DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe17wesl 


T H E 


W OR  K S 

OF'  T H E 

. * # ••  *.**  ♦*►;•  .’  . ,V\  / * 

*f  - * ‘ # . * 

> • ] J \ ; / \ 

Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 

. % *•*  *# 


Late  Fellow  of  Lirxoln-College,  Oxford. 


Volume  XVII. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  JVine-Street, 


MDCCL  XXIII. 


[ 3 ] 


^ S/Jg 

V.  17 

A SECOND 


LETTER 


TO  THE 


LORD  BISHOP  of  Exeter, 


In  anfwer  to  his  Lordship’s  late  Letter. 


My  Lord, 

IN  my  late  letter  to  your  Lordlhip,  I ufed  no 
ceremony.  I fuppofe  it  was  not  expe&ed 
from  one  who  was  fo  deeply  injured  : and,  I 
truft,  I ufed  no  rudenefs ; if  I did,  I am  ready 
to  afk  your  lordfhip’s  pardon. 

That  letter,  + “ related  to  a matter  of  fa£t 
publifhed  on  your  lordfhip’s  authority,  which  I 

A 2 endeA= 

+ The  Bifhop  of  Exeter’s  letter,  page  2,  3. 


[ 4 ] 

endeavoure4  to  falfify,"  and  your  lordfhip,  now 
again  endeavours  to  fupport. 

The  fa£ls  alledged  are,  id,  That  I told  Mrs. 
Morgan  at  Mitchel,  ‘ You  are  in  hell ; you  are 
‘ damned  already.’  2dly,  ‘ That  I alked  her  to 
4 live  upon  free  coll.’  3dly,  4 That  fhe  de- 
4 termined  to  admit  no  more  Met  ho  difls  into  her 
4 houfe.’ 

At  fir  ft  I thought  fo  filly  and  improbable  a 
dory  neither  deferved  nor  required  a confuta- 
tion : but  when  my  friends  thought  ot'nerwife,  I 
called  on  Mrs,  Morgan , who  denied  fire  ever 
faid  any  fitch  thing.  I wrote  down  her  words; 
part  of  which  I tranfcribed  in  my  letter  to  your 
lordflr ip,  as  follows : 

4 On  Saturday , Augu/l  25,  1730,  Mr.  Trent- 
4 bath  of  Ge.n'nys,  Mr.  Ha  me  of  Shajl/bury,  and  I, 

4 called  at  Mr.  Morgan’s  at  Mitchel,  The  fervant 
4 telling  me  her  mailer  was  not  at  home,  I defired 
4 to  fpeak  with  her  millrefs,  the  44  honed,  fenfi- 
4 ble  woman,”  I immediately  alked,  Did  I ever 
4 tell  you  or  your  hufband,  that  you  would  be 
4 damned  if  you  took  any  money  of  me  ? (So  the 
4 dory  ran  in  the  firft  part  of  the  comparffon  : it 
4 has  now  undergone  a very  confiderable  alrera- 
4 tion)  Or  did  you  or  he  ever  affirm,  (another 
4 circumflance  related  at  Truro ) that  I was  rude 
4 with  your  maid  P She  replied  vehemently,  Sir, 

* 4 I never  faid  you  was,  or  that  you  faid  anv  fuch 
4 thing  : and  I do  not  fuppofe  my  hufband  did  : 

4 but  we  have  been  belied  as  well  as  our  neigh- 

4 bours. 


[ 5 ] 

‘ hours.  She  added,  when-  the  bifliop  came  down, 
‘ Jail,  he  lent  us  word  he  would  dine  at  our 
< ho  life ; but  he  did  not,  being  invited  to  a 
« neighbouring  gentleman’s.  He  fent  for  me 

* thither,  and  faid,  Good  woman,  do  you  know 
‘ thefe  people  that  go  up  and  down?  Do  you 
‘ know  Mr.  JVeJley  ? Did  not  he  tell  you,  you 
‘ would  be  damned  if  you  took  any  money  of 
s him  ? And  did  not  he  offer  rudenefs  to  your 

* maid  ? I told  him,  No,  my  lord,  he  never  faid 
‘ any  fuch  thing  to  me,  nor  to  my  luifband  that  I 
6 know  of.  He  never  offered  any  rudenefs  to 
*•  any  maid  of  mine.  I never  faw,  or  knew  any 
‘ harm  by  him.  But  a man  told  me  once,  (who, 
4 I was  told,  was  a Methodill  preacher)  that  I 
4 fhould  be  damned,  if  I did  not  know  my  fins 
4 were  forgiven.5 

Your  lordfhip  replies,  f 4 I neither  fent  word 
4 that  I would  dine  at  their  houfe,  nor  did  I fend 
4 for  Mrs.  Morgan  ; every  word  that  paffed  be- 
4 tween  us,  was  at  her  own  houfe  at  Mitchel.’ 
I believe  it ; and  confequentlv,  that  the  want  of 
exaftnefs  in  this  point  reds  on  Mrs.  Morgan,  not 
on  your  worfhip. 

Your  lordfhip  adds,  4 The  following  attefla- 
4 tions  will  fufficiently  clear  me  from  any  irnputa* 
4 tion,  or  even  fuipicion,  of  having  publifhed  a 
4 falfhood  I apprehend  otherwife  : to  wave  what 
is  pad,  if  the  faffs  now  publidred  by  your  lord- 
fhip, or  any  part  of  them,  be  not  true ; then 
A g certainly 

t Page  7. 


[ 6 ] 

certainly  your  lordfhip  will  lie  under  more 
than  a ‘ fufpicion  of  having  publifhed  a falf- 
hood.’ 

The  atteflations  your  lordfhip  produces  are, 
ift,  Thofeofyour  lordfhip’s  chancellor  and  arch- 
deacon. 2dly,  Thofe  of  Mr.  Bennet. 

The  former  attefts,  that  in  June , or  July, 
1748,  Mrs.  Morgan  did  fay  thofe  things  to  your 
lordfhip.  + I believe  {he  did,  and  therefore  ac- 
quit your  lordfhip  of  being  the  inventor  of  thofe 
falfhoods. 

Mr.  Bennet  avers,  that  in  January  lafi,  Mrsr 
Morgan  repeated  to  him  what  fhe  had  before 
faid  to  your  lordfhip.  ^ Probably  fhe  might ; 
having  faid  thofe  things  once,  I do  not  wonder 
if  fhe  faid  them  again. 

Neverthelefs,  before  Mr.  Trembath  and  Mr. 
Hame  fhe  denied  every  word  of  it. 

To  get  over  this  difficulty,  your  lordfhip  pub- 
lifhes  a fecond  letter  from  Mr.  Bennet , wherein 
he  fays,  ‘ On  March  4th  laff,  Mrs.  Morgan  faid, 

* I was  told  by  my  fervant,  that  I was  wanted 
‘ above  flairs ; where,  when  I came,  the  cham- 

* ber  door  being  open,  I found  them  (Mr.  Wejley 
and  others)  round  the  table  on  their  knees.’ 
He  adds,  ‘ That  Mrs.  Morgan  owned  one  cir- 

* ctimflance  in  it  was  true,  but  as  to  the  other 
‘ parts  of  Mr.  Wejley  % letter  to  the  bifhop,  fhe 

* declares  it  is  all  falfe.’ 

I believe  Mrs.  Morgan  did  fay  this  to  Mr. 

Bennet, 

+ Page  8.  J Page  it. 


[ 7 ] 

Bennet,  and  that  therefore  neither  is  he  the 
maker  of  a lie.  But  he  is  the  reiater  of  a whole 
train  of  fafhoods,  and  thofe  told  merely  for 
telling  fake.  I was  never  yet  in  any  chamber 
at  Mrs.  Morgan's.  I was  never  above  fairs 
there  in  my  life.  On  Augajl  25,  1750,  I was 
below  fairs  all  the  time  I was  in  the  houfe. 
When  Mrs.  Morgan  came  in,  I was  fanding 
in  the  large  parlour ; nor  did  any  of  us  kneel 
while  we  were  under  the  roof.  This  both 
Mr.  Trembath  and  Mr.  Hame  can  atteft  upon 
oath,  whatfoever  Mrs.  Morgan  may  declare  to 
the  contrary. 

But  fhe  declared  farther,  (To  Mr.  Bennet 
writes)  ‘ That  Mr.  John  Wefey,  fome  time  ago, 

* faid  to  a maid  of  her’s,  fuch  things  as  were 
‘ not  fit  to  be  fpoken  + and  Mr.  Morgan 
declared,  that  he  ‘ did  or  faid  fuch  indecent 
‘ things  to  the  above-named  maid  fthe  fame  fadt, 

* I prefume,  only  a little  embellifhed)  in  his 
‘ chamber,  in  the  night,  that  fhe  immediately 

* ran  down  flairs,  and  protefted  fhe  would  not 
‘ go  near  him  or  any  of  the  Method fs  more.’]; 

To  fare  trouble  to  your  lordfhip  as  well  as  to 
myfelf,  I will  put  this  caufe  upon  a very  fhort 
iflue.  If  your  lordfhip  will  only  prove,  that  ever 
I lay  one  night  in  Mrs.  Morgan's  houfe,  nay, 
that  ever  I was  in  the  town  of  Mitchel  after  fun-fet. 
I will  confefs  the  whole  charge. 

What  your  lordfhip  mentions  by  ‘ the  way’ 
A 4 I will 

£ Page  1 2. 


+ Page  11. 


t -8  J 

I will  now  confider.  ‘ Some  of  your  wefleroi 
‘ correfpondents  impofed  upon  the  leaders  of  Me- 
‘ thodifm,  by  tranfmitting  to  London  anotorioufly 
‘ falfe  account  of  my  charge  to  the  clergy.  Af- 
‘ terwards  the  Metkodijis  confefTed  themfelves  to 
‘have  been  deceived ; yet  fome  time  after,  the 

* Metliodifs  at  Cork,  in  Ireland,  your  own  bro- 

* tber  at  the  head  of  them,  reprinted  the  fame 
‘ lying  pamphlet,  as  my  performance. ’t 

My  lord,  I know  not  who  are  your  lordfhip’s 
Irfh  correfpondents  : but  here  are  almofl  as  many 
miflakes  as  lines.  For,  1.  They  were  none  of  my 
correfpondents  who  fent  that  account  to  London. 
2.  If  was  fent  not  to  the  leaders  of  Methodifm, but 
to  one  who  was  no  Methodijl  at  all.  3.  That  it 
was  a falfe  account  I do  not  know.  But  your 
lordfhip  may  eafily  put  it  out  of  difpute.  And 
many  have  wondered,  that  your  lordfhip  did  not 
do  fo  long  ago,  by  printing  the  charge  in  queflion. 
4.  I did  never  confefs,  it  was  '<s  fafe  account ; nor 
any  perfon  by  my  confent,  or  with  my  know- 
ledge. .5.  That  account  was  never  reprinted  at 
Cork  at  all.  6.  When  it  was  reprinted  at  Dublin, 
your  lordfhip  had  not  difowned  it.  7.  My  bro- 
ther was  not  in  Dublin  when  it  was  done;  nor 
did  either  he  or  I know  of  it  till  long  after. 

Therefore,  when  my  brother  was  afked,  ‘ How 

* he  could  reprint  fuch  an  account,  after  t our 

* lordfhip  had  publicly  difowned,1  I do  not  at  all 

wonder, 


■f  Page  4,  5. 


[ 9 ] 

wonder,  that  * he  did  not  offer  a fingle  word  in 
* anfwer.’ 

Whether  this,  as  well  as  my  former  letter  be 
“ mere  rant  and  declamation,”  or  plain  and  fober 
reafon,  I muff  refer  to  the  world  and  your  lord- 
fhip’s  own  confcience. 

I am,  my  Lord, 

Your  lordjhip's  viojl  obedient  fervant, 
NewcaJile-upon-Tyne,  JOHN  WE  S LE  Y. 
May  8,  1752. 


A 5 A LETTER: 

. . * > 


C 1°  ] 


A 


L E T T E R 

TO  THE 

Rev.  Mr.  P O T T E R. 


Norwich , Nov.  4,  1758. 

Rev.  SIR, 

1.  ?rTMLL  to  day  I had  not  a fight  of  your 
JL  fermon  on  the  pretended  infpiration  oj  the 
Methodijls.  Otherwife  I fhould  have  taken  the 
liberty  fome  days  fooner  of  fending  you  a few 
lines.  That  fermon,  indeed,  only  repeats  what 
has  been  often  faid  before,  and  as  often  anfwer- 
ed.  But  as  it  is  faid  again , I believe  it  i$  my  du- 
f ty  to  anfwer  it  again.  Not  that  I have  any  ac- 
quaintance 

N.  £,  Mr.  Fetter's  words  are  printed  in  ltduu 


[ » ] 

quaintance  with  Mr.  Cayley  or  Ofborn : I never 
exchanged  a word  with  either.  However  as  you 
lump  me  and  them  together,  I am  conftrained  to 
fpeak  for  myfelf,  and  once  more,  to  give  a rea- 
fcn  of  my  hope , that  I am  clear  from  the  charge 
you  bring  again  ft  me. 

2.  There  are  feveral  aflertions  in  your  fermon 
which  need  not  be  allowed  ; but  they  are  not 
worth  difputing.  At  prefent  therefore,  1 fhall. 
only  fpeak  of  two  things.  1.  Your  account  of 
the  new  birth  ; and,  2.  The  pretended  infpiration. 
(as  you  are  pleafed  to  term  it)  of  the  Method fs. 

3.  Of  the  new  birth,  you  fay,  t The  terms  of 
being  regenerated,  oj  being  born  again,  of  being 
born  of  God,  are  often  ufed  to  exprefs  the  works 
of  gojpel  righteoujnefs . I cannot  allow  this.  I 
know  not  that  they  are  ever  ufed  in  feripture,  to 
exprefs  any  outward  work  at  all-.  They  always  ex- 
prefs an  inward  work  of  the  fpirit,  whereof  baptifm 
is  the  outward  fign.  ^ You  add,  Their  primary , 
peculiar,  and  precife  meaning  fignifies  (a  little  im- 
propriety of  expreflion)  our  redemption  from, 
death  and  ref  oration  to  eternal  life , through  the 
grace  of  God . It  does  not,  unlefs  by  death  you 
mean  fin  ; and  by  eternal  life,  holinefs.  The 
precife  meaning  ofthetermis,  A new  birth  unto 
right eoufnefs,  an  inward  charge  from  unholy 
to  holy  tempers.  You  go  on  : this  grace  our 
Lord  here  calls , entering  into  the  kingdom  of  God . 
If  fo,  his  aflertion  is,  “ Except  a man  be  born 

A 6 again; 

•f  Pag.  \o , 11. 


t P-  '3- 


[ ] 

again  — he  cannot  be  born  again.”  Not  fen 
What  he  fays  is,  except  a man  experience  this 
change , he  cannot  enter  into  my  kingdom. 

4 You  proceed  : + Our  holy  church  doth  teach 
us,  that — by  the  hiver  of  regeneration  in  baplifm, 
we  are  received  into  the  number  of  the  children  of 
God — this  is  the  frf  part  of  the  new  birth.  What 
is  the  frf  part  of  the  new  birth  ? Baptifm?  It 
is  the  outward  fgn  of  that  inward  and  Spiritual 
grace  ; but  no  part  of  it  all.  It  is  impofbble  it 
fhould  be.  The  outward  fign  is  no  more  a part 
of  the  inward  grace  than  (lie  body  is  a part  of  the 
foul.  Or  do  you  mean,  that  regeneration  is  a 
part  of  the  new  birth  ? Nay,  this  is  the  -whole  of 
it.  Or  is  it  the  laver  of  regeneration  which  is 
the  firft  part  of  it  ? That  cannot  be  : for  you 
fuppofe  this  to  be  the  fame  with  baptifm. 

g.  The  fecond  part,  the  inward  and  fpiritual 
grace,  is  a death  unto  fn,  and  a new  birth  unto 
mghteoufnefs.  What  ! Is  the  new  birth  the  fecond 
part  of  the  newr  birth  ? I apprehend  it  is  the  firft 
and  fecond  part  too.  And  furely  nothing  could 
have  prevented  your  feeing  this,  but  the  ardor 
of  your  fpirit,  and  the  impetuofity  wiih  which 
you  rufh  along  and  trample  down  all  before  you. 
Your  manner  of  writing  reminds  me  of  an  honeft 
Quaker  in  Cornwall,  whofe  words  I would  re- 
commend to  your  confideration.  Being  con- 
fuhed  by  one  of  the  friends,  whether  he  fhould 
•publifh  a traft  which  he  had  read  to  many  in  pri- 
vate •> 


-t  ?. 


[ *3  ] 

vate ; he  replied,  “ What,  art  thou  not  content 
with  laying  John  We/ley  on  his  baek,  but  thou 
mu  ft  tread  his  guts  out  too?” 

6.  So  much  for  your  account  of  the  new  birth. 
I am,  in  the  fecond  place,  to  confider  the  ac- 
count you  give  of  the  pretended  inspiration  (fo 
you  are  pfeafed  to  term  it)  of  the  Metkodijis. 

t The  Holy  Ghofi  fat  on  the  apcfles  with  cloven 
tongues  as  oj  fire — and  figns  and  wonders  were 
done  by  their  hands.  (W onders  indeed  ! For  they 
healed  the  Tick  by  a word,  a touch,  a fhadow  ! 

“ They  fpake  the  dead  alive,  and  living  dead.”) 
But  though  thefe  extraordinary  operations  of  the 
Spirit  have  been  long  f nee  withdrawn,  yet  the  pre- 
tenfon  to  them  fill  Jubfijls  in  the  confident  claim  of 
the  Alethodifis.  This  you  boldly  affirm,  and  I 
flatly  deny.  I deny,  that  either  I,  or  any  in 
connexion  with  me  (for  others,  whether  called 
Methodifs,  or  any  thing  elfe,  I am  no  more  con- 
cerned to  anfwer  than  you  are)  do  now,  or  ever 
did  lay  any  claim  to  thefe  extraordinary  operations 
of  the  Spirit. 

7.  But  you  will  prove  it.  They  i confidently 
and  prefumptuoufly  claim  a particular  and  immedi- 
ate infpiration.  I anfwer,  firft,  So  do  you,  and 
in  this  very  fermon,  though  you  call  it  by  ano- 
ther name.  By  infpiraton,  we  mean,  that  in- 
ward affiftance  of  the  Holy  Ghof,  which  ||  helps 
§ur  infirmities,  enlightens  our  underfianding,  rec- 
tifies our  will,  comforts,  purifies  and  f nullifies  us. 

Now. 


+ Pag.  16,  17,  18,  I Ibid.  ||  Pag.  14.. 


C »4  ] 

Now  all  this  you  claim  as  well  as  I ; for  thefe  are 
your  own  words,  “ Nay,  but  you  claim  a parti- 
cular infpiration.”  So  do  you : do  not  you  ex- 
pend him  to  fan&ify  you  in  particular  ? “ Yes, 
but  I look  for  no  immediate  infpiration.”  You 
do  : you  expeft  he  will  immediately  and  direflly 
help  your  infirmities.  Sometimes,  it  is  true,  he 
does  this,  by  the  mediation  or  intervention  of 
other  men  : but  at  other  times,  particularly  in 
private  prayer,  he  gives  that  help  direBly  from 
himfelf.  “ But  is  this  all  you  mean  by  particu- 
lar, immediate  infpiration  ?”  It  is,  and  fo  I 
have  declared  a thoufand  times  in  private,  in 
public,  by  every  method  I could  devife.  'Tis 
pity  therefore,  that  any  fhould  ftill  undertake  to 
give  an  account  of  my  fentiments,  without  either 
hearing  or  reading  what  I fay.  Is  this  doing  as 
we  would  be  done  to  ? 

8.  I anfwer,  fecondly.  There  is  no  analogy 
between  claiming  this  infpiration  of  the  Spirit, 
who  you  allow  + f/i/ls  and  will  afijl  all  true  be- 
lievers to  the  end  of  the  world : and  claiming  thofe 
extraordinary  operations  of  the  Spirit,  which  were 
vouchfafed  to  the  apollles.  The  former,  both 
you  and  I pretend  to:  yea,  and  enjoy  ; or  we 
are  no  believers.  The  latter  you  do  not  pretend 
to:  nor  do  I;  nor  any  that  are  in  connexion 
with  me. 

9.  “ But  you  do  pretend  to  them.  For  you 
pray  that fgns  and  wonders  may Jhll  be  wrought  in 

the 


+ Page  »8. 


[ *5  ] 

the  name  of  Jefus .”  True  : but  what  figns  and 
wonders?  The  converfion  of  finners ; th  e heal- 
ing the  bro/en  in  heart : the  turning  men from  dark- 
nefs  to  light,  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God . 
Thefe  and  thefe  only  are  the  figns  and  wonders 
which  were  mentioned  in  that-  prayer.  And 
did  I not  fee  thefe  figns  and  wonders  fill] 
wrought,  I would  fooner  hew  wood,  or  draw 
water,  than  preach  the  gofpel.  For  thofe  are  to 
me  very  awful  words,  which  our  Lord  fpeaks  of 
prophets  or  teachers;  Ye fiall  know  them,  (whe- 
ther they  are  true  or falfe  prophets  J by  their  fruits  : 
Every  good  iree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit — Every 
tree  that  bringeth  not  forth  good fruit,  is  hewn  down 
and  cafl  into  the  fire.  What  fruit  yon  have  brought 
forth  at  Reymerfion,  I know  not  ; God  knoweth. 

10.  “ Your  followers,  however,  ho  pretend  to 
the  grace  of  a miraculous  converfion Is  there 
any  converfion  that  is  not  miraculous  ? Is  conver- 
fion a natural  or  fupernatural  work  ? I fuppofe 
all  who  allow  there  is  any  fuch  thing,  believe  it 
to  be  fupernatural.  And  what  is  the  difference 
between  a fupernatural  and  a miraculous  work  I 
am  yet  to  learn. 

But  they fay,  that  at  fuch  a time,  and  in  fuch  a 
manner,  the  divine  illumination  fone  upon  them 
Jefus  knocked  at  the  door  of  their  hearts,  and  the 
Holy  Ghof  defended  upon  their  fouls . That  is,  in 
plain  terms,  raillery  apart,  at  a particular  time^ 
which  they  cannot  eafily  forget,  God  did,  in  fo 
eminent  a manner  as  they  never  experienced  be- 
fore, enlighten  their  undemanding  (they  are  your 

own 


L 16  ] 

own  words)  comfort  and  purify  their  hearts,  and 
give  his  heavenly  Spirit  to  dwell  in  them.  But  what 
has  all  this  to  do  with  thofe  extraordinary  opera- 
tions  of  the  Holy  Spirit? 

11.  + Under  thefe  pretencd  imprejjions,  their 
next  advance  is,  to  a call  to  preach  the  word  them- 

felves  ; and  forth  they  iff ue,  asunder  the  immedi- 
ate ihfpiration  of  God's  Spirit,  with  the  language  of 
apofles,  and  zeal  of  martyrs,  to  publifi  the  gofpel, 
as  if  they  were  among  our  remotef  ancefors,  f ran- 
ker s to  the  name  of  Chrif. 

The  plain  truth  is  this.  One  in  five  hundred 
of  thofe  whom  God  fo  enlightens  and  confor's, 
fooner  or  later,  believes  it  to  be  his  duty  to  call 
other  Tinners  to  repentance.  Such  an  one  com- 
monly ftifles  this  convidiion,  till  he  is  fo  uneafv 
he  can  fli fie  it  no  longer.  He  then  confultsone 
or  more  of  thofe  whom  he  believes  to  be  compe- 
tent judges:  and  under  the  diredlion  of  thefe, 
goes  on,  ftep  by  flep,  from  a narrower  to  a larger 
fphere  of  adlion.  Mean  time  he  endeavours  to 
ufe  only  the  language  of  the  apofles,  to  fpeak  the 
things  of  the  Spirit,  in  the  words  of  the  Spirit. 
And  he  longs  and  prays  for  the  zeal  of  martyrs, 
continually  finding  the  need  thereof ; feeing  our 
prefent  countrymen  are  as  great  flrangers  to  the 
mind  that  was  in  Chrifl,  as  our  anceflors  were  to 
his  name. 

12.  But  the  Holy  Spirit  no  longer  comes  from 
heaven  like  a rifling  mighty  wind.  It  no  longer 

appears 


t Page  20,  si. 


' C n ] 

appears  in  cloven  tongues,  as  of  fire.  I wonder 
who  imagines  it  does  ? We  now  difcern  not  be - 
tween  his  fuggejlicns  and  the  motions  of  our  rational 
nature.  Many  times  we  do  not : but  at  other 
times,  God  may  give  fuch  peace  or  joy,  and  fuch 
love  to  himfelf  and  all  mankind,  as  we  are  fure 
are  not  the  motions  of  our  own  nature.  To  fay*, 
then,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  began  his  work  atfuch  a 
time,  and  continued  it,  fo  long  in  fuch  a- manner,  is 
as  vain  as  to  account  for  the  blowing  of  the  wincL 
Hold  ! Accounting  for,  is  not  the  thing.  To 
make  a parallel,  it  muft  be,  is  as  vain  as  to  fay, 
that  the  wind  began  to  blow  at  fuch  a time,  and 
continued  fo  long  in  fuch  a manner.  And  where 
is  the  vanity  of  this  ? Why  may  I not  fay,  either 
that  the  wind  began  to  blow  at  fuch  a time,  and 
blew fo  long  'vafuch  a manner  : or  that  God  began 
at fuch  a time  to  comfort  my  foul  ? That  he  con- 
tinued that  confolation  fo  long  ? And  in  fuch  a 
manner,  by  giving  me  either  peace  and  joy  in 
believing,  or  a lively  hope  of  the  glory  of  God  ? 

13.  t Not  that  we  are  without  a memorable  in- 
fance  of  this  infantaneous  impulfe,  in  the  fudcltn 
converjion  of  St.  Paul.  A poor  inftance  this  ; for 
it  does  not  appear,  that  his  was  a fudden  conver- 
fion.  It  is  true,  A great  light fuddenly Jhone  round 
about  him ; but  this  light  did  not  convert  him. 
After  he  had  feen  this,  he  was  three  days  without 
fight,  and  neither  did  eat  nor  drink.  And  proba- 
bly, during  the  whole  time,  God  was  gradually 


+ Page  23. 


[ .8  ] 

working  in  his  heart,  till  he  arofe,  and  being  bap- 
tized , wafted  away  his  fins , and  was  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghoft. 

14.  But  to  return,  f Their  teachers  claim  a 
particular  and  immediate  infpiration  in  their  nau- 
feous  effufions.  Certainly  they  claim  either  a par- 
ticular and  immediate  infpiration  (as  above  ex- 
plained) or  none  at  all.  But  this  is  no  other  in- 
spiration (call  it  influence , if  you  pleafe,  though 
it  is  a far  ftronger  term)  than  every  one  muft  have, 
before  he  can  either  underftand,  or  preach,  or 
live  the  gofpel.  But  there  is  not  in  fcriplure  the 
leaf},  promife  or  encouragement  to  expetl  any  parti- 
cular infpiration.  Yes  furely,  fuch  an  infpira- 
tion as  this ; you  have  allowed  it  over  and  over. 
And  what  external  evidence  of  this,  would  you 
have?  I will  believe,  you  are  thus  ufpired,  if  you 
convert  finners  to  God,  and  if  you  yourfelf  are 
holy  in  all  manner  of  converjation. 

15.  Is  there  no  need  of  this  infpiration  now , be- 
caufe  the  prejudices  of  mankind  are  in  favour  of  the 
gofpel  and  the  prof ejfion  of  it  is  under  the  protection 
and  encouragement  of  the  civil  power?  The  pre- 
judices of  mankind  are  in  favour  of  the  gofpel! 
What,  the  prejudices  of  the  bulk  of  mankind  ? 
To  go  no  farther  than  England.  Are  the  bulk 
of  our  nation  prejudiced  in  favour  of  the  genuine 
gofpel  ! Of  the  holinefs  which  it  enjoins;  of 
chaility  and  temperance ; of  denying  ourfelves, 
and  taking  up  our  crofs  daily  ; of  dying  to  the 

world 


+ Page  *i. 


[ *9  ] 

world,  and  devoting  all  our  heart,  and  all  our 
life  to  God?  Are  they  prejudiced  in  favour  of 
prefenting  our  fouls  and  bodies  a conflant,  holy 
facrifice  to  God  ? What  lefs  than  this  is  gofpel 
holinefs  ? And  are  the  prejudices  of  mankind 
in  favour  of  this  ? 

16.  Likewife  how  far  this  real  Chriftianity  is 
under  the  proteElion  and  encouragement  of  the  civil 
power,  I know  not  But  I know,  all  that  will 
live  godly  in  Chrijl  Jefus , Jliall fuffer  perfecution > 
domeftic  perfecution,  if  no  other  ; for  the foes  oj 
fuch  a man  Jhall  be  they  of  his  own  houfhold. 
There fhall  be,  and  there  are  now,  five  in  one 
houfe,  three  againfi  two,  and  two  againjl  three : 
and  that  not  for  being  Methodijls,  for  having  a 
nick-name  (although  that  may  be  the  pretence,  for 
want  of  a better  : for  who  fcruples  to  throw  a 
man  into  the  dich,  and  then  beat  him,  becaufe 
his  cloaths  are  dirty  ?)  but  for  living  godly  ^ for 
loving  and  ferving  God,  accotding  to  the  beft 
light  they  have  ? And  certainly  thefe  need  the 
affiftance  of  God’s  Spirit,  to  ftrengthen  and  com- 
fort them,  that  they  may  fuflfer  all  things,  rather 
than  turn  afide,  in  any  point,  from  the  gofpel-way. 

+ 17.  But  the  fcriptures  are  a compleat  and  a 
fufficient  rule . Therefore  to  zvhat  purpofe  could 
any  further  infpiration ferve  ? All farther  infpira - 
tion  is  unneceffary  ; the  fuppofed  need  of  it  is  high- 
ly injurious  to  the  written  word.  And  the  preten- 
fiion  thereto,  ( which  mufl  be  either  to  explain,  or  to 

fuppty 

+ pag-  27>  28. 


[ # ] 

Supply  U)  is  a nicked  prefumption,.  with  which  Sep- 
tan hath  filled  their  hearts , to  lie  of  the  Holy 
Ghof. 

High  founding  words!  Rut,  blefled  be  God. 
they  are  only  brutum  fulmen  ; they  make  much 
noife,  but  do  not  wound.  To  what  purpofe  could 
any  further  in fpir ation  ferve?  Anfwer  yourfelf: 
To  c High  ten  the  underfunding,  and  to  reclify  the 
Will.  Elfe,  be  the  ferip/ures  ever  fo  coinpleat, 
they  will  not  faveyour  foul.  How  then  can  you 
imagine  it  is  unneceffary  ? And  that  the  fuppofed 
need  of  it  is  injurious  to  the  written  word?  And 
when  you  fay  yourfelf,  the  Spirit  is  to  teach  us 
all  things,  and  togmde  us  into  all  truth  ; judge  you, 
whether  this  is  to  explain,  or  to  fupply  the  written 
word.  “ O he  does  this  by  the  written  word .” 
True;  but  alfo  by  his  holy  infpiration.  So  the 
complers  of  our  liturgy  {peak  : who  therefore,  ac- 
cording to  you,  are  guilty  of  wicked prefumption, 
with  which  Satan  filled  their  heaits,  to  he  of  the 
Holy  Ghof. 

l-S.  1 hefe  alfo  are  the  men  upon  whom  you 
fall  in  the  following  warm  words.  The  power  of 
enthufafn  over  an  heated  imagination,  may  be  very 
great.  But  it  muf  be  under  the  ferment  of  that  old, 
four,  leaven,  hypo  crip1,  to  rife  to  that  daring 
height.  I think  not : I think  they  were  neither 
hypocrites  nor  enthufiafts,  though  they  teach  me 
to  pray  for,  confequently  to  expefl;  (unlefs  I am 
an  hypocrite  indeed)  “God's  holy  infpiration,' 
both  in  order  to  “ think  the  things  that  be  good,” 

and 


[ 21  ] 

and  alfo,  “ perfectly  to  love  him,  and  worthily 
to  magnify  his  holy  name.  ” 

19.  You  go  on.  They  hoaft  that  their  heart  is 
clean,  and  their fpirit  right  within  them.  Sir, 
did  you  ever  read  morning  prayer  on  the  tenth 
day  of  the  month  ? You  then  faid,  Make  me  a 
clean  heart \ 0 God , and  renew  a right  fpirit  with - 
in  me.  Did  you  mean  what  you  faid  ? If  you  did 
not,  you  was  guilty  of  the  grofleft  hypocrify.  If 
you  did  ; IVken  did  you  expect  God  would  an- 
lwer  that  prat  er  ? When  your  body  was  in  the 
grave  ? Too  late!  Unlefs  we  have  dean  hearts 
before  we  die,  it  had  been  good  we  had  never 
been  born ! 

20.  But  they  boafl  they  are  pure  from  fin, 
ha  rmlefs  and  undefltd.  So,  in  a found  fenfe, 
is  every  true  believer.  Nay,  they  boajl , that 
their  bodies  are  a living  facrifice,  holy,  ac- 
ceptable to  God.  Sir,  Is  not  yours  ? Are  not 
vour  foul  and  body  fuch  a facrifice,  holy,  accepta- 
ble to  God  ? As  the  Lord  God  liveth,  before 
whom  we  Hand,  if  they  are  not,  you  are  not  a 
ChriHian.  If  you  are  not  an  holy,  living  fa- 
crifice you  are  Hill  dead  in  trefpaffes  and  fins.  You 
are  an  alien  from  the  commonwealth  of  Ifreal,  with- 
out Chriflian  hope,  without  God  in  the  world  ! 

21.  You  add,  Thus  have  1'expofed  their  hoofed 
claim  to  a particular  and  immediate  inf piration. 
Page  30*  No,  Sir,  you  have  only  expofed  your- 
felf.  For  a1!  that  we  claim,  you  allow.  I have 
fiewn  what  a inferable  farce  is  carrying  on,  be- 


[ 22  ] 

T.eath  the  mark  of  a more  r fried  holinefs.  No 
tittle  of  this  have  you  fhewn  yet.  And  before 
you  attempt  again  to  (hew  any  thing  concerning 
us,  let  me  intreat  you,  Sir,  to  acquaint  your- 
felf  better  with  our  teal  fentiments.  Perhaps 
you  may  then  find,  that  there  is  not  fo  wide  a 
difference  as  you  imagined,  between  you,  and, 

Rev.  Sir, 

Your  fcrvant,  for  Chrif  's fake , 

Laken-heath,  JOHN  WESLEY. 

Nov.  7,  1758. 


A LETTER 


[ ^3  ] 


A 


L 


E 


T 


T 


R 


TO  THE 

Reverend  Dr.  FREE. 


Tullamore,  May  2,  1758. 

Rev.  Sir, 

1.  A LITTLE  traQ:  appearing  under  your 
-LA-  name  was  yefterday  put  into  my  hands. 
You  therein  call  upon  me,  to  fpeak,  “ if  I have 
“ any  exceptions  to  make  to  what  is  advanced,” 
and  promife  to  “ reply  as  fairly  and  candidly  as  I 
“ can  expeft,  provided  thofe  exceptions  be  drawn 
“ up,  as  you  have  fet  the  example , in  a fhort  com- 
" pafs,  and  in  the  manner  wherein  all  wife  and 

“ good 


r *4  ] 

good  people  would  chufe  to  manage  a religious 
difpute.”+ 

2.  “ In  a fhort  compafs,”  Sir,  they  will  cer- 
tainly be  drawn  up,  for  my  own  fake,  as  well  as 
yours.  For  I know  the  value  of  time,  and  would 
gladly  employ  it  all  in  what  more  immediately 
relates  to  eternity.  But  I do  not  promife  to 
draw  them  up  in  that  manner,  whereof  you  have 
Jet  the  example.  I cannot;  I dare  not:  fori 
fear  God,  and  do  really  believe  there  is  a judg- 
ment to  come.  Therefore  I dare  not  return  evil 
for  evil-,  neither  railing  for  railing.  Nor  can  I 
allow,  that  your  manner  of  treating  this  fubjefl, 
is  that  “ wherein  ali  wife  and  good  people  would 
“ chufe  to  manage  a religious  difpute.”  Far, 
very  far  from  it.  I fhall  rejoice,  if  a little  more 
fairnefs  and  candor  Ihould  appear  in  your  future 
writings.  But  I cannot  expe£l  it;  for  the  nigrae. 
fuccus  loliginis,  wormwood  and  gall  feem  to  have 
infefted  your  very  vitals. 

3.  The  quotation  from  bifhop  Gib/on,  which 
takes  up  five  out  of  nineteen  pages,  I have  parti- 
cularly anfwered  already  i : and  in  a manner 
wherewith  I have  good  reafon  to  believe  his 
lordfhip  was  entirely  fatisfied.  With  his  lord- 
fhip  therefore  I have  no  prefent  concern  : my 
bufinefs  now  is  with  you  only.  And  feeing  you 
are  “ now  ready  (as  you  exprefs  it)  to  run  a tilt,” 

I mull  make  what  defence  I can.  Only  you  mull 

excufe 

+ In  “ a letter  to  the  Right  Rev.  the  Lord  Bifhop 
of  London,” 


4 "Page  22. 


[ *6  1 

cxcufe  me  from  meeting  you  on  the  fame  ground, 
or  fighting  you  with  the  fame  weapons.  My 
weapons  are  only  truth  and  love.  May  the  God 
of  truth  and  love  ftrengthen  my  weaknefs! 

4. 1 wave  what  relates  to  Mr.  V- ’s  perfonal 

charadter,  which  is  too  well  known  to  need  my 
defence  of  it:  as  likewife  the  concurrence  (real 
or  imaginary  I cannot  tell)  which  gave  birth  to 
your  performance.  All  that  I concern  myfelf 
with  isvourfive  vehement  affections,  with  regard 
to  the  people  called  Methodifls.  Thefe  I fhall 
confider  in  their  order,  and  prove  to  be  total! 
falfe  and  groundlefs. 

g.  The  firft  is  this,  + “ Their  whole  miniftry 
“ is  an  open  and  avowed  oppofition  to  one  of  the 
“ fundamental  articles  of  our  religion.”  How 
fo  ? Why  “ the  20th  article  declares,  We  may 
“ not  fo  expound  one  fcripture,  that  it  be  repug- 
t:  nant  to  another.  ± And  yet  it  is  notorious,  that 
“ the  Metkcdifls  do  ever  explain  the  word  faith 
“ as  it  ftands  in  forne  of  St.  Paul's  writings,  fo  as 
“ to  make  his  do&rine  a diredl  and  flat  contra- 
“ diftionto  that  of  St.  James." 

This  ftale  obje&ion  has  been  anfwered  an  hun- 
dred times,  fo  that  I really  thought  we  fhould 
have  heard  no  more  of  it.  But  fince  it  is  re- 
quired, I repeat  the  anfwer  once  more.  By  faith 
we  mean,  the  evidence  of  things  not Jeen  : by  jufli- 
1}  ing  faith,  .a  divine  evidence  or  conviftion,  that 
Clnifl  loved  me  and  gave  himfdffor  me.  St.  Paul 
Vol.  XVII.  B affirms, 

+ Page  4.  + Page  5. 


r.  26  ] 

affirms,  that  a man  is  juftified  by  this  faith ; 
which.  James  never  denies  ; but  only  affierts,  that 
a man  cannot  be  juftified  by  a dead faith.  And 
this  St.  Paul  never  affirms. 

“ But  St.  James  declares,  faith  without  works 
is  dead.  Therefore  it  is  clearly  St.  James's. 
“ meaning,  that  a faitli  which  is  without  virtue 
“ and  morality , cannot  produce  falvation.  Yet 
“ the  Methodifs  fo  explain  St.  Paul,  as  to  affirm 
“ that  faith  without  virtue  or  morality  will  pro- 
“ duce  falvation.”  Where?  In  which  of  their 
writings  ? This  needs  fome  proof : I abfolutely 
deny  the  faff.  So  that  all  which  follows  is  mere 
flourifh,  and  falls  to  the  ground  at  once : and  all 
that  you  aver  of  their  + “ open  and  fcandalous 
“ oppofition  to  the  20th  article,”  is  no  better  than 
open  and  fcandalous  Hander. 

6.  Your  fecond  affection  is  this,  “ The  ^ Me- 
“ thodijl , for  the  perdition  of  the  fouls  of  hisiol- 
“ lowers,  openly  gives  our  Saviour  the  lie,  loads 
the  feripture  with  falfhood  and  contradiction  : 
il  (and  pray  what  could  a Mahometan,  or  inf  del, 
“ or  the  devil  himfelf  do  more)  yea,  openlv  blaf- 
“ pheme  the  name  of  Chrijl,  by  faying,  that  the 
“ works  of  men  are  of  no  confi deration  at  all; 
“ that  God  makes  no  diitinCtion  between  virtue 
“ and  vice,  that  he  does  not  hate  vice  or  love 
“ virtue.  What  blajphemy  then  and  impiety  are 
“ thofe  wretches  guilty  of,  who  in  their  diaboli- 
51  cal  phrenzy,  dare  to  contradift  our  Saviour's 

authority, 


t Page  6. 


J Page  7,  8,  cu 


[ 27  ] 

“ authority,  and  that  in  fuch  an  efTential  article 
“ of  religion  ?”  Here  alfo  the  Methodifls  plead 
not  guilty,  and  require  you  to  produce  t our 
evidence  : to  fhew  in  which  of  their  writings  they 
affirm,  that  Gcd  “ will  not  reward  every  man 
“ according  to  his  works  ; that  he  makes  no  dif- 
“ tinftion  between  virtue  and  vice  ; that  he  does 
“ not  hate  vice  or  love  virtue.”  Thefe  are 
pofitions  which  they  never  remember  to  have 
advanced.  If  you  can,  refrefh  their  memory. 

7.  You  aflert,  thirdly,  The  Methodifls,  by  thefe 
pofitions,  “ deffroy  the  efTential  attributes  of 
“ God,  and  ruin  his  character  as  Judge  of  the 
“ world.”  Very  true— if  they  held  thefe  pofi- 
tions. But  here  lies  the  mifiake.  They  hold 
no  fuch  pofitions.  They  never  did.  They  deteft 
and  abhor  them.  In  arguing  therefore  on  this 
fuppofition,  you  are  again  beating  the  air. 

8.  You  aflert,  fourthly,  The  Methodifts  “ teach 
and  propagate  + downright  atheifm  (a  capital 

“ crime ; and  atheifis  in  Tome  countries  have 
“ been  put  to  death)  hereby  they  make  room  for 
“ all  manner  of  vice  and  villainy,  by  which  means 
“ the  bands  of  fociety  are  difTolved.  And  there- 
“ fore  this  attempt  muff  be  confidered  as  a fort  of 
“ treafon  by  magif  rates.” 

Again  we  deny  the  whole  charge,  and  call 
for  proof : and,  blefled  be  God,  fo  do  the  ma- 
gifrates  in  Great  Britain.  Behold,  vehement 
affeverations  will  not  pafs  upon  them  for  leaal 
evidence.  Nor  indeed  on  any  reafonable  men. 

B 2 They 

+ Page  10, 11. 


- [ *8  J 

rl  hey  can  difHnguilli  between  arguing  and. 
calling  names.  The  former  becomes  a gentleman 
and  a Chriftian  : but  what  is  he,  who  can  be 
guilty  of  the  latter  ? 

9.  You  alien,  laftly,  That  any  who  chufe  a 
MethocHJl  clergyman  for  their  leflurer,  + “ put 
“ into  that  office,  which  ffiould  be  held  by  a 
“ minifter  of  the  church  of  England,  an  enemy, 
li  who  undermines  not  only  the  legal  eflabliffi- 
“ meat  of  that  church,  but  alfothe  foundation  ol 
“ all  religion/’ 

Once -more  we  muff  call  upon  you  for  the 
proof:  the  proof  of  thefe  two  particulars,  firfl, 
That  I,  John  Wflcy,  am  “ an  enemy  to  the 
“ church,  and  that  I undermine  not  only  the  legd 
“ eflabliOinient  of  the  church  of  England,  butalfo 
“ the  very  foundation  of  all  religion.”  Secondly, 

That  “ Mr.  V- is  an  enetnv  to  the  church,  and 

“ is  undermining  all  religion,  as  well  as  the  efla- 
“ bliffiment.” 

10.  Another  word  and  I have  done.  Are 
there  ± “ certain  qualifications  required  of  all 
*•  lecturer s,,  before  they  are  by  law  permitted 
“ to  fpeak  to  the  people  ?”  And  is  a fubfeription 
to  the  thirty-nine  articles  of  religion,  one  of 
thefe  qualifications  ? And  is  a perfon  who  does 
not  conform  to  fuch  fubfeription”  difqualified 
to  be  a Uclurer?  Or,  who  “ has  ever  held 
“ or  puhlifhed  any  thing  contrary  to  what  the 
“ church  of  England  maintains  ?”  Then  cer- 

-J 

tainlv 

/ 

t Page  13.  + Page  14. 


r 2 9'  i 

tainly  you,  Dr.  John  Free,  are  'not  “ permitted 
“ by  law  to  (peak  to  the  people  neither  are 
you  “ qualified  to  be  a lecturer ” in  any  church 
in  London  or  England,  as  by  law  efrablijhcd. 
For  you  flatly  deny  and  openly  oppofe  more 
than  one  or  two  of  thofe  articles.  You  do  not 
in  any  wife  conform  to  the  fubfcnption  you 
made,  before  you  was  ordained  either  pried  or 
deacon.  You  both  hold  and  publjli  (if  you  are 
the  author  and  publifher  of  the  trabf  before  me) 
what  is  grofly,  palpably  “ contrary  to  what  the 
“ church  of  England  maintains,”  in  her  homilies 
as  well  as  articles  : thofe  homilies  to  which  you 
have  alfo  fubfcribed,  in  fubfcribing  the  36th 
article.  You  have  fubfcribed  them,  Sir:  but  did 
you  ever  read  them  ? Did  you  ever  read  fo  much 
as  the  three  firfl  homilies?'  I beg  of  you,  S;r,  to 
read  thefe  at  lead,  before  you  write  again  about" 
the  doflrine  of  the  church  of  England.  And 
would  it  not  be  prudent  to  read  a few  of  the 
writings  of  the  Methodijls,  before  you  undeitake 
a farther  confutation  of  them  ? At  prefent  you 
know  not  the  men  or  their  communication. 
You  are  as  wholly  unacquainted  both  with  them 
and  1 heir  doflrines,  as  if  you  had  lived  all  your 
days  in  the  iflands  of  Japan,  or  the  defarts  of 
Arabia.  You  have  given  a furious  alTault  to  you 
know  not  whom  : and  you  have  done  if,  you 
know  not  why.  You  have  nothurt  me  thereby  ; 
but  you  have  hurt  yourfelf:  perhaps  in  your 
eharaQer;  certainly  in  your  confidence.  For 
B 3.  this 


[ 3°  ] 

this  is  not  doing  to  others  as  you  would  they 
fhould  do  unto  you.  When  you  grow  cool,  I 
trufl  you  will  fee  this  clearly  : and  will  no  more 
accufe,  in  a manner  fo  remote  from  fairncfs  and 
candor, 

Rev.  Sir, 

You fervanl for  ChrijT s fake, 

JOHN  WESLEY. 


A LETTER 


A 


LETTER 

TO  THE 

Rev.  Mr.  DOWNES, 

Reftor  ef  St.  Michael,  Wood-Street  .: 
Occafioned  by  his 

LATE  TRACT, 

IK  T IT  L E D, 

Methodifm  examined  and  expofed. 

Rev.  S 1 R, 

i.TN  the  tra£l  which  yon  have  juft  pub* 
A iifhed  concerning  the  people  called  Me- 
thod ijts,  you  very  properly  fay,  “ Our  fir  ft 
care  ihould  be,  candidly  and  Fairly  to  examine 
B 4 their 


C 3*  j 

their  docilities.  For,  as  to  cenfure  them  unexa- 
mined would  be  unjufl,  fo  to  do  the  fame  witb- 
cnt  ?l  fair  and  impartial  examination  would  be 
ungenerous.”  And  again,  “ Weihoull,  in  the 
nr  IF  place,  carefully  and  candidly  examine  their 
doflrines.'  t F his  is  undoubtedly  true.  But 
have  you  done  it  ? Have  ySu  ever  examined 
their  doclrines  yet?  Have  you  examined  them 
fairly  ? Fairly  and  candidly  ? Candidly  and  care- 
fully  ? Have  yrou  read  over  fo  much  as  the  fer- 
mons  they'  have  publifhed  ? Or  the  Appeal  to 
Men  of  Reajjm  and  Religion  ? I hope  you  have 
not  : for  I would  fain  make  fome  little  excufe  for 
your  uttering  fo  many  fenfelefs,  fhamelefs  falf- 
hoods.  I hope  you  know  nothing  about  the  Afc- 
tkodifls,  no  more  than  I do  about  the  Cham  of 
Tartar y : that  you  are  ignorant  of  the  whole  af- 
fair, and  are  fo  bold,  only  becaufe  you  are  blind. 
Bold  enough  ! Throughout  your  whole  traH,  you 
{peak  fatis  pro  imperio  : as  authoritatively  as  if 
you  was  not  an  arch-bifhop  only,  but  apoltolic  vi- 
car alfo  : as  if  you  had  the  full  papal  power  in 
your  hands,  and  fire  and faggot  at  your  beck  f 
And  blind  enough:  fo  that  you  blunder  or, 

through  thick  and  thin,  befpattering  all  that  come 
in  your  way : according  to  the  old,  laudable 
maxim,  Throw  dirt  enough,  and  fome  will 
flick. ” 

2.  I hope,  I fayr,  that  ^his  is  the  cafe,  and  that 
vou  do  not  knowingly  affert  fo  many  palpable 

fallhoods. 


t Page  6S. 


[ 33  1 

falfnoods,  You  fay,  “ If  I am  mifkaken,  I fhall 
always  be  ready  and'defircus  to  retrafi:  my  error.”]] 
A little  candour  and  care  might  have  prevent- 
ed thofe  miftakes  : this  is  the  fir  ft  thing  one 
would  have  defined.  The  next  is,  that  they  may 
be  removed ; that  you  may  fee  wherein  you 
have  been  miftaken,  and  be  more  wary  for  the 
time  to  come. 

2-  You  undertake  to  give  an  account,  firftj 
Of  the  rife  and  principles,  then  of  the  pradtices 
of  the  Metliodifls. 

On  the  former  head  you  fay,  “ Our  church 
has  long  been  infefted  with  thefe grievous  wolves, 
who  though  no  more  than  two  when  they  enter- 
ed in,  and  they  fo  young,  they  might  rather.be 
called  woljlings,”  (that  is  lively  and  pretty  !} 
“ have  yet  fpread  their  ravenous  kind  through 
every  part  of  this  kingdom.  Where  what  ha- 
vock'  they  have  made,  how  many  of  the  fheep 
they  h'ave  torn — I need  not  fay.  § About  twen- 
ty-five years  ago,  thefe  two  bold,  though  beard- 
lefs  divines,”  (pity,  Sir,  that  you  had  not  taught 
me  twenty-five  years  ago  fapientem  pafcere  bar - 
bam,  and  thereby  to  avoid  fome  part  of  vour  dif- 
pleafure)  “ being  lifted  with  fpiritual  pride,  were 
prefumptuous  enough  to  become  founders  of  the 
fe£l  called  Methodijls .”  t “ A couple  ^ of  young, 
raw,  afpiring  twigs  of  the  miniflry,  dreamed  of  a 
fpecial  and  fupernatural  call  to  this.”  No,  Sir, 

B 5 it 

I)  Page  56.  § Page  4,  5.  + Page  6-  4 Page  2g„ 


[ 34  } 

it  was  you  dreamed  of  this,  not  we.  We  dream- 
ed of  nothing  twenty-five  years  ago,  but  inlfruft- 
ing  our  pupils  in  religion  and  learning,  and  a few 
prifoners,  in  the  common  principles  of  Chrilti- 
anity.  You  go  on.  “ They  were  ambitious  of 
being  accounted  mifiionaries,  immediately  dele- 
gated by  heaven  to  correft  the  errors  of  bifhops 
and  archbifhops,  and  reform  their  abufes,  to  in- 
itrudl  the  clergy  in  the  true  nature  of  Chriftianity, 
and  to  caution  the  laity,  not  to  venture  their  fouls 
i n any  fuch unhallowed  hands,  as  refufed  to  be  ini- 
tiated in  all  the  myltcriesof  t Methodifm Well 
ajferted  indeed!  But  where  is  the  proof  of  any 
one  of  thefepropofitions  ? I mull  infill  upon  this; 
clear,  cogent,  proof.  Elfe  they  mull  be  fet  down 
for  fo  many  glaring  fallhoods. 

4.  “ The  church  of  Rome  (to  which  on  fo  many 
accounts  they  were  much  obliged,  and  as  grate- 
fully returned  the  obligation)  taught  them  to  fet 
up  for  infallible  interpreters  | of  fcripture.  ’ 
Pray  on  what  accounts  are  we  “ obliged  to  the 
church  of  Rome  ?”  And  how  have  we  “ return- 
ed the  obligation  r I beg  you  would  pleafe,  1. 
To  explain  this  : and  2.  To  prove,  that  we  ever 
vet  (whoever  taught  us)  “ fet  up  for  infallible 
interpreters  of  fcripture.  So  far  from  it,  that 
we  have  over  and  over  declared,  in  print  as  well 
as  in  public  preaching,  “ We  are  no  more  to 
expeft  any  living  man  to  be  infallible  than  to  be 
omnifcient."|| 

5-  “ As 

t Fagc  54.  I)  Sermons,  Vol.  III.  p. 


4 Page  20,  21. 


[ 35  J 

5.  11  As  to  other  extraordinary  gifts,  influences 
and  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghofl,  no  man  who 
has  but  once  dipped  into  their  journals  and  oihe» 
ojlentalions  trajh  of  the  fame  kind,  can  donut 
their  looking  upon  themfelves,  as  not  coming 
one  whit  behind  he  greater!  of  tne  apoltles.  1 
I acquit  you,  Sir,  of  ever  having  “ once  clip- 
ped into  that  oftentatious  trafli.  I do  not  ac- 
cufe  you  of  having  read  fo  much  as  tr.e  titles  of 
my  journals.  I fay,  my  journals;  for  (as  little  as 
you  feem  to  know  it)  my  brother  has  pubhfhed 
none.  I therefore  look  upon  this  as  fimple  ig. 
norance.  You  talk  thus,  becaufe  you  know  no- 
better.  You  do  not  know,  that  in  thefe  very 
journals  I utterly  difclaim  the  “ extraordinary 
gifts  of  the  Spirit,”  and  all  other  “ influences 
and  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  ’ than  thofe 
that  are  common  to  all  real  Chriftians- 

And  yeti  will  not  fay,  this  ignorance  is  blame- 
lefs.  For  ought  you  not  to  have  known  better  ? 
Ought  you  not  to  have  taken  the  pains  of  procur- 
ing better  information,  when  it  might  fo  eaiily 
have  been  had  ? Ought  you  to  have  publicly  ad- 
vanced fo  heavy  charges  as  thefe.  without  know- 
ing whether  they  were  true  or  no  ? 

6.  You  proceed  to  give  as  punciual  an  account 
of  us,  tanquam  intus  6?  in  cute  neflfes.  “ They 
outflript,  ifpoffible,  even  Montanus  for  externaf 
fanciity  and  feverity  of  difeiplinei.  They  con- 
demned all  regard  for  temporal  concerns. — They 
B 6 encouraged 


f Page  21. 


Page  32,. 


[ 3«  ] 

encouraged  their  devotees  to  take  no  thought  for 
any  one  thing  upon  earth:  the  confequence  of 
which  was,  a total  negledl  of  their  affairs,  and  vn- 
poverijhment  of  their  families.”  t Blunder  all 
over  ! We  had  no  room  for  any  difeipline,  fe- 
vere  or  not,  five  and  twenty  years  ago  : unlefs 
college  dilcipiine,  my  brother  then  reGding  at 
Chrijl -Church,  and  I at  Li ncoln-C 'allege.  And  as 
to  our  “ famElity'’  (were  it  more  or  lefs)  how 
do  you  know  it  was  only  external?  Was  you  in- 
timately acquainted  with  us  ? I do  not  remem- 
ber where  I had  the  honour  of  converting  with 
you.  Or  could  you  (as  the  legend  fays  of  St.  Pac- 
bonnus ) “ fmell  an  heretic  ten  miles”  off?  And 
how  came  you  to  dream  again,  that  we  “ con- 
demned all  regard  for  temporal  concerns,  and  en- 
couraged men  to  take  no  thought  for  any  one 
thing  upon  earth  ?”  ‘Vain  dream!  We  on  the 
contrary  feverely  condemn  all  who  neglebt  their 
temporal  concerns,  and  who  do  not  take  care  of 
every  thing  on  earth  wherewith  God  hath  in- 
truded them.  The  confequence  of  this  is,  that 
the  Melhodijls,  fo  called,  do  not  “ neglect  their 
affairs  and  iinpoverifh  their  families  but  by  di- 
ligence in  'buhnch  provide  things  honejl  in  the  fight 
(f  all  men.  Infomuch  that  multitudes  of  them, 
who  in  time  pad,  had  fcarce  food  to  eat,  or  rai- 
ment to  put  on,  have  now  all  things  needful  for 
life  and  godlinefs,  and  that  for  their  families,  as 
well  as  themfclves. 

7.  Hitherto 


t Page  23. 


[ 37  ] 

7.  Hitherto  you  have  been  giving  an  account 
of  two  tvolfiings  only  : but  now  they  are  grown 
into  perfeft  wolves.  Let  us  fee  what  a pifture 
you  draw  of  them  in  this  flate,  both  as  to  their 
principles  and  practice. 

You  begin  with  a home  droke,  “ In  the  Mon * 
t-amjl  ± you  may  behold  the  bold  lineaments  and 
bloated  countenance  of  the  Method fi:’  I wifhyou- 
do  not  fquint  at  the  honefl  countenance  of  Mr. 
Venn,  who  is  indeed  as  far  from  fear,  as  he  is 
from  guile.  But  if  it  is  fomewhat  bloated,  that 
is  not  his  fault : ficknefs  may  have  the  fame  ef- 
fect on  yours  or  mine. 

But  to  come  clofer  to  the  point.  “ They 
have  § darkened  religion  with  many  ridiculous 
fancies,  tending  to  confound  the  head,  and  to 
corrupt  the  heart.’’  “ A thorough  knowledge 
of  them  would  work  in  every  rightly- diTpofed 
mind  an  aborrence  of  thofe  doftiines,  which  di- 
rectly tend  to  didraft  the  head,  and  to  debauch 
the  heart,  by  turning  faith  into  frenfy,  and  the 
grace  of  God  into  wantonnefs.t”  “ Thefe  doc- 
trines are  unreafonable  and  ridiculous,  clafhing 
with  our  natural  ideas  of  the  divine  perfections, 
with  the  end  of  religion,  with  the  honour  of 
God,  and  man’s  both  prefent  and  future  happi- 
nefs.  Therefore  we  pronounce  them  filthy 
dreamers,  turning  faith  into  fancy,  thegofpel  in- 
to farce,  thus  adding  blafphemy  to  enthufiafm.’J|j 

Take 

+ Page  17.  § Page  13.  + Page  101.,  102.  |[  Page  66,  68» 


[ 3§  ] 

Take  breath,  Sir,  there  is  a long  paragraph 
behind.  “ The  abetters  § of  thefe  wild  and 
whimfical  notions,  are  1.  Clofe  friends  to  the 
church  of  Rome , agreeing  with  her  in  almoll  every 
thing,  but  the  doctrine  of  merit  : 2.  They  are 
no  lefs  kind  to  infidelity , by  making  the  Chrifti- 
ao  religion  a mere  creature  of  the  imagination  : 
3.  They  cut  up  Ckrifiianity  by  the  roots,  fruf- 
trating  the  very  end  for  which  Chrift  died, 
which  was  that  by  hohnefs  we  might  be  made 
meet for  the  inheritance  of  the  faints  : 4.  They  are 
enemies  not  only  to  Chrihianity,  but  to  every 
religion  ichatjoever , by  labouring  to  fubvert  or 
overturn  the  whole  fyftem  of  morality  : 5. 

Confequently  they  mult  be  enemies  of  fociety, 
diffolving  the  band  by  which  it  is  united  and 
knit  together.”  In  a word,.  “ All  antient  herefies 
have  in  a manner  concentered  in  the  Methodifls  : 
particularly  thofe  of  the  Simonians,  Gnofiics, 
Antinomians,  (as  widely  diftant  from  each  other, 
as  Predefiinarians  from  Calvinifis!  ) Valenti  mans, 
Donatifis  and  Montanijls While  your  hand 
was  in,  you  might  as  will  have  added,  Carpocra - 
lions,  Eutychians,  Neforiens,  Sabellians.  If  you 
fay,  “ I never  heard  of  them  no  matter  for 
that : you  may  find  them  as  well  as  the  reft  in 
Bp.  Pearfon's  index. 

Well,  all  this  is  mere  flourifh  ; raifing  a duft, 
to  blind  the  eyes  of  the  fpefitators.  Generals, 

you 


$ Page  101,  102. 


[ 39  ] 

you  know,  prove  nothing.  So  leaving  this  as 
it  is,  let  us  come  to  particulars. 

But,  firft,  give  me  leave  to  tranfcribe  a few 
words  from  a traft  publifhed  fome  years  ago. 
“ Your  + lordfhip  premifes.  It  is  not  at  all 
needful  to  charge  the  particular  tenets  upon  the 
particular  perfons  among  them.”  Indeed  it  is 
needful  in  the  higheft  degree.  Juft  as  needful 
as  it  is,  not  to  put  a ftumbling-block  in  the  way 
of  our  brethren  : not  to  lay  them  under  an  almoft 
infuperable  temptation  of  condemning  the  in- 
nocent with  the  guilty. 

And  it  is  now  far  more  needful  than  it  was 
then  ; as  that  title  of  reproach,  Methodijl , is 
now  affixt  to  many  people  who  are  not  under 
my  care,  nor  ever  had  any  connexion  with  me. 
And  what  have  I to  do  with  thefe  ? If  you  give 
me  a nick-name,  and  then  give  it  to  others 
whom  I know  not,  does  this  make  me  accounta- 
ble for  them  ? Either  for  their  principles  or  prac- 
tice? In  no  wife.  I am  to  anfwer  for  myfelf,  and 
for  thofe  that  are  in  connexion  with  me.  This 
is  all  that  a man  of  common  fenfe  can  under- 
take, or  a man  of  common  humanity  require. 

Let  us  begin  then  upon  even  ground  : and 
if  you  can  prove  upon  me,  John  Wejley,  any 
one  of  the  charges  which  you  have  advanced,  call 
me  not  only  a wolf  but  an  otter,  if  you  pleafe. 

8.  Your  firft  particular  charge  (which  indeed 
runs  through  your  book,  and  is  repeated  in 
twenty  different  places)  is,  that  we  make  the 

way 


+ Letter  to  the  Bp.  of  London,  p.  4,  5, 


[ 40  ] 

ivay  to  heaven  too  broad,  teaching,  men  mav 
be  faved  by  faith,  without  works.  Some  of 
your  words  are,  “ They  d Jet  out  with  forming  a 
fair  and  tempting  model  of  religion,  {o flattering 
the  follies  of  degenerate  man,  that  it  could  not 
fail  to  gain  the  hearts  of  multitudes,  efpecially  of 
the  loofe  and  vicious,  the  lazy  and  indolent/5 
“ They  want  to  get  to  heaven  the  fliortefl  way\ 
and  with  the  leajl  trouble  : now  a reliance  on 
Chrilf  and  a declaiming  of  good  works,  are 
terms  as  eafly  as  the  meereli  libertine  can  ark. 
They  perfuade  their  people  that  they  may  be 
faved  by  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrilf,  without 
any  holinefs  of  their  own  : nay,  that  p good 
work  are  not  only  unnecelfarv,  but  alfo  dan- 
gerous : that  we  ||  may  be  faved  by  faith, 

without  any  other  requifite,”  fuch  as  “ ^ofpef- 
obedience,  and  holy  life.”  LaPily,  “ Ttie 
§ Valentinians  pretended,  that  if  good  works 
were  neceffary  to  falvation,  it  was  only  to  ani- 
mal men,  that  is,  to  all  who  were  not  of  their 
clan;  and  that  although  fin  might  damn  others, 
it  could  not  hurt  them.  In  confequence  of 
which  they  lived  in  all  lull  and  impurity,  and 
wallowed  in  the  moll  unheard-of  bedialities. 
The  Method ifls  dilfinguifii  much  after  the  fame 
manner.” 

Sir,  you  are  not  awake  yet.  Youare  dream- 
ing Ifill,  and  fighting  with  fhadows  of  your  own 
raifing.  The  “ model  of  religion  with  which 

the 

+ Page  52.  £ p.  31.  (!  p.  38>  S P-  *4* 


C 41  ] 

the  Methodjls  Jet  out,”  is  perfectly  well  known, 
if  not  to  yon,  yet  to  many  ihoufands  in  England 
who  are  no  Methodijls.  I laid  it  before  the  uni- 
verfity  of  Oxford,  at  St.  Mary's,  on  January  1, 
1733.  You  may  read  it  when  you  are  at  leifure, 
for  it  is  in  print,  intitled,  “ The  circumcifion  of 
the  heart/’  And  whoever  reads  only  that  one  difi- 
courfe,  with  any  tolerable  lhare  of  attention,  will 
eafily  judge,  whether  that  model  oj  religion 
“ flatters  the  follies  of  degenerate  man,  ’ or  is 
likely  to  “ gain  the  hearts  of  multitudes,  efpe- 
cially  of  the  loofe  and  vicious,  the  lazy  and 
indolent!1.’  Will  a man  choofe  this,  as  “ the 
JJiortejl  way  to  heaven,  and  wdth  the  leaf  trouble  ?” 
Are  thefe  “ as  eajy  terms,  as  any  libertine  or 
infidel  can  defire?’’  The  truth  is,  we  have 
been  thefe  thirty  years  continually  reproached 
for  juft  the  contrary  to  what  you  dream  of  : 
with  making  the  way  to  heaven  too  Jh ait ; with 
being  ourfelves  righteous  over-much,  and  teach- 
ing others,  they  could  not  be  faved  without 
fo  many  works  as  it  was  impoffible  for  them  to 
perform.  And  to  this  day,  initead  of  teaching' 
men,  that  they  may  be  laved  by  a faith  which 
is  without  good  works,  without  “ gofpel- 
obed'ence  and  holinefs  of  life,”  we  teach 
exaftly  the  reverfe,  continually  infilling  on  ail 
outward  as  well  as  all  inward  holinefs.  For  the 
notorious  truth  of  this  we  appeal  to  the  whole 
tenor  of  our  fermons,  printed  and  unprinted  : 
in  particular  to  thofe  upon  our  Lord’s  fermou 

eti 


[ 4^  ] 


on  the  mount,  wherein  every  branch  of  gofpc-1- 
obedience  is  both  afferted  and  proved  to  be 
indifpenfably  necefTary  to  eternal  falvation. 

Therefore  as  to  the  reft  of  the  “ antinomian 
trajli’’  which  you  have  fo  carefully  gathered  up, 
as,  |]  “ That  the  regenerate  are  as  pure  as  Chrift 
himfelf ; that  it  would  be  criminal  for  them  to 
pray  for  pardon  ; that  the  greateft  crimes  are  no 
crimes  in  the  faints,”  &c.  &c.  I have  no  con- 
cern therewith  at  all,  no  more  than  with  any  that 
teach  it.  Indeed  I have  confuted  it  over  and 
over,  in  trafiis  publifhed  many  years  ago. 

9.  A fecond  charge  which  you  advance,  is, 
That  “ v/e  fuppofe  every  man’s  final  doom  to 
depend  on  God’s  fovereign  will  and  pleafure 
(I  prefume  you  mean,  on  his  abfolute,  uncon- 
ditional decree  :)  that  we  “ confider  man  as  a 
mere  machine  that  we  fuppofe  believers  “ can- 
not fall  from  grace. ”+  Nay,  I fuppofe  none  of 
thefe  things.  Let  thofe  who  do,  anfwer  for 
themfelves.  I fuppofe  juft  the  contrary,  in 
“ Fredeflination  calmly  conftdered,  ’ a trafl  pub- 
lifhed ten  years  ago. 

10.  A third  charge  is,  “ They  reprefent  faith 
as  a fupernatural  principle,  altogether  precluding 
the  judgment  and  underftanding,  and  difeerned 
by  fome  internal  figns ; not  as  a firm  perfuafion, 
founded  on  the  evidence  of  reafon,  and  difeern- 
able  only  by  a conformity  of  life  and  manners  to 
fuch  a perfuafion. ’ j; 

We 

U Page  17.  I Page  31.  ^ Page  11. 


C 43~  1 

We  do  not  reprefent  faith  “ as  altogether  pre- 
cluding, or  at  all  precluding  the  judgment  and 
underflanding rather  as  enlightening  and 
flrengthening  the  underflanding,  as  clearing  and 
improving  the  judgment.  But  we  do  reprefent 
it  as  the  gift  of  God , yea,  and  a “ fupernatural 
gift,”  yet  it  does  not  preclude  “ the  evidence  of 
reafon  though  neither  is  this  its  whole  founda- 
tion. “ A conformity  of  life  and  manners”  to 
that  perfuafion,  Chrift  loved  me,  and  gave  himf elf 
for  me,  is  doubtlefs  one  mark  by  which  it  is  dif- 
cerned ; but  not  the  only  one.  It  is  likewife 
difcerned  by  internal  fgns,  b'oth  by  the  witnefs 
of  the  Spirit,  and  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  namely, 
love,  peace,  joy,  meeknefs,  gentlenefs : by  all  the 
mind  which  was  in  Chrijl  Jefus. 

11.  You  affert,  fourthly,  “ They  fpeak  of 
grace,  that  it  is  as  perceptible  to  the  heart,  as 
fenfible  objefls  are  to  the  fenfes  : whereas  the 
fcriptures  fpeak  of  grace,  that  it  is  conveyed  im- 
perceptibly ; and  that  the  only  way  to  be  fatisfied 
whether  we  have  it  or  no,  is  to  appeal,  not  to  our 
inward  feelings,  but  our  outward  a£lions.”§ 
w We  do  fpeak  of  grace,  (meaning  thereby, 
that  power  of  God  which  worketh  in  us  both  to 
will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleafure)  that  it  is  “ as 
perceptible  to  the  heart”  (while  it  comforts,  re- 
frefhes,  purifies,  and  fheds  the  love  of  God 
abroad  therein]  “ as  fenfible  objebls  are  to  the 
fenfes.  ’ And  yet  we  do  not  doubt,  but  it  may 

frequently 


§ Page  32. 


[ 44  ] 

frequently  be  “ conveyed  to  us  imperceptibly.’'" 
But  we  know  no  fcripture  which  fpealis  of  it  as 
always  conveyed,  anil  always  working  in  an  im- 
perceptible manner.  We  likewife  allow,  that 
outward  aftions  are  one  way  ol  fatisfying  us,  that 
we  have  grace  in  our  hearts.  But  we  cannot  pof- 
fibly  allow,  that  1:  t!ie  only  way  to  be  fadsfied  of 
this,  is  to  appeal  to  our  outward  actions  and  not 
our  inward  feelings On  the  contrary,  we  be- 
lieve that  love,  joy,  peace,  arc  inwardly  felt,  or 
they  have  no  being  : and  that  men  are  fadsfied 
they  have  grace,  firlf  by  feeling  thefe,  and  after- 
ward by  their  outward  addons. 

22.  You  afTert,  fifthly,  “ They  talk  of  regene- 
ration in  every  Chriftian,  as  if  it  was  as  fudden 
and  miraculous  a converfion,  as  that  of  St.  Paul 
and  the  firft  converts  to  C hi i flianity,  and  as  if 
the  figns  of  it  were  frightful  tremors  of  body,  and 
convulfive  agonies  of  mind  : not  as  a work  gra- 
cioufly  begun  and  gradually  carried  on  by  the 
bleffed  Spirit,  in  conjun&ion  with  our  rational 
powers  and  faculties;  the  figns  of  which  are, 
fincere  and  univerfal  j|  obedience.'’ 

This  is  part  true,  part  falfe.  We  do  believe 
regeneration,  or  in  plain  EngbJJi,  the  new  birth, 
to  be  as  miraculous  or  fupernarural  a work  now 
as  it  was  feventeen  hundred  years  ago.  W e 
likewife!  believe,  that  the  fpirftual  life,  which 
commences  when  we  are  born  again,  mud  in 
the  nature  of  the  thing,  have  a firjl  moment  as 

well 


!i  38» 


[ 45  J 


well  as  the  natural.  But  we  fay  again  and  again, 
we  are  concerned  for  the  Jubjianc e of  the  work, 
not  the  zircumjlance.  Let  it  be  wrought  at  all, 
and  we  will  not  contend,  whether  it  be  wrought 
gradually  or  inftantaneoufly.  “ But  what  are  the 
figns  that  it  is  wrought  ?”  We  never  faid  or 
thought,  that  they  were  either  “ frightful  tremors 
of  body,”  or  M convullive  agonies  of  mind:'3 
I prefume  you  mean,  agonies  of  mind  attended 
with  bodily  convulfions.  Although  we  know 
many  perfonswho  bej ore  this  change  was  wrought, 
felt  much  fear  and  forrow  of  mind  : which  in 
fome  of  thefe  had  fuclr  an  effeft  on  the  body,  as 
to  make  all  their  bones  to  (hake.  Neither  did 
we  ever  deny,  that  it  is  a “ work  graciouflv  be- 
gun by  the  holy  Spirit,  enlightening  our  under- 
ftancling”  (which  I fuppofe  you  call  “ our  rational 
powers  and  faculties,)  as  well  as  influencing  our 
affeftions.”  And  it  is  certain,  he  “ gradually 
carries  on  this  work,”  by  continuing  to  influence 
all  the  powers  of  the  foul  : and  that  the  outward 
fign  of  this  inward  work,  is  “ fincere  and  uni- 
verfal  obedience.” 

13.  A fixth  charge  is-41  They  treat  Chriflianity 
as  a wild,  enthufiaflic  fcheme,’  which  will  bear 
no  examination .”+  Where  or  when  ? In  what 
fermon  ? In  what  traft,  practical  or  polemical  ? 
I wholly  deny  the  charge.  I have  myfelf  clofely 
and  carefully  examined  every  part  of  it,  every 

verfe 


t Page  30. 


L 46  ] 

verfe  of  the  New  Teftament,  in  the  original,  as 
well  as  in  our  own  and  other  tranflations. 

14.  Nearly  allied  to  this  is  the  threadbare 
charge  of  enthujiafm,  with  which  you  frequently 
and  largely  compliment  us.  But  as  this  alfo  is 
averted  only,  and  not  proved,  it  falls  to  the 
ground  of  itfelf.  Mean  time  your  afferting  it,  is 
a plain  proof,  that  you  know  nothing  of  the  men 
you  talk  of.  Becaufe  you  know  them  not,  you 
fo  boldly  fay,  “ One  advantage  we  have  over 
them,  and  that  is  reafon."  Nay,  that  is  the  very 
queftion.  I appeal  to  all  mankind,  whether  you 
have  it,  or  no  ? However,  you  are  fure,  we  have 
it  not,  and  are  never  likely  to  have.  For  “ rea- 
fon,  you  fay,  cannot  do  much  with  an  enthufiaft, 
whofe  firft  principle  is,  to  have  nothing  to  do 
with  reafon,  but  refolve  all  his  religious  opinions 
and  notions  into  immediate  infpiration."  Then, 
by  your  own  account  I am  no  enthufiaft  ; for  I 
refolve  none  of  my  motions  into  immediate  in- 
fpiration. I have  fomething  to  do  with  reafon  ; 
perhaps  as  much  as  many  of  thofe  who  make  no 
account  of  my  labours.  And  I am  ready  to  give 
up  every  opinion,  which  1 cannot  by  calm, 
clear  reafon  defend.  Whenever  therefore  you 
“ will  try  what  you  can  do  by  argument ,”  which 
you  have  not  done  yet,  I wait  your  leifure,  and 
will  follow  you  ftep  by  ftep,  which  way  foever 
you  lead. 

* 15.  “ But  is  not  this  plain  proof  of  the  en- 
thufiafm  of  the  Method fs,  that  they  defpife  hu- 
man 


[ 47  ] 

man  learning,  and  make  a loud  and  terrible  out- 
cry againft  it  ?”  Pray,  Sir,  when  and  where  was 
this  done?  Be  fo  good  as  to  point  out  the  time 
and  place  ; for  I am  quite  a Itranger  to  it.  I be- 
lieve indeed,  and  fo  do  you,  that  many  men 
make  an  ill  ufe  of  their  learning.  But  fo  they 
do  of  their  bibles : therefore  this  is  no  reafon  for 
defpifing  or  crying  out  againft  it.  I would  ufe  it 
juft  as  far  as  it  will  go  ; how  far  I apprehend  it 
may  be  of  ufe,  how  far  I judge  it  to  be  expedi- 
ent at  leaft,  if  not  neceffary  for  a clergyman, 
you  might  have  feen,  in  the  EarneJi  Addrefs  to 
the  clergy.  But  in  mean  time  I blefs  God,  that 
there  is  a more  excellent  gift,  than  either  the 
knowledge  of  languages  or  philofophy.  For 
tongues  and  knowledge  and  learning  will  vanijh 
away  ; but  love  never  faileth. 

16. 1 think  this  is  all  you  have  faidwhich  is  any 
way  material  concerning  the  doSlrines  of  the  Me~ 
thodijls.  The  charges  you  bring  concerning  their 
fpirit.  or  praSice,  may  be  difpatched  in  fewer 
words. 

And,  firft,  you  charge  them  with  pride  and 
uncharitablenejs.  “ They  + talk  as  proudly  as 
the  Dotanijls , of  their  being  the  only  true  preach- 
ers of  the  gofpel,  and  efteem  thernfelves,  in  con- 
tra-diftinftion  to  others,  as  the  regenerate,  the 
children  of  God,  and  as  having  arrived  at  finlefs 
perfe£tion.” 

All 


t Page  15. 


[ 1 

All  of  a piece.  We  neither  talk  nor  think  fc. 
We  doubt  not  but  there  are  many  true  preachers 
of  the  gofpel,  both  in  England  and  elfewhere, 
who  have  no  connexion  with,  no  knowledge  of 
us.  Neither  can  we  doubt,  but  that  there  are 
many  thoufand  children  of  God,  who  never  heard 
our  voice,  or  faw  our  face.  And  this  may  fuf- 
fice  for  an  anfwer  to  all  the  allertions  of  the  fame 
kind,  which  are  fcattered  up  and  down  your 
work.  Offinlefs  perfe&ion,  here  brought  in  by 
head  and  fhoulders,  I have  nothing  to  fav  at  pre- 
fent. 

17.  You  charge  them,  fecondlv,  “ with  boldnefs 
and  blafphemy,  who  triumphing  in  their  train  of 
credulous  and  crazy  followers,  the  fpuiious 
(fhould  it  not  be  rather  the  genuine ) offspring  of 
their  infidious  craft,  afcribe  the  glorious  event  to 
divine  grace,  and  in  almoft  every  page  of  their 
paltry  harangues , invoke  the  blclfed  Spirit  to  go 
along  with  them,  in  their  foul-awakening  work, 
that  is,  to  continue  to  afiift  them  in  feducing 
the  fimple  and  unwary. ”j| 

What  we  afcribe  to  divine  grace  is  this,  the 
convincing  Tinners  of  the  errors  of  their  ways, 
and  the  turning  them  from  darknefs  to  light,  from 
the  power  of  Satan  to  God.  Do  not  you  yourfeif 
“ afcribe  this  to  grace  ?”  And  do  not  you  too 
“ invoke  the  bleffed  Spirit,  to  go  along  with  vou 
“ in  every  part  of  your  work?’’  If  you  do  not,  you 
lofe  all  your  labour. — Whether  we  “ feduce  men 

into 


U PaSe  4l • 


V 


[ £9  ] 

into  fin,”  or  by  his  grace  fave  them  from  it 
another  queftion. 

18.  You  charge  us,  thirdly,  with  “ requiring  + 
a blind  and  implicit  trull;  from  our  difciples,”  who 
accordingly  “ truft  as  implicitly  ± in  their  preach- 
ers, as  the  papills  in  their  Pope,  councils,  or 
church.’’  Far  from  it ; neither  do  we  require  it  ; 
nor  do  they  that  hear  us  place  any  fuch  trull  in  any 
creature.  fearch  the  Jcriptiu  es,  and  here- 

bv  try  every  dotlrine  whether  it  be  of  God. 
And  what  is  agreeable  to  fcripture  they  em- 
brace; what  is  contrary  to  it  they  rej eft. 

19  You  charge  us,  fourthly,  with  injuring 
the  clergy  in  various  wavs.  ill.  “ They  are 
very  indullrious  to  diffolve  or  break  off  that  fpi- 
ritual  intercourfe,  which  the  relation  wherein 
we  Hand,  requires  fhould  be  preferved  betwixt 
us  and  our  people.’’  But  can  that  fpiritual  in- 
tercourfe be  either  preferved  or  broke  off,  which 
never  exifted  ? What  fpiritual  intercourfe  exifts 
between  you,  the  retlor  of  St.  Michael,  and  the 
people  of  your  parilh  P I fuppofe  you  preach  to 
them  once  a week,  and  now  and  then  read  prayers. 
Perhaps  vou  vifit  one  in  ten  of  the  Tick.  And 
is  this  all  the  fpiritual  intercourfe , which  you 
have  with  thofe,  over  zu/iom  the  Holy  Ghojl  hath 
made  you  an  overfeer?  In  how  poor  a fenfe  then 
do  you  watch  over  the fouls,  for  whom  you  are  to 
give  an  account  to  God  ! Sir,  I wilh  to  God, 
there  were  a truly  fpiritual  intercourfe  between 
VOL.  XVII.  C you 

-fPage  10.  j p.  51. 


you  and  all  your  people ! I wifh  you  “ knew  all 
your  flock  by  name,  not  excepting  the  men-fer- 
vants  and  women-fervants  !”  Then  you  might 
cherijli  each,  as  a nurfe  her  own  children , and 
tram  them  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the 
Lord.  Then  might  you  warn  every  one  and 
exhort  every  one , till  you  Ihould  prefent  every  one 
p erf  ell  in  Chriji  JeJus. 

“ But  they  fay,  our  fermons  contradict  the 
articles,  homilies  and  liturgy  of  our  own  church  ; 
Vea,  that  we  contradift  ourfelves,  faying  one 
thing  in  the  defk  and  another  in  the  pulpit.” 
And  is  there  not  caufe  to  fay  fo  ? I myfelf  have 
heard  feveral  fermons  preached  in  churches, 
which  flatly  contradicted  both  the  articles,  homi- 
lies and  liturgy,  particularly  on  the  bead  of 
juflification.  I have  like  wife  heard  more  than 
one  or  two  perfons,  who  “ faid  one  thing  in  the 
defk,  and  another  in  the  pulpit.”  In  the  defk 
they  prayed  God  to  cleanfe  the  thoughts  of  their 
hearts  by  the  infpiration  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  In 
the  pulpit  they  faid  “ There  was  no  fuch  thing  as 
infpiration , flnce  the  time  of  the  apoflles.” 

“ But  this  is  not  alb  You  poifon  the  people 
by  the  mofl  peevifh  and  fpiteful  -mve£lives 
againfl  the  clergy,  the  mod  rude  and  rancorous 
revilings,  and  the  mofl  invidious  + calumnies.” 
No  more  than  I poifon  them  with  arfenic.  I 
make  no  peevifh  or  fpiteful  inveftives  againfl  anv 
man.  Rude  and  rancorous  revilings  (fuch  as 

your 


[ 5*  ] 

your  prefent  tradl  abounds  with)  are  alfo  far 
from  me.  I dare  not  return  railing  j or  railing , 
becaufe  (whether  you  know  It,  or  no)  I fear  God.- 
Invidious  calumnies  likewife  I never  dealt  in: 
all  fuch  weapons  I leave  to  you. 

20.  One  charge  remains,  which  you  repeat 
over  and  over,  and  lay  a peculiar  ftrefs  upon : 
fas  to  what  you  talk  about  perverting  fcripture,  I 
pafs  it  by,  as  mere,  unmeaning,  common-place 
declamation.)  It  is  the  poor  old,  worn-out  tale  of 
“ Getting  money  by  preaching.”  This  you 
only  intimate  at  firft.  “ Some  of  their  followers, 
had  an  inward  call,  to  fell  all  that  they  had,  and 
lay  it  f at  their feet.”  Pray,  Sir,  favour  us  with 
the  name  of  one,  and  we  will  excufe  you  as  to 
all  the  reft.  In  the  next  page  you  grow  bolder, 
and  roundly  affirm  “ With  all  their  heavenly- 
mindednefs,  they  could  not  help  calling  a fheep’s- 
eye  at  the  unrighteous  mammon.  Nor  did  they 
pay  their  court  to  it  with  lefts  cunning  and  fuccefs 
than  Mont  anus.  Under  the  fpecious  appear- 

ance of  gilts  and  offerings,  they  railed  con- 
tributions from  every  quarter.  Belidcs  the  week- 
ly penfions  fqueezed  out  of  the  poorer  and  lower 
part  of  their  community,  they  were  favoured 
with  very  large  oblations  from  perfons  of  better 
figure  and  fortune  : and  efpecially  from  many 
believing  wives,  who  had  learned  to  praflife  pious 
frauds  on  their  unbelieving  hufbands.” 

I am  airaoft  afhamed  (having  done  it  twenty 

C 2 times 

+ Page  2 2. 


L 52  ] 

times  before)  to  anfvver  this  flale  calumny  again. 
But  the  bold,  frontlefs  manner  wherein  you  ad- 
vance it,  obliges  me  fo  to  do.  Know  then,  Sir, 
that  you  have  no  authority  either  from  fcripture 
orreafon,  to  judge  of  other  men  by  you rf elf.  If 
your  own  confcience  convifts  you  of  loving 
money,  of  “calling  a fheep’s-eye  at  the  unrighte- 
ous mammon,”  humble  yourfeif  before  God,  if 
haplv  the  thoughts  and  de  fires  of  your  heart  may 
be  forgiven  you.  But,  bluffed  be  God,  my 
confcience  is  clear.  My  heart  does  not  con- 
demn me  in  this  matter.  I know,  and  God 
knoweth,  that  I have  no  defire  to  load  mvfelf 
with  thick  clay  : that  I love  money  no  more  than 
I love  the  mire  in  the  llreets  : that  I feek  it  not. 
And  I have  it  not  : any  more  than  fuffices  for 
food  and  raiment,  for  the  plain  conveniencies  of 
life.  I pay  no  court  to  it  at  all,  or  to  thofe  that 
have  it,  either  with  cunning  or  without.  For 
myfelf,  for  my  own  life,  I raife  no  contribu- 
tions either  great  or  fmall.  The  weekly  con- 
tributions of  our  community  (which  are  freely 
given,  not  fqueezed  out  of  any)  as  well  as  the 
gifts  and  offerings  at  the  Lord’s  table  never  come 
into  my  hands.  I have  no  concern  with  them, 
not  fo  much  as  the  beholding  them  with  my  eyes. 
They  are  received  every  week  by  the  Rewards 
of  the  fociety,  men  of  well  known  character  in 
the  world,  and  by  them  conftantly  diilributed 
within  the  week,  to  thofe  whom  they  know  to 

be 


[ 53  ] 

be  in  real  neceffity.  As  to  the  “ very  large 
oblations  wherewith  I am  favoured  by  perfons  of 
better  figure  and  fortune,”  I know  nothing  of 
them:  be  fo  kind  as  to  refrefh  my  memory  by 
mentioning  a few  of  their  names.  I have  the 
happinefs  of  knowing  fome  of  great  figure  and 
fortune  : fome  right  honourable  perfons.  But  if 
I were  fo  fay,  that  all  of  them  together  had  given 
ine  feven  pounds  in  feven  years,  I fhould  fay 
more  than  I could  make  good.  And  yet  I doubt 
not,  but  they  would  freely  give  me  any  thing  I 
wanted  : but  by  the  blelfing  of  God,  I want  no- 
thing that  they  can  give.  I want  only  more  of 
the  Spirit  of  love  and  power,  and  of  an  healthful 
mind. — As  to  thofe  “ many  believing  wives  who 
praftife  pious  frauds  on  their  unbelieving  huf- 
bands,”  I know  them  not,  no,  not  one  of  that 
kind  : therefore  I doubt  the  faff.  If  you  know 
any  fuch,  be  pleafed  to  give  us  their  names  and 
places  of  abode.  Otherwife  you  mull  bear  the 
blame  of  being  the  lover , if  not  the  maker  of  a lie , 
Pei  haps  you  will  fay,  “ Why,  a great  man 
faid  the  fame  thing  but  a few  years  ago.”  What 
if  he  did  ? Let  the  frog  fwell  as  long  as  he  can, 
he  will  not.  equal  the  ox.  He  might  fay  many 
things,  all  circumflances  confidered,  which  will 
not  come  well  from  you  ; as  you  have  neither  his 
wit,  nor  fenfe,  nor  learning,  nor  age,  nor  dignity. 

Tibi  par vula  res  ejl : 

Metiri fe  quemq-,  fuo  modulo  ac  pede  verum  ef. 

C 3 


If 


[ <54  ] 

If  you  fall  upon  people  that  meddle  not  with  you, 
without  either  fear  or  wit,  you  may  poffibly 
find  they  have  a little  more  to  fay  for  themfelves 

than  you  was  aware  of. 1 follow  peace  with 

all  men:  but  if  a man  fet  upon  me,  without 
either  rhyme  or  reafon,  I think  it  my  duty  to  de- 
fend myfelf,  fo  far  as  truth  and  juflice  permit. 
Yet  {fill  I am  (if  a poor  enthuliaft  may  not  be  fo 
bold  as  to  ilile  himfelf  your  brother,) 

Reverend  Sir, 

London,  Your  fervant for  Chrijl's fake, 

Nov.  17,1759.  JOHN  WESLEY, 


A LETTER 


[ 55.  ] 


LETTER 

TO  THE 

Reverfcnd  Dr,  HORNE: 


Occafioned  by  his  late  Sermon  preached  before 
the  Univerfity  of  Oxford , about  1762. 


Rev.  Sir, 

WHEN  you  fpoke  of  “ kerefes  making  their 
“ periodical  revolutions,”  of  “ Antino - 
“ mianifm  rampant  among  us,”  and  immediately 
after,  of  “ the  new  lights  at  the  Tabernacle  and 
“ Foundery mull  not  your  hearers  naturally 
think,  that  Mr.  Whitefeld  and  I were  reviving 
thofe  herefies  ? But  do  you  know  the  perfons  of 
whom  you  fpeak?  Have  you  ever  converfed  with 
C 4 them  ? 


E s«  ] 

them?  Have  you  read  their  writings  ? If  not,  is 
it  kind,  is  it  juft,  to  pafs  fo  fevere  a cenfure 
upon  them  ? Had  you  only  taken  the  trouble  of 
reading  one  traff,  the  “ Appeal  to  Men  of  Rea- 
fon  and  Religion,”  you  would  have  feen,  that  a 
great  part  of  what  you  affirm,  is  what  I never 
denied,  1 o put  this  beyond  difpute,  I beg  leave 
to  tranfcribe  fome  palTages  from  that  treatife ; 
which  will  ffiew  not  only  what  I teach  now, 
but  what  I have  taught  for  rnanv  years.  I will 
afterward  fimply  and  plainly  declare,  wherein  I 
as  yet  differ  from  you.  And  the  rather,  that  if 
I err  therein,  you  may,  by  God’s  affiltance,  con- 
vince me  of  it. 

1.  1.  “ J 'unification  fometimes  means,  our  ac- 
quittal at  the  laft  day.t 

2.  That  faith  alone  is  the  proximate  condition 
of  juftification.” 

II.  1.  “ T have  here  fhewn  at  large,  what  is  the 
do&rine  I teach  with  regard  to  juffification,  and 
have  taught,  ever  fince  I was  convinced  of  it 
myfelf,  by  carefully  reading  the  New  Teflament 
and  the  Homilies.  In  many  points,  I appre- 
hend, it  agrees  with  yours ; in  fome,  it  does 
not : thefe  I come  now  to  confider.  May  God 
enable  me  to  do  it,  in  love  and  meeknefs  of 
wifdom  !” 

You  fay,  p.  7.  “ Happy  times,  when  faith 

and 


+ Farther  Appeal.  Part  I.  p.  1,  *. 


[ 57  ] 

and  a good  life  were  fvnonymous  terms.”  I con- 
ceive, they  never  were.  Is  not  faith  the  root,  a 
good  life  the  tree  fpringing  theiefrom  ? 

P.9.  “ That  good  works  are  a necelTary  con- 
dition of  our  juflification,  may  be  proved,  1.  From 
exprefs  teffimonies  of  fcripture.  So  Ifaiah  i.  16. 
Ceafe  from  evil , learn  to  do  well.  Then  your  fins 
that  were  as  Jcarlet,  Jliall  be  white  as  flow.  Here 
ceafiingfrom  evil,  and  learning  to  do  well,  are  the 
conditions  of  pardon.”  I anfwer,  without  them 
there  is  no  pardon  ; yet  the  immediate  condition 
of  it  is  faith.  He  that  beljevetb,  and  he  alone, 
isjuffified  before  God.  “ So  Ezekiel  xxxiii.  J4. 
If  the  finner  turn  from  his  evil  ways,  and  walk  in 
the  Jlatnt.es  ofilfe,  then  all  his  fnsjhall  not  be  once 
mentioned  to  him.'’  Molt  fure  ; that  is,  if  he  be- 
lieve ; elfe,  whatever  his  outward  walking  be, 
he  cannot  be  jollified. 

The  next  fcripture  you  cite,  + Matt.  xi.  28. 
proves  no  more  than  this,  that  none  find  ref  to 
their  fouls,  unlefs  they  fir  ft  come  to  Chrift  (namely 
by  faith)  arid  then  obey  him. 

But  “ he  fays,  Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do 
uhatfoever  I command  you.'’  He  does  fo  : but 
how  does  it  appear,  that  this  relates  to  juftifica- 
tion  at  all  ? 

“ St.  Peter  alfo  declares,  ± In  every  nation  he 
that  fearetk  God  and  worketh  mghteoufnefs  is  ac- 
cepted of  him.”  He  is  : but  none  can  either  fear 
God  or  work  righteoufnefs,  till  he  believes  ac- 
C 5 cording 

+ Sermon,  p.  ro.  j A£bx-.  34. 


C 58  ] 


cording  to  the  difpenfation  he  is  under.  “ And 
St.  John,  He  that  doth  righteoufnefs  is  righteous.” 
I do  not  fee,  that  this  proves  any  thing.  “ And 
again,  + lj  we  walk  in  the  light  as  God  is  in  the 
light,  then  have  ivc  communion  with  him,  and  the 
blood  of  Jefus  ChriJ}  his  Son  cleanfeth  us  from  all 
fn.”  This  would  prove  fomething  if  it  could  be 
proved,  that  cleanfing  us  from  all  Jin,  meant  only 
juftification. 

“ The  fcriptures  infill  upon  the  neceffity  of 
repentance  in  particular  for  that  purpofe.  But 
repentance  comprehends  compun&ion,  humilia- 
tion, hatred  of  fin,  confeftion  of  it,  prayer  for 
mercy,  ceafing  from  evil,  a firm  purpofe  to  do 
well,  reftitution  of  ill-got  goods,  forgivenefs  of 
all  who  have  done  us  wrong,  and  works  of  bene- 
ficence.”:!; I believe  it  does  comprehend  all  thefe, 
either  as  parts  or  as  fruits  of  it:  and  it  compre- 
hends “ the  fear,”  but  not  “ the  love  of  God:” 
that  flows  from  a higher  principle.  And  he  who 
loves  God  is  not  barely  in  the  right  way  to  jufti- 
fication : he  is  adlually  juftified.  The  reft  of  the 
paragraph  aftertsjuft  the  fame  thing  which  was 
aflerted  in  thofe  words,  ‘ previous  to  juftifying 
faith  muft  be  repentance,  and,  if  opportunity 
permits,  fruits  meet  Jor  repentance.’  But  ftill  I 
muftobferve,  that  “ neither  the  one  nor  the  other 
is  neceffary,  either  in  the  fame fenfe,  or  in  the 
fame  degree  with  faith.”  No  fcripture  tefti- 

mony 


■f  1 John  i 7. 


$ Page  ll,  12. 


[ 59  ] 

mony  can  be  produced,  which  any  way  contra- 
difils  this. 

2.  “ That  works  are  a neceffary  condition  of 
our  juftification,  may  be  proved,  fccondly,  from 
fcripture  examples : particularly  thofe  recited  in 
the  eleventh  chapter  of  the  epiflle  to  the  Hebrews. 
Thefe  all  through  faith  wrought  righteoifn'ejs  ; 
without  working  righteoufnejs , they  had  never 
obtained,  the  promifesTh  I lay  the  fame  thing  : 
none  are  finally  faved,  but  thofe  whofe  faith 
worketh  by  love.- 

“ Even  in  the  thief  upon  the  crofs,  faith  was 
attended  by  repentance,  piety  and  charity.”  It 
was repentance  went  before  his  faith  : piety 
and  charity  accompanied  it.  “ Therefore  he  was 
notjuftified  by  faith  alone.”  Our  chufich,  adopt- 
ing the  words  of  St.  Chryfojlom , exprefly  affirrhs, 
in  the  paffage  above  cited,  he  was  jufiified  by 
faith  alone.  And  her  authority  ought  to  weigh 
rnorfc  than  even  that  of  bifhop  Bull,  or  of  any 
fingle  man  whatever.  Authority,  be  pleafed  to 
o'bferve,  I plead  again  ft  authority  ; reafon  againft; 
xeafon. 

It  is  no  objeftion,  that  the  faith  whereby  he 
was  jufiified,  immediately  produced  good  works. 

3.  How  we  are  jufiified  by  faith  alone,  and 
yet  by  fuch  a faith  as  is  not  alone : it  may  be 
proper  to  explain.  And  this  alfo  I chiife  to  do, 
not  in  my  own  words,  but  in  thofe  of  our 
church. 

C 6 “ Eaith 

t Page  13,  , ,( 


[ 6°  ] 

“ Faith  does  not  ffiut  out  repentance,  hope, 
love,  and  the  fear  of  God,  to  bejoined  with  faith 
in  every  man  that  is  jullified  ; but  it  fhutteth 
them  out  from  the  office  of  jultify ing.  So  that 
although  they  be  all  prefent  together  in  him  that 
is  jullified,  yet  they  jullify  not  altogether. ”+ 
Neither  doth  faith  ffiut  out  good  works,  necef- 
farily  to  be  done  ajterwards,  of  duty  towards 
God. 

“ That  we  are  jullified  only  by  this  faith  in 
Chrifl,  fpeak  all  the  antient  authors : fpecially 
Origen,  St.  Cyprian,  St.  Ckryfojiom,  Hilary,  Bafil , 
St.  Ambrojt  and  St.  Augujlint .” 

4.  You  go  on.  “ Thirdly,  £ if  we  confider 
the  nature  of  faith,  it  will  appear  impoffible  that 
a man  ffiould  be  jullified  by  that  alone.  Faith  is 
either  an  affent  to  the  gofpel  truths,  or  a reliance 
on  the  gofpel  promt fes.  I know  of  no  other 
notion  of  fault.”  I do  : an  £Xe1%o,-  of 

things  not  Jetn  : which  is  far  more  than  a bare 
ajjent,  and  yet  teto genere  different  from  a reliance. 
Therefore  if  you  prove,  that  neither  an  afftni  nor 
a reliance ]\i[\\hzs,  nor  both  of  them  together,  Hill 
you  do  not  prove,  that  we  are  not  jullified  by 
faith,  even  by  faith  alone.  Rut  how  do  you 
prove,  that  we  cannot  be  jullified  by  faith  as  a 
reliance  on  the  promifes  ? Thus.  “ Such  a reli- 
ance mull  be  founded  on  a confcioufnefs  of  hav- 
ing performed  the  conditions.  And  a reliance 
fo  founded  is  the  refult  of  works  wrought  through 

Jaithr 

+ Homily  on  the  Salvation  of  Man.  ^ Page  15. 


[ 6i  ] 

faith”  No  : of  works  wrought  withovt  faith; 
elfe  the  argument  implies  a contradi&ion.  For 
it  runs  thus,  (on  tFie  fuppofition  that  faith  and 
reliance  were  fvnonymous  terms)  fuch  a reliance 
is  the  refult  of  works  wrought  through  fuch  a 
reliance. 

g.  Your  fourth  argument  againd  judification 
by  faith  alone,  is  drawn  from  the  nature  of  jolli- 
fication. This,  you  obferve,  “ implies  a prifoner 
at  the  bar,  and  a law  by  which  he  is  to  be  tried ; 
and  this  is  not  the  law  of  Mofes , but  that  of 
Child,  requiring  repentance  and  faith,  with  their 
proper  fruits, :’t  which  now,  through  the  blood 
of  Chrid,  are  accepted  and  counted  for  righteouf- 
nefs.  St.  Paul  affirms  this,  concerning  faith,  in 
the  fourth  chapter  of  his  epiffie  to  the  Romans. 
But  where  does  he  fay,  that  either  repentance 
or  its  fruits  are  counted  for  righteoufnels  ? Ne- 
verthelefs  I allow,  that  the  law  of  Chrid  requires 
fuch  repentance  and  faith  before  judification,  as, 
if  there  be  opportunity,  will  bring  forth  the  fruits 
of  right  eoufnefs.  But  ifthere  be  not,  he  that  re- 
pents and  believes  is  judified  notwithstanding. 
Confequently,  thefe  alone  are  neceffary,  indif- 
penfably  neceffary  conditions  of  our  judification. 

6.  Your  lad  argument  againd  judification  by 
faith  alone,  “ is  drawn  from  the  method  of  God's 
proceeding  at  the  lad  day.  He  will  then  judge 
every  man  according  to  his  works.  If  therefore 
works  wrought  through  faith  are  the  ground  of 

the 


t Pag.  16. 


[ ««  ] 

the  fentencepaftupon  us  in  that  day,  then  are  they 
a neceflary  condition  of  our  juftification t in 
other  words,  “ if  they  are  a condition  of  our  final, 
they  are  a condition  of  our  prefent  juftification.” 
I cannot  allow  the  confequence.  All  holinefs 
mull  precede  our  entering  into  glory.  But  no 
holinefs  can  exift,  till  being  jufiified  by  faih , we 
have  peace  with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrifi. 

7.  You  next  attempt  to  reconcile  the  writings 
of  St.  Paul  with  juftification  by  works.  In  order 
to  this  you  fay,  “ in  the  three  firft  chapters  of 
his  epiftle  to  the  Romans,  he  proves  that  both 
Jews  and  Gentiles  mult  have  recourfe  to  the  gofpel 
of  Chrift.  To  this  end  he  convifts  the  whole 
world  of  fin.  And  having  Jlopped  every  mouth , 
he  makes  his  inference,  Therefore  by  the  deeds  of 
the  law,  there  fhall  no  filefih  be  juflified.  JVe  con- 
clude,then,  fays  he,  a man  is  jujlified  by  faith , 
without  the  deeds  of  the  law.  But  here  arife  two 
quellions,  firft,  What  are  the  works  excluded 
from  juftifying?  Secondly,  What  is  the  faith 
which  juftifies  ?,-j; 

“ The  works  excluded  are  Heathen  and  Jewijk 
works,  fet  up  as  meritorious.  This  is  evident 
from  hence,  that  Heathens  and  carnal  Jews  are 
the  perfons  againft  whom  he  is  arguing.”  Not 
fo : he  is  arguing  againft  all  mankind:  he  is 
44  convifting  the  whole  world  of  fin.”  His  concern 
is,  to  fop  every  mouth,  by  proving,  that  no  ffi, 

none 

+ Page  19.  J Page  20,  21, 5 2. 


[ 63  ] 

none  born  of  a woman,  no  child  of  man  caa 
btjujlified  by  his  own  works.  Confequently  he 
fpeaks  of  all  the  works  of  all  mankind,  antece- 
dent to  j unification,  whether  Jewifh  or  any  other, 
whether  fuppofed  meritorious  or  not,  of  which 
the  text  fays  not  one  word.  Therefore  all  works 
antecedent  to  juflification  are  excluded,  and 
faith  is  fet  in  Jlat  oppofition  to  them.  Unto  him 
that  worketh  not  but  believeth,  his  faith  is  counted 
to  him  for  nghteou fiefs. 

“ But  what  is  the  faith  to-  which  he  attributes 
juflification  ? That  which  worketh  by  love:  which 
is  the  fame  with  the  new  creature , and  implies  in 
it  the  keeping  the  commandments  of  God.” 

It  is  undoubtedly  true,,  that  nothing  avails  for 
our  final  falvation  without  yum  a new  crea- 

tion, and  confequent  thereon,  a fincere,  uniform 
keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God.  This 
St.  Paul conflantly  declares.  But  where  does  he 
fay,  this  is  the  condition  of  our  juflification  ? In 
the  epi files  to  the  Romans  and  Galatians  particu- 
larly, he  vehemently  afferts  the  contrary;  ear- 
neflly  maintaining,  that  nothing  is  abfolutely  ne- 
ceffary  to  this,  but  believing  in  him  that  juf  if  eth 
the  ungodly : not  the  godly;  not  him  that  is  al- 
ready a new  creature,  that  previoufly  keeps  all  the 
commandments  of  God.  He  does  this  after- 
ward: when  he  is  juflified.  by  faith,  then  his  faith 
worketh  by  love. 

Therefore  there  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that 
are  in  Chrifl  Jefus,  juflified  by  faith  in  him,  pro- 
vided 


[ 64  3 

vided  they  walk  in  him  whom  they  have  received , 
not  after  the  fefi,  but  after  the  Spirit.  But  fhould 
they  turn  back,  and  walk  again  after  the  fleffi, 
they  would  again  be  under  condemnation.  But 
this  no  way  proves,  that  walking  ajter  the  Spirit 
was  the  condition  of  their  juflification. t 

Neither  will  any  thing  like  this  follow,  from 
the  apofile’s  faying  to  the  Corinthians , Though  I 
had  all faith,  fo  as  to  remove  mountains , and  have 
not  charity,  I am  nothing.  This  only  proves, 
that  miracle-working  faith  may  be,  where  faving 
faith  is  not. 

* 8.  To  the  argument,  “ Sr.  Paul  fays,  Abraham 
was  jifhfied  by  faith,”  you  anfwer,  “ St.  James 
fays,  Abraham  was  jufified  by  works.”  1 True  : 
but  he  neither  fpeaks  of  the  fame  juf  if  cation, 
nor  the  fame  faith,  nor  the  fame  works.  Not  of 
the  fame  juflification  ; for  St.  Paul  fpeaks  of  that 
juflification  which  was  five  and  twenty  years  be- 
fore Ifaac  was  born  :§  St.  James  of  that  where- 
with he  wasjuflified  when  he  ojftred  up  Ifaac  on 
the  altar.  It  is  living  faith,  wheieby  St.  Paul  af- 
firms we  are  juflified : it  is  dead  faith,  whereby 
St.  James  affirms  we  are  not  juflified.  St.  Paul 
fpeaks  of  works  antecedent  to  juflification  : St. 
James  of  vjorks  confequent  upon  it.  This  is  the 
plain,  eafy,  natural  way  of  reconciling  the  two 
apoftles. 

* The  faff  was  manifeflly  this : i.  When  Abra- 
ham dwelt  in  Haran,  being  then  feventy  five  years 

okli 

i Page  23.  f Page  24.  \ Gea. 


L 65  ] 

old,  God  called  him  thence : he  believed  God,  and 
he  counted  it  to  him  for  righteoufnejs.  That  is,  he 
zuas  ju/iified  by  faith,  as  St.  Paul  llrenuoufly  af- 
ferts.  2.  Many  years  after  Ifaac  was  born  (Tome 
of  the  antients  thought,  three  and  thirty)  Abraham 
fhewing  his  faith  by  his  works,  offered  him  up 
upon  the  altar.  3.  Here  the  faith  by  which,  in 
St.  Paul's  fenfe,  he  was  juftified  long  before, 
wrought  together  with  his  works,  and  hewasjufti- 
fied,  in  St.  James's  fenfe,  that  is,  (as  the  apoftle 
explains  his  own  meaning)  by  works  his  faith  was 
made  perfedl.  God  confirmed,  increafed  and  per- 
fe£ted  the  principle  from  which  thofe  works 
fprang. 

* 9.  Drawing  to  a conclufion  you  fay,  “ What 
pity  fo  many  volumes  fhould  have  been  written 
upon  the  queflion,  whether  a man  be  juftified  by 
faith  or  works,  feeing  they  are  two  effential  parts 
of  the  fame  thing  ?”+  If  by  works  you  underhand 
inward  and  outward  holinefs,both  faith  and  works 
are  effential  parts  of  Chriflianity : and  yet  they 
are  effentially  different,  and  by  God  himfelfcon- 
tradiftinguifhed  from  each  other.  And  that  in 
the  very  queflion  before  us,  him  that  worketh  not, 
but  believeth.  Therefore,  whether  a man  be  jufti- 
fied by  faith  or  works,  is  a point  of  the  laft  im- 
portance : otherwife  our  reformers  could  not 
have  anfwered  to  God,  their  fpending  fo  much 
time  upon  it.  Indeed  they  were  both  too  wife 

and 


+ Page  25, 


r 66.  ] 

mid  too  good  men,  to  have  w wrote  To  many  vo 
lumes'’  on  a trifling  or  needlefs  queflion. 

10.  If  in  fpeaking  on  this  important  point, 
(fuch  at  leafl  it  appears  to  me)  I have  laid  any 
thing  offenfive,  any  that  implies  the  leafl  degree 
of  anger  or  difrefpeci,  it  was  entirely  foreign  to 
my  intention  : nor  indeed  have  I any  provoca- 
tion. I have  no  room  to  be  angry  at  your  main- 
taining what  you  believe  to  be  tbe  truth  of  the 
gofpel : even  though  I might  wifh  you  had  omit- 
ted a few  expreflions^ 

Quas  aut  incuria fudit, 

Aut  ku/nana  parum  cavit  natural 

In  the  general,  from  all  I have  heard  concerning 
you,  I cannot  but  very  highly  efteem  you  in  love. 
And  that  God  may  give  you  both  “ a right  judg- 
ment in  all  things,  and  evermore  to  rejoice  in. 
his  holy  comfort,”  is  the  prayei  of, 

Reverend  Sir, 

Your  ajfefliohate  brother  and Jervant, 

JOHN  WESLEY. 


SOME 


[ 67  ] 


S O M F, 

REMARKS 


ON  A 


Defence  of  the  Preface  to  the  Edinburgh  edition 
of  A/gafto  vindicated. 


Edinburgh , May,  1766. 

I Have  neither  time,  nor  inclination,  to  write 
a formal  anfwer  to  the  Reverend  Dr.  Erjkint  s 
tra£f.  My  hope  of  convincing  him  is  loft:  he 
has  drank  in  all  the  fpirit  of  the  book  he  has 
publifhed.  But  I owe  it  to  God  and  his  children, 
to  fay  fomething  for  myfelf,  when  I am  attacked 
in  fo  violent  a manner,  if  haply  fome  may  take 
knowledge,  that  I alfo  endeavour  to  live  honJUyr 
%nd  to  ferve  God . 

I.  Dr.  Erjkint 


[ 68  ] 

I.  Dr.  Erjkine  fays,  “ An  edition  of  thefe 
“ letters  has  been  publifhed  in  London , from  the 
“ author’s  own  manufcripts,  which  puts  the  au- 
“ thenticity  of  them  beyond  doubt.”  I anfwer. 
This  is  a miftake  : impartial  men  doubt  of  their 
authenticity  as  much  as  ever.  (I  mean,  not  with 
regard  to  the  letters  in  general,  but  to  many  par- 
ticular paffages.)  And  that  for  two  reafons. 
Firfl,  becaufe  thofe  paffages  breathe  an  acrimo- 
ny and  bitternefs  which  Mr.  Hervey  in  his  life- 
time never  fhewed  to  any  one,  and  leafl  of  all 
to  one  he  was  deeply  obliged  to.  Surely  this  is 
not  what  Dr.  E.  terms  his  “ fcriptural  and  ani- 
“ mated  manner .”  I hope  it  was  not  for  this  cauje, 
that  he  pronounces  this  “ equal,  if  not  fuperior 
“ to  any  one  of  his  controverfial  pieces  publifhed 
“ in  his  life-time.”  Indeed,  I knew  of  no  con- 
troverftal  piece  at  all  which  he  publifhed  in  his 
life-time.  His  Dialogues  he  no  more  intended 
for  fuch,  than  his  Meditations  among  the  tombs. 
A fecond  reafott  for  doubling  of  their  authentici- 
ty is,  that  he  told  his  brother,  with  his  dying 
voice,  (I  have  it  under  his  brother’s  o-wn  hand,) 
“ I defire  my  letters  may  not  be  publifhed : 
“ becaufe  great  part  of  them  is  wrote  in  a fhort- 
“ hand,  which  none  but  myfelf  can  read.” 

II.  But  the  prefent  queftion  lies,  not  between 
me  and  Mr.  Hervey,  but  between  Dr.  E.  and 
me.  He  vehemently  attacks  me,  for  faying, 
“ Orthodoxy,  or  right  opinion,  is,  at  befl,  but  a 

very  {lender  part  of  religion,  if  any  part  of  it 

“ at 


<6 


L 


69  } 

*«  at  all.”  He  labours  to  deduce  the  moil  fright- 
ful confequences  from  it,  and  cries,  “If  once 
“ men  believe,  that  right  opinion  is  a {lender 
“ part  of  religion,  if  any  part  of  religion  or  no 
“ part  at  all,  there  is  fcarce  any  thing  fo  loolifh, 
« or  fo  wicked,  winch  Satan  may  not  prompt 
“ to,”  p.  6.  And  what  if,  after  all,  Dr.  E. 
himfelf  believes  the  very  fame  thing  ? I am 
much  miftaken  if  he  does  not.  Let  us  now 
fairly  make  the  trial. 

I afTert,  1.  That,  in  fome  cafes,  “ right  opi- 
“ nion  is  no  part  of  religion:”  in  other  words, 
there  may  be  right  opinion,  where  there  is  no 
religion.  I inftance,  in  the  devil.  Has  he  not 
right  opinions  ? Dr.  E.  mult,  per  force,  fay,  yes. 
Has  he  religion  P Dr.£.  mull  fay,  No.  Therefore, 
here  right  opinion  is  no  part  of  religion.  Thus 
far  then  Dr.  E.  himfelf  believes  as  I do. 

I albert,  r.  In  other  cafes,  “ it  is  a {lender  part 
“ of  religion.”  Obferve,  I fpeak  of  right  opi- 
nion, as  contradiftinguiffied  both  from  right  tem- 
pers, and  from  right  words  and  uchons.  Of  this, 
I fay,  “ it  is  a llender  part  of  religion.”  And  can 
Dr.  E.  fay  otherwife  ? Surely,  no  : nor  any  man 
living,  unlefs  he  be  brimful  of  the  fpirit  of  con- 
tradiflion. 

“ Nay,  but  I affirm,  right  tempers  cannot  fub- 
“ fift  without  right  opinion:  the  love  of  God, 
" for  inliance,  cannot  fubfift  without  a right 
“ opinion  of  him.”  I have  never  faid  any  thing 
to  the  contrary  : But  this  is  another  queftion. 

Though 


[ 7°  ] 

Though  right  tempers  cannot  fubfift  without  right 
opinion,  yet  right  opinion  may  fubfift  without 
right  tempers.  There  may  be  a right  opinion  of 
God,  without  either  love,  or  one  right  temper 
toward  him.  Satan  is  a proof  of  it.  All  there- 
fore that  I alTert  in  this  matter,  Dr,  E.  mull  af- 
firm too. 

But  does  it  hence  follow,  “ that  ignorance  and 
error  are  as  friendly  to  virtue  as  juft  fentiments  ?” 
Or,  that  anv  man  may  “ difbelieve  the  bible 
with  perfeft  innocence  or  fafety  ?!’  Does  Dr.  E. 
himfelf  think  I believe  this  ? I take  upon  me  to 
fay,  he  does  not  think  fo.  “ But  why  does  he  talk 
as  if  he  did  ?”  Becaufe  it  is  a clear  confequence 
from  your  own  affertion.  I anfwer.  1.  If  it 
be,  that  confequence  is  as  chargeable  on  Dr.  E. 
as  on  me  : fince  he  muft,  nolens  volens , alTert  the 
fame  thing,  unlefs  he  will  difpute  through  a ftone- 
wall.  2.  This  is  no  confequence  at  all.  For  ad- 
mitting “ right  tempers  cannot  fubfrft  without 
■right  opinions you  cannot  infer  ; therefore 
right  opinions  cannot  fubfift  without  right  tem- 
pers.” Prove  this  by  other  mediums,  if  you  can  : 
but  it  will  never  be  proved  by  this.  However, 
until  this  is  done,  I hope  to  hear  no  more  of  this 
thread-bare  objeftion. 

III.  Dr.  E.  attacks  m e,/econd!y,  with  equal  ve- 
hemence, on  the  head  of  jvjlijication.  In  vari- 
ous parts  of  his  tra ft,  he  flatly  charges  me  with 
holding  jujlijication  by  works.  In  fupport  of  this 

-charge. 


C 71  ] 

^charge,  he  cites  feveral  fentences  out  of  various 
treatifes,  abridgments  of  which  I have  occafional- 
]y  publifhed  within  thefe  thirty  years.  As  I have 
not  thofe  abridgments  by  me  now,  I fuppofe  the 
citations  are  fairly  made  : and  that  they  are  exact- 
ly made,  without  any  miflake,  either  defigned 
or  undefigned.  I will  fuppofe  likewife,  that  fome 
of  thefe  expreffions,  gleaned  up  from  feveral 
tradls,  are  indefenfible.  And  what  is  it  which 
anv  unprejudiced  perfon  can  infer  from  this  ? 
Will  any-candid  man  judge  of  my  fentiments,  ei- 
ther on  this,  or  any  other  head,  from  a few  fen- 
tences of  other  men,  (though  reprinted  by  me, 
after  premifing,  that  I did  not  approve  of  all  their 
exprejjions,)  or  from  mv  own  avowed,  explicit 
declarations,  repeated  over  and  over?  Yet  this  is 
the  way  by  which  Dr.  E.  proves,  that  I hold  juf- 
tification  by  works ! He  continually  cites  the 
words  of  thofe  authors  as  mine,  telling  his  rea- 
der, “ Mr.  Wejley  fays  thus  and  thus.”  I do  not  fay 
fo  ; and  no  man  can  prove  it,  unlefs  by  citing  my 
own  words.  I believe  juflification  by  faith  alone, 
as  much  as  I believe  there  is  a God.  I declared 
this  in  the  fermon  preached  before  the  univerfity 
of  Oxford , eight  and  twenty  years  ago.  I declar- 
ed it  to  all  the  world  eighteen  years  ago,  in  a fer- 
mon wrote  exprefsly  on  the  fubjeft.  I have  ne- 
ver varied  from  it,  no,  not  an  hair’s  breadth, 
from  1738  to  this  day.  Is  it  not  flrange,  then, 
that  at  this  time  of  day  any  one  fhoukl  face  me 
dpwn,  (yea,  and  one  who  has  that  very  volume 


in 


E 7*  ] 

In  his  hands,  wherein  that  fermon  on  juflification 
by  faith  is  contained,)  that  I hold  juflification  by 
works  ? And  that,  truly,  becaufe  there  are  fome 
expreflions  in  fome  tradfs  wrote  by  other  men,  but 
reprinted  by  me  during  a courfe  of  years,  which 
feem  (at  lead)  to  countenance  that  doctrine!  Let 
it  fuffice,  (and  it  will  fuffice  for  every  impartial 
man,)  that  I abfolutely,  once  for  all,  renounce 
every  expreflion  which  contradiffs  that  fundamen- 
tal truth,  We  art  jujhfiedby  faith  alone. 

“ But  you  have  publifhcd  John  Goodwin' s 
trcatife  on  juflification.”  I have  fo  : but 

1 have  not  undertaken  to  defend  every  ex- 
preflion which  occurs  therein.  Therefore  none 
has  a right  to  palm  them  upon  the  world  as  mine. 
And  vet  I defire  no  one  will  condemn  that  trea- 
tife  before  he  has  read  it  over  ; and  that  feiioufly 
and  carefully  ; for  it  can  hardly  be  underflood 
by  a flight  or  curfory  reading.  And  let  whoever 
has  carefully  read  it  declare,  whether  he  has  not 
proved  every  article  he  aflerts.  not  only  by  plain 
exprefs  fcripture,  but  by  the  authority  of  the  mod 
eminent  reformers.  If  Dr.  E.  thinks  otherwife, 
let  him  confute  him  ; but  let  no  man  condemn 
what  he  cannot  anlwer. 

IV.  Dr.  E.  attacks  me,  thirdly,  on  the  head  of 
Chrijlian  perfettion.  It  is  not  my  dcfign  to  enter 
into  the  merits  of  the  caufe.  I would  on'yjuft 
obfei  ve  1.  That  the  great  argument  which  Dr.  E. 
brings  againfl  it  is  of  no  force  ; and  2.  That  he 

mifunderflands 


[ 73  ] 

■mifundcr'flands  and  mifreprefents  my  fentiments 
on  the  fubjefh 

Firft,  His  great  argument  againfi  it  is  of  no 
force.  It  runs  thus.  “ Paul’s  contention  with 

Barnabas,  is  a flrong  argument  again  ft  the  at- 
“ tainablenefs  of  perfeftion  in  this  life,”  p.  41. 
True,  if  we  judge  by  the  bare  found  of  the  Eng- 
lijh  verfion.  But  Dr.  E.  reads  the  original : 
■lyimo  7rapo£ucrf*Sf.  It  does  not  fay,  that fiarpnefs 
was  on  both  /ides.  It  does  not  fay,  that  all,  or  any 
part  of  it  was  on  St.  Paul’s  fide.  Neither  does  the 
context  prove,  that  he  was  in  any  fault  at  all. 
Indeed,  ke.  thought  it  not  good  to  take  him  with 
than,  who  had  deferted  them  before.  Now  cer- 
tainly there  was  no  blame  in  this : neither  was 
there  any  in  his  fubfequent  behaviour.  For  when 
Barnabas  alfo  departed  from  it,  he  went  on  dill 
in  the  work.  He  went  through  Syria  and  Cilicia, 
•as  he  had  propofed,  confirming  the  churches. 

Secondly,  He  mifunderftands  and  mifrepre- 
fents  my  fentiments  on  the  fubjeft.  He  fays, 
“ Mr.  Wejlcy  feerns  to  maintain,  that  finlefs  per- 
fection is  aCtually  attained  by  every  one  born  of 
God,”  p.  39. 

I do  not  maintain  this.  I do  not  believe  it.  I 
'believe  Chriftian  perfection  or  p erf ed  love,  ( finlefs 
fierfedion,  is  an  expreflion,  which  I do  not  ufe 
■or  contend  for)  is  not  attained  by  any  of  the 
children  of  God,  till  they  are  what  the  apoftle 
John  terms  fathers.  And  this  I exprefsly  declare 
Von,  XVII.  D in 


[ 74  1 

in  that  very  fermon  which  Dr.  E.  fo  iargcl'/ 
quotes. 

IV.  Why  Dr.  E.  fhould  quarrel  with  me  con- 
cerning natural free-will,  I cannot  conceive,  un- 
lefs  for  quarrelling’s  fak-e.  For  it  is  certain,  on 
this  head,  if  no  other,  we  are  precifely  of  one 
mind. 

I believe  that  Adam  before  his  fall  had  fuch 
freedom  of  will , that  he  might  chufe  either  good 
or  evil : but  that  fince  the  fall  no  child  of  man 
has  a natural  power  to  chufe  any  thing  that  is 
truly  good.  Yet  I know,  and  who  does  not?} 
that  man  has  dill  freedom  of  will  in  things  of  an 
indifferent  nature.  Does  not  Dr.  E.  agree  with 
me  in  this  ? O ! why  fhould  we  feck  occafion  oi 
■contention  ? 

V.  That  Michael  Servetus  W3S  “ one  of  the 
wildeft  antitrinitarians  that  ever  appeared,"  is  by 
no  means  clear.  I doubt  of  it,  on  the  authority 
of  Calvin  hitnfelf,  who  certainly  was  not  prejudic- 
ed in  his  favour.  For  if  Calvin  does  not  mifquote 
his  words,  he  was  no  antitrinitarian  at  all.  Calvin 
himfelf  gives  a quotation  from  one  of  his  letters, 
in  which  he  exprefsly  declares,  “ I do  believe  die 
Father  is  God,  the  Son  is  God,  and  the  FIolv 
Ghoft  is  God.  But  I dare  not  ufe  the  word  tri- 
nity, or perfon.”  I dare,  and  I think  them  very- 
good  words.  But  I fhould  think  it  very  hard  to 

be 


[ 75  ] 

be  burnt  alive  for  not  tiling  them  : efpecially  with 
a flow  fire,  made  of  moift,  green  wood! 

I believe£h/w«  was  a great  inftrument  of  God  ; 
and  that  lie  was  a wife  and  a pious  man.  But  I 
cannot  but  advife  thofe  who  love  bis  memory  to 
let  Sorvetus  alone.  Yet  if  any  one  refolves  to  un- 
derffand  the  whole  affair,  he  may  fee  a circum- 
ftantia!  account  of  it,  publifhed  fome  years  fince 
by  Dr.  Chandler,  an  eminent  Prefbyterian  divine 
in  London. 

VI.  Gf  myfelf  I fhall  fpeaka  little  by  and  by. 
But  I would  now  {'peak  of  the  Meihodijls,  fo  cal- 
led, in  general.  Concerning  thefe,  Dr.  E.  cites 
the  following  words,  from  a little  traft,  publifhed 
Tome  years  fince.t 

“ We  look  upon  ourfelves,  not  as  the  authors 
“ or  ringleaders  of  a particular  feft  or  party,  but 
“ as  meffengers  of  God  to  thofe  who  are  Chrif- 
“ tians  in  name,  but  Heathens  in  heart  and  life, 
“ to  call  them  back  to  that  from  which  they  are 
“ fallen,  to  real  genuine  Cbri'ftianity.” — “ We 
“ look  upon  the  Mdhodijh,  not  as  any  particu- 
lar  party,  but  as  living  witnefles,  in  and  to 
“ every  party,  of  that  Chrifiianity  which  we 
preach.”  p.  g. 

On  this  Dr.  E.  remarks.  “ If  the  Methodift- 
teachers  confined  themfelves  to  preaching,  there 
might'  be  fome  room  for  this  plea  : but  hardly, 
when  they  form  bands  and  clafles:”  that  is,  when 
D 2 " they 

'+  Advice  to  the  people  called  Methodifts. 


[ 76  ] 

they  advife  thofe  who  are  “ recalled  to  real 
Chriftianity”  to  watch  over  each  other,  left  they 
fall  again  into  the  nominal  religion,  or  no  reli- 
gion, that  Inrrounds  them.  But  how  does  this  al- 
ter the  cafe  ? What,  if  being  jealous  left  any  op 
their  brethren  fhould  again  be  hardened  through  the 
deceitjulnefs  of  Jin,  they  fhould  exhort  one  another, 
not  only  weekly,  but  daily,  to  cleave  to  God 
with  full  purpofe  of  heart?  Why  might  we  not 
plead  ftill,  that  thefe  are  not  to  “ be  looked  upon 
as  any  particular  party,  but  as  living  witnelTes,  in 
and  to  every  party,  of  that  Chriftianity  which  we 
preach  ?” 

What  Dr.  E.  fays  of  the  mifchievoufnefs  of 
this,  and  with  great  plaufibilily,  p.  27.  depends 
upon  an  entire  miftake,  namely,  that  the  leader 
of  a clafs  a£fs  juft  like  a Romifti  firieft:  and  that 
the  inquiries  made  in  a clafs  are  of  the  fame  kind 
with  thofe  made  in  auricular  coifefjion.  It  all 
therefore  falls  to  the  ground  at  once,  when  it  is 
obferved,  that  there  is  no  refemblance  at  all,  ei- 
ther between  the  leader  ana  the  priejl,  or  between 
the  inquiries  made  by  one  and  by  the  other. 

It  is  true,  that  the  leader  “ fees  each  perfon 
once  a week,  to  inquire  how  their  fouls  prof- 
per  ?”  And  that  when  they  meet,  “ the  leader  or 
teacher  alks  each  a few  queftions  relating  to  the 
prefent  fituation  of  their  minds."  So  then,  that 
queftions  are  adfually  afked,  yea,  and  inquiries 
made,  cannot  be  denied.  But  what  kind  of  quef- 
inquiries  ? None  that  expofe  the  an- 

fwerer 


tions  or 


[ 77  ] 

fwerer  to  any  danger : none  that  they  would 
fcruple  to  anfwer  before  Dr.  E.  or  any  other  per- 
fon  that  fears  God. 

VII.  But  you  “ form  a church  within  a church, 
whofe  members  in  South-Bntain  profefs  to  be- 
long to  the  church  of  England,  and  thofe  in 
North-Britain  to  the  church  of  Scotland,  while 
yet  they  are  infpecfed  and  governed  by  teachers 
who  are  fent,  continued,  or  removed  by  Mr. 

wr  P.  3. 

All  this  is,  in  a certain  fenfe,  very  true.  But 
let  us  fee  what  all  this  amounts  to. 

You  “ form  a church  within  a church that 
is,  you  raife  up  and  join  together  witnelfes  of 
real  Chriftianity,  not  among  Mahometans  and 
Pagans,  but  within  a church  by  law  eBabl ifhed. 

Certainly  fo.  And  that  church,  if  fhe  knew 
her  own  intereft,  would  fee  fhe  is  much  obliged 
to  us  for  fo  doing.  “ But  the  Methodifls  in 
Soutli-Britain  profefs  to  belong  to  the  church  of 
England .”  They  profefs  the  truth  : for  they  do 
belong  to  it  ; that  is,  all  who  did  fo  before  the 
change  was  wrought,  not  in  their  external  mode 
ofworfhip,  but  in  their  tempers  and  lives.  “ Nay, 
but  thofe  in  Scotland  profefs  to  belong  to  the 
church  of  Scotland And  they  likewife  profefs 
the  truth.  For  they  do  belong  to  it  as  they  did 
before.  And  is  there  any  harm  in  this  ? 

“ But  they  are  flill  infpeffed  by  Mr.  W.  and 
his  preachers.”  And  they  think  this  both  their 
D 3 duty 


[ 78  ] 

duty  and  their  privilege  : namely,  to  be  {fill  in- 
flrufted,  and  built  up  in  faith  and  love,  by  tliofe 
who  were  the  inftruments,  in  God's  hand,  of 
bringing  them  from  dead,  formal  religion,  to 
righteouftiefs  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoji. 
But  {fill  thofe  teachers  are  fo  e <reft;l,  not  to  with- 
draw them  from  the  church  to  which  they  belong, 
not  to  make  any  divifion,  that  they  neither  bap- 
tize, nor  adminiffer  the  Lord  s fupper.  If  I were 
deftrous- to  form  a fep^rate  party,  I fhculd  do 
both  without  delay. 

VIII.  I come  now  to  add  a few  words,  with- 
out any  preface  or  ceremony,  concerning  myfelf. 

Dr.  E.  affirms,  fvjl , That  I am  a very  knave  ; 
-.  and , fecondly,  That  I am  in  a flate  of  damnation. 

As  to  the  firjl , he  fays,  truth  and  honejly  chufe 
to  enter  openly  and  undifguifed.  He  that  enter- 
cth  not  by  the  door  of  a plain,  ftmple  declaration 
of  his  fentiments,  but  infinuates  h'mfelf  by  con- 
cealing his  opinions,  the  fame  is  a thief  and  a rob- 
ber,  p.  5. 

We  have  more  to  the  fame  purpofe.  “ Upon 
mature  reflection,  I faw  no  caufe  to  flatter  myfelf, 
that  I could  procure  from  him  fatisfaCfion  as  to 
what  offended  me. — He  had  difeovered  himfelf 
no  novice  in  the  arts  of  fubtlety  and  difguife,” 

p.  24. 

Again,  “ I find  little  elfe  than  that  Jlufting  at 
which  Mr.  W.  is  fo  fingularly  expert This  is 
as  genteel  as  to  fay,  “ Sir,  you  lie and  it  is 

jufl 


[ 79  ] 

juft  as  ftrong  an  argument.  It  is  indeed  mere 
common-place,  with  which  a man  fond  of  fuch 
flowers  may  embellifh  his  page  on  any  occafion. 

But  what  room  is  there  for  it  on  this  occafion  ? 
By  God’s  help,  I will  lift  this  matter  thoroughly. 
And  I trull  no  gentleman  or  fcholar,  who 
weighs  what  I fay,  will  throw  this  dirt  in  my  face 
any  more. 

For  feveral  years  I was  moderator  in  the  depu- 
tations which  were  held  fix  times  a week  at 
Lincoln  College  in  Oxford.  I could  not  avoid 
acquiring  hereby  fome  degree  of  expertnejs  ia 
arguing:  and  efpecially  in  difcerning  and  point- 
ing out  well-covered  and  plaufible  fallacies. 
I have  fince  found  abundant  reafon  to  praife  God 
for  giving  me  this  honejl  art.  By  this,  when 
men  have  hedged  me  in,  by  what  they  called 
demonjlrations,  F'have  been  many  times  able  to 
dafh  them  in  pieces:  in  fpite  of  all  its  covers,  to 
touch  the  very  point  where  the  fallacy  lay  : and 
it  flew  open  in  a moment.  This  is  the  art  which 
I have  ufed  with  bifhop  Warburton,  as  well  as 
in  the  preceding  pages.  When  Dr.  E.  twilled 
truth  and  falfhood  together,  in  many  of  his  pro- 
pofitions,  it  was  by  this  art  I untwifled  the  one 
from  the  other,  and  fhewed  juft  how  far  each 
was  true.  At  doing  this,  I blefs  God,  I am 
expert:  as  thofe  will  find,  who  attack  me  with- 
out rhyme  or  reafon.  But  f lifting,  fubtlety,  and 
difguifel  defpife  and  abhor,  full  as  much  as  Dr. 
E.  And  if  he  cannot  fee,  that  I have  anfwered  bp. 

D 4 Warburton 


C »o  ] 

Warburton  plainly  and  direftly,  and  fo  untwified 
his  arguments,  that  no  man  living  will  be  able  to 
piece  them  together,  I believe  all  unprejudiced 
men  can  and  are  thoroughly  convinced  of  it. 

Let  any  candid  man  review  the  la  ft  article, 
and  he  will  fee  another  inflance  of  this.  Dr. 
E.  had  given  us  a long  paragraph,  about  “ form- 
ing a church  within  a church.”  It  is  to  the 
fame  effeft  with  the  obje&ion  which  the  warm 
church-men  have  often  urged  again!!  the  difien- 
ters  in  England . It  founds  extremely  plaufible, 
and  the  parts  of  it  are  carefully  knit  together. 
But  it  is  not  a gordian  knot  : a man  moderately 
expert  in  arguing  may  untie  it.  And  when  the 
threads  are  feparate,  it  plainly  appears  to  have 
been  fine,  but  not  flrong. 

As  to  the  fecond  point,  I cannot  at  all  com- 
plain of  Dr.  jE.’s  want  of  opennefs.  He  fpeaks 
plain  and  downright : “ Seeming  ftriftnefs  of 
behaviour  will  not  juflify  thofe  who  forget” — 
“■  there  is  a way  which  feemeth  right  unto  a 
man  ; but  the  end  thereof  is  the  way  oj  death.” 
P.  46. 

Again.  “ What  claim  can  he  have  to  ge- 
nuine Chrifnanity , whofe  profefied  experience 
gives  God  the  lie  P”  “ Say  I thefe  things  as  a 
man,  or  faith  not  the  law  the  fame  alfo  ?”  “ It  is 
a deadly  charity  that  flatters  men  with  a per- 
fuafion  that  they  are  in  the  way  of  life,  whom 
the  fcripture  pronounces  in  a way  oj dejlruc- 
tion 


Dr. 


[ 8i  ] 

Dr.  E.’s  charity  is  of  another  kind  ! It  is  Mr. 
Sandman' s charity  ! It  reminds  me  of  the  chari- 
ty of  an  Antinomian  in  London,  one,  I mean, 
who  was  newly  recovered  from  that  delufion  : 
“ Sir,  faid  (he,  laft  week,  I would  not  have  been 
content  to  kill  you,  if  I could  not  have  damned 
you  too.”  I pray  God  to  deliver  me  from  fuch 
charity  ! Charity  cruel  as  the  grave  1 
“'But  what  right  have  I to  complain  ofDr.  E.  ? He 
has  no  obligation  to  me.  My  fpeaking  of  him 
every  where  as  I have  done,  was  a point  of 
juftice,  not  of  friendlhip.  I had  only  the  defire, 
but  not  the  power  of  doing  him  any  kindnefs. 
I could  not  fay  to  him,  Neverthelefs  thou 
owe/l  me  thine  own  fold  afo.  I have  it  not 
underDr.  £.’shand,  as  I have  under  Mr,  Hervey  s, 
t:  Shall  I call  you  my  father , or  my  friend  ? 
You  have  been  both  to  me.”  If  thofe  related 
to  me  by  fo  near,  fo  tender  ties,  thus  furioufly 
rife  up  againft  me,  how  much  more  may  a 
ftranger,  one  of  another  nation?  “ 0 Abfalom, 
my  fon,  my  fon  /” 


POSTSCRIPT. 

In  his  twenty- fir  ft  page,  Dr.  E.  fays,  “ How  far  Mr.. 
Wefey  s letter  was  an  anfwer  to  any  thing  material 
in  the  preface,  the  reader  will  beft  judge  by  pe- 
D 5 ruling 


C 82  ] 


ruling  it.”  I have  annexed  it  here,  that  the  rea- 
der may  judge,  whether  it  is  not  an  anfwer  to  one 
very  material  thing,  namely,  the  charge  of 
“ concealing  my  fentiments,”  for  whichDr.  E.  con- 
demns me  in  the  keened  manner,  and  on  which 
very  account  he  makes  no  fcruple  to  pronounce 
me  a thief  and  a robber.  I need  only  premife, 
that  I wrote  it  not  out  of  fear,  (as  perhaps  Dr.  E. 
thought)  neither  in  guile  ; but  merely  out  of  love 
to  him,  and  concern  for  the  caufe  of  God.  I de- 
fire no  favor  from  him  or  any  opponent : do  me 
ju/lice,  and  I alk  no  more. 

Edinburgh,  April  24,  1765. 

Reverend  Sir, 

BETWEEN  thirty  and  forty  years  I have  had 
the  woild  upon  me,  fpeaking  all  manner  of 
evil.  And  I expected  no  lefs,  as  God  had  called 
me  to  teftify  that  its  deeds  were  evil.  But  the 
children  of  God  were  not  upon  me  : nor  did  I 
expeft  they  would.  I rather  hoped  they  would 
take  knowledge,  that  all  my  defigns,  and  thought, 
and  care,  and  labour,  were  dire&ed  to  this  one 
point,  to  advance  the  kingdom  of  Chrift  upon 
earth.  And  fo  many  of  them  did,  however  dif- 
fering from  me  both  in  opinions  and  modes  of 
worfhip.  I have  the  pleafure  to  mention  Dr. 
Doddridge,  Dr.  I Vat  is,  and  Mr.  War  dr  ope,  in 

particular. 


[ 83  ] 

particular.  How  then  was  I furpized,  as  well  as 
concerned,  that  a child  of  the  fame  Father,  a 
fervant  of  the  fame  Lord,  a member  of  the  fame 
family,  and  (as  to  the  eftence  of  it)  a preacher' 
of  the  fame  gofpel,  fhould,  without  any  provoca- 
tion that  I know  of,  declare  open  war  againft  me! 

I was  the  more  furprized,  becaufe  you  had  told 
me  fome  months  fince,  that  you  would  favour 
me  with  a letter.  And  had  this  been  done,  I 
make  no  doubt  but  you  would  have  received 
full  fatisfaftion.  Inftead  of  this,  you  ufhered 
into  this  part  of  the  world,  one  of  the  mofl  bitter 
libels  that  was  ever  wrote  againft  me  : wrote  by 
a dying  man,  (fo  far  as  it  was  wrote  by  poor, 
well-meaning  Mr.  Hervey,)  with  a trembling 
hand,  juft  as  he  was  tottering  on  the  margin  of 
the  grave.  A great  warrior  refigned  his  crown, 
becaufe  “ there  fhould  be  fome  interval,  he  faid, 
between  fighting  and  death,”  But  Mr.  Hervey, 
who  had  been  a man  of  peace  all  his  life,  began  a 
war  not  fix  months  before  he  died.  He  drew  his 
fword,  when  he  was  juft  putting  off  his  body.  He 
then  fell  on  one  to  whom  he  had  the  deepeft  ob- 
ligations, (as  his  own  letters,  which  I have  now* 
in  my  hands,  teflify)  on  one  who  had  never  in - 
ttntionally  wropged  him,  w'ho  had  never  fpoken 
an  unkind  word  of  him,  or  to  him,  and  who  loved  - 
him  as  his  own  child.  O tell  it  not  in  Gai/il  The 
good  Mr.  Hervey  (if  thefe  letters  were  his)  died 
curling  his  fpirituai  Father. 

And  tiiefe  letters  another  good  man,  Mr. 

D 6 


has 


[ §4  J 

has  introduced  into  Scotland,  and  warmly  re- 
commended. Why  have  you  done  this  ? “ Be- 
caufe  you  have  concealed  your  principles,  which 
is  palpably  dijlionejly 

When  I was  fir  ft  invited  into  Scotland,  (about 
fourteen  years  ago)  Mr.  Whitefield  told  me,  “ You 
have  no  bufinefs  there  : for  your  principles  are 
lb  well  known,  that  if  you  fpoke  like  an  angel, 
none  would  hear  yon.  And  if  they  did,  you 
would  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  difpute  with  one 
and  another  from  morning  to  night.” 

I anfwered,  “ If  God  fends  me,  people  will 
hear.  And  I will  give  them  no  provocation  to- 
difpute  : for  I will  ftudioufly  avoid  controverted 
points,  and  keep  to  the  fundamental  truths  of 
Chriftianity.  And  if  any  ftdl  begin  to  difpute,. 
they  may  : but  I will  not  difpute  with  them.” 

I came.  Hundreds  and  thoufands  flocked  to 
hear.  But  I was  enabled  to  keep  my  word.  I 
avoided  whatever  might  engender  ftrife,  and  in- 
filled upon  the  grand  poin  s,  the  religion  of  the 
heart,  and  falvation  by  faith,  at  all  limes,  and  in 
all  places.  And  by  this  means,  I have  cut  off  all 
cccafion  of  difpute,.  from  the  fiift  day  to  this 
very  hour. 

And  this  you  amazingly  improve  into  a fault; 
conftrue  into  a proof  or  difhoncjly.  You  likewife 
cha.ge  me  with  holding  unfound principles,  and 
with  faying,  “ right  opinions  are  (fometimes)  no 
part  of  religion.” 

The  laft  charge  I have  anfwered  over  and  o\er, 

and 


C §5  ] 

and  very  lately  to  bifhop  Warburton.  Certainly 
had  you  read  that  fingle  traft,  you  would  never 
have  repeated  that  dale  objection. 

As  to  my  principles,  every  one  knows,  or  may 
know,  that  I believe  the  thirty-firft  article  of 
the  church  of  England.  But  can  none  be  faved 
who  believe  this  ? I know  you  will  not  fay  fo. 
Meaning,  in  the  main  point,  judification  by  faith, 

I have  not  wavered  a moment  for  thefe  feven  and 
twenty  years.  And  I allow  all  which  Mr.  Hervey 
himfelf  contends  for,  in  his  entrance  upon  the 
fubjeft,  “ Come  to  Jefus  as  a needy  beggar  : hang 
upon  him  as  a devoted penfioner And  whoever 
does  this,  I will  be  bold  to  fay,  fhall  not  perifh 
everlading. 

As  to  your  main  objeflion,  convince  me  that  it 
is  my  duty  to  preach  on  controverted  fubjefts, 
predeflination  in  particular,  and  I will  do  it.  At 
prefent,  I think  it  would  be  a fin.  I think  it 
would  create  dill  more  divjfions.  And  are  there 
not  enough  already  ? I have  feen  a book  wrote 
hy  one  who  diles  himfelf,  Ecclefict  direptce  et 
gementis  Prejbyter.  Shall  / tear  ecclefiam  direp- 
tam  et  gementem?  God  forbid!  No;  I will,  fo 
far  as  I can,  heal  her  breaches.  And  if  you 
really  love  her,  (as  I doubt  not  you  do)  why 
fhould  you  hinder  me  from  fo  doing  ? Has  fire 
fo  many  friends  and  helpers  left,  that  you  fhould 
drive  to  leffen  their  number  ? Would  you  wifk 
to  turn  any  of  her  friends,  even  though  weak 
and  midaken,  into  enemies  ? If  you  mud  con- 
tend, 


[ §6  ] 

tend,  have  you  not  Arians , Socinians,  Seceders, 
Infidels,  to  contend  with  ? To  fay  nothing  of 
whore-mongers,  adulterers,  fabbath-breakers, 
drunkards,  common  fwearers  ! 0 ecclefia  gemens  ! 
And  will  you  pafs  by  all  thefe,  and  fingle  out  me 
to  fight  with  ? Nay,  but  I will  not.  1 do  and 
will  fight  with  all  thefe,  but  not  with  you.  I 
cannot:  I dare  not.  You  are  the  fon  of  my  Fa- 
ther; my  fellow-labourer  in  the  gofpel  of  his  dear 
Son.  I love  your  perfon  : I love  your  chara&er: 
I love  the  work  wherein  you  are  engaged.  And  if 
you  will  ftill  fhoot  at  me,(becaufe  'Mx.Herttey  has 
painted  me  as  a monfler)  even  with  arrows  drawn 
from  bilhop  Warburtori s quiver,  (how  unfit  for 

Mr. ’s  hand  !)  I can  only  fay,  as  I always 

did  before,  the  Lord  Jefus  blefs  you  in  your 
foul,  in  your  body,  in  your  relations,  in  your 
work,  in  whatever  tends  to  his  own  glory  ! 

I am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  affeBionate  brother, 

JOHN  WESLEY. 


. A LETTER 


[ §7  ] 


A 

LETTER 


TO  THE 

Rev.  Dr.  RUTHERFORTH. 


Rev.  Sir,  March  28,  1768. 

I.  1.  '\7rOUR  charges,  publifhed  five  years  ago, 
•A-  I did  not  fee  till  yefterday.  In  the 
fourth  I am  unconcerned.  The  three  former  I 
purpofe  now  to  confider : and  I do  it  the  more 
chearfully,  becaufe  they  are  wrote  with  fuch  feri- 
oufnefs  as  becomes  the  importance  of  the  fubjeft, 
and  with  lefs  tartnefs  than  I am  accuftomed  to  ex- 
pe£t  from  opponents  of  every  kind. 

2.  But  before  I enter  on  the  fubjefl:,  fuffer  me 
to  remove  a fiumbling-bloek  or  two  out  of  the 

way. 


[ 88  ] 

way.  You  frequently  charge  me  with  evajion  : 
and  others  have  brought  the  fame  charge.  The 
plain  cafe  is  this  : I have  wrote  on  various  heads, 
and  always  as  clearly  as  I could.  Yet  many  have 
mifunderftood  my  words,  and  raifed  abundance 
of  objedtions.  I anfwered  them,  by  explaining 
myfelf,  fhewing  what  I did  not  mean,  and  what 
I did.  One  and  another  of  the  cbjeffors  llretched 
his  throat,  and  cried  out,  “Evafion!  Evafion!;’ 
And  what  does  all  this  outcry  amount  to  ? Why 
exactly  thus  much.  They  imagined  they  had  tied 
me  fo  fall;  that  it  w7as  impoflible  for  me  to  efcape. 
But  prefently  the  cobwebs  were  fwept  away,  and 
I was  quite  at  liberty.  And  I blefs  God  I can 
unravel  truth  and  fallhood,  although  artfully 
twilled  together.  Of  fuch  evajion  I am  not 
alhamed.  Let  them  be  afhamed  who  conftrain 
me  to  ufe  it. 

3.  You  charge  me  likewife,  and  that  more 
than  once  or  twice,  with  maintaining  contradic- 
tions. I anfwer,  x.  If  all  my  fentiments  were 
compared  together,  from  the  year  1725  to  1768, 
there  would  be  truth  in  the  charge : for  during 
the  latter  part  of  this  period,  I have  relinquilhed 
feveral  of  my  former  fentiments.  2.  During 
thefe  laft  thirty  years,  I may  have  varied  in 
fome  of  my  fentiments  or  exprefhons  with- 
out obferving  it.  3.  I will  not  undertake 
to  defend  all  the  expreffions  which  I have 
occafionally  ufed  during  this  time:  but  mult 

defiie 


[ 89  ] 

defile  men  of  candor  to  make  allowance  lor 
thofe, 

Oiias  aut  incuria fudity 
Aut  Humana  parum  cavit  natura. 

4.  It  isnot  flrangeifamong  thefe  inaccurate  expref- 
fions,  there  are  fome  feeming  contradiftions  : ef- 
pecially  confidering  I was  anfwering  fo  many 
different  obje&ors,  frequently  attacking  me  at 
once  : and  one  pufhing  this  way,  another  that, 
with  all  the  violence  they  were  able.  Neverthe- 
lefs,  5.  I believe  there  will  be  found  few,  if  any, 
real  contradi&ions,  in  what  I have  publifhed  for 
near  thirty  years. 

4.  I come  now  to  your  particular  objections. 
I begin  with  the  fubjeft  of  your  third  charge, 
ajfurances  : becaufe  what  I have  to  fay  upon  this 
head,  will  be  comprized  in  few  words.  Some 
are  fond  of  the  exprejfion , I am  not : I hardly 
ever  ufe  it.  But  I will  limply  declare,  (having 
neither  leifure  nor  inclination  to  draw  the  faw  of 
controverfy  concerning  it)  what  are  my  prefent 
fentiments  with  regard  to  the  thing,  which  is 
ufually  meant  thereby. 

* I believe  a few,  but  very  few  Chriflians  have 
an  ajfuranee  from  God  of  everlajling  falvation: 
and  that  is  the  thing  which  the  apoftle  terms,  the 
plerophory,  or full  ajfurance  of  hope. 

*1  believe  more  have  fuch  an  ajfurance  of  being 
now  in  the favor  of  God,  as  excludes  all  doubt  and 

fear.- 


C 9°  J 

tear.  And  tins,  if  I do  not  miflake,  the  apoftie 
means  by  the pier ophoty  or full  ajfurancc  of  faith. 

I believe  a confcioufnzfs  of  being  in  the favour 
cj God,  (which  I do  not  term  pier ophcry,  or  full 
affurance,  fince  it  is  frequently  weakened,  nay, 
perhaps  interrupted,  by  returns  of  doubt  or  fear) 
is  the  common  privilege  of  Chriftians,  fearing 
God  and  working  righteoufnefs. 

•r  Yet  I do  not  affirm,  there  are  no  exceptions 
to  this  general  rule.  Poffibly  fome  may  be  in  the 
favour  of  God,  and  yet  go  mourning  all  the  day 
long.  (But  I believe  this  is  ufually  owing  either 
to  di forder  of  body,  or  ignorance  of  the  gofpel- 
promifes.) 

* Therefore  I have  not  for  many  years  thought 
a confcioufnefs  of  acceptance  to  be  effential  to 
juffif}  ing  faith. 

And  after  I have  thus  explained  myfelf,  once 
for  all,  I think  without  any  evafion  or  ambiguity, 
I am  fine  without  auy  felf-co.otradiclion,  1 hope 
all  reafonable  men  will  be  fatisfied.  And  who- 
ever will  Hill  difpute  with  me  on  this  head,  mud 
do  it  for  difputing  fake,. 

II.  1.  In  your  firfi:  charge  you  undertake  to 
prove,  that  “ Chriflianity  does  not  reject  the  aid 
of  human  learning.”  p.  l. 

Mr.  B thinks  it  does.  But  I am  not  ac- 

countable for  him,  from  whom  in  this  I totally 
differ.  Yet  you  certainly  include  me  when  you 
fay,  “ thefe  new  reformers  maintain,  that  every 

believer 


[ 9*  ] 


believer  who  has  the  gift  of  utterance,  is  qualifi- 
ed to  preach  the  gofpel.”  p.2.  I never  main- 
tained this.  On  many  occafionsl  have  maintain- 
ed quite  the  contrary.  I never  faid,  “ Human 
learning  is  an  impediment  to  a divine,  which  will 
keep  him  from  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.”  p.  3. 
When  therefore  you  fay,  “ The  contempt  with 
which  thefe  men  treat  human  learning,”  ib.  you 
do  me  much  ihjuftice:  as  likewife  when  you  fay, 
“ They  agree  that  human  learning  is  of  no  ufe  at 
all  to  a preacher  of  the  gofpel.”  I do  not  agree 
with  any  who  fpeak  thus.  Yet  you  cite  my  own 
writings  to  prove  it.  Farther  Appeal , Part  III.  p. 
106.  If  I fay  any  fuch  thing  either  there  or  any 
where  elfe,  let  me  bear  the  blame  for  ever. 

2,  For  my  deliberate  thoughts  on  human  learn- 
ing, I appeal  to  my  Jerious  addrefs  to  the  clergy. 
1 there  lay  down  exprofejfo  the  qualifications,  the 
learning  in  particular,  which  (as  I apprehend) 
every  clergyman  who  can  have,  ought  to  have. 
And  if  any  who  are  educated  at  the  univerfity 
have  it  not,  they  are  inexcufable  before  God 
and  man. 

To  put  this  matter  beyond  difpute,  I appeal  to 
fomething  more  than  words.  Can  any  man_feri- 
oufly  think,  I defpife  learning,  who  has  ever 
heard  of  the  fchooi  at  King/wood?  Efpecially  if 
he  knows,  with  how  much  care,  and  expence, 
and  labour,  I have  kept  it  on  foot  for  thefe  twen- 
ty years  ? Let  him  but  read  “ the  rules  of 

Kingfwood, 


C 92  ] 

Kingfwood.  fchool ,”  and  he  will  urge  this  objection 
no  more. 

3.  But  you-  “ employ  illiterate  preachers.”  I 
cannot  anfwer  this  better,  than  by  transcribing 
the  very  page  to  which  you  refer. 

‘ It  f will  eafily  be  obferved,  that  I do  not  de- 
preciate learning  of  any  kind.  The  knowledge 
of  the  languages  is  a valuable  talent  ; fo  is  the 
knowledge  of  the  arts  and  fciences.  Both  the 
one  and  the  other  may  be  employed  to  the  glory 
of  God,  and  the  good  of  men.  But  yet  I alk, 
where  hath  God  declared  in  his  word,  that  he 
cannot,  or  will  not  make  ufe  of  men  that  have  it 
not  ? Has  Mofes , or  any  of  the  prophets  affirm- 
ed this  P Or  our  Lord,  or  any  of  bis  apoflles  ? 
You  are  fenfible,  all  thefe  are  againft  you.  You 
know  the  apoflles  themfefves,  all  except  St.  Paul, 
were-  a l/tye?  aygaftpalot  xAi  iSiar nzi.  common,  unphilo- 
fopbical,  unlettered  men.’ 

4.  Suffer  me  to  add  that  paragraph,  from  which 
you  ftrangely  infer,  that  I hold  learning  to  be  of 
“ no  ufe  at  all  to  a preacher/’ 

‘ I am  bold  to  affirm,  that  thefe  unlettered  men 
have  help  from  God  for  that  great  work,  the  hav- 
ing fouls  from  death  ; feeing  he  hath  enabled,  and 
doth  enable  them  ftill,  to  turn  many  torighteouf- 
nefs.  Thus  hath  he  deflroyed  the  wifdom  of  the 
wife,  and  brought  to  nought  the  underflanding 
of  the  prudent.  When  they  imagined  they  had 
effedlually  (hut  the  door,  and  blocked  up  every 

paffage, 

j-  My  words  are  maiked  with  tingle  comma's. 


[ 93  ] 

paffage  whereby  any  help  could  come  to  two  or 
three  preachers,  weak  in  body  as  well  as  foul ; 
who,  they  might  reafonably  believe  would,  hu- 
manly fpeuking,  wear  themfelves  out  in  a fhort 
time  : when  they  had  gained  their  point,  by  fe- 
curing  (as  they  fuppofed)  all  the  men  of  learning 
in  the  nation;  he  (hat  fitteth  in  heaven  laughed 
them  to  fcorn,  and  came  upon  them  by  a way 
they  thought  not  of.  Out  of  the  fiones  he  raifed 
up  thofe  who  fhoukl  beget  children  to  Abraham. 
We  had  no  more  forefight  of  this  than  you.  Nay, 
we  had  the  deepefl  prejudices  againft  it  : until 
vre  could  not  but  own,  that  God  gave  wifdom 
from  above  to  thefe  unlearned  and  ignorant  men'; 
fo  that  the  work  of  the  Lord  profpered  in  theit 
hand,  and  {timers  were  daily  converted  to  God.5 

‘ Indeed,  in  the  one  thing  which  they  profefs 
to  knew,  they  are  not  ignorant  men.  I truft 
there  is  not  one  -of  them  who  is  not  able  to  go 
through  fucli  an  examination,  in  fubflantial,  prac- 
tical, experimental  divinity,  as  few  of  our  candi- 
dates for  holy  orders,  even  in  the  univerfny,  (I 
fpeak  it  with  farrow  and  fhame,  and  in  tender 
love)  are  able  to  do.  But  oh  ! What  manner  of 
examination  do  mod  of  thofe  candidates  go 
through  ? And  what  proof  are  the  teftimonials 
commonly  brought  {as  foiemn  as  the  form  is 
wherein  they  run)  either  of  the  piety  or  know- 
ledge of  thofe  to  whom  are  intruded  thofe  fheep 
which  God  hath  purcllafed  with  his  own  blood  f* 

5.  Yet 


C 94  ] 

5.  Yet  you  cite  this  very  paragaph  to  prove 
that  I “ intimate,  the  help  which  thefe  illiterate 
men  receive  from  God,  is  fuch  as  will  enable 
them  to  preach  Chrift’s  gofpel,  without  reading 
the  fcriptures;”  p.  9.  “ Adding,  St.  Paul’s  com- 
mand to  Timothy  is  a fufficient  confutation  of 
this  groundlefs,  or  rather  impious  pretence.1’ 
I cannot  conceive,  how  you  could  imagine  thofe 
words  to  intimate  any  fuch  thing.  BethisjJre- 
tcnce  whofe  it  will,  it  is  none  of  mine  ; it  never 
entered  into  rav  thoughts. 

6.  But  “ there  are  in  the  fcriptures  things  hard, 
to  be  underjlood.  And  is  every  unlettered  mechanic 
able  to  explain  them  ?”  p.  11.  No  furely.  But 
may  we  not  li'cewife  afk  : Is  every  clergyman 
able  to  explain  them  ? You  will  no^  affirm  it. 
However  “ they  are  the  fafcfl  guides,  who  from 
their  childhood  have  known  the  holy  fcriptures, 
and  have  diligently  and  faithfully  made  ufe  of  all 
the  helps  to  underhand  them,  which  a liberal 
education  has  put  into  their  hands ; who  have 
given  attendan  t to  reading,  have  meditated  on  thofe 
things,  and  have  given  themfelves  wholly  to  them.” 
p.  11. 

* Certainly  thefe  are  the  fafefl  guides.  But 
how  many,  Sir,  do  you  know  of  thefe  ? Suppofe 
there  are  thirty  thoufand  clergymen  in  England, 
can  you  vouch  this  for  ten  thoufand  cf  them  ? I 
remember  his  late  grace  of  Canterbury  (I  mean 
archbifhop  Potter ,)  was  occafionally  faying,  that 
on  fearching  the  records,  he  could  find  only  three 

hundred 


[ 9'5  ] 

hundred  of  the  clergy  who  flood  out  againft  po- 
pery in  queen  Mary’s  reign.  Do  you  think,  the 
other  twenty  nine  thoufand  feven  hundred  were 
“ the  fafeft  guides  ?”  I hope  indeed  things  are 
mended  now.  I fee  no  reafon  to  doubt,  but 
there  are  among  the  prefent  clergy  a far  greater 
number  both  of  learned  and  pious  men.  And 
vet  I fear,  we  cannot  couqt  many  thoufands  now, 
that  anfwer  your  flrong  defcnption.  May  our 
good  Lord  increafe  their  number,  how  many  fo 
ever  they  be  ! 

* 7".  Now  I beg  leave  to  afk  aqueflionin 
my  turn.  Which  do  you  think  is  the  fafefl  guide, 
a cut  king,  fwearing,  drinking  clergyman  (that 
fuch  there  are  you  know)  or  a tradefman,  who 
has  in  faft  “ from  his  chidhood  known  the  holy 
feriptures,  ?.nd  has  for  live  years  (to-  fay  no  more, 
faithfully  “ and  diligently  made  ufe  of  all  the 
helps  which  the  Engiifh  tongue  has  put  into  his 
hands  ; who  has  given  attendance  to  reading , has 
meditated  on  ihefe  things,  ana  given  himfelj  whol- 
ly to  them  ?”  Can  any  reasonable  man  doubt  one 
moment  whiclvof  thefe  is  the  fafefl  guide  ? 

* Certainly  “ thofe  who  want  theje  qualifica- 
tions,” who  do  not  give  attendance  to  reading, 
who  do  not  meditate  on  thofe  things,  yea  and 
give  themfelves  wholly  to  them,  are  ignorant 
andvnjlab'c  men , in  a very  bad  fe-nfeofthe  words. 
And  let  them  underhand  philofophy  ever  fo  well, 
and  be  ever  fuch  critics  in  Greek  and  Hebrew, 
51  they  will  pervert  the  fcriptuies,  when  they  pre- 
tend 


[ 9«  ] 

tc-nd  (o  interpret  them,”  p.  12,  and  that  not  only 
to  thtir  own  dedruftion. 

8.  But  “ many  of  thefe  drolling  preachers  are 
fo  ignorant,  as  not  to  know  that  the  fcripiures 
were  not  written  in  their  mother  tongue.” p. 
8.  Indeed  tliev  are  not  : whoever  gave  vou  that 
information,  abufed  your  credulity  : mod  of  the 
travelling  preachers  in  connexion  with  me,  are 
not  ignorant  men.  As  I obfcrved  before,  they 
know  all  which  they  profefs  to  know.  The  lan- 
guages they  do  not  profefs  to  know  : yet  fonre 
of  them  underhand  them  well.  Philofopby  they 
do  not  profefs  to  know  : yet  fome  of  them  to- 
lerably underhand  this  alio.  They  underhand 
both  one  and  the  other  better  than  great  part  of 
my  pupils  at  the  univerdty  did.  And  yet  thefe 
were  not  inferior  to  their  fellow  collegians  of  the 
fame  handing  : (which  I could  not  but  know, 
having  daily  intercourfe  with  all  the  u der-gra- 
duates,  either  as  Greek  lecturer  or  moderator.) 
Nor  were  thefe  inferior  to  the  under-graduates  of 
other  colleges. 

g.  You  conclude  this  charge.  For  “ thofe 
whofe  minds  are  not  ftored  with  ufeful  literature, 
the  wifdom  of  the  public  has  provided  fuch 
guides  as  are  both  able  and  willing  to  fhew  them 
the  right  wav.”  p.  13.  Would  to  God  it 
had  ! But  is  it  really  fo  ? Is  there  fuch  a guide 
in  every  parifli  in  England!  Are  then  all  the 
reffors,  vicars  and  curates  therein,  “ both  able 
and  willing”  to  guide  all  their  parifhioners  to 

heaven  ? 


[ 97  1 

heaven  ? Do  not  both  you,  and  I,  and  all  the 
world  know,  that  this  is  not  the  cafe  ? Are  there 
not  many,  who  are  utterly  unable  to  guide 
others;  having  neither  learning  nor  underftand- 
ing  to  guide  themfelves  ? Are  there  not  more, 
who  if  they  are  able,  are  not  willing,  taking  no 
care, or  thought  about  it  ? They  cat,  and  drink, 
and  rife  up  to  play  : 

u And  leave  to  tatter  d crape  the  drudgery  of  proper," 

* Once  more.  Are  there  net  too  many  of 
thefe  guides  “ whom  the  wifdom  of  the  public 
has  provided,”  who  are  neither  able  nor  willing 
to  guide  others  in  the  right  way,  being  equally 
void  of  knowledge  and  piety  ? Is  it  then  “ the 
duty  of  the  people  to  continue  in  the  things 
which  they  have  learned”  from  tliefe  guides? 
And  “ to  hold  fall  the  faithful  word  as  they  have 
been  taught  ?”  Why,  what  have  they  been 
"taught  ? Juft  nothing.  Prom  thefe  guides  they 
have  learned  nothing,  nor  could  learn  any  thing, 
either  from  their  precept  or  example.  And  are 
they  “ then  only  in  danger  when  they  do  not 
follow  thefe  guides  ?”  If  they  do  follow  them, 
they  mu  ft  follow'  them  to  hell.  Q,  Sir,  why  will 
you  conftrain  me  to  (hew  the  n?.kednefs  of  the 
land  ? I would  far  rather  fpread  a veil  over  it. 
And  I heartily  with,  I may  never  more  be  laid 
under  a neceiTity  of  touching  on  this  unpleafing 
fubjeft. 

Vo  l.  XVII.  E * 10.  Upon 


C 98  J 

10.  Upon  the  whole,  what  I believe  con.- 
-cerning  learning,  as  I have  again  and  again  de- 
clared, is  this:  that  it  is  highly  expedient  for  a 
. guide  of  fouls  ; but  not  abfolutely  necejjary : what 
I believe  to  be  abfolutely  necelfary  is,  a faith  un- 
feigned, the  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour,  a 
burning  zeal  for  the  advancement  ofChrifl’s  king- 
dom, with  an  heart  and  life  wholly  devoted  to 
God.  Thefe  I judge  to  be  necelfary  in  the  high- 
ell  degree  : and  next  to  thefe,  a competent  know- 
ledge of  fcripture  ; a found  underftanding,  a to- 
lerable utterance,  and  a willingnefs  to  be  as  the 
filth  and  ojfjcourmg  of  the  world . 

III.  1.  You  intitle  your  fecond  charge,  “An 
examination  of  the  doftrine  of  the  Mdhodifs, 
concerning  inward feelings.'’ 

I have  explained  myfelf  fo  frequently  and  fo 
largely  upon  this  head  alreadv,  that  I flattered 
myfelf  I Ihould  fcarce  have  occation  to  do  it 
any  more.  But  as  I am  ftill  totally  mifunderllood 
and  inifreprefented,  I am  under  a necefTity  of  do- 
ing; it  vet  again. 

You  Hate  the  queflion  thus,  “ Have  we  any 
reafon  to  believe,  that  the  mind  has  an  inward 
feeling , which  will  enable  it  to  perceive  the  ordi- 
nary influences  of  God’s  Spirit,  fo  as  to  difcern 
from  whence  they  come  ?”  p.  15. 

I anfwer,  1.  The  fruit  of  his  ordinary  influen- 
ces  are  love,  joy,  peace,  long-fuffering,  gentle- 
nefs,  meeknefs.  2.  Whoever  has  thefe,  inward- 
ly 


[ 99  ] 

iy  feels  them.  And  if  he  underftands  his  bible, 
he  difcerns  from  whence  they  come.  Obferve, 
what  he  inwardly  feels,  is,  thefe  fruits  themf elves  : 
whence  they  come  he  learns  from  the  bible. 

This  is  my  do&rine  concern!  ng  inward feelings, 
and  has  been  for  above  thefe  forty  years.  And 
this  is  clear  to  any  man  of  common  fenfe  : I ap- 
peal to  all  the  world  if  it  is  not.  Only  do  not 
puzzle  the  caufe  by  a cloud  of  words,  and  then 
lay  the  blame  on  me. 

2.  You  hate  the  queflion  again,  p.  17.  “ What 
I mean  to  affirm  is,  that  while  the  foul  is  united 
to  fuch  a body,  the  operations  of  external  things1’ 
(fay,  the  operations  .of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  of 
thefe  we  are  talking,  and  of  thefe  alone)  “ upoa 
fome  one  or  more  of  thefe  organs,  excite  no  in- 
ward feeling .”  Nay,  nor  outward  neither.  He 
muff  be  a bold  man,  that  will  affirm  the  contrary. 
If  this  be  all  that  you  mean  to  affirm,  we  agree  to 

'an  hair’s  breadth. 

3.  You  afterwards  open  yourfelf  farther.  “ The 
mind  in  its  prefent  flotation,  has  no  inward  fenfe, 
by  which  the  influence  of  external  caufes,”  (the 
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit)  “ or  the  caufes  them- 
felves,”  (this  is  quite  another  queflion)  “ maybe 
felt  or  difcerned.  It  then  only  perceives  them, 
when  they  affeft  the  organs  of  the  body,  fo  as  to 
raife  a fenfation  in  it  by  their  means.”  p.  a 2. 

Did  ever  the  moll  illiterate  Methodift  talk  in 
fuch  a manner  as  this  ? “ The  mind  then  only 
E 2 perceives 


a 


[ 100  ] 

perceives  the  influences  of  the  Hoi)'  Spirit,  wher 
they  affeft  the  organs  of  the  body  !’’ 

If  you  fay,  “ I do  not  mean  tlie  Holv  Spirit  by 
exteral  carafes  Y Then  you  mean  and  fay  what  is 
nothing  to  the  purpofe.  For  your  very  title  con- 
fines you  to  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  : 
and  you  are,  or  fhould  be,  fpeaking  of  nothing 
elfe. 

4.  You  go  on,  “ It  is  a fundamental  principle 
in  the  Methodijl  fchool,  that  all  who  come  into 
it  muff  renounce  their  reafon.”  Sir,  are  you 
awake  ? Unlefs  you  are  talking  in  your  fieep, 
how  can  you  utter  fo  grofs  an  untruth  ? It  is  a 
fundamental  principle  with  us,  That  to  renounce 
reafon  is  to  renounce  religion:  that  religion  and 
reafon  go  hand  in  hand,  and  that  all  irrational 
religion  isfalfe  religion.  I therefore  fpeak  quite 
“ confifiently  with  my  own  dobtrines,”  when 
I caution  my  followers,  ‘ again  (l  judging  of  the 
fpirit  by  which  any  one  fpeaks,  by  their  own 
inward  feelings — becaufe  thefe  being  of  a doubt- 
ful nature,  may  come  from  "God,  or  may  not.’ 
You  add,  “ What  therefore  fhall  we  think  of 
thefe  inward  feelings  ? They  cannot  be  clear 
perceptions  of  the  caufe  from  which  thefe  af- 
fections or  fentiments  are  derived.'  Who  fays 
they  are?  I never  did.  You  cite  the  words 
wherein  I fay  juft  the  contrary.  Whom  then  doth 
your  arguing  reprove?  Do  you  not fight  as  one 
that  beateth  the  air  ? 


5.  Mr. 


[ 101  ] 

Mr.  TV,  indeed  “ endeavours  to  explain 
awav,  the  doflrine  of  the  Methodifls  concerning 
inward  feelings”  p.  25.  That  is,  I plainly  tell, 
what  I mean  by  thofe  expreffions.  My  words 
run  thus.  ‘ By  feeling  I mean,  being  inwardly 
confcious  of ; by  the  operations  oj  the  Spirit,  I 
do  not  mean  the  manner  in  which  he  operates, 
but  the  graces  which  he  operates  in  a Chriffian.’ 
And  again.  * We  believe  that  love,  joy,  peace, 
are  inwardly  felt,  or  they  have  no  being  : and 
that  men  are  fatisfied  they  have  grace,  lirff  by 
feeling  thefe,  and  afterwards  by  their  outward 
aftions.’ 

One  might  imagine,  the  controverfy  was  now 
at  an  end.  No  : I am  not  a jot  the  nearer.  For 
you  go  on,  “ If  he  and  his  brethren”  (away  with 
his  brethren  : the  point  lies  between  you  and  me) 
“ mean  no  more  than  this,  why  do  they  fpeak  of 
this  matter  in  fuch  language,  as  makes  their  dif- 
ciples  pretend  to  have  an  inward  fenfe,  by  which 
they  feel,  fometimes  the  power  of  God,  fome- 
times  the  Holy  Ghoft,  fometimes  Jefus  Chrift, 
and  by  which  they  can  as  clearly  difcern  each  of 
thefe  while  he  afts  upon  them,  as  they  can  dif- 
cern outward  objefts  by  their  bodily  fenfes.”  p. 
2 6.  So  now  the  matter  is  out ! But  who  are  the 
men  ? What  are  their  names  ? And  where  do 
they  live  ? If  you  know  any  who  pretend  to  this, 
I do  not : but  I know,  they  are  none  of  my  dif- 
ciples.  They  never  learned  it  of  me,  I have 
E 3 three 


[ 102  ] 

three  grains  of  common  fenfe,  whether  you  be- 
lieve it,  or  not. 

6.  But  you  will  pin  it  upon  me,  whether  I 
will  or  no  ; and  that  by  three  palfages  of  my  own 
writings.  1.  ‘ Lucy  Godfhall  felt  the  love  of 
God,  in  an  unufual manner.'’  She  did.  I mean, 
in  an  unufiial  degree.  And  what  will  you  make 
of  this?  2.  “When  he  examined  fome  of  his 
difciples,  and  they  related  their  '■feeling  the 
blood  of  Chrift  running  upon  their  arms,  or  going 
down  their  throats,  or  poured  like  water  upon 
their  bread  and  heart did  he  tell  them,  that 
tliefe  circunflances  were  all  the  dreams  of  an  heat- 
ed imagination  ? I did  : I told  them,  that  tliefe 
three  dr  cum  fiances,  and  feveral  others  of  the  fame 
kind,  were  mere  dreams,  though  fome  of  thofe 
which  they  then  related,  might  he  otherwife.  I 
will  tell  you  more  : I was  fo  difgufied  at  them 
for  thofe  dreams,  that  I expelled  them  out  of  the 
fociety. 

The  third  pafifage  is  this.  ‘ We  do  fpeak  of 
grace,  (meaning  thereby  the  power  of  God, 
which  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do  of 
his  good  pleafure)  that  it  is  as  perceptible  to  the 
heart,  (while  it  confirms,  refrelhes,  purifies,  and 
fheds  the  love  of  God  abroad  therein)  as  fenfible 
objefts  are  to  the  fenfes,’  p.  27.  I do  fpeak  thus. 
And  I mean  thereby,  that  the  confort  which  God 
adminifiers,  not  his  power  diftinft  from  it,  the 
Icve  and  purity  which  he.  works,  not  his  ad  of 
working  diftinguilhed  from  it,  are  as  clearly  dif- 

cernible 


[ I03  ] 

cernible  by  the  foul,  as  outward  objefiis  by  the 
fenfes.  And  I never  fo-  much  as  dreamed,  that 
any  one  could  find  any  other  meaning  in  the' 
words. 

7.  ' I cannot  clofe  this  fubje£I  of  inward  feelings- 
without  recurring  to  the  20th  page  of  your  trabE 
Here  you  attempt  to  prove,  that  “ thefe  prea til- 
ers confine  the  influences  of  God’s  holy  Spirit  to 
themfelves  and  their  followers,  becaufe,  fay  you,. 
no  oneelje feels  its  workings  none  but  they  and1 
their  followers.  Obferve  : it  is  not  1 affirm  this 
but  you,  that  “ none  but  Methodifls  fed  the 
workings  of  the  Spirit  ” But  how  will  you  recon- 
cile this  alfertion  with  the  feventeenth  aiticle  of 
our  church,,  which  teaches,  that  all  “ godly  per- 
fons feel  in  themfelves  the  working  of  the  Spirit  of 
Cbrilf,  mortifying  the.  works  of-  the  flelh,  and 
drawing  up  their  mind  to  high  and'  heavenly 
things  ?”  It  is  in  this  fenfe,  and  this  only,  that  I 
did  and  do  allert,  all  good  men  feel  the  working 
(f  the.  Holy  Spirit . II  any  can  prove,  they  do 
not,  I Hand  condemned  : if  not,  none  can  con- 
demn me  concerning  inward feelings. 

8.  You  fubjoinfome  refleblions  on  another  fub- 
je£I,  bodily  emotions  of  various  kinds.  Before  we 
reafon  upon  it,  let  us  flat e the  fa 61.  Thefe  out- 
ward fvmptoms  are  not  at  all  times,  nor  in  all 
places:  for  two  or  three  years  they  were  (not 
conllant  but)  frequent  in  London,  Brijlol,  New - 
caJlle-upon-Tyne,  and  in  a few  other  places.  They 
Sometimes  occur  {fill,  but  not  often.  And  ws  do 

E 4 


not 


[ *«4  3 

not  regard  whether  they  occur  or  not : knowing 
that  the  effence  of  religion,  rightcoufnefs,  peace 
and  j°y  in  the  Holy  Ghoft,  is  quite  independent 
upon  them. 

Upon  this  you  afk,  “ Are  thefe  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit  ?”  p.  31.  I anfver,  No,  Whofoever 
thought  they  were  ? You  afk,  2.  “ Are  thefe  the 
marks  whereby  we  may  be  affined,  that  they  who 
are  thus  affecled  difcern  its  workings  ?”  You 
anfw’er  for  me,  “ They  themfelves  do  not  believe 
it.  Nay,  Mr.  JV.  declares,  it  is  his  opinion, 
4 Some  of  thefe  agonies  are  from  the  devil ; and 
makes  no  doubt,  but  it  was  Satan  tearing  them , 
as  they  were  coming  to  Chrift,’  p.  33.  But  if  I 
myfelf  declare  thus,  what  room  was  there  for  the 
preceding  queflions  ? Now  certainly  you  muft 
be  quite  fatisfied.  No  : you  are  as  far  from  it  as 
ever ! You  gravely  afk,  “ What  experienced 
phyficians  of  the  foul  muft  thefe  be,  who  are  un- 
able to  diftinguifh  the  influence  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  from  the  tearing  of  Satan  ?”  Why,  Sir, 
you  this  inftant  repeated  the  very  words  wherein 
I do  diftinguifh  them.  “ But  you  afcribe  the 
fame  fymptoms  fometimes  to  the  one,  and  fome- 
times  to  the  other.”  Indeed  I do  not.  I always 
afcribe  thefe  fymptoms  to  Satan  tearing  them. 

9.  You  add  in  a marginal  note,  “ Mr.  IV.  fome- 
times denies,  that  he  confiders  thefe  fits  as  figns  of 
the  new  birth.”  I always  deny  it,  if  you  mean 
by  fgns  any  thing  more  than  fomething  w'hich 
may  accidentally  attend  it.’  Yet  “ in  fome  of 

his 


[ 105  ] 

ms  writings,  he  calls  ihefe  fallings  and  roarings, 
by  the  name  of  convidions He  fays,  ‘ Many 
were  wounded  deeply  ; but  none  were  delivered 
from  that  painful  conviftion.’  ‘ Monday  30, 
two  more  were  in  ftrong  pain,  both  their  fouls 
and  bodies,  being  well  nigh  torn  afunder.’  Very 
true:  but  in  which  ofthefe  paffages,  do  I “call 
fallings  and  roarings  by  the  name  of  conviclions  ? 
Excufe  me  : if  I cannot  diftinguifh  God  from  the 
devil,  I can  at  lealt  diltinguilh  the  foul  from  the 
body.  For  do  I ever  confound  bodily  disorders 
with  forrow  or  pain  of  mind  ? 

10.  However  “ Mr.  W.  fpeaks  of  thefe  at  leafi 
as  outward  ligns,  that  the  new  birth  “ is  working 
in  thofe  that  have  them.”  p.  23.  I fpeak  of  them 
as  ‘ outward  fymptoms  which  have  often  ac- 
companied the  inward  work  of  God.’  A pecu- 
liar iilftance  of  this  I relate  in  the  firlt  journal, 
which  you  are  at  the  pains  to  tranfcribe.  And, 
as  you  obferve,  “ there  are  many  inliantes  in  the 
fame  "journal,  in  which  I exprefs  myfelf  in  the 
fame  manner.”  But  what  does  all  this  prove  ? 
Juft  what  I faid  before,  and  not  one  jot  more  : I 
fpeak  of  them  as  ‘ outward  fymptoms  which  have 
often  accompanied  the  inward  work  of  God.’ 
Often,  I fay,  not  always ; not  necefjarily ; they 
may,  or  they  may  not.  This  work  may  be  with- 
out thofe  fymptoms,  and  thofe  fymptoms  may  be 
without  this  work. 

11.  But  you  fay,  “ The  following  account 
which  he  writes  to  one  of  his  correfpondents,  will 
make  the  matter  clear.  1 1 have  teen  very  many 

E 3 perfons 


[ 106  ] 

perfons  changed  in  a moment,  from  the  fpirit 
of  fear,  horror,  defpair,  to  the  fpirit.  of  love, 
joy,  peace ; and  from  finful  defires,  till  then 
reigning  over  them,  to  a pure  defire  of  doing 
the  will  of  God.  That  fuch  a change  was 
then  wrought,  appears  not  from  their  (bedding 
tears  only,  or  falling  into  fits,  or  crying  out 
(thefe  are  not  the  fruits,  or  figns,  ‘ whereby 
I judge)  but  from  the  whole  tenor  of  their  lives.1 

P-  33- 

Now  I fhould  really  imagine  this  paffage 
proves  juft  the  contrary  of  what  you  intend.  - 
Yea,  that  it  is  full  and  decifive.  “ But,  fay 
you,  though  he  denies  thefe  to  be  the  fruits 
by  which  he  judges,  that  this  inward  change 
is  wrought,  yet  he  looks  upon  them  as  figns 
that  it  is  working."  Yes,  in  the  fenfe  above  ex- 
plained. While  God  was  inwardly  working , 
thefe  outward  figns  often  appeared : nay,  almoft 
daily  in  Brifol,  during  the  fiift  fummer  which  I 
fpent  there. 

12.  Upon  the  whole,  I declare  once  for  all 
(and  I hope  to  be  troubled  no  more  upon  the 
fubjett)  I look  upon  fome  of  thofe  bodily  fymp- 
toms,  to  have  been  preternatural  or  diabolical : 
and  others  to  have  been  effects  which  in  fome 
circumftances  naturally  followed  from  ftrong  and 
fudden  emotions  of  mind.  Thofe  emotions  of 
mind,  whether  of  fear,  forrow,  or  joy,  I believe 
were  chiefly  fupernatural  ; fpringing  from  the 


gracious 


C 197  ] 

gracious  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  which 
accompanied  his  word. 

13.  I believe  this  is  all  the  anfwer  I need  give 
to  the  fevere  accufation  you  have  brought  againA 
trie  : for  which  I truft  men  of  candor  will  difcern 
there  was  not  the  lead  foundation.  With  refpedt 
to  the  firft  point,  defpifing  learning , I am  utterly 
clear.  None  can  bring  any  proof,  or  fhadow  of 
proof,  that  I do  not  highly  efteem  it.  With 
regard  to  the  ajfurance  of  faith  and  hope , I have 
fpoken  as  clearly  as  I can  ; and  I truft  ferious 
men,  who  have  fome  experience  in  religion, 
will  not  find  much  to  condemn  therein.  And 
with  refpecf  to  inward  feelings,  whoever  de- 
nies them  in  the  fenfe  wherein  alone  I defend 
them,  mufl  deny  all  the  life  and  power  of 
religion,  and  leave  nothing  but  a dead,  empty 
form.  For  take  away  the  Jove  of  God  and' 
our  neighbour,  the  peace  of  God  and  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghoft,  or  (which  comes  to  the  fame)  deny 
that  they  are  felt,  and  what  remains  but  a poor, 
lifelefs  ftradow  ? 

* 14.  This  is  what  I db,  and  mull  contend 
for.  “ I thought  you  had  contended  for  quite 
another  thing.”  If  you  had  only  thought  fo, 
or  only  faid  fo  in  private  converfation,  it  had 
been  of  no  great  co’nfequence.  But  it  was 
of  confequence,  when  you  not  only  brought' 
a falfe  accufation  againft  your  brother  before 
fo  venerable  an  affernbly,  but  aifo  publifhed 
E 6 it 


t ] 

it  to  all  the  world.  Surely  the  firfl  flep  was 
enough  and  more  than  enough.  Was  there 
nothing  more  important  wherewith  to  entertain 
the  Jieuiards  oj  the  myfteries  oj  God,  than  the 
miftakes,  if  they  really  had  been  fuch,  of  the 
Methodijls,  fo  called  ? Had  they  no  enemies 
more  dangerous  than  thefe  ? Were  they  not 
in  more  imminent  danger,  if  of  no  outward  fin, 
nothing  in  their  behaviour  or  converfation 
unworthy  of  their  calling;  yet  of  negleft,  of 
remifTnefs,  of  not  laying  out  all  their  time, 
and  care,  and  pains,  in  feeding  the  fheep 
which  Chrifl  hath  purchafed  with  his  own 
blood  ? Were  none  ol  them  in  danger  of  levity, 
of  pride,  of  paffion,  of  difcontent,  of  covet- 
oufnefs?  Were  none  of  them  feeking  the 
praife  of  men  more  than  the  praife  of  God? 

0 Sir,  if  this  was  the  cafe  of  any  of  them, 

1 will  not  fay  how  trifling,  how  infignificant, 
but  how  mifchievous  to  thefe,  how  fatal,  how 
deflruftive  mull  a charge  of  this  kind  be  ? 
By  which  they  were  led,  not  to  examine 
themfelves,  to  confider  either  their  own  hearts 
or  ways,  but  to  criticife  on  others,  on  tliofe 
with  whom  nine  in  ten  had  no  manner  of 
concern?  Surely  fo  fdemn  an  opportunity 
might  be  improved  to  far  other  purpofes! 
Even  to  animate  every  one  prefent,  to  offer 
up  bimfelf  a living  facrifice  to  God,  that  fo 
he  may  be  ready  to  be  offered  up,  on  the 

facrifice 


[ *og  ] 

facrifice  and  fervice  of  his  faith  : to  have  one 
thing  only  in  his  eye,  to  defire  to  aim  at  no- 
thing elfe,  not  honour,  not  eafe,  not  money, 
not  preferment ; but  to  fave  his  own  foul  and 
them  that  hear  him. 

I am,  Reverend  Sir, 

Your  brother  and  fervant  for  Ch  rifts  fake, 

JOHN  WESLEY, 


A NAR= 


[ ] 


A 

NARRATIVE 

OF  THE 

Late  WORK  of  G O D, 

At  and  near  Northampton , in  Ncw-England. 


EXTRACTED  FROM 

Mr.  Edwards’s  letter  to  Dr.  Coleman. 


l.npHE  town  of  Northampton,  in  Nezv- 
X England , contains  about  200  families. 
After  a more  than  oidinary  hcentioufnefs  in  the 
people  here,  a concern  for  religion  began  to 
revive,  in  the  year  1729  : but  more  obfervably 
in  1733  ; when  there  was  a general  reformation 
of  outward  diforders,  which  has  continued  e\er 
fince. 


2.  Soon 


L ii»  ] 

2.  Soon  after,  a remarkable  concern  began  to 
anpear,  in  a little  village,  three  miles  from  the 
town.  From  thence  it  fpread  to  us  in  fpring 
1734,  and  increafed  during  the  fummer.  In 
autumn  I propofed  it  to  the  young  people,  to 
fpend  the  evenings  in  focial  religion  ; and  to 
that  end,  to  divide  themfelves  into  feveral  compa- 
nies, to  meet  in  various  parts  of  the  town  ; which 
was  accordingly  done,  and  the  example  after- 
wards imitated  by  elder  people. 

3.  About  this  lime  I began  to  preach  concern- 
ing juftific a tion  by  Jaith  alone.  This  was  attended 
with  a very  remarkable  bleffing : the  people  in 
general  were  deeply  concerned,  and  began 
earneftly  to  feek  acceptance  with  God  and  fal- 
vation  in  the  wav  of  the  gofpel.  And  then 
it  was,  in  December,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  began 
wonderfully  to  work  among  us.  A great  and 
earned  concern  about  the  things  of  God  ran  thro’ 
all  parts  of  the  town.  And  the  noife  among  the 
dry  bones  waxed  louder  and  louder  : all  talk  but 
of  eternal  things  was  laid  afide.  The  converfa- 
tion  in  all  companies  (unlefs  fo  far  as  was  necef- 
fary  for  the  carrying  on  of  worldly  bufinefs)  was 
wholly  upon  religion.  The  minds  of  people 
were  ftrangely  taken  off  from  the  world  : it  was 
treated  as  a thing  of  very  little  importance  : men 
followed  their  bufinefs,  only  as  a part  of  their 
duty  ; the  temptation  now  lying  on  that  hand, 
to  negleff  worldly  affairs,  and  to  fpend  too  much 
time  in  the  immediate  exercifes  of  religion.  And 

this 


C 1*2  ] 

this  thing  was  exceedingly  mifreprefented,  bv 
reports  fpread  in  diftant  parts  of  the  land,  as  thoJ 
the  people  here  had  wholly  thrown  by  all  bufi- 
nefs,  and  fpent  all  their  time  in  reading,  hear- 
ing and  prayer. 

4.  But  tho’ people  did  not  ordinarily  negleft 
their  bufinefs,  yet  religion  was  with  all  forts  the 
great  concern.  The  thing  in  their  view  was  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  and  every  one  appeared  pref- 
ling into  it.  There  was  fcarce  a perfon  in  the 
town  left  unconcerned.  The  vainelt  and  loofelf 
of  all,  and  thofe  who  were  ufed  to  fpeak  moll 
llightly  of  inward  religion,  tvere  now  generally 
in  deep  conviftions.  And  the  work  increafed 
daily,  fo  that  from  day  to  day,  for  many  months 
together,  might  be  feen  evident  inllances  of 
linners  brought  out  of  darknefs  into  marvellous 
light. 

5.  Hence  there  foon  appeared  a glorious  al- 
teration : fo  that  in  thefpring  and  fummer  fol- 
lowing, anno  173 5,  the  town  feemed  to  be  full 
of  the  prefence  of  God.  It  was  never  fo  full  of  love, 
and  joy,  nor  yet  of  diftrefs,  as  it  was  then.  There 
were  remarkable  tokens  of  God’s  prefence, 
almoft  in  every  houfe  : parents  rejoicing  over 
their  children  as  new-born  ; hufbands  over 
their  wives,  and  wives  over  their  hulbands. 
The  goings  cf  God  were  then  Jetn  in  his  [and  nary. 
our  public  aflemblies  were  beautiful  : the  con- 
gregation was  alive  in  God’s  fervice ; ever)’  one 
earnellly  intent  on  the  work  every  hearer 

eager 


C tt3  ] 

eager  to  drink  in  the  word  : the  affembly  iii 
general,  from  time  to  time,  in  tears  : Some  weep- 
ing with  borrow  and  diftrefs,  others  with  joy  and 
love  ; and  others  with  pity  and  tender  concern 
for  the  fouls  of  their  neighbours. 

6.  In  all  companies,  on  whatever  occafion  per- 
fons  met,  Chrift  was  to  be  heard  of  and  feen  in 
the  midft  of  them.  Out  young  people,  when  to- 
gether, were  wont  to  fpend  the  time,  in  talking 
of  the  dying  love  of  Chrift,  the  glorious  excellen- 
cy of  his  falvation,  and  his  free  grace  to  loft  fin- 
ners.  And  even  at  weddings,  there  was  now  no 
difeourfe  but  of  religion,  and  no  appearance  of 
any  but  fpiritual  mirth. 

7.  When  this  work  of  God  began,  others 
round  about  us  feemed  not  to  know  what  to  make 
of  it : and  there  were  many  that  fcoffed  at  and  ri- 
diculed it.  But  it  was  very  obfervable  of  many 
who  occafionally  came  among  us,  that  what  they 
faw  here,  foon  cured  them  of  fuch  a temper* 
Strangers  were  generally  furprized,  to  find  things 
fo  much  beyond  what  they  had  heard,  and  were 
wont  to  tell  others,  that  the  ftate  of  the  town 
could  not  be  conceived  by  thofe  that  had  not  feen 
it.  And  moft  of  them  went  home  with  wound- 
ed hearts,  and  with  fuch  impreffions  as  never 
wore  off.  There  were  many  inftances  alfo  of 
perfons  that  came  to  town  on  vifits  or  on  bufi- 
nefs,  who  had  not  been  here  long,  before  they 
partook  of  that  fliower  of  bleffing,  and  went  home 
rejoicing  ; till  at  length  the  fame  work  began  evi- 
dently 


[ H4  ] 

deritly  to  appear  in  feveral  other  towns  in  the~ 
the  county. 

* 8.  In  the  month  of  March,  the  people  in 
South  Hadley  began  to  be  feized  with  deep  con- 
cern about  the  things  of  religion  ; which  foon 
became  univerfal  : and  the  work  of  God  has  been 
very  wonderful  there  : not  much,  if  any  thing,, 
fhort  of  what  it  has  been  here,  in  proportion  to 
the  bignefs  of  the  place.  About  the  fame  time 
it  began  to  break  forth  in  the  weft  part  of  Suffieldr 
and  foon  fpread  into  all  parts  of  the  town.  It  next 
appeared  at  Sunderland , and  boon  overfpread  the 
town  ; and  I believe  was,  for  a feafon,  not  lefs 
♦remarkable  than  it  was  here.  About  the  fame 
time,  it  began  to  appear  in  a part  of  Deerfield, 
called  Green-River,  and  afterwards  filled  the 
town.  It  began  almoft  to  be  manifeft,  in  the 
fouth  part  of  Hatfield,  in  a place  called  the  Hill, 
and  after  that  the  whole  town,  in  the  fecond  week 
in  April,  Teemed  to  be  feized,  as  it  were  at  once, 
with  concern  about  the  things  of  God.  There 
has  been  alfo  a very  general  awakening  at  JHefi- 
Springfield,  and  Long- Meadow ; and  in  Enfield, 
there  was  for  a time  a general  concern  amongfi: 
fome  that  before  had  been  very  loofe  perfons. 
About  the  fame  time  that  this  appeared  at  Enfield, 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Bull  of  Wefljield  informed  me,  that 
there  had  been  a great  alteration  there,  and  that 
more  had  been  done  in  one  week  than  in  fieven 
years  before.  Something  of  this  work  likewife 
appeared  in  the  firft  precmct  in  Springfield , prin- 
cipally 


[ "5  3 

cipalJvin  the  north  and fouth  extremes  of  th epa- 
rifh.  And  in  Hadley  old  town,  there  gradually 
appeared  fomuch  of  a work  of  God,  as  at  another 
time  would  have  been  thought  worthy  of  much 
notice.  For  a Jhort  time  there  was  alfo  a very 
great  and  general  concern,  of  the  like  nature,  at 
Northfeld.  And  w'herever  this  concern  appear- 
ed, it  feemed  not  to  be  in  vain  : but  in  every 
place  God  brought  faving  bleffings  with  him,  and 
his  word,  attended  with  his  Spirit,  returned  not 
void.  It  might  well  be  faid  at  that  time  in  all  parts 
of  the  county,  Who  are  thefe  that  jly  as  a cloudy 
and  as  doves  to  their  windows  ? 

9.  This  remarkable  pouting  out  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  which  thus  extended  from  one  end  to  the 
other  of  this  county , was  not  confined  to  it,  but 
many  places  in  ConneBicut  havepartookin  the  fame 
mercy  : th zfrfparijh  in  Windfor  was  thus  bleft 
about  the  fame  time,  while  we  had  knowledge 
of  each  other’s  circumftances.  And  fomething 
confiderable  of  the  fame  work  began  afterwards 
in  Eaf -Windfor,  my  honoured  father  $ parifh, 
which  has  in  times  pajl  bfeen  a place  favoured 
with  mercies  of  this  nature,  above  any  on  this 
fide  of  New- England,  except  Northampton. 

10.  There  was  alfo  the  lajl  fpring  and  fummer 
a wonderful  work  of  God  carried  on  at  Coventry. 
I had  opportunity  to  converfe  with  fome  of  the 
Coventry  people,  who  gave  me  a very  remarkable 
account  of  the  furprizing  change  that  appeared  in 
the  moll  rude  and  vicious  perfons  there.  The 

like 


[ **6  ] 

like  was  alfo  very  great  at  the  fame  time  in  apart 
of  Lebanon,  called  the  Crank , and  at  Durham  : 
and  likewife  amongft  many  of  the  young  people 
in  the  fit  fl  precinfl  in  Stratford. 

Something  of  this  work  appeared  in  feveral 
other  tozvns  in  thofe  parts,  the  Jail  autumn.  And 
we  have  fuice  been  acquainted  with  fomething 
very  remarkable  of  this  nature  at  another  parifh 
in  Stratford , called  Riplon ; as  alfo  at  a part  of 
Guildford ; at  Mansfield ; at  Tolland ; at  Hebron  ; 
and  at  Bolton.  There  was  alfo  no  fmall  effufion 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  North  parifh  in  Prefi 
ton  ; in  the  congregation  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Lord ; 
who,  with  the  Rev.  Mr.  Owen  of  Groton,  came 
up  hither  in  May,  the  la  ft  year,  on  purpofe  to 
fee  the  work  oi  God  here;  and  having  heard  va- 
rious and  contradictory  accounts  of  it,  were  care- 
ful to  inform  and  fatisfy  themfelves : to  that  end 
they  particularly  converfed  with  many  of  our 
people  ; which  they  declared  to  be  entirely  to 
their  fatisfa£lion  ; and  that  the  one  half  had  not 
been  told  them.  Mr.  Lord  told  me,  that  when  he 
got  home,  he  informed  his  congregation  of  what 
he  had  feen,  and  that  it  proved  the  beginning  of 
the  fame  work  amongft  them,  which  prevailed 
till  there  was  a general  awakening,  and  many 
perfons  remarkably  converted. 

il.  But  this  fhower  of  divine  blefting  has  been 
yet  more  extenfive ; there  was  no  fmall  degree  of 
it  in  fome  parts  of  the  Jerfeys  ; as  I was  inform- 
ed when  I was  at  New- York,  by  fome  people  of 

the 


[ 11-7  ] 

the  jferfiys,  whom  I faw  efpecially  in  a place 
called  the  Mountains,  under  the  mini  dry  of  one 
Mr.  Crofs  : in  another  place  under  the  mini  dry 
of  Mr.  Gilbert  Tennent  ; and  alfo  at  another  place, 
under  the  minidry  of  a Dutch  Minifler,  whofe 
name,  as  I remember,  was  Freelinghoufa. 

42.  This  feems  to  have  been  a very  extraordi- 
nary difpenfation  of  Providence  : God  has  in 
many  refpefls  gone  beyond  his  ufual  and  ordi- 
nary may.  The  work,  in  this  town,  and  fome 
others  about  us,  has  been  extraordinary  on  ac- 
count ol  the  univajahty  of  it,  affecf  ing  all  forts, 
fober  and  vicious,  high  and  low,  rich  and 
poor,  wife  and  unwife;  it  reached  the  mod  con- 
fiderble  families  and  petfons,  to  all  appearance, 
as  much  as  ot  hers.  In  former  dirrings  of  this 
nature,  the  bulk  of  t he  young  people  have  been 
greatly  affefted  ; but  c/c/men,  little  children 
have  been  fonow.  Many  ol  the  lajl  have  of  their 
own  accord,  formed  themfelves  into  religions 
focieties,  in  different  parts  of  the  town:  a loofe, 
carded  perfon  could  fcarcely  find  a companion 
in  the  whole  neighbourhood  ; and  if  there  was 
any  one  that  feemed  to  remain  fenfelefs  or  un» 
concerned, -it  was  fpoke-n  of  as  a jhange  thing. 

* 13.  This  difpenfation  has  alfo  appeared  very 
extraordinary  in  the  numbers  of  thofe,  on  whom 
we  have  reafon  to  hope  it  has  "had  a faving  ef- 
fect : we  have  now  about  620  Communicants 
which  include  aimoft  all  our  adult  perfons.  The 
church  was  very  full  before ; but  perfons  never 

thronged 


[ “8  ] 

thronged  into  it  as  they  do  at  the  prefent  time. 
—Our  facr aments  are  eight  weeks  afunder,  and 
I received  into  our  communion  about  a n hundred 
before  one  facrament,  and  Jour-fcore  of  them  at 
one  time,  whofe  appearance  when  they  prefent- 
ed  themfelves  together  to  make  an  open  explicit 
Prclf^Ul0n  Chriftianity,  was  very  affecting  to 
the  congregation.  I am  far  from  pretending  to 
determine  how  many  have  lately  been  the  fubje&s 
of  fuch  mercy  : but  if  I may  be  allowed  to  declare 
what  appears  probable  in  a thing  of  this  nature,  I 
hope  more  than  300  fouls  were  brought  home  to 
Chrifl  in  this  town  in  the  fpace  of  half  a year, 
and  about  the  fame  number  of  males  as  females; 
which,  by  what  I have  heard  Mr.  Stoddard  fay, 
has  not  been  ufual  in  years  part,  for  he  obferved 
that  in  his  time,  many  more  women  were  con- 
verted than  men.  Thofe  of  our  young  people, 
that  are  on  other  accounts  mod  confiderate,  are 
moftly,  as  I hope,  truly  pious.  Thofe  that  were 
formerly  loofer,  are  generally,  to  all  appearance, 
become  true  lovers  of  God  and  Chrifl.  And  I 
hope  that  by  far  the  greater  part  of  perfons  in 
this  town,  above  16  years  of  age,  have  the  hav- 
ing knowedge  of  Jefus  Chrift  ; and  fo,  by  what 
I heard,  I fuppofe  it  is  in  fome  other  places,  par- 
ticularly at  Sunderland  and  South-Hadley. 

14/rhis  has  alfo  appeared  to  be  a very  extraor- 
dinary difpenfation,  in  that  the  Spirit  of  God  has 
extended  his  influences  both  to  elderly  perfons 
and  thofe  that  are  very  young.  It  has  been  here- 
tofore 


[ 1X9  ] 

to  fore  rarely  heard,  that  any  were  converted  pad 
middle  age;  but  now  we  have  the  fame  ground 
to  think,  that  many  fucli  have  been  favingly  chang- 
ed, as  that  others  have  been  fo  in  more  early 
years.  I fuppofe  there  were  upwards  of fifty  per- 
fons  in  this  town  above  40  years  of  age  ; and 
more  than  twenty  of  them  above  50,  and  about 
ten  of  them  above  60,  and  two  of  them  , above  70 
years  of  age. 

It  has  heretofore  been  looked  on  as  ftrange, 
when  they  have  been  favingly  wrought  upon,  in 
their  childhood  : but  now,  near  thirty  were  to 
appearance  fo  wrought  upon  between  10  and  14 
years  of  age,  and  two  between  9 and  10,  and  one 
of  about  4 years  of  age;  and  becaufe  I fuppofe 
this  lad  will  be  mod  difficultly  believed,  I will 
herea.ter  give  a particular  account  of  it.  There 
are  feveraJ  numerous  families,  in  which,  we 
have  reafon  to  hope  that  all  the  children  are  truly 
pious,  and  mod  of  them  lately  become  fo  : and 
there  are  very  few  honfes  in  the  whole  town,  into 
which  falvation  has  not  lately  come,  in  one  or 
more  indances.  There  are  feveral  negroes,  that 
from  wffiat  was  feen  in  them  then,  and  what  is 
difcernible  in  them  dnce,  appear  to  have  been 
truly  born  again  in  the  late  remarkable  feafon. 

15.  God  has  alfo  feemed  to  go  out  of  his  ufual 
way  in  the  quicknefis  of  his  work.  5Tis  Wonderful 
that  perfons  ffiould  be  fo  fuddenly,  and  yet  fo 
greatly  changed  : many  have  been  taken  from  a 
loofe  and  carelefs  way  of  living,  and  feized  with 
ftrong  convittions  of  their  guilt  and  mifery,  and 

in 


[ 120  ] 

in  a very  little  time  old  things  have  pafied  away, 
and  all  things  have  become  new  with  them. 

16.  God’s  work  has  alfo  appeared  very  extraor- 
dinary, in  the  degrees  of  the  influences  of  his  Spi- 
rit, both  in  the  degree  of  conviHion , and  of fay- 
ing light,  and  love,  and  joy,  that  many  have  ex- 
perienced It  has  alfo  been  verv  extraordinary  in 
the  extent  of  it,  and  its  being  fo  fwiftly  propogat- 
ed  from  town  to  town.  In  former  times  of  the 
pouring  out  of  the  Spirit  of  God  on  this  town, 
though  in  fume  of  them  it  was  very  remarkable, 
yet  it  reached  no  farther  than  this  town,  while 
the  neighbouring  towns  all  continued  unmoved. 

- The  work  of  God's  Spirit  feemed  to  be  at 
its  greatefi  height  in  this  town,  in  the  former  part 
of  the  jipring,  in  March  and  April-,  at  which  time 
it  was  carried  on  in  fo  wonderful  a manner,  that 
fo  far  as  I can  judge,  there" were,  at  leaf!,  four 
perfons  in  a day  converted  to  God,  or  near  thir- 
ty in  a week,  take  one  with  another,  for  five  or 
fix  weeks  together:  when  God  in  fo  remarkable 
a manner  100k  the  work  into  his  own  hands,  there 
was  as  much  done  in  a day  or  two,  as  at  ordinary 
times,  with  all  our  endeavours,  and  with  fuch  a 
bl effing  as  we  commonly  have,  is  done  in  a 
year. 

17.  I am  very  fenfible  bow  apt  many  may  be 
to  think  I am  fond  of  magnifying  and  aggrandiz- 
ing the  matter ; and  that,,  for  want  of  judgment,  I 
take  every  religious  pang,  and  enthufiaflic  con- 
ceit, for  faving  converfion,  And  for  this  reafoti 

I have 


[ 121  ] 

I have  forborn  to  publifh  an  account  of  this 
great  work,  though  I have  often  been  put  upon 
it ; but  having  now  as  I judge  a fpecial  call  fo  to 
do,  I thought  it  bell  to  conceal  no  part  of  it,  leav- 
ing it  with  God  to  take  care  of  the  credit  of  his 
own  work  : and  that  diftant  perfons  may  be  the 
better  able  to  judge  for  themfelves,  I would  be  a 
little  more  large  and  particular.; 

18.  I therefore  proceed  to  give  an  account  of 
the  manner  of  perfons  being  wrought  upon:  and 
here  there  is  a vaji  variety,  perhaps  as  manifold 
as  the  lubjetts  of  operation  ; but  yet  in  many 
things  there  is  a great  analogy  in  all. 

Perfons  fn  ft  are  awakened  into  a fenfe  of  their 
rniferable  condition  by  nature,  the  danger  they 
are  in  of  perifhing  eternally,  and  that  it  is  of 
great  importance  to  them  that  they  fpeedily  ef- 
cape.  Thofe  that  before  were  fecure  and  fenfe- 
lefs,  are  made  fenfible  they  were  in  the  way 
to  ruin  in  their  former  comics.  Some  are  more 
fuddenly  feized  ; it  may  be,  by  the  news  of  others 
converfion,  or  fomething  they  hear  in  public, 
or  in  private  confeience,  their  confciences  are 
fuddenly  fmitten,  as  il  their  hearts  were  pierced 
through  with  a dart.  Others  have  awakenings  that 
come  upon  them  more  gradually,  they  begin  at 
fir fl  to  be  fomething  more  thoughtful  and  confi- 
derate,  fo  as  to  come  to  a conclufion  in  their 
minds  that  tis  their  wifeft  way  to  improve  the 
prefent  opportunity;  and  have  accordingly  fet 
themfelves  feiioufly  to  meditate,  on  purpofe  to 
Vol.  XVII.  F obtain 


[ 122  ] 


obtain  convictions  ; and  fo  their  awakenings  have 
increafed,  till  a fenfe  of  their  mifery  has  had  fall 
hold  of  them.  Others  that,  before  this  time,  had 
been  fomething  concerned  for  their  falvation, 
have  been  made  fenfiblethat  their  flack  and  dull 
way  of  feeking  was  never  like  to  attain  their 
purpofe,  and  fo  have  been  roufed  up  to  a greater 
violence  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

19.  Thefe  awakenings  when  they  have  firft 
feized  on  perfons  have  had  two  effefls  : one  was, 
that  they  have  brought  them  immediately  to  quit 
their  finful  practices : when  once  the  Spirit  of 
God  began  to  be  fo  wonderfully  poured  out  in  a 
general  way  thro’  the  town,  people  had  foon 
done  with  their  old  quarrels,  backbitings,  and 
intermeddling  with  other  men’s  matters  ; perfons 
kept  much  at  home  ; none  went  abroad  unlefs 
on  neceflary  bufinefs,  or  on  fome  religious  ac- 
count, and  every  day  feemed  in  many  refpefts  like 

a fabbath-day The  other  effeft  was,  that  it 

put  them  on  earned,  application  to  the  means  of 
falvation,  reading,  prayer,  meditation,  to  the 
ordinances  of  God’s  houfe,  and  private  con- 
frence : their  cry  was,  what  Jliall  we  do  to  he 
faved  ? The  place  of  refort  was  now  altered,  it 
was  no  longer  the  tavern,  but  the  minifler  s houfe, 
that  was  thronged  far  more  than  ever  the  tavern 
had  been  wont  to  be. 

20.  There  is  a great  variety,  as  to  the  degree 
of  fear  and  trouble  that  perfons  are  in,  before 

they  obtain  any  comfortable  evidences  of  pardon 

and 


[ 123  1 

and  acceptance.  Some  are  from  the  beginning 
carried  on  with  abundantly  more  hope : fome 
have  had  ten  times  lefs  trouble  of  mind  than 
others,  in  whom  yet  the  ifTue  feems  to  be  the 
fame.  Some  have  had  fuch  a fenfe  of  thedif- 
pleafure  of  God,  and  the  great  danger  they  were 
in  of  damnation,  that  they  could  not  fleep  at 
nights  : and  many  have  faid  that  when  they  laid 
down,  the  thoughts  of  fleeping  in  fuch  a condi- 
tion have  been  frightful  to  them,  and  they  have 
fcarcely  been  free  from  terror  while  they  were 
afleep,  and  have  awaked  with  fear  and  diftrefs 
flill  on  their  fpirits  : and  often  the  concern  that 
has  been  on  their  minds,  has  had  a painful  in- 
fluence on  their  bodies,  and  given  difturbance  t® 
animal  nature. 

21.  The  awful  apprehenfions  perfons  have  had 
of  their  mifery,  have  for  the  moll  part  been  in- 
creaking,  as  they  have  approached  to  deliverance  ; 
though  they  often  pafs  through  many  changes,  in 
the  frame  of  their  minds  r foraetimes  they  think 
themfelves  wholly  fenfelefs,  and  fear  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  has  left  them,  and  that  they  are 
given  up  to  a judicial  hardnefs ; yet  they  appear 
very  troubled  with  that  fear,  and  are  in  great  ear- 
ned: to  obtain  convictions  again. 

Together  with  thofe  fears,  and  that  exercife 
of  mind  which  is  rational,  and  which  they  have 
juft  ground  for,  they  have  often  fuffered  many 
needlefs  di  ft  re  fifes  of  thought,  in  which  Satan 
■probably  has  a great  hand  ; and  fometimes  the 
2 aiftemper 


[ l24  ] 

dt  (temper  of  melancholy  has  been  evidently  mix- 
ed : one  knows  not  how  to  deal  with  fuch  per- 
fons  ; they  turn  every  thing  that  is  faid  to  them 
the  wrong  way  ; and  there  is  nothing  that  the 
devil  feems  to  make  fo  great  a handle  of,  unlefs 
it  be  the  real  corruption  of  the  heart. 

22.  But  it  is  remarkable,  there  has  been  far  lefs 
of  this  mixture  now  than  was  wont  to  be  in  per- 
fons  under  awakenings  at  other  times ; yea,  many 
that  before  had  been  exceedinolv  involved  in  fuch 

O J 

difficulties,  feem  now  flrangely  to  be  fet  at  li- 
berty : fome  that  had  for  a long  time  been  en- 
tangled with  peculiar  temptations,  of  one  fort  or 
other,  and  unprofitable  and  hurtful  diffreffes, 
were  foon  helped  over  them,  and  convictions 
have  been  fuccefsfully  carried  on  in  the  way  to 
life.  And  thus  Satan  feemed  to  be  reftrained, 
till  towards  the  latter  end,  when  God's  Spirit  was 
about  to  withdraw. 

Many  under  great  awakenings  were  concerned, 
becaufe  they  thought  they  were  not  awakened, 
but  fleeping  upon  the  brink  of  hell : and  the  fenfe 
of  the  need  they  have  to  be  awakened,  grows 
upon  them  with  their  awakenings ; fo  that  they 
feem  to  themfelves  to  be  very  ferjelejs,  when  in- 
deed mod  JtnJible.  There  have  been  fome  in- 
dances of  perfons  that  have  had  as  great  a fenfe 
of  the’r  danger  and  tnifery,  as  their  natures  could 
weil  fubfifl  under,  .and  yet  they  have  expred 
themfelves  much  amazed  at  their  own  infenfibi- 

lity 


[ 12  5 ] 

llty  and  fottilhnefs,  in  fuch  an  extraordinary  time 
as  it  then  was. 

Perfons  are  frequently  brought  to  the  borders 
of  defpair  a little  before  the  day  dawns  in  their 
fouls  : fome  there  have  been  who  have  had  fuch 
a fenfe  of  God’s  wrath  for  fin,  that  they  have  been 
overborn,  and  made  to  cry  out  under  an  aflonifh- 
ing  fenfe  of  their  guilt,  wondering  that  God  fuf- 
fers  fuch  guilty  wretches  to  live  upon  earth,  and 
that  he  doth  not  immediately  fend  them  to  hell. 
And  fometimes  their  guilt  does  fo  Hare  them  in 
the  face,  that  they  are  in  exceeding  terror  for 
fear  that  God  will  inflantly  do  it.  In  others  thefe 
terrors  do  not  feem  to  be  fo  fharp  when  near 
comfort,  as  before  ; but  they  are  led  further  into 
their  own  hearts,  to  a deeper  fenfe  of  their  own 
univerfa!  depravity  and  deadnefs  in  fin. 

23.  The  corruption  of  the  heart  difcovers  itfell 
various  ways  in  the  time  of  conviftion ; fome- 
times it  appears  in  a great  ftruggle,  like  fome- 
thing  rouzed  by  an  enemy,  and  Satan  the  old  in- 
habitant feems  to  exert  himfelf,  like  a ferpent 
difturbed  and  enraged.  Many  in  fuch  circum- 
fiances  have  felt  great  envy  towards  thofe  that 
are  lately  converted,  and  moll  of  all  towards 
their  acquaintance  and  companions:  indeed  fome 
have  felt  many  heart-rifings  againft  God,  and 
murmurings  at  his  ways  of  dealing  with  mankind, 
and  his  dealings  with  themfehes  in  particular. 
But  it  has  been  much  infilled  on,  that  perfons 
fhould  have  the  utmoft  dread  of  fuch  thoughts, 
r 3 which 


[ ] 

which  tend  exceedingly  to  quench  the  Spirit  of 
God.  And  when  fuch  a fpirit  has  much  pre- 
vailed, and  perfons  have  not  earneftly  flrove 
againft  it,  it  has  feemed  to  be  exceedingly  to  the 
hindrance  of  their  fouls  : but  in  fome  other  in- 
stances, where  they  have  been  much  terrified  at 
the  fight  of  fuch  wickednefs  in  their  hearts,  God 
has  brought  good  out  of  evil,,  and  made  it  a 
means  of  convincing  them  of  their  own  defperate 
finfulnefs,  and  bringing  them  off  from  all  felf- 
confidence. 

The  drift  of  the  Spirit  of  God  herein  has 
feemed  evidently  to  be,  to  make  way  for  a con- 
viction of  their  abfolute  dependence  on  his  fo- 
vereign  power  and  grace,  and  the  necefnty  of  a 
mediator,  by  leading  them  more  and  more  to  a 
f'enfe  of  their  exceeding  wickednefs  and  guilti- 
riefs  in  his  fight,  and  of  the  pollution  anti  in- 
fufficiency  of  their  own  righteoufnefs  ; to  fhew 
them  that  they  can  in  no  wife  help  themfelves, 
and  that  God  would  be  wholly  juft  in  rejecting 
them  and  all  that  they  do,  and  in  calling  them 
off  for  ever  : though  there  be  a vaft  variety,  as  to 
the  manner  and  diftinCtnefs  of  perfons  convicti- 
ons of  thefe  things. 

As  they  are  more  and  more  convinced  of  the 
corruption  and  wickednefs  of  their  hearts,  they 
feem  to  themfelves  to  grow  worfe  and  worfe, 
harder  and  blinder,  and  more  defperately  wicked, 
inftead  of  growing  better.  Under  the  fenfe  which 

the 


[ 127  ] 

the  Spirit  of  God  gives  them  of  their  finfulnefs, 
they  often  think  that  they  differ  from  all  others  ; 
their  hearts  are  ready  to  fink  with  the  thought, 
that  they  are  the  worft  of  all,  and  that  none  ever 
obtained  mercy  that  were  as  wicked  as  they. 

* At  firjt , their  confidences  are  commonly 
mold  exercifed  by  their  outward  vicious  courfe, 
or  other  aCts  of  fin  ; but  afterwards  they  are  more 
burdened  with  a fenfe  of  heart-fins,  the  dreadful 
corruptions  of  their  nature,  their  enmity  agair.fi; 
God,  the  pride  of  their  hearts,  their  unbelief, 
their  rejection  of  Chrift,  the  flubbornnefs  and 
obfiinacy  of  their  wills,  and  the  like.  In  many, 
God  makes  much  ufe  of  their  own  experience,  in 
the  courfe  of  their  awakenings  and  endeavours 
after  faring  good,  to  convince  them  of  their  own 
vile  emptinefs  and  univerfal  depravity. 

24.  Very  often  under  the  fir fl  awakenings, 
when  they  are  brought  to  refleCt  on  their  pall 
lives,  and  have  a terrifying  fenfe  of  God’s  anger, 
they  fet  themfelves  to  walk  more  firiCtly,  and 
cortfefs  their  fins,  and  perform  many  religious 
duties,  with  a fecret  hope  of  appeafing  God’s 
anger  and  making  up  for  the  fins  they  have  com- 
mitted : and  oftentimes,  at  firft  fetting  out,  their 
affections  are  moved  and  they  are  full  of  tears 
in  their  confeffions  and  prayers,  which  they  are 
ready  to  make  very  much  of,  as  though  they  were 
fome  atonement,  and  had  power  to  move  corref- 
pondent  affeCtions  in  God  too  : and  hence  they 
are  for  a while  big  with  expectation  of  what  God 
F 4 will 


[ 128  J 

will  rlo  for  them;  and  conceive  that  they  grow 
better  a-pace,  and  fhall  foon  be  thoroughly  con- 
verted. But  thefe  affections  are  but  fhort-Iived; 
they  quickly  find  that  they  fail,  and  then  they 
think  themfelves  to  be  grown  worfe  again  ; they 
do  not  find  fuch  a profpeft  of  being  foon  con- 
verted as  they  thought  ; inftead  of  being  nearer , 
they  feern  to  be  farther  off ; their  hearts  they 
think  are  grown  harder,  and  by  this-  means  their 
fears  of  perifhing  greatly  increafe.  But  though 
they  are  difappointed,  they  renew  their  attempts 
again  and  again  ; and  ftil!  as  their  attempts  are 
multiplied,  fo  are  their  difappointments ; all 
fails  ; they  fee  no  token  o-f  having  inclined  God’s 
heart  to  them  ; they  do  not  fee  that  he  hears 
their  prayers  at  all  as  they  expected  he  would; 
and  fometimes  there  have  been  great  temptations 
arifing  hence  to  leave  off  feeking,  and  to  yield 
up  the  cafe.  And  as  they  are  ftill  more  terrified 
with  fears  of  perilhing,  and  their  hopes  of  pre- 
vailing on  God  in  a great  meafure  fail,  fometimes 
their  religious  affections  have  turned  into  heart- 
rifings  againft  God,  becaule  he  would  not  pity 
them,  and  feeins  to  have  little  regard  to  their 
dilfrefs,  and  to  all  the  pains  they  take.  They 
think  how  foon  others  have  obtained  comfort, 
and  thofe  too  that  were  worfe  than  they,  and 
have  not  laboured  fo  much  as  they  have  done; 
and  fometimes  fall  into  dreadful  blafphemous 
thoughts.  When  they  refleCl  on  thefe  wicked 
workings  of  heart  againft  God,  they  have  ftilt 

more 


[ 129  3 

more  diflrefling  apprehenfions  of  his  anger,  and 
it  may  be  fear  they  have  committed  the  unpar- 
donable fin,  and  that  God  will  furely  now  never 
fhew  mercy  to  them. 

25.  But  then  perhaps  by  fomething  they  read 
or  hear  of  the  infinite  mercy  of  God,  and  all- 
fufficiency  of  Chrift  for  the  fake  of  finners,  they 
have  forne  hope  renewed;  but  think  as  yet  they 
are  not  jit  to  come  to  .Chrift  ; and  then  fet  them- 
felves  upon  a new  courfe  of  endeavours  to  male 
themjelves  better,  and  ft i II  meet  with  new  difap- 
pointments  : they  are  earneft  to  enquire  what 
they  fhall  do?  They  do  not  know  but  there  is 
fomething  elfe  to  he  done,  in  order  to  their  ob- 
taining converting  grace,  that  they  have  never 
done  yet.  It  may  be  they  hope  that  they  are 
fomething  better  than  they  were  ; but  the  pleaf- 
ing  dream  foon  vanishes  again.  They  find  not 
yet  the  appearance  of  any  good,  but  all  looks  as 
dark  as  midnight  to  them.  Thus  they  wander 
about  from  mountain  to  hill,  feeking  reft,  and 
finding  none : when  they  are  beat  out  of  one 
refuge  they  fly  to  another , till  being  broken  and 
fubdued,  God  gives  them  a conviftion  of  their 
own  utter  helpleftnefs  and  infufficiency,  anddif- 
covers  the  true  remedy,  a knowledge  of  Chrift 
and  his  gofpel. 

* Men  that  begin  to  feek  falvation  are  com- 
monly profoundly  ignorant  of  thenifelves  ; they 
are  not  fenfible  how  blind  they  are,  and  how 
little  they  can  do  towards  biinging  themfelves-to 
F 5 fee 


[ >3°  ] 

fee  fpiiitual  things  aright ; they  are  not  fenfi’bie 
how  remote  they  are  from  the  love  of  God,  and 
all  other  holy  difpofitions.  When  they  fee  un- 
expected pollution  in  their  own  hearts,  they  go 
about  to  walh  their  own  defilements  and  make 
themfelves  clean  : and  they  weary  therafelves  in 
vain,  till  God  fhows  them  it  is  in  vain,  and  that 
their  help  is  not  where  they  have  fought  it,  but 
elfewhere. 

* But  fome  continue  wandering  in  a kind  of 
labyrinth,  ten  times  as  long  as  others,  before 
their  own  experience  will  convince  them  of  their 
infufficiency  ; and  fo  it  appears  not  to  be  their 
own  experience  only,  but  the  influence  of  God's 
Spirit : and  God  has  of  late  abundantly  fhown 
that  he  does  not  need  to  wait  to  have  men  con- 
vinced by  long  and  often  repeated  fruitlefs  trials; 
for  in  multitudes  of  infiances  he  has  made  a 
shorter  work  : he  has  fo  convinced  perfons,  and 
made  them  fo  fenlible  of  their  exceeding  great 
vilenefs,  and  given  them  fnch  a fenfe  of  his 
wrath  againft  fin,  as  has  quickly  overcome  all 
their  vain  felf-confidence,  and  borne  them  down 
into  the  dull  before  a holy  and  righteous  God. 

26.  There  have  been  fome  who  have  not  had 
great  terrors,  but  have  had  a very  quick  work. 
Some  of  thefe  that  have  not  had  fo  deep  a con- 
viction before,  have,  it  may  be,  much  more  of 
it  after  their  converfion.  God  has  appeared  far 
from  limiting  himfelf  to  any  certain  method  in 
his  proceedings  with  finners  under  conviCtions. 

In 


[ 131  ] 

In  fome  inftances  it  Teems  eafy  for  our  reafoning 
powers  to  difcern  the  methods  of  divine  wifdom 
herein  : in  others  his  footfteps  cannot  be  traced, 
and  his  ways  are  paft  finding  out  : and  fome  that 
are  lefs  diJiinElly  wrought  upon,  in  what  is  pre- 
paratory to  grace,  appear  no  lejs  eminent  after- 
wards. 

There  is  in  nothing  a greater  difference,  in 
different  perfons,  than  with  refpe£l  to  the  time 
of  their  being  under  trouble:  fome  for  a few 

O 

days,  and  others  for  months  or  years.  There 
were  many  in  this  town,  that  had  been,  before 
this  effufion  of  God’s  Spirit  upon  us,  for  years, 
and  fome  for  many  years,  concerned  about  their 
falvation ; and  to  fuch  a degree  as  to  be  very  un- 
eafy,  to  live  an  uncomfortable,  difquieted  life, 
without  any  evidence  of  a good  efiate,  who  now 
have  received  light;  but  many  of  them ' were 
fome  of  the  lafl  : they  fir  ft  faw  multitudes  of 
others  rejoicing,  with  fongs  of  deliverance  in 
their  mouths,  who  Teemed  wholly  carelefs  and 
at  eafe,  and  in  purfuit  of  vanity,  while  they  had 
been  bowed  down  with  folicitude  about  their 
fouls;  yea,  fome  had  lived  licentioufly,  and  fo 
continued  till  a little  before  they  were  converted, 
and  grew  up  to  a holy  rejoicing  in  the  infinite 
blelfmgs  God  had  bellowed  upon  them. 

* 27.  And  whatever  minifler  has  a like  occa- 
fion  to  deal  with  fouls,  in  a flock  under  fuch  cir- 
cumftances,  he  will  Toon  find  himfelf  under  a 
neceffity  greatly  to  infill  upon  it  with  them,  that 
F 6 God 


C x32  ] 

God  is  under  no  manner  of  obligation  to  fhevv 
them  mercy  ; and  that  a man  can  challenge  no- 
thing in  jujiice  from  any  thing  he  does  before  he 
has  believed  on  J Jefus  Lhrijt,  It  appears  to  me, 
that  if  I had  taught  thofe  under  trouble  any  other 
doftrine,  I ihould  have  taken  the  direCI  courfe  to 
have  undone  them;  I fhould  have  direftly  crofled 
what  was  plainly  the  drift  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
his  influences  upon  them  ; for  if  they  had  be- 
lieved what  I faid,  it  would  either  have  promoted 
careleffnefs,  and  Co  put  an  end  to  their  awaken- 
ings, or  blocked  up  their  way  to  that  humilia- 
tion before  the  fovereign  Dtfpofer  of  life  and 
death,  whereby  God  is  wont  to  prepare  us  for  his 
confolations  : and  I have  found  no  difcourfes 
more  remarkably  blefled,  than  thofe  in  which  the 
doflrineof  God's  liberty,  with  regard  to  anfwer- 
ing  the  prayers,  or  fucceeding  the  pains  of  men, 
have  been  infiAed  on.  I never  found  fo  much 
immediate  fruit  of  any  difcourfes  I have  preach- 
ed, as  of  fome  from  thofe  words,  Rom.  iti.  19. 
That  every  mouth  may  be  flopped- ; endeavouring 
to  {hew  from  thence,  that  it  would  be  juft  with 
God  were  he  to  caft  us  off  for  ever. 

28.  Commonly  the  firft  thing  that  appears 
after  men  have  been  much  awakened",  is  a con- 
viction of  the  juftice  of  God  in  their  condemna- 
tion, in  a fenfe  of  their  own  exceeding  finful- 
nefs,  and  the  vi'enefs  of  all  their  performances  : 
in  giving  an  account  of  this,  they  exprefled 
themfelves  very  variouflv  ; fome,  that  they  faw 

God 


[ 133  J 

God  might  juftlybeftow  mercy  on  every  perfon 
in  the  town,  and  on  every  perfon  in  the  world, 
and  damn  themfelves  to  all  eternity;  fome,  that 
they  fee  that  God  may  juftlv  have  no  regard  to 
all  the  pains  they  have  taken,  and  all  the  prayers 
they  have  made  ; fome,  that  they  fee  if  they 
fhould  feek,  and  take  the  utmoft  pains  all  their 
lives,  God  might  juftly  call  them  into  hell  at  laff, 
becaufe  all  their  labours,  prayers,  and  tears  can- 
not  make  an  atonement  for  the  leaf!;  lin,  nor 
merit  any  blcfling  at  the  hands  of  God;  fome 
have  declared  themfelves  to  be  in  the  hands  of 
God,  that  he  can,  and  may,  difpofe  of  them  juft 
as  he  pleafes  ; fome,  that  God  may  glorify  him- 
felf  in  their  damnation,  and  they  wonder  that 
God  has  buffered  them  to  live  fo  long,  and  has 
not  call  them  into  hell  long  ago 

Some  are  brought  to  this  conviction  by  a great 
fenfe  of  their  finfulnefs,  in  general,  that  they  are 
fuch  vile  wicked  creatures  in  heart  and  life  ; 
others  have  the  fins  of  their  lives  in  an  extraordi- 
nary manner  fet  before  them,  multitudes  of 
them  coining  juft  then  lrefli  to  their  memory* 
and  being  fet  before  them  with  their  aggrava- 
tions. Some  have  their  minds  efpecially  fixed 
on  fome  particular  wicked  pra&ice  they  have 
indulged  ; others  on  the  corruption  of  their 
hearts.  Some  are  deeply  convinced  by  a view 
they  have  of  the  horridnefs  of  fome  particular 
exereifes  of  corruption,  in  the  time  of  their  awak- 
ening, whereby,  the  enmity  of  the  heart  againft 

Goff 


[ *34  3 

God  has  been  manifefled  ; and  others  by  a fenfe 
of  the  fin  of  unbelief,  the  oppofition  of  their  hearts 
to  the  way  of  falvation  by  Chrift,  and  their  obfti- 
nacy  in  reje&ing  him  and  his  grace. 

29.  There  is  a great  deal  of  difference  as  to 
perfor.s  diJlinBnefs  here ; fome  have  not  fo  clear 
a fight  of  God’s  juflice  in  their  condemnation  ; 
but  yet  mention  things  that  plainly  imply  it. 
They  acknowledgeGod  to  be  juft  in  his  threaten- 
ings,  and  that  they  are  deferving  of  nothing  : 
and  many  times,  though  they  had  not  a fight  of 
it  at  the  beginning,  they  have  very  clear  difco- 
veries  of  it  afterwards,  with  great  humblings  in 
the  dull  before  God. 

Commonly  perfons  minds  immediately  before 
this  difcovery  of  God’s  juftice  are  exceeding 
reftlefs,  and  in  a kind  of  ftruggle  and  tumult, 
and  fometimes  in  mere  anguifh ; but  generally, 
as  foon  as  they  have  this  conviction,  it  brings 
their  minds  to  a calm  compofure.  And  mod 
frequently,  though  not  always,  then  the  preffing 
weight  upon  their  fpirits  is  taken  away,  and  a 
general  hope  arifes,  that  fome  time  or  other 
God  will  be  gracious,  even  before  any  diflinft 
difcoveries  of  mercy.  And  often  they  then  come 
to  a conclufion  within  themfelves,  that  they  will 
lie  at  God’s  feet,  and  wait  his  time. 

go.  In  many,  the  firft  conviftion  of  the  juftice 
of  God  in  their  condemnation,  which  they  take 
particular  notice  of,  and  probably  the  fnft  dif- 
tinft  conviflion  of  it  that  they  have,  does  not  ap- 
pear 


[ ^35  1 


pear  to  be  forced  by  mere  terrors  and  convictions  j 
for  there  is  in  it  a fort  of  complacency  of  foul,  in 
the  attribute  of  God’s  jultice,  as  difplayed  in  his 
threatenings  of  eternal  damnation  to  Tinners. 
Sometimes  at  the  difcovery  of  it,  they  can  fcarce 
forbear  crying  out,  5TIS  JUST  ! ’TIS  JUST ! 
Some  exprefs  themfelves,  that  they  fee  the  glory 
of  God  wouldj7z2«£  bright  in  their  own  condem- 
nation ; and  they  are  ready  to  think  that  if  they 
are  damned,  they  could  take  part  with  God 
againft  themfelves,  and  glorify  hisjuftice  therein. 

Some,  when  sn  fuch  circumflances,  have  felt 
that  fenfe  of  the  excellency  of  God’s  juftice, 
againft  fuch  finfulnefs  as  theirs  was,  and  have 
had  fuch  a fubmiffion  of  mind,  together  with  an 
exceeding  loathing  of  their  own  unworthinefs, 
and  a kind  of  indignation  againft  themfelves,  that 
they  have  called  it  a rmllingnefs  to  be  damned ; 
though  it  muft  be  owned  they  had  not  clear  ideas 
of  damnation,  nor  does  any  word  in  the  bible 
require  fuch  felf-denial  as  this.  But  the  truth  is, 
as  fome  have  more  clearly  exprefl  it,  falvation 
appeared  too  good  for  them  : they  were  worthy  of 
nothing  but  condemnation , and  they  could  not  tell 
how  to  think  oj  falvation  s being  befowed  upon 
them , fearing  it  was  inconffent  with  the  glory  of 
God's  majejly , which  they  had fo  much  contemned 
and  affronted. 

31.  That  calm  of  fpirit  which  fome  have  found 
after  their  diffrefs,  continued  fome  time  before 
any  fpecial  manifelfation  of  the  favour  of  God. 

But 


[ <3«  ] 

But  in  others  the  comfortable  view  of  a merciful 
God,  and  a fufficient  Redeemer,  immediately  fol- 
lowed. And  in  feveral,  the  firft  fight  of  their 
juft  defert  of  hell,  and  of  God's  love,  were  fo 
near,  they  feemed  to  go  together. 

Thefe  gracious  difcoveries  are  in  many  refpefts 
very  various  ; more  frequently  Chrift  is  diftinft- 
ly  made  the  objeft  of  the  mind,  in  his  all- 
fufficiency  and  willingnefs  to  fave  finners:  but 
fome  have  their  thoughts  more  efpecially  fixed  an 
God,  in  fome  of  his  glor  ious  attributes  mani  felted 
in  thegofpel, and fhining  forth  in  the  faceof  Chrifi: 
fome  view  the  alUfufficiency  of  the  mercy  and 
grace  of  God  ; fome  chiefly  the  infinite  power  of 
God,  and  his  ability  to  fave  them,  and  to  do  all 
things  for  them  ; and  fome  look  moft  at  the  truth 
and  faithfulncfs  of  God.  In  fume , the  truth  and 
certainty  of  the  gofpel  in  general  is  the  fit  11  joyful 
difcovei  v they  have  ; in  others,  the  certain  truth 
of  fome  particular  promifes  ; in  fome,  the  grace 
and  fincerity  of  God  in  h Vs  invitations,  very 
commonly  in  fome  particular  invitation.  Some 
are  ilruck  with  the  glory  and  wonderfulncfs  of 
the  dying  love  of  Chrill  : and  fome  with  the 
fufikiency  and  precioufnefs  of  his  blood,  as 
offered  to  make  an  atonement  for  fin  ; in  fome 
the  excellency  and  lovelinefsof  Chrift  chiefly 
engages  their  thoughts;  in  fome  his  divinity, 'that 
he  is  indeed  the  Son  of  the  hung  God;  and  in 
others,  the  excellency  of  the  way  of  ialvation  by 
Chrift,  and  the  fuitablenefs  of  it  to  their  neceflities. 

Some 


[ *37  ] 

Some  have  an  apprehenfion  of  thefe  things  fo 
given,  that  it  feems  more  natural  to  them  to  ex- 
prefs  it  by  fight  or  difcovery  ; others  think  what 
they  experience  better  expreffed  by  the  realizing 
conviElions,  ora  lively  feeling  fenfe  of  heart-,  mean- 
ing, as  I fuppofe,  no  other  difference  but  what  is 
merely  circumftantial  or  gradual. 

There  is,  often,  in  the  mind,  fom z particular 
text  of  fcripture,  giving  them  confolation  ; fome- 
times  a multitude  of  texts,  gracious  invitations 
and  promifes  flowing  in  one  after  another,  filling 
the  foul  more  and  more  with  comfort.  Comfort 
is  firft  given  to  fome  while  reading  a portion  of 
fcripture;  but  in  others  it  is  attended  with  no 
particular  fcripture  at  all,  either  in  reading  or  me- 
ditation. In  fome,  many  divine  things  feem  to  be 
difcovered  to  the  foul  as  it  were  atonce  ; others 
have  their  minds  efpecially  fixed  on  fome  one 
thing  at  firft,  and  afterwards  a fenfe  is  given  of 
others  ; in  Jome  with  a fwifter,  and  others  a flow- 
er fucceflion,  and  fometimes  with  interruptions 
of  much  darknefs. 

32.  The  way  that  grace  feems  fometimes  firft 
to  appear  after  deep  humiliation,  is  in  earneft 
longings  of  foul  after  God  and  Chrift,  to  know 
God,  to  love  him,  to  be  humbled  before  him, 
which  arife  from  a fenfe  of  the  fuperlative  ex- 
cellency of  divine  things,  with  a fpiriiual  tafte 
and  relifti  of  them.  Such  longings  are  common- 
ly attended  with  firm  refolutions  to  purfue  this 
good  for  ever,  together  with  a hoping,  waiting 

difpofition. 


C *3*  ] 

difpofition.  Other  experiences  and  difcoveries 
Toon  follow,  which  more  clearly  manifeft  a 
change  of  heart. 

“ It  mull  be  confeft  that  Chrilf  is  not  always 
dijhn&ly  and  explicitly  thought  of  at  firfl,  (though 
moll  commonly  he  is)  but  only  implicitly.  Thus 
fometimes  when  perfons  feemed  evidently  to  be 
hript  of  all  their  own  righteoufnefs,  and  to  have 
Hood  felf-condemned  as  guilty  of  death,  they 
have  been  comforted  with  a joyful  view,  that 
the  mercy  and  grace  of  God  is  fufhcient  for  them  ’ 
that  their  fins,  though  never  fo  great,  (hall  be  no 
hindrance  to  their  being  accepted  ; that  there  is 
mercy  enough  in  God  for  the  whole  world,  and 
the  like,  when  they  give  no  account  of  any  dif- 
tinff  thought  of  Chrifi  : but  yet  it  appears  that 
the  revelation  of  the  mercy  of  God  in  the  gof- 
pel,  is  the  ground  of  this  their  hope  ,*  and  that  it 
is  indeed  the  mercy  of  God  through  Chrift,  that 
is  difcovered  to  them. 

* So  fometimes  difconfolate  fouls  among  us, 
have  been  brought  to  refi  in  God,  by  a fweet 
fenfe  of  his  grace  and  faithfulnefs  in  fome  fpe- 
cial  invitation  or  promife,  in  which  is  no  parti- 
cular mention  of  Chrifi,  nor  is  it  accompanied 
with  any  diftindl  thought  of  him  in  their  minds  ; 
but  yet  it  is  not  received  as  out  oj Chrift,  but  as 
one  of  the  invitations  or  promifes  made  of  God 
to  poor  Tinners  through  his  Son  Jefus,  as  it  is  in- 
deed : and  fuch  perfons  have  afterwards  had  clear 

and 


C r39  ] 

and  diftintl  difcovtiies  of  Chrift,  accompanied 
with  a lively  faith  and  love  towards  him. 

33.  Frequently  when  perfons  have  firft  had 
the  gofpel-ground  of  relief  for  loft  finners  difco- 
vered  to  them,  they  have  thought  nothing  at  that 
time  of  their  being  converted  : only,  to  fee  that 
there  is  fuch  an  afl-fufticiency  in  God,  and  fuch 
plentiful  provifion  made  in  Chrift,  after  thay  have 
been  borne  down  with  a fenfe  of  their  guilt  and 
fear  of  wrath,  exceedingly  refrefhes  them  ; the 
view  isjoyful  to  them,  as  it  is  in  its  own  nature 
glorious,  and  gives  them  quite  new  and  more- 
delightful  ideas  of  God  and  Chrift,  and  begets  in 
them  a ftrong  refolution  to  give  up  themfelves  to 
God  and  his  Son,  and  patiently  to  wait  for  him, 

34.  It  was  very  wonderful  to  fee  after  what 
manner  perfons  affections  were  fometimes  mov- 
ed when  God  fuddenly  opened  their  eyes,  and 
let  into  their  minds  a fenfe  of  the  greatnefs  of 
his  grace  and  fulnefs  of  Chrift,  and  his  readi- 
ng's to  fave.  Their  joyful  furprize  has  caufed 
their  hearts  as  it  were  to  leap,  fo  that  they  have 
been  ready  to  break  forth  into  laughter  ; tears 
often  at  the  fame  time  ifluing  like  a flood,  and 
intermingling  a loud  weeping  : and  fometimes 
they  have  not  been  able  to  forbear  crying  out 
with  a loud  voice,  expreffing  their  great  admi- 
ration. 

Thefe  influences  of  God’s  Spirit  commonly 
bring  an  extraordinary  conviction  of  the  reality 
and  certainty  of  the  great  things  of  religion  ; 

(though 


[ H°  ] 

(though  in  fome  this  is  much  greater,  fome  time 
after  than  at  fit  ft:)  they  have  a fight  and  tafle  of 
the  divine  excellency  that  there  is  in  the  things 
of  the  gofpel,  which  is  more  to  convince  them, 
than  reading  many  volumes  of  arguments  with- 
out it.  It  feems  to  me  that  in  many  inftances 
when  the  glory  of  the  things  of  Ckrijlianity  have 
been  fet  before  perfons,  and  they  have  at  the 
fame  time  feen,  and  tailed,  and  felt  the  divinity 
of  them,  they  have  been  as  far  from  doubting  of 
the  truth  of  them,  as  they  are  from  doubting 
whether  there  be  a fun,  when  their  eyes  are  open 
in  the  midll  of  a clear  hemifphere.  And  yet 
many  of  them,  if  one  fhould  alk  why  they  be- 
lieved thofe  things  to  be  true,  would  not  be  able 
well  to  fatisfy  the  enquirer,  and  perhaps  would 
make  no  other  anfwer,  but  that  they  fee  them 
to  be  true  : but  a perfon  may  foon  be  fatisfied, 
by  a particular  convtrfation  with  them,  that  what 
they  mean  by  fuch  an  anfwer  is,  that  they  have 
intuitively  beheld,  and  immediately  felt,  mod 
powerful  evidence  of  divinity  in  them. 

33..  Some  are  thus  convinced  of  the  truth  of 
the  gofpel  in  general,  and  that  the  feriptures  are 
the  word  of  God  : others  have  their  minds  more 
efpecially  fixed  on  fome  great  do£irine  of  the 
gofpel,  fome  particular  truths  that  they  are  me- 
ditating on  ; or  are  in  a fpecial  manner  con- 
vinced of  the  divinity  of  the  things  they  are  read - 
ing  of  in  fome  portion  of  feripture.  Some  have 
fuch  convidions  in  a much  more  remarkable  man- 


ner 


[ ] 

ner  than  others.  And  fome  that  never  had  2 
fpecial  fenfe  of  the  certainty  of  divine  things  im- 
prefted  upon  them  with  fuch  inward  evidence, 
have  yet  very  clear  exercifes  of  grace,  1.  e.  of 
love  to  God,  repentance  and  holtnefs.  And  if 
they  be  more  particularly  examined,  they  ap- 
pear plainly  to  have  a firm  perfuafion  of  the  rea- 
lity of  divine  things  fuch  as  they  had  not  be- 
fore. But  thofe  that  have  the  mofi  clear  dif- 
coveries  of  divine  truth,  have  them  not  always  in 
the  fame  degree.  In  a dull  frame,  things  appear 
dim  to  what  they  did  before  : and  though  there 
mu  remains  an  habitual  ftrong  perfuafion,  yet 
not  fo  as  to  exclude  temptations  to  unbelief,  and 
all  poflibilitv  of  doubting,  as  before:  but  then 
at  particular  times,  by  God's  help,  the  fenfe  of 
things  revives,  like  fire  that  lay  hid  in  afhes. 

36.  I fuppofe  the  grounds  of  fuch  a convitlion 
of  the  truth  of  divine  things  to  be  juft  and  ra- 
tional, but  yet  in  fome  God  makes  ufe  of  their 
own  reafon  much  more  fenfibly  than  in  others. 
Oftentimes  pcrfons  have  (fo  far  as  could  be  judg- 
ed) received  the  firft  having  convitlion  from  rea- 
foriing  which  they  have  heard  from  the  pulpit ; 
and  often  in  the  courfe  of  reafonmg  which  they 
are  led  into  in  their  own  meditations. 

The  arguments  are  the  fame  that  they  have 
heard  hundreds  of  rimes  ; but  the Jorce  oj  the  ar- 
guments, and  tlieir  conviBion  by  them,  is  altoge- 
ther new  ; they  come  with  a new  and  before  un- 
experienced power  ; before  the)-  heard  it  was  fo, 

and 


[ M2  ] 

and  the)7  allowed  it  to  be  fo  ; but  now  they  fee  it 
to  be  fo  indeed.  Things  now  look  exceeding 
plain  to  them,  and  they  wonder  that  they  did  not 
fee  them  before. 

They  are  fo  greatly  taken  with  their  new  dif- 
covery,  and  things  appear  fo  plain  andfo  rational 
to  them,  that  they  are  often  at  firft  ready  to  think 
they  can  convince  all  men.  and  are  apt  to  engage 
in  talk  with  every  one  they  meet  with,  almcjl  to 
this  end  ; and  when  they  are  difappointed,  are 
ready  to  wonder  that  their  reafonings  make  no 
more  impreflion. 

37.  They  often  fpeak  of  the  things  of  religion 
•as  feeming  new  to  them  ; that  preaching  is  a new 
thing  ; that  it  feems  to  them  they  never  heard 
preaching  before  j becaufe  they  fee  them  in  a 
new  light.  Here  was  a remarkable  inflance  of 
an  aged  woman  of  above  70  years,  who  reading 
■in  the  New  Teflament  concerning  Chrift's  buf- 
ferings for  fmners,  feemed  to  be  aflonifhed  at 
what  (lie  read,  as  at  a thing  that  was  quite  new  to 
her,  infomuch  that  at  firft,  before  file  had  time 
to  turn  her  thoughts,  fhe  wondered  within  herfell 
fire  had  never  heard  of  it  before  ; but  then  im- 
mediately recolleHed  that  fhe  had  often  heard  of 
it,  and  read  it,  but  never  till  now  faw  it  as  a thing 
real  ; and  then  caff  in  her  mind,  how  wonderful 
this  was,  that  the  Son  of  God  fhould  undergo 
fuch  things  for  tinners,  and  how  (lie  had  fpent 
her  time  in  Cmgrateful  finning  againft  fo  good  a 
God,  and  fuch  a Saviour  ; though  fhe  was  a per- 

fon, 


[ M3  ] 

fan,  as  to  what  was  vifible,  of  a very  blamelefs 
■and  inoffenfive  life  : and  fhe  was  fo  overcome 
by  thofe  confiderations,  that  her  nature  was  rea- 
dy to  fail,  Thofe  that  were  about  her,  and  knew 
not  what  was  the  matter,  were  furprized,  and 
■thought  fhe  was  a dying. 

38.  Many  have  fpoken  much  of  their  hearts 
beincr  drawn  out  in  love  to  God  and  Chrilf,  and 
their  minds  being  wrapt  up  in  delightful  contem- 
plation of  the  glory  and  wonderful  grace  of  God, 
and  the  excellency  and  dying  love  ofjefus  Chrift, 
and  of  their  fouls  going  forth  in  longing  defnes 
after  God  and  Chrift.  Several  of  our  young 
-children  have  expreffed  much  of  this,  and  have 
mani felled  a willingnefs  to  leave  father  and  mo- 
ther, and  all  things  in  the  world,  to  be  with 
•Chrift.  Some  perfons  have  had  fuch  defires  after 
Chrift,  as  to  take  away  their  natural  ftrength. 
Some  have  been  fo  overcome  with  a fenfe  of  his 
love  to  fuch  poor,  wretched,  and  unworthy  crea- 
tures as  to  weaken  the  body.  Several  perfons 
have  had  fo  great  a fenfe  of  the  glory  of  God,  and 
excellency  of  Chrift,  that  nature  and  life  have 
feemed  almoftto  fink  under  it ; and  in  all  proba- 
bility, if  God  had  (hewed  them  a little  more  of 
himfelf,  it  would  have  diffolved  their  frame. 
And  their  fenfe  of  their  ow  n exceeding  littlenefs 
and  vilenefs,  has  been  in  proportion  to  their  light 
and  joy. 

Such  perfons  have  commonly  appeared  with 
none  of  the  affirming,  and  feif-conceited,  and 

felf- 


£ Hi  ] 

felf-fufficient  airs  of  enthufiaft$;  but  exceedingly 
thecontrary,  being  eminent  formeeknefs,modefty, 
felf-difhdence,  and  a low  opinion  of  thernfelves. 
None  are  fo  fenfible  of  their  need  of  inlfruhtion, 
and  fo  eager  to  receive  it,  as  fome  of  them  : nor 
fo  ready  to  think  others  better  than  thernfelves. 
And  generally  they  have  manifefled  a longing  to 
lie  low  and  in  the  dull  before  God ; withal  com- 
plaining of  their  not  being  able  to  lie  low  enough. 

They  fpeak  much  of  the  inexprtjjibler.ejs  of 
what  they  experience,  how  their  words  fail,  fo 
that  they  can  in  no  wife  declare  it : of  the  fuper- 
lative  excellency  of  that  delight  of  foul  which 
they  fometimes  enjoy  ; how  a little  of  it  is  fuffi- 
cient  to  pay  them  for  all  the  pains  and  trouble 
they  have  gone  through  in  feeking  falvation ; 
and  of  the  fenfe  which  thefe  fpiritual  views  give 
them  of  the  vanity  of  earthly  enjoyments,  how 
mean  and  worthlefsall  thefe  things  appear  to  them. 

19.  Many,  while  their  minds  have  been  filled 
with  fpiritual  delights,  have  as  it  were  forgot 
their  food  ; their  bodily  appetite  has  faded, 
while  their  minds  have  been  entertained  with 
meat  to  eat  that  others  know  not  oj.  And  the 
light  and  comfort  they  enjoy,  gives  a new  rehfh 
to  their  common  bleffings,  and  canfes  all  tinners 
about  them  to  appear  beautiful,  fweet  and  pleafant 
to  them  : all  things  abroad,  the  fun,  moon  and 
flars,  the  clouds  and  Iky,  the  heavens  and  eaith, 
appear  as  it  were  with  a calf  of  divine  glory  and 
fweetnefs  upon  them.  But  the  lupreme  atten- 
tion of  their  minds  is  to  the  glorious  excellencies 


[ 145  ] 

of  God  and  Chrift,  which  they  have  in  view; 
a ravilhing  fenfe  of  God’s  love  accompanying  a 
fenfe  of  his  excellency  ; and  of  the  faithfulnefs  of 
God’s  promifes,  as  they  iefpea  the  future  eter- 
nal enjoyment  of  God. 

The  joy  that  many  of  them  fpeak  of  as  that  to 
which  none  is  to  be  pararelled,  is  that  which  they 
find  when  they  are  .lowed  in  the  duff,  emptied 
mod  of  themfelves,  and  as  it  weie  annihilating 
themfelves  belore  God,  when  they  are  nothing, 
and  God  is  all,  as  feeing  their  own  unworthi- 
nefs,  depending  not  at  all  on  themfelves,  but 
alone  on  Chrift,  and  afcribing  all  glory  to  God  ; 
then  their  fouls  are  mod  in  the  enjoyment  of 
fatisfying  red  ; excepting  that,  at  fuch  times, 
they  apprehend  themfelves  to  be  not  fufliciently 
felf-abafed  : for  then  above  all  times  do  they 
long  to  be  lower.  Some  fpeak  much  of  the  ex- 
quifite  fweetnefs -and  red  of  foul  that  is  to  be 
found  in  refignation  to  God,  and  bumble  fub- 
miffion  to  his  will.  Many  exprefs  earned  long- 
ings to  praife  God  ; but  at  the  fame  time  com- 
plain they  cannot  praife  him  as  they  would  do, 
and  they  want  to  have  others  help  them  in  praif- 
ing  him  : they  want  to  have  every  one  praife 
God,  and  are  ready  to  call  upon  every  thing  to 
praife  him.  They  exprefs  a longing  defire  to 
live  to  God’s  glory,  and  to  do  fomething  to  his 
honour  ; but  at  the  fame  time  cry  out  of  their 
infufficieney  and  barrennefs,  that  they  are  poor 
impotent  creatures,  can  do  nothing  of  themjelves, 
Vol.  XVII.  G and 


E »*i6  ] 

and  are  utterly  insufficient  to  glorify  their  Cieator 
and  Redeemer. 

40.  \I  bile  God  was  fo  remarkably  peiTent 
amongft  us  by  his  Spirit,  there  was  no  book  fo 
delighted  in  as  the  bible  ; efpecially  the  book  of 
of  P/alms,  the  prophecy  of  Ifaiah,  and  ihe  New 
If  ament.  Some  by  reafon  of  their  efieem  and 
love  to  God  s word,  have  at  fome  times  been 
greatly  and  wonderfully  affefted  at  the  fight  of  a 
bible  : and  then  alfo,  there  was  no  time  fo  prized 
as  the  Lord  s-day,  and  rc  place  in  this  v/oiid  fo 
defired  as  God’s  houfe.  Our  converts  remark- 
ably appeared  united  in  dear  affection  to  one  ano- 
ther, and  many  have  exprelfed  much  of  that 
love  which  tb.py  felt  to  all  mankind  ; and  par- 
ticularly to  thofe  that  had  been  leaf!  friendly  to 
them.  Never,  I believe,  was  fo  much  done  in 
con  felling  injuries,  and  making  up  differences,  as 
the  laR  year.  Peifons  after  their  own  conver- 
fion,  have  commonly  expreffed  an  exceeding 
defire  for  the  converfion  of  others:  fume  have 
thought  that  they  fhould  be  willing  to  die  for  the 
converfion  of  any  foul,  though  of  one  of  the 
mean  eft  of  their  fellow-creatures,  or  of  their 
word  enemies ; and  many  have  indeed  been  in 
great  d i it  refs  with  defires  and  longings  for  it.  This 
work  of  God  had  alfo  a good  effeft  to  unite  the 
people’s  affeftions  to  their  minifter. 

There  are  fome  perfons  that  I have  been  ac- 
quainted with,  but  more  efpeciallv  two,  that 
have  been  fwallowed  up  exceedingly  with  a fenfe 

of 


[ *47  3 

of  the  awful  greatnefs  and  majefty  of  Gcd  ; and 
both  of  them  told  me  to  this  purpofe,  that  if  they 
in  the  time  of  it,  had  had  the  lealt  fear  that 
they  were  not  at  peace  with  this  fo  great  a God, 
they  fhould  inftantly  have  died. 

* 41.  But  there  is  an  endlefs  variety  in  the 
particular  manner  and  cir cumjlances  in  which 
perfons  are  wrought  on,  and  an  opportunity  of 
feeing  fo  much  offuch  a work  of  God,  will  fliew 
that  God  is  further  from  confining  himfelfto  cer- 
tain Heps,  and  a particular  method  in  his  work  on 
fouls,  than  fome  imagine.  I believe  it  has  occa- 
fioned  fome  among  us,  that  were  before  too 
ready  to  make  their  own  experience  a rule  to 
others,  to  be  lefs  cenforious,  and  this  is*  an  excel- 
lent advantage  indeed  : that  this  variety  has  dif- 
played  the  manifoldnefs  and  unfearchablenefs  of 
the  wifdom  of  God,'  and  wrought  more  charity 
among  his  people. 

42.  I think  the  main  ground  of  doubts  and 
fears  in  perfons,  after  their  converfion,  has  been 
that  they  have  found  fo  much  corruption  remain- 
ing in  their  hearts.  At  firil  their  fouls  were  all 
alive,  their  hearts  were  fixed,  and  their  afFeftions 
flowing;  they  live  above  the  world,  and  meet 
with  but  little  difficulty  in  religious  exercifes. 
And  they  are  ready  to  think  it  will  always  be  fo  : 
though  they  are  truly  abafed  under  a fenfe  of 
their  vilenefs,  by  reafon  of  former  fin,  yet  they 
are  not  then  fufficiently  fenfible  what  corruption 
Hill  remains  in  their  hearts;  and  therefore  are 
G 2 furprized 


[ M*  ] 

furprized  when  they  find  that  they  begin  to  be 
dull  and  dead,  to  be  troubled  with  wandering 
thoughts  in  the  time  of  public  and  private  wor- 
fh ip  ; and  to  be  utterly  unable  to  keep  themfelves 
from  them  ; alfo  when  they  find  themfelves  un- 
affetted  at  feafons  in  which,  they  think,  there  is 
the  greatefl  occafion  to  be  affeffted;  and  when 
they  feel  worldly  difpolitions  working  in  them, 
and  it  may  be  pride,  envy,  or  flirrings  of  re- 
venue ; their  hearts  are  almofi  funk  with  the 
difappointment ; and  they  are  ready  prefently  to 
think  that  all  this  they  have  met  with  is  nothing, 
and  that  they  are  nicer  hypocrites. 

They  are  ready  to  argue,  that  if  God  had  in- 
deed done  fuch  great  things  for  them,  fuch  in- 
gratitude would  be  inconfiflent  with  it  : they  cry 
out  of  the  hardnefs  and  wickednefs  of  their 
hearts;  and  fay  there  is  fo  much  corruption,  that 
it  feems  to  them  impojfible  that  there Jhould  be  any 
roodnejs  there  : and  many  of  them  feem  to  be 
more  fenfible  how  corrupt  their  hearts  are,  than 
ever  they  were  before  they  had  faith.  But  in 
truth,  the  cafe  is,  that  now  they  feel  the  pain  of 
their  own  wounds,  they  have  a watchful  eye 
upon  their  hearts  that  they  do  not  ufe  to  have  : 
they  take  more  notice  what  fin  is  there,  and  fin 
is  now  no  more  burthenfome  to  them;  they 
Jlrive  more  againft  it,  and  feel  more  of  the 
flrength  of  it. 

They  are  furprized  that  they  fhould  find  them- 
fgly.es  fo  different  from  the  idea  that  they  gene- 
rally 


[ H9  ] 

rally  had  entertained  of  believers ; for  though 
faith  be  indeed  of  a far  more  excellent  nature 
than  they  imagined;  yet  thofe  that  believe  have 
much  more  remaining  corruption  than  they 
thought.  They  never  realized  it,  that  perlons 
were  wont  to  meet  difficulties  after  they  were 
once  converted.  But  on  a return  of  the  influ- 
ences of  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  light  breaks 
through  the  cloud,  and  doubting  and  darknefs- 
vanifh  away. 

Perfons  are  often  revived  by  religious  conver- 
faticn  : while  they  are  talking  of  divine  things, 
or  ever  they  are  aware  their  J'ouls  are  carried 
away  into  holy  exercifes  with  abundant  pleafure- 
And  often  while  they  are  relating  their  pall  ex- 
periences, the  fame  experiences  are  renewed. 
Sometimes  they  have  feriptures,  one  after  ano- 
ther, coming  to  their  minds,  to  anfwer  their 
fcruplcs  and  unravel  their  difficulties,  exceeding 
appofite  and  proper  to  their  circumilances  ; by 
which  means  their  darknefs  is  fcattered  ; and 
often  before  any  new  remarkable  comforts,  efpe- 
cially  after  a long  continued  deadnefs,  there  are 
renewed  humblings,  in  a great  fenfe  of  their  own 
exceeding  vilenefs  and  unworthinefs,  as  before- 
their  fir  ft  comforts  were  beffowed. 

Many  in  the  country  have  entertained  a’ 
mean  thought  of  this  great  work,  from  what  thev 
have  heard  of  vnprejfwns  made  on  perfons  ima- 
ginations. But  there  have  been  exceeding  great 
G 3 mifrepre- 


r 

L 


1 5°  ] 

rmfreprefentations,  ami  innumerable  falfe  re- 
ports concerning  that  matter.  It  is  not,  that  I 
know  of,  the  opinion  of  any  one  perfon  in  the 
town,  that  any  weight  is  to  be  laid  on  any  thing 
feen  with  the  bodily  eye  : I know  the  contrary 
to  be  a received  and  efiablifhed  principle  amongft 
us.  I cannot  fav  that  there  have  been  no  in- 
itances  of  perfons  that  have  been  ready  to  give 
too  much  heed  to  ufelefs  imagination-,  but  they 
have  been  eafily  corrected ; and  it  will  not  be 
wondered  at,  that  a congregation  fhould  need  a 
guide  in  fuch  cafes,  to  affifl  them  in  dilfinguifli- 
ing  wheat  from  chaff.  But  fuch  imprefhons  on 
the  imagination  as  have  been  more  ufua],  feem 
to  me  to  be  no  other  than  what  is  to  be  expeCted 
in  human  nature  in  fucli  circumfiances,  and 
what  is  the  natural  refult  of  imprefiions  on  the 
heart. 

I do  notfuppofe  they  themfelves  imagined  that 
they  faw  any  thing  with  their  bodily  eyes ; but 
only  have  had  within  them  ideas  ftrongly  im- 
prefied,  and,  as  it  were,  lively  pictures  in  their 
minds;  as  for  infiance,  forne,  when  in  great 
terrors,  through  fear  of  hell,  have  had  lively  ideas 
of  a dreadful  furnace.  When  fome  were  greatly 
moved  with  a fenfe  of  the  excellency  of  Chriit, 
together  with  a fenfe  of  his  glorious  fpiritual 
perfections,  there  has  rifen  in  the  mind  an  idea 
of  one  of  glorious  Majefty,  and  of  a fweet  and 
gracious  afpeCt  : and  fome,  when  greatly  afFeCted 
with  Chrifi’s  death,  had  at  the  fame  time  a lively 

idea 


r.  w ] 

idea  of  Chrift’s  hanging  upon  the  crofs,  and  of 
his  blood  running  from  his  wounds  ; which  things 
will  not  be  wondered-  at  by  them  that  have  ob- 
ferved  how  ilrong  affections  about  temporal  mat- 
ters will  excite  lively  ideas  of  different  things  in 
the  mind. 

i here  have  indeed  been  feme  few  inflances  of 
imprefjicns  on  perfons  imaginations,  that  have 
been  myfierious  tome,  and  I have  been  at  a lofs 
about  them;  for  though  it  has  been  exceeding 
evident  to  me  by  many  things  that  appeared  in 
them,  both  then  (when  they  related  them)  and 
afterwaids,  that  they  indeed  had  a great  fenfeofthe 
fpiritual  excellency  of  divine  things  accompany- 
ing them  ; yet  I have  not  been  able  well  to  Tatis  fy 
myfelf,  whether  thefe  imaginary  ideas  have  been 
more  than  could  naturally  arife  from  the  fpiritual 
fenfe  of  things.  However,  I have  ufed  the  ut- 
rnoft  caution  in  fuch  cafes  ; and  great  care  has 
been  taken  both  in  public  and  in  private  to  teach 
perfons  the  difference  between  what  is  fpiritual 
and  what  is  imaginary,  I have  often  warned 
perfons  not  to  lay  the  fire fs  of  their  hope  on  any 
ideas  ofanv  outward  glory,  or  any  external  things 
whatfoever,  and  have  met  with  no  oppofition  in 
fuch  infiruflions.  But  it  is  not  11  ran  tie  if  feme 

O 

weaker  perfons,  in  giving  an  account  of  their  ex- 
periences, have  not  fo  prudently  diflinguifhed 
between  the  fpiritual  and  imaginary  part  : which 
thole  that  have  not  been  well  affeited- to  religion, 
might  take  advantage  of. 

^ i 43.  But 


f.  ] 

43*  Bui  to  give  a clearer  ide.a  of  the  nature  ant! 
manner  o!  the  operations  of  God’s  Spirit,  in  this 
wonderful  effufion  of  it,  I would  give  an  account 
of  two  particular  injlances.  The  firfl  is  an  adult 
perjon , a young  woman,  whole  name  was  Abigail 
Ilutckinjon.  I pitch  upon  her  efpeciallv,  becaufe 
fhe  is  now  dead,  and  fo  it  may  be  more  fit  to 
ipeak  freely  of  her  than  of  living  inflances; 
though  I am  under  far  greater  difadvantages,  on 
other  accounts, to  givea  full andclear  narrative  of 
her  experiences;  nor  can  an)7  account  be  given 
but  what  has  been  retained  in  the  memories  of 
her  near  friends,  and  fome  others,  of  what  thev 
have  heard  her  exprefs  in  her  life- time. 

She  was  of  a rational,  underfianding  family ; 
there  could  be  nothing  in  her  education  that 
tended  to  enihufafn,  but  rather  to  the  contrary 
extreme.  She  was  before  her  converfion,  to  the 
obfervation  of  her  neighbours,  of  a fober  and  in- 
offenfive  convcrfalicn : and  was  a flill,  quiet, 
referved  perfon.  She  had  long  been  infirm  of 
body,  but  her  infirmity  had  never  been  obferved 
at  all  to  incline  her  to  the  notional  or  fanciful,  or 
to  occahon  any  thing  of  religious  melancholy. 
She  was  under  awakenings  fcarcelv  a week,  be- 
fore there  feemed  to  be  plain  evidence  of  her 
being  favingly  changed. 

She  was  firfl  awakened  in  the  winter,  on  a 
Monday-,  by  fometbing  fhe  heard  her  brother  fay 
of  the  neccflity  of  being  in  good  earned  in  feek- 
inv  Chrift,  together  with  the  news  of  the  conver- 

O 3 o 


[ *53  ] 

fon  of  another  young  woman.  This  news 
wrought  much  upon  her,  and  furred  up  a fpirit 
of  envy  in  her  towards  this  young  woman,  whom 
fhe  thought  very  unworthy  to  be  diflingu hired 
irom  others  by  fuch  a mercy  ; but  withal  it  en- 
gaged her  in  a firm  refolution  to  do  her.  uunoit  to 
obtain  the  fame  bletling  ; and  confidering  with 
herfelf  what  courfe  fhe  Ihould  take,  Ihe  thought 
fhe  had  not  a fnfficient  knowdedge  of  the  princi- 
ples of  religion  : whereupon  ihe  refolved  tho- 
roughly to  fearch  the  fcriptures ; and  accordingly 
immediately  began  at  the  beginning  of  the  bible, 
intending  to  read  it  through.  She  continued 
thus  till  Thurfday,  and  then  there  was  a-  hidden 
alteration,  by  a great  increafe  of  her  concern,  in 
an  extraordinary  fenfe  of  her  own  finfulnefs,  par- 
ticularly the  finfulnefs  of  her  nature,  and  wicked- 
nefs  of  her  heart,  which  came  upon  her  (as  fhe 
cxpreffed  it)  as  a flaih  of  lightning,  and  flruck 
her  into  an  exceeding  terror.  Upon  which  fhe 
left  off  reading  the  Bible  in  courfe  as  fire  had  be- 
gun, and  turned  to  the  New  Teflament,  to  fee 
if  fire  could  find  forae  relief  for  her  diflrefTed. 
foul. 

44.  Her  great  terror,  file  faid,.  was , fhe  had 

finned  againji  God  : her  difirefs  grew  more  and 
more  for  three  days ; until  (as  fhe  faid)  fhe  faw 
nothing  but  blacknefs  of  darkntjs  before  her,  and 
her  very  fefh  trembled for fear  of  God’j  wrath.  She 
wondered  and  was  afonifhed  at  herfelf,  that  fie 
had  beat  fo  concerned  for  her  body , and  had  ap- 
G 5 plied 


[ 15i  ] 

phed  fo  often  to  phyficians  to  heal  that,  and  had 
yegletted  her  foul.  Her  fihfulnefs  appeared  with 
a very  awful  afpeft  to  her,  efpccially  in  three 
things,  viz.  her  original  fin,  her  fin  of  murmur- 
ing at  God  s providence,  in  the  weakrrefs  fhe  had 
been  under,  and  in  want  of  duty  to  her  parents, 
though  others  had  looked  upon  her  to  excel  in 
dutifulnefs.  On  Saturday , (lie  was  fo  earneftly 
engaged  in  reading  the  btble  and  other  books, 
that  Ihe  continued  in  it,  fearching  for  fomething 
to  relieve  her,  till  her  eyes  were  fo  dim  that 
Ihe  could  not  know  the  letters.  Whillt  fhe  was 
thus  engaged  in  reading,  prayer,  and  other  reli- 
gious exercifes,  fhe  thought  of  thefe  words  of 
Chrift,  wherein  he  warns  us  not  to  be  as  the  Hea- 
thens, that  think  they  fall  be  heard  for  their  .■each 
freaking  ; which,  fhe  faid,  led  her  to  fee  that  fhe 
had  milled  to  her  own  prayers  and  religious  per- 
formances, and  now  fire  was  put  to  a nonplus, 
and  knew  not  which  way  to  turn  herfelf,  or 
where  to  feek  relief. 

While  her  mind  was  in  this  polfure,  her 
heart,  ihe  faid,  feemed  to  fly  to  the  minifler  for 
refuge,  hoping  that  he  could  give  her  fome  relief. 
She  came  the  fame  day  to  her  brother,  with  the 
countenance  of  a perfon  in  difirefs,  expoflulat- 
ing  with  him,  why  he  had  not  told  her  more  of 
'her  finfulnefs,  and  earneftly  enquiring  of  him 
what  fhe  fhould  do.  She  feemed  that  day  fo  feel 
in  herfelf  an  enmity  againft  the  bible,  which 
greatly  affrighted  her.  Her  fenfe  of  her  own 

exceeding 


] 


exceeding  finfulnefs  continued  lncreafing  from 
Tliurjday  till  Monday  ; and  die  gave  this  account 
of  it,  that  it  had  been  an  opinion,  which  till  now 
file  had  entertained,  that  the  was  not  guilty  of 
Adam  s fin  ; but  that  now  file  faw  (lie  was 
guilty  of  that  fin,  and  all  over  defiled  by  it;  and 
that  the  fin  which  fhe  brought  into  the  wot  Id 
with  her,  was  alone  fufficient  to  condemn  her. 

.py.  On  the  fabbalh-day  fire  was  To  ill  tbit  her 
friends  thought  it  not  be  ft  that  !he  fhould  go  to 
public  worfhip,  of  which  fire  feemed  very  defir* 
ous:  but  when  fhe  went  to  bed  on  the  fabbath- 
day  night,  (he  took  up  a iefolution  that  fine  would 
the  next  morning  go  to  the  nrinifter.  As  fhe 
awaked  on  Monday  morning,  a little  before  day, 
fhe  wondered  within  berfel-f  at  the  calm  fire  felt 
in  her  mind,  which  was  of  that  kind  which  file 
never  felt  before.  As  file  thought  of  this,  fitch 
words  as  thefe  were  in  her  mind,  the  words  of 
the  Loi  d are  pure  words , health  to  the  foul,  and 
-marrow  to  the  bones-,  and  then  thefe  words,. 
the  blood  of  Chrijl  clean feth  from  all  fin-,  which 
were  accompanied  wiih  a lively  fenfe  of  the 
excellency'  of  Chrift,  and  his  fufificiency  to  fa- 
tisfy  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world:  fire  then 
thought  of  that  expreflion,  it  is  a pleafant  thing 
for  the  eyes  to  behold  the  fun  ; which  words  then 
feemed  to  her  to  be  very  applicable  to  Jefus 
Chnft.  By  thefe  things  her  mind  was  exceeding- 
full  of  joy.  She  told  her  brother  in  the  morning, 
that  fire  had  feen  (i.  e.  by  faith)  Chrift^e  lajl  night , 
G 6 ar.d. 


[ *56  ] 

and  that  Hie  had  really  thought  that  Jhe  had  not 
knowledge  enough  to  be  converted  • but,  fays  fhe, 
Got!  can  male  it  quite  cajy.  On  Monday  (he  felt 
ail  day  a conflan:  fweetnefs  in  her  foul.  She  had 
a repetition  of  the  fame  difcoveries  of  Ghrift  three 
mornings  together,  that  flic  had  on  Mon  da  v 
morning,  and  much  in  the  fame  manner,  at  each 
time,  waking  a little  before  day;  but  brighter 
and  brighter  every  time. 

46.  At  the  lad  time  on  Wednefday  morning, 
while  m the  enjoyment  of  a fpirhual  view  of 
Chrift’s  glory  and  fulnefs,  her  foul  was  filled  with 
diflrefs  for  unbelieveis,  to  conlider  what  a ir.1- 
ferable  condition  they  were  in  : and  fine  felt  in 
hevfielf  a ftrong  inclination  immediately  to  go 
forth  to  warn  finners  ; and  propofed  it  the  next 
day  to  her  brother  to  afhd  }:er  in  going  from 
houfe  to  lioufe  ; but  her  brother  reftrained  her, 
telling  her  of  the  unfuitablenefs  of  fuch  a method. 
She  told  one  of  her  fillers  that  day,  that  fine  loved 
all  mankind,  blit  ejpeciulfy  the  people  cf  God. 
Her  filler  inked  her  why  fhe  loved  all  mankind  r 
She  replied,  hcauje  God  had  made  them.  After 
this,  there  happened  to  come  into  the  (hop 
where  five  was  at  work,  three  perfons  that  were 
thought  to  be  lately  converted.  Her  feeing  them 
as  they  Hepped  in,  fo  drew  forth  her  love  to 
them,  that  it  overcame  her,  and  (lie  almofl 
fainted  : a.  1 when  they  began  to  talk  of  the 
things  of  religion,  it  was  more  than  fhe  could 
bear;  they  were  oblige  ! to  ceafc  on  that  account. 

It 


[ *57  3 

It  was  a very  frequent  thing  with  her  to  be  over- 
come with  a flow  of  affeftion  to  them  that  fhe 
thought  godly,  in  converfation  with  them,  and 
fometimes  only  at  the  fight  of  them. 

47.  She  had  many  extraordinary  difcoveries 
of  the  glory  of  God  and  Chrift  ; fometimes  in 
fume  particular  attributes,  and  fometimes  in  many. 
She  o-ave  an  account  that  once,  as  thofe  four 
words  paffed  through  her  mind,  WISDOM , 
JUSTICE,  GOODNESS , and  TRUTH , her  foul 
was  filled  with  a fenfe  of  the  gloiy  of  each  of 
thefe  divine  attributes,  but  efpecially  the  lafl  ; 
TRUTH , faid  fhe,  Junk  ike  deepejl  ! And  there- 
fore as  thefe  words  paffed,  this  was  repeated, 
TRUTH,  TRUTH ! Her  mind  was  fo  fwallow- 
ed  up  with  a 'fenfe  of  the  glory  of  God's  truth 
and  other  perfections,  that  fhe  faid,  it  Jtemed  as 
tho' her  lift  vxis  going,  and  that  fh t Jaw  it  was 
eajy  with  God  to  take  away  her  life  by  difcoveries  of 
himfclj.  Soon  after  this  fhe  went  to  a private 
religious  meeting,  and  her  mind  was  full  of  a 
fenfe  and  view  of  the  glory  of  God  all  the  time  : 
and  when  the  exercife  was  ended,  fome  afked 
her  concerning  what  fhe  had  experienced  ; and 
fhe  began  to  give  them  an  account ; but  as  fire 
was  relating  it,  it  revived  fuch  a fenfe  of  the 
fame  things,  that  her  flrength  failed;  and  they 
were  obliged  to  take  her  and  lay  her  upon  the 
bed.  Afterwards  fhe  was  greatly  affeCted,  and 
rejoiced  with  thefe  words,  Worthy  is  the  Lamb 
that  was fain. 


48.  She 


[ ig8  J 

48.  She  had  feveral  days  together  a P.-.eet  fenfe 
of  the  lovelinefs  of  Chrift  in  his  me  chiefs,  which 
di fpo fed  her  continually  to  be  repeating  over 
thefe  words,  MEEK  AND  LOWLY  IN  HEART, 
MEEK  AND  LOWLY  IN  HEART.  She 
once  exprelfed  herfelf  to  one  of  her  fillers., 
to  this  ptirpofe,  that  fhe  had  continued  whole 
days  and  whole  nights,  in  a conflant  ravifhing 
view  of  the  glory  of  God  and  Chrift,  having 
enjoyed  as  much  as  her  life  could  bear.  Once  as 
her  brother  was  fpeaking  of  the  dying  love  of 
Chrift,  fhe  told  him  that  fhe  had  fuch  a fenfe 
of  it,  that  the  mere  mentioning  it  was  ready  to 
overcome  her. 

* Orrce,  when  (lie  came  to  me,  fire  told  how 
at  fuch  and  fuch  a time  Are  thought  fhe  faw  as 
much  of  God,  and  had  as  much  joy  and  pleafure 
as  was  poffible  in  this  life,  and  that  yet  after- 
wards God  difeovered  himfelf  far  more  abun- 
dantly, and  (he  faw  the  fame  things  more  clear;  -. , 
and  in  another,  and  far  more  excellent  2nd 
delightful  manner,  and  was  filled  with  a more 
exceeding  fweetnefs.  She  likewife  gave  me 
fuch  an  account  of  the  fenfe  fhe  once  had  from 
day  to  dav  of  the  glory  of  Chirfi,  and  of  Gcd, 
in  his  various  attributes,  that  it  feetned  to  me 
fhe  dwelt  for  days  together  in  a kind  of  beatific 
vifiun  of  God  ; and  feemed  to  have  as  immediate 
intercourfe  with  him,  as  a child  with  a father  : 
and  at  the  fame  time,  fhe  appeared  moft  remote 
from  any  high  thought  of  herfelf,  and  of  her  own 

fufficiency  , 


[ *59  j 

fufficiency  ; but  was  like  a Utile  child , and  ex- 
prelFed  a great  defire  to  be  inflrucled,  telling 
them  that  file  longed  very  often  to  come  to  me 
for  inftrucfion,  and  wanted  to  live  at  my  houfe, 
that  I might  tell  her  her  duty. 

* 49.  She  often  expreffed  a fenfe  of  the  glory 
of  God  appearing  in  the  trees,  and  growth  of 
the  fields,  and  other  works  of  God’s  hands.  She 
told  her  filler,  that  lived  near  the  heart  of  the 
town,  that  Ihe  once  thought  it  a pleafant  thing  to 
five  in  the  middle  of  the  town,  but  now , fays  Ihe, 
I think  it  much  more  fit  aj ant  to  Jit  and  fee  the  wind 
blowing  the  trees,  and  to  beholcl  in  the  country  what 
God  has  made.  She  had  [ometimes  the  power- 
ful breathings  of  the  Spirit  of  God  on  her  foul, 
while  reading  the  feripture,  and  would  exprefs  a 
fenfe  that  fire  had  of  the  certain  truth  and  divi- 
nity thereof.  She  fotnetimes  would  appear  with 
a pleafant  fmile  on  her  countenance  ; and  when 
her  filler  took  notice  of  it,  and  alked  why  fhe 
fmiied,  file  replied,  I am  brim- full  of  a fxeet 
feeling  within  l She  often  ufed  to  exprefs  how 
good  and Jzoeet  it  was  to  lie  low  before  God,  and 
the  lower  (lays  fhe)  ihe  better  ! and  that  it  was 
pleafant  to  think  of  lying  in  ihe  dufl,  all  the  days 
of  her  life,  mourning  for  fin.  She  was  wont  to 
manifeft  a great  fenfe  of  her  own  meannefs  and 
dependence.  She  often  exprefied  an  exceeding 
compaiTion,  and  pitiful  love,  which  fhe  found  in 
her  heart  towards  perfons  that  knew  not  Chi  ill  ; 
which  was  fometimes  fo  flrong,  that  as  fhe  was 

paffing 


[*&>]. 

palling  by  fuch  in  the  ftreets,  or  thofe  that  f he 
feared  were  fuch,  (he  would  be  overcome  b\'  the 
fight  of  them.  She  once  faid,  that  fhe  longed  to 
have  the  -world Javed fhe  wanted,  as  it  were,  to 
pull  than  all  to  her ; fhe  could  not  hear  to  hc.vc 
one  loft. 

go.  She  had  great  longings  to  die,  that  fire 
might  be  with  Chrift  ; which  increafed  till  fire 
thought  fhe  did  not  know  how  to  be  patient  to 
wait  till  God’s  time  fhould  come.  But  once  when 
file  lelt  thofe  longings,  fhe  thought  with  herfelf, 
If  I long  to  die , why  do  I go  to  phyficians  ? 
Whence  fhe  concluded  that  her  longings  for 
death  were  not  well  regulaied.  After  this  fire 
often  put  it  to  herfelf,  which  file  fhould  cboofe, 
whether  to  live  or  die,  to  be  fick  or  to  be  well, 
and  fhe  found  fhe  could  not  tell,  till  at  kail  fhe 
found  herfelf difpofed  to  fay  tliefe  words  ; lam 
quite  willing  to  live , and  quite  willing  to  die  ; quite 
willing  to  be  fick,  and  quite  willing  to  be  well ; and 
quite  willing  for  any  thing  that  God  will  bring  upon 
me!  And  then,  faid  fhe,  I felt  m\jdj  perjetlly 
eafy,  in  a full  fubmiflion  to  the  will  of  God.  She 
then  lamented  much,  that  fhe  had  been  fo 
eager  in  her  longings  for  death,  as  it  argued  want 
of  refignation  to  God.  She  feemed  hencefor- 
ward to  continue  in  this  refigned frame  till  death. 

^l.Afterthisher  illnefs  increafed  upon  her:  and 
once  after  file  had  fpent  the  greater  part  of  the 
nigh'  In  extreme  pain,  fhe  awakened  out  of  a lit- 
tle deep  with  thefe  words  in  her  heart  and  mouth  ; 

I am 


[ *6i  ] 

1 am  willing  to  fnffcrfor  Chi  ft' s fake,  I am  willing 
to  /paid  and  be  [pent  for  Chi  ij't's  fake,  I am  willing 
to  fpend  my  Ufa  even  my  very  life  for  '(thrift's  Jake  ! 
And  though  Ihe  had  an  extraordinary  refignation 
with  refpeQ:  to  life  or  death,  yet  the  thoughts  of 
death  were  exceeding  fweet  to  her.  At  a time 
when  her  brother  was  reading  in  Job,  concern- 
ing worms  feeding  on  the  dead  body,  fhe  appear- 
ed with  a pleafant  fmile,  and  being  enquired  oi 
about  it,  fhe  faid,  it  was  fweet  to  her  to  think  of 
her  being  in  fuclt  circumflances.  At  another 
time,  when  her  brother  mentioned  the  danger 
there  feemed  to  be  that  the  illnefs  fire  then  labour- 
ed under  might  be  an  occafion  of  her  death,  it 
filled  her  with  joy  that  almofl  overcame  her.  At 
another  time,  when  fhe  met  a company  follow- 
ing a corpfe  to  the  grave,  fhe  faid,  it  was  fweet 
to  her  to  think,  that  they  would  in  a little  time 
follow  her  in  like  manner. 

52.  Her  illnefs  in  the  latter  part  of  it  was  feat- 
ed  much  in  her  throat  ; fwelling  inwardly,  filled 
up  the  pipe,  fo  that  fhe  could  fwallow  nothing  but 
w'hat  was  perfectly  liquid,  and  but  very  little  of 
that,  and  with  great  and  long  flrugglings  and 
and  flranglings,  that  which  fhe  took  in,  flying  out 
at  hernoftrils,  till  fhe  at  lafl  could  fwallow  noth- 
ing at  all.  She  had  a raging  appetite  to  food,  fo 
that  (lie  told  her  fifler,  when  talking  with  her 
about  her  circumflances,  that  the  word  bit  fhe 
threw  to  her  fwine,  would  be  fweet  to  her  ; but 
when  fhe  faw  that  Hie  could  not  fwallow  it,  flic 

feemed 


[ i6a  ] 

Teemed  to  be  as  perfectly  contented  without  it  as 
if  (he  had  no  appetite  to  it.  Others  were  great- 
ly moved  to  fee  what  fhe  underwent,  and  were 
filled  with  admiration  at  her  unexampled  patience. 
At  a time  when  fhe  was  flriving  in  Vain  to  get 
down  a little  food,  fomething  liquid,  and  was 
very  much  fpent  with  it,  fhe  looked  upon  her 
filler  with  a fmile,  fating,  Offer,  (his  is  for  my 
good  l At  another  time,  when  her  filler  was 
fpeakingof  what  fire  underwent,  fhe  told  her,  that 
fire  lived  an  heaven  upon  earth  for  all  that.  She 
ufed  fometimes  to  fay  to  her  filler,  under  her  ex- 
treme fuffe rings,  It  is  good  to  be  Jo ! Her  filler 
once  afked  her,  why  fhe  faid  fo,  Why , fays  fire, 
becaufe  God  would  have  it  jo  : it  is  bef  that  things 
fiould  be  as  God  would  have  them  : it  looks  bejl  to 
me.  After  her  confinement,  as  they  were  leading 
her  from  the  bed  to  the  door,  fhe  feemed  over- 
come by  the  fight  of  things  abroad,  as  filewing 
forth  the  glory  of  the  Being  that  made  them.  As 
fire  lay  on  her  death-bed,  fhe  would  often  fay 
thefe  w'ords,  God  is  my  friend ! And  once  look- 
ing upon  her  fifrer,  with  a fmile,  faid,  0 [fieri 
Plow  good  it  is  ! How  fweet  and  comfortable  it  is  to 
confider , and  think  of  heavenly  things  ! 

She  expreffed,  on  her  death-bed,  an  exceed- 
ing longing,  both for perfons  in  a natural Jlate,  that 
they  might  be  converted,  and  for  believers  that  they 
might  fe  and  know  moreoj  God.  And  when  thofe 
that  looked  on  thehrfelves  as  unbelievers  came  to 
fee  her,  fire  would  be  greatly  moved  with  com- 

pafuonale 


t 163  ] 

paffionate  affection.  * The  fame  week  that  fhe 
died,  when  die  was  in  diflreffing  circumftances 
as  to  her  body,  home  of  the  neighoours  that  came 
to  fee  her,  afked,  if  fhe  was  willing  to  die  ? She 
replied,  that  fhe  was  quite  witting  either  to  live  or 
die ; fie  was  willing  to  be  in  pain-,  fie  was  willing 
to  be  Jo  always  as  Jhe  was  then,  if  that  was  the  will 
oj  God.  She  willed  what  God  willed.  1 hey  afk- 
ed her  whether  lhe  was  willing  to  die  that  night  ? 
She  anfwered,  Yes,  if  it  be  Godh  will  And 
feemed  to  fpeak  all  with  that  perfeft  compofure 
of  fpirit,  and  with  fuch  a chearful  and  pleafant 
countenance,  that  it  filled  them  with  admiration. 

53.  She  was  very  w’eak  a confiderable  time 
before  fhe  died,  having  pined  away  with  famine 
and  third,  fo  that  her  flefh  feemed  to  he  dried 
upon  her  bones ; and  therefore  could  fay  but 
little,  and  manifelied  her  mind  very  much  by 
figns.  She  faid  fhe  had  matter  enough  to  fill  up 
all  her  time  with  talk,  if  Jhe  had  but  Jlr  ength.  A 
few  days  before  her  death,  fome  afked  her,  whe- 
ther fhe  was  afraid  to  die  ; fhe  anfwered  to  this 
purpofe,  that  fhe  had  not  the  leaft  degree  of 
fear  of  death,  they  afked  her  why  fhe  would  be  fo 
confident?  She  anfwered,  IJ I fould fay  other- 
wife,  I fhould  J'peak  contrary  to  what  I know.  There 
is,  fays  fie,  indeed  a dark  entry,  that  looks fome- 
thing  dark,  but  on  the  other  fide  there  appears 
fuch  a bright  fining  light,  that  I cannot  be  a- 
fraid  ! She  faid  not  long  before  fhe  died,  that  lhe 
vfed  to  be  afraid  how  fhe  fiould  grapple  with 

death'. 


L i64  ] 

death  ; hut , fays  fhe,  God  has fmutJ  me  that  he 
can  make  it  eajy  in  great  pain.  Several  davs 
before  fhe  died,  fhe  could  fcarcelv  fay  any  thing 
but  juff  yes,  and  no,  to  quefiions  that  were 
afked  her  ; for  fhe  feemed  to  be  dv  ing  for  three 
days  together ; but  feemed  to  continue  in  a 
fweet  compofure  cf  foul,  without  interruption, 
to  the  laid,  and  died  as  a perfon  that  went  to 
fleep,  without  any  ffruggling,  about  noon,  on 
Friday,  June  27,  1743. 

54.  I proceed  to  the  other  injlance.  Her  name 
is  Phebe  Bartlet,  daughter  of  Willian  Bat  let,  I 
fhali  give  the  account  as  I took  it  from  the 
mouths  of  her  parents,  whofe  veracity,  none  that 
know  them  doubt  of. 

She  was  born  i n Marc' , in  the  year  173c. 
About  the  latter  end  o\ April,  or  beginning  of 
May,  1735,  lhe  was  greatly  affected  by  the  talk 
of  her  brother,  who  had  been  converted  a little 
before,  at  about  eleven  years  of  age,  and  then 
ferioufly  talked  to  her  about  the  great  things  of 
religion.  Her  parents  did  not  know  of  it  at  that 
time,  and  were  not  wont,  in  the  counfels  they 
gave  to  their  children,  particularly  to  direft  them- 
felves  to  her,  by  reafon  of  her  being  fo  young, 
and  as  they  fuppofed  not  capable  of  underflanding. 
But  after  her  brother  had  talked  to  her,  they  ob- 
ferved  her  very  earneflly  to  liffen  to  the  advice 
they  gave  to  the  other  children  : and  fhe  teas  ob 
ferved  very  conflantlv'  to  retire,  feveral  times  in 
a day,  for  fecret  orator.  She  grew  more  an  1 

J 1 i o 


more 


[ i«5  J 

more  engaged  in  religion,  and  was  more  frequent 
in  her  ciofet  ; till  at  laft  flic  was  wont  to  vifit 
it  five  or  fix  times  in  a day  ; and  was  fo  engag- 
ed in  it,  that  nothing  would  at  an)'  time  divert 
her,  either  by  putting 't  out  of  her  thoughts,  or 
otherwife  engaging  her  inclinations. 

* gg.  She  once  of  her  own  accord  fpake  of  her 
unfuccefsfulnefs,  in  that  fhe  could  not  find  God. 
But  on  Tkurjday,  the  lad  day  of  July,  about  the 
micldl-e  of  the  day,  the  child  being  in  the  ciofet, 
where  fhe  ufed  to  retire,  her  mother  heard  her 
fpeaking  aloud  ; which  was  unufual,  and  never 
had  been  obferved  before;  and  her  voice  feenr- 
ed  to  be  as  of  one  exceeding  importunate;  but 
her  mother  could  difiin&Iy  hear  only  thefe 
words,  (fpoken  in  her  childifh  manner,  but  with 
extraordinary  earneflnefs,)  Pray,  blejfed,  Lord, 
give  me  Jalvation  ! I PRAY,  BEG,  pardon  of  all 
my  Jmsl  When  the  child  had  done  prayer,  fhe 
came  out  of  the  ciofet,  and  came  and  fat  down 
by  her  mother,  and  cried  out  aloud.  Her  mother 
earneftly  afked  her  feveral  times,  what  the  mat- 
ter was,  before  fire  would  make  any  anfwer  ; but 
fhe  continued  exceedingly  crying,  and  wreathing 
her  body  to  and  fro,  like  one  in  anguifh  of  fpirit. 
Her  mother  then  afked  her  whether  fire  was  afraid 
that  God  would  not  give  her  falvation.  She  then 
anfwered,  Yes,  / am  ajraid  l Jlidll go  to  hell ! Her 
mother  then  endeavoured  to  quiet  her,  and  told 
her  fhe  would  not  have  her  cry , file  mujl  be  a good 
girl,  and  pray  every  day,  and  fhe  hoped  God 

would 


C *66  ] 

would  give  her  falvation.  But  this  did  not  cuiet 
her  at  ail,  but  (he  continued  thus  earneftlv  cry- 
ing, and  began  to  fmde,  and  prefently  faid  with 
a fmiling  countenance,  Mother , the  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  come  to  me'.  Her  mother  was  furprized 
at  the  fudden  alteration  and  at  the  fpeech,  and 
knew  not  what  to  make  cf  it,  but  at  firft  faid  no- 
thing to  her.  The  child  prefently  fpake  again, 
and  faid,  (here  is  another  come  to  vie , and  there  is 
another , there  is  three  ; and  being  a Iked  what  (lie 
meant,  fhe  anfwered,  one  is,  thy  a id  he  done,  and 
there  is  another,  enjoy  him  for  ever  ; by  which  it 
feems,  that  when  the  child  faid  there  is  three 
come  to  me,  fhe  meant  three  palfages  of  the  cate- 
chifm  that  came  to  her  mind. 

56.  After  the  child  had  faid  this,  flie  retired 
again  into  her  clofet ; and  her  mother  went  over 
to  her  brothel’s,  who  was  next  neighbour;  and 
when  file  came  back,  the  child,  being  come  out 
of  the  clofet,  meets  her  mother  with  this  chear- 
ful  fpeech,  I can  find  God  now ! Referring  to 
what  fhe  had  before  complained  of,  that  fhe 
could  not  find  God.  Then  the  child  fpoke  again, 
2nd  faid,  I love  God!  Her  mother  afked  her, 
how  well  flie  loved  God,  whether  fhe  loved  God 
better  than  her  little  ffler  Rachel.  She  anfwered, 
yes,  better  than  any  thing  l Then  her  eldeft  filter, 
referring  to  her  faying  Jhe  could  find  God  now, 
afked  her  where  file  could  find  God  ? She  an- 
fwered, in  heaven , Why,  faid  fhe,  have  you  been 
in  heaven?  No,  faid  the  child.  By  this  it  feems 

not 


[ i67  ] 


not  to  have-teen  any  imagination  of  any  thing 
been  with  bodily  eyes,  that  {he  called  God,  when 
{he  faid,  I can  find  God  now7.  Her  mother  afked 
her  whether  fhe  was  afraid  of  going  to  hell?  She 
anfwered,  yes,  I was,  but  flow  I Jhant.  Her 

mother  afked  her  whether  {he  thought  that  God 
had  given  her  Salvation  ; fhe  anfwered,  yes.  Her 
mother  afked  her,  when  ? She  anfwered,  to-day. 
She  appeared  all  that  afternoon  exceeding  joyful. 
One  of  the  neighbours  afked  her,  how  file  felt 
herfelf?  She  anfwered,  I feel  better  than  ever  1 
did.  The  neighbour  afked  her,  what  made  her 
feel  better  ? She  anfwered,  God  makes  me.  That 
evening  as  fire  lay  a-bed,  file  called  one  of  her 
little  coufins  that  was  prefent  in  the  room,  as 
having  fomething  to  fay  to  him  ; and  when  he 
came,  fire  told  him,  that  heaven  was  better  than 
earth.  The  next  day  being  Friday,  her  mother 
afking  her  her  catechifm,  afked  her  what  God 
made  her  for  ? She  anfwered,  to  ferve  him,  and 
added,  every  one  fiould  ferve  God,  and  get 
Chrift. 

* gy.  The  fame  day  the  elder  children,  when 
they  came  home  from  fchool,  feemed  much  af- 
fefted  with  the  change  in  Phcbe ; and  her  fifter 
Abigail  handing  by,  her  mother  took  occafion 
to  counfel  her,  now  to  improve  her  time  to 
prepare  for  another  world  : on  which  Phebe 
burfl  out  in  tears,  and  cried  out, poor  Nabb  ! Her 
mother  told  her  fhe  would  not  have  her  cry,  fhe 
hoped  that  God  would  give  Nabby  falvation  ; 

but 


[ *68  ] 

but  that  did  not  quiet  her,  but  die  continued 
earned!)-  crying  for  fome  time  ; and  when  fhe 
had  in  a meafure  ceafed,  her  fider  Eunice  being 
by  her,  (he  built  out  again,  and  cried,  poor 
Eunice!  and  cried  exceedingly;  and  when  (he 
had  aimed  done,  (lie  went  into  another  room, 
and  there  looked  upon  her  filler  Naomi,  and 
burd  out  again,  crying,  poor  Amy  ! Her  mother 
was  greatly  affeCted,  and  knew  not  what  to  fay. 
One  of  the  neighbours  coming  in  a little  after, 
afked  her  what  Ihe  had  cried  for  : (he  feemed  at 
fiu't  backward  to  tell  the  reafon:  her  mother 
told  her  fine  might  tell  that  perfon,  upon  which 
(lie  faid,  (he  cried  becauje  (he  was  ajraid  they 
would  gc  to  hell. 

58.  At  night  a minider,  that  was  occafionally 
in  the  town,  was  at  the  houfe,  and  talked  confi- 
derably  with  her  of  the  things  of  religion  ; and 
after  be  was  gone  (he  fat  leaning  on  the  table, 
with  tears  running  out  of  her  eves ; and  being 
afked  what  made  her  cry,  die  faid  it  was  thinking 
about  God.  The  next  dav,  being  Saturday,  fhe 
feemed  great  part  of  the  day  to  be  in  a very 
affectionate  frame,  had  four  turns  of  crying,  and 
feemed  to  endeavour  to  curb  herfelf,  and  hide 
her  tears,  and  was  very  backward  to  talk  of  the 
occafion  of  it.  On  the  Jabbath  day  die  was 
afked  whether  (he  believed  in  God,  die  an- 
fwered,  yes:  and  being  toid  that  Chrift  was  the 
Son  of  God,  (he  made  ready  anfwer.  and  faid, 
I know  it. 


From 


C 179  ] 

From  this  time  there  has  appeared  a very  re- 
markable change  in  the  child  : (he  has  been  very 
dri£f  upon  the  fabbath  ; and  feems  to  long  for 
the  fabbath-day  before  it  comes,  and  will  often 
in  the  week-time  be  enquiring  how  long  it  is  to 
the  fabbath-day,  and  mud  have  the  days  particu- 
larly counted  over  that  are  between,  before  die 
will  be  contented.  And  (he  feems  to  love  God's 
houfe,  and  is  very  eager  to  go  thither.  When 
fhe  is  in  the  place  of  worfhip,  die  is  very  far 
from  fpending  her  time  there  as  children  at  her 
age  ufually  do,  but  appears  with  deep  attention. 
She  alfo  appears  very  defirous  at  all  opportunities 
to- go  to  private  religious  meetings  ; and  is  very 
dill  and  attentive  at  home  in  prayer-time,  and 
has  appeared  afifefted  in  time  of  family-prayer. 
She  feems  to  delight  much  in  hearing  religious 
converfation  : when  I once  was  there  with  fome 
others  that  were  drangers,  and  talked  to  her 
fomething  of  religion,  fhe  feemed  more  than  or- 
dinarily attentive  ; and  when  we  were  gone,  fhe 
looked  out  very  wifhfully  after  us,  and  faid, 
I tuijli  they  would  come  again ! Her  mother 
adeed  her  why  ? Says  die,  I love  to  hear  than 
talk ! 

59.  She  feems  to  have  very  much  of  the  fear 
of  God  before  her  eyes,  and  an  extraordinary- 
dread  of  fin  ; of  which  her  mother  mentioned 
the  following  remarkable  indance.  Some  time 
in  Augitfl,\b\e  lad  year,  die  went  with  fome  bigger 
children  to  get  fome  plumbs,  in  a neighbour’s 
Vo l.  XVII.  H lot, 


[ i8o  ] 

lot,  knowing  nothing  of  any  harm  in  what  (he 
did;  hut  when  fhe  brought  fome  of  the  plumbs 
into  the  houfe,  her  mother  mildly  reproved  her, 
and  told  her  that  fhe  muji  not  get  plumbs  without 
leave,  becaufe  it  was  a fin  ; God  had  commanded 
her  net  to  Jlcal.  The  child  feemed  greatly  fur- 
piized,  and  burfl  out  ir.to  tears,  and  cried  out, 
l wont  have  theft  plumbs  ! And  turning  to  her 
filler  Eunice , very  earneflly  faid  to  her,  Why  did 
you  ajk  me  to  go  to  that  plumb-tree?  I JkotUd  not 
have  gone  if  you  had  not  aftied  me.  The  other 
children  did  not  feem  to  be  much  affe&ed  or 
concerned,  but  there  was  no  pacifying  Phebc. 
Her  mother  told  her  fhe  might  go  and  afk  leave, 
and  then  it  w'ould  not  be  fin  for  her  to  eat  them ; 
and  fent  one  of  the  children  to  that  end,  and 
when  fire  returned,  her  mother  told  her  the 
owner  had  given  leave,  now  fhe  might  eat  them 
and  it  would  not  be  flealing.  This  Hilled  her  a 
little  while;  but  prefently  file  broke  out  again 
into  an  exceeding  fit  of  crying-,  her  mother  afked 
her  what  made  her  cry  again  ? Why  fhe  cried 
now,  face  they  had  afked  leave?  What  it  was  that 
troubled  her  now  ? And  afked  her  feveral  times 
very  earneflly  before  fhe  made  any  anfwer,  but 
at  iafi  fhe  faid,  it  was  BECAUSE  IT  WAS  SIX. 
She  continued  a confiderable  time  crying,  and 
faid  file  would  not  go  again  if  Eunice  afked  her 
an  hundred  times  ; and  file  retained  her  averfio 
to  that  fruit  for  a confiderable  time,  under  the 
remembrance  of  her  former  fin. 


Co.  At 


[ 181  ] 

60.  At  fome  time  about  the  middle  of  the  win- 
ter, very  late  in  the  night,  when  all  were  a-bed, 
her  mother  perceived  that  fhe  was  awake,  and 
heard  her  as  though  (he  was  weeping.  She  called 
to  her,  and  afked  her  what  was  the  matter;  fire 
anfwered  with  a low  voice,  fo  that  her  mother 
could  not  hear  what  fire  faid,  but  thinking  it 
might  be  occafioned  by  fome  fpiritual  affeftion, 
faid  no  more  to  her,  but  perceived  her  to  lie 
awake  and  to  continue  in  the  fame  frame  for  a 
confiderable  time.  The  next  morning  (Ire  afked 
her,  whether  fhe  did  not  cry  the  lad  night  ? The 
child  anfwered,  Yes,  I did  cry  a little,  for  divas 
thinking  about  God  and  Chrilf,  and  they  loved 
me.  Her  mother  afked  her,  whether  to  think  cf 

, ^God  and  Chrifth  loving  her  made  her  cry  ? She 
'..-anfwered,  Yes,  it  does Jometimes. 

61.  She  has  often  manifefted  a great  concern 
for  the  good  of  other  fouls : and  has  been  wont 
many  times  affe&ionately  to  counfel  the  other 
children.  Once  about  the  latter  end  of  September, 
the  laft  year,  when  fhe  and  fome  others  of  the 
children  were  in  a room  by  themfelves  a hulking 
Indian  corn,  the  child  after  a while  came  out  and 
fat  by  the  fire.  Her  mother  took  notice  that  fne 
appeared  with  a more  than  ordinary  ferious  and 
penftve  countenance.  At  laft  fhe  broke  filence, 
and  faid,  I have  been  talking  to  Nobby  and 
Eunice.  Her  mother  afked  her  what  fhe  had 
faid  to  them  ; why,  faid  fhe,  I told  them  they  rnujl 
pray  and  prepare  to  d\e,  that  they  had  but  a little 

H 2 while. 


[ *8*  ] 

zukile  to  live  in  this  world , and  they  mujl  be  always 
ready.  When  Nabby  came  out,  her  mother 
a ike  cl  her  whether  (he  had  (aid  that  to  them ; yes, 
faid  Ih  ejhe  faid  that  andagreat  deal  more.  At  other 
times  the  child  took  her  opportunities  to  talk  to 
the  children  about  the  great  concern  of  their 
fouls,  fometimes  fo  as  to  fet  them  into  tears. 
She  was  once  exceeding  importunate  with  her 
mother  to  go  with  her  ft  her  Naomi  to  pray;  her 
mother  endeavoured  to  put  her  off ; but  fhe 
pulled  her  by  the  fleece,  and  feemed  as  if  fhe 
would  by  no  means  be  denied.  At  laft  her  mo- 
ther told  her,  that  rimy  mujl  go  and  pray  herfef; 
but,  fays  the  child, Jhe  will  not  go;  and  per- 
fifted  earnefily  to  beg  of  her  mother  to  go  with 
her. 

She  Hill  continues  very  conflant  in  fecret 
praver,  fo  far  as  can  be  obferved,  (for  fhe  feems 
to  have  no  defire  that  others  fhould  obferve  her 
when  fhe  retires,  but  feems  to  be  a child  of  a 
referved  temper)  and  every  night  before  fhe  goes 
to  bed  will  fay  her  catechifn,  and  will  by  no 
means  mifs  it ; fhe  never  forgot  it  but  once,  and 
then,  after  fhe  was  a-bed  thought  of  it,  and  cried 
out  in  tears,  I han't  faid  my  catechifn  ! And  would 
not  be  quiet  till  her  mother  afkcd  her  the  cate- 
chiftn  as  fhe  lay  in  bed.  She  fometimes  ap- 
pears to  be  in  doubt  about  the  condition  of  her 
foul:  but  at  other  times  fhe  feems  to  have  no 
doubt,  but  when  afked  replies  without  hefi- 
tation. 


62.  In 


[ 183  ] 

62.  In  the  former  part  of  this  great  work  of 
God  amongflus,  till  it  got  to  its  height,  we  were 
wonderfully  bleifed  in  all  refpefts.  Satan  (as 
has  been  already  obferved)  feemed  to  be  unufnally 
retrained  : perfons  that  before  had  been  involv- 
ed in  melancholy,  feemed  to  be  as  if  they  were 
waked  out  of  it ; and  thofe  that  had  been  entan- 
gled with  extraordinary  temptations,  were  won- 
derfully fet  at  liberty;  and  not  only  fo,  but  it 
■was  the  mod  remarkable  time  of  health  that 
ever  I knew  fince  I have  been  in  the  town. 
But  after  this  it  was  otherwife.  When  this 
work  of  God  appeared  to  be  at  its  greateff 
height,  a poor  wmak  man  that  belongs  to  the 
town,  being  in  great  fpiritual  trouble,  was  hur- 
ried to  cut  his  throat,  and  made  an  attempt,  but 
did  not  do  it  effebtually.  He  after  this  continued 
a confiderable  time  exceedingly  overwhelmed 
with  melancholy  ; but  has  now  of  a long  time 
been  delivered  by- the  light  of  God’s  countenance 
lifted  up  upon  him. 

63.  In  the  latter  part  of  May,  the  Spirit  of 
God  gradually  withdrew  from  us,  ana  after  this 
time  Satan  feemed  to  be  let  loofe,  and  raged 
in  a dreadful  manner.  The  firfl  inffance  wherein 
it  appeared,  was  a perfon’s  putting  an  end  to  his 
own  life,  by  cutting  his  throat.  He  was  a gen- 
tleman of  more  than  common  underfranding,  of 
firift  morals,  religious  in  his  behaviour,  and  an 
ufeful  honourable  perfon  in  the  town  ; but  was 
of  a family  that  are  exceeding  prone  to  melan- 

H 3 choly, 


[ i84  ] 

choly,  and  his  mother  was  killed  with  it.  The 
news  of  this  extraordinarily  affected  the  minds 
of  the  people  here,  and  fbuck  them  with 
aflonifhment.  After  this,  multitudes  in  this, 
and  other  towns,  feemed  to  have  it  ffrongly 
luggefled  to  them,  and  prefled  upon  them  to 
do  as  this  perfon  had  done.  And  many  that 
feemed  to  be  under  no  melancholy,  nor  were 
under  any  fpecial  trouble  of  mind,  yet  had  it 
urged  upon  them,  as  if  homebody  had  fpoke 
to  them,  cut  your  own  throat , now  is  a good 
opportunity  : New!  Now!  So  that  they  were 

obliged  to  fight  with  all  their  might  to  refill  it, 
and  yet  no  reafon  fuggefled  why  they  fliould 
do  if. 

6“_p  After  tliefe  things  the  inflances  of  con- 
verfion  were  rare  in  comparifon  of  what  they 
bad  been,  (though  that  remarkable  inflance  of 
the  little  child  was  after  this;)  and  the  Spirit  of 
God  appeared  fenflbly  withdrawing  from  all 
parts  of  the  country;  but  religion  remained 
here,  and  I believe  in  l'ome  other  places,  the 
main  fubjeft  of  conversation  for  feveral  months. 
And  there  were  fome  turns,  wherein  God’s 
work  feemed  fomething  to  revive,  and  we 
were  ready  to  hope  that  all  was  going  to  be 
renewed  again  ; yet  in  the  main  there  was  a 
gradual  decline  of  that  general,  lively  fpirit  in 
religion,  which  had  been  before.  But  as  to 
thofe  that  have  been  converted  among  us  in 
this  time,  they  generally  feem  to  have  had  an 

abiding 


[ ] 

abiding  change  wrought  on  them  : I have  had 
particular  acquaintance  with  many  oi  them  fince, 
and  they  appear  to  have  a new  fenfe  of  things, 
new  apprehenfions  and  views  of  God,  of  the 
divine  attributes,  and  Jefus  Chiijl,  and  the 
great  things  of  the  gofpel  ; they  have  a new 
fenfe  of  the  truth  oi  them,  and  they  affietl  them 
in  a new  manner,  though  it  is  very  far  from  being 
always  alike  with  them;  they  feel  an  inward 
ardor  and  burning  of  heart,  the  like  to  which 
they  never  experienced  before ; they  have  new 
appetites,  new  breathings  and  pantings  of  heart, 
and  groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered.  There  is 
a new  kind  of  inward  labour  and  ilruggle  of  foul 
towards  heaven  and  holinefs. 

6g.  Some  that  before  were  very  rough  in 
their  temper  and  manners,  are  remarkably  fat- 
tened and  fweetened  : and  fonie  have  had  their 
fouls  exceedingly  filled  and  overwhelmed  with 
light,  love,  and  comfort,  long  fince  the  work 
of  God  has  ceafed  to  be  fo  remarkably  carried 
on  in  a general  way:  and  there  is  fill  a great 
deal  of  religious  converfation  among  young  and 
old;  a religious  difpofition  is  Hill  maintained 
amongfi  our  people,  by  their  upholding  frequent 
private  religious  meetings,  and  all  forts  are 
generally  worihipping  God  at  fuch  meetings, 
on  fabbath  nights,  and  in  the  evening  after  our 
public  lefhrre.  Many  children  in  the  town  fill 
keep  up  fuch  meetings  among  thcmfelvcs.  I 
H 4 know 


[ i»6  ] 

know  -of  no  one  young  perfon  in  the  town 
that  lias  returned  to  their  former  loofenefs  or 
extravagancy  ; but  we  dill  remain  a reformed 
people,  and  God  has  evidently  made  us  a new 
people. 

I cannot  fay  there  has  been  no  indance  of 
any  one  perfon  that  has  carried  himfelf  fo,  that 
others  fhould  juflly  be  offended  ; nor  am  I fo  vain 
as  to  imagine  that  we  have  not  been  miftaken 
concerning  any.  And  we  are  not  fo  pure,  but 
that  we  have  great  caufe  to  be  humbled  and 
afhamed  that  we  are  fo  impure-,  nor  fo  religious, 
but  that  thofe  that  watch  for  cur  hailing  may 
fee  things  in  us,  whence  they  may  take  occa- 
fion  to  reproach  us  and  religion.  But  in  the 
main,  there  has  been  a great  and  marvellous 
work  of  converfion  and  fanfdificatiou  among  the 
people  here. 

66.  Yet  a great  part  of  the  country  have 
not  received  the  mod  favourable  thoughts  of 
this  affair;  and  to  this  day  many  retain  a 
jealoufy  concerning  it,  and  prejudice  againft 
it : I have  reafon  to  think  that  the  meannefs 
and  rveaknefs  of  the  inflrument  that  has  been 
made  ufe  of  in  this  town,  has  prejudiced  many 
againft  it  : but  yet  this  circumilance  of  this 

great  work  of  God,  is  analogous  to  other  cir- 
cumftances  of  it ; God  has  fo  ordered  the  man- 
ner of  it  in  many  refpefts,  as  remarkably  to 
{hew  it  to  be  his  own  peculiar  work,  and  to 

fecure 


[ *8;  ] 

fecure  the  glory  of  it  only  to  his  own  almighty 
power  and  fovereign  grace.  And  whatever  the 
cir cumjlances  and  means  have  been,  yet  fo  hath 
it  pleafed  God  to  work  ! And  we  are  evidently  a 
people  blefled  of  the  Lord  1 And  here,  in  this 
corner  of  the  world , God  dwells,  and  manifefls 
his  glory. 


H5 


The. 


[ i88  ] 


THE 

DISTINGUISHING  MARKS 

O F A 

WORK 

OF  THE 

SPIRIT  of  GOD. 


Extrafted  from  Mr.  EDWARD  S. 


i John  iv.  i. 

Beloved,  believe  not  every  fpuit,  but  try  the Jpints 
whether  they  are  oj God,  becaufe  manyjalje  pro- 
phets are  gene  out  into  the  world. 

l.  r 8 "TIE  apoftolical  age  was  an  age  of  the  < 
greateft  out- pouring  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  that  ever  was.  And  that  both  as  to  the 
extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  and  alfo  as  to 

Iris 


C 189  ]' 

his  ordinary  operations,  in  convincing,  convert- 
ing, enlightening  and  fan&ifying  the  fouls  of 
men.  But  as  the  influences  of  the  true  Spirit 
abounded,  fo  counterfeits  did  alfo  then  abound  : 
the  devil  mimicking,  both  the  ordinary  and 
extraordinary  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
This  made  it  neceffary  that  the  church  of  Chrift 
ihould  be  furniflied  with  fome  difliiigui filing 
mark's,  by  which  Ihe  might  proceed  fafely  in 
judging  of  fpiriis,  and-  diftinguifh  the  true  from 
the  falfe.  The  giving  fuch  rules  is  the  plain 
defign  of  this  chapter,  where  we  have  this 
matter  exprefly  treated  of.  The  apoftle  here, 
of  fet  purpofe  undertakes  to  fupply  the  church 
of  God  with  fuch  marks  of  the  true  Spirit  as  may 
be  plain  and  fafe,  and  furely  diftinguifhing,  and 
well  accommodated  to  ufe  and  praflice.  And 
that  the  fubjeft  might  be  clearly  and  fuffici- 
ently  handled,  he  infills  upon  it  throughout  the 
chapter  : which  makes  it  wonderful  that  what  is 
faid  in  this  chapter,  is  no  more  taken  notice  of 
at  this  time,  when  that  which  is  fo  remarkable 
appears  ; fuch  an  uncommon  operation  on  the 
minds  of  people;  and  there  is  fuch  a variety  of 
opinions  concerning  it,  and  fo  much  talk  about 
the  work  of  the  Spirit. 

2.  The  apoftle  is-  led  to  difeourfe  on  this 
fubjeft  by  an  occafiona!  mention  of  the  indwel- 
ling of  the  Spirit,  as  the  fure  evidence  of  an  in- 
tereft  inChrifi,  in  the  laft  verfe  of  the  foreooinrj 
chapter.  And  he  that  keepeth  his  commandments 
H 6 dwelkth 


[ igo  ] 

dwtllrth  m him , and  he  in  him  ; and  hereby  we 
know  that  he  abideth  in  us,  by  the  Jpirit  which  he 
hath  given  us.  Whence  we  may  infer,  that  the 
ciefign  in  this  chaper  is  not  only  to  give  marks 
whereby  to  diftinguifh  the  true  Spirit  from  the 
falte  in  his  extraordinary  gifts,  but  alfo  in  his 
ordinary  influences  on  the  minds  of  his  people. 

3.  The  words  of  the  text  are  an  introduction 
to  this  difcourfe,  of  the  cl i fli ngui filing  figns  of 
the  true  and  falfe  fpirit.  Before  the  apoffle 
proceeds  to  lay  clown  thefe  figns,  1.  Here  is  the 
duty  of  trying  the  fpirits  urged,  with  a caution 
annexed,  again!!  over  creduloufnefs  : Beloved, 
believe  net  every  fpirit,  but  try  the  Jpints  whether 
they  are  cf  God.  2.  The  necefiity  of  this  duty  is 
fhewn  from  this,  that  there  were  many  coun- 
terfeits, becaufe  many  falfe  prophets  were  gone  out 
into  the  world.  And  thefe  did  not  only  pretend 
to  have  the  Spirit  of  God  in  his  extraordinary 
gifts,  but  alfo  to  be  eminently  holy  perfons,  to 
have  much  of  his  ordinary  influences  on  their 
hearts.  We  are  therefore  to  lock  upon  thefe 
words  as  a direCion  to  try  their  pretences  in  both 
thefe  refpeCs. 

4.  After  theapofile  having  thus  warned  Chrif- 
tians,  with  refpeC  to  the  trial  of  fpirits,  he 
immediately  proceeds  to  give  them  rules,  by 
which  they  may  fafely  proceed  in  judging  of 
every  thing  that  has  the  pretext  of  being  either 
the  ordinary  or  extraordinary  work  of  the  Spirit. 


My 


[ la1  3 

My  defign  therefore  is  to  drew  what  are  the  true, 
certain,  and  diftinguifhing  evidences  of  a work 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  by  which  we  may  proceed 
fafely  in  judging  of  any  operation  we  find  in  our- 
felves,  or  fee  in  others. 

And  here  I would  obferve,  that  we  are  to 
take  the  fcriptures  as  our  guide  in  this  and  in  all 
cafes.  This  is  the  {landing  rule  which  God  has 
given  to  his  church,  to  guide  them  in  all  things 
relation-  to  their  fouls.  And  doubtlefs  that  Spirit 
that  indited  the  fcriptures  knew  how  to  give  us 
good  rules,  by  which  to  diflinguifh  his  operations 
from  all  that  is  falfelv  pretended  to  be  from  him. 
And  feeing  he  has  done  this,  in  the  chapter 
wherein  is  the  text,  more  fully  than  any  where 
elfe  ; in  my  prefent  difcourfel  {hall  go  no  where 
elfe  for  marks  of  the  trial  of  fpirits,  but  (hall 
confine  myfelf  to  thofe  that  I find  here. 

But  before  I proceed  particularly  to  fpeak  to 
thefe,  I would  prepare  my  way  by  obferving 
what  are  not  figns  that  we  are  to  judge  of  a work 
by,  whether  it  be  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
or  no.  And  efpecially,  what  are  no  evidences  that 
a work  wrought  among  a people,  is  not  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

6.  Fir fl.  Nothing  can  certainly  be  concluded 
from  this,  That  the  work  that  appears  is  carried  on 
in  a way  very  unufual  and  extraordinary.  ’Tis 
no  fign  that  a work  is  not  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  that  it  is  carried  on  in  fuch  a way  as  the 
fame  Spirit  has  not  been  wont  to  carry  on  his 

work  ; 


L *S2  j 

work  ; provided  the  difference  be  fuch,  as  mav 
Hill  be  comprehended  within  the  limits  of  thofe 
rules  which  the  fcriptures  have  given  to  diffin- 
guifh  a work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  by.  What  we 
have  been  ufed  to,  or  what  the  church  of 
“God  has  been  ufed  to,  is  not  a rule  by  which  we 
are  to  judge  whether  a work  be  the  work  of  God, 
becaufe  there  may  be  new  and  extraordinary 
works  of  God.  God  has  heretofore  wrought  in 
an  extraordinary  manner  ; he  has  brought  thofe 
things  to  pafs  that  have  been  new  things,  flrange 
works  : and  has  wrought  in  fuch  a manner  as  to 
furprize  both  men  and  angels  : and  as  God  has 
done  thus  in  times  pah,  fo  we  have  no  reafon  to 
think  but  that  he  will  'do  fo  {fill.  The  prophe- 
cies of  fcripture  give  us  reafon  to  think  that  God 
has  flill  new  things  to  accomplifh,  things  that 
have  never  yet  been  feem  No  deviation  from 
what  has  hitherto  been  ufual,  let  it  be  never  fo 
great,  is  an  argument  that  a work  is  not  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  if  it  be  no  deviation 
from  the  rule  that  God  has  given  to  judge  by. 
The  Spirit  of  God  is  fovereign  in  his  operations, 
and  we  know  that  he  ufes  a great  variety  : and  we 
can’t  tell  how  great  a variety  he  may  ufe,  within 
the  compafs  of  the  rules  he  himfelfhas  fixed. 
We  ought  not  to  limit  God  where  he  has  not 
limited  himfelf.  If  a work  be  never  fo  different 
from  what  has  formerly  been,  yet  if  it  agrees  in 
thofe  things  that  the  word  of  God  has  given  us  as 

the 


[ 19'3  ] 


the  diflinguiffiing  figns  of  a Work  of  his  Spirit, 
that  is  fufficient  to  determine  us  in  its  favour. 

7.  Therefore  it  is  not  reafonable  to  determine 
that  a work  is  not  the  work  of  God’s  Spirit,  be- 
caufe  of  the  extraordinary  degree  in  which  the 
minds  of  perfons  are  influenced.  Ifthey  have  an 
extraoidinary  convi&ion  of  the  dreadful  nature 
of  fin,  and  a very  uncommon  fenfe  of  the  mifery 
ofit,  or  extraordinary  views  of  the  ceitainty  and 
glory  of  divine  things;  and  are  proportionably 
moved  with  very  extraordinary  affeftions  of  fear 
and  forrow,  defire,  love  or  joy  : or  if  the  change 
that  feems  to  be  made  in  .perfons  be  very  fudden, 
and  the  work  carried  on  with  very  unufual  fwift- 
nefs,  and  the  perfons  that  are  thus  llrargely  af- 
fefled  are  very  many,  and  many  of  them  are 
very  young  ; and  alfo  be  very  unufual  in  many 
other  circum fiances,  not  infringing  upon  fcrip- 
ture  marks  of  a work  of  the  Spirit  ; thefe  things 
are  no  argument  that  the  work  is  not  a work  of 
the  Spirit  of  God. 

The  extraordinary  degree  of  influence,  if  in  its 
nature  it  be  agreeable  to  the  rules  and  marks 
given  in  fcripture,  is  rather  an  argument  in  its 
favour;  for  by  how  much  the  higher  degree  that 
is  in,  which  is  in  its  nature  agreeable  to  the  rule, 
fo  much  the  more  is  there  of  conformity  to  the 
rule,  and  fo  much  the  more  evident  is  that  con- 
formity. 

8-  There  is  a great  apinefs  in  perfons  to  doubt 
of  things  that  are  ftrange;  efpecially  it  is  difficult 

for 


[ *94  ] 

for  elderly  perfens  to  think  that  to  be  right 
which  they  have  been  never  ufed  to,  and  have 
not  heard  of  in  the  days  of  their  fathers.  But  if 
it  be  a good  argument  that  a work  is  not  from 
God,  becaufe  it  is  very  unufual,  then  it  always 
was  fo,  and  was  fo  in  the  apoflle’s  days.  For  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  that  was  wrought  then, 
was  carried  on  in  a manner,  that  in  very  many 
refpefts,  was  altogether  new.  There  were  fuch 
things  then,  as  neither  the  Jews,  then  living, 
nor  their  fathers,  had  ever  feen  or  heard.  Yea, 
fuch  as  never  had  been  fince  the  world  flood  : 
the  work  was  carried  on  with  more  vifible  and  re- 
markable power  than  ever  had  been  before 
never  were  there  feen  before  fuch  mighty  and 
wonderful  eflfe&s  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  fuch 
fudden  changes,  and  fuch  great  engagednefs  and 
zeal  in  fuch  multitudes;  fuch  a great  and  fudden 
alteration  in  towns,  cities  and  countries;  fuch  a 
fwift  progrefs,  and  vaft  extent  of  the  work. 

And  we  have  reafon  from  feripture  prophecy 
to  fuppofe,  that  at  the  commencement  of  the  laft 
and  greatefl  out-pouring  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
the  manner  of  the  work  will  be  very  extraordi- 
nary, and  fuch  as  never  has  yet  been  feen  ; fo 
that  there  fhall  be  occafion  then  to  fay,  as  in  Ifai. 
lxvi.  8.  Who  hath  heard  fuch  a thing  ? Who  hath 
feen  fuch  things  ? Shall  the  earth  be  made  to  bring 
forth  in  one  day  P Shall  a nation  be  born  at  once  P 
For  as foor  as  Zion  travailed, fie  brought forth  her 
children.  It  may  be  reafonably'expetted  that  the 

extraordinary 


[ *95  ] 

extraordinary  manner  of  the  work  then,  will  bear 
fome  proportion  to  the  very  extraordinary  events, 
and  that  glorious  change  in  the  ftate  of  the  world, 
God  will  be  about  to  bring,  to  pafs  by  it. 

9.  Secondly,  A work  is  not  to  be  judged  of  by 
any  effe&s  on  the  bodies  of  men  ; fuch  as  tears, 
trembling,  groans,  loud  outcries,  agonies  of  bo- 
dy, or  the  failing  of  bodily  flrengtb.  The  influ- 
ence the  minds  of  perfons  are  under,  is  not  to  be 
judged  of  one  way  or  the  other,  whether  it  be 
from  the  Spirit  of  God  or  no,  by  fuch  effects  on 
the  body  ; and  the  reafon  is,  becaufe  the  feripture 
no  where  gives  us  any  fuch  rule.  We  cannot 
conclude  that  perfons  are  under  the  influence  of 
the  true  Spirit,  becaufe  we  fee  fuch  effeffs  upon 
their  bodies,  becaufe  this  is  not  given  as  a mark 
of  the  true  Spirit : nor,  on  the  other  hand,  have 
we  any  reafon  to  conclude,  from  any  fuch  out- 
ward appearances,  that  perfons  are  not  under  the 
influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  becaufe  there  is 
no  rule  of  feripture  given  us  to  judge  of  fpirits 
by,  that  does  either  exprefly  or  indiredfly  exclude 
fuch  effeffs  on  the  body  : nor  does  reafon  exclude 
them.  * 'Tis  eafdy  accounted  for  from  the  na- 
ture of  divine  arid  eternal  things,  and  the  nature 
of  man,  and  the  laws  of  the  union  between  foul 
and  body,  how  a true  and  proper  fenfe  of  things 
fnould  have  fuch  effedi  on  the  body,  even  thofe 
that  are  of  the  mod  extraordinary  kind  ; fuch  as 
taking  away  the  bodily  flrength,  or  throwing  the 
body  into  great  agonies,  and  extorting  loud  out- 


cries. 


[ 196  ] 

cries.  There  are  none  of  us  but  fuppofe,  that  the 
mifery  of  hell  is  fo  dreadful,  and  eternity  fo  vail, 
that  if  a perfon  fhould  have  a clear  apprehenfion 
of  that  mifery  as  it  is,  it  would  be  mote  than  his 
feeble  frame  could  bear  ; and  efpecially,  if  at  the 
fame  time  he  faw  himfelf  in  great  danger  of  it, 
and  was  utterly  uncertain  whether  he  fhould  be 
delivered  from  it,,  yea,  and  had  no  fecurity  from 
it  one  day  or  hour.  We  need  not  then  wonder, 
that  when  perfons  have  a very  great  fenfe  of  that 
which  is  fo  amazingly  dreadful,  and  alfo  a great 
view  of  their  own  wickednefs  and  God's  anger, 
things  feem  to  them  to  forbode  immediate  de- 
ffrudfion.  We  fee  the  nature  of  man  to  be  fuch, 
that  when  he  is  in  danger  of  fome  calamity  that 
is  very  terrible  to  befall  him,  he  is  ready  upon 
every  occafion  to  think  that  now  it  is  coming  : as 
when  perfons  hearts  are  full  of  fear,  in  time  of 
war,  they  are  ready  to  tremble,  at  the  {halting  of  a 
leaf,  and  to  expefl  the  enemy  every  minute, 
and  to  fay  within  tfcemfelves,  now  I (ball  be  flain. 
If  we  fhould  fuppofe  that  a perfon  faw  himfelf 
hanging  over  a great  pit,  full  of  fierce  and  glow- 
ing flames,  by  a thread  that  he  knew  to  be  very 
weak,  and  not  fufiicient  long  to  bear  bis  weight, 
and  knew  that  multitudes  bad  been  in  fuch  c ir- 
cumftances  before,  and  that  moll  of  them  had  fal- 
len and  perifhed  ; and  faw  nothing  within  reach, 
that  he  could  take  hold  of  to  fave  him  ; what  dif- 
irefs  would  he  be  in  ? How  ready  to  think  that 
now  the  thread  was  breaking  ; now  this  muiute  he 

fhould 


[ 1 97  ] 

fhould  be  fwallowed  up  in  thefe  flames  ? Arid 
would  not  he  be  ready  to  cry  out  in  fuch  circum- 
flances  ? How  much  more  thofe  that  fee  them* 
f'elves  in  fuch  a manner  hanging  over  an  infinite- 
ly more  dreadful  pit,  or  held  over  it  in  the  hand 
of  God,  whom  at  the  fame  time  they  fee  to  be 
exceedingly  provoked  ? No  wonder  they  are  rea- 
dy to  expe£t  every  moment  when  this  angry  God 
will  let  them  drop;  and  no  wonder  they  cry  out 
of  their  mifery ; and  no  wonder  that  the  wrath  of 
God,  when  manifefled  but  a little  to  the  foul,  over- 
bears human  flrength. 

* to.  So  it  may  eafily  be  accounted  for,  how 
a true  fenfe  of  the  glorious  excellency  of  the  Lord 
Jefus  Chrifl,  and  of  his  dying  love,  fhould  be  fuch 
as  to  overcome  the  bodily  flrength.  We  all  own, 
that  ho  man  can  fee  God  and  live  : and  that  it  is 
but  a very  fmall  part  of  that  apprehenfion  of  the 
glory  and  love  of  Chrifl,  which  the  faints  in  hea- 
ven enjoy,  that  our  prefent  frame  can  bear: 
therefore  dt  is  not  at  all  ftrange  that  God  fhould 
fometimes  give  his  faints  fuch  foretafles  of  hea- 
ven, as  to  diminilh  their  bodily  flrength. 

it.  But  fome  objefl  againft  fuch  extraordinary 
appearances,  that  we  have  no  inftances  of  them 
recorded  in  the  New  Teftamerit.  If  this  fhould 
be  allowed,  I fee  no  force  in  the  objefilion,  fince 
neither  reafon,  nor  any  rule  of  feripture  excludes 
fuch  things.  I do  not  know  that  we  have  any  ex- 
prefs  mention  in  the  New  Teftament  of  any  per- 
fons  weeping,  or  groaning,  or  fighing  through 

fear 


[ i98  ] 

fear  of  hell,  or  a fenfe  of  God's  anger ; but  is 
there  any  body  fo  foohfh  as  from  hence  to  argue, 
that  in  whomfoever  thefe  things  appear,  their 
conviftions  are  not  from  the  Spirit  of  God  ? And 
the  reafon  why  we  do  not  argue  thus,  is,  becaufe 
thefe  are  eafily  accounted  for,  from  what  we 
know  of  the  nature  of  man,  and  from  what  the 
fcriptures  inform  us  in  general,  concerning  the 
nature  of  eternal  things,  and  the  nature  of  the 
convi£lions  of  God’s  Spirit ; fo  that  there  is  no 
need  that  any  thing  fhould  be  faid  in  particular 
concerning  thefe  external,  circumftantial  effe£fs. 
But  though  they  are  not  particularly  recorded, 
yet  there  is  great  reafon  to  think,  from  the  ge- 
neral accounts  we  have,  that  it  could  not  be  other- 
wife  : and  that  that  great  out-pouring  of  the  Spi- 
rit which  then  was,  was  not  wholly  without  thofe 
extraordinary  effects  on  perfons  bodies.  The 
jaylor,  in  particular,  feems  to  have  been  an  in- 
ftance  of  that  nature,  when  he,  in  the  utmofl 
diltrefs  and  amazement,  came  trembling,  and  fell 
down  before  Paul  and  Silas  : his  falling  down  at 
that  time  does  not  appear  a defigned  putting  him- 
felf  into  a pofture  of  ^application;  for  he  feems 
not  to  have  faid  any  thing  to  them  then  ; but  he 
firft  brought  them  out,  and  then  he  fays  to  them, 
Sirs,  whatmufl  I do  to  bejaved?  A els  xvi.  29,30. 

12.  Thirdly,  It  is  no  argument  that  an  opera- 
tion on  the  minds  of  a people,  is  not  the  work  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  that  it  occojions  a great  ado, 

and 


[ *99  ] 

and  a great  deal  of  noife  about  religion.  For 
though  true  religion  does  not  delight  in  the  ap- 
plaufe  of  men,  yet  fuch  is  human  nature,  that 
’tis  morally  impoflible  there  fhould  be  a great  and 
general  concern  and  engagednefs  of  mind  a- 
mongfl  a people,  and  yet  but  little  faid  or  done  that 
fhould  be  publicly  obfervable  ; or  that  it  fhould 
not  caufe  a viftble  and  open  commotion  and  al- 
teration amongft  that  people. 

Surely,  it  is  no  argument  that  the  minds  of 
perfons  are  not  under  the  influence  of  God’s 
Spirit,  that  they  are  very  much  moved.  For 
eternal  things  are  fo  great,  and  of  fuch  vaft  con- 
cern, that  there  is  great  abfurdity  in  men’s  being 
but  moderately  moved  by  them.  And  when 
was  there  ever  any  fuch  thing  fince  the  world 
flood,  as  a people  in  general  being  greatly  affefl- 
ed,  in  any  affair  whatfoever,  without  noife  or 
llir  ? The  nature  of  man  will  not  allow  it. 

Accordingly  we  find,  that  when  Chrifi’s  king- 
dom came,  by  that  remarkable  pouring  out  of  the 
Spirit  in  the  apoflle’s  days,  it  occafioned  a great 
flir  and  ado  every  where.  What  a mighty'  oppo- 
sition was  there  in  Jentfalem , on  occafion  of  that 
great  effufion  of  the  Spirit  there  ? And  fo  what 
great  ado  in  Samaria , Antioch,  Ephefus,  Corinth , 
and  other  places.  The  affair  filled  the  world  with 
noife,  and  gave  occafion  to  forne  to  fay  of  the 
apoflles,  that  they  had  turned  the  world  upfide 
down , A6ls  xvii.  6. 


* 13.  Fourthly', 


[ 200  ] 


* ig.  Fourthly,  It  is  no  argument  that  an  ope- 
ration on  the  minds  of  a people,  is  not  the  work 
of  the  Spirit  of  G-od,  that  many  who  art  the  fub- 
jtels  of  it , have  great  vnpreffons  on  their  imagina- 
tions. That  perfons  have  many  impreffions  on 
their  imaginations,  does  not  prove  that  they 
have  nothing  elfe.  It  is  eafy  to  be  accounted 
for,  that  there  fhould  be  much  of  this  nature 
amongfl  a people  where  a great  multitude  of  all 
kinds  of  conftitulions  have  their  minds  engaged 
with  intenfe  thought  and  ftrong  affection  about 
thofe  things  that  are  invifible.  Yea,  it  would 
be  ft  range  if  there  fhould  not.  We  can't  think 
of  things  invifible,  without  a degree  of  imagina- 
tion. I dare  appeal  to  any  man,  whether  he  is 
able  to  fix  his  thoughts  on  Chrift,  or  the  things 
of  another  world,  without  imaginary  ideas  attend- 
ing his  meditations  P And  the  more  engaged  the 
mind  is,  the  more  lively  and  ftrong  will  the  ima- 
ginary idea  ordinarily  be ; especially  when  the 
contemplation  is  attended  with  any  thing  of 
furprize.  As  when  the  view  a perfon  has  is  new, 
and  takes  ftrong  hold  of  the  paftions,  either 
fear  or  joy  ; and  when  tire  change  is  fudden,  from 
a contrary  extreme,  as  from  that  which  was  ex- 
tremely dreadful,  to  that  which  is  extremely  de- 
lightful. And  it  is  no  wonder  that  many  perfons 
do  not  well  diftmguifh  between  that  which  is 
imaginary,  and  that  which  is  intellectual  and  fpi- 
ritual;  and  that  they  are  apt  to  lay  too  much 
weight  on  the  imaginary  part,  and  are  mod  ready 

to 


C 201  ] 

to  fpeak  of  that  in  the  account  they  give  of  their 
^xpcrioric^s,  efpectally  perfons  of  lets  undeifiand« 
ins. 

14.  As  God  has  given  us  fach  a faculty  as  the 
imagination,  and  has  fo  made  us,  that  we  cannot 
think  of  things  fpiritual  and  iriviGBle,  without 
fome  exercife  of  this  faculty,  fo  it  appears  to  me, 
that  this  is  really  helpful  to  the  other  faculties  of 
the  mind,  when  a proper  ufe  is  made  of  it,  though 
often,  when  the  imagination  is  firong,  and  the 
other  faculties  weak,  it  overbears  them.  And  it 
appears  to  me  manifefl  in  many  infiances,  that 
God  hath  made  ufe  of  this  faculty  to  truly  divine 
purpofcs  ; efpecially  in  fome  that  are  more  ig- 
norant : he  feems  to  condefcend  to  their  circum- 
fiances,  and  deal  with  them  as  babes;  as  of  old 
he  infirufted  his  church  while  in  a fiate  of  igno- 
rance and  minority,  by  types  and  outward  repre- 
fentations.  I can  fee  nothing  unreafonable  in 
fuch  a fuppofition.  Let  others  that  have  much 
occafion  to  .deal  with  fouls  in  fpiritual  concerns, 
judge  whether  experience  do  not  confirm  it. 

* 15.  Fifthly,  It  is  no  fign  that  a work  wrought 
on  the  minds  of  people  is  not  from  the  Spirit  of 
God,  that  example  is  made  ufe  of  as  a great, 
means  of  it.  It  is  furely  no  argument  that  an  effeff 
is  not  from  God,  that  means  are  made  ufe  of  in 
producing  it  ; and  it  is  no  more  an  argument, 
that  this  means  is  made  ufe  of,  than  if  it  was  any 
other  means.  It  is  agreeable  to  fcripture  that 
perfons  fhould  be  influenced  by  one  another’s 

good 


[ 202  ] 

good  example  : the  fcripture  direfts  us  to  fet 
good#examples  to  that  end,  Matt.  v.  16.  1 Pet. 

iii.  lV  1 Tim.  iv.  12.  Tit.  ii.  7.  and  alfo  di- 
rects us  to  be  influenced  by  the  good  examples 
that  others  fet,  and  to  fellow  them,  2 Cor.  viii. 
l — 7.  Heb.  vi.  12.  Phil.  iii.  17.  1 Co  r.  iv.  16. 

and  chap.  xi.  1.  2 ThcJ]'.  iii.  9.  1 Thejf.  i.  7.  By 
which  it  appears,  that  example  is  one  of  God’s 
means ; and  certainly  it  is  no  argument  that  a 
work  is  not  the  work  of  God,  that  God’s  own 
means  are  made  ufe  of  to  effect  it. 

16.  And  as  this  is  a Jcnptural  way  of  carrying 
on  God’s  work,  fo  it  is  a reafonable  way.  It  is 
no  argument  that  men  are  not  influenced  by  rea- 
fori,  that  they  are  influenced  by  example.  This 
way  of  perfons  holding  forth  truth  to  one  another, 
has  a tendency  to  enlighten  the  mind,  and  to  con- 
vince reafon.  None  will  deny,  but  that  for  per- 
fons to  fignify  things  one  to  another  by  words, 
may  rationally  tend  to  enlighten  their  minds.  But 
the  fame  thing  may  be  fignified  by  actions,  and 
that  more  fully  and  effectually.  Words  are  of  no 
ufe  but  as  they  convey  our  ideas  to  others ; and 
this,  aflions,  in  feme  cafes,  may  do  more  fully. 
There  is  a language  in  aftions : and  in  fome  cafes, 
much  more  clear  and  convincing  than  in  words. 

It  is  therefore  no  argument  againff  the  good- 
nefs  of  the  effeff,  that  one  affedts  and  flirs  up 
another  ; or  that  perfons  are  greatly  affefled  by 
feeing  others  fo  ; yea,  though  the  impreflion  that 
is  made  upon  them  fhould  be  only  by  feeing  the 

tokens 


[ 203  ] 

^tokens  of  extraordinary  affedlion  in  others,  with- 
out hearing  them  fay  one  word.  There  may  be 
a language  fufficient  in  their  behaviour  only,  to 
convey  their  minds  to  Others,  and  to  fignify  to 
them  the  fenfe  of  things  they  have,  more  than 
can  poflibly  be  done  by  words.  If  a perfon  fhould 
fee  another  under  fome  extreme  bodily  torment, 
he  might  receive  much  more  convincing  evi- 
dence of  what  he  buffered,  by  his  a£Hons  in  his  mi- 
fery,  tha^i  he  could  do  by  the  words  of  a relator. 
In  like  manner,  he  might  receive  a greater  idea  of 
any  thing  that  is  delightful,  from  the  behaviour 
of  one  that  is  in  adtual  enjoyment,  than  by  the 
narration  of  another.  I defue  this  matter  may  be 
examined  by  the  ft  r idle  ft  reafon. 

17.  There  never  yet  was  a great  revival  of  re- 
ligion, but  example  had  a main  hand  in  it.  So  it 
was  in  the  time  of  the  reformation,  and  fo  it  evi- 
dently was  in  that  great  out-pouring  of  the  Spt- 
rit  that  was  in  the  apoftle’s  days,  in  Jerufalem , 
and  Samaria,  and  Ephefus,  and  other  parts  of  the 
world  ; as  will  be  maniieft  to  any  one  that  attends 
to  the  accounts  we  have  in  the  Adis  oj the  apojlles  : 
as  in  thofedays  one  perfon  was  moved  by  ano- 
ther, foone  city  or  town  was  influenced  by  the 
example  of  another,  1 Thejf.  i.  7,  8.  So  that  ye. 
were  examples  to  all  that  believe  in  Macedonia  and 
Athaia,for  from  you  founded  out  the  word  of  the 
Lord , not  only  m Macedonia  and  Achaia , but  alfo 
in  every  place  your  faith  to  God-ward  is  fp'read 
■abroad. 

'Vo L.  XVII.  I 18.  Sixthly, 


[ 204  ] 

1 8.  Sixthly,  It  is  no  fign,  a work  which  k 
wrought  amongR  a people  is  not  from  the  Spirit 
of  God,  that  many  that  Jeem  to  be  the  Jubjecls  of 
it,  are  guilty  of  great  imprudence  and  irregulari- 
ties in  their  condudl.  It  is  no  wonder  at  all,  that 
in  a mixt  multitude  of  all  forts,  wife  and  unwife, 
young  and  old,  who  are  under  flrong  impreflions 
of  mind,  there  are  many  that  behave  imprudent- 
ly. There  are  but  few  that  know  how'to  con- 
du Ei  them  under  veheme  nt  affe&ions  of  any  kind  ; 
to  do  fo  requires  a great  deal  ol  diferetion,  and 
flrength,  and  lleadinefs  of  mind.  A thoufand 
imprudencies  will  not  prove  a work  not  to  be 
the  work  ol  the  Spirit  of  God  ; yea,  if  there  be 
not  only  imprudences,  but  many  things  prevail- 
ing that  are  irregular,  and  really  contrary  to  the 
rules  of  God's  holy  word.  That  it  Ihould  be 
thus  may  be  well  accounted  lor  from  the  exceed- 
ing weaknefs  of  human  nature,  together  with  the 
remaining  darknefs  and  corruption  of  thofe  that 
are  yet  the  fubjefts  of  the  faving  influences  of 
God's  Spirit. 

We  have  a remarkable  inRance  in  the  New 
TeRament,  of  a people  that  partook  largely  of  that 
great  eflufion  of  the  Spirit  among  whom  there  ne- 
verthelefs  abounded  imprudencies  and  great  irre- 
gularities; and  that  is  the  Corinthians.  There  is 
fcarce  any  church  more  celebrated  in  the  New  Tef- 
tament  for  large  meafures  of  the  Spirit  ol  God ; yet 
what  manifold  imprudencies,  vea  finful  irregulari- 
ties, did  they  run  into,  at  the  Lord's  fupper,  in  other 

parts 


[ *05  ] 

parts  of  public  worfhip,  in  contention  about  their 
teachers,  and  even  in  the  esercife  of  their  extraor- 
dinary gifts,  though  they  fpake  and  afied  by  the 
immediate  infpiration  of  his  Spirit. 

19.  Nay,  if  we  fee  great  imprudences,  and  even 
finful  irregularities  in  fome  that  are  employed  as 
great  inftruments,  it  will  not  prove  it  not  to  be 
the  work  of  God.  The  apoftle  Peter  himfelf, 
one  of  the  chief  inftruments  of  fetting  up  the 
Chriftian  church,  when  he  was  aflually  engaged 
in  this  work,  was  guilty  of  a great  and  finful 
error  in  his  conduft  : of  which  the  apoftle  Paul 
fpeaks,  Gal.  ii.  11,  12,  13.  Eat  when  Peter  was 
come  to  Antioch , I withjlood  him  to  the face , becaufe 
he  was  to  be  blamed.  For  before  that  certain  came 

from  James , he  did  eat  with  the  Gentiles , but 
when  they  were  come , he  withdrew,  and  feparated 
himfelf,  fearing  them  that  zvere  of  the  circumcifion  ; 
and  the  other  Jews  dijfembled  likewife  with  him  ; 
infomuch  that  Barnabas  a/fo  was  carried  away  with 
their  djjimulation.  Now  if  the  great  pillar  of  the 
Chriflian  church  was  guilty  of  fuch  an  irregularity 
is  it  any  wonder  if  other  leffer  inftruments  ihould 
be  guilty  of  many  irregularities  ? 

20.  And  here  in  particular,  it  is  no  evidence 
that  a work  is  not  the  work  of  God,  if  many  that 
are  the  fubjefls  of  it,  or  inftruments  to  carry  it 
on,  are  guilty  of  too  great  a forwardnefs  to  cenfure 
others  as  unconverted , either  not  duly  apprehend- 
ing the  latitude  the  Spirit  of  God  ufes  in  the  me- 
thods of  his  operations,  or' for  want  of  making 

I 2 ' due 


[ 206  ] 

due  allowance  for  that  infirmity  and  corruptioa 
that  may  be  left  in  the  hearts  of  true  believers. 

It  is  obfervable,  there  never  was  a time  of  great 
reformation,  a fpirit  of  zeal  in  the  church  of  God, 
but  it  has  been  attended  with  irregularity,  run- 
ning out  fome  way  or  other  into  an  undue Jeve- 
rity.  Thus  in  the  apoflles  days,  a great  deal  of 
zeal  was  fpent  about  unclean  meats,  both  parties 
condemning  one  another,  while  St.  Paul  had 
charity  for  both  : He  that  eats,  fays  he,  to  the 
Lord  he  eats,  and giveth  God  thanks-,  and  he  that 
eateth  not,  to  the  Lord  he  eateth  not,  and  giveth 
God  thanks.  So  in  the  church  of  Corinth,  they 
had  got  into  a way  of  extolling  fome  minifters, 
and  cenfuring  others,  and  were  puffed  up  for  one 
againfl  another;  but  yet  thefe  things  \rere  no 
fen  that  the  work  then  carried  on,  was  not  the 
work  of  God.  After  this,  when  religon  was 
flill  flourifhing  in  the  world,  and  a fpirit  of 
eminent  holinefs  prevailed,  the  zeal  of  Chriftians 
run  out  into  a very  improper  feverity,  in  the 
exercife  of  church  difcipline  towards  delin- 
quents. And  in  that  glorious  revival  of  religion, 
in  the  time  of  the  reformation,  zeal  in  many  in- 
flances  appeared  in  a very  improper  feverity,  and 
even  in  a degree  of  perfecution  ; yea,  in  fome 
of  the  mod  eminent  reformers;  as  in  the  great 
Calvin  in  particular  : and  many  were  guilty  of 
feverely  cenfuring  others  that  differed  from  them 
in  opinion. 


21.  Seventhlv. 


[ 207  ] 

21.  Seventhly,  nor  are  many  errors  in  judg- 
ment, and fame  delufions  of  Satan  intermixed  with 
the  work,  any  argument  that  the  work  in  general 
is  not  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  If  many 
delufions  of  Satan  appear  at  the  fame  time  that  a 
great  religious  concern  prevails,  it  is  not  an  argu- 
ment that  the  work  in  general  is  not  the  work  of 
God,  any  more  than  it  was  an  argument  in  Egypt, 
that  there  were  no  true  miracles  wrought  there 
by  the  hand  of  God,  becauf c fannes  and  Jamhres 
wrought  falfe  miracles  at  the  fame  time  by  the 
hand  of  the  devil.  Yea,  the  fame  perfons  may 
be  the  fubjefls  of  much  of  the  influences  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  vet  in  fome  things  be  led 
away  by  the  delufion  of  the  devil.  And  this  is  no 
more  a paradox  than  many  other  things  that  are 
true,  of  real  believers,  in  the  prefent  hate,  where 
grace  dwells  with  fo  much  corruption  in  the  fame 
heart.  Many  good  men  have  undoubtedly,  in  this 
and  other  ages,  expofed  themfelves  to  grievous 
delufions,  by  an  aptnefs  to  lay  too  much  weight 
on  impulfes  and  impreflions,  as  if  they  were  im- 

r mediate  revelations  from  God,  to  direft  them 
where  to  go,  and  what  to  do. 

22.  Eighthly,  if  fome  fall  away  into  gr ofs  er- 
rors, or  fcandalous  pradlices,  it  is  no  argument 
that  the  work  in  general  is  not  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  That  there  are  fome  counterfeits 
is  no  argument  that  nothing  is  true  ; fuch  things 
are  always  expe&ed  in  a time  of  reformation.  If 
we  look  into  church  hiftory,  we  fliall  find  no  in- 

I 3 fiance 


[ 208  J 

fiance  of  a great  revival  of  religion,  but  what  bias 
been  attended  with  many  fuch  things:  inftances- 
of  this  nature  m the  apoflles  days  were  inumera- 
ble,  both  of  thofe  that  fell  awav  into  grofs  here- 
fles,  and  alfo  vile  praftices.  And  they  were  not 
only  private  Chriflians,  but  teachers  and  officers, 
and  eminent  perfons  in  the  Chriftian  church  ; 
and  fome  whom  God  had  endowed  with  miracu- 
lous gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghofl. 

An  inffance  of  this  nature  was  Nicolas,  one  of 
the  feven  deacons,  who  was  locked  upon  by  the 
Chriflians  in  Jtrufahm,  as  a man  full  oftbe  Holy 
Ghofl,  and  was  chofen  out  of  the  multitude  of 
Chriflians  to  that  office,  for  thatreafon;  as  you 
may  fee  in  Ads  vi.  3,  5.  yet  he  afterwards  fell 
away,  and  became  the  head  of  a fe£l  of  vile  here- 
tics, of  grofs  prablices,  called  from  his  name  the 
fe£l  of  Nicolaitans,  Rev.  ii.  6,  and  15. 

So  in  the  time  of  the  reformation  from  popery, 
how  great  was  the  number  of  thofe  that  for  a 
while  joined  with  the  reformers,  that  fell  away 
into  the  grofleft  and  moft  abfurd  errors  and  abo- 
minable praflices  ? 

And  it  is  particularly  obfervable,  that  in  times 
of  great  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit  the  number  of 
thofe  that  for  a while  partook  in  it,  have  fallen 
off  into  extravagant  errors,  boafting  of  high  de- 
grees of  fpirituality,  and  condemning  others  as 
carnal.  Thus  it  was  with  the  Gnofhcs  in  the  a- 
poftles  times  ; and  thus  it  was  with  the  feveral 
febls  of  Aaabaptifis  in  the  time  of-the  reformation. 

And 


[ 209  J 

And  fome  of  the  leaders  of  thofe  wild  enthufiafts, 
had  been  for  a while  highly  efieemed  by  the  firft 
reformers. 

23.  Ninthly,  It  is  no  argument  that  a work  is 
not  from  the  Spirit  of  Cod,  that  is  it  promoted  by 
minijlers  injijling  very  much  on  the  terrors  oj  God's 
holy  love,  and  that  u ith  a great  deal  oj  Pathos  and 
earnejlnefs.  If  there  be  really  a hell  of  never-end- 
ing torments,  which  multitudes  are  in  great  dan- 
ger of,  and  which  the  bigger  part  of  men  in  Chril- 
tian  countries  do  aftually  from  generation  to  gene- 
ration fall  into,  for  want  of  a fenfe  of  the  terrible- 
nefs  of  it,  and  fo  for  want  of  taking  due  care  to 
avoid  it ; then  why  is  it  not  proper  for  thofe  that 
have  the  care  of  fouls  to  take  great  pains  to  make 
men  fenfible  of  it  ? Why  fhould  not  they  be  told 
as  much  of  the  truth  as  can  be  ? If  I am  in  danger 
of  going  to  hell,  I fhould  be  glad  to  know  as  much 
as  poflible  I can  of  the  dreadfulnefs  of  it  ; if  I 
am  very  prone  to  negleff  due  care  to  avoid  it,  he 
does  me  the  bell  kindnefs,  that  does  moft  to  re- 
prefent  to  me  the  truth  of  the  cafe,  that  fets  forth 
my  mifery  and  danger  in  the  livelieft  manner. 

I appeal  to  every  one  here,  whether  this  is 
not  the  very  courfe  they  would  take  in  cafe  of 
any  great  temporal  calamity  ? If  any  of  you  that 
are  heads  of  families  faw  one  of  your  children  in 
an  houfe  that  was  all  on  fire,  that  feemed  infen* 
fible  of  its  danger,  and  neglefled  to  efcape,  after 
you  had  often  called  to  it,  would  you  go  on  to 
I 4 fpeak 


[ 210  ] 

fpeak  in  a cold  and  indifferent  manner?  Would' 
not  you  cry  aloud,  and  reprefent  the  danger  it 
was  in,  and  the  folly  in  delaying  it,  in  the  mod 
lively  manner  you  was  capable  of?  If  you  fhould 
continue  to  fpeak  to  it  only  in  a cold  manner, 
as  you  are  wont  to  do  in  ordinary  converfation 
about  indifferent  matters,  would  not  thofe  about 
you  begin  to  think  you  were  bereft  of  reafon  ? It 
is  not  the  way  of  mankind,  in  temporal  affairs  of 
great  moment,  that  require  earned:  heed  and 
great  hafte,  to  fpeak  to  others  of  their  danger, 
and  warn  them  but  a little;  and  when  they  do  it 
at  all,  in  a cold  indifferent  manner.  If  then  we 
that  have  the  care  of  fouls  knew  what  hell  was, 
had  feen  the  Hate  of  the  damned,  or  by  any 
other  means  became  fenfible  how  dreadful  their 
cafe  was;  and  at  the  fame  time  knew  that  the 
bigger  part  of  men  went  thither,  and  faw  our 
hearers  in  imminent  danger,  and  yet  infenfible 
of  their  danger,  it  would  be  impoffible  for  us  to 
avoid  earneftly  fetting  before  them  the  dreadful- 
nefs  of  that  mifery  they  were  in  danger  of,  and 
warning  them  to  fly  from  it. 

24.  When  minifters  preach  of  hell,  and  warn 
Tinners  to  avoid  it  in  a cold  manner,  though  they' 
may  fay,  in  words,  that  it  is  infinitely  terrible; 
yet  they  contradidf  tbemfelves  ; for  atlions,  as  I 
obferved  before,  have  a language  as  well  as 
words.  And  at  the  fame  time  that  fuch  a 
preacher’s  words  reprefent  the  finners  Hate  as 
infinitely  dreadful,  if  his  manner  of  fpeaking 

contradidi 


[ 211  ] 

contradift  it,  he  defeats  his  own  purpofe,  for  the 
lancniacre  of  his  ablions  is  more  effectual  than  the 

iD  O 

bare  fignitication  of  his  words. 

Not  that  I think  the  law  only  fhould  be 
preached  : minifters  may  preach  other  things 
too  little.  The  gofpel  is  to  be  preached  as  well 
as  the  law,  and  the  law  is  to  be  preached  only  to 
make  way  for  the  gofpel.  So  that  a minifter 
ought  not  to  infill  fo  much  on  the  tenors  of  the 
law,  as  to  negledl  to  preach  the  gofpel.  But 
yet  the  law  is  much  to  be  infilled  on,  and  the 
preaching  of  the  gofpel  is  in  vain  without  it. 

Indeed  fome  talk  of  it  as  an  unreafonable 
thing  to  frighten  perfons  to  heaven.  But  I think 
it  is  real'onable  to  endeavour  to  fright  perfons 
from  hell  that  Hand  upon  the  brink  of  it,  and 
are  juft  ready  to  fall  into  it,  and  are  fenfelefs  of 
their  danger.  It  is  a reafonable  thing  to- fright 
a perfon  out  of  a houfe  on  fire.  The  word 
fright  is  commonly  ufed  for  fudden,  caufelefs 
fear,  or  groundlefs  furprize  ; but  furely  a juft 
fear,  though  it  be  very  great,  is  not  to  be  fpofcen 
againft  under  any  fuch  name. 

25.  Having  thus  fhown  what  are  not  evi- 
dences that  a work  is  not  a work  of  the  Spirit, 

I proceed  in  the  fecond place,  to  Ihew  what 
are  the  fure,  diftinguifhing,  fcripture  marks  of  a. 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  by  which  we  may 
judge  of  any  operation  we  find  in- ourfelves,  or 
fee  among  a people. 

And  in  this  I fihall  confine  myfelf  wholly  to 
I 5 thole 


[ , 2z-e  J: 

ihofe  marks  which  are  given  by  the  apofile  in 
this  chapter,  where  this  matter  is  particularly 
handled,  and  more  fully  than  any  where  elfe  in 
the  bible.  And  in/peaking  to  thefe  marks,  I 
fhall  take  them  in  the  order  in  which  I find  them, 
in  the  chapter. 

Firfi,  when  that  Spirit  which  is  at  work  among 
a people  is  obferved  to  raife  their  elteem  of  that 
Jefus  who  was  born  of  the  virgin,  and  to  con- 
firm their  minds  in  the  truth  of  what  the  gofpel 
declares,  of  his  being  the  Son  of  God,  and  the 
Saviour  of  men  ; it  is  a fure  fign  that  that  Spirit 
is  of  God.  This  fign  the  apofile  gives  us  in  the 
P.d  and  3d  verfes.  Hereby  know  ye  the  Spirit  of 
God ; every  Spirit  that  confejfeth  that  Jefus  Chrifi 
is  come  in  the  JleJJi,  is  oj  God ; and  every  Spirit 
that  confejfeth  not  that  Jefus  Chrifi  is  come  m tae 
fefi,  is  not  of  God.  This  implies  a confeffing 
not  only  that  there  was  fuclt  a perfon  who  did 
and  fuffered  thofe  things  that  are  recorded  of 
him,  but  that  that  perfon  was  Chrift,  i.  e.  the 
Son  of  God,  the  anointed  of  God  to  be  Lord 
and  Saviour.  That  thus  much  is  implied,  is 
confirmed  by  the  15th  verfe,  where  the  apolhe 
is  fiill  on  the  fame  fubjeft  of  figns  of  the  true 
Spirit  : Whofocver  fiall  confcfs  that  Jefus  is  the 
Son  o)  God,  God  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he  in  Gcd. 

So  that  if  the  Spirit  which  is  at  work  among 
a people  is  plainly  obferved  to  work  alter  that 
manner,  as  to  convince  them  of  Chrifi,  and  lead 
them  to  Chrifi  ; to  confirm  their  minds  in  the 

belief 


[ 21 3 ] 

belief  that  he  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  was  fent  of 
God  to  fave  finners,  and  that  he  is  the  only 
Saviour,  and  that  they  hand  in  great  need  of 
him  ; and  to  beget  in  them  higher  thoughts  of 
him  than  they  ufed  to  have,  and  to  incline  their 
affefHons  more  to  him  ; it  is  a fure  fign  that  it 
is  the  true  and  right  Spirit. 

2 6.  Secondly,  When  the  Spirit  that  is  at 
work  operates  again  ft.  the  interejt  oj  Satan’s  king- 
ilom,  which  lies  in  efiablijhing  Jin,  and  cheriflung 
mens  worldly  lujls  ; this  is  a fure  fign  that  it  is  a 
true,  and  not  a falfe  Spirit.  This  is  given  in 
the  4th  and  5th  verfes.  Ye  are  oj  God,  little 
children,  and  have  overcome  them  ; becaufe  greater 
is  he  that  is  in  you,  than  he  that  is  in  the  world. 
They  are  of  the  world , theref  ore  Jpeak  they  of  the 
world,  and  the  world  heareth  them.  Here  it  is 
evident  the  apoftle  is  fiill  comparing  tfiofe  that 
are  influenced  by  the  two  oppofite  kind  of  fpi- 
rits,  the  true  and  the  falfe,  and  fhewing  the  dif- 
ference;. the  one  are  of  God,  and  overcome 
the  fpirit  of  the  world  ; the  other  are  of  the 
world,  and  fpeak  and  favour  the  things  of  the 
world.  The  fpirit  of  the  devil  is  here  called, 
he  that  is  in  the  world.  Chrift  fays,  My  kingdom 
is  not  of  this  world.  But  it  is  otherwife  wnh  Sa- 
tan’s kingdom  ; he  is  the' god  of  this  world. 

So  that  we  may  fafely  determine,  the  Spirit 
which  works  after  luch  a manner,  as  to  leffen- 
mens  efleem  of  the  pleafures,  profits,  and  ho- 
nours of  the  world  ; to  take  off  their  hearts  from 
L.  6 the  fie 


[ 2J4  ] 

ihefe  things;  and  to  engage  them  in  a deep  con- 
cern  about  eternal  bappinefs,  which  puts  them 
upon  earneft  feeking  the  kingdom  of  God  and 
his  righteoufnefs,  and  convinces  them  of  the 
dreadfulnefs  of  fin  ; I fay,  the  Spirit  that  ope- 
rates after  fuch  a manner,  mufl  needs  be  the 
Spirit  of  God. 

* It  is  not  to  be  fuppofed  that  Satan  would 
convince  men  of  fin,  and  awaken  the  confcience. 
It  can  no  way  ferve  his  end,  to  make  the  can- 
dle of  the  Lord  fhine  the  brighter,  and  to  open 
the  mouth  of  that  vicegerent  of  God  in  the  foul. 
Would  the  devil  when  he  is  about  to  eftabli fh 
men  in  fin,  waken  the  confcience  to  fee  the 
dreadfulnefs  of  it,  make  them  fenftble  of  their 
nailery  by  reafon  of  their  part  fins,  and  the  great 
need  of  deliverance  from  the  guilt  of  them,  and 
more  careful,  inquifitive,  and  watchful  to  di-f- 
cern  what  is  finful,  and  to  avoid  future  fins;  and 
fo  more  afraid  of  the  devil’s  temptations,  and 
careful  to  guard  againft  them?  What  do  thofe 
men  do  with  their  reafon,  who  fuppofe  that 
the  Spirit  that  operates  thus,  is  the  fpirit  of  the 
devil  ? 

27.  Poflibly  fome  may  fay,  that  the  devil  may 
awaken  mens  confidences  to  deceive  them,  and 
'make  them  think  they  are  of  God  while  they 
are  indeed  in  the  gall  of  bitternefs.  But  it  may 
be  replied,  that  the  man  that  has  an  awakened 
confcience  is  the  leal!  likely  to  be  deceived  of 
any  man  in  the  world  : it  is  the  drowfy,  infenfi- 

ble. 


[ zts  ] 

ble,  ftupid  confidence,.  that  is  moll  eafily  blind- 
ed. The  more  fenlible  confcience  is  in  a dif- 
eafed  foul,  the  lefs  eafily  is  it  quieted  without  a 
real  healing.  The  more  fenfible  confcience  is 
made  of  the  clreadfulnefs  of  fihr  and  of  the  great- 
nefs  of' a man’s  guilt,  the  lefs  likely  is  he  to  reft 
in  his  own  righteoufnefs,  or  to  be  pacified  with 
fhadows.  A man  that  has  been  thoroughly  terri- 
fied with  a fenfe  of  his  danger  and  mifery,  is 
not  eafily  made  to  believe,  himfelf  fafe,  without 
good  grounds. 

To  awaken  confcience,  and  to  convince  of 
the  evil  of  fin,  cannot  then  tend  to  eftablifh  fm, 
but  ceitainly  tends  to  make  way  for  fm  and  Sa- 
tan’s being  caft  out.  .therefore  this  is  a good 
argument  that  the  Spirit  that  operates  thus  cannot 
be  the  fpirit  of  the.devil  ; if  Chrift  knew  how  to 
argue,  who  told  the  Pharifees , that  fuppofed  the 
Spirit  he  wrought  by  was  the  fpirit  of  the  devil, 
that  Satan  would  not  caft  out  Satan , Matt.  xri. 
2 5.  a6- 

And  thereiore,  if  we  fee  perfons  made  fenfibte 
of  the  dreadful  nature  of  fin,  and  of  the  difplea- 
fure  of  God  againft  it,  earneflly  concerned  for 
their  eternal  falvation,  fenfible  of  their  need  of 
God’s  help,  and  engaged  to  feek  it  in  the  ufe  of 
the  means  that  God  has  appointed,  we  may  cer- 
tainly conclude  this  is  from  the  Spirit  of  God; 
whatever  effeffs  this  concern  has  on  their  bo- 
dies, though  it  caufes  them  to  cry  out  aloud,  or 
to  fhriek,  or  to  faint,  or  though  it  throws  them 

into 


[ £>6  3 

into  convulfions,  or  whatever  other  way  the 
blood  and  fpirits  are  moved. 

The  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  yet  more 
abundantly  manifefled,  if  per  foils  have  their 
hearts  drawn  off  from  the  world,  and  weaned 
from  the  objefts  of  their  worldly  luffs,  and  taken 
off  from  worldly  purfuits  by  the  fenfe  they  have 
of  the  excellency  of  divine  things,  and  the  affec- 
tion they  have  to  thofe  fpiritual  enjoyments  of 
another  world  that  are  promifed  in  the  gofpel. 

28.  Thirdly,  That  Spirit  which  operates  in 
fuch  a manner,  as  to  caufe  in  men  a greater  re- 
gard to  the  holy  fcriptures,  and  ejlablijhes  them 
more  in  their  truth  and  divinity , is  certainly  the 
Spirit  of  God.  This  rule  the  apoflle  gives  us  in 
the  6th  verfe;  We  are  of  God , he  that knoweth 
God  heareth  us : he  that  is  not  of  God,  heareth  not 
us  : hereby  know  we  the  Spirit  of  truth , and  the 
fpirit  of  error.  We  are  of  God , that  is,  “ We, 
“ the  apoffles,  are  fent  forth  of  God,  and  ap- 
“ pointed  of  him,  to  teach  the  world,  and  to  deli— 
41  ver  that  docfrine,  thofe  inflruffions  that  are 
“ to  be  their  rule  ; therefore  he  that  knoweth 
“ God,  heareth  us,  & c.:' The  apoftle’s  argu- 

ment in  the  verfe  equally  reaches  all  that  in  the 
fame  fen teare  of  God,  that  is,  all  thofe  whom 
God  appointed  to  deliver  to  his  church  its  rule 
of  faith  and  praftice  ; all  the  prophets  and  apof- 
tles,  whofe  doctrine  God  had  made  the  founda- 
tion on  which  Ire  has  built  his  church.  The 
devil  never  would  go  about  to  beget  in  per  Tons- 

a regard 


[ 217  ] 

a regard  to  that  divine  word,  which  God  hath 
given  to  be  the  great  and  handing  rule  for  the 
direction  of  his  church  in  all  ages.  Would  the 
fpirit  of  error,  in  order  to  deceive  men,  be^et 
in  them  an  high  opinion  of  the  infallible  rule, 
and  incline  them  to  think  much  of  it,  and  be 
very  converfant  wiih  it?  Would  the  prince  of 
darknefs,  in  order  to  promote  his  kingdom  of 
darknefs,  lead  men  to  the  fun?  The  devil  has 
ever  fliown  a mortal  hatred  towards  that  holy- 
book,  the  bible  : he  has  done  all  that  has  been 
in  his  power  to  extinguifh  that  light,  and  draw- 
men  off  from  it  : he  knows  that  it  is  that  light  by 
which  his  kingdom  of  darknefs  is  to  be  over- 
thrown. He  has  had  for  many  ages  experience 
of  its  power  to  defeat  his  purpofes,  and  baffle 
his  defigtis  ; it  is  his  conftant  plague  ; it  is  the 
main  weapon  which  Michael  ufes  in  his  war  with 
him  ; it  is  the  fword  of  the  Spirit  that  pierces 
him  and  conquers  him  it  is  that  great,  and fore 
and jlrongtfvord  with  which  God  punijhes  Le- 
viathan, that  crooked  ferpent ; it  is  that  fharp 
fword  that  we  read  of,  Rev.  xix.  15.  that  pro- 
ceeds out  of  the  mouth  of  him  that  fat  upon  the 
horfe,  with  which  he  fmites  his  enemies.  Every 
text  is  a dart  to  torment  the  old  ferpent : he  has 
felt  the  flinging  finart  thoufands  of  times  ; there- 
fore he  is  enraged  againft  the  bible,  and  hates 
every  word  in  it ; and  therefore  we  may  be  fure 
that  he  never  will  go  about  to  raife  perfons 
efleern  of  it,  or  affedlion  to  it. 


29.  fourthly, 


[ 218  J 

2 9'.  Fourthly,  Another  rule  to  judge  of  fpirits, 
maybe  drawn  from  thofe  oppofite  compellations 
given  to  the  two  oppofite  fpirits,  in  the  laft 
words  of  the  6th  verfe,  the  J 'pint  of  truth  ; and 
fpirit  of  error.  Thefe  words  exhibit  the  two 
oppofite  charadlers  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and 
other  fpirits.  And  therefore,  if  we  fee  that  a 
fpirit  operates  as  zfpii  it  of  truth,  leading  perfons 
to  truth , convincing  them  of  thofe  things  that 
are  true,  we  may  fafely  determine  it  is  a right  and 
true  fpirit.  As  for  inflance,  if  we  obferve  that 
the  fpirit  which  is  at  work,  makes  men  more 
fenfible  than  they  ufed  to  be,  that  there  is  a 
God  and  that  he  is  a great  God,  and  a juft  God  : 
and  makes  them  more  to  realize  it,  that  they  muff 
die,  that  life  is  fhort  and  very  uncertain  ; that 
there  is  another  world  : that  they  have  immor- 
tal fouls,  and  that  they  mull  give  account  of 
themfelves  to  God  ; if  it  convinces  them  that 
they  are  exceeding  finful  by  nature  and  pra&ice; 
and  that  they  aie  helplefs  in  themfelves  : and 
confirms  them  in  other  things  that  are  agreeable 
to  found  doftrine  : the  fpirit  that  works  thus, 
operates  as  a fpirit  of  truth  : he  reprefents  things 
as  they  are  indeed  : he  brings  men  to  the  light; 
and  we  may  conclude,  that  it  is  not  the  fpirit  of 
darknefs  that  doth  thus  df cover  an d make  manifejl 
the  truth. 

30.  Fifthly,  If  the  fpirit  that  is  at  work  among 
a people  operates  as  a fpirit  of  love  to  God  and 
man,  it  is  a fare  fign  that  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God, 

This 


[ 219  ] 

This  fign  the  apoftle  infifts  upon  from  the  6tb 
verfe  to  the  end  of  the  chapter  : Beloved,  let  us 
love  one  another  ; for  love  is  of  God,  and  every  on e 
that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God  : he 
that  loveth  not,  knoweth'not  God,  for  God  is  love, 
&.c.  Here  it  is  evident,  that  the  apoffle  is  ffill 
comparing  thofe  two  forts  of  perfons  that  are 
influenced  by  the  oppofite  kinds  of  fpirits  ; and 
mentions  love  as  a mark  by  which  we  may  know 
who  has  the  true  fpirit  , but  this  is  efpccially  evi- 
dent by  the  12th  and  13th  verfes,  If  we  love  one 
another,  God  dwelleth  in  us,  and  his  love  is  per - 
jaded  in  us  ; hereby  know  we  that  we  dwell  in  him 
and  he  in  as,  becaufe  he  hath  given  us  of  his  Spirit » 
In  thefe  verfes  love  is  fpoken  of  as  if  it  were  that 
wherein  the  very  nature  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ccn- 
fiffed  : or  as  if  divine  love  dwelling  in  us,  and  the 
Spirit  of  God  dwelling  in  11s,  were  the  fame 
thing;  as  it  is  alfo  in  the  two  laft  verfes  of  the 
foregoing  chapter,  and  in  the  16th  verfe  of 
this.  Therefore  this  lafl  mark  he  feems  to  fpeak 
of  as  the  moft  eminent  ; and  fo  infifls  much 
more  largely  upon  it  than  upon  all  the  reft  ? 

Therefore,  when  the  fpirit  that  is  at  work 
amongft  a people,  works  in  them  a delightful 
fenfe  of  the  excellency  of  Jefus  Chrift  ; reprefent- 
ing  him  as  the  chief  among  ten  thoufand,  altoge- 
ther lovely,  and  makes  him  precious  to  the 
foul  ; winning  and  drawing  the  heart  with  the 
wonderful,  free  love  of  God  in  giving  his  only 
begotten  Son  to  die  for  us,  and  the  wonderful  dy- 
ing 


[ 22"C  ] 

mg  love  of  Chrift  to  us  who  had  no  love  to  him,. 
but  were  his  enemies,  as  ver.  g,  10.  In  this 
was  manifefled  the  love  of  God  towards  us,  becauft 
that  God.  fait  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world, 
that  we  might  live  through  him.  Herein  is  love  ; 
not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and 
Jent  his  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  fins.  And 
ver.  16.  And  we  have  known,  and  believed  the 
love  that  God  hath  to  us.  And  ver.  19.  We  love 
him,  becaufe  he  fir  ft  loved  us : when  the  Spirit  ex- 
cites to  love  on  thefe  motives,  and  makes  the 
foul  to  long  after  God  and  Chrift,  and  to  live  fo 
as  to  pleafe  and  honour  them  ; and  alfo  quells 
contentions  among  men,  and  gives  a fpirit  of 
peace  and  good-will,  excites  to  a£h  of  outward 
kindnefs,  and  earned  defires  of  the  falvation  of 
other  fouls  ; and  caufes  a delight  in  thofe  that 
appear  as  the  children  of  God,  and  followers  of 
Chrift : I fay,  when  a fpirit  operates  after  this 
manner,  there  is  the  higheft  evidence  of  a true 
and  divine  Spirit. 

31.  Indeed  there  is  a counterfeit  of  love,  that 
often  appears  amongft  thofe  that  are  led  by  a fpi- 
rit of  delufion.  But  there  isfufiicient  faid  in  this 
paffage  of  truly  Chriftian  love,  to  diftinguifh  it 
from  all  fuch  counterfeits.  It  is  love  that  arifes 
from  an  apprehenfion  of  the  wonderful  riches  of 
God’s  love  to  us  in  Chrift  Jefus ; attended  with 
a fenfe  of  our  unworthinefs,  and  a renunciation 
of  all  our  own  excellency  and  righteoufnefs.  See 
ver.  9,  10,  xi,  and  19.  The  fureft  character 

of 


[ 2*1-  ] 

of  true  divine  love,  is,  that  it  is  an  humble  love, 
l Cor,  xiii.  4.  Charity  vannteth  not  itfelf , is  not 
pufftd  up.  When  therefore  we  fee  love  in  per- 
fons  attended  with  a fenfe  of  their  own  littlenefs, 
vilenefs,  weaknefs,  and  utter  infufficiency  ; and 
fo  with  felf-renunciation,  and  poverty  of  fpirit, 
there  are  the  manifeft  tokens  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  : he  that  thus  dwells  in  love,  dwells  in  God, 
and  God  in  him. 

Love  and  humility  are  two  things  the  moll  con- 
trary to  the  fpirit  of  the  devil  of  any  thing  in  the 
world  ; for  the  character  of  that  evil  fpirit,  above 
all  things,  confids  in  pride  and  malice. 

32.  Thus  I have  fpoken  particularly  to  the  fe» 
veral  marks  the  apodle  gives  of  a work  of  the 
h ue  Spirit.  There  are  fome  of  tbefe  things  the 
devil  would  not  do  if  he  could  : thus,  he  would 
not  awaken  the  confcience,  and  make  men  fenft- 
ble  of  their  miferable  date  by  nature,  by  reaforv 
of  fin,  and  of  their  great  need  of  a Saviour.  And 
he  would  not  confirm  men  in  a belief  that  Jefus 
is  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  Saviour  of  finners,  or 
raife  their  value  and  edeem  of  him  ; he  would 
not  beget  in  mens  minds  an  opinion  of  the  ne- 
ceffity,  ufefulnefs  and  truth  of  the  holy  fcriptures, 
or  incline  them  to  hearken  to  them,  or  make 
much  ufe  of  them  ; nor  would  he  go  about  to 
£hew  men  the  truth,  in  things  that  concern  their 
fouls ; to  undeceive  them,  and  lead  them  out 
of  darknefs  into  light,  and  give  them  a view  of 
things  as  they  are  indeed.  And  there  are  other 

things, 


[ 222  ] 

filings  that  the  devil  neither  can  nor  will  do  : her 
will  not  give  men  a fpirit  of  divine  love  or  Chrif- 
tian  humility;  nor  could  he  if  he  would:  thefe 
things  are  as  contrary  as  poffible  to  his  nature. 
And  therefore,  when  there  is  an  extraordinary 
influence  on  the  minds  of  a people,  if  thefe 
things  are  found  in  it,  we  are  fafe  in  determin- 
ing that  it  is  the  work  of  God,  whatever  other 
circumflances  it  may  be  attended  with,  whatever 
inftruments  are  employed,  whatever  methods  are 
taken  to  promote  it,  whatever  means  a fovereign 
God,  whofejudgments  are  a great  deep,  makes 
ufe  of  to  carry  it  on,  and  whatever  motions  there 
may  be  of  the  animal  fpirits,  whatever  effects 
may  be  wrought  on  mens  bodies.  Thefe  marks, 
that  the  apoflle  has  given,  are  fufficient  to  Hand 
alone,  and  fupport  themfelves  ; and  wherever 
they  are,  they  plainly  fhew  the  finger  of  God,. 
and  are  fufficient  to  outweigh  a thoufand  fuch 
objections  as  many  make  from  oddities,  irregu- 
larities, and  errors  in  conduft,  and  the  delufions 
and  fcandals  of  fome  that  were'believers. 

33.  But  here  fome  may  obje£t  what  the  apof- 
tle  Paul  fays,  in  the  2 Cor.  xi.  13,  14.  Such  are 
falfe  apofles,  deceitful  workers,  transforming  them- 
felves into  the  apojlles  of  Ghrifl  ; and  no  marvel , 
for  Satan  hinfelfis  transformed  into  an  angel  of 
light. 

I anfwer,  it  is  principally  with  a view  to  them, 
that  the  apoflle  gives  thefe  marks  ; as  appears 
by  the  words  of  the  text,  Believe  not  every  fpirit, 

hut 


[ 223  ] 

hit  try  the /pints,  whether  they  are  of  God.  And 
this  is  the  reafon  he  gives,  Becavfe  many  jalfe 
prophets  are  gone  cut  into  the  world : Thofe 
falje  prophets  the  apoi'ile  John  fpeaks  of,  are 
doubtlefs  the  fame  fort  of  men  with  thofe  falfe 
prophets  and  deceitful  workers  the  apofHe  Paul 
fpeaks  of,  in  whom  the  devil  was  transformed 
into  an  angel  oj  light ; and  therefore  we  may  be 
fure  thefe  marks  the  apofile  gives,  are  efpeciaily 
adapted  to  diliinguifh  between  the  true  Spirit, 
and  the  devil  transformed  into  an  angel  of  light, 
becaufe  they  are  given  for  that  end.  That  is  the 
apoflle’s  declared  purpofe,  to  give  marks  by  which 
the  true  Spirit  may  be  didinguifhed  from  that 
fort  of  counterfeits. 

34.  Having  thus  done  what  I at  firft  pro- 
pofed,  in  confidering  what  are  the  certain,  dif- 
tinguifhing  marks  by  which  we  may  fafely  pro- 
ceed in  judging  of  any  work  that  falls  under 
our  obfervation,  whether  it  be  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  or  no,  I now  proceed  to  the  ap- 
plication. 

I.  From  what  has  been  fa  id,  I will  venture  to 
draw  this  inference,  viz.  That  that  extraordinary 
influence  that  has  lately  appeared  on  the  minds  of 
the  people  abroad  in  this  land,  caufing  in  them  an 
uncommon  concern  about  the  things  of  religion,  is 
undoubtedly,  in  the  general,  from  the  Spirit  of 
God.  1 here  are  but  two  things  that  need  to  be 
known  in  order  to  fuch  a work’s  being  judged  of. 


viz. 


[ 224  ] 

viz.  fads  and  rules.  The  rules  of  the  word  of 
God  we  have  laid  before  ns ; and  as  to  fads , 
there  are  but  two  ways  that  we  can  come  at 
them,  fo  as  to  be  in  a capacity  to  compare  them 
with  the  rules  ; either  by  our  own  obfervation, 
or  by  information  from  others  that  have  had  op- 
portunity to  obferve. 

As  to  this  work  that  Iras  lately  been  carried  on 
in  the  land,  there  are  fo  many  things  concern- 
ing it  that  are  notorious,  as,  unlcfs  the  apoflle 
John  was  out  in  his  rules,  are  fufhcient  to  deter- 
mine it  to  be  in  general  the  work  of  God.  It  is 
notorious  that  the  Spirit  that  is  at  work,  takes 
off  perfons  minds  from  the  vanities  of  the  world, 
engages  them  in  a deep  concern  about  eternal 
happineis,  puts  them  upon  earnefllv  feeking  their 
falvation,  and  convinces  them  of  the  dreadful- 
nefs  of  fin,  and  of  their  own  guilty  and-mifer- 
able  date  by  nature,  ft  is  notorious  that  it  awa- 
kens men’s  conferences,  and  make  them  fenfible 
of  the  dreadfulnefs  of  God’s  anger,  and  caufes  in 
them  a great  define  and  earned  care  and  endea- 
vour to  obtain  his  favour.  It  is  notorious  that 
it  puts  them  upon  a more  diligent  improvement 
of  the  means  of  grace  which  God  has  appointed. 
It  is  alfo  notorious  that,  in  general,  it  works  in 
perfons  a greater  regard  to  the  word  of  God, 
and  defire  of  hearing  and  reading  of  it.  And  it 
is  notoriously  manned  that  the  Spirit  in  general 
operates  as  a Spirit  of  truth,  making  perfons 
more  fenfible  of  what  is  really  true,  in  tl  ore 

things 

O 


[ 225  ] 

things  that  concern  their  eternal  falvation  ; as 
that  they  mud  die,  and  that  life  is  very  fhort  and 
uncertain  ; that  there  is  a great  and  juil  God, 
whom  they  are  accountable  to,  and  that  they 
ft-and  in  great  need  of  a Saviour.  It  is  further- 
more notorious,  that  this  Spirit  makes  perfons 
more  fenfible  of  the  value  of  that  Jefus  that  was 
crucified,  and  their  need  of  him ; and  that  it 
puts  them  upon  earneftly  feeding  an  mterefl  in 
him.  It  cannot  be  but  thefe  things  fhould  be  ap- 
parent to  people  in  general  through  the  land  ; 
for  thefe  things  are  not  done  in  a corner.  The 
work  that  has  been  wrought  has  not  been  con- 
fined to  a few  towns,  in  fome  remoter  parts  of 
the  land,  but  has  been  cairied  on  in  many  places, 
and  in  the  principal  and  inoft  populous  and 
public  places  in  it.  And  it  has  now  been  conti- 
nued for  a confiderable  time  ; fo  that  there  has 
been  a great  deal  of  opportunity  to  obferve  the 
manner  of  the  work. 

35.  And  here  I would  obferve,  that  the  na- 
ture and  tendency  of  a fpirit  that  is  at  work, 
may  be  determined  with  much  greater  certainty, 
when  it  is  obferved  in  a great  multitude  of  peo- 
ple of  all  forts,  and  in  various  places,  than  when 
it  is  only  feen  in  a few',  in  fome  particular  place, 
that  have  been  much  converfant  one  with  ano- 
ther. A few  particular  perfons  may  agree  to  put 
a cheat  upon  otheis.  But  when  the  work  is 
fpread  over  great  part  of  a country,  in  places 
diifant  one  from  another,  among  people  of  all 

forts 


r 226  j 

^Torts  and  all  ages,  and  in  perfons  of  found  mind, 
good  underftanding,  and  known  integrity  ; there 
would  be  the  greatelf  abfurdity  in  fuppofmg  that 
by  all  the  obfervation  that  can  be  made  for  many 
months  together,  by  thofe  that  are  mod  inti- 
mate with  them  in  thefe  affairs,  and  have  long 
been  acquainted  with  them,  flill  it  cannot  be 
determined  what  kind  of  influence  the  operation 
they  are  under  has  upon  people’s  mind  ; whe- 
ther it  tends  to  awaken  their  confidences,  or  to 
ffupify  them;  to  incline  them  more  to  feek  their 
falvation,  or  neglect  it;  whether  it  confirms 
them  in  a belief  of  the  feriptures,  or  leads  them 
to  deifm;  and  fo  in  other  things.  There  is  pro- 
bably no  particular  perfon  here  prefent,  that 
thinks  himfelf  to  have  a right  to  be  treated  as  one 
of  common  fenfe  and  veracity,  but  would  think 
himfelf  abufed  if  he  fhoukl  declare  to  others, 
that  “ lie  had  altered  his  mind  in  thefe  and 
thofe  particulars;  he  now  found  himfelf  convinced 
of  the  truth  of  this  or  that,  that  formerly  he  didnot 
believe;”  if  thofe  he  made  fuch  a profeflion  to 
would  not  bekeve  him,  though  they  had  long 
been  converfant  with  them,  and  though  he  per- 
fiflcd  in  this  profefiion  for  many  months  toge- 
ther, and  nothing  appeared  in  him  hut  what 
agreed  thereto.  But  much  more  unreafonable 
would  it  be,  when  fuch  profeffions  are  made, 
not  by  a particular  perfon  only,  but  by  great 
numbers  of  people,  to  fuppofe  that  they  all  agree 

in 


f_  227  ] 

in  profeffing  what  indeed  they  do  not  feel  in 
their  fouls. 

* 36.  Thofe  in  whom  thefe  uncommon  appear- 
ances have  been,  whence  have  arifen  the  main 
objections  to  this  work,  have  been  of  two  forts; 
either  thofe  that  have  been  in  great  diftrefs  in  an 
apprehenfion  of  their  fin  and  mifery,  or  thofe 
that  have  been  overcome  with  a fenfe  of  the 
greatnefs,  wonderfuinefs,  and  excellency  of  di- 
vine things.  Of  the  multitude  of  thofe  of  the 
former  fort  that  I have  had  opportunity  to  ob- 
ferve,  there  have  been  very  few ; but  by  all  that 
could  be  obferved,  their  difcipline  has  arifen 
from  real  proper  conviction.  And  though  I do 
not  fuppofe,  when  fuch  things  were  obferved  to 
he  common,  that  perfons  have  laid  themfelves 
under  thofe  violent  refiraints,  to  avoid  outward 
manifeflations  of  their  diftrefs,  that  perhaps  they 
otherwife  would  have  done  ; yet  there  have  been 
very  few  in  whom  there  has  been  any  appearance 
of  feigning  or  afiedling  fuch  manifeftations,  and 
very  many  for  whom  it  would  have  been  un- 
doubtedly impoffible  to  avoid  them.  Generally 
thofe  that  have  been  in  thefe  agonies  have  ap- 
peared to  be  in  the  perfedf  exercife  of  their  rea- 
fon ; and  thofe  of  them  that  have  been  able  to 
fpeak,  have  been  well  able  to  give  an  account 
of  the  circumftanees  of  their  minds,  and  the 
caufe  of  their  diftrefs  in  the  time  of  it,  and  well 
able  to  remember  and  give  an  account  after- 
wards. I have  known  a very  few  infiances  of 
Vol.  XVII,  K thofe, 


[ 228  ] 

fhofe  that  in  their  great  extremity  have  for  a 
Ihort  fpace  been  deprived,  in  fome  meafure,  of 
the  ufe  of  reafon;  but  among  the  many  hun- 
dreds, and  it  may  be  thoufands,  that  have  lately 
been  brought  to  fuch  agonies,  I never  yet  knew 
one  laltingly  deprived  of  their  reafon.  In  fome 
that  I have  known,  melancholy  has  evidently 
been  mixt;  and  when  it  is  fo,  the  difference  is 
very  appparent ; their  diflreffes  are  of  another 
kind,  and  operate  quite  after  another  manner. 
It  is  not  truth  only  that  diflreffes  them,  but  many 
vain  fhadows  and  notions.  Some  in  their  great 
diflrefs  have  not  been  able  to  give  an  account  of 
themfelves,  or  to  explain  the  manner  and  caufe 
of  their  trouble  to  others.  But  this  will  not  at 
all  be  wondered  at  by  thofe  who  have  had  much 
to  do  with  fouls  under  fpiritual  difficulties.  Some 
things  that  they  are  fenftble  of  are  altogether 
new  to  them,  their  ideas  and  inward  fenfations 
are  new,  and  what  they  therefore  know  not  how 
to  accommodate  language  to,  or  to  find  words  to 
exprefs.  And  fome  who  at  firfl  fay  they  know 
not  what  was  the  matter  with  them,  on  being 
particularly  examined,  have  been  able  to  repre- 
fent  the  cafe,  though  of  themfelves  they  could 
not  find  expreffions  fo  to  do. 

37.  Some  fay,  the  terrors  fuch  perfons  are  in, 
that  have  fuch  effe£ls  on  their  bodies,  is  only  a 
fr  ght.  But  certain!)  there  ought  to  be  a dif- 
tinftion  made  between  a very  great  feai  and  ex- 
treme diflrefs,  arifing  from  an  apprehenfton  of 

fome 


[ a29  ] 

Tome  dreadful  truth,  that  is  a caufe  fully  propor- 
tionable to  fuch  an  effea,  and  a needlefs,  caufe- 
lefs  fright ; which  is  of  two  kinds,  either  when 
perfons  are  terrified  with  that  which  is  not  the 
truth,  (of  this  I have  feen  very  few  inftances* 
-unlefs  in  cafe  of  melancholy  or  fecondly,  when 
perfons  are  under  a childifh  fright,  only  fiom 
foine  terrible  outward  appearance,  and  a general 
notion  thence  arifing,  that  there  is  fomething  or 
other  terrible,  they  know  not  what,  without  hav- 
ing in  their  minds  the  apprehenfion  of  any  par- 
ticular terrible  truth  whatioever.  Ol  fuch  a kind 
of  fright  I have  feen  very  little  appearance,  ei- 
ther among  old  or  young. 

Thofe  that  are  in  fuch  extremity,  commonly 
exprefs-a  great  fenfe  of  their  exceeding  wicked- 
nefs,  of  their  great  guilt  in  the  fight  of  God, 
and  the  dreadfulnefs  of  the  punifhment  that  fin 
expofes  to.  Very  often  they  have  a lively  idea 
of  the  horrible  pit  of  eternal  mifery ; and  at  the 
fame  time  the  wrath  of  God  appears  amazingly 
terrible  to  them : God  appearing  to  them  fo 
much  provoked,  they  are  apprehenfive  he  will 
not  bear  with  them  any  longer,  but  will  now 
forthwith  fend  them  down  to  the  dreadful  pit 
they  have  in  view.  Very  many,  in  the  midfl  of 
their  extremity,  have  been  brought  to  an  extra- 
ordinary fenfe  of  their  fully  defer ving  that  wrath 
and  deftru&ion  which  is  then  before  their  eyes  ; 
and  at  the  fame  time  that  they  feared  every  mo- 
:ment  it  would  be  executed  upon  them,  they  have 
K.  2 been 


[ 2 3°  ] 

been  greatly  convinced  it  would  be  altogether 
■juft  that  it  fhould.  And  very  often  fome  text 
of  fcripture  to  that  effeft  has  been  fent  home 
upon  their  minds,  whereby  their  minds  have 
been  calmed,  and  they  have  been  brought  as  it 
were  to  lie  at  God’s  foot.  And  after  great  ago- 
nies, a little  before  light  has  arifen,  they  have 
been  compofed  and  quiet  in  a kind  of  fubmiffion 
to  a juft  God,  but  their  bodily  ftrength  much 
fpent;  and  fometimes  their  lives,  to  appearance, 
almoft  gone.  Then  light  has  appeared,  and  a 
glorious  Redeemer,  with  his  wonderful  all-fuffi- 
cient  grace,  has  been  reprefented  to  them  often 
in  fome  fweet  invitation  of  fcripture.  Some- 
times the  light  comes  in  fuddenly,  fometimes 
more  gradually,  filling  their  fouls  with  love,  ad- 
miration, joy,  and  felftabafement ; drawing  forth 
their  hearts  in  longing  after  the  Redeemer,  and 
longing  to  lie  in  the  duft  before  him  ; and  long- 
ings that  others  might  behold  and  embrace  him; 
and  longings  to  live  to  his  glory  ; but  appearing 
vile  in  their  own  eyes,  and  having  much  jea- 
loufy  over  their  own  hearts.  And  all  the  appear- 
ance of  a real  change  of  heart  have  followed  ; 
and  grace  has  afted  from  time  to  time,  after  the 
fame  manner  it  ufed  to  aft  in  thofe  that  were 
converted  formerly,  except  that  in  many  light 
and  comfort  have  been  in  a higher  degree.  Many 
very  young  children  have,  been  thus  wrought 
upon.  There  have  been  fome  inflances  very 
much  like  thofe  demoniacs,  Mark  i.  26.  and 
„ chap. 


[ 22i  ] 

chap,  ix.  2 6.  of  whom  we  read,  that  when  the  de- 
vil had  cried  with  a loud  voice , and  rent  them  fore, 
he  came  out  of  than.  And  probably  thofe  in- 
flances  were  defigned  for  a type  of  fuch  things  as 
thefe.  Some  have  feveral  turns  of  great  agonies 
before  they  are  delivered  ; and  feme  have  been 
in  fuel)  difireffes,  and  it  has  paffed  off,  and  no 
deliverance  at  all  has  followed. 

38.  Some  obje£l  againfi  it  as  great  confufion, 
when  there  is  a number  together,  in  fuch  circum- 
ffances  : and  fay,  God  cannot  be  the  author  of 
it,  becaufe  he  is  the  God  of  order,  not  of  con- 
fufion. But  let  it  be  confidered,  what  is  the 
proper  notion  of  confufion,  but  the  breaking 
that  order  of  things,  whereby  they  are  duly  di- 
refled  to  their  end,  fo  that  the  order  and  the  due 
connexion  of  means  being  broken,  they  fail  of 
their  end  ; but  conviftion  and  converfion  of  fin- 
ners  is  the  end  of  religious  means.  Not  but  I 
think  perfons  fhould  endeavour  to  refrain  from 
fuch  outward  manifeflations,  in  the  time  of  the 
folemn  worfhip.  But  if  God  is  pleafed  to  con- 
vince the  confciences  of  perfons,  fo  that  they 
cannot  avoid  great  outward  manifeflations,  even 
to  the  interrupting,  and  breaking  offthofe  public 
means  they  were  attending,  I do  not  think  this  is 
confufion,  or  an  unhappy  interruption,  any 
more  than  if  a company  fhould  meet  on  the  field 
to  pray  for  rain,  and  fhould  be  broken  off  from 
their  exercife  by  a plentiful  fhower.  Would  to 
God  that  all  the  public  affemblies  in  the  land 
K g were 


[ 232  ] 

were  broken  off  from  their  public  exercifes  with 
fuch  confufion  as  this  the  next  fabbath  day  ! We 
need  not  be  forry  for  the  breaking  the  order  of 
the  means,  by  obtaining  the  end  to  which  that 
order  is  directed:  lie  that  is  going  a journey 
to  fetch  a treafure,  need  not  be  forry  that  he  is 
flopped,  by  meeting  the  treafure  in  the  raidft  of 
his  journey. 

Befides  thofe  that  are  overcome  with  convic- 
tion and  diflrefs,  I have  feen  many  that  have  had 
their  bodily  flrength  taken  away  with  a fenfe  of 
the  glorious  excellency  of  the  Redeemer,  and  the 
wonders  of  his  dying  love:  with  a very  uncom- 
mon fenfe  of  their  own  littlenefs,  and  exceeding 
vilenefs  attending  it,  with  all  expreftions  of  the 
greatefl  abafement  and  abhorrence  of  thcmfelves;. 
and  many  have  been  even  overcome  with  pity  to 
the  fouls  of  others,  and  longing  for  their  falvar 
tion. 

39.  As  to  the  imprudencies  and  irregularities 
that  have  been,  it  is  not  at  all  to  be  wondered 
at,  that  a reformation,  after  a long-continued 
and  almoft  univerfal  deadnefs,  fliould  at  firll  be 
attended  with  fuch  things.  When  God  at  firft 
began  his  great  work  for  the  deliverance  of  his 
people,  after  their  long-continued  bondage  in 
Egypt,  there  were  falfe  wonders  mixed  with  true 
for  a while  ; which  hardened  the  unbelieving 
Egyptians,  and  made  them  to  doubt  of  the  di- 
vinity of  the  whole  work.  When  day-light 
firft  appears  after  a night  of  darknefs,  we  muil 

expe£! 


C 233  ] 

expeft  to  have  darknefs  mixt  with  light,  for  a 
while,  and  not  have  perfeQ:  day,  and  the  fun 
rifenatonce.  The  fruits  of  the  earth  are  green 
before  they  are  ripe,  and  come  to  their  perfec- 
tion gradually  ; and  fo  Chrift  tells  us,  is  the  king- 
dom of  God , .Mark  iv^  26,  27,  28.  So  is  the  king- 
dom of  God ; as  ij  a man  fiould  caf  feed  into  the 
ground , and  fiould feep,  and  rife  night  and  day  ; 
and  the  feed fiould fpring  and  grow  up,  he  knowetk 
not  how  : for  the  earth  bringeth  forth  fruit  of 
herfelf ; firfi  the  blade  ; then  the  ear  ; then  the 
full  corn  in  the  ear. 

The  imprudences  and  errors  that  have  attended 
this  work,  are  the  lefs  to  be  wondered  at,  if 
it  be  confidered,  that  it  is  chiefly  young  perfons 
that  have  been  the  fubje£ls  of  it.  And  doubtlefs 
it  has  been  one  occafion  of  much. of  the  mifcon- 
du£f  there  has  been,  that  in  many  places,  people 
who  are  the  fubjefts  of  this  work  of  God’s  Spirit, 
fee  plainly  that  their  minifiers  have  an  ill  opinion 
of  the  work:  and  therefore  with  jult  reafon,  dare 
not  apply  themfeives  to  them  as  their  guides  in 
this  work:  and  fo  are  without  guides  : and  no 
wonder  that  when  a people  are  as  fheep  without 
a fhepherd,  they  wander  out  of  the  way.  A 
people  in  fuch  circumffances  efpecially  fland  in 
great  and  continual  need  of  guides,  and  their 
guides  -Hand  in  continual  need  of  much  more 
wifdom  than  they  have  of  their  own.  And  if 
a people  have  minifters  thar  favour  the  work, 
and  rejoice  in  it,  yet  it  is  not  to  be  expefted 
K 2 that 


[ 234  ] 

that  either  people  or  miniflers  fhould  know  fo 
well  how  to-conduft  themfelves  in  fuch  an  extra- 
ordinary Rate  of  things,  while  it  is  new,  and  what 
they  never  had  any  experience  of  before,  as  they 
may,  after  they  have  had  experience,  and  time 
to  fee  the  tendency,  confequences  and  iffue  of 
things. 

40.  II.  Let  us  all  be  hence  warned,  by  no 
means  to  oppofe,  or  do  any  thing,  in  the  leajl  to 
hinder  that  work  that  has  lately  been  carried  on  in 
the  land. 

The  example  of  the  in  Chrifl’sand  the 
apoflles  times,  is  enough  to  beget  in  thofe  that 
do  not  acknowledge  this  work,,  a great  jealoufy 
of  themfelves,  and  to  make  them  exceeding  cau- 
tious of  what  they  fay  or  do.  Chrifl  then  was  in 
the  world,  and  the  world  knew  him  not  ; he  came 
to  his  own , by  profeffion,  and  his  own  received 
him  not.  That  coming  of  Chrifl  had  been  much 
fpokcn  of  in  fcripture,  and  had  been  long  expefft- 
ed ; and  yet  becaufe  Chrifl  came  in  a manner 
that  they  did  not  expefl,  they  would  not  own 
him,  but  oppofed  him,  counted  him  a madman, 
and  the  Spirit  that  he  wrought  by  the  fpirit  of  the 
devil.  They  flood  and  wondered  at  the  great 
things  that  were  done  ; but  yet  they  met  with  fo 
many  flumbling-blocks,  that  they  finally  could 
not  acknowledge  him.  And  when  the  Spirit  of 
God  came  to  be  fo  w’onderfully  poured  out  in  the 
apoflles  days,  they  looked  upon  it  to  be  confu- 
fion  and  diflraflion.  They  were  aftonifhed  by 

what 


['  2 35  J 


what  they  faW  and  heard,  but  not  convinced. 
And  the  work  of  God  was  then  rejefled  by  thofe 
efpecially  that  were  mod  conceited  of  their  own 
underhanding  and  knowledge,  agreeable  to  Ifa. 
xxix.  14.  Therefore  behold,  I will  proceed  to  do 
a marvellous  work  amongf  this  people , even  a?  mar- 
vellous zvor/i  and  a wonder  ; for  the  tvifdom  of  their 
wife  men  fiall  per  if  1,  and  the  underfunding  of  their 
prudent  men fiall  be  hid.  And  many  of  them  that 
had  been  in  reputation  for  religion  and  piety,  had 
agreat  fpite  againfl  the  work,  becaufe  they  faw 
it  tended  to  diminifh  their  honour,  and  to  re- 
proach their  formality  and  lukewarmnefs.  Yea, 
fome  malicioufly  and  openly  oppofed  and  re- 
proached the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  cal- 
led it  the  work  of  the  devil. 

There  is  another  coming  of  Chrifl,  a fpiritual 
coming,  to  fet  up  bis  kingdom  in  the  world,  that 
is  as  much  fpoken  of  in  fcripture  prophecy,  as 
that  firft  coming  of  Chrifl  was,  that  has  been 
long  expefled  by  the  church  of  God;  and  we 
have  reafon  to  think  will  be,  in  many  refpefts, 
parallel  wiih  the  other.  And  certainly,  that  low 
Hate  that  the  vifible  church  of  God  has  lately 
been  funk  into,  is  very  parallel  with  the  hate  of  ' 
the  JewiJh  church,  when  Chrifl  came  ; and 
therefore  no  wonder  at  all,  that  when  Chrifl 
comes,  his  work  Ihould  appear  a ilrange  work  to 
mofl.  Whether  the  work  that  is  now  wrought, 
be  the  beginning  of  that  great  coming  of  Chrifl  to 
fet  up  his  kingdom,  that  is  much  fpoken  of,  or 
K 5 no 


[ s36  3 

ao  ; it  is  evident,  it  is  a work  of  the  fame  Spirit; 
and  of  the  fame  nature.  And  there  is  no  reafon 
to  doubt,  but  that  for  perfons  to  continue  long 
to  refule  to  acknowledge  Clirifl;  in  the  work,  ef- 
pecially  thofe  that  are  fet  to  be  teachers  in  his 
church,  will  be  in  like  manner  provoking  to  God, 
as  it  was  in  the  Jews  of  old,  to  refufe  to  acknow- 
ledge Chi ifl ; and  that,  notwithftanding  they  may 
plead  the  great  ftumbling-blocks  that  are  in 
the  way,  and  the  caufe  they  have  to  doubt  of  the 
work. 

41.  Thofe  that  cannot  believe  the  work  to  be 
true,  becaufe  of  the  extraordinary  degree  and 
manner  of  it,  fhotild  confider  how  it  was  with  the 
unbelieving  Lord  in  Samaria , who  faid,  Behold , 
if  the  Lord  would  make  windows  in  heaven , might 
this  thing  be?  To  whom  Elijha  faid,  behold  thou 
Jhall  fee  it  with  thine  eyes,  butjha.lt  not  eat  thereof. 
Let  all  to  whom  this  work  is  a cloud  and  dark- 
nefs,  as  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  was  to  the 
Egyptians,  take  heed  that  it  be  not  their  deilruc- 
tion,  as  that  was  theirs,  while  it  gave  light  to 
God’s  IfratL 

* I would  pray  thofe  that  quiet  themfelves  with 
that,  that  they  proceed  on  a principle  of  pru- 
dence, and  are  waiting  to  fee  what  the  ifTue  of 
things  will  be,  and  what  fruits  men  will  bring 
forth  in  their  lives  and  converfations,  would  con- 
fider whether  this  will  juftify  a long  refraining 
from  acknowledging  Chrift  when  he  appears  fo 
wonderfully  in  the  land*.  It  is  probable  that  ma- 

nT 


[ 237  3 

ny  of  thofe-tbat  are  thus  waiting,  know  not  what 
they  are  waiting  for  : if  they  wait  to  fee  a work 
of  God  without  difficulties  and  ftumbling-blocks, 
that  will  be  like  the  fool  waiting  at  the  river-fide 
to  have  the  water  all  run  by.  A work  of  God 
without  ftumbling-blocks  is  never  to  be  expect- 
ed : 2 tmuf  needs  be  that  offences  come.  There  ne- 
ver yet  was  any  great  manifeftation  that  God 
made  of  himfelf  to  the  world,  without  many  dif- 
ficulties attending  it.  It  is  with  the  works  of 
God,  as  it  is  with  the  word  of  God  ; they  are 
full  ofthofe  things  that  feem  ftrange  and  inconfif- 
tent  and  difficult  to  -the.  unbelieving  hearts  of  men. 
Chrijl  and  his  work  always  was,  and  always  will 
be  a ftone  of  {tumbling,  and  rock  of  offence  ; a 
gin  and  a fnare  to  many.  The  prophet  Hofea, 
in  thelaft  chapter  of  his  prophecy,  fpeaking  of  a 
glorious  revival  of  religion  in  God’s  church, 
when  God  would  be  as  the  dew  unto  lfrael , and  he 
Jhould  grow  as  the  /illy,  and  cajl  forth  his  roots  as 
Lebanon , concludes  all  thus,.  Who-  is  wife?  And 
he  fiall  under jland  theft  things  ; prudent  ? And  he 
Jhall  know  them.  For  the  ways  of  the  Lord  are 
right , and  the  juft fall  walk  in  them  ; but  the  t ran  f 
grejfors Jhall ' fall  therein. 

* It  is  probable  that  the  Humbling  blocks  that 
now  attend  this  work,  will  in  feme  refpefts  be 
increafed,  and  not  diminifbed.  Particularly,  we 
probably  fhall  fee  more  inftances  of  apoftacy  and 
grofs  iniquity  among  profeffors.  And  if  or.e  kind 
of  ftumbling-blocks  are  removed,  it  it  to  be  ex- 
K 6 peCied 


r 23g  ] 

pefted  that  others  will  come.  It  is  with  ChrifTs 
works,  as  it  was  with  his  parables  ; things  that 
are  difficult  to  mens  dark  minds,  are  ordered  of 
purpofe,  for  the  trial  of  perfons  difpofitions  and 
fpiritual  fenfe.  Thofe  that  are  now  waiting  to 
fee  the  iffue  of  this  work,  think  they  ffiall  bebet- 
ter  able  to  determine  by  and  by;  but  they  are 
probably  many  of  them  miftaken.  The  Jews, 
that  faw  Chrift’s  miracles,  waited  to  fee  better 
evidences  of  his  being  the  Meffiah  ; they  wanted 
a fign  from  heaven  ; but  they  waited  in  vain ; 
their  ftumbling-blocks  did  not  diminifh,  but  in- 
creafe;  they  found  no  end  to  them  ; and  fo  were 
more  and  more  hardened  in  their  unbelief. 

42.  It  is  ftrange,  that  thofe  who  have  doubt- 
ed of  the  work  that  has  been  attended  with  fuch 
uncommon  external  appearances,  ffiould  be  eafy 
in  their  doubts,  without  taking  thorough  pains  to 
inform  themfelves,  by  going  where  fuch  things 
have  been  to  be  feen,  and  narrowly  obferving 
them,  and  diligently  enquiring  into  them  ; not 
contenting  themfelves  only  with  obferving  two  or 
three  inflances,  nor  refling  till  they  were  fully 
informed  by  their  own  obfervation.  I do  not 
doubt,  but  that  if  this  courfe  had  been  taken,  it 
would  have  convinced  all  whofe  minds  are  not 
Ihut  up  again  A conviflion.  How  greatly  havo 
they  erred,  who  only  from  the  uncertain  reports 
of  others,  have  ventured  to  fpeak  flightingly  of 
thefe  things  ? That  caution  of  an  unbelieving 
Jew  might  teach  them  more  prudence,  Ails  v. 

38. 


C 239-  ] 

38,  39.  Refrain  from  thefe  men , and  let  them 
alone  ; for  if  this  caunfel , or  this  work  be  of  men-, 
it  will  come  to  nought-,  but  if  it  be  of  God,  ye  can- 
not overthrow  it  ; lef  haply  ye  be  found  to  fght 
agaiizfi  God. 

I.  come  now  in  the 

* 43.  III.  and  laft  place,  to  apply  myfeif  to 
thofe  that  are  the  friends  of  this  work,  who  have 
been  partakers  of  it,  or  are  zealous  to  promote  it. 
Let  me  earneftly  exhort  fucb,  to  give  diligent  heed 
to  themfelves,  to  avoid  all  errors  and  mifconducl 7 
and  whafoever  may  darken  and  obfeure  the  work , 
and  give  cccafon  to  thofe  that  ft  and  ready  to  re- 
proach it.  T he  apoftle  was  careful  to  cut  off  oc- 
cafion from  thofe  that,  defied  cccafon.  The  fame 
apoftle  exhorts  Titus  to  maintain  that  drift  care 
and  watch  over  hitnfeli,  that  both  his  preaching, 
and  behaviour  might  be  fuch  as  could  not  be  con- 
demned ; that  he.  who  was  of  the  contrary  part  might 
be  afkamed,  having  no  evil  thing  to  Jay  of  them. 
Tit.  ii.  7,  8,  We  had  need  to  be  wife  as fer- 
pents,  and  harmlefs  as  doves.  It  is  of  no  fmall 
confequence  that  we  fhould  behave  ourfelves  in- 
nocently and  prudently.  We  mull  expe£i  that 
the  great  enemy  of  this  work  will  try  his  utmoft 
zoith  us;  and  he  will  efpeci ally  triumph  if  he  can 
pi  evail  againft  any  of  us,  in  any  thing  to  blind 
and  miflead  us : he  knows  k will  do  more  to  fur- 
ther his  intereft,  than  if  he  prevailed  againft  an 
hundred  others.  We  had  need  to  watch  and 
pray,  for  we  are  but  little  children  ; this  roaring 

lion 


[ 240  ] 

iion  is  too  ftrong  for  us,  and  this  old  ferpent  too 
fubtle  for  us. 

Humility,  felf-diffidence,  and  an  entire  depen- 
dence on  our  Lord,  will  be  our  belt  defence. 
Let  us  therefore  maintain  the  ftri£!eft  watch 
again!!  fpiritual  pride,  or  being  lifted  up  with 
extraordinary  experiences  and  comforts.  Wehad 
need,  after  fuch  favours,  in  a fpecial  manner  fo 
keep  a ftritft  and  jealous  eye  upon  our  own  hearts, 
left  there  fhould  aiife  high  thoughts  of  ourfelves, 
as  being  now  peculiar  favourites  of  heaven. 
When  we  have  great  difcoveries  of  God  made  to 
our  fouls,  we  fhould  not  fhine  bright  in  our  own 
eyes.  Mofts , when  he  had  been  converfing 
with  God  in  the  mount,  though  his  face  fhone  fo 
as  to  dazzle  the  eves  of  Aaron  and  the  people,  yet 
he  did  not  fhine  in  his  own  eyes  ; lit  zvi/1  not  that 
his  fact  Jhone.  Let  none  think  themfelves 
out  of  danger  of  this  fpiritual  pride.  God  faw 
that  the  apoflle  Paul  himfelf  was  not  out  of 
danger  of  it,  no  not  when  he  had  juft  been 
converfing  with  God  in  the  third  heaven  : 
fee  2 Cor.  xii.  7.  pride  is  the  firft  fin  that  ever 
entered  into  the  univerfe,  and  it  lies  loweft  of  all 
in  the  foundation  of  the  whole  building  of  fin, 
and  is  the  moft  fecret,  deceitful,  and  unfearcha- 
ble  in  its  way  of  working,  of  any  luft  whatfoever. 
It  is  ready  to  mix  with  every  thing;  and  nothing 
is  fo  hateful  to  God,  and  contrary  to  the  fpirit  of 
the  gofpel ; and  there  is  no  one  fin  that  does  fo 
much  let  in  the  devil  into  the  hearts  of  men,  and 
expofe  them  to  his  delufions.  I have  feen  it  in 

many 


[ 24*  ] 

many  inflances.  The  devil  has  come  in  at  this- 
door,  prefently  after  fome  extraordinary  com- 
munica  ion  with  God,  and  has  woefully  deluded 
and  led  them  altray,  till  God  has  mercifully  open- 
ed their  eyes:  and  they  themfelves  have  after- 
wards been  fenlible  that  it  was  pride  that  betray- 
ed them. 

44.  Some  of  the  true  friends  of  the  work 
of  God’s  Spirit  have  erred  in  giving  too  much 
heed  to  impulfes  and  flrorrg  imprefiions  of 
their  minds.  Thefe  imprefhons,  if  they  are  truly 
from  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  of  a quite  dif- 
ferent nature  from  the  gracious  influences  of 
the  Spirit  of  God  on  the  heart.  1 hey  are  of 
the  nature  of  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the 
Spirit. 

But  his  ordinary  gracious  influences  are  by  far 
the  molt  excellent  and  glorious,  as  the  apoftle 
largely  thews  in  the  firfl  of  Corinthians,  beginning 
with  the  21ft  verle  of  the  12th  chapter,  where 
fpeaking  of  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit, 
he  fays',  But  covet  earnefly  the  bejl  gifts  ; and  yet  ■ 
IJhew  you  a more  excellent  way,  i.  e.  a more  ex- 
cellent way  of  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  : and 
then  he  goes  on  in  the  next  chapter,  to  fhew 
what  that  more  excellent  way  is,  even  that  which 
fummarily  con  fills  in  charity,  or  divine  love.  A 
man  may  have  thofe  extraordinary  gifts,  and  yet 
be  abominable  to  God  and  go  to  hell:  the  fpi- 
ritaal  and  eternal  life  of  the  foul  do  not  confuS 

in 


[ 242  } 

in  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  but  the 
grace  ofthe  Spirit  : this,  and  not  thofe,  is  that 
influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  which  God 
bellows  on  his  dear  children  : he  has  fome- 
times  thrown  out  the  other  to  dogs  and  fwine, 
as  he  did  to  Balaam , Saul,  and  Judas.  Many 
wicked  men  at  the  day  of  judgment  will 
plead,  have  we  not  prophefed  in  thy  name,  and 
in  thy  name  cajl  out  devils,  and-  in  iky  name 
done  many  zuonderfvd  works ? * The  greateft 

privilege  of  the  prophets  and  apoflles  was 
not  their  working  miracles,  but  their  eminent 
holinefs.  The  grace  that  was  in  their  hearts 
was  a thonfand  times  more  their  dignity  and 
honour  than  their  miraculous  gifts.  To  have 
grace  in  the  heart  is  an  higher  privilege  than 
the  bleffed  virgin  herfelf  had,  in  having  the 
body  of  the  fecond  perfon  in  the  Trinity  con- 
ceived in  her  womb,  by  the  power  of  the 
Highefl  overfbadowing  her,  Luke  xi.  27,  28. 
And  it  came  to  pafs  as  he  fpake  thefe  things,  a 
certain  woman  of  the  company  lift  up  her  voice , 
and  faid  unto  him,  Bleffed  is  the  womb  that  bare 
thee,  and  the  paps  that  thou  heft  fucked ! But  he 
faid , yea,  rather  bltjfed  are  they  that  hear  the 
word  of  God,  and  keep  it. 

45.  The  ordinary  fanctifying  influences  ofthe 
Spirit  of  God  are  the  end  of  all  extraordinary 
gifts,  as  the  apoflle  fhews,  Eph.  iv.  1 1 , 12,  13. 
They  are  good  for  nothing,  any  further  than 

as- 


[ M3  3 

as  they  are  fubordinate  to  this  end;  they  will  be 
fo  far  from  profiting  .any  without  it,  that  they 
' will  only  aggravate  their  mifery.  This  is,  as  the 
apoflle  obferves,  the  moll  excellent  way  of  God’s 
communicating  his  Spirit  to  his  church  ; it  is  the 
great  glory  of  the  church  in  all  ages,  d his 
glory  is  what  makes  the  Hate  of  the  church  on 
earih  moll  like  the  Hate  of  the  church  in  heaven, 
where  prophecies  and  tongues,  and  other  miracu- 
lous gifts  ceafe,  and  are  vanilhed  away,  and: 
God  communicates-  his  Spirit  only  in  that 
more  excellent  way  that  the  apoflle  fpeaks 
®f,  viz.  Charity , or  divine  Love,  which  never 
faileth. 

* I would  therefore  intreat  the  people  of  God 
to  be  very  cautious  how  they  give  heed  to  fuch 
things.  I have  feen  them  fail  in  many  in- 
flances,  and  know  by  experience  that  impref- 
fions  being  made  with  great  power,  and  pre- 
fently  after,  yea,  in  the  midft  of  fweet  com- 
munion with  God,  and  attended  with  texts- 
of  fcripture  flrongly  impreffed  on  the  mind, 
are  no  fure  figns  of  their  being  revelations, 
from  heaven  ; for  I have  known  fuch  impref- 
fions  fail,  and  prove  vain  by  the  event,  in 
fonre  inflances  attended  wuth  all  thefe  circum- 
flances. 

" 46  Neither  let  us  defpife  human  learning.. 
They  that  fay  human  learning  is  of  little  or  no 
ufe  in  the  work  of  the  minifiry,  do  not  confider 
wh.at  they  fay.  By  human  learning  I mean,  the 

improvement 


[ Hi  ] 

improvement  of  the  common  knowledge  which 
men  have  by  human  and  outward  means.  And 
therefore  to  fay  that  human  learning  is  of  no  ufe, 
is  as  much  as  to  fay  that  the  education  of  a child, 
or  that  the  common  knowledge  that  a grown 
man  has  more  than  a little  child,  is  of  no  ufe; 
fo  that  a child  of  four  years  old  is  as  fit  for  a 
teacher  in  the  church  of  God,  with  the  fame 
degree  of  grace,  and  capable  of  doing  as  much 
to  advance  the  kingdom  of  Chrift  by  his  inftruc- 
tion,  as  any  underflanding  man  of  thirty  years  of 
age.  If  adult  perfons  have  greater  ability  and 
advantage  to  do  fervice,  becaufe  they  have  more 
human  knowledge  than  a little  child,  then  doubt- 
lefs  if  they  have  more  human  knowledge  fill, 
with  the  fame  degree  of  grace,  they  would  have 
flill  greater  ability  and  advantage  to  do  fer- 
vice. An  increafe  of  knowledge,  without 

doubt,,  increafes  a man’s  advantage  either  to 
do  good  or  hurt,  according  as  he  is  dif- 
pofed.  It  is  too  manifefl  to  be  denied, 

that  God  made  great  ufe  of  human  learning 
in  the  apoffle  Paul,  as  he  alfo  did  in  Mcjes 
and  Solomon. 

And  if  knowledge,  obtained  by  human  means, 
is  not  to  be  defpifed,  then  it  will  follow  that  the 
means  of  obtaining  it  is  not  to  be  negletted,  viz. 
Study;  and  that  this  is  of  great  ufe  in  order  to  a 
preparation  for  a public  inflru&ing  others.  And 
though  undoubtedly,  an  having  the  heart  full  of 
the  powerful  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 

may 


[ 245  I 

may  at  fometimes  enable  perfons  to  fpeak.  profit- 
ably, yea,  very  excellently,  without  fludy  ; yet 
this  will  not  warrant  us  needlefly  to  call  ourfelves 
down  from  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  depend- 
ing upon  it  that  the  Lord  will  bear  us  up,  when 
there  is  another  way  to  go  down,  though  it  be 
not  fo  quick.  And  I would  pray  that  method , 
which  tends  greatly  to  help  both  the  under- 
ftanding  and  memory,  may  not  be  wholly  neg- 
Jefted. 

* 47.  One  other  thing  that  I would  intreat  the 
friends  of  this  work  of  God  to  avoid,  is  manag- 
ing the  controverfy  with  oppofers  with  too  much 
heat,  and  an  angry  zeal;  and  particularly  infift- 
ing  very  much  on  the  perfecution  of  oppofers- 
If  this  perfecution  were  ten  times  as  great  as  it  is, 
methinks  it  would  not  be  beft  to  fay  fo  much 
about  it.  It  becomes  Chriftians  to  be  like  lambs, 
not  to  be  apt  to  complain  and  cry  when  they  are 
hurt ; to  be  dumb  and  not  to  open  their  mouth, 
after  the  example  of  our  dear  Redeemer;  and 
not  to  be  like  fwine,  that  are  apt  to  fcream  aloud 
when  they  are  touched.  We  fhould  not  be  ready 
prefently  to  think  and  fpeak  of  fire  from  heaven, 
when  the  Samaritans  oppofe  us,  and  will  not  re- 
ceive us  into  their  villages/  God’s  zealous  mi- 
nifiers  would  do  well  to  think  of  the  direction 
the  apoflle  Paul  gave  to  a zealous  minifter,  aTim. 
ii.  24,  25,  26.  The  fervant  of  the  Lord  mujt  not 
fnve,  but  he  gentle  unto  oil  men , apt  to  teach, pa- 
tient l; 


[ H6  ] 

tunt ; in  mecknefs  inflruchng  thofe  that  oppofe 
them /elves,  if  God,  peradventure,  mill  give  them 
repentance , to  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth. 
And  that  they  may  recover  themfelves  out  of  the 
fnare  of  the  devil , who  are  taken  captive  by  him  at 
his  will , 


l 


THOUGHTS 


[ 247  ] 


THOUGHTS 

\ 

Concerning  the  prefent  Revival  of 

RELIGION  in  New- England. 


Extracted  from  Mr.  E D W A R D S. 


PART  I. 

Shewing  that  the  work  that  has  of  late  been  going 
on  in  this  land,  is  a glorious  work  of  Q od. 

rTPHE  error  of  thofe  who  have  had  ill  thoughts 
of  the  great  religious  operation  on  the 
minds  of  men,  that  has  been  of  late  in  New- 
England,  feems  fundamentally  to  lie  in  three 
things  ; firjl,  In  judging  of  this  work  a priori. 
Secondly,  In  not  taking  the  holy  fcriptures  as  a 
whole  rule  whereby  to  judge  cf  fuch  operations. 
Thirdly,  In  not  juftly  diflinguifhing  the  good 
from  the  bad. 


[ =4S  ] 

i.  They  have  greatly  erred  in  the  way  which 
they  have  gone  about  to  try  this  work,  whether 
it  be  a work  of  ihe  Spirit  of  God  or  no,  viz. 
In  judging  of  it  a priori-,  from  the  way  that  it 
began,  the  inflruments  that  have  been  employed, 
and  the  methods  that  have  been  taken  in  carry- 
ing it  on.  Whereas,  if  we  duly  confider,  fuch  a 
work  is  not  to  be  judged  of  a priori , but  a pofe- 
riori : we  are  to  obferve  the  effeci  wrought,  and 
if  upon  examination  it  be  found  agreeable  to  the 
word  of  God,  we  are  bound,  without  more  ado, 
to  reft  in  it  as  God's  work  ; and  fhall  be  rebuked 
for  our  arrogance,  if  we  rcfufe  fo  to  do  till  God 
fhall  explain  to  us  how  he  has  brought  this  efTefl 
to  pafs.  or  why  he  has  made  ule  of  fuch  anti  fuch 
means  in  doing  it.  Thofe  texts  are  enough  to 
caufe  us  with  trembling  to  forbear  fuch  a way  of 
judging  of  a work  of  God's  Spirit,  t Who  hath 
dir  tiled  the  Spirit  if  the  Lord,  or  being  his  coun- 
fellor  hath  taught  him  ? With  whom  took  he  coun- 
fd,  and  who  in/hufled  him,  and  taught  him  in  the 
path  of  judgment,  and  taught  him  knowledge,  and 
Jhewed  to  rum  the  way  of  underfunding  ? ± The 
wind  bloweth  where  it  iifeth,  and  thou  hearejl  the 
found  thereof ; but  carfi  not  tell  whence  it  cometh, 
and  whither  it  goeih.  We  hear  the  found,  we 
perceive  the  effeff,  and  from  thence  we  judge 
that  the  wind  does  indeed  blow,  without  waiting, 
fir  ft  to  be  fatisfied  what  fhould  be  the  caufe  of  its 
blowing  from  luch  a part  of  the  heavens,  and 

how 

+ Ifaiah  xl.  03,  1.4.  f John iii.  8. 


[ 249  1 

how  it  comes  to  pafs  that  it  fhould  blow  in  fuch 
a manner,  at  fuch  a time.  To  judge  a priori,  is 
a wrong  way  of  judging  of  any  of  the  works  of 
God.  We  are  not  to  refolve  that  we  will  fir ff;  be 
fatisfied  how  God  brought  this  or  the  other  effeft 
to  pafs,  and  why  he  made  it  thus,  or  why  it  has 
pleafed  him  to  ufe  fuch  and  fuch  means,  before 
we  will  acknowledge  his  work.  This  is  too 
much  for  the  day  to  take  upon  it  with  refpeff  to 
th o potter.  God  gives  no  account  oj his  matters: 
his  judgments  are  a great  detp : he.  hath  his  way 
in  the  fea,  and  his  path  in  the  great  waters,  and 
his  footjieps  are  not  known.  And  who  Jha/l  teach 
God  knowledge,  or  enjoy  him  his  way,  or  fay  unto 
him.  What  doji  thou  ? We  know  not  what  is  the 
way  of  the  Spirit,  nor  how  the  hones  do  grow  in 
the  womb  oj  her  that  is  with  child-,  even  fo  we 
know  not  the  works  oj  God  who  maketh  all.  No 
wonder  therefore  if  thofe  that  go  this  forbidden 
way,  in  judging  of  the  prefent  work,  are  per- 
plexed and  confounded. 

* Indeed  God  has  not  taken  that  courfe,  nor 
made  ufe  of  thofe  means  to  begin  and  carry  on 
this  great  work,  which  men  in  their  wifdom 
would  have  thought  moft  advifeable,  if  he  had 
afked  their  counfel.  But  the  great  God  has 
wrought  like  himfelf;  fo  as  to  fhew  his  own 
glory,  and  caff  contempt  on  all  that  ftrength, 
wifdom,  prudence,  and  fufficiency  that  men 
have  been  wont  to  glory  in ; in  fulfilment  of 

•that 


I zo°  ] 

that,  t The  loftinefs  of  man  Jhall  be  bowed  down , 
and  the  haughtinefs  of  men  Jhall  be  made  low,  and 
the  Lord  alone  fall  be  exalted  in  that  day.  God 
doth  thus,  intermingling  To  many  flumbling- 
blocks  with  his  work  ; in  fuffering  fo  much  of 
human  weaknefs  to  appear,  and  in  ordering  fo 
many  things  that  are  myllerious  to  mens  wifdom: 
in  pouring  out  his -Spirit  chiefly  on  the  common 
people,  and  admitting  them  nearer  to  himfelf 
than  the  great,  the  honourable,  the  rich,  and 
the  learned,  agreeable  to  that  prophecy,  i The 
Lord  aljo  fall  five  the  tents  of  Judah  firjl,  that 
the  glory  oj  the  hoi f e -oj  David,  and  the  glory  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerufalem,  do  not  magnify  them- 
felves  again/}  Judah.  Thofe  that  dwelt  in  the 
tents  of  Judah  were  the  people  that  dwelt  in  the 
country,  and  were  of  inferior  rank  ; the  inhabi- 
tants of  Jerufalem  were  the  citizens,  the  men  of 
wealth  and  figure ; and  Jerufalem  alfo  was  the 
habitation  or  reiort  of  the  priefls  and  Levites, 
and  the  officers  and  judges.  The  houfe  of  David 
were  the  higheft  rank  cf  all  the  royal  family,  and 
the  great  men  that  were  round  the  king. — It  is 
evident  by  the  context,  that  this  prophcfy  has 
refpefcl:  to  fpmething  further  than  the  faving  the 
people  out  of  the  Babylonifh  captivity. 

* God  in  this  work  has  begun  at  the  lower 
end,  and  has  made  ule  of  the  weak  and  Joolijh 
things  of  the  world  to  carry  it  on.  Of  the  mini- 
flers  that  have  been  chiefly  employed,  fome 

have 


i Ifaiah  ii.  17. 


t Zcch.  xil.  7. 


[ 25l  ] 

have  been  mere  babes  in  age  and  {landing,  and 
feme  of  them  fuch  as  have  not  been  fo  high  in- 
reputation  among  their  fellows  as  many  others. 
And  God  has  fuffered  their  infirmities  to  appear 
in  the  fight  of  others,  fo  as  much  to  difpleafe 
them  ; and  at  the  fame  time  it  has  pleafed  God 
greatly  to  fucceed  them,  while  he  has  not  fo  fuc- 
eeeded  others  that  are  reputed  vaftly  their  fupe- 
riors.  Yea,  there  is  reafon  to  think  that  it  has 
pleafed  God  to  make  ufe  of  the  infirmities  of 
fome  that  he  has  (ucceeded  ; as  particularly  their 
imprudent  and  rafh  zeal,  to  chafiife  the  deadnefs, 
negligence,  earthly  mindednefs  and  vanity  that 
brave  been  found  among  minifiers  in  the  late  times, 
wherein  minifiers  and  people  have  funk  into  fuch 
a deep  fleep.  Thefe  things  in  minifiers  of  the 
gofpel,  that  go  forth  as  the  ambaffadors  of  Chrifi, 
and  have  the  care  of  immortal  fouls,  are  extreme- 
ly abominable  to  God;  vaftly  more  hateful  in  his 
fight  than  all  the  imprudence  and  intemperate 
heats,  wildnefs  and  diltraftion  (as  fome  call  it)  of 
thefe  zealous  preachers.  A fupine  careleffnefs, 
or  worldly  fpirit  in  a minifier  of  the  gofpel,  is  the 
word  diftraflion  in  the  fight  of  God.  God  may 
alfo  make  ufe  of  the  cenforioufnefs  of  fome 
preachers,  the  more  to  humble  and  purify  fome 
of  his  own  children  that  have  been  wrongfully 
cenfured,  and  to  fit  them  for  more  eminent  fer- 
vice.  „ 

•IL  Another  fundamental  error  of  thofe  that 
Voi,.  XVII,  L do 


[ 252  ] 

do  not  acknowledge  the  divinity  of  this  work, 
is,  not  taking  the  holy  fcriptures  as  a whole , and 
fufficient  rule  to  judge  of  fuch  things  by.  They 
that  have  one  confident  rule  to  judge  by,  may 
come  to  fome  clear  determination,  but  they 
that  have  half  a dozen  different  rules  to  make 
the  thing  they  would  judge  of  agree  to,  in- 
ftead  of  juflly  and  clearly  determining,  do  but 
perplex  and  darken  themfelves  and  others. 

They  will  indeed  make  fome  ufe  of  the  fcrip- 
ture,  fo  far  as  they  think  it  ferves  their  turn  ; but 
do  not  make  ufe  of  it  atone,  as  a rule  fufficient 
by  itfelf.  They  make  as  much  or  more  ufe  of 
other  things,  to  judge  of  this  work  by.  As  par- 
ticularly, 

1.  Some  make  philofophy , inflead  of  the  holy 
fcriptures,  their  rule  of  judging  of  this  work; 
particularly  the  philofophical  notions  they  enter- 
tain of  the  nature  ol  the  foul,  its  faculties  and  af- 
fections. “ There  is  but  little  fober,  folid  reli- 
gion, fay  they,  in  this  work  ; it  is  little  elfe  but 
flaffi  and  noife.  Religion  now-a-days  all  runs 
out  into  tranfports  and  high  flights  of  the  paffions 
and  affeflions.”  In  their  philofophy,  the  affections 
of  the  foul  are  but  the  meanefl  principles  that 
it  has ; that  belong  to  man  as  partaking  of  animal 
nature,  and  what  he  has  in  common  with  the 
brute  creation,  rather  than  any  thing  whereby  he 
is  conformed  to  angels  and  pure  fpirits. 

But  thefe  gentlemen  labour  under  great  mif- 

takes. 


[ 2c53  3 


takes,  both  in  their  philofophy  and  divinity.  It  is 
true,  diftindlion  rnuft  be  made  in  the  affe&ions  or 
paffions.  Some  are  much  more  folid  than  others. 
There  are  many  exercifes  of  the  affe&ions  that 
are  little  to-be  depended  on  ; and  often  there  is  a 
great  deal  that  appertains  to  them,  which  isvery 
much  owing  to  the  frame  of  the  body  ; and  that 
which  more  efpecially  obtains  the  name  of  paf- 
fion,  is  nothing  folid  or  fubflantial.  But  it  is 
falfe  philofophy  to  fuppofe  this  is  the  cafe  with 
all  great  and  high  affeftions  ; and  falfe  divinity  to 
fuppofe  that  religious  affediions  do  not  appertain 
to  the  e {Fence  of  Chriflianity.  Gn  the  contrary, 
the  very  life  and  foul  of  all  true  religion  confifls 
in  them. 

* All  will  allow  that  true  holinefs  has  its  feat 
chiefly  in  the  heart  ; not  the  head.  It  follows, 
that  it  confifls  chiefly  in  holy  ajfechons.  For  the 
things  of  religion  take  place  in  men’s  hearts,  no 
further  than  they  are  affeiled  with  them.  The  in- 
forming of  the  underftanding  is  all  vain,  any  fur- 
ther than  it  affetds  the  heart,  or,  which  is  the 
the  fame  thing,  has  influence  on  the  affettions. 

Thofe  gentlemen  will  doubtlefs  allow  that 
true  religion,  as  it  has  its  feat  in  the  heart,  is  ca- 
pable of  very  high  degrees  in  the  foul.  As  for 
inffance,  they  will  doubtlefs  allow  that  the  holi- 
nefs of  i he  heart  is  capable  of  being  raifed  to  an 
hundred  times  as  gieat  a degree  of  ftrength,  as  it 
is  in  the  moft  eminent  faint  on  earth  ; and  yet  be 
L 2 true 


C 254  ] 

true  holinefs  ftill.  Now  I afk,  by  what  name 
they  will  call  thefe  high  exercifes  of  the  heart  ? 
Are  they  not  high  affections  ? What  can  they 
confift  in  ? But  in  high  a£ts  of  love;  ftrong  and 
vigorous  exercifes  of  benevolence  and  compla- 
cence ; ftrong  defires  after  God,  yea,  thofe  very 
fame  high  and  raifed  affeftions  that  before  they 
made  light  of? 

I fuppofe  further,  that  all  allow  there  is  no- 
thing but  folid  religion  in  heaven  ; but  that  there, 
religion  is  raifed  to  an  exceeding  great  height, 
to  ftrong,  exalted  exercifes  of  heart.  Now,  what 
other  ftrong  and  h'gh  exercifes  of  the  heart,  can 
we  devife  for  them,  but  holy  affections,  high  de- 
grees of  love  to  God,  rejoicing  in  God,  admir- 
ing of  God  ? — Therefore  thefe  things,  in  the  an- 
gels in  heaven,  are  not  to  be  defpifed  by  the 
name  of  great  heats  and  tranfports  of  the  palfions. 

And  it  will  be  farther  allowed,  that  the  more 
eminent  the  faints  are  on  earth,  the  more  they 
are  like  the  faints  in  heaven,  i.  e.  (by  what  has 
been  juff  now  obferved)  the  more  they  have  of 
high  or  raifed  affections. 

If  we  take  the  fcriptures  for  our  whole  rule, 
then  the  greater  and  higher  are  the  exercifes  of 
love  to  God,  longings  after  God,  delight  in  the 
children  of  God,  love  to  mankind,  brokennefs  of 
heart,  abhorrence  of  fin,  and  felf-abhorrence  for 
fin  ; exalting  and  glorying  in  God  ; fo  much  the 
higher  is  Chrift’s  religion  raifed  in  the  foul. 


But 


[ 2 55  ] 

But  it  is  a {tumbling  to  fom'e,'  that  religious  af- 
fe£tions  fhould  be  to  violent  (a?  they  exprefs  it)  in 
fome  perfons : they  are  therefore  ready  to  doubt 
whether  it  can  be  the  Spirit  of  God,  or  whether 
this  vehemence  be  riot  rather  a fiign  of  an  evil 
fpirit.  But  what  is  reprefented  in  fcripture  as 
more  powerful  in  its  effefifs  than  the  Spirit  of 
God  ? Which  is  therefore  called  t The  power  of 
the  Highef.  And  it  is  faid  to  operate  in  the 
minds  of  men  with  the  exceeding  greatnefs  cf  di- 
vine power,  and  ^ according  to  the  working  of  God's 
mighty  power.  So  in  2 Tim.  i.  7.  the  Spirit  of 
God  is  called  the  Spirit  of  power,  and  love,  and  of 
a found  mind.  And  the  Spirit  is  reprefented  by  a 
mighty  wind,  and  by  fire,  things  moft  powerful 
in  their  operation. 

2.  Many  are  guilty  of  not  taking  the  holy 
fcriptures  as  a fufficient  and  whole  rule,  where- 
by to  judge  of  this  work,  whether  it  be  the  work 
of  God  ; in  that  they  judge  by  thofe  things  which 
the  fcripture  does  not  give  as  any  marks  where- 
by to  judge  one  way  or  the  other,  viz.  The  ef- 
fects that  religious  affe&ions  of  mind  have  upon 
the  body.  Scripture  rules  refpeft  the  Hate  of  the 
mind,  and  perfons  voluntary  behaviour ; not  the 
phyfical  Rate  of  the  body.  The  defign  of  the 
fcripture  is  to  teach  us  divinity,  and  not  phyfic 
and  anatomy.  Minifters  are  made  the  watch- 
men of  men’s  fouls,  and  not  their  bodies ; and 
therefore  the  great  rule  which  God  has  commit- 
L 3 ted 

+ Luke.i,  35, 


| Eph.  i.  19. 


[ 256  ] 

ted  into  their  hands  is  to  make  them  divines,  not 
phyficians.  Chrifl  knew  what  inflru&ions  a nd 
rules  his  church  would  {land  in  need  of,  bet- 
ter than  we  do ; and  if  he  had  feen  it  need- 
ful in  order  to  the  church’s  fafety,  he  doubtlefs- 
would  havegiven  minifters  rules  to  judgeof  bodily 
effe&s  ; and  would  have  told  them  how  the  pulfe 
fhould  beat  under  fuch  and  fuch  exercifes  of  the 
mind  : when  men  fhould  look  pale,  and  when 
they  fhould  fned  tears  ; when  they  fhould'  trem- 
ble, and  whether  or  no  they  fhould  ever  be  faint 
or  cry  out  ; or  whether  the  body  fhouid  ever  be 
put  into  convulfions  : he  would  have  put  fome 
book  into  their  hands,  to  make  them  anatomifls 
and  phyficians  ; but  he  has  not  done  it,  becaufe 
he  did  not  fee  it  to  be  needful.  He  judged,  that 
ifminiflers  did  their  duty  as  overfeers  of  the 
Rate  of  mens  fouh,  and  of  their  voluntary  con- 
du£l,  according  to  the  rules  he  had  given,  his 
church  would  be  well  provided  for.  And  there- 
fore thofe  minifters  that  bufy  themfelves  about 
the  involuntary  motions  of  the  fluids  and  folids 
of  mens  bodies,  when  nothing  appears  but  that 
the  ftate  of  their  minds  and  their  behaviour  is 
good  and  agreeable  to  God’s  word  ; I fay, 
fuch  minifters  go  out  of  the  place  that  Chrifl  has 
fet  them  in,  and  leave  their  proper  bufinefs,  as 
much  as  if  they  fhould  undertake  to  tell  who  are 
under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  by  their  looks, 
or  their  gait. 


The 


[ 257  ] 

The  moft  fpecious  thing  that  is  alledged  againft 
thefe,  is,  that  the  body  is  impaired,  and  health 
injured  ; and  that  ’tis  hard  to  think  that  God,  in 
the  merciful  influences  of  his  Spirit  on  men, 
would  wound  their  bodies,  and  impair  their 
health.  But  if  it  were  fo  commonly  (which  I 
don’t  fuppofe  it  is)  that  perfons  received  a lading 
wound  to  their  health  by  extraordinary  impref- 
fions  made  upon  their  minds,  yet  ’tis  too  much 
for  us  to  determine  that  God  fhall  never  bring 
an  outward  calamity  in  bellowing  a vaflly  greater 
fpiritual  good.  Jacob  in  wrellling  with  God, 
at  the  fame  time  that  he  received  the  biefling 
from  God,  buffered  a great  outward  calamity 
from  his  hand  ; God  impaired  his  body,  fo  that 
he  never  got  over  it  as  long  as  he  lived  : he 
gave  him  the  bleffing,  but  fent  him  away  halting 
on  his  thigh , and  he  went  lame  all  his  life  after. 
And  yet  this  is  not  mentioned  as  if  it  were  any 
diminution  of  the  great  mercy  of  God  to  him, 
when  God  blefled  him  and  he  received  his 
name  Ifrael,  becaufe  as  a Prince  he  had  power 
with  God,  and  had  prevailed. 

Butfay  fome,  the  operations  oftheSpirit  ofGod 
are  of  a benign  nature.  True  ; yet  it  has  been 
a thing  allowed,  till  now,  that  there  is  fuch  a 
thing  as  bt'ing/ick  of  love  to  Chrift,  or  having  the 
bodily  llrength  weakened  by  flrong  and  vigorous 
exercifes  of  love  to  him.  And  however  kind  to 
human  nature  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  are,  yet  no  body  doubts  but  that  divine 
L 4 and 


[ £3§  J 

and  eternal  things,  as  they  may  be  difcovered, 
would  overpower  the  nature  of  man  in  its  pre- 
fent  Hate  ; and  that  therefore  the  body,  in  its 
prefen t weaknefs,  is  not  fitted  for  the  views  and 
pleafures  of  heaven  : yea,  that  if  God  did  dif- 
cover  but  a little  of  that  which  is  feen  by  the 
angels  in  heaven,  our  frail  natures  would  fink 
-under  it — Let  us  rationally  confider  what  we 
profefs  to  believe  of  the  infinite  greatnefs  of  the 
things  of  God,  the  divine  wrath,  the  divine 
glory,  the  infinite  love  and  grace  in  Jefus  Chrili, 
and  the  vaflnefs  and  infinite  importance  of  the 
things  of  eternity.  How  reafonable  then  is  it  to 
fuppofe,  that  if  it  pleafe  God  to  withdraw  the 
veil,  and  give  a view  of  the  great  things  of  ano- 
ther world  in  their  tranfcendent  and  infinite 
greatnefs,  human  nature,  that  is  as  the  grafs,  a 
fhaking  leaf,  a weak  withering  flower,  fhould 
totter  under  fuch  a difcovery  r*  Such  a bubble  is 
too  weak  to  bear  the  weight  of  a view  of  thing3 
that  are  fo  vaff.  Alas  1 what  is  duff  and  afhes, 
that  it  fhould  fupport  itfelf  under  the  view  of  the 
awful  wrath  or  infinite  glory  of  JEHOVAH  ! 
No  wonder  therefore  that  it  is  faid,  no  man  can 
fee  jne  and  live.  That  external  glory  and  ma- 
jefty  of  Cbrifl  which  Daniel  faw,  when  t there 
remained  no  frength  in  him,  and  his  comelinefs  was 
turned  in  him  into  corruption,  and  which  the 
apoflle  John  faw,  when  h e fell  at  his  feet  as  dead: 
was  but  a fhadow  of  that  fpiritual  glory  and 

majefly 


•{■  Dan.  x.  6,  7,  8. 


[ 259  ] 

majefly  of  Chrift,  which  will  be  manifefted  in 
another  world,  and  which  is  fometimes,  in  fome 
degree,  manifefted  to  the  foul  in  this  world,  by 
the  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  And,  if 
the  beholding  the  fhadow  of  this  majelty  and 
glory  did  fo  overpower  human  nature,  is  it  un- 
reafonable  to  fuppofe  that  a fight  of  the  glory  it- 
felf,  fhould  have  as  powerful  an  effeft  ? The 
prophet  Habakhuk,  fpeaking  of  the  awful  mani- 
feftations  God  made  of  his  majefty  and  wrath, 
at  the  red Jea,  and  in  the  wildernefs,  and  at 
mount  Sinai , where  he  gave  the  law  ; and  of  the 
imprelfion  God  caufed  it  to  have  upon  him,  to 
the  end  that  he  might  be  faved  from  that  wrath, 
and  rejl  in  the  day  of  trouble ; fays,  t when 
I heard , my  belly  trembled , my  lips  quivered  at  the 
voice,  rottennefs  entered  into  my  bones,  I trembled 
myfelf  that  I might  rejl  in  the  day  of  trouble. 
Which  is  much  fuch  an  effedt  as  the  difeovery 
of  the  fame  majefty  and  wrath  has  had  on  many 
in  thefe  days  : and  to  the  fame  purpofes,  viz. 
to  give  them  rejl  in  the  day  oj  trouble,  and.  fave 
them  from  that  wrath.  The  pfalmift  alfo  fpeaks 
of  fuch  an  affedf  as  I have  often  feen  on  per- 
fons  under  religious  affedlions,  j;  I opened  my 
mouth  and  panted,  for  I longed for,  thy  command- 
ments. 

God  is  pleafed  fometimes,  in  dealing  fpiritual 
blelfmgs  to  his  people,  to  .exceed  the  capacity  of 
the  veffel  in  its  prefent  fcantinefs  ; fo  that  he 
Lyj  does  ■ 

+ Hab.  iii.  16,  f Pfal.  cxix.  231. 


[ 26o  3 

does  not  only  fill  it  full,  but  he  makes  their  cup 
to  run  over  ; and  pours  out  a bleffing  in  fuch 
a manner  and  meafure  that  there  is  not  room  to 
receive  it.  He  gives  them  riches  more  than 
they  can  carry  away,  as  he  did  to  Jehojhaphat 
and  his  people  in  a time  of  great  favour,  in  an- 
fwer  to  earned  prayer,  when  the  people  bleffed 
the  Lord  in  the  valley  of  Berchali.  + It  has  been 
with  the  difciples  of  Chrift,  for  a long  time,  a 
time  of  great  emptinefs  upon  fpiritual  accounts  ; 
they  have  gone  hungry,  and  have  been  toiling 
in  vain,  during  a dark  feafon  : a time  of  night 
with  the  church  of  God  ; as  it  was  with  the  dif- 
ciples of  old,  when  they  had  toiled  all  night  and 
caught  nothing.  But  now,  the  morning  being 
come,  Jefus  appears  to  his  difciples,  and  takes  a 
compaflTionate  notice  of  their  wants,  and  fays  to 
them,  Children , have  ye  any  meat  ? and  gives 
fome  ol  them  abundance,  that  they  are  not  able 
to  draw  their  net  ; yea,  fo  that  their  net  breaks, 
and  their  veffel  is  over-loaded  and  begins  to 
fink. 

We  cannot  determine  that  God  never  fhall 
give  perfons  fuch  a difcov-ery  ol  himfelf,  as  even 
to  take  away  their  lives.  It  is  fuppofed  by  many 
divines,  that  Mofesr  life  was  taken  away  after  this 
manner ; and  this  has  alfo  been  fuppofed  of  fome 
other  faints.  Yea,  I fee  no  other  fure  grounds 
to  determine,  that  God  fhall  never  make  fuch 
flrong  impreflions  on  the  mind  by  his  Spirit,-  as 

fball 


f 4 Chron,  xx.  25,  26. 


[ *6i  ] 

fhall  be  an  occafion  of  fo  impairing  the  frame  of 
the  body,  and  particularly  that  part  of  the  body, 
the  brain,  that  perfons  fhall  be  deprived  of  the 
ufe  of  reafon.  As  it  is  too  much  for  us  to  fay, 
that  God  will  not  bring  an  outward  calamity  in 
bellowing  fpiritual  bleffings;  fo  it  is  too  much 
for  us  to  determine  how  great  an  outward  calami- 
ty he  will  bring.  If  God  gives  great  difcoveries 
of  himfelf,  and  love  to  him,  the  benefit  is  infi- 
nitely greater  than  the  calamity,  though  the  life 
fhould  prefently  be  taken  away  ; yea,  though 
the  foul  fhould  not  immediately  be  taken,  but  he 
fome  years  in  a deep  Deep,  and  then  be  taken  to 
heaven  : or,  which  is  much  the  fame  thing,, 
though  it  be  deprived  of  the  ufe  of  its  faculties, 
and  be  unaftive  and  unferviceable,  as  if  it  lay  in 
a deep  deep  for  fome  years,  and  then  fhould  pafs 
into  glory.  We  cannot  determine  how  great  a 
calamity  diftra&ion  is,  when  confidered  with 
all  its  confequences,  and  all  that  might  have  been 
confequent  if  the  diltraflion  had  not  happened  : 
nor  indeed  whether  (thus  confidered)  it  be  any 
calamity  at  all,  or  whether  it  be  not  a mercy,  by 
preventing  fome  great  fin,  or  fome  more  dread- 
ful thing,  if  it  had  not  been.  It  is  a great  fault 
in  us  to  limit  a fovereign  all-wife  God,  whofe 
judgments  are  a great  deep,  and  his  ways  paji' 
Jinding  out,  where  he  has  not  limited  himfelf* 
and  in  things  concerning  which  he  has  not  told  us 
what  his  way  fhall  be  with  fo  very  few.t 

L 6 3.  Another: 

t N.  B,  1 do  not  know  oj  me  fuch  injlanco  in  England. 


[ 262  ] 

3-  Another  thing  that  fome  make  their  rule  to 
judge  of  this  work  by,  inftead  of  the  holy  fcrip- 
tures,  is  hiflory,  or  former  obfervation.  Thefe 
err  two  ways;  JirJl , If  there  be  any  thing  new  and 
extraordinary  in  the  circumftances  of  this  work, 
that  was  not  obferved  in  former  times,  that  is  a 
rule  with  them  to  rejefi  it.  Herein  they  make 
that  their  rule  that  God  has  not  made  fo  ; and 
limit  God,  where  he  has  not  limited  himfelf.. 
And  this  is  efpecially  unreafonable  in  this  cafe. 
For  whofoever  has  well  weighed  the  myfterious 
methods  of  divine  wifdom,  in  the  progrefs  of 
the  work  of  redemption,  from  the  firft  promife 
of  the  feed  of  the  woman  to  this  time,  may  eafi- 
ly  obferve  that  it  has  all  along  been  God’s  man- 
ner to  open  new  fcenes,  and  to  bring  forth 
to  view  things  new  and  wonderful,  fuch  as  eye 
hath  not  feen,  nor  ear  heard.  As  the  old  creation 
was  carried- on  through  fix  days,  and  appeared  all 
cotnpleat,  fettled  in  a jfate  of  reft  on  the  fevent’n  ; 
fo  the  new  creation,  which  is  immenfely  the. 
greateft  work,  is  carried  on  in  a gradual  progrefs, 
from  the  fall  of  man  to  the  confummation  of  all 
things.  And  as  in  the  progrefs  of  the  old  crea- 
tion there  were  ftill  new  things  accomplifhed ; 
new  wonders  appeared  every  day  in  the  fight  of 
the  angels,  the  fpedftators  of  that  work;  new 
fcenes  were  opened,  things  that  they  had  not 
feen  before,  till  the  whole  was  finilhed  ; fo  it 
is.  in  the  progrefs  of  the  new  creation.  So  that, 

that 


203  J 


that  promife,  t For  [met  the  beginning  cf  the 
world,  men  have  not  heard,  nor  perceived  by  the 
ear,  neither  hath  the  eye  feen,  0 God,  bejides  thee, 
what  he  hath  prepared  for  him  that  zuaitetk  for  him  y 
though  it  had  a glorious  fulfilment  in  the  days  of 
Chrift  and  the  apofiies,  as  the  words  are  applied, 
x Cor.  ii.  9.  yet  it  always  remains  to  be  ful- 
filled in  things  that  are  yet  behind,  till  the  new 
creation  is  finifhed,  at  Chrift’s  delivering  up  the 
kingdom  to  his. Father. 

And  befides,  thofe  things  in  this  work,  that 
have  been  chiefly  complained  of  as  new,  are  not 
fo  new  as  has  been  generally  imagined : though 
they  have  been  much  more  frequent  lately,  in 
proportion  to  the  uncommon  degree,  extent  and 
fwiftnefs,  and  other  extraordinary  circumftances 
of  the  work,  yet  they  are  not  new  in  their  kind  ; 
but  are  things  of  the  fame  nature  as  have  been 
found  in  the  church  of  God  before,  from  time  to 
time. 

We  have  a remarkable  inffance  in  Mr  Bolton , 
that  noted  minifter  of  the  church  of  England , 
who  being  awakened  by  the  preaching  of  the  . fa- 
mous Mr.  Perhtns,  in  the  univerfity  of  Cambridge , 
was  fubjefl:  to  fuch  terrors  as  threw  him  to  the 
ground,  and  caufed  him  to  roar  with  anguifh  j 
and  the  pangs  of  the  new-birth  in  him  were  feen, 
that  he  lay  pale- and  without  fenfe,  like  one  dead. 
And  we  have  another  in  the  life  of  Mr.  George 
Frcffe,  of  terrors  by  awakenings  of  confcience,  fo 

over- 


- f Ifaiab  lxiv, 


C *64  ] 

oyerpowering  the  body,  as  to  deprive  him,  for 
fome  time,  of  the  ufe  of  reafon. 

Yea,  fuch  extraordinary  external  effe&s  of  in- 
ward jmpreflions  have  not  only  been  found  in 
here  and  there  a (ingle  perfon,  but  there  have  al- 
fo  before  now  been  times  wherein  they  have  ap- 
peared in  congregations,  in  many  at  once.  So 
in  the  year  1625,  in  the  weft  of  Scotland,  it  was 
a frequent  thing  for  many  to  be  fo  feized  with 
terror  in  hearing  of  the  word,  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  convincing  them  of  fin,  that  they  fell  down, 
and  were  carried  out  of  the  church.  Many  in 
France  alfo  were  fo  wonderfully  affecled  with  the 
preaching  of  the  gofpel,  in  the  time  of  thofe  fa- 
mous divines  Farrel  and  Viret,  that  for  a time 
they  could  not  follow  their  fecular  bufinefs:  and 
many  in  Ireland , in  the  year  1628,  were  fo  filled 
with  divine  comforts,  that  they  made  but  little 
ufe  of  either  meat,  drink  or  deep,  and  profefled 
they  did  not  feel  the  need  thereof. 

Great  outcries  under  awakenings  were  alfo  fre- 
quently  heard  of,  in  former  times,  in  this  coun- 
try, as  fome  aged  perfons  now  living  do  teftify: 
I think  fit  here  to  infert  a teftimony  of  my  ho- 
noured father,  of  what  he  remembers  formerly  to 
have  heard. 

“ I well  remember,  that  one  Mr.  Alexander 
“ Allan , a Scote  gentleman  of  good  credit,  that 
“ dwelt  formerly  in  this  town,  (hewed  me  a let- 
“ ter  that  came  from  Scotland , that  gave  an  ac- 
count  of  a fermon  preached  in  the  city  of  Edin- 

“ burgk, 


[ 265  ] 

“ burgh,  in  the  time  of  the  fitting  of  the  general 
*4  alfembly  of  divines,  which  fo  affefted  the  peo- 
54  pie,  that  there  was  a great  and  loud  cry  made 
“ throughout  the  affembly.  I have  alfo  been 
“ credibly  informed,  that  it  was  a common  thing, 
“ when  the  famous  Mr.  John  Rogers,  of  Bed- 
“ ham , in  England,  was  preaching,  for  fome  of 
“ his  hearers  to  cry  out  ; and  by  what  I have 
“ heard,  I conclude  tl  at  it  was  ufual  for  many 
“ that  heard  that  awakening  preacher  of  God’s 
“ word,  to  make  a great  cry  in  the  congregation.” 
Windjor,  May  g,  174 2.  Timothy  Edwards, 

There  have  been  inftances  alfo  before  now,  of 
perfons  crying  out  in  tranfports  of  divine  joy  in 
New-England.  We  have  an  inflance  in  Cap't. 
Clap’s  memoirs,  not  of  a filly  woman  or  child,  but 
a man  of  lolid  underfianding,  that,  in  a high 
tranfport  of  fpiritual  joy,  was  made  to  cry  out 
aloud  on  his  bed.  His  words  (p.  9.)  are,  God’s 
“ Holy  Spirit  did  witnefs  with  my  fpirit,  that  I 
“ was  a child  of  God;  and  did  fill  my  heart  and 
“ foul  with  fuch  affurance  that  Chri ft  was  mine, 
“ to  make  me  cry  out  upon  my  bed,  with  a loud 
“ voice,  He  is  come,  he  is  come!’ 

There  has,  before  now,  been  both  crying  out 
and  falling  down,  in  this  town,  under  awakenings 
of  confcience,  and  alfo  in  fome  of  the  neigh- 
bouring towns.  In  one  of  them,  more  than 
feven  years  ago,  were  a great  number  together 
that  cried  out  and  fell  down  under  conviflions. 

And 


[ 266  ] 

And  the  Rev.  Mr.  Williams , of  Deerfield,  gave  me 
an  account  of  an  aged  man  in  that  town,  many 
years  before  that,  that  being  awakened  by  his 
preaching,  cried  out  aloud  in  the  congregation. 
There  have  been  many  infiances  in  this  and  fome 
neighbouring  towns,  before  now,  of  perfons 
fainting  with  joyful  difcoveries  made  to  their 
fouls  ; once  feveral  together  in  this  town.  And 
there  alfo  formerly  have  been  feveral  infiances 
here  of  perfons  flefh  waxing  cold,  benumbed,  and 
their  hands  clinched  ; yea,  their  bodies  being  fet 
into  convulfions,  being  overpowered  with  a 
firong  fenfe  of  the  aflonifhingly  great  and  excel- 
lent things  of  God  and  the  eternal  world. 

4.  I 'would  propofe  it  to  be  confidered,  whe- 
ther fome,-  irtfiead  of  making  the  feriptures  their 
only  rule  to  judge  of  this  work,  do  not  make 
their  own  experience  the  rule,  and  reject  fuch 
things,  becaufe  they  never  felt  them  themfelves. 
Are  there  not  many  that  have  entertained  fufpt- 
cions,  if  not  peremptory  condemnations,  of  thofe 
extreme  terrors,  and  thofe  great  difcoveries  of 
the  glorious  perfeftions  of  God,  and  of  the  beau- 
ty and  love  of  Chrifl ; and  fuch  vehement  affec- 
tions, fuch  high  tranfports  of  love  and  joy,  and 
exercifes  of  mind,  that  have  fuch  great  effe£is  on 
perfons  bodies,  becaufe  they  knew  nothing  about- 
them  by- experience  ? It  is  to  be  feared  many 
good  men  have  been  guilty  of  this  error  ; which 
yet  does  not  make  it  the  lefs  unreafonable.  And 
perhaps  there  are  fome  that  upon  this  ground  do- 

net- 


[ s67  ] 

no  t only  rejeft  thefe  extraordinary  things,  but 
ail  fuch  conviction  of  fin,  and  fuch  difcoveries 
of  the  glory  of  God,  and  excellency  of  Chrift, 
and  inward  conviftion  of  the  truth  of  the  gofpel, 
by  the  immediate  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
as  are  neceffary  to  falvation. 

III.  Another  fundamental  error  of  thofe  that 
rejeft  this  work  is,  their  not  duly  dijlinguijhing 
the  good  from  the  bad,  and  fo  rejecting  the  work 
in  general,  for  the  fake  of  fome  things,  which 
are  accidental  to  it,  that  are  evil.  They  look  for 
more  in  men  that  are  fubjeft  to  the  operations  of 
a good  fpirit,  than  is  juffly  to  be  expefted  from 
them,  in  this  imperfeff  ff ate,  and  dark  world1, 
where  fo  much  blindnefs  remains  in  the  befl. 
When  any  profefs  to  have  received  light  and 
comforts  from  heaven,  and  to  have  had  com- 
munion with  God,  many  are  ready  to  expefb 
that  now  they  appear  like  angels,  and  not  flili 
like  poor,  feeble,  blind  and  {infill  worms.  That 
fo  much  corruption  is  left  in  the  hearts- of  God’s 
own  children,  was  always  a ftumbling-block  to 
the  world  ; but  it  will  not  be  wondered  at,  by 
thofe  that  are  duly  mindful  of  two  things ; frjl , 
the  word  of  God,  which  teaches  us  the  {fate  of 
Chriflians  in  this  world  : and feeondly,  their  own 
heart,  at  lead  if  they  have  any  grace,  and  have 
experience  of  its  conflifls  with  corruption.  If  all 
our  conduff,  both  open  and  fecret,  fhould  be 
known,  and  our  hearts  laid  open  to  the  world  ; 

how- 


[ 268  ] 

how  fhould  we  be  even  ready  to  flee  from  the 
light  of  the  fun,  and  hide  ourfelves  from  the  view 
of  mankind  ? And  what  great  allowances  fhould 
we  need  that  others  fhould  make  for  us  ? Per- 
haps much  greater  than  we  are  willing  to  make 
for  others. 

* The  great  weaknefs  of  the  bigger  part  of 
mankind,  in  any  affair  that  is  new  and  uncom- 
mon, appears  in  not  diflinguifhing  ; but  either 
approving  or  condemning  all  in  the  lump.  They 
that  highly  approve  of  the  affair  in  general,  can- 
not bear  to  have  any  thing  at  all  found  fault  with  : 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  thofe  that  fatten  their 
eyes  upon  fome  things  that  are  arnifs,  at  once 
reject  the  whole.  But  it  is  rafh  and  unjutt,  when 
we  proceed  thus  in  judging  either  of  a particular 
perfon,  or  a people,  or  of  fuch  an  affair  as  the 
prefent  influence  on  the  minds  of  the  people  of 
this  land.  Yet  fo  it  is  ; many  if  they  fee  any 
thing  ill  in  a particular  perfon,  will  at  once  brand 
him  as  an  hypocrite.  And,  if  there  be  two  or 
three  of  a people  or  fociety,  that  behave  them- 
felves  irregularly,  the  whole  mutt  bear  the  blame 
of  it.  If  there  be  a few,  though  it  may  be  not 
above  one  in  an  hundred,  that  had  a fhew  of  be- 
ing the  happy  partakers  of  the  benefits  of  this 
work,  who  prove  naught  in  the  end,  the  whole 
work  mutt  be  rejebled  on  their  account;  and 
thofe  in  general,  that  make  the  like  profeffion, 
mutt  be  condemned  for  their  fakes. 


2.  So 


[ 269  J 

2.  So  careful  are  fome  perfons  left  this  work 
fhould  be  defended,  that  now  they  will  hardly  al- 
low that  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God  on  the 
heart  can  fo  much  as  indireElly,  and  accidentally , 
be  the  occalion  of  fin. — Thus  far  is  true,  that  this 
influence  won’t  be  an  occafion  of  the  increafe  of 
the  corruption  of  the  heart  in  general,  but  of  the 
weakening  of  it ; yet  there  is  nothing  unreafon- 
able  in  fuppofing,  that  at  the  fame  time  it  weak- 
ens corruption  in  general,  it  may  be  an  occafion 
of  the  turning  what  is  left  into  a new  channel, 
and  fo  of  there  being  more  of  fome  certain  kinds 
of  the  exercife  of  corruption  than  there  was 
before  ; as  that  which  tends  to  hinder  and  flop 
the  courfe  of  a ftream,  if  it  do  not  do  it  wholly, 
may  give  a new  courfe  to  fo  much  of  the  water 
as  gets  by  the  obftacle.  The  influences  of  the 
Spirit,  for  inftance,  may  be  an  occafion  of  new 
ways  of  the  exercife  of  pride.  This  was  not 
doubted  of,  till  now  it  is  found  to  be  needful  to 
maintain  the  war  astainft  this  work. 

O 

But  I fuppofe  all  will  allow,  that  the  influences 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  yea,  and  an  high  degree 
of  love  to  God,  is  confident  with  thefe  two 
things,  viz.  a confiderable  degree  of  remain- 
ing corruption,  and  alfo  many  errors  of  judg- 
ment in  matters  of  religion,  and  in  matters  of 
practice.  And  this  is  all  that  need  to  be  allow- 
ed, in  order  to  its  being  demonftratively  evident 
that  even  love  to  God  may  accidentally  move 
a perfon  to  that  which  is  contrary  to  the  will  of 

God, 


[ 2 7°  ] 

God.  For  a high  degree  of  love  to  God  will 
ftrongly  move  a perfon  to  do  that  which  he 
believes  to  be  agreeable  to  God’s  will  ; and 
therefore,  if  he  be  miflaken,  and  be  perfuaded 
that  is  agreeable  to  the  will  of  God,  which  in- 
deed is  contrary  to  it,  then  his  love  will  acci- 
dentally incline  him  to  that  which  is  indeed 
contrary  to  the  will  of  God. 

3.  Farther;  true  difciples  of  Chrift  may  have 
a great  deal  of  falfe  zeal,  fuch  as  the  difciples 
had  of  old,  when  they  would  have  fire  called 
for  from  heaven  to  come  down  on  the  Samari- 
tans, and  even  fo  great  a faint  as  Mofes,  who  con- 
verfed  with  God,  as  a man  with  his  friend,  and 
concerning  whom  God  gives  his  tefiimony,  that 
he  was  very  meek,  above  any  man  upon  the  face 
of  the  earth,  yet  maybe  rafh  and  finful  in  his 
zeal,  fo  as  to  fpeak  unadvifedly  with  his  lips. 
Yea,  man,  in  thofe  very  things  wherein  they  are 
influenced  by  a pious  principle,  yet  thro’ error 
and  want  of  due  confideration  may  be  very  rafh 
svith  their  zeal.  It  was  a truly  good  fpirit  that  ani- 
mated that  excellent  generation  of  lfrael  that 
was  in  f of  iua\  time,  in  that  affair  that  we  have 
an  account  of  in  the  2 2d  chapter  01  JoJTiua  ; and 
yet  they  were  rafh  and  heady  with  their  zeal,  to 
go  about  to  gather  all  I/rael  to  go  up  furioufly 
to  war  with  their  brethern  of  the  two  tribes  and 
half,  about  their  building  the  altar  Ed,  without 
fir  ft  enquiring  into  the  matter,  or  fo  much  as 
fending,  a melfenger  to  be  informed.  So  the 

Chriftians 


[ 271  ] 

'Chrifiians  that  were  of  the  circumcifion  con- 
demned Peter  for  receiving  Cornelius , though 
there  is  all  appearance  that  they  afted  from  a real 
concern  for  the  will  and  honour  of  God.  So  the 
primitive  Chrifiians,  from  their  zeal  for  and 
againft  unclean  meats,  cenfured  and  condemned 
one  another  : this  was  a had  effeft,  and  yet  the 
apoftle  bears  them  witnefs,  that  both  hides  .a£ted 
from  a good  principle,  Rom.  xiv.  6.  The  zeal  ot 
the  Corinthians  with  re  [peel  to  the  inceftuous 
man,  though  the  apoftle  highly  commends  it, 
yet  at  the  fame  time  needed  a caution,  left  they 
fhould  carry  it  too  far,  fo  as  to  fail  of  Chriflian 
meeknefs  and  forgivenefs.h 

q.  It  finely  cannot  be  wondered  at  by  corifi- 
derate  perfons,  that  at  a time  when  multitudes 
have  their  affections  greatly  moved,  many 
fhould  run  into  errors  and  miltakes  with  refpeft 
to  their  duty,  and  confequenily  into  practices 
that  are  imprudent  and  irregular.  - I queflion 
whether  there  be  a man  in  Nezu- England , of  the 
ftrongeft  reafon  and  greatelt  learning,  but  what 
would  be  put  to  it  to  keep  mailer  of  himfelf,  tho- 
roughly to  weigh  his  words,  and  co slider  all  the 
the  confequences  of  his  behaviour,  if  he  were  fo 
ftrongly  imprelfed  with  a fenfe  of  divine  things, 
and  his  affections  fo  exceedingly  moved,  as  has 
been  frequent  of  late  among  the  common  people. 
How  little  then  do  they  confider  human  nature,  who 
think  it  fo  infuperable  a flumbling-block,  when 

fuch 

+ a’Cor.  ii.  6,  ,7,  8.  9,  :o,  11,  and  Chap.  vii.  11,  to  the  end, 


[ 272  ] 

fuch  multitudes  of  all  kinds  of  capacities,  natural 
tempers,  educations,  culloms,  and  manners  of 
life,  are  fo  greatly  and  varioufly  affefted,  that 
imprudencies  fhould  abound ; efpecially  in  a flate 
of  things  fo  uncommon,  and  when  the  degree, 
extent,  fwiftnefs,  and  power  of  the  operation  is 
fo  extraordinary  and  fo  new,  that  there  has  not 
been  time  and  experience  enough  to  give  birth 
to  rules  for  peoples  conduct,  and  fo  unufual  in 
times  pall,  that  the  writings  of  divines  do  not 
afford  rules  to  diiedt  us  in  fuch  a flate  of  things? 

* A great  deal  of  noife  and  tumult,  and  dark- 
nefs  mixed  with  light,  is  to  be  expefted  in  the 
beginning  of  fomething  very  extraordinary  and 
very  glorious  in  the  flate  of  things  in  human 
fociety,  or  the  church  of  God.  As  after  nature 
has  long  been  fhut  up  in  a cold  dead  flate,  when 
the  fun  returns  in  the  fpring  there  is,  together 
with  the  increale  of  light  and  heat,  very  dirty 
and  tempefluous  weather  before  all  is  fettled  calm 
and  ferene,  and  all  nature  rejoices  in  its  bloom 
and  beauty.  It  is  in  the  new  creation  as  it  was 
in  the  old,  the  Spirit  of  God  firfl  moved  upon 
-the  waters,  which  was  an  occafron  of  uproar  and 
tumult,  and  things  were  gradually  brought  to  a 
fettled  flate,  till  at  length  all  flood  forth  in  that 
beautiful  peaceful  order,  when  the  heavens  and 
the  earth  were  finifhed,  and  God  Jaw  every  thing 
that  he  had  made , and  behold  it  was  very  good. 
When  God  is  about  to  bring  to  pafs  fomething 

great 


C s73  1 

-great  and  glorious  in  the  world,  nature  is  in  a 
ferment  and  ftruggle,  and  the  world  as  it  were  in 
travail ; as  when  God  was  about  to  introduce 
the  MeJJiah  into  the  world,  and  the  new  and  glo- 
rious difpenfation  that  he  fet  up,  he  Jhook  the 
heavens  and  the  ■earth. 

* 3.  The  weaknefs  of  human  nature  has  al- 
ways appeared  in  times  of  a great  revival  of 
religion,  by  a difpofitiott  ■ to  run  to  extremes, 
efpecially  in  thefe  three  things,  enthufiafm,  fu- 
perflition,  and  intemperate  zeal.  So  it  appeared 
in  the  time  of  the  reformation  ; and  alfo  in  the 
days  of  the  apoflles,  many  were  then  exceedingly 
difpofed  to  lay  weight  on  thofe  things  that  were 
notional  and  chimerical,  giving  heed  to  fables 
and  wnimfies,  as  appears  by  i Tim.  i.  4.  and  iv. 
7.  2 Tim.  ii.  16.  and  ver.  23.  arid  Tit.  i.  14. 

and  iii.  9.  Many,  as  ecclefiaftical  hiltory  in- 
forms us,  fell  off  into  the  molt  wild  enthufiafm  ; 
and  many  into  fuperflition,  will-worfhip,  and 
a voluntary  humility,  giving  heed  to  the  com- 
mandmenis  of  men.  And  what  a pronenefs  then 
appeared  to  fwcrve  from  the  fpirit  of  the  gofpel, 
by  ralh  indifcreet  zeal,  cenfuring  and  condemn- 
ing minillers  and  people  ; one  faying,  I am  of 
Paul;  another,  I am  of  Apollos ; another,  I am 
of  Cephas  ; judging  one  another  for  differences 
of  opinion  about  fmaller  matters,  unclean  meats, 
holy  days  and  holy  places,  and  their  civil  inter- 
courfe  and  communication  with  their  heathen 
neighbours  ? And  how  much  did  vain  jangling 

•and 


[ 274  ] 

and  difputing  prevail  under  the  name  of  religi- 
ous zeal  ? 2 Tim.  vi.  4,  5.  2 Tim.  ii.  16.  and  7z£ 
Lii.  9.  What  a tafk  had  the  apoflles  to  keep 
them  within  bounds,  and  maintain  good  order  in 
the  churches  ? How  often  are  they  mentioning 
their  irregularities  ? The  prevailing  of  fuch  like 
diforders  leems  to  haveheen  the  fpecial  occafion 
of  writing  many  of  their  epifiles.  The  church 
in  that  great  effufion  of  the  fpirit  that  was  then, 
was  under  the  care  of  infallible  guides,  that 
watched  over  them  day  and  night;  but  yet  fo 
prone  were  they,  through  the  corruption  of  na- 
ture, to  get  out  of  the  wav,  that  irregularity  and 
confufion  rofe  to  a very  great  height,  even  in 
the  apofiles  life  time,  and  under  their  eye.  And 
though  fome  of  the  apofiles -lived. long  to  fettle 
the  Hate  of  things,  yet,  prefently -after  they  were 
dead,  'the'Chrift-ian  church  ran  into  many  fuper- 
flitions  and  cbildifh  notions  and  practices.  And 
let  any  wife  perfon,  that  has  not  in  the  midft 
of  difpute  got  beyond  the  calmnefs  of  confidera- 
tiori,  impaitially  cortfider  to  what  lengths  we 
may  reafonably  fuppofe  many  of  the  primitive 
Chriftians  would  have  gone  if  they  had  had  no 
infpired  guides.;  and  whether  it  is  not  probable 
that  the  church  of  Corinth  in  particular,  would 
in  a Utile  time  have  broke  to  pieces,  and  dif- 
folved  in  a Hate  of  the  utmoH  confufion  ? And 
yet  ti  : s would  have  been  no  evidence  that  there 
had  not  been  a glorious  work  of  the  Spirit  in  that 
city.  But  as  for  us,  we  have  no  infallible  apoflle 

to 


[ 2 75  3 

to  refilify  disorders  and  reclaim  us  when  we  are 
wandering;  but  they  that  are  got  into  a wrong 
path  continue  to  wander  till  experience  of  the 
mifchievous  ifiue  convinces  them  of  their  error. 

* 6.  If  we  look  over  this  affair,  and  ferioufly 
weigh  it  in  its  circumftances,  it  may  eafily  be 
accounted  for,  how  many  fhould  run  into  great 
errors,  and  juft  luch  errors  as  they  have.  It  is 
known,  that  fome  that  have  been  great  inftru- 
ments  to  promote  this  work  have  been  very 
young;  and  how  natural  is  it  for  fuch  as  are 
themfelves  newly  waked  out  of  fieep,  and  have 
a new  and  wonderful  feene  opened  to  them, 
who  have  in  view  the  reality,  the  vaftnefs  and 
infinite  importance  and  nearnefs  of  fpiritual  and 
eternal  things;  and  at  the  fame  time  fee  the 
'world  afleep  about  them,  who  have  not  the  ad- 
vantage of  age  and  experience,  and  have  had  but 
little  opportunity  to  ftudy  divinity,  or  to  converfe 
with  aged  experienced  Chriftians  and  divines: 
•I  fay,  how  natural  is  it  for  fuch  to  fall  into  many 
errors  with  refpedl  to  the  ftate  of  mankind,  and 
with  refpefil  to  the  methods  of  their  relief?  Is  it 
any  wonder  that  they  have  not  at  once  learned 
how  to  make  all  the  allowances  that  are  to  be 
made,  and  that  they  do  not  at  once  find  out  that 
method  of  dealing  with  the  world  that  is  adapted 
to  the  myfterious  ftate  and  nature  of  mankind  ? 
Is  it  any  wonder  that  they  cannot  at  once  forefee 
what  the  confeauences  of  things  will  be,  what 
Vo  L.  XVII.  M evils 


{ .276  ] 

evils  are  to  be  guarded  againfl,  and  what  aiffi.- 
cultiesare  like  toarife  that  are  to  be  provided  for? 

We  have  long  been  in  a flrange  flupor  : the 
inftances  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  the  heart 
have  been  but  little  felt,  and  the  nature  of  them 
but  little  taught,  fo  that  they  are  in  many  re- 
fpefts  new  to  great  numbers  of  thofe  that  have 
lately  fallen  under  them.  And  is  it  any  wonder 
if  they  that  never  before  had  experience  of  the 
fupernatural  influence  of  the  divine  Spirit  upon 
their  fouls,  and  never  were  inflrufted  in  the  na- 
ture of  thefe  influences,  do  not  fo  well  know 
how  to  difiinguifh  one  impreflion  from  another, 
and  fo  infenfibly'  run  into  entkujiafm , taking 
■every  ftrong  impreflion  to  be  divine  ? How  na- 
tural is  it  to  fuppofe,  that  among  the  multitudes 
of  illiterate  people  (moll  of  which  are  in  their 
youth)  who  find  themfelves  fo  wonderfully 
changed,  and  brought  into  fuch  new,  and  be- 
fore (to  them)  almoft  unheard-of  circumflances, 
many  fhould  pafs  wrong  judgments  of  both  per- 
tons  and  things  that  are  about  them  ; and  that, 
non?  they  behold  them  in  fuch  a new?  light,  they 
fhould  go  further  from  the  judgment  they  were 
wont  to  make  of  them  than  they  ought,  and  pafs 
from  one  extreme  to  another  ? And  why  fhould 
it  be  thought  flrange,  that  thofe  that  fcarce  ever 
heard  of  any  fuch  thing  as  pouring  out  of  the 
Spirit  or  God  before  ; or,  if  they  did,  had  no 
notion  of  it,  do  not  know'  how  to  behave  them- 
fclves  in  fuch  a new  and  flrange  ftate  of  things? 

When 


I 277  ] 

When  thefe  perfons  are  extraordinarily  affeft- 
ed  with  a frefh  difcovery  of  the  greatnefs  of 
the  divine  Bering,  the  infinite  importance  of 
eternal  things,  and  the  dreadful  danger  and 
madnefs  of  mankind,  together  with  a great  fen fe 
of  God’s  kindnefs  and  love  to  them;  no  wonder 
that  they  know  not  how  to  fit  fiill  and  forbear 
fpeaking  and  aiding  with  uncommon  earnefinefs 
and  vigour.  And  if  they  be  not  perfons  of  more 
than  common  ffeadinefs  and  diferetion,  or  have 
not  fome  perfon  of  vvifdom  to  direfil  them,  it  is 
a wonder  if  they  do  not  proceed  without  due 
caution,  and  do  things  that  are  irregular. 

7.  Cenfuring  others,  is  the  word  difeafe  with 
which  this  affair  lias  been  attended  : but  yet  fitch 
a time  is  indeed  a time  of  great  temptation  to  it. 
When  there  has  been  fuch  great  and  long-conti- 
nued deadnefs,  and  many  are  brought  out  of 
a ftate  of  nature  into  a date  of  grace,  in  fo  ex- 
traordinary a manner,  and  filled  with  fuch  un- 
common degrees  of  light,  it  is  natural  for  fuch  to 
form  their  notions  of  a date  of  grace  wholly  from 
what  they  experience. 

Though  cenforioufnefs  be  a thing  that  is  very 
iinful,  yet  it  is  not  found  in  hypocrites  only: 
Job's  three  friends  feein  to  have  been  eminently 
holy  men,  who  yet  confuted  the  beft  man  on 
earth,  very  pofitively  determining  ihat  he  u^as  an 
unconverted  man;  yea,  Job  himfelf,  that  parti- 
cularly excelled  in  a humble,  meek,  and  patient 
M 2,  fpirir, 


[ *7»  ] 

fpirit,  was  guilty  of  bitterly  cenfuring  his  three 
friends,  as  wicked,  vile  hypocrites. 

Thus  I think  the  errors  and  irregularities  that 
attend  this  work  may  be  accounted  for,  from  the 
confideration  of  the  weaknefs  and  common  cor- 
ruption of  mankind,  together  with  the  circum- 
flances  of  the  work,  though  we  fhould  fuppofe  it 
to  be  the  work  of  God.  And  it  would  not  be  a 
juft  objeffion  in  any  one  to  fay,  If  thefe  impref- 
fions  are  from  God,  why  does  not  the  fame  Spi- 
rit give  ftrength  of  underftanditig  and  capacity 
in  proportion  to  thofe  perfons  that  are  the  fub- 
j ef  Is  of  them,  fo  that  ftrong  affeflions  may  not, 
through  their  error,  drive  them  to  an  irregular 
conduft  ? For  I do  not  know  that  God  has  any 
where  obliged  himfelf  to  do  it.  The  end  of  the 
influences  of  God’s  Spirit  is  to  make  men  wife 
to  falvation  ; and  be  has  alfo  appointed  means 
for  our  gaining  fuch  degrees  of  other  knowledge 
as  we  need  to  conduft  ourfelves  regularly,  which 
means  fhould  be  carefully  ufed  ; but  the  end  of 
the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  not  to  in- 
creafe  mens  natural  capacities,  nor  has  God  oblig- 
ed himfelf  immediately  to  increafe  civil  prudence 
in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  fpiritual  light. 

* 8.  If  we  confider  the  errors  that  attend  this 
work,  not  only  as  from  man  and  his  infirmity, 
but  alfo  as  from  God,  and  by  his  permiflion  and 
difpofal,  they  are  not  ftrange,  though  it  be  as  to 
the  fubftance  the  work  of  God.  If  God  intends 
this  great  revival  of  religion  to  be  the  dawning 

of 


[ 279  1 

of  an  happy  ftate  of  his  church,  it  may  be  an  m- 
itance  of  the  divine  wifdom,  in  the  beginning  of 
it,  to  fuffer  fo  many  irregularities  in  conduft. 
For  it  will  be  very  likely  to  be  of  excellent  bene- 
fit to  his  church,  in  the  continuance  and  progrefs 
of  the  work.  The  experience,  in  the  firll  fetting 
out,  of  the  mifchievous  confequences  of  thefe 
errors,  may  be  an  happy  defence  to  them  after- 
wards, for  many  generations. 

And  it  is  very  analogous  to  the  manner  of 
God’s  dealing  with  his  people,  to  permit  a great 
deal  of  infirmity  to  appear,  in  the  beginning  of  a 
glorious  work  of  his  grace,  to  humble  them,  and 
fit  them  for  that  profperitv  he  is  about  to  advance 
them  to,  and  the  more  to  fecure  to  himfelf  the  ho- 
nour of  fuch  a glorious  work.  For,  by  man’s  ex- 
ceeding weaknefs,  it  is  evident  that  God  does  not 
lay  the  foundation  of  it  in  man’s  ftrength  or  wifdom. 

And  as  we  need  not  wonder  at  the  errors  that 
attend  this  work,  if  we  look  at  the  hand  of  men 
that  are  guilty  of  them,  and  the  hand  of  God  in 
permitting  them  : fo  neither,  if  we  confider  the 
hand  that  Satan  has  in  them.  For  as  this  work  is 
much  greater  than  any  other  that  has  ever  been 
in  New- England,  fo  no  wonder  that  the  devil  is 
more  alarmed  and  enraged,  and  exerts  himfelf 
more  vigcroufly  againft  it,  and  does  more  power- 
fully endeavour  to  tempt  and  miflead  thofe  that 
are  the  fubjefts  or  promoters  of  it. 

Whatever  imprudences  there  have  been,  and 
whatever  vehemence  of  the  paflions,  and  heats 
M 3 of 


[ 2^0  J 


of  the  imagination  ; whatever  error  in  judgment 
and  indifcreet  zeal ; and  whatever  outcries,  and' 
faintings,  and  agitations  of  body;  yet  it  is  mani- 
fefr  and  notorious,  that  there  has  been  of  late  a 
very  uncommon  influence  upon  the  minds  or 
very  many  people,  that  has-  been  attended  with 
the  following  effects,  viz.  a great  increafe  of  leri- 
oufnefs  and  fober  confideration  of  the  things  of 
the  eternal  world ; a difpofition  to  hearken  to 
any  thing  that  is  faid  of  things  of  this  nature 
with  attention  and  affe&ion  ; a difpofition  to  hear 
matters  of  religion  with  folemnity,  and  as  matters 
of  great  importance;  a difpofition  to  make  thefe 
things  the  fubjeftof  converfation  ; and  a great  dif- 
pofition  to  hear  the  word  of  God  preached,  to  take 
all  opportunities  in  order  to  it ; and  to  attend  on  the 
public  woifhip  ol  God,  and  all  external  duties  of 
religion,  in  a more  folemn  and  decent  manner. 
Multitudes  of  vain,  thoughtlefs  perfons,  are  quite 
changed,  and  become  ferious  and  confiderate  ; 
there  is  a vaft  increafe  of  concern  for  the  falva- 
tion  of  the  foul,  and  of  that  enquiry,  What  faall 
I do  to  be  favcd  ? The  hearts  of  multitudes  have 
been  greatly  taken  off  from  the  things  of  the 
world,  in  profits,  pleafures  and  honours  ; and 
have  been  made  fenfible  of  the  pernicious  confe- 
quencesof  fin,  and  what  a dreadful  thing  it  is  to 
lie  under  the  difpleafure  of  God  : they  have  alfo 
been  awakened  to  a fenfe  of  the  fliortnefs  and  un- 
certainty of  life,  and  the  reality  of  another  world : 
they  are  more  afraid  of  fin,  more  careful  to  know 

what 


[ 28 1 ] 


wfiat  is  contrary  to  the  will  of  God,  that  they 
may  avoid  it,  and  what  he  requires  of  them,  that 
they  may  do  it ; more  watchful  over  their  own 
hearts,  earneflly  defirous  of  being  informed  what 
are  the  means  for  their  falvation,  and  diligent  in 
the  ufe  of  tbofe  that  God  has  appointed  in  or- 
der to  it.  Many  very  ffupid,  fenfelefs  finners, 
have  been  oreatlv  awakened.  There  is  a flranse 
alteration  among!!  young  Deople  : by  a powerful 
influence  on  their  minds,  they  have  been  brought 
to  forfake  thofe  things,  as  it  were  at  once,  that 
they  were  extremely  fond  of,  and  that  they  feem- 
ed  to  place  the  happinefs  of  their  lives  in,  and 
which  nothing  before  could  induce  them  to  for- 
fake; as  their  vain  company,  their  mirth  and  jol- 
lity, their  impure  language  and  lewd  fongs : in 
vain  did  miniflers  preach  againft  thofe  things 
before,  and  in  vain  were,  laws  made  to  reftrain 
them,  and  in  vain  was  all  the  vigilance  of  magif- 
trates  and  civil  officers;  but  now  they  have  dropt 
them  as  it  were  of  themfelves.  And  there  is  a 
great  alteration  amongfl  old  and  young  as  to 
drinking,  profane  fpeaking,  and  extravagance 
in  apparel.  Many  notorioufly  vicious  perfons 
have  been  reformed  and  become  externally 
new  creatures  : Some  that  are  wealthy  and 
of  a fafhionable,  gay  education,  that  feemed 
to  have  their  minds  fwallowed  up  with  the  fhew 
and  pleafures  of  the  world,  have  relinquifhed 
thefe  vanities,  and  are  become  ferious,  mortified 
and  humble  in  their  converfation.  It  is  aftonifh- 
M 4 ing 


[ 282  j 

ing  to  fee  the  alteration  that  is  in  fome  places, 
■where  before  was  no  appearance  of  religion  : ancl 
now  they  are  transformed  into  another  fort  of 
people  ; and  are,  as  it  were,  gone  to  a new 
world  : their  thoughts,  and  their  talk,  and  their 
concern,  affections  and  enquiries,  are  now  about 
the  favour  of  God,  an  interefl  in  Chrifl,  and  a 
fpiritual  bleffednefs,  and  acceptance  and  happi- 
nefs  in  a future  world.  And,  through  the  greater 
part  of  New- Engl  and,  the  holy  bible  is  in  much 
greater  efteem  and  ufe  than  it  ufed  to  be  : the 
great  things  that  are  contained  in  it,  are  much 
more  the  fubjefis  of  meditation  and  converfation  ; 
and  other  books  of  piety  have  been  abundantly 
more  in  ufe  ; the  Lord’s  day  is  more  religioufly 
obferved  ; and  abundance  has  been  lately  done 
at  making  up  differences,  and  confefTing  faults- 
one  to  another,  and  making  reftitution  ; proba- 
bly more  within  thefe  two  years,  than  was  done 
in  thirty  years  before.  And  furprizing  has  been 
the  power  of  that  Spirit  that  has  been  poured  out 
on  the  land,  to  aeftroy  old  grudges,  and  make  up 
long-continued  breaches,  and  to  bring  thofe  that 
feemed  to  be  irreconcilable,  to  embrace  each 
other  in  a fincere  and  entire  amity. 

Great  numbers  have  been  brought  to  a deep 
fenfe  of  their  own  finfulnefs  and  vilenefs;  the 
finfulnefs  of  their  lives,  the  heinoufnefs  of 
their  difregard  of  the  authority  of  the  great  God, 
and  the  heinoufnefs  of  their  living  in  contempt 
of  a Saviour  : and  many  perfons  have  had  fuch 

a fenfe 


[ *83  J 

a fenfe  of  their  own  finfulnefs,  that  they  thought 
themfelves  to  be  the  worft  of  all,  and  that  none 
ever  was  fo  vile  as  they.  And  fo  far  as  we  are 
worthy  to  be  credited  one  by  another,  in  what 
we  fay,  (and  perfons  of  good  under  Handing  and 
found  mind,  and  known  and  experienced  probity, 
have  a right  to  be  believed  by  their  neighbours, 
when  they  fpeak  of  things  that  fall  under  their 
obfervation  and  experience)  multitudes  have 
lately  been  brought  to  fweet  reft  of  foul  in  Chrift 
as  a glorious  Saviour,  a ftrong  rock  and  high 
tower;  accompanied  with  a fenfible,  ftrong  and 
fweet  love  to  God,  far  furpaffmg  all  earthly  plea- 
fures  ; and  a reft  of  foul  in  him,  as  a portion  and 
the  fountain  of  all  good  ; attended  with  an  abhor- 
rence of  fin,  and  earned;  longings  after  more 
holinefs  and  conformity  to  God,  with  a fenfe 
of  the  great  need  of  God’s  help  in  order  to 
holinefs  of  life  ; together  with  a mold  dear  love  to 
all  that  are  fuppofed  to  be  the  children  of  God  and 
a love  to  mankind  in  general,  and  a moft  tender 
compaffion  for  the  fouls  of  ftnners,  and  earned; 
defires  of  the  advancement  ox  Chrift’s  kingdom. 

And  many  little  children  have  been  remark- 
ably inlightened,  their  hearts  wonderfully  affeft- 
ed  and  inlarged,  and  their  mouths  opened,  in 
a manner  far  beyond  their  years,  to  the  juft  af- 
tonifhment  of  thofe  that  heard  them;  force  of 
thefe  are  ftill  greatly  aiTetled  with  the  glory  of 
divine  things,  and  the  excellence  and  love  of 
the  Redeemer,  having  their  hearts  filled  with 
M 5 love- 


[ 284  ] 

love  to  and  joy  in  him,  and  continuing  ferious 
and  pious  in  their  behaviour. 

9.  And  now  let  us  confider. Is  it  not 

flrange  that,  in  a Chriflian  country,  there 
fhould  be  any  at  a lofs  whole  work  this  is,  whe- 
ther the  work  of  God  or  of  the  devil  ? Is  it  not 
a Ihame  to  New-England  that  fuch  a work  fhould 
be  doubted  of  here  ? Need  we  look  over  the 
hiftories  of  all  paft  times,  to  fee  if  there  be  not 
fome  circumflances  and  external  appearances  that 
attend  this  work,  that  have  been  formerly  found 
among  enthufiaffs  ? We  need  not  fay,  Whojhall 
afcend  into  heaven,  to  bring  us  fomething  whereby 
tojudgeof  this  work?  Nor  does  God  fend  us  down 
beyond  the  feas,  nor  into  paid  ages,  to  obtain  a rule 
that  fhall  fatisfy  us:  but  we  have  a rule  near  at 
hand, a facred  book  that  God  himfelf  has  put  into 
our  hands,  with  clear  and  infallible  marks  fufficient 
to  refolve  us  ; which  book  we  muff  reject,  not 
only  in  fome  particular  paffages,  but  in  the  fub- 
flance  of  it,  if  we  rejefl  fuch  a work,  as  not  be- 
ing the  work  of  Gcd.  The  whole  tenor  of  the 
gofpel  proves  it ; all  the  notion  of  religion  that 
the  fcripture  gives  us  confirms  it. 

I fuppofe  there  is  fcarcely  a minifler  in  this 
land,  but  has  prayed  that  God  would  pour  out  his 
Spirit,  work  a reformation  and  revival  of  religion, 
and  turn  us  from  our  intemperance,  profanenefs, 
uncleannefs,  worldlinefs  and  other  fins  ; and  we 
have  kept  from  year  to  year  days  of  public 
falling  and  prayer  to  God,  to  humble  ourfelves 
for  our  fins,  and  to  feek  of  God  fcrgivenefs  and 

reforms- 


r a8-5  ] 

reformation;  and  now  when  fo  great  andextenfive 
reformation  is  fo  fuddenly  and  wonderfully  accorn- 
plifhed,  in  thofe  very  things  that  we  have  fought 
to  God  for,  fhall  we  not  acknowledge  it  ? And 
that  becaufe  (altho’ indeed  there  be  luch  a work 
attended  with  all  thefe  glorious  effedts,  yet)  the 
work  is  attended  with  a mixture  of  error  and 
imprudencies  ; becaufe  fome  perfons  are  cat- 
ried  away  with  impreffions,  and  are  indifcreet, 
and  too  tenforious  with  their  zeal  ; and  becaufe 
there  are  high  tranfporis  of  religious  affedlions, 
and  becaufe  of  fome  effedts  on  perfons  bodies 
that  we  do  not  underhand  ? 

10.  Thofe  that  are  waiting  for  the  fruits,  in 
order  to  determine  whether  this  be  the  work  God 
or  no,  would  do  well  to  confider  two  things  ; 
i.  What  they  are  waiting  for:  whether  it  be 
not  this  ; . to  have  this  influence  that  is  on  the 
minds  of  people  over,  and  then  to  fee  how  they 
will  behave  themfelves  ? That  is,  to  have  grace 
fubftde,  and  perfons  gt  ow  cold  and  dead. ; and 
then  to  fee  whether  they  will  behave  themfelves 
with  that  exadtnefs  and  brightnefs  of  convetfa- 
tion,  that  is  to  be  expedited  of  lively  Chriftians, 
There  are  many  that  will  not  be  fatisfied  with 
any  exadlnefs  now  ; for  they  lay  it  to  their  heat 
of  zeal,  as  they  call  it,  they  are  waiting  to  fee 
whether  they  will  carry  themfelves.  as  well  when 
thefe  affedtions  are  over  : that  is,  they  are  waiting 
to  have  perfons  fieken  and  lofe  their  llrength,  that 
they  may  fee  whether  they  will  then  behave  them- 
felves  like  healthy  flrong  mem.  1 would  defire 
M 6 that 


[ 286  ] 

that  they  would  alfo  confider  whether  they  be 
not  waiting  for  more  than  is  reafonably  to  be  ex- 
pended, fuppofing  this  to  be  really  a great  work 
of  God  ? Do  not  they  expend  fewer  inftances  of 
apoffacy,  and  evidences  of  hypocrify,  in  thofe 
that  for  the  prefent  feem  to  be  under  the  in- 
fluences of  the  Spirit,  than  were  after  that  great 
out-pouring  of  the  Spiiit  in  the  apoflles  days? 
And  do  not  they  hand  prepared  to  make  a migh- 
ty argument  of  it  againfl  this  work,  if  there  fhould 
he  half  fo  many?  And,  2.  They  would  do  well 
to  confider  how  long  they  will  wait  to  fee  the 
good  fruit  of  this  work,  before  they  will  determine 
in  favour  of  it.  Is  not  their  waiting  unlimited  ? 
The  vifible  fruit  that  is  to  be  expended  of  a pour- 
ing-out of  the  Spirit  of  God  on  a country,  is  a vi- 
fible reformation  in  that  country  : what  reforma- 
tion has  lately  been  brought  to  pafs  by  this  work, 
has  been  before  obferved;  and  has  it  not  continu- 
ed long  enough  already,  to  give  reafonable  fatis- 
faftion  ? Surely  it  is  unreafonable  that  our  ex- 
pefdations  and  demands  fhould  be  unlimited,  and 
our  waiting  without  any  bounds. 

ji.  As  there  is  the  cleareft  evidence,  from 
thofe  things  that  have  been  obferved,  that  this  is 
the  work  of  God  ; fo  it  is  evident  that  it  is  a very 
great  and  wonderful,  and  exceeding  glorious  work 
of  God.  This  is  certain,  that  it  is  a great  and 
wonderful  event,  a ftrange  revolution,  an  unex- 
pended, furprizing  overturning  of  things,  fudden- 
ly  brought  to  pafs  ; fuch  as  never  has  been  feen 

in 


[ *87  ] 

in  New-England,  and  fcarce  ever  has  been  heard 
of  in  any  land.  Who  that  faw  the  ftate  of  things 
in  New-England  a few  years  ago,  the  date  that  it 
was  fettled  in,  and  the  way  that  we  had  been  fo 
long  going  on  in,  would  have  thought  that  in  fo 
little  time  there  would  be  fuch  a change  ? 

Such  a work  is,  in  its  nature,  the  moll  glori- 
ous of  any  work  of  God  whatfoever,  and  is  al- 
ways fo  fpoken  of  in  fcripture.  It  is  the  work 
of  redemption  (the  great  end  of  all  other  works  of 
God,  and  of  which  the  work  of  creation  was  but 
a fhadow)  in  the  event,  fuccefs  and  end  of  it:  it 
is  the  work  of  new  creation,  that  is  infinitely 
more  glorious  than  the  old.  I am  bold  to  fay, 
that  the  work  of  God  in  the  converfion  of  one 
foul,  is  a more  glorious  work  of  God  than  the 
creation  of  the  whole  material  univerfe.  It  is 
the  moft  glorious  of  God’s  works,  as  it  above  all 
others  manifefts  the  glory  of  God ; as  it  fhews 
the  exceeding  grealnefs  of  God's  power,  and  the 
glory  and  riches  of  his  grace-,  wherein  Chrift  has 
the  moll  glorious  triumph  over  his  enemies,  and 
wherein  God  is  mod  exalted  ; and  it  is  a work 
above  all  others  glorious,  as  it  concerns  the  bap- 
pinefs  of  mankind  ; more  happinefs,  and  a greater 
benefit  to  man,  is  the  fruit  of  each  fingle  drop  of 
fuch  a fhower,  than  all  the  temporal  good  of  the 
moll  happy  revolution  in  a land  or  nation  amounts 
to,  or  all  that  a people  could  gain  by  the  conquefl 
©f  the  world. 


And 


[ s88  ] 

And  as  this  work  is  very  glorious  in  its  nature, 
fo  it  is  in  the  extent  of  it ; being  in  this  refpedt 
vaftly  beyond  any  that  ever  was  known  in  New- 
England.  d here  has  formerly  fometimes  been  a 
remarkable  awakening,  in  fome  particular  congre- 
gation : bat  now  God  has  brought  to  pafs  a new 
thing,  he  has  wrought" a great  work  of  this  nature, 
that  has  extended  from  one  end  of  the  land  to 
the  other,  befides  what  has  been  wrought  in  other 
Biitijh  colonies  in  America. 

The  work  is  very  glorious  in  the  great  numbers 
that  have  been  turned  from  fin  to  God.  How 
high  an  honour,  and  great  reward  of  their  labours, 
have  fome  eminent  perfons  fignified  that  they 
fhould  elfeern  it,  if  they  lhould  be  made  the  in- 
flruments  of  the  converfion  of  but  one  foul  P No 
greater  event  than  that  is  thought  worthy  of  great 
notice  in  heaven,  amongft  the  boils  of  g!  rious 
angels,  who  rejoice  and  fing  on  fitch  an  occafion  ; 
and  when  there  are  many  theufands  converted, 
fhall  it  be  elleemed  worth  but  little  notice,  and  be 
mentioned  with  coldnefs  and  indifference  here 
on  earth,  by.thofe  among  whom  fuch  a work  is 
wrought  ? 

The  work  has  been  very  glorious  and  wonder 
ful  in  many  cir cumjlances  of  it,  wherein  God  has 
in  an  uncommon  manner  made  his  power  con- 
fpicuous  : as  in  the  extraordinary  degrees  of  awak- 
ening, the  fnddennefs  of  coaverfions  in  innumer- 
able infiances,  in  whom  though  the  work  was 
quick,  vet  the  thing  wrought  is  manifeftly  dura- 
ble. 


[ *89  ] 

ble.  IIow  common  a thing  has  it  been  for  great 
part  of  a congregation  to  be  at  once  moved  by  a 
mighty  invifible  power  ; and  for  fix,  eight  or  ten 
fouls  to  be  convened  to  God  at  once,  in  whom 
the  vifible  change  fiiil  continues  P How  great  an 
alteration  has  been  made  in  fome  populous  towns-, 
the  change  flill  abiding  ? And  how  many  very 
vicious  perfons  have  been  wrought  upon,  fo  as  to- 
become  vifibly  new  creatures  ? God  has  alfo 
made  his  hand  very  vifible,  and  his  work  glorious, 
in  the  many  little  children  that  have  been  wrought 
upon,  any  one  of  which  formerly  would -have  been 
thought  fo  remarkable,  as  to  be  worthy  to  be  re- 
corded, and  pubhfhed  through  the  land. 

The  work  is  alfo  exceeding  glorious  in  the  high 
altaimnents  of  Chrifiians,  in  the  extraordinary  de- 
grees of  light,  love  and  fpiritual  joy,  that  GocT 
has  beftowed  upon  great  multitudes.  In  this  re- 
fpeft  too,  the  land  in  all  parts  has  abounded  with 
inltances,  any  one  of  which,  if  they  had  happen- 
ed formerly,  would  have  been  thought  worthy  to 
he  taken  notice  of  throughout  the  Bridjli  domi- 
nions. The  New  JeruJalem  in  this  refpeft  has 
begun  to  come  down  from  heaven,  and  perhaps 
never  were  more  of  the  prelibations  of  heaven’s 
glory  given  upon  earth. 

There  being  a great  many  errors  and  irregulari- 
ties mixed  with  this  work  of  God,  ariling  from 
our  weaknefs,  darknefs  and  corruption,  does  not 
hinder  it  from  being  very  glorious.  Our  follies 
and  fins  that  we  mix,  do  in  fome  refpefts  mani- 

fell 


[ 29°  3 

feft  the  glory  of  it : the  glory  of  divine  power  and 
grace  is  fet  off  with  the  greater  luftre,  by  what 
appears  at  the  fame  time  of  the  weaknefs  of  the 
earthen  veffel.  It  is  God’s  pleafure  that  there 
fhould  be  fomeibing  remarkable  to  manifeft  the 
weaknefs  and  unworthinefs  of  the  fubjedf,  at  the 
fame  time  that  he  difplays  the  excellency  of  his 
power  and  riches  of  his  grace.  And  I doubt 
not  but  fome  of  thofe  things  that  make  us  hete  to 
look  on  this  work  with  adifpleafed  countenance, 
heighten  the  fongs  of  the  angels,  when  they 
praife  God  and  the  Lamb,  for  the  glory  of  God’s 
all-fufficiency,  and  efficacy  of  Chriffs  redemp- 
tion. 


PART  II. 

Shewing  the  obligation  that  all  are  under  to  acknow 
ledge,  rejoice  in,  and  promote  this  work, 

i.  r | HERE  are  many  th'ngs  tn  the  word  of 
JL  God,  which  fhew  that  when  God  re- 
markably appears  for  his  church,  and  againft  his 
enemies,  it  is  a mod  dangerous  thing  to  be  flow 
and  backward  to  acknowledge  God  in  the  w'ork. 
Chrift’s  people  are  in  feripture  reprefented  as  his 
army  : he  is  the  Lord  of  bofls  or  armies  ; he  is  the 
Captain  of  she  hoft  of  the  Lord,  the  Captain  of  his 

people’s 


[ 29*  1 

people’s  falvation  : and  therefore  it  may  well  £>e 
highly  refented,  if  they  do  not  refort  to  him 
when  he  orders  his  banner  to  be  difplayed;  ii 
they  refufe  to  follow  him  when  he  blows  the 
trumpet,  and  glorioufly  appears  going  forth- 
againlt  his  enemies.  God  experts  that  every 
living  foul  fhould  have  his  attention  roufed  on 
fuch  an  occafion,  fhould  cheerfully  yield  to  the 
call,  and  heedfully  and  diligently  obey  it : All  ye 
inhabitants  of  the  world , and  dwellers  on  the  earth , 
fee  ye  when  he  lifted  up  an  evfign  on  the  mountains  ; 
and  when  he  blowetk  the  trumpet,  hear  ye.  Ifa. 
Ixviii.  3.  How  fevere  is  the  martial  law  in  fuch 
a cafe,  when  any  of  an  army  refufes  to  obey  the 
found  of  the  trumpet,  and  follow  his  general  to 
the  battle  ? God  at  fuch  a time  appears  in  pecu- 
liar manifeftations  of  his  glory  ; and  therefore 
to  lie  ft  ill,  and  refufe  to  follow  God,  will  be 
refented  as  an  high  contempt  of  him. 

At  a time  when  God  manifefts  himfelf  in  fuch 
a work  for  his  church,  there  is  no  fuch  thing 
as  being  neuters ; there  is  a necefiity  of  being 
either  for  or  againfl  the  King  that  then  glori- 
oufly  appears.  So  it  was  when  Chrift  came 
down  from  heaven  in  his  incarnation,  and  ap- 
peared on  earth  in  his  human  prefence  ; there 
was  no  fuch  thing  as  being,  neither  on  his  fide 
nor  againfl  him : thofe  that  fat  flill  and  faid 
nothing,  and  did  not  declare  for  him,  and  come 
and  join  with  him,  after  he,  by  his  word  and 
works,  had  given  fufiicient  evidence  who  he 

was, 


C 29£  J 

v/a-,  werejuftly  looked  upon  as  his  enemies;  as 
Chiift  fays,  Matlh.  xii.  30.  He  that  is  not  with 
me  is  c.gainjl  me ; and  he  that  gathereth  not  with 
me,  fcatltreth  abroad.  So  it  is  in  a time  when 
Chrifi  is  remarkably  fpiritirally  prefent,  as  well 
as  when  he  is  bodily  prefent  : and  when  he  comes 
to  carry  on  the  work  of  redemption  in  the  ap- 
plication of  it,  as  well  as  in  the  revelation  and 
purchafe.  If  a king  ihould  come  into  one  ofhis 
provinces,  that  had  been  oppreffed  by  its  foes, 
where  fome  of  his  fubjebls  had  fallen  off  to  the 
enemy,  and  joined  with  them  againd  their  law- 
ful fovereign  ; I fay,  if  the  lawful  fovereign 
himfelf  fhould  come  into  the  province,  and 
fhould  ride  forth  there  againd  his  enemies,  and 
fhould  call  upon  all  that  were  on  his  fide  to  come 
and  gather  themfelves  to  him  ; there  would  be 
no  fuch  thing,  in  fuch.  a cafe,  as  {landing  neu- 
ter ; they  that  lay  {till  and  {laid  at  a diflance 
would  undoubtedly  be  looked  upon  and  treated 
as  rebels.  So  in  the  day  of  battle,  when  two 
armies  join,  there  is  no  fuch  thing  for  any  prefent 
as  being  of  neither  party  ; all  mud  be  on  one 
fide  or  the  other  ; and  they  that  are  not  found 
with  the  conqueror  in  fuch  a cafe,  mud  expect 
to  fall  with  the  red  of  his  enemies. 

2.  When  God  manifeds  himfelf  with  fuch  glo- 
rious power,  he  appears  efpeciallv  determined 
to  put  honour  upon  his  Son,  and  to  fulfil  his  oath, 
that  he  would  make  ever  knee  to  lew,  and  every 

tongue 


C 2 93'  .1 

tongue  to  confefs  Jam.  Such  a day  is  a day  of  his 
power,  wherein  he  flial!  rule  in  the  midft  of  his. 
enemies  ; thefe  efpecially  are  the  times  wherein 
God  declares  his  firm  decree,  that  his  Sou  fhall 
reign  on  Jus  holy  hill  of  Zion  : and  therefore  thofe 
that  at  fuch  a time  do  not  kzfs  the  Son,  as  he  then 
appears  in  the  glory  of  his  majefty,  expofe  them- 
felves  to perijh  from  the  way , and  to  be  dajhed  in 
pieces  with  a rod  of  iron. 

It  always  is  fo,  that  when  Chrift  is  in  a pecu- 
liar manner  manifefied  by  a glorious  work  of 
God  in  his  church,  as  a foundation  and  a fanc- 
tuary  for  fome,  he  is  a flone  of  fumrbling  and  a 
rock  of  offence  to  others.  They  that  continue 
long  to  be  offended  at  fuch  a work  of  Chrift, 
Humble  at  Chrifl,  and  are  offended  in  him-. 
But  how  dangerous  is  it  to  continue  always  Hum- 
bling at  fuch  a work,  for  ever  doubting  of  it, 
and  forbearing  fully  to  acknowledge  it,  and  give 
God  the  glory  of  it!  Such  perfons  are  in  danger 
to  go  and  fall  backward,  and  be  broken,  and 
fnared  and  taken,  and  to  have  Chrift  a fone  of 
fumbling  to  them,  that  (hall  be  an  occafion  of 
their  ruin. 

■g.  Tne  church  is  called  upon  greatly  to  rejoice, 
when  at  any  time  Chrift  remarkably  appears  to 
enlarge  his  own  kingdom,  and  to  deliver  poor 
fouls  out  of  the  pit  wherein  there  is  no  water. 
In  Zech.  ix.  9,  10,  n.  Rejoice  greatly  ,0  daughter 
tf Zion  ; fiout,  0 daughter  of  Jerufaltm',  behold. , 

thy 


[ 294  J 

thy  King  cometk  unto  thee-,  he  is  juft,  and  having 
falvation.  Chrift  was  pleafed  to  give  a typical 
reprefeniation  of  fuch  an  event,  in  his  folemn 
entry  into  Jcrufalem,  which  was  a type  of  the 
church  or  daughter  of  Zion  there  fpoken  of,  pro- 
bably intending  it  as  a figure  of  that  great  aciual 
fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  that  was  to  be  after 
his  afcenfion.  "When  he  made  this  his  folemn 
entry  into  Jerufatem,  and  the  whole  multitude 
of  the  difciples  were  rejoicing  and  praifing  God 
with  loud  voices,  for  all  the  mighty  works  that 
they  had  feen,  the  Pharifees  faid,  Mafter,  rebuke 
thy  difciples-,  but  we  are  told,  Luke  xix.  39,  40. 
He  anfwered  and  faid  unto  them,  I tell  you,  that 
if  thej'e  Jhould  hold  their  peace,  the  Jlones  would  im- 
mediately cry  out.  Signifying,  that  if  Chrifts 
difciples  fhould  be  unaffe&ed  on  fuch  an  occa- 
fion,  and  fhould  not  appear  openly  to  acknow- 
ledge and  rejoice  in  the  glory  of  God,  it  would 
manifefl  fuch  a fearful  hardnefs  of  heart,  that  the 
very  Hones  would  condemn  them.  Should  not 
this  make  thofe  confider  who  have  held  their 
peace  fo  long,  fince  Ghrifl  has  fo  wonderfully 
manifefled  his  glory  in  this  mighty  work  of 
his  Spirit,  and  fo  many  of  his  difciples  have 
been  rejoicing  and  praifing  God  with  loud  voices  ? 

4.  The  great  danger  of  not  joining  with  God’s 
people  at  that  glorious  day  is  alfo  reprefented, 
Ifa.  xl.  12.  For  the  nation  and  kingdom  that  will 
notferve  thee  Jha-ll  perijh ; yea,  thofe  nations  fall 
be  utterly  wafted. 


Molt 


[ Z9B  ] 

"Moll  of  the  great  temporal  deliverances  that 
were  wrought  for  Ifrael  of  old,  as  expofitors  ob- 
ferve,  were  typical  of  the  great  fpiritual  works 
-of  God  for  the  falvation  of  mens  fouls,  and  the 
profperity  of  his  church  in  the  days  of  the  gof- 
pel;  and  efpecially  of  that  great  work  of  actual 
falvation  that  (hall  be  in  the  latter  days,  which, 
is  above  all  others  the  appointed  time,  and  pro- 
per feafon  of  a final  redemption  of  mens  fouls. 
But  it  may  be  obferved,  that  il  any  appeared  to 
oppofe  God’s  work  in  thofe  great  temporal  deli- 
verances ; or  if  there  was  any  of  his  people  that 
on  fuch  an  occafton  lay  fill  and  food  at  a dif- 
tance,  and  did  not  arife  and  acknowledge  God 
in  his  work,  and  appear  to  promote  it,  it  was 
what  in  a remarkable  manner  incenfed  God’s 
anger,  and  brought  his  curfe  upon  fuch  perfons. 

5.  That  was  a glorious  work  of  God  that  he 
wrought  for  -Ifrael when  he  delivered  them  from 
the  Canaauitcs,  by  the  hand  of  Deborah  and 
-Barak : which  makes  Deborah  exulting  to  fay, 
Judg.  v.  31.  0 my  foul , thou  hajl  trodden  down 
ftrength!  Chrif  with  his  heavenly  hof  was  en- 
gaged in  that  battle  ; and  therefore  it  is  faid,  ver. 
20.  They  fought  f rom  heaven , the  fears  in  their 
courfes  fought  a gain f Sifera.  The  work  of  God 
therefore,  in  this  victory  and  deliverance  wrought 
for  Ifrael , was  a type  of  that  viftorv  and  deliver- 
ance which  he  will  accomplifh  for  his  church  in' 
that  great  battle,  that  laft  conflict  that  the  church 
vfhall  have  -with  her  open  enemies,  as  appears  by 

-Rev. 


L *96  ] 

Dev.  xvi.  16.  (Tpeaking  of  that  great  battle)  And 
he  gathered  them  together  into  a place , called  in  the 
Hebrew  tongue  Armageddon,  i.  e.  the  mountain 
of  Megiddo ; alluding  to  the  place  where  the 
battle  was  fought  with  the  hoft  oiSifera , Judg. 
v.  19.  The  kings  came  and  fought,  the  kings  of 
Canaan  m Taanacb,  by  the  waters  of\  Megiddo. 
Which  can  fignify  nothing  elfe  than  that  this 
battle,  which  Chrift  and  his  church  fliall  have 
■with  their  enemies,  is  the  antitype  of  the  battle 
that  was  fought  there.  But  what  a dreadful 
curfe  did  fome  of  Ifrael  bring  upon  themfelves, 
by  lying  Hill  at  that  time,  and  not  putting  to  an 
helping  hand  ? Judg.  v.  23.  Curfe yc  Meroz,  faid 
the  angel  of  the  Lord,  curfe  ye  bitterly  the  inhabi- 
tants thereof:  becaife  they  came  not  to  the  help  of 
the  Lord,  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  againjl  the  mighty. 
It  feems  the  inhabitants  of  Meroz  were  unbe- 
lieving concerning  this  great  work,  nor  would 
they  hearken  to  Deborah's,  pretences,  nor  did  it 
enter  into  them  that  fttch  a poor  company 
fhould  ever  prevail  again!!  thofe  that  were  fo 
mighty  : they  did  not  acknowledge  the  hand  of 
God,  and  therefore  flood  at  a diilance,  and  did 
nothing  to  promote  the  work;  but  what  a bitter 
curfe  did  they  bring  upon  themfelves  by  it ! 

It  is  very  probable  that  one  great  reafon  why 
the  inhabitants  of  Meroz  were  fo  unbelieving  con- 
cerning  this  work,  was,  that  they  argued  a priori; 
they  did  not  like  the  beginning  of  it,  it  being  a 
woman  that  firfl  led  the  way,  and  had  the  chief 

ccnduQ: 


conduct  in  the  affair;  nor  could  they  believe 
that  fuch  defpicable  inftr-uments.  as  a company 
of  unarmed  flaves,  were  ever  like  to  ctTeift  fo 
great  a thing;  and  pride  and  unbelief  wrought 
together,  in  not  being  willing  to  follow  Deborah 
to  the  battle. 

6.  It  was  another  glorious  work  of  God  that 
he  wrought  in  the  vitlery  obtained  by  Gideon 
over  the  Midianites  and  Amalekites,  and  the  chil- 
dren of  the  eaff,  when  they  came  up  like  graf- 
hoppers,  a multitude  that  could  not  be  num- 
bered. This-  alfo  was  a remarkable  type  of  the 
victory  of  Chrift  and  his  church  over  his  enemies ; 
as  is  evident  by  the  manner  of  it,  which  was  not 
by  human  fword  or  bow,  but  only  of  blowing  of 
trumpets,  and  by  lights  in  earthen  veffels.  We 
read  that  on  this  occafion  Gideon  called  the  peo- 
ple together  to  help  in  this  great' affair  ; and  that 
accordingly  great  numbers  reforted  to  him,  and 
came  to  the  help  of  the  Lord,  Judg.  vii.  23,  24. 
Eut  there  were  feme  that  were  unbelieving,  and 
would  not  acknowledge  the  hand  of  God  in  that 
work.  They  were  the  inhabitants  01  Succoth  and 
Penuel.  Gideon  de fired  their  help  when  he  was 
purfuing  after  Ze'oa  and  Zalmunna  ; but  they  def- 
pifed  his  pretences,  and  his  confidence  of  the 
Lord's  being  on  his  fide,  to  deliver  t’nofe  two. great 
princes  into  the  hands  of  fuch  a defpicable  com* 
party  as  he  and  his  three  hundred  men.  God 
.proceeded  in  this  work  in  a way  that  was  ex- 
ceeding crofs  to  their  pride.  And  they  alfo 


[ «sf8  ] 

refufed  to  own  the  work  becaufe  they  argued  a 
priori ; they  could  not  believe  that  God  would 
do  fuch  great  things  by  fuch  a defpicable  inftru- 
ment,  one  of  fuch  poor,  mean  family  in  Ma- 
najfeh , and  he  the  leaf!  in  his  father’s  houfe ; and 
the  company  that  was  with  him  appeared  very 
wretched,  being  but  three  hundred  men,  and 
they  weak  and  laint.  But  we  fee  how  they  fuf- 
fered  for  their  folly.  Gideon,  when  he  returned 
from  the  victory,  look  them,  and  taught  them  with, 
the  briers  and  thorns  of  the  wildernefs,  and  beat 
down  the  tower  oj  Penuel,  and Jlew  the  men  of  the 
city , Judg.  8.  This  in  all  probability  Gideon  did. 
-as  directed  by  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  that  is 
Chrift,  that  firft  called  him,  and  fent  him  forth 
in  this  battle,  and  inftrufled  and  directed  him  in 
the  whole  affair. 

7.  That  we  may  be  warned  not  to  continue 
doubting  and  unbelieving  concerning  this  work, 
becaufe  of  the  extraordinary  degree  of  it,  and 
the  fuddennefs  and  fwiftnefs  of  the  accomplifh- 
ment  of  the  great  things  that  pertain  to  it ; let 
us  conlider  the  example  of  the  unbelieving  Lord 
in  Samaria.  The  prophet  E!ifha  foretold  that 
the  great  famine  in  Samaria  fhould,  in  one  dav, 
be  turned  into  an  extraordinary  plenty  ; but  the 
work  was  too  great  and  too  fudden  for  him  to 
believe  ; fays  he,  If  the  Lord fiould  make  windows 
in  heaven,  might  this  thing  be?  And  the  curfe 
that  he  brought  upon  himfelf  by  it  was,  *that  he 
faw  it  with  his  eyes,  and  did  not  eat  thereof ; 

but 


[ 299  3 

bat  miferably  perifhed,  and  was  trodden  down 
as  the  mire  of  the  ftreets,  when  others  were  feaft- 
ing  and  rejoicing,  2 Kings,  chap.  7. 

8.  And  as  perfons  will  greatly  expofe  them- 
felves  to  the  curfe  of  God,  by  oppofing,  or  hand- 
ing at  a diftance  and  keeping  filence  at  fuch  a 
■time  as  lit  is ; fo  perfons  who  arife  and  readily 
acknowledge  God,,  who  chearfully  and  vicror- 
eufly  exert  themfdves  to  promote  this  work,  put 
themfelves  in  the  way  of  the  divine  blefTmg. 
What  a mark  of  honour  does  God  put  upon 
thofe  in  Ifrael,  that  willingly  offered  themfelves, 
and  came  to  the  help  of  the  -Lord  again ft.  the 
mighty  ? And  what  a particular  and  honourable 
notice  is  taken  in  the  records  of  God’s  word,  of 
thofe  that  arofe  and  appeared  as  David's  helpers, 
to  introduce  him  into  the  kingdom  of  If  ad ? 
In  the  12th  chapter  of  1 Chron.  The  hoft-of 
thofe  that  thus  came  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  in 
that  work,  is  compared  to  the  hoft  of  God,  ver. 
22.  And  the  Spirit  of  God  pronounced  a fpe- 
cial  blefling  upon  them,  as  thofe  that  were  co- 
workers with  God,  ver.  18.  Then  the  Spirit  came 
upon  Amafai  zuho  was  chief  of  the  captains,  and 
he  Jaid,  Thine  are  we,  David,  and  on  thy  fide, 
thou  fon  of  .Jefe  : peace,  peace  be  unto  thee,  and 
peace  be  to  thine  helpers  ; for  thy  God  helpeth  thee. 
So  we  may  conclude,  that  God  will  much  more 
give  his  blefling  to  fuch  as  come  to  the  help  of 
the  Lord,  when  he  fets  his  own  Son  as  king  on 
his  holy  hill  of  Zion. 

Vol.  XVII. 


N 


The 


T 300  ] 

The  favourable  notice  that  God  will  take  of 
fuch  as  appear  to  promote  the  work  of  God , at 
fuch  a time  as  this,  may  alfo  be  argued  from  fuch 
a very  particular  notice  being  taken  in  the  facred 
records  of.  thofe  that  helped  in  rebuilding  the 
wall  of  Jtrufalem,  upon  the  return  from  the  Ba - 
bylonijli  captivity,  Neh.  chap.  3. 

9.  But  above  all  others,  is  God’s  eye  upon  mi- 
millers  of  the  gofpel,  as  expelling  of  them,  that 
they  fhould  arife,  and  acknowledge,  and  honour 
him  in  fuch  a work  as  this,  and  do  their  utmoft 
to  encourage  and  promote  it : for  to  promote 
fuch  a work,  is  the  very  bufxnefs  which  they  are 
called  and  devoted  to  ; it  is  the  office  to  which 
they  are  appointed,  as  co-workers  with  Chriff, 
and  as  his  embaiTadors,  to  awaken  and  convert 
finners  ; it  is  the  buftnefs  they  have  been  folemn- 
ly  charged  with  before  God,  angels  and  men, 
and  that  they  have  given  up  themfelves  to,  by  the 
moft  facred  vows.  Thefe  efpecially  are  the  offi- 
cers of  Chrift’s  kingdom,  that,  above  all  other 
men  upon  earth,  do  reprefent  his  perfon,  unto 
whom  Chr iff  has  committed  the  facred  oracles, 
and  holy  ordinances,  and  all  his  appointed  means 
of  grace,  to  be  adminiftered  by  them;  they  are 
the  Rewards  of  his  houfhold,  into  whofe  hands 
he  has  committed  its  provifion;  the  immortal 
fouls  of  men  are  committed  to  them,  as  a flock  of 
fheep  are  committed  to  the  care  of  a fhepherd: 
it  is  expeffed  of  them,  above  all  others,  that 
they  fhould  have  underffanding  of  the  times,  and 

know 


[ 3°*  ] 

know  what  Ifrael ought  to  do  ; for  it  is  their  bu- 
Tinefs  to  acquaint  themfelves  with  things  pertain- 
ing to  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  to  teach  and  en- 
lighten others  therein.  We  that  are  employed  in 
the  facred  work  of  the  gofpel-miniilry,  are  the 
watchmen  over  the  city,  to  whom  God  has  com- 
mitted the  flays  of  the  gates  of  Zion  ; and  if,  when 
the  rightful  king  of  Zion  comes  to  deliver  his  peo- 
ple, we  refufe  to  open  the  gates  to  him,  how 
greatly  fhall  we  expofe  ourfelves  to  his  wrath  ? 
"We  are  appointed  to  be  the  captains  of  the  hofl 
in  this  war  : and  if  a general  will  highly  refent 
it  in  a private  foidier,  if  he  refufes  to  follow  him 
when  his  banner  is  difplayed,  and  his  trumpet 
blown  ; how  much  more  will  he  refent  it  in  the 
officers  of  his  array  ? The  gofpel-miniftry,  is  the 
principal  means  that  God  has  appointed  for  car- 
rying on  his  work  in  the  fouls  of  men  : and  it  is 
his  will,  that  whenever  that  glorious  revival  of 
religion,  and  reformation  of  the  world,  is  accom- 
plifhed,  it  fliould  be  principally  by  the  labours  of 
his  miniflers  ; and  therefore  how  heinous  will  it 
be  in  the  fight  of  God,  if,  when  a work  of  that 
nature  is  begun,  we  appear  unbelieving,  flow, 
backward  and  difaffefted  ? There  was  no  fort  of 
perfons  among  the  Jews  that  was  treated  with 
fuch  manifeflations  of  God's  great  difpleafure, 
for  not  acknowledging  Chrift,  and  the  work  of 
his  Spirit,  in  the  days  of  Cirri fl  and  his  apcftles, 
as  the  miniflers  of  religion  ; fee  how  Chrifl  deals 
with  them  for  it,  in  the  2gd  chapter  of  Matthew ; 

N 2 with 


[ 302  ] 

with  what  gentlenefs  did  Chrift  treat  publicans 
and  harlots,  in  companion  of  them  ? 

xo.  If  minifters  preach  never  fo  good  doBxine 
and  are  never  fo  painful  and  laborious  in  their 
work,  yet  if,  at  fuch  a time  as  this,  they  {hew 
their  people  that  they  are  not  well  affected  to 
this  work,  they  will  do  their  people  a great  deal 
mere  hurt  than  good  : for  the  very  fame  of  fuch 
a work  ol  God,  if  their  people  were  fuffered  to 
believe  it  to  be  his  work,  would  be  likely  to 
have  a greater  influence  upon  then  minds,  to  ani- 
mate them  in  religion,  than  all  their  labours  ; and 
befidcs,  their  minifters  opinion  will  not  only  beget 
in  them  a fufpicion  of  the  work  they  hear  of 
abroad,  whereby  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that 
appears  in  it,  lofes  its  influence  upon  their  minds,- 
but  it  will  alfo  tend  to  create  a fufpicion  of  ever', 
thing  of  the  like  nature,  that  fhall  appear  among 
themfelves,  as  being  fomething  of  the  fame  dif- 
temper  that  is  become  fo  epidemical  in  the  land, 
and  that  is,  in  effefl,  to  create  a fufpicion  of  alt 
vital  religion,  and  to  put  the  people  upon  talk- 
ing againii  it,  and  difeouraging  it,  wherever 
it  appears,  and  knocking  it  in  the  head  as  fall 
as  it  rifes.  And  we  that  are  minifters,  by  look- 
ing on  this  work  from  year  to  vear  with  a dif- 
pleafed  countenance,  keep  the  fheep  from  their 
pafture,  inllead  of  doing  the  part  of  fhepherds 
to  them,  bv  feeding  them  ; and  our  people  bad 
a great  deal  better  be  without  any  fettled  minifier 
at  all,  at  fuch  a time  as  this. 

We 


[ 3°3  ] 


We  that  are  in  this  facred  office  had  need  to 
fake  heed  what  we  do,  and  how  we  behave 
ourfelves  at  this  time.  If  we  hinder  and  fland  in 
the  way  of  the  work  of  God,  whofe  bufmefs 
above  all  others  it  is  to  promote  it,  how  can 
we  expett  to  partake  of  the  glorious  benefits  of 
it  ? Thofe  awful  words  of  Chriff  to  the  jfezuijk 
teachers,  fhould  be  confidered  by  us,  Mattk. 
xxiii.  13.  Wo  unto  you,  for  you  Jhut  up  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  ; — -for  ye  neither  go  in  yourfelves , 
neither  fuff er  ye  them  that  are  entering , to  go  in. 
If  we  keep  the  fheep  from  their  paflure,  how 
fhall  we  anfwer  it  to  the  great  Shepherd,  that 
has  bought  the  flock  with  his  precious  blood,  and 
has  committed  the  care  of  them  to  us  ? I would 
humbly  defire  of  every  minifter  that  has  thus 
long  remained  difaffefted  to  this  work,  and  has 
had  contemptible  thoughts  of  it,  to  confider 
whether  he  has  not  hitherto  been  like  Michal, 
without  any  child,  or  at  leaf!:  in  a great  meafure 
barren  and  unfuccefsful  in  his  work ; I pray 
God  it  may  not  be  a perpetual  barrenefs,  as 
her’s  was. 

Miniffers  fhould  efpecially  take  heed  of  a fpi- 
rit  of  envy  towards  other  miniffers,  whom  God 
is  pleafed  to  make  more  ufe  of  to  carry  on  his 
work  than  they  ; and  that  they  do  not,  from  fuch 
a Spirit,  reproach  fome  preachers,  that  have  the 
true  fpirit,  as  though  they  were  influenced  by  a 
falfe  fpirit,  or  were  bereft  of  reafon,  and  were 
mad,  or  were  proud,  falfe  pretenders,  and  de- 
N 3 ferved 


L 3°4  ] 

{erved  to  be  put  in  prifon,  or  the  flocks,  as  dit- 
turbers  of  the  peace left  they  expofe  themfelves 
to  the  curfe  of  Shemaiah  the  Nehelamite , who  en- 
vied the  prophet  Jeremiah,  and  in  this  manner 
reviled  him,  in  his  letter  to  Zephaniah  the  prieft, 
Jer.  xxix.  26,  27.  The  Lord  hath  made  thee 
priejl  in  the  Jlead  0/"  Jehoiada  the  prieft,  that  ye 
Jhould  be  officers  in  the  houfe  of  the  Lord,  for  every 
man  that  is  mad , and  maketh  himfelf  a prophet, 
that  thou  ffioiddfl  put  him  in  prijon,  and  in  the 
Jlocks.  Now  therefore,  why  haft  thou  not  reprov- 
ed Jeremiah  of  Anathoth,  which  maketh  himfelf 
a prophet  to  you  ? His  curfe  is  denounced  in  the 
32d  verfe,  Therefore  thus  faith  the  Lord,  Behold , 
l will  punifh  Shemaiah  the  Nehemalite,  and  his 
feed : he  fhall  not  have  a man  to  dwell  among  his 
people,  neither  ffiall  he  behold  the  good  that  L will 
do  for  my' people,  faith  the  Lord,  becaufe  he  hath 
taught  rebellion  againf  the  Lord. 

11.  But  not  only  minifters,  but  every  living 
foul  is  now  obliged  to  arife  and  acknowledge 
God  in  his  work,  and  put  to  his  hand  to  promote 
it,  as  they  would  not  expofe  themfelvcs  to  God's 
curfe.  All  forts  of.perfons  throughout  the  whole 
congregation  of  Ifrael,  great  and  fmall,  rich  and 
poor,  men  and  women,  helped  to  build  the 
tabernacle  in  the  wildernefs;  fome  in  one  way, 
others  in  another,  each  one  according  to  his 
capacity  : every  one  whofe  heart  firred  him  up, 
and  every  one  whom  his  fpint  made  willing  ; all 
forts  contributed,  and  all  forts  were  employed 

in. 


[ 3G5  ] 

rn  that  affair,  both  men  and  women.  And  thus 
it  ought  to  be  in  this  day  of  building  the  taber- 
nacle of  God  .-.with  fuch  a willing  and  chearful 
heart  ought  every  man,  woman  and  child,  to  do 
fomething  to  promote  this  work  ; thofe  that  have? 
not  onyx-flones,  or  are  not  able  to  bring  gold  or- 
filver,  yet  may  bring  goats  hair. 

* We  have  an  account,  how  that  all  forte- 
affifled  in  the  rebuilding,  the  wall  of  Jerufalerh, 
not  only  the  proper  inhabitants  of  Jerufalem , 
but  thofe  that  dwelt  in  other  parts  of  the  land. 
And  we  have-  an  account  of  one  and  another', 
that  he  repaired  over  againjl  his  houfe,  and  of 
one  that  repaired  over  againjl  his  chamber.  So 
now,  at  this  time  of  rebuilding  the  walls  of  Jeru- 
falem, every  one  ought  to  promote  the  work  of 
God  within  his  own  fphere,  and  by  doing  what 
belongs  to  him,  in  the  place  God  has  fet  him. 
Man  in  a private  capacity  may  repair  over 
againft  their  houfes  ; and  even  thofe  that  have 
not  the  government  of  families,  and  have  but  a 
part  of  a houfe  belonging  to  them,  fhould  repair 
each  one  over  againft  his  chamber  : and  every 
one  fhould  be  engaged  to  do  the  utmoft  that 
lies  in  his  power,  labouring  with  the  utmoft 
watchfulnefs,  care  and  diligence,  with  united 
hearts,  and  united  ftrength,  and  thegreateft  rea- 
dinefs,  to  aftift  one  another  in  this  work  ; as 
God’s  people  rebuilt  the  wall  of  Jerufalem,  who 
were  fo  diligent  in  the  work,  that  they  wrought 
from  break  of  day  till  the far  s appeared,  and  did 
N 4 no t 


i 3°6  ] 

net  fo  much  as  put  off  their  clothes  in  the  night  ; 
and  wrought  with  that  care  and  watchfulnefs, 
that  with  one  hand  they  wrought  in  the  work , and 
with  the  other  held  a.  weapon  : and  were  fo  well 
united  in  it,  that  they  took  care  that  one  fhould 
ftand  ready  with  a trumpet  in  his  hand,  that,  if 
any  were  affaulted  in  one  part  thofe  in  the  other 
parts,  at  the  found  of  the  trumpet,  might  refort  to 
them,  and  help  them. 

12.  Inflead  of  coming  to  the  help  of  the  Lord, 
we  (hall  aflually  fight  againfl  him,  if  we  are 
abundant  in  infilling;  on  the  blemiihes  of  the 
work,  fo  as  to  manifell  that  we  are  more  for- 
ward to  take  notice  of  what  is  amifs,  than  what 
is  good  and  glorious  in  the  work.  Not  but  that 
the  errors  that  are  committed  ought  tobeob- 
ferved  and  lamented,  and  the  inoil  probable 
means  ufed  to  have  them  amended  ; but  an  in- 
filling much  upon  them,  as  tho’  it  were  a pleaf- 
ing  theme,  or  fpeaking  of  them  with  heat  of 
fpirit  or  with  ridicule,  or  an  air  of  contempt, 
rather  than  grief  for  them,  has  no  tendency  to 
correft  the  errors  ; but  to  darken  the  glory  of 
God’s  power  and  grace,  and  to  beget jealoufies 
and  ill  thoughts  in  the  minds  of  others.  What- 
ever errors  many  zealous  perfons  have  run  into, 
yet  if  the  work,  in  the  fubflance  of  it,  be  the 
work  of  God,  then  it  is  a joyful  day  indeed  ; 
’tis  fo  in  heaven,  and  ought  to  be  fo  among 
God’s  people  on  earth.  ’Tis  a day  of  great  rejoic- 
ing withChrifl  himfelf,  the  good  Shepherd,  when 

he 


r 3°7  ] 

he  finds  his  fheep  that  was  loft.  If  we  therefore 
are  Chrift’s  friends,  now  it  fiionld  be  a day  of 
great  rejoicing  with  us.  If  we  viewed  things  in 
a juft  light,  fo  great  an  event  as  the  converfion 
of  fuch  a multitude  of  finners,  w'ould  engage  our 
attention  much  more  than  all  the  imprudencies 
and  irregularities  that  have  been ; our  hearts 
would  be  fwallowed  up  with  the  glory  of  this 
event,  and  we  fhould  have  no  great  dilpofition  to 
attend  to  any  th:ng  elfe,  T he  imprudencies 
and  errors  of  poor  leeble  worms  do  not  hinder 
great  rejoicing,  in  the  angels  of  God,  over  fo 
many  poor  finneis  that  have  repented  ; and  it 
will  be  an  argument  offomething  very  in',  if  they 
prevent  our  rejoicing. 

God  doubtlefs  now  expeffs,  that  all  forts  of 
perfons  in  New- England,  minifters  and  people, 
high  and  low,  .rich  and  poor,  old  and  young, 
{hould  take  great  notice  of  his  hand  in  this  mighty 
work  of  his  grace,  and  fiionld  appear,  to  acknow- 
ledge his  glory  in  it,  and  greatly  to  rejoice 
in  it,  every  one  doing  his  utmofi,  in  the  place 
that  God  has  fet  them  in,  to  promote  it.  And 
G.od,  according  to  his  wonderful  patience,  feems 
to  be  Hill  watting,  to  give  us  opportunity  thus 
to  acknowledge  and  honour. him;  but,  if  we 
finally  refufe,  there  is  not  the  leaft  reafon  to  ex- 
pend any  other  than  that  his  awful  curfe  will 
purfue  us,  and  that  the  pourings  out  of  his  wrath 
will  be  proportionable  to  the  pourings  out  of.  his 
grace,  which  we  have  defpifed_ 

N 5, 


PART- 


[ 3°8  3 


PART  III. 

Skewing  many  injlances,  wherein  the  fubjecls,  or 
promoters  of  this  work,  have  been  injurioufly 
blamed . 

IN  treating  of  the  methods  to  be  taken  to  pro- 
mote this  work,  I would,  i.  Take  notice 
wherein  fault  has  been  found  with  the  conduft 
of  the  fubjeffs,  or  promoters  of  it,  beyond  juft 
caufe.  2.  I -would  fhew  what  things  ought  to  be 
corre&ed  or  avoided.  And,  3,  What  ought  te 
be  done  to  promote  it. 

Firjl,  I would  take  notice  of  fome  things,  at 
which  offence  has  been  taken  without  or  beyond 
juft  caufe. 

l.  One  thing  that  has  been  complained  of  is, 
minifters  addreffing  themfelves  to  the  affebhons  of 
their  hearers,  and  driving  to  raife  their pajfions,. 
rather  by  earneftnefs  in  voice  and  gefture,  than 
by  clear  reafoning  : by  which  means,  it  is  cbjeft- 
ed,  the  affeftions  are  moved,  without  a propor- 
tionable inlightening  of  the  undei  Handing. 

To  which  I would  fay,  I am  far  from  thinking 
that  it  is  not  very  profitable  for  minifters,  in  their 
preaching,  to  explain  the  doftrines  of  religion, 
■unravel  the  difficulties  that  attend  them,  to  con- 
firm them  with  ftrength  of  reafon  and  argumen- 
tation; 


[ 3°9  3 

tation,  and  alfo  to  obferve  fome  method  and  or- 
der herein  : yet  I believe  the  objection  made,  of 
affe&ions  raifed  without  inlightening  the  under- 
flanding, is  in  a great  meafure  built  on  a miflake, 
and  confufed  notions  that  fome  have,  about  the 
nature  and  caufe  of  the  affe&ions,  and  the  man- 
ner in  which  they  depend  on  the  underflanding. 
All  affections  are  raifed  either  by  light  in  the  un- 
derjlanding,  or  by  fome  error  and  delufion  in  the 
underflanding  : for  all  affeCtions  certainly  arife 
from  fome  apprehenfion  in  the  underflanding  ; 
and  that  apprehenfion  mud  either  be  agreeable  to 
truth,  or  not  : if  it  be  an  apprehenfion  agreeable 
to  truth,  then  it  is  light  in  the  underflanding. 
Therefore  the  thing  to  be  enquired  is,  whether 
the  apprehenfions  of  divine  things,  that  are  raif- 
ed in  people’s  minds  by  thefe  affeftionate  preach- 
ers, be  apprehenfions  that  are  agreeable  to  truth, 
or  whether  they  are  miflakes.  If  the  former,  then 
the  affeftions  are  raifed  the  way  they  fhould  be, 
viz.  by  informing  the  mind,  or  conveying  light 
to  the  underflanding.  They  go  away  with  a 
wrong  notion,  that  think  thofe  preachers  can 
not  affeCt  their  hearers  by  inlightning  their  under- 
ftandings,  who  do  not  do  it  by  fuch  a diftinCt 
handling  of  doftrinal  points,  as  depends  on  hu- 
man difcipline,  or  the  ftrength  of  reafon,  and 
tends  to  inlarge  their  hearers  learning,  and  fpe- 
culative  knowledge  in  divinity.  The  manner  of 
preaching  without  this,  may  tend  very  much 
to  fet  divine  things  in  a right  view,  and  to  give 
N 6 the 


C 3*°  ] 

the  hearers  fuch  apprehenfions  of  them  as  are  a- 
greeable  to  truth,  and  fuch  impieflions  on  their 
hearts  as  are  anfwerablc  to  the  real,  nature  of 
things. 

* And  not  only  the  words  fpoken,  but  the 
manner  of  fpeaking,  has  a great  tendency  to  this. 
An  affeftionate  way  of  preaching  about  the  great 
things  of  religion,  has  no  tendency  to  beget 
falfe  apprehenfions  of  them  ; but  a much  greater 
to  beget  true  apprehenfions  of  them,  than 
a moderate,  dull,  indifferent  way  cf  fpeaking. 
Affeftion  and  earneflnefs  in  the  manner  of 
delivery,  if  it  be  very  great  indeed,  yet  if  it  be 
agreeable  to  the  nature  of  the  fubjeft,  not  be- 
yond proportion  to  its  importance,  and  there  be 
no  appearance  of  its  being  feigned  or  forced,  has 
fo  much  the  greater  tendency  to  beget  true  ap- 
prehenbons  in  the  minds  of  the  hearers,  of 
the  fubjeft  fpoken  of,  and  fo  to  inlightc-n 
the  ur.derdanding  : and  that,  for  this  rea- 
fon,  that  fuch  a manner  of  fpeaking  of  thefe 
things  does,  in  faff,  truly  reprefent  them.  If  the 
fubjeft  be  worthy  of  very  great  affeftion,  then 
a fpeaking  of  it  with  every  great  affeftion  is  the 
trued  reprefentation  of  it,  and  therefore  has 
mod  tendency  to  beget  true  ideas  of  it.  Nor  are 
miniders  to  be  blamed  for  raifing  the  affeftions  of 
their  hearers  too  high,  if  that  which  they  are  af- 
fefled  with  be  worthy  of  affeftion,  and  their  af- 
feftions  are  not  raifed  beyond  a proportion  to 
their  importance  or  wortbinefs. 


2 know 


[ 3 11  3 

i know  it  has  long  been  fufhionable  to-defpife 
an  earneft  and  pathetical  way  of  preaching  ; and 
they  only  have  been  valued  as  preachers,  that 
have  fhown  the  greatell  extent  of  learning,  and 
flrength  ol  reafon,  and  correflnefs  of  method 
and  language  : but  I humbly  conceive  it  has  been 
for  want  of  underflanding  or  duly  confidering 
human  nature,  that  fuch  preaching  has  been 
thought  to  have  the  greatefhtendency  to  anfwer 
the  ends  of  preaching.  And  the  experience  of 
the  prefent  and. paft ages  abundantly  confirms  the 
fame.  Speculative  knowledge  in  divinity  is  not 
what  is  fo  much  needed  by  our  people  as  fome- 
thing  elfe.  Men  may  abound  in  this  fort  of 
light,  and  have  no  heat  : how  much  has  there 
been  of  this  fort  of  knowledge  in  this  age  ? Was 
there  ever  an  age  wherein  flrength  and  penetra- 
tion of  reafon,  extent  of  learning,  exaffnefs  of  dif- 
tindlion  covre&nefs  of  fiile  and  clearnefs  of 
expreflion,  did  fo  abound  P And  yet,  was  there 
ever  an  age,  wherein  there  has  been  fo  little 
fenfe  of  the  evil  of  fin,  fo  little  love  to  God, 
heavenly-mindednefs  and  holinefs  oflife,  among 
the  profeffors  of  the  true  religion  ? Our  people 
do  not  fo  much  need  to  have  their  heads- 
flored,  as  to  have  their  hearts  touched ; and 
they  (land  in  the  greatefl  need  of  that  fort  of 
preaching  that  has  the  greatefl  tendency  to  do 
this- 


2,  Another 


[ 212  ] 

2.  Another  thing  that  fotne  minifters  have 
been  blamed  for,  I think  unjuftly,  is  fpeaking 
terror  to  them  that  are  already  under  great  terrors. 
Indeed  ii  they  go  about  to  terrify  pet  Tons  with 
that  which  is  not  true,  or  to  affright  them  by 
reprefenting  their  cafe  worfe  than  it  is  or  in 
any  refpecl  otherwife  than  it  is,  they  are  to  be 
condemned;  but  if  they  terrify  them  only  by 
ftill  holding  forth  more  light,  and  giving  them  to 
underhand  more  of  the  truth  of  their  cafe,  they 
are  altogether  to  be  juftified.  When  finners  are 
awakened  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  is  by  light  im- 
parted to  the  confcience,  enabling  them  to  fee 
their  cafe  as  it  is  ; and,  if  more  light  be  let  in,  it 
will  terrily  them  more  : but  minihers  are  not 
therefore  to  be  blamed,  that  they  endeavour  to 
hold  forth  more  light  to  the  confcience,  and  do 
not  rather  alleviate  the  pain  they  are  under,  by 
intercepting  and  obhru&ing  the  light  that  fhines 
already.  Why  (hould  we  be  afraid  to  bring  per- 
fons,  that  are  in  an  infinitely  miferable  condition, 
into  the  light,  for  fear  it  fhould  terrify  them  ? 
The  more  we  bring  finners  into  the  light,  while 
the  light  is  terrible  to  them,  the  more  likely  it  is 
that  by  and  by  the  light  will  be  joyful  to  them. 
The  eafe,  peace  and  comfort,  that  natural  men 
enjoy,  have  their  foundation  in  darknefs  and 
blindnefs  ; therefore  as  that  darknefs  vanifhes, 
and  light  comes  in,  their  peace  vanilhes,  and 
they  are  terrified  : but  that  is  no  good  argument 
why  we  fhould  endeavour  to  uphold  their  dark- 


[ 3*3  1 

nsfs,  that  we  may  uphold  their  comfort.  The 
truth  is,  as  long  as  men  do  not  favingly  believe,- 
however  flrift  they  may  be  in  religion,  they 
have  the  wrath  of  God  abiding  on  them;  they 
are  his  enemies  and  the  children  of  the  devil: 
and  feeing  this  is  the  truth,  they  fhould  be  told 
fo,  that  they  may  be  fenfible  what  their  cafe  in* 
deed  is. 

* To  blame  a minifter  for  thus  declaring  the 
truth  to  thofe  who  are  under  awakenings,  and 
not  immediately  adminiltering  comfort  to  them, 
is  like  blaming  a furgeon,  becaufe  when  he  has 
begun  to  thru  ft  in  his  lancet,  whereby  his  pati- 
ent fhrinks  and  cries  out,  he  is  fo  cruel  that  he 
will  not  flay  his  hand,  but  goes  on  to  thruft  it 
in  further,  till  he  comes  to  the  core  of  the  wound. 
Such  a compaffionate  phyfician,  who,  as  foon  as 
his  patient  began  to  cry,  fhould  withdraw  his 
hand,  and  immediately  apply  a plai flex'  to  fkin 
over  the  wound,  and  leave  the  core  untouched, 
would  heal  the  hurt  {lightly,.  crying,  peace,  peace, 
when  there  is  no  peace. 

Indeed  fomething  dfe  befides  terror  is  to  be 
preached  to  them  whofe  confciences  are  awaken- 
ed ; the  gofpel  is  to  be  preached  to  them.  Sin- 
ners at  the  fame  time  that  they  are  told  how  mi- 
ferable  their  cafe  is,  fhould  be  earneftly  invited 
to  come  and  accept  of  a Saviour:  but  this  is  to 
induce  them  to  efcape  from  the  mifery  of  the 
condition  they  are  now  in,  not  to  make  them 
think  it  is  lefs  miferable  than  it  is,  or  at  all  to 

abate 


r oh  ] 

abate  their  uneafinefs  and  diArefs  while  they  ar<i 
in  it ; that  would  be  the  way  to  fallen  them  in  it, 
and  not  to  excite  them  to  flee  from  it.  Comfort, 
in  one  fenfe,  is  to  be  held  forth  to  finners  under 
awakenings  of  eonfcience,  i.  e . comfort  is  to  be 
offered  to  them  in  ChriA,  on  condition  of  their 
fleeing  from  their  prefent  miferahle Jlate  to  him; 
but  comfort  is  not  to  be  adminiflered  to  them  in 
their  prefent  fate,  as  any  thing  that  they  have 
now  any  title  to.  No  comfort  is  to  be  adminif- 
tered  to  them,  from  any  thing  in  them,  any  of 
their  qualifications,  prayers,  or  other  performan- 
ces, pafl,  prefent  or  future  ; but  miniflers  fhould 
in  fuch  cafes  flrive  to  their  utmoA  to  take  all  fuch 
comforts  from  them.  A perfon  that  fees  himfelf 
ready  to  fink  into  hell,  is  ready  to  Arive  feme 
way  or  other'  to  lay  God  under  fome  obligation 
to  him  ; but  lie  is  to  be  beat  off  from  every  thing 
of  that  nature,  though  it  greatly  increafes  his  ter- 
ror, to  fee  himfelf  wholly  deAitute  on  every  fide 
of  any  refuge,  or  any  tiling  of  his  own  to  lay 
hold  of;  as  a man  that  fees  -himfelf  in  danger  of 
drowning,  is  in  terror,  and  endeavours  to  catch 
hold  on  every  twig  within  his  reach,  and  he  that 
pulls  away  thofe  twigs  from  him  increafes  his 
terror;  yet  if  they  are  infuScient  to- fave  him, 
and  by  being  in  his  way  prevent  his  looking  to 
that  which  will  fave  him,  to  pull  them  away  is 
neceffary  to  fave  his  life. 

If  finners  are  in  diArefs  from  any  miflake  they 


ars 


[ 3*‘5  1 

are  under,  that  is  to  be  removed  : for  inftance,  if 
they  are  in  terror  from  an  apprehenfion  that  they 
have  committed  the  unpardonable  fin,  fuch  ter- 
rors have  no  tendency  to  do  them  any  good  ; ic-r 
they  are  from  temptation,  not  from  convi£lion : 
but  that  terror  which  arifes  from  comi&ion,  or  a 
fight  of  truth,  is  to  be  increafed  ; for  thofe  that 
are  moll  awakened,  have  great  remaining  ffupr- 
dity  ; they  have  a fenfeof  but  little  of  that  which 
is;  and  it  is  from  remaining  blindnefs  and  dark- 
nefs  that  they  fee  no  more,  and  that  remaining 
blindnefs  is  a difeafe  that  we  ought  to  endeavour 
to  cure.  I am  not  afraid  to  tell  finners  that  are 
moft  fenfible  of  their  mifery,  that  their  cafe  is 
indeed  as  miferable  as  they  think  it  to  be,  and  a 
thoufand  times  more  fo;  for  this  is  the  truth. 
Some  may  be  ready  to  fay,  that  though  it  be  the 
truth,  yet  it  feems  not  to  be  feafonable  then : 
but  it  feems  to  me,  fuch  truth  is  never  more 
feafonable  than  at  fuch  a time,  when  Chrift  is 
beginning  to  open  the  eyes  of  confcience.  Mi- 
nifters  ought  to  a£f  as  co-workers  with  him ; to 
take  that  opportunity,  and  to  the  utmoff  to  im- 
prove that  advantage;  and  when  the  light  has 
begun  to  fhine,  then  to  remove  all  obflacles,  and 
life  all  proper  means  that  it  may  come  more  fully. 
And  experience  abundantly  fhews,  that  to  take 
this  courfe  is  not  of  an  hurtful  tendency : 1 have 
feen  in  very  many  inffances,  the  happy  effeffs  of 
it,  and  never  knew  any  ill  confequence  in  cafe 

of 


[ 3*6  1 

of  real  conviction,  and  when  difirefs  has  only 
been  from  thence. 

I know  but  of  one  cafe  wherein  the  truth 
ought  to  be  with-held  from  Tinners  in  dilfrefs  of 
confcience,  and  that  is  the  cafe  of  melancholv  : 
and  it  is  not  to  be  with-held  from  them  then, 
becaufe  the  truth  tends  to  do  them  hurt,  but  be- 
caufe  if  we  {peak  the  truth  to  them,  fometimes 
they  will  be  led  into  error  by  it,  through  that 
ffrange  difpofition  there  is  in  them  to  take  things 
wrong,  unlefs  it  be  fpoken  with  abundance  of 
caution  and  prudence,  and  confideration  of  their 
difpofition  and  circumftances.  But  the  moll 
awful  truth  of  God’s  word  ought  not  to  be  with- 
held from  public  congregations,  becaufe  it  may 
happen  that  fome  fuch  perfons  may  be  in  it,  any 
more  than  the  bible  is  to  be  with-held  from 
the  Chriliian  world,  becaufe  it  is  manifefl:  there 
are  many  who  exceedingly  abufe  the  awful 
things  contained  in  the  fcripture,  to  their  own 
woupding. 

* What  has  more  efpecially  raifed  a loud  cry 
againft  fome  preachers,  is  their  frighting  poor 
children  with  talk  of  hell  and  damnation.  But 
if  thofe  that  complain  of  this  really  believe  that 
all  are  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath,  and  heirs 
of  hell ; fuch  a cry  betrays  great  weaknefs  and 
inconfideration.  As  innocent  as  children  feem 
to  be  to  us,  yet,  if  they  are  without  Chrifi,  they 
are  not  fo  in  God's  fight,  but  are  in  a moll  mi- 
ferable  condition  as  well  as  grown  perfons ; and 

they 


[ 3*7  ] 

they  are  naturally  very  fenfelefs  and  ftupid,  be- 
ing born  as  the.  wild  a/s’s  colt . Why  then  fhould 
we  conceal  the  truth  from  them  ? Will  thofe 
children  that  have  been  dealt  tenderly  with  in 
this  refpeft,  and  lived  and  died  infenfible  of  their 
mifery  till  they  come  to  feel  it  in  hell,  ever  thank 
their  parents  for  their  tendernefs,  in  not  letting 
them  know  what  they  were  in  danger  of  ? If 
parents  love  towards  their  children  was  not 
blind,  it  would  affedt  them  much  more  to  fee 
them  expofed  to  eternal  burnings,  and  yet  fenfe- 
lefs, than  to  fee  them  fuffer  the  diftrefs  of  that 
awakening  that  is  neceflary  in  order  to  their 
efcape  from  them.  A child  that  has  a dangerous 
wound  may  need  the  painful  lancet  as  well  as 
grown  perfons ; and  that  would  be  a foolifh  pity, 
in  fuch  a cafe,  that  fhould  hold  back  the  lancet, 
and  throw  away  the  life. — I have  feen  the  happy 
effefts  of  dealing  plainly  with  children  in  the  con- 
cerns of  their  fouls,  without  fparing  them  at  all, 
in  many  inftances,  and  never  knew  any  ill  con- 
fequence  of  it  in  any  one  inftance. 

3.  Another  thing  that  has  been  blamed,  is  hav- 
ing fo  frequent  religious  meetings,  and  fpending 
fo  much  time  in  religion.  And  indeed  there  are 
none  of  the  externals  of  religion  but  what  are  ca- 
pable of  excefs.  But  yet  this  objection  of  perfons 
fpending  too  much  time  in  religion,  has  been  in 
the  general  groundlefs.  Though  worldly  buli- 
nefs  muft  be  done,  and  perfons  ought  not  to  neg- 
ledl  the  bufmefs  of  their  particular  callings  ; yet 

it 


[ 3*8  ] 

it  is  !o  the  honour  of  God,  that  a people  fhouicl 
be  fo  much  in  outward  a£is  of  religion,  as  to  (hew 
a great  engagcdnefs  of  mind  in  it,  as  the  main 
bufinefs  of  life;  and  efpeeially  at  a time  when 
God  appears  unufually  prefent  with  a people  in 
wonderful  works  of  power  and  mercy.  And  as 
to  the  grand  objection  of,  fix  days  J, halt  thou  la- 
bour ; all  that  the  objectors  themfelves  under- 
hand by  it  is,  that  we  may  follow  our  fecular  la- 
bours in  ho  e fix  days,  and  ought  to  be  diligent 
in  them  : not  but  fometimes  we  may  turn  from 
them  even  within  thofe  fix  days,  to  keep  a day 
of  lading  or  thankfgiving  ; and  that  more  fre- 
quently or  rarely,  as  God’s  providence  and  the 
date  of  things  fhallcall  us.. 

But  if  the  matter  be  juftly  confidered,  it  will 
be  found,  that  the  country  has  loll  no  time  from 
their  temporal  affairs  by  the  late  revival  of  reli- 
gion, but  rather  gained  time;  and  that  more 
time  has  been  faved  from  idlenefs  and  unprofit- 
able vifits,  vain  talk,  and  need  efs  diverfions, 
than  has  been  fpent  in  extraordinary  religion  ; 
and  probably  five  times  as  much  has  been  faved 
in  perfons  edates,  at  the  tavern,,  and  in  their  ap- 
parel, as  has  been  fpent  by  religious  meetings. 

That  the  great  complaint  that  is  made  againft 
fo  much  time  fpent  in  religion,  cannot  be  in 
general  from  a real  concern,  that  God  may  be 
honoured,  is  very  manifed  from  this,  that  there 
is  a much  more  zealous  outcry  made  againd  this 
extraordinary  religion,  than  was  before  againd  )o 

much. 


C 3 *9  ] 

■much  time  fpent  in  tav-erns,  vain  company,  and 
other  things,  which  both  wafted  our  time  and 
fubftance,  and  injured  our  virtue. 

4.  Another  thing,  wherein  home  minifters 
have  been  much  blamed,  is,  for  making  fo  much 
of  outcries,  faintings,  and  other  -bodily  effedls ; 
fpeaking  of  them  as  tokens  of  the  prefence  of 
God,  and  arguments  of  the  fuccefs  of  preaching; 
feeming  to  ftrive  to  bring  a congregation  to  that 
pafs,  and  to  rejoice  in  it,  yea,  to  blefs  God  when 
they  fee  thefe  effedls. 

Concerning  this  I would  obferve,  in  the  fnjl 
place,  that  there  are  many  things  with  refpedt  to 
cryings  our,  falling  down,  & c.  that  are  charged 
on  minifters,  that  they  are  not  guilty  of.  Some 
would  have  it  that  they  fpeak  of  thefe  things  as 
certain  evidences  of  a work  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
on  the  heart;  or  that  they  efteem  thefe  bodily 
effedls  themfelves  to  be  the  work  of  God,  as 
though  the  'Spirit  of  God  took  hold  of  and  agi- 
tated the  bodies  ol  men  ; and  fome  are  charged 
with  making  thefe  things  eJJ'entidl , and  fuppofing 
that  perfons  cannot  be  converted  without  them; 
whereas  I never  yet  could  fee  the  perfon  that 
held  any  of  thefe  things. 

'*  But  for  fpeaking  of  fitch  effedls  as  probable 
tokens  of  God’s  prefence,  and  arguments  of  the 
fuccefs  of  preaching,  it  feemsto  me  they  are  not 
to  be  blamed,  becaufe  I think  they  are  fo  indeed: 
and  therefore  when  I fee  them  excited  by  preach- 
ing the  important  truths  of  God’s  word,  urged 

•and 


and  inforced  by  proper  arguments  and  motives, 
or  as  confequent  on  other  means  that  are  good, 
I do  not  fcruple  to  rejoice  in  them  and  blefs  God 
for  them  ; and  that  for  this  (as  I think)  good  rea- 
fon,  viz.  That  from  time  to  time,  upon  proper 
enquiry  and  examination,  and  obfervation  of 
the  confequences,  I have  found  thefe  are  all 
evidences  that  the  perfons  in  whom  thofe  effefts 
appear,  are  then  under  the  influences  of  God’s 
Spirit.  Cryings-out  in  fuch  a manner,  and 
with  fuch  circumflances,  as  I have  feen  them 
from  time,  are  as  much  evidence  to  to  me  of  the 
general  caufe.they  proceed  from,  as  language:  I 
have  learned  the  meaning  ol  it  the  fame  way 
that  perlons  leain  the  meaning  of  language,  viz-- 
by  ufe  and  experience.  I confefs  that  when  I 
hear  a great  crying-out  in  a congregation,  in  the 
manner  that  I have  heard  it,  when  thofe  things 
are  fpoken  that  are  worthy  of  their  being  greatly 
affefted  by,  1 rejoice  in  it  much  more  than 
merely  in  an  appearance  offolemn  attention,  and 
a Ihew  ofaffeftion  by  weeping;  -and  thatbecaufe, 
when  there  have  been  thofe  outcries,  I have 
found  from  time  to  time  a much  greater  and  more 
excellent  effePt.  To  rejoice  that  the  work  of 
God  is  carried  on  calmly,  without  much  ado, 
is  in  effePr  to  rejoice  that  it  is  carried  on  with 
lefs  power,  or  that  thete  is  net  fo  much  of  the 
influence  of  God’s  Spirit;  for  though  the 
degree  of  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
on  particular  perfons , is  by  no  means  to  be 

.judged 


t B21  ] 

judged  of  by  the  degree  of  external  appearances, 
becaufe  of  the  different  conftituiions,  tempers 
and  circumftances  of  men ; yet,  if  there  be  a 
very  powerful  influence  of  the  Spirit  on  a mixed 
multitude,  it  will  caufe  Tome  way  or  other  a great 
vifible  commotion. 

And  as  to  minifters  aiming  at  fuch  effedfs,  I 
fup.pofe  none  aim  at  it  any  otherwife  than  as  they 
ftrive  to  raife  the  affedlion  of  their  hearers  to  fuch 
an  height  as  often  appears  therein ; and  if 
thofe  affedlions  are  good,  and  it  be  found  by 
experience,  that  fuch  a degree  of  them  com- 
monly has  a good  effedf,  I think  they  are  to  be 
juftified  in  fo  doing. 

5.  Again,  fome  minifters  have  been  blamed 
for  keeping  perfons  together  that  have  been 
under  great  affedlions,  which  have  appeared  in 
fuch  extraordinary  outward  manifeftations.  Many 
think  when  any  in  a congregation  are  fo  feized, 
that  they  cannot  forbear  outward  manifeftations 
of  it,  they  fhould  be  removed,  that  -others  may 
not  be  diverted. 

But  I cannot  but  think  that  thofe  that  thus  ob- 
jedl  go  upon  quite  wrong  notions  of  things:  for 
though  perfons  ought  to  take  heed  that  they  do 
not  make  an  ado  without  neceftitv  : yet  the  una- 
voidable manifeftations  of  ftrong  religious  affec- 
tions are  found  by  experience  to  have  an  excel- 
lent and  durable  effedf : and  fo  to  order  things, 
that  others  may  have  opportunity  to  obferve 
them,  has  been  found  a great  means  to  promote 

the 


E 322  ] 

the  work  of  God;  and  to  prevent  their  being  in 
the  way  of  obfervation,  is  to  prevent  the  eflett 
of  that  which  God  makes  ufe  of  as  a principal 
means  of  carrying  on  his  work  at  fuch  a time,  viz. 
Example  ; which  is  often  fpoken  of  in  fcripture, 
as  one  of  the  chief  means  by  which  God  would 
carry  on  his  work  in  the  time  of  the  profperity  of 
jeligion  in  the  latter  days. 

6.  Another  thing  that  gives  great  difguft  to 
many,  is  the  difpofition  that  perfons  fhew,  under 
great  affeflions,  to  fpeak  fo  much,  and,  with 
Inch  earneftnefs  and  vehemence,  to  be  fetting 
forth  the  greatnefs  and  importance  of  eternal 
things:  and  to  be  fo  paflionately  warning,  invit- 
ing and  intreating  others. 

I am  far  from  thinking  that  fuch  a difpofition 
fhould  be  wholly  without  any  limits  or  regulation  : 
but  yet  it  feems  to  me,  that  fuch  a difpofition  in 
general  is  what  both  reafon  and  fcripture  will 
juftify.  Thofe  that  are  offended  at  fuch  things, 
as' though  they  were  unreafonable,  are  not  juft: 
upon  examination  it  will  probably  be  found,  that 
they  have  one  rule  of  reafoning  about  temporal 
things,  and  another  about  fpiritual  things.  They 
would  not  at  ail  wonder,  if  a perfon  on  fome 
very  great  and  affe&ing  occafton,  of  extraordi- 
nary danger  or  great  joy,  is  difpofed  to  fpeak 
much,  and  with  great  earneftnefs,  efpecially  to 
thofe  to  whom  he  is  united  in  the  bonds  of  dear 
affeftion.  And  therefore,  if  they  were  juft, 
why  would  they  not  allow  it  in  fpiritual  things  ? 

And 


[ 3aS  1 

And  much  m ore  in  them  agreeable  to  their  vaflly 
-greater  importance  and  more  affe&ing  nature  ? 

We  ought  not  be  like  the  unbelieving  Jews 
in  Chrift’s  time,  who  were  difgufted  both  with 
crying  out  with  diftrefs,  and  with  joy.  When 
the  poor  blind  man  cried  out  before  all  the  mul» 
titude,  Jefus,  thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on, 
me  / x\nd  continued  inftantly  thus  doing,  the  mul- 
titude  rebuked  him  that  he fiould  hold  his  Longue , 
Mark  x.  46,  47,  4^,  and  Luke  xviii.  38,  39. 
They  looked  upon  it  to  be  a very  indecent  noife 
that  he  made ; a thing  very  ill  becoming  him,  to 
caufe  his  voice  to  be  heard  fo  much,  and  fo  loud. 
And  when  Chrift  made  his  folemn  entry  into 
Jerufalem , the  whole  multitude  ef  all  forts,  efpe- 
cially  young  people,  began  to  rejoice  and  praife 
-God  with  a loud  voice,  for  all  the  mighty  works 
that  they  had  feen,  faying,  Blejfed  be  the  king  that 
cometh  in  the  name  oj  the  Lord ! Peace  in  heaven, 
and  glory  in  the  highejl.  But  the  Pharifees  faid 
to  Chrift,  Mafer,  rebuke  thy  difciplcs.  They  did 
not  underhand  fuch  great  tranfports  of  joy;  it 
feemed  to  them  a very  undatable  and  indecent 
-noife  and  clamour  that  they  made  a confufed 
uproar,  many  crying  out  together  as  though  they 
were  out  of  their  wits ; they  wondered  that  Chrift 
would  tolerate  it.  But  what  fays  Chrift  ? I tell 
you,  that  if  thefe  fiould  hold  their  peace,  the  fones 
would  immediately  cry  out. 

7.  Another  thing  that  fome  have  found  fault 
with,  is  making  ufe  of  hymns  of  human  compo- 
Vol.  XVII.  ' O fure. 


[ 324  ] 

fure.  And  I am  far  from  thinking  that  the  book 
of  pfalms  fhould  be  thrown  by  in  our  public  wor- 
fhip,  but  that  it  fhould  always  be  ufed  in  the  Chrif- 
tian  church  to  the  end  of  the  world  : but  I know 
of  no  obligation  we  are  under  to  confine  our- 
felves  to  it.  And  it  is  really  needful  that  we 
fhould  have  fome  other  fongs  befides  the  pfalms 
of  David  : it  is  unreafonable  to  fuppofe  that  the 
Chriftian  church  fhould  for  ever,  in  her  praifes 
of  God  and  the  Lamb,  be  confined  only  to  the 
words  of  the  Old  Teftament,  wherein  all  the 
greateft  and  moft  glorious  things  of  the  gofpel, 
.that  are  infinitely  the  greateft  fubjeffs  of  her 
praife,  are  fpoken  of  under  a veil,  and  not  fo 
much  as  the  name  of  our  glorious  Redeemer  ever 
mentioned,  but  in  fome  dark  figure,  or  as  hid  un- 
der fome  type. 


PART  IV. 

Shelving  what  things  are  to  be  cor  reded  or  avoid- 
ed, in  promoting  this  work. 

T T AVING  thus  obferved  fome  inftances 
wherein  the  conduft  of  thofe  that  have  ap- 
peared to  be  the  fubjefts  of  this  work,  or  have 
been  zealous  to  promote  it,  has  been  objefled 

again  ft 


[ 3 

againft  without  or  beyond  juft  caufe;  I proceed 
now,  in  the 

II,  Place,  to  fiiew  what  things  ought  to  be  cor- 
refled  or  avoided. 

1.  If  we  look  back  into  the  hiftory  of  the 
church  of  God,  we  may  obferve  it  has  been  a 
common  device  of  the  devil  to  ovCrfet  a revival 
of  religion,  when  he  can  keep  men  quiet  no 
longer,  then  to  drive  them  to  exceffes  and  extra- 
vagancies. He  holds  them  back  as  long  as  he 
can  ; but  when  he  can  do  it  no  longer,  then  he 
'will  pufh  them  on,  and,  if  polfible,  run  them 
upon  their  heads.  And  it  has  been  by  this  means 
chiefly  that  he  has  been  fuccefsful,  in  feveral  in- 
ilances,  to  overthrow  promifmg  beginnings  : yea, 
the  principal  means  by  which  lie  was  fuccefsful, 
'by  degrees  to  overfet  that  grand  religious  revival 
of  the  world,  that  was  in  the  primitive  ages  of 
Chriftianity,  and  in  a manner  to  overthrow  the 
-Chriflian  church  through  the  earth,  and  to  make 
way  for  and  bring  on  the  great  antichriflian  apof- 
tafy,  was  to  imploy  the  indifcreet  zeal  of  Chrif- 
'-dans,  to  drive  them  into  thofe  three  extremes  of 
enthufiafm,  Juperjhtion,  and  femrity  towards  op- 
pojers  \ which  fhould  be  an  everlafting  warning  to 
the  Chriflian  church. 

Though  the  devil  will  do  his  diligence  to  ftir 
■up  the  open  enemies  of  religion,  yet,  in  a time 
of  revival  of  religion,  his  main  ffrengtii  is  tried 
with  the-  friends  of  it  ; in  his  attempts  upon  them 
O 2 tO 


[ 3^6  ] 

to  miflead  them.  And  one  truly  zealous  perlon 
in  the  time  of  fuch  an  event,  that  feems  to  have 
a great  hand  in  the  affair,  and  draws  the  eyes  of 
many  upon  him,  may  do  more  to  hinder  the 
work,  than  an  hundred  great,  and  ftrong,  and 
open  oppofers. 

The  errors  of  the  friends  of  the  work  of  God, 
and  efpecially  of  the  great  promoters  of  it,  give 
vaft  advantage  to  the  enemies  of  fuch  a work. 
Indeed  there  are  many  things  that  are  no  errors, 
but  are  only  duties  faithfully  done,  that  wound 
fuch  perfons  more  than  errors  : but  yet  one 
real  error  gives  oppofers  as  much  advantage,  and 
hinders  and  clogs  the  work  as  much  as  ten  fup- 
pofed  ones.  Real  errors  do  not  fret  and  gall  the 
enemies  of  religion  fo  much  as  thofe  things  that 
are  ftriflly  right but  they  entourage  them  more, 
they  give  them  liberty,  and  open  a gap  for  them  ; 
fo  that  fame  who  before  kept  their  enmity  burn- 
ing in  their  own  bowels,  and  durfl  not  (how  them- 
felves  will  on  fuch  an  occafion  take  courage, 
and  give  themfelves  vent ; and  their  rage  will  be 
like  that  of  an  enemy  let  loofe  ; and  thofe  that 
lay  fill!  before,  having  nothing  to  fay  but  what 
they  would  be  afhamed  of,  when  they  have  fuch 
a weapon  put  into  their  hands,  will  fight  with  all 
violence.  And  indeed,  the  enemies  of  religion 
would  not  know  what  to  do  for  weapons  to  fight 
with,  were  it  not  for  the  errors  of  the  friends  of 
it.  And  befides,  in  real  errors,  we  cannot  expeft 

God 


[ 327  ] 

God  will  appear  on  our  fide,  as  if  our  errors 
were  only  fuppofed  ones. 

Since  therefore  the  errors  of  the  friends  and 
promoters  of  fuch  a glorious  work  are  of  fuch 
dreadful  confequence  ; and  feeing  the  devil  is  fo 
afliduous  in  his  attempts  with  them,  and  has 
thereby  been  fo  fuccefsful  to  overthrow  religion 
heretofore ; certainly  fuch  perfons  ought  to  be 
exceeding  circumfpeft  and  vigilant,  and  jealous 
of  themfelves,  and  humbly  dependent  on  the  gui- 
dance of  the  good  Shepherd.  1 Pet.  iv.  7.  Be 
fober , and  watch  unto  prayer.  Chap.  v.  8.  Be 
fober , be  vigilant  ; becaufe  your  adverfary  the 
devil , as  a roaring  lion,  zualleth  about.  For  per- 
fons to  go  on  refolutely,  in  a kind  of  heat  and 
vehemence,  defpifing  admonition  and  correftion. 
is  direffly  contrary  to  be  fober , be  vigilant. 

2.  !Tis  a miftake  in  fome,  that  they  think 
they  are  in  no  danger  of  being  milled  by  the 
devil,  becaufe  they  are  near  to  God  ; and  fo  have 
no  jealous  eye  upon  themfelves,  and  negleft 
vigilance  and  circumfpeflion.  They  don’t  think 
God  will  leave  them  to  difhonour  him,  as  long 
as  they  keep  near  to  him.  And  I believe  fo  too, 
as  long  as  they  keep  near  to  God  in  that  refpeft, 
that  they  maintain  an  univerfal  diligent  watch,  and 
avoid  fin  and  fnares  with  diffidence  in  them- 
felves and  humble  dependence  and  prayerful- 
nefs  ; but  not  merely  becaufe  they  are  near  to 
God,  in  receiving  refreffiirfg  views  of  him  ; if 
at  the  fame  time  they  are  not  jealous  over  their 
O 3 own 


[ 3*8  3 

own  hearts,  by  reafonofits  remaining  blindneu 
and  a fubtil  adverfary.  ’Tis  a grand  error  for 
perfons  to  think  they  are  out  of  danger,  even  in 
their  highed  fpiritual  joy.  However  highly  we 
may  be  favoured  with  divine  comforts,  yet,  as 
long  as  we  are  in  the  world,  we  are  in  the  ene- 
mies country ; and  therefore  that  direction  of 
Chrid  to  hisdifciples  is  never  out  of  date;  Watch 
and  pray  always , that  you  may  be  accounted  wor- 
thy to  efcape  ail  thefe  things,  and  to Jland  before 
the  Son  of  man,  Luke  xxi.  36.  For  though  God 
{lands  ready  to  proteft  his  people,  efpecially  thofe 
that  are  near  to  him : yet  he  expefts  we  fhould 
put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that  we  may 
Hand  in  the  evil  day  : and  whatever  fpiritual  pri- 
vileges we  are  raifed  to,  we  have  no  warrant  to 
expeft  prote&ion  in  any  other  way;  for  God  has 
appointed  this  whole  life,  as  a Hate  of  labour,  to 
be  all  as  a race  or  battle  ; the  date  wherein  we  fhali 
have  no  need  of  watching  and  fighting  is  referved 
for  another  world.  I have  known  in  abundance 
of  indances,  the  devil  has  come  in,  even  in  the 
midd  of  the  mod  exalted  frames  : it  may  feem  a 
great  mydery  ; but  it  is  no  greater  mydery  than 
that  Chrid  fliould  be  carried  into  the  wildernefs, 
immediately  after  the  heavens  had  been  opened 
to  him,  and  the  Holy  Ghod  defcended  like  a 
dove  upon  him,  and  he  heard  that  joyful  voice 
from  the  Father,  This  is  ?ny  beloved  Son,  in  whom 
I am  well pleafed.  In  like  manner  a Chridian  is 
oftentimes  carried  into  a wildernefs,  prefently 

after 


[ 3^9  ] 

after  heaven  has  been  as  it  were  opened  to  the 
foul,  and  the  Holy  Ghoft  has  defcended  upon  it 
like  a dove,  and  God  has  been  fweetly  owning 
the  believer,  and  teftifying  his  favour  to  him  as 
his  beloved  child. 

3.  In  fpeaking  of  the  errors  that  have  been,  or 
that  we  are  in  danger  of,  I would 

Fuji , Take  nqtice  of  the  caufes  whence  the 
errors  that  attend  a great  revival  of  religion  u- 
fually  arife  ; and,  of  fome  errors  that  arife  from 
each  of  thofe  caufes. 

Secondly , Obferve  fome  errors  that  have  been 
owing  to  the  influence  of  feveral  of  thofe  caufes 
cpnjointly. 

As  to  the  firil  of  thefe,  the  errors  that  attend  a 
great  revival  of  religion  ufually  arife  from  thefe 
three  things  ; 1.  Undifcerned  fpiritual  pride.  2. 
Wrong  principles.  3.  Ignorance  of  Satan’s  de- 
vices. 

The  fir  ft  and  worft  caufe  of  errors,  in  fuch  a 
ftate,  is  fpiritual  pride.  This  is  the  main  door 
by  which  the  devil  comes  in.  It  is  the  chief  in- 
let of  fmoke  from  the  bottomlefs  pit,  to  darken 
the  mind  and  miflead  the  judgment.  This  is  the 
main  handle  by  which  the  devil  has  hold  of  reli- 
gious perfons,  and  the  chief  fource  of  all  the  mif- 
chief  that  he  introduces,  to  clog  and  hinder  a 
work  of  God. 

I know  many  things  are  injurioufly  laid  to  the 
pride  of  thofe  that  are  zealous  in  the  caufe  ofGod. 
When  any  perfon  appears  more  zealous  in  reli- 
O 4 gion, 


[ 33o  ] 

gion,  than  others,  or  feems  to  be  dillinguifhed 
with  fuccefs,  ten  to  one  but  thofe  that  are  about 
him  will  fufpeft  that  he  is  very  proud  of  his 
goodnefs,  and  that  he  aflfefts  to  have  it  thought 
that  no  body  is  fo  good  as  he.  Thofe  that  are 
themfelves  cold  and  dead,  and  efpeciallv  fuch  as 
never  had  any  experience  of  the  power  of  godli- 
nefs,  are  ready  to  entertain  fuch  thoughts  of  the 
heft  Chriliians,  from  a fecret  enmitv  asainil  vital 
piety. 

But  then  zealous  Chriliians  fhouid  take  heed 
that  this  do  not  prove  a fnare  to  them,  and-  the 
devil  do  not  take  advantage  from  it,  to  blind  their 
eyes  from  beholding  what  is  indeed  in  their  hearts. 

The  corruption  of  nature  may  all  be  refolved 
into  two  things,  pride  and  worldly-mindednefs,  the 
Devil  and  the  Be ajl : thefe  are  the  two  pillars  of 
Dagon’s  temple,  on  which  the  whole  hoafe  leans. 
But  the  former  of  thefe  is  every  way  the  worth 
part ; it  is  the  firlt-born  fon  of  the  devil,  and  his 
image  in  the  heart  of  man  chiefly  confifls  in  it  ; 
it  is  the  laft  thing  in  a {inner  that  is  overborn  by 
conviflion,  in  order  to  converfion  ; and  it  is  moll; 
like  the  devil  its  father,  in  a ferpentine  deceitful- 
nefs ; it  lies  deepeft,  and  is  moll  aftive,  moil 
ready  fecretly  to  mix  itfelfwith  every  thing. 

Spiritual  pride  in  its  own  nature  is  fo  fecret, 
that  it  is  not  as  well  difcerned  by  immediate  intui- 
tion on  the  thing  itfelf,  as  by  the  fruits  of  it ; 
fome  of  which  I lhall  mention,  together  with 
the  contrary  fruits  of  humility. 


4.  Spiritual 


C 331  ] 

q.  Spiritual  pride  difpofes  to  fpeak  of  other 
perfons  fins,  their  enmity  againft  God  and  his 
people,  the  miferable  delufion  of  hypocrites,  and 
their  enmity  againft  vital  piety,  and  the  dead- 
nefs  of  fome  Chriftians,  with  bitternefs,  or  with 
laughter  and  levity,  and  an  air  of  contempt; 
whereas  humility  difpofes,  either  to  be  filent 
about  them,  or  to  fpeak  of  them  with  grief  and 
piety. 

Spiritual  pride  is  apt  to  fufpeft  others  ; 
whereas  an  humble  man  is  moil  jealous  of  him- 
felf ; he  is  fo  fufpicious  of  nothing  in  the  world 
as  he  is  of  his  own  heart.  He  has  fo  much  to  do 
at  home,  and  fees  fo  much  evil  in  his  own  heart, 
and  is  fo  concerned  about  it,  that  he  is  not  apt  to 
be  very  bufy  with  others  ; he  complains  moil  ©f 
himfelf,  and  cries  out  of  his  own  coldnefs,  and  is 
ready  to  hope  that  there  is  no  body  but  has  more 
love  and  thankfulnefs  to  God  than  he. 

* In  a contrariety  to  this,  it  has  been  the  man- 
ner of  fome  to  fpeak  of  almoft  every  thing  that 
they  fee  amifs  in  others,  in  the  moft  harfh.  fe- 
vere  and  terrible  language.  It  is  frequent  with 
them  to  fay  of  others  opinions  or.  condufcl  or  ad- 
vice, or  of  their  coldnefs,  their  filence,  their  cau- 
tion, their  prudence,  that  they  are  from  the  devil, 
or  from  hell  ; that  fuch  a thing  is  devihfh,  or  hel- 
lifh,  or  curfed,  and  that  fuch  perfons  are  ferving 
the  devil,  or  the  devil  is  in  them  , fo  that  the 
words  devil  and  hell  are  almoft  continually  in  their 
mouths.  And  fuch  kind  of  language  they  will 
O 5 commonly 


[ 332  } 

commonly  ufe,  not  only  towards  wicked  men, 
but  towards  them  that  they  themfelves  allow  to  be 
the  true  children  of  God,  and  alfo  towards  minif- 
ters  and  others  that  are  much  their  fuperiors.  And 
they  look  upon  it  as  a virtue  and  high  attain- 
ment thus  to  behave  themfelves.  Oh,  fay  they, 
we  muji  be  plain  and  bold  for  Chrijl,  we  mujl  de- 
clare war  againjl  fin  wherever  we  fee  it,  we  muf 
not  mince  the  matter  in  the  cavfe  of  God,  and 
when  [peaking  forChrifl. 

What  a flrange  device  of  the  devil  is  here,  to 
overthrow  all  Chriflian  meeknefs  and  gentlenefs, 
and  even  all  fhew  and  appearance  of  it,  under  a 
clokeof  zeal  and  boldnefs  for  Chrift ! And  it  is  a 
remarkable  inftance  of  the  weaknefs  of  the 
human  mind,  and  how  much  too  cunning  the 
devii  is  for  us  ! 

The  grand  defence  of  this  way  of  talking  is, 
that  they  fay  no  more  than  what  is  true,  but  tis 
a grand  miltake  to  think  that  we  may  ufe  con- 
cerning one  another  all  fuch  language  as  is  ac- 
cording to  drift  truth.  Tis  really  true,  that  every 
kind  of  fin,  and  every  degree  of  it,  is  devilifh. 
and  from  hell,  and  iscurfed,  hellifh,  and  con- 
demned or  damned.  But  lhall  a child  therefore 
from  time  to  time,  ufe  fuch  language  concern- 
ing an  eminently  holy  father  or  mother,  as,  that 
the  devil  is  in  them  ; that  they  have  fuch  and  fuch 
devilifh  curled  difpofitions  : that  they  commit 
every  day  hundreds  of  hellifh  damned  afts  : and 
that  they  are  curfed  dogs,  hell-hounds  and 

devils  ? 


[ .333  J 

devils  ? And  (hall  the  meanefl  of  the  people  be 
juftified,  in  ufing  fuch  language  concerning 
magiftrates,  or  eminent  minifters  P I hope  no 
body  has  gone  to  this  height ; but  the  fame  pre- 
tences of  boldnefs,  and  declared  war  againft-fin, 
will  as  well  juftify  thefe  things,  as  the  things 
they  are  aftually  made  ufe  of  to  juftify  it.  If  we 
proceed  in  fuch  a manner,  what  a face  will  be 
introduced  upon  the  church  of  Chrift  ? What 
a found  (hall  we  bring  into  the  houfe  of  God, 
into  the  family  of  his  dear  children  ? How  foon 
banifh  that  lovely  appearance  of  humility,  fweet- 
nefs,  gentlenefs,  mutual  honour,  benevolence, 
complacence,  and  an  efteem  of  others  above 
themfelves,  which  ought  to  clothe  the  children 
of  God  all  over  ? Not  but  that  Chriftians  fhould 
watch  over  one  another,  and  in  any  wife  reprove 
one  another,  and  do  it  plainly  and  faithfully; 
but  it  does  not  thence  follow  that  dear  brethren 
in  the  family  of  God,  in  rebuking  one  another, 
fhould  ufe  worfe  language  than  Michael  the 
archangel  durft  ufe  when  rebuking  the  devil 
himfelf. 

Chriftians,  that  are  but  fellow  worms,  ought 
at  leaf!  to  treat  one  another  with  as  much  humility 
and  gentlenefs  as  Chrift,  that  is  infinitely  abp.ve 
them,  treats  them.  But  how  did  Chrift  treat  his 
difciples  when  they  were  fo  cold  towards  him, 
and  fo  regardlefs  of  him,  at  the  time  when  his 
foul  was  exceeding  forrowful  even  unto  death, 
and  he  in  a difmal  agony  was  crying  and  fweat- 
O 6 mg 


[ 334  ] 

ing  blood  for  them  ? One  would  think  then  was  a 
proper  time,  if  ever,  to  have  reproved  them 
for  a devilifh,  hellifh,  curfed  and  damned  flothful- 
nefs  and  deadnefs.  But  after  what  manner  does 
Chrifl  reprove  them  ? Behold  his  aftonifhing 
gentlenefs ! What , could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one 
hour  ? The  fpirit  indeed  is  willing , but  the JleJh  is 
weak.  And  how  did  he  treat  Peter  when  he  was 
afhamed  of  his  Mailer,  while  he  was  made  a 
mocking-llock  and  a fpitting-flock  for  him  :: 
Why,  he  looked  upon  him  with  a look  of  love, 
and  melted  his  heart. 

,5.  Again,  fpiritual  pride  often  difpofes  per- 
fons  to  afFeft  a Angular  way  of  fpeaking,  or  to  be 
lingular  in  voice,  or  air  of  countenance  or  beha- 
viour : but  he  that  is  humble',  though  he  will  be 
firm  to  his  duty,  however  Angular  he  is  in  it;  yet 
delights  not  in  Angularity,  for  Angularities  fake  ; 
but  on  the  contrary  is  difpofed  to  become  all 
things  to  all  men,  and  to  yield  to  others,  and 
conform  to  them  in  every  thing  but  fin.  Spiri- 
tual pride  occafions  a ItifFnefs  and  inflexibility  in 
perfons,  in  their  own  judgment  and  their  own 
ways  ; whereas  the  humble  perfon,  though  he  be 
inflexible  in  his  duty,  and  in  thofe  things  where- 
in God’s  honour  is  concerned  ; and  with  regard 
to  temptation  to  thofe  things  he  apprehends  to  be 
finful,  though  in  never  fo  fniall  a degree,  is  like 
a brazen  wall  ; vet  in  other  things  he  is  of  a plia- 
ble difpofition,  ready  to  pay  deference  to  the 
©pinions  of  others,  to  comply  with  their  inclina- 
tions. 


[ 335  ] 

tions,  and  has  a heart  that  is  tender  and  flexible, 
like  a little  child. 

Spiritual  pride  difpofes  perfons  to  affeft  repa- 
ration, to  hand  at  a diftance  from  others,  but  the 
humble  Chrillian  is  ready  to  look  upon  himfeif 
as  not  worthy  that  others  fhould  be  united  to 
him  : and  though  he  will  not  be  a companion 
with  one  that  is  vifibly  Chrift’s  enemy,  yet  his 
univerfal  benevolence  delights  in  union  with  his 
fellow  creatures,  and  will  maintain  it  as  much  as 
he  poltibly  can,  without  wounding  his  own  foul. 

* The  humble  Chrillian  is  as  it  were  clothed 
with  lowlinefs,  mildnefs,  meeknefs,  gentlenefs 
of  fpirit  and  behaviour,  and  with  a foft,  fweet, 
condefcending,  winning  air  and  deportment  ; 
thefe  things  are  juft  like  garments  to  him.  he  is 
clothed  with  humility , he  puts  on,  as  the  elcB  of 
God,  holy  and  beloved,  bowels  of  mercies,  kindnefs, 
humblenefs  of  mind,  meeknefs,  l ong-f offering. 

Humility  has  no  fuch  thing  as  rougbnefs,  or 
contempt,  or  fiercenefs,  or  bitternefs  in  its  na- 
ture ; it  makes  a perfon  like  a little  child,  liarm- 
lefs  and  innocent,  and  that  none  need  to  be  afraid 
of;  or  like  a lamb,  deftitute  of  all  bitternefs, 
wrath,  anerer  and-  clamour. 

With  fuch  a fpirit  as  this  ought  efpecially  zea- 
lous minifters  of  the  gofpel  to  be  clothed,  and  thofe 
that  God  is  pleafed  to  employ  as  inftruments  of 
promoting  his  work  : they  ought  indeed  to  be 
explicit  in  preaching  the  word  of  God,  without 
mincing  the  matter  at  all;  they  are  not  to  be 

gentle 


C 336  J 

gentle  in  fearching  and  awakening  the  confcience, 
but  Oiould  be  fons  of  thunder.  The  word  of 
God,  which  is  in  itfelf  (harper  than  any  two-edg- 
ed fword,  ought  not  to  be  fheathed  by  them,  but 
fo  ufed  that  its  fharp  edges  may  have  their  full 
effeft,  even  to  the  dividing  afunder  foul  and  fpi- 
rit,  joints  and  marrow  ; (provided  they  do  it 
without  judging  particular  perfons,  leaving  it  to 
confcience  and  the  Spirit  of  God  to  make  the  ap- 
plication) but  all  their  converfation  fhould  favour 
of  nothing  but  lowlinefs  and  good-will,  love  and 
pity  to  all  mankind  ; fo  that  fuch  a fpiiit  Ihould 
be  like  a fwreet  odour  diffufed  around  them  where- 
ever  they  go,  or  like  a light  fhining  about  them, 
their  faces  Ihould  as  it  were  (hine  with  it  ; they 
fhould  be  like  lions  to  guilty  confciences,  but 
like  lambs  to  mens  perfons.  This  would  have  no 
tendency  to  prevent  the  awakening  ot  mens  con- 
fciences, but  on  the  contrary  would  have  a very 
great  tendency  to  awaken  them;  it  would  make 
way  for  the  Or arp  fword  to  enter;  it  would  re- 
move the  obdacles,  and  make  a naked  bread  for 
the  arrow.  Yea,  the  amiable  converfation  of 
fuch  miniflers,  in  itfelf,  would  terrify  the  con- 
fciences of  men,  as  well  as  their  terrible  preach- 
ing; both  would  co-operate,  one 'with  another, 
to  fubdue  the  hard,  and  bring  down  the  proud 
heart.  If  there  had  been  conltanlly  and  univer- 
fallv  obfervable  fuch  a behaviour  as  this  in  itiner- 
ant preachers,  it  would  have  terrified  the  confci- 
ences of  burners  ten  times  as  much  as  all  the  invec- 


tives 


[ 337  ] 

lives  and  cenforious  talk  there  has  been  concern- 
ing particular  perfons. 

6.  Spiritual  pride  takes  great  notice  ofoppofi- 
lion  and  injuries  received,  that  is  apt  to  be  often 
fpeaking  of  them,  and  to  be  much  in  taking 
notice  of  the  aggravations  of  them,  either  with 
an  air  of  bitternefs  or  contempt  ; whereas  hu- 
mility difpofes  a perfon'to  be  like  .his  Lord,  when 
reviled,  dumb,  not  opening  his  mourn,  but  com- 
mitting himfeif  in  filence  to  him  that  judgeth 
righteoufly.  The  humble  Chriftian,  thr>  more 
clamorous  and  furious  the  world  is  againft  him 
the  more  filent  and  dill  will  be  be  ; unlefs  it  be 
in  his  clofet,  and  there  he  will  not  be  dill.  Our 
bleffed  Lord  feems  never  to  have  been  fo  filent, 
as  when  the  world  compaffed  him  round,  reproach- 
ing, bufFeting  and  fpitting  on  him,  with  loud  and 
virulent  outcries. 

There  has  been  too  mijch  talk  of  late,  among 
many  of  the  friends  of  religion,  about  oppofition 
and  perfecution.  It  becomes  the  followers  of 
the  Lamb  of  God,  when  the  world  is  in  an  uproar 
about  them,  and  full  of  clamour  againft  them, 
not  to  raife  another  noile  to  anfwer  it,  but  to  be 
dill  and  quiet.  ’Tis  not  beautiful,  at  fuch  a 
times  to  have  pulpits  and  converfatton  ring  with 
the  found  ol  Perfecution , perfecution , or  with  a- 
bundant  talk  about  Phanfes , carnal  perfecutors 
and  the  feed  of  the  ferpent. 

Meeknefs  and  quietnefs  among  God’s  people 
when  oppofed  and  reviled,  would  be  thefureft 

way 


[ 338  ] 

way  to  have  God  remarkably  appear  for  their 
defence.  Nothing  is  fo  effectual  to  bring  God 
down  from  heaven  in  the  defence  of  his  people 
as  their  patience  under  bufferings.  And  thus  it  is 
that  we  might  expeft  to  have  Chrilt  appear  for  us, 
if,  under  all  reproaches  we  are  loaded  with,  we 
behaved  ourfelves  with  a lamb-like  meeknefs 
and  gentlenefs:  but  if  our  fpiriisare  raifed,  and 
we  are  vehement  and  noify  with  our  complaints, 
this  will  be  to  take  upon  us  our  own  defence,  and 
God  will  leave  it  with  us,  to  vindicate  our  caufe 
as  well  as  we  can  ; yea,  if  we  go  on  in  a way  of 
bitternefs,  and  high  cenfuring,  it  will  be  the  way 
to  have  him  rebuke  us,  and  put  us  to  fhame  be- 
fore our  enemi  es. 

Here  fome  may  be  ready  to  fay,  “ ;Tis  not  in 
our  own  caufe  that  we  are  thus  vehement,  but  in 
the  caufe  of  God  ; and  the  apoltle  di reeled  the 
primitive  Chri  Ilians  to  contend  earnejilyfor  thefaitli 
once  delivered  to  the  faints.”  But  how  was  it  that 
the  primitive  Chriflians  contended  earneffly  for 
the  faith  P They  defended  the  truth  with  a holy 
converfation,  but  gave  their  reafons  with  meek- 
nefs and  fear;  they  contended  earneflly  lor  the 
faith,  yea,  they  refilled  unto  blood,  flriving 
againll  fin  : but  the  blood  that  was  filed  in  this 
earned  flrife,  was  their  own  blood,  and  not  the 
blood  of  their  enemies.  It  was  in  the  caufe  of 
God  that  Peter  was  fo  fierce,  and  drew  his  fword 
and  began  to  finite  with  it  : but  Chrifl  bids  him 
put  up  his  fword  again,  telling  him  that  they  thai 

take 


[ 339  ] 

take  the  (word  fhall  perilh  by  the  fword.  They 
are  the  greateft  conquerors  in  a time  of  perfecu- 
tion,  who  bear  it  with  the  greateft  meeknefs  and 
patience. 

* 7.  Another  effeft  of  fpiritual  pride  is  a cer- 
tain felf-confident  boldnefs  before  God  and  men. 
Thusfome,  in  their  great  rejoicings  before  God 
have  not  rejoiced  with  a reverential  trembling, 
in  a proper  fenfe  of  the  majelly  of  God,  and  the 
awful  diftance  between  God  and  them.  And 
there  has  alfo  been  an  improper  boldnefs  before 
men  ; which  is  a great  error,  and  quite  contrary 
to  fcripture.  There  is  a fear  of  reverence  that  is 
due  to  fome  men,  Rom.  xiii.  7.  Fear  to  whom  fear , 
honour  to  whom  honour.  And  there  is  a fear  of 
modefty  and  lhamefacednefs  in  inferiors  towards 
fuperiors,  that  is  amiable,  and  required  by  Chrif- 
tian  rules.  Yet  it  is  well  if  that  very  fear  and 
lhamefacednefs,  which  the  apoftle  recommends, 
has  not  fometimes  been  condemned,  under  the 
name  of  a curfed  fear  of  men. 

8.  Another  effeft  of  fpiritual  pride  is  ajfumingz 
it  makes  it  natural  to  perfons  fo  to  aft  and  fpeak, 
as  though  it  in  a fpecial  manner  belonged  to  them 
to  be  taken  notice  of,  and  regarded.  It  is  very 
natural  to  a perfon  that  is  much  under  the  in- 
fluence of  it  to  take  all  the  refpeft  that  is  paid 
him;  if  others  (hew  a difpofition  to  yield  him 
the  deference  of  a.  preceptor,  he  is  open  to  it, 
and  freely  admits  it  ; yea,  ’tis  natural  for  him  to 
expeft  fuch  treatment,  and  to  take  much  notice 

of 


[ 34»  ] 

of  it  if  her fails  of  it,  and  to  have  an  ili  opinion 
of  others  that  do  not  pay  him  that  which  he 
looks  upon  as  his  prerogative.  He  is  apt  to  clothe 
himfelf  with  a judicial  and  dogmatical  air  in  con- 
verfation,  and  to  take  it  upon  him,  as  what  be- 
longs to  him,  to  give  forth  his  fentence,  and  to 
determine  and  decide.  Whereas  humility  vaunt - 
eth  not  itfelf , and  is  apt  to  prefer  others  in  ho- 
nour. 

There  ought  to  be  the  utmoft  watchfulnefs 
againft  all  fuch  appearances  of  fpiritual  pride,  in 
all  that  profefs  to  have  been  the  fubjefts  of  this 
work,  and  efpecially  in  the  promoters  of  it,  but 
above  all  itinerant  preachers  : the  moll  eminent 
gifts,  and  higheft  tokens  of  God’s  favour  will  not 
excufe  them.  Alas  1 what  is  man  at  his  belt  ef- 
tate  ! What  is  the  mod  highly  favoured  Chriftian, 
or  the  moll  fuccefsful  minifler,  that  he  Ihould 
now  think  he  is  fufficient  for  fomething,  and 
fomebody  to  be  regarded  ; and  that  he  fhould  go 
forth,  and  aft  among  his  fellow  creatures  as  if  he 
were  wife,  and  flrong,  and  good! 

They  whom  God  has  made  ufe  of,  as  it  were, 
to  bring  up  his  people  out  of  Egypt,  as  he  did  of 
Mofes,  fhould  take  heed  that  they  do  not  pro- 
voke God,  as  Mofes  did.  The  fruits  of  Mofes's 
unbelief,  which  provoked  God  to  (hut  him  out  of 
Canaan , where  chiefly  thefe  two  ; frfl,  His  ming- 
ling bitternefs  with  his  zeal.  He  had  a great  zeal 
for  God,  and  he  could  not  bear  to  fee  the  intoler- 
able fliff-neckednefs  of  the  people,  that  they  did 

not 


[ 24*  J 

not  acknowledge  the  work  ol  God,  and  were  not 
convinced  by  all  his  wonders  they  had  keen  : but 
human  paffion  was  mingled  with  his  zeal  : They 
angred  him  alfo  at  the  waters  ofjlrife ; fo  that  it 
went  ill  with  Mofes  for  their  Jakes  : becaufe  they 
provoked  his  Spirit , fo  that  he  fpake  unadvifedly 
with  his  lips,  Pfal.  cvi.  32,  33.  Hear  now,  ye  re- 
bels, fays  he,  with  bitternefs  of  language.  Second- 
ly, he  alTumed  too  much  to  himfelf ; Hear  now,  ye 
rebels,  mujl  we  fetch  water  out  of  this  rock.  His 
temptations  indeed  were  very  great;  for  he  had 
had  great  difcoveries  of  God,  who  had  made  him. 
the  inflrument  of  great  good  to  his  church  : and 
they  were  now  too  flrong  for  him  : which  furely 
fhould  make  our  young  miniflers  exceeding  care* 
ful  and  diftruffful  of  themfelves.  Alas!  how 
far  are  we  from  having  the  flrength  of  holy, 
meek,  aged  Mofes ! And  the  temptation  at  this 
time  is  exceeding  great  to  both  thofe  errors  that 
Mofes  was  guilty  of:  to  bitternefs  and  corrupt 
paffion  with  zeal;  there  is  fo  much  unreafonable 
oppofition  made  againfl  this  glorious  work,  and 
fo  much  ftiff-neckednefs  manifefled  in  multi- 
tudes of  this  generation,  notwithftanding  all  the 
wonderful  works  of  God.  And  there  is  alfo  great 
temptation  to  an  affuming  behaviour  : when  a 
minifler  is  greatly  blefl  from  time  to  time,  and 
fo  draws  the  eyes  of  the  multitude  upon  him,  it 
is  almofl  impoffible  to  avoid  taking  upon  him 
the  airs  of  a mailer,  or  fome  extraordinary  per- 
fon  ; a man  had  need  to  have  much  divine  af- 

fiftance, 


[ 3'42  ] 

n (lance,  to  refill  the  temptation.  But  the  greater 
our  dangers  are  the  more  ought  to  be  our  watch- 
fulnefsr  and  prayer,  and  diffidence  of  ourfelves. 
And  we  ffiould  take  warning  by  Gideon,  who 
after  God  had  highly  favoured  him,  and  made 
him  the  inflrument  of  a wonderful  deliverance 
for  his  people,  at  length  made  a God  of  the  fpoils 
of  his  enemies,  which  became  a fnare  to  him  and 
to  his  houfe: 

Secondly,  Another  thing  from  whence  errors 
in  condubl,  that  attend  fuch  a revival  of  religion, 
arife,  is  wrong  principles. 

* One  of  thefe  is,  that  whatfoever  is  found  to 
be  of  prefent  benefit  ought  to  be  praflifed,  with- 
out looking  to  future  confequences.  Some  per- 
fons  feem  to  think  that  it  fufficiently  jufiifies  any 
thing  that  they  fay  or  do,  that  it  is  lound  to  be 
for  their  prefent  edification,  and  the  edification 
of  thofe  that  are  with  them  ; and  therefore  they 
think  that  they  fhould  not  concern  themfelves 
about  confequences,  but  leave  them  with  God. 
Indeed  things  that  are  in  themfelves  our  duty, 
being  required  by  abfolute  commands  of  God, 
muff  be  done,  and  future  confequences  left  with 
God  ; our  diferetion  takes  no  place  here,  but  in 
other  things  we  are  to  be  governed  by  diferetion, 
and  muff  not  only  look  at  the  prefent  good,  but 
our  view  muff  be  extenfive,  and  we  mull  look 
at  the  confequences  of  things.  It  is  the  duty  of 
ininifiers  efpecially  to  exercife  this  diferetion ; 
in  things  wherein  they  are  not  determined  by  an 

abfolute 


t 343  3 

abfolute  rule,  and  that  are  not  enjoined  them  by 
a wifdom  fuperior  to  their  own,  Chrift  has  left 
them  with  that  general  rule,  that  they  Ihould  ex- 
ercife  the  utmoft  wifdom  in  purfuing  that  which, 
upon  the  belt  view  of  the  confequenees  of  things, 
will  tend  mod:  to  the  advancement  of  his  king- 
dom.— When  we  have  done  our  utmoft,  there 
will  be  oppofition  enough  againft  vital  religion, 
againft  which  the  carnal  mind  of  man  has  fuch 
an  enmity,  as  in  the  apoftles  days,  though  he  took 
fo  much  pains  to  pleafe  men,  yet,  becaufe  he  was 
faithful  in  his  work,  perfecution  almoft  every 
where  wasraifed  againft  him. 

* 1 know  there  is  naturally  a great  enmity^  in 
the  heart  of  man  againft  vital  religion  ; and  I be- 
lieve there  would  have  been  a great  deal  of  op- 
pofition  againft  this  glorious  work  of  God,  if  the 
fubjefts  and  promoters  of  it  had  behaved  them- 
felves  never  fo  agreeably  to  Chriftian  rules  ; and 
I believe  if  this  work  goes  on  and  fpreads  much 
in  the  world,  fo  as  to  begin  to  fhake  kingdoms 
■and  nations,  it  will  dreadlully  ftir  up  the  rage  of 
earth  and  hell,  and  will  put  the  world  into  the 
greateft  uproar  that  ever  it  was  in  lince  it  flood  ; 
I believe  Satan’s  dying  ftruggles  will  be  the  mod 
violent:  but  yet  1 believe  a great  deal  might  be 
done  to  reftrain  this  oppofition,  by  a good  con- 
formity to  that  of  the  apoftle  James , Who  is  a 
wife  man , and  endued  with  knowledge  ? Let  him 
Jhew  out  of  a good  converfation  his  works  with  meek- 
nefs  of  wifdom,  Jam,  iii.  13. 


10.  Under 


[ 344  ] 

10.  Under  the  head  of  careleffnefs  of  confe- 
quences,  it  may  be  proper  to  fay  fomeLbing  of 
introducing  things  new  and  flrange,  and  that  have 
a tendency  by  their  novelty  to  (hock  and  furprize 
people.  Nothing  can  be  more  evident  from  the 
New  Teftament,  than  that  fuch  things  ought  to 
he  done  with  great  caution  and  moderation,  to 
avoid  the  offence  that  may  be  thereby  given, 
and  the  prejudices  that  might  be  raifed,  to  hinder 
the  progrefs  of  religion  ; yea,  that  it  ought  to  be 
thus  in  things  that  are  good  and  excellent,  pro- 
vided they  are  not  of  the  nature  of  abfolute  duty, 
which  though  they  may  appear  to  be  innovations, 
yet  cannot  be  neglefled  without  dilobedience  to 
the  commands  ol  God.  What  great  caution  did 
'the  apoftles  ufe  in  introducing  things  that  were 
■new,  and  abohfhing  things  that  were  old  ? 
How  gradually  were  the  ceremonial  perfor- 
mances oi  the  law  of  Mofes  abohfhed  among 
•the  Chriflian  Jews?  And  how  long  did  even  the 
apoftle  Paid  himfell  conform  to  thofe  ceremo- 
nies, which  he  calls  weak  and  beggarly  elements  P 
So  it  feems  to  have  been  very  gradually  that  the 
JeznJli  fabbath  was  abolifhed,  and  the  ■Chriflian 
labbath  introduced.  Thus  ftviCtlv  did  the  apof- 
tles obferve  the  rule  that  their  bleffed  Matter 
gave  them,  ol  not  putting  new  wine  into  old  bot- 
tles, left  they  Ihould  burft  the  bottles,  and  lofe 
the  wine. — Thefe  things  might  convince  any  one, 
that  does  not  think  himfeif  wifer  than  Chrift  and 
"his  apoftles,  that  great  prudence  and  caution 
ihould  be  ufed  in  introducing  things  into  the 

church 


C 345  ] 

church  of  God,  that  are  very  uncommon,  though 
in  themfelves  they  may  be  very  excellent,  left 
by  our  rafhnefs  and  imprudent  hafte  we  hinder 
religion  much  more  than  we  help  it. 

ix.  Thus  I have  confidered  the  two  firft  of 
thofe  three  caufes  of  error  in  condufit  that  were 
mentioned  ; I come  now  to  the 

Third  and  laft  caufe  of  the  errors  of  thofe  that 
have  appeared  to  be  the  fubje&s  or  zealous  pro- 
moters of  this  work,  viz.  a being  ignorant  or  un« 
obfervant  of  fome  particular  things,  by  which  the 
devil  has  fpecial  advantage. 

And  here  I would  particularly  take  notice,  x. 
Of  fome  things  with  refpefil  to  the  inward  expe- 
riences of  Chriftians  r and,  2.  Something  with 
regard  to  the  external  effefils  of  experiences. 

There  are  three  things  I would  take  notice  of 
with  regard  to  the  experiences  of  Chriftians,  by 
which  the  devil  has  many  advantages  againft 
us. 

* The  firft  thing  is  the  mixture  there  is  in  the 
experiences  of  Chriftians;  whereby  when  they 
have  truly  fpiritual  difcoveries  and  exercifes,  they 
have  fomething  mixed,  with  them  befides  what 
is  fpiritual.  The  beam  of  light,  as  it  comes  from 
the  fountain  of  light  upon  our  hearts,  is  pure  ; 
but  as  it  is  reflefifed  thence,  it  is  mixed  : the 
feed  as  fent  from  heaven,  and  planted  in  the 
heart,  is  pure  : but,  as  it  fprings  up  out  of  the 
heart,  is  impure  : yea,  there  is  commonly  a 
much  greater  mixture  than  perfons  feem  to  have 

any 


I 346  ] 

Sny  imagination  of;  I have  often  thought  that 
the  experiences  of  Chriftians  are  very  frequently 
as  it  is  with  fome  forts  of  fruits,  that  are  invelop- 
ed  in  feveral  thick  (hells,  which  are  thrown  away 
and  but  a very  fmall  part  of  the  whole  bulk  is  the 
pure  kernel. 

* The  things,  of  all  which  there  is  frequently 
fome  mixture,  even  with  great  and  high  experi- 
ences, are  thefe  three:  human  or  natural  affec- 
tion and  paffions:  impreffons  on  the  imagination.  \ 
and  a degree  of  ffelf- righteoufnefs  or  Jpiritual 
pride.  There  is  very  often  with  that  which  is 
fpiritual,  a great  mixture  of  that  affection  or  paf- 
fion  which  antes  from  natural  principles  ; fo  that 
nature  has  a very  great  hand  in  thole  vehement 
motions  and  flights  oi  the  paffions  t hat  appear. 
Hence  the  fame  degrees  of  divine  communica- 
tion (hall  have  different  effects,  in  perfons  of  diffe- 
rent natural  tempers.  And  fometimes  there  is 
not  only  a mixture  ol  that  which  is  common  and 
natural  but  even  that  which  is  animal,  which  is 
in  a great  meafure  from  the  body  and  is  properly 
the  reftilt  ol  the  animal  frame.  So,  in  that  love 
that  Chrillians  have  one  to  another,  very  often 
there  is  a great  mixture  oi  what  arifes  from  com- 
mon and  natural  principles  ; yea,  there  may  be 
a mixture  of  natural  love  to  the  oppofite  fex. 
So  zeal,  though  it  be  an  excellent  virtue,  a hea- 
venly flame,  when  it  is  pure  ; as  it  is  exercifed 
in  thofe  who  are  little  fanftified  and  little  hum- 
hied,  is  very  apt  to  be  mixed  with  human  paffion, 

yea, 


[ 347  ] 

yea,  with  corrupt,  hateful  affeflions,  pride  and 
bitternefs. 

15.  Another  thing  that  is  often  mixed  with 
what  is  fpiritual  in  the  experiences  of  Chrif- 
tians,  are  impreffions  on  the  imagination ; where- 
by perfons,  together  with  a fpiritual  undemand- 
ing of  divine  things,  and  a Ifrong  fenfe  of  their 
excellency  or  great  importance,  have  flrongly 
imprelfed  on  their  minds  external  ideas  or  images 
of  things.  A degree  of  imagination  in  fuch  a 
cafe,  as  I have  ebferved  elfewhere,  is  unavoid- 
able, and  necelfarily  arifes  from  human  nature, 
as  conffituted  in  the  prefent  date  ; and  a degree 
of  imagination  is  really  ufeful,  and  often  of  great 
benefit;  but,  when  it  is  in  too  great  a degree,  it 
becomes  an  impure  mixture  that  is  prejudicial. 
And  it  greatly  contributes  to  the  other  kind  of 
mixture  mentioned  before,  viz.  of  natural  affec- 
tions and  pafiions. 

Another  thing  that  is  often  mixed  with  the 
experiences  of  Chriflians,  which  is  the  worft 
mixture  of  all,  is  fpiritual  pride.  This  is  often 
mixed  with  the  joys  of  Chriflians  : the  joy  that 
they  have  is  not  purely  the  joy  of  faith,  or  a 
rejoicing  in  Chrift  Jefus,  but  is  partly  a re- 
joicing in  themfelves.  There  is  often  in  their 
elevations  a looking  upon  themfelves,  and  a 
viewing  their  own  high  attainments;  they  rejoice 
partly  becaufe  they  are  taken  with  their  own  ex- 
periences and  great  difcoveries  ; and  this  height- 
ens all  their  pafiions,  and  efpeciallv  thofe  effefts 
that  are  more  external. 

Vol.  XVII. 


P 


There 


[ 348  ] 

There  is  a much  greater  mixture  of  tbefe  things 
in  the  experiences  of  fome  Chriftians  than  others; 
in  fome  the  mixture  is  fo  great,  as  very  much  to 
obfeure  and  hide  the  beauty  of  grace  in  him,  like 
a thick  fmoke  that  hinders  all  the  fhining  of  the 
fire. 

* Thefe  things  we  ought  to  be  well  aware  of, 
that  we  may  know  what  to  countenance,  and  what 
to  difeourage  ; otherwife  Satan  will  have  a vaft 
advantage  againft  us,  for  he  works  in  the  corrupt 
mixture.  Sometimes  for  want  of  perfons  diflin- 
guifliing  the  ore  from  the  pure  metal,  thofe  ex- 
periences are  mod  admired  by  the  perfons  them- 
felves  that  are  the  fubjedls  of  them,  and  by  others 
that  are  not  the  mofl  excellent.  The  great  ex- 
ternal effedfs,  and  vehemence  of  the  paflions, 
and  violent  agitations  of  the  animal  fpirits,  are 
fometimes  much  owing  to  the  corrupt  mixture.  I 
have  obferved  a great  difference  among  thofe 
that  are  difpofed  to  be  earneflly  talking  to  thofe 
that  are  about  them  ; fome  infift  moff  on  what 
they  behold  in  God  and  Chrrft,  the  glory  of  the 
divine  perfedtions,  Chrift’s  wonderful  condefcen- 
fion  and  grace,  their  own  unworthinefs,  and  the 
infinite  obligations  they  themfelves  and  others  are 
under  to  love  and  ferve  God others  almoft 
wholly  on  their  own  high  privileges,  their  affur- 
ance  of  God’s  love  and  favour,  and  the  weak- 
nefs  and  wickednefs  of  oppofers;  and  how  much 
they  are  above  their  reach.  The  latter  may  have 
much  of  the  prefence  of  God,  but  their  ex- 
periences 


[ 349  ] 

periences  are  not  fo  folid  and  unmixed  as 
the  former.  And  there  is  a great  deal  of 
difference  in  perfons  earneftnefs  in  their  talk 
and  behaviour:  in  fome  it  feems  to  come  in- 
deed from  the  fulnefs  of  their  hearts,  and  from 
the  great  fenfe  they  have  of  the  certainty  and 
infinite  greatnefsof  eternal  things  attended  withall 
the  appearances  of  great  humility  ; but  in  others, 
their  earneftnefs  feems  to  arife  from  a great  mix- 
ture of  human  paffion,  and  an  intemperate 
agitation  of  the  fpirits,  which  appears  by  their 
earneftnefs  and  vehemence  not  being  proportioned 
fo  the  nature  of  the  fubjeft  they  infift  on,  but 
they  are  violent  in  every  thing  they  fay,  as  much 
when  they  are  talking  ol  things  of  fmaller  impor- 
tance, as  when  fpeaking  of  things  of  greater 
weight.  And  there  have  been  fome  fewinftances  of 
a more  extraordinary  nature  {till,  even  of  perfons 
finding  themfelves  conftrained  to  cry  out,  from 
an  unaccountable  kind  of  bodily  preffure,  with- 
out any  extraordinary  view  of  any  thing  in  their 
minds,  or  fenfe  of  any  thing  upon  their  hearts  ; 
wherein  probably  there  was  the  immediate  hand 
of  the  devil. 

* 16.  Another  thing  by  which  the  devil  has  ' 
great  advantage,  is  the  unheeded  defefts  there 
fometimes  are  in  the  experiences  of  true  Chrif- 
tians,  and  thofe  high  affeftions  wherein  there  is 
much  that  is  truly  good. 

* What  I now  have  refpefl  to  is  fomething  di- 
verfe  from  that  defeft  or  imperfe&ion  of  degree 

P 2 which 


[ 350  ] 

which  is  in  every  holy  difpofition  and  exercife ; 
what  I aim  at  is,  experiences  being  defective  in 
fome  particular  thing  that  ought  to  be  in  them  ; 
which  though  it  be  not  fuch  a defe£l  as  renders 
them  utterly  vain,  and  altogether  abominable  to 
God,  yet  fuch  a defe£t  as  maims  and  deforms  the 
experience  : the  effence  of  truly  Chriflian  ex- 
periences is  not  wanting,  but  yet  that  is  wanting 
that  is  very  needful  in  order  to  the  beauty  of  the 
image  of  Chrift  in  fuch  a perfon’s  experiences  ; 
things  are  very  much  out  of  due  proportion : 
there  is  indeed  much  of  fome  things,  but  at  the 
fame  time  there  is  fo  little  of  fome  other  things 
that  fhould  be,  that  the  defeft  very  much  de- 
forms the  Chriflian. 

* When  this  deficiency  and  difproportion  is 
great,  it  is  not  only  a great  deformity  in  itfelf, 
but  has  many  ill  confequences  ; it  gives  the  de- 
vil great  advantage,  and  leaves  a door  open  for 
corruption,  and  expofes  to  very  unlovely  aftions, 
and  iffues  oftentimes  in  the  meat  wounding  of 
the  foul. 

* For  the  better  underflanding  of  this  matter, 
we  may  obferve,  that  God,  in  the  revelation  that 
he  has  made  of  himfelf  by  Jefus  Chrift,  has  taken 
care  to  give  a proportionable  manifefration  of  two 
kinds  of  excellencies  or  perfeftions  of  his  nature, 
viz.  thofe  that  tend  to  pofTefs  us  with  awe  and  re- 
verence ; and  thofe  that  tend  to  draw  and 
encourage  us : by  the  one,  he  appears  as  an 
infinitely  great,  hqlv,  and  heart- fearebing  Judge ; 

by 


C 351  ] 

by  the  other,  as  a gentle  and  gracious  Father  and 
a loving  friend  : by  the  one,  he  is  a pure,  fearch- 
ing  and  burning  flame  ; by  the  other,  a fweet, 
refreihing  light.  Thefe  two  kinds  of  attributes 
are  admirably  tempered  together  in  the  reve- 
lation of  the  gofpel : there  is  a proportionable 
manifeftation  of  juflice  and  mercy,  holinefs  and 
grace,  authority  and  condefcenfion.  God  hath 
thus  ordered,  that  his  diverfe  excellencies,  as  he 
reveals  himfelf  in  the  face  of  Jefus  Chrift,  fhould 
have  a proportionable  manifeflation  : he  knew  it 
to  be  of  great  confequence,  that  our  apprehen- 
fions  of  thefe  diverfe  perfections  of  his  nature 
fhould  be  duly  proportioned  one  to  another : a 
defeat  on  the  one  hand,  viz.  having  much  of  a 
difcovery  of  his  love  and  grace,  without  a pro- 
portionable difcoverv  of  his  awful  majefty,  and 
his  holy  and  fearching  purity,  would  tend  to  fpi- 
ritual  pride,  carnal  confidence  and  prefump- 
tion  ; and  a defeft  on  the  other  hand,  viz.  hav- 
ing much  of  a difcovery  of  his  holy  majefty, 
without  a proportionable  difcovery  of  his  grace, 
tends  to  unbelief,  a finful  fearfulnefs  and  fpirit 
of  bondage.  And  herein  chiefly  confifts  that  de- 
ficiency of  experiences  that  I am  now  fpeaking 
of:  the  revelation  God  has  made  of  himfelf  in 
his  word,  is  perfeft ; but  the  light  and  commu- 
nications we  have,  are  not  perfeCt,  but  many 
ways  exceeding  imperfeft  and  maimed.  There 
is  a great  difference  among  Chriftians  in  this  re- 
fpeft ; fome  have  much  more  general  difcoveries 
P 3 than 


[ 3<5*  ] 

than  others,  who  are  upon  many  accounts  the 
moft  amiable  Chriftians.  Chriftians  may  have 
experiences  that  are  very  high,  and  yet  there  may 
be  very  much  of  this  deficiency  and  difpropor- 
tion  : their  high  experiences  are  truly  from  the 
Spirit  of  God,  but  fin  comes  in  by  the  defeft  (as 
indeed  all  fin  is  originally  from  a defective,  pri- 
vative caufe)  and  in  a fuch  a cafe  high  difcove- 
ries,  at  the  fame  time  that  they  are  enjoyed,  may 
be,  and  fometimes  are,  the  occaficn  of  fin  : and 
many  times  the  Spirit  of  God  is  quenched  by  this 
means,  and  God  punifhes  the  pride  and  prefump- 
tion  that  rifes,  by  bringing  fuch  darknefs,  and 
fuffering  fuch  horrid  temptations,  as  are  enough 
to  make  one’s  hair  hand  an  end  to  hear  them. 
Chriftians  therefore  fhculd  diligently  obferve 
their  own  hearts,  and  fhonld  pray  to  God  that  he 
would  give  them  experiences,  in  which  one  thing 
may  bear  a proportion  to  another,  that  God  may 
be  honoured,  and  their  fouls  edified  thereby  ; 
and  minifters  fhouldhavean  eye  to  this,  in  their 
private  dealings  with  the  fouls  of  their  people. 

It  is  chiefly  from  fuch  a defect  of  experiences 
that  fome  things  havearifen  that  have  been  pret- 
ty common  of  late  ; as  talking  of  divine  things, 
and  expreffing  divine  joys  with  laughing  or  a 
light  behaviour.  The  proper  caufe  of  this  has 
been,  that  odious  defeft  in  their  experience, 
whereby  there  has  been  wanting  a fenfe  of  the 
awful  majefty  of  God  as  prefent  with  them,  and 
their  vilenefs  before  him,  proportionably  to  the 

fenfe 


[ 353  ] 

fenfe  they  have  had  of  God’s  grace  and  the  love 
of  Chrift.  And  the  fame  is  true  in  many  cafes 
of  perfons  unfuitable  boldnefs,  their  difpofition 
to  fpeak  with  intemperate  zeal,  and  many  other 
things  that  fometimes  appear  in  Chriftians  under 
great  religious  affeftions. 

* And  fometimes  the  vehement  motion  of  the 
animal  fpirits,  is  owing  to  experiences  being  thus 
partial.  I have  known  in  feveral  inftances,  that 
perfons  have  been  greatly  affefled  with  the  dying 
love  of  Chrift,  and  the  happinefs  of  the  enjoy- 
ment of  him  in  heaven,  and  their  animal  fpirits 
have  been  in  great  emotion  ; but  in  the  midlt  of 
it  a deep  fenfe  of  the  awful  majefty  of  God,  has 
at  once  compofed  them,  and  quieted  animal  na- 
ture, without  diminifhing  their  comfort,  but  on- 
ly has  made  it  of  a better  and  more  folid  nature  ; 
when  they  have  had  a fenfe  both  of  the  majefty 
and  grace  of  God,  one  thing  has  as  it  were  ba- 
lanced another,  and  caufed  a more  happy  fedate- 
nefsand  compofure  of  body  and  mind. 

* From  thefe  things  we  may  learn  how  to 
judge  of  experiences,  and  to  eftimate  their  good- 
nefs.  Thofe  are  not  always  the  bell  experiences 
that  are  attended  with  the  moll  vehement  motions 
of  the  animal  fpirits,  or  that  have  the  greateft 
effefts  on  the  body  ; nor  are  they  always  the  bell 
that  do  moft  difpofe  perfons  to  abound  in  talk, 
and  to  fpeak  in  the  moft  vehement  manner(though 
thefe  things  often  arife  from  the  greatnefs  of  fpi- 
ritual  experiences :)  but  thofe  are  the  moft  excel- 

P 4 lent 


[ 354  ] 

lent  experiences  that  are  qualified  as  follows  ; i. 
That  have  the  leaft  mixture,  or  are  the  mod 
purely  fpiritual.  2.  That  are  the  leaft  deficient 
and  partial,  in  which  the  diverfe  things  that  ap- 
pertain to  Chriftian  experience  are  proportionable 
one  to  another.  And  3.  That  are  raifed  to 
the  higheft  degree  ; it  is  no  matter  how  high 
they  are  raifed  if  they  are  qualified  as  before  men- 
tioned. Experiences,  thus  qualified,  will  be  at- 
tended with  the  moft  amiable  behaviour,  will 
bring  forth  the  moft  folid  and  fweet  fruits,  and 
will  be  the  moft  durable,  and  have  the  greateft  ef- 
fect on  the  abiding  temper  of  the  foul. 

If  God  is  pleafed  to  carry  on  this  work,  and  it 
fhould  prove  to  be  the  dawning  of  a general  revi- 
val of  the  Chriftian  church,  the  time  will  come 
when  the  experiences  of  Chriftians  (hall  be  much 
more  generally  thus  qualified.  Their  difcoveries 
will  be  in  a much  higher  degree;  but  yet  fo  or- 
dered of  an  infinitely  wife  God,  that  they  fhall 
not  havefo  great  an  effeft,  in  proportion,  on  the 
body,  and  will  be  lefs  oppreflive  to  nature : and 
that  the  outward  manifeftations  will  rather  be 
like  thofe  that  -were  in  Stephen,  when  he  was 
full  of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  when  all  that  fat  in  the 
council,  looking  ftedfaJUy  on  him.  Jaw  his  face  as 
it  had  been  the  face  of  an  angel.  Their  inward 
fulnefs  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  his  divine,  ami- 
able and  fweet  influences,  fhall  as  itw'erefhine 
forth  in  an  heavenly  afpeft,  and  manner  of  fpeech 
and  behaviour.  But, 


* 17.  There 


C 355  ] 

* 17.  There  is  another  thing  concerning 
the  experiences  of  Chriftians,  of  which  it  is  of 
yet  greater  importance  we  fhould  be  aware,  than 
either  of  th  e preceding,  and  that  is  the  degenera- 
ting of  experiences.  What  I mean  is  fomething 
diverfe  from  the  mere  decay  of  experiences,  or 
their  gradually  vanifhing,  by  perfons  lofing  their 
fenfe  of  things  : it  is  perfons  experiences  grow- 
ing by  degrees  worfe  and  worfe  in  their  kind, 
more  and  more  partial  and  deficient;  in  which 
things  are  more  out  of  due  proportion,  and  alfo 
have  more  and  more  of  a corrupt  mixture;  the 
fpiritual  part  decreafes,  and  the  other  ufelefs  and 
hurtful  parts  greatly  increafe.  There  is  fuch  a 
thing,  and  it  is  very  frequent:  I have  feen  it  in 
very  many  infiances  ; and  great  are  the  mifchiefs 
that  have  rifen  through  want  of  being  more  aware 
of  it. 

There  is  commonly,  as  I obfervcd  before,  in 
high  experiences,  befides  that  which  is  fpiritual, 
a mixture  of  three  things,  viz.  natural  affeffions, 
workings  of  imagination,  and  felf-righteculnefs 
or  fpiritual  pride.  Now  it  often  comes  to  pafs, 
that  through  perfons  not  diftinguifhing  the 
wheat  from  the  chaff,  and  and  for  want  of 
watchfulnefs  and  humble  jealoufy  of  themfelves, . 
and  laying  great  weight  on  the  natural  and  im- 
aginary part,  that  part  grows,  and  the  fpiritual 
part  decteafes  ; the  devil  fets  in,  and  works  in 
the  corrupt  part,  and  cherilhes  it  to  his  utmoft; 
till  at  length  the  experiences  of  thofe  who  began 
E 5 well 


[ 356  ] 

well  come  to  little  elfe  but  violent  motions  of 
carnal  affe&ions,  great  heat  of  imagination,  a 
great  degree  of  enthufiafm,  and  fwelling  of  fpiri- 
tual  pride  ; like  fome  fruits  which  bud,  blolfom 
and  kernel  well,  but  afterwards  are  blafled  with 
an  excefs  of  moiflure  ; fo  that  though  the  bulk  is 
monflroufly  great,  yet  there  is  little  but  what  is 
ufelefs  and  unwholefome.  ’Tis  probable,  that 
many  of  the  herefies  that  have  arifen,  and  fefls 
that  have  appeared  in  the  Chriflian  world,  with 
wild  enthufiafiical  notions  and  practices,  began 
at  firfl  by  this  means,  that  it  was  fuch  a degenerat- 
ing of  experiences  that  firfh  gave  rife  to  them. 

* There  is  nothing  in  the  world  that  does  fo 
much  expofe  to  this  degenerating  of  experiences, 
as  an  unheeded  fpiritual  pride,  perfons  being  con- 
ceited of  their  own  Hock,  without  an  humble,  dai- 
ly, and  continual  dependence  on  God.  This  above 
all  things  promotes  this  degeneracy  of  experiences, 
becaufe  it  grieves  and  quenches  the  Spirit  of  God, 
kills  the  fpiritual,  and  cherifhes  the  natural  part, 
inflames  the  carnal  affefiions,  and  heats  the  im- 
agination. 

* By  the  mixture  there  is  of  common  affec- 
tion with  love  to  God,  the  love  of  true  Chriflians. 
is  liable  to  degenerate,  and  to  be  more  and 
more  built  on  the  fuppofttion  of  being  his  high 
and  peculiar  favourites.  So  the  joy  of  Chriflians 
by  reafon  of  the  mixture  there  is  v’ith  fpiritual 
joy,  is  liable  to  degenerate,  and  to  come  to  that 
at  laft,  as  to  be  but  little  elfe  but  joy  in  a perfon's 

own 


[ 357  ] 

own  fuppofed  eminency.  So  zeal,  that  at  firfl 
might  be  in  great  part  fpiritual,  yet  through  the 
mixture  there  is,  in  a long  continuance  cl  op- 
pofttion  and  controverfv,  may  degenerate  more 
and  more  into  human  paffion,  and  may  come  to 
bitternefs,  and  even  to  a degree  of  hatred.  And 
fo  love  to  brethren  may  by  degrees  come  to  little 
elfe  but  fondnefs  for  a party  ; yea,  through  a 
mixture  of  a natural  love  to  the  oppofite  fex,  may 
degenerate  more  and  more.  Certainly  the  mutual 
embraces  and  kilfes  of  perfons  of  different  fexes, 
under  the  notion  of  Chrillian  love,  are  utterly  to 
be  difallowed,  as  having  the  mod  direft  ten- 
dency  to  turn  Chrillian  love  into  brutifh  luff. 
I fhould  alfo  think  it  advifeable,  that  meetings 
of  young  people,  of  both  fexes,  in  the  evenings, 
by  themfelves,  without  aminiffer,  or  any  elder 
people  amongft  them,  for  religious  exercifes, 
fhould  be  avoided  ; for  though  for  the  prefent, 
while  their  minds  are  greatly  folemnized  with 
lively  impreffions,  anrf  a deep  fenfe  of  divine 
things,  there  may  appear  no  ill  confequences  : 
yet  we  muff,  look  to  the  farther  end  of  things, 
and  guard  againfl  future  dangers. 

* The  defeff  there  fometimes  is  in  the  experi- 
ences of  Chriffians,  expofes  them  to  degenerate, 
as.well  as  the  mixture  that  they  have.  Maimed 
experience  fometimes  become  more  and  more 
fo  : the  mind  being  wholiy  intent  upon  thofe 
things  that  are  in  view,  and  thofe  that  are  moft 
wanting  being  negleffed,  there  is  lefs  and  lefs  of 
P t6  them, 


[ 358  ] 

them,  and  fo  the  gap  for  corruption  to  come  in 
grows  wider  and  wider.  And  commonly  both 
the  caufes  of  the  degenerating  of  experiences  ope- 
rate together. 

18.  Thus  I have  taken  notice  of  fome  things 
with  regard  to  the  inward  experiences  of  Chrif- 
tians,  by  which  Satan  has  an  advantage.  I now 
proceed  in  the 

II.  Place,  to  take  notice  of  fomething  with  re- 
gard to  the  external  effeffs  of  experiences,  which 
alfo  gives  Satan  an  advantage. 

* Though  it  would  be  unreafonable,  and  pre- 
judicial to  the  intereft  of  religion,  to  frown  upon 
all  thefe  extraordinary  external  effects  and  mani- 
fellations  of  great  religious  affefdions  (for  a raea- 
fure  of  them  is  natural,  neceffary  and  beautiful) 
yet  they  err  who  think  thefe  things  fhould  be 
wholly  unlimitted,  and  that  all  fhould  be  encou- 
raged in  going  to  the  utmoll  length  they  feel 
themfelves inclined  to:  there  ought  to  be  a gentle 
reftraint  held  upon  thefe  things,  and  there  fhould 
be  a prudent  care  taken  of  perfons  in  fuch  cir- 
cumftances,  and  they  fhould  be  moderately  ad- 
vifed  at  proper  feafons  to  hold  a reftraint  upon 
their  inclinations;  otberwife  extraordinary  out- 
ward effe£fs  will  grow  upon  them,  they  will  be 
more  and  more  natural  and  unavoidable,  and  the 
outward  (how  will  increafe,  without  any  increafe 
of  the  internal  caufe;  perfons  will  find  them- 
felves under  a kind  of  necefiity  of  making  a 

great 


[ 359  J 

great  ado,  with  lefs  and  lefs  affeftion  of  foul,, 
till  at  length  almoft  any  flight  emotion  will 
fet  them  going;  and  they  will  be  more  and 
more  violent  and  boiflerous,  and  will  grow 
louder  and  louder,  till  their  actions  and  beha- 
viour become  abfurd.  Thefe  things  experience 
proves. 

19.  Thus  I have  taken  notice  of  the  more  ge- 
neral caufes  whence  the  errors  that  have  attended 
this  great  revival  of  religion  have  arifen,  and  un- 
der each  head  have  obferved  fome  particular 
errors  that  have  flowed  from  thefe  fountains.  I 
now  proceed,  as  1 propofed,  in  the 

Second  place,  to  take  notice  of  fome  par- 
ticular errors  that  have  rifen  from  feveral  of 
thefe  caufes;  in  fome  perhaps  they  have  been 
chiefly  owing  to  one,  in  others  to  another,  and 
in  others  to  feveral,  or  all  conjoint.  And 
here  the 

* 1 ft.  Thing  I.  would,  take  notice  of  is,  cen- 
furing  others.  It  is  the  worfl  difeafe  that  has 
attended  this  work.  The  manner  of  many  has 
been,,  when  they  fir  ft  enter  into  converfatioq 
with  any  perfon,  to  difcern  him,  or  to  fix  a judg- 
ment of  him  from  his  manner  of  talking  of  things 
of  religion,  whether  he  be  experimentally  ac- 
quainted with  vital  piety  or  not.  So  when  they 
have  heard  any  minifler  pray  or  preach,  their 
firfl:  work  has  been  to  obferve,  whether  he  prays 
like  one  that  feels  the  faving  power  of  God’s 
Spirit  in  his  heart,  and  whether  he  preaches  liks 

one 


C 360  3 

one  that  knows  what  he  fays.  It  has  been  fo 
much  the  way  in  fome  places,  that  many  new 
converts  do  not  know  but  it  is  their  duty  to  do 
fo.  When  once  perfons  yield  to  fuch  a notion, 
they  will  quickly  grow  very  difcerning  in  their 
own  apprehenfions ; and  when  they  have  paffed 
their  cenfure,  every  thing  feems  to  confirm  it ; 
they  fee  more  and  more  in  the  perfon  they  have 
cenfured^  that  feems  to  them  to  fhew  plainly  that 
he  is  an  unconverted  man.  And  if  the  perfon 
cenfured  be  a minifter,  every  thing  in  his  public 
performances  feems  dead  ; yeav  it  feems  worfe 
and  worfe  to  them,  his  preaching  grows  more 
and  mere  intolerable.  When  the  Spirit  of  God 
was  wonderfully  poured  out  in  this  place  more 
than  feven  years  ago,  and  all  the  town  feemed 
to  be  alive  and  full  of  God,  there  was  no 
fuch  notion  or  humour  prevailing : when  mini- 
ffers  preached  here,  as-  very  many  did  at  that 
time,  young  and  old,  our  people  did  not  go 
about  to  difeern  whether  they  were  men  of  ex- 
perience or  not,  nor  did  3ny  fuch  thing  enter 
into  their  hearts;  but  the  bufinefs  cf  every  one 
was  to  liften  to  what. was  faid,  and  apply  it  to  his 
own  heart.  And  fcarcely  ever  did  any  minifter 
preach  here,  but  his  preaching  did  fome  remark- 
able fervice. 

* 20.  One  that  has  been  fuppofed  to  be  fuffi- 
cient  warrant  for  openly  cenfuring  minifters,  is 
their  oppofing  this  work  of  God.  And  there 
can  be  no  doubt  but  that  oppefition  may  be  fuch, 
as  to  render  either  miniilers -ox  people  truly  fcan- 

dalous ; 


[ 36*  ] 

dalous;  and  that  minifters  hereby  may  utterly 
defeat  the  defign  of  their  miniftry.  Nor  fhould 
I think  that  any  perfon  had  power  to  oblige  me 
to  attend  the  miniftry  of  one  who  did  from  time 
to  time  plainly  preach  againft  this  work,  or  fpeak 
reproachfully  of  it  in  his  public  performances, 
after  all  Chriftian  methods  had  been  ufed  for  a 
remedy,  and  to  no  purpofe. 

* -But  as  to  determining  how  far  oppofing  this 
work  is  confident  with  a Rate  of  grace,  or  how 
far,  and  for  how  long  time  fome  perfons  of  ex- 
perience may  oppofe  it,  through  prejudices  they 
have  received  from  the  errors  that  have-  been 
mixed  with  this  work,  or  through  fome  peculiar 
difadvantages  they  are  under,  this  is  a difficult 
thing:  I have  feen  that  which  abundantly  con- 
vinces me  that  the  bufmefs  is  too  high  for  me; 
I am  glad  that  God  has  not  committed  it  to  me; 
I can  joyfully  leave  it  in  his  hands.  We  may 
reprefe-nt  it  as  exceeding  dangerous  to  oppofe 
this  work,  for  this  we  have  good  warrant  in  the 
word  of  God ; but  I know  of  no  neceffity  we  are 
under  to  determine  whether  it  be  poffible  for  thofe 
that  are  guilty  of  it  to  be  in  a ftate  of  grace  or 
no.  Blefied  be  his  name,  that  he  has  not  laid 
fuch  a temptation  in  the  way  of  my  pride ! I 
know  that  in  order  to  be  fit  for  this  bufinefs,  I 
rauft  not  only  be  vaftly  more  knowing,  but  more 
humble  than  I am. 

* 21.  One  thing  more  I svould  take  notice  of 
before  I conclude  this  part.  I believe  it  to  have 

been 


[ 36“  ] 

been  one  fruit  of  the  joyful  influences  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  that  there  has  appeared  fuch  a 
difpofition  to  fing  praife  to  God  ; not  only  in 
folemn  meetings,  but  when  Chriftians  occafi- 
onally  met  together  at  each  other’s  houfes.  But 
the  mifmanagement  is  the  getting  into  a way  of 
performing  it  without  that  reverence  and  folem- 
nity  with  which  all  open  afts  of  divine  worfhip 
ought  to  be  attended.  It  may  be  two  or  three  in 
a room  are  flinging  hymns  of  praife  to  God, 
others  talking  at  the  fame  time,  others  about 
their  work,  with  little  more  appearance  of  regard 
to  what  is  doing,  than  if  fome  were  only  flinging 
a common  fong.  There  is  danger  if  fuch  things 
are  continued,  of  its  coming  to  that  by  degrees, 
that  a mere  nothing  be  made  of  this  duty,  to  the 
s;reat  violation  of  the  third  commandment.  Let 
Chriltians  abound  as  much  as  they  will  in  this 
holy,  heavenly  exercife,  in  God's  houfe,  and 
in  their  own  houfes,  but  when  it  is  performed, 
let  it  be  performed  as  an  holy  a Ei,  wherein 
they,  have  immediately  and  viflbly  to  do  with 
God, 

* What  a poor,  blind,  weak  and  miferable 
creature  is  man  at  his  bed  eflate!  We  are  like 
helplefs  fheep  ; the  devil  is  too  fubtle  for  us: 
what  is  our  ftrength  ! What  is  our  wifdom  ! How 
ready  are  we  to  go  aftray  ! How  eaflily  are  we 
drawn  afide  into  innumerable  fnares,  while  we 
in  the  mean  time  are  bold  and  confident,  and' 
doubt  not  but  we  are  right  and  fafe ! we  are 

foolifh' 


[ 363  3 

foolilh  fliecp,  in  the  midft  of  fubtle  ferpents  and 
cruel  wolves,  and  do  not  know  it.  O how  unfit 
are  we  to  be  left  unto  ourfelves ! And  how  much 
do  we  Hand  in  need  of  the  wifdom,  the  power, 
the  condefcenfion,  patience,  lorgivenefs  and 
gentlenefs  of  our  good  Shepherd  1 


PART  V. 

Shewing  pofitively  what  ought  to  be  done  to  promote 
this  ivork. 

i,  IN  confidering  the  means  of  promoting  this 
work  of  God,  I have  already  obferved 
fome  inftances  wherein  there  has  been  needlefs 
objefting;  and  have  alfo  taken  notice  of  many 
things  that  ought  to  be  amended.  I now  pro- 
ceed in  the 

Third  and  laft  place,  to  fhew  pofitively  what 
ought  to  be  done  to  promote  this  work.  The 
obligations  that  all  are  under,  with  one  confent, 
to  do  their  utmofi,  were  obferved  before.  I 
hope  that  fome,  upon  reading  what  was  faid  un- 
der that  head,  will  be  ready  to  fay,  what 
fhall  we  do  ? To  fuch  I would  now  offer  my 
thoughts,  in  anfwer  to  fuch  an  enquiry. 

And  that  which  I think  we  ought  to  fet  our- 
felves 


[ 3^4  ] 

felves  about,  in  the  firft  place,  is  to  remove 
ftumbling-blocks.  When  God  is  revealed  as 
about  to  come,  gloriouflv  to  fet  up  his  kingdom 
in  the  world,  this  is  proclaimed,  Prepare  ye  the 
way  of  the  Lord,  make  flrait  in  the  defart  an  high- 
way  for  our  God,  Ifa.  xl.  3.  And  again,  Ifa. 
ivii.  14.  Cajl  ye  up,  cqfl ye  up;  prepare  the  way; 
t ake  up  the  f ambling -Mock  out  of  the  way  of  my 
people . And,  chap.  Ixii.  10.  Go  through , go 
through  the  gates  ; prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  peo~ 
pie  ; cajl  up,  cajl  up  the  highway  ; gather  out  the 
fones. 

And  in  order  to  this,  there  mull  be  a confef- 
ftng  of  faults  on  both  fides for  undoubtedly 
many  are  the  faults  that  have  been  committed. 
There  is  hardly  any  duty  more  mortifying  to  the 
pride  of  man ; but  it  mufl  be  done.  Repentance 
is,  in  a peculiar  manner,  a proper  duty,  when 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand.  And  if  God 
does  now  loudly  call  upon  us  to  repent,  then  he 
alfo  calls  us  to  make  proper  manifeftations  of  our 
repentance.  I am  perfuaded  that  thofe  that  have 
openly  oppofed  this  work,  or  have  from  time  to 
time  fpoken  lightly  of  it,  cannot  be  excufed  in 
the  fight  of  God,  without  openly  confeffing  their 
fault  therein  ; efpecially  if  they  be  miniflers.  If 
they  have,  either  direftly  or  indireftly,  oppofed 
this  work,  or  in  public  or  private  prejudiced 
their  people  againft  it;  if  hereafter  they  fhall  be 
convinced  it  is  cf  God,  they  ought  by  no  means 
to  palliate  the  matter,  and  excufe  themfelves,  and 


[ 3 65  3 

pretend  that  they  always  thought  fo,  and  that  it 
was  only  fuch  and  fuch  imprudencies  they  objefi- 
ed  againft  : but  they  ought  openly  to  declare 
their  conviction,  and  condemn  themfelves  for 
what  they  have  done  ; for  it  is  Chrift  that  they 
have  fpoken  againft,  in  fpeaking  lightly  of,  and 
prejudicing  others  againft  this  work ; yea,  worfe 
than  that,  it  is  the  Holy  Ghoft.  And  though 
they  have  done  it  ignorantly,  yet,  when  they 
find  out  who  it  is  they  have  oppofed,  undoubt- 
edly God  will  hold  them  bound  publicly  to  con- 
fefs  it. 

On  the  other  fide,  if  thofe  that  have  been  zea- 
lous to  promote  this  work  have  in  any  of  the 
forementioned  inftances  gone  out  of  the  way,  and 
done  that  which  is  contrary  to  Chriftian  rules, 
whereby  they  have  openly  injured  others,  and 
wounded  religion,  they  muft  publicly  confefs  it, 
as  they  would  gather  out  the  ftones,  and  prepare 
the  way  of  God’s  people.  They  who  have  laid 
great  ftumbling-blocks  in  others  way  by  their 
open  tranjgrejjlon,  are  bound  to  remove  them  by 
their  open  repentance. 

Some  probably  will  objeft,  that  the  oppofers 
will  take  advantage  by  this  to  infult  both  them 
and  religion.  And  indeed,  to  the  fhame  of  fome, 
they  have  taken  advantage  by  fuch  things.  But 
if  there  are  fome  imbittered  enemies  of  religion, 
that  fiand  ready  to  improve  every  thing  to  its 
difadvantage,  yet  that  ought  not  to  hinder  an 

enjoined 


[ 3*6  ] 

enjoined  Chriflian  duty;  open  repentance,  after 
a fault  openly  committed. 

2.  Again,  at  fuch  a time  as  this,  God  doe3 
efpecially  call  us  to  meeknefs  and  mutual  forbear- 
ance: Let  your  moderation  be  known  unto  all  men: 
the  Lord  is  at  Jiand.  For  us  to  be  judging 
one  another,  and  behaving  with  fiercenefs  and 
bitternefs,  when  he  who  is  the  fearcher  of  all 
-hearts,  to  whom  we  mull;  all  give  an  account, 
appears  fo  remarkably  prefent,  is  exceeding 
unfuitable.  Our  bufinefs  at  fuch  a time  fhould 
be  at  home,  fearching  ourfelves,  and  taking  heed 
to  our  own  behaviour.  If  there  be  glorious 
profperity  to  the  church  of  God  approaching, 
thofe  that  are  the  moll  meek  will  have  the 
largeft  fhare  in  it:  for,  when  God  remarkably 
arifes  to  execute  judgment,  it  is  to  faveall  the  meek 
of  the  earth. 

Thofe  therefore  that  have  been  zealous  for 
this  work,  and  have  erred  with  their  zeal,  ought 
not  to  be  treated  with  bitternefs.  There  is 
abundant  reafon  to  think,  thatmoft  of  them  are 
children  of  God  ; and  as  to  thofe  things  where- 
in we  fee  them  to  be  in  an  error,  we  have  rea- 
fon to  fay  as  the  apoftle,  If  any  are  ctherwife 
minded , God  fiall  reveal  this  unto  them.  Phil, 
iii.  15.  Their  errors  fliould  not  be  made  ufe  of 
by  us  to  excite  indignation  towards  them,  but 
fliould  influence  all  of  us  that  hope  we  are  chil- 
dren of  God  to  humble  ourfelves  and  become  more 
intirely  dependent  on  the  Lord  Jefus.  And 

thofe 


[ 3 67  1 

thofe  minfters  that  have  been  judged,  and  injuriouf- 
Yf  dealt  with,  will  do  the  part  of  Chriff’s  difciples, 
not  to  judge  and  revile  again,  but  to  receive  fuch 
injuries  with  meeknefs  and  forbearance,  and 
make  an  improvement  of  them,  more  firstly 
examining  the i r hearts  and  ways,  and  commit- 
ting themfelves  to  God.  We  have  not  yet  feen 
the  end  of  things  ; nor  do  we  know  who  will 
be  moll  honoured  of  God  in  the  iffue.  Better 
is  the  end  of  a thing  than  the  beginning  thereof ; 
and  the  patient  in J'pint  is  better  than  the  proud  in 
Jpirit , Eccl.  vii.  8. 

Contrary  to  this  is  each  party’s  ffigmatizing  the 
other  with  odious  names,  which  tends  greatly  to 
widen  and  perpetuate  the  breach.  Such  diftin- 
guifhing  names  of  reproach  do  as  it  were  divide 
us  into  two  armies,  drawn  up  in  battle  array, 
ready  to  fight  one  with  another  ; which  greatly 
hinders  the  work  of  God, 

3.  And  as  fuch  a time  does  efpecially  require 
the  exercife  of  forbearance  one  towards  another  ; 
fo  does  it  the  exercife  of  great  patience,  in  waiting 
on  God,  under  any  fpecial  difficulties  and  dis- 
advantages they  may  be  under.  The  beginning 
of  a revival  of  religion  will  necefiarily  be  attend- 
ed with  many  difficulties  of  this  nature  ; many 
parts  of  the  reviving  churchwill,  for  a while,  be  un- 
der great  difadvantages  by  what  remains  of  the  old 
difeafe.  We  cannot  expeft  that,  after  a long  time 
of  degeneracy  and  depravity,  things  fhould  all 
come  right  at  once ; and  to  be  over  hafty  and 

violent. 


[ 3^8  ] 

violent,  in  fuch  a cafe,  being  refolved  to  have 
-every  thing  rectified,  or  elfe  to  feparate,  is  the 
way  to  hinder  things  coming  right  at  all,  and  to 
break  all  in  pieces.  Not  but  the  cafe  may  be  fuch 
as  to  allow  of  no  delay,  without  violation  of 
the  abfolute  commands  of  God  : hut  otherwife, 
though  the  difficulty  may  be  very  great,  another 
courfe  fhould  he  taken.  We  fhould  have  re- 
courfe  dire&ly  to  the  throne  ol  grace,  to  reprefent 
our  difficulties  before  the  great  Shepherd  of  the 
fheep  ; and  \vrhen  we  have  done,  fhould  wait 
patiently  upon  him,  who  in  his  time  will  appear 
for  our  deliverance  ; but  if,  inffead  of  that,  we 
are  impatient,  and  take  the  work  into  our  own 
hands,  we  difhonour  God,  and  have  reafon  to 
fear  that  he  will  leave  us  to  manage  our  affairs  for 
ourfelves. 

4.  What  has  been  mentioned  hitherto,  -has  re- 
lation to  the  behaviour  we  are  obliged  to,  as  we 
would  prevent  the  hindrances  of  the  work  ; but, 
befides  thefe,  there  are  things  that  muff  be 
done,  more  direftly  to  advance  it.  And  here  it 
concerns  every  one  to  look  into  his  own  heart, 
and  fee  that  the  work  be  promoted  in  his  own 
foul. 

And  though  I judge  not  thofe  that  have  oppof- 
ed  it,  yet  I would  entreat  them  to  leave  off  con- 
cerning themfelves  to  much  about  others,  and 
look  into  their  own  fouls,  and  fee  to  it  that  they 
experience  a true,  faving  work  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  If  they  do  not,  how  can  they  have  any 

heart 


[ 369  ] 

heart  to  be  bufily  and  fiercely  engaged  about  the 
mifiakes  of  others  ? I would  befeech  them  feri- 
oufly  to  weigh  the  matter  with  refpedi  to  this 
work,  and  confider  whether,  if  the  fcriptures 
are  the  word  of  God,  the  work  that  has  been 
defcribed  in  the  firft  part  of  this  treatife  muff  not 
needs  be,  as  to  the  fubffance  of  it,  the  work  of 
God,  and  the  flourifhing  of  that  religion  that  is 
taught  by  Chrift  and  his  apoflles ; and  whether 
■any  good  medium,  can  be  found,  between  own- 
ing this  work,  and  being  a Deiff.  I would  now 
humbly  invite  them  to  come  and  join  with  us, 
and  be  on  our  fide  ; and,  if  I had  the  authority 
of  Mofes,  I would  fay  to  them  as  he  did  to  Hohab , 
Numb.  x.  29.  We  are  journeying  unto  the  place,  of 
which  the  Lord faid,  I will  give  it  you  ; come  thou 
with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good  : for  the  Lord 
hath  fpoken  good  concerning  Ifrael. 

As  the  benefit  of  improving  fuch  a feafon  is 
extraordinary  great,  fo  is  the  danger  of  neglect- 
ing or  mifemploying  it.  For  as  fuch  a time  is  a 
time  of  great  favour  to  thofe  that  are  partakers  of 
the  bleffing,  fo  it  is  always  a time  of  remarkable 
vengeance  to  others.  So  in  Ifa.  lxi.  2.  the  fame 
that  is  called  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,  is 
called  alfo,  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God.  So 
it  is  foretold,  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  glorious 
times  of  the  Chriffian  church,  as  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  is  known  towards  his  fervants,  fo  fall 
his  indignation  towards  his  enemies , Ifa.  lxvi.  14. 
There  is  no  time  like  fuch  a time  for  the  increafe 

of 


[ 37°  ] 


of  guilt,  and  defperate  hardening  of  the  heart  ; 
which  is  the  moft  awful  fruit  of  divine  wrath  that 
can  be  infli&ed  on  any  mortal.  So  that  a time 
of  great  grace  and  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit,  and 
the  fruits  of  divine  mercy,  is  everalfo  a time  of 
pouring  out  divine  vengeance,  on  thofe  that  neg- 
1 eft  and  mifemploy  fuch  a feafon. 

3.  The  prefent  revival  of  religion  has  an  aw- 
ful afpecl  upon  thofe  that  are  advanced  in  years. 
It  has  been  chiefly  amongll  thofe  that  are  young. 
And  indeed  commonly,  when  God  has  began  any 
great  work,  he  has  taken  the  young  people,  and 
has  caft  off  the  old  and  flifF-necked  generation. 
There  was  a remarkable  pouring  out  of  the  Spi- 
lit  of  God  on  the  children  of  IJrael'm  the  wiider- 
nefs,  on  their  younger  generation,  their  little  ones, 
that  they  faid Jhould  be  a prey,  the  generation  that 
entered  into  Canaan  wiih  JoJhua.  That  genera- 
tion feems  to  have  been  the  mod  excellent  gene- 
ration that  ever  was  in  the  church  of  Jjrael . 
There  is  no  generation,  of  which  there  is  fo  much 
good,  and  fo  little  hurt  fpoken  in  fcripture.  In 
that  generation,  that  were  under  twenty  years 
when  they  went  out  of  Egypt,  was  that  kindnefs 
of  youth,  and  love  of  efpoufals,  fpoken  of,  fr.  ii. 

2,  3.  ' But  the  old  generation  were  palled  by, 
and  remained  oblfinate  and  flilT-necked,  and  un- 
convinced by  all  God’s  wondrous  works  that  they 
beheld.  Let  the  old  generation  in  this  land  take 
warning  from  hence,  and  take  heed  that  they  do 
not  continue  for  ever  objecting,  murmuring  and 

cavilling 


[ _ 37*  ] 

cavilling  againft  the  work  of  God,  left,  while 
■God  is  bringing  their  children  into  a land  flow- 
ing with  milk  and  honey,  he  fhould  fwear  imhis 
wrath  concerning  them,  that  their  carcafes  fhall 
fall  in  the  wildernefs. 

6.  But  above  all  others,  does  it  concern  ns  that 
are  minifters  to  fee  that  we  are  partakers  of  this 
work,  that  we  have  experience  of  the  faving  ope- 
rations of  the  fame  fpirit  which  is  now  poured 
out  on  the  land.  How  melancholy  is  the  cafe, 
when  it  is  otherwife!  For  one  to  ftand  at  the 
head  of  a congregation  as  reprefenting  Ghrift, 
and  fpeaking  in  has  ftead  ; and  to  a£l  the  part  of 
a fhepl  ie;d  and  guide  to  a people,  when  many 
are  under  great  awakenings,  and  many  filled  with 
■divine  light.,  love  and  joy.;  to  undertake  to  in- 
ftruft  and  lead  them  all,  under  thefe  various  cir- 
cumftances ; to  be  put  to  it,  continually  to  play 
the  hypocrite,  and  force  the  airs  of  a faint  in 
preaching;  and  from  time  to  time  in  private  oon- 
verfation,  and  particular  dealing  with  fouls,  to 
undertake  to  judge  of  their  circumftances ; to  talk 
with  thofe  that  come  to  him,  as  if  he  knew  what 
they  faid  ; to  try  to  talk  with  perfons  of  experi- 
ence, as  if  he  had  experience  as  well  as  they  ; 
to  force  a joyful  countenance  and  manner  of 
fpeech,  when  there  is  nothing  in  the  heart: 
What  forrowful  work  is  here ! O how  miferably 
imilt  fuch  a perfon  feel ! What  a wretched  flavery 
is  this!  Befides  the  infinite  provocation  of  the 
moll  high  God,  and  difpleafure  of  his  Lord  and 
Vol.  XVII.  O Matter. 


C 372  ] 

Mafier.  There  is  reafon  from  the  fcripture  to 
conclude,  that  no  fort  of  men  will  be  fo  low  in 
hell  as  ungodly  miniflers : for  every  thing  fpoken 
of  in  fcripture,  as  that  which  aggravates  guilt,  and 
heightens  divine  wrrath,  meets  in  them. 

We  that  are  miniflers  not  only  have  need  to 
experience  the  faving  influence  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  upon  our  heart,  but  we  need  a double  por- 
tion of  the  Spirit  of  God  at  fuch  a time  as  this  : 
we  had  need  to  be  as  full  of  light  as  a glafs  is,  that 
is  held  out  in  the  fun  ; and,  with  refpefl  to  love 
and  zeal,  to  be  like  the  angels,  that  are  a flame 
of  fire.  The  times  extremely  require  a fulnefs  of 
the  divine  Spirit  in  miniflers,  and  we  ought  to 
give  ourfelves  no  refi  till  we  have  obtained  it. 
And  in  order  to  this,  I fhould  think  miniflers, 
above  all  perfons,  ought  to  be  much  in  Cecret 
prayer  and  fading,  and  alfo  much  in  praying  and 
faffing  one  with  another.  It  feems  to  me,  it 
fhould  be  becoming  cur  circumflances,  if  minff- 
ters  in  a neighbourhood  would  often  meet  toge- 
ther, and  fpend  days  in  fading  and  fervent  praver 
among  ihemfelves,  earneflly  feeking  for  extraor- 
dinary fuppliesol  divine  grace  ; and  alfo  if,  on 
their  occafional  vifits  one  to  another,  inftead  of 
fpending  their  time  in  fitting  and  fmoaking,  and 
in  diverting,  or  worldly,  unprofitable  converfa- 
tion,  telling  news,  and  making  their  remarks  on 
this  and  the  other  trifling  fubjeff,  they  would 
fpend  their  time  in  praying  together,  and  reli- 
gious conference.  Iiow  much  do  many  of  the 

common 


r 373  ] 

common  people  fhame  many  of  us  that  are  in  the 
work  of  the  miniflry,  in  thefe  refpeXs  ? Surely 
we  do  not  behave  ourfelves  like  ambaffadors  of 
Chrift ! And,  while  we  condemn  zealous  per- 
fons  for  cenfuring  miniflers,  it  ought  not  to  be 
without  deep  refle&ions  upon  ourfelves  ; for  in- 
deed we  do  very  much  to  provoke  cenforiouf- 
nefs,  and  lay  a great  temptation  before  others. 
And  if  we  can  prove  that  they  tranfgrefs  the  fcrip- 
ture-rule,  yet  our  indignation  fhould  be  chiefly 
againft  ourfelves. 

* 7.  Two  things  that  are  exceeding  needful  in 
miniflers  who  would  advance  the  kingdom  of 
Chrift,  are  zeal  and  resolution.  The  power  of 
thofe  is  greater  than  can  well  be  imagined  : a 
man  of  but  an  ordinary  capacity  will  do  more 
with  them,  than  one  of  ten  times  the  parts  and 
learning  without  them.  More  may  be  done  with 
them  in  a few  days,  or  at  leaf!;  weeks,  than  can 
be  done  without  them  in  many  years.  The  very 
fight  or  appearance  of  a thoroughly  engaged 
fpirit,  together  with  a fearlefs  courage  and 
unyielding  refolution,  in  any  perfon  that  has 
undertaken  the  managing  any  affair  amongfl 
mankind,  goes  a great  way  towards  accomplifh- 
ingthe  effeX.  But  while  we  are  cold  and  heart- 
lefs,  and  only  go  on  in  an  old  formal  round  we 
(hall  never  do  any  great  matters.  Our  mifery 
is  want  of  zeal  and  courage.  Hence  often,  when 
any  thing  very  confiderable  that  is  new  is  propof- 
ed  to  be  done  for  the  advancement  of  religion, 
O 2 many 


[ 374  ] 

many  difficulties  are  found  out.  many  objections 
flarted,  and  it  is  put  off  from  one  to  another; 
but  no  body  docs  any  thing.  And  after  this 
manner  good  defigns  have  often  failed,  and  funk 
as  foon  as  propofed- 

8.  And  though  it  may  be  thought  that  I go 
out  of  my  proper  fphere,  to  intermeddle  in  the 
affairs  of  the  colleges  ; yet  I will  take  the  liberty 
of  an  Englipiman  (that  fpeaks  his  mind  freely 
concerning  public  affairs)  and  the  liberty  of  a 
minifler  of  Chri fb  (who  doutbtlefs  may  fpeak  his 
mind  asfreely  about  things  that  concern  the  king- 
dom of  his  Lord)  to  give  my  opinion,  in  fome 
things,  with  refpefl  to  thofe  focieties  ; the  main 
deGgn  of  which  is  to  train  up  perfons,  and 
fit  them  for  the  work  of  the  minilfry.  And 

I would  fay  in  general,  care  fhould  be  taken 

that  thofe  focieties  fhould  be  fo  regulated, 
as  to  be  in  faff  nurferies  of  piety.  Other- 
wife  they  are  fundamentally  ruined  and  un- 
done as  to  their  main  defign  and  mofl  effential 
end.  They  ought  to  be  fo  conlfituted  that  vice 
and  idlenefs  fhould  have  no  living  there  : thefe 
are  not  to  be  fuffered  in  focieties  whofe  main 
defign  is,  to  train  up  youth  in  Chrilfian  knowledge 
and  eminent  piety,  to  fit  them  to  be  pallors  of  the 

flock  of  the  bleffed  Jefus.  I have  had  fome 

acquaintance  with  the  affairs  of  a college  : and  I 
cannot  but  think  that  it  is  praflicable  fo  to  confli- 
tute  fuch  focieties,  that  there  fhould  be  no  being 
there,  without  being  virtuous,  ferious  and  dili- 
gent. 


C 375  ] 

gent.  It  feems  to  me  to  be  a reproach  to  the 
land,  that  ever  it  fhould  be  fo  with  our  colleges, 
that,  inftead  of  being  places  of  the  greateft  ad- 
vantages for  true  piety,  one  cannot  fend  a child 
thither  without  great  danger  of  his  being  infeffed 
as  to  his  morals.  ’Tis  perfeftly  intolerable ; 
and  any  thing  fhould  be  done  rather  than  it  fhould 
be  fo.  If  we  pretend  to  have  any  colleges  at  all, 
under  a notion  of  training  up  youth  for  the  mi- 
niftry,  there  fhould  be  fome  way  found  out  that 
fhould  certainly  prevent  its  being  thus.  To  have 
focietiesfor  bringing  perfons  up  to  be-ambafTarlors 
of  Jefus  Chriff,  and  to  have  them  places  of  fo 
much  infe&ion  is  the  greateft  nonfenfe  and 
adfurdity  imaginable. 

And  as  thorough  and  effeflual  care  fhould  be 
taken,  that  vice  and  idlenefs  be  not  tolerated  in 
thefe  focieties  ; fo  certainly  the  defign  of  them 
requires  that  extraordinary  means  fhould  be 
ufed  in  them  for  training  uptheftudents  in  vital 
religion,  and  experimental  and  praftical  god- 
linefs;  fo  that  they  fhould  be  holy  focieties,  and 
the  very  place  be  as  it  were  facred  : they  fhould 
be,  in  the  midft  of  the  land,  fountains  of  piety 
and  holinefs.  There  is  a great  deal  of  pains 
taken  to  teach  the  fcholars  human  learning  ; there 
ought  to  be  as  much  and  more  care  thoroughly 
to  educate  them  in  religion,  and  lead  them  to 
true  and  eminent  holinefs.  If  the  main  defign  of 
thefe  nurferies  is  to  bring  up  perfons  to  teach 
Ghrift,  then  it  is  of  the  greateft  importance  that 
QjT  care 


[ 37^  ] 

care  be  taken  to  bring  tbofe  who  are  there  educat- 
ed to  the  knowledge  of  Chriff.  It  has  been  com- 
mon in  our  public  prayers  to  call  thefe  focie- 
ties  the  fchools  of  the  prophets  ; and,  if  they  are 
fchools  to  train  up  young  men  to  be  prophets , 
certainlythere  ought  tobe  extraordinary  care  there 
taken  to  train  them  up  to  be  Chriflians. 

And  I cannot  fee  why  it  is  not  on  all  accounts 
fit  and  convenient  for  the  governors  and  in- 
flruffors  of  the  colleges,  particularly,  fmgly  and 
and  frequently  to  converfewith  the  fludents  about 
the  Hate  of  their  fouls. 

9.  There  are  fome  that  are  not  miniflers,  who 
have  great  advantages  for  promoting  fuch  a glori- 
ous work  as  this;  particularly  great  men,  or  men 
that  are  high  in  honour  and  influence.  How  much 
might  fuch  do  to  encourage  religion,  and  open 
the  way  for  it  to  have  free  courfe  ! But  there  is 
commonly  a fhynefs  in  great  men  with  refpeft  to 
Teligion,  as  though  they  were  afhamed  of  it,  or  at 
leaf!  afharaed  to  do  very  much  at  it  ; whereby 
they  greatly  provoke  the  King  of  kings,  andsvound 
religion  among  the  common  people.  They  are 
careful  of  their  honour,  and  feem  to  be  afraid  of 
appearing  forward  and  zealous  in  religion,  as  though 
it  were  what  would  debafe  their  character,  and 
expofe  them  to  contempt.  But,  in  this  day  of 
bringing  up  the  ark,  they  ought  to  be  like  David , 
that  great  king  of  lfrael,  who  made  himfelf  vile 
before  the  ark ; and  as  he  was  the  higheft  in 
dignity  among  God’s  people,  fo  be  appeared 

foreraofl 


[ 377  ] 

foremofl  in  the  zeal  he  manifefted  on  that  a c- 
cafton  ; thereby  animating  and  encouraging  the 
whole  congregation  to  praife  the  Lord,  and  re- 
joice before  him  with  all  their  might. 

ijo.  But  I would  now  proceed  to  mention 
fome  things  which  ought  to  be  done,  that  concern 
all  in  general. 

The  firft  thing  I ffiall  mention  is  fajling  and 
prayer.  It  feerns  to  me,  that  the  circumflances 
of  the  prefent  work  loudly  call  God’s  people  to 
abound  in  this;  whether  they  confider  the  ex- 
perience God  has  lately  given  them  of  the  efFu- 
fions  of  his  Spirit,  to  excite  them  to  pray  for  the 
continuance  and  increafe,  and  greater  extent  of 
fuch  bleffiflgs ; or  whether  they  confider  how 
much  there  is  in  what  we  have  feen  of  the  glo- 
rious works  of  God,  to  put  us  in  mind  of  the  yet 
greater  things  that  he  has  fpoken  of  in  his  word, 
and  to  excite  our  longings  for  thofe  things,  and 
hopes  of  their  approach  ; or  whether  we  confider 
the  oppofition  Satan  makes  againfl  this  work,  and 
the  many  difficulties,  with  which  it  is  clogged, 
and  the  diftreffing  circumflances  that  fome  parts 
of  God’s- church  are  now  under  in  this  land. 

When  God  is  about  to  accompliffi  great  things 
for  his  church,  he  will  begin  by  pouring  out  the 
fpirit  of  grace  and  fupplication,  Ztck.  xii.  ic. 
If  we  are  not  to  expeft  that  the  devil  ffiould  go 
out  of  a particular  perfon,  without  extraordi- 
nary prayer,  or  prayer  and  facing  ; how  much 

lefs; 


C 378  1 

lefs  fhould  we  expefil  to  have  him  call  out  of  the 
land,  and  the  world,  without  it  ? 

I am  fenfible  much  has  been  done  in  duties  of 
this  nature,  but  not  fo  much  as  God  in  his  pro- 
vidence calls  for.  I fhould  think  the  people  of 
God  in  this  land,  at  fuch  a time  as  this  is,  would 
be  in  the  wav  of  their  duty,  to  do  three  times  as 
much  at  falling  and  prayer  as  they  do  ; not  only 
for  the  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit  on  thofe  towns  or 
places  whereto  they  belong,  but  that  God  would 
appear  for  his  church,  carry  on  his  work  in  the 
land,  and  in  the  world,  and  fulfil  the  things  he 
has  fpoken  of  in  his  word,  that  his  church  has 
been  fo  long  wilhing  and  waiting  for.  Before  the 
firlt  great  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit  of  God  on  the 
Chrillian  church,  the  church  of  God  gave  them- 
felves  to  inceffant  prayer,  Acls\.  13,  14.  There 
is  a time  wherein  God  will  wonderfully  appear 
for  the  deliverance  of  his  church  from  all  her 
enemies,  when  he  will  avenge  his  own  eleil  : and 
Chrill  reveals  that  this  will  be  in  anfwer  to  their 
incelfant  prayers,  or  crying  day  and  nighty 
Luke  xviii,  7.  In  Ifrael,  the  day  of  atone- 
ment, which  was  their  great  day  of  falling 
and  prayer,  preceded  and  made  way  for  the 
glorious  and  joyful  JeaJl  of  tabei  nacles.  W hen 
Chrill  is  myllically  born  into  the  world,  to 
rule  over  all  nations,  it  will  be  in  confe- 
quence  of  the  church  s crying,  and  tr availing 
in  birth,  and  being  pained  to  be  delivered.  One 

thing. 


L 379  3 

thing  here  intended  doubtlefs  is,  her  crying 
and  agonizing  in  prayer. 

lx.  God  feems  now,  at  this  very  time,  to 
be  waiting  for  this  from  us.  When  God  is 
about  to  bellow  fome  great  bleffing  on  his 
church,  it  is  often  his  manner,  fo  to  order 
things  in  his  providence,  as  to  fhew  his  church 
their  great  need  of  it,  and  fo  put  them  upon 
crying  earneftly  to  him  for  it.  And  let  us 
conhder  God’s  prefent  difpenfations  towards 
his  church  in  this  land  ; a glorious  work  of 
his  grace  has  been  begun  ; and  God  has,  of 
late,  fuffered  innumerable  difficulties  to  arife* 
that  do  in  a great  meafure  clog  and  hinder 
it,  and  bring  many  of  God’s  children  into 
great  diflrefs.  And  yet  he  does  not  wholly 
forfake  the  work  of  his  hand ; there  are  re- 
markable tokens  of  his  prefence  flill  to  be 
feen  ; as  though  he  was  not  forward  to  for- 
fake us,  (if  I may  fo  fay)  as  though  he  had 
a mind  to  carry  on  his  work  : but  only  was 
waiting  for  fomething  that  he  expefled  in  us, 
as  requifite  in  order  to  it.  And  we  have 
great  reafon  to  think,  one  thing  at  leaft  is, 
that  we  fhould  further  acknowledge  the  great- 
nefs  and  neceffity  of  fuch  a mercy,  and  our 
dependence  on  God  for  it,  in  earned;  and  im- 
portunate prayers  to  him. 

If  the  people  of  God,  inflead  of  fpending  time 
in  fruitlefs  difputing,  and  talking  about  oppofers, 

and 


t 380  1 

and  animadverting  upon  the  unreafonablenefs  of 
their  talk  and  behaviour,  would  be  more  filent 
in  this  way,  and  open  their  mouths  much  before 
God,  they  would  be  more  in  the  way  of  a blef- 
fing.  And  if  fome  that  have  been  complaining  of 
their  minifters,  had  faid  and  a6led  lefs  before  men, 
and  had  applied  themfelves  with  all  their  might 
to  cry  to  God  for  their  miniflers,  had  as  it  were 
rifen  and  (formed  heaven  with  their  inceffaDt 
prayers  for  them,  they  would  have  been  much 
more  in  the  way  of  fuccefs. 

12.  One  thing  more  I would  mention  concern- 
ing fading  and  prayer,  wherein  I think  there 
has  been  a negleft  in  minifters  ; and  that 
is,  that  although  they  much  indd  on  the  duty 
offecret  prayer  in  their  preaching,  yet  little  is 
faid  about  fecret  fading.  It  is  a duty  recommend- 
ed by  our  Saviour  to  his  followers,  juft  in  like 
manner  as  fecret  prayer  is.  There  are  many 
occafions,  of  both  a fpiritual  and  temporal  nature 
that  properly  require  it ; and  there  are  many 
particular  mercies,  that  we  defire  for  ourfelves 
or  friends,  which  it  would  be  proper  in  this  man- 
ner to  feek  of  God. 

Another  thing  I would  mention,  which  is  of 
dill  greater  importance,  and  that  is  the  duty 
that  is  incumbent  upon  God’s  people  to  take 
heed,  that  while  they  abound  in  external  duties 
of  devotion,  fuch  as  praying,  hearing,  Tinging, 
there  be  a proportionable  care  to  abound  in 
moral  duties^  fuch  as  a£ls  of  righteoufnefs,  truth, 

meeknefs, 


C 3»‘  ] 

•meeknefs,  forgivenefs,  and  love  towards  our 
neighbour ; which  are  of  much  greater  impor- 
tance in  the  fight  of  God  than  all  the  externals 
of  his  worfhip ; this  our  Saviour  was  particular- 
ly careful  that  men  fhould  be  well  aware  of, 
Mat.  ix.  13.  But  go  ye,  and  learn  what  that 
meaneth,  1 will  have  mercy,  and  not  facrijice.  And 
chap.  xii.  7.  If  he  had  known  what  this  meaneth,  I 
will  have  mercy  and  not  Jacrijice,  y e would  net  have 
-condemned  the guiltlefs , 

At  a time  when  there  is  an  appearance  of  the 
approach  of  any  glorious  revival  of  God’s  church, 
God  does  efpecially  call  his  people  to  the 
praftree  of  moral  duties.  Thus  faith  the  Lord , 
keep  ye  judgment,  and  do  jujhce ; for  my falvation 
is  near  to  come , and  my  righteoufnefs  to  be  re- 
vealed, Ifa.  !vi.  1.  So  when  John  preached 
that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  at  hand,  and 
cried  to  the  people,  Prepare  ye  the  viay  of  the 
Lord,  make  his  paths  frait,  as  we  have  an  ac- 
count, Luke  iii.  4.  the  people  afked  him,  What 
they  fiould  do  ? He  anfwers,  He  that  hath  two 
coats,  let  him  impart  to  him  that  hath  none ; and 
he  that  hath  meat,  let  him  do  likewife.  The  Pub- 
licans faid.  What  Jhall  we  do?  He  anfwers, 
Ex  ad  no  more  than  that  which  is  appointed  you » 
And  the  foldiers  afed  him,  What  Jhall  we  do  ? 
He  replies.  Do  violence  to  no  man ; neither 
accufe  any  falfly,  and  be  content  with  your  wages , 
ver.  10,  11,  12,  13,  14. 

13.  God’s  people  at  fucb  a time  as  this, 

nought 


[ 38a  ] 

ought  efpecially  to  abound  in  deeds  of  charity, 
or  alms-giving.  We  generally,  in  thefe  days, 
feem  to  fall  far  below  the  true  fpirit  and  pra&ice 

of  Cbriftianity  with  regard  to  this  duty. At 

a time  when  God  is  fo  liberal  of  fpiritual  things, 
we  ought  not  to  be  fparing  of  our  temporal 
things. — So  far  as  I can  judge  by  the  fcripture, 
there  is  no  external  duty  whatfoever,  by  which 
perfons  will  be  fo  much  in  the  way,  not  only 
of  receiving  temporal  beneF.ts,  but  alfo  fpiritual 
-blefiings,  the  influences  of  God's  holy  Spirit  in 
the  heart,  in  divine  difcoveries,  and  fpiritual 
confolations.  1 think  it  would  be  unreafonable 
to  underftand  thofe  promifes  made  to  this  duty 
in  the  58th  chapter  of  lj'aiah , in  a fenfe  exclu- 
five  of  fpiritual  difcoveries  and  comforts;  Is  it 
not  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  that 
thou  bring  the  poor  that  are  cajl  out  to  thy 
houfe?  When  thou  feejl  the  naked,  that  thou 
cover  him,  and  that  thou  hide  not  thyfelf  from 
thine  own  Jlefh  ! Then  Jhall  thy  light  break  forth  as 
the  morning,  and  thy  health  Jhall  fpring  forth 
fpeedily  : and  thy  1 igliteoufnef s fall  go  before 
thee-,  the  glory  of  the  Lord fiall  be  thy  rere-ward. 
Then  fialt  thou  call , and  the  Lord  f iall  anfwer ; 
thou  Jhalt  cry,  and  he  fall fay,  Here  1 am  : if 
thou  draw  out  thy  foul  to  the  hungry,  and  fatisfy 
the  ajflitled  foul  ■;  then  fall  thy  light  rife  in  obfcu- 
nty,  and  thy  darknefs  be  as  the  noon-day.  And 
the  Lord  fall  guide  thee  continually,  and fatisfy 
thy  foul  in  drought,  and  make fat  thy  bones  : and 

thou 


[ 383  3 

thou,  Jhalt  be  like  a watered  garden , and  like 
a fpring  of  water  whofe  waters  fail  not , Ifa. 
Iviii.  7,  &c. 

14.  Some  may  objeCt,  that  for  perfons  to  do 
deeds  of  charity,  in  hope  of  obtaining  fpiritual 
bleffings,  would  feern,  to  fhew  a felf-righteous 
fpirit,  as  though  they  would  offer  fomething  to 
God  to  purchafe  thefe  favours.  But  if  this  be  a 
good  objection,  it  may  be  made  againft  every 
duty  whatfoever.  All  external  duties  of  the 
-fifft  table  will  be  excluded  by  it,  as  well  as  thofe 
of  the  fecond.  Thefe  have  as  direCt  a tendency 
to  raife  felf-righteous  perfons  expectations  of 
receiving  fomething  from  God  on  account  of 
them,  as  thofe;  and  on  fome  accounts  more, 
for  thefe  duties  are  more  immediately  offered 
to  God , and  therefore  perfons  aie  more  ready  to 
expeCt  fomething  from  God  for  them.  But.no 
duty  is  to  be  negletted,  for  fear  of  making  a 
righteoufnefs  of  it.  And  I have  always  obferv- 
ed,  thofe  that  are-  moft  exaCt  in  external  duties 
of  the  firft  table,  and  flack  as  to  thofe  of  the 
fecond,  are  the  moft  felf-righteous. 

* If  God’s  people  in  this  land  were  once 
brought  to  abound  in  fuch  deeds  of  love,  as 
much  as  in  praying,  hearing,  finging,  and  reli- 
gious meetings  and  conference,  it  would  be  a 
moft  blelfed  omen  ; there  is  nothing  would  have 
a greater  tendency  to  bring  the  God  of  love 
down  from  heaven  ; fo  amiable  would  be  the 
fight  in  the  eyes  of  our  loving.and  exalted  Re- 
deemer, 


[ 3*4  ] 

deemer,  that  it  would  foon  as  it  were  fetch  him 
down  from  his  throne,  to  fet  up  his  tabernacle 
with  men.  I do  not  remember  ever  to  have 
read  of  any  remarkable  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit, 
that  continued  any  long  time,  but  what  was  at- 
tended with  an  abounding  of  this  duty.  So  we 
know  it  was  in  the  apoflles  days : and  fo  in  the 
late  remarkable  revival  of  religion  in  Saxony, 
which  began  by  the  labours  of  the  famous  pro- 
fefior  Frank,  and  has  now  been  carried  on  for 
above  thirty  years,  and  has  fpread  its  happy  in- 
fluences into  many  parts  of  the  world  ; it  was 
begun,  and  has  been  carried  on,  bv  a wonderful 
pra£Hce  of  this  duty.  And  it  is  foretold,  that 
God’s  people  fliall  abound  in  this  duty  in  the  time 
of  the  great  effufion  of  the  Spirit  in  the  latter 
days ; The  vile  ptrfon Jhall  no  more  he  called  liberal, 
nor.  the  churl J aid  to  be  bountiful. — But  the  liberal 
devifeth  liberal  things,  and  by  liberal  things  Jhall 
he  (land. 

Thus  I have  (by  the  help  of  God)  finifhed 
what  was  propofed.  I have  taken  the  more 
pains  in  it,  becaufe  it  appears  to  me,  that  now 
God  is  giving  us  the  mod  happy  feafon  to  attempt 
an  univerfal  reformation  that  ever  was  given  in 
New-England.  And  it  is  a thoufand  pities  that 
we  fhouldfaii  of  that  which  fliould  be  fo  glorious, 
for  want  of  our  being  fenfible  of  our  opportunity, 
or  being  aware  of  thofe  things  that  tend  to  hin- 
der it,  or  by  taking  improper  courfes  to  obtain 
it,  or  not  being  fenfible  in  what  way  God 

expeft? 


[ 3^5  3 

expends  we  fhould  feek  it.  If  it  fhould  pleafe 
God  to  blefs  any  means  for  the  convincing  the 
country  of  his  hand  in  this  work,  and  bringing 
them  fully  and  freely  to  acknowledge  his  glo- 
rious power  and  grace  in  it,  and  engage  with 
one  heart  and  foul,  and  by  due  methods  to 
endeavour  to  promote  it,  it  would  be  a difpenfa- 
tion  of  divine  Providence  that  would  have  a 
moll  glorious  afpeft,  happily  fignifying  the  ap- 
proach of  great  and  glorious  things  to  the 
church  of  God,  and  juflly  caufing  us  to  hope 
that  Chrilt  would  fpeedily  come  to  fet  up  his 
kingdom  of  light,  holinefs,  peace  and  joy  on 
earth,  as  is  foretold  in  his  word.  Amen  ,*  even 
fo  : come.  Lord  Jefus ! 


End  of  the  Seventeenth  Volume, 


THE 


CONTENTS 

Of  the  Seventeenth  Volume. 


Pagt 

A fee  on  d letter  to  the  Lord  Bijkop  of  Exeter.  3 
A letter  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Potter.  — 10 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Free.  — ■ 23 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Downes,  occafioned  by 
a late  traB  intitled,  Methodifm  explained 
and  expofed.  — — 31 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Horne.  — • 55 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Rutherford.  87 

A narrative  of  the  late  work  of  God,  at  and 
near  Northampton,  in  New-England.  11a 

The  diftinguifhing  marks  of  a work  of  the  Spirit 
of  God.  188 

Thoughts  concerning  the  revival  of  religion  in 
New-England.  247 


Date  Due 

Demco  293-5 

