Ciass 

Book 12 

Copyright  N° 


COPYRIGHT  DEPOSIT 


The  New  Life  in  Christ  Jesus 


The  New  Life  in 
Christ  Jesus 

By 

C.  I.  Scofield,  D.  D. 

Aut«^  ?f  "The  Scofield  Bible  Correspondence  Course" 
Rightly  Dividing  the   Word  of  Truth,"  "Plain 
Papers  on  the  Holy  Spirit,"  "Addresses  on 
Prophecy,"   etc.;   Editor   of  "The   Sco- 
field Reference  Bible." 


Chicago 

The  Bible  Institute  Colportage  Association 

826  North  La  Salle  Street 


&& 


4 


COPYRIGHT   1915,   BY 
THE  BIBLE  INSTITUTE  COLPORTAGE 
ASSOCIATION  OF  CHICAGO 


i 


JUL  2'i  ISI5 


^ 


To  My  Wife 

Who  has  been  my  untiring  helper  in  what- 
ever I  have  said  or  written  for  thirty-one 
blessed  years.  Always  abiding  in  the  min- 
istries of  a  Christian  home,  she  has  left  to 
me  the  thanks  and  prayers  of  those  who  have 
been  blessed  through  our  joint  labours,  con- 
tent so  only  that  Christ  was  exalted. 


To  the  Reader 

All  of  the  matter  composing  this  book  was  preached  to 
my  congregations  in  my  two  pastorates  at  Dallas,  Texas, 
and  Northfield,  Massachusetts,  and  all,  save  the  ad- 
dress on  "The  Imparted  Life,"  were  published  first  in 
the  "Dallas  News."  These,  re-printed  in  "The  Chris- 
tian Worker's  Magazine,"  awoke  a  desire  which  seemed 
to  be  unusually  widespread  that  these  teachings  con- 
cerning the  New  Life  in  Christ  Jesus  might  be  collected 
into  a  book.  This,  by  arrangement  with  The  Bible  In- 
stitute Colportage  Association,  has  now  been  done. 

The  book  is  here  and  now  committed  to  the  care  of 
Him  whom  it  seeks  to  exalt  in  the  fervent  prayer  that 
through  His  grace  it  may  show  the  way  into  happy, 
victorious,  fruitful  Christian  living  to  many  in  bondage. 

C.  I.  SCOFIELD 
Greyshingles 

Douglaston,  N.  Y, 

April,  1915. 


Contents 

Chap.  Page 

I.     The  Inner  Life 11 

II.     The  Imparted  Life 24» 

III.     The  Tragedy  of  the  Inner  Life 33 

IV.     The  Delivered  Life 45 

V.     The  Larger  Christian  Life 56 

VI.     The  Spirit-Controlled  Life 67 

VII.     The  Joyous  Life 75 

VIII.     True  Consecration 85 

IX.     Defilement   and   Cleansing 100 


I 

The  Inner  Life 

Text:  "I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but 
now  mine  eye  seeth  thee:  wherefore  I  abhor  myself." — Job 
42:5,  6. 

SOMEONE  has  called  the  Book  of  Job 
"The  Epic  of  the  Inner  Life."  It  is  most 
felicitous.  We  all  know  that  there  is  an 
inner  life;  that  within  the  barriers  of  our  be- 
ing, behind  all  activities  and  externalities,  we 
ourselves  live.  We  all  know  that  there  is  trans- 
acted the  real  life.  We  all  know  that  there  we 
are  solitary,  that  there  every  man  is  a  hermit. 
And  while  this,  past  all  controversy,  is  true, 
in  another  sense  this  strange  inner  life  is  im- 
mensely populous.  Passions,  desires,  tempta- 
tions, lurid  and  demoniacal  thoughts,  angelic 
thoughts,  prayers,  adorations,  mean  selfish- 
nesses, wrestle  and  plead,  and  it  is  into  this 
chaos  that  faith  brings  the  nature  of  God,  and 
the  life  of  the  risen  Christ,  and  the  immense 
peace  and  power  and  joy  of  the  Holy  Spirit's 

11 


12        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

indwelling.  And  we  all  know  that  when  we 
have  received  eternal  lif e  we  have  written  but 
the  first  chapter  in  the  new  history  of  the  in- 
ner life.  New  conflicts,  new  victories,  alas! 
new  defeats,  too. 

The  most  commonplace  Christian  whom  you 
know  is  transacting  in  the  recesses  of  his  be- 
ing an  epic. 

And  we  know  that  this  inner  life  is,  finally, 
the  source  and  spring  of  the  outer  life.  It  is, 
of  course,  possible  to  keep  these  dissimilar  for 
years,  but  soon  or  late  the  inner  life  becomes 
determinative  of  the  external  life.  It  is  with 
this  life,  therefore,  that  God  most  concerns 
Himself.  It  is  the  distinctive  characteristic  of 
the  gospel  dispensation.  "Now  is  the  ax  laid 
to  the  root  of  the  tree,"  says  the  forerunner, 
John.  "Make  the  tree  good,  and  his  fruit 
good,"  is  almost  the  opening  word  of  Christ. 
It  was  always  so,  indeed.  "Behold,  thou  de- 
sirest  truth  in  the  inward  parts."  "The  Lord 
pondereth  the  heart." 

I  can  not,  I  think,  do  better  than  to  take  the 
last  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Job  for  my  point 
of  departure,  verses  5  and  6: 


THE  INNER  LIFE  13 

"I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the 
ear,  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee;  wherefore 
I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes." 
It  is 

THE  CRISIS  OF  THE  TROUBLED  PATRIARCH 

The  thing  itself  is  very  simple.  "I  have 
heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear."  There 
was  a  testimony  concerning  God  which  had 
come  to  Job,  and  upon  which  he  had  based  a 
true  faith  and  a  good  life.  Ordinarily,  Chris- 
tian experience  has  just  that  history.  There 
is  a  record  concerning  Christ,  His  person  and 
work.  It  is  God's  testimony,  and  we  receive  it 
and  set  to  our  seal  that  God  is  true.  We  are 
saved.  It  is  a  very  real  faith,  though  a  faith 
based  wholly  upon  testimony,  the  hearing  of 
the  ear.  That  was  the  faith  of  Job  down  to 
the  very  last  chapter. 

Here  was  a  godly  man  whose  outward  life 
was  so  blameless  that  God  could  challenge  the 
malice  of  Satan  himself  to  find  a  flaw  in  it. 
Nor  was  he  but  negatively  good.  He  was  a 
good  man  in  the  positive  sense.  His  life 
counted  on  the  right  and  helpful  side  of  things, 


14        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

Then  began  that  strange  dealing  of  God, 
that  permitted  chastening,  which  has  been  the 
mystery  in  so  many  other  lives.  How  strange  a 
thing  that  the  best  man  of  his  time  should  be 
the  most  troubled;  should  be  the  man  upon 
whom,  as  it  seemed,  the  hand  of  God  lay  most 
heavily.  And  the  fact,  as  you  know,  called  out 
various  interpretations.  The  opinion  of  Satan 
concerning  this  man's  goodness  and  usefulness 
was  that  he  was  a  mere  hireling.  "Hast  not 
thou  made  an  hedge  about  him?"  You  have 
given  him  unusual  prosperity,  and  in  a  certain 
sense  you  have  bribed  him.  That  was  Satan's 
opinion.  That  was  a  lie.  And  God  permitted 
Satan  to  demonstrate  the  falsity  of  his  theory 
of  this  man's  life.  God  said,  in  effect,  "Take 
away  the  hedge";  and  then  you  know  what 
happened:  his  property  went,  his  children 
went,  and  yet  the  integrity  of  the  man  re- 
mained. He  did  not  curse  God.  And  then 
Satan  fell  back  upon  another  theory  which  was 
just  as  false  as  the  other.  He  said:  "Skin  for 
skin;  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for 
his  life."  You  have  left  the  man  his  health. 
"Put  forth  now  thine  hand,  and  touch  his  bone 


THE  INNER  LIFE  15 

and  his  flesh,  and  he  will  curse  thee  to  thy 
face."  And  so  that  was  permitted.  His  health 
went,  grievous  pains  fell  upon  him.  Bereft  of 
property,  bereft  of  family,  bereft  of  health, 
and  yet  this  man,  with  a  faith  which  was 
founded  upon  a  hearing  about  God,  main- 
tained his  integrity. 

And  then  came  the  theories  of  his  friends. 
They  agreed  in  the  belief  that  there  must  be 
in  his  life  some  secret  sin,  although  he  had  suc- 
ceeded in  covering  it  from  human  vision.  They 
were  very  sure  that  the  only  explanation  of  the 
sorrows  which  were  falling  so  heavily  upon 
him  was,  that  he  was  a  hypocrite;  was  not  as 
good  as  he  seemed  to  be,  and  upon  that  belief 
they  argued  the  question  with  him.  But  Job 
knew  that  also  to  be  false,  and  he  made  good 
his  contention  that  he  was  not  a  hypocrite. 

A  VISION  OF  GOD 

And  now  we  come  to  the  real  epic  of  his  in- 
ner life.  God  Himself  took  up  the  matter. 
And  if  you  follow  the  closing  chapters  of  this 
wonderful  Book  of  Job,  you  will  find  the  whole 


16        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

mechanics,  so  to  speak,  of  the  deeper  dealing  of 
God  with  the  inner  life  of  a  saint  whom  He  is 
about  to  make  saintly. 

There  was,  first  of  all,  the  unveiling  of  His 
power,  His  majesty,  His  greatness. 

"Then  the  Lord  answered  Job  out  of  the 
whirlwind.  *  *  *  Where  wast  thou  when 
I  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth?  *  *  * 
Whereupon  are  the  foundations  thereof  fast- 
ened? or  who  laid  the  cornerstone  thereof, 
when  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all 
the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy?  *  *  * 
Hast  thou  commanded  the  morning  since  the 
days,  and  caused  the  dayspring  to  know  his 
place?  Knowest  thou  the  ordinances  of  heav- 
en? Canst  thou  set  the  dominion  thereof  in  the 
earth?  *  *  *  Wilt  thou  also  disannul  my 
judgment  ?" 

Ah,  poor  Job !  Thou  wert  able  to  maintain 
thy  cause  against  Satan  and  against  man,  but 
what  wilt  thou  answer  to  God?  What,  indeed, 
can  Job  say  before  this  personal  manifestation 
of  God  Himself  but  that  which  he  did  say: 

"I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of 


THE  INNER  LIFE  17 

the  ear;  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee.    Where- 
fore I  abhor  myself." 

THE  UTTER  COLLAPSE  OF  SELF 

Yes,  fellow-man,  thyself.  Now  the  secret  is 
out. 

It  was  not  at  all  something  Job  had  done, 
it  was  what  Job  was.  Job  himself  was  wrong. 
He  had  never  judged  self  before  God.  He 
had  not  the  sentence  of  death  in  himself.  The 
interpretative  chapter  of  Job  is  the  twenty- 
ninth.  The  personal  pronoun  occurs  forty- 
eight  times  in  twenty-five  verses.  He  was  a 
good  man,  but  he  was  too  much  aware  of  it, 
and  he  was  in  deep  darkness  as  to  the  real 
state  of  his  soul,  of  his  inner  life  before  God. 
And  nothing,  not  the  depth  of  his  affliction, 
nor  the  reproaches  of  his  friends,  nor  his  own 
self-communings  ever  brought  him  to  see  him- 
self. But  when  he  passed  from  a  knowledge 
about  God  to  a  personal  acquaintance  with 
God  there  was  nothing  to  be  said  but  the  de- 
spairing: 

"I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the 


18        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

ear,  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee.    Wherefore 
I  abhor  myself." 

The  revelation  of  God,  bringing  a  real  sense 
of  personal  unworthiness  and  demerit,  is  what 
I  think  essentially  we  have  in  this  experience 
of  Job.  It  is  not  in  exercises  of  self  about 
self;  not  in  any  efforts  of  Job  to  discover  the 
mystery  of  his  inner  life,  that  he  comes  to  real 
self -consciousness ;  but  it  was  the  vision  of  God 
Himself  which,  flooding  his  inner  being, 
brought  the  humbling,  hateful  vision  of  self. 

A  NEW  AND   HIGHER  SERVICE 

And  then  the  most  astonishing  thing  of  all 
happened.  God  took  up  the  vindication  and 
restoration  of  the  man  who  abhorred  himself! 

"The  Lord  said  to  Eliphaz  the  Temanite, 
My  wrath  is  kindled  against  thee  and  against 
thy  two  friends:  for  ye  have  not  spoken  of 
me  the  thing  that  is  right,  as  my  servant  Job 
hath." 

And  then,  as  you  know,  God  made  of  Job 
a  priest  through  whom  alone  the  three  re- 
proachful moralizers  could  approach  His  of- 
fended holiness. 


THE  INNER  LIFE  19 

"My  servant  Job  shall  pray  for  you,  and 
him  will  I  accept." 

You  see,  we  have  essentially  four  things 
here:  First,  the  vision  of  God;  secondly,  the 
utter  collapse  of  self ;  thirdly,  a  new  and  higher 
service;  and  lastly,  a  doubled  fruitfulness. 

"Also  the  Lord  gave  Job  twice  as  much  as 
he  had  before." 

Now  I  believe  we  have  here  an  order  which 
is  invariable,  and  I  am  very  sure  that  we  have 
here  an  experience  which  is  not  exceptional. 

Oh,  beloved,  we  too  have  heard  of  Him  by 
the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but  we  need  to  come  to 
deeper  things,  closer  things,  with  God.  We 
need  to  come  to  that  personal  and  underived 
acquaintanceship  with  Him,  so  that  we  may 
say  with  the  men  of  Samaria,  "Now  we  believe 
not  because  of  thy  saying;  for  we  have  heard 
him  ourselves,  and  know  that  this  is  indeejl  the 
Christ,"  although  the  first  effect  of  it  will  be 
this  awful  humbling,  this  utter  collapse  of  self. 
But  oh,  how  blessed  a  place  is  that  valley  of 
humbling.  No  one  falls  there  who  does  not 
rise  to  newness  of  life  and  service.     But  re- 


20        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

member,  it  costs  the  sentence  of  death  in  self; 
the  thorough  reconstruction  of  the  inner  life. 

NOT  AN   ISOLATED   EXPERIENCE 

It  will  help  us  in  interpreting  this  experience 
to  see  that  it  came,  not  to  Job  alone,  but  to 
every  man  greatly  used  of  God.  The  circum- 
stances differ  but  the  essence  is  the  same — God 
is  realized,  self-strength  is  turned  into  helpless- 
ness, new  power  and  blessing  are  given.  Josh- 
ua fell  at  the  feet  of  the  Man  with  the  drawn 
sword  (Josh.  5:13-15) ;  Isaiah  must  cry,  "Woe 
is  me"  (Isa.  6:5-8),  only  to  be  cleansed  and 
recommissioned ;  Jeremiah  must  learn  that  he 
"cannot  speak"  before  the  Lord  will  touch  his 
mouth  (Jer.  1:6-10);  Ezekiel,  prostrated  by 
the  glory,  must  fall  on  his  face  in  the  collapse 
of  self  before  the  Spirit  can  fill  him,  and  Je- 
hovah can  say,  "I  send  thee"  (Ezek.  1:28; 
2:1-10)  ;  Daniel  must  say,  "I  saw  .  .  .  and 
my  comeliness  was  turned  in  me  into  corrup- 
tion" (Dan.  10:5-12).  Even  John  the  Be- 
loved, before  the  vision  of  the  glorified  Christ, 
must  fall  "at  his  feet  as  one  dead"  before  the 


THE  INNER  LIFE  21 

"right  hand"  can  be  laid  upon  him,  and  he  can 
hear  the  "fear  not." 

I  wish  now  to  gather  up  briefly  what  all  this 
means.    And  first  of  all, 

TWO  THINGS  WHICH  IT  IS  NOT 

It  is  neither  the  entire  eradication  of  the 
flesh,  the  death,  the  extinction  of  self,  nor  is  it 
sinless  perfection.  Self  is  abhorred,  distrusted, 
detested,  set  at  naught.  But  so  uniform  are 
the  characteristics  of  this  experience,  whatever 
the  age  or  dispensation,  that  it  is  not  difficult  to 
state  both  the  result  accomplished  and  the 
steps  by  which  it  is  wrought. 

1.  We  have,  then,  in  this  supreme  experi- 
ence, the  revelation  of  God  Himself  to  the  soul. 
It  is  not  something  about  God;  some  new  tes- 
timony concerning  God,  or  some  lesson  of 
sorrow  or  trial.  It  is  God's  own  act,  His  self- 
revelation  of  something  which  testimony  had 
never  communicated  to  heart  or  conscience,  so 
that  there  is  a  new  and  intense  apprehension  of 
himself. 

2.  The  instances  quoted  from  the  Scrip- 


22        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

tures  agree,  too,  in  the  effect  of  this  unveiling 
of  God.  Before  that  vision  of  God  self  is  ab- 
horred. So  absolute  is  this  effect  that,  as  we 
have  seen,  it  is  constantly  spoken  of  as  the  ut- 
ter deprivation  of  strength.  The  self-life  is 
not  slain,  but  it  is  so  seen  in  that  glory  as  never 
again  io  be  trusted,  or  in  any  way  counted  on 
in  the  things  of  God.  As  Paul  said:  "We  had 
the  sentence  of  death  in  ourselves,  that  we 
should  not  trust  in  ourselves,  but  in  God,  which 
raiseth  the  dead,"  in  the  God  of  the  resurrec- 
tion, in  the  God  of  the  new,  undying  life. 

3.  In  agreement,  too,  are  the  biblical  in- 
stances that  this  destruction  of  self-confidence 
is  followed  by  the  infilling  with  the  strength 
of  Him  who  was  dead  and  is  alive  again.  Not 
once  is  the  man  on  his  face  before  the  awful, 
beautiful  vision  left  prostrate.  "I  received 
strength,"  is  the  unvarying  testimony. 

4.  And  then  comes  the  new  and  higher  ser- 
vice. This  is  the  blessed  consummation;  this 
and  the  new  fruitfulness. 

Could  I  covet  anything  better  for  you  than 
that  you  should  see  God  face  to  face?    Than 


THE  INNER  LIFE  23 

that  there  should  come  to  you  this  highest  word 
in  the  epic  of  the  inner  life?  May  He  grant  it, 
for  His  name's  sake. 


II 

The  Imparted  Life 

Text:    "I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life,  and  that  they 
might  have  it  more  abundantly." — John  10:10. 

THIS  was  the  new  note  in  the  message 
of  Jesus  Christ.  It  fell,  for  the  most 
part,  upon  uncomprehending  ears. 
After  nineteen  centuries  of  alleged  gospel 
preaching  it  is  still  for  the  most  part  uncom- 
prehended. 

That  Christ  was  a  teacher  of  ethics,  as  in  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount,  is  understood.  That 
He  died  for  our  sins  is,  as  a  fact,  understood. 
That  He  changed  the  issue  from  righteousness 
by  works  to  righteousness  by  faith,  moving  the 
centre  from  Mount  Sinai  in  Arabia  to  Mount 
Calvary  in  Judea,  is  understood,  though  halt- 
ingly, but  that  He  came  to  impart  to  believing 
human  beings  a  new  quality  of  life,  even  the 
very  life  which  was  and  is  in  Himself — this  is 
not  understood. 

Eternal  life  is,  indeed,  much  spoken  of,  but 

24 


THE  IMPARTED  LIFE  25 

it  is  understood  to  mean  mere  duration  of  be- 
ing— the  persistency  of  life  notwithstanding 
the  fact  of  physical  death. 

In  the  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  in  the 
apostolic  writings,  the  eternal  life  imparted  by 
Christ  to  all  who  believe  in  Him,  is  indeed  a 
term  implying  endlessness  of  life,  but,  since 
endlessness  is  also  a  quality  of  mere  human 
life,  eternal  life  is,  far  more  emphatically,  a 
term  of  quality,  of  kind. 

The  ministry  of  John  the  Baptist  also  had 
its  startling  message,  "And  now  also  the  ax  is 
laid  unto  the  root  of  the  trees."  There  was 
to  be  no  more  experimentation  with  the  old 
Adamic  tree,  no  more  seeking  of  fruit  from  a 
stock  that,  after  centuries  of  testing,  could 
produce  but  wild  fruit.  "Make  the  tree  good" 
is  the  new  word,  and  this  can  only  be  done  by 
giving  the  tree  a  new  life  and  nature.  "That 
which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,"  and  can 
never  be  made  aught  else.  The  old  man  under 
the  new  gospel  is  to  be  crucified  with  Christ, 
not  improved  by  higher  ideals.  "They  that 
are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God."  The 
Adamic  taint  forbids  it,  and  is  ineradicable. 


26        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

Two  tilings  are  said  by  Christ  in  this  tenth 
chapter  of  John:  He  gives  his  life  for  the 
sheep  (vs.  11,  15,  17),  and  this  is  redemption; 
and  He  gives  His  life  to  the  sheep  (vs.  28)  and 
this  is  regeneration. 

Precisely  this  duality  is  found  in  the  third 
chapter.  The  sheep  are  under  a  two-fold  dis- 
ability: they  are  "perishing"  under  the  curse 
and  sentence  of  the  law,  and  must  be  redeemed 
by  one  able  and  willing  to  be  "made  a  curse" 
in  their  stead;  but  also  they  are  born  of  the 
flesh  and  therefore  mere  flesh-men,  unable  to 
"see''  or  "enter"  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  for 
this  there  is  no  remedy  save  in  a  re-birth. 

But  precisely  these  two  needs  are  met  by  the 
gospel  of  the  love  of  God;  the  Son  of  man 
must  be  lifted  up  on  the  cross  to  redeem  the 
perishing,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  imparts  the  di- 
vine nature  and  the  new  life  to  all  who  believe 
on  the  Son  of  man  as  crucified  for  their  sins. 

THE  NEW  LIFE  IS  CHRIST'S  LIFE 

Mere  endlessness  of  being  would  not  be 
"eternal"  life.  Eternal  is  "from  everlasting  to 
everlasting."    Only  He  who  "was  in  the  begin- 


THE  IMPARTED  LIFE  27 

ning  with  God  *  *  *  was  God"  would  be- 
stow, through  the  eternal  Spirit,  eternal  life. 

And  this  imparted  life  is  His  own  life.  "I 
am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches."  What  a 
symbol  of  unity  of  life  is  the  vine  with  its 
branches.  The  branch  has  no  independent 
source  of  life.  The  life  of  the  vine  and  the  life 
of  the  branch  are  one.  All  possibility  of  re- 
newal, of  growth,  of  f ruitfulness  depends  upon 
the  life  energy  of  the  vine.  Well  might  the 
vine  say  to  the  branch,  "Because  I  live,  ye  shall 
live  also." 

It  would  not  be  possible  to  state  more 
strongly  than  does  our  Lord  this  identity  in 
life  of  Himself  and  those  who  through  faith 
in  Him  crucified  have  been  born  again.  "As  * 
*  *  I  live  by  the  Father:  so  he  that  eateth 
me,  even  he  shall  live  by  me."  "As  thou, 
Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee,  that  they  also 
may  be  one  in  us."  "I  in  them,  and  thou  in 
me." 

The  vital  suggestions  are,  if  possible,  even 
more  intense  in  our  Lord's  simile  of  "the  corn 
of  wheat."  Just  as  a  grain  of  wheat  sown  dies, 
indeed,  yet  dies  into  countless  grains  of  wheat, 


28        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

giving  its  own  life  to  each,  so  Christ  speaks  of 
His  own  death. 

And  this  testimony  to  oneness  of  life  with 
Christ  pervades  the  apostolic  explanation  of 
the  gospel.  The  church  is  declared  to  be  His 
body.  The  human  body,  composed  of  many 
members,  is  the  figure  used  to  express  the  one- 
ness with  Him  of  the  "many  members"  who 
constitute,  like  the  members  of  the  natural 
body,  one  organism,  and  this  organism  is  called 
"Christ"  (1  Cor.  12:12).  It  is  declared  of 
Christ,  not  only  that  He  gave  life  to  the  be- 
liever, but  that  He  "is  our  life."  And  John 
declares  the  record  to  be  "that  God  hath  given 
to  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son." 

THE  INLIVING  CHRIST  TO  BE  OUTLIVED 

God  expects  nothing  from  the  flesh — the 
self -man.  In  the  divine  reckoning  our  old  man 
was  crucified  with  Christ.  The  old  man  is 
summed  up  in  one  terrific  word  of  three  let- 
ters— sin.  Acts  of  sin  proceed  from  a  nature 
which  is  sin. 

In  one  great  and  luminous  passage  the  Holy 
Spirit  through  the  Apostle  Paul  states,  in  the 


THE  IMPARTED  LIFE  29 

terms  of  the  apostle's  actual  experience,  the 
fact  and  method  of  the  new  life:  "I  am  cruci- 
fied with  Christ."  This  is  a  fact  of  revelation 
not  a  fact  of  consciousness.  Paul  does  not 
"feel"  crucified,  but  in  the  divine  reckoning  he 
is  counted  so,  and  this  the  apostle  also  reckons 
to  be  true.  God  expects  nothing  from  the  old 
Saul  of  Tarsus,  and  in  the  seventh  of  Romans 
experience  the  apostle  has  learned  the  final 
truth  about  Saul :  "In  me,  that  is  in  my  flesh, 
dwelleth  no  good  thing." 

Then  comes  a  fact  of  consciousness,  "Nev- 
ertheless I  live,"  followed  by  another  fact  of 
revelation,  "Christ  liveth  in  me."  Saul  lives  as 
yet,  but  death  or  the  return  of  Christ  will  be 
the  end  of  the  Saul  life,  and  Christ  also  lives  in 
Paul. 

Then  comes  the  practical,  present  outcome 
of  it  all,  "The  life  which  I  now  live  in  the 
flesh"  (body).  How  shall  that  life  be  lived? 
The  Holy  Spirit  gives  an  answer  to  which, 
speaking  broadly,  the  church  has  never  risen. 

THE  METHOD  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE 

Two  theories  of  Christian  living  here  on 


30        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

earth  have  measured,  and  do  measure,  the  aver- 
age faith. 

First,  life  by  precept,  by  rule.  There  is  a 
large  truth  here.  The  Bible  is  a  great  in- 
struction in  righteousness;  a  great  revelation 
of  the  mind  of  God  about  human  life.  No  in- 
ner light  can  take  the  place  of  the  divine  rev- 
elation. It  is  perfect  ethically  and  also  com- 
plete. 

But  it  has  the  fatal  defect  of  furnishing  no 
dynamic.  "The  law  made  nothing  perfect." 
Precept  gives  a  perfect  rule  of  life,  and  by  it 
life  must  always  be  tested,  but  precept  carries 
no  enablement.  "The  law  *  *  *  was  weak 
through  the  flesh."  A  chart  does  not  carry 
us  across  the  ocean,  but  it  shows  us  where  we 
are  on  the  trackless  deep,  and  where  to  go. 
The  life  by  precept  was  tried  under  law  and 
left  the  whole  world  of  humanity  in  speechless 
guilt  before  God. 

Still  more  hopeless  is  the  notion  of  life  by 
the  example  of  Christ.  "What  would  Christ 
do?"  is  the  formula.  As  to  immoralities,  self- 
ishness, worldliness,  the  answer  is  easy.  In  all 
the  real  crises  of  life  it  utterly  breaks  down. 


THE  IMPARTED  LIFE  31 

Our  conclusions  as  to  what  Christ  would  do 
are  vitiated  by  our  limitations  of  habit  of 
thought,  of  unspirituality,  of  ignorance  of 
Christ.  In  His  earth-life  He  constantly  did  the 
things  that  shocked  every  religionist  in  Pales- 
tine— Pharisee,  Sadducee,  Herodian.  He  did 
not  do  the  things  they  thought  He  ought  to  do, 
but  every  day  did  something  they  thought  in- 
consistent with  His  Messiahship. 

What  then  is  Christian  living?  It  is  Christ 
living  out  His  life  in  the  terms  of  our  person- 
ality, and  under  the  conditions  which  environ 
us.  We  do  not  ask,  "What  would  Christ  do?" 
we  say  to  self,  "Let  not  I,"  and  yield  our 
powers  to  the  sway  of  the  inliving  Christ.  "Al- 
ways bearing  about  in  the  body  the  putting  to 
death  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  (the  practical  ex- 
pression of  our  co-crucifixion  with  Him  being 
"having  no  confidence  in  the  flesh"),  "that  the 
life  also  of  Jesus  might  be  made  manifest  in 
our  body." 

And  we  are  not  to  be  discouraged  by  fail- 
ures. Not  all  at  once  does  Christ  gain  com- 
plete control  over  powers  and  faculties  accus- 


32        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

tomed  to  the  rule  of  self;  but,  "walking  in  the 
Spirit/ '  there  assuredly  comes  an  increasing 
sense  of  peace,  rest,  joy. 


Ill 

The  Tragedy  of  the  Inner  Life 

Text:  "For  to  will  is  present  with  me,  but  how  to  perform 
that  which  is  good,  I  find  not." — Rom.  7:18. 

THAT  is  the  tragedy  of  the  inner  life; 
the  breakdown  of  the  human  will  be- 
fore the  Christian  ethic;  the  torment 
of  an  unattained  ideal. 

The  defeat  of  a  languid  desire  is  nothing; 
but  to  throw  the  whole  power  of  the  will  on  the 
side  of  something  which  God  commands,  and 
then  to  find  the  will  break  down,  that,  for  an 
earnest  soul,  is  tragic  beyond  words. 

It  is  a  very  common  mistake  to  suppose 
that  we  could  be  holy  if  we  only  wanted  to. 
We  think  our  difficulty  lies  in  bringing  the 
will  to  act  on  the  side  of  what  God  requires, 
and  that  if  we  really  put  forth  sufficient  will 
power  we  should  enter  upon  a  spiritual  life. 
But  here  is  a  man  who  makes  the  amazing  dis- 
covery  that   the    spiritual   life   is    something 

33 


34        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

above  the  reach  of  his  will  at  its  highest 
stretch.  He  can  not  grasp  spirituality  and 
bring  it  down  into  his  life  by  willing  to  do  it. 
And  this  was  the  experience,  let  us  remember, 
of  one  of  the  strongest  wills  that  ever  was 
lodged  in  a  human  character.  The  Apostle 
Paul  was  not  a  weakling;  he  was  endowed 
with  immense  will  power.  When  he  was  a 
mere 

RELIGIONIST  AND  NOT  A  CHRISTIAN 

he  was  not  a  lax  nor  a  languid  one.  He  saw 
that  the  great  enemy  of  the  traditionalism  in 
which  he  had  been  reared  was  this  new  thing, 
Christianity ;  and  his  imperious  will  forced  him 
into  the  very  front  of  the  fight  against  Christi- 
anity; made  of  him  "the  tiger  of  the  Sanhe- 
drim/' Nothing  deterred  him — no  weeping  of 
women,  no  plaint  of  age,  or  youth;  he  put 
Christian  men  and  women  in  prison,  and  when 
the  question  was  one  of  stoning  them  to  death 
he  gave  his  vote  against  them.  No,  Paul  was 
never  a  half-and-half  man.  There  was  in  him 
not  merely  a  fullness  of  intellectual  vigor  and 
life  that  compelled  him  to  take  sides,  but  there 


THE  TRAGEDY  OF  THE  INNER  IIFE     35 

was  in  him  a  force  of  will  that  enabled  him  to 
accomplish  his  desires. 

But  here  was  a  seemingly  simple  thing  that 
he  was  not  able  to  do;  but  now  he  has  before 
him  an  ideal  which  is  unattainable  by  the 
power  of  his  resolution.  "To  will  is  present 
with  me,"  he  says,  "but  how  to  perform  that 
which  is  good,  I  find  not."  He  can  not  will 
himself  into  spirituality. 

what  is  "good"? 

That  is  the  case  before  us.  But  we  shall 
never  understand  what  Paul  means  unless  we 
stop  for  a  moment  to  consider  his  little  word 
"good."  What  is  this  good  that  Paul  can  not 
do  by  willing  to  do  it?  We  may  exclude  some 
things  at  once.  He  is  not  speaking  here  of 
morality,  of  honesty,  of  kindliness,  of  chastity, 
of  faithfulness  in  the  relations  in  which  man 
stands  to  man,  as  husband,  as  parent,  as 
friend.  These  things  lie  completely  within  the 
power  of  the  will.  Every  one  of  us  has  known 
men  wholly  apart  from  Christian  power  and 
Christian    influence    who    were    all    of    these 


36        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

things.  Every  community  has  upright,  truth- 
ful, honest,  kindly,  courageous,  helpful,  clean, 
high-living  men  who  are  not  Christians. 
The  Apostle  Paul  is  not  speaking  of  those 
good  qualities  at  all;  all  those  things  he  had 
done  all  his  life;  his  will  had  proved  effective 
in  that  sphere. 

And  neither  is  he  thinking,  by  this  word 
good,  of  common  religiousness,  church-mem- 
bership, church-going,  saying  prayers,  read- 
ing the  Bible,  giving  money;  all  these  things 
he  had  done  all  his  life  by  will  power.  He 
was  the  foremost  religionist  of  his  time,  by  a 
conscientious  use  of  his  will. 

Well,  then,  what  does  he  mean  by  speaking 
of  the  good  which  he  wills  but  can  not  attain? 
He  means  such  things  as  this :  "For  to  me  to 
live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain."  And  this: 
"I  am  crucified  with  Christ;  nevertheless  I 
live ;  yet  not  I  but  Christ,  liveth  in  me ;  and  the 
life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the 
faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me  and 
gave  himself  for  me."  That  is  what  he  is  think- 
ing about — the 


THE  TRAGEDY  OF  THE  INNER  LIFE     37 
REPRODUCTION  OF  CHRIST  BEFORE  MEN 

—of  being  Christlike.  That  is  what  he  calls 
"good."  Did  Paul  mean,  then,  that  he  was  de- 
feated in  a  will  to  be  Christlike — not  as  good 
as  Christ,  but  good  like  Christ  in  measure? 
Yes. 

He  had  before  his  mind,  to  illustrate  it 
further,  perhaps,  the  beatic  character.  He  had 
read  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  we  may- 
be very  sure  that  he  put  it  into  its  right  place, 
dispensationally,  but  he  was  not  willing  for  one 
moment  to  say  that  because  he  was  in  grace 
and  in  the  church,  and  not  in  the  kingdom 
and  not  under  law,  that  therefore  he  was  justi- 
fied in  living  on  a  lower  level  than  the  kingdom 
life — rather  he  would  say,  "  a  higher  demand 
is  laid  upon  me." 

And  while  there  was  not  in  his  mind  all  this 
negative  and  inferior  morality,  there  was  in 
his  mind  the  spiritual  morality  which  forms  the 
Christian  standard.  "Blessed  are  the  poor  in 
spirit,"  he  would  say,  and  then  I  can  imagine 
that  he  would  beat  upon  his  breast  and  say, 
"Oh,  proud  Paul!     Oh,  Paul,  when  will  you 


38        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

ever  be  poor  in  spirit?"  And  then,  perhaps, 
in  the  earlier  stages  of  his  experience  he  would 
say,  "I  will  be  poor  in  spirit." 

"Blessed  are  the  meek."  "Oh,"  he  would 
say  afterward,  "I  am  the  chief  of  sinners. 
When  I  read  that  word  meek,  I  dare  not  lift 
my  eyes  to  him — I  can  not."  Did  you,  my 
hearer,  every  try  to  be  meek?  If  you  did,  did 
you  succeed?  It  is  open  to  any  one  to  act 
meekly,  to  go  around  with  a  kind  of 

URIAH  HEEP  'UMBLENESS 

but  that  only  makes  a  hateful  Pharisee  of  you ; 
that  is  not  being  meek.  And  if  there  is  any- 
thing that  Jesus  Christ  hates,  it  is  Pharisee- 
ism;  that  is  the  one  thing  He  can  not  do  any- 
thing with.  The  only  word  he  had  for  the 
Pharisee  of  his  day  was,  "Woe  unto  you."  He 
had  no  messages  for  them;  there  was  nothing 
in  his  gospel  for  a  Pharisee.  No,  Paul  is  not 
going  back  to  Phariseeism.  And,  deeper  than 
that  there  was  in  Paul's  heart,  when  he  talked 
about  being  good,  the  imperious  demand 
which  his  new  nature  and  the  urge  of  the  new 
life  made  upon  him  that  he  should  have  victory 


THE  TRAGEDY  OF  THE  INNER  LIFE     39 

over  self  in  all  the  forms  in  which  self  mani- 
fests itself. 

Now  in  the  face  of  a  standard  as  exalted  as 
the  Christlike  life  there  is 

A  GRAVE  DANGER 

That  danger  must  have  been  present  to  Paul, 
and  I  have  no  doubt  he  had  to  resist  it  and  to 
cry  mightily  to  God  about  it;  the  danger,  I 
mean,  of  saying  or  thinking  that  the  Christ 
standard  is  too  high ;  that  it  was  put  there,  not 
to  attain  to,  but  as  an  ideal  toward  which  we 
are  to  aspire.  We  are  to  consent  to  it  that  it 
is  good,  but  for  flesh  to  expect  to  attain  to  it  is 
another  thing.  Well,  here  was  a  man  who 
was  minded  to  live  that  kind  of  a  life,  some- 
how, and  never  let  himself  go  till  he  did. 

There  is  a  saying,  you  know,  that  if  you  aim 
your  arrow  at  the  moon  you  won't  hit  the 
moon,  but  you  will  shoot  higher  than  if  you 
aimed  your  arrow  at  a  barn.  Well,  Paul  never 
let  himself  down  by  any  poor  sophistry  like 
that.    You  and  I  do,  my  friends. 

Now  I  want  to  pass  on  to 


40        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 
A   VERY   PRACTICAL   QUESTION 

What  does  Paul  mean  by  saying,  "To  will 
is  present  with  me,  but  how  to  perform  that 
which  is  good,  I  find  not"?  I  have  heard  all 
my  Christian  lif e  the  statement  that  Christians 
are  not  to  live  in  the  seventh  of  Romans.  Well, 
I  would  to  God  that  nine  out  of  ten  of  them 
go  into  the  seventh  of  Romans.  The  man  in 
the  seventh  of  Romans  is  not  a  listless  dweller 
in  spiritual  things;  he  is  a  man  whose  heart  is 
breaking  and  whose  being  is  in  agony  because 
his  life  is  not  like  Christ's!  The  man  in  the 
seventh  of  Romans  is  a  man  who  was  all  red 
with  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God.  He  knew 
that  he  was  wrestling  with  something  that  was 
awful  and  real,  and  he  was  bound  to  have  the 
solution  for  this  problem  if  God  has  one  for 
him.  I  ask,  what  does  this  man  need  who 
wills  and  resolves  to  do  good,  and  then  finds 
himself  defeated?  Does  he  need  more  ethics? 
A  higher  standard?  Why,  the  poor  man 
knows  more  good  now  than  he  is  doing;  and 
just  there  is  the  weakness  of  mere  ethical 
preaching.     It  continually  says  to  the  poor 


THE  TRAGEDY  OF  THE  INNER  LIFE     41 

sinner,  "Be  good,"  but  never  tells  him  how  to 
be  good.  And  the  pulpit  today  is  largely  en- 
gaged with  telling  people  to  "be  good"  and  not 
telling  them  how. 

We  come  to  him  with  the  Ten  Command- 
ments and  say,  "Why,  Paul,  I  do  not  know 
what  is  the  matter  with  you;  you  seem  beside 
yourself  with  all  this  talk  about  not  being  able 
to  be  good.  Here  are  the  Commandments." 
And  he  says,  "But  I  know  them;  I  have  known 
them  from  my  youth  up,  and  I  delight  in  them 
after  the  inner  man,  but  I  can  not  keep  even 
them."  No,  law  can  not  help  him.  Law  says, 
"Thou  shalt,"  and  "Thou  shalt  not,"  but  it 
adds  nothing  to  the  force  and  power  of  man; 
nothing  whatever.    Well,  what  does  he  need? 

NOT  ETHICS,   BUT  DYNAMICS 

The  man  needs  superhuman  power  to  enable 
him  to  realize  in  his  life  a  superhuman  spiritu- 
ality* 

Now,  when  any  one  says,  as  an  objection  to 
Christianity,  that  the  ethical  demand  of  Chris- 
tianity is  too  high  for  human  nature,  he  has 
just  begun  to  find  out  the  truth;  a  truth  that 


42        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

about  eight  out  of  every  ten  Christians  never 
do  find  out.  It  is  too  high  for  human  nature. 
It  is  meant  to  be  too  high  for  human  nature. 
It  is  put  where  no  hand  of  man  can  ever  touch 
it;  where  no  unassisted  human  capacity  can 
ever  reach  it.  And  if  that  were  all,  the  gospel 
would  be  to  the  saint,  whatever  it  may  be  to 
the  sinner,  a  message  of  despair.  But  that  is 
not  all. 

Along  with  this  superhuman  demand,  super- 
human power  is  offered.  And  Paul  laid  hold 
upon  it.  He  did  not  stay  in  the  seventh  of 
Romans,  for  when  the  will  is  aroused  to  its 
utmost  power  and  yet  can  not  do  a  thing,  then 
the  man  has  reached  the  end  of  himself. 

AT  PEACE  AND  VICTORIOUS 

When  we  pass  from  the  seventh  to  the  eighth 
of  Romans  we  find  the  wretched  man  of  the 
seventh  of  Romans  at  peace  and  victorious; 
what  is  now  his  testimony?  "The  law  of  the 
spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me 
free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."  Not  a 
new  resolution,  nor  a  new  habit,  nor  a  deeper 
hold  on  himself,  nor  more  prayer.     Do  you 


THE  TRAGEDY  OF  THE  INNER  LIFE     43 

think  that  a  man  in  the  agony  of  the  seventh 
of  Romans  does  not  pray?  Why,  the  Apostle 
Paul,  when  he  was  there,  prayed,  you  may  be 
sure,  day  and  night  on  his  face  before  God. 
Not  more  prayer,  nor  more  anything  that  you 
and  I  can  do,  nor  that  Paul  could  do,  but 
something  that  God  can  do. 

THERE  IS  THE  REMEDY 

That  is  what  Paul  means:  not  more  from 
within,  but  something  from  without  put  with- 
in. And  almost  while  he  is  saying,  "Oh, 
wretched  man  that  I  am,"  out  of  the  very 
agony  of  spiritual  defeat,  he  lifts  up  his  face 
in  triumphant  testimony  for  he  has  found  the 
secret,  and  he  says,  "The  law  of  the  spirit  of 
life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free  from 
the  law  of  sin  and  death." 

So  this  man  can  write  afterward,  "For  me 
to  live  is  Christ";  write  it  to  Philippians  who 
knew  him  more  intimately  than  you  know  me. 
"The  life  which  now  I  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live 
by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God"  he  could  say 
to  those  Galatians  who  had  seen  him  under 
trial  and  testing,  "Not  by  my  efforts,  nor  by 


44        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

my  resolutions,  nor  by  my  vows,  but  by  the 
power,  the  authority,  the  law,  of  the  spirit  of 
life  in  Christ  Jesus." 

Defeated  along  the  line  of  the  will,  he  is  vic- 
torious by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  within  him; 
the  superhuman  standard  achieved  by  super- 
human power.  Paul  laid  hold  upon  that 
power,  and  so  we  have  the  triumphant  eighth 
chapter  of  Romans,  which  may  be  the  experi- 
ence of  every  child  of  God — a  life  of  continual 
victory,  peace  and  power. 


IV 

The  Delivered  Life 

Text:    "If  the  Son  therefore  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be 
free  indeed."— John  8:36. 

THE  most  widespread  and  universal  of 
the  delusions  current  among  men  is 
the  notion  that  they  are  free.  No 
imputation  is  more  quickly,  more  vehemently 
resented  than  the  imputation  of  slavery,  of 
bondage.  There  are  no  free  men.  Millions, 
thank  God,  are  in  the  process  of  emancipation, 
but  none  are  yet  completely  emancipated. 
Paul  told  the  Roman  chief  captain  that  he 
was  born  free.  In  the  limited  sense  in  which 
he  used  the  word  it  was  true ;  Paul  was  born  a 
Roman  citizen.  But  in  every  other  important 
sense  the  words  were  not  true,  as  Paul  would 
have  been  the  first  to  admit.  Like  all  of  us, 
Paul  inherited  chains.  For  centuries  that 
mysterious  force,  heredity,  had  been  silently, 
invisibly,  preparing  bonds  for  him — bonds  for 
spirit,  soul,  body.     Every  soul  born  into  the 

45 


46        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

world  is  born  into  an  invisible  net  which  the 
centuries  have  been  weaving  for  him.  Its 
meshes  are  race  predisposition,  race  habit,  f am* 
ily  habit,  family  sin,  family  religion. 

Think  of  the  men  to  whom  Christ  was  talk- 
ing when  He  uttered  the  words  of  our  text. 
"We  be  Abraham's  seed,  and  were  never  in 
bondage  to  any  man."  They  spoke  honestly 
enough,  as  we  do  when  we  boast  of  our  free- 
dom, but  at  that  moment  they  were  in  political, 
intellectual  and  religious  bondage. 

Politically,  they  were  under  bondage  to  an 
assortment  of  despots  from  Caesar  down  to 
Herod  and  Pilate.  Morally,  they  were  the 
slaves  of  race  pride,  of  prejudice,  of  ignorance, 
of  habit,  of  sin,  of  self-will.  Religiously,  they 
were  the  slaves  of  traditionalism,  of  bigotry,  of 
formalism. 

WE  ARE  SLAVES  OF  PARTY 

Is  our  case  better?  Very  slightly.  Theoret- 
ically, we  are  free  politically.  Actually,  we  are 
the  slaves  of  party,  of  the  caucus,  of  the  bosses. 
The  very  minute  I  give  over  into  the  hands  of 
a  convention  the  right  to  formulate  my  polit- 


THE  DELIVERED  LIFE  47 

ical  creed  I  am  no  longer  absolutely  free. 
When  I  take  my  opinions,  my  convictions,  con- 
cerning morals  or  religion  second-hand  from 
other  men,  whether  they  are  men  of  today  or 
men  of  the  Reformation  period,  or  of  the  early 
church  councils,  I  am  no  longer  free. 

(When  I  allow  a  habit  to  dominate  my  life, 
I  am  no  longer  free.  When  I  allow  pride  or 
vanity,  or  ambition,  or  pleasure  to  control  my 
life,  I  am  the  basest  of  slaves.  The  very  fact 
that  I  do  not,  can  not,  of  myself,  cease  from 
sin  proclaims  me  a  slave.  Jesus  Christ  came 
into  a  world  of  slaves. 

CHRIST  THE  EMANCIPATOR 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  His  first  formal 
announcement  of  His  mission  on  earth  touched 
life  at  that  very  point.  In  the  synagogue  at 
Nazareth  there  was  handed  to  Him  the  book 
of  the  Prophet  Isaiah,  and  He  found  the  place 
where  it  was  written:  "The  spirit  of  the  Lord 
is  upon  me,  because  he  hath  anointed  me  to 
preach    *    *    *    deliverance  to  the  captives." 

He  begins  with  our  slavery  to  sin.  And  here 


48        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

He  encounters  an  initial  difficulty.  The  man 
whom  He  would  set  free  is  not  only  a  slave,  but 
a  condemned  slave.  He  is  a  slave,  exposed  for 
sale,  but  with  a  halter  round  his  neck.  Who 
will  redeem  him?  Nay,  rather,  who  can  re- 
deem him?  Not  his  brother  man,  for  he  too  is 
a  slave  with  a  halter  round  his  own  neck. 
"What  is  the  price  of  this  slave?  of  that  one?" 
One  price  for  all.  Whoever  will  redeem  these 
slaves  must  die  in  their  stead.  And,  obviously, 
only  one  who  has  never  sinned,  and  who  is  him- 
self perfectly  free,  can  be  accepted.  Only  one 
being  has  ever  appeared  who  met  these  neces- 
sary conditions — Jesus  Christ.  And,  to  pay 
that  price  is  the  very  business  that  brought 
Jesus  Christ  to  this  earth.  At  the  cost  of  His 
own  life,  of  His  own  unimaginable  suffering, 
He  pays  the  last  demand  of  a  holy  law  and  re- 
deems from  death  the  slaves  of  sin. 

Are  they  free  from  the  curse  of  the  law? 
Yes.  From  the  habit  of  sin?  No.  Then  begin 
those  great  redemptive  processes  which  work 
in  the  sphere  of  the  inner  life,  the  object  of 
which  is  the  transformation  of  character  and 
complete  deliverance  from  the  dominion  of  sin. 


THE  DELIVERED  LIFE  49 

THE  PROCESS  OF  DELIVERANCE 

It  begins  with  the  complete  removal  of  fear. 
The  believer  is  told  that  he  is  not  under  law, 
that  is,  a  system  of  probation  to  see  if  he  can 
work  out  a  righteousness  for  himself,  but  un- 
der grace,  that  is,  a  system  of  divine  inwork- 
ing,  which  produces  the  very  righteousness 
which  the  law  required,  but  which  man  never 
achieved.  The  believer  is  assured  that  Christ 
has  given  to  him  eternal  lif  e,  and  that  he  shall 
never  perish ;  that  nothing  is  able  to  pluck  him 
out  of  the  omnipotent  hand  which  holds  him; 
that  He  who  began  a  good  work  in  him  will 
perfect  it  till  the  day  of  Christ.  As  for  his 
sins;  they  are  blotted  out,  cast  behind  God's 
back,  buried  in  the  depths  of  the  sea,  forgiven 
and  forgotten.  And  this  is  a  necessary  first 
work,  for  no  man  is  really  free  who  is  under  the 
bondage  of  fear. 

Then  grace  imparts  to  the  believer  the  in- 
dwelling Holy  Spirit.  The  nature  that  was 
open  to  every  assault  from  without,  and  a  slave 
to  every  vile  impulse  from  within  is  now  gar- 
risoned by  omnipotence.    In  the  power  of  that 


50        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

indwelling  One,  the  believer  is  made  free  from 
the  monstrous  necessity  of  sinning  under  which 
every  unredeemed  life  groans,  No  Christian 
needs  to  sin.  If  he  yields  to  solicitations  from 
without,  or  the  more  subtle  suggestions  from 
within,  it  is  because  he  deliberately  or  care- 
lessly wills  it  so.  The  Spirit  is  there  to  break 
the  power  of  sin. 

GRACE  AND  THE  INSPIRATION  OF  NEW  RELATION- 
SHIP 

Then  grace  puts  the  renewed  life  under  the 
stimulus  and  inspiration  of  great  relationships. 
The  believer  is  not  merely  a  pardoned  criminal, 
he  is  a  child  and  son  of  God ;  and  that  by  a  new 
birth  which  is  as  actual  in  the  sphere  of  the 
spiritual  as  his  natural  birth  was  in  the  sphere 
of  the  physical.  He  is  a  son  of  God,  not  by 
some  far-off  fact  of  creation,  but  by  the  imme- 
diate and  personal  fact  of  a  divine  begetting. 
He  no  longer  traces  his  descent  from  God 
through  Adam,  but  is,  as  Adam  was,  a  son  of 
God  with  no  intervening  ancestor. 

This,  the  believer  is  told,  brings  him  into  the 
wonderful  privileges  of  access  to  the  Father, 


THE  DELIVERED  LIFE  51 

and  of  fellowship  with  Him.  Christ  is  not 
ashamed  to  call  him  "brother";  he  is  raised  to 
joint  heirship  with  Christ  in  all  things,  and  is 
to  share  the  power  and  glory  of  Christ  in  the 
coming  kingdom. 

Grace  confers  upon  the  believer  the  great 
offices  of  priest  and  king.  As  priest  he  is  set 
free  from  the  ancient  formalism  in  the  worship 
of  God  "entering  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus,"  and  offering,  without  regard  to  time 
or  place,  "spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  unto 
God  through  Jesus  Christ."  His  worship, 
freed  from  ceremonialism,  is  a  son's  adoration 
of  a  Father  who  is  infinite  in  holiness  and  be- 
nevolence and  power,  but  who  is  none  the  less 
a  Father  because  He  is  God.  And  this  office 
of  priest  carries  of  necessity  the  privilege  of  in- 
tercession. The  believer-priest  prays  for  those 
outside  the  family  of  God  who  do  not  pray  for 
themselves.  He  is  the  daysman  and  remem- 
brancer before  his  Father  of  the  unbelieving 
world. 

Grace  tells  the  believer  that  he  is  as  vitally 
united  to  Christ  as  the  members  of  his  own 
body  are  united  to  him.    "By  one  Spirit  are 


52        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

we  all  baptized  into  one  body."     "He  that  is 
joined  unto  the  Lord  is  one  Spirit." 

WHAT  TRUE  FREEDOM  IS 

But  Christian  freedom  is  not  anarchy,  which 
is  the  mere  riot  of  self-will,  but  it  is  to  be  so 
joined  to  God  the  Father;  so  vitally  one  with 
Christ  the  Son ;  so  yielding  to  the  gentle  sway 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  the  human  will  is 
blended  into  the  divine  will,  and  so  made  one 
with  the  absolutely  free  and  sovereign  will  of 
God  Himself.  God  does  as  He  wills,  but  God 
always  wills  to  do  that  which  is  at  once  abso- 
lutely right  and  absolutely  benevolent. 

And  in  all  this  there  is  no  subversion  of  the 
believer's  individuality,  but  the  lifting  of  that 
individuality  to  the  divine  level  of  a  passionate 
love  of  all  that  is  lovely.  It  is  obedience,  but 
obedience  under  the  new  covenant,  where  the 
law  is  written  in  the  heart,  like  mother-love. 
A  mother  finds  her  highest  joy  in  obedience 
to  that  imperative  born  into  her  deepest  being 
with  the  birth  of  her  child. 

No  truly  honest  man  feels  the  constraint  of 
the  laws  against  theft.    He  is  not  honest  be- 


THE  DELIVERED  LIFE  53 

cause  of  something  printed  in  a  statute  book, 
but  because  of  something  printed  on  his  heart. 
He  would  still  be  honest  if  the  statute  were 
repealed.  And  therefore  he  is  perfectly  free. 
Without  that  interior  work  no  external  thing 
done  to  a  man  makes  or  can  make  him  feel  free. 
Executive  clemency  extended  to  a  convicted 
criminal  does  not  make  him  a  free  man.  He  is 
still  the  slave  of  his  criminal  desires.  But  if 
he  falls  in  love  with  honesty  and  uprightness 
and  integrity,  then  he  is  free.  All  this  trans- 
formation grace  works  in  the  redeemed  heart. 

THE  NEW  IDEAE  OF  LIFE 

Then  grace  works  transformingly  by  the 
power  of  new  and  exalted  ideals.  The  whole 
conception  of  life  is  changed.  Under  the  old 
bondage  life  was  conceived  of  as  a  possession 
which  man  might  rightly  use  for  himself ;  under 
the  new  ideal  life  is  precious  because  it  may  be 
used  for  the  blessing  of  others.  The  new  man 
in  Christ  has  accepted  as  the  new  ideal  of  his 
new  life  Christ's  law  of  sacrifice.  He  heartily 
adopts  Christ's  formulae:  "The  Son  of  man 
came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister, 


54        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many";  "He 
that  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it,  but  he  that 
will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake,  shall  find  it"; 
"Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground 
and  die,  it  abideth  alone,  but  if  it  die,  it  bring- 
eth  forth  much  fruit." 

Such  an  ideal,  heartily  accepted,  under  the 
conviction  that  so  only  may  life  be  nobly  lived, 
works  of  itself  toward  disenthralment  from  the 
old  slavery  of  self. 

Pursued,  though  with  many  a  failure,  and 
with  steps  which  often  halt,  such  an  ideal  is  a 
transformation.  The  man  who  accepts  it  has 
issued  to  the  universe  his  declaration  of  in- 
dependence. He  is  free  from  the  old  appeals 
and  solicitations  which  had  power  over  him 
because  they  seemed  to  promise  something 
toward  the  old  monstrous  ministry  to  the  god 
self.  No  longer  desiring  self-exaltation  or  self- 
pleasing,  the  bride  has  ceased  to  appeal.  Its 
presentment  only  causes  pain  to  the  heart  that 
has  fallen  in  love  with  humility. 

THE  VISION  OF  ETERNITY 

Then  grace  allures  and    charms    with    the 


THE  DELIVERED  LIFE  55 

vision  of  eternal  things.  Paul  divides  all  things 
into  two  categories,  things  seen  and  things  un- 
seen, and  he  declares  that  the  seen  things  have 
the  fatal  defect  of  being  temporary,  while  the 
unseen  things  have  the  infinite  value  of  eter- 
nal endurance.  Believing  this,  the  new  man  in 
Christ  sits  lightly  to  things  seen.  They  become 
the  mere  accidents  of  life,  not  its  substance.  Of 
this  world's  goods  he  may  have  much,  and  he 
is  glad  because  they  can  be  used  to  enrich  other 
lives;  or  he  may  gather  little,  and  he  is  glad 
because  he  has  not  the  responsibility  of  the 
right  use  of  great  possessions.  His  true  inheri- 
tance is  in  heaven.  And  in  and  through  all 
this  the  Son  has  made  him  free. 

Walking  in  the  Spirit,  the  Lord's  free-man 
has  but  to  heed  the  exhortation,  "Stand  fast, 
therefore,  in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath 
made  us  free,  and  be  not  entangled  again  with 
the  yoke  of  bondage." 


V 
The  Larger  Christian  Life 

Text:    "He  brought  me  forth  also  into  a  large  place." — Psa. 
18:19. 

YOU  observe  that  we  have  here  a  testi- 
mony, not  a  promise.  God  actually  had 
done  this  thing  for  David.  He  was  a 
shepherd  lad ;  obscure,  conscious  but  dimly  if  at 
all  of  his  own  capacities ;  shut  up  to  the  small 
things  and  small  thoughts  of  a  young  rustic. 
Then  God  began  to  work  in  his  life,  stimulat- 
ing him  with  great  promises,  leading  him  into 
great  ventures,  beating  him  with  the  hammer 
of  adversity  till  the  crude  ore  of  him  was 
turned  into  tempered  steel;  but  all  the  while 
breaking  shackles,  tearing  away  enmeshing 
nets,  lifting  the  wings  of  his  soul,  filling  him 
with  divine  inbreathings,  expanding,  enlarging, 
disenthralling  him ;  until  at  last  David  came  to 
the  consciousness  that  he  was  a  free  man  and 
in  a  large  place.  He  could  stand  with  lifted 
head,  strong  young  arms  outflung,  upraised 

56 


THE  LARGER  CHRISTIAN  LIFE  57 

chest  breathing  deep  the  free,  ample  air,  a 
man  at  home  in  the  universe.  I  repeat  it, 
David  is  testifying  here,  not  theorizing.  He 
had  found  it  so.    Upon  which  I  remark: 

THE  REAL  CHRISTIAN  LIFE  IS  LARGE 

It  is  the  men  who  are  living  without  God 
who  are  living  in  a  small  and  narrow  place. 
There  is  no  more  shameless  lie  afloat  among 
men  than  that  the  Christian  life  is  a  narrow 
life,  and  that  the  life  that  does  not  subject  it- 
self to  the  will  of  God  is  a  high,  free  thing. 

We  are  all,  I  believe,  passionate  lovers  of 
liberty.  We  seek  room;  we  want  a  place  in 
which  we  may  expand  and  broaden  out.  A 
great  many  young  people  of  today  have  a  fancy 
that  to  come  into  the  will  of  God  is  to  come 
into  narrowness.  It  is  Satan's  lie.  But  let  us 
not  blame  the  devil  overmuch.  He  never  could 
have  got  his  lie  believed  if  so  many  of  God's 
people  had  not  made  ' "religion"  a  poor  nega- 
tive thing:  a  system  of  "don't"  and  of  outward 
observance. 

It  was  to  intensely  "religious"  people — in 


58        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

this  sense — that  Christ  spoke  His  great  word, 
"If  the  Son,  therefore,  shall  make  you  free,  ye 
shall  be  free  indeed,"  He  came  to  preach  de- 
liverance to  the  captive  of  formalism  no  less 
than  to  the  captive  of  sin.  The  gospel  is  a  call 
out  of  littleness,  out  of  pettiness,  out  of  insig- 
nificant things,  to  the  breadth  and  sweep  of 
great  thoughts  and  forces,  and  to  the  wide  hori- 
zon of  limitless  possibilities. 

Now  it  is  true  of  every  child  of  God  that  he 
is  brought  into  a  large  place.  Unfortunately, 
many  persist  in  living  narrow  lives  in  the  large 
place.  To  be  free  and  not  to  know  it,  this 
seems  to  me  tragical  and  pathetic  beyond 
words.  One  thinks  of  old  prisoners  set  free, 
and  weeping  for  the  old  dungeon  again. 

CIRCUMSTANCES  CANNOT  NARROW  IT 

Just  here  permit  me  to  anticipate  a  very  nat- 
ural objection.  You  say,  "I  live  in  obscurity; 
God  has  set  me  in  narrow  circumstances,  in  a 
routine  of  petty  duties.  I  live  in  a  farm  house; 
I  live  in  a  village;  I  toil  in  a  factory;  I  monot- 
onously feed  pieces  of  leather  or  wood  into  a 


THE  LARGER  CHRISTIAN  LIFE  59 

machine  and  never  see  them  again;  I  plow,  I 
delve,  I  sell  cloth  by  the  yard,  I  wash  pans  and 
dishes.  I  know  of  no  large  and  beautiful  way 
to  wash  pans.  I  keep  a  little  district  school;  I 
must  have  my  mind  on  my  work;  my  back 
grows  bent  and  my  muscles  stiff  and  sore.  I 
am  no  exultant  young  David,  anointed  of  the 
Lord,  free  to  go  and  come,  to  sing  deathless 
songs,  to  rule  over  men." 

PATIENCE,,  DEAR  HEART,  HEAR  THIS 

Jesus  Christ  lived  thirty  years  in  Nazareth, 
but  He  never  permitted  Nazareth  to  give  the 
measure  of  His  life.  You  may  think  of  Him 
as  a  boy  helping  His  mother,  holding  baby, 
fetching  water  from  the  fountain  and  chips 
from  the  shop.  He  made  yokes,  I  suppose, 
not  wholesale  with  a  big  iron  machine,  but  one 
by  one,  patiently  fitting  them  to  peasant  shoul- 
ders, broad  and  narrow,  stooped  and  straight. 
Thirty  years  He  lived  there,  and  there  was  ma- 
tured the  finest  human  character  the  world 
ever  saw.  The  baptism  with  the  Spirit  added 
power;  suffering  perfected  sympathy,  but  it 


60        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

was  the  largest,  freest  man  that  ever  lived  who 
laid  down  His  carpenter's  tools  one  day  and 
walked  down  to  Jordan  to  be  baptized  of  John. 

Do  you  not  see  the  secret?  He  never  per- 
mitted Nazareth  to  put  its  littleness  upon  Him. 
The  one  man  upon  whom  there  are  no  limita- 
tions whatever  of  race,  of  circumstance  or  of 
character  was  a  villager  who  toiled  for  bread! 

It  is  not  given  to  many  of  us  to  live  in  great 
scenes  and  to  be  a  part  of  great  transactions. 
Our  life  is  a  round  of  small  cares  and  duties. 
But  Jesus  Christ  lived  in  narrower  circum- 
stances than  ours.  The  newspapers,  the  tele- 
graph, the  railway  and  steamship  bring 
largesses  to  the  remotest  of  us.  Homer  chanted 
his  deathless  songs  from  door  to  door,  in  pov- 
erty, unappreciated,  for  a  crust  of  bread.  Mil- 
ton, shut  up  to  physical  blindness,  ranged  in 
spirit  from  the  Paradise  that  was  to  the  Para- 
dise that  shall  be.  Dante,  in  exile,  in  a  petty, 
mediaeval  town,  learning  "the  steepness  of  an- 
other's stairs  and  the  saltness  of  another's 
bread,"  fathomed  the  upper  and  the  nether 
depths. 


THE  LARGER  CHRISTIAN  LIFE  61 

Do  you  say,  "But  we  are  not  Homer,  Milton, 
and  Dante?"  Thank  God!  I  would  rather 
have  my  two  eyes  than  Milton's  fame ;  my  own 
good  native  land  than  Dante's  exile ;  my  hum- 
ble home  than  Homer's  wanderings.  But  surely 
our  souls  have  some  power  of  flight;  their 
wings  may  beat  the  upper  air  for  some  dis- 
tance, somewhere,  if  they  may  not  take  Dante's 
tremendous  spirals. 

WHAT  WE  ARE,  NOT  WHAT  WE  DO,  DETERMINES 
THE  LARGENESS  OF  LIFE 

Lacordaire  says :  "A  king  may  pass  through 
our  streets  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen, 
and  he  may  be  a  mean  and  base  man,  because 
his  thoughts  are  mean  and  base ;  and  there  may 
pass  by  a  poor  man  in  vile  raiment  and  he  may 
be  a  great  man,  because  his  converse  with  him- 
self is  high  and  great."  That  is  true.  Things 
do  not  make  life  large.  Men  do  large  things 
sometimes  in  small  places,  and  others  do  small 
things  in  large  places.  If  we  are  of  kin  to  the 
great  souls  we  shall  some  time  be  known  as  of 
that  strain. 


62        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

A  homely  American  poet  has  put  this  into 
his  poem:  "The  Unexpressed.''  Three  men, 
writer,  musician,  builder,  plod  through  life, 
toiling  day  by  day  for  daily  bread;  and  the 
writer  never  pens  the  epic  which  he  dumbly 
feels ;  the  musician  never  composes  the  oratorio 
which  resounds  in  his  soul;  the  builder  builds 
wooden  houses  instead  of  the  cathedral  of 
which  he  feels  himself  capable.  And  then  they 
die,  and  the  three  men  who  greet  them  are  Ho- 
mer, Mozart,  and  Michel  Angelo! 

"This  dead  musician's  soul  went  forth 

Into  the  darkness   drear — 
A  glad  voice  smote  the  clouds  apart — 
The  brother-greeting  of  Mozart, 

Who  hailed  him  as  his  peer. 
'Souls  know/  he  said,  'that  music  best 
That  haunts  the  dumb  soul  unexpressed.' " 

Yes ;  many  a  life  of  obscurity,  poverty,  neg- 
lect, self-denial  and  pain  is  essentially  great 
because  it  is  lived  in  fellowship  with  great 
tilings — the  tilings  of  God.  Such  a  soul  can 
wait.   It  is  elect,  and  shall  vet  come  to  its  own. 


THE  LARGER  CHRISTIAN  LIFE  63 


"Serene,  I  fold  my  hands  and  wait, 
Nor  care  for  wind,  or  tide,  or  sea; 
I  rave  no  more  'gainst  time  or  fate, 
For,  lo,  my  own  shall  come  to  me. 


"I  stay  my  haste,  I  make  delays; 
For  what  avails  this  eager  pace? 
I  stand  amid  the  eternal  ways, 

And  what  is  mine  shall  know  my  face. 


"Asleep,  awake,  by  night  and  day, 
The  friends  I  seek  are  seeking  me. 
No  wind  shall  drive  my  bark  astray, 
Nor  change  the  tide  of  destiny. 


"What  matter  if  I  stand  alone? 

I  wait  with  joy  the  coming  years; 
My  heart  shall  reap  where  it  has  sown, 
And  garner  up  its  fruit  of  tears. 


"The  waters  know  their  own  and  draw 

The  brook  that  springs  in  yonder  height; 
So  flows  the  good  with  equal  law 
Unto  the  soul  of  pure  delight. 


"The  stars  come  nightly  to  the  sky, 
The  tidal  waves  unto  the  sea; 
Nor  time,  nor  tide,  nor  deep,  nor  high, 
Shall  keep  my  own  away  from  me!" 


64        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 
THE  SECRET  OF  THE  LARGER  LIFE 

If  now  you  ask  me  how  all  this  larger  Chris- 
tian life  may  be  lived,  I  shall  venture  three 
suggestions : 

1.  Put  your  life  under  the  great  law  of  ex- 
clusion by  preoccupation.  Keep  littleness  out 
by  being  with  greatness.  There  was  no  place 
in  Christ  for  mean  things.  It  was  not  that 
Christ  refused  small  cares,  drudgeries,  duties. 
It  was  that  He  accepted  them  and  was  filled 
with  the  joy  of  doing  them. 

2.  Live  your  Christian  life  in  the  sense  of 
its  great  verities.  You  are  children  and  heirs 
of  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  Say  every 
day,  "I  am  a  child  of  God."  I  defy  circum- 
stances to  narrow  and  dwarf  the  life  that  is 
lifted  by  the  consciousness  of  divine  sonship 
and  divine  fellowship. 

"The  larger  Christian  life  is  independent  of 
circumstances." 

There  drifted  into  my  house  once  a  human 
wreck.  He  had  been  the  editor  of  a  great  daily 
newspaper,  and  was  a  man  of  rare  gifts.  It 
was  the  old  story;  little  by  little  the  drink  habit 


THE  LARGER  CHRISTIAN  LIFE  65 

had  fastened  upon  him  and  had  dragged  him 
down  to  a  living  hell.  I  could  not  tell  him  to 
"assert  his  manhood;"  he  had  none.  I  had  a 
better  gospel  than  that.  I  told  him  that  he 
could  be  born  again;  that  he  could  become  a 
partaker  of  the  divine  nature,  and  a  son  and 
heir  of  God.  He  fell  upon  his  knees.  "My 
God!"  he  cried.  "Can  a  dog  like  me  become 
God's  son?"  And  he  poured  out  his  heart, 
giving  himself  away  to  Christ.  I  shall  never 
forget  his  transfigured  face,  nor  the  singular 
solemnity  and  loftiness  of  his  bearing  as  he 
took  my  hand  and  said :  "I  am  a  child  of  God." 

Get  out  under  the  stars  on  a  clear  night,  and 
look  over  your  estate.  The  stars  are  yours  and 
Christ's.  Know  that  as  a  child  of  God  you  are 
greater  than  any  possible  estate,  and  you  will 
not  wash  pans,  plow  and  reap  any  less  thor- 
oughly, but  you  will  do  these  things  royally, 
like  a  king  or  queen.  Remember,  you  are  of 
the  family  of  God. 

A  poor  saint  went  into  a  very  aristocratic 
church  in  a  strange  place.  "I  believe,"  said 
the  usher  rather  dubiously,  "that  I  do  not  know 
you."    "Do  you  know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?" 


66        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

asked  the  poor  saint.  "Oh,  yes."  "Well,"  said 
the  poor  man,  "I  am  a  poor  brother  of  His." 

3.     Be  a  vital  part  of  Christ's  work. 

"The  field  is  the  world."  Your  field  is  the 
world.  Keep  your  sympathies  world  wide.  If 
your  heart  is  in  China  or  Africa  or  Central 
America,  and  with  the  work  there,  it  is  just 
the  same  as  if  you  were  there,  wherever  your 
body  may  happen  to  be. 

At  the  Student  Volunteer  Convention  in 
Cleveland  they  had  Carey's  cobbler's  hammer. 
It  was  better  worth  seeing  than  the  crown 
jewels  in  the  Tower.  No  scepter  in  Christen- 
dom is  so  venerable  as  that  hammer.  It  is  as 
if  it  came  out  of  the  shop  in  Nazareth,  almost. 
Carey  beat  hobnails  into  peasants'  shoes  with 
that  hammer;  beat  sturdily  and  well.  But,  as 
one  thinks  of  him,  the  narrow  walls  of  his  cob- 
bler's stall  fall  away,  and  his  humble  bench 
changes  to  the  likeness  of  a  throne,  and  one 
sees  a  pierced  hand  hold  over  his  head  the  dia- 
dem of  righteousness.  For  that  cobbler,  bowed 
over  his  daily  task,  was  sweeping  the  darkened 
continents  into  his  yearning,  and  holding  a 
world  up  in  prayer  to  God. 


VI 

The  Spirit- Controlled  Life 

Text:  "Whosoever  drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give 
him  shall  never  thirst ;  but  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall 
be  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life." — 
John  4:14. 

LET  us  think  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the 
j  inner  life  of  the  believer.  There  is  an 
inner  life ;  an  inner  life  so  deep,  so  truly 
inner,  that  no  one  knows  it  but  God  and 
ourselves.  It  is  a  life  of  which,  in  its  deeper 
depths,  we  never  speak  to  our  dearest  friends. 
There  are  defects  there,  there  are  victories 
there — heart-surgings,  heartaches  that  we  can- 
not put  into  words — we  can  only  go  with  them 
before  God,  and  the  Spirit,  who  helpeth  our 
infirmities,  can  make  intercession  for  us  with 
groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered. 

Now,  we  are  to  think  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as 
indwelling  the  believer : 

THE  UPSPRINGING  FOUNTAIN  WITHIN 

What  a  wonderful  symbol  it  is !    How  apart 

67 


68        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

from  all  other  instructions,  it  speaks  of  the  con- 
stant renewal  of  the  spiritual  life.  You  know 
the  contrast  was  with  Jacob's  well,  which  was 
very  deep,  and  out  of  which  water  must  be  la- 
boriously drawn.  When  our  Lord  spoke  to  the 
woman  about  this  living  water,  this  water  which 
was  not  down  in  the  bottom  of  the  well,  but 
was  upspringing,  she  asked  a  question: 
" Whence  hast  thou  this  water?  Thou  hast 
nothing  to  draw  with  and  the  well  is  deep." 

What  a  contrast,  what  a  picture  of  the  aver- 
age Christian  life !  Somehow,  if  we  are  Chris- 
tians at  all,  we  get  on;  we  manage  to  get 
through  the  day  after  a  fashion,  but  it  is  just 
like  that  poor  woman,  laboriously  drawing 
water  out  of  Jacob's  well.  We  draw  it  up 
just  a  little  at  a  time,  and  some  of  us  with  a 
sense  that  we  have  nothing  to  draw  with,  and 
there  is  a  constant  effort  to  be  spiritual;  and 
over  against  that  our  Lord  puts  the  picture 
of  a  fountain  that  springs  up  of  its  own  lovely 
energy,  and  throws  its  crystal  flood  into  the 
clear  air  and  dances  and  sparkles  there  in  the 
sunlight,  and  then  flows  away  to  be  kissed  by 
the  sun  back  again  into  the  azure  blue. 


THE  SPIRIT-CONTROLLED  LIFE  69 

Now  the  Christian  life,  the  true  spiritual  lif e 
in  Christ's  conception  of  it,  is  a  life  which  has 
within  it  the  source  and  renewal  of  its  freshness 
and  vigor  and  power.  An  upspringing  foun- 
tain constantly  fed  from  a  higher  source,  com- 
ing down  that  it  may  ascend  again.  Here  is  a 
little  springlet  in  the  valley  half  afraid  that  it 
may  dry  up ;  and  the  spring  up  on  the  moun- 
tain says :  "No,  you  shall  not  dry  up,  for  I  am 
renewing  your  abundance  all  the  time."  What 
a  contrast  with  the  average  life!  Here  is  the 
plentitude  of  divine  power,  the  omnipotent 
Spirit  of  God,  who  has  not  only  taken  up  his 
abode  in  us,  but  wishes  to  be  in  the  believer  a 
living  vital  force,  constantly  renewed,  himself 
the  un wasting  Source. 

Now,  is  our  Christian  life  like  that,  or  do  we 
have  to  painfully  draw  it  with  a  creaking  wind- 
lass out  of  Jacob's  well  till  our  backs  ache? 
Which  is  it?    Here  is  the  contrast. 

SOURCE  HIGHER  THAN  ITSELF 

And,  too,  the  inlet  must  be  kept  open  and 
the  outlet  must  be  kept  open. 

There  are  two  sins  which  Christians  commit 


70        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

against  the  Spirit.  We  are  said  to  grieve  the 
Spirit,  and  we  are  told  some  of  the  things  which 
grieve  Him.  "Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God,  whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of 
redemption.  Let  all  bitterness  and  wrath  and 
anger  and  clamor  and  evil  speaking  be  put 
from  you  with  all  malice."  Now  are  you  allow- 
ing a  little  bitter  feeling  toward  somebody  in 
your  heart?  Bitterness!  Wrath!  Anger!  Per- 
haps we  do  not  care  much  about  that.  We  say, 
"The  Lord  knows  I  was  born  with  a  hot  tem- 
per; I  am  made  up  that  way,  but  it  is  just  a 
flash  and  all  over  in  a  minute."  All  over  with 
you,  perhaps,  but  is  it  all  over  with  the  heart 
you  have  wounded?  Anger!  Malice!  Envy! 
Ah,  my  friends,  all  these  things  which  we  allow 
in  ourselves,  defended,  petted,  kept  there,  are 
but  stones  that  choke  the  inlet  and  prevent  the 
upspringing  of  the  fountain. 

And  then  we  are  told  not  to  quench  the 
Spirit;  not  to  say  "No"  to  the  Spirit,  but  to  let 
the  Spirit  have  His  way.  To  say  "No"  when 
the  Spirit  says,  "Pray,  serve,  give,"  is  to  choke 
the  outlet,  and  the  fountain  does  not  flow. 
Now 


THE  SPIRIT-CONTROLLED  LIFE  71 

JUST  A  FEW  PROPOSITIONS 

Do  not  imagine  that  your  Jacob's  well  ex- 
perience proves  that  you  have  not  the  fountain 
within  you.  In  other  words,  don't  imagine,  if 
you  are  a  believer  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
that  you  have  not  the  Spirit  within.  Every 
believer  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  indwelt  by 
the  Holy  Spirit.  You  have  not  to  intercede 
for  Him,  you  have  not  to  seek  Him,  you  have 
but  to  take  account  of  the  fact  that  you  have 
Him  already.  "What?"  says  Paul  in  the  sixth 
chapter  of  1  Corinthians,  "Know  ye  not  that 
your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  is  in  you,  which  ye  have  of  God,  and  ye 
are  not  your  own?"  And  remember,  the 
apostle  is  addressing  there  a  people  whom  he 
has  just  described  as  "carnal' — running  after 
human  leaders — babes  in  Christ,  to  these  he 
says,  "What?  Know  ye  not  that  your  body  is 
the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  in  you, 
which  ye  have  of  God,  and  ye  are  not  your 
own?" 

Now,  when  that  fact  is  received  by  faith, 
without  waiting  for  feeling,  you  have  taken  a 


72        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

long  step  toward  better  things.  If  you  really 
believe  that  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in 
your  mortal  body,  a  transformation  of  life  has 
begun. 

WHAT  THE  UPSPRINGING  FOUNTAIN  DOES 

First,  the  Spirit  indwells  the  believer  that  he 
may  give  victory  over  the  old  self  -life.  A  might- 
ier power  has  come  in  and  while  the  old,  evil 
life  of  the  flesh  is  there,  omnipotence  is  hold- 
ing it  in  the  place  of  death  and  we  may  be 
free  from  the  dominion  of  it.  Not  by  good 
resolutions,  not  by  struggling  to  keep  a  law, 
but  by  divine  power  within,  to  which  we  have 
yielded  our  whole  being.  Ah,  it  is  a  deep 
truth  that  old  John  Newton  uttered  when  he 
said,  "I  hear  a  great  deal  of  talk  about  the 
pope,  but  the  pope  who  troubles  me  most  is 
Pope  John  Newton."  Now,  the  Spirit  of  God 
is  there  to  govern,  to  control,  to  keep  that  self 
life  in  the  place  of  death  and  to  give  us  victory 
as  we  walk  in  the  Spirit. 

And  secondly,  He  is  there  to  make  real  the 
things  of  Christ.  "He  shall  receive  of  mine," 
as  the  promise  was,  "and  show  it  unto  you." 


THE  SPIRIT-CONTROLLED  LIFE  73 

Now  that  does  not  mean  "exhibit,"  but  make 
actual  to  us  the  things  of  Christ. 

And  thirdly,  He  is  here  to  make  real  to  you 
the  Fatherhood  of  God.  You  realize  that  God 
is  your  Father  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  when 
you  pray  to  God  you  are  not  merely  praying 
to  a  Creator,  to  one  who  laid  the  foundations 
of  the  earth  and  who  keeps  the  planets  in  their 
courses,  but  you  are  praying  to  your  Father  in 
heaven;  and  just  as  you  go  to  an  earthly  father 
with  your  needs,  wanting  help  and  counsel, 
just  so  you  may  go  to  your  heavenly  Father. 
So,  because  the  Spirit  of  sonship  dwells  in  you, 
you  realize  the  Fatherhood  of  God. 

Furthermore,  the  Spirit  will  take  up  every 
one  of  the  blessings  which  we  have  in  Christ 
and  give  us  possession  of  them. 

And  when  He  is  ungrieved  and  unquenched, 
He  is  doing  that.    That  is  the  life  in  the  Spirit. 

And  then  he  takes  up  the  problems,  the  diffi- 
culties that  we  have  to  do  with  our  lives  and 
settles  them  for  us  according  to  the  will  of 
God;  so  that  the  outer  life  is  the  unforced  ex- 
pression of  an  inner  life  which  is  pure  and  clean 
and  high,  and  full  of  love  and  tenderness,  look- 


74        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

ing  about  with  the  eyes  of  love  on  all  human- 
ity, watching  for  opportunities  to  put  out  the 
helping  hand  and  to  lift  up  the  downtrodden 
and  oppressed. 

The  whole  problem  lies,  not  in  self-effort, 
not  in  painfully  drawing  water  out  of  Jacob's 
well — that  is  going  back  to  the  law;  to  what 
the  apostle  calls  the  "beggarly  elements  of  the 
world";  to  elementary  things — and  not  going 
on  to  the  fulness  of  what  God  has  for  us. 
Which  is  it  to  be  hereafter?  The  upspringing 
fountain,  or  Jacob's  well? 


VII 
The  Joyous  Life 

Text:  "That  they  might  have  my  joy  fulfilled  in  them- 
selves."—John  17:13. 

WE  have  here  two  simple  ideas — Jesus 
Christ  filled  with  joy;  ourselves  priv- 
ileged to  partake  of  that  joy  until 
we  also  are  filled. 

PLEASURE,  HAPPINESS,  JOYOUSNESS 

It  is  not  uncharitable  to  say  that  many  peo- 
ple in  this  world  are  content  if  they  may  be 
merry ;  they  seek  nothing  higher  from  life  than 
pleasure.  If  they  may  put  far  from  them  the 
burden  and  sorrow  and  care  of  this  world,  and 
forget  its  grief  in  a  passing  jest,  they  are  con- 
tent. There  is  a  place  in  life  for  pleasure,  but 
pleasure  is  never  the  object  of  lives  which  are 
noble. 

Better  than  this  and  the  pursuit,  I  would  fain 
believe,  of  a  far  great  number,  is  happiness. 
Happiness  is  an  infinitely  higher   thing   than 

75 


76        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

pleasure,  and  the  desire  of  God  that  His  chil- 
dren should  be  happy  is  abundantly  revealed 
in  the  Bible.  The  Beatitudes  are  instructions 
in  the  art  of  happiness. 

But  our  text  speaks  of  something  which  is 
better  even  than  happiness,  and  that  is  joyous- 
ness.  Joyousness,  in  the  scriptural  sense  of 
the  word,  might  be  defined  as  happiness  over- 
flowing. Happiness  too  full  to  be  used  up  in 
mere  personal  satisfaction;  happiness  all  alive 
and  aglow.  If  happiness  might  be  compared 
to  a  tranquil  lake,  embosomed  in  protecting 
hills,  joyousness  would  be  like  the  outflowing 
of  a  brimming  river. 

It  may,  then,  help  us  just  at  the  beginning, 
to  fix  in  our  minds  these  three  things  which 
stand  over  against  sorrow  or  pain;  pleasure, 
which  exists  for  and  ends  upon  self;  happi- 
ness, a  deeper,  nobler  thing,  and  joyousness, 
which  is  the  overflow  of  happiness. 

THE  JOY  OF  JESUS  CHRIST 

First  of  all,  Jesus  speaks  of  His  own  joy. 
Now,  we  do  not  habitually  think  of  Jesus 
Christ  as  joyful.   Long  before  His  manifesta- 


THE  JOYOUS  LIFE  77 

tion,  the  Prophet  Isaiah  had  said  of  Him  that 
He  would  be  a  "man  of  sorrows  and  acquaint- 
ed with  grief."  And  so  it  was.  But  observe: 
A  man  of  sorrows,  not  a  man  of  melancholy. 
We  can  not  think  of  Jesus  Christ  as  moping 
through  life ;  we  can  not  think  of  Him  as  turn- 
ing fretfully  toward  His  burden,  as  thinking 
of  His  wrongs — His  throne  denied  Him,  His 
people  rejected  Him,  His  poverty  and  humil- 
iation in  a  world  which  He  had  made.  Just 
once,  in  Gethsemane,  He  speaks  of  His  sorrows : 
"My  soul  is  exceedingly  sorrowful,  even  unto 
death."  But  habitually  He  speaks  of  His  joy- 
fulness.  That,  then,  is  the  paradox  of  His  lif  e. 
"A  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief" ; 
but  bearing  these  sorrows,  as  it  were,  upon  the 
deep  floodtide  of  a  mighty  joy.  And  the  joy 
was  more  than  the  sorrow. 

Let  us  try  to  understand  this  paradox — an 
exultant  and  joyful  man  of  sorrows. 

Have  you  ever  observed  that  the  nearer 
Jesus  came  to  the  cross,  the  more  He  spoke  of 
His  joy?  You  do  not  find  that  He  testified 
of  His  joyfulness  much  in  the  earlier  part  of 
His  ministry,  and  I  believe  not  once  in  that 


78        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

which  is  called  "the  year  of  public  favor," 
when  the  multitudes  thronged  Him,  and  it 
seemed  as  if  the  nation  would  really  receive 
Him  as  the  long-expected  Messiah.  But  as 
He  went  on,  drawing  ever  nearer  to  Calvary, 
and  as  the  burden  of  the  shame  and  sorrow 
and  sin  of  the  world  began  to  gather  in  awful 
darkness  over  Him,  He  speaks  ever  more  and 
more  of  His  joyfulness,  and  in  His  closing 
admonitions  and  instruction  there  is  a  con- 
stant reference  to  the  deep  joy  which  filled 
His  being.  Just  when  the  tide  of  sorrow  is 
rising  highest,  the  joyfulness  seems  to  rise 
above  it  and  triumph  over  it. 

THE  PARADOX  SOLVED 

If  we  ponder  that,  and  connect  it  with  the 
prophet's  explanation  of  the  sorrows  of  Jesus 
Christ,  "Surely  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and 
carried  our  sorrows,"  I  think  we  shall  be  on 
the  very  verge  of  solving  the  paradox.  In 
other  words  (and  is  it  not  very  simple?) ,  Jesus 
found  His  Supreme  joy  in  bearing  the  sorrows 
of  others.  He  was  not  joyfu1  in  spite  of  hav- 
ing to  bear  the  sorrow  and  burden  of  the 


THE  JOYOUS  LIFE  79 

world;  He  was  joyful  because  He  could  bear 
it.  It  was  the  fountain  head,  the  very  source, 
of  His  joy. 

I  think  we  can  conceive  of  that,  if  we  are 
willing  to  separate  ourselves  for  a  moment 
from  that  shrinking  which  we  all  feel  at  the 
thought  of  pain  and  sorrow,  and  get  upon  the 
nobler  side  of  our  own  souls.  We  can  under- 
stand that  such  a  being  as  Jesus  would  re- 
joice, with  joy  unspeakable,  that  He  could  do 
that  thing.  We  can  understand  how,  when 
looking  down  upon  this  world,  with  its  sin 
and  misery  and  want  and  woe,  and  mountain- 
ous iniquity,  there  would  be  ever  in  His  heart 
the  exultant  joy  at  knowing  that  it  was  He 
who,  in  due  time,  should  come  down  here  and 
get  underneath  all  that  unspeakable  guilt  and 
bear  it  away  from  man  through  the  cross. 

Just  as  Jean  Valjean,  in  Victor  Hugo's 
great  story,  was  happy  under  the  cart ;  it  hurt 
him  cruelly,  but  he  lifted  it  away  from  the 
old  man  who  was  being  crushed  by  it.  So 
there  was  a  joy  in  the  very  pain  which  it  cost 
to  do  it — the  joy  of  vicarious  suffering;  the 
joy  of  getting  underneath  all  that  was  bearing 


80        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

down  the  heart  of  humanity,  and  lifting  it  for- 
ever away — this  was  the  joy  of  the  Lord. 

You  know  how  easily,  after  all,  poor  as  this 
world  is  in  nobleness,  this  truth  finds  illustra- 
tion. Surely,  Winkelreid  must  have  felt  some- 
thing of  that  joy  when  he  gathered  the  spears 
of  the  enemy  into  his  own  bosom  so  that  his 
comrades  might  break  the  hostile  line  and  make 
way  for  liberty.  There  must  have  been  in  him 
an  ineffable  joy  as  he  felt  those  spears  crush- 
ing into  his  heart  and  his  life  going  out.  There 
was  suffering,  but  it  was  a  joyful  thing  so  to 
die. 

I  think  that  pilot,  who  kept  his  burning 
boat  against  the  shore  until  every  passenger 
was  safe,  though  his  own  hands  burnt  to  a 
crisp  as  he  held  the  wheel,  must  have  had  a 
joy  greater  than  the  pain.  This  is  a  very  high 
kind  of  joy,  but  we  may  realize  it  after  all, 
may  we  not? 

I  think  that  captain  who  stood  upon  the  deck 
of  the  sinking  ship  and  gave  his  place  in  the 
last  boat  to  a  poor  stowaway,  who  had  no  kind 
of  claim  upon  him,  and  saw  him  pass  on  into 


THE  JOYOUS  LIFE  81 

safety  while  he  went  down  with  the  ship,  drank 
deeply  of  this  joy  of  vicarious  suffering. 

SOURCES  OF  THE  SAVIOURS  JOY 

Then  there  was  another  source  of  the  joy 
of  the  Lord.  He  rejoiced  in  the  will  of  God. 
Will  you  consider  that  for  a  moment?  What 
a  joyful  thing  it  is  that  we  are  not  left  alone 
in  this  world!  What  a  joyful  thing  to  know 
that  one  is  not  the  sport  of  circumstance  and 
of  accident;  not  orphaned  amid  all  these  de- 
structive forces  that  move  in  upon  us,  as  chil- 
dren of  God  here  in  the  world;  to  know,  in 
short,  that  over  it  all  there  is  the  resistless 
will  of  God.  Things  are  not  happening  to  the 
children  of  God.  We  are  moving  upon  an 
appointed  course,  and  the  joys  and  sorrows 
of  our  life  are  all  appointed  and  portioned 
out,  molding  and  shaping  us  for  better  things. 
The  joy  of  doing  and  enduring  the  will  of 
God,  and  of  suffering  that  others  might  not 
suffer — here  are  the  abiding  sources  of  our 
Lord's  joy. 

In  the  Hebrews  we  are  told  of  another 
source  of  joy  which  sustained  our  Lord  in 


82        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

the  supreme  agony  of  the  cross — "the  joy- 
that  was  set  before  him."  The  joy  of  the 
final  consummation;  the  joy  of  anticipation 
when  He  should  see  the  eternal  results  of 
His  suffering;  all  this  was  present  with  Him 
helpfully  in  the  hour  of  agony.  That  is  what 
we  need  to  see.  Beyond  question  we  do  not 
live  enough  in  the  inspiration  of  the  compen- 
sations and  balancings  of  heaven. 

THE  LOBl/s   JOY,,  OUR  JOY 

Turn  now  for  a  moment  to  the  other  thought 
— the  human  side  of  it. 

"That  my  joy  might  be  fulfilled  in  them." 

But  how  shall  we  have  the  joy  of  the  Lord? 
Evidently  there  is  here  a  call  to  the  unselfish 
heights?  If  we  are  to  share  the  joy  of  the 
Lord  we  must  be  willing  to  share  that  out  of 
which  His  joy  sprang.  We  must  rejoice  if 
we  can  bear  away  some  sorrow  from  another 
heart,  some  burden  from  another  life,  even  if  it 
means  sorrow  and  burden  to  us. 

We  must  learn  to  rejoice  as  we  never  yet 
have  learned  to  rejoice,  in  the  salvation  of  the 
lost.    We  read  that  there  is  "joy  in  the  pres- 


THE  JOYOUS  LIFE  83 

ence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that 
repenteth." 

We  must  stop  regretting  that  "only  ten 
were  converted,"  and,  like  the  angels,  rejoice 
over  one  sinner  that  repenteth. 

Then  we  must  turn  our  thoughts  more  to- 
ward the  future,  toward  the  heavenly  rest,  the 
heavenly  activities  and  the  eternal  joys  which 
are  there.  I  repeat,  it  is  a  trumpet  call.  It 
costs  something  to  have  the  joy  of  the  Lord. 
Salvation,  with  its  joy,  is  a  free  gift,  but  the 
joy  of  the  Lord  is  to  be  had  only  by  enter- 
ing into  fellowship  with  the  Lord  in  His  life 
plan;  to  be,  in  the  measure  of  our  capacity, 
Christ's  in  the  world;  to  get  with  Him  into 
the  joy  of  suffering;  into  the  joy  of  the  great 
sweet  will  of  God ;  into  the  expectation  of  the 
things  to  come. 

It  was  a  great  thing  for  humanity  when 
that  strange  being,  Peter  the  Hermit,  went 
through  Europe  preaching  the  Crusades.  It 
was  a  call  to  those  barons  and  knights  to  cease 
petty  neighborhood  wars;  to  come  away  from 
their  pompous  and  empty  way  of  life;  from 


84        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

tilting  in  the  castle  yard,  and  feasting  in  the 
castle  hall,  to  go  forth  to  do  an  unselfish  thing. 
Is  not  the  sorrow  and  pain  of  human  life  a 
call  to  a  perpetual  crusade,  a  call  up  out  of 
the  petty  things  in  which  our  lives  are  frittered 
away,  into  sympathy  and  helpfulness?  And  is 
not  the  sin  of  the  world  a  call  to  go  out  upon 
Christ's  own  great  enterprise  of  salvation  into 
the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth?  It  seems  to 
me  there  is  something  in  this  that  ought  to  lay 
hold  of  the  noble  side  of  us,  that  ought  to  re- 
deem us  from  the  meanness  of  self-pleasing 
and  to  lift  us  up  into  a  glad  participation  in 
our  Lord's  sufferings  and  also  in  His  unspeak- 
able joy. 


VIII 

The  Consecration 

Texts  "And  the  priests  brought  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
of  the  Lord  unto  his  place,  into  the  oracle  of  the  house,  to 
the  most  holy  place,  even  under  the  wings  of  the  cherubims. 
For  the  cherubims  spread  forth  their  two  wings  over  the  place 
of  the  ark,  and  the  cherubims  covered  the  ark  and  the  staves 
thereof  above.  And  they  drew  out  the  staves,  that  the  ends 
of  the  staves  were  seen  out  in  the  holy  place  before  the  ora- 
cle, and  they  were  not  seen  without;  and  there  they  are  unto 
this  day.  There  was  nothing  in  the  ark  save  the  two  tables 
of  stone,  which  Moses  put  there  at  Horeb,  when  the  Lord 
made  a  covenant  with  the  children  of  Israel,  when  they  came 
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the 
priests  were  come  out  of  the  holy  place,  that  the  cloud  filled 
the  house  of  the  Lord."— 1  Kings  8:6-11. 

I  WISH  to  begin  a  study  of  the  subject  of 
Consecration.  I  believe  it  to  be,  in  the 
common  apprehension  of  believers,  great- 
ly encumbered  with  misconceptions.  Is  con- 
secration God's  act  or  man's  act?  Is  it  partly 
man's  act  and  partly  God's  act?  If  so,  what  is 
man's  part  in  it? 

Beyond  doubt  the  subject  is  vaguely  felt 
to  be  important.     The  religious  literature  of 

85 


86        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

the  time  insists  upon  this  importance,  and  very 
rarely  do  Christians  come  together  in  conven- 
tions, or  in  any  large  gathering,  without  ap- 
pointing hours  for  "consecration  meetings." 
And,  in  fact,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  so-called 
"consecrating"  done.  The  Christian  Endeavor 
societies  appoint  monthly  consecration  meet- 
ings, and  so,  in  a  certain  sense,  there  is  a 

PERPETUAL   CONSECRATION 

work  going  on.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  prayer 
about  consecration,  and  a  great  deal  of  talk 
about  it,  and  a  great  many  directions  how  to 
do  it,  and  a  great  deal  of  doubt,  I  believe,  at 
the  end,  whether  it  has  been  done  after  all — 
the  doubt,  of  course,  growing  out  of  the  fact 
that  so  many  people  are  continually  reconse- 
crating themselves. 

Now,  is  consecration  something  that  requires 
to  be  done  over  and  over  again?  If  it  is,  we 
ought  to  know  it.  We  ought  to  know  what 
degree  of  frequency  there  should  be  in  the  act 
of  consecration,  so  that  we  may  be  very  sure 
that  we  keep  consecrated  all  of  the  time. 

I  am  the  more  surprised  by  this  confusion, 


THE  CONSECRATION  87 

because  God  has,  so  to  speak,  prepared  the 
subject  for  our  study.  He  has  put  into  the 
Bible 

TWO  GREAT  TYPICAL  ILLUSTRATIONS 

of  consecration,  one  in  the  consecration  of  the 
temple,  and  the  other  in  the  consecration  of  the 
priesthood.  And  you  know  that  both  of  these 
types  converge  upon  us,  the  believers  of  this 
dispensation,  for  we  are  called  both  "temples" 
and  "priests." 

"For  ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God" 
(2  Cor.  6:16) .  "What?  know  ye  not  that  your 
body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost?"  (1 
Cor.  6:19).  "Ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a 
royal  priesthood"  (1  Pet.  2:9).  "Unto  him 
that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in 
his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and 
priests  unto  God"  (Rev.  1:5,  6). 

The  temple  was  for  the  possession,  the  abid- 
ing place  of  God ;  the  priesthood,  for  the  serv- 
ice of  God;  and  for  each  there  was  an  act — 
consecration.  The  shekinah  did  not  take  pos- 
session of  the  temple  until  the  act  of  consecra- 
tion was  complete;  nor  could  a  priest,  though 


88        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

born  to  the  priesthood,  enter  upon  his  serv- 
ice until  duly  consecrated. 

My  purpose,  then,  is  to  study  the  Temple- 
type  of  Consecration. 

1.  Now,  first  of  all,  consider  what  a  won- 
derful structural  analogy  there  is  between  that 
old  typical  temple,  and  these  living  temples 
which  we  are. 

The  temple,  as  you  remember,  was  in  three 
parts :  the  court,  or  outer  enclosure,  which  was 
public  and  obvious,  and  into  which  any  might 
enter;  the  holy  place,  coming  next  to  the 
court,  which  was  the  ordinary  place  of  wor- 
ship, as  the  court  was  of  sacrifice;  and  then, 
opening  out  of  the  holy  place,  the  holy  of 
holies,  into  which  the  high  priest  only — type 
of  Christ,  our  High  Priest — might  enter,  and 
which  was  filled  with  the  glory  of  the  presence 
of  God. 

Just  so,  the  living  temple  is  in  three  parts — 
the  body,  outward,  obvious  and  answering  to 
the  outer  court,  in  which  sacrifice  was  offered 
(for  remember,  Christ  "bore  our  sins  in  his 
own  body"),  the  soul,  or  "heart,"  the  seat  of 
affections,  desires,  and  of  the  will  (and,  there- 


THE  CONSECRATION  89 

fore,  the  sphere  of  worship,  for  worship  is  lov- 
ing adoration  and  praise)  and,  lastly,  con- 
nected with  the  soul  most  intimately  in  some 
way  which  we  do  not  precisely  understand,  but 
yet  distinct  from  it,  the  spirit,  the  highest  part 
of  man,  the  seat  of  the  reason,  the  understand- 
ing, the  imagination — in  a  word,  the  mind. 
And,  just  as  the  body  answers  to  the  temple 
court,  and  the  soul  to  the  holy  place,  so  the 
spirit  is,  in  these  living  temples,  the  holy  of 
holies. 

2.  Recur  now  to  the  passage  which  is  our 
text,  and  which  describes  the  act  by  which  the 
temple  was  consecrated,  and  we  shall  see  how 
the  type  helps  us  to  understand  what  our  con- 
secration must  be  if  it  is  to  have  any  real  mean- 
ing. 

I  think  I  am,  most  of  all,  struck  by  the 
exceeding  simplicity  of  that  act.  The  priests 
simply  put  the  ark  of  the  covenant  into  the 
holy  of  holies,  and  then  withdrew.  God  did 
the  rest. 

And  the  significance  of  the  act  is  as  simple 
as  the  act  itself.  That  ark  was,  perhaps,  the 
most  important,  the  most  all-inclusive  of  all 


90        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

the  types  of  Christ.  When  God  was  showing 
to  Moses  the  patterns  in  the  mount,  the  first 
of  them  all  was  the  ark.  In  a  very  real  sense, 
the  tabernacle  was  built  around  that  ark.  That 
ark  with  its  shadowing  cherubim  and  radiant 

SHEKIXAH  GLORY 

was  the  center  of  Israel's  worship  and  service, 
and,  sprinkled  with  atoning  blood,  was  Israel's 
mercy-seat.  And,  just  as  the  temple  was,  as  to 
the  human  side,  consecrated  when  the  ark  was 
installed  in  its  inmost  apartment,  so,  when  we, 
by  a  deliberate,  definite  act,  have  surrendered 
to  Him  for  His  exclusive  habitation  and  pos- 
session, our  whole  being,  body,  soul  and  spirit, 
are  consecrated. 

It  is  when  we  come  to  consider  the  temple- 
type  in  its  several  parts  that  we  may  with  cer- 
tainty know  not  only  how  to  proceed,  but  that 
the  act  is,  indeed,  complete.  Remember,  with 
the  divine  part  of  consecration  we  have  no  con- 
cern. God  may  safely  be  trusted  to  do  His 
part. 

First,  then,  the  priests  carried  the  ark  in. 
God  did  not  send  an  angel  to  do  that,  nor  in 


THE  CONSECRATION  91 

any  way  assist  by  supernatural  means.  It  was 
an  action  entirely  upon  the  human  side.  It 
was  the  voluntary,  deliberate  act  of  the  priests. 
Secondly.  They  carried  it  into  the  holy  of 
holies.  They  did  not  stop  in  the  court,  nor 
even  in  the  holy  place.  They  kept  no  part  of 
the  temple  for  themselves.  Into  its  innermost 
recesses,  into  that  most  secret  room,  made 
beautiful  and  costly  with  gold  and  precious 
marbles,  and  cunning  work  of  the  engraver — 
the  very  place  where  pride  might  most  eas- 
ily entrench  itself — they  carried  the  ark. 

Thirdly.  They  drew  out  the  staves.  That 
was  an  act  of  exceeding  symbolical  beauty. 
You  know  what  the  staves  were:  they  were 
the  wooden  rods  by  which  the  ark  was  carried 
from  place  to  place,  and  there  was  an  express 
command  that  during  the  wilderness  wander- 
ings the  staves  should  not  be  taken  out.  You 
see  the  significance  of  the  action?  It  was  a 
finality!  They  did  not  intend  to  do  that  again. 
They  had  surrendered  the  holy  of  holies  to 
Jehovah  for  an  everlasting  possession.  Israel 
had  many  recurring  ceremonials,  but  "reconse- 


92        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

cration"  was  not  one  of  them.  They  meant 
it.    It  was  once  for  all. 

Fourthly.  They  went  out.  They  did  not 
remain  to  share  the  holy  of  holies  with  Je- 
hovah. And  you  observe,  it  was  "when  the 
priests  were  come  out  of  the  holy  place,  the 
cloud  filled  the  house  of  the  Lord."  I  am 
well  persuaded  that  the  cloud  would  never  have 
filled  the  house  if  the  priests  had  remained 
within.    They  went  out. 

Observe,  the  surrender  of  the  holy  of  holies 
was  in  itself  the  surrender  of  the  temple.  To 
reach  it  the  ark  passed  through  the  court; 
passed  through  the  holy  place.  There  was 
no  pause, 

NO  PIECEMEAL  SURRENDER, 

no  separate  ceremony  for  these  outer  parts  of 
the  edifice.  To  surrender  the  holy  of  holies 
was  to  surrender  the  court  and  the  holy  place. 
It  is  as  if  some  conqueror,  taking  possession 
of  a  surrendered  fortress,  should  pass  through 
the  outer  defenses,  through  the  inner  defenses, 
and  then  into  the  inner  citadel  and  there  plant 


THE  CONSECRATION  93 

his  imperial  banner  in  sign  of  undisputed  occu- 
pancy of  the  whole. 

Precisely  in  this  way  is  consecration  pre- 
sented in  the  New  Testament.  "Present  your 
bodies  a  living  sacrifice" — the  court.  "Let  the 
peace  of  God  rule  in  your  hearts" — the  holy 
place.  "Casting  down  imaginations,  and  ev- 
ery high  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against  the 
knowledge  of  God,  and  bringing  into  captiv- 
ity every  thought  to  the  obedience  of  Christ" 
— the  mind,  the  holy  of  holies. 

8.  Now  let  us  make  all  of  this  personal. 
Perhaps  we  shall  be  ready  to  agree,  first  of 
all,  that 

OUR  CONCEPTION  OF  CONSECRATION 

has  been  poor  and  inadequate.  We  have  been 
thinking  of  service,  simply,  and  that  in  con- 
nection with  the  body;  "take  my  hands,  take 
my  lips,  take  my  feet,"  and  so  on,  in  a  kind  of 
sentimental,  anatomical  way.  We  have  not 
thought  of  this  temple-type  and  what  it  sig- 
nifies; of  being  God-filled,  God-possessed, 
quite  apart  from  considerations  of  service.  I 
grow  very  weary  of  the  perpetual  spurring  of 


94        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

God's  dear  people  to  service,  service,  as  if  any 
father  ever  did  care  so  much  to  have  his  chil- 
dren toiling  for  him,  as  loving  and  trusting 
him.  And  the  more  so  as  the  God-possessed 
Christian  invariably  does  serve.  No.  There 
is  a  higher  thought :  the  enthronement  of  Jesus 
as  Lord  of  all. 

How  is  it  with  us,  beloved?  Have  we,  by 
a  definite  act  of  the  will,  heartily,  joyfully, 
brought  Jesus  into  His  own,  saying  as  we 
passed  through  the  court,  "This  body,  O  Lord, 
is  thine;  rule  it  as  thou  wilt;  choose  thou  its 
service?"  As  we  passed  through  the  holy 
place,  "Rule  thou  in  my  heart,  thou  Peace  of 
God,"  and  as  we  came  into  the  spirit:  "Here 
abide,  adorable  Jesus;  subject  my  reason  to 
the  authority  of  thy  word ;  set  my  imagination 
at  holy  work; 

SHINE  INTO  MY  SPIRIT 

the  radiant  glory  of  thine  own,  and  from  this 
innermost  place  rule  all  the  temple"? 

Then,  have  we  drawn  out  the  staves?  You 
know  what  that  means — it  is  not  to  be  done 
over  again.     I  know  what  you  are  thinking: 


THE  CONSECRATION  95 

"Perhaps  I  did  not  do  it  well."  I  dare  say- 
not.  The  priests  may  have  moved  very  awk- 
wardly ;  their  feelings  may  not  have  been  what 
they  ought  to  have  been;  their  conception  of 
the  meaning  of  what  they  were  doing  may  have 
been  imperfect.  But  this  they  did — they  took 
the  ark  in  and  drew  out  the  staves. 

And  again:  When  you  brought  Christ  in 
did  you  retire?  Or,  did  you  stay  in  with  Him? 
Has  not  that  been  the  trouble? 

I  remember  once  hearing  a  rather  excitable 
young  lady  testify  in  a  meeting  in  New  Eng- 
land. She  said  over  and  over  again:  "It  is 
Jesus  and  I."  A  dear  brother,  who  sat  on  the 
platform  with  me,  whispered :  "I  have  known 
that  girl  eight  or  nine  years,  in  fact,  I  was 
her  pastor,  and  that  is  just  the  trouble  with 
her.  It  is  Jesus  and  the  girl.  If  she  can  ever 
get  where  she  will  say:  'It  is  Jesus  only,'  she 
will  have  a  more  even  experience." 

4.  Lastly,  one  word  as  to  the  divine  side 
of  consecration.  The  priests  went  out  and  left 
God  in  possession.  It  was  then  that  the  di- 
vine part  of  consecration  was  performed,  and 
not  till  then.    The  shekinah  of  God  filled  the 


96        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

house  with  a  glory-cloud  which  always  abode 
between  the  wings  of  the  cherubim  over  the 
mercy  seat,  and  which  spread  and  increased 
until  all  the  holy  place  and  the  very  courts 
were  filled  with  the  radiance.  That  was  God's 
act. 

GOD   ACCEPTED    THE    CONSECRATION 

when  the  priests  had  put  Him  where  He  be- 
longed and  when  there  was  no  door  shut  to 
Him  anywhere.  There  was  no  shining  when 
He  was  in  the  court.  There  was  no  shining 
when  He  was  in  holy  place,  nor  even  when 
He  was  put  in  the  most  holy  place;  nor  even 
when  the  staves  were  drawn  out;  it  was  not 
until  the  priests  went  out,  setting  themselves 
aside,  disowning  all  lordship  over  the  place, 
and  left  that  building  to  God  that  the  place 
was  filled  with  glory.  And  till  that  was  done, 
nothing  wTas  done. 

You  know  that  what  the  shekinah  was  to  the 
temple  of  old,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  these  tem- 
ples which  we  are. 

"In  whom  ye  also  are  builded  together  for 
an   habitation    of   God   through   the    Spirit" 


THE  CONSECRATION  97 

(Eph.  2 :22) .  "What?  know  ye  not  that  your 
body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which 
is  in  you?"  (1  Cor.  6:19). 

This,  then,  is  the  tremendous  typical  sig- 
nificance of  this  type  of  the  divine  side  of  con- 
secration— it  is  the  filling  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Think  of  it !  The  answer  of  God  to  the  heart- 
felt, sincere  surrender  of  the  whole  being  to  the 
possession  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  filling  of  the 
whole  man,  spirit,  soul  and  body;  with  the 
Holy  Spirit.  How  insignificant  in  compari- 
son the  human  side,  and  yet  how  unspeakably 
important,  since  the  fullness  of  the  Spirit's 
presence  depends  upon  it. 

Friends,  we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight.  The 
priests  of  old  could  see  the  glory — with  which 

GOD  FILLED  THE  HOUSE 

- — we  must  believe  it  is  there.  Ah !  just  there  is 
the  fatal  gap  with  so  many.  Multitudes  in  all 
sincerity  surrender  the  three-fold  being  to 
Jesus;  and  then,  because  they  do  not  feel  the 
Spirit  in  fuller  manifestation,  doubt — and  re- 
peat the  process  again  and  again.  Remember, 
it  is  not  consecration  to  service,  nor  power  for 


98        THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

service  which  is  before  us  in  the  Temple-type; 
that  will  be  considered  when  the  Priest-type 
is  before  us.  It  is  consecration  unto  posses- 
sion. 

After  all,  can  anything  be  simpler  than  real, 
biblical  consecration.  It  is  only  putting  God 
in  His  place,  giving  Him  access  everywhere, 
and  then  going  out  and  leaving  Him  to  the 
control  of  that  which  has  been  given  to  Him. 
Then  God  will  do  His  part.  He  will  take  pos- 
session. 

Now,  just  a  few  questions.  Have  we,  as 
believers,  ever  definitely  brought  Jesus  into 
the  temple  at  all?  Have  we  not  regarded  Him 
as  an  external  Master,  to  whom  we  gave  some- 
thing which  He  might  use,  just  as  I  might  take 
that  pencil  and  write  with  it?  Have  we 
brought  Him  within?  Has  that  been  the 
thought  of  our  consecration?  Have  we  given 
Him,  by  a  definite  act,  the  outer  court — our 
bodies?  If  we  have  done  that,  have  we,  each 
one,  brought  Him  into  the  holy  place — our 
hearts — and  said:  "Now  reign  here,  reign 
over  me,  over  my  desires  and  over  my  affec- 
tions"?   If  we  have  done  that,  have  we  sev- 


THE  CONSECRATION  99 

erally  brought  Him,  by  a  definite  act,  once  for 
all,  into  our  spirits,  and  said,  "Reign  over  my 
reason, 

TAKE  MY  IMAGINATION 

and  set  it  to  picturing  the  glories  of  heaven 
and  the  beautiful  things  of  God,  and  redeem 
it  from  the  things  it  is  too  much  occupied 
with"?  And  have  we  said:  "Take  this  intel- 
lectual pride  of  mine,  Lord  Jesus ;  I  am  a  poor 
fool;  just  come  in,  and  do  my  thinking  for 
me"? 

Then,  have  we  drawn  out  the  staves?  Have 
we  said :  "Lord,  now  you  are  brought  in  once 
for  all  and  I  draw  out  the  staves;  I  am  not 
going  to  do  this  again  next  month;  I  do  it 
now"?  And  then,  having  said  that,  have  we 
not  gone  out  ourselves? 

How  is  it  with  us?  Are  we  living  as  if  this 
whole  wonderful  temple — body,  soul  and  spirit 
— were  no  longer  ours?  It  was  ours,  but  we 
moved  out  and  God  moved  in,  and  now  it  is 
His.  Just  when  it  is  that  way,  I  am  very  sure 
the  glory  of  God  will  fill  the  house. 


IX 

Defilement  and  Cleansing 

Txxt:  "Having  therefore  these  promises,  dearly  beloved, 
let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  nlthiness  of  the  flesh  and 
spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  G:d." — 2  Cor.  7:1. 

"If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive 
us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness." — 
1  John  1:9. 

'Teter  saith  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet 
Jesus  answered  him,  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part 
with  me." — John  13:8. 

W]  ARE  now  to  consider  Defilement 
and  Cleansing  as  connected  with  Con- 
secration. You  remember  that  we 
have  been  looking  at  the  subject  of  consecra- 
tion, first  through  the  Temple-type;  secondly, 
through  the  Priest-type.  We.  as  believers,  are 
both  temples  and  priests ;  and  we  found  in  the 
consecration  of  the  temple  for  the  abiding  pres- 
ence of  God.  and  the  consecration  of  the  priests 
for  the  service  of  God,  a  two-fold  type  which 
instructed  us  concerning  our  own  consecration. 
Xow,  while  it  is  true  that  neither  temple  nor 
priest  was  ever  reconsecrated,  it  is,  alas,  true 

100 


DEFILEMENT  AND  CLEANSING  101 

also  that  both  were  frequently  defiled,  and 
whenever  that  occurred,  cleansing  from  that 
defilement  was  imperative.  A  defiled  priest 
was  still  a  priest ;  indeed,  he  was  born  a  priest, 
and  consecration  was  but  the  ceremony  which 
inducted  him  into  his  priesthood,  into  the  ex- 
ercise of  its  functions,  just  as  coronation  puts 
into  rulership  one  who  is  born  a  prince,  born 
with  a  royal  right.  We  are  priests  by  the  new 
birth,  and  consecration  but  opens  the  door  to 
our  service  as  such.  Defilement  suspends  this 
privilege  of  service.  A  priest  defiled  was 
sternly 

FORBIDDEN  TO  SERVE 

in  the  things  of  God  until  cleansed,  but  the 
method  of  cleansing  was  not  reconsecration, 
that  was  never  done  again. 

Without  doubt,  it  occurred  oftentimes,  when 
there  was  a  low  spiritual  state  in  Israel,  that 
the  priests,  who  really  in  God's  sight,  and  ac- 
cording to  the  Book  of  God,  were  defiled,  still 
served  at  the  altar.  But  nothing  could  have 
been  more  displeasing  to  God  than  for  them 
to  persist  in  serving  Him  with  unclean  hands ; 


102      THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

it  was,  as  we  might  say,  a  wanton  insult.  It 
was  shocking  that  one  of  God's  priests  should 
be  defiled;  it  was  insolent  for  him,  with  that 
defilement  upon  him,  to  presume  to  continue 
in  the  service  of  God.  I  might  quote  from 
the  New  Testament  in  this  connection  to  show 
that  God  will  have  no  service  from  a  defiled 
servant.    He  has  made  abundant  provision  for 

INSTANT  CLEANSING 

from  defilement,  but  this  He  insists  upon. 
4 'They  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord  must 
have  clean  hands."  I  am  persuaded  that  one 
reason  why  there  is  so  little  fruit  from  very 
much  of  the  service  of  those  who  unquestion- 
ably are  God's  children,  is  that  they  persist  in 
service,  or  the  forms  of  service,  while  living 
upon  a  low  level. 

Now  I  want  to  take  up  briefly  these  two 
things:  defilement  and  cleansing  as  connected 
with  consecration. 

1.  And,  first,  unpleasant  as  the  matter  is, 
look  at  defilement.  Let  us  turn  in  our  Bibles 
to  the  eighth  chapter  of  Ezekiel.  It  may  be 
we  shall  not  need  to  go  beyond  that  chapter, 


DEFILEMENT  AND  CLEANSING         103 

or,  at  most,  to  look  at  one  or  two  other  pas- 
sages which  may  serve  to  bring  before  our 
minds  the  biblical  idea  of  defilement. 

"And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  sixth  year,  in 
the  sixth  month,  in  the  fifth  day  of  the  month, 
as  I  sat  in  mine  house,  and  the  elders  of  Judah 
sat  before  me,  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  God 
fell  there  upon  me.  Then  I  beheld,  and  lo, 
a  likeness  as  the  appearance  of  fire:  from  the 
appearance  of  his  loins  even  downward,  fire; 
and  from  his  loins  even  upward,  as  the  ap- 
pearance of  brightness,  as  the  color  of  amber. 
And  he  put  forth  the  form  of  a  hand,  and  took 
me  by  a  lock  of  mine  head ;  and  the  spirit  lifted 
me  up  between  the  earth  and  the  heaven,  and 
brought  me  in  the 

VISIONS  OF  GOD 

to  Jerusalem,  to  the  door  of  the  inner  gate  that 
looketh  toward  the  north;  where  was  the  seat 
of  the  image  of  jealously,  which  provoketh  to 
jealousy." 

Let  me  say  a  word  here.     This  "image  of 
jealousy"  was  simply  an  idol.    Ezekiel  goes 


104      THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

in  the  spirit  into  the  temple,  and  looking 
through  the  gate  northward,  right  toward  the 
altar,  he  found  an  idol  set  up  in  the  very  court 
of  that  temple,  which  had  once  been  conse- 
crated to  God. 

4 'And,  behold,  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel 
was  there." 

That  was  not  the  proper  place  for  the  glory. 
The  proper  place  for  the  shekinah  was  in  the 
holy  of  holies  over  the  ark,  between  the  cheru- 
bim. We  shall  see  presently  why  the  glory 
had  withdrawn  from  the  holy  of  holies  of  the 
temple,  and  was  abiding  there;  probably  in- 
visible to  the  eyes  of  apostate  Israel,  but  visi- 
ble to  the  faithful  prophet. 

"Then  said  he  unto  me,  Son  of  man,  lift  up 
thine  eyes  now  the  way  toward  the  north.  So 
I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  the  way  toward  the  north, 
and  behold  northward  at  the  gate  of  the  altar, 
this 

IMAGE  OF  JEALOUSY 

in  the  entry.  He  said  furthermore  unto  me, 
Son  of  man,  seest  thou  what  they  do?  even  the 
great  abominations  that  the  house   of  Israel 


DEFILEMENT  AND  CLEANSING         105 

committeth  here,  that  I  should  go  far  off  from 
my  sanctuary?" 

God,  as  it  were,  had  withdrawn  from  the 
inner  room,  from  the  place  of  His  enthrone- 
ment, but  still  standing  by  the  altar  that  spake 
of  sacrifice.  The  higher  blessings  withdrawn, 
there  was  still  the  brazen  altar  for  a  point  of 
meeting  with  God.  Justification  remains, 
blessed  be  God,  even  when  His  people  have  no 
heart  for  holiness. 

"But  turn  thee  yet  again,  and  thou  shalt 
see  greater  abominations.  And  he  brought 
me  to  the  door  of  the  court ;  and  when  I  looked, 
behold  a  hole  in  the  wall.  Then  said  he  unto 
me,  Son  of  man,  dig  now  in  the  wall :  and  when 
I  had  digged  in  the  wall,  behold  a  door.  And 
he  said  unto  me,  Go  in,  and  behold  the  wicked 
abominations  that  they  do  here.  So  I  went 
in  and  saw;  and  behold  every  form  of  creep- 
ing things,  and  abominable  beasts,  and  all  the 
idols  of  the  house  of  Israel,  portrayed  upon 
the  wall  round  about." 

There  was  defilement  with  a  vengeance. 
They  were  not  going  in  by  the  usual  way 
through  the  veil;  they  had  made  themselves 


106      THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 
A  SECRET  WAY 

into  the  holy  of  holies.  They  had  actually 
gone  into  the  inner  abiding  place  of  God,  which 
He  had  taken  possession  of  at  the  consecration 
of  that  temple  by  the  shining  cloud  of  His 
glory,  and  had  painted  those  golden  walls  with 
all  the  abominations  of  lust  and  idolatry! 

"And  there  stood  before  them  seventy  men 
of  the  ancients  of  the  house  of  Israel,  and  in 
the  midst  of  them  stood  Jaazaniah  the  son  of 
Shaphan,  with  every  man  his  censer  in  his 
hand;  and  a  thick  cloud  of  incense  went  up." 

They  had  dispossessed  God,  so  to  speak, 
from  the  holy  of  holies,  and  there  they  had 
pictured  their  idols,  which  were  too  filthy  and 
obscene  for  the  world  to  see.  And,  in  secret, 
getting  in  by  a  hole  in  the  wall,  they  were  of- 
fering incense  to  those  unspeakable  things.  Out 
in  the  outer  court,  where  every  one  could  see, 
the  priests  were  still  going  through  the  form  of 
the  regular  ritual  of  Israel;  the  lamb  smoking 
on  the  altar  every  morning  and  every  night, 
and  by  it  stood  the  priest  in  the  sacred  gar- 
ments of  priesthood!    And  there,  just  there, 


DEFILEMENT  AND  CLEANSING  107 

invisible  to  the  defiled  eyes  of  His  priest,  aw- 
ful in  His  nearness,  was  the  God  of  the  altar 
— cast  out  of  the  holy  of  holies,  which  was 
painted  with  abominations. 

"Then  said  he  unto  me,  Son  of  man,  hast 
thou  seen  what  the  ancients  of  the  house  of 
Israel  do  in  the  dark,  every  man  in  the  cham- 
bers of  his  imagery?" 

Surely,  exposition  is  not  needed  here.  In 
the  holy  place  an  idol.  Within  the  holy  place 
an  idol.    Within  the  holy  of  holies, 

ALL  CONCEALED 

from  the  eyes  of  man,  unspeakable  abomina- 
tions upon  the  painted  walls,  and  the  elders 
of  Israel  secretly  offering  incense. 

But  apply  the  type.  We  are,  in  ourselves, 
that  which  corresponds  to  the  temple,  the  court, 
the  holy  place,  and  the  holy  of  holies — the 
body,  the  heart,  the  mind.  Do  we  know  some- 
thing of  all  this?  Putting  Jesus,  by  the  act 
of  consecration,  into  possession  of  the  whole 
being,  enshrining  Him  in  heart  and  mind — 
and  then  letting  loose  the  imagination  to  paint 
the  walls  of  that  inner  chamber  with  pictures 


108      THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

we  would  not  wish  the  world  to  see?  And 
do  we  like  to  go  in  there  to  see  all  this  while 
keeping  up  our  church-going  —  perhaps 
preaching  or  teaching  Sunday-school  classes — 
living  before  the  world  in  the  profession  of  be- 
ing God's  people.  Do  we  know  anything  about 
that?  Or,  if  that  be  not  our  case,  are  we  put- 
ting some  idol  into  the  temple, 

SOME  DARLING  THING 

that  comes  between  us  and  God,  while  all  the 
time  our  lips  are  saying:  "Yes,  God  is  su- 
preme"; do  we  know  anything  of  that?  It 
may  be  money,  or  social  position,  or  a  habit,  or 
just  self — the  ugliest  idol  of  all. 

"Then  said  he  unto  me,  Son  of  man,  hast 
thou  seen  what  the  ancients  of  the  house  of 
Israel  do  in  the  dark,  every  man  in  the  cham- 
ber of  his  imagery?" 

All  this  was  in  the  dark.  I  wonder  if  we 
would  be  willing  to  have  the  pictures  which 
our  imagination  paints  taken  right  out  and 
shown  to  our  fellowmen! 

"He  said  also  unto  me,  Turn  thee  yet  again, 
and  thou  shalt  see  greater  abominations  than 


DEFILEMENT  AND  CLEANSING         109 

they  do.  Then  he  brought  me  to  the  door  of 
the  gate  of  the  Lord's  house  which  was  toward 
the  north ;  and,  behold,  there  sat  women  weep- 
ing for  Tammuz." 

Tammuz— sun-god  worship.  When  the  sun 
went  down,  they  worshipped  him  by  weeping, 
as  if  he  had  died.  And  every  morning  they 
greeted  the  sun  as  if  he  were  born  again.  That 
was  pretty  bad  for  the  temple  of  Jehovah,  was 
it  not? 

"Then  said  he  unto  me,  Hast  thou  seen  this, 
O  son  of  man?  turn  thee  yet  again,  and  thou 
shalt 

SEE  GREATER  ABOMINATIONS 

than  these.  And  he  brought  me  into  the  inner 
court  of  the  Lord's  house,  and,  behold,  at  the 
door  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  between  the 
porch  and  the  altar,  were  about  five  and  twenty 
men,  with  their  backs  toward  the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  and  their  faces  toward  the  east ;  and  they 
worshipped  the  sun  toward  the  east." 

Now  sun  worship,  in  the  very  essence  of  it, 
is  simply  nature  worship.  The  sun  is  the  most 
glorious  object  which  meets  the  eye  as  we  look 


110      THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

abroad  upon  nature.  It  is  that  on  which  life 
and  comfort  and  all  those  things  depend,  and 
naturally,  therefore,  to  the  heart  that  has  gone 
away  from  God,  a  kind  of  center  of  that  wor- 
ship which  goes  out  toward  the  powers  of  na- 
ture. 

You  may  say  that  I  am  wasting  time  to 
dwell  upon  this,  that  we  have  nothing  like  sun 
worship  in  this  country,  nothing  like  turning 
our  backs  to  the  altar  of  God,  and  worshipping 
the  sun.  I  beg  your  pardon,  we  have.  This 
is  precisely 

THE  MOST  SUBTLE  ABOMINATION 

permitted  today  in  the  thoughts  and  hearts  of 
Christian  people.  It  finds  expression  in  the 
extraordinary  deference  of  the  modern  church 
to  so-called  science.  Multitudes  are  turning 
away  from  the  Bible  accounts  of  creation,  and 
of  the  origin  of  man,  to  the  improved  theories 
and  plausible  hypotheses  of  alleged  scientists; 
theories  which  hide  God  behind  phenomena, 
and  deny  the  supernatural.  Witness  the  pur- 
chase by  professed  Christians  of  thousands 
upon  thousands  of  volumes  of  "Natural  Law 


DEFILEMENT  AND  CLEANSING         111 

in  the  Spiritual  World."  Witness  the  im- 
portation by  professed  Christians  of  Henry 
Drummond  to  lecture  upon  the  "Ascent  of 
Man,"  while  they  know  that  their  Bibles  give 
one  long  testimony  to  the  descent  of  man. 
Never  perhaps  in  all  the  history  of  the  church 
was  there  such  a  turning  of  the  back  upon  the 
altar  of  God  and  the  temple  of  God  to  wor- 
ship nature,  as  now,  and  never  were  these 
things  doing  such  serious  harm.  For  millions 
of  professed  Christians  Drummond  and  Dar- 
win are  more  authoritative  than  Moses. 

Now  to  sum  up  for  a  moment  these  defile- 
ments :    The  idol  in  the  holy  place ;  the 

INNEE  CHAMBER  PAINTED 

with  all  manner  of  vileness,  and  the  elders  of 
Israel  loving  to  be  there,  while  out  in  the  court 
men  turn  their  backs  upon  the  altar  of  God, 
too  "advanced"  to  endure  a  dripping  cross, 
and  esthetically  worship  the  sun. 
Turn  now  to  the  New  Testament: 
"And  the  Jews'  passover  was  at  hand,  and 
Jesus  went  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  found  in  the 
temple  those  that  sold  oxen  and    sheep    and 


112      THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

doves,  and  the  changers  of  money  sitting:  and 
when  he  had  made  a  scourge  of  small  cords, 
he  drove  them  all  out  of  the  temple,  and  the 
sheep,  and  the  oxen ;  and  poured  out  the  chang- 
ers' money,  and  overthrew  the  tables ;  and  said 
unto  them  that  sold  doves,  Take  these  things 
hence;  make  not  my  Father's  house  an  house 
of  merchandise"  (John  2:13-16). 

Perhaps,  we  are  beginning  to  apply  the  doc- 
trine of  this  passage  to  the  temples  of  brick 
and  stone  and  wood  which  we  have  erected  for 
the  worship  of  God;  but  the  deeper  truth  ah 
ways  lies  back  of  the  symbol,  and  we  have  here 
the  thought  illustrated  for  us  of  the  prostitu- 
tion of  the  natural  powers  of  man  to  the  mere 
pursuit  of  gain;  the  taking  of  the  body  and 
making 

A  MONEY-MAKING  MACHINE 

out  of  it,  or  an  eating  and  drinking  machine, 
nothing  else ;  that  body,  which  is  the  temple  of 
God.    Do  we  know  anything  of  this? 

Without  going  further,  we  have  here  cer- 
tainly that  which  ought  to  search  us.  We  have 
the  thought  of  idols  coining  in  between  our- 


DEFILEMENT  AND  CLEANSING         113 

selves  and  God,  and  claiming  our  affections, 
also  the  thought  of  the  mind  polluted,  the  im- 
agination suffered  to  wander  into  things  that 
are  unclean  and  painting  the  inner  chambers 
with  foul  imagery  kept  very  secret ;  of  turning 
the  back  upon  the  altar  of  God  in  mad  worship 
of  nature  and  nature's  laws. 

2.  Let  us  turn  now  to  the  provision,  alike 
sublime,  simple  and  adequate,  which  God  has 
made  for  our  cleansing. 

First  of  all,  let  us  look  for  a  moment  at  one 
of  the  most  familiar  passages  in  the  word  of 
God. 

"If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and 
just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us 
from  all  unrighteousness"  (1  John  1:9). 

There  is  something  then  for  us  to  do  in  the 
matter  of  cleansing  when  we  have  become  de- 
filed. 

"If  we  confess  our  sins."  That  is  a  very  dif- 
ferent thing,  and  far  more  searching  in  its  im- 
port than  the  mere  confession  of  sinfulness. 
We  do  that  very  readily.  There  is  not  one 
of  us  but  what  would  say:  "Yes,  I  am  a  sin- 
ner." 


114      THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

"If  we  confess  our  sins."  That  means  just 
taking  the  hateful  things  up  one  by  one  and 
showing  them  to  God,  saying:  "I  did  this, 
and  that,  and  that."  I  have  observed  so  many 
times  in  dealing  with  my  little  son,  that  it  is 
very  easy  to  get  a  general  confession  from  him 
that  he  has  been  doing  that  which  is  disobedi- 
ent, but  it  is  not  so  easy  to  get  him  to  tell  just 
what  he  has  been  doing  that  is  wrong. 

Confessing  our  sins  is  taking  a  hateful  sin 
and  holding  it  up  before  God,  and  letting  Him 
look  at  it.  Held  up  before  God,  in  that  white 
light,  a  sin  does  not  look  nearly  so  pretty  as 
it  did  when  we  yielded  to  the  temptation. 

That  is  the  human  side  of  cleansing — con- 
fession. I  need  not  say  that  this  is  a  believer's 
privilege.  The  Christ-rejecter  might  confess 
his  sins  until  he  fell  into  perdition,  and  his  sins 
would  be  just  the  same  as  before.  "No  man 
cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by  me,"  says 
Christ.  There  is  but  one  way  of  salvation — the 
way  of  faith.  But  when  we  have  confessed  our 
sins  then  we  may  claim  the  promise : 

"He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our 


DEFILEMENT  AND  CLEANSING         115 

sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteous- 
ness."    First,  forgiveness;  then  cleansing. 

How  simple  this  is!  Now  connect  it  with 
the  third  text  I  gave  you:  Peter  saying  "Thou 
shalt  never  wash  my  feet,"  and  Christ  saying: 
"If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with 
tne."  You  see,  there  is  no  other  resource. 
When  we  have  become  defiled  we  must 

RUN  AWAY  TO  JESUS 

and  humbly  put  the  defiled  feet  in  His  pierced 
hand.  But  when  that  has  been  done  faith  says : 
"Now  I  am  cleansed." 

The  Christian  who  has  confessed  his  sins 
ought  not  to  go  about  with  a  sense  of  the  di- 
vine displeasure,  nor  with  the  sense  of  defile- 
ment. Faith  says:  "I  have  done  that  which 
God  requires  from  me,  and  now  I  believe  He 
is  indeed  faithful,  and  has  done  His  part  of  it. 
He  has  forgiven  me,  and  there  is  no  frown  on 
His  blessed  face.  He  has  cleansed  me,  and  I 
am  clean,  and  am  going  forward  in  His  service 
with  the  full  assurance  that  He  is  abiding 
sweetly  once  more  in  the  very  secret  chambers 
of  my  being." 


116      THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS 

We  must,  as  in  salvation,  take  the  divine 
part  of  it  by  faith. 

As  in  consecration,  we  yield  ourselves  for 
it  and  then  believe  we  are  consecrated  because 
we  dare  not  doubt  that  God  does  His  part,  so, 
when  that  consecration  has  become  defiled,  w£ 
confess  the  thing  in  all  its  detail  to  God,  and 
we  go  away  happy  because  we  believe  God  has 
again  done  His  part — has  forgiven  us,  has 
cleansed  us. 

After  all,  it  is  all  by  faith.  We  begin  by 
faith  and  we  go  on  by  faith.  That  which  is 
required  of  us  is  simple  and  reasonable  and 
we  do  it,  and  then  we  believe  God  has  done  that 
which  He  promised  he  would  do. 

After  all,  how  very  simple  it  is !  I  may  have 
made  it  very  difficult,  although  it  was  in  my 
heart  to  make  it  exceedingly  simple.  First  of 
all, 

THE  YIELDING  TO  GOD 

for  consecration,  followed  by  a  definite  act  of 
faith  which  says :  "God  has  done  it;  I  am  con- 
secrated." Then  when  defilement  comes  in, 
confession,  and  then  again  the  act  of  faith, 


DEFILEMENT  AND  CLEANSING         117 

which  says:  "God  has  cleansed  me,  and  once 
more  I  am  clean  every  whit."  Then  we  go 
forward  in  His  service  expecting  the  mani- 
festation of  His  glorious  power,  and  then  His 
peace  garrisons  our  hearts  and  minds  through 
Christ  Jesus. 


Helpful  Books  and 
Pamphlets 

By  REV.  C.  I.  SCOFIELD,  D.  D. 

PLAIN  PAPERS  ON  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT. 
16mo,  paper,  15  cents  net;  cloth,  35  cents 
net. 

ADDRESSES  ON  PROPHECY.  16mo,  paper, 
25  cents  net;  cloth,  50  cents  net. 

RIGHTLY  DIVIDING  THE  WORD  OF 
TRUTH.  Being  ten  outline  studies  of  the 
more  important  divisions  of  Scripture.  16mo, 
paper,  15  cents  net;  cloth,  30  cents  net. 

GALATIANS.     12mo,  paper,  15  cents  net. 

THE  NEW  LIFE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS. 
12mo,  paper,  25  cents  net;  cloth,  50  cents  net. 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  Oct.  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 
1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township.  PA  16066 
(724)779-2111 


J  CO 


