V 


A 


..      -■   1955 
%06ICAL  st^^^^ 


^/ff 


"B 


c.4-^ 


4^. 


The  Biblical  Illustrator 

By  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 
This  remarkable  work  is  the  triumph  of  a  life  devoted  to 
Biblical  research  and  study.   Assisted  by  a  small  army  of  stu- 
dents, the  editor  has  drawn  upon  all  the  rich  stores  of  the 
great  minds  since  the  beginning  of  New  Testament  times. 
Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems  and  Illustrations;  Expository,  Sci- 
entific, Geographical,  Historical  and  Homiletic,  gathered  from  a  wide 
range  of  Home  and  Foreign  Literature,  on  the  verses  of  the  Bible. 
Old  Testament  Set. — Noiv  complete  in  28  'volumes. 
Each,  S'vo,  cloth,  $2.00. 


Genesis,  Vol.  I. 

Genesis,  Vol.  II. 

Exodus. 

Leviticus  and  Numbers. 

Deuteronomy. 

Joshua,  Judges,  Ruth. 

I.  Samuel. 

II.  Samuel. 

I.  Kings. 

II.  Kings. 

I.  and  II.  Chronicles,  Ezra, 

Nehemiah,  Esther. 
Job. 

Psalms,  Vol.  I. 
Psalms,  Vol.  II. 
Psalms,  Vol.  III. 
Psalms,  Vol.  IV. 
Psalms,  Vol.  V. 
New  Testament  Set. — In  2g 
St.  Matthew. 
St.  Mark. 
St.  Luke,  Vol.  L 
St.  Luke,  Vol.  II. 
St.  Luke,  Vol.  IIL 
St.  John,  Vol.  I. 
St.  John,  Vol.  II. 
St.  John,  Vol.  IIL 
Acts,  Vol.  I. 
Acts,  Vol.  II. 
Acts,  Vol.  IIL 
Romans,  Vol.  I. 
Romans,  Vol.  II. 
Galatians. 
Ephesians. 
Philippians  and  Colossians. 


Proverbs. 

Ecclesiastes  and  the  Song  of 

Solomon. 
Isaiah,  Vol.  I. 
Isaiah,  Vol.  IL 
Isaiah,  Vol.  IIL 
Jeremiah,  Vol.  I. 
Jeremiah,  Vol.  IL,  and 

Lamentations. 
Ezekiel. 
Daniel.    . 
Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  I.    Ho- 

sea,  Joel,  Amos,  Obadiah, 

Jonah  and  Micah. 
Minor  Prophets, Vo).  II.   Na- 

hum,     Habakkuk,   Zepha- 

niah,     Haggai,    Zechariah 

and  Malachi. 
'volumes.     Each,  S'vo,  cloth,  $2.00. 
Thessalonians. 
First  Timothy. 
Second  Timothy,  Titus  and 

Philemon. 
Hebrews,  Vol.  I. 
Hebrews,  Vol.  II. 
James. 

First  Corinthians,  Vol.  I. 
First  Corinthians,  Vol.  II. 
Second  Corinthians. 
First  and  Second  Peter. 
First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

and  Jude. 
Revelation. 
Index  Vol.  to  Entire  New 

Testament. 


v>*"^" 


""-tro. 


'* 


^t-OGiai  st^:^ 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
literature,   on  the   Verses  of  the    Bible 


Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


ROMANS,  Vol.  I 


New  York  Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming   H.  Revell   Company 

London    and    Edinburgh 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  BOMANa 

I.  Its  OENXjnntNxss  Am>  authbotioitt.  The  author  declares  himself  to  be  Paul, 
the  apostle  of  the  Qentiles  (chaps,  i.  1-7,  xv.  15-20),  who  writes  in  order  to  fulfil 
his  commission  "  to  bring  aU  the  Gentiles  to  the  obedience  of  the  faith  "  (chap.  i. 
6).  1.  The  witnesses.  The  unanimous  tradition  of  the  Church  is  in  harmony  with  tho 
declaration  of  the  author.  (1)  Between  90  and  100  a.d.  Clement  of  Bome  reproduced  in 
his  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  (chap,  zxzv.)  the  picture  of  the  vices  of  the  Oentiles 
traced  in  Bom.  L,  and  (chap,  xzxviii.)  applies  to  the  circumstances  of  his  time  the 
exhortations  addressed  to  strong  and  weak  in  Bom.  xiv.  Our  letter  was  therefore 
preserved  in  the  archives  of  the  Church  of  Bome,  and  recognised  as  the  work  of  tha 
apostle  whose  name  it  bears.  (2)  The  author  of  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas  (oir.  96  a.  d.) 
in  chap,  iii  had  present  to  his  mind  Bom.  iv.  11,  Ao.  (3)  The  letters  of  Ignatiaa 
again  and  again  reproduce  the  antithesis  in  the  twofold  origin  of  Jesus  (Bom.  i. 
8,  4).  (4)  In  the  Dialogue  with  Trypho  (chap,  xxvii.)  Justin  (middle  of  2nd 
century  a.d.)  repeats  the  enumeration  of  the  many  Biblical  passages  whereby  Paul 
(Bom.  iii.)  demonstrates  the  natural  corruption  of  man.  (5)  The  Epistle  to 
DiognetuB  alludes  (chap,  iz.)  to  Bom.  v.  18,  19.  (6)  The  Churches  of  Lyons  and 
Vienne  in  their  letter  to  the  Churches  of  Pontus  (cir.  177  a.d.)  speak  of  their  martyri 
"really  proving  the  sufferings  of  the  present  time"  (Bom.  viii.  18).  (7)  Many 
features  of  the  picture  of  Gentile  infamies  (Bom.  i.)  reappear  in  the  Apologies  of 
Athanagoras  and  of  Theophylus  (soon  after  the  middle  of  2nd  century  A.D.).  Th« 
latter  quotes  Bom.  ii.  6-9,  xiii.  7,  8.  (8)  The  so-called  Canon  of  Muratori  (170- 
180  A.D.)  places  our  Epistle  among  the  writings  which  the  Church  receives,  and 
which  should  be  read  publicly.  (9)  The  quotations  made  by  Irensus,  Clement  of 
Alexandria,  and  Tertullian  are  very  numerous.  It  is  only  from  this  time  that  Paul 
is  expressly  named  as  author.  (10)  In  century  3rd  a.d.  Origen,  and  in  centoiy 
4th,  Eusebius,  do  not  mention  any  doubt  as  expressed  as  to  the  authenticity  of  our 
Epistle.  (11)  The  testimony  of  heretics  is  no  less  unanimous,  Basilides,  Ftolemsua, 
and  very  particularly  Marcion,  from  the  first  half  of  the  1st  century  onwards  maka 
use  of  our  Epistle  as  a  genuine  apostolic  document.  {Prof.  Godet.)  2.  Objec« 
tions  answered.  Througliout  the  whole  course  of  the  past  centuries  only  two 
theologians  have  contested  this  unanimous  testimony — Evanson  and  Bruno  Bauer. 
They  ask — (1)  Why  does  the  author  of  the  Acts  not  say  a  word  about  a  work  of 
such  importance  ?  As  if  the  Acts  were  a  biography  of  Paul  1  (2)  How  are  we  to 
understand  the  numerous  salutations  of  chap.  xvi. ,  addressed  to  a  Church  in  which 
Paul  had  never  lived  ?  As  if  (granting  that  they  really  belong  to  this  Epistle)  tha 
apostle  could  not  have  known  all  these  persons  in  Greece  and  the  East,  as  he  did 
Priscilla  and  Aquila  !  (8)  How  can  we  account  for  the  existence  of  so  considerable 
a  Church  before  the  arrival  of  any  apostle  ?  As  if  the  founding  of  the  Church  at 
Antioch  did  not  furnish  us  with  a  sufficient  precedent  to  solve  the  question.  There 
is  nothing  to  prevent  us  from  accepting  the  testimony  of  the  Church,  which  is  con- 
firmed, besides,  by  the  grandeur  which  betrays  a  master,  the  truly  apostolic  power 
of  the  work  itself,  and  its  complete  harmony  in  thought  and  style  with  othet 

V 


tI  ZNTBODUCTION  to  the  epistle  to  the  ROMANS. 

acknowledged  epistles.  (Ibid.)  8.  The  force  of  the  argument.  Could  this 
absolute  unanimity  have  been  obtained  for  a  forgery  ?  Suppose  a  case.  The  laws 
of  causation  have  been  set  aside,  and  a  bramble  has  produced  the  fruit  of  Paradise : 
s  deceiver  has  written  this  Epistle.  Or  a  great  man  has  written  it,  and  left  his 
offspring  to  the  tender  mercies  of  an  ungrateful  world.  The  foundling  has  escaped 
the  notice  of  every  one  else,  and  come  into  the  hands  of  a  deceiver,  and  by  him  has 
been  wrapped  up  in  the  garments  of  Paul  and  brought  to  Eome.  When  was  it 
brought  ?  Not  during  the  apostle's  life,  for  he  died  at  Bome ;  and  his  presence  was 
a  safeguard  against  such  imposture.  It  must  then  have  been  brought  after  his 
death.  It  is  shown  to  the  members  of  the  Church.  No  one  has  heard  of  it  before. 
Yet  it  professes  to  have  been  sent  to  them  years  ago,  when  Paul  was  in  active  work, 
and  before  he  came  to  Rome.  They  ask  at  once,  Where  has  the  letter  been  all  this 
time  ?  Why  have  we  not  seen  it  before  ?  The  details  given  in  chaps,  i. ,  xv.  expose 
the  fraud.  That  this  important  work  is  in  the  form  of  a  letter  to  a  prominent 
Church,  is  in  some  sense  a  voucher  for  its  genuineness.  In  short,  we  have  a  result 
for  which  we  seek  causes:  the  unanimous  acceptance  of  the  Epistle  in  the  2nd 
century.  In  Paul  we  have  an  author  worthy  of  the  Epistle ;  in  the  Epistle  we  have 
a  work  worthy  of  Paul.  If  it  came  from  him  its  universal  reception  is  accounted 
for.  If  it  did  not,  its  reception  is  a  fact  for  which  no  sufficient  cause  is  assigned. 
{Prof.  J.  A.  Beet.) 

n.  Datb  and  tocAUTT  OF  coMPOsmoN.  These  can  be  fixed  to  a  nicety  by  a 
comparison  of  the  Pauline  letters  with  the  Pauline  history  in  the  Acts.  1.  It  was 
written  before  the  apostle  had  been  at  Bome  (chap.  i.  11,  13,  15),  but  during  the 
time  when  he  was  purposing  to  go  there  after  his  visit  to  Jerusalem  (chap.  xy. 
83-28).  Such  was  the  apostle's  wish  when  at  Ephesus  (Acts  xix,  21),  just  before 
his  visit  to  Greece  (Acts  xx.  2).  2.  It  was  written  when  he  was  about  to  take  a 
collection  of  alms  from  Macedonia  and  Achaia  to  Jerusalem  (chap.  xv.  26,  31) ;  and 
this  he  did  carry  from  Greece  to  Jerusalem  at  the  close  of  his  three  months'  stay 
(Acts  XX.  2,  3,  xxiv.  17).  3.  When  Paul  wrote  it,  Timotheus,  Sosipater,  Gains, 
and  Erastns  were  with  him  (chap.  xvi.  21,  23).  Now  in  the  Acts  the  three  first  of 
these  are  actually  mentioned  as  being  with  him  during  his  three  months'  stay  in 
Greece  (Acts  xx.  2,  3) ;  and  Erastus  (2  Tim.  iv.  20),  who  was  probably  himself  a 
Corinthian,  had  been  sent  shortly  before  from  Ephesus  (Acts  xix.  22)  to  Macedonia 
with  himself.  4.  From  1  Cor.  xvi.  10,  11  we  learn  that  Timotheus  was  sent  to 
Corinth;  and  as  Phoebe  (chap.  xvi.  1,  2),  the  probable  bearer  cf  the  Epistle,  came 
from  Cenchrea,  the  port  of  Corinth,  it  seems  almost  certain  that  during  Paul's 
three  months'  stay  in  Greece  he  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the  Eomans.  "  It  was 
written,"  too,  Lewin  remarks,  "  from  Corinth,  and  not  from  Cenchrea,  for  Gains,  a 
Corinthian  (1  Cor.  i.  14),  was  the  host  of  the  apostle  at  the  time  of  writing  the 
Epistle  (chap.  xvi.  23) ;  and  while  Paul  mentions  Cenchrea  by  name,  he  refers  to 
Corinth  as  •  the  city,*  viz.,  in  which  he  was  sojourning  "  (chap.  xvi.  1,  23).  6.  As 
Paul  was  imprisoned  two  years  before  Felix's  recall  and  Festus's  appointment  in 
A.D.  60  (Acts  xxiv.  27),  we  arrive  at  the  early  spring  of  A.i>.  58  as  the  date  of  the 
Epistle.    (C.  Neil,  M.A.) 

ni.  LiTBBABT  CHABACTERiSTics.  1.  Its  stylc.  (1)  In  general,  (o)  It  is  Paul's 
constant  habit  to  insulate  the  one  matter  he  is  considering  and  to  regard  it  irre- 
spective of  qualifications  or  objections  up  to  a  certain  point.  Much  of  the  difficulty 
in  chaps,  t.,  vi.,  vii.  has  arisen  from  not  bearing  this  in  mind,  (b)  After  thus  treating 
the  subject  till  the  main  result  is  gained,  he  then  takes  into  account  qualifications 
and  objections,  but  in  a  manner  peculiar  to  himself ;  introducing  them  by  putting 
the  overstrained  use,  or  the  abuse  of  the  proposition,  in  an  interrogative  form,  and 
answering  the  question  just  asked,  (c)  One  of  the  most  wonderful  phenomena  is 
the  manner  in  which  all  such  parenthetical  inquiries  are  interwoven  with  the  great 
subject ;  in  which,  wbUe  he  pursues  and  annihilates  the  off-branching  fallacy,  at 
the  same  time  he  has  been  advancing  in  the  main  path — whereas  in  most  human 
arguments  each  digression  must  have  its  definite  termination.  The  thesis  must  bs 
resumed  where  it  has  been  left.  A  notable  instance  is  seen  in  chap,  vi.,  in  which, 
while  the  mischievous  fallacy  of  ver.  1  is  discussed  and  annihilated,  the  great 
subject  of  the  introduction  of  life  by  Christ  is  carried  on  through  another  step — viz., 
the  establishment  of  that  life  as  one  of  sanctification.  Among  other  characteristios 
note— (d)  Frequent  and  complicated  antitheses,  requiring  great  discrimination, 
for  often  the  different  members  of  the  antitheses  aae  not  to  be  taken  in  the  same 


INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.  tU 

extent  of  meaning ;  Bometimes  the  literal  and  metaphorical  significations  are  inter 
changed  in  a  curious  and  intricate  manner,  so  that  perhaps  in  the  first  member  o£ 
two  antithetical  clauses  the  subject  may  be  literal  and  the  predicate  metaphorical, 
and  in  the  second  vice  versd.  Sometimes,  again,  the  terms  of  one  member  are  to 
be  amplified  to  their  fullest  possible  meaning,  whereas  those  of  the  second  are  to  be 
reduced  down  to  their  least  possible  meaning,  (e)  Frequent  plays  upon  words,  or 
rather,  perhaps,  choice  of  words,  from  their  similarity  of  sound,  which  of  course 
cannot  be  translated,  and  thus  much  of  the  terseness  and  force  of  the  apostle's 
expressions  are  lost.  (/)  Accumulation  of  prepositions  often  with  the  same  or  very 
slightly  different  meanings,  which  tempts  the  expositor  to  give  precise  meaning  and 
separate  force  to  each,  thus  exceeding  the  intention  of  the  sentence,  (g)  Frequency 
and  peculiarity  of  parentheses  which  are  hard  to  disentangle.  The  danger  is  lest 
we  too  hastily  assume  an  irregular  construction  not  perceiving  the  parenthetical 
interruption,  and  lest  we  err  on  the  other  side  and  assume  a  parenthesis  where  none 
exists.  The  parentheses,  however,  are  generally  well  marked  to  the  careful  observer, 
and  their  peculiarity  consists  in  this,  that  owing  to  his  fervour  and  rapidity  Paol 
frequently  deserts  in  a  clause  intended  to  be  parenthetical,  the  construction  of  the 
main  sentence,  and  instead  of  resuming  it  again,  proceeds  with  the  parenthesis  as 
though  it  were  the  main  sentence.  Instances  of  all  these  difficulties  will  be  found 
in  chap,  v.,  where  they  reach  their  culminating  point.  (Dean  Alford.)  (2)  In 
particular  the  style  of  the  Epistle  is  characteristic  of  the  apostle  and  non-olassioal. 
As  in  general  we  can  best  estimate  the  style  of  a  writer  in  connection  with  his 
character,  so  here.  The  attributes  which  especially  characterise  Paul  are  power, 
fulness,  and  warmth.  If  to  these  is  added  perspicuity  we  have  all  united  which 
ennobles  an  orator.  But  fulness  of  ideas  and  warmth  of  feelings  often  bring  with 
them  a  certain  informality  of  expression ;  the  very  wealth  of  the  productive  power 
does  not  always  leave  time  to  educate  the  thoughts  which  are  born  into  the  light 
— to  arrange  and  select  the  feelings.  And  the  result  in  the  case  of  Paul  is  that, 
as  the  Fathers  frequently  confess,  we  must  refrain  from  seeking  classical  elegance. 
Ab  the  Son  of  God  appeared  in  a  state  of  humiliation,  so  also  the  Word  of  Qod. 
'^rof.  Thaluck.)  2.  The  language  in  which  it  was  written.  This  Epistle  to  the 
Bomans  was  written  not  in  their  own  language,  the  Latin,  but  in  Greek.  Of  this 
the  explanation  is  that  the  Greek  had  become  the  literary  language  of  the  empire. 
It  was  the  tongue  which,  no  doubt,  Paul  himself  best  understood ;  and  the  great 
majority  of  his  hearers  would  understand  it  also.  The  Jews  learnt  it  by  intercourse 
with  Greeks,  and  many  of  the  Romans  preferred  it  to  the  Latin.  The  oldest  Jewish 
tombs  of  Bome  have  Greek  inscriptions,  and  that  Gentile  Christians  understood 
it  we  infer  from  various  witnesses  :  from  Martial,  Tacitus,  Juvenal  and  Ovid, 
Ignatius,  Dionysius  of  Corinth,  and  Irenffius  wrote  in  Greek  to  the  Church  at 
Bome.  Justin  Martyr,  who  resided  in  Bome  for  a  tiihe,  wrote  his  apologies  to  the 
emperors  in  the  same  tongue.  Clement  and  Hermas  wrote  in  Greek.  Of  the  names 
of  the  first  twelve  bishops  of  Bome,  ten  are  Greek,  and  only  two  Latin.  Of  the 
twenty-four  names  found  in  chap.  xvi.  5-15,  one  is  Hebrew,  seven  are  Latin,  and 
sixteen  Greek,  and  they  belong  for  the  most  part  to  the  middle  andl  ower  grades  of 
Booiety.  Many  of  them  are  found  in  the  columbaria  of  the  freedmen  and  slaves  of 
the  early  Boman  emperors  (PhiL  iv.  22).    [S.  O.  Green,  D.D.) 

IV.  Concluding  BEFLEcnoNS.  Coleridge  pronounced  the  Epistle  to  be  "the 
profonndest  book  in  existence."  Chrysostom  had  it  read  to  him  twice  a  week. 
Lather  says  in  his  preface :  "  This  Epistle  is  the  chief  work  of  the  New  Testament, 
the  purest  gospel.  It  deserves  not  only  to  be  known  word  for  word  by  every 
Christian,  but  to  be  the  subject  of  his  meditation  day  by  day,  the  daily  bread  of  his 
Boul.  The  more  time  one  spends  upon  it,  the  more  precious  it  becomes  and  the 
better  it  appears."  Melanchthon,  in  order  to  make  it  thoroughly  his  own,  copied 
it  twice  with  his  own  hand.  It  is  the  book  he  most  frequently  expounded  in  his 
lectares.  The  Beformation  was  undoubtedly  the  work  of  Bomans  as  well  as 
Galatiana ;  and  the  probability  is  that  every  great  spiritual  revival  in  the  Church 
will  be  connected  as  cause  and  effect  with  a  deeper  understanding  of  this  book. 
This  observation  unquestionably  applies  to  the  various  religious  awakenings  which 
have  successively  marked  the  course  of  our  century.  In  studying  the  Epistle  we 
feel  ourselves  at  every  word  face  to  face  with  the  unfathomable.  Our  experience 
is  somewhat  analogous  to  what  we  feel  when  contemplating  the  great  master- 
pieces of  medisBval  architectur*,  such,  e.g.,  as  the  cathedral  of  Milan.  We  do  not 
know  which  to  admire  most,  the  majesty  of  the  whole  or  the  finish  of  the  details. 


Tlil  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS. 

and  every  look  makes  the  discovery  of  Bome  new  perfection.  M.  De  Pressensfi  has 
called  the  great  dogmatic  works  of  the  Middle  Ages  "  the  cathedrals  of  thoQght." 
The  Epistle  to  the  Bomans  is  the  cathedral  of  the  Christian  faith.    (Ibid.) 

Thb  Chtjbch  or  Romb.— I.  Its  obigin.  1.  It  was  not  founded  by  Peter.  According 
to  Papal  teaching  this  apostle  came  to  Eome  to  preach  the  gospel  and  combat  the 
heresies  of  Simon  Magus  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Claudius  (41-54).  But  it 
is  probable  that  this  tradition  rests  on  a  gross  mistake  of  Justin  Martyr's,  who  took 
a  statue  raised  to  a  Sabine  god  (Semo  Sanctus)  for  one  erected  to  the  sorcerer. 
But  if  the  tradition  were  true  Paul  evidently  could  not  write  a  long  letter  to  this 
Church  without  mentioning  its  founder,  nor  indeed  could  he  write  it  at  all  in 
consistency  with  his  own  principles  had  Peter  been  its  founder  (chap.  xv.  20 ;  2  Cor. 
X.  16).  It  is  supported,  however,  by  two  facts.  (1)  Acts  xii.  17,  where  it  is  said 
that  the  delivered  Peter  went  •'  into  another  place,"  viz.,  Eome.  (2)  The  passage 
in  Suetonius  relative  to  the  decree  of  Claudius  banishing  the  Jews  from  Eome, 
because  they  ceased  not  "  to  rise  at  the  instigation  of  Chrestus  " — whom  pre- 
sumably Peter  preached.  But  why  should  not  Luke  have  specially  named  Eome  ? — 
there  was  no  cause  for  mystery.  Besides,  at  this  period  Peter  can  hardly  have  gone 
as  far  as  Eome ;  for  in  51  (Acts  xv.)  we  find  him  at  Jerusalem,  and  in  54  only  at 
Antioch.  Paul  himself,  the  great  pioneer  of  the  gospel  in  the  West,  had  not  yet, 
in  42,  set  foot  in  Europe ;  and  Luke  enumerates  (chaps,  vi.-xiii.)  very  carefully  all 
the  providential  circumstances  which  paved  the  way  for  carrying  tbe  gospel  into 
the  Gentile  world.  Assuredly,  therefore,  Peter  had  not  up  to  that  time  crossed  the 
fleas  to  evangelise  Eome.  As  to  the  passage  from  Suetonius,  it  is  very  arbitrary 
to  make  Chrestus  a  personification  of  Christian  preaching  in  general.  A  true 
Eoman  tradition  is  much  rather  to  be  sought  in  a  deacon  of  the  Church  (Ambro- 
siaster  or  Hilary,  third  or  fourth  century)  who  declares  to  the  praise  of  his  Church 
that  the  Eomans  had  become  believers  "  without  having  seen  a  single  miracle  or 
any  of  the  apostles."  Not  that  we  deny  that  Peter  ever  came  to  Eome ;  but  hia 
visit  cannot  have  taken  place  till  after  the  composition  of  Eomans,  and  the  Epistles 
of  his  first  imprisonment  (62-63).  How,  if  Peter  had  at  that  time  laboured  simul- 
taneously with  him  in  the  city  of  Eome,  could  Paul  have  failed  to  name  him  among 
the  preachers  of  the  gospel  whom  he  mentions,  and  from  whom  he  sends  greetings? 
Peter  cannot  therefore  have  arrived  at  Eome  till  the  end  of  63  or  the  beginning  of 
64,  or  his  stay  cannot  have  lasted  more  than  a  few  months  till  August,  64,  when  he 
fell  a  victim  of  the  persecution  of  Nero.  To  be  a  good  Protestant  one  need  not 
combat  this  tradition.  It  is  even  probable  that,  but  for  the  notoriety  of  this  fact, 
the  legend  of  the  founding  of  the  Church  at  Eome  could  never  have  arisen  and 
become  so  firmly  established.  {Prof.  Godet.)  2.  It  was  probably  founded  by  the 
Pentecostal  disciples  of  Peter.  We  may  readily  believe  that  the  first  nucleus  of  the 
Christian  order  and  discipline  which  was  about  to  develop  itself  would  be  the 
declaration  of  Peter,  "that  God  hath  made  this  same  Jesus,  whom  ye" — (the 
Jews  at  Jerusalem) — "  have  drucified,  both  Lord  and  Christ  "  ;  that  confession  upon 
which  Christ  had  said  that  He  would  build  His  Church  as  upon  a  rock.  This,  they 
would  say  one  to  another,  is  the  faith  we  have  learnt  from  Peter,  who  seemed  to  be 
the  mightiest  among  the  disciples  we  met  on  the  day  of  Pentecost ;  whose  preaching 
was  confirmed  to  us  by  the  gift  of  tongues.  The  name  of  Peterwould  still  stand  first 
and  foremost  in  their  minds,  and  occupy  the  chief  place  in  their  accounts  of  what 
they  had  discovered.  To  him  they  would  refer  as  the  author  of  their  faith.  As 
their  internal  organisation  began  to  assume  a  form,  they  would  recognise  in  him 
the  founder  of  their  Church.  Such,  we  may  presume,  would  be  the  natural  progress 
of  ideas  among  them.  Even  if  Peter  never  came  to  Eome  at  all,  never  assumed 
any  authority  of  the  Church,  nevertheless,  it  was  natural  that  to  him  such  a  founda- 
tion should  be  attributed,  that  an  ecclesiastical  legend  should  grow  up  around  it, 
and  that  it  should  become,  in  the  course  of  ages,  an  established  article  of  popular 
belief  that  Peter  was  the  founder  of  the  Eoman  Church,  and  the  first  bishop  of 
Eome.  Such,  indeed,  we  know  to  have  been  the  case ;  but  tbe  historical  testimony 
on  which  this  development  is  founded  is  absolutely  worthless.  We  assume  that 
the  message  of  the  gospel  was  first  announced  at  Eome  by  the  Jews  or  proselytes 
who  had  been  converted  to  Christ  by  the  preaching  of  St.  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost, A.D.  33.  These  men  doubtless  talked  over  what  they  had  seen  ;  they  discussed 
its  bearings;  they  contracted  a  natural  sympathy,  and  communicated  their  own 
hope  and  faith  to  those  nearest  to  them.  As  heirs  of  one  hope  and  of  tbe  same 
•ailing  they  rejoiced  over  every  new  adherent  whom  they  attracted  to  their  side 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.  ix 

•nd  iadaced  to  listen  to  their  spiritnal  exhortations.  One  or  another  of  them 
would  come  to  be  soon  acknowledged  as  a  leader,  for  his  spiritnal  gifts,  for  his  gift 
of  praying,  of  preaching  or  expounding,  for  the  sanctity  of  his  life,  or  generally  for 
the  superior  force  of  his  character.  These  disciples  would  occupy  themselves  in 
searching  the  Scriptures  for  their  witness  to  Christ's  appearance,  and  for  the 
assurance  they  might  give  of  a  new  covenant  with  the  God  of  Israel.  But  they 
would  not  all  at  once  develop  any  form  of  spiritual  government  among  themselvea. 
They  would  be  satisfied  at  first  with  administering  the  simple  rite  of  baptism  as  an 
assurance  of  the  remission  of  sins  upon  a  declaration  of  repentance ;  they  would 
live  constantly  together  in  the  practice  of  mutual  kindness,  breaking  bread  from 
house  to  house,  and  consecrating  their  meal  with  prayer,  in  remembrance  of  their 
blesi-ed  Lord  and  Saviour.  Such  would  be  "  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship," 
in  which  they  had  been  instructed  at  Jerusalem ;  such  the  common  forms  of 
obedience  by  which  they  would  become  mutually  known  to  one  another.  But  they 
had  received  no  instructions  there  as  to  the  position  which  the  law  must  now 
assume,  the  conditions  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  the  services  or  ministry  of  the 
gospel.  Such  matters  as  these,  fundamental  as  they  were,  must  be  left  for  their 
own  discovery,  or  for  the  arrival  of  more  advanced  teachers  to  disclose  to  them. 
(Dean  Merivale.)  3.  Or  possibly  by  the  Gentile  converts  of  Paul.  Without 
denying  what  may  have  been  done  in  an  isolated  way  for  the  spread  of  Christianity 
in  Eome  by  Jews  returning  from  Jerusalem,  we  must  assign  the  founding  of  the 
Roman  Church  to  a  different  origin.  Borne  was  to  the  world  what  the  heart  is  to 
the  body — the  centre  of  vital  circulation.  Tacitus  asserts  that  "  all  things  hateful 
or  shameful  were  sure  to  flow  to  Rome  from  all  parts  of  the  empire."  This  law 
must  be  applied  to  better  things.  Long  before  the  composition  of  this  Epistle,  the 
gospel  had  already  crossed  the  frontier  of  Palestine  and  spread  among  the  Gentile 
populations  of  Syria,  Asia  Minor,  and  Greece.  Endowed  as  it  was  with  an  inherent 
force  of  expansion,  could  not  the  new  religious  principle  easily  find  its  way  from 
those  countries  to  Rome  ?  There  are  some  facts  which  serve  to  confirm  the 
essentially  Gentile  origin  of  the  Roman  Church.  Five  times  in  the  salutations 
(chap,  xvi.)  the  apostle  addresses  groups  of  Christians  scattered  over  the  great  city. 
At  least  five  times  for  once  to  the  contrary  the  names  are  Greek  and  Latin,  not 
Jewish.  These  bear  witness  to  the  manner  in  which  the  gospel  gained  a  footing 
in  the  capital.  This  wide  dissemination  and  those  Gentile  names  find  a  natural 
explanation  in  the  arrival  of  Christians  from  Greece  and  Asia,  who  had  preached 
the  Word  each  in  the  quarter  of  the  city  where  he  lived.  A  still  more  significant 
fact  is  that  of  Acts  xxviii.  15,  which  proves  that  the  Roman  brethren  already  loved 
and  venerated  Paul  as  their  spiritual  father,  and  that  consequently  their  Christianity 
proceeded  directly  or  indirectly  from  the  Churches  founded  by  Paul  in  Greece  and 
Asia,  rather  than  from  the  Judaeo-Christian  Church  of  Jerusalem.  The  objection 
has  been  raised  that  the  time  between  the  composition  of  the  Epistle  (57  or  58)  and 
the  founding  of  the  Churches  of  Greece  (cir.  53  or  54)  is  too  short  for  the  gospel  to 
have  spread  so  far  as  Rome,  and  for  the  "  whole  world  "  to  have  heard  of  the  fact 
(chap.  i.  8).  But  the  latter  phrase  is,  of  course,  somewhat  hyperbolical  (c/.  1  Thess. 
i.  8 ;  Col.  i.  6),  and  the  time  is  surely  enough  to  admit  of  reinforcements  from  the 
great  commercial  centres  of  Thessalonica  and  Corinth,  of  those  who  at  any  time 
from  the  year  40,  when  the  Churches  of  Syria  were  founded,  may  have  brought  the 
gospel  from  thence  or  from  Asia  Minor.  The  question  arises  how  it  was  that  the 
standard  of  the  new  doctrine  had  not  yet  been  raised  in  the  synagogue  ?  And  the 
answer  is,  that  for  such  a  mission  it  was  not  enough  to  be  a  sincere  believer  ;  one 
required  to  have  a  scriptural  knowledge  and  a  power  of  speech  and  argument  which 
could  not  be  expected  from  simple  men  engaged  in  commerce  and  industry.  When 
(Acts  xviii.  26)  Apolloa  "  made  bold  "  to  speak  in  the  Ephesian  synagogue  even 
Aquila  did  not  attempt  to  answer  him  in  the  open  assembly.  Only  a  very  small 
number  of  men  exceptionally  qualified  could  essay  an  attack  such  as  would  tell  on 
the  fortress  of  Roman  Judaism,  and  not  one  of  these  strong  men  had  yet  appeared 
in  the  capital.  We  have  in  the  founding  of  the  Church  of  Antioch  a  case  analogous 
to  that  which  we  are  supposing  for  the  Church  of  Rome.  Some  Christian  emigrants 
from  Jerusalem  reach  the  capital  of  Syria  shortly  after  the  martyrdom  of  Stephen ; 
they  turn  to  the  Greeks,  i.e.,  the  Gentiles.  A  large  number  believe,  and  the  dis- 
tinction between  this  community  of  Gentile  origin  and  the  synagogue  is  so  marked 
that  the  new  name  "  Christian  "  is  invented  to  designate  believers  (Acts  xi.  19-26). 
Let  us  transfer  this  scene  to  the  capital  of  the  empire  and  we  have  the  history  of 
the  founding  of  the  Church  of  Rome.    We  understand  how  Greek  names  are  in  th« 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS. 


majority,  the  ignorance  which  prevailed  among  the  rulers  of  the  synagogue,  and 
the  eagerness  of  the  Eoman  Christians  to  salute  Paul  on  his  arrival.     We  believe, 
therefore,  that  the  Roman  Church  was   mostly  of  Gentile  origin  and  Pauline 
tendency,  even  before  the  apostle  addressed  our  letter  to  it,  and  that  the  formation 
of  the  Church  was  indirectly  traceable  to  him,  because  its  authors  proceeded  for  the 
most  part  from  the  Churches  of  the  East,  whose  existence  was  due  to  his  apostolio 
labours.  (Prof.  Godet.)      II.  Its  composite  elements.   As  all  the  Christian  Churches 
outside  of  Palestine  were  composed  partly  of  Jews  and  partly  of  Gentiles,  we  would 
naturally  expect  that  this  would  be  the  case  also  in  Rome.  The  Epistle,  however,  gives 
ns  some  clear  indications  as  to  the  real  facts  of  the  case.    1.  That  the  congi-egation 
contained  Jewish  Christians  is  evident  from  chap.  ii.  17,  iv.  1,  vii.  1,  and  from  the 
general  argument  of  the  fourteenth  chapter.    2.  That  it  contained  Gentile  Christiana 
is  evident  from  chap.  i.  6,  13,  xi.  13,  25,  28,  80,  xv.  15-21.     3.  That  the  Church 
was  composed  of  both  elements  is  further  evinced  by  such  passages  as  chap.  xv.  7- 
13  xvi.  17-19.    4.  We  may  also  infer  that  the  Gentile  portion  of  the  Church  was 
in  the  ascendency  both  in  numbers  and  in  doctrinal  influence.    Not  only  was  this 
the  ordinary  condition  of  the  Churches  in  Gentile  lands,  but  the  whole  argument 
of  chaps,  ix.-xi.  presupposes  this  ;  and  so  decisive  was  the  majority  that  St.  Paul 
could  even  directly  address  the  Church  at  Rome  as  a  Church  of  believers  of  the 
Gentile  world  (chaps,  i.  5,  6,  13-15,  xv.  15-21).     That  this  is  the  correct  view  of 
the  composition  of  the  Church  at  Rome  is  further  confirmed  by  Acts  xxviii.  16-28. 
{Prof.  R.  F.  Weidner.)        The  Roman  Church  was  at  once  Jewish  and  Gentile ; 
Jewish  in  feeUng,  Gentile  in  origin — Jewish,  because  the  apostle  everywhere  argues 
with  them  as  Jews ;  Gentile,  because  he  expressly  addresses  them  by  name  as  such. 
In  this  double  fact  there  is  nothing  strange  or  anomalous :  it  typifies  the  general 
condition  of  Christian  Churches,  whether  Jewish  or  GentUe.     To  those  who  were 
OentUes  by  birth,  but  had  received  the  gospel  originally  from  Jewish  teachers,  the 
subject  of  the  Epistle  would  have  a  peculiar  interest.     It  expressed  the  truth  on 
the  verge  of  which  they  stood,  which  seemed  to  be  peculiarly  required  by  their 
own  circumstances,  which  explained  their  position  to  themselves.    It  purged  the 
fi1n>  from  their  eyes,  which  prevented  them  seeing  the  way  of  God  perfectly. 
Hitherto  they  had  acquiesced  in  the  position  which  public  opinion  among  the 
heathen  assigned  to  them,  that  they  were  a  Jewish  sect :  and  they  had  implicitly 
followed  the  lives  as  well  as  the  lessons  of  their  first  instructors  in  Christ.     But  a 
nobler  truth  was  now  to  break  upon  them.    God  was  not  the  God  of  the  Jews  only, 
but  of  the  Gentiles  also.     And  this  wider  range  of  vision  involved  a  new  principle, 
not  the  law,  but  faith.    If  nations  of  every  tongue  were  to  be  included  in  the 
gospel  dispensation — barbarian,  Scythian,  bond  and  free — the  principle  that  was 
to  unite  them  must  be  superior  to  the  differences  that  separated  them,  and  that 
principle  was  faith.    In  confirmation  note  that  there  is  no  allusion  in  the  Epistle 
to  circumcision.    This  would  hardly  have  been  the  case  had  the  Church  been 
divided  between  two  parties  of  Jew  and  Gentile,  or  had  it  been  a  Jewish  Church 
opening  its  door  to  the  Gentiles.     The  absence  of  such  an  allusion  is,  however, 
perfectly  consistent  with  the  fact  that  it  was  addressed  to  a  community,  the 
majority  of  whose  members  had  not  undergone  the  rite.     {Prof.  Jowett.)        HI. 
Thb  sooiAii  BANK  OF  ITS  MEMBERS.     Those  saluted  by  Paul  in  chap.  xvi.  could 
assuredly  boast  no  aristocratic  descent,  whether  from  the  proud  patrician  or  the 
equally  proud  plebeian  families.     They  bear  upstart  names,  mostly  Greek,  some- 
times borrowed  from  natural  objects,  sometimes  adopted  from  a  pagan  hero  or 
divinity,  sometimes  descriptive  of  personal  qualities  or  advantages,  here  and  there 
the  Bomamea  of  some  noble  family  to  which  they  were  attached  perhaps  as  slavea 
or  freedmen,  but  hardly  in  any  case  bearing  the  stamp  of  high  Roman  antiquity. 
Prom  the  middle  and  lower  classes,  therefore,  the  Chorob  drew  her  largest  rein- 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS,  il 

foroements.  Of  Borne,  not  less  than  Corinth,  it  must  have  been  tme,  that  "  not 
many  wise  after  the  flesh,  not  many  powerful,  not  many  high  born  "  were  called. 
Not  many,  and  yet  perhaps  a  few.  The  great  Stoio  philosopher  and  statesman 
Seneoa,  the  poet  Lucan,  the  philosopher  Epictetas,  the  powerful  freedmen  Naroissna 
and  Epapbroditas,  the  emperor's  mistresses  Aote  and  PoppGea — a  strange  medley  of 
good  and  bad  have  been  swept  by  tradition  or  conjecture,  without  a  shadow  of 
evidence,  into  that  capacious  drag-net  which  "  gathers  of  every  kind."  Yet  one 
illustrious  convert,  at  least,  seems  to  have  been  added  about  this  time.  Pomponia 
GrsBcina,  the  wife  of  Plautius,  the  conqueror  of  Britain,  was  arraigned  (57  or  68)  of 
••foreign  superstition."  Delivered  over  to  a  domestic  tribunal,  according  to  ancient 
nsage,  she  was  tried  by  her  husband  in  presence  of  her  relations,  and  was  pro- 
nounced by  him  innocent.  Her  grave  and  sad  demeanour  (for  she  never  appeared 
bat  in  mourning  garb)  was  observed  by  all.  The  untimely  death  of  her  friend 
Julia  had  drawn  a  cloud  over  her  life,  which  was  never  dissipated.  Coupled  with 
the  charge,  this  notice  suggests  that  shunning  society  she  sought  consolation  nnder 
her  deep  sorrow  in  the  duties  and  hopes  of  the  gospeL  At  all  events  a  generation 
later  Christianity  had  worked  its  way  even  into  the  imperial  family  in  the  persona 
of  Flavins  Clemens  and  his  wife  Flavia  Domitilla  both  eoosins  of  Domitian.  {Bp. 
lAghtfoot.) 

The  vorks  of  the  Imt«  Bev.O.H.  Spnigeonaie  naed  la  tta  prepftrmtlaa  of  thla  vohun*  bj 
,  Paaemore  and  AlabMter. 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTMTOB. 

ROMANS. 

OHAPTEB  L 

Tna.  1>7.  PMl,  a  Mrrant  of  Jesrui  OhrlBt. — AuthenHeatUm  and  $alutat{«H  .*— 
L  Tsn  irosTLB.  1.  Paul  was  not  the  name  by  which  he  was  always  knoMm,  bat 
WM  assomed  shortly  after  the  oommencement  of  his  mission  to  the  Gentiles.  The 
praetiM  of  assuming  a  Qentile,  in  addition  to  the  original  Hebrew  name,  was  then 
eonunon,  and  indicated  a  loosening  of  the  bonds  of  religious  exclasiveness.  2. 
Servant  of  Jesus  Christ.  Not  a  hired  servant  {fuaOioc,  ft  /iiaOtitroc),  nor  a  voluntary 
attendant  {9tpaTru>v),  nor  a  subordinate  officer  {viriipi-n]e)t  nor  a  ministering  disciple 
(iuucovoc) ;  but  a  slave  {SovXoc).  Yet  the  title  is  very  far  from  denoting  anything 
humiliating.  That,  indeed,  it  must  do  if  the  master  were  only  human.  Even 
thoogh  the  slave  should  be  promoted  as  minister  of  state,  the  stigma  of  servitude 
was  not  removed ;  for  the  despot  might,  at  any  moment,  degrade  or  destroy  him. 
We  may  therefore  rest  assured  that  to  no  mere  man,  however  exalted,  would  St. 
Paol  have  willingly  subscribed  himself  a  slave.  But  to  be  the  bondmen  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whose  property  he  was  both  by  right  of  creation  and  redemption ; 
all  of  whose  requirements  were  known  to  be  in  absolute  accordance  with  truth  and 
righteousness,  and  to  all  of  which  his  own  renewed  heart  responded  with  most 
lively  sympathy,  was  the  truest  liberty  and  the  highest  dignity.  3.  This  dignity  St. 
Paul  participated  in  common  with  every  other  disciple ;  but,  nnlike  many  others, 
he  had  been  called  to  the  office  of  an  apostle.  Those  thus  called  were  coustituted 
"  ambassadors  for  Christ,"  being  chosen,  qualified,  and  deputed  by  Him  to  transact 
basiness  with  their  fellow-men  in  respect  to  His  kingdom.  The  twelve  had  been 
chosen  by  the  Master  during  the  days  of  His  flesh,  and  had  oompanied  with  Him 
daring  His  earthly  ministry  (Acts  i.  21).  St.  Paul  had  not  enjoyed  this  advantage. 
Hevertheless,  he,  too,  was  an  apostle  by  Divine  call  (GaL  i.  1).  True,  he  was 
confessedly,  because  of  the  lateness  of  his  call,  "  as  one  born  out  of  due  time  " 
(1  Cor.  XV.  8) ;  but  his  call  was  not  the  less  real  or  effectual.  And  in  all  that  was 
requisite,  he  was  "  not  a  whit  behind  the  very  chiefest  apostles "  (2  Cor.  xi.  5 ; 
xii.  12).  4.  He  had  not  only  been  called,  but  specially  '*  separated  unto  the  gospel 
of  God."  Like  Jeremiah  (Jer.  i.  6),  so,  too,  St.  Paul  was  "  separated  from  his 
mother's  womb  "  (GaL  i.  15).  His  parentage,  birth,  endowments,  education,  &o.,  had 
been  so  arranged  by  God  as  to  constitute  him  "  a  choice  vessel  "  for  this  very  work 
(Acts  xivi.  1&-19 ;  xiii.  1-3).  II.  The  gospel  to  publish  which  hb  had  bek» 
SEPARATED.  1.  It  had  bccH  "promised  afore  by  the  prophets  in  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures ;  so  designated  because  they  were  written  for  holy  purposes,  by  holy  men, 
inspired  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  developed  holy  fruits.  2.  This  gospel  was  ••  con- 
oerning  His  Son  [Divine  dignity]  •'  Jesus  Christ "  [the  personal  name  and  official 
designation]  "  our  Lord  "  (absolute  right  of  property  and  dominion).  (1)  He  was, 
as  to  His  human  descent,  of  "the  seed  of  David"  (Kom.  viii.  3;  Gal.  iv.  4,  6; 
Heb.  ii.  14).  His  "  flet^h  "  is  His  complete  human  nature,  in  respect  of  which  it  is 
said  that  *•  He  increased  in  wisdom,"  &o.  (Luke  ii.  52).  (2)  He  had  also  a  higher 
nature,  here  distinguished  as  "  the  Spirit  of  holiness,"  in  respect  to  which  He  was 
not  made,  not  bom,  but  instated  with  power  in  His  proper  glory  as  the  Son  of  God, 
by  His  "resurrection  from  the  dead,"  In  order  to  estimate  the  full  force  of  the 
apostle's  statement,  it  ought  to  be  remembered  that  men — the  Jewish  rulers — had 
denounced  Him  as  a  blasphemer  (John  lix.  7 ;  v.  18 ;  x.  38).  They  could  not 
endure  that  He,  being  manifestly  a  man,  should  make  Himself  God.  But  the 
VOIi.  I.  1 


S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  i. 

"  resarrection  '*  was  God'a  answer  to  their  derision.  That  aot  proclaimed,  in  reply 
to  all  that  man  had  done,  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  hear  Him."  III.  The  object, 
EXTENT,  AND  BE8ULT  OP  HIS  COMMISSION.  He  had  received  "  grace  and  apostleship." 
1.  To  promote  "  obedience  to  the  faith  "  :  i.e.,  first  of  all,  men  must  be  tanght  the 

faith i.e.,  the  things  to  be  believed  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).    It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose 

that  Christian  men  are  called  upon  to  believe  they  know  not  what,  nor  why 
(2  Thess.  ii.  13;  John  viii.  82).  Now  these  things  proposed  to  faith  not  only  bring 
to  us  the  tidings  of  peace  and  of  new  life  in  Christ,  but  they  propose  to  as  a  course 
of  life  to  be  pursued.  They  require  belief,  in  order  to  obedience ;  and  make  it 
plain  that  a  faith  which  does  not  result  in  obedience  is  a  dead  thing  (Matt,  zxviii.  20 ; 
Bom.  xvi.  26).  2.  The  apostle  had  received  authority  to  promote  this  obedience  of 
faith  amongst  *'  all  nations."  The  Gentiles  Jiad  never  grasped  the  truth  of  the 
universal  brotherhood  of  man ;  while  the  Hebrews,  though  very  strictly  separated 
from  all  others,  not  only  possessed  the  thought,  but  were  preparing  the  way  for  a 
reign  of  grace  in  which  all  the  nations  should  be  blessed.  That  was  the  purport 
of  the  promise  made  to  Abrahiam,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  and  confirmed  to  David  and 
his  son.  Therefore  the  prophets  sang  triumphantly  of  one  whom  the  Gentiles 
should  seek  (Isa.  xi.  10).  The  nation  did  not  indeed  admit  Gentiles  on  eqaal 
terms.  They  required  that  these  should  assume  the  yoke  of  the  Mosaic  law.  But 
now  the  obedient  to  the  faith  from  amongst  all  nations  were  to  constitute  the  tme 
Israel  of  God.  3.  The  whole  result  was  to  be  for  the  glory  of  "  His  name,"  by 
whom  our  redemption  has  been  accomplished.  It  was  not  for  the  glory  of 
Israel,  nor  of  the  apostles,  nor  of  any  number  of  men  (1  Cor.  i.  27-29; 
2  Cor.  iv.  6,  7).  IV.  The  formal  addbess  and  salutation.  The  things  to  be 
noted  are— 1.  That  the  blessing  sought  for  the  saints  was  the  grace  of  God 
our  Father,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  so  manifested  as  to  insure  peace.  2. 
The  spedally  Christian  conception  of  God  as  our  Father.  3.  The  significant 
association  of  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  common  objeot 
of  prayer  and  the  common  source  of  grace  and  peace.  {W.  Tyson.)  The 
opening  address: — I.  The  author.  1.  Paul,  once  called  Saul,  of  Tarsus,  a  citizen 
of  no  mean  city,  a  Benjamite,  of  pure  Hebrew  extraction,  well  trained  in  a  know- 
ledge of  the  Scriptures,  a  free  citizen  of  the  Eoman  empire,  acquainted  with  the 
literature  of  Greece,  by  nature  endowed  with  great  force  of  intellect,  passion,  and 
resoluteness,  of  bold  and  ambitious  spirit,  a  Pharisee  of  the  austerest  type,  zealoua 
for  the  law,  and  hating  its  enemies,  real  or  supposed.  2.  Yet  a  servant  of  Jesus 
Christ,  by  a  free,  rational  subjection.  He  stood  before  his  Lord,  like  the  angels 
which  stand  before  the  throne  of  God,  or  like  nobles  in  the  court  of  a  mighty 
prince.  How  was  this  ?  3.  He  received  grace  for  his  own  salvation's  sake ;  and 
apostleship  to  bring  about  the  salvation  of  others.  4.  He  was  an  apostle  to  the  Gen- 
tiles :  while  Peter  and  the  other  eleven  were  apostles  to  the  Jews.  II.  The  persons 
addressed.  The  letter  was  written  in  58.  Think  what  Rome  was  at  that  period — 
much  like  London  at  the  close  of  the  last  century,  only  without  its  Christianity. 
Its  population  exceeded  two  millions,  half  of  whom  were  slaves.  Many  families 
were  amazingly  rich  and  luxurious :  but  far  more,  among  the  freemen,  were  as  lazy 
as  they  were  proud,  and  as  poor  as  they  were  lazy.  The  population  was  low 
sunk  in  misery  and  sensual  degradation.  In  religion,  the  vulgar  were  besotted 
polytheists,  and  the  philosophers  avowed  atheists.  The  Jews  occupied  a  quarter 
apart  from  therest  of  the  city.  It  is  not  known  by  whom  that  Church  was  founded, 
but  probably  by  some  of  the  "  strangers  from  Eome "  who  were  in  Jerusalem  at 
Pentecost,  and  was  composed  principally  of  Gentile  converts.  To  these  would  be 
added  such  Jewish  converts  as  had  effectually  separated  themselves  from  the 
synagogue.  The  Church  seems  to  have  been  one  of  singular  purity,  spirituality, 
and  strength.  Its  disciples  were  "beloved  of  God";  His  "chosen  saints."  And 
the  Church  needs  to  be  built  up  in  its  holy  faith.  It  is  not  enough  to  hear  of  Christ 
and  beheve  in  Him ;  to  be  converted  and  witness  a  good  confession ;  but  to  be 
fully  instructed  in  the  apostle's  doctrine,  and  to  continue  in  it,  that  we  may  grow 
np  to  the  fall  stature  of  a  perfect  man  in  Christ.  III.  The  subject-matter  of  thb 
Efistlb.  1.  It  is  an  exposition  of  what  is  contained  in  the  prophets.  Here  is  no 
new  thing,  but  the  historic  verification  and  doctrinal  development  of  what  the 
prophets  declared.  2.  It  concerns  the  glad  tidings  of  God,  which  relate  all  to  the 
salvation  wrought  out  for  men  by  Jesus  Christ,  who — (1)  Was  a  true  man,  and  a 
lineal  descendant  of  David,  the  ancient  king  of  Israel.  (2)  Had  also  a  Divine 
nature,  called  here  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  because  it  made  Him  absolutely  im- 
maculate ;  and  because  by  it  He  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  His  people  to  make  them 


OHAr.  L]  ROMANS.  » 

holy.     By  this  nature  He  irss  God's  ooeternal  Son.     Saoh  had  Ha  annoonoed 

Himself  when  living,  and  His  claim  vi&b  demonstrated,  by  irresistible  evidence,  by 
His  resurrection  from  the  dead.  (3)  Wills  His  gospel  to  be  proclaimed  among  all 
nations.  IV.  Thb  sfibit  of  the  wholb.  This  comes  out  in  the  benediction  and 
salutation  of  ver.  7.  1.  "  Grace  "  is  Divine  favour.  Its  fruit  and  effect  is  ••  peace," 
which  comprehends  all  gospel  blessedness.  2.  Grace  and  peace  come  from  God  the 
Father,  and  God  the  Son.  (T.  G.  Horton.)  The  true  preacher  and  hU  great 
theme : — I.  The  true  pbeacheb.  1.  His  spirit :  a  willing  bondsman — not  by  force  or 
legal  orders,  but  by  inward  necessity.  ♦•  Woe  is  me  Lf  I  preach  not  the  gospel." 
Bound  by  obligations  that  are  as  tender  as  silken  cords,  but  firm  as  adamant ;  too 
weak  to  fetter,  but  too  strong  to  break.  2.  His  preparation :  "called"  "  separated" — 
the  Godward  side  of  the  call  to  the  ministry,  and  the  ground  of  ministerial 
authority.  3.  His  aim — (1)  From  God — how  high;  to  announce  glad  tidings  from 
God.  (2)  For  all  men— now  wide.  II.  His  obeat  theme.  The  gospel  is  great 
because  of — 1.  Its  Author,  God :  not  about  Him  merely,  but  from  Him.  The 
gospel  has  its  source  in  God  as  the  river  in  the  fountain,  the  beam  in  the  sun.  It 
is — (1)  The  plan  of  the  Creator  for  renewing  His  spiritual  creation.  (2)  The 
proclamation  of  the  Sovereign  for  producing  loyalty  and  peace.  (3)  The  pardon 
of  the  Great  Father  offered  to  His  prodigal  sons.  ••Herein  is  love."  2.  The 
method  of  its  foreannouncement  (ver.  2].  A  gospel  which  had  been  foretold  by 
such  men  as  Moses,  David,  Isaiah,  Daniel,  and  in  such  a  way,  is  indeed  a  great 
gospel.  And  just  as  by  the  dawn  God  promises  day,  by  spring,  summer,  so  by  old 
prophecy  He  "  promised  the  gospel."  3.  Its  subject.  "  His  Son  Jesus  Christ." 
Christ  is  great  because  of — (1)  His  position  in  regard  to  us.  "  Our  Lord," 
signifying  His  dignity,  claims  and  crown  rights  over  us.  (2)  His  exalted  human 
mastery  (ver.  3).   (3)  His  relationship  to  God,  as  proved  by  His  resurrection  (ver.  4). 

iU.  B,  Thomas.)  Chrittianity  a$  an  objective  $ystem  : — I.  Its  nature — a  gospel 
ver.  1).  II.  Its  antiquity.  It  was  promised  before  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  by  the 
prophets  (ver.  2).  HI.  Its  central  idea.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (ver.  3).  IV. 
Its  instbumentality.  Men,  apostles,  with  the  truth,  not  priests  with  things  to  do, 
but  men  with  a  truth  to  teach  (ver.  6).  V.  The  immediate  and  alternate  aims. 
The  obedience  of  faith  in  the  reception  of  the  truth,  a  holy  sainthood  to  the  man 
who  receives  it  (vers.  6-7).  VI.  Its  supernatubal  and  spiritual  elements.  Grace 
and  peace,  &o.  (ver.  7).  VII.  Its  sphere.  It  is  to  go  abroad  into  the  whole 
world,  and  be  exhibited  there  (ver.  8).  (T.  Binney.)  A  servant  of  Jesxu  Christ ;— » 
I.  Thb  highest  title  known  in  earth  ob  heaven  Is  "  a  servant  of  God."  1.  At 
the  commencement  of  their  Epistles,  Paul,  James,  Peter,  and  Jude,  use,  in- 
discriminately, the  expressions — "  servant  of  God,"  and  ••  servant  of  Christ,"  as 
il  they  were  synonymous.  It  is  one  of  the  undesigned,  and  therefore  strongest 
arguments  for  the  Deity  of  Christ.  James  combines  the  two.  And  in  every  case 
each  apostle  places  it  first  as  his  highest  title — above  his  apostleship.  2.  And  were 
you  to  ask  the  man  on  earth  nearest  heaven,  "What  are  you?  "  or  the  saints  in 
Paradise,  or  the  angels — in  all  their  order  and  degrees — the  response  would  be, 
"I  am  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ."  3.  And  no  marvel!  The  Lord  Jesus  Himself 
gloried  in  the  name.  It  designated  Him  in  prophecy.  It  was  His  own  delineation 
of  His  work — "a  Servant."  II.  How  do  we  enteb  the  service?  1.  It  begins 
with  a  vocation  from  God.  It  is  not  such  as  any  one  may  say  that  he  has  it.  It  is 
a  distinct  call.  Every  one  here  might  be  inclined  to  say,  "  I  am  a  servant  of 
Christ — of  course  I  am."  When  did  yon  go  to  that  "  service  "  ?  There  cannot  be 
*'  service  "  without  an  act  of  engagement.  The  outward  vocation — the  pledge  on  either 
side — was  at  baptism.  But  it  was  not  there  that  it  became  real.  It  is  real  when 
vou  begin  to  close,  with  certain  inward  impulses,  which  have  been  at  work  in  your 
heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  to  love  God.  This  love  is  the  child  of  liberty,  and 
the  service  is  the  child  of  love.  2.  Now  you  are  prepared  for  "  service."  And  you 
go,  and  in  some  way  or  other — it  may  be  at  confirmation,  or  holy  communion — 
you  go  and  consecrate  yourself  to  His  work.  "Lord,  here  I  am.  I  am  Thine. 
Accept  me,  fit  me,  teach  me,  use  me,  as  Thou  wilt."  HI.  The  privilege  op  thb 
BEBvicB.  1.  You  are  placed  in  close  communication  with  your  Master,  He  tells  you 
His  secrets.  "  The  slave  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth ;  but  I  have  called  you 
friends ;  for  all  things  that  I  have  heard  of  My  Father,  I  have  made  known  unto 
you."  2.  You  serve  "  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  " ;  but  you  serve  One 
who  was  once  a  servant.  Many  an  earthly  servant  may  sometimes  have  wished, 
"  0  that  my  master  or  mistress  knew  what  service  is  1  "  That  is  what  you  have. 
He  understands  it  all,  and  has  the  heart  to  feel,  and  the  power  to  help.    S.  And  to 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v 

that  same  Master  His  servants  bring  all  their  work ;  and  as  they  lay  it  at  His  feet.  Ha 
makes  it  clean,  and  perfumes  it  with  the  odour  of  His  own  perfect  service.  What 
has  been  wrong  in  it.  He  cancels :  what  is  good.  He  accepte,  when  He  has  made 
it — by  what  He  adds  to  it — acceptable  to  Himself.  4.  And  all  along  the  sweet 
feeling  of  the  servant  is,  "  My  Master  is  pleased  with  me  and  my  poor  service.  And 
all  I  am  doing,  it  is  practice  for  a  far  higher  and  better  service."  IV.  The  chabaotkb 
OF  THS  "  SEBViCE."  It  doBS  not  much  matter  what  Christ's  servants  do.  They  are 
His  servants  everywhere.  It  is  the  motive  which  makes  the  service,  not  the  action. 
If  a  person  desires  to  carry  on  his  business  apon  Christian  principles — and  directly 
or  indirectly  to  honour  Christ  in  the  world — that  man  is  "  a  servant  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  If  any  one  does  an  act  of  kindness  to  another — if  be  give  to  the 
poor,  or  minister  to  the  afflicted,  and  if  he  see  Christ  in  them — then  he  does  it  to 
Christ,  and  he  is  "  His  servant."  If  a  man  humble  himself  for  Christ's  ssike,  then 
that  man  is  Christ-like  in  His  service,  and  he  is  a  "servant"  indeed.  Or,  no  less, 
if  a  man  suffer  patiently,  for  Jesus'  sake,  he  is  "  a  servant  of  Jesus."  Perhaps  that 
is  the  highest  service  which  combines  the  right  fulfilment,  for  Christ's  sake,  of  the 
greatest  number  of  the  duties  of  life.  The  daughter  whom  every  day  her  father, 
mother,  brothers,  sisters,  and  servants,  rise  op  to  bless,  and  who,  as  she  has 
opportunity,  goes  out  to  the  poor,  and  the  sick,  and  the  schools  about  her,  she  is  a 
truer  "  servant  of  Christ "  than  the  daughter  who  shuts  herself  up  into  the  one 
narrower  sphere  of  her  own  selection.  Practically,  what  yon  have  to  do,  is  to 
accept  whatever  work  the  providence  of  God  may  give  you.  And  if  you  want  to 
know  what  it  is,  in  the  providence  of  God,  that  you  should  do,  consult,  after  special 
prayer  about  it,  your  minister,  your  Christian  friends,  your  own  judgment.  A  field 
of  service  will  be  sure  to  open  to  you,  in  due  time,  if  yon  look  for  it.  There  go  in, 
nothing  doubting,  and  put  all  the  Christ  yon  can  into  it.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
The  servant  of  Jesus  Christ  a  willing  servant : — The  following  story  well  illustrates 
the  force  of  lovXoc,  as  applied  to  the  believer.  A  slave,  on  hearing  that  an 
Englishman  had  purchased  him,  gnashed  his  teeth,  knit  his  brows,  and  declared, 
with  true  pathos  and  heartfelt  indignation,  that  he  would  never  obey  so  unworthy 
a  representative  of  the  land  of  boasted  freedom.  On  learning  afterwards,  however, 
that  his  new  master  had  bid  for  and  bought  him  in  order  to  bestow  upon  him  his 
freedom,  the  poor  negro  was  so  overcome  with  joy  and  gratitude,  that  he  fell  down 
at  the  feet  of  the  man  he  had  just  vowed  never  to  serve,  and  exclaimed,  "I  am 
your  slave  for  ever"  (Psa.  cxvi.  16).  {C.  Neil,  M.A.)  Paul,  the  slave  of  Jestu 
Christ : — I.  Ko  one  had  a  more  vivid  sense  ov  ubebtt  and  tiie  right  of  private 
judgment  than  this  disciple  of  Gamaliel.  He  had  all  the  zeal  of  a  Eepublican  for 
the  worth  of  manhood.  He  was  a  free-born  Boman  citizen,  and  he  never  forgot  it. 
He  could  make  a  stand  for  his  civil  rights  like  a  Hampden  or  a  William  Tell.  He 
allowed  no  privileged  authority  to  rob  him  of  his  franchise.  He  was  the  champion 
of  personal  hberty  before  the  weak-minded  Felix,  or  the  straightforward  Festus, 
or  the  frivolous  Agrippa.  And  that  famous  declaration :  "  I  appeal  unto 
Caesar  1 " — it  rings  down  eighteen  centuries  like  the  sound  of  a  war-trumpet. 
"  Paul,  a  slave  of  Jesus  Christ."  Yes,  a  slave — in  body,  mind,  and  spirit ;  boasting 
of  his  slavery  in  the  face  of  the  world.  U.  The  auihobitt  ot  this  Divine  siiAVE  is 
PBOPOBTioNATE  TO  THE  EXTENT  OF  HIS  SLAVEBT.  The  moic  slavc  hc  is  of  the  Suprcmo 
Mind  of  humanity,  the  more  right  and  power  has  he  to  be  the  founder  of  Christian 
theology.  For  what  does  this  splendid  slavery  mean?  It  is  a  soul  finding  a 
personality  higher  and  better  than  its  own,  and  yielding  allegiance  to  it.  Slavery  T 
It  is  liberty.  It  is  moving  within  God.  "  Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth 
shall  make  you  free."    {H.  Elvet  Lewis.)  The  mystery  of  loyalty— the  master 

mnd  the  slave : — 1.  Christianity  has  revolutionised  the  world,  above  all  by  teaching 
the  value  and  dignity  of  man  as  man.  There  is  one  instance  which  exhibits  this 
in  the  highest  degree — "  Paul,  the  slave  of  Jesus."  2.  It  is  thus  that  he  begins  the 
most  elaborate  of  his  letters.  Now  such  a  beginning  is  noteworthy  for  two  reasons, 
because — (1)  It  is  deliberately  chosen,  for  only  one  other  of  his  Epistles  opens  in 
precisely  the  same  way.  (2)  In  both  cases  the  apostle  is  addressing  those  who, 
fully  in  Rome,  and  in  some  measure  in  Philippi,  understood  the  proud  position  of 
Boman  citizenship,  3.  The  gospel,  however,  had  spread  through  every  rank  of 
society ;  and  so  in  these  two  cities  there  would  be  those  who  understood  the  term 
of  "master,"  as  well  as  those  who,  to  their  sorrow,  could  not  fail  to  realise  the 

Eosition  of  a  "  slave."    4.  Dwell  for  a  moment  on  the  title.    This  man  gives  of 
imself  an  almost  contemptuous  description  to  the  proudest  people  in  the  world. 
And  then  think  of  the  man  who  thus  voluntarily  places  himself  in  the  ranks  of  the 


CBAr.  I.]  ROMANS.  "« 

eonqnered.  Brought  np  a  Pharisee,  by  his  very  training  inclined  to  be  proud, 
nnoompromising ;  to  this  must  be  added  the  possession  of  learning,  and  a  con- 
sequent  sense  of  superiority,  was  ever  man  less  likely  to  submit  willingly  to  the 
place  of  a  slave  ?  Note — L  Thk  mxanino  or  the  apostle.  1.  Complete  submission 
of  will  to  the  commands  of  Christ.  What  those  commands  are,  or  mean,  may  be 
a  matter,  in  part  at  least,  of  question ;  but  the  point  of  importance  is  that  once 
discovered,  they  are  to  be  unhesitatingly  and  entirely  obeyed.  It  has  been  said  that 
"  ft  Celt  craves  for  a  king."  It  is  true  of  all  mankind,  and  a  true  King  for  us  there 
it.  One  who  understands  man,  whose  sway  is  imperial,  but  whose  laws  meet  the 
deepest  yearniugs  of  the  soul,  and  whose  result  is  blessing.  To  disobey  such  ia  to 
make  life  a  scene  of  slaughter ;  and  obey  Him  and  "  the  wilderness  and  the 
solitary  place  blossom  as  the  rose."  2.  Entire  submission  of  judgment  to  the 
revelation  of  Christ.  To  accept  Christ  at  all  is  to  accept  Him  as  the  absolute 
truth.  Hard  sayings,  mysterious  doctrines,  came  from  His  lips.  To  accept  these 
in  so  far  as  they  accord  with  our  preconceived  notions,  or  suit  our  tastes  and  wishes, 
is  scarcely  to  accept  them  at  all.  To  hold  ourselves  in  submission  to  His  revelation 
is  the  attitude  of  mind  suited  to  His  followers :  to  that  tone  of  thought  more  light 
is  given,  and  "spiritual  things  are  spiritually  discerned."  3.  An  entire  and  earnest 
effort  to  imitate  the  Ufe  of  Christ.  St.  Paul  felt  this  to  be  a  necessity,  because  that 
life  was  itself  a  revelation.  St.  Paul,  like  others,  might  have  set  about  to  seek  self 
in  a  manner  not  altogether  ignoble,  but  in  the  prudent  indulgence  of  legitimate 
ambition,  and,  indeed,  he  did  so  till  Christ  crossed  his  path.  He  had  taken  one 
view  of  life,  and  it  was  the  wrong  one.  Here,  in  spite  of  all  the  world's  assertion  to 
the  contrary,  was  the  best,  the  noblest,  the  happiest  life.  What  is  your  line  in 
life?  "A  servant  you  are  to  whom  you  obey";  and  your  obedience  will  be 
regulated  by  that  object  of  imitation  and  attainment  to  which  your  desire  is  turned. 
Is  it  pleasure  ?  To  seek  it  is,  proverbially,  to  scare  it  from  your  path ;  and  if  found 
in  any  degree,  how  soon  it  palls  upon  tbe  satiated  soul !  Is  it  reputation  ?  Ah, 
me!  it  is  a  mere  bubble  shining  for  a  moment  in  a  gleam  of  sunlight,  then  bursting 
ftnd  gone.  Is  it  riches  ?  Our  graveyards  remind  us  that  "  we  brought  nothing 
into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  we  can  carry  nothing  out."  Nay,  more.  What  is 
dearer,  what  more  beautiful  than  family  life  ?  If  ever  the  weary  worker  may  find 
an  end  and  an  object  in  his  work,  it  is  to  create  around  him  those  objects  of  love 
which  elevate  and  soothe.  And  yet  they  die.  4.  That  one  attitude  towards  the 
Bedeemer  that  is  suitable  in  a  soul  which  has  sinned.  When  we  are  fully  alive  to 
tin,  how  little  do  the  arguments  with  which  before  we  cozened  ourselves  when 
sinning  then  avail  1  We  want — and  we  feel  that  we  want — a  Bedeemer.  It  is  then 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  precious.  To  waken  to  that  great  truth  to  which  Paul 
wakened — "  loved  me,  gave  Himself  for  me  " — is  to  become  the  willing,  loving  slave 
of  the  Bedeemer.  U.  The  consequences  of  this  Christian  view  of  submission 
TO  Chbist.  1.  It  points  to  a  large  and  loving  recognition  of  all  who  name  the  Holy 
Name.  "  Our  common  Christianity  "  is  a  dangerous  phrase,  when  it  is  meant  to 
hint  or  encourage  a  doctrine  of  indifferentism.  But  it  is  true  and  consoling  when 
it  expresses  that  amongst  all  who  are  "  baptized  unto  Jesus  Christ "  there  is  a 
share  in  one  main  ground  of  common  faith  and  hope,  which  may  unite  them  more 
at  last  than  their  differences  can  divide.  2.  It  affects  in  a  very  serious  sense  the 
attitude  of  the  individual  life.  (1)  There  ia  one  striking  difference  between  the 
Boman  servitude  from  which  the  apostle  took  his  image,  and  that  condition  to 
which  it  pointed.  To  be  a  "slave  of  Jesus  Christ"  we  must  deliberately  choose 
our  Master.  (2)  If  we  choose  Christ,  there  follows  necessarily  a  wholly  new  view 
of  our  relation  to  mankind.  "  There  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  Barbarian, 
Scythian,  bond  nor  free,  but  Christ  is  all  and  in  you  alL"  (3)  To  have  constantly 
before  the  mind  an  unblemished  ideal,  and  that  with  the  knowledge  that  all  life, 
happiness,  and  power  are  proportioned  to  our  approach  to  that  ideal ;  and,  further, 
to  have  learned  that  abundant  help  is  offered  to  essay  the  task,  this  must  indeed 
have  a  powerful  effect  on  character.  III.  The  becbet  spbing  of  such  an  attitude 
OF  leiND.  In  the  mind  of  Paul  there  was  no  sort  of  question  as  to  who  Christ  was. 
He  had  had  amplest  opportunity  of  examining  His  claims,  but  no  amount  of  study, 
observation  or  evidence  was  enough.  Divine  faith  ruled  his  life.  He  recognised 
Christ  as  the  Eternal  God,  who  was  also  the  Eepresentative  Man,  and  recognising 
this,  by  the  grace  given  him,  he  acted  on  the  recognition.  1.  To  do  this  was  to 
live  by  faith.  Henceforth  he  directed  his  course  by  the  visual  efficacy  of  a  fr-tsher 
and  fuller  spiritual  sf'nse  directed  upon  the  reality  of  the  unseen  world.  That 
reality  was  Christ's.    To  submit  to  the  absolute  supremaoj  of  the  same  Master 


h  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  £oHAP.  t. 

involves  in  each  soul  the  supremacy  of  the  same  principle,  to  "walk  by  faith.* 
Now  the  antagonist  of  such  a  principle  is  to  walk  by  sight.  The  man  who  lives  bj 
the  principle  of  "  sight  "  may  be  respectable ;  but  one  thing  he  is  not  doing,  viz., 
seeking  to  guide  his  course  and  govern  his  actions  by  habitual  reference  to  an 
unseen,  a  loving  Friend ;  he  has  in  no  way  staked  his  all  upon  the  promise,  and 
committed  his  destiny  to  the  keeping  of  "  the  Son  of  God."  2.  But  as  faith  was 
allowed  to  exercise  its  sovereign  S'^ay,  there  grew  and  deepened  in  the  mind  of  the 
apostle  an  intense  personal  love  and  loyalty  towards  Christ.  This  lay  at  the  root  of 
his  patient  study  of  the  mind  of  his  Master,  and  his  unwearying  effort  to  do  His 
work.  Henceforth  life  was  changed.  Not  only  was  he  now  baptized  into  Jesus 
Christ,  but  he  rose  to  the  fulness  of  his  regenerate  life.  Oue,  the  Highest,  had 
thought  of  him,  even  him.  Could  he  ever  forget  it  ?  "The  life  that  I  now  live  in 
the  flesh,"  so  he  writes,  "I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me,  and 
gave  Himself  for  me."  Jesus  the  Conqueror!  Paul  the  slave  I  A  great  love  had 
overmastered  Paul,  and  a  faithful  response  was  given.  ^1)  Loyal  affeotionateness 
is  always  beautiful.  To  see  the  grey-haired  man,  meltmg  into  tenderness  at  the 
dear  memory  of  one,  once  loved,  now  gone — having  once  seen,  what  heart  can  re- 
sist it  ?  To  see  the  little  child,  sweet,  gentle,  retiring — flash  into  sudden  enthusiasm, 
or  grow  into  sudden  gravity  of  reproof  in  behalf  of  an  absent  parent  or  friend — the 
heart  is  touched.  (2)  Ah,  me !  the  world  grows  cold  and  critical :  young  hearts  lose 
their  freshness  because  they  lose  their  faithfulness ;  miss  their  nobility  when  hero- 
worship  is  dead.  God  save  you  from  the  cynical  spirit.  It  is  the  generous  spirit 
that  is  the  brave  spirit ;  because  where  it  is  there  is  loyalty.  To  what  ?  Well,  to 
anything  or  any  one  who  is  in  any  measure  really  deserving;  to  your  Church, 
Queen,  country,  to  a  great  tradition,  to  a  hallowed  memory — loyalty  to  these  leads 
to  the  higher.  (3)  Think  what  it  is  for  as  Christians  to  have  the  vision  of  the 
highest  truth  before  us,  and  to  fail  in  loyalty  I  What  follows  ?  Success,  money, 
greed  satisfled,  and  the  dark  heart,  the  narrow  brain.  Think  also,  to  see  the 
highest  truth  and  to  be  loyal  1  Certainly  it  means  some  pain,  some  shame.  Con- 
clusion :  What  Paul  did  that  we  Christians  must  do.  The  child  Blandina  smiled 
as  she  went  to  her  agony ;  the  aged  Polycarp  wept  in  an  ecstasy  of  tenderness  when 
he  thought  of  the  love  of  his  Master,  and  the  horror  of  denying  One  who  so  long 
had  loved  him.  The  Greek  girl — in  a  beautiful  romance — lay  in  the  depth  of  the 
African  dungeon ;  she  had  longed  for  the  azure  skies  of  Attica,  she  had  pined  for 
the  free  breezes  of  the  fresh  ^gean,  but  they  found  her  radiant  with  joy  in  her 
darkness  and  solitude,  and  the  only  account  she  gave  of  that  strange  completeness 
of  revolutionised  nature  was  this,  "My  Love  was  crucified."  1.  The  comfort.  Life 
is  full  of  failure,  of  sorrow,  of  sin.  Listen.  He  changes  not,  "  He  loved  you,  and 
gave  Himself  for  you."  Well,  then,  if  listening — 2.  The  result.  (1)  Surely  peni- 
tence— deepening  penitence.  And  more.  You  will  grow,  advance,  increase  in  grace 
as  your  surrender  becomes  more  complete.  (2)  Devotion.  Not  perhaps  the  burning 
enthusiasm  of  His  first  followers,  or  the  blind,  vigorous  courage  of  the  martyrs. 
But  life  will  be  truer,  nobler,  better,  if  we  keep  Him  before  as ;  the  business  man 
may  restrain  his  speculations  when  they  pass  the  line  of  honesty,  may  spend  his 
money  for  God ;  the  young  city  clerk  may  subdue  his  passions,  and  teach  in 
the  Sunday  school;  the  fashionable  lady  may  bend  the  proud  rules  of  social 
convention  with  a  sweet  dexterity,  and  do  self-denying  acts  in  real  Christian 
love ;  the  labouring  man  may  work ;  the  bedridden  may  endure ;  each  with  one 
thing  in  common  some  surrender;  that  is,  some  deepening  love  of  heart,  and 
stronger  energy  of  will  for  love  of  Him  who  gave  Himself  for  them,  may 
learn  in  their  several  measures  to  be  "slaves  of  Christ."  {Canon  Knox-LittU.) 
The  tublimest  tervltude : — Men  are  made  to  serve.  In  true  service  alone  they  realise 
the  harmonious  development  of  their  powers,  and  the  realisation  of  their  aspira- 
tions. Note  here — I.  The  highest  mastebhood.  1.  His  mission — Jesus,  i.e.,  a 
Saviour ;  Christ,  i.e.,  anointed.  Christ  is  God  in  His  redemptive  capacity.  There 
is  no  salvation  where  there  is  not  a  deliverance  from  sin,  from  its  possession, 
dominion,  consequences.  2.  His  divinity — "the  Son  of  God."  The  universe 
teems  with  sons  of  God ;  but  the  Infinite  has  no  son  like  Christ.  Hence  He  is 
called  "  His  only  begotten  Son."  3.  His  human  history.  (1)  By  birth  He  sprang 
from  the  seed  of  David  (John  vii.  42).  He  was  bom  of  humanity.  (2)  He  was 
raised  from  the  dead.  His  birth  proved  Him  a  man.  His  resurrection  a  God  accord- 
ing to_  a  spirit  essentially,  eternally  holy.  Such  is  the  Highest  Master.  Hia 
authority  is  indisputable.  His  love  amazing,  His  character  holy.  His  experienoa 
wonderfoL    II.  The  highest  iuployuent.    Paul  was  an  apostle  of  this  Mastec 


CHAP.  I.]  E0MAN8.  T 

There  are  many  branches  of  employment  in  the  service  of  Christ ;  but  there  is 
nothing  higher  than  that  of  apostleship  (1  Cor.  xii.  28).  It  is  an  office  of  the 
highest  trust,  it  is  to  represent  his  Master.  Of  the  most  salutary  and  ennobling 
influence,  it  is  to  redeem  the  world.  Paul  was  "  called  "  to  this  high  office,  on  the 
way  to  Damascus,  and  from  his  mother's  womb  (Gal.  i.  15).  2.  He  was  an  apostle 
of  the  highest  message.  "  The  gospel  of  God."  God  is  the  Author,  the  Substance, 
and  the  End  of  this  good  news  to  men.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Paul's  servitude 
and  apostleship : — I.  Paul,  a  servant  op  Jesus  Christ.  1.  On  his  first  appearance 
in  history  who  would  ever  have  thought  of  finding  his  name  associated  with  such  a 
designation  ?  The  Jewish  priests  and  rulers,  the  sworn  enemies  of  Christ,  were 
then  his  masters ;  and  Satan  was  theirs.  But  the  slave  of  the  devil  became  the 
servant  of  Christ.  And  he  transferred  from  the  one  service  to  the  other  all  hia 
native  ardour,  and  all  his  indefatigable  activity.  That  service  was  more  than 
destitute  of  dignity  in  the  eyes  of  both  Jews  and  Gentiles.  But  now  to  be  "  a 
servant  of  Jesus  Christ "  was  esteemed  by  Paul  his  most  distinguished  honour,  and 
was  enjoyed  by  him  as  the  chief  zest  and  happiness  of  his  life.  2.  Let  the  disciples 
of  Christ  remember  that  they  are  all  His  servants  ;  and  what  department  soever 
of  that  service  they  are  called  to  fill,  whether  public  or  private,  let  them  cherish 
the  same  spirit  with  Paul.  The  more  highly  we  think  of  the  Master  the  more 
honourable  will  we  deem  His  service ;  and  the  deeper  our  sense  of  obligation,  the 
more  ardent  will  be  our  delight  in  the  doing  of  His  will,  and  in  the  advancement  of 
His  glory.  II.  But  Paul  seuved  Christ  in  a  speciai,  capacity.  1.  The  office  of 
an  apostle  was  the  highest  among  the  offices  of  the  Christian  Church.  In  every 
enumeration  of  them  this  stands  first  (Eph.  iv.  8-11 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  28).  In  the  apostles 
we  find  all  gifts  combined.  They  were,  in  the  very  highest  sense,  "  ambassadors 
for  Christ,"  and  "  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God."  Their  testimony  was  the 
standard  of  truth ;  and  their  authority,  as  the  plenipotentiaries  of  their  exalted 
Lord,  was  without  appeal  (John  xvii.  18).  2.  And  that  authority  continues  still. 
The  writings  of  the  apostles  have  all  the  authority  of  the  apostles  themselves. 
What  a  powerful  inducement  to  their  careful  study,  and  how  solemn  the  admonition, 
that  if  we  "  wrest  "  them,  it  must  be  to  "  our  own  destruction  "  1  This  is  coin  that 
bears  "  the  image  and  superscription  "  of  the  King  of  Heaven  ;  to  destroy,  to  debase, 
or  to  lighten  it  is  an  act  of  treason.  III.  This  officiaij  honodb  required  a  com- 
mission FROM  THE  Lord  Hijiself.  Such  commission  Saul  of  Tarsus  received  when 
the  Lord  appeared  to  him  on  his  way  to  Damascus  (Acts  xxvi.  15-18).  There  was 
he  "called  to  be  an  apostle."  The  word  "called  "  has  by  different  commentators 
been  explained  as  of  tbe  same  meaning  with  "  chosen."  It  may  be  questioned,  how- 
ever, whether  the  calling  is  not,  more  properly,  the  result,  or  practical  following-out, 
of  the  choice.  "  A  called  apostle  "  means  one  who  had  not  assumed  the  office  of 
his  own  will,  but  in  virtue  of  an  express  call,  at  once  authoritative  and  effectual, 
from  the  Lord ;  for  while  the  call  included  the  sanction  of  authority,  itHncluded 
also  that  Divine  operation  upon  the  mind  by  which  he  was  at  once  inclined  and 
fitted  for  the  office.  IV.  The  object  to  which  he  ha^d  been  previously  set  apart, 
and  was  subsequently  cat.led,  was  "  THE  GOSPEL  OP  GoD."  "  The  gospel  of  God," 
is  a  message  from  Him  to  His  sinful  and  guilty  creatures ;  and  its  very  name 
imphes  that  it  is  a  message  of  good.  As  such,  it  recommends  itself  to  all  to  whom 
it  comes  by  the  appeal  which  it  makes  to  their  desire  of  happiness,  and  as  "  the 
gospel  of  God  "  it  comes  with  all  the  united  recommendations  of  authority,  kindness, 
and  truth.  Thus  it  should  be  contemplated  with  solemnity  and  awe  on  the  one  hand, 
and  welcomed  with  delight  on  the  other.  V.  The  subject  op  that  gospel  is — 1. 
Jesus, "  Jehovah  that  saveth  " — i.  e, ,  a  Divine  Saviour.  He  was  to  "  save  His  people 
from  their  sins. "  2.  Christ — i.e.,  anointed — the  Hebrew  Messiah  (Isa.  Ixi.  1,2).  Jesua 
was  thus  anointed  when,  after  His  baptism,  "  the  heavens  were  opened,  and  the 
Spirit  of  God  descended  like  a  dove,  and  hghted  upon  Him,"  being  given  to  Him 
"  without  measure,"  and  consecrating  Him  to  His  official  work.  3.  Our  Lord  (Matt. 
xxviii.  18;  Rom.  xvi.  9;  Phil.  ii.  9-11).  {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  A  servant  of 
Christ : — When  the  saintly  Geoige  Herbert  took  possession  of  the  humble  parsonage 
to  which  strangers  for  his  sake  made  pilgrimage,  he  is  said  by  his  biographer  to 
have  entered  a  resolution  from  that  day  forward  always  to  speak  of  Jesus  Christ 
with  the  added  words  "  my  Master  "  ;  and  the  appropriation  seemed,  it  is  added,  to 
perfume  his  very  life.  He  then  may  be  said  to  have  consecrated  Christ  as  Lord  in  hia 
heart.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  The  happiness  oj  service : — Many  years  ago,  happening 
to  be  in  South  Wales,  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  a  Welsh  gentleman.  He  was 
theo  a  landed  proprietor,  living  in  his  own  mansion,  and  in  very  comfortable 


d  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [chap,  u 


circomstaneea.  He  ^ad  been  before  carrying  on  an  extensive  busineBa  in  a  large 
town.  By  the  death  of  a  relative  he  had  unexpectedly  come  into  possession  of  this 
property.  After  considering  whether  he  should  retire  from  business,  he  made  up 
his  mind  that  he  should  still  continue  to  carry  it  on,  though  no  longer  for  himself, 
but  for  Cbrist.  I  could  not  help  being  struck  with  the  gleesomeness  of  a  holy  mind 
which  lighted  up  his  countenance  when  he  said,  "  I  never  knew  before  what  real 
happiness  was.  Formerly  I  wrought  as  a  master  to  earn  a  livelihood  for  myself ; 
bat  now  I  am  carrying  on  the  same  work  as  diligently  as  if  for  myself,  and  even 
more  so,  but  it  is  now  for  Christ,  and  every  half  !>enny  of  profit  la  handed  over  to 
the  treasury  of  the  Lord,  and  I  feel  that  the  smile  of  my  Saviour  rests  upon  me." 
I  think  that  is  an  example  worthy  of  being  imitated.  {Dr.  Duff.)  The  Christian^ 
personal  service: — Every  Christian  hath  his  talent  given  him,  his  aervioe  enjoined 
nim.  The  gospel  is  a  depositum,  a  public  treasure,  committed  to  the  keeping  of 
every  Christian ;  each  man  having,  as  it  were,  a  several  key  of  the  Church,  a  several 
trust  for  the  honour  of  this  kingdom  delivered  unto  him.  As  in  the  solemn  corona- 
tion of  the  prince  every  peer  of  the  realm  hath  his  station  about  the  throne,  and 
with  the  touch  of  his  hand  upon  the  royal  crown,  declareth  the  personal  duty  of 
that  honour  which  he  is  called  unto,  namely,  to  hold  on  the  crown  on  the  head  ot 
hia  sovereign ;  to  make  it  the  main  end  of  his  greatness,  to  study,  and  by  all  meanv 
endeavour  the  establishment  of  his  prince's  throne ;  bo  every  Christian,  as  soon  as 
he  hath  the  honour  to  be  called  unto  the  kingdom  and  presence  of  Christ  hath 
immediately  no  meaner  a  depositum  committed  to  his  care,  than  the  very  throne 
and  crown  of  his  Saviour  than  the  public  honour,  peace,  victory  and  stability  of  his 
Master's  kingdom.  {Bp.  Reynolds.)  Christ's  servant  Christ's  representative : — 
A  man  who  knocks  at  our  door,  and  calls  himself  a  servant  of  some  great  one, 
implies  that  he  has  come  on  his  master's  business  ;  and  claims  an  attention  to  be 
measured  by  the  importance,  not  of  himself,  but  of  his  master.  {Prof.  Beet.) 
Called  to  toe  an  apostle. — A  call  to  the  ministry — includes — I.  Divinb  approval.  A 
servant,  accept*  d,  devoted,  faithful.  II.  A  DrviNE  cojjmission.  Inward  conviction, 
holy  impulse.  III.  Divinb  designation.  By  suitable  qualifications,  providential 
arrangements,  to  a  special  work.  {J.  Lyth.)  Qualifications  for  tfie  apostleship : — 
He  had  seen  the  Lord  after  His  resurrection  (1  Cor.  ix.  1).  He  had  received  his 
commission  directly  from  Jesus  Christ  and  God  the  Father  (Gal.  i.  1).  He  pos- 
aessed  the  signs  of  an  apostle  (2  Cor.  xii.  12).  He  had  received  the  knowledge  of 
the  gospel,  not  through  any  man,  or  by  any  external  means,  but  by  the  revelation 
of  Jesus  Christ  (Gal.  i.  11,  12),  and  although  he  was  as  one  bom  out  of  due  time, 
yet,  by  the  grace  vouchsafed  to  him,  he  laboured  more  abundantly  than  all  the  rest. 

S.  Haldane.)  Separated  unto  the  gospel  of  (Sod. — Separated  unto  the  gospel : — 
rist  separated  him  from  the  service  of  sin ;  from  Jewish  tradition,  superstition, 
and  empty  ceremony ;  from  working  out  a  righteousness  of  his  own  ;  from  all  merely 
temporal  aims  and  purposes ;  from  cares  and  anxieties  of  provisions  for  the  flesh ; 
from  the  more  worldly  affairs  of  the  Church,  the  serving  of  tables ;  to  be  a  living 
depositary  of  gospel  doctrine,  a  gracious  example  of  the  gospel's  power,  and  an 
efficient  organ  for  the  gospel's  utterance.  Like  a  vessel  separated  from  the  fool 
clay  of  the  mine,  the  worthless  dross  of  the  metal,  the  graceless  and  uaeleaa  forma 
of  the  shapeless  mass,  the  common  uses  of  the  world,  and  even  the  ordinary  uses 
of  the  house  of  Christ,  "  a  chosen  vessel,"  to  be  filled  full  to  overflowing  with  the 
water  of  life,  and  borne  about  everywhere  among  thirsty  men.  "  No  man  can  serve 
two  masters."  "Be  ye  separate."  "  If  a  man  therefore  purge  himself  from  these, 
he  shall  be  a  vessel  unto  honour,"  <fec.  {W.  Griffiths.)  Paul's  separation: — I. 
What.  Set  apart  to  a  special  purpose,  sanctified  (Jer.  L  6).  II.  How.  1.  In 
God's  purpose  from  the  womb  (Gal.  i.  15).  2.  Actually  and  generally  at  his  con- 
version (Acts  ix.  16).  3.  Specially  aa  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  at  Antioch  (Acta.  xiii. 
2).  The  first  separation  preceded  the  call ;  the  others  followed  it.  Before  hia  con- 
version Paul  separated  himself  and  became  a  Pharisee ;  after  it  he  was  separated 
by  God  and  became  a  Christian  and  an  apostle.  The  first  separation  by  human 
pride;  the  second  by  Divine  grace.  III.  What  to.  1.  The  gospel.  (1)  Good 
news  (Luke  ii.  10)  concerning  Christ  and  His  salvation.  (2)  Foretold  by  Isaiah 
nnder  this  term  (Isa.  lii.  7 ;  Rom.  x.  16).  (3)  Called  gospel— (a)  Of  the  kingdom 
(Man  Iv.  2).  (6)  Of  the  grace  of  God  (Acta  xx.  24).  (c)  Of  salvation  (Eph.  i.  13). 
(d)  Of  peace  (Eph.  vi  15).  (e)  Glorious  of  the  blessed  God  (1  Tim.  I.  11).  (/) 
Everlasting  (Rev.  xiv.  6).  (4)  It  ia  good  news  in  respect  to  past,  present,  and 
futore.  2.  Of  God.  God  is  its  Author  and  subject-matter  (John  iii.  16).  It  is 
tiM  produflt  of  His  wisdom  and  love  (Eph.  iii.  10 ;  litus  iii.  4).    Henoe— <1)  It* 


OBAP.  I.]  ROMANS.  •» 

•xoellence,  preoiousness,  and  anthority;  for  the  gospel  of  God  must  be — (a)  True;  (b) 
Important ;  (c)  Full  of  authority.  (2)  The  guilt  and  danger  of  neglecting  it  (Heb. 
xii.  26  ;  1  Thess.  It.  8 ;  Luke  x.  16).  (3)  God  speaks  in  the  gospel,  therefore  it 
most  be  heard  with— (o)  Earnestness ;  (fc)  Reverence ;  (c)  Thankfulness,  (d) 
Obedience.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  gospel  of  God: — God  is — I.  Its  Author, 
as  He  has  purposed  it  in  His  eternal  decrees.  II.  Its  Intebpbeter,  as  He  Himself 
hath  decliired  it  to  men.  III.  Its  Subject,  because  in  the  gospel  His  sovereign 
perfections  and  purposes  towards  men  are  manifested.    {R.  Haldane,) 

"Vet.  2.  Whicli  He  bad  promised  afore  by  His  prophets. — TJtt  Messiah  predicted : 
— The  Jews,  throughout  their  history,  differed  from  every  other  nation  in  their 
expectation  of  aMessial',  While  heathen  kingdoms  decayed  and  fell  without  hope  of 
deliverance,  in  Israel  pohiical  decline  was  attended  by  an  increasing  expectation  of 
a  high  and  God-sent  deliverer.  This  idea  was  always  referred  by  the  prophets  to 
Divine  revelation,  and  we  have  every  reason  to  receive  their  testimony ;  for  it  is 
contrary  to  the  very  nature  of  things  that  such  golden  fruit  as  this  should  grow  on 
the  barren  thorn  of  the  simple  human  heart.  Could  this  have  been,  surely  the 
great  and  noble  spirits  of  other  nations  would  also  have  confidently  expected  salva- 
tion, whereas  we  only  hear  from  the  lips  of  a  few  some  dim  and  obscure  yearnings 
of  this  kind.  It  was  only  as  a  vanished  epoch,  a  poetical  dream,  or  a  political 
panegyric,  that  heathen  poets  ever  sang  of  a  golden  age.  The  heathen  were 
*•  without  hope "  because  they  were  without  God  in  the  world.  (Professor 
Auberlen.)  Christ  foretold  by  the  prophets  : — I.  Who  they  webk.  Persons — 1. 
Speaking  by  special  Divine  impulse  (1  Sam.  x.  6;  1.  Cor.  xiv.  1).  2.  Employed  by 
Ood  to  reveal  His  will  and  to  foretell  future  events.  8.  Moved  to  compose  and  sing 
hymns  to  God  (Exod.  xv.  20  ;  1  Chron.  xxv.  1).  4.  Living  in  habitual  communion 
with  God.  II.  What  thet  promised.  Christ  and  His  salvation  (Luke  xxiv.  27 ; 
Acts  iii.  18,  X.  43).  1.  By  Moses  as — (1)  The  woman's  seed  (Gen.  ill.  16).  (2) 
Abraham's  seed  (Gen.  xxii.  18).  (3)  Shiloh  (Gen.  xlix.  10).  (4)  The  prophet  like 
onto  Himself  (Deut.  xviii.  15).  2.  By  David  as— (1)  His  son  (Psa.  cxxxii.  11).  (2) 
His  Lord  (Psa.  ex.  1).  (3)  The  Anointed  (Psa.  ii.  2 ;  Ixxxiv.  9).  (4)  The  Priest- 
King  (Psa.  ex.  1).  (5)  The  Pierced  One  (Psa.  xxii.  16).  3.  By  Isaiah  as— (1)  The 
Virgin's  Son  (vii.  14).  (2)  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  Mighty  God  (ix.  6).  (3)  Rod 
oat  of  the  stem  of  Jesse  (xi.  1).  (4)  Man  of  sorrows  (liii.  3).  (5)  Wounded  and 
bruised  Surety  (liiL  5 ;  10-12).  (6)  God's  righteous  Servant  (xlii.  1 ;  Hi.  18  ;  liii.  11). 
4.  By  Jeremiah  as — (1)  The  righteous  Branch  (xxiii,  5).  (2)  The  Lord  our  Bight, 
eousness  (xxiii.  6).  5.  By  Ezekiel  as  the  true  David,  the  Shepherd  King  (xxxvii. 
24).  6.  By  Daniel  as  Messiah  the  Prince  (ix.  25,  26).  7.  By  Micah  as  the  Judge 
of  Israel  (v.  2).  8.  By  Haggai  as  the  Desire  of  all  nations  (ii.  7).  9.  By  Zechariah 
as — (1)  The  Pierced  One  (xii.  10).  (2)  The  Man  who  was  Jehovah's  Shepherd  and 
Fellow  (xiii.  7).  10.  By  Malachi  as — (1)  The  Messenger  of  the  Covenant  (iii.  1). 
(2)  The  Sun  of  Righteousness  (iv.  3).  {T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Messianic  prophecy : 
.—The  prophets  had  foretold  concerning  the  Messiah — 1.  His  Divine  and  human 
natures  (Isa.  ix.  6).  2.  His  descent  ^Gen.  iii.  16,  xii.  3,  xlix.  10 ;  Isa.  xi.  1 ;  1  Sam. 
zvi.  11).  3.  The  time  of  His  appearing  (Gen.  xlix.  10 ;  Dan.  ix.  24,  25  ;  Haggai  ii. 
6-9).  4.  The  place  of  His  birth  (Micah  v.  2).  6.  The  virginity  of  His  mother  (Isa. 
vii.  14).  6.  The  Forerunner  who  should  prepare  His  way  (Mai.  iii.  1).  7.  The 
special  scene  of  His  ministry  (Isa.  ix.  1, 2).  8.  The  miracles  that  should  accredit  His 
mission  (Isa.  xxxv.  6,  6).  9.  His  sufferings  and  death  (Psa.  xxii.  16,  Ao. ;  Zeoh. 
xiii.  7  ;  Isa.  liii.  28).  10.  His  resurrection  (Psa.  xvi.  10).  11.  His  ascension  (Psa. 
Ixviii.  18).  12.  His  sitting  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  (Psa.  ex.  1).  13. 
His  effusion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Joel  ii.  28).  14.  His  second  coming  in  judgment 
(Dan.  vii.  13).  {Ibid.)  The  gospel  is  no  afterthought,  but  the  forethought  of  Ood : 
— God  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning.  AU  things  in  nature  and  grace  are  work- 
ing out  one  grand  scheme,  which  God  before  the  creation  of  heaven  and  earth 
designed.  The  gospel  was  but  a  further  and  fuller  development  of  God's  plans  in 
Old  Testament  times.  The  stem  is  no  afterthought ;  the  leaves  and  buds  are  no 
Afterthought ;  the  flower  is  no  afterthought ;  the  fruit  is  no  afterthought ;  for  they 
were  all  wrapped  up  from  the  first  in  the  seed,  or  cutting,  or  bulb.  Or,  to  take 
another  illustration,  it  is  of  no  nnfrequeut  occurrence  that  the  architect  designs  a 
Gbthic  church  which  is  not  to  be  built  all  at  once,  but  as  sufficient  funds  are  forth- 
coming, or  as  the  congregation  increases.  At  first  the  nave  is  constructed,  then  one 
aisle  after  another  is  added ;  and  afterwards  the  chancel  is  built,  and  last  of  all  is 
•letited  ihe  soii^ — whose  "  silent  finger  points  to  heaven. "    The  pulling  down  of 


19  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [CHA».  & 

temporary  walls  and  hoardings,  and  the  additions  from  time  to  time  made,  are  a* 
afterthonght,  but  only  the  carrying  out  of  the  original  design.  Thus  the  doing  away 
with  the  ceremonial  law  and  Jewish  ritual,  and  the  bringing  life  and  immortality 
to  light  through  Jesus,  are  no  afterthought,  but  the  /orethought  of  God — the 
revealing  of  His  glorious  scheme  of  grace  designed  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world,  and  previously  promised  by  His  prophets.  (C.  Neil,  M.A.)  In  the  holy 
Scripttires. — The  Old  Testament  Scriptures  called  holy  from — I.  Thbib  Authob, 
God  the  Holy  Ghost  (2  Pet.  i.  21 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  16 ;  Heb.  L  1).  II.  Thbib  mattbb, 
God's  holy  will,  thoughts,  words,  and  works.  III.  Thehi  desion  and  tendency,  to 
make  man  holy  (2  Tim.  iii.  17 ;  John  zvii.  17).  IV.  To  disiinodibh  ihem  7bom 
ALL  OTHEB  BOOKS.    {T.  Bobiuson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  Concerning  His  Son  Jesns  Christ  onr  Lord. — Christ,  OocTs  Son : — ^L 
In  what  SENSE.  1.  Not — (1)  As  angels  (Job.  xxxviii.  7).  (2)  As  Israel  (Erod.  ▼. 
22 ;  Hos.  xi.  1).     (3)  As  Adam  and  men  in  general  (Luke  iii.  38 ;  Acts  xvii.  29J. 

(4)  As  kings  and  rulers  (Psa.  lxx>ii.  6).  (5)  As  the  godly  and  regenerate  (Gen.  vi. 
2 ;  John  i.  12 ;  1  John  iii.  1).  2.  But  in  an  entirely  peculiar  sense  (John  v. 
17, 18).  (1)  God's  own  Son  (Eom.  viil  32).  (2)  Only  begotten  Son  (John  iii  16). 
(8)  Equal  with  God  (Phil.  ii.  6 ;  John  v.  18).     (4)  One  with  the  Father  (John  v.  80). 

(5)  The  brightness  of  His  glory,  and  express  image  of  His  person  (Heb.  i.  3).  (6) 
With  God  from  eternity  (John  i.  1,  2 ;  Prov.  viii.  22,  23).  (7)  God  Himself  (John 
i.  1 ;  Bom.  ix.  3).  IL  By  whom  declared.  1.  By  prophecy  (Psa.  ii.  7).  2.  By 
the  Father  (Matt.  iii.  17  ;  xvii.  5).  3.  By  Himself  (Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64 ;  John  ix.  35, 
89,  X.  30-36).  4.  By  the  apostles  (Acts  iii.  13,  ix.  20 ;  1  Cor.  i.  9,  xv.  28 ;  2  Cor. 
i.  19;  Gal.  iv.  4;  1  Thess.  i.  10;  Heb.  i.  2,  v.  8:  1  John  iv.  9).  (T.  BobinsoUt 
D.D.)  Christ  as  Lord  : — He  was  promised  as  such  (Psa.  ii.  6,  9,  ex.  1,  2;  Isa. 
ix.  6,  7 ;  Micah  v.  1,  2),  and  assumed  as  by  right  the  title  (John  xiii.  13 ;  xx.  28). 
He  was  made  so  by  the  Father  (Acts  ii,  36;  Phil,  ii,  11;  Eph.  i.  22),  and  the 
universal  confession  of  the  fact  will  constitute  His  mediatorial  reward  (Phil.  ii.  11|. 
Now  He  is  confessed  as  such  by  men  only  through  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor  xii.  8). 
As  Lord,  Christ.  I.  Is  the  Sovekeion  of  the  universe  ;  men,  angels,  and  devils, 
are  subject  to  Him  (Eph.  i.  21).  H.  Is  Head  of  His  Church  and  Kino  of  saints 
(Eph.  i.  22,  iv.  16  ;  Rev.  xv.  3).  All  other  headship  is  usurpation.  HI.  Abolishes 
THE  Old  Testament  economy  (Matt.  xi.  6 ;  John  iv.  21,  23 ;  Heb,  xii.  26,  27  ; 
Eev.  xxi.  5).  IV.  Sends  down  the  Holy  Spirit  (Acts  iL  33-36).  V.  Gathers 
MEN  into  His  kingdom  (John  x.  2-4,  14-16 ;  Isa.  Iv.  4,  6).  Yl.  Commissions  His 
apostles  to  preach  with  that  object  (Matt,  xxviii.  18,  19).  VII.  Appoints  what 
IS  TO  BE  DONE  IN  His  Church  (1  Cor.  ix.  14,  xi.  23  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20).  (Ibid.) 
Which  was  made  of  the  seed  of  David  according  to  the  flesh. — Christ  the  seed  of 
David: — Christ's  descent  from  David  gave  Him  a  claim  upon  the  Jews  as  a 
descendant  of  their  ancient  kings  ;  and  as  a  scion  of  the  stock  to  which  the  future 
royalty  was  promised  (Jer.  xxiii.  5;  Psa.  cxxxii.  11).  {Prof.  Beet.)  Christ  the 
seed  of  David : — Messiah  to  be  descended  from  David  (Psa.  cxxxii.  11 ;  Matt. 
xxii.  42).  He  was  David's  seed  by  Mary  (Luke  iii.  23),  also  by  Joseph,  His 
adoptive  Father  (Matt.  i.  18).  The  promised  Saviour.  1.  The  seed  of  the 
woman  and  therefore  a  man  (Gen  iii.  15).  2.  The  seed  of  Abraham  and 
therefore  a  Jew  (Gen.  xxii.  18 ;  Rom.  xv.  8).  3.  The  seed  of  David  and  there- 
fore a  king  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  29;  Luke  xxiii.  3;  John  i.  49).  {T.  Bobinson,  D.D.) 
The  Incarnation  of  God  {a  sermon  for  Christmas  Day) : — I.  Such  an  event  as  that 

CAN   have   nothing  LIKE    IT,  OR   PARALLEL   TO   IT,  WHILE    THIS  WORLD  LASTS.      It  is  the 

turning-point  in  the  history  of  the  world.  The  gospel  of  Christ  has  made  the 
Incarnation  of  the  Eternal  Son  what  St,  Paul  made  it — the  centre  of  all  teaching, 
worship,  obedience,  and  morality,  the  fulfilment  of  all  that  was  old,  the  starting- 
point  of  all  that  was  new — the  gospel  of  Christ  refuses  to  compromise  with  any 
view  of  religion  which  puts  this  tremendous  truth  in  any  less  than  its  sovereign 
place.  God  has  been  with  us,  and  seen  our  Ufe,  what  we  are,  what  we  do,  all  our 
sin  and  all  our  need — seen  it  with  the  eyes  of  a  man,  with  a  heart  as  human  in  its 
sympathy  and  brotherhood  as  it  was  Divinely  perfect  in  its  love  and  righteousness. 
God  has  unveiled  Himself  to  us  here,  to  be  as  man  the  restorer  of  mankind.  Is  it 
possible  that  such  a  thing  could  be,  and  not  that  all  things  else  be  changed  by  it? 
II.  The  Incarnation  was  the  turning-point  in  the  history  of  the  world ;  and,  as  A 
matter  of  fact,  we  have  before  our  eyes  the  consequences  which  have  followed 
FROM  it.  For  each  man,  as  for  the  world,  the  Son  of  God  was  made  man  to  enable 
eaoh  man  to  reach  the  perfection  for  which  he  was  made.     His  Incarnation  has 


.  tj  ROMANS.  ir 

been  made  known  to  as,  not  only  for  the  pablio  creed  of  the  Ghnroh,  bat  for  the 
personal  hope  and  stay  of  each  of  onr  souls.  And  to  know  what  it  means,  to  realise 
what  it  is  to  us,  is  the  turning-point  of  each  man's  belief.  To  think  that  He  who 
loved  with  such  self-sacrifice  is  He  of  whom  all  may  be  said  that  the  mind  of  man 
ean  conceive  of  the  everlasting  God — this  is  a  revelation  to  a  man's  spirit  which, 
whether  it  comes  gradually  or  suddenly,  is  one  of  those  things  which  lift  him  up 
oat  of  the  commonplaces  of  routine  rehgion,  one  of  those  things  which  bring  him 
face  to  face  with  the  real  questions  of  his  being — with  those  fateful  alternatives, 
the  choice  of  which  decides  the  course  of  life  and  its  issues.  We  may  overload 
and  cloud  it  with  subordinate  doctrines,  with  the  theories  and  traditions  of  men, 
with  a  disproportionate  mass  of  guesses  on  what  is  not  given  as  to  know — of 
Bubtleties  and  reasonings  in  the  sphere  of  human  philosophy.  We  may  recoil  from 
it  as  something  which  oppresses  oar  imagination  and  confounds  onr  reason ;  but 
we  may  be  sure  that  on  the  place  which  we  really  give  it  in  our  mind  and  heart 
depends  the  whole  character  of  our  Christianity,  depends  what  the  gospel  of  Christ 
means  to  as.    III.  We  see  in  the  Incarnation  how  God  fulfils  the  pbomises  Hb 

HAKES,  AND  THB   HOPES  WHICH  He  RAISES,  IN  WAYS  OTTEBLV  UNFORESEEN  AND  UXTERLT 

INCONOEIVABLB  BEFOREHAND,  otterly  bcyoud  the  power  of  man  to  anticipate ;  and, 
farther,  we  see  exemplified  in  it  that  widely  prevailing  law  of  His  government,  that 
in  this  stage  of  His  dispensations  with  which  we  are  acquainted — which  we  call 
•*  this  world  "  and  ••  this  life  " — that  which  is  the  greatest  must  stoop  to  begin  from 
what  is  humblest,  the  greatest  glories  must  pass  through  their  hour  of  obscurity, 
the  greatest  strength  must  rise  out  of  the  poorest  weakness,  the  greatest  triumphs 
mast  have  faced  their  outset  of  defeat  and  rebuke,  the  greatest  goodness  start 
onrecognised  and  misunderstood.  Is  it  not  something  almost  too  great  for  the 
mind  to  endure — the  contrast  between  what  the  eye  of  man  really  saw  and  what 
really  was ;  between  what  was  to  be,  and  its  present  visible  beginning  ?  When 
wonder,  adoration,  and  thanksgiving,  if  it  were  possible,  without  bounds,  have  had 
their  due,  there  remain  the  practical  impressions  to  be  laid  up  for  the  serious  work 
of  life.  Yoa  are  the  heirs — you  cannot  doubt  it  in  presence  of  that  manger-cradle 
—of  a  hope  which  passes  measuring  here.  You  are  the  object  of  a  Divine  solicitude, 
interested  in  an  economy  of  grace  and  recovery,  of  which  human  language  is  abso- 
lately  incapable  to  reveal  the  fulness.  But,  in  the  meanwhile,  you  are  men  and 
women,  with  your  appointed  parts  to  play  on  this  earthly  scene — with  time  to  waste 
or  to  devate,  with  the  risks  of  unfaithfulness,  with  the  sure  rewards  of  self- 
discipline,  with  a  character  to  fashion  after  the  mind  of  Christ,  with  an  allotted 
and  fast  shortening  term  to  finish  your  work.  What  can  you  learn  for  your  own 
guidance  from  the  mystery  of  His  Incarnation?  Is  it  not,  surely,  that  we  must 
begin  our  eternal  work,  as  He  was  pleased  to  begin  His,  according  to  that  law 
which  He  has  laid  down  for  the  kingdom  of  God,  by  which  those  who  are  to  reach 
the  highest  must  have  known  and  welcomed  the  humblest  and  the  lowest.  "  Except 
ye  become  as  little  children,"  is  His  characteristic  word,  "  ye  cannot  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven."  Let  us  think  of  ourselves  as  children  in  the  presence  of  that 
supreme  mystery  with  which  all  onr  destiny  is  bound  up — children  before  the 
incalculable  humiliation  of  the  Son  of  God,  before  the  infinity  of  His  greatness  and 
His  love ;  children  on  the  brink  and  threshold  of  that  vast,  anchanging  life,  to 
which  this  one  is  but  a  play-time  and  a  trial-ground,  knowing  nothing  except  in 
pari  yet  with  the  fortunes  of  an  eternal  existence  in  our  hands.  {Dean  ChurcK) 
The  necessity  of  Christ's  Incarnation: — Whenever  the  Saviour's  character  can  be  under- 
stood there  is  a  felt  adaptation.  We  do  not  know  Him  as  a  Jew  any  more ;  we  know 
Him  as  the  Son  of  Man,  as  the  Saviour,  as  the  Great  Bepresentative  of  the  human 
race ;  we  know  Him  as  having  something  in  common  with  everything  that  is  human ; 
we  know  Him  as  being  more  nearly  related  to  human  beings  than  any  human  being 
is  to  another,  feeling  every  throb — shall  I  say  ? — every  emotion,  and  every  anxiety  of 
every  human  creature  with  an  interest,  a  depth,  and  a  nearness  of  sympathy  that 
no  mother  ever  felt  for  her  child.  This  is  wonderful !  It  is  an  amazing  provision 
for  human  want.  All  humanity  cries  out  for  an  Incarnation.  Did  you  ever  think 
that  the  very  idols  which  the  poor  heathen  hath  prepared  throughout  the  whole 
world,  wherever  the  gospel  has  not  gone,  are  the  product  of  the  groaning  there  is 
in  the  human  heart  after  God  incarnate  ?  They  are  groping  in  the  dark,  and  yet 
they  are  reaching  out  after  the  hght  of  heaven.  It  is  the  want  of  humanity  reach- 
ing after  something  that  is  more  tangible,  more  accessible,  and  more  within  the 
grasp  and  conception  of  human  character  than  an  invisible,  intangible,  inappre- 
ciable, all-pervading  and  infinite  Spirit.    It  is  strange  that  men  shut  themselves  off 


It  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [<au».  b 

in  a  Taoonm  when  this  wonderful  proyision  is  broaght  to  them — Ood  manifested 
in  tiie  fleBh.  {C.  Kingsley.)  And  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power, 
according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead. — Ghriat 
evinced  by  the  resurrection  to  be  the  Son  of  Qod : — His  resurrection  then  did  not 
coDBtitute  Him  the  Son  of  God,  it  only  evinced  that  He  was  traly  so.  Jesas  Christ 
had  declared  Himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  on  this  account  the  Jews  charged 
TTim  with  blasphemy,  and  asserted  that  He  was  a  deceiver.  By  His  resurrection^ 
the  clear  manifestation  of  the  character  He  had  assumed,  gloriously  and  for  ever 
terminated  the  controversy  which  had  been  maintained  during  the  whole  of  His 
ministry  on  earth.  In  raising  Him  from  the  dead  God  decided  the  contest.  He 
declared  Him  to  be  His  Son,  and  showed  that  He  had  accepted  His  death  in  satis- 
faction for  the  sins  of  His  people,  and  consequently  that  He  had  su£fered  not  for 
Himself,  but  for  them,  which  none  could  have  done  but  the  Son  of  God.  On  this 
great  fact  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  Paul  rests  the  truth  of  the  Christian 
religion,  without  which  the  testimony  of  the  apostles  would  be  false,  and  the  faith 
of  God's  people  vain.  (R.  Haldane.)  Christ's  resurrection  a  proof  of  Hit 
Divinity  : — I  shall — I.  Explaik  thb  wobds.  1.  "  Declared  "  may  signify  decreed 
or  determined.  But  with  what  propriety  could  Christ  be  said  to  be  decreed  to  be 
that  which  He  was  from  eternity.  That  which  is  the  proper  object  of  decree  or 
destination  is  something  future ;  but  that  which  was  eternal  cannot  be  imagined  in 
any  period  of  time  to  be  future.  Those  who  deny  the  eternal  godhead  of  Christ, 
and  date  His  Sonship  principally  from  His  resurrection,  are  great  friends  to  this 
exposition.  But  the  word  also  means  to  declare,  show  forth,  or  manifest,  and 
this  signification  carries  a  most  fit  and  emphatic  opposition  to  "  He  was  made  of 
the  seed  of  David,"  which  word  imports  the  human  constitution  that  did  not  exist 
before ;  but  here,  since  He  had  from  eternity  been  the  Son  of  God,  it  is  not  said  of 
Him  that  He  was  made,  but  only  declared  or  manifested  to  be  so.  2.  "  With 
power  "  ;  which,  though  some  understand  of  the  power  of  Christ,  as  it  exerted  itself 
in  His  miracles ;  yet  here  it  signifies  rather  the  glorious  power  of  His  Divine  nature, 
by  which  He  overcame  death,  and  properly  opposed  to  the  weakness  of  His  human 
nature,  by  which  He  suffered  it  (2  Cor.  xiii.  4).  3.  "  According  to  the  Spirit  of 
holiness."  Christ's  Divine  nature — in  opposition  to  His  human  nature  (John  iv. 
24 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  16).  This  qualification  of  holiness  is  annexed  because  Paul  con- 
siders not  the  Divine  nature  of  Christ,  absolutely  in  itself,  but  according  to  the 
relation  it  had  to  His  other  nature.  For  it  was  His  Divinity  which  consecrated 
and  hypostatically  deified  His  humanity.  4.  "  By  the  resurrection  from  the  dead" 
cannot,  as  some  suppose,  mean  the  general  resurrection,  because  that  was  future, 
and  the  apostle's  design  here  is  to  demonstrate  the  Divinity  of  Christ  by  something 
already  done  and  known.  It  must  be  understood  therefore  of  His  personal  resur- 
rection. II.  Show  that  Christ's  besobbeotion  is  thb  gbeatest  abgoment  to 
PBovE  Him  thb  Son  of  God.  1.  The  foundation  and  sum  of  the  gospel  Ilea 
within  the  compass  of  this  proposition,  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  the  Son  of  God. 
For  that  which  properly  discriminates  the  Christian  religion  from  the  natural,  or 
Judaical,  is  the  holding  of  Christ's  Deity.  Of  course  Christ  is  capable  of  being 
called  the  Son  of  God  in  several  respects.  (1)  According  to  His  human  nature.  He 
had  no  natural  father,  but  was  produced  in  the  womb  of  His  mother  by  the  imme- 
diate power  of  God.  (2)  For  His  resemblance  to  God ;  it  being  proper  to  call  Him 
the  Son  of  God,  who  does  the  works  of  God  (John  iii.  44).  (3)  From  His  having 
the  government  of  all  things  put  into  His  hands  upon  His  ascension.  Yet  here  we 
are  to  consider  the  principal  cause  of  His  being  called  so ;  which  is  from  the  eternal 
generation  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God  in  such  a  way  as  proves  Him  to  be  God 
Himself.  2.  Now  this  supereminent  Sonship  ought  in  reason  to  be  evinced  by  some 
great  and  conclusive  argument ;  and  such  a  one  is  supplied  by  His  resurrection. 
(1)  But  you  will  naturally  reply.  How  can  His  resurrection,  which  supposes 
Him  to  have  been  dead,  prove  Him  to  have  existed  from  all  eternity,  and  so 
could  not  die?  The  answer  is  that  we  must  consider  it  with  relation  to  His 
doctrine,  affirming  Himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  as  the  seal  set  to  the  truth 
of  that  doctrine.  (2)  It  is  much  disputed,  whether  Christ's  resurrection  is  to  bo 
referred  to  His  own  power,  or  only  to  the  power  of  the  Father.  But  it  is  not  material, 
for  both  equally  prove  the  same  thing.  If  Christ  raised  Himself,  He  must  have 
done  it  by  virtue  of  a  power  inherent  in  another  nature,  which  was  Divine  ;  if  the 
Father  raised  Him,  it  still  proves  Him  to  have  been  God  ;  for  the  Father  would  not 
have  exerted  an  infinite  power  to  have  confirmed  a  lie.  3.  The  resurrection  is  the 
principal  proof  of  Eis  Divinity.   The  ordinary  arguments  are — (1)  From  tbo  nator* 


OHAY.  l]  ROMANS.  U 

of  the  things  which  He  taaght.  (2)  The  fulfilling  of  prophecies  in  His  person. 
(8)  The  wonderful  works  that  He  did,  which  were  the  syllogisms  of  heaven,  and 
the  argumentations  of  omnipotence.  (4)  Yet  over  these  Christ's  resurrection  had 
a  vast  pre-eminence,  (a)  All  His  miracles,  supposing  that  His  resurrection  had 
not  followed,  would  not  have  had  sufficient  efficacy,  but  His  resurrection  alone  had 
been  a  full  and  undeniable  proof.  The  former  part  of  the  assertion  is  clear  from 
1  Cor.  XV.  14,  17.  Now  before  Christ's  death  all  His  miracles  were  actually  done, 
and  yet  the  apostle  states  that  if  He  had  not  risen  the  whole  proof  of  the  gospel 
had  been  buried  with  Him  in  the  same  grave.  And  for  the  other  part  of  tl:e  as- er- 
tion,  that  appears  upon  two  accounts  ;  first,  that  the  thing  considered  absolutely  in 
itself,  according  to  the  greatness  of  it,  did  transcend  all  the  rest  of  His  works  put 
together.  Secondly,  that  it  had  a  more  intimate  connection  with  His  doctrine 
than  any  of  the  rest ;  and  that  not  only  as  a  sign  proving  it,  but  as  enabling 
Him  to  give  being  to  the  things  which  He  promised,  viz.,  to  send  the  gifts  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  upon  His  disciples  to  fit  them  to  promulge  the  gospel,  and  to  raise  np 
those  that  beheved  in  Him  at  the  last  day,  which  are  two  of  the  principal  pillars  of 
His  doctrine.  But  for  Him  to  have  done  this  not  rising  from  the  dead,  but  con- 
tinuing under  a  state  of  death,  had  been  utterly  impossible,  (b)  His  miracles  did 
not  convince  men  so  potently,  but  that  while  some  believed,  more  disbelieved,  and 
assigned  them  to  some  other  cause,  short  of  Divine  power,  either  devilish  or  magical 
(Matt.  rii.  24).  But  now,  when  they  came  to  His  resurrection,  they  never  attempted 
to  assign  any  cause  besides  the  power  of  Ood,  so  as  to  depress  the  miraculousness 
of  it ;  but  denied  the  fact,  and  set  themselves  to  prove  that  there  was  no  such 
thing ;  allowing,  tacitly,  that,  if  real,  His  Godhead  could  not  be  denied.  Their 
scepticism  in  regard  to  the  other  miracles  arose  from — first,  the  difficulty  of  dis- 
cerning when  an  action  is  really  a  miracle;  i.e.,  above  the  force  of  nature,  and 
therefore  to  be  ascribed  to  a  supernatural  power.  For  who  can  assign  the  limits 
beyond  which  nature  cannot  pass  ?  Then,  secondly,  supposing  that  an  action  ia 
fully  known  to  be  a  miracle,  it  is  as  difficult  to  know  whether  it  proves  the  truth 
of  the  doctrine  of  that  person  that  does  it,  or  not.  For  it  is  by  no  means  certain 
bat  that  God  may  suffer  miracles  to  be  done  by  an  impostor,  for  the  trial  of  men, 
to  see  whether  or  no  they  will  be  drawn  off  from  a  received,  established  truth 
(Deut.  xiii.  1-5).  But  now  neither  of  these  exceptions  take  place  against  the  resur- 
rection. For  first,  though  we  cannot  assign  the  determinate  point  where  the  power 
of  nature  ends,  yet  there  are  some  actions  that  so  vastly  transcend  it,  that  there 
can  be  no  suspicion  that  they  proceed  from  any  power  but  a  Divine.  I  cannot  tell, 
e.g.,  how  far  a  man  may  walk  in  a  day,  but  I  know  that  it  is  impossible  for  him  to 
walk  a  thousand  miles.  Now  reason  tells  us  that  the  raising  of  a  dead  man  to  life  in 
reference  to  the  force  of  natural  causes,  that  is  not  in  their  power  to  do  it.  And 
secondly,  should  God  suffer  a  miracle  to  be  done  by  an  impo'^tor,  there  is  no  neces- 
sity hence  to  gather  that  God  did  it  to  confirm  His  words;  for  God  may  do  a 
miracle  when  and  where  He  pleases.  But  since  Christ  had  so  often  laid  the  stress 
of  the  whole  truth  of  His  gospel  upon  His  resurrection,  and  declared  to  those  who 
sought  for  a  sign  that  it  was  the  oniy  sign  that  should  be  given  to  that  generation, 
God  could  not  have  raised  Him  but  in  confii-mation  of  what  He  had  said  and 
promised,  and  so  have  joined  with  Him  in  the  imposture.  In  a  word,  if  this  does 
not  satisfy,  I  affirm  that  its  not  in  the  power  of  man  to  invent,  or  of  God  to  do  any 
greater  thing  to  persuade  the  world  of  the  truth  of  a  doctrine  and  he  who  believes 
not  upon  Christ's  resurrection  from  the  dead  would  scarce  believe,  though  he  rose 
from  the  dead  himself.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  The  resurrection  of  Chrint:  its  evidence, 
and  iU  hearing  on  the  truth  of  Christianity : — I.  It  was  predicted  beforehand. 
In  the  Old  Testament  (Pt^a.  xvi.  9,  10 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  19),  and  by  Himself  (Matt,  xvii, 
9,  23).  This  was  not  understood  by  His  disciples  (Mark  ix.  10;  Luke  xviii.  33,  34), 
and  they  were  slow  to  beUeve  the  fact  when  it  took  place  (Mark  xvi.  11-14 ;  Luke 
xxiv.  21,  25).  II.  It  occurred  under  circumstances  which  rendered  imposture 
iBiPOBSiBKB.  1.  Christ's  death  was  real.  2.  The  story  of  the  Jfws  in  regard  to  the 
resurrection  is  absurd.     III.  The   idea   of    falsehood   is  contradicted  bx  thb 

WHOUt   UTB   AND    CONDUCT    OP    THE    APOSTLFg.       IV.    ThE    EXISTENCE    OF    ChRISTIANITT 

«HB  PB007  OF  Chbist's  besubbection.  The  institution  of  the  Chrisciau  Subbath 
is  dne  to  it,  and  all  its  other  institutions  and  distinctive  doctrines  stand  or  fall 
▼ith  it.  The  resurrection  is  true,  or  Christianity  is  built  on  a  lie,  to  believe  which 
requires  greater  creduhty  than  the  resurrection  itself.     (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)        Tin 

tecret  of  the  success  of  Christiaiilti/ ; — Tlip  theophilanthrop'st  LarevelT'r?' Lcp''n,TTX 
had  laboored  to  bring  into  vogue  a  sort  of  improved  Christianity,  wiiich  should  ba 


14  THE  Biblical  illustrator.  (ota*.  & 

both  a  benevolent  and  rational  religion.  He  went  to  Talleyrand,  and,  with  expres- 
sions of  mortification,  he  admitted  that  he  had  failed,  for  the  sceptical  age  would 
have  nothing  to  do  with  religion.  •*  What,  my  friend,  shall  I  do  ?  "  he  mournfully 
asked.  The  wily  ex-bishop  and  diplomat  hardly  knew,  he  said,  what  to  advise  in 
a  matter  so  difficult  as  the  improvement  of  Christianity.  "  Still,"  said  he,  after  a 
moment's  pause,  and  with  a  smile,  "  there  is  one  plan  you  might  try."  His  friend 
was  all  attention,  but  there  was  a  somewhat  prolonged  pause  before  Talleyrand 
answered.  "  I  recommend  to  you,"  he  said,  "  to  be  crucified  for  mankind,  and  to 
rise  again  on  the  third  day  1 "  It  was  a  Ughtning  fiash,  and  the  reformer  stood,  at 
least  for  the  moment,  awed  and  reverent  before  the  stupendous  fact  suggested  by  the 
great  diplomat.  (W.  Baxendale.)  Christ's  Holy  Spirit : — The  word  "  spirit "  is 
in  contrast  with  "flesh,"  and  "  according  to"  (Gr.j  limits  the  assertion  "who  was 
marked  out  as  Son  of  God  "  to  the  spirit  which  animated  the  body  bom  of  David's 
seed.  Looking  at  the  material  of  His  body,  we  call  Him  David's  Son ;  looking  at 
the  Spirit  which  moved,  spoke,  and  acted,  in  that  human  body,  we  call  Him  Son  of 
God.  In  every  man  there  is  a  mysterious  linking  together  of  two  worlds,  of  that 
which  is  akin  to  the  clay,  and  that  which  is  akin  to  God ;  of  flesh  and  Spirit.  In 
Christ  on  earth  we  have  this  in  a  still  higher  degree.  The  flesh  of  Christ  was 
ordinary  flesh  ;  and  therefore  needs  no  further  description.  But  the  Spirit  which 
animated  that  flesh  is  altogether  different  from  all  other  human  spirits.  Spirit  of 
holiness  is  chosen,  perhaps,  to  distinguish  the  personal  Spirit  of  Christ  from  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  to  show  that  it  was  a  personal  embodiment  of  holiness  (Psa.  li.  11 ; 
Isa.  Ixiii.  10),  i.e.,  absolute  devotion  to  God  is  a  great  feature  of  the  nature  of 
Christ,  that  of  Him  every  thought,  purpose,  word,  act,  points  directly  towards  God. 
This  agrees  with  the  words  of  Jesus  about  Himself  (John  iv.  34 ;  v.  19,  30 ;  vi.  38). 
With  Him  holiness  was  not  accidental  or  acquired ;  but  was  an  essential  element 
of  His  nature,  arising  directly  from  His  relation  to  God  (chap.  v.  19).  When  we 
look  at  Christ's  body,  we  find  Him  Uke  ourselves  ;  and  we  call  Him  David's  Son  ; 
but  when  we  look  at  the  Spirit  which  moved  those  lips  and  hands  and  feet,  which 
breathed  in  that  human  breast,  and  when  we  see  that  Spirit  turning  always  and 
essentially  to  God,  we  declare  Him  to  be  the  Son  of  God.    (Prof.  But.) 

Ver.  6.  By  whom  we  have  received  grace  and  apostleshlp ; — Grace  and  apostle- 
ship  : — I.  Grace  or  apostleship,  i.e.,  the  favour  of  being  an  apostle.  Given  to  the 
twelve  (Matt.  x.  1,  2) ;  to  Paul  (Acts  ix.  15;  xiii.  2).  The  ministry  of  the  Word  is 
given  as  a  mark  of  Divine  favour.  So  Chrysostom  deemed  it  when  he  said,  "  Not 
by  our  labour  and  industry,  but  by  His  grace " ;  and  Philip  Henry,  after  his 
ordination,  "  I  received  this  day  as  much  honour  and  work  as  I  shall  be  able  to 
know  what  to  do  with."  Especially  was  this  a  grace  to  one  who  had  been  a 
blasphemer  and  persecutor.  II.  Grace  with  apostleship,  i.e.,  apostleship  with  the 
necessary  gifts  and  graces,  extraordinary  gifts  as  well  as  spiritual  grace  (2  Cor. 
xii.  9;  Gal.  ii.  9;  Epb.  iv.  8-11).  The  grace  which  caUs  also  qualifies  for  office 
(Piom.  xii.  3,  xv.  5  :  Eph.  iii.  2).  This  is  necessary,  as  was  felt  by  Augustine  when 
he  said,  "The  ministry  is  a  weight  from  which  even  an  angel  might  shrink";  and 
by  Luther,  who,  "though  an  old  preacher,  trembled  each  time  he  ascended  the 
pulpit."  III.  Grace,  then  apostleship,  i.e.,  saving  grace  necessary  to  apostlesldp. 
Grace  and  office  not  to  be  sejarated  (Psa.  1.  16).  A  graceless  ministry  a  grievous 
curse  to  the  Church  and  to  the  minister  himself.  Of  all  callings  the  ministry  is 
the  most  dangerous  to  an  unconverted  man,  and  more  likely  to  destroy  men's 
souls  than  to  save  them.  How  dreadful  to  preach  to  others  and  be  at  last  a  cast- 
away (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  Noah's  workmen  refused  to  enter  the  ark  and  perished. 
(2'.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Apostleship : — 1.  Its  source.  2.  Its  privilege.  3.  Its 
object.  4.  Its  sphere.  5.  Its  motive.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  For  obedience  to  the 
faitli. — Obedience  to  the  faith,  or  (Gr.)  obedience  of  faith  : — I.  Obedience.  The 
gospel  a  thing  to  be  obeyed  (Eom.  vi.  17 ;  1  Pet.  i.  22 ;  Acts  vi.  7).  In  it  God 
commands  as  well  as  invites  and  offers  (1  John  iii.  23).  Men  are  commanded  to 
believe  the  gospel  (Mark  i.  15) ;  in  Christ  (1  John  iii.  23).  Unbelief  and  rejection 
of  Christ  rebellion  against  God.  II.  Faith  viewed — 1.  Subjectively  is— (1) 
Credit  given  to  the  gospel  as  God's  message.  (2)  Trust  reposed  in  Christ  and  His 
finished  work  as  God's  plan.  2.  Objectively — the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  to  be 
received  in  faith  (Gal.  L  23 ;  iiL  23-25).  Gospel  truth  is  only  to  be  known  and 
learned  by  a  Divine  revelation.  III.  Obedience  to  the  faith.  1.  Obedience,  in 
which  faith  consists.  Faith  is  itself  obedience.  When  God  speaks  men  are  not  to 
CMSOU,  but  to  believe  and  accept.    The  Jews  asked  for  a  sign,  Greeks  for  wisdom ; 


amif.  v]  ROMANS.  If 

God  demands  faith,  and  faith  cordially  anbmits  to  His  method  of  salvation  by 
Christ.  2.  Obedience  as  the  fruit  of  faith.  Faith  in  Christ  is  the  mother  of  all 
true  and  acceptable  obedience  (Rom.  xv.  18,  xvi.  19;  2  Cor.  vii.  16,  x.  5,  6;  1  Pet, 
L  3).  Works  without  faith,  faith  without  works,  both  alike  dead  (James  ii.  26). 
(Jod  seeks  evangelical,  not  legal  obedience,  because  the  gospel,  not  the  law,  pro- 
duces the  love  that  alone  fulfils  it.  Faith  in  Christ  proved  by  obedience  to  Him 
as  a  tree  by  its  fruit  (James  ii.  18-26).  Faith  is  the  obedience  of  the  understand- 
ing to  God  revealing  its  effect,  the  obedience  of  the  will  to  God  commanding. 
(T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Faith  meamred  by  obedience: — Our  obedience  being  the 
child  of  faith,  partakes  of  its  parent's  strength  or  weakness.  Abraham  was  strong 
in  faith,  and  what  an  heroic  act  of  obedience  did  he  perform  in  offering  up  His  Son  I 
{W.  Gurnall.) 

Ver.  6.  Among  fTliom  are  ye  also  the  called  of  Jesns  Christ. — The  called  of 
Jetut  Christ: — This  expression  denotes — 1.  That  the  change  is  wholly  of  the 
Lord,  that  it  is  the  effect  of  His  own  good  pleasure,  and  accomplished  by  His 
Almighty  power.  Others  may  attempt  it,  but  none  can  do  it  effectually  but  Him- 
self. The  Word  may  be  the  instrument,  but  its  success  is  of  Him  alone.  2. 
The  ease  with  which  this  great  work  is  accomplished,  for  what  more  easy 
than  to  do  it  with  a  word.  In  the  morning  of  creation  God  said,  ••  Let  there 
be  light,  and  there  was  light."  In  the  morning  of  conversion  His  mandate 
is  equally  sovereign  and  efficacious.  3.  The  great  difference  that  is  made 
between  the  former  and  present  state  of  the  person  called.  It  clearly  impUes 
that  a  separation  existed  between  the  parties,  and  that  in  virtue  of  this  call  the 
sinner  is  brought  nigh  to  God.  I.  The  nature  of  this  votn  calling.  There  are 
various  calls  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures,  1.  To  particular  services  of  a  civil 
nature.  God  called  Cyrus  to  the  conquest  of  nations,  and  to  be  the  protector  of 
Israel.  A  person's  secular  employment  is  said  to  be  his  calling ;  it  is  the  work  to 
which  Providence  invites  him  (Isa.  xlv.  4 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  20).  2.  To  office,  as  when 
Paul  was  called  to  the  apostleship  (ver,  1).  Thus  every  faithful  minister  of  the 
gospel,  in  an  inferior  degree,  is  called  of  God  (1  Cor,  xii.  7-11).  3.  To  mankind, 
wherever  the  gospel  comes,  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  be  saved.  But 
though  all  without  exception  are  thus  invited,  few  are  chosen  (Prov,  viii.  4  ;  Isa.  Iv. 
7;  Matt,  xxii.  1-10;  Acts  xvii.  30),  But  the  call  mentioned  in  our  text  is  peculiar 
to  true  believers.  It  implies — 1.  A  conviction  of  the  evil  of  sin,  of  tho  utter  insuffi- 
ciency of  the  creature,  and  of  the  want  of  a  Saviour.  2.  A  sweet  and  powerful 
inclination  of  the  whole  soul  towards  God.  The  compliance  is  voluntary,  while 
the  energy  is  efficient  and  almighty.  "  I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man,  with  bands 
of  love."  3,  A  solemn  surrender  of  ourselves  to  be  the  Lord's.  4.  Certain  effects. 
Sinners  are  hereby  called  out  of  dar1-;ness  into  marvellous  light ;  from  the  bondage 
of  sin,  Satan,  and  the  law,  to  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God.  It  ia  said  to 
be  a  holy  and  a  heavenly  calling,  whereby  we  are  called  to  the  attainment  of  glory 
and  virtue.  It  ia  that  by  which  we  are  meetened  for  heaven.  A  partial  but  real 
conformity  to  God  in  this  world  will  be  followed  by  a  perfect  conformity  to  Him  in 
the  next ;  for  whom  He  called,  them  He  also  glorified  (Rom.  viii,  30 ;  2  Pet.  i,  3). 
II.  The  means  employed.  These  are  diverse,  but  it  is  the  same  God  which 
worketh  all  in  all.  Some  are  called  into  the  vineyard  at  the  third  hour,  some  at 
the  sixth,  some  at  the  ninth,  and  some  even  at  the  eleventh  hour  of  the  day. 
Sometimes  remarkable  providences  have  become  the  messengers  of  unexpected 
mercy;  sometimes  fearful  dreams,  or  the  edifying  discourse  of  pious  friends,  but 
more  frequently  the  public  ministry  of  the  Word.  The  Lord  calls  some  in  thunder, 
others  in  the  still  small  voice.  III.  Its  distinguishing  properties.  It  is — 1. 
Personal  and  particular.  The  general  call  of  the  gospel  is  addressed  to  all  who 
come  within  its  sound,  but  this  singles  out  the  object  and  speaks  to  him  as  it  were 
byname.  "Zaccheus,  come  down,"  "Saul,  Saul,  why  pdrsecutest  thou  Me?" 
The  former  is  drawing  the  bow  at  a  venture,  the  latter  directs  the  arrow  to  the 
mark.  The  one  is  the  act  of  man,  the  other  the  sole  work  of  God  :  the  one  is 
directed  to  the  ear,  the  other  to  the  heart,  2.  Secret  and  internal.  It  is  visible 
only  in  its  effects  (John  iii,  8).  Saul's  companions  heard  a  sound  of  words,  but 
knew  not  what  was  spoken,  3,  Eff^-ctual,  Many  other  calls  are  not  so,  even 
where  God  Himself  is  the  speaker ;  for  he  speaketh  once — yea,  twice — to  our  senses, 
to  our  reason,  in  the  works  of  crpation  an. I  pi'ovidence,  and  in  the  ministry  of  the 
Word,  but  man  p^rceiveth  it  not,  or  does  not  regard  it.  But  when  God  speaks  to 
the  conscience  and  the  heart  the  sinner  is  made  to  hear  and  to  obey.    His  iaa* 


lA  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  U 

gnage  is,  •*  Call  Thon,  and  I  will  answer — speak.  Lord,  for  Thy  servant  heareth."  4. 
Irrevooable.  Not  only  the  gifts,  but  the  calling  of  God  is  without  repentance 
(Bom.  zi.  29).  God  is  said  to  repent  that  He  gave  man  a  being,  but  never  that  He 
gave  him  grace.  Improvement :  1.  How  necessary  and  important  is  it  that  we 
give  all  diligence  to  make  our  calling  and  election  sure  (2  Pet.  i.  10).  2.  Let  oa 
learn  our  obligations  to  Divine  grace.  Whatever  we  are  enabled  to  do  for  CJhrist 
is  the  fruit  of  what  He  has  done  for  us.  3.  Let  our  gratitude  for  God's  dis- 
tinguishing grace  be  exemplified  by  a  course  of  universal  obedience.  (B,  Bed- 
dome.)  The  inspiring  energy  of  a  Divine  call : — Great  heroes  of  history  have 
often  been  represented  as  urged  on,  stimulated,  or  inspired  by  some  influence 
beyond  themselves.  Whether  it  has  been  called  a  genius  or  a  spirit,  a  demon  or 
an  angel,  fate  or  providence,  the  principle  is  the  same.  They  have  either  them- 
selves believed,  or  the  superstition  of  their  followers  has  given  birth  to  the  idea 
that  some  overruling  and  irresistible  power  was  leading  them  through  the  intri- 
cacies of  their  earthly  course  and  directing  their  every  step  towards  a  predetM- 
mined  end.  Thus  Joan  of  Arc,  a  simple  rustic  country  maid,  was  led  on  by 
imaginary  voices  which  she  heard  to  seek  the  deliverance  of  her  country  from  the 
hand  of  her  enemies.  She  believed  herself  inspired  to  take  the  lead  of  armies  and 
to  place  the  crown  of  France  upon  the  head  of  the  rightful  monarch.  Nor  did  she 
cease  or  fail  in  her  endeavours  till  she  had  roused  her  countrymen  to  vigorous  aution, 
led  them  on  to  victory,  and  restored  the  kingdom  to  him  whom  she  regarded 
as  its  true  and  lawful  king.  (Harvey  Phillips.)  The  Christian  calling  ascer- 
tained : — To  every  Christian  man  there  is  a  heavenly  calling,  a  Divine  mission, 
a  sacred  consecration,  and  it  behoves  him  to  see,  to  contemplate,  to  study  what 
that  calling  is  and  how  he  can  best  perform  its  sacred  obligations.  {Ibid.) 
Life  not  to  fall  below  the  heavenly  calling : — A  being  already  invested  with  a  death- 
less life,  already  adopted  into  the  immediate  family  of  God,  already  enrolled  in  the 
brotherhood  of  angels,  yea,  of  the  Lord  of  angels ;  a  being  who,  amid  the  revolu- 
tions of  earth  and  skies,  feels  and  knows  himself  indestructible,  capacitated  to 
outlast  the  universe,  a  sharer  in  the  immortality  of  God — what  is  there  that  can 
be  said  of  such  an  one  which  falls  not  below  the  awful  glory  of  his  position  !  Oh, 
misery,  that  with  such  a  calling,  man  should  be  the  grovelling  thing  that  he  is  1 — 
that,  summoned  but  to  pause  for  awhile  in  the  vestibule  of  the  eternal  temple  ere 
he  be  introduced  into  its  sanctuaries,  he  should  forget,  in  the  dreams  of  his 
lethargy,  the  eternity  that  awaits  him  1  Oh,  wretchedness  beyond  words,  that, 
surrounded  by  love,  and  invited  to  glory,  we  should  have  no  heart  for  happiness, 
but  should  still  cower  in  the  dark,  while  light  ineffable  solicits  him  to  behold  and 
enjoy  it  I  (Prof.  W.  A.  Butler.)  The  Christian  calling  should  lead  to  service : — Like 
as  if  the  Queen,  to  show  her  puissance  against  a  foreign  power,  should  call  forth 
some  of  her  subjects  who  are  most  beholden  to  her  to  combat  in  her  presence  for 
her  honour,  they  would,  no  doubt,  strain  all  their  strength  in  this  service,  yea,  and 
their  lives  too :  even  so,  much  more  ought  we  that  are  Christians  to  perform  this 
duty  to  our  God  and  Prince,  who  hath  called  us  out  by  name  to  fight  for  His 
honour,  to  be  a  chosen  and  peculiar  people  unto  Himself,  to  stand  on  His  posts,  to 
show  forth  His  virtues  and  to  be  zealous  of  good  works ;  yea,  and,  that  we  might 
the  better  perform  this  service.  He  had  furnished  us  with  His  own  armour  and 
weapons,  yea,  and  His  own  holy  hand  is  with  us  too,  though  all  men  see  it  not ; 
therefore  we  must  endeavour  to  do  valiantly,  and  to  do  our  best,  to  answer  the 
expectation  of  our  heavmly  King  and  Prince.      (Cawdray.)  The  gospel  ia — 

I.  The  call  of  God.  1.  He  provides  it.  2.  Speaks  in  it.  8.  Sends  it.  IL 
Addbesssd  TO  ALL.    1.  Of  every  natioo.    2.  To  yoa  in  particular.    {J.  Lyth,  DJ>.) 

Vers.  7.  To  all  that  be  in  Rome. — The  apostolic  greeting  : — I.  Its  contents.  1. 
Grace.  (1)  Favour  bestowed  by  God  in  conviction,  conversion,  sanctificatioa, 
comfort,  help,  &c.  (2)  Consciously  enjoyed.  Not  something  placed  to  our  account 
in  a  heavenly  record,  but  actually  experienced  in  the  heart  and  life,  (3)  Through 
the  use  of  means.  Not  a  mysterious  endowment,  but  received  by  the  exercise  of  a 
rational  faith  working  through  prayer,  meditation,  communion,  &o.  (4)  Exhibited 
in  the  ever  ripening  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  Not  an  inward  enjoyment  merely,  but  an 
outward  expression  by  which,  in  grace  of  character  and  usefulness,  a  Christian  ig 
read  and  known  of  all  men.  (5)  Issuing  in  glory.  As  grace  originates  in  heaven, 
80  it  works  through  our  earthly  experience  only  to  return  to  its  source.  Its  final 
issue  is  eternal  fellowKbip  with  the  (rod  of  all  grace.  2.  Peace.  (1)  Its  nature,  (a) 
Beconoiliation  with  God — iudii!feience  ox  fear  replaced  hj  love  and  couMexuM. 


«H1».  1.]  BOMANS.  it 

(&)  Inward  tranqoillity — freedom  from  mental  and  moral  distarbanoe  ;  all  can  cast 
apon  God.  (c)  Amity  with  all  men.  When  men  are  at  peace  with  God  ihej 
will  be  at  peace  with  each  other.  Wars  and  dissentlons  are  utterly  foreign  to  the 
family  of  the  God  of  peace.  (2)  Its  relation  to  grace,  (a)  It  originates  in  grace. 
God  makes  overtures  of  peace  ;  says,  "  roll  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord  "  ;  "  the 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  .  .  .  peace  "  ;  as  grace  ripens,  peace  increases.  II.  Theib 
socBOB.  1.  God  as  Father  delights  to  bestow — (1)  Grace.  It  is  His  pleasure — (a) 
To  confer  the  highest  benefit.  (&)  To  see  its  blessed  operation,  (c)  To  contem- 
plate its  lovely  effects,  ^d)  To  enjoy  its  everlasting  fruits.  (2)  Peace.  The 
supreme  desire  of  a  father  is  to  see  his  children  in  amity  with  himself  and  with  ontt 
another  and  free  from  care.  2.  God  as  our  Father  is  the  warrant  for  our  confidenca 
in — (1)  Supplicating  these  highest  blessings.  (2)  Anticipating  their  presence  here 
and  their  full  perfection  hereafter.    III.  Theib  medium — "  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

I.  As  God  He  has  grace  and  peace  to  give.  2.  As  Man  He  exhibited  the  perfect 
enjoyment  of  these  blessings.  He  was  "  full  of  grace  "  ;  and  He  had  peace  to  such 
•n  extent  that  He  regarded  it  peculiarly  as  His  own — "  My  peace. "  3.  As  God-Man 
Mediator  He  is  qualified  and  oommissioued  to  bedttw  them.  (1)  He  purchased  both 
by  the  blood  of  the  Cross.  (2)  He  gives  both  (2  Cor.  xii.  9  ;  John  xiv.  17,  27, 
XX.  19  ;  Phil.  iv.  7).  {J.  W.  Bum.)  This  salutation  is — I.  Rich  in  its  impost. 
L  Grace.  2.  Peace.  II.  Divine  in  its  efficacy — from  God,  &o.  III.  Special  di 
ITB  APPLiOATioN  AND  DE8I0N — to  all  that  are  beloved,  Ac.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Chrittian  talutation  : — Many  persons  say,  *•  What  is  the  use  of  salutations  ? 
When  I  meet  a  lady  in  the  street,  why  should  I  raise  my  hat  ?  "  And,  by  the  by, 
yoang  men,  it  is  worth  your  while  either  to  salute  a  lady,  or  not  to.  The  habit  of 
touching  your  hat  is  a  vulgar  habit.  It  is  like,  in  letter-writing,  using  "  geut " 
instead  of  "  gentleman."  It  is  a  kind  of  contraction  that  is  indicative  of  a  lack  of 
proper  information.  A  man  says,  '•  Why  should  I  say  '  Good  morning '  to  a  man 
when  I  meet  him  ?  "  or,  "  Why  should  friends  say  •  Good-bye  '  when  they  part  ?  " 
That  very  expression,  "Good-bye,"  shows  what  the  Western  literalising  tendeucy  is. 
There  was  a  time  when  friends  at  parting  looked  gravely  at  each  other,  and  said, 
"  God  be  with  you  " ;  but  now  they  say  "  Good-bye,"  which  is  the  same  thing 
abbreviated.  In  the  "  God  be  with  you  "  of  the  West  there  is  no  *'  God,"  no  '*  with 
you,"  no  anything,  except  "  Good-bye,"  which  is  what  a  bird  is  when  its  feathers 
have  all  been  plucked  off.  But  why  should  we  have  so  many  of  these  salutations  ? 
Well,  for  my  part,  I  think  that  even  good  folks,  without  sucb  little  ceremonies,  are 
like  grapes  packed  for  market  without  leaves  between  them.  They  will  crush,  and 
come  in  mashed.  Even  good  folks  need  to  have  little  courtesies  between  them  to 
keep  them  from  attrition.  And  to  take  society  and  divest  it  of  all  these  little 
civilities  would  be  to  deteriorate  it,  and  carry  it  toward  the  savage  state.  I  do  not 
think  that  the  bushmen  of  South  Africa  trouble  themselvea  about  such  things. 
They  economise  speech  and  conduct.  And  as  you  go  up  in  civilised  and  Christian 
communities,  you  will  find  more  and  more,  and  not  fewer  and  fewer,  of  them.  And 
when  you  come  to  the  very  height  of  civilisation  and  Christianity — the  family — you 
will  not  only  find  more  of  them,  but  you  will  find  that  they  are  not  conventional. 
There  you  will  hear  the  mother  talking  to  the  little  child,  and  the  child  talking 
back ;  and  you  will  hear  them  calling  each  other  all  manner  of  fond  epithets.  The 
whole  of  society  is  chased  by  golden  figures  of  those  civilities  that  tend  to  make 
life  rich  and  happy.  And  if  you  think  that  these  things  are  of  no  use,  it  is  because 
you  never  put  your  heart  into  them.  When  you  see  a  friend  coming,  and  you  say, 
"  Good  morning,"  mean  good  morning.  Let  your  heart  go  in  kindness  toward  him. 
If  you  meet  a  person,  and  you  choose  to  uncover  your  head,  let  your  heart  be 
uncovered  too.  When  in  honour  you  prefer  others  to  yourselves,  put  more  good- 
will, more  Christianity  into  it.  Please  men  more,  desire  to  please  them  more,  and 
it  will  swell  up  the  shrunken  proportions  of  these  civilities,  and  make  them  put  new 
buds  and  new  blossoms  out.  We  need  not  fewer,  but  more  of  these  tilings  in  human 
life,  to  take  away  its  vulgarity,  and  its  harJ  surfaces,  and  to  enrich  it  with  more 
flowers  and  perfumes.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Beloved  of  God. — Beloved  of  God: — 
This  is  the  glorious  distinction  of  believers.  So  of  Israel  (Deut.  xxxiii.  4).  God's 
love  the  origin  of  believers'  salvation  (John  iii.  16;  Eph.  ii.  4 ;  1  John  iii.  1).  God 
has  a  common  love  to  all  men  (Deut.  x.  18 ;  John  iii.  16 ;   1  Tim.  iv.  10  ;   Titus  ii. 

II,  iii.  4) ;  a  special  love  to  believers  (1  John  iii.  1  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  3  ;  Eph.  i.  3-6,  ii. 
4-8).  This  special  love  is  seen  in  making  them  His  people  and  blessing  them  as 
•ach.  This  love  is — I.  Distinguishing  (1  Cor.  iv.  7  ;  Rom.  viii.  28,  29).  II.  Freb 
AND  SPONTANEOUS  (Eph.  i.  2-6  i  ii.  4j.    III.  UNCBANaiNa  and  :£:v£BiiASxiNa  (John  ziiu 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cia».  I. 

1  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  3  ;  Isa.  liv.  10).  IV.  Infinitelt  costly  (Zech.  xiii.  7 ;  Isa.  liii.  6, 
10 ;  Bom.  viii.  32).  V.  Opebative  and  efficacious  (2  Thess.  ii.  16 ;  2  Tim.  i.  9).  VI. 
AiiL-coNQtiERiNQ  (Psa.  cx.  3 ;  Kom.  viii.  30,  35-39).  VII.  Existing  in  and  fob  thb 
SAKE  OF  Chbist  (Rom.  viii.  39 ;  Eph.  i.  3,  6 ;  John  xvii.  23).  To  be  beloved  of  God 
is  a  creature's  highest  blessedness,  secures  every  blessing,  and,  when  realised,  is 
bliss  itself  (Psa.  Ixiii.  3,  xxx.  5  ;  Canticles  i.  2).  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Called  to 
be  saints. — Called  to  be  saints  : — The  text  might  have  been  rendered  "  called 
saints."  It  is  requisite  to  remember  this,  because  you  might  think  that  it  means 
"  called  to  be  saints  "  hereafter,  as  though  it  would  be  impossible  to  be  a  saini 
here.  I.  Where  and  by  what  means  are  we  called  to  be  saints  ?  1.  By  the 
election  of  God  and  the  providence  of  birth  in  a  Christian  land.  2.  By  the  dedica* 
tion  and  grace  of  baptism,  8.  By  those  inward  calls  felt  in  the  heart.  4.  By  the 
many  voices  of  affliction  and  the  constant  gentle  operations  of  the  Comforter  in  the 
BouL  IL  What  is  the  pbocess  ?  1.  Stands  the  pardon  of  sin  and  the  sense  of 
pardon.  Many  greatly  increase  the  difficulty  of  saintliness  by  patting  holiness 
before  peace.  2.  But  forgiveness  is  not  merit ;  it  is  not  even  acceptance.  You 
must  be  acceptable  and  pleasing  in  God's  sight.  And  for  this  you  must  have  a 
righteousness  not  your  own,  and  be  able  to  present  yourself  to  God  in  Christ,  and 
be  pleasing  even  to  Him,  because  He  sees  the  Christ  in  whom  you  are.  3.  When 
you  are  so  justified,  an  act  of  union  takes  place  between  Christ  and  your  souL 
Through  that  union  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  the  fountain  of  all  saintliness,  flows 
into  you,  and  the  flow  will  vary  according  as  the  Spirit  is  grieved  or  honoured  in  yon. 
4.  And  now  saintliness,  properly  so-called,  begins.  You  are  a  thing  dedicate.  (1) 
There  is  intercourse  set  up  between  your  soul  and  God.  You  feed  on  spiritual  food. 
Your  Bible  is  a  home — worship  is  the  atmosphere  of  your  love,  especially  the  Holy 
Communion.  (2)  Meanwhile  the  natural  appetites  are  being  subdued,  and  the 
body  subjugated.  The  besetting  sin,  by  the  power  of  a  wonderful  alchemy,  is 
being  gradually  turned  into  a  characteristic  grace.  The  temper  which  was  hot,  is 
meek — the  spirit  which  was  restless,  is  patient — your  appetites  first  changed,  then 
turned,  go  upward.  (3)  You  have  become  devoted  to  good  works  ;  you  love  the 
brethren  ;  whatever  is  holy,  it  is  akin  to  you  ;  you  yearn  for  souls  and  to  extend 
the  Church.  (4)  And  now  men  are  beginning  to  "  take  knowledge  of  you."  (5)  I 
do  not  venture  now  to  look  where  those  blessed  ones,  in  the  dazzling  lustre  of  their 
white  robes,  are  still  pursuing  their  saintly  offices.  But  I  do  ask,  "  Out  of  what 
material  is  that  holy  saintship  made  ?  "  And  He  who  makes  the  rainbow  from  the 
mist,  and  the  pearl  from  the  shell,  and  the  butterfly  from  the  grub,  and  the  diamond 
from  the  charcoal  gives  the  answer.  "  These  are  they  which  came  out  of  great 
tribulation, "  &o.  (J.  Vaughan, M.A.)  Called  to  be  saints : — Why?  Because — 
I.  They  lived  with  Jesus.  IL  They  lived  foe  Jesus,  and  therefore — IH.  They 
OBEW  LIKE  Jesus.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Saints  : — What  is  a  saint  ?  A  celebrated 
wit,  who  was  asked  this  question,  replied,  "  A  saint  is  long-faced  piety,  which  has 
neither  the  smile  of  friendliness,  nor  the  tear  of  pity."  It  is  to  be  regretted  that 
the  word  "  saint "  is  a  sort  of  nickname  for  that  which  is  mean  and  spurious ;  but 
when  people  know  a  man  to  be  really  saint-like  they  give  him  reverence.  I 
remember,  one  day,  asking  a  little  orphan  girl,  "  What  is  a  saint  ?  "  After  a  little 
thought,  she  answered,  "Please,  sir,  my  mother  was  a  saint  I"  To  that  child's 
mind  saint  meant  somebody  good,  holy,  and  loving  ;  and  the  person  whom  she  had 
known  to  fulfil  that  description  was  her  mother.  Every  mother  should  try  to  be 
to  her.  daughters  the  panorama  of  what  a  saint  should  be,  and  every  father 
too.  A  saint  is — I.  A  bepentino  child  of  God.  II.  A  obanobd  child  or  God. 
That  man  who  is  honest,  because  it  is  the  best  policy,  is  in  a  very  low  state  of 
morahty ;  is  he  not  at  heart  a  thief  ?  The  prodigal  may  desire  pardon  as  a  policy 
which  saves  him  from  hell  and  admits  him  into  heaven ;  but  the  saint  acts  from  a 
nobler  motive.  The  saint  yearns  for  heaven  more  as  a  state  of  holiness  than  as  a 
place  of  freedom  from  pain.  Napoleon  once  said,  "  If  you  would  truly  conquer, 
you  must  replace."  This  is  true  of  morals  as  of  nations.  If  you  wish  to  take 
away  the  craving  for  sin,  whatever  it  may  be — drink,  or  anything  else — ^you  must 
replace  it  with  a  craving  for  something  higher  and  better.  You  remember  the  old 
fable  of  the  Isle  of  Sirens,  whose  songs  lured  the  sailors  from  their  ships  to  sin  and 
death ;  and  the  shore  of  the  island  was  covered  with  the  bleached  bones  of  tempted 
men.  We  are  told  that  Ulysses,  when  sailing  past,  in  order  to  see  and  no*  be 
captivated,  ordered  that  his  crew  should  have  wax  put  into  their  ears,  and  then 
stopped  ap  his  own  ears,  and  had  himself  tied  to  the  mast.  When  his  ship  sailed 
by  tha  island  the  Sirens  sang  their  most  bewitching  melodies,  bat  Ulysses  and  hia 


CTAP.  L]  ROMANS.  If 

crew  did  not  hear ;  and  were,  therefore,  not  tempted  as  other  sailors  who  had  both 
seen  and  heard.  Bnt,  some  time  afterwards,  there  came  another  ship,  commanded 
by  Orphens,  who  was  a  master  of  mnsic.  Orpheus  did  not  attempt  to  resist  the 
temptation  by  putting  wax  in  his  ears,  or  by  tying  himself  to  the  mast.  The  Sirens 
sang  their  most  melodious  strains  ;  but  Orpheus  played  a  sweeter  mupic,  which, 
like  a  magnet,  kept  his  crew  from  having  the  slightest  desire  to  go  to  the  island. 
The  song  of  the  Sirens  charmed  the  ear  ;  but  the  music  of  Orpheus  thrilled  the 
soul.  Such  is  the  change  which  has  taken  place  in  the  soul  of  the  saint.  The  joys 
of  religion  are  sweeter  to  him  than  the  pleasures  of  sin  ;  to  be  beloved  of  God  is 
more  precious  than  the  applause  of  erring  men.  You  may  ask,  "  How  is  this 
accomplished  7  "  Just  by  the  love  of  God  being  inspired  in  the  spirit  of  the 
forgiven  penitent.  III.  A  FOKorvEN  child  or  God.  A  young  man  went  head- 
long into  evil  courses,  and  stole  some  of  his  father's  money,  and  ran  away 
from  home.  Some  time  afterwards  his  father  solemnly  crossed  the  prodigal's 
name  from  the  family  register  at  the  beginning  of  the  Bible.  After  many 
years  the  son,  like  the  prodigal,  "came  to  himself,"  and  when  he  knocked 
at  the  door  was  received  with  a  loving  welcome.  The  following  morning  the 
father  opened  the  Bible  at  the  first  page,  wrote  the  name  of  his  son,  and  after  it, 
"  Everything  forgiven."  This  is  like  what  takes  place  when  a  penitent  cries  for 
pardon  ;  but  the  page  where  the  forgiveness  is  written  is  in  the  heart  of  the  penitent. 
(FT.  Birch.)  Sainthood  now  being  prepared  for  glory: — Tliey  who  are  not 
made  saints  in  a  state  of  grace  shall  never  be  saints  in  glory.  The  stones 
which  are  appointed  for  that  glorious  Temple  above  are  hewn  and  polished  and 
prepared  for  it  here,  as  the  stones  were  wrought  and  prepared  in  the  mountains 
for   building   the  temple   at  Jerusalem.      (T.  H.   Leary,  D.C.L.)  Grace. — 

Grace  : — 1.  The  word  is  from  the  French,  who  got  it  from  the  Romans.  And  the 
Bomans  got  it  under  the  old  parental  roof,  at  that  remote  period  which  preceded 
the  migration  both  of  Latins  and  Greeks  from  their  common  Oriental  home.  The 
Greek  form  of  the  word  is  xapiQ,  connected  with  xaipm,  "  I  rejoice."  So  that  the 
word,  in  its  etymology,  means  "  that  which  gives  joy  and  pleasure,  that  which  is 
delightful,"  2.  Hence  it  was,  at  a  very  early  period  of  its  career  as  a  word,  applied 
to  that  which  was  beautiful.  Beauty  gives  delight.  It  is  grace.  A  beautiful 
movement  of  the  body  is  graceful.  If  a  dress  is  beautiful  in  its  fabric,  and  if  it  fits 
beautifully,  it  is  graceful.  The  fertile  Greek  imagination  constructed  three  distinct 
personifications  of  beauty,  "  the  Graces."  The  echo  of  their  idea  continues,  and 
we  still  speak  of  the  three  Christian  graces — faith,  hope,  charity.  When  our 
Queen  visits  some  private  home,  we  sometimes  say  that  the  royal  lady  graces  the 
home  with  her  presence.  She  lends  charm  and  beauty  to  it ;  and  the  charm  and 
beauty  occasion  delight.  3.  But  Greeks,  Latins,  French,  and  English,  were  not 
slow  to  perceive  that  there  is  an  inner  as  really  as  an  outer  beauty.  There  is 
beauty  of  character,  of  moral  deportment,  of  moral  feeling  and  acting ;  and  this 
beauty  is  fitted  to  give  great  delight  and  joy.  Hence  all  united  in  calling  it  grace. 
Kindness  and  loving-kindness  is  grace.  It  is  really  most  graceful.  It  is  the  most 
beautiful  possible  ornament.  Justice  is  admirable.  It  cannot  be  dispensed  with. 
Its  prf'sence  lends  dignity  to  character ;  and  dignity  is  a  species  of  grandeur ;  and 
grandeur  is  a  species  of  beauty.  Thus  there  is  beauty  in  justice.  But  it  is  by  a 
eironitous  logical  process  that  we  find  out  "  the  beauty  of  holiness,"  and  the  cor- 
responding beauty  that  is  inherent  in  the  hatred  of  sin.  But  not  so  is  it  with 
kindness.  It  inspires  as,  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  with  dehght  and  joy, 
especially  when  we  find  ourselves  the  objects  of  the  loving-kindness.  It  is  the 
grace  that  belongs  peculiarly  to  God.  God's  favour  is  grace.  4.  But  man,  too,  as 
well  as  God,  can  be  gracious.  Our  Queen  and  Princess  of  Wales  are  gracious.  It 
is  their  pleasure  to  be  kind ;  and  their  loving-kindness  is  delightful,  and,  because 
delightful,  is  grace ;  so  that  they  are  gracious.  Even  a  very  humble  man  can  be 
gracious,  or  show  favour  to  his  fellow-men,  when,  e.g.,  his  fellow-men  have  injured 
him.  Such  graciousness  is  the  refiection  in  man  of  the  peculiar  glory  which  is 
inherent  in  ^e  character  of  God.  6.  Again :  We  speak  of  grace  before  and  after 
meals.  The  meaning  is  the  utterance  of  thanks  or  gratitude  to  God,  the  bountiful 
Benefactor.  This  gratitude  is  grace.  How  significant  I  With  what  charm  it 
invests  the  idea  of  gratitude  1  Gratitude  for  favour  received,  as  a  token  of  loving- 
kindness,  is  as  truly  graceful  as  is  loving-kindness  itself.  In  nothing  is  there 
greater  deformity  and  unloveliness  than  in  ingratitude.  Hence  both  Greeks  and 
Bomans  freely  combined  in  calling  gratitude  grace.  "  For  if  ye  love  them  who 
love  yon,  what  thank  have  ye  ?  for  sinners  also  love  those  that  love  them.    And  if 


80  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CBAT.   . 

ye  do  good  to  them  who  do  good  to  joa,  what  thank  have  ye  ?  for  sinners  also  do 
even  the  same.  And  if  ye  lend  to  them  of  whom  ye  hope  to  receive,  what  thank 
have  ye?  for  sinners  also  lend  to  sinners  to  receive  as  mnch  again."  We  read  in 
another  part  of  the  New  Testament  those  glorious  and  glowing  words  ot  the 
Apostle  St.  Paul,  "  Thanks  be  unto  God  for  His  unspeakable  gift  "  In  these  pas- 
sages the  term  employed  is  grace.  In  the  sayings  of  our  Saviour,  as  is  evidenced 
by  the  parallel  expression  in  St.  Matthew,  the  word  is  tantamount  in  import  to 
reward.  What  thank  or  reward  do  ye  deserve  ?  In  the  saying  of  the  apostle  it 
Bimply  means  thanks  ;  and  thanks  is  expressed  by  this  term  "  grace,"  just  because 
thankfulness  is  always,  as  a  manifestation  of  character,  a  grace,  delightful  to  God 
and  to  all  other  beings  who  are  Godlike.  (J.  Moriton,  D.D.)  The  beginnings  of 
grace : — Trace  back  any  river  to  its  source,  and  you  will  find  its  beginnings  small. 
A  httle  moisture  oozing  through  the  sand  or  dripping  out  of  some  unknown  rock, 
a  gentle  gush  from  some  far-away  mountain's  foot,  are  the  beginning  of  many  s 
broad  river,  in  whose  waters  tall  merchantmen  may  anchor  and  gallant  fleets  may 
ride.  For  it  widens  and  gets  deeper,  till  it  mingles  with  the  ocean.  So  is  the 
beginning  of  a  Christian's  or  a  nation's  grace.  It  is  first  a  tiny  stream,  then  it 
swells  into  a  river,  then  a  sea.  There  is  life  and  progression  towards  an  ultimate 
perfection  when  God  finds  the  beginning  of  grace  in  any  man.  {J.  J.  Wray.) 
Grace  necessary  for  human  perfection  : — The  nature  of  a  seed  is  such  that  when  it 
is  thrown  into  the  ground  it  unfolds  itself  without  culture,  without  any  exterior 
influence  beyond  the  light  and  air  and  soil,  to  be  just  that  thing  which  it  was  meant 
to  be.  Every  flower  comes  to  its  own  nature  ;  and  although  culture  may  make  it 
larger  and  finer,  yet  it  expresses  the  radical  idea  involved  in  the  seed.  It  is  so 
with  every  insect  and  every  animal.  But  man  is  not  a  creature  that,  according  to 
this  analogy,  being  bom  into  the  world  opens  and  develops  himself  to  that  which 
God  meant  manhood  to  be.  When  left  in  the  most  favourable  conditions  man  does 
not,  and  will  not,  so  develop  himself ;  for  that  which  is  required  to  make  manhood 
is  not  in  him.  There  were  elements  left  out  of  the  nature  of  man  without  which 
that  nature  never  can  come  to  its  perfection.  For,  as  in  fruits  sugar  comes  from 
the  sun,  so  in  man  grace  comes  from  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  working  in  ns, 
and  elaborating  the  things  that  we  need.  But  they  are  never  wrought  out  by  any 
process  that  takes  place  by  the  natural  faculties  in  the  soul.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Peace. — The  peace  of  God  : — Hence  the  worldling  does  not  understand  our  peace, 
and  frequently  sneers  at  it  because  be  is  puzzled  by  it.  Even  the  Christian  is 
sometimes  surprised  at  his  own  peacefulness.  I  know  what  it  is  to  suffer  from 
terrible  depression  of  spirit  at  times  ;  yet  at  the  very  moment  when  it  has  seemed 
to  me  that  life  was  not  worth  one  single  bronze  coin,  I  have  been  perfectly  peaceful 
with  regard  to  all  the  greater  things.  There  is  a  possibility  of  having  the  surface 
of  the  mind  lashed  into  storm  while  yet  down  deep  in  the  caverns  of  one's  inmost 
consciousness  all  is  still :  this  I  know  by  experience.  There  are  earthquakes  upon 
this  earth,  and  yet  our  globe  pursues  the  even  tenor  of  its  way,  and  the  like  is  true 
in  the  little  world  of  a  believer's  nature.  Why,  sometimes  the  Christian  will  feel 
himself  to  be  so  flooded  with  a  delicious  peace  that  he  could  not  express  his 
rapture.     (C.  H,  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  8-16.  First,  I  thank  my  God  throngh  Jesns  Christ  for  yon  aH — True 
Christian  teal : — I.  As  it  bespecxs  God  is — 1.  Thankful.  2.  Sincere.  8.  Con- 
stant. 4.  Prayerful.  5.  Dependent  (vers.  8-10).  H.  As  it  bespscts  mak  is — 
1.  Earnest.  2.  Communicative.  3.  Loving.  4.  Unquenched  by  difficulties. 
6.  Expansive.  6.  Humble,  not  a  merit  but  a  debt.  7.  Self-sacrificing.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Paul's  desire  to  see  Rome : — I.  The  facts  of  the  passage.  1.  "  I  thank 
my  God  through  Jesus  Christ  for  you  all,  that  your  faith  is  spoken  of  throughout 
the  whole  world  "  (chap.  xvi.  19).  The  "  world  "  here  means,  in  the  first  place,  the 
Eoman  Empire.  But  the  term  must  be  limited  further  to  a  particular  class  in  the 
empire ;  though  even  at  this  time  the  general  population  were  alive  to  some  of  the 
great  Christian  facts.  The  expression  however,  does  not  mean  that  the  people 
in  all  parts  of  the  empire  were  all  talking  about  the  *'  faith  "  of  the  Eomans, 
because  as  ynu  know  there  are  twenty  distinct  worlds  even  in  this  London  of  ours. 
There  are  different  classes  that  actually  intermingle,  but  do  not  touch.  There  may 
be  a  world  close  to  you  that  may  have  connections  all  over  the  nation  and  yet  you 
know  nothing  aL(  t  it.  Literary  men  have  a  world  of  their  own,  and  they  ar« 
known  one  to  anotlier  all  over  the  world  ;  and  there  are  religious  teachers  who  art 
known  all  over  their  world,  and  yet  they  often  know  nothing  of  one  another.  So  th« 


.  1.)  ROMANS. 


meaning  is  that  every  city  wherever  Paul  went,  amongst  the  Christian  people  with 
whom  he  mingled,  the  faith  and  obedience  of  the  Roman  Christians  was  spoken  of. 
And  when  I  was  in  America  I  did  not  enter  a  single  town  but  I  met  with  some  one 
or  more  persons  who  had  been  in  this  place.  I  was  minghug  with  a  certain  class  ; 
they  fonnd  me  out  and  I  found  them  out,  because  we  had  syuipatLiies  in  common  ; 
bat  there  are  many  millions  of  people  who  never  heard  either  of  them  or  me. 
Well  now,  three  years  after  the  apostle  wrote  that  he  got  to  Borne,  and  called  a 
number  of  most  respectable  Jews,  yet  these  men  seemed  to  know  nothing  of  the 
"  faith  "  or  "  obedience  "  of  the  Christians  at  Rome ;  but  only  knew  concerning 
the  "  sect "  that  it  was  "  everywhere  spoken  against."  Now  these  two  accounts 
may  at  first  seem  rather  startlmg,  bat  they  are  perfectly  in  harmony  with  each 
other  if  properly  viewed ;  and  the  entire  naturalness  of  the  two  convinces  me  of 
the  truth  of  both  statements.  The  Jews  and  the  Christians  at  Rome  lived  in 
different  worlds.  2.  '*  God  is  my  witness"  (vers.  9-12).  (1)  The  two  points  in  the 
passages  are  these — that  the  apostle  was  very  earnest  in  his  prayers  that  he  might 
get  to  Rome,  and  have  a  prosperous  journey.  The  other  point  is  tbat  he  wished  to 
impart  some  spiritual  gift  and  to  be  comforted  by  m  utual  faith.  I  think  he  means 
not  to  confer  any  miraculous  gift  as  an  apostle,  but  that  as  an  authoritative  teacher 
by  preaching  the  truth,  they  might  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  faith.  There  is 
an  exquisite  delicacy  of  feeling  here.  Paul  had  been  uttering  a  great  thing  about 
what  he  wished  to  get  to  Rome  for.  And  then,  as  if  he  had  uttered  nothing  that 
might  imply  apostoUc  authority  and  distinction,  but  as  if  he  had  simply  placed 
himself  on  a  level  with  the  people,  he  says,  "  that  is,  that  I,  "  &o.  (ver.  12).  (2)  Now 
I  very  much  doubt  whether  these  things  came  to  pass ;  and  it  may  do  us  much  good 
to  learn  that  the  prayers  even  of  an  apostle,  and  long  continued,  were  not  answered. 
We  must  always  be  ready  for  disappointments,  and  be  prepared  for  a  very  different 
state  of  things  from  that  for  which  we  pray.  Instead  of  getting  to  Rome  "soon," 
it  was  three  years  (two  of  them  in  prison),  then  he  was  shipwrecked,  and  when  he 
got  to  Rome  he  was  a  prisoner.  Ton  will  find  in  chap.  zv.  that  he  asked  the  people 
at  Rome  to  join  their  prayers  with  his  for  the  same  thing.  But  their  prayers  were 
unanswered.  And  so  with  respect  to  the  other  point.  The  letters  written  from  Rome 
contain  some  alarming  statements  about  how  things  had  gone.  He  says  that  there 
were  some  who  preached  the  gospel  out  of  envy  and  strife,  wishing  to  add  affliction 
to  his  bonds  ;  and  although  the  things  that  happened  to  him  turned  out  for  the 
furtherance  of  the  gospel,  yet  those  hopes  which  he  had  formerly  cherished  were 
disappointed,  8.  The  apostle  goes  on — "  Now  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant, 
brethren,  that  oftentimes  I  purposed  to  come  to  you  (but  was  hindered),  that  I 
might  have  some  fruit  among  you,  even  as  among  other  Gentiles."  He  wanted  to 
have  men  converted  as  well  as  to  comfort  and  impart  spiritual  gifts  to  the  Church. 
The  apostle  felt  that  he  had  "  a  dispensation  committed  to  him."  "I  am  called  and 
commissioned,  and,  therefore,  am  a  debtor  to  all  men  ;  I  am,  therefore,  ready  to 
preach  the  gospel  to  you  at  Rome  also.  For  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel." 
IL  Thb  liEssoNS.  1.  In  regard  to  the  Christian  life  we  perceive  here  its — (1) 
Peoaliar  nature  in  opposition,  generally,  to  philosophic  theism,  or  anything  else. 
**I  thank  my  God  through  Jesus  Christ,"  says  Paul.  That  means  God  con- 
templated as  revealed  by  Christ ;  and  it  is  well  known  that  the  apostles  and  early 
Christians  conducted  their  worship  in  the  name  of  Christ,  as  a  mediator  and 
advocate.  (2)  That  it  is  habitually  earnest  and  devotional;  praying  in  everything; 
in  everything  giving  thanks ;  committing  everything  to  God,  asking  even  for  a 
prosperous  journey,  believing  in  the  gracious  presidency  of  God  over  human 
affairs ;  expecting  answers,  but  being  prepared  for  disappointments.  (3)  Its 
peculiar  sympathies,  as  becomes  the  children  of  the  same  father ;  an  interchange 
of  affection,  fellowship  and  union,  "  and  be  comforted  together  by  mutual  faith." 
2.  In  relation  to  the  apostle.  (1)  The  union  of  prayer  and  preaching;  and  he  did 
both  with  earnestness.  He  preached  as  if  the  conversion  of  the  world  depended 
upon  it,  and  as  if  he  was  able  to  convert  the  world.  But  we  find  him  equally  earnest 
in  prayer.  (2)  He  is  always  modest  but  manly.  He  says,  I  want  to  comfort  and 
establish  the  Church,  and  I  want  to  be  comforted  together  with  you  by  mutual 
faith.  (3)  He  served  God  in  his  spirit  in  the  gospel  of  His  Son,  with  earnestness,  with 
sincerity,  and  with  faith.  Paul  had  a  great  idea  of  duty,  and  the  word  ' '  debtor  "  comes 
from  duty :  that  which  is  due  to  another  is  duty  from  me.  (4)  He  was  not  ashamed 
of  the  gospel  because  of  the  commission  which  he  had  received  from  on  high. 
(T,  Binney.)  Thankfulness  for  the  blessings  of  others : — The  expression  of  thanks 
to  God  for  His  meroy  to  them  was  fitted  to  coiiciUate  their  feelings  and  to  prepare 


2S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [CH1».  b 

them  lor  the  truths  he  was  about  to  communicate  to  them.  It  showed  the  deep 
interest  he  had  in  their  welfare,  and  the  happiness  it  would  give  him  to  do  them 
good.  It  is  proper  to  give  thanks  to  God  for  His  mercies  to  others  as  well  as  to 
ourselves.  We  are  members  of  one  great  family,  and  we  should  make  it  a  subject  ol 
thanksgiving  that  He  confers  any  blessings,  and  especially  the  blessing  of  salvation, 
on  any  mortals.  (A.  Barnes.)  Standard  of  thankfulness  : — As  physicians  judge 
of  the  condition  of  men's  hearts  by  the  pulse  which  beats  in  their  arms,  and  not 
by  the  words  which  proceed  from  their  mouths ;  so  we  may  judge  the  thankfulness 
of  men  by  their  lives  rather  than  by  their  professions.  [Dictionary  of  Illustra- 
tions.) The  bond  of  Christian  union  is  a  bond  of — I.  Bbotherlt  lovb  (vers. 
8-10.)  n.  Mutual  help  (vers.  11,  12).  III.  United  effort  for  the  spread  of 
Christ's  kingdom.      [J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Thanksgiving  : — L  Is  every  Christian's 

first  duty.  II.  Should  be  offered  through  Jesus  Christ.  III.  Should  be  presented 
for  every  blessing  and  for  all.  IV.  Is  especially  due  for  the  success  of  the  gospel. 
(Ibid.)  Personal  religion: — "  My  God,"  is — 1.  The  Author  of  my  being  and  my 
well-being.  2.  The  object  of  my  worship.  3.  My  covenant  God  in  Christ.  The 
text  is  the  language  of — I.  Faith  in  Christ.  God  is  only  ours  through  faith  in 
Him,  only  according  to  the  new  covenant  (Jer.  xxxi.  33  ;  Heb.  viii.  10).  Receiving 
Jesus  and  trusting  in  Him  God  becomes  our  God  (John  i.  12 ;  Gal.  iii.  26).  II.  Love. 
That  is  our  God  which  we  most  love  and  esteem  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  25).  III.  Trust 
(Psa.  xviii.  2).  The  object  of  our  confidence  is  our  God  (Job  xxxi.  24;  Hab.  i.  16). 
IV.  Subjection,  dedication,  obedience  (Isa.  xliv.  5 ;  Acts  xxvii.  23).  Conclusion  : 
1.  Thanksgivings  to  be  presented  to  God  as  our  God  in  Christ.  2.  The  gospel  teaches 
as  not  only  to  say  "  our  Father,"  but  "  my  God."  3.  God  as  our  God,  the  most 
glorious  and  only  satisfying  portion.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Thankfulness  for  faith 
spoken  of: — I.  Faith  spoken  op  proves — 1.  Its  nobility.  2.  Its  boldness.  3.  Its 
fruitfulness.  II.  Thanks  arvEN  fob  this  on  account  of — 1.  Honour  bestowed  on 
the  Eomans.  2.  Benefit  likely  to  accrue  to  others.  3.  Glory  redounding  to  Christ. 
{Ibid.)  Exemplary  faith  : — I.  Its  peatures — consistent ;  earnest ;  loving.  U.  Its 
EPPECTS — a  good  report ;  glory  and  thanks  to  God.     (e/.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  For  God  Is  my  witness,  whom  I  serve  with  my  spirit  In  the  gospel  of  His 
Son. — PauVs  appeal  to  God : — I.  lis  ground  is  the  consciousness  op  entire  con- 
secration   TO   THE   SEBVICE   OF   THAT    GoD   WHOM    HE    HAD   FOUND   IN   THE   REVELATION 

OP  His  Son.  1.  These  are  the  two  thoughts  which  are  stamped  on  the  whole  of  this 
introduction,  and  which  everywhere  else  are  prominent.  (1)  Before  he  knew  Christ 
his  God  was  always  the  object  of  his  fear  and  devotion.  But  how  different  was 
that  God  and  his  knowledge  of  Him — without  his  love  in  Christ,  and  His  Triune 
essence.  The  service  he  offered  was  sincere,  but  ignorant  and  bigoted,  a  service 
which  rejected  Christ  and  persecuted  His  saints.  But  now  in  Christ  all  this  had 
undergone  a  change.  It  had  pleased  God  to  reveal  His  Son  in  Him,  and  the  Son 
had  revealed  the  Father,  and  both  revelations  had  been  made  perfect  in  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  God  in  Christ  became  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  Divine  things  to 
Him.  (2)  To  that  God  whom  the  gospt- 1  revealed  the  apostle  gave  the  service  of  hia 
renewed  spirit.  Not  merely  in  the  sphere  of  his  intellect,  because  that  was  con- 
vinced, nor  in  the  sphere  of  the  emotions,  because  they  had  been  stirred,  but  in  the 
very  inmost  self  of  his  self  he  had  given  his  life  to  the  God  of  the  gospel.  2.  Let 
the  richest  treasure  of  your  experience  be  "  God  is  my  Witness."  Paul  had  no 
grace  that  we  may  not  claim.  But  the  real  secret  which  enables  us  to  dure  this 
Omniscient  scrutiny  is  the  habitual  revelation  of  the  Fatherly  love  of  God  in  Christ 
which  enables  us  to  say,  "  My  God."  "  If  Thou,  Lord,  shouldst  mark  iniquity  1 " 
carried  to  an  extreme  would  take  away  all  confidence.  "  God  is  my  witness,"  but 
He  is  "  my  God  "  in  Christ.  II.  Its  special  emphasis  bests  upon  the  words  "  is 
MY  spirit."  1.  The  terms  are  hturgical,  for  Paul  never  forgot  the  ancient  templo. 
The  soul  is  regenerate  because  inhabited  by  God.  Where  He  dwells  must  be  » 
temple ;  and  all  glorious  things  spoken  about  the  ancient  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah 
may  be  transferred  to  the  spirit  of  the  believer.  But  He  is  Priest  as  well  as 
Temple.  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  Christ  in  your  hearts."  Tlie  great  concern  of  our 
life  must  be  to  preserve  our  spirit  inviolate  for  the  eacred  Indweller.  The  apostle 
lived  in  his  body  as  in  a  temple  :  "  an  earthly  house  "  which  should  be  dissolved, 
but  then  built  again.  He  hved  in  his  spirit,  however,  as  in  a  temple  which  should 
never  be  dissolved  ;  and  he  lived  in  Lope  that  both  should  be  reunited  and  glorified 
as  the  eternal  dwelling-place  of  God  in  Christ.  2.  This  service  that  he  offered 
in  his  spirit  was  the  service  of  God  in  the  gospel  of  His  Son.     (1)  He  served 


BOMANS.  88. 


Ood  for  himsell  In  a  certain  sense  he  was  a  solitary  worshipper,  presenting  in 
secret  his  whole  devotion  before  it  was  translated  to  the  outer  sanctuary  and  the 
visible  life.  Habituate  yourself  to  an  interior  life,  hid  with  Christ  in  God,  (2) 
With  this,  however,  we  must  connect  his  supplications  for  others.  In  the  temple  of 
his  spirit  he  offered  a  systematic,  persevering  intercession  with  ihanksgiving  for  the 
Churches  of  Christ.  It  was  a  house  of  prayer  for  all  nations.  8.  Cultivate  this 
habit  of  prayer  for  yourself,  your  own  communion,  Christendom  and  the  world  in 
general ;  cultivate  also  the  habit  of  mixing  mutual  prayer  with  all  your  engagements. 
4.  Remember  that  God  alone  is  the  witness  of  your  fidelity,  but  men  will  be  the 
witnesses  of  its  results.      (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)         The  true  service  of  God: — L 

ReSPECXB   the    spread    of   the    gospel.       II.    Is  RENDERED  WITH  THE    SPIRIT.       Ill,    Is 

CONSTANT.  IV,  Prayerful,  V,  Is  discharged  as  in  the  sight  of  God.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  The  nature  of  Christian  obedience  : — We  all  serve  something  or  some  one, 
self,  passion,  prejudice,  sin,  business,  ambition,  <&c.,  and  we  find  the  service  pleasant 
enough.  But  the  only  service  worth  entering  upon  is  that  of  Christ.  I.  The 
CLAIMS  WHICH  GoD  HAS  DPON  OUR  SERVICE,  These  are — 1,  Self-interest.  God  is  a 
good  Master.  2,  Gratitude,  A  child  that  turns  his  back  on  a  kind  parent,  a 
servant  who  repays  affection  by  insult,  a  rebel  who  plots  against  a  munificent  king 
— all  these  is  the  man  who  forgets  God.  II.  The  principles  which  should  direct 
AND  GOVERN  ouB  SEBVicB  TO  GoD.  *'  Whom  I  serve  with  my  spirit,"  implies — 1. 
Voluntariness.  We  are  not  so  much  influenced  by  the  command  which  addresses 
the  ear,  or  the  threatening  which  alarms  the  conscience,  as  by  love.  2.  Sincerity. 
The  "  spirit  "  is  that  which  commands  the  whole  of  man.  Often  we  see  the  affec- 
tions dormant  and  the  will  persevering.  How  much  of  God's  worship  is  performed 
outwardly  when  it  is  inwardly  disliked.  The  body  without  the  spirit  is  dead ; 
service  without  love  is  hypocrisy.  3,  Universality.  It  had  respect  to  every 
precept  of  God's  Word.  The  carnal  mind  will  only  obey  such  commands  as  seem 
pleasing  to  us.  4.  Perpetuity.  Not  in  prosperity  only  nor  in  adversity  only.  It  is 
only  by  continuousness  that  perfection  is  arrived  at.  III,  The  rule  by  which  the 
service  should  be  governed.  The  gospel  is  not  only  the  means  of  salvation,  but 
it  is  the  rule  which  regulates  our  life.  To  serve  God  in  the  gospel  is  to — 1.  Serve 
God  in  light.  The  gospel  is  the  light  which  shows  the  Christian's  safety  and 
danger,  2,  To  serve  God  in  faith.  The  whole  principle  of  the  gospel  is  faith,  the 
principle  of  hfe,  thought,  and  action.  3,  To  serve  God  in  love.  Love  is  the  great 
rule  of  life  and  sanctification.  4.  To  be  rewarded  by  God  according  to  the 
gospel.  {J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  My  tpirit: — 1,  There  was  an  auction  one 
day  of  the  books  and  furniture  of  a  very  celebrated  author,  and  a  vain  but 
rich  young  man,  having  induced  the  auctioneer  to  offer  them  in  one  lot,  paid 
several  thousand  pounds  for  the  books,  shelves,  carpet,  and  in  fact  everything 
except  the  room  itself.  He  directed  the  things  to  be  taken  carefully  to  his 
house  and  fitted  up  in  a  room,  and  placed  in  the  same  positions  as  in  the 
author's  study.  The  young  man  then  sat  down  with  reverence  on  the  author's 
chair,  took  up  the  author's  pen,  dip^  .d  it  in  the  author's  ink,  and  bent  his 
head  over  the  paper  on  the  author's  table.  But  nothing  came ;  the  paper  remained 
a  blank.  The  genius  of  the  author  was  in  neither  his  pen  nor  his  surrounding,  but 
in  his  spirit — the  gift  of  God.  We  may  be  unable  to  create  in  our  spirit  the  genius 
of  a  celebrated  man ;  but  we  may  develop  our  own  faculty ;  and,  if  we  do  this, 
we  shall  bless  the  world  exactly  as  God  wishes  us  to  do.  The  little  forget-me- 
nots  which  grow  in  the  quiet  nook  of  the  steep  rock  do  their  work  as  effectively  as 
the  great  oaks  which  grace  the  park  of  a  king ;  and  as  the  tiny  flower  does  its  best, 
it  is  as  worthy  of  praise  as  the  gigantic  tree  that  does  no  more,  2,  But  though  we 
cannot  obtain  the  special  genius  of  another  man's  spirit,  we  can  receive  as  our  own 
the  disposition  of  tbe  greatest  man  who  ever  lived — Christ  can  be  received  by  all, 
and  the  breathings  of  His  Spirit  within  us  shall  mould  our  thoughts,  fashion  our 
desires,  and  develop  our  lives  like  His  own.  If  a  man  would  occupy  the  place  in 
the  world  for  which  he  has  been  specially  created,  it  is  absolutely  needful  for 
him  to  have  the  breathings  of  Christ  in  his  own  spirit ;  and  when  undertaking  any 
sacred  mission  for  the  benefit  of  our  fellow-men,  our  inquiry  should  not  be,  Have 
I  bags  of  money?  but.  Is  my  spirit  influenced  by  Christ?  Christ-direction 
is  the  first  and  most  important  step  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  3.  One  dsy  a  young 
soldier  went  to  visit  the  tomb  of  Scandetiberg,  and  the  sword  of  the  famous  warrior 
was  placed  in  his  hand.  The  soldier  hfted  it  saying,  "  Is  this  really  Scandenherg'a 
sword  ?  Why  there  is  nothing  in  it  more  than  mine !  "  The  old  clerk  exclaimed, 
*•  You  see  only  the  sword ;  jou  should  have  seen  the  hand  that  grasped  it  I "  Likewise, 


14  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [0H1».  L 

the  preacher  may  be  only  an  ordinary  man,  he  is  only  an  earthen  vessel ;  bat  in  hit 
spirit  there  should  be  a  power  whioh  can  move  men's  hearts  and  inflaence  their 
lives — God  should  breathe  within  him.  4.  Christ  and  the  angels  do  not  look  on  oa 
as  we  look  on  each  other.  We  value  a  man's  surroundings  rather  than  the  man 
himself.  An  artist  whose  soul  loves  beauty  does  not  value  a  picture  by  its  frame. 
Seeing  the  picture  to  be  a  gem,  he  buys  it,  and  does  not  care  twopence  tor  the  frame. 
So,  when  the  Lord  looks  on  you,  He  does  not  value  your  bank  book,  your  dress, 
yoor  bodily  strength  and  beauty;  he  values  you — your  spirit.  "A  man  is 
measured  by  his  soul  I  "    (W.  Birch.) 

Yers.  10-12.  Making  request,  if  by  any  means  ...  I  might  hare  a  prosperona 
Journey. — Prospercmt  journey  : — What  is  necessary  to  render  a  journey,  or  a  voyage, 
prosperous  in  the  estimation  of  a  real  Christian  ?  Is  he  satisfied  if  by  it  his  tem  • 
poral  interests  are  advanced,  if  he  enjoys  worldly  pleasure,  if  he  meets  with  kind 
friends,  if  he  be  preserved  from  calamity,  and  return  home  with  invigorated  health  t 
These  are  blessings  which  require  his  grateful  acknowledgments  to  God.  With 
these  he  ought  to  be  contented,  if  this  world  were  his  home.  But  when  he 
remembers  that  heaven  is  his  true  country,  and  religion  his  great  business,  he  must 
feel  that  something  more  is  necessary.  I.  Wb  should  bbkk  mokx  AirxoTiNa  and 
ADMiBiNo  VIEWS  OF  THB  Cbeatob,  AS  DispLAiED  IN  His  woBKB.  When  ooT  minds 
are  employed  upon  the  works  of  nature,  it  is  generally  only  to  make  them  Bubser> 
Tient  to  our  worldly  interest,  or  to  administer  to  our  earthly  gratification ;  and  not 
to  warm  our  hearts  by  the  contemplation  of  that  infinite  power,  wisdom,  and  good- 
ness, which  appear  in  the  formation  of  them.  If  such  conduct  at  all  times  is  inex- 
cusable and  ungrateful,  it  is  doubly  so  in  our  journeys,  in  which  the  works  of  Gt>d 
are  presented  to  us  in  rapid  succession.    II.  Wb  shodu>  acquibb  a  uobb  dbbp 

AND   QBATEFUL  SEMSB   OW    THB   GOODNESS  AND    CABB   OW    THAT  PbOVIDENCB    ON   WHIOH 

WB  DEPEND.  Though  iu  God  "  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being,"  yet  the 
majority  of  mankind  think  but  little  of  this  guardian  providence.  And  even 
Christians,  when  nothing  occurs  to  interrupt  the  regular  course  of  their  lives,  are 
too  apt  to  forget  their  dependence ;  but  surely  in  our  journeys  we  must,  from  their 
unseen  dangers,  feel  that  we  need  each  moment  to  be  shielded  by  the  power  of 

Ood.      lU.   Ix  SHOULD  DEBPBN  OUB  CONVICTION  OF  THB  VALUE  AND  DNIFOBMITT  OT  THB 

BBUQioN  OF  Jesus.  The  various  objects  presented  to  him  will  be  calculated  to 
produce  this  conviction.  Far  from  home  we  meet  with  the  disciples  of  the 
Bedeemer.  IV.  Wb  should  bmbbaob  oppobtunities  of  acquirino  and  doino  good. 
Sometimes  even  believers,  during  their  journeys,  have  found  their  graces  withering, 
because  they  neglected  these  means  of  spiritual  improvement.  Carefully  gnard 
against  this.  Let  the  Word  of  God  not  be  disregarded.  Let  nothing  interfere  with 
prayer.  Sabbath  duties,  &o.  Be  not  ashamed  to  avow  your  attachment  to  the 
blessed  Saviour.    A  word  spoken  in  season  may  be  the  means  of  saving  a  soul.    V. 

BSMEUBEB    THAT    OUB   WHOLE   LIFE   IS    A    JOUBNBX   TOWABDS    ETEBNITT.        Frequently 

think,  wheu  far  from  home,  that  you  are  only  sojourners  upon  earth ;  that  heaven 
IB  yoor  country.  {S.  Davies,  DJ).)  A  prosperous  journey  : — I.  Depends  upon 
XHB  WILL  OF  God.  II.  Supposes  God's  oabb,  dibection,  and  BLSssiNa.  UL  Gam 
ONLY  BE  BEOUBED  BT  EABNEST  piumB.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  By  tbe  will  of  Ood,  or  in 
the  wUl,  <&c. — Paul  seemed  to  regard  the  will  of  God  as  a  straight  course,  in  which 
he  was  desirous  of  sailing ;  or  as  a  circle,  outside  of  whose  radius  he  would  not 
steer,  through  selfishness,  impatience,  and  self -judgment.  The  track  marked  out  on 
God's  chart  must  be  followed,  for  out  of  it  were  shoals  and  rocks,  where  he  would 
founder  and  make  shipwreck  of  his  faith.  (G.  Neil,  M.A.)  Prayer  and  the  wiU  of 
Ood : — There  is  nothing  with  which  Christians  should  be  more  habitually  impressed 
than  that  God  is  the  disposer  of  events.  They  should  look  to  His  will  in  the 
smallest  concerns  of  life,  as  well  as  in  affairs  of  the  greatest  moment.  Even  a 
prosperous  voyage  is  from  the  Lord.  In  this  way  they  glorify  God  by  acknow- 
ledging His  providence  in  aU  things,  and  have  the  greatest  confidence  and  happi- 
ness in  walking  before  Him.  Here  we  also  learn  that,  while  the  will  of  God 
oonceming  any  event  is  not  ascertained,  we  have  liberty  to  desire  and  pray  for 
what  we  wish,  provided  our  prayers  and  desires  are  conformed  to  His  holiness. 
We  also  learu  in  this  place  that,  since  all  events  depend  on  the  will  of  God, 
we  ought  to  acquiesce  in  them,  however  contrary  they  may  be  to  oar  wishes; 
and  likewise  that  in  those  things  in  which  the  will  of  God  is  not  apparent,  we 
should  always  accompany  our  prayers  and  our  desires  with  this  condition  if 
it  be  pleasing  to  God,  and  to  be  ready  to  renounce  oar  desires  as  f  oon  as  they 


1.]  BOMANS. 


appear  not  to  be  conformed  to  His  wilL     "  O  how  sweet  a  thing,"  as  one  has  well 
observed,  "  were  it  for  us  to  lerf^rn  to  make  our  burdens  light  by  framing  our 
hearts  to  the  burthen,   and   making  the  Lord's  will   our  law  !  "     (J.  Haldane.) 
For  I  long  to  see  you  that  I  may  Impart  onto  you  some  spiritual  gift. — PauVt 
dtiire  to  »ee  the  Roman  Chrittianf : — Note — I.  The  lonoino  of  an  eabnest  kind 
FOR  ENOAGEMBNT  IN  Christ's  bebvicb.      Paul  wishcd   to  See   th' m — 1.   That  he 
might  impart  some  spiritual  gift.     Some  suppose  reference  is  made  to  those  super- 
natural gilts  in  which  the  Church  at  Corinth  was  so  rich,  and  were  tliey  still  in  the 
Church  some  would  be  tempted  to  say,  "  Give  me  this  power,"  with  a  view  to  use- 
(nlness.     But  why  do  you  not  use  those  you  alreadv  have  ?     It  is  not  that  our 
Churches  come  behind  in  gifts,  but  that  fo  many  are  unemployed.     Eveiy  one  has 
some  gift — use  it.     Some  mistake  their  gifts  and  hinder.     If  you  have  no  gift  for 
public  prayer,  pray  in  silence.     But  all  have  the  gift  of  tongues.     Every  one  can 
speak  a  word  in  season  to  them  that  are  weary.     Pray  that  they  may  be  baptized 
with  tire.     That  will  purge  from  detraction,  Ac,  and  make  meet  for  the  Master's 
ase.    2.  That  he  and  they  might  be  comforted  by  the  faith  of  each.    There  is  a  law 
pervading  God's  works  by  which  the  giver  becomes  the  receiver.    The  seed  comes 
back  in  the  harvest ;    the  ocean  receives  the  rain  it  gives  off   in  evaporation. 
Nothing  is  so  injurious  as  selfishness;  nothing  so  remunerative  as  benevolence. 
No  prayer  is  so  profitable  as  intercession  for  others ;  no  Bible  knowledge  so  rich  as 
that  derived  from  exposition  to  others.     How  many  have  been  recompensed  for 
efforts  made  to  attend  the  prayer  meeting !     II.  The  delays  often  met  with  in 
IHB  ACCOMPLISHMENT  OF  ODB  WORE.    Do  uot  soppose  that  bccause  your  motive  is 
pure  your  end  will  be  achieved  at  once.     Paul  planned  long  ago  to  visit  Rome, 
but  found  his  plans  set  aside  by  Ood.     In  all  your  und^  rtakings  do  what  he  did — 
pray  to,  and  then  wait  for,  God  to  make  the  way  plain.   Tiie  opportunity  will  come 
in  His,  i.e.,  the  best  time.     III.  Our  desire  for  employment  in  Christ's  work 
HAT  BE  realised  IN  A  WAT  LEAST  EXPECTED.     The  Spirit,  rather  than  the  letter, 
of  the  prayer  is  answered.     How  little  Paul  thought  that  he  would  enter  Borne  a 
prisoner  ;  but  the  sequel  shows  that  God  was  right.     What  a  rich  experience  Paul 
brought  with  him,  and  accumulated  for  the  benefit  of  the  Church  of  all  ages.     How 
invaluxble  is  the  record  of  his  shipwreck  1     We  could  ill  have  spared  the  incidents 
of  his  history  even  for  more  sermons  and  epistles.    Then  he  tells  us  how  that  all 
fell  out  for  the  furtherance  of  the  end  he  had  in  view  (Phil.  i.).     IV.  To  accom- 
plish Christ's  work  we  most  have  a  powerfol  conviction — 1.  Of  our  personal 
indebtedness.      2.  Of    the  glory  and  power  of    the    gospel.      (J.    S.   Peartall.) 
Pergonal  intercourse : — I.  Its  advantages.    It  accomplishes  more  than  a  letter — hence 
reading  the  Word  at  home  does  not  supersede  the  necessity  of  the  living  ministry. 

II.  Its  objects.  1.  The  communication  of  some  spiritual  good.  2.  Mutual  edification. 

III.  Itsatiractionb.  1.  Mutual  love.  2.  Love  to  Christ.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Pastoral 
visitation : — 1.  Supposes  personal  communication  about  Divine  things.  2.  Contributes 
to  the  development,  increase,  and  communion  of  faith.  3.  Secures  mutual  comfort — 
the  minister  needs  it^-can  impart  it.  4.  Promotes  unity  of  affection  and  effort.  {Ibid.) 
The  bond  and  purpose  of  the  ministry : — I.  Notice  the  hanlt  kxpression  of 
Cbristuh  affection  which  the  apostle  allows  himself  here.  Very  few  Christian 
teachers  could  or  should  venture  to  talk  so  much  about  themselves  as  Paul  did. 
The  strong  infusion  of  the  personal  element  in  all  his  letters  is  so  transparently 
simple,  BO  free  from  affectation  or  unctuous  sentiment,  that  it  attracts  rather  than 
repels.  He  had  never  been  in  Bome  when  he  spoke  these  words ;  he  had  no 
personal  relations  with  any  of  the  believers  there;  but  still  bis  heart  went  out 
towards  tiiem,  and  he  was  not  ashamed  to  show  it.   "  I  long  to  see  you."   II.  Note 

THE  LOFTY  CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  THE  PURPOSE  OF  THEIB  MEBTIKO.      The  WOrd  he  employs 

here,  "  gift,"  is  never  used  in  the  New  Testament  for  a  thing  that  one  man  can 
give  to  another,  but  is  always  employed  for  the  concrete  results  of  the  grace  of  God 
bestowed  upon  men.  The  very  expression,  then,  shows  that  Paul  thought  of  him- 
self, not  as  the  original  giver,  but  simply  as  a  channel  through  which  was  com- 
municated what  God  had  givetu  In  the  same  direction  points  the  adjective  whi<  h 
accompanies  the  noun — a  "spiritual  gift" — which  probably  describes  the  origin  ot 
the  gift  as  being  the  Spirit  of  God,  rather  than  defines  the  seat  of  it  when  received 
as  being  the  spirit  of  the  receiver.  Notice,  too,  as  bearing  on  the  limits  of  Paul  l- 
part  in  the  gift,  the  delicacy  of  the  language  in  his  statement  of  the  ultimate 
purpose  of  the  gift.  He  does  not  say,  "  that  I  may  strengthen  you,"  which  may 
have  been  too  egotistical,  but  he  says,  "that  ye  may  be  strengthened,"  for  the  true 
■trengthener  ia  not  Paul,  but  the  Spirit  of  God.    And  cow,  what  are  the  lassuos 


28  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [c«ip.  4 

that  I  take  from  this  ?  1.  No  Christian  teacher  has  any  basiness  to  open  his  month 
nuleas  he  is  snre  that  he  has  got  something  to  impart  to  men  as  a  gift  from  the 
Divine  Spirit.  And  no  Christian  organisation  has  any  right  to  exist  unless  it 
recognises  the  communication  and  further  spreading  of  this  spiritaal  gift  as  its 
great  function.  That  is  the  one  lesson,  and  the  other  one  is  this — 2.  Have  jon 
received  the  gift  that  I  have,  under  the  limitations  already  spoken  of,  to  bestow  ? 
Th&t  is,  have  you  taken  Christ,  and  have  you  faith  in  Him.  The  purpose  of  the 
Church,  and  the  purpose  of  the  ministry,  is  that  spiritual  gifts  may  be  imparted. 
And  if  that  purpose  be  not  accomplished,  all  other  purposes  that  are  accomplished 
are  worse  than  nothing.  III.  Note  the  lowly  oonsciousness  that  ucch  was  to 
BE  BECEr^ED  AS  WELL  AS  uucH  TO  Bs  GIVEN.  The  apostle  oorrects  himself  after  he 
has  said,  "that  I  may  impart  unto  you  some  spiritual  gift,"  by  adding,  "that  is, 
that  I  may  be  comforted  (or  rather,  encouraged)  together  with  you  by  the  mutual 
faith  both  of  you  and  me."  If  his  language  were  not  so  transparently  sincere,  and 
springing  from  deep  interest  into  the  relationship  between  himself  and  these  people, 
we  should  say  it  was  exquisite  courtesy  and  beautiful  delicacy.  But  it  moves  in  a 
region  far  more  real  than  the  region  of  courtesy,  and  it  speaks  the  inmost  truth 
about  the  conditions  on  which  the  Roman  Christians  should  receive,  viz.,  that  they 
should  also  give.  There  is  only  one  giver  who  is  only  a  giver,  and  that  is  God. 
All  other  givers  are  also  receivers.  Paul's  was  a  richly-complicated  nature — firm  ai 
a  rock  in  the  will,  tremulously  sensitive  in  its  sympathies;  like  some  strongly- 
rooted  tree  with  its  stable  stem  and  a  green  cloud  of  fluttering  foliage  that  movei 
in  the  lightest  air.  So  his  spirit  rose  and  feU  according  to  the  reception  that 
he  met  from  his  brethren,  and  the  manifestation  of  their  faith  quickened  and 
strengthened  his.  And  he  is  but  one  instance  of  a  universal  law.  All  teachers, 
the  more  geuuine  they  are,  the  more  sympathetic  they  are,  are  the  more  sensitive 
of  their  environment.  The  hearer  reacts  on  the  speaker  quite  as  much  as  the 
speaker  does  on  the  hearer.  If  you  have  got  ice  in  the  pews,  that  brings  down  the 
temperature  up  here.  And  the  unbelief  and  low-toned  religion  of  a  congregation  ia 
always  pulling  down  the  faith  and  the  fervour  of  their  minister,  if  he  be  better  and 
holier,  as  they  expect  him  to  be,  than  they  are.  On  the  other  hand,  the  true 
encouragement  to  give  a  man  when  he  is  trying  to  do  God's  will,  to  preach  Christ's 
gospel,  is  not  to  pat  him  on  the  back  and  say,  "  What  a  remarkable  sermon  that 
was  of  yours  I  What  a  genius  ;  what  an  orator  1 "  not  to  go  about  praising  it ;  but 
to  come  and  say,  "  Thy  words  have  led  me  to  Christ ;  and  from  thee  I  have 
taken  the  gift  of  gifts."  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Sharing  happiness  : — Men  of  the 
noblest  disposition  think  themselves  happiest  when  others  share  with  them  in  their 
happiness.  {Jeremy  Taylor.)  To  the  end  ye  may  be  established. — Christian 
establishment: — I.  The  object  which  we  all  should  have  in  view — "that  we 
may  be  established."  1.  In  knowledge.  This  kind  of  knowledge  Paul  terms  "  the 
full  assurance  of  understanding  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  mystery  of  God," 
&c.  When  we  attain  this,  comprehend  the  gospel  of  Christ  so  completely  that  we 
see  its  adaptation  to  all  our  wants,  it  becomes  its  own  evidence ;  doubt  vanishes, 
the  heart  and  the  mind  are  both  at  rest.  2.  In  hoUness  (1  Thess.  iii.  12,  13.)  So 
that  we  get  a  fixed  abhorrence  of  evil,  and  love  good  for  its  own  sake,  and  be  Uke 
God  and  those  holy  beings  who  minister  to  Him  perpetually.  3.  In  all  those 
external  habits  which  fiow  from  holiness.  The  holiness  of  the  Christian's  heart 
must  be  manifest  in  his  daily  habits  and  conduct,  "  in  every  good  word  and  work." 
II.  The  means  which  may  be  employed  to  further  that  object.  God  Himself 
is  the  source  of  the  establishment  of  His  people,  but  the  Word  of  God  is  explicit 
as  to  the  part  which  men  should  take  in  the  same.  While,  therefore,  it  is  fre- 
quently a  prayer  of  the  apostle  that  the  Churches  might  be  '•  established  in  the 
faith,"  this  is  no  less  the  subject  of  exhortation  (1  Cor.  xv.  68).  While  we  are 
using  the  prescribed  means,  we  may  look  to  Him  for  His  needful  blessing ;  the 
grace  of  God  co-operates  with  the  energy  to  which  He  brings  His  people.  And 
among  these  means  which  God  has  provided  are — 1.  The  ministry  of  the  gospel. 
This  is  perhaps  a  less  important  means  than  it  once  was,  because  of  the  accessibility 
of  the  Word  of  God  to  all ;  and  now  each  parent,  each  master,  may  become  a 
minister  of  Christ  in  his  own  household.  Yet  still  ministers  have  been  appointed 
by  Christ  as  instruments  in  the  building  up  of  their  fellow  Christians.  2.  The 
summoning  into  activity  all  the  individual  powers.  If  you  have  any  earnestness, 
decision,  promptitude,  courage,  in  prosecuting  any  common  business,  try  tbe 
sincerity  of  your  spirits  by  seeking  whether  they  are  manifest  in  seeking  your 
epixitual  progress  daily.    3.  Prayer.    {Baptist  Noel,  M.A.)        That  I  may  be  com- 


CHAT,  l]  ROMANS.  HI 

forted  together  with  yoa. — Christians  mutual  helpers : — The  relations  of  Christiaos 
to  each  other  are  like  the  several  flowers  in  a  garden  that  have  upon  each  the  dew 
of  heaven,  which  being  shaken  with  the  wind,  they  let  fall  the  dew  at  each  other's 
roots,  whereby  they  are  jointly  nourished,  and  become  nourishers  of  one  another. 
(J.  Bunyan.)  The  joy  of  imparting  joy  : — And  I  might  add  that  service  in  itaell, 
throngh  the  blessing  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  always  a  means  of  comfort,  because  of 
the  blessedness  which  it  yields  to  a  generous  heart  to  be  doing  good  to  others. 
Oh  I  you  little  know  how  much  pleasure  you  would  derive  from  the  kindly  endea- 
vours to  impart  joy  to  others.  I  passed  a  brother  yesterday  whose  eyes  sparkled, 
and  his  cheerful  face  was  lit  up  with  smiles.  Though  I  did  not  know  the  man,  I 
seemed  to  read  his  character  in  his  countenance.  Surely,  thought  I,  he  is  a  busy 
one  who  is  trying  to  dispense  some  blessings  to  the  needy.  Again  this  morning  I 
fell  in  with  him,  and  this  time  I  made  his  acquaintance.  His  cordial  greeting 
pleased  me,  and  bis  lively  manner  induced  me  to  ask  on  what  good  errand  he  had 
been.  "  Well,"  said  he,  "  I  have  just  been  visiting  some  poor  people,  and  talking 
with  some  sick  ones,  and  I  have  had  a  sweet  time  vrith  them."  Yes;  that  is  the 
way  to  get  sweet  times.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  communion  of  saints : — As  in 
the  case  of  fire,  if  any  one  gather  together  many  lights,  it  is  a  bright  flame  that  he 
kindles ;  thus  also  does  it  naturally  happen  with  the  faithful.  For  when  we  be  by 
ourselves,  torn  away  from  others,  we  are  somehow  in  worse  spirits.  But  when  we 
sec  one  another,  and  are  entwined  with  the  members  of  our  own  selves,  great  is 
the  comfort  we  receive.  (Chrysostom.)  By  the  mutual  faith  both  of  you  and 
me. — Mutual  faith: — Faith  is  tbe  all-inspiring  element  of  work  everywhere!  No 
man  long  pursues  any  work  which  he  does  not  believe  in.  No  man  invests  his 
money  in  something  he  does  not  believe  in.  Faith  is  not  misty  imagination,  nor 
is  it  a  mere  mystical  meditation  about  God ;  it  is  built  upon  what  God  is  and  what 
God  has  said  and  what  God  has  done.  But  then  there  comes  in  this  other  con- 
sideration ;  faith  is  a  thing  of  degree.  Here,  then,  it  touches  the  point  of  mutuality  1 
If  you  and  I  engage  in  a  commercial  enterprise,  I  find  my  faith  weakened  or 
strengthened.  I  say  I  wish  you  knew  a  little  more  about  that  enterprise.  If  we  do 
business  with  a  great  firm,  the  doubt  of  others  affects  us.  It  was  a  terrible  thing 
when  the  crew  of  Columbus  said,  "  We  do  not  believe."  The  heroism  of  that  man 
is  seen  in  the  fact  that  he  found  the  land  in  spite  of  the  mutinous  crew  1  But 
where  there  is  this  element  of  mutuality  in  faith,  there  is  wonderful  strength.  I. 
Successful  enterprises  need  the  faith  of  every  one  of  ub.  The  unbeliever  is  • 
weakness  wherever  he  is.  Do  you  believe  that  yourself  ?  Masses  are  not  strong 
in  and  of  themselves.  The  unity  of  the  spirit  in  the  bond  of  faith — that  is  strength. 
1.  Men  who  are  engaged  on  gospel  enterprises  can  only  do  it  in  proportion  as  they 
believe  in  Christ,  and  in  each  other  as  true  men  in  Christ.  2.  If  you  are  mated 
to  another,  take  care  your  friend  believes  with  you,  or,  young  woman,  you  will 
regret  it.  You  cannot  row  to  heaven  with  one  oar  comfortably ;  both  must  row 
together.  It  is  a  terrible  revelation  to  some.  "I  am  yoked  to  an  unbeliever  1 " 
8.  The  enterprises  of  home-life  demand  mutual  faith.  II.  The  best  faith  needs 
befreshment.  Even  Paul  gained  strength  by  another's  faith.  The  rivulet  feeds 
the  sea,  as  well  as  the  mountain  feeds  the  river!  The  little  child  feeds  my  faith — 
I  cannot  hear  a  child's  prayer  without  being  helped.  The  increase  of  faith  is  made 
up  of  quiet  influences !  When  you  went  to  the  seaside  out  of  health,  you  wonder 
how  it  was  you  got  better.  You  breathed  the  pure  oxygen ;  you  looked  up  to  the 
broad  heavens  and  forgot  meaner  things ;  your  nature  was  influenced  by  a  million 
little  touches  along  the  nerves.  So  you  may  be  in  an  atmosphere  of  faith ;  and 
Paul  wanted  to  see  them  to  be  in  such  an  atmosphere  and  to  contribute  to  it.  III. 
Faith  brtnos  comfort.  When  we  voyage  to  America,  "Do  you  believe  in  the 
captain,  too  ?  "  Then,  when  evening  comes,  "  Good  night,"  and  we  are  all  com- 
forted. The  vessel  is  safe  in  which  we  voyage  to  heaven.  All  believe  in  the  same 
Divine  Lord  over  the  storm.  You  are  going  home  without  trepidation  to-night,  but 
if  you  had  lived  in  some  parts  of  Italy  some  time  ago  we  might  have  asked,  "  Are 
yon  afraid  of  being  stabbed  to-night  ?  Which  way  are  you  going  ?  We  will  walk 
together  1 "  We  are  comforted  by  mutual  faith  in  each  other.  The  same  thing 
holds  good  in  regard  to  religion.  What  a  glorious  triumph  over  fear  the  early 
Christians  enjoyed.  IV.  Faith  gives  courage.  There  were  a  few  people  inside 
Eome  who  believed  in  Jesus,  and  the  apostle  took  courage  from  the  thought  that 
he  should  not  be  alone,  but  be  surrounded  by  a  loyal  few.  In  the  army  every  one 
helps  the  other's  courage.  There  is  no  talk  about  danger,  but  only  of  taking  the 
battlements !     So  wherever  you  are,  by  the  exercise  of  your  faith  you  are  8u» 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cma.  U 

tainiiig  that  poor  fellow  there  who  has  the  same  battle  to  fight  as  70a  hare.  Y. 
Faith  HEARS  PBATBB.  "Making  request,"  <&o.  You  cannot  work  joorseli  op  into 
love  or  faith !  It  must  be  something  that  comes  to  you.  Everr  good  gift  comes 
from  God.  What  we  want  to  make  request  for  is  faith,  and  if  we  have  it  as  a 
possession,  may  God  enlarge  it.    {W.  M.  Statham.) 

Ter.  13.  Oftentimes  I  purposed  to  come  onto  yon. — Pauft  purpo$e: — I.  Its 
msTOBT.  "  Oftentimes."  The  project  doubtless  early  formed.  What  more  natural 
than  that  so  distinguished  a  Obristian  citizen  should  desire  to  see  the  gospel 
firmly  planted  in  the  centre  of  the  empire.  This  would  be  strongly  opened 
by  the  conviction  that  from  Bome  the  gospel  would  perforce  radiate  more 
powerfully.  A  Christianised  Bome  would  mean  a  Christianised  world.  The 
purpose  was  originated  or  confirmed  by  Divine  revelation  (cf.  Acts  zix.  21, 
xzvii.  24 ;  Bom.  ZT.  23).  His  eye  would  never  be  off  this  great  object.  II.  Its 
TEMPOKABT  FBUsTBATioN.  1.  Doubtless  by  Diviuc  interpositions.  He  was  kept  from 
Bome  as  he  was  kept  from  Asia,  <&c.  (Acts  zvi.  6,  7).  Sometimes  God's  purposes 
are  best  answered  by  the  frustration  of  our  own  when  they  are  of  the  highest. 
Perhaps  it  was  best  for  Paul  to  work  his  way  to  Bome  by  a  circuitous  route, 
coming  in  contact  with  diverse  peoples,  and  so  preparing  him  for  dealing  with  the 
heterogeneous  population  of  the  capital  Anyhow,  no  ministry  at  Bome  would 
have  compensated  for  the  loss  of  his  brilliant  history.  2.  Certainly  by  necessary 
engagements  (chap.  zv.  20,  21).  It  is  always  best  to  do  the  duty  which  is  nearest 
to  hand,  and  follow  it  up  by  proceeding  to  the  next.  All  Paul's  career  seems  an 
illustration  of  this.  He  never  seems  to  have  gone  out  of  his  way.  One  event  leads 
to  another  by  a  perfectly  natural  sequence.  3.  Possibly  Satan  may  have  hindered. 
If  at  one  time,  why  not  at  another  (1  Thess.  ii.  18  ;  Dan.  z.  13)  7  Did  he  hinder 
at  lUyricum  (cliap.  xt.  20)  when  Bome  was  so  temptingly  near  7  III.  Its  ultimatx 
OBJECT.  "Fruit."  1.  This  fruit  was — (1)  The  conversion  of  sinners  (Col.  i.  6; 
Phil.  i.  11).  (2)  The  comfort  and  advancement  of  believers  (John  zt.  16 ;  PhiL 
L  25).  (8)  The  growth  of  the  Church,  both  inwardly  and  outwardly.  2.  Much 
fruit  he  had  reaped  already  (chap.  zv.  18-21).  3.  Yet  he  yearned  for  more.  He 
could  have  no  rest  while  one  field  remained  unplanted,  and  he  knew  that  the  most 
fruitful  field  yet  remained.  lY.  Its  accomflishuent.  Bead  Phil,  i.,  and  remember 
that  Fhilippians,  Colossians,  Ephesians,  and  Philemon  were  written  at  Bome. 
Who  shall  estimate  the  fruit  reaped  by  this  visit  to  Bome?  Only  the  Great 
Husbandman  at  the  Great  Day.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  But  was  let  hitherto. — Tht 
true  estimate  of  hindrances : — 1.  Distinguish  between  the  imaginary  and  the  reaL 
2.  Do  not  be  discouraged  by  them,  nor  seek  to  evade  them.  3.  Conquer  them  bj 
prayer.  4.  Convert  them  into  means  of  advancement — among  other  things  the 
apostle's  difficulties  occasioned  this  Epistle  to  the  Bomans.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
That  I  mlglit  have  some  trvdX. — Anxiety  for  mouU  : — Brainerd  could  say  of  him- 
self  on  more  than  one  occasion,  "  I  cared  not  where  or  how  I  lived,  or  what  hard- 
ships I  went  through,  so  that  I  could  but  gain  souls  to  Christ.  While  I  was  asleep 
I  dreamed  of  these  things;  and,  when  I  waJ^ed,  the  first  thing  I  thought  of  was  this 
great  work.  All  my  desire  was  for  the  conversion  of  the  heathen,  and  all  my  hope 
was  in  God."  Earnestness  in  seeking  for  soitls : — When  Judson  carried  the  message 
of  salvation  to  the  villages  and  jungles  of  India,  he  declared  his  conviction  that 
men  must  be  redeemed  to  God  by  personal,  individual  contact  with  those  who  knew 
the  grace  of  Christ ;  and  he  said,  "  I  am  deteraoined  to  preach  the  goq>el  wherever 
I  oan  find  a  congregation  of  one." 

Yers.  14-16.  I  am  debtor  both  to  the  Greeks  and  to  the  Barljarlans. — I  am 
debtor: — The  text  raises  a  question  on  points  which,  in  mercantile  phraseology, 
would  be  designated — I.  The  bdbiness.  1.  A  merchant,  embarked  in  an  extensive 
foreign  trade,  has  fallen  into  the  habit  of  doing  a  good  deal  of  petty  business  at 
home  on  which  the  profit  is  small ;  but  it  is  near,  and  therefore  occupies  time  out 
of  all  proportion  to  its  worth.  In  the  meantime  rumours  are  rife  that  in  one  foreign 
market  prices  had  suddenly  fallen  before  his  goods  arrived ;  that  in  another  bis 
agents  had  sold  his  cargo  and  absconded ;  and  that  in  a  third  direction  an  invest* 
ment,  not  insured,  had  been  lost  at  sea.  He  declines  to  ezamine  these  reports, 
because  he  does  not  like  the  subject;  and  to  keep  his  mind  free  from  painful 
reflections  he  throws  himself  with  redoubled  energy  into  his  huckstering,  and  exults 
over  the  halfpence  of  profit  which  each  transaction  produces.  The  man  is  mad, 
yon  say.    He  is.    But  probably  "  thou  art  the  man."    8.  We  are  all  merehanta. 


1.]  ROMANS.  M 

We  hare  basiness  with  both  worlds ;  bat  oar  stake  in  the  one  is  alight,  in  the  other 
all  but  infinite.  It  becomes,  therefore,  an  important  question  whether  our  attention 
to  these  two  is  in  due  proportion  to  their  comparative  worth.  Alas  1  there  are  many 
foolish  traders  who  are  anxious  about  the  balance  of  their  accounts  for  time,  and 
leave  the  interests  of  eternity  to  sink  or  swim.  3.  Paul  was  a  dQigent  and  energetic 
man.  Had  he  been  a  merchant,  the  keenest  wit  in  all  the  Exchange  could  not 
have  overreached  him.  He  closely  examined  the  worth  of  an  article,  and  nicely 
oalonlated  how  much  it  would  bring.    He  embarked  all  in  one  basiness,  and  then 

Eushed  it  to  the  uttermost.    He  did  not  neglect  the  necessary  affairs  of  this  life,  but 
is  treasure  was  in  heaven,  and  his  heart  followed  it.     U.  Thb  debt.     1.  How- 
ever  good  men's  position  in   the  present  world,  in  their  greatest  business  all 
begin  in  debt,  and  no  efforts  of  their  own  can  ever  discharge  it.     Some  heirs  would 
lain  get  quit  of  their  heritage.     When  a  man  discovers  his  property  is  burdened 
beyond  the  worth  of  all  that  he  has  or  can  ever  hope  to  win  the  consequences  are 
disastrous.    If  there  were  any  hope  of  success,  he  might  strive  by  industry  to 
diminish  gradually  his  burden  ;  but  the  debt  is  obviously  so  great  that,  in  spite  of 
all  his  efforts,  its  amount  will  grow  greater  every  year.     He  loses  heart,  and 
abandons  himself  to  his  fate.     Such  is  the  condition  of  men  in  relation  to  God. 
We  are  bom  with  a  debt,  and  the  amount  of  our  liabilities  has  increased  and  is 
still  increasing  day  by  day.    In  this  extremity  a  Daysman  comes  in  between  the 
Judge  and  the  guilty  and  pays  the  debt.   "  There  is  therefore  now  no  eo  idemnation 
to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."    The  handwriting  that  was  against  us  is  blotted 
oat ;  the  bond  is  cancelled,  and  we  are  free.    2.  The  forgiven  sinner  is  clear  in  the 
book  of  God's  judgment ;  but  he  owes  much  to  his  Bedeemer.     He  is  as  deeply  in 
debt  as  ever,  but  it  is  now  a  debt  of  gratitude.     It  is  greater  than  he  can  ever  pay ; 
but  the  more  he  realises  its  greatness  the  happier  he  grows.     3.  But  Paul  confesses 
here  that  he  is  a  debtor  to  man — to  every  man.     How  comes  this  ?    Thus  :  In  the 
complicated  processes  of  modern  merchandise  a  man  often  finds  himself  in  debt  to 
onknown  persons.    You  have  done  business  with  a  merchant  at  a  distance,  and  the 
result  is  a  pecuniary  balance  in  his  favour,  while  in  transactions  with  another  party 
the  balance  is  against  him.    With  a  view  to  the  convenience  of  himself  and  his 
correspondent,  instead  of  getting  money  from  you  and  paying  it  to  his  creditor,  he 
hands  over  to  that  creditor  the  claim  which  he  hulds  against  you  ;  or,  to  make  the 
analogy  more  complete,  the  merchant  to  whom  you  owe  money  desires  to  help 
certain  destitute  persons  in  your  city,  and  to  them  makes  over  the  bill  as  an 
equivalent  for  money.   The  person  who  possesses  that  claim  so  transferred  presents 
it  for  payment,  and  you  must  pay.   Thus  you  become  debtors  to  persons  whom  you 
never  saw.    Thus  Paul  became  a  debtor  to  the  Greeks ;  and  he  owed  all  that  he  had 
and  was  to  Christ,  who  transferred  his  claim,  and  Paul  was  bound  to  honour  it.    So 
wherever  there  is  a  man  in  want,  spiritual  or  temporal,  there  a  legal  claim  is  pre- 
sented to  the  disciples  of  Christ ;  and  if  they  repudiate  they  dishonour  their  Lord. 
This  principle  is  exhibited  in  the  story  of  the  woman  with  the  alabaster  box  of 
ointment  (Mark  xiv.  3-9).    4.  The  root  and  life  of  true  religion  is  personal  devotion 
to  a  personal  Redeemer  ;  thereafter  and  thereon  grows  active  service  in  his  cause. 
These  are  the  first  and  second  commandments  of  the  New  Testament  decalogue. 
Neither  of  these  can  thrive  alone.  Devotion  without  work  degenerates  into  monkery; 
work  without  devotion  sinks  into  a  shallow,  fitful  secularism.    If  we  have  got  mercy 
from  Christ,  we  owe  mercy  to  men.    5.  Nor  does  the  world's  apathy  release  a 
Christian  from  his  obligations.     If  a  company  of  poor  people  held  a  claim  against 
a  citizen,  and  if  he  should  take  advantage  of  their  ignorance  and  poverty  to  evade  the 
payment,  he  would  be  a  dishonourable  man.    In  like  manner,  although  those  who 
now  hold  Christ's  claim  on  as,  not  knowing  its  value,  do  not  present  it  for  payment, 
we  are  bound  in  honour  to  seek  them  out  and  dischar(:;e  our  obligations.    III.  Thb 
COMPOSITION ;  in  what  manner  and  to  what  amount  the  insolvent  proposed  to  pay. 
Carefully  observe  that  the  most  devoted  life  is  not  offered  as  an  adequate  return  to 
the  Savionr.    As  well  might  a  man  purchase  his  pardon  at  first  from  the  Judge  as 
repay  the  Redeemer  for  it  afterwards.    He  pays,  not  in  the  spirit  of  bondage,  but  in 
the  spirit  of  grateful  love ;  not  that  he  looks  to  a  time  when  the  debt  will  be  paid 
off,  but  that  he  delights  in  the  act  of  paying  it.     Having  announced  his  principle, 
Paul  plunged  at  once  into  its  practical  details  (ver.  15).     Adopting  the  natural  and 
Scriptural  order,  we  shall  suggest  first  some  instalments  of  the  debt  that  are  due  to 
parties — 1.  At  home.     It  is  not  necessary  that  the  debtors  should  go  far  away  in 
order  to  find  a  person  authorised  to  receive  the  payments.    The  original  creditor  has 
■eoored  that  properly  qualified  receivers  should  be  at  hand.    Wherever  there  is  » 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  foHl».  I. 

being  in  wretchedness  within  your  reach,  to  that  hnman  being  yon  an  ft  debtor. 
Behold  the  open  spring  of  all  home-mission  effort !  When  certain  institntlons  which 
at  first  were  supported  by  voluntary  contributions  were  transferred  to  a  tax  imposed 
on  the  community  by  imperial  authority  the  difficulties  of  the  managers  disappeared. 
Ah,  the  treasury  of  mission  would  always  be  full  if  the  authority  of  Christ  were  aa 
effective  in  the  hearts  of  Christians  as  that  of  the  government  I  But  let  it  not  b« 
supposed  that  it  is  in  money  only  or  chiefly  that  Christians  should  pay  their  debt. 
Personal  service  is  the  legal  tender,  and  it  is  only  to  a  limited  extent  that  moaey 
may  be  received  as  an  equivalent.  Personal  dealing  is  the  need  of  oor  day.  2. 
Abroad.  A  rich  man  dies,  leaving  a  large  family  of  young  children,  of  whom 
another  rich  man  obtains  the  guardianship.  Partly  by  law  and  partly  by  violence 
he  drives  off  all  cnmpetitors  and  constitutes  himself  sole  trustee  of  the  wealthy 
minors.  He  then  proceeds  to  enrich  himself  out  of  the  inheritance  of  his  wards. 
We  have  masterfully,  not  to  say  unjustly,  ousted  all  other  claimants,  and  assumed 
absolute  guardianship  over  the  vast  populations  of  India.  We  have  enriched 
ourselves  by  the  inheritance  of  those  little  children.  As  a  Christian  nation,  there- 
fore, we  are  debtors  to  them.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Debtor  and  creditor: — The 
text  suggests  that  Christian  missions  are  "  a  new  way  to  pay  old  debts."  The 
debts  are  indeed  old;  the  way  to  pay  them  is  new.  The  creditors  have  been 
increasing  in  numbers,  while  the  debt,  with  interest,  has  been  growing.  The 
debtors,  too,  have  been  growing  in  numbers  and  in  ability  to  discharge  their  obli- 
gations. But  still  the  debt  is,  to  a  large  extent,  nnpaid.  I.  The  debtob  and  his 
DEBT.  The  apostle  nsed  these  words  as  representing  the  whole  Church.  The 
Church  is  not  a  company  under  the  Limited  Liability  Act,  bat  is  a  partnership, 
and  each  partner  is  involved  to  the  uttermost  of  his  possessions.  Consider — 1.  The 
ground  of  this  indebtedness.  Paul's  words  are  not  used  directly  of  his  relation  to 
God.  Tet  we  must  remember  that  there  is  an  intimate  connection  between  oor 
debt  to  God  and  our  debt  to  our  fellow-men.  The  question,  "  How  much  owest 
thou  unto  thy  Lord  ?  "  must  ever  precede  the  other,  "  How  much  owest  thou  to  thy 
neighbour  ?  "  Because  we  are  debtors  to  God  we  are  debtors  to  man,  and  jast  in 
proportion  as  we  recognise  the  one  shall  we  recognise  the  other.  The  true  ground 
of  this  indebtedness  is  found,  therefore,  in  the  relation  of  the  regenerate  man  to 
God  as  a  subject  of  "  the  exceeding  riches  of  His  grace,  in  His  kindness  toward  as 
through  Christ  Jesus."  2.  Looked  at  in  this  light,  the  debt  is  a  debt  of  honour.  I 
do  not  use  the  term,  as  is  often  done,  in  such  a  way  as  to  imply  that  there  may  be 
no  dishonour  in  neglecting  debt  in  other  forms.  But  as  in  this  case  no  writ  can  be 
issued,  it  is  therefore  peculiarly  a  debt  of  honour.  When  God  gave  us  His  salvation  it 
was  not  for  ourselves  alone,  but  for  the  family  of  man,  of  whom  we  are  but  members. 
Our  honour  is  concerned,  therefore,  in  fulfilling  to  the  utmost  the  purpose  of  God 
thus  made  known.  A  trustee  has  a  charge  committed  to  him  by  another  whose 
representative  he  is.  The  due  administration  of  the  trust  is  with  him  a  point  of 
the  highest  honour.  Every  Christian  is,  in  virtue  of  his  Christianity,  a  trustee 
of  the  gospel  for  mankind  at  large,  and  Uierefore  in  honour  bound  to  see  that  the 
members  of  the  race  get  their  full  share.  3.  Granted  this,  I  think  you  will  admit 
that  to  the  man  of  honour  it  is  a  sad  thing  to  be  in  debt.  Paal  was  no  pessimist ; 
but  he  was  far  too  true  a  man  to  shut  his  eyes  to  the  real  state  before  Qod  of  those 
who  knew  not  Christ.  There  were,  therefore,  two  sides  to  his  experience,  as  there 
must  be  to  that  of  every  Christian.  Looking  Godward,  he  was  gladdened  by  the 
rays  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness ;  looking  manward,  he  was  saddened  by  the  thick 
darkness  of  his  nnregeneracy  and  death  in  sin.  So  it  came  about  that  he  was 
"  sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing,"  and  his  sorrow  wakened  in  him  a  deep  sense  of 
responsibility,  which  found  expression  in  the  words, "  I  am  debtor."  4.  The  Christian 
debtor,  seeing  the  true  ground  of  his  indebtedness,  moved  by  a  sense  of  honour  to 
Christ,  and  saddened  by  the  thought  of  his  responsibility,  will  m^ke  strenuous  and 
self-denying  efforts  to  discharge  his  debt.  Thus  it  was  with  Fsal.  In  spite  of  the 
scanty  means  of  transport  at  his  disposal  he  managed  to  reach  nearly  all  the  chief 
centres  of  the  then  known  world.  Brief  as  was  his  Christian  course,  it  was  packed 
full  of  action.  "  He  fiew  across  the  world,"  and  at  every  point  he  touched  he  held 
meetings  of  his  creditors — meetings  the  object  of  which  was,  not  to  o£fer  a  compo- 
sitton,  but  to  pay  twenty  shillings  in  the  pound — as  he  unfolded  to  them  "  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."  The  debt  is  owing  still.  There  is  no  "  statute  of 
limitations  "  cancelling  our  obligations  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature. 
II.  The  obeditob  and  his  claim.  1.  Where  is  he?  The  touching  cry  of  the  widow 
to  Elisha  was,  "  The  creditor  is  come."    Aye,  the  creditor  is  come.    Civilisation  has 


na.  V]  ROMANS.  tl 

brought  him.  Time  was  when  the  heathen  was  afar  off ;  but  railroad  and  steam* 
boat,  telegraph  and  telephone,  have  unified  the  race.  In  three  weeks  you  may  be 
among  the  teeming  millions  of  India.  Yon  may  know  to-day  what  took  place  in 
China  yesterday,  as  William  Carey  could  not  have  known  in  Northampton  what 
had  transpired  in  London  the  day  before.  The  discoveries  of  science  have  laid 
fresh  and  weighty  burdens  of  responsibility  on  the  Church  of  God,  but  at  the  same 
time  help  as  to  discharge  our  obligations.  2.  Who  is  he?  "  I,  too,  am  a  man," 
he  says ;  "  no  evolutionised  ape,  much  as  appearances  are  against  me,  but  of  the 
creation  of  God.  Tour  father  Adam  was  my  father  too."  The  common  brother* 
hood  constitutes  the  claim  of  man  upon  man  in  regard  to  the  gospel.  When  God, 
in  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation,  was  pleased  to  take  humanity  into  union  with 
Himself,  it  was  not  English  humanity  or  civilised  humanity,  but  humanity  as  such. 
The  brotherhood  of  the  race,  established  in  creation  in  the  person  of  the  first  man, 
ia  confirmed  in  Incarnation  in  the  person  of  the  Second  Man.  The  creditor,  then, 
is  your  long-lost  brother  asking  for  his  share  of  that  salvation  which  God  came  near 
to  man  to  secure.  3.  His  claim.  This  is  emphatically  the  day  of  the  people. 
The  day  of  oligarchy  and  of  aristocracy  has  set ;  the  day  of  democracy,  whether  w« 
like  it  or  not,  has  dawned.  The  few  have  had  their  day,  the  many  are  now  to  have 
theirs.  The  rights  of  man  as  man  are  being  rapidly  brought  to  the  front.  He  who 
discerns  the  signs  of  the  times  hears  the  ever-swelling  cry  of  the  proletariat  claiming 
a  larger  share  of  privilege,  and  alongside  of  it  the  equally  eager  though  silent  cry  from 
the  heathen  world  for  a  fuller  communion  in  Christian  privilege  and  blessing.  He 
who  notes  these  things  will  still  have  sounding  in  his  ears  the  cry, "  Come  over  and 
help  us  I  "  8.  How  is  this  claim  to  be  met  ?  The  claims  of  the  widow's  creditor 
were  met  by  a  supply  given  by  God.  The  debts  we  owe  to  the  heathen  must  be  paid 
by  that  which  we  receive  from  the  same  Divine  source.  When  God  had  multiplied 
her  oil,  the  p>ophet  said,  "  Pay  thy  debt  and  live,  thou  and  thy  children,  of  the 
test."  Home  work  will  not  sulSer  because  the  demands  of  the  outside  world  are 
met.  I  do  not  under-value  money  nor  men ;  but  in  order  to  the  bringing  out  in 
fuller  measure  both  of  men  and  money  we  need  that  which  neither  money  can  buy 
nor  men  create — a  fuller  measure  of  Divine  power  in  the  whole  Church.  ( W.  P. 
Lockhart.)  Debtors  : — 1.  The  language  is  commercial,  and  yet  the  obligation  is 
not  precisely  that  which  a  merchant  commonly  understands.  Debt  is  that  which  a 
man  owes  to  another  for  something  received.  But  Paul  was  not  in  any  such  way 
indebted  to  the  (Gentiles.  He  owed  no  one  a  penny.  Neither  did  he  owe  the 
Gentiles  any  gratitude,  for  in  almost  every  city  he  had  suffered  wrong.  It  was  not, 
therefore,  on  this  ground  that  Paul  acknowledged  himself  to  be  a  debtor,  but  solely 
on  the  ground  that  he  had  received  something  for  them.  "  The  glorious  gospel  of 
the  blessed  God  "  had  been  "  committed  "  to  his  "  trust " ;  he  had  been  "  allowed 
of  Ood  to  be  put  in  trust  with  the  gospel."  This,  therefore,  he  could  not  honestly 
hold  back.  On  the  one  hand  he  had  been  signally  blessed  by  Christ.  Then,  on  the 
otiier  side,  were  the  needs  of  the  Gentile  world.  The  vision  of  the  Macedonian 
crying,  "  Come  over  and  help  us,"  was,  indeed,  a  special  Divine  indication  of  what 
the  Lord  would  have  him  to  do ;  but  it  came  in  that  form  and  time  because  it  was 
already  in  the  line  of  all  his  desires.  He  knew  the  hollowness  and  degradation  of 
tiie  idolatries  of  the  Gentiles,  and  having  learned  the  value  of  his  own  soul  at  the 
Cross  of  Christ,  he  was  eager  to  be  the  means  of  communicating  the  same  revela- 
tion and  conveying  the  same  life  to  them.  Whether  they  should  accept  it  or  not 
rested  with  themselves.  But  as  for  the  proclamation,  necessity  was  laid  upon  him, 
and  he  felt  that  it  was  at  his  peril  if  he  should  hold  his  peace.  2.  How  that  motive 
operated  is  seen  by  his  course  at  Athens.  He  was  there  alone.  He  had  not 
intended  without  companions  to  do  anything  publicly  there  ;  but  when  he  saw  the 
state  of  things  his  spirit  was  so  stirred  that,  at  the  risk  of  scorn  and  persecution,  he 
could  not  but  speak.  He  was  always  on  the  outlook  for  opportunities  of  pa;^'ing  this 
debt.  He  was  not  afraid  to  speak  to  men  like  Sergins  Faulus  or  Festus ;  and  yet 
he  was  not  above  seeking  the  salvation  of  a  runaway  slave  like  Onesimns.  He  was 
equally  earnest  in  the  Uttle  prayer-meeting  at  Philippi  and  upon  the  summit  of 
Areopagus,  and  even  in  Borne  he  found  a  congregation  large  enough  for  his  ambition 
in  the  soldier  that  was  chained  to  his  right  arm.  He  never  saw  a  man  without 
remembering  that  he  had  a  debt  to  pay  to  him,  and  so,  not  more  for  the  benefit  of 
the  stranger  than  for  the  exoneration  of  his  own  conscience,  he  sought  his  highest 
welfare.  When  I  put  it  so,  I  cease  to  wonder  at  the  unwearying  assiduity  of  tl  i  ' 
great  apostle,  while  at  the  same  time  I  am  filled  with  shame  at  the  paltry  littlenes- 
of  oar  modem  Christianity.     3.  His  was  only  a  specific  instance  of  a  principle. 


t9  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  fc 

which  holds  for  os  as  really  and  powerfnlly  as  it  did  for  him,  viz.,  that  personal 
possession  of  privilege  is  of  the  nature  of  a  trust,  and  involves  the  obligation  to  as* 
it  not  for  individual  profit  merely,  but  for  the  welfare  of  others.     The  greatness  of 
exceptional  endowment  carries  with  it  an  obligation  to  exceptional  service.     The 
highest  of  all,  by  virtue  of  his  very  elevation,  is  to  be  the  servant  of  all.   The  power 
of  the  strong  is  Divinely  mortgaged  in  the  interests  of  the  weak  ;  the  sufferer  has  a 
God-given  claim  upon  me  for  relief  and  the  ignorant  for  instruction.   This  is  clearly 
the  true  interpretation  of  the  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan ;  and  indeed  it  is  the 
true  and  proper  outcome  of  the  gospel  itself.   I  know  that  selfishness  would  repudiate 
all  such  indebtedness.     The  man  of  wealth,  rank,  learning,  power,  says  he  kas  won 
his  position,  and  that  he  has  a  right  to  ase  it  as  he  will,  no  matter  what  may 
become  of  others.     4.  But  Christ  has  reversed  all  that  by  introducing  the  principle 
on  which  I  am  now  insisting,  and  already  we  see  indications  of  its  operations  among 
ns.    Take  power,  for  example ;  and  how  readily  now  men  assent  to  the  statement 
that  it  has  its  duties,  i.e.,  debts,  as  well  as  its  prerogatives  1     Then  as  to  wealth  : 
the  conviction  is  becoming  stronger  among  us  that  the  man  who  is  blessed  with  it 
is  a  debtor  to  the  community  of  which  he  is  a  member.    The  same  is  true  of 
education,  Ac.    True,  we  are  a  very  long  way  yet  from  a  full  recognition  of  thla 
principle ;  bnt  it  is  making  its  way.    5.  The  principle  has  had  its  origin  in  the 
gospel,  for  until  Christ  came  men  oared  little  for  anything  outside  of  themselves. 
The  question  of  Cain,  •'  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ?  "  gives  the  key  to  the  explana- 
tion of  all  the  enormities  of  the  ancient  civilisations.      But  Christ  tnught  His 
followers  to  look  •'  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the 
things  of  others."    And  this  principle  furnishes  what  is  needed  to  meet  the  perils 
of  our  modem  civilisation.     The  tendency  of  the  times  is  to  increase  the  separation 
between  different  classes.    We  continually  hear  it  said  that  the  rich  are  becoming 
richer  and  the  poor  are  growing  poorer.    The  gulf  which  has  long  yawned  between 
employer  and  employed  is  widening.    Now  some  of  that  is  no  doubt  inevitable.   We 
can  never  have  a  dead  level  of  absolute  equality.     What  we  have  to  do  is  to  bring 
the  gospel  principle  to  bear  upon  this  subject  with  more  force ;  for  see  how  it  takes 
the  poison  out  of  all  this  diversity  of  condition.     It  makes  the  powerful  man  the 
trustee  for  the  weak,  the  rich  man  the  guardian  for  the  poor,  the  learned  man  the 
teacher  of  the  ignorant,  and  the  free  man  the  emancipator  of  the  enslaved.     When 
His  followers  disputed  among  themselves  which  should  be  greatest,  the  Lord, 
instead  of  seeking  to  uproot  ambition,  gave  a  new  definition  of  greatness  as  service, 
and  bade  them  be  ambitious  of  that.    And  in  precisely  the  same  way  here  the 
gospel,  far  from  blotting  ont  all  distinctions  in  society  as  the  Communist  would  do, 
makes  the  very  privileges  which  mark  the  distinction  between  a  higher  class  and  s 
lower  the  basis  of  obligation,  so  that  the  one  is  the  debtor  of  the  other,  and  the 
obligation  increases  with  the  increase  of  the  privilege.     6.  But  we  should  expect  to 
find  the  highest  manifestntion  of  this  principle  in  the  Christian  Church.    And  here, 
though  it  has  not  attained  anything  like  its  legitimate  development,  we  are  not 
entirely  disappointed,  for  it  has  originated  and  sustained  the  great  missionary 
enterprise ;  and  thouL'h  the  Church  as  a  whole  has  not  yet  anything  like  come  up 
to  the  level  of  Paul,  still  there  have  been  individuals  who  are  not  unworthy  to  be 
compared  even  with  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.     While  we  here  at  home  are 
enjoving  our  privileges  with  self-complacency  and  satisfaction,  and  thinking  that 
we  perform  our  part  by  giving  a  small  annual  donation,  missionaries  are  labouring 
with  devoted  heroism  to  carry  the  gospel  into  benighted  lands.     {W.  M.  Taylor, 
D.D.)        Evei-y  Christian  a  debtor  to  the  pagan  : — I.  Thk  natdrb  and  strength  o» 

THAT  PABTICtniAB  MOTIVE   TO   liABOUB  fOB  THB   SPREAD   OF   THE   OOSPEL   WHICH   IS  PBE> 

8ENTED  IN  THE  TEXT.  The  feeling  of  indebtedness  in  an  honourable  mind  is — 1.  A 
powerful  one.  It  lies  under  all  the  commerce  of  the  world,  and  is  the  spring  which 
impels  all  the  wheels  of  secular  business.  Never  are  the  secular  abilities  of  a  man 
braced  up  to  a  more  vigorous  activity  than  when,  under  the  sense  of  obligation,  he 
proceeds  with  perfect  integrity  to  obey  the  injunction,  "  Owe  no  man  anything.** 
2.  A  cheerful  and  an  encouraging  motive.  Men  distinguished  in  the  monetary 
world  have  described  the  gush  of  pleasure  which  they  experienced  in  the  earlier 
days  of  their  career  from  the  excitement  incident  to  a  gradual  but  certain  over- 
coming of  their  liabilities.  IL  Its  soubce  and  foundation.  Every  Christian  owes 
the  gospel  to  the  pagan — 1.  Because  of  the  de^  p  interest  which  Christ  takes  in  the 
pagan.  In  the  account  of  the  last  judgment  we  are  taught  thnt  all  neglect  of 
human  welfare  is  neglect  of  Christ,  and  that  anything  that  is  done  for  human 
salvation,  in  any  cation  or  age,  is  done  for  Him.    We  have  no  conception  oi  th« 


OKAV.  t.]  ROMANS.  IS 

immensity  of  that  Divina  oompassion  for  man  which  moved  Christ  to  "  take  oxu 
infirmities  and  bear  our  sicknesses."  So  absorbed  was  He  in  His  merciful  work 
that  "  His  frieuds  went  oat  to  lay  hold  on  Him."  This  compassion  originated 
partly  from  His  Divinity  and  partly  from  His  humanity.  The  Divinity  in  His 
complex  person  gave  the  eye  to  see,  and  the  humanity  the  heart  to  feel  and  su£fer; 
and  when  such  an  eye  is  united  with  such  a  heart  the  sorrow  and  the  sympathy 
are  infinite.  As  God,  the  Eedeemer  was  the  Creator  of  men,  and  as  Man  He  was 
their  Elder  Brother ;  and  therefore  He  can  so  unify  Himself  with  mankind,  as  He 
does  in  these  wonderful  utterances,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the 
least  of  these  My  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  Me,"  <&c.  2.  Because  of  his  own 
personal  indebtedness  to  Christ.  Language  fails  to  express  the  absoluteness  of  the 
right  which  the  Kedeemer  has  to  the  service  of  His  redeemed  people.  The  right  to 
man's  service  which  He  has  by  virtue  of  His  relation  as  a  Creator  is  immeasurable  ; 
but  this  claim  which  Ood  as  Redeemer  possesses  upon  a  human  being  who  He  has 
saved  from  eternal  death  is  even  greater.  This  it  was  that  made  Paul  say,  "  I  am 
debtor,"  &o. — "I  owe  the  knowledge  of  this  great  atonement  which  my  Redeemer 
has  made  for  the  sin  of  the  whole  world  to  every  creature."  Conclusion :  Every 
Christian — 1.  Should  look  upon  the  work  of  evangelising  the  world  as  a  debt  he 
owes  to  Christ  and  to  his  fellow-man.  He  should  heartily  acknowledge  this  debt 
and  not  attempt  to  free  himself  from  it  by  explaining  it  away  as  a  figure  of  speech. 
"  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give."  This  was  the  command  which  the  Saviour 
gave  to  His  twelve  disciples  when  He  endowed  them  with  miraculous  powers 
"  against  andean  spirits  to  cast  them  out,  and  to  heal  all  manner  of  sickness  and 
all  manner  of  disease."  Suppose  now  that  they  had  attempted  to  use  this  super- 
naturalism  for  their  own  selfish  purposes,  how  instantaneously  would  the  wrath  of 
the  Redeemer  have  fallen  upon  them  1  But  the  case  would  have  been  the  same  had 
they  neglected  to  make  any  use  of  their  gifts.  They  were  debtors,  and  owed  these 
healing  mercies  to  the  sick  and  the  dying,  and  the  mere  non-use  of  tbem  would  have 
been  a  sin  and  a  crime.  Precisely  such  is  the  relation  whicn  every  Christian  sustains  to 
that  power  of  healing  spiritual  maladies  which  is  contained  in  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
We  cannot  too  carefully  remember  that  the  work  of  missions  is  not  an  optional 
matter;  it  is  a  debt.  "  Woe  is  me,"  said  St.  Paul,  "  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel." 
It  is  Uke  the  manna,  which,  so  long  as  Israel  ueed  it,  was  the  bread  of  heaven  ;  but 
when  they  hoarded  it,  it  became  corruption  in  their  very  hands.  If  this  sentiment 
of  indebtedness  declines,  then  the  Church  will  lapse  back  into  indifference  and 
apathy,  and  these  are  the  harbingers  of  a  corrupt  Christianity,  which  will  be  buried 
in  one  common  grave  with  paganism,  Mohammedanism,  and  all  forms  of  human 
ein  and  error.  2.  Should  labour  zealously  to  discharge  this  debt.  The  debt 
which  the  believer  is  to  pay  is  not  his  debt  to  eternal  justice.  That  he  can 
never  discharge.  Christians  are  not  to  send  the  gospel  to  the  Greek  and  the 
Barbarian  for  the  purpose  of  making  atonement  for  their  sins,  and  thereby 
cancelling  their  obligations  to  law  and  justice.  That  debt  Christ  Himself  has 
paid.  But  our  debt  is  to  "  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  If  the  providence 
and  Spirit  of  God  indicate  that  we  are  to  go  in  person,  then  we  are  to  go  in  person. 
If  the  providence  of  God  has  placed  in  our  hands  the  silver  and  the  gold  bj 
which  we  can  send  our  representative,  then  we  are  to  give  our  silver  and  our  gold, 
with  our  prayers  for  the  Di^dne  blessing  upon  it.  And,  by  the  grace  of  God,  this 
can  be  done.  The  labour  is  of  that  moderate  and  proportioned  species  which  consists 
in  giving  back  to  Christ  what  we  have  received  from  Him.  3.  Will  be  rewarded  for  his 
discbarge  of  his  obligations.  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom 
prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  God  rewards  His  own  grace.  (G.  T. 
Shedd,  D.D.)  The  Chriitim  a  debtor  to  mankind : — I.  How  was  Paxil  a  debtob  ?  1. 
Not  for  special  benefits  conferred.  He  had  the  Roman  citizenship,  indeed,  and  he  was 
not  unmindful  of  its  privileges ;  but  he  did  not  have  it  as  a  pecuMar  grant  in  con> 
sequence  of  any  pecuhar  favour  of  the  Roman  people.  He  had  received  benefits 
from  contact  with  the  Greek  literature  and  art,  the  influence  of  which  pervaded 
the  atmosphere  of  the  world  in  that  age ;  but  even  this  was  not  a  benefit  which 
was  conferred  upon  him  as  separate  from  others.  And  these  benefits,  whatever 
they  were  on  any  human  calculation,  were  wiped  out  by  the  treatment  which 
Roman  and  Greek  alike  gave  to  him.  2.  Still  less  was  he  indebted  to  the  bar- 
bsurian  who  had  nothing  whatever  to  give  him.  3.  He  felt  the  obligation  of  those 
who  have  special  gifts  of  power  or  grace  entrusted  to  them  of  God  to  use  them  for 
the  benefit  of  others.  (1)  He  had  a  knowledge  which  the  world  as  yet  had  not 
attained — the  knowledge  of  God,  in  the  person  of  His  Son,  by  the  power  of  His 
YOI..   I.  3 


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHA*.  ». 

Spirit,  giving  redemption  to  the  world,  providing  for  man  purification  from  sin, 
into  the  white  beauty  of  God's  holiness.  It  was  the  knowledge  most  necessary  ol 
all  to  personal  welfare,  for  the  guidance  of  men  in  this  life,  and  for  their  prepara- 
tion  for  the  great  Ufe  beyond.  It  was  the  knowledge  most  prolific  of  public  benefit; 
under  whose  transforming  energy  the  empire  itself  should  be  purged  of  its  savage- 
ness  and  converted  to  Christ.  (2)  He  had  extraordinary  power,  too,  given  him  o£ 
God  for  the  proclamation  of  this  knowledge ;  and  because  he  had  such  eminent 
gifts  he  felt  himself  under  proportionate  obligations  to  others  destitute  of  them. 
II.  The  mpoBTANT  and  helpful  suggestions  which  flow  fbou  this.  1.  What 
reason  the  poor  and  the  weak  always  have  to  bless  God  for  the  gospel.  It  is  simply 
the  gospel  of  Christ  taking  the  current  of  man's  natural  inclination — arresting  it, 
and  then  reversing  it — which  gives  to  the  poor,  the  weak,  and  the  friendless  their 
recognised  claim  upon  those  who  are  stronger.  2.  What  a  beautiful  civilisation  it 
is  which  the  gospel  contemplates  as  its  result  in  the  world — a  civilisation  the  key 
of  which  is  in  this  doctrine ;  that  weakness  confers  right,  and  power  simply  imposes 
obligation.  3.  What  the  test  is  of  the  progress  of  Christian  civilisation  in  the  world. 
Not  in  the  multiplying  inventions  of  mechanism ;  in  the  accumulating  wealth  of 
cities ;  in  the  extension  of  free  institutions ;  in  the  spread  of  literature,  and  the 
steady  advance  of  science  in  the  earth ;  but  in  the  answer  to  this  one  question : 
How  far  does  society  recognise  its  obhgation  to  the  weakest  and  the  poorest  in  it  ? 
4.  Here  is  the  practical  test  of  our  individual  Christian  experience.  Not  in  out- 
ward beUef ;  not  in  ecstasy  of  spirit,  but  here :  How  much  have  I  of  the  feeling  of 
Paul  toward  all  around  me  that,  hj  whatever  of  power  and  grace,  and  of  Hia 
supreme  knowledge  God  has  given  to  me,  I  have  become  the  more  indebted  to  them  ? 
{R.  S.  Storrt,  D.D.)  Christian  debt: — I.  Its  natubb  and  oue  poweb  to  pat  it. 
1.  When  a  footpad  starts  to  relieve  a  traveller  of  his  purse  he  says  to  himself,  "  The 
world  owes  me  a  living,  and  a  living  I  must  have."  Many  a  one  cherishes  the  same 
feeling.  A  scholar  murmurs,  as  he  gazes  upon  his  unsold  volume,  "  The  world 
owes  me  fame  and  a  hearing  !  "  The  woman  of  fashion  declares,  •*  The  world 
owes  me  a  position !  "  As  the  politician  clamours  for  votes  he  insists,  "  The  world 
owes  me  a  place  1 "  The  ancients  exercised  themselves  much  in  the  attempt  to 
answer  the  question,  What  is  man  ?  One  said,  It  is  the  animal  which  laughs. 
Another  said.  It  is  the  animal  who  cooks  his  food.  A  truer  answer  is.  It  is  the 
animal  who  never  is  appreciated.  There  lives  not  the  man  who  is  restful  under 
the  estimate  he  receives.  And  if  that  great  burden-bearer — the  world — should 
attempt  to  pay  all  the  bills  for  undervaluation  presented  to  it  from  day  to  day,  it 
would  be  hopelessly  bankrupt  in  a  single  generation.  2.  Now  precisely  here  the 
gospel  meets  our  race.  When  Jesus  hears  the  cry,  "  The  world  owes  me,"  He 
answers,  "  Well,  I  will  pay  you  all  it  owes ;  I  will  pour  out  upon  you  such  a  wealth 
of  resource  that  the  balance  due  shall  be  reversed ;  then  you  will  in  turn  owe  the 
world."  Here  is  a  man  who  has  been  wont  to  say,  •'  The  world  owes  me  a  com- 
petence, for  it  is  the  duty  of  the  strong  to  take  care  of  the  weak."  To  him  Christ 
Bays  in  the  gospel,  "  I  admit  that  principle.  You  shall  have  all  you  need.  '  Seek 
ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,'  &c.  Concern  yourself  no  more  about  money.  If  you 
implicitly  trust  Me,  I  will  see  that  the  treasure  never  fails.  Eemember  steadfastly 
your  own  principle.  You  owe  the  world  a  living.  I  have  furnished  you  with  Tast 
resources.  You  are  to  spread  the  kingdom  which  crowns  you."  Just  so  of  eyery- 
thing  else.  If  one  demands  happiness,  influence,  position,  the  gospel  bestows  it 
beyond  any  measurement.  All  that  it  ever  says  the  world  owes,  is  so  copiously 
transcended  that  the  obligation  rushes  across  the  ledger  into  a  new  balance.  And 
now  it  is  the  Christian  man  who  is  in  debt,  and  that  upon  his  own  showing ;  for 
he  is  strong,  and  the  strong  are  to  care  for  the  weak.  II.  The  pabties  who  hold 
OUB  obligations.  The  apostle  specifies  the  ranks  and  the  races  he  owes.  Ha 
meant,  simply,  he  owed  everybody.  As  he  says  elsewhere,  he  was  to  "  do  good  to 
all  men."  And  all  Christianity  is  embodied  in  Paul.  "  Owe  no  man  anything,  bat 
to  love  one  another."  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  and  ye  are  the  children  of 
God  1  lU.  The  pubpose  of  all  which  has  been  said  is  this — 1.  There  is  a  lesson  of 
deepest  importance  here  to  all  young  Christians.  Life  is  certain  to  be  moulded  by 
the  ideal  one  has  of  it,  and  the  principles  which  he  makes  to  underlie  it  at  the 
start.  A  child  of  opulent  parents  who  goes  forth  into  life  saying,  "  The  world 
owes  me  honour,  ease,  flattery,  and  place,"  will  make  a  very  different  man  from 
the  child  of  many  prayers  who  enters  the  conflict  saying,  "  I  owe  the  world  a  work 
and  a  duty."  So  the  gospel  sets  the  Christian  on  the  search,  not  how  much  ha 
may  claim  in  the  wrestle  of  existence,  but  how  much  he  may  give.    2.  There  it 


.  L]  ROMANS. 


something  instructive  in  those  instances  when  men  have  pat  forth  all  their  energies 
to  pay  their  debts.  Sir  Walter  Scott  once  tried  to  rest  his  half-deliriooB  brain. 
But  he  had  no  time  to  be  sick,  as  the  outstanding  obligations  matured.  "  This  ia 
folly,"  said  he  to  the  startled  servant,  as  he  sprang  up  from  the  couch ;  "bring  in 
the  pens  and  paper  1 "  There  is  no  fertility  of  genius  like  the  pressure  of  a  great 
debt.  Necessity  is  the  mother  of  invention.  3.  Note,  also,  the  industry  and  thrift 
it  promotes.  That  man  pays  most  of  his  dues  whose  unfailing  hammer  rings 
earhest  in  the  morning  and  latest  at  night.  He  lessens  debt  the  most  whose  shuttle 
wea>88  the  most  yards  in  faithful  toil.  Diligence  in  business  keeps  the  bailiff  a 
stranger.  Put  this  commonplace  alongside  of  devout  Christian  Hfe,  and  so  learn 
the  lesson.  A  child  of  God  who  really  feels  that  he  is  a  debtor  to  the  whole  world 
will  surely  find  some  shrewd  way  of  his  own  to  discharge  the  daty.  Conclusion : 
Sometimes  you  notice  a  new  church  coming  into  being.  Once  a  pastor  was 
asked,  "When  will  this  building  be  completed?"  He  easily  gave  the  time. 
"  Will  the  congregation  be  in  debt  ?  "  "  Oh  yes,  awfully  ;  sometimes  it  frightens 
me  to  think  of  it  1  "  Then  came  the  question,  "  Why  did  you  begin  when  you  had 
not  the  money  ?  "  Then  the  minister  of  God  answered,  "  Oh,  we  have  money 
enough ;  we  shall  have  no  such  debt  as  that ;  but  think  how  much  a  church  like 
this  is  going  to  owe  the  community  and  the  world  I  How  they  will  look  to  us  for 
man's  love  and  God's  grace  I  "  Is  our  church  debt  paid  ?  How  much  owest  thou  ? 
Souls  are  looking  to  as  for  help.  The  true  test  of  piety  is  a  sense  of  debtorship  to 
souls.  (C.  S,  Eobimon,  D.D.)  Debtors  to  all  men: — Then  I  am  afraid  there 
are  a  great  many  dishonest  Christians  who  scarcely  recognise,  and  never 
pay,  their  debts !  What  was  it  that  Paul  felt  he  owed  to  the  whole  world  ? 
It  was  the  gospel,  the  message  of  God's  love  in  Jesus  Christ.  I.  Ws  abb 
ALL  DEBT0E8  BY  THE  POSSESSION  OF  A  COMMON  HUMANrTY.  The  differences 
between  slave  or  free,  cultured  or  ancultured,  rich  or  poor,  are  but  the  surface. 
What  hes  beneath  is  the  one  human  heart,  with  the  same  wants,  the  same  weak- 
nesses, the  same  aspirations,  the  same  fears,  the  same  possibihties.  Here 
stand  a  range  of  Alps,  separate,  frowning,  white-topped,  the  Jungfrau,  the  Eiger, 
and  the  Monch,  and  all  the  brother  giants  of  that  mountain  system,  parted  from 
each  other  by  profound  gulfs.  Tes  I  so  they  are,  at  the  top  ;  but  at  the  bottom  all 
rise  op  from  the  one  formation.  And  so  mankind.  And  that  unity  involves,  as  a 
distinct  consequence,  the  thought  that  every  man  possesses  all  his  possessions  in 
order  that  through  him  the  benefit  and  the  use  of  them  may  pass  to  his  fellows. 
n.  Wb  abb  debtors  by  the  possession  of  a  common  SALVATION.  God's  purpose  in 
giving  you  and  me  Christ  for  ours  is  that  we  should  give  Him  to  others.  The 
world  needs  healing ;  you  there  have  the  healing  that  the  world  needs.  Is  any- 
thing  more  required  to  prescribe  duty  ?  What  would  you  say  about  a  man  that,  in 
the  midst  of  famine,  sat  at  home  and  feasted  luxuriously  whilst  his  brethren  were 
starving,  and  then  pleaded  that  nobody  had  bade  him  go  out  to  supply  their  wants  T 
in.  Wb  Enqlibb  Christians  abb  debtors,  in  many  cases,  to  thb  world,  bt 
BBNEEiTB  RECEIVED.  This  great  commercial,  maritime,  colonising  nation,  what  does 
it  not  owe  ;  what  do  your  homes  not  owe  ;  what  does  the  business  of  Manchester 
not  owe  to  the  heathen,  to  whom  yoa  owe  your  Saviour  T  We  have  received  our 
civilisation  in  its  germs,  our  language,  and  much  high  thought,  from  that  far-off 
East  which  is  still  the  possession  of  the  English  Crown.  IV.  Wb  abb  debtors  by 
iNJUBiEs  inflioted.  That  is  a  sad  but,  as  it  would  appear,  almost  an  inevitable 
law,  that  the  contact  of  the  superior,  or,  at  all  events,  of  the  civUised,  with  the 
inferior  or  uncivilised  races,  shall  result  in  the  gradual  fading  of  the  latter  from 
before  the  stronger  conquerors.  And,  in  addition  to  that  injury,  the  vices  of  oar 
modern  civUisation  are  carried  whithersoever  our  ships  and  our  colonies  and  our 
commerce  goes.  " How  much  owest  thou  unto  thy  Lord?  "  You  pay  Christ  when 
yoa  pay  your  fellows.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Christendom's  debt  to  the  world : — If  A 
gives  me  property  to  be  employed  for  the  use  of  B,  my  debt  is  to  6.  God  has  given 
the  gospel  to  Christendom  to  impart  to  mankind,  and  Christendom  owes  it  as  a  debt. 
This  is  a  debt — I.  Whose  magnitude  is  immense.  1.  It  is  the  gospel.  Who  can 
estimate  this  treasure  ?  It  is  the  pearl  of  great  price,  God's  unspeakable  gift.  2. 
It  is  the  consecration  of  life  to  the  diffusion  of  the  gospel.  We  owe  not  merely  the 
gospel,  but  all  our  powers  and  circumstances  in  order  to  its  diffusion.  Not  merely 
the  preaching  of  it,  but  the  living  it,  and  that  for  ever.  What  a  debt  is  this  I  We 
are  not  our  own.  II.  Whose  justice  is  indisputable.  Tbink  of — 1.  The  terms 
of  its  bestowment.  It  was  given  in  trust ;  not  to  monopolise,  but  to  diffuse.  "  Qo 
ye  into  all  the  world,"  &c.    2.  The  universality  of  its  provisions.    They  aia  not  foe 


•e  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA*.  I. 

ft  elasB,  bat,  like  the  elements  of  nature,  for  aniversal  man — the  bread  and  water  of 
life  to  all.  3.  The  conscience  of  its  possessors.  All  its  genuine  disciples  feel  that 
they  ought  to  communicate  it.  "  Necessity  is  laid  upon  me."  4.  The  condition 
of  its  claimants.  Those  to  whom  we  owe  it  are  perishing  for  the  lack  of  it.  IIL 
Whose  dischakgk  is  dbgent.    It  is  urKent  as  far  as — 1.  The  creditor  is  concerned 

the  whole  heathen  world,  sunk  in  ignorance,  superstition,  and  misery.      The 

recovery  of  these  fallen  millions  depends  on  our  paying  the  debt.  2.  The  debtor. 
He  who  neglects  to  discharge  it  is  injuring  his  own  nature,  character,  prospectg, 
ftnd  usefulness.  Conclusion  :  Let  as  all  rise  to  discharge  this  debt.  1.  It  has  long 
arrears.  2.  Is  ever  accumalating.  3.  May  be  on  our  hands  at  death.  (D.  Thomat, 
D.D.)  Our  debtarnhip  : — I.  Paul's  estimate  of  the  gospel.  1.  He  designates  it 
*'  the  gospel  of  Christ,"  not  so  much  because  Christ  is  the  author,  as  because  He  is 
the  subject  of  it.  It  is  the  good  news  about  Christ  as  our  Substitute  and  Sacrifice. 
In  this  sense  only  is  it  "good  news."  Ignore  the  doctrine,  and  the  bare  facts  of 
the  history  are  no  more  a  gospel  than  any  other  story  of  a  lite  or  death  would  be. 
Only  when  you  speak  of  a  Christ  who  has  died  for  our  sins  will  yoa  pot  music  into 
the  heart  of  a  sin  and  sorrow-stricken  world.  2.  In  view  of  Paul's  anticipated  visit 
to  Borne  this  expression  is  especially  suggestive.  The  Bomans  prided  themselves 
on  power,  and  worshipped  it,  and  Paul  seizes  on  this  historic  fact  to  tell  the  Bomans 
that  he  knew  of  a  greater  pov?er  even  than  theirs.  The  emblems  of  this  power  are 
the  dew,  the  seed,  the  light,  the  leaven,  things  which  work  quietly ;  mighty  forces, 
resistless  in  the  might  of  their  stillness.  Sometimes,  it  is  true,  God  comes  to  men 
in  the  thunders  of  the  law,  as  when  He  made  Felix  tremble  ;  but  more  frequently 
it  is  with  the  gentle  persuasiveness  which  opened  Lydia's  heart  to  the  gracioas 
message  as  the  flower  unfolds  its  petals  to  drink  in  the  dew.  I  have  seen  machines 
ased  in  Nottingham  lace  work  witb  power  enough  to  rend  the  whole  fabric  into  a 
thousand  pieces,  yet  working  with  such  exquisite  nicety  that  they  do  not  break  the 
finest  thread.  So  in  the  gospel,  though  God  brings  His  Omnipotence  to  bear  upon 
the  soul,  He  influences  men  through  means  and  motives  so  sweet  yet  strong  that 
they  willingly  and  gladly  yield.  3.  And  the  sphere  of  the  gospel's  operation  is  to 
be  as  broad  as  its  power  is  boundless.  "To  every  one,"  &c.  There  is  an  old 
Turkish  proverb  which  declares  that  Islam  can  flourish  only  where  the  palm-tree 
grows.  But  there  is  no  such  legend  for  the  gospel  as  that.  The  word  of  life  which 
Paul  sought  to  plant  will  grow  in  every  soil.  II.  Paul's  sense  of  the  obligation 
IN  which  the  possession  of  the  gospel  involved  him.  "  I  am  debtor,"  Ac.  1. 
Debt  impUes  obligation,  and  obligation  is — (1)  A  law  of  nature.  Nothing  in  the 
material  world  lives  to  itself.  The  flower  made  sweet  by  the  breath  of  God  is  con- 
strained to  shed  its  fragrance  on  the  air.  The  sun,  filled  with  warmth  and  radiance, 
flings  them  abroad  to  gladden  the  dark  places  of  the  earth  and  to  make  her  desert 
smile.  Basking  in  his  beams  the  birds  sing,  the  corn  ripens,  and  the  trees  bend 
down  with  rich  ripe  clusters.  All  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea,  yet  the  sea  is  not  full. 
Why  ?  Simply  because  it  is  under  the  same  beneficent  constraint.  Thus  Nature 
everywhere  and  by  everything  proclaims  with  BubUme  though  silent  voice,  "I  am 
debtor."  (2)  An  instinct  of  human  Ufe — the  genial,  gracious  bond  which  unites 
all  hearts.  As  no  man  liveth  by  himself,  so  no  man  may  live  to  himself.  We  all 
live  through  others  and  are  dependent  on  their  ministries.  And  every  generous 
nature  feels  that  unless  he  gives  back  to  the  world  as  much  service  as  he  takes  from 
it  he  is  a  delinquent.  2.  Christianity  enlarges  and  ennobles  this  feeling.  (1) 
Sitting  at  the  foot  of  the  Gross  men  catch  the  spirit  of  Him  who  hangs  upon  it, 
who  "  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,"  &o.  Christ's  Uf e  was  love 
in  action.  And  as  His  disciples  we  learn  from  His  lips  as  from  His  life,  that  He 
designs  sweet  and  sympathetic  ministries  to  be  the  golden  coinage  of  our  new 
nature,  the  currency  of  our  affections,  and  that  if  we  try  to  be  misers  of  such 
wealth  we  shall  suffer  the  fate  of  misers.  But  if  grace  has  rightly  done  its  work  in 
ns  we  cannot  help  sharing  it.  It  will  flow  forth  from  us  as  spontaneously  as  heat 
from  a  fire,  or  fragrance  from  a  June  rose.  Like  the  box  of  ointment  which  Mary 
broke,  it  will  shed  its  perfume  all  around.  (2)  The  gospel,  too,  strengthens  the 
instinct  of  debtorsbip  by  revealing  men  in  a  new  light.  Apart  from  the  gospel  we 
are  almost  ready  to  question  whether  some  of  our  dark  and  depraved  fellows  are 
worth  saving  at  all ;  but  the  gospel  reveals  the  fact  that  the  most  depraved  are  men 
after  all,  and  precious  in  God's  sight.  Outcasts  and  prodigals,  as  children  of  the 
same  Father,  have  a  claim  on  our  brotherly  sympathy  and  succour.  As  trustees  of 
an  inheritance  to  which  they  have  an  equal  right,  they  demand  that  we  share  with 
(hem  oar  riohea.    (3)  Again  we  are  laid  under  obligation  by  positive  command  ol 


9Bit.  l]  ROMANS.  91 

the  Master.  When  the  Crasades  were  being  preached  the  one  ory  which  provoked 
a  response  from  every  lip  was  this :  "  Ood  tcilU  it  i  "  The  plea  in  oar  case  is  more 
urgent  than  in  theirs,  and  shall  oar  sense  of  obligation  be  less.  "  It  is  not  merely 
God  wills  it,  bat  Christ  commandt  it.  It  comes  direct,  not  merely  as  the  Divine 
wish,  bat  as  the  Divine  injanction."  When  Christ  says  "60,"  who  will  dare  to 
stay  t  8.  And  having  laid  the  obligation  on  as,  the  Master  has  opened  the  way  for 
its  falfilment.  Never  have  the  nations  been  so  accessible  as  they  are  to-day.  As 
Englishmen  we  mix  with  the  world  everywhere.  Now,  why  has  Ood  thas  brought 
as  into  toaoh  with  all  the  nations  ?  Merely  that  we  might  fill  the  coffers  of  our 
merchants  or  sharpen  to  a  keener  point  the  boast  about  "  An  empire  on  which  the 
Ban  never  sets  "  ?  Conclusion  :  Do  we  realise  our  obligation,  and,  if  so,  are  we 
ready  and  willing  to  discharge  it  ?  Paul  said,  not  only  "  I  am  debtor,"  but  "  I  am 
ready."  So  ready  that  neither  pain,  nor  peril,  nor  privation  could  root  out  of  him 
his  eagerness.  Thus  "  ready,"  like  Paul,  to  proclaim  the  gospel,  let  as  rejoice  in 
the  assurance  that  it  will  be  as  resistless  in  our  hands  as  it  was  in  his.  When  the 
knights  of  Germany  offered  their  swords  to  Luther  in  behalf  of  his  cause  he  replied  : 
"  The  Word  shall  do  it."  And  he  was  right.  There  is  an  old  story  about  the 
conqueror  of  Rome,  who  dashed  his  sword  down  into  the  scales  when  the  ransom 
was  being  paid ;  and  Christ  flings  His  two-edged  sword  into  the  scale  when  we  are 
weighing  resources,  and  the  other  scale  kicks  the  beam.  Only  make  sure  that  your 
hand  grips  His,  and  then  nothing  can  withstand  you.  A  young  officer  detailed  by 
the  Iron  Duke  for  some  dangerous  service,  asked  for  one  grasp  of  the  great  oom> 
mander's  "  all-conquering  hand,"  to  fit  and  fire  him  for  the  death-daring  enterprise. 
{J.  Le  Huray.)  The  Chrittian'i  obligation  to  diffiue  the  gotpel : — This  declaration 
of  the  apostle  implies — I.  Tbk  adaptation  of  thb  gospel  to  all  the  varieties 
or  HUMAN  OHARACTEB.  There  are  three  reasons  which  prove  this  fact,  which  fact 
oonstitutes  the  basis  of  all  missionary  duty,  and  gives  encouragement  to  missionary 
exertion.  1.  The  perfection  of  its  evidence.  There  is  no  species  of  moral  proof 
by  means  of  which  the  understanding  can  be  convinced,  the  heart  impressed,  the 
conscience  affected — that  is,  not  brought  before  us  in  that  evidence  which  establishes 
and  illustrates  the  divinity  of  the  gospeL  2.  The  completeness  of  its  discoveries. 
Jesus  is  expressly  termed  "  the  Finisher  of  the  faith."  He  has  not  only  announced 
it,  but  completed  it.  Whatever  respects  the  character  of  Ood,  the  way  of  salvation, 
the  rule  of  duty,  the  source  of  happiness — whatever  belongs  to  the  faith,  the  hope, 
the  holiness  of  the  Christian — is  fully  revealed  in  this  sacred  testimony.  3.  The 
results  of  its  Influence.  We  can  look  back  on  the  workings  of  this  mighty  system 
for  eighteen  centuries,  and  see  how  it  has  always  been  attended  by  the  same  gracious 
power,  and  secured  the  same  spiritual  results,  and  thus  has  been  demohstrably 
proved  the  truth  that  it  "  is  the  power  of  God  to  salvation  unto  every  one  that 
believeth."     U.  The  oblioationb  which  Christians  are  under  to  becubb  by  all 

PRACTICAL     AND     DiVINBLY     APPOINTED     MEANS     ITS     UNIVERSAL     DIFFUSION.         1.     The 

obligation  respects  yourselves.  There  is  a  question  which  should  always  ta^e  the 
precedency  when  we  are  contemplating  any  line  of  benevolent  effort.  Have  yoa 
fled  to  the  refuge  of  mercy  ?  Is  the  gospel  testimony  cordially  believed  by  you  ?  Let 
these  be  your  feelings,  and  then  you  will  be  at  once  prepared  to  appreciate  the  force 
of  the  apostle's  statement :  "  I  am  a  debtor,"  <&o.  Having  yourselves  tasted  that  the 
Lord  is  gracious,  you  will  be  delighted  to  invite  others  to  partake  with  you  in  the 
rich  banquet  of  mercy.  The  very  fact  of  receiving  it  carries  along  with  it  the 
obligation  to  make  it  known  as  well  as  imparts  to  the  mind  receiving  it  an  holy 
activity  in  its  diffusion.  2.  In  what  respects  may  we  regard  this  obligation  as  a 
debt?  (1)  Gratitude  to  the  Redeemer  requires  that  we  should  regard  this  debt  and 
attempt  to  discharge  it.  What  is  there  that  we  do  not  owe  to  dhrist  ?  (2)  It  is  a 
debt  of  honour.  If  there  were  no  explicit  command,  yet  recollecting  how  much  you 
owe  to  the  Saviour,  and  your  high  privileges,  every  honourable  feeling  should 
bring  you  to  His  service.  (3)  It  is  a  debt  of  justice.  You  have  what  every  man 
wants,  and  what  has  been  given  you  for  every  man ;  therefore  it  is  unjust  to  with- 
hold it.  What  would  have  been  the  condition  of  this  land,  or  our  personal  con- 
ditions, if  others  had  acted  towards  ns  on  the  same  feeling  of  selfish  indifference 
and  forgetfnlnesB  of  this  plain  and  palpable  duty  ?  (4)  It  is  a  debt  for  the  payment 
of  which  we  shall  be  amply  compensated.  No  man  lends  in  this  work  of  labour 
and  love  without  finding  an  abundant  interest.  To  be  in  any  measure  instrumental, 
directly  or  indirectly,  in  saving  the  souls  of  men,  will  confer  a  great  happiness 
compared  with  which  all  other  sources  of  enjoyment  are  less  than  nothing  and 
Tanity.     (5)  It  ia  enforced  by  the  command  and  authority  of  the  Divine  Redeemer. 


as  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  I.' 

It  ia  not,  therefore,  left  to  yoar  calcalations  or  to  yoor  feelings.  {J.  Fletcher,  D.D.) 
The  Christian's  obligation  to  propagate  the  gospel : — I.  The  oblioation  ukdeb  which 
THE  APOSTLE  LAY.  "  I  am  a  debtor."  Necessity  was  laid  npon  him  (1  Cor.  ix.  16). 
Bat  there  it  was  a  necessity  laid  on  him  to  Godward;  here  it  is  towards  man. 
How  so?  1.  There  is  an  obligation  in  man  towards  man,  established  by  the  law  of 
creation,  which  nothing  can  set  aside.  One  proof  of  it  will  be  seen  in  the  character 
oi  the  man  who  disowns  the  obligation.  He  is  anti-social.  He  opposes  the  funda- 
mental law  of  society  by  which  it  is  seen  that  men  are  formed  for  each  other.  And, 
if  so,  no  limitation  either  of  country  or  peculiarity  of  condition,  can  supersede  this 
law.  The  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan  establishes  and  illustrates  this  position. 
It  was  the  old  commandment  from  the  beginning,  though  in  Christ  new  both  as  to 
motive,  extent,  and  object.  2.  But  there  is  an  obligation  which  results  from  the 
condition  on  which  good  is  imparted  by  the  great  Giver  of  all  good.  "  Freely  ye 
have  received,  freely  give."  The  apostle  himself  states  that  Christ  was  revealed  in 
him,  that  he  "  might  preach  Him  among  the  heathen."  And  in  another  place  that  "  a 
dispensation  or  stewardship  was  committed  unto  him  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  17),  "  to  make  all 
men  know  the  fellowship  of  the  mystery  "  (Eph.  iii.  9).  3.  But,  while  the  apostle 
would  quicken  his  own  zeal  by  thoughts  of  responsibility  and  by  the  plea  of 
necessity,  he  delighted  rather  to  dwell  upon  the  more  constraining  obligation  of 
love.  He  was  one  of  a  redeemed  brotherhood.  He  could  honour  all  men.  Hence 
he  could  look  on  every  one  he  met,  whether  "  Barbarian  or  Scythian,  bond  or  free  " 
(Col.  iii.  11),  as  one  of  the  families  which  are  all  blessed  in  Christ.    H.  The 

UAKNEB  IS   WEIGH   THE   APOSTLE   DISCHABOED    THE   OBLIGATION.      The   proposition  iS, 

that  the  debt  owing  from  every  Christian  man  to  another  is  the  gospel :  the 
preaching  or  communicating  the  gospel  is  the  discharge  of  that  debt.  How  so? 
The  substance  of  all  good  is  comprised  in  the  gospel  Everything  short  of  it 
leaves  a  man  short  of  salvation,  is  an  abridgment  of  human  happiness.  The  gospel 
brings  the  sinner  near  to  God  (Eph.  ii.  13,  18 ;  2  Cor.  v.  21),  and  restores  man  to  his 
former  position  of  love  to  his  fellow  (Eph.  ii.  19-22).  The  preaching  of  it  satisfied  all 
the  claims,  because  it  answered  all  the  wants,  of  man.  {Canon  Jacob.)  The  duty  of 
proclaiming  the  gospel : — I.  An  urgent  Christian  obligation.  There  is  an  obliga-, 
tion  in  man  towards  man  which  nothing  can  destroy.  It  is  instituted  and  established.' 
1.  By  mutual  expediency.  The  interest  of  one  demands  the  good  of  all.  One  bad 
man  in  a  community  will  destroy  the  peace  of  aU.  One  diseased  person  may  infect 
*  whole  nation.  2.  By  the  fundamental  laws  of  society.  All  men  are  made  for 
each  other.  3.  By  the  law  of  benevolence.  Even  heathens  have  felt  the  force  of 
this  sentiment,  and  among  the  early  Christians  it  became  particularly  prominent. 
4.  By  the  condition  on  which  all  good  is  imparted  to  ns.  "  Freely  ye  have  received, 
freely  give."  II.  The  Christian's  manner  of  cabbying  this  obligation  out.  There 
is — 1.  Undaunted  purpose.  "  I  am  ready  to  preach  the  gospel  to  you  that  are  at 
Eome  also."  Eome  had  everything  which  was  opposed  to  the  nature  and  character 
of  Christianity,  and  could  endanger  the  apostle's  life.  How  little  do  we  imitate 
this  example  1  Do  we  care  for  men's  moral  and  social  well-being  to  such  an  extent 
that  we  should  be  willing  to  sacrifice  home,  comfort,  or  even  self,  for  their  advan- 
tage ?  2.  A  limitation  of  power.  "  So  far  as  in  me  is."  (1)  This  limitation  has 
its  use.  It  prevents  us  from  despair  when  our  talents  are  small  or  our  opportunities 
few.  Not  all  of  us  can  go  as  ambassadors  to  Bome.  But  we  can  help  so  far  as  in 
OS  Mes.  If  we  cannot  go,  we  can  send  those  who  can.  (2)  But  this  limitation  is  also 
made  an  abuse.  Persons  urge  it  as  an  excuse  for  their  negligence,  sloth,  or  parsi- 
mony.  (Homilist.)  The  missionary  spirit : — I.  The  missionary  estimate.  The 
"  power  of  God  tp  salvation,"  and  from  this  the  debtorship  to  extend  it  rises.  1. 
Ton  would  not  have  expected  that  Paul  would  have  had  this  estimate.  The  doctrine 
was  incredible,  the  demand  insupportable,  the  blessings  impalpable  and  vague — 
belonging  either  to  the  world  of  the  spiritual  or  of  the  future.  And  how  conld  he 
expect  such  a  gospel  to  be  accepted  ?  But  Paul  knew  what  it  had  been  to  himself 
and  dared  not  despair.  He  took  it  everywhere,  and  the  new  power,  wherever  it 
went,  although  ignored  by  the  better  and  despised  by  the  worse  forces  of  society, 
made  its  calm  and  even  way.  Its  very  incredibilities  were  the  things  that  won 
credence  of  the  human  heart,  and  its  insupportable  demands  came  to  men  as  a 
dignity  which  they  were  prond  to  wear,  and  its  impalpable  blessings  of  peace  with 
God  of  light,  of  heavenly  hope  came  to  them  as  the  balm  of  heaven.  2,  But  it  is  not 
the  acceptance  that  the  apostle  accentuates.  A  man  may  accept  a  creed,  and  if  it 
has  no  influence  there  is  no  great  importance  in  the  acceptance  of  it ;  but  this  creed 
men  accepted  to  a  throne  of  mighty  influence.    It  wrought  marvels.    It  was  "  the 


mA*.  L]  ROMANS.  t» 

Omnipotence  of  God  nnto  salvation. "  Yon  know  how  hard  it  is  to  touch  the 
character ;  how  that  is  the  aim  and  the  despair  of  all  reform.  The  necessary  thing 
IB  to  lift  men's  manhood,  then  you  lift  everything  about  them.  But  it  is  just  here 
that  other  reforms  faiL  But  where  everything  else  failed  the  gospel  never  failed, 
but  lifted  them  up  into  what  Paul  calls  "salvation."  And  it  did  this  universally. 
Philosophers  wanted  specially  fitted  disciples  to  receive  their  truths,  mysteries 
wanted  some  culture,  other  doctrines  wanted  some  congruity ;  but  the  glory  of  the 
gospel  was  this — that  whoever  believed  it  in  him  it  was  omnipotent.  3.  That  was 
Paul's  estimate  of  the  gospel  after  twenty  years'  experience;  the  estimate  and 
experience  of  all  that  preached  it.  Let  us  to-day  remember  that  what  we  have  got 
in  our  hands  is  no  feeble  thing,  but  the  omnipotence  of  God  for  salvation  to  every 
one  that  believeth.  II.  Thb  missionary  instinct.  •*  I  am  debtor,"  &o.  1.  This 
is  not  exclusively  Christian,  it  is  a  human  instinct ;  we  all  have  to  say,  "  I  am 
debtor."  From  infancy  to  age  no  day  passes  but  we  are  enriched  with  some  comfort 
that  comes  to  us  from  the  service  of  our  fellow-men.  We  did  not  work  our  freedom ; 
others  wrought  the  laws  which  give  us  protection ;  others  achieved  the  sciences 
which  gives  us  delight ;  others  opened  wide  those  very  avenues  of  trade  by  which 
men  make  their  wealth.  What  would  we  be  without  the  example,  influence, 
sympathy  of  other  men?  We  cannot  pay  the  debt  back  to  those  that  have  gone; 
we  can  only  pay  it  forward  to  those  they  make  their  heirs,  and  every  generous 
nature  feels  that  unless  he  gives  back  to  the  world  as  much  service  as  he  takes 
from  it,  he  is  a  deUnquent  and  short  of  honour.  2.  And  this  instinct  blossoms 
into  many  forms — into  neighbourly  affection,  into  righteousness,  patriotism,  philan- 
thropy, sympathy.  Sometimes  this  instinct  is  thwarted  in  its  growth.  But  in  the 
degree  in  which  there  is  nobility,  in  that  degree  men  look  not  to  society's  duty  to 
them,  but  to  their  duty  to  society.  Sometimes  thwarted  by  the  action  of  pride  and 
fear  and  weakness ;  when  this  sense  of  debtorship  meets  with  the  gospel,  then  it 
comes  forth  in  all  its  lordly  strength.  Everything  helps  to  develop  it  then — 
penitence  deepens  it ;  gratitude  increases  it ;  it  thrives  beneath  the  dew  of  Calvary 
and  especially  under  the  influence  of  grace,  because  it  moves  love,  and  sees  men  in 
the  new  light.  Outside  the  light  of  the  gospel  men  may  almost  question  whether 
their  fellow-men  are  worth  helping.  But  when  we  begin  to  see  them  precious  in 
God's  sight,  then  our  fellow-men  put  on  a  dignity  which  makes  it  worth  our  while 
to  serve  them.  It  has,  therefore,  been  the  singular  mark  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 
At  Pentecost  men  saw  the  love  of  God  and  copied  it,  and  none  said  that  aught  of 
the  things  that  he  possessed  was  his  own.  The  widows'  hearts  began  to  sing  for 
joy  with  the  new  kindness  that  had  dawned  upon  the  world.  Now  it  blossoms  into 
the  care  of  the  infants  cast  out  into  the  streets  of  the  heathen  cities ;  now  in  the 
redemption  of  captives ;  now  in  the  ministry  to  the  sick.  All  the  fairest  names  in 
the  Church's  history  are  the  names  of  those  who  felt  that  debtorship  to  proclaim 
the  gospel  of  Christ  to  their  fellow-men.  You  do  not  wonder,  then,  that  Paul 
should  feel  this  debtorship.  He  saw  a  creditor  in  the  face  of  every  man — hia 
creditor  wanting  gold  that  he  could  give  him ;  and  he  woke  glad  and  eager  to  pay 
his  debt.  III.  The  missionary  consecration.  "  I  am  ready" — that  is  Paul  in  three 
words.  The  first  question  at  conversion  was,  "  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  " 
and  that  was  the  last,  the  hourly  question.  So  ready  was  he  that  "  forthwith  "  he 
preached  Christ  in  the  Bynagop;ues  of  Damascus  and  in  Jerusalem  ;  so  ready  that 
God  had  to  stop  him  and  send  him  to  Arabia  to  meditate  and  pray.  So  ready  that 
if  to-night  he  dreams  of  the  Man  of  Macedonia,  in  the  morning  he  is  looking  oat 
for  the  ship  that  will  carry  him  across  the  wave.  So  ready  that  nothing  can  root  out 
of  him  his  eagerness.  He  was  ready  always,  and  now — a  battered,  withered  old  man 
— he  is  ready  to  assail  Eome  itself,  and  believes  in  the  possibility  of  converting  that 
secular  empire,  and  all  its  degradation,  to  Christ.  Of  what  infinite  value  that 
readiness  is  in  any  man  !  Presence  of  mind  is  good,  but  presence  of  heart  is  better. 
It  saves  time,  freshness,  and  penetrative  power.  What  a  different  story  there  would 
have  been  in  Christianity  if  Paul's  readiness  had  not  been  so  bright  I  The  gospel 
grew  richer  with  every  new  effort  to  proclaim  it.  Paul's  heaven  has  grown  larger 
and  richer  from  that  hour  to  this,  as  daily  still  the  pilgrims  have  entered  it  who 
were  led  by  him  to  know  and  to  choose  the  Lord  !  He  was  "  ready,"  bat  we  are 
unready.  We  are  rich,  but  not  ready.  Strong  minds  and  warm  hearts  are  ready 
for  commerce,  war,  science,  but  the  great  ambition  does  not  seem  to  touch  them. 
{R.  Glover.)  The  Grecian: — There  are  four  departments  of  human  nature 
spoken  of  in  these  verses,  with  only  one  of  which  we  can  now  deal.  Four  charac- 
teristics marked   Grecian  life  and  religion.     I.   Bestlesbitess.     1.   Polytheiua 


40  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  i 

divided  the  contemplation  over  many  objects,  Ao.  The  Oreoian  was  to  obtain 
wisdom  from  one  Deity :  eloquence  from  Meroarias ;  purity  from  Diana,  Ac.  Hence 
dissipation  of  mind:  that  fioklenesa  for  which  the  Greeks  were  famous.  AU 
stability  of  character  rests  on  the  contemplation  of  changeless  unity.  2.  And  aU 
the  results  of  science  have  been  to  simplify  and  trace  back  the  manifold  to  unity. 
It  is  ever  tending  towards  unity  of  law.  Hence  science  is  calm  and  dignified, 
reposing  upon  uniform  fact.  3.  So  also  in  religion.  Christianity  proclaimed 
"  One  God  and  one  Mediator,"  Ac.  St.  Paul's  view  of  the  gospel,  the  salvation  of 
the  Gentiles,  was  the  eternal  purpose,  and  his  own  personal  election  was  part  of  an 
eternal  counsel.  Now  see  the  effect  on  character.  First,  on  veracity  (2  Cor.  i.  18, 
Ac).  He  contemplated  the  changeless  "  yea  "  of  God — his  own  yea  became  fixed 
as  God's.  Again  in  orthodoxy — "  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for 
ever."  Be  not  carried  about  by  divers  and  strange  doctrines.  Truth  is  one — Error 
manifold — many  opinions,  yet  there  can  be  but  one  faith.  See  how  calm  and  fufl 
of  rest  all  this  spirit  is.  St.  John's  view  of  the  gospel  recognised  it  rather  as  the 
manifestation  of  love.  Pain  and  pleasure,  the  sigh  and  smile,  the  sunshine  and  the 
storm,  were  but  the  results  of  eternal  love.  Hence  came  deep  calm — the  repose 
which  we  are  toiling  all  our  lives  to  find,  and  which  the  Greek  never  found,  n. 
WoBLDLiNESS.  There  are  men  and  nations  who  live  as  if  they  had  no  aspiration 
above  it.  If  ever  there  was  a  nation  who  understood  the  science  of  living,  it  was 
the  Grecian.  This  world  was  their  home  and  the  object  of  their  worship.  The 
results  were  threefold.  1.  Disappointment.  Lying  on  the  infinite  bosom  of  Nature, 
the  Greek  was  yet  unsatisfied.  The  worldly  man  is  trying  to  satiate  his  immortal 
hunger  upon  husks.  2.  Degradation.  Had  you  asked  the  Greek  his  highest  wish, 
he  would  have  replied,  "  This  world,  if  it  could  only  last — I  ask  no  more."  This 
is  to  feed  on  husks :  but  husks  which  the  swine  did  eat.  3.  Disbelief  in  immortality. 
The  more  the  Greek  attached  himself  to  this  world,  the  more  the  world  unseen 
became  a  dim  world  of  shades.  Accordingly,  when  Paul  preached  at  Athens  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  they  "  mocked."  This  bright  world  was  all,  and  the 
Greek's  hell  was  death.  The  dreadfulness  of  death  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
things  that  meet  us  in  their  ancient  writings.  And  these  men  were  startled  by 
seeing  a  new  sect  rise  up  to  whom  death  was  nothing.  For  the  Cross  of  Christ  had 
crucified  in  their  hearts  the  Grecian's  world.  The  rise  of  the  higher  life  had  made 
this  life  nothing,  "  and  delivered  those  who,  through  fear  of  death,  were  all  their 
lifetime  subject  unto  bondage."  III.  Thk  worship  op  the  beaotifdl.  1.  The 
Greek  saw  this  world  almost  only  on  its  side  of  beauty.  He  looked  at  actions  in  the 
same  way.  If  he  wanted  to  express  a  perfect  man,  he  called  him  a  musical  or 
harmonious  man.  What  was  the  consequence?  Eeligion  degenerated  into  the  arts. 
Hence,  necessarily,  sensuality  became  religious.  There  is  a  peculiar  danger  in  refine- 
ment of  sensuous  enjoyments.  Coarse  pleasures  disgust  and  pass  for  what  they  are ; 
but  who  does  not  know  that  the  real  danger  and  triumph  of  voluptuousness  are 
when  it  approaches  the  soul  veiled  under  the  drapery  of  elegance  ?  They  fancied 
themselves  above  the  gross  multitude;  but  their  sensuality,  disguised  even  from 
themselves,  was  sensuality  still — ay,  and  at  times  even,  in  certain  festivals,  broke 
out  into  gross  and  unmistakable  licentiousness.  2.  There  is  this  danger  now. 
Men  are  awakened  from  coarse,  rude  life  to  the  desire  of  something  deeper.  And 
the  God  of  this  world  can  subtly  turn  that  aside  into  channels  which  shall  effec- 
tually enfeeble  and  ruin  the  soul.  Eefinement,  imagery,  witchery  of  form  and  colour, 
music,  architecture :  all  these,  even  coloured  with  the  hues  of  religion,  producing 
feelings  either  religious  or  quasi-religious,  may  yet  do  the  world's  work.  For  all 
attempt  to  impress  the  heart  through  the  senses,  "  to  make  perfect  through  the 
flesh,"  is  fraught  with  that  danger  beneath  which  Greece  sunk.  This,  too,  is  the 
ruinous  effect  of  an  education  of  accomplishments.  An  education  chiefiy  romantic 
or  poetical,  not  balanced  by  hard  practical  life,  is  simply  the  ruin  of  the  soul.  3. 
If  any  one  ever  felt  the  beauty  of  this  world  it  was  Christ,  but  the  beauty  which 
He  exhibited  in  life  was  the  stern  loveliness  of  moral  action.  The  King  in  His 
beauty  '•  had  no  form  or  comeliness  " :  it  was  the  beauty  of  Divine  self-devotion. 
The  Cross  tells  us  that  it  is  the  true  beautiful  which  is  Divine :  an  inward,  not  an 
outward  beauty,  which  rejects  and  turns  sternly  away  from  the  meretricious  forms 
of  the  outward  world,  which  have  a  corrupting  or  debilitating  tendency.  IV.  Thx 
woBSHiF  or  HuuANiTT.  1.  The  Greek  had  strong  human  feehngs  and  sympathies. 
He  projected  his  own  self  on  nature :  humanised  it :  gave  a  human  feeling  to 
clouds,  forests,  rivers,  seas.  In  this  he  was  a  step  above  other  idolatries.  It  was 
BOt  mwely  power,  beauty,  or  life,  but  human  power,  Ae.,  whiob  WM  the  objeot  ol 


aait.  I.]  ROMANS.  41 

hi«  profoandest  veneration.  His  effort  therefore  was,  in  his  conception  of  his  god, 
to  realise  a  beaatifal  human  being.  Much  in  this  had  a  germ  of  truth — more  was 
false.  This  principle,  which  is  true,  was  evidently  stated  :  The  Divine,  onder  the 
limitations  of  humanity,  is  the  only  worship  of  which  man  is  capable ;  for  man 
cannot  conceive  that  which  is  not  in  his  own  mind.  They  wanted  humanity  in  its 
glory — they  asked  for  a  Son  of  Man.  Christ  is  Deity  under  the  limitations  of 
humanity.  But  there  is  presented  in  Christ  for  worship,  not  power,  nor  beauty, 
nor  physical  life,  but  the  moral  image  of  Ood's  perfections.  Through  the  heart 
and  mind  and  character  of  Jesus  it  was  that  the  Divinest  streamed.  Divine 
oharaoter,  that  was  given  in  Christ  to  worship.  2.  Another  error.  The  Qreek 
worshipped  all  that  was  in  man.  Every  feeling  had  its  beauty  and  its  divine 
origin.  Hence  thieving  had  its  patron  deity,  and  treachery  and  cunning,  and  lust 
had  its  temple  erected  for  abominable  worship.  All  that  was  human  had  its 
sanction  in  the  example  of  some  god.  Christ  corrects  this.  Not  all  that  is  human 
18  Divine.  There  is  a  part  of  our  nature  kindred  with  God ;  the  strengthening  of 
that,  by  mixture  with  Ood's  Spirit,  is  our  true  and  proper  humanity — regeneration 
of  soul.  There  is  another  part  whereby  we  are  related  to  the  brutes  ;  and  whoever 
Uvea  in  that,  sinks  not  to  the  level  of  the  brutes,  but  below  them,  to  the  level  of  the 
demons ;  for  he  uses  an  immortal  spirit  to  degrade  himself,  and  the  immortal  joined 
with  evil,  as  the  life  to  the  body,  is  demoniacal.  Conclusion  :  In  all  this  system 
one  thing  was  wanting — the  sense  of  sin.  The  Greek  would  not  have  spoken  to  you 
of  sin:  he  would  have  told  you  of  departure  from  a  right  line,  want  of  moral 
harmony,  discord  within  :  he  would  have  said  that  the  music  of  your  soul  was  out 
of  tune.  Christ  came  to  convince  the  world  of  sin ;  and  for  this  there  is  only  one 
remedy — that  which  is  written  in  the  Redeemer's  blood.  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.) 
The  Roman  : — The  Roman  nation  was  one  of  the  noblest  that  the  world  has  seen. 
We  may  judge  from  the  fact  of  St.  Paul's  twice  claiming  his  Roman  citizenship,  and 
that  at  a  time  when  a  luxurious  Greek  could  purchase  his  freedom.  We  may 
conceive  what  it  had  been  once,  when  even  the  faint  lustre  of  its  earlier  dignity 
oonld  inspire  a  foreigner,  and  that  foreigner  a  Jew,  and  that  Jew  a  Christian,  with 
such  respect.  At  the  outset,  then,  we  have  a  rare  and  high-minded  people  and 
their  life,  to  think  of.  I.  Ths  public  life  or  Rome.  1.  The  spirit  of  its  religion 
— the  very  word  means  obligation,  a  binding  power.  Very  different  from  the 
oorresponding  Greek  expression,  which  implies  worship  by  a  sensuous  ceremonial 
(threskeia).  The  Roman  began  from  the  idea  of  duty.  The  fabulous  early  history 
of  Rome  preserves  the  spirit  of  the  old  life  when  it  does  not  preserve  the  facts. 
Accordingly,  the  tradition  taught  that  the  building  of  Rome  was  done  in  obedience 
to  the  intimations  of  the  will  of  Heaven.  Its  first  great  legislator  (Numa)  is 
represented  as  giving  laws  after  secret  communion  with  the  superhuman.  It  was 
the  belief  of  Roman  writers  that  the  early  faith  taught  access  to  God  only  through 
the  mind  :  that  therefore  no  images  were  found  in  earliest  Rome.  War  itself  was 
a  religious  act,  solemnly  declared  by  a  minister  of  religion  casting  a  spear  into  the 
enemy's  territory.  Nay,  we  even  find  something  in  spirit  resembling  the  Jewish 
sabbath  :  the  command  that  during  the  rites  of  relip;ion  no  work  should  go  on,  but 
that  men  should  devoutly  contemplate  God.  2.  This  resulted  in  government 
Duty :  and  therefore  law  on  earth,  as  a  copy  of  the  will  of  Heaven.  Beauty  was 
not  the  object  of  the  Roman  contemplation,  nor  worship ;  nor  was  harmony. 
Hence,  when  Greece  war  reduced  to  a  Roman  province,  in  146  b.c,  the  Roman 
soldiers  took  the  noblest  specimens  of  Grecian  painting  and  converted  them  into 
gambling-tables.  You  may  distinguish  the  difference  of  the  two  characters  from 
the  relics  which  they  have  left  behind  them.  The  Greek  produced  a  statue  or  m 
temple,  the  expression  of  a  sentiment.  The  Roman,  dealing  with  the  practical,  has 
left  behind  him  works  of  public  usefulness :  roads,  aqueducts,  bridges,  drains,  and, 
above  all,  that  system  of  law  which  has  so  largely  entered  into  modem  juris- 
prudence. 8.  In  accordance  with  this,  it  is  a  characteristic  fact  that  we  find  the 
institutions  of  Rome  referred  to  inspiration.  Turning  to  Scripture,  whenever  the 
Roman  comes  prominently  forward,  we  always  find  him  the  instrument  of  public 
rule  and  order.  Pilate  has  no  idea  of  condemning  unjustly:  "  Why,  what  evil  Lath 
He  done  ?  "  But  he  yields  at  the  mention  of  the  source  of  law,  the  emperor.  The 
Apostle  Paul  appeals  to  Caesar,  and  Festus  respects  the  appeal.  The  tumult  at 
Ephesus  is  stilled  by  a  hint  of  Roman  interference.  When  the  angry  mob  was 
about  to  destroy  Paul,  Claudius  Lysias  comes  "with  an  army,  and  rescues  him." 
It  was  always  the  same  thing.  The  Roman  seems  almost  to  have  existed  to  exhibit 
on  earth  a  copy  of  the  Divine  order  of  the  uuiverse,  the  law  of  the  heavsnlj^ 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  fc 

hierarchies.  11.  Pbivatb  ltfb.  1.  The  sanctity  of  domestic  ties.  (1)  Very  touching 
ete  the  anecdotes — that,  e.g.,  of  the  noble  matron,  who  felt,  all  spotless  as  she  was, 
life-dishonoured,  and  died  by  her  own  hand.  The  saeredness  of  home  was  expressed 
strongly  by  the  idea  of  two  guardian  deities  (Lares  and  Penates)  who  watched  over 
it.  There  was  no  battle-cry  that  came  so  to  the  Boman's  heart  as  that,  "  For  the 
altar  and  the  hearth."  The  whole  fabric  of  the  Commonwealth  rose  out  of  the 
family.  First  the  family,  then  the  clan,  then  the  tribe,  lastly  the  nation.  (2) 
Very  different  is  it  in  the  East.  A  nation  there  is  a  collection  of  units,  held 
together  by  a  government.  When  the  chief  is  slain,  the  nation  is  in  anarchy — the 
family  does  not  exist.  Polygamy  and  infanticide,  the  bane  of  domestic  life,  are  the 
destruction  too  of  national  existence.  (3)  There  is  a  solemn  lesson  in  this.  Moral 
decay  in  the  family  is  the  invariable  prelude  to  public  corruption.  The  man  whom 
you  cannot  admit  into  your  family  cannot  be  a  pure  statesman.  A  nation  stands 
or  falls  with  the  sanctity  of  its  domestic  ties.  Bome  mixed  with  Greece,  and  learned 
her  morals.  The  Goth  was  at  her  gates ;  but  she  fell  not  till  she  was  corrupted 
and  tainted  at  the  heart.  (4)  We  will  bless  God  for  our  English  homes.  Partly 
the  result  of  our  religion.  Partly  the  result  of  the  climate  which  God  has  given 
ns,  so  that  darkness,  making  life  more  necessarily  spent  within  doors,  is  domestic. 
When  England  shall  learn  domestic  maxims  from  strangers,  as  Bome  from  Greece, 
her  ruin  is  accomplished.  2.  Let  us  break  up  this  private  life  into  particulars.  (1) 
We  find  manly  courage.  Courage,  manhood,  virtue,  were  one  word.  Among  tne 
degenerate  descendants  of  the  Bomans  virtue  no  longer  means  manhood :  it  is 
simply  dilettantism.  This  courage  was  not  merely  animal  daring.  Like  every- 
thing Boman,  it  was  connected  with  religion.  The  Boman  legions  subdued  the 
world,  not  by  their  discipline,  strength,  or  brute  daring,  but  by  their  moral  force. 
A  nation  whose  heroes  could  thrust  their  hand  into  the  fiame,  or  come  from 
captivity  and  advise  their  countrymen  against  peace,  and  then  go  back  to  torture 
and  death,  or  devote  themselves  by  solemn  self-sacrifice  (like  the  Decii),  could  bid 
sublime  defiance  to  pain  and  count  dishonour  the  only  evil.  The  world  must  bow 
before  such  men ;  for  unconsciously  here  was  a  form  of  the  spirit  of  the  Cross : 
self-surrender,  unconquerable  fidelity  to  duty,  sacrifice  for  others.  (2)  The  honour 
of  her  women.  There  was  a  fire  in  Bome  called  Eternal,  which  was  tended  by  the 
Vestals,  and  implied  that  the  duration  of  Bome  was  co-extensive  with  the  preserva- 
tion of  her  purity  of  morals.  The  Boman  was  conspicuous'  for  the  virtues  of  this 
earth ;  but  moral  virtues  are  not  religious  graces.  There  are  two  classes  of  excellence, 
each  of  which  is  foimd  at  times  disjoined  from  the  other.  Men  of  almost  spotless 
earthly  honour  scarcely  seem  to  know  what  reverence  for  things  heavenly  and 
devout  aspirations  towards  God  mean;  and  men  who  have  the  religious  instinct  ;vet 
fail  in  matters  of  common  truth  and  honesty.  Morality  is  not  religion.  Still, 
beware  of  talking  contemptuously  of  "mere  morality."  IIL  The  decline  of  Boman 
LITE.  1.  First  came  corruption  of  the  moral  character.  The  soul  of  the  Boman, 
bent  on  this  world's  affairs,  became  secularised,  then  animalised,  and  so  at  last, 
when  there  was  little  left  to  do,  pleasure  became  his  aim.  Then  came  ruin  swiftly. 
When  the  emperors  lived  for  their  elaborately  contrived  life  of  luxury — when  the 
Boman  soldier  left  his  country's  battles  to  be  fought  by  mercenaries — the  doom  of 
Bome  was  sealed.  Lofty  spirits  rose  to  stem  the  tide  of  corruption  and  the  death- 
throes  of  Bome  were  long  and  terrible.  2.  Scepticism  and  superstition  went  hand 
in  hand.  The  lower  classes  sunk  in  a  debased  superstition — the  educated  classes, 
too  intellectual  to  believe  in  it,  and  yet  having  nothing  better  to  put  in  its  stead. 
Or  perhaps  there  was  also  a  superstition  which  is  only  another  name  for  scepticism : 
infidelity  trembling  at  itself — shrinking  from  its  own  shadow.  This  is  as  true  now. 
Men  tremble  at  new  theories,  new  views,  the  spread  of  infidelity ;  and  they  think  to 
fortify  themselves  against  these  by  multiplying  the  sanctities  which  they  reverence. 
But  it  is  not  by  shutting  out  inquiry  and  resenting  every  investigation  as  profane, 
that  yoo  can  arrest  the  progress  of  infidelity.  Faith,  not  superstition,  is  the  remedy. 
3.  Beligion  degenerated  into  allegiance  to  the  State.  In  Greece  it  ended  in  taste. 
In  Bome  it  closed  with  the  worship  of  the  emperor,  and  the  word  "  sacrament " 
meant  an  oath  of  allegiance.  In  the  Christian  Church  it  is  also  the  oath  of  highest 
fidelity.  "  Here  we  offer  and  present  unto  Thee,  0  Lord,  ourselves,  our  souls  and 
bodies,  to  be  a  living  sacrifice."  And  in  this  contrast  of  the  sacramental  vowa 
were  perceptible  the  different  tendencies  of  the  two  starting-points  of  revealed 
religion  and  Boman.  Judaism  began  from  law  or  obligation  to  a  holy  Person. 
Roman  religion  began  from  obedience  to  a  mere  will.  Judaism  ended  in  Christianity ; 
whose  central  principle  is  joyful  surrender  to  One  whose  name  is  Love.   The  religion 


L]  ROMANS.  4S 

«f  Borne  stiffened  into  Stoicism,  or  degenerated  in  public  spirit.  4.  The  last  step 
is  the  decline  of  religion  into  expediency.  It  is  a  trite  and  often  quoted  observation 
of  a  great  Roman,  that  one  minister  of  religion  could  scarcely  meet  another  with- 
ont  a  smile  upon  his  countenance.  And  an  instance  of  this,  I  believe,  we  have  in 
the  town-clerk  of  Ephesus,  who  stilled  the  populace  by  an  accommodation  to  their 
prejudices,  much  in  the  same  way  in  which  a  nurse  would  soothe  a  passionate 
child.  He  was  the  friend  of  Paul,  yet  he  assures  the  people  that  there  could  be 
no  doubt  that  the  image  fell  down  from  Jupiter — •'  great  goddess  Diana."  (Ibid.) 
Neglecting  to  extend  the  gospel : — The  late  Hugh  Stowell  said : — "  In  the  Isle 
of  Man,  as  I  was  one  day  walking  on  the  seashore,  I  remember  contemplating, 
with  thrilling  interest,  an  old  grey  ruined  tower,  covered  with  ivy.  There 
was  a  remarkable  history  connected  with  the  spot.  In  that  tower  was  formerly 
hanged  one  of  the  best  governors  the  island  ever  possessed.  He  had  been 
accused  of  treachery  to  the  king  during  the  time  of  the  Civil  Wars,  and  received 
sentence  of  death.  Intercession  was  made  on  his  behalf,  and  a  pardon  was  sent ; 
but  that  pardon  fell  into  the  hands  of  his  bitter  enemy,  who  kept  it  locked  up,  and 
the  governor  was  hanged.  His  name  is  stUl  honoured  by  the  Manx ;  and  you  may 
often  hear  a  pathetic  ballad  sung  to  his  memory  to  the  music  of  the  spinning-wheel. 
We  must  all  feel  horror-struck  at  the  fearful  turpitude  of  that  man  who,  having  the 
pardon  of  his  fellow-creature  in  his  possession,  could  keep  it  back,  and  let  him  die 
the  death  of  a  traitor.  But  let  us  restrain  our  indignation,  till  we  ask  ourselves 
whether  God  might  not  point  His  finger  to  most  of  us  and  say :  « Thou  art  the 
man !  Thou  hast  a  pardon  in  thine  hands  to  save  thy  fellow-creatures,  not  from 
temporal  but  eternal  death.  Thou  hast  a  pardon  suited  to  all — sent  to  all — designed 
for  all;  thou  hast  enjoyed  it  thyself,  but  hast  thou  not  kept  it  back  from  thy 
brother,  instead  of  sending  it  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  ?  ' "  PauVs  desire  to  extend 
the  gospel : — Paul  was  anxious  to  do  more  good,  to  get  more  good,  to  be  more  good. 
He  sought  to  win  souls.  He  wanted  to  make  Christ's  name  known.  An  ardent 
passion  inflamed  him ;  a  high  enthusiasm  inspired  him.  Tent-making,  it  is  true, 
was  his  trade,  but  tent-making  did  not  monopolise  quite  all  his  heart,  and  soul, 
and  strength.  Does  your  secular  vocation  absorb  all  your  thoughts  ?  Though  Paul 
was  proud  of  his  industry,  and  could  say,  conscientiously,  "My  own  hanris  have 
ministered  to  my  necessities,"  yet  preaching  the  gospel  was  the  one  thing  he 
pursued  as  his  life-work.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  16.  For  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  g^ospel  of  Christ. — The  gospel : — What 
grand  truths  lie  concealed  in  this  Scripture,  as  in  a  kaleidoscope  1  The  gospel 
being  its  focal  point,  several  easy  turns  bring  into  clearest  view  some  of  the  most 
precious  things  of  our  Christian  faith.  I.  The  first  turn  presents  its  ebticact: 
'*  It  is  .  .  .  power."  II.  The  second  its  Divinity  :  "  It  is  the  power  of  God."  IH. 
The  tliird  its  object  :  "  It  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  IV.  The  fourth 
its  iMPARTiAi,nrr :  "It  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  everyone."  V.  The 
fifth  its  coNDiTioNALiTT  c  "  It  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that 
believeth."  VI.  The  sixth  the  ordeb  in  which  it  was  to  be  preached  to  and  employed 
by  guilty  man  :  "  To  the  Jews  first,  and  also  to  the  Greek."  A  man  who  can  define 
it  so  comprehensively  and  grandly,  could  not  well  be  •'  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ."  In  more  than  the  sense  of  willingness  he  is  "ready  to  preach"  it 
anywhere.  {W.  H.  Luckenbach.)  The  apostle's  estimate  of  the  gospel : — I.  Paul's 
ESTIMATE  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  1.  The  gospel  is  a  power.  This  power  is  manifested — 
(1)  In  overcoming  deeply  rooted  prejudices.  Perhaps  no  man  was  more  prejudiced 
than  was  Paul.  Yet  he  embraced  it.  (2)  In  triumphing  over  cruel  persecutions. 
(3)  In  overturning  systems  of  long-established  idolatry.  Diana  of  the  Ephesians, 
worshipped  by  the  world,  lost  her  adherents  when  the  gospel  was  proclaimed.  All 
the  deities  of  Greece  and  Eome  were  soon  dethroned.  Buddhism,  Brahminism, 
and  other  isms  are  furnishing  unmistakable  signs  of  decay.  (4)  In  its  influence 
over  men's  lives.  When  imprisonment,  stripes,  destitution,  and  disgrace  have 
been  powerless  to  reform,  the  gospel  of  Christ  has  succeeded.  2.  The  gospel  is  the 
power  of  God.  The  Jews  said  this  power  was  of  Beelzebub.  The  Pagans  that  it 
was  the  power  of  fanaticism.  Paul  said  it  was  of  God.  (1)  The  gospel  scheme  was 
originated  by  God.  (2)  The  success  of  the  gospel  is  of  God.  "  Not  by  might  .  .  , 
but  by  My  Spirit,"  Ac.  3.  The  gospel  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  Nature 
exhibits  His  power  in  creation.  The  Deluge  furnished  proof  of  His  destructive 
power.  The  gosrel  reveals  His  power  to  save.  It  saves — (1)  From  present  sinful- 
ness.    "  Thou  shalt  call  His  name  Jesus,  because  He  shall  save  His  people  from 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohav.  I. 

their  •ins."  f2)  From  fatnre  wrath.  4.  The  gospel  \b  the  power  of  Qod  anto 
salvation  to  believers.  The  Lord  has  a  perfect  right  to  fix  the  terms  of  onr  salva- 
tion. 5.  The  gospel  is  the  power  of  God  ante  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth. 
II.  Pauii's  personal  feslikgs  conoebkiko  thb  oospei..  *'I  am  cot  ashamed." 
Being  satisfied  of  its  Divine  origin.  1.  The  poverty  of  its  adherents  did  not  make 
him  ashamed  of  it.  Thoagh  onr  religion  had  a  carpenter  for  its  founder,  fishermen 
for  its  advocates,  and  the  poor  for  its  supporters,  yet  Paul  was  not  ashamed.  2. 
The  iUiterateness  of  its  adherents  did  not  make  him  ashamed  of  it.  Paul  was  a 
learned  man.  The  vast  majority  of  Jewish  rabbis  and  heathen  philosophers 
despised  the  gospeL  The  bulk  of  Christians  were  unlearned  and  ignorant  men. 
Tet  Paul  was  not  ashamed.  8.  The  persecutions  of  its  adherents  did  not  make  him 
ashamed.  Lessons:  1.  The  apostle  was  not  ashamed  to  profess  the  gospel.  2. 
The  apostle  was  not  ashamed  to  live  the  gospel.  S.  The  apostle  was  not  ashamed 
to  preach  the  gospel.  4.  Are  you  ashamed  of  the  gospel  f  {W.  Sidebottom.) 
Not  ashamed  of  the  gotpel :  and  why  f — The  success  of  Christianity  has  won  for  it  the 
respect  even  of  its  enemies.  I.  The  subject  which  n  emphasises — the  "  gospel." 
In  the  context  we  have  clearest  evidence  that  a  knowloilge  of  certain  facta  and 
truths  associated  therewith  existed  among  those  to  whom  the  apostle  wrote.  These 
facts  and  truths  all  clustered  around  the  person,  life-work,  example,  death,  and 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  bare  historical  record  of  these,  however,  was  not 
the  gospel  any  more  than  mere  creeds  or  systems  of  Christian  truth,  however 
important  these  may  be.  The  members  of  the  body  are  the  servants  of  the  living 
soul ;  so  the  gospel  is  the  animating  spirit  which  employs  as  its  instruments  facta 
and  doctrines,  precepts  and  institutions.  II.  The  refebencb  which  oub  text 
mpuxs — Not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  I  Strange  language,  surely,  for  Paul  to  nse, 
is  it  not  ?  Did  he  not  love  the  gospel  with  a  most  ardent  affection  ?  Did  he  not 
prize  it  above  all  things,  and  glory  in  it  as  an  ineffable  trust  Divinely  committed  to 
his  charge :  How  could  Paul  content  himself  with  declaring  that  he  was  "  not 
ashamed  of  the  gospel "  ?  The  reference  here  implied  brings  ns  back  to  the  words 
in  which  Christ  described  His  mission  to  the  world  at  its  commencement  (Luke  iv. 
18),  and  also,  when  replying  to  the  messengers  sent  to  Him  by  John  the  Baptist, 
from  the  prison  (Luke  vii.  22).  Christ's  heart  glowed  with  love  to  all ;  but  most 
intensely  towards  the  poor,  the  vast  struggling  masses  of  humanity,  denied  univer- 
sally the  rights  of  citizens  and  of  manhood.  Slavery  and  class-privilege  were  the 
comer-stone  of  that  Pagan  civilisation,  then  so  powerful,  and  to  these  the  g<^spel 
did  not  o£fer  any  terms  of  compromise ;  and  so  its  advocates,  as  Paul  tells  us,  were 
"  made  as  the  filth  of  the  world,  the  off-scouring  of  all  things. "  Enemies  were 
constantly  asserting  that  this  "  new  religion  drew  to  it  the  dregs  of  the  population 
— peasants,  mechanics,  beggars,  and  slaves."  Even  long  after  the  time  of  Paul, 
when  Christianity  had  won  many  triumphs,  we  find  Celsus,  a  haughty,  heathen 
philosopher,  remarking  that  "  even  the  Christian  teachers  were  wool-workers, 
cobblers,  and  fullers — the  most  illiterate  and  vulgar  of  mankind."  We  can  easily 
understand  that  some  might  waver  in  the  good  cause,  and  that  others,  though 
favourable,  might  shrink  from  embracing  it  through  fear  of  being  treated  as  per- 
sons who  had  degraded  themselves  in  the  social  scale.  So  the  apostle  Paul  comes 
down  for  the  moment  from  his  wonted  high  position  of  "  glorying  "  in  the  gospel  and 
adopts  a  lowlier  strain ;  he  "  was  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel."  III.  The  ABanMENT 
UPON  WHICH  this  DECLARATION  RESTS.  (J.  M.  Cruickshank.)  T}ie  distinguishing 
feuturet  of  Christianity  : — Whether  religion  in  general  has  any  rational  ground  or 
not,  it  is  certain  that  human  society  in  the  long  run  is  quite  impossible  without 
religion.  You  have  heard  of  the  ten  great  religions  of  the  world.  Of  these  only 
three  have  been  expansive  and  conquering  religions — Buddhism,  Mohammedanism, 
and  Christianity.  To  these  three  the  struggle  is  narrowed  down.  And  as  between 
the  three,  whether  legitimately  or  illegitimately,  the  hard,  historic  fact  is,  that 
Christianity  is  certainly  carrying  the  day.  I.  I  name  as  the  first  distinctive  feature 
of  Christianity,  the  incarnation  of  God  in  Christ.  History  tesches  that  human 
nature  cannot  endure  a  bald  spiritual  theism.  We  have  two  thoughts  of  God  equally 
necessary.  We  think  of  Him  as  an  Infinite  Spirit,  wholly  separate  from  matter  and 
superior  to  it — wise,  just,  awful  in  holiness.  Hence  the  pure  monotheism  now  recog- 
nised as  lying  in  the  background  of  all  the  better  mythologies.  But  human  weak- 
ness, and,  above  all,  human  depravity  necessitate  another  conception  of  God.  The 
human  heart,  yearning  for  sympathy  in  its  weakness,  and  stricken  with  terror  in 
its  defilement,  cries  out  passionately  for  an  Incarnate  God.  Call  it  reason  and 
eonscienoe,  or  call  it  finite  limitation  and  guilty  fear,  this  uniform  importunat* 


I.J  BOMANS. 


demand  tor  an  Inoamate  Ood  ia  answered  only  by  oar  Qod  in  Christ.  II.  The  second 
distinetiTB  feature  of  Christianity  is  atoneuent.  Both  Testaments  are  fall  of  it. 
III.  The  third  distinetive  feature  of  Christianity  is  beoeneration.  Confession  of  sin 
is  not  confined  to  Christendom.  Universal  sacrifice  is  universal  confes=sion.  Chris- 
tianity begins  its  curative  work  by  a  better  diagnosis  of  the  disease.  It  sets  in  clear 
light  the  original  rectitude  of  man,  discloses  the  tempter,  and  proclaims  the 
fall.      (R.  D   Hitchcock,  D.D.)  On  Christianity  : — I.  The   chaiuotbb  ow  its 

AUIBOB  BECOMMKKDS  ChBISTUNITT  TO  PABTICUIiAB  RBOABD.  U.  ThB  IMTBINSIO 
EXCEtXENCB    OF   CbBISTIANITT    UABKS    ITS    SUPEBIOBITT    TO    EVEBT    OTHEB    BELI0I0D8 

SYSTEM.  III.  Consider  the  hode  or  its  establishment.  (T.  Laurie,  D.D.) 
The  Christian  evangel,  its  contents  and  results  : — In  these  words  we  have  exhibited 
the  true  spirit  of  this  ambassador  of  Christ,  and  the  nature  of  the  message  he  was 
commissioned  to  make  known.  "  The  gospel  is  no  feeble  utterance,  no  mere 
human  speoalation  composed  of  sentiments  light  as  air.  It  is  charged  with  Divine 
energy,  and  works  oat  the  salvation  of  all  who  receive  it."  I.  Notice  that  by  these 
words  we  are  assured  thebb  is  a  Divine  positive  uebsaob  to  man.  Paul  did  not 
appear  before  tbe  world  as  a  philosopher,  who  by  the  workings  of  a  powerful  intellect 
could  solve  all  the  problems  of  being  and  knowing  which  had  baffled  those  who 
went  before  him.  He  did  not  assume  the  position  of  a  reformer,  whose  business 
was  to  set  in  order  those  things  which  pertained  to  the  social  and  political  condi- 
tions of  life.  Neither  did  he  maintain  the  position  of  an  educator  who  should  train 
minds  in  the  mental  products  of  human  genius.  Paul  was  a  herald  of  the  King  of 
grace  and  of  glory ;  he  was  an  ambassador  of  Christ,  a  preacher  of  a  positive 
message  of  truth  and  lore  to  all  mankind,  and  which  came  from  the  heart  of  the 
Eternal.  God  has  looked  down  from  His  high  and  holy  abode  in  tenderest  love  and 
righteous  mercy,  and  has  made  known  to  us  His  purposes  and  desires.  II.  Our 
text  teaches  us  that  the  bubden  or  this  Divine  message  to  man  is  a  pebbon. 
The  gospel  is  the  gospel  of  Christ — concerning  Christ.  It  came  from  Him  and  it 
is  occupied  with  Him  and  nothing  else.  UI.  The  Chbistun  evanoel  is  charqed 
WITH  Divine  foweb.  The  magnetism  of  great  men — which  is  the  resnltant  of  their 
personalities — has  more  power  with  those  they  infiuence  than  their  wisest  counsels. 
So  it  is  with  the  gospel.  It  is  powerful,  not  ouly  because  of  its  truthfulness,  or 
merely  because  of  the  love  it  reveals,  but  because  Ood  in  the  person  of  His 
own  Son  is  in  it,  and  with  it,  dealing  personally  with  the  sinfal  and  the  lost.  Its 
efficiency  is  from  Heaven,  and  the  spiritual  revolutions  it  has  vrrought  have  been 
produced,  not  only  by  power  as  power,  but  by  the  living  spirit  of  the  Lord.  IV.  We 
advance  a  step  further  by  noticing  that  the  oospel  is  a  savino  powbb.  The  Roman 
power  was  in  its  outgoings,  in  very  many  instances,  a  power  nnto  destruction.  It 
pulled  dovm,  injured,  and  destroyed ;  and  the  more  destruction  it  produced,  the 
greater  it  was  feared,  and  the  more  loudly  it  was  applauded.  This  destroying 
power  is  a  low,  vulgar  power.  Any  person — no  matter  how  weak  and  wicked — is 
capable  of  destroying  the  finest  work  of  art  which  ever  proceeded  from  the  reason 
and  hand  of  man.  On  the  other  hand,  it  takes  one  who  is  wise,  tender,  and  good — 
inspired  by  more  than  human  genius — to  raise  and  to  save  the  human  soul,  and 
secure  the  advance  and  development  of  the  human  race.  Of  all  beings  who  ever 
appeared  in  this  world,  no  one  has  ever  been  equal  to  this  Herculean  task  except 
the  Man  of  Sorrows.  He  alone  can  build  np  the  temple  of  humanity  which  was 
pulled  down  by  sin.    V.  Finally,  it   is  to  be  observed  that  tee  salvation  thb 

OOSFEI.  WOBXS   OUT   18  TO  BS   POSSESSED  AND   ENJOTED   BY  PAITH.       Faith  Is  the  dOOT 

by  which  all  spiritual  power  and  upbuilding  influences  enter  the  soul.  It  is 
receptive  in  its  nature,  and  takes  into  the  inner  man  those  thoughts,  feelings,  and 
persons,  which  regulate  the  heart  out  of  which  flows  the  issnes  of  life.  He  that 
believeth  the  testimony  of  the  gospel  takes  Christ  and  all  that  is  in  Christ  into  the 
deepest  parts  of  his  spirit.    By  faith  Christ  dwells  in  us  the  hope  of  glory  and  the 

Eower  of  an  endless  life.  {W.  Adamson,  D.D.)  Qod's  power  unto  salvation: — 
[  he  had  been  ashamed,  oould  we  have  so  much  wondered  ?  Consider  the  time 
and  the  place,  and  the  man  and  the  message.  The  time  was  the  hideons  time  of 
Kero ;  the  place  was  the  city  of  Bome,  in  which,  as  in  a  sort  of  moral  sewer,  all  the 
detestable,  and,  to  us,  in  many  respects,  inconceivable  wickedness  of  the  world 
festered.  The  man  was  a  Jew,  one  of  an  ancient  and  indestructible  race,  which 
then,  even  more  than  now,  the  world  despised,  ill-used,  and  robbed.  The  message 
was  this  :  that  a  crucified  Hebrew  had  risen  from  the  dead,  being  the  Son  of  Ood, 
with  power.  And  the  apostle  felt  no  sort  of  reluctance  with  this  message.  Of  this 
gospel,  the  apostle  tells  aa  these  magnificent  statements.     First,  he  colls  it  » 


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  K 

gospel,  a  good  news — a  good  news  which  could  have  been  discovered  only  in  one 
way,  by  revelation  from  heaven,  a  good  news  declared  in  a  life  sealed  by  death, 
confirmed  by  resurrection,  and  written  in  a  book.  And  this  great  revelation,  which 
none  of  the  great  thinkers  of  the  day  had  been  able  to  think  out,  tells  us  of  three 
great  things.  It  is  a  revelation  of  the  fatherhood  of  God,  of  the  redemption  of 
Christ  by  the  power  of  grace.  Then,  in  the  power  of  this  grace,  we  go  on  free, 
reconciled,  and  strengthened  for  the  duties  of  life  and  for  the  city  of  God.  This  is 
the  gospel,  there  is  no  other — the  free,  full,  present  forgiveness  of  sin  in  Christ  our 
Lord.  And  it  is  called  the  gospel  of  Christ ;  Christ  is  the  gospel ;  Christ  reveals 
the  Father.  "And  Christ  is  our  Bedeemer.  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins, 
and  not  for  ours  only,  but  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  "  The  gospel  of 
Christ,"  the  apostle  calls  it,  and  he  goes  on  to  tell  us  that  the  gospel  of  Christ  is 
the  power  of  God.  How  is  it  the  power  of  God  ?  It  is  the  power  of  God  because 
God  uses  it  to  convert,  and  to  instruct,  and  to  console,  and  to  inspire.  This  book 
that  brings  us  to  God  makes  ns  like  God,  it  makes  us  thirst  for  God,  it  helps  us  to 
be  filled  with  God.  And  once  more  it  inspires  ideas  of  the  power  that  rules  the 
world ;  and  this  power,  with  its  lofty  ideals,  with  its  moral  principles,  with  its 
wonderful  history,  with  its  life-giving  promises,  is  the  one  book  in  all  the  world 
which  has  done  more  than  anything  else  to  break  the  chains  of  the  captive,  to  lift 
up  mortal  man  to  the  true  dignity  for  which  God  intended  him.  It  is  the  power  of 
God ;  and  yet  there  is  another  sense  in  which  it  is  the  power  of  God,  because  only 
God  can  make  it  powerful.  I  think  it  is  upon  this  great  truth  that  we  preachers 
need  to  rely  more  than  we  have  ever  relied  yet.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power, 
but  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  The  apostle  further  defines  what  he 
means  by  "  power  "  ;  he  says,  "  unto  salvation."  Salvation  from  the  power  of  sin ; 
from  the  dominion  of  the  world ;  from  the  yoke  of  selfishness ;  from  the  misery  of 
small,  wretched  faults  which  eat  and  ulcerate  the  soul  like  venomous  insects ; 
salvation  from  all  that  makes  life  poor  and  mean ;  salvation  from  low  idea ;  salva- 
tion from  forgetting  God.  It  is  the  gospel  which  is  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation,  because  it  tells  us  whence  we  came,  and  to  what  we  go :  that  we  are  the 
sons  of  God.  But  there  is  a  limitation  to  this — "  unto  every  one  that  believeth." 
God  never  makes  a  man  good  against  his  will,  He  never  takes  from  any  one  of  as 
our  awful  freedom.  He  knows  that  one  day  we  shall  stand  to  be  judged  for  oar 
works  before  His  Son,  to  whom  He  hath  committed  judgment.  How  could  He 
punish  us  for  the  evil  we  have  done,  how  could  He  recompense  us  for  the  good 
which,  by  His  grace,  we  may  have  done  if  He  did  not  leave  us  free  ?  To  every  one 
that  believeth  is  the  gospel  a  power,  and  to  no  one  else.  It  was  of  this  gospel  of  which 
the  apostle  was  not  ashamed  first  to  accept  it  for  himself,  and  then  to  proclaim  it 
to  others.  He  knew,  if  any  man  ever  yet  knew,  on  whom  he  had  believed.  With 
these  last  three  truths  I  will  leave  the  subject  in  your  hearts.  First,  St.  Paul's 
reason  for  writing  to  Borne,  and  afterwards  going  to  Bome,  was  the  sense  of  his 
indebtedness.  "  I  am  a  debtor,"  so  we  are  debtors  to  God,  to  the  world,  to  the  Church, 
and  in  a  sense  to  ourselves  and  to  those  who  come  after  us ;  and  just  so  far  as  we 
know  what  we  owe  to  Christ,  and  what  Christ  has  done  for  us,  shall  we  feel  the 
blessed  duty  and  obligation  of  passing  on  to  others  what  has  been  given  to  us.  And 
then  when  this  is  the  case,  when  we  feel  our  obligation,  and  when  each  takes  such 
share  as  we  may  in  what  Christ  gives  us  to  do,  we  shall  feel  the  reasonableness  of 
faith — the  reasonableness  of  a  reasonable  faith.  {Bp.  Thorold.)  Not  ashamed 
of  the  gospel : — I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ — I.  Because  of  the  heroic 
character  of  its  witnesses.  II.  Because  of  the  influence  it  has  had  on  civihsation. 
IIL  Because  of  its  adaptability  to  human  necessities.  lY.  Because  of  the  promise 
it  gives  of  eternal  life.  I.  The  heboio  chabacteb  of  its  witnesses.  I  think  it  is 
Thomas  Carlyle  who  says  that  "  the  history  of  a  nation  is  the  history  of  its  great 
men."  On  the  same  principle  it  may  be  said  that  the  history  of  Christianity  is  the 
history  of  its  heroes.  For  it  is  from  them  and  by  them  that  we  have  given  to  as 
practical  illustration  of  the  power  and  processes  of  the  great  God-sent  religion.  And 
first  we  tui-n  to  Eiim  who  was  at  once  the  Founder  and  Finisher  of  the  faith,  Jesna 
Christ,  whose  life  may  be  said  to  epitomise  the  biography  of  mankind.  Bui 
perhaps  it  may  be  said,  "  Time  has  lent  a  fascination  to  their  labours ;  what  they 
did  perforce  has  been  transfigured  into  something  done  for  love."  If  it  was  done 
"  perforce,"  it  was  the  force  of  Christianity — the  force  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  is 
the  force  of  devotion  and  love.  I  do  not  know  that  history  and  the  lapse  of  time 
have  done  anything  to  magnify  their  work.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  prompts 
taea  to  acta  of  as  great  heroism  to-day  as  it  did  in  the  darker  times  of  history, 


L]  ROMANS.  4t 

n.  Bbcatjsh  of  its  iKFUiiiNOB  OS  CIVILISATION.  So  silentlj  has  this  power  been 
exeroiaed,  that  we  are  very  apt  to  lose  sight  of  its  influence  upon  the  morals  of 
men.  And  yet  in  its  very  secrecy  has  lain  its  strength.  It  began  by  enforcing  the 
troth  of  universal  brotherhood:  the  duties  of  each  to  all,  and  of  all  to  each.  It 
flnng  aside  the  superstitions  of  the  age.  Civilisation  without  religion  !  It  is  im- 
possible. It  is  fire  without  warmth  ;  it  is  motion  without  progress  ;  it  is  existence, 
bat  it  is  not  life.  It  becomes  in  time  the  very  apotheosis  of  immorality.  I  have 
said  that  the  influence  of  religion  is  spiritual.  But  all  work  which  is  spiritual 
•ventnally  reveals  itself  in  the  natural,  the  material.  So  is  it  especially,  I  think, 
with  the  Christian  faith.  What  has  Christianity  done  for  men  in  the  mass  ?  Each 
phase  of  its  spiritual  activity  has  its  equivalent  in  the  natural  world,  in  society. 
in.  Becatjsb  op  its  ADAPTABrLTTT  TO  HDMAN  NECESSITIES.  Herein  Ues  the  beauty 
and  the  blessedness  of  oar  religion.  It  is  to  this  that  what  in  the  most  sacred 
sense  may  be  called  its  success  is  due.  To  go  back  to  its  earliest  days,  how  did  it 
attract  men  ?  It  gave  rest  to  the  weary,  and  comfort  to  the  sad  ;  it  cheered  the 
mourning  and  raised  the  dead  to  life.  To-day  its  methods  are  the  same.  How  are 
we  to  account  for  this  power?  Simply,  I  think,  because  its  Founder  was  "the  Man 
Christ  Jesus."  He  knew  what  was  in  man.  IV.  Because  of  the  promise  it 
eivxs  OF  ETERNAii  LiFB.  It  is  uot  a  rcward ;  it  is  a  development.  And  even  if  it 
were  only  a  reward,  I  am  too  human  to  disregard  its  value  as  an  element  in  the 
teaching  of  Jesus  Christ.  A  religion  which  provides  for  this  world  only  is  no 
religion  at  all.  (R.  Barclay,  M.  A.)  The  nature  and  clahns  of  the  gospel : — I.  What 
ABE  WE  TO  UNDERSTAND  BY  THB  GOSPEL  OF  Christ  7  Christianity,  OT  the  scheme  of 
religion  revealed  in  the  New  Testament.  1.  The  things  it  proposes  to  our  faith.  Thesa 
are  of  several  sorts.  Some  of  them  are  merely  historical ;  others  purely  authoritative, 
and  some  partly  historical  and  partly  authoritative.  Of  this  latter  class  are  the 
truths  relating  to  the  Incarnation  of  Christ.  2.  The  things  which  the  gospel  com- 
mands to  be  practised.      II.  What  are  the  beasons  fob  not  bbino  ashamed  of 

THIS    gospel,    but,    ON    THB     CONTBART,  FOR    EMBRACINO   IT,  AND  QLOBTINO    IN   IT,    WITfl 

ALL  THB  HEART?  1.  Its  incontrovertible  truth.  2.  Its  incomparable  excellence. 
Compare  the  system,  in  its  doctrines  and  duties,  with  all  other  systems.  (1)  What 
has  been  the  worship  of  the  heathen  religions?  Ceremonies,  penances,  and 
orgies  ;  many  that  were  puerile,  painful,  cruel,  and  obscene.  And  are  these  to  be 
compared  with  a  worship  contemplative,  devout,  reverential,  filial,  snch  as  that  of 
Christianity?  (2)  What  have  been  the  duties  incnlcated  by  other  religions?  How 
questionable  and  scanty  their  moral  code  I  But  what  weed  escapes  in  the  moral 
garden  of  Scripture  ?  (3)  It  is,  however,  in  its  state  of  future  rewards  and  punish- 
ments that  the  gospel  far  outshines  every  other  system.  3.  Its  sovereign  eflScacy. 
"  It  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,  to  every  one  that  believeth."  Its  objects  and 
sentiments  are  not  merely  to  fall  upon  the  ear,  or  to  remain  before  the  eye,  but  to 
enter  into  the  mind  and  accomplish  its  renovation.  III.  What  abb  the  objec- 
tions    UBQED    BT    men    AGAINST    THIS    SYSTEM,     AND     BY    WHICH    THET    ATTEMPT    TO 

JUSTIFY  THEIR  NEGLECT  OF  IT  ?  Thesc  may  be  easUy  shown  to  be  trivial.  1.  Do 
they  object  that  they  can  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment history,  only  in  a  secondary  way — only  from  the  testimony  of  others — and 
that,  therefore,  they  are  not  so  responsible  for  their  unbelief  as  these  other  would 
b«?  This,  however,  is  felt  to  be  no  prejudice  to  the  truth  of  any  other  history, 
and  no  argument  for  its  disbelief.  2.  Do  they  object  to  severity  of  the  gospel 
requirements  ?  The  gospel  requires  us  to  crucify  only  our  sins ;  to  deny  ourselves 
only  what  would  be  injurious  to  us.  The  virtues  it  inculcates  it  renders  easy  to  us 
by  a  new  nature,  and  productive  of  a  present  happiness  surpassing  every  other  kind 
of  happiness.  3.  Do  they  object  the  incomprehensibleness  of  many  things  which 
the  gospel  states  to  exist?  If  God  has  not  revealed  them,  reject  them  for  their 
incomprehensibleness ;  if  He  has,  receive  them  for  His  veracity's  sake.  Conclusion : 
1.  How  awful  is  their  condition  who  oppose  the  gospel  I  What  excuse  can  there  be 
for  this  ?  What  evil  has  the  gospel  done  ?  What  attestation  does  it  lack  ?  What 
good  has  it  not  done  t  2.  How  pitiable  is  their  condition  by  whom  the  gospel  of 
their  salvation  is  practically  disregarded  1  We  are  about  to  be  wrecked  ;  the  gospel 
is  the  only  plank  left  for  our  escape  to  the  shore  ;  and  while  we  neglect  to  seiie  it, 
our  danger  increases,  and  the  destructive  waves  bear  us  nearer  and  nearer  to  our 
doom.  3.  Let  them  who  have  received  the  gospel,  and  who,  in  addition  to  all  other 
evidence,  have  that  of  experience  in  its  favour,  attach  themselves  closely  to  it.  4. 
The  gospel  is  a  subject  of  triumph  to  Christians,  as  through  life,  so  especially  at 
the  hoar  of  dissolution.     Its  grandest  objects  are  those  of  another  world.     {J. 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmi.  t. 

Leifehild.)  8t,  PattPi  eonfidtnce  in  the  gospel : — St.  Paal's  enthosiasm  for  Christ 
ia  one  of  the  great  problems  of  history.  That  such  a  man  should  deliberately 
renounce  all  his  advantages,  and  embark  on  a  career  which  inyolved  obloquy  and 
sufiering,  is  a  fact  that  has  to  be  aooonnted  for.  His  own  explanation  is  cleat 
enough,  viz.,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  appeared  to  him  under  circumstances  which  left 
no  room  for  doubt  as  to  His  person  and  His  claims  ;  that  the  evidences  he  received 
of  Christ's  love  acted  on  him  like  an  irresistible  constraint  to  yield  to  those  claims ; 
and  that  to  discharge  them  he  had  become  a  preacher  of  a  gospel  which  he  knew 
to  be  the  power  of  God  onto  salvation  to  a  perishing  world.  The  world,  therefore, 
was  his  creditor  until  the  glad  tidings  had  been  everywhere  proclaimed.  By  the 
time  he  wrote  this  letter  Paul  had  been  able  to  wipe  off  no  inconsiderable  portion 
of  his  debt.  But  he  felt  that  until  he  had  seen  Rome  the  greatest  portion  of  the 
debt  must  remain  unpaid,  and  that  at  Some  the  most  favourable  opportunities 
would  be  afforded  for  paying  it.  Once  firmly  rooted  there  the  gospel  would  spread 
its  branches  everywhere.  So  he  says,  "  I  am  ready  to  preach  the  gospel  to  yon 
that  are  in  Bome."  Here  the  apostle  seems  to  pause  to  take  breathing  time,  so 
that  he  might  calculate  his  resources  for  an  enterprise  the  like  of  which  he  had 
never  yet  attempted.  "  At  Bome  I  Tes,  at  Bome  also,  for  I  am  not  ashamed  of 
the  gospel.  I  was  not  ashamed  of  it  at  sacred  Jerusalem,  at  philosophical  and 
artistic  Athens,  at  commercial  Ephesus  and  Corinth,  any  more  than  among  my 
own  friends  at  Tarsus,  or  among  the  unsophisticated  heathen  at  Lystra.  And 
now,  although  I  shall  have  to  confront  in  combination  at  Bome  all  the  forces  I 
have  elsewhere  met  singly,  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel."  I.  The  apobtlb's 
ooNnsEMOE  IN  THE  oosPEL.  To  fully  appreciate  this  we  mast — 1.  Befieot  wbera 
the  apostle  was  writing  to.  If  St.  Paul  could  have  been  ashamed  of  the  gospel  it 
would  certainly  have  been  when  brought  into  juxtaposition  with  Bome.  The 
incredible  tenets  of  some  obscure  Hindoo  or  Chinese  sect  would  hardly  appear  to 
greater  disadvantage  in  London  than  would  Christianity  in  that  proud  capital 
of  the  world.  For  Bome  was  now  in  the  zenith  of  her  glory.  Yet  before  this 
wondrous  city,  where  all  that  constituted  what  was  then  thought  greatness  existed 
in  colossal  proportions,  the  advocate  of  a  creed  which  was  everywhere  spoken 
against,  and  to  whom,  as  a  provincial,  the  grand  metropolis,  we  may  be  sure,  would 
lose  none  of  its  glamour,  says,  "  I  am  ready  to  preach  the  gospel  at  Bome ;  tot 
I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel."  2.  Notice  where  the  apostle  was  writing  from. 
St.  Panl  had  only  recently  been  prosecuting  a  vigorous  ministry  in  Ephesus  which 
had  been  brought  to  a  riotous  close.  From  Ephesus  Paul  went  to  Corinth,  where 
he  wrote  to  Bome,  and  where  there  was  enough  to  put  a  far  less  sensitive  mind 
than  his  to  the  blush,  and  enough  for  some  men  to  utterly  discredit  the  pretensions 
of  a  religion  claiming  to  be  heavenly  and  Divine.  And  again,  he  had  just  learned 
how  the  gospel  bad  fared  among  the  Churches  of  Galatia,  and  the  memorable 
Epistle  to  these  Churches  unfolds  one  of  the  most  tragic  of  all  the  stories  of  early 
Christianity.  Biot  and  scandal  and  failore  had  been  the  result  of  three  of  the  most 
recent  experiments  of  the  gospel,  and  Panl  knew  the  impression  that  they  would 
make  at  Bome.  And  besides,  were  these  results  to  be  repeated  there  on  a  gigantio 
scale  f  But  such  was  the  apostle's  faith  in  the  gospel  that,  with  Ephesus,  Corinth, 
and  Galatia  behind  him,  and  Bome,  with  its  unmeasured  and  complicated  problems 
before  him,  he  nevertheless  declares,  "  I  am  ready  to  preach  the  gospel  in  Bome," 
die.  3.  Consider  what  that  gospel  was  of  which  he  was  not  ashamed  at  Corinth 
when  writing  to  Bome.  (1)  It  was  a  system  of  vast  pretensions,  with  no  apparent 
means  of  supporting  them.  The  Boman  government  was  excee^g  tolerant  of  the 
diverse  faiths  of  its  heterogeneous  peoples.  But  tbe  gospel  scorned  to  ask  iot 
a  simple  toleration  as  it  afterwards  declined  to  receive  an  honourable  patronage. 
It  aimed  at  nniversal  supremacy.  And  what  were  its  means  for  furthering  its 
amazing  pretensions?  There  was  no  known  force  in  the  world  beside  which  it 
did  not  look  contemptible.  It  had  no  history.  It  was  a  word,  and  therefore  could 
not  compete  with  the  power  of  arms.  It  had  no  public  buildings,  and  scarcely 
anything  that  could  be  called  a  ceremonial.  From  a  political,  intellectual,  and 
religions  standpoint  nothing  seemed  so  feeble  as  the  gospel.  Nor  did  its  advocates 
dissemble  in  the  least  in  this  particular.  "  Not  many  wise,  not  many  mighty,  not 
many  noble  were  called."  The  chiefest  among  them  were  fishermen  and  tent- 
makers,  and  the  rest,  for  the  most  part,  artisans  or  slaves.  They  "  came  in  mnch 
weakness,"  and  were  content  to  let  the  gospel  go  on  its  own  merits,  and  on  those 
merits  they  insisted  with  a  confidence  that  startled  the  world.  (2)  It  was  a  system 
whose  principles  seemed  least  likely  to  succeed.    Its  Author  belon([ed  to  a 


flHAF.  I.]  ROMANS.  49 

nowhere  so  detested  as  at  Borne,  and  yet  the  Bomana  were  asked  to  aooept  the 
emcified  Jew  as  the  Son  of  Ood,  who  had  died  and  had  risen  again  to  be  their 
8a/iour.  Forgiveness  and  salvation,  worda  of  insult  to  patrician  and  plebeian 
alike,  must  be  sought  on  the  humiliating  oonditiona  of  penitence  and  faith.  In 
■rging  these  the  gospel  appealed  to  sentiments  which  were  a  degradation  for 
a  Boman  soldier  to  encourage,  and  to  hopes  and  fears  which  he  scorned  to  eater- 
tain.  Those  who  embraced  it  were  charged  with  duties  alien  to  their  nature,  and 
with  the  exercise  of  virtues  for  which  no  existing  vocabulary  could  provide  a  name. 
In  return  it  offered  privileges  in  this  life  on  which  the  Bomans  would  set  no  value, 
and  a  destiny  in  the  next  from  which  they  would  turn  with  scorn.  And  Paul  bad 
discounted  all  this.  He  had  once  himself  regarded  and  persecuted  the  gospel  as  a 
foolish  and  offensive  thing.  And  so  had  people  everywhere.  In  Bome,  of  all  places, 
was  this  general  verdict  least  likely  to  be  reversed.  Nevertheless,  he  says,  "  I  am 
ready  to  preach  the  gospel  in  Bome,"  <fto.  II.  Thk  oboonds  or  thk  apostlb's 
ooNFmsNOB  IN  THB  OOBPBL.  1.  Paul  souuded  the  apparent  power  of  Bome  and  found 
it  weakness.  As  tbe  apostle  gazed  at  Bome  he  saw  a  colossal  fabric  whose  founda- 
tions were  sand.  The  empire  was  built  up  in  utter  disregard  of  the  forces  on  which 
power  has  ultimately  to  depend.  The  mere  lost  of  power  was  satiated ;  but  with 
its  gratification  everything  that  made  it  worth  the  having  went  to  wreck.  (1)  The 
nations  poured  their  luxury  into  the  lap  of  Bome  ;  but  with  their  treasures  came 
their  filth,  and  that  which  made  her  the  embodiment  of  this  world's  glory,  made 
her  the  receptacle  of  its  corruption  and  its  shame.  Military  plunder  brought  vast 
wealth  into  hands  that  knew  not  how  to  use  it.  It  had,  however,  to  be  spent,  and 
•n  era  of  extravagance  set  in.  Family  Ufe  was  extinguished.  Divorce,  and  worse, 
was  rife,  and  infanticide  was  feufully  prevalent.  What  political  life  had  become 
may  be  guessed  by  the  positions  to  which  a  Caligula  and  a  Nero,  a  Pilate  and 
a  Felix,  might  attain,  and  the  means  they  employed  to  attain  them.  The  conse- 
quences were  inevitable.  The  age  was  fast  wearing  itself  out.  Wholesale  indulgence 
was  inducing  an  intolerable  lassitude  which  refused  relief  from  the  ordii)ary  means 
of  excitement.  A  monstrous  ingenuity  had  to  be  called  into  play  to  invent  new 
pleasures  and  hitherto  inconceivable  vices,  and  the  end  could  not  be  far  off  when 
death  by  suicide  was  recommended  and  embraced  as  a  refuge  from  the  tedious 
superfluity  of  a  life  which  had  exhausted  all  possible  means  of  gratification.  (2) 
Equally  gigantic  evils  in  another  direction  also  sprang  from  the  satiated  lust 
of  power.  The  swarms  of  captives  who  survived  the  butchery  which  celebrated  the 
military  triumphs  had  to  be  provided  for.  A  system  of  slavery  was  therefore 
introduced,  for  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  find  a  parallel.  Not  the  least  evil 
of  the  system  consisted  in  its  wholesale  adoption  in  trade  and  agriculture,  from 
which  the  freemen  were  gradually  driven,  to  the  extinction  of  a  middle  class.  Thus 
there  grew  up  a  free  population,  released  from  the  obligations  and  opportunities  of 
labour,  and  eventually  despising  it  as  beneath  the  dignity  of  a  Boman  citizen,  who 
becane  mere  loafers  and  parasites.  This  teeming,  lazy,  and  because  such,  dangeroai 
elass  had  to  be  kept  quiet.  It  was  not  enongh  that  they  were  fed  by  the  State,  and 
that  they  received  occasional  doles  from  their  lordly  patrons.  They  caught  the 
prevalent  unrest  and  craving  for  excitement,  and  developed  vicious  instincts,  which 
had,  at  all  costs,  to  be  gratified.  Hence  the  savage  amusements  of  the  amphi- 
theatre. Hence  the  open  and  unabashed  practice  of  every  form  of  moral  abomina- 
tion, of  which  there  was  an  unlimited  provision  at  a  cheap  rate.  Is  there,  then,  no 
relief  to  this  terrible  picture  ?  Was  there  no  salt  that  could  purify  this  poisoned 
fountain  ?  The  answer  is — none.  Beligion,  which  had  been  powerless  to  check  the 
progress  of  corruption,  became  incurably  tainted  with  it,  and  eventually  succumbed 
to  it  Worship  was  but  one  of  the  outlets  for  the  passion  for  excitement,  and  was 
made  the  cover  for  the  most  licentious  orgies.  Of  coarse,  widespread  infidelity 
prevailed ;  but  the  very  Atheists  surrendered  themselves  wholesale  to  still  baser 
systems  of  superstition  and  imposture.  Philosophy  was  the  last  hope  of  the  age  ;  but 
that,  alas !  was  dying  of  despair.  The  apostle  saw  all  this  moral  rottenness  and  had 
already  predicted  its  doom.  Christianity,  however  humble,  he  felt,  could  not  suffer 
by  comparison.  He  said,  therefore,  with  the  ntmost  confidence,  "  I  am  ready  to 
preach  the  gospel  at  Bome,"  &0.  2.  Paul  proved  the  apparent  weakness  of  the 
gospel  and  found  it  power.  He  knew  that  onder  the  seeming  weakness  of  its 
infancy  lay  the  germs  of  a  mighty  manhood,  which  would  soon  measure  itself  with 
Bome  and  wrest  from  its  senile  grasp  the  sceptre  of  the  world.  This  knowledge 
was  bom  of  a  personal  experience  of  its  power.  (1)  It  was  the  power  of  God.  It 
Blight  seem  weak,  bat  then  he  felt  that  "  the  weakness  of  Qod  is  stronger  than 
▼OIm  I.  4 


f»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  I. 

men."  The  gospel  was  a  word,  bat  it  was  the  word  of  God.  A  word  of  God 
brought  the  amverse  into  being,  and  by  the  Divine  word  it  is  still  npheld.  It  was 
bat  a  word  that  was  spoken  at  the  grave  of  Lazaras,  bat  at  that  word  the  power  of 
death  was  shattered.  To  the  Word  of  the  gospel  a  Divine  power  was  guaranteed 
in  a  special  sense.  Its  preachers  were  Med  with  His  inspiration,  and  were  endowed 
by  TTim  with  tongues  of  flame.  Mighty  promises  urged  them  forward  with  it ;  and 
BO,  as  they  preached  it,  their  word  was  with  power,  and  it  grew  mighty  and 
prevailed.  The  want  of  this  Divine  power  reduces  the  greatest  human  force  to 
impotence.  Rome  was  built  up  by  force  of  arms,  but  were  is  Rome  to-day?  Our 
schools  of  thought  are  created  by  the  power  of  intellect,  but  how  many  survive 
their  own  generation?  Human  power,  Hke  its  embodiment,  "  is  as  grass,  and  the 
glory  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  grass.  The  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth;  but 
the  Word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever."  And  this  Word  is  that  gospel  of  which,  in 
the  presence  of  the  splendid  rottenness  of  Rome,  St.  Paul  was  not  ashamed,  because 
it  was  the  power  of  God.  (2)  It  was  the  power  of  God  directed  to  the  mightiest 
result.  The  weakness  of  Rome  largely  lay  in  the  inability  of  its  leading  men 
to  measure  the  world's  needs,  and  in  the  Inadequacy  of  the  best  systems  of  tibe  age 
to  supply  them.  But  the  power  of  the  gospel  consisted  in  the  fact  that  it  could 
penetrate  the  secret  of  the  world's  wretchedness  and  despair,  and  articulate  it.  The 
gospel  met  man  at  once  with  the  most  searching  diagnosis  of  sin,  but  told  how  that 
God  commended  His  love  toward  men  in  that  while  we  were  yet  sinners  Christ  died 
for  them.  And  men  began  to  realise  what  it  was  to  be  saved.  This  was  what 
men  wanted,  and  what  nothing  else  could  give  them.  The  gospel  succeeded  in 
accomplishing  results  that  nothing  else  was  competent  to  reach — nay,  even  to 
conceive.  And  the  apostle  was  therefore  ♦•  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel,"  &c.  (3)  It 
was  a  power  available  for  all  men.  (a)  It  was  offered  to  every  man.  It  began,  as 
it  has  continued,  not  by  dealing  with  the  mass,  but  by  dealing  with  individuals, 
(fc)  This  universal  offer  was  to  be  accepted  on  the  condition  of  faith.  The  embrace 
of  the  heart's  faith  was  and  is  necessary  to  quicken  it  into  a  salvation.  "The 
word  could  not  profit  "  where  it  was  not  "  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  heard," 
but  it  worked  effectually  in  them  that  believed,  (c)  This  condition  was  within  the 
compass  of  every  man's  ability.  The  evils  which  the  gospel  proposed  to  remedy 
were  worldwide.  If  the  remedy  therefore  were  to  be  equal  to  the  evU,  the  conditions 
of  its  application  must  be  within  the  reach  of  alL  All  the  gospel  asks  is  to  be 
embraced,  and  surely  every  man  can  do  that.  Paul  lived  long  enough  to  repeat 
this  boast  after  a  ministry  at  Rome.  With  what  emphasis  would  he  repeat  it  could 
he  stand  where  we  stand  to-day  1  And  how  he  would  endeavour  to  make  those 
tongues  which,  eloquent  on  every  other,  are  dumb  on  this  great  theme  aflame  with 
a  live  coal  from  off  the  altar,  and  the  vehicles  of  this  solitary  boast,  "  I  am  not 
ashamed  of  the  gospel,"  &c.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  Paul's  holy  audacity  in  regard  to 
the  gospel : — Courage  is  of  two  kinds.  There  is  the  hardihood  which  can  face 
danger,  and  there  is  the  intrepidity  which  can  confront  shame.  The  former  can 
only  be  where  the  danger  is  without  dishonour,  and  the  latter  where  the  shame  is 
without  desert.  The  former  is  an  instinctive  and  animal  endowment,  while  the 
latter  is  an  acquired  virtue  and  a  moral  quality  possessed  only  by  man.  It  is 
physical  courage  which  we  admire  in  the  soldier  who  stands  unmovod  in  front  of 
blazing  musketry ;  in  the  sailor,  lashed  to  the  wheel,  and  steering  his  tumbling 
vessel  across  the  foaming  waves,  or  in  the  traveller  of  science  scaling  untrodden 
heights :  but  it  is  a  much  higher,  rarer,  and  Diviner  quality  which  we  admire  in 
the  pious  workman  who  rebukes  the  ribaldry  and  oaths  of  his  fellow-craftsmen. 
Rarely  does  it  happen  that  these  two  kinds  of  courage  meet  in  the  same  individual. 
You  may  see  the  undaunted  hero  of  a  battle-field  crimson  with  shame  and  rage  to 
be  twitted  for  his  virtue,  or  the  firm  heroine  of  the  household  tremble  to  hear  an 
unusual  noise.  In  Paul,  however,  the  union  may  be  found;  and  it  is  this 
which  ranks  him  among  the  kingliest  of  men.  Let  us  ponder  a  few  of  the  reasons 
of  Paul's  holy  audacity.  Note — I.  The  end  pboposed  :  Man's  salvation,  an  object 
not  only  aimed  at  but  achieved.  1.  Salvation  may  be  viewed  either  as  an  individual 
benefit  or  as  a  social  one.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  a  blessing  for  every  one  that 
believeth  ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  needed  by  the  race  at  large,  and  the  gospel 
proposes  to  accomplish  the  salvation  of  mankind  in  both  these  aspects.  In  saying 
this  we  oppose  those  who  speak  and  act  as  if  the  whole  aim  of  the  gospel  was  to 
pick  out  themselves,  and  a  few  other  individuals,  from  the  mass  devoted  to  destruc- 
tion, and  translate  them  one  by  one  to  a  better  world.  And  we  also  oppose  the 
TAgae  dreams  of  rationaUstic  philosophers  who  profess  to  be  engrossed  wi^  a  noble 


.  I.J  ROMANS.  II 

eoDoem  for  the  good  of  mankind  at  large.  The  peculiarity  of  the  gospel  Is  that  it  begins 
with  the  individual,  and  bo  seeks,  as  its  last  result,  the  salvation  of  the  community. 
2.  It  may  be  regarded  as  either  an  inward  or  outward  process.  Inward  salvation  is 
sanity  or  soundness  ;  outward  salvation  is  deliverance  and  safety.  Each  one  of  as 
needs  to  be  both  restored  to  righteousness  and  rescued  from  hell.  8.  It  is  negative 
and  positive.  There  is  much  sin  and  suffering  from  which  we  are  saved  by  it ;  but 
there  is  also  much  of  holy  attainment  and  heavenly  joy  to  which  we  are  raised  by 
it.  n.  Thb  powbb  kmployeo.  1.  Its  source  is  Divine ;  and  this  in  so  direct  a  way 
that  its  very  nature  is  Divine.  It  is  the  power  of — (1)  God's  truth,  revealing  to  08 
both  His  nature  and  our  own  state.  (2)  Love  appealing  to  us  to  subdue  our  enmity 
and  incite  us  to  gratitude  and  trust.  (3)  All  urgent  motives  addressed  to  our  hopes 
and  to  cor  fears.  (4)  Precious  promises  whereby  we  are  offered  a  filial  position  in 
God's  family,  and  a  final  lot  among  all  the  sanctified.  (5)  The  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  who  helpeth  all  our  infirmities.  This  is  the  gospel,  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation,  because  it  has  God  Himself  in  it  and  with  it.  2.  Its  extent.  The  gospel 
is  as  strong  as  God.  It  can  do  all  that  He  can  do.  (1)  As  to  individual  souls,  it 
can  save  any  and  it  can  save  all.  It  can  deliver  from  all  sin,  and  enrich  with  all 
the  treasures  of  holiness.  (2)  And  so  for  society  generally  and  the  world  at  large. 
Here  is  a  Divine  and  all-availing  expedient  for  the  regeneration  of  the  species, 
and  the  establishment  of  righteousness  and  peace  through  all  the  earth.  (T.  O. 
Horton.)  Not  athamed  of  the  gospel : — We  have  no  reason  to  be  ashamed  of — 
L  Thb  kvidencb  bt  which  it  is  suppobted.  1.  Historical.  Take  the  testimony 
of  Paul.  He  was  a  contemporary  of  Christ ;  he  conferred  with  the  apostles ;  he 
saw  the  Lord.  In  his  four  undisputed  Epistles  he  embodies  all  the  facts  of  gospel 
history.  His  testimony  is  unexceptionable,  for  he  was  too  sane  to  be  imposed  upon, 
too  disinterested  to  be  an  impostor.  2.  Prophetical.  The  canons  of  prophecy  are 
that  it  should  be  long  anterior  to  the  event ;  that  it  should  be  so  constructed  that 
the  story  of  its  fulfilment  could  not  be  manufactured  out  of  the  mere  study  of  its 
terms,  and  that  its  fulfilment  be  undesigned  and  in  full  correspondence  vs-ith  it. 
Apply  these  to  Isa.  liii.  3.  Moral.  How  can  we  account  for  the  difference  between 
the  character  of  Christ  and  that  of  His  age  ?  The  age  could  produce  a  Nero,  but 
not  a  Christ.  II.  Tbe  iNXELLEcroAii  calibre  of  its  chief  bepbesentatives. 
Although  not  exclusively  fitted  for  intellectual  giants,  but  for  the  least  intelligent 
also,  yet  in  every  age  it  has  produced  champions  able  to  cope  with  the  most  gifted 
of  its  opponents.  lU.  The  effects  it  has  produoed.  1.  Individually.  It  has 
made  the  drunkard  sober.  2.  Domestically.  It  has  given  sanctity  to  the  marriage 
tie  and  blessed  little  children.  3.  Socially.  It  has  stood  between  class  and  class 
as  the  good  Samaritan.  4.  Politically  it  has  laid  the  foundation  of  liberty.  {W.  M. 
Taylor,  D.D.)  Not  ashamed  of  the  gospel: — I.  The  nature  of  this  avowal. 

"  Not  ashamed."  1.  Of  what  is  this  spoken  ?  Of  the  gospel's — (1)  Doctrines. 
(2)  Precepts.  (3)  Threatenings.  (4)  Promises.  (5)  Privileges.  2.  By  whom  ? 
Paul— (1)  The  gifted.  (2)  The  disinterested.  (3)  The  self-sacrificing.  3.  To 
whom?  Borne— (1)  The  great.  (2)  The  intellectual.  (3)  The  cruel.  4.  What  is 
implied  in  it  ?  (1)  That  he  gloried  in  the  gospel.  (2)  Tbat  he  held  everything  else 
in  cc«nparative  contempt.  II.  Its  ground.  1.  The  Divine  energy  of  the  gospel. 
2.  The  powerful  combination  against  which  it  has  to  contend.  3.  Its  saving 
eflBcacy.  4.  Its  impartiality.  Learn — 1.  The  evil  of  religious  cowardice.  2. 
The  necessity  of  consistency  in  religion.  3.  Your  obligation  to  make  it  known. 
4.  Your  duty  to  expect  that  your  efforts  will  be  successful.  (R.  Newton,  D.D.) 
Not  ashamed  of  the  gospel: — I.  What  there  is  in  the  gospel  to  make  cabnal 
MEN  ASHAMED  OF  IT.  1.  It  procccds  upou  principles  so  contrary  to  the  natural 
man,  and  so  brings  down  human  reasoning  and  the  pride  of  intellect,  that  men 
are  shocked  at  its  positions  and  requirements.  2.  It  exposes  a  man's  great  idol. 
8.  It  demands  absolute  submission.  4.  The  world  attributes  regard  to  it  to 
weakness  of  either  the  head  or  heart.  6.  It  levels  men.  II.  Why  Paul  was  not 
ASHAMED  OF  IT.  Bccauso  he  knew  it  to  be — 1.  The  power  of  God.  2.  The  power  of 
God  to  the  greatest  end — salvation.  {R.  Cecil,  M.A.)  Not  ashamed  of  the  goi'pel  • 
—The  solitary  grandeur  of  the  imperial  city ;  Paul's  knowledge  of  Rome's  own  and 
its  borrowed  glories,  as  a  centre  of  power ;  his  courage  in  meeting  the  contemptuous 
estimate  which  ancient  society  passed  upon  the  truth  of  God.  I.  Some  elements 
OF  POWEB  IN  THE  GOSPEL.  1.  Great  in— (1)  Motives.  (2)  Penalties.  (3)  Sacrifices. 
(4)  Inspirations.  2.  These  forces  Paul  had  seen  exerted  on  individuals  and  on 
communities.  They  were— (1 )  Moral  forces.  (2)  Universal.  (3)  Permanent.  II. 
Having  seen  avv  felt  these  beneficent  influences,  Paul  globibd  in  the  samb. 


S2  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [<«*'•  «• 

We  arg»— 1.  Paul's  interpretation  of  the  gospel  U  vitaMn  its  power.  The  doctrines 
of  sin,  atonement,  the  Holy  Spirit  and  eternal  retribution,  oannot  be  eliminated 
and  any  power  remain.  A  glass  crowbar  could  as  well  tunnel  the  Alps.  2.  That 
each  of  us  trust  the  gospel  as  heartily  as  did  Paul.  Exemplify  its  power  here,  and 
enjoy  its  fruition  in  the  perfect  felicity  of  heaven.      {B.  S.  Stom,  D.D.)  Not 

ashamed  of  the  gotpel : — There  were  reasons  which  made  it  needful  for  Paul  to  say 
this.  The  gospel  was  then  a  "  contemptible  thing. "  Its  Author  had  been  despised 
and  executed.  Its  character  was  at  variance  with  the  traditions  of  men,  and,  above 
all,  of  the  Pharisees.  Its  followers  were  looked  upon  as  the  scum  of  the  earth. 
But,  amid  all  this,  there  was  a  man  of  the  highest  intellect  and  the  noblest  powers, 
who  knew  the  gospel  and  knew  the  world,  standing  forth  and  declaring  in  the  face 
of  all  that  he  was  not  ashamed  of  it.  Consider  it — I.  Iitcslleotuallt.  As  a  scheme 
it  is  more  magnificent  than  any  mind  of  man  could  have  conceived.  No  systems  of 
philosophy  possess  its  grandeur  or  power.  The  gospel  is  no  puny,  drivelling,  or 
paltry  imitation.  Other  systems  have  been  propounded,  but  all  are  borrowed  more 
or  less  from  the  gospel.  II.  Mobally.  It  is  the  purest  system  of  morality  which 
the  world  has  known.  God's  spotless  purity  is  made  the  model  for  human  conduct. 
But  the  gospel  is  not  only  a  system  of  morahty,  it  is  a  means  thereto.  It  teaches 
men  how  they  may  become  holy.  Its  chief  object  is  to  purify  and  to  destroy  the 
evil  which  is  in  the  world.  III.  Hisxcbicallt.  It  affords  an  outline  of  history 
of  which  but  for  it  we  should  know  nothing.  That  which  it  is  requisite  for  us 
to  know — the  life  of  Christ,  and  the  particulars  of  the  way  of  salvation — are  fully 
developed.  IV.  Its  pubpose.  It  is  the  "  gospel " — good  news,  and  it  is  the  power 
of  God  unto  salvation.  Salvation  is  a  great  word.  What  can  we  vrish  for  more 
than  it  includes  ?  Its  object  is  to  transform  human  nature.  It  is  to  glorify  the 
soul,  to  exalt  the  spirit,  to  give  us  thrones  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  to  purge  us 
from  the  dross  of  sin.  Is  this  a  thing  whereof  to  be  ashamed  ?  (D.  Thoin(u,D.D,) 
Not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ : — There  are  three  gradations  of  artists.  The 
lowest  is  one  who  is  able  to  reproduce  an  exact  representation  of  natural  objects  as 
they  appear  to  ordinary  eyes.  A  higher  type  is  where  one  brings  to  objects  a  clearer 
eye  than  belongs  to  most  men.  There  is  a  third  and  rare  artist  power,  where  the 
things  represented  are,  as  it  were,  but  instruments  to  represent  the  effect  produced 
upon  the  mind  of  the  artist  by  the  scene,  or  the  event,  or  the  thing.  Now,  upon 
this  scale  Paul  was  the  greatest  moral  artist  of  the  world.  All  the  way  through,  it 
was  the  unconscious  endeavour  of  the  apostle  to  represent  truths  as  they  reflected 
themselves  upon  the  sensitive  suriace  of  his  glowing  soul.  Instead  of  showing 
what  were  all  the  wonderful  elements  that  in  his  view  constituted  it,  he  reflects 
what  the  impression  was  of  the  whole  gospel  of  Christ  upon  his  sensitive  soul.  "  I 
•m  not  ashamed. "  Well,  why  should  he  have  been  7  Every  one  of  as  would  say 
it  now ;  but  not  one  of  us  would  have  said  it  in  his  time,  perhaps.  In  our  time, 
yes.  And  it  is  a  matter  of  much  interest  to  imagine  what  would  be  Paul's  thought 
if  he  were  permitted  to  discern  the  Christianity  of  the  present  age  and  all  its 
triumphs,  its  monuments,  its  power,  its  wealth,  its  learning,  its  refinements.  1.  If 
he  had  looked  out  into  the  world  and  at  the  external  forms  and  organisations  of  the 
Church,  what  would  he  have  had  occasion  to  be  ashamed  of  ?  2.  And  if  Paul  had 
seen  the  pomp  of  their  worship,  and  their  worship  in  the  pomp  of  architecture 
which  had  been  inspired  and  created  by  them,  he  would  not  have  occasion  to 
express  a  feeling  of  shame.  8.  Still  less  could  he  have  been  insensitive  to  the 
literature  and  the  learning  that  have  been  inspired  among  devout  scholars  all  over 
the  world,  and  that  have  sprung  from  Christianity.  4.  And  still  more  would  he  have 
been  in  sympathy  with  the  outpouring  of  the  spirit  of  manhood,  "  the  enthusiasm 
of  humanity,"  that  has  sprung  from  the  temper  of  the  gospel,  and  has  gradually 
crept  into  the  laws,  and  ameliorated  the  theory  of  morals,  and  softened  and 
sweetened  the  whole  intercourse  of  human  life ;  and  that,  moreover,  has  made  man 
helpful  to  man.  5.  More  beautiful  still  to  Paul,  who  had  the  art  of  discerning 
much  from  little,  would  have  been  the  exhibitions  of  the  Christ  spirit  in  its  humbler 
workings  among  Christian  men  and  in  Christianity  unorganised,  or  but  slightly 
organised.  6.  More  yet,  to  him,  would  it  have  been  to  have  seen  what  a  class  of 
men  and  women  had  arisen  in  every  household,  and  become  scattered  up  and  down 
through  every  village  and  hamlet  of  the  land.  Domestic  life,  its  parification  and 
its  exaltation,  wonld  have  been  a  glorious  sight  to  his  eyes.  As  one  that  should 
go  across  a  prairie  and  carry  a  bag  filled  wilh  the  rarest  seeds  and  give  them  to  th« 
north  wind  that  scattered  them  south,  and  to  the  south  wind  that  scattered  them 
north,  every  whither,  might,  years  afterwards,  when  he  goes  over  the  same  ground, 


OBAT.  I.]  ROMANS.  a 

rejoice  to  see,  in  the  midst  of  many  coarse  weeds  and  much  choking  grass,  here 
and  there  ledges  and  beds  of  flowers ;  so  if  Paul  should  come  down  to  our  day,  and 
see  the  setds  he  has  sown  which  are  every  day  springing  up  in  the  hoasehold, 
would  not  he  be  filled  with  more  than  gratitude  and  wonder — with  transcendent 
transport  ?  Of  course  he  would  not  be  ashamed.  Nobody  is  ashamed  of  the  gospel 
now  except  those  of  whom  it  is  ashamed,  (fl.  W.  Beecher.)  Not  ashamed  of  tlie 
gospel : — We  are  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  because  it  is — I.  Divine  poweb.  1. 
The  history  of  Christianity  among  the  nations  of  the  earth  has  established  its 
elaim  to  power.  Its  progress  has  often  been  in  the  face  of  bitterest  hostility,  with- 
out the  help  of  worldly  patronage.  It  proved  more  than  a  match  for  the  iron 
despotism  of  Rome,  and  it  has  never  failed  for  eighteen  centuries  to  make  its 
enemies  its  footstool.  2.  The  secret  of  this  amazing  power  is  that  God  is  behind 
it.  Nothing  but  Divine  influence  could  account  for  such  uniform  and  unfailing 
triumphs.  Other  systems  may  show  the  power  of  man,  but  the  gospel  shows  the 
power  of  God.  It  brought  into  the  world  a  force  unknown  before.  II.  Savino 
powKB.  The  power  seen  in  creation  and  providence  is  truly  Divine,  but  not  neces- 
sarily saving.  Nor  will  the  power  that  resiJes  in  the  gospel  result  in  salvation, 
unless  it  is  accompanied  by  the  influence  of  the  Spirit.  The  gospel — 1.  Gomes 
with  a  message  of  forgiveness  to  guilty  man.  Sin  is  the  disease,  and  in  God's  hands 
alone  is  the  remedy.  2.  It  is  a  power  for  the  renewal  of  man's  nature.  "  Who  can 
bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?  "  This  is  a  task  beyond  unaided  human 
resources.  Man  can  neither  begin  the  work  of  grace  in  his  heart  nor  carry  it  on 
after  it  is  begun.  III.  Universal  poweb.  "To  everyone  that  believeth."  The 
glory  of  the  gospel  consists  not  only  in  its  Divine  origin  or  saving  efficacy,  but  also 
in  its  universal  adaptation.  It  suits  the  needs  of  mankind  everywhere.  It  reaches 
out  a  helping-hand  to  all,  without  respect  to  nation  or  social  standing.  (D.  Merson, 
M.A.)  Not  ashamed  of  the  gospel : — I.  Jdstift  the  high  claim  here  made  fob 
SHE  QOSPBL.  Paul  was  not  ashamed  of — 1.  Its  origin.  The  advocates  of  other  systems 
had  reason  to  be  ashamed  of  their  origin.  2.  Its  sentiments — (1)  Of  God.  God  is 
light,  love,  purity.  (2)  Of  man.  His  degradation,  guilt,  helplessness.  (3)  Of 
salvation  and  of  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  to  make  that  salvation  known  with 
power  to  every  heart.  (4)  Of  a  future  state.  Which  of  these  sentiments  can 
•ause  shame  ?  3.  Its  practical  tendency.  It  is  a  system  of  purest  morals  springing 
from  the  purest  motives — gratitude  and  love.  It  shows  us  a  temper  without  a  flaw, 
and  a  life  without  a  stain  ;  and  it  says,  "  We  ought  to  walk  as  He  also  walked. "  4. 
Its  efficacy.  The  efficacy  of  the  ancient  systems  was  nothing.  But  the  gospel  is 
"  the  power  of  God  to  ssdvation."  II.  Who  are  odilty  of  being  ashamed  of  the 
eosPEL  ?  One  would  suppose  that  none  could  ever  be  ashamed  of  it ;  but,  alas ! 
there  is  reason  to  fear  that  some  are.  1.  Such  are  those  preachers  and  writers  who 
know  the  truth,  but  conceal  it  by  specious  arguments.  2.  In  the  social  circle  how 
many  are  ashamed  of  the  gospel !  8.  In  private  life  there  is  not  that  attention  to 
religion  which  there  should  be.  Young  Christians  are  too  often  ashamed  because 
of  the  sneers  of  those  around  them.  (B,  Rayson.)  Not  ashamed  of  the  gospel : — 
The  botanist  is  not  ashamed  of  the  insignificant  plant  which  he  prefers  before  the 
rose  and  the  jasmine,  because  of  its  healing  properties  and  powers.  The  gardener 
is  not  ashamed  of  the  tiny,  dusky  little  seed,  because  he  knows  that  God  has 
endued  it  with  hidden  virtues  which  He  has  denied  to  the  diamond  and  ruby. 
Thns  the  apostle  was  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel,  because  it  could  accomplirh  what 
the  law  was  powerless  to  do ;  and  because  from  his  own  personal  experience  he 
knew  that  it  was  able  to  produce  a  mighty  and  spiritual  change  in  a  man's  whole 
character  and  Hfe.  {C.Neil,  M.A.)  Not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ: — 1. 
Years  ago  the  subject  of  the  extension  of  the  Church  would  have  suggested  ques- 
tions of  one  kind  only — viz.,  that  it  was  desirable,  and  possibly  discussions  would 
have  tamed  upon  the  best  means  of  carrying  it  out.  Now  you  only  raise  in  certain 
minds  the  previous  question,  whether  it  is  worth  the  effort.  2.  St.  Paul  is  led  to 
nse  this  expression  by  an  association  of  ideas  which  is  easy  to  trace.  "  In  Home 
also."  Before  his  imagination  there  rises  the  imperial  form  of  the  mistress  of  the 
world.  And  this  vision  for  a  moment  produces  a  momentary  recoil,  so  that,  like 
a  man  whose  course  has  been  suddenly  checked,  he  falls  back  to  consider  the 
resources  at  his  disposal.  There  is  a  moment's  pause  and  then,  "  I  am  not 
ashamed,"  he  says.  3.  He  is  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel.  We  are  stouck  at  first 
by  the  reserved  and  negative  phrase.  It  seems  to  fall  so  far  below  the  require- 
ments of  the  occasion  and  the  character  of  the  man.  Elsewhere  the  apostle  vaen 
yttj  different  language  from  this.    He  loves  to  call  the  gospel,  just  as  the  Jews  call 


54  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (cha».  b 

their  law,  his  boast.  The  truth  is  the  apostle  is  not  nsing  a  rhetorical  figure  at  all. 
His  negative  and  measured  phrase  is  imposed  on  him  by  the  thoughts  which  rise 
before  him.  He  is  resisting  the  feeling  which  threatens  to  overawe  him,  and 
it  is  in  protesting  against  this  feeling,  and  in  thus  disavowing  it,  that  he  cries, 
"I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ."  Why,  you  may  ask,  should 
he  be  ashamed  of   it?     Note — I.  The  apparent  djsiqnificakce  of  the  oospel 

BEIATTVELY   TO   THE    GBEAT    WOULD    OF    THODOHT    AND   ACTION    BEPRE8ENTBD    BT    AND 

EMBODIED  IN  EoME.  1.  The  Very  name  was  a  symbol  of  magnificence  and  power. 
Bome  was  the  seat  of  empire,  the  centre  of  society,  the  home  and  the  patroness  of 
learning  and  thought,  the  great  centre  of  the  current  religions.  She  was  in  ancient 
civilisation  what  Paris  is  to  France ;  everything  else  was  provincial.  2.  And  the 
gospel — how  did  it  look  when  placed  in  juxtaposition  with  Bome  ?  Was  it  not 
relatively  to  everything  else,  as  far  as  the  natural  sense  and  judgment  of  man  could 
pierce,  poor  and  insignificant?  (1)  The  estimate  which  a  French  academician  might 
be  supposed  to  form  of  Quakerism  is  probably  not  unlike  the  estimate  which  approved 
itself  to  the  most  cultivated  minds  in  Bome  respecting  the  religion  of  St.  Paul.  (2) 
And  then  if  it  meant  to  propagate  itself,  what  was  its  organisation  ?  How  could  a 
few  unnoticed  congregations  challenge  any  sort  of  comparison  with  the  mighty 
system  of  the  imperial  rule  7  (3)  Where  was  its  literature  ?  How  could  it  com- 
pete with  the  genius  of  poets  and  historians  who  had  the  ear  of  the  world  ?  (4) 
Where  were  its  leading  men  when  set  side  by  side  with  the  accomplished  statesman 
who  had  created,  and  who  still  from  time  to  time  ruled  the  empire  ?  Yes,  Bome  must 
overawe,  by  the  magnificence  of  its  collective  splendours,  the  pretensions  of  any 
system,  or  of  any  teacher  coming  from  an  out-of-the-way  comer  of  the  empire,  on 
a  commission  to  illuminate  and  to  change  the  world.  3.  True  enough  Paul  had 
his  eye  on  higher  things ;  but  his  was  too  sympathetic  a  nature  not  to  be  alive  to 
what  was  meant  by  Bome.  Yet  the  splendours  of  Bome  do  not  overawe  him.  He  is 
not  enslaved  by  the  apparent  at  the  cost  of  the  real ;  he  knows  that  a  civilisation 
which  bears  a  proud  front  to  the  world,  but  which  is  rotten  within,  is  destined  to 
perish.  Already,  five  years  before,  he  has  shown  in  one  line  in  2  Thess.  that  he 
forsees  the  end  of  all  this  splendour.  In  Christian  eyes  Alaric  and  his  Ooths  were 
at  the  gates  of  Bome  before  their  time.  4.  St.  Paul  was  well  aware  of  the  insigni- 
ficance of  the  gospel  when  measured  by  all  ordinary  human  standards.  It  was  hia 
own  observation  that  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are  "  called."  But  then, 
in  his  estimate  of  the  relative  value  of  the  Divine  and  the  human,  this  did  not 
matter ;  for  "  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things 
that  are  mighty."  II.  The  appeabance  of  eailuee  which  had  cluno  to  the  gospel. 
1.  Bemember  that  he  was  writing  from  Corinth,  and  what  was  the  Church  there  a 
short  year  before  in  the  judgment  of  the  apostle  himself.  Its  discipline  forgotten ; 
its  nnity  rent  by  schisms ;  fundamental  articles  of  the  faith  were  denied  among  its 
members ;  scandals  permitted  such  as  were  not  even  named  among  the  heathen. 
Of  all  this  the  apostle  was  sufficiently  conscious ;  and  yet  with  Corinth  behind  him, 
and  Bome  with  its  gigantic  and  unattempted  problems  before  him,  he  still  exclaims, 
"  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ."  2.  And  the  truth  is  that  in  this 
matter  St.  Paul  distinguished  between  the  ideal  revealed  from  above  as  in  hia 
Master's  mind,  and  the  real,  embarrassed  by  the  conditions  imposed  on  it  by  fallen 
human  nature.  He  "  knew  that  the  treasure  of  the  faith  was  deposited  in  earthen 
vessels,  that  the  excellency  of  the  glory  might  be  of  God  and  not  of  as."  And, 
therefore,  Paul  for  his  part  was  not  surprised.  The  failure  lay  not  in  the  gift,  but 
in  the  recipient.  It  was  still  possible  to  believe  that  a  new  power  had  entered  into 
human  nature  which  was  not  therefore  incapable  of  raising  and  saving  human  nature, 
because  it  did  not  suspend  man's  free  will  and  overrule  his  instincts  of  resistance 
and  mischief.  HI.  The  substance  op  the  biessagb.  1.  Paul  was  well  aware  that 
there  were  features  in  the  Christian  creed  which  were  in  the  highest  degree  unwel- 
come. Leas  than  this  he  cannot  mean  by  "  the  offence  of  the  Cross,"  or  "  Christ 
crucified  foolishness  to  the  Greeks."  How  was  this  teaching,  familiar  enough  to  oar 
generation  but  strange  beyond  all  measure  to  the  men  who  heard  it  from  its  first 
preachers,  to  compass  acceptance  and  victory  ?  Was  it  the  cogeny  of  the  evidence  f 
No  doubt  much  of  the  earliest  teaching  of  the  apostles  was  devoted  to  enforce  this. 
Certainly  the  resurrection  of  Christ  was  sufficiently  well  attested,  and  yet  its  wit- 
nesses were  not  believed.  Mere  demonstrative  evidence,  although  at  first  hand, 
has  no  e£fect  against  a  strong  and  hostile  predisposition  of  the  will.  2.  And  here  it 
is  that  the  apostle  may  give  us  his  own  reason  for  not  being  ashamed  of  the  gospel 
of  Christ,  for  not  despairing  of  its  capacity  to  win  a  oymcal  and  soomfnl  world. 


OHAP.  I.]  ROMANS.  5f 

He  Jsays  that  it  is  the  power  of  God  onto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth. 
There  is  lodged  in  it  a  secret  impetuosity  which  pours  forth  from  it  into  the  human 
soul,  with  the  result  of  bearing  down  all  opposition  and  landing  it  safely  on  the 
eternal  shoro.  And  by  this  gospel  he  means  no  mere  fragment  of  it,  such  as  Chris- 
tian morality  without  Christian  doctrine,  or  as  the  atonement  without  the  grace 
and  power  of  the  sacraments.  For  all,  all  is  really  included  in  that  free  unmerited 
gift  of  righteousness  which  faith  receives  at  the  hands  of  Christ,  and  which  robea 
ihe  believer  in  the  garments  of  salvation.  St.  Paul  knew  that  this  had  been  hia 
own  experience.  Since  that  scene  on  the  road  to  Damascus  he  had  been  another 
man,  he  had  lived  a  new  hfe.  Old  things  had  passed  away,  and  all  things  had 
become  new.  And  as  with  himself,  so  with  others.  The  gospel  had  made  many  a 
man,  whom  he  knew,  utterly  unlike  his  former  self.  The  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
here  upon  ground  peculiarly  its  own.  There  are  many  claimants  in  our  modem 
world  for  the  throne  which  it  has  owned  for  eighteen  hundred  years.  But  whether 
the  eye  rests  upon  the  masters  who  have  done  so  much  for  mind,  or  upon  the 
masters  who  have  spent  themselves  in  manipulating  matter,  what  has  been  achieved 
by  these  great  and  distinguished  men  that  could  be  described  as  the  power  of  God 
unto  salvation  ?  No :  the  deeper  aspects  of  human  life,  and  much  more  the  grave 
and  real  siguifioance  of  death,  are  quite  beyond  them.  3.  And  yet,  even  here, 
a_  lingering  feeling  might  well  be  experienced,  I  do  not  say  of  shame,  but  of  hesita- 
tion. Those  to  whom  the  saving  power  of  Christ's  gospel  is  intimately  certain, 
cannot  without  difficulty  bring  themselves  to  talk  about  it.  We  do  not  any  of  us 
readily  talk  about  that  which  really  touches  ns.  Men  have  no  objection  to  talk 
pohtics,  because  politics  address  themselves  to  those  common  sympathies  and  judg- 
ments which  we  share  with  others.  But  no  man  will  consent  to  discuss,  if  he  can 
help  it,  his  near  relations  or  some  family  interest  in  public.  This  motive  operates 
not  unfrequently  in  the  case  of  religion.  Religion  twines  itself  round  the  heart 
like  a  family  afifection.  The  relations  of  each  soul  to  the  Lord  of  souls  are  quite 
unique  ;  and  therefore  the  very  best  of  men  are  not  unfrequently  the  least  able  to 
talk  freely  on  the  one  subject  respecting  which  they  feel  most  deeply.  Doubtless  so 
human  and  sympathetic  a  nature  as  St.  Paul's  would  have  felt  this  difficulty  in  its 
full  force,  and  yet  we  know  how  completely  he  overcame  it.  If  he  did  not  yield  to 
the  instinct  which  would  have  sealed  his  lips  and  stilled  his  pen,  this  is  so  because 
he  knew  that  the  gospel  of  his  Lord  and  Master  was  not  really,  like  some  family 
question  or  interest,  a  private  matter  for  him.  The  friend  of  hia  soul  was  the 
rightful,  the  much-needed  friend  of  every  human  being.  And  therefore  no  false 
reserve  could  permit  St.  Paul  to  treat  the  gospel  as  a  private  or  personal  interest. 
Conclusion  :  In  their  degree  the  feelings  which  may  have  been  present  to  St.  Paul's 
mind  will  have  been  our  own.  Pagan  Eome  has  perished,  and  yet  that  which  it 
represented  to  the  apostle's  eye  is  still  in  a  modified  form  before  us.  And  yet  to 
those  who  can  take  a  sober  measure  of  men  and  things  there  are  no  reasons  for 
being  ashamed  of  Christ's  gospel.  The  world  which  confronts  us  is  really  not 
more  splendid  nor  yet  more  sohd  than  the  empire  which  has  long  since  gone  its 
way.  The  religious  weakness  and  disorganisation  which  alarms  ns  in  the  Church 
is  not  greater  than  that  which  was  famihar  to  St.  Paul.  Modern  attacks  npon  the 
faith  are  not  more  formidable  than  those  which  he  refuted.  And  the  gospel  is  now 
what  it  was  then,  only  to  a  much  greater  multitude  of  souls,  the  power  of  God  onto 
salvation.  1.  "I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ."  Here  is  a  fitting 
motto,  not  merely  to  Christ's  great  apostle,  but — (1)  To  the  humblest  and  weakest 
of  His  ministers.  No  man  who  wears  His  livery  can  be  ashamed  of  His  gospel 
without  incurring  even  the  scorn  of  the  world.  (2)  For  every  young  man  who  is 
entering  upon  life.  You  know  what  is  practically  meant  by  being  ashamed  of  the 
gospel.  The  creed  is  best  confessed  in  the  life  of  the  believer.  (3)  For  a  nation 
which  owes  to  Christ's  gospel  so  great  a  debt  as  England  has  owed  it  now 
for  1,400  years.  They  tell  us,  indeed,  that  the  gospel  is  an  admirable  guide  of 
fife  for  the  individual,  but  that  it  has  no  business  to  enter  into  the  sphere  of 
politics.  But  if  the  religious  principle  is  worth  anything,  it  applies  to  a  miUion 
of  human  beings  just  as  truly  as  to  one.  Yet  many  a  man  who  is  exemplary  in  all 
the  private  relations  of  life,  is  in  his  public  conduct  and  political  opinions  too  often 
ishamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Let  us  be  honest.  Let  us  either  have  the  courage  not 
to  be  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  in  any  one  department  of  hfe  and  thought,  or  let 
as  own  that  we  have  really  adapted  the  ethics  of  the  New  Testament  to  suit  a  state  of 
feeling  and  conduct  which  they  were  intended  gradually  to  render  impossible.  (Canon 
Liddon.)     Who  are  athamed  of  the  gospel ;  — I.  Th£  wibs,  because  it  calls  men  to  believe 


M  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  & 

and  not  to  argue.  11.  The  obkat,  becaase  it  brings  all  into  one  body.  III.  Thb  bioh, 
beoaase  it  is  to  be  had  without  money  and  withoat  price.  IV.  Thb  oat,  becaase 
they  fear  it  will  destroy  all  their  mirth.  {R.  M.  MeCheyne. )  The  gospel  ashamed 
of  some  of  its  preachers : — Dr.  Murray  was  made  warden  of  Manchester  by  Jamea  I. 
There  was  little  to  do,  and  Murray  had  neither  the  ability  nor  the  inclination  to  do 
mach.  He  was  expected  to  preach  but  seldom,  and  he  did  not  intend  to  preach  at 
all.  Once,  however,  he  did  preach  before  the  king,  and  his  text  was,  "  I  am  not 
ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ."  "True"  said  James,  "but  the  gospel  may 
well  be  ashamed  of  thee."  The  shame  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  its  glory: — I.  In  its 
relation  to  the  houam  intellect.  Its  mysterious  character.  II.  Li  its  relation  to 
the  HOBAL  CONSTITUTION.  Its  humiliating  character.  III.  In  its  relation  to  other 
KiMDB  or  BELioioN.  Its  transcendent  character.  IV.  In  its  relation  to  this  life. 
Its  unworldly  character.  {H.  G.  Weston,  D.D.)  Reasons  for  glorying  in  the 
gospel : — There  are  three  things  in  connection  with  this  avowal  which  invest  it 
with  great  significance :  the  distinguished  character  of  the  author  —  the  great 
apostle  ;  the  universally  execrated  nature  of  the  subject — the  religion  of  the  cruci- 
fied malefactor ;  and  the  class  of  persons  to  whom  it  was  addressed,  the  cultured, 
intrepid  inhabitants  of  the  imperial  city.  For  such  an  avowal  there  must  have 
been  good  reasons  and  here  they  are  specified : — The  gospel  is — I.  a  ststem  or 
Divine  poweb.  1.  There  are  three  manifestations  of  Divine  power.  (1)  Material, 
as  seen  in  the  production,  support,  and  order  of  the  universe.  (2)  Intellectual,  as 
seen  in  the  plan  upon  which  the  whole,  the  vast  and  the  minute,  is  organised.  (3) 
Moral,  as  seen  in  the  influence  of  God's  thoughts  and  feelings  upon  the  minds  of 
His  intelligent  creatures.  The  last  is  the  power  of  the  gospel,  God's  truth.  2.  All 
tmth  is  powerful.  But  there  are  three  things  that  make  gospel  truth  peculiarly 
powerful.  (1)  It  is  moral,  appealing  to  the  conscience  and  heart.  (2)  Remedial, 
graciously  providing  for  our  deeply-felt  spiritual  wants.  (3)  Embodied  in  the 
living  example  of  God  Himself.  There  then  is  one  reason  why  Paul  was  not 
ashamed  of  it.  Had  it  been  a  weak  thing,  he  as  a  strong-minded  man  might  have 
blushed  to  own  it.  II.  A  system  or  Divine  poweb  to  save.  What  is  salvation  ? 
Some  persons  speak  of  it  as  if  it  were  a  local  change,  a  transporting  of  man  from 
one  world  to  another.  "But  the  mind  is  its  own  place."  Salvation  may  be 
regarded  as  consisting  in  the  restoration  of  a — 1.  Lost  love.  We  were  made  to  be 
governed  in  all  things  by  a  supreme  affection  for  God,  but  nothing  is  more  clear  than 
that  man  is  not  so  governed  now.  The  gospel  comes  to  restore  it.  2.  Lost  harmony. 
The  soul  is  all  in  tumult.  This  cannot  be  the  normal  state.  3.  Lost  usefulness.  Our 
relations  to  each  other  and  our  social  instincts  and  powers  are  such  as  to  show  that  we 
were  intended  to  be  useful  to  each  other.  But  we  are  injurious.  The  gospel  makes 
QB  useful.  This  is  another  reason  which  made  Paul  glory  in  it.  If  it  had  been  a 
power  to  destroy,  his  generous  nature  would  have  been  ashamed  of  it.  Any  power 
can  destroy.  III.  A  system  of  Divine  power  to  save  all.  1.  ••  The  Jew  first," 
because — (1)  He  has  the  best  opportunity  of  testing  the  foundation  facts  of  the 
gospel.  (2)  When  converted  he  would  become  the  most  effective  agent  in  convert- 
faig  others.  (3)  It  exhibits  more  strikingly  the  merciful  genius  of  the  gospel  The 
Jew,  the  murderer  of  the  prophets  and  of  Christ,  &c,  2.  The  gospel  is,  like  the  air 
and  sun,  for  humanity.  Had  it  been  for  a  sect,  or  class,  Paul  might  have  been 
ashamed  of  it.  IV.  A  system  of  Divine  power  to  save  all  on  the  most  simple  con- 
dition. "  To  every  one  that  believeth. "  Man  as  man — 1.  Has  this  power  to 
believe.  It  requires  no  peculiar  talent  or  attainment.  2.  Has  a  strong  tendency  to 
believe.  He  is  credulous  to  a  fault.  Conclusion: — Who  are  ashamed  of  the 
gospel  ?  1.  Any  in  heaven  ?  No  1  They  owe  their  blessedness  to  its  discoveries, 
•nd  chant  the  praises  of  its  Author.  2.  Any  in  hell?  No  !  There  are  thousands 
there  ashamed  of  themselves  for  having  been  ashamed  of  the  gospel.  3.  Who  on 
earth  ?  Not  the  best  parents,  &o.,  the  greatest  sages,  poets,  patriots  and  philan- 
thropists. They  are  to  be  found  in  the  lower  strata  of  moral  life.  They  are  to  be 
found  amongst  men  who  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  themselves.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Moial  courage  ready  to  encounter  shame : — Let  us  not  pass  over  the  intrepidity  of 
Panl,  in  the  open  and  public  avowal  of  his  Christianity.  We  call  it  intrepidity, 
though  he  speaks  not  here  of  having  to  encounter  violence,  but  only  of  having 
to  encounter  shame.  For,  in  truth,  it  is  often  a  higher  effort  and  evidence 
of  intrepidity  to  front  disgrace,  than  it  is  to  front  danger.  There  is  many 
a  man  who  would  march  np  to  the  cannon's  mouth  for  the  honour  of  his 
eountry,  yet  would  not  face  the  laugh  of  his  companions  for  the  honour  of 
lus  Savioor.    We  doubt  not  that  there  are  individuals  here  who,  if  they  were 


.  lJ  ROMANS.  a 

plied  with  all  the  devices  of  eastern  cruelty  to  abjnre  the  name  of  Christian, 
whose  oonrage  would  bear  them  in  triumph,  and  yet  whose  courage  fails  them  every 
day  ill  the  softer  scenes  of  their  social  and  domestic  history.  The  man  who  under 
the  excitements  of  persecution  was  brave  enough  to  be  a  dying  witness  to  Jesus, 
crouches  into  all  the  timidity  of  silence  under  tbe  omnipotency  of  fashion.  There 
is  as  much  of  tbe  truly  heroic  in  not  being  ashamed  of  the  profession  of  the  gospel, 
as  in  not  being  afraid  of  it.  Paul  was  neither  :  and  yet  when  we  think  of  what  he 
once  was  in  literature,  and  how  aware  he  must  have  been  of  the  loftiness  of  its 
contempt  for  the  doctrine  of  a  crucified  Saviour ;  and  that  in  Rome  the  whole 
power  and  bitterness  of  its  derisions  were  awaiting  him,  and  that  the  main  weapon 
with  which  he  had  to  confront  it  was  sucli  an  argument  as  looked  to  be  foolishness 
to  the  wisdom  of  this  world — we  doubt  not  that  the  disdain  inflicted  by  philosophy 
was  naturally  as  formidable  to  the  mind  of  this  apostle  as  the  death  inflicted  by 
the  arm  of  bloody  violence.  So  that  even  now,  and  in  an  age  when  Christianity 
has  no  penalties  and  no  proscriptions  to  keep  her  down,  still,  if  all  that  deserves 
the  name  of  Christianity  be  exploded  from  conversation — if  a  visible  embarrassment 
ran  through  a  company  when  its  piety  or  its  doctrine  is  introduced  among  them — 
if,  among  Iteings  rapidly  moving  towards  immortality,  any  serious  allusion  to  the 
concerns  of  immortality  stamps  an  oddity  on  the  character  of  him  who  brings  it 
forward — if,  through  a  tacit  but  firm  compact  which  regulates  the  intercourse  of 
this  world,  tbe  gospel  is  as  effectually  banished  from  the  ordinnry  converse  of 
society  as  by  the  edicts  of  tyranny  the  profession  of  it  was  banished  in  the  days 
of  Claudius  from  Rome  : — then  he  who  would  walk  in  his  Christian  integrity  among 
the  men  of  this  lukewarm  and  degenerate  age — he  who,  rising  above  that  meagre 
and  mitigated  Christianity  which  is  as  remote  as  Papranism  from  the  real  Chris- 
tianity of  the  New  Testament,  would,  out  of  the  abundance  of  his  heart,  speak  of 
the  things  which  pertain  to  the  kingdom  of  God — he  will  find  that  there  are  trials 
still  which,  to  some  temperaments,  are  as  fierce  and  as  fiery  as  any  in  tbe  days  of 
martyrdom  ;  and  tbat,  however  in  some  select  and  peculiar  walk  he  may  find  a  few 
to  sympathise  with  him,  yet  many  are  the  families  and  many  are  the  circles  of  com- 
panionship where  the  persecution  of  contempt  calls  for  determination  as  strenuous, 
and  for  firmness  as  manly,  as  ever  in  the  most  intolerant  ages  of  oar  Church 
did  the  persecution  of  direct  and  personal  violence.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  For  It 
Is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  belleveth. — The  power  of  the 
gntjiel : — I.  The  poweb  of  the  gospel.  1.  We  can  quite  understand  that  to  a  man 
of  sucb  singular  force  of  character  as  St.  Paul,  the  "  power  "  of  the  gospel  would  be 
its  leading  idea.  To  St.  John,  it  migbt  be  its  sweetness.  And  we  can  follow  the 
curreut  of  St.  Paul's  feelings  when  he  said  that  he  could  not  be  "  ashamed  "  of 
anything  which  was  so  very  strong.  2.  What  we  all  want  is  to  treat  religion  more 
as  a  thing  of  "  power."  We  think  and  speak  of  it,  and  act  about  it,  too  softly.  It 
is  a  thing  of  beauty,  poetry,  enjoyment, — but  would  not  it  be  far  better  if  we  held 
it  more  as  a  grand  fact  for  vigorous  thought,  manly  action,  and  practical  effort? 
The  piety  of  the  day  is  too  enervated.  Hence  its  watery  literature,  its  feeble  hold 
on  the  minds  of  working  men,  its  pettiness,  unreality,  and  small  results.  There 
would  be  less  "  shame"  if  there  were  more  "power."  3.  I  need  scarcely  say  that 
before  the  gospel  can  be  this  "  power,"  it  must  be  gospel  indeed — not  a  theory,  a 
system  of  theology,  an  abstract  truth,  a  diluted  joy,  something  half  fear  and  hall 
hope,  but  "  God's  spell."  II.  Some  facts  in  reference  to  this  power.  1.  The 
Christian  rehgion  is  the  only  one  which  has  ever  had  "  power  "  to  set  in  motion 
real  missionary  action.  Why?  The  selfishneps  and  sluggishness  of  human  nature 
is  exclHi»ive,  and  it  requires  an  immense  lever  to  stir  it,  and  nothing  in  the  world 
bas  ever  been  found  equal  to  do  it,  except  the  love  of  such  a  God  as  we  have  in 
Christ.  That,  and  that  only,  can  "  thrust  out  labourers  into  the  vineyard."  We 
have  something  to  say  worth  making  a  mission  for — we  have  a  motive  which  can 
send  as  forth  to  say  it.  2.  See  what  the  gospel  of  God  does  in  all  lands  wherever 
it  is  planted — what  softening  of  savagery,  what  civilisation  it  carries  along  with  it. 
True,  it  may  be  hindered  by  the  inconsistencies  of  Christians.  But  in  itself  tbe 
gospel  always  grows  into  an  improvement  in  everything.  3.  Look  over  this  world 
at  this  moment.  There  are  about  two  hundred  millions  of  Christians  upon  the 
earth — once  there  were  twelve.  The  increase  without  war — the  great  engine  of 
Mahometanism — with  very  little  to  please  and  attract  flesh  and  blood  into  it,  rather 
with  the  greatest  opposition  to  all  which  is  natural  to  us,  what  "  power "  lies  in 
ttuit  single  historical  fact!  4.  Or  let  me  tell  you  the  expe'ience  of  every  Christian 
aainister.     It  is  when  he  preaches  the  lull  simple  gospel  that  he  gets  all  his  success. 


68  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OBIP.  t 

If  he  preach  morality,  or  an  abstract  divinity,  or  a  gospel  which  is  half  go^el,  h« 
has  no  results  whatever.  Bat  Christ  carries  everything.  5.  Or  listen  to  the 
witness  of  your  own  heart.  (1)  What  have  been  the  best  honrs  of  your  life  ?  The 
hours  when  Christ  was  most  to  you.  (2)  Who  is  the  really  composed  man,  but  the 
man  who  is  at  peace  in  his  own  soul.  That  man  does  everything  with  confidence, 
and  rest  is  power — "  the  power  of  God."  III.  Wats  in  which  tou  may  csb  thm 
"  powBB."  1.  Perhaps  you  are  a  weak  character.  You  long  for  more  strength  of 
mind,  and  will,  and  purpose,  and  for  capacity  and  power  to  persevere.  Now 
nothing  will  give  what  you  want  but  real  personal  religion — union  with  Christ,  the 
gospel  of  Christ  in  you,  and  that  gospel  is  "  power."  2.  Or  you  may  have  a  habit, 
and  you  want  to  conquer  it.  Bring  Christ  to  bear  npon  that  habit,  have  motive 
enough,  make  the  effort  for  Christ's  sake,  because  He  has  loved  you,  do  it  to  please 
Him,  and  show  that  you  love  Him.  That  principle  wiU  command  all  victory.  3. 
Or,  perhaps,  there  is  some  one  you  very  much  wish  to  influence,  but  you  cannot 
move  him.  Lead  him  to  your  object  through  the  peace  you  bring  into  his  own  soul, 
and  Christ  will  be  stronger  than  the  strong  one.  4.  Or,  you  are  conscious  of  a 
want  of  moral  courage  in  speaking  of  religious  subjects ;  there  is  only  one  remedy, 
Christ  must  be  more  to  you,  and  then  you  will  be  able  to  say,  "  I  am  not  ashamed 
of  the  gospel  of  Christ,"  &o.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  gospeVs  power:  it  ii 
great : — I.  In  the  bevzlation  it  embodies.  It  is  the  power  of  God,  because  it  not 
only  emanates  from  God,  but  God  is  in  it.  The  Father  has  centred  all  His 
thoughts  in  the  words  of  His  gospel,  and  these  words  retain  their  power  because 
they  are  the  only  satisfying  portion  of  the  human  heart.  II.  In  the  delivebancb 
IT  effects.  It  was  with  a  mighty  hand  that  Israel  was  delivered  from  Egyptian 
bondage.  No  less  wonderful  is  the  power  demonstrated  in  the  deliverance  of  man 
from  under  the  thraldom  of  sin.  III.  In  the  teansfobmation  it  pboduces.  IV. 
In  the  motives  it  inspibes.  Men  are  actuated  by  a  desire  to  gain  wealth,  fame, 
learning ;  and  what  unflagging  energy  this  inspires  I  The  gospel  inspires  us  with 
a  hope  of  being  kings  and  priests  unto  God.  But  love  to  God  and  our  fellow-men 
is  to  be  the  great  motive  for  our  actions.  This  is  to  be  the  ruling  power  of  om 
lives,  and  this  will  render  us  godlike.  V.  In  the  univebsalitt  or  its  appucation. 
"  To  every  one  that  believeth."  It  is  the  gospel  for  mankind,  and  among  aL 
nations  it  has  gained  its  trophies.  Its  power  has  not  waned.  Conclusion  : — Its 
hindrances  are  in  the  individual  soul.  Sin  makes  the  barrier.  But  the  gospel 
brought  home  by  the  Spirit  can  overcome  alL  There  is  nothing  in  it  of  which  we 
should  be  ashamed.  {A.  Huelston,  Ph.D.)  The  power  of  the  gospel  contrasted 
with  other  theories : — Suppose  that  two  persons  start  upon  a  philanthropic  mission. 
One  shall  be  a  preacher  determined  to  preach  the  old-fashioned  gospel ;  and  the 
other  shall  be  a  nineteenth  century  lecturer,  whose  great  article  of  faith  is,  "  I 
believe  in  the  nineteenth  century."  Each  of  us  addresses  congregations,  and  at  the 
end  of  one  of  my  sermons  I  say,  "  Now  then,  if  there  are  any  of  you  who  feel 

?  ourselves  tied  and  bound  with  the  chain  of  yonr  sins,  while  you  are  longing  to 
ead  a  better  life,  stay  behind  and  I  will  endeavour  to  make  the  way  as  plain  as  I 
can."  Well,  suppose  also  that  the  lecturer  has  delivered  his  oration,  the  place  is 
crowded,  and  a  great  amount  of  enthusiasm  is  kindled  by  the  wonderful  oratory  of 
the  man.  At  the  end,  suppose  again  that  he  too  says  something  of  the  same  kind : 
"  Now  then,  I  have  been  speaking  of  the  progress  of  civilisation,  and  the  develop- 
ment of  humanity,  and  what  we  may  expect  as  years  roll  away  and  as  man  rises  to 
a  higher  level.  But  I  wish  to  be  practical,  and  to  endeavour  to  benefit  any  now 
present  who  feel  they  need  some  help.  Should  any  of  you  to-night  feel  as  if  you 
are  failing  to  benefit  by  this  general  advance  that  is  being  made,  just  remain  behind 
and  I  vriU  offer  you  a  few  words  of  advice."  Suppose  that  in  both  cases  the  invita- 
tion is  accepted  by  some.  I  come  down,  and  there  approaches  me  a  miserable- 
looking  specimen  of  humanity.  I  have  only  to  look  in  bus  face  to  see  the  marks  of 
sin  there.  A  few  minutes'  conversation  discloses  the  fact  that  there  is  scarcely  a 
sin  which  that  man  has  not  committed ;  tears  stand  in  his  eyes  as  he  says  to  me,  "  I 
wish  yon  could  tell  me,  sir,  what  I  must  do  to  be  saved."  To  such  a  one  I  should 
have  no  difficulty  in  making  answer — "  My  dear  brother,  you  are  just  the  person  I 
have  to  preach  to.  My  Master  came  to  seek  and  to  save  the  lost.  Tell  me,  are 
you  altogether  out  of  conceit,  nay,  out  of  heart,  with  yourself  7"  I  can  imagine  the 
melsaicholy  reply,  "  What  hope  have  I  left  in  myself  ?  Unless  a  higher  power  than 
mine  do  something  for  me,  there  is  nothing  before  me  but  despair."  If  such  be 
the  response,  I  can  hail  that  seU-despair  as  the  harbinger  of  true  hope.  I  am  able 
to  lead  the  forlorn  and  hopeless  wretch  out  of  self  and  into  Christ ;  show  him  th« 


.  I.]  B0MAN8.  n 

provision  that  has  been  made  to  meet  the  case  of  the  helpless,  and  gnide  him  step 
by  step,  till  at  length  he  claims  Christ  as  his  all-snfficient  Savionr  who  is  able  to 
save  to  the  nttermost.  Well,  in  saoh  a  case,  the  man  will  become  a  changed 
person.  The  intervention  of  the  Creator  will  have  made  him  a  new  creature,  and 
he  who  before  delighted  in  sin,  will  snddenly  find  himself  hating  sin  and  loving 
purity  and  holiness.  Now  let  us  turn  to  the  other  scene.  The  lecture  is  juat  clos- 
ing, and  the  lecturer  gives  such  an  invitation  as  I  have  suggested.  One  man 
comes  up  and  addresses  himself  to  the  lecturer :  "  I  am  a  very  bad  man,  and  have 
lived  a  very  bad  life,  and  I  want  to  know  if  you  can  give  me  any  advice  that  shall 
make  me  better."  "  Well,  my  friend,  reasoning  on  utilitarian  grounds,  I  assume 
that  you  have  found  your  evil  course  not  much  to  your  advantage."  "  Advantage  I 
Why,  I  have  stripped  my  house  of  every  comfort,  and  turned  it  into  a  wild  beast's 
den  rather  than  a  human  home ;  I  have  lost  my  situations ;  and  it  is  all  through 
that  cursed  drink."  "  Then  your  case  is  very  clear,  my  friend.  You  can  see  with- 
out any  lecture  on  utilitarianism  that  drunkenness  is  unprofitable  to  you."  *•  Well, 
I  know  that ;  but  the  point  is  how  I  am  to  overcome  this  craving."  "  Well,  first 
reflect  seriously  that  you  are  injuring  yourself."  "  But  I  am  convinced  of  that 
already."  "  Well,  then  act  in  accordance  with  that  conviction  ;  sign  the  pledge." 
"  I  have  signed  the  pledge,  over  and  over  again,  but  I  cannot  keep  it."  "Why 
not  ?  Have  you  been  really  in  earnest  ?  "  "  Yes,  sir ;  but  I  could  never  keep  it  for 
any  length  of  time."  "  Well,  but  you  had  better  sign  it  again."  "  I  have  signed 
it  a  dozen  times,  dr."  "  Well,  I  don't  know  what  to  advise ;  struggle  more 
earnestly."  "  But  I  have  struggled  my  very  utmost."  **  Then  can  you  keep  out  of 
the  way  of  bad  company  ?  "  "I  may  try,  sir ;  but  the  bad  company  won't  keep 
out  of  my  way."  What  is  the  lecturer  to  say  next?  My  own  impression  is  that 
there  is  nothing  left  for  the  apostle  of  the  new  creed  but  to  admit  his  failure,  unless 
he  has  the  assurance  to  say  to  him,  "  Very  well,  then,  your  only  chance  is  to 
believe  in  the  nineteenth  century  I  "  But  where  is  there  one  who  would  dare  to  say 
this?  No  i  the  individual  must  perish,  while  the  lecturer  comforts  himself  with 
the  hope  that  the  species  will  improve.  You  ask  me  to  lay  aside  the  gospel,  and 
take  in  place  of  it  one  which  leaves  me  in  such  a  position  that  I  am  morally 
helpless  and  incapable  of  grappling  with  the  infirmities  of  human  nature,  or  of  hold- 
ing out  a  helping  hand  to  those  around  me  who  are  sinking  down  to  perdition.  We 
are  asked  to  accept  the  dictates  of  science,  or  the  theories  of  philosophers,  or  what 
are  supposed  to  be  exhibitions  of  supernatural  power,  or  some  enthusiastic  visionary 
who  sets  himself  up  as  a  religious  reformer,  and  bids  us  accommodate  our  convic- 
tions to  his  dreams.  But  we  go  back  to  that  question,  "  Where  is  the  power?  "  As 
I  look  around  on  all  the  various  substitutes  for  the  gospel,  I  seek  an  answer,  and  I 
seek  in  vain.  Where  is  the  man  who  is  ready  to  tell  me  how  a  bad  man  is  to 
become  good,  how  a  weak  man  is  to  become  strong  ?  From  all  these  I  turn  to  the 
cross  of  Emmanuel.  The  power  of  God  in  redemption  is  felt,  a.nd  from  the  cross  I 
Bee  men  going  forth,  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus,  possessed  of  new  desires  and 
new  affections,  and  animated  by  a  new  power.  (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  The 
gotpel  a  power  unto  talvation  : — (Text,  and  Matt.  vi.  13 ;  Acts.  i.  8).  The  first  of 
these  verses  declares  that  power  belongs  to  God,  and,  by  implication,  that  we  have 
power  only  as  we  borrow  it  from  God ;  the  second,  how  this  power  is,  in  the  moral 
and  spiritual  realm,  to  be  bestowed  upon  men ;  the  third,  through  what  instrumen- 
tality this  power  shall  be  bestowed — "  the  gospel."  I.  The  religion  of  the  Biblb 
IS,  THEN,  charaotebisticaIiLT  A  P0WBB-BE8T0WING  RELIGION.  It  is  this  which  dis- 
tinguishes it  from  all  other  religions.  1.  All  the  significance  of  the  miracles  of  the 
Old  Testament  and  the  New  Testament  lies  in  this,  that  they  are  witnesses  to  a 
help  that  lies  beyond  humanity,  but  which  is  extended  to  humanity.  The  entire 
Old  Testament  is  the  history  of  a  power  not  belonging  to  humanity,  and  yet  work- 
ing for  the  benefit  of  Israel  It  is  by  the  power  of  God  that  the  Israelites  are  sum- 
moned from  their  bondage,  that  the  waves  of  the  Bed  Sea  part  for  them,  and  that 
one  after  another  victory  crowns  their  campaigning  in  Palestine.  The  history  is 
not  the  history  of  what  the  Jews  did  or  Jewish  great  men  did,  but  of  what  a  power 
not  themselves  was  doing  for  them.  As  this  is  the  Old  Testament  history,  so  this 
is  the  Old  Testament  experience  of  the  inuividual.  It  reappears  in  David,  in 
Isaiah,  in  every  prophet.  2.  The  old  doctrine  that  power  belongeth  unto  God,  and 
that  God  bestows  this  power  upon  His  children,  reappears  in  the  New  Testament, 
but  in  a  new  form.  It  is  now  the  spiritual  helpfulness  of  God  that  comes  to  the 
front.  We  speak  as  though  a  man's  power  had  greatly  increased  our  power  during 
the  past  few  centuries ;  but  all  the  power  of  civilisation  is  a  power  that  is  not  ouz 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohat.  l 

own.  We  hare  increased  a  little  our  individual  mosoalar  power,  bat  the  increase  is 
very  little,  while  it  is  stored  in  nature,  and  we  lay  hold  upon  it  and  nse  it.  And  I 
win  not  go  to  an  orthodox  authority,  but  I  will  ask  Herbert  Spencer  what  this 
power  is  in  that  famous  definition :  "  Amid  the  mysteries  which  become  the  more 
mysterious  the  more  they  are  thought  about,  there  will  remsdn  the  absolute  cer- 
tainty that  we  are  ever  in  the  presence  of  an  Infinite  and  Eternal  Energy  from 
whom"all  things  proceed."  What  is  this  but  the  old  Hebrew  Psalmist's  '*  Power 
belongeth  unto  God  ?  "  And  what  is  the  result  of  all  modem  science  bnt  this :  m 
skill  to  lay  hold  on  this  power  that  is  not  our  own,  and  to  make  it  our  own  hj 
obedience  to  its  laws  ?  8.  Now,  the  New  Testament,  as  a  spiritnal  appendix  to 
the  Old,  confirmed  by  modern  science,  adds  the  declaration  that  there  are  powers  not 
oar  own  that  make  for  human  helpfulness  and  lift  as  ap  in  the  spiritual  realm. 
The  power  that  is  of  God  is  a  power  unto  spiritual  salvation.  As  there  is  a  power 
to  help  man  in  the  material  and  physical  world,  so  there  is  a  power  to  help  him  in 
the  realm  of  virtue  and  troth.  A  hopeful  man  can  inspire  hope ;  a  weak-willed 
man  can  be  made  stronger  in  will  by  leaning  npon  a  man  whose  will  is  stronger 
than  his  own ;  there  is  power  in  a  great  heart  to  fill  vacant  hearts  full  of  noble. 
Divine  love.  4.  And  as  the  individual  imparts  to  the  individual,  parents  to  their 
children,  the  teacher  to  his  pupils,  the  pastor  to  his  congregation,  so  generations 
impart  to  other  generations.  It  is  not  all  a  fiction,  this  Boman  Catholic  idea  of 
works  of  supererogation  stored  ap,  on  which  men  may  draw.  The  world  has  acca- 
malated  a  great  reservoir  of  virtue,  and  we  draw  on  it  every  day.  Tou  are  stronger 
men  and  women  to-day  for  yoar  Puritan  ancestry,  for  your  Anglo-Saxon  blood. 
n.  Salvation  is  not  soubthino  you  abb  to  get  in  hbavbn  bt  and  by,  on  conditioh 

THAT  YOU  DO  BELIEVB,  THINK,  OB  EXFERIENOE  80METHIN0  HEBB   ON   EARTH  NOW.      That 

man  will  be  saved  from  future  punishment  through  faith  in  Christ  is  true,  but  it  is 
not  the  burden  of  the  Bible  declaration.  The  great  good  news  of  the  Bible  is  this : 
men  are  saved  from  the  burdens  of  their  present  life ;  from  the  darkness  of  their 
scepticism ;  from  the  bondage  of  their  superstition ;  from  inhumanity,  weakness  of 
will,  and  sin,  here  and  now.  This  universe  is  stored  with  great  spiritual  powers. 
Do  not  fight  your  battle  alone ;  lay  hold  on  those  powers  and  ask  their  help  in  the 
confiict.  "  There  is  no  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we 
must  be  saved."  What  is  that  ?  A  narrow  declaration  ?  Not  at  all.  I  find  a 
man  trying  to  lift  a  great  stone,  which  is  too  heavy  for  his  strength  ;  and  I  say  to 
him,  Get  out  your  tackle  and  pulleys,  and  then  yoa  can  lift  it.  Is  that  narrow  ?  No 
man  can  take  the  fruits  of  civilisation  unless  he  lays  hold  on  powers  other  than  his 
own  ;  and  no  man  can  take  the  fruit  of  Divine  culture  unless  he  reaches  out  and  lays 
hold  of  powers  that  are  not  his  own,  that  make  for  righteousness.  HI.  Faith  is  not 
BELIEF.  It  is  not  belief  in  a  long  or  a  short  creed.  Faith  does  in  the  spiritual  realm 
that  which  reason  does  in  the  material  realm.  It  is  simply  reaching  out  a  heart  of 
sympathy  and  laying  hold  on  the  heart  of  God,  and  receiving  strength  that  God 
pours  into  the  children  whose  souls  are  open  to  receive  His  help.  What  virtue  is 
there  in  the  mere  declaration  of  an  opinion?  This  is  not  faith.  Faith  in  Christ 
is  an  appreciation  of  the  quality  that  is  in  Christ,  a  sense  of  EUs  worth,  a  desire 
to  be  like  Him,  a  resolute  purpose  to  follow  after  Him.  {Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.) 
The  power  of  the  gospel  to  tave : — The  gospel  manifests  the  power  of  God.    L  Iir 

THE   BEVELATION   IT   UASBS  OF   WHAT    GOD    HAS    DONE    FOB    US  IN   THE    WOBK   OF    HiS 

Son.  1.  As  transgressors  the  law  held  as  in  bondage,  and  bonnd  as  over  to  endure 
the  wages  of  sin  in  everlasting  death.  But  in  the  obedience  which  Christ  has 
rendered  to  the  law,  and  the  satisfaction  He  has  made  to  its  demands.  He  has 
opened  a  new  and  certain  way  of  life  for  the  guilty.  Satan  also  held  as  captive, 
but  Christ  has  overcome  him  who  had  the  power  of  death.  2.  The  influence  of 
this  work  is  displayed — (1)  In  heaven  in  the  acceptance  there  of  Christ's  sacrifice, 
in  His  prevailing  intercession,  and  in  the  continual  crowning  of  the  subjects  of  His 
redemption.  (2)  On  earth  in  the  increasing  testimony  that  is  borne  to  the  glorioas 
redemption,  in  the  providence  which  causes  all  things  to  work  together  for  the  good 
of  the  redeemed,  and  in  the  continual  progress  of  the  truth.  (3)  In  hell,  in  the 
Bnbjeotion  which  it  compels  Satan  to  acknowledge  to  the  Lord  Jesus.     H.  In  thr 

EXHIBITION   OF     THE    WOBK    WHICH     GoD     ACCOMPLISHES     WITHIN   US     BY    HiS    SpIBIT. 

Take  a  view  of  this  as  given — 1.  In  the  past  history  of  the  Church.  Reflect  on  the 
progress  of  the  gospel,  and  the  multitudes  who  have  been  actually  rescued.  2.  In 
the  experience  of  the  individual.  (1)  Who  awakens  and  converts  the  careless 
sinner  ?  (2)  Who  justifies  the  penitent  believer,  and  gives  him  peace  and  acceptance 
with  God?    (3)  Who  carries  on  in  increasing  holiness  the  work  thas  commenced  T 


l]  bomans.  m 

(4)  Who  upholds  and  preserves  to  final  salvation  those  who  are  thus  brought  to 
God  ?  (5)  Who  finally  orowns  the  subjects  of  grace  in  glory  ?  III.  In  thx  profeb 
esouND  for  bops  which  it  thus  affords.  1.  If  you  look  upon  yourselves  yoa 
find  yourselves  utterly  weak  and  unworthy  ;  but  there  is  offered  to  you  in  the  gospel 
a  sufficient  and  abiding  hope.  2.  Let  the  Christ  have  all  the  praise  for  this  work 
of  salvation.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  The  gospel  the  power  of  God  : — There  are  two 
reasons  for  which  we  may  be  ashamed  of  anything — 1.  If  it  be  base  in  itself,  or 
shameful  in  its  aim.  2.  Though  good  in  itself,  and  honourable  in  its  aim,  if  it  be 
weak  and  powerless  to  achieve  the  good  it  aims  at.  For  example  :  we  are  ashamed 
of  a  traitor  who  sells  his  country  for  gold  ;  and  of  a  general  who,  though  loyally 
fighting  for  his  country,  ruins  its  cause  through  ignorance  or  incapacity.  Paul  was 
not  ashame<l  of  the  gospel  because — I.  It  was  not  base  in  itself,  nob  shameful  im 
ITS  Aius.  Its  facts  were  true,  its  morals  pure,  its  doctrine  ennobling.  Its  aim  is 
"salvation."  You  have  seen  at  a  railway  station  carriages  labelled  "London," 
"  Edinburgh,"  «feo.,  signifying  that  the  company  engaged  to  carry  the  passengers 
to  these  places.  So  the  gospel  is  labelled  as  intended  to  carry  passengers  "  unto 
salvation."  Anything  short  of  that  would  be  to  fail  in  its  promise.  But  what  is 
this  "  salvation  "  ?  The  common  idea  is,  that  when  a  man  dies  he  shall  be  saved 
from  hell  and  have  a  place  in  heaven.  But  salvation  implies  more  than  this — 
deliverance  from  the  corruption  of  sin  as  well  as  from  its  condemnation ;  from  its 
power  as  well  as  from  its  punishment — in  short,  deliverance  from  sin  itself.  II.  It 
WAS  MOT  FEEBLE  AND  UNABLB  TO  ACHIEVE  ITS  AIM.  Its  power  is  as  great  as  its 
purpose  is  good.  This  is  what  most  of  all  we  need  ?  We  know  the  doctrines  of  the 
gospel,  the  sins  it  forbids,  the  duties  it  requires,  the  hopes  it  teaches.  But  some- 
how we  feel  that  these  things  do  not  influence  us  as  they  ought.  What  we  need  is 
power  to  convince  us,  to  subdue  us,  to  rule  over  us,  to  sustain  us,  power  to  resist 
the  devil,  to  overcome  the  world.  In  some  things  the  gospel  has  come  to  us  in 
power.  For  example,  we  believe  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins  through  Christ's  blood. 
And  that  belief  has  brought  us  peace  from  the  fear  of  punishment.  But  oh !  how  we 
long  that  the  words,  *' Go  and  sin  no  more,"  would  "  come  in  power."  Behold, 
then,  gospel  promises  do  not  speak  more  truly  of  pardon  than  they  speak  of  power 
for  present  duty  by  Christ's  living  grace.  III.  Its  offer  is  not  limited  to  ant 
ONE  NATION  OB  CLASS,  but  is  fiec  and  sure  "to  every  one  that  believeth."  "To  as 
many  as  received  Him,  to  them  gave  He  power,"  &c.  Every  one  who  beUeves  on 
Jesus  receives  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  receive  this  power,  but  they  must  use  it. 
The  power  of  God  is  laid  up  for  them  in  Christ ;  but  out  of  His  fulness  they  must 
go  on  to  draw  grace  for  grace.  {W,  Grant.)  The  gospel  the  power  of  God: — 1. 
The  apostle  here  gives  his  reason  for  the  statement  that  he  was  willing  to  preach 
the  gospel  in  Bome.  In  characterising  the  gospel  as  "  the  power  of  God,"  he 
showed  his  usual  tact.  It  was  his  object  to  present  the  gospel  to  his  readers  in 
such  an  aspect  as  would  commend  it  to  their  peculiar  disposition  as  admirers  of 
power.  At  Athens,  on  the  other  hand,  he  was  amongst  a  people  who  spent  their 
time  in  telling  or  hearing  some  new  thing.  The  apostle,  therefore,  observing  an 
altar  to  "  the  unknown  God,"  presents  himself  as  one  who  had  the  key  to  this 
mystery.  The  effect  upon  men  of  such  an  inquisitive  turn  of  mind  may  be  easily 
conceived.  The  Corinthians,  again,  made  great  pretensions  to  wisdom ;  to  them, 
therefore,  the  apostle  represents  the  gospel  as  th«  highest  wisdom — the  wisdom  of 
God.  Wbilst,  however,  representing  the  gospel  as  "  power,"  to  the  Bomans  the 
apostle  is  careful  to  say  that  it  was  the  "power  of  God,"  not  that  military  and 
political  power  so  much  desiderated  by  them.  2.  In  the  text  we  have  three  terms, 
salvation,  gospel,  and  power.  The  gospel  effects  the  salvation,  and  the  power  is 
the  reason  why.  (1)  Salvation  must  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  the  exposition  of  it 
given  in  this  Epistle.  Three  words  describe  it — justification,  sanctifioation,  and 
glotification.  The  first  is  the  soul's  deliverance  from  the  condemnation  and  penalty 
of  sin  (chaps.  i.-v.) ;  the  second,  its  emancipation  from  its  dominion  as  a  ruling 
principle  (chaps,  vi.,  vii.) ;  and  the  third,  the  bestowment  upon  it  of  everlasting 
happiness  and  glory  (chap.  viii.).  (2)  The  gospel  as  a  record  embodies  a  scheme  of 
truth  based  upon  a  series  of  transactions  of  transcentlent  glory,  the  incarnation  of 
the  Son  of  God,  His  life,  death,  resurrection,  exaltation,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  As  a  message  of  mercy,  the  truths  it  records  are  presented  for  acceptance 
as  a  means  for  effecting  salvation.  (3)  The  power  of  God.  The  gospel  is — I.  Thb 
PBODuoT  OF  Divine  power.  The  transactions  it  records  testify  to  the  power  of 
God  in  the  same  way  that  every  author's  power  is  revealed  by  his  works.  Power 
iias  three  qualities.     Moral,  which  indicates  the  motive,  and  has  regard  to  the  end 


63  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  u 

in  view;  intellectnal,  which  contrives,  and  has  regard  to  the  means;  physical, 
which  executes,  i.e.,  applies  the  means  devised  to  the  end  contemplated.  Thus, 
power  manifests  itself  in  force,  contrivance,  and  purpose.  The  Divine  operations 
ever  display  these  qualities.  These  qualities,  however,  in  the  gospel  show  different 
degrees  of  combination  from  those  which  obtain  in  creation — €.g.,  all  physical 
objects  are  distinguished  by  some  one  particular  colour,  although  all  the  other  hues 
of  light  are  there.  In  the  light  falling  upon  objects  which  appear  blue,  all  the 
hues  of  light  are  present,  but  by  the  operation  of  a  certain  law,  the  blue  alone 
presents  itself  to  the  eye.  So  in  creation  physical  power  prevails,  at  least  to  our 
senses.  The  multiplicity  of  its  worlds  and  their  vast  magnitude  divert  the  mind 
from  the  equally  glorious,  but  less  obtrusive,  manifestations  of  intellect  and  bene- 
ficence. Now  the  gospel  is  a  marvellous  manifestation  of  power  in  its  several 
phases.  As  the  product  of  God's  moral  power  it  is  defined  as  "  the  exceeding  riches 
of  His  grace  "  (Eph.  ii.  5).  As  an  exhibition  of  His  intellectual  power  it  is  repre* 
sented  as  ••  making  known  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  "  (Eph.  iii.  10 ;  1  Pet.  i.  10). 
Its  manifestations  of  physical  power,  instanced  in  the  resurrection  and  exaltation 
of  Jesus,  are  described  as  the  working  of  His  mighty  power  (Eph.  i.  19).  But  its 
moral  power  is  its  crown  and  glory.  One  characteristic  vrill  suffice  to  show  this. 
Its  pith  and  marrow  is  its  provision  for  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  and  this  is  the 
grandest  exercise  of  moral  power  possible.  "Who  is  a  God  Uke  unto  Thee,  that 
pardoneth  iniquity  f  "  So  far  was  the  idea  of  forgiveness  from  the  hearts  of  men 
that  when  they  came  to  create  gods  they  never  imagined  gods  possessed  of  the 
power  to  pardon  sin.  Does  not  this  prove  that  the  reliKion  which  presents  this 
fact  to  us  must  be,  as  regards  its  conception,  absolutely  Divine  ?  II.  An  instbu- 
HBNT  OF  DiviNB  powBB.  "  The  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  The  transactions  it 
embodies  were  characterised  by  superlative  condescension  and  self-sacrifice.  As 
such  they  were  replete  with  power  in  the  two  senses  of  legal  merit  and  spiritual 
infiuence — the  one  forming  the  ground  of  men's  reconciliation  with  God,  the  other 
forming  the  instrumentality  for  weaning  them  from  sin,  for  changing  their  disposi- 
tion, subduing  their  passions,  and  kindling  in  their  hearts  the  love  of  Christ.  But 
this  is  not  all.  The  gospel  possesses  instrumental  fitness  for  securing  justification 
and  sanctification,  bat  in  order  that  these  may  become  experimental  realities  men 
must,  believingly,  accept,  as  the  ground  and  instrument  of  their  salvation,  the 
transactions  it  records.  Hence  powerful  influences  are  necessary  to  overcome 
men's  indifference  and  stubbornness.  The  gospel  is  the  power  of  God  to  this  end. 
The  transactions  it  embodies  are  presented  as  messages  of  love.  This  message  is 
instinct  with  the  moral  and  Divine  power  of  the  transactions  which  form  its  theme. 
No  wonder  the  gospel  is  called  the  "  word  of  salvation  " — the  word  which  both 
reveals  salvation  and  opens  the  heart,  by  conviction,  to  its  reception.  (A.  J.  Parry.) 
The  gospel  the  power  of  God : — The  gospel  is  the  power  of  God — I.  In  its  most  paba- 
noxicAL  AND  TET  HIGHEST  FOBM.  1.  Of  coursc,  the  message  was  power  only  as  being 
the  record  of  power ;  the  real  energy  lay  in  the  Incarnate  Word.  And  Paul's  thought 
is,  that  high  above  all  other  manifestations  of  the  Divine  energy,  rises  that  strange 
paradox,  the  omnipotence  of  God  declared  in  weakness.  Sinai  is  impotent,  com- 
pared with  the  tremendous  forces  which  stream  from  the  little  hillock,  where  stand 
three  black  crosses,  and  a  dying  Christ  on  the  midmost.  2.  There  is  the  power  of 
God ;  for  material  force  is  not  power ;  nor  majesty,  which  being  deprived  of  i1^ 
externals  becomes  a  jest ;  nor  the  rule  over  men's  wills  by  iron  constraint ;  nor  is 
the  rule  of  ideas  the  highest  power ;  but  the  Divinest  force  in  God  is  tenderness, 
and  the  true  signature  of  omnipotence  is  love.  (1)  What  a  discovery  of  the  depths 
of  the  Godhead  that  is  I  The  world  has  heard  of  gods  of  physical  force,  lustful, 
whimsical,  benevolent  by  fits  and  starts,  vengeful  when  mood  suits  them ;  gods 
apathetic  and  indifferent,  but  it  never  dreamed  until  this  Man  came  of  a  God  whose 
power  could  drape  itself  in  weakness,  and  was  guided  by  love.  (2)  What  a  lesson 
as  to  where  the  true  strength  and  greatness  for  man  lies  I  We  have  had  enough  of 
the  worship  of  genius ;  of  the  beating  of  drums  and  singing  hosannas  over  the 
achievements  of  poet  and  philosopher,  and  artist  and  scholar.  Let  us  remember 
that  there  is  a  stronger  thing  in  the  world  than  all  these,  and  that  is  patient  gentle- 
ness that  bows,  and  bears,  and  suffers,  and  dies.  II.  Im  its  mightiest  operation. 
Borne  gathered  its  forces  for  destruction.  And  Paul  is  thinking  of  the  contrast 
between  the  devilish  use  of  human  strength  which  generally  attends  it,  and  the 
Divine  use  of  Divine  power  which  dedicates  it  all  for  salvation.  Salvation  is  nega- 
tively the  deliverance  from  everything  that  is  evil ;  positively  it  is  the  endowment 
vith  every  good.     1.  Think  of  the  strange  audacity  of  Christianity  in  calmly  pro- 


I.]  ROMANS. 


posing  to  itself  snoh  an  end  as  this.    People  tell  as  that  the  gospel  idea  of  men  is 
dark  and  depressing.    Why  ?  bat  beoanse  the  gospel  can  afford  to  look  f aots  in  the 
faoe,  inasmuch  as  it  knows  itself  able  to  overoome  all  that  is  evil,  and  to  reverse 
and  supplant  it  by  perfect  good.    And  there  is  nothing  in  the  New  Testament  Uiat 
is  more  of  the  nature  of  a  demonstration  of  its  Divine  energy  than  the  unrufSed 
composure  with  which  it  declares,  looking  on  the  ruins  that  lie  round  about  it,  "  I 
have  come  to  set  all  that  right,  and  I  know  that  I  can  do  it."    And  it  has  done  it. 
I  do  not  know  any  other  religion  that  would  not  be  laughed  out  of  court  if  it  strode 
forward  and  said,  "  I  have  come  here  to  abolish  all  evil,  and  to  make  every  soul  of 
man  like  God."    "  Well,  then  ;  do  it  1 "  would  be  the  simple  answer ;  "  and  if  with 
your  philosopher's  stone  you  can  turn  the  smallest  grain  of  a  baser  metal  into  gold, 
we  will  admit  the  claim  and  believe  that  the  transmutation  of  the  rest  is  a  question 
of  time."     Well,  Christianity  Aoj  done  it,  and  there  are  millions  of  people  in  this 
world  to-day  who  will  say,  "  One  thing  I  know,  there  are  a  great  many  things  I  do 
not  know,  but  one  thing  I  do :  whereas  I  was  blind  now  I  see.    Look  at  my 
eyes  if  you  doubt  it."    2.  This  transforming  and  saving  power  is  clearly  beyond 
man's  ability.    It  will  take  God  to  change  a  man's  relations  to  the  Divine  govern- 
ment, and  to  hold  back  the  consequences  which,  if  there  were  no  God,  by  the  law  of 
cause  and  effect,  would  certainly  follow  every  transgression  and  disobedience.    And 
it  needs  no  less  than  Ood  to  renew  the  spirit  into  a  loftier  life.    And  the  world 
knows  it,  and  instead  of  salvation  it  talks  about  reformation,  restraint,  culture,  Sso.; 
all  very  good  in  their  way,  but  not  going  deep  enough  down  into  the  facts  of  man's 
condition,  not  being  able  to  lift  him  high  enough  up  towards  the  destined  good,  to 
be  accepted  as  a  substitute  for  the  Divine  idea  of  salvation.     There  tower  the  great 
white  summits  of  the  Himalayas;  down  at  their  feet  stand  palaces,  temples, 
porches  for  philosophers.    Measure  the  height  of  the  one  by  the  other,  and  you  get 
an  approximation  to  the  difference  between  human  efforts  upon  human  society  and 
the  Divine  design  for  every  soul  of  man  upon  earth.     3.  This  restoring  work  of 
salvation  is  not  only  exclusively  a  Divine  work,  but  is  the  most  enerf^etic  exercise 
of  the  Divine  power.     Creation  is  great  and  Divine.     The  new  creation,  which  is 
restoration  to  more  than  primeval  blessedness  and  beauty,  is  greater,  inasmuch  as 
it  is  accomplished  not  by  a  word  but  by  toU,  sacrifice,  and  death,  and  inasmuch  as 
the  result  is  man  more  truly  and  gloriously  the  image  of  God  than  was  he  over 
whose  appearance  angels  shouted  for  joy,  and  God  said,  "It  is  good."    It  is  great  to 
•*  preserve  the  stars  from  wrong,"  and  to  keep  the  most  ancient  heavens  *'  fresh 
and  strong,"  but  the  conception  of  the  Divine  power  that  is  gathered  from  those 
majestic  regions  where  His  finger  works  is  low  compared  with  that  which  flows 
from  the  redeeming  work  of  Christ.     God  never  has  done,  and  never  will  do  a 
mightier  thing  than  when  He  sends  His  Son  with  power  to  save  a  world.    HI.  In 
ITS  WIDEST  SWEEP.     1.  Bome  wielded  an  empire  which  approached  to  universality, 
so  far  as  the  world  then  knew.    But  Paul  has  a  vision  of  an  empire  that  overlaps 
it,  as  some  great  sea  might  a  little  pond,  and  sees  the  Dove  of  Christ  outflying  the 
Eoman  eagle,  and  the  raven,  sin.    For  to  him  his  Christ  is  everybody's  Christ ; 
and  that  which  changed  him  from  persecutor  to  apostle  can  never  have  a  more 
obstinate  block  to  hew  into  beauty.    2.  The  text  may  seem  to  narrow  the  univer- 
sality which  the  apostle  proclaims,  but  not  really.    For  to  believe  is  nothing  more 
than  to  take  the  power  which  the  gospel  brings.    Faith  is  the  belt  by  which  we 
fasten  our  else  still  and  silent  wheels  to  the  great  engine,  and  the  power  then  begins 
to  drive.    Ton  would  not  say  that  a  universal  medicine  was  less  universal  because 
it  did  not  cure  people  that  did  not  take  it.    3.  Nay !  rather  the  intention  and  power 
of  the  gospel  to  save  everybody  can  only  be  preserved  by  faith  being  the  condition 
of  its  operation.    For  the  condition  is  one  that  everybody  can  exercise,  and  just 
because  men  do  not  get  saved  by  things  that  belong  to  classes  it  comes  about  that 
"not  many  wise,  not  many  noble,  not  many  mighty  after  the  flesh"  are  saved. 
The  wise  man  wants  a  religion  that  will  give  culture  its  proper  high  seat  in  the 
synagogue.    The  noble  does  not  like  to  have  his  robes  cruaipled  by  a  crowd  of 
greasy  jackets  going  in  at  the  one  common  door.    And  so  they  turn  away  becauf5e 
they  would  like  to  have  a  httle  private  postern  of  their  own,  where  a  ticket  of  a 
special  colour  would  let  them  and  their  friends  in.     Conclusion :  Are  you  exercising 
this  faith,  and  therefore  saved  ?    Yon  can  separate  yourselves  from  the  power,  not- 
withstanding the  Divine  purpose  and  adaptation  of  the  gospel  to  everybody.     And 
although  God  wants  all  of  us  to  come  to  His  heart,  you  can,  if  you  will,  stand  apart. 
You  do  not  need  to  do  much.     Putting  your  hands  behind  your  back,  or  letting  them 
hang  languidly  at  your  sides,  is  enough.  Not  to  accept  is  to  reject.  You  can  waterproof 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  L 

your  boqIb,  as  it  were,  and  so  lie  there  as  dry  as  a  bone,  whilst  all  aroand  yon  the  dew 
of  His  blessing  is  refreshing  others.     Christ's  power  received  is  life  ;  Christ's  power 
not  received  is  not  negatived,  bat  reversed,  and  becomes  death.    {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  gospel  the  power  of  Ood  unto  salvation : — By  affirming  this  the  apostle  lays 
down  the  fundamental  doctrine  which  he  intends  to  establish  against  the  legalistio 
pretentions  of  the  Jews.     Here  are  no  less  than  five  cardinal  terms,  key-words, 
which  suggest  a  five-fold  antithesis  between  Christianity  and  Judaism.     The  gospel 
is — I.  "  The  power  of  God  " — a  hint  as  to  the  weakness  of  the  law  in  reference  to 
salvation.    This  contrast  is  brought  out  fully  and  clearly  in  chap.  viii.  2-4.     Ood 
EUmself  is  powerless  to  save  any  one  righteously  except  through  the  graoioas  pro- 
visions of  the  gospel  of  His  Son,  whom  He  accordingly  "  set  forth  to  be  a  propitia- 
tion," &c.  (chap.  iii.  25).    U.  "  The  power  of  God."    He  who  wins  sonla  in  the 
presentation  of  the  gospel  is  wielding  a  power  not  human,  but  Divine ;  and  the 
resulting  justification  before  God  is  based,  not  on  the  righteousness  of  man,  bat 
"the  righteousness  of  God."    Here  we  have  another  antithesis  of  the  apostle's 
great  theme,  which  is  fully  presented  in  chap.  z.  3  and  Phil.  iii.  7-9.    The  Jews, 
"being  ignorant  of  God's  righteousness,  and  going  about  to  establish  their  own 
righteousness,  have  not  submitted  to  the  righteousness  of  God,"    It  is  only  on  the 
ground  of  merit  that  law  can  justify.     If,  then,  a  man  could  merit  his  acceptance 
with  God,  his  justification  would  not  be  due  to  the  gracious  "  power  of  God,"  bat 
would  rest  upon  his  own  inherent  goodness.    III.  The  "  power  of  God  unto  salta- 
tion."   This  the  law  could  not  accomplish  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh. 
Bnt  as  regards  the  very  opposite  result,  condemnation  and  death,  it  has,  indeed, 
tremendous  power  (chap.  vii.  9,  10 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  6,  7).     Thus  the  only  hope  for  man 
is  to  pass  from  under  a  legal  system,  which  can  only  justify  the  sinless,  to  ft 
dispensation  of  grace  which  is  clothed  with  Divine  power  to  "  justify  the  ungodly." 
IV.  "  The  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  eveby  one  who  believes. "  But  the  Jew,  sup- 
posing that  he  had  kept  the  law  sufficiently  to  stand  before  God  in  the  strength  of  his 
own  righteousness,  very  naturally  limited  the  favour  of  God  to  legalistic  worshippers, 
and  looked  upon  all  others  as  inevitably  doomed  to  death  without  mercy.     Now  the 
argument  of  the  Epistle,  in  dispelling  this  double  delusion,  enables  as  to  discern 
the  broad  contrast  between  the  universality  of  grace  and   the  exclusiveness  of 
legalism  (chap.  iii.  21-23).    We  are  again  and  a^ain  reminded  that  this  blessedness 
oometh  not  upon  the  circumcision  only,  but  upon  the  uncircumcision  also  ;  that "  the 
same  God  over  all  is  rich  unto  all  who  call  upon  Him,"  and  that,  consequently, 
••  whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved."    V.  "  The  power 
of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  who  believes."     The  contrast  between  the 
gospel  and  the  law  is  the  significant  antithesis  of  faith  and  works  so  extensively 
developed  in  this  Epistle.     The  dictum  of  the  law  is,  "  Do  this  and  thou  shalt  live." 
The  maxim  of  the  gospel  is,  "  The  just  shaU  live  by  faith."    Doing  is  the  ground  of 
legal  justification.    Believing  is  the  condition  of  gracious  justification.  The  radical 
opposition  between  these,  together  with  the  inapplicability  of  the  former  to  man  as  a 
sinful  being,  undergoes  thorough  discussion,  especially  in  chaps,  iii.  and  iv.    (Prof. 
I.  B.  Orubbg.)        To  the  Jew  first  and  also  to  the  Greek. — Our  duty  to  Israel  :— 
The  gospel  shoald  be  preached  first  to  the  Jews,  because — I.  Judombnt  wili, 
begin  with  teeu  (chap.  ii.  &-10).     Why  is  this  ?    Because  they  have  had  mora 
light  than  any  other  people.    God  chose  them  out  of  the  world  to  be  His  witnesses. 
Every  prophet,  evangelist,  and  apostle  was  sent  first  to  them.     Christ  said,  "  I  am 
not  sent  but  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel."    The  Word  of  God  is  still 
addressed  to  them.    Tet  they  have  sinned  against  all  this  light  and  love.     "  O 
Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,"  &o.    Their  cap  of  wrath  is  fuller  than  that  of  other  men. 
Is  not  this  a  reason,  then,  why  the  gospel  should  first  be  preached  to  the  Jew  ? 
They  are  ready  to  perish— to  perish  more  dreadfully  than  other  men.  In  an  hospital 
the  physician  runs  first  to  the  worst  case.    When  the  sailors  have  left  the  shore  to 
save  the  sinking  crew  they  first  help  those  that  are  readiest  to  perish.     And  shall 
we  not  do  the  same  for  Israel  ?     The  billows  of  God's  anger  are  ready  to  dash  first 
over  them — shall  we  not  seek  to  bring  them  first  to  the  Bock  that  is  higher  than 
they  ?    Yes,  and  some  of  you  are  in  a  situation  very  similar  to  that  of  Israel — yoa 
who  have  the  Word  of  God  in  your  hands  and  yet  are  anbelieving  and  onsaved. 
Think  how  like  yoar  wrath  will  be  to  that  of  the  unbelieving  Jew.     H.  It  is  liiui 
God.    It  is  the  chief  glory  and  joy  of  a  soul  to  be  like  God.    Too  many  rest  in  the 
joy  of  being  forgiven.  We  should  be  like  God  in  understanding,  in  will,  in  holiness, 
and  also  in  His  peculiar  affections ;  and  the  wliole  Bible  shows  -that  God  has  a 
pecnliax  affection  for  Israel  (Deut.  vii.  7 ;  Lam.  iv.  2 ;  Jer.  zii.  7).    Shall  wa  b* 


«!».  I.]  ROMANS.  U 

Mhamed  to  cherish  the  same  affection  as  oar  heavenly  Father  7    III.  Thbbe  n 

FBCUIilAB  ACCESS    TO    THS   JeWS.        IV.   ThSY   WILL   QIVB    VtfS  TO    THE   DSAO   WOBLO. 

A  reflective  traveller,  passing  through  the  countries  of  this  world,  and  observing 
the  race  of  Israel  in  every  land,  might  be  led  to  guess,  merely  from  the  light  of  hia 
natural  reason,  that  that  singular  people  are  preserved  for  some  great  purpose  in 
the  world.  There  is  a  singular  fitness  in  the  Jew  to  be  the  missionary  of  the  world. 
They  have  not  that  peculiar  attachment  to  home  and  country  which  we  have.  They 
are  also  inured  to  every  clime  ;  they  are  to  be  found  amid  the  snows  of  Bussia  and 
beneath  the  burning  sun  of  Hindostan.  They  are  also  in  some  measure  acquainted 
with  all  the  languages  of  the  world,  and  yet  have  one  common  language — the  holy 
tongue — in  which  to  communicate  with  one  another.  But  what  says  the  Word  of 
God?  (Read  Zech.  viii.  13,  23  ;  Micah  v.  7.)  {B.  M.  McGheyne.)  To  the  Jew 
Jir$t : — The  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the  Jews  first,  served  various  important  ends. 
It  fulfilled  Old  Testament  prophecies,  as  Isa.  ii.  3.  It  manifested  the  compassion 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  for  those  who  shed  His  blood,  to  whom,  after  His  resurrection, 
He  commanded  His  gospel  to  be  first  proclaimed.  It  showed  that  it  was  to  be 
preached  to  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  proved  the  sovereign  efficacy  of  His  atonement 
in  expiating  the  guilt  even  of  His  murderers.  It  was  fit,  too,  that  the  gospel  should 
be  begun  to  be  preached  where  the  great  transactions  took  place  on  which  it  was 
founded  and  established  ;  and  this  furnished  au  example  of  the  way  in  which  it  ia 
the  will  of  the  Lord  that  His  gospel  should  be  propagated  by  His  disciples,  begin- 
ning  in  their  own  houses  and  their  own  country.  {R.  Haldane.)  The  utefuU 
»eu  of  converted  Jew$  : — A  Jewish  convert  says:  "  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  men 
eeiebrated  as  theologians,  as  lawyers,  as  teachers  of  the  young,  as  professors  at  the 
various  universities  of  Europe,  have  been  or  are  converts  frum  Judaism.  The  late 
M.  Fould,  the  great  French  finance  minister,  was  a  Jewish  convert.  The  late  Dr. 
Neander,  the  author  of  one  of  the  most  erudite  works  on  the  Church  of  Christ,  and 
professor  of  theology  at  the  University  of  Berlin,  was  a  converted  Jew.  Dr.  Crippa- 
dorn  of  Holland,  physician  to  his  Majesty  the  King  of  Holland,  is  a  converted  Jew. 
The  late  Dr.  Dufosty,  one  of  the  greatest  poets  which  Holland  has  ever  produced, 
and  the  author  of  '  Israel  and  the  Gentiles,'  *  A  Harmony  of  the  Gospels,'  and 
several  other  works,  was  a  Jewi^^h  convert.  Prof.  Leone  Levi,  of  King's  College,  ia 
a  Jewish  convert.  The  late  Dr.  Alexander,  the  first  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  was  a 
converted  Jew  ;  while  not  less  than  a  hundred  and  thirty  clergymen  of  the  Church 
of  England  are  converted  Jews."  He  states  further  that,  in  London,  there  are 
between  two  and  three  thousand  Jewish  converts,  whose  conduct,  whether  as  heads 
of  families,  as  citizens,  or  as  men,  is  an  honour  and  credit  to  the  churches  with 
which  they  are  connected. 

Ver.  17.  For  therein  la  the  righteousness  of  God  revealed  from  faith  to  taith. — 
Righteoiitne*s  revealed : — I.  Thk  oospel  is  a  bkvklation  of  God's  biohieodsnkss. 
1.  Bighteousness  is  a  regard  to  what  ia  right.  2.  God  is  essentially  a  righteous 
Being.  He  knows  what  is  due  from  each  to  the  rest,  and  from  all  to  Himself,  and 
also  sees  and  acknowledges  what  is  due  from  Him  to  them.  The  foundation  and 
standard  of  all  righteousness  are  to  be  found  in  His  nature  and  characrer.  He  has 
no  desire,  and  can  have  no  temptation  to  do  that  which  is  unjust.  The  Judge  of 
all  the  earth  must  do  right.  3.  He  loves  righteousness  in  others,  and  hates  iniquity. 
Whether  we  rob  God  or  our  neighbours,  it  is  alike  abhorrent  to  Him.  He  shows 
His  love  of  righteousness — (1)  By  rewarding  it ;  this  He  has  done  among  the  angela 
in  heaven.  (2)  By  punishing  unrighteousness  ;  this  He  has  done  among  the  lost 
spirits  in  hell.  (8)  By  seeking  the  recovery  of  those  who  have  fallen  from  righteous- 
ness ;  and  this  He  is  doing  upon  earth  through  the  gospel  of  His  Son.  4.  The 
gospel  is  not  merely  a  display  of  mercy,  but  of  righteousness.  He  could  not  bestow 
forgiveness  on  sinners  in  violation  of  righteousness.  (1)  He  must  therefore  devise 
some  way  of  satisfying  the  demands  of  justice  before  He  can  deliver  the  ungodly 
from  the  doom  which  they  deserve.  This  He  has  done  in  the  surrender  of  His  Son 
as  a  sin-offering  tor  the  world.  (2)  He  must  provide — which  He  has  done  through 
the  Holy  Ghost — for  ths  restoration  of  pardoned  rebels  to  personal  purity  and 
holiness ;  and  so  will  His  righteousness  be  displayed  and  His  law  magnitied  in  the 
salvation  of  a  mined  race.  Shall  we  say  that  His  righteousness  is  the  handmaid  of 
His  love,  or  that  His  love  is  subservient  to  His  righteonsne&s  ?  liCt  us  not  attempt 
to  settle  the  law  of  precedence ;  it  is  enough  for  us  to  know  that  in  the  salvation  of 
sinful  men  both  God's  righteousness  and  God's  love  are  resplendentJy  rf^vfaleM  — 
the  righteousntisa  through  His  love,  and  the  love  through  His  righteousness.  11.  Xaa 
voim  I.  5 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  I. 

OBJECT  or  THs  008PEL  IS  TO  RAISE  MAN  TO  BioHTEousiTsss.  1.  Man  was  at  first  mad* 
apright.  In  the  enjoyment  of  this  righteousness  he  possessed  life.  Bat  by  trans* 
gression  he  fell.  Instantly  his  understanding  was  darkened,  his  conscience  per- 
verted, his  heart  disordered,  and  his  happiness  destroyed.  He  lost  his  life. 
2.  God's  purpose  in  the  gospel  is  to  make  us  again  righteous  ;  to  deliver  us  from 
condemnation  and  renew  our  souls  in  virtue  and  truth.  This  is  the  same  thing  as 
to  recover  us  from  death  to  life.  By  being  rightoous  we  live,  by  being  unrighteous 
we  die.     III.  Faith,  as  the  instboment  of  man's  becovebt  to  bighteousness. 

1.  Faith  is  mentioned  in  opposition  to  legal  works.  We  might  be  righteous  if  we 
could  keep  the  whole  law  unfalteringly  and  unceasingly.  But  we  have  not,  and 
cannot  do  so.  Hence  we  are  shut  out  from  works,  and  shut  up  to  faith.  We  cannot 
acquire  a  righteousness  of  our  own,  but  must  be  content  to  let  God  give  us  one. 

2.  Faith  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  feelings.  It  may  lead  to  certain  emotions  of 
the  soul,  but  it  does  not  consist  of  them.  The  object  of  faith  is  not  to  be  found 
within  ourselves ;  it  lies  without.  3.  What,  then,  is  faith  ?  (1)  It  is  belief,  and 
nothing  more,  when  it  is  directed  to  a  doctrinal  statement  or  alleged  fact  of  the 
past,  and  then  we  may  call  it  intellectual  or  historical  faith.  (2)  But  suppose  its 
object  to  have  some  immediate  and  powerful  bearing  upon  our  duty  and  interests ; 
then  will  our  faith  necessarily  lead  to  action.  Such  faith  may  be  called  practical 
or  ethical.  (3)  But  the  object  of  faith  may  be  something  more  than  either  state- 
ments or  precepts  :  it  may  be  a  living  person.  We  then  have  faith  in  him,  or  on 
him,  as  well  as  belief  about  him ;  our  faith  takes  the  form  of  confidence,  reliance, 
trust.  It  is  through  faith  in  all  its  forms,  but  especially  through  the  last  one,  that 
we  lay  hold  on  the  righteousness  of  God  in  the  gospel,  and  appropriate  it  as  our 
own.  4.  Faith  is  a  noble  and  worthy  instrument  of  our  salvation.  It  is  not  to  be 
disdained  as  inferior  to  reason.  Bather  it  is  reason's  highest  and  most  enlightened 
exercise.  Faith  gives  reason  wings,  wherewith  she  mounts  to  regions  of  truth 
otherwise  beyond  her  reach.  5.  Faith  is  necessary  as  the  means  of  salvation.  It 
is  not  an  arbitrary  condition  of  salvation,  but  indispensable  in  the  very  nature  of 
things ;  and,  being  such,  it  is  all  that  is  demanded,  for  "  whosoever  believeth," 
whatever  else  he  lacks  or  hath,  "  shall  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  (T. 
O.  Horton.)  The  righteousness  of  God: — The  two  statements  of  Qie  previous 
verse  are  here  explained  and  confirmed.  The  gospel  is  the  saving  power  of  God, 
because  it  reveals  a  Divine  righteousness  which  is  itself  salvation.  The  first  of 
these  propositions  declares  to  us  what  gives  the  gospel  its  saving  property.  It  has 
many  excellences  which  may  well  recommend  it.  It  inculcates  a  morality  which 
in  purity  and  completeness  is  unapproached.  It  presents  us  with  its  historical 
embodiment  in  a  character  equally  lofty  and  unique.  It  contains  the  noblest  and 
most  attractive  conception  of  God  which  has  ever  dawned  upon  the  world,  while  it 
invests  men  with  a  new  and  unspeakable  dignity  by  bringing  life  and  immortality 
to  light.  Yet  while  all  this  is  truCj  it  remains  that  what  constitutes  the  gospel  a 
saving  power  is  that  revelation  of  righteousness  of  which  the  apostle  here  speaks. 
Whatever  else  it  may  do  for  you  in  awakening  conscience,  in  haunting  you  with  an 
ideal  which  you  haje  never  really  embraced,  in  sobering  you  with  convictions  of 
judgment  and  eternity,  it  will  not  save  you  unless  this  righteousness  be  appre- 
hended. And  what  in  the  last  resort  will  it  have  done  for  you  if  it  has  failed  to 
save  you?  I.  What,  then,  is  the  bighteousness  of  God?  1.  The  ostensible 
meaning  might  seem  to  be  the  righteousness  which  is  an  attribute  of  God.  But  it 
cannot  be  said  that  this  in  any  special  sense  is  a  revelation  of  the  gospel,  for  it  was 
iUe  great  theme  of  Old  Testament  teaching.  Moreover,  it  is  impossible  to  see  how 
the  revelation  of  it  could  constitute  a  saving  power.  We  can  understand  how  it 
raight  awaken  conscience  and  deepen  the  conviction  of  sin.  But  this  would  only 
la  ake  our  condemnation  more  obvious  and  inevitable.  2.  The  righteousness  of  God, 
a  is  evident  from  the  quotation  in  Habakkuk,  as  well  as  from  other  parallel 
e  pressions,  is  the  righteousness  of  which  God  is  the  author,  which  He  provides 
a  d  bestows,  so  that  the  man  who  acquires  it  becomes  thereby  a  righteous  man. 
Now,  this  is  precisely  what  we  need.  (1)  The  testimony  of  the  apostle  is  that  the 
whole  world  is  guilty  before  God.  None,  accordingly,  is  clear  in  the  eye  of  the  law. 
God  cannot  count  us  as  anything  else  than  transgressors  until  we  stand  guiltless  in 
His  sight.  The  great  question  is,  How  can  this  be  accompUshed  ?  And  the  only 
answer,  independently  of  the  gospel,  is,  By  our  own  efforts  or  not  at  all.  It  is  no 
part  of  the  righteous  judge,  as  such,  to  assoil  the  transgressor.  It  might  be  a 
palpable  breach  of  his  duty  to  do  so.  Hence  man  has  never  looked  to  God  alone 
to  clear  him,  but  always  to  some  sacrifice  or  endeavour  of  his  own,  which  might 


CHi».  L]  ROMANS.  tr 

eaneel  or  atone  for  his  offence.  Bat  no  Bacrifice  could  ever  assure  him  that  hig 
relation  to  God  had  been  rendered  satisfactory,  because  he  has  never  received  any 
Divine  promise  to  that  effect.  The  same  is  true  of  every  effort  after  repentance  or 
amendment  of  life.  At  the  best,  therefore,  one  could  only  hope  that  such  expedients 
might  attain  their  object.  And  this  hope  has  been  the  root  and  spring  of  almost 
all  religions.  But  the  gospel  shows  that  the  desired  prospect  is  not  to  be  secured 
by  any  such  means.  (2)  But  what  the  world  could  not  do  for  itself  God  did  for  it. 
And  if  the  gospel  passes  its  sentence  of  impotence  upon  us,  it  is  only  to  direct  us  to 
its  provision  of  saving  grace.  This  position  has  been  secured  by  the  mediation  of 
Christ,  whom  God  gave  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Every  demand  of  the  law 
was  satisfied  in  His  life  of  obedience.  And  He  gave  Himself  for  us,  to  bear,  as  our 
Bepresentative  and  Substitute,  the  penalty  of  our  disobedience,  so  that  everything 
the  law  might  claim  at  oar  hands  might  be  infallibly  and  fully  met.  By  His 
resurrection  the  Divine  satisfaction  was  openly  declared,  and  He  passed  through 
the  heavens  to  enter  into  the  presence  of  God  on  our  behalf.  There  He  appears, 
the  eternal  pledge  of  a  righteousness  fulfilled,  presenting  to  His  Father  a  humanity 
clear  of  every  ground  of  accusation,  and  securing  to  every  one  who  will  trust  in  Him 
a  safe  8tan(Ung  in  His  sight.  He  is  the  Lord  oar  righteousness.  This,  then,  is 
what  the  apostle  means  when  he  says  that  in  the  gospel  is  revealed  a  righteousness 
of  God.  3.  Thus  understood,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  the  gospel  becomes  thereby 
the  power  of  God  to  salvation.  For — (1)  It  lays  the  foundation  of  fellowship  with 
God.  So  long  as  sin  is  nnforgiven  fellowship  is  impossible.  Sin  compels  Him  to 
treat  as  as  offenders.  Therefore  it  is  that  the  broad  foundation  and  starting-point 
of  all  religion  lies  in  being  right  with  God.  (2)  Further,  if  being  right  with  God  ia 
essential  to  fellowship  with  Him,  so  also  it  is  fellowship  with  Him  that  secures  the 
growth  of  spiritual  life.  As  the  branch  must  abide  in  the  vine  to  receive  the  sap 
and  nourishment  that  circulates  through  the  tree,  we  must  abide  in  connection  with 
God  to  be  partakers  of  His  Spirit  and  power.  This  it  is  that  enables  us  to  bring 
forth  the  fruits  of  holiness.  The  expulsive  power  of  the  new  affection  will  purge 
the  soul  of  its  fleshly  desires.  As  the  soiled  and  ornmpled  leaves  are  pushed  off 
the  tree  by  the  rising  sap  that  swells  the  buds  with  the  foliage  of  the  coming 
summer,  so  it  will  cleanse  as  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God.    H.  Taa 

GOSPEL  IS  THE  BAVINO  POWEB  OF   GOD   BECAUSE   IT  IB   FROU  FAITH  TO    FAITH.      1.   ThiS 

righteousness  of  which  the  apostle  has  spoken  is  not  due  to  our  own  works,  which 
do  not  contribute  to  it  anything  whatever.  When  it  becomes  ours  it  is  due  entirely 
to  faith,  which  appropriates  Christ,  and  by  resting  upon  Him  enters  into  it  and 
invests  as  with  all  its  prerogatives.  "We  are  found  in  Him,  not  having  our  own 
righteousness,"  &o,  2.  And  just  as  it  is  due  to  faith,  so  also  it  is  designed  to  pro- 
dace  faith.  The  more  thoroughly  its  character  is  onderstood,  the  more  perfectly  its 
completeness  and  satisfactoriness  in  all  points  is  perceived,  the  more  will  faith  be 
confirmed.  For  if  anything  weakens  faith  it  is  just  our  not  being  sore  of  oar 
rightness  with  God,  or  of  the  foundation  on  which  that  rightness  depends.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  the  ground  of  our  acceptance  be  clearly  distinguished  and  seen  in 
its  length  and  breadth  in  Christ  Jesus,  we  learn  more  boldly  to  appropriate  the  con- 
tents of  His  salvation.  Here  lies  the  secret  of  its  power  to  transform  yon  and  lift 
you  up.  There  is  no  other  sure  foothold  for  as.  But  this  is  sure.  (C  Moinet,  M.A.) 
The  righteousness  of  God  for  justification  revealed  in  the  gospel  as  being  by  faith: — I. 
Thbbe  is  a.  biqhteousness  of  God  available  fob  sinful  hen.  This  righteousness  is 
revealed  as  a  •*  free  gift "  of  God  (chap.  v.  16, 17),  of  which  they  become  possessed  •♦  in 
Christ "  (2  Cor.  v.  2ij,  and  this,  not  as  a  result  of  their  own  striving  or  legal  obedience 
(Rom.  X.  3 ;  Phil  iii.  8,9),  but  simply  by  faith  in  Him  (chap.  iii.  21,  22).  1.  It  is 
manifest  therefore  that  this  "  righteousness  of  God  "  does  not  denote — (1)  That  perfect 
personal  righteousness  which  is  required  of  as  by  law.  That  can  exist  only  where 
there  has  been  maintained  perfect  innocence  and  obedience.  But  "  there  is  none 
righteous,  no,  not  one."  And  therefore,  "  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  there  shall  no 
flesh  be  justified  "  (chap.  iii.  9-20).  (2)  That  righteousness  which  is  implanted  and 
perfected  in  believers  by  the  grace  of  God.  Clearly,  indeed,  there  is  such  a  righteous- 
ness, but  it  is  surely  not  one  which  is  so  by  faith  as  to  be  "  not  of  works,"  and 
"  without  the  law."  (3)  "  God's  method  of  saving  sinners,"  nor  "that  authorised 
and  attested  method  of  justifying  the  ungodly,"  which  is  revealed  in  the  gospel.  For 
how  manifestly  absurd  to  declare  that  "  God  hath  made  Him  who  knew  no  sin  to  be 
sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be  made  "  God's  method  of  justifying  sinners  in  Him  t  (4) 
The  active  obedience  or  positive  righteousness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  dis- 
ttngoished  from  His  negative  righteousness,  or  innocence,  and  His  sufferings  and 


W  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OBAr.  u 

death.  The  Scriptures  know  nothing  of  such  a  parting  and  distribution  of  the 
Bedeemer's  one  seamless  robe  of  righteousness.  They  do  not  teach  that  a  believer, 
as  such,  has  a  right,  in  the  positive  righteousness  of  Christ,  to  the  rewards  of 
eternal  glory.  A  right,  in  Him,  every  believer  has  to  the  position  and  immonitiea 
of  innocence,  but  the  positive  rewards  of  righteousness  are  to  be  conferred  on  each 
"according  as  his  work  shall  be."  (5)  "  The  justification  which  is  of  God."  For 
that  fails  to  bring  out  the  most  central  thought  of  the  expression,  viz.,  the  ground 
npoQ  which  God  saves  or  justifies.  It  confounds  effect  with  cause.  2.  What  then 
is  this  "  righteousness  of  God  "  ?  It  is  that  one  righteousness  of  Christ  which  He 
effected  for  us  in  His  obedience  unto  death.  To  establish  valid  ground  for  the 
justification  of  the  sinner,  it  is  obvious  tbat  mere  innocence  was  not  enough  ;  nor 
the  most  splendid  achievements  of  active  righteousness.  That  which  law  demands, 
in  regard  to  an  offender,  is  the  endurance  of  penalty.  When  that  has  been  endured, 
the  law  relaxes  its  grasp,  and  sets  the  prisoner  free.  Then  he  goes  forth  justified, 
BO  as  that  he  cannot  be  again  legally  touched  on  account  of  the  offences  for  which 
he  has  already  suffered.  It  is  quite  true  that  such  a  righteousness  could  never  b« 
won  for  himself  by  a  sinful  man  ;  for  a  sinful  act  in  him  induces  at  once  a  sinful 
character,  and  the  fact  and  guilt  of  sin  go  on  increasing  with  the  progress  of  his 
being.  Hence,  in  the  Scriptures,  the  possibility  of  any  man  being  justified  before 
God  on  the  ground  of  his  own  righteousness,  however  accomplished,  is  never  once 
imagined.  But  these  Scriptures  do  maintain  that  "  as  by  the  offence  of  one  judg- 
ment came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation,  even  so  by  the  righteousness  of  One,  the 
free  gift  (namely,  of  righteousness)  came  upon  all  men  unto  (or  for)  justification  of 
life  "  (chap.  v.  18).  But  that  righteousness  is  pre-eminently  the  righteousness  of 
Buffering.  Therefore  it  is  written  that  "  He  was  dehvered  [namely,  to  suffer  unto 
death]  on  account  of  our  offences,  and  [that  having  so  suffered,  and  thereby  earned 
the  legal  claim  for  our  discharge.  He]  was  raised  again  on  account  of  our  justifica- 
tion "  (chap.  iv.  25).  This,  then,  we  apprehend,  is  "  the  righteousness  of  God  whicb 
is  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe  "  (chap.  iii.  22). 
It  is  this  which,  being  conferred  upon  believers  as  a  free  gift  of  grace,  secures  for 
them  the  legal  ground  on  which  they  can  be  justified.  To  impute  this  to  them  is 
to  put  them  in  possession  of  that  which  insures  for  them  a  full  discharge  from  all 
liability  to  arrest,  imprisonment,  or  punishment  on  account  of  their  own  past 
offences.  In  Christ,  the  demand  of  the  law  has  been  met  on  their  behalf.  They 
were  arrested  in  Him,  condemned  in  Him,  led  forth  to  be  crucified  in  Him,  suffered 
the  extreme  penalty  of  the  law  in  Him,  and  are  now  also  "  made  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  Him."  U.  This  biohteodsness  is  betealed  in  the  oospei.,  not  indeed 
exclusively,  but  specially,  pre-eminently,  and  perfectly.  The  righteousness  itself,  in 
its  true  ground  and  nature,  had  not  been  before  revealed.  Indeed,  till  the  Holy  One 
and  the  Just  had  given  exhibition  of  it  in  His  own  actual  human  history,  it  could 
not  be.  Yet,  even  in  the  Old  Testament  times,  thus  much  was  known,  namely — 1. 
That  no  man  could,  in  his  own  right,  claim  to  be  legally  justified — he  had  no 
righteousness  which  could  command  that  result;  and  yet— 2.  That  some  men 
should,  through  gracious  Divine  provision,  inherit  the  rewards  of  righteousness ; 
righteousness  should  be  imputed  to  them ;  they  should  be  justified  and  treated  as 
righteous  (Psa.  xxiv.  5  ;  Isa.  xlv.  24,  25,  Ixi.  10).  What  constituted  that  righteous- 
ness had  not  yet  been  disclosed.  It  was  indeed  faintly  foreshadowed  by  those  per- 
petual sacrifices,  which  could  not  make  the  offerers  perfect,  but  without  reference  to 
which  the  plea  for  mercy  could  not  be  successfully  urged.  This  plea  failed  indeed 
to  supply  any  solid  ground  of  hope,  and  yet  there  was  hope,  a  hope  which  in  some 
Beuse  was  sustained  by  it  (Psa.  li.  16,  17).  But  that  hope  was  ever  reaching  onward 
into  the  coming?  age,  for  tbat  One  who  would  make  an  end  of  transgression  and 
bring  in  an  everlasting  righteousness,  and  whose  name  was  foreannounced  as  "  The 
Lord  our  righteousness  "  (Dan.  ix.  24 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  6).  But  now,  in  the  gospel  of 
Christ,  this  Hope  of  Israel  has  actually  come,  and  accomplished  His  work  of 
righteousness  for  sinners.  III.  This  biohteousness  is  herb  bevealed  to  be  fbom 
FAITH  TO  faith,  or  by  faith  for  belief.  1.  Of  faith,  or  by  faith.  Men  attain  pos- 
session of  it  by  faith,  and  by  faith  only  (chap.  iv.  16).  Hence  the  protest  of  St.  Paul 
to  the  "  dissembling"  Peter  (Gal.  ii.  15, 16).  2.  By  faith  forbeUef.  The  righteous- 
ness of  God,  as  the  ground  of  justification,  is  proclaimed  to  men  in  the  gospel,  as 
being  by  faith,  in  order  that  they  may  believe  and  be  justified.  So  the  testimony 
that  the  faith  of  Abraham  was  counted  to  him  for  righteousness,  had  been  put  upon 
record,  not  for  his  sake  alone,  but  for  ours  also  (chap.  iv.  23-26).  And  the  whole 
mgviwj  •oaeerninf  (he  righteousness  of  God  is  made  known  to  all  nations  for  the 


CHAT.  I.]  ROMANS.  :M 

obedience  ot  faith  (ohap.  xvi.  25,  26).  Conclusion  :  1.  A  salvation  grounded  in  the 
righteousness  of  God  must,  when  clearly  apprehended,  afford  an  equal  satisfaction  to 
reason,  judgment,  and  oonscience.  2.  A  salvation  which  is  by  faith  is  possible  to  alL 
3.  Salvation  on  any  other  terms  would   be  impossible.      (W.  Tyson.)  Ood'$ 

righteoxuneu  of  faith : — It  is  a  "  righteousness  "  because  on  it  the  acquittal  ot 
accused  and  sinful  men  justly  proceeds.  It  is  "  God's  righteousness  "  because  pro- 
vided by  the  Triune  God  through  the  human  passion  of  the  Second  Person.  It  is 
"  God's-righteousnesti-of-faith,"  because,  in  order  to  our  becoming  justified  by 
it,  faith  is  the  solitary  condition.  The  relation  of  gospel  righteousness  is  thug 
expressed  by  its  very  name  on  both  sides.  As  it  respects  God,  it  is  His,  as  opposed  to 
its  being  mine:  He  is  its  Autbor,  Achiever,  Proprietor.  But  it  comes  to  me,  stands 
me  in  stead,  is  reckoned  to  me  for  acquittal  "  by  faith."  This  expression  stands 
opposed  to  another  often  recurring — "  by  law-works  "  (chap.  iii.  20),  i.e.,  personal  acts 
of  obedience  carrying  with  them  some  merit  in  God's  sight.  II  men  could  accom- 
plish  these  they  would  have  a  righteousness  of  their  own,  not  God's,  arising  out  o. 
such  •'  law-works."  But  in  sharp  contrast  to  this  self-provided  righteousness  stands 
the  gospel  righteonsness  provided  by  Another.  Thus  the  whole  of  this  composite 
title,  **  God's-righteousness-by-faitb,"  is  at  every  point  clean  contrary  to  "Man's- 
righteousness-by-works,"  and  accordingly  the  apostle  through  nearly  three  following 
chapters  endeavours  to  aboUsh  the  latter  that  he  may  establish  the  former,  and  shut 
us  up  to  accept  it.  {J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.)  The  righteousness  of  God: — All  our 
conceit  about  our  past  righteousness  must  be  completely  overthrown.  Perhaps  wa 
flatter  ourselves  that  all  is  well,  because  we  have  been  baptized,  or  have  come  to  the 
communion,  like  one  who  was  visited,  a  few  days  ago,  by  an  elder.  Seeing  that  she 
was  sick,  and  near  to  die,  he  asked  her :  "  Have  you  a  good  hope  ?  "  "  Oh,  pir,  yes ; 
a  good  and  blessed  hope."  "  And  pray,"  said  he,  "  what  is  it  ?"  "  Well,"  she  said, 
"I  have  taken  the  sacrament  regular  for  fifty  .\ears."  Whwl  think  ye  of  that  in  a 
Christian  country,  from  the  lips  of  one  who  had  attended  a  gospel  ministry  ?  Her 
confidence  was  built  upon  the  mere  fact  of  her  having  attended  to  an  outward  cere- 
mony, to  which,  probably,  she  had  no  right  whatever  1  There  are  hundreds  and 
thousands  who  are  thus  resting  upon  mere  ceremonies.  They  have  been  church- 
goers or  chapel-goers  from  their  youth  up.  They  have  never  been  absent,  except 
under  sickness,  from  their  regular  place  of  worship.  Good  easy  souls  I  if  these  are 
the  bladders  upon  which  they  hope  to  swim  in  eternity,  they  will  surely  burst,  to 
their  everlasting  destruction.  Some  base  their  confidence  on  the  fact  that  they  have 
never  indulged  in  the  grosser  vices  ;  others  that  they  have  been  scrupulously  honest 
in  their  commercial  transactions.  Some  that  they  have  been  good  husbands ;  others 
that  they  have  been  charitable  neighbours.  I  know  not  of  what  poor  flimsy  tissue 
men  will  not  make  a  covering  to  hide  their  natural  nakedness.  But  all  this  must  be 
unravelled — every  stitch  of  it.  No  man  can  put  on  the  robes  of  Christ's  righteous- 
ness till  he  has  taken  oS  his  own.  Christ  will  never  go  shares  in  our  salvation.  God 
will  not  have  it  said  that  He  partly  made  the  heavens,  but  that  some  other  spirit 
came  in  to  conclude  the  gigantic  work  of  creation,  much  less  wiU  He  divide  the  work 
of  our  salvation  with  any  other.  He  must  be  the  alone  Saviour,  as  He  was  the 
alone  Creator.  In  the  wine-press  of  His  sufferings  Jesus  stood  alone;  of  the  people 
none  were  with  Him  :  no  angel  could  assist  Him  in  the  mighty  work  ;  in  the  fight 
He  stood  alone,  the  solitary  Champion,  the  sole  Victor.  So  too  thou  must  be  saved 
by  Him  alone,  resting  on  trlira  entirely,  and  counting  thine  own  righteousness  to  be 
but  dross  and  dung,  or  else  thou  canst  never  be  saved  at  all.  It  must  be  down  with 
Shebna,  or  else  it  cannot  be  up  with  Eliakim.  It  must  be  down  with  self,  or  it  can 
never  be  up  with  Christ.  Self-righteousness  must  be  set  aside  to  make  room  for  the 
righteousness  of  Jesus ;  otherwise  it  can  never  be  ours.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  From 
faithto faith  indicates — I.  The  exclusiveneps  ot  faith.  Faith  all  in  all  in  a  man's 
justification.  Works  not  in  the  account.  Not  from  faith  to  works,  but  from  faith 
to  faith  (chap.  iii.  22,  28).  IL  The  okowth  of  faith.  From  one  degree  of  faith  to 
another.  Advance  made  in  clearness,  simplicity,  strength.  III.  The  mant  bided- 
NESS  of  faith.  From  one  kind  of  faith  to  another.  From  faith  which  saves  to  faith 
for  still  further  blessings.  From  faith  which  justifies  to  faith  which  sanctifies. 
From  faith  of  the  intelle  t  to  faith  of  the  heart.  (T.  Eohin.on,  D.D.)  The  Just 
shall  live  by  faith. — The  life  of  faith.  The  harmony  of  the  Old  Testament  teaching 
and  tlie  New  : — The  apostle  quotes  from  Habakkuk,  who  mourns  the  vileness  and 
lawlessness  around.  He  foresees  as  its  retribution  the  rapid  and  complete  conquest 
by  the  Ciialdeans.  He  appeals  to  the  chp-racter  of  God  ;  and  expresses  for  himself 
and  the  godly  in  Judiea  an  assurance  of  deliverance  grounded  on  God's  character, 


70  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHtf.  I. 

"  We  shall  not  die.**  He  betakes  himself  to  the  watch-tower,  and  awaits  the  replj 
of  God.  In  solemn  tones  God  proclaims  the  destruction  of  the  proud  Chaldeans ;  and 
declares  that  while  others  perish,  the  righteous  man  shall  live,  shall  live  by  his  faith. 
In  the  Old  Testament,  as  in  chap.  iii.  3,  the  words  *'  faith  "  and  "  faithful  "  denote, 
not  belief —as  almost  always  in  the  New  Testament — but  faithfulness,  that  constancy 
and  stability  of  character  which  makes  a  man  an  object  of  reliance  to  others.  In 
these  words  God  assumes  that  faithfulness  is  an  element  of  the  righteous  men'g 
character ;  and  declares  that  by  his  faithfulness  he  shall  sarvive.  It  is  quite  evident 
that  this  faithfulness  arises  from  behef  of  the  Word  of  God.  Hab.  1.  12  is  an 
expression  of  belief.  The  prophet  is  unmoved  because  he  leans  upon  the  veracity 
of  God.  "  Shall  live  "  refers  primarily  to  the  present  Ufe.  The  righteous  shall  escape 
when  others  perish.  But  in  this  sense  the  promise  is  only  partially  fulQlled.  And 
the  incompleteness  of  its  fulfilment  in  the  present  Ufe  was  a  sure  proof  that  there  is 
a  Ufe  to  come.  Thus  in  the  Old  Testament  God  proclaims  in  face  of  the  coming 
storm,  that  the  righteous  man  will  survive  by  his  faith.  In  Paul's  day  God  spoke 
again.  In  face  of  the  tempest  so  soon  to  overwhelm  the  Jewish  nation,  and  some 
day  to  overwhelm  the  world,  God  proclaims  that  the  man  of  faith  shall  live.  There- 
fore Ctod's  word  in  the  gospel  is  in  harmony  with  His  word  to  Habakkuk.  This 
harmony,  amid  so  much  divergence,  confirms  the  words  both  of  prophet 
and  apostle.  {Prof.  Beet.)  The  life  of  faith: — 1.  The  soul  is  the  life  of  the 
body.  2.  Faith  is  the  life  of  the  soul.  3.  Christ  is  the  life  of  faith.  {J.  Flavel.) 
High  living  : — The  secret  of  all  living  is  living  by  faith.  Faith  is  the  Christian's 
vital  principle.  "No  man's  religion,"  it  has  been  said,  "survives  his  morals"; 
and  it  is  equally  true  to  assert  that  no  man's  religion  survives  his  faith,  for  the  just 
shall  live  by  faith,  if  he  lives  at  all  in  the  higher  sense  of  the  word.  Other  graces 
may  be  necessary  to  his  comfort,  to  his  completeness  as  a  man  of  God,  but  faith  ia 
necessary  to  his  very  existence.  1.  This  faith  by  which  the  just  are  to  live  is  to  be 
in  continual  operation  from  first  to  last.  The  just  shall  live  by  faith,  and  that  not 
at  any  one  stage  of  their  career,  but  all  the  way  through,  from  the  moment  they 
leave  the  house  of  bondage  till  they  plant  their  footstep  on  Canaan's  happy  shore. 
Faith  is  not  to  be  exercised  only  occasionally.  It  is  not  to  be  kept  for  great  occa> 
sions,  or  for  dire  emergencies.  It  is  to  resemble  not  the  rushing  torrent  of  Kishon's 
brook,  sweeping  all  before  it  for  the  time,  but  the  steady  flow  of  Siloah's  quiet 
waters,  which  make  glad  perpetually  the  city  of  God.  2.  Faith  as  a  principle  of 
living  is  intensely  practical.  It  is  not  a  garment  to  be  worn  on  Sundays,  but  the 
ordinary  workday  garb,  which  we  are  to  wear  in  the  farmyard  and  the  field,  in  the 
shop  and  in  the  marketplace.  8.  This  principle  of  faith  is  exclusive  of  every  other 
that  may  compete  with  it.  There  is  not  a  word  here  in  favour  of  living  by  feeling. 
Our  feelings  are  too  variable  to  rely  on.  Such  a  one  must  needs  live  jerkily, 
inconsistently,  uncomfortably.  But,  behold,  I  show  unto  you  a  more  excellent  way. 
The  just  shall  live  by  faith.  That  is  a  form  of  Uving  which  is  not  liable  to  the  ebbs 
and  flows  incident  to  a  state  of  emotionalism,  for  faith  fixes  on  a  Saviour  who 
never  alters,  on  a  righteousness  which  is  always  the  same,  and  on  a  promise  which 
is  for  ever  sure.  There  is  another  class  who  are  accustomed  to  live  by  experience. 
The  same  objection  applies  here.  There  are  so  many  ups  and  downs,  even  in  the 
best  experience,  that  to  build  upon  it  is  to  build  upon  a  quaking  bog.  The  just  have 
more  stable  comforts,  for  they  live  by  faith,  and  faith  walks  above  experience, 
singing  of  heaven's  brightness  when  earth  is  dark  around  her,  and  boasting  of 
pardon  when  sin  makes  itself  felt  most  consciously.  When  Ralph  Erskine  lay  upon 
his  death-bed  one  of  the  bystanders  said  to  him,  "  I  hope,  sir,  you  have  some  blinks 
of  sunshine  to  cheer  you  in  the  valley."  The  answer  was :  •*  I  had  rather  have  one 
promise  of  my  God  than  all  the  blinks  of  sunshine  that  ever  shone."  •*  The  just 
shall  live  by  faith."  4.  The  faith  here  spoken  of  is  applicable  to  all  kinds  of 
living.  If  the  just  are  to  live  by  faith,  the  faith  must  be  capable  of  adjustment  to 
every  variety  of  life  that  the  just  may  be  called  upon  to  lead.  "  We  talk  of  human 
life  as  a  journey,"  says  Sydney  Smith,  "  but  how  variously  is  the  journey  per- 
formed." Variously  indeed.  It  is  a  Pilgrim's  Progress  to  us  all,  but  to  no  two 
pilgrims  is  the  progress  the  same.  (1)  Whether  it  be  high  life  or  life  on  a  lower 
plane  it  is  to  be  lived  by  faith.  I  have  seen  a  bird  on  the  topmost  bough  of  a  tree, 
and  very  sweetly  he  sang.  But  I  have  seen  another  bird  perched  on  the  lowest 
bough  of  that  same  tree,  and  he  sang  just  as  sweetly.  And  so  you  may  put 
the  just  person  on  the  uppermost  branch  or  the  undermost,  but  in  either  position  he 
will  live  by  faith.  (2)  Whether  life  be  ordinary  and  commonplace,  or  exalted  and 
heroic,  it  is  to  be  lived  by  faith.     Those  humble  duties  of  yours — you  must  look  up 


mur.  I.]  BOMANS. 


to  Heaven  for  strength  to  discharge  them  with  fidelity.  Your  little  cares — yon 
must  cast  them  all  on  Him  who  careth  for  you.  It  has  been  beautifully  said,  that 
"  while  God  is  great  in  great  things,  He  is  greatest  in  little  things."  Take  to  Him, 
therefore,  the  ounces  of  trouble  as  well  as  the  pounds  and  the  tons.  But  assuming 
your  life  to  be  lived  on  a  more  elevated  platform  and  on  a  much  grander  scale — what 
then?  Living  by  faith  is  still  the  rule.  If  you  are  summoned  to  Abrahamic  duty, 
you  have  need  of  Abrahamic  faith.  (3)  Whether  life  is  long  or  short  it  is  to  be 
lived  by  faith.  Length  of  life  is  a  great  blessing,  but  it  is  also  a  great  trial.  To 
hold  out  is  often  a  harder  thing  than  to  hold  fast  or  to  hold  on.  How  the  unjust 
get  on  with  that  problem  I  do  not  know,  but  as  for  the  just — I  can  speak  for  them 
— they  live  by  faith ;  and  there  is  nothing  so  strengthening  as  faith.  In  the  case 
of  short  life  I  do  not  alter  the  prescription.  (4)  May  we  not  add  to  this,  that  life 
at  its  highest  pitch  is  to  be  lived  by  faith.  There  are  periods  of  inspiration  when 
we  are  alive  at  every  point  in  our  character,  when  there  is  no  death  in  as  at  all,  and 
we  feel  forceful,  triumphant.  We  are  strong  for  service,  we  are  brave  for  endur- 
ance. Faith  provides  the  channel  by  which  God's  life  flows  into  our  life.  It  is  the 
link  between  our  weakness  and  His  almightiness.  5.  But  it  is  time  to  ask  the 
question,  By  faith  in  what  ?  (1)  I  answer,  first  and  foremost,  by  faith  in  Gt)d. 
*'  Sever  my  connection  with  God,"  says  Prince  Bismarci,  ••  and  I  am  the  man  to 
pack  up  my  trunks  to-morrow,  and  go  back  to  my  country  residence."  The  great 
statesman  feels  that  he  cannot  occupy  his  difficult  position,  unless  he  has  God  to 
fall  back  upon.  (2)  Do  not  the  just  live  also  by  their  faith  in  Providence?  It 
would  be  a  great  mainstay  to  us  if  we  could  only  resign  all  things  into  God's  hands 
and  sweetly  rest  upon  the  promise.  During  the  American  war  a  poor  coloured 
soldier  came  to  General  Grant  in  a  state  of  great  anxiety  and  asked  him,  *«  How  are 
things  getting  on.  General  ?  "  The  General's  answer  was,  "  Everything  is  going 
right,  sir."  These  words  acted  like  magic.  They  were  passed  round  the  whole 
camp  as  a  watchword,  and  one  soldier  might  be  heard  cheering  his  fellow-soldier 
with  the  assurance,  "  Everything  is  going  right,  sir."  Christian,  let  that  be  a  watch- 
word with  you  also.  Cherish  a  stronger  faith  in  Providence.  (3)  Do  we  not  also 
live  by  our  faith  in  prayer  ?  (4)  Above  all,  let  us  live  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God. 
When  we  can  trust  in  nothing  else  we  can  trust  in  Him :  and  when  no  comfort  can 
be  quarried  out  of  our  own  hearts,  we  can  always  find  comfort  at  the  Cross.  {S. 
L.  Wilson,  M,A.)  Faith:  life  (text,  and  Hab.  ii.  4;  Gal.  iii.  11;  Heb.  x. 
88): — When  the  Spirit  frequently  repeats  Himself,  He  thereby  appeals  for 
special  attention.  A  doctrine  so  often  declared — 1.  Must  be  of  the  first  im- 
portance. 2.  Should  be  constantly  preached.  8.  Should  be  unhesitatingly 
received  by  the  hearer.  We  will  treat  the  four  texts — I.  As  one.  1.  Life  is 
received  by  the  faith  which  makes  a  man  just.  A  man  begins  to  live — (1)  By 
a  full  acquittal  from  condemnation  and  penal  death  so  soon  as  he  believes  in 
Christ.  (2)  As  one  raised  from  out  of  spiritual  death  so  soon  as  he  has  faith  in 
Christ.  No  form  of  works,  or  profession,  or  knowledge,  or  natural  feelings,  can 
prove  him  to  be  an  absolved  and  quickened  man  ;  but  faith  does  this.  2.  Life  ia 
sustained  by  the  faith  which  keeps  a  man  just.  (1)  He  who  is  forgiven  and 
quickened  lives  ever  after  as  he  began  to  live,  viz. ,  by  faith.  Neither  his  feelings, 
devotions,  nor  acquirements  ever  become  his  trust ;  he  still  looks  out  of  himself  to 
Jesus.  He  is  nothing  except  so  far  as  he  is  a  believer.  ^2)  He  lives  by  faith  as  to 
all  the  forms  of  life,  (a)  As  a  child  and  as  a  servant,  (b)  As  a  pilgrim  proceeding 
and  a  warrior  contending,  (c)  As  a  pensioner  enjoying,  and  as  an  heir  expecting. 
(3)  He  lives  by  faith  in  every  condition,  (a)  In  joy  and  sorrow.  (6)  In  wealth  and 
poverty,  (c)  In  strength  and  weakness,  (d)  In  labouring  and  languishing,  (e)  In 
life  and  death.  (4)  He  lives  best  when  faith  is  at  its  best,  even  though  in  other 
respects  he  may  be  sorely  put  to  it.  He  Uves  the  life  of  Christ  most  blessedly  when 
most  intensely  he  believes  in  Christ.  3.  Hearty  belief  in  God,  His  Son,  His  pro- 
mises, His  grace,  is  the  soul's  life,  neither  can  anything  take  its  place.  "  Believe 
and  live "  is  a  standing  precept  both  for  saint  and  sinner  (1  Cor.  xiii.  18).  II. 
Sbp&batelt.  1.  Habakkuk  exhibits  faith  as  enabling  a  man  to  live  on  in  peace  and 
htmaility,  while  as  yet  the  promise  has  not  come  to  its  maturity.  While  waiting,  we 
live  by  faith  and  not  by  sight.  We  are  thus — (1)  Able  to  bear  up  under  th»  tem- 
porary triumphs  of  the  wicked  (Hab.  i.).  (2)  Preserved  from  proud  impatience  at 
delay.  (3)  Filled  with  delight  in  confident  expectation  of  good  things  to  come.  2. 
Paul  in  the  text  exhibits  faith  as  working  salvation  from  the  evil  which  is  in  the 
world  through  lust.  The  chapter  presents  an  awful  view  of  human  natuie,  and 
implies  that  only  faith  in  the  gospel  can  bring  us  life  in  the  form  of  —  (1)  Mental 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  '  [oBAr.  c. 

ralightenment  of  life  as  to  the  true  God  (vers.  19-23).  (2)  Moral  parity  of  Ufa 
(vera.  24,  &c.).  (3)  Spiritual  life  and  communion  with  that  which  is  Divine  tind 
holy.  Naturally  men  are  corrupt.  The  law  reveals  our  death  (chap.  iii.  10-20) ; 
but  the  goppel  imparts  spiritual  life  to  those  who  receive  it  by  faith.  8.  Galatians 
•xhibits  faith  as  bringing  ns  that  justification  which  saves  as  from  the  sentence  of 
death.  Nothing  can  be  plainer  than  the  declaration  that  no  man  is  justified  before 
God  except  by  faith.  4.  Hebrews  exhibits  faith  as  the  life  of  final  perseverance. 
(1)  There  is  need  of  faith  while  waiting  for  heaven  (vers.  32-36).  (2)  The  absence 
of  such  faith  would  cause  as  to  draw  back  (ver.  38).  (3)  That  drawing  back  would 
be  a  fatal  sign.  (4)  From  that  drawing  back  we  are  saved  by  faith.  Conclusion: 
1.  What  can  you  do  who  have  no  faith  ?  In  what  other  way  can  yoa  be  accepted 
with  God?  2.  On  what  ground  can  yoa  excuse  your  unbelief?  8.  Will  you  perish 
sooner  than  believe  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Rectitude  and  faith : — The  just  man 
is  the  righteous  man — the  man  who  is  right — right  with  God,  with  man,  with 
his  environments,  with  himself.  Faith  is  what  keeps  a  man  right  in  every  depart- 
ment of  life.  A  man  can  only  live  rightly  as  he  lives  by  faith.  I.  On  what  may  be 
c^ed  HIS  SEcuiiAK  SIDE.  1.  Intellectually.  Faith  is  necessary  to  mental  sound- 
ness, and  to  efiicient  mental  work.  First  principles  must  be  taken  for  granted ; 
results  of  previous  workers  must  be  accepted.  To  be  ever  digging  foundations  and 
discussing  axioms  not  only  wastes  time,  but  unsettles  and  enervates  the  mind,  and 
incapacitates  it  for  healthy  work.  The  just  thinker  works  from  established  conclu- 
sions  to  first  results.  2.  Commercially.  All  business  would  be  at  a  standstill  but 
tor  faith — faith  in  self,  faith  in  others,  faith  in  success.  The  distrustful  man  is 
unjust  to  himself  and  ail  concerned,  and  eventually  dies  in  bankruptcy.  3.  Domes- 
tically. Family  life  is  dead  where  the  members  distrust  each  other,  but  flourishes 
in  full  vigour  when  there  is  honest  and  implicit  faith  between  husband  and  wife,  Ac. 
4.  Politically.  Where  there  is  no  faith  in  principles,  but  only  a  scramble  after  place 
and  power,  political  injustice  supervenes  and  political  life  dies.  II.  His  spmiraAii 
SIDE.  1.  As  a  rehgious  character.  (1)  Faith  makes  a  man  right.  (2)  Faith  keeps 
him  right.  2.  As  a  Christian  worker.  His  is  pre-eminently  a  work  of  faith,  and 
only  as  such  can  he  rightly  perform  it.  He  requires  faith  which — (1)  Lays  hold  of 
Divine  strength.  (2)  Supports  him  in  the  midst  of  discouragements.  (3)  Belies  on 
the  Divine  promise.  (4)  Confidently  anticipates  future  results.  8.  As  a  Bible 
student.  Faith — (1)  Accepts  its  mysteries  without  questioning.  (2)  Transunites 
its  truths  into  spiritual  food.  Without  faith  he  is  both  unjust  to  the  Bible  and  to 
himself.  Instead  of  the  Word  of  life  it  becometh  the  letter  which  killeth.  4.  As  an 
immortal  being.  Faith  links  the  future  with  the  present,  makes  both  one,  and  sets 
the  believer  right  with  both.  {J.  W.  Burn.)  The  office  of  faith  : — It  is  not 
dead :  but  living  and  active.  It  is  not  something  by  which  we  conceive  of  ourselves 
fts  interested  in  that  which  is  infinitely  removed  from  us.  It  is  the  hand  by  which 
we  grasp  the  Saviour  near  to  us ;  making  Him,  with  all  His  wealth  and  all  His 
righteousness,  our  own  ;  so  that,  in  having  Him,  we  become  both  righteous  and  rich. 
It  is  the  tendrils  by  which  the  branches  of  the  vine  do  cling  around  their  all-sap- 
porting  stem ;  it  is  also  the  common  vessels  by  which,  from  the  root,  the  sap  is  eon- 
ducted  to  the  branches  and  leaves.  It  is  that  system  of  nerves  by  which  all  the 
parts  of  the  body  are  consciously  connected  with  the  head.  It  is  very  artery,  the 
aorta,  by  which  from  the  heart  Ufe  is  conveyed ;  so  that  by  its  habitual  action  the 
very  lowest  extremities  are  continually  invigorated  and  warmed.  (Wm.  Elliott.) 
The  conversion  of  Martin  Luther : — Near  the  splendid  church  of  St.  John  de  Lateran 
is  the  famous  Scala  Sancta,  or  Sacred  Stair,  supposed  to  have  been  brought  from 
Jerusalem — the  same  steps  down  which  our  Saviour  walked  from  Pilate's  hall  of 
judgment  to  the  hill  of  Calvary.  These  steps  are  twenty-five  in  number,  made  of 
soUd  marble,  and  covered  with  wood  to  keep  them  from  being  worn  away  by  the 
knees  of  the  climbing  pilgrims.  These  pilgrims  on  Easter  week  come  from  all  parts 
of  the  world.  They  are  of  different  colours,  and  ranks,  and  ages,  and  I  watched  them 
beginning  to  climb  this  "holy  stair,"  slowly  creeping  up,  counting  their  beads, 
crossing  their  faces,  and  muttering  their  "  Ave  Marias  "  and ' '  Paternosters  "  as  they 
went.  Near  the  top  was  a  full-sized  image  of  the  Saviour  made  of  wood,  crowned 
with  tiioms,  and  wearing  the  marks  of  His  wounds  on  His  temples,  and  hands,  and 
side,  and  feet.  Around  this  "  image  "  of  Jesus  a  group  of  women  were  gathered.  It 
was  sad  to  see  their  pitiful  looks  and  hear  their  groaning  prayers,  as  they  beat  their 
breasts  and  kissed  each  wound,  from  the  pierced  feet  to  the  thorn-crowned  head. 
Foot  people  I  they  were  quite  in  earnest,  but  they  were  sadly  self-deceived.  They 
thftwgnt  that  for  ereiy  step  they  climbed,  they  received  indulgence  or  pardon  forth* 


,  t,]  ROMANS.  78 

Binii  of  a  year  I  Therefore,  when  they  reached  the  top,  they  thought  that  sins  of 
twenty-five  years  were  blotted  out ;  bo  that,  taking  their  average  life  at  fifty,  two 
visits  to  the  Saoied  Stair  would  carry  them  to  the  "  gates  of  heaven."  I  thought  of 
a  noble  roan — namely,  Martin  Luther — who,  three  centuries  ago,  foand  the  light  of 
the  gospel  on  that  same  stair.  Dressed  as  a  monk,  with  his  shaven  head  and  bare 
knees,  be  was  creeping  up  those  marble  steps,  hoping  thereby  to  calm  his  troubled 
conscience  and  work  his  way  to  heaven,  when  all  at  once  the  voice  of  God  was  heard 
crying  in  his  soul,  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  Obedient  to  the  heavenly  voice, 
he  saw  his  error  of  trying  to  earn  his  title  to  salvation  by  his  own  pains  and  works  ; 
and  leaving  the  city  in  disgust,  he  went  home  to  nail  his  •'  Theses  "  to  the  church 
door  at  Wittenberg,  and  to  kindle  the  fire  of  the  glorious  Reformation.  Faith : — 
Now  we  tdlk  so  much  in  Christian  teaching  about  this  "  faith  "  that,  I  fancy,  like  a 
worn  sixpence  in  a  man's  pocket,  its  very  circulation  from  band  to  hand  has  worn  off 
the  lettering.  And  many  of  us,  from  the  very  familiarity  of  the  Word,  have  only  a  dim 
conception  of  what  it  means.  It  may  not  be  profitless,  then,  to  remind  you,  first  of 
all,  that  this  faith  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  very  familiar  thing  which  you  are 
constantly  exercising  in  reference  to  one  another,  that  is  to  say,  simple  confidence. 
You  trust  your  husband,  your  wife,  your  child,  your  parent,  your  friend,  your  guide, 
your  lawyer,  your  doctor,  your  banker.  Take  that  very  same  emotion  and  attitude 
of  the  mind  by  which  you  put  your  well-being,  in  different  aspects  and  provinces, 
into  the  hands  of  men  and  women  round  about  you ;  lift  the  trailing  flowers  that 
go  all  straggling  along  the  ground,  and  twine  them  round  the  pillars  of  God'a 
throne,  and  you  get  the  confidence,  the  trust  of  praises  and  glories  of  which  this 
New  Testament  is  full.  There  is  nothing  mysterious  in  it,  it  is  simply  the  exercise 
of  confidence,  the  familiar  cement  that  binds  all  human  relationship  together,  and 
makes  men  brotherly  and  kindred  with  their  kind.  Faith  is  trust,  and  trust  saves 
a  man's  soul.  Then  remember,  further,  that  the  faith  which  is  the  foundation  of 
everything  is  essentially  the  personal  trust  reposing  upon  a  person,  upon  Jesus 
Christ.  You  cannot  get  hold  of  a  man  in  any  other  way  than  by  that.  The  onlj 
real  bond  that  binds  people  together  is  the  personal  bond  of  confidence,  manifesting 
itself  in  love.  And  it  is  no  mere  doctrine  that  we  present  for  a  man's  faith,  but  it  is 
the  Person  about  which  the  doctrine  speaks.  We  say,  indeed,  that  we  can  only 
know  the  Person  on  v\  hom  we  must  trust  by  the  revelation  of  the  truths  concerning 
Him  which  make  the  Christian  doctrines ;  but  a  man  may  believe  the  whole  of 
them,  and  have  no  faith.  And  what  is  the  step  in  advance  which  is  needed  in  order 
to  turn  credence  into  faith — belief  in  a  doctrine  into  trust  7  In  one  view  it  is  the 
step  from  the  doctrine  to  the  Person.  When  you  grasp  Christ,  the  living  Christ, 
and  not  merely  the  doctrine,  for  yours,  then  yoa  have  faith.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Yer.  18.  For  the  wrath  of  God  Is  revealed  £rom  heaven  against  all  nngodllness. — 
The  wrath  of  Ood: — I.  Its  objects.  1.  Unrighteousness.  2.  Impenitence.  XL 
Its  reveiation.  1.  In  the  conscience.  2.  In  the  Word  of  God.  3.  In  Divine 
providence.  III.  Its  consummation.  1.  Certain.  2.  Terrible.  (<7.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  torath  of  God : — I.  Of  a  holy  God,  whose  hatred  of  sin  is  infinite.  II.  Of  a 
just  God,  who  cannot  but  punish  sin  according  to  its  true  desert.  III.  Of  an 
OMNISCIENT  God,  whose  eye  there  is  no  eluding,  who  is  "greater  than  our  hearts  and 
knoweth  aU  things."  lY.  Of  an  aIiMIOHTX  God,  whose  ability  to  punish  no  created 
power  can  resist.  Y.  Of  an  unohanqeable  God,  whose  nature  must  continue  eternally 
opposed  to  sin,  whose  knowledge  no  forgetfulness  can  ever  impair,  and  whose  power 
eternity  cannot  weaken  I  "  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  His  anger  ?  "  (JR.  Ward- 
law,  D.D.)  Wrath  in  Ood  and  wrath  in  man : — I.  The  differenob  or  wbath  as 
IT  IB  IN  God  AMD  AS  IT  IS  IN  HAN.  1.  In  man  it  is  an  exciting  passion.  It  shakes 
him  to  the  very  centre  of  his  being.  It  is  seen  in  his  countenance  ;  sometimes  in 
a  ghastly  pallor,  and  sometimes  in  scarlet  fire.  Not  so  in  God ;  it  wakes  no  ripple 
on  the  infinite  rivers  of  His  being.  He  is  ever  of  one  mind.  2.  In  man  it  is  a 
malignant  passion.  It  bums  with  a  desire  to  make  its  object  miserable.  But  there 
ia  no  malevolence  in  the  heart  of  God.  *'  Fury  is  not  in  Me."  "  God  is  love  " ; 
and  all  His  other  attributes  are  but  so  many  forms  of  His  love.  All  His  threaten- 
kiga  are  but  love  raising  its  warning  voice  to  prevent  His  creatures  from  falling  into 
min.  8.  In  man  it  is  a  painful  passion.  The  man  who  treasures  anger  inflicts  a 
greater  injury  on  himself  than  he  can  on  the  object  of  his  hate.  But  nothing  can 
disturb  the  peace  of  the  "  ever  blessed  God."  4.  In  man  it  is  a  selfish  passion- 
Man's  wrath  is  excited  because  something  has  occurred  which  he  supposes  injnri 
ooeiy  affects  him  in  some  way  or  other.    There  is  nothing  of  this  kind  in  the  wrath 


74  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  fc 

of  God.  No  creature  can  injnre  Him.  II.  The  aobeeuemi  or  wbatb  ab  n  is  m 
OoD,  AKD  AS  ms  IN  MAN.  1.  EepugnaDce.  Wrath  in  man  raises  his  whole  natare 
against  the  offence,  or  the  offender,  or  both.  There  is  at  once  a  recoil,  and  an 
antagonism.  Is  there  nothing  answering  to  this  in  the  wrath  of  God,  in  relation  to 
sin  ?  There  must.  Wickedness  is  repugnant — (1)  To  His  natare.  He  is  essentially 
holy,  and  moral  evil  in  all  its  forms  must  be  necessarily  disagreeable  to  Him  (Prov» 
vi  6).  (2)  To  His  procedure.  The  construction  of  the  universe,  the  moral  consti* 
tation  of  souls,  the  essential  conditions  of  happiness,  personal,  social,  and  national, 
show  that  God's  whole  conduct  as  Creator  and  Governor  is  opposed  to  sin.  As 
wrath  in  man  separates  him  from  his  offender,  wrath  in  God  detaches  Him  from 
wickedness.  He  has  no  fellowship  with  wrong.  2.  Eetribution.  There  is  in  the 
wrath  of  man  an  avenging  instinct.  There  is  this  retributiveness  in  the  wrath  of 
God.  Not  as  a  passion,  but  as  an  eternal  and  unalterable  principle.  The  principle 
of  retribution  runs  through  the  whole  universe,  so  that  the  wrong  never  fails  to 
meet  with  punishment.  Thus  the  wicked  now  and  here  are  "  going  away  into  ever- 
lasting punishment."  Every  sin  is  a  step  adown.  Every  sinful  feeling  is  a  nest  where 
the  furies  hatch  their  swarming  brood.  Conclusion :  This  subject — 1.  Corrects  a  theo- 
logical error.  The  error  is  that  Christ's  death  was  an  appeasement  of  Divine  vengeance. 
Christ's  mission  was  the  effect,  not  the  cause,  of  God's  love.  2.  Supplies  a  terrible 
warning  to  sinners.  "  Be  sure  your  sins  will  find  you  out."  3.  Urges  the  necessity 
of  regeneration.  The  only  way  to  avoid  wrath  is  to  avoid  sin,  the  only  way  to  avoid 
sin  is  by  repentance  towards  God  and  faith  in  oar  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
On  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness  : — I.  The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven 
against  all  ungodliness  and  luPiEr:  of  men.  This  description  of  sinners  use  the 
name  of  God  irreverently,  in  vain,  and  for  criminal  purposes.  It  is  a  consequence 
of  such  impious  representations,  to  arraign  the  dispensation  of  Divine  mercy  by  a 
Mediator,  and  to  become  incapable  of  salvation,  by  an  unrighteous  rejection  of  the 
best  means  Infinite  Wisdom  has  appointed  for  its  attainment.  II.  The  wrath  of  God 
is  also  revealed  from  heaven  against  evert  species  of  injustice  and  crime.  Under 
injustice  I  comprehend  every  injury  done  to  character  and  to  fidelity,  as  it  respects 
promises  and  engagements ;  and  it  may  be  extended  to  every  mean  and  insidious 
art  by  which  another  is  overreached  and  circumvented.  IH.  In  what  manner  thb 
JUDGMENTS  OF  GoD  ABE  MADE  KNOWN  AND  EXECUTED.  Man,  by  the  moral  constitu- 
tion of  his  nature,  is  susceptible  of  various  and  intense  punishment;  and  his 
corporeal  frame  subjects  him  to  another  species  of  it.  The  constitution  of 
things  is  adapted  to  the  nature  of  man,  and  is  either  adverse  or  friendly  in  pro- 
portion to  his  obedience  or  disobedience  to  the  laws  of  his  Maker.  {A.  Stirling, 
LL.D.)  God's  wrath  against  wickedness : — I.  The  world's  abounding  wicked- 
ness. 1.  Its  exhibition.  (1)  Men  have  renounced  their  Creator,  receiving  His 
gifts  without  acknowledging  His  kindness,  and  wilfully  withholding  from  Him 
both  homage  and  thanks.  (2)  The  renunciation  of  Jehovah  soon  led  to  gross 
and  palpable  idolatry.  Men  must  worship  something ;  and  when  they  refused 
to  acknowledge  God,  they  were  driven  to  find  substitutes  for  Him.  For  awhile 
they  were  content  to  adore  the  works  of  His  hands ;  but  ere  long  they  set  up  the 
works  of  their  own.  So  low  did  they  sink  that  they  worshipped  images  of  them- 
selves. Nothing  has  been  too  mean,  or  too  obscene,  for  man  to  worship.  He  has 
taken  and  set  up  for  his  god  that  which  he  should  only  have  shrunk  from  in 
disgust  or  cast  away  with  shame.  (3)  With  idolatry  is  connected — (a)  The  most 
reckless  profligacy  of  manners,  {b)  Abandonment  to  every  selfish  and  malignant 
passion.  2.  Its  guiltiness.  It  was  wilful.  Men  had  the  truth,  but  stified  it  in  their 
unrighteousness  ;  and  therefore  they  were  "  without  excuse."  The  race  began  with 
a  sufSciency  of  Divine  knowledge ;  but  it  interfered  with  their  bad  passions  and 

Propensities,  and  so  they  resolved  to  adapt  their  theology  to  their  base  practices, 
'his  disposition,  started  at  an  early  period,  was  maintained  by  every  succeeding 
generation.  In  each  age  the  light  diminished ;  but  still  in  each  enough  remained 
to  convict  the  human  conscience  of  wrong.  "  God  left  not  Himself  without  witness." 
Ever  since  the  creation  of  the  world  His  "  eternal  power  and  Divine  supremacy  " 
have  been  displayed  in  the  material  universe.  Besides  which,  other  means  of 
religious  instruction  have  always  been  accessible.  Once  in  Judaism,  and  since  in 
Christianity,  God  has  maintained  a  testimony  for  Himself.  Hence  the  wickedness 
of  the  world  brings  with  it  an  infinite  culpability.  H.  God's  angeb  bevealed 
AGAINST  IT.  1.  Its  mode.  This  is  various.  It  was  declared  of  old  by  the  prophets. 
It  was  displayed  in  the  great  crises  of  the  world's  history,  as  the  Deluge,  the  destruc- 
tion of  Sodom  and  Ck)morrah,  the  overthrow  of  the  Egyptians  in  the  Bed  Sea,  and 


eau.  L]  ROMANS.  IS 

the  downfall  of  Babylon,  Ac.  Besides,  there  were  the  acknowledged  miseries  of 
life  bewailed  by  philosophers  and  poets ;  ooold  these  be  pondered  by  the  thoughtful 
without  the  conviction  that  God  was  "  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day  "  ?  Above 
all  there  was  death.  Was  it  not  in  His  wrath  that  the  Almighty  consamed  the 
nations  ?  All  these  evidences  of  God's  anger,  backed  by  the  internal  monitions  of 
every  man's  conscience,  were  patent  to  all  long  before  the  time  of  Paul,  but  they 
had  all  been  cast  into  the  shade  by  a  still  mightier  and  more  convincing  demonstra- 
tion furnished  by  the  gospel  of  CLrist.  2.  Its  burden.  The  thing  revealed  is  that  He 
hates  sin,  and  is  resolved  severely  to  punish  those  who  practise  it.  Each  individual 
who  persists  in  his  iniquity  will  die,  and  after  death  be  judged,  condemned,  and 
banished  into  "  the  outer  darkness,"  &o.  So  also  there  is  a  day  of  wrath  appointed 
for  the  world  at  large.  Conclusion  :  Let  the  subject — 1.  Convince  you  of  sin.  2. 
Inspire  you  with  salutary  fear.  8.  Turn  you  to  the  gospel  of  Christ.  (T.  O. 
Horton.)  The  revelation  of  the  wrath  of  God : — I.  The  wrath  of  God.  1.  Its 
nature.  It  is  no  easy  thing  to  speak  of  wrath  in  connection  with  God.  Among  us 
it  is  known  to  be  a  passion,  and  seldom  a  righteous  passion.  But  it  is  not  a  passion 
in  God :  "  Fury  is  not  in  Me  ";  in  Him  it  is  principle,  the  love  of  order,  a  determi- 
nation to  maintain  equity,  a  resolution  to  punish  sin.  It  results,  therefore,  from 
the  perfection  of  His  nature.  The  legislator  is  not  angry  when  he  promulgates  his 
l&ws,  nor  the  judge  when  he  pronounces  sentence.  But  the  case  is  that  society 
cannot  be  maintained  without  laws,  and  laws  are  nothing  without  penalties  and 
sanctions.  In  all  well-ordered  countries  crime  is  punished ;  and  can  it  escape  in 
the  empire  of  a  Being  who  is  "  righteous  in  all  His  ways,  and  holy  in  all  His 
works  "  ?  And  this  we  contend  to  be  essential  to  the  very  character  of  God.  We 
could  not  esteem  nor  love  Him  if  we  supposed  that  He  viewed  equally  truth  and 
lies,  honesty  and  injustice,  cruelty  and  benevolence.  2.  Its  dreadfulness.  If  "  the 
wrath  of  a  king  "  be,  as  Solomon  says,  as  "  the  roaring  of  a  lion,"  what  must  the 
wrath  of  God  be  ?  "  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  His  anger  ?  Even  according  to 
Thy  fear  so  is  Thy  wrath."  In  many  cases  the  evil  is  far  less  than  the  fear ;  and 
when  the  reality  comes  it  is  found  to  be  nothing  compared  with  the  apprehension. 
But  here  the  reahty  will  equal,  will  surpass  all  imagination.  II.  The  revelation 
OF  THIS  WRATH  to  our  Very  senses.  1.  To  our  faith.  This  is  done  by  the  Scriptures. 
There  hell  is  naked  before  it,  and  destruction  has  no  covering  ;  there  faith  beholds 
the  outer  darkness  where  there  is  weeping  and  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  2. 
To  the  conscience.  Thus  it  is  revealed  in  those  uneasinesses  and  apprehensions 
which  attend  the  commission  of  sin.  When  Joseph's  brethren  were  in  the  hold, 
they  said  one  to  another,  "  We  are  verily  guilty,"  &o.  What  was  there  here  to 
remind  them  of  Joseph?  Oh,  there  was  enough.  Inhumanity  deserves  and  demands 
punishment,  and  conscience  knows  it.  And  when  Belshazzar  saw  the  handwriting 
his  face  gathered  terror,  the  joints  of  his  loins  were  loosed,  and  his  knees  smote 
one  against  another.  Why  ?  How  does  he  know  but  that  it  is  an  eulogium  upon 
his  character,  or  an  announcement  of  the  raising  of  the  siege,  or  a  prediction  of 
the  extension  of  his  reign  ?  There  was  something  within  him  that  foreboded  of 
evil ;  and  the  interpreter,  therefore,  only  came  in  to  confirm  the  exposition  of  his 
own  feelings.  So  was  it  with  Herod,  who,  when  he  heard  of  the  fame  of  Jesus,  said, 
"  It  is  John  the  Baptist."  3.  To  our  senses.  All  nature  abounds  throughout  with 
tokens  of  Gods  displeasure  against  sin.  And  before  we  dismiss  this  part  of  the 
Bubject  we  will  observe  that,  while  the  existence  of  this  wrath  shows  us  the  holiness 
and  justice  of  God,  the  revelation  of  it  displays  His  mercy  and  His  grace  too.  He 
would  not  take  you  sinners  by  surprise.  He  has  revealed  the  wrath  before  that  you 
may  escape  it.  III.  The  objects  against  which  this  wrath  is  revealed.  1. 
Ungodliness.  Ungodliness  comprehends  all  the  sins  against  the  first  table  of  tha 
law.  The  ungodly  do  not  fear  God,  do  not  love  Him,  worship  Him,  confide  in  Him. 
God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts ;  they  practically  say  unto  Him,  "  Depart  from  us ; 
we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  Thy  ways."  2.  Unrighteousness.  Unrighteousness 
comprehends  all  the  sins  against  the  second  table  of  the  law.  Unrighteousness  is 
injustice  in  your  regards  and  in  your  dealings  with  your  fellow  creatures.  3.  All 
ungodliness,  and  all  unrighteousness — the  concealed  and  the  open,  the  refined  and 
the  gross.  Yon  do  not  worship  a  graven  image,  but  then  you  take  the  name  of  your 
God  in  vain.  IV.  The  class  of  victims  peculiarly  obnoxious  to  it.  "  Who  hold 
the  truth  in  righteousness."  1.  The  heathen  themselves  never  lived  up  to  the  light 
they  possessed.  This  is  the  charge  directly  brought  home  against  them  by  the 
apostle  in  this  chapter.  2.  It  was  not  otherwise  also  with  the  Jews,  thev  never 
practised  what  they  knew.     This  is  the  charge  the  apostle  brings  against  them  in 


7t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OflAT.  i. 

the  next  obaptet.  3.  There  is  not  a  man  that  lives  up  to  his  own  principles ;  ha 
does  many  things  which  he  knows  to  be  wrong,  and  he  omits  many  things  which  he 
knows  to  be  right.  The  plea  of  ignorance  therefore  can  only  be  admitted  in  the  case 
of  idiots.  The  original  is,  "  who  imprison  the  truth  in  unrighteousness  " ;  that  is, 
the  truth  would  speak  in  them,  and  struggles  to  be  heard  ;  but  it  is  confined, 
imprisoned.  Fashion,  the  god  of  this  world,  the  love  of  fame,  the  love  of  money, 
the  love  of  pleasure,  these  are  the  jailers  that  confine  the  truth  in  prison.  Saul 
knew  it  belonged  not  to  him  to  offer  sacrifice ;  his  conscience  told  him,  therefore, 
that  it  was  a  sin ;  he  strugtled  hard,  but  yielded.  ♦'  I  forced  myself."  Herod  knew 
John  and  revered  him,  yet  for  the  oath's  sake,  and  them  which  sat  with  him  at 
meat,  he  sent  and  beheaded  John.  It  was  the  same  with  Pilate.  Conclusion :  1. 
What  then  shall  we  say  to  the  state  of  many  born  in  a  land  of  light,  who  have  from 
children  known  the  Holy  Scriptures  ?  With  what  accusing  and  condemning  con- 
sciences you  have  forced  yourselves  on,  you  and  God  only  know.  I  have  read  of  a 
captain  who,  when  he  found  his  men  begin  to  waver,  threw  himself  on  the  ground, 
and  exclaimed,  "  Well,  if  you  will  flee,  you  shall  tread  me  under  foot."  Conscience 
has  done  the  very  same  with  regard  to  some  of  you.  2.  Let  me  beseech  you  to 
practise  what  you  know.  Do  you  believe  that  covetousness  is  a  sin  ?  Let  the  con- 
viction go  free ;  be  ready  to  distribute.  If  you  believe  it  your  duty  to  make  a 
profession  of  religion,  and  to  join  the  Church  of  God,  why,  then,  go  immediately 
and  give  up  yourselves,  not  only  "  to  the  Lord,"  but  "  to  His  people,"  and  be 
concerned  to  walk  in  all  the  ordinances  of  the  Lord  blameless.  3.  Is  there  nothing 
else  revealed  from  heaven  but  the  wrath  of  God  ?  We  deserve  nothing  else  ;  but  is 
there  no  way  of  escape  from  it  ?  We  have  a  revelation  of  mercy  and  of  grace  too. 
Jesus  delivers  us  from  the  wrath  to  come.  (W.  Jay.)  The  revelation  of  wrath  : — 
I.  It  is  HEBE  ASSUMED,  the  position  being  presently  fully  established,  that  aijL  msn 
ABE  BOTH  UNBI0HTE0D8  AND  UNGODLY.  1.  They  are  ungodly.  For,  being  the  creatures 
of  God,  they  owe  to  Him  perpetual  allegiance  and  service.  Those  who  withhold 
this  violate  their  moral  obligations,  and  rob  God  of  His  due.  2.  They  are  unrighteous. 
Indeed,  it  is  hardly  to  be  supposed  that  it  could  be  otherwise.  The  more  com- 
pletely men  are  cut  off  from  the  fear  of  God  the  less  regard  do  they  have  for  the 
rights  and  happiuess  of  their  fellows.  Besides,  the  claims  of  God  being  first  and 
supreme,  there  can  be  no  true  righteousness  where  those  claims  are  denied,  II. 
This  being  so,  what  aspect  does  the  aduinistbation  of  the  God  of  natoee  assumk 
TOWAEDS  ungodliness  AND  UNEiGHTEoosNESS.  Is  it  onc  of  complaceucy  ?  or  of  indif- 
ference ?  or  not  rather  of  active  and  resolute  antagonism  ?  Paul  is  not  here  writing 
of  a  revelation  of  righteous  wrath  which  is  to  be  made  at  the  close  of  human  history, 
but  of  one  which  is  present  and  preparatory.  It  is  made  openly  and  incontestably 
"  from  heaven."  Not  that  it  comes  glistering  down  from  on  high  as  the  shaft  of 
livid  lightning.  When  M.  Arnold  affirms  that  "  there  is  an  eternal  Power,  not  our- 
selves, which  makes  for  righteousness  " ;  and  when  the  Psalmist  exclaims  that  •'  the 
face  of  the  Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil,"  they  but  set  forth,  in  varied  form, 
the  truth  that  "the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven."  For  heaven  is  the 
throne  of  God  ;  and  that  throne  is  but  the  symbol  of  His  supreme  legislative  and 
executive  dominion.  From  that  heaven — that  throne— the  wrath  of  God  is  being 
perpetually  revealed — 1.  In  the  human  conscience.  What  but  the  manifested 
power  of  conscience,  as  an  actual  revealer  of  the  wrath  of  God  from  heaven,  gave 
occasion  to  the  Proverbs,  that  "the  wicked  trembleth  at  the  shaking  of  a  leaf,"  and 
"  fleeth  when  no  man  parsueth  "  ?  Why  fled  our  first  parents,  but  that  conscience 
had  already  revealed  a  coming  wrath  ?  Why  that  whispering,  pallid  terror  in  those 
ten  bronzed  Bedouins  in  the  Egyptian  treasure-city?  (Gen.  xlii.  21,  12).  Why  does 
that  agitated  man  in  the  temple  treasury  so  vehemently  press  those  ofiicials  to  take 
from  him  his  thirty  pieces  of  silver  ?  And  why,  when  he  finds  that  it  cannot  be 
recalled,  does  he  hasten  away  to  hang  himself?  Who  knows  not  that  conscience 
has  compelled  many  a  man  to  reveal  secrets  of  iniquity,  from  whom  no  rack  or 
torture  could  have  extorted  the  disclosure  ?  And  though  many  a  guilty  conscience 
becomes  so  accustomed  to  its  load  as  to  be  little  incommoded  thereby,  it  requires  but 
that  startling  touch  which  Providence  may,  at  any  moment,  give  to  cause  it  to 
awaken  from  its  slumbers.  2.  In  the  general  moral  sentiments  of  mankind — those 
sentiments  as  they  are  exercised  in  reference  to  those  who  invade  human  rights. 
It  is  quite  true  that,  as  human  nature  now  in,  it  is  not  safe  to  leave  the  administra- 
tion of  justice  in  private  hands.  Iherefore  society  has  combined  for  the  purpose  of 
maintaining  private  rights  by  public  power.  This  power  foi'  the  administration  of 
justice  is  ordained  of  God  (chap.  ziii.  1-7).    And  hence  the  penal  laws  and  all  the 


flBAV.  I.]  SOMANS.  77 

instruments  of  punishment  are  bat  so  many  mediums,  through  which  the  wrath  of 
God  is  revealed  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness  of  men.  3.  In  the 
general  course  of  providence,  or  of  God's  own  administration  of  the  universe  in 
refereaee  to  men.  (1)  While  those  vices  which  terminate  upon  the  individual 
himself,  or  which  elude  the  vigilance  of  society,  are  subject  to  the  remc/rse  of  con- 
science ;  and  while  those  which  prey  upon  the  general  community  are  repelled  and 
punished  by  the  officers  of  public  justice  ;  those  which  arise  from  the  perversion  or 
over-indulgence  of  bodily  appetites  are  sooner  or  later  overtaken  and  avenged  by 
bodily  disease  and  death.  Now  all  these  bear  unmistakable  testimony  to  the  fact 
that  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  indeed  against  them  that  do  evil.  But  have  we  not  also 
further  proof  of  this  in  His  more  general  government  of  nations  and  the  race  ?  Do 
we  not  find  that  so  soon  as  any  nation  has  become  morally  degenerate  Providence 
has  at  once  planted  His  standard  and  "  hissed  "  for  the  gathering  forces  which 
should  humiliate  and  punish  that  people  ?  4.  In  the  Scriptures.  In  the  Pentateuch 
the  principles  of  the  Divine  government,  hicluding  the  revelation  of  wrath  against 
sin,  are  clearly  set  forth.  In  the  prophets  those  principles  are  so  expounded  and 
enforced  as  to  warn  against  misapprehension  and  perversion  ;  while  in  the  historical 
books,  the  principles  not  only  receive  abundant  illustration  from  God's  actual  treat- 
ment both  of  Gentiles  and  Jews,  but  the  additional  information  is  given,  on  God's 
own  authority,  that  such  and  such  calamities  which  had  overtaken  particular  men 
and  nations  were  revelations  of  His  wrath  from  heaven  against  the  ungodliness 
and  unrighteousness  of  the  sufferers.  By  these  Scriptures  the  general  truth 
is  estabUshed  beyond  all  contradiction,  that  "  verily  there  is  a  God  who  judgeth 
in  the  earth " ;  and  that,  "  though  hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not 
be  onpunished."  Conclusion:  But — 1.  It  should  ever  be  remembered  that  this 
revelation  of  wrath  is  but  preparatory  and  predictive.  It  is  neither  perfect  nor 
universal.  Many  criminals  remain  undetected,  and,  in  this  respect,  unpunished, 
and  sometimes  the  innocent  are  wrongfully  convicted  and  punished.  The  whole 
effect,  therefore,  of  the  present  revelation  of  the  wrath  of  God  from  heaven  is  to 
remind  us  that  we  are  under  moral  government ;  and  that  all  are  hastening  onwards 
towards  that  day  in  which  "  every  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of  himself  to  God." 
2.  And  in  prospect  of  that  final  retribution,  this  present  revelation  of  the  wrath 
of  God  from  heaven  may  prove  to  us  what  ample  and  tremendous  powers  of 
punishment  are  provided  for  the  unrighteous  and  ungodly.  (W.  Tyton.) 
Who  hold  the  truth  in  nnrighteoasness. — Holding  the  truth  in  unrighteousness : — 
The  word  •'  hold  "  signifies  "  to  restrain  or  hold  back."  Under  the  influence  of 
"  unrighteousness  "  they  restrained  or  held  back  the  truth  from  exerting  its  proper 
power.  They  laid  it,  as  it  were,  under  arrest,  because  itn  imperative  dictates  were 
such  as  opposed  the  inclinations  of  their  depraved  hearts.  It  is  not  merely 
that  they  kept  the  truth  to  themselves — holding  it  in  concealment  and  captivity, 
and  instead  of  disclosing  to  others  what  they  knew,  criminally  leaving  them  in 
error  and  delusion,  which  some  of  the  philosophers  have  justly  been  charged  with 
doing  in  regard  to  the  unity  and  other  attributes  of  the  Divine  Being ;  but  more 
generally  that  both  philosophers  and  others  refused  to  frame  their  lives  even 
•ooording  to  snch  knowledge  of  truth  as  they  actually  possessed,  or  had  the  ready 
means  of  attaining.  They  acted  towards  the  truth,  in  voluntarily  resisting  its 
control,  and  shackling  its  freedom,  as  a  foolish  and  unprincipled  king  does  towards 
his  best  and  wisest  counsellor,  whom  he  throws  into  prison  to  have  him  out  of  the 
way,  resenting  his  past  fidelity,  and  determined  to  be  no  longer  troubled  with  his 
salutary  but  unpalatable  admonitions.  {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Holding  down  the 
truth : — The  heathen  world  would  not  allow  the  truth  to  exercise  its  proper  and 
legitimate  influence  apon  them.  They  failed  to  educate  their  minds  to  perceive  it, 
or  their  hearts  to  love  it.  The  eye  can  be  trained  to  discover  beauty  in  the  land- 
scape and  in  works  of  art;  or  it  may  have  its  very  powers  of  vision  impaired  and 
destroyed  by  gazing  at  the  sun  or  on  the  snow.  So  man,  by  a  holy  walk  and  con- 
Tersation,  may  fit  and  prepare  his  soul  to  discern  and  value  the  truth  concerning 
the  eternal  power  and  character  of  God  ;  or  by  unrighteousness  he  may  injure  his 
spiritual  faculties  and  be  unable  to  read  the  revelation  of  God,  though  plainly 
written  in  the  book  of  nature.  The  following  are  some  of  the  steps  by  which  men 
keep  back  the  truth : — 1.  They  are  prejudiced  against  it.  2.  They  positively  hate 
it.  3.  They  neglect  or  misrepresent  it.  4.  They  deny  and  dethrone  it  in  order  to 
enthrone  and  exalt  falsehood.  5.  They  revile  it.  {C.  Neil,  M.A.)  Repression  of 
GoiTs  tinith : — Two  interpretations  :  One,  that  a  man  may  be  of  unrighteous  life  and 
Tet  have  a  knowledge  of  the  truth ;  he  holds  the  truth,  but  is  unrighteous  in  sjate  at 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  I. 

it.  The  other,  that  men  keep  down  the  truth  by  their  anrighteonsneea.  Compara 
2  Thessalonians  ii.  6,  where  the  word  here  translated  "hold"  is  translated  "with- 
hold." We  take  the  latter.  Man's  unrighteousness  "  withholds,"  "  keeps  back," 
*'  represses  God's  truth."  This  is  evidently  the  view  of  the  revisers  of  the  Authorised 
Version,  for  they  translate  :  "  Who  hold  down  the  truth  in  anrighteousness."    I.  Alii 

THINQS  DEMAND  FOB  THEIB  PBOPEB  DEVELOPMENT  SUITABLE  CONDITIONS  AND  SUBBOUNI)-. 

ING8.  Truth  no  exception  to  this  rule.  We  observe  that  it  requires — 1.  An  appre- 
ciative spirit — love  for  truth.  2.  A  receptive  spirit— openness  to  truth.  3.  An 
earnest  spirit — zeal  for  truth.  Such,  and  such  alone,  attain  truth;  into  such 
minds  only  will  truth  enter  or  come  to  anything.  This  with  respect  to  truth 
generally.  Beligious  truth  requires  something  more.  4.  An  obedient  spirit  (John 
vii.  17 ;  viii.  31,  32).    II.  Teusx  involves  a  mobal  element  because  it  does  not 

CONCERN   THE   INTELLECT  ALONE,   BUT  BEOULATES   THE   LIFE.      The  text  declares  that 

unrighfeousness — sin — represses  the  truth.  This  appears  from  the  following  con- 
siderations :  Sin — 1.  Destroys  the  love  of  truth.  2.  Sensitiveness  to  truth.  3.  Zeal 
for  truth.  4.  Obedience  to  truth.  Hence  it  destroys  the  conditions  necessary  to 
the  development  and  progress  of  God's  truth.  III.  It  follows  fbou  all  this — 
1.  That  a  sinner  is  disqualified  for  pronouncing  upon  Divine  truth.  2.  That  our 
doubts — all  scepticism — are  finally  referable  to  a  sinful  nature  in  ourselves  rather 
than  to  any  inherent  difficulties  in  the  truth  itself.  3.  That  the  progress  of  Christ's 
religion  is  hindered  not  only  by  outward  sin,  but  by  the  imperfections  and  incon- 
sistencies of  those  who  profess  it.  (H.  M.  Jackson.)  The  truth  held  prisoner : — 
I.  What  is  that  tbuth  which  men  hold  pbisoneb  ?  Beligious  and  practical  truth 
which  tends  to  the  right  ruling  of  the  heart  and  life  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  God. 
The  truth  is  twofold.  1.  The  truth  of  natural  religion,  or  the  dictates  of  a  natural 
conscience,  agreeable  to  those  common  notices  of  good  and  evil  left  in  man  since 
the  Fall.  2.  The  truth  of  revealed  religion,  which  comprehends  the  whole  truths  of 
the  law  and  of  the  gospel  also.  U.  How  hen  hold  truth  prisoner.  1.  In  others. 
(1)  By  putting  truth  into  an  ill  name,  casting  reproach  and  disgrace  upon  it,  on 
whatever  pretences.  (2)  By  resisting  and  opposing  the  truth.  (3)  By  an  authori- 
tative shutting  up  of  truth.  This  often  follows  as  a  judgment.  2.  In  themselves. 
This  is  what  the  text  mainly  aims  at.  It  is  kept  prisoner — (1)  With  respect  to 
others,  when  it  is  kept  back  from  preventing  sin  in  them.  This  is  done  two  ways. 
(a)  When  it  is  restrained  by  undue  sUence.  If  the  Lord  call  men  to  bring  it  forth, 
silence  in  that  case  is  a  bond  laid  on  truth.  "  Whosoever  therefore  shall  be  ashamed 
of  Me  and  of  My  words,"  &o.  When  is  truth  held  prisoner  by  nndne  silence? 
(t.)  Negatively,  not  when  one  has  no  sufficient  call  to  bring  it  forth.  "  There  is  a 
time  to  keep  silence,  and  a  time  to  speak."  And  in  discerning  these  times  there  is 
much  spiritual  wisdom.  Truth  kept  in  silence,  during  the  proper  time  of  silence, 
is  not  kept  prisoner,  but  entertained  in  its  lodging  suitable  to  its  character.  "  A  fool 
nttereth  all  his  mind,  but  a  wise  man  keepeth  it  in  till  afterwards."  Truth  is  too 
sacred  a  thing  to  bring  forth  just  to  make  a  show  of,  and  far  more  to  prostitute  to 
men's  lusts  and  humours.  There  is  an  anseasonable  venting  of  truth,  by  which 
truth  and  holiness  gain  nothing,  but  lose  much  (1  Sam.  zxii.  10).  Our  Lord  for- 
bids it.  "  Neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before  swine."  (it.)  Positively,  when  the 
honour  of  God  requires  the  bringing  it  forth  (Mark  viii.  38).  When  the  Lord's 
honour  is  at  stake,  truth  is  like  a  fire  that  will  seek  a  vent,  and  get  it  in  a  tender 
soul.  Thus  speaks  Jeremiah,  "  His  word  was  in  mine  heart  as  a  burning  fire  shut 
np  in  my  bones,  and  I  was  weary  with  forbearing,  and  I  could  not  stay."  And  it 
exposes  men  to  the  wrath  of  God,  to  hold  in  truth  in  that  case,  for  that  is  to  sacri- 
fice God's  glory  to  men's  own  interests.  Again,  to  hold  it  in  when  the  good  of  our 
neighbour  requires  it  to  come  forth,  is  to  hold  it  prisoner,  "  Thou  shalt  not  hate  thy 
brother  in  thine  heart :  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  rebuke  thy  neighbour,  and  not  suffer 
sin  upon  him."  Where  there  is  any  probable  appearance  of  sin's  being  prevented 
in  others,  by  means  of  the  coming  forth  of  truth,  it  is  not  to  bo  held  in,  nor  can  it 
be  so,  without  the  guilt  of  imprisoning  it.  (6)  When  by  words  or  actions,  one  holding 
in  the  truth,  leads  another  into  sin.  This  is  to  hold  truth  prisoner  with  a  witness, 
shutting  the  prison  door  with  double  bars.  (2)  In  themselves  several  ways.  As 
by — (a)  Neglecting,  overlooking,  and  not  adverting  to  it  in  the  management  of  their 
hearts  and  lives.  "The  light  shines  about  them,  but  they  take  no  notice  of  it  to  order 
their  steps  by  it.  This  is  put  the  Lord's  candle  in  them,  under  a  bushel,  (b)  Not 
obeying  truth  speaking  to  them  in  their  consciences,  (c)  Going  on  in  opposition  to 
known  truth,  knowing  the  right  and  doing  the  wrong.  "  They  are  of  those  that 
■•bel  against  the  light."    (d)  By  overcoming  the  truth  in  their  war  against  it.    Many 


(Sir.  I.]  ROMANS.  19 

a  battle  there  is  betwixt  truth  in  the  conscience  and  a  man's  lusts,  till  the  man 
taking  part  with  his  lusts  against  the  truth,  convictions  are  murdered,  the  trouble- 
some light  in  the  soul  is  put  out,  and  truth  is  taken  and  held  prisoner,  that  it  can 
no  more  distnrb  the  man  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  lusts.     III.  Truth  is  itnjustlt 

THUS  TBEATED,  WBONOLT  HELD  PBISONEB  BT  SINMEBS.      This  is  clear,  for  that — 1.  It  iS 

God's  messenger  to  men  and  His  deputy  in  the  soul,  over  which  they  have  no  power 
and  authority.  So  that  one  cannot  hold  it  prisoner  but  in  unrighteousness,  or  in 
rebellion  against  the  God  of  truth.  2.  It  is  never  guilty  of  any  crime  against  men, 
that  it  should  be  so  treated.  Falsehood  and  lies  are  ever  contrary  to  men's  true 
interest,  but  the  truth  is  never  so.  3.  It  cannot  be  held  prisoner  bat  for  an 
nnrighteons  cause,  and  in  favour  of  some  lust  or  other.  4.  A  just  God  will  clear 
it,  and  set  it  free  at  the  cost  of  those  who  hold  it  prisoner,  • '  They  shall  know,  saith 
the  Lord,  whose  word  shall  stand.  Mine  or  theirs."  If  truth  prevail  not  to  men's 
reformation,  it  will  prevail  to  their  destruction.  IV.  To  confibm  the  doctbine. 
Consider — 1.  A  person's  treating  truth  thus  is  rebellion  against  God,  who  is  the  God 
of  truth  and  Lord  of  light.  "  If  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is  greater  than  our 
heart,  and  knoweth  all  things,"  2.  It  exposes  men  to  severe  temporal  judgments. 
It  was  our  first  parents  holding  truth  prisoner  which  brought  in  the  flood  of  miseries 
on  the  world  (see  also  1  Pet,  iii.  19,  20),  3.  It  exposes  to  spiritual  judgments  (Isa. 
vL  8-10  ;  Kom,  i,  21-23).  4.  It  exposes  to  eternal  judgments.  Conclusion :  Con- 
sider— L  The  evil  of  it.  (1)  It  is  ingratitude  to  God  of  the  deepest  dye.  (2)  It  is 
direct  disobedience  to  God,  a  flying  in  the  face  of  His  orders.  (3)  It  is  a  rismg  up 
against  God  in  open  rebellion  and  war.  (4)  It  is  working  against  our  own  interest 
in  favour  of  Satan  and  our  lusts.  It  is  the  putting  out  of  the  candle  which  God  in 
oompassion  to  our  darkness  has  lighted  unto  us.  It  is  like  one  travelling  through 
a  wilderness  of  pits,  rising  up  against  his  guide,  binding  him  and  casting  him  into 
one  of  them.  Like  captives  conspiring  against  their  deliverers,  or  sick  men  against 
their  physicians,  to  their  own  ruin.  2.  The  greatness  of  the  hazard,  (1)  Men  so 
doing  grow  worse  and  worse.  (2)  It  brings  on  judicial  blindness.  (3)  It  brings  on 
judicial  hardness  (Isa.  vi.  10),  (4)  It  provokes  God  to  give  up  with  men  and  to  give 
them  over  to  their  own  lusts.  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols,  let  him  alone,  (5)  It 
paves  the  way  to  the  unpardonable  sin  (Heb.  vi.  1-8).  (6)  It  is  often  punished  with 
the  prevailing  of  the  spirit  of  error  and  delusion  (Isa.  Ixvi.  3,  4),  (7)  It  provokes 
God  to  remove  the  gospel  from  among  a  people,  and  to  leave  tbem  in  darkness 
(Rev,  ii,  5),  (8)  It  will  aggravate  a  person's  torment  in  hell.  "It  shall  be  more 
tolerable  for  Tyre  and  Sidon  at  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  you,"  Remember  the 
doom  of  the  servant  who  knew  his  master's  will,  but  did  it  not.  As  the  sharpest 
vinegar  comes  of  the  most  generous  wine,  so  the  most  fierce  wrath  comes  from  the 
despising  of  truth  revealed  to  one  in  the  pospel.  3,  Set  truth  free,  loose  its  bands 
that  it  may  reign  freely  in  your  hearts  and  lives.  That  is — (1)  Resist  not  truth  laid 
before  you.  (2)  Slight  not  nor  overlook  truth  in  the  conduct  of  your  lives.  (3) 
Submit  to  the  truth,  to  the  truth  in  the  Word,  and  to  truth  in  your  conscience,  as 
the  ruler  of  your  life,  (o)  It  will  set  you  at  liberty,  "  Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and 
the  truth  shall  make  you  free."  (b)  Tho  way  of  truth  is  the  way  of  holiness  and 
happiness.  {T.  Boston,  D.D.)  God's  truth  and  man's  treatment  of  it : — I.  The 
thino  spoken  of  heeb  as  "the  troth."  1.  Truth  in  the  spheres  of  science, 
literature,  art,  philosophy,  is  an  object  worth  attaining.  But  it  is  not  in  reference 
to  such  truth  that  Paul  writes.  Truth,  indeed,  is  one,  in  whatever  you  may  find  it, 
whether  in  geological  records  or  in  the  Bible.  It  means  universally  the  reality  as 
opposed  to  that  which  is  not  real.  Now  we  want  to  know  what  the  reality  is  in 
everything  that  cornea  before  our  minds.  We  want  the  historian  to  give  us  the 
reality  as  he  narrates  for  us  the  events  of  history.  So  also  in  the  higher  matters  of 
religion.  The  truth  about  God  and  His  relation  to  man ;  truth  bearing  upon  our 
duties,  destiny — this  is  our  supreme  want.  That  which  distinguishes  us  froHi  the 
brutes  is  the  possession  of  a  religious  nature  with  its  moral  capacities,  2,  It  is  only 
as  this  religious  nature  grows  that  the  man  himself  can  be  said  to  truly  grow ;  and 
this  growth  can  proceed  only  in  connection  with  religious  truth,  which  is  its  proper 
food.  Take  away  light  and  moisture  from  the  plant,  and  it  dies.  So  our  spiritual 
being  can  live  and  grow  only  in  the  light  and  under  the  vitalising  influence  of 
religious  truth.  Christ  assigns  two  functions  to  Divine  truth  in  relation  to  our 
fallen  humanity.  (1)  A  liberating  work.  Christ  says,  •'  Ye  shall  know  the  truth, 
and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free."  With  all  the  progress  of  civilisation,  and  the 
spirit  of  civil  and  political  liberty,  moral  slavery  still  prevails  among  every  people. 
And  men  are  not  very  adverse  to  it.    A  very  real  slavery  this ;  because,  while  the 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ota».  i. 

body  may  be  fre«,  the  man  himself  is  fettered  by  the  love  of  sin  and  the  spirit  of 
worldliness.  How  shall  he  be  made  free  ?  The  truth  is  the  only  instrument  to 
effect  his  liberation.  "  The  truth,"  not  any  truth.  The  truths  of  physical  soienoa 
or  of  political  philosophy,  however  precious  for  other  purposes,  are  wholly  insuffi- 
cient for  the  liberation  of  a  soul  from  sin  and  guilt.  (2)  A  sanctifying  work. 
••  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  Truth."  Growth  in  holiness  of  character  is  the  great 
thing — greater  than  any  advancement  in  culture,  than  brilliant  talents  and  genius ; 
than  the  acquisition  of  material  wealth  or  social  rank  and  power.  As  we  grow  in 
holiness  we  grow  in  real  greatness  and  in  real  happiness.  II.  Man's  conddct  ni 
BEFEBENCE  TO  "  THE  TRUTH."  It  does  uot  get  acccss  to  the  heart,  does  not  get  its 
rightful  power  and  ascendancy ;  it  is  checked,  hindered,  held  back  in  its  design  to 
bless  by  unrighteousness.  In  what  way?  Notice — 1.  That  sin  extinguishes  the 
love  and  desire  for  the  truth.  It  does  not  do  so  in  regard  to  secular  truth.  The 
astronomer  in  his  observatory,  the  chemist  in  his  laboratory,  the  geologist  among 
the  rocks — each  in  his  own  way  seeks  the  truth  and  desires  it.  But  it  is  very 
different  in  regard  to  "  the  truth  "  as  it  comes  to  us  in  God's  Word,  and  sounds  in 
the  conscience.  Why  ?  (1)  Because  it  does  not  offer  itself  as  mere  abstract  truth, 
to  excite  speculative  interest ;  it  comes  with  great  demands ;  it  is  truth  which  cliims 
obedience ;  and  it  is  not  so  easy  always  to  obey  the  truth  as  to  talk  about  it  and  admire 
it.  (2)  "  The  truth  "  is  a  rebuke  to  a  life  of  sin  ;  and  we  do  not  like  to  be  rebuked 
for  that  which  we  know  to  be  wrong.  (3)  "  The  truth,"  again,  reveals  to  man  the 
peril  to  which  a  life  of  sin  exposes  him.  The  sinner,  therefore,  closes  his  eyes  to 
it.  He  desires  to  be  undisturbed  and  at  peace  in  his  sin.  2.  Sin  destroys  the 
soul's  sensitiveness  to  the  truth.  It  weakens  the  soul's  power  of  moral  perception, 
beclouds  the  inner  vision.    {A.  Bell,  B.A.) 

Yers.  19-21.  Because  that  which  may  he  known  of  God  Is  manifest  In  them,  tor 
QoA  hath  showed  it  onto  them. — What  acquaintance  man  can  have  of  God  withovZ 
Divine  revelation : — Consider — I.  His  means  op  information.  Conscience  ;  nature; 
providence.  II.  The  extent  op  His  information.  God's  natural  perfections, 
eternity,  power,  wisdom,  &c. ;  even  something  of  His  justice,  &o.  ;  but  nothing  of 
His  it^Lnite  holiness  and  mercy.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Ignorance  of  God  is — I. 
Criminal.  Because  every  man  has  the  opportunity  of  knowing  something  of  Him  ; 
is  only  hindered  by  his  corrupt  nature  and  love  of  sin.  II.  Never  total.  God 
reveals  Himself  in  the  conscience,  in  nature.  III.  A  judicial  consequence  o» 
SIN.  Sin  darkens  the  heart,  eclipses  the  intellect.  IV.  A  precursor  of  final 
judgment.  They  are  without  excuse.  (Ibid.)  Div'ne  revelation  is — I.  Limited. 
"  That  which  may  be  known  " — hence  some  things  may  not  be  known.  Do  not 
pry  into  the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  existence,  futurity,  &c.,  but  be  humble  and 
contented  with  what  may  be  known.  II.  Sufficient.  "  That  which  may  be 
known."  God  knows  best  what  this  is.  Enough  has  been  revealed  to  make  ua 
holy  and  happy ;  let  us  be  thankful.  III.  Manifest  to  reason  and  conscience. 
Beason  approves  the  contents  of  revelation  as  true,  and  conscience  accepts  them 
as  good.  IV.  Clear.  Tiierefore — 1.  Study  it.  2.  Embrace  it.  3.  Carry  it  out. 
(J.  W.  Bum.)  The  limit  of  nature' »  revelation: — Nature  proclaims  the  existence 
of  a  God ;  but  concerning  what  that  God  is  to  us,  nature  is  altogether  silent. 
Nature  tells  us  that  there  is  a  God,  possessed  of  boundless  wisdom  and  of  vast 
benevolence  ;  but  nature's  oracles  do  not  announce  that  that  God  will  pardon  sin. 
It  gives  us  intimations  from  our  conscience  that  He  is  just ;  it  gives  us  intima- 
tions from  the  mechanism  of  our  frames  that  He  is  infinitely  wise  ;  it  whimpers  to 
us  from  the  broad  surface  of  the  world  we  gaze  on  that  He  is  a  benevolent  God ;  but 
conscience,  while  it  tells  us  that  God  is  holy,  tells  us,  too,  in  the  tones  of  a  despair 
that  it  cannot  dissipate,  that  man  is  a  fallen,  guilty,  miserable  sinner.  I  ask 
philosophy.  How  shall  God  be  just  while  He  justifies  the  ungodly  ?  I  ask  of 
physiology,  with  all  its  bright  and  brilliant  announcements,  Will  God  forgive  me 
my  sins?  I  ask  of  astronomy,  as  it  discloses  world  piled  on  world,  If  amid  the 
brightness  and  the  glory  of  those  stars,  if  amid  the  splendour  of  those  ten  thou- 
sand lamps,  it  has  discovered  that  there  is  "a  just  God  and  yet  a  Saviour"? 
And  all  nature  is  dumb  ;  astronomy  is  dumb  ;  the  mechanism  of  a  man's  frame  is 
dumb.  Still  the  great  proposition  that  must  be  solved  before  ray  dying  pillow  can 
be  peace  remains  unexplicated,  unreconciled,  unknown.  {J.  Cumming,  D.D.) 
Our  knowledgi'  of  God  limited : — A  young  child,  who  has  hitherto  fancied 
that  the  rim  'f  tiie  sky  rests  on  the  earth  a  few  miles  awav,  and  that  the  whoia 
world  lies  within  that  circle,  sails  down  the  Forth  there,  and  sees  the  tiver- 


.  I.]  ROMANS.  tl 

bAnkfl  gradually  widening  and  the  river  passing  into  a  frith.  When  he  oomes 
back,  he  tells  his  young  companions  how  large  the  ocean  is.  Poor  boy  1 
he  has  not  seen  the  ocean,  only  the  widened  river.  Just  so  with  all  creature- 
knowledge  of  God.  Though  all  the  archangels  were  to  utter  all  they  know,  there 
woald  still  remain  an  infinity  antold.  (J.  Culross,  D.D.)  For  the  Invisible 
things  of  Him  £rom  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen. — Invisible  thing* 
clearly  seen : — See  here,  I  hold  a  Bible  in  my  hand,  and  you  see  the  cover,  the 
leaves,  the  letters,  the  words,  but  you  do  not  see  the  writers,  the  printer,  the  letter- 
foander,  the  ink-maker,  the  paper-maker,  or  the  binder.  You  never  did  see  them, 
yon  never  will  see  them,  and  yet  there  is  not  one  of  you  that  will  think  of  disputing 
or  denying  the  being  of  these  men.  I  go  further ;  I  affirm  that  you  see  the  very 
■ouIb  of  these  men  in  seeing  this  book,  and  you  feel  yourselves  obliged  to  allow  that 
they  had  skill,  contrivance,  design,  memory,  fancy,  reason,  and  so  on.  In  the  same 
manner,  if  you  see  a  picture,  you  judge  there  was  a  painter;  if  you  see  a  house, 
you  judge  there  was  a  builder  of  it ;  and  if  you  see  one  room  contrived  for  this 
purpose,  and  another  for  that,  a  door  to  enter,  a  window  to  admit  light,  a  chimney 
to  hold  fire,  you  conclude  the  builder  was  a  person  of  skill  and  forecast,  who 
formed  the  house  with  a  view  to  the  accommodation  of  its  inhabitants.  In  this 
manner  examine  the  world,  and  pity  the  man  who,  when  he  sees  the  sign  of  the 
wheatsheaf,  hath  sense  enough  to  know  that  there  is  a  joiner,  and  somewhere  a 
painter,  but  who,  when  he  sees  the  wheatsheaf  itself,  is  so  stupid  as  not  to  say  to 
himself,  '•  This  had  a  wise  and  a  good  Creator."  (C.  S.  Rohimon,  D.D.)  The 
illiutriotu  manifestatioTU  of  God  and  the  inexcusable  ignorance  of  men : — I.  It  is 

MOBB    KNOWABLE    THAT   THBBB    IS   A    OoD   THAN    AfmrHINO   ELSE    IS    KMOWABLB.       1.    In 

respect  of  the  fulness  of  being  that  is  in  Him.  We  sooner  find  out  the  sun  than  a 
lesser  light,  the  sea  than  a  httle  fountain.  2.  In  respect  of  the  ways  of  knowing 
Him.  We  come  to  a  more  certain  knowledge  of  God — (1)  By  way  of  perfection. 
We  need  not  fear  to  say  too  much  of  God.  If  we  speak  of  man's  soul,  or  of  an 
angel,  we  may  speak  too  much ;  but  of  God  we  cannot  speak  too  mur^h.  (2)  By 
way  of  negation.  We  can  never  remove  imperfection  far  enough  from  God.  When 
we  have  done  our  most  we  must  say,  God  is  beyond  what  finite  and  limited  under- 
standings can  lay  out.  3.  In  respect  of  our  relation  to  Him.  We  stand  nearer 
related  to  God  than  to  anything  in  the  world ;  our  souls  and  bodies  are  not  nearer 
related  than  our  souls  and  God  (Acts  xvii.  28).  4.  In  respect  of  our  dependence 
upon  Him,  and  His  conservation  of  us  and  co-operation  with  us.  Any  man  that  is 
in  any  degree  spiritual  and  intellectual,  and  not  altogether  sunk  down  into  sense 
and  brutish  affections,  seeks  in  himself  foreign  suggestions  and  whispers  that  direct 
him  better  and  carry  him  beyond  his  own  mind  and  resolves  (Job  xxxii.  8 ;  xxxv. 
27).  II.  I  INFER — 1.  The  excellency  of  religion.  It  is  no  stranger  to  human 
nature,  nor  any  of  the  eminent  notable  acts  of  it.  Man  contradicts  hia  own 
principles  and  departs  from  himself  when  he  falls  ofi  from  God.  2.  The  use  of 
reason  in  matters  of  religion.  In  religion  there  is  the  natural  knowledge  of  God. 
and  the  knowledge  of  the  revelation  of  His  will.  In  the  former  we  are  made  to 
know  ;  in  the  latter  we  are  called  to  partake  of  God's  counsel.  In  the  former  we 
know  that  God  is  and  what  His  nature  is ;  and  in  the  latter  we  know  what  God 
enjoins  in  order  to  our  future  happiness.  3.  That  there  is  no  invincible  ignorance 
as  to  the  great  rights,  viz.,  that  God  is  to  be  worshipped  and  adored,  and  that  there 
is  a  difference  between  good  and  evil.  If  a  man  varies  from  these  laws,  he  con- 
tracts guilt  to  his  conscience,  and  is  condemned  by  the  sense  of  his  own  mind. 
4.  That  reason  is  so  far  from  doing  any  disservice  to  Christian  faith,  that  it  fits 
men  to  receive  it.  For  man  in  the  true  use  of  his  reason,  knowing  that  he  hath 
not  performed  his  duty  to  God,  reason  puts  him  upon  deprecating  God's  displea- 
sure, and  to  think  that  Ck>d,  who  is  the  first  and  oUefest  good,  will  certainly  be 
ready  to  commiserate  the  case  of  him  who  repents  and  returns  to  duty.  And  this 
is  gospel,  that  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  confirm.  And  taking  up  the  Bible  and 
finding  that  "  God  is  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  to  Himself,"  Beason  says, 
"  This  is  that  I  did  expect :  I  did  believe  such  a  thing  from  the  first  and  ohiefest 
good ;  and  now  I  am  assured  of  it  by  the  gospel."  5.  Since  the  great  things  of 
religion  and  conscience  are  committed  to  reason  to  keep  and  secure,  why  should  we 
think  the  reason  of  a  man  may  not  be  trusted  with  those  things  that  are  of  lesser 
moment.  III.  Thb  impious  akd  pbofame  abb  thebefobb  without  excusb.  There 
k  a  natural  sense  of  Deity  in  every  rational  soul;  and  this  is  fundamental  to  a?) 
religion.  The  eternal  power  and  Godhead  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood  by 
the  things  that  are  made.     If  men  are  ignorant,  it  is  through  tlieir  own  fault  . 


g|  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  fc 

either  through  the  neglect  of  their  own  faculties,  or  through  an  inobservance  of 
the  great  effects  of  God  in  the  world,  which  show  and  declare  what  He  is.  To 
pursue  the  argument  a  little  further.  The  Scripture  doth  thus  represent  the  state 
of  man's  creation  that  the  proper  employment  of  mind  is  to  inquire  after  God 
(Acts  zvii.  27).  God  did  never  intend  that  reason  should  ever  be  adjudged  to  be  a 
hewer  of  wood  or  a  drawer  of  water,  but  for  observance  of  God  and  attendance  upon 
Him.  "  The  spirit  of  man  is  the  candle  of  the  Lord."  A  candle  is  a  thing  first 
lighted,  then  lighting ;  so  that  mind  is  first  made  light  by  Divine  influences,  and 
then  enlightens  a  man  in  the  use  thereof  to  find  out  God,  and  to  follow  after  Him 
in  creation  and  providence.  And  we  find  degeneracy  is  thus  described :  "  They 
have  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes."  "  Without  God  in  the  world."  And  it  is 
the  fool's  sense  that  "  there  is  no  God."  There  is  therefore  no  plea  for  want  of 
the  sense  of  Deity.  1.  No  invincible  difficulty  lies  upon  any  man  but  that  he  may 
come  to  the  cognisance  of  a  God.  Not  the  difficulty  of — (1)  Ignorance ;  for  we  are 
made  to  know  there  is  a  God.  (2)  Impotency ;  for  every  man  may  use  his  natural 
parts  and  powers.  (3)  Foreign  impediment ;  for  it  is  a  transaction  performed 
within  a  man's  self.  If  any  one  be  devoid  of  all  sense  of  Deity,  I  declare  it  is  the 
malignity  of  the  subject  upon  a  threefold  account.  First,  because  of  the  nearness 
of  God  to  us.  Secondly,  because  of  the  sagacity  of  our  faculties.  And  thirdly, 
because  of  the  nearness  of  light  of  knowledge.  2.  There  are  invitations  everywhere 
afforded  us  to  acts  of  acknowledgment  and  taking  cognisance  of  God.  (1)  The 
communications  of  God  awaken  ns.  All  we  have  and  are  is  by  a  voluntas  y  com- 
munication from  God.  We  are  nowhere  but  receivers.  (2)  The  very  principles  of 
man's  make  do  incline  him  to  God.  All  things  move  to  tbeir  centre,  and  God  is 
the  centre  of  immortal  souls.  Caesar's  money  was  no  more  properly  his  than  mind 
is  God's  ;  for  it  bears  His  impress.  The  soul  of  man,  any  ways  by  violence  torn 
off  from  God,  is  like  leaves  fallen  off  from  the  trees,  that  wither  away  ;  but  in  God, 
who  is  their  centre,  they  have  rest,  perfection,  and  quiet.  (3)  If  we  consider  the 
whole  creation  about  us,  they  contribute,  by  way  of  object,  to  God's  glory ;  for  they 
have  not  ability  to  do  it  by  way  of  efficiency.  And  this  is  the  sense  of  the  Psalmist. 
For  mind  in  man  is  to  see  and  observe  the  wisdom  and  power  and  goodness  of 
God.  3.  To  speak  a  little  more  home,  and  only  to  the  Christian  world.  There  is 
God's  superadded  instrument,  the  Bible,  which  contains  matter  of  revelation  from 
God  whereby  also  our  natural  notices  of  God  are  awakened  and  enlivened.  Being 
disposed  by  the  two  former  arguments,  this  Book  gives  further  assurance.  So  that 
here  are  my  three  arguments.  (1)  The  language  of  our  own  souls  within.  (2)  The 
impressions  of  the  Divine  wisdom  throughout  the  whole  creation,  and  objective 
acclamations  of  all  creatures,  car.ry  us  strongly  on  to  the  knowledge  of  God.  (3) 
Holy  Scripture  comes  in  to  the  pursuance  of  these,  to  repeat  and  reinforce  them, 
so  that  he  must  needs  be  of  a  stupid  mind,  or  a  havoced  conscience,  or  dissolute  in 
his  life  and  manners,  that  lives  in  the  midst  of  so  many  arguments,  and  doth  not 
spell  out  God  and  understand  the  audible  language  of  heaven  and  earth.  Con- 
clusion :  Note — 1.  The  infinite  patience  of  God  to  endure  men  of  stupid  minds, 
havoced  consciences,  and  profligate  lives  (Heb.  xii.  3).  2.  The  business  of  the  Day 
of  Judgment  is  very  easy  on  God's  part,  but  very  sad  on  degenerate  men's  part. 
For  God's  work  is  prepared  to  His  hands;  all  sinners  are  self -condemned.  8. 
The  greatness  of  the  work  of  reconciliation.  A  man  must  be  made  whole  in  him- 
self, or  else  he  cannot  be  kept  out  of  hell.  A  man  cannot  be  at  ease  until  all  that 
he  hath  sinfully  done  be  undone,  and  until  right  judgment  hath  been  renewed 
which  hath  been  violently  forced,  and  regular  life  and  conversation  be  restored. 
Now  these  are   the  materials  of  regeneration.     (B.    Whichcote,  B.D.)  The 

doctrine  of  correspondences : — The  science  of  correspondences  is  little  under- 
stood at  the  present  day  ;  yet  it  is  in  truth  the  grandest  of  all  sciences.  For  it  is 
founded  on  the  relation  that  exists  between  heaven  and  earth,  between  the  Creator 
and  His  creation.  There  is  nothing  existing  in  the  material  world,  whether  of  the 
animal,  vegetable,  or  mineral  kingdom,  which  does  not  correspond  to  something 
spiritual,  as  an  effect  corresponds  to  its  cause.  Here  is  the  foundation  of  what  is 
called  figurative  writing,  in  which  human  thoughts  and  feelings  are  described  by 
natural  images.  Thus  we  say  in  ordinary  conversation,  "  bold  as  a  lion,"  "  cunning 
as  a  fox,"  &c. ;  and  the  Lord  Himself  is  called,  in  the  Divine  Word,  a  Lion,  and 
also,  in  other  places,  a  Lamb.  He  calls  Himself  also  a  Vine  :  •*  I  am  the  Vine,  ye 
are  the  branches."  The  Scriptures,  indeed,  are  written  throughout  according  to 
this  science,  and  it  is  only  by  means  of  an  understanding  of  its  laws  and  principles 
that  we  can  rightly  interpret  Scripture.   Thus  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  are  all  used 


CBAP.  L]  ROMANS. 


in  Soriptnre  as  metaphors  or  correspondences,  and  a  knowledge  of  their  significa* 
tion  is  a  key  to  many  eingnlar  passages.  As  for  instance,  when  it  is  said,  "  that 
the  sun  and  moon  shall  be  darkened,  and  the  stars  shall  fall."  By  the  sun  is  here 
meant  Divine  love,  because  love  is  spiritual  heat,  of  which  Divine  love  is  the  solo 
source.  Hence  the  Lord  is  called  the  "  Sun  of  Kighteousness."  The  moon,  again, 
is  the  emblem  of  faith,  because  all  the  light  of  faith  is  derived  from  love,  as  the 
moqp  derives  all  her  light  from  the  sun.  The  stars  signify  the  various  forms  of 
knowledge  in  the  mind  with  reference  to  Divine  truth :  for  as  the  stars  are  little 
points  of  scintillating  light  scattered  through  the  sky,  so  these  truths  in  the  mind 
are  as  little  points  of  spiritual  light,  whereby  the  young  Christian  may  be  guided  in 
his  dark  way,  ere  yet  the  brighter  light  of  faith  of  the  glowing  sun  of  love  has  arisen 
in  his  soul.  The  declaration,  therefore,  that  at  the  "  end  of  the  world  the  sun  and 
moon  shall  be  darkened,  and  the  stars  shall  fall,"  means,  when  spiritually  under- 
stood, that  at  the  end  of  the  Church  love  and  faith  should  be  extinguished,  and 
that  even  the  very  knowledge  of  truth  should  be  lost.  Other  things  also  in  the 
visible  heavens,  or  in  the  atmosphere,  as  rain,  snow,  clouds,  &o,,  are  all  corre- 
spondences. Water  refers  in  a  general  sense  to  truth  ;  hence  rain,  which  is  water 
falling  from  the  skies,  signifies  truth  descending  from  heaven  into  the  human  mind. 
As  the  objects  above  the  earth  are  correspondences,  so  are  all  things  upon  the  earth 
itself,  whether  in  the  mineral,  vegetable,  or  animal  kingdom.  A  knowledge  of  this 
will  explain  innumerable  difficult  passages  in  the  Scriptures.  Let  us  look  first  at 
the  mineral  kingdom.  The  Lord  says  in  Isaiah,  "  For  brass  I  will  bring  gold,  and 
for  iron  I  will  bring  silver."  ^rass  corresponds  to  natural  goodness,  and  gold  to 
celestial  goodness.  Iron,  again,  refers  to  natural  truth,  and  silver  to  spiritual  truth. 
The  meaning,  therefore,  is  that  when  the  Lord  came  to  publish  the  gospel,  and  to 
establish  Christianity,  then  instead  of  only  natural  or  external  goodness  and  truth, 
which  had  prevailed  in  the  Jewish  Church,  He  would  bring  to  men  celestial  and 
spiritual  goodness  and  truth — in  other  words,  that  the  Christian  Church  was  to  be 
an  internal  or  spiritual  church.  Let  us  now  turn  to  the  vegetable  kingdom.  We 
know  that  the  olive,  the  vine,  and  the  fig-tree  are  very  often  mentioned  in  Scripture, 
and  frequently  simultaneously.  The  same  general  meaning  is  implied  as  in  the 
case  of  the  metals  already  explained.  By  the  olive  is  signified  celestial,  by  the  vine 
spiritual,  and  by  the  fig-tree  natural  goodness ;  for  there  are  three  distinct  degrees 
or  regions  in  the  human  mind.  Turn  now  to  the  signification  of  the  animals  men- 
tioned in  Scripture.  The  Lord  Himself  is  compared  both  to  a  lion  and  a  lamb  ;  a 
lion  from  the  power  of  His  Divine  truth,  and  a  lamb  from  the  innocence  of  His 
Divine  love  ;  for  a  lion  in  a  good  sense  signifies  the  power  of  truth,  and  a  lamb  the 
principle  of  innocence.  In  a  bad  or  opposite  sense,  a  Hon  is  used  to  denote  the 
power  of  falsity  and  its  ilestructive  influence  in  the  Church  ;  for  false  doctrines  have 
a  powerful  effect  in  leading  men  into  evil  practices.  Birds  represent  generally 
thoughts  and  intellectual  faculties.  Thus  where  it  is  said  in  Jeremiah,  "  I  beheld, 
and  there  was  no  man,  and  all  the  birds  of  the  heaven  were  fled,"  the  meaning  is  that 
the  Jewish  Chnrch  had  come  to  an  end ;  there  was  no  wisdom  left,  and  no  thought 
of  spiritual  things.  From  the  views  here  set  forth,  we  learn  how  all  things  in  nature 
are  representative  of  things  in  the  spiritual  world  ;  how  the  outward  universe 
reflects,  as  in  a  mirror,  the  inward  and  unseen,  and  how  the  whole  creation  is  an 
image  of  the  great  Creator.  (P.  Hiller.)  The  inexcusahleness  and  unreason  of 
unbelief: — The  law  of  manifestation  is  that  there  must  always  be  hidden  powers 
and  forces  adequate  to  produce  the  manifestation.  The  law  is  worthy  of  all  honour, 
and  commands  our  reverence  ;  it  is  the  basis  of  faith  in  invisible  things.  Whatever 
we  see  is  but  the  face,  or  expression,  which  the  unseen  substance  and  energy  have 
made  for  themselves.  If  men  are  dubious  about  there  being  an  invisible  universe 
behind  the  veil  of  the  visible,  they  are  mentally  and  spiritually  blind.  Our  houses, 
ships,  steam-engines  and  whatever  is  mechanically  fabricated  are  made  out  of 
things  which  appear  ;  but  living,  breathing  organisms  could  only  be  evolved  by  an 
invisible  spirit.  Bells  on  the  stem  of  the  hly,  the  petals  of  the  rose,  equally  with 
the  consteUations  of  the  heavens,  could  only  be  played  into  form  by  an  inscrutable 
mind.  Not  only  is  the  visible  creation  a  birth  from  the  invisible  ;  but  it  is  every 
moment  fed  and  kept  alive  by  the  communication  and  inbreathing  of  the  invisible 
potency.  To  scientists  who  affirm  "We  can  know  nothing  but  phenomena,"  I 
reply  we  can  know,  and  do  know,  the  invisible  world  of  our  affections,  of  our 
thoughts  a  great  deal  better,  and  with  much  more  certainty,  than  we  can  ever 
know  phenomena.  If  we  speak  of  an  imaginary  world,  it  must  be  the  world  that  is 
outside  of  us  rather  than  the  unseen  world  of  our  consciousness.    We  all  know  the 


si  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chi».  t. 


bidden  world  of  oar  likes  and  dislikes,  oar  designs  and  motives,  oar  hopes  and  fears, 
much  more  indubitably  than  we  can  ever  know  external  appearances.  Aspirations, 
reasonings,  smd  intuitions  are  constantly  coming  to  birth  within  us,  and  are  very  living 
realities ;  but  they  can  neither  be  seen  nor  handled.  Nor  can  they  be  ascribed  to  the 
solids  and  fluids  of  our  physical  structure.  By  physical  observation  a  man  can  no 
more  And  himself  than  he  can  find  God,  who  is  to  the  universe  what  man  is  to  the 
organs  of  his  natural  body.  Observe  that  the  conclusions  of  our  very  knowing,  but  on- 
knowing,  friends  empty  the  universe  of  all  real  contents,  and  the  soul  of  all  reverence 
and  hope.  Yet  it  is  somewhat  instructive  to  find  many  of  these  cold  sciolists  surrender- 
ing and  even  bowing  down  the  invisible  fire  of  love  which  they  find  embodied  in 
woman,  and  pulsing  through  woman.  Man's  admiration  of  woman  has  no  adequate 
ground,  nor  can  it  endure,  unless  she  be  regarded  as  a  shrine  for  the  love  and  beauty 
of  eternal  God.  Suppose  a  man  has  actually  come  to  such  a  conclusion,  and  that  his 
fiaal  positivism  is,  "  There  is  no  infinite  understanding  in  and  over  the  universe, 
nor  is  there  any  enduring  spirit  in  man  "  ;  what  in  that  case  has  he  done  for  him- 
self and  the  human  race  ?  He  has  set  up  reasonless  atoms  above  reason ;  for  he 
has  made  them  to  be  the  cause  of  reason.  He  has  exalted  icy  indifference  to  the 
throne  of  the  universe.  In  effect,  he  says :  "  I  have  searched  creation  through,  and 
I  find  everywhere  complicated  contrivance,  realising  most  admirable  results ;  and 
from  beginning  to  end  law  reigns,  all-comprehending,  but  there  is  no  Lawgiver,  no 
supreme  Fount  of  Life,  no  God  and  Father  of  the  spirits  of  men."  Now  if  that  be 
reason,  I  earnestly  pray  that  I  may  be  for  ever  and  ever  void  of  such  reason.  The 
truth  is,  that  men  who  magnify  material  forms,  above  spiritual  and  personal  entities, 
Boffer  the  penalty  in  the  infatuation  of  their  own  minds.  Strictly  speaking,  educa- 
tion is  not  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  from  without ;  but  consists  rather  in 
awakening  and  leading  oat  the  latent  and  superior  powers  which  are  in  the  man, 
that  he  may  be  able  to  correct  the  conclusions  of  his  outer  senses — a  work  this 
involving  a  vastly  higher  estimate  of  humanity  than  the  wretched  postulate  that 
you  can  catalogue  the  contents  of  a  man  by  the  analysis  of  bis  physical  form. 
There  is  a  path  of  entrance  to  the  sacred  substance  and  centre  of  life ;  but  neither 
the  lion  nor  the  vulture  of  materialism  will  ever  find  it.  And  let  me  press  the 
inquiry  here :  How  could  there  be  in  nature  such  a  scope  for  the  researches  of  the 
human  mind,  unless  she  were  a  revelation  of  mind  ?  If  the  heavens  and  the  earth 
do  not  show  forth  the  wisdom  of  God,  how  is  it  they  are  so  attractive  to  mind  ? 
And  surely,  if  we  admire  mind  and  wisdom  in  the  men,  who  are  no  more  than 
appreciative  observers,  we  must  much  more  ascribe  mind  and  wisdom  to  the 
originating  genius  and  architect.  If  mind,  and  mind  only,  can  read  and  study  the 
book  of  the  heavens,  how  is  it  possible  to  escape  the  conclusion  that  mind,  and  mind 
only,  could  have  composed  the  book  ?  Our  friends,  therefore,  who  say  that  they 
can  discover  no  evidence  of  mind  in  the  structure  of  the  universe  are,  as  it  appears 
to  us,  strangely  illogical.  We  are  afraid  also  that  they  are  answerable  for  some 
degree  of  perverseness.  For  they  treat  not  the  works  of  man  as  they  treat  the  works 
of  the  Infinite.  They  see  man's  mind  in  his  machinery,  and  in  his  manipulation 
of  the  forces  of  wind  and  water,  steam  and  electricity ;  but  fail  to  see  the  Mind  of 
minds  in  the  forces  and  the  laws,  the  processes  and  beneficent  results  of  nature. 
The  infinite  soul  which  streams  through  and  through  nature,  blending  with  our 
souls,  gives  us  an  intense  feeling  of  at-homeness  in  the  universe.  It  is  our  Father's 
house  and  our  house.  Light,  hope,  and  joy  reign  in  our  bosoms.  And,  by  a  like 
law  of  cause  and  effect,  all  hunuin  souls  who  turn  to  God  as  the  earth  turns  to  the 
Bun,  and  whose  affections  attract  the  Spirit  of  His  love,  become  absolutely  conscious 
of  a  new  summer  in  their  breasts,  which  is  their  heaven  begun.  We  compassionate 
greatly  all  blind  and  paralysed  souls  who  never  see  what  is  best  worth  seeing, 
and  never  taste  the  sublime,  the  undying  human   joy.     {J.  PuUford.)  The 

universe  a  manifestation  of  God  : — Some  may  ask,  "  What  has  this  to  do  with  our 
sins  and  our  salvation — with  this  life  or  the  life  to  come  ?  "  I  answer,  "  Much," 
for  the  root  of  them  all  lies  in  the  nature  of  God  and  in  the  state  of  man  ;  and  as 
we  should  know  more  of  our  own  selves  if  we  knew  more  about  humanity,  so 
should  we  know  more  about  humanity  if  we  knew  more  of  the  great  truths  which 
God  has  written  upon  the  tablets  of  the  universe.  Tiie  beauty  of  the  works  of  God 
is  one  of  the  most  signal  manifestations  of  the  Crsator's  handiwork,  and  the 
recognition  of  this  is  one  of  the  purest  sources  of  human  happiness,  and  one  of  the 
surest  proofs  that  the  universe  is  a  revelation  of  its  God.  The  reason  why  I  am 
not  sorry  thus  to  touch  on  this  theme  is  because  in  these  great  cities,  where  we  lose 
nine-tenths  of  the  lessons  of  nature,  we  are  more  liable  to  be  feverishly  absorbed  in 


I.]  ROMANS.  85 

oar  personal  aud  material  intereste,  and  because  we  should  be  much  purer,  wiser, 
larger-hearted  men  if  we  looked  more  lovingly  and  thougbtfuUy  at  the  great  works 
of  Ctod.  The  remedy  for  much  personal  sadness,  narrowness,  irreligious  spirit  of 
much  that  calls  itseli  religion,  is  that  deeper  knowledge  of  Ood  to  be  found  not 
only  in  Scripture,  but  in  nature,  history,  oonscience,  and  the  reason  of  mankind. 
For  them  who  have  the  knowledge  and  the  humility  to  read  His  awful  signature, 
Ood  has  written  His  name  upon  the  universe.  I.  Even  the  heathen  read  it  there. 
The  mythology  of  Greece,  in  its  purer  and  earlier  stage,  was  but  an  expression  of 
the  sights  they  saw  and  the  lessons  they  read  therein.  In  Homer,  the  earliest  of 
Greek  poets,  we  see  throughout  this  cheerful  piety.  St.  Paul  himseU  appeals  to 
the  holy  lessons  which  the  Greek  poets  had  learnt  from  the  works  of  God.  "We 
•re  all  God's  offspring  "  ;  •♦  God  giveth  as  rain  from  heaven  and  fruitful  seasons, 
miing  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness  " ;  and,  in  my  text,  he  argues  with  the 
Romans  that  God  was  manifest  even  to  the  heathen,  because  "  the  invisible  things 
of  Him,"  <S;c.  Many  an  age  had  intervened  between  the  early  Greek  singers  and 
the  late  Stoic  philosophers  ;  yet  in  them,  too,  we  find  exactly  the  same  feeling  to 
the  works  of  God.  "All  things,"  says  Marcus  Aurelius,  "come  from  that  universal 
power.  Everything  harmonises  with  me  which  is  harmonious  to  thee,  0  universe! 
Everything  is  fruit  to  me  which  thy  seasons  bring."  Is  not  this  the  language  in 
every  age  of  natural  piety  ?  And  ii,  in  all  ages,  it  has  been  thus  that  the  best  and 
wisest  have  interpreted  the  universe,  is  not  that  alone  a  proof  that  God  meant  it 
to  be  so  interpreted  ?  II.  The  Scriftubbs  leave  us  in  no  doubt  upon  that  matter. 
Bead  over  Psalm  civ.,  which  has  been  called  the  natural  theology  of  the  old  Jews. 
It  is  eminently  refreshing,  at  all  times,  to  torn  from  the  wordy  strifes,  and  petty 
jealonsies,  and  miserable  interests  of  earth,  to  these  sweet  and  wholesome  truths 
of  natural  theology.  When  God  speaks  to  Job  out  of  the  whirlwind  to  console  his 
Borrows,  to  revive  his  sinking  faith,  He  points  him  to  the  sweet  influences  of  the 
Pleiades  and  the  bands  of  Orion,  Ac.  And  is  it  not  thus  in  our  Lord's  own  sermon 
on  the  Mount  ?  Did  not  our  Lord  speak  there  of  the  fowls  of  the  air  and  of  the 
lilies  of  the  field  ?  And  does  He  not  draw  parables  from  the  simplest  objects  of 
nature  ?  Why  should  He  have  done  so  if  it  were  not  to  show  us  that  this  universe 
is  a  parable  of  God  ?  III.  God's  tbcb  saints  in  all  aoes  have  not  been  unmind- 
ful of  the  lesson.  They  have  ever  regarded  nature  as  a  revelation  of  God't^ 
awfulness  and  goodness,  of  God's  care  and  love.  When  St.  Anthony  was  asked 
how  he  could  exist  without  books,  he  replied  that  to  him  who  read  the  two  books 
of  Scripture  and  of  nature  no  other  teaching  was  necessary.  Take  the  medisevaJ 
saints.  St.  Bernard  said  that  the  oaks  and  beeches  of  Clairvanx  had  been  his  best 
masters  in  theology,  St.  Francis  thanks  God  "  for  our  brother,  my  lord  the  sun, 
and  for  our  sister,  the  moon,  and  for  the  jocund  strength  and  irresistible  bri<^htne8s 
of  oor  brother,  the  fire,  and  for  the  sweet,  chaste  usefulness  of  our  sister,  the 
water,"  Take  the  outburst  of  our  own  Milton,  "  These  are  Thy  glorious  works. 
Parent  of  good,"  Ac. ;  and  the  sweet  hymn  of  the  poet-statesman,  '*  The  spacious 
firmament  on  high,"  Ac;  and  the  touching  story  of  the  dying  Livingstone,  revived 
into  the  effort  which  saved  his  life  by  seeing  there,  in  the  African  desert,  the  little 
tuft  of  moss,  and  thinking  that  if  God  could  water  that  little  beaming  moss,  and 
keep  it  moist  with  the  dew  and  bright  with  the  sunshine.  He  surely  would  care  lor 
him.  IV,  And  this  also  has  ever  been  the  attitude  of  all  tbite  science.  It  is  the 
attitude  of  Bacon,  praying  that  after  labooring  in  God's  works  with  the  sweat  of 
his  brow,  God  would  make  him  partaker  of  His  rest  and  Sabbath.  It  is  the 
attitude  of  Faraday,  worshipping  Sunday  after  Sunday  in  his  little,  quiet 
Dissenting  chapel.  It  is  the  attitude  of  Linnaeus  falling  on  his  knees  under  the 
open  sky  to  thank  God  for  the  unspeakable  beauty  of  fields,  golden  in  the  sunshine 
with  a  summer  gloss,  Y.  And  such,  also,  is  the  intuition  of  genius.  The  great 
poets,  painters,  musicians  of  this  and  the  close  of  the  last  century,  seem  to  have 
been  specially  commissioned  to  interpret  nature  to  man.  Who  that  has  beard  the 
thrilling  jubilance  of  the  "  Creation,"  has  not  seen,  as  it  were,  a  new  door  opened 
into  heaven — has  not  been  drawn  nearer  to  the  presence-chamber  of  God  ?  To 
Wordsworth  it  was  given  to  make  others  feel  that  •'  the  meanest  flower  that  blows 
can  give  thoughts  that  do  often  lie  too  deep  for  tears,"  To  Turner  it  was  given  to 
perpetuate  the  most  transient  glories  of  nature,  and  the  scenes  he  painted  became 
an  apocalypse  of  the  splendour  and  the  meaning  of  the  world.  The  greatest  thing 
which  Raskin's  writings  have  done  for  ue  has  been  to  show  us  how  all  creation 
testifies  to  its  God,  and  that  we  miss  the  happiness  which  His  mercy  has  provided 
when  we  fail  to  trust  Him,  and  to  learn  of  Him  as  we  drink  in  the  delights  of  t},'- 


86  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  I. 

hearing  ear  and  the  Beeing  eye.  Conclusion:  Believe  me,  it  is  often  the  most 
humble  and  obvious  arguments  which  are  most  irresistible  ;  and  the  simple  earth- 
work stops  the  cannon  ball  which  shatters  the  buttress  into  dust.  Once  when  the 
great  Napoleon  was  sailing  to  Egypt,  he  sat  on  the  deck  with  a  circle  of  distin- 
guished savans  around  him,  who  were  openly  boasting  of  their  infidelity.  He 
listened  in  silence ;  but  as  he  rose  to  leave  them,  he  raised  his  arm  towards  the 
Btarry  canopy  of  night,  and  he  asked  them  the  simple  question,  "  It  is  all  very  well 
to  talk,  gentlemen,  but  who  made  all  those  ?  "  And  if  this  natural  conviction  has  been 
shaken  in  some  minds  by  the  pride  of  science,  it  has,  as  we  have  seen,  been  simul- 
taneously intensified  in  others ;  and  that  is  why  the  great  painters,  and  poets,  and 
musicians  have  not  only  saved  many  of  as  from  being  crushed  by  the  revelations, 
or  inflated  by  the  discoveries,  of  science ;  but,  pouring  on  every  realm  of  nature  a 
flood  of  Divine  illumination,  they  have  opened  our  eyes  to  beauties  before  un- 
noticed, and  filled  our  souls  with  melody,  which  heaven  only  can  excel.  [Arch- 
deacon Farrar.)        God  in  nature : — I.  Whereveb  wb  see  a  ohanqb,  we  abe  fobced 

BT  THE  VEBY  CONSTITUTION   OF  DUB   MIND  TO  BELIEVE  THAT  IT  HAD  A  CAUSE.      If  We  866 

a  plant  growing  to-day  where  there  was  none  a  short  while  ago,  we  conclude  that 
some  hand  has  planted  it  there.  If  we  feel  pain  we  at  once  ascribe  it  to  some 
cause,  and  immediately  set  about  to  discover  what  it  is.  And  so  with  every  change. 
I  take  the  book  geologists  have  opened  for  me,  and  I  find  there  that  innumerable 
changes  have  passed  upon  our  globe.  Science  takes  us  back  to  a  time  in  its 
history  when  there  was  no  life  upon  it.  Nothing,  therefore,  is  more  certain  than 
that  Life  had  a  beginning  on  our  globe.  What  produced  it?  The  most  distin- 
guished scientific  men  have  to  confess  that  there  is  a  gulf  here  which  they  cannot 
bridge.  "The  present  state  of  knowledge,"  says  Professor  Huxley,  "furnishes  aa 
with  no  link  between  the  living  and  the  not-living."  "  I  am,"  says  Sir  W.  Thom- 
son, "ready  to  adopt,  as  an  article  of  scientific  faith,  true  through  all  space  and 
through  all  time,  that  life  proceeds  from  life  and  nothing  but  life."  So  far,  then, 
as  science  is  concerned,  the  origin  of  life  remains  a  mystery.  "  Give  me  matter," 
said  Eant,  "  and  I  will  explain  the  formation  of  a  world ;  but  give  me  matter  only, 
and  I  cannot  explain  the  formation  of  a  caterpillar."  I  contend,  therefore,  that 
the  existence  of  life  on  our  globe  proves  its  origination  by  a  living  Being.  II. 
Wherever  we  see  order,  we  bee  an  evidence  of  uind.  1.  When  we  see  that 
changes  have  been  produced  through  which  there  runs  a  principle  of  order,  we  are 
compelled,  by  the  very  constitution  of  our  nature,  to  say.  Here  is  not  only  a  power 
which  causes  these  changes,  but  one  which  has  intelligence.  (1)  "One  day  at 
Naples,"  says  a  French  writer,  "  a  certain  person  in  our  presence  put  six  dice  into 
a  box,  and  offered  a  wager  that  he  would  throw  sixes  with  the  whole  set.  I  said 
that  the  chance  was  possible.  He  threw  the  dice  in  this  way  twice  in  succession ; 
and  I  still  observed  that  he  had  succeeded  by  chance.  He  put  back  the  dice  into 
the  box  for  the  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  time,  and  invariably  threw  sixes  with  the 
whole  set.  Then  I  exclaimed,  *  The  dice  are  loaded ! '  and  so  they  were.  And 
when  I  look  at  the  order  of  nature,  and  consider  that  there  is  but  one  chance  which 
can  preserve  the  universe  in  the  state  I  now  see  it,  aud  that  this  always  happens 
in  spite  of  a  hundred  millions  of  other  possible  chances  of  perturbation  and 
destruction,  I  cry  out,  *  Surely  nature's  dice  are  also  loaded '  " ;  which  is  just  saying 
that  order  is  due  to  intelligence.  (2)  Or  suppose  you  come  upon  a  quantity  of  type 
lying  in  confusion.  You  say  these  types  have  been  thrown  together  by  accident. 
But  close  beside  this  confused  mass  you  find  a  form  of  types,  which  are  so  placed 
as  to  make  words,  and  the  words  sentences,  and  the  sentences  a  continuous  story. 
What  would  you  be  constrained  to  conclude?  That  it  was  the  result,  not  of 
chance,  but  of  intelligence.  (3)  Or  let  as  take  this  building.  There  yoa  have 
window,  doorway,  wall,  roof,  forming  a  structure  in  which  you  see  unity,  order, 
and  beauty.  All  this,  you  know,  is  the  result  of  intelligence,  and  any  man  who  would 
try  to  persuade  you  that  as  much  order  and  beauty  can  be  produced  by  mere  blind  force 
acting  on  matter,  might  as  well  ask  yoa  to  give  ap  using  your  reason  altogether. 
2.  Now,  when  we  turn  to  nature,  we  find  order  everywhere.  There  may  be  much 
in  the  world  of  which  we  do  not  know  the  precise  use,  except  that  of  ornament. 
The  architect  who  planned  this  building  designed  much  which  was  not  needed, 
except  to  please  the  eye.  And  so,  in  the  works  of  nature,  we  find  precisely  the 
same  thing.  As  Professor  Le  Gomte  puts  it,  "  The  law  of  order  underlies  and  con- 
ditions the  law  of  use  " ;  and  he  illustrates  this  in  the  following  way.  (1)  He  goes 
back  to  the  period  when  fishes  were  the  only  representatives  of  the  vertebrate  plan 
9t  stractaza.    This  machine,  as  he  calls  the  fish,  was  a  swimming  machine,  fitted 


OTi*.  I.]  EOMANS.  91 

for  locomotion  in  the  water.  Ages  pass  away,  and  then  reptiles  appear ;  but  thera 
ia  no  new  organ  created  to  enable  them  to  crawl  upon  the  land.  The  Bwimming 
organ  is  so  modified  as  to  become  a  crawling  one.  Ages  again  pass  away,  and  then 
birds  are  introduced.  Here  again  the  same  order  is  modified,  and  becomes  a  wing 
which  enables  them  to  move  in  the  air.  Ages  again  pass  away,  and  at  last  man 
appears  on  the  scene.  What  is  wanted  now  is  not  a  fin,  nor  a  wing,  but  a  hand  ; 
and  this  is  obtained  by  another  modification  of  the  same  organ.  "  And  thus,  in 
the  hand  of  man,  in  the  forefoot  of  a  quadruped,  in  the  paw  of  the  reptile,  in  the 
wing  of  a  bird,  and  in  the  filn  of  the  fish,  the  same  organ  is  modified  for  different 
purposes."  (2)  Dr.  M'Cosh  arranges  order  under  four  heads — number,  time,  colour, 
and  form.  Take — (a)  Number.  You  find  seven  bones  in  the  vertebrae  of  the  neck 
of  all  mammalia,  whether  the  neck  be  short  or  long,  {b)  Colour.  Seldom  or  never 
are  the  two  primary  colours,  blue  and  red,  found  on  the  same  organ,  or  in  contact 
on  the  same  plant.  Every  dot  in  the  flower  comes  in  at  the  proper  place,  every 
tint  and  shade  and  hue  is  in  accordance  with  all  that  is  contiguous  to  it.  (c) 
Form.  All  minerals  crystallise  in  certain  forms,  and  every  living  object,  though 
composed  of  numerous  parts,  has  a  definite  shape  as  a  whole,  and  a  normal  shape 
for  each  of  its  organs.  (3)  But  take  a  wider  view.  Sweep  the  universe  with  your 
eye,  and  you  will  everywhere  find  order.  "  Our  own  planet  is  so  related  to  the  sun 
and  moon  that  seed-time  and  harvest,  the  ebb  and  flow  of  tides,  never  fail.  The 
countless  millions  of  suns  and  stars  are  so  arranged  and  distributed  in  relation  to 
one  another,  or  in  accordance  with  the  profoundest  mathematics,  as  to  secure  the 
safety  of  one  and  all,  and  to  produce  everywhere  harmony  and  beauty"  (Prof. 
FUnt).  Now  can  you  think  of  that  universal  order  and  beauty  without  thinking 
of  a  mind  behind  it  to  which  they  are  due  7  3.  But  all  this,  we  are  told,  is  the 
result  of  evolution,  in  which  force  is  revealed  but  mind  dispensed  with.  But 
evolution  only  describes  a  process,  and  does  not  account  for  it.  It  is  not  enough 
to  point  to  force  as  the  explanation  ;  it  may  account  for  change,  but  not  for  order. 
Force  throws  no  light  upon  the  evolution  of  protoplasm  now  into  a  fish,  now  into 
a  bird,  and  now  into  a  man.  The  prevalence  of  order  is  the  "  reign  of  law  " ;  and 
the  "  reigu  of  law  "  is  the  reign  of  mind.  III.  Ijj  the  abrangements  and  adapta- 
tions TO  ends  which  WZ  find  m  MATTER  WE   HAVE    ALSO  THE    EVIDENCE   OF   MIND.      1. 

Take  the  simple  illustration  of  a  rude  hut.  The  materials  are  so  placed  and 
adapted  that  you  have  not  only  order,  but  a  useful  end ;  you  have  a  contrivance, 
an  evidence  here  of  design,  and  this  means  that  you  have  here  a  proof  of  mind. 
Or  take  the  steam  engine.  There  you  have  iron,  water,  coal,  and  fire;  but  observe 
how  they  are  arranged.  The  iron  is  so  disposed  as  to  furnish  a  receptacle  for  the 
water,  and  a  chamber  into  which  coals  can  be  put  and  lighted.  You  have  also 
cylinders,  pistons,  connecting-rods,  and  wheels.  And  then  the  connection  of  all 
the  parts  is  such  that,  when  the  coals  are  lighted,  the  water  is  changed  into  steam, 
which  gives  motion  to  piston,  rod,  and  wheel,  and  sends  the  engine  along  its  track, 
or  propels  the  vessel  over  the  ocean.  No  mere  shaking  of  coal,  iron,  and  water,  for 
any  period,  however  lengthened,  and  by  any  forces,  however  mighty,  could  ever 
have  resulted  in  forming  such  an  engine.  No  union  and  adjustment  of  them,  such 
as  we  have,  could  have  been  brought  about  by  mere  chance.  This  adaptation  and 
arrangement  of  different  elements  of  matter,  so  as  to  accomplish  this  end,  the 
production  of  motive  power,  required  mind,  ay,  and  vastly  more  of  it  than  the 
construction  of  a  rude  hut.  3.  Now,  let  as  turn  to  the  works  of  nature,  and  we 
shall  see  that  whether  we  look  to  earth,  or  ocean,  or  sky,  or  man,  we  meet  every- 
where with  arrangements  for  distinct  ends,  which  reveal  the  highest  intelligence, 
and  not  only  constrain  belief  in  the  Divine  existence,  but  rouse  to  admiration  and 
praise.  (1)  We  take  this  globe,  which  revolves  around  the  sun.  There  are  two 
forces  acting  upon  it,  which  balance  each  other — the  one  tending  to  draw  it 
towards,  and  the  other  to  draw  it  away  from,  the  sun.  If  the  first  of  these  had 
been  greater  than  it  is,  the  earth  would  have  been  drawn  into  the  sun  and 
destroyed ;  and  if  the  second  had  been  stronger  than  it  is,  then,  just  as  a  stone 
slung  round  the  head  flies  ofF  when  the  string  is  let  go,  so  the  earth  would  have 
rushed  from  its  orbit  into  darkness  and  ruin.  In  this  adjustment  of  forces,  then, 
which  preserves  our  world,  do  we  not  see  the  manifestations  of  a  controlling  mind? 
(2)  We  take  the  book  which  the  geologist  has  opened.  The  great  convulsions  it 
records  prove  to  have  been  but  the  birth-throes  of  a  world  fitted  for  the  varied 
necessities  of  the  living  creatures  which  inhabit  it.  The  coal  and  the  iron,  for, 
example,  which,  more  than  anything  else,  have  contributed  to  human  civilisation 
«nd  comfort,  have  had  their  strata  tilted  up  by  these,  so  that  man  could  reach 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  laa^.  t. 

them.    The  disposition  of  land  and  water ;  the  elevation,  slope,  and  direotion  at 
the  mountain   ranges ;  the   Boooping  out  of  the  Talleys ;   the  elevation  of  vaal 
plateaus ;  the  formation  of  the  lakes ;  the  streams ;  the  oceanic  currents — all  these 
afiect  the  temperature,  rainfall,  and  vegetation.    (8)  Turn  to  the  atmosphere, 
which  is  essential  to  life,     (a)  Its  chemical  elements  are  being  constantly  abstracted 
in  the  vital  processes  of  vegetable  and  animal ;  but  what  the  one  consumes  the 
other  supplies ;  and  so,  by  this  and  other  arrangements,  the  balance  of  elements  in 
(he  air  is  maintained,  otherwise  it  would  become  unfit  to  support  life.     {L)  Look  at 
it  as  the  medium  for  the  diffusion  of  light  and  heat  and  sound.    If  we  had  no 
atmosphere,  then,  while  every  object  on  which  the  sun's  rays  fell  would  dazzle  us 
by  its  brightness,  everything  else  would  be  in  the  deepest  darkness.    Nor  could  we 
hear,  for  the  air  is  necessary  to  the  transmission  of  sound.    Nor  could  the  heat  of  the 
sun's  rays  be  retained  and  diffused  without  an  atmosphere.     (4)  From  dead  matter 
let  as  turn  to  organic  or  living  matter.    Take  vegetable  life.    When  a  certain  cycle 
of  existence  has  been  passed,  vegetable  growths  die ;  but  before  they  die  they  make 
provision  for  the  continuance  of  their  species.    (5)  Let  as  ascend  to  a  higher 
region.    The  structure  of  the  human  body.     "  How  complicate  I  how  wonderful  is 
man  1 "     The  writer  of   one  of    the  old  Hermetic  books  called  "  The  Divinf 
Poemander  "  puts  the  argument  from  man's  structure  in  this  way :  "  Consider,  O 
son,  how  man  is  made  and  framed  in  the  womb  ;  and  examine  diligently  the  skill 
and  cunning  of  the  workman,  and  learn  who  it  was  that  vnrought  and  fashioned 
the  beautiful  and  divine  shape  of  man.     Who  circumscribed  and  marked  out  his 
eyes  ?   Who  bored  his  nostrils  and  ears  ?    Who  opened  his  mouth  ?   Who  stretched 
out  and  tied  together  his  sinews  ?    Who  hardened  and  made  strong  the  bones  ? 
Who  clothed  the  flesh  with  skin?    Who  divided  the  fingers  and  the  joints ?    Who 
flattened  and  made  broad  the  soles  of  the  feet  ?    Who  digged  the  pores  ?    Who 
stretched  out  the  spleen  ?    Who  made  the  heart  like  a  pyramid  ?    Who  made  the 
liver  broad  and  the  lungs  spougy  and  full  of  holes  ?     Who  made  the  belly  large 
and  capacious?     Who  set  to  view  the  more  honourable  parts  and  hid  the  filthy 
ones  ?    See  how  many  arts  in  one  matter ;  and  how  many  works  in  one  superscrip- 
tion, and  all  exceedingly  beautiful,  and  all  done  in  measure,  and  yet  all  differing. 
Who  hath  made  all  these  things  ?    What  mother  ?    What  father  ?     Save  only  God 
that  is  most  manifest — that  made  all  things  by  His  own  will."    Now,  "  Who  in  the 
world  is  a  verier  fool,"  as  Jeremy  Taylor  puts  it,  "than  he  who  is  an  atheist?  .  .  . 
Can  anything  in  this  world  be  more  foolish  than  to  think  that  all  this  rare  fabrio 
of  heaven  and  earth  can  come  by  chance  [or  blind  force]  when  all  the  skill  of  art  is 
not  able  to  make  an  oyster?    To   see  rare  effects  and  no  cause;   an  excellent 
government  and  no  prince ;  a  motion  without  an  immovable ;  a  circle  without  a 
centre ;  a  time  without  an  eternity  ;  a  second  without  a  first ;  a  thing  that  begins 
not  from  itself,  and  therefore  not  to  perceive  that  there  is  something  from  whence 
it  does  begin,  which  must  be  without  beginning ;   these  things  are  so  against 
philosophy  and  natural  reason,  that  he  must  needs  be  a  beast  in  understanding 
who  does  not  assent  to  them  ;  this  is  the  atheist.     '  The  fool   hath  said  in  his 
heart,  There  is  no  God.'"     (A.  Oliver,  B.A.)        Nature's  revelatiotu  overlooked  in 
their  commonnes$ : — If  the  stars  should  appear  one  night  in  a  thousand  years,  how 
would  men  believe  and  adore  and  preserve  for  many  generations  the  remembrance 
of  the  city  of  God  which  had  been  shown.     {R.  W.  Ememon.)         God  seen  in  the 
order  of  nature : — A  clerpyman  asked  an  old  negro  his  reasons  for  believing  in  the 
existence  of  a  God.    •'  Sir,"  said  he,  "  I  have  been  here  going  hard  upon  fifty  years. 
Every  day  since  I  have  been  in  this  world,  I  see  the  sun  rise  in  the  east  and  set  in 
the  west.     The  north  star  stands  where  it  did  the  first  time  I  ever  saw  it ;  the 
seven  stars  and  Job's  coflSn  keep  on  the  same  path  in  the  sky,  and  never  turn  out. 
It  ain't  so  with  man's  works.     He  makes  clocks  and  watches :  they  may  mn  well 
for  a  while  ;  but  they  get  out  of  fix,  and  stand  stock  still.    But  the  sun  and  moon 
and  stars  keep  on  the  same  way  aU  the  while.     There  is  a  power  which  makes  one 
man  die,  and  another  get  well ;  that  sends  the  rain,  and  keeps  everything  in  motion." 
The  existence  of  God : — I.  Grounds  of  belief  in  the  existence  of  God.    God 
reveals  Himself — 1.  By  the  works  of  nature.     (1)  Every  effect  must  have  a  cause. 
You  see  the  picture  of  a  flower  or  a  bird,  and  you  ask  at  once,  Who  drew  it?    You 
behold  a  statue,  and  you  inquire.  Who  was  the  sculptor  ?   But  how  much  more  ia  a 
real  flower,  bird,  man,  the  proof  of  a  Creator  I    (2)  The  same  conviction  is  only 
confirmed  when  you  observe  the  adaptation  of  means  to  ends.   The  plant  is  designed 
lo  be  stationary,  and  accordingly  its  roots  are  firmly  fixed  in  the  earth.     The  bird 
was  desired  for  locomotion,  and  hence  in  its  wings  we  find  a  perfect  apparatus  tot 


.  t]  ROMANS. 


transporting  it  from  plaoe  to  place.  Man  was  intended  to  govern  all  oreatores,  and 
aooordingly  he  is  endowed  with  an  nnderstanding  that  rendtirs  him  capable  of  doing 
so :  the  hnman  understanding — the  most  wonderful  of  the  works  of  nature — cannot 
be  accounted  for,  but  upon  the  ground  of  the  existence  of  an  Infinite  Mind. 
Vegetation  was  to  be  sustained,  and  hence  roots  have  so  many  mouths  to  extract 
nourishment  from  the  soil,  while  their  leaves  are  for  lungs  to  inhale  from  the 
atmosphere  those  gases  that  are  congenial  and  to  exhale  those  that  are  anwhole- 
6ome.  Vegetation  was  to  be  propagated,  and  hence  every  plant  is  made  to  produce 
its  own  seeds  ;  and  in  the  work  of  sowing  them,  winds,  waves,  and  animals,  are  all 
made  to  do  their  part.  The  construction  and  furnishing  of  this  world  were  intended 
mainly  to  promote  the  welfare  of  the  human  family — and  how  admirably  is  this 
object  accomplished  t  Do  our  lungs  need  air  ?  Nothing  is  so  free.  Do  we  need 
food  to  satisfy  our  hunger  f  It  springs  up  all  around  us.  Do  we  require  water  to 
•lake  our  thirst  ?  Its  limpid  currents  murmur  at  our  feet.  Do  we  want  clothing 
to  defend  ns  against  the  changes  of  the  sea-^ons?  It  grows  in  our  fields,  or  is 
brought  to  our  doors  upon  the  backs  of  the  bleating  flocks.  2.  In  providence.  (1) 
Which  connects  vicious  habits  with  disease,  disgrace,  and  poverty,  and  a  virtuous 
life  with  health,  wealth,  and  honour.  (2)  Which  leads  to  the  detection  and  panish- 
ment  of  crime,  and  which  pursues  every  criminal  with  the  scorpion  lash  of  self- 
condemnation.  (3)  As  exerted  in  favour  of  tbat  best  and  purest  system  of  morals, 
the  Christian  religion.  3.  In  the  Scriptures.  Here  we  have  the  portraiture  of  His 
moral  character.  4.  To  the  soul  by  His  Spirit.  II.  Impbovement.  This  doctrine 
Ues  at  the  foundation  of  all  religious  truth.  This  established,  and  the  most  impor- 
tant inferences  follow.  1.  To  the  impenitent  hearer.  If  there  is  a  God,  He  is  your 
Creator,  Preserver,  and  Redeemer ;  and  you  are  under  infinite  obligations  to  serve 
and  obey  Him.  2.  To  Christians  this  doctrine  is  the  source  of  great  consolation. 
If  there  is  a  God,  the  Christian's  hopes  are  all  safe ;  death  loses  its  terror,  and  the 
bright  visions  of  heavenly  bliss  are  a  glorious  reality.  (N.  Rounds,  A.M.)  The 
existence  of  God;  evidence  for  :—Ba.Bil  called  the  world  a  school,  wherein  reasonable 
souls  are  taught  the  knowiedgfl  of  God.  In  a  musical  instrument,  when  we  observe 
divers  strings  meet  in  harmony,  we  conclude  that  some  skilful  musician  tuned  them, 
When  we  see  thousands  of  men  in  a  field,  marshalled  under  several  colours,  all 
yielding  exact  obedience,  we  infer  that  there  is  a  general,  whose  commands  they 
are  all  subject  to.  In  a  wat'h,  when  we  take  notice  of  great  and  small  wheels,  all 
BO  fitted  as  to  concur  to  an  orderly  motion,  we  acknowledge  the  skill  of  an  artificer. 
When  we  come  into  a  printing-house,  and  see  a  great  number  of  different  letters  so 
ordered  as  to  make  a  book,  the  consideration  hereof  maketh  it  evident  that  there  is 
a  composer,  by  whose  art  they  were  brought  into  such  a  frame.  When  we  behold  a 
fair  building,  we  conclmie  it  had  an  architect ;  a  stately  ship,  well  rigged,  and  safely 
conducted  to  the  port,  that  it  hath  a  pilot.  So  here ;  the  visible  world  is  such  an 
instrument,  army,  watch,  book,  building,  ship,  as  undeniably  argueth  a  God,  who 
was  and  is  the  Tuner,  General,  and  Artificer,  the  Composer,  Architect,  and  Pilot  of 
it.  {J.  Arrowsmith.)  No  effect  without  a  enuse : — A  man  of  talent  was  supping 
one  evening  with  some  atheists.  The  philosophers  spoke  of  tlieir  denial  of  the 
existence  of  God,  but  be  remained  silent.  They  asked  his  cpinion,  and  while  they 
were  speaking  the  clock  struck.  He  answered  them  by  pointing  to  the  clock  and 
saying,  "Clocks  do  not  make  themselves."  {A.  G.  Jackson.)  So  that  they  are 
without  ezcnse;  because  that  when  they  knew  God  they  glorified  Him  not  as  God, 
neither  were  thankful — Natural  religion,  without  revelation,  sufficient  to  render  a 
tinner  inexcusable  : — I.  The  sin  here  followed — Idolatry.  "  They  glorified  not 
God,  as  God,"  which  general  charge  is  drawn  into  particulars  :  as,  that  they 
"  changed  His  glory."  &o.  (ver.  23) ;  where,  by  glory,  he  means  God's  worship ; 
that  by  which  men  glorify  Him,  and  not  His  essential  glory,  which  is  not  in  men's 
power  to  change  or  debase.  Note  that  the  persons  charged  with  idolatry  are  affirmed 
to  have  known  and  worshipped  the  true  God.  From  whence  it  follows  that  they 
did  not  look  upon  those  images,  which  they  addressed,  as  gods.  So  idolatry  is 
a  worshipping  the  true  God  in  a  way  wholly  unsuitable  to  His  nature — viz.,  by  the 
mediation  of  corporeal  resemblances  of  Him.  For  the  defence  of  which  no  doubt 
but  they  pleaded  that  tbey  used  images,  not  as  objects  of  worship,  but  only  as 
instruments  by  which  they  directed  their  worship  to  God.  But  the  distinction, 
which  looks  so  fine  in  the  theory,  generally  miscarries  in  the  practice ;  especially 
where  the  ignorant  vulgar  are  the  practisers.  II.  The  persons  charged  with  this 
SIN.  The  old  heathen  philosophers,  who  "  professed  themselves  to  be  wise."  Their 
great  title  was  ao^oi,  and  the  viord  of  applause,  still  given  to  their  lectures,  wa* 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAP.  t. 


ao^uf;.  Pythagoras  was  the  first  who  brought  ao^bc  down  to  ^iKSao^oc,  from  a 
master  to  a  lover  of  wisdom,  from  a  professor  to  a  candidate.  These  grandees  and 
gismts  in  knowledge  looked  down  upon  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  laughed  at  them 
as  barbarous  and  insignificant,  yet  blundered  and  stumbled  about  their  grand  and 
principal  concern,  the  knowledge  of  their  duty  to  God,  sinking  into  the  meanest  and 
most  ridiculous  instances  of  idolatry — having  confessed  a  God,  and  allowed  Him 
an  infinite  power  and  an  eternal  Godhead,  they  yet  denied  Him  tiie  worship  of  God. 
Had  the  poor  vulgar  root  only  been  abused  into  such  idolatroas  saperstitions,  it 
might  have  been  detested  or  pitied,  but  not  so  much  to  be  wondered  at :  but  for  the 
stoa,  the  academy,  or  the  peripaton  to  ovm  such  a  paradox ;  for  an  Aristotle,  or  a 
Plato,  to  think  their  Eternal  Mind,  or  Universal  Spirit,  to  be  found  in  the  images 
of  four-footed  beasts ;  for  the  Stagirite  to  recognise  his  gods  in  his  own  book,  "  De 
Animalibus,"  this,  as  the  apostle  says,  was  "  without  excuse."  IIL  Tee  oaubb  os 
SEASON  OF  TBEm  FALUNQ  INTO  THIS  SIN :  their  holding  of  the  truth  in  anrighteousness. 
1.  What  was  the  truth  here  spoken  of  ?  There  were  these  six  great  truths,  the 
knowledge  of  which  the  Gentile  philosophers  stood  accountable  for :  as — (1)  That 
there  was  a  God ;  a  being  distinct  from  matter,  perfect,  omniscient,  omnipotent, 
eternal,  good  and  holy.  And  this  was  a  truth  written  with  a  sunbeam,  clear  and 
legible  to  all  mankind,  and  received  by  universal  consent.  (2)  That  this  God  was 
the  Maker  and  Governor  of  this  visible  world.  The  first  of  which  was  evident  from 
the  very  order  of  causes ;  and  the  second  followed  from  it ;  for  that  a  oreatare 
should  not  depend  upon  its  Creator  in  all  respects  (among  which,  to  be  governed  by 
Him  is  one),  is  contrary  to  the  common  order  and  nature  of  things.  Besides  all 
which  it  is  also  certain  that  the  heathens  did  actually  acknowledge  the  world 
governed  by  a  Supreme  Mind.  (3)  That  this  God  was  to  be  worshipped.  For  this 
was  founded  upon  His  omnipotence  and  His  providence.  (4)  That  this  God  was 
to  be  worshipped  by  virtuous  and  pious  practices.  For  so  much  His  essential 
holiness  required.  (5)  That  upon  any  deviation  from  virtae  and  piety,  it  was  the 
duty  of  every  rational  creature  to  repent  of  it.  The  conscience  of  every  man, 
before  it  is  debauched  and  hardened  by  habitual  sin,  will  recoil  after  the  doing  of 
an  evil  action,  and  acquit  him  after  a  good.  (6)  That  every  such  deviation 
rendered  the  person  liable  to  punishment.  And  upon  this  notion,  universally  fixed 
in  the  minds  of  men,  were  grounded  all  their  sacrifices.  2.  These  truths  they  held 
in  unrighteousness.  (1)  By  not  acting  up  to  what  they  knew.  As  in  many  things 
their  knowledge  was  short  of  the  truth,  so  almost  in  all  things  their  practice  fell 
short  of  their  knowledge.  The  principles  by  which  they  walked  were  as  much  below 
those  by  which  they  judged,  as  their  feet  were  below  their  head.  By  the  one  they 
looked  upwards,  while  they  placed  the  other  in  the  dirt.  For  they  neither  depended 
upon  God  as  if  He  were  almighty,  nor  worshipped  Him  as  if  they  believed  Him  holy. 
For  the  proof  of  which  go  over  all  the  heathen  temples,  and  take  a  survey  of  the 
absurdities  and  impieties  of  their  worship,  their  monstrous  sacrifices,  their  ridiculous 
rites  and  ceremonies.  And  then  so  notoriously  did  they  balk  the  judgment  of  their 
consciences,  in  the  plainest  duties  relating  to  God,  their  neighbour,  and  themselves ; 
as  if  they  had  owned  neither  God  nor  neighbour,  but  themselves.  (2)  By  not 
improving  those  known  principles  into  the  proper  consequences  deduoible  from 
them.  For  surely,  had  ihej  discoursed  rightly  but  upon  this  one  principle,  that 
God  was  a  Being  infinitely  perfect,  they  could  never  have  been  brought  to  assert  or 
own  a  multiplicity  of  gods.  Nor  could  they  have  slid  into  those  brutish  immor- 
alities, had  they  duly  cherished  these  first  practical  notions  and  dictates  of  right 
reason.  But  they  quickly  stified  and  overlaid  those  seeds  of  virtue  sown  by  God 
in  their  own  hearts,  so  that  they  brought  a  voluntary  darkness  and  stupidity  upon 
their  minds  (ver.  21).  (3)  By  concealing  what  they  knew.  For  how  rightly  soever 
they  might  conceive  of  God  and  of  virtue,  yet  the  illiterate  multitude  were  never 
the  wiser  for  it.  Socrates  was  the  only  martyr  for  the  testimony  of  any  truth  that 
we  read  of  amongst  the  heathens.  As  for  the  rest,  even  Zeno  and  Chrysippus, 
Plato  and  Aristotle  swam  with  the  stream,  leaving  the  poor  vulgar  as  ignorant, 
vicious,  and  idolatrous  as  they  first  found  them.  And  thus  I  have  shown  three 
notable  ways  by  which  the  philosophers  held  the  truth  in  unrighteousness.  This 
disposed  them  to  greater  enormities  ;  for,  "  changing  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie," 
they  became  hke  those  who,  by  often  repeating  a  lie  to  others,  come  at  length  to 
believe  it  themselves.  They  owned  the  idolatrous  worship  of  God  so  long,  till,  by 
degrees,  even  in  spite  of  reason  and  nature,  they  thought  that  He  ought  so  to  be 
worshipped.  But  this  stopped  not  here ;  for  as  one  vrickedness  is  naturally  an 
introduction  to  another,  so,  from  absurd  and  senseless  devotions,  they  passed  into 


eair.  t]  ROMANS.  fl 

rfle  afPeotions  (ver.  24,  &o.).    Qod  knows  how  far  the  spirit  of  infatuation  m%j 
prevail  npon  the  heart,  when  it  oomes  once  to  court  and  love  a  ielusion.    IV.  Thb 

JT7DOHSNT,    OB    BATHER    THR    STATB    AND    OONDmOIf    PENALLY    CONSEQUENT   UPON   THB 
rSBSONS    HEBS    OHABOED    BT    THB    AFOBTLB     WITH     IDOLATBT  :     "  thej    Were    without 

excuse."    The  last  refuge  of  a  guilty  person  is  to  take  refuge  nnder  an  excuse,  and 
■o  to  mitigate,  if  he  cannot  divert  the  blow.    It  was  the  method  of  the  great  pattern 
and  parent  of  all  sinners,  Adam,  first  to  hide,  and  then  to  excuse  himself.    Bat 
now,  when  the  sinner  shall  have  all  his  excuses  blown  away,  be  stabbed  with  his 
own  arguments,  and,  as  it  were,  sacrificed  upon  that  very  altar  which  he  fled  to  for 
saccour ;  this,  surely,  is  the  height  and  crisis  of  a  forlorn  condition.     Yet  this  was 
the  case  of  the  malefactors  who  stand  here  arraigned  in  the  text ;  they  were  not 
only  unfit  for  a  pardon,  but  even  for  a  plea.    An  excuse  imports  the  supposition  of 
a  sin,  and — 1.  The  extenuation  of  its  guilt.     As  for  the  sin  itself,  we  have  already 
heard  what  that  was,  and  they  could  only  extenuate  it  on  the  ground  either  of 
ignorance  or  unwillingness.     As  for  nnwillingness,  the  philosophers  generally 
asserted  the  freedom  of  the  will,  which,  in  spite  of  the  injury  inflicted  by  sin,  has 
still  so  much  freedom  left  as  to  enable  it  to  choose  any  act  in  its  kind  good,  as  also 
to  refuse  any  act  in  its  kind  evil.    This  is  enough  to  cut  off  all  excuse  from  the 
heathen,  who  never  duly  improved  the  utmost  of  such  a  power,  but  gave  themselves 
np  to  licentiousness.    The  only  remaining  plea  therefore  must  be  that  of  ignorance, 
since  there  could  be  no  pretence  for  nnwillingness.    But  the  apostle  divests  them 
even  of  this  also  (vers.  19,  21).     Conclusion  :  Note — 1.  The  mercy  of  God  to  those 
to  whom  He  has  revealed  the  gospel,  since  there  was  nothing  that  could  have 
obliged  Him  to  it  upon  the  account  of  His  justice;  for  if  there  had,  the  heathens, 
to  whom  he  revealed  it  not,  could  not  have  been  thus  without  excuse.    2.  The 
nnspeakably  deplorable  condition  of  obstinate  sinners  nnder  the  gospel.     The  sun 
of  mercy  has  shined  too  long  and  too  bright  upon  such,  to  leave  them  any  shadow 
of  excuse.     {R.  South,  D.D.)        Sin  without  excuse  : — How  fearful  an  evil  is  sin  I 
Its  nature  precludes  all  apology  for  it.     And  yet  all  men  "  with  one  consent  make 
excuse."    Apt  scholars  of  the  first  apologist  I    Adam  and  his  fallen  race,  rather 
than  condemn  themselves  on  account  of  transgression,  will  venture  to  charge  the 
Holy  One  with  the  occasion  of  it.    Many  lines  of  Scriptural  argument  might  be 
adduced  to  show  the  inexcusableness  of  sin.  But  we  know  of  none  more  answerable 
than  that  of  the  text — man's  impiety  and  ingratitude.     Take  the  case  of — I.  Thb 
FiBST  siNNBB.     Whatever  was  the  occasion  of  Satan's  sin,  the  text  gives  a  clue  as 
to  its  nature.     "  The  first  estate  "  of  the  fallen  angels  was  doubtless  one  of  exten- 
sive knowledge.     In  their  present  condition  what  craft,  what  subtlety  do  they 
display  t  And  yet  angels  were  made  to  live  even  in  His  unveiled  presence — to  know 
Him,  to  love,  serve,  and  glorify  Him.    But  from  some  unrevealed  cause,  their 
knowledge  did  not  beget  humility,  their  surprising  privileges  did  not  ensure  grati- 
tude; whilst  standing  before  "the  high  and  lofty  One  who  inbabiteth  eternity," 
they  were  "  lifted  up  with  pride,"  and  rebelled  against  Him.  And  God,  who  created 
them  and  had  blessed  them,  spared  them  not,  and  "  they  are  without  excuse ; 
because  that  when  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  Him  not  as  God,  neither  were 
thankfoL"    II.  Oub  fibst  pabents.    Their  nature  was  one  degree  lower  than  that 
of  the  angels.  They  were  created  after  the  image  of  God  in  holiness  and  happiness. 
What  bounds  could  have  been  fixed  to  that  mind  which  held  daily  converse  with 
God  ?    What  privileges  were  there  I    The  body  and  soul  united  in  bliseful  harmony, 
and  both  united  in  the  God  of  love  !     But  notwithstanding,  impiety  and  ingratitude 
were  the  sin  and  ruin  of  Adam  I     He  credited  the  word  of  "  the  father  of  lies  " 
before  the  word  of  the  God  of  truth.    Ambition  made  him  forget  his  privileges. 
And  *•  they  were  without  excuse,  because  that,"  (fee.    HI.  The  heathen.     The 
apostle  proves  that  though  they  are  ignorant  of  the  revelation  of  grace  (and  they 
will  not  be  condemned  for  rejecting  that  which  was  never  offered  to  them),  yet  they 
cannot  be  ignorant  of  the  revelation  of  nature.   The  present  awful  and  ruinous  state 
of  the  heathen  has  arisen  from  the  depravity  of  human  nature ;  the  love  of  sin, 
and  consequent  hatred  of  holiness.     They  abused  their  privileges,  "  loved  darkness 
rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil."    IV.  The  Jews.     What  nation 
was  ever  so  blessed  as  they !    Raised  from  obscurity  to  the  dignity  of  a  theocracy, 
they  passed  on  from  one  degree  of  glory  to  another,  till  the  Lord  of  glory  appeared 
as  "  the  King  of  the  Jews."    And  notwithstanding  all  this,  impiety  and  ingratitude 
were  the  sin  and  the  ruin  of  Israel.     V.  Nations  peofessino  Chbistianitt.    Have 
we  not  known  God  ?     Are  we  not  biepsed  by  Him  with  extraordinary  and  pecnliaf 
privileges  ?     To  what  modern  nation  has  God  revealed  Himself  so  signaUy  m  the 


W  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbjlP.  l 

GK>d  of  love  has  nnto  us?  And  how  great  oar  temporal  prosperity,  and  oar  inflaenca 
and  power  over  the  whole  world !  Such  are  oar  privileges.  And  what  use  do  w« 
make  of  them  ?  If  we  '*  know  God,"  by  what  national  acts  do  we  **  glorify  Him  as 
God  "  ?  Does  He  receive  the  glory  due  unto  His  holy  name  in  the  calm  deliberation 
of  oar  senators  ?  Is  His  Word  alone  the  acknowledged  and  the  supreme  rule  of 
faith  and  practice  ?  Is  truth  and  piety  upheld  and  protected,  and  are  falsehood  and 
idolatry  trampled  under  our  feet  ?  Alas  1  if  our  candlestick  were  removed,  we 
are  "without  exoose,  because  that,"  d;c.  ((?.  A.  Rogers,  M.A.)  Inexcusable 
irreverence  and  ingratitude: — After  a  missionary  had  gone  into  a  certain  part 
of  Hindostan,  and  had  given  away  New  Testaments,  a  Hindoo  waited  upon 
him,  and  said,  "  Did  you  not  write  that  first  chapter  of  Romans  after  yon  came 
here?"  "No;  it  has  been  there  nearly  two  thousand  years."  "Well,  ail  I 
ean  say  is,  that  it  is  a  fearfully  true  description  of  the  sin  of  India."  However, 
I  am  not  going  to  talk  about  Hindoos ;  they  are  a  long  way  off.  I  am  not  going  to 
speak  about  the  ancient  Romans ;  they  lived  a  couple  of  thousand  years  ago.  I  am 
going  to  speak  about  ourselves,  and  about  some  persons  here  whom  my  text 
admirably  fits.  Here  is — I.  Want  op  reverence.  "  They  knew  God,"  but  "  they 
glorified  Him  not  as  God."  1.  Many  never  think  of  God.  Whethar  there  is  a  God, 
or  not,  makes  no  practical  difference  to  them  ;  if  we  could  prove  that  there  were 
no  God,  they  would  feel  easier  in  their  consciences.  "  Well,"  says  one,  "  I  do  not 
care  much  whether  there  is  a  God  or  not ;  I  am  an  agnostic."  Thai  is  a  Greek 
word,  is  it  not?  And  the  equivalent  Latin  is  "Ignoramus."  I  could  not  bear  to  be 
an  "  ignoramus  "  or  an  "  agnostic  "  about  God  I  I  must  have  a  God.  He  is  to  ma 
as  necessary  as  food  to  my  body,  and  air  to  my  lungs.  The  sad  thing  is,  that  many 
who  believe  that  there  is  a  God  yet  go  from  the  beginning  of  the  week  to  the  end 
of  it  without  reflecting  upon  Him  at  all.  2.  Have  no  right  conceptions  of  God. 
The  true  conception  of  God  is  that  He  is  all  in  all ;  and  unless  we  treat  Him  as 
such,  we  have  not  treated  Him  as  He  ought  to  be  treated.  8.  Some  who  think 
of  God  a  little,  but  never  offer  Him  any  humble,  spiritual  worship.  Do  not  imagine 
that  God  can  be  worshipped  by  anything  which  is  merely  mechanical  or  external, 
but  which  is  not  from  the  heart.  4.  There  are  those  who  do  not  obediently  serve 
Him — for  they  are  the  servants  of  themselves;  and  there  is  no  master  mora 
tyrannical  than  nnsanctified  self.  But,  remember,  if  the  Lord  be  God,  and  Ha 
made  as,  we  are  bound  to  serve  Him.  5.  They  do  not  trust  Him.  The  place  for 
man  is  under  the  shadow  of  God's  wings,  but  yon  nm  to  your  neighbours  as  soon 
as  ever  yoa  are  in  difficulties.  6.  They  did  not  seek  to  commune  with  Him.  It  ia 
a  very  sad  business  when  a  boy  who  has  been  at  home  with  his  father  and  mother 
for  years  has  never  spoken  to  them.  7.  They  do  not  want  to  be  reconciled  to  Him. 
n.  Want  or  gratitude.  I  cannot  say  anything  much  worse  of  a  man  than  that 
he  is  not  thankful  to  his  benefactors ;  and  when  yoa  say  that  he  is  not  thankful  to 
God,  you  have  said  about  the  worst  thing  yon  can  say  of  him.  I  will  prove 
ingratitude  on  the  part  of  many.  1.  God's  law  is  despised.  God  has  taken  the 
trouble  to  give  as  this  map  of  the  way,  and  to  direct  as  in  the  only  right  road ;  yet 
some  have  gone  directly  in  the  teeth  of  it ;  in  fact,  it  looks  as  if  the  very  existenoa 
of  the  law  is  a  provocation  to  them  to  break  it.  2.  God's  day  is  dishonoured.  God 
has,  in  great  mercy,  given  us  one  day  in  seven  wherein  to  rest,  and  to  think  of 
holy  things.  He  said,  "Take  six,  and  use  them  in  your  business.  No,  we  must 
have  the  seventh  as  well.  8.  God's  book  is  neglected.  Was  there  ever  such  a 
book,  so  fall  of  wisdom,  and  so  full  of  love?  But  there  are  many  who  do  not  take 
the  trouble  to  read  it.  A  father's  love-letter  to  his  son,  and  his  son  leaves  it 
nnread !  4.  God's  Son  is  refused.  Ingratitude,  thou  hast  reached  thy  utmost  limit 
now.  6.  God's  deliverances  are  forgotten.  Some  years  ago  I  spoke  with  a  soldier 
who  rode  at  Balaclava ;  and  when  he  told  me  so,  I  took  him  by  the  hand ;  I  could 
not  help  it,  though  he  was  a  stranger  to  me.  The  tears  were  in  my  eyes,  and  I 
said,  "  Sir,  I  hope  that  yon  are  God's  man  after  suoh  a  deliverance  as  that."  But 
I  did  not  find  that  he  had  given  his  heart  to  Christ.  Over  there  is  a  man  who  has 
been  in  half-a-dozen  shipwrecks ;  and  if  he  does  not  mind,  he  will  be  shipwrecked 
to  all  eternity  1  One  here  has  had  yellow  fever.  Ah,  sir,  there  is  a  worse  fever 
than  that  on  you  now  !  6.  God's  providences  are  ignored  !  Some  of  you,  from  your 
childhood,  have  had  all  that  heart  could  wish.  Should  God  not  have  some  gratitude 
from  yoa  ?  But  one  says,  "  I  have  had  good  luck."  Here  is  untbankfulness  to  God 
indeed,  when  you  ascribe  His  gifts  to  "  good  luck,"  "  Well,  yoa  know,  but  I  have 
been  a  very  hard-working  man."  I  know  you  have,  but  who  gave  you  the  strength 
for  joar  work  ?    7.  God's  Spirit  is  resisted.    III.  This  irbbverenob  and  inqbatx- 


ROMANS.  n 


TUDB  wiBK  kaussi  KMOwuiDos.  "  When  they  knew  Qod."  Notice — 1.  Enow- 
ledge  is  of  no  nee  if  it  does  not  lead  to  holy  practice.  It  was  no  good  to  them  to 
know  Gk)d,  for  "they  glorified  Him  not  as  God."  So, my  theoIogicAl  friend,  it  does 
not  matter  what  you  think,  or  know,  unless  it  leads  yon  to  glorify  God,  and  to  be 
thankfnl.  2.  Knowledge  will  increase  the  responsibility  of  those  who  are  irreverent 
and  nngratefol.  Whatever  excnse  might  be  made  for  those  who  never  heard  of 
Qod,  there  was  none  for  these  people.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  False  and  faulty 
eonceptiotu  of  Qod  : — 1.  To  right  hearts,  a  stndy  of  God's  character  both  attracts 
and  repels.  The  attractive  influences  are  our  need  of  God,  our  thirst  after  Him, 
and  the  curiosity  of  our  natures.  And  yet  no  sooner  do  we  approach  the  con- 
sideration of  His  appalling  greatness  and  spotless  purity,  than  we  shrink  back 
under  an  oppressive  sense  of  our  demerit.  Only  sanctity  of  heart  can  give  the 
power  of  apprehending  this  subject  needs.  2.  Our  age  is  pre-eminently  one  of 
criticism  and  reconsiderationi.  Every  theory  of  science  and  theology  is  being  put 
into  the  crucible.  We  have  no  anxiety  about  the  final  issue.  Nothing  will  be  lost 
but  the  dross.  But  this  fact  should  not  become  a  couch  on  which  our  indifference 
reclines,  but  rather  an  inspiration  to  us  to  defend  the  truth.  Between  the  Bible 
representation  of  God  and  the  God  of  much  modern  thought  there  are  sad  dis- 
crepancies. Error  can  change  its  form  vrithout  disappearing.  If  heathens  have 
had  a  god  made  with  their  own  hands,  modem  thinkers  have  one  cast  in  the  mould 
of  their  wild  imaginations.  They  may  revolt  at  the  idea  of  bowing  before  an  idol ; 
but  they  conceive  a  Deity  lacking  the  qualities  essential  to  the  nature  of  Jehovah, 
such  as  righteousness,  justice,  and  grace.  3.  There  are  many  reasons  why  we 
should  seek  to  have  right  conceptions  of  God.  (1)  Our  belief  will  effect  our  life. 
Souls  become  assimilated  to  the  object  of  their  worship.  The  voluptuons  wor- 
shipped Venus,  (fto.  False  and  faulty  conceptions  of  God  cannot  do  other  than 
result  in  the  false  and  faulty  character.  (2)  There  is  an  equally  close  connection 
between  character  and  work.  Our  work  will  never  be  better  than  we  are.  I.  Falsb 
CONCEPTIONS  o»  GoD.  The  most  prevalent  of  these  are — 1.  Pantheism  which 
teaches  that  the  universe  is  God,  and  that  God  is  the  universe.  Tliis,  of  course, 
denies  His  distinct  existence,  and  affirms  that  God  has  neither  intelligence,  conscious- 
ness, nor  will.  He  is  not  a  personaHty  who  can  say  "  I,"  or  be  addressed  as  "Thou." 
What  a  man  would  be  without  faculties  and  without  consciousness,  that,  say  they, 
is  God  without  the  universe.  The  destiny  of  the  human  soul,  according  to 
Pantheism,  is  its  absorption  into  the  Infinite.  And,  as  we  may  well  suppose,  its 
effects  have  been,  and  still  are,  disastrous.  It  destroys  all  distinctions  between 
good  and  evil,  for  they  are  alike  the  operations  of  God.  Sin  is  no  barrier  to 
intercourse  with  God.  Self  is  deified,  for  the  soul  is  part  of  the  Divine  essence. 
The  drapery  and  sophistry  of  this  form  of  religion  deceive  the  imagination  and 
captivate  the  minds  of  some.  But  there  will  come  a  time  when  all  hearts  will  be 
flick  of  it.  The  heart  yearns  for  a  personal  Father  to  whom  it  can  carry  its  burdens 
and  tell  its  griefs.  But  that  Father  is  not  found  in  Pantheism,  but  in  the  personal, 
self-existent,  glorious  God  of  the  Bible.  2.  The  mechanical  conception  of  God  is 
very  different,  but  little  less  revolting.  According  to  this  "  God  is  " — as  Carlyle 
has  worded  this  theory,  "an  absentee,  "sitting,  ever  since  the  first  Sabbath,  on  the 
outside  of  Hia  creation  seeing  it  po."  God  is  only  present  in  the  world  by  the 
agency  of  law,  and  law  acts  through  the  agency  and  tendencies  of  matter ;  while 
the  Lawgiver  Himself  is,  to  use  Martineau's  words,  "  a  remote  and  retired 
mechanician,  inspecting  from  without  *he  engine  of  creation,  to  see  how  it  per- 
forms."   Those  who  thus  believe  seem  to  leave  the  character  of  God  with  no  other 

perfection  than  that  which  belongs  to  a  great  first  cause,  or  an  Almighty  contriver 

"too  vast  to  praise,  too  inexorable  to  propitiate,  with  no  ear  for  prayer,  no  heart 
for  sympathy,  no  arm  to  save."  They  believe  in  law,  and  that  is  all  they  do  believe 
in.  Poor  mortals  I  We  are  fed,  preserved,  and  nurtured  from  the  cradle  to  the 
tomb  by  machinery.  We  do  not  hesitate  to  pronouuce  this  conception  of  God  to  be 
false.  The  world  is  not  a  mere  machine.  Natural  law  is  but  the  omnipresent 
expression  of  God's  will.  Law  does  not  govern,  but  God — by  means  of  law. 
Instead  of  God  being  "  an  absentee,"  "  He  is  not  far  from  any  one  of  us,"  Ac. 
3.  The  poetic  view  of  God  has  been  propagated,  by  sentiment  and  imagination, 
influenced  and  guided  largely  by  an  unsanctified  heart.  A  few  of  God's  attributes 
are  admired,  but  the  stern  integrity  of  His  nature  is  forgotten.  With  these 
dreamers  God  is  not  principle,  but  sentiment.  As  to  how  the  great  Lawgiver  is  to 
act  towards  a  broken  law  these  visionaries  never  trouble  themselves.  The  King  of 
kings  may  reign,  but  He  certainly  does  not  govern.     But  such  conception  is  falae. 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

The  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  still  livee,  and,  as  ever,  He  has  thnnderbolto 
as  well  as  tears.  He  awards  and  avenges.  Holiness  and  heaven,  sin  and  hell.  He 
has  linked  together  with  indissoluble  chains.  The  Judge  is  not  lost  in  the  Father 
nor  the  Father  in  the  Judge.  II.  Faultt  comoeptiomb  of  God,  i.e.,  defective, 
fragmentary.  1.  Perhaps  there  are  few  of  as  bat  have  faulty  conceptions  of 
God.  (1)  This  can  be  partially  accounted  for  by  a  consideration  of  our  consti- 
tutional peculiarities.  Most  of  oar  minds  are  ill-proportioned,  and,  as  a  con- 
sequence,  we  are  apt  to  see  only  isolated  fragments  of  God's  character.  We  may 
beheve  in  God  as  revealed  in  Scripture,  and  yet,  certain  elements  of  our  nature 
being  more  susceptible  of  impression,  we  are  apt  to  conceive  of  God  as  possessing 
only  those  attributes  and  qualities  that  interpret  themselves  to  our  nature.  One 
man  is  overstrung  with  nerves  ;  to  him  God  is  all  joy — one  eternal  summer.  But 
to  another  man  "  whom  melancholy  has  marked  for  her  own,"  God  exhibits  the 
hues  of  His  own  feeling.  Men,  whose  natures  are  full  of  stem  severity,  are  apt  to 
view  God  only  as  a  mass  of  spiritual  strength.  Bat  there  are  those  who  revolt  at 
this  stoical  conception  of  God,  for  in  them  the  pathetic,  tender,  benevolent  elements 
largely  predominate.  (2)  Our  individual  experiences  have  a  determining  force  in 
this  matter.  To  the  Christian  whose  life  has  been  one  of  signal  success  and 
joyous  prosperity,  God  is  the  hero  of  a  thousand  battles,  never  once  disappointed 
in  His  expectations  or  frustrated  in  His  purposes.  To  others,  life  has  been  a 
melancholy  blank — a  series  of  unfinished,  unsuccessful  enterprises.  Such  are  apt 
to  forget  that  "  the  Lord  reigneth,"  and  that  "  out  of  evil  He  still  educeth  good." 

2.  How  are  we  to  avoid  these  mistakes?  (1)  Let  us  labour  after  a  growing  likeness 
to  God,  for  God  only  becomes  real  to  us  as  His  nature  is  unfolded  within  us.  (2)  In 
our  testimony  for  God,  let  us  eudearour  to  meet  every  phase  of  human  want.  The 
needs  of  human  souls,  the  conditions  of  human  life,  are  infinitely  various,  and  it 
will  expand,  ennoble,  and  enlarge  our  conceptions  of  God  if  we  endeavour  to  show 
that  God's  character  is  adapted  to  the  necessities  and  wants  of  all.  (3)  Above  all, 
we  should  constantly  study  Him  who  is  "  the  image  of  the  invisible  God."  The 
person  of  Christ  reflects  the  Divine  nature ;  His  ministry  the  Divine  mind ;  Hia 
death  the  Divine  heart ;  His  resurrection  the  Divine  power.  In  the  life  and  death 
of  our  Eedeemer,  justice,  wisdom,  love,  and  power,  mingle  their  beams  and  shine 
with  imited  and  meridian  splendour.  There  they  form  a  glorious  covenant  rainbow, 
made  up  of  the  effulgent  light  of  the  Eternal,  and  tears  of  the  Bedeemer's  grief. 
{W.  Williams.)  The  sin  of  not  glorifying  God: — I.  What  is  it  to  glorift  God? 
1.  Negatively,  (1)  Not  as  if  we  made  Him  glorious  (Exod.  xv.  11).  (2)  Nor  as  if 
we  added  anything  to  His  glory.  2.  Positively.  (1)  To  acknowledge  His  glory 
(Psa.  xix.  1).  (2)  To  admire  it.  (3)  To  live  up  to  it.  (4)  To  speak  of  it.  II. 
What  is  it  to  olokift  God  as  God  ?  1.  To  acknowledge  Him  to  be  God.  (1)  To  be 
what  He  is  in  Himself — a  Spirit,  Almighty,  all-wise,  Ac.  (2)  To  be  what  He  is  to 
us.  Our— (a)  Maker  (Gen.  L)  (b)  Preserver  (Acts  vii.  28).  (c)  Governor  (Psa. 
Ixxv.  6 ;  Matt.  x.  29,  30).     (d)  Eedeemer  (Psa.  xlvil  41).    2.  To  fear  Him  as  God. 

3.  To  hope  in  Him  (Psa.  xxvii.  1 ;  xlvi.  1,  2)  as  an  all-wise,  almighty,  aU-gracioua 
and  all-faithful  God.  4.  To  rejoice  in  Him  (Phil.  iv.  4)  as  reconciled  in  Christ,  and 
a  soul-satisfying  God  in  Himself.  5,  To  desire  Him  as  one  without  whom  we 
cannot  but  be  miserable,  and  in  whom  we  cannot  but  be  happy.  6.  To  love  Him  as 
the  chief  Lord  in  Himself  (Luke  xviii.  19),  and  as  the  fountain  of  goodness  in  His 
creatures.  7.  To  worship  Him  only,  and  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  8.  To  serve  Him 
alone,  in  all  things,  so  as  to  do  all  to  His  glory  (Isa.  xlii.  8 ;  1  Cor.  x.  31).  III.  How 
DOES  IT  APPEAB  TO  BE  A  BIN  NOT  TO  GLORIFT  GoD  AS  GoD  ?  1.  God  here  accuses  the 
Gentiles  of  it,  and  blames  them  for  it.  2.  Not  to  glorify  God  as  God  is  not  to  glorify 
Him  at  all.  IV.  Who  are  goiltt  op  this  sin?  1.  Such  as  do  not  acknowledge 
there  is  a  God  (Psa.  xiv.  1).  2.  Such  as  do  not  know  the  Lord  they  acknowledge. 
3.  Such  as  know  Him,  but  do  not  glorify  Him.  4.  Such  as  glorify  Him,  as  they 
think,  but  not  as  God,  and  these  are — (1)  Such  as  have  not  right  apprehensions  of 
Him.  (2)  That  have  not  right  affections  for  Him.  (3)  That  do  not  perform  right 
worship  and  obedience  to  Him.  Conclusion :  1.  You  know  God  ;  you  know  that 
He  is  an  all-knowing  and  all-powerful  God,  that  He  is  the  chiefest  Good,  most 
merciful  and  gracious,  and  that  He  will  bring  all  things  into  judgment,  and  yet  you 
do  not  live  up  to  this  knowledge,  and  therefore  do  not  glorify  Him  as  God.  2. 
Examine  whether  you  have  not  been  guilty  of  this  sin,  humble  yourselves  for  it,  and 
then  reform  it.  Consider — (1)  The  glory  of  God  is  the  first  thing  that  ought  to  be 
prayed  for  (Matt.  vi.  9).  (2)  Remissness  in  this  is  denounced  (Mai.  ii.  2)  and 
(Punished  (Acta  xii.  23  :  Eom.  i.  24).    (3)  Unless  you  glorify  God  your  religion  is 


OULT.  I.]  ROMANS,  fB 

^nain.  (4)  To  glorify  God  is  the  gloty  of  heftren.  (6)  Glorify  God  and  God  will 
glorify  ^oa  (1  Sam.  ii.  80).  {Bp.  Bweridge.)  God  dishonoured  by  the  heathen : — 
They  did  not  render  to  Him  me  honour  tnat  was  His  dne ;  cherish  towards  Hini 
those  tempers  of  mind  which  became  His  creatures,  or  express  the  sentiments  of 
devotion  in  worship  befitting  His  nature  and  character.  They  forgot  His  unity,  and 
gave  Him  not  exclusive  adoration ;  they  lost  sight  of  His  spirituality,  and  instead 
of  worshipping  Him  "  in  spirit  and  in  truth,"  imagined  Him  to  be  gratified  with 
what  pleased  the  sensual  appetites  of  corporeal  beings ;  the  impression  of  His 
infinite  though  unseen  majesty  (the  majesty  of  eternity,  immensity,  omniscience, 
and  omnipotence)  being  effaced  from  their  minds,  their  homage  was  no  longer  that 
of  "  reverence  and  godly  fear  "  ;  and,  letting  slip  the  remembrance  of  His  infinite 
and  irreconcilable  separation  from  all  evil,  they  served  the  God  of  light  with  the 
works  of  darkness,  the  "  Holy  One  "  with  the  mysteries  of  iniquity  and  impurity. 
(R,  Wardlaw,  D-DJ)  Ingratitude  to  God  : — Why  are  men  unthankful  to  Heaven  f 
I.  Is  it  because  Heatbn  does  not  bestow  favoubs  oh  hem?  There  can  be  no 
gratitude  without  favours.  What  has  God  given  as?  Existence,  the  world.  His 
blessed  Son.  Were  He  to  withdraw  from  us  all  that  He  has  given,  we  would  havs 
nothing  left,  and  be  no  more.  Ingratitude  to  man  is  bad ;  but  to  God  it  is  in* 
finitely  worse,  for  the  greatest  favours  we  receive  from  men  are  only  borrowed  from 
Heaven,  and  are  mean,  and  few  in  comparison  with  what  God  bestows.  II.  Is  it 
beoaaae  those  fatocbs  abs  deserved  f  Great  favours  have  not  power  in  them- 
selves to  generate  gratitude.  The  recipient  must  feel  that  he  has  no  claim  whatever 
to  them.  He  who  gives  me  that  which  I  feel  to  deserve  will  fail  to  inspire  with 
thankfulness  by  that  act.  IH.  Is  it  because  God  is  not  fbbe  in  theib  bestowment? 
If  I  know  that  a  man  is  constrained  to  bestow  a  favour,  his  gift  will  fail  to  inspire 
me  with  thankfulness.  I  care  not  how  valuable  his  gift,  nor  how  greatly  it  may 
serve  my  interest;  the  feeling  will  destroy  the  possibility  of  gratitude.  IV.  Is  it 
becaase  He  is  not  disintebestedlt  kind  in  oivino  7  If  in  the  man  who  bestows 
on  me  a  favour  I  discover  indifference  or  selfishness,  I  can  feel  no  thankfulness, 
however  valuable  the  gift  may  be.  Conclusion :  Ingratitude  to  God  is  not  only 
without  all  reason,  but  against  all  good  reason.  It  is  the  basest  of  all  vices,  and 
lies  at  the  root  of  nearly  all  the  evils  of  lith.  "  As  the  Dead  Sea,"  says  an  old 
aathor,  "  drinks  in  the  river  Jordan,  and  is  never  the  sweeter,  and  the  ocean 
all  other  rivers,  and  is  never  the  fresher,  so  we  are  apt  to  receive  daily  mercies 
from  God,  and  still  remain  insensible  of  them,  unthankful  for  them.  The  rain 
comes  down  from  heaven  in  showers ;  it  goes  up  but  in  mists.  (2>.  Thovuis,D.D.) 
Ingratitude : — Ingratitude  is  here  reckoned  among  the  fatal  steps  taken  toward 
degradation  and  toward  gross  impiety.  The  whole  world  agree  to  consider  that 
nature  base  which  is  not  moved  by  substantial  kindness.  All  agree,  too,  that 
gratitude  is  a  manly  and  noble  quality.  There  is  a  great  difference  iu  this  affection. 
There  are  some  natures  that  take  but  the  slightest  favours  to  make  them  exhale 
thanks  and  gratitude.  There  are  others  that  require  much.  Gratitude  works  also 
with  different  degrees  of  expression.  In  some,  favours  are  very  soon  forgotten. 
In  others,  never.  With  some,  gratitude  is  like  the  new-fallen  snow,  exquisite  ;  but, 
like  it,  it  very  soon  dissolves  and  passes  away.  With  others,  gratitude  is  like  the 
diamond,  once  formed,  hard  and  enduring,  brilliant,  and  from  every  facet  sending 
radiance.  In  some,  gratitude  excites  uneasiness  and  unrestfulness  till  in  some  way 
it  can  discharge  obligation.  In  others,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  discharging  the 
obligation  for  a  favour — a  kindness  done  to  them  binds  them  to  the  doer  evermore. 
It  is  perfectly  fair,  then,  that  God  should  demand  at  our  hands  gratitude  for  mercies 
received,  and  that  we  should  attempt  to  measure  human  character  and  human 
conduct  by  this  expectation  of  God.  I.  Has  thankfulness  to  God  been  in  ant 
PBOPOBTiON  TO  THE  BENEFITS  BECEiVED  ?  Has  it  cver  been  a  common  experience, 
lively  and  quick  ?  Has  it  acted  to  promote  obedience  7  The  children  of  unnum- 
bered kindnesses — have  these  blessings  of  God  that  have  watched  you  from  youth  up 
to  this  hour,  and  that  have  flowed  through  all  the  channels  of  your  life,  ever  brought 
forth  in  you  a  profound  sense  of  recognition  ?  Is  not  what  the  apostle  describee 
applicable  to  as  ?  But  let  us  more  in  detail  look  into  this  matter.  Let  us  look  at 
— 1.  A  man's  own  organisation,  and  inquire  in  what  way  he  is  wont  to  receive  that 
as  a  comprehensive  and  complex  gift  of  God,  It  is  no  small  thing  that  we  have  an 
organisation  that  brings  health  and  strength.  There  are  many  that  are  born  to 
misfortune.  They  carry  organised  suffering  with  them.  That,  for  the  most  part, 
is  not  our  condition.  The  separate  elements  that  go  to  constitute  ths  gift  of  our 
organisation  are  marvellous.   If  the  eye  could  keep  a  journal  of  all  the  pleasures 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHO.  U 

that  it  has  brought  to  as  no  tongue  could  measure  oar  obligations.  If  the  ear  oonld 
give  its  accoant  of  pleasures  issued ;  if  not  a  single  sense  merely,  but  the  whole  of 
oar  bodj,  could  rise  up  and  bear  witness  to  God's  goodness  in  its  organisation,  what 
a  complex  series  of  services  from  God  to  us  would  be  exhibited  I  And  jet,  are  not 
life,  and  health,  and  strength,  more  frequently  a  reason  of  indifference  1  All  the 
senses  that  God  has  put  together  to  create  the  most  noble  thing  made  onder  the 
heaven — we  take  them  as  a  gift,  of  course.  We  arrogate  to  oorselves  personid 
beauty,  if  we  are  handsome  ;  personal  strength,  if  we  are  strong ;  personal  skill,  if 
we  have  a  hand  to  execute.  We  take  all  these  sovereign  gifts  of  God,  not  with 
thanksgiving,  not  as  if  they  brought  as  nearer  to  Him  in  sweet  obedience,  not  as 
benefits  received,  but  to  set  as  apart  from  Him  and  His  serrice.  2.  The  gifti 
of  God  expressed  in  the  human  mind  and  disposition.  We  are  neither  thankful 
for  the  casket  nor  the  jewels  that  God  has  put  within  the  casket.  Indeed,  the 
more  men  have,  usually,  the  less  apt  are  they  to  be  grateful.  Men  we  apt  to 
become  vain,  arrogant,  worldly,  and  foolish  in  the  possession  of  their  mental  gifti 
and  powers.  We  carry  about,  in  reason,  in  imagination,  in  hope,  in  love,  in 
sympathy,  in  everything  that  goes  to  make  up  the  human  disposition,  that 
wonderful  gift  of  God,  the  human  soul,  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  and  soareelj 
think  to  thank  God  or  to  love  Him  for  His  benefaction.  3.  Oar  social  advantages. 
It  is  no  small  thing  to  have  been  bom  in  a  Christian  land.  How  many  of  as  find 
occasion  for  real  thankfulness  in  this  ?  It  is  no  small  thing  to  have  been  bom  of 
Christian  parentage— to  have  been  pat  into  this  life  through  a  right  gate.  Have 
you  ever  made  it  an  object  of  thought  f  Our  honourable  connections  are  matters 
of  no  small  moment,  as  they  stand  intimately  related  to  our  happiness.  The 
position  we  are  permitted  to  occupy  in  society  we  are  apt  to  ascribe  to  our  own 
skill  and  work.  Bat  there  is  not  a  man  Uving  that  has  really  achieved  the  social 
advantages  which  he  has.  There  is  a  providence  in  them.  Aiad  all  that  which  we 
have  of  repute,  ease,  influence,  consequence  by  reason  of  our  social  connection — 
does  not  this  tend  to  puff  us  up  ?  How  many  men  requite  God  by  being  to  others 
exactly  what  He  is  not  to  them!  God  bridges  the  way  from  His  heart  to  ours  bj 
kindnesses  without  number.  We  look  down  upon  men  less  favoured  than  we,  and 
seem  to  say,  "Stand  thou  there:  come  not  near  to  touch  our  robes."  4.  Oar 
relations  to  the  gifts  of  God  in  nature  and  in  human  society  (1)  No  one  can 
enough  appreciate  the  wonderfulness  of  God's  bounties  of  love  registered  for  every 
one  that  has  an  eye  to  see  and  an  ear  to  hear  in  the  fulness  of  nature.  Everywhere 
God  makes  Himself  known  to  those  that  have  a  heart  sensitive  to  His  presence. 
The  whole  globe  is  a  sacrament,  and  time  is  full  of  the  most  solemn  lessons  and 
the  most  momentous  truths.  And  yet  we  let  day  after  day,  and  year  after  year, 
pass  over  our  heads,  and  our  constant  thought  is — what?  That  the  winter  is 
severe  ;  that  the  day  is  inclement ;  that  the  rain  incommodes  our  party  or  mars  oar 
pleasure.  (2)  The  successes  of  life,  by  which  men  attain  livelihood  and  the  respect 
of  men,  are  gifts  of  God,  and  not  the  less  subjects  of  gratitude  because  they  depend 
upon  our  activity,  since  oar  activity  again  depends  upon  God's  being  ever  present 
with  us.  God  invites  as  to  all  the  bounties  of  nature,  and  we  are  more  vain  of  their 
skill  to  reap  them  than  thankful  for  the  bounties  themselves.  6.  The  work  of  God 
in  providences  toward  every  one  of  as.  There  are  gifts  of  prosperity  and  gifts  of 
adversity ;  there  are  sparing  mercies  in  sickness  and  danger  to  us,  and,  what  comes 
nearer  to  a  sensitive  nature,  to  others.  The  providence  of  God  that  attends  oar 
daily  walk  is  marvellous  to  him  that  has  an  eye  to  discern  all  its  details,  and 
wisdom  to  comprehend  its  full  meaning.  But  we  walk  through  the  day,  the  year, 
often  without  a  thought,  or  scarcely  a  reminiscence.  6.  God's  spiritual  dealings 
with  as.  The  gift  of  Christ,  that  richest  and  Divinest  of  all  gifts,  and  the  promise 
through  Him  of  eternal  life,  and  of  help  in  every  time  of  need ;  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  His  mindfulness  of  every  feeling  in  us,  though  we  are  mindless  of  any  feeling 
in  Him — in  aU  these  spiritual  blessings,  gratitude  and  thankfulness  are  the  exception, 
and  not  the  rule.  U.  The  bin  of  this.  1.  There  is  no  one  thing  that  you  admit 
to  be  a  fairer  measure  of  character  and  life  than  this  principle  of  gratitude ;  and 
when  you  take  it  and  measure  your  course  of  conduct,  not  toward  an  inferior,  or  an 
equal,  or  a  mere  superior,  but  toward  God — the  highest,  the  noblest,  the  most 
disinterested,  and  the  best  being  that  ever  lived — no  man,  not  even  the  purest,  can 
help  feeling  that  he  has  lived  a  life  of  ingratitude.  God's  wonderful  bounties  have 
come  before  you  unrecognised.  You  have  made  yourself  selfish  through  God's 
kindnesses.  Yoa  have  made  yourself  proud  through  His  goodness.  The  very 
things  that  were  meant  to  draw  yoa  to  God  b^ve  built  around  you  walls  of  separation 


CBtf.  L]  BOMANS.  9f' 

between  yooraelTes  and  God.  2.  It  does  not  need  that  men  should  lay  to  their 
consciences  the  charge  of  theft,  of  crime.  There  is  no  offence  any  more  guilty  than 
this.  If  there  be  a  single  soul  that  says,  "I  need  no  repentance,  no  change 
of  heart :  I  am  not  a  sinner,"  I  lay  this  charge  upon  him,  and  he  cannot  resist  it. 
We  cannot  receive  from  our  father  and  mother  a  love-token  and  not  know  it ;  bat 
from  Christ  we  can.  We  cannot  take  a  poor  gift  from  a  fellow's  hand  without 
feeling  a  sentiment  of  honour  and  requital;  but  from  God's  hand  we  take  royal 
bounties  without  any  such  consciousness.  Ah  1  when  Christ  takes  His  own  heart. 
His  sacrifice,  and  His  love,  and  brings  it  to  us  and  makes  it  a  present,  is  there  no 
requital,  are  there  no  thanks  due?  When  God  requires  the  service  of  our  life  and 
the  fulness  of  our  heart,  is  it  an  exacting  requisition  ?  Does  the  mother  expect  too 
much  when  she  demands  that  the  child  she  has  reared  shall  love  and  serve  her  T 
If  you  have  given  your  time  to  nurse  the  sick,  is  it  too  much  to  expect  that  when 
they  come  to  health  they  will  kindly  remember  you?  If  a  man  is  about  to  be 
destroyed,  and  you  step  between  him  and  his  peril  and  rescue  him,  is  it  strange 
that  you  should  expect  at  least  kindness  and  love  from  him  ?  The  untutored  savage 
would  never  forget  such  a  benefactor.  It  requires  Chiistians,  men  educated  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  death  of  Christ,  who  died  that  they  might  live,  to  refuse  to  requite 
service  with  gratitude.     (H.  W.  Beeclier.)         On  the  causes  of  unthankfulness  : — 

I.    Wb   abb   aft    BATHBB    to     best    in    second   causes   than   to   TBACB    OUB   BLESSINOa 

TO  THBiB  FRiuABY  SouBCB.  Docs  mau  rcceive  any  good,  it  appears  to  be  the  fruit 
of  his  own  labour,  or  prudence,  or  of  the  kindness  of  his  friends ;  but  the  First  Causa 
ifl  the  Being  to  whom  our  thanks  are  chiedy  due.  Take  a  case.  The  way  in  which 
I  can  best  serve  a  friend  is  by  persuading  a  third  perHon  to  do  something  for  his 
benefit.  To  whom,  then,  is  my  friend  really  indebted ?  While  his  thanks  ought 
nndoubtedly  to  be  given  to  the  third  person,  they  are  principally  due  to  me.  Suppose 
you  deemed  it  right,  before  you  conferred  a  favour  upon  your  child,  to  require  of 
him  some  previous  exercise — would  he,  when  he  received  it,  argue  justly  if  he  were 
to  say,  "  I  do  not  owe  this  to  my  parent,  but  to  my  own  labour  "1  The  fact  is,  the 
favour  is  enhanced  by  the  appointment  of  the  means  where  a  merciful  end  is 
secared.  This  we  discover  in  other  cases,  but  not  where  God  is  the  Author  of  our 
success.  Paradise  was  not  less  replenished  by  His  bounty  because  He  appointed 
Adam  to  dress  the  garden.  The  bounty  of  the  monarch  is  not  the  less  because  he 
distributes  it  by  the  hand  of  his  ministers.  II.  Odb  defective  view  of  His 
PBOviDENCB.  Our  acknowledgment  of  the  agency  of  God  in  some  instances  becomes 
a  means  of  diminishing  our  sense  of  His  agency  in  others.  The  fact  is,  God  more 
distinctly  reveals  to  us  His  agency  in  some  instances  that  we  may  learn  to  recognise 
it  in  all.  The  very  idea  of  a  particular  Providence  arises  from  our  imperfect 
conception  of  the  Divine  agency.  For,  if  we  saw  the  agency  of  God  as  it  is  seen  in 
heaven,  we  should  discover  that  His  providence  is  as  distinct,  as  minute  in  one  case 
as  another.  Thus  men  call  it  a  "  providence  "  when  they  receive  some  unexpected 
deUverance  or  blessing.  But  they  do  not  call  a  loss,  or  a  disease,  a  providence. 
But  it  is  certain  that  on  this  point  the  views  of  God  differ  most  widely  from  our 
own ;  and  when  we  shall  be  able  to  form  a  true  conception  of  the  goodness  of  God 
we  shall  discover  mercy  where  we  once  discerned  only  severity,  and  shall  thank 
God  for  trials  and  sufferings  as  the  most  signal  instances  of  His  providential  care. 
in.  Men  do  not  consideb  themselves  indebted  to  God  exokpt  fob  pecoliar  ob 
nisTiNODisHiNG  MEECIE8.  For  the  mercies  they  share  in  common  with  others  they 
think  little  gratitude  is  due.  But  do  the  diffusiveness  and  extent  of  the  bounty  of 
God  form  any  just  cause  of  unthankfulness?  What  would  you  think  of  a  child  who 
should  say,  "  I  am  not  indebted  to  my  parent ;  for  he  feeds  and  clothes  and  takes 
care  of  my  brothers  and  sisters  as  weU  as  of  myself  "  ?  The  fact  is,  that  the  very 
extent  of  those  blessings  we  sLiare  with  others  demands  additional  gratitude,  for 
such  mercies  are  the  most  valuable.  Compare  such  a  gift  as  light  with  any  petty 
comforts  granted  to  an  individual.  All  private  mercies  may  be  compared  to  tiie 
dew  which  fell  only  upon  the  fleece  of  Giaeon.  But  general  mercies  are  like  the 
dew  of  heaven  desceuding  on  the  Hjc  gene)al  surface  of  nature,  refreshing  the  thiisty 
fields,  and  clothing  them  with  verdure  and  beauty.  Surely  the  blessing  cannot  be 
lessened  to  me  because  others  also  are  blessed.  IV.  The  vert  ndmber  of  thb 
MEBciES  or  God  tends  to  diminish  oub  obatitude.  Examine  the  common  feelings 
of  mankind  :  is  it  not  evident  that  some  extraordinary  instance  of  the  bounty 
of  God  excites  more  gratituvie  than  the  more  valuable  mercies  of  eveiy  day  ?  The 
constant  enjoyment  of  oar  senses,  the  nightly  refreshment  of  sleep,  make  scarcely 
any  impression;  but  if  a  sense,  apparently  lost,  is  restored,  then  wa  feel  much 

voiu  X.  7 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [CBAF.  I, 

gratitnde  to  onr  Benefactor.  The  same  disposition  is  seen  in  other  oases.  If 
a  parent  gives  to  his  children  something  new  and  unexpected,  they  are  more 
tbankfol  tiian  for  their  daily  food  and  clothing.  Thus,  also,  although  the  unex- 
pected bounty  of  a  friend  may  at  first  excite  thankfulness,  yet,  if  repeated  every 
day,  it  is  received  with  diminished  gratitude,  and  at  length  the  withholding  of  it  is 
resented  as  an  injury.  If  it  be  urged  in  reply  that  this  springs  from  a  principle  in 
human  nature,  surely  it  is  no  excellent  principle,  but  argues  a  depraved  nature  and 
a  corrupt  heart.  From  the  same  depravity  it  arises  that  the  very  feeling  of  obliga- 
tion is  attended  with  pain,  especially  where  the  debt  is  large.  Men  love  to  be 
independent,  and  therefore  hate  an  obligation.    V.  A  pbevalent  vibw  o»  Qod's 

OHABAOTEB  AS  A  JUST  AND     HOLT    BATHER  THAN  AS   A   KISJ)  AKD  COMPASSIONATX   GoD. 

(J.  Venn,  M.A.)  But  became  vain  In  their  Imaginations,  and  their  foolish  heart 
was  darkened. — PauVa  indictment  of  heathenism : — Note — I.  The  cobbupxion  o» 
HUMAN  NATUBB.  The  facts  enumerated  are  such  as  to  manifest — 1.  Corruption 
in  principle  evincing  itself  by  corruption  in  practice.  Had  there  been  in  the 
human  heart  any  liking  to  the  true  God,  the  difficulty  would  have  been  to  forget 
not  to  remember  Him.  Those  whom  we  love  we  are  fond  to  think  of.  Has 
this  been  the  case  with  men  in  regard  to  God?  Has  it  not  rather  been,  in 
every  one  point,  precisely  the  reverse?  And  if  it  be  in  human  nature  to 
forget  and  depart  from  the  living  God,  must  it  not  be  emphatically  corrupt? 
2.  Idolatrous  defection  is  here  associated  with  practical  wickedness  as  its 
inseparable  concomitant.  Does  not  the  state  of  the  heathen  world  bear  ample 
testimony  to  its  truth?  3.  And  observe  further — the  connection,  in  the  way  of 
reciprocid  influence,  between  impiety  and  immorality.  Immorality  in  the  life  is 
the  natural  consequence  and  evidence  of  impiety  towards  God  in  the  heart,  while 
the  love  of  sin  inspires  the  wish  that  God  were  other  than  He  is.  H.  The  necessitt 
AND  THB  VALUE  OE  BEVELATioN.  How  early  did  this  necessity  appear  I  (Gen.  vi.  6, 
11, 12 ;  Josh.  xxiv.  2).  And  yet  men  talk  of  the  sufficiency  of  the  light  of  nature, 
while  the  experience  of  every  age  plainly  contradicts  this.  Never  was  an  experiment 
more  completely  tried,  and  on  every  trial  the  great  general  result  has  been  uniformly 
the  same.  Take  the  most  enlightened  nations  in  the  most  enlightened  times. 
Have  they,  in  these  circumstances,  excelled  others  in  their  views  of  God  and  in 
moral  goodness?  Frequently,  indeed,  they  have  even  been  worse.  Even  the 
philosophers  had  defective  and  erroneous  views  of  Deity,  of  the  way  of  obtaining 
His  favour,  and  of  morals.  All  that  is  good  in  any  of  their  systems  is  to  be  found 
in  the  Bible  along  with  infinitely  more  and  infinitely  better.  Yet  the  Bible  must  be 
discarded  and  their  conjectures  substituted  1  Because  they  had  a  dim  taper,  we 
must  seek  to  quench  the  sun  I  No ;  blessed  be  God  for  this  heavenly  light  t  But 
for  it  we  too  should  have  been  sitting  in  the  region  and  shadow  of  death — "  without 
God  and  without  hope  in  the  world."    IH.  How  inexcusable  must  they  bs  who, 

POSSESSING     such    A    BEVELATION,     BEMAIN,    NOTWITHSTANDING,     IQNOBANT     07     God! 

But  alas  1  the  same  principles  of  corruption  which  make  men  willing  to  forget  God 
amidst  His  works  of  creation  and  providence,  make  them  unwilling  to  receive  the 
truth  concerning  Him  when  set  before  them  more  directly  in  His  Word.  1.  If  the 
heathen  be  "  without  excuse,"  what  shall  be  said  of  those  who  shut  their  eyes 
against  this  superior  light,  and  while  it  shines  around  them  continue  to  walk 
in  darkness  ?  2.  How  inexcusable,  too,  and  how  deeply  criminal  must  they  be  who 
still  "  hold  the  truth  in  righteousness  "  1  Here  is  the  Bible.  You  have  a  general 
knowledge  of  its  contents.  You  profess  to  believe  them.  Yet,  withal,  they  have 
no  proper  influence  upon  your  hearts  and  lives.  What  if  the  righteous  God,  in 
His  just  displeasure,  should  give  you  over  to  "  a  reprobate  mind  "  ?  Beware  of 
imagining  that  the  mere  possession  of  revelation  constitutes  you  Christians.  The 
mere  having  of  the  Bible  can  do  no  good  if  its  important  truths  are  disbelieved  or 
neglected.  IV.  The  guilt  op  idolatbt,  it  is  to  be  peabed,  attaches  to  mant 
who  little  imagine  that  they  abb  at  all  chabqeable  with  anything  op  thb 
KIND.  The  spirit  of  idolatry  is  the  alienation  of  the  heart  from  God ;  the  with- 
holding from  Him,  and  the  giving  to  other  objects,  that  homage  and  those  affections 
to  which  He  alone  is  entitled.  Every  man's  idol  is  that  on  which  his  heart  is 
supremely  set.  Ambition,  wealth,  power,  learning,  <feo.,  are  all  idols  if  served 
irrespective  of  God.  V.  What  an  iBBESisTiBiiB  motive  is  hebe  pbesented  to 
UI88I0NABT  EXERTIONS !  Whose  Spirit  is  not  stirred  within  him  with  the  emotions 
of  indignant  zeal  in  beholding  the  world  "  wholly  given  to  idolatry."  To  suppose 
a  Christian  indifferent  on  such  a  subject  is  to  suppose  a  contradiction  in  terms — a 
Christian  without  piety,  without  mercy,  without  benevolence  I    Think  how  th« 


I.]  ROMANS.  99 

glory  of  God  is  trampled  ander  foot ;  how  Satan  reigns  triumphant ;  how  large  a 
proportion  of  the  world  is  still  in  the  condition  here  described  I   VL  L«t  Christiams 

HAEB  IT  MANIFEST  BY  THEER  WHOLS  CHABACTEB  THAT  THE  CONNECTION  18  AS  OLOSB 
BETWEEN     TRUTH     AND     BIGHTEOUSNESS    AS     BETWEEN     EBBOB     AND     WICKEDNES8.      Let 

yonr  profession  of  the  faith  of  the  gospel  be  adorned  by  a  condaot  uniformly 
consistent  with  its  pure  nature  and  its  holy  influence.  {R.  Wardlav,  D.D.)  The 
omUtion  of  good  leads  to  the  eommission  of  evil : — 1.  In  respect  of  the  understanding 
the  refusal  of  adoration,  •'  they  did  not  glorify,"  became  a  vain  labouring  of  the 
mind,  "  they  became  vain,"  and  complete  estrangement  from  the  truth,  ♦'  they 
became  fools."  2.  In  respect  of  the  heart,  ingratitude  was  first  transformed  into 
darkness,  and  then  into  monstrous  and  degrading  fetishism.  The  ungrateful  heart 
did  not  stop  short  at  not  thanking  God,  it  degraded  and  dishonoured  Him  by 
changing  Him  into  His  opposite.     {Prof.  Godet.)  Evil  imaginatiom  .-—What 

you  love,  what  you  desire,  what  yon  think  about,  you  are  photographing,  printing 
on  the  walls  of  your  immortal  nature.  And  just  as  to-day,  thousands  of  years  after 
the  artists  have  been  gathered  to  the  dust,  we  may  go  into  Egyptian  temples  and 
see  the  figures  on  their  walls  in  all  the  freshness  of  their  first  colouring,  as  if  the 
painter  had  but  laid  down  his  pencil  a  moment  ago ;  so  on  your  hearts  youthful 
evils,  the  sins  of  your  boyhood,  the  pruriences  of  your  earliest  days,  may  leave  ugly 
shapes  that  no  tears  and  no  repentance  will  ever  wipe  out.  Nothing  can  do  away 
with  "the  marks  of  that  which  once  hath  been."  What  are  you  painting  on  the 
chambers  of  imagery  in  your  hearts?  Obscenity,  foul  things,  mean  things,  low 
things  ?  Is  that  mystic  shrine  within  you  painted  with  such  figures  as  in  some 
chambers  in  Pompeii,  where  the  excavators  had  to  cover  up  the  pictures  because 
they  were  so  foul ;  or  is  it  like  the  cells  in  the  Convent  of  San  Marco  at  Florence, 
where  Fra  Angelico's  holy  and  sweet  genius  painted  on  the  bare  walls,  to  be  looked 
at,  as  he  fancied,  only  by  one  devout  brother  in  each  cell,  angel  imaginings,  and 
noble,  pore  celestial  faces  that  calm  and  hallow  those  who  gaze  upon  them  ?  What 
are  you  doing,  my  brother,  in  the  dark,  in  the  chambers  of  your  imagery  ?  (A 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  ^ 

Ver.  22,  23.  Professlnj:  themselves  to  be  wise  they  became  foola.— rft«/oZ?te»  of 
the  vn$e : — Futility  of  thought  has  reached  the  character  of  folly.  What,  in  fact, 
is  polytheism,  except  a  sort  of  permanent  hallucination,  a  collective  delirium,  a 
possession  on  a  great  scale  t  And  this  mental  disorder  rose  to  a  kind  of  perfection 
among  the  very  peoples  who,  more  than  others,  laid  claim  to  the  glory  of  wisdom. 
When  he  says,  "  professing  to  be  wise,"  Paul  does  not  mean  to  stigmatise  ancient 
philosophy  absolutely ;  he  only  means  that  all  that  labour  of  the  sages  did  not 
prevent  the  most  civilised  nations — Egypt,  Greece,  and  Borne — from  being  at  the 
same  time  the  most  idolatrous  of  antiquity.  The  popular  imagination,  agreeably 
served  by  prieets  and  poets,  did  not  allow  the  efforts  of  the  wise  to  dissipate  this 
delirium.  (Prof.  Oodet.)  Boasting  of  wisdom : — In  every  department  of  know- 
ledge, but  especially  in  religion,  boasting  of  wisdom  is  alike  the  proof  and 
parent  of  folly.  I.  It  leads  a  man  to  go  beyond  the  limits  of  his  own 
POWEBS,  and  to  meddle  with  matters  too  high  for  him,  ob  else  to  befdse  to 

BELIEVB  IN  ANYTHING  WHICH  HE  CANNOT  UNDEBSTAND  OB  OBASP.      1.  In  either  CaSC  thig 

ends  in  folly.  For  the  wisest  and  the  most  ignorant  are  on  a  par  when  they  specu- 
late npon  subjects  which  transcend  human  thought,  or  over  which  God  has  been 
pleased  to  place  an  impenetrable  veil.  2.  He  who  believes  in  truth  taught  by 
nature  and  revelation  is  wiser  than  the  so-called  philosopher,  who  declines  to 
receive  anything  but  what  his  human  intellect  and  finite  powers  can  explain  or 
fully  grasp.  II.  It  leads  a  man  to  dispense  with  the  help  to  be  derived  from 
tile  labours,  remarks,  or  suggestions  or  others,  as  well  as  to  advance  the  most 
ABSUBD  opinions,  and  to  maintain  them  with  the  most  inveterate  obstinacy  for  the 
sake  of  notoriety.  IH.  It  makes  a  man  too  willing  to  accept  his  own  conclu- 
sions without  sufficient  and  searching  examinations.  IV.  It  ignores  God's  law 
that  the  temple  of  Divine  knowledge  must  be  entebbd  only  by  the  gate  or 
humility.  (Biblical  Mtueum.)  And  changed  the  glory  of  the  Incorruptible  God 
Into  an  linage. — Degradation  of  God's  glory  : — The  glory  of  God  is  the  splendour 
which  His  manifested  perfections  cast  into  the  heart  of  His  intelligent  creatures ; 
hence  a  bright  image  which  is  to  man  the  ideal  of  all  that  is  good.  This  image 
had  been  produced  within  them.  What  did  they  make  of  it  ?  The  sequel  tells. 
While  holding  the  Divine  person,  they  wrapped  it  up,  as  it  were  in  the  likeness  oi 
its  opposite ;  it  would  have  been  almost  better  to  leave  it  in  lilenee — ^it  would  not 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHW.  i. 

have  been  so  great  an  affront.  The  preposition  Iv  exactly  describes  this  imprison- 
ment of  the  Divine  glory  in  a  form  ignoble  and  grotesque.  The  epithet  "  incor- 
ruptible "  is,  as  it  were,  a  protest  beforehand  against  this  degradation.  {Prof. 
Godet.)  Idolatry  a  retrogression,  not  an  advance  in  religious  thought : — Idolatry 
according  to  Paul  is  not  a  progressive  stage  reached  in  the  religious  thought  of 
mankind  starting  from  primeval  fetishism.  Far  from  being  a  first  step  towards 
the  goal  of  Monotheism.  Polytheism  is,  on  the  contrary,  the  result  of  degeneracy, 
an  apostasy  from  the  original  Monotheism,  a  darkening  of  the  understand! ug  and 
heart  which  has  terminated  in  the  grossest  fetishism.  The  history  of  religions, 
thoroughly  studied  nowadays,  fully  justifies  Paul's  view.  It  shows  that  the 
present  heathen  peoples  of  India  and  Africa,  far  from  rising  of  themselves  to  a 
higher  religious  state,  have  only  sunk,  age  after  age,  and  become  more  and  more 
degraded.  It  proves  that  at  the  root  of  all  pagan  religions  and  mythologies  there 
lies  an  original  Monotheism,  which  is  the  historical  starting-point  in  religion  for 
all  mankind.     {Ihid.) 

Vers.  24,  25.  Wherefore  God  also  gave  them  up  to  imcleanness,— Tfte  eon$e- 
quences  of  the  Divine  abandonment : — You  have  merely  to  loose  the  connection,  and 
the  trucks  by  their  own  weight  rush  down  the  incline,  and  dash  themselves  to  a 
thousand  pieces.  A  physician  has  merely  to  retire  when  his  orders  have  been 
repeatedly  disregarded,  to  deliver  his  refractory  patient  over  in  his  disease  to  pro- 
tracted suffering  and  possibly  to  a  premature  grave.  In  like  manner,  if  God 
judicially  delivers  over  men  who  wilfully  reject  Him  to  their  lusts,  tbey  will  sink 
into  the  lowest  depths  of  degradation,  and  come  to  everlasting  destruction.  (C. 
Neil,  M.A.)  The  Divine  penalty  attached  to  sin : — Here  Paul  expresses  the  feeling 
of  indignation  raised  in  his  heart  by  the  thought  and  view  of  the  treatment  of  God 
by  the  creation  to  whom  He  had  revealed  Himself  so  magnificently.  There  is 
something  here  of  that  "exasperation  of  heart"  (Acts  xvii.  16),  felt  at  Athens. 
This  feeling  is  expressed  forcibly  by  the  conjunctions,  Sw,  "on  account  of  which," 
i.e.,  of  the  sin  just  described,  referring  to  the  justice  of  the  punishment  in  general. 
Kai,  "  also,"  brings  out  more  especially  the  relation  of  congruity  between  the 
nature  of  the  punishment  and  that  of  the  offence.  They  sinned,  "  wherefore  " 
God  punished  them  ;  they  sinned  by  degrading  God,  wherefore  also  God  degraded 
them.  The  word  •'  gave  over"  does  not  signify  that  God  impelled  them  to  evil,  to 
punish  the  evil  committed.  The  holiness  of  God  is  opposed  to  such  a  sense,  and 
to  give  over  is  not  to  impel.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  impossible  to  stop  short  at 
the  idea  of  a  simple  permission.  God  was  not  purely  passive  in  the  terrible 
development  of  Gentile  corruption.  Wherein  did  His  action  consist  ?  He  positively 
withdrew  His  hand  ;  He  ceased  to  hold  the  boat  as  it  was  dragged  by  the  current 
of  the  river.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  apostle  in  Acts  xiv.  16.  It  is  not  a  simple 
abstention,  but  the  positive  withdrawal  of  a  force.  Such  is  the  meaning  of  Gen.  vi.  3. 
As  Meyer  says,  "  The  law  of  history,  in  virtue  of  which  the  forsaking  of  God  is 
followed  by  a  parallel  growth  of  immor.ility,  is  not  a  purely  natural  order  of 
things;  the  power  of  God  is  active  in  the  execution  of  this  law."  If  it  is  asked 
how  such  a  mode  of  action  harmonises  with  the  moral  perfection  of  God,  the 
answer  undoubtedly  is  that  when  man  has  reached  a  certain  degree  of  corruption 
he  can  only  be  cured  by  the  excess  of  his  own  corruption  ;  it  is  the  only  means  left  of 
producing  what  all  preceding  appeals  and  punishments  failed  to  effect,  the  salutary 
action  of  repentance.  So  it  is  that  at  a  given  moment  the  father  of  the  prodigal 
lets  him  go,  even  giving  him  his  share  of  goods.  The  monstrous  character  of  the 
excesses  about  to  be  described  confirms  this  view.  The  two  prepositions  iv, 
"through,"  and  tiQ,  "to,"  differ  from  one  another  as  the  current  which  bears  the 
bark  along,  once  it  has  been  detached  from  the  shore,  differs  from  the  abyss  into 
which  it  is  about  to  be  plunged.  Lusts  exist  in  the  heart ;  God  abandons  it  to  their 
power,  and  the  legions  that  fall  which  must  end  in  the  most  degrading  impurities 
*•  You  have  dishonoured  Me ;  I  give  you  up  that  you  may  dishonour  your  own  selves." 
{Prof.  Godet.) 

Ver.  23.  Who  changed  the  tmth  of  Ood  Into  a  He. — The  truth  of  God  exchanged 
into  a  lie : — fv  signifies  the  workshop,  or  matrix,  where  the  exchange  took  place. 
Everything,  of  course,  effected  in  and  coming  out  of  the  workshop  or  matrix  of 
falsehood  is  falsehood  itself.  How  ridiculous  would  it  be  for  ns  to  exchange  the 
present  knowledge  of  Bcienoe  for  the  crude  notions  and  false  theories  of  savHges  or 
of  the  ancients  1     How  absurd  for  us  to  strip  the  walls  of  our  national  galleries  oi 


eur.  z.]  ROMANS.  10| 

the  masterpiecoB  of  each  artists  as  Raphael  and  Titian  and  the  like,  and  to  put  op 
in  their  places  paintings  without  true  perspective,  worthy  conception,  or  correct 
execution  1  Or,  again,  what  an  act  of  madness  would  it  be  to  abandon  springs  of 
clear  and  crystal  waters  for  impure  and  poisonous  ponds  1  (Isa.  xliv.  20.)  But  such 
instances  of  folly  and  madness  in  exchanging  the  true  for  the  false,  the  good  for 
the  evil,  were  nothing  in  comparison  to  the  exchanging  the  positive  and  precious 
knowledge  of  God  in  the  workshop  of  falsehood,  and,  as  a  matter  of  course,  into 
falsehood  itself,  such  as  idols,  the  tales  of  mythology,  and  heathen  systems  of 
philosophy  and  religion.  (C  Neil,  M.A.)  Idolatry  a  lie  agaimt  God'g  truth: — 
The  number  of  the  gods  of  the  heathen  is  a  lie  against  the  Divine  unity ;  their 
corporeal  nature  a  lie  against  His  pure  invisible  spirituality ;  their  coufined  and 
local  residence  a  lie  against  His  omnipresence  and  immensity ;  their  hmited  and 
subdivided  departments  of  operation  a  lie  against  His  universal  proprietorship  and 
dominion ;  their  follies  and  weaknesses  a  lie  against  His  infinite  wisdom  ;  their 
defects  and  vices  and  crimes  a  lie  against  His  unsullied  purity  and  perfection. 
The  entire  system,  in  all  its  diversity  of  modes,  is  a  sacrilegious  robbery  of  Heaven, 
a  universal  slander  on  the  character  of  the  Most  High.  Every  framer  and  every 
worshipper  of  idols,  or  of  real  or  imaginary  beings  represented  by  idols,  has 
"  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie."  {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  A  lie  .-—I.  An 
n>OL  IS  A  LIB.  1.  As  professing  to  be  what  it  is  not.  2.  As  deceiving  him  who 
trusts  in  it.  II.  Evebytbimo  opposed  to  God  ib  a.  lie.  III.  Evebythino  is  a 
LIB  which— 1.  Disappoints  man's  hopes.  2.  Fails  to  satisfy  the  cravings  of  his 
immortal  soul.  IV.  That  life  is  a  lib  which  is  not — 1.  According  to  God's  will. 
2.  Directed  to  His  glory.  3.  The  realisation  of  His  enjoyment.  (T.  Ilobiniion,D.D.) 
And  worshipped  and  served  the  creature  more  tlian  the  Creator. — Nature-worship : — 
1.  There  is  no  fact  in  the  history  of  the  Jews  more  certain  or  familiar  than  their 
propensity  to  lapse  into  idolatry,  yet  after  the  return  from  Babylon  they  have  never 
been  reproached  with  any  tendency  to  idol  worship.  While  a  large  part  of  the 
Christian  world  has  resumed  the  form,  if  not  the  substance  of  idolatry,  the  Jews 
have  borne  witness  against  their  defection.  2.  This  extraordinary  contrast  prompts 
the  question.  How  and  why  is  it  bo  ?  What  has  become  of  the  idolatrous  pro- 
pensity which  once  appeared  inseparable  from  the  corruptions  of  the  human  heart  ? 
There  might  be  less  cause  to  propound  this  question  if  a  corresponding  change  had 
taken  place  among  the  heathen.  But  the  heathen  world  is  as  idolatrous  as  ever. 
Is  it  because  we  are  too  civilised  ?  If  by  this  we  mean  intellectual  refinement  and 
cultivation  of  the  taste,  we  have  only  to  remember  Greece.  Or  if  a  civil  and 
political  wisdom,  military  force,  and  practical  sagacity,  then  look  at  Bome !  3. 
Since  none  of  these  solutions  explain  why  idolatry  is  now  so  rare  among  ourselves, 
it  may  not  be  without  its  use  to  inquire  whether,  after  all,  we  are  so  free  from 
idolatry  as  supposed.  Let  us  then  inquire  what  ia  idolatry.  We  must  reject  the 
etymological  definition  which  would  restrict  it  to  the  worship  of  images.  Then 
they  who  adored  the  host  of  heaven,  who  invoked  the  winds,  bowed  down  at  the 
fountains,  whispered  their  devotions  to  the  air,  and  called  upon  the  mountains,  are 
excluded  from  the  catalogue.  On  the  other  hand,  idolatry  is  not  to  be  resolved 
into  a  purely  spiritual  act,  the  preference  of  some  other  supreme  object  of  affection 
io  our  Maker.  This,  though  the  soul  of  all  idolatry,  is  not  the  whole  of  it,  and 
exists  now  just  as  much  as  in  ancient  times.  Covetousness  is  idolatry,  but  idolatry 
is  not  covetousness.  What  imparted  to  the  ancient  Paganism  its  distinctive 
character,  and  gave  unity  to  it,  was  the  worship  of  nature.  However  they 
might  differ  in  their  symbols,  rites,  theology,  or  ethics,  they  are  all  reducible  to 
this.  4.  This  view  does  not  exclude  a  vast  variety  of  forms  and  of  gradations. 
The  lowest  stage,  above  that  of  mere  stnpid  fetishism,  may  be  described  as  the 
religious  worship  of  particular  natural  objects  or  their  artificial  representatives, 
rising  from  the  shapeless  stone  to  plants,  to  trees,  from  the  meanest  brutes  to  the 
most  noble,  from  the  clod  to  the  mountain,  from  the  spring  to  the  ocean,  from  earth 
to  heaven.  A  still  more  intellectual  variety  would  be  that  which,  instead  of 
individual  sensible  objects,  paid  its  adorations  to  the  elements  or  mysterious 
powers  of  nature.  By  a  still  higher  act  of  philosophical  abstraction  some  wor- 
shipped  Nature  itself,  ri  irav,  including  all  the  objects  which  have  been  already 
mentioned.  6.  These  views  as  to  the  essential  character  of  ancient  heathenisoc 
derive  at  least  some  countenance  from  the  solution  which  they  seem  to  afford  of 
the  disappearance  of  idolatry.  On  this  hypothesis,  if  on  no  other,  it  may  certainly 
be  said  that  there  is  still  a  strong  taint  of  idolatry  perceptible.  I.  Ik  our 
ZJ^auAOB;  for  to  what  strange  accident  can  it  be  owing  that  in  common  parlance 


lOa  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  c. 

and  in  current  literature  there  shoald  be  so  constant,  so  instinctive  an  aversion  to 
the  name  of  God  as  a  personal  distinctive  appellation.  Can  it  be  reverence  ?  Alas ! 
this  explanation  is  precluded  by  the  levity  with  which  the  same  men  often  make 
that  venerable  name  the  theme  of  jests  and  the  burden  of  imprecation.  No ;  the 
name  seems  to  be  shanned  because  it  means  too  much.  Not  only  is  the  grand  and 
simple  name  of  God  exchanged  for  a  descriptive  title,  such  as  Supreme  Being — 
or  an  abstract  term,  the  Deity — but  still  more  readily  and  frequently  is  God 
supplanted  by  a  goddess,  and  her  name  is  Natare.  It  is  Nature  that  endows  men 
with  her  gifts  and  graces,  that  regulates  the  seasons  and  controls  the  elements. 
Whatever  explanation  may  be  given  of  this,  it  is  still  an  odd  coincidence  that  this 
darling  figure  of  speech  or  philosophical  formula  should  so  exactly  tally  with  the 
spirit  and  language  of  idolatry  considered  as  the  worship  of  nature.  U.  But  this 
coincidence  may,  in  some,  be  the  eSect  of  classical  studies,  and  need  excite  no 
serious  alarm  if  confined  to  the  fanciful  creations  of  romance  or  poetry.  But  we 
find  these  analogies  also  vst  beal  ixez  and  its  least  imaoinativb  wales.  The 
compulsory  dependence  upon  seasons  and  weather  often  takes  the  form  of  an 
extreme  anxiety,  a  breathless  watching  of  the  elements,  a  superstitious  faith  in 
something  quite  distinct  from  God,  and  a  constant  disposition  to  invest  this  some- 
thing with  an  individual  existence  and  with  personal  attributes ;  although  it  may 
prove  nothing  with  respect  to  any  formal  belief,  it  certainly  presents  another 
strange  approximation  to  the  spirit  and  the  practice  of  the  old  idolaters.  The 
fisherman  who  feels  himself  to  be  the  slave  of  the  winds  and  tides,  without  a 
thought  of  God  as  his  Creator,  is  not  so  very  far  removed  from  the  old  Greek  or 
Phoenician,  who  sacrificed  to  Ocean  ere  he  launched  his  bark.  The  mariner  who 
spends  whole  nights  in  whistling  for  the  wind,  may  do  it  from  habit  or  in  jest ;  but 
he  may  also  do  it  with  a  secret  faith,  by  no  means  wholly  different  in  kind  from 
the  emotions  of  the  ancient  pagan,  as  he  poured  out  his  libations  to  Eolus,  or  his 
prayers  to  the  particular  wind  of  which  he  stood  in  need.  The  social  and  domestic 
superstitions  which  have  lingered  in  all  Christian  countries,  as  to  signs  of  good 
and  evil  luck,  and  the  methods  of  procuring  or  averting  it,  are  the  relics  of  a 
heathenism  which  we  sometimes  look  upon  as  finally  exploded.  III.  But  objection 
may  be  made  to  sweeping  infiuences  from  the  errors  of  the  vulgar.  Well,  admitting 
that  the  uninstructed  multitude  must  always  embrace  errors,  some  of  which  may 
accidentally  resemble  those  of  heathenism,  let  us  ascend  again  into  the  region  of 
intellectual  cultivation  in  eefebencb  to  sciENTino  observation.  The  philo- 
sophical explorer  often  looks  upon  God's  place  as  empty,  or  as  filled  by  another — 
yet  the  same — viz.,  Nature.  No  one  supposes  that  astronomers  ever  formally 
adore  the  stars,  or  geologists  earth,  or  chemists  the  elements,  or  botanists 
trees  and  flowers.  But  let  the  evidence  that  some  of  all  these  classes  recognise  a 
Nature,  quite  distinct  from  God,  by  whose  mysterious  virtues  these  effects  are  all 
produced,  and  whose  authoritative  laws  are  independent  of  His  will,  be  gathered 
from  the  language,  actions,  and  feelings  of  these  votaries  of  science,  and  then  it 
will  appear  whether  the  prophets  and  the  high  priests  of  material  wisdom  are  or 
are  not  in  hesurt  and  practice  worshipped  of  nature.  IV.  Another  class  adore 
nature  as  the  source  of  sensible  and  imaginative  pleasure.  These  are  the  wor- 
shippers of  BBAUTT.  The  voice  that  whispers  in  the  trees  or  roars  in  the  tornado 
may,  to  some  ears,  be  the  voice  of  God ;  but  they  may  also  utter  other  inspirations, 
and  bring  responses  from  another  oracle.  Instead  of  calling  ns  to  God,  they  may 
but  call  us  to  themselves,  or  to  the  place  where  nature  sits  enthroned  as  God. 
This  form  of  idolatry  has  all  the  aid  that  art  can  yield  to  nature.  The  idolater  of 
nature  cannot  but  be  an  idolater  of  art.  The  high  art  of  the  ancients  was  a  part 
of  their  religion.  It  was  nature  that  they  represented,  beautified  and  worshipped. 
The  gradual  return  in  modern  times  to  this  view  of  the  arts,  and  the  impassioned 
zeal  with  which  it  is  pursued,  is  one  of  the  most  startling  analogies  to  heathenism 
that  can  be  produced,  and  threatens,  more  than  any  other,  to  result  in  an  exterior 
resemblance  corresponding  to  the  essential  one  described  already.  It  may  no 
doubt  be  said  that  this  apotheosis,  both  of  art  and  nature,  has  resulted  by  reaction 
from  the  barbarous  and  unscriptural  contempt,  especially  of  God's  material  works. 
This  is  in  some  sense  true.  But  the  idolatry  itself  springs  from  a  deeper  and  remoter 
source.  As  long  as  man  retains  the  sensibilities  which  God  has  given  him,  and  yet 
remains  unwilling  to  retain  God  in  his  thoughts,  the  voice  of  nature  will  be  louder 
than  the  voice  of  God.  V.  From  the  agreements  which  have  now  been  traced,  it 
may  reasonably  be  expected  that  the  principle  of  this  idolatry  will  also  avow  itself 
a  DOCiBiNB.    It  has  done  so  already  in  Uie  pantheistical  philosophy  of  Germany. 


tma.  I.]  ROMANS.  108 

Conolasion  :  From  all  this  it  becomes  ns  to  take  warning,  that  whatever  we  do  wa 
do  with  oar  eyes  open,  to  see  to  it  that  we  incur  not  the  reproach,  "  Ye  know  not 
what  je  worship,"  and  to  see  to  it  that  we  are  not  led  into  idolatry  by  any  speoioas 
figments  or  delusions,  lest  we  be  constrained  to  take  np  the  lament  of  those  con- 
fessors in  the  times  of  heathen  persecation,  who,  though  proof  against  all  menace 
and  persuasion,  were  at  last  miserably  cheated  into  acts  of  worship  at  the  altar  of 
•n  idol,  when  they  thought  themselves  kneeling  at  the  altar  of  their  God.  {J.  A. 
Alexander,  D.D.)  Scepticism  and  superstition: — There  is  a  very  close  connec- 
tion, as  all  history  proves,  between  theoretical  disbelief  in  a  future  life  and 
spiritual  existence,  and  superstition.  So  strong  is  the  bond  that  unites  men  with 
the  unseen  world  that  if  they  do  not  link  themselves  with  that  world  in  the  legiti- 
mate and  true  fashion,  it  is  almost  certain  to  avenge  itself  upon  them  by  leading 
them  to  all  manner  of  low  and  abject  superstitions.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Heart 
idolatry: — Worship  is  the  attribution  of  supreme  excellence  to,  and  the  entire 
dependence  of  the  heart  upon,  a  certain  person.  And  the  people  or  the  things  to 
which  a  man  attributes  excellence,  and  on  which  he  hangs  his  happiness  and  his 
well-being,  these  be  his  gods,  no  matter  what  his  outward  profession  is.  You  can 
find  out  what  these  are  for  yourself,  if  you  will  honestly  ask  yourself  one  or  two 
questions.  What  is  it  that  I  want  most  f  What  is  it  which  makes  my  ideal  of 
happiness  7  What  is  it  which  I  feel  that  I  should  be  desperate  without  ?  What 
do  I  think  about  most  naturally  and  spontaneously,  when  the  spring  is  taken  off, 
and  my  thoughts  are  allowed  to  go  as  they  will  ?  And  if  the  answer  to  none  of 
these  questions  is  "  God !  "  then  I  do  not  know  why  you  should  call  yourself  a 
worshipper  of  God's.  It  does  not  matter,  though  we  pray  in  the  temple,  if  we  have 
the  dark  subterranean  pit,  where  our  true  adoration  is  rendered.  Oh  1  I  am  afraid 
there  are  a  great  many  of  us  nominal  Cbristians,  connected  with  Christian 
churches,  posing  before  men  as  orthodox  religionists,  who  keep  this  private  chapel 
where  we  do  our  devotions  to  an  idol  and  not  to  God.  If  our  real  gods  could  be 
made  visible,  what  a  pantheon  they  would  make  1  All  the  foul  forms  painted  on 
that  underground  cell  would  be  paralleled  in  the  creeping  things — which  crawl 
along  the  low  earth,  and  never  soar  nor  even  stand  erect,  and  in  the  vile  bestial 
forms  of  passion  to  which  some  of  us  really  bow  down.  Honour,  wealth,  literary 
or  other  distinction,  the  sweet  sanctities  of  human  love  dishonoured  and  profaned 
by  being  exalted  to  the  place  which  Divine  love  should  hold,  ease,  family, 
animal  appetites,  lust,  drink — these  ate  the  gods  of  some  of  as.  (Ibid.) 
Who  Is  blessed  for  ever. — The  blessedne$»  of  God : — I.  The  blessedness  op  God. 
To  bless  is  to  make  happy,  and  to  be  blessed  is  to  be  happy.  God  is  necessarily 
happy — 1.  In  His  benevolent  feelings.  God  is  love.  Benevolence  always  givea 
pleasure  to  the  mind.  There  is  a  selfish  benevolence,  which  is  a  happy  feeling  so 
long  as  it  continues.  There  is  also  a  pure,  disinterested,  and  universal  benevolence, 
which  yields  a  purer,  higher,  and  more  lasting  satisfaction  to  the  mind.  And  such 
is  the  benevolence  of  the  Deity.  His  benevolent  feelings,  therefore,  must  be  a 
source  of  pure  and  permanent  felicity.  2.  In  expressing  His  benevo^nt  feelings. 
There  are  emotions  which  are  not  productive  of  any  external  act.  Good  men  have 
a  thousand  affections  which  they  never  could  express  by  any  external  actions,  but 
God  is  both  able  and  disposed  to  express  His  benevolence.  He  diffuses  as  much 
happiness  among  His  creatures  as  His  mighty  power,  guided  by  His  unsearchable 
wisdom,  can  produce.  And  all  these  expressions  of  His  goodness  are  extremely 
gratifying  to  His  benevolent  heart.  He  makes  Himself  happy  by  making  His  crea- 
tares  happy.  Do  parents  feel  peculiar  satisfaction  in  expressing  their  love  to  their 
children  ?  So  does  the  kind  parent  of  the  universe.  3.  In  beholding  the  effects  of 
His  benevolence.  As  He  loves  to  promote  the  happiness  of  His  creatures,  so  He 
Irves  to  see  the  happiness  which  He  bestows  and  they  enjoy.  II.  God  is  pebfectlt 
AND  FOB  EVEB  BLESSED.  This  blcsseduess  is — 1.  Without  the  least  alloy,  or  mixture. 
It  is  as  pure  as  His  perfect  benevolence,  from  which  it  flows.  God  is  love,  and  in 
Him  is  no  malevolence  at  all.  Though  the  benevolence  of  saints  in  this  life  affords 
them  some  real  happiness,  yet  it  is  mixed  with  many  painful  feelings,  which  arise 
from  the  mixture  of  their  selfish  with  their  benevolent  affections.  But  all  the  affec- 
tions of  God's  heart  are  uniform  and  harmonious.  2.  Uninterrupted.  There  are 
many  things  which  serve  to  interrupt  the  happiness  of  saints  in  this  imperfect  state. 
But  there  is  nothing  to  interrupt  the  pure  and  unmixed  felicity  of  the  Divine  Being. 
He  never  finds  any  difficulty  in  the  way  of  extending  His  benevolent  regards  to  any 
of  His  creatures,  who  are  always  in  His  sight  and  His  reach.  He  never  sees  a  good 
to  be  done  which  is  out  of  His  power  to  do.    He  never  sees  an  evil  to  be  removed 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap,  t, 

which  it  is  out  of  His  power  to  remove.     3.  Unlimited.    The  happiness  of  created 
beings  never  can  be  nnlimited.   Their  finite  natures  will  for  ever  set  bounds  to  their 
enjoyments.    But  the  blessedness  of  the  Deity  can  admit  of  no  limitation.    This  is 
evident  from  the  great  scheme  which  God  formed  from  eternity.   Among  all  possible 
modes  of  operation  which  stood  present  to  His  omniscient  eye,  His  infinite  wisdom 
ohose  the  best,  to  give  the  most  free,  full,  extensive  expressions  of  His  perfectly 
benevolent  feelings.     Among  all  possible  things  to  be  done.  He  determined  to  do  aU 
those  which  would  diffuse  the  greatest  sum  of  happiness  through  the  universe.   And 
by  forming  this  scheme  which  would  give  the  most  unlimited  indulgence  to  His 
benevolent  feelings,  He  laid  a  foundation  for  His  own  unlimited  felicity  and  self* 
enjoyment.    4.  Everlasting.    He  is  blessed  for  ever.     He  can  never  see  any  reason 
to  alter  His  designs,  and  therefore  it  is  certain  that  He  never  will  alter  them.   He  can 
never  meet  with  any  insurmountable  diiBculties  in  carrying  His  designs  into  effect, 
and  therefore  He  will  infallibly  accomplish  them.     And  if  He  does  eventually 
accomplish  all  His  purposes,  His  joy  will  be  full.    He  was  blessed  in  forming  Hia 
benevolent  designs  ;  He  has  been  blessed  in  carrying  them  on  ;  He  will  be  blessed 
in  bringing  them  to  a  close ;  and  He  will  be  blessed  in  contemplating  them,  through 
interminable  ages.    III.  Improvement  :   1.  If  the  blessedness  of  Ood  essentially 
consists  in  the  benevolence  of  His  heart,  then  we  may  clearly  understand  what  is 
meant  by  His  acting  for  His  own  glory.  His  creating  the  universe  for  His  glory,  means 
His  creating  it  for  His  own  most  benevolent  and  perfect  blessedness.    2.  If  God's 
blessedness,  which  consists  in  the  gratification  of  His  benevolence,  be  His  glory, 
which  He  seeks  in  all  His  works,  then  His  glory  and  the  good  of  the  universe  cannot 
be  separated.     His  acting  for  His  glory  is  acting  to  express  His  pure  benevolence  to 
His  creatures,  in  promoting  their  highest  happiness.     It  is  impossible  that  God 
should  promote  His  own  glory  to  the  highest  degree,  without  promoting  the  highest 
good  of  the  universe.    8.  If  God  means  to  gratify  His  own  benevolence  in  all  EUs 
conduct,  then  we  may  be  assured  that  He  never  has  suffered,  and  never  will  suffer 
anything  to  take  place  but  what  will  promote  the  greatest  good  of  the  whole  system 
of  moral  beings.    Since  He  has  caused  both  natural  and  moral  evils  to  exist,  we 
may  be  sore  that  no  more  shall  exist  than  He  sees  necessary  to  promote  His  bene- 
volent purposes.    As  He  designs  that  the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  Him,  so  the 
remainder  of  wrath  He  will  restrain,  or  not  cause  to  exist.    4.  If  it  be  God'g 
supreme  design  to  make  Himself  and  His  creatures  as  happy  as  possible,  then  we 
have  reason  to  rejoice  that  He  is  absolutely  sovereign.    If  any  of  His  selfish  crea- 
tures could  guide  or  stay  His  hand,  they  would  not  suffer  Him  to  seek  His  own 
happiness,  nor  the  greatest  happiness  of  the  universe,  but  constrain  Him  to  promote 
their  own  private,  personal,  selfish  happiness.    6.  Since  God  places  His  highest 
happiness  in  promoting  the  highest  happiness  of  His  creatures,  we  have  soUd 
ground  to  believe  that  He  will  fulfil  all  His  great  and  precious  promises  to  beUevers. 
He  has  inseparably  connected  their  happiness  with  His  own.    6.  We  learn  from 
what  has  been  said  that  none  can  be  miserable,  in  time  or  eternity,  but  those  who 
are  unwilling  that  God  should  promote  the  highest  good  of  the  universe.     (N. 
Emmons,  D.D.)         The  Divine  ble$$ednett : — I.  Let  us  approach  this  subject  from 
the  easiest  standpoint,  that  of  the  fctobe.    We  project  our  vision  through  dim 
ages  yet  to  come.    The  curse  has  gone  from  the  universe.    Terrible  whilst  it  lasted, 
God's  tenderness  has  at  last  abolished  it  from  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men.     God's 
innate  blessedness  has  been  transfused  into  numbers  no  arithmetic  can  compute,  and 
they  are  eager  to  copy  the  beneficence  that  has  won  their  supreme  adoration.     If 
there  were  fresh  worlds  to  be  redeemed,  not  one  would  decline  the  task,  for  the  Son 
who  gave  Himself  a  ransom  for  many  is  in  them.    In  spirits  many  as  the  sands  of 
the  sea.  He  has  implanted  the  foundation  motives  of  His  own  saving  love,  and  has 
drawn  them  into  the  same  circle  of  sacred  joy  with  Himself.    When  we  look  at  God 
from  this  standpoint,  it  is  not  difficult  to  conceive  of  Him  as  infiiutely  and  endlessly 
blessed.    But  the  subject  is  not  without  its  difficulties.    1.  On  the  far-off  confines 
of  all  this  blessedness,  is  there  not  the  smoke  of  a  torment  that  ascendeth  up  for 
ever  and  ever  t    Whilst  there  is  one  world  of  guilt  and  pain,  can  God's  great  pitying 
heart  be  quite  at  rest  7    Well,  do  not  suppose  that  the  ratio  between  good  and  evQ 
will  always  be  what  it  was  when  Christ  spoke  of  the  few  that  were  saved,  or  even 
what  it  is  now.    Evil  will  shrink  to  ever-diminishing  proportions  in  the  uncounted 
centuries  yet  to  be.    In  the  quiet  night  the  heavens  breathe  their  wetdth  of  dew 
upon  the  fields  and  moors  and  forests,  but  you  can  scarcely  find  the  dewdrop  that 
haa  distilled  itself  into  the  cup  of  the  nightshade.    For  many  a  hundred  miles  the 
trelliied  vinea  spread  their  proud  clusters  before  the  sun.     You  may  travel  for  dajM 


OBAP.  I.]  BOMANS.  lOgr 

before  yoa  find  the  one  vine  that  has  been  smitten  with  mildew.  Uncounted  sani 
glitter  through  the  Milky  Way.  The  astronomer  may  search  for  months  before  he 
can  find  the  sub  whose  light  has  been  quenched.  And  so  evil  will  be  lost  in  the 
prevalence  of  good,  and  God's  blessing  prove  itself  measureless.  2.  But  does  not 
this  view  run  counter  to  that  of  the  Good  Shepherd  who  left  the  ninety  and  nine  to 
seek  that  which  was  lost?  Yes,  if  the  lost  one  could  still  be  brought  back.  But  I 
know  of  no  law  of  beneficence  that  compels  the  Shepherd  to  tarry  in  the  wilderness 
when  the  vtanderer  fights  the  hand  that  seeks  to  guide  it  back,  or  rushes  into 
thickets  where  it  is  impossible  to  follow  it.  I  know  of  no  law  of  beneficence  which 
compels  the  Shepherd  to  sit  down  by  the  carcase  of  His  lost  sheep,  like  Rizpah  by 
the  bones  of  her  son,  and  rend  the  air  with  incessant  lamentation.  God  would  be 
untrue  to  the  claims  of  the  saved  if  He  were  so  full  of  regrets  for  the  lost  few,  that 
He  could  not  rej..ice  with  infinite  gladness  over  the  saved  multitudes.  3.  But  was 
not  God  the  Father  of  these  lost  ones,  and  can  a  father  be  perfectly  blessed  whilst 
a  single  child  remains  in  uncancelled  sin  and  abiding  torment  ?  But  what  is  it  that 
haunts  the  mind  of  the  parent  ?  The  sense  of  possible  failure  in  himself.  "  If  I 
had  guided  more  wisely,  spoken  more  softly,  prayed  more  faithfully,  sympathised 
more  ungrudgingly,  possibly  the  issue  might  have  been  otherwise."  But  no  thought 
akin  to  that  can  be  awakened  in  the  Divine  mind.  Whatever  suffering  convulses 
the  world  of  impenitence,  He  has  not  contributed  to  it.  In  respect  of  the  damned 
He  has  the  blessedness  of  knowing  that  He  has  done  for  them  all  that  infinite  love 
and  patience  and  resource  could.  4.  But  He  might  have  withheld  the  freedom 
through  the  misuse  of  which  these  men  have  damned  themselves.  Yes,  but  that 
would  have  been  to  create  a  vast  negative  hell  of  privation  and  frustrated  gladness, 
in  place  of  a  limited  positive  hell  of  incurable  perversity  and  woe.  If  God  does  all 
that  His  great  heart  can  devise,  and  aU  that  His  mighty  hand  can  achieve,  and  it 
what  He  has  done  issues  in  the  sanctity  and  blessedness  of  a  vast  preponderating 
majority,  God  is  without  qualification  infinitely  blessed.  II.  Contemplate  God's 
blessedness  from  the  standpoint  of  the  present.  That  is  much  more  di£5cult.  How 
are  we  to  reconcile  God's  blessedness  with  suffering  and  sin  ?  If  a  mother  lay  in 
a  trance,  conscious  of  all  that  was  going  on  around,  but  unable  to  move,  and  heard 
the  cry  of  pain  from  her  little  one,  could  she  be  blessed  ?  And  God  seems  to  be 
blessed  ?  And  God  seems  to  be  present  in  every  scene  of  human  woe.  The  human 
parent  is  spared  the  pain  of  looking  upon  the  actual  circumstances  of  the  child's 
profligacy.  But  God  is  looking  with  unveiled  eye  upon  every  offence.  One  hot 
summer  morning,  long  before  daybreak,  I  wandered  through  the  streets  of  a 
Japanese  city.  The  houses  are  built  of  thin  board,  and  the  rooms  separated  by 
paper  partitions  only.  I  cannot  describe  the  strange  sensations  that  took  possession 
of  my  mind.  I  could  hear  the  tick  of  every  clock,  the  very  breath  and  movements 
of  the  sleepers.  And  I  thought,  Is  it  not  thus  with  God  as  He  walks  through  this 
world  of  ours  ?  How  can  He  be  perfectly  blessed  ?  The  least  sensitive  man  in  our 
midst  could  not  bear  it  for  an  hour.  Is  not  God's  present  relation  to  pain  a  quali- 
fication of  His  blessedness  ?  1.  No ;  for  He  is  ever  exercising  a  ministry  df  pity  and 
healing.  A  nervous  woman  in  the  presence  of  disaster  is  brought  by  the  excess  of 
grief  to  the  verge  of  madness  ;  but  commit  to  her  some  trifling  ministry  of  help,  and 
she  becomes  calm  as  an  angeL  The  people  whose  lives  are  employed  in  mitigating 
pain  are  always  the  happiest.  And  so  the  blessedness  God  realises  through  His 
secret  ministry  to  sorrow,  protects  Him  against  the  shadow  that  the  spectacle  of 
widespread  suffering  might  otherwise  cast  upon  His  gladness.  2.  Qod's  blessedness 
can  suffer  no  eclipse  from  contact  with  pain,  because  it  is  His  vrill  to  make  it  the 
vehicle  for  the  manifestation  of  conspicuous  tenderness.  How  many  cynical  people 
have  only  felt  the  sympathy  and  affection  of  their  kind  in  the  hour  of  aflfliction  ? 
Although  the  human  heart  in  its  perversity  may  make  of  suffering  a  curse,  it  is 
God's  will  to  make  it  a  point  in  our  wilderness  lives  at  which  sweet,  secret  springs 
of  Divine  and  hnman  sympathy  shall  arise  and  blend  with  each  other,  and  create 
magic  balm  and  beauty  and  freshness.  When  God's  purpose  is  accomplished,  He 
makes  His  servants  glory  in  their  tribulations  ;  and  when  men  glory  in  their  tribu- 
lations God  glories  with  them,  and  in  that  case  His  blessedness  is  not  impaired.  3. 
God's  blessedness  is  not  overshadowed  by  human  pain,  because  by  it  He  is  teaching 
as  sympathy  with  each  other,  and  conformity  to  His  own  pattern  of  beneficence. 
God  very  often  does  not  help  and  heal  because  He  wants  as  to  do  it.  God  is  blessed 
in  the  very  pains  of  His  creatures,  when  they  teach  His  people  to  be  full  of  kindness. 
4.  God  looks  upon  pain  from  the  standpoint  of  that  wider  epoch  when  sorrow  and 
sighing  shall  have  fled  away.    (1)  Pain  so  viewed  cannot  darken  His  gladnftwu 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmt.  U 

What  a  little  thing  the  pain  and  sickness  of  yonr  childhood  is,  when  yon  look  at  it 
through  the  vista  of  years  1  Pain  is  nothing  when  passed,  and,  regarded  from  the 
standpoint  of  the  Eternal,  it  is  as  though  it  were  passed  already.  (2)  So  with  death 
— so  sad,  solemn,  unknown  to  as,  it  is  a  very  difEerent  thing  as  God  sees  it.  Some 
time  ago  a  young  lady  was  operated  upon  who  had  been  blind  from  her  childhood. 
The  operations  themselves  were  not  painful,  but  the  terror  created  by  the  returning 
power  of  sight  was  excruciating.  She  wished  to  remain  in  blindness.  She  felt  as 
though  she  were  always  standing  upon  the  brink  of  a  precipice.  But  the  doctor  felt 
no  remorse.  He  knew  that  his  patient  would  by  and  by  rejoice  in  the  faculty  of 
sight.  So  when  death  takes  the  scales  from  our  sight,  the  revelation  is  full  of 
terror.  But  the  beneficent  issue  of  the  process  is  more  than  a  counterpoise  to  its 
pain.  The  work  of  death  does  not  embitter  the  blessedness  of  God.  By  and  by 
death,  like  pain,  will  be  no  more.  (3)  And  so  with  sin,  which  would  otherwise  be 
a  qualification  of  the  Divine  blessedness.  It  is  in  the  hearts  of  parents  that  the 
Bweetest  joys  as  well  as  sharpest  sorrows  are  to  be  found.  The  father,  by  his  relation 
and  process  of  loving  his  children,  has  given  to  those  children  a  strange  power  of 
wounding  him  through  their  disobedience.  But  the  very  same  love  attunes  his 
nature  to  gratifications  that  may  reach  him  through  the  conduct  of  dutiful  and 
loving  children.  God  looks  upon  the  race  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  regard  to  theii 
future.  He  may  see  the  prodigal  in  his  unholy  riot.  That  is  the  fleeting  image  of 
the  moment.  He  sees  the  restored  prodigal  welcomed  back  within  the  household. 
That  is  the  reality  that  abides.  He  may  hear  the  music  to  whose  seductive  strain» 
ihe  prodigal  is  listening  in  the  haunts  of  harlotry,  and  that  is  the  murmur  in  the 
sea  shell  He  hears  also  the  music  and  gladness  in  the  homes  whose  vacant  places 
have  just  been  filled  again,  and  that  is  the  pealing  anthem  of  an  everlasting  ocean. 
In  that  anthem  the  faint  murmurs  in  the  shells  that  strew  the  shore  are  swallowed 
up  and  forgotten.  There  are  terrible  contingencies  connected  with  the  gift  of  free 
will.  But  we  must  never  forget  the  profound  theology  in  the  simple  parable  of  the 
marriage  feast.  God  will  find  countless  recipients  for  the  bounty  His  great  love 
has  made  ready  ;  if  not  amongst  Pharisees,  then  amongst  publicans  ;  if  not  amongst 
Jews,  then  amongst  Gentiles ;  if  not  in  the  men  of  this  generation,  then  in  uncounted 
generations  yet  to  come.  III.  Realise  God's  blessedness  in  relation  to  the  past. 
We  go  back  to  the  epochs  when  the  worlds  had  not  issued  upon  their  courses.  How 
can  we  reconcile  the  Divine  blessedness  with  solitude  ?  There  can  be  no  blessed- 
ness without  beneficence,  and  no  beneficence  without  a  relation.  1.  Well,  the 
beneficence  of  character  that  was  the  spring  of  all  after  triumph  and  achievement 
was  there.  The  righteousness  and  purity  and  love  that  were  exercised  in  the  rela- 
tions to  be  afterwards  constituted,  were  already  living  and  conscious  forces.  And 
God  could  not  be  morally  perfect  without  being  infinitely  blessed  in  Himself.  2. 
More  still :  the  Son,  who  was  to  be  the  instrument  for  the  accomplishment  of  all 
the  Father's  vast  and  holy  and  loving  purposes,  was  already  a  willing  instrument  in 
the  Father's  bosom.  And  in  the  life  of  that  Son  every  soul  was  reflected  that  was 
to  be  afterwards  united  by  faith  to  Him  as  its  Saviour  and  Head.  Literary  artists 
sometimes  identify  themselves  with  the  creatures  of  their  imagination.  They  have 
shed  tears  over  their  pains  and  reverses,  and  been  in  ecstasies  over  the  good  fortune 
to  which  they  thought  fit  to  bring  them  at  the  breaking  of  the  clouds.  And  the 
mind  of  God  has  been  peopled  from  the  beginning  with  the  forms  of  those  who  were 
after-wards  to  be,  not  the  figures  of  a  romance  only,  but  profound  realities  upon  the 
platform  of  human  life  and  action.  And  towards  all  these,  the  Divine  love  has  been 
pouring  itself  out  from  everlasting.  Conclusion  :  But  it  may  be  asked :  "  Does  not 
this  view  of  the  eternal  blessedness  of  God  preclude  the  possibility  of  sympathy? 
How  can  the  eternal  God  enter  into  the  fleeting  sorrows  of  time  ?  Can  He  grieve 
for  Ds  in  our  grief  and  shame  ?  Does  not  the  vast  perspective  in  His  vision  seem 
to  exclude  every  trace  of  affinity  and  sensitive  relation  with  our  mortal  life  ?  "  Just 
as  the  human  eye  has  different  focal  lengths,  and  can  adjust  itself  to  the  different 
degrees  in  which  light  may  be  diffused,  so  the  Divine  mind  can  mysteriously  com- 
bine into  one  the  view  o^  life  opening  itself  at  the  standpoint  of  time,  and  that  other 
view  opening  itself  at  the  standpoint  of  eternity.  Indeed,  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  He 
has  given  us  proof  of  the  fact  that  He  can  bring  Himself  under  the  conditions  of 
time,  looking  at  sorrow  and  sin  from  our  own  levels,  and  transcending  all  human 
brotherhood  and  friendship  in  the  perfectness  of  His  sympathy.    (T.  O.  Sclby.) 

Vers.  26-32.  For  this  cause  God  gave  them  up  to  vile   aflTectlons.— Human 
depravity : — I.  Thb  causb  of  all  this  gross  ignorance  and  corruption  is  assigned  itt 


•HAP.  t.]  ROMANS.  107 

▼er.  S8.  "  They  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge."  1.  The  expression 
plainly  assomes  God's  having  been  known,  and  that  the  oanse  of  corruption  and 
loss  of  the  original  knowledge  was  entirely  of  a  moral  nature.  This  will  appear — 
(1)  From  the  word  itself — "they  did  not  like."  Inability:  whether  arising  from 
the  want  of  evidence,  or  opportunity  to  observe,  or  capacity  to  understand  it,  is  not 
alleged.  The  word  clearly  expresses  the  voluntariness  of  the  defection,  the  indis- 
position to  keep  the  knowledge  as  the  true  cause  of  the  loss  of  it.  (2)  From  the 
consequence  which  followed  in  the  Divine  procedure  :  "  God  gave  them  over  to  a 
reprobate  mind,"  &c.,  is  clearly  judicial.  Nothing  of  this  description  could  ever  be 
inflicted  on  account  of  mere  deficiency  of  intellect,  but  must  be  connected  with  the 
disposition  or  state  of  the  heart.  2.  The  true  character  of  God  it  is  impossible  that 
corrupt  creatures  should  relish.  As  a  creature  in  love  with  sin,  he  wishes  to  believe 
that  God  is  "  such  an  one  as  himself."  In  this  way  idolatry  becomes  an  evidence 
of  the  deep  and  universal  depravity  of  the  human  heart.  This  view  of  the  case 
accords  well  with  the  character  of  the  "  gods  many  and  lords  many  of  the  heathen 
world."  Men  love  sin  ;  and  they  make  their  gods  sinners,  that  they  may  practise 
evil  under  their  sanction  and  patronage.  The  worship  of  their  gods  is  such  as  might 
be  anticipated  from  their  characters.  They  consist,  not  merely  of  the  most  sense- 
less fooleries  and  extravagances,  but  of  the  most  disgusting  impurities,  and  the  most 
iron-hearted  cruelties.  II.  Thb  consequences  are  clearly  represented  in  vers.  26 
and  28,  as  bringing  upon  them  the  just  displeasure  of  a  forgotten  and  insulted  God. 
1.  "  God  gave  them  over  to  vile  afifections,"  •'  to  a  reprobate  mind."  God  is  not  repre- 
sented as  infusing  any  evil  principles ;  but  simply  as  leaving  them  to  the  unrestrained 
operation  of  the  principles  of  evil  already  in  them.  What  an  awful  curse  this  was, 
y/rUl  sufficiently  appear  from  the  portrait  in  the  passage  before  us.  The  various 
evils  are  represented  as  "  not  convenient  " — not  becoming — against  all  propriety  and 
all  law;  and  as  abounding — personal  and  social  life  being  "filled"  with  them. 
The  description  shows  the  fearful  length  to  which  the  corrupt  affections  of  "a 
reprobate  mind  "  will  carry  those  who  are  given  up  to  their  unchecked  dominion. 
We  are  not,  it  is  true,  to  suppose  all  the  evils  enumerated  to  exist  in  individual 
characters.  Many  of  them  are  of  such  different  kinds  that  they  could  not  exist 
together.  It  is  with  nations  as  with  individuals.  Some  of  the  features  of  the 
picture  may  appear  with  more  or  less  of  characteristic  aggravation  or  diminution, 
according  to  particular  circumstances.  But  of  the  general  state  of  the  Gentile  world, 
at  that  time  and  still  the  outline  here  drawn,  hideous  as  it  is,  is  not  overcharged, 
but  faithful  to  nature  and  to  fact.  2.  The  displays  of  "  eternal  power  and  Godhead  " 
in  the  works  of  God  rendered  men's  forgetf ulness  and  ignorance  of  Him  '•  without 
excuse."  In  like  manner,  the  wickedness  here  described  was  also  rendered  inexcus- 
able by  what  is  stated  in  ver.  32,  The  judgment  originally  pronounced  by  Jehovah 
against  sin  was  death.  Of  this  tradition  could  not  fail  to  carry  down  some  remem- 
brance, and  tradition  had  the  assistance  of  natural  conscience.  And  while  the 
sentence  of  death  was  thus  engraven  on  the  memories  and  consciences  of  sinful  men, 
the  early  and  singular  institution  of  animal  sacrifices  spoke  the  very  same  language. 
And  so  did  the  regular  fulfilment  of  the  original  sentence  against  sin—*'  Dust  thou 
art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  return  " ;  together  with  all  the  judgments  by  which 
the  Supreme  Ruler  manifested  His  displeasure  against  sin.  Men,  then,  knew,  and 
ought  to  have  kept  in  mind,  "  the  judgment  of  God,  that  they  which  commit  such 
things  are  worthy  of  death."  Yet,  instead  of  this,  they  cast  off  all  restraint.  Instead 
of  "striving  against  sin  "  they  strove  to  rid  their  minds  of  every  check  to  the  com- 
mission of  it.  {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Sin : — I.  Its  name  is  legion.  II.  Its  natueb 
is  devilish.  HI.  Its  effect  is  demoralising.  IV.  Its  judgment  is  death.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Sin  its  own  punishment: — I.  In  the  sins  here  enumebated.  Which 
were— 1.  Senseless  ;  2.  Filthy  ;  3.  Inhuman  ;  4,  Self-deceptive ;  5.  God  dis- 
honouring. II.  In  theib  effects,  such  as — 1.  Health  impaired  and  bodily  frame 
debilitated.  2.  Mental  faqplties  enfeebled.  8.  Conscience  seared,  and  moral  sense 
weakened  and  degraded,  4.  Finer  feelings  and  delicate  sensibiUtieB  blunted  and 
extinguished.  6.  Incapacity  to  appreciate  the  natural  affections.  6.  Insensibility 
to  the  noble  and  good,  the  beautiful,  and  true.     {T.  Robinson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  28.  And  even  as  they  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  thsir  knowledge,  God 
gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind. — The  state  of  heathendom: — Idolatry  is 
essentially  the  same  in  every  age  and  place.  1.  In  its  origin.  It  flows  from  a 
corrupt  heart,  desirous  not  to  retain  the  knowledge  of  God.  2.  In  its  nature. 
However  great  the  variety,  or  modes  of  worship,  there  is  a  grand  generic  likeness 


108  TELE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  i, 

in  them  all.  The  Greeks  may  worship  Jupiter,  and  the  Hindoos  Vishnu ;  one  olasi 
s  god,  and  another  a  goddess  ;  but  still  all  agree  in  this  one  point,  they  "  like  not 
to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge."  8.  In  its  effects  :  "  God  gave  them  over  to  a 
reprobate  mind  "  ;  and,  as  the  necessary  consequence  of  that,  they  did  "  those  things 
which  are  not  convenient "  (vers.  29-32).  Such  were  the  effects  produced  by  idolatry 
in  ancient  times.  And  we  ask  those  who  object  to  this  language  to  show  as  if 
idolatry,  by  being  continued  in  for  nearly  two  thousand  years,  has  grown  better  than 
it  was  in  the  days  of  the  apostle?  I.  The  state  of  the  heathen  as  hebe  described. 
1.  God  has  given  them  over  to  '•  a  reprobate  mind."  The  term  signifies  disapproved. 
The  mind  which  God  approves  must  be  one  which  has  correct  views  of  the  Divine 
character — a  just  idea  of  the  plan  of  salvation  ;  and  these  views  must  have  a  holy 
influence  on  the  heart  and  life.  The  views  of  the  heathen  on  these  points  prove  that 
they  are  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind.  (1)  What  are  their  views  of  the  Supreme 
Being?  The  heathens  of  India  believe  that  all  things  exist  in  God,  and  that  God 
exists  in  them  all.  Hence,  when  you  charge  a  Hindoo  with  sin,  he  answers  with 
the  greatest  gravity,  "  Sir,  it  is  not  I  that  sin,  but  God  that  does  all  these  things  in 
me."  It  you  ask  them,  Why,  then,  are  you  punished  for  what  is  not  done  by  your 
agency  ?  they  answer,  "  Because  there  must  be  a  certain  consequence  from  all 
actions,  like  fruit  from  a  seed ;  and  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  all  the  gods  to  prevent 
it."  Surely  they  are  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind  i  The  ssone  may  be  said  with 
regard  to  their  views  of  the  gods  and  goddesses  they  worship.  Seeing  in  these 
nothing  that  is  excellent,  they  become  objects  of  terror  only  to  their  minds.  And 
to  those  whom  they  consider  as  having  the  greatest  power,  and  as  doing  the  greatest 
mischief,  they  pay  the  greatest  respect,  and  make  the  most  frequent  offerings.  All 
their  gods  and  goddesses  have  been  guilty  of  the  greatest  excesses.  How  must  this 
strengthen  their  minds  in  sin,  when  they  find  themselves  encouraged  by  snch 
examples !  So  that  their  very  religion  is  a  curse  to  them.  As  for  their  visible 
embodiments,  they  know  that  "they  have  eyes,  but  see  not,"  Ac. ;  and  yet  such  is 
their  infatuation,  that  when  the  priest  has  pronounced  certain  formularies  over 
these  images,  they  imagine  that  the  beings  whom  they  represent  become  completely 
identified  with  the  stocks  of  wood  or  of  stone  which  stand  before  them.  Is  not 
this  a  proof  that  they  are  "  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind  ?  "  (2)  Being  ignorant 
of  God,  they  are  ignorant  of  the  way  in  which  His  favour  may  be  secured.  They 
suppose  that  they  can  obtain  absorption  into  the  supreme  Being,  by  meditating  upon 
Hhn.  Hence  some  of  them  plunge  into  the  forest,  and  stand  in  one  posture 
meditating  upon  Him,  till  their  hair  becomes  grown  like  eagles'  feathers,  and  their 
nails  like  birds'  claws.  Thus  they  remain  till  they  believe  that  their  souls  have 
passed  into  the  structure  of  their  skulls,  and  are  completely  absorbed  into  it.  Tbos* 
who  are  not  able  to  enter  into  this  sublime  course  of  study,  found  the  same  hope  on 
the  perfotmance  of  a  number  of  rites,  such  as  bathing  in  the  river  Ganges  ; 
repeating  thousands  of  times  the  names  of  their  chosen  gods,  counting  over  a  vast 
nomber  of  beads,  building  some  temple,  making  some  god,  offering  fruits  and 
flowers  to  some  deity.  By  some,  or  all,  of  these  duties  they  hope  to  heap  np  a 
stock  of  merit  for  a  future  world ;  and  they  have  no  other  idea  whatever  of  any- 
thing in  the  way  of  atonement.  As  merit  is  attached  to  suffering  as  well  as  to 
actions,  many  of  the  heathen  have  entered  on  certain  penalties,  and  inflicted 
severe  pains  upon  themselves.  Some  hold  their  hands  towards  heaven  till  their 
arms  become  fixed  in  their  sockets.  Some  travel  hundreds  of  miles  to  visit  some 
«acred  place  ;  others  measure  the  whole  length  of  their  journey  with  their  bodies  on 
the  ground.  Thousands  die  every  year  by  these  penances.  Do  not  these  things 
prove  that  they  are  "  given  over,"  Ac.  (3)  Ignorance  of  the  means  to  be  adopt^ 
argues  ignorance  of  the  end  that  is  to  be  obtained.  The  heathen  have  no  idea  of  a 
pure  and  eternal  heaven.  Those  who  live  in  meditation  maintain  that  when  the 
soul  goes  out  of  the  body  it  mingles  as  completely  with  the  Deity  as  water  mingles 
with  the  ocean,  and  suppose  that  they  shall  be  as  incapable  of  pleasure  as  of  pain. 
Those  who  depend  on  rights  and  ceremonies  believe  that  in  proportion  to  their 
attention  to  these  duties  wiU  be  their  future  degree  of  pleasure  in  a  heaven  that  is 
as  sensual  in  its  nature  as  it  is  short  in  its  duration ;  and  that  then  they  shall 
return  back  again  to  earth  to  suffer  again.  Those  who  are  left  unburied,  they 
believe  will  be  cast  into  one  of  the  nine  hells,  and  will  then  come  back  to  earth  in 
the  form  of  a  reptile,  a  bird,  or  a  beast,  before  they  can  again  assume  a  human 
form.  Thus,  when  there  is  no  true  knowledge  of  God  or  Christ,  there  is  no  true 
notion  of  eternal  life.  "  This  is  life  eternal,"  Ac.  2.  God  has  given  them  over  "  to 
do  those  things  which  are  not  convenient."    Without  entering  into  all  here  stated. 


amt».  I.]  ROMANS.  109 

w«  may  instance — (1)  Their  lying.  The  character  of  a  people  mast  always  be  in 
accordance  with  the  things  they  believe.  The  Hindoos  believe  tales  the  most 
monstrous  and  absurd,  and  what  wonder  that  they,  who  receive  such  lies,  should 
be  thjemselves  given  to  lying  ?  They  consider  the  sin  to  consist,  not  in  lying,  but  in 
being  detected.  So  much  does  it  prevail  in  civil  life,  that  in  the  courts  of  judicature 
it  is  almost  impossible  to  administer  justice.  In  mercantile  concerns,  after  telling 
many  lies  as  to  the  value  of  an  article,  and  what  it  cost  them,  they  will  sell  the 
article  for  one-third  less  tban  they  at  first  demanded.  And  the  inconveniences  of 
this  practice  are  almost  endle=:3.  (2)  So  are  those  which  arise  from  the  free  and 
unrestrained  indulgence  of  vicious  appetites  and  propensities.  The  sins  which  are 
spe^iiflpd  in  this  chapter  are  the  very  sins  which  they  commit.  I  have  gone  through 
it  with  the  Pundits,  and  have  found,  from  their  own  confession,  that  this  is  really 
the  case.  (3)  Their  covetousness  must  be  noticed  also.  They  believe  that  money 
is  everything,  both  for  this  world  and  the  next.  When  urged  to  become  Christians, 
it  is  not  uncommon  for  them  to  say,  "  Give  us  fine  houses,  and  gold,  and  we  will 
become  Christians."  They  will  submit  to  anything,  however  base  and  mean,  for 
money.  It  is  contrary  to  their  Shasters  for  any  Brahmin  to  become  the  servant  of 
a  foreigner ;  and  yet,  for  the  sake  of  gain,  there  is  not  a  priest  among  them  but  wUl 
acknowledge  a  barbarian  for  his  master.  They  will  offer  up  prayers  to  the  goddess 
Ealee,  to  be  assisted  in  their  depredations  on  the  property  of  others  ;  and  I  know 
of  one  instance  in  which,  when  these  prayers  were  supposed  to  be  unanswered,  the 
goddess  was  herself  robbed.  (4)  Their  cruelty.  Some  of  them  they  practise  on 
themselves.  In  many  cases  they  will  see  misery  and  distress,  without  moving  to 
afford  the  least  relief.  I  have  seen  men  fastened  to  a  long  pole  by  hooks,  and  then 
swung  round  by  a  rope  with  a  swiftness  which  deprived  them  of  their  reason.  Some 
have  iron  spits  run  through  their  tongues,  or  sticks  passed  through  their  sides. 
But  the  greatest  of  all  their  cruelties  is  the  burning  of  widows,  infanticide  and 
murder  of  parents.  II.  What  effect  ought  this  view  to  prodooe  in  our  minds  ? 
We  ought  to  learn — 1.  How  evil  and  dreadful  a  thing  it  is  to  separate  God  from  our 
thoughts.  If  we  exclude  God  from  our  thoughts,  we  must  expect  that  He  will  cast 
Qs  out  from  His  presence.  It  became  the  righteous  God  to  give  over  to  a  reprobate 
mind  those  who  "  did  not  like  to  retain  Him  in  their  knowledge."  (1)  That  othen 
may  see  the  folly  of  such  conduct,  and  avoid  the  rocks  on  which  they  have  split. 
(2)  That  He  might  show  His  just  abhorrence  of  idolatry.  God  had  tried  all  means 
with  the  heathen,  and  all  in  vain  ;  and  at  last  He  said,  "  They  are  joined  to  their 
idols,  let  them  alone  1 "  2.  To  be  truly  thankful  for  our  superior  state  and  privileges. 
Contrast  your  state  with  theirs :  they  have  no  Bible,  you  have  the  Word  of  God. 
Their  sacred  books  countenance  the  most  unhallowed  feelings,  while  the  Bible 
teaches  you  to  *•  deny  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,"  and  to  "  follow  holiness." 
Your  Bible  reveals  an  immortality  of  purity  and  bliss,  their  Bible  reveals  nothing 
except  a  sensual  heaven.  You  have  teachers  to  guide  you  in  the  way  to  heaven,  bat 
ignorance  is  perfect  bliss  compared  to  the  knowledge  which  they  obtain  from  their 
Brahmins.  The  priest  will  visit  them  at  their  houses,  and  covet  some  article  which 
he  sees  in  the  room  ;  and  if  it  be  not  given  to  him,  he  will  leave  a  curse  instead  of 
ft  blessing.  You  have  Sabbaths,  but  the  Sabbath  never  shines  on  Hindoostan! 
8.  To  pity  and  to  pray  for  the  heathen.  We  ought  to  look  on  them  as  Christ  looked 
on  us  when  in  our  sins  and  our  blood.  If  your  feeling  of  pity  be  genuine,  it  will 
lead  to  prayer.  4.  To  make  the  most  strenuous  exertions  for  the  amelioration  of 
their  condition.  It  is  well  to  pity  them  and  to  pray  for  them ;  but  if  yon  do  no 
more,  it  will  be  difficult  to  prove  to  God  or  man  the  sincerity  of  your  pity  and  your 
prayers.  (1)  We  should  do  so  from  a  regard  to  the  glory  of  God.  The  Word  of 
God  declares  that  He  has  given  His  Son  "the  heathen  for  His  inheritance."  He 
has  placed  the  heathen  of  India  in  our  hands,  that  we  may  bring  them  to  the  know- 
ledge of  the  truth.  (2)  To  this  we  are  bound  by  the  greatest  obligations.  "Freely 
have  ye  received,  freely  give."  What  a  disgrace  to  the  Christian  army  if  volunteers 
be  not  found  to  engage  in  th's  service!  Some  may  perhaps  say,  there  are  so 
many  discouragements.  But  we  should  remember  that  God  does  not  despise 
-  the  day  of  small  things " ;  and  that  from  some  of  our  saddest  exercises, 
the  most  glorious  prospects  may  arise.  (3)  We  call  upon  you,  by  the  memory 
of  those  noble  servants  of  the  Lord  who  have  laid  down  their  lives  in  His  service. 
(4)  We  exhort  you,  by  the  example  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  "who,  though  He  was 
rich,  yet  for  our  sakes  became  poor."  [W.  Yates.)  Qod  lost  to  the  tight  of  an  evil 
h'-ftrt : — Th»  hp^^rt  that  is  addicted  to  evil,  that  is  in  love  with  sin,  th«t  is  oloeered 
•nd  burdened  with  guilt,  has  lost  the  capacity  of  discerning  God  as  it  has  lost  th« 


110  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  & 

wish  to  be  near  Him.  His  name  is  not  welcome,  the  idea  of  Him  is  not  pleasant ; 
we  are  neither  willing  nor  able,  when  we  are  plunged  in  onr  selfish  sinfulness,  to 
cherish  the  bright  and  purifying  thought  of  our  loving  Father.  As  a  cloud  darkens 
the  heavens,  the  mist  of  our  own  evil  hearts  rises  up  and  fills  oar  sky,  and  blots  oat 
all  the  starry  intentions  of  oar  spirit,  and  drapes  the  face  of  God  Himself  in  a 
blackness  that  can  be  felt.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Diminishing  light  but  not 
diminishing  responsibility : — We  would  infer  from  this  acooant  that  men,  in  the 
first  instance,  had  a  far  more  clear  and  convinced  sense  of  God ;  bat,  not  liking  to 
retain  it,  committed  the  sin  of  a  perverse  disposition  against  the  light  which  they 
had,  and  in  part  extinguished  it — that  they  of  course  left  their  own  immediate 
posterity  in  a  light  more  shaded  than  that  which  shone  aroand  the  outset  of  their 
own  progress  through  the  world — that  these  still  disliked  the  remainder  of  truth 
which  they  enjoyed;  and,  by  their  wilful  resistance  inflicted  upon  it  a  farther 
mutilation,  and  transmitted  it  to  their  descendants  with  a  still  deeper  hue  of 
obscurity  thrown  over  it ;  but  still  with  such  glimpses  as  were  enough  at  least  to 
try  the  affection  of  man  towards  it,  to  stir  up  a  distinct  resistance  on  the  part  of 
those  who  disliked  it,  to  keep  up  the  responsibility  of  the  world,  and  to  retain  it  in 
rightfal  dependence  on  the  judgment  of  Him  who  made  the  world — so  as  to  make  it 
clear  on  the  day  of  reckoning,  that  men,  even  in  their  state  of  most  sunken  aliena- 
tion from  the  trae  God,  were  never  so  destitute  of  all  capacity  for  discerning  between 
the  good  and  the  evU,  as  to  render  them  the  unfit  subjects  of  a  moral  sentence  and 
a  moral  examination.  With  every  human  creature  who  shall  be  pronounced  worthy 
of  death  on  that  day,  will  it  be  seen  that  there  was  either  a  light  which  he  actually 
had  and  liked  not  to  retain,  or  a  light  which  he  might  have  had  and  liked  not  to 
recover.  To  whom  much  is  given  of  him  much  shall  be  required ;  and  there  will 
be  gradations  of  punishment  in  hell.    (T.  Chalmers^  D.D.) 

Vers.  29-31.  Being  filled  with  all  onrighteousness. — The  prevalence  of  evil : — 
All  is  full  of  crime  and  vice ;  there  is  more  committed  than  can  be  healed  by  punish- 
ment.  A  monstrous  prize-contest  of  wickedness  is  going  on.  The  desire  to  sin 
increases,  and  shame  decreases  day  by  day.  Vice  is  no  longer  practised  secretly,  bat 
in  open  view.  Vileness  gains  in  every  street  and  in  every  breast  to  such  an  extent  that 
conscience  has  become  not  only  rare  but  extinct.  (Seneca.)  Wickedness. — With 
and  without  the  gospel : — The  worst  kind  of  religion  is  no  religion  at  all ;  and  these 
men,  living  in  ease  and  luxury,  indulging  themselves  in  the  "  amusement  of  going 
without  religion,"  may  be  thankful  that  they  Uve  in  the  lands  where  the  gospel  they 
neglect  has  tamed  the  beastliness  and  ferocity  of  the  men  who,  but  for  Christianity, 
might  long  ago  have  eaten  their  carcases  like  the  South  Sea  Islanders,  or  cut  off 
their  heads  and  tanned  their  hides  like  the  monsters  of  the  French  Bevolotion. 
When  the  microscopic  search  of  scepticism,  which  has  hunted  the  heavens  and 
Boanded  the  seas  to  disprove  the  existence  of  a  Creator,  has  turned  its  attention  to 
human  society,  and  has  found  a  place  on  this  planet  ten  miles  square  where  a 
decent  man  can  live  in  decency,  comfort,  and  security,  supporting  and  educating 
his  children  unspoiled  and  unpolluted — a  place  where  age  is  reverenced,  infancy 
respected,  manhood  respected,  womanhood  honoured,  and  human  life  held  in  due 
regard ;  when  sceptics  can  find  such  a  place  ten  miles  square  on  this  globe,  where 
the  gospel  of  Christ  has  not  gone  and  cleared  the  way  and  laid  the  foundations  and 
made  decency  and  security  possible,  it  will  then  be  in  order  for  the  sceptical  literati 
to  move  thither  and  then  ventilate  their  views.  But  so  long  as  these  very  men  are 
dependent  upon  the  religion  which  they  discard  for  every  privilege  they  enjoy,  they 
may  well  hesitate  a  Uttle  before  they  seek  to  rob  the  Christian  of  his  hope  and 
humanity  of  its  faith  in  that  Saviour  who  alone  has  given  to  man  that  hope  of  life 
eternal  which  makes  life  tolerable  and  society  possible,  and  robs  death  of  its  terrors 
and  the  grave  of  its  gloom.  (J.  R.  Lowell.)  Spreading  tendency  of  sin  : — I  need 
not,  I  suppose,  spend  any  time  in  illustrating  the  vividness  and  truthfulness  of  that 
metaphor  which  compares  any  kind  of  evil  in  a  man's  character  to  the  silently, 
gradually,  surely  working  leaven.  The  cancer  spreads  ;  the  fungus  creeps  steadily 
through  the  rotting  timber ;  the  smallest  hidden  speck  of  evil  in  a  man's  nature  has 
in  it  a  demoniacal  transforming  and  assimilating  power  which  works  underground, 
nnconsciously  even  to  the  man  himself,  until  some  strain  of  temptation  and  stress 
of  trial  comes ;  and  lo  I  he  finds  that  what  he  thought  was  solid  timber  is  all  eaten 
oat  in  the  heart  of  it,  and  has  no  strength  to  resistor  to  bear.  The  smallest  sin  may 
eorrnpt  a  man's  whole  nature,  and  change,  as  it  were,  the  chemical  composition  of 
•Tei7  part  of  it ;  though  in  itself  it  be  but  an  infinitesimal  and  almost  invisible  atom 


CRiF.  L]  ROMANS,  111 

that  has  been  dropped  into  the  hole.  {A .  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Whisperers,  backbiterB. — 
Detraction : — These  two  words  agree  that  they  both  wound  the  fame  of  our  neigh- 
bour, and  they  both  do  it  behind  his  back  or  in  his  absence.  But  they  differ — 1. 
In  that  whispering  doth  it  secretly  and  closely,  but  backbiting  openly.  2.  Whispering 
tendeth  to  breed  strife  among  our  friends,  but  backbiting  to  our  general  disgrace 
before  the  world.  The  one  seeketh  to  deprive  us  of  the  goodwill  of  our  friends,  the 
other  to  destroy  our  service.  They  are  often  conjoined  (2  Cor.  xii.  20).  I.  What 
u  DKTBACTiONf  1.  The  nature  of  it  in  general.  It  is  an  unjust  violation  of  another's  ' 
reputation.  God,  that  hath  bidden  me  to  love  my  neighbour  as  myself,  doth 
therein  bid  me  to  be  tender  not  only  of  his  person  and  goods,  but  of  his  good  name. 
Therefore  certainly  this  is — (1)  A  sin  against  God,  who  hath  forbidden  us  to  bear 
false  witness  against  our  neighbour,  and  to  speak  evil  of  others  without  a  cause 
(Eph.  iv.  31) ;  (2)  A  wrong  to  man,  because  it  robbeth  him  of  his  good  name,  which 
is  so  deservedly  esteemed  by  all  that  would  do  anything  for  God  in  the  world 
(Prov.  xxii.  1;  Eccles.  vii.  1).  (3)  The  causes  it  proceedeth  from  are — (a)  Malice 
and  ill-will,  which  prompteth  us  to  speak  falsely  of  others,  so  to  make  them  odious, 
or  do  them  wrong  or  hurt.  Now,  to  hate  our  brother  is  inconsistent  with  that 
charity  which  the  love  of  Christ  should  beget  in  us  (1  Pet.  iv.  8 ;  2  Pet  i.  7) ;  (b) 
Uncharitable  credulity,  whereby  men  easily  beUeve  a  false  report,  and  so  convey  it 
to  others  (Jer.  xx.  10) ;  (c)  Rashness  and  unruliness  of  tongue  (Jamea  L  26). 
Possibly  it  may  not  come  from  downright  malice,  but  (Prov.  li.  13)  whisperers  must 
be  talking,  and  be  it  true  or  false,  out  it  comes;  (d)  Passion  for  our  different 
interests  and  opinions.  Bitter  envying  (James  iii.  14)  hath  made  mad  work  in  the 
world  as  to  strifes,  and  confusions,  and  quarrels,  and  bloodsheds,  and  persecutions. 
But  usually  it  venteth  itself  in  evil-speaking  ^2  Cor.  xii.  20).  2.  The  kinds  of  it 
are  two  in  the  text.  (1)  Whispering,  which  is  privy  defamation  of  our  brother. 
Now  this  is  a  great  sin — (a)  Because  it  is  here  reckoned  among  those  which  reigned 
among  the  heathen,  and  God  bath  expressly  forbidden  to  His  people  (Lev.  xix.  16  ; 
Jer.  xi.  4).  (b)  It  is  against  natural  equity,  because  they  do  that  to  others  which 
they  would  not  have  done  to  themselves  (Matt.  vii.  2).  (c)  It  is  a  cause  of  much 
mischief  in  the  world,  as — Grief  to  the  party  wronged  (Prov.  xviii.  8) ;  much  debate 
and  strife  (Prov.  xxvi,  20 ;  xvi.  28 ;  vi.  19) ;  sometimes  even  the  destruction  of 
another's  life  (Ezek.  xxii.  9 ;  1  Sajn.  xxii.  9).  But  here  ariseth  a  question,  whether 
all  private  complaints  and  informations  against  others  come  under  the  name 
of  whispering?  I  auswer — No,  with  these  cautions — (i.)  If  the  party  be  duly 
admonished ;  for,  before  we  go  any  further,  the  rule  is  (Matt,  xviii.  15).  (ii.)  If  it 
be  made  to  such  as  have  power  to  redress  the  fault  by  the  most  discreet  and  gentle 
means  (Gen.  xxxvii.  2).  (iii.)  If  the  complainer  seeketh  nothing  but  the  amendment 
of  the  party,  (iv.)  If  he  grieve  that  he  hath  cause  to  complain,  and  pray  for  his 
conversion.  3.  Backbiting  is  a  more  public  speaking  evil  of  our  absent  brother,  to 
the  impairing  of  his  credit.  Now,  this  may  be  done — (1)  With  respect  to  the  good 
things  found  in  him.  There  are  four  degrees  in  this :  (o)  When  we  deny  them. 
This  is  not  only  to  wrong  our  neighbour,  but  to  rob  God  of  His  own  praise.  (6) 
When  we  lessen  them.  To  extenuate  and  clip  another's  due  praise  is  envy,  but  in 
honour  to  prefer  them  above  ourselves  is  charity  and  humility  (Phil.  ii.  3 ;  Bom. 
xii.  10).  (c)  When  we  but  deprave  them  by  supposing  a  sinister  intention  (Job  i.  9). 
(d)  When  we  enviously  suppress  them.  (2)  With  respect  to  evil  supposed  to  be 
committed  by  them,  (a)  When  we  publish  their  secret  slips,  which  in  charity  we 
ought  to  conceal  (Prov.  xi.  13).  (6)  When,  in  relating  any  evil  action  of  another, 
we  use  harder  terms  than  are  required,  and  make  beams  of  motes,  and  mountains 
of  mole-hills.  We  should  lessen  sins  all  that  we  can  (Acts  iii.  17).  II.  Thb 
HKiNonsNBSs  OF  THE  BIN.  1.  In  general,  that  is  evident  from  what  is  said  already. 
I  shall  urge  two  arguments  more.  (1)  That  men  shall  be  called  to  an  account  for 
these  sins  as  well  as  others  (Jude  15 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  4,  5).  (2)  It  is  the  property  of  a 
citizen  of  Zion  not  to  be  given  to  backbiting  (Psa.  xv.  3).  2.  More  particularly,  it 
is  the  more  heinous.  (1)  From  the  person  against  whom  it  is  committed.  As 
suppose  the  godly  and  irreprovable  for  the  main,  who  by  their  hf e  and  conversation 
have  the  best  right  to  honour  and  esteem  (Psa.  Ixiv.  3  ;  Numb.  xii.  8 ;  1  Tim.  liL  7). 
Against  these  it  is  not  only  unjust,  but  noxious  and  hurtful  to  God's  service.  (2) 
From  the  persons  before  whom  the  slander  is  brought ;  so  that  they  are  deprived 
not  only  of  private  friendsljips,  but  the  favour  and  countenance  of  these  under 
whose  protection  they  have  their  life  and  service  (Esther  iii.  8  ;  Psa.  Iii.  1).  (3^  From 
the  end  of  it.  Some  men  have  no  direct  intention  of  mischief,  but  are  given  to 
tattling.    It  is  a  great  sin  in  them,  aud  an  unprofitable  \\  aste  of  time ;  but  it  is 


lia  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  I. 

a  greater  in  those  that  make  it  their  business  to  disgrace  others  or  sow  discord.  (4) 
From  the  effect  or  great  hurt  that  followeth,  be  it  loss  of  estate,  as  in  the  case  of 
Mephibosheth,  or  a  general  trouble  and  persecution  on  the  people  of  God.  When 
their  good  names  are  buried  their  persons  cannot  long  subsist  afterward  with  any 
degree  of  service.  Conclusion:  Note — 1.  How  good-natured  Christianity  is,  and 
befriendeth  human  societies ;  it  condemneth  not  only  sins  against  God,  but  sins 
against  our  neighbour  (Phil.  iv.  8).  2.  That  we  should  not  speak  evil  of  others 
behind  their  backs,  but  tell  them  their  faults  plainly  in  love  and  wisdom,  nor 
encourage  others  in  this  sin  (Prov.  xxv.  23).  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Eaters  of  God.— 
Hatred  of  God : — Enemies  of  God  in  heart  and  work  (Bom.  viii.  7).  Hatred  of  God 
is  the  essence  of  sin,  as  the  love  of  God  is  the  essence  of  holiness.  Hatred  to  God 
is  shown  in  dislike — 1.  To  His  character  as  just  and  holy.  2.  To  His  government 
as  opposed  to  evil-doers.  3.  To  His  laws  as  forbidding  what  is  sinful.  4.  To  His 
people  as  bearing  His  image.  Hatred  of  God  is  the  cause  of  men's  rejection  a| 
Christ  (John  xv.  21-24).  Written  in  characters  of  blood  in  times  of  persecution 
(Psa.  Ixxix.  2,  3).  Shows  the  intense  wickedness  and  madness  of  the  human  heart. 
God  is  hated  who  is  supremely  excellent,  and  man's  greatest  benefactor.  An  unholy 
nature  is  at  the  root  of  such  hatred,  which  is  aggravated  by  conscious  guilt  and 
dread  of  God.  It  is  only  overcome  by  the  belief  of  God's  love  as  seen  in  Christ. 
(T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Hatred  of  God :  itt  futility  : — The  inventions  of  a  hater 
of  God  are  as  the  proud  engines  and  presumptuous  artillery  of  a  Titanic  warfare 
of  defiance  against  Heaven,  which  recoil  on  himself,  like  mountains  which  are 
hnrled  back  on  the  heads  of  the  giants  who  attempted  to  scale  the  skies,  and  which 
erushad  them  beneath  the  ruins.     (Bp.  Chr.  Wordsworth.) 

Yet.  32.  Who  knowing  the  Judgment  of  Ood,  that  they  'which  commit  sik^ 
things  are  worthy  of  deatb,  not  only  do  the  same,  but  have  pleasure  In  tbem 
that  do  them. — I'he  displeasure  of  God  with  all  who  are  pleased  with  sin : — I.  Sin- 
ners DO  THINGS  WHICH  THET  KNOW  ABE  DisPLEASiNO  TO  GoD.  The  heathen  do 
things  which  God  has  forbidden  by  the  law  of  nature;  the  Jews  those  which  are 
forbidden  by  the  God  of  revelation :  both,  therefore,  do  things  which  they  know 
must  be  displeasing  to  Him.  And  this  is  true  of  all  men  now.  They  know  that 
God  forbids  them  to  love  themselves  and  the  world  supremely ;  but  they  do  both. 
God  forbids  them  to  disobey  His  commands ;  but  they  do  disobey  them.  God 
forbids  them  to  disbelieve  and  reject  the  gospel ;  but  they  do  disbelieve  and  reject 
it.  And  they  will  persist  in  displeasing  Him,  notwithstanding  death  appears  to  be 
their  certain  doom.  II.  They  take  pleasube  in  seeing  othebs  take  the  saub 
PATH  to  buin.  It  will  be  easy  to  Hccouut  for  this  if  we  consider — 1.  That  they  love 
one  another.  They  are  all  by  nature  possessed  of  the  same  selfish  heart.  And  it 
is  therefore  reasonable  to  suppose  that,  notwithstanding  the  great  diversity  in  their 
external  conduct,  they  love  one  another  because  they  are  sinners,  and  not  saints. 
Christ  says  repeatedly,  ••  that  sinners  love  those  that  love  them."  And  He  tella 
His  disciples  that  this  selfish  spirit  is  essential  to  their  character.  "If  ye  were  of 
the  world,  the  world  would  love  his  own."  Men  of  the  world  universally  approve 
the  spirit  of  the  world,  and  are  pleased  to  see  one  another  act  it  out  without  the 
least  reserve ;  though  they  know  it  is  infinitely  displeasing  to  God.  2.  As  sinners 
possess  one  and  the  same  selfish  and  sinful  heart,  so  they  are  heartily  united  in 
opposing  one  and  the  same  holy  and  benevolent  cause.  The  greatest  nations  have 
been,  and  still  are,  united  in  their  views,  and  feelings,  and  conduct,  towards  the 
Church  of  Christ.  As  all  sinners  wish  that  God's  gracious  designs  may  be  defeated ; 
so  they  have  pleasure  in  seeing  any  of  their  fellow-men  doing  what  they  think  has 
a  tendency  to  frustrate  them.  3.  Those  who  do  things  which  they  know  are  dis- 
pleasing to  God,  take  pleasure  in  seeing  others  do  the  same.  Those  who  disbelieve 
the  existence  of  God  are  pleased  to  hear  others  say  that  they  believe  there  is  no 
God.  Those  who  disbelieve  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible  are  pleased  to  hear  others 
say  that  they  believe  it  is  a  cunningly  devised  fable.  Those  who  disbelieve  the 
doctrines  of  the  Trinity,  of  atonement,  of  total  depravity,  of  regeneration,  &c.,  are 
always  pleased  to  hear  others  say  that  they  disbelieve  all  these  doctrines.  Those  who 
disbelieve  in  the  Sabbath,  who  practise  tavern-haunting,  vain  and  sinful  amusements, 
like  others  to  do  the  same.  Those  who  are  ambitious  love  to  see  others  ambitious. 
Those  who  are  worldly  minded  love  to  see  others  worldly  minded.  Those  who 
despise  all  religion  love  to  see  others  despise  it.  III.  Improvement.  1.  If  sinners 
love  to  do  things  which  they  know  are  displeasing  to  God,  then  they  never  refrain 
from  doing  anything  merely  because  they  kaow  it  will  be  displeasing  to  Him.     They 


.  I.]  ROMANS.  lis 

know  what  is  pleasing  to  themselres,  and  they  mean  to  do  what  is  pleasing  to 
themselves,  thongh  they  know  it  will  be  displeasing  to  God.  They  are  like  dis* 
obedient  ohUdren  and  servants,  who  will  always  do  what  is  agreeable  to  their  own 
eorrnpt  heart,  though  they  know  it  will  be  disagreeable  to  their  parents  or  masters, 
nnless  they  fear  their  displeasure.  It  is  the  fear  and  not  the  love  of  God  that 
restrains  sinners  from  doing  any  evil  action  or  pursuing  any  evil  course.  2.  If 
sinners  love  to  do  things  which  they  know  are  displeasing  to  God,  then,  though 
they  do  a  great  many  things  which  He  has  required,  yet  they  never  do  anything 
merely  for  the  sake  of  obeying  or  pleasing  Him.  They  labour  to  please  themselves, 
and  not  Him.  8.  If  sinners  love  to  do  things  that  they  know  are  displeasing  to 
God,  and  take  pleasure  in  seeing  others  act  from  the  same  principle,  then  no  ex- 
ternal means  nor  motives  are  snfl&cient  to  restrain  thfm  from  sin,  and  induce  them 
to  love  and  please  God,  They  sin  with  their  eyes  wide  open.  They  know  what 
would  please  God,  but  they  do  not  desire  to  please  Him.  4.  If  sinners  not  only  do 
tilings  which  they  know  are  displeasing  to  God,  but  take  pleasure  in  seeing  othera 
do  the  same  things,  then  they  are  guilty  not  only  of  their  own  sins,  but  of  all  the 
■ina  of  others,  which  they  see  and  approve.  And  the  approvers  are  often  more 
guilty  and  criminal  than  the  actors.  Parents  who  allow  their  children  to  profane 
the  Sabbath,  to  game,  to  attend  balls  and  haunt  taverns,  are  more  guilty  than  their 
children  that  do  these  things.  Executive  ofiBcers,  who  see  and  approve  of  those 
who  break  the  laws  of  the  land,  are  more  guilty  than  the  actual  transgressors.  The 
reason  is,  that  in  all  these  cases  the  approvers  know  more  than  the  actors,  and  are 
ander  stronger  obligations  to  condemn  and  restrain  those  who  are  under  their  care, 
than  the  transgressors  are  to  refrain  from  their  evil  courses.  6.  If  men  are  gnilty 
of  all  the  sins  which  they  know  and  approve  of,  then  we  may  see  what  it  is  to  be 
guilty  of  national  sins.  It  is  to  approve  of  those  sins,  which  the  majority  of  a 
nation  commit  and  approve  of.  And,  in  this  view,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  one  nation 
may  be  guilty  of  the  sins  of  another  nation.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  The  heinoiu 
guilt  of  taking  pleamre  in  other  men's  sint : — From  the  beginning  of  ver.  18  to  the 
end  of  ver.  31  we  have  an  abridgment  of  the  lives  and  practices  of  the  whole 
heathen  world.  And  yet,  as  comprehensive  as  this  catalogue  of  sin  is,  it  is  but  of 
Bin  under  a  limitation ;  sins  of  direct  and  personal  commission.  Is  not  this  a 
sufficient  comprehension  ?  For  is  not  a  man's  person  the  compass  of  his  actions  ? 
Or,  can  he  operate  further  than  he  does  exist?  Yes;  he  may  not  only  commit  sins, 
but  also  take  pleasure  in  the  sins  of  others.  Which  implies,  first,  that  thus  to  take 
pleasure  in  other  men's  sins  is  a  distinct  sin  from  all  the  former ;  and,  secondly,  that 
it  is  much  greater — the  furthest  that  human  pravity  can  reach.  For  surely,  that 
sin  that  exceeds  idolatry,  monstrous  nnnatural  lusts,  &o.,  must  needs  be  such  a  one 
M  must  nonplus  the  devil  himself  to  proceed  further.    I.  What  it  is  that  bbinos 

A  MAN  to   such   A   DISPOSITION    OP   MIND    A3    TO    TAKE    PLEASUEE   IN   OTHER    MEN'S  SINS. 

1.  In  order  to  show  this  I  shall  premise — (1)  That  every  man  naturally  has  a  dis- 
tinguishing sense  of  what  is  fit,  and  what  is  not  fit  to  be  done — the  candle  of  the 
Lord,  which  discovers  to  him  both  what  he  is  to  do  and  what  to  avoid.  (2)  That 
there  is  consequently  upon  this  an  inward  satisfaction,  or  dissatisfaction,  after  a 
good  or  an  evil  action.  And  this,  no  doubt,  proceeds  not  only  from  the  real  un- 
suitaVileness  of  sin  to  the  nature  of  man,  but  also  from  a  foreboding  fear,  that  evil 
will  follow  the  doing  of  that  which  conscience  disallows,  which,  no  question,  is  the 
voice  of  God  Himself,  speaking  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and  by  secret  intimations 
giving  the  sinner  a  foretaste  of  that  direful  cup,  which  he  is  Uke  to  driak  more 
deeply  hereafter.  (3)  That  this  distinguishing  sense  of  good  and  evil,  and  this 
satisfaction  and  dissatisfaction  is  a  principle  not  easily  extinguished.  It  is  founded 
in  nature,  and  the  great  important  end  that  God  designs  it  for  shows  the  necessity 
of  its  being  put  beyond  the  danger  of  being  torn  up  by  ordinary  violence.  (4)  That 
that  which  weakens  this  principle  is  an  inferior,  sensitive  principle,  which  receives 
its  gratifications  from  objects  clean  contrary  to  the  former,  and  which  affect  a  man 
much  more  warmly  and  vividly  than  those  which  affect  only  his  nobler  part,  his 
mind.  2.  From  these  considerations  we  naturally  infer — (1)  That  no  man  is  easily 
brought  to  take  a  full  pleasure  in  his  own  sins.  For  though  sin  offers  itself  in 
never  so  alluring  a  dress  at  first,  yet  the  remorse  of  the  soul,  upon  the  commission 
of  it,  infinitely  overbalances  those  transient  gratifications  it  affords  the  senses.  The 
fine  colours  of  the  serpent  by  no  means  make  amends  for  the  smart  and  poison  of 
his  sting.  (2)  That  as  no  man  is  easily  brought  to  take  a  full  pleasure  in  his  own 
sins,  so  much  less  easily  can  he  be  brought  to  take  pleasure  in  those  of  others. 
The  reason  is  beoaose  the  chief  motive  that  induces  a  man  to  sin — the  gratification 
TOL.   I.  8 


114  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  u 

of  his  sensitive  part — cannot  be  had  from  the  sins  of  another.  For  eertainlj 
another  man's  intemperance  cannot  affect  my  sensuality  any  more  than  the  meai 
and  drink  that  I  take  into  my  mouth  can  please  his  palate.  3.  What,  then,  are  the 
causes  that  corrupt  the  mind  of  man  as  to  take  pleasure  in  other  men's  sins?  (1)  A 
commission  of  the  same  sins.  This  is  imported  in  the  words,  •'  They  not  only  do 
the  same  things."  It  is  acquaintance  that  must  give  delight  in  actions,  as  weU  aa 
in  persons.  And  it  is  trial  that  must  begin  the  acquaintance.  None  look  with  so 
much  pleasure  upon  the  works  of  art  as  artists.  In  like  manner  no  sober  man  can 
look  with  complacency  on  drunkenness.  No ;  he  must  first  be  a  practitioner.  It  is 
possible,  indeed,  that  a  sober  or  a  chaste  person,  through  illwill,  envy,  or  spiritual 
pride,  may  be  glad  to  see  the  intemperance  and  debauchery  of  some  about  him,  but 
he  rejoices  not  in  it,  as  in  a  delightful  object,  but  as  in  a  means  of  his  neighbour's 
ruin.  (2)  A  commission  of  them  against  the  conviction  of  conscience.  The  per- 
sons charged  in  the  text  are  such  "  as  knew  the  judgment  of  God,  that  they  who 
committed  such  things  were  worthy  of  death,"  such  as  broke  through  all  mounds  of 
law,  and  laughed  at  the  sword  of  vengeance,  which  Divine  justice  brandished  in 
their  faces.  For  God  has  set  a  flaming  sword  not  only  before  paradise,  but  before 
hell ;  and  conscience  is  the  angel  into  whose  hand  this  sword  is  put.  But  if  now 
the  sinner  shall  not  only  wrestle  with  this  angel,  but  throw  him  too,  his  heart  lies 
open,  like  a  broad  road,  for  all  the  sin  in  the  world  freely  to  pass  through.  (3)  Con- 
tinuance in  them.  For  God  forbid  that  every  single  commission  of  a  sin  should  so 
far  deprave  the  soul  and  bring  it  to  such  a  condition.  David  and  Peter  sinned 
against  the  dictates  of  their  conscience ;  yet  we  do  not  find  that  either  of  them 
delighted  in  their  own  sins,  and  much  less  in  other  men's.  Before  a  man  can  come 
to  be  pleased  with  sin,  because  he  sees  his  neighbour  commit  it,  he  must  have  had 
such  a  long  acquaintance  with  it  as  to  create  a  kind  of  friendship ;  and  we  know 
a  man  is  naturally  glad  to  see  his  old  friend  wheresoever  he  meets  him.  It  is 
generally  the  property  of  an  old  sinner  to  find  a  delight  in  reviewing  his  own 
villainies  in  the  practice  of  other  men.  An  old  wrestler  loves  to  look  on  the  lists, 
though  feebleness  will  not  let  him  offer  at  the  prize.  An  old  huntsman  finds  a 
musie  in  the  noise  of  hounds,  though  he  cannot  follow  the  chase.  An  old  drunkard 
loves  a  tavern,  though  he  cannot  go  to  it,  but  as  he  is  supported  by  another,  just  as 
some  are  observed  to  come  from  thence.  And  an  old  wanton  will  be  doating  upon 
women  when  he  can  scarce  see  them  without  spectacles.  Their  great  concern  is, 
that  the  vice  may  still  go  on.  (4)  That  mearmess  and  poor-spiritedness  that 
naturally  and  inseparably  accompanies  all  guilt.  Whosoever  is  conscious  of  sin, 
feels,  whether  he  will  own  it  or  not,  shame  and  depression  of  spirit.  And  this  is  so 
irksome  that  he  is  restless  to  rid  himself  from  it ;  for  which  he  finds  no  way  so 
effectual  as  to  get  company  in  the  same  sin.  A  vicious  person,  like  the  basest  sort 
of  beasts,  never  enjoys  himself  but  in  the  herd.  Company,  he  thinks,  abates  the 
torrent  of  a  common  odium  by  deriving  it  into  many  channels ;  and,  therefore,  if 
he  cannot  wholly  avoid  the  eye  of  the  observer,  he  hopes  to  distract  it  at  least  by  a 
multiplicity  of  the  object.  (5)  A  certain,  peculiar,  unaccountable  malignity.  This 
we  see  in  those  who  secretly  rejoice  when  they  hear  of  the  calamity  of  their  neigh- 
bour, though  no  imaginable  interest  can  be  served  thereby.  And  as  this  occurs  in 
temporals,  so  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  with  some  it  acts  the  same  way  also  in 
spirituals.  So  he  acted  who  made  a  poor  captive  renounce  his  religion,  in  order  to 
the  saving  of  his  life ;  and  when  he  had  so  done,  presently  ran  him  through,  glory- 
ing that  he  had  thereby  destroyed  his  enemy,  both  body  and  soul.    II.  The  KEAsoNg 

WHY  A  man's  being  DISPOSED  TO  DO   BO   COMES  TO   BE  ATTENDED  WITH  SUCH  AN   EXTRA- 

ORDiNABY  ooiLT.  1.  That  naturally  there  is  no  motive  to  tempt  a  man  to  it.  The 
lesser  the  temptation  the  greater  the  sin.  For  in  every  sin,  the  freer  the  will  the 
more  sinful  the  act.  If  the  object  be  extremely  pleasing,  though  the  will  has  still 
a  power  of  refusing  it,  yet  it  is  not  without  some  difficulty.  Now  this  pleasure 
springs  from  the  gratification  of  some  desire  founded  in  nature.  An  irregular 
gratification  it  is  often ;  yet  still  the  foundation  of  it  is,  and  must  be,  something 
natural.  Thus  drunkenness  is  an  irregular  satisfaction  of  the  appetite  of  thirst; 
and  covetousness  a  boundless,  unreasonable  pursuit  of  the  principle  of  self-preserva- 
tion. There  is  hardly  any  one  vice  but  what  is  the  abuse  of  one  of  those  two  grand 
natural  principles ;  namely,  that  which  inclines  a  man  to  preserve  himself,  or  to 
please  himself.  But  now,  what  is,  or  can  be,  gratified  by  another  man's  pursuit  of 
his  own  vice  ?  All  the  pleasure  that  naturally  can  be  received  from  a  vicious  action 
can  immediately  affect  none  but  him  who  does  it.  And  therefore  the  delight  that 
ft  man  takes  for  another's  sin  can  be  nothing  else  but  a  fantastical,  preternatural 


.  I.)  ROMANS,  US 

love  of  vice,  as  snch,  a  delighting  in  sin  for  its  own  sake.  "  If  a  man  plays  tha 
thief,"  says  Solomon,  "  and  steals  to  satisfy  his  hanger,"  though  it  cannot  wholly 
ezcnse  the  fact,  yet  it  sometimes  extenuates  the  guilt.  Bat  when  a  man  shall,  with 
a  sober,  diabolical  rancour,  enjoy  himself  in  the  sight  of  his  neighbour's  sin  and 
shame,  can  he  plead  the  instigation  of  any  appetite  in  nature  inclining  him  to  this  ? 
No,  for  he  may  as  well  carry  his  eyes  in  another  man's  head,  and  run  races  with 
another  man's  feet,  as  directly  and  naturally  taste  the  pleasures  that  spring  from 
the  gratification  of  another  man's  appetites.  Nor  can  that  person,  who  accounts  it 
his  recreation  to  see  a  man  wallowing  in  his  filthy  revels,  allege  for  a  reason  of  his 
6o  doing  that  it  leaves  the  least  relish  upon  the  tip  of  his  tongue.  What  can  we 
then  assign  for  the  cause  of  this  monstrous  disposition  ?  Why,  that  the  devil  and 
long  custom  of  sinning  have  superinduced  upon  the  soul  new,  unnatural,  and 
absurd  desires,  that  relish  things  not  at  all  desirable.  In  fine,  there  is  as  much 
difference  between  the  pleasure  a  man  takes  in  his  own  sins,  and  that  which  he 
takes  in  other  men's,  as  there  is  between  the  wickedness  of  a  man  and  the  wicked- 
ness of  a  devil.  2.  A  second  reason  is,  from  the  boundless  nature  of  this  way  of 
sinning.  For  by  this  a  man  contracts  a  kind  of  a  universal  guilt,  and,  as  it  were, 
sins  over  the  sins  of  others ;  so  that  while  the  act  is  theirs,  the  guilt  of  it  is  equally 
his.  Personal  powers  and  opportunities  of  sinning  comparatively  are  not  great ; 
for  at  greatest,  they  must  still  be  limited  by  the  measure  of  a  man's  acting,  and  the 
term  of  his  duration.  But  now,  for  the  way  of  sinning  which  we  have  been  speak- 
ing  of,  it  is  neither  confined  by  place  nor  weakened  by  age ;  but  the  bedrid  and  the 
lethargic  may,  upon  this  account,  equal  the  activity  of  the  strongest  sinner.  A 
man,  by  delight  and  fancy,  may  grasp  in  the  sins  of  countries  and  ages,  and  by  an 
inward  liking  of  them  communicate  in  their  guilt.  3.  It  presupposes  and  includes  in 
it  the  guilt  of  many  preceding  sins.  For  a  man  must  have  passed  many  periods  of 
sin  before  he  can  arrive  to  it,  and  have  served  a  long  apprenticeship  to  the  devil 
before  he  can  come  to  such  a  perfection  and  maturity  in  vice  as  this  imports.  It 
Is  the  wickedness  of  a  whole  life,  discharging  all  its  foulness  into  this  one  quality, 
as  into  a  great  sink.  So  that  nothing  is,  or  can  be,  so  properly  and  significantly 
called  the  "  very  sinfulness  of  sin,"  as  this.  III.  What  kind  of  persons  are  to  bb 
BECKONED  DNDEB  THIS  CHARACTER  ?  In  general  whosoever  draws  others  to  sin.  But 
to  particularise — 1.  Those  who  teach  doctrines  directly  tending  to  a  sinful  course 
(Matt.  V.  19 ;  cf.  xv.  5,  6).  Now  these  are  of  two  sorts.  (1)  Such  as  represent 
actions  that  are  sinful,  as  not  so — e.g.,  Antinomians,  who  assert  that  believers 
cannot  sin.  (2)  Such  as  represent  many  sins  much  less  than  they  are — e.g.,  those 
who  assert  that  all  sins  committed  by  believers  to  be  but  infirmities.  2.  Such  as 
endeavour  to  allure  men  to  sin,  either  by  formal  persuasions  (Prov.  vii.  13-22),  or 
by  administering  objects  and  occasions  fit  to  draw  forth  a  man's  corrupt  affections ; 
Buoh  as  are  the  inflaming  of  a  choleric  person  into  a  fit  of  rage  against  his  neigh- 
bour, the  provoking  of  a  lustful  person  by  filthy  discourse,  books,  and  pictures. 
8.  Such  as  affect  the  company  of  vicious  persons.  For  otherwise,  what  is  there  in 
Buch  men,  which  they  can  pretend  to  be  pleased  with?  For  generally  such  sots 
have  neither  parts  nor  wits.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  where  a  man  can  like  the 
conversation  of  debauched  persons,  amidst  all  the  natural  grounds  of  dislike,  it  can 
proceed  from  nothing  but  the  inward  affection  he  bears  to  their  lewd  humour.  It 
is  this  he  enjoys ;  and  for  the  sake  of  this  the  rest  he  endures.  4.  Such  as  en- 
courage men  in  their  sins.  This  may  be  done — (1)  By  commendation.  No  man 
commends  another  any  further  than  he  likes  him.  He  who  writes  an  encomium 
Neronis  is  but  a  transcript  of  Nero.  From  whence  we  see  the  reason  of  some  men's 
giving  such  honourable  names  and  appellations  to  the  worst  of  men  and  actions, 
and  base,  reproachful  titles  to  the  best.  (2)  By  preferment.  None  certainly  can 
love  to  see  vice  in  power,  but  such  as  love  to  see  it  also  in  practice.  IV.  The 
EFFECTB  OF  THIS  SIN.  1.  UpoH  particular  persons.  (1)  It  quite  alters  and  depraves 
the  natural  frame  of  a  man's  heart.  (2)  It  peculiarly  indisposes  a  man  to  repent 
and  recover  himself  from  it.  For  the  first  step  to  repentance  is  a  man's  dislike  of 
his  sin ;  and  how  can  we  expect  that  a  man  should  dislike  that  which  has  taken 
such  possession  of  his  affections,  that  he  loves  it,  not  only  in  his  own  practice,  but 
also  in  other  men's  ?  (3)  The  longer  a  man  lives  the  wickeder  he  grows,  and  his 
last  days  are  certainly  his  worst.  To  delight  in  other  men's  sins  is  most  properly 
the  vice  of  old  age,  and  may  be  truly  called  the  old  age  of  vice.  For,  as  first,  old 
age  necessarily  implies  a  man's  having  lived  many  years,  and  withal,  this  sort  of 
viciousness  supposes  the  precedent  commission  of  many  sins,  so  it  has  this  further 
property  that,  as  when  a  man  comes  once  to  be  old,  he  grows  every  day  older  and 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  n. 

older;  bo  when  a  man  comes  to  Boch  a  degree  of  wickedness,  as  to  delight  in  the 
wickedness  of  others,  it  is  more  than  ten  thousand  to  one  il  he  ever  returns  to  a 
better  mind.  Tiberius  is  a  notable  instance,  who  was  bad  enough  in  his  youth,  but 
monstrously  so  in  his  old  age;  and  the  reason  of  this  was  because  he  took  s 
particular  pleasure  in  seeing  other  men  do  vile  things.  And,  therefore,  let  not  men 
flatter  themselves  that  though  they  find  it  difficult  to  combat  an  ill  practice,  yet 
that  old  age  shall  do  that  for  them  which  they  in  their  youth  could  never  find  in 
their  heart  to  do  for  themselves,  for  a  habit  may  continue  when  it  is  no  longer  able 
to  act.  The  longer  a  blot  continues  the  deeper  it  sinks.  And  it  will  be  found  a 
work  of  no  small  difficulty  to  dispossess  and  throw  out  a  vice  from  that  heart  where 
long  possession  begins  to  plead  prescription.  (4)  Many  perish  eternally  who  never 
arrived  at  such  a  pitch  of  wickedness  as  to  take  any  pleasure  in,  or  indeed  to  be  at 
all  concerned  about,  the  sins  of  other  men.  But  they  perish  in  the  pursuit  of  their 
own  lusts,  and  often  not  without  a  considerable  mixture  of  dislike  of  themselves  for 
what  they  do.  2.  Upon  communities.  Some  men's  taking  pleasure  in  other  men's 
sins  will  cause  many  men  to  sin  to  do  them  a  pleasure,  for — (1)  It  is  seldom  or 
never  that  any  man  comes  to  such  a  degree  of  impiety  as  to  take  pleasure  in  other 
men's  sins,  bat  he  also  shows  the  world,  by  his  actions  and  behaviour,  that  he  does 
so.  (2)  There  are  few  men  in  the  world  so  inconsiderable,  bat  there  are  some  who 
have  an  interest  to  serve  by  them.  (3)  The  natural  course  that  one  man  takes  to 
serve  his  interest  by  another  is  by  applying  himself  to  him  in  saob  a  waj  M  may 
most  gratify  and  delight  him.    {B.  South,  D.D.) 


OHAPTEB  n. 

VsBS.  1-16.  Wberefora  thoa  art  Inexcnsable,  0  man,  wbOBoerer  thon  art  tbat 
Judgest. — Man's  inexcusahlenest : — I.  Because — 1.  He  has  a  knowledge  of  his  duty. 
2.  He  was  created  with  ability  to  perform  it.  8.  He  knows  the  consequences  of 
neglecting  it.  4.  He  condemns  others  for  doing  what  he  does  himself.  U.  What 
svEB  BE — 1.  The  nation  to  which  he  belongs.  2.  The  profession  he  makes.  8.  The 
privileges  he  enjoys.  4.  The  position  he  occupies.  (T.  JJofciTwon,  D.D.)  Jew$ 
as  had  as  pagans : — The  tests  of  the  Jews'  pretentions  lay  to  hand  in  the  facts  of 
Jewish  life.  Did  the  morals  of  his  countrymen  fit  them  to  stand  before  the  righteous 
tribunal  of  Eternal  Justice  ?  Had  they  so  kept  their  boasted  law  as  to  attain  by  it 
to  practical  righteousness  ?  Let  the  observation  of  the  Roman  world  reply.  The 
appeal  is  a  rough  and  ready  one — fit  for  the  occasion.  In  his  own  case,  Paul's 
Hebrew  life  had  been  outwardly  pure.  Like  a  good  many  of  his  contemporaries, 
especially  among  the  Palestinian  schools,  he  could  accuse  himself  of  no  patent 
vices.  Here,  however,  he  is  writing  to  a  community  familiar  with  foreign  Jews 
resident  in  a  city  where  of  all  others  the  basest  elements  from  every  land  flowed 
together  to  make  one  another  worse ;  and  he  could  appeal  to  the  observation  of  the 
Boman  Christians  whether  the  Jews  of  Bome  were  not  as  bad  in  morals  as  any 
pagan — nay,  whether  the  very  name  of  Jew  had  not  come  to  be  on  Gentile  lips  a 
word  of  opprobrium  and  reproach.  A  vagrant  life,  association  with  the  servile 
population  of  great  towns,  an  equivocal  position  in  the  eyes  of  Boman  law,  social 
exclusion,  the  necessity  of  living  by  their  wits  and  amassing  bullion  instead  of 
stable  property,  these  causes  were  already  at  work  creating  that  deteriorated  type 
of  Hebrew  character  which  has  long  been  fixed  in  Europe.  From  independent 
witnesses  we  know  that  the  Jews  were  at  that  day  the  gipsy,  the  usurer,  the  fortune- 
teller, the  pander,  and  the  slave  agent  of  the  Boman  world ;  everywhere  living  on 
the  vices  of  the  heathen  whom  he  despised ;  one  of  the  most  restless,  turbulent, 
and  despicable  elements  in  that  corrupt  society.  And  this  is  what  has  oome  of 
Israel's  religious  privileges  and  ancestral  glories.  This  was  the  upshot  of  the 
national  attempt  to  attain  to  the  righteousness  of  God  by  the  works  of  "  the  law." 
An  open  rupture  betwixt  profession  and  performance,  between  religion  and  morals  ; 
on  one  side,  a  faith  which  was  mocked  by  their  life ;  on  the  other,  a  life  which  was 
condemned  by  their  faith.  For  while  in  morals  they  were  a  byword  even  to  the 
h^  athens,  these  same  Jews  were  eaten  up  with  religious  self-importance,  and  looked 
down  on  heathens  as  outcasts  and  unclean.    Arrogant  and  bigoted  zeal  for  prosely- 


CHAP,  n.]  ROMANS.  117 

tyaing  vent  hand  in  hand,  therefore,  with  personal  profligacy.     It  was  nothing  to 
be  s  cheat  or  a  procurer :  it  was  everything  to  know  the  true  God,  and  to  be  cir- 
enmcised  and  to  be  instructed  in  the  law.     (J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.)        Censorious' 
tut$ : — I.  Its  prevalbmcb.     II.  Its  folly.      IU.  Its  inexcdsableness.     {J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)         Unconscioxu   hypocrisy: — Hypocrisy  is  almost  always  unconscious:    it 
draws  the  veil  over  its  own  evil  deeds,  while  it  condemns  those  of  others,  not 
intentionally,  but  because  human  nature  is   strangely  gifted  with  the  power  of 
deceiving  itself.     It  is  popularly  described  as  "  pretending  to  be  one  thing,  and 
doing,  thinking,  or  feeling  another  " ;  in  fact  it  is  very  different.     Nobody  really 
leads  this  sort  of  divided  existence.    A  man  does  wrong,  but  he  forgets  it  again ; 
he  sees  the  same  fault  in  another,  and  condemns  it;  but  no  arrow  of  conscieuce 
reaches  him,  no  law  of  association  suggests  to  him  that  he  has  sinned  too.    Human 
character  is  weak  and  plastic,  and  soon  reforms  itself  into  a  deceitful  whole.    Indig- 
nation may  be  honestly  felt  at  others  by  men  who  do  the  same  thing  themselves; 
they  may  often  be  said  to  relieve  their  own  conscience,  perhaps  even  to  strengthen 
the  moral  sentiments  of  mankind,  by  their  expression  of  it.     So  that  hypocrisy, 
though  the  worst  of  sins,  is  for  the  most  part  weakness  and  self-deception.     The 
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  "  hypocrites,"  regarded  their  own  lives  in  a  very  different 
light  from  that  in  which  our  Lord  has  pictured  them.     Their  hypocrisy,  too,  might 
be  described  as  weakness   and  self-deception,  only  heightened  and   made  mora 
intense  by  the  time  and  country  in  which  they  lived.     It  was  the  hypocrisy  of  an 
age  and  a  state  of  society — blinder,  perhaps,  and  more  fatal  in  its  consequences  for 
this  very  reason,  but  less  culpable  in  the  individuals  who  were  guilty  of  it.    Those 
who  said,  "  We  have  a  law,  and  by  it  He  ought  to  die,"  were  not  without  a  zeal  for 
God,  though  seeking  to  take  away  Him  in  whom  only  the  law  was  fulfilled.    But 
although  experience  of  ourselves  and  others  seems  to  show  that  hypocrisy  is  almost 
always  unconscious,  such  is  not  the  idea  that  we  ordinarily  attach  to  the  word. 
The  reason  is — 1.  That  the  strong  contrast  we  observe  between  the  seeming  and  the 
reality,  between  the  acta  and  words  of  the  hypocrite,  lead  us  to  speak  as  though  the 
contrast  were  present  and  conscious  to  himself.     We  caunot  follow  the  subtle  mazes 
through  which  he  leads  himself ;  we  see  only  the  palpable  outward  effect.     2.  The 
notion  that  hypocrisy  is  self-deception  or  weakness  is  inadequate  to  express  our 
abhorrence  of  it.    3.  Our  use  of  language  is  adapted  to  the  common  opinions  of 
mankind,  and  is  incapable  of  expressing  the  tintr  shades  of   human   nature. 
(Prof.  Jowett.)         The  self-righteous  and  the  hypocrite   tried  and  condemned  by 
— I.  CoNsoiBNCE  (vers.  1-3).     U.    Thb    mehct  op    God  (ver.  4).     III.   Eternal 
Justice  (ver.  6-11).     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        Judging  others : — I.  This  sin  is  to  bb 
ATOiDEO,  because — 1.   We  are  incapable  of  judging  accurately.     2.  We  are  not 
invested  with  the  office  of  judge  (chap.  xiv.  4;  James  iv.  12).    3.  Judging  others  is 
generally  the  effect  of  uncharitableness ;  and — 4.  Is  expressly  forbidden  by  Christ. 
II.  In  ordeb  to  avoid  this  sin — 1.  Be  slow  to  judge,  and  do  not  condemn  with- 
out evidence.     2.  While  different  motives  are  possible,  do  not  ascribe  an  action  to 
the  worst.    8.  When  there  is  just  ground  for  doubt,  suspend  your  judgment.     4. 
When  yon  are  obliged  to  condemn,  do  it  with  regret.     5.  Listen  calmly  to  apology, 
and  readily  admit  every  explanation.    6.  Confound  not  in  one  general  censure  all 
of  a  party  or  sect.     7.  View  men's  actions  in  the  sunshine  of  charity,  not  in  the 
shade  of  moroseness.     (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)        Judging  others : — By  doing  so  a 
man — I.  Demonstrates  his  own  guilt.     1.  He  knows  the  law.     2.  He  violates  it. 
II.  Denies  the  justice  of  God.      1.  Its  equity.     2.  Its  severity.      III.  Despises 
God's  mercy.     1.  As  if  he  needed  it  not.     2.  He  will  not  repent.     3.  He  treasures 
up  wrath.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        The  judges  judged: — I.  To  whom  the  expostula- 
tion IS  addressed.     The  disp^^sition  here  reproved  shows  itself  in — 1.  Worldlings 
towards—  (1)  Each  other.     (2)  Professing  Christians.     2.  Eeligious  persons  towards 
— (1)   Each    other.      (2)    The    world.       II.   The   address   itself.      Concerning 
uncharitable  persons  it  shows — 1.  How  vaiu  their  hopes.     2.  How  aggravated  their 
guilt.     3.  How  fearful  their  prospects.    Application :  1.  Do  not  occupy  yourselves 
too  much  about  others,  but  rather  take  heed  to  yourselves.     2.  Above  all  things 
seek  to  know  your  need  of  a  Saviour.     {C.  Simeon.  M.A.)        The  final  judg- 
ment foreshadowed : — It  had  been  clearly  established  against  the  Gentiles  that  they 
were  inexcusable,  and  that  there  could  be  no  hope  of  their  escape  but  on  the  ground 
of  the  salvation  revealed  in  the  gospel.     But  of  such  salvation  the  Jew  stood  in 
equal  need.     Only  to  convince  him  of  it  a  different  process  was  required.    Confident 
that  he  should  escape  the  just  punishment  of  sin,  it  was  necessary  to  convince  him 
that  the  grounds  of  his  expectation  were  false.     He  is,  therefore,  reminded — 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  U. 

I.  That,  in  pbonounoino  judgment  upon  the  sins  op  othebs,  hb  wab  but  fobb- 
SHADowiNO  HIS  OWN  Doou,  for  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  always  according  to  truth. 
It  is  true  that  Paul's  reasoning  would  be  equally  conclusive  against  Jew  or  Gentile, 
but  there  is  no  intimation  that  the  latter  meted  out  condemnation  only  to  others ;  or 
that  he  flattered  himself  that,  while  they  were  justly  punished,  he  should  escape. 
But  the  fond  thought  of  many  a  Jew  was  that  his  interest  with  the  Eternal  Judge 
was  too  intimate,  powerful,  and  well  assured  to  render  it  possible  that  he  should  be 
punished  as  other  sinners  (Matt.  iii.  9  ;  John  viii.  33-44).  Now  the  apostle  would 
have  him  understand  that  such  a  hope  was  vain.  No  external  connection  with  the 
kingdom  of  God ;  no  attention  to  the  requirements  of  religious  ritual  can  possibly 
avail  to  deliver  any  man  from  wrath  if  it  does  not  avail  to  save  him  from  his  sina 
(Isa.  i.  11-20).  Neither  circumcision  nor  baptism,  neither  the  sacrifices  of  Judaism 
nor  even  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  will  screen  a  man  from  wrath  who  does  not 
honestly  consent  to  abandon  his  sinful  practices.  II.  That  the  biches  of  God's 
GOODNESS  WEBE  INTENDED  TO  LEAD  HIM  TO  BEPENTANCE,  and  that,  therefore,  his  con- 
tinued sinfulness  would  but  serve  to  enhance  his  guilt.  1.  In  specifying  "the 
riches  of  God's  goodness,"  Ac,  the  apostle  refers  to  those  aboundings  of  grace  which 
pertained  specially  to  the  Jews.  The  words  of  Moses  indicate  at  once  their  character 
and  purpose  {Deut.  iv.  5-8).  The  Mosaic  institutions,  the  Abrahamio  covenant, 
the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  the  disciplinary  dealing  of  God  with  the 
nation,  had  but  this  one  object,  "  That  they  should  fear  the  Lord,"  &o.  (Deut.  x. 
12).  To  this  end  mercy  was  promised  them  upon  repentance ;  and,  for  the  like 
purpose,  all  gracious  instruction,  aid,  defence,  and  supply  were  assured  to  them. 
But  should  they,  notwithstanding  aU  this,  refuse  to  repent  and  to  become  a  holy 
people,  then  they  should  be  overtaken  by  wrath.  2.  The  purpose  and  tendency  of 
the  goodness  of  God  was  to  lead  them  to  repentance.  But  it  required  the  con- 
currence of  their  own  wills,  which,  however,  they  would  not  render.  Their  hearta 
were  hard  and  impenitent.  They  valued  their  religious  institutions  only  so  far  as 
they  supposed  that,  through  their  magic  influence,  the  consequences  of  their  sins 
should  never  overtake  them.  Moses  had  clearly  foreseen  this  abuse  of  God's 
goodness,  and  had  strongly  warned  the  people  against  it  (Deut.  zxix.  18-20).  Yet, 
notwithstanding  this,  the  people,  from  generation  to  generation,  did  bless  them- 
selves in  their  hearts,  saying,  "  Peace  I  peace  1 "  when  there  was  no  peace  (Jer. 
xxiii.  16,  17).  Therefore  was  sent  to  them  the  scathing  rebuke  (Isa.  vi.  9,  10). 
III.  That  the  day  fob  the  bevelation  of  wbath  is  fixed,  and  that  the  decisions 

SHALL  THEN   BE   IN  ACCOBDANCE  WITH  THE  BTBICTEST   EQUITY.      This  day  Is   DOt  One  of 

probation,  in  which,  along  with  a  revelation  of  wrath,  there  is  also  a  revelation  of 
mercy ;  but  one  in  which,  probation  being  concluded,  its  lasting  results  will  be  dis- 
closed. It  is  stated — 1.  That  the  judgments  of  that  day  shall  proceed  upon  character 
and  works  alone.  Such  is  the  uniform  and  consistent  doctrine  of  Scripture.  The 
question  of  questions  will  be  not  to  what  nation  or  Church  the  man  belonged ;  not, 
••  Was  he  duly  circumcised  or  baptized  ?  "  This,  too,  was  the  teaching  of  the  Old 
Testament  (Eccles.  viii.  12,  13,  xii.  14 ;  Prov.  xi.  18,  21 ;  Psa.  i.  6,  6)  and  of  Christ 
Himself  (Matt.  vii.  21).  If  a  man  despise  the  goodness  of  God,  and  continue  in  his 
sins  to  the  end  of  life,  then  all  his  sins,  with  all  their  evil  influence  upon  his  own 
character,  must  go  with  him  to  the  judgment,  and  he  must  bear  the  punishment  of 
aU.  But  if,  softened  by  the  riches  of  that  goodness,  he  yields  to  the  gracious 
influence,  then,  by  virtue  of  the  Atonement,  his  iniquity  shall  be  taken  away  (Ezek. 
zviii.  21,  22;  Matt,  xviii.  3).  2.  That  the  rule  of  judgment  shall  be  administered 
without  respect  of  persons.  That  which  is  pronounced  wicked  in  a  heathen  will  be 
pronounced  equally  wicked  in  a  Jew  or  a  Christian.  Nay,  more  so  (Luke  xii.  47, 
48).  Therefore,  "  as  many  as  have  sinned  without  law,  shall  also  perish  without 
law,"  &o.  3.  That  the  judgment  of  that  day  will  be  so  far  from  opening  up  a  way 
of  escape  for  the  Jew  that  it  will  disclose  for  his  portion  a  "  how-much-sorer 
punishment."    And  this  according  to  the  solemn  warning  of  the  Judge  Himself 

Slatt.  xi.  21-24).  His  sin  is  greatest  who  has  sinned  against  the  fullest  light  and 
e  richest  grace.  Therefore  there  must  be  provided  a  deeper  hell  of  "  tribulation 
and  anguish  "  for  the  obdurate  Jew  than  for  the  impenitent  Gentile ;  but  the  deepest 
must  needs,  on  the  same  principle,  be  reserved  for  those  who  have  sinned  away  the 
day  of  Christian  light  and  salvation.  4.  The  results  of  the  judgment  shall  be  to  the 
righteous  eternal  life,  i.e.,  an  immortality  of  supremely  blessed  existence.  To  the 
impenitent  and  disobedient  it  shall  be  a  revelation  of  "  indignation  and  wrath," 
producing  "  tribulation  and  anguish."  And  as  the  award  shall  be  final,  so  too  the 
resutita  shall  be  ever-euuuring  (Dan  xii.  2 ;  Matt.  xxv.  46  ;  Mark  ix.  43-48 ;  2  Thes«« 


.  n.]  ROMANS.  11» 

i.  9).  One  way  there  is,  bat  only  one,  by  which  sinful  men  may  escape  from  the 
terrors  of  that  great  day — the  way  of  repentance.  Obviously  that  way  of  escape  waa 
open  to  the  Jew  even  before  the  advent  of  Christ  (Ezek.  zviii.  30).  and  was  assumed 
by  Paul  to  be  available  for  the  sinful  Jew  still,  and  also  for  the  sinful  Gentile  (vers. 
26-29).  {W.  Tyson.)  Judgment — ituman  and  Divine: — I.  Hdman  judgment  la 
PBONOUNCED  BY  INCONSISTENT  MEN.  The  men  who  judge,  often  those  who  judge  most 
sternly,  are  themselves  guilty.  David  and  Nathan.  The  accusers  and  the  woman 
taken  in  adultery.  In  the  light  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  we  are  all  inconsistent. 
II.  Divine  judgment  is  pronounced  by  a.  peefectly  bighteous  Being.  We  notice 
— 1.  The  standard  by  which  God  judges — truth.  2.  The  spirit  in  which  God 
judges.  His  judgment  is — (1)  Longsuilering ;  (2)  Impartial ;  (3)  Thorough.  3. 
The  character  of  the  Divine  Judge  is — (1)  An  inspiration  to  those  who  seek  well- 
doing. (2)  A  terror  to  those  who  obey  unrighteousness.  {U.  R.  Thomas.)  The 
judgment  of  God : — It  is  easy  for  us  to  see  sin  in  others,  and  to  join  in  general  con- 
fessions of  sin,  in  which  we  seem  to  include  ourselves.  But  it  is  very  hard  to 
acknowledge  it  penitently  before  God.  There  is,  in  every  man's  heart,  a  subtle 
element  of  self-flattery,  which  leads  him  to  extenuate  or  deny  his  own  offences, 
while  yet  he  is  very  forward  to  condemn  the  iniquities  of  his  neighbours.  When 
Haldane  read  to  D'Aubign^  a  chapter  from  this  Epistle  concerning  the  natural  cor- 
ruption of  man,  he  said,  "  Now  I  do,  indeed,  see  it  in  the  Bible."  "  Yes,"  replied 
Haldane,  "but  do  you  see  it  in  your  heart?" — a  home-thrust  which  awakened  a 
sense  of  sin,  and  led  to  his  conversion.  Thus  Paul  proceeds  here  to  bring  home  to 
every  man's  conscience  the  terrible  charge  advanced  against  the  world  at  large  in 
the  latter  part  of  chap.  i.  He  knew  that  many  who,  while  acknowledging  the 
general  correctness  of  his  statements,  would  make  an  exception  of  themselves. 
None  would  be  more  ready  to  do  this  than  the  Jews  The  apostle  therefore 
approaches  them  warily,  beginning  with  appeals  of  a  more  general  character,  and  then 
coming  gradually  down  to  a  direct  appUcation  of  his  argument  to  every  self-righteous 
descendant  of  Abraham.     Let  us  notice — I.  Those  who  exempt  and  excuse  them- 

BBLTES  FBOM  THE  GENEBAIi  CHABGE   OW  THE  WOBLD's  ABOUNDING  WICKEDNESS.      1.   The 

Greeks,  or  Gentiles.  Among  these  were  many  who  could  condemn  their  neighbours 
most  severely,  while  yet  they  openly  commended  themselves.  Even  Socrates  could 
practise  in  Becret  gross  sensualities  which  he  inveighed  against  in  public.  There 
were  men  who  were  by  nature  less  savage  or  less  treacherous  than  their  fellows ;  but 
there  were  vices  of  disposition,  such  as  envy,  malice,  and  revenge,  in  which  they 
freely,  if  not  vauntingly,  participated.  Then  there  were  men  of  refinement  whose 
only  difference  from  the  Ucentious  mob  was  in  tbe  superior  delicacy  of  their 
pleasures,  the  higher  artfulness  of  their  hypocrisies,  the  closer  secrecy  of  their 
excesses.  And  have  not  we  also  many  classes  of  character,  the  exact  counterpart 
of  those  just  described — those  who  have  not  yet  been  found  out,  or  are  careful  to 
avoid  all  coarse  and  flagrant  forms  of  vice  ;  but  are  selfish,  covetous,  proud,  or  vin- 
dictive ?  And  are  not  these  dispositions  as  certainly  the  manifestations  of  a  corrupt 
heart  as  many  fouler  sins  from  which  they  fastidiously  shrink  f  Therefore  are  they 
without  excuse,  for  in  judging  others  they  condemn  themselves.  2.  The  Jews. 
Their  common  delusion  was  to  fancy  themselves  free  from  condemnation,  merely 
because  they  possessed  the  oracles  of  God  and  enjoyed  special  tokens  of  the  Divine 
regard.  They  thus  missed  the  very  object  of  the  kindness  extended  toward  them. 
It  was  meant  to  lead  them  to  repentance ;  but  they  used  it  to  build  up  their  pride 
and  confirm  their  obduracy.  And  have  they  not  also  their  representatives  in  the 
Christian  pale  ?  There  are  many  amongst  us  who  pride  themselves  on  their  religious 
advant&ges  without  ever  improving  them  to  their  own  salvation.  Are  you,  then, 
better  than  the  heathen,  because  you  possess  the  Bible,  rest  on  the  Sunday,  and 
attend  the  sanctuary  T  Is  it  enough  that  you  hear  the  law,  without  obeying  it  ? 
The  enjoyment  of  these  advantages  only  heightens  your  obligation,  adds  to  your 
responsibility,  and  may  make  you  at  last  tenfold  more  the  child  of  hell  than  the 
pagans  yon  despise.  "  He  that  knoweth  his  master's  will,  and  doeth  it  not,  shall 
be  beaten  with  many  stripes."  U.  The  final  judgment  of  the  wobld  by  Jesus 
Chbist.  1.  This  is  a  peculiarly  gospel  disclosure.  True,  there  were  premonitions  of 
it  amongst  the  heathen,  as  there  were  pre-intimations  of  it  in  the  Old  Testament ; 
but  still  it  was  left  to  Christ  and  His  apostles  to  develop  the  doctrine.  Here  we 
learn  that  a  day  is  determined  on  by  God  to  be  devoted  to  that  exclusive  business. 
We  need  not  conceive  of  a  day  cousisting  of  twenty-four  hours,  but  rather  of  a  vast 
period — just  as  we  call  the  term  of  gospel  grace  the  day  of  salvation,  or  of  immortal 
Ages  as  the  day  of  eternity.     Over  the  affairs  of  that  day  shall  the  Son  of  Man 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHA».  n. 

preside  in  person.  Before  His  bar  all  nations  mast  be  arraigned.  "  We  mast  all 
appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,"  and  answer  for  the  things  done  in  the 
bod;.  2.  Mark  its  impartiality.  "  There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God."  No 
man's  case  will  be  prejudiced  by  his  circamstances,  and  no  man  will  find  favour 
because  of  the  accidents  of  birth  and  position.  We  can  conceive  of  no  motives  of 
favouritism  in  the  mind  of  God.  And  certainly  it  will  be  impossible  either  to 
corrupt  the  Judge  with  bribes,  to  pervert  Him  by  Battery,  or  to  overcome  Him  with 
threats.  The  wise  will  not  be  saved  by  his  wisdom,  nor  the  strong  by  his  strength, 
nor  the  rich  by  his  riches,  nor  the  noble  by  his  rank ;  youth  and  beauty  will  be  aa 
powerless  as  decrepitude  and  age.  8.  Its  strict  equity.  Each  must  receive  according 
to  his  deeds,  whether  good  or  evil.  What,  then,  is  the  moral  amenability  of  the 
extra-Christian  world  ?  What  the  possibility  of  its  salvation  ?  (vers.  12-15.)  The 
heathen  world  was  not  left  wholly  without  a  knowledge  of  right  and  wrong.  Also, 
in  highly  civilised  countries,  wise  men  had  been  raised  up  who  had  carefully 
sought  out  the  rule  of  virtue,  and  thus  estabhshed  many  correct  principles  of  moral 
guidance,  which  gained  the  consent  of  their  fellow-citizens,  and  might  have  served 
to  lead  them  far  on  in  the  path  of  righteousness.  If  the  light  of  Christianity  is 
that  of  the  sun,  the  light  of  Judaism  that  of  the  moon,  the  rest  had  at  least  the 
light  of  many  stars.  The  same  state  of  things  is  still  found  among  anohristian 
peoples.  They  have  both  rehgious  feelings  and  moral  convictions.  Thus  is  the 
foundation  laid  for  a  future  judgment,  extending  to  all.  All  have  within  or  amongst 
them  a  law,  through  the  operation  of  which  they  are  held  amenable  to  their  Creator, 
and  are  preparing  to  stand  before  His  judgment  bar.  And  thus  may  they  perish 
without  the  law,  although,  in  such  a  case,  their  guilt  will  be  less  and  their  doom 
more  endurable  than  that  of  men  who  sin  amid  all  the  illumination  of  Scriptural 
truth.  And  so  also  it  is  possible  for  some  to  be  saved,  if,  with  honest  purpose,  they 
follow  up  the  light  they  possess  and  sincerely  seek  to  please  God.  Thus  may  it 
oome  to  pass  that  from  every  heathen  land  redeemed  souls  may  come  and  sit  down 
with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  Any  way,  the  judgment 
of  the  great  King  will  be  according  to  truth  and  justice.  To  whom  much  has  been 
given,  from  him  much  will  be  expected  ;  and  only  little  from  him  whose  advantages 
have  been  few.  4.  The  principle  of  judgment  will  be  a  strict  regard  to  the  actions 
of  men.  Universally,  throughout  the  Bible,  is  this  doctrine  affirmed  (Eccles.  xii. 
14 ;  Matt.  xxv. ;  2  Cor.  v.  10 ;  Rev.  xx.  13).  Yet  none  will  be  saved  by  their  works 
as  works,  but  only  as  evidential  of  a  right  and  honest  state  of  will  and  feeling ;  a 
state  produced,  in  all  cases,  by  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  through  such  light 
of  truth  as  may  be  enjoyed.  This  principle  will  not  invalidate,  bat  only  the  more 
elucidate  and  confirm,  the  fundamental  arrangement  of  grace  that  "  the  just  shall 
live  by  faith."  6.  The  grand  bearings  of  the  final  judgment  upon  the  destiny  of 
men  (vers.  6-10).  Two  awards,  and  only  two,  will  result  from  the  proceedings  of 
the  great  judgment  day.  The  good  will  be  thenceforward  and  for  evermore 
separated  from  the  evU ;  the  former  will  enter  into  a  state  of  absolute  enjoyment 
and  peace,  while  the  latter  will  be  consigned  to  an  abode  of  unmitigated  wretched- 
uess  and  infamy.    (T.  G.  Horton.) 

Ver.  2.  But  we  are  sore  that  the  Judgment  of  Ctod  Is  aeeordlns:  to  truth. — Ood^$ 
judgment  is — I.  Correct  ;  according  to  the  facts  of  the  case.  II.  Imfabtial  ; 
according  to  a  true  mortJ  standard,  having  respect  to  character.  III.  Equixabub, 
according  to  the  principles  of  infallible  justice.  By  Him  actions  are  weighed  (1 
Bam.  ii.  3).  "  Tekel "  is  written  on  each  one's  conduct  (Dan.  v.  27).  Job's  wish 
(Job  xxxi.  6)  ils  realised  in  all.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  Jinal  judgment  of  God : 
— When  Babbi  Jochanan  Ben  Zachai  was  sick  his  disciples  came  to  visit  him,  and 
when  he  saw  them  he  began  to  weep.  They  said  to  him,  "  Babbi,  the  light  of 
Israel,  the  right-hand  pillar,  the  strong  hammer,  wherefore  dost  thou  weep  ?  "  He 
answered,  "  If  they  were  carrying  me  before  a  king  of  flesh  and  blood,  who  is  here 
to-day  and  to-morrow  in  the  grave,  who,  if  he  were  angry  with  me,  his  anger  would 
not  last  for  ever  ;  if  he  put  me  in  prison,  his  prison  would  not  be  everlasting;  if  he 
eondemned  me  to  death,  that  death  would  not  be  eternal ;  whom  I  could  soothe  with 
words  or  bribe  with  riches ;  yet  even  in  such  circumstances  I  should  weep.  But 
now  I  am  going  before  the  King  of  kings,  the  holy  and  blessed  God,  who  liveth  and 
endureth ;  who,  if  He  be  angry  with  me.  His  anger  will  last  for  ever ;  if  He  put  me 
in  prison.  His  bondage  will  be  everlasting ;  if  He  condemn  me  to  death,  that  death 
will  be  eternal ;  whom  I  cannot  soothe  with  words  nor  bribe  with  riches.  When, 
further,  there  are  before  me  two  ways,  the  one  to  hell  and  the  other  to  paradise. 


CBAi".  n.]  ROMANS.  HI 

and  I  know  not  into  which  they  are  carrying  me,  shall  I  not  weep?"  {Talmud.) 
The  $ure  judgment  of  Ood : — Said  Anne  of  Austria,  the  Queen  of  France,  to  her  im- 
placable enemy,  Cardinal  Bichelien,  "  My  lord  cardinal,  there  is  one  tact  which  yoa 
seem  to  have  entirely  forgotten.  God  is  a  sure  paymaster.  He  may  not  pay  at  the 
end  of  every  week  or  month  or  year;  but  I  charge  you,  remember  that  He  pays  in 
the  end."  The  justice  of  God' »  judgment : — I.  This  we  see  in  its — 1.  Principles. 
2.  Exercise.  3.  Awards.  II.  Of  this  wk  have  the  assurance  in — 1.  God's  own 
nature.     2.  His  Word.     3.  His  providence.     4.  Conscience.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Yer.  8.  And  thlnkest  tbov  .  .  .  that  thou  shalt  escape  the  Jndgment  of  Ood  T — 
The  tinners' folly : — I.  Their  conddct.  1.  Tiiey  judge  others.  2.  Forget  them- 
selves. 8.  Dream  of  impunity.  II.  Its  folly.  There  is  but — 1.  One  law.  2. 
One  judge.  3.  One  judgment.  (Ibid.)  No  escaping  God's  judgment : — I.  The 
Jews  thotjoht  to  escape  it,  on  the  grounds  of — 1.  Their  relation  to  Abraham.  2. 
Their  possession  of  the  law.  3.  Their  circumcision.  4.  Benefits  already  received. 
6.  Their  own  good  works.  6.  The  merits  of  their  ancestors.  7.  Their  ceremonies 
each  as  the  Day  of  Atonement,  &o.  II.  Mem  in  general  thine  to  sscape  it.  With 
as  little  reason,  through — 1.  Wealth,  power,  or  exalted  position.  2.  Poverty  or 
insignificance.  3.  Religious  profession,  Clmrch  membership,  or  sacred  oifice.  4. 
Personal  conduct.  6.  Pious  ancestry.  6.  Practice  of  religious  rites.  7.  Prayers, 
fastings,  almsgivings.  8.  Afflictions.  III.  The  impossibility  of  this.  1.  The 
Jews  were  solemnly  warned  that  they  should  not  escape  (Amos  ix.  1-4 ;  Psa.  i.  7-22). 
2.  The  only  escape  is  through  Christ  (Acts  iv.  12),  just  as  the  only  refuge  from 
the  flood  was  in  the  provided  ark  (1.  Pet.  iii.  20,  21).  3.  The  guilty  flee,  the 
pardoned  alone  escape  the  judgment  of  God.  {T.  Eolijison,  D.D.)  The  gradual 
but  inevitable  advance  of  Divine  judgment : — Slow  goes  the  hand  of  justice,  hke  the 
ehailow  on  the  sun-dial ;  ever  moving,  yet  slowly  creeping  on,  with  a  motion  all  but 
imperceptible.  Still  stand  in  awe.  The  hand  of  justice  has  not  stopped,  although 
imperceptible  it  steadily  advances ;  by  and  by  it  reaches  the  tenth,  eleventh,  and 
twelfth  hour.  And  now  the  bell  strikes.  Then  unless  you  have  fled  to  Christ,  the 
blow  which  was  so  slow  to  fall,  shall  descend  over  the  head  of  impenitence  with 
accumulated  force.     (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Or  desplsest  thou  the  riches  of  His  goodness. — Earnest  expostulation: — 
I  will  give  nothing  for  that  preaching  that  is  like  the  sheet-lightning,  flaming  over 
a  broad  expanse,  but  altogether  harmless.  The  apostle  fixes  his  eye  on  a  single 
person  who  had  condemned  others  for  transgressions  in  which  he  himself  indulged; 
one  who  did  not  place  his  candle  on  his  table  to  light  his  own  room,  but  held  it  out 
at  the  door,  to  inspect  therewith  his  neighbours  who  passed  by.  He  thinks  he  shall 
escape  in  the  future,  and  so  despises  the  present  goodness  and  longsuffering  of  the 
Most  High.  Let  me  speak  to  thee,  unregenerate  man,  of — I.  The  goodness  of  God 
WHICH  THoo  hast  EXPERIENCED.  1.  In  temporal  things.  You  have,  perhaps,  been 
prospered  above  your  fellows.  God  has  granted  you  wealth  and  health.  You  are 
happy  in  your  wife  and  children.  A  thousand  evils  have  been  kept  from  yoa.  2. 
In  spiritual  things.  You  are  in  the  very  focus  of  Christian  light.  The  Word  of 
God  is  on  your  table  ;  you  hear  the  earnest  preaching  of  the  gospel.  A  tender  con- 
science makes  your  road  to  perdition  peculiarly  hard.  The  Spirit  has  so  striven 
with  you  that  you  were  at  times  almost  ready  to  drop  into  the  Saviour's  arms.  3. 
He  has  been  forbearing  and  longsufFeriug  for  your  sins.  Forbearance  has  to  do 
with  the  magnitude  of  sin  ;  longsuffering  with  the  multiplicity  of  it.  Many  have 
been  snatched  from  vice  only  to  return  to  its  deep  ditch  of  filthiness.  They  have 
trembled  on  the  brink  of  death,  yet  God  has  permitted  them  to  recover  strength. 
They  slight  His  love,  yet  He  perseveres  in  it.  How  many  years  you  have  been 
heaping  up  the  loads  of  transgression  !  Yet  here  you  are  still,  on  praying  ground 
and  pleading  terms  with  God.  Think,  also,  who  and  what  God  is,  who  displays 
this  longsuffering.  Think  of  His  goodness:  why  should  you  provoke  Him?  Think 
of  His  omniscience  :  every  transgression  is  committed  in  His  very  presence.  Think 
of  how  powerful  He  is  :  your  wicked  Leart  would  cease  to  beat  if  He  should  with- 
draw His  power.  Think  of  His  purity :  sin  is  much  more  intolerable  to  Him  than 
to  as.  II.  The  sin  of  which  thou  art  suspected.  Some  despise  God's  goodness, 
forbearance,  and  longsuffering,  because — 1.  They  never  even  gave  a  thought  to  it. 
God  has  given  you  life,  and  indulged  you  with  kindness  ;  yet  it  has  never  occurred 
to  yon  that  this  patience  is  worthy  of  the  smallest  tbanks.  You  have  been  of  no 
service  to  your  Maker,  nor  even  thought  of  being  of  service  to  Him.     Others  havOi 


122  THB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  a, 

perhaps,  thought  of  it,  bat  never  meditated  thereon.  2.  Because  they  imagine  Gk>d 
does  not  take  any  great  account  of  what  they  do.  So  long  as  they  avoid  gross  and 
open  sin,  they  think  it  of  light  consequence  not  to  love  God.  8.  They  think  the 
threatenings  of  God  will  never  be  fulfilled.  They  think,  becaase  the  blow  is  long 
delayed,  it  never  will  come.  III.  The  knowiiEdoe  or  which  thou  abt  foboetful. 
The  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance — 1.  By  giving  opportunity  to 
repent.  All  these  years  have  been  given  yoa,  that  you  might  turn  to  God :  yet  yon 
are  spared  only  to  multiply  your  transgressions.  2.  By  euggestions  to  repent. 
Life  and  death,  heaven  and  hell,  call  upon  yoa  so  to  do.  Every  page  of  the  Bible, 
every  sermon,  calls  yoa  to  repent.  Nature  is  full  of  voices  warning  yoa.  3.  By 
leading  to  repentance.  His  mercies  lead  yoa  If  they  fail,  He  turns  yoa  by 
admonition.  He  leads  you ;  hence  He  will  help  you,  and  will  accept  your  repent* 
anoe.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Ood's  goodneu : — The  principal  thoughts  of  these  words 
are  the  wonderful  things  which  meet  our  observation — the  wonderful  conduct  of 
God.  I.  The  womdebvol  conduct  of  God.  How  grand  is  the  expression  I  It  is 
not  merely  the  "  goodness,"  &c.,  but  the  "  riches  "  of  them  all.  1.  God  is  rich. 
We  lay  up  a  few  thousands,  or  purchase  a  few  acres  and  call  ourselves  rich  ;  bat 
God  is  the  owner  of  all.  Oar  world  is  but  a  speck  of  sand  in  His  possessions.  How 
stupendous,  then,  that  He  should  accept  the  halfpence  which  some  of  yoa  give  to 
His  cause !  Then  think  of  His  spiritual  wealth — the  souls  He  owns — how  macb 
more  astounding  this  than  His  material !  2.  We  are  here  directed  to  His  wealth  of 
goodness.  Here  is  an  ocean  unfathomable.  We  know  so  little  of  what  goodness 
reaUy  consists  in  that  we  can  only  stand  and  gaze  on  the  surface.  The  riches  of 
Divine  goodness  are  more  wonderful  than  those  of  Divine  possession.  S.  This 
goodness  is  manifested  in  "  longsuffering  and  forbearance."  God  need  not  be  long- 
suffering.  Why  not  end  the  long,  sad,  tale  of  rebellion  and  sin  ?  Why  not  crush 
the  blasphemous  atoms  ?  He  could  create  another  race.  Surely,  there  is  no  theme 
for  the  contemplation  of  angels  or  men  like  the  wonderful  conduct  of  God.  U. 
The  wondebfcl  conduct  of  hen.  These  words  contain — 1.  A  charge.  It  is 
unnatural  among  men  to  manifest  ingratitude  and  indifference  in  return  for  favour. 
To  injare  one  who  saves  our  life  is  inhuman.  But  men  think  little  of  the  treat- 
ment they  show  to  God.  Sin  is  weak  in  some  things,  and  man  is  powerless,  bat  in 
this  thing  they  both  have  strength.  They  can  do  what  angels  dare  not  do.  Man 
can  break  down  barriers  which  it  cost  the  life  of  the  Son  of  God  to  erect.  He  can 
withstand  the  love  of  God.  Oh  fatal  power  I  Some  have  attempted  to  dare  the 
power  of  God,  but  they  have  been  crushed  as  a  moth  before  the  advance  of  a  world. 
But  they  are  more  successful  in  resisting  His  love.  2.  An  appeal.  It  is  as  if  it 
said,  "  Can  you  despise  such  riches  ?  "  &c.  It  is  an  appeal  to  our  highest  attributes 
of  humanity.  It  is  an  appeal  to  our  gratitude.  Thanklessness  is  the  lowest  stage 
of  inhumanity.  It  is  an  appeal  to  oar  own  hearts.  How  should  we  like  such  a 
return  to  our  beneficence  f  Despised  !  Axe  we  not  thrilled  with  the  unnaturalness 
of  the  act?  We  despise  that  which  is  evil  and  contemptible;  but  the  apostle 
speaks  of  despising  that  which  is  good.  It  is  wonderful  that  God  acts  as  He  does ; 
it  is  far  more  wonderful  that  man  should  treat  that  action  with  contumely  and 
scorn.  What  madness  for  the  shipwrecked  sailor  to  despise  the  rope  thrown  to 
him !  What  folly  for  the  inhabitants  of  a  burning  house  to  scorn  the  fire-escape  I 
But  to  spurn  the  tenderness  of  God  is  incomprehensible  in  the  intensity  of  its 
madness.  UI.  The  wondebful  loss — "That  leadeth  thee  to  repentance."  He 
who  despises  the  riches  of  Divine  forbearance  despises  that  which  ought  to  lead  to 
bis  eternal  salvation.  Earthly  friendships  are  precious,  how  much  more  the  friend- 
ship of  God  I  Yet  this  is  despised,  and  so  lost,  and  with  it  happiness,  peace,  glory, 
eternal  life.  But  the  loss  consists  not  only  in  what  we  lose,  but  in  what  we  gain. 
It  is  easy  to  lose  by  a  gain.  A  man  had  a  splendid  coat  given  him  which  had  been 
worn  by  a  fever  patient.  He  gained  the  coat,  but  he  lost  his  life.  In  despising 
God  we  not  only  lose  heaven,  but  we  involve  ourselves  in  eternal  condemnation. 
(J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  God's  goodness  : — As  the  sun  sends  forth  a  benign  and 

gentle  influence  on  the  seed  of  plants,  that  it  may  invite  forth  the  active  and  plastio 
power  from  its  recess  and  secrecy,  that,  by  rising  iuto  the  tallness  and  dimensions 
of  a  tree,  it  may  still  receive  a  greater  and  more  refreshing  influence  from  its  foster- 
father,  the  prince  of  all  the  bodies  of  light ;  and,  in  aU  these  emanations,  the  sun 
itself  receives  no  advantage  but  the  honour  of  doing  benefits  :  so  doth  the  Almighty 
Father  of  all  the  creatures.  He  at  first  sends  forth  His  blessings  upon  us,  that  we, 
by  using  them  aright,  should  make  ourselves  capable  of  greater  ;  while  giving  glory 
to  Qod  and  doing  homage  to  II im  are  nothing  to  His  advantage  but  only  to  oon ; 


OBAP.  n.]  ROMANS.  123 

oar  duties  towards  Him  being  vapours  ascending  from  the  earth,  not  at  all  to  refresh 
the  regions  of  the  clouds,  but  to  return  back  in  a  fruitful  and  refreshing  shower  ; 
and  Ood  created  us,  not  that  we  can  increase  His  felicity,  but  that  He  might  have 
•  subject  receptive  of  felicity  from  Him.  {Bp.  Taylor.)  God's  riches: — A 
favourite  word  of  Paul's,  implying  abundance,  preciousness.  It  is  applied  to — 1. 
God's  wisdom  and  knowledge  (chap.  xi.  33).  2.  His  glory  (chap.  ix.  23).  3.  His 
grace  (Eph.  i.  7 ;  ii.  7).  4.  The  glory  of  His  inheritance  (Eph.  i.  18).  6.  The 
glory  of  this  mystery  (Col.  1. 27).  6.  The  full  assurance  of  understanding  (Col.  ii.  2). 
7.  The  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ  (Eph.  iii.  8).  8.  The  hberahty  of  the  poor 
(2  Cor.  viii.  2).  Here  the  riches — (1)  Of  goodness  is  goodness  overflowing,  multi- 
plied, long-continued.  (2)  Of  forbearance  is  patience  all  but  unwearied.  (3)  Of 
longsuffering  is  delay  in  punishing  beyond  all  expectation.  Corresponding  aggrava- 
tion of  the  sinner's  impenitence.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  God's  riches: — I.  In  what 
THBT  CONSIST.  1.  By  the  "goodness"  of  God  I  understand  those  providential 
mercies  which  surround  us,  and  ought  to  lead  us  to  acknowledge  Him,  and  those 
which  are  manifested  in  His  calling  sinners  "  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous 
light."  We  are  to  bear  in  mind  that  there  was  no  one  single  thing  in  man  which 
oould  attract  or  merit  God's  goodness,  but  that  all  sprang  from  God's  sovereign 
grace.  2.  The  "  forbearance  "  of  God  is  His  withholding  the  judgments  which  are 
due  to  His  enemies  (chap.  iii.  24,  <&c.).  3.  The  "  longsuffering"  of  God  is  mani- 
fested— (1)  By  the  plenteousness  of  redemption.  We  can  understand  that  plenteous- 
ness — (a)  By  looking  at  the  will  of  God.  He  does  not  desire  "  that  any  should 
perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance. "  (b)  By  the  infinite  price  that  has 
been  paid,  (c)  By  the  extent  to  which  that  redemption  reaches.  II.  Xhk  biqht 
USE  OF  THESE  BicHES.  1.  The  awakening  of  our  better  affections.  There  is  a  sorrow 
for  sin  which  "  worketh  death,"  and  a  sorrow  which  "  needs  not  to  be  repented  of." 
When  we  realise  the  greatness  of  God's  goodness  there  will  be  a  greatness  of  love 
toward  God — e.g.,  take  the  history  of  the  woman  spoken  of  in  Luke  vii.  When  we 
truly  understand  the  extent  of  sin  which  has  been  pardoned,  the  depths  of  misery 
from  which  we  have  been  extricated,  the  heights  of  glory  to  which  we  are  to  be 
admitted,  then,  and  not  till  theu,  will  our  hearts  burn  with  love  towards  God.  2. 
To  teach  us  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin — that  we  are  sinning  not  only  against 
One  whose  eyes  are  too  pure  "  to  look  upon  iniquity,"  but  against  One  who  is  good, 
and  to  lead  us  therefore  to  repentance.  lU.  Their  abuse.  How  common  is  it 
that  men  live  and  die  despising  the  riches  of  God's  lovet  Take  the  case  of 
temporal  mercies.  How  many  speak  of  their  good  fortune,  their  success,  never 
considering  that  these  things  came  from  God  1  And  if  we  turn  to  the  subject  of 
our  gracious  mercies,  how  many  are  there  who  presume  upon  the  continuance  of 
those  mercies,  and  determine  to  indulge  in  sin,  as  if  there  were  no  reckoning-time 
for  them  (Eccles.  viii.).  There  are  many  who  misrepresent  God's  forbearance  as 
though  He  were  overlooking  sin.  Many  are  there  who,  when  they  learn  the  exceed- 
ing riches  of  His  grace,  suppose  that  sin  can  therefore  be  of  no  consequence  (Jer. 
vii.  9,  10).  {Bp.  VilUers.)  The  riches  of  God's  goodness : — God  only  is  originally 
good.  All  created  goodness  is  a  rivulet  from  this  fountain,  but  Divine  goodness 
has  no  spring.  God  has  it  in  and  of  Himself.  All  the  goodness  that  is  in  His 
creatures  is  but  the  flowing  of  His  goodness  upon  them,  and  vast  as  is  the  number 
towards  whom  it  flows — angels,  glorified  spirits,  men,  <&o. — there  is  still  less  mani- 
fested than  is  left.  All  possible  creatures  are  not  capable  of  exhausting  its  riches. 
And  God  only  is  perfectly  good,  because  infinitely  good.  He  is  good  without  indi- 
gence, because  He  has  the  whole  nature  of  goodness,  not  only  some  beams  that 
nay  admit  of  increase  of  degree.  As  nothing  has  an  absolutely  perfect  being  but 
God,  so  nothing  has  an  absolutely  perfect  goodness  but  God ;  as  the  sun  has  a 
perfection  of  heat  in  it,  but  what  is  warmed  by  the  sun  is  imperfectly  hot,  and 
equals  not  the  sun  in  that  perfection  of  heat  wherewith  it  is  naturally  endued 
And  then  God  only  is  immutably  good.  Other  things  may  be  good  by  supernatural 
power,  but  not  in  their  own  nature ;  ».e.,  they  are  not  so  good  but  they  may  be  bad  ; 
God  is  80  good  that  He  cannot  be  bad.  (S.  Charnock,  B.D.)  The  exuberance  of 
God's  goodness : — There  is  not  so  much  sin  in  man  as  there  is  goodness  in  Goci. 
There  is  a  vaster  disproportion  between  sin  and  grace  than  between  a  spark  and  an 
ocean.  Who  would  doubt  whether  a  spark  could  be  quenched  in  an  ocean  ?  Thy 
thoughts  of  disobedience  towards  God  have  been  within  the  compass  of  time  ;  but 
His  goodness  hath  been  bubbling  up  towards  thee  from  all  eternity.  {N.  Culver- 
veil.)  The  riches  of  God's  goodness  : — Goodness  to  the  innocent,  or  goodness  to 
the  deserving,  merely  displays  this  attribute  in  a  state  of  simphcity  ;  but  the  good- 


IM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  i^ 

ness  which  remsiins  unequalled  and  unexhausted  after  it  has  been  sinned  against— 
the  goodness  which  persists  in  multiplying  upon  the  transgressor  the  chances  of 
his  recovery,  and  that  in  the  midst  of  affront  and  opposition — the  goodness  which, 
loth  to  inf  ict  the  retaliating  blow,  still  holds  out  a  little  longer  and  a  little  longer ; 
and,  with  all  the  means  in  its  power  of  avenging  the  insults  of  disobedience,  still 
ekes  out  the  season  for  its  return,  and  plies  it  with  all  the  encouragements  of  a 
free  pardon  and  an  offered  reconciliation.  This  is  the  exuberance  of  goodness, 
this  is  the  richness  of  forbearance  and  longsuCFering ;  and  it  is  the  very 
display  which  God  is  now  making  in  reference  to  our  world.  And  by  every 
year  which  rolls  over  our  heads — by  every  morning  in  which  we  find  that 
we  have  awoke  to  the  light  of  a  new  day,  instead  of  awaking  in  torment — by 
every  hour  and  every  minute  through  which  the  stroke  of  death  is  suspended,  and 
you  still  continue  a  breathing  man  in  the  land  of  gospel  calls  and  gospel  invita- 
tions— is  God  now  justifying  His  goodness  towards  you.  And  earnest  as  He  is 
for  your  return,  and  heedless  as  you  are  of  all  this  earnestness,  does  it  call  as 
time  moves  onwards  for  a  higher  and  a  higher  exertion  of  forbearance  on  the 
part  of  the  Divinity,  to  restrain  His  past  and  accumulating  wrath  from  being 
discharged  on  the  head  of  those  among  whom  though  God  entreats  yet  no  man  wiU 
turn,  and  though  He  stretch  out  His  hand  yet  no  man  regardeth.  {T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 
Despising  the  riches  of  Ood's  goodness  : — I.  What  abb  thb  biohes  of  God's  good- 
nebs  ?  &o.  The  greatness,  the  abundance  of  His  kindness  and  patience  towards 
sinful  men.  1.  To  understand  this  you  must  consider  the  greatness  of  the  provo- 
cation that  is  given  Him.  Look  around  you — look  within  you  I  Can  yon  help 
seeing  how  unspeakable  the  outrage  that  is  offered  to  Him  day  by  day  I  Think  of 
— (1)  The  amount  of  it.  There  is  not  a  moment  in  which  ten  thousand  times  tea 
thousand  lips  are  not  uttering  corrupt  communications ;  not  a  moment  in  which 
as  many  guilty  hearts  are  not  thinking  wicked  thoughts ;  not  a  moment  in  which 
as  many  hands  and  feet  are  not  hastening  to  acts  of  sin.  And  God's  all-seeing 
eye  perceives  at  every  instant,  and  in  every  quarter,  one  widespread  scene  of  sin 
and  vileuess.  (2)  The  heinousness  of  it.  It  is  the  Creator,  the  Preserver,  the 
Bedeemer  of  mankind  who  is  thus  sinned  against.  Nor  do  men  sin  through 
ignorance  of  His  requirements.  He  hath  written  His  law  in  the  consciences  of 
men ;  and  to  a  vast  multitude  He  hath  revealed  it  plainly  in  His  Scriptures.  Yet 
they  only  Usten  to  His  precepts  that  they  may  tread  them  under  foot.  They  know 
that  He  hath  sent  His  Son  into  the  world  to  die  for  them ;  and  yet  they  do  outrage 
to  His  very  mercies — neglecting  such  a  great  salvation.  2.  And  now  behold  "  the 
riches  of  God's  goodness,"  &o.  How  doth  He  act  ?  Doth  He  crush  every  sinner  f 
No ;  He  sits  patiently  seeing  and  bearing  all  the  outrage  that  is  done  to  Him  ;  yet 
holding  back  His  judgments,  and  giving  breath  to  all  these  sinners,  and  providing 
food  convenient  for  them.  True,  God  doth  in  some  cases  break  forth  and  vindicate 
the  injured  honour  of  His  name  by  sending  instant  death  on  the  transgressor. 
But  such  instances  are  comparatively  rare.  Where  is  the  sinner  who  hath  not 
cause  to  say  that  the  Lord  is  slow  to  punish.  3.  But  why  is  this  ?  (1)  Is  it 
because  He  looks  upon  sin  with  indifference  and  unconcern  ?  Is  it  excusable— is 
it  a  trifle  in  His  eyes  ?  No ;  sin  is  an  abomination  in  His  holy  eyes  beyond  what  we 
can  possibly  imagine.  (2)  Is  it,  then,  a  want  of  ability  to  punish  them?  Were 
God  only  to  pronounce  the  word,  how  instantly  would  death  be  at  our  side  I  Nay, 
were  He  only  to  take  from  you  His  preserving  hand,  where  would  yon  now  be  t 
(3)  Why,  then,  if  sin  be  so  "  exceedingly  sinful,"  why  does  He  prolong  the  life  of 
the  transgressor?  (2  Pet.  iii.  9;  Ezek.  xxxiii.).  U.  What  tbaub  or  mind  thbt 
ouoHT  TO  LEAD  OS  TO.  Who  Can  meditate  on  the  goodness  of  God  and  not  feel 
that  it  calls  him  to  repentance  ?  1.  It  does  so,  were  it  only  for  this  reason,  that  it 
gives  the  sinner  time  and  opportunity  to  turn  to  God.  2.  While  there  is  a  time 
tiiere  is  a  call.  So  long  as  God's  forbearance  gives  you  opportunity.  His  grace 
gives  you  invitation.  The  sinner  may  be  sure  that,  whilst  the  longsuffering  of 
God  waiteth,  he  is  welcome  to  a  Saviour,  and  cannot  seek  in  vain  (Job  xxxiii.  27, 
28).  3.  But  God's  longsuffering  makes,  on  another  ground,  a  strong  appeal  to 
guilty  man.  Suppose  it  were  a  fellow-creature  we  had  wronged,  and  he  should 
return  our  injuries  with  kindness  and  forbearance,  should  we  not  be  moved  and 
melted  by  it  ?  Then  how  much  more  ought  we  to  be  melted  down  by  the  for- 
bearance of  our  God !  As  often  as  you  have  sinned  against  Him,  so  often  hath 
He  pitied  you  and  spared  you.  How  different  His  dealings  towards  you  from  your 
dealJ^gs  towards  Him !  Ought  not  this  amazing  kindness  of  the  Lord  to  make 
jou  feel  the  vileness  of  your  sins  7    lU.  What  is  it  to  desfisx  thkh?    In  ordec 


OBAT.  n.]  ROMANS,  iU 

to  reply  there  is  only  need  to  describe  the  way  in  which  men  do  avail  themselves 
of  Qod's  forbearance.  1.  Multitudes  draw  courage  from  it  to  live  on  in  sin  (Eccles. 
▼iii.  11 ;  Psa.  vii.  21).  Let  not,  then,  a  man  venture  after  reading  the  text  to 
bolster  himself  up  in  sin  by  making  God's  longsuffering  his  pillow.  If  God 
prolong  a  wicked  man's  life  it  is  not  because  God  hath  a  liking  for  that  man,  or 
because  He  views  his  condact  with  indifference  ;  it  is  to  give  him  time  and  reason 
for  repentance  ;  but  if  the  man  be  not  led  unto  repentance  by  God's  goodness  to 
him,  that  goodness  will  only  aggravate  his  final  ruin  (Psa.  xcii.).  2.  They  also 
despise  it  who  consider  not  "  tbat  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  them  to  repent- 
ance.** Alas  I  how  vain  for  countless  multitudes  of  sinners  is  the  time  in  which 
God  waits  for  them  1  "The  three-score  years  and  ten  "  are  all  consumed  in  vanity, 
and  end  as  tbey  began.  {A.  Eoberts,  M.A.)  God's  goodness  despised: — I.  Thb 
OBJECT  OF  God's  goodness  is — 1.  To  exhioit  His  perfections  and  to  receive  His 
creatures'  praise.  2.  To  attach  this  to  Himself  in  gratitude  and  love.  3.  To  lead 
them  to  obedience  and  a  holy  life.  II.  God's  ooodness  is  despised.  1.  When 
not  duly  noticed.  2.  When  not  followed  by  grateful  acknowledgment.  3.  When 
the  end  aimed  at  in  it  is  disregarded.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  heinoxuness  of 
despising  God's  goodness  : — To  sin  againet  law  is  daring,  but  to  sin  against  love  is 
dastardly.  To  rebel  against  justice  is  inexcusable,  but  to  fight  against  mercy  is 
abominable.  He  who  can  sting  the  hand  which  nourishes  him  is  nothing  less 
than  a  viper.  When  a  dog  bites  its  own  master,  and  bites  him  when  he  is  feeding 
him  and  fondling  him,  no  one  will  wonder  if  bis  owner  becomes  bis  executioner. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  goodness,  dbc,  not  to  be  despised: — I.  The  goodness, 
roBBEABAMCS,  AMD  LONosDFFEBiMO  OF  GoD.  1.  As  God  is  good,  infinitely  good  in 
Himself,  so — (1)  His  goodness  was  the  cause  of  the  universe,  and  is  still  the  source 
of  {fll  His  dispensations.  It  is  true,  all  His  other  attributes  also  were  concerned  in 
creating,  and  are  still  concerned  in  governing  the  world  ;  but  it  seems  they  are  all 
but  modifications  of  His  goodness.  What  is  His  wisdom  but  goodness  planning 
and  directing?  His  power  but  goodness  executing?  His  justice  but  goodness 
governing,  &o.  (2)  And  if  His  goodness  gave  origin  to  the  universe  in  general,  so 
did  it  to  man  in  particular,  as  he  was  first  formed,  that  masterpiece  of  Divine 
workmanship.  Although  by  the  Fall  we  forfeited  every  blessing  our  Creator  had 
bestowed  upon  us,  His  goodness  continues  to  us  (Acts  xiv.  17).  (3)  His  goodness 
is  more  particularly  manifested  in  our  redemption,  in  which  especially  "  the  kind- 
ness and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  man  appeared"  (Tit.  iii.  4;  John  iii.  16; 
1  John  IV.  9).  The  unspeakable  extent  of  His  goodness  is  seen  in  the  dignity  of 
the  Person  given,  and  the  humiliation  and  sufferings  to  which  He  was  given 
(Pbil.  ii.  6-8)  ;  the  unworthiness  of  those  for  whom  He  undertook ;  the  great 
misery  from  which  we  are  rescued  ;  the  happiness  to  which  we  are,  or  may  be, 
advanced.  It  is  manifested  in  the  blessings  consequent  on  our  redemption ;  as  in 
the  information  afforded  by  the  gospel,  and  means  of  grace  (Luke  i.  78) ;  the 
influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  the  sincere  and  free  offer  of  salvation,  both  present 
and  eternal.  (4)  As  to  the  influence  this  goodness  of  God  ought  to  have  upon  us ; 
ought  it  not  to  humble  us,  as  a  much  less  display  of  goodness  did  one  of  old  t 
(Gen.  xxxii.  10)  to  fill  us  with  gratitude  and  love?  2.  His  forbearance — (1) 
Exercised  of  old  towards  the  heathen  world  (Acts  xiv.  15,  16  ;  xvii.  24-31).  What 
an  awful  picture  in  chap,  i.,  and  what  a  proof  of  God's  forbearance  that  He  should 
endure  those  depicted  I  Towards  the  Jews  (ver.  1,  17-24),  whose  perverse  and 
sinful  manners  He  suffered  for  ages.  (Acts  xiii.  18 ;  Isa.  i.  6).  Towards  sinners 
still;  those  wilfully  ignorant,  neglecting  the  means  of  instruction;  tbose  living  in 
open  or  secret  sin,  and  though  knowing  their  Master's  will  (Isa.  Ixv.  2 ;  i.  10), 
such  as  rest  contented  without  Christian  experience  and  practice,  such  as  leave 
their  first  love,  and  backslide  (Hos.  xi.  7-9  ;  Jer.  iii.  12) ;  unfruitful  and  slothful 
Christians,  compared  to  the  "  earth  drinking  in  the  rain  which  cometh  oft  upon 
it "  (Heb.  vi.  7,  8).  He  bears  with  them  year  after  year.  (2)  What  is  the  end  for 
which  He  bears  with  them  T  That  a  reformation  may  be  wrought,  and  a  change 
take  place  in  all  the  instances  mentioned.  If  there  be  no  alteration,  still  God  is — 
S.  Longsuffering,  ».«.,  slow  to  punish  (Numb.  xiv.  18 ;  Joel  ii.  12).  Many 
instances  of  this  are  noticed  in  Scripture,  as  towards  the  old  world  in  the  days  of 
Noah  (1  Pet.  iii.  20 ;  cf.  Gen.  vi.  3-7  ;  vii.  4).  Towards  the  world  now  (2  Pet.  iii. 
7-9).  Towards  particular  nations,  as  Egypt,  in  the  days  of  Pharaoh  (Gen.  xv.  13. 
14 ;  Bom.  ix.  22) ;  the  Canaanites  (Gen.  xv.  16) ;  the  Israelites  in  all  ages  (Isa.  v. 
1),  especially  in  the  time  of  Christ  (Matt.  iii.  7-10 ;  Luke  xiii.  6-9).  Towards 
particular  cities,  as  Sodom  (Gen.  xviii.  20) ;  Nineveh  (Jonah  i.  2 ;  iii.  10 ;  iv.  11) ; 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  a. 

Babylon,  Tyre.  Towards  Churches  that  have  left  their  first  love  (Bev.  ii.  1-6) ; 
that  are  lakewarm  (Bev.  iii.  15) ;  that  are  formal  and  dead  and  barren  (Bev.  iit  1). 
Towards  families,  as  that  of  Ahab  (1  Kings  xxi.  29) ;  the  hoase  of  Stuart,  in 
England,  and  of  Bourbon,  in  France.  Towards  individuals  innumerable  of  aU 
characters,  whom  God  is  slow  to  punish,  and  even  to  chastise  (Luke  xiii.  7).    H. 

How  THESE  ATTRIBUTES,  INCLUDED  UNDEB  THE  NAME   OT  THE   OOODNESS  OF  GoD,  LEAD, 

OB  BBoxjiJ)  LEAD,  MEM  TO  BEPENTANCE.  1.  Bcpentauce  is — (1)  After-thought  or 
reflection ;  the  looking  back  upon  our  former  ways,  and  considering  them  with  a 
just  conviction  of  our  guilt,  attended  with  humiliation,  sorrow,  and  hatred  of  aU 
our  sins.  (2)  A  change  of  mind  of  all  our  powers.  (3)  Evidenced  by  the  produc- 
tion of  the  proper  fruits.  2.  How  does  the  goodness  of  God  lead  men  to  repent- 
ance ?  His  longsuSering  leaves  room  for  it  (Bev.  ii.  21),  which  there  would  not 
be  if  punishment  followed  immediately  on  the  heels  of  transgression.  His  for- 
bearance, when  considered,  strongly  invites,  persuades,  and  must  move  an 
ingenuous  mind.  His  goodness  and  bounty  also  afford  every  needful  and  useful 
help,  as  the  mediation  and  intercession  of  Christ ;  the  ministry  of  the  Word ;  the 
chastisements  and  blessings  of  Providence ;  the  strivings  and  influences  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  III.  The  seasons  wht  the  ooodness  ov  God  does  not  fboducb 
THAT  EETEOT.  Thcse  are — 1.  Ignorance.  "  Not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of 
God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance.  Ignorance  of  their  fallen  state  and  exposure  to 
Divine  wrath ;  of  the  worth  and  necessity  of  holiness ;  of  the  true  character  of 
God,  that  He  is  as  holy  and  just  as  He  is  merciful  and  gracious ;  of  the  dignity  of 
the  Bedeemer,  and  of  His  great  love  and  sufferings :  of  the  end  of  man's  creation, 
preservation,  and  redemption ;  of  the  infinite  importance  of  this  short  span  of 
human  life,  and  how  much  depends  on  our  rightly  improving  it,  as  a  state  of  trial, 
for  eternity.  2.  Hardness,  or  callousness,  contracted  by  sinning  against  light,  and 
the  formation  of  evil  habits  (Eph.  iv.  18,  19).  8.  An  impenitent  heart,  i.e.,  an 
inconsiderate,  unreflecting,  and  therefore  unrelenting  heart.  {Joseph  Brown.) 
God^s  goodness :  its  abuse  and  its  design : — 1.  It  is  an  instance  of  Divine  condes- 
cension that  the  Lord  reasons  with  men,  and  asks  this  question,  and  others  like  it 
(Isa.  i.  5,  Iv.  2 ;  Jer.  iii.  4 ;  Ezek.  xxziii.  11).  2.  God  not  only  acts  kindly  to 
sinners,  but  when  they  misuse  His  kindness  He  labours  to  set  them  right  (Isa.  i. 
18 ;  Hos.  xi.  8).  3.  It  is  a  sad  thing  that  any  who  Lave  seen  God's  judgments  on 
others,  and  have  escaped  themselves,  should  draw  from  this  special  mercy  a  reason 
for  adding  sin  to  sin  (Jer.  iii.  8).  From  the  Lord's  earnest  question  let  us  learn 
wisdom.  I.  Let  vb  eonodb  the  Lobd's  goodness  and  fobbeabancb.  A  reverent 
sense  of  it  will  be  a  sure  safeguard  against  despising  it.  It  is  manifested  to  us — 1. 
In  a  threefold  form.  (1)  Goodness  which  has  borne  with  past  sin  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  38). 
(2)  Forbearance  which  bears  with  us  in  the  present  (Psa.  ciii.  10).  (3)  Longsuffer- 
ing  which,  in  the  future  as  in  the  past  and  the  present,  is  prepared  to  bear  with 
the  guilty  (Luke  xiii.  7-9).  2.  In  great  abundance — "  riches  of  His  goodness." 
(1)  Biches  of  mercies  bestowed,  temporal  and  spiritual  (Psa.  Ixviii.  19).  (2)  Biches 
of  kindness  seen  in  gracious  deliverance,  measured  by  evils  averted  which  might 
have  befallen  us,  such  as  sickness,  poverty,  insanity,  death,  and  hell  (Psa.  Ixxxvi. 
13).  (3)  Biches  of  grace  promised  and  provided  for  all  needs.  3.  In  its  excellence 
by  four  considerations.  (1)  The  person  who  shows  it.  It  is  "  the  goodness  of 
God"  who  is  omniscient  to  see  sin,  just  to  hate  it,  powerful  to  punish  it,  yet 
patient  towards  the  sinner  (Psa.  cxlv.  8).  (2)  The  being  who  receives  it.  It  is 
dealt  out  to  man,  a  guilty,  insignificant,  base,  provoking,  ungrateful  being  (Gen.  vi. 
6).  (3)  The  conduct  to  which  it  is  a  reply.  It  is  love's  response  to  sin.  Often 
God  forbears,  though  sins  are  many,  wanton,  aggravated,  daring,  repeated,  &o. 
(MaL  iii.  6).  (4)  The  boons  which  it  brings.  Life,  daily  bread,  health,  gospel. 
Holy  Spirit,  new  birth,  hope  of  heaven,  <fec.  (Psa.  Ixviii.  19).  4.  It  has  been  in  a 
measure  manifested  to  you.  "  Despisest  thou  ?  "  II.  Let  us  consideb  how  it 
MAT  BE  DESPISED.  1.  By  allowing  it  to  remain  unnoticed — ungratefully  passing  it 
over.  2.  By  claiming  it  as  our  due,  and  talking  as  if  God  were  bound  to  bear  with 
us.  8.  By  opposing  its  design,  and  refusing  to  repent  (Prov.  i.  24,  25).  4.  By 
perverting  it  into  a  reason  for  hardness  of  heart,  presumption,  infidelity,  and 
further  sin  (Zeph.  i.  12 ;  Ecclos.  viii.  11).  5.  By  urging  it  as  an  apology  for  pro- 
crastination (2  Pet.  iii.  3,  4).  III.  Let  us  feel  the  fokce  of  its  leadings.  The 
forbearance  of  God  should  lead  us  to  repentance.  For  we  should  argue  thus  -  1. 
He  is  not  hard  and  unloving,  or  He  would  not  have  spared  us.  2.  His  great 
patience  deserves  recognition  at  our  hands.  We  are  bound  to  respond  to  it  in  a 
generous  spirit.    3.  To  go  on  to  oSeud  would  be  cruel  to  Him,  and  disgraceful  to 


aur.  n.]  ROMANS.  1S7 

onrselvet.  Nothing  can  be  baser  than  to  make  forbearance  a  reason  for  provoca- 
tion. 4.  It  is  evident  from  His  forbearance  that  He  will  rejoice  to  accept  as  if  we 
'Will  torn  to  Him.  He  spares  that  He  may  save.  5.  He  has  dealt  with  each  one 
personally,  and  bj  this  means  He  is  able  to  pat  it,  as  in  the  text,  "  God  leadeth 
thee  to  repentance."  He  calls  as  individually  to  Himself.  Let  each  one  personally 
remember  his  own  experience  of  sparing  mercies.  6.  The  means  are  so  gentle,  let 
as  yield  to  them  cheerfully.  Those  who  might  refuse  to  be  driven  should  consent 
to  be  drawn.  Conclusion — 1.  Each  gift  of  goodness  draws  thee  to  Jesus  I  2.  For- 
bearance would  fain  weep  tbee  to  Jesus  I  8.  Longsuffering  waits  and  woos  thee  to 
Jesus  i  Wilt  thoa  not  turn  from  sin  and  return  unto  thy  God,  or  "  despisest  thoo 
the  riches  of  His  goodness  ?  "  (C  H,  Spurgeon.)  And  forbearance. — God'ifar- 
bearanee: — The  Boman  magistrates,  when  they  gave  sentence  of  scourging,  a 
bundle  of  rods  tied  hard  with  many  knots  was  laid  before  them.  The  reason  was 
this :  that  whilst  the  flagellifer  was  untying  the  knots,  which  he  was  to  do  in  a 
certain  order,  and  not  hastily,  the  magistrate  might  see  the  deportment  of  the 
delinquent,  whether  he  was  sorry  for  his  fault,  and  showed  hope  of  amendment, 
that  he  might  recall  his  sentence  or  mitigate  the  punishment ;  otherwise  he  was  to 
be  corrected  the  more  severely.  Thus  God  in  the  punishment  of  sinners,  how 
patient  is  He !  how  loath  to  strike  t  how  slow  to  anger  if  there  be  but  hopes  of 
recovery  I  How  many  knots  doth  He  untie  t  How  many  knots  doth  He  make  in 
His  way  to  jnstice  I  He  doth  not  try  us  by  martial  law,  but  pleads  the  case  with 
ns,  ••  Why  will  ye  die  ?  "  And  all  this  to  see  whether  the  poor  sinner  will  throw 
himself  down  at  His  feet,  make  his  peace  and  be  saved.  {T.  Fuller,  D.D.)  The 
patience  of  Qod : — I.  Its  naturs.  It  is  one  of  those  attributes  which  the  sins  of 
His  creatures  first  called  into  exercise.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  it  proceeds 
from  any  ignorance  in  God,  for  "  He  has  set  all  our  misdeeds  before  Him."  Nor 
is  it  the  fruit  of  indifference.  On  the  contrary,  it  implies  that  "  God  is  angry  with 
the  wicked  every  day."  Neither  must  we  ascribe  it  to  a  want  of  power  to  punish. 
We  sometimes  bear  with  provocations  because  we  are  unable  to  avenge  them  ;  but 
the  Omnipotent  has  at  all  times  the  means  of  vengeance.  II.  Its  sodbcb.  Solely 
God's  goodness.  These  attributes  are  mentioned  together,  and  the  one  must  be 
regarded  as  the  origin  of  the  other.  Goodness,  when  exercised  in  withholding 
vengeance  is  patience  ;  and  when  continued  under  repeated  provocations,  is  long- 
suffering.  There  is,  however,  a  distinction  to  be  made  between  the  goodness  and 
the  patience  of  God.  Man,  as  needy,  is  the  partaker  of  the  one,  whilst  man,  as 
guilty,  is  the  object  of  the  other.  Goodness  supplies  our  wants,  patience  bears  with 
oar  sins.  The  one  will  endure  for  ever,  and  is  inseparable  from  the  Divine  natare ; 
the  other  is  adapted  only  to  the  present  scene  of  things,  and  may  end  to-morrow. 
in.  Its  greatness,  or  its  "  riches."  Every  blessing  Christ  has  purchased  in 
abundance.  The  mercy  He  has  obtained  is  "  great "  and  "  tender,"  the  grace 
"manifold  and  exceeding,"  the  redemption  •' plenteous,"  the  joy  "  unspeakable," 
the  glory  *'  an  exceeding  great  and  eternal  weight."  In  regard  to  God's  patience 
consider — 1.  How  long  it  has  been  exercised.  2.  How  many  sins  every  man 
commits.  3.  How  aggravated  and  daring  many  of  our  provocations  have  been, 
4.  How  many  sinners  there  are.  IV.  Its  designed  effect.  *•  Eepentance."  The 
forbearance  of  the  Almighty — 1.  Gives  us  time  for  repentance.  2.  Shows  that  the 
penitent  may  obtain  forgiveness.  3.  Has  a  tendency  to  produce  repentance  in  our 
hearts.  Experience  proves  that  man's  stubborn  heart  is  much  less  likely  to  be  subdued 
by  the  contemplation  of  vengeance,  than  by  the  influence  of  mercy.  V.  The  danger 
OF  DESPISING  it.  We  BIB  Undoubtedly  guilty  of  this  sin — 1.  When  we  are  unmind- 
ful of  the  patience  which  bears  with  us,  when  we  either  think  nothing  at  all  about  it, 
or  think  of  it  lightly.  2.  When  we  draw  encouragement  from  it  to  continue  in  sin. 
And  lon^offertng. — God's  longsuffering  a  demonstration  of  His  almighty  ■poiver : — 
Longsuffering  is  the  greatest  exhibition  of  power  on  this  side  the  day  of  judg- 
ment. It  is  our  evidence  that  God  now  possesses  all  that  God  shall  then 
exercise.  1.  When  I  am  told  that  God  is  longsuffering,  and  no  limitations  are 
placed  on  th«  attribute,  you  bring  before  me  a  picture  as  overwhelming  in  outline  as 
stupendous  in  detail.  I  see  at  once  that  God  can  punish  sin.  Then  vice  may  seem 
to  carry  it  over  virtue,  and  I  may  search  in  vain  through  all  that  is  passing  over  a 
disordered  creation  for  tokens  that  a  moral  government  is  still  upheld ;  and  the 
Infidel  may  tauntingly  refer  to  the  triumph  of  evil,  and  infer  that  God  has  been 
compelled  to  abandon  one  world  at  least  to  the  dominion  of  His  foes ;  but  fastening 
on  the  longsui?ering  of  the  Creator,  I  am  proof  against  all  doulits  as  to  His  power. 
He  could  not  be  longsuffering  unless  He  could  punish ;  He  could  not  punish  unless 


12S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n. 

He  were  snpreme.  2.  To  each  of  as  He  has  been  longsaffering.  Each  of  oa  has 
provoked  His  wrath,  and  yet  upon  none  of  us  has  tbat  wrath  come  down  to  its  fary. 
So  that  if  the  great  demonstration  of  God's  power  be  His  longsuffering,  then  each 
of  OS  may  find  in  himself  that  demonstration  in  all  its  completeneRS.  And  thus  it 
may  be  possible  that  after  summoning  suns  and  seas  and  mountains  to  give  in 
their  tribute  to  His  night,  that  angels  may  be  looking  down  upon  myself  as  the 
crowning  proof ;  and  not  because  I  am  marvellous  as  the  compound  of  matter  and 
spirit,  of  mortal  and  immortal :  and  not  because  I  inherit  a  nature  that  has  been 
taken  into  union  with  the  Divine ;  but  because  I  have  sinned  and  yet  breathe ; 
because  I  have  defied  the  living  God  and  not  been  consumed ;  because  I  have  been 
long-offending  and  God  has  been  longsuffering — therefore  may  they  regard  me  as 
the  most  perfect  demonstration  that  the  power  of  their  Lord  is  great ;  and  assign 
me  because  spared  in  mine  offences,  a  place  amongst  the  witnesses  to  the 
almightiness  of  their  Maker,  which  they  give  not  to  the  marching  of  planets,  nor 
to  the  gorgeousness  of  light,  nor  to  their  own  beauty  as  ethereal  beings,  and  rapid 
and  masterful.  3.  We  have  all  heard  of  the  infidel  challenging  God  to  prove  Hia 
existence  by  smiting  him.  His  denier.  Now  you  can  hardly  picture  to  yourselves  a 
being  exercising  over  himself  so  perfect  a  command  that,  with  all  the  apparatus  of 
fiery  reply  at  his  disposal,  he  should  not  answer  the  challenge  by  levelling  him  who 
utters  it  to  the  ground.  Can  you  measure  to  me  the  effort  which  it  would  be  to  a 
creature  to  keep  the  thunder  silent,  and  to  chain  up  the  lightning?  Yet  the 
atheist  is  allowed  to  depart  unscathed ;  and  the  proof  of  God's  existence,  which 
would  have  seemed  pre-eminently  calculated  to  overspread  a  neighbourhood  with 
terrible  conviction  is  mysteriously  withheld.  But  the  believer  learns  God's  might 
a  hundredfold  more  from  the  unbroken  silence  of  the  firmament  than  he  would 
from  the  hoarse  tones  of  vengeance  rushing  down  to  the  destruction  of  the  rebeL 
The  atheist  overthrown — this  is  as  nothing  to  the  atheist  spared.  It  would  have 
been  as  nothing  that  God  should  have  launched  the  bolt — the  prodigy  whose  height 
I  cannot  scale,  whose  depth  I  cannot  fathom  is  that  God  should  have  withheld  the 
bolt.  I  should  have  learnt  God  powerful  over  the  elements  had  I  seen  the  blas- 
phemer a  blackened  corpse  at  my  feet:  I  learn  God  powerful  over  Himself  when  the 
questioner  of  His  deity  passes  on  uninjured.  4.  When  I  think  on  the  difference 
between  God's  creating  a  world  and  God's  pardoning  a  sin — the  one  done  without 
effort,  the  other  demanding  an  instrumentality  terribly  sublime;  the  one  effected 
by  a  word,  the  other  wrought  out  in  agony  and  blood  on  a  quaking  earth  and 
beneath  a  darkened  heaven— the  one  is  as  nothing  beside  the  other.  That 
God  can  pardon  is  at  the  very  summit  of  what  is  wonderful ;  and  therefore 
then,  0  Lord,  do  I  most  know  Thee  as  the  Omnipotent  when  I  behold  in 
Thee  the  longsuffering.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Not  knowing  that  the  good- 
ness of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance — Goodness  leading  to  repentance : — A 
distinguished  minister  on  a  journey  was  once  stopped  by  a  highwayman,  and 
called  on  to  deliver  his  purse,  with  the  weapon  of  death  presented  at  his  breast. 
"  Wait,"  said  the  man  of  God,  "  for  one  moment "  ;  and  instantly  fell  on  his  knees 
and  offered  a  fervent  prayer  for  the  unhappy  man  before  him.  The  murderer 
stood  silent,  and  listened.  When  the  holy  man  had  finished  his  supplication,  he 
said  to  him  for  whom  he  had  prayed  :  "  Do  you  not  wish  for  some  better  employ- 
ment than  this ;  some  other  means  of  a  Uvelihood  ?  "  The  answer  was  in  the 
affirmative.  "  Come,  then,"  said  the  minister,  to  such  a  place,  naming  his  own 
residence,  "  and  without  ever  divulging  this  act  of  yours  while  you  live,  such  a 
provision  shall  be  made  for  vou."  He  confided  in  the  assurance  of  one  so  intent  on 
his  welfare ;  became  a  member  of  his  own  family — an  humble  disciple  of  Christ : 
and,  after  a  life  of  exemplary  piety,  died  at  the  age  of  sixty,  when,  in  his  funeral 
sermon,  the  minister  related  these  facts.  {N.  W.  Taylor,  D.D.  God's  goodness 
leading  to  repentance : — Let  us — I.  Expound  the  text.  1.  ••Repentance"  denotes 
a  change  of  mind,  inclination,  and  habits.  2.  "  Leadeth  "  describes  the  method 
in  which  the  Lord  deals  with  rational  creatures.  There  is  a  sort  of  spurious 
repentance,  to  which  men  are  sometimes  driven.  Thus  Ahab  was  driven  by 
Divine  threatenings,  Pharaoh  by  supernatural  judgments,  Felix  by  the  dread  of  a 
future  reckoning,  and  Judas  by  the  terror  of  his  own  conscience ;  but  to  genuine 
repentance  a  man  is  led  ;  allured  by  the  discovery  of  hope,  and  the  attraction  of 
love.  3.  "Thee."  It  matters  not  so  much  what  others  are :  the  question  is.  What 
are  we  ?  The  charge  of  the  prophet  is  pointed :  "  No  man  repented  him  of  hia 
wickedness,  saying,  What  have  I  done  ?  "  4.  Observe  what  it  is  that  conducts  to 
this  result.    "The  goodness  of  God."    Not  that  this  is  always  the  case.    It 


CBAi.  n.]  ROMANS.  t» 

freqaently  emboldens  men  in  transgression,  and  hardens  them  in  impenitence. 
The  text,  however,  expresses  its  natural  and  proper  tendency.  U.  Illustbatb  thx 
8BMTIMENT  WHICH  IT  CONTAINS.  The  goodness  of  Qod — 1.  Gives  time  for  repentance* 
This  is  implied  in  the  "  forbearance  and  iongsuSering."  It  is  said  uf  one,  "  I  gave 
her  space  to  repent,  and  she  repented  not."  Here  was  the  perversion  of  Divine 
goodness.  Of  others  it  is  affirmed,  "  Because  seutence  against  an  evil  work  is  not 
executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do 
evil."  Here  is  depravity  in  its  most  hateful  form.  Let  us  "  account  that  the  long- 
suffering  of  our  Lord  is  salvation."  2.  Provides  the  means.  (1)  The  law,  by  which 
"  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  (2)  Affliction,  which,  while  it  gives  leisure  for  redectiun, 
disposes  to  the  duty.  (3)  The  gospel.  A  man  may  be  convinced  of  sin ;  but  his 
repentance  is  not  unto  salvation,  except  so  far  as  he  is  persuaded  of  mercy,  and 
discovers  *•  a  door  of  hope."  3.  Furnishes  motives.  Note — (1)  The  common 
mercies  you  enjoy.  Are  they  not  all  forfeited  by  sin  ?  And  yet  do  they  not  freely, 
richly,  and  constantly  descend  ?  (2)  Every  special  interposition  of  God  in  your 
favour.  From  how  many  dangers  and  sicknesses  has  He  delivered  yon?  (3) 
Trials.  Are  not  trials  wisely  appointed;  mitigated  by  abounding  comforts,  and 
mingled  with  innumerable  benefits  T  (4)  The  authority  which  enjoins  it.  "  God 
hath  commanded  all  men  everywhere  to  repent."  (5)  The  love  which  recommends 
it.  How  tender  the  expostulations,  how  precious  the  promises  of  the  gospel  on  this 
subject  I  "Return,  ye  backsliding  children."  "Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way," 
«&o.  (6)  The  grace  which  accepts  it.  For  repentance  is  accepted,  not  in  con- 
sideration  of  its  desert,  but  in  virtue  of  the  mediation  of  the  Saviour.  (7)  The 
examples  which  illustrate  it.  The  Prodigal,  Zaccheus,  Peter,  &g.  Conclusion : 
1.  Does  not  this  subject  remind  yon  of  the  hardness  of  the  human  heart  ?  The 
design  of  Divine  goodness  is  apparent ;  its  true  tendency  is  most  beneficial ;  but 
how  is  it  perverted  and  abused  !  2.  Forget  not  the  necessity  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
produce  this  change.  He  it  is  who  works  repentance  by  impressing  the  heart  with 
a  sense  of  Divine  goodness ;  and  of  the  evU  of  sin,  and  to  feel  the  attractions  of 
heavenly  love,  as  displayed  in  the  gospel.  {'/'.  Kidd.)  The  goodness  of  God  a 
persuasive  to  repentance : — 1.  There  is  much  in  the  verv  nature  of  Divine  goodness 
that  is  fitted  to  lead  men  to  repentance.  It  lays  them  and  all  intelligent  beings  in 
the  universe  under  everlasting  obligations  to  love  and  serve  God,  the  great  Author 
of  their  being  and  of  their  mercies.  It  shows  also,  in  a  very  affecting  lipht,  the 
exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  as  committed  against  the  greatest  and  best  of  beings. 
It  appeals  to  our  reason ;  and  the  verdict  is  that  to  sin  against  such  a  Being  as  God 
is  a  most  guilty  perversion  of  the  noble  faculties  with  which  He  has  endowed  us. 
It  appeals  to  our  sense  of  duty ;  and  the  verdict  is  that  no  obligation  is  so  strong 
as  that  which  binds  us  to  the  love  and  service  of  Jehovah.  It  appeals  to  our 
gratitude,  to  our  hopes  and  fears ;  and  the  verdict  is  thnt  no  good  can  be  secured 
BO  great  as  that  which  flows  from  repentance  toward  God,  and  no  evil  incurred  so 
tremendous  as  that  which  must  result  from  continued  impenitence.  There  is,  too, 
a  peculiarity  in  the  mode  in  which  Divine  goodness  flows  to  guilty  man  which  adds 
inexpressibly  to  its  tender,  persuasive  power.  It  is  not  goodness  flowing  to 
innocent  beings  through  the  unobst*«<ted  channels  of  benevolence  ;  but  goodness 
flowing  to  lost  sinners  through  the  mediation  and  suffering  of  the  Son  of  God. 
Here  is  goodness  such  as  was  never  mauifested  in  any  world  but  ours,  nor  towards 
any  other  beings  but  the  lost  children  of  men.  2.  The  goodness  of  God  is  suited 
to  lead  men  to  repentance,  as  it  secures  for  them  a  respite  from  punishment  and 
gives  a  space  for  repentance.  3.  The  goodness  of  God  leads  to  repentance,  as  it 
has  opened  a  way  in  which  repentance  is  available  to  secure  pardon  and  life  for 
even  the  chief  of  sinners.  4.  The  goodness  of  God  is  fitted  to  lead  to  repentance, 
as  it  furnishes  the  best  possible  means  of  repentance,  and  the  most  powerful 
motives  to  this  duty.  Consider  the  impressive  instruction  poured  around  you 
from  the  Word,  the  {irovidence,  and  the  works  of  God.  All  these  conspire  to 
impress  on  your  mind  the  same  lessons  of  eternal  wisdom  and  love.  Notice  next 
thn  invitations  of  Divine  gooduess  ;  they  must  avail  to  subdue  every  heart  that  is 
not  a  heart  of  stone.  Turn  next  to  the  promises  which  Divine  goodness  has  made 
to  those  that  repent — promises  of  pardon,  grace,  and  eternal  glory.  Such,  then, 
being  the  tendency  of  the  goodness  of  Go<<,  let  us  inquire  what  are  its  actual  effects. 
1.  All  who  truly  love  God  feel  the  constraining  power  of  His  goodness,  and  bv  it 
»re  made  penitent,  believing,  thankful,  and  obedient.  2.  There  is  another  class 
of  persons  whom  the  goodness  of  God  appears  to  leave  wholly  nr affected  an'l 
unmoved,  la  not  this  to  despise  the  riches  of  God's  goodness,  and  with  siniiUiat 
VOL.   I.  9 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohi».  n. 

rapidity  to  treasare  np  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath  ?  8.  There  is  another  olasa 
who  go  still  farther,  and  take  encouragement  from  the  goodness  of  God  to  sin 
against  TTim  with  an  increased  freedom  and  boldness.  This  is  eminently  to 
despise  the  riches  of  the  goodness  of  God,  and  forbearance,  and  longsn&er- 
ing.      (J.   Hawes,    D.D.)  The    Divine  goodness   a  motive    to   repentance : — 

There  is  no  need  to  insist  on  the  necessity  of  repentance;  for  nothing  woald 
appear  more  impious  than  for  any  one  to  say,  "I  need  no  repentance."  But 
there  is  a  consideration  of  very  grave  importance,  viz.,  that  all  men  will 
certainly  come  to  repentance.  In  this  view  it  is  a  very  solemn  thing  to 
look  at  the  thoughtless,  impious,  hardened,  self-righteous,  and  think,  "  You  will 
certainly  repent  1  your  repentance  may  be  in  vain — too  late,  but  it  ^nll  certainly 
come  1 "  But  we  would  speak  of  reasons  that  should  enforce  it  now ;  and  surely 
this  should  be  a  powerful  one.  If  ultimate  repentance  is  inevitable,  under  an 
irresistible  power,  how  desirable  it  should  not  be  left  to  be  caused  so ;  but  be 
effected  under  the  persuasive  influence  of  more  gracious  causes  I  And  of  these  the 
chief  "  is  the  goodness  of  God,"  manifested,  acknowledged,  and  felt.  Contemplate, 
then,  that  "  goodness."  I.  As  beheld  in  thb  same  view  with  the  deserts  or 
UAN.  1.  What  is  it  in  man  that  is  adequately  correspondent  to  that  goodness  f  Ii 
it  a  humble,  constant  sense  of  dependence  ?  an  affectionate  admiration  of  His  bene- 
ficence ?  a  mighty  attraction  towards  Him  ?  a  solicitude  to  be  conformed  to  Him  f 
an  aversion  to  all  that  He  disapproves  ?  2.  Look  at  any  of  the  particulars  of  His 
goodness — His  constant  provision.  His  watchful  protection.  His  compassionate  care 
of  weakness.  What  corresponds  to  these  ?  His  rays  of  instructive  wisdom  falling 
on  man — what  corresponds  ?  Love  of  truth  ?  anxiety  to  be  taught  f  His  shining 
forth  on  them,  a  sovereign  pattern  of  sanctity,  and  in  an  economy  of  redemption — 
what  does  this  very  thing  imply  that  there  is  in  man  to  answer  to  it  7    II.  In  thb 

SAME  VIEW  WITH  THE   MANIFESTATIONS  OF   God's  MIND  AGAINST  SIN.      HoW   many  they 

are,  how  decisive,  solemn,  just  I  And  yet  the  world  is  not  made  an  unmingled 
scene  of  vindictive  execution.  His  just  denunciations  are  sent  conjoined  with 
mercies  exceeding  the  number  of  the  expressions  that  He  is  offended,  as  if  He 
would  not  send  His  rebukes  or  threatenings  but  by  the  hands  of  friends.  "  It  is  of 
the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are  not  consumed."  III.  As  being  contemporaby  with 
EACH  SIN  IN  OUR  LONG  SUCCESSION  OF  OFFENCES.  Advert  to  any  sin  in  its  time,  there 
was  goodness  experiencing  then :  advert  to  the  next,  and  the  next ;  at  that  time 
there  was  still  "  the  goodness  of  God,"  and  in  various  ways  at  once.  IV.  Bt 
SUPPOSING  IT  WITHDRAWN.  Deprivation  is  sometimes  the  most  effectual  way  of 
verifying  what  and  how  much  a  thing  was.  So  God  might  cause  His  bounty  to 
recede  on  every  side  of  the  sphere  of  our  interests.  On  one  side  a  diminution  just 
enough  to  be  felt  at  first ;  but  speedily  more,  and  still  more  ;  the  same  operation  on 
another  side :  something  still  departing  day  after  day! — things  we  had  scarcely  thought 
of  as  mercies,  leaving  incurable  pain,  or  want,  behind ;  our  condition  becoming 
more  and  more  miserable,  till  we  sunk  in  a  death  without  consolation  or  hope  I  Or, 
instead  of  this  gradual  process,  a  sudden  general  deprivation.  V.  In  its  characteb 
OF  PATIENCE  AND  L0NG8UFFEBING.  All  His  lengthened  indulgence,  His  train  of 
favours — what  for?  What,  but  that  there  might  be  increasing  gratitude  and 
devotedness?  And  when  has  there  been  such  a  degree  of  these,  that  it  was 
anything  but  mere  goodness  in  God  to  continue  His  favours?  {J.  Foster.) 
The  goodness  of  God  an  indiicement  to  repentance  : — ^Adversity  has  its  place  in  the 
salutary  economy  of  probation,  but  God's  voice  may  be  discerned  in  prosperity  at 
least  as  much  as  in  adversity,  and  much  more  frequently.  The  latter  is  His 
common  way  of  addressing  us  ;  to  the  other  mode  He  only  resorts  when  for  soma 
reason  it  is  necessary  or  expedient.  I.  How  may  we  abuse  the  goodness  of  God  ? 
We  do  so — 1.  When  we  accept  His  gifts  but  ignore  Him.  How  common  a  thing  it 
is  for  men  to  enjoy  the  good  things  of  this  life,  without  thinking  for  one  moment 
that  they  come  from  God  !  How  many  of  us  take  our  portion  without  a  thought 
of  thankfulness,  as  though  it  came  from  that  ofiBce-keeper,  Nature,  instead  of  from 
our  Father's  hands  1  How  does  it  cut  us  to  the  heart  when  our  gifts  elicit  no 
grateful  recognition  !  And  where  is  there  a  man  that  would  go  on  from  year  to 
year  repeating  his  kindnesses  where  no  sort  of  notice  was  taken  of  him?  And 
what  do  men  gain  by  this  ?  nay,  what  do  they  not  lose  ?  Should  we  enjoy  His 
gifts  any  the  less  if  we  took  them  as  coming  from  the  Giver,  and  found  in  each 
an  occasion  for  fresh  manifestation  of  grateful  love  ?  Where  we  receive  the  gifta 
of  God,  but  disown  the  Giver,  the  gift  loses  the  most  precious  part  of  its  value.  It 
oeases  to  be  a  gift  at  all  to  our  higher  nature.     2.  When  we  accept  His  gifts,  and 


CHIP,  n.]  EOMANS.  181 

find  in  them  a  substitute  for  Himself,  and  bo  many  reasons  why  we  should  ignore 
Him.  He  gives  us  many  good  things,  that  we  think  we  can  dispense  with  Him, 
the  Giver ;  so  much  gratification,  that  we  have  no  need  to  seek  a  truer  and  deeper 
gratification  in  His  love.  But  when  His  gifts  thus  become  substitutes  for  Him- 
self, and  you  turn  away  from  Him  because  you  enjoy  them,  surely  you  are  making 
it  necessary  for  Him  to  take  them  away.  Bather  than  let  you  lose  all,  in  your 
folly  and  blindness  He  may  see  fit  to  take  away  some  of  the  many  good  things 
that  you  enjoy.  Why  not  hear  His  voice  in  all  that  He  gives  you,  and  let  the  good- 
ness of  God  lead  you  to  repentance  t  8.  By  counting  upon  the  continuance  of  His 
goodness,  in  order  that  we  may  go  on  sinning  against  Him.  This  is  the  very  worst 
abuse,  and  it  is  to  this  that  St.  Paul  here  specially  refers — the  abuse  of  God's  for- 
bearance,  who,  though  provoked,  in  the  magnanimity  of  His  nature  goes  on 
forbearing  to  smite  when  smaller  natures  must  inevitably  have  lost  patience  long 
since.  He  waits  because  He  loves  ;  and  yet  this  is  the  very  characteristic  that  men 
count  upon  in  order  to  sin  against  Him,  as  they  hope,  with  impunity.  Were  it 
clearly  understood  by  any  that  God's  longsufiering  would  reach  its  term  this  very 
night,  where  is  there  one  who  would  dare  to  defy  the  Majesty  of  heaven?  Surely 
there  cannot  be  any  meanness  so  repulsive.  Common  manhood  should  lead  us  to 
say,  "  I  can't  be  at  one  and  the  same  moment  the  pensioner  of  God's  bounty  and 
the  enemy  of  His  authority."  But  what  are  the  facts  of  the  case  ?  What  is  mora 
common  than  to  meet  with  utterly  godless  people,  who  have  the  fullest  intention 
of  turning  to  God  some  day  or  oUier,  most  probably  in  a  dying  hour  I  But  if  we 
can't  be  put  out  of  conceit  with  this,  by  considering  its  meanness  and  onmanliness, 
it  may  be  well  to  remember  that  God's  goodness  is  not  weakness,  that  even  His 
forbearance  must  have  its  term.  "  Because  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused,"  i&c. 
(Prov.  i.  24-28).  He  who  attempts  to  mock  God  finds  in  the  end  that  he  is  only 
mocked  himself.  It  is  not  that  you  evade  or  escape  the  penalty  of  your  base 
ingratitude  and  perfidy,  but  it  is  that  yon  treasure  it  up  (ver.  5).  Just  think  of  the 
possibility  of  laying  up  treasure  in  hell  I  II.  Its  use.  The  history  of  sin  dates 
from  the  first  suspicious  thought  of  God.  This  thought  Satan  delights  in  cherishing, 
until  those  who  yield  to  his  infiuence  get  to  think  of  God  as  if  He  were  a  pitiless 
tyrant,  ever  ready  to  diminish  our  happiness.  On  the  other  hand,  a  real  repentance 
begins  with  the  repudiation  of  all  such  false  views  of  God,  and  to  such  a  repentance 
the  goodness  of  God,  revealed  in  all  His  dealings  with  us,  is  intended  to  lead;  and 
surely  it  will  if  we  will  only  let  it  speak  to  our  heart.  How  can  God  be  stern  and 
nnsympathetic  when  He  gives  as  so  much  to  enjoy?  1.  If  He  provides  for  the 
gratification  of  every  sense  with  which  He  endows  us,  multiplying  the  fair  sights 
and  sweet  sounds  of  nature,  and  sometimes  stirring  all  our  being  with  the  vision  of 
the  beautiful  or  the  sublime,  how  can  He  be  the  enemy  of  our  happiness  ?  2.  Or, 
if  He  enriches  you  with  all  that  social  wealth  accumulated  through  the  ages,  so 
constituting  society  that  man  may  become  a  source  of  untold  gratification  to  hia 
fellow-man,  surely  His  goodness  in  all  this  must  needs  show  that  He  is  the  Friend 
and  not  the  enemy  of  human  happiness.  Is  it  not  to  Him  that  we  owe  music,  art, 
literature,  science,  and  philosophy  ?  and  how  much  of  enjoyment  do  all  these  add 
to  life  ?  3.  It  is  from  Him  that  we  derive  both  our  faculties  of  loving  and  all 
those  tender  relations  of  home  and  friendship  which  call  forth  our  love  and  which 
contribute  so  much  to  increase  the  joy  of  liie ;  surely,  then,  we  wrong  Him  when 
we  shrink  from  Him  as  though  He  were  the  enemy  of  our  happiness.  4.  But  is 
there  not  one  supreme  manifestation  of  His  goodness  which  should  move  as  more 
than  all  the  rest  and  bring  as  to  repentance  ?  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &c. 
He  let  His  own  Son  suffer  to  spare  yon  suffering !  Let  His  goodness  carry  the 
day  triumphantly.     (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)        God's  goodness  and  repentance: — 

1.  Thb  action  spechted — "  Repentance."  1.  Its  nature.  2.  Its  necessity.  Why 
is  it  necessary  ?  Not  because  it  earns  the  favour  of  God  or  claims  the  pity,  but 
because — (1)  It  shows  a  trae  desire  to  be  His  disciple.  (2)  It  manifests  a  breaking 
with  the  world  and  the  evil  that  is  therein.  (3)  It  brings  the  soul  into  harmony 
with  the  Divine  purposes  and  plan.  U.  Thb  uotitx  which  prompts — "  The  good- 
ness of  God."  1.  God  never  drives  when  He  can  lead.  The  grand  principle  of  all 
His  dealings  is  to  lead  His  people,  even  as  He  led  the  children  of  Israel,  by  a  cloud. 

2.  What  it  is  to  lead  us  to  repentance.  It  is  goodness,  and  the  point  of  this  good- 
ness is  that  it  is — (1)  Undeserved.    It  is  shown  to  rebels,  enemies,  and  persecutors. 

g)  Continuous.    Good    is   not   one  thing  to-day  and   another  to-morrow.    (3) 
nassuming.    God,  unlike  some  human  patrons,  does  not  make  a  mighty  show  of 
His  goodness  to  sinners;  He  treats  them  with  tenderness  and  genUeness.     IIL 


13S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n. 

Ths  conduct  enjoined.  The  apostle  indirectly  arges  upon  as  all  the  duty  of 
repentance.  Not  only  the  notoriously  evil  need  repentance.  The  most  humble 
Christian  is  constantly  transgressing.  And  every  act  of  benevolence  we  receive 
should  awaken  in  us  the  sense  of  our  deficiency  and  our  sorrow  therefor.  For 
repentance  is  not  a  slavish,  legal  act.  It  is  not  degrading  humiliation  or  desponding 
misery.  It  is  a  consciousness  indeed  of  self -failure,  but  an  expiession  of  loved 
affection  towards  our  heavenly  Father.  (J,  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  TJie  goodness  of 
God  designed  to  reclaim : — It  has  this  tendency — I.  As  rr  enfobces  the  comuand- 
MENTs  OE  God.  These  are  not  merely  the  commands  of  one  who  governs  by  virtue 
of  His  power  and  supremacy,  nor  merely  of  one  whom  it  is  our  interest  or 
obligation  to  obey;  they  are  the  commands  of  our  Benefactor.  The  God  who, 
having  made  us  of  nothing,  still  keeps  us ;  the  God  whose  care  and  presence  are 
ever  surrounding  as,  who  gives  us  friends,  health,  raiment,  food;  who  provides 
salvation  and  oSers  heaven — it  is  this  God  who  commands  us  to  repent.  Has  such 
a  Gud  no  claim  on  us  by  His  mercies  ?  II.  As  it  appeals  to  the  tkndebest  and 
STRONOEST  SENSIBILITIES  OF  oDB  NATUBE.  There  is  no  principle  of  human  nature, 
fallen  and  degraded  as  it  is,  that  is  more  obvious  than  that  which  leads  us  to 
requite  kindness  with  kindness.  Precisely  on  this  principle  does  God  assail  the 
hearts  of  sinners.  He  does  not  rely  merely  on  His  authority  ever  us,  nor  resoii 
merely  to  His  terrors  to  alarm  us.  He  who  searcheth  the  heart  well  knows  that, 
amid  all  its  darkness  and  corruptions,  there  is  yet  another  and  a  surer  spring  that 
can  be  touched.  God  reveals  Himself.  God  in  Christ  unfolds  Himself  in  the 
attractive  aspect  of  the  God  of  mercy  in  order  to  touch  sympathy,  gratitude,  and  the 
Becret  place  of  tenderness  and  tears.  III.  As  rr  discovees  to  ds  the  true  chabacteb 
or  God.  God  is  love,  and  all  the  expressions  of  His  kindness  to  us  are  only  a  mani- 
festation, bringing  that  character  before  as.  We  may  contemplate  and  admire 
moral  excellence  in  another,  who  may  never  have  been  called  to  show  kindness  to 
us.  But  let  as  become  the  objects  of  that  kindness,  and  we  find  a  new  and  stronger 
emotion  rising  in  our  hearts,  and  fixing  our  strongest  affection  on  Him.  And  if  we 
have  to  such  a  friend  been  unfaithful,  how  will  the  tears  of  repentance  flow  when 
we  come  again,  under  a  sense  of  his  kindness  1  It  is  thus  the  goodness  of  God 
leadeth  to  repentance — it  unvails  in  brightest  manifestation  the  perfection  of  His 
character,  directing  all  its  cares,  its  solicitude,  its  tenderness  to  us.  IV.  As  is 
SHOWN  by  its  expressions — 1.  In  their  number.  Would  we  count  them  ?  As  the 
sands  of  the  sea,  they  are  without  number.  And  for  what  are  they  bestowed  ?  Is 
it  that  we  deserve  them?  No.  Is  it  that  He  cannot  strip  ns  of  every  good  thing, 
and  leave  us  naked  before  the  stoim  of  His  wrath  ?  No  ;  it  is  that  He  may  prove 
to  us  how  able,  how  content  He  is  to  bless.  2.  In  their  nature.  Not  one,  nor  all 
of  them,  can  become  a  satisfying  portion,  but  they  are  exactly  fitted  to  the  great 
end  for  which  they  are  given — our  probation.  Every  blessing  comes  with  this 
inscription,  "Take  not  this  for  your  portion,  but  receive  it  with  thanksgiving,  and 
use  it  with  reference  to  your  eternal  well-being.  Take  all  these  gifts  as  the  pledge 
of  the  love  of  the  Creator  to  His  own  creature — the  proof  that  He  longs  for  thy  love 
in  return,  and  to  flow  forth  on  thee  in  a  pure  and  abundant  stream  of  good  for 
ever."  V.  As  is  demonstbated  by  facts.  What  illustrations  of  this  have  we 
while  the  Saviour  was  on  the  earth  1  In  how  many  hearts  did  He  plant  the 
dominion  of  His  love  by  acts  of  kindness !  And  wh;tt  multitudes,  from  Saul  of 
Tarsus  downwards,  hfive  been  actually  led  by  it  to  repentance i  {N.  W.  Taylor ^ 
D.D.)  God's  goodness  means  salvation: — The  full  force  of  the  text  cinnot  be 
made  to  appear  except  by  reading  tbe  catalogue  of  crimes  in  chap.  i.  The  apostle 
goes  on  to  say,  substantially,  that  it  made  no  difference  whether  these  things  wfire 
committed  by  the  Jew  or  the  Gentile.  Wrong  is  wrong  without  regard  to  nation- 
ality or  anything  else.  Wrong  is  the  violation  of  great  laws,  universal,  perpetual, 
which  defend  themselves  by  penalties.  If  a  man  drugs  himself,  the  drug  vindicates 
its  nature ;  if  a  man  is  selfish,  the  moral  law  carries  a  penalty  of  selfishness.  If  a 
man  is  good,  the  law  brings  forth  the  fruit  of  goodness  to  him.  The  only  question 
is  a  question  of  how  shall  a  man  be  restrained  from  the  violation  of  the  law  of  the 
moral  economy ;  how  shall  he  be  developed  so  that  he  shall  love  the  good  rather 
than  the  evil?  The  apostle  here  declares  that  the  presentation  of  the  goodness  of 
God  is  that  which  constitutionally  tends  to  restrain  men  from  evil,  and  to  develop 
in  them  all  goodness.  Goodness  is  the  working  force  of  God's  nature,  and  is  to  be 
made  the  working  force  of  all  government ;  but  if  God's  goodness  does  not  help 
men.  His  natural  law  goes  right  on  to  penalties  without  trial  or  sentence ;  the  laws 
execute  themselves  in  the  moral  kingdom.    From  this  general  exposition  oi  this 


CHAF.  n.]  ROMANS.  138 

passage  I  remark — I.  Oob'b  goodness  is  tbe  gband  pbesentation  or  Him  i-bou 
WHICH  THX  HOST  iNFLDSNCx  ANB  BENEFIT  IS  TO  BE  KXPEOXED.    It  has  been  a  curreot 
idea  that  God's  mercies  are  alternative,  but  that  His  justice  is  primary;    that 
fear  is  the  primary,  mercy  the  secondary,  instrument  by  which  men  are  to  work. 
But  this  is  in  flat  contradiction  of  the  whole  tenor  of  Scripture.    First,  middle,  and 
last,  the  Scripture  teaches  God's  goodness  as  first  to  be  preached,  and  if  that  does 
not  avail,  then  the  alternative  comes,  namely,  the  sure  penalty  of  transgression. 
For  example,  let  us  go  back  to  that  memorable  passage  where  Moses  was  about  to 
legislate.    He  wanted  to  know  (Exod.  xxxiii.  13-15)  what  view  of  God's  nature  he 
was  to  employ,  and  wished  to  be  filled  to  overflowing  with  that  view.     Then  God 
said  to  him,  "  I  will  make  all  My  goodness  pass  before  thee,"  &o.    Then  comes  the 
declaration  in  grand  dramatic  form,  as  recorded  in  Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7.    There  is  tbe 
staple  view  of  the  character  of  God.     But  if  men  will  not  see  that,  and  go  on  still 
in  their  transgressions,  let  them  understand  that  this  goodness  does  not  mean  the 
aboUtion  of  distinctions  between  right  and  wrong.    The  great  law  of  the  universe 
will  go  on  with  its  penalties,  yea,  by  heredity  for  generations  to  come.     The  guilty 
cannot  be  cleared  except  upon  their  repentance  and  reformation.     It  is  not  a 
goodness  that  will  clear  a  man  and  let  him  do  just  what  he  pleases,  treating  him 
as  ii  he  had  been  righteous  and  just.     And  bo  Paul  at  Lystra  (Acts  xiv.  17).    It 
was  the  goodness  of  God  that  had  to  be  preached  to  them  first.    And  our  text  is 
the  same  thing.    Coming  in  through  the  darkness  of  that  terrific  record  of  vices, 
Paul  says  that  it  was  the  goodness  of  God  that  should  have  led  men  to  repentance. 
This  is  the  doctrine  not  only  of  Scripture,  but  of  good  reason  or  philosophy ;  for — 
II.  Goodness  and  feab  touch  human  natdbe  on  ditfeeent  and  opposite  sides.    The 
double  being,  man,  the  animal  and  spiritual,  is  approached  on  the  upper  and  on 
the  under  side  of  his  nature.     Goodness  develops  what  is  of  its  own  nature,  touches 
the  spiritual  side  of  man.     The  presentation  of  goodness  to  the  affections  of  a 
man's  upper  life  helps  them.     When  you  present  beauty  to  a  man,  you  tend  to 
develop  the  same  quality  in  him.    But  the  animal  man  cannot  see  anything  in 
beauty.    Such  a  man  has  to  be  touched  and  intiuenced  by  fear.     You  cannot  teach 
duty  to  a  horse  or  an  ass,  and  so  you  put  a  bit  and  bridle  in  the  mouth,  and  spurs 
in  their  sides,  or  make  them  afraid.    The  training  of  wild  animals  goes  on  wholly 
on  the  principle  of  fear.     Therefore  fear  has  in  it  a  power  of  restraint,  but  not  of 
development.    All  the  conversions  of  men  that  have  been  the  result  of  fear  are 
hardly  worth  the  letters  that  spell  the  story.    Whenever  the  character  of  God  is 
preseuted  to  ns  as  goodness,  it  waters,  stimulates,  and   develops   that  side  of 
human  nature  which  is  most  like  God.    But  when  men  do  not  respond  to  that  bat 
range  in  their  lower  instincts,  then  you  have  got  to  bring  in  a  restraint,  and  that 
restraint  comes  from  fear  ;  but  it  is  secondary,  it  is  alternative.     Convicts  who  are 
in  insurrection,  are  rushing  out  for  their  Uberty,  rush  upon  serried  ranks  of 
bayonets.    "  One  step  further  and  you  are  dead  men,  every  one  of  you. "    They 
draw  back,  but  they  do  not  become  law-keepers  on  that  account.     They  are  simply 
restrained.     So,  in  the  great  moral  government  of  God,  men  may  be  restrained 
from  going  further  into  trangression,  but  no  man  is  converted  by  abject  fear.     If, 
therefore,  human  nature  is  to  be  developed  in  the  direction  of  spiritual  excellence, 
^ou  must  develop  it  by  the  presentation  of  those  excellencies  in  their  supreme  forma 
in  God.    No  view,  then,  of  God,  no  view  of  the  gospel,  no  view  of  the  atonement 
as  an  element  in  the  gospel,  is  a  right  one  which  does  not  present  the  hopeful 
side,    the    vrinning    and    the    cheerful    side.      God    loving    and   saving  is    the 
doctrine    of    the    Bible.      {H.    W.  Beecher.)  God's   goodness    in  relation  to 

man,  and  man's  relation  to  it: — I.  Divine  goodness,  in  its  belation  to  man, 
IS  teby  bxtbaobdinaby — 1.  In  its  plentitude.  "  The  riches  of  His  goodness." 
See  this — {1)  In  his  constitution.  The  extent  of  God's  goodness  to  a  being  may  be 
determined  oy  the  capacities  which  He  has  given  for  happiness,  and  the  provision 
He  has  made  to  supply  them.  How  great,  then,  His  goodness  in  the  constitution 
of  man  1  He  has  a  capacity  for  sensational,  intellectual,  social,  and  rehgiouB 
pleasure.  Beasts  have  a  capacity  for  sensational  pleasure,  but  not  for  intellectual ; 
angels  have  a  capacity  for  intellectual,  but  not  for  sensational ;  man  has  a  capacity 
for  both.  He  has  powers  to  draw  happiness  from  all  the  wells  of  enjoyment.  (2) 
In  His  redemption.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &o.  "  Herein  is  love,"  &c.  2.  In 
its  form.  It  is  "  longsuffering " — forbearance.  God's  goodness  to  brutes  or 
angels  is  not  "  longsuffering."  But  His  goodness  to  man  is  goodness  holding  back 
the  arm  of  indignant  justice.  3.  In  its  design — to  1(  ad  to  "  repentance  " ;  to 
reform  our  souls.    U.  Man's  conduct,  in  belation  to  Divine  goodness,  is  tbbt 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [OHAV.  a 

DBPBAYED.  This  is  Been — 1.  In  his  inconsideration.  "  Not  knowing."  Men  pay 
no  attention  to  the  moral  meaning  and  design  of  all  this  goodness.  2.  In  hiii 
insensibility  of  heart.  "  Thy  hardness  and  impenitent  heart."  Pharaoh  a  type. 
His  heart  grew  stony  under  the  rich  showers  of  Divine  goodness.  3.  In  his  self- 
destrnctiveness.  "  Treasurest  up  wrath."  He  is  transmuting  those  very  streama 
of  goodness  into  poison.  See  the  electric  cloud  on  the  summer's  sky.  It  was  as 
small  as  a  man's  hand  half  an  hour  since,  but  it  has  grown  wondrously.  What  ia 
it  doing  ?  "  Treasuring  up."  Every  fresh  particle  swells  and  blackens  it.  It  will 
burst  in  flame  and  Ihunder  soon.    That  cloud  is  an  emblem  of  the  sinner.    DI. 

The   DAT  OF  JUDGMENT  WILL   BB  VERT  AWFUL  IN   EELATION  TO  SUCH  CONDUCT.      Thera 

will  come  such  a  day.  There  is  historic,  moral,  and  Biblical  evidence  enough  to 
satisfy  US  of  this.  1.  This  judgment  will  be  a  righteous  judgment.  "  The  righteoua 
judgment  of  God."  2.  A  universal  judgment.  "  Who  will  render  to  every  man 
according  to  his  works."  How  will  the  abuser  of  Divine  goodness  stand  in  this 
judgment?  He  will  have  "tribulation  and  anguish."  (D.  Thonuu,  D.D.) 
Divine  love : — •'  God  is  love  " ;  consciously  to  know  this  is  life.  "  He  that  loveth 
is  bom  of  God."  "Not  knowing  "  it,  the  mind  "  despises  "  all  the  manifestationa 
of  God's  goodness  which  are  adapted  to  lead  to  repentance  unto  life.  In  what 
way,  then,  shall  we  get  an  influential  conviction  of  the  Divine  love  which  tends  to 
produce  repentance  ?  The  love  of  God  towards  us,  as  spiritual  beings,  is  manifested 
— I.  In  THE  OHABACTEB  AND  oFFicB  OF  CONSCIENCE.  Couscienoe  is  Dot  a  guide 
infallible.  It  is  empowered  only  by  faith  in  God,  and  it  is  true  only  by  belief  of 
the  truth.  This  fact  is  one  of  the  strongest  testimonies  for  the  necessity  of  revela- 
tion.   With  revelation  conscience  is — 1.  Moral  admonition.    When  any  sin  ia 


seen  in  conscience  as  clearly  as  the  design  of  the  maker  in  the  regulator  of  a  watch. 
The  regulator  was  placed  in  the  watch  to  govern  its  movements  and  keep  the  watch 
right.  So  was  conscience  in  the  soul.  God  in  conscience  shows  His  goodness  by 
placing  a  power  in  the  soul  to  deter  us  from  known  sin,  and  to  lead  us  to  repen- 
tance. Despise  not  His  goodness !  The  best  friend,  though  he  follow  the  smful 
ipany  years,  will  turn  back  if  his  counsel  be  persistently  rejected :  so  the  voice  of 
conscience  will  abate  in  the  soul  if  we  continue  to  resist  its  admonitions.  II.  In 
THE  OHABACTEB  AND  DESIGN  OF  DiviNE  REVELATION.  The  true  tcst  of  benevolenco 
is  its  design.  What,  then,  is  Revelation  designed  to  accomplish  for  man  ?  The 
greatest — 1.  Individual  good.  To  love  God  and  man  is  the  soul's  highest  good 
here  and  hereafter.  2.  Social  good.  Suppose  a  family  obeyed  the  laws  of  God — 
"  Husbands  love  your  wives  " ;  "  Wives  love  and  reverence  your  husbands " ; 
«•  Children  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord  " — who  will  doubt  but  that  such  a  family 
would  experience  the  greatest  good?  3.  Universal  good.  If  I  loved  others  aa 
myself,  I  should  rejoice  in  their  good  as  much  as  my  own ;  and  every  blessing 
bestowed  upon  them  would  be  bestowed  upon  me,  and  my  blessings  upon  them. 

m.    In    THE    MOTIVES    Hb    PBESENTS    to    INCLrME    US    TO    BEPENT    AND    OBBT.      The 

character  of  any  mind  is  known  by  the  character  of  the  motives  that  it  presents 
to  influence  other  minds.  Now,  in  the  New  Testament,  the  evil  of  sin  and 
its  final  curse  are  presented  to  our  fears  to  arrest  us  in  the  highway  to  hell. 
The  purity  and  glory  of  heaven  are  presented  to  our  hopes  to  induce  ua 
to  repentance  and  faith.  The  heart  is  appealed  to  by  infinite  love.  From 
the  Cross  the  suffering  Saviour  cries,  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  for  why  will  ya 
die  ? "  IV.  In  the  sacbifice  of  Christ.  A  revelation  of  law  does  not  lead 
us  to  love  the  law  that  we  have  transgressed;  but  a  revelation  of  love,  which 
offers  pardon,  leads  us  to  love  the  lawgiver,  and  thus  to  honour  and  obey  the  law. 
"  What  the  law  could  not  do,"  &o.  God  could  not  make  a  law  which  would  allow 
a  single  sin.  But  we  are  all  sinners,  and  in  our  evil  and  helpless  state  Christ  offera 
Himself  "  a  propitiation  for  the  sins  that  are  past,"  "  that  God  might  be  just  and 
the  justifier  of  him  that  believeth  on  Jesus."  "  In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of 
God  "  (1  John  iv.  9).  V.  To  lead  us  to  bepentance  by  the  mbbct  of  the  Holt 
Spirit's  opebation.  He  convicts  "  the  world  of  sin,  righteousness,  and  judgment," 
i.e..  He  shows  them  their  sin,  points  to  the  true  standard  of  righteousness,  and 
admonishes  them  of  judgment,  in  order  thus  to  lead  them  to  repentance.  Then, 
in  the  heart  of  Christians,  He  "  takes  of  the  things  of  Ciirist  and  shows  tbem  " 
(■John  ivi.  14) ;  and  as  the  Chiistian  sees,  he  repents,  worships,  and  rejoices.  In 
the  conviction  and  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  are  the  love  of  God  manifested  to  lead 


n.]  ROMANS.  lU 

men  to  repentance.  (J.  B,  Walker,  M.D.)  God's  goodnett  to  he  reverenced: — I 
remember  well  being  taken  one  day  to  see  a  gorgeous  palace  at  Venice,  where  every 
piece  of  famiture  was  made  with  most  exquisite  taste  and  of  the  richest  material, 
where  statnes  and  pictures  of  enormous  price  abounded  on  all  hands,  and  the  floor 
of  each  room  was  paved  with  mosaics  of  marvellous  art  and  extraordinary  value. 
As  I  was  shown  from  room  to  room,  and  allowed  to  roam  amid  the  treasures  by  its 
courteous  owner,  I  felt  a  considerable  timidity,  I  was  afraid  to  sit  anywhere,  nor 
did  I  hardly  dare  to  put  down  my  foot  or  rest  my  hand  to  lean.  Everything 
seemed  to  be  too  good  for  ordinary  mortals  like  myself  ;  bat  when  one  is  introdaced 
into  the  gorgeous  palace  of  infinite  goodness,  costlier  and  fairer  far,  one  gazes 
wonderingly  with  reverential  awe  at  the  matchless  vision.  "  How  excellent  is  Thy 
lovingkindness,  O  God  1 "  "I  am  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  all  Thy  benefits. 
Oh  I  the  depths  of  the  love  and  goodness  of  the  Lord."     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yet.  6.  But  after  thy  hardness. — Hardneit  of  heart : — I.  What  it  is.  1.  Not 
mere  callousness  or  insensibility  of  feeling.  2.  But  entire  obduracy  of  soul — not 
of  one  faculty,  but  of  all.  The  same  word  is  sometimes  translated  blindness  and 
sometimes  hardness.  There  are  two  words,  irupo^  a  stone,  and  irwptoate,  blindness 
or  hardness  (Mark  iii.  6  ;  Bom.  xi.  25).  This  hardness,  therefore — (1)  Is  blindness 
of  the  mind.  (2)  Is  fixedness  of  the  will  in  opposition  to  God  and  His  truth.  (3) 
Admits  of  degrees,  (a)  Disobedience  and  secret  opposition  to  truth,  {b)  Zealous 
opposition  and  hatred  of  it,  manifesting  itself  at  length  in  blasphemy  and  perse- 
cution. II.  This  habdkess  is  l  sikfxtl  state.  1.  From  its  very  nature.  2.  In 
its  higher  form  it  is  the  state  or  character  of  the  lost  and  of  Satan.  3.  It  is  self 
induced.  (1)  As  it  is  the  natural  effect  of  our  depravity.  (2)  As  it  is  the  natural 
consequence  of  the  indulgence  of  sin.  As  the  natural  consequence  of  the  cultivation 
of  virtue  is  virtue  ;  of  kindness  is  kindness,  and  so  the  natural  consequence  of  the 
indulgence  of  sin  is  sin — a  sinful  hardening  of  the  heart.  III.  It  is  moke  the  less 
A  DiviME  JUDGMENT  AMD  A  FBEuoMiTioN  OF  BEPBOBATioM.  Any  degree  of  it  is  reasoQ 
to  fesur  such  reprobation.  The  higher  forms  of  it  are  direct  evidence  of  it.  1.  God 
exerts  no  efficiency  in  hardening  the  heart  of  sinners,  as  He  does  in  working  grace. 
2.  But  it  is  the  punitive  withdrawing  of  the  Spirit ;  the  inevitable  result  of  which 
is  obduracy.  God  let  Pharaoh  alone  and  the  result  was  what  it  was.  8.  In  its  last 
stage  it  is  beyond  the  reach  of  argument,  motive,  discipline,  or  culture ;  and  beyond 
oar  own  power  to  cure  or  remove.  Conclusion :  1.  Dread  it.  2.  Withstand  it. 
8.  Pray  against  it.  4.  Avoid  it  by  not  grieving  and  quenching  the  Holy 
Spirit.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  Hardness  of  heart: — This  is  the  state  of  a  person 
insensible  alike  to  entreaties,  expostulations,  warnings,  admonitions,  and  chastise- 
ments (Jer.  T.  3).  Men  become  obdurate — 1.  By  separating  themselves  from  God, 
the  Source  of  all  life,  just  as  a  branch  dries  up  when  detached  from  the  tree,  or  as 
a  limb  withers  when  the  connection  between  it  and  the  heart  ceases.  2.  By  a  life 
of  pleasure  and  sin,  the  effects  of  which  may  be  compared  to  those  of  the  river 
north  of  Quito,  petrifying,  according  to  Eirwin's  account,  the  wood  and  leaves  cast 
into  its  waters ;  or  to  those  of  the  busy  feet  of  passers-by  causing  the  crowded 
thoroughfare  to  grow  hard.  {C.  Neil,  M.A.)  Hardening  the  heart : — On  a  winter 
evening,  when  the  frost  is  setting  in  with  growing  intensity,  and  when  the  sun  is 
now  far  past  the  meridian,  and  gradually  sinking  in  the  western  sky,  there  is  a 
double  reason  why  the  ground  grows  every  moment  harder  and  more  impenetrable 
to  the  plough.  On  the  one  hand,  the  frost  of  evening,  with  ever  increasing  intensity, 
is  indurating  the  stiffening  clods :  on  the  other  hand,  the  genial  rays  which  alone 
can  soften  them  are  every  moment  withdrawing  and  losing  their  enUvening  power. 
Take  heed  that  it  be  not  so  with  yon.  As  long  as  yon  are  unconverted,  you  are 
nnder  a  double  process  of  hardening.  The  frosts  of  an  eternal  night  are  settling 
down  upon  your  soula;  and  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  with  westering  wheel,  is 
hastening  to  set  upon  you  for  evermore.  If,  then,  the  plough  of  grace  cannot  force 
its  way  into  your  ice-bound  heart  to-day,  what  likelihood  is  there  that  it  will  enter  to- 
morrow? (Ji.  M.  McCheyne,  M.A.)  Conscience  deadened: — As  the  old  historian 
says  abont  the  Boman  armies  that  marched  through  a  country  burning  and  destroy- 
ing every  living  thing,  "  they  make  a  solitude,  and  call  it  peace,"  so  men  do  with 
their  consciences.  They  stifle  them, forcibly  silence  them,  somehow  or  other;  and 
then  when  there  is  a  dead  stillness  in  the  heart,  unbroken  by  no  voice  of  either 
approbation  or  blame,  but  doleful  like  the  unnatural  quiet  of  a  deserted  city,  then 
they  say  it  is  peace.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  And  impenitent  heart. — The  imperii' 
Unt  heart  is  one  which — 1.  Has  not  repented.  2.  Is  not  easily  brought  torepentanos. 


U6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  if 

8.  Is  disiDoIlned  and  onwilliiig  to  repent.     4.  Is  anable  to  repent.    (T.  Bobiruon, 
D.D.)        Impenitence: — I.  Its  natorb.     1.  We  shall  better  understand  this  if  we 
consider  what  is  the  natare  of  penitence,  which  is  a  clear  view  of  oar  nature  and 
eonduct  as  tried  by  the  pure  and  perfect  law  of  Ood.    Connected  with  this  there  is 
—(1)  A  consciousness  that  we  are  deservedly  under  the  wrath  of  God,  and  the  curse 
of  that  law  which  our  sins  have  violated.     (2)  Alarm  at  sin  and  its  consequences 
(3)  An  ingenuous  disposition  to  confess  sin  to  God,  without  extenuation  or  selt- 
««fence.     (4)  Grief  for  sin.     (5)  A  disposition  to  forsake  it.     (6)  And  there  will  be 
no  true  repentance  where  there  is  not  faith  in  Christ,  as  the  only  way  by  which  sin 
can  be  forgiven.    2.  Now,  impenitence  means,  of  course,  the  opposite  to  this.    The 
man  who  is  not  convinced  of  sin,  &c.,  is  impenitent,  hard-hearted  towards  God 
and  religion.     3.  Mark  the  guilt  of  this.    It  really  contains  in  itself  every  aggrava- 
tion that  sin  admits  of.    It  is — (1)  Bebellion  against  the  authority  of  God,  who 
eommands  men  everywhere  to  repent.     (2)  Great  insult  to  God :  for  in  proportion 
to  the  excellence  of  any  being  whom  we  may  offend  should  be  the  promptness  of 
our  mind  to  confess  the  offence  and  mourn  over  it.     (3)  Great  contempt  of  the  law 
of  God,  that,  after  we  have  trampled  it  under  foot,  we  should  have  no  grief  for  the 
injury  we  have  done  it.     (4)  Total  rejection  of  the  whole  scheme  of  mercy  in  the 
gospel.    II.  Its  conseqttbnces.     1.  The  time  when  the  punishment  will  be  inflicted. 
It  is  very  true  that  the  moment  we  die  we  enter  into  heaven  or  hell.    But  neither 
the  happiness  of  the  righteous  nor  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  will  be  complete 
till  the  judgment.    This  is  called — (1)  •'  The  day  of  wrath,"  and  it  will  be  to  the 
wicked  nothing  but  that.     (2)  A  day  of  revelation.    There  will  be  a  revelation — (a) 
Of  God,  in  the  wisdom  of  His  plans,  in  His  mercy  to  His  people,  in  His  justice  of 
the  punishment  of  the  wicked,     (b)  Of  Jesus  Christ.     No  more  shall  it  be  doubted 
that  He  is  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour,     (c)  Of  man.     Millions  of  saints  shall 
come  out  from  their  obscurity,  and  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their 
Father.     Millions  of  flaming  but  hypocritical  professors  shall  stand  at  that  day 
nnmasked.     (d)  Of   secrets — all  the  secrets  of  men's  history.     (3)  But  the  text 
speaks   of   it  as  the   revelation   of   righteous  judgment  that  shall  come  on  the 
wicked.     There  will  be  a  revelation — (a)  Of  jutlgment  itself.     The  punishment  oi 
the  wrath  of  God  is  now  revealed  only  partially ;  never,  impenitent  sinner,  till  the 
day  of  judgment  will  the  greatness  of  thy  iniquity  be  revealed.    (6)  Of  righteous 
judgment;  a  complete  manifestation  of  the  justice  of  God  in  the  puuisliment  of  the 
wicked.     There  shall  be  no  infidels  in  hell :  there  shall  none  go  from  the  judgment 
Beat  impeaching  the  justice  of  God.     (c)  Before  the  world.     So  that,  while  the 
righteous  sliall  be  honoured,  the  wicked  will  be  punished  before  the  universe.    2.  Its 
nature.     "  Thou  treasures!  up  wrath."    Whose  wrath  ?    If  it  were  the  wrath  of  an 
angel  there  would  be  something  tremendous  in  it.    But — (1)  It  is  the  wrath  of  God 
— something  more  terrible  than  the  imagination  can  compass  I     Solomon  tells  us 
that  "  the  wrath  of  a  king  is  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion."     But  what  is  the  wrath  of  a 
king  to  the  wrath  of  God?    But,  perhaps,  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  only  a  taste  of 
His  wrath.     The  Scripture  says  wrath  will  come  on  the  wicked  to  the  uttermost ;  it 
will  be  unmixed  wrath.     Now  God  blends  mercy  with  judgment :  then  mercy  will 
retire.     (2)  It  wiU  be  wrath  felt,  not  merely  threatened.     Now  it  is  threatened, 
and  the  wicked  sport  with  the  threat ;  but  then  it  will  be  felt.     (3)  It  will  be  ever- 
lasting wrath.    What  must  it  be  to  endure  the  unmitigated  wrath  of  God  for  a 
moment,  for  an  hour,  for  a  week,  for  a  year,  for  a  century,  for  a  thousand  years,  for 
a  million  of  ages  1     But  if,  at  that  distance,  there  should  be  one  gleam  of  hope 
appearing  through  the  vista  of  darkness,  hell  would  cease  to  be  hell ;  hope  would 
spring  up ;  and  the  very  idea  of  the  termination  of  torment  would  sustain  the  soul 
under  it.     But  oh,  eternal  wrath  1     To  be  obliged  to  cry  out.  How  long?  and  to 
receive  no  answer  but  "  For  ever !  "     And  after  millions   of  ages  have  passed, 
and  the  question  is  again  asked,  How   long?   still  to   receive  no  answer   but 
"  For  ever  1 "      (4)   This  wrath  is   said  to  be  wrath  to  come,  and  because  it 
is  to  come,  sinners  will   not    believe  it ;   because  it  is  to  come,  they   think   it 
never  will  come.     But  it  is  perpetually  drawing  near.      It  is  nearer  this  day 
than  it  was  last  Sabbath-day.     3.  The  proportion  of  the  punishment.     In  the. 
Hebrew  Scriptures  anything  that  is  accumulative  is  accounted  treasure.    Hence, 
we  read  of  the  treasures  of  wickedness.    The  expression  "  treasurest  up  wrath  " 
seems  to  be  put  in  opposition  to  "  the  riches  of  His  goodness."    What  an  idea ! 
Treasures  of  love  I   Heaps  of  wrath  I  And  you  will  observe  the  sinner  is  represented 
as  the  author  of  his  own  panishment.     The  idea  conveyed  is  this,  that  there  is  an 
ftooumalation  continually  going  on  as  long  as  he  sins.  And  then,  as  this  proportion 


n.]  BOMANS.  Uf^ 

will  be  according  to  the  sin  oommitted,  bo  it  will  be  according  to  the  mercies  abased 
and  neglected.  The  sins  of  the  poor  heathen  are  light  compared  with  ours,  and  the 
punishment  will  be  light  too.  {J.  Angell  Jamet.)  Treasurest  up  onto  thyself 
wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath. — Anuusing  wrath : — He  who  perseveres  in  sin  is 
not  only  continuing  in  a  dangerous  state,  but  treasuring  up  unto  himself  wrath.  As 
a  man  amasses  a  fortune  by  saving  up  certain  sums  from  year  to  year,  and  more 
and  more  as  he  goes  on,  so  this  man  goes  on  making  the  wrath  that  will  come  upon 
him  at  last  heavier  and  heavier,  by  adding  fresh  sins  day  after  day.  Qod  dues  not 
forget ;  He  is  ready  to  forgive,  so  entirely  and  freely  to  forgive  that  He  calls  it  for- 
getting, but  He  does  not  let  things  pass  by  forget! ulness,  and  therefore  our  deeds 
are  "treasured  up"  against  the  day  of  judgment,  and  He  will  then  render  to  ua 
according  to  them.  Prudence  would  always  lead  us  to  think  what  we  are  treasuring 
up  for  ourselves,  for  whatever  we  do,  we  may  be  sure  we  are  treasuring  up  some- 
thing. Our  daily  life  is  adding  by  little  and  Little  to  some  kind  of  stock  that  is  laid 
up  for  us.  In  this  world,  if  we  are  regular  and  temperate  in  our  living,  we  lay  up 
for  ourselves,  ordinarily,  health  and  length  of  life.  If,  on  the  contrary,  we  are 
irregular,  self-indulgent,  or  intemperate,  we  lay  up  for  ourselves  an  accumulating 
stock  of  weakness  and  disease,  and  a  debt  to  our  nature  which  we  may  have  to  pay 
by  the  cutting  off  of  many  days  from  our  time  here.  If  we  are  honest  and  indus- 
triooa,  we  lay  up  for  ourselves  a  treasure  of  good  character,  which  will  serve  us 
more  and  more  as  we  grow  older  ;  if  we  are  dishonest  and  idle,  we  lay  up  for  our- 
selves a  bad  character,  which  will  tell  more  and  more  against  us.  If  we  are  kind 
and  good-tempered,  we  lay  up  a  treasure  of  the  good-will  of  our  fellows  ;  if  we  are 
proud  and  quarrelsome,  we  lay  op  enmities  and  dislikes,  which  may  grow  even  to 
our  ruin,  and  which  may  any  day  show  themselves,  all  gathered  into  a  mass,  when 
we  should  most  wish  to  be  clear  of  them.  And  we  know  very  well  how  it  is  some- 
times when  any  person  goes  on  behaving  ill  towards  ourselves,  disregarding  our 
advice,  disobeying  our  orders,  reckoning  upon  our  not  choosing  to  punish  ;  we  go 
on  a  long  time,  it  may  be,  to  give  him  a  chance  of  doing  better,  but  at  last  he  heaps 
up  such  an  abundance  and  weight  of  misconduct,  that  we  can  bear  it  no  longer,  and 
we  dismiss  him  from  bis  employment  with  disgrace.  So  it  is  with  a  man  who  deals 
thus  lightly  with  God,  and  presumes  on  His  forbearance.  Ood  warns  him  again 
and  again,  but  yet  for  a  while  does  not  execute  judgment  upon  him.  But  at  last 
comes  the  day  of  reckoning,  and  it  is  found  that  he  has  been  all  along  heaping  up 
for  himself  an  evil  treasure,  a  treasure  of  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath.  The 
pleasures  that  are  gone  have  left  a  sting  behind  them,  the  unjust  gains,  that  seemed 
for  a  while  to  abide,  are  a  witness  against  the  covetous  (James  v.  2-4).  (C.  Marriott, 
B.D.)  Treasuring  up  wrath : — This  proves  that  sins  will  be  punished  according 
to  their  accumulation.  A  man  is  rich  according  to  his  treasures.  The  wicked  will 
be  punished  according  to  the  number  and  aggravation  of  their  sins.  There  are  two 
treasures,  which  Paul  opposes  to  each  other — that  of  goodness,  of  forbearance,  and 
longsaffering — and  that  of  wrath  ;  and  the  one  may  be  compared  to  the  other. 
The  one  provides  and  amasses  blessings  for  the  creature,  the  other  punishments  ; 
the  one  invites  to  heaven,  the  other  precipitates  to  hell ;  the  one  looks  on  sin  to 
pardon  it  on  repentance,  the  other  regards  obstinate  continuance  to  punish  it,  and 
avenge  favours  that  are  despised.  God  alone  prepares  the  first,  but  man  himself 
the  second.  (R.  Haldane.)  Accumulating  wrath  : — It  is  related  that  some  years 
ago,  in  a  mountainous  region  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  an  avalanche  of  snow — 
i.e.,  an  enormous  mass  of  snow — came  down  from  one  of  the  overhanging  rocks  in 
such  a  vast  body  as  entirely  to  dam  up  a  river  into  which  it  fell.  What  was  the 
effect  produced  ?  As  the  river  could  no  longer  flow,  it  went  on  forming  itself  into 
an  extensive  lake — threatening,  whenever  it  should  burst  through  its  snowy  barrier, 
to  carry  desolation  and  ruin  upon  men  and  villages  in  the  country  beneath.  The 
larger  the  quantity  of  water  suspended,  the  greater  would  be  its  violence  when  it 
obtained  its  liberty :  and  so  it  proved.  The  devastation  caused  was  said  to  be 
terrible  in  the  extreme.  It  is  thus  with  every  unconverted  sinner.  The  longer  he 
lives,  the  greater  is  the  amount  of  wrath  he  is  accumulating,  or  treasuring  up, 
igainst  his  day  of  destruction.  (C  Clayton,  M.A.)  And  revelation  of  the 
rlghteouB  judgment  of  God. — The  revelation  of  God's  righteous  judgments : — 1, 
Further  on  in  this  epistle  the  contrast  between  darkness  and  light  is  employed  to 
depict  the  differenoe  between  the  present  time  and  that  which  will  succeed  the 
second  coming  of  Christ  (chap.  xiii.  12).  We  may  have  been  compelled  to  tread  a 
dangerous  path  nnder  the  guidance  of  an  imperfect  light,  and  we  can  recall  the 
difficulty  of  distinguishing  between  substance  and  shadow,  the  bewildering  sense  ol 


188  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  k 

ineecnrity,  and  onr  thankfulness  when  the  day  enabled  ns  to  see  things  as  they 
really  were.    2.  The  imagery  then,  of  the  apostle  is  exceedingly  appropriate  to  our 
present  condition.    We  are  not  in  absolute  darkness,  for  we  have  the  Word  of  God, 
which  is  a  lamp  unto  our  feet,  and  a  light  unto  our  path.     The  road  of  safety  is 
indeed  sufiBciently  plain.    But  if  we  look  beyond  and  around  ns,  there  are  painful 
problems  which  we  cannot  solve,  and  huge  difiSculties  which  we  cannot  snrmoimU 
We  cannot  discern  as  yet  the  true  proportions  and  nature  of  things ;  but  when  the 
day  of  eternity  breaks,  then  the  blinding,  perplexing  shadows  will  disappear.    3. 
These  remarks  will  serve  to  introduce  our  topic.  God  is  greatly  misunderstood  even 
by  His  own  people.    Witness  the  cases  of  Job,  of  Jeremiah,  and  of  some  of  the 
Psalmists  (Psa.  Ixxiii.).    And  il  it  be  so  with  religious  people,  much  more  must  it 
be  true  of  the  ungodly.    But  a  day  is  coming  when  it  shall  be  seen  that  He  is  holy 
in  all  His  ways,  and  righteous  in  all  His  works.    I.  Consideb  bomb  or  the  vurwi' 
ctjLTiES  WHICH  PERPLEX  US.    1.  Thosc  which  concem  God's  dealings  with  ourselves. 
Not  nnfrequently  it  happens  that  trials  befall  a  Christian  which  he  cannot  Interpret, 
and  he  is  almost  tempted  to  think  that  God  is  not  the  wise  and  loving  Father  he 
has  been  led  to  suppose.    It  may  be,  too,  that  the  explanation  will  never  come  in 
this  world.     God  would  have  His  children  trust  Him  without  explanation.    And 
then  the  only  refuge  is  in  the  words  "  What  I  do,  thou  knowest  not  now ;  but  thoa 
shalt  know  hereafter."     2.  Those  connected  with  God's  sovereignty  and  man's 
responsibility.    (1)  If  there  be  one  thing  in  Scripture  more  plain  than  another,  it 
is  that  the  offer  of  salvation  is  made  to  every  man.    And  the  blame  of  rejection  i» 
distinctly  thrown  upon  the  sinner :  •'  Ye  will  not  come  unto  Me  that  ye  might  hav» 
life."    Now  all  this  points  to  the  responsibility  of  man.    He  might  come,  but  he 
refuses  to  come.    Here,  then,  is  one  side  of  the  truth.    On  the  other  side  we  are 
just  as  plainly  taught  that  no  man  cometh  unto  Christ  unless  the  Father  draw  him; 
that  repentance  and  faith  are  both  the  gift  of  God ;  and  that  Christians  can  take 
no  credit  to  themselves  for  the  position  in  which  they  are  placed,  but  that  they  are 
"  elect  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God,"  &o.    In  the  matter  of  salvation  H& 
acts  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  His  will.    "  Many  are  called,  but  few  are 
chosen."    "  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have  mercy."    Here,  then,  we  have 
another  side  of  the  truth — the  sovereignty  of  God.    (2)  Now  you  ask  me  to  make 
these  two  statements  consistent.    I  cannot  comply  with  your  demand.    What  I 
know  is  this,  that  I  am  bound  to  hold  both  truths  without  anxiety  about  conse- 
quences ;  and  that  there  is  a  witness  for  both  facts  in  the  hearts  of  men.    Never 
yet  was  a  Christian  found  who  would  not  admit  that  his  salvation  originated  with 
Ood ;  and  the  man  without  faith  in  Christ,  though  he  will  say  nothing,  his  con- 
science bears  witness  that  he  has  been  resisting  by  an  act  of  his  own  will  the 
gracious  influences  of  God's  Holy  Spirit ;  and  that  ii  he  should  perish  in  his  sins, 
he  will  have  no  one  to  blame  for  his  ruin  but  himself.    With  these  testimonies  we 
may  be  satisfied,  and  look  for  the  solution  of  the  difficulty  hereafter.  The  revelation 
that  is  coming  will  be  a  revelation  of  the  "  righteous  "  judgment  of  God.    (3)  With 
respect  to  this  particular  subject  we  may  represent  the  two  doctrines  as  two  massive 
pillars  standing  face  to  face  as  if  they  were  rivals.    There  they  stand ;  and  we  look 
up  at  them,  trying  to  trace  out  a  point  of  contact.  But  they  rise  beyond  our  vision, 
and  their  majestic  shafts  are  soon  lost  in  dark  mysterious  clouds,  and  the  eye  can 
follow  them  no  longer.  But  somewhere  beyond  the  clouds — somewhere  in  the  world 
of  light  above — we  believe  that  they  unite  in  some  grand  arch,  and  that  there  all 
appearance  of  antagonism  disappears ;  and  we  beUeve  also  that  that  meeting-point 
will  be  seen  at  the  manifestation  of  Jesus  Christ.    3.  Those  connected  with  the 
broad  subject  of  the  Divine  dealings  with  the  human  race.    (1)  There  is  one  in  the 
fact  that  so  many  centuries  have  elapsed  since  the  sacrifice  of  Calvary,  and  yet  so 
small  a  portion  of  the  human  race  have  heard  the  gospel.     (2)  There  is  another  in 
the  fact  that  those  who  die  in  their  sins  will  be  punished  eternally.    This  topic  is 
one  so  inexpressibly  painful  and  puzzling  that  we  do  not  much  wonder  at  the 
theories  which  evade  the  force  of  the  Scriptural  statements.    II.  With  bespect  to 
THESE  DiPFictJLTiES  CONSIDER — 1.  That  they  are  altogether  inseparable  from  our 
present  condition.    Much  as  we  should  like  to  have  everything  made  plain  to  us,  it 
cannot  be  so  ;  and  it  is  well,  too,  that  it  should  be  so.     We  are  in  the  night,  not  ia 
the  day ;  we  have  a  glimmer,  but  not  the  full  light :  the  full  light  comes  in  with 
the  appearing  of  Christ.    Moreover,  this  is  the  season  of  training.     If  everything 
were  intelligible,  where  would  be  the  exercise  of  faith  ?    2.  That  we  are  led  to  look 
forward  to  a  day  of  explanation.  A  day  of  revelation  is  coming,  which  will  be  a  day 
oi  revelation  of  the  righteousness  of  the  decisions  aud  of  the  appointments  of  Qod> 


n.]  ROMANS. 


Wait  for  that  day  patiently.  Its  bright  light  will  solve  all  problems,  and  scatter 
the  darkness  of  those  mysteries  which  now  perplex  and  distress  the  Christian  mind. 
m.  What  conclusions  bball  wx  draw  fboh  ocb  subject  7  1.  That  the  belief  of 
the  coming  of  a  day  of  explanation  will  operate  to  check  all  hasty  theorising,  all 
••  judging  before  the  time."  Men  yield  to  this  temptation  and  invent  systems  of 
doctrine  in  the  vain  hope  of  escaping  from  the  grand  inconsistency  of  Holy  Scrip- 
tare.  Like  men  in  old  times,  occupied  with  squaring  the  circle,  perpetual  motion, 
or  the  method  of  turning  everything  into  gold,  they  busy  themselves  with  an 
nnprofitable,  because  impossible,  task.  Yet  again,  men  in  their  impatience  to  solve 
the  problem  of  the  Divine  dealings  with  man  have  rejected  the  statements  of  Holy 
Writ.  These  theorists  are  bidden  wait  for  the  day  of  explanation  that  is  coming. 
Thus  there  is  in  this  view  of  the  text  a  remedy  for  our  natural  impatience.  2.  But 
more  than  this :  there  is  much  comfort  in  looking  forward  to  such  a  time.  A  loving 
child  may  have  most  perfect  confidence  in  his  father.  He  is  sure  that  what  that 
father  does  is  right  and  wise ;  yet  he  may  be  puzzled  with  the  captious  remarks  of 
his  father's  enemies.  So  he  looks  forward  to  the  day  of  explanation.  He  knows 
that  then  the  character  and  acts  of  his  parent  will  receive  a  most  triumphant  vindi- 
cation, and  that  the  mouths  of  all  detractors  will  be  silenced,  and  silenced  for  ever. 
Even  so  the  Christian  looks  forward  with  delight  to  the  second  appearing  of  the 
Lord — the  dav  of  the  revelation  of  the  righteousness  and  holiness  of  God.  3.  Yet 
in  all  perplexities  we  have  an  anfailing  remedy  available  now.  We  can  look  to  the 
Cross  of  Jesas  Christ.  Every  murmur  ought  to  be  stilled,  every  doubt  ought  to  be 
suppressed,  every  misgiving  silenced — when  we  stand  on  the  slope  of  Calvary.  (G. 
Calthrop,  M.A.) 

Ver.  6.  Who  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  dtQ^.— Well-doing 
rewarded : — Li  some  parts  of  the  Bible  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  is  set  forth 
as  the  recompense  of  good  works,  while  there  are  others  in  which  it  is  repre- 
sented as  the  free  gift  of  grace,  a  thing  that  faith  alone  can  receive.  Without 
faith  no  one  can  hope  to  see  heaven  ;  neither  can  any  one  see  it  without  good  works, 
or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  without  that  newness  of  heart  in  which  they  take  their 
rise.    They  are  not  related  to  heaven,  however,  in  the  same  manner.    I.  Eternai. 

MTE  CANNOT,  IN  ANY  STRICT  SENSE,  BE  SAID   TO   BE  THE   BEWAHD  OP  ANT  WELL-DOINO  OB 

MERIT  or  OUR  OWN.  For  who  is  there  that  can  look  for  anything  at  the  hands  of 
God,  or  even  hope  to  stand  in  peace  before  Him,  on  the  simple  ground  of  his  own 
character  ?  Even  the  best  parts  of  the  very  holiest  of  lives  in  this  world  cannot 
bear  His  rule  of  retribution.  It  is  only  of  infinite  grace  that  any  one,  even  when 
he  has  done  his  utmost,  can  enter  into  the  joy  of  the  Lord.  Eternal  lite  is  not 
wages,  it  is  the  gift  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  II.  While  the  work  of  oub 
Saviour  accounts  fob  the  gift  of  eternal  life  as  enjoyed  in  common  by  all  thb 

SAINTS,  it  leaves  UNEXPLAINED  THOSE  DIVERSITIES  BY  WHICH  THEIR  LIFE  IN  HEAVEN  IS 

CHARACTERISED.  The  ground  on  which  the  gift  of  life  is  given,  is  the  meritorious 
work  done  by  Christ  in  our  behalf — a  righteousness  that  is  made  ours  by  faith,  and 
that  comes  up  to  all  that  the  holy  law  of  God  can  require  of  us.  This  righteousness 
is  not  only  perfect  in  its  nature,  but  also  infinite  in  measure  ;  so  rich  in  merit  that 
it  can  extend  to  any  number  of  souls,  and  secure  for  us  any  degree,  however  high, 
in  the  joys  of  heaven.  Its  virtue  is  no  wise  dependent  on  the  strength  of  the  faith 
by  which  we  embrace  it,  but  is  entirely  inherent  in  itself,  as  the  work  of  One 
in  whom  the  Divine  and  the  human  are  alike  combined  in  all  their  fulness.  Hence, 
if  there  is  no  other  consideration  to  come  into  view,  the  honours  and  the  enjoy- 
ments of  heaven  must  be  the  same  to  all ;  there  can  be  no  degrees  of  blesseduess  ; 
one  saint  cannot  have  a  higher  place  in  glory  than  another.  But  does  this  agree 
with  what  we  are  taught  concerning  the  heavenly  world  ?  We  read  of  diversities 
of  gifts  in  the  early  Church,  all  proceeding  from  the  same  Spirit — some  more,  and 
some  less  honourable — some  more,  and  some  less  profitable :  diversities  of  some- 
what the  same  kind  prevail  at  this  day.  May  we  not  expect  that  these  distinctions 
in  the  Church  on  earth  will  give  rise  to  corresponding  distinctions  in  the  Church 
in  heaven,  and  that  the  various  degrees  of  blessedness  among  the  saints  in  light 
will  have  their  root  in  those  varieties  of  character  and  services  by  which  Christians 
are  distinguished  in  the  present  world  ?  1.  As  the  believer  is  accepted  in  Christ, 
80  all  that  is  good  in  him,  whether  in  heart  or  life,  is  accepted  also,  and  not  only 
accepted  but  rewarded.  An  illustration  may  be  used,  in  the  light  of  which  eternal 
life  as  a  free  gift  may  be  seen  to  be  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  idea  of  recoii;pcnse. 
Take  the  case  of  some  institution  in  this  world,  the  inmates  of  which  are  received 


IM  THB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  IL 

into  it  not  on  the  ground  of  anything  meritorioaB  in  themselves,  bat  simply  by 
virtae  of  the  free  gift  of  some  generous  benefactor  who  procures  the  right  of 
admission  for  them.  Side  by  side  with  this,  may  there  not  be  room  in  the  internal 
arrangements  of  such  an  institution  for  various  measures  of  benefit  and  various 
degrees  of  enjoyment,  arising  from  diversities  of  character  among  those  who  have 
found  a  home  in  it  ?  2.  Another  reason  why  heaven  will  be  richer  in  blessing  tc 
some  than  to  others  is,  that  many  of  the  works  in  which  they  engage  on  earth  are  of 
such  a  kind  that  their  results  wUl  meet  them  there,  and  thus  prove  a  source  of  joy 
to  them.  The  landscape  glowing  on  the  canvas  is  an  object  of  pleasant  interest  to 
every  one,  but  to  none  so  much  as  to  the  artist  whose  taste,  and  skill,  and  patient 
labour  have  produced  it.  When  a  tract  of  waste  and  barren  land  has  been  reclaimed 
and  brought  under  cultivation — when  golden  harvests  and  pleasant  homes  are  seen 
to  spread  over  a  whole  district  where  but  lately  there  was  nothing  to  meet  the  eyo 
but  crags  and  marshes — the  contemplation  of  a  scene  like  this  will  be  a  source  of 
peculiar  pleasure  to  the  man  to  whose  enterprise  the  change  is  due.  One  who 
spends  his  time  and  his  means  in  civilising  some  rude  and  degraded  tribe,  secures 
for  himself  a  pleasure  of  a  higher  kind.  But  of  a  still  higher  and  more  lasting 
nature  must  the  pleasure  be  that  is  enjoyed  by  the  man  who  is  instrumental,  under 
God,  in  reclaiming  lost  souls,  and  to  whom  it  is  given  to  behold  peace  and  holinesa 
where  there  was  nothing  but  disorder  and  sin.  For  what  is  the  utmost  that  a  mere 
earthly  civilisation  can  do  for  mankind,  in  comparison  with  those  blessings  to  which 
they  may  be  raised  through  the  gospel — blessings  imperishable  as  the  soul  and 
lasting  as  eternity  7  3.  A  further  reason  why  some  will  stand  higher  than  others 
in  the  joy  of  heaven,  is  to  be  found  in  the  larger  capacity  for  spiritual  enjoyment 
to  which  they  have  attained  in  their  course  on  earth.  The  new  man  of  the  heart 
Ib  capable  of  increase  in  knowledge,  and  power,  and  love,  and  holiness,  and  oon* 
sequently  in  the  capacity  for  happiness.  This  increase  depends  partly  on  the  use 
we  make  of  the  means  of  grace,  but  also  on  the  faithfulness  with  which  we  employ 
the  powers  we  already  have,  both  natural  and  spiritual,  in  doing  the  work  that  Ood 
has  given  us  to  do.  Exercise  is  one  of  the  indispensable  conditions  of  the  soul's 
growth :  there  must  be  a  "  patient  continuance  in  well-doing."  And  the  more  we 
abound  in  those  things  by  which  man  is  blessed  and  God  glorified,  the  more 
do  we  grow  in  sympathy  with  the  Divine  character,  the  purer  is  the  joy  we 
are  capable  of  receiving,  and  the  more  meet  do  we  become  for  the  employments 
and  the  pleasures  of  a  higher  world ;  so  that  on  this  principle  well-doing  has  a  part 
in  working  out  its  own  recompense.  (G.  Hutchison,  D.D.)  Divine  justice  is 
— I.  Essential — proved  a  priori  by — 1.  Revelation.  2.  Beason.  3.  Example.  II. 
Retbibutivb.  1.  To  the  good,  glory,  Ac.  (ver.  7).  2.  To  the  wicked,  wrath  (ver. 
8).  III.  luPABTiAL.  To  the  Jews,  <&o. ,  for  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God 
(vers.  9-12).  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  final  judgment : — I.  Its  cebtaintt,  "  will 
render."  II.  Its  univebsalitt,  "  to  every  man."  III.  Its  equity,  "  according  to 
their  deeds."  {Ibid.)  Justification  by  faith  and  works : — It  has  been  asked  how 
this  maxim  can  be  reconciled  with  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  There  is 
only  one  answer  to  this  question,  viz.,  that  justification  by  faith  alone  applies  to 
the  time  of  entrance  into  salvation  through  the  free  pardon  of  sin,  but  not  to  the 
time  of  judgment.  When  God  of  free  grace  receives  the  sinner  at  the  time  of  his 
conversion,  Ue  asks  nothing  of  him  except  faith;  but  from  that  moment  the 
believer  enters  on  a  wholly  new  responsibility ;  God  demands  from  him,  as  the 
recipient  of  grace,  the  fruits  of  grace.  This  is  obvious  from  the  parable  of  the 
talents.  The  Lord  commits  His  gifts  to  His  servants  freely ;  but  from  the  moment 
when  that  extraordinary  grace  has  been  shown,  He  expects  something  from  their 
labour.  Compare  also  the  parable  of  the  wicked  debtor,  where  the  pardoned 
sinner  who  refuses  to  forgive  his  brother  is  replaced  under  the  rule  of  justice,  and 
consequently  under  the  burden  of  debt.  The  reason  is  that  faith  is  not  the  dismal 
prerogative  of  being  able  to  sin  with  impunity  ;  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  the  means  of 
overcoming  sin  and  acting  holUy,  and  if  this  life-fruit  is  not  produced  it  is  dead, 
and  vrill  be  declared  vain  (Matt.  iii.  10 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10  ;  Gal  vi.  7).  {Prof.  Oodet.) 
Deeds  recompensed  according  to — I.  Their  quality.  II.  Their  fbequency.  HI. 
Their  oeobeb.  IV.  Their  circumstances.  V.  Their  ErPECTS.  {T.  Robinson.  D.D.) 
Deeds  are  seeds : — The  crop  may  extend  through  many  generations.  The  conse- 
quences of  our  deeds  may  end  only  with  the  world.  Men's  example,  instructions, 
institutions,  written  works.  Believers'  good  deeds  receive  a  righteous  reward  of 
grace  (Matt.  xxv.  34,  35  ;  Heb.  vi.  10) ;  their  evil  ones  though  pardoned  in  Christ 
are  visited  with  chastiseiaents  here.    {Ibid.) 


raujp.  n.]  ROMANS.  141 

Vera.  7-10.  To  them  who  hj  patient  contlnaance  In  well  doing  seek  for  glory 
and  honour  and  inunortallty,  eternal  life. — Contrasts : — I.  In  aim.  II.  In  coNnucT. 
in.  In  RESULT.  (./.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Well-doing  : — I.  The  bopbeme  duty  of  lifr. 
"Well-doing."  Man  only  lives  as  he  is  active,  and  he  only  lives  rightly  and 
happily  as  he  acts  well.  "  Well-doing  "  does  not  mean  the  "  well-doing  "  of  one 
faculty,  but  of  all  faculties,  not  in  one  sphere  of  life,  but  in  all  spheres  ;  it  means 
doing  everything  from  the  ripht  principle,  supreme  love  to  God.  II.  The  sdpkemb 
DUTY  OP  LITE  KEQOiRES  CONTINUANCE.  "  Patient  Continuance."  He  that  does  not  do 
well  always,  at  all  times,  in  all  circumstances,  does  not  do  well  at  alL  A  man  is 
either  under  the  sovereignty  of  the  right  principle  or  not.  If  not,  whatever  he 
does  is  wrong-doing ;  if  he  is,  whatever  he  does  is  right.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in 
his  hf  art  so  is  he."  Hold  on  to  the  principle,  be  ever  loyal  to  it.  III.  Continuance 
nj  THE  SUPREME  DUTY  CALLS  FOR  PATIENCE.  "Patient  continuanco  is  well-doing." 
Patience,  because  there  are  so  many  forces  that  obstruct,  so  many  circumstances 
that  try,  so  many  agencies  that  are  hostile.  "Kesist  the  devil,"  &c.  (D.  Thomat, 
D.D.)  Well-doing  : — "  Good  work,"  as  tlie  Greek  has  it — not  "  works,"  but  life- 
long work.  Consider  this — L  Negatively,  It  is  not — 1.  Well-knowing.  2.  Well- 
promising.  3.  Well-professing.  4.  Well-abstaining,  II.  Positively.  It  is  well-doing ; 
good.  1,  As  to  the  matter — prescribed  by  God  and  according  to  His  will  (Mioah  vi. 
8).  2.  As  to  the  motive — done  for  God's  glory  and  pleasure  (1  Cor.  x.  31 ;  Col.  iii. 
23).  8.  As  to  the  manner — carefully,  earnestly,  heartily  (2  Cor.  ix.  7 ;  Bom.  xii. 
11 ;  Col.  iii.  23).  4,  As  to  its  essential  element--love  (Matt.  xxii.  37-39  ;  Bom.  xiii. 
10).  5.  As  to  its  example— Christ  (1  Pet.  ii.  21-23).  HI.  Belationally.  Well- 
doing is  agreeable.  1.  To  the  nature  God  has  given  us.  2.  To  the  relation  in 
which  we  stand  to  God  and  our  fellow  men.  3  To  the  rule  God  has  given  us  in 
Scripture.  Conclusion :  1.  Well-doing  is  the  effect  of  grace  alone  (Bom.  iii,  12 ; 
Eph,  ii.  9).  2.  Man  is  renewed  in  Christ  for  this  purpose  (2  Cor.  v.  17  ;  Eph.  ii.  10). 
3.  Believers  are  required  to  abound  in  it  (Col  i.  10 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  18).  4.  Well-doing 
alone  will  be  rewarded.  "  Well  done  thou  good  and  faithful  servant."  {T.Robin- 
ton,  D.D.)  Patient  continuance  in  well  doing  : — As  the  sun  never  leaves  off  shin- 
ing, though  clouds  sometimes  obscure  its  light,  so  we  must  never  cease  to  do  well, 
even  to  our  enemies  and  persecutors.  The  reward  of  patient  effort : — If  we  look 
back  to  the  history  of  efforts  which  have  made  great  changes,  it  is  astonishing  how 
many  of  them  seemed  hopeless  to  those  who  looked  on  at  the  beginning.  Take, 
e.g.,  the  effort  after  the  unity  of  Italy.  Look  into  Mazzini's  account  of  his  first 
yearning,  when  he  was  a  boy,  after  a  restored  greatness  and  new  freedom  for  bia 
country,  and  of  his  first  efforts  as  a  young  man  to  rouse  the  same  feelings  in  other 
young  men,  and  get  them  to  work  towards  a  united  nationality.  Almost  everything 
seemed  against  him ;  his  countrymen  were  ignorant  or  indifferent,  governments 
hostile,  Europe  incredulous.  Of  course  the  scorners  often  seemed  wise.  Yet 
you  see  that  the  prophecy  lay  with  him.  (George  Eliot.)  Fersecerance  :  it* 
value  and  effects  : — It  is  only  by  slow  stages  that  we  can  rear  a  monument 
whose  proud  boast  it  shall  be  that  it  is  <zre  perennius.  The  constant  dropping 
of  water,  says  one  proverb,  hollo vfs  out  the  stone,  and  another  that  "  he  who 
goes  slowly  goes  long,  and  goes  far."  No  work  is  well  done  that  is  done  by 
fits  and  starts.  Steadfast  application  to  a  fixed  aim  is  the  law  of  a  well-spent 
life.  When  Giardini  was  asked  how  long  it  would  take  to  learn  the  violin,  he 
rei)lied.  Twelve  hours  a  day  for  twenty  years,  Alas  !  too  many  of  us  think  to  play  our 
fiddles  by  a  species  of  inspiration.  The  Leotards  and  Blondins — what  painful 
diligence  must  they  have  exhibited  I  The  same  adherence  to  a  settled  purpose 
might  assuredly  have  made  them  benefactors  of  mankind  had  they  been  animated  by 
a  noblor  impulse.  In  music,  take  the  examples  of  Malibran  and  Pasta  ;  in  painting, 
of  Titian  and  Baffalle ;  in  letters,  of  Lord  Lytton  and  Carlyle ;  in  science,  of 
Laplace  and  Faraday ;  and  you  will  find  that  the  great  results  which  have  sur- 
rounded their  names  with  imperishable  honour,  were  wi-ought  out  by  the  most  wonder- 
ful constancy  of  labour,  and  the  most  heroic  energy  of  patience.  Nothing  can  be  a 
greater  mistake  than  to  suppose  that  genius  dispenses  with  labour.  What  genius 
does  is;  to  inspire  the  soul  with  a  power  to  persevere  in  the  labour  that  is  needed ; 
but  the  greater  geniuses  in  every  art  invariably  labour  at  their  art  far  harder  than 
all  others,  because  their  genius  shows  them  the  value  of  such  patient  labour,  and 
aids  them  to  persist  in  it,  ( W.  H.  D.  Adams. )  Good  works  must  be  continuous  : — 
No  grace,  no,  not  the  most  sparkling  and  shining  grace,  can  bring  a  man  to  heaven 
of_  itself  without  perseverance  ;  not  faith  (which  is  the  champion  of  grace),  if  it  be 
faint  and  fail ;  nor  love  (which  is  the  nurse  of  grace),  ii  it  decline  and  wax  oold ; 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chip.  a. 

nor  hamility  (which  is  the  sdorner  and  beautifier  of  grace),  if  it  continue  not  to  the 
end ;  not  obedience,  not  repentance,  noi  patience,  no,  nor  any  other  grace,  except 
they  have  their  perfect  work.  It  is  not  enough  to  begin  well  except  we  end  welL 
Manasseh  and  Paul  began  ill,  but  ended  well ;  Judas  and  Demas  began  well,  but 
ended  ilL  (T.  Brooks.)  The  constancy  of  holiness : — Holiness  oonsiBts  not  in  the 
rushing  of  intense  resolve,  which,  like  Eishon,  sweeps  everything  before  it,  and 
then  subsides,  but  in  the  constant  flow  of  Siloah's  still  waters,  which  perpetually 
make  glad  the  city  of  our  God.  Holiness  is  no  blazing  comet,  amazing  nations 
with  a  transient  glory ;  it  is  a  fixed  star  that,  with  still,  calm  radiance,  shiuee  on 
through  the  darkness  of  a  corrupt  age.  Holiness  is  persevering  obedience ;  it  is 
not  holiness  at  all  if  it  be  occasional  zeal  and  sensational  piety.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  permanent  determination  to  realise  goodness : — The  notion  of  patient  continuance 
is  emphasised  here,  not  only  in  opposition  to  the  idea  of  intermittent  moral  efforts, 
but  to  indicate  that  there  are  great  moral  obstacles  to  be  met  on  this  patb,  and  that 
a  persistent  love  of  goodness  is  needed  to  surmount  them.  The  apostle  eays 
literally;  perseverance  in  "good  work."  In  verse  6  be  had  used  the  plural.  He 
now  comprehends  this  multiplicity  of  "  works  "  in  the  profound  principle  which 
constitutes  their  unity — the  permanent  determination  to  realise  goodness.  What 
supports  a  man  in  this  course  is  the  good  which  he  has  constantly  before  him  : 
"  glory,"  an  existence  without  defilement  or  weakness,  resplendent  throughout  vnth 
the  Divine  brightness  of  holiness  and  power:  "honour,"  the  approbation  of  God 
which  forms  the  eternal  honour  of  its  object:  "incorruptibility,"  the  absolute 
impossibility  of  any  wound,  interruption  or  end  to  this  state  of  being.  The  "  and  " 
between  the  last  two  substantives,  shows  a  certain  degree  of  emotion ;  the  accumu- 
lation of  terms  arises  from  the  same  cause.  In  all  human  conditions  there  are 
souls  who  contemplate  the  ideal  here  described,  and  which,  ravished  with  its  beauty, 
are  elevated  by  it  above  every  earthly  ambition  and  the  pursuit  of  sensual  gratifica- 
tions. These  are  the  men  who  are  represented  under  the  figure  of  the  merchant 
seeking  goodly  pearls.  For  such  is  the  pearl  of  great  price — "  life  eternal  I  "  This 
last  word,  laden,  as  it  were,  with  all  Divine  riches,  denotes  the  realisation  of  the 
ideal  just  described  ;  it  worthily  closes  this  magnificent  proposition.  (Prof.  Godet.) 
The  beatitude  of  patient  courage : — I.  The  ideai.  Christun  litb.  "  Patient  con- 
tinuance in  well-doing."  1.  The  feverish  ambition  which  must  see  its  name  in  the 
newspaper  and  be  congratulated  in  public  meetings,  is  in  great  danger  of  exhaust- 
ing its  reward  before  the  day  of  judgment  (Matt.  vi.  2-5).  Happier  far  is  he  who 
hears  with  glad  surprise  the  Master's  "  Well  done,"  and  finds  that  the  work  which 
was  unnoticed  on  earth  was  seen  and  remembered  in  heaven.  2.  Spasmodio 
effort,  brief  fervour  followed  by  long  languor,  wins  no  enduring  honour  either  in 
this  world  or  the  next.  Steady,  brave,  unremitted  work  is  that  which  pays  best, 
both  here  and  hereafter.  How  many  teachers  have  for  years  toiled  on  receiving 
scant  recognition  on  earth,  yet  day  by  day  preparing  for  that  time  when  their  pound 
shall  have  gained  ten  pounds  1  There  was  a  teacher  at  East  Grinstead  who  for 
fifty-seven  years  had  been  present  at  his  post  twice  every  Sunday  with  few  excep- 
tions. "  He  has  in  his  class  the  grandchildren  of  those  he  once  taught.  He  does 
not  remember  a  single  occasion  on  which  he  has  been  late."  It  would  be  hard  to 
find  a  more  apt  illustration  of  patient  continuance  in  well-doing.  8.  Patient  con- 
tinuance means  more  than  patience,  perseverance,  endurance.  It  is  heroic  patience, 
strong  both  to  bear  and  to  do,  which,  like  love,  •'  beareth  all  things,  believeth  all 
things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things  "  and  "  never  faileth."  There  sure 
many  short  cuts  to  success  in  Christian  work,  but  this  is  the  only  true  way.  Let 
us  seek  it  earnestly,  and  tread  it  consistently.  II.  The  bewabd.  1.  What  they 
seek  they  win.  Eternal  glory,  the  honour  that  cometh  from  God,  a  life  that  knows 
no  decay,  these  are  the  objects  of  Christian  ambition,  and  they  who  patiently  seek 
shall  find  them.  God  giveth  to  such  eternal  life — not  simply  unending  life,  but 
life  in  all  its  glorious  f uhiess.  This  is  the  end  of  patient  Christian  toil.  2.  There  is  a 
way  which  to  the  natural  man  seemeth  dull,  hard,  uninviting,  unhonourable,  "  but 
the  end  thereof  are  the  ways  of  "  life  (Prov.  xiv.  12).  The  loftiest  end  is  reached  by 
the  lowliest  path.  8.  Eternal  life,  with  aU  its  unutterable  joy  and  glory,  awaits  the 
faithful  Christian  worker  in  every  field.  It  is  not  well  to  dwell  exclusively  upon  the 
things  that  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him,  but  it  is  surely  well  ever  and 
anon  to  glance  upward  for  a  moment  to  that  crown  which  the  man  with  the  muck-rake 
neither  sought  nor  saw.  These  things  are  made  known  to  us,  not  that  we  may  become 
careless  or  boastful,  but  that  we  may  be  strengthened  and  heartened.  (A.  E.  Qregory.) 
High  l{fe : — I.  The  qbamdsub  or  the  aim — "  Seek  for  glory,  honour,  immortidity. 


OKiP.  a.]  ROMANS.  141 

What  great  words  these  1  Some  wish  to  take  them  oat  of  the  vocabnlary,  and  ont 
of  haman  life — they  deride  sach  ideas.  But  we  need  them,  and  cannot  get  on 
without  them.  We  go  into  the  fields,  and  there  grows  a  modest  simple  daisy.  But 
think  what  a  costly  flower  it  is  1  It  owes  its  shape  to  the  action  of  the  vast  terrible 
law  of  gravitation  working  through  all  the  realms  of  space;  to  refresh  it  the  ocean 
must  yield  its  virtue  ;  to  vivify  it  the  electrical  forces  must  sweep  through  the  planet ; 
to  colour  it  millions  of  vibrations  must  shoot  through  the  light  ether  ;  to  build  it 
up,  unfold  it,  perfect  it,  it  requires  an  orb  ninety-five  millions  of  miles  away,  five 
hundred  times  bigger  than  all  the  planets  put  together — a  million  and  a  half  times 
bigger  than  the  earth  itself.  "  Vain  little  daisy,  will  not  less  than  this  do  for  you," 
Bays  the  sceptical  critic.  No  ;  less  will  not  do.  So  man  may  seem  a  poor  creature 
in  infidel  eyes,  but  if  he  is  shut  out  from  large  ideas  and  hopes  he  loses  the  fulness 
of  life  and  happiness.  Take  these  words,  "  gloiy,  honour,  immortality,"  out  of  the 
vocabulary,  and  what  is  the  effect  on — 1.  Character  ?  It  is  all  very  well  to  attempt 
to  shut  men  up  to  beef  and  beer,  but  we  shall  never  get  large,  strong,  beautiful  life 
out  of  that.  It  is  certain  that  where  these  words  have  been  most  laid  to  heart,  the 
rarest,  purest  graces  have  bloomed.  Some  horticulturists  hold  that  roses  grow  best 
on  their  own  roots.  I  am  quite  sure  that  God's  roses  grow  best  so ;  and  whenever 
they  are  severed  from  their  own  roots,  grafted  into  some  wild  briar  of  the  wilder- 
ness, and  planted  on  secular  ground,  the  moss-rose  of  the  garden  becomes  the  dog- 
rose  of  the  hedge.  No  ;  you  only  get  noble,  tender,  pure,  beneficent  character  out 
of  a  lofty  faith  and  a  glorious  hope.  2.  Experience  ?  Will  the  spirit  of  man  be 
content  without  these  words  ?  No,  say  the  men  of  the  world,  but  they  can  find 
glory,  honour,  immortality  within  the  worldly  life.  Can  they  ?  "  Glory  "  means 
solidity,  reality,  durability ;  have  they  these  ?     Certainly  not.    According  to  their 

EhUoaophy,  man  is  a  soap-bubble,  aud,  pricked  by  death,  where  is  he?  •*  Honour," 
ave  they  that  ?  If  you  take  the  soul  out  of  man  he  is  but  one  of  the  beasts  which 
perish,  and  social  honours  are  his  golden  shoes,  his  jingling  bells.  Is  this  honour  ? 
*•  Immortality,"  have  they  that  ?  Yes,  fame.  Fame  1  a  death's-head  decked  with 
a  fading  wreath.  No,  they  have  not  these  things,  they  have  only  the  words. 
There  is  no  lofty,  luminous  character,  no  rich,  satisfying  experience,  except  as  wo 
recognise  our  share  in  the  Divine  and  the  eternal.  "  To  them  who  seek  glory, 
honour,  immortality,  eternal  life."  God  goes  beyond  our  utmost  ideas.  In  the  lips 
of  men  these  words  shrink  to  nothing,  but  God  fills  them  to  overflowing  with 
glorious  meaning.  Aim  at  the  highest.  When  a  great  ideal  slips  out  of  a  man's 
sotil  he  begins  to  rot ;  only  as  he  cherishes  grand  thoughts  does  he  find  rest  to  hia 
BOol,  and  come  to  the  stature  of  a  perfect  man.  II.  The  simplicity  of  thb  path- 
way. "  By  patient  continuance  in  well-doing."  There  is  something  quite  startling 
between  the  aim  and  the  condition.  "Well-doing."  Men  have  sought  "glory," 
<fec.  in  many  strange  paths,  but  the  true  plain  path  is  here — well-doing.  Not 
brilliant  doing  in  trade,  war,  scholarship,  but  well-doing.  Doing  the  work  of  life 
with  a  willing  mind,  a  loving  heart,  with  both  hands  earnestly — diligence  in  getting 
got)d,  being  good,  doing  good.  In  this  world  all  the  grand  prizes  go  to  a  few 
brilliant  people.  It  was  so  at  school.  The  brilliant  boys  carried  off  the  prizes. 
It  is  the  same  in  the  big  world,  which  likes  genius,  brilliance,  audacity.  But  what 
a  blessing  it  is  to  us,  thf  dim  million,  to  know  that  God  recognises  patient  merit, 
and  that  the  grandest  prizes  of  all  are  kept  not  for  the  brilliant,  but  for  the  faithful. 
God  recognises — 1.  The  greatness  of  simple  character.  We  are  apt  to  overlook 
great  character  in  hucuble  guise,  but  God  does  not.  We  look  at  the  outward 
appearance,  but  God  looks  on  the  heart.  I  do  not  want  anybody  to  tell  me  about 
the  man  who  spoke  prose  for  forty  years  without  knowing  it.  Scores  of  men  speak 
poetry  for  forty  years  without  knowing  it,  nay,  act  splendid  poetry  without  knowing 
it,  and  God  shall  surprise  them  with  a  splei)did  reward.  "  Then  shall  the  righteous 
answer  Him,  saying.  Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee  an  hungered,"  &o.  Thousands  of 
lowly  men  think  but  little  of  themselves  and  their  doings,  but  God  knows  their 
measure  and  shall  surprise  them  with  glory,  honour,  immortality  beyond  their 
most  glowing  dream.  2.  The  greatness  of  simple  duty.  The  cynic  loves  to  show 
how  mean  splendid  things  are  when  critically  examined.  Such  substances  as  clay 
and  flint  form  the  basis  of  nearly  all  the  precious  stones.  But  so  far  from  showing 
the  meanness  of  magnificence,  he  shows  the  magnificence  of  meanness.  So 
men  of  a  certain  temper  love  to  show  how  all  the  business  of  life  is  vulgar  and 
insignificant ;  but  if  our  daily  tasks  are  viewed  in  regard  to  the  will  of  God,  the 
fashioning  of  our  character  and  destiny,  they  are  solemn  and  momentous.  Angela 
and  shopkeepers,  archangels  and  mauulacturers,  bekug   to   the  same  oalestial 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cm*,  n. 

hierarchy  as  they  stand  before  God's  face  and  do  His  bidding.  "  There  is  no 
difference,  for  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons."  3.  The  greatness  of  simple  suffer- 
ing.  One  of  our  writers  said  the  world  jast  now  wants  heroes.  It  altogether 
depends  what  kind  of  heroes  they  are.  Some  of  these  make  a  great  stir  for  small . 
advantage.  The  most  illustrious  of  heroes  are  often  those  of  "  obscure  life." 
AU  around  ns  simple  people  bear  uncomplainingly  the  most  bitter  suffering ;  nobly 
resist  the  most  terrible  temptation ;  sustain  with  silence  the  heaviest  burdens. 
Gordon  flashed  a  splendid  figure  on  the  imagination  of  the  world,  but  there  are 
many  Gordons  unknown  to  fame,  but  who  are  known  to  God,  and  shall  not  losa 
their  appropriate  reward.  Conclusion  :  Let  us  be  content  with  our  place  and  work 
however  coarse  and  common.  If  we  cannot  be  flowers  of  the  garden,  of  the 
aristocracy  of  flowers,  let  us  be  flowers  of  the  grass,  very  beautiful  in  the  eyes  of 
Him  who  makes  the  grass  to  grow  upon  the  mountains.  It  is  not  in  brilliance 
that  we  shall  be  saved,  but  by  pegging  away  in  simple,  honest  work.  But  let  us 
feed  our  soul  with  high  beliefs  and  hopes.  Let  ns  talk  to  ourselves  all  the  day  long 
about  glory,  honour,  immortality,  eternal  life  ;  so  shall  our  path  of  life,  however 
lowly,  be  a  royal  pathway,  brighter  and  brighter,  to  a  perfect  day  1  {W.L.  Watkinton.) 
The  Christian's  great  aim : — I.  Thb  object  of  the  Ghbistian's  pursuit.  A  triple 
crown — a  crown  of  ••  glory  and  honour  and  immortality."  But  does  not  this  reduce 
their  virtue  to  a  thing  of  hollow  utility  ?  No ;  as  will  appear  if  we  consider  their 
motive,  which  is  that  they  may  cast  their  crowns  at  Jesus'  feet.  They  seek — 1.  A 
glorious  position — "glory,"  "  majesty."  The  inhabitants  of  heaven  are  all  glorioufl 
within,  and  all  glorious  without.  2.  The  highest  praise,  "  honour."  Courtiers  have 
spent  years  to  insinuate  themselves  into  the  favour  of  their  king ;  while  vast 
numbers  have  not  spent  an  hour  in  seeking  the  smile  of  God.  And  yet  to  have  the 
approbation  of  the  highest  potentate  of  earth,  is  nothing  compared  with  the  appro- 
bation of  the  King  of  Glory.  3.  To  hold  this  position  and  this  praise  in  perpetual 
possession.  There  is  here  a  contrast  between  the  things  of  earth  and  of  heaven. 
Here,  the  leaf  must  wither  and  the  flower  must  die ;  there,  the  leaf  is  evergreen 
and  the  flower  amaranthine.     II.  The  means  employed  to  obtum  this  object. 

1.  There  is  the  performance  of  good  works.  This  universe  is  an  infinite  conjuga- 
tion of  the  verb  *•  to  do."  And  it  is  either  conjugated  ill  or  well.  By  the  Christian, 
it  is  conjugated  well.  2.  The  patient  performance  of  good  works.  "  Good  doing  " 
in  this  world  is  climbing  the  steep,  often  with  bleeding  feet.  Hence,  Christians 
require  the  Divine  virtue  of  patience ;  and  patience  is  true  heroism.  8.  Perse- 
verance in  the  performance  of  good  works.  Our  life  must  resemble  the  sun  in  his 
commencement,  continued  course,  and  consummation.  We  must  travel  onward 
and  upward  to  "the  perfect  day"  of  knowledge,  of  purity,  of  joy.  HI.  Thb 
OBJECT  obtained  bt  THE  MEANS  EMPLOYED.  Thosc  who  scck  in  the  way  described 
not  only  find  what  they  seek,  but  much  more — eternal  life.     This  life  is — 1.  Pore. 

2.  Progressive.  3.  Permanent.  (J.  Dunlop.)  Seeking  for  glory,  honour,  and 
immortality : — How  ?  1.  As  one  who  feels  the  want  of  those  blessings  (Luke  xv.  14 ; 
Eccles.  i.  2 ;  Jer.  ii.  13).  2.  As  one  who  discerns  their  surpassing  excellence  and 
worth  (Matt.  xiii.  44  ;  Phil.  iii.  7,  8).  3.  As  one  who  is  willing  to  strive  for  them  in 
the  appointed  and  proper  way,  and  to  accept  them  upon  the  terms  offered  (2  Tim. 
ii.  5  ;  Isa.  Iv.  1).  4.  As  one  who  is  prepared  to  make  any  self-sacrifice,  brave  all 
dsngers  and  oppositions,  and  never  to  be  deterred  by  failure  (Acts  xxi.  13). 
{C.  Neil,  M.A.)  Glory,  or  splendour,  is  here  as  often  elsewhere  in  Scripture, 
specified  as  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  that  celestial  state  in  which  the 
holy  find  their  everlasting  award.  "  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the 
sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father  "  (Matt.  ziii.  43 ;  cf.  Bom.  v.  2,  ix.  23 ;  Eph. 
i.  18  ;  1  Tim.  iii.  16 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  10;  Heb.  ii.  10;  1  Pet.  v.  1,  4,  10).  On  earth  the 
righteous  may  have  their  lot  in  the  midst  of  the  mean  accompaniments  of  poverty. 
In  heaven  everything  around  as  well  as  within  them  will  be  lustrous  and  glorious. 
(J.  Moriion,  D.D.)  Honour : — This  is  another  fold  of  the  manifold  excellency  of 
the  heavenly  state.  It  is  kindred  to  "  glory."  Its  idea,  however,  has  more  of 
relativity  about  it.  One  may  be  absolutely  glorious.  God  from  everlasting  was 
so.  But  one  can  have  "  honour  "  only  when  others  esteem  and  prize  and  praise. 
Hence  the  connection  of  the  Greek  word  (riftrj)  with  price  (see  1  Cor.  vL  20,  vii.  23  ; 
Matt,  xxvii.  6 ;  and  compare  the  German  preis,  and  the  English  "  prize "  and 
"praise.")  Belative  "  honour  "  as  well  as  essential  glory  awaits  the  holy.  They 
will  bask  in  the  Father's  approbation  and  complacency.  Angels  will  rejoice  in  their 
companionship.  They  will  be  "  kings  unto  God,"  and  wUl  "  reign  with  Christ  " 
(Bev.  v.  10).   (Ibid.)        Immortality  naturally  looks  back  to  "  glory  "  and  "  hoiioar,'* 


CBir.  n.]  kOMANS.  145 

and  oontrssts  the  pannanence  of  the  celestial  with  the  fleeting  shadows  of  the 
terrestrial.  The  "  inheritance  "  is  "  incorruptible."  The  diadem  that  encirdea 
the  brows  of  the  glorified  heirs  is  amaranthine.  It  "  fadeth  not  away."  (Ibid.) 
Labouring  for  eternity  : — "There,"  exclaimed  an  artist,  on  finishing  a  perishable 
work  on  perishable  material,  *'  it  is  done  I — and  it  has  been  thirty  years  in  doing  1 " 
We  labour  for  eternity  ;  and  shall  we  think  a  life  long  to  devote  to  endless  results  ? 
(A.  Reed,  D.D.)  Working  for  eternity  : — Apelles,  the  Grecian  painter,  when 
asked  why  he  touched  and  retouched  his  pictures  with  so  much  care,  answered, 
"Because  I  paint  for  eternity."  But  unto  them  that  are  contentloos,  and  do  not 
obey  the  truth,  but  obey  anrlghteoasness,  Indignation,  and  wrath. — Factioutnest 
and  itt  punithment : — I.  Thb  charaoteb  described.  1.  Factious.  (1)  The  ex- 
pression is  literally  '•  those  who  are  '  of  '  a  factious  spirit."  Descent  or  parentage 
is  suggested  as  in  "  him  who  is  of  faith,"  "  them  who  are  of  the  circumcision  " 
(c/.  also  Gal.  iv.  10;  John  xviii.  37),  and  in  "  children  of  light,"  &c.  (Eph.  ii.  2,  8, 
T.  8;  1  Pet.  i.  14;  2  Thess.  ii.  8).  In  all  such  expressions  the  outstanding  idea 
derived  from  the  universally  recognised  law  of  like  begetting  hke,  is  that  of 
predominant  characteristic.  (2)  The  word  itself  denotes  a  spirit  of  faction,  but 
always  with  a  vile  implication  of  interested  and  selfish  aims.  The  apostle's  re- 
ference, therefore,  is  not  to  mere  political  sectarianism,  or  national  bigotry.  Bis 
mind  has  before  it  the  conception  of  God's  vast  moral  empire.  Faction  in  it  is 
opposition  to  the  monarch  of  the  universe ;  opposition  that  springs  from  a  base 
desire  to  gratify  the  lower  principles  of  the  nature.  It  is  in  fact  a  covert  kind  of 
rebellion ;  only  it  is  rebellion  animated  by  the  most  ignoble  aims.  2.  The  factious 
are  disobedient  to  the  truth.  Such,  indeed,  is  implied  in  their  factiousness.  "  The 
truth  "  is  personified  as  a  lady  or  mistress  who  ought  to  be  obeyed.  The  truth  is 
disobeyed  when  there  is  a  wilful  refusal  to  have  the  life,  at  once  in  its  inner  thoughts 
and  feelings,  and  in  its  outer  acts,  conformed  to  the  rule  which  it  embodies.  The 
rule  is  imperative.  For  moral,  religious,  evangelical  truth  is  revealed  just  in  order 
that  the  Uving  mind  may  live  in  conformity  with  it,  and  thus  in  consonance  with 
the  will  of  Him  whose  voice  truth  is.  3.  The  factious  while  disobedient  to  the 
truth  are  obedient  to  unrighteousness — the  counterpart  idea  which  is  the  com- 
plement of  the  preceding  clause.  The  lawful  sovereign  of  the  soul  being  disobeyed, 
•abjection  is  transferred  to  a  usurper's  sway.  Unrighteousness  has  doubtless  its 
usual  import  as  the  antithesis  of  moral  rectitude,  and  is  not  to  be  regarded  as 
doctrinal  error.  It  is  the  case,  however,  that  just  as  "  the  truth  "  received  is  the 
kernel  of  that  of  righteousness,  without  which  no  one  can  be  meet  to  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven ;  so  unrighteousness  is  a  husk  within  which  will  be  found 
the  primal  seed  of  error.  II.  Its  punishment.  1.  "  Wrath  and  indignation  "  from 
God.  The  one  word  reverberates  on  the  other.  The  two  are  an  intensification  of 
the  idea  of  each.  2.  The  suffering  of  tribulation  and  anguish.  {J.  Morison,  D.D.) 
Tlie  mercenary  spirit : — Contentions  is  mistranslated  on  the  supposition  that  it  has 
something  to  do  with  ipic — strife — whereas  it  comes  from  tpiBoc,  a  day-labourer,  a 
hireling.  The  word  lpi9eia  is  used  of  those  who  canvass  for  office,  and  form  cabals 
and  parties  to  accomplish  their  ends.  Hence,  in  the  largest  sense  it  will  signify 
those  who  labour  for  their  own  private  and  selfish  ends ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that 
this  should  be  contrasted  with  the  patient  continuance  in  well-doing,  as  containing 
in  itself  every  form  of  evil.  The  words  would  be  properly  translated,  "  those  who 
are  of  a  mercenary  spirit."  {Bp.  Thirlwall.)  Obedience  to  unrighteousness,  i.e., 
revolting  against  what  is  good,  and  becoming  slaves  to  what  is  evil.  Here  a  striking 
contrast  is  indicated  between  that  contentious  spirit  which  disobeys  the  truth,  and 
yet  obeys  unrighteousness.  The  one  denotes  an  extraordinary  haughtines'*,  and  an 
exceeding  boldness,  and  the  other  extreme  meanness  and  servility  of  soul.  They 
who  do  not  choose  to  serve  God  as  their  legitimate  sovereign  become  the  slaves  of  a 
master  who  is  both  a  tyrant  and  usurper,  (it.  Haldnnc)  Indignation  and  wrath 
mark  the  greatness  of  God's  anger  proportioned — 1.  To  the  dignity  of  the  Sovereign 
Judge  of  the  world.  2.  To  the  authority  of  those  eternal  laws  which  have  been 
Tiolated.  3.  To  the  favours  which  sinners  have  received.  4.  To  the  unworthiness 
and  meanness  of  sin.  (Ibid. )  Tribulation  and  anguish  upon  every  soul  of  man 
that  doeth  evil. — Tribulation  and  anguish  : — Tribulation  means  pressure,  wliich, 
when  extreme,  as  in  various  modes  of  torture,  causes  excruciating  pain.  Anguish 
means  straitened  room — straits — the  source  of  utter  despair  and  ruin  when  one 
is  pursued  by  an  invincible  antagonist.  The  latter  is  stronger  than  the  former 
(c/.  2  Cor.  iv.  8) — in  every  way  troubled  and  hard  pressed,  but  not  rediu^ed  to 
absolute  straits.    Here  the  one  term  simply  intensifies  the  other ;  and  the  two  is 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  n. 

anion  are  a  representation  of  the  award  of  woe  which  hangs  over  the  persistently    - 
wicked.    They  represent  the  award  as  it  terminates  in  the  persons  judged ;  whereav 
*'  indignation  and  wrath  "  represent  it  as  it  emanates  from  the  Judge.    (J.  Moritotif 
D.D.)       The  punishment  of  tin: — I.  Itsmatubb.  1.  Tribulation.   By — (1)  Exclusion 
from  God's  presence  and  the  bliss  of  heaven.     (2)  ConfiQement  to  the  society  of 
the  devil,  his  angels,  and  wicked  men.    (3)  The  absence  of  ail  that  can  afford 
comfort  and  pleasure.    (4)  The  presence  of  all  that  can  occasion  misery.    Outer 
darkness :    furnace  and  lake  of  fire ;    undying  worm ;  bottomless  pit,  are  its 
emblems.    2.  Anguish.     From — (1)  Experience  of  God's  anger.     (2)  Sense  of 
abhorrence  of  all  holy  beings.    (3)  Consciousness  of  moral  loathsomeness  and 
corruption.    (4)  Working  of  uncontrolled  passions  and  ungratified  desires.     (5) 
Sense  of  all  being  self-caused  and  justly  deserved.    (6)  Inability  to  escape  or  obtain 
mitigation.    (7)  Knowledge  that  all  is  everlasting.    II.  Its  ohabactebistics.     1. 
Universality.    "  Every  soul  that  doeth  evil."    2.  Suitability.    "  The  soul  "—(1)  The 
chief  seat  of  suffering  as  the  chief  agent  in  sinning.     2.  Especially  capable  of 
realising  the  Divine  anger.     3.  Impartiality.     "  The  Jew  first  and  also  the  Gentile." 
(T.  Robinson,  D.D.)        The  retribution  of  tin  mercifully  revealed : — I  do  not  accept 
the  doctrine  of  eternal  punishment  because  I  delight  in  it.     I  would  cast  in  doubts, 
if  I  could,  till  I  had  filled  hell  up  to  the  brim.     I  would  destroy  all  faith  in  it,  but 
that  would  do  me  no  good ;  I  could  not  destroy  the  thing.     I  cannot  alter  the  stem 
fact.     The  exposition  of  future  punishment  in  God's  Word  is  not  to  be  regarded  aa 
a  threat,  but  as  a  merciful  declaration.    If,  in  the  ocean  of  life,  over  which  we  are 
bound  to  eternity,  there  are  these  rocks  and  shoals,  it  is  no  cruelty  to  chart  them 
down  ;  it  is  an  eminent  and  prominent  mercy.    {H.  W.  Beecher.)        The  law  of 
consequences: — After  a  service  in  a  place  where  the  people  had  been  a  good 
deal  bewildered  by  a  young  preacher,  who  accepted  only  so  much  of  the  Bible  aa 
suited  his  whims,  and  who  was  wont  to  make  merry  over  the  idea  of  future  punish- 
ment, a  man  stepped  up  to  me  and  said  in  a  bantering  voice :  "  Bishop,  do  yoa 
believe  in  hell?"    I  said,  "Are  you  anxious  to  know  what  I  think  of  hell?" 
•*  Yes,"  said  he.     "  Well,"  said  I,  •'  the  best  answer  I  ever  heard  came  from 
a  poor  negro  woman.    She  had  a  young  niece,  who  sorely  tried  the  poor  souL 
The  more  she  struggled  to  keep  this  wilful  charge  in  the  right  way  the  more 
she  seemed  to  wander.    One  day,  after  hearing  a  new  preacher,  the  niece  came 
bounding  into  the  room  and  said :  '  Aunty,  I  ain't  gwine  to  believe  in  a  hell  no 
more.    Ef  dar  is  any  hell,  I  jest  wants  to  know  where  dey  gets  all  de  brimstone 
for  dat  place;  dat's  'zactly  what  I  would  like  to  know.'    The  old  woman  fixed 
her  eyes  on  her,  and  with  a  tear  on  her  cheek,  said:  'Ah,  honey  darlin',  you  look 
out  you  don't  go  dere,  for  you'll  find  dey  takes  dere  own  brimstone  wid  'em.*  "    I 
then  said,  "  Is  there  any  other  question  in  theology  you  would  hke  to  ask  ? " 
'•  No,"  said  he.    And  he  went  home,  I  hope,  with  a  new  idea  that  sin  brings  sorrow, 
«nd  that  to  be  saved  we  need  deliverance  from  sin.     Some  men  carry  • '  their  own 
brimstone"  even  in  this  world.     {Bp.  Whipple.)        The  end  of  sinful  pleasures  :— 
Be  assured,  a  serpent  lurks  at  the  bottom  of  guilt's  sweetest  pleasure.     (T.  Chithne, 
D.D.)        But  glory  and  honour  and  peace  to  every  man  that  worketh  good. — 
Glory,  honour  and  peace ; — This  is  the  echo  of  verse  7.     "  Peace  "  is  added  in 
contrast  to  "  anguish."    He  who  is  pursued  by  an  antagonist  with  whom  he  cannot 
cope  in  strength,  he  who  while  thus  pursued,  finds  himself  shut  in  within  soma 
strait  place,  either  on  land  or  sea,  can  have  no  repose  of  spirit.    But  in  heaven 
there  are  no  foes  to  pursue,  and  no  straits  into  which  to  be  pursued.     "  Honour 
&%d  glory  "  shall  be  enjoyed  in  uninterrupted  peace.    "  On  earth,"  says  Chrysostom, 
"  whatever  good  things  a  man  has,  he  has  with  many  troubles,  even  though  he  be 
rich  and  powerful,  or  even  a  king.     Although,  too,  he  may  have  no  dissensions 
with  others,  he  has  them  often  with  himself  :  there  is  war  within  his  own  thought. 
But  in  heaven  all  is  reversed.    There  is  calmness  and  freedom  from  trouble,  and 
genuine  peace."    {J.  Morison,  D.D.)        The  blessings  God  has  in  store  : — L  Thkib 
HATCiiE.     1.  Glory.    2.  Honour.     3.  Peace.    II.  Their  objects.     Those  who  work 
good.     III.  Theib  IMPAETIALIXY.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        The  glory  of  heaven: — Wa 
know  not,  and  never  shall  know  until  experience  strips  the  bandages  from  our  eyes, 
what  new  methods  of  participation  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  new  possibilities  of 
intimacy  and  intercourse  with  Him  may  be  ours  when  the  veils  of  fiesh  and  sensa 
and  time  have  all  dropped  away.     New  windows  may  be  opened  in  our  spirits,  in  m 
which  we  shall  perceive  new  aspects  of  the  Divine  character.     New  doors  may  ba 
opened  in  onr  soals,  from  out  of  which  we  may  pass  to  touch  parts  of  His  nature, 
all  impalpable  and  inconceivable  to  as  now.    And  when  all  the  veik  of  «  dia* 


caiAr.  ou]  ROMANS.  Ul 

eordant  moral  natare  are  taken  away,  and  we  are  pore,  then  we  shall  see,  then  wa 
shall  draw  nigh  to  Qod.  The  thing  that  chiefly  separates  man  from  Ood  is  man'i 
sin.  When  that  is  removed,  the  centrifugal  force  which  kept  ooi  tiny  orb  apart 
from  the  great  central  snn  being  withdrawn,  we  shall,  as  it  were,  fall  into  the 
brightness  and  be  one,  not  losing  our  sense  of  individuality  which  would  be  to  lose 
all  the  blessedness,  but  united  with  Him  in  a  union  far  more  intimate  tban  earth 
can  paralleL  (A.  Maclaren.)  The  glory  of  heaven: — The  glory  of  heaven  is 
such  that  it  can  never  be  fully  known  till  it  is  fully  enjoyed.  And  yet  if  heaven 
were  ever  made  crystally  transparent  to  you,  if  ever  God  opened  yon  a  window  into 
it  and  then  the  eyes  of  your  faith  to  look  in  by  that  window,  think  what  it  is  that 
you  there  discovered,  what  inaccessible  light,  what  cherishing  love,  what  daunting 
majesty,  what  infinite  purity,  what  overloading  joy,  what  insupportable  and  sinking 
glory,  what  rays  and  sparklings  from  crowns  and  sceptres ;  but  more  from  the 
glances  and  smiles  of  God  upon  the  heavenly  host,  who  for  ever  warm  and  san 
themselves  in  his  presence ;  and  when  yon  have  thought  all  this,  then  think  once 
again  that  all  your  thoughts  are  but  shadows  and  glimmerings,  that  these  are  dust 
and  ashes  in  the  eye  of  your  faith  that  makes  all  these  discoveries  come  infinitely 
ghort  of  the  native  glory  of  these  things,  and  then  yoa  may  guess,  and  somewhat 
near,  what  heaven  is.    {Bp.  Eopkiru.) 

Yer.  IL  For  there  l8  no  respect  of  persons  with  God.— God  no  respecter 
<lf  persoTU : — I.  It  nseds  bs  so,  for  God  rules  us  all.  II.  It  hat  weix  bb 
so,  for  God  is  good  to  all.  HI.  It  otioht  to  bk  so,  for  God  has  made  all. 
IV.  It  MUST  BE  80,  for  God  is  just  to  all.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  God  no  respecter  of 

pertOTU : — Impartiality  is  one  of  the  chief  qualifications  of  a  judge.  Without  it 
no  amount  of  knowledge  or  ability  can  inspire  confidence.  Yet  it  is  by  no  means  a 
common  quality.  Even  where  a  judge  is  truly  conscientious,  he  is  made  partial  by 
common  prejudices,  and  by  the  law  itself,  which,  in  many  instances,  favours  the 
rich  above  the  poor.  But  God  is  strictly  impartial,  and  the  law  affords  shelter  for 
no  rich  sinner,  nor  can  any  outlet  be  found  for  him  who  has  broken  it.  And  yet, 
there  is  an  appearance  of  partiality.  The  good  are  the  objects  of  God's  peculiar 
regard.  But  such  is  no  partiality.  He  favours  the  good  because  they  are  good. 
He,  who  is  righteous  Himself,  could  not  favour  the  unrighteous  without  being 
implicated  in  their  sin.  But  God's  impartiality  is  seen  by  the  fact  that  any  one  can 
become  a  participator  in  ELis  goodness.  This  impartiality  is  shown  in — I.  Thb 
COMMON  DEciiABATioN  OF  SIM  AFFIRMED  OF  ALL.  On  this  the  whols  Word  of  God  is 
uniform.  Now,  strong  as  the  assertion  here  may  seem,  one  moment's  refiection  will 
show  its  righteousness.  With  one  consent  men  declare  they  have  done  wrong. 
Should  one  affirm  that  his  life  was  perfect,  he  would  be  laughed  at,  so  utterly  at 
variance  is  it  with  the  common  experience  of  men.  Here,  then,  is  the  impartiality 
of  God.  For  His  own  honour  it  would  seem  that  the  faults -of  those  who  were  His 
favourite  servants  should  be  concealed ;  but  no,  all  is  told.  II.  The  common 
Savioub  PBoviDEn  FOB  ALL.  No  man  could  save  himself,  because  all  bad  sinned. 
Then  aU  must  rely  on  this  one  great  Mediator,  who  was  to  die  for  the  sins  of  the 
whole  world.  The  Jew,  as  a  Jew,  was  not  the  object  of  His  life  and  death,  but  the 
Jew,  as  a  man,  and  the  Geutile  as  a  man.  HI.  The  common  condition  bequhikd  o» 
ALL.  It  is  usual  in  man-made  religions  so  to  frame  the  condition  of  salvation  in 
favour  of  the  rich  and  influential.  But  no  such  thing  can  be  found  in  God's  Word. 
All  may  be  saved  from  the  common  evil  by  one  way  only.  It  tells  all  that  they  must 
submit  themselves  to  God,  and  that  submission  is  shown  and  obtained  by  repent- 
ance and  faith.  IV.  The  common  eewabds  and  punishments  adjudged  to  all. 
This  was  beautifully  taught  by  our  Lord  in  the  parable  of  Lazarus  and  Dives.  God 
purposes  that  all  should  possess  the  blessings  of  eternal  life,  irrespective  of  their 
condition.  The  truly  loving,  faithful  heart,  wherever  it  may  be  found ,  shall  be  taken 
into  Abraham's  bosom ;  while  the  disobedient,  the  unbelieving,  will  be  subject  to 
eternal  death.  Y.  The  common  bevelation  given  to  all.  It  is  in  one  book,  which 
may  be  read  and  understood  by  all  who  can  read.  In  our  own  country,  every  man 
cannot  be  his  own  lawyer,  and  so  at  great  cost  has  to  employ  a  lawyer ;  hence,  the 
rich  can  obtain  the  best  advice  and  knowledge,  while  the  poor  cannot  obtain  counsel 
at  all.  Such  is  not  the  case  with  God's  law.  The  book  is  given  into  our  hands. 
{H.  W.  Butcher.)  God  no  respecter  of  persons : — Whatever  apparent  varieties  there 
may  be  in  Divine  dispensations,  they  do  not  affect  the  perfect  rectitude  of  God's 
moral  administration,  and  every  one  will  be  harmonised  by  the  decisions  of  the 
judgment-day.  It  will  be  seen,  then,  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  according  to  truth,foC 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OKAP.  a. 

He  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds.  A  superficial  inspection  of  Hia 
government  often  leads  men  to  a  different  conclusion ;  and  nothing  is  more  natural 
than  that  the  government  of  an  infinite  Being  should  present  mysteries  to  finite 
minds,  for  it  is  an  obvious  impossibility  that  we  should  comprehend  all  the  reasons 
by  which  an  infinite  Spirit  is  actuated ;  but  until  we  can  do  so,  we  are  not  in  a  posi- 
tion to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  His  proceedings.  But  whatever  is  mysterious  to 
OS,  may  yet  be  in  strict  accordance  with  the  rectitude  of  the  Divine  character. 
"  His  ways  are  not  as  our  ways,  nor  His  thoughts  as  our  thoughts."  He  treats  men 
differently.  There  is  an  immense  variety  in  His  dealings  with  His  creatures,  so  that 
the  experience  of  no  two  men  is  exactly  alike ;  yet  whatever  differences  exist,  they 
do  not  trespass  on  equity ;  His  punishments  never  exceed  the  demands,  and  Hie 
mercy  is  never  exercised  without  a  sacred  regard  to  the  rights  of  justice.  Let  xu 
examine — I.  Thb  testimony  of  Sobiptubb  ;  and  we  shall  perceive  more  clearly 
wherein  the  Divine  impartiality  consists.  1.  God  hath  not  that  respect  for  outward 
appearances  which  man  has.  In  the  selection  of  instruments  to  accomplish  His 
purposes.  He  has  respect  solely  to  moral  quahties.  This  is  seen  in  the  selection  of 
David  instead  of  Eliab.  "  The  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart."  2.  While  there  is  great 
variety  in  His  providential  government,  with  regard  to  different  nations,  yet  it  arises 
not  from  partiality ;  and  though  the  Jews  had  put  this  interpretation  on  the  Divine 
conduct,  they  were  taught  by  Paul  that  both  Jew  and  Gentile  would  be  recompensed 
according  to  their  works.  And  Peter,  having  imbibed  the  prejudices  of  his  nation, 
was  taught  to  acknowledge  that "  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons."  3.  Bank,  riches, 
honour,  &o.,  do  not  affect  the  moral  character  of  the  Divine  administration.  The 
king  and  his  subjects,  the  master  and  his  servants,  are  treated  on  the  same  equitable 
principles.  4.  We  often  form  a  too  favourable  estimate  of  those  we  love ;  oar 
partiality  conceals  their  defects,  and  magnifies  their  excellencies ;  but  not  so  with 
God.  5.  We  cannot  conceive  of  an  infinitely  perfect  moral  governor,  and  divest 
him  of  this  impartiality.  (1)  To  suppose  Him  destitute  of  it,  would  be  to  imagine 
some  defect  in  His  perfections.  He  is  infinitely  wise,  so  that  He  cannot  possibly 
mistake  the  characters  of  men.  He  is  "  a  God  of  knowledge ;  by  Him  actions  are 
weighed."  Partiality  might  be  shown  unwittingly,  as  when  it  arises  from  defective 
information ;  but  intentional  partiality  must  have  a  motive,  and  is  ordinarily  con- 
nected with  a  feeling  of  interest  arising  from  the  limitations  and  weakness  of 
authority.  But  no  such  motive  can  operate  with  the  Divine  Being.  The  independence 
of  Jehovah  is  a  security  for  His  impartiality.  As  He  has  no  natural  inducements 
to  it,  so  partiality  could  only  result  from  moral  obliquity.  But  He  has  no  tendency 
to  depart  from  perfect  uprightness ;  He  naturally  and  necessarily  esteems  that  which 
is  good  and  excellent  in  itself,  and  dislikes  that  which  is  evil.  "  The  righteous  Lord 
loveth  righteousness."  (2)  As  His  infinite  perfections  are  a  security  for  the  impartial 
administration  of  His  government,  so  the  inspired  writers  have  inferred  it  from  the 
common  relation  in  which  He  stands  to  all  men.  He  is  our  Creator  ;  and  it  may  be 
fairly  inferred,  that  those  who  stand  in  a  common  relation  will  be  treated  on  common 
principles.  As  our  universal  Parent,  He  will  display  the  parental  character  to  all ; 
and  whatever  diversities  obtain  in  His  administration,  they  are  not  violations,  but 
different  manifestations,  of  the  strictest  impartiality.  Thus  God  will  not  regard  the 
rich  more  than  the  poor,  because  He  is  the  Maker  of  them  all.  U.  Illustbationb 
TBou  THB  obbat  FEATURES  OF  God'b  oovebnuent  OF  THB  woBLD.  1.  His  provi- 
dential dispensations  are,  notwithstanding  their  great  variety,  impartial.  (1)  There 
is  perfect  equality  in  the  principal  facts  of  man's  histoiy ;  and  all  the  varieties  of 
providence  are  trifling  when  compared  with  the  points  in  which  men's  experience 
agree.  Men  enter  into  life  in  the  same  state  of  helpless  infancy  ;  they  are  subject 
to  similar  diseases ;  and  the  characteristic  joys  of  different  periods  of  life  are  much 
the  same  in  all  countries.  There  is  great  sameness  in  the  occupations  of  men  ;  and 
while  there  are  differences  of  rank  and  station,  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of 
each  are  so  nicely  poised,  that  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  say,  when  we  contemplate  the 
whole  of  our  being,  which  is  to  be  preferred.  (2)  Human  hfe,  in  itself  considered, 
presents  no  essential  difference.  It  is  preserved  and  sustained  by  means  which  have 
all  the  regularity  of  laws ;  and  the  actions  of  the  body  and  mind  are  obviously 
essentially  the  same  in  all  men.  And  while  there  is  no  important  distinction  in  the 
physical  or  mental  constitution  of  mankind,  the  external  world  stands  in  the  same 
relation  to  all,  quite  irrespective  of  persons  or  character.  The  sun  shines  on  the 
evil  and  the  good  ;  God  sends  His  rain  upon  the  just  and  upon  the  unjust.  The  same 
physical  laws  are  in  operation  with  regard  to  all  men  ;  and  the  natural  results  of 
conduct  are  experienced  over  the  whole  world.    In  all  ordinary  oircamstaaoes,  "  H« 


mu».  n.]  ROMANS,  149 

t«oometh  poor  that  is  slothful,  and  the  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich."  As  the 
whole  character  of  man's  existence  is  strikingly  similar,  so  in  death  there  appears  a 
similar  equality.  (3)  Ood's  experimental  probation  of  His  intelligent  creatures  is 
perfectly  adapted  to  the  infinite  variety  of  mind  and  character.  He  governs  them 
by  one  law,  which,  by  its  contractile  and  expansive  force,  is  a  perfect  law  of  equity 
to  every  individual  He  has  formed.  "  Unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him 
much  will  be  required."  There  is  nothing  in  God's  law  which  respects  only  a  portion 
of  our  race  ;  it  is  of  universal  obligation,  and  of  common  concern  to  every  individual. 
It  is  accompanied  by  the  same  rewards  and  punishments  to  all  men.  Its  sanctions 
are  of  universal  application,  and  constitute  encouragements  to  obedience,  and  motives 
against  transgressions.  There  is  not  one  kind  of  reward  for  the  rich  and  another 
for  the  poor.  2.  The  doctrine  of  the  text  is  illustrated  by  the  nniversal  aspect  of 
the  gospel  to  all  mankind.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &o.  3.  In  the  final  decisions 
of  the  judgment  day  it  will  be  seen  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  None  will 
be  exempted  from  judgment ;  they  will  all  have  to  appear  at  the  same  tribunal, 
before  the  same  Judge,  and  their  judgment  will  proceed  on  the  same  principles  of 
equity  and  truth.  Conclusion.  Let  the  doctrine  of  the  text — 1.  Guard  us  against 
a  rash  and  hasty  judgment  of  any  part  of  the  Divine  conduct.  We  see  but  small 
parts  of  an  immense  and  combined  system  of  operation,  and  are  incompetent  to 
decide  upon  the  character  of  any  one  event  without  knowing  vastly  more  than  we 
do  in  the  present  state.  2.  Guard  us  against  presumption.  Msn  cherish  undefined 
notions  of  the  goodness  of  God,  that  induce  them  to  suppose  He  will  not  be  strict  to 
mark  iniquity.  Other  men  presume  on  their  self -righteousness.  Another  class  are 
hypocritical  professors,  who  name  the  name  of  Christ,  but  depart  not  from  iniquity. 
S.  Direct  as  to  the  only  ground  of  hope  and  confidence  towards  God.  There  is  no 
respect  of  persons  with  Him :  nothing  in  our  external  condition  or  relations  will 
induce  Him  to  form  a  judgment  of  us  contrary  to  truth.  The  universal  condition 
of  salvation  is  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  {S.  Summers.)  God  no  respecter  of  persons  : — 
Even  those  works  of  God,  with  which  we  seem  the  most  familiar,  are  replete  with 
mystery ;  much  more  is  this  true  of  the  moral  world,  which  the  mind  of  God 
administers  and  directs.  We  see,  e.g.,  virtue  prostrated  with  calamity,  while 
nngodliness  "  prospers  in  the  world."  And  yet  we  are  told  that "  there  is  no  respect 
of  persons  with  God."  How,  then,  are  we  to  reconcile  what  we  see,  and  feel,  with 
what  we  read  ?    In  order  to  a  complete  view  of  the  subject,  I  shall — I.  Assign  thb 

BEAB0N8  WHY  THERE  IS  APPAKENTLT  "  RESPECT  OF  PERSONS  "  HERE.    NoW  it  is  popularlv, 

but  mistakenly  assumed,  that  differences  of  outward  circumstances  is  an  evidence  of 
"  respect  of  person" ;  because  we  are  in  every  instance  what  God  has  made  us, and 
have  in  every  instance  what  He  has  given  us;  and  He  hath  given  to  some  pre- 
eminence over  others  in  personal  endowments,  in  worldly  possessions,  and  in  honour 
among  mankind.  For  this,  however,  we  may  assign  the  following  reasons — 1.  That 
such  has  been  the  order  of  nature,  throughout  all  God's  works,  from  the  beginning. 
And  not  only  has  it  been  the  order  of  nature  that  there  should  be  degrees  of  beauty 
in  the  vegetable,  and  of  strength  in  the  animal  world  ;  that  trees,  e.g.,  should  be  of 
different  height,  flowers  of  different  hues,  and  fruits  of  different  flavour,  and  that 
the  irrational  creatures  should  vary  in  the  measure  of  instinct ;  but  the  same  wise 
Creator  ordained  a  difference  also  in  the  first  hving  pair  whom  He  was  pleased  to 
form  in  His  own  image.  But  from  the  first  fatal  act  of  disobedience,  both  were  alike 
involved  in  the  common  transgression,  and  both  are  alike  capable  of  realising  the 
proper  deliverance.  Hence  says  St.  Paul,  "  Thereisnodiffereuce  between  male  and 
female."  2.  That  inequality  among  individuals  conduces  to  the  general  good.  And 
this  connects  itself  with  the  former.  Some  men,  indeed,  raise  the  absurd  and 
senseless  cry  of  universal  equality ;  forgetting  that  such  a  state  of  things  could  not 
possibly  exist,  unless  all  mankind  were  exactly  equal  in  strength,  and  talent,  actuated 
by  the  very  same  propensities,  and  in  pursuit  of  the  same  objects.  So  long  as  there 
are  some  formed  by  natural  endowments  to  lead,  and  others  to  follow,  so  long  must 
there  be  some  to  exercise  command,  and  others  to  render  obedience.  And  could  we 
balance  the  advantages  of  either  state,  we  should  find  it  very  diflScult  to  determine 
on  which  side  the  scale  preponderates.  David,  the  innocent  youth,  keeping  his 
father's  sheep,  with  not  an  enemy  upm  earth,  andwitb  God  for  his  Friend  in  heaven, 
was  assuredly  not  less  happy  than  David,  king  of  Israel.  Again,  what  was  the  result 
of  the  attainment  of  royal  dignity  to  Saul?  The  nation,  indeed,  required  one  to 
lead  them  against  the  Philistines  ;  and  for  their  sake,  but  not  for  his  own,  was  Saul 
exalted  out  of  the  people;  but  for  his  own  sin,  not  for  theirs,  were  the  weapons  of 
his  waiiaxe  broken.    3.  That  the  worldly  condition,  whatever  it  be,  is  the  trial  of 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  n.' 

faith,  and  the  probation  for  eternity,  best  suited  to  him  who  occupies  it.  Some  are 
born,  as  it  might  seem,  to  do — others  to  suffer — the  will  of  God  ;  but  if  action  is  mora 
profitable  to  others,  endurance  is  most  assuredly  not  the  least  profitable  to  ourselves ; 
and  only  towards  that  man  could  God  be  said  to  act  with  partiaUty,  to  whom  He 
should  deny  the  power  of  doing  His  will,  and  the  opportunity  of  attaining  to  the 
perfect  bliss  of  the  riRhteouB.  But  God  has  done  this  to  none.  Whether  we  are 
possessed  of  the  one  talent,  or  of  the  two,  or  of  the  ten,  is  comparatively  of  inferior 
moment ;  since  a  man  is  '*  accepted  according  to  that  he  hath,  and  not  according  to 
that  he  hath  not."  Thus  St.  Paul  "charges  them  that  are  rich  in  this  world,  that 
they  do  good,  that  they  be  rich  in  good  works,"  &c. ;  but  even  if  the;^  attain  to  this, 
it  is  not  a  higher  degree  of  attainment  than  to  suffer  patiently  the  will  of  God.  Had 
Dives  given  half  his  goods,  like  Zaccheas,  to  the  poor,  we  have  no  warrant  whatever 
for  supposing  that  this  would  have  been  more  acceptable  than  the  patient  self-devo- 
tion  of  the  beggar.  Lazarus  could  not  act,  indeed,  but  he  could  suffer ;  he  could  nok 
relieve  the  distress  of  others,  but  he  could,  and  did,  exhibit  a  shining  example  of 
long-suffering  and  patience.  And  thus  every  one  placed  in  a  humble  sphere  ought 
to  consider  whether  that  situation  is  not  the  best  calculated  to  advance  his  highest 
and  most  enduring  interests  ;  whether  if  God  were  to  bestow  upon  him  worldly 
prosperity,  his  heart  might  not  thereby  become  hardened,  or  his  spiritual  perceptions 
obscured.  The  fact  of  an  eternal  existence  must  be  taken  to  be  the  true  test  of  the 
interests  of  time.  Hence,  again,  ••  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God,"  because 
He  will  judge  all  by  what  they  have  done,  and  by  what  they  have  suffered  for  Christ's 
Bake ;  not  by  what  they  have  enjoyed  or  possessed.    II.  Afford  the  evtdencb  wmt 

THEBE  IS  TUfAT.T.Y  <>  NO  RESPECT  OF  PERSONS  WITH  GoD,"  BECAUSE  THERE  SHALL  BE  NONS 

HBBEAFTEB.  And  this  evidence  is  also  threefold.  1.  Because  the  distinctions  to 
which  men  attach  so  much  importance  are  transient  and  precarious.  Whatever 
difference  there  may  be  in  the  character  of  our  path  through  life,  there  is  none  what- 
ever  in  the  nature  of  the  end.  One  *' house  "  is  "  appointed  for  all  living  " ;  and  no 
sooner  do  we  enter  that  common  tenement  than  all  are  on  the  same  leveL  And 
what  is  the  undying  soul  ?  It  is  either  rejoicing  in  God's  manifested  presence,  or  it 
is  an  outcast  from  the  glories  of  redemption.  Then,  if  not  before,  it  vdll  be  seen 
that  the  fancied  advantages  on  account  of  which  we  "call  the  proud  happy," 
are  far  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the  downward  tendency  of  wealth.  It  may, 
indeed,  cost  an  effort  on  the  part  of  those  who  are  daily  struggling  with  privation  to 
suppress  the  rising  wish  that  they  had  been  bom  to  opulence,  but  never  let  them 
harbour  for  an  instant  the  vain  imagination  that  it  is  because  they  are  of  less  esti- 
mation in  the  sight  of  God.  They  ought  to  consider  that  if  they  have  not  the 
advantages,  neither  have  they  the  trials  of  the  afQuent ;  if  they  have  not  their  means 
of  doing  good,  neither  have  they  their  responsibilities  for  leaving  good  andone.  Nay, 
they  ought  to  consider  that  the  very  necessity  of  daily  toil  is  a  preservative  against 
sin  ;  and  though  necessities  and  distress  may  plant  their  path  with  thorns,  they  at 
least  diminish  the  attractions  of  things  below,  and  point  the  soul  to  things  above. 
The  "  good  part "  is  that  "  which  cannot  be  taken  away  " ;  and  while  "  the  world 
passeth  away,  and  the  lust  thereof,  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever." 
2.  Because  all,  whatever  they  possess,  are  alike  responsible  to  their  Judge.  "  Every 
one  of  us,"  said  St.  Paul,  "  must  give  account  of  himself  to  God."  To  whom  little 
is  given,  of  him  is  little  required,  while  "  to  whom  men  have  committed  maoh,  of 
him  they  will  ask  the  more  ";  and  so  it  is  with  God.  8.  Because,  as  to  all  there  ia 
a  common  Saviour,  there  must  be  a  common  salvation.  All,  therefore,  who  shall  be 
convened  before  the  tribunal  of  the  Judge,  whether  those  who  reigned  or  those  who 
served,  those  who  smiled  or  those  who  suffered — all  shall  be  separated  into  two 
classes,  and  only  two.  {T.  Dale,  M.A.)  The  Divine  impartiality  ;— How  is  this 
possible,  since  all  men  are  what  God  made  them,  and  since  no  one  thing  can  more 
differ  from  another  than  one  person  seems  to  differ  from  another  ?  1.  As  to  the 
body,  one  is  defective,  and  another  well-formed ;  one  is  deprived  of  some  of  the 
senses,  or  hath  them  in  low  degree,  another  enjoys  them  all  in  their  full  vigour ;  one 
is  weak  and  sickly,  another  healthy  and  strong ;  one  hath  length  of  days,  another  is 
cut  off  in  the  flower  of  youth.  2.  As  to  circumstances ;  one  is  poor,  and  another 
rich ;  one  unfortunate,  another  successful ;  one  is  doomed  to  obscurity,  another  is 
powerful  and  in  high  station.  3.  As  to  temper ;  one  is  easily  satisfied,  and  pos- 
sesses serenity  of  mind ;  another  is  anxious  or  melancholy,  and  is  plagued  with 
forebodings.  4.  As  to  the  passions ;  they  seem  to  be  more  impetuous  in  some,  whilst 
others  find  them  more  compliant.  6.  As  to  natural  abilities ;  one  hath  a  strong 
memoiy,  a  lively  fancy,  a  good  judgment,  a  fine  taste,  and  a  large  capacity ;  another  is 


CHAT.   I.]  ROMANS.  161 

deficient  in  all  these  respects.  6.  As  to  the  external  advantages,  of  country,  situation, 
and  education,  upon  which  so  much  depends ;  one  isplaced  in  a  land  of  liberty,  learning, 
religion,  and  good  manners,  and  wants  no  helps  of  enlarging  the  mind  and  improving 
the  heart ;  another  hath  his  hard  lot  in  regions  quite  the  reverse.  To  clear  up  the 
Divine  impartiaUty  from  objections  consider — I.  What  is  respect  of  persons,  and 
distinguish  between  matters  of  favour  and  matters  of  justice.  1.  Amongst  men, 
gifts  to  which  another  person  hath  no  claim,  are  free,  and  none  can  be  accused  as 
a  respecter  of  persons  who  makes  one  rather  than  another  the  object  of  his  kind- 
ness, if  he  is  guided  by  prudence  or  by  innocent  affection.  As  in  the  choice  of 
friends  or  servants,  or  in  beneficence,  we  cannot  keep  company  with,  or  employ,  or 
assist  every  one,  and  we  may  prefer  one  deserving  person  to  another  equally  deserv- 
ing, without  being  respecters  of  persons.  But  in  points  of  justice  and  matters  of 
trust,  whosoever  favours  the  guilty  hurts  the  innocent,  or  gives  or  refuses  contrary 
to  the  eternal  rules  of  right,  such  an  one  is  a  rf  specter  of  persons.  2.  The  same 
distinction  holds  true  in  relation  to  God's  dealings  with  His  creatures.  His  giving 
them  more  or  less,  His  placing  them  here  or  there,  is  a  matter  of  favour,  and  respect 
of  persons  hath  nothing  to  do  with  it.  But  in  His  behaviour  to  His  creatures  con- 
sequent to  their  behaviour  towards  Him,  in  this  He  acts  by  the  rules  of  justice,  and 
in  this  His  justice  shall  be  so  manifest  as  to  clear  Him  from  all  imputations  of 
partiality.  3.  If  you  examine  the  Scripture  where  God  is  said  to  be  no  respecter  of 
persons,  you  will  find  that  it  is  as  He  is  Buler  and  Judge,  and  dispenser  of  rewards 
and  punishments ;  and  so  with  relation  to  men,  when  they  are  commanded  not  to 
respect  persons,  they  also  are  considered,  not  as  doing  favours,  but  as  exercising  acts 
of  authority  and  justice,  in  a  public  or  private  character.  II.  The  present  nrvERSiiT 
OF  coNorriON  amongst  men  is  80  uncertain  and  variable,  and  lasts  for  bo  very 

short    a   space,    that   it   BECOMES   IN   THIS   VIEW   FAR   MORE   INCONSIDERABLE   THAN   IS 

tJsiTALLY  IMAGINED.  1.  Man  is  Called  into  this  world  for  a  few  years,  and  then  to 
depart  into  eternity.  One  flourishes,  and  another  struggles  with  adversity ;  and 
whilst  we  gaze  with  envy  upon  the  one,  and  pity  on  the  other,  the  scene  closes,  and 
the  vision  fades  away.  It  is  our  future  lot  alone  that  can  determine  us  happy  or 
unhappy  upon  the  whole.  2.  Even  the  present  condition  of  men  is  perpetually 
varying.  All  men,  more  or  less,  pass  tlirough  the  vicissitudes  of  what  we  call  good 
and  evil.  3.  Even  temporal  happiness  depends  not  so  much  upon  externals.  Many 
other  circumstances  are  to  be  taken  into  account ;  and  of  two  persons,  of  whom  the 
one  passes  for  happy,  and  the  other  for  unhappy,  perhaps  the  sum  total  of  their 
pleasure  and  pain  is  nearly  equal.  4.  Natural  evil,  such  as  poverty,  pain,  and  dis- 
appointments, is  not  always  a  real  calamity,  but  rather  discipline,  tending  to  make 
the  sufferer  better,  and  to  guide  him  to  happiness.  III.  The  bvils  op  which  men 
COMPLAIN  ARE  OFTEN  OF  THEIR  OWN  PROCURING.  Virtuc  has  a  natural  connection 
with  happiness.  This  connection  is  sometimes  suspended  and  interrupted  by  acci- 
dental causes ;  but  it  holds  good  on  the  whole,  and  vice  has  the  same  connection 
with  misery.  If  the  evils  to  which  men  were  obnoxious  were  traced  up  to  their 
causes,  we  should  find  that  the  greater  part  of  them  are  the  consequences  either  of 
thoughtless  folly  or  wickedness.  Therefore  these  sufferings  are  not  to  be  charged 
to  the  Divine  administration.    IV.  The  imparttat.ttt  of  Providence,  whatsoever 

DIFFICULTIES   MAY  ATTEND  IT   IN   THE   PRESENT   STATE,  WILL   BE   FULLY  CLEARED   UP   IN 

THE  NEXT  ;  and  we  must  wait  with  patience  to  that  time  for  the  fuller  solution  of 
some  of  our  doubts.  As  to  the  temporals  there  is  no  reasonable  objection  to  the 
Divine  impartiaUty.  It  is  the  moral  and  religious  difference  between  men  that 
creates  the  main  difficulty.  One  hath  an  opportunity  of  religious  improvement,  and 
ia  a  good  Christian  ;  another  is  deprived  of  this  advantage,  by  no  fault  of  his  own, 
but  by  having  his  hard  lot  in  the  dark  regions  of  rudeness  and  of  ignorance.  In 
answer  to  this,  the  Scripture  saith  that  God  will  judge  the  world  in  righteous- 
ness, and  deal  with  every  one  according  to  his  talents,  and  to  the  use  which  he  hath 
made  of  them.  1.  All  men  have  it  in  their  power  to  do  what  God  requires.  2.  All 
those  who  in  the  main  act  suitable  to  their  abilities  have  a  secret  influence  of  God 
to  hfllp  them  so  far  as  is  needful.  3.  All  such  have  Christ  for  their  Eedeemer, 
though  He  never  was  revealed  to  them.  4.  All  those  who  have  thus  behaved  them- 
selves shall  enjoy  the  beneficial  effects  of  it  hereafter,  according  to  the  extent  of 
their  desires  and  capacities,  and  shall  have  the  means  of  making  greater  progress  in 
goodness  and  happiness.  5.  All  they  who  by  their  own  perverseness  have  abused  the 
talents  committed  to  them,  shall  suffer  for  it  in  such  manner  as  the  Supreme 
Wisdom  shall  judge  expclicnt.  Unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  much 
•hall  be  required;    and  unto  whomsoever  little  is  given,  of  him  little  shall  ba 


151  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [ohaf.  a, 

reqaired.  This  is  the  voioe  of  reason,  this  is  the  express  declaration  of  oar  Savioar. 
V.  Mem,  in  many  eespkots,  and  with  a  few  exceptions,  abb  ratheb  uobb  upon  ths 
liKTEii  THAN  WE  usuAiiLY  lUAOiNE.  1.  All  men  have  a  mortal  body,  an  immortal 
Bonl,  the  same  senses,  and  mach  the  same  powers  and  faculties.  2.  All  have  the 
same  earth  to  feed  them,  the  same  sun  and  stars  to  shine  npon  them,  the  same  air 
to  breathe,  and  the  same  heavens  to  cover  them.  3.  All  have  the  same  ordinary 
means  and  methods  to  improve  themselves,  such  as  diligence,  application,  sobriety, 
civility ;  and  all  suffer  by  the  contrary  vices.  4.  As  they  are  reasonable  creatures, 
they  have  the  same  great  law  of  reason,  or  natural  religion,  to  guide  and  instmot 
them.  6.  As  they  stand  equally  in  need  of  the  Divine  assistance,  they  all  may 
secure  it,  if  they  behave  themselves  suitably  to  their  situation  and  oircomstances. 
6.  They  are  all  subject  to  one  supreme  Governor,  to  whom  they  are  answerable, 
not  according  to  their  rank  or  possessions,  bat  according  to  their  ose  or  abase  of  the 
Divine  blessings.  7.  Christianity,  indeed,  hath  not  been  reveeJed  to  all ;  bnt  this 
arises  from  other  causes,  and  not  from  anything  in  its  nature.  It  is  plainly  intended 
for  universal  use,  and  where  revealed,  it  is  for  all  classes  and  conditions.    YL  Ooo 

18  AND   HDST   NEEDS  BE   IMPABTIAL,  TBOM   HiS  OWN  NATOBE  AND  PEB7ECTI0NS.      1.  All 

partiality  arises  either  from  vice,  weakness,  or  ignorance ;  consequently  it  can  find 
no  access  to  an  all-perfect  Being.  2.  As  6od  is  almighty,  self-existing,  eternal,  and 
independent,  all  His  creatures  are  at  the  same  infinite  distance  below  Him.  Com- 
pared with  each  other,  they  differ  in  a  vast  variety  of  degrees ;  but  compared  with 
Him,  they  bear  no  proportion  at  alL  Therefore  He  must  behold  them  all  as  they 
are  created  beings,  with  the  same  disposition.  3.  As  He  is  perfectly  wise.  He  mast 
treat  them  according  to  the  laws  of  wisdom  and  justice.  4.  As  He  is  perfectly  good. 
He  considers  them  all  as  His  offspring.  He  created  them  to  do  them  good,  and 
nothing  can  hinder  Him  from  exerting  this  beneficence,  except  their  ondatifol 
behaviour.  Conclusion:  Let  as  imitate  Qod  in  this  perfection.  It  is  indeed 
extremely  diflScult  for  man  to  be  impartial,  and  therefore  we  mast  divest  ourselves 
of  those  qualities  which  lead  us  to  unfairness,  such  as  pride,  selfishness,  party  zeaL 
anger,  envy,  indolence  of  temper,  capriciousness,  <fec.  {J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  Tfis 
Divine  impartiality : — This  was  a  bold  and  startling  declaration  to  make  at  Borne,  to 
a  community  whether  of  Romans  or  of  Jews ;  for  these  two  nations  were  each,  above 
all  others  at  that  moment,  convinced  that  such  a  respect  did  actually  exist  in  their 
special  favour.  The  Roman  deemed  his  own  the  favoured  race,  and  regarded  the 
extent  of  his  dominion  as  a  conclusive  proof  of  it.  The  Jew,  with  no  less  com- 
placency, maintained  that  the  Divine  preference  of  himself  was  intimated  by  the 
spiritual  advantages  he  manifestly  enjoyed,  and  the  glorious  hopes  proclaimed  to 
him.  To  require  the  Jew  and  the  Roman  each  to  surrender  the  assurance  on  which 
he  relied,  and  admit  the  other  to  an  equal  footing  in  Divine  favour,  was  indeed  a  bold 
undertaking.  But  between  the  Jew  and  the  Roman  there  stood  also  the  Qreek,  and 
the  Epistle  of  St.  Paul  was  addressed  to  the  Greek  equally  with  both  the  others ; 
perhaps,  indeed,  to  the  Greek  more  directly  than  to  either  of  them,  inasmuch  as  the 
Grecian  element  in  the  early  Roman  Church  was  larger  probably  than  either  of  the 
others.  The  Greek,  too,  had  a  pride  of  his  own,  a  pride  in  his  intellectual  culture ;  and 
he  looked  down  from  his  own  point  of  view  vnth  equal  scorn  on  both  the  Roman  and 
the  Jew.  He,  too,  would  despise,  if  he  dared  not  resent,  the  apostolic  declaration  of 
a  universal  equality  of  the  races.  {Dean  Merivale.)  No  partiality  with  God : — A 
little  black  girl,  eight  years  old,  was  setting  the  taole,  when  a  boy  in  the  room  said 
to  her,  "  Mollie,  do  you  pray  ?  "  The  suddenness  of  the  question  confused  her  a 
little,  but  she  said,  "  Yes,  every  night."  "  Do  you  think  God  hears  you  ?  "  the  boy 
asked.  She  answered  promptly, "  I  know  He  does."  *'  But  do  you  think,"  said  he, 
trying  to  puzzle  her,  '*  that  He  hears  your  prayers  as  readily  as  those  of  white 
children  ?  "  For  full  three  minutes  the  child  kept  on  with  her  work ;  then  she  slowly 
said,  ••  Master  George,  I  pray  into  God's  ears,  and  not  His  eyes.  My  voice  is  just 
like  any  other  little  girl's,  and  if  I  say  what  I  ought  to  say,  God  does  not  stop  to 
look  at  my  skin."  No  respect  to  person  : — M.  Boudon,  an  eminent  surgeon,  was 
one  day  sent  for  by  the  Cardinal  du  Bois,  Prime  Minister  of  France,  to  perform  a 
very  serious  operation  upon  him.  The  Cardinal,  on  seeing  him  enter  the  room,  said 
to  him,  "  You  must  not  expect  to  treat  me  in  the  same  rough  manner  as  yon  treat 
your  poor  miserable  wretches  at  your  hospital  of  the  Hotel  Dieu."  "  My  lord," 
replied  M.  Boudon,  with  great  dignity,  '*  every  one  of  those  miserable  wretches,  as 
your  Eminence  is  pleased  to  call  them,  is  a  Prime  Minister  in  my  eyes." 

Yer.  12.  For  aa  xaaay  as  have  ilnned  without  law  shall  also  perlsli  vltlioat  lav : 


CHAf.  u.]  ROMANS.  159 

and  as  many  as  have  sinned  In  the  law  shall  be  Judged  by  the  law. — The  law  an4 
tin : — All  sin — I.  Implies  law.  II.  Most  be  measdred  by  the  law  under  which  it 
a  COMMITTED.  III.  MosT  BE  VISITED  AcooRDiNQLT.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  respoti- 
tibility  of  man  : — I.  The  text  divides  the  race  into  two  classes — those  who  have 
sinned  without  law  and  those  who  have  sinned  in  the  law.  What  is  meant  by  law  ? 
Bale.  Here,  then,  are  some  without  and  some  within  rule — the  Gentiles  not  having 
and  the  Jews  having  a  revealed  rule.  II.  The  text  next  affirms  a  certain  amodnt 
or  obligation  connected  with  each  division  ;  for  we  cannot  understand  those  who 
have  sinned  and  shall  consequently  perish  without  law  to  mean  a  class  to  be  judged 
without  any  standard  whatever  by  which  to  try  their  guilt  or  innocence.  As  between 
man  and  man  we  insist,  before  judgment  is  passed  upon  us,  on  having  the  oppor- 
tunity of  knowing  the  rule  by  which  we  are  to  be  judged.  Before  the  statute  law  of 
this  country  is  proclaimed  no  one  is  guilty  of  any  violation  of  it,  and  of  course  it 
must  be  the  same  as  between  God  and  man ;  and  so  the  passage  before  as  would 
appear  to  direct  onr  attention  to  law  of  some  kind  applying  to  each  party,  and 
therefore  human  responsibility  appears  to  arise.  III.  Human  responsibility  seems 
TO  arise  from  the  relation  in  which  both  classes  stand  to  God.  The  law  revealed 
to  the  Gentiles  is  the  law  of  nature,  that  to  the  Jews  is  the  law  of  the  Ward  of  God. 
Now  if  both  are  in  substance  the  same,  then  we  must  admit  that  the  responsibility 
resting  on  man  in  a  state  of  nature  is  as  decidedly  proved  as  that  resting  on  bim 
when  under  revelation.  1.  Nature  discovers  indications  of  kindness  on  the  part  of 
a  fatherly  Creator,  and  of  brotherhood  among  the  creatures.  Everything  is  so  con- 
structed that  all  must  harmonise  to  a  certain  extent  with  one  another  or  perish 
together.  Different  countries  have  different  climates  and  productions  that  there 
may  be  an  intercommunity  between  the  various  regions,  from  all  which  we  conclude 
that  it  is  the  duty  and  interest  of  this  common  family  to  connect  their  common 
wants,  safety,  and  comforts,  that  they  may  rejoice  together  in  the  same  grace  of  life. 
To  infringe,  therefore,  this  law  of  nature  is  to  rebel  against  God,  and  consequently  to 
incur  responsibility  for  tliis  rebellion.  Can  we  look  out  on  nature,  and  see  what  its 
Author  meant,  and  tben  set  that  meaning  at  naught,  and  say  that  we  will  follow 
the  bent  of  our  own  minds  and  passions,  and  then  say  tLat  we  feel  no  accusation  of 
ourselves  in  our  own  hearts  ?  We  cannot.  There  is  a  sense  of  responsibility  to 
God  when  we  discover  what  God  intends.  2.  But  to  rise  into  a  higher  sphere.  Are 
there  not  intimations  in  nature  that  we  owe  to  God  an  acknowledgment  of  His  being 
iuad  a  veneration  for  His  character  ?  Are  there  not,  e.g.,  feelings  that  indicate  to 
DB  the  duty  of  children  to  respect  their  parents  ?  Well,  surely  we  are  as  much 
bound  to  honour  the  Universal  as  the  particular  parent ;  and  so  we  further  estab- 
lish the  responsibility  of  man,  which,  when  we  come  to  Scripture,  is  confirmed 
beyond  question.  IV.  But  it  may  be  said  that,  admitting  all  this,  there  may  be 
AM  internal  inability  to  meet  the  rule  bo  clearly  seen.  The  heathen  may  see 
that  God  is  his  Father,  has  kindness  and  authority,  but  he  may  feel  within  him  an 
indisposition  to  act  accordingly  because  he  is  corrupt,  and  the  same  may  be  said 
about  a  man  who  has  God's  Word  in  his  hands.  Does  this,  then,  relieve  from 
responsibility  ?  Let  the  answer  be  derived  from  individual  experience.  For  what 
is  responsibility  f  That  state  which  is  created  by  a  clear  discovery  of  law  to  one 
who  is  a  free  agent.  And  what  is  inability  ?  A  man  is  physically  unable  to  walk, 
e.g.,  when  he  is  chained  to  his  prison,  in  which  case  he  cannot  be  blamed  for  his 
inability,  because  it  arises  from  another,  not  from  himself,  and  this  other  has  the 
responsibility  for  all  the  consequences  of  his  bondage,  i.e.,  whenever  the  inability  is 
external,  and  comes  not  from  ourselves,  the  responsibility  is  not  recognised.  So 
morally,  if  a  man  is  bound  by  another  his  responsibility  is  at  an  end.  But  where 
is  the  man  whose  moral  faculty  is  bound  by  another  ?  You  can  tie  your  neighbour's 
hand,  but  you  cannot  bind  his  will.  You  can  work  upon  the  outward,  but  you 
eannot  touch  the  inner  man.  The  moral  inclination  of  man  is  his  own,  and  can  be 
restrained  by  none.  Why,  then,  if  man  is  thus  free,  does  he  not  obey  the  law  ? 
Because  he  is  corrupt,  and  acts  according  to  his  own  nature ;  and  is  responsible 
because  he  so  acts.  He  acts  under  no  foreign  influence,  but  according  to  the 
principles  by  which  his  own  normal  nature  is  moved.  And  so — to  return  to  our 
text — those  who  have  had  no  revelation  will  be  tried  by  the  illustrations  of  their 
duty  which  nature  gives,  and  those  who  have  by  the  illustrations  of  duty  which  it 
furnishes.  And  if  they  are  found  guilty  it  will  be  found  to  arise,  not  from  inability, 
bot  from  dislike ;  and  let  no  man  say  because  he  dislikes  God  therefore  he  is 
cmaocountable — a  delusion  which  is  in  itself  absurd  and  an  encouragement  to  all 
viokedness.    Gonclosion :  Let  us  acknowledge  oar  responsibility.     This  will  lead 


164  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  B. 

ns  to  ask  for  and  to  secure  power  to  discharge  it,  and  to  find  in  its  discharge  ptaee 
of  conscience  in  this  life  and  an  eternal  reward  in  the  life  to  come.  (J.  Burnet.) 
Future  of  the  heathen  : — A  clergyman  once  travelling  in  a  stage-coach  was  abruptly 
asked  by  one  of  the  passengers  if  any  of  the  heathen  would  go  to  heaven.  "  Sir,'* 
replied  the  clergyman,  "  I  am  not  appointed  Judge  of  the  world,  and  consequently 
I  cannot  tell ;  but  if  ever  you  get  to  heaven  you  shall  either  find  some  of  them  there 
or  a  good  reason  why  they  are  not  there  " — a  reply  well  fitted  to  answer  an  imperti- 
nent question,  dictated,  at  best,  by  an  idle  curiosity. 

Yer.  18.  For  not  the  hearers  of  the  law  are  Just  before  God,  but  the  doers  of  the 

law  shall  be  justified. — Hearen : — What  the  apostle  says  about  the  Jews  is  equally 
applicable  to  many  so-called  Christians.  Multitudes  justify  themselves  by  attend- 
ance on  a  gospel  ministry ;  God  only  justifies  those  who  practise  what  they  hear. 
Our  congregations  are  made  up  of — I.  Those  who  ebab — 1.  But  do  not  understand. 
Often,  doubtless,  this  is  the  preacher's  fault,  who  fails  because  he  is  not  clear  or 
lacks  the  power  to  awaken  the  dormant  intelligence ;  but  it  often  arises  from  a  want 
of  spiritual  perception  of,  or  interest  in,  the  truth  by  those  who  hear.  2.  Or  only 
admire,  the  object  being  in  some  cases  the  mere  beauty  of  the  truth  itself,  in  others 
the  grace  of  its  setting  and  the  charm  of  its  delivery.  8.  Or  criticise,  the  object 
being  the  statement  in  some  instances,  the  method  or  manner  in  others.  II.  Thosb 
WHO  HEAB  AKD  SO.  AxQongst  Buch  are  those  who  are — 1.  Anxious  to  understand. 
They  want  to  know  in  order  that  they  may  do.  Hence  they  bring  all  their  intel- 
lectual and  spiritual  powers  to  bear  upon  the  message  declared.  Such  seldom  go 
away  unsatisfied  or  become  "  unfruitful "  hearers.  2.  Believe  the  truth.  While 
not  insensible  to  its  intrinsic  beauty  or  to  the  grace  of  the  form  in  which  it  is 
presented,  they  regard  it  as  a  solemn  message  from  God  having  a  direct  bearing  on 
life  and  destiny.  They  desire,  therefore,  not  only  to  understand  it,  but  to  assimilate 
it  and  make  it  a  power  for  action.  3.  Who  reduce  the  truth  to  practice.  This  is 
the  true  criterion  of  hearing  which  is  acceptable  to  God.  Many  understand  clearly 
enough,  many  thoroughly  believe  as  far  as  intellectual  conviction  goes — how  few 
"  do  "  1  Let  this  be  a  matter  of  self-examination  to  thoughtful  and  orthodox 
hearers  I  (vers.  17-23).  III.  Thosb  who  NErrHEB  heab  nob  do.  One  might  almost 
say.  Who  do  not  because  they  do  not  hear,  but  for  the  fact  that  hearing  is  not  the 
only  source  of  knowledge.  Conclusion  :  1.  Hearing  is  a  great  privilege.  2.  As  a 
privilege  it  involves  responsibility.  8.  For  the  manner  in  which  we  have  heard  we 
shall  be  called  into  judgment,  and  judged  accordingly.  (J.  W.  Bum.)  Hearing 
and  doing : — A  consideration — I.  Fob  those  seeking  salvation  by  the  IiAW.  The 
whole  law  must  be  done,  not  simply  heard.  Who  has,  who  can  do  it?  Sin  has  so 
corrupted  our  moral  nature  that  we  are  "without  strength,"  and  therefore  so  cannot 
obtain  salvation.  II.  Fob  those  seekdjo  salvation  thbouoh  an  influential  gospel. 
The  principle  of  the  text  applies  much  more  here.  There  is  no  salvation  even  by 
the  gospel  save  by  acting  on  its  terms — "  believe,"  "  receive,"  "  repent,"  Ac.    III. 

SUOOEBTINO  THE  TANITT  OF  AN  EVANGELICAL  PBOFESSION  WITHOUT  AN  XVANGELIOAL  LIFB. 

The  gospel  has  its  laws  as  well  as  Judaism.  {R.  Olover.)  Hearing  without 
doing  : — It  is  a  strange  folly  in  multitudes  of  us  to  propound  no  end  in  the  hearing 
of  the  gospel.  The  merchant  sails,  not  only  that  he  may  sail,  but  for  traffic,  and 
traffics  that  he  may  be  rich.  The  husbandman  ploughs,  not  only  to  keep  himself 
busy,  but  in  order  to  sow,  and  sows  that  he  may  reap  with  advantage.  And  shall 
we  do  the  most  excellent  and  fruitful  work  fruitlessly? — hear  only  to  hear,  and  look 
no  further  ?  This  is  indeed  a  great  vanity  and  a  great  misery,  to  lose  that  labour 
which,  duly  used,  would  be  of  all  others  most  gainful ;  and  yet  all  our  meetings  are 
fall  of  this  i     (T.  Leighton.) 

Vers.  14, 15.  For  when  the  Gentiles,  which  have  not  the  law,  do  by  nature  the 
things  contained  In  the  law,  these  .  .  .  are  a  law  unto  themselves. — Man  withoni 
the  Bible : — "  Law  "  means  God's  special  revelation  through  the  Bible.  This  con- 
tains the  moral  code  of  Moses,  exhibited  in  prophetic  teaching,  inculcated  in  the 
instructions,  illustrated  in  the  life  and  death  of  Christ.  It  is  here  suggested  that 
man  without  the  Bible — I.  Has  Bible  mobalitt  wbitten  on  his  spieitual  natubb. 
1.  "  The  law  written  in  their  hearts."  The  great  cardinal  principles  of  morality 
are  in  every  man's  soul,  and  the  ethics  of  the  Bible  are  but  a  transcript  of  them. 
Christ,  who  was  the  living  exemplar  of  the  moral  code  of  the  universe,  reduced  it  to 
supreme  love  for  the  great  Father  of  all  and  unselfish  love  for  all  His  children ; 
and  in  every  heart  these  two  elements  are  found — moral  reasoning  and  conduct. 


«■!».  n.]  ROMANS.  165 

"  Soerates  speaks  of  the  nnwritten  laws  which  were  held  in  every  oonntrj,  and 
mentions  as  samples  honour  to  parents  and  the  prohibition  of  incest.  He  says  that 
since  these  laws  are  nniversally  held,  and  are  evidently  not  the  result  of  human 
legislation,  they  must  have  been  made  by  the  gods."  Sophocles  speaks  of  "  the 
onwritted  and  indelible  laws  of  the  gods  in  the  hearts  of  man,"  and  Plutarch  of  "  a 
law  which  is  not  outwardly  written  in  books,  bat  implanted  in  the  heart  of  man." 
The  moral  Governor  of  the  universe,  then,  has  writteD  in  the  constitution  of  all  the 
subjects  of  His  empire  the  eternal  laws  that  should  govern  them.    II.  Can  tvt  into 

ntAOnCB  IN   HIS  DAIIiT   UFB  THB   BiBLB  HOBAUTY  THAT  IS   WBITTEM  CM   HIS    NATUBB. 

"For  when  the  Gentiles,"  Ac,  "are  a  law  onto  themselves."  "Do  by  nature," 
i.e.,  by  the  outworking  of  those  moral  elements  within  them" — not  by  written 
directions,  but  by  moral  intuitions.  The  bee  that  constructs  her  cells  and  lays  up 
honey  proves  thereby  the  existence  within  her  of  architectural  principles.  She 
works  oat  the  laws  which  her  Maker  imprinted  upon  her  constitution.  Thus, 
heathens  who  have  no  Bible  can  work  out  the  moral  principles  of  their  nature, 
and  often  do  to  an  extent  that  may  well  out  to  blush  the  conduct  of  those  who 
possess  a  written  revelation.  In  estimating  their  responsibility  it  is  well  to  remem- 
ber both  I.  and  II.  They  are  rather  the  objects,  therefore,  of  honest  denunciation 
than  of  sentimental  pity  if  they  pursne  an  immoral  or  ungodly  Ufe.    HI.  Will  bb 

INWARnLT    HAFPT    OB   MISEBABLB    AS    HB  PUTS   IM    PBACTIOB    OB  0THEBWI8B  THB  BxBLB 

UORALITT  WBiTTEN  ON  HIS  NATURE.     "  Their  oonscience  also  bearing  witness,"  &c. 

1.  Psychologists  supply  different  and  conflicting  definitions  of  conscience.  Is  it  a 
distinct  faculty  of  the  soul,  or  its  substratum — that  in  which  all  the  faculties 
inhere  ?  Whatever  it  is,  it  is  that  within  as  which  concerns  itself,  not  with  the 
troth  or  falsehood  of  propositions  or  the  expediency  or  inexpediency  of  actions,  but 
with  the  right  and  wrong  of  conduct.  If  a  heathen  acts  up  to  his  ideas  of  right,  it 
blesses  him  with  peace;  if  he  does  not,  it  scourges  him  with  anguish.  2.  The 
"aoonsing"  power  of  conscience  was  seen  in  the  Pharisees  who  brought  to  Jesus 
the  woman  taken  in  adultery  (John  viii.  9) ;  in  Felix,  when  he  trembled  before  Paul 
the  prisoner ;  in  Pilate,  when  he  called  for  a  basin  of  water  to  wash  his  hands. 
3.  Conscience  can  "excuse,"  i.e.,  make  righteous  allowances;  she  vindicates  as 
well  as  condemns.  "  Who  can  tell  the  sacred  calm  which  fills  the  soul  when 
Conscience,  sitting  on  her  great  white  throne,  pronounces  the  sentence  of  approval 
of  any  one  single  act  or  thought,  and  assures  the  misunderstood,  or  misrepresented, 
or  cuuraniated,  or  even  self-doubting  servant  of  God, '  Herein  you  are  free  from 
blame  '?  "  Conclusion  :  Several  things  may  be  deduced  from  this  subject.  1.  The 
identity  in  authorship  of  human  souls  and  Divine  revelation.  The  grand  rudi- 
mental  subjects  of  the  Bible  are  love,  retribution,  God ;  and  these  are  written  in 
ineffaceable  characters  on  the  tables  of  the  human  heart  everywhere.  2.  The 
impossibility  of  atheism  ever  being  established  in  the  world.  The  human  soul  is 
essentially  theistio  and  religious.  3.  The  responsibility  of  man  wherever  he  is 
foand.  4.  The  duty  of  missionaries  in  propagating  the  gospel.  Let  those  who  go 
forth  to  the  heathen  not  ignore  the  good  in  the  human  heart  on  all  shores  and 
ander  all  suns,  but  let  them — (1)  Recognise  it ;  (2)  honour  it ;  (3)  appeal  to  it ;  and 
(4)  develop  it.  (D.  Thoma$,  D.D.)  Gentile  obedience  to  the  law: — They  do 
(literally)  "the  things  which  are  of  the  law,"  i.e.,  which  are  agreeable  to  its  pre- 
scriptions. They  do  not  observe  the  precept  as  such,  for  they  have  it  not,  but  they 
fulfil  its  contents ;  e.g.,  Neoptolimus  in  Philoctetes,  when  he  refuses  to  save  Greece 
at  the  expense  of  a  lie ;  or  Antigone,  when  she  does  not  hesitate  to  violate  the  tem- 
porary law  of  the  city  to  fulfil  the  law  of  fraternal  love ;  or  Socrates,  when  he  refuses 
to  save  his  life  by  escaping  from  prison,  in  order  to  remain  subject  to  the  magis- 
trates. Sophocles  speaks  of  these  "  eternal  laws,"  and  contrasts  this  internal  and 
Divine  legislation  with  the  ever-changing  laws  of  man.  (Prof.  Godet.)  The 
natural  feeling  of  right  and  wrong  :  its  analysis  : — These  verses  reveal  that  feeling 
in  three  states  or  stages.  1.  The  unconscious  stage,  in  which  the  Gentiles  not 
having  the  law  show  its  real  though  latent  existence  in  their  own  hearts,  of  which — 

2.  They  have  a  faint  though  instinctive  perception  in  the  witness  of  conscience, 
which— 3.  Grows  by  reflection  into  distinct  approval  or  disapproval  of  their  own 
acts  and  those  of  others.  [Prof.  Jowett.)  Natural  morality  : — 1.  It  is  a  common 
impression  that  we  are  dependent  for  all  our  knowledge  of  moral  duty  upon  the 
Bible,  or  at  least  that  there  are  no  motives  to  moral  goodness  worth  speaking  of 
apart  from  it.  But  just  think  what  the  latter  means.  It  means  that  unless  a  man 
has  faith  in  God,  reverence  for  His  authority,  dread  of  His  anger  and  desire  of  Hia 
approval,  there  is  no  strong  motive  to  prevent  him  from  being  a  liar  and  a  villain. 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  n> 

The  former  lands  as  in  still  more  startling  results,  vis.,  that  a  man  who  has  not, 
or  disbelieves  in,  the  Bible  cannot  see  that  iTing,  &o.,  are  bad  things,  and  thai 
truthfulness,  &o.,  are  good  things,  i.e.,  that  he  can  see  no  difference  between  Tic« 
and  virtue.  But  yon  know  that  among  your  own  acquaintances  there  are  non- 
religions  men  who  abhor  lying,  <&c.,  as  mnch  as  yon  do,  and  in  the  old  heathen 
world  there  were  illustrious  examples  of  lofty  virtue.  2.  Christ  has  ennobled  our 
conception  of  morality  and  brought  new  motives  and  aids  to  right-doing,  but  He 
always  assumed  that  man  had  a  knowledge  of  duty  and  recognised  its  authority. 
The  gospel  itself  assumes  this,  for  it  is  a  declaration  that  God  is  willing  to  forgive 
sin ;  but  it  could  have  no  meaning  for  men  who  did  not  know  that  they  had  done 
wrong.  If  the  natural  conscience  were  murdered,  and  men  lost  the  distinction 
between  right  and  wrong,  the  gospel  would  have  nothing  to  take  hold  of.  3.  Some 
say  thtit  religious  faith  is  the  foundation  of  morals  :  it  would  be  nearer  the  truth  to 
speak  of  morals  as  the  foundation  of  religion  ;  for  the  grounds  of  our  trust  in  God 
are  not  His  infinite  power,  which,  if  not  governed  by  justice  and  goodness,  would  fill 
us  with  terror,  nor  His  infinite  knowledge,  which  might  fill  us  with  wonder  but 
could  not  command  affection  and  confidence — we  trust  and  reverence  Him  because 
of  His  righteousness,  truth,  and  love — his  moral  perfections,  which  we  see  are 
admirable  in  themselves.  We  cannot  trust  God  until  we  know  that  He  is  trust- 
worthy. 4.  St.  Paul  believed  that  heathens  not  only  knew  many  of  their  duties, 
but  discharged  them.  The  subject  is  not  a  speculative  one  merely.  One  great 
defeat  of  the  Evangelical  revival  was  that  it  failed  to  aSord  its  converts  a  lofty  ideal 
of  practical  righteousness  and  a  vigorous  moral  training,  with  the  result  that 
EvangeUcal  Christians  have  the  poorest  conceptions  of  moral  duty  and  the  weakest 
moral  strength.  To  remedy  this  defect  we  must  think  more  about  Christian  ethics, 
which  we  cannot  do  to  any  good  purpose  unless  we  begin  with  St.  Paul  by  recog- 
nising the  power  which  belongs  to  man  to  distinguish  between  right  and  wrong.  6. 
Tbis  power  is  one  of  the  noblest  of  our  prerogatives,  but  it  is  forgotten  that,  like  every 
other  faculty,  it  needs  training.  Many  suffer  from  colour-blindness,  but  experiments 
have  proved  that  tbis  arises,  not  from  any  disease  or  malformation  of  the  eye,  but 
from  want  of  education ;  and  it  has  been  cured  by  teaching  the  colour  alphabet. 
Skeins  of  wool  of  different  colours  have  been  displayed  and  their  differences  slowly 
learnt.  Most  of  us  learn  this  without  systematic  instruction,  but  drapers  and 
milliners,  who  have  to  notice  the  finer  gradations  of  tints,  obtain  the  power  of 
discriminating  the  difference  between  shades  of  blue  and  scarlet  which  seem  to 
ordinary  eyes  ahke.  Their  eyes  are  not  better  than  ours,  but  they  have  been  better 
taught.  And  so  most  of  us,  if  we  have  lived  among  good  people,  learn  without 
regular  teaching  to  distinguish  in  a  rough  way  between  right  and  wrong.  But  if  the 
conscience  is  to  have  a  keen  vision,  and  if  its  discrimination  between  right  and 
wrong  is  to  be  unaffected  by  the  cross-lights  of  interest  and  passion,  it  must  be  more 
perfectly  trained,  and  surely  it  is  worth  it ;  and  if  you  are  careful  to  train  your 
child's  memory  and  voice,  why  not  its  conscience,  which  is  infinitely  more  deserving 
of  your  care  ?  6.  There  is  a  bad  way  of  teaching  morals  as  there  is  of  teaching 
arithmetic.  In  a  bad  school  the  rule  is  given  and  the  child  works  his  sum  blindl^), 
accepting  the  rule  on  the  authority  of  the  teacher.  If  his  mind  is  shai-p,  he  may 
puzzle  out  its  reason ;  if  not,  he  is  left  to  mark  it  in  the  dark.  So  some  people 
teach  morality.  They  give  the  child  God's  rules  of  conduct,  and  happily  the 
conscience  may  discover  for  itself  their  nobleness ;  but  if  it  does,  no  thanks  to  the 
teacher.  Having  been  told  the  rule,  the  child  is  warned  that  God  will  punish 
disobedience ;  but  if  from  this  motive  only  the  rule  is  obeyed,  it  is  not  obedience, 
but  servile  superstition.  The  appeal  to  God's  authority  should  only  be  occasional, 
or  the  moral  sense  will  be  disabled  or  checked  in  its  growth  by  so  tremendous  a 
conception.  When  we  follow  a  guide  who  never  leaves  us  we  are  likely  to  take  no 
notice  of  the  path,  and  our  knowledge  of  it  will  be  no  greater  at  the  end  than  at  the 
beginning.  7.  For  the  education  of  the  conscience  we  need  teaching  that  is  really 
moral,  and  not  religious,  that  trains  the  mind  to  recognise  for  itself  the  obligation 
to  do  right  because  it  is  right.  The  vesssl  of  human  nature,  when  exposed  to  storms 
of  temptation,  needs  more  than  one'  strong  cable.  BeUgious  faith  is  the  great 
security ;  but  all  the  anchors  are  sometimes  wanted,  and  we  have  no  right  to  refuse 
the  aid  of  such  guarantees  of  safety  as  a  genuine  love  of  righteousness  for  its  own 
sake,  a  deep  hatred  of  wrong,  a  dread  of  moral  shame.  It  is,  however,  alleged  that 
apart  from  the  Divine  authority  it  is  impossible  to  enforce  the  obligations  of  virtue. 
The  objection  is  put  in  this  form  :  "  You  say  to  a  boy  that  he  ought  to  tell  the  truth ; 
suppose  he  asks,  '  Why  ?  '  what  can  you  answer  except  that  God  commands  it  ?  ** 


CHA».  n.]  ROMANS.  167 

Bat  BoppoBe  the  boy  asks,  "  Why  should  I  do  what  Ood  commands  ?  "  will  yoa  say 
that  because  if  he  does  not  he  will  be  punished  ? — a  very  mean  and  sandy  founda- 
tion for  morals,  for  it  is  no  man's  duty  to  do  anything  simply  because  he  will  suffer 
for  not  doing  it.  A  rule  must  be  right  in  itself,  or  else  it  is  a  crime  to  punish  men 
for  disobeying  it.  If  a  child  asks, "  Why  ought  I  to  obey  God  or  to  tell  the  truth  ?  " 
you  must  answer,  "  Because  you  ought."  But  neither  question  will  be  asked  if  we 
have  done  our  duty  by  our  children.  If  tbey  have  learnt  from  us  who  God  is,  if 
they  have  heard  us  speak  of  Him  with  reverence  and  trust  and  love,  they  will  know 
that  they  ought  to  obey  Him  ;  and  if  we  are  truthful  at  the  impulse  of  a  hearty  love 
and  admiration  for  truth,  and  put  in  their  way  stories  about  heroic  truthfulness, 
they  will  know  for  themselves  that  lying  is  wrong  and  shameful.  8.  I  have  pleaded 
for  the  education  of  the  conscience  in  the  interest  of  morality  ;  I  also  plead  for  it  in 
the  interest  of  religion.  Why  shonld  I  trust,  obey,  and  worship  God  ?  Because  I 
ought.  And  wherever  that  answer  is  not  given  by  the  human  soul,  no  appeal  to 
hope  or  fear  or  gratitude  will  be  effective.  Mere  terror  is  not  without  its  uses.  It 
may  break  the  strong  cords  of  immoral  habits  and  paralyse  for  a  time  the  baser 
passions,  and  may  so  give  the  conscience  which  has  been  trampled  under  the  brutal 
hoofs  of  insolent  vice  the  chance  of  asserting  its  authority.  But  I  believe  that  as  a 
general  rule  the  nobler  power  has  been  in  alliance  with  the  terror  from  the  very  first. 
However  this  may  be,  I  do  not  believe  that  religious  faith  can  have  any  secure  hold 
of  man  except  it  is  confederate  with  conscience  ;  and  a  man  who  has  learned  to 
revere  his  minister  is  most  likely  to  revere  God  Himself.  {R.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.) 
The  moral  constitution  of  man: — The  question  which  the  apostle  was  obliged  to 
argue  was  largely  the  condition  of  the  heathen  world.  He  argues  both  sides  of  it ; 
and  in  chap.  i.  that  they  were  to  be  condemned  on  substantially  moral  grounds,  and 
that  yet  they  must  be  condemned  in  much  less  measure  than  the  Jews — a  peculiarly 
offensive  turn  to  the  argument,  because  the  Jew  held  that  he  had  a  right  to  superiority 
before  God,  no  matter  how  he  lived.  The  fact  that  men  were  now  Jews,  though 
they  might  be  virtuous  and  devout,  was  enough.  The  apostle,  therefore,  is  obliged 
to  go  against  this  stupid  bigotry:  "It  is  not  they  that  hear  the  law  that  are  the 
safest,  but  they  that  do  it."  "  Ah  1  but  the  Gentiles  never  had  it,  and  of  course  they 
did  not  do  it."  "  But,"  says  Paul,  "  nevertheless,  if  they  do  those  things  under  the 
light  of  nature  which  the  law  commands,  that  shall  suffice.  If  you,  with  the  law, 
sin,  and  they  sin  without  it,  they  will  stand,  for  that  very  reason,  higher  than  yoa 
do."  This  question,  historically  considered,  was  local,  but  the  apostle  settles  it 
upon  a  ground  which  makes  it  universal ;  for  he  here  takes  ground  with  the  moral 
constitution  of  man — that  man  has  in  himself,  not  as  a  full  revelation,  but  in  a 
rudimentary  form,  an  interpreting  nature,  by  which  he  knows  what  is  right  and 
wrong,  by  which  he  accuses  or  excuses  his  conduct.  He  declares  that  men  receive  a 
revelation,  not  for  the  sake  of  creating  a  moral  sense,  but  for  the  sake  of  guiding  a 
moral  sense  already  created ;  that  religion  is  not  a  thing  superinduced  upon  the 
moral  constitution  of  man,  but  the  right  unfolding  of  that  constitution.  Let  us 
follow  this  line  out.  1.  The  essential  truths  of  religion  are  natural,  constitutional, 
organic.  They  were  not  first  created  when  declared  by  inspired  men.  Mental 
philosophy  does  not  create  mind,  and  the  law  of  conscience  did  not  create  con- 
science. All  those  great  Bible  truths  which  involve  the  nature  of  right  and  wrong, 
of  inferiority  and  superiority,  of  submission,  of  obligation — all  that  goes  to  oonsti- 
tate  what  we  call  moral  sense — has  a  foundation  in  the  nature  of  things ;  and  if 
man  only  had  the  wisdom  to  know  what  he  was  and  how  to  unfold  his  moral 
constitution,  every  man  would  work  from  his  own  moral  consciousness  to  substan- 
tially the  same  ground  which  is  open  to  him  in  Scripture.  So  that,  when  I  preach 
the  gospel,  particularly  in  its  relations  to  duty  and  obligation,  I  feel  strong,  not 
only  because  I  believe  the  Word  of  God,  but  because,  tracing  the  Word  back,  I  find 
U  written  again  in  you.  Studying  man  as  I  do,  and  studying  the  Word  of  God,  I 
find  the  two  are  respectively  witnesses  of  each  other,  and  both  together  are  stronger 
than  either  alone;  and  all  the  way  through  the  Word  of  God  appeals  to  this 
consciousness  of  men  to  bear  witness  to  its  essential  truth.  2.  On  the  other  hand, 
a  right-minded  man,  if  he  had  no  revelation,  but  had  power  to  keep  his  mind  clear 
and  sensitive  and  his  conduct  in  harmony  with  his  higher  nature,  would  go  up  on 
to  the  plane  of  the  gospel.  Hence,  the  gospel  is  not  a  superaddition  to  nature.  It 
is  the  opening  of  nature,  the  blossom  of  that  which  belongs  to  the  race ;  nature 
being  understood  to  mean,  for  the  most  part,  that  condition  which  God  first 
intended.  8.  From  this  fundamental  view,  it  will  appear  right  and  wrong  in 
homan  condact,  in  the  main,  are  not  conventional,  not  things  of  mere  oastom. 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHiP.  B. 

There  are  a  thonsand  things  in  life  which  may  be  changed,  and  which  are  different 
in  different  nations.  Bat  the  great  fundamental  principles  of  right  and  wrong- 
truth,  justice,  purity,  and  love — these  are  the  same  in  every  age  and  everywhere.  It 
makes  no  difference  how  much  men  may  philosophise  about  them.  A  man  may 
have  any  theory  he  pleases  of  digestion,  bat  digestion  does  what  it  pleases.  A 
man  may  beUeve  that  there  is  a  brain  in  his  head,  or  that  there  is  nothing  in  it ; 
but  his  belief  makes  no  difference  with  the  facts.  And  so  with  moral  theories :  they 
touch  not  moral  facts  in  the  least  degree.  4.  Men  are  not  released  from  obligations 
to  virtue  and  religion  simply  by  keeping  away  from  the  church,  &o.  There  arc 
manywho  think  that  if  they  shut  out  disturbing  truths  they  will  have  rest.  No. 
The  Word  of  God  comes  as  your  friend  to  help  you,  by  giving  yon  the  state  of  facts ; 
but  if  you  throw  the  facts  away,  you  simply  throw  the  help  away.  A  man  lies  sick, 
and  sends  for  his  physician.  The  physician  prescribes  such  and  such  remedies, 
and  forbids  the  use  of  such  and  such  articles  of  food,  Ac,  Ao.  But  after  the 
physician  has  gone  the  man  says  to  his  attendant,  "  Go,  tell  him  not  to  come 
again — to  keep  his  advice  and  his  medicines  away."  And  then  he  says,  "  There !  I 
have  dismissed  my  doctor."  If  you  could  only  dismiss  your  disease  as  easily 
as  you  can  your  doctor,  it  would  be  all  very  well ;  but  to  dismiss  your  doctor 
and  keep  your  disease  is  not  wise.  The  fever  is  a  fact,  and  does  not  depend 
on  quarrelling  schools  of  medicine.  A  man  ea^s,  "  The  Churches  are  all  by  the 
ears,  and  I  am  going  to  take  my  own  way.  I  will  manage  my  case  myself."  Yoa 
may  in  that  way  get  rid  of  Churches  and  of  a  thousand  disagreeable  circumstances ; 
but  will  any  men  get  rid  of  that  nature  in  which  the  law  is  written,  "  Thou  shalt 
love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,"  Ac,  "  and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself  "  ? 
Go  out,  now,  into  the  world  to  get  gain,  to  be  happy.  Wind  yourself  up  with  the 
key  of  selfishness.  Try  to  make  your  own  powers  serve  you  faithfully  in  harmony 
with  each  other.  They  are  at  a  jangle  with  themselves.  And  you  are  not  any 
better  off  because  you  have  put  the  Church  away  from  you ;  for  the  obligations  rest 
not  on  the  Church,  but  on  you.  Not  they  alone  who  have  made  a  profession  of 
religion  are  bound  by  its  duties :  they  are  binding  upon  every  man.  A  man  does 
not  see  any  better  for  being  in  an  oculist's  establishment.  The  necessity  or  the 
desirableness  of  his  seeing  does  not  arise  from  the  fact  that  he  is  there,  but  from 
the  nature  of  things.  And  if  a  man  has  ophthalmia  the  necessities  of  his  eye  and 
the  laws  of  sight  are  just  the  same  as  though  he  were  under  medical  treatment  and 
care.  And  yet  there  are  people  who  seem  to  think  that  of  course  a  man  ought  to  do 
certain  things  because  he  is  a  member  of  the  Church.  No,  the  obhgations  came  long 
before  the  Church  could  have  imposed  them  upon  him.  Tou  say,  "  I  am  not  a 
member  of  the  Church,  and  you  ought  not  to  expect  that  of  me."  But  are  yoa 
not  born  ?  Have  you  not  that  law  of  God  written  in  you  ?  I  preach  right,  purity, 
holiness  to  you,  because  you  are  men.  If  you  had  never  seen  a  Bible,  these  obhga- 
tions would  have  rested  on  you  by  the  very  primal  conditions  of  your  creation. 
6.  There  is  an  impression  among  many  that  freedom  is  gained  by  going  out  of  the 
sphere  of  religious  teaching  into  infidehty  ;  and  they  laugh  and  say,  "  I  used  to  feel 
guilty  if  I  broke  the  Sabbath,  but  I  do  not  now ;  I  used  to  think  that  I  ought  to 
pray,  but  prayer  is  a  superstition."  And  so  men  go  on  setting  aside  point  after 
point  of  fundamental  religious  belief  ;  and  they  think  they  are  becoming  more  and 
more  free,  and  they  ridicule  Christians,  whom  they  think  to  be  bound  hand  and 
foot.  Now,  1  do  not  say  that  the  Churches  have  the  perfect  view  of  religion  ;  but  I 
do  affirm  that  the  faith  which  is  held  by  all  Christians  is  in  the  main  a  guide  and 
a  hght.  You  and  another  man  are  walking  in  a  troublous  path.  There  are  preci- 
pices on  the  right  and  left,  and  deep  morasses  below.  Your  companion  is  walking 
with  a  little  lantern,  containing  only  a  tallow  candle,  and,  taking  one  step  at  a 
time,  manages  to  pick  his  way,  though  with  some  difficulty.  You,  wLo  are  so  bold 
as  to  venture  without  any  light,  say  to  him,  "  Your  tallow  candle  makes  a  miser- 
able pretence  of  giving  light ;  of  all  absurd  things,  the  greatest  is  the  attempt  to 
make  one's  way  through  the  world  with  such  a  light  as  that  "  ;  and  yoa  knock  it 
into  the  mud.  It  may  be  that  the  lantern  could  have  been  improved ;  but  is  it 
improved  by  darkness  ?  Now  the  man  has  nothing  to  guide  himself  with.  The 
light  he  had  was  feeble,  but  it  was  enough  to  guide  him  safely ;  and  now  he  makes 
a  misstep,  and  plunges  headlong  down  the  precipice  and  perishes.  Suppose  all  is 
true  thwt  you  say  of  Churches :  after  all,  are  they  not  better  than  nothing  ?  Do  not 
they  attempt  to  take  hold  of  those  fundamental  instincts  which  belong  to  men,  and 
which  must  be  cared  for  and  satisfied  ?  And  do  not  they  go  a  certain  way  toward 
Mtisf^ing  them  1    And  does  not  infidelity  bring  men  into  bondage  and  daiknesa 


«u».  n.]  ROMANS,  150 

Instead  of  into  liberty  and  light  ?  6.  By  throwing  oft  religions  faith  and  Iha 
restraint  of  the  Charch  men  do  not  escape  oonriotion  of  sin,  nor  a  sense  of  guilt, 
nor  nnhappinesB  (chap.  L.  20).  If  there  were  not  a  Church,  nor  a  Bible,  nor  a 
teacher ;  it  there  were  nothing  bat  the  san  and  the  stars  and  the  rolling  seasons  ; 
and  if  there  were  bat  a  single  man  living,  he  woald  be  withoat  excuse ;  for  Qod  has 
made  the  heavens  and  the  glimmering  light  of  nature,  and  these  are  enough  to  hold 
ft  man  responsible  for  his  character  and  condnot.  And  then  in  the  text  he  sajs, 
**  When  the  (Gentiles  which  have  not  the  law,"  &o.  There  is  no  man  of  any  degree 
of  reflectiveness  or  sensibility  who  is  not  made  nnhappy  in  himself  by  the  way  in 
which  he  is  living.  In  the  excitement  of  a  career  of  business,  in  the  intoxication 
of  pleasure,  men  drown  their  unhappiness ;  but  the  moment  there  comes  a  leisure 
moment  there  comes  a  time  for  thought.  A  man's  reason  looks  over  his  life,  and  he 
gays,  "  I  have  toiled  fifty  years,  and  I  have  built  my  house  and  famished  it,  and  I 
have  a  place  among  men ;  bat,  after  all,  what  am  I  profited  ?  If  I  might  live  again, 
woald  I  live  over  the  same  life  ?  Have  I  satisfied  my  early  aspirations,  realised  my 
own  ideal  ?  "  Or,  if  he  looks  more  closely  at  himself,  he  says,  "  Am  I  selfish,  or 
am  I  not  7  I  have  learned  to  wield  the  pen ;  I  know  how  to  paint ;  I  can  carve ;  I 
am  able  to  build  a  house ;  I  can  handle  the  sword ;  I  have  power  to  manage  any- 
thing in  this  world  almost ;  but  myself  I  cannot  manage.  My  conscience  jangles 
with  my  feelings;  I  am  often  carried  away  by  temptation.  Everything  is  wrong. 
There  is  nothing  that  I  make  saoh  poor  business  in  dealing  with  as  myself."  A 
man  reads  this,  not  oat  of  the  Bible,  but  out  of  his  own  soul.  And  if  a  man's 
facolties  do  not  live  in  harmony,  then  his  own  thoughts  accuse  him,  and  his 
judgment  judges  him,  and  his  moral  sense  brings  him  under  condemnation.  It  is 
in  such  cases  that  the  gospel  way  is  shown  to  men ;  and  though  they  may  set  aside 
the  revelation  of  mercy,  they  cannot  set  aside  this  judgment  that  is  perpetually 
going  on  in  their  consciences.  7.  The  gradation  in  condemnation  is  a  matter  for 
thought.  Those  who  have  been  taught  the  truth,  and  who  then  sin,  are  condemned 
in  the  greatest  measure.  But  let  no  man  say,  "  I  was  bom  of  ignorant  parents, 
remote  from  instruction,  and  I  cannot  be  condemned."  According  to  your  measure 
yon  will  be  condemned ;  but  the  lowest  grade  of  condemnation  will  be  more  than 
yoa  can  bear.  No  one  can  afford  to  be  sick.  All  the  contrivances  of  nature  have 
never  made  anybody  attempt  to  be  sick.  You  can  make  the  body  love  odious  things, 
you  can  modify  the  digestive  powers,  but  no  sort  of  treatment  ever  made  sickness  an 
agreeable  thing.  And  by  no  means  can  a  soul  that  is  out  of  order  be  happy.  There 
is  a  condemnation  that  rests  upon  it  just  so  long  as  it  is  in  that  state.  And  now 
comes  the  declaration  of  the  gospel,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,"  &o.  It  rests 
not  alone  upon  those  that  have  been  instructed,  but  upon  everybody.  8.  This 
moral  constitution  is  not  a  mere  thing  of  time.  It  is  not  an  arrangement  for  a 
special  occasion,  nor  for  a  transitory  scene.  The  testimony  of  the  Saviour  and  the 
New  Testament  all  through  is  that  right  and  wrong  are  eternal ;  that  the  moral 
constitution  which  divided  men  in  this  world  divides  them  in  the  other.  As  on  the 
one  hand  he  that  in  this  world  loves,  seeks,  and  so  far  as  in  him  lies  does  the  right, 
goes  on  for  ever  with  increasing  blessedness,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  he  who  in  this 
world  perverts  his  body  and  soul  grows  worse  and  worse  ;  and  the  evil  effects  of  his 
misspent  life  do  not  drop  off  from  him  when  he  dies,  but  go  on  with  him.  You  are 
not  sinful,  then,  because  you  have  been  preached  to  or  because  the  Bible  says  bo 
and  so,  but  on  account  of  the  perversion  of  that  nature  which  God  gave  you.  But 
when  an  offer  is  made  to  you  of  pardon  for  the  past,  and  God  in  His  infinite  mercy 
through  Jesus  Christ  gives  you  a  remedy  for  your  sins  thus  far  if  you  will  forsake 
that  which  is  evil,  if  you  turn  away  from  Him  you  are  destroyed.  Men  are  very 
much  like  lunatics  in  hospitals.  All  their  wants  are  provided  for,  and  yet  they 
set  fire  to  the  institution  and  burn  it  up.  They  are  not  made  well  by  this  deed.  It 
is  simply  a  part  of  their  insanity  to  do  it.     {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  15.  Which  show  the  work  of  the  law  written  in  their  hearts. — The  work 
of  the  law  written  in  i'.^e  heart : — "  I  know  and  approve  the  better,  and  yet  follow 
the  worse,"  said  one  of  the  wisest  heathens  ;  yet  it  did  not  require  any  superlative 
wisdom  to  arrive  at  that  conclusion.  Dr.  Livingstone  tells  us  that  he  found  the 
rudest  tribes  of  Africa  ready  to  admit  that  they  were  sinners.  Indeed  they  hold 
almost  everything  to  be  sin  which,  as  such,  is  forbidden  by  the  Word  of  God.  Nor 
is  it  possible  to  read  his  clear  statement  on  that  subject  witbout  arriving  at  tliis 
interesting  and  important  conclusion,  that  the  decalogue  is  but  the  copy  of  a  much 
older  law — that  law  which  his  Maker  wrote  on  Adam's  heart,  and  which,  though 


18»  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  & 

sadly  defaced  by  the  Fall,  may  still,  like  the  inscription  on  a  time-eaten,  moss-grown 
B^n«,  be  trac«d  on  ours.  See  how  guilt  reddens  in  the  blush,  and  consciousness  of 
sin  beiifajb  itself  in  the  downcast  look  of  childhood.  Even  when  they  wallow  in 
sin  as  swine  in  the  mire,  there  is  a  conscience  within  men  which  convicts  of  guilt 
and  warns  of  judgment.  Dethroned,  but  not  exiled,  she  still  asserts  her  claims, 
and  fights  for  her  kingdom  in  the  soul ;  and  resuming  her  lofty  seat,  with  no  more 
respect  for  sovereigns  than  beggars,  she  summons  them  to  the  bar,  and  thunders 
on  their  heads.  Felix  trembles ;  Herod  turns  pale,  dreading  in  Christ  the  apparition 
of  the  Baptist ;  while  Cain,  fleeing  from  his  brother's  grave,  wanders  away 
conscience-stricken  into  the  gloomy  depths  of  the  solitudes  of  the  unpeopled 
world.  Like  the  ghost  of  a  murdered  man,  conscience  haunts  the  house  that  was 
once  her  dwelling,  making  her  ominous  voice  heard  at  times  even  by  the  most 
hardened  in  iniquity.  In  her  the  rudest  savage  carries  a  God  within  him,  who 
warns  the  guilty,  and  echoes  those  words  of  Scripture,  "  Depart  from  evil  and  do 
good."  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  law  written  and  rewritten  in  the  heart : — Th«j 
moral  law  is  interwoven  in  man's  moral  constitution.  Man  was  created  in  Ood's 
image  (Gen.  i.  27) ;  so  in  knowledge  and  holiness  (Col.  iii.  10 ;  Eph.  iv.  24).  The 
expression  "  written  "  is  an  allusion  to  the  two  tables  of  stone  (Exod.  xxxii.  15, 16), 
perhaps  also  to  Roman  laws  written  on  brass.  God's  law  is  rewritten  in  the 
renewed  heart  (Jer.  xxxi.  33  ;  Heb.  viu.  10).  In  creation  it  is  written  as  a  light  to 
direct  and  convict ;  in  regeneration  it  is  rewritten  as  a  power  to  govern  and  trans- 
form. In  creation  it  is  written  so  as  to  be  known  and  felt ;  in  regeneration  it  is 
rewritten  so  as  to  be  known  and  loved.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Their  conscience 
also  bearing  witness. — The  witness  of  conscience : — At  the  mouth  of  two  or  three 
witnesses  shall  every  matter  be  established.  The  three  in  regard  to  men  are  God, 
the  Bible,  conscience.  The  latter  is — I.  An  inward  witness.  Other  witnesses  are 
outside,  and  so  may  be  set  aside.  One  witness  may  be  produced  against  another, 
or  circumstances  may  destroy  the  testimony  given,  but  it  cannot  be  so  with  the 
witness  within.  A  man  may  as  soon  fly  from  God  or  himself  as  from  conscience. 
Now  that  which  is  thus  within  a  man  has  the  greatest  influence  upon  him  either 
for  comfort  or  terror :  so  that  we  had  better  have  all  men  and  all  devils  for  our 
enemies  than  our  own  conscience!  11.  A  knowing  and  intelligent  witness. 
None  can  know  what  conscience  knows  but  He  who  knows  all  things.  Human 
witness  are  sometimes  set  aside  on  account  of  intellectual  feebleness,  but  con- 
Bcience  penetrates  into  the  secret  windings  of  our  hearts  ;  and  as — Its  discernment 
is  clear,  so  its  judgment  is  generally  true,  and  what  it  once  knows  it  never 
forgets,  ni.  An  authorised  and  credible  witness.  Witnesses  are  sometimes 
disallowed  on  the  ground  of  moral  blemish ;  but  conscience  is  the  King's  witness, 
eo  that  he  who  heareth  conscience,  heareth  God  (Rom.  ix.  1).  IV.  A  faithful  and 
TRUE  witness.  It  will  not  be  bribed :  like  its  Master  it  accepts  of  no  man's  person. 
It  deals  impartially  with  the  monarch  and  the  slave  ;  and  though  it  may  sometimes 
speak  amiss,  yet  never  contrary  to  its  judgment.  V.  A  lodd  witness.  The  deaf 
shall  hear  the  voice  of  conscience.  Like  the  voice  of  God,  it  is  terrible  and  full  of 
majesty.  Cain  found  it  so.  The  cry  of  conscience  was  as  loud  as  that  of  his 
brother's  blood.  Judas  thought  it  so  when  he  went  and  hanged  himself.  How 
loud  does  it  sometimes  speak  on  a  sick  and  dying  bed  I  The  law  thunders,  and 
conscience  is  but  the  echo  of  its  voice.  The  law  speaks  by  terrible  things  in 
righteousness,  and  conscience  does  the  same.  The  law  says,  "  The  soul  that 
sinneth  it  shall  die  "  ;  and  conscience  says,  "  Thou  art  the  man  1 "  Many  endeavour 
to  drown  it  in  riot,  and  the  hurry  of  business,  but  their  efforts  will  be  inefifectual. 
When  God  bids  it  speak,  it  will  speak  to  purpose  ;  and  those  who  would  not  hear 
the  voice  of  parents,  ministers,  providences,  or  even  of  the  Divine  Word,  yet  shall 
hear  the  voice  of  conscience.  VI.  A  sufficient  witness.  It  will  silence  all  pleas 
and  excuses,  put  an  end  to  all  subterfuges  and  evasions,  and  leave  a  man  self- 
judged  and  self-condemned.  It  is  sufficient  now  ;  there  is  no  refuting  its  testimony, 
or  setting  aside  its  verdict,  and  it  will  be  so  at  the  last  day.  VII.  An  eternal 
witness.  If  all  other  witnesses  were  dead,  conscience  lives,  and  will  hereafter  bear 
its  testimony  unrestrained.  Its  language  will  be,  "  Son,  remember"  1  (Prov.  v.  12). 
Conclusion :  1.  Let  us  take  care  of  sinning  against  conscience.  It  is  an  enemy 
that  no  bolts  nor  bars  can  keep  at  a  distance.  The  approbation  of  conscience,  next 
to  God's,  is  the  greatest  blessing  this  side  of  heaven.  2.  Let  us  endeavour  to  keep 
conscience  tender,  then  attend  to  its  motions,  and  hearken  to  its  remonstrances. 
Tenderness  is  its  perfection.  God  takes  notice  of  it  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  27).  3.  Above 
ftU,  lei  08  have  our  hearts  purged  from  an  evil  conscience  by  the  blood  of  Chrisk 


.  n.]  ROMANS.  W 

4.  Let  wioked  men  remember  that  if  conscience  be  ever  so  eilent  now,  it  will  be 
Tooiferous  enough  at  the  great  day.  As  the  spectre  said  to  Brutus,  "  I  will  meet 
(hee  at  Philippi,"  so  conscience  says,  "  I  will  meet  thee  at  judgment-seat  1  "  Good 
men,  who  at  times  suffer  much  from  the  lashes  of  their  own  consciences,  learn  the 
importance  of  having  always  "  a  conscience  void  of  offence  "  (1  John  iii.  21).  (B, 
Beddome,  M.A.)  Conscience : — The  apostle  is  explaining  how  the  heathen,  who 

had  not  the  written  law  of  God,  were  yet  amenable  to  an  unwritten  law  impressed 
on  the  hearts  of  all  mankind.  Their  conscience  is  a  witness  for  or  against  them. 
L  Its  nature  and  offiox.  1.  God  has  given  man  a  written  law  as  the  supreme 
standard,  whose  object  ia  to  educate  and  confirm  him  in  his  duty  to  God  and 
man.  This  law,  however,  is — (1)  Of  late  communication.  The  Old  Testament, 
given  only  gradually  through  centuries.  The  New  Testament  only  when  the  world 
was  already  old.  (2)  Of  only  local  extent.  Before  Moses  there  was  none.  In  St. 
Paul's  day  it  was  known  only  to  the  Jews.  In  our  day  vast  regions  and  even  in  our 
own  country  too  many  have  no  knowledge  of  it.  If,  then,  there  were  only  God's 
written  law,  the  mass  of  men,  in  the  past  and  still,  would  have  no  standard  of  right 
and  wrong — their  passions  unchecked.  Society  would  be  impossible.  2.  But  the 
existence  of  a  written  moral  law  implies  an  already  existing  moral  sense,  or 
mnwritten  law.  Without  this  our  obedience  to  any  law  would  want  a  moral 
character.  It  would  be  either  mere  training  and  discipline,  or  submission  to  force. 
There  would  be  no  sense  of  obligation  to  keep  it,  no  choice  of  the  will  and 
heart  in  doing  so.  3.  An  unwritten  law  of  God,  however,  does  exist.  In  every 
race  there  is  an  instinct  which — (1)  Condemns  evil.  The  judgment  day  not  only 
in  the  future.  The  great  white  tbrone,  and  He  that  sits  on  it,  are  in  eftect  set  up 
in  every  bosom.  No  deception  is  possible.  No  outward  position  screens  us.  (2) 
Vindicates  the  right.  The  answer  of  a  good  conscience  is  the  support  of  the  soul 
under  any  trial.  Of  old  it  sustained  the  saints  in  their  fiery  trials.  Fidelity  to 
principle  still  bears  up  many  a  one.  It  is  the  greatest  solace  in  the  retrospect  of 
life.  (3)  Is  given  to  receive  and  act  up  to  the  higher  teachings  of  the  written  law. 
"  By  manifestation  of  the  truth  commending  ourselves  to  every  man's  conscience 
in  the  sight  of  God."  Imposes  on  us  the  duty  of  learning  all  the  bearings  of  our 
obligations.  II.  Hindrances  to  its  healthful  vigour.  1.  Ignorance.  In  savage 
life,  obscured  and  limited  in  its  range  by  circumstances.  Imperfect  conception  of 
relative  duties  from  the  struggle  for  self-preservation.  Now  long  reign  of  selfish 
passion.  Violence  and  hereditary  darkness.  In  criminal  life  amongst  ourselves. 
The  child  of  a  thief,  what  can  it  know  of  right  and  wrong  in  some  directions  ?  2. 
Perversion.  Education  colours  our  estimate  of  the  character  of  acts  in  many  cases. 
Pascal  speaks  of  morality  as  varying  with  latitude  and  longitude.  This  is  seen — (1) 
In  religion.  Inquisitors  torturiug  and  burning  for  the  greater  glory  of  God.  White- 
field  defending  slavery.  Paul  thinking  he  honoured  God  by  helping  to  stone  St. 
Stephen.  (2)  In  business.  Conventional  or  trade  morality.  Men  do  in  business  what 
they  would  shrink  from  in  private  life.  3.  The  seared  conscience.  The  religious 
faculty  may  be  weU-nigh  extirpated  by  neglect ;  like  eyes  of  cave  insects  and  fishes. 
4.  The  weak  conscience.  A  failing  that  leans  to  virtue's  side.  Troubles  itself  and 
others  by  making  a  principle  of  what  is  really  indifferent.  The  disputes  in  Paul's 
Epistles,  new  moons,  eating  flesh,  Levitical  laws,  &o.  So  some  object  to  matters  of  no 
moral  moment.  III.  Characteristics  of  a  healtht  conscience.  1.  It  accepts  and 
acts  on  principle,  not  its  accidental  illustration.  It  guards  itself  in  great  matters  by 
fidelity  in  all.  Its  rule  is,  "  He  that  is  faithful  in  that  which  is  least,  is  faithful 
also  in  much."  2.  It  is  not  content  with  profession,  but  carries  its  convictions  into 
practice  ;  not  "  go  "  and  "  went  not."  3.  It  is  always  humble.  Feeling  its  own 
weakness  and  constant  need  of  strength.  4.  It  is  manly.  Will  not  yield  to  custom, 
favour,  gain.  5.  It  bases  its  action  on  the  law  of  Christ  as  the  ideal  of  morality. 
6.  It  keeps  the  example  ever  before  it,  and  remembers  its  obligations  to  honour 
Him  by  loyal  duty.  Conclusion :  One  may  strengthen  and  enlighten  conscience. 
In  any  case  it  grows  with  the  wider  realisation  of  the  breadth  and  sweep  of  God's 
law.  In  our  own  day  it  has  widened  its  sphere.  Needs  still  further  quickening  ia 
each  walk  of  life  ;  especially  in  the  vital  matters  of  the  soul.  The  deputy  of  the 
Almighty.  Bring  your  soul  before  it.  As  it  asks  you,  "  Guilty,  or  not  guilty?" 
answer.  If  guilty,  repentance  and  a  holy  life,  looking  to  the  great  salvation 
of  Christ,    will   reverse  the  verdict.      (C  Geikie,  D.D.)  Conscience  : — I.  Ixa 

OFFICES.     1.  It  is  an  ever  present,  true  and  helpful  friend.     One  who  will  not  be 
afraid  to  speak  plainly,  and  whose  counsels  will  be  to  the  point,  and,  as  a  rule,  wis?, 
kind,  true,  aud  good.     2.  It  is  an  ever  observant  and  faithful  witness — one  out  ot 
YOS,,   I.  11 


f#tf  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  O. 

whose  sight  we  can  nerer  get,  who  is  diligent  to  record,  oarefol  to  remember,  and 
ultimately  faithful  to  bear  its  testimony.  3.  It  is  an  impartial  judge.  It  not  only 
bears  witness,  but  acquits  or  condemns.  4.  In  regard  to  the  impenitent,  it  will  bie 
the  righteous  executioner  fulfilling  the  behests  of  the  Great  Judge  of  aU,  and  the 
punishment  itself — the  worm  that  never  dies.  11.  Thb  seasons  at  which  tz 
EXECUTES  ITS  SEVEKAL  OFFICES.  1.  To  an  extent  at  all  times — with  more  or  less 
eflBciency.  2.  To  a  more  powerful  degree — (1)  After  some  special  act  of  sin.  (2^ 
Under  some  specially  awakening  sermon.  (3)  Under  some  severe  afQiction.  (4) 
At  the  hour  of  death.  III.  The  cibocmstances  which  hat  fob  a  tiue  intebfebr 
WITH  its  efficient  ACTION.  1.  It  may  be  misinformed  or  ignorant.  Conscience 
can  only  condemn  a  man  for  what  he  himself  believes  to  be  wrong.  2.  It  may  be 
warped  or  swayed — (1)  By  prevalent  customs  and  notions.  (2)  By  a  man's  interest, 
passions,  tastes.  (3)  It  may  be  partially  stifled  and  benumbed.  Tampering  with 
conscience  will  enfeeble  its  action.  A  watch-dog  gave  notice  of  danger  to  the 
inhabitants  of  a  log  hut ;  they  were  disturbed  by  his  bark,  and,  annoyed,  they 
silenced  him — but  only  when  too  late.  The  Indians  were  upon  them,  their  hut  was 
burned,  and  their  lives  sacrificed.  Conclusion  :  1.  Do  not  trifle  with  conscience. 
2.  Seek  its  enlightenment.  3.  Remember  that  conscience  after  all  is  less  rigid  than 
the  law  of  God  (1  John  iii.  20).  4.  Let  it  lead  you  not  only  to  tremble,  but  to  the 
Cross.  {O.  J.  Adeney,  M.A.)  Conscience: — We  all  know  that  the  word  comes 
from  con  and  scio,  but  what  does  that  con  intend  ?  Conscience  is  not  merely  what 
I  know,  but  what  I  know  vritb  some  other ;  for  the  prefix  cannot  be  esteemed  super • 
flaous,  or  taken  to  imply  merely  that  which  I  know  with  or  to  myself.  That  other 
knower  whom  the  word  implies  is  God.  His  law  making  itself  known  and  felt  in 
the  heart ;  and  the  work  of  conscience  is  the  bringing  of  the  evil  of  our  acts  and 
thoughts  as  a  lesser,  to  be  tried  and  measured  by  this  as  a  greater — the  word 
growing  out  of  and  declaring  that  awful  duplicity  of  our  moral  being  which  arises 
from  the  presence  of  God  in  the  soul — our  thoughts,  by  the  standard  which  that 
presence  implies,  and  as  a  result  of  a  comparison  with  it,  "  accusing  or  excusing 
one  another."  (Abp.  Trench.)  Conscience  quickened  by  the  Holy  Spirit: — The 
Holy  Spirit  is  to  the  moral  sense  what  the  warm  breath  of  spring  is  to  the  hidden 
seeds  of  things.  This  brings  them  out,  this  unfolds  them  into  flower  and  fruit,  this 
makes  of  a  barren  expanse  a  landscape  of  beauty,  fertility,  and  gladness.  (T. 
Griffith.)  Conscience :  its  power  : — This  is — I.  Discriminatino.     By  it  man — 

1.  Discovers  the  reality  of  moral  law.  2.  Determines  his  character  according  to  it. 
II.  Binding.    Conscience — 1.  Tells  us  that  we  are  under  obligation  to  God's  law. 

2.  Produces  consciousness  of  obligation.  HI.  JuDictAL.  1.  As  a  witness.  2.  As 
a  judge.  Inferences :  1.  The  reality  of  conscience.  2.  Its  originality.  3.  Its 
universality.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Comcience:  susceptible  of  improvement  and 
injury : — I.  It  may  be  impboved.  1 .  By  use.  2.  By  reflecting  on  the  moral 
character  of  our  actions.  3.  By  obedience  to  its  admonitions,  or  conscientious 
acting.  4.  By  meditating  on  characters  of  pre-eminent  moral  excellence.  II.  It 
may  be  injubed.  1.  By  disuse.  2.  By  neglecting  to  reflect  on  the  moral  character 
of  our  actions.  3.  By  disobedience  to  its  admonitions,  or  want  of  conscientiousness. 
4.  By  frequent  meditation  on  vicious  characters  and  actions.  "  Vice  seen  too  oft, 
familiar  with  its  face,  we  first  endure,  then  pity,  then  embrace."  (T.  Robinson,  D.D). 
Com^cience  : — Nothing  has  done  so  much  to  perplex  men's  speculations  about  con- 
science as  certain  fundamental  mistakes  respecting  its  proper  nature  and  functions. 
1.  In  the  first  place,  conscience  is  not  a  law,  but  a  faculty;  not  the  decision  pro- 
nounced in  a  particular  case,  but  the  faculty  which  pronounces  the  decision.  2. 
Again,  this  faculty  is  susceptible  of  instruction  and  improvement,  like  other  faculties 
of  the  human  mind  ;  Uke  the  understanding,  for  example,  or  the  taste.  3.  There  is 
also  another  important  distinction  to  be  made  in  respect  to  conscience.  Its  authority 
is  sometimes  said  to  be  supreme  and  final.  And  so  it  is,  in  a  certain  sense ;  that  is 
to  say,  it  is  supreme  over  every  other  kind  of  human  motive  and  inducement ;  should 
a  conflict  arise,  our  sense  of  what  is  right  ought  to  prevail,  in  all  cases,  over  our 
sense  of  what  is  expedient  or  agreeable.  But  the  authority  of  conscience  is  not  final 
in  such  a  sense  as  to  forbid  conscience  itself  from,  if  need  be,  reversing  its  own  past 
decisions.  I  may  appeal  at  any  time  from  my  conscience  less  instructed  to  my  con- 
science more  instructed,  and  under  these  circumstances  what  was  right  to  me 
yesterday  may  become  wrong  to  me  to-day ;  and  what  is  right  to  me  to-day  may 
become  wrong  to  me  to-morrow.  4.  But  if  conscience  itself  is  an  improvable  faculty, 
and  if,  in  its  legitimate  action  to-day,  it  can  revise  and  reverse  its  own  decisions  of 
yesterday,  the  question  naturally  arises,  Is  there  anything  in  conscience  which  is 


(otAF.  n.]  BOMANS.  US 

fixed  and  absolate  ?  I  answer,  Tes.  The  things  whioh  are  fixed  and  absolate  in 
oonsoienoe — that  is  to  say,  the  things  which  are  the  same  in  all  consciences,  and  th* 
same  in  every  conscience  at  all  times — would  seem  to  be  these  three.  In  the  first 
place,  all  oonsoienoes  make  a  distinction  between  actions  as  being  right  or  wrong  ; 
secondly,  the  notion  of  right,  as  such,  or  of  wrong,  as  such,  is  identical  to  all  minda ; 
and,  thirdly,  all  concur  in  the  feeling  that  they  ought  to  do  what  they  believe  to  be 
right.  Each  man's  conscience  ia  a  special  development  of  our  common  moral 
nature ;  and  each  man's  duty  in  respect  to  it  is,  to  take  care  that  this  special 
development  shall  be  more  and  more  complete,  and  more  and  more  effective ; 
in  short,  that  he  may  have  a  better  conscience  to  obey,  and  obey  it  more  faithfully. 
5.  It  remains  to  consider  the  means  by  which  this  twofold  improvement  in  conscience 
and  in  conscientiousness  may  be  promoted.  The  first  condition  is,  a  habit  of  attend- 
ing to  the  moral  aspects  of  things,  and  especially  of  our  own  dispositions  and  con- 
duct ;  in  one  word,  moral  thoughtfulness.  A  second  necessary  condition  of  the  moral 
progress  required — of  progress  in  both  conscience  and  conscientiousness — is  found 
in  a  determination  to  do  right,  cost  what  it  may ;  in  other  words,  to  moral  thought- 
fulness  we  must  add  an  invincible  moral  purpose.  The  progress  insisted  on  in  this 
discourse  supposes  another  condition  ;  namely,  that  we  not  only  obey  conscience,  bat 
obey  it  as  an  echo  of  the  Divine  will :  in  other  words,  to  moral  thoughtfulness  and 
a  moral  purpose  we  must  add  a  sense  of  the  authority  and  sanctions  of  religion. 
One  condition  more.  To  make  us  more  observant  of  conscience,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  to  make  conscience  what  it  ought  to  be,  we  must  take  our  standard  of  righteous- 
ness from  the  New  Testament.  {Ja$.  Walker.)  Thelttw  of  conscience  (with  John 
viiL  9) : — Like  every  other  mental  and  moral  power,  conscience  has  its  own  distinct 
fmiotion.  It  is  that  faculty  of  our  moral  nature  which  perceives  the  right  and 
wrong  in  our  actions,  accuses  or  excuses,  and  anticipates  their  consequences  ander 
the  righteous  government  of  God.  I.  Conscibmcb  is  an  orioinal  law  in  man's 
UOBAL  NATDBE.  Being  80,  it  is  the  same  in  all  men,  civilised  and  uncivilised.  It 
cannot  be  educated  any  more  than  the  eye  can  be  taught  to  see,  or  the  ear  to  hear. 
The  only  training  a  man  can  be  given  is  in  applying  the  law  of  conscience  to  the 
conduct,  and  in  the  art  of  subjecting  the  other  powers  of  the  soul  to  its  authority. 
When  conscience  is  spoken  of  as  enlightened  and  unenlightened,  there  is  applied  to 
it  what  properly  belongs  to  some  of  the  other  powers  with  which  it  is  associated, 
particularly  the  understanding.  Being  intended  for  all  classes  the  Scriptures  are 
written  not  in  metaphysical,  but  in  popular  language,  and  therefore,  while  it  is 
proper  to  make  such  distinctions  as  those  we  have  just  indicated,  we  shall  at  present 
treat  of  conscience  in  the  popular,  that  is  in  the  Bible,  sense.  "  Their  own  con- 
science "  is  an  expression  which  suggests  these  two  things,  viz.,  that  every  man  is 
endowed  with  this  faculty,  and  that  it  is  an  essential  part  of  bis  being,  so  really  his 
own  as  to  be  inseparable  from  him,  and  indestructible.  But  conscience  is  not  now 
in  any  man  what  it  originally  was.  In  consequence  of  sin,  the  moral  law  written 
at  first  on  the  fleshly  tables  of  the  heart  had  lost  much  of  its  clearness  and  certainty, 
like  a  scarcely  legible  inscription  on  a  decaying  gravestone.  It  had  therefore  to  be 
deeply  graven  by  the  finger  of  God  on  tables  of  stone,  and  afterwards  given  in  the 
imperishable  Book,  whicli  could  be  read  in  every  tongue  throughout  the  habitable 
globe.  But  while  conscience  is  not  now  in  any  one  what  it  once  was,  and  has  in 
some  reached  its  lowest  possible  degree  of  weakness,  in  different  persons  it  may 
exist  in  different  states.  Paul  speaks  of  some  who  had  their  conscience  seared  with 
ft  hot  iron.  As  that  part  of  the  flesh  becomes  insensible  to  pain,  so  conscience, 
under  the  habit  of  sinning,  comes  to  be  so  familiar  with  evil  that  its  accusing  voice 
is,  if  at  all,  but  faintly  heard.  It  is  past  feeling.  Jude  speaks  of  some  ungodly 
men  in  his  day  as  being  twice  dead,  implying  that  their  conscience  had  been  once 
quickened,  but  that  it  had  again  sunk  into  its  previous  condition  of  torpor  and 
paralysis,  which  was  little  different  from  death.  Having  been  dead  before,  it  was 
thus  twice  dead.  The  man  whose  conscience  is  in  this  condition  will  practise  lying, 
dishonesty,  intemperance,  and  uncleanness,  without  often  thinking  he  is  doing 
wrong,  and  without  at  all  dreading  the  consequences  of  his  wrong-doing.  A  more 
hopeful  condition  of  conscience  is  that  which  is  described  as  a  pricking  in  the  heart. 
Tlus  was  how  the  first  converts  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  were  affected.  A  more  appro- 
priate phrase  could  not  easily  be  found  to  portray  the  same  moral  change  in  any 
who  undergo  it.  Piercing  sorrow,  sharp  mental  pain,  is  what  it  points  to.  Yet, 
distressing  though  it  be,  this  is  an  interesting  and  hopeful  state  of  mind.  The 
thunder  is  not  a  more  certain  presage  of  a  pure  and  settled  atmosphere  ;  the  storm 
is  not  the  more  certain  forerunner  of  a  calm  ;  the  opening  buds  and  genial  breezes 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  ru 

of  spring  are  not  the  enrer  signs  of  retreating  winter  than  are  those  prickings  of 
heart,  the  signs  of  a  spiritual  winter  breaking-up  in  the  soul,  and  of  a  spring  of  life 
and  growth  and  beauty  having  come.  Thea  there  is  also  the  peaceful  conscience. 
Tme  peace  can  come  from  only  one  source.  When  a  man  sees  that  Jesus  Christ 
has  by  His  obedience  unto  death  borne  the  penalty  of  his  sin,  and  when  he  accepts 
of  God's  forgiveness  through  Christ,  his  fears  leave  him,  his  conscience  is  pacified, 
hope  springs  up  in  his  breast.  He  may  now  and  again  have  his  regrets  and  his 
fears,  but  as  his  knowledge  of  the  Saviour  and  of  His  work  with  his  own  purity  of 
heart  and  life  increases,  so  does  his  peace  become  fuller  and  more  settled.  II.  It 
IS  BY  coNsciENCB  THAT  CONVICTION  OF  BIN  IB  PRODUCED.  There  are  no  doubt  other 
powers  which  co-operate  with  it  to  bring  about  this  result.  There  is  the  uuder- 
Btanding.  Truth  and  duty  must  be  known  before  they  can  be  believed  and  practised. 
A  man  cannot  rightly  realise  his  sinfulness  until  he  knows  what  God's  law  requires 
of  him,  nor  believe  the  gospel,  which  is  God's  great  revelation  to  us,  before  he  knows 
what  it  means.  Without  a  knowledge  of  its  truths  there  cannot  be  faith,  and 
without  an  increasing  knowledge  of  its  truths  there  cannot  be  much  progress  in 
goodness.  There  is  also  the  will.  The  renewal  of  our  moral  nature  presupposes  as 
one  of  its  conditions  the  subduing  of  the  will,  and  the  bringing  of  it  into  harmony 
with  the  will  of  God.  There  are,  it  is  true,  preliminary  steps  in  this  inward  change, 
such  as  the  enlightening  of  the  mind  with  regard  to  sin  and  salvation,  and  the 
melting  of  the  heart  into  penitence  and  contrition,  bat  there  is,  besides,  the  bending 
of  the  will  to  choose  and  to  follow  the  Divinely  appointed  way  of  deliverance.  And, 
humanly  speaking,  it  is  here  the  greatest  difficulty  in  the  work  of  conversion  is  met 
with.  The  hardest  of  all  struggles  is  to  conquer  a  man's  self-righteous  pride,  that 
Le  may  humbly  and  thankfully  accept  eternal  life  as  God's  free  gift  to  the  undeserv- 
ing who  believe  in  His  Son.  III.  It  is  by  the  truth  op  the  gospel  that  con- 
BCiENCB  IS  AWAKENED.  The  teachings  of  science  and  philosophy  are  powerless  here. 
Only  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  can  work  its  way  into  the  deep  recesses  of  man's 
nature,  stir  into  life  its  slumbering  activities,  meet  aU  its  wants,  and  satisfy 
its  highest  aspirations.  No  other  truth  can  give  us  a  fixed  and  unchanging 
standard  of  duty  outside  of  ourselves  and  not  subject  to  our  variations,  show 
Qs  how  far  we  come  short  of  it,  and  set  before  us  with  certainty  the  fixed  and 
indissoluble  connection  there  is  between  cause  and  consequence  in  the  moral 
universe.  No  other  truth  has  the  same  self-evidencing  power.  (Jos.  Bhick, 
D.D.)  Conscience  :  its  uses  and  perversions : — The  world  is  under  a  solemn 
conomy  of  gtHcrnment,  discerning,  approving,  or  condemning.  Now  it  was 
requisite  there  should  be  something  in  the  soul  to  recognise  this ;  a  faculty  to  feel 
obligation  to,  and  apprehension  of  a  greater  power.  And  that  which  makes  a  man 
feel  so  is  a  part  of  himself,  so  that  the  struggle  against  God  becomes  a  struggle  with 
man's  own  soul.  Therefore  conscience  has  been  often  denominated  "  the  God  in 
man."  I.  This  internal  judge  has  not  been  altogether  in  vain.  1.  Many 
men  have  wished  they  could  be  rid  of  it,  and  in  most  it  may  be  presumed,  there- 
fore, that  conscience  has  had  some  restraining  effect.  Criminals  would  have  been 
still  more  criminal  but  for  this.  It  has  been  one  dissentient  power  among  man's 
faculties,  as  if  among  a  company  of  gay  revellers  there  should  appear  one  dark  and 
frowning  intruder  whom  they  could  neither  conciliate  nor  expel.  It  has  struck  on 
the  Boul,  and  said,  "  Listen  to  that ! — that  belongs  to  thee  1 "  2.  It  has  often 
compelled  confessions  of  great  importance  to  truth  and  justice.  Very  generally,  in 
the  last  scene  of  life,  it  has  constrained  even  bad  men  to  give  testimony  to  religion 
and  the  guilt  and  wretchedness  of  trifiing  with  it.  3.  It  has  often  been  made 
effectual  to  urge  men  to  a  persevering  application  to  Divine  mercy,  as  acting  through 
the  mediation  of  Christ.  The  guilt  is  too  deep  for  Divine  justice  to  pardon.  There 
must  be  some  grand  expedient  as  a  medium  of  mercy,  and  here  it  is.  4.  In  good 
men  it  has  been  mighty  in  trial  and  temptation,  consolatory  under  injustice, 
and  a  sublime  energy  under  persecution.  II.  But  there  is  a  darker  side  of 
the  subject,  i.e.,  the  view  of  its  perversions  and  frustration.  1.  With  by  far  the 
greatest  number  of  men  conscience  has  been  separated  from  all  true  knowledge  of 
God.  Now  God  is  both  the  essential  authority  of  conscience  and  the  model  for  its 
rectitude.  What  is  its  condition  then  where  the  one  true  God  is  lost  from  human 
knowledge?  and  instead,  a  tribe  of  deities  whose  characters  exemplify  all  varieties 
of  ^iniquity,  dictating  absurdities  and  abominations,  blended,  indeed,  with  some 
better  things  which  are  spoiled  in  such  combination.  Or  (paganism  being  dis- 
claimed), there  is  a  falsified  notion  of  God,  and  a  perverted  apprehension  of  His 
will.     Think  vhat  an  authoiitj  for  conscience  to  acknowledge.     What  should  it  do 


CHAP,  n.]  ROMANS.  165 

but  correspond  to  its  authorities?     "  He  that  killeth  you  shall  think  he  doeth  God 
service."    A  perpetrator  in  the  St.  Batholomew  massacre  said,  "  God  was  obliged 
to  me  that  day."  2.  Conscienoe  has  often  been  beguiled  to  admit  trifling  ceremonies 
as  an  expiation  of  great  sins,  when,  had  it  been  in  its  right  state,  it  would  have 
shaken  the  whole  souL     3.  Conscience  may  suffer  itself  to  be  very  much  conformed 
to  prevailing  customs  and  notions.    That  which  ought  to  ever  look  to  the  throne 
and  law  of  God  may  be  degraded  to  this  most  irrehgious  homage  to  man.    So  that 
the  superior  and  eternal  order  of  principles  is  nearly  out  of  sight,  aa  in  some 
countries  they  rarely  see  the  son  or  the  stars.     (1)  When,  at  moments,  conscience 
does  attempt  to  resume  a  little  of  the  genuine  spirit  of  its  office,  it  is  solicited  to 
look  out  on  the  world  and  see  whether  the  common  estimates  and  practices  do  not 
warrant  that  which  it  is  disposed  to  accuse.     (2)  The  next  consequence  is  that  it 
will  have  Uttle  to  take  account  of  short  of  positive  vices.    Therefore  it  will  begin 
with  slight  censures  at  a  point  where  very  grave  ones  are  deserved.     Supposing 
the  whole  of  what  the  Divine  law  condemns  to  be  measured  by  a  scale  of  one 
hundred  degrees  of  aggravation,  then,  the  censure  beginning  at  one,  will  become 
extremely  severe  by  the  time  of  rising  to  fifty.     But  let  this  first  fifty  be  struck  off 
as  harmless  in  accommodation  to  the  general  notions,  then  conscience  will  but 
begin,  and  in  slight  terms,  its  censures  at  the  fifty-first  degree,  and  so,  at  the  very 
top  of  the  scale,  will  produce  with  but  just  that  emphasis  which  was  due  at  the 
point  where  it  began.    4.  Conscience  is  extremely  liable  to  be  accommodated  to 
each  man's  own  interests,  passions,  and  tastes.     What  will  he  not  do  to  reconcile 
it  or  make  it  submit  to  them  ?    He  will  not  part  with  them,  and  consequently  has 
great  advantages  against  his  conscience.     The  favourite  interest  or  inclination  he 
sets  in  the  fairest  light ;  palliations  of  what  is  wrong  in  it  multiply ;  it  is  far  less 
culpable  than  many  things  in  others  which  they  think  very  venial,  and  there  is  such 
and  such  good  to  which  it  will  turn  to  account.    Now  it  is  not  strange  if,  by  this 
time,  his  conscience  has  come  to  speak  in  a  much  more  submissive  voice.    And, 
melajicholy  as  the  fact  is,  there  are  few  things  that  gratify  a  corrupt  mind  more 
than  to  have  gained  a  victory  over  conscience.     5.  Conscience  may,  in  a  great 
degree,  be  turned  to  a  judgment  on  bare  external  actions.     Now  conscience  has 
a  great  advantage  as  a  judge  over  outward  observers.     It  is  seated,  with  its 
lamp,  down  in  the  hidden  world  among  the  thoughts,  motives,  intentions,  and 
wishes.     The  greater  the  grievance  1  but  how  to  obviate  it  ?    Labour  to  think  that 
what  is  practical  is  of  far  greater  importance  than  feelings  and  thoughts.    These 
are  varying  and  transient ;  actions  substantial  and  permanent.    Inward  principles 
within  do  injury  to  none  ;  the  right  actions  do  much  good.    Thoughts  and  move- 
ments within  are  much  involuntary ;  the  outward  conduct  is  the  result  of  will  and 
effort.    Look  so  much  on  the  best  parts  of  conduct  as  to  become  emboldened  to 
make  the  inference — "  the  case  is  not  so  wrong  within  as  conscience  had  attempted 
to  charge,"  for  •'  by  their  fruits  shall  men  be  known."    Thus,  in  a  measure,  may 
conscience  be  beguiled  out  of  its  inward  watching  place,  to  be  content  to  look  only 
at  the  outside.    6.  When  conscience  is  seriously  alarmed,  it  may  be  quieted  by 
delusive  applications,    *'  There  will  be  time  enough  yet."    Sometimes  these  alarms 
are  frustrated  by  treacherous  presumptions  as  to  the  way  of  propitiating  the  Divine 
Justice ;  men  may  reconcile  God  by  repentance  ;  satisfy  His  demands  by  a  reformed 
conduct ;  secure  final  safety  by  a  careful  obedience  instead  of  faith  in  Christ.    This 
last  is  a  deadly  treachery  practised  on  conscience ;  for  it  is  quieting  its  alarms  by 
inducing  it  to  abjure  that  very  law  which  is  its  appointed  standard,  and  of  which 
it  is  its  very  office  to  be  the  representative  and  sanction.    7.  Conscience  can  be 
reduced  to  a  state  of  habitual  insensibility.     This  is  attained  by  tampering  and 
equivocating  with  it ;  by  a  careful  avoidance  of  all  that  might  alarm  it ;  continual 
neglect  of  its  admonitions  ;  a  determined  resistance  and  repression ;  and  habits  of 
sin.     The  result  of  this  will  be  a  deep  torpor  and  stupefaction.     Think  of  the 
advantage  of  being  able  to  look  at  others  who  are  troubled  by  a  wakeful,  inter- 
fering conscience  1    But  why  does  this  dead  stillness  appear  an  awful  situation  ? 
Because  it  will  awake  1  and  with  an  intensity  of  life  and  power  proportioned  to  this 
long  sleep,  as  if  it  had  been  growing  gigantic  during  its  slumber.     It  will  awake  I 
— probably  in  the  last  hours  of  hfe.    But  if  not,  in  the  other  world  there  is  soma- 
thmg  which  will  certainly  awake  it.    III.  The  bight  teeatment  op  conscience, 
1.  It  should  be  regarded  with  deep  respect — even  its  least  intimations  attended  to, 
not  slighted  as  scrupulous  impertinencies,    blown    away,    &c.     2.   We  should 
diligently  aim  at  a  true  judgment  of  things,  because  our  judgment  is  the  rule  by 
which  conscience  will  proceed.     There  must  be  much  reflection  and  retirement. 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

3.  We  Bhall  recollect  always  that  the  most  judicial  conscience  is  less  rigid  and 
comprehensive  than  the  Divine  law.  •'  If  our  heart  condemn  ns,  God  is  greater 
than  our  heart."  Therefore  in  consulting  conscience  we  should  endeavour  to 
realise  to  ourselves  the  Divine  presence,  and  implore  that  our  consciences  may  ever 
be  in  the  Divine  keeping  rather  than  our  own.  4.  As  we  often  speak  of  improve- 
ments in  the  Christian  life  be  it  remembered  that  one  of  them  is  an  improvement 
in  the  discerning  sensibility,  and  extent  of  jurisdiction  of  conscience.  And  if  this 
involves  an  increase  of  solicitudes,  pains,  penitential  emotions,  so  much  the  more 
desirable  will  appear  that  better  world  where  there  is  no  possibility  of  sin,  where 
the  continued  improvement  of  spiritual  perception  will  be  a  continually  augmented 
ezquisiteness  of  the  felicity.     (John  Foster.) 

Ver.  16.  In  the  day  when  God  shall  Judge  the  secrets  of  men. — The  future 
iudgment : — I.  The  grand  subject  of  inquibt.  '*  The  secrets  of  men."    A  phrase  to 
be  understood  in  its  utmost  latitude,  including  not  only  matters  known  only  to  God 
and  our  own  consciences,  but  also  things  which  escape  ourselves,  or  the  nature  of 
which  may  be  undiscovered.    The  hypocrite,  who  either  deceived  others  or  deluded 
himself,  shall  then  be  laid  open.    And  the  good  actions  of  the  sincere  Christian, 
uncharitably  mistaken  by  the  world,  or  unreasonably  censured  by  his  own  con- 
science, shall  be  vindicated.    The  expression  does  not  exclude  public  actions 
(Eccles.  xii.  14),  which  are,  in  a  sense,  a  secret  as  to  their  nature,  motives  and 
consequences.  Our  secret  sufferings  will  also  be  judged ;  what  we  have  endured,  and 
in  what  spirit,  whether  with  resignation  toward  God,  and  with  gentleness  towards 
men ;  all  which  is  difficult  to  determine  now.    II.  The  pebson  who  will  judge  thb 
BECBETS  OF  MEN.     1.  God  who  alone — (1)  Has  a  right  to  judge  them  ;  it  is  His  law 
that  is  broken.     (2)  Can  judge  them ;  none  other  has  power  to  assemble  the  living 
and  the  dead;  wisdom,  to  know  all  the  individuals  and  their  actions,  words, 
thoughts,  &c. ;  holiness  to  hate  sin ;  justice  to  pass  an  equitable  sentence.    2.  By 
Jesus  Christ  (John  v.  22 ;  Matt,  xxviii.  18 ;  Rev.  i.  18 ;  Matt.  xvi.  27 ;  xxv.  31 ; 
Acts  X.  42 ;  xvii.  31 ;  2  Thess.  i.  7).     (1)  This  appointment  is  reasonable,  as  a 
reward  of  His  obedience  and  sufferings.    If  He  reward  us  for  ours,  how  much  more 
is  He,  who  was  "made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels  for  the  suffering  of  death," 
worthy  to  be  ••  crowned  with  glory  and  honour  "  (Phil.  ii.  6-10).     (2)  This  perfect 
honour  is  appropriate  to  Him.    The  powers  of  hell  employed  their  force  and  fraud 
in  opposing  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  it  is  fit  He  should  pass  sentence  upon  thenc 
(Rev.  xvii.  13,  14).    (3)  With  respect  to  His  followers  also,  it  is  fit  that  He  should 
acquit  them,  who  bore  their  sins  ;  that  He  should  determine  their  happiness,  who 
purchased  heaven  for  them  with  its  various  mansions;  that  He  should  present  them 
faultless,  who  preserved  them  from  falling ;  that  He  should  judge  those  who  were 
under  His  government  while  on  earth.    (Joseph  Benson.)        Coming  judgment  of 
the  secrets  o/  men : — I.  On  a  certain  day  God  will  judge  men.     1.  A  judgment  ia 
going  on  daily.    Every  deed  is  recorded  in  the  register  of  doom.     (1)  This  session 
of  the  heavenly  court  is  like  the  daily  sessions  of  our  local  magistrates,  and  does 
not  prevent  but  rather  necessitates  the  holding  of  an  ultimate  great  assize.    (2)  Aa 
each  man  passes  into  another  world  an  immediate  judgment  is  passed  upon  him; 
but  this  is  only  the  foreshadowing  of  the  final  judgment.    (3)  There  is  a  judgment 
also  passing  upon  nations,  for  as  nations  will  not  exist  as  nations  in  another  world, 
they  have  to  be  judged  now,  and  history  shows  how  sternly  justice  has  dealt  with 
empire  after  empire,  when  they  have  become  corrupt.    Where  is  Assyria,  Babylon, 
Rome,  Ac.  ?    The  world  is  full  of  monuments  of  the  mercy  and  justice  of  God :  the 
very  monuments  of  His  justice  being  proofs  of  His  goodness ;  for  it  is  mercy  to  put 
an  end  to  evil  systems  when,  like  a  nightmare,  they  weigh  heavily  upon  matikini 
We  have  often  laughed  at  the  idea  of  the  New  Zealander  sitting  on  the  broken  arch 
of  London  Bridge  sketching  the  ruins  of  St.  Paul's.    But  is  it  quite  so  ridiculous  aa 
it  looks  ?  What  is  there  about  London  that  it  should  be  more  enduring  than  Bome  ? 
If  we  rebel,  God  will  not  bold  us  guiltless.     2.  Though  such  judgments  proceed 
every  day,  yet  there  is  to  be  a  day  in  which  more  distinctly  and  finally  God  will 
judge  men.     We  might  have  guessed  this  by  the  light  of  nature  and  of  reason. 
Even  heathen  peoples  have  had  a  dim  notion  of  a  day  of  doom  ;  but  we  are  solemnly 
assured  of  it  in  Holy  Scripture.     (1)  By  judging  is  here  meant  all  that  concerns  the 
proceedings  of  trial  and  award,     (a)  There  will  be  a  session  of  majesty,  and  the 
appearing  of  a  great  white  throne,  surrounded  with  pomp  of  angels  and  glorified 
beings,     (b)  Then  a  summons  will  be  issued,  bidding  all  men  come  to  judgment. 
(c)  Then  the  indictment  will  be  read,  and  each  one  examined,     (d)  Then  the  books 


CHAP,  n.]  ROMANS.  167 

shall  be  opened,  and  everything  recorded  there  read,  (e)  Then  the  great  Jndge  shall 
give  the  decision,  pronounce  sentence  and  execute  it.  (2)  This  will  be  so,  and  it 
ought  to  be  80  :  God  should  judge  the  world,  because  He  is  the  universal  ruler  and 
sovereign,  (a)  There  has  been  a  day  for  sinning,  there  ought  to  be  a  day  for 
punishing,  (b)  It  ought  to  be  so  for  the  sake  of  the  righteous.  The  best  have  had 
the  worst  of  it,  and  there  ought  to  be  a  judgment  to  set  these  things  right.  Besides, 
the  festering  iniquities  of  each  age  cry  out  to  God  that  He  should  deal  with  them. 
(3)  Why  doth  it  not  come  at  once  ?  And  when  will  it  come  ?  It  is  idle  and  profane 
to  guess  at  it,  since  even  the  Son  of  Man,  as  such,  knoweth  not  the  time.  It  is 
sufficient  that  it  will  surely  come ;  sufficient  also  to  believe  that  it  is  postponed. 
(a)  To  give  space  for  repentance,  {b)  That  the  Church  may  be  completed.  The 
Lord  keeps  the  scaffold  standing  till  He  hath  built  up  the  fabric.  Not  yet  are  all 
the  redeemed  with  blood  redeemed  with  power  and  brought  forth  into  the  holiness 
in  which  they  walk  with  God.  But  do  not  deceive  yourselves.  The  great  day  of 
Hia  wrath  cometh  on  apace,  and  days  of  reprieve  are  numbered.  II.  God  whl 
JUDGE  THE  SECRETS  OP  MEN.  1.  By  thcse  are  meant — (1)  Those  secret  crimes 
which  hide  themselves  away  by  their  own  infamy,  which  are  too  vile  to  be  spoken 
of.  (2)  The  hidden  motives  of  every  action  ;  for  a  man  may  do  that  which  is  right 
from  a  wrong  motive,  and  so  the  deed  may  be  evil  in  the  sight  of  God,  though  it 
seem  right  in  the  sip;ht  of  men.  Oh,  think  what  it  will  be  to  have  it  proven  that 
yon  were  godly  for  the  sake  of  gain,  that  you  were  generous  out  of  ostentation,  or 
for  love  of  praise,  <&o.  (3)  The  sensual  desires  and  imaginings.  (4)  Secrets,  that 
were  secrets  even  to  the  sinners  themselves,  for  there  is  sin  in  us  which  we  have 
never  yet  discovered.  2.  Why  God  should  judge  the  secrets  of  men.  Because — 
(1)  There  is  really  nothing  secret  from  God ;  for  all  things  are  naked  and  open  to 
the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  (2)  Often  the  greatest  of  moral  acts  are 
done  in  secret.  The  brightest  deeds  that  God  delights  in  are  those  that  are  done 
by  His  servants  when  they  have  no  motive  but  to  please  Him,  and  when  they 
studiously  avoid  publicity.  It  were  a  pity  that  such  deeds  should  be  left  out  at  the 
great  audit.  Thus,  too,  secret  vices  are  also  of  the  very  blackest  kind,  and  to 
exempt  them  were  to  let  the  worst  of  sinners  go  unpunished.  (3)  Besides,  the 
secret  things  of  men  enter  into  the  very  essence  of  their  actions.  An  action  is, 
after  all,  good  or  bad  very  much  according  to  its  motive.  So,  if  God  did  not  judge 
the  secret  part  of  the  action  He  would  not  jud^e  righteously.  (4)  The  secret  thing 
is  the  best  evidence  of  the  man's  condition.  Many  a  man  will  not  do  in  public  that 
which  would  bring  him  shame.  That  which  a  man  does  when  he  thinks  that  he  is 
entirely  by  himself  is  the  best  revelation  of  the  man.  III.  God  will  jtjdqe  thb 
SECRETS  of  men  BY  Jesus  Chbist.  This  will  be— 1.  For  the  display  of  His  glory. 
What  a  difference  there  will  be  then  between  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem's  manger  and 
the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  ;  between  the  weary  man  and  fuU  of  woes,  and 
He  that  shall  then  be  girt  with  glory,  sitting  on  a  throne  encircled  with  a  rainbow  t 
From  the  derision  of  men  to  the  throne  of  the  universal  judgment,  what  an  ascent ! 
This,  too,  will  finally  settle  the  controversy  about  our  Lord's  Deity.  2.  Because 
men  have  been  under  Hia  mediatorial  sway,  and  He  is  their  King.  We  have  been 
placed  by  an  act  of  Divine  clemency,  not  under  the  immediate  government  of  an 
offended  God,  but  under  the  reconciling  rule  of  the  Prince  of  Peace.  3.  That  there 
may  never  be  a  cavil  raised  concerning  that  judgment.  Men  shall  not  be  able  to 
say.  We  were  judged  by  a  superior  being  who  did  not  know  our  weaknesses  and 
temptations,  and  therefore  judged  us  without  a  generous  consideration  of  our  con- 
dition. The  Judge  was  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.  He 
is  our  brother,  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,  partaker  of  our  humanity, 
and  therefore  understands  and  knows  what  is  in  men.  4.  This  judgment  by  Christ 
puts  beyond  possibility  all  hope  of  any  after-interposition.  If  the  Saviour  con- 
demns, and  such  a  Saviour,  who  can  plead  for  us  7  If  He  that  bled  to  save  men  at 
last  oomes  to  this  conclusion,  that  there  is  no  more  to  be  done,  bat  they  must  be 
driven  from  His  presence,  then  farewell  hope.  6.  Does  not  this  also  show  how 
oertain  the  sentence  will  be  ?  for  this  Christ  of  God  is  too  much  in  earnest  to  play 
with  men.  If  He  says,  "  Come,  ye  blessed,"  He  will  not  fail  to  bring  them  to  their 
inheritance.  If  He  be  driven  to  say,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed,"  He  will  see  it  done,  and 
into  the  everlasting  punishment  they  must  go.  6.  It  seems  as  if  God  in  this 
intended  to  give  a  display  of  the  unity  of  all  His  perfections.  In  Christ  you  behold 
justice  and  love,  mercy  and  righteousness,  combined  in  equal  measure.  He  tarns 
to  the  right,  and  says,  "Come, ye  blessed,"  and  with  the  same  lip,  as  He  glances  t« 
the  left,  He  says,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed."     IV.  All  this  is  ACCORDtNO  to  thb  oospel. 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

There  is  nothing  in  the  gospel  contrary  to  this  solemn  teaching.  Men  gather  tr 
hear  as  preach  of  infinite  mercy,  and  oar  task  is  joyful ;  bat  oh,  remember  thai 
nothing  in  our  message  makes  light  of  sin  1  There  is  grace  for  the  man  who  quits 
his  sin,  but  there  is  tribulation  and  wrath  upon  every  man  that  doeth  evil.  The 
gospel  is  all  tenderness  to  the  repenting,  but  all  terror  to  the  obstinate  offender. 
The  background  of  the  Cross  is  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  "  According  to  my 
gospel,"  saith  Paul ;  and  he  meant  that  the  judgment  is  an  essential  part  of  the 
gospel  creed,  and  in  times  of  righteous  indignation  its  terrible  significance  seems  a 
very  gospel  to  the  pure  in  heart.  I  have  read  this  and  that  concerning  oppression, 
slavery,  the  treading  down  of  the  poor,  and  the  shedding  of  blood,  and  I  have  rejoiced 
that  there  is  a  righteous  Judge.  Thousands  of  men  have  been  hanged  for  much 
less  crimes  than  those  which  now  disgrace  gentlemen  whose  names  are  on  the  lips 
of  rank  and  beauty.  Where  this  is  not  preached,  I  am  bold  to  say  the  gospel  is 
not  preached.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  that  men  be 
warned  as  to  what  will  happen  if  they  continue  in  their  sins.  Surgeon,  you  hope 
to  heal  the  sick  without  their  knowing  it.  Yon  therefore  flatter  them  ;  and  they 
die  I  Tour  delicacy  is  cruelty ;  you  are  a  murderer.  Shall  we  keep  men  in  a  fool's 
paradise  ?  Shall  we  lull  them  into  soft  slumbers  from  which  they  will  awake  in 
hell  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  secrets  of  men  disclosed  and  judged  : — Secrets  of — 
I.  Conduct.  Those  actions  we  concealed  from  friendship  and  from  man,  pro- 
claimed on  the  housetop.  How  many  secrets  are  now  in  progress  in  the  world ! 
Secrets  of — 1.  Ambition,  where  the  man  is  sacrificing  all  for  it.  2.  Covetousness  ; 
call  them  secrets  of  trade  if  you  like,  but  there  are  many  practices  countenanced 
which  cannot  bear  the  Ught.  How  have  you  held  back  from  the  widow,  and  passed 
by  the  orphan  ?  3.  Sensuality.  In  darkness,  not  to  be  named  in  public.  Look  in 
your  closets  ;  how  have  your  consciences  been  contaminated.  4.  Envy  :  I  cannot 
go  into  your  closets ;  but  what  has  God  seen  there  I  U.  Chabactzb.  Character  ia 
formed  by  principle.  Now  this  can  only  be  known  to  Him  who  searches  the  heart. 
I  know  not  the  springs  of  your  conduct,  nor  the  principles  on  which  your  character 
is  formed.  Though  Jesus  says  we  may  know  the  tree  by  the  fruit,  yet  there  is  not 
always  a  faithful  correspondence  between  principles  and  practice.  How  few  seek 
only  the  glory  of  God.  Self  is  a  subtle  principle.  In  private  a  man  will  blush  at 
his  own  hypocrisy  ;  and  Satan,  helping  him,  may  make  him  a  self-deceiver.  Bat 
every  motive  will  then  start  up !  How  many  actions  now  under  the  garb  of 
humility  wiU  then  be  seen  to  have  originated  in  pride  1  How  many  blazoned  deedp 
from  self-love  !  How  many  actions,  which  seem  under  the  motive  of  zeal  to  God. 
like  those  of  Jehu,  are  prompted  by  interest  I  IIL  Inattention.  A  large  portion 
of  our  actions  are  thought  to  be  venial,  trifling,  &c.  "  For  every  idle  word  which 
men  shall  speak,  they  shall  give  account  in  the  day  of  judgment."  lY.  Influence. 
We  are  members  one  of  another.  We  are  always,  when  in  society,  doing  either 
good  or  harm.  1.  Little  do  we  know  how  many  are  they  on  whom  we  have  in  some 
way  exerted  an  unhallowed  influence.  In  that  day  the  author  of  blasphemous 
works  will  answer  for  all  the  evil  he  has  done.  2.  At  the  same  time,  many  secrets 
of  prayer  will  then  be  found,  many  tears,  &o.  Conclusion :  1.  This  subject  requires 
deep  self-examination.  What  secrets  will  this  night  conceal !  2.  What  will  be  the 
effects  of  this  judgment  ?  (1)  The  shame  of  exposure.  What  would  you  not  give 
here  to  avoid  exposure?  (2)  Besides  shame,  the  agony  of  remorse,  the  horror  of 
despair.  "  Some  shall  awake  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."  (J.  Summerfield, 
A.M.)  Judgment  of  our  thoughts : — 1.  Thoughts  are  amongst  the  secrets  of  men. 
They  are  what  men  cannot  be  sure  of  in  each  other.  They  are  what  men  often 
seem  to  imagine  that  even  God  cannot  behold.  2.  Whence  is  it  that  the  thoughts 
arise  which  will  be  called  to  account  ?  "  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts" 
(Matt.  XV.  19).  Out  of  the  heart  also  it  is  that  good  thoughts,  by  God's  good  grace, 
spring  up.  3.  And  this  make  it  so  needful  for  them  to  be  judged  hereafter.  They 
prove  what  is  the  inward  disposition  of  the  soul,  what  there  is  of  good  or  evil  there. 
4.  But  though  it  is  easy  to  see  why  the  thoughts  must  be  judged ;  yet  it  is  not  easy  to 
think  as  if  they  would  be.  How  few  think  continually  such  thoughts  as  they 
would  wish  to  have  entirely  laid  open  onto  those  amongst  whom  they  live  I  How 
few  such  as  are  fit  to  be  beholden  by  Him  to  whom  all  thoughts  are  open  I  How 
few  that  God  will  judge  them  I  I.  What  abe  the  thoughts  that  will  be  judged. 
1.  Selfish  thoughts.  For  what  are  the  thoughts  which  God  commands  us  to  cherish 
towards  each  other  ?  (see  Matt.  xix.  19 ;  Kom.  xii.  10  ;  Phil.  ii.  4).  Consider  how 
far  are  your  thoughts  guided  by  these  rules  ?  2.  Proud  thoughts.  The  pattern  set 
before  a  Christian  is  as  follows :  "  Learn  of  Me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart " 


IWAP.  n.]  ROMANS.  16* 

(Mntt.  xi.  29).     The  rule  laid  down  for  his  thoughts  of  others  is,  "  In  lowliness  of 
mind,"  &o.  (Phil.  ii.  8).    How  often  is  this  rule  violated  ;  how  seldom  this  pattern 
followed !   There  is,  indeed,  a  great  variety  in  rank,  ability,  i&o.,  and  it  would  be  but 
a  pretence  to  humility  for  a  man  to  profess  himself  inferior  in  a  point  where  he 
cannot  help  to  know  his  own  advantages.    But  whatsoever  be  his  comparative 
advantages,  let  him  fix  his  attention  rather  on  his  own  actual  defects — his  sins, 
wasted  opportunities — and  he  will  scarcely  think  highly  of  himself.     3.   Angry 
thoughts.     These  are  closely  connected  with  pride  and  selfishness.    He  that  thinks 
highly  of  himself  covets  largely  for  himself,  and  must,  therefore,  often  be  disappointed 
and  affronted.     Thus  spring  up  angry  thoughts  ;  and  though  neither  unkind  words 
or  actions  follow,  the  thoughts  alone  are  sinful,  and  will  be  judged.    The  most 
secret  thoughts  Christ  would  have  to  be  now  gentle  and  charitable.    4.  Impure 
thoughts  (Matt.  v.  27,  28).    Let  no  one  imagine  himself  innocent,  merely  because 
his  conduct  is  respectable.      The  fear  of  shame,  the  lack  of  opportunity,  may 
preserve  the  outward  character,  but  they  cannot  secure  the  favourable  judgment  of 
Him  who  sees  the  heart  to  be  sensual.    Thus  not  only  he  who  follows  after  strong 
drink  in  excess,  but  he  also  who  fain  would  do  so  if  he  could  is  a  drunkard  in  the 
sight  of  the  Almighty.     Thus  in  another  sin,  "  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a 
murderer "  (1  John  iii.  15).    5.  Worldly  thoughts.      We  learn  that  a  Christian 
should  set  his   "  affections  on  things  above "  (Col.   iii.   2),   and  not  be  anxious 
for  this  world's  morrow  (Matt.  vi.  25-34).    How,  then,  can  they  answer  for  it  here- 
after, whose  whole  minds  are  occupied  with  the  business  of  the  world  they  live  in  ; 
with  scarcely  one  reflection  in  the  day  on  the  world  which  they  so  soon  must  enter? 
Are  not  these  things  among  those  secrets  of  men  which  God  will  judge  ?    II.  What 
SHOULD  WK  DO  IN  VIEW  OF  THIS?    1.  Besides  the  times  which  you  set  apart  for 
prayer,  Ac,  you  must  endeavour  to  cherish  thoughts  of  heaven  in  the  midst  of  your 
attention  to  the  business  of  earth.     Say  you  are  engaged  in  work.     Why  should 
you  not  relieve  your  toil  by  thinking  of  what  awaits  you  when  life  shall  end  ?    2. 
Bet  before  yourselves  your  Christian  calling.    Keep  in  view  the  condemnation  from 
which  you  have  been  deUvered,  and  the  dealings  of  Him  who  has  delivered  yen 
(Phil.  iv.  8).    And  think  further  of  what  God  has  yet  in  store  for  us  in  the  world 
which  now  we  see  not.     Let  us  more  etedfastly  believe  that  we  shall  dwell  in 
heaven,  and  we  shall  think  more  frequently  of  dwelling  there.     Let  us  believe  more 
firmly  that  Christ  died  fur  our  sins,  and  we  shall  think  of  Him  both  more  often  and 
more  thankfully.    Then  shall  we  less  fear  to  have  our  secrets  judged,  when  we  have 
not  a  thought  which  is  not  beforehand  submitted  to  our  Judge,  suggested  by  His 
Spirit,  guided  by  His  Word,  or  devoutly  surrendered  to  His  will.     (C.  Girdlestone, 
M.A.)        The  secrets  of  the  soul: — I.  We  live  in  a  steange  secbecy,  even  hidden 
FBOM  OUB  MOST  INTIMATE  FBiENDS.     1.  If  any  oue  of  US  Were  asked  to  relate  his  own 
life,  he  might  relate  two  lives  which  would  seem  all  but  independent  of  each  other. 
He  might  tell  when  he  was  born,  where  he  had  lived,  what  he  had  done,  &o.    He 
might  anticipate  the  future,  calculate  what  were  his  chances  of  success,  and  how  he 
expected  to  end  his  days.    Or,  again,  he  might  tell  quite  a  different  story.    What 
he  remembered  of  his  own  early  character ;  what  were  his  real  affections ;  what  did 
he  secretly  like,  and  pursue,  and  hope  for ;  what  changes  had  passed  over  him  ;  what 
events  had  influenced  the  general  current  of  his  thoughts ;  what  struggles  he  bad 
been  engaged  in,  and  their  issue.     He  might  tell  of  the  very  beginningR,  unknown 
to  all  save  himself,  of  habits  of  sin  never  since  quite  shaken  off  ;  of  deeds  done  in 
darkness;  why  some  names,   associations,  memories  make  him  uncomfortable 
without  any  visible  reason ;  why  he  wishes,  in  his  secret  heart,  some  subjects  to  be 
forbidden,  and  is  always  conscious  of  an  effort  to  seem  indifferent  when  they  are 
mentioned.    2.  Now  how  different  these  two  lives  would  often  be !    How  events  of 
the  highest  importance,  and  persons  who  play  a  large  part  in  the  one  would 
disappear  in  the  other  I     How  strange  it  would  be  to  see  that  a  man  who  had 
sncceeded  in  the  eyes  of  his  friends  in  a  particular  path  had  meanwhile  been 
cherishing  within  him  quite  foreign  thoughts  and  other  longings  I     How  strange 
to  find  that  a  fair  character  was  only  fair  outwardly  I    Those  who  had  been  praised 
would,  in  many  cases,  win  pity ;  and  some  few  who  now  suffer  from  showing  ill 
would  be  found  to  rank  far  above  the  level  at  which  they  had  always  been  placed. 
Often  the  recital  of  a  man's  secret  life  would  completely  change  our  opinion  of  him. 
But  still  more  often  we  should  be  astonished  to  see  how  these  two  lives  seemed  to  run 
Bide  by  side  almost  without  mingling.     II.  The  revelation  will  one  day  be  made, 
AND  Christ  will  decide,  A^•D  Hk  alon'k  can  decide,  on  the  evidence  which  each 
will  give     1.  l^e'ther  tcL's  the  whole  man.   (I)  The  outer  life  only  tells  what  we  ar*^ 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  & 

under  all  the  inflaences  of  the  eyes  of  others,  which  eyes  call  into  use  a  completely 
different  set  of  faculties  and  motives — the  desire  to  be  thought  well  of,  to  please,  to 
win  popularity  or  love,  then  begin  to  act.  Our  consciences,  too,  are  strengthened 
in  some  ways  by  the  sight  of  each  other ;  and  there  are  some  duties  which  we  see 
much  more  clearly.  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  the  inner  life  tells  what  we  are  when 
quite  left  to  ourselves,  but  no  man  is  complete  when  alone.  There  is  a  large  part 
of  his  nature  which  is  made  to  fit  into  the  society  of  his  fellows ;  and  if  this  part  of 
him  does  not  find  its  proper  complement,  the  nature  of  the  man  is  not  all  called  out. 
Moreover,  what  goes  on  in  our  secret  lives  is,  to  a  great  extent,  the  very  consequence 
of  our  believing  that  it  will  end  where  it  begins.  Many  a  man  indulges  passing 
thoughts,  who  would  not  put  them  into  deeds  even  if  tempted  by  the  oertainty  of 
perpetual  concealment.  It  would  not  be  possible,  therefore,  to  judge  a  man  either 
by  the  secret  life  or  by  the  public.  But  Christ  will  unveil  them  both,  and  we  shall 
see  and  feel  the  justice  of  His  decision.  2.  Now  we  can  see  why  God  has  thus  shut 
ap  a  large  and  important  part  of  our  lives  in  this  absolute  secrecy.  God  has  made 
VLB  to  be  members  one  of  another;  but  He  will  not  have  ns  to  be  nothing  but 
members  one  of  another.  Every  soul  shall  have  an  individual  life,  with  an  in- 
dividual history,  and  sball  come  at  last  to  an  individual  judgment.  God  requires 
that  each  soul  shall  have  a  separate  strength  supplied  by  Himself  alone.  The 
Church  is  much.  But  the  Church  shall  not  be  everything.  You  shall,  if  you  are 
to  call  yourself  a  servant  of  Christ,  give  something  which  you  and  you  alone  can 
give,  which  you  and  you  alone  can  know  whether  you  give  or  not.  From  this 
responsibihty  you  cannot  escape.  Another  may  ask  you  whether  you  have  done  it, 
but  he  must  depend  for  his  answer  on  what  you  tell  him,  and  he  cannot  know 
whether  your  answer  is  the  whole  truth.  God  alone  can  tell  that ;  and  between 
yourself  and  God  the  secret  must  remain  till  the  judgment-day.  3.  God  hag 
hidden  a  part  of  our  lives ;  and  this  concealment  we  can  cast  over  much  more  than 
He  has  hidden.  But  again  and  again  are  we  warned  against  it.  It  is  the  man 
whose  deeds  are  evil  that  loves  darkness  rather  than  light.  And  what  is  the  voice 
of  God's  Word  is  also  the  voice  of  natural  feeling.  The  man  who  is  fair  outside  and 
foul  within  is  condemned  of  all  men  as  a  hypocrite.  Men  reserve  all  their  strongest 
terms  of  reprobation  for  the  dark,  reserved,  and  secret  sinner.  Men  refuse  their 
love  to  the  reserved  and  secret  character.  Nature  and  revelation  both  warn  us 
against  the  danger  we  run  if  we  pollute  our  inner  and  secret  life  with  what  we  dare 
not  tell.  4.  In  view  of  this  awful  coming  judgment  let  us  determine  to  force  al)  our 
faults  outwards.  At  whatever  cost  let  us  keep  sacred  to  God  that  inner  shrine 
which  He  has  thus  hidden  with  a  secrecy  of  His  own  making.  Let  us  avoid  a 
secret  sin  with  a  hundred  times  more  eager  avoidance,  just  because  it  is  secret.  II 
we  can  be  fair  anywhere  let  it  be  in  that  which  God  has  reserved  for  Himself,  and 
where  Christ  is  willing  to  dwell.  (Bp.  Temple. )  According  to  my  gospel. — St.  Paul 
and  his  gospel : — It  is  impossible  to  tell  what  it  cost  Paul  to  write  Chapter  I.  It  is  a 
shame  even  to  speak  of  the  things,  but  Paul  felt  that  it  was  necessary  to  break 
through  bis  shame,  and  to  speak  out  concerning  the  hideous  vices  of  the  heathen. 
Monsters  that  revel  in  darkness  must  be  dragged  into  the  open,  that  they  may  be 
withered  up  by  the  light.  After  Paul  has  thus  written  in  anguish  he  bethought 
himself  of  his  chief  comfort.  He  clings  to  the  gospel  with  a  greater  tenacity  than 
ever.  Here  he  did  not  speak  of  it  as  "the  gospel,"  but  as  "my  gospel."  He  felt 
that  he  could  not  live  in  the  midst  of  so  depraved  a  people  without  holding  the 
gospel  with  both  hands,  and  grasping  it  as  his  very  own.  "  My  gospel."  Not  that 
Paul  was  the  author  of  it,  not  that  Paul  had  an  exclusive  monopoly  of  its  blessings, 
but  that  he  had  so  received  it  from  Christ  Himself,  and  so  fully  taken  it  into  himself 
that  he  could  not  do  less  than  call  it  '•  my  gospel."  In  another  place  he  speaks  of 
"  our  gospel";  to  show  how  believers  identify  themselves  with  the  truth  which  they 
preach.  1.  He  had  a  definite  form  of  truth,  and  he  beheved  in  it  beyond  all  doubt ; 
and  therefore  he  spoke  of  it  as  "  my  gospel."  Herein  we  hear  the  voice  of  faith, 
which  seems  to  say,  "  Though  others  reject  it,  I  am  sure  of  it,"  "  Should  all  the 
forms  that  men  devise,"  <feo.  2.  Is  not  this  word  "  my  gospel "  the  voice  of  love? 
Does  he  not  by  this  word  embrace  the  gospel  as  the  only  love  of  his  soul — for  the 
sake  of  which  he  had  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things,  and  for  the  sake  of  which  he 
w£ia  willing  to  proclaim,  even  in  Caesar's  palace,  the  message  from  heaven  7  Though 
each  word  should  cost  him  a  life,  he  was  willing  to  die  a  thousand  deaths  for  the 
holy  cause.  3.  Does  not  this  show  his  courage  1  As  much  as  to  say,  "  I  am  not 
ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ."  4.  There  is  a  touch  of  discrimination  about  the 
expression.    Paul  perceives  that  there  are  other  gospels,  and  he  makes  short  work 


n-]  ROMANS.  ITl 

with  them.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Pauline  gospel: — Twice  in  this  epistle  the 
apoBfle  QBes  tills  remarkable  expression  ;  here  and  in  chap.  zvi.  25.  Now,  it  wonld 
be  obviously  arrogant  for  any  ordinary  preacher  to  use  such  an  expression.  We  dare 
not  speak  of  it  so  as  to  imply  that  it  has  acquired  some  distinctive  character  from 
oar  way  of  putting  it.  But  in  Paul's  case  we  may  feel  sure  that  this  expression  was 
not  used  presumptuously.  1.  Not  only  was  he  a  chosen  apostle,  but  there  was  given 
to  him  such  excellency  of  knowledge  in  the  mystery  of  CHirist,  that  it  is  impossible 
to  see  how  Christianity  could  have  become  the  religion  of  all  men  but  for  Paul.  Peter 
may  have  been  qualified  to  open  the  door  of  faith  to  the  Gentiles,  and  may  hav« 
struck  the  first  blow  at  the  middle  wall  of  partition,  but  it  was  through  Paul's 
preaching  that  this  middle  wall  was  broken  down  effectually  and  finally,  and  the 
last  trace  of  the  long  inferiority  of  the  Gentile  to  the  Jew  completely  effaced.  2. 
Then,  again,  it  is  Paul  who  has  shaped  all  our  formal  theology  as  such,  and  given 
the  life  of  Christ  in  the  soul  that  articulate  form  without  which  it  would  soon  die 
away  into  a  vague  and  bodiless  sentiment.  It  is  Paul  who  has  opened  up  the  types, 
and  linked  Old  Testament  and  New  together.  8.  All  philosophy  and  all  history  may 
be  said  to  stream  out  of  the  teaching  of  this  the  greatest  of  the  apostles,  like  those 
rivers  which  flowed  oat  of  Eden  and  parted  into  four  heads.  As  for  the  philosophy 
of  history,  it  may  be  said  to  take  its  rise  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Bomans,  in  the 
same  way  as  it  has  been  said  that  history  itself  was  born  on  the  night  of  the 
Exodus.  4.  I  dare  not  make  use  of  this  expression.  And  yet  I  feel  irresistibly 
attracted  to  nse  it,  though  in  a  much  lower  sense.  My  justification  for  preaching  at 
all  is,  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  any  true  teacher  has  a  message  from  God 
which  may  be  said  to  be  distinctively  his  own.  Every  man  must  be  fully  persuaded 
in  his  oum  mind,  and  then  declare  hit  own  mind  to  others.     {J.  B.  Heard,  M.A.) 

Vers.  17-29.  Behold,  thou  art  called  a  Jew. — The  Jews  also  toithout  excuse : — 
Hitherto  the  apostle,  in  seeking  to  shut  up  the  Jew  onto  the  faith  of  Christ,  has 
contented  himself  with  an  enunciation  of  the  equitable  principles  on  which  the 
final  judgment  shall  proceed,  simply  affirming,  of  both  rewards  and  punishments, 
that  they  shall  be  to  the  Jew  first,  but  also  to  the  Gentile.  He  now  proceeds,  in  a 
direct  appeal  to  the  Jew,  to  indicate  to  him  the  folly  of  any  hope  of  escape  but  in 
the  free  grace  of  God  as  revealed  in  the  gospel.  I.  The  appeal  is  hade  to  the 
Jew  as  to  the  pbacticai,  effect  of  the  relioion  of  which  he  made  his  boast  ttpon 
HIS  OWN  ohabaoteb  AMD  ooNDtiCT.  1.  Did  it  make  him  to  become  a  wiser  or  better 
man?  If  not,  of  what  avail  could  it  be  in  the  day  of  final  account?  "For  cir- 
cumcision verily  profiteth,  if  thou  keep  the  law,"  Ac.  (ver.  25).  Circumcision  there- 
fore is  not  itself  a  saving  rite,  but  the  sign  and  seal  of  a  salvation  already  secured 
by  faith  (chap.  iv.  10,  11).  But,  if  a  man's  life  proclaims  his  profession  of  faith 
false,  then  the  sign  becomes  a  falsehood,  and  the  seal  a  delusion  and  a  snare.  The 
sign  is  not  the  thing  signified  ;  nor  does  the  thing  signified  of  necessity  wait  upon 
the  sign.  The  seal  is  not  the  treasure  sealed ;  and  neither  is  it  produced  by  the 
magic  influence  of  the  sealing ;  nor  does  it  of  necessity  remain  so  long  as  the  seal 
remains.  Marvellous  it  is  that  men  should  ever  have  imagined  that  God  could  be 
bound,  by  this  mere  external  rite,  to  deliver  men  from  the  just  punishment  of  their 
sins.  How  different  the  faith  and  reasoning  of  the  great  Father  of  the  faithful  I 
With  him  it  was  not  a  question  of  circumcision,  but  of  righteousness  (Gen.  xviii. 
24,  25).  2.  But  if  an  uncircumcised  Gentile  should  practically  meet  the  law's 
requirement  he  should  be  accounted  as  a  circumcised  person,  and  his  conduct 
would  condemn  that  of  the  unfaithful  Jew  (vers.  26,  Ac).  The  inward  and  spiritual 
character  of  the  religion  required  both  by  the  Abrahamic  covenant  and  the  Mosaic 
law  had  been  distinctly  insisted  upon  by  all  the  inspired  writers,  and  the  one  ever- 
recurring  complaint  was  that  of  Stephen,  "  Ye  stiff-necked  and  uncircumcised  in 
heart  and  ears,  ye  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost :  as  your  fathers  did,  so  do  ye  " 
(Acts  vii.  61).  By  the  testimony  of  Moses,  and  all  the  prophets,  such  circumcised 
ones  were  really  and  before  God  uncircumcised.  But  could  an  uncircumcised  Gentile 
remaining  uncircumcised,  secure  a  position  of  grace  equal  to  that  which  the  dis- 
obedient Jew  forfeited  1  By  consenting  to  be  circumcised  he  confessedly  might. 
For  that  express  provision  had  been  made .  But  besides  proselytes  there  were  great 
numbers  of  Gentiles  like  the  "  devout "  centurion  (Luke  vii.  1,  &c.),  and  "  devout" 
Cornelius,  who  were  truly  godly  men  and  accepted  of  God,  and  whose  circumcision 
was  that  of  the  heart  (Acts  x.  34).  And  why  should  the  reference  be  restricted  even 
to  these  ?  Surely  there  are  men,  even  in  purely  heathen  lands,  who  turn  from  sin 
seeking  for  redemption.    And  shall  it  be  said  that  because  they  do  not  possess  the 


171  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n, 

light  of  revelation,  and  cannot  exercise  an  intelligent  personal  faith  in  the  Saviour 
of  men,  they  mast  therefore  be  cut  off  from  all  interest  in  His  great  redeeming 
work  ?  But  if  men,  under  such  disadvantages,  should  become  circumcised  in  heart 
and  accepted  of  God,  their  fulfilment  of  the  law  would  indeed  judge  those  who, 
•with  all  the  advantages  of  revelation,  continued  still  to  be  transgressors  of  the  law. 
IL  Objections  to  the  conclusiveness  or  the  akgument  abb  answeeed  (chap.  iiL 
1,  Ac).  1.  If  a  Gentile,  by  keeping  the  law,  might  become,  in  the  estimation  of 
God,  a  Jew,  while  the  Jew,  through  disobedience,  might  be  reduced  to  the  position 
of  a  sinful  Gentile,  then  what  profit  could  there  be  in  circumcision  ?  The  advantage 
was  much  every  way.  First,  indeed,  because  that  unto  them  were  committed  the 
oracles  of  God.  The  question  to  be  solved  was  not  how  could  a  man  be  assured  of 
perfect  immunity  from  punishment,  but  how  could  he  be  most  effectually  rescued 
from  the  love  and  the  practice  of  sin  ?  For  this  Gentilism  had  no  aptitude  or  power, 
but  rather  the  contrary ;  while  Judaism  had  both.  In  its  sacred  oracles,  the  need, 
the  grace,  the  way,  and  the  sure  promise  of  salvation  were  made  abundantly  plain ; 
so  that,  if  the  Jew  did  not  secure  it,  he  was  without  excuse.  Then  it  is  demanded 
— 2.  If  some  of  the  Jews  did  not  believe  those  sacred  oracles,  so  as  to  secure  pos- 
session of  the  promised  salvation,  would  their  unbelief  invalidate  the  promise  of 
God  ?  Most  surely  not.  For  the  fact  that  He  had  given  the  promise  to  believing 
and  holy  Israel  could  not  be  supposed  to  bind  Him  to  insure  salvation  to  every 
descendant  of  Abraham,  whether  believing  and  obedient  or  not.  In  respect  to  that, 
"  Let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar."  David  (Psa.  11  4)  would  have  vindicated 
Gk>d  for  excluding  him  from  salvation,  because  of  his  sin;  and  he  sought  the 
restoration  of  the  joy  of  that  salvation  only  on  the  ground  of  the  promise  which 
free  grace  had  made  to  the  penitent.  But  now — 3.  "  If  our  unrighteousness  (who, 
being  Jews,  fail  to  manifest  the  faith  and  obedience  of  the  covenant  people)  com- 
mend the  righteousness  of  God,"  establish  and  make  it  more  conspicuous,  what 
shall  we  say  ?  "  Is  God  unrighteous  who  taketh  vengeance  "  upon  us  whose  very 
iniquities  have  served  to  promote  His  glory  ?  "  (I  speak  as  a  man)  God  forbid :  for 
then  how  shall  God  judge  the  world  ?  "  If  He  must  needs  exempt  from  punish- 
ment all  who  contribute  to  His  glory,  then  none  can  possibly  be  condemned.  For 
His  real  glory  is  that  He  deals  impartially  with  men  according  to  their  true  cha- 
racters, and  not  according  to  accidental  relationship ;  and  if  it  were  possible  for 
Him  to  depart  from  this  rule,  then  the  glory  would  also  depart.  "  For  lif  the  truth 
of  God  hath  more  abounded  through  my  lie  unto  His  glory,  why  am  I  yet  to  be 
judged  as  a  sinner?  "  Clearly  because  I  am  a  sinner.  If  otherwise,  "  why  should 
we  not  say,  as  we  be  slanderously  reported,  and  as  some  affirm  that  we  do  say.  Let 
QB  do  evil  that  good  may  come  ?  "  To  that  Jesuitry  which  carried  out  to  its  logical 
results  would  justify  any  crime,  the  apostle  deigns  no  other  reply  than  that  the 
damnation  of  its  promulgators  is  just.    lU.  As  to  actual  hobal  and  belioious 

CHABACTEB,  THE  JeW  UUST  STAND  SIDE   BT  SIDE  WITH   THE   GeNTILE,  AS  A   SINNEB,  AND 

exposed  to  just  CONDEMNATION  (vcr.  9,  &c.)  (W.  TysoTi.)  The  advantages 
of  the  Jews  consisted  in  their — I.  Beabino  the  name  of  Jew,  which  embraces 
three  significations — confession,  praise,  and  thanksgiving,  by  which  that  people 
was  distinguished  from  all  other  nations.  The  Jew  alone  had  been  chosen  as  the 
confessor  of  God,  while  all  the  rest  of  the  world  abjured  His  service ;  he  alone  was 
appointed  to  celebrate  His  praises,  while  by  others  He  was  blasphemed ;  he  alone 
was  appointed  to  render  thanksgiving  to  God  for  multiplied  benefits  received,  while 
others  were  passed  by.  II.  Having  beceived  the  law.  They  had  no  occasion  to 
study  any  other  wisdom  or  philosophy  (Deut.  iv.  6).  In  this  they  "  rested."  1. 
Labour  was  spared  them  of  employing  many  years  and  great  endeavours,  and 
travelling  to  distant  countries,  as  was  the  case  with  other  nations  in  acquiring 
knowledge  and  certain  rules  of  direction.  2.  They  had  an  entire  confidence  in  the 
law  as  a  heavenly  and  Divine  rale  which  could  not  mislead  them,  while  the  Gentiles 
could  have  no  reliance  on  their  deceitful  philosophy.  HI.  Having  the  tbue  God 
AS  theib  God,  while  the  Gentiles  having  only  false  gods  were  "  without  God  in  the 
world."  They  had,  therefore,  great  reason  to  glory  in  Him,  and  on  this  account 
David  said,  that  in  God  was  his  strength  and  his  refuge  (Psa.  xviii.,  Ixii.  7,  cxliv.). 
IV.  Knowing  His  will,  and  that  not  by  a  confused  knowledge,  such  as  the  Gentiles 
had  by  the  revelation  of  nature,  but  a  distinct  knowledge  by  the  revelation  of  the 
word,  which  the  Gentiles  did  not  possess  (Psa.  cxlvii.  19,  20).  V.  Discerning  what 
IS  EVIL.  They  knew  the  will  of  God,  and  consequently  what  was  contrary  to  it, 
i.e.,  what  He  condemns.  VI.  Theib  abilitt  to  teach  and  guide  othees.  The  law 
not  only  instructed  the  Jews  for  themselves,  but  also  for  others,  and  in  this 


OUP.  n.]  ROMANS.  173 

they  held  that  they  enjoyed  a  great  superiority  over  the  other  nations,  who  ar« 
here  caHed  blind,  for  with  all  the  lights  of  their  philosophy,  laws,  and  arts,  being 
without  true  religion,  they  had  no  true  saving  light.  (iJ.  Haldarie.)  Jewish 
boasting : — I.  The  Jews'  grounds  of  dependence.  1.  Their  covenant  relation.  The 
Jew  expected  salvation  because  he  was  a  Jew.  Denominationalism,  rather  than 
the  living  personal  Christ,  is  too  often  made  a  ground  of  trust.  They  rested  in  the 
law  as  their  confidence,  and  boasted  that  God  was  their  God  and  they  His  people. 
2.  Their  superior  knowledge.  Divine  things  had  been  specially  revealed  to  them ; 
on  this  ground  they  expected  special  favour  of  God.  They  forgot  that  superior 
knowledge  often  enhances  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  increases  the  certainty,  necessity, 
and  severity  of  punishment.  It  should  make  as  first  anxious  to  do  right  ourselves 
and  then  to  lead  others  right.  3.  The  fact  of  circumcision.  II.  The  jdst 
PBiNciPLES  OP  DrviNE  JUDGMENT.  These  are  to  be  men's  works  or  character,  and 
the  standard  of  judgment,  the  light  we  all  severally  enjoy.  This  is  true  both  of 
Gentiles  and  Jews.  The  one  will  be  judged  precisely  by  the  same  principles  as  the 
other  (vera.  28,  29).  {C.  Higgins.)  The  need  of  spiritual  religion : — Paul  now 
addresses  the  Jew  direct.  I.  The  false  conceptions  of  the  Jews.  1.  The  Jews 
were — (1)  Overweeningly  proud  of  their  national  name.  To  be  entitled  to  the 
name  of  "Jew  "was  the  highest  of  earthly  honours.  To  be  an  Athenian,  or  a 
Boman,  was  a  much  inferior  distinction.  Nor  without  reason ;  yet  they  should  not 
have  carried  it  to  so  ridiculous  an  excess.  Alas  1  how  has  the  fine  gold  now  become 
dim  (Deut.  xzviii.  37).  (2)  Boastful  of  their  religious  privileges,  and  vainly  built 
upon  them  their  confidence  of  final  safety  and  present  acceptance  with  God.  He 
possessed  the  law,  &c.  With  such  distinguishing  favours  he  gave  himself 
wondrous  airs  of  self-importance ;  and  looked  down  upon  Grecian  sages  and  Buman 
legislators  with  contempt.  As  to  the  common  people  among  the  uncircumcised, 
they  were  mere  dogs  and  swine.  (3)  Thought  themselves  at  liberty  to  indulge  in  all 
manner  of  unrighteousness  with  impunity.  As  the  special  favourites  of  heaven,  God 
would  be  tolerant  of  their  vices,  and  readily  sanction  them  in  their  evil  propensities. 
What  would  be  a  damnable  crime  among  the  heathen  would,  in  a  Jew,  be  a  small 
and  venial  offence  scarcely  needing  forgiveness.  2.  Accordingly,  the  apostle  boldly 
assails  their  refuges  of  lies,  and  shows  them  that  their  transgressions  were  aa 
abhorrent  to  God  as  the  corresponding  iniquities  of  the  heathen.  And  here  he 
establishes  the  principle,  that  circumcision  was  never  meant  to  be  a  substitute  for 
personal  holiness,  and  can  never  be  accepted  as  such,  while  uncircumcision  will  not 
place  at  a  disadvantage  any  virtuous  and  well-meaning  Gentile.  And  why? 
Because  God  regards  the  heart  rather  than  the  outward  appearance.  The  sign  of 
the  covenant  is  of  Uttle  worth  unless  the  terms  of  the  covenant  have  been  appre- 
hended and  accepted  by  the  inner  man.  "  For  he  is  not  a  Jew,  which  is  one  out- 
wardly," &o.  3.  All  that  is  essential  in  this  teaching  belongs  to  us,  as  professedly 
a  Christian  people.  We  have  the  form  of  saving  truth  aud  knowledge  as  well  aa 
they  ;  aud  we  are  in  the  same  danger  of  resting  in  that  form,  and  then  making  it  an 
excuse  for  sin  and  a  cloak  to  our  unrighteousness.  Baptism  stands  in  the  place  of 
circumcision.  Do  we  not  need,  then,  to  be  taught  that  he  is  not  a  Christian  who 
is  one  outwardly  only  (1  Pet.  iii.  21).  4.  This  doctrine  was,  indeed,  taught  in  the  Old 
Testament,  and  the  prophets  severely  rebuked  their  contemporaries  for  resting  in 
the  outward  law,  and  thereby  causing  the  n«me  of  Jehovah  to  be  evil  spoken  of 
among  the  heathen,  who,  of  course,  judged  of  Him  and  His  requirements  by  the 
conduct  of  His  professing  people  (Deut.  x.  16,  xxx.  6  ;  Ezek.  xxxvi,  16-21,  25-27).  II. 
The  mwABD,  true,  and  spiBiTUAii  beligion,  on  which  the  apostle  so  forcibly  insists. 
1.  Its  seat  is  in  the  heart.  There  is  an  outward  form  which  is  not  to  be  despised  ; 
for  wherever  there  is  the  power  of  godliness  there  will  also  be  its  appropriate 
expression,  because  a  good  tree  must  bring  forth  good  fruit,  and  a  pure  fountain 
send  forth  pure  streams.  A  piety  which  consists  wholly  of  frames  and  feelings,  and 
articles  of  belief,  is  a  delusion  and  a  snare.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  there  may  be 
an  imitation  of  the  form  of  godliness  where  its  power  is  entirely  absent.  Some- 
times there  is  a  consciousness  of  hypocrisy,  and  a  man  puts  on  the  livery  of  religion 
with  the  deUberate  purpose  of  imposing  on  the  world ;  bat  more  frequently  the 
error  is  the  result  of  self-delusion.  People  observe  the  external  proprieties  of  Chris- 
tianity, while  their  hearts  are  utterly  dark  and  dead.  The  difference  between  a 
formed  Christian  and  a  real  one  is  that  the  one  is  an  artificial  tree,  made  of  dead 
wood  aud  wire,  on  whose  branches  oranges  and  apples  are  mechanically  hung ; 
while  the  other  is  a  tree  which  bringeth  forth  his  fruit  in  due  season.  The  one  ia 
a  painted  fire,  while  the  other  is  an  altar  on  whose  sacred  hearth  the  flame  trul/ 


174  TBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

bums.  2.  It  is  not  ours  by  nature,  but  it  is  the  gift  of  God.  By  nature  we  have 
no  religion,  but  we  can,  even  if  left  to  ourselves,  easily  acquire  one.  That  which  ia 
outward  is  within  the  compass  of  our  natural  powers  ;  but  that  which  is  inward 
and  spiritual  is  like  the  flames  which  Ucked  up  Elijah's  altar,  which  only  Jehovah 
could  flash  forth.  It  is  not  enough  that  you  read  the  Bible,  say  your  prayers,  &o. 
Are  you  the  subject  of  a  direct  Divine  working,  changing  your  inward  character  ? 
Is  your  circumcision,  your  consecration  to  God,  that  of  the  heart,  "  in  the  spirit 
and  not  in  the  letter :  whose  praise  is  not  of  men  but  of  God  "  ?  3.  Let  us  deli  leate 
it.  Circumcision  was  the  sign  of  the  covenant  with  Israel.  God  pledged  Himself 
to  be  their  King  and  Father.  They,  on  the  other  hand,  were  to  be  wiUing  to  obey 
and  serve  Him.  Our  consecration  ia  to  be  substantially  of  the  same  order.  Let  ug 
view  it  as  relating  to — (1)  The  will.  As  God's  creatures,  we  ought  to  be  subject  to 
His  will.  Nor  should  this  be  a  hardship  when  we  reflect  on  His  perfect  wisdom, 
goodness,  and  righteousness.  Yet,  man  is  a  self-willed  creature.  This  tendency  reveals 
itself  in  earliest  childhood.  And  then,  afterwards,  when  our  thoughts  are  directed 
to  a  higher  quarter,  when  we  become  aware  of  a  God  whom  it  is  our  duty  to  honour 
and  obey,  the  guilty  struggle  is  renewed.  Or,  perhaps,  we  try  to  put  Him  off  with 
a  half-hearted  and  pretended  service.  The  necessity  of  religion  and  the  triumph  of 
grace  is  to  subdue  this  mutinous  spirit,  and  make  us  willing  and  ready  to  say, 
"  Father,  not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  Now,  this  subjection  of  the  will  to  God 
shows  itself  in  submission  to  His  dealings  with  ns,  and  obedience  to  His  require- 
ments of  us.  (2)  The  motives  follow  the  will.  It  is  true  that  the  will  is  influenced 
by  motives ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  the  will  has  a  prior  power  of  choosing  its  own 
motives.  Now,  ordinarily,  men  are  constrained  by  a  love  of  money,  pleasure, 
power,  &o.  The  man  of  God  may  be  the  subject  of  the  same  tendencies  and 
incp^tives  80  far  as  they  are  in  themselves  lawful  and  right ;  but  then  he  will  not 
yi  d  himself  up  to  them  blindly  or  absolutely;  he  wUl  subordinate  the  whole  to 
the  .,apreme  principle  of  seeking  first  the  Divine  glory  and  being  actuated  by  love  to 
God  (Cor.  X.  31).  (8)  The  affections  participate  in  the  effects  of  inward  holiness. 
(a)  Love  is  an  acknowledged  necessity  of  our  existence.  If  carnally  minded,  our 
love  will  be  impure,  misleading,  dangerous ;  but  if  spiritually  minded,  its  great  and 
all-satisfying  object  will  be  God  Himself,  (b)  Closely  allied  to  love  is  fear ;  for 
what  we  love  we  fear  to  lose.  And  if  we  love  God  we  shall  fear  to  offend  or 
displease  Him  ;  and  having  that  we  need  have  no  fear  beside,  (c)  Where  our  love 
and  fear  centre  thither  will  our  desires  ascend,  (d)  From  this  feeling  will  spring 
both  trust  and  hope.  We  shall  confide  with  unfaltering  aflSance  in  Him  whom  our 
Boul  loveth.  We  shall  have  boldness  before  His  presence,  and  know  that,  as  He 
liveth,  we  shall  live  also.  We  shall  not  be  dismayed  by  the  prospect  of  death,  or 
tremble  when  we  think  of  judgment.  Conclusion :  Such  is  spiritual  religion,  the 
♦'  circumcision  of  the  heart."  It  is  produced  within  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The 
instrument  is  the  Word  of  truth.  And  especially  does  He  employ  and  apply  to  our 
hearts  those  doctrines  which  relate  to  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ,  to  God's 
readiness  to  be  a  Father  to  ns  and  acknowledge  ns  as  His  children,  and  to  the  dread 
realities  of  the  world  to  come.  Let  us  again  ask  ourselves  if  we  possess  real, 
inward,  and  spiritual  rehgion  ?  If  not,  a  mere  form  and  profession  will  be  found  in 
vain.  (T.  G.  Horton.)  The  ncrrJnal  Christian  : — L  What  hb  boasts  (vers.  17- 
20).  II.  What  hb  does  (vers.  21-24).  III.  What  is  the  besult.  He  is  con- 
demned— 1.  By  his  own  principles.  2.  By  the  upright  heathen.  3.  By  the  gospel 
law.      {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  professor: — 1.    His  exalted  privileges.      2.   His 

honourable  calling.  3.  His  faithless  conduct.  (Ibid.)  And  approvest  the 
things  that  are  more  excellent. — Sensitiveness  of  moral  sense: — The  phrase  is 
explained  by  Alford  as  "  provest  (in  the  sense  of  sifting  and  coming  to  a  conclusion 
on)  things  which  differ  " ;  and  by  Vaughan  as — 1.  "  Discernest  things  that  differ ;  art 
able  to  discriminate,  as  by  an  infallible  test,  things  true  and  false,  right  and  wrong. 
2.  Approvest  things  that  excel  "  (c/.  Phil.  i.  10 ;  Eom.  xii.  2).  The  boast,  here,  clearly 
refers  to  accuracy  of  judgment  and  to  the  sensitiveness  of  the  moral  sense.  As  the 
wild  huntsman  can  hear  a  footfall  at  incredible  distances ;  as  the  Indian  of  the 
prairie  can  track  a  trail,  which  to  a  dull-eyed  European  is  invisible  ;  as  the  con- 
noisseur can  distinguish  the  slightest  shades  of  flavour  in  food  and  in  wines  of 
rarious  vintages ;  as  the  artist  can  at  a  glance  decide  if  a  picture  be  that  of  a  master 
or  not ;  so  the  Jew  boasted  he  could  discern  the  good  from  the  bad,  the  right  from 
the  wrong,  and  unloose  all  kind  of  casuistical  knots  of  morality.  {C.  Neil,  M.A.) 
And  art  confident  that  then  thyself  art  a  guide  of  the  hllnd. — Jewish  treatment 
qf  Gentiles : — ^Foor  terms  set  forth  the  moral  treatment  to  which  the  Jew,  as  the 


ffup.  n.]  ROMANS.  176 

bom  pbyeioisn  of  mankind,  subjects  his  patients,  the  Gentiles,  to  their  complete 
cure.  "  Thoa  art  oonfident "  describes  his  pretentious  assurance.  And,  first,  he 
takes  the  poor  Gentile  by  the  hand  as  one  does  "a  blind  man,"  offering  to  "  guide" 
him ;  then  he  opens  his  eyes,  dissipating  his  "  darkness  "  by  the  "  light  "  of  revela- 
tion ;  then  he  "rears"  him,  as  one  who  would  bring  up  a  being  yet  "without 
reason  " ;  finally,  when  through  all  this  care  he  has  come  to  the  stage  of  the  "  little 
ebild"  (one  who  cannot  speak — a  designation  of  proselytes),  he  initiates  him  into 
the  full  knowledge  of  the  truth,  by  becoming  his  "  teacher."  {Prof.  Godet.) 
Unsaved  workers : — Now,  I  should  like  to  ask  a  question  of  two  or  three  classes, 
and  then  send  you  home.  There  are  a  great  many  of  us  here  to-night  who  are 
teachers  of  others.  Some  of  you  are  deacons,  elders,  Sunday-school  teachers, 
■treet-preachers.  I  thank  God  that  you  are  a  busy  people,  and  you  are  doing  much 
for  Christ.  There  is  a  question  I  want  to  ask  of  you  and  of  myself :  Are  we  who 
teach  others  sure  that  we  have  believed  in  Christ  ourselves  ?  It  is  well  to  ask  that 
question ;  it  is  a  very  dangerous  thing  indeed  for  an  unsaved  man  to  begin  to  work 
for  Christ,  for  the  probabilities  are  that  he  will  take  for  granted  what  he  ought 
diligently  to  have  proved.  In  many  oases  he  never  will  seek  to  be  t^aved ;  but  go 
on,  on,  on,  never  pausing  to  examine  himself,  and  so,  while  professing  to  work  for 
God,  he  may  be  a  stranger  to  the  work  of  God  on  himself.  There  is  an  old  story  I 
recollect  reading  somewhere  of  a  lunatic  in  an  asylum,  who  one  day  saw  a  very  lean 
cook.  Accosting  him,  he  said,  "  Cook,  do  you  make  good  food  ?  "  "  Yes,"  said  the 
cook.  "  Are  you  sure  ?  "  "Yes."  "  And  does  anybody  get  fat  on  it  ?  "  "Yes," 
again  was  the  reply.  "  Then,"  said  the  man,  "  you  had  better  mind  what  you  are 
after,  or  else,  when  the  governor  comes  round,  he  will  put  you  in  along  with  me,  for 
if  you  make  good  food,  and  yet  are  so  thin  yourself,  you  must  be  mad,  for  you  do 
not  eat  it,  or  else  you  would  get  fat  too  I  "  There  is  some  sense  in  that.  You  teach 
others,  you  say  ;  you  give  them  spiritual  food  ;  but  why  not  feed  on  it  yourselves  ? 
Master,  what  right  hast  thou  to  teach  if  thou  wilt  not  first  learn  ?  Physician, 
physician,  heal  thyself  1  Brother,  it  will  go  hard  with  you  and  with  me,  if  we  are 
lost.  What  will  become  of  us  teachers  of  others,  if,  after  having  led  others  to  the 
river,  we  never  drink  ;  after  bringing  others  the  heavenly  food,  we  perish  of  spiritual 
famine  ourselves  ?  {C.  H.  Spurfjeon.)  An  Instructor  of  the  foolish,  a  teacher  of 
babes. — The  Sunday-school  teacher: — I.  His  work  and  office.  "  An  instructor  of  the 
foolitih,  a  teacher  of  babes."  1.  In  these  words  this  is  comprehensively  described, 
both  as  respects  the  material  upon  which  the  teacher  has  to  work,  and  the  appliance 
which  he  brings  to  bear  upon  it.  He  has  to  deal  with  human  nature  in  its  ignorant 
and  helpless  condition :  to  make  the  naturally  foolish  "  wise  unto  salvation  through 
faith  in  Christ  Jesus."  (1)  "  The  foolish !  "  According  to  Scripture,  the  natural 
state  of  mankind  is  one  of  folly,  and  the  way  of  sin  the  way  of  foolishness.  And 
right  reason  agrees  with  this ;  for  surely  it  is  folly  to  neglect  the  great  end  of  a 
man's  being,  and  to  come  short  of  eternal  happiness.  Surely  it  is  a  gross  infatua- 
tion to  risk  that  precious  jewel,  the  soul,  in  seeking  to  grasp  the  pomps  of  tho 
world,  or  to  grovel  in  the  dust  of  its  pollutions.  And  this  foolishness,  though  not  so 
exaggerated  as  in  more  advanced  years,  is  incident  to  the  years  of  childhood.  It 
is  "  bound  in  the  heart  of  a  child  "  ;  "  childhood  and  youth  are  vanity  "  (Prov.  xxii. 
15  ;  Eccles.  xi.  10).  It  is  so  in  the  very  nature  of  things.  Impressible  for  good  as 
the  mind  of  a  child  unquestionably  is,  and  free  as  it  is  from  the  prejudices  of 
riper  age,  still  when  left  to  itself  it  will  invariably  take  the  wrong  direction,  and  by 
degrejs  develop  its  sinful  tendencies.  The  soil  of  the  heart,  if  it  be  not  cultured 
for  the  good  seed  of  the  Divine  word,  will  be  speedily  sown  with  evil  principles,  and 
bring  forth  an  abundant  measure  of  foolish  and  evil  habits.  (2)  Thus  "  foolish," 
the  young  are  mere  "  babes  "  as  far  as  regards  spiritual  health  and  strength.  This 
designation  sufficiently  expresses  men's  natural  inability  to  recover  themselves 
out  of  the  way  of  folly,  and  advance  in  the  true  life  of  God  (Jer.  x.  23).  And,  if 
this  is  true  of  man  in  mature  life,  how  much  truer  must  it  be  of  his  childhood. 
But  the  Sunday-school  teacher  has  to  deal  literally  with  babes,  and  needing 
as  much  care,  in  a  moral  point  of  view,  as  the  very  babe  which  hangs  upon  its 
mother's  breast.  They  are  the  lambs  of  the  flock,  the  young  and  tender,  who 
stand  in  need  of  kind  assistance,  of  gentle  leading,  of  suitable  provision.  They 
are  those  of  whom  the  good  Shepherd  spake  (John  xxi.  15).  2.  The  office  must  be 
of  the  last  importance.  It  is  to  "  train  the  little  ones  in  the  way  they  should  go  "; 
to  "  bring  them  up  in  the  nurture  aud  admonition  of  the  Lord."  The  Sunday- 
school  is  a  nursery  for  heaven.  It  is  true  that  it  has  afforded  a  means  of  education 
to  many  a  poor  child ;  but  its  grand  object  is  to  make  scholars  in  the  school  of 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  iv 

Christ.  This  may  be  done  now  with  greater  ease  than  at  any  other  time.  The 
young  plant  may  be  trained  to  assume  almost  any  shape,  if  bent  and  turned  while 
it  is  yet  flexible.  To  pre-occupy  and  cultivate  the  ground  should  be  the  aim  of  the 
Christian  philanthropist :  it  will  not  long  lie  fallow ;  for  Satan  and  his  agents  will 
be  assiduous  enough  in  their  endeavours  to  plaut  it  with  tares.  If  we  do  not  train 
the  foolish  and  helpless  for  God,  Satan  will  train  them  for  himself  (Deut.  vi.  6,  7 ; 
Psa,  Ixxviii.  3-7 ;  Eph.  vi.  4 ;  Prov.  xxii.  6).  II.  The  spibtt  in  which  he  should 
ENGAGE  IN  HIS  woBK.  1.  Sincere  desire  to  promote  the  spiritual  well-being  of  the 
children.  What  we  want  is  to  Christianise  our  people,  and  when  is  this  so  likely  to 
be  brought  about  as  in  youth  ?  Do  not  think,  then,  that  you  have  done  enough 
■wten  you  have  taught  them  to  read  the  letter  of  the  Bible :  you  must  seek  to  imbue 
them  with  its  spirit.  But  here  an  inquiry  will  naturally  be  suggested,  are  you 
competent  for  this,  i.e.,  are  you  a  converted  character,  or  only  a  professor.  Here  is 
your  test.  Thus,  only  as  you  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God  are  you  fit  to  be  "  an 
instructor  of  the  foolish,  a  teacher  of  babes."  2.  Self-denial,  patience,  and  perse- 
verance. There  will  always  be  much  to  try  and  discourage  you  :  the  waywardness 
of  some,  the  dulness  of  others,  and  the  uncertainty  of  not  a  few.  There  is  much 
call  for  gentle  and  cautious  treatment :  the  variety  of  dispositions  and  capacities 
must  be  noted,  and  dealt  with  in  various  ways ;  and  the  difficulty  of  so  doing  will 
often  occasion  discouragement.  Some  require  to  be  urged  on,  while  others  must 
rather  be  restrained  (Gen.  xxxiii.  13).  You  are  sorely  tried  on  account  of  the  little 
impression  which  seems  to  be  made  upon  your  children;  but  little  is  matiifest  as 
the  result  of  your  teaching ;  do  not  despair,  the  seed  often  remains  a  long  time  in  the 
soil  before  it  begins  to  fructify :  if  you  work  in  a  proper  spirit,  "  your  labour  shall 
not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord  "  (Eccles.  xi.  1).  Yon  cannot  expect  to  do  everything 
at  once.  3.  Unwavering  dependence  upon  Divine  aid.  While  on  the  one  hand  the 
inquiry  may  be  made,  '*  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  "  on  the  other  hand, 
it  may  be  confidently,  though  humbly,  urged,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ, 
which  strengtheneth  me."  He  whom  we  serve  has  all  hearts  and  all  things  at  His 
disposal :  He  can  overturn  or  remove  this  or  that  obstacle,  and  make  our  way  smooth 
before  us,  and  so  interpose  as  to  leave  us  without  excuse,  if  we  grow  weary  or  faint 
in  our  duty.  Hence  we  must  fervently  pray  for  Divine  enlightenment  and  teaching. 
We  want  wisdom  as  well  as  strength.  And  in  seeking  for  the  guidance  of  the 
Spirit,  we  are  not  to  despise  or  pass  by  all  proper  human  aids.  We  may  the  more 
confidently  crave  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit,  when  we  have  duly  sought  after  avail- 
able knowledge ;  for  the  Divine  blessing  is  invariably  given  in  the  use  of  means. 
4.  A  single  eye  to  the  Divine  glory.  When  the  Christian  sets  this  before  him  as  the 
end  of  his  hfe,  he  will  not  regard  ordinary  difficulties.  This  wiU  lead  him  to  strive 
after  the  conversion  of  souls.  HI.  The  ENCODKAQEMENTa.  1.  The  general  assurance 
of  success.  Enough  is  said  to  encourage  every  labourer  to  prosecute  his  work  with 
assiduity.  And  not  a  few  instances  might  here  be  recorded  of  pleasing  results. 
Not  only  have  children  been  instructed  and  converted  to  God,  but  they  have  proved 
the  means  of  instruction  and  conversion  to  their  parents  and  others.  How  many 
who  now  occupy  stations  of  eminence  and  usefulness  owe  their  all,  under  God,  to 
Sunday  schools.  2.  Personal  benefit.  In  many  cases  the  instructor  has  been 
savingly  taught  himself,  while  teaching  others.  And  where  he  has  been  truly 
pious,  when  engaged  in  the  work,  the  graces  of  the  Christian's  life  have  been  called 
into  exercise,  and  their  growth  promoted.  3.  The  final  reward  (Matt.  xxv.  40). 
{J.  S.  Broad,  M.A.)  Ineffectual  opinions: — Opinions  may  play  upon  the  surface 
of  a  man's  soul,  like  the  moonbeams  on  the  silver  sea,  without  raising  its  tempera- 
ture one  degree  or  sending  a  single  beam  into  its  dark  caverns.  And  that  is  the  sort 
of  Christianity  that  satisfies  a  great  many  of  you,  a  Christianity  of  opinion,  a 
Christianity  of  surface  creed,  a  Christianity  which  at  the  best  slightly  modifies  some 
of  your  outward  actions,  but  leaves  the  whole  inner  man  unchanged.  {A.  Maclaren.) 
Thou  therefore  which  teachest  another,  teachest  thou  not  thyself  7 — The  teacher 
taught : — In  His  conversation  with  Nicodemus  our  Saviour  enunciated  the  principle 
to  which  all  Christian  usefulness  must  eventually  be  referred  (John  iii.  11).  The 
model  Pharisee  asserted  for  himself  the  most  edifying  orthodoxy,  flawless  morality 
and  eminent  devotion  ;  he  claimed  extraordinary  keenness  in  discrimination, 
approving  only  what  was  excellent ;  he  coulJ  inform  the  ignorant,  illumine  the 
darkened,  give  counsel  to  illumined  adults,  and  help  forward  untaught  children. 
Yet  with  all  these  assumptions  the  apostle  seems  to  have  discovered  that  which  led 
him  to  rate  such  a  creature  as  a  mere  spiritual  quack.  This  man,  so  earnest  against 
tiieving,  had  a  touch  of  dishonesty  ;  so  stern  in  pressing  the  penalties  of  the  seventh 


«BA».  n.]  ROMANS.  ITT 

commandment,  had  some  edns  which  would  look  ill  under  scrntiny.  In  a  word,  he 
was  iustrnoting  others  with  no  word  for  himself.  And  so  St.  Paul  reiterates  the 
grand  principle  of  the  gospel :  religions  instruction  is  to  be  indorsed  by  the  living 
experience  of  the  instructor.  Consider : — I.  The  great  common  need  under  which 
HUMANITY  LIES.  It  has  pleased  Ood  to  make  men  instraments  of  good  to  each 
other.  Hence  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  is  necessarily  experimental.  "  Come 
all  ye  that  fear  God,  and  I  will  declare  what  He  hath  done  for  my  souL"  Naaman 
was  just  the  person  to  tell  lepers  of  the  prophet  who  had  bidden  him  go  wash  in 
the  Jordan.  Bartimeus  was  just  the  right  one  to  lead  blind  men  to  Jesus,  who  had 
opened  his  eyes.  Hence,  it  is  perfectly  natural  that  we  demand  of  him  who  teaches 
that  he  should  first  have  felt  the  truth  he  proffers.  Otherwise  he  lays  himself  open 
to  the  taunt,  "  Physician,  heal  thyself  1 "  II.  The  aim  of  all  religious  instruction. 
The  conscience  must  be  reached,  and  through  its  monitions  the  entire  life  must  be 
influenced,  or  else  all  teaching  is  wasted.  Nothing  is  so  mysterious  as  the  forms  of 
operation  which  this  inner  monitor  chooses.  Sometimes  it  seems  to  render  a  man 
hiarder  and  more  violent ;  and  yet  at  that  very  wildest  moment  he  is  nearer  yielding 
than  ever  before.  Sometimes  it  melts  a  man  into  deep  emotion  ;  and  yet  we  pain- 
fully discover  afterward  that  this  has  been  mere  ebullition  of  excited  feeling.  Now, 
we  cannot  grow  skilful  in  distinguishing  these  external  shows,  without  diligent  study 
of  our  own  experience.  Conscience  must  be  watched  in  its  working  within  our 
hearts.  "As  in  water,  face  answereth  to  face;  so  the  heart  of  man  to  man." 
That  truth  is  most  efifective  which,  having  proved  itself  forceful  in  reaching  our 
own  consciences,  goes  from  its  success  there  upon  the  intrencbments  of  another. 
HL  The  variety  of  iorms  employed  in  Scripture  instruction.  **  All  Scripture 
is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable  for  doctrine,"  d;o.  But  then,  how 
much  there  is  of  it !  and  what  room  for  skill  in  discriminating  what  doctrine, 
principle,  or  precept  to  apply  in  each  given  case.  Now,  many  of  our  Sunday-school 
teachers  are  at  a  loss  here.  When  the  tossed  vessel  is  drifting,  and  a  passenger  lies 
at  the  point  of  death,  are  there  none  who  hurry  to  the  Bible,  as  a  sailor  to  the 
medicine-chest ;  and  yet  stand  appalled  at  the  formidable  array  of  spiritual  drugs, 
any  one  of  which  possibly  might  be  helpful  or  hurtful,  if  only  they  could  know 
which  ?  How  can  we  learn  what  phases  of  truth  to  present  ?  Let  the  Scriptures  be 
studied  experimentally.  Let  the  Christian  teacher  re- work  every  principle  he  offers 
to  others,  first  into  his  own  mind,  and  out-work  it  into  his  own  life.  IV.  The 
VOWEB  OF  A  GODLY  EXAMPLE.  Men  are  imitative,  and  in  nothing  so  much  as  religious 
observance.  Moreover,  they  insist  upon  identifying  a  moral  teacher  with  what  he 
teaches.  They  will  not  suffer  a  limping  man  to  propose  an  effective  cure  for  lame- 
ness. Hence  there  can  be  no  failure  more  ridiculous  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  than 
that  of  a  man  who  urges  a  truth  and  lives  a  lie.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  whenever 
fully  possessed  of  the  power  of  the  gospel,  and  radiant  with  its  light,  a  grand  life 
goes  about  doing  good,  that  life  has  a  majestic  driving  force  to  it  almost  unlimited. 
V.  The  law  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  action.  Truth  is  propagated  not  by  transmission 
through  mere  symbols,  but  by  radiation  through  conductors  in  contact.  The  lens 
of  a  burning-glass  will  not  only  suffer  the  free  passage  of  the  sun's  rays,  but  will 
concentrate  them,  until  what  they  fall  upon  bursts  into  flame  ;  meanwhile  the  lens 
itself  will  remain  perfectly  cool.  Wonderful  experiments  of  this  sort  have  been 
performed  with  even  a  lens  of  ice,  which  kindled  a  fire  and  continued  unmelted. 
You  can  find  notbing,  hc<rever,  in  religious  matters  to  which  this  phenomenon 
would  answer.  The  torch,  not  the  burning-glass,  is  the  emblem  of  spiritual  life ; 
it  flames  while  it  illumines,  and  is  warmed  as  it  sets  on  Are.  He  influences  others 
most  who  has  been  nearest  in  contact  with  Christ.  No  religious  teacher  can  give 
more  than  he  gets.  Conclusion  :  Whichever  way  we  look,  then,  we  reach  the  same 
conclusion.  The  heart  hes  behind  the  hand  which  proffers  religious  truth.  1.  We 
learn  here  the  proper  use  to  make  of  the  Scriptures.  All  religious  instruction  must 
be  received  experimentally.  Thus  the  Bible  becomes  personal  in  every  one  of  its 
utterances.  How  is  it  now  (see  Isa.  xxix.  11,  12)?  What  renders  the  learned  and 
the  unlearned  together  so  at  fault  is  not  want  of  education,  but  want  of  experience. 
It  may  be  worth  knowing,  as  a  geographical  fact,  that  there  is  no  water  in  the  Kidron 
valley  save  after  a  shower  :  it  may  be  important  to  learn,  as  a  historic  fact,  tlat 
Capernaum  was  located  at  Khan  Minyeh ;  but  this  is  not  what  is  going  to  save  souls. 
We  must  embody  truth  in  life,  and  reduce  vague  information  to  vital  and  available 
help.  2.  We  learn  to  distinguish  between  gift  and  grace.  Mere  intellectual  gift 
sometimes  even  hinders  grace.  *'  Christ,"  said  Legh  Richmond,  "  may  be  crucified 
between  classics  and  mathematics."  It  is  not  our  want  of  aptitudes  ior  doing  good 
VOL.    X.  12 


178  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [can.  n. 

which  stands  in  oar  waj,  half  so  much  as  it  is  oar  want  of  commanion  with  God. 
The  rale  is, "  Oh  1  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good !  "  Out  of  this  experimental 
acqaaintance  with  truth  grows  oar  power  fitly  to  offer  it.  Scholarship  is  only  a 
means  to  an  end.  The  gospel  light  is  mach  like  the  solar  light ;  its  beauty  is  not 
its  efficiency.  You  may  divide  the  sunbeam  into  seven  beautiful  colours,  and  not 
one  alone  nor  all  together  will  imprint  an  image  on  a  daguerreotype  plate.  Just 
outside  the  spectrum,  in  the  dark,  there  is  one  entirely  invisible  ray,  called  the 
chemical  ray,  which  does  all  the  work.  No  man  ever  saw  it,  no  man  every  felt  it ;  and 
yet  this  it  is  which  bleaches  and  blackens  a  dull  surface  into  figures  of  loveliness 
and  lire.  I  care  not  how  luminoas  a  man's  personal  or  intellectual  qualities  may  be; 
if  he  lacks,  amid  the  showy  beams  that  are  shining,  this  one  which  is  viewless — 
this  efficient  but  inconspicuous  beam  of  spiritual  experience — aU  his  endeavours 
will  surely  prove  inoperative  for  good.  3.  We  learn  here  the  advantage  of  seasons 
of  discipline.  In  all  the  round  of  God's  dealing  with  His  children,  there  is  nothing 
like  suffering  as  an  educator.  Anything  that  loosens  the  hold  of  the  soul  on  earthly 
things,  and  shuts  it  up  to  God,  is  valuable ;  but,  as  a  preparation  for  usefulness,  is 
priceless.  Any  man  expert  in  sea-life  could  have  said  all  that  the  apostle  said  when 
he  came  forth  to  quiet  the  sailors  in  the  midst  of  a  shipwreck.  The  force  of  his 
counsel  lay  not  so  much  in  the  prudence  of  what  he  suggested,  as  in  the  experience 
which  was  embodied  in  it — that  "  long  abstinence  "  in  which  he  had  received  his 
vision.  One  mysterious  but  remembered  hour  there  was  which  gave  his  speech  all 
its  efficiency  (Acts  xvii.  22-25).  It  is  Just  this  which  is  the  element  of  power  in 
any  counsel.  The  angel  of  experience  is  sent  to  one,  and  then  he  is  ready  to  say, 
"  I  believe  God  1 "  4.  We  learn  the  secret  of  all  success,  and  the  explanation  of 
aU  failure.  It  would  seem  at  first  sight  that  truth  is  efficient  in  itself.  But  now 
we  understand  that  first  it  must  pass  through  the  teacher's  experience.     When  the 

Elague  was  raging  in  Ireland,  the  priests  gave  out  that  if  any  man  would  take  from 
is  own  fire  a  piece  of  burning  peat  and  light  his  neighbour's  fire  with  it,  he  would 
deliver  the  fanaily  from  an  attack  of  the  disease.  The  whole  region  was  instantly 
alive  with  brands  passing  to  and  fro.  Oh !  if  superstition  could  do  this  much, 
ought  not  zeal  to  do  more  ?  But  the  kindling  was  to  come  from  one's  own  hearth- 
stone then  ;  and  the  kindling  must  come  from  one's  own  heart  now.  Calvin's  seal- 
motto  was  a  hand  holding  a  heart  on  fire,  with  the  legend,  "  I  give  thee  all,  I  hold 
back  nothing  1 "  What  we  need  is  to  have  our  entire  level  of  Christian  experience 
lifted.  We  are  too  busy  about  appliances  and  places  and  theories.  6.  We  learn 
the  last  essential  of  preparation  for  teaching.  We  must  have  the  presence  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Tou  see  this  most  evidently  in  the  case  of  Paul.  They  called  him 
PauUus,  because  he  was  little.  He  had  a  distemper  in  his  sight.  His  bodily 
presence  was  paid  to  be  weak,  and  his  speech  contemptible.  But  no  man  ever 
equalled  him  in  power  as  a  religious  teacher.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  teacher 
animated  and  urged  to  duty : — ^I.  Let  us  attempt  to  produce  animation  by  an  appeal 
to  you  as  teachers  of  others.  "Be  not  weary  in  well-doing  "  ;  implies  that  in  well- 
doing we  may  be  weary — though  sinners  are  not  often  weary  in  ill-doing.  1.  Fill  your 
minds  with  the  magnitude  and  importance  of  your  work.  (1)  When  you  look  upon 
your  little  charge,  you  are  not  merely  to  regard  them  as  beauteous  shells  scattered 
on  the  shore  of  the  ocean,  but  as  each  a  pearl  of  incalculable  value.  When  you 
are  called  to  be  "  teachers  of  babes,"  you  are  not  called  to  play  with  toys.  _  (2)  But, 
as  an  incalculable  value  is  impressed  upon  them,  so  they  are  exposed  to  imminent 
danger.  Though  naturally  depraved,  this  depravity  is  increased  by  indulgence,  and 
rivetted  by  practice ;  and,  if  you  interpose  in  time,  you  may  rescue  many.  (3) 
Recollect  that  God  calls  the  greater  part  of  His  people  in  early  life.  2.  Let  me 
charge  on  your  consciences  your  obligations  to  attend  to  the  work.  (1)  Think  that 
you  are  all  now  listening  to  Him  who  says,  "  Lovest  thou  Me? — feed  My  lambs." 
The  Saviour  takes  a  httie  child  in  His  arms,  and  He  says,  "  Suffer  Uttle  children  to 
come  unto  Me,"  &o.  •'  He  that  receiveth  one  such  little  child  in  My  name,  receiveth 
Me."  While  others  look  at  the  Saviour,  as  He  issues  His  command,  and  say,  "  Is 
this  all  ?  onr  imaginations  are  filled  with  something  greater,  we  would  be  preachers, 
writers,  missionaries,  martyrs — anything  but  teachers  of  babes " : — you  say, 
"  What  I  disdain  to  stoop  to  babes,  when  Christ  takes  the  little  ones  up  in  His  arms." 
(2)  And  while  Christ  thus  aims  to  bind  you  by  a  sense  of  obligation,  let  me  remind 
you  what  He  has  done  for  you.  Has  He  not,  as  it  were,  washed  your  feet  ?  and 
should  you  not  wash  the  feet  of  His  meanest  disciples  ?  3.  Eecall  to  your  grateful 
recollection  the  blessings  with  which  God  has  crowned  this  work.  "  Train  up  a 
child  in  the  way  that  he  should  go,  and  when  he  is  old  he  will  not  depart  from  it." 


CBi».  n.]  ROMANS.  Vn 

Some  may  eaytbat  they  have  tamed  oat  ill  who  were  broaght  up  well ;  but  we  may 
Bay,  "  Be  of  good  obeer ;  for  I  believe  God  that  it  shall  be  even  as  it  was  told  me." 
Let  OB  then  look  round,  and  see  what  blessings  have  attended  the  instruction  of  the 
rising  race  ;  and,  while  we  look  around,  let  us  inquire,  "  What  hath  God  wrought  ?  " 
(1)  Take  this  school  and  all  the  children  who  have  been  instructed  in  it — add  to 
them  all  in  the  metropolis — in  the  kingdom — in  the  world.  (2)  And  such  being  the 
numbers  of  those  coUeoted  in  Sabbath  schools,  think  how  many  blessings  have 
been  carried  into  families.  Consider  how  the  first  tidings  of  salvation  have  been 
thus  conveyed.  4.  Tremble  at  the  thought  of  neglecting  this  work.  Woe  to  us  if 
Sunday  schools  should  expire  I  We  have  waked  up  the  world  so  completely  that 
it  will  not  soon  go  to  sleep  again.  We  have  taught  this  generation  that  they  must 
teach  the  next.  We  must  go  on :  we  have  advanced  too  far  to  recede.  The  great 
enemy  of  man  is  at  work  to  ruin  the  world,  by  the  very  same  means  which  we 
employ  to  benefit  the  world.  II.  Attend  to  the  expostulation  which  is  contained 
in  the  second  part  of  the  text,  "  Teachest  thou  not  thyself  t"  I  would  expostulate 
with  you.  1.  With  regard  to  over-enhsting.  Sabbath  schools  are  at  once  our  glory 
and  our  shame.  We  should  earnestly  wish  their  extinction ;  it  is  a  disgrace  to  us 
that  they  are  needed.  When  the  children  of  pious  and  instructed  parents  are  sent 
to  a  Sunday  school,  it  is  a  perversion  of  things.  There  should  be  a  Sunday  school 
in  every  house.  There  are  but  two  exceptions  to  this — the  first  is  where  the  parents 
are  so  ignorant  that  they  need  instruction  themselves ;  the  children  of  these  yoa 
ought  to  take  and  instruct.  The  other  is  where  the  parents  have  small  famiUes,  and 
can  take  their  children  with  them  to  a  Sunday  school :  thus  they  may  instruct  the 
children  of  the  poor  and  their  own  children  at  the  same  time.  No  mortal  living  has 
a  right  to  transfer  the  care  of  his  children  to  others,  while  he  can  take  care  of 
them  himself.  2.  Against  over-working.  Over-doing  is  often  undoing.  All  should 
be  anxious  to  do  as  much  as  possible ;  but  you  must  remember  that  the  Lord's  day 
was  intended  to  be  a  day  for  the  rest  and  edification  of  your  own  souls.  Let  there 
be  no  long  singing,  long  prayers,  long  lessons.  For  the  children's  sakes,  as  well  as 
for  your  own,  avoid  over-working.  As  long  as  you  can  keep  the  attention  judiciously 
awake,  you  do  good ;  but  when  you  see  the  spirits  flagging  you  may  be  certain  very 
little  will  be  done.  3.  Beware  of  over-valuing.  Nothing  is  more  common  than 
for  persons  to  think  highly  of  that  in  which  they  are  engaged.  4.  Beware  of  under- 
valuing. Do  not  suppose  that  because  a  man  is  wise  to  his  own  salvation  he  is 
therefore  wise  enough  to  teach  others.  (1)  You  should  know  much  ;  you  should 
have  some  time  for  study  ;  and  all  your  knowledge  should  be  made  subservient  to 
your  grand  design.  (2)  And  then  there  must  be,  also,  the  art  of  teaching.  This 
must  be  acquired,  or,  with  all  your  knowledge,  you  will  not  be  wise  to  win  souls. 
(3)  There  must  be  the  art  of  ruhng :  if  you  have  not  the  abihty  to  hold  sway  over 
your  own  spirits,  the  children  will  soon  perceive  it,  and  will  soon  manage  you. 
{J.  Bennett,  D.D.)  Teaching  and  example  : — He  that  giveth  good  precepts,  and 
follows  them  by  a  bad  example,  is  like  a  foolish  man  who  should  take  great  pains 
to  kindle  a  fire,  and,  when  it  is  kindled,  throws  cold  water  upon  it  to  quench  it. 
{Abp.  Seeker.)  Teaching  and  practice: — The  contradiction  between  the  two  is — 
1.  Common.  2.  Inexcusable.  3.  Damnable.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  responsibility 
of  the  teacher : — A  misplaced  switch  or  a  wrong  signal  may  send  hundreds  into 
eternity  unprepared.  Truths  best  taught  by  life : — In  how  quick  a  time  a  man  can 
take  round  the  hands  of  a  watch  when  he  has  the  key  !  But  who  can  tell  the  hour 
from  that  ?  It  is  a  different  thing  when  slowly,  moment  by  moment,  the  machinery 
within  works  them  round  so  that  every  hour  and  every  minute  is  marked  correctly. 
So  a  man  may  run  the  whole  round  of  Christian  doctrines  in  speech,  but  it  is  not 
half  so  effective  as  when  he  lives  and  shows  them  forth  day  by  day,  and  as  events 
arise,  in  this  diflBcult  hf  e  of  ours.  The  teacher  must  make  the  truth  part  of  his 
inner  experience : — I  am  afraid  that  very  often  the  truth  which  we  deliver  from  the 
pulpit — and  doubtless  it  is  much  the  same  in  your  classes — is  a  thing  which  is 
extraneous  and  out  of  ourselves,  Uke  the  staff  which  we  hold  in  our  band  but  which 
is  not  a  part  of  ourselves.  We  take  doctrinal  or  practical  truth  as  Gehazi  did  the 
staff,  and  we  lay  it  upon  the  face  of  the  child,  but  we  ourselves  do  not  agonise  for  its 
soul.  We  try  this  doctrine  and  that  truth,  this  anecdote  and  the  other  illustration, 
this  way  of  teaching  a  lesson  and  that  manner  of  delivering  an  address  ;  but  so 
long  as  ever  the  truth  which  we  deliver  is  a  matter  apart  from  ourselves  and 
unconnected  with  our  innermost  being,  so  long  it  will  have  no  more  effect  upon  a 
dead  soul  than  Elisha's  staff  had  upon  the  dead  child.  (C.  fl.  Spurgeon.)  Tbon 
ibat  abborrest  idols,  dost  tbou  commit  sacrilege  7 — Sacrilege : — That  the  Jew  of 


IW  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Paul's  time,  and  for  generations  long  before,  abhorred  idols  there  can  be  no  qaestion. 
In  the  Babylonish  captivity,  the  nation  became  so  disgnsted  with  idolatry  that  the 
hatred  of  it  then  engendered  was  left  as  a  legacy  to  all  time.  Bat  did  the  Jew  at 
the  same  time  commit  sacrilege  ?  To  answer  this  qaestion  we  mast  first  clearly 
understand  what  we  mean  by  sacrilege.  1.  We  may  take  the  alternative  reading, 
"  Dost  thou  rob  temples  ?  "  And  then  the  inference  would  be  that  this  hater  of 
idolatry  was  none  the  less  sometimes  profiting  by  it,  stealing  the  gifts  of  Pagans 
from  their  altars,  and  turning  them  to  his  own  account ;  as  we  may  suppose  in  our 
own  time  one  who  should  inveigh  fiercely  against  the  liquor  traffic,  and  derive  a  part 
of  his  income  from  the  rental  of  a  spirits  vault.  2.  Leaving  this,  however,  and 
accepting  the  text  as  it  stands,  our  idea  of  sacnlege  is  that  of  the  profanation  of 
sacred  things.  Uzziah,  e.g.,  assuming  priestly  functions,  or  Belshazzar  using  the 
sacred  vessels  in  the  orgies  of  a  bacchanalian  reveL  To  speak  more  generally, 
sacrilege  is  diverting  from  its  Divine  purpose  anything  that  God  has  given  us.  The 
undue  exaltation  of  sacred  things  may  be  sacrilege,  and  herein  the  Jew  might 
commit  idolatry  in  the  spirit  while  he  vehemently  protested  against  it  in  the  letter. 
A  superstitious  reverence  for  sacred  things,  such  as,  e.g.,  the  worship  of  the  brazen 
serpent  in  Hezekiah's  time.  3.  Herein  we  think  the  integrity  of  the  antithesis  that 
runs  through  the  questions  from  the  21st  verse  is  sustained,  "  Thou  therefore 
which  teachest  another,  teachest  thou  not  thyself?  thou  that  preachest  a  man 
should  not  steal,  dost  thou  steal?  . .  .  Thou  that  abhorrest  idols,  dost  thou—by  thy 
foolish  superstitions,  by  using  and  exalting  some  of  thy  sacred  things  in  a  way 
never  intended  by  the  Lord  as  well  as  in  degrading  them  to  common  purposes — dost 
thou  commit  sacrilege,  and  so  in  spirit  fall  into  that  sin  of  idolatry  against  which 
thou  criest  out  so  loudly?  "    And  now  to  turn  this  question  to  good  account.     Is  it 

Eossible  for  us  who  have  renounced  idolatry  to  commit  sacrilege  in  the  sense  of 
eooming  idolaters  in  spirit,  while  in  the  letter  we  denounce  it  ?  I  think  it  is — I. 
Wb  buy  commit  sacbileqe  with  DrviNB  OBDiMANCES,  with  baptism  and  the  Lord's 
Supper,  e.g.,  by  investing  them  with  a  mechanical  efficacy  never  intended  by  their 
Author.  II.  Selfishness  is  sacrileoe,  self-worship  being  one  of  the  worst  and 
most  subtle  forms  idolatry  can  take.  1.  "  Know  ye  not,  brethren,  that  your  bodies 
are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  you  are  not  your  own,  but  bought  with  a 
price,"  and,  if  this  be  so,  what  greater  sacrilege  or  idolatry  can  any  man  commit 
than  to  use  his  God-given  powers  and  faculties  as  if  they  were  his  own  ?  Selfish- 
ness, self-worship,  is  a  kind  of  sacrilege  that  brings  with  it  its  own  most  certain 
retribution.  No  leprosy  may  break  out  upon  our  persons  as  in  the  case  of  Uzziah ; 
no  handwriting  may  appear  upon  the  wall  as  in  the  case  of  Belshazzar ;  but,  none 
the  less,  the  retribution  will  surely  come.  2.  Selfishness  is  sacrilege  in  relation  to 
others  as  well  as  to  ourselves,  for  what  right  have  we  to  use  our  fellows  for  our  own 
selfish  ends  and  purposes  7  How  dare  we  make  capital  out  of  other's  weaknesses? 
Every  man's  person  is  sacred ;  he  is  an  image  of  God.  Wherefore  let  us  honour  all 
men,  recogni^-e  the  sacred  uses  and  possibilities  that  are  in  them,  lest  losing 
reverence  for  the  human  we  lose  it  also  for  the  Divine.  3.  Selfishness  is  sacrilege 
against  God,  too,  for  in  His  great  house  we  are  all  of  us  vessels  of  gold,  or  of  silver, 
of  wood,  or  of  stone,  and  if  we  use  ourselves  as  for  ourselves,  forgetful  of  His 
sacred  service,  we  are  Uke  servants  that  waste  their  master's  goods,  like  priests  who 
desecrate  all  sacred  things,  and  abuse  their  solemn  functions.  III.  The  love  of 
OTHEKS,  where  it  leaves  in  the  soul  no  room  for  love  to  God,  is  saceilegb.  We 
may  degrade  them,  and  so  fall  into  this  sin,  but  we  may  also  so  exalt  them  as  to 
fall  into  the  same.  When  we  hear  it  said  that  a  woman  is  "  devoted  "  to  her  child, 
or  that  she  "idolises  "  her  husband,  if  we  were  to  adhere  to  the  letter  we  should 
say  that  this  is  sacrilege.  We  do  not  think  upon  the  whole  that  we  are  in  very  much 
danger  of  loving  our  dear  ones  either  unwisely  or  too  well.  We  can  love  the  Lord 
our  God  with  all  oar  hearts,  and  also  yet  love  our  husbands,  our  wives,  our 
children,  as  Christ  loved  the  Church  and  gave  EUmself  for  it.  We  are  more  likely 
on  the  whole,  I  think,  to  become  sacrilegious  by  loving  them  too  little  than  too 
much.  Yet  if  it  should  be  so  with  any  of  us  that  these  relationships  come  between 
as  and  our  God,  then  indeed  do  we  commit  sacrilege  against  them  as  certainly  as 
against  Him.  IV.  Wobldliness  of  spieit,  the  excessive  love  of  this  world's  goods 
IS  SACBiLEGE  and  idolatry.  If  we  are  the  devotees  of  fashion  or  of  pleasure,  if  the 
shows  of  this  world  so  engross  us  as  to  leave  no  time  nor  heart  for  the  spiritual, 
then  we  are  committing  sacrilege.  The  most  common  gifts,  the  most  earthly 
things  are  amongst  the  '•  all  things  "  that  work  together  for  our  good,  but  they  work 
together  for  our  hann  when,  instead  of  using  them  for  God,  we  use  them  for  mean 


.  n.]  ROMANS.  191 

Sarposes.  The  silver  snd[the  gold  are  the  Lord's,  and  we  may  be  eaorilegioas  if  we 
iscem  not  this  and  nse  them  not  for  Him.  Whether  we  waste  oar  money  or  hoard 
it,  we  are  committing  sacrilege  with  it,  for  money  answereth  all  things,  even 
the  ends  of  grace  as  well  as  the  means  of  ruin.  Let  ns  reverently  handle 
even  our  money,  using  it  as  God  Himself  would  have  ns  use  it,  and  so  in  things 
sacred  or  in  things  secular,  it  will  be  consecrated  to  Him  in  a  true  life  service. 
V.  Thb  liOVB  OF  Natueb  to  thb  exclusion  of  the  love  of  God,  the  worship 
of  mere  material  forms,  is  sacbileoe.  The  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness 
thereof;  the  heavens  declare  His  glory,  &g.,  and  to  see  nothing  beyond  this  state 
of  things  is  to  commit  sacrilege.  For  these  do  as  truly  reveal  Him  as  does 
the  Bible.  But  just  as  we  may  be  bibliolatrous,  so  there  is  a  nature-worship 
which,  while  it  seems  to  elevate,  does  but  desecrate  and  degrade.  (J.  W.  Lance.) 
Sacrilege — i.e.,  temple  robbery.  I.  The  Jews  webe  guilty  of  it.  1.  In  reference 
to  heathen  temples  (Acts  zix.  37).  2.  Li  withholding  or  misappropriating  tithes 
and  offerings  (Mai.  iii.  8).  3.  In  not  giving  God  the  glory  which  is  His  due. 
They  made  the  temple  a  den  of  thieves  (Jer.  vii.  11 ;  Matt.  zxi.  13),  and  were 
charged  with  offering  the  blind  and  lame  for  sacrifice  (Mai.  i.  8).  Thus  they 
abhorred  false  gods,  but  robbed  and  dishonoured  the  true  God.  II.  We  hay 
COMMIT  sacbileoe  by — 1.  Withholding  what  is  God's.  2.  Appropriating  to  our 
own  use  what  properly  belongs  to  God  in  regard — (1)  To  property :  a  portion 
ckimed  for  His  service  (Mai.  iii.  10).  (2)  To  time :  the  whole  of  the  weekly 
Sabbath  claimed  as  His  own  (Ezod.  zx.  8).  It  is  sacrilege,  therefore,  to  appropriate 
any  part  of  it  to  business  or  pleasure  (Isa.  Iviii.  13).  Conclusion :  1.  Sacrilege  the 
climax  denoting  intense  coveteousness.  2.  Unrenewed  men  only  substitute  one 
idol  for  another.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  For  the  name  of  God  la  blasphemed 
amongr  the  keathen  through  you. — Nominal  Christiana,  the  occasion  of  blasphemy 
to  the  heathen  : — If  the  fifth  commandment  be  "  the  first  with  promise,"  the  third 
is  the  first  with  threatening.  In  no  point  is  the  Almighty  so  sensitive  as  the 
honour  of  His  name.  Hence  His  Son  has  taught  us  to  pray,  "  Hallowed  be  Thy 
name."  And  in  no  sin  is  God  more  provoked  than  in  that  which  brings  dishonour 
upon  His  name.  Hence  this  charge,  which  we  shall  illustrate — I.  In  its  applica- 
tion to  Israel.  1.  It  is  essential  to  remember  that  Israel  were  God's  chosen, 
peculiar,  separate  people,  whom  He  had  called  forth  in  order  that  He  might 
make  them  the  lamp  into  which  He  would  introduce  the  light  of  revelation  for  a 
lost  world.  To  them  He  committed  all  the  institutions  of  His  holy  worship,  and 
all  the  laws  of  His  Divine  will.  To  the  world  at  large,  they  were  as  Goshen  in  the 
midst  of  the  land  of  Egypt  in  the  plague  of  darkness.  So  that  the  whole  earth 
borrowed  what  little  light  streaked  its  dark  horizon  from  the  solitary  lamp  lighted 
upon  Zion;  and  just  in  proportion  as  that  lamp  cast  forth  its  beams  was  the 
moral  darkness  relieved,  and  the  Gentile  nations  came  to  the  brightness  of  the 
hope  that  was  in  Zion.  2.  We  must  remember,  further,  that  for  a  lengthened 
period  the  people  of  God  were  not  missionaries,  sent  abroad  to  communicate  their 
prophecies,  laws,  and  ordinances  to  the  Gentile  lands ;  but  rather  the  people 
from  afar,  hearing  the  fame  of  what  God  had  done  for  Israel,  came  up  to 
Jerusalem  to  inquire  and  worship,  even  as  the  Ethiopian  eunuch  came.  And 
many  were  the  proselytes  that  were  led  to  join  themselves  to  the  people  of  the 
God  of  Israel.  But  in  process  of  time  God  Ufted  up  His  hand  to  scatter  them 
among  the  nations,  so  that  long  ere  their  final  dispersion  at  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  there  was  scarcely  a  known  spot  where  some  of  the  wanderers  of  Zion 
were  not  to  be  found.  And  how  did  they  go  ?  They  went  still  as  the  people  of 
God.  And  consequently  the  ht  athen  could  not  but  regard  them  with  deep  curiosity 
and  attention,  in  orcler  that  they  might  trace  in  them  the  character  of  their  faith. 
8.  And  what  was  the  consequence  ?  When  the  heathen  saw  that  their  vices  were 
dark  as  their  own,  whilst  they  were  puffed  up  with  pride,  because  of  their  privileges, 
then  it  came  to  pass  that  the  name  of  God  was  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles 
through  the  people  of  God  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  19,  &c.).  And  the  apostles  had  to 
encounter  no  obstacle  in  the  progress  of  the  truth  that  was  more  fatal  than  the 
dark  misconduct  of  the  scattered  Israelites.  II.  In  its  application  to  oub  own 
FAVooBED  LAND.  1.  Englishmen  undoubtedly  stand  nearest  to  the  condition  of  the 
ancient  people  of  God.  If  Israel  stood  in  the  relation  of  a  covenant  people  to  God, 
BO  do  we.  We  are  a  baptized,  as  they  were  a  circumcised,  people  ;  and  if  all  their 
rebellion  and  inconsistency  did  not  loose  the  bond  of  the  covenant,  but  God  spoke 
of  them  as  His  people,  is  it  not  so  with  ourselves?  Hov/ever  deeply  we  may 
disgrace  the  name  of  Christians,  that  name  is  fastened  upon  us.     He  has  tabso 


18S  THE  BIBLICAIj  ILLUSTRATOR,  [OHA».  n. 

this  nation  into  pecaliar  anion  with  His  truth  and  His  faith ;  He  has  identified  oa 
with  His  cause.  And  have  not  other  lands  looked  to  us  as  their  example,  and 
soaght  ns  for  light  and  holy  knowledge?  And  then  God  has  brought  us  into 
contact  with  all  nations.  As  of  old  the  Jews  were  everywhere  intermingled,  eo 
has  it  come  to  pass  with  the  English.  But  Israel  was  scattered  by  the  sword ; 
they  were  exiles  and  wanderers,  despised  and  cruelly  entreated.  But  our  sons  are 
abroad  through  the  richness  of  the  blessing  of  God  given  to  their  mother  land ;  bo 
that  her  merchants  visit  every  shore,  her  travellers  explore  every  waste,  her 
mariners  are  on  every  sea  and  in  every  haven — and  over  the  whole  world  an 
Englishman's  name  constitutes  a  passport.  And  everywhere,  too,  our  land  has  a 
mighty  influence,  and  an  empire  so  vast,  that  the  sun  never  sets  upon  its  limits. 
One  fourth  of  the  whole  family  of  the  earth  acknowledges  the  sway  of  our  Queen, 
and  the  other  three-fourths  are  more  or  less  influenced,  and  mightily  too,  by  our 
land.  2.  What  ought  to  have  been  the  results  of  such  unexampled  influenced 
It  ought  to  have  been  that  wherever  Briton's  sons  went  they  should  have  carried 
the  blessed  savour  of  Britain's  truth ;  and  wherever  they  planted  their  feet,  they  should 
be  recognised  at  once  as  witnesses  for  Christ.  Alas  I  the  charge  brought  against 
Israel  may  with  equal  emphasis  be  brought  against  ourselves.  "  The  name  of  God 
hath  been  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles "  through  us.  What  has  been  oox 
colonisation  but,  to  a  terrific  extent,  an  annihilation  of  the  tribes  whose  lands  wa 
have  usurped,  and  whose  homes  we  have  ravaged  ?  Our  missionaries,  one  and  all, 
concur  in  telling  us  that  the  most  fatal  and  formidable  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the 
reception  of  Christ's  gospel  among  the  Gentiles  is  the  blasphemy  occasioned  to  the 
name  of  our  Eedeemer  by  those  who  bear  it  but  to  defile  it.  And  until  this  great 
stumbling-block  be  removed,  the  gradual  progress  of  Divine  truth  must  be  retarded ; 
that  we  could  only  have  our  mariners,  merchantmen,  travellers,  and  colonial 
settlers  going  forth  as  "  living  epistles,  known  and  read  of  all "  the  heathen  landa 
through  which  they  pass,  then  indeed  would  there  go  forth  from  Britain's  shore  a 
voice  which  would  come  home  to  every  heart — the  voice  of  a  godly  life.  8.  Then, 
if  such  be  the  application  of  this  solemn  charge  against  our  own  favoured  land,  it 
follows  that  there  is  not  a  more  pressing  or  urgent  claim  upon  Christian  restitution, 
Christian  justice  as  well  as  Christian  sympathy  and  Christian  zeal,  than  that  every 
means  should  be  used  to  redeem  our  title  to  the  Christian  name.  (Canon  Stowell.) 
Inconsistency:  its  evil  effects: — How  many  sinners  every  year  are  driven  away 
from  all  thought  of  religion  by  the  inconsistency  of  professors!  And  have  you 
ever  noticed  how  the  world  always  delights  to  chronicle  the  inconsistency  of  a 
professor !  I  saw  only  yesterday  an  account  in  the  paper  of  a  wretch  who  had 
committed  lust,  and  it  was  said  that  "  he  had  a  very  sanctified  appearance."  Ay, 
I  thought,  that  is  the  way  the  press  always  likes  to  speak :  but  I  very  much  question 
whether  there  are  many  editors  who  know  what  a  sanctified  appearance  means  1  at 
least  they  will  have  to  look  a  long  time  among  their  own  class  before  they  find 
many  that  have  any  excess  of  sanctification.  However,  the  reporter  pat  it  down 
that  the  man  had  "  a  sanctified  appearance  " ;  and  of  course  it  was  intended  as  a 
fling  against  all  those  who  mtike  a  profession  of  religion,  by  making  others  believe 
that  this  man  was  a  professor  too.  And  really  the  world  has  had  some  grave 
cause  for  it,  for  we  have  seen  professing  Christians  in  these  days  who  are  an  utter 
disgrace  to  Christianity,  and  there  are  things  done  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
which  it  would  be  a  shame  to  do  in  the  name  of  Beelzebub.  There  are  things  done, 
too,  by  those  who  are  accounted  members  of  the  Church  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  so 
shameful  that,  methinks,  Pandemonium  itself  would  scarcely  own  them.  The 
world  has  had  much  cause  to  complain  of  the  Church.  0  children  of  God  be 
careful.  The  world  has  a  lynx  eye :  it  will  see  your  faults,  it  will  be  impossible 
to  hide  them ;  and  it  will  magnify  your  faults,  making  much  of  little,  and  of  much 
a  boundless  mass.  It  will  slander  you  if  you  have  no  open  faults ;  give  it,  at  least, 
no  ground  to  work  upon ;  "  let  your  garments  be  always  white  " ;  walk  in  the  fear 
of  the  Lord,  and  let  this  be  your  daily  prayer,  "  Hold  Thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be 
safe."  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  IncoTisistency  hinders  the  spread  of  Christianity : — 
When  Brainerd  was  among  the  American  Indians,  he  stopped  at  a  place  where  he 
offered  to  instruct  them  in  Christianity.  He  was  met  by  the  retort,  "  Why  should 
yon  desire  the  Indians  to  be«ome  Christians,  seeing  that  the  Christians  are  so 
much  worse  than  the  Indians  ?  The  Christians  lie,  steal,  and  drink  worse  than  the 
Indians.  They  first  taught  the  Indians  to  be  drunk.  They  steal  to  so  great  a 
degree,  that  their  rulers  are  obliged  to  hang  them  for  it;  and  even  that  is  not 
enough   to  deter  others   from   the  practice.     We  will  not  consent,  therefore,  to 


OBir.  n.]  ROMANS,  18S 

become  Christians,  lest  we  should  be  as  bad  as  they.  We  will  live  as  oar  fathers 
lived,  and  go  where  oar  fathers  are  when  we  die."  Bj  no  influence  could  ha 
change  their  decision. 

Vers.  25-29.  For  circumcision  verfly  proflteth  If  then  keep  the  la,vr.— Circum- 
cision in  relation  to  baptism : — I.  Its  institdtion  (Gen.  xvii.  9).  It  is  called  "  the 
covenant,"  and  "  the  token  of  the  covenant,"  which  God  established  with  Abraham 
and  his  seed.  So  circumcision  was  not  of  man's  invention,  but  of  God's  appoint- 
ment. And  baptism  is  not  a  ceremony  introduced  into  the  Church  by  the  invention 
of  man.  Christ  said,  *'  Go  and  baptize  all  nations,"  &o.  II.  The  history  oi"  thb 
ORDINANCE.  1.  It  Commenced  with  adults  (Gen.  xvii.  23).  We  do  not  read  about 
the  state  of  mind  of  all  these  adults.  It  is  certain  that  Ishmael  differed  exceedingly 
from  Isaac  and  from  his  father.  So  baptism  was  first  amongst  adults.  You 
remember  the  instance  of  Lydia.  She  having  her  heart  opened,  was  afterwards 
baptized,  and  her  house,  without  any  specific  mention  of  the  character  of  the 
parties  composing  her  household.  2.  It  continued  not  amongst  adults,  but  on 
children  (Gen.  xxi.  4).  And  this  became  a  custom  in  Israel.  Korah,  Dathan,  and 
Abiram  were  as  truly  circumcised  as  Moses  and  Aaron ;  Jeroboam  and  Ahab  as 
David  or  Hezekiah.  Aud  thus  it  came  to  pass,  by  the  continuance  of  the  outward 
ordinance,  not  waiting  upon  the  individual  character,  but  taking  its  rise  on  the 
eighth  day  of  the  child's  age,  there  came  to  be  an  Israel  in  two  senses — spiritual, 
inclusive  of  that  chosen  people  that  God  rei'erved  to  Himself;  and  national, 
inclasive  of  the  others,  together  with  the  mixed  multitude  which  knew  not  God. 
And  so  the  apostle  tells  us,  "  All  are  not  Israel  that  are  of  IsraeL"  Now  the 
analogy  here  again  is  perfect.  Baptism,  which  commenced  with  adults,  soon 
proceeded  among  the  children ;  the  children  of  the  baptized  converts  were  them- 
selves baptized.  There  is  no  especial  commandment  for  the  purpose.  None  was 
needed,  because  the  earliest  Christians,  who  were  Jews,  regarded  their  children  as 
entitled  to  the  same  privileges  as  themselves.  It  would  have  been  strange  if 
Christianity,  placing  before  them  greater  privileges  in  every  other  respect,  had 
restricted  them  in  this.  They  were  in  the  habit  of  bringing  their  children  as  Jews  ; 
to  do  so  as  Christians,  at  the  same  age,  was  natural.  But  if  instead  of  presenting 
tiiem  at  eight  days  old,  they  were  to  keep  them  back  till  they  had  formed  some 

I'udgment  of  their  character,  then,  indeed,  a  special  commandment  would  have 
teen  required,  because  they  would  have  been  called  to  change  their  already 
established  practice.  The  same  consequences  would  naturally  follow  which 
followed  in  the  case  of  Israel.  There  would  grow  up  a  baptized  community,  a 
variety  of  characters.  All  would  not  be  Christians  which  were  of  Christendom ; 
as  all  were  not  Israelites,  indeed,  who  were  of  Israel  in  the  fiesh.  III.  The  natcrb 
ov  THE  OBDiNANCE  AND  THE  ABUSE  OF  IT  (Bom.  iv.  11).  1.  Here  faith  is  distin- 
goished  from  circumcision.  It  was  enjoyed  by  Abraham  previous  to  the  ciicum- 
cision ;  and  he  received  the  circumcision — a  sign,  and  declared  also  to  be  a  seal,  to 
him  of  the  righteousness  of  the  faith  which  he  had  before.  Nothing  less  than  this 
ooold  ever  have  been  supposed  to  belong  to  circumcision  by  any  believing  IsraeUte. 
Bemembering  it  was  a  seal  to  his  father  Abraham  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,  he 
would  look  upon  it  as  a  seal  to  himself  in  hke  manner,  and  would  ask  for  it  as  a 
seal  upon  his  child  also,  and  would  give  thanks  unto  God  that  his  infant  might  be 
sealed  in  like  manner.  He  would  presently  find,  indeed,  that  many  have  the  seal 
who  grow  up  without  the  faith.  But  would  their  falling  off  alter  his  view  of  the 
ordinance  of  God  ?  No.  He  would  be  called  to  distinguish  between  the  ordinance 
itself  and  the  abuse  of  it,  into  which  the  nation  had  fallen ;  and  he  wonld  endeavour, 
amidst  all  the  degenerancy  of  the  people  around  him,  to  rise  into  holy  confidence 
that  God  would  bless  His  own  ordinance,  and  as  he  found  that  faith  working  within 
him,  he  would  appeal  to  that  ordinance  as  a  proof  of  God's  lovingkindness  to  him. 
Now  here  the  analogy  is  the  same.  Baptism  was,  indeed,  a  seal  of  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  faith  which  the  first  adult  Christian  had,  being  yet  uibaptized.  It 
does  not  follow  that  no  persons  were  baptized  except  true  believers.  We  know  of 
oue  who  was  baptized,  and  the  apostle  told  him  that  he  had  "  neither  part  nor  lot 
in  the  matter."  But  all  who  made  a  profession  of  faith  were  baptized.  If  the 
answer  were  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience,  then  baptism  was  all  that  it  wai 
intended  to  be — a  seal  to  them  of  the  righteousness  of  the  faith  which  God  had 
given  them.  But  afterwards,  when  the  infants  of  those  believing  parents  were 
baptized,  it  would  presently  appear  that  many  were  baptized  in  the  flesh  who  lived 
without  God  in  the  world :  and  the  faith  of  the  believer  would  then  be  pat  to  ft 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  k. 

trial.  Baptism  has  been  abused,  as  circumcision  was.  2.  See,  then,  how  oircmn- 
cision  was  abused.  It  is  the  nature  of  the  human  heart  to  desire  to  escape 
punishment  without  desiring  to  avoid  sin ;  and  therefore  the  tendency  of  man 
always  has  been  to  substitute  some  form  for  real  religion.  The  Jews  boasted  ol 
being  the  children  of  Abraham,  and  placed  their  confidence  in  that  for  escape  from 
punishment.  There  is  nothing  that  the  Scripture  is  more  express  against  than  this 
resting  in  outward  privileges,  as  if  they  could  give  them  safety  with  God  (Matt,  iii. 
8,  9 ;  John  viii.  33,  <fec. ;  Acts  vii.  51 ;  Eom.  ii.  28,  29).  How  awful  is  the  analogy 
here.  With  regard  to  the  outward  forms  of  religion,  there  remains  a  large  class  of 
persons  amongst  ourselves  who  place  the  same  sort  of  bold  reliance  upon  the  out- 
ward ordinance  of  baptism  that  the  Jews  placed  upon  their  being  the  children  of 
Abraham.  Bead  from  ver.  17  in  its  application  to  yourselves :  most  remarkable  it 
is,  by  the  transposition  of  a  few  words — changing  "  Jew  "  for  "  Christian  "  and 
changing  "  circumcision "  for  "  baptism."  Oh,  be  assured  that  while  circam> 
cision  was  a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  Abraham's  faith,  the  baptism  which  is  of 
the  heart  is  the  purifying  power  of  God.  (R.  McNeill,  D.D.)  Religious  forma : — 
1.  Are  intended  to  promote  holy  living.  2.  If  this  end  be  accomplished  they  are 
invaluable.  3.  If  not  our  very  religion  becomes  irreligion.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  For 
lie  is  naft  a  Jew  that  is  one  outwardly. — Outward  and  inward  religion : — I.  Mebelt 
ouxwABD  RELIGION  IS  NO  THUS  BGLioioN  AT  ALL.  1.  The  apostlc  is  proviug  that 
both  Jews  and  Gentiles  are  all  under  sin.  He  has  shown  this  respecting  the 
GentUes.  He  next  comes  to  the  Jew,  and  there  is  a  harder  task,  for  the  Jew  was 
so  blinded,  prejudiced,  and  self-righteous.  There  was  nothing  which  the  Jew  more 
gloried  in  than  in  that  of  circumcision.  God  having,  as  they  said,  promised 
Abraham  that,  if  his  children  transgressed,  He  would  remember  their  compliance 
with  this  ordinance,  and  deliver  them  on  account  of  the  merit  of  circumcision. 
They  accounted  this  one  rite  equal  to  the  keeping  of  all  the  commandments  of 
God.  But  in  this  they  showed  a  lamentable  ignorance  of  their  own  Scriptures 
(Deut.  X.  16 ;  Jer.  ix.  25,  iv.  4).  Surely  these  are  sufficiently  plain  as  to  the  utter 
outward  worthlessness  of  circumcision.  So,  with  regard  to  the  other  rites,  when 
the  Jews  would  substitute  tbem  for  true  religion,  then  they  became  an  object  of 
aversion  to  God  (Isa.  i.  13,  <X:c.).  What  is  there  in  outward  rites  and  practice 
which,  of  itself,  can  be  acceptable  to  God,  who  is  a  Spirit.  Worship  offered  to 
the  Divine  being  must  have  some  correspondence  to  His  nature,  and  accordance 
with  His  will  and  Word.  If  God  had  a  body,  and  were  not  a  Spirit,  then  a  religion 
of  bodily  exercise  might  serve  without  any  regard  to  the  inward  state  of  the  wor- 
shipper's mind  and  heart.  But  God  has  no  corporeal  form,  and  therefore  bodily 
service,  without  spiritual  worship,  is  no  worship  at  all.  If,  again,  God  were  a 
^tock  or  a  stone,  then  a  religion  which  exercises  neither  the  mind  nor  the  spirit 
might  satisfy  His  claim.  But  when  God  is  a  pure  Mind,  a  great  Spirit — when  God 
is  love,  and  claims  all  souls  as  His,  then  to  attempt  to  put  Him  oS  with  outward 
forms  is  an  insult  to  His  spiritual  character  and  His  holy  majesty.  2.  Are  there 
none  of  you  who  have  thought  that,  if  you  came  to  church  once  or  twice  a  week, 
this  alone  proved  that  yon  were  good  Christians  ?  And  yet  it  might  be  that  there 
was  only  a  bodily  attendance:  your  minds  might  have  been  at  home,  or  with  your 
business,  or  with  the  last  pleasure.  And  so  with  baptism,  which  has  taken  the 
place  of  circumcision.  The  Scripture  itself  guards  us  against  not  resting  in  the 
mere  outward  form  or  outward  rite  (1  Pet.  iii.  21).  And  yet  many,  if  baptized 
with  water,  never  examine  themselves  as  to  whether  they  have  also  been  baptized 
with  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  so  the  spirit  of  formality  can  turn  even  the  Lord's 
Supper,  which  is  meant  to  deepen  penitence,  and  to  call  forth  simple  glory  in  the 
Cross  of  Christ,  into  self-righteous  formality  and  a  judaizing  ceremony.    II.  Thb 

ABSOLUTE  NECESSITY  OV  AN  INWABD  WORK  OF  DiVINE  GRACE.      "  For  he  iS  a  JeW  which 

is  one  inwardly,"  <feo.  1.  This  may  be  learned  from  the  Old  Testament.  Moses 
taught  (Deut.  xxx.  6)  that  true  circumcision  is  that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit,  and 
not  in  the  letter,  a  Divine  work,  inwardly  wrought.  2.  What  was  the  design  of 
this  peculiar  rite  ?  (1)  St.  Paul  says,  "  Abraham  received  the  sign  of  circumcision, 
a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  the  faith  which  he  had,  being  yet  nncircumcised." 
So,  in  Gen.  zvii.,  God  calls  it  a  token  of  the  covenant  betwixt  Him  and  Abraham. 
In  that  covenant  God  had  engaged  to  make  Abraham  a  father  of  many  nations ;  to 
be  a  God  to  him  and  his  seed  after  him,  and  in  this  all  blessings  are  comprehended; 
and  if  Abraham  had  not  believed  God,  he  would  not  have  complied  with  a  rite  so 
painful  to  flesh  and  blood.  Thus,  in  its  very  origin,  this  rite  was  connected  with 
faith,  and  if  used  without  faith,  it  did  not  answer  its  original  design.    (2)  Bui, 


OIUP.  u.]  ROMANS.  ISr 

again,  this  rite  also  denoted  that  man  is  by  nature,  from  his  very  birth,  a  sinner ; 
that  the  covenant  of  grace  requires  blood  to  be  sbed  in  order  to  atone  for  him ; 
that  there  must  be  the  inward  mortification  of  the  body  of  sin ;  and  that  there  must 
be  a  marked  distinction  in  spirit  between  the  people  of  God  and  the  children  of 
the  world.  It  especially  set  forth  Christ  the  Mediator  of  the  covenant  who  should 
arise  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  who  should  shed  His  blood  in  atonement  for  sin, 
through  whom  also  should  be  given  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  should  impart  a  new 
nature,  a  new  heart,  and  should  enable  men  to  mortify  their  sinful  lusts,  and  thus 
to  become  a  peculiar  people,  separate  from  the  world  indeed,  zealous  of  good 
works.  But  all  this  spiritual  meaning  was  lost  where  men  used  only  the  outward 
form.  Hence  the  declaration  of  vers.  25-29.  3.  To  this  rite  of  circumcision  our 
Lord  personally  submitted.  He  had  not  the  personal  need  which  others  had.  It 
was  because  He  had  consented  to  be  made  under  the  law,  to  be  obedient  unto  the 
law  for  men,  yea,  to  shed  His  blood  for  the  atonement  of  the  sins  of  men.  As  He 
ended,  so  He  began  His  life,  with  shedding  His  sacred  blood.  Here  was  part  of 
the  vicarious  obedience  paid  by  Christ  to  the  law,  whence  our  safety,  eur  peace, 
our  happiness,  our  salvation.  4.  But  now,  under  the  gospel,  the  outward  rite  ia 
gone  with  the  types  of  the  ceremonial  law,  but  the  inward  blessing  is  as  important 
as  ever.  We  are  by  nature  born  in  sin  ;  we  have  to  look  with  faith  to  the  blood  of 
the  everlasting  covenant ;  we  have,  through  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  mortify 
our  members  which  are  on  earth  ;  we  have  to  come  out  of  the  world.  Especially 
we  have  to  receive  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  in  all  His  offices,  and  we  are  to  depend  on 
Christ,  in  the  fulness  of  His  grace,  for  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  regenerate,  to 
mortify,  and  to  sanctify.  These  things  are  not  less  essential  to  our  religion  than 
they  were  to  the  Jew  ;  without  them  our  Christianity  is  nothing  worth.  Whatever 
outward  things  the  Christian  may  do,  he  will  never  allow  himself  to  forget  the 
necessity  of  inward  piety.  But  in  his  zeal  for  spiritual  religion  he  need  not  neglect 
the  few  or  simple  ordinances  of  religion  ;  but  while  using  all  means  must  trust  to 
Christ  only.      (J.  Hambleton,  M.A.)  Church  privileges  no  sign  of  grace: — 

This  point  deserveth  a  lively  discovery,  because  it  is  the  only  evidence  of  most 
Christians  for  heaven.  And  whereas  in  other  things  they  would  judge  a  title 
without  reality  to  be  a  miserable  comfort,  yet  in  religion  they  are  strongly  con- 
tented to  have  the  repute  of  Christians,  baptized  persons,  professors  of  Christ's 
doctrine,  and  yet  know  not  the  power  of  these  things,  being  like  a  dead  corpse 
with  sweet  flowers  strewed  upon  it.  1.  Therefore  to  explicate  this  necessary 
point,  consider  some  things  by  way  of  foundation.  (1)  We  find  it  such  a  sin 
that  generally  the  people  of  Israel  were  guilty  of,  insomuch  that  the  great  con- 
testation between  the  prophets  in  the  Old  Testament  and  the  Israelites  Uving  then, 
between  Christ  and  His  apostles  and  the  Jews  Uving  then,  to  have  been  upon  this 
very  particular.  No  minister,  no  sermon,  could  take  them  off  from  this,  that 
because  they  had  the  external  privileges,  therefore  they  did  belong  to  God,  and  were 
the  children  of  Abraham.  (2)  If  you  look  over  all  Christianity  you  shall  find  this 
the  universal  sin,  whereby  Christ  and  regeneration  with  powerful  godliness  ia 
wholly  neglected,  and  a  fleshly  carnal  confidence  in  the  titles  and  ordinances  of 
Christianity  established.  (3)  To  demonstrate  the  oonnaturality  of  this  sin,  observe 
how  ingenious  the  fleshly  minds  of  men  have  been  by  arguments  and  opinions  to 
encourage  a  carnal  confidence  in  these  externals.  2.  While  we  give  this  explication, 
you  must  by  way  of  caution  take  heed  of  two  other  extremes.  (1)  To  cry  down  the 
very  being  and  use  of  these  external  ordinances  as  being  but  forms,  and  the  spiritual 
frame  of  the  heart  is  made  all  in  all.  (2)  We  are  also  deficient  when,  although  we 
do  not  cry  down  forms  wholly,  yet  we  give  too  little  to  these  institutions  of  Christ. 
8.  Consider  why  people  are  so  apt  to  rest  upon  these  as  comfortable  testimonies,  and 
there  are  several  reasons.  (1)  Because  they  being  duties  commanded,  when  per- 
formed, that  gives  some  ease  and  comfort  to  a  natural  conscience.  (2)  We  are  apt 
to  rest  in  these  things  because  they  are  easy  to  be  done ;  whereas  the  way  of  morti- 
fication is  tedious  to  flesh  and  blood.  Hence  it  is  called  crucifying  the  flesh,  and 
cutting  off  the  right  hand,  and  pulling  out  the  right  eye.  (3)  Men  rest  upon  these 
because  they  are  ignorant  of  the  work  and  necessity  of  regeneration.  The  apostle 
calls  circumcision  of  the  heart,  circumcision  made  without  hands ;  and  so  baptism 
and  the  sacraments  in  the  heart,  which  are  not  visible  in  the  eyes  of  the  world, 
make  us  esteemed  before  God.  Be  not,  then,  idol  Christians  that  have  eyes  and  see 
not,  hearts  and  understand  not  the  inward  virtue  and  spiritual  efficacy  of  Christ  in 
His  ordinances.  (4)  They  put  confidence  in  them  because  they  are  ignorant  of  the 
righteousness  by  faith  in  Christ.     (5)  Men  rest  on  them  because  they  lo«k  oa 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a, 

these  duties  as  satisfactory  and  compensatory  to  God.  (6)  Carnal  people  rely  on 
these  because  they  mistake  the  nature  of  them.  They  look  upon  them  as  those 
things  which  will  of  themselves  make  them  acceptable  to  God,  notwithstanding  any 
preparation  or  spiritual  managing  of  them.  Whereas  setting  aside  the  Word  of 
God  that  works  the  first  grace  in  us,  all  other  duties  they  are  but  as  garments  to  the 
body,  which  cannot  warm  a  dead  body,  but  if  there  be  life  in  the  body  to  heat  them 
first,  then  they  will  increase  the  heat.  And  thus  it  is  here :  if  there  be  spiritual  life 
in  thee,  and  thou  put  it  forth  in  these  duties,  then  these  duties  will  corroborate  and 
strengthen  it  more.  [A.  Burgesi.)  The  having  and  enjoying  such  seals  is  not  sign 
ture  enough  for  our  being  in  the  state  of  grace : — 1.  That  they  are  not  may  appear  in 
that  the  Scripture  makes  it  not  only  possible  for  such  to  be  dananed,  but  doth  foretell 
even  actual  damnation,  and  that  to  the  greater  part  of  such  persons.  2.  The  Scrip- 
ture reckons  the  condition  of  a  man  with  these  privileges  and  one  without  them  in 
the  same  condition  if  there  be  not  holiness.  Thus  Jeremiah  makes  the  uncircum- 
cised  in  heart,  though  circumcised  in  flesh,  all  one  with  the  worst  of  heathens,  the 
Moabites  and  the  Ammonites.  And  to  this  purpose,  also,  the  apostle  in  the  verses 
before,  "  Shall  not  thy  circumcision  be  accounted  nncircumcision  if  thou  keep  not 
the  law  ?  "  So  that  as  long  as  wickedness  is  in  thy  life,  thy  baptism  doth  no  more 
advantage  thee  than  the  heathen's  no-baptism.  3.  The  Scripture  goeth  higher,  and 
doth  not  only  make  them  equal  with  pagans,  but  God  professeth  His  abomination 
of  all  their  religious  service,  and  thy  wickedness  is  more  noisome  than  all  thy 
religion  is  weU-pleasing.  See  Isa.  i.,  how  God  expresseth  Him^^elf  concerning  the 
sacrifices  and  new  moons  of  the  sinful  Israelites.  He  hated  ihem ;  th  j  were  an 
abomination  to  Him.  It  was  like  cutting  off  a  dog's  head.  Ch,  how  contrary  are 
God's  thoughts  and  thy  thoughts  about  the  same  religious  duiiea  1  The  prophet 
Haggai  also  (Hag.  11 .)  doth  by  an  excellent  instance  show,  that  if  a  man  be  unclean 
and  sinful,  his  holy  services  do  not  take  off  from  his  uncleanness,  but  his  unclean- 
ness  defiles  them.  4.  These  are  so  far  from  being  signs  without  grace,  that  they 
will  be  aggravations  of  thy  condemnation.  As  in  some  countries  when  their  male- 
factors were  to  be  burnt  at  the  fire,  they  poured  oU  and  pitch  to  increase  their 
torment  the  more,  so  will  every  sacrament,  every  prayer,  every  church  privilege, 
make  hell  the  hotter  for  thee.     (Ibid.)       Outward  and  inward  religion: — I.  Therb 

ABE    SOME     WHO    ARE     ONLT     GhBISTIANB     OUTWABDLY,    AND     OTHEBS     WHO     ABE     ALSO 

Cheistians  inwardly.  This  difference  appears — 1.  In  the  different  characters 
given  those  who  profess  the  same  faith  and  true  religion  (Matt.  xiii.  47,  48).  The 
tares  and  the  wheat  and  the  goats  and  the  sheep,  the  wise  and  the  foolish  (Matt. 
xxT.),  are  in  the  Church.  2.  In  the  different  effects  religion  has  on  the  lives  of 
those  who  are  called  Christians.  There  are  some  whose  religion  makes  them  holy, 
others  who  have  nothing  but  an  idle  form  (2  Tim.  ill.  5).  The  knowledge  of  some 
is  confined  to  their  heads,  it  never  gets  down  to  their  hearts  (Tit.  i.  16).  Others, 
by  ruason  of  their  light,  dare  not  venture  on  an  ill  thing,  more  than  on  a  precipice. 
The  pretended  rehgion  of  others  leaves  them  loose.  3.  In  the  different  acceptance 
which  persons'  prayers  get.  Some  are  very  pleasing,  others  God  abhors  (Prov. 
xxviii.  9  ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  2,  3,  i.  11).  4.  From  the  different  feeling  which  those  have  of 
the  advantage  of  religion,  the  ordinances  and  duties  thereof.  Some  are  acquainted 
with  the  gain  of  religion,  and,  from  their  own  experience,  can  give  a  solid  reason 
why  they  follow  it  (1  Tim.  vi.  6).  But  unto  others  all  these  things  are  but  as 
empty  husks  (Prov.  xiv.  10).  They  abide  in  the  outer  court  of  religion  all  their 
days.  6.  In  the  different  effects  of  the  religion  which  those  profess.  Grace  is  of  a 
growing  nature  (Prov.  iv.  18).  And  the  longer  that  saints  have  a  standing  in 
religion  they  will  be  the  more  firmly  rooted  (Psa.  xcii.  13,  14 ;  Prov.  xxvi.  14) 
But  others  think  they  are  right,  and  they  seek  no  farther,  and  some,  instead  of 
growing  better,  grow  worse  and  worse  (Rev.  iii.  16).  6.  In  the  different  passage 
which  those  have  out  of  time  into  eternity.  Death  is  the  point  at  which  we  all 
meet ;  but  it  is  the  point  where  outside  and  inside  Christians  part  for  ever  (Psa. 
xxxvii.  37,  38).  II.  The  causes  of  this  difference.  1.  The  different  way  that 
persons  come  by  their  religion.  There  is  a  difference — (1)  In  the  weight  which 
their  entering  on  their  religion  had  on  their  spirits.  Some  come  very  lightly  by 
their  religion ;  hence  it  sits  lightly  upon  them,  and  often  goes  as  hghtly  from 
them.  They  venture  upon  building  a  tower  without  counting  the  cost.  To  others 
it  is  not  BO  easy,  but  they  are  brought  to  the  utmost  seriousness  in  the  matter 
(Luke  xiv.  28,  29)  ;  hence  they  go  to  the  bottom  of  the  matter,  while  others 
satisfy  themselves  with  superficial  work.  (2)  In  the  depth  of  their  conviction  and 
humihatiou  (Luke  vi.  48,  49).    The  plough  of  conviction  Ughtly  going  over  the 


OBAr.  n.]  ROMANS,  18T 

fallow  groand  of  the  heart  is  snfficient  to  make  an  ontside  Christian  (Matt.  xiii. 
6,  20).  But  it  must  be  carried  deeper  to  make  an  inside  Christian,  even  to  the 
root  of  the  most  inward  beloved  lust,  and  to  the  discovery  of  Christ  for  sanctifica- 
tion,  as  well  as  justification.  (3)  In  the  issue  of  their  exercises  about  their  soul's 
case.  In  the  one  they  have  issued  in  the  change  of  their  nature  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26) ; 
but  in  the  other,  whatever  stir  has  been  made  in  the  affections,  the  stony  heart  has 
remained  untaken  away  (Matt.  xiii.  5).  2.  The  different  ways  in  which  professors 
follow  religion.  (1)  Some  make  religion  their  main  business  (Gen.  v.  24).  And 
this  makes  an  inside  Christian  (Psa.  cxix.  6).  Others  make  religion  but  a  bye- 
work  ;  their  main  business  is  of  another  kind.  In  regard  to  the  one,  all  things 
else  about  him  bow  to  his  religion  ;  whereas,  as  to  the  other,  he  makes  his  religion 
bow  to  his  other  designs.  (2)  They  follow  religion  from  different  principles, 
motives,  and  ends,  (a)  Some  follow  it  from  a  natural  conscience.  Fear  of 
punishment,  or  hope  of  reward,  are  powerful  enough  to  make  an  outward 
Christian.  But  an  inside  Christian  has  a  gracious  principle  of  love  to  God  and 
holiness  implanted  in  him  which  incline  him  unto  holiness,  {b)  Some  aim  at 
approving  themselves  to  men  in  their  religion  (Matt.  vi.  2),  and  others  study  to 
approve  themselves  to  God  (2  Cor.  t.  9).    III.  What  is  thjb  outsidb  and  lbiteb 

OF  BELIOION  WHICH  ONIiT   MAKES  AN   OUTSIDE    ChBISTIAN,  AND    WHAT    IS    THE    INSIDE 

AND  BPiBiT  OF  IT  WHICH  MAKES  A  CHRISTIAN?  1.  The  outside  of  religion  is  that 
part  of  it  which  lies  open  to  the  view  of  the  world  by  which  men  form  their 
estimate,  not  God  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7).  It  comprehends  all  Church  privileges,  duties, 
and  attainments  lying  open  to  the  view  of  men.  2.  The  letter  of  religion  is  that 
part  of  it  which  is  agreeable  to  the  letter  of  the  law,  whether  in  externals  or 
internals.  And  it  comprehends  not  only  the  outside,  but  internal  dispositions 
and  attainments  as  to  the  matter  of  them  ;  for  example,  Judas's  sorrow  for  sin,  the 
stony  ground's  joy  at  receiving  the  seed  of  the  "Word,  and  the  hypocrite's  delight 
in  approaching  God  (Isa.  Iviii.).  3.  The  inside  of  religion  is  that  part  of  it  which 
is  open  to  the  all-seeing  eye  of  God  (Matt.  vi.  4).  4.  The  spirit  or  spirituality  of 
religion  is  the  eternal  grace  joined  to  the  external  performance  (John  iv.  24 ;  1  Tim. 
i.  6).  IV.  Not  the  former,  but  the  latter,  sobt  of  religion  mares  a  tbur 
Chbistian.  This  is  evident  if  we  consider — 1.  That  there  is  nothing  in  the  outside 
or  letter  of  religion  but  what  man  may  reach  in  an  unregenerate  state,  in  which  no 
man  can  ever  please  God  (Bom.  iii.  8).  2.  That  the  outside  and  letter  of  religion 
may  be  without  any  true  love  to  God  in  the  heart,  which  yet  is  the  substance  of 
practical  holiness  and  the  comprehensive  duty  of  the  whole  law  (Ezek.  xxxiii. 
81).  8.  That  the  outside  and  letter  of  religion  may  consist  with  the  reign  of 
sin  in  the  heart  (2  Tim.  iii.  5).  4.  That  men  are  in  religion  only  what  they 
are  before  God,  not  what  they  are  before  men  (Gen.  xvii.  1).  (T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
Outward  and  inward  religion : — Though  the  apostle  here  addresses  Jews,  yet  his 
words  concern  us.  Change  Jew  into  Christian,  and  circumcision  into  baptism,  and 
those  outward  duties  and  privileges  which  we  set  so  high  a  value  upon,  and  the  text 
will  fit  as.  As  they  believed  themselves  secure  of  God's  favour,  merely  because 
they  had  all  the  external  characters  of  Judaism  upon  them,  so  do  we,  too,  often 
presume  upon  an  outward  Christianity.  Note — I.  The  parallel  between  outward 
Judaism  and  outward  Christianity.  1.  The  Jews  place  their  confidence  in  being 
the  seed  of  Abraham,  being  circumcised,  and  having  the  true  religion  and  worship 
of  God  among  them,  and  consequently  despised  all  the  world  besides,  and  thought 
that  therefore  they  should  certainly  be  saved,  let  them  lead  what  lives  they  would. 
It  is  this  notion  that  the  Baptist  tacitly  reproves  in  Matt.  iii.  8,  9.  But  many 
among  us  build  upon  no  better  a  foundation.  What  great  difference  is  there  between 
being  natural-born  Jews  and  being  born  of  Christian  parents?  between  an  outward 
circumcision  and  an  outward  baptism  ?  between  an  external  profession  of  the  law 
of  God  given  by  Moses  and  an  external  profession  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  ?  And 
yet  are  there  not  too  many  of  us  that  hope  to  be  saved  merely  on  account  of  these 
things  ?  Far  am  I  from  undervaluing  these  privileges,  but  to  rest  upon  them  alone 
is  just  the  folly  of  a  man,  that,  being  bom  to  a  good  estate,  riotously  spends  it  all, 
and  yet  thinks  to  die  rich.  Baptism  and  the  profession  of  a  holy  religion  are 
nnspeakable  blessings ;  but  they  were  granted  us  that  we  might  be  obliged  to  forsake 
the  devil  and  all  his  works,  and  follow  the  example  of  our  Lord.  If  we  do  not  make 
use  of  our  baptism  and  profession,  they  will  signify  nothing  to  us.  2.  The  Jews 
boasted  in  being  skilful  in  the  knowledge  of  their  law  (vers.  19,  20),  and  the  more 
they  excelled  in  this  the  better  Jews  they  took  themselves  to  be,  and  the  more 
acceptable  to  God,  and  the  more  they  despised  their  inferiors  in  this  knowledge 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

(John  vii.  49) .  Hence,  instead  of  practising  the  law  their  study  was  taken  ap  in  specula- 
tions  about  it.  And  are  there  not  some  now  that  make  Christianity  little  more  than  a 
mere  speculation,  or  a  set  of  orthodox  opinions  7  And  too  many,  who  read  the 
Word  of  God,  but  with  no  intent  to  better  their  Uveo,  but  merely  for  the  confirma- 
tion of  some  notion  they  have  taken  up?  Others  study  Scripture  merely  for 
the  sake  of  its  language,  which  they  so  wretchedly  misapply  that  it  is  little  better 
than  jargon  and  cant.  With  some  of  these,  to  be  a  good  Christian  is  to  be  able  to 
dispute  about  articles  of  faith.  With  others  of  them,  Christianity  is  bat  talking 
warmly  in  Scripture  phrase  about  matters  they  never  troubled  to  understand — such 
regard  with  contempt  those  plain  simple  Christians  that  heartily  believe  their  creed, 
and  endeavour  to  serve  God,  but  yet  trouble  not  about  points  of  speculation.  This 
is  the  worst  representation  of  Christianity  that  can  be  (Bom.  ii.  13 ;  John  xiii.  17, 
ii.  3,  4).  3.  The  Jews  had  an  extraordinary  zeal  for  things  indifferent,  and  not  com* 
manded  of  God  (Mark  vii.  7-9).  What  a  stir  did  they  make  about  their  phylacteries, 
which  they  were  abundantly  more  careful  to  have  tied  on  their  heads  than  to  have 
the  law  of  God  written  upon  their  hearts.  What  conscience  did  they  make  of  cleans- 
ing cups  and  platters,  Ac.  (Matt.  xv.  1 ;  Mark  vii.  2).  We  who  know  better  are  apt  to 
deride  these  superstitions ;  but  are  not  many  of  us  as  foolish  ?  Is  it  not  as  great  a 
piece  of  superstition  to  make  it  a  matter  of  conscience  to  forbear  the  use  of  an 
indifferent  thing  when  God  hath  uot  forbid  the  use  of  it,  as  it  is  to  make  it  a  matter 
of  conscience  to  use  an  indifferent  thing  when  God  hath  not  conmianded  it  f  And 
those  who  think  to  recommend  themselves  to  God  merely  by  a  conformity  to  the 
forms  prescribed  in  the  worship  of  God,  without  any  inward  devotion,  are  as  much 
devoid  of  the  life  of  God  as  any  I  have  now  represented.  4.  The  Jews  showed  a 
greater  zeal  for  rituals  than  for  the  moral  duties  of  the  law  (Matt,  xxiii.  23,  vi.  5  ; 
Luke  xviii.  12 ;  Matt.  xv.  8).  Now,  consider  whether  we  also  do  not  frequently  thus 
play  the  Jews  with  God.  Hath  not  the  world  experience  of  some  who  would  not, 
for  any  consideration,  swear  an  oath,  that  yet  will  make  no  scruple  of  using  very 
indirect  arts  for  the  promoting  their  own  interests  ?  These  are  those  who  are  very 
strict  in  keeping  the  Lord's  day ;  but  yet  they  are  not  so  strict  in  keeping  faith  and 
trust,  and  preserving  their  minds  irom.  worldliness  and  sensuahty.  II.  Thb 
CHAEACTEBisTics  OF  INWARD  BELiGioN.  1.  The  inward  Jew  is  one  who  is  "an 
Israelite  indeed  "  (John  i.  47).  A  true  disciple  of  Christ  is  one  who  is  so  far  from 
vaunting  himself  in  the  outward  privileges  he  enjoys,  that  he  draws  from  hence  an 
argument  of  working  out  his  salvation  with  greater  fear  and  trembling,  knowing 
that  the  greater  advantages  he  enjoys  above  others  involve  him  in  greater  obliga- 
tions to  outstrip  them  in  holiness.  2.  He  is  one  that  hath  quitted  his  mind  of  all 
its  sinful  prejudices,  so  that  he  is  always  prepared  to  receive  any  truth  of  God, 
though  conveyed  to  him  by  mean  instruments,  and  though  never  so  disagreeable. 
3.  He  is  one  that  gives  every  duty  its  due  and  just  place  in  his  esteem,  preferring 
inward  acts  of  piety,  and  so  ordering  his  devotions  towards  God  that  they  promote 
the  duties  he  owes  to  his  neighbour.  4.  He  is  one  who  endeavours  to  yield  a 
universal  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God,  not  picking  and  choosing  those  that  are 
easiest  and  least  repugnant.  5.  He  seeks  not  the  praise  of  men,  but  hath  a  mighty 
care  to  approve  himself  to  God.  6.  He  is  one  that,  when  he  hath  done  ail,  is  yet 
humble,  not  pretending  to  merit  anything  at  the  hand  of  God  (Luke  xvii.  10; 
Psa.  cxv.  1).  (Ahp.  Sharp.)  Outward  and  inward  religion: — Would  the 
washing  of  the  windows  of  a  house  make  the  inhabitants  thereof  clean  ?  Yea, 
does  the  painting  and  ornamenting  of  the  exterior  of  a  mansion  make  the  dwellers 
in  it  healthier  or  holier  men  ?  We  read  of  devils  entering  into  a  clean-swept  and 
garnished  house,  and  the  last  end  of  that  man  was  worse  than  the  first.  All  the 
outward  cleansing  is  but  the  gilding  of  the  bars  of  the  cage  full  of  unclean  birds  ; 
the  whitewashing  of  sepulchres  fuU  of  rottenness  and  dead  men's  bones.  Washing 
the  outside  of  a  box  will  leave  all  the  clothes  inside  as  foul  as  ever.  Bemember, 
therefore,  that  all  that  you  can  do  in  the  way  of  outward  religion  is  nothing  but  the 
sacrifice  of  the  fat  of  rams,  and  "  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken 
than  the  fat  of  rams."  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Outward  and  inward  religion : — The 
Egyptian  temples  were  very  beautiful  on  the  outside,  but  within  you  shall  find 
nothing  but  some  serpent  or  crocodile.  {M.  Mede.)  Artificial  religion : — When 
Archdeacon  Hare  first  visited  Bome,  some  of  his  Protestant  friends,  it  is  said,  who 
knew  his  love  of  art,  and  the  personal  sympathy  which  he  had  with  the  Eternal 
City,  trembled  for  the  effect  it  might  produce  upon  his  mind.  These  fears  were 
groundless.  Bome  was  all,  and  more  than  all,  he  had  imagined.  But  the  rolandid 
vision  left  him  a  stronger  Protestant  than  it  found  him.    "  I  saw  the  Pope,"  he  ue«d 


CHAP,  n.]  ROMANS.  189 

to  Bay,  "  apparently  kneeling  in  prayer  for  mankind ;  but  the  legs  that  kneeled  were 
artificial — he  was  in  his  chair.  That  sight  was  enough  to  counteract  all  the  eesthetical 
impressions  of  the  worship,  if  they  had  been  a  hundred  times  stronger  than  they 
were."  Thus  it  is  with  sJl  mere  ritualism  and  other  formaUsm— the  legs  which 
kneel  are  artificial.  The  mere  routine  of  religion : — Richard  Knill  notes  in  his 
journal  the  following  amusing  incident  of  the  force  of  habit,  as  exemplified  in  his 
horse.  "  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Loveless  would  have  me  live  with  them,  but  tbey  charged 
me  very  little  for  my  board,  whereby  I  was  enabled,  with  my  salary,  to  support 
seven  native  schools.  These  were  so  situated  that  I  could  visit  them  all  in  one  day. 
My  horse  and  gig  were  seen  constantly  on  the  rounds,  and  my  horse  at  last  knew 
where  to  stop  as  well  as  I  did.  This  nearly  cost  a  Bengal  ofiicer  his  life.  Captain 
Page,  a  godly  man,  who  was  staying  with  us  until  a  ship  was  ready  to  take  him  to 
the  Cape,  one  morning  requested  me  to  lend  him  my  horse  and  gig  to  take  him  to 
the  city.  The  captain  was  driving  officer-like,  when  the  horse  stopped  suddenly, 
and  nearly  threw  him  out.  He  inquired,  '  What  place  is  this  ?  '  The  answer  was, 
•  It's  the  Sailors'  Hospital.'  They  started  again,  and  soon  the  horse  stopped 
suddenly,  and  the  captain  was  nearly  out  as  before.  '  What's  this  ?  '  'A  school, 
sir,'  was  the  reply.  At  last  he  finished  his  business,  and  resolved  to  return  another 
way.  By  doing  this  he  came  near  my  schools,  and  again  and  again  the  horse 
stopped.  When  he  got  home,  he  said,  '  1  am  glad  that  I  have  returned  without 
broken  bones,  but  never  will  I  drive  a  religious  horse  again.'  "  Persons  who  go  to 
places  of  worship  from  mere  habit,  and  witliout  entering  into  the  devotions  of  the 
service,  may  here  see  that  their  religion  is  only  such  as  a  horse  may  possess,  and  a 
horse's  religion  will  never  save  a  man.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  true  Christian 
described;  the  hypocrite  detected : — 1.  He  ib  not  a  true  Christian  who  only  bears 

THE  visible   badges   OF    ChBISTIANITT,  BUT    HE    WHO,  WITH   THE   VISIBLE    BADGES,  ALSO 

PARTAKES  OP  THE  INVISIBLE  GRACE  (Mark  xvi.  16).  1.  One  may  be  baptized  in  the 
name  of  Christ,  and  yet  be  even  at  the  last  only  an  outside  Christain  (as  in  our  text, 
and  Acts  viii.  13,  21).  But  he  is  a  true  Christian  who  has  the  invisible  grace 
signified  by  baptism.  See  the  difference  in  this  (Matt.  iii.  11,  and  1  Pet.  iii.  21). 
2.  Persons  may  be  admitted  to  the  Lord's  table,  and  yet  not  be  true  Christians. 
They  may  be  admitted  to  an  external  partaking  of  the  children's  bread,  and  yet  be 
but  dogs  in  tbe  sight  of  the  heart-searching  God  (Luke  xii.  26 ;  Matt.  xxii.  13). 
But  he  is  a  true  Christian  who  is  admitted  to  communion  with  God  in  that  ordin- 
ance (Cant.  V.  1 ;  John  vi.  57).  The  one  is  held  in  the  outer  court,  the  other  is 
admitted  into  the  inner,  and  is  there  feasted.     H.  He  is  not  a  true  Christian 

WHOSE  OUTWARD  MAN  ONLY  IS  CLEAKSED   FROM   THE    POLLUTIONS  OF  THE  WORLD,  BUT    HE 

WHOSE  INWARD  MAN  IS  ALSO  CLEANSED.  Saving  giaco  penetrates  to  the  inside 
(Psa.  xxiv.  3,  4;  Luke  xxviii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10).  A  blameless  life  in  the  world, 
though  good  in  itself,  yet  comes  not  the  length  of  true  Christianity.  1.  There  are 
several  things  that  may  in  some  measure  cleanse  the  conversation  from  gross 
pollutions.  (1)  Good  education  and  company,  as  in  the  case  of  Joash  under 
the  tutorage  of  Jehoiada.  This  may  chain  men's  lusts,  though  it  cannot  change 
their  nature.  (2)  A  good  natural  temper  and  disposition.  But  no  man  is  born  a 
true  Christian,  as  he  is  with  his  natural  temper  ;  religion  is  a  supernatural  temper 
(2  Pet.  i.  4).  (3)  Their  being  kept  out  of  the  way  of  temptation.  The  outward 
cleanness  of  many  is  owing  more  to  circumstances  than  to  any  gracious  disposi- 
tion. Many  have  kept  right  as  long  as  they  were  not  tried,  but  so  soon  as  the  trial 
comes  they  give  way.  (4)  The  workings  of  a  natural  conscience  under  a  rousing 
ministry  (Mark  vi.  20).  (5)  Self-love,  fear  of  punishment,  and  hope  of  reward, 
are  powerful  incentives,  where  God's  authority  is  but  little  valued  (Matt.  vi.  2  ; 
Ezek.  viii.  12).  2.  But  the  true  Christian  has  this  cleanness  of  the  outward 
conversation,  and  goes  farther.  (1)  He  joins  internal  purity  to  external  (Psa.  xxiv.  4; 
Matt.  V.  8 ;  Gal.  v.  24).  (2)  Even  his  external  purity  is  from  religious  motives, 
springs,  and  principles  (Gen.  xxxix.  9).     III.  He  is  not  the  true  Christian  who 

ONLY  PERFORMS  THE   DUTIES   OP   EXTERNAL   OBEDIENCE,  BUT    HE    WHO    ALSO   WITH    THEM 

JOINS  THE  DUiXES  OF  INTERNAL  OBEDIENCE.  (1)  A  man  may  perform  the  external 
duties  of  morality  towards  his  neighbour,  and  yet  be  no  more  than  an  outward 
Curistian.  He  may  be  just  in  his  dealings  with  men  (Luke  xviii.  11),  and  be  liberal 
towards  the  needy  (1  Cor.  xiii.  3).  True  Christianity  makes  a  good  neighbour;  but 
when  a  man  is  nothing  else  he  is  but  half,  and  hardly  half,  a  true  Christian.  (2)  A 
man  may  perform  the  outward  duties  of  piety  towards  God,  yet  after  all  be  but  an 
outside  Christian,  (a)  Persons  may  be  very  punctual  in  their  attendance  at  public 
ordinances,  and  behave  themselves  gravely  anu  attentively  (Isa.  Iviii.  2 ;  Ezek,  xxxiii. 


IM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0HA>.  O. 

31),  and  be  at  much  pains  in  following  ordinances  from  place  to  place  (John  vL  24, 26)i 
and  talk  well  of  what  they  hear  (1  Cor.  ziii.  1),  and  after  all  be  but  ontside  Christians. 
(b)  They  may  be  praying  persons,  and  so  ct-rry  religion  into  their  families,  and  into 
their  closets  (Jer.  xii.  2 ;  Heb.  xii.  17).  (c)  They  may  also  be  sufferers  for  religion 
(1  Cor.  ziii.  3).  Hypocrisy  is  such  a  salamandar  as  can  live  in  the  fire  of  persecu- 
tion ;  and  many  whom  the  violent  wind  of  persecution  has  not  been  able  to  drivs 
off  the  Lord's  way,  the  warm  sun  of  prosperity  has  done  their  business.  (3)  They 
may  join  both  the  outward  of  the  first  and  second  tables,  and  yet  be  but  outside 
Christians  (Luke  xviii.  12  ;  Phil.  iii.  6).  All  this  may  be,  and  yet  not  beyond  the 
boundaries  of  Pharisaical  righteousness  (Matt.  v.  20).  2.  The  inside  exceeds  the 
outside  Christian.  (1)  He  performs  the  duties  of  evangelical  obedience,  in  subject- 
ing his  whole  heart  and  soul  to  the  Lord,  as  well  as  the  outward  man  (John  iv.  23 ; 
PhiL  iii.  3 ;  Gal.  v.  24).  (2)  He  is  unreserved  and  universal  in  his  obedience, 
which  the  outside  Christian  never  is.  (3)  His  obedience  is  son-like,  the  other  la 
servile  and  slavish.  The  highest  principle  with  the  hypocrite  is  fear  of  punishment, 
and  hope  of  reward  (Hos.  z.  11),  their  highest  end  is  themselves  (Hos.  z.  1).  Jeha 
professed  zeal  for  the  Lord,  but  in  effect  it  was  but  zeal  for  a  kingdom.  The  inside 
Christian  serves  God  as  a  son  does  his  father.  Prompted  by  love  to  Him,  and  aim- 
ing at  His  honour  (1  Cor.  z.  31).     lY.  He  is  not  a  tbdb  Chbistum  who  has  imsiob 

BEUGION  ONLY  IN  THB  LEXIER  OF   IT,  BUT  HB   WHO  ALSO   HAS  IT   IN  ITS  SVIBITUALIIY. 

1.  A  man  may  carry  his  religion  into  internals,  and  yet  be  but  a  Christian  in  the 
letter.  He  may  do  and  have  that  in  religion  which  no  eye  but  God  sees  or  can  see, 
and  yet  be  no  true  Christian  (Jer.  xvii.  9, 10,  iii.  10).  (1)  A  natural  conscience  may 
check  for  sins  that  no  eye  sees  but  God's  (Bom.  ii.  15).  (2)  An  unsanctified  desire 
of  salvation,  in  the  way  of  the  covenant  of  works,  may  carry  a  man  to  the  internals 
in  religion  (Bom.  z.  3).  Observe  the  case  of  the  young  man  in  Matt.  zix.  16-20. 
(3)  Light  may  be  strong,  and  kept  strong  by  the  common  operations  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  in  an  unholy  heart.  Thus,  Balaam  durst  not  entertain  a  thought  of  cursing 
Israel ;  though  he  would  fain  have  gained  the  wages  of  unrighteousness.  2.  The 
true  Christian  has  inside  religion,  not  in  the  letter  only,  but  in  the  spirituality 
thereof  (Phil.  iii.  3),  which  consists — (1)  In  the  graciousness  of  the  principle  (1  Tim.  i. 
6).  Their  inward  religion  is  the  fruit  of  their  new  nature ;  it  is  natural,  and  not  forced 
by  terrors  or  necessity.  (2)  In  the  holiness  of  their  aim  (Col.  i.  10).  (T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
Bat  he  is  a  Jew  which  is  one  inwardly. — A  Jew  in  the  true  sense : — A  man  may  be 
bom  an  Englishman  or  become  naturalised,  and  yet  be  un-English  in  his  thoughts 
and  habits  and  character,  and  disloyal  in  his  conduct ;  while  a  foreigner  may  be 
English  in  his  sympathies  and  behaviour,  and  deeply  attached  to  the  crown.  Which 
of  the  twain  is  the  true  Englishman  ?  Which  of  the  twain  would  be  the  most 
acceptable  to  the  Sovereign  ?  The  former  represents  the  case  of  the  unfaithful 
Jew,  while  the  latter  that  of  the  believing  GentUe.  (C  Neil,  M.A.)  Profession 
and  reality  : — If  the  idea  we  have  of  a  philosopher  and  his  profession  were  merely 
to  wear  a  cloak  and  a  long  chain,  those  who  do  so  may  be  entitled  to  the  name ; 
but  if  it  be  rather  to  keep  himself  free  from  faults,  why  are  not  those  who  do 
not  fulfil  the  profession  deprived  of  the  title  ?  When  we  see  one  handle  an  aze 
awkwardly  we  say,  "  This  man  is  no  carpenter  " ;  and  when  we  hear  one  sing  badly 
we  say,  "  This  fellow  is  no  musician  " ;  so  shall  it  be  with  philosophers  who  aOt 
contrary  to  their  profession.  (Epictetus.)  Literal  and  spiritual  obedience: — 
There  are  two  kinds  of  obedience  to  law — the  literal  and  the  spiritual.  The  former 
depends  upon  specific  directions ;  it  is  doing  just  as  much  as  is  in  the  letter,  and 
because  it  is  in  the  letter.  This  obedience  is  merely  outward  and  mechanical ;  it 
is  in  the  knee,  tongue,  or  head,  but  not  in  the  heart.  It  is  always  a  burden.  This 
was  the  observance  of  the  Jews.  The  other  is  spiritual.  Supreme  love  to  the 
Lawgiver  is  the  motive  and  inspiration.  This  is  happiness.  There  are  two  sons, 
children  of  the  same  father,  living  onder  the  same  roof,  subject  to  the  same 
domestic  laws ;  one  has  lost  all  filial  love,  his  father  has  no  longer  any  hold  upon 
his  affections.  The  other  is  full  of  the  sentiment;  the  fiUal  instinct  in  him  is 
almost  passion.  How  different  is  the  obedience  of  these  two  sons  1  The  one  does 
nothing  but  what  is  found  in  the  command,  and  does  that  merely  as  a  matter  of 
form ;  he  would  not  do  it  if  he  could  help  it.  The  other  does  it  not  because  it  is  in 
the  command,  but  because  it  is  the  wish  of  him  he  loves.  He  goes  beyond  the 
written  law ;  he  anticipates  his  father's  will.  Obedience  is  burden  in  the  one  case, 
but  delight  in  the  other.  (H.  Allan,  D.D.)  Spiritual  Judaism: — To  be  a  Jew  in 
the  proper  sense  was  a  high  privilege  indeed.  It  was  to  bear  ••  the  highest  style  of 
man."    St.  Paul  could  give  no  sadder  state  of  the  unevangelised  GentUes  than  that 


«Hir.  n.]  ROMANS,  191 

they  were  aliens  from  the  oommonwealth  of  Israel.  On  the  road  to  Damasons  ha 
had  beheld  the  True  Jew.  This  was  Ihe  Messiah  Himself,  the  only  type  and  model 
hencefortia  of  a  Jew.  Saul's  zeal  for  Judaism  was  not  diminished  but  rather 
increased  by  the  heavenly  vision.  Yet  it  took  a  wholly  new  direction  from  the 
fundunental  change  in  his  conception  of  what  Judaism  was.  True  Judaism  haa 
three  characteristics : — 1.  It  is  not  a  thing  of  mere  observances,  but  a  hidden  life,  a 
lanctification  of  the  affections,  right  direction  of  the  will,  a  regal  power  which  holds 
all  inferior  faculties  in  subjection,  which  mortifies  all  worldly  and  carnal  lusts,  and 
is  in  all  things  obedient  to  God's  blessed  will.  2.  It  is  spiritual,  not  a  literal 
Judaism,  not  in  bondage  to  statutes  and  rules,  but  taking  the  principle  of  the  law, 
which  being  written  on  the  heart,  the  Lawgiver's  intention  is  carried  out  in  life. 
It  is  an  energy  which  goes  beyond  the  rules  of  justice  to  the  unconstrained  works 
of  reverence,  love,  and  pity.  3.  And  then,  just  because  it  is  thus  hidden  and 
spiritual,  the  being  and  the  beauty  of  it  are  manifest  to  God  rather  than  man.  Lei 
oa  come  to  our  Great  High  Priest  for  this  circumcision  of  the  heart.  (Homilist.) 
Inward  religion  it  found  in: — I.  The  state  of  thb  undebstanmno.  •'  The  eyes  of 
yoar  understanding  being  enlightened."  It  is  in  this  faculty  that  the  work  of  grace 
commences,  in  order  to  bring  into  a  right  state  this  leading  power  by  which  all  the 
rest  are  governed.  If  we  are  Christians  inwardly,  then  our  understandings  will  be 
so  enlightened  as  that  all  the  truths  of  God  essential  for  us  to  know  shall  be  so 
olearly  discerned  as  to  exercise  an  infiuence  as  powerful  as  their  importance 
demands.  Here  is  the  great  cause  of  error  in  those  who  fancy  they  have  already 
acquired  a  right  knowledge  of  the  truth  because  they  have  been  instructed  in  the 
Christian  theory.  They  rest  in  the  knowledge  of  some  general  propositions  ;  and 
this  is  perfectly  consistent  with  complete  spiritual  blindness.  Christ  prayed  for 
His  disciples,  •'  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth  :  Thy  word  is  truth."  The  truth 
of  God,  when  apprehended  by  the  understanding  in  the  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
exerts  its  own  sanctifying  influence  on  the  soul.  U.  In  the  state  of  ibb  judqmemt. 
•«  And  this  I  pray,"  said  the  apostle  (Phil.  i.  9,  10),  i.e.,  that  we  may  come  to  such 
conclusions  in  our  judgment  respecting  the  truth  which  our  understanding  has 
admitted  as  shall  render  our  kuowledge  of  the  truth  practical.  What  is  faith,  in 
fact,  intellectually  considered,  but  an  expression  of  our  judgments  on  Divine  truth? 
What  is  the  faith  of  credit  but  the  expression  of  our  judgment  on  the  credibility  of 
that  which  we  believe  ?  And  what  is  the  faith  of  trust  and  reliance  which  justifies 
but  the  expression  of  our  judgment  that  the  great  truths  of  Christianity  are  worthy 
of  being  admitted  into  our  spirit,  and  rested  and  acted  upon  ?  It  is  here  that  we 
find  a  great  difference  between  outward  and  inward  Christians.  The  judgment  of 
the  former  respecting  Divine  things  seldom,  if  ever,  amounts  to  more  than  a  general 
belief  of  their  truth.  But  he  who  possesses  inward  religion  has  been  brought  to 
this  serious  judgment,  that  he  must  be  born  again,  or  he  cannot  enter  the  kingdom 
of  God ;  that  Christ  must  be  received,  and  His  atonement  embraced  personally ; 
that  he  must  yield  obedience  to  His  laws.  And  thus  it  is  that  the  state  of  our 
religion  is,  to  a  great  extent,  regulated  by  the  state  of  our  judgment  in  Divine 
things.  If  this  judgment  is  weak  and  feeble  there  is  little  effect  produced.  If  it  is 
strong,  and  the  truth  of  God  form  the  continual  basis  of  our  judgment,  there  will 
be  a  decision  of  mind  which  operates  as  a  principle,  and  rapidly  becomes  a  habit. 
III.  In  the  state  of  thb  will.  When  this  is  right,  it  will  be  clearly  manifested  in — 
1.  Submission  to  the  Divine  authority — i.e.,  a  full  acknowledgment  that  we  belong 
to  Christ,  and  have  no  right  to  ourselves.  When  we  are  brought  to  this  state,  every- 
thing that  God  has  fixed  as  the  object  of  our  choice  will  be  accepted  by  us  readily, 
constantly,  and  fully.  2.  Acquiescence  in  all  the  dispensations  of  Providence, 
even  in  the  infliction  of  pain  and  trouble.  Inward  religion  always  brings  us  to 
imitate  Him  who  said,  "  Nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt."  IV.  In  the 
state  of  our  principles.  All  are  men  of  principle,  some  way  or  other.  Sometimes 
the  principles  may  be  right,  sometimes  wrong.  It  is  only  he  who  is  a  Christian 
inwardly  that  has  a  principle  capable  of  universal  reference,  and  thus  of  uniform 
operation.  The  grand  principle  on  which  the  men  of  the  world  act  is  to  live  to 
themselves.  The  blindness  oi  their  understanding  conceals  from  them  those  true 
and  holy  principles  which  ought  to  govern  their  feelings  and  life.  If  we  are 
Christians  inwardly,  new  principles  are  fixed  in  our  heart  and  are  operating  there  ; 
and  they  all  resolve  themselves  into  this :  "  We  are  not  our  own ;  we  are  bought 
with  a  price,"  &c.  And  how  easy  of  application  this  is  !  What  a  universal  rule  it 
affords  for  the  government  of  all  our  actions !  If  this  great  principle  entirely 
governs  us,  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  be  practically  wrong.    Y.  In  the  state  of  xas 


193  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  n. 

rsELiNQS.  There  are  some  who  deny  that  feeling  forms  any  essential  part  of 
religion.  They  might  as  well  say,  either  that  man  has  no  feelings,  or  that  there  is 
one  faculty  of  the  mind  which  religion  does  not  control.  We  do  not  say  that  these 
deep  emotions  are  always  visibly  expressed,  but  wherever  there  is  true  piety  there 
will  be  strong  feelings.  Look  at  man  as  God  has  made  him,  and  then  say  if  it 
would  not  be  strange  if  the  great  things  of  eternity  could  be  set  before  him,  and 
cordially  believed  by  him,  without  producing  lively  and  constant  emotion.  What- 
ever danger  may  be  ascribed  to  religious  emotions,  the  real  danger  will  be  found  to 
be,  not  so  much  in  the  emotion  itself,  as  in  the  opinions  and  principles  by  which 
it  is  directed.  The  feelings  that  arise  from  right  principles  and  opinions  will 
seldom  be  wrong.  Conclusion :  As  an  inference  from  this  passage,  I  would  say — 
1.  That  those  external  things  which  do  not  promote  this  state  of  mind  are,  as  to  as, 
whatever  they  may  be  to  others,  of  no  value  at  all  (ver.  25).  No  person  derives 
benefit  merely  from  having  heard  the  name  of  Christ,  by  being  acquainted  with  the 
doctrines  of  Christianity.  This  doctrine  of  the  difiference  between  a  merely  out- 
ward religion,  and  one  which  is  enthroned  in  the  heart  and  reigns  over  the  whole 
man,  separates  the  chaS  from  the  wheat,  and  ought  to  lead  to  the  inquiry,  in  what 
manner  we  are  affected  by  our  external  privileges.  2.  Let  not  those  be  discouraged 
who  find  that  their  understandings,  judgments,  will,  principles,  and  feeling  are  not 
yet  exactly  in  the  state  that  has  been  described,  if  they  are  penitently  and  earnestly 
seeking  inward  religion.  God  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench  the 
smoking  flax.  3.  When  we  thus  bring  our  character  and  experience  to  the  test  of 
God's  holy  Word,  there  is  an  impression  which  may  almost  naturally  be  made  on 
our  mind.  We  may  think  these  requisitions  of  AJmighty  God  to  be  somewhat 
severe  and  rigorous.  But  let  us  correct  ourselves.  He  requires  all  this  of  us,  not 
only  as  He  is  our  Judge,  but  as  He  is  our  Saviour.  {R.  WaUon.)  Inward  religion 
its  own  evidence  : — A  Eoman  Catholic  priest,  a  Protestant  minister,  a  farmer,  and  an 
atheist  were  in  a  railway  carriage  together.  The  atheist  commenced  the  conversa- 
tion by  asking  the  priest  this  question,  "  What,  in  your  opinion,  is  sufBcient  proof 
of  the  truth  of  the  Christianity  which  you  profess  to  believe  and  teach  ?  "  The 
priest  began  to  talk  of  councils,  of  the  traditions  of  the  Church,  and  so  on ;  but  the 
atheist  had  been  all  over  that  ground  before,  and  soon  replied  to  the  arguments 
advanced.  He  then  turned  to  the  Protestant  minister  and  asked  the  same  question. 
The  minister  talked  of  external  evidences,  of  internal  evidences,  of  collateral 
evidences,  and  so  forth ;  but  the  infidel  had  also  considered  all  these  arguments, 
and  had  his  answer  ready.  The  minister  then  referred  the  atheist  to  the  old 
farmer,  whom  he  happened  to  know.  The  farmer's  indignation  had  been  welling 
up  for  a  consiclerable  time  at  hearing  his  Lord  and  Master  reviled,  and  when  the 
atheist  said,  with  a  contemptuous  air,  "  Well,  my  man,  what  in  your  opinion  is 
sufficient  proof  of  the  truth  of  the  Christianity  you  profess  to  believe  ?  "  the  farmer 
answered  earnestly,  "  Sir,  I  feel  it  1  "  The  atheist  was  surprised  at  the  reply,  and 
said,  "  Gentlemen,  I  can't  answer  that  1 "  {Gervase  Smith,  D.D.)  And  circum- 
cision Is  that  of  the  heart. — The  circumcision  of  the  heart : — In  general  it  is  that 
habitual  disposition  of  the  soul  which  is  termed  holiDess,  and  which  consists  in 
being  cleansed  from  sin  and  being  endued  with  those  virtues  which  were  in  Christ. 
To  be  more  particular,  it  impUes — I.  Humility.  Humility,  a  right  judgment  of 
ourselves,  cleanses  cur  minds  from  those  high  conceits  of  our  abilities  and  attain- 
ments which  are  the  fruit  of  a  corrupted  nature.  It  convinces  us  that  in  our  best 
estate  we  are  of  ourselves  sin  and  vanity ;  that  we  are  insufficient  to  help  ourselves ; 
that  without  the  help  of  the  Spirit  of  God  we  can  do  nothing  but  add  sin  to  sin ; 
that  it  is  He  alone  who  works  in  us  to  will  or  do  that  which  is  good.  A  sure  effect 
of  having  formed  this  right  judgment  will  be  a  disregard  of  the  honour  that  cometh 
of  men.  II.  This  knowledge  of  our  disease  disposes  us  to  embrace  with  a  willing 
mind  that  faith  which  aloue  is  able  to  make  us  whole.  The  best  guide  of  the  blind, 
the  surest  light  of  those  who  sit  in  darkness,  the  most  perfect  instructor  of  the 
foolish,  is  faith.  But  it  is  such  a  faith  as  is  mighty  to  the  overturning  of  all  the 
prejudices  of  corrupt  reason,  all  false  maxims  and  evil  customs  and  habits.  All 
things  are  possible  to  him  who  thus  believeth.  The  eyes  of  his  understanding 
being  enlightened  he  sees  what  is  his  calling,  viz.,  to  glorify  God  who  hath  bought 
him  with  a  piice.  He  feels  what  is  the  exceeding  great')  ess  of  His  power  who  is 
able  to  quicken  the  dead  in  sin.  This  faith  is  not  only  an  assent  to  all,  even  the 
most  important,  truths  of  Scripture,  but  the  conviction  of  Chi-ist's  personal  love 
who  "  gave  Himself  for  me."  Such  a  faith  cannot  fail  to  show  evidently  the  power 
pi  Him  who  inspires  it,  by  dehvering  His  chUdrea  from  the  yoke  of  siri,  and 


«BAP.  n.]  ROMANS.  191 

"  purging  their  consciences  from  dead  works."  HI.  Those  who  are  thus  by  faith 
bom  of  God  have  also  strong  consolation  through  hope — even  the  testimony  of  their 
own  spirit  with  the  Spirit  which  witnesses  in  their  hearts  that  they  are  the  children 
of  God.  It  is  that  Spirit  who  works  in  them  that  clear  and  cheerful  confidence  that 
their  heart  is  upright  toward  God ;  who  gives  them  the  expectation  of  receiving  all 
good  things  at  Christ's  hand ;  who  assures  them  t'lat  their  labour  is  not  in  vain. 
lY.  Yet  lackest  thou  one  thing.  If  thou  wilt  be  perfect  add  to  all  these  love,  and 
thou  hast  the  circumcision  of  the  heart.  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  the  end 
of  the  commandment.  1.  To  God.  2.  To  our  neighbour.  3.  To  our  brethren  in 
Christ.  {J.  Wesley,  M.A.)  Circumcision  of  the  heart  essential : — It  is  not  merely 
true  that  your  sabbaths  and  sacraments  may  be  as  useless  to  you  aa  the  rite  of 
circumcision  ever  was  to  the  Jews ;  that  the  whole  ceremonial  of  Christianity  may 
be  duly  and  regularly  described  on  your  part,  without  praise  or  without  acceptance 
on  the  part  of  GoJ  ;  that  worship  may  be  held  every  day  in  your  own  houses,  and 
your  families  be  mustered  at  every  recurring  opportunity  to  close  and  unfailingf 
attendance  on  the  house  of  God.  But  it  is  also  true  that  all  the  moral  honesties  of 
life  may  be  rendered,  and  yet  one  thing  may  be  lacking.  The  circumcision  of  the 
heart  may  be  that  which  you  have  no  part  in.  All  its  longings  may  be  towards  the 
affairs  and  the  enjoyments  and  the  interests  of  mortality.  Your  taste  is  not  to 
what  is  sordid,  but  to  what  is  splendid  in  character ;  but  still  it  is  but  an  earthly 
and  a  perishable  splendour.  Your  very  virtues  are  but  the  virtues  of  the  world. 
They  have  not  upon  them  the  impress  of  that  saintliness  which  will  bear  to  be 
transplanted  into  heaven.  The  present  and  the  peopled  region  of  sense  on  which 
you  expatiate,  you  deck,  it  is  true,  with  the  lustre  of  many  fine  accomplishments ; 
but  they  have  neither  the  stamp  nor  the  endurance  of  eternity.  And,  difiicult  as  it 
was  to  convict  the  Hebrew  of  sin,  robed  in  the  sanctities  of  a  revered  and  imposing 
ceremonial,  it  is  at  least  a  task  of  as  great  strenuousness  to  lay  the  humiliation  of 
the  gospel  spirit  upon  him,  who  lives  surrounded  by  the  smiles  and  the  applauses 
of  society — or  so  to  awaken  the  blindness,  and  circumcise  the  vanity  of  his  heart, 
as  to  briug  him  down  a  humble  supplicant  at  the  footstool  of  mercy.  What  turns 
the  virtues  of  earth  into  splendid  sins  is  that  nothing  of  God  is  there.  It  is  the 
want  of  this  animating  breath  which  impresses  upon  them  all  the  worthlessness  of 
materialism.  It  is  this  which  makes  all  the  native  loveliness  of  our  moral  world  of 
as  httle  account,  in  the  pure  and  spiritual  reckoning  of  the  upper  sanctuary,  as  is  a 
mere  efflorescence  of  beauty  on  the  face  of  the  vegetable  creation.  It  serves  to 
adorn  and  even  to  sustain  the  interests  of  a  fleeting  generation.  Verily  it  hath  its 
reward.  But  not  till,  ander  a  sense  of  nothingness  and  of  guilt,  man  hies  him  to 
the  Cross  of  expiation ;  not  till,  in  the  attitude  of  one  whose  breast  is  humbled  out 
of  all  its  proud  complacencies,  he  receives  the  atonement  of  the  gospel,  and  along 
with  it  receives  a  clean  heart  and  a  right  spirit  from  the  hand  of  his  accepted 
Mediator  ;  it  is  not  till  the  period  of  such  a  transformation,  when  he  is  made  the 
workmanship  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  the  true  image  of  moral  excellence  which 
was  obliterated  from  our  species  at  the  fall,  comes  to  be  restored  to  him,  or  that  ho 
is  put  in  the  way  of  attaining  a  resemblance  to  his  Maker  in  righteousness  and  in 
true  holiness.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Whose  praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God. — 
The  praise  of  true  religion : — The  love  of  praise  is  a  natural  passion.  We  see  it  in 
children,  young  people,  and  adults.  Its  highest  earthly  form  is  ambition,  or  the 
love  of  fame.  Among  other  things  men  praise  rehgion  ;  but  that  which  the  world 
commends  is  only  an  outward  religion,  one  that  can  be  seen,  is  profuse  and  sancti- 
monious in  pious  exercises,  or  which  is  charitable  to  the  poor.  True  religion  is 
abhorrent  to  the  world.  L  Men  do  not  pbaise  it.  1.  They  have  a  difficulty  in 
understanding  it.  It  consists  so  much  of  feelings  and  experiences  with  which  they 
have  no  sympathy.  2.  They  fail  to  appreciate  what  they  cannot  understand.  Surely 
it  is  enough  to  do  good,  and  harm  nobody,  and  there  can  be  no  need  for  so  much 
praying,  crying,  and  love.  3.  They  make  its  possession  no  standard  of  worth. 
Their  heroes  are  of  quite  another  order.  If  they  should  admire  a  philanthropist,  it 
will  be  because  they  view  his  public  usefulness  quite  apart  from  his  spiritual 
prinoiplee.  4.  They  often  bitterly  hate  and  persecute  it.  11.  Its  pbaisb  is  or 
God.  1.  Why  does  He  commend  it?  Because — (1)  Of  its  intrinsic  excellence. 
There  is  an  inherent  worth  about  humility,  goodness,  devotedness  to  God,  self- 
Burrender  to  Him,  the  entire  circumcision  of  the  heart.  (2)  It  is  the  produce  of 
His  own  grace  and  power.  Wherever  spiritual  religion  exists  it  has  been  imparted 
Bupematurally  by  ihe  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (3)  It  reflects  His  own  imace  and 
character.    God  must  approve  Himself,  and  therefore  He  must  admire  all  that 

VOL.    I.  19 


194  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

resembles  Himself.  2.  How  does  He  show  it  ?  (1)  By  the  inward  witness  of  His 
Spirit;  giving  to  the  humble  and  happy  soul  a  sweet  and  secret  sense  of  His 
approval.  (2)  By  outward  tokens  of  success  and  prosperity,  as  in  the  history  of 
Abraham,  Moses,  David,  and  Daniel.  (3)  Hereafter  by  open  acknowledgment  of 
His  own  elect  in  the  day  of  judgment.  Conclusion :  The  love  of  praise  will  influence 
you,  among  other  motives,  in  matters  of  religion.  Will  you,  then,  seek  to  please 
men  or  God  T  It  you  please  men,  you  must  displease  God ;  and  what  will  their 
commendation  and  applause  do  for  you  in  the  article  of  death,  or  in  the  hour  of 
judgment?  Therefore — 1.  Seek  only  to  please  God.  2.  Be  satisfied  with  His 
approvaL  8.  Thus  overcome  the  worldly  lust  of  fame.  4.  And  enjoy  perfect 
peace.  5.  And  show  yourself  a  pattern  of  high  and  genuine  hexoism.  (T.  O. 
Horton.) 


CHAPTEB  m. 

Yebs.  1, 2.  What  advantage  then  hath  the  Jew  7  .  .  .  chiefly,  beeanse  that  vnto 
them  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God. — Moral  advantage : — I.  Thbbb  is  much 

ADVANTAGB  TO   THOSE  FAVODBED  WITH  CLEABEB  LIGHT  AND  HIGHEB  PBIVILEOE,  IN  BVEBT 

BE8PECT.  They  have  the  advantage — 1.  Of  feeling  that  God  cares  for  them.  The 
heathen  had,  some  of  them,  lost  the  knowledge  of  God  altogether,  and  others  were 
only  dimly  conscious  of  His  goodness.  2.  Of  a  superior  temporal  condition.  They 
are  delivered  from  the  miseries  inflicted  by  cruel  superstitions,  are  able  to  check  the 
progress  of  debasing  immoralities,  and  to  promote  freedom,  comfort,  peace,  and 
brotherhood.  8.  Of  better  opportunity  of  performing  what  their  better  position 
demands.  The  man  who  possessed  five  talents  had  the  advantage  over  his  fellow. 
He  had  a  better  command  of  the  market,  and  could  stand  a  greater  shock  of  adverse 
circumstances.  They  would  help  each  other  to  grow ;  for  five  united  are  more  than 
five  times  as  strong  as  one,  and  more  than  two-and-a-half  times  as  strong  as  two. 
An  Israelite  or  a  Christian  may  walk  uprightly  in  his  noonday  light  more  easily 
than  a  heathen  may  walk  at  all  in  his  dim  twilight.  4.  Of  attaining,  if  faithfnl,  an 
absolutely  higher  reward.  As  two  statesmen  of  equal  desert,  and  equally  in  favour, 
take  higher  and  lower  positions  on  account  of  their  different  capacities,  so  those 
who  receive  equally  the  King's  commendation,  «*  Well  done,  good  and  faithful 
servant,"  shall  yet  differ,  as  one  star  differeth  from  another,  in  glory.  U.  Thb 
OBEATEST  ADVANTAGE  IB  TO  HAVE  THB  0BACLE8  OF  GoD.  1.  The  knowledge  they  impart 
is  a  blessing.  As  day  is  more  blessed  than  night ;  as  freedom  for  thought  is  better 
than  the  fetters  of  ignorance,  so  the  possession  of  these  oracles  is  unspeakably 
better  than  deprivation  of  them.  2.  It  is  a  blessing  to  have  assured  Divine  com- 
mnnication.  As  the  spirit  of  a  plebeian  is  lifted  by  a  word  or  a  look  from  his  king; 
as  the  heart  of  an  absent  child  is  gladdened  by  the  outside  of  his  father's  letter,  so 
is  man  blessed  by  the  fact  that  God  has  spoken  to  him.  3.  It  is  an  advantage  to 
be  thus  taken  into  peculiar  covenant  relationship  to  God.  Every  precept  of  these 
oracles  is  a  condition  of  some  blessedness  which  God  pledges  Himself  to  bestow ; 
and  every  promise  contains  God's  oath  of  faithfulness  to  all  to  whom  these  oracles 
come.  It  is  a  high  advantage  to  know  that  we  are  God's  and  God  is  ours,  as  we 
grasp  in  faith  and  obedience  His  sacred  Word.  Over  our  higher  privileges  it 
becomes  us  to  "  rejoice  with  trembling."  With  all  thy  responsibilities,  thy  greater 
required  service,  and  thy  heavier  doom  if  faithless,  still  "Happy  art  thon,  O  Israel,** 
••  satisfied  with  favour,  and  full  with  the  blessing  of  the  Lord."  (W.  Griffi,th».) 
Moral  advantage : — 1.  Man  has  unspeakable  advantage  in  the  possession  of  the 
oracles  of  God.  2.  May  lose  it  through  unbelief.  3.  Cannot  thereby  invalidate 
lod's  faithfulness.  4.  Must  ultimately  confess  and  justify  it.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  surplus  of  privilege  : — The  following  supposed  cases  may  serve  to  explain  the 
force  of  the  question  raised,  and  replied  to  in  the  text:  If  the  scholarships  at  Oxford 
or  Cambridge  are  given  away  irrespective  of  the  seminaries  from  which  the  candi- 
dates come,  what  relative  advantage  has  a  youth  educated  at  one  of  our  public 
schools  over  and  above  another  who  is  self-taught,  and  with  few  helps  ?  Much 
every  way ;  for  he  has  had  the  best  text-books,  skilled  masters,  and  the  like.  Or, 
again,  suppose  a  philanthropist  should  undertake  the  reformation  of  the  waifs  and 
strays  of  society  in  his  own  neighbourhood,  and  for  this  purpose  were  to  select 


•BAT.  m.]  ROMANS.  IM 

certain  yonths  whom  he  received  into  an  institution  where  they  were  fed,  clothed, 
and  specially  trained.  Now  if,  after  a  while,  the  person  in  qaestion  should  throw 
open  the  duors  of  this  establishment,  would  not  there  still  be  a  surplus  of  privilege 
belonging  to  those  whom  he  had  first  admitted  ? — would  not  the  care  and  instruc- 
tion which  they  had  already  enjoyed  raise  them  above  their  fellows,  and  fit  them 
for  being  the  most  qualified  instruments  in  the  carrying  out  of  their  benefactors' 
liberal-minded  and  large-hearted  designs  T  (C.  Neil,  M.A. )  The  advantages  of 
Christiani  over  heathens : — I.  What  thet  abb.  1.  A  guide  for  faith.  2.  A  warrant 
for  hope.  3.  A  rule  for  conduct.  U.  Thb  iupboveuent  we  should  mass  of  theh. 
1.  Study.  2.  Obey.  3.  Diffuse.  {C.  Simeon,  M.A.)  The  advantage  of  possessing 
the  Holy  Scriptures : — I.  The  appellation  herb  given  to  the  Holy  Scbiptubes — the 
oracles  of  God.  1.  There  seems  to  be  an  allusion  to  the  heathen  oracles.  These 
were,  indeed,  merely  pretended  communications  from  gods  that  had  no  existence ; 
or,  perhaps,  in  some  instances  real  communications  from  demons,  and  the  answers 
which  were  given  were  generally  expressed  in  such  unintelligible,  or  equivocal 
phrases  as  might  easily  be  wrested  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  oracles  whatever  the 
truth  might  be  (Acts  xvi.  16).  2.  But  the  apostles,  when  they  term  the  Scriptures 
"  oracles  "  (Acts  vii.  38 ;  Heb.  v.  12  ;  1  Pet.  iv.  11),  signify  that  they  are  real  reve- 
lations from  the  true  God.  These  were  communicated — viva  voce,  as  when  God 
spake  to  Moses  face  to  face — in  visions,  as  when  a  prophet  in  an  ecstaoy  had 
Bupernataral  revelations  (Gen.  xt.  1,  xlvL  2 ;  Ezek.  xi.  24 ;  Dan.  viii.  2) — in 
dreams,  as  those  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxviii.  12)  and  Joseph  (Gen.  xxxvii.  5,  6) — by 
Urim  and  Thummim,  which  was  a  way  of  knowing  the  will  of  God  by  the  ephod 
or  breastplate  of  the  high  priest.  After  the  building  of  the  temple,  God's  will  was 
generally  made  known  by  prophets  Divinely  inspired,  and  who  were  made 
acquainted  with  it  in  different  ways  (Chron.  ix.  20,  21).  3.  The  apostles,  giving  the 
Scriptures  this  appellation,  show  that  they  considered  them  as  containing  God's 
mind  and  will  (2  Tim.  iii.  16 ;  1  Pet.  i.  10-13,  23,  25  ;  2  Pet.  i.  19-21).  And  these 
apostles,  being  themselves  inspired  (John  xiv.  17,  26,  xv.  26,  xvi.  13)  could  not  be 
mistaken.  Christ  Himself  has  borne  a  clear  testimony  to  the  truth  and  importance 
of  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament  (John  v.  89,  x.  35  ;  Luke  xvi.  29,  31).  4. 
Other  proofs  of  their  inspiration  are — the  majesty  of  their  style ;  the  evident  truth 
and  authority  of  their  doctrines ;  the  harmony  of  all  their  parts ;  their  power  on 
the  minds  of  myriads  ;  the  accomplishment  of  their  prophecies ;  the  miracles  per- 
formed by  their  authors.  If  these  things  can  be  affirmed  of  the  writing  of  the  Old 
Testament,  how  much  more  of  the  Nevr,  which  consist  of  the  discourses  of  God's 
Incarnate  Truth  (Heb.  i.  1),  and  of  His  Divinely  commissioned  servants  (Eph.  iv. 
7-13).  IL  The  advantages  those  have  above  othebs,  who  abb  favoueed  with 
THEM.  1.  There  are  many  truths  of  vast  importance  which  may  be  known  from 
God's  works  (chap.  i.  19,  20) ;  nevertheless,  matter  of  fact  has  proved  that  even 
as  to  the  most  obvious  and  primary  truths,  all  flesh  have  corrupted  their  way.  If 
the  existence  of  a  Deity  has  been  generally  acknowledged,  yet  His  unity  and 
spirituahty  has  not,  but  the  most  civilised  nations  have  multiplied  their  gods 
without  end  (chap,  i,  21-24 ;  hence  Isa.  xl.  19,  20,  ili.  6,  7,  xliv.  12-20).  As  to 
the  accountableness  of  man,  fatalism  on  the  one  hand,  and  self-sufficiency  on  the 
other,  prevailed  even  among  the  Greeks  and  Bomans  ;  as  to  the  distinction  between 
vice  and  virtue,  we  refer  to  the  apostle  (chap.  i.  26-32).  And  as  to  a  future  state  of 
happiness  or  misery,  they  were  in  general  "  without  hope."  2.  But  if  these  and 
Buch  like  truths  could  have  been  discovered  by  the  light  of  nature,  they  are  taught 
in  Scripture  much  more  clearly  and  fully ;  with  more  authority  and  certainty ;  and 
in  a  way  more  adapted  to  the  condition  of  mankind,  who  in  general  have  neither 
capacity  nor  time  for  deep  and  difficult  research.  Many  other  truths  of  equal 
importance,  which  are  not  known  at  all  by  the  light  of  nature,  are  clearly  revealed 
in  the  Scriptures.  3.  The  oracles  of  God  may  well  be  called  by  St.  Stephen  '•  lively." 
God's  word  is  a  "  hammer  and  fire,"  "  quick  and  powerful "  (Heb.  iv.  12),  "  spirit 
and  hfe  "  (John  vi.  63).  They  partake  of  the  spiritual,  living,  and  powerful  nature 
of  Him,  from  whom  they  proceed.  The  God  who  gave  them  is  still  at  hand  to  give 
the  right  understanding  and  feeling  of  them  (Luke  xxiv.  45  ;  2  Pet.  i.  20),  and  still 
works  by  and  with  them.  Hence  men,  from  age  to  age,  have  been  '•  pricked,"  "  cut 
to  the  heart  "  (Acts  ii.  37,  v.  33),  "  begotten  "  (James  i.  18),  "  bom  again  "  (1  Pet. 
i.  23),  "  set  free"  (John  viii.  32),  "made  clean"  (John  xv.  3),  "sanctified"  (John 
xvii.  17 ;  Eph.  v.  26),  built  up  and  made  perfect  by  them  (Eph.  iv.  12 ;  2  Tim.  iii. 
15).  4.  But  here  arises  a  grand  objection ;  the  Jews,  though  favoured  with  the 
oracles  of  God,  were  as  wicked  as  the  Gentiles  (chap,  ii.) ;  professing  ChristiaiOS  ara 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

as  wicked  as  the  heathen.  This  is  by  no  means  the  case.  A  very  favoarable  change 
in  the  manners  of  men  in  general  has  been  wrought  where  the  Scriptures  have  been 
received ;  and  myriads,  both  Jews  and  Christians,  have  thereby  been  made  truly 
pious  persons  in  all  ages ;  and  with  respect  to  the  rest,  "  if  some  did  not  believe, 
shall  their  unbelief  make  the  faith  of  God  without  effect  ?  "  (ver.  3).    III.  Oub 

OBLIGATION  TO  IMPBOVB   THIS  ADVANTAGE   FOB  OURSELVES  AND  TO  COMMUNICATE   IT  TO 

OTHEKs.  1.  The  oracles  of  God  can  only  profit  those  who  believe  them  (Heb.  iii. 
11,  iv.  2).  They  must  also  be  considered  and  laid  to  heart,  otherwise  they  canzM)! 
profit  an  intelligent  and  free  being,  for  they  do  not  work  upon  our  minds  mechani- 
cally. We  musk  bring  to  their  consideration  a  teachable  and  serious  mind ;  must 
receive  them  with  reverence,  gratitude,  and  affection ;  practise  the  religion  they 
describe  ;  and,  in  order  to  all  this,  pray  to  Him  that  gave  them,  that  He  may  impart 
to  us  the  Spirit  by  whose  influences  alone  we  can  either  understand  or  comply  with 
them.  2.  With  respect  to  others — the  oracles  of  God  are  equally  necessary  and  de- 
signed for  aU  men  (Psa.  xxii.  27  ;  Isa.  ii.  2 ;  Mio.  iv.  1 ;  Isa.  xi.  9,  Ix.  8, 9 ;  Luke  xxiv. 
47;  Mark  xvi.  15 ;  Eom.  i.  6 ;  Eev.  xiv.  6,  7).  All  professing  Christians  are  under 
an  obligation  to  aid  their  circulation,  that  their  endeavours  may  be  consistent  with 
their  prayers,  for  they  pray  that  His  "kingdom  may  come."  {Joseph  Beruon.) 
The  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  having  the  Divine  oracles  compared :  a  plea 
for  missions  : — I.  To  whom  much  is  given  much  will  be  eequibed  ;  the  question, 

THEN,  IS  WHETHEB  IT  IS  BETTEB  THAT  IT  SHALL  BE  GIVEN  OB  WITHHELD.       1.   The  JOW, 

who  sinned  against  the  Hght  of  his  revelation,  will  have  a  severer  retribution  than 
the  Gentile  who  only  sinned  against  the  light  of  his  own  conscience ;  and  the 
nations  of  Christendom  who  have  rejected  the  gospel  will  incur  a  darker  doom  than 
the  native  of  China,  whose  remoteness,  while  it  shelters  him  from  the  light  of  the 
New  Testament  in  this  world,  shelters  him  from  the  pain  of  its  fulfilled  denuncia- 
tions in  another.  And  with  these  considerations  a  shade  of  uncertainty  appears  to 
pass  over  the  question — whether  the  Christianisation  of  a  people  ought  at  all  to  be 
meddled  with.  2.  But  without  an  authoritative  solution  of  this  question  from  God, 
we  are  really  not  in  circumstances  to  determine  it.  We  have  not  all  the  materials 
of  the  question  before  us.  We  know  not  how  to  state  what  the  addition  is  which 
knowledge  confers  npon  the  sufferings  of  disobedience ;  or  how  far  an  accepted 
gospel  exalts  the  condition  of  him  who  was  before  a  stranger  to  it.  It  is  all  a  matter 
of  revelation  on  which  side  the  difference  Hes ;  and  he  who  is  satisfied  to  be  wise 
op  to  that  which  is  written  will  quietly  repose  upon  the  deliverance  of  Scripture  on 
this  subject.  "  Go  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature  under  heaven,"  and  "  go 
anto  all  the  world,  and  teach  all  nations."  These  parting  words  of  our  Saviour  may 
not  be  enough  to  quell  the  anxieties  of  the  speculative  Christian,  but  they  are  quite 
enough  to  decide  the  conduct  of  the  practical  Christian.  3.  But  the  verses  before 
as  advance  one  step  farther,  and  enter  on  the  question  of  profit  and  loss  attendant 
on  t  le  possession  of  the  oracles  of  God ;  and  to  decide,  on  the  part  of  the  former, 
that  the  advantage  was  much  every  way.  And  it  is  not  for  those  individuals  alone 
who  reaped  the  benefit  that  the  apostle  makes  the  calculation.  He  makes  an  abate- 
ment for  the  unbelief  of  all  the  others ;  and,  balancing  the  difference,  he  lands  aa 
in  a  computation  of  clear  gain  to  the  whole  people.  And  it  bears  importantly  on 
this  question ;  for  surely  we  may  well  venture  to  circulate  these  oracles  when  told 
of  the  most  stiff-necked  and  rebellions  people  on  earth,  that,  with  all  their  abuse  of 
them,  they  conferred  a  positive  advantage  on  their  nation.  And  yet  what  a  fearful 
deduction  from  this  advantage  must  have  been  made  by  their  wickedness.  It  were 
h  rd  to  tell  the  amount  of  aggravation  upon  all  their  sin,  in  that  it  was  sin  against 
the  light  of  the  oracles  of  God  ;  but  the  apostle  tells  us  that,  let  the  amount  be  what 
it  may,  it  was  more  than  countervailed  by  the  positive  good  done  through  these 
oracles.  II.  A  few  bemaeks  both  on  the  speculative  and  on  the  pbactical  pabt 
OF  THIS  question.  1.  The  Bible,  when  brought  into  a  new  country,  may  be  instru- 
mental in  saving  those  who  submit  to  its  doctrine  ;  and,  in  so  doing,  it  saves  them 
from  an  absolute  condition  of  misery  in  which  they  were  previously  involved.  If 
along  with  this  advantage  to  those  who  receive  it,  it  aggravates  the  condition  of 
those  who  reject  it,  it  does  not  change  into  wretchedness  that  which  before  waa 
enjoyment ;  and  the  whole  amount  of  the  evil  that  has  been  rendered  is  only  to  be 
computed  by  the  difference  in  degree  between  the  suffering  that  is  laid  upon  sin 
with,  and  sin  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Saviour.  We  do  not  know  how  great 
the  difference  is,  but  we  gather  that  it  was  better  for  the  Jews,  in  spite  of  all  the 
deeper  responsibility  and  guilt  which  their  possession  of  the  Old  Testament  laid 
npon  the  disobedient,  yet  that  a  nett  accession  of  gain  was  thus  rendered  to  the 


CHAP,  m.]  ROMANS,  197 

whole — then  may  we  infer  that   any  enterprise  by  which  the  Bible  is  more 
extensiTely  circulated,  or  taught,  is  of  positive  benetit  to  every  neighbourhood.     2. 
Though  in  Jewish  history  they  were  the  few  to  whom  the  oracles  of  God  were  a 
blessing,  and  the  many  to  whom  they  were  an  additional  condemnation — yet,  on  the 
whole,  the  good  so  predominated  over  the  evil,  that  it  on  the  whole  was  for  the 
better  and  not  for  the  worse  that  they  possessed  these  oracles.    But  the  argument 
gathers  in  strength  as  we  look  onward  to  futurity,  as  we  dwell  upon  the  fact  of  the 
universal  prevalence  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.     Even  in  this  day  of  small  things,  the 
direct  blessing  which  follows  in  the  train  of  a  circulated  Bible  and  a  proclaimed 
gospel  overbalances  the  incidental  evil ;  and  when  we  think  of  the  latter-day  glory 
which  it  ushers  in,  who  should  shrink  from  the  work  of  hastening  it  forward, 
because  of  a  spectre  conjured  up  from  the  abyss  of  human  ignorance?    Even  did 
the  evil  now  predominate  over  the  good,  still  is  a  missionary  enterprise  like  a 
magnanimous  daring  for  a  great  moral  and  spiritual  acbievement,  which  will  at 
length  reward  the  perseverance  of  its  devoted  labourers.     There  are  collateral  evils 
attendant  on  the  progress  of  Christianity.    At  one  time  it  brings  a  sword  instead  of 
peace,  and  at  another  it  stirs  up  a  variance  in  families,  and  at  all  times  does  it 
deepen  the  guilt  of  those  who  resist  the  overtures  which  it  makes  to  them.    But 
these  are  only  the  perils  of  a  voyage  that  is  richly  laden  with  the  moral  wealth  of 
many  future  generations.    These  are  but  the  hazards  of  a  battle  which  terminates 
in  the  proudest  and  most  productive  of  all  victories — and,  if  the  hberty  of  a  great 
empire  be  an  adequate  return  for  the  loss  of  the  lives  of  its  defenders,  then  is  iha 
glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God,  which  will  at  length  be  extended  over  the 
face  of  a  still  enslaved  and  alienated  world,  more  than  an  adequate  return  for  the 
spiritual  loss  that  is  sustained  by  those  who,  instead  of  fighting  for  the  cause,  have 
resisted  and  revUed  it.    III.  Concldde  wtib  a  few  fkacxicaij  buuarks.    1.  It  is  with 
argument  sui  'i  as  this  that  we  would  meet  the  anti-missionary  spirit.  Not  long  ago 
Christianising  enterprise  was  traduced  as  a  kind  of  invasion  on  the  safety  and 
innocence  of  paganism,  and  it  was  afSrmed  that,  though  idolatry  is  blind,  yet  it 
were  better  not  to  awaken  its  worshippers,  than  to  drag  them  forth  by  instruction 
to  the  hazards  and  the  exposures  of  a  more  fearful  responsibility.    But  wby  should 
we  be  restrained  now  from  the  work  by  a  calculation,  which  did  not  restrain  the 
missionaries  of  two  thousand  years  ago  ?    2.  If  man  is  to  be  kept  in  ignorance 
because  every  addition  of  light  brings  along  with  it  an  addition  of  responsibility — 
then  ought  the  species  to  be  arrested  at  home  as  well  as  abroad  in  its  progress 
towards  a  more  exalted  state  of  humanity ;  and  such  evils  as  may  attend  the 
transition  to  moral  and  religious  knowledge,  should  deter  us  from  every  attempt  to 
rescue  our  own  countrymen  from  any  given  amount  of  darkness  by  which  they  may 
now  be  encompassed.    3.  However  safe  it  is  to  commit  the  oracles  of  God  into  the 
hands  of  others,  yet,  considering  ourselves  in  tLe  light  of  those  to  whom  these 
oracles  are  committed,  it  is  a  matter  of  urgent  concern  whether,  to  us  personally, 
the  gain  or  the  loss  will  predominate.     It  resolves  itself,  with  every  separate  indi- 
vidual, into  the  question  of  his  secured  heaven,  or  his  more  aggravated  hell — 
whether  he  be  of  the  some  who  turn  the  message  of  God  into  an  instrument  of  con- 
version ;  or  of  the  many  who,  by  neglect  and  unconcern,  render  it  the  instrument 
of  their  sorer  condemnation.    (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)      The  oracles  of  God: — I.  Theib 
LBADiNO  CHARACTERS.     1.  Absolutc  truth  and  wisdom.     The  word  "  oracles  "  signi- 
fies  a  "Divine  speech  or  answer."    Words  professing  to  be  from  God  ought  to  have 
strong  evidence;  arjd  how  mighty  and  commanding  is  the  evidence — attested  by 
miracle,  ratified  by  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  continuing  when  they  have  for  ages 
reproved  the  world,  giving  life  and  salvation  to  this  hour.     If,  then,  they  are  from 
God,  the  question  of  their  wisdom  and  truth  is  settled.     And  here  is  the  advaiitiige 
of  possessing  these  oracles.     There  is  not  a  question  relating  either  to  duty  or 
salvation  to  which  there  is  not  here  an  answer.    Are  you  an  inquirer?     There  ia 
the  oracle.     Consult  it;  for  "it  shall  speak,  and  shall  not  lie."    2.  Infinite  import- 
ance.    On  those  questions  which  are  merely  curious  the  oracle  is  silent,  but  on  no 
subject  which  it  behoves  us  to  know,  e.g.,  the  character  of  God  ;  the  laws  by  whicn 
we  are  governed ;  the  true  state  of  man ;  rescue  and  redemption ;  the  pVaciical 
application  and  attainment  of  this  mercy.    3.  Life.  Hence  they  are  called  "  lively  " 
or.  living  oracles,  or  as  our  Lord  says,  "  The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  they  ara 
spirit,  and  they  are  life."   No  other  book  has  this  peculiarity.    Show  me  one  which 
ell  the  wicked  fear ;  which  outs  deep  into  the  conscience,  and  rouses  salutary  fears  ; 
which  comforts  and  snpriorts :  and  whilst  its  blessed  tnitlis  quiver  on  the  lips  of 
the  dying,  disarms  death  of  its  sting.     Show  me  a  man  who,  whc-u  he  discyuiocs. 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

awakens  souls  from  deadly  sleep ;  who  to  a  trembling  spirit  says,  "  Believe,  and 
live,"  and  he  actually  believes  and  lives ;  whose  oonnsel  effectually  guides,  quickens, 
and  comforts ;  and  you  show  me  one  who  speaks  only  as  the  oracles  of  God. 
Among  all  who  have  been  celebrated  for  oratory,  who  ever  professed  to  produce 
effects  like  these  7  Nothing  explains  this  but  the  life  which  tiie  Spirit  imparts. 
With  the  oracles  of  God  the  Author  is  present.  Ton  cannot  avoid  this  power.  It 
will  make  the  Word  either  "  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  a  savour  of  death  onto 
death."  4.  They  make  all  other  oracles  vocal.  (1)  Nature  has  its  solemn  voice, 
but  it  is  not  heard  where  the  gospel  is  not.  In  heathendom  the  very  heavens  are 
turned  into  idols,  and  God  is  excluded  from  the  thoughts  of  men.  But  whenever 
the  living  oracles  come,  then  every  star,  and  mountain,  and  river,  proclaims  its 
glorious  Maker :  "  day  onto  day  uttereth  speech."  (2)  The  general  providence  of 
God  in  the  government  of  nations  is  intended  to  display  the  wisdom,  power,  good- 
ness, justice,  and  truth  of  God ;  and  terminate  in  the  conversion  of  all  nations  to 
the  faith  of  Christ.  Tet  all  this  is  unknown  to  those  who  are  destitute  of  th« 
Divine  oracles.  To  them  it  appears  that  one  event  happens  to  all.  Every  occur- 
rence  is  either  attributed  to  chance,  to  blind  fate,  or  to  the  caprice  of  deities  without 
wisdom,  and  without  mercy.  The  living  oracle  gives  a  voice  to  all  this.  Instructed 
by  it  we  mark  the  design  of  God, "  who  worketh  all  in  all."  We  see  all  things  tending 
to  one  end,  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed ;  and  all  flesh  shall  see  it 
together."  (3)  There  is  also  a  particular  providence  which  appoints  us  our  station 
in  life,  our  blessings  and  our  sorrows.  Many  lessons  this  providence  is  intended  to 
teach  us.  "  The  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance."  But  till  the  living, 
oracle  speaks,  all  is  silence ;  and  we  derive  no  lessons  of  true  wisdom  from  the 
events  of  life.  When  we  acquaint  ourselves  with  God  in  His  Word,  then  every, 
thing  ministers  to  our  "  instruction  in  righteousness."  6.  Variety.  Here  we  have ' 
history,  proverbs,  poetry,  examples,  doctrine,  prophecy,  parable,  allegory,  and 
metaphor.  6.  Fulness  of  truth.  Great  as  are  the  revelations,  nothing  is  exhausted. 
As  in  Christ  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwells  bodily,  to  be  eternally  manifested ; , 
so  in  His  Word  there  is  a  fulness  of  truth.  And  hence  the  Bible  is  always  new.  i 
(1)  In  regard  to  morals,  we  have  principles,  as  well  as  acts,  applicable  for  ever.  (2) 
Who  can  exhaust  the  doctrine  of  Holy  Scripture  ?  Doctrines  especially  relating  to 
God,  and  Christ,  and  the  depth  of  all-redeeming  love.  (3)  The  effects  of  the  whole 
scheme  will  be  developing  for  ever.  In  a  very  important  sense  the  Bible  will  be  Uie 
oracles  of  God  to  the  Church  above.  II.  These  oracles  abx  "  cohuitted  "  or  entrusted 
TO  Tou.  1.  To  be  read  and  understood,  consequently  there  is  great  guilt  in  treating 
them  with  indifference  and  neglect.  2.  To  interpret  honestly.  They  are  "  the 
oracles  of  God";  and  it  is  a  sin  of  no  ordinary  magnitude  to  pervert  their  meaning. 
8.  To  make  them  known  to  others.  It  is  a  great  sin  to  restrain  the  Scriptures.  HI. 
Tbeib  advantage.  1.  Instruction.  2.  Direction.  8.  Salvation.  (Richard  Watton.) 
The  oracles  of  Ood : — L  The  obacles  of  God.  1.  The  meaning  of  the  term.  (1) 
Among  heathen  the  word  was  first  used  to  denote  the  answers  supposed  to  be  given 
by  their  gods,  and  was  afterwards  applied  to  the  shrines  where  such  answers  were 
given.  Whether  these  answers  were  forged  by  the  priests,  or  were  the  results  of 
diabolical  agency,  it  is  not  necessary  to  inquire.  Suffice  it  that  though  proverbially 
obscure,  they  are  regarded  with  veneration  and  confidence.  Ko  enterprise  of 
importance  was  undertaken  without  consulting  them;  splendid  embassies,  with 
magnificent  presents,  were  sent  from  far  distant  states,  with  a  view  to  obtain  a 
propitious  answer ;  and  contending  nations  often  submitted  to  them  the  decision  of 
their  respective  claims.  With  these  facts  the  Gentile  converts  were  acquainted ;  in 
these  opinions  they  had  participated.  The  word,  therefore,  could  scarcely  fail  to 
excite  in  them  some  of  the  ideas  and  emotions  with  which  it  had  been  so  long  and 
intimately  associated.  No  title,  then,  could  be  better  adapted  to  inspire  them  with 
veneration  for  the  Scriptures.  (2)  Nor  would  it  appear  less  sacred,  or  important  to 
the  Jew,  associated  as  it  was  with  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  and  with  those 
responses  which  Jehovah  gave  from  the  inner  sanctuary.  In  our  version  this 
place  is  frequently  styled  The  Oracle ;  and  the  answers  which  God  there  gave  to 
the  inquiries  of  His  worshippers  were  full,  explicit,  and  definite ;  forming  a  perfect 
eontrast  to  the  oracles  of  paganism.  By  employing  thii  language,  he  did  in  effect 
say  to  the  Gentile  converts.  All  that  you  once  supposed  the  oracles  of  your 
countrymen  to  be,  the  Scriptures  really  are.  With  at  least  equal  force  did  hit 
language  say  to  the  Jews,  The  Scriptures  are  no  less  the  Word  of  God  than  were 
the  answers  which  He  formerly  gave  to  your  fathers  from  the  mercy  seat.  2.  This 
title  is  given  to  the  Scriptures  with  perfect  truth  and  propriety.    They  do  not, 


OBAT.  m.]  ROMANS.  IM 

Indeed,  resemble  in  all  respects  the  heathen  oracles.    They  were  never  designed  to 
gratify  a  vain  eoriosity ;  mach  less  to  subserve  the  purposes  of  ambition  or  avarioe, 
and  this  is,  probably,  one  reason  why  many  persons  never  consult  them.    Bat 
whatever  a  man's  situation  may  be,  this  oracle,  if  consalted  in  the  manner  in 
which  Qod  has  prescribed,  will  satisfactorily  answer  every  question  which  it  is 
proper  for  him  to  ask  ;  for  it  contains  all  the  information  which  our  Creator  sees 
it  best  that  His  human  creatures  should,  at  present,  possess.     U.  Thsib  surpassino 
VALUE.     1.  In  possessing  the  Scriptures  we  possess  every  real  advantage  that  would 
result  from  the  establishment  of  an  oracle  among  us ;  and  more.    For  wherever 
the  oracle  might  be  placed,  it  would  unavoidably  be  at  a  distEince  from  a  large  pro- 
portion of  those  who  wished  for  its  advice.    But  in  the  Scriptures  we  possess  an 
oracle,  which  may  be  brought  home  to  every  family  and  every  individual  at  all 
times.     2.  But  in  consequence  of  having  been  familiar  with  them  from  our  child- 
hood, we  are  far  from  being  sensible  how  deeply  we  are  indebted  to  them.    We 
must  place  ourselves  in  the  situation  of  a  serious  inquirer  after  truth,  who  has 
pursued  his  inquiries  as  far  as  unassisted  intellect  can  go ;  and  that  he  now  finds 
himself  bewildered  in  a  maze  of  conflicting  theories  into  which  the  researches  of 
men  unenlightened  by  revelation  inevitably  plunge  them.     To  such  a  man  what 
would  the  Scripture  be  worth  ?    He  asks,  *'  Who  made  the  universe  7"    A  mild« 
but  majestio  voice  replies  from  the  oracle,  "  In  the  beginning,  Gk>d  created  the 
heavens,  and  the  earth."    Startled,  the  inquirer  eagerly  exclaims,  "  Who  is  God — 
what  is  His  nature  f  "    "  God,"  replies  the  voice,  "  is  a  spirit,  wise,  almighty,  holy, 
just,  merciful  and  gracious,  longsuffering,"  Ac.   The  inquirer's  mind  labours,  faints, 
while  vainly  attempting  to  grasp  the  Being,  now,  for  the  first  time  disclosed.    But 
a  new  and  more  powerful  motive  now  stimulates  his  inquiries,  and  he  asks,  "  Does 
any  relation  subsist  between  this  God  and  myself  ?  "    ••  He  is  thy  Maker,  Father, 
Preserver,  Sovereign,  Judge ;  in  Him  thou  dost  live,  and  move,  and  exist ;  and 
at  death  thy  spirit  will  return  to  God  who  gave  it."    *•  How,"  resumes  the  inquirer, 
•*  will  He  then  receive  me  ?  "     "  He  will  reward  thee  according  to  thy  works." 
"  What  works  ?  "    "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  with  all  thy  heart,"  4o. 
" Every  transgression  of  this  law  is  a  sin;  and  the  soul  that  sinneth  shall  die." 
*•  Have  I  siimed  ? "  the  inqnirer  tremblingly  asks.    "  All,"  replies  the  oracle, 
♦'  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."    A  new  sensation  of  conscious 
guilt  now  oppresses  the  inquirer,  and  with  increased  anxiety  he  asks,  "Is  there  any 
way  in  which  the  pardon  of  sin  may  be  obtained  ?  "    ••  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ," 
replies  the  oracle,  "  cleanseth  from  all  sin.     He  that  oonfesseth  and  forsaketh  his 
sins  shall  find  mercy."     ••  But  to  whom  shall  I  confess  them?  where  find  the  God 
whom  I  have  offended  t "    "  He  is  a  God  at  hand,"  returns  the  voice ;  "  I,  who 
speak  to  thee,  am  He."    "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  exclaims  the  inquirer, 
not  daring  to  lift  his  eyes  towards  the  oracle  :  "  What,  Lord,  wilt  Thou  have  me  to 
do  T  "    "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  answers  the  voice,  "  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved."    **  Lord,  who  is  Jesus  Christ  ?  that  I  may  believe  on  Him  ?  "    "  He  is  My 
Beloved  Son,  whom  I  have  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  His  blood ; 
hear  thou  Him,  for  there  is  salvation  in  no  other."    Such  are,  probably,  some  of 
the  questions  which  would  be  asked  by  the  supposed  inquirer ;  and  such  are,  in 
substance,  the  answers  which  he  would  receive  from  the  oracles  of  God.     Who  can 
compute  the  value  of  these  answers.    UI.  Tbeib  iNEXHArsTiBt<ENE8B.    But  why 
should  those  consult  them  who  are  already  acquainted  with  the  answers  which  they 
will  return  ?    1.  Has  the  man  who  asks  this  drawn  from  the  Scriptures  all  the 
information  which  they  contain  ?    It  may  reasonably  be  doubted  whether  any  one 
would  have  discovered  that  the  declaration  of  Jehovah,  "  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham, 
and  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob,"  furnishes  a  conclusive  proof  of  the  after  existence  of 
the  human  soul.    And  how  many  times  might  we  have  read  the  declaration, 
"  Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec,"  before  we  should  have 
suspected  that  it  involves  all  those  important  consequences  deduced  from  it  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  ?    And  many  other  passages  remain  to  reward  the  researches 
of  future  inquirers.    2.  Many  of  the  oracles  contain  an  infinity  of  meaning  which 
no  mind  can  ever  exhaust.     What  finite  mind  will  fully  comprehend  all  that  is 
contained  in  the  titles  given  to  Jehovah  and  Christ,  or  in  the  words,  "  eternity," 
*•  heaven,"  "hell "  ?  Now  he  who  most  frequently  consults  the  oracles  will  penetnita 
most  deeply  into  their  unfathomable  abyss  of  meaning.     He  may,  indeed,  receive 
the  same  tmswers  to  his  inquiries ;  but  these  answers  will  convey  to  his  mind 
clearer  and  more  enlarged  conceptions  of  the  truths  which  they  reveal.    His  views 
will  resemble  those  of  an  astronomer,  who  is,  from  time  to  time,  furnished  with 


200  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  ni 

telescopes  of  greater  power ;  or  what  at  first  seemed  only  an  indistinct  shadow,  win 
become  a  vivid  picture,  and  the  picture  will,  at  length,  stand  cat  in  bold  relief. 
The  lisping  child  and  the  astronomer  use  the  word  "sun"  to  denote  the  same  object. 
The  child,  however,  means  by  this  word,  nothing  more  than  a  round,  luminous 
body,  of  a  few  inches  in  diameter.  But  it  would  require  a  volume  to  contain  all 
the  conceptions  of  which  this  word  stands  for  the  sign  in  the  mind  of  the  astro, 
nomer.  IV.  Theib  vitalisino  poweb.  It  may,  perhaps,  b«  objected  that,  as  the 
Scriptures  do  not  speak  in  an  audible  voice,  their  answers  can  never  possess  that 
life  which  attends  the  responses  of  a  living  oracle,  such  as  was  formerly  established 
among  the  Jews.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  well  termed  lively  or  "  living  oracles" — 
"alive  and  powerful."  "The  words,"  says  Christ, *' that  I  speak  unto  you,  are 
spirit,  and  they  are  life."  The  living  God  lives  in  them,  and  employs  their  instru- 
mentality in  imparting  life.  Take  away  His  accompanying  influences,  and  the 
living  oracles  become  "  a  dead  letter."  But  he  who  consults  them  aright  does  not 
find  them  a  dead  letter ;  he  finds  that  the  living,  life-giving  Spirit,  by  whom  they 
were  and  are  inspired,  carries  home  their  words  to  him  with  an  energy  which  no 
tongue  can  express.  V.  The  hanneb  in  which  thbt  abe  to  be  consulted. 
Thousands,  of  course,  derive  no  benefit,  and  receive  no  satisfactory  answers,  for  they 
do  not  consult  them,  as  an  oracle  of  God  ever  ought  to  be  consulted.  1.  They  do 
not  consult  them  with  becoming  reverence.  They  peruse  them  with  little  more 
reverence  than  the  works  of  a  human  author,  as  they  would  consult  a  dictionary 
or  an  almanac.  2.  Nor  is  sincerity  less  necessary  than  reverence — a  real  desire  to 
know  our  duty,  with  a  full  determination  to  believe  and  obey  the  answers  we  shall 
receive.  If  we  consult  the  oracles  of  God  with  a  view  to  gratify  our  sinful  inclina- 
tions, or  to  justify  our  questionable  pursuits,  practices,  or  favourite  prejudices,  the 
oracle  will  be  dumb.  The  same  remark  is  applicable  to  every  one  who  consults  the 
Scriptures,  whUe  he  neglects  known  duties,  or  disobeys  known  commands.  We 
may  see  these  remarks  exemplified  in  Saul.  He  had  been  guilty  of  known  dis- 
obedience ;  and  therefore,  when  he  inquired  of  the  Lord,  the  Lord  answer  him  not. 
3.  There  are  others  whose  want  of  success  is  owing  to  their  unbelief.  As  no  food 
can  nourish  those  who  do  not  partake  of  it ;  as  no  medicines  can  prove  salutary  to 
those  who  refuse  to  make  use  of  them ;  so  no  oracles  can  be  serviceable  to  those 
by  whom  they  are  not  believed  with  a  cordial,  practical,  operative  faith.  The 
Scriptures  are  able  to  make  us  wise  unto  salvation  only  through  faith  in  Christ 
JesQS.  4.  Many  persons  derive  no  benefit  from  the  oracles  of  God,  because  they 
attempt  to  consult  them  without  prayer.  Consulting  an  oracle  is  an  act  which,  in 
its  very  nature,  implies  an  acknowledgment  of  ignorance,  and  a  petition  for 
guidance,  for  instruction.  He,  then,  who  reads  the  Scriptures  without  prayer, 
does  not  really  consult  them.  {E.  Payson,  D.D.)  The  oracles  of  Ood :  accessible  to 
all : — A  priest  observing  to  William  Tyndale,  "  We  are  better  without  God's  laws 
than  the  Pope's,"  "  I  defy  the  Pope  and  all  his  laws,"  he  replied  ;  and  added,  "If 
God  spare  my  life,  ere  many  years  I  will  cause  the  boy  which  driveth  the  plough  to 
know  more  of  Scripture  than  you  do."  (Quarterly  Review.)  The  oracles  of  6od: 
accessible  to  all : — A  Roman  Catholic  priest  in  Ireland  recently  discovered  a  peasant 
reading  the  Bible,  and  reproved  him  for  daring  to  peruse  a  book  forbidden  to  the 
laity.  The  peasant  proceeded  to  justify  himself  by  a  reference  to  the  contents  of 
the  book,  and  the  holy  doctrines  which  it  taught.  The  priest  replied,  that  the 
doctrines  could  only  be  understood  by  the  learned,  and  that  ignorant  men  would 
wrest  them  to  their  own  destruction.  "  But,"  said  the  peasant,  "  I  am  authorised, 
your  reverence,  to  read  the  Bible ;  I  have  a  search-warrant."  "  Wliat  do  yon 
mean,  sir?  "  said  the  priest,  in  anger.  "  Why,"  replied  the  peasant,  "  Jesus  Christ 
says,  *  Search  the  Scriptures ;  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life  ;  and  they 
are  they  which  testify  of  me.'  "  The  argument  was  unanswerable.  The  oracles 
of  God :  hoto  to  conault : — "  How  am  I  to  know  the  Word  of  God  ?  "  By  studying  it 
with  the  help  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  As  an  American  bisliop  said,  ••  Not  with  the 
blue  light  of  Presbyterianism,  nor  the  red  light  of  Methodism,  nor  the  violet  light 
of  Episcopacy,  but  with  the  clear  light  of  Calvary."  We  must  study  it  on  our 
knees,  in  a  teachable  spirit.  If  we  know  our  Bible  Satan  will  not  have  much  power 
over  us,  and  we  will  have  the  world  under  our  feet.  (D.  L.  Moodii.)  Thf  oracles  of 
God :  may  be  consulted  with  perfect  confidence : — If  a  man  in  the  night,  by  the  light 
of  a  lamp,  is  trying  to  make  out  his  chart,  and  there  is  storm  in  the  heavens  and 
storm  upon  the  sea,  and  someone  knocks  that  lamp  out  of  his  hand,  what  is  done? 
The  storm  is  above  and  the  storm  is  below,  and  the  chart  lies  dark,  so  that  he 
cannot  find  it  out — that  is  all.    If  it  were  daylight  be  could  see  the  chart  well 


CKAP.  m.]  ROMANS.  201 

•Doagh ;  bat  there  being  no  liRht,  and  the  lamp  on  which  he  depended  for  light 
being  knocked  oat  of  hia  hand,  be  cannot  avail  himseli  of  that  which  is  before  him . 
And  the  same  is  true  concerning  much  of  the  Bible.    It  is  an  interpreter.     It  is  a 
lamp  to  onr  feet  and  a  light  to  oar  path.     And  those  troths  which  have  their  expo- 
sition in  the  Bible,  and  which  are  a  revelation  of  the  structure  of  the  world  and  of 
the  Divine  nature  and  government,  do  not  depend  for  their  truth  upon  the  Bible 
itself.    They  are  only  interpreted  and  made  plain  by  it.     (H.  W.  Beecher. )        The 
oracles  of  God :  never  consulted  in  vain : — How  marvellous  is  the  adaptation  of 
Scripture  for  the  race  for  whom  it  was  revealed  1    In  its  pages  every  conceivable 
condition  of  human  experience  is  reflected  as  in  a  mirror.      In  its  words  every 
struggle  of  the  heart  can  find  appropriate  and  forceful  expression.     It  is  absolutely 
inexhaustible  in  its  resources  for  the  conveyance  of  the  deepest  feelings  of  the  soul. 
It  puts  music  into  the  speech  of  the  tuneless  one,  and  rounds  the  periods  of  the 
unlettered  into  an  eloquence  which  no  orator  can  rival.     It  has  martial  odes  to 
brace  the  warrior's  courage,  and  gainful  proverbs  to  teach  the  merchant  wisdom  ; 
all  mental  moods  can  represent  themselves  in  its  amplitude  of  words.    It  can 
translate  the  doubt  of  the  perplexed ;  it  can  articulate  the  cry  of  the  contrite ;  it 
fills  the  tongue  of  the  joyous  with  carols  of  thankful  gladness  ;  and  it  gives  sorrow 
words,  lest  grief,  that  does  not  speak,  should  whisper  to  the  heart,  and  bid  it  break. 
Happy  we,  who,  in  all  the  varieties  of  our  religious  life,  have  this  copious  manual 
Divinely  provided  to  our  hand.     (IF.  M.  Pumhon.)        The  oraclet  of  God  :  suppose 
they  thmdd  be  taken  away  : — I  thought  I  was  at  home,  and  that,  on  taking  up  my 
Bible  one  morning,  I  found,  to  my  surprise,  what  seemed  to  be  the  old  familiar 
book  was  a  total  blank  ;  not  a  character  was  inscribed  in  or  upon  it.    On  going  into 
the  street  I  found  every  one  complaining  in  similar  perplexity  of  the  same  loss ; 
and  before  night  it  became  evident  that  a  great  and  wonderful  miracle  had  been 
wrought  in  the  world  ;  the  Hand  which  had  written  its  awful  menace  on  the  walls 
of  Belshazzar's  palace  had  reversed  the  miracle,  and  expunged  from  our  Bibles 
every  syllable  they  contained — thus  reclaiming  the  most  precious  gift  Heaven  had 
bestowed  and  ungrateful  man  had  abused.    I  was  curious  to  watch  the  effects  of 
this  calamity  on  the  varied  characters  of  mankind.    There  was,  however,  uni- 
versally an  interest  in  the  Bible,  now  it  was  lost,  such  as  had  never  attached  to  it 
while  it  was  possessed.     Some  to  whom  the  sacred  book  had  been  a  blank  for  twenty 
years,  and  who  never  would  have  known  of  their  loss  but  for  the  lamentations  of 
their  neighbours,  were  not  the  less  vehement  in  their  expressions  of  sorrow.     The 
calamity  not  only  stirred  the  feelings  of  men,  but  it  immediately  stimulated  their 
ingenuity  to  repair  their  loss.     It  was  very  early  suggested  that  the  whole  Bible 
had  again  and  again  been  quoted  piecemeal  in  one  book  or  another ;  that  it  had 
impressed  its  image  on  human  literature,  and  had  been  reflected  on  its  surface  as 
the  stars  on  a  stream.    But,  alas  !  on  inspection  it  was  found  that  every  text,  every 
phrase  which  had  been  quoted,  whether  in  books  of  theology,  poetry,  or  fiction, 
had  been  remorselessly  obliterated.    It  was  with  trembling  hand  that  some  made 
the  attempt  to  transcribe  the  erased  texts  from  memory.     They  feared  that  the 
writing  would  surely  fade  away ;   but,  to  their  unspeakable  joy,  they  found  the 
impression  durable  ;  and  people  at  length  came  to  the  conclusion  that  God  left 
them  at  liberty,  if  they  could,  to  reconstruct  the  Bible  for  themselves,  out  of  their 
collective  remembrances  of  its  contents.    Some  obscure  individuals  who  had  studied 
nothing  else  but  the  Bible,  but  who  had  well  studied  that,  came  to  be  the  objects  of 
reverence  among  Christians  and  booksellers  ;  but  he  who  could  fill  up  a  chasm  by 
the  restoration  of  words  which  were  only  partially  remembered  was  regarded  as  a 
public  benefactor.    At  length  a  great  movement  was  projected  amongst  the  divines 
of  all  denominations  to  collate  the  results  of  these  partial  recoveries  of  the  sacred 
text.    But  here  it  was  curious  to  see  the  variety  of  different  readings  of  the  same 
passages  insisted  on  by  conflicting  theologians.    No  doubt  the  worthy  men  were 
generally  unconscious  of  the  influence  of  prejudice ;  yet  somehow  the  memory  was 
seldom  so  clear  in  relation  to  texts  which  told  against  as  in  relation  to  those  which 
told  for  their  several  theories.     It  was  curious,  too,  to  see  by  what  odd  associations 
of  contrast,  or  sometimes  of  resemblance,  obscure  texts  were  recovered.    A  miser 
contributed  a  maxim  of  prudence  which  he  recollected  principally  from  having 
Bystematically  abused.    All  the  ethical  maxims  were  soon  collected  ;  for  though,  as 
osual,  no  one  recollected  his  own  peculiar  duties  or  infirmities,  every  one  kindly 
remembered  those  of  his  neighbours.     As  for  Solomon's  "times  for  everything," 
lew  could  recall  the  whole,  but  everybody  remembered  some.     Undertakprs  Paid 
there  was  "  a  time  to  mourn,"  and  comedians  said  ti;ere  was  "  a  time  to  laugh  " ; 


201  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  l& 

joang  ladies  innumerable  remembered  there  was  "  a  time  to  love,"  and  people  of 
all  kinds  that  there  was  "  a  time  to  hate  "  ;  everybody  knew  that  there  was  "  a  time 
to  speak,"  bat  a  worthy  Quaker  added  that  there  was  also  "  a  time  to  keep  silence.'* 
Eat  the  most  amasing  thing  of  all  was  to  see  the  variety  of  speculations  which  were 
entertained  concerning  the  object  and  design  of  this  strange  event.  Many  gravely 
qnestioned  whether  it  could  be  right  to  attempt  the  reconstmction  of  a  book  of 
which  God  Himself  had  so  manifestly  deprived  the  world ;  and  some,  who'  were 
secretly  glad  to  be  reUeved  of  so  troublesome  a  monitor,  were  particularly  pious  on 
this  head,  and  exclaimed  bitterly  against  this  rash  attempt  to  counteract  the  decrees 
of  Heaven.  Some  even  maintained  that  the  visitation  was  not  in  judgment  but  in 
mercy ;  that  God  in  compassion,  and  not  in  indignation,  had  taken  away  a  book 
which  men  had  regarded  with  an  extravagant  admiration  and  idolatry ;  and  that, 
if  a  rebuke  at  all  was  intended,  it  was  a  rebuke  to  a  rampant  Bibliolatry.  This 
last  reason,  which  assigned  as  the  cause  of  God's  resumption  of  His  own  gift  an 
extravagant  admiration  and  reverence  of  it  on  the  part  of  mankind — it  being  so 
notorious  that  even  the  best  of  those  who  professed  belief  in  its  Divine  origin  and 
authority  had  so  grievously  neglected  it — struck  me  as  so  ludicrous  that  I  broke  inta 
a  fit  of  laughter,  which  awoke  me.  The  morning  sun  was  streaming  in  at  the 
window  and  shining  upon  the  open  Bible  which  lay  on  the  table ;  and  it  was  with 
joy  that  my  eyes  rested  upon  those  words,  which  I  read  with  grateful  tears — "The 
gifts  of  God  are  without  repentance."  (H.  Rogers.)  The  Bible : — I.  Its  posses- 
8I0N  IS  AN  IMMEKSB  "  ADVANTAGE  "  TO  ANY  PEOPLE.  What  distinguishes  it  from  all 
other  books,  and  gives  it  transcendent  worth,  is  that  it  contains  the  "  oracles  of 
God."  1.  They  are  infinitely  valuable  in  themselves.  They  are  infallible  truth.. 
The  *'  oracles  "  of  the  heathen  world  were  gross  deceptions,  that  of  Apollo  at  Delphi 
was  a  notorious  imposture.  They  give — (1)  A  true  revelation  of  God  to  man.  (2) 
A  true  revelation  of  man  to  himself.  Who  can  estimate  the  transcendent  worth  of 
such  revelations?  2.  They  are  infinitely  valuable  in  their  influence.  (1)  Intel- 
lectually. They  quicken  reason  and  set  the  wheels  of  thought  agoing.  (2)  Socially.. 
They  unseal  the  fountains  of  social  sympathy,  and  bless  the  people  with  philan- 
thropic societies  and  institutions.  (3)  Politically.  They  break  down  tyrannies, 
promote  wholesome  laws,  and  foster  fair  dealing,  peace,  and  liberty.  (4)  Spiritually. 
Their  great  work  is  to  generate,  develope,  and  perfect  the  highest  spiritual  life.  II. 
Thebe  ABE  THOSE  WHO  i^CK  TBUB  FAITH  IN  IT.  "  What  if  Bomc  did  not  believe  ?  "' 
Though  the  Jews,  as  a  people,  had  the  "  oracles,"  there  were  multitudes  amongst 
them  who  were  destitute  of  faith.  Their  conduct  during  their  pilgrimage,  their 
whole  history  in  Canaan,  and  the  rejection  of  the  true  Messiah,  all  proved  they  had 
httle  or  no  faith  in  the  "  oracles  "  they  possessed.  How  few,  to-day,  who  possess 
the  Bible  have  any  true  faith  in  the  Divine  "  oracles."  To  such  the  Bible — 1.  Is 
of  no  real  spiritual  "  advantage."  It  can  convey  no  real  benefit  to  the  soul,  only  so 
far  as  its  truths  are  believed  and  realised.  Unless  it  is  believed  it  has  no  more 
power  to  help  the  soul,  the  man,  than  the  genial  sunbeam  or  the  fertilising  shower 
to  help  the  tree  that  is  rotten  at  its  roots.  2.  It  ultimately  becomes  a  curse.  It 
heightens  responsibility  and  augments  guilt.  '*  If  I  had  not  come  and  spoken  unto 
them,  they  had  not  known  sin."  HI.  The  lack  of  faith  in  it  neitheb  affects 
ITS  BEALTTZ  NOB  LESSENS  ITS  IMPOBTANCB  (ver.  3).  Man's  lack  of  faith  will  neither 
affect  nor  nullify  the  faithfulness  of  God.  Facts  are  independent  of  denials  or  affir- 
mations. What  if  some  say  there  is  no  God  ?  Their  denial  does  not  destroy  the 
fact.  He  still  exists.  What  if  some  say  there  is  no  bell;  hell  still  bums  on. 
Though  all  Europe  denied  that  the  earth  moved,  it  still  pursued  its  course  circling 
round  the  sun.  But  though  our  states  of  mind,  whether  credulous  or  incredulous, 
in  no  way  affect  those  facts,  they  vitally  affect  our  own  character  and  destiny. 
What  if  we  do  not  believe  ?  It  matters  nothing  to  the  universe  or  to  God,  but  it 
matters  much,  nay  everything  to  us.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D. )  The  Bible  given  for 
guidance : — Here  is  a  man  going  over  a  mountain.  Night  falls  and  he  is  lost.  He 
sees  a  light  in  a  cabin  window.  He  hastens  up  to  it.  The  mountaineer  comes  out 
and  says,  "  I  will  furnish  you  with  a  lantern."  The  man  does  not  say,  "  I  don't 
like  the  handle,  and  I  don't  like  the  shape  of  this  lantern ;  it  is  octangular ;  it 
ought  to  be  round ;  if  you  can't  give  me  a  better  one,  I  won't  take  any."  Oh,  no. 
He  starts  on  with  it.  He  wants  to  get  home.  That  lantern  shines  on  the  path  all 
the  way  through  the  mountain.  Now,  what  is  the  Bible  ?  Have  we  any  right  to 
say  we  do  not  like  this  or  that  in  it,  when  God  intended  it  for  a  lamp  for  our  feet 
and  a  lantern  for  our  path  to  guide  us  through  our  wilderness  march,  and  bring  us 
at  last  to  our  Father's  house  on  high  ?     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)        The  use  oj  the 


flgoir.  m.]  ROMANS.  203 

Bible: — The  Bev.  E.  T.  Taylor,  oommonly  known  as  Father  Taylor,  addressing  % 
namber  of  sailore,  said,  *'  I  say,  ehipmates,  now  look  me  full  in  the  face.  What 
■hould  we  Bay  of  the  man  aboard  ship  who  was  always  talking  about  his  compass, 
and  neyer  nsmg  it  7  What  should  yoa  think  of  the  man  who,  when  the  storm  is 
gathering,  night  at  hand,  moon  and  stars  shut,  on  a  lee  shore,  breakers  ahead, 
then  first  begins  to  remember  his  compass,  and  says, '  Oh,  what  a  nice  compass  I 
have  got  on  board,'  if  before  that  time  he  has  never  looked  at  it?  Where  is  it  that 
you  keep  your  compass  ?  Do  you  stow  it  away  in  the  hold  ?  Do  yoa  clap  it  into 
the  forepeak  t "  By  this  time  Jack's  face,  that  unerring  index  of  the  soul,  showed 
visibly  that  the  reductio  ad  abiurdum  had  begun  to  tell.  Then  came,  by  a  natural 
logic,  as  correct  as  that  of  the  school,  the  improvement.  "  Now,  then,  brethren, 
listen  to  me.  Believe  not  what  the  scoffer  and  the  infidel  say.  The  Bible,  the 
Bible  is  the  compass  of  life.  Eeep  it  always  at  hand.  Steadily,  steadily  fix  your 
eye  on  it.  Study  your  bearing  by  it.  Make  yourself  acquainted  with  all  its  points. 
It  will  serve  yon  in  calm  and  in  storm,  in  the  brightness  of  noonday,  and  amid 
the  blackness  of  night;  it  will  carry  you  over  every  sea,  in  every  clime,  and 
navigate  you,  at  last,  into  the  harbour  of  eternal  rest."  The  Bible  a  national 
advantage: — Father  Hyacinthe,  an  eloquent  and  fearless  priest  in  Paris,  while 
recently  preaching  a  charity  sermon  in  Lyons,  in  bebalf  of  the  asylum  for  the  poor, 
having  asked  his  audience,  which  was  composed  of  the  principal  Roman  Catholic 
fanoiilies,  if  they  knew  why  Prussia  triumphed  on  the  field  of  battle  in  the  war  with 
Austria,  said,  "  It  is  because  the  nation  is  more  enlightened,  more  religious,  and 
because  every  Prussian  soldier  has  the  Bible  in  his  knapsack.  I  will  add,  that 
what  produces  the  power  and  superiority  of  Protestant  peoples  is,  that  they  possess 
and  read  the  Bible  at  their  own  firesides.  I  have  been  twioe  in  England,  and  have 
learned  that  the  Bible  is  the  strength  of  that  nation." 

Yerg.  3,  4.  For  what  If  some  did  not  believe  f — Man'e  unbelief  and  God^s  faith- 
fulneu  : — I.  Man's  unbelief  ;  its  various  forms  ;  impenitence  ;  scepticism.  II. 
God's  faithfulness;  His  Word  remains  true;  cannot  fail  of  effect;  must  be 
glorified.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  God  justified  though  man  believes  not: — We  have 
here — I.  A  sobbowful  bemindeb.  There  always  have  been  some  who  have  not 
believed.  1.  This  is  stated  very  mildly.  The  apostle  might  have  said  "many" 
instead  of  "  some."  Bemember  that  all  but  two  who  came  out  of  Egypt  fell  in  the 
wilderness  through  unbelief ;  but  the  apostle  does  not  wish  to  unduly  press  his 
argument,  or  to  aggravate  his  hearers.  Even  in  his  own  day  he  might  have  said, 
•'  The  bulk  of  the  Jewish  nation  has  rejected  Christ.  Wherever  I  go,  they  seek  my 
life,  because  I  preach  a  dying  Saviour's  love."  Yet  this  is  a  very  appalling  thing, 
even  when  stated  thus  mildly.  If  all  here  except  one  were  believers,  and  it  was 
announced  that  that  one  would  be  pointed  out  to  the  congregation,  we  should  all 
feel  in  a  very  solemn  condition.  But  there  are  many  more  than  one  here  who 
have  not  believed.  If  the  unconverted  were  not  so  numerous  they  would  be  looked 
upon  with  horror  and  pity.  As  they  are  so  numeroas,  there  is  aU  the  greater  need 
for  onr  compassion.  2.  The  terms  of  Paul's  question  suggest  a  mitigation  of  the 
Borrow.  "  What  if  some  did  not  believe  ?  "  Then  it  is  implied  that  some  did 
believe.  Olory  be  to  God,  there  is  a  numerous  "  some."  8.  Tet  it  is  true  that, 
at  times,  the  "  some  "  who  did  not  believe  meant  the  majority.  Bead  the  story  of 
Israel  through  and  you  will  be  saddened  to  find  how  again  and  again  they  did  not 
believe,  and  it  may  be  that,  even  among  hearers  of  the  gospel,  the  unbelievers 
preponderate.  4.  This  unbelief  has  usually  been  the  case  between  the  great  ones 
of  the  earth.  In  our  Saviour's  day  they  said,  "  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  of  the 
Pharisees  believed  on  Him  ?  "  The  gospel  has  usually  had  a  free  course  among 
the  poor,  bat  "  not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many 
noble,"  are  called.  5.  Some  who  have  not  believed  have  belonged  to  the  religious 
and  to  the  teaching  class.  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  rejected  Christ,  although 
they  were  the  religious  leaders  of  the  people.  And  now  we  may  be  preachers,  and 
yet  not  preach  the  gospel  of  Christ ;  we  may  be  members  of  the  Church,  and  yet 
not  savingly  know  it.  6.  The  same  may  be  said  if  we  take  the  whole  range  of  the 
nations  favoured  with  the  gospeL  7.  "What,  then,  if  some  do  not  believe?" 
Then — (1)  They  are  lost.  "He  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already. "  (2) 
There  still  remains,  to  those  who  hear  the  gospel,  the  opportunity  to  believe ;  and, 
believing,  they  shall  find  life  through  the  sacred  name.  (3)  Let  ns,  who  do 
believe,  make  them  the  constant  subject  of  our  prayers ;  and  bear  cor  witness  to  the 
saving  power  of  the  gospel.     U.  A  hokrible  inference,  viz.,  that  their  unbelief  had 


2M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHiF.  la 

niade  the  faith,  or  the  foithfuhiess  of  God,  without  effect.  1.  Some  will  say,  **If 
So-and-so  and  So-and-so  do  not  believe  the  gospel,  then  religion  is  a  failure.** 
We  have  read  of  a  great  many  things  being  failures.  A  little  while  ago  it  was  a 
question  whether  marriage  was  not  a  failure.  I  suppose  that,  by  and  by,  eating 
and  breathing  will  be  a  failure.  The  gospel  is  said  to  be  a  failure,  because  certtun 
gentlemen  of  professed  culture  and  knowledge  do  not  believe  it.  Well,  there  have 
been  other  things  that  have  not  been  believed  in  by  very  important  individuals,  and 
yet  they  have  turned  out  to  be  true.  Before  the  trains  ran,  the  old  coachmen  and 
farmers  would  not  believe  that  an  engine  could  be  made  to  go  on  the  rails,  and  to 
drag  carriages  behind  it.  According  to  the  vrise  men  of  the  time,  everything  was  to 
go  to  the  bad,  and  the  engines  would  blow  up  the  first  time  they  started  with  a 
train.  But  they  did  not  blow  up,  and  everybody  now  smiles  at  what  those  learned 
gentlemen  ventured  then  to  say.  Look  at  those  who  now  tell  us  that  the  gospel  is  % 
failure.  They  are  in  the  line  of  those  whose  principal  object  has  been  to  refute 
all  that  went  before  them.  If  auy  of  you  shall  live  fifty  years,  you  will  see  that 
the  philosophy  of  to-day  will  be  a  football  of  contempt  for  the  philosophy  of  that 
period.  I  have  to  say,  with  Paul,  "  What  if  some  did  not  believe  ?  "  It  is  no  new 
thing ;  for  there  have  always  been  some  who  rejected  the  revelation  of  God.  What 
then  1  Ton  and  I  had  better  go  on  believing,  and  testing  for  ourselves,  and  proving 
the  faithfulness  of  God.  The  gospel  is  no  failure,  as  many  of  as  know.  2.  Has 
God  failed  to  keep  His  promise  to  Israel  because  some  Israelites  did  not  believe  ?  Paul 
eays.  No.  He  did  bring  Israel  into  the  promised  land,  though  all  but  two  that  came 
out  of  Egypt  died  through  unbelief  in  the  wilderness.  A  nation  came  up  from  their 
ashes,  and  God  kept  His  covenant  with  His  ancient  people ;  and  to-day  He  ig 
keeping  it.  The  "  chosen  seed  of  Israel's  race  '*  is  "  a  remnant,  weak  and  small " ; 
but  the  day  is  coming  when  then  they  shall  be  gathered  in  ;  then  shall  also  be  the 
fulness  of  the  Gentiles  when  Israel  has  come  to  own  her  Lord.  3.  Because  some 
do  not  believe,  wUl  God's  promise  therefore  fail  to  be  kept  to  those  who  do  believe  ? 
I  invite  yon  to  come  and  try.  When  two  of  John's  disciples  inquired  of  Jesus 
where  He  dwelt.  He  said  to  them,  *'  Come  and  see."  If  any  here  will  try  Christ,  as 
I  tried  Him,  they  will  not  tolerate  a  doubt.  One  said  that  she  believed  the  Bible 
because  she  was  acquainted  with  the  Author  of  it,  and  you  will  believe  the  gospel 
if  yon  are  acquainted  with  the  Saviour  who  brings  it.  4.  Will  God  be  unfaithful 
to  His  Son  if  some  do  not  believe  ?  I  thank  God  that  I  have  no  fear  about  that. 
«'  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied."  Suppose  that  you 
wickedly  say,  "  We  will  not  have  Christ  to  reign  over  us."  If  you  think  that  you 
will  rob  Him  of  honour  by  your  rejection,  you  make  a  great  mistake.  If  you  will 
not  have  Him,  others  will.  This  word  shall  yet  become  true,  "  The  kingdoms  of 
this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ,"  &o.  6.  If 
some  do  not  believe,  will  God  change  the  gospel  to  suit  them  ?  Ought  we  to  change 
our  preaching  because  of  "  the  spirit  of  the  age  "  ?  Never ;  unless  it  be  to  fight 
"  the  spirit  of  the  age  "  more  desperately  than  ever.  We  ask  for  no  terms  between 
Christ  and  His  enemies  except  these,  unconditional  surrender  to  Him.  The 
gospel  cannot  be  altered  to  your  taste ;  therefore  alter  yourself  so  as  to  meet  its 
requirements.  III.  An  indiqn'ant  reply  to  this  horrible  inference.  1.  Paul  gives 
a  solemn  negative:  "  God  forbid."  All  the  opponents  of  the  gospel  cannot  move 
it  by  a  hair's  breadth ;  they  cannot  injure  a  single  stone  of  this  Divine  building. 
2.  He  utters  a  vehement  protestation :  "  Yea,  let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a 
liar."  You  know  that  if  the  majority  goes  in  a  particular  direction,  you  are  apt  to 
Bay,  *'  It  must  be  so,  for  everybody  says  so."  But  what  everybody  says  is  not 
therefore  true.  If  God  says  one  thing,  and  every  man  in  the  world  stiys  another, 
God  is  true,  and  all  men  are  false.  God  speaks  the  truth,  and  cannot  lie.  We  are 
to  believe  God's  truth  if  nobody  else  believes  it.  3.  He  uses  a  Scriptural  argument. 
He  quotes  what  David  had  said  in  the  Fifty-first  Psalm,  "  That  Thou  mightest  be 
justified  in  Thy  sayings,  and  mightest  overcome  when  Thou  art  judged."  (1)  God 
will  be  justified  in  everything  that  He  has  said.  God  shall  also  be  justified  when 
He  juflfres  and  condemns  men.  (2)  A  very  startling  expression  is  used  here : 
"That  Thou  mightest  overcome  when  Thou  art  judged."  "Think  of  this  enormous 
evil ;  here  are  men  actually  trying  to  jufl^e  the  Divine  juflgments,  and  to  sit  as  if 
they  were  the  god  of  God.  Still  the  verdict  will  be  in  God's  favour.  It  would  be 
proved  that  He  had  neither  said  an-\ thing  untrue,  nor  done  anything  unjust. 
Conclusion :  1.  I  want  the  Lord's  people  to  be  brave  about  the  things  of  God. 
There  has  beon  too  much  of  yielding,  and  apologising,  and  compromising,  2.  If 
you  are  opposed  to  God,  I  beseech  you  give  up  your  opposition  at  once.  This  battle 


OBAP.  m.]  EOMANS.  SM 

cannot  end  well  for  you  unless  you  yield  yourself  to  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Let 
God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  Uar. — God  true  : — The  primary  meaning  of  *'  truth  " 
in  Greek  is  openness :  what  is  not  concealed ;  but  in  Hebrew,  that  which  sustains, 
which  does  not  fail  or  disappoint  our  expectations.  The  true  therefore  is — I.  That 
WHICH  IS  REAL  as  opposcd  to  what  is  fictitious  or  imagiuary.  Jehovah  is  the  true 
God,  because  He  is  really  God,  while  the  gods  of  the  heathen  are  vanity  and 
nothing.  II.  That  which  completely  comes  up  to  its  idea,  or  wliat  it  purports  to 
be.  A  true  man  is  a  man  in  whom  the  idea  of  manhood  is  fully  realised.  The 
true  God  is  He  in  whom  is  found  all  that  Godhead  imports.  III.  That  in  which 
the  bealitt  cobbesponds  to  the  manifestation.  God  is  true  because  He  really  is 
what  He  declares  Himself  to  be ;  because  He  is  what  He  commands  us  to  believe 
Him  to  be ;  and  because  all  His  declarations  correspond  to  what  really  is.  IV. 
That  which  can  be  depended  upon,  which  does  not  fail,  or  ohant^e,  or  disappoint. 
In  this  sense  God  is  true  as  He  is  immutable  and  faithful.  His  promise  cannot 
fail.  His  word  never  disappoints  :  it  "  abideth  for  ever."  (C.  Ilndge,  D.D.)  God'i 
truth : — 1.  Will  survive  all  human  lies.  2.  Will  be  amply  justified.  8.  Will  be 
triumphantly  vindicated.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Standing  to  what  Ood  ha$  laid : — 
I  admire  the  spirit  of  the  boy  who  mentioned  something  which  his  mother  said. 
One  said,  "It  is  not  so,"  and  he  said,  "It  is  so;  my  mother  said  it."  "But," 
said  the  other,  "it  is  not  so."  Says  he,  "If  mother  said  it,  it  is  so;  and 
if  it  is  not  so,  it  is  so  if  mother  said  it."  And  I  will  stand  to  that  with 
God.  If  God  has  said  it,  it  is  so,  and  you  shall  prove  to  a  demonstration 
if  yon  like  it  is  not  so ;  but  it  is  so,  and  there  will  I  stand.  "  And  be  a 
fool,"  Bays  one.  Tes,  a  fool;  for  such  hath  He  chosen  to  seek  to  do  things 
that  make  others  who  do  not  believe  staud  aghast :  only  believe  thou,  and  stand 
thou  to  it,  and  it  shall  be  impossible  for  thee,  a  child  of  God,  to  be  driven  to 
distrust  thy  Father.  It  ought  to  be  so.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  goodness  and 
wisdom  of  God's  law  unimpeachable  : — It  has  ever  been  held  the  highest  wisdom  for 
a  man  not  merely  to  submit  to  necessity — necessity  will  make  him  submit — but  to 
know  and  believe  well  that  the  stern  thing  which  necessity  had  ordered  was  the 
wisest,  the  best,  the  thing  wanted  there.  To  cease  his  frantic  pretension  of 
scanning  thi^  great  God's-world  in  his  small  fraction  of  a  brain ;  to  know  that  it 
had  verily,  though  deep  beyond  his  soundings,  a  just  law,  that  the  soul  of  it  was 
good — that  his  part  in  it  was  to  conform  to  the  law  of  the  whole,  and  in  devout 
silence  follow  that ;  not  questioning  it,  obeying  it  as  unquestionable.  (T.  Carlyle.) 
Ideal  standards  of  duty : — The  apostle  had  been  showing  the  Jews  that  they  had 
utterly  failed  of  becoming  truly  religious  by  means  of  the  old  law.  And  the 
qnestion  arose,  **  What !  was  the  law,  then,  good  for  nothing  ?  "  The  law  was  good, 
but  man  was  weak ;  therefore  it  did  not  work  out  that  which  its  interior  spiritual 
tendency  would  have  wrought  out  if  it  had  been  unchecked.  But  then  God 
attempted  to  do  what  He  was  unable  to  do  I  If  the  law  was  dishonoured  in  the 
eonduct  of  the  Jews,  how  should  the  Lawgiver  retain  honour  ?  The  tendency  of 
the  Jewish  objector  was  to  defend  himself  by  bringing  down  the  character  and 
government  of  God ;  and  the  apostle  answered,  "  Let  the  justice  and  goodness  of 
God  remain  untarnished,  however  it  may  affect  men's  reputation."  And  the  doctrine 
which  we  deduce  from  this  passage  is — I.  The  tendenct  of  the  beabt  to  seek  to 

DIMINIBH   THE  INTENSITT  OF  SELF-CONDEMNATION  BT  LOWEBINO  THE  STANDABD  OF  DUTT. 

All  sense  of  self-condemnation  arises  from  a  comparison  of  one's  deeds,  character, 
life  and  motives,  with  certain  standards  of  duty.  If  there  had  been  no  law,  there 
ooold  have  been  no  sense  of  violating  law,  and  none,  therefore,  of  sin.  There  is 
one  thing  which  we  bear  less  willingly  than  any  other — namely,  a  sharp  sense  of 
ehame  in  self-condemnation.  There  is  no  other  feeling  that  seems  to  suffocate  a 
man  more  than  to  be  worried  by  his  own  accusing  and  condemning  conscience. 
While,  then,  this  feeling  is  so  unbearable,  it  is  scarcely  surprising  that  men 
attempt  to  get  rid  of  it.  They  pad  their  conduct,  as  it  were,  that  the  yoke  may  not 
bear  so  heavily  where  they  feel  sore.  Therefore,  men  tell  themselves  more  lies  in 
this  direction  than  in  any  other.  They  deliberately  fool  themselves — and  for  the 
same  reason  that  men  take  opiates.  "It  is  not  good,"  said  the  physician,  "that 
yon  should  take  opiates  to  remove  that  sharp  pain.  Yon  had  better  remove  the 
cause,  and  so  get  rid  of  the  pain."  "  But,"  you  say,  "  I  must  pursue  my  business ; 
and,  though  it  may  not  be  the  best  thing,  give  me  the  opiate."  Men  will  not,  if 
they  can  help  it,  bear  the  ache  of  self-condemnation ;  and  by  every  means  in  their 
power  they  are  pei-petually  trying  to  get  rid  of  it.  The  ordinary  method  is  to 
impair  that  rule  of  conduct,  or  that  ideal  of  light,  which  condemns  them.    They 


S06  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

attack  that  which  attacks  them.  Men  plead  the  force  of  oircumstances  for 
breaking  the  laws  which  are  most  painful  to  them.  They  attempt  to  show  thai 
they  are  not  to  blame.  They  plead  that  breaking  the  law  is  not  very  sinfuL  That 
is,  to  save  themselves,  they  destroy  the  dignity  and  the  importance  of  the  law. 
Let  ns  trace  this  tendency.  1.  It  begins  in  early  life.  (1)  A  child  that  will  not 
obey  his  parents'  injunctions  begins,  after  a  while,  to  find  fault  with  the  rigour 
by  which  he  is  held  in  check ;  and  as  he  gets  older  he  finds  fault  with,  and 
endeavours  to  throw  off,  parental  authority.  "  To  be  sure,"  he  says,  "  I  have  gone 
forth  at  untimely  honrs,  had  my  own  way  in  contravention  of  express  authority ; 
but  then,  I  am  not  so  much  to  blame,  Who  could  live  in  a  family  screwed  up  as 
this  is  f  A  man  must  have  some  room."  What  is  all  this  but  an  attempt  to  excuse 
his  own  disobedience,  by  inveighing  against  the  law  under  which  the  obedience 
takes  place  ?  (2)  When  the  young  go  forth  to  the  training  ground  of  Ufe,  they 
manifest  the  same  tendency.  The  truant  and  dullard  at  school  turns  against  the 
master,  and  at  last  against  the  school.  He  declares  that  it  is  not  his  fault.  Or, 
if  he  admits  that  it  is  his  fault  in  part,  he  pleads  the  provocation ;  and  so  the 
rebellious  boy  at  school  tarnishes  the  good  reputation  of  the  teacher,  and  inveighs 
against  the  school.  2.  It  runs  through  industrial  forms.  (1)  If  in  a  trade  or 
profession,  a  man  prefers  to  sport  rather  than  to  work,  and  is  indolent,  and 
unsteady,  when  the  pressure  of  blame  and  condemnation  begins  to  come  on  him, 
he  turns  instantly  to  blame  everybody  and  everything  but  his  own  self.  Or  perhaps 
the  plea  is  urged  that  such  and  such  a  calling  cannot  be  successfully  followed 
without  moral  obUquity.  What  is  this  but  destroying  their  reputation  for  the  sake 
of  shielding  their  own  ?  3.  It  finds  its  way  into  social  relations.  When  men  defy 
the  public  sentiment  which  expresses  the  social  conscience  of  the  community,  and 
come  under  its  ban,  and  begin  to  smart,  they  attack  that  sentiment.  If  it  be  a 
course  of  impurity  that  they  have  pursued,  they  charge  sentiment  with  prudery ; 
if  they  have  been  going  in  ways  in  which  they  have  left  truth  far  behind,  they 
charge  it  with  fanaticism.  And,  more  than  that,  they  do  not  believe  there  is 
anything  in  the  community  better  than  they  are.  4.  It  pervades  the  pleas  by 
which  criminals  seek  to  defend  themselves.  As  men  begin  to  violate  the  laws  of 
the  community,  as  they  begin  to  suffer  under  the  loss  of  reputation,  they  seek  to 
excuse  themselves  from  blame,  and  to  fix  it  upon  others.  Even  when  the  law 
cannot  get  its  hand  upon  them ;  or  when,  getting  it  upon  them,  it  cannot  hold 
them ;  and  when  they  begin  to  feel  that  the  unwritten  law,  which  no  man  can 
escape,  the  judgment  of  good  men's  thoughts,  the  wintry  blast  of  good  men's 
indignation  round  about  them,  and  they  are  called  "  sharpers,"  and  are  treated  as 
such,  they  complain  that  it  is  an  indignity  heaped  upon  them  ;  that  it  is  a  wrong 
done  to  them,  and  say,  "  Society  is  wrongly  organised.  If  it  were  better  organised, 
business  would  be  conducted  differently,  and  men  would  act  differently.  But  how 
can  you  expect  that  a  man  will  be  right  when  everything  is  organised  on  wrong 
principles?  "  6.  It  manifests  itself  in  men's  arguments  on  the  subject  of  vice.  (1) 
Here  is  a  man  who  says,  "I  am  no  more  intemperate  than  anybody  else.  I  am 
frank  and  open.  I  drink,  and  show  it.  Just  go  behind  the  door  and  see  what  these 
temperance  men  do."  What  is  this  but  the  plea  of  a  man  who,  not  satisfied  with 
being  a  drunkard,  is  destroying  the  very  ideal  of  temperance  ?  (2)  Here  is  a  man 
who  has  utterly  gone  from  chastity.  That  is  bad  enough  ;  but  that  is  not  all.  He 
says,  "  Impure,  am  I  ?  WeU,  I  think  I  have  company  enough  in  this  world.  No 
one  is  pure.  It  is  because  they  cannot,  and  not  because  they  will  not,  that  they  do 
not  run  into  excesses."  Such  men  stand  inveighing  against  the  memory  of  their 
very  mother,  and  whelming  the  reputation  of  pure  and  noble  sisters,  and  a  man 
who  has  lost  respect  for  womanhood  in  actual  life  may  be  considered  as  given  over. 
(3)  There  are  those  who  pursue  the  same  course  in  regard  to  probity.  They  are 
not  themselves  truth  speakers ;  neither  do  they  believe  that  any  man  does  speak 
the  truth.  "  I  am  a  swindler,"  says  one.  "But  who  is  not?  Every  man  has  his 
price."  And  what  does  he  do  ?  fie  destroys  the  very  ideal  of  honesty  by  declaring 
that  nobody  is  honest.  6.  It  may  also  be  traced  in  men's  reasonings  on  the  subject 
of  religious  truth.  Men  care  very  little  what  theology  teaches,  provided  it  does  not 
come  home  to  them,  either  as  a  restraint  or  as  a  criterion  of  judgment ;  but  when 
they  begin  to  be  made  uncomfortable ;  when  for  one  or  another  reason  the  pulpit 
is  a  power,  and  they  find  it  in  the  way  of  their  ambition,  or  gain,  or  comfort ;  when 
theology  begins  to  stir  tbem  up,  and  sit  in  judgment  on  them,  then  there  is  a  strong 
tendency  developed  in  them  to  find  fault  with  the  truth,  and  to  justify  themselves 
by  adopting  what  they  are  pleased  to  call  "  a  more  Hberal  view."    And  so  men  find 


ema.  m.]  ROMANS.  M7 

fault  with  the  fundamental  principles  of  a  moral  government.  And  under  snoh  cir- 
eumstances  they  go  from  church  to  church  to  find  a  more  lenient  pulpit.    II.  The 

IMPORTANOB  OP  MAINTAINING  OUR  IDEAL  OP  DOTT  IN  8PITB  OP  ALL  HUMAN  IMPERFECTIONS. 

The  destruction  of  ideal  standards  is  utterly  ruinous  to  our  manhood.  1.  What  is 
an  ideal  ?  A  perception  of  something  higher  and  better  than  we  have  reached, 
either  in  single  actions,  or  in  our  life  and  character.  Do  I  need  to  ask  you  what 
your  ideal  is,  ye  that  have  sought  in  a  thousand  ways  to  reach  that  very  conception  ? 
The  musician  is  charmed  with  the  song  that  he  seems  to  hear  angels  sing ;  but 
when  he  attempts  to  write  it  down  with  his  hands  he  curses  the  blundering 
rudeness  of  material  things,  by  which  he  cannot  incarnate  so  spiritual  a  thing  as 
his  thought.  The  true  orator  is  a  man  whose  unspoken  speech  is  a  thousand  times 
better  than  his  utterance.  The  true  artist  is  a  man  who  says,  "  Oh  I  if  you  could 
Bee  what  I  saw  when  I  first  tried  to  make  this,  yon  would  think  this  most  homely." 
lliis  excelsior  of  every  soul;  this  sense  of  something  finer,  and  nobler,  and  truer, 
and  better — so  long  as  this  lasts  a  man  can  scarcely  go  down  to  the  vulgarism.  A 
man  who  is  satisfied  with  himself  because  he  is  better  than  his  fellow-men. 
Yon  never  thought  as  well  as  you  ought  to  think.  Tou  never  planned  as  nobly 
AS  you  ought  to  plan.  You  never  executed  as  well  as  you  ought  to  execute.  Over 
•very  production  there  ought  to  hover,  perpetually,  your  blessed  ideal,  telling  you, 
••  Your  work  is  poor — it  should  be  better  " ;  so  that  every  day  yon  should  lift 
yourself  higher  and  higher,  with  an  everlasting  pursuit  of  hope  which  shall  only 
bnd  in  perfection  when  you  reach  the  land  beyond.  2.  But  what  if  some  mephitic 
gas  shall  extinguish  this  candle  of  God  which  casts  its  light  down  on  our  path  to 
guide  us,  and  direct  our  course  up  ?  What  if  the  breath  of  man,  for  whom  it  was 
sent,  should  blow  it  out,  and  he  be  left  in  darkness  to  sink  down  toward  the  beast 
that  perishes?  Woe  be  to  that  man  whose  ideal  has  gone  out  and  left  him  to  the 
vulgar  level  of  common  life  without  upward  motive.  And  yet,  that  which  our  text 
reveals,  and  revealing  condemns,  is  universal — namely,  the  attempt  of  men  to  find 
fault  with  law,  or  with  God,  the  fountain  of  law,  with  the  ideal  of  rectitude,  rather 
than  find  fault  with  themselves.  May,  "Let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar." 
(fl.  Ward  Beecher.) 

Vers.  5-8.  Bat  If  our  nnrlghteoasness  commend  the  righteousness  of  God,  what 
■hall  we  say  1 — Man's  sin  and  God's  righteousness : — 1.  Our  unrighteousness  may 
possibly  commend  the  righteousness  of  God.  2.  This  result  is  involuntary,  not 
meritorious.  3.  Hence  to  suppose  that  sin  is  less  punishable  because  good  follows 
is  a  grievous  error.  4.  To  persist  in  sin  that  good  may  come,  is  positively  blas- 
phemous and  wicked.  5.  Therefore  God  will  righteously  punish  those  who  do  so. 
{J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Man's  sin  and  God's  righteousness : — 1.  Man's  sin  has  occasioned 
the  displays  of  God's  righteousness.  2.  Does  not  thereby  lose  its  enormity.  8. 
Must,  if  not  repented  of,  be  avenged.  4.  Otherwise  all  righteous  judgment  must 
cease.  {Ibid.)  Is  God  unrighteous  that  taketh  vengeance  7  (text,  and  Gen. 
xviii.  25). — God's  attitude  towards  sin : — 1.  God  makes  the  wickedness  and  unbelief 
of  men  subservient  to  His  glory.  2.  Holds  them  responsible  for  their  sins,  not- 
withstanding  the  result.  3.  Teaches  that  the  morality  of  an  action  depends  not 
upon  the  consequences  of  it,  but  upon  its  agreement  or  disagreement  with  His  law. 
4.  Condemns  the  slanderous  importation  that  the  gospel  sanctions  the  principle 
of  doing  evil  that  good  may  come.     {Ibid. )         God's  attitude  towards  sin : — He — 

1.  Overrules  it ;  2.  Judges  it ;  3.  Utterly  condemns  it.  {Ibid.)  The  heart's 
rest  in  the  righteousness  of  God  : — Thousands  of  years  part  those  two  questions,  yet 
in  substance  they  are  the  same.  The  first  occurs  in  a  tender,  sublime  intercession  ; 
the  second  in  a  hard,  fiery  argumentation.  Note — I.  That  both  befeb  to  the  betri- 

BUTIVB  providence  OP  GoD  AS  DECLARED  IN  PARTICULAR  AND  DECI8IVB  ACTS.      Both  actS 

were  determined  by  the  moral  conditions  of  men,  though  their  effects  operated  in 
different  spheres.  One  was  temporal,  the  other  a  spiritual  judgment.  1.  Let  us 
try  and  get  their  position.  Think  of  Abraham  when  God  divulged  to  him  His 
appalling  purpose.  Think  of  Paul  writing  with  the  full  knowledge  that  God  had 
placed  Israel  under  a  ban.  In  different  ways  these  two  men  were  bidden  look  into 
the  treasure-house  of  Divine  wrath.  They  had  to  stand  on  the  shadowed  side  of 
the  providence  of  God.   And  the  hand  of  Him  they  knew  as  love  placed  them  there. 

2.  Both  felt  the  moral  pressure  upon  their  reason  and  conscience,  and  were  com- 
pelled to  ask,  Is  it  right  for  God  to  do  this  ?  One  tried  to  turn  judgment  aside,  so 
forcibly  did  the  diflSculty  press  itself  home.  Paul's  perplexities  were  more 
intricate,  and  his  endeavour  to  extricate  his  reason  and  conscience  is  one  great 


3US  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».  m.. 

wrestling  with  the  Spirit  of  Truth.  3.  Now,  looking  into  these  difficulties  ol 
Abraham  and  Paul,  do  we  not  recognise  our  own  ?  Our  thoughts  and  feeling  form 
themselves,  almost  without  our  will,  into  the  old  interrogation,  "  Wilt  Thou  also 
destroy  the  righteous  with  the  wicked?  "  Are  we  not  ready  to  expostulate,  "  That 
be  far  from  Thee  to  do  after  this  manner  "  f  lu  h  iw  many  sweeping  oiJamities 
the  righteous  are  slain  with  the  wicked.  Earthquake,  storm,  flood,  fire,  make  no 
elections  ;  they  take  any  and  all  alike.  In  a  commercial  crisis  often  some  of  the 
best  men  are  among  the  wreckage,  ignominiously  huddled  with  the  rogues.  Where 
is  the  answer  to  this  ?  I  do  not  find  one  in  the  Old  Testament  narrative.  There 
is  one  streak  of  light.  Lot  was  saved.  Yet,  in  view  of  the  after  history,  one  is 
ready  to  ask.  Why?  And  if  we  take  Paul's  questions  of  sin,  responsibility,  and 
punishment,  our  bafflings  are,  if  anything,  increased.  The  impenetrable  facts  are 
with  us.  The  fact  of  sin :  what  theologians  call  original  sin,  and  men  of  science 
heredity.  Millions  are  bom  castaways,  come  into  the  world  nnder  wrath.  What 
about  their  responsibility  ?  What  about  their  destiny  ?  II.  Thb  dltimatb  tbuth 
UPON  WHICH  THosB  WHO  PUT  THEM  BELIED  FOB  A  SOLUTION.  God  did  not  Icave  them 
without  answer ;  nor  has  He  left  us  without  one.  Their  answer  is  ours,  for  the 
Bible  is  for  all  time.  We  shall  find  our  answer  in  the  questions  themselves ;  for 
they  contain  a  truth  quite  equal  to  the  removal  of  doubts,  though  not  of  difficulties. 
1.  Abraham  and  Paul  grasped  the  eternal  righteousness  of  God.  That  became  a 
formulated  conception  of  God's  character.  Reason  and  conscience  built  on  it,  and 
could  not  be  shaken.  It  is  for  us  to  make  that  our  own.  Before  we  pass  jadgment, 
or  seek  to  form  a  judgment  on  any  section  of  human  history,  or  any  problem  of 
human  life  and  destiny,  let  us  take  fast  hold  of  the  manifested  truth — God  is 
righteous.  That  is  larger  than  the  statement — God  does  righteously.  It  means 
more  than  He  does  no  wrong  things.  It  means.  He  cannot  do  a  wrong  thing.  And 
then,  moreover,  His  wisdom  is  such  that  He  cannot  commit  a  blunder.  2.  These 
questions  not  cnly  express  a  truth  of  God's  character,  but  also  the  moral  requisition 
of  the  creature-consciousness.  Beason  and  conscience  both  demand  that  the 
Judge  of  all  the  earth  shall  be  righteous.  And  God  has  not  so  constituted  man 
that  hf>  may  mock  Him.  And  notice  in  connection  with  this  that  *'  The  Lord  said, 
Shali  I  hide  from  Abraham  that  thing  which  I  do  ?  "  Does  not  that  look  as  if  God 
craved  the  sympathy  and  approval  of  man  ?  He  would  not  have  those  intuitive 
demands  which  He  has  put  into  souls  violated  by  deeds  of  His.  The  Creator  would 
be  justifies  i\  the  eyes  of  His  creature.  God  does  not  rebuke  the  demand  that  He 
shall  do  right.  And  when  we  fully  apprehend,  as  did  these  men,  that  God  is 
righteous,  every  special  act  of  His  will  be  tried  by  that  conclusion.  The  thorniest 
questions  that  can  ever  arise  must  have  their  answers  in  the  righteousness  of  God. 
ni.  The  PBorouND  mobal  acquiescence  in  the  Divine  will  which  the  texts  betkaii. 
The  harassed  reason  of  patriarch  and  apostle  found  rest  in  the  eternal  righteousness 
of  God.  1.  We  must  always  start  there,  and  take  it  as  our  lamp  to  light  our  feet 
along  winding  and  perilous  paths,  and  seldom  shall  we  stumble  or  lose  our  way. 
It  is  not  a  truth  for  reflection  alone,  but  for  practical  guidance,  and  should  command 
our  acquiescence  in  the  Divine  will.  2.  Not  that  we  are  to  cease  inquiry.  Only 
we  should  question  with  faith  in  our  hearts;  especially  the  faith  that  God  is 
righteous.  3.  The  acquiescence  spoken  of  does  not  mean  unconcern  as  to  the  fate 
of  men.  It  does  not  mean  indifference  to  sin  and  sorrow,  and  suffering  and  destiny. 
Abraham  cared.  How  he  pleaded  I  Clearly  we  are  now  amid  the  overwhelming 
mysteries  of  moral  government.  We  see  that  men  may  become  so  bad  that  nothing 
is  left,  even  for  God,  but  a  determining  stroke  of  wrath.  But  we  must  not  be 
content  to  leave  men  to  their  doom.  There  must  be  no  willingness  that  they  should 
perish.  God's  will  is  that  they  should  be  saved.  Paul  said,  "I  have  great 
heaviness  and  continual  sorrow  in  my  heart  concerning  reprobated  Israel."  (W. 
Hiibhard.)  Qod  forbid:  for  then  how  shall  Qod  Judge  the  world 7— (?o<r« 
riflhte  usnest  and  future  judgment : — God'i-  ''trhteousness — I.  Is  the  basis  or  thb 
HOPE  OF  FUTUBE  JUDGMENT.  Things  are  i  t  :  fght  now  if  viewed  from  a  strictly 
temporal  standpoint ;  for  the  good  often  ^eo  the  worst  of  it,  and  the  bad  the  best 
of  it.  The  hope  thxt  these  inequalities  will  be  adjusted  at  the  Judgment  has  been 
the  comfort  and  mainstay  of  God's  saints  under  both  dispensations.  II.  Necessitates 
THIS  JUDGMENT.  1.  If  the  world's  affairs  are  administered  by  a  Eighteoas  Governor, 
then  the  things  that  are  now  manifestly  wrong  must  at  some  period  be  put  right, 
and  the  date  assigned  by  the  Righteous  Governor  of  the  world  is  the  Day  of 
Judgment.  2.  Having  assigned  that  date,  God's  righteousness  pledged  Him  to  keep 
it.    Qod  is,  so  to  apeeik,  committed  to  it,  and  He  is  not  "  the  son  of  man  that  Qe 


eatr.  m.]  ROMANS,  200 

fhoald  repent."  HI.  Will  qotern  its  decisions.  Men  will  be  judged  equitably. 
Judicial  decisions  are  now  often  inequitable — because  some  legal  technicality  stands 
in  the  way  ;  or  because  all  the  facts  are  not  forthcoming,  or  some  of  them  are  not 
placed  in  their  true  light ;  or  because  the  eloquence  of  the  advocate,  or  something 
about  the  accused,  influences  the  jury.  But  then  the  awards  will  be  according  to 
the  merits  of  the  case,  all  the  circumstances  of  which  will  be  naked  and  open. 
Conclusion :  We  may  take  comfort  from  this  doctrine — 1.  Amid  all  the  perplexities 
of  the  present.  We  do  not  estimate  things  by  their  momentary  appearance, 
nor  a  man  by  a  solitary  action.  We  must  therefore  estimate  God  and  His  pro* 
cednre  comprehensively.  He  has  all  eternity  to  work  in,  and  when  we  take  the 
larger  view  we  shall  acknowledge  that  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  right. 
2.  Amid  all  the  perplexities  concerning  the  future.  Whatever  becomes  of  the 
wicked  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  right.  {J.  W.  Burn.)  Jmtiee  and 
judgment : — The  following  story  is  told  of  Judge  Gray,  now  in  the  United  States 
Supreme  Court : — A  man  was  brought  before  him  who  was  justly  charged  with 
being  an  offender  of  the  meanest  sort.  Through  some  technicality  the  judge  was 
obliged  honourably  to  discharge  him,  but  as  he  did  so  he  chose  the  time  to  say  what 
he  thought  of  the  matter.  **  I  believe  you  guilty,"  he  said,  ••  and  would  wish  to 
condemn  you  severely,  but  through  a  petty  technicality  I  am  obliged  to  discharge 
you.  I  know  you  are  guilty,  and  so  do  you  ;  and  I  wish  you  to  remember  that  you 
will  some  day  pass  before  a  better  and  a  wiser  Judge,  when  you  will  be  dealt  with 
according  to  justice,  and  not  according  to  law."  The  standard  of  God' » justice: — 
In  the  reign  of  King  Edward  the  First  there  was  much  abuse  in  the  traiHo  of  all 
sorts  of  drapery,  much  wrong  done  betwixt  man  and  man  by  reason  of  the  diversity 
of  their  measures,  every  man  measuring  his  cloth  by  his  own  yard,  which  the  king 
perceiving  being  a  goodly  proper  man,  took  a  long  stick  in  his  hand,  and  having 
taken  the  length  of  his  own  arm,  made  proclamation  tbrough  the  kingdom,  that 
ever  after  the  length  of  that  stick  should  be  the  measure  to  measure  by,  and  no 
other.  Thus  God's  justice  is  nothing  else  but  a  conformity  to  His  being,  the  pleasure 
of  His  will ;  so  that  the  counsel  of  His  will  is  the  standard  of  His  justice,  where- 
unto  all  men  should  regulate  themselves  as  well  in  commutative  as  distributive 
justice,  and  so  much  the  more  righteous  than  his  neighbour  shall  every  man 
appear,  by  how  much  he  is  proximate  in  this  rule,  and  less  righteous  as  he  is  the 
more  remote.    {J.  Spencer.) 

Ver.  8.  And  not  rather.  .  .  .  Let  ns  do  evil  that  good  may  come. — Doing  evtl 
that  good  may  come: — I.  Aluiohtt   God   can   and   often   doth   ovekrdlk  evil 

ACTIONS  TO  His  own  OLOBT,  and  CAUSB  bad  UEAN8  TO  CONDUCE  TO  A  GOOD  END. 

1.  This  Ib  sufficiently  intimated  in  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  which  gave 
occasion  to  the  reflection  made  in  the  text.  The  Jews  had  been  favoured  with 
special  advantages  for  the  knowing  the  Messiah,  yet  they  rejected  Him  to  their 
ruin.  But  yet  their  sin  illustrated  God's  justice  in  punishing  them  for  their  crime  ; 
and  by  giving  occasion  to  the  apostles  to  turn  from  them  to  the  Gentiles,  it  proved 
a  means  of  advancing  God's  glory.  The  Gentiles,  on  the  other  hand,  had  been 
grievons  sinners;  yet  upon  their  hearing  the  gospel  preached  many  of  them 
embraced  it,  which  likewise  gave  occasion  to  the  magnifying  the  grace  of  God 
towards  them  in  forgiving  and  receiving  them  into  His  favour.  This  proved  the — 
1.  Occasion  of  the  Jews  imputing  to  Paul  the  principle  of  doing  evil  that  good  may 
come  (c/.  chap.  vi.  1).  2.  Scripture  furnishes  many  instances  of  the  like  kind. 
The  book  of  Esther  seems  to  have  been  written  to  declare  the  wisdom  and  goodness 
of  God,  in  overruling  the  pride  and  malice  of  a  wicked  man  to  His  own  glory,  and 
the  good  of  His  Church.  The  greatest  sin  that  ever  was  committed,  the  crucifying 
the  Son  of  God,  was  by  the  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness  overruled,  to  become  a 
means  of  the  greatest  good.  3.  And  the  reason  of  all  this  is  evident.  That  Being 
who  seeth  all  things  at  one  view,  who  discerneth  the  tendency  and  consequence  of 
every  action,  and  who  hath  all  power  in  His  hands,  can  easily  outwit  and  over- 
reach the  craftiest  of  men,  and  dispose  their  designs  to  other  pui  poses.  And  as 
His  goodness  is  equal  to  His  power  and  wisdom,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  He 
will  govern  affairs  in  such  wise  as  to  bring  good  out  of  evil.  So  we  argue  from  the 
perfection  of  His  nature,  that  He  never  would  have  permitted  evil  to  have  come 
into  the  world  unless  He  could  have  overruled  it  to  wise  and  good  ends.  H. 
Notwithstanding  all  this,  it  is  a  detestable  principle,  that  unlawful  jieans 
may  be  used  in  ordke  to  the  bringino  about  an  end  that  18  good.  you  see 
with  what  abhorrence  the  apostle  in  the  text  disclaims  it.  It  is  such  an  open 
TOIi.   I.  14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

defiance  to  God  and  goodness ;  such  a  flat  contradiction  to  truth  and  reason,  as 
well  as  to  Christianity,  that  it  very  well  became  him  thus  to  express  himself.  1. 
Paul  has  elsewhere  testified  his  sense  of  this  matter  (Acts  xxvi.  11 ;  1  Tim.  L  13). 
And  Christ  also  (John  xvi.  2).  And  as  the  New,  so  the  Old  Testament  also  hath 
fully  bom  its  testimony  (Job  xiii.  7-11).  2.  But,  indeed,  we  may  certainly  conclude 
without  the  affirmation  of  an  apostle  or  prophet,  that  this  is  a  detestable  principle. 
It  is  absurd  and  self-contradictory.  To  design,  and  to  do  good,  is  the  proper 
business  of  a  reasonable  being.  It  is  the  glory  of  God  Himself,  and  is  what  He 
requires  of  all,  whom  He  hath  made  after  His  own  image.  Now  that  is  good,  either 
to  design  or  do,  which  is  according  to  the  will  of  the  Creator ;  so  that  to  do  evil, 
in  order  to  the  doing  good,  is  to  contradict  and  thwart  His  will  in  order  to  the 
performing  it ;  it  is  to  break  His  commandments  in  order  to  the  keeping  them. 
In  a  word,  it  is  to  do  that  which  is  directly  opposite  to  the  end  we  profess  to  aim 
at.  For  no  evil  has  in  its  own  nature  a  tendency  to  good,  but  to  the  contrary,  m. 
It  is  a  blandebous,  and  therefore  an  dnjust  and  detestable  fbactice,  to 
charge  this  principle  upon  those  who  not  onlt  disown  it,  bdt  who  oive  no 
jdst  OCCASION  FOB  SUCH  AN  IMPUTATION.  This  is  in  truth  so  lewd  a  principle  that 
those  who  do  act  upon  it  will  probably  not  own  to  it.  But,  however,  if  they  do 
act  upon  it,  then  it  is  no  injustice  to  say  they  do.  But  if,  on  the  contrary,  they 
not  only  disavow  the  principle,  but  give  no  just  ground  for  such  a  charge,  then  it  is 
without  all  question  a  slanderous  report.  So  St.  Paul  affirms  in  the  text,  using  the 
same  word,  which,  when  applied  to  God,  is  rendered  ' '  blasphemy  " ;  and  when  to  men, 
"  evil- speaking,"  or  "  calumniating."  And  those  Jews  who  raised  this  slanderous 
report,  when  they  knew,  or  at  least  might  easily  have  known  that  it  was  a 
slander,  were  justly  liable  to  damnation  for  so  doing ;  so  that  God  would  punish 
them,  not  only  for  rejecting  the  gospel  when  preached  to  them,  but  also  for 
calumniating  the  doctrine  of  Christianity,  and  slandering  its  preachers.  {Bp. 
Bradford.)  Doing  evil  that  good  may  come  impossible : — He  who  does  evil  that 

good  may  come,  pays  a  toll  to  the  devil  to  let  him  into  heaven.  {Gttetset  at  Truth.) 
We  mtist  not  do  evil  that  good  may  come  : — I.  This  will  appear  from  tetk  natobb  op 
MORAL  GOOD  AND  EVIL.  1.  To  denominate  an  action  morally  good  there  must  be 
a  concurrence  of  all  conditions  requisite  thereunto.  If  the  object  be  lawful,  the 
manner  of  the  performance  regular,  and  it  be  fitly  circumstantiated,  yet  if  it  be 
done  for  a  wicked  end,  this  mars  the  action  and  renders  it  sinful ;  and  for  the 
same  reason  let  the  intention  be  never  so  good,  the  end  never  so  excellent,  yet,  if 
the  thing  we  do  is  forbidden  by  God's  laws,  it  is  a  vicious  action.  2.  Nay,  further, 
such  is  the  contrariety  between  the  good  and  evil,  that  what  is  really  evil  cannot  be 
chosen  as  a  fit  means  to  produce  good,  any  more  than  darkness  can  beget  light,  or 
false  premises  infer  a  true  conclusion,  or  an  evil  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit.  To  do 
evU  to  obtain  good  is  as  if  a  man  should  put  his  hand  into  the  flame  to  oool  it. 
n.  To  do  evil  that  good  may  come  is  a  great  affront  to  and  distrust  or  ths 
DiviNB  providence  and  government  of  the  world.  So  saith  Job,  "  Will  ye 
speak  wickedly  for  God,  and  talk  deceitfully  for  Him  ?  "  (xiii.  7).  1.  Doth  He  stand 
in  need  of  our  sins  to  help  Him  out  at  a  dead  lift  to  bring  His  designs  to  pass  ? 
Cannot  He  preserve  His  religion  without  our  venturing  on  a  special  occasion  to 
strain  a  point,  and  transgress  our  duty  for  the  sake  of  it  ?  2.  This  is  seen  in  those 
who,  fondly  imagining  that  our  Saviour  and  His  apostles  had  not  wrought  miracles 
enough  for  confirmation  of  their  doctrine,  have  coined  other  miracles  ;  which  pious 
frauds  are  most  highly  dishonourable  to  our  Saviour,  intimating  as  if  His  gospel  had 
been  imperfect,  unless  men  had  interposed  their  own  wit  and  knavery  to  complete  it. 
3.  Let  us  but  suppose  God  to  have  done  wisely  and  considerately  in  all  that  He  hath 
commanded  or  forbidden,  and  it  must  then  necessarily  follow  that  we  must  never  go 
against  His  will,  though  it  may  seem  to  tend  to  never  so  great  or  good  an  end.  lU. 
Add  to  this  thb  examples  in  Scbiptube  of  God's  condemning  what  hath  been  donb 
against  His  command,  though  with  a  good  intention  and  for  a  wortht  end. 
In  the  Old  Testament,  not  to  insist  on  tbe  case  of  Uzzah,  you  find  King  Saul 
(1  Sam.  15)  receiving  commandment  from  God  to  destroy  all  Amalekites.  He 
very  zealously  sets  about  the  work,  but  saves  the  best  and  fattest  of  the  cattle  to  offer 
them  for  a  sacrifice.  This  one  act  of  disobedienee,  notwithstanding  the  piety  of 
his  intention,  cost  him  his  kingdom.  "  Behold,  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,"  <fto. 
In  the  New  Testament  we  read  of  Peter,  who,  out  of  great  love  to  his  Master  when 
apprehended,  ••  drew  his  sword,  and  struck  a  servant  of  the  high  priest's,  and  smote 
oil  his  ear."  It  was  done  in  defence  of  Christ ;  it  was  against  unjust  violence. 
Yet  mark  our  Saviour's  rebuke  (Matt.  zxvi.  52).     IV.  The  ill  coNSEguENCKB  ov 


.  ni.]  ROMANS.  Ill 

SUCH  A  CONCESSION  AS  THIS,  that  cvil  may  be  done  for  a  good  end.  This  one 
principle  sets  as  free  from  all  aathority  either  Divine  or  human,  and  every  one  may 
do  whatever  he  thinks  fit,  so  his  intention  and  end  be  but  good.  1.  What  we  are  to 
do,  or  to  avoid,  if  this  doctrine  be  admitted  for  true,  we  are  not  to  learn  from  God's 
law  Things  are  either  good  or  evil  according  as  they  seem  to  as,  and  our  own 
jadgment  is  the  measure  of  lawful  and  unlawful,  and  thus  we  are  wholly  our  own 
masters  and  lawgivers.  2.  Nay,  this  principle  plainly  overthrows  all  justice  and 
faith  amongst  men,  all  peace  and  security  in  societies,  and  makes  all  government 
precarious,  since  every  one  is  an  arbitrary  subject,  and  may  obey  or  resist  the  laws 
as  they  appear  to  himself  to  be  for  or  against  the  common  good  ;  and  every  man's 
life  and  fortune  is  at  my  disposal,  if  once  I  think  it  most  for  the  glory  of  God  and 
the  safety  of  religion  that  they  should  be  taken  away.  You  know  our  Saviour  tells 
His  disciples  of  some  that  should  arise,  who  would  think  they  did  God  good  service 
in  killing  them.  According  to  this  doctrine  St.  Paul  was  innocent  when  he  was 
BO  mad  against  the  Church.  (B.  Calamy,  D.D.)  Right  not  to  be  attained  by  doing 
wrong : — We  ought  to  think  much  more  of  walking  in  the  right  path,  than  of 
reaching  our  end.  We  should  desire  virtue  more  than  success.  If  by  one  wrong 
deed  we  could  accomplish  the  liberation  of  millions,  and  in  no  other  way,  we  ought 
to  feel  that  this  good,  for  which  perhaps  we  had  prayed  with  an  agony  of  desire, 
was  denied  us  by  God,  was  reserved  for  other  times  and  other  hands.  (Channing.) 
Right  ihould  not  connive  mth  xirrong : — Yield  to  no  established  rules  if  they  involve 
a  lie.  Do  not  do  evil  that  good  may  come  of  it.  "  Consequences  I  " — this  is  the 
devil's  argument.  Leave  consequences  to  God  ;  but  do  right.  If  friends  fail  thee, 
do  the  right.  If  foemen  surround  thee,  do  the  right.  Be  genuine,  real,  sincere, 
true,  upright,  godlike.  The  world's  maxim  is  trim  your  sails  and  yield  to  circum  - 
stances.  But  if  you  would  do  any  good  in  your  generation,  you  must  be  made  of 
sterner  stu£F,  and  help  make  your  times  rather  than  be  made  by  them.  Yoa  must 
not  yield  to  customs,  but,  like  the  anvil,  endure  all  blows  until  the  hammers  break 
themselves.  When  misrepresented,  use  no  crooked  means  to  clear  yourself. 
Clouds  do  not  last  long.  If  in  the  course  of  doty  you  are  tried  by  the  distrust  of 
friends,  gird  up  your  loins,  and  say  in  your  heart,  I  was  not  driven  to  virtue  by  the 
encouragement  of  friends,  nor  will  I  be  repelled  from  it  by  their  coldness.  Finally, 
be  just  and  fear  not;  "  corruption  wins  not  more  than  honesty  " ;  troth  lives  and 
reigns  when  falsehood  dies  and  rots.     (T.  Outhrie,  D.D.) 

Ters.  9-20.  What  then  T  Are  we  better  than  they  7  Mo,  .  .  .  they  are  all 
under  sin. — Nominal  Christians  compared  with  heathen : — 1.  Have  mnch  advantage 
every  way  (ver.  2).  2.  Are  no  better.  8.  Are  all  alike  under  sin.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Man  under  tin,  inasmuch  as — I.  He  is  under  the  imputation  of  snr.  And  whose 
sm  7  Adam's ;  for  he  had  been  placed  by  his  Maker  in  the  situation  of  head  and 
representative  of  all  his  descendants.  And  because  he  rendered  himself  guilty, 
therefore  we,  being  in  him  and  identified  with  him,  were  made  sharers  of  his  guilt. 
This,  of  course,  is  a  statement  against  which  the  pride  of  human  reason  vrill  rebeL 
But  if  you  will  listen  to  the  Word  of  God,  turn  to  chap.  v.  12,  &c.  And  what  puts 
this  matter  beyond  all  doubt  is  the  way  in  which  all  through  that  passage  Paul 
represents  our  sin  and  condemnation  in  Adam,  as  parallel  and  as  correspondent  to 
our  righteousness  and  salvation  by  Christ.  He  tells  you  here,  that  just  as  believers 
are  accounted  righteous  in  Christ's  righteousness,  so  they  were  held  as  sinners  on 
account  of  Adam's  sin.  As  Christ's  obedience  now  justifies  them,  because  accounted 
theirs,  so  was  Adam's  disobedience.  H.  His  natubb  is  undeb  the  deobadino 
AND  polluting  influencb  ot  BIN.  Now  this  also  he  inherits  from  Adam. 
*•  Original  sin  is  the  fault  and  corruption  of  the  nature  of  every  man,  that  naturally 
is  engendered  of  the  offspring  of  Adam;  whereby  man  is  very  far  gone  from 
original  righteousness,  and  is  of  his  own  nature  inclined  to  evil "  (Art.  ix. ;  Gen. 
vi.  6,  viii.  21 ;  Psa.  li.  5 ;  Bom.  vii.  18,  viii.  7)-  In  support  of  this  we  may 
appeal— 1.  To  the  individual  conscience.  2.  To  the  page  of  history.  3.  To  the 
witness  of  travellers.  4.  To  the  reports  of  newspapers.  IH.  He  ib  held  in 
BONDAQE  BT  THE  TYRANNY  OF  SIN.  This  is  more  than  being  depraved  and  corrupt :  it 
is  a  positive  enslaving  of  the  will.  Man  cannot  of  himself  turn  from  evil  to  Ood. 
The  condition  of  man  after  the  fall  of  Adam  is  such  that  he  cannot  turn  and 
prepare  himself,  by  his  own  natural  strength  and  good  works,  to  faith  and  calling 
npon  God.  Wherefore  we  have  no  power  to  do  good  works,  pleasant  and  acceptable 
to  God,  without  the  grace  of  God  by  Christ  preventing  us,  that  we  may  have  a  good 
will,  and  working  with  us  when  we  have  that  good  will "  (Art.  z. ;  Bom.  t.  6 ; 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  aatr.  au 

Eph.  ii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  14).  1.  Well  may  this  thonght  stir  as  earnestly  to  cry  to  God 
to  send  down  His  Spirit,  and  give  us  the  strength  He  only  can  commanicate.  2. 
Sin,  indeed,  would  whisper,  "  You  can  do  nothing,  and  therefore  you  need  not  care ; 
the  fault  is  not  your  own."  Perish  the  thought!  No,  rather  say,  "I  can  do 
nothing ;  therefore,  0  God,  create  Thou  a  clean  heart  and  renew  a  right  spiiit 
within  me."  IV.  Hb  is  unbeb  the  condemnation  and  thb  oubsk  of  sin.  1.  Am 
a  purtaker  of  Adam's  guilt,  he  is  included  in  the  sentence  of  Adam's  punishment. 
2.  As  he  is  corrupt,  he  incurs  the  wrath  due  to  his  own  iniquity.  3.  As  one  sold 
under  sin,  he  must,  if  left  to  himself,  be  consigned  to  a  hopeless  state  of  misery 
(Eph.  ii.  3 ;  Bom.  vii.  5,  vi.  23).  Conclusion :  1.  Have  we  felt  these  truths  so  aa 
to  cry,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  "  ?  That  is  the  question  which  coustitutea 
the  first  step  in  the  way  of  salvation.  2.  The  gospel  brings  as  instead  of  Adam's 
guilt,  Christ's  righteousness ;  instead  of  inherent  corruption,  the  counteracting 
balm  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  instead  of  the  bondage  of  sin,  "  the  glorious  Uberty  of  the 
children  of  God";  instead  of  "the  wages  of  sin,"  which  "is  death,"  the  "gift 
of  God,  eternal  life."  (J,  Harding,  M.A.)  Sin  at  revealed  by  conscience  and 
Scripture : — 1.  Pacl  had  appealed  to  the  conscibnoe  of  the  Jews,  and  in  chap.  ii. 
affirmed  and  enlarged  upon  their  guilt.  He  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  proved  it ; 
he  had  only  charged  them  with  it ;  and  yet  through  the  conscience  of  those  whom 
we  address  it  is  possible  that  a  charge  may  no  sooner  be  uttered  than  conviction 
may  come  on  the  back  of  it.  There  is  often  a  power  in  a  bare  statement  which  la 
not  at  all  bettered  but  rather  impaired  by  reasoning.  If  what  you  say  of  a  man 
agree  with  his  own  experience,  there  is  a  weight  in  your  simple  affirmation  which 
needs  no  enforcing.  It  was  this  which  mostly  gained  acceptance  for  the  apostles. 
They  revealed  to  men  the  secrets  of  their  own  hearts ;  and  what  the  inspired 
teachers  said  they  were,  they  felt  themselves  to  be.  This  manifestation  of  the 
truth  unto  the  conscience  is  the  grand  instrument  still.  That  obstinacy  of 
unbelief,  which  we  vainly  attempt  to  carry  by  the  power  of  any  elaborate  demonstra* 
tion,  may  give  way,  both  with  the  untaught  and  the  cultivated,  to  the  bare  state- 
ment  of  the  preacher,  when  he  simply  avers  the  ungodliness  of  the  human  heart. 
II.  He  mow  befebs  the  Jews  to  thelb  own  Scbiptcbes,  and,  in  so  doing,  he 
avails  himself  of  a  peculiarly  proper  instrument.  Thus  Christ  expounded  what  was 
written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  and  in  the  prophets,  and  in  almost  every  interview 
the  apostles  had  with  the  Hebrews,  you  will  meet  with  this  as  a  peculiarity 
which  is  absent  when  Gentiles  only  are  addressed — e.g.,  Stephen,  Peter,  Paul  at 
Antioch,  Thessalonica,  &o.  He  who  was  all  things  to  all  men  was  a  Jew  among 
the  Jews.  He  reasoned  with  them  on  their  own  principles,  and  nowhere  more 
frequently  than  in  this  Epistle.    IIL  It  is  this  aobbement  between  the  Biblb 

AND   conscience   WHICH   STAMPS   UPON   THB   BoOS  OF   GoD  ONE   OF   ITS    HOST    SATISFY* 

iNO  EVIDENCES.  It  is  this  perhaps  more  than  anything  else  which  draws  the 
interest  and  the  notice  of  men  towards  it.  For  there  is  no  way  of  fixing  the 
attention  of  man  so  powerfully  as  by  holding  up  to  him  a  mirror  of  himself ;  and  no 
wisdom  which  he  more  prizes  than  that  which  by  its  piercing  and  intelligent 
glance  can  open  to  him  the  secrecies  of  his  own  heart,  and  force  him  to  recognise 
a  marvellous  accordancy  between  its  positions  and  all  the  varieties  of  his  own 
intimate  and  home-felt  experience.  The  question,  then,  before  us  is.  Does  this 
passage  bear  such  an  accordancy  with  the  real  character  of  man  ?  It  abounds  in 
affirmations  of  sweeping  universality,  and  a  test  of  their  truth  or  of  their  falsehood 
is  to  be  found  in  every  heart.  The  apostle  has  here  made  a  most  adventurous 
commitment  of  himself ;  for  the  matters  here  touched  upon  all  lie  within  the  well- 
known  chambers  of  a  man's  own  consciousness,  and  one  single  case  of  disagreement 
would  be  enough  to  depose  him  from  all  the  credit  which  he  has  ever  held  in  the 
estimation  of  the  world.  Of  course,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  a  withdrawment 
must  be  conceded  in  behalf  of  those  who  are  under  the  gospel,  yet  we  are  prepared 
to  assert  that  Paul  has  not  overcharged  the  account  that  he  has  given  of  the 
depravity  of  those  who  are  under  law — whether  it  be  the  law  of  conscience,  or  of 
Moses,  or  even  of  the  purer  morality  of  Christ — insomuch  that  all  who  refuse  the 
mysteries  of  His  grace  are  universally  in  the  wrong.  Be  assured,  then,  that  there 
is  a  delusion  in  all  the  complacency  associated  with  self-righteousness.  It  is  the 
want  of  a  godly  principle  which  essentially  vitiates  the  whole  :  and  additional  to 
this,  with  all  the  generosities  and  equities  which  have  done  so  much  for  your 
reputation  among  men,  there  is  a  selfishness  that  lurks  in  your  bosom  ;  or  a  vanity 
that  swells  and  inflames  it ;  or  a  preference  of  your  own  object  to  that  of  others, 
which  maf  lead  you  to  acts  or  words  of  onfeeling  severity }  or  a  regard  for  soum 


CHAP,  m.]  ROMANS.  213 

partioalar  gratification,  coupled  with  a  regardlessness  for  every  interest  which 
lieth  in  the  way,  that  may  render  you,  in  the  estimation  of  Him  who  pouderoth 
the  heart,  as  remote  a  wanderer  as  he  on  the  path  of  whose  visible  hii^tory  thore 
occurred  in  other  times  the  atrocities  of  savage  cruelty  and  savage  violence.  It 
were  barbarous  to  tell  you  so  had  we  no  remedy  to  offer.  Life  has  much  to  vex 
and  to  trouble  it ;  and  it  were  really  cruel  to  add  to  the  pressure  of  a  creature  so 
beset  and  borne  in  upon  by  telling  him  of  his  worthlessness,  did  we  not  stand 
before  him  charged  with  the  tidings  of  his  possible  renovation  (vers.  21-26). 
(r.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Sin  :  revealed  by  conscience  : — A  fashionable  lady  entered 
church  in  a  strange  place,  and  heard  a  sermon  on  human  depravity.  During  the 
week  the  preacher  called  upon  Ler,  when  she  told  him  she  did  not  believe  in  the 
doctrine  of  his  sermon.  He  asked  the  lady  to  test  the  subject  by  reviewing  her  life, 
alone  before  God,  to  see  if  all  her  acts  had  been  done  from  ri^ht  motives,  which 
she  promised  to  do.  The  next  day  the  preacher  called  again,  when  the  lady 
confessed  that  she  did  not  find  one  bright  spot  of  conscious  love  to  God  in  all  her 
past  life.  A  look  within  had  convinced  her  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrine.  Feeling 
now  the  disease  of  sin,  she  went  to  the  Great  Physician  and  found  a  core. 
Sin  :  revealed  by  grace  ; — When  the  light  of  God's  grace  comes  into  your  heart,  it 
is  something  like  the  opening  of  the  windows  of  an  old  cellar  that  has  been  shut  ap 
for  many  days.  Down  in  that  cellar,  which  has  not  been  opened  for  many  months, 
are  all  kinds  of  loathsome  creatures,  and  a  few  sickly  plants  blanched  by  the 
darkness.  The  walls  are  dark,  and  damp  by  the  trail  of  reptiles :  it  is  a  horrid, 
filthy  place,  which  no  one  would  willingly  enter.  "You  may  walk  there  in  the 
dark  very  securely,  and,  except  now  and  then  for  the  touch  of  some  slimy  creature, 
you  would  not  believe  the  place  was  so  bad  and  filthy.  Open  those  shutters,  clean 
a  pane  of  glass,  let  a  little  hght  in,  and  now  see  how  a  thousand  noxious  things 
have  made  this  place  their  habitation  1  Sure,  it  was  not  the  light  that  made  this 
place  so  horrible ;  but  it  was  the  hght  that  showed  how  horrible  it  was  before.  So 
let  God's  grace  just  open  a  window,  and  let  the  light  into  a  man's  soul,  and  he 
will  stand  astonished  to  see  at  what  a  distance  he  is  from  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgcon.] 
The  reign  of  sin  : — I.  Univebsal.  1.  Over  all  men.  2.  Over  every  faculty  of  man. 
IL  Ruinous.  1.  To  happiness.  2.  To  peace.  3.  To  moral  power.  4.  To  hope. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Superior  sinners  : — I  remember  a  gentleman  taking  excep- 
tion to  an  address  based  npon  this  text.  He  said,  "  Do  you  mean  to  say  that 
there  is  no  difference  between  an  honest  man  and  a  dishonest  one ;  between  a  sober 
man  and  a  temperate  man  ?  "  "  No,"  I  remarked,  "  I  did  not  affirm  that  there  was 
no  room  for  comparison  between  such  cases  ;  but  my  position  is  that  if  two  men 
were  standing  here,  the  one  intemperate  and  the  other  sober,  I  should  say  of  the 
one,  "  This  is  an  intemperate  sinner,  and  the  other  a  sober  sinner."  My  friend  did 
not  know  how  to  meet  the  difficulty,  but  answered,  "  Well,  I  don't  like  such 
teaching."  Very  quietly  I  replied,  '*  Then  I  virill  make  some  concession,  and  meet 
your  difficulty.  I  will  admit  that  there  are  many  '  superior  sinners,'  and  that  yoa 
are  a  '  superior  sinner.'"  I  shall  not  soon  forget  my  friend's  expression  of  ooon- 
tenance  when  he  had  taken  stock  of  the  argument.  (H.  Varley.)  Human 
depravity  : — I.  Universal.  Jew  and  Gentile.  None  righteous,  wise,  faithful.  II. 
Total.  In— 1.  Word  ;  2.  Deed ;  3.  Thought ;  4.  Purpose.  III.  Ruinous.  All— 1. 
Guilty  ;  2.  Condemned ;  3.  Without  hope.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Human  depravity  : — 
I.  Wherein  it  consists  (vers.  9-18).  IL  How  rr  is  dbmonstbated.  By  the  law 
(ver.  20).  HI.  What  is  the  effect  (ver.  19)  ?  (Ibid.)  Human  depravity  :  its 
deceitfulness  and  the  occasion  of  its  manifestation : — ^In  a  vessel  filled  with  muddy 
water,  the  thickness  visibly  subsided  to  the  bottom,  and  left  the  water  purer  and 
purer,  until  at  last  it  seemed  perfectly  limpid.  The  slightest  motion,  however, 
brought  the  sediment  again  to  the  top ;  and  the  water  became  thick  and  turbid  as 
before.  •'Here,"  said  Gotthold,  when  he  saw  it,  "we  have  an  emblem  of  the 
human  heart.  The  heart  is  full  of  the  mud  of  sinful  lusts  and  carnal  desires ;  and 
the  consequence  is,  that  no  pure  water — that  is,  good  and  holy  thoughts — can  flow 
from  it.  It  is,  in  truth,  a  miry  pit  and  slough  of  sin,  in  which  all  sorts  of  ugly 
reptiles  are  bred  and  crawl.  Many  a  one,  however,  is  deceived  by  it,  and  never 
imagines  his  heart  half  so  wicked  as  it  really  is,  because  sometimes  its  lusts  are  at 
rest,  and  sink  to  the  bottom.  But  this  lasts  only  so  long  as  he  is  without  oppor- 
tunity or  incitement  to  sin.  Let  that  occur,  and  worldly  lusts  rise  so  thick,  that  hia 
whole  thoughts,  words,  and  works  show  no  trace  of  anything  but  shme  and  imparity. 
One  is  meek  as  long  as  he  is  not  thwarted ;  cross  him,  and  he  is  Uke  powder  ignited 
by  the  smallest  spark,  and  blazing  up  with  a  loud  report  and  destructive  efleot. 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  nx. 

Another  is  temperate  so  long  as  he  has  no  jovial  companions ;  a  third  chaste  while 
the  eyes  of  men  are  upon  him.  Human  depravity  :  its  outward  development  from 
latent  germs  of  evil : — A  few  years  ago,  a  house  was  built  at  Newcastle-upon-Tyne  ; 
and  the  earth  which  was  dug  out  of  the  foundations  was  thrown  over  a  piece  of 
ground  in  front,  intended  for  a  garden.  The  following  spring  a  number  of  caper 
plants  came  up :  they  were  not  common  in  that  part  of  the  country,  and  their 
appearance  excited  great  surprise.  Upon  inquiry,  it  was  found  that,  years  before, 
that  ground  had  been  a  public  garden :  it  therefore  appeared  certain  that  those  seeds 
had  remained  dormant  while  buried  deep  in  the  earth,  and  had  sprung  to  life  as  soon 
as  they  were  brought  within  the  influence  of  heat  and  light.  How  like  to  om-  hearts  I 
What  seeds  of  evil  may  lie  dormant  in  them  I  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Human 
depravity  :  its  universality  : — The  greatest  of  unregenerate  men  are  as  much  in  need 
of  new  hearts  as  the  meanest  of  their  fellows.  There  be  some  men  that  are  bom 
into  this  world  master-spirits,  who  walk  about  it  as  giants,  wrapped  in  mantles  of 
light  and  glory.  I  refer  to  the  poets,  men  who  rise  aloft,  like  Colossi,  mightier  than 
we,  seeming  to  be  descended  from  celestial  spheres.  There  be  others  of  acute 
intellect,  who,  searching  into  mysteries  of  science,  discover  things  that  have  been 
hidden  from  the  creation  of  the  world  ;  men  of  keen  research,  and  mighty  erudition ; 
and  yet,  of  each  of  these — poet,  philosopher,  metaphysician,  and  great  discoverer — 
it  must  be  said,  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God  1  "  Ye  may  train  an 
unrenewed  man,  ye  may  make  his  intellect  almost  angelic,  ye  may  strengthen  his 
soul  until  he  shall  unravel  mysteries  in  a  moment ;  ye  may  make  him  so  mighty, 
that  he  can  read  the  iron  secrets  of  the  eternal  hills,  tearing  the  hidden  truth  from 
the  bowels  of  ancient  marvels  ;  ye  may  give  him  an  eye  so  keen  that  he  can 
penetrate  the  arcana  of  rocks  and  mountains ;  ye  may  add  a  soul  so  potent,  that 
he  may  slay  the  giant  Sphinx,  that  had  for  ages  troubled  the  mightiest  men  of 
learning ;  yet,  when  ye  have  done  all,  his  mind  shall  be  a  depraved  one,  and  his 
carnal  heart  shall  still  be  in  opposition  to  God,  unless  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  create 
him  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  {Ibid.)  The  importance  of  civil  government  to 
society: — I.  The  apostle's  conclusion  is,  that  befobe  God  all  the  wobld  is 
GUiLTT,  and  if  we  single  out  those  verses  which  place  man  in  his  simple  relationship 
to  God,  we  shall  see  the  justice  of  the  sentence.  1.  "  There  is  none  righteous,  no, 
not  one."  To  be  held  as  having  kept  the  law  of  our  country,  we  must  keep  the 
whole  of  it.  It  is  not  necessary  that  we  accumulate  the  guilt  of  treason,  forgery, 
murder.  One  of  these  acts  is  enough  to  condemn.  A  hundred  deeds  of  obedience 
will  not  efface  or  expiate  one  of  disobedience ;  and  we  have  only  to  plead  for  the 
same  obedience  to  a  Divine  that  we  render  to  a  human  administration,  to  prove  that 
there  is  none  righteous  before  God.  2.  "  There  is  none  that  understandeth,  there  is 
none  that  seeketh  after  God. ' '  No  man  who  has  not  submitted  himself  to  the  doctrine 
of  justification  by  faith  has  any  clear  knowledge  of  the  ground  on  which  he  rests 
his  acceptance  with  God.  He  may  have  some  obscure  conception  of  His  mercy, 
but  he  has  never  struck  the  compromise  between  His  mercy  and  His  justice.  What" 
becomes  of  all  that  which  stamps  authority  upon  a  law,  and  exhibits  the  Majesty  of  a 
Lawgiver,  is  a  matter  of  which  he  has  no  understanding,  and  he  does  not  care  to 
understand  it.  He  is  seeking  after  many  things,  but  not  seeking  after  God.  When 
did  your  efforts  in  this  way  ever  go  beyond  an  empty  round  of  observances  ?  3. 
"  They  are  all  gone  out  of  the  way,  they  are  together  become  unprofitable,  there  is 
none  that  doeth  good ;  no,  not  one."  We  do  not  say  that  they  have  gone  out  of  the 
way  of  honour,  equity,  or  neighbourliness.  But  they  are  all  out  of  the  way  of 
godliness.  The  prophet  does  not  affirm  that  we  have  turned  every  one  to  a  way 
either  of  injustice  or  cruelty  ;  but  he  counts  it  condemnation  enough  that  we  have 
turned  every  one  to  his  own  way — a  way  of  independence  of  God,  if  not  of  iniquity 
against  our  fellows  in  society.  It  is  this  which  renders  all  the  works  of  mere 
natural  men  so  unprofitable,  that  is,  of  no  value  in  the  reckoning  of  eternity.  They 
want  the  great  moral  infusion  which  makes  them  valuable.  There  is  nothing  of 
God  in  them.  II.  We  now  pass  onward  to  another  set  of  charges — which  may  not 
be  80  easy  to  substantiate — of  offences  against  the  deaeest  interests  op  societt. 
It  is  true  that  the  apostle  here  drops  the  style  of  universality,  and  quotes  David's 
charges,  not  against  the  race,  but  against  his  enemies.  But  yet  it  will  be  found 
that  though  the  picture  of  atrocity  may  not  in  our  day  be  so  broadly  exhibited  as 
in  ruder  periods,  yet  that  the  principles  of  it  are  still  at  work ;  that  though  law 
and  civilisation  and  interest  may  have  stopped  the  mouth  of  many  a  desolating 
volcano,  yet  do  the  fiery  materials  still  exist  in  the  bosom  of  society.  So  that  our 
nature,  though  here  personified  by  the  apostle  into  a  monster,  witii  a  throat  like  an 


(OBir.  m.]  ROMANS.  815 

open  sepalchre,  emitting  everything  offensive ;  and  a  tongue  practised  in  the  arta 
of  deceitfulness ;  and  lips  from  which  the  gall  of  malignity  ever  drops  in  unceasing 
distillation;  and  a  mouth  full  of  venomous  asperity  ;  and  feet  that  run  to  assassi- 
nation as  a  game ;  and  with  the  pathway  on  which  she  runs  marked  by  the  ruin  and 
distress  that  attend  upon  her  progress ;  and  with  a  disdainful  aversion  in  her  heaii 
to  peace  ;  and  with  an  aspect  of  defiance  to  the  God  that  gave  all  ber  parts  and  all 
her  energies — though  this  sketch  was  originally  taken  by  the  Psalmist  from  prowling 
banditti,  yet  has  the  apostle,  by  admitting  it  into  his  argument,  stamped  a  perpetuity 
upon  it,  and  made  it  universal — giving  us  to  understand  that  if  such  was  the 
character  of  man,  as  it  stood  nakedly  out  among  the  hostilities  of  a  barbarous 
people,  such  also  is  the  real  character  of  man  among  the  regularities  and  the 
monotonous  decencies  of  modern  society.  To  illustrate :  Oaths  were  more  frei^uent 
at  one  time  than  they  are  now,  but  while  there  may  be  less  of  profaneness  in  the 
mouths,  there  may  be  as  much  as  ever  in  the  heart.  Murder  in  the  act  may  be  less 
frequent  now,  but  if  he  who  hateth  his  brother  be  a  murderer,  it  may  be  fully  as  foul 
and  frequent  in  the  principle.  Actual  theft  may  be  no  longer  practised  by  him  who 
gives  vent  to  an  equal  degree  of  dishonesty  through  the  chicaneries  of  merchandise. 
And  thus  may  there  lurk  under  the  disguises  of  well-bred  citizenship  enough  to 
prove  that,  with  the  duties  of  the  second  table  as  with  the  first,  man  has  wandered 
far  from  the  path  of  rectitude.     III.  All  this,  while  it  gives  a  most  hdmilutino 

ESTIMATE  of  OUB  SPECIES,  SHOULD  BEKTE  TO  ENHANCE  TO  OUR  MINDS  THE  BLESSINGS  OF 

REGULAH  GOVERNMENT.  Let  our  poUce  and  magistrates  depose  to  the  effect  it  would 
have  upon  society,  were  civil  guardianship  dissolved.  Were  all  the  restraints  of 
order  driven  in,  conceive  the  effect,  and  then  compute  how  little  there  is  of  moral, 
and  how  much  there  is  of  mere  animal  restraint  in  the  apparent  virtues  of  human 
Bociety.  There  is  a  twofold  benefit  in  such  a  contemplation.  It  will  enhance  to 
every  Christian  mind  the  cause  of  loyalty,  and  lead  him  to  regard  the  power  that  is, 
as  the  minister  of  God  to  him  for  good.  And  it  will  also  guide  him  through  many 
delusions  to  appreciate  justly  the  character  of  man;  to  distinguish  aright  between 
the  semblance  of  principle  and  its  reality.  IV.  Learn  three  lessons  from  all  that 
has  been  said.  1.  As  to  the  theology  of  this  question.  We  trust  you  perceive  how 
much  and  how  little  it  is  that  can  be  gathered  from  the  comparative  peace  and 
gentleness  of  modern  society  ;  how  much  is  due  to  the  physical  restraints  that  are 
laid  on  by  this  world's  government,  and  how  little  is  due  to  the  moral  restraints 
that  are  laid  on  by  the  unseen  Government  of  Heaven  :  proving  that  human  nature 
is  more  like  the  tractableness  of  an  animal  led  about  by  a  chain,  than  of  an  animal 
inwardly  softened  into  docility.  On  this  point  observation  and  orthodoxy  are  at 
one ;  and  one  of  the  most  convincing  illustrations  which  the  apostle  can  derive  to 
his  own  doctrine  may  be  taken  from  the  testimony  of  legal  functionaries.  Let  them 
simply  aver  what  the  result  would  be  if  all  the  earthly  safeguards  of  law  and  of 
government  were  driven  away ;  and  they  are  just  preaching  orthodoxy  to  our  ears. 
2.  The  very  same  train  of  argument  which  goes  to  enlighten  the  theology  of  this 
subject,  serves  also  to  deepen  and  estabUsh  the  principles  of  loyalty.  That  view  of 
the  human  character,  upon  which  it  is  contended,  by  the  divine,  that  unless  it  is 
regenerated  there  can  be  no  meetness  for  heaven,  is  the  very  same  with  that  view 
of  it  upon  which  it  is  contended,  by  the  politician,  that  unless  it  is  restrained  there 
will  be  no  safety  from  crime  and  violence  along  the  course  of  the  pilgrimage  which 
leads  to  it.  An  enlightened  Christian  recognises  the  hand  of  God  in  all  the  shelter 
that  is  thrown  over  him  from  the  fury  of  the  natural  elements ;  and  he  equally 
recognises  it  in  all  the  shelter  that  is  thrown  over  him  from  the  fury  of  the  moral 
elements  by  which  he  is  surrounded.  Had  he  a  more  favourable  view  of  our  nature 
he  might  not  look  on  government  as  so  indispensable ;  but,  with  the  view  that  he 
actually  has,  he  cannot  miss  the  conclusion  of  its  being  the  ordinance  of  Heaven 
for  the  Church's  good  upon  earth  ;  and  he  rejoices  in  the  authority  of  human  laws 
as  an  instrument  in  the  hand  of  God  for  the  peace  of  His  sabbaths,  and  the  peace 
of  His  sacraments.  3.  Let  our  legislators  recognise  the  value  of  true  religion. 
When  Solomon  says  that  it  is  righteousness  which  exalteth  a  nation,  he  means 
something  of  a  deeper  and  more  sacred  character  than  the  mere  righteousness  of 
•ociety.  Cut  away  the  substratum  of  godliness,  and  how,  we  ask,  will  the 
secondary  and  the  earth-born  righteousness  be  found  to  thrive  on  the  remaining 
soil  which  nature  supplies  for  rearing  it  ?  But  with  many,  and  these  too  the  holders 
of  a  great  and  ascendant  influence  in  our  land,  godliness  is  pnritanism ;  and  thus 
is  it  a  possible  thing  that  in  their  hands  the  alone  aliment  of  public  virtue  may  be 
withheld,  or  turned  into  poison.    The  patent  way  to  disarm  Nature  of  her  ferocitiea 


ai6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  m. 

1«  to  Christianise  her.  For  note — (1)  Thoagh  social  virtae  and  loyalty  may  exist 
in  the  apper  walks  of  life  apart  from  godliness — yet  godliness,  in  the  hearts  of  those 
who  have  the  brunt  of  all  the  oommon  and  popular  temptations  to  stand  against,  ii 
the  main  and  effective  hold  that  we  have  upon  them  for  securing  the  righteousness 
of  their  lives.  (2)  The  despisers  of  godliness  are  the  enemies  of  the  true  interest 
of  our  nation;  and  it  is  possible  that,  under  the  name  of  Methodism,  that  very 
instrument  may  be  put  away  which  can  alone  recall  the  departing  virtues  of  our 
land.  (3)  Where  godliness  exists,  loyalty  exists ;  and  no  plausible  delusion — no 
fire  of  their  own  kindling,  lighted  at  the  torch  of  false  or  spurious  patriotism,  will 
ever  eclipse  the  light  of  this  plain  authoritative  Scripture — "  Honour  the  king,  and 
meddle  not  with  those  who  are  given  to  change."  (4)  Though  Christianity  may 
only  work  the  salvation  of  a  few,  it  raises  the  standard  of  morality  among  many. 
The  reflex  influence  of  one  sacred  character  upon  his  vicinity  may  soften,  and 
purify,  and  overawe  many  others,  even  where  it  does  not  spiritualise  them.  This 
is  encourag<^ment  to  begin  with.  (5)  Alarming  as  the  aspect  of  the  times  is,  and 
deeply  tainted  and  imbued  as  the  minds  of  many  are  with  infidelity,  and  widely 
spread  as  the  habit  has  become  of  alienation  from  all  the  ordinances  of  religion,  yet 
the  honest  and  persevering  good-will  of  one  imbued  with  the  single-hearted  benevo* 
lence  of  the  gospel  will  always  meet  with  respect.  He  who,  had  he  met  a  minister 
of  religion  or  of  the  state,  would  have  cursed  him,  had  he  met  the  Sabbath-school 
teacher  who  ventured  across  his  threshold  might  have  tried  to  bear  a  repulsive 
front  against  him,  but  would  have  found  it  to  be  impossible.  Here  is  a  feeling 
which  even  the  irreligion  of  the  times  has  not  obliterated,  and  it  has  left,  as  it  were, 
an  open  door  of  access,  through  which  we  might  at  length  find  our  way  to  the 
landing-place  of  a  purer  and  better  generation.  (T.  Chalmen,  D.D.)  There  la 
none  righteous,  no,  not  one. — None  righteous : — Had  there  been  one  righteous,  Ood 
would  have  found  him  out.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  There  it  none  that  onder- 
■tandeth,  there  Is  none  that  seeketh  after  God. — Human  ignorance  and  perversity : — 

1.  There  is  nonk  that  undeestandeth.  1.  What  ?  Ignorance  is  not  affirmed  of 
many  things  of  more  or  less  importance.  A  man  may  be  an  accomplished  scientist, 
a  profound  scholar,  widely  read  in  general  literature,  and  yet  not  unrlerstand — (1) 
His  guilt ;  (2)  His  duty ;  (3)  His  responsibibty ;  (4)  His  Saviour ;  (5)  His  destiny. 

2.  Why?  Because — (1)  He  does  not  want  to.  Ignorance  is  fancied  bliss.  He  is 
not  troubled  by  qualms  of  conscience,  a  sense  of  God's  anger,  an  anticipation  of 
judgment.  A  practical  knowledge  of  these  things  would  trouble  him.  (2)  He  will 
not ;  and  that  in  spite  of  the  witness  of  both  Nature  and  Bevelation.  He  might 
understand  if  he  would.  II.  There  is  none  that  seeketh  after  God.  There  are 
many  who  "  seek  after  "  matters  infinitely  less  important — temporal  profit,  pleasure, 
&o.  1.  The  folly  of  this.  (1)  The  sick  will  not  seek  after  their  Physician.  (2)  The 
ignorant  after  their  Teacher.  (3)  Sinners  after  their  Saviour.  2.  The  necessity 
and  blessedness  of  reversing  this.  (1)  God  must  be  sought,  for  men  have  lost  Him. 
^2)  When  sought,  God  will  be  found — and  as  all  that  the  soul  can  possibly  want. 
(J.  W.  Bum.)  They  are  all  gone  out  of  the  way. — Practical  error : — I.  Its 
SOURCE.  II.  Its  mantfebtations.  III.  Its  predominance.  rV.  Its  effects.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Progrest  in  $in  inevitable  : — Every  sin  we  commit  is  like  taking  a  step 
further  back  from  God:  and  return  is  rendered  impossible  without  Divine  assistance, 
as  Satan  cuts  the  bridges  behind  man  in  his  retreating  downward  path ;  and  also 
as  every  false  step  necessitates  another — rather  indeed  many — as  the  author  of 
Waverley  Novels  knew  to  his  cost,  and  left  it  on  record  :  "  Oh,  what  a  tangled  web 
we  weave,  when  first  we  practise  to  deceive  I  "  Or  again,  as  Schiller  more  philo- 
sophically puts  it :  *'  This  is  the  very  curse  of  evil  deed,  that  of  new  evil  it  becomes 
the  seed."  The  tin  and  folly  of  ignoring  God : — Why  did  you  not  think  of  God  ? 
One  would  deem  that  the  thought  of  Him  must,  to  a  serious  mind,  come  second  to 
almost  every  other  thought.  The  thought  of  virtue  would  suggest  the  thought  of 
both  a  lawgiver  and  a  rewarder  ;  the  thought  of  crime,  of  an  avenger  ;  the  thought 
of  sorrow,  of  a  consoler ;  the  thought  of  an  inscrutable  mystery,  of  an  intelligence 
that  understands  it ;  the  thought  of  that  ever-moving  activity  that  prevails  in  the 
system  of  the  universe,  of  a  supreme  agent ;  the  thought  of  the  human  family,  of  a 
great  father;  the  thought  of  all-being,  of  a  creator;  the  thought  of  life,  of  a 
preserver;  and  the  thought  of  death,  of  an  incontroUable  disposer.  By  what 
dexterity  of  irreligious  caution  did  you  avoid  precisely  every  track  where  the  idea  of 
Him  would  have  met  you,  or  elude  that  idea  if  it  came  ?  And  what  must  sound  reason 
pronounce  of  a  miud  which,  in  the  train  of  millions  of  thoughts,  has  wandered  to 
tU  things  under  the  sun,  to  all  the  permanent  objects  oi  Tauighing  appearances  in 


OBAT.  m.]  EOMJNS.  817 

the  oreation,  bat  never  fixed  its  thought  on  the  supreme  reality ;  never  approached, 
like  Moses,  "  to  see  this  great  sight."  (</.  Foster.)  Their  throat  Is  an  open  sepolchr*. 
— Tlie  throat  of  an  ungodly  vian  compared  to  an  opened  sepulchre : — I.  I  have  to  men- 
tion some  particulars  in  which  the  throat  of  man  is  *•  an  open  sepulchre  "  in  regard 
to  THAT  WHICH  IT  BECKIVE3  :  I  meau,  in  regard  to  the  air  we  breathe,  and  the  food 
and  beverage  we  eat  and  drink.  1.  This  is  true  universally  of  every  unregenerate 
man.  Every  breath  of  air  that  is  breathed  by  a  man  who  is  not  boi  n  of  God,  and 
every  morsel  of  food  that  he  eats,  is  but  like  the  carrying  a  putrid  corpse  into  a 
vault.  He  is  supporting  his  body  for  the  dishonour  of  Ood.  It  is  not  in  the 
service  of  his  heavenly  Father,  but  in  the  service  of  his  Father's  enemies,  that  he 
uses  all  hii^  streogth  and  health,  and  all  his  bodily  powers;  he  is  guilty  of  abusing 
God's  gracious  gifts  ;  he  is  steadily  going  forward  into  increased  corruption.  2. 
But  if  in  this  way  it  holds  good  of  all  who  are  not  restored  to  God,  even  the 
most  abstemious,  that  "  tbeir  throat  is  no  better  than  an  opened  sepulchre,"  how 
much  more  does  it  give  us  a  striking  view  of  the  wretched  state  of  the  intemperate : 
the  gluttonous  and  the  drunkard?  Well  does  the  wisdom  of  God  compare  the 
throats  of  all  snch  wretched  sinners  to  an  opened  selpnlchre,  corrupt  in  themselves, 
infectious  to  others,  and  oflensive  to  God.  Can  such  a  man  expect  to  dwell  with 
God  in  holiness  and  glory  T  Would  you  yourselves  consent  to  have  an  ••  opened 
sepulchre,"  with  all  its  abominations,  in  your  house  ?  Would  you  tolerate  anything 
so  offensive?  Much  less  can  you  suppose  that  God  will  suffer  a  drunkard  to  be  any- 
where but  in  the  depths  of  helL  II.  I  now  proceed  to  enumerate  a  few  particulars 
in  which  the  throat  of  every  unregenerate  man  is  also  hke  "  an  open  sepulchre  "  in 
that  which  proceeds  out  or  it.  1.  But  let  me  first  say  a  word  generally  to  those 
who  are  Christians  in  name  only.  As  in  regard  to  what  goes  in,  so  in  regard  to 
what  comes  forth  from  your  throat,  it  is  still  but  an  "  open  sepulchre."  2.  In 
descending  to  particulars,  I  must  be  content  to  mention  only  one  of  the  multitude 
of  sins  that  make  the  "  throat  of  sinners  an  open  sepulchre  "  ;  and  that  is,  the  sin 
of  blasphemy,  and  swearing,  and  profaneness.  And  if  an  opened  sepulchre  ia 
odious  because  it  sends  forth  the  smell  of  death,  well  may  we  say  that  the  month 
of  the  profane  is  like  it,  for  it  breathes  the  breath  of  spiritual  and  eternal  death. 
{John  Tucker,  B.D.)  Dignity  of  human  nature  shown  from  its  ruins : — 1.  A 
most  dark  and  dismal  picture  of  humanity,  and  yet  it  has  two  aspects.  In  one 
view  it  is  the  picture  of  weakness,  wretchedness,  and  shame  ;  in  the  other  it  presents 
a  being  fearfully  great ;  great  in  his  evil  will,  his  demoniacal  passions,  his  contempt 
of  fear,  the  splendour  of  his  degradation,  and  the  magnificence  of  his  woe.  2.  It 
has  been  the  way  of  many  to  magnify  humanity  by  tracing  its  capabilities  and  its 
affinity  with  God  and  truth  ;  and  by  such  kind  of  evidences  they  repel  what  they 
call  the  insulting  doctrine  of  total  depravity.  And  not  without  some  show  of 
reason,  when  the  doctrine  is  asserted  so  as  to  exclude  the  admission  of  high  aspira- 
tions and  amiable  properties ;  for  some  teachers  have  formulated  a  doctrine  of 
human  depravity  in  which  there  is  no  proper  humanity  left.  3.  Now  one  of  these 
extremes  makes  the  gospel  unnecessary,  because  there  is  no  depravation  to  restore ; 
the  other  makes  it  impossible,  because  there  is  nothing  left  to  which  any  holy 
appeal  can  be  made ;  but  I  undertake,  in  partial  disregard  of  both,  to  show  the 
essential  greatness  of  man  from  the  ruin  itself  which  he  becomes  ;  confident  of  this, 
that  in  no  other  point  of  view  will  he  prove  the  spiritual  sublimity  of  his  nature  so 
convincingly.  I.  Wb  form  oub  conceptions  of  many  things  by  their  bcins.  1. 
Of  ancient  dynasties.  Falling  on  patches  of  paved  road  leading  out  from  ancient 
Bome  here  for  Britain,  here  for  Germany,  here  for  Ephesus,  &c.  ;  imagining  the 
couriers  flying  back  and  forth,  bearing  the  mandates  of  the  central  authority, 
followed  by  the  military  legions  to  execute  them  ;  we  receive  an  impression  o£  the 
empire  which  no  words  could  give  us.  So,  to  form  some  opinion  of  the  dynasty  of 
the  Pharaohs,  of  whom  history  gives  us  but  the  obscurest  traditions,  we  have  only 
to  look  on  the  monumental  mountains,  and  these  dumb  historians  in  stone  wiil 
show  ua  more  of  that  vast  and  populous  empire  than  history  and  geography  together. 
2.  Of  ancient  cities.  Though  described  by  historians,  we  form  no  sutlicient  con- 
ception of  their  grani^eur  till  we  look  upon  their  ruins.  Even  the  eloquence  of 
Homer  yields  only  a  faint,  unimpressive  conception  of  Thebes;  but  to  pass  through 
the  ruins  of  Karnao  and  Luxor,  a  vast  desolation  of  temples  and  pillared  avenues 
that  dwarf  all  the  present  structures  of  the  world.  This  reveals  a  fit  conception  of 
the  grandest  city  of  the  world  as  no  words  could  describe  it.  So  Jonah  endeavours 
to  raise  some  adequate  opinion  of  Nineveh,  and  Nahum  follows,  magnifving  its 
Bfilendoar  in  terms  of  high  description ;  but  no  one  had  any  proper  conception  of 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ctur.  tau 

it  till  a  traveller  opens  to  view,  at  points  many  miles  asander,  collects  the  tokens  of 
art  and  splendour,  and  says,  "This  is  the  '  exceeding  great  city.'"  And  so  it  ia 
with  Babylon,  Ephesos,  Tadmor  of  the  Desert,  Baalbeo,  and  the  nameless  cities 
and  pyramids  of  the  extinct  American  race.  II.  So  it  is  with  man.  Our  most 
veritable,  though  saddest  impression  of  his  greatness,  we  shall  derive  from  the 
magnificent  ruin  he  displays.  1.  And  this  is  the  Scripture  representation  of  man, 
as  apostate  from  duty  and  God.  How  sublime  a  creature  must  that  be  who  is  able 
to  confront  the  Almighty  and  tear  himself  away  from  His  throne  1  And,  as  if  to 
forbid  our  taking  his  deep  misery  and  shame  as  tokens  of  contempt,  the  first  men 
are  shown  as  living  out  a  thousand  years  of  lustful  energy,  and  braving  the 
Almighty  in  strong  defiance  to  the  last.  We  look  upon  a  race  of  Titans  who  fill 
the  earth — even  up  to  the  sky — with  demoniacal  tumult,  tiU  God  can  suffer  them 
no  longer.  So  of  the  picture  in  chap.  i. ,  and  the  picture  in  the  text  corresponds. 
2.  But  we  come  to  the  ruin  as  it  is,  and  we  look — (1)  Upon  the  false  religions  of  the 
world ;  pompous  and  costly  rites  transacted  before  crocodiles  and  onions  ;  magni- 
ficent temples  built  over  monstrous  creatures,  carved  by  men's  hands ;  children 
offered  up  by  their  mothers ;  gorgeous  palaces  and  majestic  trappings  studded  aU 
over  with  beetles  in  gold,  or  precious  stones,  to  serve  as  a  protection  againsi 
pestilences,  poisons,  and  accidents.  A  picture  of  ruin — yet  how  magnificent  1  For 
how  high  a  nature  must  that  be  that  it  must  prepare  such  pomps,  incur  aucb 
sacrifices,  and  can  elevate  such  trifles  of  imposture  to  a  place  of  reverence  1  If  we 
say  that  in  all  this  it  is  feeling  after  God,  then  how  inextinguishable  and  grand  are 
those  religious  instincts  by  which  it  is  allied  to  Him  I  (2)  The  wars  of  the  world. 
What  opinion  should  we  have  of  the  fearful  passion  of  a  race  of  animals,  who 
marshal  themselves  by  the  hundred  thousand,  marching  across  kingdoms  and 
deserts,  "  swift  to  shed  blood,"  and  strewing  leagues  of  ground  with  dead  ?  (ver.  16). 
One  race  there  is  that  figure  in  these  heroics,  viz. ,  the  tiny  race  of  ants,  whom  God 
has  made  a  spectacle  to  mock  the  glory  of  human  wars.  Plainly  enough  man  is  a 
creature  in  ruins,  but  how  magnificent!  Mean  as  the  ant  in  his  passions,  but 
erecting,  on  the  desolations  he  makes,  thrones  of  honour  and  renown;  for  who  of 
us  can  live  content  without  some  hero  to  admire  and  worship  ?  (3)  The  persecutions 
of  the  good  ;  poison  for  Socrates,  a  cross  for  Jesus.  What  does  it  mean  ?  No  other 
than  this,  that  cursing  and  bitterness,  the  poison  even  of  asps,  and  more,  is  entered 
into  the  heart  of  man.  He  hates  with  a  diabolical  hatred.  And  what  a  being  is 
this  that  can  be  stung  with  so  great  madness  by  the  spectacle  of  a  good  and  holy 
life  !  The  fiercest  of  animals  are  capable  of  no  such  devilish  instigation.  (4)  The 
great  characters  of  the  world.  On  a  small  island  of  the  southern  Atlantic  is 
shut  up  a  remarkable  prisoner,  wearing  himself  out  there  in  a  feeble  mixture  of 
peevishness  and  jealousy,  solaced  by  no  great  thoughts  and  no  heroic  spirit.  And 
this  is  the  great  conqueror  of  the  modem  world ;  a  man  who  carried  the  greatest 
victories,  and  told  the  meanest  lies ;  who,  destitute  of  private  magnanimity,  had 
stupendous  powers  of  nnderstanding  and  will.  How  great  a  being  must  it  be  that 
makes  a  point  of  so  great  dignity  before  the  world,  despite  of  so  much  that  is 
contemptible  t  But  he  is  not  alone.  The  immortal  Eepler,  piloting  science  into  the 
fikies,  and  comprehending  the  vastness  of  heaven,  only  proves  the  magnificence  of 
man  as  a  ruin,  when  you  discover  the  strange  ferment  of  irritability  and  "  super- 
stition wild,"  in  which  his  great  thoughts  are  brewed,  and  his  mighty  life  dissolved. 
So  also  Bacon — "The  greatest,  wisest,  meanest  of  mankind."  Probably  no  one 
has  raised  himself  to  a  higher  pitch  of  renown  by  his  superlative  genius  than 
Shakespeare ;  flowering  out,  nevertheless,  into  such  eminence  of  glory,  on  a  compost 
of  buffoonery,  and  other  vile  stuff,  which  he  so  covers  with  splendour,  and  irradiates 
with  beauty,  that  disgust  itself  is  lost  in  the  vehemence  of  praise.     III.  But  wb 

MUST   LOOK   MORE   DIEECTLT  INTO   THE  CONTENTS  OF  HUMAN  NATURE,  AND  THE  INTERNAI. 

RUIN  BY  WHICH  THEY  ARE  DISPLAYED.  And  Hotice — 1.  The  sublime  vehemence  of 
the  passions.  (1)  What  a  creature  must  that  be  who,  out  of  mere  revenge,  will 
deliberately  take  the  life  of  a  fellow-man,  and  then  despatch  his  own  to  avoid  the 
ignominy  of  a  public  execution  I  No  tiger  is  ever  instigated  by  any  so  intense  and 
terrible  pRSsion.  (2)  Or  take  the  passion  of  covetousness.  How  great  a  creature 
must  that  be  who  is  goaded  by  a  zeal  of  acquisition  so  restless,  so  self-sacrificing,  so 
insatiable  1  The  poor,  gaunt  miser  were  even  the  greatest  of  heroes  if  he  could 
deny  himself  with  so  great  pati«ice  in  a  good  cause.  (3)  The  same  is  true  even  of 
the  licentious  lusts.  No  rar«  of  animals  can  show  the  parallel  of  such  vices, 
because  they  are  none  of  them  instigated  by  a  nature  so  great  in  wants  that  find  no 
gQod  to  satisfy  them.   2,  The  wild  mixtures  of  thought  displayed  both  in  the  waking 


nx.]  ROMANS.  S19 

life  and  the  dreams  of  mankind.  How  grand  I  how  mean  1  It  is  as  if  the  soal  were 
a  thinking  ruin.  The  angel  and  the  demon  life  appear  to  be  contending  in  it. 
And  yet  a  ruin  which  a  Nineveh  or  a  Tbebesoan  parallel  only  in  the  faintest  degree  ; 
comprehending  all  that  is  purest,  brightest,  most  Divine  ;  all  that  is  worst,  meanest, 
most  deformed.  3.  The  significance  of  remorse.  How  great  a  creature  must  that 
be  that,  looking  down  upon  itself  from  some  high  summit  in  itself,  withers  in 
relentless  condemnation  of  itself,  gnaws  and  chastises  itself  in  the  sense  of  what  it 
is  1  4.  The  dissonance  and  obstinacy  of  his  evil  will.  It  is  dissonant  as  being  out  of 
harmony  with  God  and  the  world,  and  all  beside  in  the  soul  itself — viz.,  the  reason, 
the  conscience,  the  wants,  the  hopes,  and  even  the  remembrances  of  the  soul.  How 
great  a  creature  is  it  that,  knowing  God,  can  set  itself  off  from  God  and  resist  Him  I 
*•  There  is  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes."  In  one  view  there  is  fear  enough,  the 
soul  is  all  its  life  long  haunted  by  this  fear,  but  there  is  a  desperation  of  wHl  that 
makes  it  as  though  it  were  not.  6.  The  religious  aspirations  and  capacities  of 
religious  attraction  that  are  garnered  up,  and  still  live  in  the  ruins  of  humanity. 
rV.  The  pbaotioal  issues  or  oub  bubjeot.  1.  It  is  a  great  hope  of  our  time  that 
society  is  going  to  sUde  into  something  better — by  education,  public  reforms,  and 

Ehilanthropy.  We  have  a  new  gospel  that  corresponds,  which  preaches  faith  in 
nman  nature,  that  proposes  development,  not  regeneration.  Alas,  that  we  are 
taken  with  bo  great  folly.  As  if  man,  or  society,  crazed  and  maddened  by  the 
demoniacal  frenzy  of  sin,  were  going  to  reconstruct  the  shattered  harmony  of 
nature.  Aa  soon  will  the  desolations  of  Eamac  gather  up  their  fragments.  Nothing 
meets  our  cane  but  to  be  bom  of  Qoi.  He  alone  can  rebuild  the  ruin.  2.  The 
great  difficulty  with  Christianity  in  our  time  is  that  it  is  too  great  for  belief.  After 
all  our  supposed  discoveries  of  dignity  in  human  nature,  we  have  commonly  none 
bat  the  meanest  opinion  of  man.  How  could  we  imagine  that  any  such  history  as 
that  of  Jesus  Christ  is  a  fact,  or  that  the  infinite  God  has  transacted  any  such 
wonder  for  man?  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  1  It  is  extravagant,  out  of  proportion, 
who  can  believe  it  ?  Any  one  who  has  not  lost  the  magnitude  of  man.  To  restore 
this  tragic  fall  required  a  tragic  salvation.  Nor  did  ever  any  sinner,  who  had  felt 
the  bondage  of  his  sin,  think  for  one  moment  that  Christ  was  too  great  a  Saviour. 
Oh,  it  was  an  almighty  Saviour  that  he  wanted  I  none  but  such  was  sufficient  I  Him 
be  could  believe  in,  just  because  He  was  great — equal  to  the  measures  of  his  want, 
able  to  burst  the  bondage  of  his  sin.  3.  The  magnitude  and  real  importance  of  the 
soul  are  discovered  in  the  subject  as  nowhere  else.  The  soul  appears  under  sin,  all 
selfish  as  it  is,  to  shrink  and  grow  small  in  its  own  sight.  Perhaps  this  is  due,  in 
part,  to  the  consciousness  we  have,  in  sin,  of  moral  littleness  and  meanness. 
Whereas,  in  another  sense,  sin  is  mighty,  God-defying.  Just  here  is  it  that  you 
will  get  your  most  veritable  impressions  of  your  immortality ;  even  as  you  get  your 
best  impression  of  armies,  not  by  the  count  of  numbers,  but  by  the  thunder-shock 
of  battle,  and  the  carnage  of  the  field  when  it  is  over.  In  the  tragic  desolations  of 
intelligence  and  genius,  of  passion,  pride,  and  sorrow,  behold  the  import  of  his 
eternity.  And  yet,  despite  all  this,  you  are  trying  and  contriving  stiU  to  be  happy — 
a  happy  ruin !  The  eternal  destiny  is  in  you,  and  you  cannot  break  loose  from  it. 
With  your  farthing  bribes  you  try  to  hush  your  stupendous  wants.  Oh,  this  great 
and  mighty  soul,  were  it  something  less,  you  might  find  what  to  do  with  it.  Anything 
would  please  it  and  bring  it  content.  But  it  is  the  godlike  soul,  capable  of  rest  in 
nothing  but  God ;  able  to  be  filled  and  satisfied  with  nothing  but  His  fulness.  (H. 
Bushnell,  D.D.)  Wickedness  in  word  and  deed : — I.  In  speech.  These  verses  refer 
to  the  different  organs  of  speech,  and  show  them  all  exercising  their  power  to  hurt, 
under  the  dominion  of  sin.  1.  The  throat  (larynx)  is  compared  to  a  sepulchre ; 
this  refers  to  the  language  of  the  gross  and  brutal  man,  of  whom  it  is  said  in 
common  parlance — it  seems  as  if  he  would  Uke  to  eat  you.  The  next  characteristic 
is  a  contrast — the  sugared  tongue,  which  charms  you  like  a  melodious  instrument. 
Both  of  these  are  taken  from  the  description  of  David's  enemies  in  Psa.  v.  9.  3. 
The  next  is  taken  from  Psa.  cxl.  3 — the  calumny  and  falsehood  which  malignant 
lips  give  forth,  as  a  serpent  infuses  its  poison.  (4)  Ver.  14.  The  wickedness 
which  is  cast  into  your  face  by  a  mouth  full  of  hatred  or  bitterness  (Psa,  x.  7).  II. 
In  deed  (vers.  15-18).  Of  the  four  propositions  the  first  three  are  borrowed  from 
Isa.  lix.  7,  8.  1.  The  feet  as  the  emblem  of  walking  symbolises  the  whole  conduct. 
2.  Man  acts  without  regard  to  his  neighbour,  without  fear  of  compromising  his 
welfare  or  even  his  life  (Prov.  i  16).  He  oppresses  his  brother,  and  fills  his  life 
with  misery,  so  that  the  way  marked  out  by  such  a  course  is  watered  with  the  tears 
of  others.     3.  No  peace  can  exist  either  in  the  heart  of  such  men,  or  in  their  neigh 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [caa.  m. 

boorhood.  4.  And  this  overflow  of  depravity  and  anflering  arises  from  a  void ;  th« 
ainence  of  that  feeling  which  should  have  filled  the  heart — "the  fear  of  God." 
This  term  is  the  normal  expression  for  piety  in  the  Old  Testament ;  it  is  that 
disposition  which  has  God  always  present  in  the  heart,  will  and  judgment.  Tho 
words  "  before  their  eyes  "  show  that  it  belongs  to  man  freely  to  evoke  or  suppress 
this  inward  view  of  God  on  which  his  moral  conduct  depends  (Psa.  xzxvi.  1). 
^rof.  Godet.)  The  poison  of  asps  is  nnder  tbelr  lips. — Poisonou$  speech  : — 
Poison  concealed  in  a  bag  under  a  loose  tooth  or  fang  :  ^e  fang  pressing  the  bag, 
the  poison  is  emitted  with  the  bite.  Honey  on  the  lips,  poison  under  them.  Poison 
conveyed — 1.  In  ordinary  conversation.  2.  In  wanton  and  licentious  songs.  8.  In 
profane  and  blasphemous  expressions.  4.  In  infidel  and  unscriptural  teaching.  5. 
In  corrupting  works  of  fiction.  6.  In  the  language  of  the  drama.  (T.  Robinton, 
D.D.)  The  poison  of  the  tongue : — Suppose  I  open  a  bag  of  seipents,  and  let  them 
out  where  children  are  playing,  or  in  a  camp  where  there  are  soldiers,  and  I  say  of 
myself,  "  Madman !  fool !  "  and  go  to  hunt  my  snakes  7  I  cannot  find  them.  It  was 
min&  to  let  them  out,  but  it  is  not  mine  to  catch  them  and  put  them  in  the  bag 
it}  ain.  Now  there  never  was  a  bag  of  snakes  in  this  world  like  a  man's  mouth. 
To  open  it  is  in  your  power,  but  to  shut  it  again  upon  all  that  you  have  emitted 
from  it  is  not  in  your  power.  I  am  not  referring  to  oases  in  which  a  man  himself 
suffers  directly  from  the  evil  that  he  has  done ;  but  to  those  worse  cases  in  which 
others  suffer  from  the  evil  that  we  have  done.  For,  as  a  man  grows  spiritual,  as  a 
man  goes  toward  God  he  comes  to  feel  that  the  mischiefs  done  on  another  are 
unspeakably  worse  than  those  done  on  himself ;  and  that  no  unrepentable  trans- 
gressions  are  as  bad  as  those  by  which  he  has  struck  the  welfare  of  another. 
Parallel  with  these,  although  differing  from  them,  are  those  things  by  which  men 
wound  the  hearts  of  those  whom  they  should  shield.  Your  anger  may  sting 
venomously.  Your  jealousy  may  do  a  mischief  in  one  short  hour  that  your  whole 
life  cannot  repair.  Your  cruel  pride  may  do  a  whole  age's  work  in  a  day.  You 
cannot  take  back  the  injuries  that  you  have  done  to  those  whose  hearts  lie  throbbing 
next  to  yours.  Ah  I  when  winter  has  frozen  my  heliotropes,  it  makes  no  difference 
that  the  next  morning  thaws  them  out.  There  lie  the  heliotropes — a  black, 
noisome  heap ;  and  it  is  possible  for  you  to  chill  a  tender  nature  so  that  no  thawing 
can  restore  it.  You  may  relent,  but  frost  has  been  there,  and  you  cannot  bring  back 
freshness  and  fragrance  to  the  blossom.  You  cannot  sweeten  the  embittered  heart 
to  which  your  words  have  been  like  scorpions.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  for  a  man  to 
have  the  power  of  poisoning  the  hearts  of  others,  and  yet  carry  that  power  carelessly. 
IH.  W.  Beecher.)  Immoral  authors  and  their  poisonous  effects : — It  is  a  remarkable 
fact  that  the  poison  of  the  rattlesnake  is  even  secreted  after  death.  Dr.  Bell,  in  his 
dissections  of  the  rattlesnakes  which  have  been  dead  many  hours,  has  found  that  the 
poison  continued  to  be  secreted  so  fast  as  to  require  to  be  dried  up  occasionally  with 
sponge  or  rag.  The  immoral  author,  like  these  rattlesnakes,  not  only  poisons  during 
his  lifetime,  but  after  death :  because  his  books  possess  the  subtle  power  of  secreting 
the  venom  to  a  horrible  degree.  A  moral  sponge  is  constantly  called  into  requisition 
to  obliterate  his  poison  for  many  years  after  he  himself  has  been  dead.  (Louis  Figuier.) 
Their  Is  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes. — Impenitent  men  destitute  of  holiness  : — 
The  text  gives  as  man's  native  character.  Such  he  is  till  the  Spirit  of  God  has 
sanctified  him.     I.    Many  havb   mistaksn  ths  HATrvs  chabacxeb  or  man,  ntoic 

HAVINQ   BEEN   HIU   CAPABLE   OF  AFFECTIONS  AND  DEEDS   THAT  ABE  PBAISEWOBTHT.       W* 

do  not  deny  that  there  has  been  seen  in  men  not  sanctified.    U.  Men  have  bbbm 

IjBD    to    OONTBOVBBT    this     DOCTEINX     BEOAUSB     THET    abb    not    conscious     or     THB 

WBONO  MOTIVES  BT  WHICH  THET  ABB  ACTUATED.  What  the  prophet  says  of  the 
idol-maker  is  more  or  less  true  of  all  nnregenerate  men  in  all  ages,  "  A  deceived 
heart  hath  tamed  him  aside,  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  soul,  nor  say,  Is  there  not 
•  lie  in  my  right  hand  ?  "  They  do  not  consider  it  important  to  know  what  their 
designs  are,  and  have  not  that  familiarity  with  their  hearts  that  would  render  it 
easy  to  discover,     m.   The  doctbine  of  the  text  is  often  contbotebted  to 

SUPPOBT  schemes  WITH   WHICH  THIS  SENTIMENT   WOULD  NOT  OOBIPABB.      The  sinner'g 

entire  depravity  is  a  fundamental  doctrine  on  which  there  can  be  built  only  one, 
and  that  the  gospel  system.  Make  this  doctrine  true,  and  it  sweeps  away,  as  with 
the  besom  of  destruction,  every  creed  but  one  from  the  face  of  the  world.  It  settles 
the  question  that  God  may  righteously  execute  His  law  upon  all  nnregenerate  men ; 
that  "by  deeds  of  the  law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified";  that  the  doings  of 
xmregenerate  men  are  unholy ;  that  an  atonement,  sach  as  God  has  provided,  is 
4he  only  xaediom  through  which  we  can  purge  oar  oonscienoes  from  dead  works  to 


CBAt.  m.]  ROMANS.  tax 

Berve  the  living  God.  IT.  This  doctbimb  has  bkbit  contboysbtkd  tbbouob  xhb 
paisB  or  THB  HUUAN  HEABT.  Depravity  is  a  most  degrading  doctrine,  and  entire 
depravity  intolerable,  till  the  heait  has  been  humbled  by  the  grace  of  Qod.  TLere 
is  in  apostate  men  great  pride  of  character.  With  the  promptness  with  which  wa 
fly  the  touch  of  fire  does  pride  resist  imputation.  Hence  inquires  the  unregenerate 
man.  Would  you  deny  me  the  credit  of  loving  my  Greater,  Preserver,  and  Bene- 
factor ?  Do  I  never  obey  His  law,  or  do  a  deed  from  motives  that  please  Him  T 
And  is  there,  among  my  noblest  actions  of  kindness  to  men,  nothing  that  amounts 

to  love  ?      y.    I    FBOCEBD   TO   OFFEB   80UB    REASONS    FOB    ESTEEMINO  IT   A  TEBY    IMPOB- 

TANT  nocTBiMB.  1.  The  fact  that  it  is  plainly  revealed  testifies  to  its  importance. 
God  would  not  have  cumbered  His  Word  with  a  doctrine  of  no  value.  2.  The 
doctrine  of  the  text  is  esteemed  important,  as  it  is  one  of  the  first  truths  used  by  the 
Bpiiit  of  God  in  awakening  and  sanctifying  sinners.  3.  The  doctrine  of  the  text  is 
esteemed  important,  as  it  lies  at  the  foundation  of  the  whole  gospel  scheme.  {D. 
A.  Clark.) 

Vers.  19,  20.  Now  we  know  that  what  things  soeTer  the  law  ealth,  It  salth  to 
them  who  are  nnder  the  law. — The  law  : — L  lis  claims — are  universaL  II.  Its 
TEACBiNos — distinct  and  authoritative.  III.  Its  kffects — condemnation,  complete 
and  without  exception.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Law,  and  the  law : — For  the  most  part 
the  word  "law"  refers  to  the  general  principle  "Do  this  and  live";  the  words 
"  the  law,"  to  the  historical  and  literary  form  in  which  this  principle  took  shape  in 
the  ears,  eyes,  and  thoughts  of  the  Jews.  (Prof.  Beet.)  The  convincing  power  of 
the  law  : — 1.  "  The  things  which  the  law  saith  " — its  holy  precepts,  solemn  sanc- 
tions, awful  sentences — constitute  the  instrument  of  its  power.  They  are  the  bund 
which  grasps,  the  arm  which  conquers  the  transgressor.  2.  The  extent  of  their 
operation  is  to  "  all  those  who  are  under  the  law."  Are  they  obedient  ?  Then  it  is 
a  means  of  life  and  peace.  Are  they  disobedient  ?  Then  it  is  the  instrument  of 
their  condemnation  and  death.  3.  Its  convincing  power  is  displayed  either  in  the 
day  of  grace  to  bring  to  Christ,  or  in  the  day  of  judgment  to  banish  from  Him.  4. 
It  is  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  His  hands  it  is  living  and  powerful,  sharper 
than  a  two-edged  sword,  but  in  itself  it  is  a  dead  letter.    I.  The  thinos  of  which 

THB   LAW   IS   MADE   TO   CONVIMCB    THB    BINNEB.       "It   Saith  " 1.    "  Do    thls,  and   thoO 

shalt  live  " ;  but  "  whosoever  offendeth  in  one  point  is  guilty  of  all."  The  law 
claims  an  entire,  perpetual,  and  spotless  obedience,  and  in  the  exercise  of  its  con- 
vincing power  it  compares  the  sinner's  hfe  with  the  strictness  of  its  demands.  It 
thus  brings  to  view  his  obliquity  by  laying  down  its  perfect  and  unbending  rule 
upon  the  crookedness  of  all  his  conduct.  It  accuses  him  of — (1)  Presumptuous 
Bins.  (2)  Sins  of  inadvertence  and  ignorance.  (3)  Secret  sins,  corrupt  thoughts, 
unholy  desires.  (4)  Omission  of  holy  duties.  (5)  Deficiencies  in  the  spirit  which 
prompts  to  action.  (6)  A  corrupt  nature  in  a  state  of  rebellion  against  God.  2. 
"  Cursed  is  every  one  that  coutinueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book 
of  the  law  to  do  them."  By  this  it  convinceth  the  sinner  of  his  expo  >ure  to  the 
wrath  of  God.  The  condemnation  of  the  nngodly  is  not  future  but  present.  The 
transgressor  is  "  dead  already,"  and  though,  like  a  convict  in  his  cell,  he  has  a 
respite  before  execution,  his  case  is  to  be  regarded  as  altogether  disposed  of.  He 
may  be  ignorant  of  his  condition,  and  may  deny  it ;  but  this  is  one  of  the  things 
that  the  Jaw  saith,  and  its  work  is  to  make  the  sinner  believe  it,  and  behold  his 
danger.  But  though  onder  this  operation  he  groans  in  anguish,  he  is  no  more  in 
condemnation  than  before.  He  was  asleep,  but  is  now  awakened.  The  lightning 
which  makes  a  benighted  traveller  see  the  precipice  in  front  of  him  does  not  make 
the  danger,  it  only  reveals  it.  3.  "  Moses  describeth  the  righteousness  which  is 
by  the  law,  that  the  man  which  doeth  these  things  shall  live  by  them."  "  The  soul 
that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  By  these  "things"  the  law  convinces  of  the  impossi- 
bility  of  self -justification.  (1)  It  proposes  but  two  possible  methods  whereby  man 
shall  be  just  with  God :  it  offers  life  to  those  who  have  perfectly  obeyed  its  precepts ; 
it  presents  liberty  to  all  who  have  fully  endured  its  penalties.  Under  which  can 
there  be  hope  for  man?  (a)  He  can  nevef  obtain  acceptance  by  his  obedience — for 
there  is  imperfection  and  defilement  in  every  duty,  (b)  He  cannot  be  justified  by 
making  satisfaction  for  disobedience,  for  no  satisfaction  can  be  received  short  of  the 
entire  penalty — everlasting  death.  (2)  The  convinced  siimer  sees  this  hopeless 
state,  and  is  compelled  to  renounce  all  effort  at  legal  justification.  A  knowledge  of 
pardon  and  life  must  come  from  the  revelation  of  a  Redeemer  who,  as  the  sinner's 
■orety,  has  obeyed  the  precepts  and  endured  the  penalty.    II.  The  PBBsoMg  xo 


22i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  m, 

WHOM  IT  MtJST  Bs  APPLiBO.  "  To  them  that  are  under  the  law  " — the  Jew,  of  ooorse,  but 
all  mankind  are  bom  under  the  obligations  of  the  law,  and  the  things  it  saith,  it 
saith  to  the  whole  family  of  man.  And  if  there  be  not  an  individual  who  is  released 
from  the  obligation  of  loving  God  with  all  his  heart,  there  is  not  one  who  is  not 
justly  accused  of  transgression,  and  therefore  condemned.  "  All  have  sinned,"  (be.  ' 
The  proper  operation  of  the  law  as  a  convincing  power  is,  therefore,  upon  every 
human  being.  III.  The  besult  to  which  it  leabs.  1.  "  That  every  mouth  may 
be  stopped."  Unconvinced  sinners  complain  of  the  unreasonable  strictness  and 
severity  of  the  Divine  commandments,  and  invent  a  thousand  excuses  for  sin  and 
pleas  of  exemption  from  punishment.  But  when  the  law  discharges  its  convincing 
office,  the  justice  of  God  became  so  apparent,  guUt  so  clear,  that  they  are  incapable 
of  complaint  or  excuse.  2.  •*  And  all  the  world  become  guilty  before  God  " — con- 
sciously and  penitently.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Appeal  to  the  law: — The  new 
Collector  of  the  Port  of  New  York  is  not  harassed  by  disputes  as  his  predecessors 
were.  He  has  had  all  the  books  regulating  the  customs  servicft  placed  within  his 
reach,  and  when  appealed  to  for  his  decision  his  clear  grey  eyes  brighten  as  he 
replies:  "The  law  says  so  and  so  about  that  question,  does  it  not?"  He  is 
generally  answered  in  the  affirmative,  and  without  more  ado  he  dismisses  his  visitor, 
saying  :  «•  The  law  on  the  subject  was  made  for  me  to  follow,  and  follow  it  I  shall." 
{Christian  Herald.)  The  authority  of  the  Scriptures : — I  feel  profoundly  that  that 
word  "  authority  "  is  a  vital  word  in  all  considerations  about  the  Scriptures.  There 
are  controversies  about  inspiration  and  its  mode,  controversies  which  are  legion,  but 
they  may  circle,  like  waves  around  a  rock,  round  the  question  of  authority.  That 
which  separates  the  Bible  from  all  other  books,  however  elevating,  is,  after  all,  not 
so  much  that  it  contains  such  treasures  of  historic  information,  of  poetic  beauty,  of 
moral  analysis,  as  that  it  contains  the  authority  of  God  and  the  certainty  of  His 
Word.  Yes,  it  is  this,  after  all.  There  are  other  books,  for  which  God  be  thanked, 
written  in  other  ages,  which  have  had  their  influence  on  the  elevation  of  man,  but 
the  difference  between  them  and  this  Book  is,  that  no  conceivable  amount  of  infor- 
mation or  influence  from  them,  as  such,  is  binding  on  the  conscience  ;  but  we  claim 
for  this  Book  that  when  we  have  once  ascertained  the  meaning  of  it,  it  binds  us.  It 
is  not  merely  attractive  and  elevating — it  is  all  this — but  it  is  binding  upon  us ;  it 
says  in  the  name  of  a  greater  than  itself,  "  BeUeve  this,  because  I  say  it ;  do  this, 
because  I  command  it."  (H.  G.  C.  Moule,  M.A.)  Therefore  by  the  deeds  of  the 
law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  Justified. — Justification  by  works  impossible : — I.  Thb 
assertion  of  the  text  is,  that  ocb  whole  baob  is  incapable  of  bveb  bkimq 

justified  on  the   GBOUND   of   HAVINQ   kept   the   BEQtriREMENTS    OF  THE   UOBAL  LAW 

OF  God.  1.  This  may  be  easily  illustrated  by  a  reference  to  Scripture.  (1)  It 
declares  that  the  moral  law,  under  which  we  have  been  created,  commands  us  to 
love  the  Lord  our  God  with  all  our  heart,  and  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves. 
(2)  It  also  asserts  that  man  is  destitute  of  that  love ;  and  that,  in  the  place  of  it,  he 
cherishes  a  spirit  of  enmity  to  his  Maker  ;  and  the  constitution  of  civil  society  every- 
where proceeds  upon  the  assumption  that  men  are  selfish,  faithless,  violent,  and 
cruel,  and  laws  are  everywhere  made  to  counteract  those  hateful  tendencies.  (3)  It 
reveals  to  us  that  our  first  parents  disobeyed  God,  and  transmitted  a  sinful  taint  to 
their  posterity.  Thus  we  see  that  sin  is  not  an  accident  to,  but  a  universal  fact  in, 
human  nature.  '•  By  one  man,  sin  entered  into  the  world,"  &o.  Such  are  the 
declarations  of  Scripture,  and  to  the  truth  of  them  our  own  consciousness  bears 
undoubted  testimony.  As  soon  as  any  one  of  us  begins  to  compare  himself  with  the 
law  under  which  he  is  created,  or  even  with  the  imperfect  moral  standard  held  forth 
by  his  own  conscience,  he  acknowledges  himself  a  sinner,  coming  short  of  the  praise 
of  God.  Nor  does  any  one  find  himself  alone  in  this  condition.  He  is  surrounded 
by  just  such  beings,  an  inhabitant  of  a  world  lying  in  wickedness.     II.  Btra  herb 

THE   QUESTION  ARISES,  SINCE    WE  CANNOT  BE    JUSTIFIED  ON    THE  GBOUND    OF   INNOCENCE, 

MAT  WE  NOT  BY  SOME  WORKS  OF  ouB  OWN  ?  This  qucstion,  from  the  beginning,  has 
deeply  agitated  the  human  soul.  1.  The  first  expedient,  which  seems  universally 
to  have  suggested  itself,  was  the  offering  of  expiatory  victims.  But  such  an 
expedient  as  this  inevitably  loses  its  efficacy  as  soon  as  man  listens  to  the  voice  of 
his  own  consciousness.  He  then  feels  that  guilt  is  a  personal  thing,  and  that  he 
himself  is  a  sinner.  It  is  he,  in  his  own  person,  that  must  answer  at  the  bar  of 
offended  justice.  Guilt  cannot  be  transferred  to  a  brute,  nor  can  it  at  will  be  laid 
upon  the  conscience  of  another.  Hence  the  worshipper  returned  from  the  sacrifice 
unsatisfied  and  unblessed.  The  Jew  confessed  that  it  was  not  possible  that  the  blood 
of  bulls  and  goats  should  take  away  sin.    The  pagan  retired  from  the  flowing  liba- 


CHAT,  xxx.]  ROMANS.  MS 

tion  and  the  smoking  hecatomb  bearing  about  within  him  a  conscience  still  burdened 
with  the  guilt  of  unpardoned  sin.  2.  Another  expedient  has  been  to  offer  reparation 
to  the  violated  law  by  repentance  and  reformation.  But  if  this  doctrine  be  true — (1) 
It  must  proceed  upon  an  entire  change  of  the  moral  law.  The  law  which  the  Scrip- 
tares  have  revealed  is,  that  the  wages  of  sin  is  death.  To  declare,  however,  that  if 
a  man  repents,  he  is  entitled  to  justification,  is  to  introduce  another  law,  and  to 
declare  not  that  sin  of  itself  is  deserving  of  death,  but  only  sin  unrepented  of.  Now, 
I  ask,  where  do  we  find  the  authority  for  announcing  such  a  law  ?  Bevelation  does 
not  teach  it.  No  governmeut  on  earth  could  be  administered  upon  this  principle. 
(2)  It  would  lead  to  new  views  of  Divine  justice.  If  a  sinner  can  claim  justification 
at  the  hands  of  God  in  virtue  of  repentance,  then  there  would  seem  but  little  dis- 
tinction to  exist  between  innocence  and  guilt.  He  who  had  kept  the  whole  law 
without  fault,  and  he  who  had  broken  every  commandment  through  life,  and  at  last 
repented,  would  both  stand  in  the  same  moral  condition  before  God ;  both,  on  the 
ground  of  their  own  doings,  being  entitled  to  be  treated  as  innocent.  (3)  It  would 
lead  us  to  believe  that  God  Himself  entertained  no  moral  displeasure  against  sin, 
but  only  against  sin  unrepented  of.  The  announcement  of  His  law  would  seem  to 
be,  that  holiness  and  sin  repented  of  were  equally  lovely  in  His  sight,  inasmuch  as 
they  were  by  His  law  entitled  to  the  same  reward.  The  Deity  would  thus  seem  to 
entertain  less  abhorrence  to  sin  than  the  penitent  himself.  (4)  It  would  defeat  its 
own  object ;  for,  were  this  the  law,  repentance  would  be  impossible.  Repentance 
can  only  arise  from  a  conviction  of  the  moral  turpitude  of  sin  ;  it  is  an  abhorrence 
of  the  act  purely  on  account  of  its  moral  wrong.  But,  upon  the  supposition  in 
question,  sin  itself  is  not  wrong,  or  odious  in  the  sight  of  God,  but  only  sin  unre- 
pented of.  But,  if  the  act  itself  be  not  morally  detestable,  of  what  is  there  for  us  to 
repent?  We  are  to  be  penitent  not  for  the  act,  but  for  our  impenitence,  while 
penitence  itself  is  impossible,  because  the  act  is  not  in  itself  worthy  of  condemna- 
tion. To  me,  then,  the  Scriptures  seem  to  assert  that  repentance  can  offer  no 
atonement  for  sin.  If  the  law  be  holy,  and  just,  and  good,  it  is  holy,  and  just,  and 
good,  that  it  be  enforced.  If  a  man  repent  of  his  sins,  this  is  right ;  but  under  a 
system  of  law,  this  can  make  no  reparation  for  past  transgression.  The  man  con- 
fesses that  the  law  is  just ;  but  this  confession  does  not  render  it  less  just.  Hs 
acknowledges  that  he  deserves  to  perish ;  but  this  does  not  alter  his  desert.  "  There- 
fore, by  the  deeds  of  the  law  can  no  flesh  be  justified,"  &e.    III.  The  oosfeii  is  an 

0F7BB  OF  UNIVERSAL  PARDON   THBOCOH   THE   MEDIATION   07  CHRIST.      1.    To  ICVCal  thiS 

great  and  astonishing  truth  is  the  great  design  of  revealed  religion.  Natural  religion 
intimated  to  us  our  sin,  and  dimly  foreshadowed  our  doom.  But  from  natural 
religion  itself  no  news  of  reconciliation  could  proceed.  It  is  the  gospel  alone  that 
brings  life  and  immortality  to  light.  2.  For  the  announcement  of  this  great  central 
troth,  the  whole  previous  history  of  our  world  was  one  magnificent  preparation. 
3.  Although,  then,  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  no  flesh  can  be  justified,  yet  we  may  not 
despair,  "  for  oar  help  is  laid  upon  One  that  is  mighty,"  One  who  is  able  to  save  to 
the  uttermost  everyone  that  believeth.  {F.  Wayland,  D.D.)  Legal  justification 
impostibU  because — I.  Man  is  flesh.  1.  Depraved  by  original  corruption.  2. 
Obnoxious  by  actual  transgression.    II.  The  best  obedience  to  the  law  that  bb 

CAN  PERFORM  IB  IMPERFECT.      III.    AlL  THAT  HE    DOES   OB   CAN    DO   IS    A  DOE   DEBT  HB 

OWES  TO  THE  LAW.  1.  He  owes  all  possible  obedience  to  the  law  as  a  creature.  2. 
Bat  by  performing  all  his  debts  as  a  creature  he  can  never  pay  his  debts  as  a  trans- 
gressor. 8.  Christ  alone  is  able  to  justify  him.  (W.  Burkitt,  M,A.)  Work* 
cannot  justify : — No  matter  how  much  he  (Luther)  studied  and  prayed,  no  matter 
how  severely  he  castigated  himself  with  fasting  and  watching,  he  found  no  peace  to 
his  soul.  Even  when  he  imagined  that  he  had  satisfied  the  law,  he  often  despaired 
of  getting  rid  of  his  sins  and  of  securing  the  grace  of  God.  A  moralist  con' 
demned  : — Dr.  Bogers,  of  Albany,  gives  an  account  of  the  conversion  of  a  moralist  by 
a  dream.  The  man  thought  he  died,  and,  coming  to  the  door  of  heaven,  saw  over 
it,  "  None  can  enter  here  but  those  who  have  led  a  strictly  moral  life."  He  felt 
perfectly  able  on  that  condition,  but  was  stopped  by  one  and  another  whom  in  some 
way  he  had  wronged.  He  was  in  despair,  till  the  words  over  the  door  gradually 
faded  away,  and  in  their  place  came,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  all 
sin."  He  awoke,  and  realised  that  without  forgiveness  through  an  atonement  there 
was  no  hope  for  man.  (Seeds  and  Sheaves.)  In  His  sight. — Man  in  the  Divine 
judgment: — In  the  judgment  of  God — an  addition  of  solemn  import  I  The  all 
searching  Eye  will  try  our  inward  as  well  as  outward  acts.  None  can  stand  out  of 
Christ  the  Divine  scrutiny.    The  world  may  canonise  and  immortalise,  extul  and 


t^i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».  nb 

deify  her  hercea  ;  but  God  will  perceive  in  a  moment  their  defects,  like  the  artist 
Tvho,  when  a  piece  of  marble  had  been  selected  as  perfectly  suitable  for  his  sculp- 
turing, in  an  instant  detected  a  slight  flaw  that  had  escaped  all  notice,  rendering,  in 
his  eyes,  the  block  useless ;  and  he  refused  to  employ  his  time  and  his  tools,  his 
pains  and  his  genius,  upon  it.  {C.  Neil,  M.A.)  For  by  the  law  1b  the  knowledge 
of  sin. — The  knowledge  of  sin  by  the  law : — I.  The  natdbe  of  the  law.  1.  Sin  haa 
no  existence  but  in  relation  to  the  law ;  for  "  where  there  is  no  law,  there  is  no 
transgression."  The  law  may  be  compared  to  a  straight  rale.  Sin  is  the  deviation 
from  this  rule,  and  the  enormity  of  the  sin  may  be  measured  by  the  degree  of 
obliquity  in  any  act.  2.  Laws  are  of  different  kinds,  according  to  the  nature  of 
their  subjects.  The  universe  is  under  law,  for  the  Creator  is  a  God  of  order.  But 
our  inquiry  relates  to  the  law  given  to  man,  as  an  accountable  moral  agent.  This 
law  was  originally  written  on  the  human  heart,  but,  as  through  the  prevalence  of 
ignorance  and  error,  this  law  has  been  greatly  defaced ;  it  pleased  God  to  make  a 
full  revelation  of  it,  under  two  great  commandments,  enjoining  love  to  God  and  our 
neighbour.  But  as  the  spiritual  and  perfect  nature  of  the  law  was  misapprehended 
by  the  Jews,  and  many  of  the  precepts  were  set  aside  by  false  glosses,  our  Lord  gave 
its  true  interpretation.  S.  Many  entertain  very  inadequate  ideas  of  the  nature  and 
obligations  of  the  law.  (1)  By  some  it  is  believed  that  its  strictness  is  now  relaxed, 
and  that  a  more  indulgent  rule  has  succeeded.  But  no  conclusion  is  more  certain 
than  the  immutable  nature  of  the  law.  It  arises  from  the  nature  of  God,  and  the 
relation  of  man  to  Him.  As  God  is  infinitely  holy.  He  never  can  require  less  holi- 
ness in  His  creatures  than  they  are  capable  of.  The  idea  of  bringing  down  the  law 
to  adapt  it  to  the  ability  of  fallen  man  is  absurd.  (2)  Antinomians  hold,  that  in 
consequence  of  Christ's  perfect  obedience,  the  law  has  no  demands  on  those  in 
whose  place  He  obeyed.  This  is  a  gross  abuse  of  a  cardinal  doctrine.  And  if  the 
thing  were  true,  it  would  be  no  privilege,  but  a  real  detriment  to  the  believer ;  for 
he  finds  that  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God  is  attended  with  a  great 
reward.  (3)  Others,  again,  entertain  the  opinion  that  the  law  was  altered  and  im- 
proved by  our  Lord ;  and  they  refer  to  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  But  the  alteration 
is  not  in  the  law  itself,  but  in  the  interpretation  of  the  law.  Reason  dictates  that 
a  rational,  choosing  agent  should  employ  all  his  faculties,  and  direct  all  his  actions, 
to  the  glory  of  his  Creator  ;  and  as  this  end  can  in  no  other  way  be  attained  than 
by  obeying  the  will  of  God,  therefore  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  will  must  be 
the  law  of  all  rational  creatures.  4.  That  the  law  of  God  requires  perfect  obedience  is 
self-evident.  To  suppose  that  any  law  could  be  satisfied  by  an  imperfect  obedience 
involves  the  absurdity  that  the  law  requires  something  which  it  does  not  require. 
If  it  should  be  alleged  that  uniform  perfection  of  obedience  ought  not  to  be  insisted 
on,  since  man  is  a  fallible,  erring  creature,  I  would  reply,  that  if  any  indulgence  to 
sin  be  allowed,  there  can  be  no  limit  fixed  to  which  it  should  be  extended.  Such  a 
principle  would  destroy  the  obligation  of  the  moral  law.  Again,  these  frailties  belong 
not  to  our  nature,  as  it  came  perfect  from  the  hand  of  the  Creator,  but  belong  to  our 
sinful  nature,  to  which  a  holy  law  can  show  no  indulgence.  The  ground  of  diffi- 
culty is  in  our  depraved  nature,  which  has  lost  all  relish  for  the  service  of  God. 
To  a  soul  rightly  constituted,  the  most  intense  exercise  of  holy  affection  is  so  far 
from  being  felt  as  a  burden  or  task,  that  it  affords  the  sweetest  pleasure  of  which  we 
ever  partake.  To  be  perfectly  obedient  to  the  commandments  of  God  is  to  be  com- 
pletely happy.  Surely  no  one  ought  to  complain  of  being  required  to  pursue  his 
own  gieatest  happiness.  II.  •'  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  op  sin."  1.  If  our 
actions  had  always  been  conformable  to  the  precepts  of  God,  the  closest  application 
of  that  law  would  produce  no  conviction  of  sin.  And  that  such  perfection  of  obedi- 
ence is  possible  to  human  nature  is  manifest  by  the  example  of  Christ.  2.  Human 
nature  may  be  compared  to  a  complicated  machine,  which  has  within  it  powerful 
springs  to  keep  it  in  operation.  But  such  a  machine  requires  a  balance  or  regulator, 
which  may  preserve  all  the  parts  in  their  proper  places,  and  give  due  energy  and 
direction  to  every  part.  If  the  balance  wheel  be  taken  away,  the  machine  loses 
none  of  its  power,  but  its  action  becomes  irregular,  and  no  longer  subserves  the 
purpose  for  which  it  was  put  in  motion.  It  moves,  it  may  be,  more  rapidly  than 
Before,  but  to  its  own  ruin.  So  it  is  with  man.  He  is  an  agent,  possessing  powers, 
appetites,  affections,  and  passions  which  require  to  be  regulated  and  properly 
directed;  otherwise,  their  most  powerful  action  will  be  of  a  ruinous  character. 
Two  things  are  necessary  to  give  harmony  and  a  right  direction  to  the  complex 
faculties  and  affections  of  man.  The  first  is,  light ;  the  second,  love — an  enlightened 
oonBcience,  and  uniform  and  constant  love  to  God.    Bat  when  sin  was  introduced. 


OBAP.  m.]  ROMANS.  'SS6 

the  mind  was  blinded,  oonsoience  misdirected,  and  the  love  of  Qod  in  the  soul  was 
extinct.    3.  Although  the  mind  of  man  has  fallen  into  an  awful  state  of  blindness 
and  disorder,  yet  conscience  is  not  obliterated :  as  far  as  it  has  light,  it  still  remon- 
strates against  sin.     Happily  some  actions  are  intuitively  seen  to  be  morally  wrong  ; 
bat  in  regard  to  a  large  part  of  sinful  acts,  or  omissions,  most  men  remain  ignorant 
of  them,  because  they  know  not  the  extent  and  spirituality  of  the  law.     Mere  theo- 
retical knowledge  of  the  law  is  not  sufficient :  it  requires  the  convincing  light  ol  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  shine  in  upon  the  conscience,  and  to  cause  the  mind  to  view  itself,  as  it 
were,  in  the  mirror  of  Qod's  holy  law.  This  conviction  by  the  law  is  the  common  pre- 
paratory work  before  mercy  is  bestowed.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  us  endeavour  to  get  clear 
views  of  the  extent,  spirituality,  and  purity  of  the  moral  law,  in  order  that  we  may 
know  something  of  the  multitude  and  malignity  of  our  sins.  And,  as  all  true  spiritual 
knowledge  is  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  should  incessantly  pray  for  this  inestimable 
blessing.    2.  As  the  law  convicts  every  man  of  sin,  justification  by  it  is  impossible  ; 
for  even  one  sin  would  render  it  impossible  for  the  transgressor  to  receive  a  sentence 
of  acquittal ;  how  much  more  impossible  is  it  when  our  sins  are  literally  innumer- 
able 1    8.  If  the  law  discovers  sin  of  every  kind  to  be  a  base  and  odious  thing,  we 
should  be  soUcitous  to  be  cleansed  from  its  defilement ;  and,  in  order  to  this,  should 
oome  often  to  the  fountain  for  sin  and  uncleanness,  opened  by  the  death  of  Christ. 
4.  A  spiritual  knowledge  of  the  law  is  the  true  source  of  evang^-lical  repentance.    6. 
The  knowledge  of  sin,  produced  by  the  law,  will  have  a  tendency  to  make  the  true 
penitent  desirous  of  the  perfect  holiness  of  heaven.     6.  The  most  important  benefit 
of  the  knowledge  of  sin,  by  the  law,  is,  that  it  shows  us  our  absolute  need  of  a  better 
righteousness  than  our  own,  and  impels  us  to  look  for  salvation  to  the  Cross  of 
Christ.    {A.  Alexander,  D.D.)      Thf  knowledge  of  sin  by  the  laxc  : — "  Sin,"  in  the  New 
Testament,  means,  literally,  "  missing  that  which  is  aimed  at."    A  sin  done  for  the 
sake  of  happiness  never  brings  happiness ;  and  if  man's  true  aim  is  the  glory  of 
God,  certainly  no  sin  ever  reaches  that  mark.  "  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law," 
for  if  there  were  no  "law,"  there  would  be  no  "  transgression."    "  Transgression  " 
k  a  stepping  over  a  certain  line,  and  the  only  line  is  "  the  law."    I.  Therb  are 
KANT  "LAWS."    1.  The  natural  "law"  of  conscience.     By  this  the  heal  hen  are 
governed — for  they,  •'  having  not  the  law,  are  a  law  unto  themselves,"  &o.    The 
transgressors  of  this  law  will  be  "  beaten  with  few  stripes."    2.  The  Old  Testament 
"  law,"  which  is  chiefly  negative.    *'  Do  not."    This  law  is  higher  than  the  law  of 
nature,  more  clear,  minute,  stringent.    3.  But  above  both  there  is  the  "  law  "  of 
love — the  law  of  the  gospel.     God  loves  you,  love  Him  back,  and  show  your  love  by 
obedience.     U.  As  these  laws  bise  in  their  character,  so  do  thei  also  in  theib 
OBLIQATION  UPON  US  ;  aud  the  sins  committed  against  them  grow  in  the  same  propor- 
tion.   By  the  higher  standard  we  shall  be  judged  I     Now  I  do  not  speak  of  the 
grosser  sins  forbidden  by  the  Ten  Commandments,  but  of  snch  as  appear,  to  some, 
almost  to  be  no  sins  at  all,  but  which,  measured  by  the  law  of  the  gospel,  are  perhaps 
most  grievous  to  God.     As  is  the  light,  so  is  the  shadow ;  and  the  comparatively 
small  sin  of  a  son  grieves  a  father  more  than  the  greatest  sin  of  a  stranger.    From 
this  point  of  view,  then — 1.  It  must  be  a  sin  in  a  Christian  not  to  be  happy.     For 
this  must  be  becaase  yon  do  not  trust  the  Father,  who  has  said  that  your  sins  were 
"  blotted  out."    2.  Or,  if  believing  that  you  love  and  are  loved  by  God,  yon  are 
anxious,  yon  not  only  disobey  a  command,  but  question  a  Father's  care  and  promise. 
8.  Or,  if  your  religion  is  only  a  rehgion  of  fear,  obedience  without  affection,  it  is  in 
God's  sight  worth  nothing,  for  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."     Therefore  it  is 
•in.    4.  Or,  if  you  love  the  world  as  much  as  you  love  God,  how  can  the  great  God 
who  says,  "  Give  Me  thy  heart" — not  a  part  of  it — be  satisfied?    And  if  He  is  not 
satisfied  that  is  a  sin.    III.  Ir  Ton  would  measure  sin,  caloctlatb  it  in  Eden, 
OB  ON  Mount  Calvaby.    In  Eden,  one  bit  of  forbidden  fruit  ruined  the  world  I 
On  Calvary,  it  needed  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God  to  repair  the  wreck.    Bemember 
this  the  next  time  you  are  tempted  to  sin.    Think — "  If  I  do  that  sin,  it  will  cost 
the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  to  wash  it  out."    That  is  the  law  of  heaven  ;  and  by 
that  law  we  know  sin.    {J.Vaughan,M.A.)        The  office  of  the  law : — The  wife  of  a 
drunkard  once  found  her  husband  in  a  filthy  condition,  with  torn  clothes,  matted 
hair,  bruised  face,  asleep  in  the  kitchen,  having  come  home  from  a  drunken  revel. 
She  sent  for  a  photographer,  and  had  a  portrait  of  him  taken  in  all  his  wretched 
appearance,  and  placed  it  on  the  mantel  beside  another  p<^rtrait  taken  at  the  time  of 
his  marriage,  which  showed  him  handsome  and  well  dressed,  as  he  had  been  in 
other  days.    When  he  became  sober  be  saw  the  two  pictures,  and  awakened  to  a 
consciousness  of  his  condition,  from  which  he  arose  to  a  better  life.    Now,  the 
vol..  I.  l& 


826  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

office  of  the  law  is  not  to  save  men,  bat  to  show  them  their  tme  state  as  compared 
with  the  Divine  standard.  It  is  like  a  glass,  in  which  one  seeth  "  what  manner  of 
man  he  is."  (D.  L.  Moody.)  The  knowledge  of  sin  by  the  law  : — When  we  are  told 
what  we  onght  to  do,  we  learn  that  we  are  not  doing  as  we  ought.  1.  The  faintest 
spark  of  natural  conscience  in  a  savage  bosom  serves  this  end  at  least,  that  the 
barbarian's  grosser  acts  of  treachery  or  cruelty  seem  evil  even  to  himself.  The 
educated  conscience  of  an  old  Greek  or  Eoman  imposed  on  him  a  severer  standard 
and  made  him  ashamed  of  less  flagrant  crimes.  Moses'  nobler  code,  given  by 
Jehovah  Himself,  trained  the  Hebrew  people  by  degrees  to  regard  as  sinful  practices 
which  neighbouring  nations  called  innocent,  and  exalted  every  instinctive  vice  of 
the  blood  into  the  express  transgression  of  a  recorded  statute.  The  New  Testament 
morality  has  made  the  modern  conscience  quicker  than  ever  to  detect,  and  louder 
than  ever  in  condemning  what  is  false,  dishonourable,  impure,  and  ungenerous. 
Thus  each  addition  to  revealed  law  widens  men's  knowledge  of  what  is  sinful,  and 
pushes  forward  the  frontier  of  the  forbidden  a  little  nearer  to  that  ideal  line  which 
God's  nature  prescribes.  2.  Again,  when  a  law  has  succeeded  in  educating  one's  con- 
science to  recognise  that  what  is  forbidden  is  in  itself  evil,  that  what  is  commanded  is 
right,  there  follows  a  certain  desire  to  keep  that  law — an  effort  even  after  keeping  it. 
We  cannot  approve  what  is  good  and  not  wish  to  pursue  it.  The  moral  pressure  thus 
put  upon  a  man's  natural  likings  serves,  in  many  an  instance,  to  reveal  to  himself  his 
moral  impotence.  The  good  he  fain  would  do  in  his  better  moods  he  fails  to  do  in  the 
moment  of  temptation  ;  and  when  the  recoil  comes,  and  desire  has  burnt  itself  down 
to  white  cold  ash,  and  the  law  awakes  afresh  within  the  conscience  to  judge  the  man 
for  that  weak  and  wicked  yielding  to  an  improper  desire,  then  comes  a  new  and  very 
bitter  knowledge  of  sin.  It  is  the  knowledge  of  sin  as  a  strong  thing,  stronger  than 
I  am — a  hateful,  hostile  power,  an  alien  despot,  that  has  entrenched  itself  within 
my  nature,  and  lords  it  there  over  everything  that  is  wholesome  in  me.  3.  Suppose, 
further,  that  a  man  is  become  so  far  a  creature  of  the  law  that  through  long  edu- 
cation he  has  been  trained  to  walk  contentedly  within  its  close  fences — he  has  got 
nsed  to  curb  his  temper  and  choke  down  his  passions,  and  always  to  wear  a  smooth 
decorous  face ;  suppose  he  is  thus  all  that  the  law  can  make  him,  irreproachable  in 
the  presence  of  society,  fair  spoken,  scrupulous, "  as  touching  the  law  blameless" — 
why  then  he  is  only  on  the  road  to  a  still  more  profound  knowledge  of  sin.  For  such  a 
man,  if  he  is  honest  and  thorough,  will  admit  to  himself,  that  deep  down  beneath  thia 
blameless  exterior  the  old  passions  will  not  be  quenched,  nor  the  old  self-will  slain. 
He  will  admit  that  in  doing  violence  to  his  tastes  he  has  not  changed  them.  He  has 
merely  drilled  himself  into  outward  prosperity,  but  at  the  root  remains  ungodly. 
Is  it  unfair  to  say  that  such  righteousness  is  little  better  than  a  mask,  nsefol  in 
society,  but  sure  to  be  detected  by  the  judgment  of  Heaven?  that  the  heart  of  such 
men  resembles  a  volcano  over  which  the  lava  has  in  the  meantime  cooled  ?  What 
a  terrific  knowledge  of  sin  is  here  1  What  a  discovery  of  the  incurableness  of  the 
heart's  evil  I  What  a  revelation  of  the  impotence  of  law  and  the  unattainableness 
of  genuine  righteousness  under  any  system  of  legal  repression  1  Surely  by  the  law, 
do  as  you  will,  there  is  no  path  to  a  satisfying  righteousness  in  the  sight  of  God, 
but  only  to  a  deeper  and  ever  deeper  knowledge  of  sin  I  {J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.) 
The  law  the  standard : — When  Chicago  was  a  small  town  it  was  incorporated  and 
made  a  city.  There  was  one  clause  in  the  new  law  that  no  man  should  be  a  police- 
man who  was  not  a  certain  height — five  feet  six  inches,  let  ns  say.  When  the 
Commissioners  got  into  power,  they  advertised  for  men  as  candidates,  and  in  the 
advertisement  they  stated  that  no  man  need  apply  who  could  not  bring  good 
credentials  to  recommend  him.  I  remember  going  past  the  office  one  day,  and 
there  was  a  crowd  of  them  waiting  to  get  in.  They  quite  blocked  up  the  side  of  the 
street ;  and  they  were  comparing  notes  as  to  their  (dances  of  success.  One  says  to 
another,  "  I  have  got  a  good  letter  of  recommendation  from  the  mayor,  and  one 
from  the  supreme  judge."  Another  says,  "  And  I  have  got  a  good  letter  from 
Senator  So-and-so.  I'm  sure  to  get  in."  The  two  men  come  on  together,  and  lay 
their  letters  down  on  the  Commissioners'  desk.  •'  Well,"  says  the  officials,  "  you 
have  certainly  a  good  many  letters,  but  we  won't  read  them  till  we  measure  you," 
Ah  I  they  forgot  all  about  that.  So  the  first  man  is  measured,  and  he  is  only  five 
feet.  "  No  chance  for  you,  sir;  the  law  says  the  men  must  be  five  feet  six  inches^ 
and  you  don't  come  up  to  the  standard."  The  other  says,  "  Well,  my  chance  is  a  good 
deal  better  than  his.  I  am  a  good  bit  taller  than  he  is."  He  begins  to  measure 
himself  by  the  other  man.  That  is  what  people  are  always  doing,  measuring  them- 
Belves  by  others.    Measure  yourself  by  the  law  of  God,  and  if  yon  will  do  that  joa 


aoa.  m.]  ROMANS.  «7 

will  find  that  jou  have  oome  short.  He  goes  up  to  the  officers  and  they  measare 
him.  He  is  five  feet  five  inches  and  nine-tenths.  "  No  good,"  they  tell  him ; 
"  you're  not  up  to  the  standard."  "  But  I'm  only  one-tenth  of  an  inch  short,"  he 
remonstrates.  *'  It's  no  matter,"  say  they,  "  there's  no  difference."  He  goes  with 
the  man  who  was  five  feet.  One  comes  short  six  inches,  and  the  other  only  one- 
tenth  of  an  inch,  but  the  law  cannot  be  changed.  And  the  law  of  God  is,  that  no 
man  shall  go  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  with  one  sin  on  him.  He  that  has  broken 
the  least  law  is  guilty  of  all.  (D.  L.  Moody.)  The  knowledge  of  sin  only  by  the 
law  : — All  that  the  law  does  is  to  show  us  how  sinful  we  are.  Paul  has  been  quoting 
from  the  sacred  Scriptures  ;  and  truly  they  shed  a  lurid  light  upon  the  condition  of 
human  nature.  This  Kght  can  show  us  our  sin ;  but  it  cannot  take  it  away.  The 
law  of  the  Lord  is  like  a  looking-glass.  Now,  a  looking-glass  is  a  capital  thing  for 
finding  out  where  the  spots  are  on  your  face  ;  but  you  cannot  wash  in  a  looking- 
glass,  you  cannot  get  rid  of  the  spots  by  looking  in  tixe  glass.  The  law  is  Intended 
to  show  a  man  how  much  he  needs  cleansing ;  bat  the  law  cannot  cleanse  him. 
The  law  proves  that  we  are  condemned,  but  it  does  not  bring  us  our  pardon.  (C7. 
H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yers.  21-26.  But  now  the  rlghteonsness  of  God  without  the  latr  1b  manifested. — 
The  righteousness  of  God  is — I.  Pbepabed  by  God.  Devised  ;  approved  ;  conferred 
by  Him.  II.  Attested  bt  the  IiAW  and  the  pbophets.  III.  Secubed  bt  Chbist.  Free 
grace  ;  redemption  ;  propitiation.  IV.  Dbsioned  fob  all.  All  need  it  ;  all  are 
creatures  of  God.  "V.  Received  bt  faith.  Without  merit ;  without  works.  VI. 
Does  »ot  make  void,  but  establish  the  law.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  righteousness 
of  God  : — The  apostle  shows — I,  That  it  is  a  Divine  biohteousness,  not  a  human. 
That  righteousness  which  we  had  lost  in  Adam  was  but  a  human  thing,  finite  like 
him  who  lost  it ;  but  that  which  we  gain  is  Divine  and  forms  an  infinite  compensa- 
tion. It  is  called  the  righteousness  of  God,  because  it  is — 1.  Provided  by  Him.  2. 
Founded  on  the  doings  and  sufferings  of  the  Son  of  God.  3.  Provides  such  a 
compensation  for  human  unrighteousness,  that  it  not  only  takes  it  all  away,  but 
brings  in  a  new  and  far  higher  and  surer  footing  for  the  sinner  to  rest  on.  II.  That 
IT  is  A  biohteousness  WITHOUT  THE  LAW.  Not  an  Unlawful  righteousness — one  not 
based  on  law,  or  one  in  providing  which  law  has  been  set  aside,  but  one  which,  in 
BO  far  as  we  are  concerned,  has  nothing  to  do  with  law  at  all.  It  is  not  a  righteous- 
ness which  asks  any  doing  or  obeying  on  our  part  to  complete  it,  for  then  it  would 
cease  to  be  "the  righteousness  of  God,"  and  would  become  "  the  righteousness  of 
man."  In  so  far  as  God  and  Christ  are  concerned,  it  has  everything  to  do  with  law, 
but  in  so  far  as  we  are  concerned  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  it.  UI.  That  it  has 
BEEN  "  MANIFESTED."  It  is  not  a  thing  hidden  from  view.  God  has  been  at  infinite 
pains  to  bring  it  forward  both  on  our  account  and  on  His.  IV.  That  it  is  a  biohteous- 
ness WITNESSED  bt  THE  LAW  AND  THE  PBOPHETS.  It  is  uot  Something  DOW  comc  to  light 
for  the  first  time ;  it  is  something  which  has  been  proclaimed  from  the  beginning.  To 
this  the  eye  of  every  saint,  from  Abel  downward,  has  been  directed — on  this  the 
feet  of  every  saint  have  stood,  this  every  type  and  prophecy  and  sacrifice  has  set  forth. 
V.  That  it  is  a  biohteousness  which  is  bt  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  not 
cor  faith  that  is  our  righteousness.  If  it  were  so,  then  faith  would  be  a  work,  and 
then  should  we  be  justified  by  our  own  acts.  It  is  by  believing  that  we  are  identified 
with  Christ,  80  that  His  doing  becomes  ours  ;  His  suffering  ours  ;  His  fulfilling  of 
the  law  and  obedience  ours.  VI.  That  it  is  a  righteousness  fob  the  unbighteous. 
"  For  there  is  no  difference :  for  all  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God." 
It  is  our  unrighteousness  that  fits  us  for  this.  How  foolish,  then,  to  say,  "  I  am  too 
great  a  sinner  to  be  forgiven."  It  is  like  the  snn.  It  is  one  sun,  yet  it  is  enough 
for  and  free  to  every  one.  (flf.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  righteousness  of  God  : — In 
various  places  this  phrase  signifies  either  that  holiness  and  rectitude  of  character 
which  is  the  attribute  of  God,  or  that  distributive  justice  by  which  He  maintains 
the  authority  of  His  law ;  but  where  it  refers  to  man's  salvation  it  signifies,  as  in 
ver.  21,  that  fulfilment  of  the  law  or  perfect  conformity  to  it  in  all  its  demands, 
which,  consistently  with  His  justice,  God  has  appointed  and  provided  for  the 
salvation  of  sinners.  This  implies  that  the  infinite  justice  of  His  character 
requires  what  is  provided,  and  also  that  it  is  approved  and  accepted  ;  for  if  it  be 
God's  righteousness  it  must  be  required  and  accepted  by  the  justice  of  God.  The 
righteousness  of  God,  which  is  received  by  faith,  denotes  something  that  becomes 
the  property  of  the  believer.  It  cannot,  then,  be  here  the  Divine  attribute  of 
jastice,  but  the  Divine  work  which  God  has  wrought  through  His  Son.    This  ia. 


3M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

indeed,  the  righteonsness  of  God,  for  it  has  been  provided  by  God,  and  from  first  to 
last  has  been  effected  by  Hia  Son  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  mighty  God  and  the 
Father  of  eternity.  To  that  righteousness  is  tne  eye  of  the  believer  ever  to  be 
directed  ;  on  that  righteousness  must  he  rest ;  on  that  righteousness  must  he  live ; 
on  that  righteousness  must  he  die  ;  in  that  righteousness  mast  he  appear  before 
the  judgment-seat ;  in  that  righteousness  must  he  stand  for  ever  in  the  presence  of 
a  righteous  God  (Isa.  Ixi.  10).  This  righteousness  differs  essentially  from  all 
other  righteousness— I.  In  its  Authob,  for  it  is  the  righteousness  not  of  creatures, 
but  of  the  Creator  (Isa.  xlv.  8).  1.  It  is  the  righteousness  of  God  in  the  sense  in 
vyhich  the  world  is  the  work  of  God.  The  Father  created  it  by  the  Son  in  the  same 
way  as  by  the  Son  He  created  the  world  ;  and  if  the  Father  effected  this  righteous- 
ness because  His  Son  effected  it,  then  His  Son  must  be  one  with  Himself  (2  Pet. 
i.  1).  2.  It  was  during  His  incarnation  that  the  Son  of  God  wrought  out  this 
rigbteousness.  Before  He  acted  as  the  Creator  and  Sovereign  of  the  world — but 
afterwards  as  a  servant.  Before  that  period  He  was  perfectly  holy,  but  that  holi- 
ness could  not  be  called  obedience,  for  it  was  exercised  in  making  the  law,  and  by 
it  governing  the  world.  But  in  His  latter  condition  He  became  subject  to  the  law, 
and  in  our  nature  conferred  more  honour  on  the  law  than  the  obedience  of  all 
intelligent  creatures,  and  more  honour  than  it  had  received  of  dishonour  from  all 
its  transgiessors  (Isa.  xlii.  21).  3.  The  obedience  of  Jesus  Christ  magnified  the 
law  because  it  was  rendered  by  Divine  appointment  (Zech.  ii.  10,  11).  It  is 
impossible  therefore  to  entertain  too  exalted  an  idea  of  the  regard  which  God  has 
for  the  character  of  His  holy  law.  II.  In  its  natube  this  righteousness  is  twofold, 
fulfilling  both  the  precept  and  its  penalty.  This,  by  any  creature  the  most  exalted, 
is  impossible.  The  fulfilment  of  the  precepts  is  all  that  could  be  required  of  crea- 
tures in  their  sinless  coudition.  But  the  state  of  the  Second  Man  was  essentially 
different.  Christ  was  made  under  the  law,  but  it  was  a  broken  law  ;  aud,  conse- 
quently. He  was  made  under  its  curse  (Gal.  iii.  13).  Justice,  therefore,  required 
that  He  should  fulfil  also  the  penalty.  A  mere  creature  may  obey  the  precept  of 
the  law,  or  suffer  the  penalty  it  denounces,  but  he  cannot  do  both.  But  Jesus 
was  capable  at  the  same  moment  of  suffering  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  of  obeying 
the  precept  to  love  God.  This  was  made  manifest  during  the  whole  period  of  His 
incarnation  as  well  as  at  His  death.  By  the  sufferings  of  Christ  the  execution  of 
the  law  was  complete ;  while  no  punishment  which  creatures  could  suffer  can  be 
thus  designated.  It  is  He  only  who  could  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself. 
By  enduring  the  threatened  punishment  He  fully  satisfied  justice.  In  token  of 
having  received  a  full  discharge  He  came  forth  from  the  grave ;  and  when  He 
shall  appear  the  second  time  it  shall  be  without  sin — the  sin  which  He  had  taken 
upon  Him  and  all  its  effects  being  for  ever  done  away.  But  if  nothing  beyond  the 
suffering  of  the  penalty  had  taken  place  men  would  only  have  been  released  from 
the  punishment  due  to  sin.  It  they  were  to  obtain  the  reward  of  obedience  its 
precepts  must  also  be  obeyed  ;  and  this  was  accomplished  to  the  utmost  by  Jesus 
Christ.  III.  In  its  extknt.  Every  creature  is  bound  for  himself  to  all  that  obedience 
to  his  Creator  of  which  he  is  capable.  He  is  under  the  obligation  to  love  God  with 
all  his  heart,  Ac,  and  beyond  this  he  cannot  advance.  It  is  evident,  therefore, 
that  he  can  have  no  superabounding  righteonsness  to  be  placed  in  the  way  of  merit 
to  the  account  of  another.  And,  besides  this,  if  he  has  sinned,  he  is  bound  to 
suffer  for  himself  the  whole  penalty.  But  the  obedience  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  is 
Himself  infinite,  as  well  as  the  punishment  He  suffered,  being  in  themselves  of 
infinite  value,  are  capable  of  being  transferred  in  their  effects  without  any  diminu- 
tion in  their  respective  values.  IV.  In  its  dtjbation.  The  righteonsness  of  Adam 
or  of  angels  could  only  be  available  while  it  continued  to  be  performed.  The 
moment,  therefore,  in  which  they  transgressed,  the  advantages  derived  from  all 
their  previous  obedience  ceased.  But  the  righteousness  of  God,  brought  in  by  Hia 
Son,  is  an  "  everlasting  righteousness  "  (Dan.  ix.  24).  It  was  performed  within  a 
limited  period  of  time,  but  in  its  effects  it  can  never  terminate  (Isa.  li.  6,  8 ;  Psa. 
•xix.  142 ;  Heb.  x.  14,  ix.  12).  V.  In  its  influence.  It  is  the  sole  ground  of 
reconciliation  of  sinuers  with  God,  and  of  their  justification,  and  also  of  their 
intercession  (1  John  ii.  1).  It  is  the  price  paid  for  those  new  heavens  and  that  new 
earth  wherein  dweUeth  righteousness.  Man  was  made  lower  than  the  angels,  but 
this  righteousness  exalts  him  above  them.  The  redeemed  people  of  God  stand 
nearest  to  the  throne,  while  the  angels  stand  "  round  about "  them.  They  enter 
heaven  clothed  with  a  righteonsness  infinitely  better  than  that  which  angels  possess, 
or  in  which  Adam  was  created.  {J.  HtUdane.)        QodU  righteousnesg  man's  fear  and 


CHAP,  m.]  ROMANS.  S39 

man^s  hope  : — A  poor  man  who  had  spent  a  life  of  ignorance  and  sin  was  found  by 
a  London  clergyman  apparently  dying  in  a  miserable  garret.  He  was  in  great 
anxiety  of  mind  from  an  apparently  accidental  cause.  A  stray  leaf  torn  from  a 
Testament  met  his  eye.  It  was  part  of  this  chapter.  He  had  read  the  vivid 
de^<cription  of  a  sinner  and  had  applied  it  to  his  own  case.  But  where  was  the 
remedy  ?  wbere  the  gospel  ?  Alas  1  the  paper  ended,  '•  But  now  the  righteousness 
of  God  without  the  law  is"  .  .  .  "Is  what?"  said  the  anxious  man.  "Do  the 
next  words  give  any  hope  for  such  a  sinner  as  I  am  ?  "  The  remainder  of  the 
chapter  was  read  and  explained  to  him,  and  the  good  news  was  as  cold  water  to  his 
thirsty  souL  {W.  Baxendale.)  God's  viethod  of  righteousnest : — There  is  not  a 
more  interesting  episode  in  English  history  than  the  story  of  the  siege  of  Calais  by 
Edward  III.  The  king  had  beleaguered  the  town  for  a  year,  when  the  garrison 
surrendered,  and  the  incensed  monarch  demanded  that  six  of  the  principal  citizens 
should  be  sent  to  him  with  the  keys  of  the  town,  having  halters  about  tbeir  necks. 
Six  brave  men  volunteered  to  go  on  this  cruel  embassy,  and  were  instantly  ordei-ed 
to  execution.  Queen  Philippa,  however,  strenuously  interceded  for  them,  obtained 
their  release,  entertained  them,  and  dismissed  them  in  safety.  Now  compare  this 
much  vaunted  instance  of  human  clemency  with  that  of  God  and  then  you  will 
confess  how  unlike  His  ways  are  to  our  ways,  and  His  thoughts  to  our  thoughts. 
Those  burgesses  deserved  not  to  suffer,  and  the  king  only  granted  them  their  lives  in 
sullen  submission  to  the  importunity  of  his  queen.  And  she  did  not  make  them 
her  friends,  but  only  dismissed  them  in  a  manner  honourable  to  herself.  With 
how  much  greater  love  has  our  offended  God  dealt  with  us  1  We  appeared  before 
Him  as  culprits  condemned,  and  if  He  bad  ordered  our  instant  execution  we  could 
not  have  impugned  His  justice.  Not  waiting  to  be  moved,  He  was  the  first  to  ask  ua 
to  be  reconciled ;  and  then  forgiving  us  our  sins  He  receives  us  as  children.  Note 
— I.  The  belation  which  subsists  between  God  and  man.  1.  God  is  a  great  King  ; 
and  we  all  are  His  natural  subjects.  This  is  quite  independent  of  our  choice  or 
suffrages.  A  person  born  in  England  finds  himself  hedged  about  with  laws  which 
were  neither  of  his  devising  nor  of  his  adopting,  yet  to  which  he  is  bound  under 
penalty  to  conform.  By  a  like  anterior  necessity  he  is  born  under  a  system  of 
physical  laws.  From  that  which  is  human  and  political  we  can  escape  ;  but  from 
that  which  is  Divine  and  natural  there  is  no  escape.  Now  just  as  you  are  of  neces- 
sity bom  into  the  midst  of  these  two  systems  of  laws,  bo  are  you  also  born  under 
subjection  to  a  third,  possessing  a  higher  and  more  awful  character.  You  are 
amenable  to  God's  moral  laws,  which  are  more  searching  in  their  application,  more 
stringent  in  their  requisitions,  more  tremendous  in  their  sanctions,  more  enduring 
in  their  operation  than  the  other  two.  You  may  get  away  from  the  coils  of  national 
law  by  journeying  to  another  country ;  and  you  will  be  released  from  physical  lawa 
when  death  shall  transfer  you  to  another  world ;  but  you  will  not  even  then  escape 
from  the  control  of  God's  moral  law.  2.  The  whole  world  is  proven  guilty  in  God'a 
eight.  (1)  We  resent  His  authority  and  feel  submission  a  hardship,  simply  because 
we  are  conscious  rebels  before  Him.  Ours  are  the  feelin<^s  of  culprits  who  hate  the 
laws  which  they  have  broken,  and  the  breach  of  which  has  brought  them  into 
trouble.  This  is  true  of  all  mankind,  without  limitation  or  exception.  This  is  the 
truth  which  St.  Paul  demonstrates  in  chaps,  i.  and  ii.  (2)  But  another  mode  of  reason- 
ing is  adopted  in  chap.  v.  There  Paul  boldly  announces,  as  a  fundamental  principle  of 
God's  dealings  with  mankind,  the  organic  unity  of  our  race.  Therefore,  if  any  part 
be  naturally  foul  and  vile,  all  is  so  too ;  if  one  be  guilty  before  God,  all  must  be  the 
same.  We  are  a  sinful  race  as  inheriting  the  sin  of  Adam.  H.  Such  being  the 
case,  let  us  ask,  "  How  can  a  jian  be  just  with  God  ?  "  The  answer  constitutes  the 
very  marrow  and  pith  of  the  gospel.  And  what  we  learn  is — 1.  That  God  can  save 
us  from  our  sins  and  recover  us  to  His  favour.  2.  That  He  can  do  this  by  freely 
and  generously  forgiving  us  all  our  sins,  and  absolutely  remitting  their  penalty.  3. 
That  this  forgiveness  of  man's  sins  is  not  a  wanton  and  arbitrary  act  of  the  Divine 
clemency  which  might  outrage  His  own  holiness  and  dishonour  His  law.  4. 
Nor  is  it  the  reward,  merited  or  unmerited,  of  works  of  righteousness  and  legal 
obedience,  which  we  can  render  in  the  future  as  a  counterbalance  and  set-off 
against  our  transgressions  in  the  past.  5.  But  it  is  rendered  possible  by  the  sacri- 
ficial sufferings  and  death  of  His  Son  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  gave  Himself 
as  a  ransom  for  our  souls.  6.  That  this  benefit  accrues  to  us  simply  and  solely  on 
the  condition  of  faith  or  trust  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  assuming  only  that  we  have 
a  true  knowledge  of  sin  which  1p  ds  us  heartily  to  repent  of  it,  and  to  seek  deliver- 
ance from  the  curse  of  a  broken  law.   7.  That  this  is  a  mode  of  makiui'  us  righteous 


S80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

in  God's  sight  in  complete  harmony  with  Bis  own  perfect  righteousness  of  character 
and  law.  8.  That  this  method  of  justification  appertains  alike  to  all  mankind,  for 
as  there  is  no  essential  difference  in  their  sinfulness,  so  there  is  none  in  the  way  of 
their  recovery  to  holiness  and  life.  9.  That  this  plan  of  mercy  leaves  no  ground 
of  boasting  to  man,  but  ensures  all  the  glory  to  Ood.  10.  That  it  is  the  same  which 
has  existed  from  the  beginning,  being  spoken  of,  however  dimly,  by  both  Mosea 
and  the  prophets.  The  inference  is  plain  that  none  need  despair ;  that  all  may  be 
saved  ;  that  the  blame  of  any  man's  being  lost,  to  whom  the  word  of  this  salvation 
is  sent,  must  rest  with  himself  and  not  with  God ;  and  that  it  is  the  duty  of  those 
who  are  entrusted  with  the  ministry  of  reconcUiation  to  proclaim  a  free  and  full  and 
present  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth.  {T.  O.  Horton.)  How  to  attain 
righteousness : — This  passage  contains  the  pith  and  kernel  of  the  whole  Epistle.  All 
that  precedes  just  clears  the  ground  for  it.  All  that  follows  is  related  to  it  aa 
explanation,  illustration,  confirmation,  or  application.  I.  Biohxeousness  is  teb 
OBEAT  END  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  This  is  taken  for  granted  throughout  the  Epistle.  1. 
With  inspired  insight  Paul  surveyed  the  condition  of  mankind,  and  put  his  finger  at 
once  on  its  great  root-evil.  This  was  not  poverty,  pain,  death,  but  moral  corruption. 
He  saw  that  that  was  the  greatest  gospel  which  could  lift  men  out  of  the  mire  of 
wickedness  and  set  their  feet  on  the  rock  of  righteousness.  2.  Their  righteousnesa 
is  real  righteousness — not  the  covering  of  the  leper  with  a  fair  robe,  but  the  curing 
of  the  leprosy.  The  righteousness  of  the  gospel  is  indwelling  goodness  oat  of 
which  aU  virtues  flow.  Nothing  short  of  this  will  satisfy — (1)  The  requirements 
of  God.  He  will  not  endure  sham  goodness.  The  God  of  truth,  hating  all  lies, 
cannot  see  a  man  to  be  righteous  who  is  not  righteous.  (2)  The  ends  of  redemp< 
tion.  That  would  be  a  most  immoral  gospel  which  promised  remission  of  the 
penalty  leaving  the  disposition  of  wickedness  uncorrected.  The  true  purpose  of  the 
gospel  is  (Titus  ii.  14).  (3)  The  needs  of  our  own  souls.  Ever  since  the  war 
between  the  seed  of  the  woman  and  the  seed  of  the  serpent  began,  mankind  haa 
felt  that  sin  was  misery,  and  righteousness  blessedness.  The  hanger  and  thirst  for 
righteousness  may  be  stifled  with  morbid  cravings  for  evil  things.  But  in  our  better 
moments  it  wakes  up,  and  then  we  feel  that  it  is  not  enough  for  the  skin  to  be  safe 
if  the  heart  is  diseased.  We  do  not  want  merely  not  to  be  hurl  We  want  "  to  be 
good."  3.  Paul  sometimes  uses  "  righteousness  "  in  the  "  forensic  "  sense,  t.«.,  to 
treat  as  righteous  rather  than  to  make  righteous  (chaps,  iv.  1-3  ;  v.  1).  But  he  knev 
that  '*  to  justify  "  meant  both  to  make  righteous  and  to  forgive ;  and  so  he  passea 
from  one  to  the  other  with  little  apparent  discrimination,  because  he  sees  that  they 
are  only  two  faces  of  the  same  fact.  On  the  one  hand,  the  act  of  forgiveness  ia 
the  most  powerful  inducement  to  a  change  of  character.  They  who  are  forgiven 
most  love  most.  Thus  justification  produces  righteousness.  On  the  other  hand, 
since  God  is  aware  of  this  influence  of  forgiveness  He  must  confer  the  pardon  with 
a  reference  to  it.  He  must  see  that  in  forgiving  the  sinner  He  is  taking  the  best  step 
towards  destroying  the  sin.  II.  Biohteousness  is  a  out  or  God.  St.  Paul  has  demon- 
strated the  impossibility  of  man's  acquiring  righteousness  by  himself.  Night 
cannot  produce  day.  Water  will  not  rise  above  its  level.  Marah  will  never 
sweeten  itself.  We  caimot  grow  righteous  by  natural  development,  since  yoa  oan 
only  evolve  what  has  been  previously  involved,  and  we  have  all  lost  the  goodness 
of  original  iimocence.  History  has  proved  that  the  best  of  laws  could  not  secure 
this  end.  Law  is  good  for  detecting  wickedness.  It  is  the  standard  by  vhich  we 
are  measured,  but  it  has  no  power  for  lifting  as  np  to  that  standard.  Now  we  can 
see  the  value  of  the  great  promise  of  the  new  dispensation,  of  a  righteousness  of 
God — made  by  God,  given  by  God.  This  is  the  essential  idea  of  the  religion  of 
grace.  Therefore  the  great  requisite  is  to  be  in  such  relations  with  God  that  we  may 
receive  the  gift.  If  we  are  far  from  or  at  enmity  with  Him,  we  are  shut  out  from 
It.  We  therefore  need  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  Consequently — III.  EiOHTBotJS- 
KESB  IS  BECEiVED  THBouoB  FAITH  IN  Chbist.  This  faith  is  not  the  mere  belief  in  a 
doctrine,  but  active  trust  in  Christ,  practical  reliance  on  His  grace,  obedient  loyalty  to 
His  will  (John  xv.  10).  1.  By  faith  in  Christ  as  the  sacrifice  for  sin  we  are  reconciled 
with  God.  Christ  having  offered  Himself  to  God  on  our  behalf  we  are  called  to  look  to 
Him  as  "  the  Way  "  to  the  Father.  If  through  pride  or  unbelief  we  think  that  we 
can  dispense  with  a  Saviour,  we  must  not  be  surprised  if  God  rejects  our  overtures 
towards  reconciliation  (Acts  xiii.  38,  39).  The  offering  of  Christ  not  only  securea 
forgiveness,  but  through  this  cleanses  our  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  ths 
living  God  (Heb.  ix.  14).  2.  By  faith  in  Christ  as  the  revelation  of  God  we  grow  into 
the  Divine  image.    Christ  is  the  pattern  man  because  He  is  the  Son  of  God.  To  b« 


CHAT,  m.]  ROMANS.  331 

righteoas  is  to  be  like  Qod,  like  Christ.  When  we  trast  to  Him  faithfully,  we  shall 
walk  in  His  footsteps  in  the  irresistible  desire  to  be  near  Him,  and  thus  we  shall 
tinconsoiouEly  grow  up  into  the  likeness  of  Him  and  share  His  righteousness.  8.  By 
faith  in  Christ  as  oar  Lord  and  Master  we  are  led  into  obedient  loyalty  to  His  will. 
He  who  trusts  Christ  must  trust  Him  in  all  His  relations.  Thus  the  faith  which  is 
reliance  on  a  Saviour  becomes  loyalty  when  it  turns  to  a  King.  Then  the  righteous- 
ness which  refused  to  come  at  the  cold,  stem  bidding  of  law  springs  forth  as  a  very 
passion  of  devotion.  (W.  J.  Adeney,  M.A.)  The  announcement  of  righteousnesg 
by  faith  : — I.  That  none  can  bb  jostified  in  the  sight  op  thb  Lawgivbb  by  thb 
iA<r  IS  evident;  for — 1.  No  man  has  done  the  deeds  of  the  law.  2.  The  law,  when 
brought  into  contact  with  the  deeds  of  men,  always  discovers  sin  and  pronounces 
condemnation.  3.  The  law  is  law  only  ;  a  rule  of  life  merely,  and  in  no  sense  or 
manner  a  means  of  restoration  to  a  blameless  state.     II.  The  biohteocsness  ob 

mSEDOU     FBOH     CONDEMNATION     WHICH     THB     OOSPEL     DISPENSATION     BEVEALS,    IS     A 

bightbodsnebb  which — 1.  God  designs ;  the  plan  is  of  His  devising.  2.  God  pro- 
vides ;  the  preparation  of  it  is  of  His  working.  8.  God  confers  ;  the  bestowal  is  of 
His  grace  and  sovereignty.  4.  God  approves ;  He  accepts  it  as  complete  in  His 
sight,  and  will  accept  it  in  the  last  day.  It  is  a  blamelessness,  righteously — (1) 
Procured.  (2)  Bestowed.  (3)  Regarded  as  perfect  blamelessness.  IH.  This 
biohteousness  is  "  WITHOUT  THE  LAW  "  ;  entirely  distinct  from  it  and  its  purposes, 
belonging  to  another  province  altogether.  1.  It  is  not  provided  for  by  the  law.  2.  It 
derives  no  aid,  direction,  efficiency  of  any  kind  from  the  law.  3.  It  has  no  reference 
to,  or  connection  with  the  law,  except  as  the  law  shows  the  necessity  which  has 
to  be  met.  III.  It  is  witnessed  ob  testified  to  as  a  Divine  pbovision,  both 
by  the  law  which  reveals  the  sin,  and  by  the  prophecy  which  denounces  it.  1.  As 
being  needed.  The  law,  in  the  book  or  in  the  heart,  gives  silent  assent  to  its  neces- 
sity, by  being  dumb  with  regard  to  any  other  means  of  justification.  2.  As  being 
possible.  In  all  the  voice  of  the  law,  as  God  has  spoken  it,  there  is  mingled  an 
intimation  of  a  possible  pardon,  not  from  the  law,  but  from  the  mercy  of  God.  3. 
As  being  provided.  In  all  the  written  law  and  prophecy  of  the  Old  Testament  free 
pardon,  as  righteousness  of  God,  is  formally  announced.  The  "  righteousness  "  of 
the  gospel  pardon — (a)  Is  no  new  thing.  Obtained  by  Abel,  Enoch,  Abraham, 
"  without  the  law."  (b^  Is  manifested  now  in  the  means  of  its  provision,  the 
fulness  of  love  that  provides  it,  the  signs  and  seals  of  its  Divine  approval,  and  the 
completeness  of  its  restoration  to  favour  and  privilege,  (c)  Is  in  perfect  harmony 
with  the  law,  though  belonging  to  another  sphere ;  since  it  recognises,  respects,  and 
meets  the  claims  of  the  law,  and  provides  for  its  maintenance  as  a  righteous  rule 
of  life  ;  so  the  law  readily  witnesses  it.  IV.  This  "  biohteousness  "  has  always 
BEEN  obtained  BY  FAITH  (sec  chap.  iv.).  Now  by  faith  which  rests  not  only  in  God 
as  the  pardoner,  but  also  in  Christ  as  the  procurer  of  pardon.  Faith — 1.  Assents 
to  the  necessity  and  sufficiency  of  this  righteousness.  2.  Consents  to  its  bestowal. 
3.  Belies  on  the  work  of  Christ  and  the  word  of  promise.  4.  Claims,  seeks,  grasps, 
and  holds  this  righteousness.      Y.  It  is  bbouoht  unto  all  in  the  gospel  mani- 

RSTATION,  AND  CONFEBBED  UPON  ATiL  THAT  BELIEVE,  WITHOUT  DISTINCTION.       1.    The 

need  is  universal;  so  the  remedy.  2.  No  distinction  in  the  condemnation  (see 
chap.  IL  6-11) ;  none  in  the  justifying.  3.  Faith  a  condition  of  which  all  are 
oapable ;  and  the  only  thing  of  which  any  are  capable  (ver.  23).  (1)  All  have 
actually  transgressed.  (2)  AH  have  thus  "  fallen  behind  in  the  race  "  for  the 
Divine  approval,  or  giving  of  glory  (chap.  i.  10).  (3)  All  have  made  it  impossible 
that  they  should  be  justified  by  law.  (4)  God,  therefore,  since  the  provision  is  as 
large  as  the  need,  puts  it  within  the  reach  of  all.  {W.  Griffiths.)  Justifying 
righteousness  : — Of  all  the  subjects  there  is  none  so  important  as — How  can  man  be 
just  vrith  God  ?  and  yet  there  is  none  as  to  which  men  are  so  easily  deluded. 
Conscience  tells  the  man  that  he  has  sinned,  and  yet,  when  asked.  How  do  you 
expect  to  obtain  future  happiness  ? — he  either  evades  the  question,  or  shelters  him- 
self in  some  refuge  of  lies.  And  the  reason  is  that  the  man  is  utterly  blind  to  his 
true  condition,  he  knows  not  the  malignity  of  the  disease,  and  cannot,  therefore, 
apprehend  the  remedy.  Ere  a  sinner  can  even  understand  the  gospel,  he  must  see 
and  realise  his  own  true  position  nnder  the  government  of  God.  His  position  is 
plainly  this  :  he  has  transgressed  the  law,  and  lies  under  sentence  of  death.  How, 
then,  can  he  be  restored  to  the  favour  of  God?  How  can  the  government  of  God 
remain  unchangeable  whilst  this  creature  is  saved  ?  To  this  question  you  have  the 
answer,  that  the  sinner  is  justified  and  saved  by  means  of  a  righteousness.  This 
appears  from  the  text,  and  from  the  nature  of  the  case.     It  was  righteousness  that 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nz, 

God  required  of  man  at  first,  it  was  failing  to  yield  it  that  he  lost  his  title  to  life ; 
and  as  the  character  of  God  is  unchangeable,  it  is  only  when  he  can  plead  » 
righteousness  ample  as  the  demands  of  the  law  that  he  can  be  restored  to  favour. 
I.  This  RioHTEonsNESS  is  not  the  sinner's  own,  bht  that  of  another  (see  also 
chap.  i.  17,  18 ;  iii.  20).    And  yet,  in  the  face  of  this,  multitudes  seek  to  enter 
heaven  by  a  door  which  their  own  sins  have  closed  against  them.     Ask  that  man 
of  the  world  what  is  the  foundation  of  his  hope  for  eternity,  and  his  answer  is, 
that  he  has  never  yet  been  guilty  of  open,   flagrant  transgression.      Ask  that 
sensualist,  and  bis  answer  is  that  he  trusts  his  charitable  deeds  will  atone  for  these 
infirmities.    The  professor  of  religion  answers  that  he  does  his  best,  that  he  is 
sincere,  and  that  he  trusts  God  will  take  the  will  for  the  deed.    But  ye  who  would 
be  justified  by  your  obedience  to  the  law,  have  ye  reaUy  considered  what  the  law 
requires?    It  demands  perfect  obedience,  and  condemns  the  least  transgression. 
Have  you  such  a  righteousness  as  this  ?    Is  it  not,  therefore,  clear,  that  if  ever  the 
law  relaxes  its  hold  of  you,  the  reason  must  be  not  your  righteousness,  but  the 
righteousness  of  another?    II,  This  righteousness  can  only  bb  known  by  revela- 
tion.   Being  a  righteousness  provided  by  God,  none  but  God  can  discover  it.     It 
was  revealed  at  first  in  Eden  as  the  ground  of  the  sinner's  hope — the  Jewish  ritual 
was  a  continued  revelation  of  it — the  prophets  bore  testimony  to  it,  speaking  of 
Him  who  should  magnify  the  law,  and  make  it  honourable,  and  the  whole  New 
Testament  is  a  bright  revelation  that  God  has  provided  a  righteousness,  through 
which  He  can  be  just  when  He  justifies  the  ungodly.   An  awakened  conscience  tells 
the  sinner  that  he  has  no  resources  of  his  own  wherewith  to  meet  the  demands  of  a 
violated  law  ;  and,  if  he  looks  around  and  puts  the  question  to  all  creation.  How 
can  God  be  righteous,  and  I  be  saved  ?   Creation  remains  silent,  and  is  covered 
with  darkness.    But  a  voice  comes  from  the  Bible  which  saves  him  from  despair 
(chap.  X.  6-9).    III.  This  righteousness  was  wrought  out  in  human  nature.     The 
circumstances  rendered  this  necessary.    It  was  on  earth  that  God  was  dishonoured, 
and  on  earth  therefore  must  He  be  glorified.    *'  The  children  were  partakers  of  flesh 
and  blood,"  and  their  Redeemer  therefore  "  must  take  part  of  the  same."    The  first 
revelation  of  this  righteousness,  accordingly,  was  made  in  the  promise,  that  the 
Beed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head  ;  and,  in  due  time,  this  promise 
was  fulfilled  in  the  Second  Adam,  standing  in  the  room  of  His  people  as  their 
representative  and  head  (chap.  v.  19).     He  who  was  thus  born  of  a  woman,  was 
"  made  under  the  law  "  ;  that  is  to  say.  He  met  the  law  as  His  people's  surety,  and 
fulfilled  to  the  uttermost  all  its  demands  against  them.     IV.  This  righteousness 
IS  THE  righteousness  OF  GoD.     Truo,  the  Redeemer  was  a  man ;  but  under  that 
veil  of  humanity,  faith  beholds  Jehovah.    Without  this  were  the  case,  the  salvation 
of  His  people  was  impossible.     He  had  to  make  atonement  for  their  sin,  but  the 
righteousness  of  a  mere  creature  would  have  been  utterly  insufficient,  for  a  creature 
owes  to  God  already  all  the  obedience  he  can  yield.     The  righteousness,  therefore, 
through  which  the  sinner  is  justified  is  the  righteousness  of  a  Divine  person.     You 
accordingly  read  that  this  is  the  name  wherewith  He  shall  be  called,  Jehovah  our 
Righteousness.     It  is  the  righteousness  of  the  Mediator,  of  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh,  of  Him  who  is  God  and  man  in  two  distinct  natures  and  one  person ;  and  as 
such  it  answers,  yea,  more  than  answers,  all  the  demands  of  a  violated  law.    For 
what  higher  honour  can  the  law  receive  than  that  God  Himself  became  its  servant, 
and  obeyed  all  its  commands  ?    V.  This  righteousness  "  is  unto  all."    It  is  so 
completely  put  vnthin  the  sinner's  reach,  that  if  he  once  hears  of  it  he  eannot 
perish,  without  putting  it  from  him  and  rejecting  it.    The  brazen  serpent  was  God's 
free  gift  to  all — all  were  commanded  to  look  to  it ;  and  just  as  Moses  lifted  up  the 
serpent  in  the  wilderness,  so  has  the  Son  of  Man  been  lifted  up,  &c.     The  cities  of 
refuge  were  open  to  every  manslayer.    And  so  it  is  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ ; 
every  sinner  who  hears  of  it  is  invited  and  commanded  to  flee  for  refuge.    VI.  This 
RIGHTEOUSNESS  IS  UPON  ALL  THAT  BELIEVE.    The  believer  is  clothed  and  covered  with 
it.     Being  one  with  Christ  by  faith,  Christ's  righteousness  is  his  own  ;  he  is  dealt 
with  as  one  who  obeyed  when  Christ  obeyed,  as  one  who  suffered  when  Christ 
suffered,  as  one  who  is,  therefore,  as  righteous  as  Christ  is.      (A.  M.  McGillivr&y.) 

Ver.  22.  The  righteousness  of  God  which  Is  by  the  faith  of  Christ  unto  all  and 
upon  all  them  that  believe. — This  righteousness  is — I.  Divine  in  its  nature.  H. 
Fbbb  in  its  dispensation  —  unto  and  upon  all  them  that  beUeve.  IIL 
UMLnnxBD  in  its  offer — there  is  no  difference.  (J".  Lyth,  D.D.)  Ood't  grace 
dovndant: — Qod's  grace  resembles  a  flood  of  water,  which  not  only  reaches  (• 


CHAP,  m.]  ROMANS.  S3» 

believers,  but  comes  upon  them  like  the  waves  of  the  sea,  to  cover  all  their 
unrighteonsness  and  drown  all  their  guilt.  Their  sins  sink  into  its  depths  like 
stones  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean,  to  be  remembered  against  them  no  more  for  ever, 
^r.  G.  Hortnn.)  For  there  Is  no  difference. — All  involved  in  the  same  peril : — 
When  the  ship  is  wrecked  what  difference  does  it  make  that  some  should  be  drowned 
far  out  at  sea.  and  others  come  nearer  land,  and  there  be  lost  1  or  even  that  one  is 
withiu  arm's  length  of  the  shore  when  he  sinks  for  ever  out  of  sight  ?  What  does 
it  avail  ?  They  are  all  lost.  This  world  is  a  wrecked  world  ;  the  strongest  soul 
cannot  reach  the  haven  of  a  perfect  state  of  being  in  his  own  strength.  We  are 
all  helpless  against  the  storm  of  lightning  and  wind  and  waves.  "  There  is  no 
difference,  for  all  have  sinned."  (H.  Elvet  Lewis.)  The  right  platform  : — 1.  The 
truth  laid  down  here  and  in  ver.  23  is  of  immense  moment.  You  must  take  your 
right  position  if  you  wish  to  journey  in  a  right  direction.  At  a  great  railway 
junction  the  main  thing  is  to  get  on  to  the  right  platform  for  the  station  you  want 
to  reach.  So  with  all  who  wish  to  reach  heaven.  But  what  is  that  platform  ? 
That  of  self-condemnation.  It  is  the  laying  aside  of  every  self-righteous,  self- 
excusing  plea,  and  taking  the  place  of  a  sinner  in  God's  sight.  2.  The  Old  Version, 
*'  There  is  no  difference,"  scarcely  puts  the  truth  so  clearly  as  the  New.  There  is  a 
wide  difference  between  one  and  another  as  to  the  measure  of  responsibility  and 
the  amount  of  guilt.  Great  is  the  difference  between  an  Englishman  and  an  Arab ; 
between  a  youth  yielding  for  the  first  time  to  some  subtle  temptation  and  the  hoary- 
headed  sinner  who  has  been  the  means  of  stumbling  to  multitudes.  3.  But  in 
spite  of  these  differences  "  there  is  no  distinction."  There  is  not  one  who  has 
kept  the  law.  "  All  have  fallen  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  At  a  match  in  archery 
many  try  their  skill  and  some  come  nearer  than  others  ;  but  the  only  matter  of 
importance  is  whether  any  one  actually  hits  the  eye.  If  otherwise  all  alike  fail. 
In  the  matter  before  us  perfect  holiness  is  the  end  of  God's  law  But  who  has 
reached  it?  No  doubt  some  may  come  nearer  than  others,  but  where  is  one  who 
has  never  failed  ?  4.  Own  this  before  God.  Do  not  put  in  any  claim  for  arrest  of 
judgment.  Do  not  try  to  lull  conscience  to  sleep  by  imagining  yourself  no  worse  than 
others.  One  sin  is  enough  to  prove  you  guilty,  how  much  more  thousands  ?  5. 
Therefore  learn  the  lesson.  Stoop  and  take  the  lowest  place — willing  to  be  saved 
on  the  same  fjoting  as  a  criminal.  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  "  must  be 
yovx  only  plea.  Then  yon  are  in  the  right  direction.  Keep  on  that  line  and  you 
wUl  reach  your  journey's  end.     (O.  Everard,  M.A.) 

Yer.  23.  For  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God. — Sin  a$  a 

fact : — I.  The  necessity  of  a  cleab  sense  of  sin.  1.  The  gospel  is  a  glorious 
remedy  for  a  universal  and  otherwise  incurable  disease  ;  and  the  first  step  must 
ever  be  to  make  as  sensible  of  that  disease.  For  one  of  its  most  dangerous 
symptoms  is,  that  it  makes  men  insensible  of  it.  And,  seeing  that  the  remedy  is 
not  one  which  can  be  simply  taken  once  for  all,  but  requires  long  application,  a 
man  must  be  very  thoroughly  persuaded  that  he  has  the  disease  before  he  will  take 
the  necessary  trouble  to  be  cured  of  it.  Let  us  try  and  see  what  "  all  having 
sinned  "  means.  2.  When  any  of  us  looks  out  upon  mankind,  or  within  himself, 
one  thing  can  hardly  fail  to  strike  him.  It  is  the  presence  of  evil.  From  the  first, 
man's  hi.^tory  has  been  a  history  of  going  wrong  and  doing  wrong.  From  the 
first,  our  own  personal  history  has  been  a  history  of  interrupted  good  and  interfer- 
ing bad.  3.  Some  have  said,  ' '  Don't  tell  people  about  it ;  forget  that  there  is  evil 
in  yourself ;  and  yon  and  they  will  become  good.  It  may  be  true  that  there  is 
such  a  dark  spot  in  nature ;  but  gazing  upon  it  is  painful  and  useless  ;  look  at  the 
bright  side."  But  do  yon  suppose  that  evil  in  our  nature  can  be  thus  got  rid  of? 
Try  it  for  a  day — for  an  hour  ;  then  take  strict  unsparing  account.  And  if  more 
time  is  wanted,  try  it  for  a  year  ;  then  retire  and  trace  your  path  during  the  time. 
Does  not  every  man  see  that  it  would  be  simply  the  tale  of  the  sUly  ostrich  over 
again,  which  imagines  itself  safe  from  the  hunter  by  hiding  him  from  its  sight  ? 
No ;  a  man  who  wants  to  get  rid  of  evil  must  open  his  eyes  to  it,  stand  face  to 
face  with  it,  and  conquer  it.  11.  Sin  is  distinguished  from  every  other  evil. 
1.  There  are  bodily  pain,  discomfort,  misery,  common  to  us  and  to  all.  Now,  if 
we  can  manage  to  flee  away  from  them,  we  thereby  get  rid  of  them.  We  need  not 
atudy  their  natnre.  But  the  man  who  wishes  to  avoid  evil  in  this  world  must  be 
awake  and  alive  to  the  forms  aud  accesses  of  evil.  His  very  safety  consists  in  it 
Therefore  evil  is  a  matter  of  a  totally  different  kind  from  bodily  pain,  misery,  or 
4efrth.    2.  Evil  is  not  by  any  means  our  only  inward  source  of  annoyance  and 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

hindrance.     Eveiy  one  has  defects  and  infirmities.    Bat  none  of  these  do  we  look 
apoD  as  we  look  upon  evil.    Let  it  be  shown  that  we  are  dull,  or  feeble,  or  inferic^ 
to  some  others,  we  put  up  with  it,  we  excuse  it,  we  make  ourselves  as  comfortable 
as  we  maj  under  it ;  bat  let  it  be  once  shown  that  we  have  wished,  said,  done,  thai 
which  is  evil,  and  we  know  at  once  that  there  is  no  excuse  for  it.    We  may  try  to 
show  that  we  did  it  inadvertently,  or  by  force  of  circumstances,  or  in  some  way  to 
lessen  our  own  share  in  it,  but  the  very  labour  to  construct  an  excuse  shows  that 
we  hold  the  evil  itself,  as  evil,  to  be  inexcusable.    So  far,  then,  this  evil  is  some- 
thing  which  oar  nature  itself  teaches  as  to  revolt  from  and  abhor.    No  son  of  mas 
ever  said  or  could  say,  from  his  inmost  heart,  "Evil,  be  thoa  my  good."     It 
requires  more  than  man  ever  to  say  this.    III.  Sin  is  the  tkamsobessiom  of  law. 
1.  What  we  have  said  shows  that  there  is  a  law  implanted  in  our  nature  by  wbicb 
evil  is  avoided  and  good  desired.      All  our  laws,  public  opinion,  even  our  ways  of 
thinking  and  speaking,  are  founded  on  this.    2.  Now,  when  man  says  or  acts  evil, 
what  sort  of  a  thing  does  he  do  ?    Is  it  a  necessary  condition  of  oar  lives  that  we- 
mnst  enter  into  compact  with  evil  ?    Certainly  not.    Every  protest  against,  resis- 
tance to,  victory  over  it,  proves  that  evil  is  not  necessary  to  our  being.    But  true 
as  this  is,  the  freedom  from  and  victory  over  evil  is  not  that  after  which  all  mea 
are  striving.    One  man  seeks  sensual  gratification;  another  wealth;  a  third  power; 
a  fourth  reputation,  &c.,  &c. ;  and  so,  not  man's  highest  aim  to  be  good,  but  an  . 
aim  very  far  below  this  is  followed  by  even  the  best  of  mankind  sometimes.    Now 
every  one  of  these  lower  objects,  if  followed  as  an  object,  does  necessarily  bring  et 
man  into  contact  and  compromise  with  eviL     Greed,  intemperance,  injustice, 
unkindness,  overweening  opinion  of  self,  and  a  hundred  other  evil  things  beset 
every  one  in  such  courses  of  life.     3.  When  a  man  lives  such  a  course  he  is  dis- 
obeying that  great  first  law  of  our  being  by  which  we  choose  the  good  and  abhor 
the  evU.     Now,  whenever  we  do  this  we  sin.     "  All  sin  is  transgression  of  law.** 
4.  Now,  sin  is  committed  against  a  person.    And  this  law  of  good  and  evil  of  which 
we  have  been  speaking,  springs  from  that  Holy  and  Just  One  who  hath  made  a» 
and  to  whom  we  are  accountable.    All  sin  is  against  Him.    lY.  All  have  sinned. 
And  in  dwelling  on  this,  the  fact  that  all  men  have  inherited  the  disposition  to 
sin,  necessarily  comes  first.   And,  inheriting  this  disposition,  but  with  it  inheriting 
also  the  great  inward  law  of  conscience  warning  us  against  evil,  we  have  again  and 
again  followed,  not  the  good  law,  but  the  evil  propensity.    In  wayward  childhood 
this  has  been  so ;  in  passionate  youth ;  in  calm,  deliberate  manhood.    Now,  then, 
this  being  so,  can  sin  be  safe  ?    Can  a  sinner  be  happy?    Sin  is  and  must  be  th& 
ruin  of  man,  body  and  soul,  here  and  hereafter.     (Dean  Alford.)        The  charge  of 
tin  universal : — I.  The  chabob  here  brought  is  that  of  having  sinned,  and  a  most 
solemn  and  awful  charge  it  is.     "  Fools,"  indeed,  "  make  a  mock  at  sin  "  ;  and 
that  they  do  so,  is  a  proof  of  their  folly.    God  is  love ;  and  consequently  His  law 
requires  love.    To  love  God  with  all  tbe  heart,  and  their  fellow-beings  as  them- 
selves, is  the  essence  of  that  law.    To  break  this  law  is  sin ;  and  sin  produces  only 
misery  and  ruin.     To  charge  a  person  with  having  sinned  is  to  charge  him  with 
having  acted  contrary  to  the  purpose  for  which  he  was  made ;  with  having  failed 
to  love  and  obey  the  best  and  greatest  of  beings ;  with  being  guilty  of  the  same 
conduct  with  that  which  cast  the  angels  out  of  heaven,  and  man  out  of  Paradise. 
Surely  this  is  a  solemn  charge.     Do  we  want  other  examples  of  the  evil  of  having 
sinned  ?    Why  the  Flood  7  why  the  fire  upon  the  people  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  ? 
&c.     Because  they  had  sinned.     Or,  to  give  a  more  awful  and  decisive  example, 
why  did  the  Son  of  God  die  on  the  Cross  ?    Because  He  had  taken  upon  Himself 
the  nature  and  the  cause  of  sinners.     II.  The  persons  against  whom  it  is  brought, 
"  There  is  no  difference  ;  for  all  have  sinned,"  in  their  progenitor  and  representa- 
tive, and  in  their  own  persons  also.    But  this  is  a  truth  unpalatable  to  the  pride 
of  man.     And  under  the  influence  of  this  principle  he  will  be  disposed  yet  further 
to  ask,  *'  What  1  is  there  no  difference  ?  no  difference  between  righteous  Abel  and 
•wicked  Cain  ?  between  impenitent  Saul  and  contrite  David  ?    Are  they  all  equally 
guilty  before  God  ?  "    In  one  sense  all  these  persons  are  not  alike.     They  have 
not  all  sinned  in  the  same  manner,  in  the  same  measure,  to  the  same  degree. 
Here  there  is  a  wide  difference  between  them.    But  in  the  sense  spoken  of  in  the 
text  they  are  all  alike.    They  have  all  sinned ;  and  here  there  is  no  difference. 
Though  they  may  not  be  equally  guilty,  yet  they  are  all  guilty  before  God.     UI. 
The  extent  of  the  charge  here  brought.     "  All  have  sinned,  and,"  by  so  doing, 
"have  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."    This  expression  signifies — 1.  To  fall 
short  of  rendering  to  God  that  glory  to  which  He  is  entitled.    He  requires  that  all 


(BIT.  m.]  ROMANS.  286 

His  oreatores  shall  glorify  Him.  He  has  created  them  for  His  glory ;  and  when 
they  fulfil  the  purpose  for  which  He  created  them,  then  they  do  glorify  Him. 
Thus  "  the  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God."  What,  then,  was  the  end  and 
purpose  for  which  man  was  made?  To  love,  obey,  and  serve  his  Maker.  By 
opposition  to  His  wiU  he  comes  "  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  Man,  a  living, 
rational  being,  is  placed,  not  like  the  other  works  of  creation,  under  a  law  of 
necessity  which  he  cannot  break,  but  under  a  moral  restraint,  by  which  he  ought 
to  be  kept  in  the  path  of  duty.  But  he  is  not  so  kept  by  it.  He  dishonours  God 
in  his  very  gifts,  and  endeavours,  according  to  his  power,  to  introduce  confusion 
into  His  works,  and  to  defeat  His  great  and  gracious  designs.  2.  The  failing  to 
obtain  that  glory  which  God  originally  designed  for  man.  God  originally  designed 
man  for  a  glorious  immortality.  But  by  sin  he  fell  short  of  that  glory ;  he  for- 
feited and  lost  it.  This,  indeed,  was  the  consequence  of  not  rendering  to  God  the 
glory  due  to  Him.  Having  been  unwilling  to  glorify  God,  he  could  no  longer 
expect  to  be  glorified  with  God.  Conclusion  :  Perhaps  you  say,  "  Why,  this 
doctrine  takes  away  all  hope.  Would  you  drive  us  to  despair?"  No,  not  to  a 
despair  of  salvation,  but  to  a  despair  of  justifying  yourselves  before  God.  But  in 
Christ  there  is  a  full  and  gracious  pardon  for  all  your  sins  ;  there  is  glory  offered 
to  you  again.  (E,  Cooper. )  The  test  of  a  sinner : — A  young  man  once  said  to 
me,  "  I  do  not  think  I  am  a  sinner."  I  asked  him  if  he  would  be  willing  his 
mother  or  sister  should  know  all  he  had  done  or  said  or  thought — all  his  motives 
and  desires.  After  a  moment  he  said,  "  No,  indeed,  not  for  all  the  world."  "  Then 
can  you  dare  to  say,  in  the  presence  of  a  holy  God,  who  knows  every  thought  of 
your  heart,  •  I  do  not  commit  sin  '  f  "  (J.  B.  Gough.)  Man's  sinfulness  and 
inability: — I.  Ii  is  UNivEESAiiLT  admitted  that  there  is  something  wrong  i» 
man's  mature.  1.  In  every  one  of  us  there  is  a  something  good  which  perceives 
a  something  bad;  also  something  which  whispers  of  an  ideal  state — a  kind  of 
reminiscence  of  a  lost  condition.  2.  To  account  for  this  it  suffices  if  we  think 
of  our  nature  as  having  had,  originally  controlling  it,  a  supreme  love  which  has 
been  largely  but  by  no  means  entirely  lost.  That  in  us  which  accuses  us  when 
we  do  wrong  and  commends  us  when  we  do  right  cannot  be  sinful,  but  must  be 
holy.  And  so  there  is  in  us  all  a  viceroy  asserting  kingship  in  the  name  of  the 
true  Sovereign  of  our  souls.  As  a  matter  of  fact  we  look  upon  one  another  as 
beings  not  entirely  trustworthy.  If  man  be  not  a  depraved  creature,  why  this 
nniversal  suspicion  ?  And  yet  we  are  not  so  depraved  as  not  to  know  that  we  are 
depraved.  3.  It  is  often  argued  that  we  are  here  in  a  state  of  probation.  But 
man  as  man  has  had  his  probation  and  has  fallen.  Adam's  "  tree  of  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil "  tested  his  obedience.  Our  Tree  of  Life — Jesus  Christ — tests  our 
obedi<!nce.  Only  with  a  difference.  The  first  man,  knowing  only  good,  wanted  to 
know  what  evil  was.  We,  having  in  ourselves  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  are 
put  upon  trial,  whether  we  will  adhere  persistently  to  that  which  is  good — good 
personalised  in  Christ.  II.  What  does  this  condition  mean  ?  1.  There  is 
suggested  the  explanation  of  incompleteness.  Our  nature,  say  some,  is  moving  on 
gradually  towards  perfection.  Give  it  time  and  it  will  come  out  according  to  the 
highest  idea  that  the  best  and  most  intelligent  man  has  of  it.  Unhappily,  except 
onder  certain  conditions,  and  in  a  certain  environment,  man  as  he  grows  older  does 
not  grow  better.  And  this  idea  does  not  account  for  our  sense  of  guilt.  It  leaves 
out  too  much.  There  are  too  many  facts  which  lie  outside  of  it.  It  only  covers  a 
part  of  the  ground.  2.  It  needs  along  with  it  the  idea  of  depravation.  The  sense 
of  not  being  right,  of  being  wrong,  is  in  us  all.  And  it  is  an  internal  trouble  which 
men  would  get  away  from  if  they  could.  But  no  man  can  get  away  from  himself. 
No  external  condition  can  eradicate  it.  Men  try  all  sorts  of  devices  to  rid  them- 
selves of  it.  Sometimes  they  change  their  opinions,  but  that  does  not  alter  the 
inward  condition.  The  bad  consciousness  is  there  all  the  time,  and  there  is  no 
other  word  but  sinfulness  which  will  express  its  nature.  For  it  is  certain  that 
there  are  in  man  not  only  defects  which  mean  weakness,  but  also  a  parent  defect 
which  means  guilt.  III.  This  degeneration  is  total.  It  affects  the  whole 
nature.  Our  nature  is  so  connected,  part  with  part,  that  degeneration  in  one 
region  means  degeneration  in  every  region.  If  a  man  be  unjust  in  his  feelings  he 
wHl  be  unjust  in  his  thinking  and  action.  It  is  the  merest  rubbish  to  talk  of  a 
man  being  good  at  heart  and  bad  everywhere  else.  Whatever  affects  the  centre  of 
our  nature  affects  also  every  part  of  it  to  the  outermost  extremities.  If  there  be 
impure  blood  in  the  heart  there  will  be  impure  blood  in  every  vein.  And  there  is 
no  kindness  in  any  teaching  which  leads  men  to  assume  that  sinfulness  is  only  an 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nt. 

eruption  on  the  skin  and  not  a  disease  of  the  heart.  Only  "  fools  make  a  mock  at 
sin."  rV.  The  view  we  take  of  this  fact  of  sinfclness  will  influence  oub 
ESTIMATE  OF  EVERT  oTHEE  VITAL  TRUTH.  If  sinfulness  be  Only  ignorance  we  need 
only  a  Teacher ;  if  only  disease,  a  Physician ;  if  only  error,  an  Example.  But  if  it 
be  something  more,  we  need  in  Him  who  is  to  dehver  us  from  it  a  power  other  than 
that  possessed  by  tbe  Teacher,  &c.  Siufulness  means  ignorance,  error,  disease; 
but  it  means  a  great  deal  more.  In  many  a  case  it  means  that  state  of  heart  in 
which  the  idea  of  God  is  more  hateful  than  the  idea  of  the  deviL  I  have  known 
fallen  men  and  women  who  never  ceased  praying  '•  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner,"  and  I  cannot  forget  Christ's  words — "  The  publicans  and  harlots  enter  the 
kingdom  of  God  before  you."  There  are  sins  of  the  flesh  which  destroy  reputa- 
tion, which  bring  misery,  social  degradation,  and  much  else.  There  are  sins  of 
the  spirit  which  bring  none  of  tbese,  and  yet  which  put  men  and  women  at  even  a 
farther  distance  from  God.  Of  what  condition  of  heart  is  he  who  is  amiable  and 
placid  until  some  one  speaks  to  him  such  a  truth  as  "  God  is  Love,"  "  God  is 
Light,"  "  God  so  loved  the  world  "  ?  &c.  To  err  is  human,  but  to  contemn  and 
reject  the  claims  of  Deity,  that  is  not  human,  but  fiendish.  No  one  has  ever  taken 
a  true  measure  of  what  sinfulness  is  until  he  has  considered  it  in  this,  its  most  terrible 
form.  I  want  you  to  feel  "  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,"  for  only  then  will  you 
be  able  to  appreciate  the  exceeding  goodness  of  God  who  "  willeth  not  the  death  of 
a  sinner,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance."  "  Where  sin  abounded  grace 
did  superabound. "  No  man  who  looks  away  from  his  sin  to  his  Saviour  need 
despair,  but  then  he  must  look  to  Him  as  Saviour.  If  a  man  can  grow  out  of  this 
condition  of  sinfulness  by  natural  development ;  if  every  old  man  be  nearer  to  the 
ideal  of  manhood  than  when  he  was  young,  then  a  Teacher,  &c. ,  is  needed  ;  but 
if  man  is  helpless  to  deliver  himself  from  sinfulness,  then  he  who  is  to  meet  the 
necessities  of  the  case  must  be  human  to  understand  him,  but  more  than  human  to 
deliver  him  from  an  enemy  stronger  than  man  himself.  {Reuben  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Coming  short  of  God's  glory  : — Different  persons,  according  to  the  difference  of 
their  habits  of  thought,  or  their  education,  or  their  moral  attainments,  take  a  very 
different  standard  of  what  sin  is.  But  here  we  have  God's  definition — whatever 
"  comes  short  of  the  glory  of  God,"  that  is  "  sin."     I.  God  measures  bin  by  the 

DEGREE  in  WHICH  THE  ACT,  OR  THE  WORD,  OB  THE   THOUGHT,  INJURES  OB  GRIEVES    HiM. 

This  must  be  so.  The  only  true  rule  for  the  estimate  of  any  sin  must  be  taken 
from  the  mind  of  Him  whose  mind  is  law,  and  whom  to  offend  against  constitutes 
sinfulness.  Do  not  say,  ♦*  Are  not  we  forbidden  to  seek  our  own  glory  ?  How, 
then,  can  God  seek  His  own  glory?  "  For  the  reason  why  no  creature  is  to  seek 
his  own  glory  is  because  all  glory  belongs  to  the  Creator.  What  does  it  mean  to 
"  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God  "  ?  It  may  mean  to  come  short  of  heaven,  or  to 
be  unworthy  of  any  praise  from  God,  or  to  come  short  of  that  which  is  indeed  God's 
glory — His  perfect  image  and  likeness  ;  to  fail  to  reach,  in  its  purity,  the  only 
motive  which  God  approves — a  desire  for  His  own  glory.  It  appears  to  me  that 
though  all  the  other  senses  are  included  in  the  words,  yet  that  their  great  primary 
intention  is  the  last.  II.  This  brings  me  to  the  motive  of  human  action.  1.  You, 
who  can  read  only  what  speaks  to  the  outward  senses,  think  most  of  words  and 
actions.  And,  as  natuially,  God  will  look  at  the  sources  more  than  at  the  streams 
of  every  man's  moral  being.  So  it  will  be  at  the  last  great  account.  All  the  deeds 
and  sayings  of  a  man  will  then  stand  forth  to  give  evidence  to  a  certain  inward 
state  of  the  man,  according  to  which  every  one  will  receive  his  sentence.  2.  And 
yet  even  we  judge  of  things  by  their  motives.  Why  do  we  value  the  most  trivial 
gift,  the  act  of  a  moment,  a  smile,  a  glance  of  the  eye,  more  than  aU  the  treasures 
of  substance?  3.  Note  some  of  the  legitimate  motives  which  may  actuate  us. 
(1)  It  is  legitimate  to  wish  to  be  happy.  Therefore  God  stirs  us  up  by  promises, 
and  lifts  us  up  by  beatitudes.  It  would  be  contrary  to  common  sense  to  say  that 
we  may  not  do  anything  for  the  sake  of  going  to  heaven.  (2)  It  is  a  step  above 
that — to  do  or  bear  with  the  desire  that  we  may  become  holier.  (3)  But  higher, 
because  less  selfish,  ranges  the  motive  of  a  true  ambition  to  make  others  happy. 
(4)  And  sfill  higher  the  lofty,  Christ-hke  focus,  concentrating  the  whole  will  upon 
this — "  Father,  in  me  glorify  Thyself."  4.  To  all  these  principles  of  action,  except 
the  last,  there  attaches  a  shadow.  The  wish  to  be  happy,  even  where  the  thing« 
we  desiie  are  spiritual,  may  degenerate  into  religious  selfishness.  The  longing  to 
be  holy  will  often  turn  into  morbid  self-examination  and  a  restless  disquietude. 
The  ambition  to  be  useful  easily  becomes  vitiated  with — I  will  not  say  the  love 
ol  human  applause — but  a  desire  to  be  Uked.    But  the  motive  to  do  anything  fox 


CHAP,  in.]  ROMANS.  237 

God's  glory  has  no  shadow,  and  la  that  which  makes  all  the  other  motives  right. 
It  is  right  to  endeavour  to  be  happy,  mainly  because  our  happiness  gives  glory  to 
God  as  the  result  of  the  finished  work  of  Christ.  It  is  riyht  to  study  to  be  holy, 
because  where  God  sees  holiness  He  sees  His  own  reflection,  and  He  is  satisfied.  It 
is  right  to  set  ourselves  to  be  useful,  because  it  extends  the  kingdom  of  God.  Here, 
then,  lies  the  wrongness  of  everything  that  is  done  on  any  inferior  princip'e — it 
"  comes  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Missing  the  mark: — 
The  word  "  sin  "  alike  in  the  Hebrew  and  the  Greek  means  "  missed  the  mark,"  as 
an  archer  might.  When  one  is  interested  in  rifle  shooting  the  picture  is  easily 
realised  and  not  easily  forgotten.     I.  The  make,  the  centke,  the  bull's-eye,  that 

MAN    IS    TO    MAKE    HIS   AIM   THROUGH  LIFE,  IS  "  THE    GLORY   OF   GoD."       1.    And  what  is 

that?  The  outshining  of  God's  attributes  ;  Christ  is  the  brightness  of  His  glory, 
and  the  express  image  of  His  person.  We  can,  at  bfst,  be  but  broken  images, 
interrupted  rays  of  His  light.  But  still  that  is  what  we  are  to  aim  at — becoming 
ourselves,  and  reflecting  to  the  world  around  us  some  images  of  the  holiness,  good- 
ness, and  love  of  God.  2.  In  this  shooting  we  are  a  spectacle  to  men.  See  us  they 
will,  and  judge  from  us  the  character  and  the  worth  of  the  religion  we  profess.  The 
various  professions  or  trades  we  may  follow  are  but  the  courses  which  our  bullets 
take  amidst  the  various  influences  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  to  be  allowed  for  by 
the  shooter.  Our  bullets  must  pass  through  them  without  erring,  and  in  all  alike 
the  aim  is  to  be  one — to  manifest  the  character  of  the  God  we  serve.  Those 
occupations  are  not  in  themselves  the  true  centre  to  be  aimed  at — they  are  but  the 
means  of  reaching  the  glory  of  God.  II.  Missing  this  mark  is  sin.  St.  Paul  lays 
it  to  the  charge  of  all  alike.  1.  The  stanfiard  is  a  high  one — to  aim  directly  and 
always  at  God's  glory.  But,  then,  man  occupies  a  high  position,  made  above  all 
creation,  blessed  with  faculties  above  all  creatures  for  being  the  glory  of  God ; 
placed  with  opportunities  of  being  so  now,  and  the  promise  of  being  more  so  here- 
after. 2.  Shall  we  complain  that  we  are  so  high  in  the  creation,  or  complacently 
stoop  down  from  it  and  forfeit  the  crown  held  out  for  us  to  take,  like  Bunyan's  man 
with  the  muck-rake  ?  Was  not  he  missing  the  mark  of  life  ?  He  took  up,  as  many 
do,  a  handful  of  dirt — he  lost  the  crown  of  gold.  We  speak  of  men  having  made 
a  good  hit  when  they  have  succeeded  in  a  telling  speech,  or  a  successful  speculation, 
or  a  fortunate  match,  but  what  have  they  hit  if  they  have  not  sought  to  honour 
God  1  Certainly  not  the  glory  of  God,  nor  have  they  advanced  the  true  purposes  of 
life.  3.  Now  a  rifle  is  made  to  shoot  straight ;  if  it  will  not  do  so,  however  perfect 
the  polish  of  its  barrel,  or  the  finish  of  its  lock  or  stock,  it  is  useless,  and  you  throw 
it  on  one  side  or  break  it  up.  The  more  complete  it  seems  the  more  vexed  you  are 
with  it  for  its  utter  failure  in  the  one  work  for  which  you  had  it  made.  God  has 
made  us  for  the  one  object  of  glorifying  Him,  and  if  we  fail  in  that,  then  whatso- 
ever else  we  have  which  decorates  us — intellect,  politeness,  science,  art,  position, 
wealth — all  tend  not  to  diminish  but  to  increase  aur  condemnation.  4.  What  our 
condemnation  may  be  I  do  not  pretend  to  fathom ;  but  if  the  words  mean  no  more  than 
that  having  been  made  for  the  highest  purpose,  and  then  having  utterly  failed,  we 
are  henceforth  cast  on  one  side  as  useless,  our  powers  broken  up,  and  our  oppor- 
tunities taken  from  us,  they  will  mean  enough  to  stir  us  to  redeem  the  time.  We 
should  not  like  to  meet  the  exposure  of  such  a  shame.  Pindar  describes  the  return 
of  a  combatant  from  the  great  National  Games.  He  speaks  of  him  as  hiding  him- 
self along  the  byways,  not  venturing  to  enter  by  the  gates  into  his  city,  or  to  be 
seen  in  any  public  place.  Why  ?  Because  he  had  missed  the  mark.  He  went  out 
in  the  name  of  his  city,  equipped  by  his  fellow-citizens,  to  win  honour  for  their 
name,  and  to  give  them  glory.  But  he  has  failed,  and  he  dare  not  meet  them. 
We  have  failed,  and  we  must  "  all  appear  before  the  judgment- seat,  that  every  one 
may  receive  the  things  done  in  his  body."  HI.  To  what  does  this  lead  us? 
1.  We  must  realise  more  and  more  our  condition  as  sinners.  Let  any  man  solemnly 
ask  himself.  How  much  of  G'^d  has  the  world  seen  in  me  ?  How  much  of  His 
glory  have  I  reflected?  2.  We  must  go  buck  to  the  same  butts  and  shoot  again 
for  a  truer  aim.  Go  to  vour  seat  in  Parliament,  or  your  books,  or  your  shop,  and 
there  aim  afresh  at  rising  to  the  glory  of  God,  "forgetting  those  things  which  are 
behind,"  &c.  True,  it  will  not  be  so  easy  now  that  one's  hand  is  unsteadied  by 
neglecting  to  aim  aright ;  true,  it  will  not  be  so  simple  now  that  many  are 
looking  on  and  wondering  what  in  the  world  you  are  changing  for,  to  shoot 
straight  nnder  their  critical  eye  ;  but  such  sense  of  sin,  such  turning  from 
it  to  God  in  Christ  aprain,  such  trusting  hope  that  with  His  aid  we  may 
BQOoeed,  will  bring  with  it  His  forgiveness  for  the  past  and  His  guidance  for 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

the  fatnre ;  and  we  may  yet,  with  His  encouragemeat,  hit  the  nuurk  and  glorify 
Him.    (Canon  Morse.) 

Yer.  2i.  Being  Jnstified  freely  by  His  grace. — Justification: — I.  Its  kode — 
"  freely."  It  is  not  a  matter  of  wages,  it  is  a  free  gift.  IL  Its  obiqin — ' '  His 
grace."  God's  free  good  will  inclining  Him  to  sinful  man  to  bestow  on  him  a 
favoor.  There  is  no  blind  necessity  here.  We  are  face  to  face  with  a  generous 
inspiration  of  Divine  love.  HI.  The  means.  The  deliverance  wrought  in  Jesus 
Christ.  (Prof.  Godet.)  Justification : — I.  The  benefit  spoken  of— Justification. 
In  this  tnere  is — (1)  The  forgiveness  of  sins.  "The  remission  of  sins."  2.  A 
restoration  to  God's  favour.  3.  A  treatment  of  the  pardoned  and  accepted  person 
as  righteous.  II.  Its  obioinaii  sPBiNa,  or  first  moving  cause,  and  the  free  grace  of 
God  (Bom.  xi.  6).  1.  By  God's  grace,  which  excludes  all  merit.  2.  Freely,  which 
excludes  all  conceit.  III.  Its  meritorious  ob  procuring  cause.  "  The  redemption 
that  is  in  Jesus  Christ."  lY.  The  ordination  of  God  about  it.  He  hath  "  set 
Christ  forth  to  be  a  propitiation."  The  word  "  set  forth  "  signifies  that — 1.  God 
bath  purposed  in  Himself  that  Christ  should  be  a  propitiation  for  sin  (Eph.  i.  9 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  18-20).  2.  God  has  exhibited  and  proposed  Christ  to  as  to  be  a  propitia- 
tion. (1)  He  set  Him  forth  beforehand,  in  the  promises,  types,  and  prophecies 
(ver.  21 ;  John  v.  46 ;  Acts  x.  43).  (2)  And  when  the  fulness  of  time  was  come, 
God  actually  exhibited  Him  in  the  fiesh  (GaL  iv.  4,  5).  (3)  Then  the  great  decree 
broke  forth,  and  the  promised  Saviour  came  to  take  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of 
Himself.  (4)  He  is  now  set  forth  as  a  propitiation  in  the  clear  discoveries  which 
are  made  of  Him  in  the  gospel  (1  Pet.  i.  20 ;  Bom.  iii.  21 ;  Gal.  iii.  1).  (5)  And 
this  is  proposed  to  our  faith  for  the  remission  of  our  sins  and  acceptance  with  God 
(chap.  i.  17).  8.  God  has  preferred  Christ  as  a  propitiation  to  all  things  else.  The 
sacrifices  under  the  law  could  not  possibly  take  away  sin.  God  did  not  take  any 
pleasure  in  them  for  that  purpose ;  but  in  Christ  His  soul  is  well  pleased,  and  His 
offering  is  of  a  sweet-smelluig  savour  to  God  (Eph.  v.  2),  V.  The  way  in  which 
VTB  abb  made  partakers  OF  THIS  BENEFIT — "  through  faith  in  His  blood."  Con- 
clusion :  1.  This  gives  us  a  lively  view  of  the  great  evil  of  sin  and  the  exceeding 
riches  of  God's  grace.  2.  Here  is  no  room  for  any  to  encourage  themselves  with 
hopes  of  pardon  and  acceptance  with  God  while  they  go  on  in  sin.  3.  Here  is  a 
blessed  ground  of  relief  for  poor  convinced  sinners  who  are  discouraged  with  fears, 
as  if  there  could  be  no  pardon  for  their  sins.  4.  Here  are  the  richest  consolations 
and  the  highest  obligations  to  those  who  have  obtained  this  blessing.  (J.  Gnyse, 
D.D.)  Of  justification : — I.  What  it  is  to  justeft  a  sinneb.  Justification  is  a 
law  term  taken  from  courts  of  judicature,  wherein  a  person  is  accused,  tried,  and, 
after  trial,  absolved.  Thus  it  is  opposed  to  accusation  and  condemnation  (chap, 
viii.  33,  34  ;  Deut.  xxv.  1).  And  so  it  is  declared  to  be  a  sin  to  justify  the  wicked 
(Prov.  xvii.  15),  not  to  make  them  righteous  but  to  pronounce  them  righteous. 
Hence  it  follows  that  justification— (1)  Is  not  a  real  but  a  relative  change  of  the 
sinner's  state.  2.  Is  an  act  done  and  passed  in  an  instant  in  the  court  of  heaven, 
as  soon  as  the  sinner  believes  in  Christ,  and  not  a  work  carried  on  by  degrees. 
n.  The  parts  of  justification.  1.  That  we  may  the  more  clearly  take  up  this 
matter,  we  must  view  the  process  of  a  sinner's  justification.  (1)  God  Himself  sits 
Judge  in  this  process.  He  gave  the  law  ;  and  as  He  is  the  Lawgiver  so  He  is  the 
Judge.  And  He  only  can  justify  authoritatively  and  irreversibly.  For — (x)  He  only 
is  the  Lawgiver,  and  He  only  has  power  to  save  or  to  destroy,  and  therefore  the 
judgment  must  be  left  to  Him  (James  iv.  12).  (6)  Against  Him  the  crime  is  com- 
mitted, and  He  only  can  pardon  it.  (2)  Tlie  sinner  is  cited  to  answer  before  God's 
judgment-seat  by  the  messengers  of  God,  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  (Mai.  iii.  1). 
Every  sermon  is  a  summons  put  into  the  sinner's  hand  to  answer  for  his  sin.  But, 
alas  I  sinners  are  so  secure  that  they  slight  the  summons  and  will  not  appear. 
Some  keep  themselves  out  of  the  messenger's  way ;  some  never  read  the  summons ; 
others  tear  it  in  pieces,  or  affront  the  messengers  (Matt.  xxii.  6).  And  so  they  act 
till  Death  bring  them  under  his  black  rod  before  the  tribunal  in  another  world, 
where  there  is  no  access  to  justification.  (3)  The  Judge  sends  out  other  messengers 
who  apprehend  the  sinner  to  carry  him  before  the  judgment-seat.  And  these  are, 
the  spirit  of  bondage  and  an  awakened  conscience  (John  xvi.  8,  9 ;  Prov.  xx.  27 ; 
Jer.  ii.  27).  They  apprehended  Paul,  and  left  him  not  till  he  appeared  and  sub- 
mitted himself.  But  some  when  caught  are  unruly  prisoners,  and  strive  against 
the  Spirit  and  their  own  consciences  (Acts  vii.  51) ;  they  go  no  farther  with  them 
than  they  are  dragged.    They  get  ihe  mastery  at  length,  and  get  away  to  their  own 


OHAF.  m.]  ROMANS.  239 

rain ;  like  Cain,  Saul,  Felix,  &o.  {i)  Wlien  at  length  the  prisoner,  in  chains  of 
guilt,  is  brought  to  the  bar  (Acts  xvi.  29,  30),  what  fear  and  sorrow  seize  him  while 
he  sees  a  just  Judge  on  the  throne,  a  strict  law  laid  before  him,  and  a  guilty  con- 
science within  I  (5)  Then  the  indictment  is  read,  and  the  sinner  is  speechless 
^om.  iiL  10-19).  And  sentence  is  demanded  agreeable  to  the  law  (Qal.  iii.  10). 
(6)  Then  the  sinner  must  plead  guilty  or  not.  If  he  were  innocent  he  might  plead 
Bot  guilty,  and  thereupon  he  would  be  justified.  But  this  plea  is  not  for  us.  For 
— {aj  It  is  utterly  false  (Rom.  iii.  10 ;  Eccles.  vii.  20 ;  James  iii.  2).  (b)  False- 
hood can  never  bear  out  before  God's  judgment-seat.  There  is  no  want  of  evidence. 
Conscience  is  as  a  thousand  witnesses,  and  the  Judge  is  omniscient.  The  sinner 
then  must  needs  plead  guilty.  (7)  The  sinner  being  convicted  is  put  to  it  to  plead, 
why  the  sentence  should  not  pass  against  him.  Shall  he  plead  mercy  for  mere 
mercy's  sake?  Justice  interposes  that  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  must  do 
right.  The  truth  of  God  interposes  that  the  word  already  gone  out  must  be 
accomplished — That  without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission.  Whither 
shall  tile  sinner  turn  now?  Both  saints  and  angels  are  helpless.  So — (8)  The 
despised  Mediator,  the  Advocate  at  this  court,  who  takes  the  desperate  causes  of 
sinners  in  hand,  offers  Himself  now,  with  His  perfect  righteousness,  and  all  His 
salvation.  The  sinner  by  faith  lays  hold  on  Him,  renounces  all  other  claims,  and 
betakes  himself  to  His  alone  merits  and  suretyship.  Now  has  the  sinner  a  plea 
that  will  infallibly  bring  him  off.  He  pleads,  he  is  guilty  indeed ;  yet  he  must  not 
die,  for  Christ  has  died  for  him.  The  law's  demands  were  just,  but  they  are  all 
answered  already.  (9)  Hereupon  the  judge  sustaining  the  plea  passes  the  sentence 
of  justification  on  the  sinner,  according  to  the  everlasting  agreement  (Isa.  liii.  11), 
who  is  now  set  beyond  the  reach  of  condemnation  (chap.  viii.  1).  2.  This  great 
benefit  consists  of — (1)  Tiie  pardon  of  sin  (Acts  xiii.  38,  39).  Here  I  shall  show — 
(o)  What  pardon  is.  It  is  not  the  taking  away  the  nature  of  sin ;  God  justifies  the 
sinner,  but  will  never  justify  his  sin.  Nor  is  it  the  removing  of  the  intrinsio 
demerit  of  sin;  it  still  deserves  condemnation.  Nor  is  it  a  simple  delay  of  the 
punishment ;  a  reprieve  is  no  pardon.  There  are  four  things  in  sin  : — Its  power, 
which  is  broken  in  regeneration  (Rom.  vi.  14) ;  its  blot  and  stain,  which  is  taken 
away  in  sanctification  (1  Cor.  vi.  11) ;  its  indwelling,  which  is  removed  in  glorifica- 
tion (Heb.  xii.  23) ;  its  guilt.  Now  pardon  is  the  taking  away  of  guilt,  the  dreadful 
obligation  to  punishment.  Pardon  cuts  the  knot  whereby  guilt  ties  sin  and  wrath 
together,  cancels  the  bond  obliging  the  sinner  to  pay  his  debt,  and  puts  him  cut  of 
the  law's  reach.  (6)  Its  properties — full  (Micah  vii.  19;  Col.  ii.  13);  free;  irre- 
vocable (Rom.  xi.  29).  (c)  Its  names  discovering  its  nature.  It  is  a  blotting 
out  of  sin  (Isa.  xliii.  25),  an  allusion  to  a  creditor  who,  when  he  discharges  a 
debt,  scores  it  out  of  his  count-book ;  a  not  imputing  of  sin  (Psa.  xxxii.  2),  a 
metaphor  from  merchants,  who,  when  a  rich  friend  undertakes  for  one  of  their 
poor  debtors,  charge  their  accounts  no  more  upon  him  ;  a  taking  of  the  burden  of 
sin  from  off  the  sinner  (Psa.  xxxii.  1 ;  Hos.  xiv.  2) ;  a  washing  of  him  (1  Cor.  vi. 
11 ;  Psa.  li.  2 ;  Isa.  i.  18 ;  1  John  i.  7) ;  a  dismissing  or  remission  of  sin  (Matt.  vi. 
12 ;  Rom.  iiL  25),  as  the  scape-goat  bore  away  the  iniquities  of  the  people ;  the 
dispelling  of  a  thick  cloud  (Isa.  xliv.  22),  which  pardon,  like  the  shining  sun, 
breaks  through  and  dissolves,  or,  like  a  mighty  wind,  scatters ;  a  casting  of  sin 
behind  the  Lord's  back  (Isa.  xxxviii.  17);  a  casting  it  into  the  depth  of  the  sea 
(Micah  vii.  19) ;  a  covering  of  sin  (Psa.  xxxii.  1) ;  a  not  remembering  of  sin  (Jer. 
xxxi.  34).  (2)  The  acceptation  of  the  person  as  righteous  in  the  sight  of  God 
(2  Cor.  V.  21 ;  Rom.  iv.  6,  v.  19).  There  is  a  twofold  acceptation  which  must  be 
carefully  distinguished.  First,  of  a  man's  works  as  righteous  (Gal.  iii.  12).  Works 
in  a  full  conformity  to  the  law  are  thus  accepted.  But  since  God's  judgment  is 
according  to  truth.  He  cannot  account  things  to  be  what  really  they  are  not;  it  is 
evident  that  even  a  believer's  works  are  not  righteous  in  the  eye  of  the  law.  So 
that  this  acceptation  has  no  place  in  our  justification.  Secondly,  of  a  man's 
person  as  righteous  (Eph.  i.  6).  This  may  be  done,  and  is  done,  to  the  believer. 
This  is  an  unspeakable  benefit ;  for  thereby — {a)  The  bar  in  the  way  of  abounding 
mercy  is  taken  away,  so  that  the  rivers  of  compassion  may  flow  towards  him  (chap. 
v.  1,  &c. ;  Job  xxxiii.  24,  Ac).  (6)  He  is  adjudged  to  eternal  life  (2  Thess.  i.  6,  7  ; 
Acts  xxvi.  18).  (c)  The  accusations  of  Satan  and  the  clamours  of  evil  conscience  are 
herebytobe8tilled(Rom.  viii.  33, 34).  {T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Justification:  a  change 
of  state  accompanied  by  a  change  of  character : — There  may  amongst  men  be  a  change 
of  state  without  any  change  of  character.  A  prisoner  may  be  dismissed  from  the  bar, 
acquitted  of  the  charge  ;  or  he  may  be  convicted,  but  pardoned ;  but  he  may  go  with  all 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

the  principles  of  wickedness  as  strong  as  ever  within  him.  His  condition  is  changed, 
but  not  his  character.    But  it  is  never  so  in  God's  dealings  with  men.    In  every 
case  in  which  there  is  justification,  sanctification  accompanies  it.    Wherever  there 
is  the  change  of  state  there  is  the  change  of  character.      {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 
Justification  hij  grace  : — I.  The  redemption  that  is  in  ob  by  Christ  Jesus.   When  a 
prisoner  has  been  made  a  slave  bj  some  barbarous  power,  a  ransom  price  must  be 
paid.    Now,  we  being,  by  the  fall  of  Adam,  virtually  guilty,  Justice  claimed  us  as  hia 
bond  slaves  for  ever  unless  we  could  pay  a  ransom.     But  we  were  "  bankrupt 
debtors  " ;  an  execution  was  put  into  our  house  ;  all  we  had  was  sold,  and  we  could 
by  no  means  find  a  ransom ;  it  was  just  then  that  Christ  paid  the  ransom  price  that 
we  might  be  delivered  from  the  curse  of  the  law  and  go  free.    Note — 1,  The  multi- 
tude He  has  redeemed,  '•  a  multitude  that  no  man  can  number."    2.  This  ransom 
was  all  paid,  and  all  paid  at  once.     The  sacrifice  of  Calvary  was  not  a  part  payment. 
The  whole  of  the  demands  of  the  law  were  paid  down  there  and  then.    So  priceless 
was  the  ransom  one  might  bave  thought  that  Christ  should  pay  it  by  instalments. 
Kings'  ransoms  have  sometimes  run  through  years.    But  our  Saviour  once  for  all 
gave  Himself  a  sacrifice,  leaving  nothing  for  Him  or  us  to  do.     3.  When  Christ  paid 
all  this  ransom  He  did  it  all  Himself !     Simon,  the  Cyrenian,  might  bear  the  cross, 
but  not  be  nailed  to  it.     Two  thieves  were  with  Him  there ;  not  righteous  men,  lest 
any  should  have  said  that  their  death  helped  the  Saviour.     He  trod  the  wine  press 
alone.     4.  It  was  accepted.     There  have  been  prices  offered  which  never  were 
accepted,  and  therefore  the  slave  did  not  go  free.    But  this  was  accepted,  and  the 
proof  of  that  is — (1)  His  resurrection.    (2)  His  ascension  into  heaven.    II.  Thb 
EFTECT  OF  THE  RANSOM  "  being  justified  freely  by  His  grace."    1.  What  is  the  mean- 
ing of  justification  ?    There  is  no  such  thing  on  earth  for  mortal  man,  except  in  one 
way — i.e.,  he  must  be  found  not  guilty.     If  you  find  him  guilty,  you  cannot  justify 
him.    The  Queen  may  pardon  him,  but  she  cannot  justify  him.    It  remained  for 
the  ransom  of  Christ  to  effect  that  which  is  an  impossibility  to  earthly  tribunals. 
Now  see  the  way  whereby  God  justifies  a  sinner.    A  prisoner  has  been  tried  and 
condemned  to  death.    But  suppose  that  some  second  party  could  be  introduced  who 
conld  become  that  man,  he,  the  righteous  man,  putting  the  rebel  in  his  place,  and 
making  the  rebel  a  righteous  man.     We  cannot  do  that  in  our  courts.     If  I  should 
be  committed  for  a  year's  imprisonment  instead  of  some  wretch  who  was  condemned 
yesterday,  I  might  take  his  punishment,  but  not  his  guilt.    Now,  what  flesh  and 
blood  cannot  do,  that  Jesus  by  His  redemption  did.     The  way  whereby  God  saves  a 
sinner  is  not  by  passing  over  the  penalty,  but  the  putting  of  another  person  in  the 
rebel's  place.     The  rebel  must  die.     Christ  says,  "  I  will  be  his  substitute."    God 
consents  to  it.    No  earthly  monarch  could  have  power  to  consent  to  such  a  change. 
But  the  God  of  heaven  had  a  right  to  do  as  He  pleased.   2.  Some  of  the  characteristics 
of  this  justification.     (1)  As  soon  as  a  repenting  sinner  is  justified,  remember,  he  is 
justified  for  all  his  sins.     The  moment  he  believes  in  Christ,  his  pardon  at  once  he 
receives,  and  his  sins  are  no  longer  his  ;  they  are  laid  upon  the  shoulders  of  Christ, 
and  they  are  gone.     (2)  But  what  is  more,  he  becomes  righteous  ;  for  in  the  moment 
when  Christ  takes  his  sins  he  takes  Christ's  righteousness.     (3)  This  is  irreversible. 
If  Christ  has  once  paid  the  debt,  the  debt  is  paid,  and  it  will  never  be  asked  for 
again  ;  if  you  are  pardoned,  you  are  pardoned  once  for  ever.     HI.    The  manneb  or 
GIVING  this  justification.     1.  "  Freely,"  because  there  is  no  price  to  be  paid  for  it ; 
"  By  His  grace,"  beopjise  it  is  not  of  our  deservings.     If  you  bring  in  any  of  your 
deservings,  or  anything  to  pay  for  it,  He  will  not  give  it,     Kowland  Hill  at  a  fair 
noticed  the  chapmen  selling  their  wares  by  auction  ;  so  he  said,  "  I  am  going  to 
hold  an  auction  too,  to  sell  wine  and  milk,  without  money  and  without  price.     My 
friends  over  there  find  a  great  difiiculty  to  get  you  up  to  their  price  ;   my  difficulty 
is  to  bring  you  down  to  mine."     So  it  is  with  men.     If  I  could  preach  justification 
to  be  bought,  or  to  be  had  by  walking  a  hundred  miles,  or  by  some  torture,  who 
would  not  seek  it  ?    But  when  it  is  offered  freely  men  turn  away.     But  may  I  n*t 
say,  "  Lord,  justify  me  because  I  am  not  so  bad  as  others  " ;  or  "  because  I  go  to 
church  twice  a  day";  or  "because  I  mean  to  be  better"?     No  ;  it  is  "by  Hia 
grace."    You  insult  God  by  bringing  your  counterfeit  coin  to  pay  for  His  treasures. 
What  poor  ideas  men  have  of  the  value  of  Christ's  gospel  if  they  think  they  can 
buy  it  1     A  rich  man,  when  he  was  dying,  thought  he  could  buy  a  place  in  heaven 
by  building  a  row  of  almshouses.     A  good  man  said,  "  How  much  are  you  going  to 
leave?  "     "  Twenty  thousand  pounds."     Said  he,  "  That  would  not  buy  enough  for 
TOur  foot  to  stand  on  in  heaven;  for  the  streets  are  made  of  gold  there,  and  there- 
fore of  what  value  can  your  gold  be,  it  would  be  accounted  nothing  of,  when  tb« 


(BAP.  m.]  ROMANS.  241 

very  streeta  are  paved  with  it  ?  "  2.  But  how  is  it  to  be  got  ?  By  faith.  There  La 
a  story  told  of  a  captain  of  a  man-of-war  whose  little  boy  ran  up  the  mast  till  at 
last  he  got  on  to  the  maintruck.  Then  the  difficulty  was  that  he  was  not  tall  enough 
to  get  down  from  this  maintruck,  reach  the  mast,  and  so  descend.  He  was  clinging 
to  the  maintruck  with  all  his  might,  but  in  a  Uttle  time  he  would  faU  down  on  the 
deck  a  mangled  corpse.  The  captain  shouted,  "  Boy,  the  next  time  the  ship  lurches, 
throw  yourself  into  the  sea."  The  poor  boy  looked  down  on  the  sea ;  it  was  a  long 
way ;  he  could  not  bear  the  idea  of  throwing  himself  in.  So  he  clung  to  the  main- 
truck,  though  there  was  no  doubt  that  he  must  soon  let  go  and  perish.  The  father, 
pointing  a  gun  at  him,  said,  "  If  you  don't  throw  yourself  into  the  sea,  I'll  shoot 
yoa  I "  Over  went  the  boy  splash  into  the  sea,  and  out  went  brawny  arms  after  him, 
and  brought  him  on  deck.  Now  we,  like  the  boy,  are  in  a  position  of  extraordinary 
danger.  Unfortunately,  we  have  some  good  works  Uke  that  maintruck,  and  we  cling 
to  them.  Christ  knows  that  unless  we  give  them  up,  we  shall  be  dashed  to  pieces. 
He  therefore  says,  "  Sinner,  let  go  thine  own  trust,  and  drop  into  the  sea  of  My 
love."  We  look  down,  and  say,  "  Can  I  be  saved  by  trusting  in  God  ?  He  looks  aa 
if  He  were  angry  with  me,  and  I  could  not  trust  Him."  Ah,  will  not  mercy's  tender 
cry  persuade  you  ? — "  He  that  believeth  shall  be  saved."  Must  the  weapon  of 
destruction  be  pointed  directly  at  you  ?  Must  you  hear  the  dreadful  threat — ♦•  He 
that  beheveth  not  shall  be  damned  "  T  You  must  let  go  or  perish  1  That  is  faith 
when  the  sirmer  lets  go  his  hold,  drops  down,  and  so  is  saved ;  and  the  very  thing 
which  looks  as  if  it  would  destroy  him  is  the  means  of  his  being  saved.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  mode  and  means  of  pardon  : — I.  Justification.  1.  Negatively 
is  not  declaring  just — (1)  By  proof  that  sins  so  called  were  no  sins ;  they  are  as 
abominable  as  ever.  (2)  By  proof  that  sins  in  the  accusation  were  never  com- 
mitted ;  all  are  proved  and  confirmed.  (3)  By  proof  that  such  sins  do  not  involve 
the  sinner  in  guilt  and  condemnation ;  wrath  is  revealed  against  them  to  the 
uttermost.  2.  Positively.  It  is  a  declaring  just,  while  pardoning,  by  proof  that  the 
necessities  arising  in  the  case,  for  the  maintenance  of  law  and  exhibition  of  justice, 
are  satisfactorily  met  by  other  means  than  the  culprit's  punishment.  Pardon  is  not 
slovenly  and  careless  mercy,  and  it  does  not  come  through  the  hushing  up  or  cloaking 
under  of  the  sinner's  sin.  U.  Is  a  fbeelt  oraciods  act  and  gift.  1.  It  is  not 
purchased  by  the  offender.  2.  It  is  not  procured  by  any  means  that  recompense 
the  Pardoner.  3.  It  is  not  constrained  in  Him  by  any  interested  motive  ;  He  has 
no  peril  from  the  guilty  or  gain  from  the  pardoned.  4.  It  is  not  begrudged,  delayed, 
sold,  or  bartered.    III.  Combs  through  Christ's  redemption,  or  paying  of  a  price. 

1.  Not  to  concihate  Satan  or  sin.  2.  Not  to  conciliate  God  in  His  manner  of  feeling 
towards  us.  8.  Not  to  give  to  the  Pardoner  an  equivalent  in  value  for  the  pardon. 
4.  But  paying  down  His  own  life,  as  that  which  the  Kingly  Judge  required,  ere  as  a 
Kingly  Father  He  could  permit  His  willing  mercy  to  flow — a  payment  which  has  all 
the  effect,  and  something  of  the  nature,  of  a  ransom  price  paid  for  a  lawful  captive. 
IV.  The  redemption  is  EFrECTED  by  the  setting  forth  op  Christ  a  propitiation 
(ver.  25).    Christ  is  set  forth — 1.  In  His  Divinity,  as  all  in  all,  and  all-sufficient. 

2.  In  Hjs  humanity,  as  one  with  us  in  nature,  sympathy,  and  devotion  to  us.  8.  In 
His  spotless  purity  and  innocence,  as  owing  nothing  to  justice,  and  having  a  precious 
life  to  give.  4.  In  His  propitiatory  work,  as  being  sacrificed,  as  accepted  of  God, 
as  exalted  where  the  redemption  in  Him  affects  all  the  Divine  counsels  and 
administrations.  His  propitiation  does  not  appease  any  ill-will  or  thirst  for  venge- 
ance in  God,  for  none  existed  ;  it  meets  those  requirements  that  justice  dictated. 
Thus  God  is  not  made  propitious  in  His  feelings  ;  but  being  already  propitious  in 
Himself,  He  can  now  be  propitious  in  jd'3  Singly  actions.  V.  This  propitiation  is 
epfectuai,  towards  and  upon  cs,  through  faith  in  Christ's  blood.  1.  That  blood 
is  the  central  thing  in  the  propitiatory  work ;  for  the  blood  is  the  life,  and  in  it  that 
life  was  poured  forth  which  was  accepted  in  the  place  of  our  forfeited  life.  2. 
That  shed  blood  is  the  basis  of  the  promise  of  pardon.  8.  Faith  that  it  has  been 
shed,  shed  for  me,  and  that  it  does  acceptably  propitiate,  brings  to  me  the  pardon 
for  which  it  provides.  VI.  The  express  purpose  op  the  propitiation  is  thr 
DECLARATION  OF  God's  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  1.  To  show  while  He  pardons  that  He  was 
in  earnest  in  His  condemnation  of  sin  and  sentence  of  death,  and  that  He  has 
unexceptionable  grounds  for  pardoning  sin.  2.  To  make  such  exhibition  of  His 
justice  that  sin  may  not  seem  to  be  encouraged  or  winked  at.  3.  To  justify  His 
seeming  leniency  in  the  long-suffering  and  pardon  shown  towards  sinners  in  the 
past,  before  Christ.  To  declare  in  all  time  present  and  to  come,  that  while  Ha 
justifies  He  is  just.     {W.  Griffiths.)        Through  the  redemption  that  is  In  Christ 

VOL.  I.  16 


242  TB.E  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Jesus. — Redemption  : — By  an  image,  forcefal,  because  true,  Holy  Scripture  speaks 
of  as  "  as  slaves  of  sin,"  "  sold  under  it,"  "  slaves  of  corruption."  We  were 
not  under  its  power  only,  but  under  its  curse.  From  that  guilt  and  power  of  sin 
we  were  redeemed,  ransomed,  purchased  ;  and  the  ransom  which  was  paid  was 
"  the  Precious  Blood  of  Christ."  It  has  been  said,  "  Scripture  is  silent,  to  whom  the 
ransom  was  paid,  and  for  what."  Scripture  says  **  for  what,"  the  forgiveness  of 
sins.  "  In  whom,"  i.e.,  in  Jesus,  "  we  have  redemption  through  His  Blood,  the 
remission  of  our  sins,  according  to  the  riches  of  His  grace."  It  says,  •'  from  what." 
For  it  says,  "  Christ  purchased  us  out  of  the  curse  of  the  law."  It  says  to  whom 
when  it  says,  "  ye  were  redeemed  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  as  of  a  Lamb 
without  blemish  and  without  spot."  For  sacrifice  was  offered  to  God  alone.  {E.  B, 
Putey,  D.D.)  Redemption :  setting  free,  on  payment,  or  by  payment  of  a  price. 
It  combines  the  ideas  of  liberation  and  price.  1.  In  some  cases  the  context 
suggests  the  liberation  of  captives  on  payment  of  a  ransom.  But  here  the  next 
verse  reminds  us  that  the  word  was  frequently  used  for  those  on  whom  the  Mosaic 
law  had  a  claim,  but  whom  it  released  for  a  price  or  a  substitute.  E.g.,  God  claimed 
the  firstborn,  but  waved  His  claim  on  payment  of  five  shekels  apiece  (Exod.  xiii. 
13 ;  Numb,  xviii.  15).  The  word  may  also  be  studied  in  Lev.  xxvii.  27-33  ;  Numb, 
ill.  4&-51.  Like  most  words  which  denote  a  combination  of  ideas,  it  is  sometimes 
used  where  only  one  of  the  ideas  is  present,  viz.,  liberation  (Exod.  vi.8;  xv.  13,  <&c.). 
But  in  the  case  of  those  whom  the  Mosaic  law  claimed,  liberation  was  effected  only  by 
payment  of  a  price.  We  therefore  inquire  whether  it  is  so  in  this  case.  The  words 
which  follow,  and  the  teaching  of  Paul  and  of  the  entire  New  Testament,  give  a 
decisive  answer.  We  are  constantly  taught  that  salvation  is  by  purchase ;  and  that 
the  blood  and  life  of  Christ  are  our  ransom  (1  Cor.  vi  20 ;  Gal.  iii.  13 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  6 ; 
Matt.  XX.  28;  Bev.  v.  9).  2.  Again,  the  idea  of  a  price  is  that  of  exchange.  The 
price  takes  the  place  of  what  is  bought.  Therefore,  that  Christ's  life  is  our  ransom 
is  explained  and  confirmed  by  the  passages  which  teach  that  He  died  in  our  stead 
(2  Cor.  T.  21 ;  Gal.  iii.  13).  Paul's  words  therefore  imply  that  in  Christ  there  is  a 
setting  free  brought  about  by  some  one  or  something  taking  our  place.  By  this 
means  believers  are  justified.  (Prof.  Beet.)  The  cost  of  redemption  : — Tonder 
ermine,  hung  so  carelessly  over  the  proud  beauty's  shoulder,  cost  terrible  battles 
with  polar  ice  and  hurricane.  All  choicest  things  are  reckoned  the  dearest.  So  is 
it,  too,  in  heaven's  inventories.  The  universe  of  God  has  never  witnessed  aught  to 
be  reckoned  in  comparison  with  the  redemption  of  a  guilty  world.  That  mighty 
ransom  no  such  contemptible  things  as  silver  and  gold  could  procure.  Only  by  one 
price  could  the  Church  of  God  be  redeemed  from  hell,  and  that  the  precious  blood 
of  the  Lamb — the  Lamb  without  blemish  or  spot — the  Lamb  slain  from  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world.  (T.  L.  Cuyler.)  Redemption:  glory  of: — I  can  conceive  that 
to  the  mind  of  God,  looking  upon  a  single  soul,  and  unrolling  it  as  it  shall  be 
disclosed  through  the  cycles  of  eternity,  there  may  come,  in  the  far  perspective, 
such  a  thought  of  the  magnitude  of  a  single  soul,  as  that  in  the  view  of  God  that 
soul  shall  outweigh  in  importance  the  sum  total  of  the  governments  and  populations 
of  the  globe  at  any  particular  period  of  time.  I  can  understand  that  God  may 
sound  a  soul  to  a  depth  greater  than  earth  ever  had  a  measure  to  penetrate,  and 
find  reasons  enough  of  sympathy  to  over-measure  all  the  temporal  and  earthly 
interests  of  mankind.  And  I  can  conceive  that  God  should  assume  to  Himself  the 
right  to  execute  His  government  of  love  by  suffering  for  a  single  soul  in  such  a 
way  as  quite  to  set  aside  the  ordinary  courses  of  the  secular  and  human  idea  of 
justice.  This  is  to  my  mind  the  redemptive  idea.  I  do  not  believe  it  is  a  plaj 
between  an  abstract  system  of  law  and  a  right  of  mercy.  I  think  that  nowhere  in 
the  world  is  there  so  much  law  as  in  redemption,  or  so  much  justice  as  in  love. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Redemption :  gratitude  for. — Is  there  anything  that  is  com- 
parable with  the  love  and  gratitude  of  the  soul  that  feels  himself  redeemed  from 
death  and  destruction  ?  With  almost  an  agony  of  love,  such  an  one  clings  to  his 
deliverer.  There  be  those  that  cling  to  the  minister  of  Christ  who,  as  an  instrument 
and  representative  of  the  Master,  has  been  the  means  of  opening  their  eyes,  and 
bringing  them  out  of  darkness  into  light.  And  there  is  nothing  more  natural  or 
more  noble  than  this  instinctive  desire  of  one  that  has  been  saved  from  ruin  to  b« 
ever  present  with  his  benefactor.  And  when  a  soul  is  brought  back  from  destruction, 
how  natural  it  is  that  it  should  wish,  and  that  it  should  pray,  that  it  might  be  with 
Him  by  whom  it  has  been  rescued  1    {IMd.) 

Ter.  25.  Whom  God  liath  s«t  forth  to  be  a  propitlatloii. — TIte  tru*  profltU' 


ORAF.  m.]  ROMANS.  t4S 

tion : — I.  Speak  or  Chbist  as  a  pbopitiation,  or  show  what  His  being  said  to 
be  a  propitiation  for  sin  may  imply  in  it — 1.  That  He  was  appointed  by  God 
the  Father  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  sins  of  men.  2.  That  He  was  snb- 
stituted  in  the  room  of  sinners,  and  in  suffering  and  making  satisfaction  to 
Divine  justice  for  their  sins,  represented  their  persons,  and  was  considered  as  one 
with  them  in  the  eye  of  the  law.  3.  That  He  condescended  to  take  upon  Him  all 
the  guilt  of  His  people.  4.  That  He  suffered  the  punishment  which  His  people 
de^^erved  on  account  of  their  sins.  6.  That  all  who  have  an  interest  in  His  death, 
and  the  sacrifice  which  He  offered,  are  freed  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  are  no  more 
liable  to  the  punishment  of  it.  6.  That  by  suffering  the  death  threatened  in  the 
law  for  the  transgression  of  it,  and  satisfying  the  demands  of  justice  in  the  room  of 
sinners,  He  laid  the  foundation  of  a  throne  of  grace,  to  which  the  most  destitute, 
yea,  the  most  guilty  belonging  to  the  fallen  race  of  Adam  have  free  access,  and  from 
which  God  dispenses  to  them  all  blessings,  without  eclipsing  the  glory  of  His  justice, 
holiness,  and  other  glorious  perfections.  II.  Christ's  beimo  set  fobtb  as  a  pro- 
pitiation, for  the  benefit  of  sinners  guilty  before  God,  and  condemned  to  everlasting 
death  by  His  law.  1.  Christ  may  be  said  to  have  been  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation 
in  the  purpose  and  decree  of  God  from  eternity.  2.  Christ  was  exhibited  as  a  pro- 
pitiation in  the  first  gospel  promise  (Gen.  iii.  15).  3.  Christ  was  set  forth  as  a 
propitiation  in  all  the  types  and  ceremonies  belonging  to  the  Old  Testament  economy, 
particularly  in  the  legal  sacrifices,  all  which  were  typical  of  that  great  sacrifice 
which  the  Son  of  Qod,  the  promised  Messiah,  was  to  offer  in  the  human  nature  for 
expiating  the  guilt  of  sin.  4.  Christ  was  exhibited  as  a  propitiation  in  the  several 
prophecies  and  promises  respecting  Him  that  were  delivered  to  the  Church  under 
the  Old  Testament  dispensation.  6.  Christ  was  set  forth  as  a  propitiation  in  His 
incarnation  and  assumption  of  the  hnman  nature.  6.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  exhibited, 
or  set  forth,  as  a  propitiation  in  the  dispensation  of  the  everlasting  gospel.  The 
very  design  of  the  gospel  is  to  exhibit  a  crucified  Redeemer  to  guilty  sinners.  Hence 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  is  called  the  preaching  of  the  Cross,  and  the  preaching 
of  Ciirist  crucified.  7.  Christ  is  set  forth  as  a  propitiation  in  the  sacraments  of  the 
New  Testament,  particularly  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  HI.  Confirm  the  doctrine,  or 
show  that  as  Jesus  Christ  is  by  the  authority  and  appointment  of  the  great  Jehovah 
set  forth  to  guilty  sinners  as  a  propitiation,  all  to  whom  the  gospel  comes,  may 
warrantably  claim  the  benefit  of  that  propitiation  in  a  way  of  believing.  This  is 
abundantly  evident  from  the  words  of  the  text ;  for  the  gospel  is  preached  by  Divine 
appointment  to  every  creature,  and  in  it  Christ  is  set  forth  as  a  propitiation  to  every 
sinner  that  hears  it.  It  is  further  evident — 1.  From  the  types  that  prefigured  Him 
onder  the  Old  Testament  economy.  The  manna  which  was  rained  from  heaven  for 
nourishing  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  (Exod.  xiv.  13-16)  was  a  remarkable  type 
of  Christ,  who  is  the  Bread  of  Life  ;  is  such  as  a  propitiation,  for  He  is  said  to  have 
given  His  flesh,  nsmiely  by  offering  it  as  a  sacrifice  to  expiate  the  guilt  of  sin,  for 
file  life  of  the  world  (John  vi.  61) ;  and  it  was  what  every  one  belonging  to  the  camp 
of  Israel  might  warrantably  gather  and  apply  to  his  own  use  (Exod.  xvi.  15).  The 
brazen  serpent  was  also  a  type  of  Christ,  and  that  was  lifted  up  on  a  pole  for  the 
benefit  of  all  belonging  to  the  congregation  of  Israel,  so  that  every  one  of  them  that 
had  been  wounded  by  the  fiery  serpents  was  authorised  to  look  to  it  in  order  to  his 
being  healed  (Numb.  xxi.  8, 9 ;  John  iii.  14,1  5).  The  scape-goat  was  also  a  remark- 
able type  of  Christ,  and  designed  to  prefigure  the  efiScacy  of  His  death  for  procuring 
the  remission  of  sins  to  all  who  beUeve  in  Him.  2.  That  all  who  hear  the  gospel 
may  warrantably  claim  the  benefit  of  the  New  Testament  propitiation  spoken  of  in 
the  text,  or  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  for  the  remission  of  sins,  is  evident  from  the 
simihtades  nnder  which  Christ  and  His  grace  are  set  forth  to  us  in  Scripture  (Zech. 
xiii.  1 ;  Rev.  xxii.  2 ;  Isa.  xxv.  6  ;  Prov.  ix.  1-5  ;  Matt.  xxii.  4).  8.  The  truth  of 
the  doctrine  is  further  evident  from  the  very  nature  of  the  gospel,  which  is  not  a 
system  of  precepts  requiring  of  men  obedience  to  the  law  of  God,  to  any  law  whatso- 
erer,  as  the  condition  of  life,  but  consists  wholly  of  gracious  promises  exhibiting  life, 
ealvation,  and  all  spiritual  blessings  freely,  as  the  gift  of  God  to  perishing  sinners. 
4.  The  same  thing  is  evident  from  the  declared  end  and  design  of  the  gospel,  which 
is  that  sinners  may  believe  in  Christ  revealed  and  exhibited  in  it  (John  xx.  31).  5. 
That  all  who  hear  the  gospel  have  a  sufficient  warrant  to  claim  the  benefit  of  the 
propitiation  spoken  of  in  the  text,  or  to  apply  Christ  and  the  benefits  of  redemption 
to  their  own  souls,  appears  from  the  many  gracious  calls  and  invitations  addressed 
to  sinners  hi  the  gospeL  6.  The  peremptory  command  of  God  binding  it  upon  all 
the  hearers  of  the  gospel,  as  their  indispensable  duty,  to  believe  on  the  name  of  Hia 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  ta. 

Son,  pats  the  matter  beyond  all  debate  (1  John  iii.  23).  lY.  Pbactioai.  mfsovB- 
MBMT  of  the  doctrine.  1.  The  great  error  of  SocinianB  who  deny  that  Christ  died  to 
make  an  atonement  for  sin,  and  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  in  the  room  of  sinners, 
by  suffering  the  punishment  which  their  sins  deserved  ;  or  that  the  sacrifice  which 
He  offered  was  a  proper  sacrifice.  2.  Hence  we  may  learn,  that  men  by  nature  are 
in  a  most  wretched  and  deplorable  condition.  They  are  under  guilt  and  wrath, 
otherwise  there  would  have  been  no  need  to  offer  a  propitiatory  sacrifice  for  them. 
3.  Hence  let  us  take  occasion  to  admire  the  love  of  God  toward  sinners  of  mankind, 
manifested  in  providing  such  a  sacrifice.  4.  Hence  we  may  see  what  was  the  great 
end  of  the  Eedeemer's  incarnation,  and  of  His  taking  our  nature  into  a  personal 
union  with  Himself.  5.  Hence  we  may  lesim  what  was  the  nature,  end,  and  use  of 
all  the  sacrifices  that  were  offered  by  Divine  appointment  under  the  Old  Testament 
dispensation.  They  had  no  merit  or  efficacy  for  satisfying  the  justice  of  God  and 
appeasing  His  wrath.  They  were  only  typical  of  that  sacrifice  which  the  Messiah 
was  to  offer  in  the  fulness  of  time  for  these  ends.  6.  From  what  has  been  said  we 
may  see  that  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel  in  purity  is  a  great  privilege,  an  inesti- 
mable blessibg.  (D.  Wilson.)  Propitiation  through  faith  in  Christ's  blood : — I. 
Cbbist,  a  pbofitiation.  Sin  draws  on  the  sinner  the  holy  anger  of  God,  although 
it  cannot  quench  the  love  of  God.  And  that  it  could  not  quench  His  love  is  shown 
by  His  providing  and  setting  forth  as  a  propitiation  His  own  Son,  through  whom 
He  can  look  on  us  with  anger  no  more,  but  with  complacency.  This  He  has  done. 
It  often  costs  us  much,  we  have  often  got  much  to  get  over  in  order  to  let  the  affec- 
tion that  there  is  in  our  heart  towards  some  human  being  have  its  way,  to  help  and 
Buccour  him  on  account  of  some  waywardness  in  him.  What  would  not  the  father 
or  mother  of  a  profligate  child  give  to  be  able  to  lavish  on  the  degraded  being  tokens 
of  affection  as  freely  as  they  did  when  they  folded  him  in  their  arms  a  happy  innocent 
child,  if  they  felt  they  could  do  so  without  their  goodness  being  abused  by  him  to  his 
own  hurt  and  to  their  shame,  or  being  regarded  by  him  as  a  proof  that  they  did  not 
look  on  his  vices  with  any  great  detestation  or  sorrow  ?  What  the  sacrifice  of  God's 
only-begotten  and  well-beloved  Son  involved  to  Him,  we  vainly  attempt  to  conceive. 
"  He  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  gave  Him  up  to  the  death  for  us  all."  Mark  that 
it  is  not  said  here  that  the  Saviour  has  made  propitiation,  but  that  He  is  a  propitia- 
tion. So  speaks  also  the  Apostle  John :  "  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins."  In 
the  Saviour  Himself,  in  the  living  person  of  the  God-man,  is  found  the  ground  of 
pardon  and  acceptance.  The  virtue  of  His  obedience  and  death  is  centred  in  His 
person,  and  radiates  from  it.  II.  The  way  in  which  pbopitiation  is  effected. 
Christ  is  a  propitiation  "  through  faith  in  His  blood."  By  His  blood  and  by  faith— 
not  faith  in  His  blood — but  by  His  blood,  by  which  He  expiated  sin.  He  is  a  pro- 
pitiation by  faith  as  the  subjective  means  of  appropriation  of  this  propitiation.  Yoa 
must  look,  on  the  one  hand,  to  Christ's  sacrificial  death,  and  on  the  other  to  faith 
in  Christ,  in  order  to  account  for  the  sinner  being  received  into  the  favour  of  God 
and  being  reconciled  to  Him.  1.  It  was  by  the  giving  of  His  holy  hfe  in  sacrifice 
that  Jesus  propitiated  God  on  our  behalf,  or  appeased  the  vrrath,  and  delivered  as 
from  the  curse  of  God  due  for  sin.  2.  Christ  is  only  actually  and  effectually  a  pro- 
pitiation to  you  and  to  me,  if  we  believe  in  Him.  He  is  a  propitiation  only  through 
faith.  In  this  the  righteousness  of  God  is  also  seen.  It  were  unrighteous  to  justify 
any  but  him  who  believed  in  Jesus,  or  for  God  to  be  propitiated  through  Christ  on 
behalf  of  any  one  who  did  not  believe  on  Christ.  For  through  faith  we  come  into  a 
life-union  with  the  Son  of  God.  III.  Christ,  as  oub  pbopitiation,  is  set  forth  by 
God.  That  type  of  Christ  of  old,  which  furnishes  the  name  and  explains  the  aspect 
nnder  which  Christ  is  set  forth  here,  the  propitiation,  propitiatory,  or  mercy-seat, 
was  hid  in  the  innermost  shrine  of  the  dwelling-place  of  God.  It  was  seen  by 
no  mortal  eye  but  that  of  the  high  priest,  and  that  only  when,  once  a  year,  he 
entered  with  awed  spirit  behind  the  veil.  But  Jesus  Christ,  the  great  reality,  of 
which  that  golden  throne  of  grace  was  the  sign  and  shadow,  is  not  hidden,  but  is 
openly  set  forth.  In  word  and  ordinance  He  is  exhibited.  1.  There  is  the  Bible, 
about  which  such  daring  opinions  nowadays  are  ventured,  and  of  which,  in  their 
secret  hearts,  many  have  doubts  and  sentiments  which  they  would  not  dare  to  utter ; 
which  many,  who  read  so  much  that  is  deleterious,  never  or  rarely  open ;  which 
many  read  so  carelessly  and  to  so  little  purpose  1  My  friend,  hast  thou  ever  thought 
that  in  that  Book  God  has  set  forth  His  Son  as  a  propitiation  ?  This  is  the  great 
end  for  which  it  is  written.  2.  There  is  the  everlasting  gospel,  which  is  of  email 
account  with  many,  a  weariness,  a  superfluity,  which  even  in  their  view  might  bo 
banished  from  the  sanctuary ;  or,  if  it  cannot  be  banished,  may  be  thrust  as  far  M 


CBAV.  ni.]  ROMANS.  S45 

possible  into  a  corner,  and  its  place  supplied  very  pleasantly  by  something  tbat  will 
soothe  and  regale  the  senses  and  the  taste.  But  oh  1  see  that  you  are  not  blind  to 
what  is  set  forth  in  the  garb  of  His  words  and  thoughts — Jesus  Christ  the  propitia- 
tion through  faith  in  His  blood.  See  above  all  that  you  do  not  forget  that,  though 
with  man's  voice,  and  in  man's  language,  and  often  with  much  weakness,  yet  God 
is  really  setting  forth  Christ  as  a  propitiation.  S.  In  the  sacraments  God  so 
sets  forth  His  Son.  (W.  Wilson,  AI.A.)  Christ  the  propitiation: — I.  As  set 
roBiH  BT  God.  1.  The  words  "  set  forth"  signify  "fore-ordained";  and  also 
"places  in  public  view  "  ;  as  goods  are  exposed  for  sale,  or  as  rewards  of  victory 
were  exhibited  in  the  Grecian  Games.  So  has  God  made  conspicuous  Jesus  as  ihe 
propitiation  of  sin.  (1)  By  Divine  decree.  Christ  did  not  take  upon  Himself  the 
office  of  High  Priest  without  being  chosen  thereunto.  But  this  was  not  independent 
of  His  own  choice,  for  in  the  volume  of  the  Book  it  is  written  of  Him,  "  I  delight 
to  do  Thy  will,  OGod."  (2)  In  His  promises  before  the  Advent  did  not  God  speak 
constantly,  by  verbal  and  typical  promises,  to  multitudes  of  holy  men  the  coming 
of  Him  who  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head,  and  deliver  His  people  from  the  power 
of  the  curse  ?  (3)  When  Christ  came  God  set  Him  forth  by  angelic  messengers,  and 
by  the  star  In  the  East.  Throughout  His  life,  how  constantly  did  His  Father  set 
Him  forth  t  The  voice  of  God  was  in  the  voice  of  John,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God 
which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  And  on  the  Cross  itself,  "  when  it 
pleased  the  Father  to  bruise  Him,  and  put  Him  to  grief,"  what  an  exhibition  was 
there  to  the  eye  of  Jew  and  Gentile  of  the  propitiation  1  (4)  When  the  Holy  Ghost 
came  down  on  Pentecost  I  And  what  have  all  conversions  been  since  but  repeated 
seals  to  the  same  testimony  7  (5)  In  you  God  has  graciously  fulfilled  the  text.  2. 
What  it  is  that  God  has  so  manifestly  set  forth.  The  Greek  word  may  mean — (1)  A 
mercy-seat.  Now  God  hath  said  to  the  sinner,  "Do  you  desire  to  meet  Me?  would 
yon  be  no  longer  My  enemy  ?  would  you  receive  My  blessing  ?  I  set  forth  Christ 
to  you  as  being  the  Mercy -seat,  where  1  can  meet  you  and  you  Me. "  (2)  A  covering ; 
as  the  mercy-seat  covered  the  tables  of  the  law,  and  so  covered  that  which  was  the 
cause  of  Divine  ire,  because  we  had  broken  His  commandment.  "  Wouldst  thou 
have  anything  which  can  cover  thy  sin  from  Me,  so  that  I  need  not  be  provoked  to 
anger ;  from  you  so  that  you  need  not  tremble  ?  Wouldst  thou  have  a  shelter 
which  shall  hide  altogether  thy  sins  t  I  set  it  forth  to  thee  in  Jesus.  Trust  in  Hia 
blood,  and  thy  sin  is  covered."  3.  God  has  set  forth  Christ  before  every  one 
of  you,  in  the  preaching  of  the  Word,  and  in  the  Inspired  Book,  as  dying, 
that  your  sins  might  die ;  buried,  that  your  iniquities  might  be  buried  ;  risen, 
that  you  might  rise  to  newness  of  life ;  ascended,  that  you  might  ascend  to 
God;  received  in  triumph,  that  you  might  be  received  in  triumph  too;  made 
to  reign,  that  you  might  reign  in  Him ;  for  ever  loved,  for  ever  crowned,  tliat 
you  in  Him  may  be  for  ever  loved  and  for  ever  crowned  too.  II.  As  looked 
UPON  BT  THB  BBLiBVEB.  1.  We  may  mistake  the  proper  object  of  faith.  We  may 
look  on — (1)  Repentance  as  a  grace,  indeed,  without  which  there  can  be  no  salvation, 
bat  an  act  which  may  be  substituted  for  faith  in  the  propitiation.  (2)  Evidences. 
Evidences  are  good  as  second  things,  but  as  first  things  they  are  usurpers,  and  may 
prove  anti-Christs.  (3)  God's  promises.  I  know  many  Christians  who,  when  they  are 
in  distress,  take  up  the  Bible  to  find  a  promise — a  very  good  plan,  if  they  go  to  Christ 
first.  There  is  a  man  who  very  much  desires  an  estate,  at  the  same  time  his  heart 
is  smitten  with  the  beauty  of  some  fair  heiress.  He  gets  the  title-deeds  of  her 
estate.  Well,  the  title-deeds  are  good,  but  the  estates  are  not  his,  though  he  has 
got  the  title-deeds.  By  and  by  he  marries  the  lady,  and  everything  is  his  own. 
Get  the  heiress  and  you  have  got  the  estate.  It  is  so  in  Christ ;  promises  are  tha 
title-deeds  of  His  estates.  A  man  may  get  the  promise  and  not  get  Christ,  then 
they  will  be  of  no  use  to  him.  2.  God  has  set  forth  Christ  to  be  the  propitiation 
through  faith  in  His  blood,  and  we  ought  to  accept  that  as  being — (1)  An  aU- 
Bofficient  propitiation.  We  have  never  got  the  full  idea  of  Christ  till  we  know  that 
every  sin  of  thought,  of  word,  of  deed  finds  its  death.  (2)  An  immutable  pro- 
pitiation. Our  standing  before  God,  when  we  have  believed  in  Jesus,  depends  no 
more  npon  our  frames  and  feelings  than  the  son  depends  upon  the  clouds  and 
darkness  that  are  here  below.  III.  As  bet  forth  by  us,  and  looked  upon  by  God. 
1.  If  in  this  pulpit  Christ  be  set  forth,  God  will  look  down  upon  that  Christ  set 
forth,  and  honour  and  bless  the  word.  I  might  preach  clear  doctrine,  but  God 
might  never  look  down  npon  doctrine,  nor  upon  moral  essays,  nor  upon  philosophy. 
God  will  not  look  down  on  any  man's  ministry  unless  that  man  sets  forth  what  God 
■eta  forth.   Then  His  Word  shall  not  return  unto  Him  void ;  it  shall  prosper  in  th« 


846  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

thing  whereto  He  hath  sent  it.  2.  As  in  the  case  of  the  ministry,  so  yon  in  yoor 
pleadings  for  soals  must  set  forth  Christ.  Abel's  blood  demanded  vengeance; 
Christ's  blood  demands  pardons  and  must  have  it.  3.  As  in  pleading  for  the  souls 
of  others,  so  in  pleading  for  our  own  we  must  set  forth  the  propitiation.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Christ  the  propitiation: — In  the  only  other  place  where  the  word 
occurs  in  the  New  Testament  (Heb.  ix.  6)  it  is  rendered  "mercy-seat."  I.  To 
THE  INSTITUTION  OF  THE  "  MERCT-8BAT,"  therefore,  We  must  look,  that  we  may 
rightly  understand  the  allusion  (Exod.  xxv.  17).  It  is  from  this  description  that  the 
appellation  is  given  to  Jehovah  of  the  God  that  "  dwelleth  between  the  cherubim," 
an  appellation,  therefore,  equivalent  in  import  to  "  the  God  of  mercy,"  "the  God 
of  all  grace,"  "the  God  of  peace":  and  the  position  of  "the  mercy-seat"  or 
propitiatory,  upon  "the  ark  of  the  testimony,"  seems  to  indicate  that  His  appearing, 
in  this  benign  character,  to  commune  with  guilty  creatures,  was  in  full  con- 
sistency with  the  claims  and  sanctions  of  His  perfect  law  ;  so  that  when  Jehovah 
thus  manifested  Himself,  "  Mercy  and  truth  met  together,  righteousness  and  peace 
embraced  each  other."  All  this  cannot  fail  to  remind  us  of  Him  who  "  received 
from  God  the  Father  honour  and  glory,  when  there  came  such  a  voice  to  Him  from 
the  excellent  glory,  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  It  ia 
in  Him,  as  the  subject  either  of  promise,  of  prophecy,  of  type,  or  of  direct  testimony, 
that  God  has  from  the  beginning  made  Himself  known  to  men  in  the  character 
of  "  the  God  of  peace."  It  is  "  in  Him  "  that  He  "  reconciles  sinners  to  Himself, 
not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them."  U.  Had  nothing  more  been  said  of  the 
"  mercy-seat,"  we  might  have  been  led  to  conclude  that  Jehovah  appeared  there 
in  the  exercise  of  mere  mercy,  apart  from  any  satisfaction  for  sin.  We  must, 
therefore,  connect  this  description  of  the  mercy-seat  with  the  account  given  of 
THE  MANNEB  IN  WHICH  IT  WAS  TO  BE  APPBOACHED  by  the  worsbipper  (Lev.  xvi.  2, 11, 12). 
It  was  to  be  approached  with  the  blood  of  "  atonement "  (vers.  6,  30,  34),  which 
was  sprinkled  on  and  before  "  the  mercy-seat " ;  and  while  the  sacrificial  blood  was 
thus  presented,  the  burning  incense  was  to  diffuse  its  grateful  odour,  in  emblematic 
testimony  of  the  Divine  satisfaction ;  which  is,  accordingly,  elsewhere  expressed  in 
connection  with  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  the  offerings  by  which  it  was  typified, 
by  Jehovah's  "  smelling  a  sweet  savour "  (c/.  Gen.  viii.  21  with  Eph.  v.  2 ; 
Bev.  viii.  3 ;  and  see  also  Psa.  cxli.  2).  The  "  mercy-seat,"  then,  in  order  to 
Jehovah's  appearing  there,  consistently  with  the  glory  of  His  name,  as  the  God  of 
grace,  must  be  stained  with  "  the  blood  of  sprinkling,"  the  blood  "  that  maketh 
atonement  for  the  soul ";  and  in  this  is  set  before  us  the  necessity  of  the  shedding 
of  the  blood  of  Christ,  in  order  to  God's  being  "  in  Him  well-pleased."  And, 
agreeably  to  this,  the  Divine  declaration  "  from  the  excellent  glory,"  of  satisfaction 
in  His  well-beloved  Son,  was  made  in  connection  with  the  subject  of  conference 
on  the  holy  mount — "  the  decease  which  Jesus  was  to  accomphsh  at  Jerusalem." 
III.  The  pbopeb  idea  of  "  propitiation  "  is,  bendekinq  the  Divine  Being  favodb- 
ABLE.  1.  We  must,  beware,  however,  of  understanding  by  this  anything  like  the 
production  of  a  change  in  the  Divine  character  ;  as  if  God  required  an  inducement 
to  be  merciful.  We  ought  to  conceive  of  Jehovaii  as  eternally  compassionate  and 
merciful.  But  while  God  is  infinitely  and  immutably  good.  He  is  at  the  same 
time  infinitely  and  immutably  holy  and  just  and  true.  Never  ought  we  to  speak 
of  Him  as  acting  at  one  time  according  to  mercy,  and  at  another  according  to 
justice.  His  attributes,  though  we  may  speak  of  them  distinctly,  are  inseparable 
in  their  exercise.  2.  What,  then,  is  the  light  in  which  the  idea  of  atonement 
places  the  Divine  Being  ?  As  a  righteous  Governor  Jehovah  is  displeased  with  His 
guilty  creatures;  while,  at  the  same  time,  from  the  infinite  benignity  of  His 
nature,  He  is  inclined  to  forgiveness.  But  if  His  government  is  righteous,  its 
claims,  in  their  full  extent,  must  of  necessity  be  maintained  inviolate.  The  great 
question,  then,  on  this  momentous  subject  comes  to  be :  In  what  manner  may 
forgiveness  be  extended  to  the  guilty,  so  as  to  satisfy  the  claims  of  justice?  The 
rendering  of  the  Divine  Being  propitious,  in  this  view,  refers,  it  is  obvious,  not 
to  the  production  of  love  in  His  character,  but  simply  to  the  mode  of  its  expres- 
Bion.  The  inquiry  is.  How  may  God  express  love  so  as  to  express  at  the  same 
time  abhorence  of  sin  ;  and  thus,  in  "making  known  the  riches  of  His  mercy,"  to 
display  the  inflexibility  of  justice  and  the  unsullied  perfection  of  holiness?  When 
we  say  that  God  is  displeased  with  any  of  His  creatures,  we  speak  of  them  not  as 
creatures,  but  as  sinners.  He  hath  "no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked," 
but  He  hates  sin ;  and  the  punishment  of  it  is  required  both  by  the  glory  of  His 
righteousness  and  by  a  regard  to  the  general  happiness  of  the  intelligent  creation. 


CHAP,  m.]  ROMANS.  847 

which  sin  tends  directly  to  destroy.  It  is  in  this  view  that  the  blessed  God  is  said 
to  be  "  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day,"  to  "  hate  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  " ; 
to  have  "  revealed  from  heaven  His  wrath  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteous- 
ness of  men  " :  and  when  He  forgives  iniquity  He  is,  in  consistency  with  such 
expressions,  described  as  having  "  His  anger  turned  away."  This  is  propitiation ; 
and  it  is  in  Christ  Jesns,  in  virtue  of  His  atoning  sacrifice,  that  God  is  thus 
propitious  to  sinners.  The  animal  sacrifices  of  the  Old  Testament,  of  which  the 
blood  (because  it  was  the  life)  was  declared  to  be  "  the  atonement  for  the  soul," 
were  all  intended  to  prefigure  the  true  "  propitiation  for  sin."  (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 
The  hhtory  of  Ood's  relations  with  human  sin : — I.  Antecedently  to  the  death  op 
Christ,  the  sins  op  men  were  passed  over  in  the  forbearance  op  God,  i.e.,  God 
suffered  them  to  go  by  unavenged.  He  "  winked  at  the  times  of  ignorance."  So 
iar  was  this  strange  toleration  carried,  that  the  very  justice  of  the  Divine  Judge 
came  in  some  danger,  and  were  there  no  judgment  to  come,  men  really  could  not 
ftflBrm  that  the  world  was  ruled  on  principles  of  perfect  righteousness.  In  the 
providence  of  the  world  vengeance  limps  but  tardily  in  the  footsteps  of  crime; 
while,  not  to  speak  of  the  impenitent  who  go  unpunished,  what  shall  we  say  of 
pre-Christian  penitents  who  asked  pardon  for  their  sins,  yet  found  no  expiation  for 
them?  The  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  could  never  take  away  sin.  Tiie  Divine 
pohcy  was  to  let  sin  pass,  neither  avenged  nor  atoned  for,  leaving  still  an  open 
reckoning.  II.  At  last  God  cleared  His  clodded  administration  and  vindicated 
His  biohteousness  (ver.  25).  He  held  forth  to  public  gaze  an  expiation  of  sin 
which  did  satisfy  justice  and  demonstrate  the  severe  impartial  rectitude  of  the 
Divine  judgments.  The  death  of  Jesus  Christ  is  "  set  forth  "  as  a  public  act  done 
by  God  Himself  for  the  illustration  of  His  own  justice.  The  word  "  propitiation  " 
(or  propitiatory)  may  either  mean  a  victim  offered  in  sacrifice  for  the  recovery  of 
Divine  favour,  or  it  may  refer  to  the  golden  lid  of  the  ark  in  the  holy  of  holies, 
where  God  sat  enthroned  and  propitious  because  on  it  was  yearly  sprinkled  the 
blood  of  an  atoning  sacrifice.  The  death  of  Christ  is  in  either  case  the  one  sacrifice 
through  which  the  sins  of  the  world  have  been  expiated  and  God  has  been  enabled 
to  extend  favour  to  His  guilty  creatures.  And  this  solemn  and  unparalleled  act  is  at 
the  same  time  the  most  impressive  exhibition  of  the  Divine  vengeance  against  sin. 
Rather  than  that  sins  passed  over  so  long  should  go  altogether  unavenged,  God 
offered  His  Son  for  their  expiation.  By  this  He  has  cut  off  from  men  the  tempta- 
tion to  misconstrue  His  earlier  toleration  of  sins,  or  His  unwillingness  to  forgive 
them.  He  did  pretermit  sin  in  His  forbearance ;  but  it  was  only  because  He  had 
purposed  in  His  heart  one  day  to  offer  for  it  a  satisfaction  such  as  this.  For  this 
He  could  hold  His  peace  through  long  centuries  under  injurious  suspicion,  because 
He  knew  that  one  day  the  awful  Cross  of  His  own  Son  would  silence  every  cavil  and 
give  to  the  universe  emphatic  demonstration  that  He  is  a  just  God,  who  will  by  no 
means  clear  the  guilty.  III.  Let  us  look  at  the  bearino  op  Christ's  death  on 
"  THIS  present  season."  The  same  public  satisfaction  for  sin  is  adequate  to  justify 
■God  in  forgiving  sin  now  (ver.  26).  Before  His  attitude  to  sin  was  one  of  for- 
bearance. More  than  that  it  could  not  be,  because  no  proper  satisfaction  for  sin 
had  as  yet  been  offered.  But  now,  since  Christ  has  died,  God  has  no  need  to 
•*  wink  at "  sin,  and  pass  it  by.  He  no  longer  holds  out  to  penitents  as  He  used  to 
4o  a  hope  that  it  will  one  day  become  possible  for  Him  to  blot  their  sins.  For  He 
is  now  able  to  deal  finally  and  effectually  with  sin.  Justice  has  received  all  the 
satisfaction  it  needs  or  can  ask  for.  No  shade  of  suspicion,  whether  of  feebleness 
or  of  injustice,  can  rest  upon  the  Divine  character,  in  acquitting  at  once  any  man 
for  whose  guilt  Christ  has  made  complete  atonement.  Now,  therefore,  God  is  in  a 
position,  not  to  pretermit  sins  only,  but  to  remit  them  ;  not  to  promise  forgiveness 
merely,  but  to  confer  it.  This  new  attitude  it  is  worth  while  to  trace  out  in  detail. 
1  This  propitiation  having  been  amply  adequate  to  vindicate  Divine  justice, 
<3hiist's  death  becomes  obviously  our  redemption ;  i.e.,  it  serves  as  a  ransom,  an 
offering  in  consideration  of  which  we  who  were  held  in  custody  as  sentenced 
prisoners  of  justice  may  now  go  free.  The  Son  of  Man  has  given  His  life  as  a 
ransom  price  in  the  stead  of  many ;  and  that  atoning  ransom  being  adequate,  we 
have  "redemption  through  His  blood — even  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  So  that  it 
is  30  far  from  being  unjust  in  God  to  acquit  those  for  whom  Christ's  death  ia 
pleaded,  that  it  would  be  plainly  unjust  to  do  anything  else.  The  Deliverer  has 
paid  the  price  of  blood  for  forfeited  lives  of  guilty  men  ;  and  Justice  herself  will  now 
fling  wide  open  hsr  prison-gates,  tear  across  her  handwriting  of  condemnation,  and 
proclaim  the  ransomed   to  be  justified  from  sin.      This   St.   Paul   terms   "  tha 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0HA».  ni. 

redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (ver.  24).  2.  On  the  ground  of  this  redemption, 
ench  a  justifying  must  be  entirely  gratuitous  (ver.  24).  It  must  be  so,  because  it  i* 
obviously  independent  of  any  action  of  men's  own.  It  manifested  the  judicial 
impartiality  and  uprightness  of  the  Lawgiver  ;  but  it  was  done  at  the  bidding  of 
love  for  the  condemned,  and  its  issue  is  free,  unstinted  grace  to  the  undeserving. 
God  must  be  just ;  but  He  chose  this  way  of  manifesting  His  justice,  that  through 
it  He  might  also  manifest  mercy;  and  mercy  rejoiceth  over  judgment.  3.  A  way 
of  being  justified  which  is  so  entirely  gratuitous  must  be  impartial  and  catholic. 
It  is  offered  on  such  easy  terms,  because  on  no  harder  terms  could  helpless  and 
condemned  men  receive  it.  Heathen  or  Jew,  there  is  no  distinction  between  men 
(ver.  22)  such  as  could  limit  a  gratuitous  righteousness  to  one  set  of  them  rather 
than  to  another.  AU  of  them  alike  sinned ;  therefore  they  must  be  justified  on  a 
ground  which  cuts  away  every  distinction  of  better  or  worse  among  them,  of  mor& 
deserving  or  less  deserving.  A  righteousness  which  is  given  away  gratuitously 
must  be  meant  for  all.  4.  Yes,  to  all  who  will  trust  in  it  (ver.  26).  For  our 
justification  is  limited  to  faith,  and  that  just  because  it  is  limited  to  the  work  of 
Christ.  Our  faith  is  the  natural  counterpart  to  Christ's  atonement ;  it  is  oar 
response  to  His  sacrifice  ;  it  is  our  acceptance  of  God's  terms.  God  offers  to  justify 
ns,  but  He  does  so  only  because  Christ  has  propitiated  for  our  sins.  If  we  accept 
His  offer,  we  consent  to  be  justified  on  that  same  ground  of  Christ's  propitiation, 
for  nothing  else  is  offered.  The  very  terms  on  which  God  historically  vindicated 
His  justice  and  wrought  redemption  tie  us  down  and  limit  us  to  such  faith  as  rests 
on  Christ  as  the  instrument  of  our  justification.  {J.  Oswald  Dyke*,  D.D.y 
Through  faith  in  His  blood. — The  blood  of  Christ: — Listen,  apart  from  all  argument, 
to  what  Christ  says  of  it,  and  think,  Is  it  possible  that  all  this  can  mean  no  more 
than  what  men  say  who  do  not  believe  in  its  atoning  power,  as  shed  for  us  ?  They 
wiU  sink  deeper  in  your  minds,  if  studied  in  God's  Word.  But  look  at  this  barest 
outline  of  them.  They  will  be  the  meditation  and  praise  and  thanksgiving  of 
eternity ;  and  in  all  eternity  we  shall  long  to  thank  more  and  more  for  them,  when 
our  whole  being  will  be  thanksgiving  and  love.  "  We  were  far  off  [from  God],  but 
were  made  nigh  [to  Him]  by  the  Blood  of  Christ  "  (Eph.  ii,  13) ;  "  we  were  justi- 
fied by  His  blood  "  (chap.  v.  9) ;  "  He  suffered,  that  He  might  sanctify  us  by  His 
blood  "  (Heb.  xiii.  12) ;  "  we  have,"  as  a  continual  possession,  '•  redemption  through 
His  blood,  the  remission  of  sins  "  (Eph.  i.  7) ;  "  the  blood  of  Christ  who,  through 
the  Eternal  Spirit,  offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God,  purifieth  our  consciences 
from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  "  (Heb.  ix.  14) ;  **  the  blood  of  Christ 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  "  (1  John  i.  7) ;  "  we  have  been  redeemed  by  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ"  (1  Peter  i.  18,  19);  •'  He  has  purchased  the  Church 
with  His  own  blood  "  (Acts.  ix.  28) ;  "  God  made  peace  through  the  blood  of  His 
Cross,  through  Him,  as  to  the  things  on  earth,  and  the  things  in  heaven" 
(Col.  i.  20) :  "  Christ,  by  His  own  blood,  entered  once  into  the  holy  place, 
having  obtained  eternal  redemption  "  (Heb.  ix.  12).  "We,"  too,  ever  since  "have 
boldness  to  enter  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way  which 
He  hath  consecrated  for  us  through  His  flesh  "  (Heb.  x.  19,  20).  We  are  "  elect, 
according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God,  in  sanctification  of  the  spirit,  unto  obedience 
and  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ "  (1  Pet.  i.  2).  "  We  are  come  to 
Jesus,  the  Mediator  of  the  new  Covenant,  and  the  blood  of  sprinkling  which 
speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel "  (Heb.  xii.  22-24).  And  when  the  beloved 
disciple  saw  heaven  opened,  he  saw  "  the  Faithful  and  True,  the  Word  of  God, 
clothed  with  a  vesture  dyed  with  blood  "  (Rev.  xix.  13),  and  he  heard  the  new  song 
of  those  who  sang,  "  Thou  wast  slain  and  didst  purchase  us  to  God  by  Thy  blood  out 
of  every  tribe  and  tongue  and  people  and  nation  "  (Rev.  v.  9) ;  and  he  heard  that 
they  had  "  washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  " 
(Rev.  vii.  14),  and  had  "  overcome  the  accuser  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb"  (Rev.  xii.  11). 
And  St.  John's  doxology  is,  "  To  Him  who  loveth  us  and  hath  washed  us  from  our 
sins  in  His  own  blood,  to  Him  be  glory  and  might  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen  "  (Rev. 
i.  6).     (E.  B.  Ptisey,  D.D.) 

Ver.  26.  To  declare,  I  say,  at  this  time  His  righteousness. — The  Cross  a  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Divine  righteousness : — I.  How.  In  two  ways  so  closely  united  that 
either  of  them  separated  would  lose  its  value.  1.  By  the  very  fact  of  Christ's 
sacrifice  and  bloody  death.  If  Paul  does  not  see  in  this  punishment  a  quantitative 
equivalent  of  the  treatment  which  every  sinner  had  incurred,  this  is  what  clearly 
appears  from  such  sayings  as  2  Cor.  t.  21 ;  Gal.  iii.  13.     Now  herein  pracLsely 


OBA».  m.]  ROMANS.  24t 

oonsiBts  the  manifestation  of  the  righteoasness  wrought  out  by  the  Cross.  God  is 
here  revealed  as  one  against  whom  no  sinner  can  revolt  without  meriting  death  ; 
and  the  sinnner  is  here  put  in  his  place  in  the  dust  as  a  malefactor  worthy  of  death. 
Such  is  the  objective  manifestation  of  righteousness.  2.  This  demonstration, 
however,  would  be  incomplete  without  the  subjective  or  moral  manifestation  which 
accompanies  it.  Every  sinner  might  be  called  to  die  on  the  Cross  ;  but  no  sinner 
was  in  a  condition  to  undergo  this  punishment  as  Jesus  did,  accepting  it  as  un- 
deserved. This  is  what  He  alone  could  do  in  virtue  of  His  holiness  (John  xvii.  25). 
The  calm  and  mute  resignation  with  which  He  allowed  Himself  to  be  led  to  the 
slaughter,  manifested  the  idea  which  He  Himself  formed  of  the  Majesty  of  Ood  and 
the  judgment  He  was  passing  on  the  sin  of  the  world  ;  from  His  Cross  there  rose 
the  most  perfect  homage  rendered  to  the  righteousness  of  God.  In  this  death  the 
fiin  of  mankind  was  therefore  doubly  judged,  and  the  righteousness  of  God  doubly 
manifested, — by  the  external  fact  of  this  painful  and  ignominious  punishment,  and 
by  tbe  inward  act  of  Christ's  conscience,  which  ratified  this  dealing  of  which  sin 
was  the  object  in  His  Person.  II.  Bot  what  be.ndebed  such  a  deuonstbation 
NBCEBSABT — bccausc  of  the  tolerance  of  sins  past.  For  four  thousand  years  the 
spectacle  presented  by  mankind  to  the  whole  moral  universe  (cf.  1  Cor.  iv.  9)  was, 
so  to  speak,  a  continual  scandal.  With  the  exception  of  some  great  examples  of 
judgments.  Divine  righteousness  seemed  asleep ;  men  sinned  and  yet  they  lived. 
They  sinned  on,  and  yet  reached  in  safety  a  hoary  old  age.  Where  were  the  wage* 
of  sin  t  It  was  this  relative  impunity  which  rendered  a  solemn  manifestation  of 
righteousness  necessary.  God  judged  it  essential,  on  a'^count  of  the  impunity  so 
long  enjoyed  by  tliese  myriads  of  sinners  who  succeeded  one  another  on  the  earth, 
at  length  to  manifest  His  righteousness  by  a  striking  act ;  and  He  did  so  by  realising 
in  the  death  of  Jesus  the  punishment  which  each  of  these  sinners  would  have 
deserved  to  undergo.  But  if  it  be  asked  why  Paul  refers  only  to  sins  of  the  past 
and  not  to  those  of  the  future,  tbe  answer  is  easy :  the  righteousness  of  God  once 
revealed  in  the  sacrifice  of  tbe  Cross  this  demonstration  remains.  Whatever 
happens,  nothing  can  again  efface  it  from  the  history  of  the  world,  nor  from  the 
conscience  of  mankind.  Henceforth  all  sin  must  be  pardoned  or  judged.  {Prof. 
Godet.)  That  He  might  be  Just,  and  the  Justlfler  of  him  which  belleveth  ta 
Jesua. — Justice  tatiafied  (text,   and  1  John  i.  9).     I.   How  has  justice  been   so 

SATISFIED   THAT   IT  NO  I.ONOEB  STANDS   IN   THE  WAY  OF  God'S  JUSTIFY  INQ  THE  8INNEB? 

The  one  answer  to  that  is,  through  the  substitution  of  Christ.  When  man  sinned 
the  law  demanded  his  punishment.  The  first  offence  was  committed  by  Adam,  the 
representative  of  the  race.  When  God  would  punish  sin,  He  thought  of  the  blessed 
expedient,  not  of  punishing  His  people,  but  their  representative,  the  second  Adam. 
He  died — "  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us  to  God."  Let  us  show 
how  folly  the  law  is  satisfied.  Note — 1.  The  dignity  of  the  victim.  The  eteriial 
Bon  of  God  condescended  to  become  man  ;  lived  a  hfe  of  suffering,  and  at  last  died 
a  death  of  agony.  If  you  wiU  but  think  of  the  wondrous  person  whom  Jesus  was, 
yon  will  see  that  in  His  sufferings  the  law  received  a  greater  vindication  than  it 
eould  have  done  even  in  the  sufferings  of  the  whole  race.  There  is  such  dignity  in 
the  Godhead  that  all  it  does  is  infinite  in  its  merit ;  and  when  He  stooped  to  suffer, 
the  law  received  greater  honour  than  if  a  whole  universe  had  become  a  sacrifice. 
2.  The  relationship  which  Jesus  Christ  had  towards  the  Great  Judge.  Brutus  was 
the  most  inflexible  of  judges,  and  knew  no  distinction  of  persons.  But  when  he 
sentenced  his  own  son,  we  see  that  he  loved  his  country  better  than  his  son,  and 
justice  better  than  either.  Now,  we  say,  Brutus  is  just  indeed.  Now,  if  God  had 
condemned  each  of  us  one  by  one,  or  the  whole  race  in  a  mass,  justice  would  have 
been  vindicated.  But  lo  I  His  own  Son  takes  upon  Him  the  sins  of  the  world,  and 
"it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  Him."  Surely,  when  God  smites  His  Son,  only 
begotten  and  well-beloved,  then  justice  has  all  that  it  could  ask ;  and  this  Christ 
freely  gave.  3.  The  agonies  of  Christ,  which  He  endured  in  the  place  of  sinners. 
All  I  ought  to  have  suffered  has  been  suffered  by  my  substitute.  It  cannot  be  that 
God  can  smite  me  now.  Justice  itself  prevents,  for  when  justice  once  is  satisfif  d 
it  were  injustice  if  it  should  ask  for  more.    God  can  be  just,  and  yet  the  justifier. 

II.   Il  IS  AN  ACT    OP    JUSTICE   ON    God's    PABT    TO    FORGIVE    ON    CONFESSION    OF    SIN. 

Not  that  the  sinner  deserves  forgiveness.  Sin  can  never  merit  anything  but 
punishment.  Not  that  God  is  bound  from  any  necessity  of  His  nature  to  forgive 
every  one  that  repents,  because  repentance  has  not  in  itself  sufficient  to  merit 
forgiveness.  Yet  it  is  true  that,  because  God  is  just,  He  must  forgive  every  sinner 
who  confesses  his  sin.    Because — 1.  He  has  promised  to  do  so ;  and  a  God  wha 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOK.  [chap.  nx. 

coold  break  His  promise  were  unjust.  Every  word  which  God  utters  shall  be 
fulfilled.  Go,  then,  to  God  with — "  Lord,  Thou  hast  said,  '  He  that  confesseth  his 
sin,  and  forsaketh  it,  shall  find  mercy.'  I  confess  my  sin,  and  I  forsake  it;  Lord, 
give  me  mercy  I  "  Don't  doubt  but  that  God  will  give  it  you.  You  have  His  own 
pledge  in  your  hand.  2.  Man  has  been  induced  to  act  upon  it ;  and  therefore,  thia 
becomes  a  double  bond  upon  the  justice  of  God.  God  has  said,  "  If  we  confess  oar 
sins  and  trust  in  Christ,  we  shall  have  mercy."  Tou  have  done  it  on  the  faith  of 
the  promise.  Do  you  imagine  when  God  has  brought  you  through  much  pain  of 
mind  to  repent  and  rely  on  Christ  He  will  afterwards  tell  you  He  did  not  mean 
what  He  said  7  It  cannot  be.  Suppose  you  said  to  a  man,  "  Give  up  your  situa- 
tion and  take  a  house  near  me,  and  I  will  employ  you."  Suppose  he  does  it,  and 
you  then  say,  "  I  am  glad  for  your  own  sake  that  you  have  left  your  master,  still  I 
wiU  not  take  you."  He  would  reply,  "  I  gave  up  my  situation  on  the  faith  of  your 
promise,  and  now  you  break  it."  Aii !  but  this  never  can  be  said  of  God.  3.  Christ 
died  on  purpose  to  secure  pardon  for  every  seeking  soul.  And  do  you  suppose  that 
the  Father  will  rob  Him  of  that  which  He  has  bought  so  dearly?  IIL  The  duties 
TAUGHT  IN  THE  TWO  TEXTS.  1.  Confessiou.  Expect  not  that  God  will  forgive  yoa 
until  you  confess.  Tou  are  not  to  confess  to  a  man,  unless  you  have  offended 
against  him.  If  you  have,  leave  thy  gift  upon  the  altar,  and  go  and  make  peace 
with  him,  and  then  come  and  make  peace  with  God.  You  are  to  make  confession 
of  your  sin  to  God.  You  cannot  mention  every  offence,  but  do  not  hide  one.  2. 
Faith.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Justice  and  redemption : — What  was  the  main  purpose 
of  Christ's  sufferings  ?  I.  Thb  question  is  answeeed  in  vest  tabioub  ways.  1. 
There  are  those  who  say  that  they  had  no  purpose,  but  were  brought  about  by  the 
operation  of  blind  forces,  which  act  sometimes  through  the  working  of  inanimate 
nature,  sometimes  through  the  malignity  of  human  wUls.  We  need  not  look 
beyond  them  to  account  for  the  spectacle  of  the  best  of  human  lives  ending  as 
though  it  had  been  the  worst ;  for  that  anomaly,  that  while  Tiberius  was  enthroned 
in  Bome,  Jesus  should  have  been  crucified  in  Jerusalem.  To  discuss  this  would  be 
to  open  the  question  whether  there  is  any  Divine  government  at  all.  Suffice  it  to 
Bay,  that  if  there  is  a  Being  who  is  almighty,  and  has  a  moral  character,  then  the 
world  is  governed  by  Him.  If  a  great  deal  is  permitted  to  go  on  in  it  which  is  a 
contradiction  to  the  moral  nature  of  such  a  ruler,  this  only  shows  that,  from  certain 
reasons.  He  has  allowed  sin  to  enter  into  and  to  mar  His  work,  and  in  its  train, 
pain,  and  death.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  are  thus  only  an  extreme  illustration  of 
what  we  see  everywhere  around  us  on  a  smaller  scale,  but  they  afford  no  ground  for 
the  opinion  that  human  lives  drift  helplessly  before  forces  which  are  as  entirely 
without  moral  purpose  as  the  wave  or  the  hurricane  is  void  of  intelligence  or  of 
sympathy.  2.  A  more  satisfactory  account  of  the  sufferings  of  our  Lord  is  that 
they  were  the  crowning  feature  of  the  testimony  He  bore  to  the  sacredness  of  truth. 
This,  it  may  be  truly  urged,  is  His  own  account  of  the  matter.  "  To  this  end  was 
I  bom  .  .  .  that  I  might  bear  witness  unto  the  truth."  But  the  question  is 
whether  this  was  the  only  or  the  most  important  object.  If  it  was,  then  He  does 
not  differ  from  sages,  prophets,  and  martyrs,  who  have  all  done  this  service  to  truth. 
There  is  a  more  important  purpose  in  the  death  of  our  Lord  which  distinguishes  it 
from  every  other.  II.  The  tbub  answeb  is  that  Christ's  death  was  intended  to 
SET  forth  in  action  AN  ATTTiBUTE  OF  GoD.  1.  This  attribute  is  not,  as  we  might 
expect,  God's  love  or  mercy,  although  we  know  that  if  God  gave  His  only  begotten 
Son  to  die,  it  was  because  "  He  so  loved  the  world  "  ;  but  the  attribute  of  which  St. 
Paul  is  thinking  is  God's  righteousness  or  justice.  2.  When  we  speak  of  righteous- 
ness we  presuppose  the  existence  of  a  law  of  right,  a  law  which  justice  upholds. 
This  law  has  its  witness  partly  in  the  structure  of  society,  partly  in  the  conscience 
of  man.  If  human  society  is  largely  unfaithful  to  this  law,  it  cannot  altogether 
neglect  it  without  going  to  pieces,  sooner  or  later.  And  the  conscience  of  every  man 
attests  the  existence  of  right,  as  opposed  to  wrong.  Without  doing  violence  to  the 
mind  which  God  has  given  us,  we  cannot  conceive  of  a  time  when  right  was  not 
right,  and  when  justice  was  not  a  virtue;  and  if  so,  then  right  and  justice  are 
eternal ;  and  since  nothing  distinct  from  God  can  be  conceived  of  as  eternal — for 
in  that  case  there  would  be  two  eternals — it  follows  that  right  and  justice  belong  to 
God's  essential  nature.  To  think  of  God  as  unrighteous  is  only  a  mode  of  thinking 
of  Him  as  not  existing  at  all.  3.  This  great  truth  it  was  a  main  purpose  of  the 
Jewish  revelation  to  teach.  From  generation  to  generation  its  voice  is,  "  Righteous 
art  Thou,  0  Lord,  and  true  is  Thy  judgment."  Its  law  was  a  proclamation  of 
nghteousness  applied  to  human  life ;  its  prophets  were  preachers  of  righteousness ; 


OBir.  nx.]  ROMANS.  961 

its  penalties  were  the  sanctions  of  righteousness ;  its  sacrifices  were  a  perpetual 
reminder  of  the  Divine  righteousness ;  its  promises  pointed  to  One  who  would  make 
clearer  than  ever  to  man  the  beauty  and  the  power  of  Divine  righteousness.  And 
so  when  He  came  He  was  named  the  "Just  One"  and  "Jesus  Christ  the 
Righteous,"  and  it  was  but  in  accordance  with  these  titles  that  both  in  His  life 
and  in  His  death  He  revealed  to  man  the  righteousness  of  God  as  it  had  never  been 
revealed  before.  HI.  But  how  was  the  death  of  Christ  a  declaration  of  God's 
BIQHTEOCSNESS?  1.  Here  we  must  consider  that  righteousness  is  an  active  attribute. 
There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  working  distinction  between  a  theoretical  and  a  practical 
justice.  And  if  this  is  true  in  man,  much  more  true  is  it  in  God.  To  conceive  of 
God  as  just  in  Himself,  but  as  indifferent  to  the  strict  requirements  of  justice, 
would,  one  might  think,  be  impossible  for  any  clear  and  reverent  mind.  And  yet 
many  a  man  has  said,  "  If  I  were  God,  I  would  forgive  the  sinner,  just  as  a  good- 
natured  man  forgives  a  personal  offence,  without  expecting  an  equivalent."  Here 
ifl  a  confusion  between  an  offence  against  man  and  one  against  God.  An  offence 
against  us  does  not  necessarily  involve  an  infraction  of  the  eternal  law  of  right. 
But  with  the  Master  of  the  moral  universe  it  is  otherwise.  That  violations  of  right 
must  be  followed  by  punishment  is  as  much  part  of  the  absolute  law  of  right  as  is 
the  existence  of  right  itself.  If  the  maxim  holds  in  human  law,  that  the  acquittal 
of  the  guilty  is  the  condemnation  of  the  judge,  it  holds  true  in  a  higher  sense  of 
Him  whose  passionless  rectitude  is  as  incapable  of  being  distorted  by  a  fals» 
benevolence  as  by  a  prejudiced  animosity.  2.  The  death  of  our  Lord  was  Sk 
proclamation  of  God's  righteousness  in  exacting  the  penalty  which  is  due  to  sin. 
If  we  would  take  ^e  measure  of  moral  evil,  let  us  not  merely  track  it  to  the  work- 
house, the  prison,  the  gallows,  not  even  to  the  eternal  condition  of  the  lost ;  let  u» 
stand  in  spirit  on  Mount  Calvary,  and  there  look  how  Christ  is  "  made  to  be  sin  for 
as,  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him." 
8.  But  here  it  will  be  asked  whether  God's  justice  is  not  compromised  in  the  very 
act  of  its  assertion,  whether  the  penalty  paid  by  the  siuless  Sufferer  is  not  incon- 
sistent with  the  rule  of  justice  that  the  real  sinner  should  be  punished  for  his  sins. 
But  consider — (1)  That  a  vicarious  penalty  is  not  unjust,  e.g.,  when  the  person  who 
pays  it  has  a  natural  title  to  represent  the  criminal.  Natural  and  civil  law  are 
agreed  in  making  a  father  responsible  for  the  son's  misconduct,  and  in  exacting 
from  him  the  payment  which  the  boy  himself  cannot  produce.  On  the  other  hand, 
a  parent's  conduct,  good  or  bad,  affects  profoundly  the  destiny  of  his  descendants. 
Their  temperate  habits  or  their  loose  way  of  living  have  a  present  effect  on  our 
lives  ;  and  the  good  or  bad  name  which  a  parent  leaves  to  his  children  colours  and 
shapes  their  lives  in  a  thousand  ways.  To  be  the  son  of  David  procured  for 
Solomon  the  delay  of  the  penalty  which  his  own  misdeeds  had  deserved.  To  be 
descended  from  Jeroboam  was  to  ascend  a  throne  which  was  already  forfeited.  The 
Romans  welcomed  with  enthusiasm  the  worthless  son  of  Marcus  Aurelius,  though 
they  already  knew  something  of  his  character.  The  death  of  Louis  XVI.  was  not 
wholly  due  to  Jacobin  ferocity,  nor  to  his  own  misconduct,  but  to  the  policy  of 
ancestors  wbo  had  bequeathed  the  fatal  legacy  of  the  disaffection  and  discontent  of 
a  great  people.  Certainly  the  application  of  this  principle  is  modified  partly  by  the 
gospel  doctrine  of  individual  responsibility :  but  it  is  not  abrogated  or  forgotten. 
St.  Paul  applies  this  consideration  to  the  relation  of  our  fiist  parent  to  the  whole 
human  family.  "  By  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners."  Adam's 
representative  relation  made  his  acts  representative,  and  every  child  of  Adam  must 
consequently  say,  "Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  wickedness,  and  in  sin  hath  my 
mother  conceived  me."  This  representative  character  belonged  to  our  Lord  not 
less  truly  than  to  our  natural  parent  Adam.  This  is  the  deepest  meaning  of  His 
name — the  Son  of  Man — and  this  is  why  St.  Paul  calls  Him  the  second  Adam. 
There  are,  of  course,  important  differences.  Adam  represents  all  the  descendants 
who  ierive  their  physical  life  from  him ;  Christ  represents  all  who  derive  their 
spiritual  life  from  Him.  But  the  representation  is  as  real  in  the  one  case  as  in  the 
other,  and  it  relieves  our  Lord's  vicarious  sufferings  of  the  imputation  of  capricious 
injustice.  He  is  "  the  Everlasting  Father,"  or  the  parent  of  the  coming  age,  who 
pays  the  penalty  for  the  misdeeds  of  His  children ;  and  in  claiming  by  faith  our 
ehaire  in  His  work  we  are  falling  back  on  a  law  of  fepresentation  which  is  common 
to  nature  and  to  grace,  and  which  can  only  be  charged  with  injustice  if  God  is  to  be 
debarred  on  some  arbitrary  ground  from  treating  His  creatures  as  members  of  a 
common  body,  as  well  as  in  their  individual  capacity.  It  was  Christ's  good  pleasure 
to  take  oar  place  upon  the  Cross.    Surely  there  is  no  injustice  in  accepting  » 


25t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Ub 

eatisfaction  which  is  freely  offered.   When  a  savage  tribe  would  expiate  its  offences 
by  the  sacrifice  of  a  victim  against  his  will,  this  destruction  of  a  life  against  the 
will  of  its  owner  would  alone  involve  the  forfeiture  of  any  moral  value  attaching 
to  the  proceedings.    If  we  could  conceive  any  compulsion  in  our  Lord's  case,  it 
would  be  impossible  to  make  good  a  moral  basis  for  the  atoning  virtue  of  His  death ; 
but  "  No  man,"  He  said,  "  taketh  My  life  from  Me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  Mysell " 
"  Christ  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God  " ;  and, 
therefore,  because  our  Lord  took  a  nature  which  represented  the  race,  and  freely 
willed  the  act,  and  suffered  in  that  nature  as  its  representative,  His  death  has 
without  any  slur  on  the  law  of  justice  a  propitiatory  virtue.     4.  But  how  could  the 
penalty  paid  by  one  man  be  accepted  as  a  penalty  sufficient  to  atone  for  the  sins  of 
millions,  the  sins  of  the  centuries  that  may  be  to  come  as  well  as  of  the  ages  that 
are  past  ?    Had  the  life  which  was  offered  been  only  a  human  life,  it  could  not 
have  made  any  such  atonement.    He  who  died  on  Calvary  was  more  than  man, 
and  it  is  His  higher  and  Divine  nature  which  imparts  to  all  that  Christ  did  and 
suffered  an  infinite  value.     If  we  contemplate  the  infinitude  of  God,  our  wonder 
will  be  not  that  the  death  of  Christ  should  have  effected  so  much,  bat  rather  so  far 
as  we  know  it  should  have  effected  so  little.    I  say  so  far  as  we  know,  for  it  may 
have  had  relations  to  other  worlds  of  which  we  know  nothing,  although  it  may 
have  had  no  effect  beyond  the  redemption  won  for  and  offered  to  man.    To  achieve 
that  redemption  it  was  plainly  more  than  equal.    How  large  a  number  of  blossoms 
drop  off  without  bearing  fruit ;  how  few  seeds  fall  where  they  can  germinate,  and 
of  those  which  do  take  root  how  small  a  proportion  do  anything  more ;  how  out  of 
all  proportion  to  the  lives  which  actually  survive,  are  the  preparations  for  life  in 
the  animal  world  1     These  things  have  led  people  to  ask  whether  it  would  not  have 
been  better  to  create  only  so  much  life  as  was  wanted.     This  is  the  reasoning  of  a 
finite  creature  surveying  from  his  petty  point  of  view  the  boundless  resources  and 
the  magnificent  profusion  of  the  great  Creator.    And  if,  as  we  may  think,  He  does 
more  than  He  need  do  in  order  to  save  us  without  tampering  with  His  own  eternal 
law  of  right,  it  is  because  His  resources,  and  His  ungrudging  generosity,  are  alike 
without  limit.     At  any  rate,  if  the  death  of  onr  Lord  offered  more  than  a  satisfao- 
tion,  there  can  be  no  question  that  the  satisfaction  which  it  offered  was  fully  adequate, 
that  the  blood  of  Him,  the  Son  of  God,  cleanses  from  all  sin.    {Canon  Liddan.) 
The  necessity  of  the  atonement: — I.  Thb  atonement  was  necessabt  bntibely  on  God's 
ACCOTTNT.    It  is  easy  to  see  that  it  could  not  be  necessary  on  the  account  of  sinners. 
When  Adam  sinned,  God  might  have  destroyed  him  and  the  race,  or  He  might  have 
saved  them  in  a  sovereign  manner,  without  doing  injustice  to  them  or  any  other 
created  beings.     But  the  apostle  assures  us  that  an  atonement  was  necessary  on 
God's  account,  that  He  might  be  just,  and  the  justifier.  U.  Why  the  atonement  was 
HEOESSABT  ON  God's  ACCOUNT.    1.  If  we  cau  Only  discover  why  Adam,  after  he  had 
sinned  and  incurred  the  penalty,  despaired  of  pardon,  we  shall  see  this.    Adam 
knew  that  God  was  good,  but  he  knew,  too,  that  God  was  just ;  that  it  was  morally 
impossible  that  He  should  exercise  His  goodness  inconsistently  with  His  justice; 
and  that  His  perfect  justice  implied  an  inflexible  disposition  to  punish  the  guilty. 
It  is  not  probable  that  Adam  thought  of  an  atonement ;  and  if  he  did,  he  could  not 
see  how  an  atonement  could  be  made.    Now  as  God  could  not  have  been  just  to 
Himself  in  forgiving  Adam,  so  He  cannot  be  in  forgiving  any  of  His  guilty  posterity 
without  an  atonement.     And  as  God  did  determine  to  show  mercy  to  sinners,  so  it 
was  absolutely  necessary  that  Christ  should  make  an  atonement  for  their  sins,  and 
its  necessity  originated  entirely  in  His  immutable  justice.    There  was  nothing  in 
men  that  required  an  atonement,  and  there  was  nothing  in  God  that  required  an 
atonement,  but  His  justice.     2.  Now  there  never  was  any  difficulty  in  God's  doing 
good  to  the  innocent,  nor  in  His  punishing  the  guilty ;  but  there  was  a  difficulty  in 
forgiving  the  wicked.     (1)   God's  goodness  is  a  disposition  to  do  good  to  the 
innocent;  His  justice  a  disposition  to  punish  the  guUty;  and  His  mercy  a  dis- 
position to  pardon  and  save  the  guilty.    The  great  difficulty,  therefore,  was  to 
reconcile  Gcd's  disposition  to  punish  with  His  disposition  to  forgive.    (2)  This  was 
a  difficulty  in  the  Divine  character,  and  a  still  greater  difficulty  in  the  Divine 
governnieat.    For  God  had  revealed  His  justice  in  His  moral  government.    There 
was  a  clear  exhibition  of  retributive  justice  in  the  first  law  given  to  man.    "  In  the 
day  that  thoa  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die."     This  law,  clothed  with  all  the 
an  thority  of  God,  man  violated,  and  involved  all  his  posterity.    What  now  could 
be  done?    The  fallen  angels  had  been  doomed  for  their  first  offence.    Bat  how 
corfld  pardoning  grace  be  displayed  r    This  none  of  the  intelligent  creation  ooold 


OBAT.  lu.)  ROMANS.  158 

tell.  The  angels  of  light  coald  not  tell ;  for  they  had  seen  those  who  kept  not 
their  first  estate,  excluded  from  heaven.  Man  could  not  tell.  This  question  God 
alone  was  able  to  solve.  He  knew  that  He  could  be  just  to  Himself,  if  His  justice 
were  displayed  by  the  sufferings  of  a  proper  substitute  in  the  room  of  sinners. 
Christ  was  the  only  substitute  to  be  fouud  who  was  competent  to  the  great  work. 
Him,  therefore,  the  Father  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation,  to  declare  His  righteous- 
nesa  for  the  remission  of  sins.  III.  What  follows  ?  If  the  atonement  of  Christ 
was  necessary  entirely  on  God's  account,  that  He  might  be  just  in  exercising 
pardoning  mercy,  then — 1.  It  was  universal,  and  sufficient  for  the  pardon  of  all. 
What  can  be  more  unjust  than  to  punish  sinners  for  not  accepting  a  salvation 
which  was  never  provided  for  them  ?  And  it  never  was  provided  for  them,  if  Christ 
did  not,  by  His  sufferings  and  death,  make  atonement  for  them.  2.  It  did  not 
satisfy  justice  towards  sinners  themselves.  Nothing  which  Christ  did  or  suffered 
altered  their  characters,  obligations,  or  deserts.  His  obedience  did  not  free  them 
from  their  obhgation  to  obey  the  Divine  law,  nor  did  His  sufferings  free  them  from 
their  desert  of  suffering  the  penalty.  3.  Christ  did  not  merit  anything  at  the  hand 
of  God  for  Himself,  or  for  mankind.  There  is  no  phrase  more  misunderstood  than 
*'  the  merits  of  Christ."  Though  Christ  suffered  the  just  for  the  unjust,  yet  He 
did  net  lay  God  under  the  least  obligation,  in  point  of  justice,  to  pardon.  God  is 
above  being  bound  by  any ;  and  He  cannot  bind  Himself  otherwise  than  by  a  free, 
gratuitous  promise.  God's  promise  to  pardon  is  an  act  of  grace,  and  not  an  act  of 
justice.  Accordingly,  the  apostle  says  that  believers  are  "  justified  freely  by  Hia 
grace,  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  And  as  Christ  did  not 
merit  pardon  for  believers  by  His  sufferings,  so  He  did  not  merit  a  reward  for  them 
by  His  obedience.  It  is  true,  God  has  promised  to  reward  Him  for  His  obedience 
unto  death,  but  His  promise  is  a  promise  of  grace,  and  not  of  justice.  So  He  has 
promised  to  reward  every  man  for  the  least  good  he  does,  even  for  giving  a  cup  of 
cold  water  in  sincerity.  But  His  promise  is  a  promise  of  grace,  not  of  justice,  and 
without  the  least  regard  to  Christ's  obedience  as  the  ground  of  it.  By  obeying  and 
suffering  in  the  room  of  sinners.  He  only  rendered  it  consistent  for  God  to  pardon 
or  to  reward.  4.  God  exercises  the  same  free  grace  in  pardoning  sinners  through 
the  atonement,  as  if  no  atonement  had  been  made.  5.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that 
the  atonement  was  merely  expedient.  There  was  no  other  possible  way  of  saving 
sinners.  There  is  no  reason  to  think  that  God  would  have  subjected  the  Son  of 
His  love  to  the  Cross  if  He  could  have  forgiven  it  without  such  an  infinitely 
costly  atonement.  6.  We  may  safely  conclude  that  the  atonement  consisted  in 
Christ's  sufferings,  and  not  in  His  obedience.  His  obedience  was  necessary  on  His 
account,  to  qualify  Him  for  making  atonement  for  the  disobedient ;  but  His 
sufferings  were  necessary  on  God's  account,  to  display  His  justice.  7.  God  can 
consistently  pardon  any  penitent,  believing  sinners  on  account  of  Christ's  atone- 
ment. He  can  now  be  just,  and  be  the  justifier  of  every  one  that  believeth.  {N. 
Emmont,  D.D.). 

Vers.  27-30.  Where  Is  hoastingr  then  7  It  Is  ezclnded. — Bocutfulness — Jewith 
and  Christian : — L  Boastftjlness  wis  a  Jewish  national  ohabactebistio  of  a 
peculiar  species,  for  it  took  the  form  of  religious  conceit.  1.  They  could  not  boast 
of  being  rich  or  strong ;  but  when  their  fortunes  were  at  the  lowest  they  had  one 
■onrce  of  national  pridu  left  to  them  to  buoy  up  their  self-importance.  In  being 
the  selected  favourites  of  heaven,  they  found  a  consolation  so  flattering,  that 
they  looked  down  upon  their  conquerors  as  outcast  aliens  from  God.  Now,  there 
was  just  sufficient  foundation  for  this  pride  to  make  it  very  excusable  in  them, 
although  in  the  case  of  many  it  took  a  shape  which  proved  fatal  to  religions  life. 
2.  Having  reached  the  natural  termination  of  his  own  argument,  namely,  that  God, 
through  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  able  to  justify  all  who  trust  in  Him,  Paul 
suddenly  halts,  as  though  he  were  looking  for  something  that  had  vanished,  and 
abruptly  asks,  '•  Where,  then,  is  the  boasting  of  the  Jews  ?  "  Answer — There  is  no 
more  room  left  for  it.  But  what  shuts  it  out  ?  Not  the  law  of  works,  which  is 
understood  to  prescribe  obedience  as  a  means  of  reward ;  for  if  a  man  earned 
reward,  then,  of  course,  he  has  some  ground  for  boasting.  No ;  boasting  is  really 
excluded  only  under  the  new  and  better  way  of  being  just  before  God.  That  new 
principle  of  acceptance  with  God  cuts  self-righteousness  down  to  the  roots  as 
nothing  else  does.     That  leaves  him  a  debtor  to  sovereign  grace  alone.     II.  This 

TldOUS   BOASTFULNESS   IS   NOT  A  THING  ESSENTIALLY   JeWISH.      At    BOTTOM,    IT  IS    TEB 

OHiLD  or  HUMAN  FBips.    No  man  likes  to  own  that  he  has  Uterally  not  an  inch  of 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLDSTBATOR.  [chap.  m. 

gronnd  to  stand  on  before  the  judgment-seat  of  God,  nor  a  scruple's  weight  of  merit 
to  plead  there.  There  is  nothing  a  man  dislikes  more  than  that.  However  ragged 
our  righteousness  may  be,  or  however  filthy,  we  cannot  let  it  go  to  stand  in  utter 
shame,  unscreened  to  the  light,  or  defenceless  before  the  judgment  that  we  have 
deserved .  Can  we  not  ?  Then  there  is  no  salvation  for  us.  Salvation  is  for  men 
who  trust  in  God's  way  of  finding  mercy,  and  that  principle  shuts  boasting  oat. 
Alone,  naked,  excuseless,  condemned,  a  sinner  simply  you  must  feel  and  confess 
yourself  to  be.     III.    This  ssLF-jusTiniNa    boasxfulness    feeds    upon    ktkbt 

POINT    OF   ADVANTAGE   WHICH    IS    SUPPOSED   TO    LIFT   ONE    SINNEB   A   UTTLE    ABOVB   HIS 

FELLOW  SINNEB.  It  Uvos  by  making  invidious  comparisons.  There  are  diver- 
sities among  men  in  the  degree  of  their  moral  depravity,  and  God's  providence 
gives  to  some  an  immense  advantage  over  others  in  respect  of  religious  privilege. 
But  when  God  singles  out  one  race  from  other  races,  or  one  class  in  society 
before  another  class,  or  one  individual  from  among  others,  for  exceptional 
religious  advantages.  He  certainly  does  not  mean  to  puff  up  the  favoured  one 
with  spiritual  conceit.  It  is  nothing  but  the  abnormal  working  of  man's  own 
evil  nature  that  perverts  what  God  thus  meant  for  a  blessing.  Therefore  we  can 
afford  to  throw  no  stones  at  ancient  Israel.  Do  we  Christians  never  boast  of  being 
far  above  the  benighted  Jew  or  heathen?  Your  Israelite  long  ago  conceived 
himself  safe  for  eternity,  because  he  had  been  duly  circumcised  and  observed  the 
festivals.  Does  your  Christian  never  build  any  hope  of  heaven  upon  his  good 
churchmanship  or  his  unchallenged  Christian  profession  ?  The  Jews  toiled  hard 
to  deserve  paradise  by  a  great  zeal  for  orthodoxy,  and  by  leading  a  scrupulous  life. 
Does  no  one  ever  hear  of  any  Christian  doing  the  like  ?  For  you,  as  well  as  the  Jew, 
it  is  fatally  easy  to  miss  the  humble  road  that  leads  to  life  through  a  lowly  trust  in 
Christ.  For  you,  too,  it  is  perilously  easy  to  build  your  religious  confidence  upon  a 
righteousness  of  your  own.  IV.  Against  this  assumption  see  what  mightt  engines 
Paul  bbinos  to  beab.  1.  The  argument  is  one  to  this  effect.  "  If  I  am  wrong  in 
saying  that  every  man  is  to  be  justified  apart  from  the  law — and  if  you  are  right  in 
thinking  that  the  observance  of  Mosaic  rites  is  the  ground  of  your  acceptance, 
then  in  that  case  God  is  only  the  God  of  the  Jews,  since  it  is  only  to  Jews  that  He 
has  given  this  Mosaic  law.  But  is  not  this  dead  against  the  very  prime  point  of 
yotn  confession  as  against  polytheism,  that  there  is  one  living  true  God  of  all  men 
alike  f  The  foundation  of  this  reasoning  lies  in  monotheism,  the  doctrine  of  the 
unity  of  God,  and  His  common  relation  to  all.  The  cleft  which  cuts  the  human 
race  into  Jews  and  Gentiles  cuts  far  down ;  but  it  cannot  cut  so  far  as  the  funda- 
mental question  of  the  sinner's  acceptance  with  his  Maker.  How  shall  man  have 
peace  with  God  ?  is  a  problem  which  can  only  have  one  answer — not  two.  The 
same  one  God,  just  and  merciful  to  all  His  children,  must  justly  justify  every  sinner 
in  the  same  way.  2.  But  the  levelling  argument  of  the  apostle  is  good  for  more 
than  Jews.  Just  look  at  our  own  position  in  the  light  of  this  argument.  We  are 
privileged  men — as  Christians,  as  Englishmen,  as  the  children  of  devout  parents 
who  saw  to  our  being  early  baptized  in  the  faith  and  nurture  of  the  saints. 
Shall  we  then  rest  with  boastful  confidence  in  this,  and  deem  that  the  gate  of  life 
is  less  straight  for  us  than  for  idolaters  or  outcasts  ?  Is  not  that  to  repeat  the 
blunder  of  the  Jew,  to  postulate,  as  it  were,  a  two-faced  God? — one  God  who 
apportions  to  ignorant  and  wicked  people  their  own  share  of  grace,  as  a  thing  that 
they  have  no  claim  on,  out  of  pure  regard  to  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  who 
receives  respectable  Christian  people  on  another  and  easier  footing  altogether.  I 
have  no  fear  that  any  of  you  will  say  such  things.  But  what  I  fear  is  that  some  of 
you  may  gradually  harbour  a  self-righteous  confidence  in  your  position  and 
character,  which  would  substantially  mean  the  same  thing.  Against  such  a  self- 
confident  temper,  therefore,  I  fight  with  the  weapon  of  St.  Paul.  God  has  not  two 
ways  of  saving  men.  {J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.)  Boasting  excluded: — 1.  The 
term  '*  law  "  may  mean  more  than  an  authoritative  rule ;  it  may  signify  the  method 
of  succession  by  which  one  event  follows  another ;  and  it  is  thus  that  we  speak  of 
a  law  of  nature,  or  of  mind.  Both  the  law  of  works  and  the  law  of  faith  may  be 
understood  here  in  this  latter  sense.  The  one  is  that  by  which  a  man's  justification 
foUows  upon  his  having  performed  the  works ;  the  other  is  that  by  which  a  man's 
justification  follows  upon  his  faith — just  as  the  law  of  gravitation  is  that  upon 
which  every  body  above  the  surface  of  the  earth,  when  its  support  is  taken  away, 
will  fall  toward  its  centre.  2.  Now  the  aim  of  the  apostle  is  to  prove  that  by  the 
law  of  works  none  is  justified,  and  I  want  you  to  notice  how  those  who  dislike  the 
utter  excluding  of  works  endeavour  to  evade  this.   I.  Thbt  hold  that  the  affibxa- 


CHIP,  m.]  ROMANS^  K6 

nOM  OF  PAini   IS  OF  THB  OZBEUONIAL  AND  NOT   OF  THE   MORAL  LAW.      Tbej  are  willing 

enough  to  discard  obedience  to  the  former,  but  not  to  the  latter.  All  rites,  be  they 
Jewish  or  Christian,  have  a  greatly  inferior  place  in  their  estimation  to  the  virtues 
of  social  life,  or  to  the  affections  of  an  inward  and  enlightened  piety  in  a  man,  even 
though  a  stranger  to  the  puritanical  rigours  of  the  Sabbath  and  of  the  sacrament. 

1.  We  are  far  from  disputing  the  justness  of  their  preference ;  but  we  would  direct 
them  to  the  use  that  they  should  make  of  it  when  applying  to  it  the  statement  that 
from  justification  all  boasting  is  excluded.  Does  not  the  statement  point  the  more 
to  that  of  which  men  are  inclined  to  boast  the  more  7  To  set  aside  the  law  of  works 
is  not  to  exclude  boasting,  if  only  those  works  are  set  aside  which  beget  no  reverence 
when  done  by  others,  and  no  complacency  when  done  by  themselves.  The  exclusion 
of  boasting  might  appear  to  an  old  Pharisee  as  that  which  swept  away  the  whole 
ceremonial  in  which  he  gloried.  But  for  the  same  reason  should  it  appear  to  the 
tasteful  admirer  of  virtue  to  sweep  away  the  moral  accomplishments  in  which  he 
glories.  In  a  word,  this  verse  has  the  same  force  now  that  it  had  then.  It  then 
reduced  the  boastful  Jew  to  the  same  ground  of  nothingness  before  Qoi  with  the 
Gentile  whom  he  despised.  And  it  now  reduces  the  boastful  moralist  to  the  same 
ground  with  the  slave  of  rites,  whom  he  so  thoroughly  despises.  2.  But  that  Paul 
means  the  moral  law  is  plain,  because  in  the  theft  and  adultery  and  sacrilege  of 
chap,  ii.,  and  in  the  impiety  and  deceit  and  slander  and  cruelty  of  chap,  iii.,  we  see 
that  it  was  the  offence  of  a  guilty  world  against  it  which  the  apostle  chiefly  had  in 
his  eye ;  and  when  he  says  that  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin,  how  could  he 
mean  the  ceremonial  law,  when  they  were  moral  sins  that  he  had  all  along  been 
specifying  ?  3.  This  distinction  between  the  moral  and  ceremonial  is,  in  lact,  a 
mere  device  for  warding  off  a  doctrine  by  which  alienated  nature  feels  herself  to 
be  humbled.  It  is  an  opiate  by  which  she  would  fain  regale  the  lingering  sense 
that  she  so  fondly  retains  of  her  own  sufficiency.  It  is  laying  hold  of  a  twig  by 
which  she  may  bear  herself  up,  in  her  own  favourite  attitude  of  independence  of 
God.  But  this  is  a  propensity  to  which  the  apostle  grants  no  quarter  whenever  it 
appears  ;  and  never  will  your  mind  and  his  be  at  one  till  reduced  to  a  sense  of  yuur 
own  nothingness,  and  leaning  your  whole  weight  on  the  sufficiency  of  another,  you 
receive  justification  as  wholly  of  grace,  and  feel  on  this  ground  that  every  plea  of 
boasting  is  overthrown.  11.  Thet  at  times  allow  justification  to  be  of  faith 
WHOLLT,  BUT  HAKE  A  viBTUB  OF  FAITH.  All  the  glorifying  to  the  law  associated  with 
obedience  they  would  now  transfer  to  acquiescence  in  the  gospel.  The  docility, 
attention,  love  of  truth,  and  preference  of  light  to  darkness  confer  a  merit  upon 
believing;  and  here  would  they  make  a  last  and  a  desperate  stand  for  the  credit  of 
a  share  in  their  own  salvation.  1.  Now  if  this  verse  be  true,  there  must  be  an  error 
in  this  also.  It  eaves  the  sinner  nothing  to  boast  of  at  all ;  and  should  he  continue 
to  associate  any  glorying  with  his  faith,  then  is  he  turning  this  faith  to  a  purpose 
directly  the  reverse  of  that  which  the  apostle  intends  by  it.  There  is  no  glory,  yoa 
will  allow,  in  seeing  the  son  with  your  eyes  open,  whatever  glory  may  accrue  Vi 
Him  who  arrayed  this  luminary  in  his  brightness  and  endowed  you  with  that 
wondrous  mechanism  which  conveys  the  perception  of  it.  And  be  assured  that  in 
every  way  there  is  just  as  little  to  boast  of  on  the  part  of  him  who  sees  the  truth 
of  the  gospel,  or  who  relies  on  its  promises  after  he  perceives  them  to  be  true.  His 
faith,  which  has  been  aptly  termed  the  hand  of  the  mind,  may  apprehend  the 
offered  gift  and  may  appropriate  it ;  but  there  is  just  as  little  of  moral  praise  to  be 
rendered  on  that  account,  as  to  the  beggar  for  laying  hold  of  the  offered  alms. 

2.  And  to  cut  away  all  pretensions  to  glorying,  the  faith  itself  is  a  gift.  The  gospel 
is  like  an  offer  made  to  one  who  has  a  withered  hand ;  and  power  must  go  forth 
with  the  offer  ere  the  hand  can  be  extended  to  take  hold  of  it.  It  is  not  enough  for 
God  to  present  an  object.  He  must  also  awaken  the  eye  to  the  perception  of  it.  (T. 
Chalmert,  D.D.)  Grace  exalted — boasting  excluded : — Pride  is  most  obnoxious  to 
God.  As  a  sin.  His  holiness  hates  it ;  as  a  treason.  His  sovereignty  detests  it,  and 
the  whole  of  His  attributes  stand  leagued  to  put  it  down.  The  first  transgression 
had  in  its  essence  pride.  The  ambitious  heart  of  Eve  desired  to  be  as  God,  and 
Adam  followed ;  and  we  know  the  rest.  Eemember  Babel,  Pharaoh,  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, Sennacherib,  and  Herod.  God  loves  His  servants,  but  pride  even  in  them 
He  abhors.  Think  of  David  and  Hezekiah.  And  God  has  uttered  the  most  solemn 
words  as  well  as  issued  the  most  awful  judgment  against  pride.  But  to  put  an 
everlasting  stigma  upon  it  He  has  ordained  that  the  only  way  in  which  He  will  save 
men  shall  be  a  way  by  which  man's  pride  shall  be  humbled  in  the  dust.  Nore 
here — L   The  kbjxcted  plan.    There  are  two  ways  by  which  a  man  might  have 


S56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

been  for  ever  blessed.  The  one  was  by  works — "  This  do  and  thou  shalt  live ;  be 
obedient  and  receive  the  reward";  the  other  plan  was — "Receive  grace  and 
blessedness  as  the  free  gift  of  God."  1.  Now  God  has  not  chosen  the  system  of 
works,  because  it  is  impossible  for  us.  (1)  For  the  law  requires  of  us — (2)  Perfect 
obedience.  One  single  flaw,  one  offence,  and  the  law  condemns  without  mercy. 
And  if  it  were  possible  to  keep  the  law  in  its  perfection  outwardly,  it  is  required  to 
keep  it  in  the  heart  as  well.  (2)  Because  if  up  to  this  moment  your  heart  and  life 
have  been  altogether  without  offence,  yet  it  is  required  that  it  should  be  so  even  tc 
your  dying  day.  But  think  of  the  temptations  to  which  you  will  be  subject  I  (3) 
Bemember,  too,  that  we  are  not  sure  that  even  this  life  would  end  that  probation,  for 
long  as  thou  shouldst  live  duty  would  still  be  due,  and  the  law  still  thine  insatiable 
creditor.  Now  in  the  face  of  all  this,  will  any  of  you  prefer  to  be  saved  by  your 
works?  Or,  rather,  will  you  prefer  to  be  damned  by  your  works?  for  that 
will  certainly  be  the  issue,  let  you  hope  what  you  may.  2.  Now  I  suppose 
that  very  few  indulge  a  hope  of  being  saved  by  the  law  in  itself ;  but  there 
is  a  delusion  abroad  that  perhaps  God  will  modify  the  law.  (1)  That  He  will 
accept  a  sincere  obedience  even  if  it  be  imperfect.  Now  against  this  Paul  declares, 
**  By  the  works  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  living  be  justified,"  so  that  that  is  answered 
at  once.  But  more  than  this,  God's  law  cannot  alter,  it  can  never  be  content  to 
take  less  than  it  demands.  God,  therefore,  cannot  accept  anything  but  a  perfect 
obedience.  (2)  But  some  say,  "could  it  not  be  partly  by  grace  and  partly  by 
works  ?  "  No.  The  apostle  says  that  boasting  is  excluded  ;  but  if  we  let  in  the 
law  of  works,  then  man  has  an  opportunity  for  self-gratification  as  having  saved 
himself.  (3)  "Well,"  says  another,  "I  don't  expect  to  be  saved  by  my  morality; 
but  then,  I  have  been  baptized ;  I  receive  the  Lord's  Supper ;  I  go  to  church." 
These  ordinances  are  blessed  means  of  grace  to  saved  souls ;  but  to  the  unsaved  they 
can  have  no  avail  for  good,  but  may  increase  their  sin,  because  they  touch 
nnworthily  the  holy  things  of  God.  (4)  Others  suppose  that  at  least  their  feelings, 
which  are  only  their  works  in  another  shape,  may  help  to  save  them  ;  but  if  you 
rely  upon  what  you  feel,  you  shall  as  certainly  perish  as  if  you  trust  to  what  you 
do.  (6)  There  are  others  who  rely  upon  their  knowledge.  They  have  a  sound 
creed,  and  hold  the  theory  of  justification  by  faith  and  exult  over  their  fellow 
professors  because  they  hold  the  truth.  Now  this  is  nothing  but  salvation  by 
works,  only  they  are  works  performed  by  the  head  instead  of  by  the  hand.  II. 
Boasting  is  excluded — God  has  accepted  the  second  plan,  namely,  the  way  of 
salvation  by  faith  through  grace.  The  first  man  that  entered  heaven  entered  by 
faith.  "  By  faith  Abel,"  Ac.  Over  the  tombs  of  all  the  godly  who  were  accepted 
of  God  you  may  read  the  epitaph — "  These  all  died  by  faith."  By  faith  they 
received  the  promise ;  and  among  all  yonder  bright  and  shining  throng,  there  is 
not  one  who  does  not  confess,  "  We  have  washed  our  robes  and  made  them  white 
in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  As  Calvin  says,  "  Not  a  particle  of  boasting  can  b« 
admitted,  because  not  a  particle  of  work  is  admitted  into  the  covenant  of  grace  " ; 
it  is  not  of  man  nor  by  man,  not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but 
of  God  that  showeth  mercy,  and,  therefore,  boasting  is  excluded  by  the  law  of  faith, 
m.  Have  no  merits  of  their  own.  The  vebt  gate  which  shuts  out  boasting  SHxrrs 
IN  HOPE  FOB  THE  woBST  OF  BiNNEBS.  You  Say,  "  I  never  attend  the  house  of  God, 
and  up  to  this  time  I  have  been  a  thief  and  a  drunkard."  Well,  you  stand  to-day 
on  the  same  level  as  the  most  moral  sinner  and  the  most  honest  unbeliever  in  the 
matter  of  salvation.  They  are  lost,  since  they  believe  not,  and  so  are  you.  When 
we  come  to  God  the  best  can  bring  nothing,  and  the  worst  can  bring  no  less.  I 
know  some  will  say,  "  Then  what  is  the  good  of  morality  ?  "  I  will  tell  you.  Two 
men  are  overboard  there ;  one  man  has  a  dirty  face,  and  the  other  a  clean  one. 
There  is  a  rope  thrown  over  from  the  stern  of  the  vessel,  and  only  that  rope  will 
save  the  sinking  men,  whether  their  faces  be  fair  or  foul.  Do  I  therefore  underrate 
cleanliness.  Certainly  not ;  but  it  will  not  save  a  drowning  man,  nor  will  morality 
save  a  dying  man.  Or  take  this  case.  Here  we  have  two  persons,  each  with  a 
deadly  cancer.  One  of  them  is  rich  and  clothed  in  purple,  the  other  is  poor  and 
wrapped  about  with  a  few  rags ;  and  I  say  to  them,  "  You  are  both  on  a  par  now, 
here  comes  the  physician,  his  touch  can  heal  you  both;  there  is  no  difference 
between  yon  whatever."  Do  I  therefore  say  that  the  one  man's  robes  are  not  better 
than  the  other's  rags  ?  Of  course  they  are  better  in  some  respects,  but  they  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  matter  of  curing  disease.  So  morality  is  a  neat  cover  for 
foul  venom,  but  it  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  the  heart  is  vile  and  the  man  himself 
under  condemnation.    Suppose  I  were  an  army  surgeon.    There  is  one  man  there 


OBAi.  in.]  ROMANS.  K1 

— he  is  a  captain,  and  a  brave  man — and  he  is  bleeding  oat  his  life  from  a  terrible 
gash.  By  his  side  there  lies  a  private,  and  a  great  coward  too,  wounded  in  the  same 
way.  I  say  to  them,  "  Tou  are  both  in  the  same  condition,  and  I  can  heal  you 
both."  But  if  the  captain  should  say,  '*  I  do  not  want  you ;  I  am  a  captain,  go 
and  see  to  that  poor  dog  yonder."  Would  his  courage  and  rank  save  Lis  life? 
No  ;  they  are  good  things,  but  not  saving  things.     So  it  is  with  good  works.     IV. 

ThB    SAHB    plan    which  shots    OOT   boasting  leads  UB   to   a   OBACIODS   ORATIT0DB    TO 

Christ.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  By  what  law?  .  .  .  the  law  of  faith. — Boasting 
excluded  by  the  law  of  faith: — I.  Faith  a  law.  1.  As  God's  appointed  way  of 
acceptance.  2.  As  an  economy  according  to  which  God  deals  with  men.  3.  As  a 
binding  rule  to  which  we  owe  subjection.  4.  As  having  justification  connected  with 
it  as  a  sure  result.  II.  This  law  excludes  boasting.  1.  From  the  nature  of  faith. 
Faith  simply  trusts,  accepts  a  proffered  gift.  There  can  be  no  boasting  in  believing 
that  God  speaks  the  truth  ;  nor  in  a  helpless  sinner  leaning  on  omnipotence ;  nor 
in  a  beggar  receiving  alms.  Faith  looks  entirely  away  from  itself  to  another,  viz. , 
Christ.  Eyes  only  Christ's  righteousness,  not  its  own  ;  comes  empty-handed  and 
receives  out  of  Christ's  fulness  (John  i.  16) ;  is  the  window  through  which  the 
light  passes,  not  the  light ;  glories  in  Christ's  obedience,  but  not  in  its  own. 
Therefore  faith  is  a  humble,  depending,  self-renouncing  grace.  2.  From  God's 
procedure  in  justifying  by  it.  AH  are  regarded  on  the  same  footing  as  guilty 
sinners,  for  men  are  justified  as  ungodly  (chap.  iv.  5),  the  greatest  sinner  as  freely 
and  fully  as  the  least  (1  Tim.  i.  15).  Crimson,  double-dyed  sins  are  no  hindrance 
to  acceptance  (Isa.  L  18 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9-11) ;  nor  nature's  highest  attainments  a 
furtherance  of  it  (Mark  x.  17-22).  All  equally  need  salvation  and  all  are  welcome 
to  it.  The  one  ground  of  acceptance  for  all  is  Christ's  righteousness,  for  the 
wedding  garment  was  for  the  poorest  as  well  as  for  the  richest  (Matt.  xxii.  11, 12). 
3.  From  the  origin  of  faith  itself.  Faith  to  receive  is  Christ's  gift  (Heb.  xii.  2; 
Eph.  ii.  8 ;  Phil  i.  20).  The  withered  hand  restored  to  accept  the  proffered  bounty. 
{J.  Robinson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  28.  Therefore  we  conclnde  that  a  man  Is  Jnstllled  by  faith  without  the 
deeds  of  the  law. — Justijication  : — I.  The  teems  of  this  conclusion.  1.  "Justifi- 
cation "  signifies,  literally,  acquittal.  In  a  court  of  law  such  acquittal  may  be 
made  on  the  ground  of — (1)  Innocence.  (2)  Of  a  sufficient  satisfaction.  The 
Scripture  view  of  justification  is  acquittal  on  grounds  consistent  with  the  demands 
of  justice.  2.  "Deeds  of  the  law."  "Law"  is  the  will  of  a  superior  properly 
sanctioned;  and  Paul  employs  the  term  to  denote  generally  the  will  of  God.  (1) 
As  made  known  by  some  deep  and  powerful  impression  where  a  written  revelation 
has  not  been  given.  (2)  As  having  been  made  known  by  a  wiitten  record.  The 
whole  may  be  called  the  moral  law  ;  and  when  the  apostle  speaks  of  "  deeds  of  the 
law,"  he  refers  to  conformity  to  its  requirements,  the  acting  iu  consistency  with  the 
law  written  in  the  heart  on  the  part  of  the  Gentiles — the  acting  in  consistency  with 
the  law  inscribed  on  tables  of  stone  by  the  Jews.  3.  "  Faith  "  is  a  repose  npoa 
Jesus  Christ  as  given  for  us  and  offered  to  us — an  appropriating  confidence  on  the 
fact  that  He  died  for  us,  for  me.  II.  The  mode  by  which  the  apostle  ABSiVEa 
AT  this  coNCLnsioN.  The  apostle  hus  shown — 1.  That  mankind  are  all  sinners. 
(1)  That  the  Gentiles  are  so  morally  fallen  that  there  is  scarcely  a  single  crime 
which  may  not  be  charged  upon  them.  (2)  The  Jews  are  no  less  criminal.  Now, 
look  how  this  stands  as  part  of  the  argument.  If  a  man  is  justified  by  the  deeds  of 
the  law  his  whole  conduct  must  be  conformed  to  law.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  if 
mankind  have  all  broken  the  law,  a  man  cannot  be  justified  by  the  deeds  of  the 
law.  But  it  is  more  important  that  we  make  an  application  of  this  to  ourselv*  s. 
2.  That  we  are  justified  solely  by  Christ,  and,  consequently,  by  faith.  The  slightest 
attention  to  the  perfections  of  God  must  convince  us  that  He  can  never  dispenP3 
mercy  except  in  connection  with  His  justice  and  truth.  God,  having  given  us 
B  law,  and  that  law  having  been  broken,  was  bound  in  His  righteousness  to  punish 
the  sinner,  unless  some  one  were  to  be  punished  for  him,  and  He,  in  His  infinite 
wisdom  and  love,  was  pleased  to  set  foith  Jesus  Christ  to  be  a  propitiation.  Now 
it  follows  that  if  we  are  to  be  saved  alone  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Chiist,  we  can 
only  be  righteous  through  trusting  in  Him.  IH.  Tub  improvement  which  thj* 
apostle  MAKES  OF  THIS  DOCTRINE.  1.  He  vindicates  the  subject  from  the  charge 
of  novelty.  Anything  perfectly  new  in  religion  must  be  false.  Paul  shows  that 
the  doctrine  was  as  old  as  Abraham,  and  that  it  entered  into  the  whole  Jewish 
system.  He  then  cites  the  case  of  David  (Psa.  xxzii.],  and  shows  that,  as  it  was  tu9 
YOU   L  17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  to, 

experience  of  David,  it  was  the  doctrine  of  the  Jewish  Church  generally.  2.  He  gnards 
the  subject  against  licentious  abuse.  What  has  an  immoral  tendency  in  religion 
must  be  assumed  to  be  fallacious.  It  was  a  very  natural  conclusion  for  some  people 
to  arrive  at :  *'  Why,  if  we  are  not  justified  by  the  deeds  of  law  there  is  no  use  for  law." 

(1)  "  On  the  contrary,"  says  he,  "  we  establish  the  law."  We  are  justified  by  faith 
in  Him  who  endured  the  penalty  of  the  law  for  us.  The  law  is  thus  made  good,  as 
it  was  fully  honoured  by  Him  on  whom  we  repose,  who  was  made  our  Substitute. 

(2)  We  "  establish  the  law  "  in  another  way,  for  it  immediately  brings  the  soul  into 
union  with  God,  and  God  sends  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into  the  heart ;  aud  as 
Boon  as  we  feel  that  we  love  God.  Here  is  the  principle  of  all  holiness.  There  is 
nothing  so  powerful  in  the  world  as  love  :  "  faith  works  by  love."  3.  He  uses  the 
subject  to  excite  confidence.  "  Is  He  the  God  of  the  Jews  only  ?  Is  He  not  of  the 
Gentiles  also ?  "  (A.  E.  Farrar.)  Justification: — Our  position  in  the  sight  of 
God,  and  our  relation  to  His  government,  are  of  supreme  importance  to  us.  1.  We 
are  just  what  God  sees  us  to  be.  We  are  not  necessarily  what  we  think  ourselves 
to  be,  because  our  judgment  may  be  erroneous.  We  may  be  ignorant  of  what 
constitutes  a  true  Christian.  Or,  knowing  what  a  true  Christian  is,  we  may  look 
too  favourably  upon  certain  false  signs  of  religious  life,  and  may  thus,  in  either 
case,  decide  that  we  are  Christians  when  we  are  not.  In  like  manner  our  fellow- 
men  may  be  mistaken  about  us.  But  God  makes  no  errors.  2.  And  we  shall  be 
just  what  God's  dealings  with  us  tend  to  make  us.  Our  future  will  be  the  fruit  and 
the  effect  of  God's  dealings  with  us  here.  And  yet  we  often  think  more  of  being 
justified  by  man  than  by  God.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  we  are  unduly  influenced 
by  the  present.  The  insignificant  face  of  a  man  within  a  few  feet  of  you  will  hide 
the  face  of  the  infinite  and  eternal  God.  But  as  we  read  the  Scriptures,  and  as  we 
open  our  hearts  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  our  attention  is  called  away  from  men  to  God, 
and  from  man's  judgment  to  God  the  Judge  of  all.  3.  The  words  before  us  are  a 
conclusion  derived  from  two  propositions.  (1)  The  universal  unrighteousness  of 
man,  as  seen  in  the  Gentiles,  as  exhibited  by  the  Jews,  as  declared  by  God's  Word, 
and  as  made  manifest  by  God's  law.  (2)  The  provision  which  God  has  made  for 
free  justification.  If  it  be  true  that  all  men  are  unrighteous ;  that  "  God  hath  set 
forth  Christ  a  propitiation,"  &c.,  it  is  not  possible  that  a  man  can  be  justified  by 
the  deeds  of  the  law.  Look — I.  At  thb  means  of  justification  hebb  bejected. 
*'  The  deeds  of  the  law."  1.  The  deeds  of  the  law  are  the  natural  means  of  justifi- 
cation. Angels  are  justified  by  them,  and  so  was  Adam.  Bighteous  means  too  are 
these  and  necessary.  Why  do  men  in  their  attempts  to  magnify  the  gospel  denounce 
the  law  ?  Is  not  the  Lawgiver  the  redeeming  God,  and  the  redeeming  God  the 
Lawgiver  ?  And  if  the  gospel  be  the  glorious  gospel,  the  commandment  is  holy 
and  just  and  good.  2.  But  we  are  in  such  a  position  that  we  cannot  use  these 
means  for  justification.  And  why  not  ?  Because  by  one  man's  disobedience  many 
were  made  sinners,  and  because  individually  we  have  followed  our  first  father. 
II.  The  ueans  acknowledqed  and  exhibited.  What  would  be  our  position  if 
we  had  simply  a  revelation  teUing  us  that  we  cannot  be  justified  by  the  deeds  of  the 
law  ?  By  imagination  place  yourselves  in  this  position.  It  is  sometimes  necessary 
for  the  rich  to  put  themselves  by  thought  in  the  position  of  the  poor  in  order  to 
awaken  thankfulness  for  their  mercies.  Now  do  this  with  regard  to  the  grace 
of  God.  Just  think  of  yourselves  as  before  Sinai ;  think  as  though  yon  had  never 
Been  Calvary,  and  then  you  will  be  better  able  to  appreciate  all  the  blessedness 
involved  in  the  words,  "  A  man  is  justified  by  faith,"  &c.  1.  By  faith  in  what  ?  Not 
faith  in  anything.  You  may  have  faith  in  God  and  in  many  of  God's  words,  and 
yet  not  be  justified.  The  faith  to  which  Paul  directs  your  attention  here  is  faith 
in  the  manifestation  of  the  righteousness  of  God  without  the  law.  2.  Faith  in  what 
eense  and  to  what  extent  ?  Not  the  belief  that  such  a  manifestation  has  been  made, 
but  such  a  belief  as  leads  to  the  use  of  it.  "Faith  without  works  is  dead."  The 
faith  to  which  Paul  here  points  is  faith  that  does  work,  that  is  work.  It  is  the  sort 
of  faith  which  a  starving  man  will  have  in  the  supply  of  food  that  you  bring  him. 
Conclusion  :  Now,  supposing  this  to  be  the  doctrine  of  the  text,  what  do  we  learn  t 
1.  Guilt  does  not  of  itself  prevent  justification.  Your  sins  will  not  ruin  you,  but 
your  unbelief.  2.  No  circumstances  of  any  kind  in  the  case  of  those  who  hear  the 
gospel  constitute  an  exception  to  the  mode  of  justification.  Say  that  you  are  the 
children  of  godly  parents,  that  you  have  always  been  remarkable  for  morality,  yon 
must  still  be  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the  law.  But  justification 
is  within  reach  of  all  who  can  believe.  It  is  present  privilege.  (S.  Martin.) 
Justijication  by  faith: — St.  Paul  is  emphatically  the  apostle  ol  the  Beformation, 


«HAV.  m.]  ROMANS.  259 

of  the  Tigoroas,  intellectual,  Western  races,  and  of  the  advancing  civilisation  of  the 
•world.  Few  understood  him  in  his  own  day.  The  Church  soon  dropped  a  veil 
over  his  teaching,  and  developed  the  idea  of  sacramental  grace,  whose  fundamental 
principles  his  very  soul  abhorred.  For  fifteen  hundred  years  the  dust  of  time 
settled  on  his  doctrine ;  then  Lutber  with  one  bold  movement  scattered  it,  and 
translated  man  once  more  out  of  a  world  of  lifeless  formalities  into  a  world  of  vivid, 
spiritual  life.  The  Churches,  Jewish  and  Boman,  had  dead  works ;  Christianity 
has  lively  faith.  And  as  dead  works  breed  nothing  but  corruption,  while  living 
faith  is  fruitful  of  all  excellent  graces,  you  may  estimate  how  much  they  are 
severally  worth  to  the  world.    I.  To  dndebstand  thb  abgoment  wb  most  fibsi 

ORASP     THB     VITAIi    DISTINCTION     BBTWBBN     WORKS    AND     FBUITS.        SuppOSB    yOU    are 

•rippled,  and  need  constant  attention.  A  servant  for  good  pay  may  aSord  it ;  but 
there  will  be  a  certain  hardness  in  it,  and  his  work  will  be  the  basis  of  a  claim. 
But  if  you  have  a  wife  or  child,  whose  one  desire  is  to  be  the  minister  of  your 
needs,  her  joy  in  any  alleviation  she  is  able  to  afford  rises  into  quite  another  region. 
The  only  return  such  service  craves  is  that  which  it  creates,  increase  of  love.  Now 
man's  world  is  full  of  works ;  God's  is  full  of  fruits.  How  much  of  man's  work 
is  under  hard  compulsion — work  for  hire,  which  gold  repays  1  But  in  God's  great 
world  we  come  into  another  region.  The  fields  groaning  with  harvests,  the  trees 
bending  with  fruit,  the  birds  carolling  matins  at  heaven's  gate,  the  insects  humming 
eve's  lullaby,  do  glad  service  to  their  Maker ;  and  their  reward  is  the  mantle  of 
beauty  which  His  smile  flings  over  all  the  worlds.  And  in  this  we  have  the  key  to 
the  two  theologies.  Beligion  in  Jewish  and  Boman  schools  is  a  working ;  in  Paul's 
school,  in  Christ's,  it  is  a  life.  II.  And  now  let  us  applt  this  to  the  mattes 
XN  HAND.  The  works  of  the  Pharisaic  school  are  sketched  by  an  unerring  hand 
(Matt,  xiiii.  23-27).  Their  works  were  abundant,  their  fruit  nowhere.  All  within 
them  that  could  bear  fruit  was  dead.  The  evil  in  the  Church  began  probably  from 
a  misreading  of  St.  James.  What  St.  James  calls  "  faith  and  works,"  Paul  calls 
faith — that  is,  faith  which  is  alive,  and  can  prove  its  vitality  by  its  fruitfulness. 
But  the  Church  soon  began  to  lay  the  chief  stress  on  the  works.  They  are  the  part 
of  the  matter  with  which  a  priesthood  can  most  profitably  concern  itself.  Follow 
the  track  of  Tetzel,  and  see  what  the  Pharisaic  doctrine  of  work  inevitably  grows  to 
in  time.  And  the  fruit  of  it  is  twofold.  To  the  earnest,  life  becomes  a  weary, 
hopeless  drudgery — a  "yoke  "  which  neither  we  nor  our  fathers  were  able  to  bear ; 
with  which  compare  Luther's  description  of  his  agony  of  mind  while  a  Boman 
monk ;  while  with  the  sensual  it  develops  a  reckless  profligacy  which,  by  a  httle 
clever  arrangement  with  the  Chancery  of  heaven,  can  all  be  set  right  at  last.  lU. 
"  Whebefore  wb  conclude  that  a  man  is  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds 
OF  the  law,"  £ind  we  step  out  at  once  into  a  new  and  heavenly  world  (Gal. 
ill.  10-14,  21-29).  Paul's  position  and  Luther's  is  that  a  soul  in  anguish  on 
account  of  transgression  must  sweep  clean  out  all  anxieties  as  to  what  it  can  do  to 
please  the  Father,  beyond  the  filial  act  of  looking  to  Him  through  Him  who  came 
to  reveal  Him.  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  1. 
Well  but,  said  the  Judaising  theologians  to  St.  Paul,  and  the  Bomanising  theo- 
logians to  Luther,  this  is  to  do  away  with  the  very  foundations  of  moraUty.  But 
this  depends  wholly  on  what  we  mean  by  faith.  If  it  be  simply  a  mental  consent 
to  Scriptural  statements  then  the  Judaisers  and  the  Bomanists  are  right.  But  if 
we  believe  with  Paul  and  Luther,  that  the  act  of  faith  is  a  vital  act  whereby  the 
sinner  becomes  "  dead  to  sin,  but  alive  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ  his  Lord,"  then 
you  have  a  guarantee  for  the  fruits  of  faith,  which  may  be  regarded  as  the  nobler 
works  of  the  law,  transfigured,  glorified  by  life.  It  is  a  great  mystery  ;  so  is  the  life 
of  nature.  It  is  the  gift  of  God ;  so  is  the  life  of  nature.  As  God  has  ordained  the 
law  by  which  the  life  of  nature  is  quickened  in  the  embryo,  so  has  He  ordained  that 
in  the  spiritual  sphere  the  "  just  by  faith  shall  live."  2.  And  Paul's  conception  of 
the  meaning  of  justification  was  very  large  and  grand.  Justified  by  faith  the  law 
has  no  claim  against  you,  the  devil  no  accusation.  God  beholds  you  as  you  are  in 
Christ,  whose  image,  forming  within,  shines  through  all  the  follies  and  weaknesses 
that  defile  your  frail  humanity,  and  obliterates  them  to  heavenly  sight.  Your  title 
to  the  name  of  son,  and  the  son's  inheritance,  is  absolute.  Tou  have  not  to  win  it. 
One  thing  alone  vitiates  it — unbelief.  Let  faith  fail,  the  life  fails.  Fix  the  eye  of 
faith  again  on  Christ,  cry  to  Him,  "  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  Thou  mine  unbelief,"  and 
the  life  rises  again  in  the  springs.  Good  works  will  flow  from  you  as  summer  fruits 
from  the  sunny  earth,  music  from  a  harp  full  strung,  or  light  from  the  fountain  of 
day.    And  they  are  beautiful  to  Him,  for  He  creates  them ;  what  glory  is  in  them. 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  oi. 

ihe  newborn  lay  as  tribute  at  His  feet.  {J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.)  Justification 
by  faith  : — L  What  is  meant  by  justification.  The  justification  here  meant — I. 
Is  not — (1)  That  which  comes  upon  all  men,  even  infants,  through  the  righteousness 
of  Christ  (Chron.  v.  14,  15,  18).  (2)  That  which  shall  take  place  at  the  day  of 
judgment  (chap.  ii.  13-16 ;  Matt.  xii.  37),  which  will  be,  not  indeed  by  the  merit 
^chap.  vi.  23),  but  by  the  evidence  of  works  (Eev.  xx.  12  ;  xxii,  12).  2.  But  that 
which  the  true  people  of  God  possess  on  earth  (1  Cor.  vi.  11 ;  Tit.  iii.  7) ;  which  is 
— (1)  Not  the  declaration  of  innocence,  which  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  in  courts  of 
law  (Psa.  cxliii.  2  ;  Chron.  iii.  20).  (2)  Not  the  being  made  innocent  or  holy,  which 
would  confound  it  with  regeneration  or  sanctification.  (3)  But  the  having  righteous* 
ness  accounted  to  us  ;  sin  not  imputed,  sin  pardoned ;  or  the  senteuce  of  condem- 
nation against  us  reversed,  and  oar  obligation  to  punishment  cancelled  by  a  j  udicial 
act  of  God.  This  implies,  and  draws  after  it,  acceptance  and  adoption.  U.  In  what 
SENSE  WE  ABE  TO  BE  "  JDSTIFIED  BY  FAITH. "  When  the  apostle  says  we  are  "  justified 
by  faith — 1.  He  does  not  speak  of — (1)  The  moving  cause  of  justification  which  la 
Divine  grace ;  and  hence  we  are  said  to  be  justified  by  grace  (ver.  24 ;  Tit.  iii.  4-7). 
(2)  Nor  of  the  meritorious  cause,  which  is  the  redemption  of  Christ  (ver.  24,  25 ; 
Isa.  liii  11 ;  2  Cor.  v.  ult.) ;  and  hence  we  are  said  to  be  "  justified  by  Christ  "  (Gal. 
ii.  17).  (3)  Nor  of  the  efficient  cause,  either  of  the  preparation  necessary,  as  con- 
viction and  repentance  for  sin,  or  of  a  sense  of  this  justification  ;  this  is  the  Holy 
Spirit  (Tit.  iii.  7).  (4)  Nor  of  the  instrumental  cause  on  the  part  of  God,  which  is 
part  of  His  Word,  viz.,  His  declaration  and  promises  respecting  pardoning  tha 
penitent  (John  xv.  3).  2.  But  of  the  instrumental  cause  on  our  part,  which 
is  faith — in  Christ,  as  the  Son  of  God,  the  Messiah,  the  Saviour,  able  and  willing 
to  save  (John  iii.  16-18 ;  Gal.  ii.  16) ;  this  implies — (1)  That  we  come  to  Him  (John 
vi.  87.  vii.  37 ;  Matt.  ix.  28).  (2)  That  we  trust  in  Him  as  "  delivered  for  our 
offences"  (chap.  iv.  25),  trust  in  His  blood  (chap.  iii.  25).  (3)  That  we  receive  Him 
(John  i.  12)  in  God  (chap.  iv.  24),  in  His  mercy  and  promises  through  Christ  (chap, 
iv.  17-23).  Those  who  have  this  faith  are  justified,  and  none  without  it.  Thus, 
in  different  senses,  we  are  justified  by  grace,  by  Christ,  by  the  Spirit,  by  the  Word, 
by  faith.  IH.  How  this  is  "without  the  deeds  of  the  law."  {J.  Benson,) 
Justification  by  faith : — I.  The  doctbine  of  justification.  1.  On  this  subject 
great  misconception  prevails.  There  are  two  extremes  into  which  men  are  betrayed. 
(1)  That  justification  originates  with  the  creature,  instead  of  the  Creator.  (2)  The 
exclusion  of  man  from  all  active  concern  in  the  reception  of  the  boon.  In  the 
former,  sinners,  like  ancient  Israel,  attempt  to  establish  a  righteousness  of  their 
own ;  in  the  latter,  justification  is  regarded  as  an  act  of  the  Divine  government, 
irrespective  of  the  production  of  moral  character  in  the  predestinated  objects  of  it. 
Against  both  delusions  we  ought  to  be  on  our  guard.  The  one  is  fraught  with 
legal  confidence,  the  other  with  antinouiian  licence.  2.  That  we  may  attach 
distinct  ideas  to  the  justification,  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  consider  it  in  reference 
to  the  attributes  and  revealed  will  of  the  Divine  Lawgiver.  "  It  is  God  that 
jnstifieth  " ;  and  the  principles  accordingly  by  which  His  decisions  are  conducted 
are  those  of  unerring  wisdom  and  unchangeable  excellence.  Now,  the  revealed 
ground  of  justification,  when  man  was  in  a  state  of  innocency,  was  a  perfect  con- 
formity to  the  will  of  his  heavenly  Father.  And  will  the  unchangeable  God  now 
be  satisfied  with  a  less  pure  devotion  to  His  will  ?  Impossible  1  But,  in  Adam's 
case,  the  righteousness  was  his  own ;  now  it  is  that  of  our  Surety.  Still,  the 
principle  of  justification  is  one  and  the  same,  at  once  satisfying  the  claims  of 
justice  and  vindicating  the  equity  of  the  law.  The  patriarchal  and  Mosaic  dispen- 
sations were  at  one  with  the  Christian  in  the  revealed  ground  of  acceptance.  The 
victim  presented  at  the  altar  was  a  confession  that  the  life  of  the  offerer  had  been 
forfeited  by  sin,  and  that  the  law  of  righteousness  was  obMgatory.  True  believers 
worshipped  the  holy  Lord  God  as  also  merciful  and  gracious.  To  them,  as  to  as, 
justification  was  granted  as  an  act  of  forgiving  love.  8.  Justification  includes 
pardon  of  sin  and  acceptance  with  God.  Both  are  due  to  the  voluntary  substitu- 
tion of  the  Son  of  God  in  our  nature,  who  by  active  obedience  fulfilled  the  law  to 
the  uttermost,  and  by  penal  suffering  redeemed  us  from  its  curse.  4.  From  this 
scheme  human  works  are  completely  excluded.  The  origin,  the  progress,  tha 
revelation,  the  execution  of  it  are  all  aUke  Divine.  It  was  devised  in  the  counsels 
of  unsearchable  Wisdom,  flows  from  the  unmerited  riches  of  sovereign  compassion, 
and  glorifies  the  Divine  government  in  the  estimation  of  all  orders  of  inteUigent 
beings.  II.  Thb  natube  of  that  faith  by  which  we  aee  justified.  1.  Note 
the  relation  which  faith  bears  to  the  justifying  act  of  God  as  an  instrumental  but 


esAP.  m.]  R03IANS,  961 

not  efiBcient  cause.  A  mariner  falls  from  the  vessel's  side  and  is  in  imminent 
danger  of  sinking ;  a  rope  is  thrown  out  to  him  ;  he  believes  that  this  presents  a 
way  for  his  escape,  and  bis  faith  may  be  said  to  save  him  from  a  watery  grave. 
Unless  he  had  confided  in  the  rope,  death  would  have  been  inevitable.  Now,  it  is 
in  a  sense  analogous  to  this  that  we  are  "  justified  by  faith."  It  Is  not  our  faith 
that  imparts  a  right  to  the  blessings  of  redemption.  Faith  simply  connects  the 
needy  but  unworthy  recipient  with  the  munificent  Giver.  It  is  the  opening  of  the 
mouth  for  the  bread  of  life ;  the  stretching  forth  of  the  withered  hand  towards 
the  Divine  Physician ;  the  putting  on  the  protecting  robe  against  the  inclemency 
of  the  storm.  2.  Note  its  properties.  (1)  Its  Divine  origin.  Like  every  other 
good  gift,  it  cometh  from  above.  "  No  man,"  says  our  Lord,  "  can  come  to  Me, 
except  the  Father,  which  hath  sent  Me,  draw  him."  "By  grace  are  ye  saved, 
through  faith,  and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God."  Hence  we 
perceive  an  important  distinction  between  a  merely  speculative  or  historical  assent 
to  the  truth  of  God  and  that  holy  exercise  of  man's  heart  with  which  he  believeth 
unto  righteousness.  (2)  Its  appropriating  character.  We  may  admit  the  existence 
and  value  of  many  things  in  which  we  feel  httle  personal  interest.  Without  calling 
in  question  a  single  fact  or  doctrine  of  Holy  Scripture  we  may  be  unmoved  by  its 
most  solemn  and  touching  representations.  It  is  otherwise  when  the  slumbers  of 
spiritual  death  are  broken.  Instead  of  boasting  as  heretofore  of  good  deeds  and 
virtuous  aspirations,  the  language  is, "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  1 "  But  whither 
shall  he  take  himself  for  remission  ?  Will  he  be  satisfied  with  mere  generalities,  as 
that  Christ  Jesus  "  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,"  and  that  he  need  not 
therefore  despair  of  mercy  ?  Assuredly  not.  He  is  not  satisfied  till  he  can  say,  "  He 
loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  (3)  It  is  inseparably  connected  with  all  other 
Christian  graces.  Faith  "  works  by  love  "  ;  "  purifies  the  heart  " ;  is  •'  the  sub- 
stance of  things  hoped  for."  (J.  Sawer,  M.A.)  The  doctrine  of  justification 
by  faith : — I.  The  justification  of  sinnebs  befobe  God  entibely  excludes 
THEiB  OWN  W0BK8.  1.  When  he  says  a  man  is  justified  by  faith  without  works, 
he  does  not  mean  that  there  are  different  means  of  justification  for  different 
sinners,  but  that  every  individual  sinner  of  the  human  family  who  is  justified 
obtains  this  privilege  by  faith.  2.  The  moral  law  could  not  justify  sinners; 
for  by  it,  says  the  apostle,  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  It  points  out  the  evil  of 
sin  as  opposite  to  itself  and  to  the  Divine  nature ;  it  criminates  sinners  for  their 
offences,  and  threatens  deserved  punishment;  things  as  opposite  to  justification  as 
anything  can  be.  3.  Sinners  cannot  be  justified  by  the  works  of  the  moral  law, 
because,  in  their  natural  condition,  they  cannot  obey  any  of  its  precepts.  Their 
nature  is  corrupted,  and  all  their  actions  polluted  with  sin.  But  actions  from  an 
impure  source  cannot  justify,  but  must  render  men  liable  to  condemnation.  Besides, 
all  men  in  their  natural  condition  are  under  the  curse  of  the  law.  4.  If  it  be  pleaded 
that  sincere  though  imperfect  obedience  will  justify  sinners,  let  me  ask.  Hath 
Jehovah  anywhere  in  His  Word  required  sincere  obedience,  or  any  degrees  of  it,  as 
the  ground  of  acceptance  ?  Or  can  it  be  proved  from  the  sacred  oracles  that  one 
individual  sinner  of  the  human  race  ever  yielded  sincere  obedience  to  the  Divine 
law,  till  once  he  was  renewed  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  accepted  through  the  merit 
of  Christ  ?  It  cannot.  6.  It  is  worthy  of  observation  on  this  subject,  that  all  the 
good  works  performed  by  believers  in  Christ  Jesus  are  as  much  excluded  from  being 
the  ground  of  justification  as  the  works  of  sinners  previous  to  conversion.  All 
works  really  and  instrumentally  good  are  performed  in  a  state  of  justification,  are 
the  proper  and  natural  effects  of  it,  and  therefore  cannot  be  the  cause  of  it.  They 
are  proper  and  requisite  to  evidence  the  reality  of  justification  to  the  consciences  of 
believers  and  to  the  world,  but  were  never  designed  by  God  to  be  the  foundation  of 
this  important  privilege.  II.  The  evangelicaIi  docteine  of  justification  by  faith. 
1.  The  righteousness  which  is  the  alone  ground  of  the  sinner's  acceptance  consists 
in  the  spotless  and  perfect  righteousness  of  the  Eedeemer's  nature  and  life,  and  in 
the  complete  satisfaction  which  He  yielded  to  Divine  justice.  It  glorifies  the  moral 
administration  of  Deity,  and  renders  it  amiably  and  awfully  venerable.  2.  Let  us 
next  inquire  into  the  infiuence  of  faith  on  justification,  and  how  it  justifies.  (1) 
This  influence  is  pointed  out  by  the  apostle  when  he  declares  in  the  text,  "  A  man 
ia  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the  law."  It  is  not  a  natural  but  a  saving 
faith  that  justifies.  By  a  natural  faith  is  to  be  understood  that  assent  of  the  under- 
standing to  the  truths  of  Divine  revelation  which  sinners  are  capable  of  yielding  in 
their  natural  and  unrenewed  condition.  (2)  Let  us  now  ascertain  the  paitionlar 
«ense  in  which  faith  justifies.    It  does  not  justify  merely  as  it  is  a  grace  implanted 


M2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [obap.  m. 

in  the  heart,  for  In  this  respect  it  is  the  work  of  God,  and  not  of  man ;  though  still 
the  existence  of  the  principle  is  necessary  to  all  its  snbseqnent  operations,  and  lays 
a  foundation  for  them  in  the  souL  Nor  does  it  justify  by  its  own  act,  as  separated 
from  its  object,  the  Redeemer's  merit,  as  it  is  received  by  the  believing  sinner ;  for 
in  this  respect  it  is  a  duty,  and  as  much  excluded  from  the  ground  of  justification 
as  all  other  graces  and  duties  are.  Nor  does  it  justify  by  any  intrinsic  merit  in  its 
principle  or  exercise,  considered  abstractly  by  themselves ;  for  though  it  has  in  it  a 
nigh  degree  of  spiritual  excellence,  as  a  grace  of  the  Spirit,  yet  the  gifts  of  God  can 
found  no  plea  of  personal  merit  in  those  who  receive  them.  Neither  does  faith 
justify  by  assenting  to  this  proposition,  that  the  merit  of  Jesus  is  the  only  ground 
of  the  sinner's  acceptance  with  God ;  for  this  doctrine  may  be  assented  to  as  a  true 
doctrine  by  sinners  who  are  never  justified  and  saved.  As  in  the  former  respects 
faith  does  not  justify,  in  what  determinate  sense  does  it  justify?  I  reply,  that  faith 
justifies,  as  it  is  the  Divinely  appointed  mean  or  instrument,  whereby  the  renewed 
sinner  apprehends  and  applies  the  glorious  Mediator  in  His  all-perfect  and  meritorious 
righteousness  for  the  pardon  of  sin,  acceptance  into  the  Divine  favour,  and  as  the 
ground  of  his  title  to  all  gospel  blessings.  The  mediatorial  righteousness  is  the 
object  of  justifying  faith,  and  faith  justifies  as  it  is  the  instrument  by  which  the 
believing  soul  takes  hold  of  the  Bedeemer's  righteousness  as  the  alone  ground  of 
justification  before  God.  The  mediatorial  righteousness  justifies  meritoriously,  and 
faith  instrumentaUy.  It  is  necessary  also  to  observe,  that  when  faith  justifies 
instrumentally,  it  is  its  primary  act  that  justifies,  and  not  any  of  its  subsequent 
acts.  By  the  continued  actings  of  faith,  sanctification  is  promoted,  justification  is 
evidenced,  faith  itself  and  the  other  Christian  graces  are  invigorated,  pious  resolu- 
tions confirmed,  communion  with  God  maintained,  the  power  and  sweetness  of 
religion  experienced,  Divine  supplies  are  received,  God  and  religion  honoured,  and 
the  believer  is  gradually  ripened  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.  The  more 
lively  the  actings  of  faith  are,  the  more  vigorous  will  the  life  of  grace  become  in  the 
soul,  increasing  degrees  of  Divine  consolation  will  be  felt,  and  the  Christian  will 
press  forward  with  greater  ardour  to  the  glorious  prize  of  his  high  calling.    III.  Ths 

FECUI.IAB    EXCELLENCIES    OF    THIS  OOSPEL    UETHOD    OF    JT7STIFICATI0N.        1.    It    IS    an 

amazing  device  of  infinite  wisdom,  by  which  the  perfections  and  the  government  of 
God  are  eminently  glorified.  2.  It  excludes  boasting  in  believers,  hides  pride  from 
their  eyes,  and  leads  them  to  a  humble  dependence  on  redeeming  merit,  which  is  a 
temper  highly  becoming  sinful  creatures,  and  suitable  to  their  condition.  8.  It 
places  all  the  children  of  God  npon  the  same  level,  so  that  they  are  all  one  in 
Christ  Jesus,  and  none  of  them  have  any  superiority  over  the  rest.  There  are  many 
other  differences  between  them,  but  here  there  is  none,  as  they  all  stand  on  the 
same  immovable  foundation.  What  a  powerful  motive  arises  from  this  to  brotherly 
love,  and  to  every  office  of  the  most  endearing  friendship !  What  a  noble  incentive 
to  gratitude  to  God,  and  the  Saviour,  and  to  the  cultivation  of  holiness  in  the  heart 
and  in  life  I  4.  This  Divine  method  of  acceptance  estabUshes  the  faith  and  hope  of . 
Christians  upon  an  immovable  and  everlasting  foundation.  Had  their  own  graces, 
frames,  or  duties,  been  the  ground  of  pardon  and  acceptance,  they  must  have  been 
left  in  the  greatest  uncertainty  about  their  interest  in  the  favour  of  God,  and  had 
their  hearts  filled  with  perplexing  doubts  and  fears.  But  the  mediation  and  merit 
of  Jesus  removes  all  ground  of  uncertainty  and  perturbation.  Believers  neither 
need  to  turn  inward  to  their  graces  and  frames,  nor  outward  to  their  duties,  to  find 
the  matter  of  their  justification.  This  is  abundantly  provided  for  them  by  the  grace 
of  God  in  the  merit  of  Jesus  Christ,  whose  spotless  obedience  and  unequalled  sufferings 
are,  by  the  wise  and  benign  appointment  of  Jehovah,  the  alone  ground  of  pardon 
and  hfe  to  guilty  men.  5.  This  Divine  plan  of  acceptance  afiFords  support,  comfort, 
and  tranquillity,  to  true  Christians  under  the  pressures  of  life,  the  revolutions  of  the 
world,  and  the  challenges  of  conscience.  6.  The  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith 
in  the  merit  of  Christ  affords  the  most  powerful  methods  to  love,  gratitude,  and 
obedience.  Does  not  love  naturally  beget  love  ?  and  shall  not  a  display  of  the  love 
of  God  in  justifying  the  ungodly  through  the  mediation  of  His  Son  beget  love  in  th« 
justified  sinner?  and  if  he  love  God,  will  not  love  constrain  him  to  keep  His 
oommandmeuts  ?  (P.  Hutchinson.)  Salvation  by  faith  without  the  worki 
of  the  law  : — The  ark  of  Christ's  gospel  need  carry  no  lifeboat  of  human  making 
onboard.  (Canon  Miller.)  Salvation  by  faith  without  the  work*  of  the  law: — 
Some  years  ago  two  men,  a  bargeman  and  a  collier,  were  in  a  boat  near  the  Niagara 
Falls,  and  found  themselves  unable  to  manage  it,  it  being  carried  so  swiftly  down 
the  current  that  they  must  both  inevitably  be  borne  down  and  dashed  to  picoet. 


«HAP.  in.]  ROMANS.  S6S 

At  last,  however,  one  man  was  saved  by  floating  a  rope  to  him,  which  he  grasped. 
The  same  instant  a  log  floated  by  the  other  man.    The  thoughtless  and  confused 
bargeman,  instead  of  seizing  the  rope,  laid  hold  on  the  log.    It  was  a  fatal  mistake, 
for  clinging  to  the  loose  floating  log  he  was  borne  irresistibly  along  and  never  heard 
of  afterwards,  while  the  other  was  saved  because  he  had  a  connection  with  the 
people  on  the  land.     Faith  has  a  saving  connection  with  Christ.    Christ  is  on  the 
fihore,  so  to  speak,  holding  the  rope,  and  as  we  lay  hold  of  it  with  the  hand  of  our 
confidence,  He  pulls  us  to  shore ;  but  our  good  works,  having  no  connection  with 
Christ,  are  drifted  alone  down  to  the  gulf  of  fell  despair.     Grapple  our  virtues  as 
tightly  as  we  may,  they  cannot  avail  as  in  the  least  degree  ;  they  are  the  discon- 
nected log  which  has  no  holdfast  on  the  heavenly   shore.     {C  H.   Spurgeon.) 
Marriage  of  faith  and  works  : — The  second  chapter  of  the  Epistle  by  James  seems, 
to  my  mind,  to  describe  a  spiritual  wedding.     We  are  "  bidden  to  a  marriage  " ; 
and,  as  at  the  older  marriage  in  Cana  of  Galilee,  the  holy  Master  is  present,  and 
consummates  the  nuptials.    The  parties  to  be  united  are  but  symbolic  personages, 
and  yet  are  real  and  lifelike  too.    The  bride  is  yoang  and  beautiful — ever  young, 
and  ever  clothed  upon  with  light  as  with  a  garment.    Her  face  is  clear  as  the  day ; 
her  leok  is  firm,  and  yet  trustful.     She  is  not  of  the  earth,  but  heaven-bom,  and 
wears  her  celestial  parentage  in  every  lineament  of  her  radiant  countenance.    Her 
name  is  "  Faith."    She  is  the  daughter  of  God.    And  beside  her  stands  one  whose 
lusty  form  was  made  for  deeds  of  daring  and  endurance.     He  is  sinewy  and 
athletic.  There  is  valour  in  his  eye,  and  "cunning  in  his  ten  fingers,"  and  strength 
in  his  right  arm.     He  was  created  to  act,  to  do,  to  suffer.    He  was  formed  for 
strife  and  struggle.    His  name  is  "  Action."    With  solemn  rites  the  two  are  joined 
in  wedlock.    They  are  both  to  love,  and  both  to  obey.    They  are  always  to  live 
and  move  and  suffer  and  conquer  together.    They  are  to  be  the  fruitful  parents  of 
everything  good  on  earth.     On  them,  while  united,  Jehovah  pronounces  a  "  bless- 
ing "  richer  than  that  which  gladdened  the  nuptials  of  Isaac  and  Rebekah,  or  of 
Jacob  and  Leah.     While  united,  they  are  to  five  and  grow  and  conquer ;  when 
separated,  they  are  to  droop  and  perish.     For  each  other,  and  in  each  other,  and 
with  each  other,  their  days  of  struggle  and  victory  are  to  be  passed,  until  time  shall 
be  no  longer.    And  so  "  faith  "  and  "  works  "  were  coupled  by  infinite  Wisdom  ; 
(and  in  the  presence  of  the  world  it  was  solemnly  announced,  "  What  God  hath 
joined  together,  let  no  man  put  asunder."     {T.  L.  Gxtyler,  D.D.)        Creed  and 
conduct  (text,  and  James  ii.  14) : — 1.  The  Bible  does  certainly  teach  that  a  certain 
kind  of  faith,  which  even  James  would  commend,  is  essential  to  salvation.     (1)  We 
Bee  kindness  and  wisdom  of  God  in  this  arrangement,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  condition 
most  easy  to  fulfil.    And  not  only  has  man  the  capacity  to  believe,  but  he  has  a 

{)ropensity  to  do  so.  He  is  a  credulous  being ;  he  lives,  and  works,  and  hopes,  and 
oves,  and  rests,  by  faith.  Faith  is  the  basis  of  society,  the  wheel  of  commerce,  the 
tie  of  friendship,  the  channel  of  social  intercourse.  (2)  Nor  is  it  more  kind  than 
wise.  I  caimot  see  how  man  could  have  been  saved  without  a  certain  kind  of  faith. 
Before  he  changes  his  character,  he  must  have  new  convictions.  Man  must 
become  a  Christian,  as  he  becomes  a  farmer,  a  mariner,  a  physician — by  faith.  2. 
It  has  been  thought  by  some  that  James  disparages  faith,  and  places  himself  in 
antagonism  to  Paul.  But  note — (1)  The  difference  in  the  mental  tendencies  of  the 
sposties.  The  natural  tendency  of  Paul's  mind  was  speculative.  He  delighted  in 
the  science  of  religion.  The  tendency  of  James  was  practical.  He  thought  more 
about  acts  than  ideas.  He  estimated  the  creed  of  a  man  by  his  works.  With  this 
mental  difference,  whilst  both  would  hold  the  same  great  vital  truth,  one  would  be 
naturally  more  taken  up  with  the  speculative  aspect,  and  the  other  with   the 

Eractical.  (2)  The  difference  in  the  characters  to  whom  the  apostles  wrote.  Paul 
ad  in  view  the  legalist ;  James  had  in  view  those  who  combined  an  orthodox 
creed  with  an  unorthodox  practice.  One  was  against  legalism,  and  the  other 
against  antinomianism.  In  further  illustration  of  the  real  harmony  between  the 
two  inspired  men,  note — I.  That  thebe  mat  be  a  cektain  kind  of  work  ih 

OOKNBCnON  WITH  BELIGION  WHEBE  THERE  IS  NO  GENUINE  FAITH.       ThoSC  Which  spring 

— 1.  From  the  feeling  of  merit.  Such  were  the  works  of  the  old  Pharisees.  What 
a  deal  of  work  there  is  done  in  connection  with  religion  from  this  feeling  now  I  2. 
From  a  sympathy  with  the  feelings  and  doings  of  others.  It  is  customary  in  the 
circle  to  which  the  man  belongs  to  attend  places  of  worship,  and  to  contribute  to 
religious  institutions  ;  and  he  of  course  must  do  the  same.  Certain  religious 
doings  are  fashionable  ;  and  the  love  of  fashion  and  the  fear  of  singulaiitj  will 
prompt  them.    3.  From  oiHcial  position.    A  man  takes  some  office  in  oozuMotioa 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

with  Christianity — Sahbath-school  teacher,  deacon,  <fec. — and  he  may  do  the  datiea 
of  his  oflBce  without  any  genuine  faith.  4.  From  the  love  of  a  sect.  The  partisan 
feeling  in  religion  is  ever  wondrously  active.     H.  Thebe  mat  be  a  certain  kind  of 

rAITH  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  BELIGION  WHERE  THERE  IS  NO  GENUINE  FAITH.       There   is   a 

kind  of  faith  something  like  that  sentimental  charity  that  will  talk  fluently  and 
tenderly  about  the  sufferings  of  the  poor,  but  will  do  nothing  to  relieve  their 
Bufferings.  1.  A  traditional  faith.  Such  as  people  get  from  their  parents,  their 
Beet,  which  is  adopted  without  any  honest  searching  in  the  light  of  common  sense 
and  the  Bible  before  God.  People  whose  faith  is  of  this  description,  had  they  been 
bom  in  Turkey,  would  have  been  Mohammedans  ;  in  India,  Hindoos.  This  faith 
is  a  serious  evil :  it  warps  the  intellect,  shuts  out  new  truth,  and  obstructs  free 
thoaght,  piety,  and  progress.  It  is  everlastingly  quarrelling — anathematising 
heretics.  2.  A  speculative  faith.  Persons  of  this  faith  believe  in  God,  Christ, 
heaven,  and  hell  as  propositions,  but  do  not  realise  their  bearing  on  themselves. 
3.  A  sentimental  faith.  Persons  of  this  class  are  carried  about  with  every  wind  of 
doctrine ;  they  are  taken  np  with  this  preacher  to-day,  and  that  to-morrow.  They 
are  Arminians  one  Sunday,  and  Antinomians  the  next.  These  are  mental  children 
— clouds  without  water ;  the  creatures  of  clap-trap  and  novelty.    III.  That  neitheb 

THE   WORKS   UNCONNECTED   WITH   GENUINE   FAITH,  NOB  THE   FAITH   UNCONNECTED  WITH 

GENUINE  woBKS,  ARE  OF  ANT  MOEAL  SERVICE.  1.  The  works  Unconnected  with  genuine 
faith  are  of  no  moral  service.  Because — (1)  The  worth  of  a  work  in  the  sight  of 
God  is  the  motive.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."  (2)  The  happi- 
ness of  a  work  is  in  the  motive.  In  the  employment  of  man  the  outward  act  gives 
value  to  your  service.  So  long  as  you  can  plough,  sow,  and  build  well,  it  does  not 
matter  what  you  think  or  feel.  But,  in  religion,  the  feeling  of  the  act  is  every- 
thing. The  widow's  mite  is  "more  than  all."  2.  The  faith  unconnected  with 
good  works  is  of  no  moral  service.  What  is  a  seed  worth  if  it  has  not  the 
germinating  principle  ?  What  is  the  salt  worth  without  its  savour?  What  we 
want  now  is  to  have  the  creed  of  Churches  worked  out.  This  will  do  more  against 
infidelity  than  all  your  Ubraries.  "  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  me.  Lord,  Lord," 
&o.    IV.  That  the  faith  of  the  gospel  will  neoessabilt  lead  to  good  works, 

AND  TEra   WOBKS   07   THE  GOSPEL  NECESSABILT  SPRING   FBOM   GOSPEL  FAITH.      AnD  THUS 

Paul  and  James  agree.  1.  The  nature  of  the  case  shows  this.  Faith  in  the 
gospel  is  faith  in  the  infinite  love  of  God  for  sinners.  Can  a  man  really  believe  in 
this  without  love  rising  in  his  heart  to  God  ?  What  is  the  first  question  of  love  ? 
How  shall  I  please  ?  &o.  2.  The  biographies  of  believers  show  this.  "  When  it 
pleased  God,"  says  Paul,  "  to  reveal  His  Son  in  me,  immediately  I  conferred  not 
with  flesh  and  blood,"  <&o.  James  preached  against  the  mere  creedist,  and  Paul 
against  the  mere  workmonger;  and  such  preachers  every  age  reqoires.  (2). 
Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  29-31.  Is  He  the  God  of  the  Jews  onlj7—The  Divine  unities :— I.  One  God. 
II.  One  LAW.  in.  One  faith.  IV.  One  ultimate  purpose.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Is  He  not  also  of  the  Gentiles? — The  universal  Father: — The  writings  of  Paul 
have  met  with  a  singular  fate.  They  were  intended  to  reveal  the  Father's 
universal  and  impartial  love;  they  have  been  used  to  represent  Him  as  an 
exclusive  and  arbitrary  Sovereign.  They  were  designed  to  open  the  kingdom  of 
God  to  all  men ;  and  they  have  been  so  distorted  as  to  shut  it  on  the  many  and 
confine  it  to  the  few.  The  great  design  of  Paul  was  to  vindicate  the  spiritual  right 
of  the  race  against  the  exclusive  bigotry  of  the  Jews ;  to  manifest  God  as  the 
Father  of  all  men,  and  Christ  as  the  Saviour,  not  of  one  narrow  nation,  but  the 
whole  world.  Note,  then,  from  the  text — I.  The  doctbine  that  God  is  "  the 
God  of  the  Gentiles."  To  understand  the  full  import  of  this,  we  must  consider 
that  to  the  Jew  the  Gentiles  were  odious.  He  thought  it  pollution  to  eat  with 
them.  He  called  them  dogs.  He  claimed  God  as  exclusively  his  God.  Could  we 
fully  comprehend  this,  we  should  be  filled  with  admiration  for  the  moral  grandeur 
manifested  in  the  text.  Paul,  in  writing  them,  not  only  offered  violence  to  all  his 
earliest  and  deepest  impressions,  but  put  his  life  in  peril  1.  God  is  "  the  God  of 
the  Gentiles,"  and  do  we  not  respond  to  this  truth?  The  heathen  had  indeed 
wandered  far  from  God ;  and  to  the  Jews  He  seemed  to  have  forsaken  them  utterly. 
But  how  could  the  universal  Father  forsake  the  millions  of  His  creatures?  Judaea 
was  but  a  speck  on  the  globe.  Was  the  Infinite  One  to  be  confined  to  this  ?  Could 
His  love  be  stinted  to  the  few  to  whom  He  had  specially  revealed  His  will  ?  In  the 
tery  darkest  ages  God  was  "  the  God  of  the  Gentries."    They  had  their  revelatioib 


OBAP.  m.]  ROMANS.  966 

Light  from  heaven  desoended  into  their  souls.  They  had  the  Divine  law  "  written 
in  their  hearts."  God  keep  as  from  the  horrible  thought  that  the  myriads  who  are 
buried  in  heathen  darkness  are  outcasts  from  His  love  1  Their  spiritual  wants 
should  indeed  move  our  compassion  ;  and  the  higher  light  is  given  us  that  we  may 
send  it  to  these  brethren.  2.  That  God  is  "  the  God  of  the  Gentiles,"  we  learn 
from  the  wonderful  progress  which  human  nature  made  in  heathen  ages.  Bemember 
Greece.  God's  gift  of  genius — one  form  of  inspiration — was  showered  down  on 
that  small  territory  as  on  no  other  region  under  heaven.  To  Greece  was  given  the 
revelation  of  beauty,  which  has  made  her  literature  and  art,  next  to  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  the  most  precious  legacy  of  past  ages.  In  that  wonderful  country 
amidst  degrading  vices  were  maniiested  sublimest  virtues.  Undoubtedly  Grecian 
philosophy  was  an  imperfect  intellectual  guide,  and  impotent  as  a  moral  teacher. 
But  was  not  God  the  God  of  the  Gentiles  when  He  awakened  in  the  Greeks  such 
noble  faculties  of  reason,  and  by  their  patriotic  heroism  carried  so  far  forward  the 
education  of  the  human  race  ?  3.  God  is  "the  God  of  the  Gentiles" ;  and  He  was 
BO  just  when  He  separated  from  them  His  chosen  people.  For  why  was  the  Jew  set 
apart  ?  That  •*  all  families  of  the  earth  might  be  blessed."  Judaism  was  a  normal 
school  to  train  up  teachers  for  the  whole  world.  The  Hebrew  prophet  was  inspired 
to  announce  an  age  when  the  knowledge  of  God  was  to  cover  the  earth  as  waters 
cover  the  sea.  Nothing  in  the  history  of  the  Jews  shows  them  to  us  as  God's 
personal  favourites,  for  their  history  is  a  record  of  Divine  rebukes,  threatenings, 
and  punishments.  Their  very  privileges  brought  upon  them  peculiar  woes.  In 
ages  of  universal  idolatry  they  were  called  to  hold  forth  the  light  of  pure  Theism. 
They  betrayed  their  trust,  and  when  the  time  came  for  the  "  partition  wall "  to  be 
prostrated,  and  for  the  Jews  to  receive  the  Gentile  world  into  brotherhood,  they 
shrank  from  their  glorious  task ;  and  rejecting  mankind,  they  became  themselves 
the  rejected  of  God.  Meanwhile,  faith  in  the  one  true  God  has  been  spread 
throughout  the  Gentile  world.  Thus  we  see  that,  in  the  very  act  of  selecting  the 
Jew,  the  universal  Father  was  proving  Himself  to  be  the  God  of  the  heathen,  even 
when  He  seemed  to  reject  them.  4.  This  doctrine  is  one  which  we  Christians  still 
need  to  leam.  For  we  are  too  apt,  like  the  Jew,  to  exalt  ourselves  above  our  less 
favoured  brethren.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  the  mass  of  Christians  even  now  that  the 
heathen  are  the  objects  of  God's  wrath.  But  how  can  a  sane  man  credit  for  an 
instant  that  the  vastly  greater  portion  of  the  human  race  is  abandoned  by  God  ? 
But  Christianity  nowhere  teaches  this  horrible  faith.  And,  still  more,  no  man  in 
his  heart  does  or  can  believe  such  an  appalling  doctrine.  II.  Thb  univebsaIi 
miNciPLE  CONTAINED  IN  THIS  DOCTRINE.  The  language  of  the  text  contains  an 
immutable  truth  for  all  ages,  viz.,  that  God  loves  equally  all  human  beings ;  that 
the  Father  has  no  favourites ;  that  in  His  very  being  He  is  impartial  and  universal 
Love.  1.  This  grand  truth  is  taught  in  nature.  God's  works  are  of  the  same 
authority  with  His  Word.  The  universe  teaches  that  God  is  the  God  of  all,  and 
not  of  tike  few.  God  governs  by  general  laws,  which  bear  alike  on  all  beings,  and 
are  plainly  instituted  for  the  good  of  all.  We  are  placed  under  one  equitable 
system,  which  is  administered  with  inflexible  impartiality.  This  sun,  does  he  not 
send  as  glad  a  ray  into  the  hovel  as  into  the  palace  ?  Does  the  rain  fall  upon  a 
few  favoured  fields  ?  or  does  the  sap  refuse  to  circulate  except  through  the  flowers 
and  trees  of  a  certain  tribe  ?  Nature  is  impartial  in  her  smiles.  She  is  impartial 
also  in  her  frowns.  Who  can  escape  her  tempests,  earthquakes,  raging  waves  f 
Young  and  old,  the  good  and  evil,  are  wrapped  in  the  same  destroying  flame,  or 
plunged  in  the  same  overwhelming  sea.  Providence  has  no  favourites.  Pain, 
disease,  and  death  break  through  the  barriers  of  the  strong  and  rich,  as  well  as  of 
the  humble  and  the  poor,  2.  In  religion  the  universal  Father  is  revealed  as 
working  in  the  human  soul,  and  as  imparting  to  man  His  own  Spirit.  God's 
Spirit  faiowB  no  bounds.  There  is  no  soul  to  which  He  does  not  speak,  no  human 
abode  into  which  He  does  not  enter  with  His  best  gifts.  From  the  huts  of  the 
poor,  from  the  very  haunts  of  vice,  from  the  stir  of  very  active  business,  as  well  as 
from  the  stiUness  of  retired  hfe,  have  come  forth  the  men  who,  replenished  with 
spiritual  gifts,  have  been  the  guides,  comforters,  lights,  regenerators  of  the  world. 
IIL  Tins  pRiNcrPLB  as  applied  to  odrselves.  1.  Is  God  the  Father  of  the  rich 
only  ?  Is  He  not  also  the  Father  of  the  poor  ?  The  prosperous  are  prone  to  feel 
as  li  they  are  a  different  race  from  the  destitute.  But  to  the  Possessor  of  heaven 
and  earth,  how  petty  must  be  the  highest  magnificence  and  affluence  1  Does  the 
Infinite  Spirit  select  as  His  special  abode  the  palace  and  fiy  from  the  hut  ?  On  the 
eontrary,  if  Ood  has  a  chosen  spot  on  earth,  is  it  not  the  humble  dwelling  of 


26ft  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  nu' 

patient,  nnrepining,  trustful,  virtuous  poverty  ?  From  the  dwellinga  of  the  down- 
cast, from  the  stern  discipline  of  narrow  circumstances,  how  many  of  earth's 
noblest  spirits  have  grown  ap  I  May  we  not  still  learn  a  lesson  of  Divine  wisdom 
from  the  manger  at  Bethlehem  ?  2.  Is  God  the  God  of  the  good  only,  or  is  He 
not  also  the  God  of  the  wicked  ?  God  indeed  looks,  we  may  believe,  with  peculiar 
approval  on  the  good.  But  He  does  not  desire  spiritual  perfection  and  eternal 
happiness  for  them  more  than  He  does  for  the  most  depraved.  The  Scripturea 
even  seem  to  represent  God  as  peculiarly  interested  in  the  evil.  "  There  is  joy  io 
heaven  over,"  &o.  The  good  do  not  and  ought  not  to  absorb  God's  love.  We  in 
our  conceited  purity  may  withdraw  from  them,  may  tbink  it  pollution  to  touch 
them,  may  say,  "  Stand  off."  But  God  says  to  His  outcast  child,  "Come  near.'* 
Do  I  speak  to  those  who  have  escaped  gross  vice  ?  Bless  God  for  your  happiness, 
but  set  up  no  insuperable  barrier  between  yourself  and  the  fallen.  In  conclusion^ 
let  us  ask  ourselves.  What  was  the  guilt  of  the  Jews  against  which  the  apostle 
protested?  What  was  it  that  scattered  their  nation  like  chaff  throughout  th» 
earth?  Their  proud  separation  of  themselves  from  their  race.  And  will  not  the 
same  spirit  bring  the  same  ruin  upon  us  ?  Separation  of  ourselves  from  oar  race  is 
spiritual  death.  It  is  like  catting  off  a  member  from  the  body ;  the  severed  limh 
must  perish.  This  spirit  of  universal  humanity  is  the  very  soul  of  oar  religion. 
As  yet  its  heavenly  power  is  scarcely  felt.  Therefore  it  is  that  so  few  of  the 
blessings  of  Christianity  appear  in  Christendom.  We  hold  this  truth  in  words. 
Who  feels  its  vitalising  power  ?  When  brought  home  as  a  reality  in  social  life  it 
will  transform  the  world.  All  other  reforms  of  society  are  superficial.  But  a 
better  day  is  coming.  Cannot  we  become  the  heralds  of  this  better  day  ?  Let  oar 
hearts  bid  it  welcome  1  Let  our  lives  reveal  its  beauty  and  its  power !  (W.  E. 
Channing,  D.D.)  The  gospel  for  all  mankind: — It  happened  one  evening,  soon 
after  I  began  my  journey  up  the  country,  that  I  found  my  way  to  the  homestead  of 
a  Dutch  Boer,  of  whom  I  begged  a  night's  lodging.  It  was  nightfall,  and  the 
family  must  soon  go  to  rest.  But  first,  would  the  stranger  address  some  words  of 
Christian  counsel  to  them  ?  Gladly  I  assented,  and  the  big  bam  was  resorted  to. 
Looking  round  on  my  congregation,  I  saw  my  host  and  hostess  with  their  family. 
There  were  crowds  of  black  forms  hovering  near  at  hand,  but  never  a  one  was  there 
in  the  bam.  I  waited,  hoping  they  might  be  coming.  But  no;  no  one  came. 
Still  I  waited  as  expecting  something.  "  What  ails  you  ?  "  said  the  farmer. 
"  Why  don't  you  begin  ?  "  •'  May  not  your  servants  come  too  ?  "  I  replied. 
"  Servants  I  "  shouted  the  master ;  "  do  you  mean  the  Hottentots,  man  ?  Are  you 
mad  to  think  of  preaching  to  Hottentots  ?  Go  to  the  mountains  and  preach  to  the 
baboons ;  or,  if  you  Uke,  I'll  fetch  my  dogs,  and  you  may  preach  to  them  !  "  This 
was  too  much  for  my  feelings,  and  tears  began  to  trickle  down  my  cheeks.  I 
opened  my  New  Testament,  and  read  out  for  my  text  the  words,  "  Trufli,  Lord :  yet 
the  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs  that  fall  from  their  master's  table."  A  second  time  the 
words  were  read,  and  then  my  host,  vanquished  by  the  arrow  from  God's  own 
quiver,  cried  oat,  "  Stop !  yoa  must  have  your  own  way.  I'll  get  you  all  the 
Hottentots,  and  they  shall  hear  you."  The  barn  soon  filled  with  rows  of  dark 
forms,  whose  eager  looks  gazed  at  the  stranger.  I  then  preached  my  first  sermon 
to  the  heathen.  I  shall  never  forget  that  night.  {Dr.  Moffat.)  Ood's  favourt  not 
to  be  limited  to  a  single  people : — But,  clearly,  such  a  gospel  as  this  was  noi 
meant  for  one  or  two  men,  or  for  a  company  of  men,  or  for  a  favourite  nation,  or 
for  a  race.  "  Is  He  the  God  of  the  Jews  only  ?  "  was  St.  Paul's  indignant  question, 
addressed  to  those  who  would  have  limited  His  favours  down  to  a  single  people. 
Like  the  natural  sun  in  the  heavens,  the  Incarnate  Son  of  Eighteousness  is  the 
property — we  may  dare  to  nse  the  word — He  is  the  property  of  all  the  members  of 
the  human  family.  All  have  a  right  to  the  light  and  to  the  warmth  which  radiate 
from  His  sacred  person  and  from  His  redeeming  Cross;  and  this  explains  St.  Paul's 
sense  of  the  justice  of  proclaiming  the  good  news  of  the  reconciliation  of  earth 
and  heaven  by  faith  in  Christ  to  all  members  of  the  human  family.  Every  man, 
as  such,  has  a  right  to  his  share  in  the  gospel,  just  as  every  man  has  a  right  to  air, 
and  to  water,  and  to  freedom,  and  at  least  to  sufficient  food  to  preserve  bodily  life  ; 
and  not  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  treat  it  as  if  it  were  the  luxury  of  a  small 
clique  like  any  one  of  the  old  philosophies,  like  a  rare  book  in  a  library,  like  a 
family  portrait,  was  to  offend  against  the  sense  of  natural  justice.  {Canon  Liddon.) 
Do  we  then  make  void  the  law  through  faith  7 — Law  and  faith,  the  two  great  moral 
forces  in  human  hixtory : — "  The  law  "  means  that  which  is  written  in  every  man's 
soul,  and  republished  on  Sinai.    "  Faith  "  means  the  gospel,  "  the  glad  tidings  "  of 


OTi».  ni.]  ROMANS.  267 

Bovereign  love  to  a  rained  world.  These  two  great  moral  fcrces  of  the  world  may 
be  looked  upon  hi  three  aspects.  I.  As  aoreeino  m  some  besfectb.  1.  In  authorship. 
Both  are  Divine.  2.  In  spirit.  Love  is  the  moral  essence,  the  inspiration  of  both. 
8.  In  purpose.  The  well-being  of  humanity  is  the  grand  aim  of  both.  IL  Aa 
DiFFEBiMQ  HI  SOME  FEATURES.  1.  One  is  older  in  human  history  than  the  other. 
The  law  is  as  old  as  the  human  soul.  The  gospel  began  with  man  after  the  Fall 
(Qen.  iii.  15).  2.  One  addresses  man  as  a  creature,  the  other  as  a  sinner.  Law 
comes  to  man  as  a  rational  and  responsible  existent,  and  demands  his  homage ;  the 
gospel  comes  to  him  as  a  ruined  sinner,  and  offers  him  assistance  and  restoration. 
3.  The  one  speaks  imperatively,  the  other  with  compassion.  "  Thou  shalt,"  "  Thou 
Bhalt  not,"  is  the  voice  of  law.  The  gospel  invites,  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his 
way  " ;  "  Come  unto  Me  " ;  ••  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth."  4.  The  "  law  "  demands, 
the  "  gospel  "  delivers.  The  law  says,  Do  this  and  that,  or  Desist  from  this  or  that, 
and  will  hear  no  excuse.  The  gospel  comes  and  offers  deliverance  from  the  morally 
feeble  and  condemned  state  into  which  man  has  fallen.  III.  As  oo-operatino  to 
ONE  BESULT.  The  law  prepares  for  the  gospel  by  carrying  the  conviction  of  sin  and 
ruin.  The  gospel  exaJts  and  enthrones  the  law.  This  is  the  point  of  the  text, 
"Do  we  then  make  void  the  law  through  faith  7  God  forbid."  How  does  the 
gospel  estabhsh  the  law  ?  1.  It  presents  it  to  man  in  the  most  commanding  aspects. 
2.  It  enthrones  it  in  the  soul.  3.  It  glorifies  it  in  the  life.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
How  the  law  may  be  made  void  or  established  through  faith : — I.  How  rr  mat  be 
MADE  VOID.  1.  By  not  preaching  it  at  all.  2.  By  teaching  that  faith  supersedes  the 
Decessity  of  holiness.  3.  By  continuing  in  sin.  IL  How  it  mat  be  established. 
1.  By  insisting  on  the  whole  doctrine  of  godliness.  2.  By  urging  faith  in  Christ 
as  a  means  to  holiness.  3.  By  establishing  it  in  our  hearts  and  lives.  (J.  Wesley, 
M.A.)  The  law  made  void  and  established  : — I.  The  law  is  made  void — 1.  By 
imagining  that  the  covenant  in  Christ  is  unconditional.  2.  That  justification  is 
eternal.  3.  Consequently  that  a  believer  is  not  under  the  law  at  all.  II.  The 
liAW  IS  ESTABLISHED — 1.  In  the  heart.  2.  As  a  part  of  the  covenant.  3.  By  the 
obedience  of  faith,  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  law  established  by  faith : — God  cannot 
deny  or  contradict  Himself.  He  cannot  recall  His  own  words  or  disannul  His  own 
law  (Mai.  iii.  6).  Yet  it  might  seem,  at  first  sight,  as  if  grace  were  opposed  to  law, 
BO  that  whichever  be  established,  the  othei;  must  falL  St.  Paul  anticipates  and 
meets  this  difficulty.  Consider — I.  The  ground  or  object  of  faith.  1.  In  the 
preceding  verses  we  find  two  important  points.  (1)  We  "  are  justified  freely  by 
His  grace  "  (ver.  24).  God  forgives  us  our  sins  in  a  most  frank  and  absolute  manner, 
without  regard  to  any  good  works  on  our  part,  in  the  way  of  compensation.  But  (2)  He 
does  this  "  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  Here  we  see  the  qualify- 
ing condition  of  the  Divine  clemency.  He  upholds  His  law.  If  He  forgives  us  our 
sins,  it  is  because  He  has  first  redeemed  us  by  the  sacrifice  of  His  Son.  God  has 
made  Him  our  substitute,  and  treated  Him  as  we  deserve  to  be  treated.  2.  Here 
two  questions  occur.  (1)  Is  such  a  propitiation  allowable  in  justice  ?  We  answer 
that  it  would  be  unjust  for  God  to  compel  a  third  party  to  suffer  for  sinners ;  but 
when  One  comes  forward  willingly,  it  is  no  outrage  to  our  sense  of  righteousness 
for  His  offer  to  be  accepted.  But  still  it  might  seem  unjust  for  an  innocent  substi- 
tute to  suffer  the  penalty  for  ever.  We  instinctively  feel  that  the  penalty  must  be 
temporary.  But,  further,  if  any  sense  of  wrong  should  still  linger  it  would  surely 
be  removed  if  we  could  see  the  substitute  compensated  for  his  self-sacrifice. 
Behold  how  these  things  all  meet  in  Christ.  As  to  voluntariness  (see  John  i.  17, 18). 
As  to  the  duration  of  Christ's  sufferings,  we  know  that,  though  terrible  and  severe, 
they  were  of  short  continuance.  And  then  look  at  his  ensuing  reward.  If  there 
■were  "the  sufferings  of  Christ,"  there  was  also  the  "glory  that  should  follow." 
(2)  Is  this  particular  propitiation  adequate  to  the  occasion  ?  If  all  that  Christ 
suffered  had  been  endured  by  a  mere  man,  or  even  an  angel,  we  should  not  feel 
convinced  of  its  efficacy.  But  Christ  is  an  incarnation  of  Deity.  The  immortal 
Creator  cannot  Himself  die ;  but  He  can  ally  Himself  to  a  human  nature  which 
may  suffer  and  die,  and  in  His  suffering  and  death  Jehovah  Himself  may  be  so 
implicated  as  to  justify  the  expression  that  "  God  hath  purchased  the  Church  with 
His  own  blood,"  and  that  the  Jews  "  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory."  Here  it  is  that 
we  see  the  ground  of  the  infinite  meritoriousness  and  expiating  efficacy  of  the  death 
of  Christ.  Bather  than  the  law  should  be  broken,  or  that  sin  should  go  unpunished, 
God  gives  up  His  own  Son.  What  than  this  can  more  effectually  persuade  us  that 
the  "  wages  of  sin  "  is  death  ?  What  than  this  can  more  vividly  inspire  us  witb 
hatred  of  sin,  or  more  powerfully  deter  the  tempted  from  rebellion,  arrest  the 


868  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

orimiQal,  or  incite  the  obedient  to  watchful  diligence  and  reverential  fearf  8. 
Thus  are  the  high  ends  of  justice  secured  by  the  death  of  Christ :  and  thus  is  the 
law  established  in  its  broadest  moral  commands,  and  satisfied  in  its'^eepest  moral 
requirements.  From  this  it  will  be  easy  to  see  how  also  in  a  lower  sense  the  law 
is  established  by  faith.  (1)  Do  you  speak  of  the  ceremonial  law?  It  was  the 
shadow  of  good  things  to  come  :  its  substance  is  Christ,  and  now  He  has  come  it 
has  passed  away,  so  far  as  its  form  is  concerned  ;  but  it  still  Uves  in  its  substance 
and  antitype,  by  whom  it  has  been  ratified.  (2)  Similarly  with  the  prophetic 
Scriptures.  The  prophets  all  testified  of  Christ,  and  in  TTim  their  word  is  at  once 
accomplished  and  confirmed.  And  thus,  in  every  sense,  we  may  boldly  say  with 
Paul,  "  We  establish  the  law."  II.  The  conditions  and  operations  of  faith. 
Here  the  same  principle  holds  good.  1.  In  the  act  of  faith  the  penitent  trusts  in 
ihe  atoning  death  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  ground  of  his  acceptance.  Now  this  act 
of  faith — (1)  Is  in  accordance  with  God's  command  (John  vi.  29).  Thus  is  faith 
essentially  obedience  to  God's  law,  and  by  it  the  authority  of  God  in  His  law  is 
acknowledged  and  established.  (2)  It  acquiesces  in  Christ's  atoning  work  :  as  an 
arrangement  which  vindicates  the  Divine  righteousness.  It  thus  acknowledges  the 
validity  of  God's  law,  and  the  need  of  sustaining  its  authority.  2.  The  prehminary 
condition  of  faith  is  repentance.  It  is  not  the  hardened  unhumbled  sinner  who  is 
told  to  believe  in  Christ,  but  those  who  acknowledge  that  the  law  is  holy,  and 
tremble  and  weep  to  think  how  they  have  broken  it.  3.  So  with  the  fruit  of  faith. 
When  we  are  forgiven  it  is  that  we  may  serve  sin  no  more  (Titus  ii.  11-15). 
Conclusion  :  1.  The  greatest  sinner  may  be  forgiven  (1  Cor.  vi.  9-11).  2.  The  least 
sinner  must  be  saved  by  grace  through  faith.  3.  See  the  guilt  of  refusing  to  be  justified 
by  faith.  4.  The  duty  of  the  forgiven  man  to  run  in  the  way  of  God's  commandments 
(1  Pet.  i.  13-16).  (T.G.Eorton.)  The  law  established  through  faith:— I.  Thk 
OBJECTION  STATED.  Faith  Supersedes — 1.  The  authority  of  the  law  by  releasing  the 
sinner  from  its  curse.  2.  The  righteousness  of  the  law  as  a  basis  of  justification. 
II.  The  objection  obviated.  Faith  establishes  the  law  by  restoring — 1.  Its  power 
of  command.  2.  Its  power  of  condemnation.  III.  The  objection  betorted.  The 
objector  who  blends  faith  and  works  undermines.  1.  Its  power  of  condemnation. 
2.  Its  power  of  command.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  law  established  through  faith  ;— 
I.  Faith  establishes  the  law.  1.  In  its  character  as  holy.  2.  In  its  claims  as 
just.  3.  In  its  threatenings  as  sure.  II.  Obedience  to  the  law  is  promoted  by 
THE  GOSPEL.  1.  In  the  motives  it  supplies.  2.  In  the  strength  it  supplies.  (T. 
Robinson,  D.D.)  The  law  established  through  faith  : — 1.  The  apostle  here  means 
that  the  Divine  law  must  be  regarded  by  us  as  immutable,  and  that  any  interpreta- 
tion  of  the  gospel  at  variance  with  that  fact  must  be  a  false  interpretation.  The 
distinctions  between  right  and  wrong  are  everlasting,  and  that  law  of  which  the 
apostle  speaks  helps  us  to  make  the  distinction.  2.  Tou  stand  related  to — (1)  A 
holy  Being.  Then  you  ought  to  reverence  that  Being  because  of  His  rectitude  and 
truthfulness.  (2)  A  good  Being  :  well,  you  ought  to  love  that  goodness.  Conceive 
of  a  holy  and  good  Being  to  have  put  forth  these  properties  to  shield  you  from  evil, 
and  of  conferring  upon  you  much  good — why,  then,  ought  you  not  to  feel  grateful 
toward  that  Being  ?  One  thing  more.  Suppose  that  Being  to  be  infinitely  good 
and  holy,  and  suppose  Him  to  have  put  forth  those  perfections  to  secure  for  yon, 
either  in  fact  or  purpose,  infinite  blessings,  then  ought  you  not  to  reverence  and  love 
Him  with  all  your  heart,  and  soul,  and  mind,  and  strength  ?  3.  I  need  not  remind 
you  that  such  is  the  character  of  God,  and  that  such  are  the  relations  in  which  we 
stand  to  Him.  (1)  And  while  these  last,  so  long  must  that  law  be  binding  upon  us 
which  requires  our  utmost  consecration  to  Him  simply  as  an  act  of  right,  giving  to 
God  the  things  that  are  God's.  God's  rectitude,  therefore,  binds  Him  to  vindicate 
His  law  and  punish  wrong,  (2)  His  benevolence  must  bind  Him  to  this.  For  sin 
is  not  simply  the  putting  of  so  much  wrong  in  the  place  of  so  much  right ;  it  is  the 
putting  of  what  defiles  God's  work  in  the  place  of  what  gives  to  it  beauty ;  of 
deformity  and  misery  in  the  place  of  that  which  would  give  nobleness  and  blessed- 
ness to  His  creatures,  and  the  threadwork  of  retribution  that  is  wrought  in  with 
the  forms  of  sin  in  this  world  are  such  as  clearly  to  mark  how  He  abhors  this  eviL 
See  how  drunkenness  and  licentiousness  make  the  very  flesh  of  men  to  cry  out 
against  the  wrongs  that  are  done  to  it ;  and  how  those  evil  passions  of  the  soul, 
such  as  pride,  anger,  malice,  and  the  like,  are  made  to  be  as  very  scorpions  to  the 
nature  in  which  you  find  them.  Yes,  God  has  constituted  the  nature  of  the  human 
spirit  thus,  that  it  shall  find  happiness  only  where  He  finds  happiness  ;  that  it  shall 
know  how  to  do  homage  to  right,  and  to  love  the  good.    In  other  words,  this  law 


OBAP.  lu.]  ROMANS.  209 

of  God  is  what  it  is  becaase  God  is  what  He  is.  It  comes  from  His  own  nature, 
and  it  is  designed  to  uphold  the  God-like.  4.  Now  there  are  those  who  look  on  tha 
gospel  as  at  variance  with  the  law.  This  cannot  be.  (1)  Faith  is  the  gift  of  God  ; 
and  if  the  law  comes  from  His  nature,  and  this  faith  also  comes  from  His  nature. 
He  cannot  be  a  fountain  sending  forth  sweet  waters  and  bitter.  (2)  Faith  is  obedi- 
ence to  the  Divine  command ;  and  if  the  mandate  is  that  we  are  to  believe  on  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ,  there  can  be  nothing  inconsistent  between  the  conformity  to  a 
law  that  comes  from  Him,  and  obedience  to  this  particular  mandate  that  comes 
from  Him.  (3)  The  things  that  are  created  from  the  very  act  of  believing  ensure 
that  this  shall  not  be  so.  For  to  believe  in  Christ  is  to  believe  in  His  teaching,  e.g., 
the  doctrine  of  ruin  by  sin.  Well,  sin  is  transgression  of  the  law.  Belief  in  Christ 
is  belief  in  redemption  from  sin,  from  the  condemnation  that  sin  has  brought  upon 
Qs.  If  the  condemnation  that  has  come  upon  me  from  sin  be  not  just,  then  the 
ademption  that  is  said  to  have  been  brought  to  me  by  Christ  must  be  superfluous ; 
60  that  faith  in  Christ  comes  necessarily  of  belief  in  law.  You  cannot  receive  the 
gospel  without  receiving  the  law ;  you  cannot  understand  the  one  without  appre- 
hending the  other.  (4)  Then  the  very  truths  that  are  apprehended  have  in  them  a 
natural  fitness  so  to  change  the  spirit  of  man  that  he  who  is  at  enmity  with  law  is 
brought  back  to  loyalty.  The  purpose  of  these  things  is  to  make  the  disobedient 
obedient.  (5)  Added  to  this  we  are  assured  that  any  obedience  possible  to  us  in  any 
form,  whether  in  a  converted  or  unconverted  state,  is  never  to  be  allowed  to  come 
into  the  place — imperfect  as  it  must  necessarily  be — of  that  perfect  righteousness 
which  the  law  demands.  And  you  cannot  make  void  the  law  more  than  by  attempt- 
ing to  put  your  own  real  or  supposed  obedience  in  the  place  of  that  perfect  obedi- 
ence which  the  law  requires.  5.  Now,  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  there  is  not  a 
right  state  and  tendency  of  mind  in  the  experience  of  the  man  who  believes  in 
Christ :  it  must  be  a  state  of  mind  right  in  itself — right  from  God's  command,  right 
from  the  nature  of  the  thing ;  then  like  will  produce  like.  But  though  there  is  a 
lightness — or  righteousness — in  faith  and  flowing  from  faith  which  are  good  as  far 
as  they  go,  what  man  wants  to  meet  the  claims  of  the  Divine  law  is  not  a  Tightness 
good  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  a  rightness  good  altogether.  The  law  is  made  void,  put 
aside,  comes  to  nothing,  when  you  get  rid  of  the  necessity  of  the  perfect  obedience 
which  it  demands.  Any  attempt  to  build  upon  your  own  personal  sanctity  as  a 
ground  of  acceptance  with  God  must  be  a  mistake.  If  we  trust  in  the  righteousness 
of  Christ  at  all  we  cannot  presume  to  think  that  it  needs  to  be  eked  out  and  to  be 
made  perfect  by  ours.  (R.  Vaiighan,  D.D.)  Tlie  law  established  by  faith: — 
I.  Thb  doctrine  of  faith  is  the  doctrine  of  salvation  through  the  blood  and 
righteousness  of  the  Son  of  God.  No  good  disposition  or  qualification  what- 
ever, nothing,  in  short,  that  distinguishes  one  man  from  another,  can  be 
joined  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ  as  the  ground  of  our  confidence  towards 
God.  Here  there  is  no  room  for  boasting.  We  must  be  saved  either  com- 
pletely by  grace,  or  completely  by  our  own  works.  II.  Two  ways  in  which  thb  liAW 
MAT  BE  SAID  TO  BE  DESTKOTED,  OB  MADE  VOID.  1.  In  principle ;  when  any  doctrine  is 
taught  which,  in  its  just  consequences,  has  a  tendency  to  relax  our  obligations  to 
obey  the  law  of  God.  2.  In  practice ;  when  persons  take  encouragement  from  mis- 
taken views  of  gospel  truths  to  continue  in  sin,  or  to  be  less  punctual  in  discharging 
the  duties  which  they  owe  to  God  or  their  fellow-creatures.  III.  The  law  of  God 
IS  not  made  void,  but  ESTABLISHED  THKouGH  FAITH.  1.  The  sacrcd  authority  and 
perpetual  obligation  of  the  law  of  God  are  vindicated  in  the  strongest  manner  by 
the  doctrine  of  faith.  2.  There  are  new  obligations  superadded  by  the  gospel  to 
enforce  obedience.  (1)  A  conviction  of  its  infinite  evil  must  surely  be  allowed  to  be 
a  powerful  motive  to  depart  from  sin.  But  by  what  means  can  this  conviction  be 
produced  to  such  a  degree  as  by  a  firm  belief  of  the  doctrine  of  faith  relating  to  the 
Bufferings  and  death  of  Christ.  (2)  Just  apprehensions  of  the  holiness  of  God  have 
always  been  found  to  produce  correspondent  effects  on  the  characters  of  the  persons 
who  entertain  them.  Now,  the  doctrme  of  faith  gives  us  the  highest  display  of  this 
glorious  attribute  of  the  Divine  nature.  (3)  The  motives  which  are  chiefly  insisted 
upon  in  the  New  Testament,  and  which  the  gospel  in  a  peculiar  manner  inspires, 
are  love  and  gratitude.  Now,  where  can  we  find  such  objects  to  awaken  our  love 
and  gratitude  as  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  3.  The  law  is  established  through 
faith,  because  obedience  is  one  of  the  principal  ends  for  which  we  are  called  to 
beheve  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  4.  The  law  is  established  through  faith, 
because  the  doctrine  of  faith  furnishes  the  believer  with  the  most  powerful 
encouragements,  in  his  endeavours  to  attain  holiness.    (1)  From  w.'aat  has  been 


270  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  m. 

said,  yoa  may  judge  whether  yoa  are  possessed  of  true  faith  in  the  gospel.  Has  it 
come  to  you,  not  in  word  only,  but  in  power  also,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost?  (2)  From 
this  subject  let  me  exhort  true  believers  to  justify  the  sincerity  of  their  profession 
by  the  holiness  of  their  lives.  (D.  Black.)  The  law  established  through  faith : — 
Faith — 1.  Better  explains  it.  2.  Better  enforces  it.  3.  Better  secures  the  ends  it 
proposes.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  moral  law  established  by  faith  in  Christ : — The 
ceremonial  law  was  a  mere  law  of  expediency,  and  served  to  answer  the  Divine 
purposes  in  the  times  of  Jewish  ignorance,  until  the  bringing  in  of  a  better  covenant 
to  which  the  types  pointed ;  and  when  they  were  swept  aside  as  a  handwriting  of 
ordinances,  there  was  no  infringement  made  on  the  moral  law,  which,  as  an 
unchangeable  code  of  moral  requirements,  was  to  stand  in  full  force  to  the  end  of 
time.  I.  This  moral  law  is — 1.  Transcendently  exalted  in  its  source.  It  is  a  trans- 
cript of  the  Divine  nature.  And  as,  from  His  infinite  perfections,  God  can  only 
will  what  is  right,  so  all  created  intelligences  are  bound  to  obey  His  command- 
ments. 2.  Reasonable  in  its  requirements.  All  laws  ought  to  be  for  the  welfare  of 
the  subjects,  and  the  dignity  of  the  throne,  so  that  self-interest  might  prompt  to 
obedience,  and  a  love  to  the  monarch  lead  to  all  due  respect  for  the  administration. 
Jehovah's  laws  will  be  found  admirably  adapted  to  accomplish  these  ends,  for  they 
only  enjoin  what  contributes  to  our  happiness,  and  prohibit  what  would  tend  to 
our  misery.  "  Blessed  are  they  that  keep  His  commandments."  3.  Universal  in 
its  application.  It  requires  no  more  than  man  should  perform ;  viz. ,  to  love  the 
Lord  his  God,  <feo.  4.  Unchangeable  in  its  nature.  For  being  holy,  just,  and 
good,  Jehovah  could  as  soon  change  the  perfections  of  His  nature  as  to 
change  the  purity  of  the  moral  law,  or  to  substitute  an  opposite  one  in 
its  stead.  5.  Indispensable  in  its  demands.  It  must  be  obeyed;  its  violation 
must  be  pardoned,  or  its  penalty  must  be  endured.  II.  Faith  establishes  the 
LAW.  1.  As  a  rule  of  moral  action  throughout  our  whole  probation.  (1)  Christ 
could  be  the  author  of  no  system  of  salvation  that  would  supersede  it.  For 
otherwise  His  mission  would  be  a  curse  instead  of  a  blessing,  by  favouring  wicked- 
ness in  abolishing  that  standard  of  righteousness  that  would  deter  from  sin.  (2) 
And  if  we  deny  that  we  are  bound  to  fulfil  that  law,  then  we  have  no  infallible 
standard  by  which  to  measure  moral  actions.  For  conscience,  except  it  be  regulated 
by  the  law  of  morality,  is  no  sure  guide.  This  is  f uUy  established  by  experience ; 
for  when  the  revealed  rule  is  set  aside,  men,  with  the  approbation  of  their  own  con- 
sciences, often  run  to  the  most  disgraceful  extremes.  2.  As  a  medium  of  happiness 
(Psa.  i.  1-3).  In  every  circumstance  of  life  the  law  of  God  will  beam  a  light  on 
our  path  that  cannot  be  dimmed  by  the  trials  and  sorrows  through  which  we  may 
pass.  And  while  we  are  walking  according  to  this  rule,  "  all  things  will  work 
together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  Obedience  brings  an  evidence  of  God's 
love,  a  peace  of  conscience,  a  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  a  clear  prospect  of  heaven. 
3.  As  an  infallible  standard  in  the  day  of  judgment,  by  which  we  shall  be  tried, 
approved,  or  condemned.  This  strict  procedure  of  that  day  calls  for  a  proper 
standard  by  which  good  and  evil  shall  be  discriminated  and  judged.  4.  As  a  correct 
and  eternal  standard  of  the  proper  amount  of  rewards  and  punishments.  {W. 
Barns.)  '  The  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  only  vindicated  from  the  charge  of 
encouraging  licentiousness : — I.  The  objection,  that  faith  makes  void  the  law.  1. 
The  moral  law  is  that  rule  to  which  from  our  relation  to  God  we  are  obliged  to 
conform.  This  obligation  is  founded  on  the  nature  of  things,  which  nothing  ever 
can  dissolve.  Should  a  doctrine,  then,  tend  to  warrant  the  inference  that  it  might 
be  relaxed,  this  would  constitute  sufi&cient  ground  for  rejecting  it.  But  such  is  not 
the  tendency  of  our  doctrine.  On  the  contrary,  it  presupposes  this  obligation. 
There  would  have  been  no  occasion  for  such  a  method  of  deliverance  from  the  penal 
effects  of  offences  committed  against  the  law,  but  on  the  supposition  of  the  ante- 
cedent obligation  to  obey  the  law.  And  is  the  sinner  less  bound  to  render  obedience 
when  he  is  pardoned,  than  when  he  was  in  a  state  of  guilt  ?  2.  In  respect  to  the 
measure  of  the  required  obedience  the  objection  falls  to  the  ground.  This  law 
requires  universal,  unsinning  obedience,  and  accounts  every  deviation  to  be  sin. 
Should  any  interpretation,  then,  of  Scripture  be  advanced,  which  shall  reduce  this 
measure  of  obedience,  it  would  be  justly  rejected,  as  being  dishonourable  to  God, 
contradictory  to  the  Scriptures,  and  to  the  interests  of  morality.  But  the  tendency 
of  our  doctrine  is  the  exact  opposite.  It  teaches  us  that  we  must  be  justified  by 
faith,  because  the  unsinning  obedience  required  by  the  law  renders  it  impossible 
that  we  can  ever  be  justified  by  works.  Were  the  law  less  holy,  less  rigorous  in  ita 
(Remands,  there  would  then  be  no  necessity  for  this  method  of  justification.    But 


our.  m.]  ROMANS.  t71 

since  righteonsness  cannot  be  attained  by  the  law,  the  righteoaaness  of  faith  ia 
manifested  in  the  gospel.  Does  faith,  then,  make  void  the  law  ?  No.  It  implies 
in  the  strongest  manner  the  extensive  nature  of  that  obedience  which  the  law 
requires.  3.  But  may  not  the  doctrine  supersede  the  necessity  uf  any  obedience  at 
all  ?  No  ;  for — (1)  Mark  the  grounds  on  which  the  necessity  of  obedience  to 
the  moral  law  is  founded.  Because  without  it  man  would  be  unfit  to  enter  into  the 
presence  of  God,  and  unable  to  participate  in  the  holy  felicity  of  heaven  (Heb.  xii, 
14;  Matt.  v.  8).  (2)  Advert  next  to  the  particular  nature  of  justification.  It  is 
simply  one  part  of  salvation — that  part  by  which  the  guilt  of  sin  is  removed,  and 
the  sinner  is  reconciled  to  Ood.  While  it  declares  that  no  holiness  has  any  share 
in  atoning  for  sin,  or  in  reconciling  us  to  God,  it  does  not  therefore  intimate  that 
no  holiness  is  requisite  to  qualify  us  for  the  enjoyment  of  our  purchased  inheritance. 
An  invalid  criminal  receives  a  pardon.  If  we  should  assert  that  the  state  of  his 
health  had  no  connection  with  the  mercy  received,  such  an  assertion  could  never 
be  construed  to  imply  that  his  recovery  from  sickness  was  nncoimected  with  his 
future  happiness.  Because  his  obligation  to  punishment  has  been  remitted  by  an 
act  of  grace,  it  cannot  therefore  be  inferred  that  health  is  unnecessary  to  his  enjoy- 
ment of  the  royal  bounty.  Nay,  we  should  rather  say  that  his  deliverance  from  the 
sentence  rendered  the  removal  of  his  disorder  a  blessing  more  than  ever  desirable. 
So  justification  provides  a  remedy  for  the  penal  consequences  which  past  disobedi- 
ence has  incurred  ;  but  it  leaves  the  necessity  of  personal  holiness  to  rest  on  the 
same  foundation  on  which  it  always  had  rested,  on  the  impossibility  of  holding 
communion  with  God,  and  of  partaking  in  His  felicity,  without  possessing  corre- 
sponding dispositions,  and  being  made  partakers  of  His  holiness.  If,  then,  the 
method  of  justifying  the  sinner  by  faith  only  tends  neither  to  weaken  the  obligation 
to  obey  the  moral  law,  nor  to  reduce  the  measure  of  the  required  obedience,  nor  to 
supersede  the  necessity  of  obedience,  in  what  sense  does  it  make  void  the  law  ?  In 
no  sense  whatever.  II.  The  assertion  that  faith  establishes  the  law.  Far 
from  producing  effects  unfavourable  to  the  cause  of  moraUty,  it  tends  to  strengthen 
and  promote  it  by  motives  of  the  most  exalted  nature,  and  of  the  most  constraining 
obligation.  1.  What  is  the  state  of  the  justified  sinner  ?  Under  a  conviction  of  the 
danger  and  misery  of  sin,  looking  unto  Jesus,  he  has  found  peace  and  joy  in  believ- 
ing. The  ground  of  all  his  present  peace  and  future  prospects  is  a  comfortable  hope 
of  his  acceptance  in  the  beloved.  Let  this  hope  be  once  destroyed,  his  peace  is 
broken,  his  prospects  are  clouded.  Still  he  is  under  condemnation.  To  keep  alive, 
then,  this  hope  is  one  leading  object  which  the  justified  sinner  has  constantly  in 
view.  But  how  is  the  object  to  be  accomplished?  Doubtless  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
the  author  of  this  blessed  experience,  "  who  beareth  witness  with  our  spirits  that 
we  are  the  children  of  God."  But  He  usually  evidences  to  us  our  adoption  by  reflect- 
ing light  on  His  own  work  of  grace  in  the  heart,  and  thus  by  enabling  us  to  trace 
oat  the  existence  of  the  cause  by  the  effects  evidently  produced.  Sanctification,  as 
it  is  the  earnest  of  future  glory,  so  it  is  an  evidence,  because  a  consequence,  of  our 
present  reconciliation  with  God.  Deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin  is  a  blessing 
annexed  by  promise  to  a  state  of  justification  (chap.  vi.  14).  Observe  what  a  con- 
straining motive  is  thus  provided  to  the  attainment  of  universal  holiness.  The 
peace,  the  hope,  the  joy  of  a  siimer  are  inseparably  connected  with  the  evidence  of 
his  interest  in  Christ.  2.  But  the  faith  which  leads  a  sinner  to  Christ  for  justifica- 
tion includes  a  conviction,  not  only  of  the  danger,  but  also  of  the  demerit  of  sin. 
In  what  light  does  he  view  himself  ?  As  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire ;  as  a 
pardoned  criminal,  as  a  rebel  graciously  invested  with  all  the  privileges  of  a  loyal 
subject.  What  sentiments  of  love,  gratitude,  obedience,  does  this  view  inspire  I  3. 
These  sentiments  are  still  greatly  augmented  by  a  consideration  of  the  means  which 
have  been  employed  in  this  work  of  mercy  (Gal.  iii.  iB).  Redeemed  with  such  a 
ransom,  shall  sinners  refuse  to  give  their  lives  to  Christ  ?  (1  Cor.  vi.  20  ;  Titus  ii.  14). 
{E.  Cooper.)  The  gospel  salvation  confirms  obedience,  by  furnishing — I.  New 
VIEWS  OF  TBDTH.  The  believer  reccivcs  new  views  of — 1.  The  perfection  of  the  law 
in  itself.  His  natural  heart  rebelled  against  it,  and  longed  for  some  standard  which 
should  grant  indulgence  to  his  sinful  infirmities.  Even  the  letter  of  the  law  was 
too  strict,  and  from  the  breadth  of  its  spiritual  application  he  recoiled.  He  hated  the 
commandments  for  their  purity.  In  a  renewed  heart  this  spirit  is  entirely  subdued, 
and  that  the  law  is  holy  and  just  and  good  is  thankfully  acknowledged.  There  are, 
therefore,  now  new  and  strong  inducements  to  follow  after  the  holiness  which  it 
exhibits,  and  thus  the  gospel  has  not  destroyed  but  confirmed  the  law.  2.  His  own 
character  and  life.    His  proud  and  self-confident  spirit  is  broken  down  under  the 


27a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHiP.  m. 

consciousness  of  gailt,  which  quickens  the  desire  for  holiness,  and  increases  the 
abhorrence  of  transgression.  Hence  to  lower  the  standard  of  obedience  would  bring 
no  gratification.  He  longs  to  do  the  perfect  will  of  God,  and  is  contented  only  as 
he  can  put  ofE  the  old  man  and  put  on  the  new,  which  is  renewed  in  holiness.  3. 
Christ  and  His  Cross.  In  this  there  is  no  countenance  given  to  sin.  (1)  It  is  the 
most  solemn  manifestation  of  God's  justice  in  dealing  with  sin.  Beholding  the 
justice  and  severity  of  God  thus  displayed  the  justified  sinner  feels  the  abhorrence 
of  sin  more  deeply  impressed  ;  and  as  he  looks  upon  his  crucified  Lord  put  to  death 
by  sin  and  for  sin  the  law  gains  a  new  power  over  him.  (2)  It  is  the  most  amazing 
manifestation  of  the  love  of  God  for  guilty  man.  The  believer,  therefore,  rejoicing 
in  the  confidence  that  His  blood  was  shed  for  him  that  he  might  not  come  into 
condemnation — how  shall  he  by  continuing  in  sin  crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh  ? 
II.  New  motives  of  conduct.  1.  Sincere  gratitude  and  love  to  Christ  who  has 
redeemed  him  from  the  bondage  of  the  law.  He  looks  upon  himself  as  a  captive, 
bought  with  a  price,  and  love  for  his  Redeemer  constrains  him  to  serve  and  please 
Him.  By  this  he  is  led  to  "  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God."  2.  Consciousness 
of  exalted  privilege.  He  is  a  pardoned  man,  and  all  his  fear  of  the  consequences 
of  his  past  guHt  are  replaced  by  the  hope  of  heaven.  He  is  adopted  into  God's 
family,  and  therefore  has  all  the  rights  attaching  to  Divine  Sonship,  &c.  What  an 
assemblage  of  motives  to  holiness  1  How  can  a  man  make  void  the  law  who  has 
such  privileges  ?  3.  The  perfect  purity  of  heaven.  The  justified  man  looks  forward 
to  this  as  the  perfection  of  character,  and  consequently  longs  for  the  personal  puritj 
which  alone  can  meeten  him  for  it.  How,  then,  can  faith  make  void  the  law  when 
obedience  to  it  is  the  only  preparation  for  the  inheritance  which  faith  expects  ?  IIL 
New  means  op  attaining  this  obedience.  The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  peouliax 
to  the  gospel,  and  whatever  holiness  any  man  attains  is  given  by  Him.  In  his  own 
nature  man  has  no  strength  to  obey  the  law ;  but  the  whole  infiuence  of  the 
heavenly  Agent  is  directed  to  the  ultimate  point  of  man's  entire  obedience  to  Goi 
To  attain  this  He  maintains  an  unceasing  warfare  within  the  renewed  soul,  and  having 
brought  him  to  the  glorious  privilege  of  being  a  child  of  God,  He  enables  him  to 
walk  worthy  of  his  high  vocation.  Cs.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Religion  and  morality  ;— 
1.  There  are  many  who  cannot  see  the  difference  between  criticising  a  weak  argu- 
ment and  attacking  the  thing  it  purposes  to  prove.  St.  Paul  had  here  been  saying 
severe  things  of  that  spurious  moraUty  which  consists  simply  of  obedience  to  out- 
ward rules ;  and  there  were  foolish  auditors  who  concluded  that  he  was  assailing 
the  moral  law,  the  thing  expressed  in  these  rules.  His  answer  is,  that  he  was 
attacking  not  law,  but  legalism.  St.  Paul  maintains  that,  by  trying  to  substitute 
the  principle  of  faith  for  that  of  blind  obedience  to  an  external  rule,  so  far  from 
making  void  the  law  he  was  really  establishing  the  law.  2.  The  question  here 
discussed,  from  a  modern  point  of  view,  is  one  as  to  the  relation  between  religion 
and  morality.  Can  a  man  be  virtuous  who  is  not  pious,  or,  if  he  can,  does  his 
virtue  lack  a  quality  which  only  piety  can  infuse  into  him  ?  There  are  few  who 
would  maintain  that  the  Christian  religion  has  had  a  bad  infiuence  on  virtue ;  they 
only  contend  that  virtue  is  independent  of  religion.  And  I  think  there  are  many 
plausible  considerations  which  lend,  at  least,  a  colourable  pretext  to  this  contention. 
(1)  No  one,  e.g.,  will  question  that  there  are  not  a  few  of  blameless  lives  who  enter- 
tain grave  doubts  as  to  the  Christian  faith.  Are  we  to  deny  the  reality  of  these 
men's  virtue ;  or,  if  not,  are  we  to  conclude  that  it  makes  no  difference  whether  a 
man  is  a  religious  man  or  no  ?  Again,  it  has  been  often  urged,  that  whilst  conduct 
is  a  test,  religious  character  and  belief  is  not.  Sometimes  religious  belief  is  a  mere 
accident.  How  many  of  those  who  conform  to  the  faith  and  worship  of  our  country 
would  have  given  an  equally  firm  adherence  to  the  faith  and  worship  of  another 
country  ?  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  do  we  never  find  that  religion  may  exist  without 
morality?  Is  there  not  some  ground  for  the  assertion  that  it  is  in  the  religious  and 
not  in  the  secular  world  that  intolerance,  uncharitableness,  and  the  like  often  attain 
their  rankest  growth  ?  3.  Are  we  Christians,  then,  driven  to  the  admission  that 
there  is  no  connection  between  our  Christian  faith  and  our  goodness  of  life  ?  Or, 
at  least,  are  we  driven  to  the  confession  that  morality  gains  nothing  from  religion  ? 
No.  All  the  apparent  incongruities  notwithstanding,  I  maintain  that  religion  and 
morality  are  inseparably  united ;  that  that  morality  is  at  the  best  a  poor,  shallow 
thing  which  is  not  fed  from  the  fount  of  a  genuine  Christian  faith.  Whenever, 
in  its  power  and  reality,  the  faith  of  Christ  takes  possession  of  a  soul,  we  find 
that  it  transfigures  into  new  beauty  and  nobleness  all  the  hitrher  elements  of  our 
nature,  expanding  the  horizon  oi  intelligence,  kindling  the  spiritual  imagiua- 


CHIP,  in.]  ROMANS.  27» 

tion  by  a  visioQ  of  a  fairer  than  earthly  beauty,  infusing  a  new  and  keener 
Bensitiveness  into  the  conscience,  a  new  tenderness  into  the  affections,  arming  the 
will  with  a  new  commanding  power  over  the  passions,  breathing,  amidst  all  cor 
struggles  and  efforts  in  this  passing  life,  a  sweeter,  serener  peace  into  the  heart,  and 
shedding  over  all  the  dim,  dark  future  the  hght  of  a  diviner,  heavenlier  hope.  4. 
There  are  many  ways  in  which  the  influence  of  Christian  faith  on  the  moral  life 
may  be  shown,  as,  e.g.,  by  pointing  out  the  influence  of  the  sense  of  God's  redeem- 
ing love  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  of  the  hope  of  immortality  on  the  moral  life ;  bat 
passing  by  these  I  fix  attention  on  the  fact  that — I.  The  taith  of  Christ  reveals  to 
us  A  NBW  AMD  INFINITE  IDEAL  OB  STANDARD  ow  GOODNESS.  1.  Eighteen  hundred  years 
ago  there  broke  upon  the  world  a  vision  of  human  perfection,  a  revelation  of  the 
hidden  possibilities  of  our  nature,  transcending  far  all  that  the  race  had  ever  witnessed 
or  conceived ;  and  if  we  ask  to-day  what  is  the  secret  of  the  wondrous  power 
over  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men  the  Christ-life  has  had,  shall  we  answer  that 
Christ  set  us  simply  a  perfect  example  of  human  virtue  ?  Had  it  been  nothing 
more,  I  believe  that  there  are  dim  aspirations  in  these  breasts  of  ours  which  had 
never  started  into  life  ;  that  there  are  secret  anticipations  of  an  immortal  destiny 
which  would  never  have  awakened  within  us.  But  I  believe  that  the  secret  of  the 
transforming  power  of  the  life  of  the  Son  of  God  lies  simply  in  this,  that  it  calls  us 
to  be  sons  of  God.  2.  I  can  well  conceive  that  to  many  this  conception  of  the 
religious  life  may  have  an  air  of  extravagance.  When  one  thinks  of  the  multitudes 
who  are  sunk  in  ignorance  and  vice,  and  of  the  dull  routine  of  commonplace 
respectability,  which  is  the  best  that  most  of  us  can  boast  of,  it  may  seem  the  excess 
of  fanaticism  to  talk  of  such  a  nature  that  its  proper  destiny  is  nothing  less  than 
sharing  in  God's  life.  And  yet  think  for  a  moment.  Outside  of  the  sphere  of 
religion  there  are  in  souls  indications  of  infinitude — a  sense  of  a  nature  that  is  one 
with  God.  (1)  When,  e.g.,  the  book  of  nature  becomes  intelligible,  when  beneath 
seemingly  orderless  confusion,  or  contingency  and  accident  in  the  phenomena  and 
facts  of  the  world,  the  man  of  science  begins  to  comprehend  the  presence  of  unseen 
bat  eternal  laws  shedding  the  light  of  design,  of  order,  of  reason  over  the  visible 
world,  what  is  the  meaning  of  all  this?  What  but  this:  that  in  the  study  of 
nature  I  am  simply  thinking  God's  thoughts  after  Him  ;  I  am  simply  proving  that 
the  mind  within  me  responds  to  the  mind  that  is  impressed  on  all  things  without 
me.  (2)  What,  again,  is  the  meaning  of  that  even  deeper  sympathy  with  nature 
which  finds  expression  in  what  we  call  the  sense  of  the  beautiful,  the  feeling  of 
sensitive  persons,  with  a  kind  of  ecstasy  when  they  look  upon  the  grander  scenes  of 
this  glorious  world  ?  What  but  this,  that  man  cannot  merely  observe  the  glory  and 
beauty  of  nature  but,  as  face  answers  to  face  in  a  glass,  the  soul  of  man  is  strung 
in  sympathy  with  the  very  mind  that  made  it.  (3)  So  in  the  sphere  of  a  higher 
and  diviner  art,  in  the  life  of  endeavour  after  goodness.  How  shall  we  explain 
this,  that  the  better  a  man  is  the  less  content  is  he  with  himself  t  Why  is  it  that 
in  the  moral  life  oar  aspirations  become  more  elevated,  and  ever  as  we  ascend  we 
see  the  moral  Ufe  unsealed  rising  before  us  ?  Why,  but  for  this  reason,  that  the 
soul  of  man  was  made  for  God,  that  with  nothing  less  than  a  Divine  perfection  can 
it  ever  be  satisfied  ?  II.  The  reUgion  of  Christ  not  only  reveals  to  us  an  infinite 
ideal  of  goodness,  but  it  assures  us  of  the  power  to  realise  it.  It  says  to  yoa 
not  merely,  "  This  is  what  you  ought  to  be,"  but,  "  This  is  what  you  may  and  can 
be."  Apart  from  this,  the  gospel  would  be  no  good  news.  As  you  know  that  the 
first  ray  of  light  your  eye  catches,  gilding  the  eastern  horizon  in  the  morning,  is  to 
you  the  sure  pledge  and  prophecy  of  the  coming  perfect  day ;  or,  as  you  know,  that 
the  future  plant  is  potentially  contained  in  the  little  seed  or  germ,  so  the  first 
movement  in  a  human  breast  of  true  spiritual  life,  the  first  throb  of  genuine  self- 
devotion  to  Christ  is  fraught  with  the  newborn  perfection  and  beauty  of  the  life 
that  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  The  religious  Mfe  indeed,  like  other  life,  is  progres- 
Bive,  and  here,  as  elsewhere,  effort,  struggle,  conflict  are  the  inevitable  conditions  of 
progress.  Here  lies  the  power  over  evil,  the  conquering  impulse  of  the  Christian 
life,  that  if  only  we  be  true  to  God  and  ourselves  the  final  victory  is  sure.  The  sur 
and  rain  and  dew,  all  the  genial  influences  of  nature,  will  not  make  a  stone  grow. 
bat  the  tiniest  germ,  the  fragile  plant,  just  peeping  above  the  soil,  has  in  it  a  secret 
principle  which  ctui  transmute  air,  earth,  sunlight,  moisture  into  means  of  it* 
development,  and  so  the  heavenborn  life  has  in  it  the  vitalising,  the  assimilating 
forces  that  will  make  "  all  things  "  in  this  our  earthly  existence,  "  all  things  "  in 
the  moral  atmosphere,  "work  together  for  its  good,"  and  bear  it  onward  to  perfec- 
tion.   If  the  Spirit  of  Christ  dwell  in  your  heart  to-day  and  mould  your  life,  ncijttiug 

tozh  u  18 


374  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oEir.  m 

in  heaven  or  earth  or  hell  ean  ever,  ever  baalk  yoa  of  your  Chriitiaii  hop*. 
{Principal  Caird.) 


CHAPTEB  IV. 

Tbbs.  1-25.  What  Shan  we  lay  then  that  Abraham  onr  father,  u  pertaining  to  th* 
flesh,  hath  found  7 — Lestoiu  from  the  case  of  Abraham : — I.  Howxtbb  hitch  thx  host 

PBBFEOT  OF  THE  SPECIEa  HAT  HATE  TO   OLOBT  OT  IK  THE   EYE  OF  HIS  FELLOWS,  HE  HAS 

NOTHING  TO  GLOBT  OF  BEFOBB  QoD.  The  apostle  afl&rms  this  of  Abraham,  whose  virtnes 
had  canonised  him  in  the  hearts  of  all  his  descendants,  and  who  still  stands  forth  as 
the  embodiment  of  all  the  virtues  of  the  older  dispensation.  But  of  hia  piety  we 
have  no  account,  till  after  that  point  which  Paul  assignn  as  the  period  of  his 
justification.  And  whatever  he  had  antecedently  of  the  virtues  that  are  nsefnl  to 
and  call  forth  the  praise  of  man,  certain  it  is,  that  with  every  human  being,  prior 
to  that  great  transition  in  his  history,  God  is  not  the  Being  whose  authority  is 
recognised  in  any  of  these  virtues,  and  he  has  nothing  to  glory  of  before  God. 
Here  we  are  surrounded  with  beings,  all  of  whom  are  satisfied  if  they  see  in  ns 
their  own  likeness ;  and,  should  we  attain  the  average  character  of  society,  its  voice 
will  suffer  us  to  pass.  But  not  till  the  revelation  of  God's  likeness  is  made  to  lu  do 
we  see  our  deficiency  from  that  image  of  unspotted  holiness — to  be  restored  to  which 
is  the  great  purpose  of  our  dispensation.  Job  protested  innocence  and  kindness  and 
dignity  before  his  friends,  but  when  God,  whom  he  had  only  before  heard  of  by  the 
hearing  of  the  ear  now  appeared  before  his  awakened  eye,  he  abhorred  himself  and 
repented  in  dust  and  in  ashes.  This  is  the  sore  evil  under  which  humanity  labours. 
The  magnitude  of  the  guilt  is  unfelt ;  and  therefore  does  man  persist  in  a  most 
treacherous  complacency.  The  magnitude  of  the  danger  is  unseen ;  and  therefore 
does  man  persist  in  a  security  most  ruinous.  II.  This  disease  of  natttbe,  deadly 
and  virulent  as  it  is,  and  that  beyond  the  suspicion  of  those  who  are  touched  by  it, 
is  NOT  BETOND  THE  BEMEDT  PBOviDED  IN  THE  GOSPEL.  Ungodlincss  is  this  disease ; 
and  it  is  here  said  that  God  justifies  the  ungodly.  The  discharge  is  as  ample  aa 
the  debt ;  and  the  grant  of  pardon  in  every  way  as  broad  and  as  long  as  is  the  guilt 
which  requires  it.  The  deed  of  amnesty  is  equivalent  to  the  offence  ;  and,  foul  as 
the  transgression  is,  there  is  a  commensurate  righteousness  which  covers  the  whole 
deformity,  and  translates  him  whom  it  had  made  utterly  loathsome  in  the  sight  of 
God,  into  a  condition  of  full  favour  and  acceptance  before  Him.  Had  justification 
been  merely  brought  into  contact  with  some  social  iniquity,  this  were  not  enough  to 
relieve  the  conscience  of  him  who  feels  in  himself  the  workings  of  a  direct  and 
spiritual  iniquity  against  God.  It  is  a  sense  of  this  which  festers  in  the  stricken 
heart  of  a  sinner,  and  often  keeps  by  him  and  agonises  him  for  many  a  day,  like  an 
arrow  sticking  fast.  And  there  are  many  who  keep  at  a  distance  from  the  overtnres 
of  mercy,  till  they  think  they  have  felt  enough  and  mourned  enough  over  their  need 
of  them.  But  we  ought  not  thus  to  wait  the  progress  of  our  emotions,  while  God  is 
standing  before  us  with  a  deed  of  justification,  held  out  to  the  ungodliest  of  tu  all. 
To  give  ns  an  mterest  in  the  saying,  that  God  justifieth  the  ungodly,  it  is  enough 
that  we  count  it  a  faithful  saying,  and  that  we  count  it  worthy  of  all  acceptation, 
in.  While  the  offeb  of  a  bighteodsness  befobe  God  is  thus  bbodqht  down  to 

THE  lowest  depth  OF  HUMAN  WICKEDNESS,  AND  IT  IS  AN  OFFEB  BY  THE  ACCEPTANCE  OF 
WHICH  ALL  THE   PAST  IS  FOBGIVEN — IT  IS  ALSO  AN  OFFEB  BY  THE  ACCEPTANCE  OF  WHICH 

ALL  THE  FUTURE  IS  BEFOBMED.  When  Christ  coufers  sight  upon  a  blind  man,  he 
ceases  to  be  in  darkness ;  and  when  a  rich  individual  confers  wealth  upon  a  poor, 
he  ceases  to  be  in  poverty — and  so,  as  surely,  when  justification  is  conferred  upon 
the  ungodly,  his  ungodliness  is  done  away.  His  godliness  is  not  the  ground  upon 
which  the  gift  was  awarded,  any  more  than  the  sight  of  him  who  was  blind  is  the 
ground  upon  which  it  was  communicated,  or  than  the  wealth  of  him  who  was  poor 
is  the  ground  upon  which  it  was  bestowed.  But  just  as  sight  and  riches  oome  out 
of  the  latter  gifts,  so  godliness  comes  out  of  the  gift  of  justification  ;  and  while 
works  form  in  no  way  the  consideration  upon  which  the  righteousness  that  availeth 
is  conferred  upon  a  sinner,  yet  no  sooner  is  this  righteousness  granted  than  it  vrill 
set  him  a-working.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  A  crucial  cote  :—l.  St.  Paul  baa 
just  shown  how  the  gospel  method  of  justification  shuts  out  tb»  usual  Hebrew  boast 


!▼.]  BOMANS.  nS 

in  the  Mosaic  law  as  a  pathway  to  eternal  life.  But  some  might  ask,  Did  it  not 
Bet  it  aside  altogether  ?  2.  To  this  there  were  two  answers  possible.  (1)  The  most 
obvioa.3  would  be  this:  The  law  had  other  ends  to  serve  (Gal.  iii.  19,  23,  24; 
Bom^  iii.  19).  (2)  Here,  however,  Paul  answers  by  alleging  the  case  of  Abraham. 
The  force  of  the  argument  may  be  somewhat  like  this :  The  reward  which  the  Jew 
hoped  to  seoore  for  himself  through  his  circumcision  and  his  observance  of  the 
Mosaic  law  was  the  national  blessing  which  God  had  originally  conferred  by 
covenant  upon  the  ancestor  and  representative  of  his  race.  It  was  in  his  character 
as  a  descendant  of  Abraham  that  each  Jew  received  in  his  flesh  the  seal  of  the 
nation^  covenant,  or  had  a  right  to  aspire  after  the  national  hope.  Nothing 
higher,  therefore,  could  be  looked  for  by  any  Israelite  than  to  attain  to  the  blessed- 
ness of  his  forefather  Abraham  (Luke  zvi.  22).  Yet  this  favour  had  been  promised 
to  and  received  by  him,  not  in  consequence  of  his  observance  of  the  Mosaic  law, 
which  was  not  given  for  a  great  while  after,  not  even  in  consideration  of  his  being 
circumcised,  but  solely  because  he  was  a  believer.  Instead  of  God's  covenant  with 
Israel  resting  on  the  law,  the  law  on  the  contrary  rested  on  the  covenant.  That 
covenant  was,  to  begin  with,  one  of  grace,  not  of  works.  So  far,  therefore,  from 
Paul's  doctrine  of  justification  upsetting  the  Mosaic  law,  it  was  just  the  old  teaching 
of  the  very  earliest  "  Book  of  the  Law."  "  Do  we,  then,  make  the  law  of  Moses 
void?  God  forbid.  On  the  contrary,  we  establish  that  law  ;  since  we  find  for  it  its 
ancient  basis  on  which  alone  it  can  serve  those  helpful  uses  for  which  it  was  given." 
3.  The  case  of  Abraham  was  thus,  as  St.  Paul  clearly  saw,  a  crucial  instance  in 
which  to  test  his  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  Abraham  was  not  merely  the 
first  of  Israelites  or  the  greatest  of  them ;  he  was  all  Israel  in  his  single  person.  It 
would  never  do  for  a  Jew  to  pretend  that  a  principle  which  ruled  the  relations  of 
Abraham  to  Jehovah  could  by  any  possibility  make  void  the  law  of  Moses.  4.  But 
the  example  of  Abraham  proves  fruitful  for  Paul's  purpose  in  more  ways  than  one. 

I.    His  CONTBOVEB8Y  UP  TO  THIS  POINT   HAS  INVOLVED   TWO    MAIN    POSITIONS.       The  fiist 

is  chap.  iii.  28.  The  second,  chap.  iii.  30.  Both  positions  he  now  proceeds  to 
illustrate  and  confirm  by  the  case  of  Abraham.  1.  It  was  by  his  faith  Abraham 
was  justified,  not  by  his  works  of  obedience  (vers.  1-8).  Paul  finds  a  remarkable 
proof- text  in  Gen.  xv.  16.  (1)  The  religious  life  of  Abraham  gathers  round  three 
leading  moments.  The  first,  when  God  bade  him  emigrate  to  Canaan  (Gen.  xii.  1-5) ; 
the  second,  at  Mamre,  when  God  first  made  with  the  childless  and  aged  man  a 
covenant  that  he  should  have  a  son,  <&c.  ((Jen.xv.) ;  the  third,  when,  after  the  first 
portion  of  this  promise  had  been  fulfilled,  as  well  as  the  whole  of  it  sealed  by 
circumcision,  Jehovah  commanded  the  child  of  promise  to  be  sacrificed  (Gen.  xxii.). 
At  all  these  three  turning-times  in  Abraham's  history  his  confidence  in  God 
appeared  as  the  most  eminent  feature  of  his  character.  But  plainly,  the  first  of 
these  was  preliminary  to  the  second,  which  conveyed  to  him  the  promises  of  God  ; 
and  the  third  was  a  consequent  of  the  second.  The  central  point,  therefore,  in  the 
patriarch's  history  is  to  be  sought  in  the  second,  to  which  St.  Paul  here  refers.  On 
God's  side  there  was  simply  a  word  of  promise ;  on  the  man's  side,  simply  a  devout 
and  childlike  reliance  upon  that  word.  God  asked  no  more ;  and  the  man  had  no 
more  to  give.  His  mere  trust  in  the  Promiser  was  held  to  be  adequate  as  a  ground 
for  that  sinful  man's  acceptance  into  friendship  and  league  with  the  eternal 
Jehovah.  (2)  The  apostle's  argument  is  a  very  obvious  one.  There  are  only  two 
ways  of  obtaining  Divine  approval.  Either  you  deserve  it,  having  earned  it ;  then 
it  is  a  pure  debt,  and  yon  have  something  to  boast  in.  Or  else  you  have  not  earned 
the  Divine  approval,  but  the  wages  of  sin,  which  is  death ;  only  yon  trust  in  the 
promised  grace  of  One  who  justifies  the  ungodly ;  then  it  may  be  said  that  this  trust 
of  yours  is  reckoned  as  equivalent  to  righteousness.  Now,  Abraham's  acceptance 
was  plainly  of  this  latter  sort.  He  therefore,  at  least,  had  no  ground  for  boast- 
ing. His,  rather,  was  such  blessedness  as  his  great  descendant  David  sang  of  so 
long  after  (Psa.  xxxii.  1,  2).  2.  Abraham  was  justified  by  his  faith,  not  as  a 
circumcised  man,  but  as  an  uncircumcised  (vers.  9-16).  It  lies  in  the  very  idea  ol 
acceptance  through  faith,  that  God  will  accept  the  believer  apart  from  nationality, 
an  external  rite,  or  church  privilege,  or  the  like.  This  inference  Paul  has  been 
pressing  on  his  Jewish  readers,  and  here  is  a  curious  confirmation  of  it.  Al^raham, 
through  whom  came  circumcision,  &o.,  was  taken  into  Divine  favour  previous  to 
his  circumcision.  Circumcision  came  in  simply  to  seal,  no  Ito  constitute,  hil 
jostification.  And  the  design  of  such  an  arrangement  was  to  make  him  the  type 
and  progenitor  of  all  believers — of  such  believers  first,  as  are  never  circumcised  at 
•II,  since  for  thirteen  years  or  more  he  was  himself  an  uncircumcised  believer ;  then 


a7«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  IT. 

of  each  also  as  are  circumcised,  indeed,  yet  believers.  He  is  "  the  father  of  as 
all."  The  only  people  whom  his  experience  fails  to  embrace,  whose  "  father"  he 
really  is  not,  are  those  Jews  who  trust  in  their  lineage  and  their  covenant  badge, 
and  expect  to  be  saved  for  their  meritorious  observance  of  prescribed  rules,  but 
who  in  the  free  and  gracious  promises  of  Abraham's  God  put  no  trust  at  alL 

(1)  Having  got  thus  far,  St.  Paul  has  reached  this  notable  conclusion  :  that  so  far 
from  his  doctrine  making  the  law  of  Moses  void,  it  is  the  Jewish  figment  of  justiflca 
tion  by  the  law  which  makes  void  God's  promise,  and  Abraham's  faith,  and  the 
whole  basis  of  grace  on  which  the  privileges  of  the  Hebrew  people  ultimately 
reposed.    Here,  therefore,  he  fairly  turns  the  tables  upon  his  objectors  (ver.  14). 

(2)  Nay,  more,  another  conclusion  emerges.  It  turns  out  now  that  instead  of 
St.  Paul  being  a  disloyal  Jew  for  admitting  believing  Gentiles  to  an  equal  place  in 
the  favour  of  Israel's  God,  it  is  his  self-righteous  countryman,  who  monopolises 
Divine  grace,  that  is  really  false  to  the  original  idea  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant. 
All  who  have  faith,  whatever  their  race,  are  ••  blessed  with  faithful  Abraham,"  and 
he,  Bays  Paul,  writing  to  a  Gentile  Church,  "is  the  father  of  us  all."  The 
apostle  has  now  completed  his  polemic  against  Jewish  objectors.  Before,  however, 
he  is  done  with  the  case  of  Abraham,  there  is  a  further  use  to  be  made  of  his  bright 
exemplar.    II.  The  fatheb  of  believebs  stands  out  as  not  simple  a  specimen  or  ihb 

rAITH  THAT  JUSTIFIES,  BUT  AS  THE  EIOHEST  PATTERN  AND  LESSON  IN  THIS  OBACE  TO  AUi 

HIS  8PIBITCAL  PROOENY  (vcrs.  17-25).  1.  I  spoke  of  three  leading  moments  in  the 
spiritual  life  of  the  great  patriarch.  In  the  roU  of  heroes  in  faith  given  in  Heb.  zi., 
stress  is  laid  upon  the  first  and  upon  the  last.  Here,  it  is  the  second  ;  and  it  is  this 
proof  of  faith,  therefore,  which  Paul  now  proceeds  to  examine.  The  particular 
promise  was  that  when  he  was  ninety-nine,  and  his  wife  ninety,  a  son  should  be 
bom  to  them.  On  this  child  of  promise  were  made  to  depend  all  the  other  promises 
— numerous  descendants — the  land  of  inheritance — a  perpetual  covenant — seed,  ii> 
whom  all  earth's  families  should  be  blessed.  To  believe  in  this  explicit  word  was 
to  believe  substantially  in  the  whole  of  God's  grace  to  men  as  far  as  it  was  then 
revealed.  It  was  gospel  faith  so  far  as  there  was  yet  any  gospel  on  earth  to  put 
faith  in.  Dimly  and  far  off  Abraham  saw  the  day  of  Christ,  and  at  God's  bare 
word  he  risked  his  spiritual  life  upon  that  hope.  This  was  his  faith.  2.  Now  note 
its  characteristics.  On  the  one  side  lay  the  improbabilities  of  an  onheard-of 
miracle,  to  be  believed  in  before  it  happened ;  a  needless  miracle,  too,  so  far  as 
man's  reason  could  discern ;  for  was  not  Ishmael  already  there  ?  On  the  other 
side,  what  was  there  ?  Nothing  but  a  word  of  God.  Between  these  two  conflicting 
grounds  of  expectation  a  weaker  faith  than  his  might  have  wavered.  But  Abraham 
was  not  weak  in  faith.  Therefore  he  did  not  shrink  from  considering  the  physical 
obstacles  to  the  birth  of  a  son.  On  the  contrary,  he  could  afford  to  fasten  his 
regard  on  these,  without  his  confidence  in  the  promise  suftering  any  diminution ; 
since  he  kept  as  clearly  in  view  the  character  of  the  Almighty  Promiser.  God  la 
the  Quickener  of  the  dead.  He  can  give  a  name  and  virtual  existence  to  the  yet 
nnbegotten  child.  Isaac  Uves  in  God's  counsel  and  purpose  before  he  has  actual 
being.  So  Abraham  dared  to  trust  in  the  hope  of  paternity  given  him  of  God,  and 
gave  God  glory,  by  honouring  the  truthfulness  of  His  word  and  the  power  of  His 
grace.  Such  is  faith ;  so  it  always  works.  Without  calling  its  eyes  off  from  the 
objections  and  difficulties  which  are  present  to  sense,  it  fastens  itself,  nevertheless, 
on  the  veracity  of  Him  who  speaks  words  of  grace  to  men.  3.  These  things  were 
not  written  for  Abraham's  sake  alone,  but  for  ours.  Abraham  trusted  in  God  to 
quicken  his  unborn  son — by  and  by  to  raise  him  (if  need  were)  from  the  dead.  We 
trust  Him  who  did  raise  from  the  dead  His  own  Son  Jesus.  The  gospel  facts,  the 
promises,  and  blessings  of  the  new  covenant  in  Christ  are  to  us  what  the  birth  of 
Isaao  was  to  Abraham:  things  all  of  them  beyond  the  reach  of  experience  or 
against  it ;  resting  for  their  evidence  solely  on  the  word  of  the  living  God.  Such 
a  faith  in  God  is  reckoned  for  righteousness  to  every  man  who  has  it,  as  it  was  to 
Abraham,  the  father  of  all  believers.  {J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.)  No  room  for 
glorying : — That  workman  should  do  ill  who,  having  built  a  house  with  another 
man's  purse,  should  go  about  to  set  up  his  own  name  upon  the  front  thereof ;  and 
in  Justinian's  law  it  was  decreed  that  no  workman  should  set  up  his  name  within 
the  body  of  that  building  which  he  made  out  of  another's  cost.  Thus  Christ  sets 
ns  all  at  work ;  it  is  He  that  bids  us  to  fast,  and  pray,  and  hear,  and  give  ahns, 
*c. ;  but  who  is  at  the  cost  of  aU  this  ?  whose  are  all  these  good  works  ?  Surely 
God's.  Man's  poverty  is  so  great,  that  he  cannot  reach  a  good  thought,  much  less 
a  good  deed ;  iJl  the  materials  are  from  God,  the  building  is  His ;  it  is  He  that  paid 


flHAT.  IT.]  ROMANS.  m 

for  it.  Give  but,  therefore,  the  glory  and  the  honoui  thereof  auto  Ood,  and  take 
all  the  profit  to  thyself.  {J.  Spencer.)  What  saith  the  Scripture  7 — What  saith  the 
Scripture  f — I.  What  is  meant  bt  the  Scripture  ?  Paul  referred  simply  to  the  Old 
Testament.  But  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  are  different 
Scriptures.  The  only  difference  is  that  in  the  New  we  have  a  clearer  explanation  of 
that  which  may  be  found  in  the  Old.  II.  What  is  tub  authority  of  the  Scripture  ? 
The  difference  between  this  and  the  best  of  other  books  is  that  it  was  written,  not  by 
man,  but  by  God ;  though  holy  men  of  old  wrote  the  Book,  they  wrote  it  aa  they 
were  moved  by  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  Divine  aij;thority  is  supported  by  ample 
evidence.  1.  Historical.  2.  Experimental.  HI.  What  saith  the  Scripture? 
1.  For  the  head.  It  unfolds— (1)  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  (2)  The  plan  of 
salvation.  (3)  The  judgment  to  come.  (4)  The  eteroity  of  future  rewards  and 
punishments.  2.  For  the  heart.  (1)  It  proclaims  every  kind  of  encouragement 
to  turn  from  the  error  of  our  ways.  It  assures  us  of — (a)  The  love  of  God  to  each 
Boul.  (b)  His  forbearance  with  sinners,  (c)  His  de^re  to  make  men  happy. 
(2)  It  secures  for  those  who  have  turned — (a)  The  sympathy  of  Jesus,  (b)  The 
comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  For  our  life — our  way  of  liwng.  It  testifies — (1)  To 
the  impossibihty  of  a  double  service.  "Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon." 
(2)  To  the  necessity  of  holiness.  Without  it  '•  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  (8)  To 
the  vanity  of  this  world  compared  with  the  next.  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man? " 
Ac.  IV.  How  ARE  WE  TO  KNOW  THESE  ScRiPTURES?  By  searc'iiug  them — 1.  Prayer- 
fully. 2.  Daily.  Conclusion :  What  an  awful  responsibility  rests  upon  every  man 
who  does  not  consider  what  the  Scripture  saith  I  It  is  just  aa  if  you  were  walking 
in  a  dark  place,  not  knowing  your  road,  and  some  one  were  to  offer  you  a  light,  and 
you  were  to  refuse  to  take  it.  Not  long  ago  I  happened  to  be  visiting  in  a  great 
castle,  situate  on  the  top  of  a  hill,  near  which  there  was  a  very:  steep  cliff,  and  a 
rapid  river  running  at  the  bottom.  A  person,  anxious  to  get  home  from  that  castle 
late  one  night  in  the  midst  of  a  violent  thunderstorm  when  the  ni^ht  was  blackness 
itself,  was  asked  to  stop  till  the  storm  was  over.  She  declined.  vShe  was  begged 
to  take  a  lantern,  that  she  might  be  kept  in  the  road,  but  she  said  she  could  do  very 
well  without  it.  She  left,  and,  perhaps  frightened  by  the  storm,  she  wandered 
from  the  road  and  got  upon  the  top  of  the  cliff;  she  tumbled  over,  and  the 
next  day  the  lifeless  body  of  that  foolish  woman  was  found  washed  ashore 
from  the  swollen  river.  Ah  I  but  how  many  such  foolish  ones  are  there  who, 
when  the  Ught  is  offered,  and  they  have  only  to  ask,  "  What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  " 
are  prepared  to  say,  "I  have  no  need  of  that  Book;  I  know  right  from  wrong; 
I  am  not  afraid;    I  fear   not    the    end."      {Bp.    Villiers.)  What  saith   the 

Scripture  f — I.  As  a  revelation.  On  some  subjects  it  is  the  sole  authority. 
Without  it  man  has  no  hght  whatever,  or  only  the  dimmest  light,  on  the  nature 
of  God,  His  relations  to  man,  the  method  of  reconciliation,  immortahty.  On 
these  subjects  its  testimony  is  full,  clear,  authoritative.  How  important,  then, 
that  man,  a  spiritual  being,  with  an  immortal  destiny,  should  ask,  "  What  saith 
the  Scriptures  ?  "  II.  As  a  coxmsELLOR.  Man  is  a  traveller  in  an  unknown  way, 
and  needs  a  guide,  or  the  chances  are  he  will  go  astray.  There  are  many  canch- 
dates  for  the  office — many  sincere,  and  desirous  only  to  secure  his  good ;  many 
insincere,  seeking  their  own  advantage :  all  fallible,  and  liable  to  give  the  wrong 
advice.  The  Scripture  alone  is  infaUible ;  it  displays  every  step  of  the  way,  so  that 
a  wayfaring  man,  if  he  accepts  its  guidance,  though  a  fool,  will  not  err.  How 
important,  then,  that  as  regards  the  path  of  duty  and  the  way  to  heaven,  young  and 
old  should  ask,  "  What  saith  the  Scriptures  ?  "  III.  As  a  standard.  Weights  and 
measures  in  ordinary  use  may  be  right  or  may  be  wrong.  Some  are  wrong,  being 
too  heavy  or  too  light,  too  long  or  too  short,  too  large  or  too  small.  So  it  is  neces- 
sary again  and  again  to  apply  the  *'  standard  "  test  of  weight,  measurement,  &c. 
So  the  Churches,  theological  schools,  &c.,  may  be  right  or  may  be  wrong  in  their 
enunciation  of  doctrine,  and  moralists  in  their  statement  of  ethics.  But  the 
Scripture  is  the  authoritative  standard  of  faith  and  practice,  and  to  it  all  teaching 
is  to  be  referred.  The  Thessalonians  received  or  rejected  Paul's  doctrine  without 
referring  to  the  standard  ;  the  Bereans  were  '*  more  noble,"  in  that  they"  searched 
the  Scriptures  whether  these  things  were  so."  IV.  As  a  judge.  The  Scripture 
will  judge  those  to  whom  it  has  been  given  at  the  last  day.  The  Books  wiU  be 
opened,  and  this  amongst  them.  It  will  be  in  vain  then  for  man  to  plead  that  he 
bias  consulted  the  Church,  human  opinion,  &o.  What  will  Scripture  say  then  ? 
"  Come,  ye  blessed,"  or,  "  Depart,   ye   cursed."     {J.  W.  Burn.)  The  BibU 

alone : — 1.  "  Scripture  "  means  writing.     Generally,  when  the  Bible,  as  a  volume, 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  If. 

is  spoken  of,  the  expression  "  the  FJcriptures  "  is  used,  becaase  it  is  made  ap  of 
many  writings.    When  some  particular  part  is  alluded  to,  then  it  is  said  "  the 
Scripture."     For  instance    (John  v.  39),  Christ  said,  "  Search   the  Scriptures," 
because  the  whole  Bible,  from  firsf;  to  last,  more  or  less  testified  to  Him.     But  when 
He  selects  any  particular  part,  then  He  says,  "  that  Scripture  "  (Matt,  xii  10). 
Now  in  the  text  Paul  does  not  say,  "  What  saith  the  Scriptures  ?  "  speaking  of  the 
whole  Bible,  but  "  What  says  t'his  particular  part  of  Scripture  which  I  am  nctr 
quoting  ?  "   2.  From  this  we  gather  that  the  Bible  is  infallible.    When  Jesus  quotes 
it,  it  is  with  a  view  to  settle  all  dispute ;  or  when  Paul  has  proved  what  he  has  to 
say  by  the  Bible,  he  has  decidod  the  matter  which  is  in  controversy.     "  To  the  law 
and  to  the  testimony,  if  they  speak  not  according  to  that  Word  it  is  because  they 
have  no  light  in  them."    Note — I.  What  the  text  does  not  sat.    It  does  not 
say — 1.  "  What  says  reasoFi  ?  "    Many  a  man  says  that.    Appeal  to  their  reason 
and  they  are  satisfied.    But  what  is  reason  ?    That  which  is  reason  to  one  man  is 
not  reason  to  another.    Must  I  listen  to  any  infidel  who  chooses  to  put  the  Bible 
aside  and  say,  "  Listen  to  me,  I  am  reason  "?    It  is  true  that  one  man  has  more 
mental  faculty  than  ano'-her.    But  when  we  come  to  weigh  mind  against  mind,  who 
have  displayed  greater  powers  of  mind  than  those  who  have  believed  the  Bible  ? 
And  am  I  to  set  aside  the  reason  of  these  men,  and  take  up  the  reason  of  other  men 
who  are  immeasurably  their  inferiors,  and  be  told  that  the  Bible  is  not  a  book  to 
be  believed  because  it  is  contrary  to  reason  ?    To  me  it  is  the  most  reasonable  thing 
to  believe  in  the  Bible.    2.  •'  What  saith  science?  "     Some  men  say  they  can  dis- 
prove the  Bible  by  scientific  discoveries.     One  geologist  will  tell  you  that  the  Bible 
has  false  statements  with  regard  to  the  antiquity  of  the  world  ;  but  another  says 
that  science  and  the  Book  of  God  are  in  perfect  harmony.    Well,  then,  which  am  I 
to  believe  f    Science  is  always  changing.    Until  Galileo  made  his  discovery  that 
the  earth  moved  round  the  sun,  science  declared  that  the  earth  stood  still  and  the 
sun  moved  round  it.    3.  "  What  saith  the  Church  ?  "    "  Holy  Scripture  containeth 
all  things  necessary  to  salvation :  so  that  whatsoever  is  not  read  therein,  nor  may  be 
proved  thereby,  is  not  to  be  required  of  any  man,  that  it  should  be  believed  as  an  article 
of  the  faith,  or  be  thought  requisite  or  necessary  to  salvation.  In  the  name  of  the  Holy 
Scripture  do  we  understand  those  canonical  books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament, 
of  whose  authority  was  never  any  doubt  in  the  Church."     Good;   that  ia  tha 
doctrine  of  all  the  Churches  that  hold  the  "  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."    And  right  that 
they  should  do  so.    They  do  not  bring  a  man's  interpretation,  creeds,  decrees,  and 
councils,  and  say,  "  Take  this  to  be  your  faith."    But  they  all  say,  "  What  saith 
the  Scripture?"    II.  What  the  text  does  say.    1.  As  to  doctrine,  Abraham  believed 
God,  and  it  was  "  co'^nted  to  him  for  righteousness."     There  is  the  doctrine,  then ; 
it  is  salvation  "  by  faith  "  alone,  "  without  the  deeds  of  the  law."    Now  many 
object  to  this,  and  say,  "  That  is  unreasonable ;  God  will  expect  me  to  do  some- 
thing."    •'  No,"  the  Scripture  saith,  and  with  reason.    If  you  look  to  the  law,  you 
must  do  all  the  works  of  the  law,  or  none — "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth 
not  in  all  things  in  the  law."    As  one  leak  will  sink  a  ship,  so  one  sin  will  damn  a 
Boul.    But  is  not  this  a  dangerous  doctrine  ?    Does  it  not  make  a  man  neglect  good 
works  ?     I  cannot  help  that.     Men  may  abuse  the  doctrine,  as  they  do  other  good 
things,  but  that  is  no  valid  objection  against  the  doctrine  itself.    2.  As  to  duty. 
Having  taught  that  doctrine,  we  proceed  to  say  that  faith  will  never  be  without 
works.    As  there  will  always  be  light  and  heat  in  the  rays  of  the  sun,  so  there  will 
always  be  works  following  and  accompanying  faith.     "  Faith  worketh  by  love." 
"  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."   What  saith  the  Scripture  ?    '•  Love  worketh  no 
ill  to  his  neighbour. "    But  there  are  those  who  speak  of  faith  but  show  no  works. 
Now,  that  is  not  the  faith  of  God's  elect.     You  will  find  it  described  in  James  ii. 
20-23.    This  bears  upon  the  subject.    The  Holy  Ghost  says  that  although  Abraham 
was  accounted  righteous  in  the  sight  of  God  by  faith,  he  justified  his  character  in 
the  sight  of  men  by  works.    What,  then,  saith  the  Scripture  to  that  man  who  live* 
as  most  men  live ;  to  that  man  who  is  neglectful  of  secret  prayer,  who  is  living  in 
Bin,  serving  divers   lusts  and  pleasures,  setting   his  affection  on  things   below? 
Why,  they  condemn  him  from  first  to  last.     *'  He  that  believeth  not  is  condemned 
already."    He  is  not  a  believer  ;  his  life  proves  it.    According  to  the  Word  of  God, 
where  there  is  faith  there  will  be  works.     {R.  W.  Dibdin,  M.A.)        The  Christian 
oracles: — 1.  This  question  is  highly  characteristic  of  St.  Paul.    If  a  Grecian  states- 
man like  SoloHrhad  been  in  a  difficulty,  his  question  would  have  been,  "  What  saith 
the  oracle  ?  "    If  a  Roman  general  like  Caesar,  his  would  have  been,  *'  What  say  tha 
victims?"     But  the  Christian  apostle's  is,  "What  saith  the  Scripture 7*^    i. 


CBAr.  IT.]  ROMANS.  tTi 

Universal  has  been  the  confession  of  human  ignorance,  especially  regarding  the 
future.     The  numerous  oracles  of  antiquity,  of  which  there  were  twenty-two  sacred 
to  Apollo  alone,  are  manifest  acknowledgments  of  this.    But  those  oracles  did  not 
arise  merely  out  of  a  consciousness  of  human  ignorance ;  they  had  their  origin 
likewise  in  a  reverence  for  the  gods  and  a  respect  for  their  religion,  such  as  it  was. 
3.  This  being  the  ease,  let  us  contrast  the  oracles  of  the  heathen  with  the  oracles 
of  God.     At  Delphi  was  the  most  famous  oracle.     In  the  innermost  sanctuary 
there  was  the  golden  statue  of  Apollo,  and  before  it  there  burnt  upon  an  altar  an 
eternal  fire.    In  the  centre  of  this  temple  there  was  a  small  opening  in  the  ground, 
from  which  an  intoxicating  smoke  arose.     Over  this  chasm  there  stood  a  high 
tripod,  on  which  the  Pythia  took  her  seat  whenever  the  oracle  was  to  be  consulted. 
The  smoke  rising  under  the  tripod  affected  her  brain  in  such  a  manner  that  she 
fell  into  a  stHte  of  delirious  intoxication,  and  the  sounds  which  she  uttered  in  this 
state  were  believed  to  contain  the  revelations  of  Apollo.     In  the  long  experiment  of 
heathenism  it  may  be  truly  said  that  men  groped  after  God,  "  if  haply  they  might 
find  Him."    Think  of  them  solemnly  examining  the  entrails  of  a  beast,  or  studying 
the  intersections  of  a  cobweb  ;  think  of  them  trying  to  discover  the  mind  of  God 
from  dreams  or  the  sounds  of  the  wind  among  the  rustling  leaves  ;  and  then  reflect 
on  our  greater  light  and  privileges,  for  we  have  the  oracles  which  holy  men  wrote 
as  they  were  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost.     As  we  have  a  nobler  oracle,  let  us  consult 
it  with  a  nobler  curiosity  and  on  nobler  subjects  than  the  Gentiles  did.    It  is  the 
boast  of  some  natural  theologians  that  they  could  do  without  the  Bible.     But  in 
the  full  light  of  nature  men  acted  as  we  have  observed,  and  therefore  something 
more  luminous  and  powerful  was  necessary  to  the  renovation  of  humanity.    That 
one  thing  needful  was  a  revelation — and  that  we  have  got ;  for  "  all  Script«re  is 
given  by  inspiration  of  God."  "  What  saith  the  Scripture"  on — L  The  oriqinaii  and 
PBESENT  STATE  OF  MAN  ?    It  tcUs  US  wc  Were  Created  upright,  that  man  is  fallen  and 
degenerate,  and  that  we  are  now  in  a  state  of  sin  and  death.  II.  This  present  world. 
How  are  we  to  interpret  it?  Now,  just  as  there  is  an  intended  distance  for  judging  of  a 
picture,  so  there  is  a  right  position  and  attitude  for  judging  this  world.    A  man 
comes  close  up  to  a  masterpiece  of  Rubens,  and  pronounces  it  a  daub.    Let  him 
stand  back,  and  the  picture  will  come  out  even  to  his  unskilful  eye.     Just  so  with 
the  world.  You  cannot  judge  it  rightly  while  you  are  near  it,  amidst  its  fascinations. 
You  must  retire  and  prayerfully  consult  the  Word  of  God.     That  is  the  right 
position  and  attitude  for  judging  of  the  world.    Many  a  thoughtful  man  asks  him- 
self, "  Why  has  God  set  me  down  here  in  the  world?    What  does  He  want  me  to 
do  ?  '*    If  he  went  to  the  Bible  he  would  get  these  questions  satisfactorily  answered ; 
but  perhaps  he  comes  to  the  easy  conclusion  that  he  ought  to  enjoy  himself,  and 
straightway  plunges  into  the  stream  of  pleasure,  and  basks  for  a  little  in  her  fitful 
sunshine.    He  is  destined  to  experience  what  a  million  experiences  fail  to  prove  to 
the  imprudent,  that  the  pleasures  of  the  world  turn  to  acids.     "  What  saith  the 
Scripture?"    It  tells  us  that  man  is  here  on  probation,  that  this  is  a  life  of 
discipline  preparatory  to  another  stage  of  existence,  that  this  life  is  not  our  home, 
but  that  our  home  is  in  heaven.     III.  The  subject  of  happiness.     It  is  not  to  be 
found  in  the  world.     Knowledge  will  not  give  happiness  ;  for  "  he  that  increaseth 
knowledge  increaseth  sorrow. "   Wealth  will  not  give  happiness.   A  rich  man,  when 
he  was  dying,  cried  out  for  his  gold.     It  was  brought  to  him,  and  he  put  it  to  his 
breast.     "  Take  it  away  !  take  it  away  !  "  he  shrieked  ;  "  that  won't  do  I  "     Great- 
ness cannot  give  happiness.     Once  a  friend  called  to  salute  a  prime  minister,  and 
wished  him  a  happy  new  year.     •'  God  grant  that  it  may  be  I "  said  the  poor  great 
man  ;  "  for  during  the  last  year  I  have  not  known  a  happy  day."    A  real  Christian 
is  the  happiest  style  of  man.     Thus  saith  the  Scripture,  "  In  the  world  ye  shall 
have  tribulation ;  but  in  Me  ye  shall  have  peace."     IV.  Of  the  immortality  of 
THE  soul.     How  unsatisfactory  is  mere  reason  here!    But  Christ  has  brought  life 
and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel.     Conclusion  :  1.  We  should  receive 
the  responses  of  God's  oracle  with  meekness.    2.  Consider  your  responsibility. 
Shall  aot  the  heathen  rise  up  in  the  judgment  and  condemn  as  ?    For  they  listened 
for  the  voice  of  Deity  among  the  rustling  leaves  or  the  cooing  of  the  doves,  bnt 
many  of  us  despise  the  voice  that  speaketh  from  heaven.     3.  Consider  the  per- 
petuity of  the  Word,  and  tremble.    Its  reviler  has  long  been  in  his  grave  ;  bat  the 
Word  5f  God  Uveth  and  abideth  for  ever.     {F.  Perry,  M.A.)        Abraham  believed 
Ood,  and  It  was  coimted  unto  him  for  righteousness. — The  faith  of  Abraham: — 
1.  A  simple  childlike  dependence  on  the  naked  Word  of  God.    2.  An  acceptance 
t4t  and  trust  in,  God's  promised  Saviour.     3.  A  renouncing  of  his  own  works  M 


S80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

meritorious.  4.  A  faith  that  wrought  by  love,  making  him  the  friend  of  God. 
5.  One  that  overcame  the  world,  leading  him  to  seek  a  better  country.  6.  One 
that  evidenced  its  reality  by  a  self-denying  obedience.  (T.  Eobinson,  of  Cambridge.) 
The  faith  of  Abraham,  though  not  the  same  with  a  faith  in  Christ,  was  analogous 
to  it— 1.  As  it  was  a  faith  in  unseen  things  (Heb.  xL  17-19).  2.  As  it  was  prior  to 
and  independent  of  the  law  (Gal.  iii.  17-19).  3.  As  it  related  to  the  promised  seed 
in  whom  Christ  was  dimly  seen.  {Prof.  Jowett.)  Abraham's  faith : — L  Whom 
did  he  believe  ?  God,  as  infinitely  powerful — who  could  quicken  the  dead,  and  who 
had  merely  to  will  that  beings  and  events  should  be,  and  they  immediately  came 
into  existence  (ver.  17).  II.  What  did  he  believe?  What  God  was  pleased  to 
reveaL  What  is  mentioned  here  is  that  he  should  become  the  father  of  many 
nations ;  but  that  was  only  a  smaU  part  of  what  was  revealed  and  what  he  believed. 
He  believed  in  effect — for  this  was  the  sum  of  what  God  revealed  to  him — that  one 
of  his  descendants  was  to  be  the  promised  Saviour  of  men  ;  and  that  both  he  and 
his  spiritual  seed  were  to  be  saved  by  faith  in  Him.  The  revelation  was  compara- 
tively indistinct,  but  this  was  its  purport.  HI.  Why  did  he  believe  this  ?  Just 
because  God  had  said  it.  He  had  no  other  ground  for  it.  Everything  else  would 
have  led  him  to  doubt  or  disbelieve  it.  IV.  What  were  the  chibactebisticb  of  this 
faith  ?  It  was— 1.  Firm  faith  (ver.  21).  2.  Hopeful  faith  (ver.  18).  8.  A  faith 
that  no  seeming  impossibilities  could  shake  (ver.  20).  {J.  Browne,  D.D.)  Abra- 
ham's faith: — I.  Abraham  was  a  man  of  faith.  1.  His  faith  was  not — (1)  Assent 
to  a  creed  ;  (2)  Nor  an  intelligent  conviction  of  any  plan  of  salvation  to  be  accom- 
plished centuries  later  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  2.  It  was  a  grand,  simple  trust 
in  God.  It  was  shown  in — (1)  His  forsaking  the  idols  of  his  forefathers  and 
worshipping  the  one  spiritual  God.  (2)  In  his  leaving  home  and  going  he  knew  not 
whither  in  obedience  to  a  Divine  voice.  (3)  In  his  willingness  to  sacrifice  his  son. 
(4)  In  his  hope  of  a  future  inheritance.  3.  Such  a  faith  is  personal  reUance, 
leading  to  obedience  and  encouraged  by  hopeful  anticipation.  4.  This  faith  is  a 
model  faith  for  us.  For  faith  is  to  rely  upon  Christ,  to  be  loyal  to  Christ,  to 
hope  in  Christ,  and  to  accept  the  fuller  revelations  of  truth  which  Christ  opens  np 
to  US  as  Abraham  accepted  the  Divine  voices  vouchsafed  to  him.  The  contents  o£ 
faith  will  vary  according  to  our  light ;  but  the  spirit  of  it  must  be  always  the  same. 
n.  His  faith  was  beckoned  to  him  fob  biohteousness.  The  special  point  in 
Abraham's  character  was  not  his  holiness,  but  his  faith.  God's  favour  flowed  to 
him  through  this  channel.  It  was  the  way  through  which  he,  imperfect  and  sinful 
as  are  all  the  sons  of  Adam,  was  called  to  the  privileged  place  of  a  righteous  man. 
This  is  recorded  of  him  in  the  sacred  history  (Gen.  xv.  6),  and  therefore  should  bo 
admitted  by  all  Jews.  The  reasons  for  our  relying  on  faith  are — 1.  Historical. 
Faith  justified  Abraham,  therefore  it  wiU  justify  us.  2.  Theological.  Faith  brings 
us  into  living  fellowship  with  God,  and  so  opens  our  hearts  to  receive  the  for- 
giveness that  puts  us  in  the  position  of  righteous  men.  3.  Moral.  Faith  is  the 
security  for  the  future  growth  of  righteousness ;  with  the  first  effort  of  faith  the 
first  seed-grace  of  righteousness  is  sown.  HI.  Pabtioipation  in  Abbaham's  faith 
IS  THE  condition  OF  PARTICIPATION  IN  Abraham's  BLESSING.  The  Jcws  claimed 
this  by  birthright,  but  Abraham  had  it  by  faith.  Only  men  of  faith  could  have  it. 
Therefore  Jews  who  lost  faith  lost  the  blessing.  But  all  men  of  faith  are  spiritual 
sons  of  Abraham  (ver.  12).  The  finest  legacy  left  by  the  patriarch  was  his  faith. 
{W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  The  nature  of  faith  as  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Abraham : — 
I.  Faith.  The  Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin,  and  English  words  hover  between  two 
meanings — 1.  Trustfulness,  the  frame  of  mind  which  relies  on  another.  2.  Trust- 
worthiness, the  frame  of  mind  which  can  be  relied  upon.  Not  only  are  the  two 
connected  together  grammatically,  as  active  and  passive  senses  of  the  same  word, 
or  logically,  as  subject  and  object  of  the  same  act ;  but  there  is  a  close  moral 
affinity  between  them.  FideHty,  constancy,  firmness,  confidence,  reliance,  trust, 
belief — these  are  the  links  which  connect  the  two  extremes,  the  passive  with  the 
active  meaning  of  "  faith."  Owing  to  these  combined  causes,  the  two  senses  will 
at  times  be  so  blended  together  that  they  can  only  be  separated  by  some  arbitrary 
distinction.  When  the  members  of  the  Christian  brotherhood,  e.g.,  are  called  "  the 
faithful,"  what  is  meant  by  this?  Does  it  imply  their  constancy,  their  trust- 
worthiness, or  their  faith,  their  beUef  ?  In  all  such  cases  it  is  better  to  accept  the 
latitude,  and  even  the  vagueness,  of  a  word  or  phrase,  than  to  attempt  a  rigid 
definition  which  after  all  can  only  be  artificial.  And  indeed  the  loss  in  grammatical 
precision  is  often  more  than  compensated  by  the  gain  in  theological  depth.  In  the 
case  oi  "  the  faithful,"  e.g.,  does  not  the  one  quality  of  heart  carry  the  other  with 


OBAP.  IT.]  ROMANS.  S81 

it,  so  that  thej  who  are  trustfal  are  trusty  also ;  they  who  have  faith  in  God  are 
steadfast  and  immovable  in  the  path  of  duty  ?  II.  In  Abrahau  this  attitude  of 
TBDSTFULMESS  WAS  MOST  MASKED.  By  faith  he  left  home  and  kindred,  and  settled 
in  a  strange  land ;  by  faith  he  acted  upon  God's  promise  of  a  race  and  an  inheritance, 
though  it  seemed  at  variance  with  all  human  experience  ;  by  faith  he  offered  up 
his  only  son,  in  whom  alone  that  promise  could  be  fulfilled.  This  one  word  "  faith" 
eums  up  the  lesson  of  his  whole  life.  As  early  as  the  First  Book  of  Maccabees 
attention  is  directed  to  this  lesson  (chr>p.  ii.  52),  and  at  the  time  of  the  Christian 
era  the  passage  in  Genesis  relating  to  it  had  become  a  standard  text  in  the  Jewish 
schools  for  discui'sion  and  comment,  and  the  interest  thus  concentrated  on  it  pre- 
pared the  way  for  the  fuller  and  more  spiritual  teaching  of  the  apostles.  Hence  we 
find  it  quoted  by  both  Paul  and  James.  While  the  deductions  drawn  from  it  by 
them  are  at  first  sight  diametrically  opposed  in  terms,  and  as  long  as  our  range  of 
view  is  confined  to  the  apostolic  writings,  it  seems  scarcely  possible  to  avoid  the 
OOD  elusion  that  James  is  attacking  the  teaching  of  Paul.  But  when  we  realise  the 
fact  that  the  passage  in  Genesis  was  a  common  thesis  in  the  schools,  that  the 
meaning  of  faith  was  variously  explained,  and  diverse  lessons  drawn  from  it — then 
the  case  is  altered.  The  Gentile  apostle  and  the  Pharisaic  rabbi  might  both 
maintain  the  supremacy  of  faith  as  the  means  of  salvation ;  but  faith  with  Paul 
was  a  very  different  thing  from  faith  with  Maimonides.  With  the  one  its  pro- 
minent idea  is  a  spiritual  life,  with  the  other  an  orthodox  creed ;  with  the  one  the 
guiding  principle  is  the  individual  conscience,  with  the  other  an  external  rule  of 
ordinances;  with  the  one  faith  is  allied  to  liberty,  with  the  other  to  bondage. 
Thus,  and  since  the  circles  of  labour  of  the  two  apostles  were  not  likely  to  intersect, 
St.  James's  protest  against  reliance  on  faith  alone  is  more  likely  to  have  been 
levelled  against  the  Pharisaic  spirit  which  rested  satisfied  with  a  barren  orthodoxy 
than  against  the  teaching  of  Paul.  (Bp.  Lightfoot.)  Abraham,  the  model  of 
faith: — I.  The  faith  of  Abraham  was  a  simple  faith — a  faith  which  asked  for 
nothing  but  the  word  of  God  to  rest  upon.  II.  It  was  an  obedient  faith.  It 
led  him  to  do  whatever  God  told  him  to  do.  And  our  faith  is  good  for  nothing 
unless  it  leads  us  to  be  like  Abraham  in  this  respect.  III.  It  was  a  conquebino 
VAiTH — a  faith  which  helped  him  to  overcome  the  greatest  difficulties.  IV.  Abraham's 
rAiTH  WAS  A  COMFORTING  FAITH.  (R.  NewtoTi,  D.D.)  Difficulties  overcovie  by 
faith : — Bishop  Hall  has  only  overstated  a  fundamental  fact  when  he  says,  "  There 
is  no  faith  where  there  is  either  means  or  hope."  Means  and  hopes  may  be  "  mixed 
with  faith,"  but  undoubtedly  the  mightiest  deliverances  ever  wrought  have  been  by 
faith  alone.  Difficulties  aud  apparent  impossibilities  are  the  food  on  which  faith 
feeds.  Believing  God: — Abraham  was  the  head  of  a  wandering  tribe,  with 
probably  only  such  small  ambitions  as  were  common  to  his  station ;  a  man  of 
purer  life,  of  higher  purposes,  perhaps,  than  his  neighbour  chiefs,  and  yet  with 
nothing  very  marked  to  distinguish  him  from  them.  God  calls  this  man,  instructs 
him,  leads  him,  and  as  he  hears,  believes,  obeys,  he  becomes  quite  another  man. 
In  this  is  the  whole  source  of  Abraham's  greatness.  It  was  not  in  his  natural 
gifts  that  he  was  distinguished  above  all  other  men  of  his  day ;  others  may  have 
been  as  intelligent  and  as  forceful  as  he.  Nor  was  it  in  his  great  opportunities 
that  he  excelled.  There  is  nothing  very  wonderful  in  his  history,  if  you  take  away 
from  it  his  faith  and  its  influence  on  his  life.  He  wandered  farther  than  many  of 
the  men  of  his  day  ;  but  they  were  all  wanderers.  He  fought  his  petty  battles  ;  so 
did  they.  But  the  one  thing  which  raised  him  above  them  all,  the  thing  which 
makes  us  know  that  there  was  such  a  man  at  all,  is  only  this,  that  he  believed  God. 
There  is  aothing  small  in  such  a  life,  for  its  whole  business  is  to  follow  God's  call. 
The  same  transformation  is  wrought  to-day  over  the  man  who,  like  Abraham, 
believes  God.  It  does  not  come  from  believing  that  God  is,  or  believing  in  God,  or 
on  God,  but  by  simply,  lovingly,  believing  God ;  believing  what  He  says,  and  all 
He  says,  and  because  He  says  it.  It  makes  a  man  a  saint  if  you  look  at  him  from 
the  side  of  personal  purity  of  character  and  life.  It  puts  him  under  the  holiest 
influence  which  can  move  a  mortal  man.  God  has  said,  "Without  holiness  no 
man  can  see  the  Lord,"  and  he  believes  God;  and  having  "thiB  hope  in  Him, 
purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure."  It  makes  a  mar  a  hero,  if  you  look  at  him 
from  the  side  of  his  daring  or  endurance.  He  believes  God.  It  makes  no 
difference  to  him  what  any  man,  what  all  men  say.  What  are  men's  words  against 
the  Word  of  God  ?  {Christian  World  Pulpit.'j  Folly  of  self-righteousness : — ♦•  By 
the  works  of  the  law  there  shall  no  flesh  living  be  justified  " ;  and  in  the  teeth  of 
that  millioni  of  men  say,  "  We  will  be  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law  " ;  lo, 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  IT. 

coming  to  God  with  the  pretence  of  worshipping  Him,  they  offer  Him  that  which 
He  abhors,  and  give  the  lie  to  Him  in  all  His  solemn  declarations.  If  God  says 
that  by  the  works  of  the  law  no  flesh  shall  be  justified,  and  man  declares,  "  But  I  will 
be  80  justified,"  he  maketh  God  a  liar ;  whether  he  knoweth  it  or  not,  his  sin  hatb 
that  within  it.  Man  is  much  like  a  silkworm,  he  is  a  spinner  and  weaver  by 
nature.  A  robe  of  righteousness  is  wrought  out  for  him,  but  he  will  not  have  it ; 
he  will  spin  for  himself,  and  like  the  silkworm,  he  spins  and  spins,  and  he  only 
spins  himself  a  shroud.  All  the  righteousness  that  a  sinner  can  make  will  only  be 
a  shroud  in  which  to  wrap  up  his  soul,  his  destroyed  soul,  for  God  will  cast  him 
away  who  relies  upon  the  works  of  the  law.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  5.  But  to  talm  that  worketh  not,  but  belleveth  on  Him  that  Justifletli  the 
ungodly,  his  talVh  is  counted  for  righteousness. — Justification  of  the  ungodly : — 
The  first  sound  of  these  words  is  startling.  What  I  is  it,  then,  the  idle  or  the 
vicious  person,  he  that  does  nothing  or  nothing  that  is  good,  and  merely  has  faith 
or  belief,  who  is  to  be  treated  as  righteous  ?  And  is  God  the  justifier,  not  of  the 
godly,  but  of  the  ungodly  ?  A  moment's  examination  of  the  words  will  show  that 
the  apostle  never  entertained  the  sentiments  which  at  first  sight  they  appear  to 
exhibit.  1.  The  very  expression,  "  His  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness,"  in- 
timates that  righteousness  is  essentially  worthy  and  acceptable.  If  faith  is  received 
in  the  stead  of  righteousness,  then  surely  righteousness  is  of  as  much  value,  at 
least,  as  that  which  is  accepted  in  its  place.  If  righteousness  be  the  debt  which 
man  owes  to  God,  and  it  pleases  God,  in  consideration  of  man's  failure,  to  take  his 
faith  as  an  equivalent,  it  is  clear  that  righteousness,  the  debt,  is  even  of  more 
value  than  faith,  which  is  taken,  in  kindness  and  pity,  as  an  equivalent.  And  a 
clue  is  here  put  into  our  hands  by  following  which,  with  the  context  to  aid  us,  we 
shall  no  doubt  be  guided  to  a  satisfactory  interpretation,  and  a  clear  result.  2. 
"  His  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness."  But  what  righteousness  ?  The 
righteousness  which  ought  to  have  been  ;  which  is  due ;  which  is  not  paid.  He 
who  "worketh  not"  owes  long  arrears  of  righteousness;  he  has  been  a  sinful 
man ;  he  is  a  debtor  to  a  large  amount.  But  when  he  turns  away  from  sin,  and 
believes  heartily  and  truly  on  God,  then  his  faith,  which  is  a  pledge  of  future 
righteousness,  is  graciously  credited  to  him  for  those  long  arrears,  and  the  debt 
remains  no  more  against  him.  "By  grace  are  we  saved  through  faith."  The 
single  consideration,  then,  that  it  is  past  righteousness  which  is  intended  ia  the 
text,  lights  it  up  at  once  with  a  holy,  and  cheering,  and  satisfying  light.  8.  And 
that  this  consideration  is  introduced,  not  only  allowably  but  necessarily,  appears 
from  the  context  (vers.  6-8).  To  "impute  righteousness  without  works"  is 
evidently  synonymous  with  forgiveness  of  sin;  it  is  to  treat  one  who  has  not 
worked  as  if  he  had  worked.  But  then  there  is  a  condition — faith,  which,  working 
by  love,  produces  henceforth  the  fruits  of  righteousness.  So  the  imputation  of 
righteousness  without  works,  or  the  non-imputation  of  sin,  is  by  no  means  a 
dispensation  from  future  righteousness,  but  exactly  the  contrary.  This  is  the 
doctrine  of  St.  James,  as  well  as  of  St.  Paul ;  the  doctrine  of  our  Saviour  and  of 
His  most  touching  parable  of  the  prodigal  son ;  and  is  the  doctrine  not  only  of  the 
New  Testament,  but  of  the  Old.  Abraham,  before  he  knew  and  believed  in  God, 
was  not  the  righteous  man  that  he  was  after  he  believed  in  Him ;  smd  his  faith 
was  counted  to  him  for  righteousness ;  his  past  sins  were  forgiven.  Since  Jesus 
came  and  died,  there  is  a  louder  call  to  repentance  and  a  stronger  array  of  motives, 
and  a  more  general  justification.  A  sincere  and  earnest  faith  in  Him  will  move,  if 
anything  can  move,  the  heart  to  love  and  gratitude,  and  the  life  to  duty.  And  the 
heart  being  thus  moved  to  love  and  gratitude,  and  the  life  to  duty,  past  sin  is  for- 
given, the  ungodly  is  justified,  and  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness  ;  not,  surely, 
because  this  powerfully  moving  faith  dispenses  with  righteousness,  or  is  above 
righteousness,  but  because  it  moves  to  it  and  secures  it.  (F.  W.  P.  Greenwood, 
D.D.)  Justifi,cation  by  faith : — I.  The  general  ground  of  the  doctrine.  1. 
Man  was  made  in  the  image  of  God,  holy  as  He  is  holy,  and  perfect  as  He  is 
perfect.  To  man,  thus  upright,  God  gave  a  perfect  law,  to  which  He  required  a 
perfect  obedience,  which  man  was  capable  of  rendering.  To  this  was  superadded 
the  commandment  not  to  eat  of  "  the  fruit  of  the  tree,"  with  death  as  the  penalty 
annexed.  2.  Man  disobeyed,  and  the  sentence  began  to  take  effect.  EQs  soul  died, 
being  separated  from  God,  his  body  became  mortal,  and  he  hastened  on  to  death 
everlasting.  Thus,  "  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,"  and  we  have 
inherited  the  sin  and  penalty  of  our  representative.    3.  In  this  state  we  were  whea 


«BAr.  IT.]  ROMANS.  283 

God  gave  His  Son  to  be  a  second  general  Parent  and  Bepresentative,  and  as  such 
"  He  bore  our  sins,"  and  by  that  one  oblation  of  Himself  He  has  redeemed  aU 
mankind.  In  consideration  of  Christ's  death  God  has  reconciled  the  world  anto 
Himself,  not  imputing  their  former  trespasses.  U.  Its  natubb.  1.  Not  the  being 
made  righteous  ;  that  is  sanctification,  which  follows  justification,  but  is  a  distinct 
and  inward  gift.  2.  Nor  the  clearing  as  from  the  accusation — (l)  Of  Satan.  (2) 
Of  the  law — theories  found  nowhere  in  the  Bible.  3.  Nor  that  which  implies  that 
God  is  deceived  in  those  He  justifies,  viz. ,  accounting  them  to  be  otherwise  than 
what  they  are.  4.  But  that  act  of  God  the  Father,  whereby,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's 
propitiation,  He  forgives  sin  (vers.  6,  7).  Ill,  Its  subjects.  1.  The  ungodly  and 
only  such.  As  the  righteous  need  no  repentance,  so  they  need  no  forgiveness ; 
which  contradicts  the  absurd  supposition  that  holiness  is  necessary  to  justification. 
Only  sinners  can  be  forgiven.  2.  Him  that  worketh  not.  But  do  not  men  feed 
the  hungry,  &c.,  before  justification  7  Tes,  and  these  may  in  a  sense  be  called 
good  works — "  good  and  profitable  to  men  " — but  no  work  is  good  which  is  not 
done  as  Qod  wills  and  commands,  and  God  hath  willed  that  all  our  works  should  be 
done  in  charity,  i.e.,  that  love  to  Him  from  which  love  to  man  proceeds.  But 
none  of  our  works  can  be  done  in  this  love  while  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in 
as.  IV.  Its  oonditiok.  Faith,  i.e.,  a  sure  trust  and  confidence  that  Christ  died 
for  my  sins,  and  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me.  This  is  the  only  but  the 
necessary  condition,  for  •'  he  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already."  (J.  Wesley, 
M.A.)  Justification  the  gift  of  grace  received  by  faith: — 1.  The  man  who  has 
obtained  justification  may  be  looked  upon  as  in  possession  of  a  title-deed,  which 
secures  to  him  a  right  to  God's  favour.  The  question  is,  How  comes  he  into 
possession  of  this  title-deed?  Did  he  work  for  it,  and  thus  receive  it  as  a  return 
for  his  works  ?  No ;  he  did  not  work  for  it ;  and  thus  it  is  that  justification  is  to 
him  who  worketh  not — that  is,  he  did  nothing  antecedent  to  his  justification  to 
bring  this  privilege  down  upon  him;  nor  subsequently,  for  it  is  a  contradiction 
to  allow  that  he  has  to  work  to  obtain  what  he  already  has  ;  nor  at  the  time,  for 
he  came  to  it  by  beUeving.  But  then,  as  in  the  case  of  a  man  coming  into  an 
estate,  no  sooner  does  he  lay  hold  of  the  deed  than  he  begins,  and  that  most 
strenuously,  to  qualify  himself  for  the  possession  :  and,  with  a  foot  which  touches 
lightly  that  earth  from  which  he  is  to  ascend  so  soon  into  the  fields  of  eternal 
glory  that  are  above  him,  to  aspire  after  the  virtues  which  are  current  there;  and, 
by  an  active  cultivation  of  his  heart,  labour  to  prepare  himself  for  a  station  of 
happiness  and  honour.  2.  But  beware  of  having  any  such  view  of  faith  as 
will  lead  you  to  annex  to  it  the  kind  of  merit  which  is  annexed  to  works  under 
the  law.  It  is  God  who  justifies.  He  drew  up  the  title-deed,  and  He  bestowed  it. 
It  is  ours  simply  by  laying  hold  of  it.  Ye  are  saved  by  grace  through  faith.  By 
which  is  a  house  enlightened  by  the  sun,  or  by  an  open  window  ?  The  answer 
may  justly  enough  be  that  it  is  by  the  window — and  yet  the  window  does  not 
enlighten  the  house — it  is  a  mere  opening  for  the  transmission  of  the  light  of  the 
■on.  Christ  hath  wrought  out  a  righteousness  for  us  that  is  freely  offered  to  us  of 
God.  By  faith  we  discern  the  reality  of  this  offer;  and  all  that  it  does  is  to  strike 
out,  as  it  were,  an  avenue  of  conveyance,  by  which  the  righteousness  of  another 
passes  to  as ;  and  through  faith  are  we  saved  by  this  righteousness.  IT.  Chalmers, 
D.D.)  The  fitnes$  of  faith  in  order  to  justification  : — 1.  It  is  obviously  the 
only  way  in  which  a  testimony  can  be  received ;  and  God  has  been  pleased  to 
appoint  that  such  only  as  receive  His  testimony  shall  reap  the  benefit  of  what  it 
reveals.  2.  It  is  a  medium  of  justification  by  which  the  whole  glory  is  secured,  as 
it  ought  to  be,  to  * '  the  God  of  all  grace  " ;  agreeably  to  the  nature  and  design  of 
the  whole  scheme  of  redemption,  by  which  "  the  loftiness  of  man  is  bowed  down, 
and  the  haughtiness  of  man  is  laid  low  ;  and  Jehovah  alone  is  exalted."  3.  It  is 
a  method  of  justification  which  unites  it  inseparably  with  sanctification.  The 
truth  must  be  received  by  faith  into  the  mind  in  order  to  its  operating  with  its 
holy  influence  on  the  affections  and  desires  of  the  heart.  (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 
Salvation  not  by  works : — Observe  what  happens  when  the  cry  rises  at  sea,  "  A 
man  overboard  1 "  With  others  on  deck,  you  rush  to  the  side ;  and,  leaning  over 
the  bulwarks,  with  beating  heart  you  watch  the  place  where  the  rising  air-bells  and 
boiling  deep  teU  that  he  has  gone  down.  After  some  moments  of  breathless 
anxiety,  you  see  his  head  emerge  from  the  wave.  Now,  that  man,  I  shall  suppose, 
is  no  swimmer ;  he  has  never  learned  to  breast  the  billows ;  yet,  with  the  first 
breath  he  draws,  he  begins  to  beat  the  water.  With  violent  efforts  he  attempts  to 
■hake  off  the  grasp  of  death,  and  by  the  play  of  limbs  and  arms  to  keep  his  head 


2«4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ota».  W. 

from  sinking.  It  may  be  that  these  struggles  but  exhaust  his  strength,  and  sink 
hina  all  the  sooner.  Nevertheless,  that  drowning  one  makes  instinctive  and  con- 
vulsive efforts  to  save  himself.  So,  when  first  brought  to  feel  and  cry,  "  I  perish  I  "i 
when  the  horrible  conviction  rushes  into  the  soul  that  we  are  lost.  When  we  feel 
ourselves  going  down  beneath  a  load  of  guilt  into  the  depth  of  the  wrath  of  God, 
our  first  eSort  is  to  save  ourselves.  Like  a  drowning  man,  who  will  clutch  al 
straws  and  twigs,  we  seize  on  anything,  however  worthless,  that  promises  salvation. 
Thus,  alasl  many  poor  souls  toil,  and  spend  weary,  unprofitable  years,  in  the 
attempt  to  establish  a  righteousness  of  their  own,  and  find  in  the  deeds  of  the  law 
protection  from  its  curse.  (T,  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Faith  a  universal  possibility  : — 
Faith  is  natural  to  man  ;  the  mightiest  principle  in  the  soul.  It  is  the  founda- 
tion of  trade;  the  wheel  of  commerce;  the  bond  of  social  life;  the  abiding 
loot  of  the  family  tree.  And  such  is  the  faith  that  reposes  on  the  Son  of  God. 
Faith  is  not  the  creation  of  theology  or  Christianity.  It  is  older  than  either.  It 
is  not  something  supematurally  implanted  in  a  man  when  he  becomes  a  Christian. 
It  is  no  new  faculty  bestowed.  That  principle  which  trusts  a  parent's  love,  and 
produces  obedience  to  a  parent's  will,  is  the  same  principle  exercised  in  another 
region  which  makes  us  one  with  God.  Thus,  the  salvation  which  God  has  provided 
for  all  becomes  a  salvation  not  only  worthy  the  acceptance  of  all,  but  possible  to 
be  accepted  by  all.  Salvation  becomes  a  universal  possibility,  because  it  is  offered 
to  a  capacity  which  all  men  possess  and  exercise.  (R.  Henry.)  The  way  of 
salvation : — I.  The  way  ot  thb  natural  man.  "  Worketh."  He  wishes  it  to  bie 
of  desert.  II.  The  betteb  way — by  faith.  This  is — 1.  The  old  way.  (1) 
Abraham's.    (2)  David's.    2.  The  blessed  way.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-8.  Even  as  David  also  descriheth  the  blessedness  of  the  man,  unto  whom 
God  Imputeth  righteousness  without  works. — Imputed  righteousness  defended  against 
its  caricatures : — It  has  been  represented  as — I.  A  lboal  fiction.  We  protest  against 
this  if  the  expression  be  meant  anything  unreal  or  untrue.  1.  We  make  this  state- 
ment with  a  limitation  because  there  are  some  *'  legal  fictions  "  which  are  very  far 
from  being  unreal.  It  is  "  a  legal  fiction  "  to  say  that  '•  the  king  can  do  no  wrong  " ; 
for  unquestionably  in  his  private  and  personal  capacity  he  may  even  be  guilty  of 
crime ;  but  in  his  public  and  official  capacity,  as  the  head  of  the  State,  he  is  held 
in  the  law  of  this  country  to  be  irresponsible,  and  the  errors  or  crimes  of  the 
government  are  imputed  to  his  constitutional  advisers,  who  are  regarded,  by  reason 
of  their  official  position,  as  alone  answerable  for  them.  It  is  a  "  legal  fiction  "  to 
say  that  "  the  king  never  dies  " ;  for  as  an  individual  he  cannot  escape  the  doom  of 
the  meanest  of  his  subjects ;  but  royalty  survives  the  person  of  the  monarch.  It 
is  a  "  legal  fiction  "  to  say  that  the  Commons  of  England  are  assembled  in  Parlia- 
ment ;  for  they  are  there  only  in  the  persons  of  their  representatives ;  and  yet  the 
whole  nation  is  bound  by  their  acts,  and  subject  to  be  governed,  taxed,  fined,  and 
imprisoned,  or  even  put  to  death,  according  to  their  laws.  It  is  a  "  legal  fiction," 
and  a  far  from  seemly  one,  to  speak  of  the  omnipotence  of  Parliament ;  yet  that 
irreverent  expression  contains  the  important  truth  that  the  supreme  power,  which 
must  exist  in  every  form  of  government,  and  from  whose  judgment  there  is  no 
appeal,  is  vested  in  the  legislative  and  executive  authorities  of  the  State.  Is  con- 
stitutional government,  therefore,  "  a  legal  fiction,"  in  the  sense  of  being  unreal 
or  unconnected  with  grave  responsibilities?  Or  was  adoption,  according  to  the 
Bomish  Jurisprudence,  which  regarded  one  as  the  son  of  another  in  law  who  was 
not  his  son  by  birth,  a  "legal  fiction," or  a  privilege  of  no  real  worth  when  it  con- 
stituted a  new  relation  between  those  who  were  not  related  before,  and  conveyed  a 
legal  right  of  inheritance?  Or  is  the  rule  that  the  wife  is  one  in  law  with  her 
husband  an  unreal  thing,  when  it  invests  him  with  serious  liabilities  ?  These  examples 
should  dispel  the  prejudice  which  is  excited  against  imputation  when  it  is  described 
as  a  "  legal  fiction,"  since  although  "  legal  fictions  "  they  express  important  truths. 
2.  Suppose  that  it  were  justly  described  as  a  "  legal  fiction  "  it  might  still  represent 
an  important  truth,  under  the  scheme  of  God's  moral  government.  (1)  If  He  has 
promulgated  His  law  in  a  covenant  form,  as  a  law  for  the  race  at  large,  and 
imposed  it  on  the  first  Adam  as  their  representative,  then  that  constitution  must 
be  productive  of  results  in  which  they  as  well  as  he  will  be  found  to  participate  ; 
and  yet  these  consequences,  so  far  from  being  mere  "legal  fictions,"  are  assuredly 
very  solemn  realities :  the  curse  on  the  ground,  the  doom  of  death,  the  loss  of  God's 
image,  the  forfeiture  of  His  favour,  and  all  the  evils  which  have  followed  in  th« 
train  of  sin, — i^  these  are  brought  upon  us  under  the  operation  of  that  law,  and 


•BUP.  IT.]  ROMANS.  S8i 

©very  one  of  them  is  real.    (2)  In  like  manner  if  God  has  promulgated  a  scheme 
ot  redeeming  mercy,  and  this,  too,  in  a  covenant  form,  through  the  second  Adam 
as  the  representative  of  His  people,  imposing  upon  Him  the  fulfilment  of  its 
conditions,  and  securing  to  them  the  benefits  of  His  work  on  their  behalf,  then  this 
constitution  must  be  pruductive  of  results,  in  which  they  as  well  as  He  will  be 
found  to  participate ;  and  yet  these  results,  so  .far  from  being  "  legal  fictions,"  are 
substantial  blessings  of  the  highest  and    must  permanent  kind  :   pardon,   the 
restoration  of  God's  favour,  renewal  in  His  image,  adoption,  eternal  life.     Hence  it 
is  vain  to  talk  of  "  legal  fictions  "  whether  under  law  or  gospel ;  for  while  con- 
demnation on  the  one  hand  and  justification  on  the  other  are  strictly  forensic  acts, 
and  must  necessarily  have  some  relation  to  the  justice  of   God,  and  while  the 
representative  character  both  of  the  first  and  second  Adam,  and  the  consequent 
inaputation  of  their  guilt  and  righteousness  to  those  whom  they  represented,  can 
only  be  ascribed  to  the  sovereign  will  of  God,  yet  the  results  are  real  and  not 
fictitious.     H.  A  THEOEY  invented  by  man  to  account  for  these  results.    A  similar 
prejudice  exists  against  all  the  peculiar  revelations  of  Scripture,  as  if  they  were 
matters  of  speculative  interest,  rather  than  of  practical  importance.    Yet  nothing 
is  more  remarkable  in  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  than  this,  that  every  one  of 
them  is  simply  the  statement  of  a  fact,  and  that  they  all  relate  either  to  substantivo 
beings — God,  angels,  and  men,  or  to  real  events,  past,  present,  or  future.    What  is 
the  doctrine  of  God  but  the  revelation  of   His  existence,  and  of  the  perfections 
which  belong  to  Him  as  the  Creator  and  Governor  of  the  world  ?    Wliat  is  the 
doctrine  of   the  Trinity  but  the  statement  of   a  fact  respecting  the  existence  of 
distinct  hypostases  in  His  one  undivided  Godhead.     What  is  the  doctrine  of  the 
Incarnation  but  the  statement  of  a  fact  respecting  the  union  of  the  Divine  and 
human  natures  in  the  Person  of  our  Lord?    And  in  like  manner,  what  is  the 
doctrine  of  Imputation,  whether  of  sin  or  righteousness,  but  the  statement  of  a 
fact  respecting  the  relation  in  which  we  stand  to  the  first  or  second  Adam,  and  the 
consequences  which  result  to  us  from  the  disobedience  of  the  one,  and  the  obedience 
of  the  other  t    No  doubt,  when  these  facts  are  revealed,  and  become  the  subjects  of 
human  thought,  they  may  occasion  speculation,  and  speculation  may  give  birth  to 
wild  theories,  when  unrestrained  by  faith ;  but  let  the  facts  be  believed  on  the 
testimony  of  the  Bevealer,  let  them  be  duly  realised  in  their  full  Scriptural  meaning, 
and  in  their  application  to  our  own  souls — and  we  may  safely  discard  every  human 
theory,  and  adhere  only  to  the  truth  as  it  has  been  taught  by  God.     {E.  Bttchanan, 
D.D.)        The  pleading  of  poverty  in  order  to  salvation: — There  is  a  legal  process 
in  which  a  person  pleads  before  the  court  in  what  is  called  in  forma  pauperis,  that 
is,  he  pleads  as  a  poor  man,  be  pleads  his  poverty ;  and  there  are  certain  privileges 
allowed  to  those  who  thus  plead  in  forma  pauperis  which  are  not  accorded  to  the 
we "Ithiest  persons  in  the  land.    This  is  the  only  successful  way  in  which  to  plead 
with  God :  we  must  come  as  paupers,  having  nothing  of  our  own ;  giving  up  every 
pretence  of  right  or  claim  of  deserving.     We  must  cry,  "  Lord,  I  am  lost  1  I  am 
lost !  I  am  lost  1  but  Thou  hast  lived  and  Thou  hast  died  ;  Thy  life,  Thy  sufferings, 
Thy  griefs.  Thy  groans.  Thy  death,  all  these  were  for  those  who  needed  such  a  sin- 
atoning  sacrifice,  and  on  that  sacrifice  by  blood  I  rest ;  I  cast  myself,  lost  and 
ruined,  upon  the  work  which  Jesus  Christ  has  done  for  me  I "        {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Saying',  Blessed  are  they  whose  iniquities  are  forgiven. — Forgiveness : — I.  Its 
MATDBS.     1.  A  non-imputation  of  the  offence.     2.  A  covering  of  its  guilt.    8.  A 
remission  of  its  punishment.    11.  The  act.     1.  Divine.    2.  Just.    3.  Through 
faith  in  Christ.    IH.  Its  blessedness.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)      Aspects  of  forgiveness  ;— . 
Sin — I.  FoBQivEM,  as  a  debt  we  are  unable  to  pay.    II.  Covebed,  as  an  object  not 
to  be  looked  upon  by  a  holy  God  (Hab.  i.  13).    III.  Not  impdted,  as  a  crime 
deserving  eternal  death  (chap.  vi.  23).     (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)        Forgiveness  of  sin : — 
True  happiness  consists  not  in  beauty,  honour,  riches  (the  world's  trinity),  but  in 
the  forgiveness  of  sin.     The  Hebrew  word  signifies  to  carry  out  of  sight  (Jer.  1.  20). 
This  blessing  is  the  foundation  for  all  other  mercies.    L  It  is  ak  act  of  God's  fbes 
seace.    The  Greek  word  deciphers  the  original  of  pardon:  it  ariseth  not  from 
anything  inherent  in  us,  but  is  the  pure  result  of  free  grace  (Isa.  xUii.  25).    When 
a  creditor  forgives  a  debtor,  he  does  it  freely.    Paul  cries  out  (1  Tim.  i.  13),  "  I 
obtained  mercy  "  (Gr.,  "I  was  be-mercied ").    He  who  is  pardoned  is  all  bestowed 
with  mercy.    When  God  pardons  a  sinner.  He  does  not  pay  a  debt,  but  gives  a 
legacy.    II.  It  is  a  bemission  of  guilt  and  penalty.    Guilt  cries  for  justice,  but  in 
remission  God  indulges  the  sinner.     He  seems  to  say,  Though  thou  hast  fallen  into 
tine  hands  of  justice  and  deservest  to  die,  yet  I  will  absolve  thee,  and  whatever  iM 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  «T. 

charged  npon  thee  shall  be  discharged.  IH.  It  ib  iHBOTiaH  the  blood  of  Chbist. 
Free  grace  is  the  impulsive  cause ;  Christ's  blood  is  the  meritorioas  (Heb.  iz.  22^. 
Justice  would  be  revenged  either  on  the  sinner  or  on  the  surety.  Every  pardon  is 
the  price  of  blood.  IV.  It  most  be  fbeceded  by  bepentance.  Therefore  both  are 
linked  together  (Luke  xxiv.  47).  Not  that  repentance  merits  forgiveness :  Christ's 
blood  must  wash  our  tears ;  but  repentance  is  a  qualification  though  not  a  cause. 
He  who  is  humbled  for  sin  will  the  more  value  pardoning  mercy.    V.  God  hatino 

FOBGIVEN  SIN  WILL  CALL  IT  NO  MOBE  INTO  BEMEMBBANCE  (Jer.  XXxi.  34).    The  Lotd  wlll 

make  an  act  of  indemnity.  He  will  not  upbraid  us  with  former  unkindnesses,  or  sue 
us  with  a  cancelled  bond  (Micah  vii.  19).  Sin  shall  not  be  cast  into  the  sea  as  a 
cork  which  riseth  up  again,  but  as  lead  which  sinks  to  the  bottom.  (T.  Watson.) 
The  blessedness  of  conscious  forgiveness : — There  is  no  true  felicity  but  what  is 
enjoyed,  and  felicity  cannot  be  enjoyed  unless  it  is  felt;  and  it  cannot  be  felt 
unless  a  man  know  himself  to  be  in  possession  of  it ;  and  a  man  cannot  know 
himself  to  be  in  possession  of  it  if  he  doubt  whether  he  has  it  or  not ;  and  therefore 
this  doubting  of  the  remission  of  sins  is  contrary  to  true  felicity,  and  is  nothing 
else  but  a  torment  of  the  conscience.  For  a  man  cannot  doubt  whether  his  sins 
are  pardoned  or  not,  but  the  thought  of  his  sin  will  strike  a  great  fear  in  him  ;  but 
the  assurance  of  his  pardon  will  fill  him  with  joy  unspeakable.  (W.  Perkin.) 
Iniquities  forgiven : — Sometimes  men  complain  of  the  doctrine  of  a  regenerated 
life  as  if  it  were  a  requisition ;  it  is  not — it  is  a  refuge.  Oh,  what  would  not  a 
criminal  who,  at  thirty-five  years  of  age,  found  himself  stung  with  disgrace,  and 
overwhelmed  with  odium,  give  if,  in  the  policy  of  human  society,  there  should  be 
any  method  by  which  he  could  begin  back  again,  as  if  he  had  not  begun  at  all,  and 
with  all  his  accumulated  experience  build  his  character  anew  1  But  in  the  economy 
of  God  in  Christianity  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  man  at  fifty  and  sixty  years  of 
age — hoary-headed  in  transgression,  deeply  defiled,  struck  through  and  through 
with  the  fast  colours  of  depravity — having  a  chance  to  become  a  true  child  again. 
God  sets  a  partition  wall  between  him  and  past  transgressions,  and  says,  "  I  will 
remember  them  no  more  for  ever."  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  blessedness  of  forgive- 
ness : — It  is  a  blessed  thing  for  a  man  to  have  all  his  sins  forgiven,  and  thus  to 
be  rescued  from  the  curse  of  a  broken  law,  and  the  apprehension  of  future  wrath — 
and  that  blessedness  is  yours.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  for  an  apostate,  alienated 
creature  to  be  reconciled  to  the  great  Creator,  and,  in  the  spirit  of  adoption,  to  look 
up  to  Him  as  his  Father,  to  whose  favour  he  has  been  graciously  restored,  and 
from  whom  he  shall  be  estranged  no  more — and  that  blessedness  is  yours.  It  is  a 
blessed  thing  to  be  delivered  from  the  tyranny  of  unholy  passions,  and  from  the 
dominion  of  an  ungodly  world,  and  to  come  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  moral 
nature,  wherewith  Christ  makes  His  people  free — and  that  blessedness  is  yours. 
It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  look  abroad  upon  the  face  of  nature,  and  after  gazing  with  a 
delighted  eye  on  the  beauties  that  adorn  the  earth,  and  on  the  magnificence  that 
covers  the  heavens,  to  rejoice  in  them  as  the  works  of  Him  who  has  called  you  back 
to  the  weJk,  and  the  privileges  of  His  children,  and  to  say  with  the  glow  of  fihal 
affection,  *'  My  Father  made  them  all " — and  that  blessedness  is  yours.  It  is  a 
blessed  thing,  amidst  the  trials,  and  difficulties,  and  distresses  with  which  humanity 
has  to  struggle  in  this  weary  world,  to  be  upheld  by  Divine  power,  to  be  guided  by 
infinite  wisdom,  to  be  cheered  by  heavenly  consolations,  and  to  gather  righteousness 
and  joy  even  from  the  scene  of  tribulation  in  which  you  dwell — and  that  blessedness 
is  yours.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be  able  to  contemplate  death,  without  being 
subject  to  the  bondage  of  fear,  to  anticipate  the  grave  as  a  resting-place  from  sin 
and  sorrow,  to  lie  down  in  its  peaceful  bosom,  with  a  prospect  of  a  resurrection  to 
life  and  immortality — and  that  blessedness  is  yours.  It  is  a  blessed  thing,  when 
one  looks  forward  to  the  judgment  and  to  eternity  which  await  us  all,  to  realise 
in  Him  who  is  to  pronounce  our  doom  the  Saviour  to  whom  we  have  committed 
the  keeping  of  our  souls,  and  in  whose  blood  we  are  already  washed  from  our  sins, 
and  to  cherish  the  hope  founded  on  His  own  faithful  promise,  that  the  portion 
assigned  us  is  everlasting  life — and  that  blessedness  is  yours.  And,  if  in  this  state 
of  darkness  and  imperfection,  where  our  views  are  too  often  clouded,  and  our  faith 
too  often  grows  feeble,  and  the  heart  too  often  forgets  the  Bock  on  which  it  has 
placed  its  confidence  for  fternity — if,  in  these  circumstances,  it  is  a  blessed  thing 
to  have  access  to  those  ordinances  which  have  been  appointed  for  refreshing  our 
decayed  spirits,  for  casting  a  clearer  light  upon  the  path  of  our  pilgrimage,  for 
bringing  us  nearer  to  the  fountain  of  grace  and  comfort,  and  for  reviving  and 
strengthening  "  the  things  that  are  ready  to  die  " — that  blessedness  also  is  yours. 


.  IT.J  ROMANS.  Kfl 

{A.  Thornton,  D.D.)  And  whose  sin  is  coverei.— The  covering  of  rin : — There  ia  a 
eoTering  of  sin  which  proves  a  curse  (Prov.  xxviii.  13),  which  consists  in  not 
confessing  it,  or  denying  it — Gehazi's  covering,  which  was  by  a  lie;  and  by  justify- 
ing ourselves  in  ii.  All  these  are  evil  coverings,  and  he  that  thus  covereth  his  sin 
shall  not  prosper.  But  there  is  a  blessed  covering  of  sin,  when  God  hides  it  out  of 
sight  by  forgiving  it.  {R.  AlUine.)  Blessed  Is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  will 
not  Impat*  sin. — Hoto  doei  the  non-imputation  of  sin  involve  and  imply  the 
imputation  of  righteousness  J — Because — I.  Thebs  is  no  VACxnjM  in  thb  kinoi>om  of 
God.  Aa  Dean  Alford  says,  "  There  is  no  negative  state  of  innocence — none 
intermediate  between  acceptance  for  righteousness  and  rejection  for  sin."     II.  Thb 

HEOATIVB    PB0CES8    OF    REMISSION    OT    SIN    AND   THE    POSITIVE    PBOCE63    OF    IMPUTATION 

OF  siOHTEOusNEbs  ABE  BEALLT  ONE,  and  Only  Capable  of  being  separated  in  thought. 
To  say  that  the  bucket  has  been  let  down  into  the  well  when  not  dry  is  the  same 
as  to  say  that  the  bucket  is  full  of  water.  III.  Both  of  these  pbocbsses  pbesopposb 
BACH  OTHEB,  like  the  rising  of  one  scale  presupposes  the  falling  of  the  other,  and  vice 
versa.  Righteousness  could  not  be  imputed  unless  sin  be  forgiven ;  while  sin  could  only 
be  forgiven  in  view  of  the  righteousness  provided  and  imputed.  (C.  Neil,  M.A.\ 
The  blessedness  of  justification: — Pardon  of  sin  is  the  general  wish  of  gospel 
hearers  ;  and  it  is  also  the  general  hope  of  all,  Uve  as  they  may.  But  bare  wishes 
and  hopes  effect  nothing ;  they  do  not  prevail  over  sinners  in  general  to  seek  for 
pardon  in  God's  appointed  way;  and  yet  they  are  generally  blessed  who  are 
pardoned.  I.  The  uan  who  is  pabdoned  is  blessed — 1.  With  respect  to  God  in 
the  person  of  the  Father,  as  the  moral  Governor,  and  as  the  God  of  salvation.  Qoi 
has  forgiven  all  his  sins — past,  present,  and  to  come.  2.  He  is  blessed  by  God,  in 
the  person  of  the  Son,  with  perfect  Christian  liberty  and  freedom  from  all  the 
demands  of  law  and  justice.  3.  He  is  blessed  by  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  effects 
that  work  in  him  by  which  he  receives  Christ,  and  the  pardon  of  sin  with  Him ; 
and  the  Spirit  makes  his  body  a  temple  to  dwell  in.  4.  He  is  blessed  with  perfect 
deliverance  from  all  danger  by  Satan,  that  cruel  and  bitter  enemy  who  has  destroyed 
BO  many.  5.  He  is  blessed  with  perfect  deliverance  from  the  danger  of  sin,  which 
has  been  the  ruin  of  all  who  have  perished,  and  will  be  the  ruin  of  all  who  shall 
perish.  6.  He  is  blessed  with  deliverance  from  the  second  death.  7.  He  is 
graciously  blessed  with  grace  in  the  heart.  This  is  the  leaven  which  will  not  cease. 
Every  grace  now  takes  root  in  the  soul ;  and  the  believer  learns  to  exercise  each  in 
its  proper  place.  8.  Now  he  can  lay  hold  of  the  promises  in  Christ  &b  his  own ; 
and,  while  he  can  act  every  spiritual  grace  in  measure  and  degree,  he  lives  by  faith 
in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  has  an  interest  in  "  the  great  and  precious  promises,  by 
which  he  is  made  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature,"  and  is  blessed  with  the  enjoy- 
ment of  all  the  promises,  which  "  all  in  Christ  are  yea,  and  in  Him  amen,  unto  the 
glory  of  (Jod  by  us."  9.  He  is  blessed  with  the  law  of  God  '•  written  in  his  heart," 
and  has  a  right  to  enjoy  all  the  blessings  of  the  covenant  which  is  "  ordered  in  aill 
things  and  sore."  He  is  daily  conforming  more  and  more  to  the  Divine  image,  and 
is  duly  more  and  more  "  made  meet  to  be  partaker  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints 
in  light."  n.  The  ueans  by  which  this  siiEssEDNESS  is  obtained  on  oub  pabt  is 
FAITH.  1.  To  ascertain  this  principle  we  must  consider  the  doctrine  of  regeneration, 
by  which  we  understand  a  saving  change  effected  in  the  behever  by  the  gracious 
influences  and  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  Christ's  sake.  2.  When  this  saving 
change  is  effected,  the  believer  is  considered  in  Scripture  as  "  a  new  creature" — a 
"  new  man  " — "  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works  " ;  and  the  confidence  and 
reliance  of  this  new  man  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  called  faith.  (Jos.  Kidd,  D.D.) 
Non-imputation  of  sin  : — Mr.  Lyford,  a  Puritan  divine,  a  few  days  previous  to  his 
death,  being  desired  by  his  friends  to  give  them  some  account  of  his  hopes,  replied, 
"  I  will  let  you  know  how  it  is  with  me,  and  on  what  ground  I  stand.  Here  is  the 
great  punishment  of  sin  on  the  one  hand ;  and  here  am  I,  a  poor  sinful  creature, 
on  the  other ;  but  this  is  my  comfort,  the  covenant  of  grace,  established  upon  so  many 
sure  promises,  hath  satisfied  all.  The  act  of  obUvion  passed  in  heaven  is,  '  I  will 
forgive  their  iniquities,  and  their  sins  will  I  remember  no  more,  saith  the  Lord.' 
This  is  the  blessed  privilege  of  all  within  the  covenant,  of  whom  I  am  one.  .  .  . 
I  know  my  interest  in  Christ.  .  .  .  Therefore  my  sins,  being  laid  on  Him,  shall 
never  be  charged  on  me." 

Vers.  9-12.  Cometh  this  blessedness  then  upon  the  circumcision  only  f ...  Abraham 
.  .  .  received  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  the  faith 
Vhlch  he  had  yet  being  ondrcumcised. — Circumcinion^sacraniental  efficacy  and 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  m 

infant  baptism: — Bightly  have  all  Protestant  churches  maintained,  as  against 
Bomanist,  that  there  are  only  two  sacraments,  "  symbolic  acts,  instituted  by  Christ 
Himself,  and  enjoined  upon  all  His  followers  to  the  end  of  time."  Baptism  takes 
the  place  of  circumcision  as  the  rite  of  initiation  into  the  Church — it  is  "the 
circumcision  of  Christ  "  (Col.  ii.  11,  12).  And  the  eucharist  succeeds  t«  the 
passover,  in  connection  with  that  redemptive  act  to  typify  which  the  passover  was 
instituted  (1  Cor.  v.  7,  8).  The  eucharist  itself  has  become  a  sacrifice  to  be  offered 
up  by  priestly  hands.    Note — I.    The  siqnifioance  and  kfficact  oi  Chbistian 

BAFTISU  AS  IT  STANDS  BELATED  TO  OIBCnMCISION.       1.    CirCUtUCision  did  UOt   OOUfer   OB 

Abraham  the  righteousness  of  faith,  nor  was  it  a  pre-required  condition  of  it ;  it 
was  simply  given  as  "a  sign"  and  for  "a  seal"  of  a  righteousness  which  was 
already  in  possession.  And  so  of  baptism.  This  does  not  itself  wash  away  sin ;  it 
is  not  a  condition  pre-required  in  order  to  this ;  but  it  is  given  as  "  a  sign  "  and  for 
a  Divine  "  seal "  of  the  fact  that,  for  all  believers,  sin  has  been  put  away  by  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ.  2.  But  the  following  texts  may  be  cited  in  opposition  :  Titus  iii. 
6  ;  1  Cor.  zii.  13  ;  Bom.  vi.  3 ;  John  iii.  5.  All  this  is  quite  true.  But  the  water 
referred  to  is  the  water  of  which  the  water  in  baptism  is  but  the  outward  sign ; 
which  really  washes  away  sin,  and  secures  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  towards 
God.  What  this  water  is,  of  which  that  in  baptism  is  but  a  type  (1  Pet.  iii.  21) ;  of 
which  the  prophet  Ezekiel  declared  that  by  the  sprinkling  thereof  Jehovah  would 
cleanse  His  people  from  all  their  filthiness  and  from  all  their  idols  (Ezek.  xxxvL 
25) ;  in  respect  to  which  David  made  earnest  request  (Psa.  li.  7) ;  may  be  sought 
for  in  that  "  water  of  purification  "  which  was  provided  by  mixing  with  clear  water 
from  a  running  brook  the  ashes  of  the  burnt  red  heifer.  The  great  reality  will  b« 
found  in  that  mingled  stream  of  '•  blood  and  water  "  which  flowed  on  Calvary 
(John  xix.  34 ;  1  John  v.  6-8).  That  "  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness  •* 
was  the  atonement  completed.  To  be  "  bom  of  water  "  is  to  have  the  atonement 
effectually  applied.  We  maintain  that  the  water  and  the  Spirit,  in  regeneration, 
are  distinct,  and  produce  distinct  results ;  that  the  water  in  baptism  is  significant, 
not  of  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  of  the  forgiveness  and  purgation  of  sin ; 
and  moreover  that  the  purgation  always  precedes  the  renewing.  And  so  baptism 
with  water  is  always  associated  with  the  remission  of  sins,  as  that  which  shall 
remove  out  of  the  way  the  fatal  obstruction  to  the  incoming  of  the  quickening 
Spirit  (c/.  Mark  i.  4 ;  Acts  ii.  38,  and  xxii.  16).  3.  Baptism  does  not  itself  wash 
away  the  sin.  It  is  not  the  medium  through  which  the  real  Divine  washing  is 
imparted.  But  it  is  a  "  sign  "  that  the  washing  is  needed,  and  has  been  provided 
for ;  and,  to  all  believers,  it  is  a  "  seal,"  given  by  Christ  Himself,  that  the  iniquity 
is  purged.  As  circumcision  was  to  Abraham,  so  is  baptism  to  the  believer  in 
Jesus — he  received  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  the  faith 
which  he  already  bad  before  he  was  circumcised.  IL  The  beabino  or  this  oh 
INFANT  BAPTISM.  1.  It  is  maintained  that  the  Lord  Jesus  gave  no  authority  for  the 
baptism  of  any  but  actual  adult  believers.  It  is  at  once  admitted  that,  when  an 
assembly  of  adult  Jews  or  Gentiles  heard  the  preached  gospel  for  the  first  time,  the 
rite  of  baptism  was  only  to  be  administered  to  those  amongst  them  who  were 
prepared  intelligently  to  make  this  confession  of  faith.  But  it  does  not  follow  that 
the  children  of  such  individuals  were  not  to  be  admitted  with  them  to  this  sacred 
rite.  We  know  that  children  were  so  admitted  into  the  kingdom  of  God  amongst 
the  Jews ;  as  we  know  also  that  all  Hebrew- born  male  infants  were  required,  by 
Divine  command,  to  be  circumcised  when  eight  days  old.  And  the  apostles,  being 
Jews,  would  doubtless  continue  to  act  as  Jews,  unless  expressly  forbidden  so  to  act 
by  the  Master.  We  know  of  no  such  prohibition.  Jesus  encourages  the  little  ones 
to  be  brought  to  Him,  for  that  **of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God."  St.  Paul 
addresses  children  in  the  church  assemblies  as  if  they,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
constituted  part  of  such  assemblies  (Eph.  vi.  1-3 ;  Col.  iii.  20).  And  when  we 
read  of  the  apostles  baptizing  whole  households,  we  are  not  told  that  the  infants 
were  excluded.  2.  But  is  not  this  the  word  of  the  Master,  "  He  that  beheveth, 
and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved  "  f  Truly.  And  is  it  not  manifest  that  tender 
infants  cannot  believe  ?  Certainly.  But  what  follows  ?  That  infants  ought  not  to  be 
baptized,  because  they  cannot  believe  ?  Must  it  then  also  follow  that  infants,  dying 
in  infancy,  cannot  be  saved,  because  that  they  cannot  believe,  and  because  it  is 
written,  ••  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned  "  ?  But  in  whose  right,  then,  do 
they  come  to  inherit  eternal  life  ?  In  their  ovni  ?  What  then  did  Jesus  mean  when 
He  paid,  •*  That  whith  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,"  Ac,  "  Ye  must  be  born  again  "  f 
According  to  that  teaching,  not  even  infants  can  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God, 


OBAP.  IT.]  ROMANS.  t89 

except  they  be  bom  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit.  But  if  tbey  need  the  thing  signified 
by  baptism ;  if  that  thing  has  been  provided  for  them  through  the  great  Mediator ; 
if,  though  they  cannot  personally  believe,  they  are  graciously  susceptible  of  that 
thing ;  and  if  all  who  die  in  infancy  do  really  become  participators  in  it,  then  who 
is  he  that  "  shall  forbid  water,"  that  they  Bhould  not  be  baptized  ?  3.  But  "  they 
ought  not  to  be  baptized,  because  they  cannot  make  a  personal  profession  of  faith." 
Could  then  the  infant  children  of  Abraham  and  his  descendants  make  a  personal 
profession  of  faith?  Clearly  not.  And  yet,  by  God's  own  appointment,  the  "sign" 
and  "  seal "  of  "  the  righteousness  of  faith  "  was  to  be  put  upon  every  one  of  them 
when  eight  days  old.  Yet  the  childreu  of  Christian  parents  are  as  capable  of  the 
righteousness  of  faith  as  were  the  children  of  Hebrew  parents.  4.  The  principle 
on  which  some  Christians  proceed  is  to  exclude  as  many  as  possible  from  the 
Church.  That  of  the  Lord  and  His  apostles  was  to  include  as  many  as  possible. 
The  former  said,  in  respect  to  the  "  little  children,"  "  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of 
Ood  " ;  and  in  respect  to  earnest  adult  workers  in  the  cause  of  righteousness, 
"  He  that  is  not  against  us  is  on  our  part."  And  one  of  the  latter  states  that  •*  the 
unbelieving  husband  is  sanctified  by  the  (believing)  wife,  and  the  unbelieving  wife 
is  sanctified  by  the  (believing)  husband  "  ;  and  he  adds,  "  Else  were  your  children 
unclean;  but  now  they  are  holy"  (1  Cor.  vii.  14).  Now,  children  who  may  be 
pronounced  "  holy  "  must  be  proper  subjects  of  baptism.  Why  may  they  not  have 
been  consecrated  and  sealed  as  holy  in  baptism  ?  But,  assuming  that  both  parents 
and  children,  admitted  into  the  Church  of  Christ  by  baptism,  are  present  in  the 
Church  assembly,  while  his  pastoral  is  being  read,  the  apostle  would  have  them  to 
remember  that  the  fact  that  the.v  are  thus  admitted  and  present,  even  though  it  be 
through  the  bath  of  baptism,  does  not  do  away  with  their  reciprocal  obligations,  but 
renders  them  still  more  urgently  imperative.  Therefore  the  loving  words  of  exhorta- 
tion to  both  (Eph.  vi.  1-4).  {W.  Tyson.)  Circumcision  and  infant  baptism: — 
1.  It  looks  a  rational  system  to  make  sure  of  the  thing  signified  ere  you  impresa 
the  sign.  We  read  of  this  one  convert  and  that  other  having  believed  and  been 
baptized,  and  this  should  be  the  order  with  every  grown-up  person.  But  mark  how 
it  fared  with  Abraham  and  his  posterity.  He  believed  and  was  circumcised ;  and 
it  was  laid  down  for  a  statute  in  Israel  that  all  his  children  should  be  circumcised 
in  infancy.  In  like  manner,  the  first  Christians  believed  and  were  baptized,  and 
then  their  children.  Express  authority  is  needed  to  warrant  a  change;  but  it  is 
not  needed  to  warrant  a  continuation.  It  is  this  want  of  express  authority  which 
stamps  on  the  opposite  system  a  character  of  innovation.  When  once  bidden  to 
walk  in  a  straight  line,  it  does  not  require  the  successive  impulse  of  new  biddings  to 
make  us  persevere  in  it.  But  it  would  require  a  new  bidding  to  justify  our  going 
off  from  the  Une.  Had  the  mode  of  infant  baptism  sprung  up  as  a  new  piece  of 
sectarianism,  it  would  not  have  escaped  notice.  But  there  is  no  record  of  its  ever 
having  entered  amongst  us  as  a  novelty ;  and  we  have  therefore  the  strongest  reason 
for  believing  that  it  has  come  down  in  one  uncontrolled  tide  of  example  and 
observation  from  the  days  of  tlie  apostles.  And  if  they  have  not  given  us  any 
authority  for  it,  they  at  least,  had  it  been  wrong,  and  when  they  saw  that  whole 
families  of  discipleship  were  getting  into  this  style  of  observation,  would  have 
interposed  and  lifted  up  the  voice  of  their  authority  against  it.  But  we  read  of  no 
such  interdict.  We  have  therefore  the  testimony  of  apostolic  silence  in  favour  of 
infant  baptism.  2.  But  is  it  not  wrong  when  the  sign  and  the  thing  signified  do 
not  go  together?  Yes.  In  the  case  of  an  adult  the  thing  signified  should  precede 
the  sign.  But  in  the  case  of  an  infant  the  sign  precedes  the  thing  signified.  The 
former  has  been  impressed  upon  him  by  the  will  of  his  parent,  and  the  latter 
remains  to  be  worked  within  him  by  the  care  of  his  parent.  If  he  do  not  put  forth 
this  care,  he  is  in  the  fault.  He  is  like  the  steward  who  is  entrusted  by  his  superior 
with  the  subscription  of  his  name  to  a  space  of  blank  paper,  on  the  understanding 
that  it  was  to  be  filled  up  in  a  particular  way,  agreeable  to  the  will  of  his  lord  ;  and, 
instead  of  doing  so,  has  filled  it  up  with  matter  of  a  different  import  altogether. 
The  infant,  with  its  mind  unfilled  and  unfurnished,  has  been  put  by  the  God  of 
providence  into  his  hands  ;  and  after  the  baptism  which  he  himself  hath  craved,  it 
has  been  again  made  over  to  him  with  the  signature  of  Christian  discipleship,  and, 
by  his  own  consent,  impressed  upon  it ;  and  he,  by  failing  to  grave  the  characters 
of  discipleship  upon  it,  hath  unworthily  betrayed  the  trust  that  was  reposed  in  him. 
The  worthies  of  the  Old  Testament  circumcised  their  children  in  infancy,  and  the 
mark  of  separation  remindeti  them  of  their  duty  to  rear  them  as  a  holy  generation  ; 
and  many  a  Hebrew  parent  was  solemnised  by  this  observance  to  say,  like  Joshua, 
yosj.  I.  19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

that  whatever  others  should  do,  he  with  all  his  house  should  fear  the  Lord  ;  and 
this  was  the  testimony  of  God  to  Abraham,  that  He  knew  him,  that  he  would 
bring  up  his  children  after  him  in  all  the  ways  that  he  had  himself  been  taught ; 
and  it  was  the  commandment  of  God  to  His  servants  of  old,  that  they  should  teach 
their  children  diligently  of  the  loyalty  and  gratitude  that  should  be  rendered  to  the 
God  of  Israel.  And  if  this  be  enough  to  rationalise  the  infant  circumcision  of  the 
Jews,  it  is  equally  enough  to  rationalise  the  infant  baptism  of  Christians.  The 
parent  of  our  day,  who  feels  as  he  ought,  will  feel  himself  in  conscience  to  be 
solemnly  charged  that  the  infant  whom  he  has  held  up  to  the  baptism  of  Christi- 
anity, he  should  bring  up  in  the  belief  of  Christianity.  It  is  well  that  there  should 
be  one  sacrament  in  behalf  of  the  grown-up  disciple,  for  the  solemn  avowal  of  his 
Christianity  before  men,  and  the  very  participation  of  which  binds  more  closely 
about  his  conscience  all  the  duties  and  all  the  consistencies  of  the  gospel.  But  it 
is  also  well  that  there  should  be  another  sacrament,  the  place  of  which  in  hia 
history  is  at  the  period  of  his  infancy,  and  the  obligation  of  which  is  felt,  not  by  hia 
conscience  still  in  embryo,  but  by  the  conscience  of  him  whose  business  is  to 
develop  and  to  guard  and  to  nurture  its  yet  unawakened  sensibilities.  This  is  like 
removing  baptism  upward  on  a  higher  vantage  ground.  It  is  assigning  for  it  a 
station  of  command  and  of  custody  at  the  very  fountain-head  of  moral  influence. 
3.  Baptism,  viewed  as  a  seal,  marks  the  promise  of  God,  to  grant  the  righteousness 
of  faith  to  him  who  is  impressed  by  it ;  but,  viewed  as  a  sign,  it  marks  the 
existence  of  this  faith.  But  if  it  be  not  a  true  sign,  it  is  not  an  obligatory  seal. 
He  who  believes  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved.  But  he  who  is  baptized  and 
believes  not  shall  be  damned.  It  is  not  the  circumcision  which  availeth,  but  a  new 
creature.  It  is  not  the  baptism  which  availeth,  but  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience. 
God  hath  given  a  terrible  demonstration  of  the  utter  wortblessness  of  a  sign  that  ia 
deceitful,  and  hath  let  us  know  that  on  that  event  as  a  seal  it  is  dissolved.  When 
a  whole  circumcised  nation  lost  the  spirit,  though  they  retained  the  letter  of  the 
ordinance,  He  swept  it  away.  Beware,  ye  parents,  who  regularly  hold  up  your 
children  to  the  baptism  of  water,  and  make  their  baptism  by  the  Holy  Ghost  no 
part  of  your  concern  or  of  your  prayer — lest  you  thereby  swell  the  judgments  of  the 
land,  and  bring  down  the  sore  displeasure  of  God  upon  your  famihes.  (T.  Chalmers, 
D.D.)  The  spiritual  family  of  Abraham: — Under  the  old  covenant  the  ground 
of  man's  justifleation  with  God  was  the  same  as  it  is  under  the  new,  viz.,  faith. 
Ordinances  varied,  being  but  helpful  accessories  leading  to,  or  resting  upon,  the  one 
changeless  basis  of  man's  justification.  I.  Faith  alone  could  admit  Jews  ob 
Gentiles  to  the  spibitcal  family  of  Abbaham.  1.  Faith  was  Abraham's  sole 
ground  of  acceptance  (ver.  9;  Gal.  iii.  6).  The  promises  (Gen.  xii.  3:  xvii.  4-6) 
preceded  his  circumcision.  2.  Faith  was  indispensable  for  the  Jews,  although 
descended  from  Abraham,  and  circumcised  (ver.  12 ;  chap.  ii.  28,  29 ;  ix.  6,  7).  For 
neglecting  this  truth,  and  unduly  trusting  in  their  privileges  of  birth  and  circumci- 
sion, Christ  rebuked  them  in  Matt,  iii.  9  ;  John  viii.  39  ;  and  in  the  parable  of  Dives 
and  Lazarus  (Luke  xvi.  22,  23).  3.  Faith  admits  Gentiles  (ver.  11)  into  the  family 
of  Abraham  (Gal.  iii.  7,  9,  29),  "  who  is  the  father  of  us  all "  (ver.  16).  Zaccheus 
was  thus  admitted  (Luke  xix.  9).  II.  Circcmcision  had  a  twofold  aspect.  1.  To 
Abraham  and  adult  proselytes  it  was  a  seal  of  antecedent  faith  (ver.  11).  2.  To 
infants  receiving  it,  as  did  Jesus  when  eight  days  old,  it  was  the  seal  of  their  admis- 
sion into  covenant  with  God  ;  an  incentive  and  pledge  of  future  faith.  If  a  child 
did  not  receive  it,  "  he  hath  broken  My  covenant  "  (Gen.  xvii.  14).  III.  Analogy 
BETWEEN  BAPTISM  AND  CIRCUMCISION.  1.  St.  Paul  implies  this  when  naming  baptism 
(Gal.  iii.  26,  27,29)  in  connection  with  the  Christian's  adoption  into  the  family  of 
Abraham  and  heirship  of  the  promises.  2.  Thus,  to  adults,  baptism  is,  as  circum- 
cision was  to  Abraham,  a  seal  of  antecedent  faith  (Mark  xvi.  16  ;  Acts  ii.  41 ;  viii. 
12,  3  7).  3.  To  infants,  baptism  is,  like  circumcision,  the  seal  of  admission  to 
covenant ;  pledge  and  incentive  to  future  faith.  The  analogy  of  Gen.  xvii.  14,  "  he  hath 
broken  My  covenant,"  bears  strongly  on  need  of  infant  baptism.  Conclusion  :  1. 
Examine  ourselves  as  to  performance  of  covenant  promises  made  to  God  in  baptism 
and  renewed  in  confirmation.  2.  Sbun  Jewish  error  of  resting  on  rites  and  on 
privileges  while  ignoring  the  spiritual  root  of  the  matter — faith  (Gal.  v.  6  ;  vi.  15, 
16).  (A.  Scott  Robertson,  M.A.)  That  he  might  he  the  father  of  all  them  that 
believe. — The  father  of  the  f aithful : —Two  points  are  involved  in  this  name.  I. 
Abraham  was  himself  faithful.  In  him  was  most  distinctly  manifested  the 
gift  of  faith.  In  him,  long  before  Luther,  long  before  Paul,  was  it  proclaimed  that 
man  is  "  justified  by  faith."    "  Abraham  believed  in  the  Lord  and  He  counted  it  to 


CHAP.  I?.]  ROMANS.  191 

him  for  righteousness  "  (ver.  xiii. ;  cf.  Gen.  xv.  6).  Powerful  as  is  the  efifect  of 
these  words  when  we  read  them  in  their  untarnished  freshness,  they  gain  immensely 
in  their  original  language,  to  which  neither  Greek  nor  German,  much  less  Latin  or 
English,  can  furnish  any  full  equivalent.  "  He  supported  himself,  he  built  himself 
up,  he  reposed  as  a  child  in  his  mother's  arms  "  in  the  strength  of  God ;  in  God 
whom  he  did  not  see,  more  than  in  the  giant  empires  of  the  earth,  and  the  bright 
lights  of  heaven,  or  the  claims  of  tribe  and  kindred,  which  were  always  before  him. 
It  was  counted  to  him  for  "  righteousness."  "  It  was  counted  to  him,"  and  hia 
history  seals  and  ratifies  the  result.  His  faith  transpires  not  in  any  outward 
profession,  but  precisely  in  that  which  far  more  nearly  concerns  him  and  every  one 
of  us,  in  his  prayers,  in  his  actions,  in  the  justice,  the  uprightness,  the  elevation  of 
soul  and  spirit  which  sent  him  on  his  way  straightforward  without  turning  to  the 
right  hand  or  to  the  left.  His  belief,  vague  and  scanty  as  it  may  be,  even  in  the 
most  elementary  truths  of  religion,  is  implied  rather  than  stated.  It  is  in  him 
simply  "  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,"  "  the  hope  against  hope."  His  faith  in 
the  literal  sense  of  the  word  is  only  known  to  us  through  "  his  works."  He  and 
his  descendants  are  blessed,  not,  as  in  the  Koran,  because  of  his  adoption  of  the 
first  article  of  the  creed  of  Islam,  but  because  he  obeyed  (Gen.  ixvi  5  ;  xviii.  19). 
II.  He  was  the  fatheb  of  the  faithful.  In  modern  times  it  has  too  often 
happened  that  the  doctrine  of  "  faith  "  has  had  a  narrowing  effect  on  those  who 
have  strongly  embraced  it.  It  was  far  otherwise  with  Paul,  to  whom  it  was  almost 
synonymous  with  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles.  It  was  far  otherwise  with  its  first 
exemplification  in  Abraham.  His  very  name  implies  this  universal  mission.  "  The 
Father"  (Abba);  "The  lofty  Father"  (Ab-ram)  ;  "The  Father  of  multitudes" 
(Ab-raham) ;  the  venerable  parent,  surveying,  as  if  from  that  lofty  eminence,  the 
ijountless  progeny  who  should  look  up  to  him  as  their  spiritual  ancestor.  He  was, 
:6rst,  the  Father  of  the  chosen  people,  the  people  who  by  reason  of  their  faith, 
though  in  one  sense  the  narrowest  of  aU  ancient  nations,  yet  were  also  the  widest 
in  their  diffusion  and  dispersion — the  only  people  that,  by  virtue  of  an  invisible 
bond,  maintained  their  national  union  in  spite  of  local  difference  and  division.  But 
he  was  much  more  than  the  father  of  the  chosen  people.  It  is  not  a  mere  allegory 
or  accidental  application  of  separate  texts,  that  justify  St.  Paul's  appeal  to  the 
case  of  Abraham  as  including  within  itself  the  faith  of  the  whole  Gentile  world. 
His  position,  as  represented  to  us  in  the  original  records,  is  of  itself  far  wider  than 
that  of  any  merely  Jewish  saint  or  national  hero  ;  and  he  is,  on  that  ground  alone, 
the  fitting  image  to  meet  us  at  the  outset  of  the  history  of  the  Church.  He  was 
"  the  Hebrew  "  to  whom  the  Arabian  no  less  than  the  Israelite  tribes  look  back  as 
to  their  first  ancestor.  The  scene  of  his  life,  as  of  the  patriarchs  generally,  breathes 
a  larger  atmosphere  than  the  contracted  limits  of  Palestine — the  free  air  of 
Mesopotamia  and  the  desert — the  neighbourhood  of  the  vast  shapes  of  the  Baby- 
Ionian  monarchy  on  one  side,  and  of  Egypt  on  the  other.  He  is  not  an  ecclesiastic, 
not  an  ascetic,  not  even  a  learned  sage,  but  a  chief,  a  shepherd,  a  warrior,  full  of 
all  the  £kffections  and  interests  of  family  and  household,  and  wealth  and  power,  and 
for  this  very  reason  the  first  true  type  of  the  religious  man,  the  first  representative 
of  the  whole  Church  of  God.  This  universality  of  Abraham's  faith — this  elevation, 
this  multitudinousness  of  the  patriarchial  character  has  also  found  a  response  in 
later  traditions  and  feelings.  When  Mohammed  attacks  the  idolatry  of  the  Arabs, 
he  justifies  himself  by  arguing,  almost  in  the  language  of  Paul,  that  the  faith  he 
proclaimed  in  one  supreme  God  was  no  new  belief,  but  was  identical  with  the 
ancient  religion  of  their  first  father  Abraham.  When  the  Emperor  Alexander 
Severus  placed  in  the  chapel  of  his  palace  the  statues  of  the  choice  spirits  of  all 
times,  Abraham  rather  than  Moses  was  selected  as  the  centre,  doubtless,  of  a  more 
extended  circle  of  sacred  associations.  {Dean  Stanley.)  Abraham's  spiritual 
fatherhood : — This  idea  was  quite  a  familiar  one  to  St.  PauL  In  Galatians  he 
expands  and  illustrates  it  stiU  more  fully.    It  represents  Abraham — I.  As  a  obaio) 

TYPE    OB  EXAMPLE    OF   BELIEVEB8   (c/.    Gen.    iv.    20,    21).      II.   As    THE  FIBST  OP   THE 

BAiNTS.  No  doubt  Abel,  Enoch,  Noah,  and  Shem  were  saved  by  faith,  but  still  it 
was  not  until  the  time  of  Abraham  that  one  was  chosen  in  whom  this  great  truth 
should  be  clearly  and  conspicuously  exemplified.  III.  As  the  fedebal  head  of  the 
faithful.  All  believers  are  accounted  as  his  seed,  so  that  the  promises  made  to  him 
are  also  made  to  them,  and  the  covenant  entered  into  with  him  is  also  the  same  aa 
that  entered  into  with  them.  We  have  now  another  head,  that  is,  Christ,  and  in 
Him  the  promises  of  God  assume  a  far  higher  and  more  spiritual  aspect  than  they 
did  in  regard  to  Abraham  ;  but  still  the  headship  of  Abraham  is  not  destroyed,  bat 


892  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHiP.  m 

absorbed.  So  far  as  God's  covenant  with  him  extended,  it  is  still  firm  and  binding, 
and  it  belongs  to  all  his  seed,  even  all  believers.  It  was  a  germ,  out  of  which  has 
sprung  the  higher  covenant  of  God  in  Christ ;  but  still  we  shall  find  in  it  much 
which  may  excite  our  interest,  provoke  our  gratitude  and  determine  our  conduct. 
(T.  6.  Horton.)  The  true  children  of  Abraham  : — I.  How  thet  are  beckoned. 
1.  Not  by  birth.  2.  Not  according  to  law.  3.  But  by  faith.  11.  How  thet  abb 
DISTINGUISHED.  1.  By  the  true  circumcision  of  the  heart,  which  is  both  a  sign  and 
a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith.  2.  By  walking  in  the  steps  of  Abraham's  faith. 
III.  What  abb  theib  pbivileges.  1.  Adoption.  2.  Inheritance.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Who  walk  in  the  steps  of  that  faith  of  our  father  Abraham. — The  faith  ofAbraliam : 
— This  was — 1.  A  simple  child-like  dependence  on  the  naked  word  of  God.  2.  An 
acceptance  of  and  trust  in  God's  promised  Saviour.  3.  A  renouncing  of  his  own 
works  as  meritorious.  4.  A  faith  that  wrought  by  love,  making  him  the  friend  of 
God  (James  ii.  23).  5.  One  that  overcame  the  world,  leading  him  to  seek  a  better 
country  (Heb.  xi.  10).  6.  One  that  evidenced  its  reality  by  a  self-denying  obedience 
(Heb.  xi.  8,  17  ;  James  ii.  21).  True  Abrahamio  faith  is  love  in  the  battle-field, 
(r.  Robinson,  D.D.) 

Vera.  13-15.  For  the  promise,  that  he  should  be  the  heir  of  the  world,  was  not 
.  .  .  through  the  law. — The  promise  made  to  Abraham : — I.  The  peomise,  "  that 
he  should  be  heir  of  the  world,-"  was  made  not  entirely  to  Abraham,  but  to  his  seed 
also  (ver.  16).  This  promise  included — 1.  Both  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly 
Canaan,  for — (1)  Abraham  and  the  other  believing  patriarchs  so  understood  it 
(Heb.  xi.  8-10,  13-16).  But  no  promise  of  it  is  to  be  found  unless  it  was  couched 
under  that  of  the  earthly  Canaan  as  a  type.  The  whole  of  the  gospel  revelation 
was  then,  and  for  many  ages  afterwards,  under  the  veil  of  figurative  language,  and 
of  typical  rites,  objects,  and  events.  But  that  the  promise  was  given  was  manifest 
from  the  passages  from  Hebrews  just  quoted,  and  also  from  Heb.  vi.  12.  (2) 
Believers  in  all  ages  are  called  heirs  according  to  the  promise  of  inheritance  given 
to  Abraham  (Gal.  iii.  18,  10  ;  Heb.  vi.  17-20).  2.  But  the  word  "  world  "  means  the 
whole  inhabited  earth  that  was  to  be  the  possession  of  Abraham's  seed ;  and  the 
possession  of  Canaan  was  but  a  small  prelude  to  it.  There  is  an  obvious  difference 
between  a  right  and  actual  possession.  The  whole  earth  may  be,  by  the  gift  or 
promise  of  God,  the  property  of  this  seed,  although  they  may  not  be  for  a  good 
while  invested  with  the  actual  possession  of  it.  The  view  of  "  the  promise,"  there- 
fore, must  be  understood  of  the  seed,  collectively  considered.  Were  we  speaking  o£ 
the  wars  in  any  former  period  of  British  history,  we  should  say,  without  hesitation, 
"  We  were  successful  in  such  a  battle."  So  we  may,  with  perfect  propriety,  say  that 
the  promise  spoken  of  is  to  us  because  it  shall  be  verified  to  the  seed  of  which  we 
are  a  part.  The  following  scriptures  countenance  this  view  of  the  promise  (Psa. 
ii.  8,  Ixxii.  8 ;  Dan.  vii.  27  ;  Isa.  Hv.  3).  When  "  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall 
cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,"  and  thus  the  declaration  be  fulfilled, 
"  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed  " ;  then  the  promise, 
that  Abraham  should  be  "  the  heir  of  the  world,"  shall  be  fully  verified,  the  whole 
earth  becoming  the  possession  of  his  seed — the  people  of  God.  II.  In  considering 
the  extent  of  the  promise,  I  have  necessarily  led  you  to  anticipate  my  view  of  thb 
SEED  HEBE  SPOKEN  OP.  Of  this  WO  have  a  plain  infallible  interpretation  (Gal.  iii.  16). 
That  the  name  '•  Christ"  is  sometimes  used  as  inclusive  of  His  people,  the  Head 
being  intended  to  express  the  whole  body  connected  with  it  is  evident  from  1  Cor. 
zii  12.  It  is  so  used  in  Galatians.  For  while  Christ  is  here  said  to  be  the  Seed,  to 
whom  the  promises  were  made,  it  is  said  that  believers  are  "  Abraham's  seed  and  heirs 
according  to  the  promise."  And  the  reason  of  their  being  so  called  is  their  being 
"  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Gal.  iii.  28,  29).  The  passage  before  us  likewise  makes 
the  same  thing  evident.  The  seed,  in  this  verse,  is  that  of  which  Abraham  is  the 
father,  in  the  spiritual  sense,  even  the  seed  spoken  of  in  vers.  11,  12  consisting  of 
"  all  them  that  believe."  These  passages  show,  then,  that  the  promises  contained  in 
the  Abrahamic  covenant — 1.  Were  both  made  to  the  same  seed  :  "  To  Abraham  and 
his  seed  were  the  promises  made."  There  is  no  hint  of  the  distinction  that  the 
temporal  promise  was  made  to  the  fleshly  seed  as  such,  and  the  spiritual  promise  to 
the  spiritual  seed  as  tuch.  But  the  promises  of  that  covenant,  without  difference, 
are  declared  to  have  been  made,  "  not  to  seeds  as  to  many,  but  as  of  one,  '  and  to 
thy  Seed '  which  is  Christ."  2.  And  if  this  be  a  just  view  of  the  matter,  it  follows 
that  these  promises  were  made  on  the  same  footing.  None  of  them  were  given  on 
Ibe  ground  of  law  or  personal  obedience,  but  all  by  grace  (Gal.  iii.  16).    Which 


OEAP.  IV.]  EOMANS.  398 

leads  as  to  consider — III.  Tbb  obound  on  which  the  promise  bests.    The  inheri- 
tance must  certainly  mean,  in  the  first  instance,  the  earthly  inheritance  ;  that  which 
is  hterally  specified  in  the  promise.     And  it  must  have  continued  to  be  held  not  by 
law,  but  on  the  footing  of  the  original  grant  made  to  Abraham  and  to  the  one  seed 
here  mentioned.     The  heavenly  inheritance  is  admitted  to  be  entirely  a  matter  of 
free  promise,  and  never  can  become,  as  to  us,  a  matter  or  right  on  the  ground  of 
personal  obedience  or  of  law.    Now,  if  it  was  otherwise  with  the  earthly  inheri- 
tance, the  type  fails  in  one  of  the  most  important  and  striking  points  of  resemblance. 
But  we  are  not  left  to  inference.    Kecorded  facts  appear  in  perfect  harmony  with 
the  apostle's  statement.    1.  What  was  the  reason  why  the  Israelites  wandered  forty 
years  in  the  wilderness  till  the  rebellious  generation  was  consumed  ?  It  was  unbehef 
(Heb.  iii.  18,  19  ;  iv,  2)  which  amounted  to  a  rejection  of  the  Word  of  God  and  a 
rejection  of  God  Himself,  as  the  God  of  their  fathers,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob. 
2.  The  Israelites  are,  indeed,  spoken  of  as  continuing  to  hold  the  laud  of  Canaan 
in  possession  through  obedience  ;  but  by  this  obedience  we  must  understand  "  the 
obedience  "  of  faith,  that  is,  obedience  springing  from  and  evincing  faith,  for,  "  if 
the  inheritance  be  of  the  law  it  is  no  more  of  promise  " ;  and  ' '  if  they  who  are  of 
the  law  be  heirs,  faith  is  made  void,  and  the  promise  made  of  none  effect."    These 
expressions  stand  in  perfect  opposition  to  the  idea  of  the  land  of  Canaan  being  ever 
held  as  the  reward  of  legal  obedience.    Many  passages,  accordingly,  describe  the 
obedience  required  of  Israel  as  being  inward  and  spiritual  subjection,  manifested 
by  outward  (Deut.  x.   12-22 ;  vi.  1-19).     And  such  subjection  is  the  fruit  and 
evidence  of  faith.    3.  The  reason  why  the  Jews  were,  with  such  awful  judgments, 
at  length  cast  out  from  the  Land  of  Promise,  and  now  continue  "  a  proverb,  and  a 
bye-word,  and  a  hissing  among  all  nations,"  corresponds  with  these  ideas.    It  waa 
unbelief — rejection  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  (Eom.  xi.  20,  &c. ;  Luke  xix.  41- 
44;  Matt,  xxiii.  34-39;  1  Thess.  ii.  15,  16;  Acts  iii.  23,  &c.).    The  curses  which 
Moses  so  many  hundred  years  before  had  denounced  against  them,  if  they  should 
prove  disobedient,  were  verified  on  account  of  their  unbelief.     Thus  it  appears  that 
the  promise  was  originally  '*  through  faith  " — that  it  was  as  professors  of  Abra- 
ham's faith  that  the  Israelites  entered  on  the  possession  of   Canaan — that  the 
possession  was  continued  through  "  the  obedience  of  faith  " — and  that,  on  account 
of  the  opposite  disobedience,  judgments  were  threatened  and  inflicted.    By  faith 
the  inheritance  was  obtained ;  by  faith  it  was  held ;  and  by  unbelief  it  was  lost. 
(B.   Wardlaw,  D.D.)         Abraham's  privilege  and   how   lie   attained  it: — I.    Thb 
POSITION  WHICH  Abraham  attained.     1.  He  was  made  by  God  "the  heir  of  the 
world."    We  must  look  upon  the  patriarch — (1)  As  the  natural  head  of  the  nation. 
(2)  As  the  federal  head  of  a  peculiar  people,  for  all  believers  are  styled  the  children 
of  Abraham.     '•  They  which  are  of  faith  are  blessed  with  faithful  Abraham."     "If 
ye  be  Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  according  to  the  promise." 
2.  It  is  necessary  to  keep  these  distinct,  otherwise  we  shall  confound  the  blessingg 
peculiar  to  Israel  with  blessings  peculiar  to  Christians.     (2)  There  are  certain 
"  blessings "  of  a  substantial  nature,  every  one  of  which  became  secured  by 
charter  to  the  house  of  Israel.    Do  we  not  find  Scripture  portraying  the  beauty, 
the  glory,  and  the  fertility  of  that  land  which  God  was  to  give  to  His  people  i     l>o 
we  not  find  promises  of  temporal  protection — all  of  which  are  bestowed  upon  the 
natural  children  of  Abraham  ?     (2)  Now  ask  whether  this  presents  to  us  the  bless- 
ings peculiar  to  the  spiritual  people  ?  Where  have  we  in  the  Word  of  God  assurances 
that  prosperity  and  worldly  distinction  are  to  belong  to  them  ?    That  they  may 
belong  to  their  condition  is  possible,  but  that  they  are  not  a  necessary  part  of  their 
present  condition  is  very  certain.    A  man  may  be  a  Lazarus  in  rags,  lying  at  the 
rich  man's  gate,  and  he  may  be  a  child  of  God.    But  the  blessings  that  God  has 
prepared  for  the  spiritual  progeny  of  Abraham  are  those  that,  like  so  many  stars  in 
the  firmament,  are  found  to  be  studded  in  the  rich  constellations  of  this  Epistle.     3, 
Both  these  sets  of  blessings  were  dependent  upon  Jesus  ;  for  Abraham  was  not  the 
heir  of  the  world  absolutely  ;  he  was  the  figurative  heir,  the  representative  and  the 
type  of  a  greater  One,  whom  God  appointed  Head  of  all  things.     The  truth  is  this, 
that  the  world  in  its  bankruptcy  is  to  be  reinstated  by  Christ  and  Christ  alone.  He  ia 
not  only  the  world's  grand  Trustee,  He  is  the  world's  mighty  Heir.    Everything  has 
come  into  His  hands  ;  all  power  is  given  unto  Him  in  heaven  and  in  earth  ;  and, 
therefore,  as  we  have  seen  these  double  blessings,  so  we  say  that  there  is  a  double 
touchstone  with  regard  to  them.     (1)  Christ  was  the  Touchstone  to  Israel.    Its 
fortunes  hung  trembhng  in  the  balance  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came,  and  who 
can  question  (hat  if  lurael  had  received  the  long-expected  One  with  open  arma 


2W  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

Israel  would  have  been  the  chief  among  the  nations  still  ?  Bat  it  was  a  stombling- 
Btone,  and  they  stumbled  at  it  and  missed  the  pathway  to  happiness,  to  glory,  and 
to  continued  national  blessedness,  simply  by  the  rejection  of  Christ.  ' '  Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem  .  .  .  how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together,  as  a  hen  doth 
??ather  her  brood  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not ;  .  . .  your  house  is  left  unto  you 
desolate."  (2)  The  same  touchstone  tells  upon  a  believer  still.  Everything  torna 
npon  this :  will  you  or  will  you  not  have  Christ  7  II.  How  rr  was  he  becamk 
rossEssED  OF  IT.  1.  It  was  impossible  for  him  to  attain  it  by  law,  for  between  Abraham 
and  the  giving  of  the  law  there  was  a  long  lapse  of  four  hundred  and  thirty  years. 
If  the  agency  was  not  in  existence  the  position  could  not  be  attributable  to  it.  And 
even  if  the  law  had  been  in  existence,  Abraham  by  the  law  even  then  could  nol 
have  become  possessed  of  the  position,  because  the  condition  of  the  law  is  faultless 
obedience,  and  Abraham  was  not  faultless.  Abraham  could  not  have  claimed  hia 
position  by  virtue  of  a  law  which  he  never  could  keep.  2.  But  there  is  another 
process  by  which  men  look  for  spiritual  advantage,  viz.,  through  ordinances.  Yoa 
«hall  find  men  at  the  present  day  who  will  tell  you  that  baptism  is  an  ordinance  of 
justification.  Now  circumcision  is  the  correlative  of  baptism,  and  yet  we  find  the 
apostle  here  laying  particular  stress  on  this,  that  Abraham's  position  was  not 
dependent  on  his  circumcision  because  the  circumcision  came  subsequent  to  his 
gaining  the  position.  3.  And  then  when  we  pass  from  the  negative  to  the  positive 
and  ask  ourselves  how  it  was  that  he  obtained  it,  the  answer  is,  "  Abraham 
believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  unto  him  for  righteousness."  It  is  this  that 
makes  the  simplicity  of  salvation  1  Whether  in  times  patriarchal,  Jewish,  or 
Christian  man  has  no  other  resort ;  and  an  appeal  to  the  mercy  of  God  through 
Christ  Jesus  is  after  all  but  putting  into  exercise  that  process  whereby  "  being  justi- 
fied by  faith  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (Dean  Boyd.) 
Abraham  the  heir  of  the  world  only  through  the  righteousness  of  faith : — Note — I.  Thh 
PROMISED  INHEBITANCE — "  THE  WORLD."  1.  But  in  tumiug  to  the  Original  covenant 
(Gen.  xvii.),  we  find  that  only  "  the  land  of  Canaan  "  was  promised  (Gen.  xv.  18). 
Along  with  that,  however,  are  the  assurances  of  Gen.  xii.  3  ;  xxii.  15-18.  On  these 
rest  all  the  predictions  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  even  as  these  have  their  back- 
ward reference  to  Gen.  iii.  15.  Which  also  had  its  implicit  reference  to  the  original 
place  of  dominion  over  all  the  earth  from  which  man  by  transgression  fell.  Of  the 
res;toration  of  that  dominion  Psa.  viii.  is  a  triumphant  anticipation  ;  while  on  the 
promise  made  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii.  17, 18)  is  founded  the  assurance,  given  to  the 
King  of  Zion,  that  Jehovah  would  give  to  Him  "  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for 
Hia  possession  "  (Psa.  ii.  8).  On  this  also  was  made  the  similar  announcements  of 
(Psa.  Ixxii.  8 ;  Zech.  ix  10).  And  it  is  precisely  upon  this  ground  that  St.  Paul  here 
assumes  that  the  promise  made  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  was  a  promise  that  they 
ehould  inherit  the  world,  of  which  Palestine  was  but  a  predictive  type.  The  promise, 
therefoi  e,  clearly  implied  that  so  surely  as  the  literal  seed  of  Abraham  were  put  in 
possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  so  surely  will  the  Christ  Himself  and  His  believing 
people,  ■who  are  truly  the  Israel  of  God,  be  put  into  possession  of  the  whole  earth. 
For  our  Jesus,  the  seed  of  Abraham,  shall  "  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged  till  He  have 
«et  judgment  in  the  earth,"  <fec.  (Isa.  xlii.  1-4).  He  is  the  Heir  of  the  world,  and 
He  shall  yet  have  His  inheritance.  2.  But  even  this  does  not  fill  up  or  complete 
the  promise.  For  that  was  the  promise  of  eternal  inheritance  (Gen.  xvii.  7,  8). 
Snch  possession  is  not  possible  in  this  probationary  state.  To  Abraham  himself 
there  was  given  "  none  inheritance,"  though  God  had  "  promised  "  it  (Acts  vii.  5). 
He,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  who  were  "  the  heirs  with  him  of  the  same  promise," 
died  without  possession.  Yet  they  lived  and  died  in  the  confidence  that  the  promise 
should  be  made  good.  And  why  ?  Because  they  looked  for  something  better  and 
more  enduring,  of  which  these  earthly  things  were  but  the  temporary  types  (Heb. 
xi.  10,  16).  It  was  in  recognition  of  this  hope  that  the  sublime  predictions  of 
Isaiah,  concerning  Messiah's  kingdom,  stretched  out  far  away  into  the  future,  till 
they  laid  the  foundations  of  and  brought  forth  to  perfection  "  the  new  heavens  and 
the  new  earth  "  (Isa.  Ixv,  17,  Ixvi.  22  ;  Dan.  vii.  22,  xii.  1-8  ;  Heb.  xi.  39,  40).  In 
and  with  Christ,  the  Seed  of  Abraham  and  the  Son  of  God,  "  whom  He  hath 
appointed  heir  of  all  things,"  we  shall  "inherit  all  things"  (Rev.  xxi.).  U.  The 
HEIRS  OF  THIS  INHERITANCE— Abraham  and  his  seed.  We  must  notice — i.  Those 
who  are  not  heirs,  or  are  not  included  in  this  seed  to  which  the  promise  was  made. 
Abraham  himself  was  not  an  heir  nor  the  father  of  heirs,  merely  as  a  man,  but  only 
as  a  believing  man.  The  promise  was  not  made  either  to  him  or  to  his  descendants 
through  the  law,  which  had  no  existence  till  some  "  four  hundred  and  thirty  yean 


CHAP.  IT.]  ROMANS.  296 

after,"  and  even  if  it  had  the  promise  must  have  been  made  of  no  effect ;  for  th« 
/aw,  being  transgressed,  works  only  wrath.  It  was  not  conditional  upon  circum- 
cision ;  for  the  promise  was  made  before  circumcision  had  been  enjoined.  It  was 
not  conditional  upon  natural  descent ;  for  then  Ishmael  and  the  sons  of  Eeturah,  and 
Esau  with  their  descendents,  must  all  have  been  included  in  the  seed  of  promise — 
which  they  most  certainly  were  not.  Therefore  the  right  of  heirship  lUd  not  pertain 
to  the  Jew  as  a  Jew.  It  was  needful  that  the  nation,  as  a  nation,  should  be  maintained 
iu  possession  of  the  land  till  the  Christ  should  come,  who  was  the  true  Seed  of  Abra- 
ham, and  the  appoined  Heir  of  all  things.  But  the  promise  apart  from  this  would  have 
received  a  true  fulfilment,  though  the  whole  multitude  of  the  seed  had  been  gathered 
from  amongst  Gentile  nations.    For— 2.  The  true  heirs  are  the  men  who  are  made 

Eartakers  of  "precious  faith,"  like  that  of  Abraham.  That  promise  was  given  to 
im  and  confirmed  by  an  oath,  as  he  was  a  believing  and  justified  man.  Had  ha 
fallen  away  the  whole  covenant  must  have  been  annulled  so  far  as  he  was  concerned, 
and  his  right  to  tha  inheritance  cancelled.  And  the  seed  which  was  to  share  the 
promise  and  the  inheritance  with  him  was  to  be,  not  a  natural,  but  a  spiritual  seed. 
If  an  IsraeUte  attained  to  tLe  righteousness  of  faith,  then  he  became  part  of  the 
seed  of  Abraham  and  an  heir  according  to  the  promise.  But  the  same  thing  might 
be  truly  aflQrmed  of  any  and  every  Gentile  who  also  became  a  believer.  For 
•*  before  God  "  Abraham  is  the  father  of  all  believers  from  amongst  all  nations,  as 
it  is  written,  "  I  have  made  thee  a  father  of  many  nations."  And,  therefore,  to 
whatever  nation,  tribe,  or  people  they  may  pertain,  those  who  have  become  one 
with  Christ  by  faith  have  given  to  them  this  assurance  (Gal.  iii.  29).  (W.  Tyson.) 
But  through  the  righteousness  of  faith. — The  righteousness  of  faith  : — 1.  There  are 
two  great  streams  of  tendency  at  work  on  the  ordering  of  human  destinies.  There 
is  the  current  of  things  which  makes  for  righteousness  through  the  great  universe, 
which  is  ultimately  irresistible ;  and  there  lies  in  the  mystery  of  human  freedom 
the  source  of  an  effort  and  tendency  which  is  ever  striving  against  it,  which  brings 
men  and  human  affairs  into  ceaseless  collision  with  it,  and  which  thereby  fills  the 
world  with  anguish  and  wreck.  A  new  element  is  added  to  the  anguish  by  the 
conflict  which  rages  within  man  himself.  The  righteousness  which  reigns  around 
has  an  awful  witness  within  which  cannot  be  silenced  ;  and  the  inward  protest  is 
reinforced  with  terrible  emphasis  by  all  the  misery  with  which  unrighteousness 
never  fails  to  chastise  a  people  or  a  soul.  Best  there  cannot  be  while  unrighteous- 
ness is  regnant.  The  cry  for  righteousness  is  the  strongest  and  most  agonising  cry 
of  a  man's  awakened  spirit.  TiU  he  has  set  himself  with  the  stream,  till  he  is 
borne  up  and  on  by  the  current,  he  cannot  see  even  the  beginning  of  peace.  2. 
There  are  mainly  two  methods  in  which  the  restoration  seems  feasible.  There  is 
the  legal  method  which  proceeds  upon  a  strenuous  effort  of  intellect  and  will  to 
obey  the  commandment.  "  There  stands  the  law  against  whose  rigid  breastwork 
you  are  constantly  dashing ;  study  it,  mark  well  its  lines,  keep  within  its  borders, 
and  live."  This  method  is  now  in  full  vogue  in  our  agnostic  schools.  Sin  is 
mainly  ignorance  ;  throw  fresh  light  on  things,  educate,  and  save.  By  all  means, 
is  the  response  of  the  gospel ;  still  "  one  thing  thou  lackest "  if  thou  wouldst  be 
saved — f  iith,  the  principle  of  a  laving  righteousness  which  satisfies  God  and  satisfies 
the  soul.  The  deepest  principle  of  the  Old  Testament  culture  and  discipline  for 
man's  spirit  is,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  &c.  Loving  Him  we  shall 
love  His  righteousness.  And  that  the  love  might  be  profound  and  mastering,  God 
lived  amongst  us.  Was  light  needed.  His  life  flooded  the  world  with  it ;  was  love 
needed,  the  love  that  endured  the  cross-bound  man  by  its  cords  to  the  Sufferer's 
heart  of  hearts.  Was  sacrifice  needed.  He  made  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  and 
reconciled  the  Father  and  the  sinner  on  the  basis  of  the  perfect  Sacrifice,  which 
presented  the  righteousness  from  which  man  had  revolted  and  to  which  man  must 
be  restored,  invested  in  the  glorious  beauty  and  splendour  of  ineffable  and  infinite 
love.  To  believe  is  to  open  the  heart  to  this  woild  of  purifying,  uplifting,  saving 
influence.  To  believe  is  to  establish  a  vital  link  by  which  warm  currents  of 
quickening  energy  pass  between  the  living  soul  and  the  living  Saviour ;  so  that  Ha 
Eves  in  us  by  His  Spirit,  and  we  live  in  Him.  The  germ  of  His  perfect  righteous- 
ness by  faith  is  within  us ;  the  full  form  of  it  will  be  developed  as  we  grow  into 
His  likeness,  behold  His  glory,  and  enter  fully  into  the  possession  of  His  bliss. 
{J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.)  For  If  they  which  are  of  the  law  he  heirs,  faith  Is 
made  Told. — Faith  made  void  by  the  law  :  — Law  implies  a  right  and  a  title  ;  faith 
or  grace  a  gift.  If  a  person  has  duly  purchased  an  estate,  there  is  no  need  that  he 
should  put  out  his  hands  as  a  suppliant  to  receive  the  title  deeds.    And  so  if  a 


9M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  IT. 

man  looks  for  the  heavenly  inheritance  by  law,  by  compliance  with  the  terms 
"  This  do  and  live,"  there  is  no  longer  any  necessity  for  the  kindly  offices  of  faith 
which  says,  "  Believe  and  live."  If  law  enters  upon  the  scene,  faith's  "  occupation 
is  gone  "  ;  it  is  emptied,  drained  of  its  contents,  and  rendered  useless  and  worthless. 
(C.  Neil,  M.A.)  Because  the  law  worketh  wrath. —  The  law  in  its  relation  to 
salvation : — I.  It  pbepaees  the  way.  1.  It  exposes  sin.  2.  Convinces  of  sin. 
8.  Disposes  the  sinner  to  receive  mercy.  II.  It  cannot  save,  1.  It  gives  no 
promise  of  mercy,  and  no  power  to  obey.  2.  But  the  more  clearly  it  is  revealed, 
the  more  powerfully  it  impels  the  sinner  to  Christ.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 
condemning  power  of  the  law : — The  blessings  which  the  heirs  of  the  Divine  promise 
receive  can  never  be  from  the  law,  because  "  the  law  worketh  wrath."  To  give  life 
is  in  direct  opposition  to  its  very  nature.  To  ofifer  it  to  a  sinner  is  like  offering 
fire  to  a  man  perishing  of  thirst.  For  the  innocent  and  obedient,  indeed,  it  is 
ordained  to  life,  and  was  so  in  the  case  of  man  before  the  FaU.  Subsequently  its 
operation  was  wrath  alone.  The  law  worketh  wrath.  I.  In  the  obedience  it 
demands.  If  it  were  a  mere  outward  system,  and  referred  wholly  to  open  trans- 
gressions, it  would  rather  encourage  men  to  endeavour  to  meet  its  claims,  that  they 
might  hope  for  the  life  which  they  would  thus  deserve.  But "  the  law  is  spiritual." 
Such  is  the  exceeding  breadth  of  its  requisitions,  the  perfect  obedience  which  it 
claims,  the  heart-reaching  power  of  its  demands,  that  it  charges  man  with  guilt 
not  only  in  his  transgressions,  but  in  his  obedience.  1.  If  he  loves  God  the  law 
asks,  • '  Does  love  rise  to  the  full  measure  of  the  precept  ?  Is  it  with  all  the 
heart,"  &o.  If  not,  there  is  sin  even  in  this  best  attainment,  and  so  condemnation. 
2.  So  in  regard  to  all  efforts  to  fulfil  the  commands  of  God.  The  law  cannot 
receive  the  disposition  in  place  of  the  act,  or  the  desire  instead  of  the  duty.  It 
allows  no  deficiency.  It  presents  as  its  standard  perfection  of  character,  and 
denounces  death  as  the  only  alternative.  To  this  man  can  never  attain,  and  so 
Btands  condemned.  In  thus  shutting  us  out,  however,  from  all  hope  in  itself,  it 
shuts  us  up  to  the  Saviour.  II.  In  the  sentence  which  it  passes.  In  this,  too, 
it  urges  man  to  flee  from  all  attempts  to  obtain  life  by  any  personal  satisfaction  for 
his  offences.  The  penalty  of  disobedience  is  death.  But  death  is  a  state  from 
which  there  is  no  return,  but  by  the  direct  interposition  of  Divine  power.  Certainly 
God  has  provided  a  remedy  but  this  is  not  in  the  law,  or  in  man's  obedience.  It 
is  in  the  perfect  work  and  righteousness  of  Christ.  In  this  man  lives  for  ever ; 
but  in  works  of  his  own  the  curse  abides,  and  the  law  offers  no  mitigation  or 
redress.  Thus  it  worketh  wrath  and  wrath  for  ever.  {S.  H,  Tyng,  D.D.)  The 
condemning  power  of  the  law  : — Tell  me,  then,  ye  who  desire  to  be  under  the  law, 
do  ye  not  hear  the  law  ?  Does  it  say  anything  to  you  but  "  Do  this  and  thou  shalt 
live  "  ?  Does  it  set  before  you  any  alternative  but  "  Cursed  is  he  that  continueth 
not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  Book  of  the  law  to  do  them  "  7  Has  it 
any  other  terms  but  these  ?  •'  Do  this,"  the  wrath- working  law  proclaims;  "  Do  it 
all  from  first  to  last  and  thou  shalt  live  ;  but  an  everlasting  curse  awaits  you  if  yoa 
offend  in  any  one  particular."  Plead  what  you  will,  these  denunciations  are 
irreversible.  You  may  say,  "  I  wish  to  obey  "  ;  and  it  answers  you,  "  Tell  me  not 
of  your  wishes,  but  do  it."  "  I  have  endeavoured  to  obey."  •'  Tell  me  not  of  your 
endeavours,  but  do  it."  •*  I  have  done  it  in  almost  every  particular."  "Tell  me 
not  what  you  have  done  almost ;  have  you  obeyed  it  altogether,  and  in  all  things  ?  " 
"  I  have  for  many  years  obeyed  it,  and  once  only  have  I  transgressed."  "  Then 
you  are  cursed ;  if  you  have  offended  in  one  point  you  are  guilty  of  all.  But  I  am 
BOrry,  I  cannot  regard  your  sorrow."  "  But  I  will  reform,  and  never  transgress 
again."  "I  care  nothing  for  your  reformation."  "But  I  wiU  obey  perfectly  in 
future,  if  I  can  find  mercy  for  the  past."  "  I  can  have  no  concern  with  your 
determinations  for  the  future ;  I  know  no  such  word  as  mercy ;  my  terms  cannot 
be  altered  for  any  one.  If  you  rise  to  these  terms,  you  will  have  a  right  to  life,  and 
need  no  mercy.  If  you  fall  short  in  any  one  particular,  nothing  remains  but 
condemnation."  {G.  Simeon,  M.A.)  For  where  no  law  is,  there  is  no  trans- 
gression.— No  law,  no  transgression : — Would  it  not  have  been  better,  then,  that 
man  should  have  been  left  without  law?  Certainly  not.  For — (1^  If  there  were 
no  law  there  could  be  reward  of  obedience,  and  so  the  Christian  religion  would  have 
lost  part  of  its  attractiveness.  And — (2)  It  might  well  be  that  certain  courses  of 
conduct,  though  they  could  not  properly  be  called  transgression,  would  yet  bring 
with  them  misery  and  suffering.  I.  The  general  tboth  op  the  assebtion- 
Where  there  is  no  law,  there  is — 1.  No  prescribed  mode  of  action.  (1)  In  the 
phyeicaJ  world.    Suppose  that  no  path  had  ever  been  marked  oat,  let  as  aaj,  for  m 


CHAt.  ly.]  SOMANS.  297 

planet,  but  that  it  had  always  travelled  hither  and  thither  in  any  direction.  In 
BQch  a  case  it  could  not  transgress  its  law.  To  transgress  is  to  pass  over  tha 
boundaries,  but  with  no  boundaries  determined  that  could  not  be.  So  it  was  when 
"the  earth  was  without  form  and  void";  before  as  yet  out  of  chaos  God  had 
called  the  cosmos,  with  its  light,  its  order,  and  its  law.  (2)  In  the  social  world. 
In  certain  low  states  of  barbarism  there  is  no  such  thing  as  government.  No  course 
of  conduct  is  either  prescribed  or  forbidden,  but  all  actions  are  indifferent,  so  that 
whatever  a  man  may  do  he  does  not  transgress.  (3)  In  the  moral  and  spiritual 
world.  There  are  in  man  moral  distinctions,  he  knows  what  is  good  and  what  is 
evil.  Because  of  this,  those  who  have  not  the  written  law  of  God  are,  as  the 
apostle  teaches,  a  law  unto  themselves,  for  they  have  a  conscience  which  approves 
or  condemns.  But  suppose  it  otherwise ;  suppose  man  really  did  not  know  right 
from  wrong ;  in  such  a  case  there  would  be  neither  law  nor  transgression.  2.  No 
knowledge  of  sin.  The  law  does  not  make  man  a  transgressor,  but  it  makes  him 
know  that  he  has  transgressed.  As  Paul  teaches:  "I  had  not  known  sin  but  by 
the  law  "  ;  '« Without  the  law  sin  is  dead  "  ;  ••  Sin  is  not  imputed  when  there  is  no 
law."  It  prescribes  righteousness,  and  in  so  doing  proscribes  sin.  It  is  when  tha 
commandment  comes  sin  revives,  and  is  made  to  appear  exceeding  sinful.  But  as 
long  as  we  are  incapable  of  knowing,  we  are  incapable  of  sinning.  "  We  sin  wilfully 
after  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  3.  No  supreme  authority 
to  judge,  to  acquit  or  condemn.  Transgression  is  disobedience,  and  this  could  not 
be  except  by  reference  to  one  who  has  authority  to  exact  obedience.  II.  Thb 
ASSERTION  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  So  far  we  have  referred  to  law  generally, 
but  we  are  under  tlie  highest  and  best  law  ever  laid  down  for  the  guidance  of  human 
conduct — the  law  of  Christ's  love.  This  law  is — 1.  Clearly  stated.  In  earthly 
kingdoms  it  is  often  a  very  difiScult  thing  to  know  what  the  law  in  a  given  case  is ; 
but  we  know  the  will  of  Christ,  for  we  have  His  new  commandment.  2.  Widely 
known.  Not  yet  universally,  but  wherever  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  preached.  8. 
Easily  obeyed.  It  is  not  enough  that  a  law  be  clearly  stated  and  widely  known. 
The  behests  of  a  tyrant  might  be  that.  But  Christ  said,  "My  yoke  is  easy." 
•'  His  commandments  are  not  grievous."  The  Psalmist  said,  "  0  how  love  I  Thy 
law."  "I  love  Thy  commandments  above  gold,  yea,  above  fine  gold."  And  the 
law  of  Christ  is  better,  holier,  and  more  easily  obeyed  than  that  which  the  Psalmist 
thus  esteemed.  4.  Of  bdieficial  tendency.  In  many  earthly  kingdoms  there  have 
been  laws  adverse  to  the  prosperity  of  the  subjects.  But  Christ's  reign  is  both  in 
righteousness,  and  for  the  highest  benefit  of  His  followers.  They  have  liberty, 
life,  peace,  hope,  &o.  "Blessed  are  they  that  do  His  commandments."  "In 
keeping  of  them  there  is  great  reward."  III.  How  this  ought  to  afteot  cub  ura 
AND  CONDUCT.  The  character  of  a  people  may  be  known  by  their  laws.  What 
manner  of  persons  thus  ought  they  to  be  who  have  become  Christ's  subjects?  This 
great  truth  should  lead  to — 1.  Earnest  solicitude.  2.  Cheerful  obedience.  8. 
Activity  for  the  extension  of  Christ's  rule.    (J.  A,  T.  Skinner,  B.A.) 

Yer.  16.  Therefore  It  la  of  faith,  that  It  might  be  by  grace. — How  i$  salvation 
received : — I.  The  fact.  1.  It  is  of  faith.  And  what  is  faith  ?  It  is  taking  God 
at  His  Word,  and  acting  upon  that  by  trusting  in  Him.  Some  of  the  Puritans  used 
to  divide  it  into  three  parts.  (1)  Self-renunciation,  which  is,  perhaps,  rather  a 
preparation  for  faith  than  faith  itself.  (2)  Reliance,  in  which  a  man  trusts,  and 
leaves  his  soul  in  the  Saviour's  hantls.  (3)  Appropriation,  by  which  a  man  takes  to 
himself  that  which  God  presents  in  the  promise.  We  shall,  however,  better  under- 
stand what  faith  is  as  we  consider — 1.  Abraham's  case.  (1)  He  believed  the 
promise  of  God  firmly  and  practically.  He  was  in  Chaldea  when  the  Lord 
promised  to  give  him  a  land  and  a  seed,  and  straightway  he  went  forth,  not  know- 
ing whither  he  went.  When  he  came  into  Canaan  he  had  no  settled  resting-place, 
but  still  believed  that  the  land  wherein  he  sojourned  as  a  stranger  was  his  own. 
God  promised  to  give  him  a  seed,  and  he  waited  till  he  was  a  hundred  years  old 
and  Sarah  ninety  when  Isaac  was  bom.  Nor  did  he  doubt  when  the  Lord  bade  him 
take  Isaac  and  offer  him  up  as  a  sacrifice.  (2)  He  had  an  eye  to  the  central  point  of 
the  promise,  the  Messiah.  ^Vhen  the  Lord  said  that  He  would  make  him  a  blessing, 
and  in  him  should  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed,  I  do  not  s appose  Abraham 
saw  all  the  fulness  of  that  marvellous  word;  but  our  Lord  declares,  "  Abraham 
saw  My  day  and  was  glad."  (3)  He  considered  no  difficulties  whatever  (vers. 
18,  19).  These  were  terrible  difficulties;  they  were  for  God  to  consider,  and 
not  for  him.    (4)  He  gave  glory  to  God  (ver.  20).    God  had  promised,  and  hfl 


998  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zr. 

treated  the  Lord's  promise  with  becoming  reverence.  He  knew  that  Jehovah  i» 
not  a  man  that  He  should  lie,  nor  the  sou  of  man  that  He  should  repent.  Abraham 
glorified  the  truth  of  God,  and  at  the  same  time  he  glorified  His  power.  It  belongs 
to  puny  man  to  speak  more  than  he  can  do ;  but  is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ? 
(5)  He  rested  upon  the  Lord  alone  (ver.  21).  There  was  nothing  whatever  in  his 
house,  his  wife,  himself,  or  anywhere  else,  which  could  guarantee  the  fultilment  of 
the  promise.  He  had  only  God  to  look  to,  and  what  could  a  man  have  more  ?  And 
this  is  the  kind  of  faith  which  God  loves  and  honours,  which  wants  no  signs, 
evidences,  or  other  buttresses  to  support  the  word  of  the  Lord.  Dictum  !  Factum  X 
These  twain  are  one  with  the  Most  High.  2.  The  faith  of  every  man  who  is  saved 
must  be  of  this  character.  When  we  are  saved — (1)  We  take  the  promise  of  God 
and  depend  upon  it.  (2)  We  believe  in  God  over  the  head  of  great  difficulties.  If 
it  was  hard  for  Abraham  to  believe  that  a  son  should  be  born  unto  him,  methinks 
it  is  harder  for  a  sinner  to  believe  the  hopeful  things  which  the  gospel  prophesies 
unto  him.  (a)  Can  the  gospel  message  be  true  to  such  a  worthless  rebel  as  I  am  t 
Despite  the  trepidation  of  the  awakened  spirit,  the  Huly  Spirit  enables  it  to  quiei 
itself  with  the  firm  persuasion  that  God  for  Christ's  sake  doth  put  away  its  sin. 
(b)  Another  miracle  is  also  beUeved  in,  namely,  regeneration.  This  is  quite  aa 
great  an  act  of  faith  as  Abraham  to  believe  in  the  birth  of  a  child  by  parents  who 
were  advanced  in  years.  The  faith  which  saves  believes  in  Jesus  and  obtains  power 
to  become  children  of  God  and  strength  to  conquer  sin.  (c)  Does  it  not  seem 
incredible  that  such  feeble,  foolish  creatures  as  we  should  continue  in  faith  ?  Yet 
this  we  must  do ;  and  the  faith  which  saves  enables  us  to  believe  that  we  shall 
persevere,  for  it  is  persuaded  that  the  Redeemer  is  able  to  keep  that  which  we  have 
committed  unto  Him.  (d)  We  believe,  according  to  God's  promise,  that  we  shall 
one  day  be  "  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing."  "  Without  fault  before 
the  throne  of  God."  But  how  is  this  to  be  ?  Surely  our  confidence  is,  that  He  who 
has  promised  it  is  able  to  perform  it.  (3)  This  saving  faith  rests  in  the  power  of 
God  as  manifested  in  Jesus  (vers.  24,  25).  It  is  not  to  us  a  thing  incredible  that 
God  should  raise  the  dead ;  we  therefore  believe  that  because  God  has  raised  the 
dead  He  hath  raised  us  also  from  our  death  in  sin,  and  that  He  will  raise  our  bodies 
too.  II.  The  fibst  beason  why  God  has  chosen  to  uaee  salvatiom  bt  faith, 
"  that  it  might  be  of  grace."  He  might  have  willed  to  make  the  condition  of 
salvation  a  mitigated  form  of  works.  If  He  had  done  so  it  would  not  have  been  of 
grace.  As  water  and  oil  will  not  mix,  and  as  fire  and  water  will  not  lie  down  side 
by  side  in  quiet,  so  neither  will  the  principle  of  merit  and  the  principle  of  free 
favour.  Grace  and  faith  are  congruous,  and  will  draw  together  in  the  same  chariot, 
but  grace  and  merit  pull  opposite  ways,  and  therefore  God  has  not  chosen  to  yoke 
them  together.  1.  In  Abraham's  case,  inasmuch  as  he  received  the  blessing  by 
faith,  it  is  very  evident  that  it  was  of  grace.  No  man  thinks  of  Abraham  as  a  self- 
justifying  person,  saying,  "  God,  I  thank  Thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men.'*  His 
name  is  not  "the  father  of  the  innocent,"  but  "the  father  of  the  faithful."  2. 
Inasmuch  as  we  are  saved  by  faith,  every  beUever  is  made  to  see  for  himself  that, 
in  his  own  instance,  it  is  grace.  Believing  is  such  a  self-renunciating  act  that  no 
man  who  looks  for  eternal  life  thereby  ever  talked  about  his  own  merits.  He 
cannot  get  away  from  simple  faith,  for  the  moment  he  attempts  to  do  so  he  feels 
the  ground  going  from  under  him.  3.  Through  the  prominence  given  to  faith,  the 
truth  of  salvation  by  grace  is  so  conspicuously  revealed  that  even  the  outside  world 
are  compelled  to  see  it,  though  the  only  result  may  be  to  make  them  cavil.  4. 
Moreover,  faith  never  did  clash  with  grace  yet.  When  the  sinner  comes  and  trusts 
to  Christ,  and  Christ  saith  to  him,  "  I  forgive  thee  freely  by  My  grace,"  faith  says, 
"  0  Lord,  that  is  what  I  want."  "  But  if  I  give  thee  everlasting  life  it  will  not  be 
because  thou  deservest  it,  but  for  Mine  own  name's  sake."  Faith  replies,  "  0  Lord, 
that  also  is  precisely  as  I  desire."  6.  Faith  is  the  child  of  grace.  The  believer 
knows  that  his  faith  is  not  a  seed  indigenous  to  the  soil  of  his  heart,  but  an  exotic 
planted  there  by  Divine  wisdom ;  and  he  knows  too  that  if  the  Lord  does  not 
nourish  it  his  faith  will  die  like  a  withered  flower.  Faith  is  begotten  and  sustained 
by  a  power  not  less  mighty  than  that  which  raised  our  Lord  from  the  dead.  IH.  A 
VUBTHEB  BEASON.  "  To  the  cud  that  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed." 
For — 1.  It  could  not  have  been  sure  to  us  Gentiles  by  the  law,  because  we  were  not 
under  the  law  of  Moses  at  all.  The  Jew,  coming  under  the  law,  might  have  been 
reached  by  a  legal  method,  but  we  who  are  Gentiles  would  have  been  altogether 
shut  out.  Therefore  grace  chooses  to  bless  us  by  faith  in  order  that  the  Gentile 
may  partake  of  the  blessing  of  the  ooveuant  at  well  as  the  Jew.    2.  The  other 


lY.]  ROMANS.  a9i 

method  has  failed  already  in  every  case.  We  have  all  broken  the  law  already,  and 
■o  have  put  onrselves  beyond  the  power  of  ever  receiving  blessing  as  a  reward  of 
merit.  What  remaineth,  then,  if  we  are  to  be  saved  at  all,  but  that  it  should  be  of 
faith  ?  3.  It  is  of  faith  that  it  might  be  sure.  Under  the  system  of  works  nothing 
is  snre.  Suppose  yoa  were  under  a  covenant  of  salvation  by  works,  and  you  had 
fulfilled  those  works  up  till  now,  yet  you  would  not  be  sure.  But  after  all  you  have 
done  for  these  long  years  you  may  lose  everything  before  you  have  finished  your 
next  meal.  But  see  the  excellence  of  salvation  by  grace,  for  when  you  reach  the 
ground  of  faith  you  are  upon  terra  firma.  4.  If  the  promise  had  been  made  to 
works  there  are  some  of  the  seed  to  whom  most  evidently  it  never  could  come.  If 
salvation  to  the  dying  thief  must  come  by  works,  how  can  he  be  saved  ?  but  he 
believed,  cast  a  saving  eye  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  and  said,  "  Lord,  remember  me," 
and  the  promise  was  most  sure  to  him,  for  the  answer  was,  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be 
with  Me  in  Paradise."  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Salvation  of  faith,  that  it  viight  be  by 
grace : — I.  Because  faith  is  thb  oin  op  God,  not  the  recompense  of  any  previous 
desert.  Were  it  otherwise,  all  would  live  and  die  in  unbelief;  for  no  one  could 
deserve  the  gift,  and  no  one  would  believe  on  whom  it  was  not  bestowed.  Faith  is 
a  coming  to  Christ  for  life  ;  but  this  coming  is  alone  the  effect  of  Divine  influence 
(John  vi.  65).  The  habit,  the  exercise,  and  the  increase  of  faith,  are  all  from 
God.  II.  Faith  is  a  suppliant  grace,  sensible  of  its  own  poverty  and  inefficacy 
(Prov.  xviii.  23).  One  of  the  most  modest,  and  yet  importunate  suppliants  was  the 
woman  of  Canaan  ;  and  our  Lord  attributed  her  importunity  to  the  strength  of  her 
faith.  The  prayer  of  faith  is  the  least  assuming,  the  most  submissive.  Its 
language  is,  Lord,  save,  or  I  perish.  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner.  III.  Faith 
BECEiVES  ALL  FBOu  Christ  ;  it  is  the  empty  hand  extended  towards  Him  for  a  full 
and  complete  salvation.  Love  may  be  said  indeed  to  give,  but  it  is  the  office  of 
faith  only  to  receive.  Faith  receives  the  truths  and  blessings  of  Christ  Himself ; 
and  is  constantly  receiving  out  of  His  fulness,  even  grace  for  grace.  It  is  also  of 
the  nature  of  faith  to  receive  all  with  humility  and  self-abasement  (Fsa.  cxv.  1 ; 
ohap.  iii.  27).  IV.  The  entire  dependence  of  faith  upon  the  wnx  of  God.  Its 
language  is.  Let  Him  do  with  me  as  seemeth  good  in  His  sight.  If  I  am  condemned, 
the  sentence  wiU  be  just ;  if  saved,  it  will  be  owing  to  a  multitude  of  tender  mercies. 
Its  hand  is  laid,  not  upon  the  duties  it  performs,  but  upon  the  head  of  Ihe  great 
atoning  sacrifice.  When  it  asks  it  is  in  the  name  of  Jesus;  what  it  expects  is 
alone  for  His  sake,  both  grace  here  and  glory  hereafter.  Y.  There  is  an  imper- 
fection IN  faith,  which  shows  that  it  can  have  no  meritorious  influence  on 
ouB  SALVATION.  If  faith  has  any  strength,^  it  arises  not  from  itself,  but  from  its 
object ;  it  needs  continual  support,  and  is  often  ready  to  sink  under  the  weight  of 
objections  and  oppositions.  It  may  in  this  respect  be  said  of  graces  as  it  is  of 
persons,  God  hath  chosen  the  things  that  are  weak  and  despised  (1  Cor.  i.  28,  29; 
xii.  24).  YI.  Faith  is  humble  and  self-dentino.  Its  language  is,  after  all  its 
laborious  exertions,  "  Yet  not  I " — I  can  do  nothing.  It  is  Christ  that  has  done,  it 
is  He  that  must  do  all.  "  I  am  not  worthy  that  Thou  shouldest  come  under  my 
roof,"  says  the  centurion.  "I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel," 
replied  the  Saviour.    It  puts  on  the  robe,  but  it  did  not  weave  it ;  it  shows  the  debt 

faid,  but  did  not  discharge  it.  We  are  said  to  live  by  faith ;  yet  faith  says.  It  is  not 
,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me.  1.  If  salvation  be  of  faith,  what  will  become  of 
unbelievers  (John  iii,  18-36).  2.  If  salvation  be  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace, 
then  it  is  no  wonder  that  Satan  employs  his  utmost  endeavonrs  to  prevent  faith,  and 
also  to  destroy  it  (2  Cor.  iv.  4).  3.  Let  his  malignant  activity  excite  us  to  watchful- 
ness and  diligence,  and  to  beware  of  his  devices.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Salvation  by 
grace  through  faith  : — I.  Salvation  is  by  faith  in  order — 1.  That  it  might  be  by 
grace,  or  pure  favour  and  goodwill.  Coming  thus — (1)  It  honours  God  as  an  act 
of  royal  beneficence.  (2)  It  honours  man  as  making  him  the  object,  not  of  Divine 
justice  and  wisdom  merely,  but  of  Divine  charity.  (3)  It  blesses  the  recipient  by 
culturing  humility  and  gratitude.  2.  That  the  promise  may  be  sure  to  all — 
(1)  Were  it  by  works,  however,  some  may  fancy  themselves  able  to  gain  it,  the  mass 
of  mankind  must  despair.  (2)  Were  it  by  works  the  original  purpose  of  its  pro- 
vision could  not  be  fulfilled,  for  the  promise  was  to  all  nations.  (3)  Faith  is 
a  condition  which  all  may  fulfil  ;  the  feeblest  as  the  strongest,  the  most  guilty  as 
the  least  guilty,  the  debtor  of  ten  thousand  talents  as  the  debtor  of  an  hundred 
pence.  III.  This  faith  is  exemplified  in  Abraham.  He  is  the  father  of  all  who 
believe,  as  Tubal  is  the  father  of  iron-wcprkers,  and  Jubal  of  musicians.  His  faith 
is  exhibited  as — 1.  A  faith  that  regarded  God  as  the  quickener  of  the  dead  and 


800  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rr. 

Creator  of  things  not  existing — as  a  God  with  whom  nothing  was  impossible.  2.  A 
faith  that  looked  for  fulfilment  of  the  promise  when  there  was  no  probability  of 
that  fulfilment ;  as  when  he  believed  in  his  possession  of  Canaan.  3.  A  faith  that 
expected  when  fulfilment  seemed  impossible ;  as  when  he  beUeved  the  promise  of 
a  son  to  himself  and  aged,  barren  Sarah.  4.  A  faith  that  failed  not  when  fulfilment 
seeoied  to  be  stopped  by  the  acts  of  God  Himself ;  as  when  the  whole  promised  seed 
lay  doomed  to  death  upon  the  altar.  5.  A  faith  that  staggered  not — a  full  per- 
suasion of  heart.  6.  A  faith  that  practically  confided  :  as  when  he  went  forth  from 
his  father's  house,  and  when  he  bound  Isaac  for  death ;  thus  a  faith  made  perfect  by 
works.  His  seed  are  all  who  imitate  his  faith.  {W.  Griffiths.)  Salvation  by  grace 
through  faith : — I.  I.  Salvation  is  by  faith.  1.  A  deliverance.  2.  Effected  for  as. 
8.  Through  faith.  4.  In  Christ.  5.  Without  merit.  II.  That  it  might  be  of  grace. 
1.  Received.  2.  Felt.  3.  Eecognised.  4.  Enjoyed  as  grace.  [J.Lyth,D.D.)  Salvation 
by  grace  : — In  a  period  of  religious  awakening,  Sammy  thought  himself  a  subject  of 
the  work,  and,  with  others,  presented  himself  for  admission  to  the  Church.  The 
office-bearers  hesitated,  on  the  ground  that  he  miglit  not  have  sufficient  capacity  to 
comprehend  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  and  the  evidences  of  conversion.  They 
concluded,  however,  to  examine  him,  and  began  with  the  subject  of  regeneration. 
"  Do  you  think,  Sammy,"  said  the  pastor,  "  that  you  have  been  born  again  ?  "  "I 
think  I  have,"  was  the  answer.  "  Well,  if  so,  whose  work  is  that"  ?  "Oh  I  God 
did  a  part,  and  I  did  a  part."  "  Ah  !  what  part  did  you  do,  Sammy  ?  "  "  Why,  I 
opposed  Cod  all  I  could ;  and  He  did  the  rest."  The  result  of  the  examination 
was,  that,  so  far  as  they  could  judge,  the  Holy  Spirit  had  been  Sammy's  theological 
teacher,  and  had  indeed  created  him  anew  in  Christ,  "  not  of  works,  lest  any  man 
should  boast."  {Christian  Treasury.)  Faith  not  meritorious,  but  effectual: — It 
does  not  stand  in  the  place  of  obedience,  as  the  terms  of  a  new  bargain,  that  has 
been  substituted  in  room  of  an  old  one.  It  is  very  natural  to  conceive  that,  as 
under  the  old  covenant  we  had  salvation  for  our  works,  so,  under  the  new,  we  have 
salvation  for  our  faith ;  and  that,  therefore,  faith  is  that  which  wins  and  purchases 
the  reward.  And  thus  Heaven's  favour  is  still  looked  upon  as  a  premium,  not  for 
doing,  it  is  true,  but  for  beUeving.  And  this  has  just  the  effect  of  infusing  the  legal 
spirit  into  our  evangelical  system  ;  and  thus,  not  merely  of  nourishing  the  pride  and 
the  pretension  of  its  confident  votaries,  but  of  prolonging  the  disquietude  of  all 
earnest  and  humble  inquiries.  For,  instead  of  looking  broadly  out  on  the  gospel 
as  an  offer,  they  look  as  anxiously  within  for  the  personal  qualification  of  faith,  as 
they  ever  did  upon  the  personal  qualification  of  obedience.  This  transfers  their 
attention  from  that  which  is  sure,  even  the  promises  of  God— to  that  which  is 
unsure,  even  their  own  fickle  and  fugitive  emotions.  Instead  of  thinking  upon 
Christ,  they  perpetually  think  upon  themselves.  They  ought  surely  to  cast  their 
challenged  and  their  invited  regards  on  Him,  who  calls  them  to  look  upon  Him 
from  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  and  be  saved  1  But  no  I  they  cast  their  eyes  with 
downward  obstinacy  upon  their  own  minds ;  and  there  toil  for  the  production  of 
faith  in  the  spirit  of  bondage ;  and  perhaps,  after  they  are  satisfied  with  the  fancied 
possession  of  it,  rejoice  over  it  as  they  would  over  any  other  meritorious  acquire- 
ment in  the  spirit  of  legaUty.  This  is  not  the  way  in  which  the  children  of  Israel 
looked  out  upon  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness.  They  did  not  pore  upon  their 
wounds  to  mark  the  progress  of  healing  there ;  nor  did  they  reflect  upon  the  power 
and  perfection  of  their  seeing  faculties ;  nor  C.i  they  even  suffer  any  doubt  that 
still  lingered  in  their  imaginations,  to  restrain  them  from  the  simple  act  of  lifting 
up  their  eyes.  And  when  they  were  cured  in  consequence,  they  would  never  think 
of  this  as  a  reward  for  their  looking,  but  regard  it  as  the  fruit  of  Heaven's  gracious 
appointment.  Do  in  like  manner.  It  will  make  both  against  your  humility  and 
your  peace,  that  you  regard  faith  in  the  light  of  a  meritorious  qualification  ;  or  that 
you  attempt  to  draw  a  comfort  from  the  consciousness  of  faith,  which  you  ought 
directly  to  draw  from  the  contemplation  of  the  Saviour.  If  salvation  be  given  as 
a  reward  for  faith,  then  it  is  not  of  grace.  But  we  are  told  in  this  verse  that  it  is 
of  faith,  expressly  that  it  might  be  by  grace.  In  the  one  way,  you  can  only  be  as 
sure  of  the  promise  as  you  are  sure  of  yourself ;  and  what  a  frail  and  fluctuating 
dependence  is  this  1  In  the  other  way,  you  are  as  sure  of  the  promise  as  you  are 
sure  of  God  ;  and  thus  your  confidence  has  a  rock  to  repose  upon.  And  in  the  very 
act  of  leaning  upon  God,  man  is  upheld  not  only  in  hope  but  in  holiness.  It  is  in 
the  very  position  of  standing  erect  upon  the  foundation  of  the  promises  that  the 
promised  strength  as  well  as  the  promised  righteousness  is  fulfilled  to  him.  It  ii 
in  the  very  act  of  looking  unto  Jesus,  that  the  light  of  all  that  grace  and  truth 


OBAV.  IT.]  ROMANS.  Ml 

vrbich  ehine  from  the  countenance  of  the  Saviour  is  let  in  upon  the  soul ;  and  ig 
thence  reflected  back  again  in  the  likeness  of  this  worth  and  virtue  from  his  own 
person.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  To  the  end  that  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  all 
the  Beed. — The  promise  made  sure — grace  and  faith : — I.  The  end  in  view — that 
"  the  promise  may  be  sure  to  all  the  seed."  Every  promise  of  God  is  sure  in  the 
Bense  of  being  trustworthy.  But  the  fulfilment  is  not  necessarily  sure  to  any,  for 
they  come  short  of  its  stipulations.  The  certainty  here  is  the  opposite  of  what  is 
deprecated  in  ver.  4:  "  the  promise  being  made  of  none  effect,"  i.e.,  falling  short 
of  its  full  accomplishment.  Let  us  think  of  the  origin  of  the  promise.  1.  Let  us 
behold  the  Father  taking  up  the  question  of  the  inheritance.  It  is  the  heirship  of 
the  world  (ver.  13).  Who  are  ultimately  to  inherit  ?  That  must  be  settled  before 
anything  about  it  can  become  the  subject  of  promise  at  all.  And  in  settling 
that,  there  must  be  sovereign  choice.  2.  The  Son  has  from  everlasting  an  interest 
in  the  promise.  The  inheritance;  which  it  conveys  is  in  the  first  instance  destined 
to  Him  (Heb.  i.  2).  He  is  the  one  seed ;  and  others  are  included  in  the  seed 
only  as  being  one  with  Him.  Through  what  a  ministry  on  His  part  they  are 
to  become  fellow-heirs  with  Him  He  all  along  knows  full  welL  He  is  to  "  bear 
their  griefs  and  carry  their  sorrows";  to  be  "made  sin,"  to  be  "made  a  curse" 
for  them.  Through  such  sore  '•  travail  of  Lis  soul  "  in  their  stead  He  is  to  obtain 
the  fulfilment  of  the  promise :  to  " see "  in  them  "His  seed  "  ;  the  seed  that  being 
one  with  Him  is  to  be  the  heir  of  the  world,  to  inherit  all  things  in  Him.  2.  The 
Holy  Spirit  is  one  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  ;  as  in  the  essence  of  the  Divine 
nature,  so  also  in  this  covenant  of  peace.  He  is  a  party  to  it.  The  seed  who  are 
to  be  heirs  are  to  be  put  into  His  hands,  to  be  made  one  with  the  Son  in  His  heir- 
Bhip,  and  one  with  one  another  in  the  Son.  That  the  promise  may  be  sure.  He  must 
put  forth  His  soul-subduing  power.  Is  He  to  do  so  otherwise  than  on  the  footing 
of  its  being  "  sure  to  all  the  seed  "  ?  II.  The  two  steps  by  which  alone  it  is  to 
BE  beached.  But  why  should  there  be  any  steps?  Why  may  not  the  mere  fiat  of 
Omnipotence  at  once  secure  the  end  in  view  ?  God  has  but  to  speak,  and  "  Out  of 
these  stones  He  is  able  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham."  Yes  I  And  if  it  were 
"  stones  "  that  He  had  to  deal  with,  the  old  creation  formula — Let  it  be — would 
suffice.  The  voice  might  go  forth,  not  only  figuratively,  "  Thy  seed  shall  be  as  the 
Band,"  but  literally,  "  Let  the  sand  by  thy  seed."  And  if  the  seed  could  be  as  stones,  or 
as  sand,  ever  after,  to  be  managed  as  stones  or  sand,  the  problem  of  securing  that  the 
promise  should  be  sure  might  be  easily  solved.  But  it  is  not  so.  For  the  materials 
are  not  stone  or  sand,  but  beings  who  have  possessed  and  abused  the  faculty  of  free 
will.  The  problem  is  solved,  however,  when  we  take  into  account  the  two  steps  here 
indicated  as  securing  the  result.  1.  It  is  "  by  grace."  The  whole  economy  is  alive  and 
instinct  with  grace.  (1)  Its  origin  is  very  gracious.  It  has  its  rise  in  the  favour 
which  the  Son  ever  finds  in  the  Father's  right  from  everlasting.  What  but  this 
grace  moves  the  Father  to  •'  appoint  the  Son  heir  of  all  things  "  (Heb.  i.  2)  ?  And 
that  is  at  once  the  source  and  pattern  of  aU  subsequent  exercises  of  the  same  graoe 
in  time.  (2)  It  is  by  the  same  grace  that,  in  virtue  of  His  being  "  appointed  heir 
of  all  things,"  the  Son  is  the  agent  "by  whom  God  made  the  worlds,"  and  "who 
upholdeth  all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power  "  (Heb.  i.  3).  It  is  for  the  grace  He 
ever  has  with  the  Father  that,  as  the  Lord  of  creation  and  providence,  and  now  the 
Lord  of  the  economy  of  redemption,  He  has  "  in  all  the  pre-eminence  "  (CoL  i.  16-18). 
(3)  For  very  specially  this  grace  appears  in  His  having  constituted  the  Saviour  of 
men.  When  He  comes  into  the  world  on  His  errand  of  redemption  He  finds  grace 
and  favour  in  the  Father's  eyes  (Matt.  iii.  17).  When  He  leaves  the  world.  His 
work  being  finished,  He  finds  grace  and  favour  still  (Eom.  i.  4).  It  is  because  the 
Father  graciously  accepts  Him  as  the  righteous  one  (Isa.  liii.  11),  that  He  "  sets 
Him  at  His  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places  "  (Eph.  i.  20).  This  grace,  love, 
on  the  Father's  part,  how  gladly  does  the  Son  always  own  (Prov.  viii.  30,  31) !  How 
willingly  does  He  welcome  the  task  that  is  to  cost  Him  so  dear  (Psa.  xl.  7,  8) !  (4) 
And  now  it  may  be  seen  how  the  Father's  treatment  of  those  who  are  the  Son's 
seed,  is  simply  an  extension  of  the  favour  which  He  bears  to  the  Son  Himself.  They 
are  embraced  or  comprehended  in  the  grace  which  the  Son  ever  finds  in  the  Father's 
Bight.  It  is  on  this  principle  that  the  Father  proceeds  in  pardoning,  acquitting, 
justifying,  glorifying  them  (Eph.  L  6).  2.  It  is  "of  faith."  Why?  Simply,  that 
it  may  still  be  aU  "  by  grace."  We  have  seen  that  it  is  by  grace  alone  that  any  are 
admitted  into  fellowship  with  the  Son  in  His  gracious  work  and  ministry  of 
substitution.  Let  us  now  see  what  grace  there  is  in  the  terms,  or  the  manner,  of 
of  their  admission.    Freely,  unreservedly,  unconditionally ;  if  they  will ;  when  the/ 


801  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

will.  Ah !  but  does  not  this  really  destroy  all  certainty  ?  If  they  will !  Does  it 
not  cast  doubt  on  everything  ?  When  they  will  I  When  will  they  ?  Will  they 
ever  ?  Of  what  avail  then  is  all  this  grace  to  them  ?  And  yet  how  can  the  thing 
be  otherwise  ?  How  can  any  enter  into  union  with  the  Son,  so  as  to  have  the 
promise  made  sure  to  them  in  Him,  otherwise  than  by  its  being  freely  left  to  their 
own  free  choice  ?  If  the  grace  is  to  be  free,  it  must  be  not  only  freely  given,  but 
freely  taken.  There  can  be  no  coercion.  There  must  be  cordial  and  congenial 
consent.  No  otnerwise  can  the  promise  be  sure  to  beings  capable  of  choice.  Their 
free,  unforced  yes  must  be  got.  And  if  that  yes  be  got,  all  is  safe.  Hence  the 
necessity  of  faith,  which  is  simply  that  free  aflSrmative  response.  This  may  be 
seen  more  clearly  if  we  consider — (1)  Faith.  The  whole  virtue  of  faith  lies  in  its 
being  your  actual  appropriation  of  the  benefit.  Its  charm  consists  in  dealing  with 
what  is  presented  to  it  as  its  object,  not  through  anything,  even  itself,  coming  in 
between,  but  directly  and  immediately,  without  any  regard  to  itself  at  all.  Now 
the  object  with  which  it  has  to  deal  is  the  promise,  or  rather  the  Son,  to  whom,  in 
the  first  instance,  the  promise  belongs,  and  is  sure.  The  only  use  of  faith  is  that 
it  embraces  Christ.  (2)  With  its  office,  the  nature  of  faith  corresponds.  Our 
entire  moral  nature  is  concerned  in  it.  Every  faculty  and  feeling  is  taken  up  with 
Christ.  There  is  no  unoccnpied  power  of  the  mind  within  at  leisure  to  take 
cognisance  of  the  rest.  (3)  But  how  shall  this  full,  simple,  direct,  straightforward 
faith  spring  up  in  any  soul  ?  Plainly  it  is  not  natural  to  man.  Witness  the  extreme 
difficulty  of  getting  men  to  comprehend  it.  A  Divine  teacher  is  needed  to  purge  the 
inward  sight,  and  open  the  eye  of  the  soul.  And  if,  for  simply  lodging  a  clear  idea 
of  this  Divine  method  of  grace  in  the  intellect,  the  agency  of  the  Divine  Spirit 
Himself  is  needed,  how  much  more  when  we  are  asked  to  approve  of  it,  to  go  along 
with  it  and  become  parties  to  it  ?  Thus  *'  by  grace  are  we  saved  through  faith,  and 
that  not  of  ourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God."     (R.  S.  Candlith,  D.D.) 

Vera.  17, 18.  As  It  Is  written,  I  have  made  thee  a  father  of  many  nations. — God'$ 
promi$e  to  Abraham : — I.  Its  oiundeub  and  impobtance.  1.  A  spiritual  seed.  2. 
A  world-wide  blessing.  H.  The  power  by  which  it  must  be  accouflished.  1. 
Almighty.  2.  Life-giving.  3.  Creative.  IH.  The  means  bt  which  that  powbb 
is  enjoyed — faith.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  God,  who  .  .  .  caUeth  those  things  which 
he  not  as  though  they  were. — The  Divine  conception  of  uncreated  things  : — Those 
philosophers  of  old  who  held  that  man  pre-existed  before  his  birth  into  this  world 
had  just  one  element  of  truth  in  their  doctrine.  Man — body,  soul,  and  spirit — pre- 
existed eternally  in  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  and  as  such  was  an  object  of  Divine 
contemplation  and  compassion.  Grand  architectural  fabrics  pre-exist  long  before 
the  ground  is  cleared,  the  materials  are  collected  or  prepared — yes,  long  before  the 
plans  are  drawn.  They  pre-exist  in  the  mind  of  the  architect  and  in  the  will  of  the 
constructor.  Many  things,  however,  exist  in  the  mind  and  will  of  man  which, 
through  his  inability  or  caprice,  fail  to  have  any  formal  or  substantial  being  what- 
ever. Consequently  it  behoves  us  not  to  speak  too  confidently  upon  the  execution 
and  realisation  of  our  conceptions.  But  with  God,  who  is  of  infinite  power  and  who 
changes  not,  the  things  in  His  mind  and  will  are  as  sure  and  certain  as  if  they  were 
already  ushered  into  life  and  activity  (of.  Heb.  xi.  3).      (C.  Neil,  M.A.)  Who 

against  hope  believed  in  Iiope. — Abrahani's  faith : — I.  Its  basis  the  absolute 
promise  of  God.  II.  Its  measdbe.  1.  Strong  against  hope.  2.  Unwavering. 
8.  Confident.  HI.  Irs  issue.  1.  God's  glory.  2.  His  own  salvation.  (/.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Undeterred  by  difficulties: — Men  differ  among  themselves.  They  differ 
as  plainly  in  their  relation  to  God.  The  differences  appear  in  their  lives.  Blorn 
or  Thorfinn  will  make  a  longer  voyage  than  Eric,  because  they  are  bolder  men. 
But  Blorn  will  push  his  ship  further  south  than  Thorfinn  if  he  has  a  stronger 
wind  and  a  better  chart.  We  need  not  fear  our  work,  nor  turn  aside  from  our  duty. 
The  hungry  multitude  need  not  depart  though  we  have  but  five  loaves,  if  we  are 
bidden  to  give  them  to  eat.  We  might  well  attempt  larger  things.  Few  men  have 
made  proof  of  their  ability.  Life  need  not  be  spent  in  the  valleys.  Our  way  need 
not  be  shut  in  by  hills.  The  promise  is  distinct,  rational,  effective.  Dare  anything 
which  is  duty.  Believe  in  yourself  because  God  believes  in  you,  and  accept  the 
honour  of  high  service.  Leibnitz  said  that  all  difficult  things  are  easy,  and  all  easy 
things  are  difficult.  If  the  hard  thing  drives  us  to  God  it  becomes  easy  in  the  act. 
Farragut  repeated  Lord  Collingwood's  saying,  that  we  are  not  to  be  afraid  of  doing 
too  much.  The  weight  of  the  universe  presses  on  the  shoulders  of  every  man  to 
bold  him  to  his  task.    "  The  only  path  of  escape  known  in  aU  the  world  of  God  ig 


«HAP.  IT.]  ROMANS.  tOS 

performance.     Tou  must  do  your  work  before  you  shall  be  released."    How  all 
things  hold  us  up  to  God,  and  every  thought  of  greatness  puts  us  under  bonds  to 
trust  and  receive  1    Westminster  Abbey  holds  no  nobler  dust  than  his  who  faced  the 
darkness  and  desperation  of  Africa,  and  single-handed  forced  his  way  through  ita 
deadly  gloom,  and  earned  a  place  among  England's  kings.     Is  there  anything  to 
stir  the  ambition,  to  nerve  the  arm,  to  empower  the  life,  like  the  summons  of  our 
Gk>d,  who  throws  the  impossible  at  our  feet  and  bids  us  take  it  up,  and  about  His 
demands  binds  the  cords  of  His  promises?     {A.  McKenzie.)        Who,  against  hope, 
believed  in  hope : — Where  hope  has  a  great  object  in  view,  there  will  always  be 
fear.      If  not  fear,  there  will  always,  however,  be  that  sort  of  timorous  fluctuation 
whioh  distinguishes  hope  from  asRurance.     It  is  thus  in  worldly  affairs.     Wben  a 
great  good  is  expected,  but  not  yet  possessed,  there  will  always  be  an  apprehension 
of  losing  it.     It  is  thus,  too,  with  every  good  man  who  views  the  Christian  dispen- 
sation as  he  ought.     When  he  contemplates  the  scheme  of  man's  redemption  in  all 
its  vastness — the  wonderful  means  employed,  and  the  immensity  of  the  views  it 
opens — he  recoils  at  his  own  insignificance  ;  and  thinks  it  against  hope  to  believe 
that  such  a  creature  as  he  feels  himself  can  ever  be  the  object  of  such  Divine 
beneficence.     On  the  other  hand,  when  he  considers  the  love  of  God  to  man  in  his 
creation,  which  could  have  no  end  but  man's  happiness — when  he  considers  that 
the  very  act  of  his  creation  is  an  assurance  of  God's  future  protection — when  he 
reflects  on  the  numerous  promises  of  the  gospel,  of  the  truth  of  which  he  is  clearly 
convinced  by  abundant  evidence — his  ditfideuce  vanishes,  and  he  cannot  help,  in  the 
language  of  the  text,  against  hope,  believing  in  hope.  [John  Gilpin,  M.A .)    Abraham's 
faith : — I.  Its  ground.  Ttie  promise  of  God.  1.  The  general  promise  (Gen.  xv.  1),  that 
God  would  take  him  into  His  protection  and  abundantly  reward  his  <  bi^dience.    The 
like  promise  is  made  to  all  the  faithful  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  11).    2.  The  particular  promise. 
When  God  had  to'd  Abraham  that  He  would  be  his  shield,  Ac,  he  replied,  "  Lord, 
what  wUt  Thou  give  me,  seeing  1  go  childless  " ;  and  again,  "  Behold,  Thou  hast 
given  me  no  seed  :  and,  lo,  one  bom  in  my  house  is  mine  heir  "  (Gen.  iv,  2,  3).  These 
words  of  Abraham  imply  some  weakness  of  faith,  though  they  also  may  be  a  revival 
of  an  old  promise  (Gen.  xii.  3).   And  they  say  in  effect,.  Lord,  how  can  I  take  comfort 
in  the  promised  reward,  since  I  do  not  seek  the  fulfilling  of  Thy  promise  touching 
my  seed  ?  But  now  mark  the  Lord's  reply  (ver.  4) ;  and  then  God  led  him  forth  (ver. 
6)— ocular  demonstration  leaveth  a  stronger  impression  upon  the  mind — upon  this 
'*  Abraham beheved  in  the  Lord,  and  He  counted  it  to  him  for  righteousness"  (ver. 
6).     He  was  a  believer  before,  but  now  he  commenceth  a  strong  believer :  "  He 
believed  in  hope  against  hope,"  &c.     I.  Its  excellency.     1.  "He  believed  in  hope 
against  hope."     Spiritual  hope  can  take  place  when  natural  hope  faileth.     Most 
men's  faith  is  borne  up  by  outward  probabilities ;  they  can  trust  God  no  further 
than  they  can  see  Him ;  but  true  faith  dependeth  upon  Him  when  His  way  is  in  the 
dark,  as  Paul  could  give  assurance  when  all  hope  was  taken  away  (Aets  xxvii. 
20-22).    I  prove  this — (1)  From  the  genius  and  nature  of  faith.    There  must  be 
some  difiBculty  in  the  thing  to  be  believed  or  else  it  is  not  an  object  of  faith  (chap. 
viii.  24).     (2)  From  the  warrant  of  faith,  uhich  is  the  Word  of  God.    We  must 
believe  God  upon  His  bare  word,  though  we  know  not  what  time  or  way  He  will 
take,  or  by  what  means  the  thing  promised  will  be  accomplished.     In  things  future 
and  invisible  we  believe  against  sense ;   in  things  incredible  we  beUeve  against 
reason  (Heb.  xi.  1).    It  must  not  be,  saith  sense  ;  it  cannot  be,  saitb  natural  reason ; 
it  both  can  and  will  be,  saith  faith.    (3)  From  the  object  of  faith,  God  all-sufficient. 
We  must  gauge  neither  His  goodness  nor  power  by  our  measure.     Not  His  goodness 
(Isa.  Iv.  8,  9 ;  Hos.  xi.  9)  :  nor  His  power  (Zech.  viii.  6).    2.  He  considered  not  the 
difficulties  (ver.  19).     Here  we  learn  that  we  must  not  oppose  natural  impediments 
to  the  power  and  truth  of  God.    Note — (1)  How  we  are  or  not  to  consider  difficulties, 
(a)  In  some  sense  it  is  our  duty  to  consider  them,  that  we  may  not  go  ahout  the 
most  serious  work  hand  over  head.     Christ  bids  us  sit  down  and  count  the  charges 
(Luko  xiv.  28).     The  saints  are  wont  to  put  hard  cases  to  themselves  (Psa.  iii.  6 ; 
xxiii.  4).     {b)  Therefore  the  ends  must  be  observed.    We  must  consider  them  to 
weaken  our  security,  but  not  to  weaken  our  coufidence  in  the  promise.     The  diffi- 
culties of  salvation  must  be  sufficiently  understood,  otherwise  we  think  to  do  the 
work  of  an  age  in  a  breath  (Luke  viii.  24 ;  Josh.  ixiv.  19) ;  for  it  is  not  so  easy 
a  matter  as  you  take  it  to  be.     (c)  Difficulties  must  be  thon.qht  on  to  quicken  faith, 
not  to  weaken  it.     If  they  be  pleaded  against  the  promise  they  weaken  faith  ;  if  they 
be  pleaded  to  drive  us  to  the  promise  they  quicken  faith.     (2)  The  inconveniences  of 
this  sinful  ct^nsidering  the  difficulties  in  all  the  parts  of  faith,    (a)  As  to  assent.    If 


304  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

you  will  not  credit  it  unless  the  thing  be  evident  in  itself,  you  do  not  believe  Christ 
but  your  own  reason ;  and  instead  of  being  thankful  for  the  revelation  you  quarrel  with 
His  truth,  because  it  is  in  some  things  above  your  capacity.  You  should  be  satisfied 
with  the  bare  word  of  God,  and  captivate  your  understandings  to  the  obedience  of  it. 
(h)  As  to  consent  and  acceptance.  There  are  mauy  things  may  be  objected  against 
entering  into  covenant  with  Christ.  First,  our  great  unworthiness.  This  is  one 
reason  why  the  instance  of  Abraham  is  proposed  as  a  pattern  of  faith  to  the 
Gentiles.  As  Abraham  considered  not  his  natural  incapacity  to  have  children,  so 
they  not  their  unworthiness  to  be  adopted  into  God's  covenant.  If  you  be  such  a 
sinner,  the  more  need  of  a  saviour.  You  would  laugh  at  him  that  would  argue 
I  am  too  cold  to  go  to  the  fire,  too  sick  to  send  for  the  physician,  too  poor  to  take 
alms,  too  filthy  to  go  to  the  water  to  be  washed.  Celsus  objected  against  Christianity 
that  it  was  a  sanctuary  for  men  of  a  licentious  hfe.  Origen  answered  him  that  it 
was  not  a  sanctuary  to  shelter  them  only,  but  an  hospital  to  cure  them.  Secondly, 
the  fickleness  of  the  heart.  You  are  afraid  to  bind  yourselves  to  God.  The  truth 
is  this  consent  implieth  a  delivery  over  of  yourselves  to  Christ,  and  you  must 
consider  difficulties  so  as  to  fortify  your  resolution  (Matt.  xvi.  24;  xx.  22).  And  not 
to  consider  is  to  discourage  your  consent,  (c)  For  affiance.  There  seemeth  to  be 
an  impossibility  to  sense  and  reason  frum  first  to  last.  If  the  difficulties  of  salvation 
were  sufficiently  understood,  we  should  see  it  is  the  mere  grace  and  power  of  God 
that  carrieth  it  on  in  despite  of  men  and  devils  (Eph.  i.  19).  As  for  instance,  the 
reconciling  of  a  guilty  soul  to  God  (Eph.  ii.  3) ;  the  changing  of  an  obstinate  heart 
(Jer.  xvii.  9) ;  and  the  giving  us  an  boly  nature  and  life  (Job  xiv.  4) ;  or  to  quicken 
OS  that  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  (Eph.  ii.  1);  to  strengthen  a  feeble  and 
weak  creature  (2  Cor.  iii.  5).  3.  "He  staggered  not  at  the  promise  through 
unbehef."  This  may  refer  to  three  acts  or  parts  of  faith  :  (1)  Assent.  If  we  have 
the  word  and  promise  of  God  we  should  believe  anything  as  surely  as  if  we  had  the 
greatest  evidence  in  the  world.  Thus  some  of  the  disciples  doubted  of  the  truth  o£ 
Christ's  resurrection  (Matt,  xxviii.  17  ;  Luke  xxiv.  21).  This  argueth  a  weak  faith ; 
but  faith  is  strong  as  it  overcomes  our  speculative  doubts,  and  settles  our  souls  in 
the  truth  (Acts  ii.  36).  (2)  Consent.  When  the  consent  is  weak  and  wavering 
faith  is  weak  (Heb.  x.  23).  But  such  a  confirmed  resolution  as  leaveth  no  room  for 
wavering  argueth  a  strong  faith  (Acts  xxi.  13).  (3)  Dependence  and  trust  (James  1. 
6-8).  4.  "  He  was  fully  persuaded  that  what  God  had  promised  He  was  fully  able 
also  to  perform. "  A  strong,  steady,  and  f uU  persuasion  of  the  power  of  God  argueth 
a  great  faith.  (1)  There  is  no  doubt  of  His  will  when  we  have  His  promise ;  but  the 
abiUty  of  the  promiser  is  that  which  is  usually  questioned.  Unbelief  stumbleth  at 
His  can  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  19  ;  Luke  i.  34 ;  2  Elings  vii.  2).  Nay  ;  and  the  children  of 
God  themselves.  Sarah  was  rebuked  when  she  laughed  (Gen.  xviii.  12-14).  (2) 
God's  power  and  all-sufficiency  is  to  the  saiuts  the  great  support  of  faith  in  their 
greatest  extremities.  They  are  relieved  by  fixing  their  eye  on  God's  ahnightiness ; 
as  Abraham  here.  So  Heb.  xi.  19  ;  so  for  perseverance  (Jude  24) ;  and  for  the 
resurrection  (Phil.  iii.  21).  In  matters  conditionally  promised  we  must  magnify 
His  power,  and  refer  the  event  to  His  wUl  (Matt.  viii.  2).  (3)  There  are  two  things 
to  enlarge  our  thoughts  and  apprehensions  about  the  power  of  God  (ver.  17).  We 
have  to  do  with  a  God  who  can  say  to  the  dead,  Live.  He  that  can  quicken  the 
dead  can  quicken  those  that  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  III.  Its  fbuit  and 
EFFECT — an  exact  and  constant  obedience.  In  Isa.  xli.  2  the  righteous  man  ia 
supposed  to  be  Abraham,  often  designed  by  that  character ;  and  he  was  called  to 
his  foot,  to  go  to  and  fro  at  God's  command,  as  the  centurion  said  (Matt.  viii.  9). 
There  are  two  great  instances  of  Abraham's  obedience:  1.  His  seK-denial  in  leaving 
his  country  (Heb.  xi.  8).  Such  a  total  resignation  there  must  be  of  ourselves  to  the 
will  of  God.  2.  Another  trial  was  Heb.  xi.  17,  18.  Because  God  would  make 
Abraham  an  example  of  faith  to  all  future  generations,  therefore  He  puts  him  to  this 
trial,  to  see  whether  he  loved  his  Isaac  more  than  Ged.  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Hope 
built  on  faith : — I.  Our   salvation   appears   impossible   to  human  expectation, 

AND   CAN    ONLY   BE   HOPED   FOR   ON    THE    GROUND    OF   FAITH.        After     the     SavioUr    h«d 

laid  before  His  disciples  that  cherished  riches  were  a  hindrance  to  religion,  they 
exclaimed,  "  Who  then  can  be  saved  ?  "  There  are  many  other  aspects  of  godliness 
which  suggest  the  same  doubt,  and  to  which  the  same  gracious  answer  applies, 
"  The  things  which  are  impossible  with  men  are  possible  with  God."  The  law  of 
self-preservation  in  human  nature  would  suggest  the  desirability  of  being  saved,  but 
the  same  law  has  no  remedy  to  offer.  Man  is  naturally  hopeful,  but  within  his  owa 
breast  there  are  no  grounds  of  salvation.    God  is  just ;  man  18  guilty.    To  remoT* 


«BA».  IV.]  ROMANS.  305 

■in  from  the  book  of  remembrance  above  and  the  book  of  conscience  below,  suggests 
insaperable  difficulties  to  man's  reason.  The  good  hope  through  grace  comes  of 
faith.  We  have  the  Word  of  God  for  our  foundation  ;  on  that  we  build  our  faith, 
and  of  faith  springs  our  hope.      II.  The   extension   of  thb   kimodou  or  thb 

MeSBUH,    AMD    THE    SALVATION    OF   THE    WOBLD,  IS   AM    EXPECTATION    WHICH    BESTS,  NOT 

OK  HuuAM  PBOBABiLiTiEs,  BUT  ON  FAITH  IM  God's  pbomise.  There  is  uo  prayer 
more  frequent  than — "  Thy  kingdom  come."  The  whole  heart  of  the  Cliurch 
is  bound  up  in  an  intense  desire  to  see  mankind  under  its  roof.  But  make  a  map 
of  the  world,  and  paint  Christian  countries  white,  and  all  the  others  black.  You 
will  see  that  the  labours  of  eighteen  centuries  have  only  touched  the  fringe  of  the 
garment.  The  human  aspect  of  the  matter  is  discouraging,  and  we  are  ready  to 
ask,  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed?  " 
The  day  of  universal  judgment  is  delayed  to  allow  time  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel. 
We  believe  that  the  earth  will  be  covered  with  a  knowledge  of  the  Lord ;  that  the 
Saviour  will  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied ;  then  the  heathen  will 
be  His  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  His  possession.  This  is 
the  hope  of  faith.     (Weekly  Baptist.) 

Vers.  19-22.  And  being  not  weak  In  faltb,  ...  be  staggered  not  at  the  promise 
of  God  through  unbelief. — The  tinfulness  oj  staggering : — I.  What  is  it  to  stagoeb 
AT  THE  promise  ?  The  word  "  staggered  "  is  properly  to  make  use  of  our  own  judg- 
ment and  reason,  in  discerning  of  things,  of  what  sort  they  be  (1  Cor.  xi.  29).  In 
the  sense  wherein  it  is  here  used  (as  also  Matt.  xxi.  21).  It  holds  out  a  self-con- 
sultation and  dispute,  concerning  those  contrary  things  that  are  proposed  to  us  (so 
also  Acts  X.  20).  To  stagger  then  at  the  promise  is  to  take  into  consideration  the 
promise,  and  all  the  difficulties  that  lie  in  the  way  of  its  accomplishment,  and  so  to 
dispute  it,  as  not  fully  to  cast  it  oS,  nor  fully  to  close  with  it.  E.g.,  the  soul  con- 
siders the  promise  of  free  grace  in  the  blood  of  Jesus,  weighs  those  considerations 
which  might  lead  the  heart  to  rest  firmly  upon  it ;  but  considers  his  own  unworthi- 
ness,  &o.,  which,  as  he  supposes,  staves  off  the  efficacy  of  the  promise.  If  he  add 
a  grain  of  faith,  the  scale  turns  on  the  side  of  the  promise ;  the  like  quantity  of 
anbelief  makes  it  turn  upon  him ;  and  what  to  do  he  knows  not :  let  go  the  promise 
he  cannot,  take  fast  hold  he  dares  not,  but  wavers  to  and  fro.  Thus  the  soul  comes 
to  be  like  Paul  (Phil.  i.  23),  or  as  David  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  14).  He  sees,  in  a  steadfast 
closing  with  the  promise,  presumption  ;  on  the  other  hand,  destruction ;  arguments 
arise  on  both  sides,  he  knows  not  how  to  determine  them,  and  so  hanging  in 
suspense,  he  staggers.  Like  a  man  meeting  with  two  paths,  that  promise  both 
fairly,  and  knows  not  which  is  his  proper  way,  guesses  and  guesses,  and  at  length  sits 
down  until  some  one  comes  that  can  give  duection.  The  soul  very  frequently  in 
this  hesitation  refuses  to  go  one  step  forward  till  God  come  mightily  and  lead  out 
the  spirit  to  the  promise,  or  the  devil  turn  it  aside  to  unbelief.  It  is  as  a  light  in 
the  air :  the  weight  that  it  hath  carries  it  downwards ;  and  the  air,  with  some 
breath  of  wind,  bears  it  up  again.  Sometimes  it  seems  as  though  it  would  fall  by 
its  own  weight ;  and  sometimes,  again,  as  though  it  would  mount  quite  out  of  sight ; 
but  poised  between  both  it  tosseth  up  and  down,  without  any  great  gaining  either 
way.  The  promise  draws  the  soul  upward,  and  the  weight  of  its  unbelief  sinks  it 
downward ;  but  neither  prevails. .  Like  the  two  disciples  going  to  Emmaus  (Luke 
xxiv.  14),  ••  They  talked  together  of  the  things  that  had  happened,"  and  (ver.  22)  they 
gave  up.  Yet  they  cannot  quite  give  overall  trusting  in  Christ  (vers.  23-25) :  here- 
upon they  staggered  (ver.  17) ;  much  appears  for  them,  something  against  them,  they 
know  not  what  to  do.  II.  Notwithstanding  ant  pketences  whatever  staogeeimo 
IS  FROM  unbelief.  The  two  disciples  just  mentioned  thought  they  had  good  cause 
of  all  their  doubtings  (Luke  xxiv.  20).  But  our  Saviour  tells  them  that  they  "  are 
foolish,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe."  Peter  venturing  upon  the  waves  at  the  com- 
mand of  Christ  (Matt,  xiv.),  seeing  the  "  wind  to  grow  boisterous,"  also  hath  a  storm 
within,  and  cries  out,  Oh,  save  me  !  The  real  cause  of  his  fear  was  merely  unbelief 
(ver.  31).  And  upon  several  occasions  doth  our  Saviour  lay  all  the  staggering  of 
His  followers  as  to  any  promised  mercy  upon  this  score  (Matt.  vi.  30,  viii.  26  ;  see 
also  Isa.  vii.  7,  9 ;  Heb.  iv.  2).  But  these  things  will  be  more  clear  if  we  consider 
that  when  a  man  doubts  his  reasonings  must  have  their  rise,  either  from  something 
within  himself,  or  from  something  in  the  things  concerning  which  he  stasgereth. 
He  that  doubteth  whether  his  friend  be  alive  or  not,  his  staggering  arisethfrom  the 
uncertainty  of  the  thing  itseK ;  when  that  is  made  ont,  he  is  resolved,  as  it  was  with 
Jacob  in  the  case  of  Joseph.  But  he  that  doubteth  whether  the  needle  in  the  com- 
TOL.  I.  20 


306  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 


pasg  being  touched  with  the  loadstone  will  turn  northward,  all  the  uncertainty  is  in 
his  own  mind.    If  when  men  stagger  at  the  promises  we  demonstrate  that  there  is 
nothing  in  the  promise  that  should  occasion  any  such  staggering,  we  lay  the  blame 
on  unbelief.    Let  us  now  see  whether  anything  be  wanting  to  the  promises.     1.  Is 
there  truth  in  these  promises  ?     If  there  be  the  least  occasion  to  suspect  their  truth, 
or  the  veracity  of  the  Promiser,  then  our  staggering  may  arise  from  thence,  and  not 
from  our  own  unbelief.    But  now  the  Author  of  the  promises  is  the  God  of  truth, 
who  has  used  all  possible  means  to  cause  us  to  apprehend  the  truth  of  His  promises. 
(1)  By  often  affirming  the  same  thing.     There  is  not  anything  that  He  hath  pro- 
mised us  but  He  hath  done  it  again  and  again ;  e.g.,  as  if  He  would  say,  "  I  will 
be  merciful  to  your  pins,"  I  pray  believe  Me,  for  "  I  will  pardon  your  iniquities," 
yea,  it  shall  be  so,  "  I  will  blot  out  your  transgressions  as  a  cloud."   (2)  By  coufirm- 
ing'the  truth  with  an  oath  (Heb.  vi.  13-18).     (3)  By  entering  into  covenant  to 
accomplish  what  He  has  spoken.     (4)  By  giving  us  a  hostage  to  secure  us  of  Hia 
truth,  one  exceedingly  dear  to  Him,  of  whose  honour  He  is  as  careful  as  of  His  own. 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  pledge  of  His  fidelity  in  His  promises  (Isa.  vii.  14).     "  In  Him 
are  all  the  promises  of  God  yea  and  amen."    Thus  also  to  His  saints  He  gives  the 
further  hostage  of  His  Spirit,  and  the  firstfruits  of  glory.     2.  But  though  there  he 
truth  in  the  promise,  yet  there  may  want  ability  in  the  promiser.    A  physician 
may  promise  a  sick  man  recovery  who,  though  he  could  rely  upon  the  physician's 
truth,  yet  doubts  his  ability,  knowing  that  to  cure  is  not  absolutely  in  his  power  ; 
but  when  He  promises  who  is  able  to  perform,  then  all  doubting  is  removed.     See 
then  whether  it  be  so  in  respect  of  God's  promises  (Gen.  xvii.  1).  When  difficulties, 
temptations,  and  troubles  arise,  remember  God  is  not  only  true  and  faithful,  but 
Almighty  (ver.  21 ;  chap.  xi.  28  ;  Eph.  iii.  20).    "When  men  come  to  close  with  the 
promise,  to  make  a  life  upon  it,  they  are  very  ready  to  inquire  whether  it  be  possible 
that  the  word  should  be  made  good  to  them.     He  that  sees  a  little  boat  swimming 
at  sea  looks  upon  it  without  any  solicitousness  ;  but  let  this  man  commit  his  own 
life  to  sea  in  it,  what  inquiries  will  he  make  ?     So  whilst  we  consider  the  promises 
at  large,  as  they  lie  in  the  Word,  they  are  all  true  ;  but  when  we  go  to  venture  our 
souls  upon  a  promise,  in  an  ocean  of  temptations,  then  every  blast  we  think  will 
overturn  it.     Now  here  we  are  apt  to  deceive  ourselves.    We  inquire  whether  it  can 
be  so  to  OS,  as  the  Word  holds  out,  when  the  question  is  not  about  the  nature  of  the 
thing,  but  about  the  power  of  God.    Place  the  doubt  aright,  and  it  is  this :  Is  God 
able  to  accomplish  what  He  hath  spoken  ?     Can  He  pardon  my  sins  ?    Now,  that 
there  may  be  no  occasion  of  staggering  upon  this  point,  you  see  God  reveals  Himself 
as  an  all-sufficient  God,  as  one  that  is  able  to  go  through  with  all  His  engagements. 
But  you  will  say,  Though  God  be  thus  able,  yet  may  there  not  be  defects  in  the 
means  whereby  He  worketh  ?    As  a  man  may  have  a  strong  arm  able  to  strike  his 
enemies  to  the  ground,  but  yet  if  he  strike  with  a  feather,  or  a  straw,  it  will  not  be 
done.     But — (1)  God's  instruments  do  not  act  according  to  their  own  virtue,  but 
according  to  the  influence  by  Him  to  them  communicated.     (2)  It  is  expressly 
affirmed  of  the  great  mediums  of  the  promise,  that  they  also  are  able.     There  is — 
(a)  The  procuring  means,  Jesus  Christ  (Heb.  v.  27 ;  ii.  18).     (6)  The  means  of 
manifestation,  the  Word  of  God  (Acts.  xx.  32).     (c)  The  means  of  operation,  the 
Spirit  of  grace  (1  Cor.  xii.  11).    8.  But  there  may  be  want  of  sincerity  in  promises, 
which,  whilst  we  do  but  suspect,  we  cannot  choose,  but  stagger  at  them.    But  there 
can  be  no  room  for  staggering  here ;  for  nothing  can  be  plainer  or  more  certain  than 
that  the  promises  of  God  signify  His  purpose,  that  the  believer  of  them  shall  be  the 
enjoyer  of  them.     So  that  upon  the  making  out  of  any  promise,  you  may  safely 
conclude  that  upon  believing  the  mercy  of  this  promise  is  mine.     It  is  true,  if  a 
man  stand  staggering,  whether  he  have  any  share  in  the  promise,  and  close  not  with 
it  by  faith,  he  may  come  short  of  it ;  and  yet  without  the  least  impeachment  of  the 
sincerity  of  the  Promiser ;  for  God  hath  not  signified  that  men  shall  enjoy  them 
whether  they  believe  or  not.    If  proclamation  be  made  granting  pardon  to  all  such 
rebels  as  shall  come  in  by  such  a  season,  do  men  use  to  stand  questioning  whether 
the  State  bear  them  any  goodwill  or  not  ?    The  gospel  proclamation  is  of  pardon 
to  all  comers  in ;  it  is  for  thee  therefore  to  roll  thyself  on  this,  there  is  an  absolute 
sincerity  in  the  engagement  which  thou  mayest  freely  rest  upon.    4.  But  though  all 
be  present,  truth,  power,  sincerity ;  yet  if  he  that  makes  the  promise  should  forget, 
this  were  a  ground  of  staggering.     Pharaoh's  butler  probably  spake  the  truth 
according  to  his  present  intention,  and  afterwards  had  doubtless  power  to  have  pro- 
cured the  liberty  of  a  prisoner ;  but "  he  did  not  remember  Jo-eph."   This  forgetting 
made  all  other  things  useless.     But  neither  hath  this  the  least  colour  of  Divin« 


CHAP.  IV.]  ROMANS.  807 

promises  (Isa.  ilix.  14).  The  canses  of  forgetfulness  are — (1)  Want  of  love.  But 
infinite  love  will  have  infinite  thoughtfulness  and  remembrance.  (2)  Multiplicity 
of  business.  But  although  God  rules  the  world,  He  will  not  forget  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  9). 
5.  But  where  all  other  things  may  concur,  yet  if  the  promiser  may  alter  his  resolu- 
tion, a  man  may  justly  doubt  the  accomplishment  of  the  promise.  Wherefore  the 
Lord  carefuUy  rejects  all  sinful  surmises  concerning  the  least  change  or  alteration 
in  Him,  or  any  of  His  engagements  (James  i.  18 ;  Mai.  iii.  6).  In  conclusion,  then, 
Buch  staggering  must  dishonour  God,  for — (1)  It  robs  Him  of  the  glory  of  His  truth 
{1  John  V.  10).  2.  It  robs  Him  of  the  glory  of  His  fidelity  to  His  promises  (1  John 
i.  9).  3.  It  robs  Him  of  the  glory  of  His  grace.  In  a  word,  if  a  man  should  choose 
to  set  himself  in  a  universal  opposition  unto  God,  he  can  think  of  no  more  com- 
pendious way  than  this.  This  then  is  the  fruit,  this  the  advantage  of  our  staggering ; 
we  rob  God  of  glory,  and  our  own  souls  of  mercy.  (J.  Owen,  D.D.)  Unstaggering 
faith : — It  was  God's  purpose  that  Abraham  should  be  a  surpassingly  excellent 
example  of  the  power  of  faith.  It  was  therefore  necessary  that  his  faith  should  be 
exercised  in  a  special  manner.  To  this  end  God  gave  him  a  promise  that  in  his  seed 
should  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed,  and  yet  for  many  a  year  he  remained 
without  an  heir.  Doubtless  he  weighed  the  natural  impossibilities,  but  he  main- 
tained a  holy  confidence,  and  left  the  matter  in  the  hands  of  the  Sovereign  Ruler. 
His  faith  triumphed  in  all  its  conflicts.  Had  it  not  been  that  Sarah  and  Abraham 
were  both  at  such  an  advanced  age  there  would  have  been  no  credit  to  them  in 
believing  the  promise  of  God,  but  the  more  difiBcult  its  fulfilment,  the  more  wonderful 
was  Abrabam's  faith.  By  such  unquestioning  confidence  Abraliam  brought  glory 
to  God.  It  glorifies  God  greatly  for  His  servants  to  trust  Him  ;  they  then  become 
witnesses  to  His  faithfulness,  just  as  His  works  in  creation  are  witnesses  to  His 
power  and  wisdom.  Let  us  view  the  text  in  regard  to — 1.  The  individcal  workek. 
1.  You  are  conscious  of  your  spiritual  weakness.  You  say,  "If  God  intends  to  bless 
souls,  I  cannot  see  how  they  can  be  blessed  through  me.  I  feel  myself  to  be  the 
most  unworthy  instrument  in  the  world."  (1)  Such  a  lowly  sense  of  our  own  unfit- 
ness is  common  at  the  beginning  of  Christian  labour,  and  arises  from  the  novel 
difficulties  with  which  we  are  surrounded.  We  have  not  gone  this  way  heretofore, 
and  being  quite  new  to  the  work,  Satan  whispers,  •'  You  are  a  poor  creature  to 
pretend  to  serve  God  ;  leave  this  service  to  better  men."  But  take  comfort ;  this  ia 
part  of  your  preparation  ;  you  must  be  made  to  feel  early  in  the  work  that  all  the 
glory  must  be  of  God.  (2)  This  sense  of  weakness  grows  on  the  Christian  worker. 
To  continue  in  harness  year  after  year  is  not  without  its  wear  and  tear  ;  our  spirit 
truly  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak,  and  faintness  in  pursuing  reveals  to  us  that 
our  own  strength  is  perfect  weakness.  The  more  earnest  your  labours  for  the  Lord, 
the  more  clear  will  be  your  sense  of  your  own  nothingness.  (3)  There  are  times 
when  a  want  of  success  will  help  to  make  us  feel  most  keenly  how  barren  and 
unfruitful  we  are  until  the  Lord  endows  us  with  His  Spirit.  Those  wbom  we 
thought  to  be  converted  turn  out  to  be  merely  the  subjects  of  transient  excitement, 
those  who  stood  long,  turn  aside,  and  then  we  cry  out,  "  Woe  is  me !  How  shall  I 
speak  any  more  in  the  name  of  the  Lord?  "  Like  Moses,  we  would  have  the  Lord 
send  by  whomsoever  He  would  send,  but  not  by  us  ;  or  like  EUas,  we  hide  ourselves 
for  fear,  and  say  "  Let  me  die,  I  am  no  better  than  my  fathers."  I  suppose  there 
is  no  worker  who  is  quite  free  from  times  of  deep  depression,  times  when  his  fears 
make  him  say,  "  Surely  I  ran  without  being  called."  At  such  moments  it  only 
needs  another  push  from  Satan  to  make  us  like  Jonah  to  go  down  to  Joppa,  that  we 
may  no  longer  bear  the  burden  of  the  Lord.  I  am  not  sorry  if  you  are  passing 
through  this  fiery  ordeal,  for  it  is  in  your  weakness  God  will  show  His  own 
strength,  and  when  there  is  an  end  of  you  there  will  be  a  beginning  of  Him.  2.  It 
may  be  also  that  our  sphere  of  Christian  effort  is  remarkably  unpromising.  In 
that  Sunday-school  class  the  boys  are  obstinate,  the  girls  frivolous.  You  had  not 
reckoned  upon  this.  The  more  you  try  to  influence  their  hearts  the  less  you 
succeed.  It  is  possible  you  are  called  to  labour  where  the  prejudices,  temptations, 
and  habits  and  ways  of  thought  are  all  dead  against  the  chance  of  success.  But 
Christian  work  never  succeeds  until  the  worker  rates  the  difiiculties  at  their  proper 
rate.  The  fact  is,  to  save  a  soul  is  the  work  of  Deity ;  and  unless  we  have  made  up 
our  minds  to  that,  we  had  better  retire,  for  we  are  not  ready  for  labour.  3.  Yet  the 
godly  worker  has  that  which  sustains  him,  for  he  has  a  promise  from  God.  Abraham 
had  received  a  promise,  and  he  knew  the  difficulties  and  weighed  them  ;  but  having 
done  so,  he  put  them  away  as  not  worth  considering.  God  had  said  it,  and  that 
was  enough.     The  promise  of  God  was  as  good  as  its  fulfilment ;  just  as  in  trade 


808  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*   it. 

some  men's  bills  are  as  good  as  cash.  Now  if  we  are  to  be  successful  we  must 
get  hold  of  a  promise  too.  Tou  say,  "  If  I  could  have  a  special  revelation,  just  as 
Abraham  had,  I  would  doubt  no  more."  Now  God  gives  His  promises  in  many 
ways.  Sometimes  He  gives  them  to  individuals,  at  other  times  to  classes  of 
character.  Now  God  has  been  pleased  to  give  the  revelation,  in  your  case,  to 
character.  "  He  that  goeth  forth  and  weepeth,  bearing  precious  seed,  shall  doubt- 
less come  again  with  rejoicing,  bringing  his  sheaves  with  him."  Now  if  you  haTe 
gone  forth,  wept,  and  carried  forth  precious  seed,  the  Lord  declares  that  you  shall 
doubtless  come  again  rejoicing.  ••  My  word  shall  not  return  unto  Me  void,  but  it 
shall  accomplish  that  which  I  please,  it  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  sent 
it."  Have  you  delivered  God's  word?  if  so,  then  God  declares  it  shall  not  return 
unto  Him  void';  and  these  promises  are  quite  as  good  as  though  they  had  been 
spoken  to  you  by  the  voice  of  an  angel.  A  promise  however  given  is  equally 
binding  upon  a  man  of  honour,  and  a  promise  of  God,  no  matter  how  delivered, 
is  sure  of  fulfilment ;  all  you  have  to  do  is  to  lay  hold  upon  it.  II.  The  Church. 
1.  We  have  set  our  hearts  upon  a  revival.  But  I  fear  that  our  temptation  is  to 
suppose  there  is  some  power  in  the  ministry,  or  in  our  organisation,  or  our  zeal. 
Let  us  divest  ourselves  of  all  that.  As  to  causing  a  genuine  revival  by  our  own 
efforts,  we  might  as  well  talk  of  whirling  the  stars  from  their  spheres.  If  God  help 
us  we  can  pray,  but  without  His  aid  our  prayer  will  be  mockery.  If  God  help  us 
we  can  preach,  but  apart  from  Him  our  preaching  is  but  a  weary  tale  told  without 
power.  2.  There  is  not  only  difBculty  in  ourselves,  but  in  the  work.  We  want  to 
see  all  these  people  converted.  But  what  can  we  do  ?  The  preacher  can  do  nothing, 
for  he  has  done  his  best  and  has  failed,  and  all  that  any  can  suggest  will  fail  also. 
The  work  is  impossible  with  us,  but  do  we  therefore  give  up  the  attempt  ?  No,  for 
is  it  not  written,  "  I  said  not  unto  the  seed  of  Jacob,  Seek  ye  My  face  in  vain  "  ? 
Christ  must  see  of  His  soul's  travail,  must  see  of  it  in  this  place  too.  We  have  God'a 
promise  for  it ;  we  cannot  do  it,  but  He  can.  III.  Every  pleading  soul.  If  your 
heart  has  been  set  upon  any  special  object  in  prayer,  if  you  have  an  express  pro- 
mise for  it,  you  must  not  be  staggered  if  the  object  of  your  desire  be  farther  off  now 
than  when  you  first  began  to  pray.  Wait  at  the  mercy-seat  in  the  full  persuasion 
that  although  God  may  take  His  time,  and  that  time  may  not  be  your  time,  yet  He 
must  and  will  redeem  His  promise  when  the  fulness  of  time  has  come.  If  you  have 
prayed  for  the  salvation  of  your  child,  or  husband,  or  friend,  and  that  person  has 
grown  worse  instead  of  better,  still  God  must  be  held  to  His  word ;  and  if  you  have 
the  faith  to  challenge  His  faithfulness  and  power,  assuredly  He  never  did  and  never 
will  let  your  prayers  fall  fruitless  to  the  ground.  Bemember  that  to  trust  God  in 
the  light  is  nothing,  but  to  trust  Him  in  the  dark — that  is  faith.  IV.  The  beeeeb. 
Tou  imagined  at  one  time  that  you  could  become  a  Christian  at  your  own  will  at 
any  moment ;  and  now  how  to  perform  that  which  you  would  you  find  not.  Ton 
desire  to  break  the  chains  of  sin,  but  they  are  far  easier  to  bind  than  to  loose.  Yon 
want  to  come  to  Jesus  with  a  broken  heart,  but  your  heart  refuses  to  break.  You 
long  to  trust  Jesus,  but  your  unbehef  is  so  mighty  that  you  cannot  see  His  Cross. 
I  am  glad  to  find  you  in  this  poverty-stricken  state,  for  I  believe  that  in  your  case 
you  must  know  your  own  powerlessness.  Every  sinner  must  learn  that  he  is  by 
nature  dead  in  sins,  and  that  the  work  of  salvation  is  high  above  out  of  his  reach. 
Self-despair  throws  a  man  upon  his  God ;  he  feels  that  he  can  do  nothing,  and  he 
turns  to  one  who  can  do  aU  things.  Now  the  next  thing  is  to  find  a  promise. 
"Whosoever  calleth  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved."  Have  you  called 
upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  ?  Have  you  cried  to  Him,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner  "  ?  If  you  so  call  you  must  be  saved.  "Whosoever  cometh  to  Me  I  will  in 
no  wise  cast  out."  Do  you  come  ?  If  so,  you  cannot  be  cast  out.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Religious  faith  rational : — That  its  object  is  marvellous  is  quite  true ;  and  it  is  also 
true  that  no  mind  will  form  itself  to  a  habit  of  faith  without  the  influences  of 
Divine  grace.  But  to  say  that  such  a  faith  as  that  of  Abraham,  which  led  him  to 
believe  God's  word  when  opposed  to  his  own  experience,  is  a  strange  principle  and 
irrational,  is  absurd.  I.  For  we  act  on  trust  evert  hour  or  our  mvbs.  1. 
We  trust  to  our  memory,  and  our  confidence  in  it  is  so  strong  that  no  man  could 
persuade  us  to  reject  its  testimony.  2.  We  trust  our  reasoning  powers.  Who  of 
us  would  doubt,  on  seeing  strong  shadows  on  the  ground,  that  the  sun  was  shining, 
though  our  face  happened  to  be  turned  the  other  way?  3.  And  we  trust  our 
memory  and  our  reasoning  powers  in  this  way,  though  they  often  deceive  ns ; 
because  on  the  whole  they  are  faithful  witnesses,  and  because  in  all  practical 
matters  we  are  obliged  to  decide  by  not  what  may  be  possibly,  bat  what  is  likelj 


OBAF.  IT.]  ROMANS.  S09 

to  be.  There  is  a  chance,  e.g.,  that  our  food  to-day  may  be  poisonous,  but  it  looks 
and  tastes  the  same,  and  we  have  good  friends  round  us ;  so  we  do  not  abstain 
from  it,  for  all  this  chance.  4.  But  it  may  be  said  that  such  belief  is  not  what 
is  meant  by  faith — that  to  trust  our  senses  and  reason  is  to  trust  ourselves — and 
though  these  do  sometimes  mislead  us,  yet  we  can  use  them  to  correct  each  other ; 
but  it  is  a  very  different  thing  to  trust  another  person,  which  is  faith  in  the 
Scripture  sense  of  the  word.  But  reliance  on  the  word  of  another  is  no  irrational 
or  strange  principle  of  conduct  in  the  concerns  of  this  life.  For  what  do  we  know 
without  trusting  others  ?  (1)  Are  there  not  towns  within  fifty  or  sixty  miles  of  ua 
which  we  have  never  seen,  but  in  which  we  fully  believe  ?  What  convinces  us  ? 
The  report  of  others — this  faith  in  testimony  which,  when  religion  is  concerned, 
is  called  irrational.  (2)  Consider  how  we  are  obliged  to  confide  in  persons  we  never 
saw,  or  know  but  slightly ;  nay,  in  their  handwritings,  which,  for  what  we  know,  may 
be  forged.  (3)  It  is  certain  that  we  all  must  sooner  or  later  die,  and  men  arrange 
their  affairs  accordingly.  Yet  what  proof  have  we  of  this  ?  because  other  men 
die  ?  how  does  he  know  that  ?  has  he  seen  them  die  ?  he  can  know  nothing  of 
what  took  place  before  he  was  born,  nor  of  what  happens  in  other  countries.  How 
little,  indeed,  he  knows  about  it  at  all,  except  that  it  is  a  received  fact.  (4)  We 
constantly  believe  things  against  our  own  judgment ;  i.e.,  when  we  think  our 
informant  likely  to  know  more  about  the  matter  under  consideration  than  our- 
selves, which  is  the  precise  case  in  the  question  of  religious  faith.  And  thus  from 
reliance  on  others  we  acquire  knowledge  of  all  kinds,  and  proceed  to  reason,  judge, 
decide,  act,  form  plans  for  the  future.  But  it  is  needless  to  proceed  ;  the  world 
could  not  go  on  without  trust.  The  most  distressing  event  that  can  happen  to  a 
state  is  the  spreading  of  a  want  of  confidence  between  man  and  man.  Distrust, 
want  of  faith,  breaks  the  very  bonds  of  human  society.  6.  Now,  shall  we  account 
it  only  rational  for  a  man  to  yield  to  another's  judgment  as  better  than  his  own, 
and  yet  think  it  against  reason  when  one,  like  Abraham,  sets  the  promise  of  God 
above  his  own  short-sighted  expectation  ?  II.  The  main  reason  for  disbelief. 
It  may  be  objected,  "  If  God  had  spoken  to  us  as  He  did  to  Abraham,  it  were 
madness  to  disbelieve  ;  but  it  is  not  His  voice  we  hear,  but  man's  speaking  in  His 
name.  How  are  we  to  know  whether  they  speak  truth  or  not?"  1.  Whatever 
such  may  say  about  their  willingness  to  believe,  in  a  great  many  cases  they  murmur 
at  being  required  to  believe,  dislike  being  bound  to  act  without  seeing,  and  prefer 
to  trust  themselves  to  trusting  God,  even  though  it  could  be  plainly  proved  to  them 
that  God  was  speaking  to  them.  Their  conduct  shows  this.  Why  otherwise  do 
they  so  frequently  scoff  at  religious  men,  as  if  timid  and  narrow-minded,  merely 
because  they  fear  to  sin  ?  Clearly,  it  is  their  very  faith  itself  they  ridicule.  To 
trust  another  implicitly  is  to  acknowledge  one's  self  to  be  his  inferior ;  and  this 
man's  proud  nature  cannot  bear  to  do.  It  is  therefore  very  much  to  our  purpose 
to  accustom  our  minds  to  the  fact  that  almost  everything  we  do  is  grounded  on 
mere  trust  in  others,  and  that  visible  dependence  reminds  us  forcibly  of  our  truer 
and  fuller  dependence  upon  God.  2.  Unbelievers  condemn  themselves  out  of  their 
own  mouth.  Our  obedience  to  God  is  not  founded  on  our  belief  in  the  word 
of  such  persons  as  tell  us  Scripture  came  from  God.  We  obey  God  primarily 
because  we  feel  His  presence  in  our  consciences  bidding  as  obey  Him.  Now, 
if  they  trust  their  senses  and  their  reason,  why  do  they  not  trust  their  conscience 
too  ?  Their  conscience  is  as  much  a  part  of  themselves  as  their  reason  is  ;  and 
it  is  placed  within  them  m  order  to  balance  the  influence  of  sight  and  reason  ; 
and  yet  they  will  not  attend  to  it ;  for  they  love  to  be  their  own  masters,  and 
therefore  they  will  not  attend  to  that  secret  whisper  of  their  hearts,  which  tells 
them  they  are  not  their  own  masters,  and  that  sin  is  hateful  and  ruinous.  Nothing 
shows  this  more  plainly  than  their  conduct.  Supposing  a  man  says  to  them,  "  You 
know  in  your  heart  that  you  should  not  do  so  " ;  they  get  angry ;  or  attempt  to 
turn  what  is  said  into  ridicule ;  anything  will  they  do,  except  answer  by  reasoning. 
Their  boasted  argumentation  flies  like  a  coward  before  the  stirring  of  conscience ; 
and  their  passions  are  the  only  champions  left  for  their  defence.  They  in  effect  say, 
**  We  do  so,  because  we  like  it  " ;  perhaps  they  even  avow  this  in  eo  many  words. 
And  are  such  the  persons  whom  any  Christian  can  trust  ?  Surely  faith  in  them 
would  be  of  all  conceivable  confidences  the  most  irrational.  For  ourselves,  let  us 
but  obey  God's  voice  in  our  hearts,  and  we  shall  have  no  doubts  practically 
formidable  about  the  truth  of  Scripture.  Our  doubts  wiU  be  found  to  arise  after 
disobedience.  And  if  we  but  obey  God  in  time  faith  will  become  hke  sight;  we 
•hall  have  no  more  difficulty  in  finding  what  will  please  God  than  in  moving  our 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it, 

limbs,  or  in   nnderstanding  the  conversation  of  onr  familiar  friends.     (J.  H. 

Newman,  D.D.)        But  was  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God. — Strong  faith  :— 

I.  What  it  is.     1.  Abraham  grew  strong  in  faith ;  faith  grows  by  exercise.    2. 

He  was  made  strong  by  faith  ;  faith  is  a  bracing  grace.   The  world's  heroes  are  strong 

by  faith  in  themselves,  God's  by  faith  in  Him  (Judges  vi.  14 ;  Heb.  xi. ;  David, 

Daniel,  etc.).     Weak  faith  is  not  rejected,  but  strong  faith  is  commended.     Strong 

faith  triumphs  over  doubts  and  fears  (Matt.  xiv.  30,  31).     II,  What  it  does.     It 

glorifies  God  as  unbelief  dishonours  Him.     It  gives  glory  to  all  His  attributes, 

especially  His  faithfulness,  benevolence,  almightiness,  for  it  builds  on  them  alone. 

Honouring  God  is  therefore  honoured  by  Him.    Not  to  believe  Him  is  to  offer  Him 

the  greatest  insult  (1  John  v.  10).*  God's  honour  and  man's  interest,  both  combined. 

Faith  secures  both.    Abraham  giving  glory  to  God  waxed  strong  in  faith.    As 

faith  glorifies  God  it  becomes  stronger  and  stronger,  and  is  a  worthy  medium  of 

justification  as  giving  God  all  the  glory.     {T.  Rohinson,  D.D.)        Strong  faith : — 

I.  Strong  faith  is  supported  by  abundant  reasons.     1.    All  the  reasons  which 

justify  our  believing  in  God  at  all  justify  our  believing  in  Him  most  firmly.   It  can 

never  be  right  to  believe  unless  the  statements  are  true,  and  if  true  they  deserve 

undivided  faith.     If  anything  be  strong  enough  for  you  to  trust  your  eternal 

destiny  to  it,  your  trust  ought  to  be  immovable  as  a  granite  rock.    If  it  be  right  to 

enter  into  faith's  stream  at  all,  every  possible  argument  proves  that  the  deeper  yon 

go  the  better.     2.  Eeasons  for  strong  faith  may  be  found  in  the  character  of  God. 

Our  reliance  upon  man  must  be  cautiously  given  ;   but — (1)  "  The  Lord  is  not 

a  man  that  He  should  lie,  nor  the  son  of  man  that  He  should  repent."     Should  we 

not  have  strong  faith  who  believe  in  a  God  whose  very  essence  is  pure  truth  ?    (2) 

God  is  omnipotent,  and  therefore  believing  should  be  strong.     "  Is  anything  too 

hsurd  for  the  Lord  ? "    "  With  God  all  things  are  possible."     (3)  All  things  else 

change,  but   God  knoweth  no  shadow  of  a  turning.    Believe  immutably  in  an 

immutable  God.     (4)  He  is  the  God  of  love.    What  a  wanton  insult  it  is  to  mistrust 

one  who  cannot  be  unkind.    3.  When  I  turn  mine  eyes  to  our  Lord  Jesus  it  appears 

incongruous  that  the  Son  of  God  should  be  received  with  meagre  confidence.     Can 

we  doubt  His  ability  to  save  7    Abraham  had  strong  confidence  when  he  saw  the 

type— the  burning  lamp  passing  between  the  pieces  of  the  slain  victims.     With 

how  much  greater  confidence  should  we  rest  in  the  antitype.     4.  We  ought  to  give 

God  strong  faith,  because  there  is  no  evidence  which  could  justify  misti-ust.     (1) 

All  down  the  ages  those  who  have  trusted  in  Him  have  never  been  confounded. 

We  read  in  the  eleventh  of  Hebrews  the  record  of  what  the  Lord  wrought  in  those 

who  believed  in  Him.    Now,  per  contra,  there  standeth  nothing.     (2)  On  the  bed 

of  death  the  truth  generally  comes  out,  yet  who  ever  heard  a  sohtary  believer 

declare  that  it  is  a  mistake  to  confide  in  the  blood  of  Jesus,  or  to  rest  in  the 

faithfulness  of  God  ?     Somewhere  or  other  this  thing  would  have  come  out  if  it 

had  been  so.     (3)  Have  you  experienced  anything  which  casts  suspicion  upon  the 

character  of  God  ?    When  you  have  trusted  Him  has  He  failed  you  ?    Will  you  put 

your  finger  upon  a  promise  which  He  has  broken  ?     II.  Stbono  faith  pboducbs 

the  most  desirable  results.     We  can  only  dwell  upon  the  one  mentioned  here, 

"  giving  glory  to  God."    This  is  "  man's  chief  end."     Strong  faith  answers  that  end 

because — I.  It  treats  him  like  God.    Unbelief  is  practical  atheism ;  because,  denying 

the  truthfulness  of  God,  it  takes  away  what  is  a  part  of  His  essential  character. 

I  would  not  grieve  those  who  have  but  little  faith,  but  still  weak  faith  limits  the 

Holy  One  of  Israel  1    It  believes  Him  up  to  such  a  point,  or  under  such  and  such 

circumstances,  whereas  strong  faith  treats  God  according  to  His  infinite  character. 

2.  It  treats  Him  as  a  father,  and  acts  towards  Him  in  the  childlike  spirit,  i.e.,  with 

unlimited  confidence.    Can  my  Father  do  an  unkind  thing,  be  untrue,  be  false  or 

changeable  ?    Impossible !    3.  It  strengthens  all  the  other  graces,  and  all  these  bring 

glory  to  God.    4.  It  gives  a  striking  testimony  to  the  world.     The  faith  which  can 

practise  eminent  self-denial  or  achieve  great  enterprises  attracts  the  eyes  of  men ; 

they  see  your  strong  faith,  and  they  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven.     I 

have  known  some  faith  which  would  have  required  a  microscope  to  perceive  it, 

and  when  we  have  declared  that  little  faith  saves  the  soul,  the  worldling  has 

replied,  "  Well,  it  is  a  very  small  concern  at  any  rate."    5.  It  enables  Him  to  work 

in  us  and  through  us.     As  our  Saviour  could  not  do  many  mighty  works  in  a 

certain  place  because  of  their  unbelief,  so  is  God  hampered  with  regard  to  some  of 

us.     IIL  Strong  faith  which  gives  giort  to  God  mat  be  exercised  by  pebsonb 

WHO  ARE  otherwise  Exci'EDixGLY  WEAK.     1.  What  a  joy  this  is  to  you  who  are 

sufferers  in  body !    You  cannot  do  apostolic  work  and  range  a  continent,  bat  yoa 


CHAj.  IV.]  ROMANS.  811 

may  exhibit  a  placid  patience,  a  sweet  resignation,  a  sacred  hopefulness  as  to  the 
future,  a  Divine  disdain  as  to  the  fear  of  death.  2.  So  you  may  have  few  talents, 
and  yet  you  may  have  strong  faith.  You  need  not  be  a  genius  in  order  to  give 
glory  to  God,  for  the  strength  of  your  faith  will  do  it.  You  can  glorify  God  by 
holding  firmly  to  the  truth  of  which  you  understand  so  little,  but  which  you  love 
80  heartily.  3.  Some  saints  are  conscious  of  weakness  of  every  sort,  but  they  must 
not,  therefore,  think  that  they  cannot  honour  God  by  strong  faith,  for  Abraham  was 
80  old  that  his  body  was  now  dead,  and  yet  he  believed  tbat  he  would  be  the  progenitor 
of  the  chosen  seed.  The  depth  of  your  weakness  is  just  the  height  of  your  possi- 
bilities of  honouring  the  Lord.  IV.  This  steong  faith  varies  as  to  its  manner  of 
WORKINO,  very  much  according  to  the  person  and  his  circumstances.  1.  There  is 
one  thing  that  strong  faith  does  not  do,  it  never  talks  big  and  boasts  of  what  it  will 
accomphsh.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  difference  between  confidence  in  yourself  and 
confidence  in  God.  Barking  dogs  do  not  often  bite,  and  those  men  who  promise 
much  very  seldom  perform.  Point  me  to  one  boastful  word  that  fell  from 
Abraham.  David  said  little  to  Lis  envious  brothers,  but  he  brought  home  the 
giant's  head.  2.  Faith  exercises  itself  as  in  the  case  of  Abraham,  by  believing 
God's  word.  God  had  said  many  things  to  him,  and  he  believed  them  all.  3.  But 
Abraham's  was  not  alone  receptive  faith  :  his  was  a  faith  which  obeyed  the  precept. 
The  test  of  obedience  was  the  strange  command  to  take  his  only  son  and  offer  him 
up  for  a  sacrifice,  but  he  went  to  do  it.  4.  Abraham's  faith  awakened  in  him 
great  expectations.  He  was  looking  for  an  heir,  from  whom  sLould  spring  a  seed 
as  the  stars  of  heaven  for  multitude.  We  shall  be  full  of  expectation  if  we  have 
strong  faith  :  looking  for  blessings,  expecting  prayers  to  be  answered,  and  promises  to 
be  fulfilled.  V.  Strong  faith  is  especially  to  be  expected  in  certain  quarters. 
1.  In  those  who  know  God.  "  They  that  know  Thy  name  will  put  their  trust  in 
Thee,  for  Thou,  Lord,  hast  not  forsaken  them  that  seek  Thee."  2.  Those  who  have 
had  a  long  experience  of  Him.  Speak  well  of  the  bridge  which  has  carried  you 
over  so  many  times.  Let  those  of  us  who  have  been  twenty-five  years  in  the  ways 
of  God  put  aside  our  childish  doubts.  3.  Those  who  have  lived  in  fellowship  with 
Him.  4.  Those  who  are  getting  near  to  heaven.  Do  not  let  it  be  among  the  last 
memories  of  earth  that  you  doubted  your  Beloved.  5.  Teachers  and  preachers. 
We  shall  never  win  sinners  tu  faith  if  we  preach  what  we  do  not  intensely  believe. 
And  I  do  not  think  we  shall  have  many  conversions  unless  we  expect  God  to  bless 
the  word.  It  is  the  rule  of  His  kingdom.  "  According  to  your  faith  so  be  it  unto 
you."  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Trusting  the  Promiser  : — Said  Hester  Ann  Kogers: 
**  By  thus  trusting  the  promise  and  the  Promiser,  I  bave  conquered,  and, 
glory  be  to  God,  through  His  strength  I  shall  prevail.  It  is  by  hanging  on 
Jesus,  as  an  infant  on  its  mother's  breast,  I  retain  my  peace,  and  love, 
and   joy."  Unfaltering  faith: — John   and  Charles  Wesley  were    once    con- 

versing about  an  important  project,  which  they  agreed  was  desirable,  but  Charles 
thought  they  could  not  do  it.  John  thought  they  should  attempt  it.  At  length 
Charles  said,  *•  When  God  gives  me  wings  I'll  fly."  John  replied,  "  When  God 
tells  me  to  fly  I'll  trust  Him  for  the  wings."  (H.  K.  Burton.)  Strong  faith : 
— Amongst  us  there  may  be  a  lack  of  faith.  The  unbelieving  man  is  weak,  and  the 
believing  man  is  strong.  Faith  pours  vigour  into  the  understanding,  the  judgment, 
the  affection,  and  the  will.  In  proportion  to  a  man's  faith  so  is  his  power.  This 
principle  has  been  illustrated  times  without  number,  by  the  soldier  on  the  battle- 
field, the  sailor  on  the  great  deep,  the  traveller  in  other  lands,  and  men  in  every 
department  in  life.  Without  strong  faith,  Hannibal  never  could  have  attempted 
the  bold  enterprise  of  crossing  the  Alps.  Without  strong  faith,  Columbus  never 
could  have  sailed  upon  the  untried  waters,  amid  the  insubordination  of  his  crew. 
Without  strong  faith,  Cook,  Bruce  and  Livingstone  never  could  have  confronted 
and  overcome  such  gigantic  difficulties  in  unknown  countries.  Without  strong 
faith  in  reason  and  science,  Socrates  and  Galileo  never  could  have  been  so  daring 
and  dauntless,  so  great  and  sublime.  A  mere  sneerer — the  man  who  sits  in 
his  easy  chair,  folds  his  arms,  believes  in  notbing,  and  laughs  at  everything 
— could  have  done  none  of  these  things,  and  can  do  nothing  for  the  improvement  of 
the  race  worthy  of  a  moment's  consideration.  What  steam  is  to  the  locomotive, 
or  what  life  is  to  the  body,  faith  is  to  successful  action.  (A.  McAmlane.) 
Faith  glorifying  God : — The  leading  thought  here  is  the  connection  of  God's  glory 
■with  our  faith.  Having  that  faith,  as  the  gift  of  God,  we  glorify  Him.  And  being 
strong  in  that  faith,  we  glorify  Him  all  the  more.  To  be  glorifying  to  God,  there- 
fore, our  faith — I.  Musx  have  a  promise  of  God  to  best  on.    Human  faith,  not 


Sl»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t?4 

resting  on  a  Divine  promise,  is  either  folly  or  fanaticism.  1.  Even  in  the  natural 
world  this  is  true.  We  walk  by  faith  ;  but  it  is  by  faith  grounded  on  the  promise 
that  nature's  laws  will  operate  with  the  regularity  hitherto  observed.  Strong  in 
that  faith  you  walk  safely,  and  glorify  God.  But  if  you  disregard  that  promise, 
you  rush  into  danger  and  dishonour  God.  2.  The  promise  to  Abraham  was  fitted 
to  try  his  capacity  of  believing  to  the  uttermost.  The  only  thing  that  could  lessen 
the  difficulty  was  that  there  could  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  exact  thing  promised,  or  as 
to  the  particular  person  to  whom  it  was  promised.  Ah  1  but  one  says,  Give  me 
a  promise  like  that  and  I  will  not  hesitate  for  a  moment.  But  consider — (1)  May 
not  Abraham's  words  elsewhere  be  applicable  here  ? — "  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and 
the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the  dead."  Is  it 
clear  that  if  I  am  not  now  complying  with  the  gospel  call,  addressed  to  all  sinners, 
I  would  comply  with  it  more  readily  if  it  were  addressed  to  me  by  name  ?  And 
again,  if  forgiveness  of  sin,  renewal,  Ac,  are  now  felt  to  be  intangible,  would  it 
obviate  the  difficulty  to  have  them  made  up  into  a  material  packet  wbach  my  hand 
may  handle,  my  eye  see,  my  mouth  swallow  ?  Called  by  name  I  might  refuse  as 
now ;  that  would  not  make  me  willing,  and  if  I  got  the  blessings  embodied  in  some 
sensible  sign,  it  would  be  the  embodiment  alone  that  became  mine.  The  blessings 
embodied  would  seem  as  shadowy  as  ever.  Be  sure  that  the  call  is  personal  and 
pointed  enough,  and  that  the  promise  is  to  be  realised  experimentally.  Let  us 
together  taste  and  see  that  God  is  good.  (2)  Understand  clearly  the  object  of  faith 
of  Abraham.  Immediately  it  was  a  son  in  his  old  age.  But  surely  he  did  not 
contemplate  that  barely  in  itself.  He  looked  at  it  in  its  spiritual  significanoy ;  in 
its  bearing  on  the  fulfilment  of  the  great  original  promise,  which  he  had  been  told 
was  to  be  fulfilled  in  his  seed.  But  for  that  aspect  of  it,  the  promise  could  really 
have  no  meaning  to  him.  In  a  worldly  point  of  view,  what  need  has  he  of  this 
child,  for  whose  birth  the  very  laws  of  nature  are  to  be  suspended  ?  For  his  own 
temporal  prosperity,  for  the  preservation  of  his  name  and  memory  in  a  numerous 
posterity,  provision  has  been  made  already.  The  promise  then  is  not  merely  that 
a  son  is  to  be  born  to  him,  but  that  in  that  son  he  is  to  see  the  day  of  Christ  afar 
oS  with  gladness.  Viewed  thus,  Abraham's  faith  really  differs  in  no  material 
respect  from  that  which  you  are  called  to  exercise.  He  has  no  promise  on  which 
his  faith  may  lean  more  special  and  personal  than  you  have ;  and  what  his  faith 
has  to  lay  hold  of  is  the  same  unseen  Saviour,  and  the  same  spiritual  salvation  that 
you  have  set  before  you  in  the  gospel.  And,  simply  relying,  as  you  may  rely,  on 
the  testimony  of  God  concerning  Him  who  is  to  be  his  seed  in  Isaac,  he  believes, 
and  righteousness  is  imputed  to  him.  Hence — (3)  Abraham's  case  becomes  now 
really  ours.  Or,  if  there  is  any  difference,  the  advantage  is  with  you.  Abraham 
had  presented  to  him  an  event  future  and  conditional  upon  certain  necessary 
antecedents  (vers.  19,  20).  You  have  an  accomplished  fact  (ver.  24).  Isaac  is  to 
be  born  ;  and  in  him  is  to  be  found  the  seed  of  the  woman  that  is  to  bruise  the 
serpent's  head :  that  is  Abraham's  ground  of  hope.  Christ  is  risen ;  the  seed  of 
woman  having  actually  bruised  the  serpent's  head :  that  is  yours.  II.  Musi  bb 
SUCH  AS  WILL  BB  OLOBiFYiNO  TO  GoD.  My  faith  must  have  its  root  in  a  real 
personal  dealing  between  God  and  me.  He  and  I  must  meet  personally,  face  to 
face  ;  as  truly  as  He  and  Abraham  did.  We  must  know  one  another ;  trust  one 
another.  No  other  kind  of  faith  than  that  can  be  glorifying  to  Him.  What ! 
Shall  I  be  contented  that  a  member  of  my  family  should  go  about  to  satisfy  himself 
by  evidence  from  hearsay,  or  from  circumstances.  Is  that  a  sort  of  faith  which 
I  can  feel  to  be  either  complimentary  or  kind  ?  Is  it  not,  on  the  contrary,  a  bitter 
disappointment.  For  does  it  not  show  that  I  am  held  to  be,  not  a  friend,  or  father, 
who  may  be  fondly  resorted  to,  that  I  may  be  trusted  and  consulted ;  but  at  the 
best  a  suspected  stranger,  about  whom  it  may  be  desirable  to  be  informed? 
m.  Most  be  strong  ob  in  the  way  of  becoming  strong.  Now,  in  considering 
this  we  must  bear  in  mind  the  Lord's  own  saying — "  If  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain  of 
mustard  seed  .  .  .  nothing  shall  be  impossible  with  you."  The  woman  with  an 
issue  of  blood  was  apparently  not  strong  in  faith.  And  yet  her  faith  did  a  great 
thing  for  her,  and  surely  God  was  greatly  glorified  through  it.  And  indeed  it  was 
strong  faith  to  say,  "  If  I  may  but  touch  His  garment,  I  shall  be  whole,"  for  it  was 
Buoh  immediate,  personal  deaUng  with  the  Lord  that  put  all  His  power  and  love  in 
operation  on  her  behalf.  The  strength  of  Abraham's  faith  consisted — 1.  Negatively, 
in  not  considering  what  sense  may  urge  against  the  promise  (vers.  19,  20).  If  ha 
had  considered  these  things  he  would  have  been  weak  in  faith.  (1)  Certainly 
th«;  were  formidable  obstacles  that  had  to  be  overcome  by  a  miracle  of  power  upon 


CHAP.  IT.]  ROMANS.  S13 

and  a  miracle  of  faith  within  him.  Everything  that  he  could  see  and  know  and 
feel,  in  nature  and  in  himself,  was  against  his  believing.  And  what  had  he  on  tha 
other  side  for  believing?  Simply  God  speaking  ;  God  promising.  That,  however, 
prevailed.  (2)  But  we  must  distinguish  this  "  not  considering  "  these  difficulties 
from  the  mere  shutting  of  the  eyes  to  the  fact  of  their  existence.  I  may  be  so  bent 
apon  the  attainment  of  an  object  as  unconsciously  to  overlook  all  intervening 
obstacles,  and  fondly  persuade  myself  that  what  I  wish  must  be  possible,  simply 
because  I  wish  it.  Or  I  may  be  so  impatient,  foolhardy,  as  to  be  wilfully  blind  to 
everything  but  the  gratifying  of  my  heart's  desire.  Not  such  was  the  faith  of 
Abraham.  He  had  full  in  view  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  promise.  And  this 
was  the  very  strength  of  his  faith,  that,  having  them  full  in  view,  he  disregarded 
them.  (3)  Alas  !  how  is  faith  weakened  and  made  to  stagger  by  your  considering 
what  sense  says  or  suggests  against  it.  (a)  Am  I  called,  as  a  sinner,  to  believe  in 
Christ  for  the  forgiveness  of  my  sin  and  my  peace  with  God  ?  God  Himself  is 
telhug  me,  not  of  a  child  to  be  born,  but  of  the  GLild  actually  born ;  and  not  of  Hia 
birth  merely,  but  of  His  wondrous  Ufe  and  death  ;  and  of  His  rising  from  the  dead, 
Ac. ,  God  is  telling  me  of  this  Christ  as  mine,  if  I  will  but  have  Him  to  be  mine. 
Alas  !  I  give  heed  to  considerations  that  seem  to  make  all  this  impossible.  I  am 
not  worthy  enough,  or  vile  enough.  I  have  not  repentance  enough,  or  faith 
enough.  I  will  not  make  up  my  mind  absolutely  to  reject  Christ.  But  I  stagger  at 
the  promise  through  unbelief.  I  stagger  into  unbelief.  Is  this  giving  glory  to  God? 
{b)  As  regards  a  holy  life,  this  evil  is  sorely  felt.  Ah  I  how  am  I  tempted  here  to 
consider  my  own  deudness  ;  and  so  to  consider  it,  as  to  put  up  with  it,  and  make 
allowance  for  it.  How  apt  am  I  to  dwell  on  infirmities  and  hindrances  ;  how  ready 
to  acquiesce  in  what  I  am,  as  if  it  were  all  I  might  be.  How  does  all  this  interfere 
with  my  giving  glory  to  God  I  (c)  For  others  my  faith  is  to  be  exercised.  I  plead 
with  God  for  a  child,  a  brother,  a  friend.  I  have  promises  to  plead.  Ah  !  can  it 
be  that  here  too  I  am  hindered  by  my  considering  the  suggestions  of  sense,  and 
giving  heed  to  difficulties  and  questions  respecting  his  deadness  and  mine  ? 
{d)  For  the  seed  of  Abraham  ;  for  Him  who  is  the  seed  of  Abraham,  and  for  all 
that  is  His  ;  His  cause  and  kingdom  ;  the  progress  of  His  gospel ;  the  winning  of 
souls  to  Him  ;  for  all  that,  I  am  commanded  to  believe  God.  Alas  I  for  my  weak- 
ness in  this  faith.  How  do  I  consider  the  mountains  that  are  in  my  way  I  For  all 
this  staggering  the  remedy  is  to  be  found,  at  least  in  part,  in  the  negative  way  of 
not  considering  the  difficulties  which  sense  may  raise.  2.  Positively,  notice  what 
being  strong  in  faith  really  is.  It  is  simply  being  fully  persuaded  "  that  what  Ha 
had  promised  He  was  able  also  to  perform  "  (ver.  21).  Nay,  but  who  doubts  that  ? 
yoQ  ask.  I  at  least  never  dream  of  calling  in  question  the  omnipotence  of  God. 
And  yet  I  see  not  how  that  will  of  itself  make  me,  or  any  man,  strong  in  faith. 
Very  true.  But  the  faith  in  question  is  not  believing  something  about  God,  but 
believing  God.  Ah  I  in  that  view  it  is  everything,  to  be  fully  persuaded  that  what 
He  has  promised  He  is  able  also  to  perform.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  remember 
that  it  is  the  Almighty  who  speaks  to  you,  who  bids  you  speak  to  Him.  0  ye  of 
little  faith,  whereof  do  you  doubt  ?  Is  anything  too  hard  for  Him  who  asks  you  to 
believe  Him  ?  Be,  then,  strong  in  this  faith,  giving  glory  to  God.  For  it  is  faith  in 
God's  power  that  most  glorifies  Him ;  it  is  distrust  of  His  power  which  lies  at  the 
root  of  most  of  the  unbelief  that  is  so  dishonouring  to  Him.  "  If  Thou  canst  do 
anything,"  we  are  apt  to  say,  with  the  afflicted  father.  Let  us  ponder  the  gracious 
answer,  "  If  thou  canst  beUeve,  all  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth."  And 
let  us  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  gracious  reply,  "  Lord,  I  believe,  help  Thou  mine 
nnbelief."  Conclusion  :  Lay  to  heart  the  ground  of  believing  strongly.  It  is 
not  that  it  gives  peace,  joy,  salvation,  but  that  it  gives  glory  to  God.  To 
be  weak  in  faith  is  not  merely  to  miss  or  mar  a  privilege,  but  to  dishonour 
the  God  whom  you  are  bound  to  glorify.  To  be  dwelling  on  hindrances  stand- 
ing in  the  way  of  His  free  word  of  promise ;  to  be  distrusting  His  ability  to 
sweep  them  all  away,  and  make  His  word  of  promise  good ;  can  anything  be  more 
fitted  to  affront  the  Almighty,  the  faithful,  true,  and  loving  Jehovah  ?  Is  it  not 
literally  and  truly  making  him  a  liar  ?  Beware  of  so  great  a  sin.  You  may  fancy 
that  there  is  humility  in  it.  You  feel  your  own  unworthiness  and  unsteadfastness 
so  deeply  that  you  dare  not  venture  to  be  too  confident  or  to  presume.  Presume  1 
— the  presumption  is  all  the  other  way  1  The  intolerable  presumption  is  to  refuse 
to  take  God  at  His  word.  Be  clothed  with  humility.  And  that  you  may  be  clothed 
with  humility,  be  not  faithless  but  believing.  Be  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to 
Qod.    {B.  S.  Candli$h,  D.D.)       And  being  fuUy  persuaded  that  what  E»  haii 


814  ^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rr. 

promised  He  was  able  also  to  perform. — Full  persuasion : — Having  full  assurance 
(Luke  i.  1 ;  Rom.  xiv.  5  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  5,  17).  Metaphor  from  a  ship  carried  forward 
with  full  sail,  **  Gave  out  all  his  canvas."  Ventured  all  on  God's  word.  Believed 
without  hesitation  or  reserve.  Full  assurance  of  faith  (Heb.  x.  22).  Grounded  on 
full  assurance  of  understanding  (Col.  ii.  2).  Conducts  to  full  assurance  of  hope 
(Heb.  vi.  11).  Faith  a  filling  grace.  Unbelief  empties  and  keeps  empty. 
[T.  Robiruon,  D.D.).  The  full  persuasion  of  God's  ability: — God's  ability  the 
foundation  of  faith's  stability.  Faith  honours  God  by  counting  Him  able  (Job  xlii, 
2 ;  Gen.  xviii.  14 ;  Matt.  xix.  26 ;  Luke  i.  37  ;  1  Sam.  xiv.  6 ;  2  Chron.  xiv.  11). 
(Ibid.)  Faith  at  a  condition  of  receiving: — Is  it  any  wonder  that,  when  we 
stagger  at  any  promise  of  God  through  unbelief,  we  do  not  receive  it  ?  Not  that 
faith  merits  the  answer  or  in  any  way  earns  it,  or  works  it  out ;  but  God  has  made 
believing  a  condition  of  receiving,  and  the  giver  has  a  sovereign  right  to  choose  his 
own  terms  of  gift.     {Samuel  Hart.) 

Vers.  23-25.  Now  It  was  not  written  for  bis  sake  alone. — The  Scriptures  used  by 
every  generation : — Do  you  ever  think,  as  you  pass  along  the  chapters  of  the  Bible, 
that  they  are  now  like  the  king's  highways ;  that  more  saints  than  tongue  could 
count  have  walked  along  these  pages  toward  heaven ;  that  each  verse  has  been  a 
bosom  like  a  mother's  to  some  child  in  Christ ;  that  each  verse  has  had  in  it  bless- 
ings for  multitude  of  souls ;  that  these  passages  of  hope  and  joy  have  made  melody 
for  thrice  ten  million  struggling  souls;  that  these  Scriptures  are  a  sublime  renewal  of 
the  miracle  of  the  loaf  which  increases  by  using,  and  which  feeds  without  diminution? 
These  unwasting  chapters  have  supplied  armies  and  multitudes  of  faint  and  hungry 
saints,  but  there  is  not  a  particle  gone.  There  is  as  much  yet  for  the  famishing  soul 
as  when  first  they  were  set  forth.  To  the  end  the  loaf  shall  be  broken,  and  shall 
yield  a  liberal  abundance  for  every  human  want ;  and  to  the  end  the  undiminished 
whole  shall  remain  a  witness  and  a  miracle  of  the  Divine  spiritual  bounty.  {H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Lessons  of  faith  from  Abraham: — I.  The  end  of  our  faith — deliver- 
ance from  sin.  II.  The  basis  of  our  faith — God's  promise — the  death  and 
resurrection  of  Christ.  III.  The  encoubaqement  of  our  faith — Abraham's  example. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Abraham's  example: — As  Abraham  believed  in  life  from  the 
dead,  so  also  we,  because — 1.  God  gives  us  a  pledge  of  it  in  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ.  2.  God  promises  to  raise  us  from  a  death  of  sin  to  a  life  of 
righteousness.  3.  Faith  realises  the  resurrection  power.  (Ibid.)  It  shall  b« 
imputed. — Imputed  righteousness  : — A  man  is  denominated  righteous  as  a  wall  may 
be  esteemed  red  or  green.  Now  that  comes  to  pass  two  manners  of  ways — either 
by  the  colour  inherent  and  belonging  to  the  wall  itself,  or  by  the  same  colour  in 
some  diaphanous,  transparent  body,  as  glass,  which,  by  the  beam  of  the  sun  shining 
on  the  wall,  doth  externally  affect  the  same  as  if  it  were  its  own,  and  covers  that 
true  inherent  colour  which  it  hath  of  itself.  In  like  manner,  by  the  strict  covenant 
of  the  law,  we  ought  to  be  righteous  from  a  righteousness  inherent  in  and  performed 
by  ourselves ;  but  in  the  new  covenant  of  grace  we  are  righteous  by  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ,  which  shineth  upon  us,  and  presenteth  us  in  His  colour  unto  the 
sight  of  His  Father.  Here,  in  both  covenants,  the  righteousness  from  whence  the 
denomination  groweth  is  the  same,  namely,  the  satisfying  of  the  demands  of  the 
whole  law ;  but  the  manner  of  our  right  and  property  thereunto  is  much  varied.  In 
the  one  we  have  right  unto  it  by  law,  because  we  have  done  it  ourselves ;  in  the 
other  we  have  right  unto  it  only  by  grace  and  favour,  because  another  man's  doing 
of  it  is  bestowed  upon  us  and  accounted  ours.  ((?.  H.  Salter.)  Christ's  imputed 
righteousness : — We  read  in  our  chronicles  that  Edmund,  surnamed  Ironside  and 
Canute,  the  first  Danish  king,  after  many  encounters  and  equal  fights,  at  length 
embraced  a  present  agreement,  which  was  made  by  parting  England  betwixt  them 
two,  and  confirmed  by  oath  and  sacrament,  putting  on  each  other's  apparel  and 
arms,  as  a  ceremony,  to  express  the  atonement  of  their  minds,  as  if  they  had  made 
transactions  of  their  persons  to  each  other ;  Canute  became  Edmund,  and  Edmund 
became  Canute.  Even  such  a  change  of  apparel  is  betwixt  Christ  and  His  Church 
— Christ  and  every  true  repentant  sinner;  He  taketh  upon  Him  their  sins,  and 
putteth  upon  them  His  righteousness ;  He  changeth  their  rags  into  robes ;  He  arrays 
them  with  the  righteousness  of  the  saints ;  that  twofold  righteousness,  imputed  and 
imparted ;  that  of  justification,  and  the  other  of  sanctification  ;  that  is  an  nr  lercoat, 
this  is  an  upper;  that  clean  and  fair,  this  white  and  fair;  and  both  from  Himself, 
who  is  made  unto  them  not  only  "  wisdom,  but  righteousness,  sanctification,  and 
xedemption."    {Ibid.)        Jesus  our  Lord.— Jesus  our  Lord : — 1.  It  is  the  part  ol 


eakt.  IT.]  BOMANS.  816 

Faith  to  accept  great  contrasts,  if  laid  down  in  the  Word,  and  to  make  them  a  part 
of  her  daily  speech.  This  name,  "  Lord,"  is  a  great  contrast  to  incarnation  and 
humiliation.    In  the  manger,  in  poverty,  shame,  and  death,  Jesus  was  still  Lord. 

2.  These  strange  conditions  for  "  our  Lord  "  to  be  found  in  are  no  difficulties  to 
that  faith  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  For  she  sees  in  the  death  of  Jesus  a 
choice  reason  for  His  being  our  Lord  (Phil.  ii.  7-11).  "  Wherefore  God  hath  highly 
exalted  Him."  She  delights  in  that  Lordship  as  the  fruit  of  resurrection ;  but  there 
could  have  been  no  resurrection  without  death  (Acts  ii.  32-36).  She  hears  the  voice 
of  Jehovah  behind  all  the  opposition  endured  by  Jesus  proclaiming  Him  Lord  of 
all  (Psa.  ii. ;  ex.).  3.  It  never  happens  that  our  faith  in  Jesus  for  salvation  makes 
US  less  reverently  behold  in  Him  the  Lord  of  all.  He  is  "  Jesus  "  and  also  "  our 
Lord."  "  Bom  a  child,  and  yet  a  King."  "  My  Beloved,"  and  yet  "  My  Lord  and 
my  God."  Our  simple  trust  in  Him,  our  familiar  love  to  Him,  our  bold  approaches 
to  Him  in  prayer,  our  near  and  dear  communion  with  Him,  and,  most  of  all,  our 
marriage  union  with  Him,  still  leave  him  "  our  Lord."  I.  His  tender  condescen- 
sions ENDEAB  THE  TITLE.  "  JesuB  our  Lord  "  is  a  very  sweet  name  to  a  believer's 
heart.  1.  We  claim  to  render  it  to  Him  specially  as  man,  "  who  was  delivered  for 
our  offences,  and  was  raised  again  for  our  justification"  (ver.  25).  As  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  He  is  Lord.  2.  We  acknowledge  Him  as  Lord  the  more  fully  and  unre- 
servedly because  He  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us.  3.  In  all  the  privileges 
accorded  to  us  in  Him  He  is  Lord.  (1)  In  our  salvation  we  have  "  received  Christ 
Jesus  the  Lord  "  (Col.  ii.  6).  (2)  In  entering  the  Church  we  find  Him  the  Head  of 
the  body,  to  whom  all  are  subject  (Eph.  v.  23).  (3)  In  our  life-work  He  is  Lord. 
"We  live  unto  the  Lord  "  (chap.  xiv.  8).  We  glorify  God  in  His  name  (Eph.  v.  20). 
(4)  In  resurrection  He  is  the  firstborn  from  the  dead  (Col.  i.  18).  (5)  At  the  Advent 
His  appearing  will  be  the  chief  glory  (Titus  ii.  13).  (6)  In  eternal  glory  He  is  wor- 
shipped for  ever  (Bev.  v.  12,  13).  4.  In  our  dearest  fellowship  at  the  table  He  is 
••  Jesus  our  Lord."  It  is  the  Lord's  table,  the  Lord's  supper,  the  cup  of  the  Lord, 
the  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord ;  and  our  object  is  to  show  the  Lord's  death  (1  Cor. 
zi.  20,  26,  27,  29).  U.  Oob  loving  heabts  bead  the  title  with  fecdliab  eufhasis. 
1.  We  yield  it  to  Him  only.  Moses  is  a  servant,  but  Jesus  alone  is  Lord.  "  One 
is  your  Master  "  (Matt,  xxiii.  8, 10).  2.  To  Him  most  willingly.  Ours  is  deligbted 
homage.  3.  To  Him  unreservedly.  We  wish  our  obedience  to  be  perfect.  4.  To 
Him  in  all  matter  of  law-making  and  truth-teaching.  He  is  Master  and  Lord  ;  His 
word  decides  practice  and  doctrine.  5.  To  Him  in  all  matters  of  administration  in 
the  Church  and  in  providence.  "It  is  the  Lord,  let  Him  do  what  seemeth  Him 
good"  (1  Sam.  iii.  18).  6.  To  Him  trustfully,  feehng  that  He  will  act  a  Lord's 
part  right  well.  No  king  can  be  so  wise,  good,  great  as  He  (Job  i.  21).  7.  To  Him 
for  ever.  He  reigus  in  the  Church  without  successor.  Now,  as  in  the  first  days, 
we  call  Him  Master  and  Lord  (Heb.  vii.  3).  III.  We  find  much  sweetness  in  thb 
woBD  "ODB."  1.  It  makes  us  remember  our  personal  interest  in  our  Lord.  Each 
believer  uses  this  title  in  the  singular,  and  calls  Him  from  his  heart,  "  My  Lord." 
David  wrote,  "  Jehovah  said  unto  my  Lord."  Elisabeth  spoke  of  "  The  mother  of 
my  Lord."  Magdalene  said,  "They  have  taken  away  my  Lord."  Thomas  said, 
"  My  Lord  and  my  God."  Paul  wrote,  "  The  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord," 
&o.  2.  It  brings  a  host  of  brethren  before  our  minds,  for  it  is  in  union  with  them 
that  we  say  "  our  Lord,"  and  so  it  makes  us  remember  each  other  (Eph.  iii.  14, 15). 

3.  It  fosters  unity  and  creates  a  holy  clanship  as  we  all  rally  around  our  "one 
Lord."  Saints  of  all  ages  are  one  in  this.  4.  His  example  as  Lord  fosters  prac- 
tical love.  Bemember  the  foot-washing  and  His  words  on  that  occasion  (John  xiii. 
14).  5.  Our  zeal  to  make  Him  Lord  forbids  all  self-exaltation.  "  Be  not  ye  called 
Babbi :  for  one  is  your  Master,  even  Christ.  Neither  be  ye  called  masters,"  &c. 
(Matt,  xxiii.  8,  10).  6.  His  position  as  Lord  reminds  us  of  the  confidence  of  the 
Church  in  doing  His  work.  *'  All  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  in  earth. 
Go  ye,  therefore,  and  teach,"  &c.  (Matt,  xxviii.  18,  19).  "  The  Lord  working  with 
them  "  (Mark  xvi.  20).  7.  Our  common  joy  in  Jesus  as  our  Lord  becomes  an 
evidence  of  grace,  and  thus  of  union  with  each  other  (1  Cor.  xii.  3).  Conclusion : 
1.  Let  us  worship  Jesus  as  our  Lord  and  God.  2.  Let  us  imitate  Him,  copying  our 
Lord's  humility  and  love.  3.  Let  us  serve  Him,  obeying  His  every  command.  {C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  Who  was  delivered  for  our  offences,  and  was  raised  again  for 
our  Justification. — An  epitome  of  the  gospel : — I.  Cheist  was  delivered,  &c. — the 
person — delivered — unto  death-  for  our  offences — by  the  determinate  counsel  of 
God.  n.  Christ  was  raised,  <&c. — the  fact — the  design — because  a  demonstration 
of  Divine  power  and  grace,  and  a  guarantee  to  faith.    (/.  Lyth,  D.D.).       The  great 


Utf  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

$ubttitute : — Daring  the  Reign  of  Terror  in  France,  when  tQanj  persons  every  day 
were  being  executed  by  the  guillotine,  a  young  man  was  led  to  the  foot  of  the  scaffold 
among  others  to  die.  His  father  stood  by  him,  and  when  the  son's  name  was  called 
the  father  stepped  forward,  ascended  the  scaffold,  and  died  in  his  place.  Here 
Christ  is  said  to  have  died  for  us.  Let  us  look  at — I.  The  cause  of  Christ's  death. 
1.  "  Offences."  Sins.  Transgressions.  Sin  is  not  a  trifle  to  be  forgotten.  It  is 
seed  that  bears  terrible  fruit.  Some  one  is  injured  by  every  sin  we  commit.  Sin 
harms  ourselves  and  offends  God.  2.  "  Our  offences."  Christ  Himself  was  without 
sin,  but  our  sin  was  laid  upon  Him  (Isa.  liii.  6).  Our  sins  are  not  one,  but  many, 
(chap.  V.  16).  II.  The  manneb  of  it.  1.  "He  was  delivered,"  that  is,  handed  over 
like  a  criminal  to  the  executioner.  "Between  two  thieves."  2.  It  was  voluntary. 
3.  Preceded  by  great  sufferings.  4.  Painful  beyond  expression.  III.  The  vibtub 
of  it.  It  was  a  sufficient  atonement.  Christ  did  not  fail  in  redeeming  us.  He  was 
*'  raised  again  for  our  justification,"  IV.  The  claims  of  it.  Such  love  claims  oar 
love  and  service.  {Preacher's  Magazine.)  Christ's  deliverance  and  resurrection: — 
I.  Christ  was  delivebed  fob  odb  offences.  1.  "Whom  was  He  delivered  by  ?  (1) 
God  (Acts  ii.  23).  (2)  Judas.  2.  What  to?  (1)  To  shame  (Isa.  liii.  3).  (2)  To 
pain  (Isa.  liiL  4-5).  (3)  To  death  (Gal.  iii.  13).  3.  What  for  ?  "  Our  offences." 
(1)  All  men  are  guilty  (Psa.  xiv.  3 ;  Gal.  iii.  22).  (2)  This  guilt  cannot  be  taken 
away  but  by  satisfying  God's  justice  (Heb.  ix,  22).  (3)  No  creature  can  satisfy  it 
(Psa.  xlix.  7,  8).  (4)  Hence  Christ  undertook  it  (1  Tim.  ii.  5).  (5)  Neither  could 
He  do  it  but  by  suffering  (Heb,  ix.  22 ;  Matt.  xv.  28 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  6).  (6)  No  suffering 
would  serve  the  turn  but  death,  and  that  on  the  Cross.  (7)  By  His  death  He  hath 
satisfied  for  our  offences  (1  John  ii.  2 ;  Eom.  iii.  25  :  Rev.  i.  5).  (8)  Hence  our  sins 
came  to  be  pardoned ;  and  so.  He  being  delivered  for  us,  we  are  delivered  from  our 
offences — (o)  As  to  their  guilt  (Matt.  i.  21).  (6)  As  to  their  strength  (Acts  iii.  26). 
III.  He  was  baised  again  foe  ocb  jdstification.  1,  How  raised  again?  From 
death  by  God  (Acts  ii.  23,  24  ;  Matt,  xxvui,  13-15 ;  Luke  xxiv.  4-6).  (1)  He  was  a 
real  man.  (2)  He  really  died  (Matt,  xxvii.  50).  (3)  He  really  rose  again  (Luke 
xxiv.  37-40 ;  John  xx.  27).  2.  What  is  justification  ?  A  forensic  term  opposed  to 
accusation  (chap.  viii.  33).  (1)  Man  hath  sinned  (chap.  iii.  23).  (2)  This  he  ia 
accused  for  by — (o)  God's  justice.  (6)  The  law.  (c)  Satan,  (d)  Conscience  ^chap. 
ii.  15 ;  1  John  iii.  20).  (3)  Christ  hath  borne  our  punishment  (Isa.  liii.  6).  (4)  He 
hath  also  performed  obedience  for  us.  (5)  This  His  righteousness  is  imputed  to  us 
(2  Cor.  V.  21) ,  (6)  By  this  we  are  cleared  from  the  charge  brought  against  as.  (7) 
This  is  my  justification.  3.  In  what  sense  did  Christ  rise  for  our  justification,  or  what 
dependence  hath  our  justification  on  Christ's  resurrection  7  (1)  Christ  undertook  to 
satisfy  God's  justice  for  us.  (2)  This  He  could  not  do  but  by  suffering  death.  (3)  Bo 
long  as  dead,  He  had  not  done  this  (1  Cor.  xv.  14).  (4)  His  rising  again  argued  death 
conquered,  and  justice  satisfied  (Acts  ii.  24).  5.  Therefore  being  risen  He  cleanses 
us  from  our  sins  and  so  justifies  us.  Conclusion  :  1.  Was  Christ  delivered  ?  Then 
— (1)  Admire  the  mercy  of  God  in  delivering  His  Son  for  us.  (2)  Be  mindful  of 
Him.  2.  Is  Christ  risen  ?  Then— (1)  We  shall  rise  (1  Cor.  xv.  12).  (2)  Let  as 
mind  the  things  where  He  is  (Col,  iii.  1).  3.  Did  He  rise  for  our  justification? 
Then  believe  on  Him  that  you  may  be  justified  (chap.  v.  1).  (1)  In  the  merits  of 
His  death.  (2)  The  truth  of  His  resurrection.  (3)  The  constancy  of  His  interces- 
Bion.  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  The  resurrection  the  Saviour's  recompense : — The  resur- 
rection of  oar  Lord  is  but  one  of  that  series  of  acts  by  which  the  Son  of  God  is 
fulfilling  the  commission  which  He  received  from  the  Father  to  bring  back  to  Him 
lost  creation.  We  must  never  so  fix  our  attention  on  the  details  of  the  work  of 
Christ  as  to  lose  sight  of  its  wholeness.  It  was  not  the  first  appearance  of  the  Son 
of  God  as  man  which  began  that  work  ;  it  was  not  His  disappearance  from  mortal 
sight  which  completed  it.  Nor  is  it  any  one  specific  link  of  Christ's  appearance  in 
the  flesh  on  which  the  salvation  of  the  world  exclusively  hangs ;  but  on  all  of  them 
taken  together,  inserted  into,  and  mutually  dependent  on  each  other,  as  visible 
parts  of  that  far  greater  invisible  whole.  And,  accordingly,  St.  Paul  makes  mention 
of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  as  consequent  upon  (not  in  order  of  time  merely,  bat 
of  relation)  the  death  of  Jesus ;  and  this  death,  again,  as  consequent  apon  (in 
similar  order  of  relation,  and  of  cause  and  effect)  the  offences  of  mankind :  "  For  " 
means  on  account  of,  as  the  result  of,  our  offences,  Christ  was  delivered  by  the 
Father  to  an  expiatory  death ;  and  on  accoant  of,  as  the  result  of,  our  justification, 
that  expiation  having  been  thereby  effected,  Christ  was  raised  again  to  everlasting 
life.  Here,  then,  we  see  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  connected  not  merely  in  the 
sequence  oi  time,  but  ixx  the  consequence  of  cause  &nd  effect,  with  the  expiatory 


OBAT.  XT.]  ROMANS.  m 

death  of  Jesus.  Wherein  does  the  connection  consist  ?  I  answer,  the  resurrection 
was  vouchsafed  by  God  to  Jesus — I.  As  thb  reward  of  that  justuyino  dkath. 
This  is  a  doctrine  which  St.  Paul  exhibits  more  clearly  than  by  the  single  particle 
of  our  text  in  Phil.  ii.  9  (see  also  Psa.  ilv.  7,  xci.  14  ;  Isa.  liii.  11,  12  ;  Heb.  xii. 
21).  And  here  we  have  an  instance  of  Ood's  general  principle  of  conduct  towards 
Hia  people.  He  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  Him.  Them  that 
honour  Him  He  will  honour.  "  God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  and 
labour  of  love  which  ye  have  showed  towards  His  name."  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto 
death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life."  And  we  must  not  let  the  thought  lie 
idle  in  our  minds ;  we  must  live  upon  it  by  an  appropriating  faith.  Faith  in  tha 
absolute  certainty  and  constant  exercise  of  God's  moral  and  retributive  government, 
gives  life  and  spirit  to  our  energies,  and  patient  perseverance  to  our  struggles.     II. 

As   THE   PUBLIC   TESTIMONY   FROM    GoD   OF   ITS   EFFICACY  AND  ACCEPTANCE.       JeSUS  had 

undertaken  a  mighty  work — no  less  than  the  taking  away  the  sin  of  the  world  ; 
and  the  assurance  of  the  full  sufficiency  and  complete  acceptance  of  His  sacrifice  is 
essential  to  our  faith,  and  peace,  and  holiness.  As,  therefore,  God  vouchsafed  to 
testify  His  acceptance  of  preceding  offerings,  bo,  by  raising  up  His  Son,  did  Ha 
testify  that  the  justifying  act  was  done  and  was  sufficient,  that  access  to  His 
presence  was  procured  for  every  penitent,  that  we  may  now  have  boldness  to  enter 
into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus.  When  Abraham  offered  sacrifice  God  vouch- 
safed to  give  him  visible  testimony  of  its  acceptance  (Gen.  xv.  17, 18).  When  Mosea 
and  the  Israelites  offered  burnt-offerings  to  the  Lord  then  "  they  saw  the  God  of 
Israel — they  saw  God  and  did  eat  and  drink."  When  Elijah  had  prepared  tha 
burnt  sacrifice  then  "  the  fire  of  the  Lord  fell  and  consumed  the  burnt  sacrifice,"  &c. 
And  so,  too,  after  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  was  offered,  then  came  there  tbe  sign  from 
heaven  ;  then  was  there  the  public  proclamation — now,  by  facts,  of  what  had  been 
already  told  in  words — "  This  is  My  beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased  1 " 
"  Thou  art  My  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  Thee  I  "  Oh,  let  the  anxious  penitent, 
who  feels  that  on  his  justification  through  the  merits  of  Christ  must  ever  hang  all 
his  peace  and  hope,  look  with  thankful  adoration  to  the  testimony  given  thereto. 
"  He  was  raised  again  for  " — for  having  wrought  out  and  completed — "  our  justifica- 
tion " ;  and  that  raising  again  is  the  public  manifesto  from  the  court  of  heaven 
that  the  act  is  registered  and  recognised  before  the  throne  of  God.  Does  any  one 
arge  that  his  particular  justification  could  not  Lave  been  accomplished  before  his 
repentance  and  faith  ?  Then  observe  that  our  personal  faith  is  not  the  antecedent 
to  our  justification,  but  simply  the  recipient  of  that  which  has  been  wrought  out 
for  us  by  Jesus  only,  on  the  Cross.  It  is  the  benefits  of  justification  to  the  individual 
penitent  that  depends  upon  his  laying  hold  of  that  free  gift  which  has  been  prepared 
for  him.  What  he  needs  is  simply  warrant  to  return  to  God  ;  and,  therefore,  when 
he  is  turning,  what  more  is  requisite  for  him  to  do  but  to  lift  the  eye  of  faith,  and 
see  that  the  path  is  open,  that  the  barriers  between  him  and  his  God  have  been  long 
ago  removed ;  that  the  new  and  living  way  has  been  consecrated  through  the  veil ; 
that  is  to  say,  Christ's  flesh  ;  and,  therefore,  that  he  has  only  to  draw  near  with  a 
true  heart  in  full  assurance  of  faith  ?  Your  state  of  justification,  your  feelings  of 
acceptance  and  adoption,  depend,  indeed,  on  having  in  your  bosom  the  scroll  of 
pardon,  sealed  with  Jesus's  blood  ;  and  your  continuance  in  the  enjoyment  of  that 
state  depends  on  your  frequent  looking  at  it,  and  your  watchful  preservation  of  it : 
but  the  act  of  justification — it  has  been  already  achieved ;  the  pardon  itself — it  has 
already  passed  the  great  seal ;  the  scroll  in  which  it  is  recorded — it  has  been 
already  exhibited  on  the  Cross  of  Jesus ;  and  you  cannot  write,  nor  seal,  nor  counter- 
sign it.  Look  up  then  upon  the  record  and  leap  for  joy ;  behold  the  public  testimony 
of  it,  and  "  bless  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  of  His  abundant 
mercy  hath  begotten  you  again  unto  aUvely  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ 
from  the  dead."    III.  As  the  pledoe  that  all  who  realise  in  themselves  the 

EFFICACY  OF   THAT  DEATH  SHALL  BE  SIMILARLY  REWARDED    WITH    PARTICIPATION  IN  THAT 

RESURRECTION.  Jcsus  died,  not  as  an  individual  only,  but  as  the  substitute  and 
representative  of  guilty  man ;  and  Jesus  was  raised  again,  not  as  an  individual 
oi^y,  but  as  the  head  and  representative  of  pardoned  men  ;  and  consequently  as  we 
reaUse  the  efficacy  of  His  death,  so  does  the  fact  which  Easter  commemorates 
assure  as  that  we  shall  realise  the  glory  of  His  resurrection  (chap.  vi.  5-10).  (T. 
Griffith,  A.M.)  Christ  raised  for  our  justification: — Justification   (in  the  full 

■ense  of  the  word)  is  the  holding  righteous,  not  merely  the  not  holding  guilty. 
The  man  who  is  justified  is  not  merely  not  condemned,  he  is  actually  accounted  to 
be  righteoas.    AJid  the  apostle,  in  the  text,  connects  the  former  with  the  death. 


818  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ct, 

the  latter  with  the  resurrection,  of  Christ.  By  that,  the  record  of  oar  sins  is  blotted 
out  from  God's  book ;  bj  this,  there  is  conveyed  to  us  our  title  to  a  place  in  His 
eternal  and  glorious  kingdom.  Why  is  our  justification  thus  associated  with  the 
Resurrection,  as  our  forgiveness  is  with  the  Passion  ?  In  answer,  remember  that 
there  are  three  moments  in  the  act  of  redemption  as  manifested  in  time,  and  that 
these  are  severally  embodied  in  the  nativity,  the  passion,  and  the  resurrection  of 
Christ.  Now — 1.  Man  is  alienated  from  God,  and  the  question  is  how  shall  he  be 
set  at  one  with  God  ?  The  method  which  God  devised  was  the  personal  union 
of  Deity  and  humanity  in  the  Word  made  flesh.  And  thus  the  mystery  of  the 
Incarnation  marks  the  first  step  in  this  Divine  process  of  restitution.  2.  But  the 
union  of  the  human  race  with  God  in  the  unity  of  the  Incarnate  Son,  is  merely 
inchoate  and  partial,  while  there  remains  the  barrier  of  sin.  And  therefore,  "  God 
Bending  His  own  Son  in  the  flesh,  and  for  sin  "  {i.e.,  as  a  sin-offering),  "  condemned 
Bin  in  the  flesh. "  Christ  died  for  us,  and  we  in  Him  ;  and  at  His  death  "  our  old 
man  was  crucified  with  Him,  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed,  that  hence- 
forth we  should  not  serve  sin. "  And  thus  the  Incarnation  and  the  Atonement  are 
each  the  necessary  complement  of  the  other.  The  Incarnation  was  necessary  that 
the  Atonement  might  be  effected  as  it  was  effected ;  the  Atonement  was  necessary  to 
carry  out  the  work  of  the  Incarnation.  3.  But  are  we  at  liberty  to  stop  here? 
ShaU  we  say  that  the  Consummatum  est  of  Calvary  marked  the  completion  and  close 
of  our  redemption,  as  it  symbolised  that  of  our  Bedeemer's  atoning  sacrifice  f  Not 
so.  By  His  act  of  self-immolation  Christ  threw  down  the  barriers  of  sin ;  by  it  He 
continually  is  and  will  be  throwing  them  down  until  all  things  are  put  under  His 
feel  And  therefore  He  "was  deUvered  for  our  offences."  But  the  very  act  by 
which  those  barriers  were  thrown  down  impaired  the  personal  anion  of  God  and 
mtm  in  Christ.  For,  although  neither  the  soul  nor  the  body  of  the  Saviour  during 
their  temporary  separation  ceased  to  be  in  anion  with  the  Divine  Word,  yet,  as 
Pearson  says,  "  As  far  ...  as  humanity  consists  in  the  essential  union  of  the  parts 
of  human  nature,  so  far  the  humanity  of  Christ  upon  His  death  did  cease  to  be, 
and  consequently  He  ceased  to  be  man."  Accordingly,  the  great  sacrifice  of  the 
Cross  removed  the  obstacle  to  carrying  out  the  process  of  restitution  initiated  in  the 
Incarnation,  at  the  price  of  partially  reversing  the  Incarnation  itself.  The  work  of 
redemption  had  indeed  gone  a  step  forward,  but  it  had  also  gone  a  step  backward. 
A  remedy  had  been  provided  for  sin,  but  the  remedy  had  left  results  which  needed 
a  further  remedy.  4.  And  then  came  the  Resurrection,  which  not  only  set  its  seal 
to  the  Incarnation  and  the  Atonement,  but  completed  the  work  of  both.  (1)  Jesaa 
was  "  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power,"  and  the  Incarnation  itself  began 
anew  when  God  "  raised  up  Jesus  again  "  ;  as  it  is  written,  "  Thou  art  My  Son, 
this  day  have  I  begotten  Thee."  (2)  As  the  atonement  on  the  Cross,  by  the  con- 
demnation of  sin  in  the  flesh,  purchased  for  man  the  non-imputation  of  sin,  and 
cleared  the  way  for  the  imputation  to  him  of  righteousness — so,  from  the  Incarna- 
tion restored  and  perfected  in  our  risen  Lord,  flows  forth  to  His  redeemed  and 
believing  people,  both  the  imputation  and  also  the  reality  of  positive  righteousness. 
Conclusion :  In  speaking  as  I  do  of  the  power  of  His  resurrection,  I  am  not  merely 
using  the  language  of  technical  theology,  but  that  of  Holy  Scripture  itself.  We  are 
told  that  baptized  and  believing  Christians  were  crucified  with  Christ,  died  with 
Him,  were  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  His  death,  were  buried  with  Him  by 
baptism  into  death,  are  dead  onto  sin — and  then,  on  the  other  hand,  that  God 
brought  us  to  Ufe  with  Christ,  and  raised  us  up  with  Him,  and  seated  us  together 
with  Him  in  the  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus,  so  that  we  may  now  reckon  our- 
Belves  "  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord."  So  again,  the  same  apostle  who  tells  us  all  this,  also  says,  "  that,  while  we 
were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us.  Much  more  then,  being  now  justified  " — the 
word  is  here  used  in  its  negative  sense — "  by  His  blood,  we  shall  be  saved  from 
wrath  through  Him.  For  if,  when  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  Q  od  by 
the  death  of  His  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  His  life." 
And  in  like  manner  St.  Peter  tells  us  that  "  Baptism  doth  now  save  us  ...  by  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,"  and  opens  his  Epistle  with  a  triumphant  burst  of 
thanksgiving  (1  Pet.  i.  3,  4).  (Bp.  Basil  Jones.)  Christ  risen  our  justification  : — 
I,  Thb  death  and  resubrkction  op  Chbist  have  each  theib  own  etfioact  and 
DiSTiNOT  onr.  1.  That  death  paid  the  ransom  for  the  whole  world,  but  the  world 
lay  as  yet  in  darkness  and  sin.  In  that  awful  night,  when  the  firstfruits  of  our 
redemption,  the  pardoned  malefactor,  was  by  Christ's  side  in  Paradise,  and  He 
brought  that  blessed  tidings  to  the  righteous  departed  who  had  bo  long  awaited  His 


«HAP.  rr.]  ROMANS.  8U 

coming,  how  lay  oar  earth  ?  Apostles  dismayed  and  perplexed ;  Peter  weeping  hia 
fall ;  the  blood  of  the  Redeemer  resting  on  the  Jews  and  their  children  ;  the  chief 
priests  seeking  to  secure  the  past  by  further  sin ;  the  sun  gone  down  at  noon,  with- 
drawing itself  from  witnessing  man's  extremest  sin.  The  mercy  of  the  Bedemption 
had  been  accomplished,  but  the  ransomed  were  not  as  yet  set  free.  They  were  "  yet 
in  their  sins."  For  this  blessed  day  it  was  reserved  to  bring  life  out  of  death,  to 
"  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison,"  and  "  let  the  oppressed  go  free,"  "  to 
bring  in  everlasting  righteousness."  His  death  atoned  for  us;  His  resurrection 
justifies  us.  2.  What  St.  Paul  declares  here,  he  teaches  elsewhere  (1  Cor,  xv.  17). 
He  says  not  merely  if  Christ  be  not  risen  no  proof  hath  been  given  that  His  atone- 
ment hath  been  accepted,  but  "your  faith  is  vain;  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins";  the 
world's  sin  has  been  atoned  for,  but  the  cleansing  blood  has  not  reached  to  you. 
The  Gross,  then,  did  not  at  once  justify  us.  Before,  all  in  a  manner  looked  on  to 
it  (Rev.  xiii.  8).  Since  all  looks  back  to  it,  all  flows  from  it  (Rev.  v.  12).  Yet  such 
was  the  will  of  God,  that  it  should  not  by  itself  directly  convey  the  mercies  it 
obtained.  What  He  purchased  for  us  by  His  death  He  giveth  us  through  His  life. 
It  is  our  living  Lord  who  imparts  to  us  the  fruits  of  His  own  death  (John  x.  17  ; 
Bev.  i.  18).  As  truly,  then,  as  the  death  of  Christ  was  the  true  remission  of  our 
sins,  though  not  yet  imparted  to  us,  so  truly  was  His  resurrection  our  true  justifica- 
tion imparting  to  us  the  efficacy  of  His  death,  and  justifying  us,  or  making  ua 
righteous  in  the  sight  of  God.  U.  Scriptdbb  tells  cs  how  the  besubrection  la 
TO  UB  THE  soDBCE  OP  JUSTIFICATION  AND  LIFE.  1.  It  was  the  espccial  promise  of  the 
resurrection  that  our  Lord  would  thereby  come  into  a  closer  relation  with  Hia 
disciples,  no  longer  to  be  in  outward  presence  with  them,  but  to  be  in  them  and  be 
their  life  (John  xiv.  17-23).  2.  And  with  this  agrees  the  language  in  which  the 
blessings  of  the  gospel  are,  in  such  a  marked  and  repeated  way,  afterwards  expressed, 
that  we  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  that  His  Spirit  dwelleth  in  us.  But  we  can  be  "  in 
Christ "  only  by  His  taking  us  into  Him  by  His  Spirit  (2  Cor.  xiii.  5).  Again,  aa 
our  Lord  declared,  '♦  I  am  the  Life,"  so  St.  Paul  says,  having  been  "  crucified  with 
Christ,"  ••  it  is  not  I  which  live,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me,"  "your  life  is  bid  with 
Christ  in  God."  3.  These  are  indeed  all  one  gift,  variously  spoken  of  according  to 
oar  various  needs,  or  deaths.  It  is  life,  as  opposed  to  our  state  of  death  in  sin ; 
righteousness,  whereas  we  were  nnrighteous  ;  sanctification,  since  we  were  unholy ; 
redemption,  as  Satan's  captives ;  wisdom,  as  become  brutish  ;  truth,  as  in  error ; 
but  the  one  gift  in  all  is  our  Incarnate  Lord,  who  is  Himself  "  made  unto  us  Wisdom, 
and  Righteousness,  and  Sanctification,  and  Redemption  " ;  *'  the  Way,  the  Truth, 
and  the  Life."  He  doth  not  merely  give  these  gifts  as  gifts,  precious  indeed,  yet 
Btill  outward  to  and  without  Himself.  He  Himself  is  them,  and  all  to  us.  These 
are  the  gifts  which,  as  man,  He  received,  to  shed  down  abundantly  on  man,  through 
His  risen  and  glorified  humanity.  4.  So,  further,  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the  knowledge 
of  Christ,  and  of  '•  the  power  of  His  resurrection,"  as  the  fruit  of  being  "  found  in 
Him,"  and  of  "  the  Spirit  of  Him  who  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwelling  in  " 
us,  and  of  "  the  exceeding  greatness  of  His  power  to  us-ward  who  believe  "  being 
*'  according  "  or  conformable  "  to  the  working  of  the  might  of  His  power  which  He 
wrought  in  Christ,  when  He  raised  Him  from  the  dead  "  ;  in  all  cases  bringing  our 
life  close  to  the  resurrection,  and  showing  how  the  same  Spirit,  whereby  His  body 
was  raised,  is  communicated  to  us,  and  that,  because  we  are  in  Him,  taken  unto 
Him  by  His  indwelling  Spirit,  and  having  the  Spirit,  because  "  in  Him."  This, 
then,  is  the  sum  of  what  Holy  Scripture  teaches  many  ways.  All  salvation,  forgive- 
ness, overcoming  of  death,  restoration  to  life,  oneness  with  God ;  all  treasures  of 
wisdom,  mercy,  and  righteousness,  and  holiness  lay  in  His  atoning  blood  ;  but, 
that  they  might  be  applied  to  us,  He  in  whom  they  were  must  come  to  us  and  take 
as  onto  Himself.  What  in  Himself  He  is,  that  to  us  He  becometh,  by  dweUing  in 
OB,  that  we  may  dwell  in  Him.  And  of  these  gifts  His  resurrection  was  the  pledge 
and  beginning.  It  was  the  earnest  that  that  same  Spirit,  through  which  His  holy 
body  was  raised,  should  be  diflfused  through  that  whole  body  which  He  purposed  to 
join  to  Himself,  the  Head.  It  was  the  commencement  of  that,  of  which  the  day  of 
Pentecost  was  the  fulfilment  ;  and  thus  our  weekly  festival  is  at  once  that  of  the 
rising  of  our  Lord,  and  His  coming  to  us  by  the  Spirit.  On  tbe  Cross  our  Lord 
gave  Himself  for  us ;  through  the  resurrection  He  giveth  Himself  to  us.  On  the 
Cross,  He  was  the  Lamb  which  was  slain  for  the  sins  of  the  world :  in  the  resurrec- 
tion, that  body  which  was  slain  became  life-giving.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Christ'* 
resurrection  : — On  the  Sacro  Monte,  at  VaraUo,  is  a  s apposed  imitation  of  the 
sepulchre  of  the  Lord  Jesus.    It  was  a  singular  thing  to  stoop  down  and  enter  it. 


SaO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ota».  ▼, 

of  cooTBe  finding  it  empty,  like  the  one  which  it  feebly  pictured.  "What  a  joyfnl 
word  was  that  of  the  angel,  "  He  is  not  here  I "  Sweet  assurance — millions  of  the 
dead  are  here  in  the  sepulchre,  thousands  of  saints  are  here  in  the  grave,  but  He  is 
not  here.  If  He  had  remained  there,  then  all  manhood  had  been  for  ever  im- 
prisoned  in  the  tomb,  but  He  who  died  for  His  Church,  and  was  shut  up  as  her 
hostage,  has  risen  as  her  representative,  surety,  and  head,  and  all  His  Baint*  h^n 
riaen  in  Him,  and  shall  eventually  rise  like  Him.    ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Vbb.  1.  Therefore  being  Juitlfled  by  faith. — Jiutifieation: — We  have  here — 
I.  A  STATE  OB  CONDITION — "justified."  This  implies — 1.  Previous  dishonour.  A 
truly  righteous  character  needs  no  justification.  2.  Complete  satisfaction.  A  man 
who  owes  a  debt  can  only  be  justified  when  that  debt  is  paid ;  although  it  need  not 
be  paid  by  himself.  3.  Perfect  restoration — to  all  rights,  privileges,  position,  Ac. 
Justification  does  not  mean  righteousness.  A  man  is  justified  although  he  is 
defiled  in  sin.  The  justification  of  man  by  God  is  His  counting  man  as 
righteous.  II.  A  meai^s  or  method — "  faith."  Faith  is  that  principle  which 
tinites  a  man  with  Christ,  and  so  enables  him  to  appropriate  all  the  Savioor's 
merits  and  righteousness.  Substitution,  to  be  effectual,  not  only  requires  its 
acceptance  by  the  judge,  but  the  acceptance  of  the  Saviour  by  the  sinner  as  his 
Substitute.  Faith  is  that  acceptance  by  the  sinner.  Notice — 1.  That  this  act  is 
difficult.  It  is  contrary  to  human  nature — men  would  rather  trust  themselves 
than  God.  Hence  they  add  rites  and  ceremonies.  2.  It  includes  acts  as  well  as 
conviction  and  trust.  "  Faith  without  works  is  dead,"  and  a  dead  principle  has  no 
existence.  III.  A  result  attained — peace  with  God.  Peace  is  desirable  with 
man,  much  more  with  God.  True  peace  can  be  obtained  in  no  other  way  but  this. 
There  is  a  state  which  is  often  mistaken  for  it,  such  as  indifference,  a  numbed 
conscience.  Gratuitous  pardon  without  justification  by  atonement  would  not  be 
able  to  give  peace,  but  pardon  through  satisfied  justice  can.  Nothing  can  satisfy 
the  sense  of  justice  but  trust  in  the  justice-satisfying  Saviour.  {Hcnnilist.) 
Justification : — I.  Its  nature.  1.  From  the  meaning  of  the  word.  2.  From  the 
type  (Lev.  xvi.  21).  (1)  The  two  goats  were  necessary  to  set  forth  the  perfect 
work  of  Christ :  the  first  in  atoning  for  sin,  the  other  in  bearing  it  away.  3.  In  its 
foundation  (chap.  iii.  24,  25 ;  v.  9).  (1)  The  foundation  is  solid.  (2)  The  grace 
is  perfect.  II.  Its  condition.  "By  faith."  Consider — 1.  The  root  meaning  of 
the  word.  2.  The  naturalness  of  the  thing  signified.  3.  What  is  involved  in 
unbelief.  III.  Its  fruits.  1.  Peace  (ver.  1).  (1)  Its  nature.  (2)  With  whom 
established.     (3)  Through  whom  acquired.     2.  Standing  (ver.  2).     3.  Joy  (ver.  2). 

(1)  Its  inspiration.  "  Hope  of  the  glory  of  God."  (2)  Its  strength.  "  In  tribula- 
tions." (3)  Its  intellectual  basis  (ver.  4).  (4)  Its  internal  evidence  (ver.  5). 
IV.  Its  source.  The  love  of  God.  1.  The  manner  in  which  it  was  procured 
(ver.  8).  (1)  "Commendeth"  should  be  rendered  "  giveth  proof  of."  2.  The 
character  of  those  for  whom  Christ  died.     (1)  "  Those  without  strength  "  (ver.  6). 

(2)  "  Sinners  '*  (ver.  8).  (3)  Such  an  exhibition  of  love  unparalleled  (ver.  7). 
3.  The  purpose  for  which  God  gave  His  Son  (vers.  9,  10).  V.  Practical  lessons. 
1.  The  blessing  of  which  this  lesson  treats  is  the  greatest  need  of  man.  2.  The 
sacrifice  which  Christ  made  to  procure  this  blessing  the  most  wonderful  fact  in 
history.  3.  The  condition  on  which  this  blessing  may  be  obtained  the  most 
reasonable  and  easy.  4.  The  benefits  which  this  blessing  confers  on  the  believer 
in  this  life  are  the  most  precious  God  can  bestow.  5.  The  glory  to  which  the 
believer  by  it  lays  claim  is  ineffable  and  eternal.  (P.  C.  Hughes^  A.M.)  Jiutifi- 
eation more  than  forgivenesi : — A  friend  with  whom  you  have  been  long  doing 
business  falls  into  a  condition  of  insolvency,  and  you  find  that  he  is  your  debtor 
to  a  large  amount.  There  is  no  prospect  of  his  ever  being  able  to  pay  you  back, 
and  you  have  reason  to  know  that  this  condition  of  debt  arises  not  merely  from 
his  misfortune,  bnt  from  his  fault.  Under  these  circumstances  it  would  be 
possible  for  you  to  liberate  him  from  his  debt  by  an  act  of  forgiveness.  Let  as 
suppose  that  yon  adopt  this  course ;  the  man  would  no  longer  be  in  fear  of  a 
debtor's  prison,  and  would  no  doubt  feel  himself  under  a  great  obligation  to  yoo* 


OBir.  v.]  ROMANS.  821 

Bat  would  such  a  state  of  things  be  likely  to  bring  yon  into  closer  personal 
relations  with  each  other  ?  Would  it  not  necessarily  produce  on  the  contrary  a 
certain  distance  and  constraint  ?  On  the  other  hand,  the  forgiven  debtor  must 
needs,  methinks,  feel  ashamed  to  look  his  generous  creditor  in  the  face,  must  feel 
ill  at  ease  in  his  presence,  and  would  shrink  from  familiar  social  intercourse  with 
the  family  of  one  on  whom  his  conduct  has  inflicted  such  serious  losses.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  forgiving  creditor  could  scarcely  be  expected  to  select  such  a 
person  for  his  friend,  and  to  treat  his  past  conduct  as  if  it  were  a  thing  easily  to  be 
forgotten.  But  to  illustrate  our  position  further,  let  us  now  present  another  case. 
Let  us  suppose  that  the  creditor  is  so  convinced  of  the  sincerity  of  the  regret 
which  his  debtor  professes,  and  has  reason  to  believe  that  the  se^re  lesson  has 
wrought  in  him  so  great  a  moral  change  that  he  feels  himself  free  to  make  an 
experiment  which  most  of  us  would  certainly  regard  as  a  perilous  one;  let  us 
suppose  that,  instead  of  remitting  his  debt,  he  introduces  him  into  partnership 
with  his  own  son,  with  whose  business  he  is  himself  closely  concerned.  This  his 
new  connection  with  a  solvent  and  flourishing  firm  places  him,  we  may  say,  in  a 
position  of  solvency,  removes  the  stigma  of  bankruptcy,  puts  him  in  the  way  of 
making  a  fuU  return  to  his  benefactor,  to  whom  at  the  same  time  it  greatly 
enhances  his  obligation.  Now  it  is  easy  to  see  how  this  man — not  merely  forgiven, 
but  in  a  certain  sense  justified — will  be  broupht  by  such  an  arrangement  into  the 
closest  relations  with  his  benefactor.  Friendly  social  intercourse  will  exist  without 
restraint,  and  he  who  under  the  former  mode  of  treatment  might  have  seemed 
little  better  than  an  escaped  convict  will  now  be  a  recognised  and  respected  member 
of  the  social  circle  in  which  his  creditor  moves.  (W.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.)  Justifi- 
cation by  faith : — There  is  no  one  who  has  not  asked  the  question  to  which  these 
words  give  the  true  answer.  "  How  shall  man  have  peace  with  God  ?  "  Wherever 
man  is  found,  whether  savage  or  civilised,  rich  or  poor,  he  is  found  attempting  to 
solve  this  problem.  For  everywhere  man  is  found  beset  with  present  miseries,  and 
haunted  with  the  dread  of  some  angry  power  that  inflicts  them.  And,  therefore, 
everywhere  man  is  found  endeavouring  to  appease  this  displeasure  by  making 
peace  with  his  God.  Now  to  this  question  there  are  three  answers  possible :  that 
man  might  restore  him8elf,or  that  God  alone  might  restore  man,  or  that  God  and 
amn  together  might  effect  this  restoration.  The  first  is  the  religion  of  the  heathen : 
he  seeks  to  appease  God  by  his  own  acts  ;  he  will  give  even  his  first-born  for  his 
transgressions.  The  second  is  the  religion  of  the  Pharisee  :  "  God,  I  thank  Thee, 
I  am  not  as  other  men  are."  The  third  is  the  religion  of  the  publican  ,  "  God  be 
merciful  to  me,  a  sinner."  Which  is  the  true  one?  I.  Scripture  everywhere 
asserts  that  God  alone  justiftes  (Micah  vi.  7 ;  Psa.  xlix.  7 ;  Isa.  xlv.  21,  22). 
Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  I  Here,  then,  is  a  simple  and  an  unerring  test,  by 
which  to  try  every  system  of  religion.  1.  To  "justify"  means  to  "pronounce 
guiltless."  It  never  signifies  to  make  just,  but  always  to  declare  or  pronounce  just 
(Prov.  xvii.  15).  This  justification  is  indispensable  to  peace  vrith  God,  for  guilt 
cannot  be  at  peace  vrith  justice.  Before  God  can  be  at  peace  with  any  man.  He  must 
first  pronounce  him  to  be  righteous.  2,  Here,  then,  arise  two  great  questions  : 
first,  what  righteousness  is  this?  and,  secondly,  how  does  it  become  ours?  St. 
Paul  tells  us  that  it  is  through  Christ.  But  even,  for  the  sake  of  His  dear  Son, 
God  cannot  say  the  thing  that  is  not.  Unless  there  be  perfect  righteousness  seen 
by  Him,  He  cannot  say  He  sees  it.  How,  then,  does  Christ  procure  us  this  perfect 
righteousness?  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  In  it  is  laid  down,  that  Christ  procured  our 
righteousness  by  being  made  sin  for  us.  Clearly,  then,  if  we  know  how  He  was 
made  sin,  we  know  how  we  are  made  righteous.  Was  He,  then,  made  really  and 
truly  sinful?  God  forbid.  He,  the  Holy  One,  was,  for  our  sakes,  reckoned  or 
accounted  sinful.  In  the  same  way,  therefore,  we  sinners  are,  for  His  sake, 
reckoned  righteous ;  our  sins  are  reckoned  as  if  they  were  His ;  His  righteous- 
ness is  reckoned  as  if  it  were  ours.  To  be  "  justified  through  Christ,"  there- 
fore, is  to  have  the  righteousness  of  Christ  so  imputed  to  us,  that  God  reckons 
U8,  or  pronounces  us,  just.  This  righteousness  is  bestowed  upon  us  by  faith. 
Faith  is  the  link  that  joins  together  the  justice  of  God  and  the  satisfaction 
of  Christ  in  the  person  of  the  believer,  so  that  God  can  be  just,  and  the 
justifier  of  him  that  believes.  3.  Is  there,  then,  no  real  righteousness  in  the 
believer?  does  God  pronounce  him  who  is  unholy,  holy;  and  admit  the  unclean, 
in  his  uncleanness.  into  His  presence?  Assuredly  not.  God  never  pronounced  any 
man  holy  whom  He  did  not  also  make  holy.  There  is  a  righteousness  external  and 
a  righteousness  internal :  both  are  real — both  shall  one  day  be  perfect ;  bat  that 
VOL.   I.  21 


811  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  t. 

which  is  wroaght  for  us  is  perfect  from  the  first ;  that  which  is  wrought  in  as  ii 
imperfect,  and  gradually  arrives  at  perfection :  the  one  at  once  and  for  ever 
justifies ;  the  other  progressively  sanctifies.  4.  But  how  does  this  doctrine  make 
God  alone  the  Saviour  without  any  co-operation  on  the  part  of  man  ?  Is  not  faith  a 
work  of  the  mind  ?  and  is  not  this,  at  least  in  part,  the  cause  of  the  sinner's  justifica- 
tion ?  We  answer,  No  1  for  we  are  not  justified  because  of  our  faith,  but  by  our  faith. 
Faith  is  the  hand  which  the  sinner  stretches  forth  to  receive  the  '•  free  gift  "  of 
God's  mercy ;  but  it  is  not  the  stretching  out  of  the  hand  which  induces  the 
bestowal  of  the  alms.  Nay,  more,  that  very  hand  is  palsied ;  we  have  no  power  of 
ourselves  to  put  it  forth.  Faith,  itself,  is  a  free  gift  of  God ;  it  is  not  until  He  haa 
said,  "  Beach<forth  thine  hand,"  that  we  can,  by  doing  so,  receive  the  alms  of  His 
free  mercy,  which,  because  of  Christ's  satisfaction.  He  is  able,  and,  because  of  His 
own  infinite  love.  He  is  willing,  to  bestow  upon  us.  5.  This  doctrine,  then,  fully 
answers  the  test  to  which  we  agreed  to  submit  it :  it  reveals  a  salvation,  which 
is  God's  work,  and  His  alone ;  prompted  by  His  love,  designed  by  His  wisdom, 
and  accomplished  by  His  power.  This  work  of  man's  salvation  has  upon 
it  the  impress  of  divinity  ;  it  displays  that  wonderful  union  of  power  and  wisdom 
that  is  found  in  all  God's  works,  which  makes  them  seem  at  once  so  simple  and  yet 
80  mysterious.  View  it  in  its  aspect  towards  man,  how  simple  it  seems — "  Believe 
and  live  1 "  View  it  in  its  aspect  as  regards  God,  as  His  plan  devised  for  the 
salvation  of  man,  without  the  compromise  of  any  one  of  His  attributes,  it  is  the 
great  '•  mystery  of  godliness."  This  plan  of  salvation  befits  the  majesty  and  the 
wisdom  of  God,  while  it  is  adapted  to  the  ignorance  and  the  weakness  of  man. 
This  river  of  life  is  unfathomable,  in  its  mysterious  depths,  by  the  mightiest  of 
created  beings ;  and  yet  the  little  child  may  kneel  by  its  brink  and  drink  of  its 
Bweet  waters  that  flow  softly,  clear  as  crystal,  from  beneath  the  throne  of  God. 
6.  It  is  an  ancient  doctrine  this  ;  older  than  Luther,  who  revived  it,  or  Paul,  who 
defended  it,  or  Abraham,  who  exemplified  it.  It  was  revealed  by  God,  at  the  gate 
of  Eden,  to  the  first  sinner  who,  by  faith,  hoped  for  deliverance  yet  to  be  accom- 
plished by  the  seed  of  the  woman.  The  first  man  who  believed  was  justified  by 
faith.  The  last  saint  that  enters  heaven  shall  enter  it  praising  God,  who,  justify- 
ing him  by  faith,  gives  peace  to  his  soul  for  ever  and  ever,  through  Jesus  Christ. 
II.  Let  us  now  contrast  with  it  man's  plan  op  salvation,  in  which  hb  seeks  to 
MiNGLB  HIS  righteousness  WITH  THAT  OF  GoD.  The  eiroT  of  the  self-righteous 
(chap.  X.  3)  is  that  he  seeks  a  righteousness  of  his  own,  because  he  will  not  submit 
to  be  saved  by  the  righteousness  of  God  ;  as  man  fell  by  seeking  to  be  his  own  God, 
BO  he  remains  fallen  by  seeking  to  be  his  own  saviour.  As  he  once  refused  to  be 
entirely  ruled  by  God,  so  he  now  refuses  to  be  entirely  saved  by  God.  This  is  a 
most  subtle  and  dangerous  error.  1.  The  statement  of  this  doctrine  we  will  take 
from  the  Church  of  Bome,  because  Bomanism  is  a  religion  of  human  nature, 
reduced  to  a  regular  system,  and  because  we  believe  this  difference  between  hw 
and  us  is  generally  misunderstood.  (1)  Let  us  clearly  state  how  Bome  and  we  are 
agreed  in  this  matter.  We  are  agreed — (a)  That  man  is  so  utterly  fallen  that  he 
has  no  power  to  help  himself,  (b)  That  he  cannot  be  saved  unless  God  bestow  on 
hmi  a  perfect  righteousness,  (c)  That  God  does  bestow  this  righteousness  for 
Christ's  sake.  (2)  Where,  then,  do  we  diSer?  (a)  As  to  the  nature  of  this 
righteousness.  We  say  that  it  is  a  righteousness  imputed;  she,  that  it  is  a 
righteousness  implanted.  We  say  it  is  a  righteousness  wrought  for  us ;  she, 
it  is  righteousness  wrought  in  us.  We  say,  God,  for  Christ's  sake,  reckons 
as  as  perfectly  righteous,  and  then  proceeds  to  make  us  holy ;  she  says, 
God,  for  Christ's  sake,  makes  us  perfectly  holy,  and  then  pronounces  us, 
because  of  this  inherent  holiness,  to  be  righteous.  In  other  words,  we  hold 
that  God  justifies  and  also  sanctifies  ;  Bome  holds  that  He  only  sanctifies. 
(b)  As  to  the  manner  in  which  this  righteousness  is  applied  to  us :  we  say,  by 
faith  only;  she  says,  in  the  sacraments:  she  holds  that  this  righteousness  is 
infused  into  every  baptised  man,  so  that  he  is  made  perfectly  righteous,  and  this 
state  of  justification,  she  holds,  further,  may  be  endangered  by  venial  sin,  and  lost 
by  deadly  sin,  and  that  it  progresses  so  that  a  man  may  be  more  or  less  justified  at 
one  time  than  another.  Now  observe  the  subtlety  of  this  error.  It  might  be  said 
this  doctrine  of  Bome  answers  our  test,  for  it  ascribes  all  the  work  of  salvation  to 
God ;  it  declares  that  this  inherent  righteousness  is  God's  free  gift,  just  as  yoa  say 
your  imputed  righteousness  is.  Surely  there  is  no  claim  here  made  for  man's 
righteousness.  Let  us  see  how  our  Lord  disposes  of  this  answer.  "Two  men 
went  up  into  the  temple  to  pray,  the  one  a  Pharisee  the  other  a  publican,  and  tha 


DBAS.  T.]  ROMANS.  828 

Pharisee  stood  and  prayed  thus  with  himself — God,  I  thank  Thee,  I  am  not  as 
other  men  are."  Where  is  self -righteousness  here?  The  Pharisee  claims  no 
merit — he  declares  the  righteousness  which  he  presents  to  God,  to  be  God's  work ; 
God  has  made  him  to  differ  ;  he  fasts,  and  prays,  and  gives  alms,  but  the  power  to 
do  these  good  works  he  acknowledges  to  have  come  from  God ;  and  yet  it  is  said 
that  he  "  trusted  in  himself  that  he  was  righteous."  Why  ?  Because  the 
righteousness  he  presented  was  a  righteousness  in  him  ;  it  was  not  the  righteous- 
ue>s  of  God,  and  it  availed  him  nothing  to  say  that  it  was  God's  gift  at  first.  It  is 
self-righteous  to  present  to  God  as  a  reason  for  pardon  anything  in  man,  whether 
that  be  said  to  be  originally  God's  gift  or  not ;  he  who  comes  to  Him  must  come  as 
the  publican,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,'" — not  a  justified  or  sanctified  man,  but — 
"  me  a  sinner  1  "  Add  to  this,  that  even  if  the  righteousness  be  God's  gift  in  the 
first  instance,  yet  the  preserving  of  it,  the  increase  of  it,  by  faith,  and  prayer,  and 
penance,  are  the  man's  own,  upon  this  system,  so  that  such  an  one  must  claim  the 
reward  of  debt  and  not  of  grace.  2.  Although  we  have  gone  to  Home  for  a  definition 
of  it,  this  doctrine  is  to  be  found  among  ourselves.  How  many  are  there  who 
believe  that  God,  for  Christ's  sake,  will  accept  them  "if  they  do  their  best" — 
Christ's  merits  making  up  for  their  deficiency  1  How  many  more  are  there  who 
think  that  God.  for  Christ's  sake,  will  enable  them  to  keep  His  holy  law,  and  so  accept 
them  as  righteous  1  And  how  many  are  there  who  imagine  that  God,  for  Christ's 
sake,  accepts  their  faith  as  something  meritorious,  justifying  them  because  they 
hold  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith !  In  all  these,  from  the  open  claim  of 
heaven  as  a  reward,  to  the  more  subtle  claim  of  merit  for  having  rejected  all 
merit ;  and  of  righteousness  for  having  renouiuel  righteousness ;  in  all  these  there 
is  the  same  error — the  presenting  to  God  of  something  in  us,  instead  of  presenting 
the  perfect  righteousness  of  Christ  (Abp,  Magee.)  Man  saved  : — "The  words 
contain  a  golden  chain  of  highest  blessings  bestowed  by  God  upon  all  true 
Christians.  Notice — I.  The  Divike  method  of  salvation.  1.  Faith  in  Christ 
removes  the  condemnation.  It  means  both  a  general  trust  in  God's  revelations 
and  grace,  and  a  special  trust  in  Christ  as  given  by  the  Father's  love  to  be  the 
Redeemer  of  His  people.  Understanding,  will,  affections,  risking  their  all  upon 
Him.  Justification  is  not  perfection.  Not  justified  by  the  law  of  innocency,  or  of 
Moses,  but  by  the  law  of  Christ — "  who  died  for  our  sins,"  and  "  was  raised  again 
for  onr  justification."  2.  Faith  in  Christ  brings  the  believer  into  close  communion 
with  the  Father.  "  By  whom  also  we  have  access,"  &c.  They  are  reconciled,  and 
iii  a  state  of  love  and  friendship.  Since  man  once  sinned,  God's  justice  and  man's 
conscience  tell  us  that  we  are  unfit  for  God's  acceptance  or  communion  immediately, 
but  must  have  a  suitable  mediator.  Blessed  be  God  for  a  "  daysman  "  appointed 
betwixt  us  and  Himself !  Without  Him  I  dare  not  pray,  I  cannot  hope,  I  fear  to 
die ;  God  would  else  frown  me  away  to  misery.  All  the  hope  and  pardon  that  I 
have,  come  by  this  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith.  (1)  This  is  joyous  inter- 
course— "  Peace  with  God."  (2)  It  opens  up  a  bright  future.  "  And  rejoice  in 
hope  of  the  glory  of  God."  3.  Faith  in  Christ  strengthens  the  child  of  God  in 
tribulation.  "  Not  only  so,  but,"  &c.  The  glory  reveaJed  unto  us  is  so  transcen- 
dent, and  tribulation  so  small  and  short,  that  an  expectant  of  glory  may  well 
rejoice  in  spite  of  bodily  sufferings.  It  is  tribulation  for  Christ  and  righteousness' 
saie  that  we  are  to  glory  in ;  tribulation  for  our  sins  must  be  patiently  and 
penitently  born.  (1)  "Knowing  that  tribulation  worketh  patience."  That  which 
worketh  patience  should  be  a  matter  of  joy  ;  for  patience  can  do  more  good  for  us 
than  tribulation  can  harm.  Why  then  do  I  complain  under  suffering,  and  study 
so  little  the  exercise  of  patience  ?  (2)  "  And  patience  experience,  and  experience 
hope."  What  profitable  experiences  are  to  be  derived  from  patient  suffering  I  Of 
God's  providence,  of  our  own  dependence  upon  a  higher  power,  of  the  fickleness  of 
human  friendship,  (fee.  (3)  '•  And  hope  maketh  not  ashamed."  That  is,  true  hope 
of  what  God  hath  promised  shall  never  be  disappointed.  They  that  trust  in 
deceitful  creatures  are  disappointed  and  ashamed  of  their  hope ;  but  God  is  true 
and  ever  faithful.  All  this  shows  the  superiority  of  a  free  spirit  over  carnal 
weapons.  II.  The  indwellino  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  soukck  of  all  excellenct 
IN  THE  Chbistian  chabacter.  1.  By  the  "  love  of  God  shed  abroad"  is  meant — (1) 
The  reaUsation  of  Divine  life  in  the  soul.  (2)  The  sweet  experiences  arising  from 
the  absence  of  doubts  and  fears.  (3)  It  leads  God's  adopted  children  to  love  one 
another.  2.  The  Spirit  within — (1)  Is  helpful  to  overcome  temptation.  "  When 
the  enemy  shall  come  in  like  a  flood,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a  standard 
against  him."    (2)  Mortifies  the  fleshly  lusts  that  war  against  the  souL    The  des* 


3J4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

perately  wicked  heart  is  a  hotbed  of  lusts  and  passions  that  require  to  be  weeded, 
else  they  will  choke  the  germs  of  the  good  seed.  We  cannot  serve  God  and  Mam- 
mon. 3.  Points  to  a  future  life,  and  proves  our  title  to  it.  There  are  some  so  blind 
as  to  think  that  man  shall  have  no  hereafter,  because  brutes  have  not.  But  it  is 
enough  for  us  to  know  that  God  hath  promised  it ;  and  let  it  be  our  earnest  prayer, 
"  Shed  more  abroad  upon  my  heart,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  love  of  Thine  which 
will  draw  up  my  longing  soul  to  Thee,  rejoicing  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God." 
(Ricliard Baxter.)  Justification  hy  faith : — The  justification  of  which  Paul  speaks  is 
— 1.  Not  that  gracious  constitution  of  God  by  which,  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  He  so  far 
delivers  men  from  the  guilt  of  Adam's  sin  as  to  place  them  in  a  salvable  state,  and  by 
virtue  of  which  all  infants  dying  in  infancy  are  saved  (see  ver.  18) ;  for  justification 
is  not  common  to  the  race,  but  is  experienced  by  certain  individuals.  2.  Not  the 
justification  of  those  who  lived  under  inferior  dispensations,  or  who  now  live  in 
countries  where  the  gospel  is  not  known.  On  this  point  there  are  two  extremes. 
(1)  The  unauthorised  severity  of  those  who  hold  that  all  heathens  are  doomed  to 
damnation.  (2)  The  undistinguishing  charity  of  those  who  insinuate  that  the 
heathen  are  perfectly  safe,  and  need  not  be  disturbed  in  their  superstitions.  Each 
of  these  is  remote  from  the  truth.  3.  Not  justification  before  men  by  the  evidence 
of  works  (James  ii.),  but  the  justification  of  penitent  sinners  before  God,  which  is 
necessarily  previous.  4.  Not  the  justification  of  persevering  believers  at  the  last 
day.  This  will  be  pronounced  on  the  evidence  of  works  springing  from  faith,  and 
evidencing  its  genuineness  and  continuance.  Our  business  is  with  a  present 
justification,  "Being  justified."  Let  us  look  at: — 1.  Its  nature.  We  assume — 
(1)  That  all  men  naturally  are  in  a  state  of  guilt  and  condemnation.  Our  heredi- 
tary depravity  is  odious  to  the  God  of  Purity,  while  our  consequent  personal 
iniquity  renders  us  liable  to  punishment.  (2)  That  the  man  of  whose  justification 
we  are  about  to  speak  is  convinced  that  this  is  his  state.  2.  What,  then,  is  meant 
by  justification  in  these  circumstances  ?  To  justify  a  sinner  is  to  consider  him 
relatively  righteous,  and  to  deal  with  him  as  such,  notwithstanding  his  past  un- 
righteousness, by  clearing  and  releasing  him  from  various  penal  evils,  especially 
from  God's  wrath  and  the  liability  to  eternal  death.  Hence  justification  and  for- 
giveness are  substantially  the  same  (Acts  xiii.  38,  39 ;  Rom.  iv.  5,  8).  Note  that 
justification — (1)  Does  not  in  the  least  degree  alter  the  evil  nature  and  desert  of  sin. 
It  is  the  holy  Lord  who  justifieth.  The  penalty  is  still  naturally  due,  though 
graciously  remitted.  Hence  the  duty  of  continuing  to  confess  and  lament  even 
pardoned  sin  (Ezek.  xvi.  62,  63).  (2)  Is  not,  as  Eomish  and  some  mystic  divines 
contend,  the  being  made  righteous  by  the  infusion  of  a  sanctifying  influence, 
which  confounds  justification  with  regeneration.  (3)  Extends  to  all  past  sins  (Acta 
xiii.  39).  God  does  not  justify  us  by  degrees,  but  at  once.  (4)  However  effectual  to 
our  release  from  past  guilt,  does  not  terminate  our  state  of  probation.  As  he  who 
is  now  justified  was  once  condemned,  so  he  may  again  come  into  condemnation  by 
relapsing  into  sin,  as  was  the  case  with  Adam.  (5)  If  lost,  may  be  recovered 
(Psa,  xxxii,  1-5 ;  cf.  Eom.  iv,  1,  8).  II.  Its  immediate  results.  1.  The  restoration 
of  amity  and  intercourse  between  the  pardoned  sinner  and  the  pardoning  God. 
"  We  have  peace  with  God,"  and  consequently  access  to  Him.  The  ground  of 
God's  controversy  with  us  being  removed,  we  become  objects  of  His  friendship 
(James  ii.  23).  This  reconciliation,  however,  does  not  mean  deliverance  from  all 
the  evils  which  sin  has  entailed,  viz.,  suffering  and  death,  but  it  entitles  us  to  such 
supports  and  such  promises  of  sanctifying  influence  as  will  "  turn  the  curse  into  a 
blessing."  2.  Adoption  and  the  consequent  right  to  eternal  hfe.  God  conde- 
scends to_  become  not  only  our  Friend,  but  our  Father  (chap.  viii.  17),  3.  The 
habitual  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  sin  induced  the  Spirit's  departure,  so 
the  pardon  of  sin  is  followed  by  deliverance  from  it,  because  it  makes  way  for  His 
return  to  our  souls  (Gal.  iii.  13, 14,  iv.  1 ;  Acts  ii.  38).  Of  this  indwelling  the  imme- 
diate effects  are — (1)  Tranquillity  of  conscience  (chaps,  v.  5,  viii.  15, 16).  (2)  Power 
over  sin,  a  prevailing  desire  and  ability  to  walk  before  God  in  holy  obedience 
(chap.  viii.  1,  «fec.).  (3)  A  joyous  hope  of  heaven  (ver.  2,  chap.  xv.  13 ;  Gal. 
V.  5).  III.  Its  method.  1.  The  originating  cause  is  the  free,  sovereign,  onde- 
Berved,  and  spontaneous  love  of  God  towards  fallen  man  (Titus  ii.  11,  iii.  4,  5; 
Bom.  iii.  24).  2.  The  meritorious  cause  is  Christ ;  for  what  He  did  in  obedience 
to  the  precepts  of  the  law,  and  what  He  suffered  in  satisfaction  of  its  penalty, 
taken  together,  constitute  that  mediatorial  righteousness,  for  the  sake  of  which 
the  Father  is  ever  well  pleased  in  Him.  In  this  all  who  are  justified  have  a  saving 
interest.    Not  that  it  is  imputed  to  them  in  its  formal  nature  or  distinct  acts ;  for 


CHAP,  v.]  ROMANS.  825 

against  any  such  imputation  there  lie  insuperable  objections  from  both  reason 
and  Scripture.  But  the  collective  merit  and  moral  effects  of  all  which  the  Mediator 
did  and  suffered  are  so  reckoned  to  our  account  that,  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  we  are 
released  from  guilt  and  accepted  of  God.  3.  The  instrumental  cause  is  faith.  (1) 
Present  faith.  We  are  not  justified  by — (a)  To-morrow's  faith  foreseen,  for  that 
would  lead  to  the  Antinomian  justification  from  eternity.  (6)  By  yesterday's  faith 
recorded  or  remembered,  for  that  would  imply  that  justification  is  irreversible. 
Justification  is  offered  on  believing.  We  are  never  savingly  interested  in  it  until 
we  believe ;  and  it  continues  in  force  only  so  long  as  we  continue  to  believe.  (2) 
The  acts  of  this  faith  are  : — (a)  The  assent  of  the  understanding  to  the  testimony 
of  God  in  the  gospe'i^  and  especially  that  part  of  it  which  concerns  the  design  and 
efficacy  of  Christ's  sacrifice  for  sin.  (6)  The  consent  of  the  will  and  affections  to  this 
plan  of  salvation,  such  an  approbation  and  choice  of  it  as  imply  the  renunciation 
of  every  other  refuge,  and  a  steady,  decided,  and  thankful  acquiescence  in  God's 
revealed  method  of  forgiveness.  (3)  Actual  trust  in  the  Saviour  and  personal 
apprehension  of  His  merits.  IV.  Infebenceb.  1.  That  we  are  not  justified  by 
the  merit  of  our  works,  inasmuch  as  no  obedience  we  can  render  can  come  up  to  the 
requisitions  of  the  Law  of  Innocence.  2.  That  repentance  is  neither  the  cause  nor 
instrument  of  justification.  Repentance  makes  no  atonement,  and  therefor© 
cannot  supersede  the  blood  of  Jesus  ;  nor  does  it  secure  any  personal  or  justifying 
interest  in  it ;  this  is  the  object  of  faith  only.  3.  That  the  Spirit's  work  in  regenera- 
tion and  sanctification  is  not  the  previous  condition  of  our  justification,  or  the  pre- 
requisite qualification  for  it.  For  in  that  case  we  should  be  saved  without  a 
Saviour,  which  is  a  contradiction.  The  work  of  pardon  for  you  must  precede  the 
work  of  purification  in  you.  In  the  cleansing  of  the  leper,  the  blood  was  first  to  be 
used,  then  the  oil  (Lev.  xiv.).  And  in  order  to  your  salvation  you  must  first  have 
"  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus,"  and  then  you  shall  have  "the  renewing 
of  the  Holy  Ghost."  4.  That  our  justification  is  not  by  the  merit  of  faith  itself — 
a  refined  theory  of  justification  by  works.  V.  Eeflections.  1.  How  clear  and 
urgent  is  the  duty  of  seeking  an  experimental  enjoyment  of  justifying  grace.  2. 
How  sacred  are  the  obligations  of  the  justified.  (1)  Gratefully  acknowledge  it. 
(2)  Diligently  improve  it.  (3)  Practically  evidence  your  enjoyment  of  it.  (Jahez 
Bunting,  D.D.)  Justification  by  faith: — I.  Justification  defined.  Justifica- 
tion is  the  Divine  judicial  act  which  applies  to  the  sinner  believing  in  Christ  the 
benefit  of  the  atonement,  delivering  him  from  the  condemnation  of  his  sin,  intro- 
ducing him  into  a  state  of  favour,  and  treating  him  as  a  righteous  person.  Though 
justifying  faith  is  an  operating  principle  which,  through  the  Holy  Spirit's  energy, 
attains  to  an  interior  and  perfect  conformity  to  the  law,  or  internal  righteousness, 
it  is  the  imputed  character  of  justification  which  regulates  the  New  Testament 
use  of  the  word.  Inherent  righteousness  is  connected  more  closely  with  the  per- 
fection of  the  regenerate  and  sanctified  life.  In  this  more  limited  sense  justifica- 
tion is  either  the  act  of  God  or  the  state  of  man.  I.  God  the  jostifieb.  The  act 
of  justifying  is  that  of  God  as  the  Judge.  Generally  it  is  ciKaiiomg,  the  word  which 
pronounces  the  sinner  absolved  from  the  condemning  sentence  of  the  law,  and  it 
refers  always  and  only  to  the  sins  that  are  past.  Whether  regarded  as  the  first  act 
of  mercy,  or  as  the  permanent  will  of  God's  grace  towards  the  believer  in  Christ, 
or  as  the  final  sentence  in  the  Judgment,  it  is  the  Divine  declaration  which  dis- 
charges the  sinner  as  such  from  the  condemnation  of  his  sin.  "  It  is  God  that 
justifieth  " — God  in  Christ,  for  all  judgment  is  "  committed  to  the  Son,"  who  both 
now  and  ever  pronounces  as  Mediator  the  absolving  word,  declaring  it  in  this  life 
to  the  conscience  by  His  Spirit.  It  is  the  voice  of  God,  the  Judge  in  the  media- 
torial court,  where  the  Eedeemer  is  the  Advocate,  pleading  His  own  propitiatory 
sacrifice  and  the  promise  of  the  gospel  declared  to  the  penitence  and  faith  of  the 
sinner  whose  cause  He  pleads.  The  simplest  form  in  which  the  doctrine  is  stated  is 
in  chap.  viii.  33,  34.  Here  the  apostle  has  in  view  the  past,  present,  and  future  of 
the  believer ;  the  death,  resurrection,  and  intercession  of  Christ ;  and  the  one 
justifying  sense  against  which  there  can  be  no  appeal  in  time  or  in  eternity.  God 
is  9£(')ff  6  diKnuov,  in  one  continuous  and  ever-present  act.  II.  Man  as  josttfied. 
The  state  into  which  man  is  introduced  is  variously  described,  according  to  his 
various  relations  to  God,  to  the  Mediator,  and  the  law.  As  an  individual  sinner 
he  is  forgiven :  his  justification  is  pardon,  his  punishment  is  remitted.  As  a 
person  ungodly,  he  is  regarded  as  rigliteous  :  "  righteousness  is  imputed  to  him," 
or  his  "transgression  is  not  imputed  to  him."  As  a  believer  in  Jesus  "his 
faith  ia  counted  for    righteousness."      AU    these    phrases   describe,    under  its 


t26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  T. 

negative  and  its  positive  aspect,  one  and  the  selfsame  blessing  of  the  new 
covenant  as  constituting  the  state  of  grace  into  which  the  believer  has  entered 
and  in  which  as  a  believer  he  abides.  This  is  attested  by  passages  running  through 
the  Gospels,  the  Acts,  and  the  Epistles  ;  passages  which  only  confirm  the  promises 
of  the  Old  Testament.  Our  Lord's  forerunner  was  fore-announced  "  to  give  know- 
ledge of  salvation  by  the  remission  of  sins  "  (Luke  i.  77).  Our  Saviour's  word  was, 
"  Man,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee  "  ;  but  he  spoke  of  the  publican  as  praying,  "  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  and  as  going  down  to  his  house  "justified" — these 
words  being  introduced  for  the  first  time,  and  both  being  reserved  for  abundant 
future  service,  especially  in  the  writings  of  St.  Paul.  He  lef^^he  commission  that 
"  remission  of  sins  should  be  preached  in  His  name."  Si.  Peter  preached  that 
"  remission  of  sins,"  and  afterwards  varied  the  expression,  "  that  your  sins  may  be 
blotted  out "  (Acts  ii.  38,  iii.  19) — counterparts  in  meaning.  But  St.  Paul  takes  up 
the  Saviour's  words  and  unites  them  (Acts  xiii.  38,  39),  and  in  this  Epistle  adds  all 
the  other  terms  and  unites  the  whole  in  one  charter  of  privileges  (chap.  iv.  4-8). 
In  this  passage  all  the  phrases  are  united  without  exception,  and  they  are  repre- 
sented as  the  act  of  God  and  the  state  of  man,  the  one  and  various  blessing  of 
habitual  experience.  To  sum  up :  the  state  of  diKaiotn'jvri  is  that  ol  conformity  to 
law,  which,  however,  is  always  regarded  as  such  only  through  the  gracious  imputa- 
tion of  God,  who  declares  the  believer  to  be  justified  negatively  from  the  condem- 
nation of  bis  sin,  and  positively  reckons  to  him  the  character,  bestowing  also  the 
privileges  of  righteousness.  The  former  or  negative  blessing  is  pardon  distinc- 
tively, the  latter  or  positive  blessing  is  justification  proper.  (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.y 
Justification  by  faith :  an  instance  of: — A  minister  of  the  gospel  was  once  preaching 
in  a  public  hospital.  There  was  an  aged  woman  present,  who  for  several  weeks 
had  been  aroused  to  attend  to  the  concerns  of  her  soul.  When  she  heard  the  Word 
of  God  from  the  lips  of  His  servant,  she  trembled  like  a  criminal  in  the  hands  of 
the  executioner.  Formerly  she  had  entertained  hope  of  acceptance  with  God,  but 
she  had  departed  from  her  comforter,  and  now  she  was  the  prey  of  a  guilty  con 
science.  A  short  time  after  this  the  same  minister  was  preaching  in  the  same 
place,  but  during  the  first  prayer  his  text  and  the  whole  arrangement  of  his  dis- 
course went  completely  from  him ;  he  could  not  recollect  a  single  sentence  of 
either,  but  Romans  v.  1  took  possession  of  his  whole  soul :  "  Therefore,  being 
justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  He 
considered  this  a  sufficient  intimation  of  his  duty,  and  descanted  freely  on  justifi- 
cation by  faith  and  a  sinner's  peace  with  God  through  the  atonement  of  Christ.  It 
was  the  hour  of  mercy  to  this  poor  distracted  woman.  A  ray  of  Divine  consolation 
now  penetrated  her  soul,  and  she  said  to  the  minister,  when  taking  his  leave,  "  I 
am  a  poor  vile  sinner,  but  I  think,  being  justified  by  faith,  I  begin  again  to  have 
peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I  think  Christ  has  now  got  the 
highest  place  in  my  heart ;  and  oh  I  I  pray  God  He  would  always  keep  Him  there." 
Justification  by  faith :  an  inatance  of : — Some  years  ago  a  clergyman  was  preaching 
on  this  text  in  the  East  End  of  London,  and  at  the  end  of  his  sermon  he  invited 
any  who  were  anxious  to  come  and  converse  with  him  in  the  vestry.  He  waa 
followed  by  an  intelligent-looking  young  man,  who  said,  "  I  am  going  to  leave 
England  in  two  or  three  days,  and  perhaps  this  is  the  last  opportunity  I  shall  have 
of  talking  with  a  clergyman.  My  father  and  I  have  had  a  terrible  quarrel,  and  it 
ended  in  his  turning  me  out,  telling  me  never  to  darken  his  door  again.  I  wandered 
up  to  London,  but  knew  not  where  to  look  for  employment.  At  last  I  found  a 
berth  as  sailor  before  the  mast,  and  before  I  go  I  want  to  ask  you, '  AVhat  must  I 
do  to  be  saved  ?  '  "  The  clergyman  endeavoured  to  make  the  way  of  salvation  as 
clear  as  he  could  to  him.  They  parted,  however,  without  there  being  any  apparent 
change  in  the  young  man's  spiritual  condition,  though  he  seemed  awakened  and 
much  in  earnest.  Time  wore  on,  and  the  incident  had  almost  passed  from  the 
clergyman's  mind,  when  one  day  a  sailor  called  at  his  residence.  "  Do  you  remem- 
ber," he  said,  "  some  months  ago  a  young  man  coming  to  your  vestry  after  the 
sermon  you  had  preached  on  the  words,  ♦  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace 
with  God?'"  "Oh,  yes;  I  remember  it  perfectly."  "  Well,  he  went  on  board 
the  London,  and  he  and  I  became  great  friends,  because  I  am  a  Christian,  and  I 
soon  found  out  that  he  wanted  to  be  a  Christian  too  ;  so  we  used  often  to  have  long 
talks  ovjr  our  Bibles,  and  used  to  pray  together ;  yet  somehow  or  other  I  could 
never  get  him  to  see  tilings  quite  clearly.  I  suppose  he  was  looking  to  his  feeUnga 
more  than  to  Christ.  Well,  then  came  the  terrible  catastrophe,  and  that  young 
man  was  told  oft  by  the  captain,  with  myself  and  a  few  others,  to  man  one  of  the 


CHAP.  ▼.]  BOMANS.  827 

boats.  The  boat  was  lowered,  and  soon  was  crowded ;  but  by  some  means  the  poor 
fellow  was  left  behind  in  the  ship.  We  hardly  knew  what  to  do,  for  our  boat  was 
<oo  full  already.  Besides,  the  ship  was  settling  fast,  and  we  were  afraid  of  being 
dra  'ged  down  with  her.  Yet  we  did  not  like  to  pull  away.  Then  I  heard  him  call 
me  by  name,  as  he  clung  to  the  rigging;  and  he  shouted  across  the  water,  •  Good- 

by«,  mate  I    If  you  get  ashore  safe,  inquire  for  the  Rev.  H.  B ,  of  Limehouse 

i^ocks,  London,  and  tell  him  that  here  in  the  presence  of  God  I  can  say  at  last, 
"Being  justified  by  faith,  I  have  peace  with  God  through  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ," ' 
As  he  said  the  words,  the  ship  gave  her  last  lurch,  and  be  disappeared  in  a  watery 
grave."  {W.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.)  Justification  by  faith  :  its  effects  : — 1.  The  effect 
of  justification  should  be  peace  and  holiness.  (1)  A  plan  of  deliverance  which  did 
not  include  both  these  would  be  a  mockery.  If  it  did  not  secure  peace  it  would  not 
meet  our  wants ;  if  it  did  not  secure  holiness  it  would  not  meet  God's  requirements. 
(2)  Accordingly  we  find  that  God  describes  His  plan  of  salvation  as  effecting  both. 
Christ  has  "  made  peace  through  the  blood  of  His  Cross  "  that  He  may  "  present  us 
holy  and  unblamable  and  unreproachable  in  His  sight."  It  is  "the  very  God  of 
peace"  who  sanctifies  us  "wholly."  2.  The  doctrine,  therefore,  which  does  not 
produce  these  effects  is  not  the  true  one,  and  there  can  be  no  surer  test  by  which 
to  try  the  truth  of  any  particular  doctrine  than  this.  The  religion  which  really 
produces  both  had  no  man  for  its  teacher,  for  these  are  the  last  things  which  men 
would  ever  think  of  joining  together.  All  human  teachers  and  lawgivers  appeal  to 
fear.  All  laws  are  accompanied  by  penalties.  It  certainly  would  never  occur  to 
any  man  to  attempt  to  produce  obedience  by  remitting  all  penalties  ;  and  therefore 
it  is  that  the  natural  man  always  seeks  to  obtain  one  of  tliese  by  the  sacrifice  of 
the  other.  (1)  Many  try  to  forget  God  altogether,  or  they  take  refuge  in  some  easy 
mode  of  appeasing  Him — something  said,  done,  or  felt,  which  quiets  conscience ; 
and  so  they  have  peace — peace  without  holiness.  (2)  But  others  are  not  so  easily 
satisfied ;  their  disposition  is  naturally  anxious,  or  their  consciences  are  scrupulous, 
and  they  cannot  feel  quite  comfortable  in  their  sins.  Such  seek  to  obtain  peace  by 
refraining  from  sin ;  but  as  their  only  motive  is  fear,  they  know  of  no  other  way  of 
increasing  their  obedience  than  by  quickening  and  strengthening  this  fear.  In 
such  religion  takes  a  gloomy  and  terrible  form.  Here  is  an  attempt  after  holiness, 
but  it  is  holiness  without  peace.  3.  And  thus  the  mind  of  the  natural  man  is 
ever  oscillating  between  these  two  extremes  of  sinful  peace  or  painful  obedience, 
but  never  attaining  to  the  union  of  these  two ;  never  imagining  it  possible  for 
man  to  be  at  once  fearless  and  obedient ;  and,  accordingly,  it  is  a  remarknble  fact 
that  aU  false  religions  have  two  different  aspects,  one  offering  easy  terms  of  salva- 
tion to  the  common  crowd,  who  only  desire  a  religion  which  shall  allow  them  to 
Bin  without  fear ;  the  other  providing  austerities  and  penances  for  the  few  whose 
intellect  or  conscience  cannot  be  so  easily  contented.  All  these  religions,  then,  are 
but  half  religions  ;  they  attempt  to  satisfy  man's  desire  for  peace  or  God's  demand 
for  holiness ;  thej'  never  even  profess  to  satisfy  both.  There  is  but  one  religion 
which  does  this  ;  it  is  that  which  is  proclaimed  in  our  text.  I.  Justification  by 
FAITH  GIVES  PEACE.  1.  He  who  belicves  that  God,  for  Christ's  sake,  reckons  him 
holy,  "  not  imputing  his  trespasses  unto  him,"  has  perfect  peace,  because  he  is 
trusting  in  a  perfect  work.  The  justice  that  demanded  his  condemnation  now 
secures  his  forgiveness  ;  the  omnipotence  once  arrayed  against  him  is  now  engaged 
in  his  defence.  Here  is  the  deep,  abiding,  perfect  peace  of  him  whose  mind  is 
stayed  upon  God.  2.  On  the  other  hand  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  inherent 
righteousness  does  not,  and  never  can,  give  perfect  peace  ;  for  it  is  a  righteousness 
partly  human  and  partly  Divine,  and  therefore  partakes  of  the  uncertainty  and 
imperfection  of  all  things  human.  He  who  holds  it  believes,  as  Dr.  Pusey  says, 
that  "  he  was  once,  in  his  baptism,  placed  in  a  state  of  justification  ;  in  which, 
having  been  placed,  he  has  to  work  out  his  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling 
through  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  God  working  in  him — a  state  which  therefore 
admits  of  relapses  and  recoveries,  but  which  is  weakened  by  every  relapse,  injured 
by  lesser,  and  destroyed  for  the  time  by  grievous  sin."  Now,  if  this  be  the  nature 
of  his  justification,  how  can  he  be  sure,  at  any  given  moment,  that  he  is  justified? 
All  that  such  a  man  can  say  is  this,  that  once  in  his  life  he  had  a  perfect  righteous- 
ness to  present  to  God,  and  that,  if  it  had  pleased  God  then  to  take  him  to  Himself 
he  had  been  blessed,  but  that  whether  he  has  this  righteousness  still  is  a  very 
doubtful  matter ;  and  yet  that  night  that  man's  soul  may  be  required  of  him  t 
What  a  miserable  faith  is  this  on  which  to  bid  a  dying  sinner  rest  his  hopes  for 
eternity  1     But  this  is  not  aU  the  doubt  and  difficulty  which  this  doctrine  gives  ris* 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

to,  for  the  means  by  which  justification  is  bestowed  is  said  to  be  the  sacrament  of 
baptism.  If  so,  perfect  and  complete  justification  can  be  had  only  once  in  each 
man's  life ;  therefore,  if  he  ever  entirely  lose  it  by  deadly  sin,  how  can  it  be 
regained  ?  To  meet  this,  Rome  has  devised  another  sacrament  by  which  the  suiner 
may  be  again  made  perfectly  righteous.  But  for  those  who  are  not  Romanists 
"  the  Church  has  no  second  baptism  to  give,  and  therefore  cannot  pronounce  the 
person  who  has  sinned  after  baptism  altogether  free  from  his  past  sins.  There  are 
but  two  periods  of  absolute  cleansing — baptism  and  the  day  of  judgment."  Again, 
"  if,  after  having  been  washed  once  for  all  in  Christ's  blood  we  again  sin,  there  is 
no  more  such  complete  absolution  in  this  life,  no  restoration  to  the  same  state  of 
undisturbed  security  in  which  God  had,  by  baptism,  placed  us  !  "  Mark  this  con- 
fession !  We  will  not  pause  to  contrast  it  with  the  teaching  of  him  who  told 
baptized  men  that  if  they  confessed  their  sins  "  God  was  faithful  and  just  to  for- 
give them  their  sins."  We  will  not  delay  to  inquire  whether  this  way  of  salvation, 
which  gives  no  "  undisturbed  security,"  can  be  the  same  with  that  which  He 
revealed  who  said,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  travail  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I 
will  give  you  rest ;  "  or  that  which  he  taught,  whose  converts  believing,  **  rejoiced 
with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  We  only  ask,  how  can  they  who  preach 
such  a  gospel  as  this  claim  to  be  the  messengers  of  peace  ?  what  peace  have  they 
to  offer?  Picture  to  yourselves  a  teacher  of  this  "  other  gospel "  proclaiming  this 
way  of  salvation  beside  a  death-bed.  3.  But  it  is  said  this  uncertainty  and  anxiety 
is  just  what  is  needed  to  make  men  zealous  and  cautious,  and  the  doctrine  may 
make  fewer  happy  death-beds  but  it  will  produce  holier  lives.  We  deny  this,  and, 
on  the  contrary,  maintain — II.  That  justification  bi  faith  does  effect  not  only 
peace,  but  holiness  ;  and  that  sacramental  justification  no  more  produces  holiness 
than  it  does  peace.  1.  Holiness  is  conformity  to  God's  image.  The  perfect  like- 
ness of  God,  to  which  we  are  to  be  assimilated,  is  seen  in  Christ,  who  "  loved 
righteousness,  and  hated  iniquity."  A  holy  man,  therefore,  is  not  one  who  merely 
refrains  from  sin,  nor  yet  one  who  strives  to  obey  all  God's  commands ;  he  may  do 
all  this,  and  yet  be  utterly  without  holiness.  But  he  is  one  who  has  become  par- 
taker of  that  Divine  nature  which  was  in  Christ,  the  instinct  of  which  it  is  to  hate 
what  God  hates,  and  to  love  what  He  loves.  2.  Now  what  is  that  power  which  can 
produce  such  conformity  to  Christ  ?  Love  is  the  only  passion  which  assimilates  to 
its  object.  Fear  obeys,  envy  rivals,  but  love  imitates.  That  religion  will  therefore 
most  tend  to  holiness  which  most  tends  to  produce  in  us  love  to  God,  Now  we 
know  that  the  belief  which  most  powerfully  moves  us  to  love  God  must  be  that 
which  most  fully  manifests  the  love  of  God  to  us.  Which,  then,  of  these  two  doc- 
trines of  justification  displays  most  of  the  love  of  God  to  sinners?  This  question 
has  received  its  answer  from  our  Lord  Himself  (Luke  vii.  41).  The  publican  went 
down  to  his  house  with  a  more  loving  and  grateful  heart  than  the  Pharisee.  The 
prodigal  had  doubtless  a  deeper  love  for  the  father  than  had  the  elder  brother  who 
had  never  given  him  cause  of  offence.     There  is  more  of  loving,  fervent,  grateful 

J'oy  in  the  heart  of  one  penitent  sinner  who  believes  that  "  being  justified  by  faith 
le  has  peace  with  God,"  than  there  is  in  the  heart  of  the  ninety-and-nine  just  per- 
sons, who,  believing  that  they  have  kept  their  baptismal  righteousness,  deem  that 
they  need  no  repentance.  But  if  he  who  thus  believes  cannot  but  love,  he  who 
thus  loves  cannot  but  obey ;  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  him,  the  mercies  of 
God  persuade  him,  to  present  himself  a  living  sacrifice  unto  God.  3.  But  this 
doctrine  further  tends  to  produce  holiness  because  it  tends  to  produce  humility. 
No  man  is  really  holy  until  he  is  really  humble.  But  who  best  learns  humility — 
he  who  presents  to  God  a  righteousness  in  part  his  own,  or  he  who  confesseth  that 
*'  in  him  dwelleth  no  good  thing  "  ?  4.  This  doctrine  tends  to  produce  holiness 
because  it  alone  enables  us  to  realise  the  promises  of  God.  It  is  by  these  that  we 
escnpe  the  '*  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust."  Now  he  who  believes 
that  God  will  assuredly  save  him  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ  claims  all  the  pro- 
mises at  once  as  his  for  ever,  so  that  he  can  say,  "  I  am  confident;  '  I  know  in 
whom  I  have  believed,  and  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  entrusted  to 
Him  against  that  day.'  '  Faithful  is  He  that  calleth  me,  who,  also,  will  do  it,' " 
and  "  every  one  that  hath  this  hope  purifieth  himself  even  as  He  is  pure."  For 
think  what  must  be  the  feelings  of  that  man  who,  truly  loving  God,  and  desiring 
His  presence,  really  believes  that  he  shall  spend  an  eternity  with  Him.  "  Where 
the  treasure  is,  there  will  the  heart  be  also."  On  the  other  hand,  we  think  it  is 
equally  clear  that  jnstification  by  inherent  righteoueness  does  not  tend  to  holiness, 
because  for  love  it  substitutes  fear ;  for  humility,  pride ;  for  assurance,  uncertainty. 


OBAF.  T.]  ROMANS.  829 

Such  a  doctrine  may  make  ascetics,  hermits,  confessors,  martyrs  even  —but  oever 
saints.     {Abp.    Magce.)  Faith   alone    the  condition  of  justification : — It    is 

faith  alone  which  justifies,  and  still  the  faith  which  justifies  is  not  alone.  Ears, 
feet,  and  hands  are  given  to  us  at  the  same  time  that  oar  eyes  are,  yet  it 
is  the  office  of  the  eye  alone  to  see.  In  like  manner  repentance,  love,  obedience, 
are  the  invariable  companions  of  faith ;  yet  it  is  faith  alone  for  which  we 
claim  the  power  and  faculty  of  justifying.  {J.  Calvin.)  Justifying  faith : — 
I.  Without  wobks.  1.  Faith  is  a  condition  of  justification  opposed  to  man's 
own  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law.  (1)  Faith  acknowleelges  that  the 
legal,  proper,  primitive  sense  of  the  term  justify,  as  the  pronouncing  him  to  be 
righteous  who  is  righteous,  is  for  ever  out  of  the  question,  (a)  As  to  the  law:  it 
has  been  broken,  and  its  condemnation  is  acknowledged ;  it  demands  an  obedience 
that  never  has  been  rendered  since  the  fall.  (6)  Then  as  to  man  himself,  faith 
renounces  all  trust  in  human  ability.  It  utterly  abjures  the  thought  of  a  righteons- 
ness  springing  from  self.  It  acknowledges  past  sin,  present  impotence,  and  the 
impossibility  of  any  future  obedience  cancelling  the  past  (Gal.  ii.  16).  It  disclaims 
all  creaturely  righteousness  as  such;  the  nullity  of  this  is  taught  by  conviction, 
felt  in  repentance,  and  confessed  in  faith.  (2)  Hence  the  specific  Evangelical 
phrase,  "  Faith  is  counted  for  righteousness."  This  implies  the  absence  of  personal 
righteousness,  and  the  reckoning  of  a  principle,  not  righteousness,  in  its  stead  by  a 
kind  of  substitution.  In  its  stead :  not  as  rendering  good  works  needless,  but  dis- 
placing them  for  ever  as  the  ground  of  acceptance.  Therefore  faith  does  not 
justify  as  containing  the  germ  of  all  good  works  ;  as  '•  fides  formata  charitate,"  or 
faith  informed  and  vivified  by  love.  Not  justifying  through  any  merit  in  itself,  it 
justifies  as  the  condition  on  which  is  suspended  the  merciful  application  of  the 
merits  of  Christ.  Faith  is  not  righteousness,  as  justifying ;  it  is  "  put  to  the 
account  "  of  a  man  in  the  mediatorial  court  as  righteousness  ;  not  as  a  good  work, 
but  reckoned  instead  of  the  good  works  which  it  renounces.  Lest  the  faith  as 
itself  a  work  should  be  regarded  as  righteousness  the  apostle  varies  the  expression. 
He  also  says  again  and  again  inversely  that  righteousness — not,  however,  Christ's 
— is  imputed  to  the  believer ;  not  to  faith  itself,  as  if  God  regarded  the  goodness 
wrapped  up  in  it  (chap.  iv.  6,  22,  24).  It  is  the  man,  in  the  naked  simplicity  of  his 
self-renouncing,  work-renouncing  trust  in  God  on  whom  the  sentence  of  justification 
is  pronounced.  (3)  Imputation  or  reckoning  has  two  meanings  ;  the  apcribing  to 
one  his  own  and  what  is  not  his  own.  The  latter  predominates  in  the  three  great 
theological  imputations ;  that  of  the  sin  of  Adam  to  the  race,  that  of  the  race  to  Christ, 
and  that  of  the  benefit  of  Christ's  righteousness  to  the  believer,  as  through  the  imputa- 
tion of  "  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners"  (ver.  19),  and  as  "the 
Lamb  of  God  bore  the  sin  of  the  world,"  "  being  made  sin  for  us  "  by  imputation  as 
a  sin  offering  "  who  knew  no  sin,"  so  the  ungodly  who  in  penitence  believes  has  the 
efficacy  of  Christ's  obedience  reckoned  to  him.  (4)  This  faith  as  a  negative  condi- 
tion is  of  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  enables  the  soul  to  renounce  every 
other  trust.  He  convinces  the  mind  of  guilt  and  impotence  ;  awakens  in  the  heart 
the  feeling  of  emptiness  and  longing  desire ;  and  so  moves  the  will  to  reject  every 
other  confidence  than  Christ.  But,  though  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  produces  it, 
it  is  80  far  only  negative — a  preparation  for  good  rather  than  itself  good.  2.  Faith 
is  the  active  instrument  as  well  as  the  passive  condition  of  justification.  (1)  It  is 
its  instrumental  cause ;  the  originating  being  God's  love ;  the  meritorious,  Christ's 
atoning  obedience  ;  the  efficient,  the  Holy  Ghost.  (2)  Its  object  is  God  in  Christ. 
In  this  as  in  all,  "  I  and  My  Father  are  one."  Yet  the  specific  object  is  not  God 
absolutely,  nor  Christ  in  His  revelation  generally,  but  Christ  as  the  mediatorial 
representative  of  sinners,  and  God  as  accepting  the  atonement  for  man  (Acts  xvi. 
31  ;  Gal.  ii.  16).  In  two  ways  this  Epistle  describes  God  as  the  object.  Chap.  iv. 
5  implies  what  had  preceded  (chap.  iii.  25,  26)  ;  and  in  relation  to  His  resurrection 
(chap.  iv.  24).  But  the  God  of  our  whole  redemption  in  Christ  is  the  object  of 
faith  (John  iii.  16;  Kom.  viii.  32,  11).  He  is  the  One  God  of  the  One  Christ.  (3) 
It  is  ne^er  said  that  we  are  justified  "  on  account  of  "  faith,  but  "  through  "  faith. 
Faith  as  the  act  of  the  soul  by  which  it  unites  itself  with  the  Lord,  makes  the 
virtue  of  His  merit  its  own.  It  apprehends  Christ  and  His  atonement ;  ascribing 
all  to  Him,  it  receives  all  from  Him.  (4)  Faith  is  not  assurance ;  but  assurance  is 
its  reflex  act.  The  same  Spirit  who  inspires  faith — which  is  alone  (and  without 
assurance)  the  instrument  of  salvation — ordinarily  and  always,  sooner  or  later, 
enables  the  believer  to  say,  "  He  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me  "  (Gal.  ii.  20 ; 
Eph.  i.  13).    (5)  Faith,  whether  receptive  or  active,  is  an  exercise  of  the  human 


830  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T, 

heart  under  the  influence  of  the  H0I7  Spirit  through  Hia  actual  revelation  of  Christ 
to  the  soul,  the  eyes  of  which  are  at  the  same  moment  opened.  The  unveiling  of 
the  Saviour  and  the  unveiling  of  the  sight  to  behold  the  Lamb  of  Qod  in  one  and 
the  same  critical  moment  is  the  sufficing  definition  of  saving  trust.  And  at  the 
same  moment  the  active  energy  and  passive  renunciation  of  saving  faith  are 
brought  to  the  perfection  of  their  unity.  11.  Faith  and  wobks.  1.  The  works  of 
faith  declare  the  life  and  reality  of  the  faith  which  justifies.  Those  works  did  not 
declare  its  genuineness  at  first  when  forgiveness  was  received  (chap.  iv.  6, 13) ;  but 
afterwards  and  to  retain  that  justification  its  works  must  absolutely  be  produced 
(James  ii.  18,  21,  24).  In  the  whole  sequel  after  receiving  Christ,  a  man  is  justified 
not  by  faith  only — which  in  this  connection  is  no  faith  at  all — but  by  faith  living 
in  its  works  (James  ii.  26).  Here  is  the  origin  of  the  term  living  or  lively  faith ;  it 
is  remarkable,  however,  tnat  the  invigorating  principle  is  not  from  the  faith  to  the 
works,  but  from  the  works  to  the  faith.  2.  The  expression  "  living  faith  "  suggests 
the  vital  relation  of  this  subject  to  union  with  Christ.  When  St.  Paul  says  "  that 
we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him"  (2  Cor.  ▼.  21),  he  means  more 
than  the  non-imputation  of  sin.  "  That  we  might  become  "  ;  our  forensic  justi- 
fication being  included  of  necessity,  our  moral  conformity  to  the  Divine  righteous- 
ness cannot  be  excluded.  These  closing  words  are  a  resumption  of  the  preceding 
paragraph,  which  ended  with,  "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new  creature." 
"  The  righteousness  of  God  in  Him  "  is  the  full  realisation  of  the  new  method  of 
eonforming  us  to  His  attribute  of  righteousness.  It  is  impossible  to  establish  the 
distinction  between  "  in  Christ "  for  external,  and  '*  Christ  in  us "  for  internal 
righteousness;  still  the  distinction  may  be  used  for  illustration.  We  are  "accepted 
in  the  Beloved,"  "  in  whom  we  have  redemption  through  His  blood,"  in  order  that 
"  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith  "  (Eph.  i.  6,  7,  iii.  17),  that  His  grace 
"  may  present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  vital  union  of  faith  secures 
both  objects :  our  being  reckoned  as  righteous  because  "  found  in  Him,"  and  our 
being  made  righteous  becauBe  He  is  in  us  as  the  Spirit  of  life  and  strength  unto  all 
obedience  (chap.  viii.  2,  4).  3.  The  justification  of  faith  itself  in  and  through  ita 
works,  forms  the  Scriptural  transition  to  internal  and  finished  righteousness, 
which,  however,  is  generally  viewed  as  entire  sanctifioation ;  improperly,  however, 
if  sanctifioation  is  regarded  as  finishing  what  righteousness  leaves  incomplete.  To 
him  who  insists  on  bringing  in  the  doctrine  of  sanctification  to  supplement  as  an 
inward  work  what  in  justification  is  only  outward,  St.  James  replies,  "  Seest  thoa 
how  faith  wrought  with  his  works,  and  by  works  was  fsuth  made  perfect?  "  (James 
ii.  22).  Here  is  the  finished  result  of  "  faith  which  worketh  by  love  "  (Gal.  v.  6)  j 
that  one  and  indivisible  "work  of  faith  "  (1  Thess,  i.  3),  in  the  assertion  of  which 
at  the  outset  of  his  teaching  St.  Paul,  by  anticipation,  declared  his  agreement  with 
St.  James.  Both  show  that  justifying  faith  in  a  consummate  religion  is  "made 
perfect "  in  its  effects ;  and  both  with  reference  to  the  law,  as  again  Antinomian 
renunciation  of  it  (see  also  chap.  viii.  4).  If  "  righteousness  is  fulfilled  in  us," 
that  must  be  by  our  being  "  made  righteous  "  while  reckoned  such.  But  always, 
whether  at  the  outset  where  works  are  excluded,  or  in  the  Christian  life  when  they 
are  required,  whether  on  earth  or  in  heaven,  justification  will  ever  be  the  imputa- 
tion of  righteousness  to  faith.  Works  only  declare  faith  to  be  genuine  and  living. 
This  alone  can  secure  eternal  life  to  those  who,  though  as  holy  as  their  Lord 
Himself,  will  be  apart  from  Him  and  in  the  record  of  the  past,  sinners  still  (Jude 
21).  (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  We  have  peace  with  God  tirough  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ — Peace  with  Ood : — There  is  a  peace  which  is  not  with  God.  A  dull  bovine 
contentment  is  the  stagnancy  of  life,  and  not  peace  with  God.  Absence  of  con- 
science presenting  lofty  ideals  and  urging  effort ;  and  in  place  thereof  a  series  of 
compromises  with  evil,  making  things  easy  all  round,  is  not  peace  with  God ;  it  is 
the  peace  of  the  lowest  organism.  Peace  with  God  is  within  the  soul,  the  balmy, 
vital  peace  of  the  summer  day,  when  the  forces  of  Nature  are  working  mightily 
with  the  repose  of  power,  moving  on  without  strain  or  care  unto  the  harvest.  Peace 
with  God  is: — I.  Peace  with  God's  retributivb  eiohteousness.  1.  God's  laws 
are  holy,  just,  and  good.  Disobedience  ought,  therefore,  to  be  followed  by  punish- 
ment. And  BO  the  wrath  of  God,  therefore,  is  revealed  from  heaven.  Plainly  is 
that  wrath  visible  in  the  miseries  of  a  dishonest  and  vicious  society,  in  the  life  and 
doom  of  a  Jezebel,  a  Caesar  Borgia,  or  a  Macbeth.  But  when  the  disobedience  is 
manifested  in  a  prudently  selfish  and  godless  life,  the  wrath  is  not  so  visible.  Often 
such  sinners,  if  they  are  clever,  have  little  trouble.  Most,  however,  who  are  not 
reconciled  to  God  are  uneasy  and  apprehensive.    They  feel  at  times  as  if  some  doom 


CHAP.  T.]  ROMANS.  831 

were  on  their  track,  now  and  again  life  feels  like  a  prison,  and  in  death  they  hav6 
no  hope.  The  feeling  of  the  fugitive  and  of  the  prisoner  is  the  retributive  provi- 
dence of  God,  a  foreshadowing  of  the  judgment  to  come.  2.  How,  then,  can  trans- 
gressors be  at  peace  with  this  retributive  righteousness  of  God  ?  Only  by  being 
justified  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Now  what  is  the  right  position  for  us  tc 
take  up  to  God  taking  this  gracious  position  to  us  ?  Plainly,  to  repent  of  the  sin 
and  to  accept  the  forgiveness  He  thus  offers.  Taking  this  position,  God  justifies 
as — i.e.,  He  acquits  us  from  all  penalty,  and  He  declares  us  to  be  right  with 
God.  God  is  for  us ;  who  then  can  be  against  us  ?  We  are  no  longer  as  a 
fugitive  pursued ;  we  are  at  the  feet  of  God,  accepted  as  a  child  returned 
home ;  we  are  in  right  relations,  and  no  soul  can  have  peace  till  it  is  right. 
II.  Peace  with  God's  revealed  .  tbuth  ;  that  is,  that  God  is  the  Heavenly 
Father,  that  Jesus  is  His  Christ  and  Son,  who  died  for  sin,  and   rose  again. 

1.  How  many  in  this  day  have  not  peace  ?  Some  are  in  honest  doubt  concerning 
it,  but  do  not  oppose  it.  Others,  however,  go  to  geology  for  stones  to  throw 
at  it,  to  biology  for  theories  to  discredit  it,  to  physical  law  as  a  great  engine 
against  it,  and  when  fighting  it  forget  their  philosophic  calm  and  their  scientific 
modesty.  Some  raise  a  prejudice  against  it  by  holding  up  its  professors  to  ridicule 
or  by  making  merry  with  some  of  its  facts.  Accompanying  this  army  is  a  motley 
crowd  of  camp  followers,  old  sinners  and  thoughtless  youths,  the  disappointed  and 
the  bitter,  lacking  courage  for  the  fight,  and  caring  not  for  the  victory,  but  for  the 
spoils — greater  freedom  for  evil.  Then,  at  a  safe  distance,  is  a  great  company  ol 
onlookers,  not  knowing  which  side  to  take.  These  are  not  to  be  envied.  Thej  who 
are  definitely  opposed  have,  it  may  be,  a  certain  intellectual  peace ;  they  are  not 
troubled  with  doubt,  but  their  peace  is  not  a  peace  with  God.  But  they  who 
doubtfully  watch  the  fight  are  to  be  sympathised  with.  To  be  swung  this  way  by 
this  argument,  then  that  way  by  that  argument,  and  to  feel,  pendulum-like,  no 
approach  to  the  hour  when  the  mind  shall  strike  the  truth,  is  a  restless,  painful 
state  of  mind.  Being  justified,  we  are  delivered  from  such  dispeace.  2.  It  is  faith, 
and  faith  only,  which  can  give  certainty  to  our  faith  of  the  truth.  Being  justified, 
then,  by  faith,  we  have  no  doubt,  no  strife  as  to  the  truth  of  the  truth.  As  our 
conscience  has  had  peace  with  God  by  our  being  put  right  with  God,  so  now  our 
intellect  has  peace  with  God's  revealed  truth  by  being  assured  of  that  truth.  III. 
Peace  with  God's  holt  commandment.  In  commandment  I  include  both  God's 
purpose  and  precept  for  our  life.  1.  There  are  works  of  fiction  which  have  been 
written  by  two  authors.  Of  course  they  must  have  decided  the  plot  and  its  details 
between  them,  and  each  must  have  worked  in  harmony.  But  suppose  each  had 
had  a  plot  of  his  own,  and  had  wrought  each  part  according  to  his  own  particular 
plot  1  In  the  working  or  writing  of  our  lives  there  are  two — ourselves  and  our  God. 
God's  purpose  is,  "  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  &c.  But  the  purpose  of  many* 
is  at  war  with  this.  It  is,  "  Seek  first  the  other  things,  and  then,  if  you  can,  add 
God  and  religion  unto  them."  Absorbed  in  their  own  selfish  purpose,  they  forget 
the  purpose  of  God.  Consequently,  in  their  lives  there  are  strife,  dispeace.  2. 
The  whole  question  of  keeping  God's  commandment  is  simply  a  question  of  dispo- 
sition, as  the  whole  question  of  justification  is  simply  a  question  of  position  with 
God.  Love  is  good  disposition,  and  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  Being  justified 
by  faith,  we  receive  this  disposition.  Believing  in  this  position  of  God  toward  us, 
we  see  His  infinite  love.  Hence  there  is  peace  within — peace  with  the  holy  com- 
mandment ;  we  want  to  fulfil  it,  we  strive  to  fulfil  it ;  it  is  no  longer  to  us  a  task ; 
it  is  a  delight,  and  the  burden  is  when  we  fail  through  weakness  to  fulfil  it.  IV. 
Peace  with  God's  disciplinaby  pbovidence.  1.  Even  where  the  purpose  of  our 
life  is  at  one  with  God's  and  we  love  His  precopts,  there  fall  to  us,  or  at  least  to 
most  of  us,  many  trials  and  troubles.  The  witked  spread  themselves  as  a  green 
bay  tree,  but  the  righteous  are  often  as  a  root  out  of  the  dry  ground.  Then  comes 
the  temptation  to  be  not  at  peace  with  God's  providence ;  to  be  angry  with  God. 

2.  But  our  justification  is  overwhelming  proof  that  God  is  not  against  us.  If  God 
had  forgotten  us  He  would  never  have  sent  His  Christ  for  us.  But  if  God  love  us, 
it  may  be  said,  it  cannot  be  that  it  is  God  who  sends  the  trouble  to  us.  No ;  in 
many  cases  it  is  through  the  fault  of  self  or  others.  But  God  could  have  prevented 
them.  Yes,  but  only  by  interfering  with  the  natural  order  of  things  ;  and  rather 
than  He  should  do  that  He  thinks  it  best  that  we  should  suffer.  Then  since  He 
60  loves  us,  let  as  in  confidence  say,  "  Even  so,  Father,  for  so  it  seemeth  good  in 
Thy  sight."  Then  the  bitterness  of  trouble  is  past,  the  weight  of  the  burden  is 
gone.     Moreover,  God's  love  for  us  is  associated  with  infinite  wisdom,  and  He  will 


832  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T^ 


somehow  cause  the  affliction  to  work  out  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
weight  of  glory.  As  the  fire  which  consumed  the  poor  man's  vineyard  cracked  the 
earth  revealing  veins  of  silver,  thus  afflicting  the  vineyard  into  a  silver  mine,  so 
shall  the  fire  which  withers  and  consumes  so  much  that  we  prize  give  us  in  place 
thereof  a  mine  of  imperishable  and  inexhaustible  treasure.  "  All  things  shall  work 
together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  Conclusion  :  Note  that  the  apostle  bases 
this  peace  on  our  being  justified  with  God.  Many  of  us  seek  this  peace  by 
endeavouring,  first  of  all,  to  be  at  peace  with  God's  providence;  or,  first  of 
all,  to  be  at  peace  with  God's  revealed  truth,  or  to  be  at  peace  with  God's 
commandment.  But,  first  of  all,  we  must  take  our  right  position  at  the 
feet  of  our  God.  It  is  monstrous  to  attempt  to  invert  the  Divine  order  in 
the  lower  spheres  of  Nature.  It  is  more  monstrous  to  attempt  to  invert  the 
Divine  order  in  these  the  higher  spheres  of  grace.  [Albert  Goodrich,  D.D.) 
Peace  with  God  : — I.  We  live  in  one  gee  at  world  of  trouble,  and  the  unerring 

WORD   of   inspiration   PLAINLY  SATS   THAT   THE    DISTURBING    FORCE    IS    SIN.      Yet   HOt 

everybody  chooses  to  admit  that.     It  will  be  asserted  that  trauitions  of  anger  in  the 

Supreme  Being,  coupled  with  an  industrious  reiteration  of  foreboding  by  a  few 

credulous  alarmists,  have  done  most  of  the  mischief.    It  would  soon  quiet  down,  if 

men  and  women  would  just  take  comfort  in  what  is  given  them  and  let  presages 

alone.     Across  the  fair  plains  of  Sicily,  with  the  rising  of  every  new  dawn,  stretches 

one  deep  line  of  darkness,  drawn  by  the  pyramidal  form  of  Mount  Etna.     It  is  the 

unvarying  reminder  of  the  ruin  that  may  at  any  hour  fall  heavily  from  the  volcano's 

crater.    And  yet  the  inhabitants  forbid  you  to  speak  of  that  giant  phantom.    Thus 

we  hve  under  the  immediate  shadow  of  Divine  wrath.     Men  choose  to  think  that 

there  is  nothing  but  incivility  in  a  reminder  of  the  coming  day  of  final  judgment. 

Still,  it  is  better  to  believe  that  a  few  desire  to  be  intelligent.    What  is  it  that 

breaks  up  the  peace  in  this  world  ?    What  will  bring  tranquillity  and  rest  ?   "  There 

is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked,"  &c.  (Isa.  Ivii.  21,  19,  20).    If  it  is  in 

antagonism  with  God,  then  a  deep-seated  source  of  irritation  and  uneasiness  is 

lodged  in  the  centre  of  its  being.     II.  No  quiet  can  possibly  be  found  until  the 

SOUL  COMES  TO  BE  AT  ONE  WITH  GoD,  and  adjusts  aU  its  purposes  to  meet  His 

declared  will  (Isa.  xxii.   17,  &c.).     The  question  all  turns,  therefore,  upon  the 

possession  of  justification,  i.e.,  righteousness.     1.  It  becomes  us  in  the  outset  to 

understand  that  righteousness  is  a  purely  individual  acquisition.    The  gospel  deals 

with  human  beings  one  by  one.     2.  What,  then,  is  this  "  justification  by  faith  "  ? 

A  sinner  is  conceived  as  condemned  at  the  bar  of  God's  justice;  the  punishment 

for  his  sins  is  death.     Now  Jesus  Christ,  as  a  redeemer  and  surety,  comes  and 

assumes  the  sinner's  exposures  and  liabilities.    In  eSect,  He  stands  in  the  sinner's 

place.    This  is  the  picture  so  often  presented  by  Paul ;  he  appears  never  to  be  tired 

of  it  (vers.  6-8).    Peace  comes,   therefore,  when  purity  has  come  beforehand. 

"  First  pure,  then  peaceable."    Saved  souls  are  pardoned  for  Christ's  sake.    The 

story  is  told  of  Martin  Luther,  that  once  the  evil  one  appeared  to  enter  his  room 

with  a  vast  roll  of  parchment,  a  catalogue  of  all  his  former  sins.     With  a  hollow 

burst  of  derisive  laughter  the  fiend  threw  it  on  the  floor,  still  holding  one  end  in 

his  hand  so  that  it  might  easily  unroll  its  awful  length.     There  the  frightened  man 

was  compelled  to  read,  hour  after  hour,  the  terrible  list  of  all  the  wicked  deeds  he 

had  done  in  all  his  life.    And  his  heart  failed  him  as  he  gazed.    Suddenly  the  devil 

called  him  by  name,  and  pointed  to  some  words  along  the  top  of  the  roll.    Luther 

looked  up  and  read  aloud,  "  All  sin  " ;  and  then  he  understood  that  no  one  of  the 

many  acts,  or  even  thoughts,  was  to  be  left  out.    Hell  appeared  opening  at  once 

under  his  feet.     His  agony  was  intense.    But  Satan  kept  screaming,  "  All  sin  1  all 

sin  1 "    And  at  last,  in  order  to  afflict  him  the  more,  exclaimed,  "  So  says  God,  so 

says  God,  all  sin,  all  sin  1  "     Now  the  man's  study  of  Scripture  stood  him  in 

excellent  stead.   For  he  asked,  "  Wlirve  speaks  God  that  word ?  "   "  There,  there ! " 

answered  the  devil,  pointing  again  to  the  parchment  and  putting  his  fiery  finger  on 

the  two  words,  "  all  sin,  all  sin."     The  reformer  snatched  the  awful  list  away  from 

his  enemy,  and  unrolling  it  one  turn  more,  in  the  other  direction,  discovered,  as  he 

hoped  he  would,  the  remainder  of  the  inscription :  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 

His  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  1  "     So  he  learned  that  all  his  sins  had  been 

massed  together  upon  that  roU  in  order  to  announce  that  atonement  had  been  made 

completely  to  cover  them.     And  with  a  glad  cry  of  exultant  joy  he  awoke,  while  the 

devil  disappeared  with  his  parchment  of  woe.     It  is  when  a  man  knows  his  sins 

are  all  in  the  burden  Jesus  bore  on  the  Calvary  Cross,  that  he  has  no  longer  any 

fear  about  them.    "  The  work  of  righteousness  is  peace,  and  the  effect  of  righteous- 


caa.  v.]  ROMANS.  883 

nesB  is  quietness  and  assurance  for  ever."    III.  It  is  not  possible  to  put  into 

FORMS    OF   SPEECH    TIIE    B0DRCE8    OF   ENJOYMENT    WHICH    A   PAUDONED   BELIEVER     KNOWS 

when  he  is  once  possessed  of  the  peace  which  passes  understanding;  the  soul  like 
a  bride  rests  in  a  love  it  cannot  explain,  when  the  sweet  day  of  espousal  to  Christ 
has  been  reached.  1.  The  Christian  cannot  be  alone,  for  a  happy  conscience,  like 
a  bird  in  his  heart,  kreps  singing  cheerily  to  give  him  company.  He  has  no  alarms, 
no  suspicions.  Nothing  breaks  up  the  calm,  bright  serenity  of  his  trustful  repose 
in  Christ  Jesus.  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,"  &c,  2.  Peace  brings 
prosperity.  God  opens  the  door  of  His  treasury  of  promise  to  the  souls  He  has 
welcomed  into  the  palace.  He  loves  His  Son,  and  they  are  His  Son's  friends.  If 
our  feet  are  upon  the  Eock  of  Ages  it  does  not  matter  at  all  where  the  danger 
threatens.  "  I  have  pain,"  said  Eichard  Baxter,  on  his  dying  bed,  "  I  have  pain  ; 
there  is  no  arguing  against  sense  ;  but  then,  I  have  peace,  great  peace  I  "  To  any 
true  believer,  there  is  no  shock  in  the  appearance  of  that  messenger  who  announces 
his  departure.  He  seems  to  himself  even  now  sitting  in  the  antechamber  of  the 
palace,  waiting ;  and  death  is  only  the  black-drt-ssed  servant  who  comes  out  to  say 
the  Eng  is  ready  to  see  him  in  the  throne-room.  Conclusion  :  Surely  it  is  worth 
something,  in  a  world  like  this,  to  find  one  antidote  for  wakefulness  and  unrest. 
This  is  the  peace  which  the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away  (ver.  10).  Each 
Christian  receives  a  testimony  in  his  soul  which  settles  all  his  fears  for  the  future- 
He  has  put  his  case  out  of  his  own  hands.  So  he  waits  tranquilly  for  the  judgment, 
knowing  he  is  prepared  for  it,  and  shall  stand  clear  in  the  end.  (C  S.  Robinson, 
D.D.)  Peace  with  God : — I.  Why  men  have  not  peace.  1.  One  reason  is  a 
want  of  knowledge  about  ourselves.  We  do  not  see  that  peace  is  the  thing  we 
want.  We  sigh  for  it  now  and  again,  but  we  do  not  pursue  it.  Geld,  pleasure, 
power,  fame,  we  pursue  with  all  our  might ;  we  do  not  covet  peace  except  when  we 
are  weary,  and  want  to  sleep  and  dream.  (1)  Look  at  yon  solitary  man  watching 
the  stream  flow.  He  is  saying,  "  I  would  this  restless  bosom  were  like  yon  tranquU 
river."  But  he  has  not  the  courage  to  ask  what  is  at  the  bottom  of  this  discontent. 
He  lets  another  sigh  escape  him,  which  goes  to  swell  that  great  wind  of  unrest 
which  goes  moaning  about  the  world,  and  hurries  back  to  some  scene  of  distraction, 
where  he  may  get  rid,  for  a  time,  of  that  burden  of  himself  which  he  cannot  bear. 
Men's  feeling  about  peace  is  often,  then,  no  more  than  a  fleeting  sentiment,  and 
where  peace  is  actually  enjoyed,  men  do  not  take  pains  to  secure  it.  (2)  What  a 
misery  is  a  home  without  peace  I  How  is  it  that  it  does  not  deeply  impress  itself, 
that  any  sacrifice  of  personal  opinion  and  feeling  is  to  be  made  rather  than  this 
blessing  of  peace  should  be  forfeited  ?  (3)  And  so  in  the  Church.  Peace  is  its 
bond  of  union.  We  cannot  worship  in  truth,  we  can  neither  edify  nor  be  edified, 
with  divided  hearts.  Yet  here,  again,  there  has  been  constant  strife  between  the 
carnal  and  the  spiritual.  And  again  and  again  the  carnal  prevails.  Christians  do 
not  guard  and  fence  about  the  sacred  enclosure  of  heaven's  peace,  and  yet  they  are 
dismayed  when  it  is  broken  into  and  trampled  upon  I  (4)  Look  again  at  the  case 
of  nations.  Is  there  anything  more  wicked  than  needless  wars  ?  And  how  few 
wars  there  are  which  are  not  needless  !  See  what  a  weight  of  pure  feeling  there  is 
in  the  scale  against  war.  All  the  most  intelligent  and  best  members  of  society  are 
against  it.  And  yet  war  still  goes  on.  Men  love  to  listen  to  the  hymn  of  the  angels, 
"  Peace  on  earth,"  and  go  to  raise  the  yell  of  demons  on  the  battlefield.  2.  The 
explanation  is  that  which  the  gospel  gives.  Tracing  the  deep  inconsistencies  of 
human  nature  down  to  their  root,  it  tells  us  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  jigainst  God. 
Here  is  the  secret  of  our  discords.  Man  has  a  spiritual  part  which  would  lead  him 
to  peaceable  ways,  and  he  has  a  passionate  part  which  leads  him  to  hate,  and  to  the 
destruction  of  himself  and  of  his  brethren.  While  this  strife  goes  on  there  cannot 
be_peace.  This  is  the  secret  of  the  deep  unrest  in  men's  souls.  Ever  yearning  and 
dreaming  of  a  blissful  quiet  that  is  so  foreign  to  their  actual  condition.  This  is 
why  the  calm  of  a  starlight  night  softens  us ;  why  the  sight  of  a  sleeping  babe 
sometimes  moves  us  to  tears  ;  or  a  strain  of  soft  music  quells  some  angry  mood  ; 
or  the  face  of  one  we  love  sleeping  placidly  in  death.  These  sights,  these  sounds, 
speak  to  us  of  a  state  where  the  unholy  war  of  passion  has  ceased,  of  that  peace 
which  ought  to  be  ours,  and  which  would  be  ours,  were  it  not  for  this  terrible  foe  in 
our  own  bosom,  in  the  mind  at  enmity  with  God.  This  is  why  thousands  of  persons 
love  to  listen  to  the  gospel  who  are  far  from  living  evangelical  lives.  II.  The  way 
OF  PEACE  pointhd  OCT  BY  THE  GOSPEL.  Evidently,  if  we  are  to  come  to  peace,  two 
things  are  necessary ;  first,  the  spiritual  part  of  our  nature  must  be  strengthened, 
and,  second,  the  carnal  or  passionate  part  of  our  nature  must  be  reduced  and 


884  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

mortified.  1.  Now  the  law,  as  St.  Paul  shows,  was  unequal  to  this  work.  The  law 
did  much  to  strengthen  and  to  educate  the  spiritual  feefing  of  man.  It  taught  as 
the  first  principle  of  «11  religion — love  to  God  and  to  man.  But  when  the  law  came 
to  oppose  the  carnal  nature  of  man,  it  was  found  to  be  weak.  It  set  up  a  great 
frowning  barrier  agaiust  man's  unholy  passions,  and  sin  acquires  greater  energy 
when  resisted,  like  pent-up  waters  behind  a  dam.  The  law,  then,  failed  to  bring  us 
to  peace  with  God,  because  it  could  not  extinguish,  though  it  could  restrain, 
passion  ;  because  it  could  punish  sin,  but  could  not  make  the  love  of  sin  to  cease. 
2.  But  what  the  law  could  not  do,  God  could  do  by  a  special  act  of  His  grace.  Ha 
sent  His  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  and  for  sin.  (1)  The  life  of  our  Lord 
was  throughout  an  invitation  to  man  to  peace  and  rest  in  God.  His  own  character 
was  a  revelation  of  the  peacefulness  of  the  Divine  nature ;  and  His  teaching  sets 
before  us  the  gentle  and  unselfish  life,  we  must  live  to  be  in  harmony  with  the  life 
of  our  Father  in  heaven.  But  this  is  not  enough.  It  is  like  telling  a  man  in  a 
fever  to  be  cool  by  thinking  of  the  frosty  Caucasus,  or  a  man  at  sea  to  be  calm  by 
thinking  of  a  quiet  harbour.  It  is  mockery  to  tell  a  man  in  the  midst  of  the 
commotions  of  his  conscience  that  he  can  be  at  peace  by  looking  at  Jesus  Christ, 
and  following  His  example.  It  is  like  telling  him  to  turn  himself  into  a  white 
marble  statue.  What  the  man  needs  is  some  influence  that  can  quell  the  rebellion 
of  his  flesh,  and  allow  his  spirit  free  action.  (2)  And  therefore  the  gospel  points  to 
the  death  of  Christ  as  the  means  of  our  reconciliation  to  God.  Our  Lord  was  put 
to  death  in  an  outbreak  of  Jewish  passion  which  was  typical  of  the  sin  of  man.  In 
the  Cross  the  gospel  teaches  us  to  see  the  last  most  dreadful  proof  of  what  sin  is, 
and  whither  it  tends.  And  the  point  before  ua  is  that  it  produces  a  profound 
reaction  upon  the  feelings  of  the  sinner.  When  a  man  who  has  long  given  way  to 
evil  passious  at  last  strikes  down  his  friend,  his  passion  dies  with  its  victim.  We 
cannot  doubt  that  sin  dies  out  of  the  heart  of  some  men  when  its  last  fatal  fruit 
has  ripened  and  fallen.  And  something  like  this  occurs  with  the  man  who  is  led 
to  see  in  the  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  the  awful  witness  and  fruit  of  his  sin.  (3) 
But  is  he  not  an  object  of  God's  vengeance  ?  No  ;  the  blood  of  Christ  not  only 
cleanses  from  sin,  but  it  is  the  last  language  of  God  to  the  sinner,  beseeching  him 
to  be  reconciled  to  Him.  It  is  the  accepted  compensation  for  sin.  It  does  not  cry 
out  for  vengeance  like  that  of  Abel,  but  it  has  the  pleading  tongue  of  eternal  mercy 
and  love.  Conclusion :  It  is  for  us  to  believe  with  all  our  hearts  that  this  is  the 
relation  in  which  God  stands  to  us  and  our  sin  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  To 
have  faith  in  this  is  the  ground  of  our  justification  and  the  beginning  of  a  peaceful 
and  a  holy  life.  {Prof.  E.  Johnson,  M.A.)  Peace :  a  fact  and  a  feeling : — 
Wonderful  is  the  power  of  faith.  Hebrews  xi.  tells  us  of  its  marvellous  exploits  ; 
but  one  of  the  most  wonderful  of  its  effects  is  that  it  brings  us  justification  and 
consequent  peace.  It  is  not  the  creator  of  these  things,  but  the  channel  through 
which  these  favours  come  to  us.  I.  Faith  brings  us  into  a  state  of  peace. 
Naturally  we  have  no  peace.  God  is  angry  with  us.  "  Can  two  walk  together 
except  they  be  agreed  ?  "  And  we  cannot  agree  with  God,  for  "  the  carnal  mind  is 
enmity  against  God,"  <fec.  1.  Before  there  can  be  peace  between  us  and  God  we 
must  with  all  our  hearts  plead  "  guilty."  To  refuse  to  do  so  is  contempt  of  court. 
Tliere  is  mercy  for  a  sinner,  but  there  is  no  mercy  for  the  man  who  will  not  own 
himself  a  sinner.  2.  Then  we  must  admit  the  justice  of  the  Divine  sentence.  It 
would  yield  my  heart  no  comfort  to  be  told  that  God  could  wink  at  sin.  Lasting 
peace  muat  be  founded  upon  everlasting  truth.  3.  And  now  comes  in  the  abound- 
ing mercy  of  God,  who,  in  order  to  our  peace,  finds  a  substitute  to  bear  our  penalty, 
and  reveals  to  us  this  gracious  fact.  He  puts  His  Son  in  the  sinner's  place.  Sin 
having  been  laid  on  Christ,  He  has  borne  it  away.  Faith  accepts  that  substitution 
as  a  glorious  boon  of  grace,  and  rests  in  it.  The  soul  may  well  have  peace  when  it 
has  realised  and  received  such  a  justification  as  this,  for — (1)  It  is  a  peace 
consistent  with  justice.  (2)  No  further  demands  can  be  made  against  us,  "  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  (3)  Our  acquittal  is  certified  beyond 
all  question,  and  the  certificate  is  always  producible,  viz.,  the  risen  Christ,  who 
"  died  for  our  sins,  and  rose  again  for  our  justification."  II.  Faith  gives  us  thb 
SENSE  OF  PEACE.  1.  The  sensc  of  peace  follows  upon  the  state  of  peace.  We  do  not 
get  peace  before  we  are  justified,  neither  is  peace  a  means  of  justification.  God 
justifies  the  ungodly.  2.  This  sense  comes  "  through  Jesus  Christ."  Many 
children  of  God  lose  their  peace  in  a  measure,  because  they  de&l  with  God 
absolutely,  but  there  cannot  be  any  point  of  contact  between  absolute  Deity  and 
ialleo    humanitj  except    through  Christ,  the    appointed  Mediator.    Have    you 


CBir.  ▼.]  ROMANS.  835 

attempted  to  approach  the  Eternal  King  without  Hia  chosen  ambassador?  How 
presumptuous  is  your  attempt !  The  throne  of  Divine  sovereignty  is  terrible  apart 
from  the  redeeming  blood.  3.  Some  Christians  say,  "  I  have  no  lasting  peace." 
But  peace  is  the  right  of  every  believer.  What  is  there  now  between  him  and  God? 
Sin  is  forgiven ;  righteousness  is  imputed.  Ood  sees  bim  in  His  Son,  and  loves 
him.  Why  should  he  not  be  at  peace?  "Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled;  ye 
believe  in  God,"  said  Jesus,  "  believe  also  in  Me."  Why  have  you  not  peace,  then  ? 
You  have  a  claim  to  it,  and  you  ought  to  enjoy  it.  What  is  the  reason  why  you  do 
not  possess  it  ?  (1)  It  is  your  unbelief.  In  proportion  to  your  faith  will  your  peace 
with  God  abide.  (2)  Or  you  make  a  mistake  as  to  what  this  peace  is.  (a)  You 
flay,  "  I  am  so  dreadfully  tempted  ;  the  devil  never  lets  me  alone."  But  did  you 
ever  read  that  you  were  to  have  peace  with  the  devil?  Never;  on  the  contrary, 
you  have  the  better  promise  that  "  the  Lord  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet 
shortly."  Till  then  the  enmity  between  the  seed  of  the  serpent  and  the  seed  of  the 
woman  will  continue.  (6)  Another  says,  *•  It  is  not  the  devil ;  it  is  myself  that  I 
fear.  I  feel  the  flesh  revolting  and  rebelling.  When  I  would  do  good,  evil  is 
present  with  me.  '  Oh  wretched  man  that  I  am  I '  "  Hearken  again.  As  the  Lord 
hath  war  with  Amalek  for  ever  and  ever,  so  there  is  war  between  the  spirit  and  the 
flesh  so  long  as  the  two  are  in  the  same  man.  There  is  no  promise  of  peace  with 
the  flesh,  but  only  of  peace  with  God.  (c)  "  Ah,"  says  another,  "  I  am  surrounded 
by  those  that  vex  me.  When  I  serve  the  Lord  they  malign  and  misrepresent  me 
with  scoff  and  slander."  Yes,  but  did  you  ever  dream  of  having  peace  in  this 
world  where  your  Lord  was  crucified — peace  with  those  that  hate  you  for  His  sake  ? 
Why,  did  He  not  say,  "  If  the  world  h:ite  you,  ye  know  that  it  hated  Me  before  it 
hated  you."  "In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation:  but  be  of  good  cheer;  I 
have  overcome  the  world."  "  And  this  is  the  victory  which  overcometh  the  world, 
even  our  faith."  (d)  "  Still,"  says  one,  "I  find  every  day  that  I  sin,  and  I  hate 
myself  for  sinning."  Yes ;  and  the  Lord  never  said  that  you  should  have  peace 
with  ain.  The  more  hatred  of  sin  the  better.  If  sin  never  distresses  you,  then 
God  has  never  favourpd  you.  4.  To  come  back  then,  '*  we  have  peace  with  God." 
We  enjoy  peace  with  God  because — (1)  We  know  He  loves  us.  He  would  not  have 
given  His  Son  to  die  for  us  if  He  had  not.  Moreover,  we  feel  a  fervent  love  to 
Him  in  return,  (2)  We  are  not  afraid  to  go  to  our  covenant  God  for  all  necessary 
things,  and  to  seek  His  help  in  time  of  trouble.  We  have  not  always  such  settled 
peace  with  our  fellow-creatures,  for  at  times  we  so  much  lack  confidence  in  them 
that  we  could  not  divulge  to  them  our  troubles.  Our  habitude  of  prayer  proves 
that  we  have  peace  with  God ;  we  should  not  think  of  praying  to  Him  if  we  doubted 
His  goodwill.  (3)  We  delight  in  God.  You  do  not  always  feel  Him  equally  near, 
bat  when  He  is  near  it  is  the  joy  of  your  spirit.  (4)  We  acquiesce  in  all  that  He 
does  in  His  rough  providences.  A  hypocrite  is  like  a  strange  dog  that  will  follow  a 
man  as  long  as  he  casts  him  a  bone ;  but  a  true  believer  is  like  a  man's  own  dog 
that  will  follow  him  when  he  gives  him  nothing.  A  true  believer  says,  "Shall  I 
receive  good  from  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  I  not  also  receive  evil  ?  "  (5)  We 
look  forward  with  confidence  to  the  time  of  our  departure  out  of  this  world  and 
say,  "  I  can  die,  if  Thou,  0  Lord,  be  with  me."  We  are  not  afraid  of  the  day  of 
judgment  because  we  have  peace  with  God,  and  hence  we  are  not  afraid  to  die. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Peace  with  God: — I.  Peace  with  God  not  natubai  to  us. 
It  must  be  an  attainment.  1.  To  be  atheistic,  seeming  to  ourselves  to  live  in  a 
headless  universe,  is  not  a  condition  in  which  to  feel  at  peace.  2.  To  regard  God 
as  ruling  in  mere  power  and  will,  and  as  having  no  administration  of  righteousness, 
is  to  see  ourselves  under  a  s^ay  in  which  it  is  impossible  to  confide.  3.  To  see 
God  as  holy  and  just,  and  ourselves  as  sinners  against  His  holiness  and  justice,  is 
to  be  filled  with  hopeless  dread  and  enmity.  Here  it  is  that  the  gospel  finds  us. 
II.  To  HAVE  PEACE  WITH  GoD  WE  NEED — 1.  To  beUevo  in  His  compassion;  that 
while  He  is  almighty  and  all  holy,  He  is  also  gracious,  and  has  provided  for  sinners 
a  way  ot  salvation.  2.  To  trust  in  and  consent  to  this  way  of  salvation,  taking  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Redeemer  and  our  Master.    III.   That  this  is  a  true 

WAT   OF   PEACE    WITH  GoD    IS   ATTESTED   BY  THE   UNIVERSAL   EXPERIENCE  OF  BELIEVERS. 

1.  There  is  no  pretence  of  attaining  such  peace  in  any  other  way.  Worldliness, 
philosophy,  science,  fail  to  give  us  peace  with  God.  2.  In  Jesus  Christ,  G«d, 
whom  you  have  offended,  and  from  whom  you  have  become  estranged,  offers  the 
hand  of  reconciliation.  Will  you  extend  the  answering  hand  of  faith  and  be  at 
peace  with   Him  ?      (C    W.   Gamp.)  Peace  by   believing  : — A  moment's  con- 

templation would    BuMce    to    arouse   any  man    to  the  terror  of    the  position 


S86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

involved  in  being  at  war  with  God.  For  a  subject  to  rebel  against  a  powerful 
monarch  is  to  incur  forfeiture  of  life.  But  for  a  creature  to  be  in  arms 
against  its  Creator,  this  is  an  appalling  thing  indeed ;  but  happy  beyond  all 
description  the  man  who  can  say,  "  I  have  peace  with  God."  I.  The  peacb 
WHICH  THE  Christian  enjoys.  1.  Its  basis.  (1)  There  is  the  widest  possible 
difference  between  a  man  being  just  in  his  own  eyes,  and  his  being  justified  in  the 
sight  of  God.  Yet,  perhaps  no  fallacy  is  more  common  than  to  mistake  the  one 
for  the  other.  Then,  as  a  natural  consequence  of  building  on  a  weak  foundation, 
the  structure,  however  fair  to  look  upon,  is  insecure.  The  peace  in  which  multi- 
tudes delight  is  merely  peace  with  their  own  conscience,  and  not  in  any  sense 
peace  with  God.  I  know  of  no  greater  contrast  than  there  is  between  that  peace 
which  is  a  mere  stagnation  of  thought,  a  lull  of  anxiety,  or  a  blindness  to  danger, 
and  that  soul-satisfying  peace  which  passes  all  understanding,  (a)  "  Are  you  living 
in  peace  with  God,  my  friend?"  "Yes,"  says  one,  "I  have  enjoyed  peace  for 
years."  "How  do  you  get  it?"  "Well,  as  I  was  walking  one  day  in  great 
distress,  a  feeling  of  comfort  came  over  me,  and  it  has  remained  with  me  ever 
since."  "  Yes,  but  what  is  the  ground  of  your  confidence ;  what  is  the  doctrinal 
proof?  "  "  Well,  do  not  press  me,"  says  he,  "  only  this  I  know — I  do  feel  happy, 
and  ever  since,  I  have  not  had  any  doubt."  That  man,  if  I  be  not  mistaken, 
is  under  a  delusion.  Satan  has  said  to  him,  "  Peace,  peace,"  where  there  is 
no  peace.  The  peace  of  a  Christian  is  not  such  a  lull  of  stupefaction  as  that. 
It  has  a  reason,  (b)  Here  is  another  who  says,  "  Some  years  ago  I  never  went 
to  a  place  of  worship.  I  was  doing  my  trade  in  a  very  bad  way,  and  now  and 
then  I  took  too  much  drink ;  and  I  thought  it  was  time  for  me  to  turn  over  a  new 
leaf,  and  I  have  done  so.  Now,  I  am  not  like  the  man  you  brought  up  just  now.  I 
think  I  may  say  I  have  a  gocjd  ground  for  saying  that  I  am  at  peace  with  God." 
Now,  let  this  man  be  reminded  that  it  is  written,  "  By  the  works  of  the  law  there 
shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  His  sight."  All  these  moral  things  are  good  enough 
in  themselves.  They  will  be  very  excellent  if  they  be  placed  at  the  top ;  but,  if 
they  be  used  as  foundations,  a  builder  might  as  well  use  tiles,  and  slates,  and 
chimney-pots,  as  use  these  reformatory  actions  as  a  ground  of  dependence.  All 
this  is  only  peace  with  yourself,  (c)  Some  true  Christians  will  say,  "  I  hope  I  am 
at  peace  with  God  now,  for  my  faith  is  in  active  exercise ;  my  love  is  fervent ;  I 
have  delightful  seasons  in  praver,  &c.,  Ac,  therefore  I  feel  that  I  have  peace  with 
God."  Oh,  believer  !  art  thou  so  foolish  as,  having  begun  in  the  Spirit  by  faith,  to 
be  made  perfect  in  the  flesh  by  your  own  doing  ?  If  thou  puttest  thy  peace  here 
upon  thy  graces,  then  there  will  come  another  day  when  all  those  graces  will  droop 
like  withered  flowers.  To  look  to  thy  graces  for  peace  is  like  going  to  the  cistern 
instead  of  living  by  the  fountain,  (d)  I  fear,  too,  that  there  are  not  a  few  who  are 
tempted  to  found  their  confidence  upon  their  enjoyments.  If  we  do  this,  let  ns 
remember  that  we  may  have  our  times  of  agonising  and  fruitless  prayer ;  we  may 
be  in  the  valley  of  despondency,  or  in  the  blacker  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death. 
(2)  The  ChristiRn's  conviction  of  his  peace  with  God  hes  in  this — that  he  is 
justified  by  faith,  I  was  a  sinner  doomed  to  die  ;  Christ  took  my  place  ;  He  died 
for  me,  God  says  that  he  who  believes  in  Christ  shall  be  saved — I  believe  in 
Christ,  therefore  I  am  saved.  He  says,  ' '  He  that  believeth  on  Him  is  not  con- 
demned," I  believe  on  Him,  therefore  I  am  not  condemned.  Now  this  is  reason- 
ing which  no  logic  can  gainsay.  There  is  a  rebel — be  is  pardoned,  he  is  at  peace 
with  his  king,  and  a  rebel  no  longer.  There  is  the  offending  child — his  father  takes 
him,  accepts  him  for  his  elder  brother's  sake,  and  he  is  at  peace  with  his 
father.  This  is  the  basis  of  the  Christian's  peace — one  on  which  he  may  sleep  or 
wake,  live  or  die,  and  live  eternally,  without  condemnation  or  separation  from  the 
love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ.  Jesus  the  Lord.  2.  Its  channel — "  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  (1)  Though  justification  by  faith  is  in  itself  a  well  of  comfort,  yet, 
even  from  that  well  we  cannot  get  it,  except  we  use  Christ,  who  digged  the  well,  to 
be  the  bucket  to  draw  the  water  up  from  its  depths.  I  will  suppose  that  I  am  in 
doubt  and  fear  and  want  to  get  my  peace  restored — how  shall  I  seek  it  ?  Through 
Christ,  the  surety  and  substitute.  Christ  tells  me  that  He  came  to  save  sinners ;  I 
am  a  sinner,  therefore  He  came  to  save  me.  (a)  He  says  He  can  save  me.  This 
looks  reasonable.  He  is  very  God,  He  is  perfect  man,  He  has  suffered  and  offered 
a  complete  atonement,  [b)  He  tells  me  He  is  willing  to  save  me.  This  also 
appears  reasonable,  for  why  else  should  He  die?  (c)  Then  He  tells  me  if  I  will 
trust  Him,  He  will  save  me.  I  trust  Him,  and  I  have  not  the  shadow  of  a  shade  of 
a  suspicion  of  doubt  that  He  will  be  as  good  as  His  word.     (2)  Some  people  say  w« 


OKAP.  T.]  ROMANS.  837 

teach  that  man  is  saved  by  mere  believing.  We  do.  There  ia  a  poor,  starving 
man  over  there.  I  give  him  bread — his  life  is  spared.  Why  do  not  these  people 
say  this  man  was  saved  by  mere  eating  I  And  here  is  another  person  who  is  dying 
of  thirst,  and  I  give  him  water  and  the  man  is  saved  by  mere  drinking.  Why  do 
not  we  drop  down  dead  in  our  pews  ?  Just  stop  your  breath  a  little  while  and  see. 
Surely  we  aU  live  by  mere  breathing.  All  these  operations  of  nature  may  be 
sneered  at  as  merely  this  or  that ;  and  in  like  manner  to  speak  disparagingly  of 
"  mere  believing  "  is  nonsense.  And  if  I  would  get  my  peace  made  more  full  and 
perfect,  having  come  to  Christ  by  faith,  the  more  I  go  to  Christ  believingly,  the 
deeper  will  my  peace  be.  If  I  live  near  to  Christ  I  shall  not  know  fear.  Who 
should  know  fear  when  he  is  covered  with  the  Eternal  wings,  and  underneath  him 
are  the  Everlasting  arms  ?  As  Christ  was  the  first  means  of  giving  us  peace,  so  Ha 
must  still  be  the  golden  conduit  through  which  all  peace  with  God  must  flow  to  our 
believing  hearts.  8.  Its  certainty.  I  like  to  read  these  rolling  sentences  of  Paul, 
without  an  "  if  "  or  a  "but"  in  them — "  Therefore,  being  justified,  we  have  peace 
with  God."  How  different  is  this  from  "  I  hope,"  "  I  trust."  Now  where  this  language 
is  genuine  it  deserves  sympathy,  but  I  believe  in  many  cases  it  is  cant.  Let  those 
who  are  the  subjects  of  these  doubts  be  cheered,  but  let  their  doubts  and  fears  be 
rooted  out.  It  is  not  presumption  to  believe  what  God  tells  you.  If  He  says,  "  You 
are  justified,"  do  not  say,  "  I  hope  I  am."  If  I  should  say  to  some  poor  man,  ••  I  will 
pay  your  rent  for  you,"  and  he  should  say,  "  Well,  well,  I  hope  you  will,"  I  should 
not  feel  best  pleased  with  him.  If  you  should  say  to  your  child,  "  I  shall  buy  you 
a  new  suit  of  clothes  to-day,"  and  he  should  say,  "  Well,  father,  I  sometimes  hope 
you  will,  I  humbly  trust,  I  hope  I  may  say,  though  I  sometimes  doubt  and  fear, 
yet  I  hope  I  may  say  I  believe  you,"  you  would  not  encourage  such  a  child  as  that 
in  his  uncomely  suspicions.  Why  should  we  talk  thus  to  our  dear  Father  who  is 
in  heaven?  4.  Its  effect.  (1)  Joy.  Who  can  be  at  peace  with  God  and  have 
Him  for  a  Father,  and  yet  be  miserable?  (2)  A  calm  resignation,  nay,  a  delightful 
acquiescence  in  his  Father's  will.  What  fear  is  there  to  the  man  that  is  at  peace 
with  God  ?  Life  ? — God  provides  for  it.  Death  ? — Christ  hath  destroyed  it.  The 
Grave  ? — Christ  hath  rolled  away  the  stone  and  broken  the  seal.  Affliction,  tribu- 
lation, famine,  peril,  or  the  sword?  "Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than 
conquerors  through  Him  that  hath  loved  us."  II.  Words  of  counsel  to  thosb 
WHO  HAVE  NOT  THIS  PEACE,  OB  HAVE  LOST  IT,  1.  There  is  a  man  who  many  years 
ago  was  a  professor,  and  who  has  never  been  easy  in  his  conscience  since  he  for- 
sook the  ways  of  God.  Backslider,  do  you  remember  the  time  when  you  did  feel 
that  Christ  could  save,  and  you  did  trust  yourself  with  Him  ?  Now  then,  do  the 
same  to-night,  and  the  dew  of  thy  youth  is  restored  unto  thee.  "  Oh  1  but  I  have 
forsaken  Him."  Lay  aside  thy  " buts"  and  "if s."  He  bids  thee  come.  "Believe 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  2.  There  are  those  who  are 
not  backsliders  exactly,  but  have  lost  their  peace  for  a  little  time.  Many 
young  Christians  are  subject  to  little  fits,  in  which  their  evidence  gets  dark 
and  tbey  lose  their  peace.  Now  learn  from  me.  I  find  it  very  convenient  to  come 
every  day  to  Christ  as  I  came  at  first.  "  You  are  no  saint,"  says  the  devil.  Well, 
if  I  am  not,  I  am  a  sinner,  and  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners. 
Sink  or  swim,  there  I  go — other  hope  I  have  none.  3.  There  are  those  who  never 
had  peace.  (1)  Do  not  seek  peace  as  the  first  object ;  for,  if  you  want  peace  before 
you  get  grace,  you  want  the  flower  before  you  get  the  root,  like  children  who,  when 
they  have  a  piece  of  garden  given  them,  pluck  the  flowers  out  of  their  father's  bed, 
and  put  them  into  their  own  ground,  and  then  say,  "  What  a  nice  garden  I  have 
got  1 "  But  to  their  dismay,  on  the  morrow  all  is  withered.  Better  put  the  roots 
in  and  wait  till  they  sprout,  and  then  the  flowers  will  be  living  ones,  not  borrowed 
ones.  Do  not  seek  after  peace  first.  Seek  after  Christ  first.  Peace  will  come  next, 
(2)  And  remember,  that  if  you  put  your  eye  on  anything  but  Christ,  or  anything 
with  Christ,  so  as  to  disturb  your  whole  thought  and  attention  from  being  directed 
exclusively  to  Him,  then  peace  will  be  an  impossibility  to  you.  Do  not  trust  your 
repentance,  faith,  feelings,  knowledge,  sense  of  need,  but  come  because  you  have 
nothing  to  recommend  you  ;  because  you  are  vile,  to  be  pardoned ;  because  you  are 
black,  to  be  washed;  come,  because  you  are  penniless,  to  be  made  rich ;  but  look  for 
nothing  else  save  in  Christ.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  False  peace : — Your  peace,  sinner,  ia 
that  terribly  prophetic  calm  which  the  traveller  occasionally  perceives  upon  the  higher 
Alps.  Everything  is  still.  The  birds  suspend  their  notes,  fly  low,  and  cower  down 
with  fear.  The  hum  of  bees  among  the  flowers  is  hushed.  A  horrible  stilln'  ss  rulea 
the  hour,  as  if  death  had  silenced  all  things  by  stretching  over  them  his  awful 
VOL.  I.  22 


838  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiP.  T# 

sceptre.  Perceive  ye  not  what  is  surely  at  hand  ?  The  tempest  is  preparing,  the 
lightning  will  soon  cast  abroad  its  flames  of  fire.  Earth  will  rock  with  thunder- 
blasts  ;  granite  peaks  will  be  dissolved ;  all  nature  will  tremble  beneath  the  fury  of 
the  storm.  Yours  is  that  solemn  calm  to-day,  sinner.  Kejoice  not  in  it,  for  the 
hurricane  of  wrath  is  coming,  the  whirlwind  and  the  tribulation  which  shall  sweep 
you  away  and  utterly  destroy  you.  {Ihid.)  Peace  of  pardon,  not  a  mere  forget- 
fulness : — I  have  spilled  the  ink  over  a  bill,  and  so  have  blotted  it  till  it  can  hardly 
be  read  ;  but  this  is  quite  another  thing  from  having  the  debt  blotted  out,  for  that 
cannot  be  till  payment  is  made.  So  a  man  may  blot  his  sins  from  his  memory  and 
quiet  his  mind  with  false  hopes,  but  the  peace  which  this  will  bring  him  is  widely 
different  from  that  which  arises  from  God's  forgiveness  of  sin  through  the  satisfac- 
tion which  Jesus  made  in  His  atonement.  Our  blotting  is  one  thing;  God's  blot- 
ting out  is  something  far  higher.  {Ibid.)  Peace  desired  : — I  once  knew  a  young 
lady  very  rich  in  earthly  gifts ;  she  had  youth,  beauty,  wealth ;  but  she  had  not  the 
best  gifts,  the  "  peace  "  that  Jesus  gives.  She  was  not  in  the  habit  of  visiting  the 
poor,  but  one  day  she  went  with  a  friend  to  see  an  old  woman  who  had  been  coined 
to  bed  for  thirty  years,  suffering  from  a  painful  complaint,  and  was  apparently  near 
death.  While  the  young  lady  stood  pitying  by,  she  was  struck  by  hearing  no  word 
of  repining  or  impatience.  The  aged  Christian  spoke  of  happiness  and  peace,  the 
mercies  she  had  experienced,  the  joys  she  was  so  soon  to  know.  The  contrast  was 
great  between  these  two — the  one  in  the  flush  of  youth,  health,  prosperity  I  the  other 
so  different.  But  the  young  lady  turned  to  her  friend,  and  said, "  I  would  gladly  change 
places  with  that  poor  creature  to  have  her  peace."  The  saint  went  to  her  rest,  but  the 
lesson  was  not  lost ;  the  young  lady  sought  for  peace  in  Jesus,  and  found  it.  She  is 
now  a  bright  example  of  a  consistent  Christian,  and  treading  in  that  path  "  which 
shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."  (Teacher's  Treasury.)  Christian 
peace : — One  who  professes  to  have  no  settled  religious  beliefs  said  to  me  a  few  days 
ago,  "The  best  argument  for  religion  I  know  is  that  it  brings  harmony  into  the  lives 
of  those  who  are  truly  religious  "  ;  and  I  believe  many  would  give  almost  all  they 
have  for  Christian  peace.  Peace  may  exist  in  the  absence  of  joy  : — God's  hand 
may  be  laid  very  heavily  upon  us,  but  faith  interprets  all  as  administered  in  love. 
Therefore,  while  joy  may  be  absent,  peace  may  reign  supreme  in  the  soul.  We 
should  not  depreciate  Christian  joy.  To  "  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  "  is  our 
blessed  privilege.  But  peace  is  that  which  our  Saviour  especially  bequeathed  as 
the  peculiar  inheritance  of  His  children  while  on  earth.  Peace  vnth  God : — God 
did  not  begin  war  against  us ;  we  began  the  war  against  Him,  and  it  is  high  time 
that  this  farce  of  the  flnite  struggling  against  the  Infinite  were  ended.  We  are 
tired  of  the  war.  We  want  to  back  out.  But  how  shall  we  get  a  cessation  of  this 
contest  ?  By  going  up  into  the  mount  of  God  and  plucking  olive  branches.  What 
mount  ?  Calvary.  Modern  travellers  say  it  is  only  an  insignificant  hill ;  but  I 
persist  in  calling  it  a  mount,  because,  through  the  grandeur  of  its  meaning,  it 
overtops  the  very  highest  of  all  earthly  elevations.  The  Alps  and  the  Himalayas 
are  less  than  ant-hills  compared  with  it.  In  the  very  excavation  on  Calvary  where 
the  Cross  was  once  set,  afterward  the  olive  was  planted,  and  it  is  green,  and  thrifty, 
and  foliaged  to-day,  and  I  strip  it  off,  and  I  wave  it  before  this  assemblage,  crying, 
•'Peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Oh,  if  there  is  any  joyful 
thought  enough  to  overthrow  one's  equilibrium,  that  is  the  thought.  It  may  be  a 
matter  of  very  little  importance  what  President  Grant,  or  Queen  Victoria,  or  Eing 
William  thinks  of  any  one ;  but  to  be  brought  into  close,  and  intimate,  and  hearty, 
and  glowing  relations  with  the  God  of  a  round  universe — that  makes  a  hallelujah 
seem  stupid.  If  we  had  continued  this  fight  against  God  for  ten  thousand  years, 
we  could  not  have  captured  so  much  as  a  sword,  or  taken  so  inuch  as  a  cavalry 
stirrup,  or  wrenched  off  so  much  as  a  chariot  wheel  of  His  omnipotence ;  but  God 
and  all  heaven's  artillery  come  over  on  our  side  at  the  first  swing  of  the  olive 
branch.  Peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  there  is  no  peace  in 
any  other  way.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmag^.)  Peace  through  Christ  alone  : — We  ooald 
relate  many  heart-moving  incidents,  but  will  here  only  give  one  which  happened  to 
him  in  the  Black  Forest.  We  were  driven  by  a  fearful  storm  to  take  refuge  in  a 
small  house,  where  we  found  a  woman  sitting  at  a  table  clad  in  deep  mourning, 
and  evidently  in  great  sorrow.  Although  the  Ave  Maria  was  sounding  from  the 
neighbouring  tower  of  the  village  church,  she  was  not  praying,  but  only  kept  on 
silently  weeping  to  herself.  In  answer  to  our  inquiries  as  to  the  cause  of  her 
sorrow,  she  told  us  that  she  had  no  rest,  and  did  not  know  how  things  stood 
between  her  and  God.    Under  the  guidance  of  her  priest,  she  had  done  all  that 


OBA».  v.l  ROMANS.  839 

eoald  be  thought  of  to  obtain  ease  of  mind.  She  had  placed  great  oandlea  on  the 
altar,  had  observed  all  the  fasts  and  joined  in  all  the  processions  "  for  the  benefit 
of  the  Holy  Father,"  and  done  many  other  things  of  the  same  sort,  bat  all  had 
failed  to  give  her  peace  of  heart.  Then  came  an  awful  trial  in  the  death  of  her 
dear  husband,  who  was  killed  while  employed  as  a  wood-cutter,  by  the  fall  of  a 

gigantic  fir  tree.     The  Jesuit  Father  B told  her  that  this  was  the  expiation  of 

her  sin,  and  that  now  she  could  be  at  rest.  "  But  I  was  not,  and  I  am  not,"  sighed 
the  poor  deeply-troubled  woman.  We  soon  found  that  she  knew  nothing  of  Christ 
except  that  He  was  the  son  of  the  Virgin  and  a  great  saint,  whom  one  ought  to 
invoke  alternately  with  the  other  intercessors.  With  what  delight  this  poor  soul 
now  absorbed  the  good  news  of  the  Saviour  of  sinners,  and  how  quickly  she  under- 
stood Him  whom  she  had  long  loved  without  knowing  it,  they  alone  can  form  a 
conception  who  know  what  it  is  to  have  been  blind,  to  have  cried  for  the  light,  and 
to  have  had  their  eyes  opened.  {Pastor  Funcke.)  Immediate  results  of  justifica- 
tion:— 1.  Here  we  come  to  a  main  turning  point  in  the  development  of  the 
apostle's  teaching.  One  chapter  whose  title  might  be,  "An  exposition  and 
defence  of  justification  by  faith  in  Christ  without  the  deeds  of  the  Law,"  is  closed. 
Another  is  about  to  open  whose  title  might  be,  "  The  results  of  justification  in  the 
experience  of  the  believer."  To  unfold  these  results ;  to  show  that,  so  far  from  the 
new  teaching  encouraging  men  in  sin,  it  affords  the  only  security  for  practical  holi- 
ness ;  to  trace  the  growth  of  a  believer's  spiritual  life  from  the  moment  of  his  justi- 
fication till  it  ends  in  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God  ; — this  continues 
to  be  his  theme  down  to  the  end  of  the  eighth  chapter.  2.  In  the  opening 
paragraph  of  this  section  St.  Paul  makes  it  plain  that  God's  gospel  way  of 
justifying  a  sinner  on  his  believing  affords  the  most  ample  ground  to  hope  for 
the  ultimate  complete  salvation  of  every  believer.  How  that  hope  is  to  be  realised 
the  apostle  does  not  as  yet  say.  Into  the  connection  between  a  justified  state  and 
a  holy  life,  he  does  not  as  yet  enter.  Taking  his  stand  simply  on  the  bare  fact  of 
justification,  he  states  that  he  who  accepts  it  cannot  help  expecting  triumphantly 
the  fullest  possible  deliverance  one  day  into  the  glory  of  God.  3.  Hope  is  the  key- 
word of  this  section,  thert^fore ;    exultant  hope  of  future  glory.     I.    Odb   bopb 

REPOSES  ON   THIS   NEW   RELATION,   ESTABLISHED  BETWIXT   VS  AND     GoD,   THAT   WE    ARB 

AT  PEACE  WITH  HiM  (vcrs.  1,  2).  1.  This  "peace  with"  or  "with  respect  to" 
God  is  probably  neither  our  changed  feelings  toward  God  in  Christ,  nor  our  peace 
of  conscience  when  we  are  sure  of  pardon,  nor  that  deep  peace  of  the  spirit  which 
is  Christ's  bequest  and  which  passes  all  understanding  ;  but  the  relationship  out  of 
which  all  this  springs.  Friendly  affections  grow  out  of  pacific  relations.  2.  The 
change  from  an  armed  to  a  peaceful  attitude  we  owe  in  the  first  instance  to  the 
atoning  work  of  the  Son.  Not  that  God  could  hate  His  sinful  creature.  But  He 
does  hate  sin — the  one  thing  which  He  hath  not  made.  And  our  sin,  so  long  as  it 
was  unexpiated,  forced  Him  into  an  attitude  of  reluctant  antagonism.  Antagonism 
is  not  hatred,  nor  even  dislike ;  it  may  co-exist  with  the  most  tender  affection. 
After  Absalom  had  assassinated  his  half-brother,  the  sorrowing  king  and  father 
refused  to  receive  the  murderer  at  court,  although  all  the  while  his  heart  longed  to 
go  forth  to  his  favourite.  So  were  we  to  God  as  that  misguided  fratricide  was  to 
David.  Apart  from  the  atonement  He  could  not  speak  to  us  words  of  friendship ; 
while  we,  on  our  part,  were  "  enemies  in  our  minds  through  wicked  works  " — dis- 
liking God  and  resenting  His  claims.  3.  But  see  what  a  mighty  revolution  Christ's 
death  wrought!  The  obstacle  which  before  had  legally  barred  a  sinful  man's 
admission  into  friendship,  was  taken  out  of  the  way.  So  soon  as  we  are  penitent 
beUevers,  we  have  an  access  into  this  favour  of  our  Father  (ver.  1) ;  and  standing  in 
that  grace,  it  is  now  possible  for  as  to  hope  that  we  shall  see  and  share  the  glory 
of  our  God  (ver.  2).  II.  Oub  hope  is  not  impaired  but  confirmed  by  our 
PRESENT  TRIBULATION.  It  is  far  off,  that  glory  of  God  which  we  hope  for.  And 
the  present  is  a  life  of  trouble.  Does  not  this  then  put  our  boastful  hope  in  a  coming 
glory  to  shame  ?  No,  life's  trouble  confirms  and  increases  our  hope ;  because  it 
works  in  as  a  steadfast  endurance  in  the  exercise  of  our  faith — a  holding  on  and 
holding  out  to  the  end.  The  Christian  who  thus  perseveres  under  trouble  is  an 
approved  or  accredited  believer.  Having  stood  that  test  of  trial,  his  faith  is  found 
genuine ;  and  as  the  tested  Christian  finds  his  faith  to  prove  itself  thus  genuine, 
must  not  his  hope  wax  only  so  much  the  more  confident  ?  As  the  hope  to  be  one 
day  glorified  with  the  glory  of  God  is  a  theme  for  triumph,  so  the  believer  learna 
to  transfer  his  exultant  triumph  even  to  those  afiflictions  which  in  the  long  run 
minister  to  his  fatare  glory,  and  that  strangest  of  aU  strange  paradoxes  on  Christian 


SM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

lips  comes  true  (ver.  3).  III.  This  tbiuuphamt  hope  in  which  God  is  xet  to  do  fob 

us,  FINDS   A   STILL  MOBE  SURE  FOUNDATION  OF  FACT  IN  WHAT  GOD  HAS  ALBEADY  DONE  TO 

PBOVB  THE  OBEATNESS  OF  His  LOVE.  This  is  the  argoiuent  which  fills  the 
remainder  of  the  section  (vers.  5-11).  It  is  introduced  in  the  words  of  ver.  5. 
This  love  of  God  for  us  which  His  Spirit  pours  out  hke  a  rich  fruitful  tide  within 
the  believer's  heart,  is  that  quite  unparalleled  love  evinced  in  Christ's  death  for  as 
while  we  were  yet  sinners  (vers.  6-8).  And  the  force  of  the  argument  is,  "  If  when 
we  were  hostile,  God  reconciled  us  by  His  Son's  death,  how  much  now  when  we 
are  His  friends,  will  He  save  us  by  His  Son's  life  ?  "  Paul  regards  all  that  still 
remains  to  be  done  for  a  believer  in  order  to  fit  him  for  final  glory  as  an  inferior 
test  of  Divine  kindness,  costing  less,  and  therefore  less  improbable,  than  what  God 
already  did  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ's  life.  He  argues  from  the  greater  thing  to 
the  less.  It  is  a  much  higher  effort  of  generosity  to  reconcile  an  enemy  than  to 
save  a  friend.  Love  was  put  then  to  its  hardest  task.  It  did  not  fail  in  that  thing 
which  was  greatest ;  why  should  it  fail  in  a  less  thing  7  The  conquering,  uplifted 
Christ,  regnant  in  celestial  bliss,  with  matchless  resources  at  command,  His 
omnipotent  breath  penetrating  His  Church — He  will  net  withdraw  His  hand  from 
the  easy  completion  of  a  task  of  which  the  first  part  has  been  already  performed  in 
tears  and  blood.  Conclusion :  Only  seize  the  religious  meaning  of  the  death  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  everything  puts  on  a  new  face.  It  did  so  to  St.  Paul.  This 
world  was  become  a  new  world  to  him  since  Christ  had  died.  Before  that  decease 
was  accomplished  at  Jerusalem,  the  human  race  lay  sunk  in  hopeless  guilt,  jailered 
by  the  inexpiable  vengeance  of  heaven,  with  the  blackness  of  death  shrouding  its 
hereafter.  But  now,  what  a  change  I  1.  God  is  changed.  Whereas  there  lay  on 
our  hearts  only  the  intolerable  sense  of  infinite  disapproval  and  displeasure,  now 
we  have  peace  with  Him.  He  is  just,  and  yet  He  justifies  us  through  His  Son's 
expiation.  2.  This  life  is  changed.  Its  troubles  are  still  upon  us,  but  before  they 
seemed  to  be  only  presages  of  a  vengeance  to  come.  Kow  we  are  God's  friends,  and 
afflictions  can  be  nothing  worse  than  experiments  upon  our  confidence  in  Him ;  a 
well-meant  discipline  vindicating  the  sincerity  of  our  attachment  to  Him,  whom, 
though  He  slay  us,  we  still  can  trust.  When  we  have  withstood  such  a  test,  we 
can  even  turn  round  and  rejoice  in  it  3.  The  future  is  changed.  The  leaden  pall 
is  lifted  which  overhung  man's  existence.  With  God  on  his  side,  a  man  learns  to 
have  boundless  anticipations.  Who  will  say  that  anything  is  too  much  to  hope  for 
a  creature  for  whom  God  was  willing  to  die  ?    (J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  By  whom  also  we  have  access  by  faifh  Into  this  grace  wherein  we 
stand. — Access  to  God : — There  are  many  locks  in  my  house  and  all  with  different 
keys,  but  I  have  one  master-key  which  opens  all.  So  the  Lord  has  many  treasuries 
and  secrets  all  shut  up  from  carnal  minds  with  locks  which  they  cannot  open ;  bat 
he  who  walks  in  fellowship  with  Jesus  possesses  the  master-key  which  will  admit 
him  to  all  the  blessings  of  the  covenant— yea,  to  the  very  heart  of  God.  Through 
the  Well-beloved  we  have  access  to  God,  to  heaven,  to  every  secret  of  the  Lord. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  state  of  grace : — In  this  chapter  St.  Paul  describes 
the  riches  of  Divine  grace — how  free,  full,  and  comprehensive  is  the  gift  of  God. 
Now  the  grace  of  God  is  not  merely  nominal,  it  is  operative  and  communicative. 
Sometimes  God  may  show  His  almighty  power,  as  when  He  creates  a  system  of 
worlds ;  sometimes  His  wisdom,  as  when  He  furnishes  and  adorns  a  planet ;  some- 
times  His  goodness  in  the  abundant  favours  which  he  confers  upon  His  creatures. 
But  He  displays  His  grace  to  the  ruined  family  of  mankind.  Here  the  kindness  of 
God  has  full  play.  *'  This  grace  wherein  we  stand  "  denotes  a  state  in  which  we 
remain  to  dwell  amidst  its  privileges.  It  is  not  a  casual  or  evanescent  feeling,  bat 
a  settled  condition  wrought  for  us  and  in  us  by  the  abounding  mercy  of  the  Lord. 
This  is  a  state  of — I.  Peace  and  favoue  with  God  (ver.  1).  When  God  justifies  the 
ungodly,  and  withdraws  the  sentence  of  condemnation,  the  fear  of  wrath  is  removed, 
and  heartfelt  peace  necessarily  succeeds  to  gloomy  apprehension.  Peace  is  the  first 
blessing  promised  by  Christ  to  the  returning  sinner,  and  it  is  a  great  one.  A  soul 
at  peace  with  the  universe,  above,  around,  and  before  it,  is  in  an  enviable  state  of 
existence !  H.  Divine  influence.  "  Grace  "  is  often  used  to  express  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  When  you  first  believed  and  entered  the  kingdom  of  grace,  the  Holy 
Ghost,  with  royal  finger,  touched  your  soul,  and  raised  it  from  the  death  of  sin  to 
a  life  of  righteousness.  He  continues  His  work  of  grace  in  the  believer.  He  lovea 
to  form  the  soul  anew,  to  beautify  and  adorn  it  with  the  image  of  the  heavenly. 
III.  GoMMUNiOM  WITH  GoD  (Eph.  U.  18).     It  is  no  mean  privilege  for  a  needy 


tmr.  T.]  ROMANS.  841 

erestore  to  have  free  and  ready  access  to  the  Giver  of  all  good ;  to  have  the  liberty 
of  ransacking  the  storehouse  of  grace.  There  is  a  temple  of  prayer  in  the  land  of 
grace.  We  know  not  if  there  be  anotlier  such  in  the  universe.  There  is  none  in 
tiie  regions  of  sin.  "  God  heareth  not  [wilful]  sinners."  True,  there  is  a  porch  of 
mercy  to  which  the  penitent  may  flee,  and  where  the  sighing  of  a  broken  heart  will 
be  heard  by  God ;  and  this  porch  communicates  with  the  temple  of  salvation  through 
the  door  which  is  Christ  Jesus.  But  until  you  reach  the  gate  of  repentance,  yoa 
may  stretch  out  your  hands  to  heaven  in  vain.  In  the  new  Jerusalem,  John  "  saw 
no  temple."  Heaven  is  a  place  of  praise,  not  of  prayer.  So  we  are  permitted  to 
pray  upon  earth.  This  is  an  amazing  privilege  which  is  too  little  appreciated,  and 
can  never  be  fully  estimated.  IV.  Joyous  anticipation.  ''We  rejoice  in  hope  of 
the  glory  of  God."  This  full  assurance  of  hope  is  the  privilege  of  the  experienced 
Christian  in  whom  grace  has  produced  its  ripe  fruits.  Hope  is  the  daughter  of 
faith.  Faith  ia  the  victory  over  the  world,  hope  over  death.  It  is  the  Christian 
warrior's  privilege.  When  his  spiritual  hope  is  matured,  it  is  a  faculty  of  no  httle 
potency.  The  believer  now  feels  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come — a  Divine  life 
which  is  ever  aspiring  towards  its  native  heaven.  (R.  M.  Macbriar,  M.A.)  Further 
fruits  of  justification : — Peace  is  only  the  first  link  of  a  golden  chain  which  binds  us 
to  the  throne  of  God.  It  is  the  first  gem  out  of  heaven's  cabinet,  the  first  fruit  of 
the  tree  of  life,  the  first  ta^^te  of  the  water  of  life.  Peace  comes  to  the  forgiven 
sinner  Uke  a  radiant  angel  from  the  skies ;  but  she  brings  along  with  her  a  happy 
troop  of  young  sisters,  every  one  of  whom  is  his  constant  companion  from  the 
wicket-gate  to  the  crystal  battlements.  Note — I.  The  believer's  pebmanent  statb 
OF  GRACE.  1.  The  privilege  of  being  specially  loved  of  God.  This  love  is  that  of  a 
father  to  his  children  (John  i.  12;  Gal.  iv,  4,  5;  James  1.  18;  Jer.  xxxi.  3).  The 
end  at  which  God  aims  in  His  treatment  of  His  children  is  to  bring  them  to  glory 
(Heb.  ii.  10).  But  first  they  have  to  be  fitted  for  it  (Col.  i.  12).  And  therefore  it  ia 
God's  present  business  to  purify  them  and  make  them  perfect  in  holiness  and  love. 
Whom  He  justifies,  them  He  also  sanctifies.  Into  this  grace  we  are  introduced  by 
faith.  And  it  is  by  faith  we  stand  in  it.  2.  The  constant  privilege  of  prayer. 
Those  who  are  justified  have  at  all  times  freedom  of  access  to  the  throne  of 
grace.  They  are  encouraged  to  come  to  it  boldly  (Heb.  iv.  16 ;  Phil.  iv.  6) ;  if 
rebuked  at  all,  it  is  because  they  do  not  pray  enough,  or  because  they  do  not  expect 
sufficiently  large  returns  (John  iv.  24).  Prayer  opens  the  armoury  of  God ;  it  is  the  key 
which  unlocks  the  promises  and  makes  them  ours.  It  makes  the  weak  worm,  Jacob, 
omnipotent.  By  it  we  link  our  little  skiff  to  the  great  ark  of  Jehovah's  purposes 
and  promises,  and  thus  are  we  borne  triumphantly  across  life's  billowy  sea  to  the 
heavenly  Ararat  of  rest.  It  is  by  Christ  that  we  have  such  access  into  this  grace 
wherein  we  stand  (Eph.  ii.  18,  iii.  12).  3.  The  privilege  of  being  God's  instruments 
in  fulfilling  His  great  purposes  in  the  world.  We  are  the  Church  of  the  living  God, 
endowed  with  a  queenly  authority  and  power.  The  Church  is  the  Lamb's  bride. 
It  is  the  heritage,  the  house,  and  the  city  of  God.  It  is  the  pillar  of  the  truth.  It 
is  the  open  mirror  of  Jehovah's  most  glorious  attributes  (Eph.  iii.  10).  And  yet  it 
is  into  this  grace  that  we  obtain  access  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  we  are 
justified  by  faith.  II.  The  believer's  joyful  hope  concerning  the  future.  1. 
Its  object.  (1)  Glory  is  a  word  which  primarily  denotes  clearness  and  brightness. 
Hence,  we  speak  of  the  glory  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  while  "  one  star  differeth 
from  another  star  in  glory."  Here  we  read  of  the  "Glory  of  God."  On  earth  this 
glory  is  dimmed  and  obscured ;  in  hell  it  is  never  beheld ;  while  heaven  is  a  realm 
of  perfect  light,  and  in  this  God  dwells  (1  Tim.  vi.  15, 16).  For  such  glory  to  be 
revealed  to  ns  now,  like  Saul  of  Tarsus,  we  should  afterwards  be  nnable  to  see,  unless, 
indeed,  we  were  instantly  destroyed  by  the  brightness  of  His  appearing.  Now  let 
OS  regard  the  Christian's  hope  of  glory  under  this  aspect.  There  are  creeping  things 
which  can  only  live  in  darkness  ;  others,  a  little  superior,  thrive  best  in  twiUght ; 
and  others  which  can  live  in  misty,  northern  climes,  while  they  would  speedily 
perish  ander  a  bright,  southern  sky.  Man,  the  chief  and  head  of  terrene  existences, 
can  bask  with  delight  in  the  most  brilliant  earthly  sunshine.  But  angels,  higher 
still,  can  live  amid  the  unscreened  splendours  of  the  heavenly  world.  Now  the 
prospect  which  we,  as  Christians,  have  is  of  one  day  joining  their  bright  hosts, 
feeling  at  home  in  that  most  intense  radiance.  But  how  great  a  change  must  pass 
over  us  before  we  are  fitted  for  that  sphere  1  We  must  possess  spiritual  bodies  (see 
CoL  iii.  4  ;  1  John  iii.  2 ;  PhU.  iii.  21).  (2)  But  God's  glory  must  be  viewed  in  a 
moral  aspect,  as  that  of  wisdom,  hoUness,  rectitude,  and  truth,  mingled  with  mercy 
and  love.    There  is  a  glory  in  God's  character  which,  the  more  we  discern,  the 


84S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap,  r, 

more  we  must  admire  it ;  in  His  law,  which  is  the  exact  counterpart  and  transcript 

of  His  character ;  in  His  government  of  all  intelligent  creatures,  and  brightest  of  all 

in  Christ.    This  glorj  we  hope  to  see  and  to  share.    Here  we  see  it  in  part,  and 

know  it  in  part.    But  hereafter,  we  shall  see  it  in  its  fullest  splendour.    Our  moral 

faculties  will  be  pnrified,  quickened,  and  enlarged,  while  our  acquaintance  with  the 

ways  and  works  of  God  will  be  corrected  and  expanded.    We  shall  be  holy,  even  as 

He  is  holy,  and  do  His  will  as  angels  do  it  now  (Psa.  xvii.  15).     (3)  There  is  also 

a  circumstantial  glory — not  the  glory  which  belongs   intrinsically  to  God,   bat 

the  extraneous  glory  which  He  bestows  upon  His  people.     We  cannot  but  prepare 

for  some  determinate  place  as  the  scene  of  our  immortal  life  ^John  ziv.  2,  8 ; 

1  Cor.  ii.  9).     We  cannot  doubt,  however,  that  heaven  will  oe  a  domain  of 

perfect  happiness  and  beauty  worthy  of  its  Maker;   it  will  contain  everything 

which  can  minister  to  the  enjoyment  of  holy  and  immortal  creatures  (Rev.  vii, 

16,  17).    2.  Its  nature.     To  hope  for  it  is — (1]  To  believe  in  its  existence  and 

certain  attainment ;    and  this  we  do,  because  it  is  expressly  promised  by  Him 

who  cannot  lie.     (2)  To  desire  it,  and  long  for  it  (2  Cor.  v.  4).    8.  This  hope, 

accordingly,  becomes  a  source  of  pleasure  and  joy  to  us.     (T.  O.  Horton.)        And 

rejoice  In  hope  of  the  glory  of  God. — The  glory  of  God  is  an  eternal  mystery 

which  the  heart  of  man  cannot  yet  conceive,  but  of  which  Holy  Scripture  gives 

here  and  there  short  glimpses.     Like  the  righteousness,  the  truth  and  the  life  of 

God  (Eph.  iv.  18),  it  has  its  hidden  source  in  the  Father,  it  is  manifested  in  the 

Son,  it  is  reflected  in  man  (John  xvii.  22).     Of  this  glory  man  was  from  the  first 

designed  to  partake  (1  Cor.  xi.  7),  but  by  sin  all  men  "come  short"  or  suffer  loss 

of  it  (chap.  iii.  23) ;  its  restoration  is  wrought  by  the  Spirit  revealing  and  imparting 

the  glory  of  Christ  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).     In  presenting  this  glory  as  an  object  of  the 

believer's  hope,  the  apostle  points  to  its  future  perfection  in  the  glorification 

of  our  whole  nature,  body,  soul,  and  spirit.    The  glory  in  which  man  will  be  thus 

transfigured  will  be  the  glory  of  God,  even  as  the  sunshine  resting  upon  earth  is 

still  the  light  of  heaven  ;  it  will  be  an  everlasting  glory,  just  because  man  will  dwell 

for  ever  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance.     (Archdn.  Gifford.)      Hope  of  glory : — 

I.  What  constitutes  that  olort  in  the  hope  of  which  the  apostle  bejoiced  ?  The 

word  "  glory  "  applied  to  God  sometimes  denotes  that  splendour  with  which  He 

often  clothed  Himself  when  He  made  His  appearance  to  the  ancient  saints ;  some- 

times  that  sublime  display  of  God's  natural  attributes,  which  He  has  made  in  the 

creation;  sometimes  a  particular  attribute  of  the  Deity.    It  is  in  general  used, 

however,  to  denote  any  signal  or  triumphant  display  of  the  Divine  attributes  as 

made  towards  men.    In  its  primary  and  highest  sense  it  is  the  full,  cloudless,  and 

combined  display  of  the  perfections  of  the  Godhead,  as  in  the  text.  1.  The  display  of 

this  glory  is  reserved  for  the  future  world.    But  it  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  any 

change  is  to  pass  upon  the  essential  divinity  of  the  Godhead.    Jehovah  is  the 

perfection  of  beauty,  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever ;  only  interposing  mediums 

will  be  removed,  and  the  capacity  of  the  creature  elevated.    This  is  accomplished 

for  the  soul  at  death ;  for  the  body  at  the  resurrection.    Think  not,  therefore,  that 

God  is  to  reveal  His  glory  by  descending  to  us.    The  revelation  will  be  made  by 

elevating  us  to  Himself.    If  we  are  to  behold  this  glory  with  a  seraph's  ecstasy,  we 

shall  gaze  upon  it  with  a  seraph's  eye.    2.  It  is  to  consist  in  the  displays  which 

God  will  make  of  Himself.    The  company  of  saints  and  angels  may  indeed  increase 

immensely  the  bliss  of  heaven.     But  what  are  they  without  God  ?    The  glory  in 

which  they  will  shine  is  but  a  reflection  from  that  embodied  effulgence  which 

emanates  from  the  perfections  of  the  Eternal  Three.    It  is  chiefly  to  be  disclosed 

through  the  Church,  and  Jesus  Christ  is  its  Head  and  Redeemer.    He  has  received 

this  appointment ;  and,  from  the  Father,  glory  has  been  given  Him,  which,  in 

answer  to  His  own  prayer.  His  saints  shall  behold.    But  in  what  way  will  He 

execute  it?    The  manifold  wisdom  of  God  is  to  be  exhibited  through  the  Church, 

nnto   principalities  and  powers  in  the  heavenly  places.    The  absolute  riches  ol 

His  glory  He  has  determined  to  display  through  the  vessels  of  mercy,  which  He 

had  afore  prepared  onto  glory.    Where  in  the  universe  besides  could  He  have 

found  materials  for  erecting  a  monument  so  splendid,  durable,  and  great,  to  His 

matchless  love  and  mercy,  as  in  these  poor  guilty  beings  which  He  thus  redeems 

and  exalts.    Having  gathered  His  saints  into  their  everlasting  rest,  and  secured 

ft  complete  triumph  over  the  last  enemy,  the  Redeemer  will  now  sit  down  in  the 

midst  of  the  throne,  encircled  with  a  bow  of  glory,  in  sight  like  nnto  an  emerald. 

Then  the  sound  of  innumerable  voices  will  break  upon  the  ear  of  teaven,  "Worthy 

is  the  Lamb  to  receive  glory."    II.  What  is  xhb  Hor>  of  oix>bt,  ahd  bow  dobs  a 


CRAP.  T.]  ROMANS.  aiS 

BECOMB  A  FOUNDATION  o»  JOY  TO  THE  BELIEVER  ?  It  is  the  hope  of  a  sinncr  founded 
in  the  atonement  of  it,  and  it  gives  to  the  believer  a  prospective  possession  of  the 
glory  that  is  to  be  revealed.  1.  There  is,  however,  a  hope  that  fastens  upon  the 
same  blessed  inheritance  which  yet  is  not  the  Christian's.  Of  this  kind  the  world 
is  full.  How  are  they  to  be  distinguished  from  each  other  ?  (1)  Look  at  their 
origin.  The  rock  of  ages,  Jesus  Christ,  is  here  placed  as  a  broad  and  deep 
substratum  on  which  the  hope  of  glory  is  built.  "  Other  foundation  can  no  man 
lay  than  that  is  laid,"  and  safely  build  upon  it  this  animating  hope.  It  is  the 
immediate  result  of  justification  by  faith.  The  impenitent  sinner's  hope,  on  the 
contrary,  is  built  upon  the  sand.  (2)  But  these  hopes  differ  not  less  in  their 
legitimate  effects  upon  the  heart.  That  of  the  Christian  is,  in  its  very  nature, 
purifying  (1  John  iii.  3).  It  is  a  hope,  too,  through  which  the  love  of  God  is  shed 
abroad  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  this  way  it  transforms  the  soul  into 
the  very  image  of  its  Maker,  and  thus  prepares  it  for  the  iuheritance  of  the  saints 
in  light.  The  hope  of  the  sinner,  however,  is  not  only  incompatible  with  the 
undisturbed  repose  of  every  sin,  but  it  is  the  very  aliment  on  which  these  plants  of 
death  are  nourished.  (3)  As  to  the  different  results  of  these  hopes,  I  need  only  say 
the  one  is  like  the  giving  up  of  the  ghost  when  God  takes  away  the  soul — while 
the  other,  on  the  same  event,  will  be  hke  the  breaking  of  a  summer's  morning. 
The  one  terminates  in  endless  day,  the  other  in  eternal  night ;  the  one  in  heaven, 
the  other  in  hell.  2.  The  hope  renders  the  possession  prospective.  But  what  is 
intended  by  possession  ?  The  glory  of  God's  kingdom  is  to  be  ours  in  a  sense 
vastly  higher  than  anything  we  are  said  to  possess  in  the  present  life.  In  the 
terrestrial  sense  nothing  becomes  completely  ours  till  every  foreign  claim  is 
extinguished.  In  the  heavenly,  everything  becomes  ours  by  extinguishing  our  own. 
In  the  present  world  our  right  to  possession  is  founded  in  the  sacrifice  we  have 
made  or  the  equivalent  we  have  rendered.  In  the  other,  the  blood  of  the  Cross  will 
seal  it  to  us  entire,  with  no  sacrifice  of  our  own,  no  equivalent  given.  Here  we 
struggle  for  possession  that  we  may  not  be  dependent.  There  we  shall  surrender 
all,  that  our  dependence  may  be  complete.  Conclusion :  1.  The  saints  have 
ample  occasion  to  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  Are  you  at 
present  the  subjects  of  affliction  ?  I  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time 
are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed  in  you.  2.  God  for- 
bid that  in  tbe  animating  prospect  which  the  heavenly  inheritance  presents,  any  of 
you  should  be  disposed  at  present  to  glory  save  in  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
(J.  W.  Adams,  D.D.)  Hope  of  the  glory  of  God  a  source  of  joy  to  His  people : — I.  Thk 
GLOBT  OF  God.  Glory  signifies  something  splendid,  dazzling,  overwhelming.  The  term 
is  misapplied  to  things  mean  and  unworthy,  but  is  always  most  rightly  applied  to  any- 
thing pertaining  to  God.  "  The  meanest  labour  of  His  hands  "  is  more  deserving  of 
the  term  than  the  greatest  works  of  men.  "  Even  Solomon,  in  all  his  glory,  was  not 
arrayed  like  one  of  these."  The  glory  of  God  means — 1.  God  Himself.  Moses 
prayed,  "  I  beseech  thee,  show  me  Thy  glory,"  that  is,  "  Reveal  Thyself  more  fuUy 
to  me."  It  would  have  been  well  if  God's  answer  had  repressed  all  similar 
curiosity.  No  man  can  see  Him  personally  and  live.  We  could  not  sustain  the 
vision,  even  were  we  physically  capable  of  it.  But  when  we  have  laid  aside  all 
that  is  mortal,  and  "  put  on  immortality,"  "  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  2.  The 
glory  of  God  which  is  beheld  in  His  works.  "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of 
God."  And  what  splendours  do  these  heavens  exhibit  I  The  most  capacious  mind 
may  well  quail  in  its  effort  to  comprehend  the  glory  of  the  infinite  Creator,  which 
they  both  reveal  and  conceal.  We  require  to  be  a  God  to  comprehend  all  of  God 
which  His  works  contain.  And  if  the  works  of  God  be  so  glorious,  what  must 
Himself  be  ?  3.  The  glory  which  appears  in  God's  ways  and  dealings  with  us  in 
providence.  We  may  take  three  views  of  this  and  call  it  a  natural  providence,  a 
judicial  providence,  and  a  gracious  providence.  By  the  first,  He  provides  for  aU 
creatures,  according  to  their  capacities  and  necessities  ;  by  the  second.  He  holds 
us  accountable  to  Himself,  and  takes  cognisance  of  our  hearts  and  lives ;  and  by 
the  third,  He  is  reconciling  us  to  Himself,  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  dispensing  mercy 
and  grace  to  all  who  ask  them  at  His  hands.  And  how  gloriously  does  He  act  in 
all  these  respects  I  4.  The  perfect  purity  and  bliss  which  await  the  godly  in 
heaven.  (1)  Their  state  is  glorious.  What  was  the  glory  of  Eden,  of  Sinai,  of 
Zion,  of  Tabor,  compared  with  this  I  No  sin,  disease,  pain,  death.  (2)  Their 
society  is  glorious.  If  it  was  "good"  to  be  present  when  Moses,  Elijah,  and 
Christ  conversed,  what  must  the  intimacies  of  heaven  afford  ?  (8)  Their  employ- 
ments are  glorious.    Think  of  being  for  ever  engaged  in  contemplating,  loving. 


844  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (oha».  ^^ 

adoring,  and  serving  God  1  of  ever  reoeiving  and  performing  reoiprooations  of 
love  I  (4)  Their  prospects  are  glorious.  The  infinite  and  various  excellences  of 
God  will  be  ever  affording  new  discoveries ;  the  river  of  their  bliss  will  increase  as 
it  rolls;  that  the  sun  of  their  heaven  will  still  brighten  as  He  shines;  and  that 
their  state  of  glory  will  ever  admit  of  "  a  far  more  exceeding  and  an  eternal  weight 
of  glory."  II.  The  JOY  WHICH  THE  HOPE  OF  THE  GiiOBT  OF  God  AFFORDS.  1.  They  are 
to  possess  it.  It  is  theirs,  as  Canaan  was  the  inheritance  of  the  descendants  of 
the  patriarchs.  It  is  given  to  them  by  a  covenant  never  to  be  broken.  It  is  the 
chief  part  of  the  "  eternal  redemption  "  procured  for  them  by  the  Redeemer.  It  is 
that  to  which  they  receive  a  title  in  their  justification,  to  which  they  are  "  begotten 
again  "  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  which  they  are  sanctified,  preserved,  and  fitted  in 
this  life.  2.  Of  this  ultimate  possession  they  have  now  a  hope — "  a  good  hope 
through  grace."  And  their  "hopemaketh  not  ashamed,"  and  is  "an  anchor  of 
their  souls,  sure  and  steadfast,  entering  into  the  things  within  the  veil."  We  see 
the  powerful  influence  of  this  hope.  With  what  firmness  and  composure  does 
many  a  good  man  endure  calamity  and  meet  death  I  Such  a  person  may  be 
likened  to  a  mariner,  who,  while  prosecuting  his  long  and  dangerous  voyage,  has 
the  eye  of  his  mind  fixed  on  the  desired  haven :  or  he  is  like  an  heir  of  some 
Tast  estate,  looking  forward,  during  his  minority,  to  the  period  when  he  shall 
receive  his  property.  3.  This  hope  begets  joy  in  the  bosom  of  its  possessors.  (1) 
The  foundation  of  it  is  a  cause  of  joy.  It  does  not  rest  upon  merits,  sacraments, 
Ac,  but  upon  the  foundation  which  God  has  laid  in  Zion,  and  "  other  foundation 
can  no  man  lay."  Everything  besides  is  as  "  shifting  sand,  fleeting  air,  or  a  bursting 
bubble."  (2)  Its  attendant  principles  occasion  joy.  It  is  one  of  a  class  of  graces 
which  are  the  "fruits  of  the  Spirit."  (3)  Its  effects  minister  joy.  It  is  not  an 
nninfluential  grace,  but  is  ever  active,  and  all  its  influence  is  for  holiness.  A 
genuine  hope  and  allowed  sin  cannot  co-exist  in  the  same  person.  (4)  Its  certainty 
yields  joy  ;  other  hopes  may  and  do  fail.  We  have  seen  the  candidate  for  wealth, 
power,  fame,  pleasure,  flushed  with  hope,  only  to  become  the  victim  of  disappoint- 
ment and  mortification !  (5)  Its  object  gives  joy — the  glory  of  God  in  heaven.  In 
other  things,  the  ultimate  enjoyment  may  not  equal  our  present  hope  of  it ;  bat 
here  realisation  will  infinitely  sustain  our  largest  and  most  sanguine  hope.  We 
shall  find  that  notwithstanding  all  that  is  written  in  the  Scriptures  of  this  glory, 
all  the  glimpses  and  tastes  we  may  have  of  it  now,  the  half  has  not  been  known. 
Conclusion :  1.  How  little  we  know  at  present  of  the  glory  of  God  1  Who  can 
find  Him  out  to  perfection  ?  And  a  cloud  rests  upon  His  works.  His  providence, 
too,  is  all  beyond  our  comprehension.  The  difficulties  do  not  diminish  if  we  think 
of  Divine  revelation  ;  in  which  we  have  certain  facts  stated,  but  the  circumstances 
of  many  of  these  facts  are  not  explained.  And  then  how  dense  is  the  veil  which 
conceals  the  world  of  spirits  from  our  view  !  And  in  all  these  things  the  mere 
philosopher  has  little  advantage  over  the  clown.  But  the  Christian  has  the 
advantage  of  faith  ;  "  what  he  knows  not  now  he  shall  know  hereafter."  2. .  Is  our 
hope  for  eternity  the  hope  of  the  gospel  and  the  real  Christian  ?  Self-deception 
and  vain  pretensions  are  common  in  the  world  and  in  the  Church.  We  can  hardly 
meet  with  a  person  who  does  not  hope  to  go  to  heaven  when  he  dies.  But,  in 
thousands  of  instances,  how  vain  is  the  hope  1  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall 
see  the  Lord. "  Here  is  a  sure  test  by  which  to  ascertain  the  genuineness  of  oar 
hope.  3.  The  subject  is  weU  fitted  to  relieve  the  present  obscurity,  and  to  mitigate 
the  present  sorrows  of  the  people  of  God.  We  shall  not  always  remain  under  a 
cloud  and  in  trouble.  A  day  of  revelation  is  approaching  when  we  shall  "  shine 
as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  our  Father,"  and  when  we  shall  no  more  "  hang  our 
harps  upon  the  willows,"  but  retain  them,  ever  strung  and  attuned  to  the  songs  of 
immortality.  {James  Dnvies.)  The  hope  of  heaven : — Shall  we  sink  or  falter  by  the 
way,  when  we  know  that  we  are  journeying  to  a  land  of  everlasting  rest,  and  shall  soon 
reach  our  eterual  home?  Shall  the  dark  valley  of  death  affright  us,  when  we  see 
beyond  it  the  fields  of  immortality  smiling  in  the  verdure  of  eternal  spring  ?  Destined 
as  we  are  for  heaven,  shall  we  grieve  or  murmur  that  the  earth  is  not  found  to  be  a 
suitable  resting-place  for  immortal  beings,  and  that  God  checks  every  tendency  to 
rest  here,  by  sharp  afflictions  and  severe  disappointment  f  God  forbid  I  heaven. 
Been  even  in  the  distance,  should  allure  us  onwards,  and  its  glorious  light  should  cast 
a  cheering  ray  over  the  darkest  passages  of  Ufe.  Nay,  not  only  should  the  hope  of 
heaven  prevent  us  from  complaining  of  the  afflictions  of  life,  but  the  thought  that 
these  afflictions  are  even  now  preparing  us  for  that  blessed  state,  that  they  are 
ordained  aa  necessary  and  osefol  means  of  discipline  to  promote  our  progress 


eEAV.  ▼.]  ROMANS.  841 

towards  it ;  that  they  are  the  furnace  by  which  the  dross  is  to  be  purged  away,  and 
the  pure  ore  fitted  for  the  Master's  use  in  the  upper  sanctuary,  should  reconcile  as 
to  resigned  submission,  should  make  us  grateful,  that  such  discipline  being  needfol, 
it  has  not  been  withheld,  and  to  pray  earnestly  that  it  may  be  so  blessed  for  oar 
use  as  that  we  shall,  in  due  time,  be  presented  faultless  and  blameless  before  the 
presence  of  God's  glory,  with  exceeding  Joy.  (James  Buchanan.)  The  futurt 
vision  of  God  : — This  vision  of  God  will  constitute  the  blessedness  or  the  miseiy  of 
the  future  world,  and  since  only  like  can  know  like,  as  Trench  has  said,  "  Every 
advance  in  a  holy  life  is  a  polishing  of  the  mirror  that  it  may  reflect  distinctly  the 
Divine  image  ;  a  purging  of  the  eye  that  it  may  see  more  clearly  the  Divine  glory ; 
an  enlarging  of  the  vessel  that  it  may  receive  more  amply  of  the  Divine  fulness." 
The  glory  of  the  Creator: — Baron  Von  Canitz,  a  German  nobleman,  who  lived  in 
the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century,  was  distinguished  both  for  talent  and 
intense  religiousness  of  spirit.  When  the  dawn  broke  into  his  sick  chamber  on  the 
last  morning  of  life  he  desired  to  be  removed  to  the  window,  and  once  more  behold 
the  rising  sun.  After  a  time  he  broke  forth  in  the  following  language,  "  Oh,  if 
the  appearance  of  this  earthly  and  created  thing  is  so  beautiful  and  so  quickening, 
how  much  more  shall  I  be  enraptured  at  the  sight  of  the  unspeakable  glory  of  the 
Creator  Himself  1  " 

Yer.  8.  And  not  only  so,  bnt  we  glory  In  tribulations  also. — The  Christian 
process  : — I.  Tribulation  gives  rise  to  patience,  coming  from  a  verb  which  signifies 
"  to  keep  good  under  "  (a  burden,  blows,  Ac),  and  might  be  rendered  "  endurance." 
II.  Endurance,  in  its  turn,  worketh  experience — the  state  of  a  force  or  virtue  which 
has  stood  trials.  This  force,  issuing  victorious  from  the  conflict,  is  undoubtedly  the 
faith  of  the  Christian,  the  worth  of  which  he  has  now  proved  by  experience.  It  is 
a  weapon  of  which  henceforth  he  knows  the  value.  The  word  frequently  denotes 
the  proved  Christian,  the  man  who  has  shown  what  he  is  (cf.  chap.  xiv.  18),  and  the 
opposite  (1  Cor.  x.  21).  III.  When,  finally,  the  beUever  nas  thus  experienced  the 
Divine  force  with  which  faith  fills  him  in  the  midst  of  suffering,  be  feels  his  hops 
rise.  Nothing  which  can  happen  to  him  in  the  future  any  longer  affrights  him. 
The  prospect  of  glory  opens  up  to  him  nearer  and  more  brilliant.  How  many 
Christians  have  declared  that  they  never  knew  the  gladness  of  faith  or  lively  hope 
till  they  gained  it  by  tribulation  1  With  this  word  the  apostle  has  returned  to  the 
end  of  ver.  2 ;  and  as  there  are  deceitful  hopes,  he  adds  that  this,  "  the  hope  of 
glory,"  runs  no  risk  of  being  falsified  by  the  event.  (Prof.  Godet.)  The  Chris* 
tian  process : — The  text  may  be  treated — I.  Analogically.  1.  Sore  was  the  tribu- 
lation which  came  upon  the  disciples  as  they  thought  upon  Christ's  death  and  burial. 
But  after  a  little  patience  and  experience,  their  hope  revived ;  for  their  Lord  arose. 
After  that  hope  had  been  begotten  in  them,  the  Holy  Spirit's  Divine  influence  was 
shed  abroad  upon  them.  They  were  not  ashamed  of  their  hope,  but  fearlessly  pro- 
claimed Jesus,  their  hope  of  glory.  2.  History  repeats  itself.  The  history  of  oar 
Lord  is  the  foreshadowing  of  the  experience  of  all  His  people.  First  comes  oar 
tribulation,  our  cross-bearing.  Out  of  our  patience  and  experience  there  arises  in 
doe  season  a  blessed  hope :  we  are  quickened  by  our  Lord's  resurrection  life,  and 
come  forth  from  our  sorrow.  Then  we  enjoy  our  Pentecost :  "  The  love  of  God  ia 
shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  Consequent  upon  that  visitation 
oar  hope  becomes  clear  and  assured,  and  we  are  led  to  make  a  full  outspoken  testi- 
mony. II.  ExPEBiMENTALLY.  Here  is  a  little  map  of  the  inner  life.  This  passage 
can  only  be  fully  understood  by  those  who  have  had  it  written  in  capital  letters  on 
their  own  hearts.  1.  "Tribulation  worketh  patience."  Naturally  it  worketh 
impatience,  and  impatience  misses  the  fruit  of  experience,  and  sours  into  hopeless- 
ness. When  the  heart  is  renewed  by  tbe  Holy  Spirit,  but  not  till  then,  tribulation 
worketh  patience.  Angels  cannot  exhibit  patience,  since  they  are  not  capable  of 
Buffering.  Job  did  not  learn  it  in  prosperity,  but  when  he  sat  among  the  ashes  and 
his  heart  was  heavy.  Patience  is  a  pearl  which  is  only  found  in  the  deep  seas  of 
affliction  ;  and  only  grace  can  find  it,  bring  it  to  the  surface,  and  adorn  the  neck  of 
faith  therewith.  2.  This  patience  worketh  in  us  experience :  i.e.,  the  more  we 
endure,  the  more  we  test  the  faithfulness  of  God,  the  more  we  prove  His  love,  and 
the  more  we  perceive  His  wisdom.  He  that  hath  never  endured  may  believe  in  the 
sustaining  power  of  grace,  but  he  has  never  had  experience  of  it.  You  must  put  to 
sea  to  know  the  skill  of  the  Divine  Pilot,  and  be  buffeted  with  tempest  before  yon 
eon  know  His  power  over  winds  and  waves.  What  better  wealth  can  a  man  have 
ttian  to  be  rich  in  experience  t    3.  Experience  works  hope.    How  wonderfully  does 


846  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [crap.  v. 

Divine  alchemy  fetch  fine  gold  out  of  baser  metal.  The  Lord  in  His  grace  spreads 
a  couch  for  His  own  on  the  threshing-floor  of  tribulation,  and  there  we  take  oar 
rest.  He  sets  to  music  the  roar  of  the  water-floods  of  trouble.  Out  of  the  foam  of 
the  sea  of  sorrow  He  causeth  to  arise  the  bright  spirit  of  hope  that  maketh  not 
ashamed.  HI.  Doctrinallt.  The  text  is  none  other  than  the  house  of  God  and 
the  gate  of  heaven.  "  The  love  of  God  [the  Father)  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  us.  For  when  we  were  yet  without  strength 
.  .  .  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  Behold  the  blessed  Three  in  One  !  It  needs  the 
Trinity  to  make  a  Christian,  to  cheer  a  Christian,  to  complete  a  Christian,  to  create 
in  a  Christian  the  hope  of  glory.  We  have  Divine  love  bestowed  by  the  Father, 
made  manifest  in  the  death  of  the  Son,  and  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Christian's  grounds  for  glorying  in  trihulation: — To 
see  a  man  rejoicing,  notwithstanding  his  sufferings,  in  the  good  of  his  portion,  were 
nothing  remarkable ;  but  his  glorying  even  in  the  very  evil  itself,  one  would  be  disposed, 
in  the  ignorance  of  any  other  cause,  to  ascribe  to  mental  derangement.  Now,  what  is 
the  light  in  which  the  gospel  teaches  us  to  regard  the  evils  of  life  ?  When  the  apostle 
says,  '•  We  glory  in  tribulations,"  are  we  to  understand  that  the  evils  of  life,  in  place  of 
being  regarded  as  indications  of  God's  displeasure,  are  really  to  be  looked  apon  by 
all  men  as  tokens  of  His  love  and  favour  ?  Not  so,  we  conceive,  by  any  means. 
Affliction,  even  when  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  gospel  by  the  unrepentant,  though 
it  may  be  looked  upon  by  them  as  the  doing  of  a  God  who  still  waits  to  be  gracious, 
cannot,  while  their  relation  to  God  is  unchanged,  be  regarded  as  so  divested  of  its 
penal  character  that  they  can  at  all  glory  in  it.  The  best  fruits  it  can  as  yet  yield 
to  them  is  that  sorrow  which  worketh  repentance,  and  it  is  only  when  it  operates 
thus  that  it  operates  aright.  There  is,  then,  manifestly  just  one  class  of  men  who 
on  reasonable  grounds  can  glory  in  their  tribulations,  and  that  is  those  who  have 
already  turned  to  God  and  found  reconciliation — to  them  alone  it  is  given  to  extract 
anything  like  the  oil  of  gladness  out  of  the  bitter  herbs  of  temporal  suffering ;  and 
BO  it  is  that  we  here  find  glorying  in  tribulations  ranked  by  the  apostle  among  the 
privileges  of  the  justified.  And  it  is  worthy  of  being  remarked,  too,  that  it  is  not 
the  first  in  the  enumeration — that  first  peace  of  conscience,  and  joyful  hope  of 
sharing  the  promised  glory,  must  have  resulted  from  justification  before  a  man  can 
bring  bimself  to  regard  his  tribulations  as  a  ground  of  rejoicing.  We  would  now 
call  attention  to  the  grounds  of  his  so  glorying,  as  here  stated  by  him.  1. 
"  Tribulation  worketh  patience."  That  patience,  which  is  a  Christian  grace,  is  not 
mere  mental  composure  in  the  midst  of  outward  troubles,  and  fixedness  of  purpose 
when  excited  passion  threatens  to  bear  the  spirit  away  from  its  firmest  resolves, 
but  it  is  all  this  from  right  religious  views  and  principles.  It  is  because  the  mind 
of  a  Christian  is  stayed  upon  God  that  it  is  kept  calm  and  steady  in  the  day  of 
trouble.  He  has  such  confidence  in  the  character  of  God,  and  has  taken  such  a 
hold  upon  His  promises,  and  understands,  moreover,  so  well  the  design  of  His 
fatherly  correction,  that  when  affliction  does  come,  instead  of  loosening  his  hold  of 
God,  it  tends,  on  the  contrary,  to  lead  him  to  cleave  to  Him  still  more  closely.  It 
being  granted,  then,  that  tribulation  worketh  patience,  what  ground,  it  may  be 
asked,  has  a  man  for  rejoicing  in  tribulation  because  it  so  operates  ?  The  Christian 
is  taught  to  regard  the  improvement  of  character — the  having  his  mind  and  will 
brought  into  perfect  conformity  to  the  mind  and  wiU  of  God — as  that  above  all 
things  else  to  be  desired  by  him.  Any  advance  he  can  make  in  this  way  he  looks 
upon  as  the  greatest  gain,  not  only  on  account  of  its  present  advantage,  but 
especially  because  of  its  eternal  recompense.  Show  him,  then,  that  be  has  gained 
in  character,  that  he  has  brought  his  will  more  nearly  to  coincide  with  the  will  of 
God,  and  he  will  be  satisfied  that  he  has  cause  to  rejoice  in  the  acquisition, 
whatever  may  have  been  the  sacrifice  or  suffering  through  which  it  was  obtained. 
Now,  how  are  such  acquisitions  made  f  First,  we  answer,  by  endeavouring,  in  the 
strength  of  Divine  grace  sought  and  relied  on,  to  do  the  will  of  God,  as  made  known 
in  His  holy  commandments;  and  secondly,  by  endeavouring,  through  the  same 
Divine  aid,  patiently  to  submit  to  God's  will  as  made  known  in  His  providential 
dispensations.  2.  But  the  patient  enduring  of  tribulation  not  only  tends  to  the 
improvement  of  a  character,  but  it  also  serves  to  test  the  character  and  bo  to 
manifest  its  genuineness.  And  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  apostle  when  he  says 
that  patience  worketh  experience.  When  a  man  is  put  into  the  furnace  of  affliction 
and  comes  out  unscathed,  then  he  has  the  best  evidence  to  conclude  that  they  are 
genuine.  3.  The  value  to  the  believer  of  this  judgment  of  self-approval  will  fully 
Appear  when  we  consider  that  it  worketh  hope,  even  a  hope  that  maketh  not 


our.  T.]  ROMANS.  847 

ashamed.  The  connection  between  a  believer's  jadgment  of  self-approval  and  his 
hope  of  glory  is  very  evident.  The  fact  of  his  being  a  believer  implies  that  he  has 
faith  in  the  unseen  realities  of  the  future  world.  He  may  believe  this,  however, 
without  having  any  assured  hope  of  being  himself  a  partaker  of  the  inheritance. 
He  knows  that  it  is  promised  to  men  of  a  certain  character  only ;  so  it  is  clearly 
onl^  when  he  has  been  enabled  to  pronounce  judgment  on  himself  favourably  and 
decidedly  that  his  hope  of  future  glory  will  be  brightened  up  into  full  assurance. 
He  need  not  mourn  though  this  earth  be  made  darkness  around  him,  who  has  the 
hope  of  heaven's  glory  to  cheer  him  ;  and  if  it  be  in  the  dark  night  of  sorrow  that 
the  hght  of  heavenly  hope  is  made  to  shine  most  brightly,  he  need  not  be  impatient 
for  the  coming  of  the  dawn.  The  apostle,  to  give  confirmation  to  his  argument  and 
to  show  that  the  process  by  which  this  gladdening  hope  is  extracted  out  of  the 
believer's  tribulations,  is  not  one  that  is  carried  on  independently  of  the  aid  of 
Divine  grace,  adds,  "  Because  the  love  of  Ood  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  to  us."  The  Divine  Spirit,  by  infusing  love  towards 
God  into  the  believer's  heart,  gives  him  assured  grounds  to  regard  himself  a  child 
of  God;  and  being  assured  of  this,  and  knowing  that  on  this  point  there  is  no 
delusion  or  self-deception,  then  he  knows  for  certain  that  his  hopes  can  never  be 
disappointed — that  be  they  ever  so  bright  they  shall  be  far  more  than  realised. 
{A.   Stewart.)  Glorying  in  tribulation  : — Let  ns — I.   Expound   the  text.      1. 

"We  glory  in  tribulations,"  i.e.  (see  Heb.  x.  33),  refers  specifically  to  perse- 
cutions. We  know  how  Paul  himself  was  exposed  to  these.  It  was  no  easy 
thing  to  be  a  Christian  in  those  early  times.  Our  EngUsh  word  means  to  thresh 
eom  with  fiails.  Methinks  that  if  the  same  flails  were  used  now  upon  the  threshing 
floors  of  Christian  profession,  we  should  very  speedily  know  how  much  chaff, 
and  how  little  wheat,  is  now  heaped  up  there.  But  we  need  not  limit  the  term  to 
tribulations  of  that  class.  Afflictions  may  overtake  us  in  many  other  forms.  We 
may  lose  our  health,  our  wealth,  our  friends,  our  domestic  comfort  and  peace.  Yet 
in  these  tribulations,  as  Christians,  we  "  glory,"  for  we  believe  them  to  be  sent  or 
permitted  of  God  to  promote  our  good  (Heb.  xii.  6-15).  2.  *•  Tribulation  worketh 
patience."  It  does  so,  of  course,  only  when  received  in  submissiveness  and  faith. 
On  the  ungodly  it  generally  produces  the  contrary  effect.  (1)  The  simplest  idea  of 
patience  is  that  of  passive  continuance,  as  when  we  read  of  patiently  waiting  for  the 
object  of  hope.  (2)  A  higher  degree  of  self-control,  or  a  power  to  govern  our  tempera 
in  provocation  (Eccles.  vii.  8,  9).  (3)  Another  notion  is  that  of  fortitude,  or  strong 
resistance  against  a  pressure  of  adversity  (James  i.  3).  (4)  But  its  crowning  excel- 
lence is  that  it  can  do  more  than  resist ;  it  can  overbear  opposition  and  go  on  its 
way  rejoicing.  It  is  the  same  thing  as  perseverance  (Heb.  xii.  1).  Now  as  tribulation 
works  patience,  we  may  well  glory  in  it,  for  it  is  a  good  thing  to  be  patient.  By 
patience  we  are  kept  from  ignoble  sloth,  children  are  converted  into  noble  heroes, 
we  are  roused  to  new  life  and  energy,  and  grow  up  from  puny  infancy  to  the  full 
gtature  of  the  perfect  man  in  Christ.  The  forest  trees  grow  stronger  the  more  they 
are  beat  upon  by  the  tempest ;  your  stalwart  rowers  pull  harder  just  as  they  feel  the 
onrrent  bearing  more  steadily  against  them ;  and  the  exposed  warrior  gets  most 
inored  to  the  battle  and  the  breeze.  3.  "  And  patience,  experience."  The  radical 
idea  is  that  of  testing  or  trying  metal,  to  ascertain  its  purity.  Patience  gives  us 
proof  of — (1)  Our  own  sincerity  and  genuineness.  You  may  imagine  yourself 
converted,  and  be  the  subject  of  joyful  feeling;  but  is  all  this  real?  The  answer  is 
got  by  the  experiment  of  tribulation  (Mark  iv.  16,  17).  (2)  The  limited  power  of 
our  adversaries.  The  young  Christian,  like  the  young  voyager,  is  soon  frightened 
by  the  tempest,  but  the  experienced  saint,  like  the  veteran  sailor,  has  discovered 
that  the  waves  are  not  so  mighty  as  they  seem,  and  that  the  winds  only  hurry  the 
vessel  faster  on  its  course.  (3)  Jehovah's  faithfulness  (Psa.  xviii.  16-18,  29  ;  Hab. 
iii.  17-19 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  5-9).  4.  "  And  experience,  hope."  Hope  was  mentioned 
before  as  the  result  of  faith  ;  here  it  is  the  fruit  of  experience.  Each  is  the  same 
in  its  nature  and  object ;  but  it  is  reached  by  two  distinct  processes.  First,  our 
hope  is  based  simply  and  nakedly  on  the  declaration  and  promise  of  God  (ver.  1 ; 
Psa.  cxix.  49,  50).  But  the  hope  of  the  text,  while  it  rests  upon  the  same  word,  also 
rests  upon  our  experience  of  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  our  souls.  This  has  the 
double  effect  of  satisfying  us  that  we  are  the  subjects  of  grace,  and  therefore  those 
to  whom  the  promise  belongs ;  and  also  of  convincing  us,  from  what  we  have 
actually  received,  that  God  "  is  faithful  who  hath  promised,  who  also  will  do  it." 
5.  This  assured  hope  suffers  us  not  to  be  ashamed,  even  in  the  midst  of  suffering 
and  reproach.    11.  Amn  the  text.    It  supplies— 1.  A  test  of  faithfulness.    How 


848  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CEA».  ?. 

do  yoQ  deal  with  troubles  ?  Do  yon  meet  them  with  fretfnlness  and  impatience,  or 
in  a  spirit  of  stoical  pride  or  stolid  indifference  ?  If  not,  do  you,  aa  God's  children, 
bear  them  patiently  and  triumph  in  them  ?  From  experience,  does  hope  spring  ? 
and  does  that  hope  make  you  bold  in  confessing  Christ  ?  Is  the  love  of  God  shed 
abroad  in  your  breast  ?  2.  A  lesson  of  wisdom.  If  our  hearts  are  set  on  worldly 
things,  then  plainly  we  can  have  no  delight  in  tribulations.  Let  us,  then,  study  the 
nature  and  the  worth  of  moral  excellence  and  religious  attainments.  It  were  surely 
better  for  us  to  get  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
than  to  compass  every  object  of  earthly  ambition.  3.  A  lesson  of  patience  and  trust. 
You  know,  as  a  child  of  God,  that  affliction  is  given  you  from  above,  that  it  is  all 
ardered  in  wisdom,  and  superintended  by  infinite  love.  Therefore,  be  patient  and 
hope  unto  the  end.  God  will  remove  the  crucible  as  soon  as  the  liquid  metal 
reflects  His  glorious  image  from  its  unsullied  surface.  Affliction  is  to  God's  children 
what  the  shepherd's  dog  is  to  the  flock,  which  barks  at  the  outsiders  and  drives  the 
wanderers  home  again.  Or  it  is  the  lapidary's  grindstone,  whereby  the  most  costly 
gems  are  rounded  and  polished.  4.  Some  solemn  thoughts  for  the  unconverted.  (1) 
Do  you  persecute  the  righteous  ?  What  you  do  against  them  will  redound  to  their 
greater  reward.  It  must,  however,  injure  you.  (2)  What  effect  has  trouble  upon 
you  f  You  cannot  avoid  it,  any  more  than  can  the  godly.  (3)  Whether  in  sickness 
or  health,  you  have  not  the  love  of  God  in  your  heart.  One  wonders  how  you  can 
live  without  it.  And  certainly  you  will  find  it  hard  to  die  without  it.  (T.  G. 
Horton.)  Glorying  in  tribulation : — It  is  joy,  when  between  the  millstones 
crushed  like  an  olive,  to  yield  nothing  but  the  oU  of  thankfulness ;  when  bruised 
beneath  the  fiail  of  tribulation,  stiU  to  lose  nothing  but  the  chaff,  and  to  yield  to 
God  the  precious  grain  of  entire  submissiveness.  Why,  this  is  a  Httle  heaven  upon 
earth.  To  glory  in  tribulations  also,  this  is  a  high  degree  of  up-climbing  towards 
the  likeness  of  our  Lord.  Perhaps  the  usual  communions  which  we  have  with  onr 
Beloved,  though  exceeding  precious,  will  never  equal  those  which  we  enjoy  when  we 
have  to  break  through  thorns  and  briars  to  be  at  Him ;  when  we  follow  Him  into 
the  wilderness  then  we  feel  the  love  of  our  espousals  to  be  doubly  sweet.  It  is  a 
joyous  thing  when  in  the  midst  of  mournful  circumstances,  we  yet  feel  that  we 
cannot  mourn,  because  the  Bridegroom  is  with  us.  Blessed  is  the  man  who  in  the 
most  terrible  storm  is  driven  in  not  from  his  God,  but  even  rides  upon  the  crest  of 
the  lofty  billows  nearer  towards  heaven.  Such  happiness  is  the  Christian's  lot.  I 
do  not  say  that  every  Christian  possesses  it,  but  I  am  sure  that  every  Christian 
ought  to  do  so.  There  is  a  highway  to  heaven,  and  all  in  it  are  safe ;  but  in  the 
middle  of  that  road  there  is  a  special  way,  an  inner  path,  and  all  who  walk  therein 
are  happy  as  well  as  safe.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Tribulation  aground  of  glorying : — 
"  Not  only  so."  The  apostle  has  been  speaking  of  the  priceless  advantages  that 
flow  from  justification,  peace,  access  into  grace,  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God. 
Surely  there  is  sufiicient  here  "  to  pay  "  a  man  for  becoming  a  Christian.  But, 
*•  not  only  so."  This  "  not  only  so  "  is  the  Christian's  peculiar  privilege.  Make 
the  most  copious  enumeration  you  will,  and  there  will  be  a  "  not  only  so."  "  0  the 
depth  of  the  riches  I "  Note — I.  The  btranoe  fact  op  oub  text.  1.  Though  a  modest 
man,  Paul  was  greatly  given  to  "  glorying."  And  in  his  grounds  we  can  generally 
justify  him.  We  are  not  surprised  that  he  should  boast  of  himself.  And  there  is 
leave  for  any  man  to  do  so  who  has  good  reason,  provided  it  be  done  in  the  spirit  of 
the  apostle.  We  are  not  surprised  that  he  should  boast  of  the  churches.  Above  all 
we  are  not  surprised  at  his  boast  in  the  Cross,  that  grand  symbol  of  the  world's 
redemption.  But  that  he  should  "  glory  in  tribulations  also  "  must  seem  somewhat 
strange  to  the  generality  of  men  who  regard  them  as  distressing.  You  could  under- 
stand him  if  he  were  speaking  of  the  halls  of  mirth,  of  the  pomp  of  palaces.  He 
might  reasonably  glory  in  such  things.  2.  But  the  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  no 
defective  mental  or  moral  organisation.  These  are  not  the  words  of  a  madman 
speaking  at  random  ;  nor  of  some  hare-brained  youth  who  goes  through  life  saying 
*<  I  don't  care  " ;  nor  of  a  stoic  whose  false  philosophy  teaches  him  to  despise  alike 
the  good  and  the  ills  of  life.  No,  never  was  a  nature  more  sensitive  than  Paul's. 
He  does  not  mean  that  he  gloried  in  the  midst  of  his  tribulations,  notwithstanding 
his  tribulations,  treating  them  as  matters  of  no  account  and  even  of  contempt. 
They  were  the  very  ground  of  his  glorying.  Nor  was  his  glorying  mistaken.  Our 
tribulations  are  but  the  instruments  of  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  for  purifying  our 
Bouls.  The  uses  of  our  griefs  are  Divine,  and  this  must  not  only  reconcile  as  to 
them,  but  enable  us  to  glory  in  them.  You  see  the  strength  of  the  apostle's  argu- 
ment.  -He  has  got  God.    Therefore  he  has  got  all  and  can  glory  in  all.  To  conneol 


«BAP.  y.]  ROMANS.  MB 

a  thing  with  God,  whatever  guise  it  wear,  is  at  once  to  make  it  an  angel,  n. 
Thk  explanation  of  this  stbanob  fact.  He  justifies  his  assertion  by  setting  forth 
the  gradations  by  which  tribulation  works  the  highest  good.  1.  Tribulation 
worketh  patience,  or  "  endurance."  The  more  a  Christian  suffers  in  a  Christian 
spirit,  the  greater  capacity  does  he  discover  for  endurance.  So  that  his  very  aflQic- 
tions  become  their  own  anodyne.  2.  "  Patience  worketh  experience."  The  word 
signifies — (1)  Proof ;  patient  endurance  of  suffering  proves  a  man's  spiritual  mettle. 
The  furnace  must  declare  whether  a  man's  religion  is  gilt  or  gold.  A  parrot  might 
be  taught  to  say  "  Thy  will  be  done."  How  will  the  man  behave  when  every  earthly 
comfort  is  withdrawn  ?  (2)  Approbation.  God  sends  tribulation  first  that  it  may 
test,  and  then,  that  He  may  say  to  us,  "  Well  done  1  "  3.  "  Experience,  or  approval, 
worketh  hope."  These  tribulations  drive  us  to  the  anticipation  of  another  world. 
While  sunny  skies  are  over  our  head  we  tblnk  only  of  the  present,  but  an  overcast 
heaven  sends  our  thoughts  into  the  future.  And  hope  maketh  not  ashamed.  We 
sometimes  see  men  with  rueful  countenances  coming  away  from  the  door  of  a 
quondam  friend.  '*  Ah  !  I  did  hope  that  man  was  my  friend,"  is  the  exclamation. 
"  But  he  has  put  my  hope  to  shame."  Men  never  come  away  like  that  from  God's 
door.  There  is  nothing  like  experience  to  fortify  faith.  4.  "  Because  God's  love 
is  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  God's  love,  as  the  active  principle 
in  the  heart,  is  the  angel  presence  that  banishes  all  impatience,  all  fear.  The  God 
I  love  sends  my  tribulations.  Therefore  wUl  I  glory  even  in  tribulations.  Only 
love  can  interpret  the  mysteries  of  God.  I  wUl  close  with  a  picture  (Rev.  vii.  9-14). 
Thus  tribulation  is  the  gateway  of  heaven.  (J.  Halsey.)  Tribulation  and  after : — 
The  apostle  sets  before  us  a  ladder  like  to  that  which  Jacob  saw,  the  foot  whereof 
resteth  upon  the  earth,  but  the  top  ascendeth  to  heaven.  Tribulation  is  the  foot, 
but  we  mount  as  we  see  that  it  worketh  patience  ;  and  we  climb  again,  for  patience 
worketh  experience  ;  and  we  ascend  yet  once  again,  for  experience  sustaineth  hope  ; 
and  hope  that  maketh  not  ashamed  climbs  up  to  the  very  heart  of  God,  and  the  love 
of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  given  unto  us.  I 
might  compare  these  verses  to  those  songs  of  degrees  which  were  sung  by  the 
people  as  they  went  up  to  the  temple :  as  they  halted  at  each  stage  of  the 
pilgrimage,  they  sang  a  fresh  psalm,  and  so  David  said,  "  They  go  from  strength  to 
strength ;  every  one  of  them  in  Zion  appeareth  before  God."  The  pilgrim  setteth  out 
from  the  duU  and  desolate  vale  of  tribulation,  he  journeys  on  to  patience  and  Ufts  up 
his  psalm  under  the  shadow  of  the  rock ;  he  removes  his  tent  and  journeys  on  to  experi- 
ence— beneath  its  wells  and  palm  trees  he  refreshes  himself ;  soon  he  marches  on 
again  from  experience  to  hope,  and  never  stayeth  till  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad 
in  his  heart,  and  he  has  reached  the  New  Jerusalem,  where  he  worships  the 
ever  blessed  God  and  drinks  full  draughts  of  His  eternal  love.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Tribulations  beautifying : — It  is  rough  work  that  polishes.  Look  at  the  pebbles 
on  the  shore.  Far  inland  where  some  arm  of  the  sea  thrusts  itself  deep  into  the 
bosom  of  the  land,  and  expanding  into  a  salt  loch,  lies  girdled  by  the  mountains, 
sheltered  from  the  storms  that  agitate  the  deep,  the  pebbles  on  the  beach  are  rough, 
not  beautiful ;  angular,  not  rounded.  It  is  where  long  white  lines  of  breakers  roar, 
and  the  rattling  shingle  is  rolled  about  the  strand,  that  its  pebbles  are  rounded 
and  polished.  As  in  nature,  as  in  the  arts,  so  in  grace  ;  it  is  the  rough  treatment 
that  gives  souls  as  well  as  stones  their  lustre.  The  more  the  diamond  is  cut  the 
brighter  it  sparkles ;  and  in  what  seems  hard  dealing,  their  Lord  has  no  end  in 
view  but  to  perfect  His  people's  graces.  He  aiflicts  not  willingly ;  He  sends  tribula- 
tion to  work  patience,  so  that  patience  may  work  experience  and  experience  hope. 
(T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Tribulations  :  how  to  meet  them : — We  should  brave  trouble 
as  the  New  England  boy  braves  vrinter.  The  school  is  a  mile  away  over  the  snowy 
hill,  yet  he  lingers  not  by  the  fire ;  but  with  his  books  slung  over  his  shoulder,  and 
his  cap  tied  closely  mider  his  chin,  be  sets  out  to  face  the  storm.  And  when 
he  reaches  the  topmost  ridge,  where  the  powdered  snow  lies  in  drifts,  and  the  north 
wind  comes  keen  and  biting,  does  he  shrink  and  cower  down  beneath  the  fences,  or 
mn  into  the  nearest  house  to  warm  himself  ?  No :  he  buttons  up  his  coat,  smd 
rejoices  to  defy  the  blast,  and  tosses  the  snow-wreaths  with  his  foot ;  and  so  erect 
and  fearless,  with  strong  heart  and  ruddy  cheek,  he  goes  on  to  his  place  at  schooL 
{H.    W.  Beeeher.)  Tribulations  :    sources   of  joy  : — Our  afflictions   are  like 

weights,  and  have  a  tendency  to  bow  as  to  the  dust,  but  there  is  a  way  of 
arranging  weights  by  means  of  wheels  and  pulleys,  bo  that  they  will  even 
lift  us  ap.  Grace,  by  its  matchless  art,  has  often  tamed  the  heaviest  of  our 
trials  into  occasions  for  heavenly  joy.     "  We  glory  in  tribulations  also."     We 


860  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ota».  ▼. 

gather  honey  out  of  the  rock,  and  oil  ont  of  the  flinty  rock.     (C.  U.  Spurgeon.) 
The  genealogy  of  Christian  hope : — 1.  It  is  no  ancommon  thing  amongst  us,  for  a 
man,  sprung  from  the  lowest  grade  of  society,  to  rise,  by  the  mere  force  of  industry 
and  intelligence,  to  a  level  with  the  high-born  and  the  noble ;  but  he  would  show 
himself  unworthy  of  his  success  and  elevation,  were  he  ashamed  of  his  mean 
parentage.    On  the  other  hand,  it  has  a  very  graceful  look  when  he  shows  no  wish 
to  hide,  but  rather  a  desire  to  display,  the  meanness  of  his  parentage  ;  when,  e.g., 
amidst  the  gorgeous  decorations  of  his  mansion  he  places  conspicuously  the  picture 
of  some  cottage,  or  some  weather-beaten  rustic,  and  says  to  his  admiring  guests 
in  a  tone  of  honest  satisfaction — "  In  that  cottage  was  I  bom,"  or,  ••  That  was  my 
father."    2.  And  we  are  assuming  the  fact  that  what  is  brilliant  is  only  the  more 
brilliant  when  traced  to  its  lowly  origin,  when  we  think  that  our  text  is  of  more 
than  common  interest.    For  what  so  glorious  as  Christian  hope  ?    And  our  text 
traces  it  back  through  its  immediate  ancestry,  and  stops — where  ?    At  what  is  lofty, 
radiant,  attractive  ?     Nay,  at  tribulation.    Nor  is  he  ashamed  of  that  ancestry  ;  for 
he  "  glories  in  tribulation."     We  shall  find  it  profitable  and  interesting  to  trace  the 
struggles  of  hope ;  for  they  are  like  the  struggles  of  a  family  raising  itself  by 
successive  steps,  till  it  has  exchanged  a  mean  for  a  dignified  position.    Let  us 
examine — I.  How  the  one  is  dependent  on  the  otheb.    Remember  that  St.  Paul 
speaks  only  of  those  who  bear  tribulation  as  Christians,  who  receive  it  as  appointed 
them  by  God.    With  them — 1.  "  Tribulation  worketh  patience !  "    There  is  nothing 
else  which  can  work  it.    Whilst  things  are  all  going  smoothly  it  is  difficult  for  him 
to  ascertain  whether  we  have  patience  or  not.    We  can  only  know  ourselves  as  to 
any  particular  quality,  as  God  shall  put  that  quality  to  proof.    Courage  must  be 
tested  by  danger,  virtue  by  temptation,  constancy  by  solicitation.     And  further, 
the  trial  is  adapted  to  develop  and  strengthen  it.    Courage  grows  by  exposure  to 
danger,  virtue  is  confirmed  by  every  victory  over  temptation,  and  constancy  acquires 
steadfastness  as  it  resists  a  solicitation.    And  all  this  is  particularly  true  in  regard 
of  patience.    It  is  beautiful  to  observe  how  persons  who,  by  nature,  were  fretful, 
have  been  disciplined  into  patience  through  affliction.    It  is  not  necessary  that  an 
individual  should  be  patient  as  a  man,  in  order  to  be  patient  as  a  Christian ;  on  the 
contrary,  grace  works  its  choicest  specimens  out  of  the  most  unpromising  materiaL 
But  patience  is  wrought  out,  not  by  tribulation  in  itself,  but  by  tribulation  bringing 
the  Christian  to  reflection  and  to  prayer.    Therefore  does  the  Christian  "glory  in 
tribulation,"  even  if  he  had  to  stop  here.    He  knows  that  patience  is  required  as 
one  of  the  chief  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  a  main  evidence  of  meetness  for  the  heavenly 
inheritance ;  shall  he  be  ashamed  of  the  adversity  whence  he  hath  acquired  so 
choice  a  grace  7    2.  Patience  worketh  experience.    The  putting  something  to  tho 
proof ;  in  this  case  the  ascertaining  the  precise  worth,  verity  and  power  of  the  consola- 
tions and  promises  of  God.    "  Tribulation  worketh  patience,"  in  that  suffering  brings 
the  Christian  into  an  attitude  of  submission ;  but  when  he  has  been  schooled  into 
resignation,  he  is  not  left  without  heavenly  visitations.     God  "  allures  him  into  the 
wilderness,"  but  only  that  He  may  "  speak  comfortably  to  him,  giving  him  the 
valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope."    Promises,  whose  beauty  can  be  but  faintly 
apprehended  so  long  as  there  is  no  pressing  need  of  their  accomplishment,  come 
home  to  the  heart  in  an  hour  of  trouble  patiently  endured,  as  if  they  were  made  on 
purpose  for  such  emergencies.  Here,  then,  is  already  a  noble  elevation.  From  tribula- 
tion we  have  passed  through  patience  and  experience ;  the  man  has  become  his  own 
evidence  to  the  truth  of  Scripture,  to  the  Divinity  of  Christianity,  to  the  sufficiency 
of  the  gospel.    No  longer  obliged  to  solicit  external  testimony,  he  has  "  tasted  and 
seen  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."    "  Experience  "  is  a  vast  advance  upon  "  patience  " ; 
and  we  may  look  to  find  in  the  next  generation  all  the  honour  and  brightness  of 
Christian  nobility.    Such,  indeed,  is  the  case,  for  "experience  worketh  hope." 
How  naturally  does  the  one  spring  from  the  other  I    He  in  whom  patience  has 
wrought  experience  is  one  who,  having  put  promises  to  the  proof,  has  found  them 
made  good,  and  thereby  proved  to  be  of  God.     Surely  now  he  who  has  tried  the 
chart,  and  found  it  correct  so  far  as  he  has  had  the  power  of  trying  it,  has  the  best 
ground  for  relying  on  that  chart  with  regard  to  ports  which  he  has  never  yet  entered. 
Accordingly  yon  will  find  the  righteous  dwelling  on  their  experience,  and  deriving 
from  it  their  confidence.    "  Thou  hast  been  my  help  " — there  is  the  experience  ; 
"  in  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings  will  I  rejoice  " — there  is  the  hope.    It  is  the  same  with 
St.  Paul.    "I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion."    Then  what  immediately 
follows  ?    "  The  Lord  shall  deliver  me  from  every  evil  work,  and  will  preserve  me 
onto  His  heavenly  kingdom."    The  one  assertion  is  that  of  experience — the  next  ig 


CBAP.  T.]  ROMANS.  851 

that  of  hope.  Experience  is  a  book  in  which  there  shonld  be  daily  entries,  and  to 
which  there  should  be  daily  reference.  If  we  do  not  register  our  mercies,  or  if 
we  never  recount  them,  they  are  not  likely  to  throw  light  upon  coming  events. 
He  must  be  grateful  for  the  past,  who  would  be  hopeful  for  the  future. 
Answers  to  prayer,  what  encouragements  to  prayer!  Promises  fulfilled,  what 
arguments  for  expecting  their  fulfilment!  Mercies  bestowed,  what  grounds  for 
confidence  that  mercies  will  not  be  withheld  I  And  thus  it  is  that  hope,  the 
splendid,  the  beautiful  grace — hope,  with  the  stately  step  and  the  soaring  wing — 
hope,  whose  special  province  it  is  to  people  the  future  with  a  brightness  which 
compensates  for  all  that  may  be  gloomy  in  the  present — hope,  which  makes  the 
emile  of  health  play  around  the  couch  of  sickness — lights  up  the  prison  with  the 
flash  of  liberty,  pours  abundance  into  the  lap  of  poverty,  and  crowds  the  very  grave 
with  the  barning  processions  of  immortahty — hope  traces  itself  back  to  tribulation, 
like  the  coronet  of  the  noble,  whose  ancestry  may  be  found  among  the  poor  and  the 
despised.  II.  Ths  apostle's  encomium  on  hope.  1.  Is  not  hope  commonly  spoken 
of  as  most  delusive  ?  Does  not  poetry  love  to  liken  it  to  some  bright  meteor,  which 
beguiles  the  traveller,  leading  him  into  danger,  and  then  leaving  him  in  darkness  t 
Gather  the  character  of  hope  from  men  of  the  world,  and  she  is  but  an  enchantress, 
whose  spells  are  so  soothing,  and  whispers  so  soft,  that  having  cheated  us  a 
hundred  times,  we  are  nevertheless  willing  to  be  cheated  again.  2.  But  Christian 
"  hope  maketh  not  ashamed."  It  paints  no  vision  which  shall  not  be  more  than 
realised ;  it  points  to  no  inheritance  which  shall  not  be  reached.  How  should  it 
make  ashamed,  when  it  altogether  rests  itself  upon  Christ,  who  is  "  not  ashamed  to 
eall  as  brethren  ?  "  This  is  the  secret  of  its  difference  from  every  other  hope ; 
Christ  is  the  source  and  the  centre  of  our  hope — Christ,  in  whom  all  the  promises 
of  Qod  are  yea,  and  in  Him  amen ;  and  if  Christ  can  deceive  us,  then,  but  not 
otherwise,  may  hope  make  ashamed.  Therefore  is  it  that  the  apostle  elsewhere 
speaks  of  hope,  in  one  place  as  an  anchor,  in  another  a  helmet.  He  gives  it 
attributes  which  fit  it  for  the  storms  or  the  battle.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  A  common 
evil  and  an  uncommon  retult : — I.  A  common  evil.  "  Tribulation."  Men's  tribula- 
tions are  various.  1.  Bodily.  2.  Mental.  3.  Social.  II.  An  uncommon  besttlt.  In 
the  case  of  most  tribulation  worketh  irritation,  hostility,  conflicting  passions. 
Bat  in  the  case  of  the  Christly  man  it  worketh  patience,  which  does  not  mean — 
1.  Insensibility.  Some  are  praised  for  their  patience  who  should  be  denounced 
for  their  stoicism.  2.  Weakness.  Some  are  praised  for  their  patience  who  lack 
the  capacity  of  strong  feeling.  Patience  implies  exquisite  sensibility,  and  the 
highest  power:  the  power  of  reflection  and  of  self-control.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  And  patience  experience. — Patience  working  experience : — The  benefit  of 
trials  is  lost  when  we  either  "  despise  the  chastening  of  the  Lord,"  or  '*  faint  when 
we  are  rebuked  of  Him."  It  is  only  when  they  are  borne  with  Christian  "patience  " 
that  "  experience  "  is  their  happy  fruit.  The  word  signifies  properly  "  proof  " :  and 
there  are  various  things  proved  to  us  by  our  trials,  endured  with  patience.    I.  Thb 

IX>TX,   CABS,  FAITHFULNESS,  AND   POWEB  OF  OUB  FATHER.        He    haS   BSSUrcd    US    that 

**  whom  He  loves  He  chastens."  He  has  encouraged  us  to  "  cast  all  our  care  upon 
EUm,"  by  the  declaration,  and,  in  the  gift  of  His  Son,  the  convincing  evidence,  that 
"  He  careth  for  us."  He  has  promised  •'  never  to  leave,  never  to  forsake  us."  He 
has  reproved  the  fears  of  His  people  by  reminding  them  that  the  "  everlasting  God, 
Jehovah,  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth,  fainteth  not  neither  is  weary,"  and 
assuring  them  that  "He  giveth  power  to  the  weak."  When  "patient  in  tribulation," 
we  learn,  by  sweet  "  experience,"  that  God  is  indeed  to  His  people  all  that  He 
declares  Himself  to  be.  II.  Oub  own  weakness  and  emptiness,  and  the  all- 
BUFFiciENCT  OF  Jesus.  We  feel  the  repugnance  of  our  nature  to  suffering;  the 
difficulty  of  bowing  to  the  Divine  will,  our  proneness  to  doubt  and  to  rebel.  Bat 
when  we  are  enabled  to  bear  our  trials  with  patience,  th^  teach  us,  by  "  experi- 
ence," which  imparts  present  delight,  and  encouragement  for  the  future,  that  "  His 
grace  is  sufficient  for  as";  ''that  we  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  who 
strengtheneth  as."  IH.  The  vanity  of  all  earthly  things,  when  sought  afteb, 
AND  DEPENDED  UPON,  AS  A  PORTION.  Sanctified  troublc  dissolves  the  delusive  charm 
of  prosperity.  When  the  cup  of  worldly  enjoyment  is  at  our  lips,  the  bitter  that  is 
infused  prevents  its  deadly  influence.  The  heart  is  brought  back  to  the  reUsh, 
which  it  was  losing,  of  higher  joys.  And  at  the  same  time  we  feel  the  gladdening 
influence,  and  the  inestimable  preciousness  of  the  truths  of  God,  and  of  the  good 
hope  which  the  faith  of  them  inspires.  Thus  the  case  of  the  prophet's  little  book  is 


853  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  is. 

reversed.  The  trial  itself  is  bitter  to  the  taste ;  but  the  experience  resulting  from  h 
is  sweet.  FV.  The  Divinb  excellence  and  suFFicrENcr  of  the  Word  of  God.  How 
precioas  has  this  volume  of  inspiration  ever  been  felt  by  the  children  of  God  in 
their  seasons  of  trial  1  How  rich  the  treasures  of  its  "  exceeding  great  and  precioas 
promises,"  when  our  worldly  resources  have  "  made  themselves  wings  and  flown 
away  " — how  sweet  the  celestial  music  of  its  devotion,  when  our  "  harp  has  been 
turned  to  mourning,  and  our  organ  to  the  voice  of  them  that  weep !  " — how  delight- 
ful the  "  still  small  voice  "  of  a  Saviour's  love,  amidst  all  the  harassing  turmoils  of 
a  turbulent  world !  The  believer  now  learns  to  clasp  this  Divine  treasure  to  his 
heart,  and  to  say, "  The  law  of  Thy  mouth  is  better  unto  me  than  thousands  of  gold 
and  silver  I "  V.  The  BEAiirv  of  odb  faith  in  Jesus,  and  of  oub  consequent  intb- 
BEST  IN  ELis  SALVATION.  We  judge  from  the  fruit  of  the  soundness  of  the  root  and 
stem.  The  man  whose  professed  faith  allows  him  to  fret  and  murmur  under  his 
trials  has  good  cause  to  suspect  that  the  gospel  has  come  to  him  •'  in  word  only." 
But  when  the  faith  of  the  truth  inspires  tranquil  resignation,  and  "  patience  has  her 
perfect  work,"  we  have  '*  the  witness  in  ourselves  "  of  our  connection  with  Him  who 
said,  »'The  cup  which  My  Father  hath  given  Me  shall  1  not  drink  it  ?  "  By  "adding 
to  our  faith — patience,"  we  "make  our  calling  and  election  sure."  VI.  The  value 
AND  cebtainty  OF  THE  GOSPEL  HOPE.  Whatever  bears  testimony  to  the  truth  of  those 
doctrines  which  the  Christian  believes  serves  to  establish  the  hope  of  which  these 
doctrines  are  the  foundation.  His  experience,  therefore,  confirms  his  faith ;  and 
the  confirmation  of  his  faith  gives  additional  confidence  to  his  hope.  It  settles  and 
animates  its  exercise.  He  "abouuds  in  hope  through  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ihost."  (jR.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Experience  confirms  men  in  the  right : — ^A  man 
propounds  the  wonderful  discovery  that  honey  is  not  sweet.  "  But  I  had  some  for 
breakfast,  and  I  found  it  very  sweet,"  say  you,  and  your  reply  is  conclusive.  He 
tells  you  that  salt  is  poisonous  ;  but  you  point  to  your  own  health,  and  declare  that 
you  have  eaten  salt  these  twenty  years.  He  says  that  to  eat  bread  is  a  mistake — a 
vulgar  error,  an  antiquated  absurdity  ;  but  at  each  meal  you  make  his  protest  the 
subject  for  a  merry  laugh.  If  you  are  daily  and  habitually  experienced  in  the  truth 
of  God's  Word,  I  am  not  afraid  of  your  being  shaken  in  mind  in  reference  to  it. 
(C  H,  Spurgeon.)  Experience  expensive  : — Experience  is  an  excellent  school- 
master; but  he  does  charge  such  dreadful  fees.  (T.  Carlyle.)  A  dead  experience: 
— In  my  Bible  at  home  I  have  in  the  Old  Testament  a  folded  sheet  of  paper,  in 
which  are  tastefully  arranged  some  flowers  and  leaves.  I  was  looking  at  it  this 
morning,  and  it  was  very  beautiful.  Every  colour  was  fading  ;  but  I  saw,  by  the 
help  of  imagination,  what  they  had  been.  If,  however,  I  had  no  other  summer 
than  that  it  would  be  poor  indeed ;  but  I  have  roses  and  daisies,  and  honeysuckles 
and  asters,  and  various  other  flowers,  all  of  which  are  fresh  every  year,  and  some 
of  which  are  fresh  almost  every  month  of  the  year ;  and  I  am  not  obliged  to  make 
this  herbarium  leaf  of  dried  flowers  my  only  summer.  But  I  have  known  Christiana 
that  had  but  three  or  four  old  leaves  in  their  Bible  which  they  would  go  and  pull 
out  and  show  you  every  time  they  alluded  to  their  religious  history.  Tbey  would 
say,  "  I  was  converted  so-and-so,"  when  they  would  exhibit  these  dry  memorials, 
and  then  they  would  put  them  up  again  very  carefully,  and  leave  them ;  and  the 
next  time  they  talked  with  you  they  would  show  you  these  old  experiences  again — 
the  same  dry  flowers  and  leaves — no  more  and  no  less.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Ex- 
perience and  faith  : — Faith,  in  its  reproductive  power  and  progress  of  growth,  may 
be  compared  to  the  great  Oriental  banyan-tree.  It  springs  up  in  God,  rooted  in 
God's  Word ;  and  soon  there  are  the  great  waving  branches  of  experience.  Then 
from  these  very  branches  the  runners  go  down  again  into  God's  Word ;  and  thence 
spring  up  again  new  products  of  faith,  and  new  trees  of  experience,  till  one  and  the 
same  tree  becomes  in  itself  a  grove,  with  pillared  shades  and  echoing  walks  between. 
So  experience  first  grows  out  of  faith  ;  and  then  greater  faith  grows  out  of  experi- 
ence, the  Word  of  God  being  all  the  while  the  region  of  its  roots  ;  and,  again,  a  still 
vaster,  richer  experience  grows  out  of  that  faith,  till  every  branch  becomes  not  only 
a  product,  but  a  parent  stock  set  in  the  same  word,  and  all  expanding  into  a  various 
magnificent  and  enlarging  forest.  (G.  B.  Cheever,  D.D.)  Experience,  knowledge 
by: — Practical  sciences  are  not  to  be  learned  but  in  the  way  of  action.  It  is 
experience  that  must  give  knowledge  in  the  Christian  profession,  as  well  as  in  all 
others ;  and  the  knowledge  drawn  from  experience  is  quite  of  another  kind  from 
that  which  flows  from  speculation  or  discourse.  It  is  not  the  opinion,  but  the  path, 
of  the  just,  that  the  wisest  of  men  tells  us  shines  more  and  more  nntc  a  perfect  day. 
The  obedient,  and  the  men  of  practice,  are  those  sons  of  light  that  shall  outgrow 


T.J  ROMANS.  8M 

all  their  donbta  and  ignorances,  tha  shall  ride  npon  these  olonds,  and  triumph 
over  their  present  imperfections,  til  ^persuasion  pass  into  knowledge,  and  know- 
ledge advance  into  assurance,  and  all  come  at  length  to  be  completed  in  the  beatific 
vision,  and  a  full  fruition  of  those  joys  which  God  has  in  reserve  for  them  whom 
by  His  grace  He  shall  prepare  for  glory.  [R,  South,  D.D.)  Experience,  power 
of: — Said  a  poor  pious  widow  to  a  scofiBng  sceptic,  when  he  asked,  "How  do  you 
know  your  Bible  is  true  ?  What  proof  have  you  of  its  truth  ?  " — "  Sir,  my  own 
experience — the  experience  of  my  heart."  "Oh,"  said  he,  contemptuously,  "your 
experience  is  nothing  to  me."  "  That  may  be,  sir ;  but  it  is  everything  to  me." 
Experience,  various  : — Too  are  too  apt  to  feel  that  your  religious  experience  must 
be  the  same  as  others  have  ;  but  where  will  you  find  analogies  for  this  ?  Certainly 
not  in  nature.  God's  works  do  not  come  from  His  hand  like  coin  from  the  mint. 
It  seems  as  if  it  were  a  necessity  that  each  one  should  be,  in  some  sort,  distinct  from 
every  other.  No  two  leaves  on  the  same  tree  are  precisely  alike  ;  no  two  bnds  on 
one  bush  have  the  same  unfolding,  nor  do  they  seek  to  have.  What  if  God  should 
command  the  flowers  to  appear  before  Him,  and  the  sunflower  should  come  bend- 
ing low  with  shame  because  it  was  not  a  violet ;  and  the  violet  should  come  striving 
to  lift  itself  up  to  be  like  a  sunflower  ;  and  the  lily  should  seek  to  gain  the  bloom  of 
the  rose  ;  and  the  rose,  the  whiteness  of  the  lily :  and  so  each  one,  disdaining  itself, 
should  seek  to  grow  into  the  likeness  of  the  other?  God  would  say,  "  Stop,  foolish 
flowers  1  I  gave  yon  your  own  forms  and  hues  and  odours ;  and  I  wish  you  to  bring 
what  you  have  received.  0  sunflower !  come  as  a  sunflower ;  and  you,  sweet 
violet,  come  as  a  violet ;  and  let  the  rose  bring  the  rose's  bloom ;  and  the  lily  the 
lily's  whiteness."  Perceiving  their  folly,  and  ceasing  to  long  for  what  they  had  not, 
violet  and  rose,  lily  and  geranium,  mignonette  and  anemone,  and  all  the  floral  train, 
would  come,  each  in  its  own  loveliness,  to  send  up  its  fragrance  as  incense,  and  all 
wreathe  themselves  in  a  garland  of  beauty  about  the  throne  of  God.  Now,  God 
speaks  to  you  as  to  the  flowers,  and  says,  "  Come  with  the  form  and  nature 
that  I  gave  you.  If  you  are  made  a  violet,  come  as  a  violet ;  if  you  are  a  rose, 
come  as  a  rose ;  it  you  are  a  shrub,  do  not  desire  to  be  a  tree ;  let  everything 
abide  in  the  nature  which  I  gave  it,  and  grow  to  the  full  excellence  that  is 
contained  in  that  nature."  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  And  experience  hope. — The 
veil-grounded  hope  : — "  Experience  worketh  hope."  Take  that  principle  in  its 
largest  sense,  apply  it  to  the  intfrests  of  this  life  and  this  world,  and  who  is  there 
that  does  not  know  that  the  apostle's  statement  would  be  utterly  wrong?  The 
inexperienced  man  is  all  buoyant  anticipation  ;  he  sees  no  difficulties  in  the  way; 
he  looks  for  brilliant  success  iu  life.  How  different  with  the  man  who  has  had 
some  experience  of  the  realities  of  life,  how  modest  are  his  hopes  of  earthly 
happiness  and  success!  But  it  was  not  of  earthly  experience  that  the  apostle 
spake,  nor  of  earthly  hope.  As  regards  our  blessed  Saviour,  His  grace  and 
preciousness  and  love  :  as  regards  the  solid  peace  and  happiness  to  be  found  when 
we  find  a  part  in  His  great  salvation :  as  regards  the  sanctifying  and  comforting 
influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit:  as  regards  the  power  and  prevalence  of  earnest 
prayer :  as  regards  the  rest  and  refreshment  the  weary  soul  may  find  in  a  Lord's 
day  duly  sanctified :  as  regards  the  consolation  which  religion  can  impart  amid 
eairthly  disappointments ;  as  regards  the  peace  that  Christ  can  give  in  death :  as 
regards  such  things  as  these,  "  experience  worketh  hope  "  ;  the  more  you  know  of 
Jesus,  His  promises  and  His  grace,  the  more  you  will  expect  from  Him  ;  and 
instead  of  experience  leading  us  to  say,  as  it  does  lead  us  to  say  of  most  earthly 
things,  "  I  have  tried  it,  it  cannot  make  me  happy,  I  shall  trust  it  no  more," 
experience  of  God  leads  us  rather  to  say,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am 
persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  Him  against  that 
day  " ;  "  I  love  the  Lord,  because  He  hath  heard  my  voice  and  my  supplication ; 
because  He  hath  inclined  His  ear  unto  me,  therefore  will  I  call  upon  Him  as  long 
as  I  live  " ;  "  The  Lord  hath  been  mindful  of  us :  He  will  bless  us  still !  "  And 
now,  concerning  St.  Paul's  declaration  that  "  experience  worketh  hope,"  let  me 
suggest  to  you  two  thoughts  which  are  implied  in  the  apostle's  principle,  and  which 
are  the  great  reasons  why  the  apostle's  principle  is  true.    I.  First,  then,  in  the 

GREAT  CONCEBN   OF  RELIGION   YOU   ARE    SURE,  IF   YOU   SEEK   IN   THE   BIGHT  WAY,  TO  GET 

WHAT  Tou  SEEK.  Now  here  at  once  we  find  a  point  in  regard  to  which  there  is  a 
total  contrariety  between  worldly  and  spiritual  things.  Who  is  there  that  needs  to 
be  told  that  one  great  cause  of  human  disappointment  in  worldly  things  lies  in  this, 
that  however  anxious  you  mny  be  to  get  something  on  which  yon  have  set  your 
heart,  and  however  diligent  you  may  be  in  using  all  the  means  which  you  think 
Toii.  I.  23 


8M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAJ.  T. 

tend  towards  your  getting  it,  you  may  yet  entirely  fail  of  getting  it  ?  But  when  w« 
pray  for  spiritual  blessings,  for  repentance  towards  God  and  faith  in  Christ  and  a 
sanctifying  Spirit,  we  may  pray  with  the  absolute  certainty  that  our  prayer  will  be 
granted,  because  we  pray  with  the  absolute  certainty  that  we  are  asking  that  which 
it  will  be  for  our  good  to  get,  and  for  God's  glory  to  give.  II.  Another  fact  on 
which  the  principle  in  the  text  founds  is,  that  in  the  matter  of  spiritual  blessicga 

TOtJ  ABE  SURE,  WHEN  YOU  GET  WHAT  YOU  SEEK,  TO  FIND   IT   EQUAL   YOUB   EXPECTATIONS, 

There  never  was  the  human  being  who  said,  I  was  earnestly  desirous  to  gain  the 
favour  of  God,  to  gain  the  good  part  in  Christ,  and  now  I  have  gained  them,  I  find 
they  are  no  such  great  matter  after  all,  the  prize  is  hardly  worth  the  cost.  God  is 
indeed  my  Father,  Christ  is  indeed  my  Saviour,  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  within  my 
breast,  and  I  know  that  heaven  is  my  home ;  but  these  things  leave  me  still 
unsatisfied  and  unhappy.  No;  experience  never  brought  any  human  being  to  such 
a  mind  as  that.  That  is  the  strain  in  which  experience  has  taught  men  to  speak 
of  earthly  ends  after  they  were  won.  But  the  man  never  breathed  who  would  say 
the  like  of  the  blessings  of  grace.  (A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  The  hope  of  faith  and  the 
hope  of  experience : — The  hope  of  the  fourth  verse  is  distinct  from,  and  posterior  to 
the  hope  of  the  second,  and  is  derived  from  another  source.  The  first  hope  is  hope  in 
believing ;  a  hope  which  hangs  direct  on  the  testimony  of  God.  The  second  hope 
is  the  fruit  of  experience,  and  is  gathered,  not  from  the  word  that  is  without,  but 
from  the  feeling  of  what  passes  within.  I  make  a  twofold  promise  to  an  acquaint- 
ance— the  lesser  part  of  which  should  be  fulfilled  to-morrow,  and  the  latter  on  this 
day  twelvemonth.  If  he  believe  me,  then  will  there  be  a  hope  of  the  fulfilment  of  both, 
and,  for  a  whole  day  at  least,  he  may  rejoice  in  this  hope.  To-morrow  comes,  and 
if  to-morrow's  promise  is  not  fulfilled,  the  hope  which  emanated  from  faith  is  over- 
thrown, and  the  man  is  ashamed  of  his  rash  and  rejoicing  expectations  I  But  if 
instead  of  a  failure  there  is  a  punctual  fulfilment  without  shame  or  without  sus- 
picion, he  will  now  look  to  the  coming  round  of  the  year  with  more  confident 
expectation  than  ever.  It  is  quite  true  that  there  is  a  hope  in  believing,  but  it  is 
just  as  true  that  experience  worketh  hope.  Now  in  the  gospel  there  are  promises, 
the  accomplishment  of  one  of  which  is  far  off  and  the  other  of  which  is  near.  By 
faith  we  may  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  coming  glory,  and  it  will  be  the  confirmation 
of  our  hope  if  we  find  in  ourselves  a  present  holiness.  He  who  hath  promised  to 
translate  us  into  a  new  heaven  hereafter  has  also  promised  to  confer  on  us  a  new 
heart  here.  Directly  appended  to  our  belief  in  God's  testimony  may  we  hope  for 
both  these  fulfilments ;  but  should  the  earlier  fulfilment  not  take  place,  this  ought 
to  convince  us  that  we  are  not  the  subjects  of  the  latter  fulfilment.  A  true  faith 
would  ensure  to  us  both,  but  as  the  one  has  not  cast  up  at  its  proper  time  neither 
wUl  the  other  cast  up  at  its  time — and,  having  no  part  nor  lot  in  the  present  grace, 
we  can  have  as  little  in  the  future  inheritance.     (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 

Yer.  5.  And  hope  maketh  not  ashamed. — Christian  hope : — There  is  no  word 
more  beautiful  than  "hope."  It  is  alight  with  the  radiance  of  futurity;  in  it 
murmurs  a  prophetic  music  of  good  times  coming.  Its  influence  upon  mankind  it 
is  impossible  to  over-estimate.  As  it  has  waxed  or  waned,  society  has  risen  or 
declined.  The  sinfulness  of  the  first  pair  threatened  life  with  a  collapse ;  but  in 
the  first  promise  the  day-star  of  humanity  arose.  A  watery  deluge  rolled  around 
the  world ;  and  in  the  solitary  ark,  among  the  dearest  objects  which  survived  was 
the  hope  of  the  race.  At  the  time  of  Jesus,  upon  the  universal  heart  was  settling 
the  sickness  of  hope  deferred.  The  virtues  of  force,  courage,  endurance,  had  failed. 
The  intellectual  hope  of  the  world  likewise  had  suffered ;  philosophy  had  sunken  into 
sophistry.  Keligious  hope,  too,  was  dead ;  buried  in  the  superstition  and  atheism 
of  the  times.  It  was  now  that  Christ  appeared  the  dawn  of  the  world — material, 
intellectual,  and  spiritual.  Among  the  many  obligations  the  Divine  Man  imposed 
upon  mankind  was  the  redemption  of  the  hope  of  the  race.  I.  The  nature  op 
Christian  hope.  1.  Hope  is  sometimes  confounded  with  desire  ;  but  the  yearning  of 
the  soul  after  unrealised  good  may  not  only  not  be  hope,  but  the  keenest  form  of 
despair.  It  is  also  confused  with  belief ;  but  as  the  perceptive  faculty,  faith  may 
reveal  to  us  evils  that  will  befall  us.  Taken  separately  these  conceptions  are 
inadequate  and  untrue ;  in  combination  they  yield  the  wished  result.  Hope  is 
made  up  of  desire  and  faith — it  is  the  confident  expectation  of  coming  good.  2. 
This  world  is  the  special  scene  of  hope.  Because  of  the  perennial  freshness  of  the 
great  source  of  all  things,  every  life  has  about  it  a  vigour  of  unlimited  hope.  To 
the  young  the  disappointments  of  the  past  go  for  nothing.    As  if  no  anticipations 


OJUX.  ▼.]  EOMANS.  S55 

had  perished,  every  heart  comes  into  life  like  the  recurring  spring  crowned  with 
flowers  of  hope.  Until  the  summit  of  life  is  reached,  earthlj  hope  guides  man 
onward ;  but  the  time  must  come  when  the  summit  of  earthly  welfare  is  reached 
and  life  becomes  a  subdued  decline — when,  from  the  guardianship  of  Hope,  man  is 
handed  over  to  the  weird  sister  Memory.  3.  But  to  the  Christian  there  is  a  higher 
hope,  which  knows  no  decay,  which  can  sustain  the  spirit  in  an  unending  course  of 
dignity.  Christianity  renews  the  youth  of  men.  II.  Its  ground.  The  best  earthly 
expectations  are  based  upon  innumerable  contingencies  which  any  moment  may 
give  way.  The  Christian  hope  is  built  upon  a  rock— the  being  and  providence  of  a 
gracious  God.  There  are  some  to  whom  the  throne  of  the  universe  is  vacant  and 
man  an  orphan.  Others  have  filled  the  supreme  seat  with  a  formless  shadow  of 
fate — without  knowledge,  without  love.  In  distinction  from  all  such  theories  the 
ground  of  the  Christian  hope  is,  first,  the  infinite  perfections  of  God's  character. 
In  the  grand  unity  which  pervades  the  whole  material  universe,  which  guides  even 
those  matters  disturbed  by  the  perverse  will  of  man  towards  a  pui-pose  of  good,  we 
gather  that  the  Divine  nature  is  a  unity.  Then,  again,  from  the  works  of  nature 
we  gather  suggestions  of  a  power  that  is  omnipotent,  a  wisdom  that  is  boundless,  a 
goodness  that  is  infinite.  Here,  then,  we  seem  to  touch  the  very  granite  of  mortal 
confidence — a  personal,  loving  Godhead.  Give  us  this,  and  the  only  fatal  sin 
among  men  is  despair.  According  to  his  faith  shall  it  be  done  unto  man.  To 
illuminate  and  supplement  the  manifestation  already  given,  the  Almighty  spoke 
the  truths  contained  in  the  Bible.  Beyond  all,  in  the  person  of  Christ,  the  very 
heart  of  the  Father  was  unfolded  to  men.  And  is  there  no  warrant  for  hope  here  ? 
"  He  that  withheld  not  His  own  Son  but  freely  gave  Him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall 
He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things! "  IH.  Its  chabactebistics.  1. 
Solidity.  It  is  "  a  good  hope."  This  fact  arises  from  the  natura  of  its  foundation 
and  from  the  character  of  its  securities.  Here,  however,  we  prefer  to  notice  some 
of  the  testimonies  of  experience.  In  support  of  Christianity  we  can  show  an  array 
of  witnesses  unapproached  in  the  defence  of  any  other  system.  Surely,  to  foUow 
the  religious  footsteps  of  Bacon,  Milton,  and  Newton  is  no  slight  comfort.  Not 
only  in  the  vigour  of  their  life  have  great  men  attested  to  the  truth  of  Christianity, 
but  likewise  in  the  hour  of  their  dissolution.  "  The  best  of  all,"  said  the  dying 
father  of  Methodism:  "The  Lord  is  with  us,"  "Hast  thou  hope?"  said  the 
attendants  upon  the  death-bed  of  John  Enoz.  He  answered  not,  but  merely  pointed 
his  finger  upward.  2.  It  is  a  purifying  hope.  (1)  This  is  so  from  the  nature  of 
the  objects  which  excite  it.  The  soul  is  tinged  by  the  phenomena  amid  which  it 
moves.  He  who  anticipates  the  impure  becomes  impure ;  he  who  aspires  after  the 
trivial  only  becomes  frivolous.  Before  the  Christian,  on  the  contrary,  are  placed 
objects  of  standard  worth.  In  this  world  he  is  called  to  holiness  ;  in  the  world  to 
come  he  is  promised  heaven.  (2)  It  is  purifying  in  itself.  Give  a  man  hope,  and 
though  steeped  to  the  hps  in  evil,  he  will,  under  the  Divine  grace,  clarify  himself. 
Give  a  man  hope,  and  you  place  his  foot  on  the  first  stair  of  heaven.  This  is  the 
reason  of  the  success  of  the  gospel  over  every  other  religious  system.  3.  It  is  a 
living  or  lively  hope.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  dead  hope.  Some  have  made 
shipwreck  of  faith  and  have  cast  away  their  confidence.  Then  there  are  some  who 
have  a  kind  of  galvanised  hope — while  operated  upon  by  outward  excitement  it 
seems  to  move,  but  the  moment  this  is  taken  away  it  coUapses.  The  Divine 
principle  which  animates  the  Christian  heart  beats  a  pulse  of  undying  ardour. 
When  the  soul  enters  heaven  it  only  begins  a  career  of  endless  progress.  Through- 
out that  course  hope  will  be  the  unfailing  guide  of  man.  IV.  Its  pkoper  objects. 
These  comprehend  all  that  is  good,  i.e.,  all  that  is  in  accordance  with  the  will  of 
God.  It  only  requires  a  moment's  reflection  to  see  the  necessity  of  such  a  con- 
dition. The  mind  of  man  is  necessarily  defective,  and  confounds  shows  with 
teaUties.  As  a  child  perplexed  in  an  intricate  path  gladly  resigns  himself  to  the 
guidance  of  his  father,  so  the  Christian  exclaims,  in  the  presence  of  Divine  love, 
"  Thou  shalt  guide  me  with  Thy  counsel."  Another  reason  for  making  hope  con- 
tingent upon  the  Divine  will  is  found  in  God's  infinite  goodness.  Assured  of  this, 
man  realises  his  highest  blessedness.  Carry  with  you  the  thought  of  Divine 
rectitude,  and  you  cannot  anticipate  too  much  from  infinite  compassion.  The  fact 
of  God's  willingness  to  bless  man  being  manifested  in  all  the  mercies  received, 
should  add  zest  to  their  enjoyment.  "  No  good  thing  is  withheld  from  them  that 
walk  uprightly."  But,  in  regard  to  religious  benefits,  the  certainties  of  hope  are 
Btill  greater.  They  have  regard — 1.  To  man  individually,  and  begin  with  human 
life.    "  Of  saoh  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  "  Their  angels  do  always  behold  tht 


S56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  t. 

face  of  My  Father  which  is  in  heaven,"  are  passages  which  hang  like  a  luminous 
cloud  over  the  heads  of  little  children.  In  them  is  opened  a  boundless  field  of  hope 
in  regard  to  incipient  life.  All  who  depart  before  the  years  of  responsibility  are 
Bafe  in  the  protection  of  Christ.  In  the  case  of  those  who  survive  it  is  made 
possible  to  train  them  up  in  the  way  they  should  go.  Still,  so  early  does  man 
become  sinful  that  the  prophet  said,  "  We  go  astray  from  the  womb,  speaking 
lies. "  Just  as  the  prodigal  left  the  house  of  his  father,  men  go  astray  from  the 
Divine  rectitude,  and  then  there  is  only  a  single  voice  which  speaks  of  hope,  that  ia 
the  voice  of  the  gospeL  The  promises  of  God  suggest  that  there  is  no  room  for 
despondency  on  the  part  of  the  vilest,  but  every  reason  for  hope.  2.  To  Christian 
attainments.  The  real  life  of  man  is  that  of  progress.  The  objects  which  are  held 
np  to  us  in  the  Christian  course  are  calculated  to  stir  the  pulse,  to  call  forfh  the 
continued  aspiration  of  the  soul.  Above  all,  there  is  a  standard  of  Christian 
character  placed  before  us  we  can  never  transcend — namely,  that  of  Jesus  Christ. 
"  We  shall  be  Uke  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  Well  was  it  added,  "  He 
that  haih  this  hope  in  Him  purifieth  himself."  3.  To  heaven.  The  life  above  will 
be  of — (1)  An  intenser  character.  (2)  Permanent  blessedness.  (3)  Improved 
circumstances.  There  the  religious  life  instead  of  being  hindered  will  be  helped  by 
the  surroundings.  (4)  Better  society.  {Stephen  Clarke.)  The  glorious  hope : — 
Consider — I.  The  confidence  of  our  hope.  We  are  not  ashamed — 1.  Of  our  hope. 
Some  persons  have  no  hope,  or  only  one  of  which  they  might  justly  be  ashamed. 
"  I  shall  die  like  a  dog,"  says  one.  "  When  I  am  dead  there's  an  end  of  me."  The 
agnostic  knows  nothing,  and  therefore  I  suppose  he  hopes  nothing.  The  Komanist's 
best  hope  is  that  he  may  undergo  the  purging  fires  of  purgatory.  There  is  no  great 
excellence  in  these  hopes.  But  we  are  not  ashamed  of  our  hope  who  believe  that 
those  who  are  absent  from  the  body  are  present  with  the  Lord.  2.  Of  the  object 
of  our  hope.  We  do  not  hope  for  gross  carnal  delights  as  making  up  our  heaven, 
or  we  might  very  well  be  ashamed  of  it.  Whatever  imagery  we  may  use,  we  intend 
thereby  pure,  holy,  spiritual,  and  refined  happiness.  Our  hope  is  that  we  shall  shine 
forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Father  ;  that  we  shall  be  like  our  perfect 
Lord,  and  where  He  is  that  we  may  behold  His  glory.  3.  Of  the  ground  of  our 
hope.  The  solemn  promises  of  God  confirmed  in  the  person  and  work  of  Christ. 
Inasmuch  as  Jesus  died  and  rose,  we  that  are  one  with  Him  are  sure  that  we  shall 
rise  and  live  with  Him.  4.  Of  our  personal  appropriation  of  this  hope.  Our 
expectation  is  not  based  upon  any  proud  claim  of  personal  deservings,  but  upon  the 
promise  of  a  faithful  God.  He  hath  said,  "  He  that  believeth  in  Him  hath  ever- 
lasting life."  We  do  believe  in  Him,  and  therefore  we  know  that  we  have  eternal 
life.  Our  hope  is  not  based  on  mere  feeling,  but  on  the  fact  that  God  hath  promised 
everlasting  life  to  them  that  believe  in  His  Son  Jesus.  5.  As  to  the  absolute 
certainty  that  cnr  hope  will  be  realised.  We  do  not  expect  to  be  deserted,  for  "  He 
hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee."  ••  Who  shall  separate  us  from 
the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  ?  "  H.  The  eeason  of  this 
CONFIDENCE.  1.  Our  hope  has  for  one  of  its  main  supports  the  love  of  God.  I 
trust  not  to  my  love  of  God,  but  to  God's  love  for  me.  We  are  sure  that  He  will 
fulfil  our  hope  because  He  is  too  loving  to  fail  us.  If  it  were  not  for  the  Father's 
love,  there  would  have  been  no  covenant  of  grace,  no  atoning  sacrifice,  no  Holy 
Spirit  to  renew  us,  and  all  that  is  good  in  us  would  soon  pass  away.  2.  This  love 
has  been  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost — like  a  rain-cloud,  black 
with  exceeding  blessing,  which  pours  forth  a  shower  of  silver  drops  innumerable, 
fertilising  every  place  whereon  it  falls,  making  the  drooping  herbs  to  lift  up  their 
heads  and  rejoice  in  the  heaven-sent  revival.  After  a  while,  from  that  spot  where 
fell  the  rain,  there  rises  a  gentle  steam,  which  ascends  to  heaven  and  forms  fresh 
clouds.  Thus  is  the  love  of  God  poured  upon  our  heart,  and  shed  abroad  in  our 
nature  till  our  spirit  drinks  it  in,  and  its  new  life  is  made  to  put  forth  its  flowers  of 
joy  and  fruits  of  holiness,  and  by  and  by  grateful  praise  ascends  Uke  the  incense 
which  in  the  temple  smoked  upon  Jehovah's  altar.  Love  is  shed  abroad  in  us,  and 
it  works  upon  our  heart  to  love  in  return.  (1)  The  Holy  Ghost  imparts  an  intense 
appreciation  and  sense  of  that  love.  We  have  heard  of  it,  believed  in  it,  and 
meditated  upon  it,  and  at  last  we  are  overpowered  by  its  greatness  I  (2)  Then  there 
comes  an  appropriation  of  it.  We  cry,  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me." 
(3)  Then  follows,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  return  of  love  which  the  human  heart 
must  feel — we  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  ns.  3.  But  notice  the  special 
sweetness  which  struck  our  apostle  as  being  so  amazingly  noteworthy.  (1)  That 
Ck>d  should  give  His  Son  for  the  nngodly.    He  loved  ns  when  we  hated  Him. 


CHAP.  T.]  ROMANS.  857 

MarvellouB  fact!  (2)  That  Christ  died  for  us.  That  Christ  should  love  us  in 
heaven  was  a  great  thing ;  that  He  should  then  come  down  to  earth  was  a  greater ; 
bat  that  He  should  die,  this  is  the  climax  of  love's  sacrifice,  the  summit  of  the  Alp 
of  love.  (3)  That  the  Lord  must  ever  love  us  now  that  we  are  reconciled.  (4)  That 
"  we  have  now  received  the  atonement."  The  hope  of  glory  burns  in  the  golden 
lamp  of  a  heart  reconciled  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ.  Grace  is  glory  in  the  bud. 
Agreement  with  God  is  the  seed-corn  of  perfect  holiness  and  perfect  happiness. 
4.  Note  the  Divine  Person  by  whom  this  has  been  done.  Only  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
could  this  have  been  done.  We  can  shed  that  love  abroad  by  preaching,  but  we 
cannot  shed  it  abroad  in  the  heart.  If  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  you.  He  is  the 
guarantee  of  everlasting  joy.  Where  grace  is  given  by  His  Divine  indwelling,  glory 
must  follow  it.  ni.  The  besult  of  this  confident  hope.  1.  Inward  joy.  2.  Holy 
boldness  in  the  avowal  of  our  hope.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  hope  that  maketh 
not  ashamed : — I.  Its  glorious  object.  II.  Its  signal  tbiuivifhs.  III.  Its  unfailing 
SUPPORT.  (J  Lyth,  D.D.)  Hopes  that  make  and  the  hope  that  maketh  not 
ashamed : — I.  Hopes  that  make  ashamed.  1.  By  the  insuflSciency  of  the  object — 
that  of  the  worldling.  2.  By  the  weakness  of  the  foundation — that  of  the  Pharisee. 
3.  By  the  falsity  of  the  warrant— that  of  the  antinomian.  II.  The  hope  that 
siaketh  NOT  ashamed.  1.  Its  uaturo.  (1)  Holy.  (2)  Solid.  (3)  Certain.  2.  Its  value. 
It  can  never  disappoint  and  thus  put  to  shame.  {Ibid.)  Believers  not  ashamed,  for 
they  have — 1.  A  good  Master.  2.  A  good  cause.  3.  A  good  hope.  (M.  Henry.) 
Because  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  In  our  hearts. — J'he  love  of  God  shed  abroad 
in  the  heart : — I.  The  love  of  God  is  His  love  to  vs.  The  fact  that  we  are  the 
objects  of  a  love  which  embraces  all  the  creatures  of  God  would  not  be  ground  of 
hope  But  this  love  is — 1.  Special.  It  stands  opposed  to  wrath,  and  includes 
reconciliation  and  Divine  favour,  and  secures  to  as  aU  the  benefits  of  redemption. 
2.  Infinitely  great.  It  led  to  the  gift  of  God's  Son.  3.  Gratuitous.  It  is  not 
founded  on  our  character,  but  was  exercised  towards  us  when  sinners.  4.  Immu- 
table. If  founded  on  anything  in  us  it  would  continue  no  longer  than  our  attrac- 
tiveness continued  :  but  flowing  from  the  mysterious  fulness  of  the  Divine  nature 
it  cannot  change.  II.  This  love  is  shed  abboad  in  oub  eeabts:  i.e.,  we  have  a 
full  conviction  and  assurance  that  we  are  its  objects.  There  might  be  a  conviction 
that  God  is  love,  and  that  His  love  toward  some  men  is  infinitely  great,  and  that  it 
is  gratuitous  and  unchangeable,  and  yet  we  might  remain  in  the  blackness  of 
despair.  It  is  only  when  we  are  assured  that  we  are  it3  objects  that  we  have  a  hope 
which  sustains  and  renders  blessed.  III.  We  know  that  we  abe  the  objects  of  this 
LOVB.  1.  Not  simply  because  God  loves  all  men.  2.  Nor  because  we  see  in  our- 
selves effects  of  regeneration  and  the  evidences  of  holiness ;  for — (1)  This  love  was 
prior  to  regeneration.  (2)  Holiness  is  the  fruit  of  the  assurance  of  it.  3.  But  by 
the  Holy  Ghost.  How  we  cannot  tell,  and  it  is  unreasonable  to  ask.  We  might  as 
well  ask  how  He  produces  faith,  peace,  joy,  or  any  other  grace.  It  is  enough  to 
say  negatively  that  it  is  not — (1)  By  exciting  our  love  to  God,  whence  we  infer  His 
love  to  us :  the  order  is  the  reverse.  Nor — (2)  By  simply  opening  our  eyes  to  see 
what  a  wonderful  display  of  love  is  made  in  redemption:  for  that  we  might  see  and 
yet  suppose  ourselves  excluded.  IV.  The  proof  that  wb  are  not  deluded  m 
this  matter  is  to  be  found  in  the  effects  of  this  conviction.  1.  The  effects  of 
such  a'conviction  when  unfounded  are  seen  in  the  Jews,  Papists,  and  Antinomians, 
and  are — (1)  Pride.  (2)  Malignity.  (3)  Immorality.  2.  When  produced  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  the  effects  are — (1)  Humility.  Nothing  so  bows  down  the  soul  as  a 
sense  of  undeserved  love.  (2)  The  tenderest  concern  for  those  who  are  not  thus 
favoured,  and  an  earnest  desire  that  they  may  share  our  blessedness.  (3)  Love  to 
God.  Love  begets  love  :  and  our  love  to  God  is  mingled  with  admiration,  wonder, 
gratitude,  and  zeal  for  His  glory.  (4)  Obedience.  {C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  The  love  of 
God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart : — I.  The  love  of  God.  If  you  would  have  this  love 
shed  abroad  in  your  hearts  you  must  consider  carefully — 1.  Who  it  is  that  loves 
you,  namely,  the  most  high  God.  To  be  loved  is  a  sublime  thought,  but  to  be  loved 
of  Him  is  a  right  royal  thing.  A  courtier  will  often  think  it  quite  enough  if  he  hath 
the  favour  of  his  prince.  It  means  riches,  pleasure,  honour.  And  what  means  tlie 
love  of  the  King  of  kings  to  you  ?  All  that  you  ever  can  need.  2.  What  He  is  who 
BO  loves  you.  Very  much  of  the  value  of  affection  depends  upon  whom  it  comes 
from.  It  would  be  a  very  small  thing  to  have  the  complacency  of  some  of  our 
fellow  creatures  whose  praise  might  almost  be  considered  censure.  To  have  the 
love  of  the  good,  the  excellent,  this  is  truest  wealth ;  and  so  to  enjoy  the  love  of 
Ood  is  an  utterly  priceless  thing  1    8.  The  remarkable  characteristics  of  that  love. 


8S8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  ▼. 

(1)  It  is  heaven-bom ;  it  sprang  from  no  source  but  itself,  and  is  not  caused  by  any 
excellence  in  the  creature.  (2)  It  is  self-sustaining.  It  borrows  nothing  from  with- 
out. It  lives,  and  shall  live  as  long  as  God  lives.  (3)  Utterly  unbounded  and 
altogether  unequalled.  Tou  cannot  say  of  God's  love  it  has  gone  thereto,  but  it 
shall  go  no  further.  There  is  no  love  that  can  any  more  be  compared  with  God's 
than  the  faint  gleam  of  a  candle  with  the  blaze  of  the  sun  at  noonday.  He  loves 
His  people  so  much  that  He  gives  them  all  that  He  hath.  (4)  It  is  unvarying  and 
unsleeping.  He  never  loves  as  less,  He  cannot  love  as  more.  The  multiplicity  of 
the  saints  doth  not  diminish  the  infinite  love  which  each  one  enjoys.  Never  for  a 
single  moment  does  He  forget  His  Church.  (5)  It  is  undying  and  unfailing.  II.  Thk 
liOVE  OF  God  is  shed  abroad.  Here  is  an  alabaster  box  of  very  precious  ointment,  it 
holds  within  the  costly  frankincense  of  the  love  of  God ;  but  we  know  nothing  of  it, 
it  is  closed  up,  a  mystery,  a  secret.  The  Holy  Spirit  opens  the  box,  and  now  tha 
fragrance  fills  the  chamber;  every  spiritual  taste  perceives  it,  heaven  and  earth 
are  perfumed  with  it.  1.  No  one  can  shed  abroad  the  love  of  God  in  the  heart  but 
the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  He  that  first  puts  it  there.  2.  Do  you  inquire  in  what  way 
is  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  ?  (1)  The  Holy  Spirit  enables  the  man  to  be  assured 
that  he  is  an  object  of  the  Divine  love  in  the  first  place.  The  man  comes  to  the 
Cross  as  a  guilty  sinner,  looks  up  to  the  Gross,  trusts  in  the  living  Saviour,  and 
then  cries,  "  I  am  saved,  for  I  have  God's  promise  to  that  effect.  Now,  since  I  am 
saved,  I  must  have  been  the  object  of  the  Lord's  love."  (2)  Next  thing,  the  Spirit 
makes  the  man  understand  what  kind  of  love  this  is,  not  all  at  once,  but  by  degrees, 
until  he  apprehends  Jehovah's  love  in  its  length  and  breadth  and  height.  (3)  But 
then  comes  the  essence  of  the  matter — the  Holy  Spirit  enables  the  soul  to  meditate 
upon  this  love,  casts  out  the  cares  of  the  world,  and  then  the  man,  while  he  medi- 
tates, finds  a  fire  begins  to  bum  within  his  souL  Meditating  yet  more,  he  is  lifted 
op  from  the  things  of  earth.  Meditating  still,  he  is  astonished,  and  then,  filled  with 
strong  emotion,  he  cries,  "  My  soul  doth  magnify  the  Lord,  and  my  spirit  hath 
rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour."  Then  while  gratitude  is  still  within  his  soul  a  Divine 
resignation  to  all  the  Master's  will  keeps  rule  within  him.  Then  follows  a  rapturous 
leaping  over  this  devout  calm,  a  joy  unutterable,  next  akin  to  heaven,  fills  the 
heart.  III.  This  love  becomes  thb  confibuation  of  oub  hops.  Hope  rests  itself 
mainly  upon  that  which  is  not  seen  ;  the  promise  of  God  whom  eye  hath  not  beheld. 
Btill  it  is  exceedingly  sweet  to  us  if  we  receive  some  evidence  and  token  of  Divine  love 
which  we  can  positively  enjoy  even  now.  And  there  are  some  of  us  who  do  not  want 
Butler's  "  Analogy "  or  Paley's  "Evidences"  to  back  our  faith;  we  have  our  own 
analogy  and  our  own  evidences  within,  for  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts, 
and  we  have  tasted  and  seen  that  the  Lord  is  gracious.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  love 
of  God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart : — It  does  not  descend  upon  us  as  dew  in  drops,  but 
as  a  stream  which  spreads  itself  abroad  through  the  whole  soul,  fiUing  it  with  a 
consciousness  of  His  presence  and  favour.  (Philippi.)  The  love  of  God  $hed 
abroad  by  the  Holy  Ghost : — ^Frequently  at  the  great  Boman  games  the  emperors,  in 
order  to  gratify  the  citizens  of  Bome,  would  cause  sweet  perfumes  to  be  rained  down 
Dpon  them  through  the  awning  which  covered  the  amphitheatre.  Behold  the  vases, 
the  huge  vessels  of  perfume  I  Tes ;  but  there  is  nought  here  to  delight  you  so  long 
as  the  jars  are  sealed ;  but  let  the  vases  be  opened  and  the  vessels  be  poured  out, 
and  let  the  drops  of  perfumed  rain  begin  to  descend,  and  every  one  is  refreshed  and 
gratified  thereby.  Such  is  the  love  of  God.  There  is  a  richness  and  a  fulness  in 
it,  but  it  is  not  perceived  till  the  Spirit  of  God  pours  it  out  like  the  rain  of  fragrance 
over  the  heads  and  hearts  of  all  the  Uving  children  of  God.  See,  then,  the  need  of 
having  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost  {€.  H.  Spur- 
geon.) The  love  of  God  in  the  heart : — This  love — I.  Is  not  naturally  bevealbo 
TO  MAN.  It  beams  on  all,  like  the  sun  which  shines  whether  the  clouds  hide  bis  heat 
or  not.  So  God's  love  always  exists,  although  the  clouds  of  sin  may  dim  and 
obscure  its  rays.  It  existed  in  Paradise,  in  the  fall,  when  man  is  most  depraved  and 
dark.  It  exists  amid  all  the  sin  of  the  earth,  in  the  wretched  comers  where  crime 
and  vice  exist.  It  exists  amid  all  the  negligence  with  which  God  is  treated.  U.  Is 
KoT  appbeciated  OB  RESPONDED  TO.  If  it  wcre,  the  lives  of  men  would  be  far 
different  to  what  tht^y  are.  The  reason  is  that  clouds  of  sin  and  its  effects  intervene 
to  prevent  its  influence.  For  the  most  part  men  keep  in  the  shade  when  they  might 
live  in  the  warmth  and  brightness  of  the  sunshine.  III.  Must  be  felt  and 
KESPONDEb  TO.  It  is  impossible  to  be  a  child  of  God  without.  For  to  realise  the 
love  of  God  is  the  only  foundation  on  which  we  can  build  any  substantial  hope  for 
the  lutore.    Nothing  but  love  could  consider  guilty,  fallen  creatures,  or  have  ooa- 


CBxr.  ▼.]  ROMANS.  859 

trived  a  method  of  salvation.  Nothing  but  love  can  guide  us  safely  through  life  and 
through  death.  IV.  Can  bk  realised  and  appreciated.  1.  The  method — "  shed 
abroad."  God  does  nothing  with  a  niggardly  hand.  The  love  of  God  is  not  sent 
in  a  puny  dribble ;  it  comes  like  the  waters  of  an  incoming  tide,  mighty,  resistless. 
His  love  fills  the  soul  and  surrounds  it  and  permeates  our  nature.  2.  The  place — 
"  in  our  hearts."  The  heart  is  the  spring  of  life,  and  metaphorically  is  the  centra 
of  spiritual  life.  It  is  the  heart  that  is  said  to  feel  love.  And  so  it  is  represented 
that  the  heart  receives  the  love  of  God.  Our  hearts  receive  all  the  blood  from  the 
body,  and  then,  after  purifying  it,  sends  it  back  to  all  parts  of  the  body.  So  we  are 
to  receive  the  love  of  God  in  the  heart  to  be  distributed  over  all  our  life  and  actions. 
8.  The  means — "  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  us."  The  great  King 
always  uses  means.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  appointed  channel  through  which  all 
the  graces  are  sent  from  heaven  to  earth.  (1)  The  value  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is,  it  is 
always  a  present  means.  It  is  not  "  should  "  be  given,  but  "  is  "  given.  (2)  The 
certainty  of  the  blessing.  Like  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  is  always  present.  (3)  The  value 
of  the  gift — the  love  of  God.  What  will  not  love  accomplish  ?  What  will  it  not 
attain  ?  The  love  of  God  is  infinite.  And  if  we  appreciate  it,  if  we  share  it,  if  we 
enjoy  it,  then  is  our  lot  the  most  blessed.  (U.  R.  Thomat.)  Personal  piety: — L 
Its  source  and  seat.  1.  Its  source :  "  the  love  of  God."  False  religions  spring 
from  fear,  but  true  religion  springs  from  love.  God's  love,  as  revealed  in  the  gift  of 
His  Son,  begets  love  in  us,  and  just  as  the  sun  is  the  author  of  life  in  the  natural 
world,  80  God  is  the  Author  of  all  life  and  light  in  the  human  soul.  2.  Its  seat : 
"  in  our  hearts."  All  life  and  growth  must  begin  within,  or  they  will  prove  to  be 
nothing  but  fruitless  fungus.  Morality  in  the  life  may  be  the  outcome  of  self- 
respect,  or  early  culture,  or  fear  of  shame  and  sorrow.  Personal  piety  has  to  do 
not  only  with  the  conduct,  but  the  character  ;  and  the  character  is  decided  by  tha 
condition  of  the  heart  in  the  sight  of  God.  Out  of  the  heart  are  the  issues  of  life, 
and  if  the  love  of  God  be  there  holiness  will  be  stamped  upon  thought,  word,  and 
deed.  The  love  of  God  diffuses  its3lf  in  the  heart  like  light,  hfe,  warmth,  frag- 
rance, and  spreads  through  every  avenue  of  the  soul  till  the  possessor  of  it  becomes 
a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  U.  Its  operation  and  outcome.  Hope  is  the  natural 
and  inevitable  outcome  of  love.    We  expect  to  derive  joy  and  blessedness  from  the 

Eersons  upon  whom  our  affections  become  fixed,  and  who  take  possession  of  our 
earts,  and  we  are  "  not  ashamed  "  of  those  we  love,  but  are  ready  at  any  time  to 
acknowledge  them  and  identify  ourselves  with  them.  Courageous  and  confiding 
hope — 1.  Sanctifies.  If  we  love  God,  and  hope  one  day  to  see  Him  and  be  with 
Him,  we  shall  seek  to  please  Him  and  become  like  Him.  2.  Sustains.  While  we 
look  at  the  things  which  are  unseen  and  eternal,  the  sorrows  and  sufferings  of  tha 
present  seem  very  light  and  small.  3.  Stimulates.  Hope,  springing  from  love  in 
the  heart,  will  quicken  all  the  faculties  of  the  mind  and  fire  all  the  passions  of  the 
Bonl.  Love  will  constrain  to  consecration,  and  hope  stimulate  to  action.  III.  Its 
Generator  and  Guardian.  Whatever  the  means  we  use,  or  the  channels  through 
which  Divine  blessings  come  to  us,  they  all  proceed  from  the  Holy  Ghost  which  ig 
given  unto  us ;  the  rise,  progress,  and  perfection  of  personal  piety  must  be  attri- 
buted to  that  source.  Let  us,  then,  be  careful  that  we  grieve  not,  quench  not  the 
Holy  Spirit,  nor  dishonour  God  by  trusting  too  much  to  outward  forms  and  worldly 
noise  and  show.  If  we  lose  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  if  the  love  of  God 
expire  in  oar  hearts,  there  will  only  remain  within  as  the  white  ashes  of  a  former 
fire,  and  ••  Ichabod  "  will  be  written  upon  our  desolated  and  darkened  brows.  (F. 
W.  Broton.)  By  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  onto  ns. — The  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is — I.  The  pledge  of  what  is  to  come  (chap.  viii.  23 ;  2  Cor.  i.  22,  v.  5  ;  Eph. 
i.  14).  n.  The  witness  of  our  sonship  (cb»p.  viii.  16;  Gal.  iv.  6).  III.  The 
Author  or  all  oraoious  fruits  and  experiences  (Gal.  v.  22, 23).  IV.  The  Bevealer 
OF  ALL  Divine  truth  (John  xvi.  13,  14  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  10-12 ;  1  John  ii.  20,  27).  The 
Seal  and  Bond  of  oub  uhiom  with  Christ  and  God  (Eph.  iv.  20 ;  Bom.  viii.  9-11). 
(T.  Robinson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-12.  For  when  we  were  yet  without  strengrtb,  In  due  time  Christ  died 
for  the  vmgodly.  —  TTit/iout  strength  : — Utter  condemnation  and  loss  lies  in  that  little 
word  •*  not."  ••  Ungodly,"  or  not  godly,  is  to  be  strengthless,  condemned,  and 
lost.  L  Bt  nature  all  men  are  unqodly.  Ungodliness  takes  a  great  many  forms. 
1.  In  some  it  is  lawlessness.     It  is  seen  in  the  breach  of  every  Divine  commandment. 

il)  Idolatry  ig  the  sin  of  hundreds  of  thousands  during  every  hoar  of  time. 
2)  Swearing  and  impiety  load  every  gale.    (3)  Sabbath-bre^ng  is,  wherever  there 


S60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHi».  ▼. 

is  a  Sabbath  to  break.  (4)  Parents  are  disobeyed  and  neglected.  (5)  Murder: 
does  it  not  come  to  our  very  doors,  and  shock  the  city  with  its  terrors  ?  (6) 
Adultery :  is  not  that  one  of  the  sins  which  is  fed  by  our  wealth  and  the  artificial 
state  of  society  ?  and  is  it  not  preying  on  the  very  vitals  of  the  nation's  life  ? 
(7)  Dishonesty :  Diogenes  would  still  need  his  lantern  in  some  places  of  the  city 
and  the  world  if  he  would  find  an  honest  man.  (8)  False  witness,  slander :  what 
society  is  free  from  these  ?  What  man  or  woman  is  safe  from  them  ?  (9)  Covetous- 
ness :  no  man  has  anything  which  is  not  apt  to  be  desired  unlawfully  by  another. 
All  these  commandments  are  broken  because  men  are  ungodly.  If  men  were 
godly  they  would  see  the  excellency  and  the  beauty  of  them.  They  do  see  this 
when  they  become  godly.  2.  But  ungodliness  may  exist  in  strength  where  th  j  e 
is  little  or  no  outward  violation  of  the  commandments.  A  man  may  keep  them 
all  in  the  letter,  and  not  one  of  them  in  the  spirit ;  he  may  still  have  the  "  carnal 
mind  which  is  enmity  against  God."  Suppose  a  child  of  yours  were  to  forget 
your  name,  or  to  show  indifference  about  you  when  named,  or  coldness  and  dislike, 
although  veiled  under  the  form  of  politeness,  could  any  one  persuade  you  that  aU 
that  was  consistent  with  loving  you  ?  And  is  not  God  forgotten  ?  Disliked  ? 
Treated  like  a  stranger,  like  an  enemy?  Ungodliness — that  is  the  great  sin. 
IL  The  apfectino  concomitant  or  Tras  btatb  of  things.  1.  Ungodliness 
brings  of  necessity  many  evils  in  its  train,  condemnation,  banishment  from 
God,  the  wild  passions  and  the  miseries  of  life,  gloomy,  dismal  prospects ; 
but  perhaps  the  most  affecting  thing  of  all  is  moral  paralysis,  "without 
strength."  2.  The  meaning  is  this — that  there  is  in  ungodly  human  nature  no 
recuperative  power,  no  blessed  gracious  recoil  in  itself,  back  again  to  goodness. 
We  may  look  up,  but  we  cannot  rise.  A  tree  may  be  bent  almost  to  breaking,  but 
in  a  day  it  is  erect  again.  There  are  some  trees  which  do  more  than  recover  I 
The  prevalent  winds  in  Mexico  which  split  the  plantain's  leaves  and  warp  the 
mango  tree,  give  the  cocoanut  tree  a  permanent  inclination  towards  the  winds. 
This  result  arises  from  the  rebound  of  the  stems  after  being  bent  by  the  wind. 
Did  you  ever  hear  of  any  man  having  such  a  spring  in  his  own  nature,  that  the 
more  he  was  pressed  down  by  evil  the  higher  he  would  rise  in  goodness  ?  Is  not 
the  process  rather  "  waxing  worse  and  worse  " — going  away  backwards  ?  "  Not 
liking,"  and  liking  less  and  less,  •'  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge."  3.  Without 
strength — (1)  Of  reason,  to  find  the  lost  God.  (2)  Of  wisdom,  to  discover  the  right 
plan  of  life.  (3)  Of  conscience,  to  see  and  testify  for  true  morality.  (4)  Of  will,  to 
do  the  duty  that  is  apparent.  (5)  Of  affection,  which  has  all  been  squandered  and 
lost,  to  love  God  even  when  He  reveals  Himself  I  4.  This  is  a  very  sad  condition. 
If  you  saw  a  man  who,  by  his  self-will  and  over-confidence,  had  brought  on  himself 
some  terrible  disaster,  you  would  yet  pity  him,  and  help  him  out  of  his  difficulty. 
And  do  you  think  that  God  will  not  pity  a  whole  world  of  immortal  creatures  made 
in  His  own  image  ?  True,  He  condemns.  But  He  also  sorrows  over  our  fall,  and 
yearns  for  our  salvation.  III.  Seasonable  interposition.  "  In  due  time."  As  "  for 
everything  there  is  a  season,  and  a  time  for  every  purpose  under  the  heaven,"  so  there 
was  a  ripe  and  full  time  for  the  manifestation  of  God  in  the  fiesh.  1.  This  mani- 
festation was  not  made  too  soon.  Suppose  it  had  been  made  very  soon  after  the 
fall,  men  might  have  said,  "  We  got  more  help  than  we  needed — we  were  not  fully 
proved — we  had  no  chance  to  try  our  powers."  If  Christ  had  come  sooner — (1)  Th. 
Jewish  priests  might  have  said,  '*  We  are  sent  away  from  the  altar  too  soon ; 
perhaps  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  might  take  away  sin  in  the  end."  (2)  Tbi 
heathen  philosophers  might  have  said,  "We  are  superseded  too  soon.  The  work) 
by  wisdom  might  know  God,  if  time  were  given."  (3)  The  great  conquerors 
Nimrod,  Cyras,  Alexander,  &c.,  might  have  said,  as  representing  kings  and  all  civi! 
governments,  and  the  whole  doctrine  of  force  in  this  world,  "  The  sceptre  i? 
wrested  from  us  too  soon  ;  a  few  more  battles  and  the  world  would  have  been  one 
empire  of  far-stretching  righteousness  and  peace."  But  no  such  protest  was  raised. 
They  were  all  silent,  priest,  and  sage,  and  conqueror.  2.  The  Divine  interposition 
did  not  come  too  late.  (1)  Not  after  the  world  had  grown  so  old  in  sin  that  it  had 
lost  in  its  wanderings  the  very  faculty  of  hearing  the  recalling  voice.  (2)  Not 
when  even  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the  chosen  people,  had  lost  their  savour,  worn  out 
their  own  beliefs,  and  lost,  as  they  might  have  done,  the  knowledge  of  God.  (3) 
Not  when  all  the  continents  and  islands  of  the  earth  were  full,  and  no  fresh  tracts 
remained  to  be  claimed  and  peopled  by  races  baptized  into  a  nobler  faith.  Not  too 
soon,  and  not  too  late,  but  when  the  world  was  weary  of  waiting,  like  a  sufferer 
worn  out  with  a  long  sickness,  in  this  "  due,"  "  full  "  time,  the  Saviour  came. 


OBAJP.  T.]  EOMANS.  861 

IV.  Hb  oaue  to  DIB.  1.  The  fountaio  and  spring  of  oar  salvation  is  the  death  of 
Chiist — (1)  One  might  have  said  when  the  angels  sang,  "  Unto  you  is  born  this  day 
a  Saviour," — that  will  be  humiliation  enough — will  have  virtue  enough  to  save  us. 
No  ;  incarnation  is  the  foundation  fact,  but  something  more  must  be  built  on  it. 
(2)  Is  life  enough  ?  Working,  sleeping,  passing  up  and  down  Nazareth  for  thirty 
years  ?  No  ;  this  is  not  redemption.  It  brings  us  nearer  to  it,  year  by  year.  But 
life  like  this  for  ever  would  not  have  saved  us.  (3)  Is  teaching  enough  ?  No ; 
that  had  great  power,  but  was  Uke  God's  law  :  it  made  sin  more  exceeding  sinful, 
but  did  not  take  it  away.  (4)  Would  translations  to  heaven,  then,  have  been 
enough  ?  No ;  nothing  will  do  but  this.  2.  "  Christ  died  for  us,"  as  our  Ransom 
and  Substitute,  not  merely  for  our  benefit  and  advantage.  All  the  explanations  of 
this  truth,  with  which  we  are  familiar,  have  force  in  them,  although  they  all  come 
short  of  the  great  and  blessed  meaning.  He  died — (1)  To  satisfy  justice.  Not  only 
would  it  be  impossible  for  God  to  save  in  any  violation  of  that  attribute,  but  men 
themselves  could  not  (for  their  own  moral  nature  would  not  allow  it)  accept 
a  salvation  that  did  not  consist  with  tiie  integrity  aud  clearness  of  that  attribute. 
(2)  To  honour  the  Divine  law,  which  is  the  visible  strength  and  protection  of  the 
universe,  the  wall  of  heaven  and  earth.  (3)  To  procure  for  us  a  righteous  forgive- 
ness, a  peace — calm,  and  deep,  and  pure — Uke  the  very  peace  of  God.  (4)  To 
cancel  guilt,  to  cleanse  us  by  His  sacrificial  blood.  (5)  To  express  Divine  grace 
and  boundless  favour.  3.  And  this  great  act  is  brought  before  us  here,  and  every- 
where, as  the  most  wonderful  proof  that  could  be  given  of  the  love  of  God.  In  the 
whole  course  of  human  history  there  has  been  nothing  Uke  it  (ver.  7).  Who  ever 
heard  of  any  one  dying  for  a  worthless  man  ?  But  this  is  what  God  does.  "  He 
commendeth,"  makes  very  conspicuous  and  great.  His  love  to  as,  in  sending  Christ 
to  die  for  us,  "  while  we  were  yet  sinners."  Take  away  the  love  ;  make  the  death 
only  a  great  historical  fact,  necessary  to  the  accomplishment  of  God's  purpose  in 
the  development  of  this  world;  make  it  a  contrivance  in  moral  government,  and 
although  it  wiU  still  be  an  impressive  fact,  you  have  shorn  it  of  its  glory.  It  is  no 
longer  the  loadstone  that  draws  all  hearts.  The  death  without  the  love  might  still 
be  the  wonder  of  angels,  and  the  political  admiration  of  the  universe,  but  would  be 
no  longer  the  joy  and  rest  of  humble  souls.  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will 
draw  all  men  unto  Me. "  How  ?  By  the  subtle,  mysterious  power  of  all-conquer- 
ing love.  Do  you  see  it  ?  Are  you  drawn  by  it  ?  I  long  to  lead  you  to  the  "  large 
and  wealthy  place,"  to  which  you  have  right  and  title.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Man'$ 
impotency  to  help  himself  out  of  hit  misery : — I.  The  condition  whebein  we  abb  bt 
NATUBB  "without  Strength."  This  will  appear  if  yoa  consider  man's  condition — 
1.  With  respect  to  the  law  (Gal.  iii.  10).  Consider — (1)  The  duty  it  exacts; 
nniversal,  perpetual,  perfect  obedience.  If  man  fails  in  one  point,  he  is  gone 
(Ezek.  xviii.  4,  xx.  11).  Now  if  God  should  caU  as  to  an  account  for  the  most 
ino£Fen8ive  day  that  ever  we  passed  over,  what  would  become  of  us  ?  (Psa.  cxxz.  3). 
So  that  we  are  "without  strength"  to  conform  to  the  law's  requirements  (chap, 
viii.  3).  (2)  The  penalty  it  inflicts:  "Cursed  is  every  one."  (a)  In  aU  he  hath 
(Deut.  xxviii.  15-18).  (6)  In  aU  he  doeth  (Prov.  xxi.  27).  (c)  For  evermore 
(Matt.  XXV.  41).  We  are  "  without  strength,"  because  we  cannot  satisfy  the  justice 
of  God  for  one  sin.  (3)  Its  operation.  Consider  how  all  this  works,  (a)  Some- 
times it  terrifies  (Heb.  ii.  15  ;  Acts  xxiv.  25).  (b)  Sometimes  it  stupefies  the  con- 
science  so  that  men  grow  senseless  of  their  misery  (Eph.  iv.  19).  (c)  Sometimes  it 
irritates  inbred  corruption  (Bom.  vii.  9).  As  a  dam  makes  a  stream  the  more 
violent  or  as  a  buUock  at  the  first  yoking  becometh  the  more  unruly,  (d)  Sometimes 
it  breeds  a  sottish  despair  (Jer.  xviii.  12).  It  is  the  worst  kind  of  despair,  when 
a  man  is  given  up  to  his  "  own  heart's  lust  "  (Psa.  Ixxxi.  12),  and  runs  headlong  in 
the  way  of  destruction,  without  hope  of  returning.  Thus  as  to  the  law  man  is 
helpless.  2.  With  respect  to  terms  of  grace  offered  in  the  gospel.  This  wiU 
appear — (1)  By  those  emphatic  terms  by  which  the  case  and  cure  of  man  are  set 
forth,  (a)  His  case.  He  is  born  in  sin  (Psa.  li.  5),  and  things  natural  are  not  easily 
altered.  He  is  greedy  of  sin  (Job  xv.  16).  Thirst  is  the  most  implacable  appetite. 
His  heart  is  a  heart  of  stone  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26),  and  deceitful  above  aU  things,  and 
desperately  wicked  (Jer.  xvii.  9),  and  the  New  Testament  is  no  more  favourable 
than  the  Old.  There  you  will  find  man  represented  as  a  "  child  of  wrath  by  nature  " 
(Eph.  ii.  3),  a  "  servant  of  sin  "  (Eom.  vi.  17),  "alienated  from  God"  (Eph.  iv.  18). 
An  enemy  to  God  (Rom.  viii.  "7),  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  "  (Eph.  ii.  1-5). 
Certainly  man  contributeth  little  to  his  own  conversion :  he  cannot  "  hunger  and 
UuTBt"  after  Christ  that  "drinks  in  iniquity  like  water."    If  the  Scripture  hjMl 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSIRATOR.  [CHl».  r. 

only  said  that  man  had  accustomed  himself  to  sin,  and  was  not  "bom  in  sin"; 
^at  man  was  somewhat  prone  to  iniquity,  and  not  "  greedy  "  of  it,  and  did  ofton 
think  evil,  and  not  "  continnally " ;  that  man  was  somewhat  obstinate,  and  not 
a  "  stone,"  an  "  adamant "  ;  if  the  Scriptore  had  only  said  that  man  was  indifferent 
to  God,  and  not  a  professed  "enemy  "  ;  if  a  captive  of  sin,  and  not  a  '*  servant " ; 
if  only  weak,  and  not  "  dead  "  ;  if  only  a  neuter,  and  not  a  "  rebel "  ; — then  there 
might  be  something  in  man,  and  the  work  of  conversion  not  so  difficult.  But  the 
Scripture  saith  the  quite  contrary,  (b)  The  cure.  To  remedy  so  great  an  evil 
requires  an  almighty  power,  and  the  all-sufficiency  of  grace ;  see,  therefore,  how 
conversion  is  described  in  Scripture.  By  enlightening  the  mind  (Eph.  i.  18).  By 
opening  the  heart  (Acts  xvi.  14).  God  knocks  many  times  by  the  outward  means, 
and  as  one  that  would  open  a  door — He  tries  key  after  key,  bnt  till  He  putteth  Hi» 
fingers  upon  the  handles  of  the  look  (Cant.  v.  4,  5),  the  door  is  not  opened  to  Him. 
If  these  words  are  not  emphatic  enough,  you  will  find  conversion  expressed  by 
regeneration  (John  iii.  3),  resurrection  (Eph.  ii.  5),  creation  (Eph.  ii.  10;  2  Cor.  iv. 
6,  ▼.  17 ;  Psa.  Ii.  10),  victory  (1  John  iv.  4),  the  beating  and  binding  of  the  "  strong 
man "  by  one  that  is  "  stronger  than  he "  (Luke  xi.  21,  22).  (2)  By  those 
assertions  whereby  all  power  is  denied  to  man  to  convert  himself  to  God,  or  to  do 
anything  that  is  spiritually  good.  As  when  it  is  said  he  catmot  know  (1  Cor.  ii.  14), 
believe  Tjohn  vi.  44),  obey  (Bom.  viii.  7).  Nay,  to  instance  in  single  acts  :  he 
cannot  think  a  good  thought  of  himself  (2  Cor.  iii.  6),  speak  a  good  word  (Matt.  zii. 
84),  do  anything  (John  xv.  5).  Surely,  then,  man  is  "  without  strength,"  to  tarn 
himself  to  God.  But  here  are  objections — (a)  How  can  it  stand  with  the  mercy, 
justice,  and  wisdom  of  God  to  require  of  man  what  he  cannot  pay  ?  Answer  first- 
God  doth  not  lose  His  right,  though  man  hath  lost  his  power ;  their  impotency 
doth  not  dissolve  their  obligation  ;  a  drunken  servant  is  a  servant,  and  it  is  against 
all  reason  that  the  master  should  lose  his  right  to  command  by  the  servant's 
default.  A  prodigal  debtor,  that  hath  nothing  to  pay,  yet  is  liable  to  be  sued  for 
the  debt  without  any  injustice.  And  shall  not  God  challenge  the  debt  of  obedience 
from  a  debtor  that  is  both  proud  and  prodigal  ?  Answer  second — Our  natural 
impotency  is  voluntary.  We  must  not  consider  man  only  as  impotent  to  good,  but 
as  delighting  in  evil :  he  will  not  come  to  God  (John  v.  40).  Our  impotency  lies  in 
our  obstinacy,  and  so  man  is  left  without  excuse.  We  refuse  the  grace  that  is 
offered  to  us,  and  by  continuing  in  sin  increase  our  bondage,  our  inveterate 
customs  turning  to  another  nature.  (6)  If  man  be  so  altogether  without  strength, 
why  do  ye  press  him  to  the  use  of  means  ?  Answer — Though  man  cannot  change 
himself,  yet  he  is  to  use  the  means.  First,  that  we  may  practically  see  our  own 
weakness.  Men  think  the  work  of  grace  is  easy,  till  they  put  themselves  upon 
a  trial :  the  lameness  of  the  arm  is  found  in  exercise.  Whosoever  sets  himself  in 
good  earnest  to  get  any  grace,  will  be  forced  to  cry  for  it  before  he  hath  done. 
When  a  man  goes  to  lift  up  a  piece  of  timber  heavy  above  his  strength,  he  is  forced 
to  call  in  help.  Second,  the  use  of  the  means  we  owe  to  God  as  well  as  the 
change  of  the  heart.  God,  that  hath  required  faith  and  conversion,  hath  required 
prayer,  hearing,  reading,  meditating ;  and  we  are  bound  to  obey,  though  we  know 
not  what  good  will  come  of  it  (Heb.  xi.  8  ;  Luke  v.  5).  Our  great  rule  is,  we  are 
to  do  what  He  commandeth,  and  let  God  do  what  He  will.  Third,  to  lessen  our 
guilt.  For  when  men  do  not  use  the  means,  they  have  no  excuse  (Acts  xiii.  46 ; 
Matt.  XXV.  26).  Fourth,  it  maybe  God  will  meet  with  us.  It  is  the  ordinary  practice 
of  His  free  grace  so  to  do  ;  and  it  is  good  to  make  trial  upon  a  common  hope  (Acts  viii. 
22).  II.  Soke  reasons  why  God  pebmits  this  weakness.  1.  To  exalt  His  grace. 
(1)  Its  freeness ;  for  God  hath  shut  up  all  under  the  curse,  that  there  may  be  no 
way  of  escape  but  by  His  mercy  (Eom.  xi.  32 ;  Gal.  iii.  22).  (2)  Its  power 
(Eph.  i.  19).  When  we  consider  it,  we  may  wonder  at  it  that  ever  such  a  change 
should  be  wrought  in  us  that  are  so  carnal,  so  obstinate  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  It  is 
indeed  marvellous  that  ever  we  should  get  out  of  the  prison  of  sin ;  more  miraculous 
than  Peter's  getting  out  of  prison.  2.  To  humble  the  creature  thoroughly  by  a 
sense  of  his  own  guilt,  unworthiness,  and  nothingness  (Eom.  iii.  19).  Conclusion  : 
The  subject  is  of  use — 1.  To  the  unconverted — to  be  sensible  of  their  condition, 
and  mourn  over  it  to  God.  Acknowledge  the  debt ;  confess  your  impotency ;  beg 
pardon  and  grace ;  and,  in  a  humble  sense  of  your  misery,  endeavour  earnestly  to 
come  out  of  it.  By  such  doctrines  as  these  men  are  either  "  cut  at  heart  "  (Acts  vii. 
64)  or  "  pricked  at  heart  "  (Acts  ii.  37).  2.  To  press  the  converted  to  thankfulness. 
We  were  once  in  such  a  pitiful  case.  8.  Let  us  compassionate  others  that  are  is 
this  estate,  and  endeavour  to  rescue  them.     (T.  Manton,  D.D.)        A  weak  world 


OBAT.  T.]  ROMANS.  86S 

made  ttrong  : — I.  Thb  hobal  pbostration  of  humanity.  "  When  we  were  yet 
■without,"  not  muscular  or  mental,  but  moral  "  strength."  1.  To  effect  the 
deliverance  of  self.  The  sools  of  all  were  "  carnal,  sold  under  sin."  Man,  the 
world  over,  felt  this  profoundly  for  ages.  His  cry  was — "  0  wretched  man  that 
lam  !  who  shall  deliver  me?"  <£o.  Philosophers,  priests,  poets,  tried  to  deliver 
the  soul,  but  failed.  2.  To  render  acceptable  service  to  the  Creator.  *'  Where- 
withal shall  we  come  before  the  Lord,  and  how  shall  we  bow  before  the  Most  High 
God?  "  3.  To  face  the  future  with  calmness.  Deep  in  the  hearts  of  all  men  waa 
the  belief  in  a  future  life,  but  that  future  rose  before  them  in  aspects  so  terrible 
that  they  recoiled  from  it.  Ko  weakness  so  distressing  as  this;  moral  power- 
lessness  is  not  only  a  curse,  but  a  crime.  Yet  all  unregenerate  men  are  the  subjects 
of  this  lamentable  prostration.  II.  Thb  rein viooratinqpo web  of  Chbist's  death. 
"  In  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  Christ's  death  enables  man — 1.  To 
deliver  himself.  It  generates  within  him  a  new  spiritual  life,  by  which  he  throws 
off  its  enthralments  as  the  winged  chrysalis  its  crust.  Christ's  death  is  the  life  of 
souls.  2.  To  render  acceptable  service  to  God.  It  presents  to  him — (1)  The 
right  motive.  (2)  The  right  method.  3.  To  calmly  face  the  future.  Christ's 
death  reveals  a  bright  future,  and  furnishes  the  means  for  attaining  it.  Christ's 
death  is  the  moral  power  of  the  world.  It  inspires  men  with  love — love  is  power ; 
with  faith — faith  is  power  ;  with  hope — hope  is  power ;  with  courage — courage  is 
power.  III.  Thk  seasonable  period  of  the  Redeemer's  mission.  '•  In  due  time," 
i.e. — 1.  When  the  world  was  prepared  to  appreciate  it.  Mankind  had  tried  every 
means  they  could  invent  to  deliver  themselves  from  the  power  of  sin,  to  attain  the 
approval  of  their  Maker,  and  to  win  a  bright  future,  but  had  failed.  Four  thousand 
years  of  earnest  philosophisings  and  sacerdotal  labour,  legislative  enactments,  and 
moral  teachings,  had  signally  failed.  "The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God." 
The  intellect  of  Judssa,  Greece,  Rome,  all  failed.  The  world  was  prostrate  in 
hopelessness.  2.  The  time  appointed  by  Heaven.  The  time  had  been  designated 
by  the  prophets  (Gen.  xliz.  10 ;  Dan.  ix.  27 ;  John  xvii.  1).  3.  The  time  most 
favourable  for  the  universal  diffusion  of  the  fact.  (1)  There  was  a  general 
expectation  of  a  Great  Deliverer.  (2)  The  world  was  at  peace,  and  mainly  under 
the  control  of  one  government — Rome.  (3)  The  Greek  language  was  all  but 
aniversally  spoken.  (4)  Communications  were  opened  up  between  all  the  villages, 
towns,  and  cities  of  the  world.  •'  In  due  time  Christ  died."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
For  whom  did  Christ  die .' — The  human  race  is  here  described  as  a  sick  man  in  an 
advanced  stage  of  disease  ;  no  power  remains  in  his  system  to  throw  off  his  mortal 
malady,  nor  does  he  desire  to  do  so.  Your  condition  is  not  only  your  calamity,  but 
your  fault.  Other  diseases  men  grieve  about,  but  you  love  this  evil  which  is 
destroying  you.  While  man  is  in  this  condition  Jesus  interposes  for  his  salvation. 
I.  Thb  fact.  "  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  1.  Christ  means  "  Anointed  One," 
and  indicates  that  He  was  commissioned  by  supreme  authority.  Jesus  was  both  set 
apart  to  this  work  and  quahfied  for  it  by  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  is 
no  onauthorised,  no  amateur  deliverer,  but  one  with  full  credentials  from  the 
Father.  2.  Christ  died.  He  did  a  great  deal  besides  dying,  but  the  crowning  act 
of  His  career  of  love,  and  that  which  rendered  all  the  rest  available,  was  His 
death.  This  death  was — (1)  Real,  as  proved  by  the  piercing  of  His  side,  and  His 
burial.  (2)  Acute.  "  My  God,  My  God,  why,"  <fec.  (3)  Penal ;  inflicted  upon  Him 
by  Divine  justice ;  and  rightly  so,  for  on  Him  lay  our  iniquities,  and  therefore  on 
Him  mast  lie  the  suffering.  (4)  Terrible.  Condemned  to  a  felon's  gibbet,  He  waa 
crucified  amid  a  mob  of  jesters.  3.  Christ  died,  not  for  the  righteous,  but  for  the 
ungodly,  or  the  godless,  who,  having  cast  off  God,  cast  off  with  Him  all  love  for 
that  which  is  right.  He  did  not  please  Himself  with  some  rosy  dream  of  a  superior 
race  yet  to  come,  when  civilisation  would  banish  crime,  and  wisdom  would  conduct 
man  back  to  God.  Full  well  He  knew  that,  left  to  itself,  the  world  would  grow 
worse  and  worse.  This  view  was  not  only  the  true  one,  but  the  kindly  one ; 
because  had  Christ  died  for  the  better  sort,  then  each  troubled  spirit  would  have 
inferred  "  He  died  not  for  me."  Had  the  merit  of  His  death  been  the  perquisite  of 
honesty,  where  would  have  been  the  dying  thief?  If  of  chastity,  where  the  woman 
that  loved  much?  If  of  courageous  fideUty,  how  would  it  have  fared  with  the 
apostles,  who  all  forsook  Him  and  fled  ?  Then,  again,  in  this  condition  lay  the 
need  of  our  race  that  Christ  should  die.  To  what  end  could  Christ  have  died  for 
the  good?  "The  just  for  the  unjust"  I  can  understand;  but  the  "  just  dying  for 
the  just "  were  a  double  injustice.  II.  Plain  inferences  from  this  fact.  1.  That 
juQ  are  in  great  danger.    Jesus  would  not  interpose  His  life  if  there  were  not 


864,  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  t. 

Bolemn  need  and  imminent  peril.  The  Gross  is  the  danger  signal  to  you,  it  wama 
you  that  if  God  spared  not  His  only  Son,  He  will  not  spare  you.  2.  That  out  of 
this  danger  only  Christ  can  deliver  the  ungodly,  and  He  only  through  His  death. 
If  a  less  price  than  that  of  the  life  of  the  Son  of  God  could  have  redeemed  men. 
He  would  have  been  spared.  K,  then,  "  God  spared  not  His  Son,  but  freely 
delivered  Him  up  for  us  all,"  there  must  have  been  a  dread  necessity  for  it.  3.  That 
Jesus  died  out  of  pure  pity,  because  the  character  of  those  for  whom  He  died  could 
not  have  attracted  Him.  "  God  commendeth  His  love  towards  us  in  that  while  we 
were  yet  sinners  Christ  died  for  us."  4.  That  the  ungodly  have  no  excuse  if  they 
do  not  come  to  Him,  and  believe  in  Him  unto  salvation.  Had  it  been  otherwise 
they  might  have  pleaded,  "  We  are  not  fit  to  come. "  But  you  are  ungodly,  and 
Christ  died  for  the  ungodly,  why  not  for  you  ?  5.  That  the  converted  find  no  ground 
of  boasting ;  for  they  were  ungodly,  and,  as  such,  Christ  died  for  them.  6.  That 
saved  ones  must  not  think  lightly  of  sin.  If  God  had  forgiven  sinners  without  an 
atonement  tbey  might  have  done  so,  but  now  that  pardon  comes  through  the  bitter 
griefs  of  their  Redeemer  they  cannot  but  see  it  to  be  an  exceeding  great  evil. 
7.  This  fact  is  the  grandest  argument  to  make  the  ungodly  love  Christ  when  they 
are  saved.  HI.  The  pboclamation  or  this  fact.  1.  In  this  the  whole  Church 
ought  to  take  its  share.  Shout  it,  or  whisper  it ;  print  it  in  capitals,  or  write  it  in 
a  large  hand.  Speak  it  solemnly ;  it  is  not  a  thing  for  jest.  Speak  it  joyfully ;  it 
is  not  a  theme  for  sorrow.  Speak  it  firmly  ;  it  is  an  indisputable  fact.  Speak  it 
earnestly ;  for  if  there  be  any  truth  which  ought  to  arouse  all  a  man's  soul  it  is 
this.  Speak  it  where  the  ungodly  live,  and  that  is  at  your  own  house.  Speak  it 
also  in  the  haunts  of  debauchery.  Tell  it  in  the  gaol ;  and  sit  down  at  the  dying 
bed  and  read  in  a  tender  whisper — "  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  2.  And  yoa 
that  are  not  saved,  take  care  that  you  receive  this  message.  Believe  it.  Fling 
yourself  right  on  to  this  as  a  man  commits  himself  to  his  life-belt  amid  the  surging 
billows.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  sad  plight  and  the  sure  relief : — I.  The  condi- 
tion OP  those  fob  whom  Christ  died.  1.  They  were  "without  strength." 
(1)  Legally.  Before  God's  bar  man  had  a  weak  case,  (a)  We  could  not  deny  the 
charge  that  we  had  broken  the  law.  (6)  We  could  not  set  up  an  alibi,  (c)  We 
could  not  make  apologies,  for  we  have  sinned  wilfully,  repeatedly,  without  any 
necessity,  with  divers  aggravations,  deliberately  and  presumptuously,  when  we 
knew  the  penalty.  So  weak  was  our  case  that  no  advocate  who  understood  it  would 
have  ventured  to  plead  it,  except  that  one  glorious  Advocate  who  pleaded  it  at  the 
cost  of  His  own  Ufe.  (2)  Morally.  We  are  so  weak  by  nature  that  we  are  swayed 
by  every  influence  which  assails  us.  At  one  time  man  is  driven  by  fashion ;  at 
another  he  is  afraid  of  his  fellow-men.  Then  the  evil  spirit  comes  upon  him,  or 
if  the  devil  should  let  him  alone,  his  own  heart  suffices.  The  pomp  of  this  world, 
the  lust  of  the  eye,  the  pride  of  life — any  of  these  things  will  drive  men  about  at 
random.  Nothing  seems  to  be  too  wicked,  too  insane,  for  mankind.  Man  is 
morally  weak — a  poor,  crazy  child.  He  has  lost  that  strong  hand  of  a  well -trained 
perfect  reason  which  God  gave  him  at  the  first.  (3)  Spiritually.  When  man  dis- 
obeyed he  died  spiritually.  The  blessed  Spirit  left  him.  Man  is  dead  in  sin.  He 
cannot  rise  to  God  any  more  than  the  dead  in  the  grave  can  come  out  of  their 
sepulchres  of  themselves  and  live.  2.  They  were  "  ungodly,"  i.e.,  men  without 
God.  God  is  not — (1)  In  their  thoughts.  (2)  In  their  hearts.  If  they  do  remember 
Him,  they  do  not  love  Him.  (3)  In  their  fears.  (4)  In  their  hopes.  Christ 
came  to  save  the  very  vilest  of  the  vile.  II.  When  Chbist  intekposed  to  sayb 
us.  In  "  due  time,"  i.e.,  at  a  proper  period.  There  was  no  accident  about  it.  Sin 
among  mankind  in  general  had  reached  a  climax.  1.  There  never  was  a  more 
debauched  age.  It  is  impossible  to  read  chap.  i.  without  feeling  sick  at  the 
depravity  it  records.  Their  own  satirists  said  that  there  was  no  new  vice  that  could 
be  invented.  Even  Socrates  and  Solon  practised  vices  which  I  dare  not  mention 
in  any  modest  assembly.  But  it  was  when  man  had  got  to  his  worst  that  Christ 
was  lifted  up  to  be  a  standard  of  virtue — to  be  a  brazen  serpent  for  the  cure  of  the 
multitudes  who  everywhere  were  dying  of  the  serpent's  bites.  2.  Christ  came  at  a 
time  when  the  wisdom  of  man  had  got  to  a  great  height.  Philosophers  were  seeking 
to  dazzle  men  with  their  teaching,  but  the  bulk  of  their  teaching  was  foolishness, 
couched  in  paradoxical  terms  to  make  it  look  like  wisdom.  "  The  world  by  wisdom 
km  lotGod."  3.  But,  surely,  man  had  a  religion  1  He  had;  but  the  less  we  say  about 
it  the  better.  Holy  rites  were  acts  of  flagrant  sin.  The  temples  were  abominable, 
and  tbe  priests  were  abominable  beyond  description.  And  where  the  best  part  of 
man,  Ills  very  religion,  had  become  so  foul,  what  could  we  expect  of  his  ordinary 


OBAi.  ▼.]  ROMANS.  86S 

life  ?  Bat  was  thei  e  not  a  trae  religion  in  the  world  somewhere  ?  Yes,  but  among 
the  Jews  tradition  had  made  void  the  law  of  God,  and  ritualism  had  taken  the  place 
of  BpirituaJ  worship.  The  Pharisee  thanked  God  that  he  was  not  as  other  men 
were,  when  he  had  got  in  his  pocket  the  deeds  of  a  widow's  estate  of  which  he  had 
robbed  her.  The  Sadducee  was  an  infidel.  The  best  men  of  the  period  in  Christ's 
days  Bdid,  "  Away  with  such  a  fellow  from  the  earth  1 "  Now,  it  was  when  men 
had  got  to  this  pitch  that  Christ  came  to  die  for  them.  If  He  had  launched  His 
thunderbolts  at  them,  or  swept  the  whole  race  away,  none  could  have  blamed  Him. 
But,  instead  of  that,  the  pure  and  Holy  One  came  down  to  earth  Himself  to  die, 
that  these  wretches — yea,  that  we  ourselves — might  live  through  Him.  IH.  What 
DID  He  do  fob  us  ?  1.  He  made  the  fuUest  degree  of  sacrifice  that  was  possible. 
He  made  the  heavens,  and  yet  He  lay  in  Bethlehem's  manger.  He  hung  the  stars 
in  their  places,  and  laid  the  beams  of  the  universe,  and  yet  became  a  carpenter's 
son  ;  and  then  when  He  grew  up  He  consented  to  be  the  servant  of  servants.  When 
at  last  He  gave  His  life,  "It  is  finished,"  said  He;  self-sacrifice  had  reached  its 
chmax  ;  but  He  could  not  have  saved  us  if  He  had  stopped  short  of  that.  2.  In 
the  fact  that  Christ's  self-sacrifice  weut  so  far  I  see  evidence  of  the  extreme  degree 
of  our  need.  Would  He,  who  is  "  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever,"  have  come  from 
the  height  of  heaven  and  have  humbled  Himself  even  to  the  death,  to  save  us,  if  it 
had  not  been  a  most  terrible  ruin  to  which  we  were  subject?  3.  This  death  of 
Christ  was  the  surest  way  of  our  deliverance.  The  just  dies  for  the  unjust ;  the 
offended  Judge  Himself  suffers  for  the  offence  against  His  own  law.  IV.  What 
THEN  ?  1.  Then  sin  cannot  shut  any  man  out  from  the  grace  of  God  if  he  believes. 
The  man  says,  "I  am  without  strength."  Christ  died  for  us  when  we  were  without 
strength.  The  man  says,  "  I  am  ungodly."  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly.  2.  Then 
Jesus  will  never  cast  away  a  behever  for  his  after  sins,  for  if  when  we  were  without 
strength  He  died  for  us,  if,  when  we  were  ungodly.  He  interposed  on  our  behalf, 
will  He  leave  us  now  that  He  has  made  us  godly  (ver.  10)  ?  3.  Then  every  blessing 
any  child  of  God  can  want  he  can  have.  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son  when 
we  were  without  strength  and  ungodly,  cannot  deny  us  inferior  blessings  now  that 
we  are  His  own  dear  children.  4.  Then  how  grateful  we  ought  to  be!  (Tbid.) 
Glwying  in  God  : — I.  God's  love  to  us.  Note — 1.  The  condition  in  which  it  found 
us.  We  were — (1)  Without  strength.  Let  this  be  viewed  as — (a)  Moral  impotence ; 
and  is  it  not  true  that  we  were  unable  to  do  that  which  is  good  ?  When  we  wished 
to  do  it,  we  could  not  will  it.  We  felt  ourselves  captives  of  the  devil,  sold  and 
bound  under  sin.  (6)  Helplessness  in  the  time  of  danger ;  and  is  it  not  true  that 
we  were  without  strength  to  defend  ourselves  against  the  condemnation  of  the  law, 
and  the  righteous  anger  of  Jehovah?  (2)  Ungodly,  that  is,  destitute  of  true 
righteousness.  We  were  not  only  weak,  but  unwilling  to  do  good.  (3)  Sinners; 
transgressors  of  God's  law  in  act  and  deed.  Being  corrupt  trees,  we  brought  forth 
evil  fruit.  (4)  Enemies  to  God.  We  did  not  love  Him,  or  care  for  Him.  Nay, 
we  insulted  Him,  fought  against  Him,  silently  or  violently,  and  so  lived  as  to 
counteract  and  oppose  all  His  purposes,  so  far  as  we  had  the  power.  2.  What  that 
love  has  done  for  us.  When  we  were  in  this  state  of  helplessness  and  rebelUon 
against  God,  He  gave  His  Son  to  die  for  us.  By  that  death  believers  are  justified 
and  reconciled  to  God.  3.  The  comparison  of  this  love  with  the  behaviour  of  men 
to  each  other  (vers.  7,  8).  The  righteous  man  is  a  man  of  correct  and  irreproachable 
behaviour ;  but  the  good  man  is  a  man  of  generosity  and  kindness,  who  wins  the 
hearts  of  his  friends,  and  for  whom  friends  have  been  willing  to  die.  But  for  a 
merely  just  man,  you  would  scarcely  find  any  willing  to  lay  down  his  life ;  while 
certainly  for  the  base  and  mean  of  mankind,  or  for  his  personal  enemies,  no  man 
has  been  found  willing  to  die.  "  But  God  commendeth  His  love  toward  us  in  that, 
while  we  were  wickedly  His  enemies,  He  gave  His  Son  to  die  for  us."  4.  That 
this  love  was  manifested  in  due  time  (Mark  i.  15 ;  Gal.  iv.  4  ;  and  Eph.  i.  10). 
This  time  seems  to  have  been  determined  by  the  stage  arrived  at  in  history  when 
man's  utter  helplessness  was  fully  demonstrated.  Many  centuries  were  allowed  for 
the  world  to  e^aust  every  device,  to  accomplish  its  own  moral  renovation.  War 
and  peace  had  been  tried,  together  with  every  possible  form  of  civil  government. 
Philosophy  and  science,  civilisation  and  religion,  literature  and  art,  had  been 
carried  suflBciently  far  to  prove  how  utterly  powerless  they  all  were  to  accomplish 
the  end  designed.  It  was  impossible  for  any  one  to  say.  If  He  had  waited  a  little 
longer,  we  should  have  found  out  some  other  plan,  and  been  able  to  do  without 
Him.  How  this  enhances  our  conception  of  God's  love  !  He  patiently  tarried  to 
■ee  what  mankind  could  achieve  for  themselves ;  and  He  beheld  them  at  length 


866  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha»,  t. 

entirely  helpless,  hopeless  of  self-restoration,  and  calloasly  indifferent  to  the  inter- 

Eosition  of  Heaven.  Then  it  was  that  God  sent  His  Son  to  die  for  the  ungodly. 
[.  OuB  HOPS  IN  God.  Look  at — 1.  The  salvation  of  which  we  are  so  sure.  It  la 
a  salvation  from  wrath ;  and  it  is  a  salvation  to  heaven  (ver.  9).  2.  The  grounds 
of  this  confidence.  The  apostle  argues  from  the  greater  difficulty  to  the  less. 
For — (1)  We  were  reconciled  when  enemies ;  how  much  more,  being  now  the 
friends  of  God,  shall  we  enjoy  the  full  blessings  of  His  grace?  (2)  We  were  saved 
from  guilt  by  His  death  ;  how  much  more  shall  we  be  sanctified  and  prepared  for 
heaven  by  Him  living  for  us.  III.  Our  globyinq  in  God.  If  such  be  our 
apprehension  of  God's  love  to  us,  and  such  the  confidence  of  our  hope  and  trust 
in  Him  for  the  future,  it  is  not  hard  to  see  how  we  must  "joy,"  or  rather  make 
our  boast  in  Him  through  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  this  blessedness  of  reconciliation 
with  God  has  been  secured.  Think  of — 1.  The  greatness  of  our  heavenly  Friend. 
In  nature  how  noble  I  In  attributes  how  august  1  2.  His  goodness.  Many  rejoice 
in  the  friendship  of  the  great  and  powerful,  while  they  cannot  boast  of  the 
goodness  and  integrity  of  their  patrons.  But  here  it  is  permitted  us  to  glory  in 
the  perfect  rectitude  and  moral  loveliness  of  Him  in  whose  name  we  make  our 
boast.  3.  His  riches.  We  might  have  a  kind  and  good  friend,  whose  ability  to  help 
us  might  fall  far  short  of  his  disposition.  But  it  is  not  so  with  God.  4.  His  love. 
The  great  ones  of  the  earth  bestow  their  friendship  on  inferiors  in  a  cold  and  meagre 
manner.  But  God  gives  us  and  shows  us  all  His  heart.  6.  His  purposes  concern- 
ing us.  It  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  value  of  the  good  things  which  He  hath 
prepared  for  them  that  love  Him.  Conclusion :  1.  How  happy  should  believers  be, 
rejoicing,  as  they  are  privileged  to  do,  "with  a  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  2. 
How  humble,  when  they  remember  their  unworthiness,  and  their  inability  to  render 
back  any  sufficient  return  to  God.  3.  How  holy  and  diligent  in  their  endeavour  to 
walk  worthily  of  so  high  a  calling,  and  so  great  a  Fnend.  4.  How  thankful,  when 
they  consider  what  they  owe  unto  God.  6.  How  ready  to  praise  Him  for  all  Hia 
goodness  toward  them.  6.  How  willing  to  trust  Him  with  all  the  issues  of  their 
salvation  in  the  time  to  come.  The  certainty  of  the  believer's  final  redemption  : — 
The  apostle  establishes  this  point  by  means  of  two  reasons — I.  The  obeat  IiOTK 
WHICH  God  has  already  bestowed  on  man.  This  is  seen  in — 1.  The  unworthiness 
of  the  object.  (1)  "  Without  strength."  In  this  expression  the  apostle  is  probably 
accommodating  himself  to  the  natural  disposition  of  the  Bomans.  Home  was  a 
mighty  empire,  and  its  motto  was  "  power."  Their  highest  notion  of  goodness,  as 
the  word  "  virtue  "  indicates,  was  strength.  Hence  Paul  represents  the  gospel  as 
"  the  power  of  God."  Nothing  was  so  detestable  in  their  eyes  as  weakness.  And  what 
a  helpless  man  was  in  the  estimation  of  the  Eoman,  that — universal  man — was  in 
the  sight  of  God.  There  was  nothing  to  evoke  the  Divine  complacency,  but  every- 
thing to  repel.  (2)  "  Ungodly."  There  was  not  only  the  destitution  of  what  was 
holy,  but  also  the  absence  of  desire  for  any  good.  (3)  ♦'  Sinners."  When  God  is 
banished  from  the  thought,  as  suggested  by  the  word  *'  ungodly,"  His  place  is 
usurped  by  unworthy  rivals.  The  higher  principles  of  the  soul  are  made  subordinate 
to  the  lower.  Disorder  prevails  ;  and  to  God,  who  in  the  beginning  commanded 
the  chaotic  earth  to  wear  its  present  aspect  of  beauty,  nothing  could  be  more 
repelling  than  the  huge  disorder  reigning  in  the  human  soul  bent  on  fulfilling  the 
desires  of  the  flesh.  (4)  "  Enemies."  Here  the  apostle  reaches  the  cKmax  of  his 
reasoning.  All  the  unworthiness  of  man  must  be  attributed  to  his  enmity  against 
God.  In  this  man  is  a  sad  exception  to  everything  else  which  God  has  made.  In 
nature,  God's  will  and  power  are  coextensive.  But  man  disobeys  and  resists  his 
Maker.  The  very  power  which  was  given  him  to  hate  sin  is  so  perverted  that  it  is 
used  against  God  Himself.  2.  The  greatness  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  With  reverence 
we  would  say,  that  to  redeem  man  was  not  easy  even  to  God.  It  required  an 
infinite  sacrifice  to  remove  the  curse  connected  with  sin.  And  for  this  purpose 
♦•God  spared  not  His  own  Son."  Now,  if  God  bestowed  such  an  incomparable 
love  upon  man  when  he  was  "  without  strength,"  "  ungodly,"  sinful,  and  inimical 
towards  Him,  surely  He  will  not  withhold  any  blessing  from  man  when  he  is 
reconciled  to  Him,  and  adopted  to  His  family  again.    II,  What  Chbist's  lifb  m 

HEAVEN    is    doing,     CONTRASTED    WITH  WHAT     HiS    DEATH     HAS    DONE.       1.   HoweVCr 

important  we  may  regard  the  death  of  our  Lord,  we  must  not  consider  Hia  life  in 
heaven  of  secondary  moment.  Apart  from  this  life  His  death  would  not  avail  us. 
But  the  apostle  asserts  that  the  death  of  Christ  effected  our  reconciliation  to  God. 
And  shall  we  doubt  the  power  of  His  life  ?  Nay ;  the  good  work  which  He  hath 
Itegan  on  our  behalf  will  be  fully  consummated.    2.  Besides,  the  nature  of  Christ's 


CHiF.  T.]  ROMANS.  Mr 

work  in  heaven  is  a  pledge  for  the  final  safety  of  the  believer.  "  He  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  as."  His  intercession  is  the  completion  of  His  sacrifice,  and 
perpetuates  the  efficacy  of  His  atonement.  {H.  Hughes.)  Christ's  vicarious 
death  : — One  of  the  most  hopeless  cases  ever  brought  into  the  Moyamensing  Prison 
in  Philadelphia,  U.S.,  was  a  negress,  who  was  convicted  of  a  crime  of  violence. 
She  was  a  huge,  fierce  animal,  who  had  been  born  and  had  lived  in  the  slums  of 
Alaska  Street.  She  was  a  drunkard  and  dissolute  from  childhood.  The  chaplain, 
after  she  had  been  under  his  charge  for  six  months,  shook  his  head  hopelessly  and 
passed  by  her  ceU  without  a  word.  One  day  the  matron,  taking  a  bunch  of  scarlet 
flowers  from  her  hat,  threw  them  to  "  Deb  "  carelessly,  with  a  pleasant  word  or 
two.  The  woman  started  in  astonishment,  and  then  thanked  her  earnestly.  The 
next  day  the  matron  saw  the  flowers,  each  leaf  straightened  and  smoothed,  pinned 
ap  on  the  wall  of  the  cell.  Deb,  in  a  gentle  voice,  called  attention  to  them,  praised 
their  beauty,  and  tried,  in  her  clumsy  way,  to  show  the  pleasure  they  had  given 
her.  "  That  woman,"  said  the  matron  to  the  chaplain,  "has  the  rarest  of  all  good 
qualities.  She  is  grateful.  There  is  one  square  inch  of  good  ground  in  which  to 
plant  your  seed."  The  matron  herself  planted  the  seed.  Every  day  she  showed 
some  little  kindness  to  the  poor,  untamed  creature,  who  was  gradually  softened  and 
sabdaed  simply  by  affection  for  this,  her  first  friend,  whom  she  followed  like  a 
fauthful  dog.  By  and  by,  the  matron  took  ber  as  a  helper  in  the  ward,  a  favour 
given  only  to  the  convicts  whose  conduct  deserved  reward.  The  matron's  hold 
upon  the  woman  grew  stronger  each  day.  At  last  she  told  her  the  story  of  the 
Saviour's  love  and  sacrifice.  Deb  listened  with  wide,  eager  eyes.  "He  died  for 
me — me ! "  she  said.  The  matron  gave  up  her  position,  but  when  Deb  was 
discharged  she  took  her  into  her  house  as  a  servant,  trained,  taught  her,  cared  for 
her  body  and  soul,  always  planting  her  seeds  in  that  "  one  inch  of  good  ground." 
Deb  is  now  a  humble  Christian.  "  He  died  for  me,"  was  the  thought  which 
lightened  her  darkened  soul.     (American  Youth's  Companion.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  For  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  one  die  .  .  .  but  God  com- 
mendeth  His  love. — Human  and  Divine  love  contrasted : — I.  The  love  of  man  to 
BIS  FKLLow-cKEATDRES  (vcr.  7).  You  may  find  in  history  generosity  and  gratitude 
manifested  by  the  greatest  of  all  sacrifices — that  of  life.  But  such  instances  are 
rare.  We  read  of  dangers  encountered,  sufferings  endured,  for  the  purpose  of 
rescuing  others  from  destruction ;  but  seldom  of  devotion  to  death,  in  order  to 
deliver  a  fellow-mortal  from  the  heaviest  calamity,  or  to  procure  for  him  the  most 
precious  privilege.  When  such  an  instance  has  occurred  it  has  been  uniformily  a 
tribute  paid  to  distinguished  excellence,  or  an  acknowledgment  of  obligations  too 
strong  and  sacred  to  be  fulfilled  by  a  less  noble  or  costly  recompense.  1.  Suppose 
an  individual  distinguished  for  honour  and  integrity,  who  had  exerted  himself  on 
all  occasions  to  maintain  the  rights,  and  redress  the  wrongs  of  others,  whose 
righteous  deportment,  fidelity,  and  defence  of  truth  had  rendered  him  the  object  of 
profound  sknd  universal  veneration;  suppose  that  such  a  person,  by  the  decree 
of  despotism,  were  doomed  to  expiate  an  imaginary  crime  on  an  ignominious 
scaffold,  would  you  step  forward  to  save  his  life  by  the  sacrifice  of  your  own?  No ; 
nor  can  we  imagine  any  one  doing  it.  2.  But,  supposing  that  to  righteousness  we 
add  benevolence — all  that  is  melting  in  tenderness,  winning  in  compassion,  god-Uke 
in  beneficence,  would  there  be  any  among  those  to  whom  such  characters  are 
dearest,  or  any,  even  of  those  who  had  shared  his  kindness,  that  would  agree  to  be 
his  substitute  ?  Yes  ;  you  may  conceive  such  cases  to  occur.  Still,  however,  the 
apostle  speaks  correctly ;  it  is  only  "  some  "  who  would  thus  die  for  a  good  man — 
that,  even  for  this  act  of  chivalry  "daring"  would  be  required — and  that  after  all, 
the  fact  must  be  qualified  with  a  "  peradventure. "  To  the  statement  of  the  apostle 
we  may  add  that  of  our  Lord,  that  "  greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a 
man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends."  This  is  the  utmost  limit  to  which  human 
affection  can  go.  And  this  may  be  still  more  readily  admitted,  if  we  consider 
fiiendship  as  comprehending  those  relationships  which,  binding  husband  and  wife, 
parent  ani  child,  brother  and  sister,  by  a  thousand  endearments,  instinctively 
prompt  to  efforts  and  endurances,  from  whose  ample  range  even  the  terrors  of 
death  are  not  excluded.  3.  But  supposing  a  person  iniquitous  and  hostile, 
condemned  to  die  for  his  iniquity  and  rebellion,  and  under  his  sentence,  cherislied 
as  bitter  an  enmity  against  his  benefactor  as  he  had  ever  done  before,  would  that 
benefactor  consent  to  suffer  his  judicial  fate,  in  order  to  send  him  back  again  ta 
the  life  and  liberty  he  had  so  justly  forfeited  /    Ah !  no  ;  that  is  a  height  of  love 


309  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

which  hnmanity  has  never  reached,  and  of  which  hamanity  is  utterly  incapable. 
And  were  it  ever  to  occur,  we  should  be  compelled  to  rank  it  amoBgst  the  greatest 
miracles.  II.  The  iajve  of  God  to  man  is  illustrated  by  two  circumstances.  L 
"  Christ  died  for  us."  The  apostle  could  not  speak  of  God  dying  for  us,  for  death 
cannot  possibly  be  predicted  of  Him  who  "alone  hath  immortality."  We  must 
remember,  therefore,  who  Christ  was,  as  well  as  what  He  did.  But  in  viewing  His 
death  as  a  manifestation  of  Divine  love,  we  must  recollect  the  connection  which 
God  had  with  it.  The  scheme,  of  which  it  formed  the  leading  feature  and  the 
essential  principle,  was  altogether  of  His  appointment  (John  iii.  16).  And  while 
God  was  thus  so  gracious,  it  becomes  us  to  think  of  the  relation  in  which  Christ 
stood  to  Him.  Christ  was  not  the  creature,  nor  the  mere  servant  of  God,  but 
•'  His  only  begotten  and  well  beloved  Son,  the  brightness  of  His  glory,  and  the 
express  image  of  His  person."  Yet  God  did  '*  not  spare  Him."  2.  But  the 
principal  evidence  of  God's  love  is  that  Christ  died  for  us,  "  while  we  were  yet 
sinners."  Had  man  been  such  as  that  the  eye  of  God  could  have  looked  on  him 
with  complacency,  or  having  fallen,  had  the  feelings  of  penitence  pervaded  his 
heart,  and  made  him  willing  to  return,  we  should  not  have  been  amazed  at  God's 
condescending  love.  But  the  marvel  lies  in  this,  that  there  was  no  good  whatever 
to  attract  the  regards  of  a  holy  being,  and  to  invite  a  willing  interposition  of  His 
benevolence.  On  the  contrary,  there  was  worthlessness  and  guilt  to  such  a  degree 
as  to  provoke  a  just  indignation,  to  warrant  an  utter  exclusion  from  happiness  and 
hope.  We  were  ' '  yet  sinners  "  when  Christ  died  for  us.  There  are  resources  in 
the  eternal  mind  which  are  equally  beyond  our  reach  and  our  comprehension. 
There  is  a  power,  a  magnitude,  and  a  richness  in  the  love  of  God  towards  those 
upon  whom  it  is  set  which,  to  the  experience  of  the  creature,  presents  a  theme 
of  wondering  gratitude  and  praise.  Man  loves  his  fellows ;  but  he  never  did, 
and  never  can  love  them  like  God.  Had  He  only  loved  us  as  man  loves, 
there  would  have  been  no  salvation,  no  heaven,  no  glad  tidings  to  cheer  our 
hearts.  But  behold !  God  is  love  itself.  Guilt,  which  forbids  and  represses 
man's  love,  awakens,  and  kindles,  and  secures  God's.  Death  for  the  guilty  is 
too  wide  a  gulf  for  man's  love  to  pass  over.  God's  love  to  the  guilty  is  infinitely 
"stronger  than  death."  God  forgives,  where  man  would  condemn  and  punish. 
God  saves,  where  man  would  destroy.  "My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts, 
neither  are  your  ways  My  ways."  "Herein  is  love,"  &c.  (A.  Thomson,  D.D.) 
Christ  and  the  martyrs : — It  was  a  principle  in  the  breast  of  every  Eoman  that  he 
owed  his  life  to  his  country.  This  being  the  spirit  of  the  people,  gave  birth  to 
many  illustrious  and  heroic  actions.  The  spirit  of  patriotism  glowed  among  the 
people  for  many  ages  of  the  republic  ;  one  hf ro  sprung  from  the  ashes  of  another, 
and  great  men  arose  from  age  to  age  who  devoted  themselves  to  death  for  the 
public  good.  These  being  the  most  celebrated  actions  in  the  history  of  mankind,  the 
apostle  here  compares  them  with  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  I.  Those  who  devoted 
themselves  to  death  for  their  friends  or  their  country,  submitted  to  a  fate  which 
THEY  MUST  ONE  DAT  HAVE  SUFFERED ;  but  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  true  God,  and 
possESSETH  ETERNAL  LIFE,  Submitted  to  death  for  our  redemption.  II.  Those  among 
the  sons  of  men  who  devoted  themselves  to  death  for  the  good  of  others,  made  thh 
SACRIFICE  FOR  THEIR  FRIENDS,  for  those  by  whom  they  were  beloved  ;  but  Jesus  died 
FOB  His  enemies.  III.  He  who  dies  a  martyr  for  the  public  good,  departs  with 
honour;  but  Jesus  made  His  departure  with  ionomint  and  shame.  (J.  Logan.) 
The  love  of  God  the  motive  to  man's  salvation : — I.  The  supreme  dignity  of  Him 

WHO  UNDERTOOK  THE  WORK  OF  OUR  SALVATION.  II.  ThE  STATE  OP  HUMILIATION  TO 
WHICH  He  consented  TO  BE  DEGRADED  IN  ORDER  TO  ACCOMPLISH  OUB  REDEMPTION. 
III.    The  RELATION  BORNE   TO  HiM   BY   THOSE    FOR   WHOM  THIS   AMAZING  TESTIMONY   0» 

LoviNOKiNDNESs  WAS  ENTERPEisED  AND  PERFECTED.  luasmuch  as  we  are  by  nature 
sinners,  we  are  also  by  nature  enemies  of  God.  If  it  be  the  act  of  an  enemy  to 
slight,  resist,  and  renounce  the  authority  of  our  lawful  sovereign ;  if  it  be  the  act 
of  an  enemy  to  range  ourselves  under  the  banners  of  a  potentate  in  open  hostility 
to  our  own ;  we  who  are  "  by  nature  the  children  of  disobedience,"  in  subjection  to 
"the  powers  of  darkness,"  "  alienated  from  the  hfe  of  God,"  and  the  ministers  and 
slaves  of  sin,  are  by  an  obvious  inference  the  natural  enemies  of  God.  And  standing 
in  this  relation  to  God,  as  rebels,  it  evidently  appears  how  inefficacious  anything 
in  us  could  have  been  towards  meriting  our  redemption  and  influencing  Him  to 
redeem  us.  There  was  in  us,  indeed,  that  which  well  deserved  the  wrath  of  God, 
and  might  well  have  left  us  exposed  to  the  severity  of  His  displeasure.  Conclusion: 
1.  The  contemplation  of  this  surprising  love  of  God  towards  us  ought  to  warm  and 


CHAP.  T.]  ROMANS.  169 


expand  our  hearts  and  fill  them  with  the  most  earnest  leva  towards  Him  in  retarn, 
and  with  the  most  zealous  determination  to  obey  Him.  2.  The  contemplation  of 
the  love  of  God,  as  having  already  interposed  to  save  us  by  the  sending  of  His  Son, 
ehould  fill  us  with  a  devout  confidence  in  Him ;  persuaded  that  He  who  has 
conferred  upon  us  of  His  free  grace  the  greatest  of  all  blessings  will  not  withhold 
from  us  others  which  He  may  know  to  be  for  our  good.  3.  A  third  inference  to  be 
drawn  from  a  contemplation  of  the  love  of  God  exemplified  in  the  work  of  our 
Balvation,  is  a  further  "  confidence  "  that  He  will  not  leave  it  imperfect ;  but  that 
if  we  love  Him  and  keep  His  commandments,  "  He  which  hath  beguu  a  good  work 
in  US  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."  4.  The  contemplation  of  the 
love  of  God  employed  for  our  redemption,  and  the  persuasion  that  our  salvation  is 
"  the  gift  of  God,"  connected  with  the  belief  that  "  we  all  had  sinned  and  come 
short  of  His  glory,"  (fee.  5.  But,  then,  whilst  we  renounce  all  hopes  of  salvation  as 
merited  by  our  works,  we  must  be  cautious  not  to  disregard  them  as  if  they  were 
not  necessary  to  our  salvation,  (Bp.  Mant.)  Unparalleled  love  : — The  grand 
doctrine  of  the  Bible  is  that  God  loves  apostate  man.  Nowliere  else  do  we 
learn  this.  Nature  teaches  that  God  loves  His  creatures,  but  the  volume 
of  nature  was  written  before  the  Fall,  and  it  says  nothing  as  to  His  affection 
towards  man  as  a  sinner.  In  every  conceivable  form  the  Bible  impresses  us 
with  the  fact  that  God  loves  man  though  a  sinner.      Note — I.   That  man  has, 

C0N8TITUTI0NAI,LT,    A   KIND   AFFECTION    TOR   HIS    SPECIES.         The     apOStlc    iS     Speaking 

here  of  men  generally,  and  he  says  that  in  some  cases  the  generous  instincts  of 
human  nature  would  prompt  to  the  utmost  self-sacrifice.  That  man  has  this  social 
kindness  I  maintain  in  the  face  of  all  the  oppression  and  cruelty  that  make  up 
a  large  portion  of  history.  Notwithstanding  the  Pharaohs,  Herods,  Neros, 
Napoleons,  there  is  a  spring  of  kindness  in  human  nature.  1.  The  tendency 
of  sin  is  to  destroy  this  element.  Had  sin  not  entered  into  the  world,  this  element 
would  have  united  all  races  in  the  bonds  of  a  loving  brotherhood.  2.  The  tendency 
of  Christianity  is  to  develop  this  element.  Christianity  recognises  it,  appeals  to  it, 
btrengthens  it.  Blessed  be  God,  bad  as  the  world  is,  there  is  a  fountain  of  love  in 
its  heart.  II.  That  some  chabacters  have  a  greater  power  to  excite  this 
AFFECTION  THAN  OTHERS.  1.  The  righteous  man  is  not  likely  to  excite  it.  "  Scarcely." 
Who  is  a  righteous  man  ?  He  is  one  who  conforms  rigorously  to  the  outward  forms 
of  morality :  he  pays  all  that  is  demanded  of  him,  and  he  will  be  paid  to  the  utmost 
fraction  of  his  due.  He  is  what  the  cold  mercantile  world  would  call  a  "  respectable  " 
man.  He  has  no  generous  impulses,  no  heart,  and  therefore  cannot  awaken  love 
in  others.  The  just  man  is  not  a  very  popular  character.  2.  The  ••  good  "  man  has 
power  to  excite  it — the  kind  man — the  man  of  warm  sympathies,  who  can  weep  with 
those  who  weep.  Such  a  man  evokes  the  sympathies  of  others.  He  has  often  done 
80.  Job  opening,  by  his  kindness,  the  heart  of  his  age ;  Pythias  enduring  the 
punishment  for  Damon ;  and  Jonathan  and  David,  are  cases  in  point.    III.  That 

THE  SACRIFICE  OF  LIFE   IS   THE   HIOHEST   EXPRESSION  OF  AFFECTION.      There  is  nothing 

man  values  so  much  as  hfe.  Friends,  property,  health,  reputation,  all  are  held 
cheap  in  comparison  with  life.  To  give  life,  therefore,  is  to  give  that  which  he 
feels  to  be  of  all  the  dearest  things  most  dear.  A  man  may  express  his  affection 
by  language,  toil,  gifts,  but  such  expressions  are  weak  compared  with  the  sacrifice 
of  life,  which  demonstrates  powerfully  both  the  intensity  and  the  sincerity  of  that 
affection.  IV.  That  Christ's  death  is  the  mightiest  demonstration  of  affection. 
This  will  appear  if  you  consider — 1.  The  characters  for  whom  He  died — "sinners." 
2.  The  circumstances  under  which  He  died.  Not  amid  the  gratitude  of  those  He 
loved,  but  amid  their  imprecations.  3.  The  freedom  with  which  He  died.  He  was 
not  compelled.  4.  The  preciousness  of  the  life  He  sacrificed.  Conclusion  :  Learn 
— 1.  The  moral  grandeur  of  Christianity.  There  is  no  such  manifestation  of  love 
in  the  universe.  2.  The  moral  power  of  Christianity.  The  motive  it  employs  to 
break  the  heart  of  the  world  is  this  wonderful  love.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Self- 
sacrificing  love  for  friends : — Damon  was  sentenced  to  die  on  a  certain  day,  and 
Bought  permission  of  Dioriysius  of  Syracuse  to  visit  his  family  in  the  interim.  It 
was  granted  on  condition  of  securing  a  hostage  for  himself.  Pythias  heard  of  it, 
and  volunteered  to  stand  in  his  friend's  place.  The  king  visited  him  in  prison,  and 
conversed  with  him  about  the  motive  of  his  conduct ;  affirming  his  disbelief  in  the 
influence  of  friendship.  Pythias  expressed  his  wish  to  die  that  his  friend's  honour 
might  be  vindicated.  He  prayed  the  gods  to  delay  the  return  of  Damon  till  aftor 
his  own  execution  in  his  stead.  The  fatal  day  arived.  Di:>nysius  sat  on  a  movinf; 
throne  drawn  hj  six  white  horses.  Pythias  mounted  the  scaSold,  and  aulmi; 
VOL.   I.  24 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmi.  ▼. 

addressed  the  spectators :  "  My  prayer  is  heard ;  the  gods  are  propitious,  for  the 
winds  have  been  contrary  till  yesterday.    Damon  could  not  come;  he  could  not 
conquer  impossibilities ;  he  will  be  here  to-morrow,  and  the  blood  which  is  shed 
to-day  shall  have  ransomed  the  life  of  my  friend.     Oh !  could  I  erase  from  your 
bosoms  every  mean  suspicion  of  the  honour  of  Damon,  I  should  go  to  my  death  as 
I  would  to  my  bridal.    My  friend  will  be  found  noble,  his  truth  unimpeachable  ;  he 
will  speedily  prove  it ;  he  is  now  on  his  way,  accusing  himself,  the  adverse  elements, 
and  the  gods ;  but  I  haste  to  prevent  his  speed.    Executioner,  do  your  office."    As 
he  closed,  a  voice  in  the  distance  cried,  '•  Stop  the  execution  I  "  which  was  repeated 
by  the  whole  assembly.    A  man  rode  up  at  full  speed,  mounted  the  scaffold,  and 
embraced  Pythias,  crying,  "  You  are  safe,  my  beloved  friend !     I  now  have  nothing 
but  death  to  suffer,  and  am  delivered  from  reproaches  for  having  endangered  a  life 
80  much  dearer  than  my  own."    Damon  replied,  "  Fatal  haste,  cruel  impatience  1 
What  envious  powers  have  wrought  impossibilities  in  your  favour  ?    But  I  will  not 
be  wholly  disappointed.     Since  I  cannot  die  to  save,  I  will  not  survive  you."    The 
king  heard,  and  was  moved  to  tears.    Ascending  the  scaffold,  he  cried,  "  Live,  live, 
ye  incomparable  pair  1     Ye  have  borne  unquestionable  testimony  to  the  existence 
of  virtue  ;  and  that  virtue  equally  evinces  the  existence  of  a  God  to  reward  it.  Live 
happy,  live  renowned,  and  oh  I  form  me  by  your  precepts,  as  ye  have  invited  me  by 
your  example,  to  be  worthy  of  the  participation  of  so  sacred  a  friendship."        Self- 
sacrificing  love  for  a  father : — While  Octavius  was  at  Samos,  after  the  battle  of 
Actium,  which  made  him  master  of  the  universe,  he  held  a  council  to  examine  the 
prisoners  who  had  been  engaged  in  Antony's  party.    Among  the  rest  there  was 
Drought  before  him  an  old  man,  Metellus,  oppressed  with  years  and  infirmities, 
disfigured  with  a  long  beard,  a  neglected  head  of  hair,  and  tattered  clothes.    The 
son  of  this  Metellus  was  one  of  the  judges  ;  but  it  was  with  great  difficulty  he  knew 
hie  father  in  the  deplorable  condition  in  which  he  saw  him.     At  last,  however, 
having  recollected  his  features,  instead  of  being  ashamed  to  own  him,  he  ran  to 
embrace  him.     Then  turning  towards  the  tribunal,  he  said,  "  Csesar,  my  father  has 
been  your  enemy,  and  I  your  officer  ;  he  deserved  to  be  punished,  and  I  to  be 
rewarded.    One  favour  I  desire  of  you  ;  it  is,  either  to  save  him  on  my  account,  or 
order  me  to  be  put  to  death  with  him."    All  the  judges  were  touched  with  com- 
passion at  this  affecting  scene;  Octavius  himself  relented,  and  granted  to  old 
Metellus  his  life  and  liberty.       Divine  love : — There  are  three  gradations  in  which 
the  love  of  God  is  here  exhibited — L  The  love  of  infinite  compassion.    Contem- 
plate— 1.  The  aspect  under  which  man  appeared  to  the  most  holy  God.    Paul  tells 
us  that  men  were — (1)  Sinners.   (2)  Ungodly,  t.«.,  living  without  God.   (3)  Enemies. 
(4)  Objects  of  the  Divine  wrath.     2.  The  aspect  under  which  the  blessed  God  ought 
to  be  viewed  by  sinful  man.     Shall  any  hard  thought  of  God  be  allowed  a  dwelling- 
place  in  your  hearts  ?    Will  you  call  in  question  His  clemency  ?    Is  it  possible  for 
you  to  imagine  that  He  takes  delight  in  the  death  of  a  sinner  t    "  Herein  is  love," 
<fec.     II.  The  love  displayed  in  the  exercise  of  that  mercy  mthich  secdbes  from 
THE  DANOEB  OF  FUTURE  CONDEMNATION  (vcr.  9).    Consider — 1.  The  extent  of  privilege 
actually  attained  by  every  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    He  is  justified  by  the 
blood  of  Christ — that  is,  God,  in  the  capacity  of  a  righteous  lawgiver  and  judge, 
pronounces  him  righteous.    2.  The  security  from  final  condemnation  arising  out  of 
the  state  already  attained.  *'  Much  more  ...  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through 
Him."    in.  The  love  dispiiAyed  in  complacency  toward  those  who  are  in  a  stats 
OF  reconciliation  (ver.  10).    The  life  of  Christ  in  heaven  secures  to  the  believer 
all  needful  resources  daring  his  progress  towards  the  enjoyment  of  consummated 
salvation  if  you  consider — 1.  That  His  presence  in  heaven  secures  His  continual 
and  prevailing  intercession  on  behalf  of  His  people.     2.  The  perpetual  communi- 
cations of  His  grace  as  secured  to  ua  by  His  hfe  in  glory.  "  All  things  are  delivered 
onto  Him  by  the  Father  " — that  is,  for  the  use  of  His  people.     "  It  hath  pleased 
the  Father  that  in  Him  shall  all  fulness  dwell " ;  therefore  it  pleased  the  Father 
that  from  His  fulness  should  every  needy  disciple  receive  an  abundant  supply ;  so 
that  of  His  fulness  we,  who  have  believed,  do  receive  even  grace  for  grace.    3. 
The   interposition  promised  and  pledged  for  the  coming  hour  of  our  greatest 
emergency.    The  death  and  the  Ufe  of  Christ  gives  to  the  believer  indeed  no 
pecurity  against  death,  but  full  security  in  death  and  after  death.  {H.  F.  Burder, 
D.D.)    Divinelove  for  sinner t: — We  infer — I.  That  God  has  love.   He  is  not  sheer 
inteUect :  He  has  a  heart,  and  that  heart  is  not  malign  but  benevolent.    He  has 
love,  not  merely  as  an  attribute,  but  in  essence.    Love  is  not  a  mere  element  In  Hi« 
oature ;  it  is  His  nature.    The  moral  code  by  which  He  governs  the  oniverse  is  bu% 


v.]  ROMANS.  »7l 

love  speaking  in  the  imperative  mood.  His  wrath  is  but  love  nprooting  and  con- 
suming  whatever  obstracts  the  happiness  of  His  creation.  U.  That  God  has  lova 
FOB  siNNEBS.  Then — 1.  This  is  not  a  love  that  is  revealed  in  nature.  It  is  exclu- 
eively  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible.  2.  This  is  not  the  love  of  moral  esteem.  The 
Holy  One  cannot  love  the  corrupt  character;  it  is  the  love  of  compassion — 
compassion  deep,  tender,  boundless.  III.  That  God's  love  for  sinners  is  demon- 
8TBATED  IN  THK  DEATH  OF  Christ.  This  demonstration  is — 1.  The  mightiest.  The 
strength  of  love  is  proved  by  the  sacrifice  it  makes.  "  God  gave  His  only  begotten 
Son."  2.  The  most  indispensable.  The  only  way  to  consume  enmity  is  to  carry 
conviction  that  he  whom  I  have  hated  loves  me.  This  conviction  will  turn  my 
enmity  into  love.  God  knows  the  human  soul,  knows  how  to  break  its  corrupt 
heart ;  hence  He  has  given  the  demonstration  of  His  love  in  the  death  of  Christ. 
{D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  God'$  unparalleled  love: — 1.  Sacrifice  is  the  true  test  of 
love.  2.  Life  is  the  greatest  sacrifice  man  can  make.  8.  Such  a  sacrifice  is 
possible,  but  exceedingly  rare.  4.  Supposes  strong  inducements.  5.  But  Christ 
died  for  His  enemies.  6.  He  thus  commends  the  love  of  God — because  He  is  God 
— and  is  the  gift  of  God.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  love  of  God  commended : — I.  By 
its  OBJECTS — without  strength  —ungodly — sinners — enemies.  II.  By  its  display — 
Christ  died — for  as.  HI.  By  its  purpose — our  justification — reconciliation  with 
God— final  salvation.  IV.  By  its  effect— joy  in  God.  (Ibid.)  Self-tacrijicing 
lot)0 : — That  young  sailor  who,  when  the  last  place  in  the  lifeboat  was  offered  him, 
drew  back,  saying,  "  Save  my  mate  here,  for  he  has  a  wife  and  children,"  and  went 
down  himself  with  the  sinking  ship;  that  brave  soldier  who,  in  the  moment  of 
deadly  peril,  threw  himself  in  front  of  bis  old  master's  son  and  fell  dead  with  a 
smile  upon  his  lips,  the  fatal  bullet  in  his  heart ;  that  poor  outcast  woman,  out  in 
the  wild  winter  night,  who  wrapped  her  baby  in  her  own  scanty  dress  and  shawl, 
and  patiently  lay  down  in  the  snow  to  die,  saving  her  child's  life  at  the  cost  of  her 
own ;  the  pilot  dying  at  his  post  on  the  burning  steamer ;  the  Russian  servant 
casting  himself  among  the  wolves  to  save  his  master ;  the  poor  child  dying  in  a 
New  York  garret  with  the  pathetic  words,  "  I'm  glad  I  am  going  to  die,  because  now 
my  brothers  and  sisters  will  have  enough  to  eat " — these,  and  hundreds  of  true 
hearts  like  these,  proclaim  with  the  clearness  of  a  voice  from  heaven,  *'  •  The  hand 
that  made  us  is  Divine ' ;  and  in  our  Father's  heart  are  higher  heights  of  love, 
deeper  depths  of  pity  and  self-sacrifice."  {Ellen  Wonnacott.)  Disinterested  friend- 
thip  : — Edwin,  one  of  the  best  and  greatest  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings,  flourished  in 
the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century.  He  was  in  imminent  danger  of  perishing  by 
the  hand  of  an  assassin,  who  had  gained  access  to  him  under  the  guise  of  an  ambas- 
sador. In  the  midst  of  his  address  the  villain  pulled  out  a  dagger  and  aimed  a  violent 
blow  at  the  king.  But  Edwin  was  preserved  from  danger  by  the  generous  and  heroic 
conduct  of  Tilla,  one  of  his  courtiers,  who  intercepted  the  blow  with  his  own  body, 
and  fell  down  dead  on  the  spot.  Thus  did  he  cheerfully  resign  his  own  life  to  preserve 
that  of  his  sovereign,  whom  he  loved.  But  this  instance  of  disinterested  friendship 
loses  all  its  charms,  and  sinks  into  insignificance  when  contrasted  with  the  love 
wherewith  Christ  hath  loved  us.  For  "  God  commendeth  His  love  to  us  in  that 
while  we  were  yet  sinners  Cbrist  died  for  us."  Nature  does  not  reveal  God's  love : — 
Nature  does  not  reveal  God's  love.  We  find  His  power  there,  andeviating  cause 
and  effect,  irresistible  force,  iron  law.  But  no  love.  The  ocean,  grand  as  it  is,  and 
beautiful  even,  will  crush  the  egg-shell  you  call  your  ship ;  the  hghtning  kills ;  the 
torrent  engulfs ;  the  beautiful  iwilight  air  chills  you ;  the  lovely  flower  conceals 
poison  under  its  gorgeous  petals ;  a  weak  spot  in  a  girder  of  iron  precipitates  a 
hundred  people  to  an  awful  death  ;  the  sun  strikes  with  deadly  sickness  ;  and  who 
can  stand  before  God's  cold  ?  Careless  or  ignorant  of  her  laws,  man  is  a  leaf  under- 
foot, or  a  bubble  on  the  wave.  You  may  search  ocean,  air,  and  desert ;  you  may 
traverse  the  whole  universe  of  matter,  and  know  all  the  secrets  of  science,  and  you 
can  find  no  Christ.  There  is  no  hint  of  mercy,  or  love,  or  pardon,  in  the  whole 
realm  of  nature.  God's  might  and  majesty  are  there  ;  but  the  "love  of  God  was 
manifested  in  this,  that  He  sent  His  Son  into  the  world  that  we  might  live  through 
Him."  The  love  of  God's  unspeakable  gift : — A  crew  of  explorers  penetrate  far 
within  the  Arctic  circles  in  search  of  other  expeditions  that  had  gone  before  them — 
gone  and  never  returned.  Failing  to  find  the  missing  men,  and  yet  unwilHng  to 
abandon  hope,  they  leave  supplies  of  food,  carefully  covered  with  stones,  on  some 
prominent  headlands,  with  the  necessary  intimations  graven  for  safety  on  plates  of 
brass.  If  the  original  adventurers  survive,  and,  on  their  homeward  journey,  faint 
yet  parsuing,  fall  in  with  these  treasures,  at  once  hidden  and  revealed,  the  food. 


872  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  t. 

when  fonnd,  will  seem  to  those  famished  men  the  smaller  blessing.  The  proof 
which  the  food  supplies  that  their  country  cares  for  them  is  sweeter  than  the  food. 
So  the  proof  that  God  cares  for  us  is  placed  beyond  a  doubt ;  the  "  unspeakable 
gift "  of  His  Son  to  be  our  Saviour  should  melt  any  dark  suspicion  to  the  contrary 
from  our  hearts.  ( W,  Arnot.)  The  love  of  God  commended  : — The  manifestations 
of  God's  love  are  many  and  various.  If  I  look  forth  upon  our  glorious  world  I  can- 
not but  feel  that  God  displays  His  love  in  the  dwelling-place  which  He  hath  given 
to  the  children  of  men.  If  I  contemplate  the  succession  of  seasons,  and  observe 
how  the  sunbeam  and  the  shower  unite  in  the  production  of  sustenance,  I  recognise 
love  in  the  workings  of  God's  providence.  Thus  also,  if  I  think  upon  man,  the 
creature  of  mighty  capacity,  but  of  mightier  destiny,  I  am  necessarily  conscious  that 
infinite  love  presided  originally  over  his  formation.  And,  if  I  yet  further  remember 
that  man,  whose  creation  bad  thus  been  dictated  by  love,  returned  despite  for 
benevolence,  I  might  marvel,  if  I  did  not  know  that  love  rose  superior  to  outrage, 
and,  in  place  of  forsaking  the  aUen,  suggested  redemption.    Note : — I.  How  Ghbist's 

8UFFEBINOS     WEBE    AOOBAVATED    BY    THE    SINFULNESS     OF    THOSE   AMONGST   WHOM   Hb 

BUFFEBED.  1.  He  posscsscd  infinite  perceptions  of  the  nature  of  sin.  He  saw  it 
without  any  of  the  varnish  which  it  draws  from  human  passion  or  sophistry  ;  and 
He  discerned  that  the  least  acting  of  impurity  struck  so  vehemently  against  the 
bosses  of  the  Almighty's  attributes,  that  it  rebounded  in  vengeance,  which  must 
eternally  crush  the  transgressor.  2.  Now  to  this  capacity  of  estimating  sin,  add — 
(1)  The  love  which  He  bore  to  the  Father.  It  would  have  accorded  well  with  the 
longings  of  His  heart,  that  He  should  succeed  in  bringing  back  the  earth  into 
obedience,  so  that  the  Almighty  might  draw  His  full  revenue  of  honour.  But 
when,  from  the  contradiction  of  sinners  against  Himself,  it  became  palpable  that 
generations  would  yet  do  despite  to  His  heavenly  Father,  this  must  inexpressibly 
have  lacerated  His  soul.  (2)  But  vast  also  was  His  love  to  mankind ;  and  here 
again  His  apprehensions  of  sin  come  into  the  account.  It  would  be  idle  to  enlarge 
on  the  greatness  of  that  benevolence  which  had  prompted  the  Mediator  to  under- 
take our  rescue.  The  simple  exhibition  of  Christ  appearing  as  the  surety  of 
mankind  remains  ever  the  overwhelming  and  immeasurable  prodigy.  Yet  when 
He  beheld  the  beings,  for  every  one  of  whom  He  was  content  to  endure  ignominy 
and  death,  pursuing  obstinately  the  courses  of  unrighteousness,  throwing  from 
them  the  proffered  boon  of  deliverance,  it  must  have  entered  like  a  poisoned  arrow 
into  His  pure  and  affectionate  heart,  and  lacerating  and  cauterising  wherever  it 
touched,  have  made  an  inlet  for  sorrow  where  there  never  could  be  found  admission 
for  sin.  3.  If  an  artist  study  to  set  forth  the  Christ's  sufferings,  he  has  recourse  to 
the  outward  paraphernalia  of  woe.  Yet  there  is  more  in  the  simple  expression  that 
Christ  died  for  us  '*  whilst  we  were  yet  sinners,"  than  in  all  that  the  crayon  ever 
produced,  when  the  genius  of  a  Raphael  guided  its  strokes.  We  look  in  at  the  soul 
of  the  Bedeemer — we  are  admitted  as  spectators  of  the  solemn  and  tremendous 
workings  of  His  spirit.  4.  We  attempt  not  to  examine  too  nicely  into  the  awful 
matter  of  the  Mediator's  sufferings,  suffice  it  that  there  is  not  one  amongst  us  who 
was  not  a  direct  contributor  to  that  weight  of  sorrow  which  seemed  for  a  time  to 
confound  Him  and  to  crush  Him.     II.  How  completely  these  suffebings  webb 

IBRESPECTIVB  OP  ALL  CLAIM  ON   THE   PABT   OP   THOSE   FOB  WHOM   THEY   WEBE   ENDDBED. 

In  the  commencement  of  His  dealings  with  our  race,  God  had  proceeded  according 
to  the  strictest  benevolence.  He  had  appointed  that  Adam  should  stand  as  a 
federal  head  or  representative  of  all  men ;  had  Adam  obeyed,  all  men  would  have 
obeyed  in  him — just  as  when  Adam  disobeyed,  all  men  disobeyed  in  him.  We  were 
not,  in  the  strictest  sense,  parties  to  this  transaction,  but  I  hold  that  if  we  had  had 
the  power  of  electing  we  should  have  elected  Adam,  and  that  there  would  have  been 
a  wisdom  in  such  procedure,  which  is  vainly  looked  for  in  any  other.  And  if  this 
appointment  cannot  be  arraigned,  then  it  must  be  idle  to  speak  of  any  claims  which 
the  fallen  have  upon  the  Creator  ;  and  whatsoever  is  done  on  their  behalf  must  be 
in  the  largest  sense  gratuitous.  If  the  arrangement  were  one  into  which  the  love 
which  prompted  the  creation  of  man  gathered  and  condensed  its  fulness,  and  its 
tenderness,  then  we  lay  it  down  that  the  compassions  of  the  Most  High  towards  our 
race  might  have  closed  themselves  up,  and,  nevertheless,  the  inscription,  "God  is 
love  "  would  have  been  graven  upon  our  archives,  and  the  lying  tongue  of  blasphemy 
alone  would  have  dared  to  throw  doubt  on  its  accuracy.  But  the  love  of  God  was 
B  love  which  could  not  be  content  with  having  just  done  enough — it  was  a  love 
which  must  commend  itself — which  must  triumph  over  everything  which  oonld 
guenoh  love.    We  were  Binners,  but,  nevertheless,  God  loved  as  in  our  degradation, 


CHA*.  T.]  ROMANS.  878 

in  our  ruin.  We  were  unworthy  the  least  mercy,  we  had  no  claim  to  it — the 
minutest  benefit,  we  had  no  right  to  it — but  God  commended  His  love  towards  us. 
{H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  love  of  God  commended  .-—Several  considerations  tend 
to  enhance  the  greatness  of  the  love  of  God  towards  us — I.  The  dignity  of  ihb 
Savioub.  He  was  no  other  than  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  coequal  with  the  Father, 
infinitely  endeared  to  Him  by  an  ineffable  union,  and  a  full  participation  in  all  the 
attributes  of  the  Divine  nature.  Hence  when  the  death  of  Christ  is  mentioned 
great  stress  is  laid  on  the  dignity  of  His  character,  as  that  which  gives  worth  and 
eflQcacy  to  His  sufferings  (Heb.  i.  3  ;  1  Pet.  i.  19 ;  1  John  i.  7).  II.  The  Divine 
AGENCY  EMPLOYED  IN  Chbist'b  DEATH.  God  did  uot  Spare  His  own  Son,  but  freely 
delivered  Him  up  as  a  victim  in  our  stead,  and  called  upon  justice  to  make  Him  a 
sacrifice  for  us.  Nor  was  the  Divine  agency  employed  merely  in  this  part  of  our 
Saviour's  sufferings  ;  it  was  also  engaged  in  their  actual  infliction.  Men  crucified 
His  body,  but  it  was  the  Lord  who  "made  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin  ";  or  it 
pleased  "  the  Lord  to  bruise  Him,  and  put  Him  to  grief  " ;  and  herein  is  expressed 
the  most  astonishing  wrath,  and  the  most  astonishing  love.  HI.  The  chabacteb 
OP  THOSE  FOB  WHOM  Chbist  DIED.  While  as  yet  no  change  was  wrought  in  us,  no 
good  performed  by  us ;  while  inveterate  enemies  to  God,  then  it  was  that  Christ 
died  for  us.  It  was  also  "  while  we  were  yet  without  stiength,"  either  to  do  the  will 
of  God,  or  to  deliver  ourselves  out  of  the  hands  of  infinite  justice.  The  patriot  diea 
for  his  country ;  but  Christ  died  for  His  enemies.  IV.  The  voluntary  natoee  of 
Chbist'b  bufferings.  His  death  was  fore-ordained,  and  He  had  received  a  com- 
mandment of  the  Father  that  He  should  lay  down  His  life  for  the  sheep ;  yet  He 
had  power  to  lay  down  His  life,  and  power  to  take  it  up  again,  and  no  one  could 
take  it  from  Him.     V.  If  wb  compare  this  manifestation  with  every  other  wb 

BHAI.L    HEBE    FIND    IT8    HIGHEST    COMMENDATION.       The    blcSSingS    of    PrOVideUCe    8X8 

incessant  and  iunamerable;  but  of  all  His  gifts,  none  is  to  be  compared  with  the 
gift  of  Christ.  This  is  the  unspeakable  gift.  VI.  The  constant  efficacy  of  the 
DEATH  OF  Christ  affords  additional  evidence  of  the  magnitude  of  the  gift,  and 
of  the  love  of  God  in  its  bestowment.  His  righteousness  for  ever  avails  for  our 
justification  ;  His  sacrifice  retains  its  cleansing  virtue  for  our  sanctification ;  and  in 
the  discharge  of  all  His  mediatorial  offices  He  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for 
ever.  Hence  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  by  Him, 
and  to  do  for  us  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think.  The 
gift  of  Christ  includes  every  other  gift ;  for  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but 
delivered  Him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all 
things.  Improvement :  1.  This  subject  affords  encouragement  to  serious  inquirers. 
The  gospel  is  the  reUgion  of  sinners,  the  only  one  that  can  afford  relief  to  the 
troubled  conscience.  2.  The  gospel,  notwithstanding,  affords  no  ground  of  hope 
or  encouragement  to  those  who  continue  to  live  in  sin.  Though  Christ  died  for 
Binners,  it  was  that  they  might  repent,  believe,  and  be  saved.  3.  To  all  true 
believers,  the  gospel  becomes  a  source  of  abundant  joy.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 
The  love  of  God  commended : — God's  manifestations  of  Himself  invariably  carry 
with  them  the  commendation  of  some  distinguishing  perfection.  He  is  manifested 
— 1.  In  the  universe,  and  "  the  heavens  declare  the  glory "  of  His  wisdom  and 
power.  2.  In  conscience,  which  commends  His  righteousness.  3.  In  the  Bible, 
which  commends  EUs  truth.  4.  In  history,  which  commends  His  sovereignty.  5. 
In  Christ,  who  by  His  life  and  death,  but  especially  in  the  latter,  commends  His 
love.  It  is  the  glory  of  Christianity  to  give  voice  to  this  commendation.  Other 
religions  profess  to  reveal  God  in  this  or  that  aspect  of  His  character,  but  none  as 
"love."  Note — I.  The  time  when  this  commendation  was  made  (ver.  6).  "In 
due  time."  The  time  was  most  appropriate.  No  other  period  would  have  done  so 
well.  This  will  be  seen  if  we  consider  that  then — 1.  The  world  most  needed  it. 
Bead  chap,  i.,  and  what  contemporary  writers  said  about  the  sinfulness,  misery,  and 
hopelessness  of  mankind.  2.  The  world  had  exhausted  all  its  resources  in  the  vain 
hope  of  working  out  its  own  salvation.  Philosophers  had  taught,  priests  had  sacri- 
ficed, governors  had  ruled  with  a  view  to  this ;  but  the  world's  wisdom,  religion,  and 
policy  had  all  failed.  3.  The  world  was  now  as  it  had  never  been  before  prepared 
for  the  wide  diffusion  of  this  commendation.  The  dispersion  of  the  Jews  who 
carried  their  Messianic  hopes  with  them  ;  the  conquests  of  Alexander  which 
disseminated  a  language  in  which  this  commendation  might  be  couched  ;  the 
universal  supremacy  of  Roman  power  and  civilisation,  which  provided  ample  means 
for  the  widespread  commendation  of  the  gospel,  combined  to  prepare  "  a  way  for 
the  Lord."     II.  Toe  persons  to  whom  it  was  made.     "  Sinners."     That  God 


874  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

Bhoald  commend  His  love  to  angels,  to  nnfallen  Adam,  or  to  conopicuons  saints, 
would  be  but  aatural,  and  that  that  love  in  a  general  way  should  be  displayed  in 
nature  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  for  the  fountain  of  love  must  overflow  ;  but  that 
God  should  commend  His  love  to  sinners  as  such  is  wonderful  indeed.  The  wonder 
heightens  as  we  follow  the  apostle's  analysis.  Men  were — 1.  Without  strength. 
Once  they  were  strong,  but  lured  by  the  devil  they  fell  from  the  breezy  heights  of 
righteousness,  and  were  maimed  and  paralysed  by  the  fall.  None  could  have  com- 
plained if  God  had  left  them  in  that  condition,  but  pitying  their  inability  to  rise  He 
"  laid  help  on  One  who  was  mighty,"  who  was  able  to  restore  them  to  moral  sound- 
ness and  a  righteous  status.  2.  Ungodly.  Men  had  severed  their  connection  with 
the  source  of  righteousness  and  bliss,  and  so  were  plunged  in  sin  and  misery.  God 
did  not  withdraw  from  man,  but  man  from  God.  No  blame  could  have  attached  to 
God  bad  He  made  the  separation  eternal.  But  He  commends  His  love  in  the  gift 
of  the  Mediator,  God-man,  who  could  lay  His  hand  on  both  and  bring  both 
together  again.  3.  Sinners.  Men  who  had  missed  the  mark.  "  Man's  chief  end 
is  to  glorify  God  and  enjoy  Him  for  ever."  Man's  blessedness  is  to  aim  at  this,  and 
in  reaching  it  to  find  his  true  rest.  But  men  failed  to  even  aim  at  this.  Their 
aspirations  were  after  inferior  objects,  and  they  missed  even  them.  So  the  earth  is 
strewn  with  moral  wrecks.  God  commendeth  His  love  in  that  He  gave  His  Son  to 
save  these  wrecks,  and  to  enable  man  to  aspire  after  and  to  reach  the  true  end  of 
life.  4.  Enemies.  In  one  sense  men  were  moral  failures  to  be  pitied  ;  in  another 
moral  antagonists  to  God  and  goodness,  hence  the  objects  of  God's  wrath.  But 
instead  of  commending  His  anger  He  commends  His  love  through  Christ,  who  saves 
from  wrath  and  reconciles  to  God.  HI.  The  manner  of  this  commendation.  1. 
"Christ  died."  God  commended  His  love,  indeed,  in  Christ's  incarnation,  life, 
teaching,  deeds,  example.  For  God  to  visit,  abide  in,  and  do  good  to  the  inhabitants 
of  His  revolted  province,  was  a  singular  display  of  affection.  Eeason  asks,  why  not 
come  with  legions  of  angels  to  destroy  ?  But  all  this  regard  would  have  fallen  short 
of  what  was  needed ;  so  love  was  displayed  in  an  unstinted  manner.  "  God  spared 
not  His  own  Son."  Spared  Him  nothing  that  was  necessary  to  save  a  lost  world  ; 
i.e.,  God  gave  all  He  could  to  commend  His  love.  The  riches  of  the  Divine  mercy 
were  practically  exhausted  on  the  Cross  (chap.  viii.  32).  2.  "For  us."  (1)  In  our 
room  and  stead.  He  bore  our  sins  with  their  curse  and  punishment  on  the  tree. 
(2)  For  our  benefit.  To  remove  our  condemnation  were  much ;  but  Christ's  death 
for  us  involves  much  more — justification,  sonship,  holiness,  heaven.  {J.  W.  Burn.) 
God's  love  commended : — I.  To  our  consideration.  II.  To  our  admiration.  III.  To 
our  ESTEEM.  IV.  To  our  GBATiTDDE.  V.  To  our  IMITATION.  (T.  EoMnson,  D.D.) 
The  love  of  God  commended  : — Some  years  ago  a  young  English  lady,  moving  in  the 
highest  circles  of  fashion  in  Paris,  happened  one  day  to  be  slightly  indisposed  and 
lying  upon  her  bed,  when  her  sisters  came  into  the  room  in  a  state  of  great  merri- 
ment, and  said  to  her,  "  There  is  a  mad  fellow  come  over  here  from  England — a 
revival  preacher.  They  say  it  is  the  greatest  joke  in  the  world ;  he  goes  ranting 
away  in  English,  and  one  of  the  French  pasteurs  does  his  best  to  interpret  what  he 
says  into  French.  All  the  world  is  going,  and  we  are  going  too,"  and  oft  they  went. 
They  had  no  sooner  gone  than  this  girl,  as  she  lay  in  her  bed,  felt  an  indescribable 
desire  to  hear  him  too.  She  rang  the  bell  for  her  maid,  and  said,  "  I  want  to  hear 
this  revival  preacher  ;  dress  me  and  order  a  carriage."  Her  servant  expostulated 
with  her  :  "  You  really  should  not  think  of  it,  ma'am  ;  I  am  sure  you  are  not  fit  to 
go."  But  she  would  not  be  put  off.  So  she  went,  and  was  shown  to  a  seat  in  front 
cf  the  platform,  and  there  sat  directly  in  front  of  the  preacher.  By  the  time  the 
hymn  was  sung  and  the  prayer  over  I  suppose  she  began  to  feel  somewhat 
solemnised.  Then  came  the  sermon,  and  the  preacher  stepped  right  to  the  front 
of  the  platform,  and  looked  her  full  in  the  face  with  a  keen,  searching  glance,  and 
said,  '•  Poor  sinner,  God  loves  you  1 "  "^  do  not  know  what  other  words  he  may 
have  spoken,"  she  afterwards  said.  "  I  dare  say  he  said  a  great  deal,  for  he 
preached  a  long  time  ;  but  all  I  know  is  that  I  sat  there  before  him  with  my  head 
buried  in  my  hands,  sobbing,  sobbing  as  if  my  heart  would  break.  My  whole  life 
passed  in  review  before  me.  I  thought  how  I  had  lost  it  and  wasted  it,  and  all  my 
life  had  turned  my  back  upon  God,  to  live  for  sin,  and  worldliness,  and  folly.  I  had 
spurned  His  entreaty  and  rejected  His  call ;  and  yet,  0  my  God,  is  it  true,  is  it  true, 
that  aU  the  while  Thou  hast  been  loving  me  ?  These  words  kept  re-echoing  over 
and  over  again  through  my  mind,  Poor  sinner,  God  loves  thee  I  I  do  not  know  how 
I  found  my  way  home.  The  next  thing  I  remember  is  that  I  was  lying  prostrate 
upon  my  face  before  God,  the  tears  still  streaming  from  my  eyes,  as  I  lifted  op  xay 


OBiP.  T.]  ROMANS.  VIS 

heart  to  Ood,  and  said,  '  It  is  trae,  it  is  trae.  Thou  hast  been  loving  me  all  the 
time,  and  now  Thy  love  hath  triumphed.  0  mighty  Love,  Thou  hast  won  my  poor 
heart  1  Great  God,  from  this  moment  forward  I  am  Thine.'"  {W.Hay  Aitken,M.A.) 
Love's  commendation : — God's  commendation  of  His  love  is  not  in  words,  but  in 
deeds.  "  Gcd  commendeth  His  love  not  in  an  eloquent  oration,"  but  by  an  act.  If 
thou  wouldst  commend  thyself  to  thy  fellows,  go  and  do — not  go  and  say  ;  and  if 
before  God  thou  wouldst  show  that  thy  faith  and  love  are  real,  remember,  it  is  no 
fawning  words,  uttered  either  in  prayer  or  praise,  but  it  is  the  pious  deed,  the  holy 
act,  which  is  the  justification  of  thy  faith.  Paul  gives  us  a  double  commendation 
of  God's  love.  I.  Christ  died  fob  ds.  Note — 1.  That  it  was  Christ  who  died. 
2.  That  Christ  died  for  us.  It  was  much  love  when  Christ  stripped  Himself  of  the 
glories  of  His  Godhead  to  become  an  infant  in  the  manger  of  Bethlehem ;  when  He 
lived  a  holy  and  a  suffering  life  for  us ;  when  He  gave  us  a  perfect  example  by  His 
spotless  life  ;  but  the  commendation  of  love  lieth  here — that  Christ  died  for  us. 
All  that  death  could  mean  Christ  endured.  Consider  the  circumstances  which 
attended  His  death.  It  was  no  common  death  ;  it  was  a  death  of  ignominy ;  it  was 
a  death  of  unutterable  pain  ;  it  was  a  long  protracted  death.  II.  Chuist  died  fob 
08  WHILE  WE  WERE  YET  siKNERs.  1.  Consider  what  sort  of  sinners  many  of  us  have 
been,  and  then  we  shall  see  the  marvellous  grace  of  Christ.  Consider — (1)  How 
many  of  us  have  been  continual  sinners.  Have  not  sinned  once,  but  ten  thousand 
times.  (2)  That  our  sins  were  aggravated.  When  you  sin  jou  do  not  sin  so  cheap 
as  others :  when  you  sm  against  the  convictions  of  your  consciences,  against  the 
warnings  of  your  friends,  against  the  enlightenment  of  the  times,  and  against  the 
solemn  monitions  of  your  pastors,  you  sin  more  grossly  than  others  do.  The 
Hottentot  sinneth  not  as  the  Briton  doth.  (3)  That  we  were  sinners  against  the 
very  Person  who  died  for  us.  If  a  man  should  be  injured  in  the  street,  if  a  punish- 
ment should  be  demanded  of  the  person  who  attacked  him,  it  would  be  passing 
strange  if  the  injured  man  should  for  love's  sake  bear  the  penalty,  that  the  other 
might  go  free ;  but  'twas  even  so  with  Christ.  (4)  That  we  were  sinners  who  for  a 
long  time  heard  this  good  news,  and  yet  despised  it.  2.  Inasmuch  as  Christ  died 
for  sinners,  it  is  a  special  commendation  of  His  love  for — (1)  God  did  not  consider 
man's  merit  when  Christ  died  ;  in  fact,  no  merit  could  have  deserved  the  death  of 
Jesus.  Though  we  had  been  holy  as  Adam,  we  could  never  have  deserved  a  sacrifice 
like  that  of  Jesus.  But  inasmuch  as  it  says,  "  He  died  for  sinners,"  we  are  thereby 
taught  that  God  considered  our  sin,  and  not  our  righteousness.  (2)  God  had  no  interest 
to  serve  by  sending  His  Son  to  die.  If  God  had  pleased.  He  might  have  crushed  this 
nest  of  rebels,  and  have  made  another  world  all  holy.  (3)  Christ  died  for  us  unasked. 
If  He  had  died  for  me  as  an  awakened  heir  of  heaven,  then  I  could  have  prayed  for 
Him  to  die;  but  Christ  died  for  me  when  I  had  no  power  nor  will  to  pray.  Where  did 
ye  ever  hear  that  man  was  first  in  mercy?  Nay,  rather,  it  is  the  other  way:  "Eeturn 
unto  Me,  backsliding  children,  and  I  will  have  mercy  upon  you."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Love  commended : — I.  How  shall  man  be  convinced  of  God's  love  towabds  him  ? 
1.  He  is  indisposed  to  believe  in  it,  and  is  disposed  to  doubt  it.  Many  do  not 
think  of  God's  love  at  all ;  and  others  cannot  bring  themselves  to  believe  that  it  is 
a  personal  affection.  But  all  are  exposed  to  the  fatal  influence  of  that  arch-deceiver 
who  poisons  our  mind  by  suggesting  that  God's  commands  are  grievous,  and  His 
government  unjust.  2.  Then  we  have  to  consider  the  nature  of  our  condition  down 
here.  God  has  been  pleased  to  put  us  into  a  world  where  we  do  not  see  Him ;  we 
are  not  in  a  position  to  enter  into  direct  communication  with  Him.  3.  Perhaps  it 
will  suggest  itself  that  God  has  only  to  reveal  Himself  to  us,  leaving  us  no  longer 
in  any  degree  of  uncertainty  about  His  relations  with  us.  But  in  order  to  make 
such  a  revelation  of  Himself,  God  would  first  of  all  have  to  contravene  the  funda- 
mental principles  of  His  government.  From  that  time  forth  we  should  be  walking 
by  sight,  no  longer  by  faith,  and  thus  our  probation  would  be  ended.  4.  But  it 
may  be  replied  that  we  see  that  God  loves  us  in  that  He  supplies  our  outward 
wants,  and  those  pleasures  which  make  life  tolerable.  This  at  first  sounds  plausible, 
but — (1)  These  effects  appear  to  come  to  us  in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature,  and  it 
is  only  natural  to  conclude  that,  ii  there  be  a  God  at  all,  His  laws  will  be  wise,  and 
such  as  to  render  the  condition  of  those  creatures  whom  He  has  called  into 
existence  not  wholly  intolerable.  If  God  were  to  create  beings  without  a  supply  for 
their  natural  wants,  it  would  be  such  an  exhibition  of  folly  as  would  cast  a  reflec- 
tion upon  His  own  character  and  glory.  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  circum- 
stances of  sorrow  which  sometimes  produce  an  opposite  impression.  5.  Perliaps  it 
maj  be  asked,  Is  it  necessary  that  man  should  be  couTinced  of  God's  love  'i    It 


«7ff  TEK  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  t. 

God  really  loves  him,  is  not  that  enongh  ?    By  no  means.    The  love  of  God,  if  it 
be  real  love,  should  have  a  certain  practical  effect.    Many  a  man  may  prate  abont 
the  value  of  love,  and  yet  be  a  total  stranger  to  anything  like  the  real  affection.    It 
is  necessary  that  God's  love  should  be  made  so  manifest  to  me  as  to  produce  in  me 
a  similar  moral  attitude  towards  Him.  True  love  always  yearns  for  reciprocity.  II. 
In  IBS  FULNESS  OP  TIME  GoD  GIVES  AN  ANswEB  TO  THIS  QUESTION ;  and  it  is  Buch  an 
answer  as  no  imagination  or  genius  of  man  could  ever  have  suggested.    It  might 
have  been  emblazoned  upon  the  starry  skies  so  that  all  might  read  it,  "  God  is 
love  !  "   These  wondrous  words  might  have  been  uttered  by  prophet  or  philosopher, 
wherever  they  went,  they  might  have  been  the  watchword  of  humanity,  the  battle- 
cry  of  man  in  his  conflict  with  all  the  powers  of  evil,  and  yet  I  apprehend  that  so 
Btrong  is  the  latent  suspicion  sown  in  the  heart  of  man  by  the  great  enemy,  that 
we  should  still  have  remained  indisposed  to  yield  it  full  credence.     God  is  not 
content  to  commit  this  truth  to  mere  testimony ;  it  is  true  St.  John  wrote  these 
words,  but  he  would  never  have  written  them  if  Christ  had  not  first  of  all  written 
them  in  His  own  life,  and  sealed  the  record  by  His  wondrous  death.    The  truth 
that  God  is  love  was  only  known  to  Him,  can  only  be  known  to  ns,  because  Christ 
has  demonstrated  it  in  His  own  person  upon  the  Cross.     1.  Here  is  God's  own  con- 
futation of  that  ancient  doubt  of  the  Divine  character  and  purpose,  sowed  by  the 
father  of  lies  in  the  human  heart.   It  is  no  longer  possible  that  God  can  be  careless 
of  our  well-being  or  indifferent  to  our  happiness,  when  to  secure  these  He  gave  His 
own  Son  to  die.     2.  By  this  we  are  able  to  form  some  conception  of  the  extent  and 
hitensity  of  God's  love.     So  far  as  it  can  be  measured,  the  Cross  of  Christ  is  the 
measure  of  the  love  of  God.    (1)  What  sacrifice  is  there  that  you  would  not 
willingly  make  for  the  benefit  of  your  fellow-man  rather  than  such  a  sacrifice  as  we 
have  here  ?    If  the  inhabitants  of  this  town  were  to  be  saved  by  some  act  of  heroic 
Belt-sacrifice  on  your  part,  what  is  there — you  that  are  a  mother — that  you  would 
not  propose  to  give  up  before  your  own  dearly -loved  child  ?  Yet  such  a  sacrifice  did 
God  willingly  make  for  us,  and  by  such  a  sacrifice  does  He  commend  His  love  to  us. 
(2)  But  even  this  is  not  all.    Why  should  God  require  a  satisfaction  before  He  lets 
His  goodness  take  its  course  ?    It  may  well  be  replied.  How  much  easier  would  it 
have  been  for  God  to  act  as  His  critics  would  have  desired  Him !    How  vast  a 
sacrifice  might  He  have  escaped,  what  sorrow  and  suffering  might  the  Son  of  His 
love  have  been  spared,  if  He  had  contented  Himself  with  the  exercise  of  His 
prerogative  of  mercy  !     Was  it  a  sign  of  greater  or  of  less  love  that  He  adopted  a 
more  costly  means  of  bringing  the  desired  result  about?    There  is  a  distinction 
between  love  and  mercy.    Mercy  may  be  exercised  without  love.     The  Queen  may 
extend  mercy  to  a  condemned  felon,  but  would  you  say  that  this  proved  her  love  for 
the  felon  ?  You  give  a  copper  to  a  beggar  and  thereby  show  mercy,  but  this  is  no  sign 
that  you  love  him,  perhaps  the  reverse.    But  if  you  put  yourself  to  much  trouble  in 
order  to  make  your  mercy  a  real  benefit,  you  are  showing  yourself  to  be  animated  by 
true  feelings  of  philanthropy.    Would  the  mere  exercise  of  mercy,  that  costs  God 
nothing,  have  impressed  my  mind  with  such  a  sense  of  Divine  love  as  does  the 
Cross  of  Calvary  ?     Here  I  see  that  love  has  provided  not  merely  for  my  pardon — 
mercy  might  have  done  that ;  but  for  my  regeneration — for  a  change  so  complete 
and  radical  as  to  constitute  me  a  new  creature.    (3)  But  even  this  is  not  all.     What 
if  it  should  be  found  that  in  one  sense  all  this  amazing  self-sacrifice  was  not 
absolutely  necessary  ?    Might  not  an  Almighty  God  have  guarded  against  any  such 
necessity,  by  modifying  the  conditions  of  human  existence,  and  placing  man,  as 
angels  would  seem  to  be  placed,  beyond  the  reach  of  temptation  ?    Probably ;  but 
by  so  doing  He  would  have  rendered  it  impossible  for  man  to  rise  to  that  special 
destiny  of  glory  which  is  to  be  his.    Was  man  to  lose  his  true  glory,  or  was  the 
Son  of  God  to  die  ?     (4)  But  we  shall  not  feel  the  f uU  force  of  these  considerations 
until  we  turn  from  the  race  to  the  individual.    He  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for 
me.    It  is  quite  true  that  God's  love  is  as  wide  as  the  world,  for  "  God  so  loved  the 
world  " ;  but  it  is  equally  true  that  it  is  as  narrow  as  the  individual.     What  art 
thou  that  He  should  love  thee  so?    How  hast  thou  dealt  with  Him?     (W.  Hay 
Aitken,  M.A.)        The  Cross,  the  witness  of  love : — 1.  A  right  knowledge  of  the  true 
God  hes  at  the  root  of  true  religion  (John  xvii.  3).    On  the  other  hand,  either 
belief  in  a  false  God,  or  a  false  view  of  the  true  God,  is  the  source  of  aU  super- 
stition.    Of  this  we  have  an  illustration  in  chap  i.  21-23.     Men  needed  a  new 
revelation  to  recall  them  from  the  worship  of  the  works  of  their  own  hands.     The 
tendency  to  invent  a  god,  where  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  is  blotted  out, 
reappears  under  a  modified  form  amongst  those  who  have  the  light  of  Divina 


OBir.  v.]  ROMANS.  87T 

revelation.  Haman  hopes  and  fears  have  led  the  intellect  into  two  opposite 
extremes  concerning  the  moral  character  of  God.  In  the  one  case,  God  is  regarded 
as  a  Being  whose  only  attribute  is  benevolence:  in  the  other,  God  is  invested  with 
the  character  of  implacability.  By  the  first,  the  sanctity  of  God  is  obscured ;  by 
the  second,  He  is  viewed  as  "  an  almighty  Tyrant,"  whom  it  must  be  our  only 
endeavour  to  propitiate.  2.  The  Cross  was  a  manifestation  to  meet  false  views  of 
God  as  to  His  sanctity  and  love.  Whilst  on  the  one  hand  it  was  the  measure  of  sin 
marking  God's  hatred  of  evil ;  on  the  other  it  was  the  witness  of  love.  It  harmonised 
Divine  mercy  and  justice — attributes  which  seemed  before  to  pursue  opposite 
roads.  Let  us  regard  the  Cross  as  witnessing  to — L  The  love  of  God.  Our 
happiness  depends  on  knowing  and  realising  this  Love.  There  are  three  ways  of 
contemplating  God.  1.  You  may  regard  Him  only  as  a  Being,  and  occupy  your 
thoughts  with  the  conditions  of  the  Divine  life — its  infinity,  immensity,  immuta- 
bihty,  and  eternity.  2.  You  may  dwell  on  His  absolute  perfections  without  respect 
to  creatures — His  power,  wisdom,  sanctity,  perfection,  form  an  august  object  of 
contemplation,  but  do  not  infiame  the  affections.  To  know  God  only  as  the  great 
"  I  Am  "  will  prevent  me  from  falling  down  to  an  idol ;  but  the  revelation  of  the 
bush  must  be  followed  by  that  of  Sinai,  and  that  of  Calvary  must  complete  both. 
3.  Concerning  God,  the  great  anxiety  is  to  know  His  relative  perfections.  The 
great  necessity  in  a  fallen  world  is  that  His  love  may  shine  in  upon  it,  and  that 
the  creatures  who  feared  His  holiness  may  be  convinced  of  His  benignity.  Love 
begets  love.  II.  The  pbe-existknt  love  op  God.  It  is  necessary  to  notice  this, 
because  language  is  sometimes  used  which  would  seem  to  imply  that  the  Cross  was 
creative  of  Divine  love.  But  the  conditions  and  perfections  of  the  Divine  life  are 
not  varying  moods  such  as  creatures  are  capable  of  feeling,  but  fixtures  (Mai.  iii.  6). 
For  God  to  view  the  human  race  with  wrath  until  Calvary,  with  love  after  Calvary — 
would  be  for  God  to  change.  For  God  to  love  once  is  for  God  to  love  always  ^Jer. 
xxxi.  3).  Ancientness  clothes  love  with  a  peculiar  tenderness.  Early  friendsnips 
and  associations  cling  to  us  in  after  life,  and  have  something  in  them  which  new 
ties  cannot  supply.  Love  is  heightened  by  the  thought  that  it  was  poured  upon  as 
when  we  were  unconscious,  and  entirely  dependent  upon  its  unrequited  lavishness. 
Oh,  wondrous  love  of  the  Parent  of  my  soul,  "  the  God  of  my  life,"  bending  over 
the  thought  of  my  being !  (Psa.  cxxxix.  16).  The  Cross  then  witnessed  to  this 
pre-existent  love.  It  revealed  it  anew  when  the  blight  upon  creation  and  the  heavy 
penalties  of  sin  had  darkened  human  life.  God's  thoughts  had  been  "thoughts  of 
peace  and  not  of  evil "  all  along,  but  they  needed  to  be  shown  in  acts. "  Angela 
needed  no  such  witness.  Creation  sufficed  when  the  first  estate  was  preserved.  But 
with  the  world  as  we  know  it — who  is  there  who  has  not  at  some  time  felt  the  need 
of  a  foundation  for  his  tottering  faith.  When  the  tempter  suggests  the  thought, 
"  whence  this  suffering  ?  is  thy  God  a  God  of  love  ?  "  there  is  but  one  vision  that 
can  sustain  the  soul — it  is  the  Cross  of  Christ,  for  that  Cross  dispels  all  doubt  as  to 
the  goodness  of  God.  III.  The  Father's  love.  All  are  accustomed  to  see  in  the 
Cross  the  love  of  our  blessc  d  Lord,  yet  many  fail  to  discover  the  Father's  love.  The 
secrecy  of  the  person  of  the  Father,  unbegotten  and  unsent,  may  tend  to  produce 
forgetfulness  of  the  first  spring  of  redeeming  love ;  and  cause  us  to  stop  short  at 
the  love  of  Jesus.  A  defect  in  recognising  love  is  a  little  evil  compared  with  the 
sin  of  substituting  anger  in  its  stead.  A  certain  system  of  theology  has  this  latter 
error  at  its  base :  it  portrays  the  Father  as  Wrath,  the  Son  as  Mercy ;  and  the  Son 
as  striving  to  appease  the  anger  of  the  enraged  and  implacable  Parent.  Hence 
"  the  love  of  the  Father  "  becomes  impossible.  The  question  is — how  is  the  First 
Person  of  the  Blessed  Trinity  described  in  reference  to  man's  salvation  ?  How  is 
He  portrayed  by  our  Lord  ?  "  Does  not  His  description  of  Him  correspond  with  His 
name — a  name  ever  associated  with  tender  love  ?  (Luke  vL  36 ;  Matt.  v.  44).  In 
the  parables  how  does  the  love  of  the  Father  Himself  shine  forth  in  the  patience  of 
the  honseholder  with  the  wicked  husbandmen ;  in  the  repeated  invitations  of  the 
king  who  made  a  marriage  for  his  son ;  in  the  yearnings  of  the  father  over  the 
returning  prodigal ;  in  the  mission  to  the  most  unworthy,  that  they  may  share  in 
the  blessings  of  the  gospel  I  Then  note  how  He  is  spoken  of  by  the  apostles  (2  Cor. 
i.  3;  Col.  i.  12;  1  Pet.  i.  3;  Bom.  xv.  5;  Eph.  i.  17;  1  John  iii,  1 ;  Titus  iii.  4). 
If  we  trace  redemption  to  its  source,  it  is  the  love  of  the  Father  which  is  reached 
through  the  Cross,  Of  Him  it  is  written,  that  He  "  so  loved  the  world  that  He 
gave  His  only  begotten  Son  "  to  save  it.  IV.  The  greatness  op  Divine  love.  Love 
is  estimated  by  sacrifice,  and  heightened  by  the  unworthiness  of  those  for  whom  the 
outlay  is  made.     Conclusion :  We  have  regarded  the  Cross  as  the  witness  of  tho 


tn  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (cHir.  T, 

love  of  Ood ;  let  as  see  now  what  should  be  the  effect  of  this  love  on  the  beholder. 
This  love  of  Go^  when  realised,  has  a  transforming  power  on  the  soul.    Love 
begets  love.    Love  drew  God  down  from  heaven  to  the  manger,  to  the  Cross ;  bnt 
it  also  draws  man  up  to  God  (Hosea  xi.  4).     {W.  H.  Hutchings,  M.A.)       The  Crons 
a  revelation : — There  have  been  many  momentous  events  in  history  which  have 
revolutionised  society,  and  opened  new  patns  of  effort.    But  the  death  of  Christ 
holds  a  unique  position,  and  has  an  importance  more  vital  to  the  well-being  of  the 
world  than  all  these  events  put  together.     Its  value  and  power  lie  in  the  appeal  it 
makes  to  the  higher  thoughts  of  men,  in  the  conception  of  life  it  sets  before  men, 
in  the  vision  it  gives  men  of  loftier  hopes,  purer  sources  of  satisfaction,  grander 
objects  of  ambition.    For  the  Cross  is  a  revelation  of  the  things  that  are  highest 
and  best  for  mankind.     It  reveals — L  The  piiAcs  we  have  in  the  heabt  of  Goo. 
There  are  times  when  we  feel  the  want  of  a  perfect  love.   The  heart  yearns  for  some- 
thing more  than  things — aches  for  another  heart  that  can  beat  in  unison  with  itself. 
Yes  ;  and  that  other  heart  must  not  be  limited  in  its  affection.    We  all  prize  human 
Icve,  but  we  spoil  our  enjoyment  of  it  by  exacting  more  than  it  can  give  us.    This 
is  the  immorttd  spirit  within  crying  out  for  God.  There  are  influences  abroad  which 
seem  to  baffle  this  deep  yearning.     The  discoveries  of  science  have  brought  to  view 
the  overwhelming  vastness  of  the  material  creation  ;  and  in  presence  of  it  all  we 
are  apt  to  be  overpowered  by  a  feeling  of  our  insignificance.     Our  little  lives  seem 
but  as  motes  dancing  in  the  sunbeam.    On  what  ground  can  we  hope  that  the 
infinite  Buler  of  all  will  have  towards  as  any  special  interest  or  affection  ?    The 
grand  corrective  to  this  is  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.    For  that  sacrifice  makes  as  feel 
that  we  are  not  so  insignificant  as  we  thought ;  there  is  an  Infinite  One  who  cares 
for  us,  and  in  the  Cross  is  the  measure  of  His  care.    There  is  one  heart  beating  for 
as  with  tireless  love,  and  that  is  the  heart  of  God.    II.  The  impobtance  God 
ATTACHES  TO  ouB  BEScuE  FBOM  SIM.  It  has  always  been  difficult  to  get  people's  minds 
rightly  aroused  to  the  danger  and  evil  of  sin.    Not  a  few  settle  themselves  down  to 
the  impression  that  evil  tendencies  are  inevitable,  and  must  be  submitted  to  in  the 
best  way  possible,  vrithout  being  allowed  too  much  to  disquiet  the  mind.    The 
shallowness  of  such  ideas  is  seen  in  the  light  which  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  flashes 
upon  them.    It  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  see  the  Great  Sufferer  without  being 
touched  with  a  sense  of  the  infinite  peril  of  all  things  evil.    The  Cross  was  the 
Divine  testimony  against  the  balefulness  of  sin.     But  more,   it  displayed  the 
solemn  fact  that  God  was  willing  to  make  great  sacrifice  to  win  men  from  sin.    It 
is  imposible  now  to  doubt  the  Divine  purpose  to  free  the  soul  from  the  thraldom  of 
evil.    III.  The  explanation  of  many  of  the  things  that  baffle  us  in  the  pbovi- 
DENCEs  OF  LIFE.    When  the  infirmities  of  our  character  bring  us  into  trouble,  when 
oar  selfishness  defeats  itself,  when  our  ambitious  successes  leave  us  unsatisfied  or 
load  us  with  heavier  cares,  it  is  God  seeking  to  wean  as  from  the  pride  that  con- 
stitutes the  bane  of  life.    He  is  striving  to  effect  this  grand  work  of  deliverance 
now.    For  the  Cross  makes  it  clear  that  God  wants  an  immediate  deliverance.    He 
knows — what  we  only  find  out  by  bitter  experience — that  every  wrong  thing  limits 
oar  capacity  for  present  enjoyment,  lowers  and  spoils  the  quality  of  our  enjoyment, 
and  breeds  more  evil.    He  therefore  seeks  to  win  men  from  sin  at  once,  that  the 
corruption  of  evil  may  not  have  time  or  opportunity  to  weave  itself  into  their 
nature,  and  so  poison  and  degrade  them  ere  they  enter  into  eternity.     Some  people 
imagine  that  they  shall  undergo  a  magical  transformation  the  moment  they  pass 
into  eternity.     If  any  one  is  to  begin  eternity  as  a  spiritual  prince,  he  must  have  the 
princely  elements  of  character  in  him  ere  he  closes  his  life  on  earth.    And  if  any 
one  closes  his  life  on  earth  as  a  spiritual  beggar,  then  as  a  spiritual  beggar  must  he 
start  on  his  eternal  career.    Now  that  is  a  consideration  of  tremendous  solemnity ; 
and  when  we  ponder  it  we  can  surely  see  the  force  of  that  appeal  which  God  makes 
to  us  in  the  Cross,  to  wake  up  with  instant  decision  to  battle  against  evil,  that  our 
character  may  be  rescued  while  there  is  time  yet  to  get  it  purged  and  sanctified  and 
trained  in  the  elements  of  goodness  by  those  hallowing  influences  which  the  Divine 
Spirit  brings  to  bear  upon  us.     IV.  The  vastness  of  the  benefit  which  God  has 
IN  STOBE  FOB  US.    We  may  take  what  God  has  actually  done  as  the  standard  of  the 
love  He  will  always  show  towards  us.    When  you  get  the  key-note  you  know  the 
strain  that  must  follow.     So  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  we  have  the  exact  pitch  of 
all  God's  dealings  with  us.    We  can  be  certain  that  no  act  of  God's  towards  us 
shall  ever  fall  below  the  note  struck  in  the  sacrifice  of  Calvary.     Everything  will 
harmonise  with  that.    Thus  the  sublimest  note  emanates  from  the  Cross.     We  see 
there  the  scale  on  which  God  means  to  bless  us.    Y.  The  hbioht  or  bpibitoa& 


«BA>.  T.]  ROMANS.  879 

ROBLsmss  TO  WHiOB  GoD  BKEKS  90  BUSE  ocB  CHABAOTEB — that  Spirit  of  self-saoiifice 
which  the  death  of  Christ  exhioits  ao  completely.  This,  alas  I  is  just  the  offence 
of  the  Gross;  bat  if  we  stumble  at  it,  oar  life  can  never  be  crowned  with  the 
imperishable  glory.  The  crowning  joys  of  life  are  the  outcome  of  deeds  of 
nnselfishness.  Tour  heart  throbbed  in  unison  with  the  heart  of  Christ  then.  And 
it  is  in  that  spirit  of  unselfishness  that  God  is  seeking  to  train  us  all.  It  is  the 
greatest  blessing  He  can  confer  upon  us.    {G.  McHardy,  M.A.)      The  best  thing  : — 

I.  Thb  best  thinq  couubnded.  Not  God's  wisdom,  power,  holiness,  or  wealth,  but 
His  love,  unsolicited,  unmerited,  free,  unparalleled,  towards  us,  the  most  undeserving 
of  His  creatures.  II.  The  best  thing  commended  bt  the  best  Jddoe.  "  God." 
"  God  only  knows  the  love  of  God."  A  man  may  know  the  love  of  man,  an  angel 
may  know  the  love  of  an  angel,  but  only  the  Infinite  can  gauge  the  Infinite.  UI. 
The  best  thing  commended  by  the  best  Judge  in  the  best  possible  way.  **  In  that, 
while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us. "  While  we  were  at  the  worst  He  did 
the  best  for  us.  lY.  The  best  thing  commended  by  the  best  Judge  in  the  best 
possible  way  fob  the  best  pubpose.  That  we  might  be  "  justified  by  His  blood  " ; 
••  saved  from  wrath" ;  *'  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  His  Son,"  and  "  saved 
by  His  life  "  ;  yea,  "  joy  in  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Cbrist  " ;  in  a  word,  have 
everlasting  life.  (D.  Brotehie.)  Christ  died  for  ua — The  death  of  Christ : — I.  Its 
OHABACTEB.     1.  Beal.    2.  Violent.   3.  Cruel.   4.  The  same  death  that  was  due  to  as. 

II.  Its  design.  It  was — 1.  The  punishment  of  our  sin.  2.  The  price  of  our 
redemption.  8.  A  sacrifice  for  sin.  HI.  Its  effects.  1.  Our  sins  by  it  are 
expiated  and  atoned  for.  2.  The  wrath  of  God  is  averted  from  us.  3.  We  are  freed 
from  all  guilt.  IV.  Application.  For  Christ's  great  love  to  us  in  dying  for  us,  we 
should  love  Him— 1.  Ardently.  2.  Transcendently.  3.  Effectually.  (D.  Clarkson, 
B.D. )  The  death  of  Christ  is — I.  The  pledge  of  God's  love  to  us — He  died  for 
OB — while  yet  enemies.  II.  The  pledge  of  salvation — it  justifies  and  reconciles 
OS  to  God.  Much  more  shall  we  be  saved  from  final  wrath  and  share  in  the 
blessedness  of  life.  III.  The  pledge  of  unspeakable  happiness  in  God.  Joy 
in  God  is  the  only  true  happiness — is  secured  in  the  reconciliation  effected  by 
the  atonement.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  death  of  Christ,  substitutionary :— The 
original  meaning  is  over  or  above  (Lat.  super).  As  if  a  bird,  hovering  over  her 
young,  warded  off  a  blow  from  them  and  bare  it  herself ;  if  by  this  act  she  rescued 
them  from  destruction  at  tbe  sacrifice  of  her  own  life,  we  see  how  the  thought  of 
dying  over  them  is  merged  in  the  greater,  of  dying  instead  of  them.  Thus  a  shield 
suggests  the  thought  of  being  over  that  which  it  protects,  and  of  receiving  t]  e  blow 
instead  of  that  which  it  defends.  The  sacrificial  relation  of  Christ  to  His  people 
involves  the  fall  notion  of  deliverance  and  satisfaction  by  substitution  (2  Cor.  t.  15). 
(Webster  and  Wilkinson.) 

Ver.  10.  For  If,  when  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death 
of  HlB  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  His  life. — Enemies 
of  God : — I.  In  what  bespect  unregenerate  men  are  such.  In — 1.  Their  esteem 
of  Him.  2.  The  natural  relish  of  their  souls.  3.  Their  will.  4.  Their  Sections. 
6.  Their  practice.  H.  To  how  obeat  a  degbeb.  1.  They  have  no  love.  2.  Their 
every  faculty  is  subject  to  this  enmity.  3.  It  is  insuperable  to  any  finite  power. 
4.  They  are  greater  enemies  to  God  than  to  any  other  being.  III.  The  beasons  fob 
THIS.  1.  God  is  opposed  to  their  idolatries.  2.  They  are  threatened  with  damna- 
tion because  of  them.  (JoTvathan  Edwards,  A.M.)  God's  hatred  of  sin  : — It  is 
no  figure  but  a  deep  essential  truth  that  God  hates  sin  ;  and  since  sin  is  necessarily 
personal,  the  sinner  as  such,  i.e.,  so  far  as  he  wilfully  identifies  himself  with  his 
sin,  is  hated  of  God,  His  enemy  (chap.  xi.  28).  But  God  loves  everything  that  He 
has  made.  He  cannot  love  man  as  a  sinner,  but  He  loves  him  as  man,  even  when 
he  is  a  sinner.  In  like  manner  the  Jews  are  described  as  being,  at  the  same  time, 
enemies  in  one  relation  and  beloved  in  another  (chap.  xi.  28).  Human  love  here 
offers  a  true  analogy  :  the  more  a  father  loves  his  son,  the  more  he  hates  in  him 
the  drunkard,  the  Har,  or  the  traitor.  Thus  God,  loving  as  His  creatures  those 
whom  He  hates  as  self-made  siimers,  devises  means  whereby  they  may  be  brought 
back  to  Him.  {Archdeacon  Gifford.)  Reconciliation  with  God: — I.  The  believer's 
BECONciLUTiON.  1.  The  previous  character  of  tbe  partakers  of  this  benefit ;  they 
"  were  enemies  to  God."  But  it  is  no  easy  thing  to  induce  men  to  acknowledge 
this.  They  may  indeed  acknowledge  that  they  have  some  imperfections  and 
infirmities;  but  they  cannot  be  persuaded  that  they  are  "  enemies  to  God."  2. 
This  inestimable  boon  itself.    There  are  but  few  who  do  not  know  the  value  of 


880  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaj.  t. 

reconciliation.  Who  has  not  tasted  the  bitterness  of  estrangement  ?  Who  has 
not  enjoyed  the  deliciousness  of  renewed  friendship  ?  How  delicious  is  national 
peace,  domestic  peace,  ecclesiastical  peace.  Bat  the  blessing  of  reconciliation 
mast  be  judged  of  by  the  Being  whom  we  have  offended  and  provoked.  Who 
knoweth  the  power  of  His  anger?  And  oh,  to  know  that  we  are  one  with  God 
again  1  Why,  then,  trials  have  no  carse,  death  no  sting,  and  all  things  work 
together  for  good.  3.  The  reconciliation  is  perfect  and  perpetual.  A  breach  may 
be  BO  far  made  ap  as  to  exclude  hostility.  Absalom  was  allowed  to  live  three  years 
in  Jerusalem  without  seeing  the  king's  face.  There  may  be  an  admission  of 
civilities  and  even  general  intercourse,  where  there  may  be  no  admission  of  cordial- 
ness.  But  how  is  it  here?  (chap.  viii.  35-39).  4.  The  medium  of  it.  '•  The  death 
of  His  Son."  We  escape,  but  He  suffered.  There  are  some  who  deny  the 
vicariousness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  But  upon  their  principles  it  seems  hard 
to  account  for  His  sufferings  at  all.  According  to  these,  He  died  not  for  others* 
sins,  and  we  know  He  could  not  for  His  own ;  so  upon  this  ground  He  suffered  in 
every  respect  as  innocent ;  and  if  this  were  true,  we  may  well  ask.  Is  there  tm- 
righteousness  with  God  ?  God  forbid.  Why  is  He  thus  making  Him  to  be  sin  for 
us  who  knew  no  sin  ?  Why,  if  our  tears,  or  repentance,  or  alms  could  have  mado 
reconciliation  with  God,  He  never  would  have  been  pleased  to  bruise  His  only 
begotten  Son ;  and  if  in  His  sacrifice  God  did  nothing  needlessly  or  in  vain,  then 
there  must  have  been  a  propriety,  a  necessity  in  the  great  transaction.  So  the 
apostle  affirms,  "  It  became  Him  to  make  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  perfect 
through  sufferings."  Thus  your  reconciliation  is  made  in  a  way  that  is  as  honour- 
able to  God  as  it  is  safe  to  us.  The  just  God  appears  a  Saviour.  Now,  this  blood 
of  sprinkling,  which  speaketh  better  things  than  the  blood  of  Abel,  having  spoken 
to  the  justice  of  God,  and  satisfied  it,  speaks  to  the  conscience  of  the  sinner,  and 
gives  it  quiet  and  peace.  Thus  have  we  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  of  all 
by  the  blood  of  Christ.  11.  The  beleeveb's  salvation.  1.  We  are  •'  saved  by  His 
life."  But  are  we  not  saved  when  reconciled?  No.  The  one  regards  God,  the 
other  regards  ourselves.  But  did  not  He  exclaim  when  He  expired,  "It  ia 
finished"?  Yes;  but  what  was  finished?  The  work  of  redemption,  or  the 
procuring  of  the  thing ;  not  the  work  of  salvation,  or  the  applying  of  the  thing. 
The  case  is  this.  We  were  guilty,  and  by  the  death  of  God's  Son  expiation  was 
made  for  our  offences.  He  pat  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself,  and  thus 
removed  every  hindrance  on  God's  side  to  our  return  to  Him.  Yet  we  are  not 
actually  saved  till  we  receive  Christ,  and  are  found  in  Him.  Indeed,  as  to  the 
commencement  of  the  work,  and  the  certainty  of  the  issue,  Christians  are  said  to 
be  saved  already.  "  By  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith."  But  as  to  the  actual 
consummation,  they  are  not  saved  till  death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory.  This  work 
of  salvation  is  a  gradual  work  carried  on  through  the  whole  of  the  Christian's  life 
on  earth.  We  go  from  strength  to  strength,  and  in  the  Divine  image  we  are 
*'  renewed  day  by  day."  2.  How  this  salvation  is  achieved.  By  His  life ;  Hia 
mediatorial  life ;  that  life  in  which  He  is  now  living  in  our  nature  in  heaven. 
This  is  what  He  referred  to  when  He  said,  "  Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also." 
Had  He  not  risen,  our  hopes  would  have  perished  in  the  same  grave.  "  But  we  are 
begotten  again  to  a  hvely  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead." 
Everything  that  concerns  our  salvation  is  now  to  be  viewed  in  connection  with  His 
life.  He  is  now  making  intercession  for  us.  He  is  a  Uving  Saviour,  and  as  such 
He  received  the  whole  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  for  men  (Eph.  iv.  8,  <&c. ;  Acts  ii. 
33).  It  is  as  a  living  Saviour,  "  it  hath  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all 
fulness  dwell,  and  out  of  His  fulness  have  all  we  received  grace  for  grace."  3. 
From  hence  you  should  learn  to  dwell  more  upon  the  present  life  of  Christ. 
Christians  love  to  hear  of  Christ's  death.  But  it  would  be  in  vain  to  view  Him  aa 
the  crucified  One,  unless  we  could  view  Him  as  the  glorified  One.  Here  is  the 
jround  of  our  highest  triumph  (chap.  viii.  34).  III.  Theib  confibmation  :  derived 
trom.  an  inference  drawn  from  one  to  the  other.  "For  if  .  .  .  much  more." 
Observe  the  conclusiveness  of  the  inference.  What  can  be  more  natural  than  for 
as  to  argue  from  the  past  to  the  future ;  from  what  has  been  done  to  what  may  be ; 
to  feel  the  remembrance  of  one  favour  encouraging  our  hope  of  another,  especially 
when  we  argue  from  the  greater  to  the  less  ;  as  chap.  viii.  32  does  ?  It  was  wonder- 
ful that  God  should  have  provided  an  ark  for  the  saving  of  Noah  and  his  house ; 
but  it  was  not  wonderful,  after  He  had  provided  it,  that  He  should  not  suffer  him 
to  sink  and  go  to  the  bottom.  It  is  wonderful  that  God  should  have  given  as 
exceeding  great  and  precious  promises ;  but  it  is  not  wcnderful,  after  He  had  given 


OBAP.  ▼.]  ROMANS.  381 

tbem,  that  He  should  fulfil  the  same.  It  is  wonderful,  Christians,  that  He  should 
hsre  began  a  good  work  in  you;  but  having  begun  it,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  He 
should  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ.  (W.  Jay.)  Reconciliation 
with  Ood  an  earnest  of  complete  salvation: — I.  More  immediately  ik  refebenob 
TO  God.  Beconoiliation  is  the  restoring  to  a  state  of  friendship  parties  who 
had  been  at  variance  with  each  other.  The  parties  presented  by  the  apostle 
in  the  passage  before  us  being  God  and  man — God  being  necessarily  the  justly- 
offended  party,  it  belonged  to  guilty,  rebellious  man  to  reconcile  himself  to  God. 
But  wherewithal  could  man  thus  come  before  God?  What  man,  however,  could 
never  have  solved,  God  hath  both  unravelled  and  removed.  "  He  was  in  Christ 
reconciling  the  world  to  Himself;  not  imputing  to  men  their  trespasses."  He  so 
far  reconciled  Himself  to  man,  when  He  devised  the  plan  whereby  He  could  con- 
tinue the  just  God,  whilst  the  justifier  of  the  ungodly  who  believe  on  Jesus.  And 
He  so  far  reconciled  Himself  to  man,  when  He  gave  and  continues  with  man,  tha 
ministry  of  reconciUation.  Now  the  reasoning  of  the  apostle,  as  bearing  on  thia 
view  of  the  case,  is  shortly  this — hath  God  out  of  absolutely  spontaneous  loving- 
kindness  thought  compassionately  on  man  in  his  low  and  lost  estate — hath  He 
exerted  His  infinite  wisdom  in  devisiug  a  scheme  whereby  "in  hi  riches  of  Hia 
grace  through  Christ,  He  hath  even  abounded  towards  man  in  all  wisdom  and 
prudence" — hath  the  character  of  the  Divine  holiness  been  signally  vindicated,  and 
the  claims  of  infinite  justice  and  unimpeachable  truth  satisfied — hath  the  almighty 
power  of  God  been  put  forth  in  raising  up  Christ  from  the  dead — hath  the  Divine 
machinery,  the  pattern  of  things  in  the  heavens,  not  only  been  constructed  and 
perfected,  but  ready  at  the  bidding  of  the  great  Artificer  to  begin  the  work  of  mercy 
and  of  love — when  lo  1  the  hand  of  the  Divine  Artificer,  ready  to  touch  the 
life-giving  apparatus  is  suspended — producing  the  silence  of  ungratified  desire  in 
heaven,  of  disappointment  on  earth,  of  joy  in  hell.  And,  would  such  a  part  be 
worthy  of  the  great  God  to  act?  Would  it  be  consistent  with  the  all-perfect 
character  of  Jehovah  ?  Could  the  wisdom  which  devised  and  consummated  the 
scheme,  rest  satisfied  till  its  excellence  was  developed  in  its  glorious  effects  ?  II. 
The  contrast  implied  between  the  efficacy  and  power  of  the  life  and  the  death 
OF  Christ.  "  Much  more  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  His  life."  Now, 
although  the  death  of  Christ  is  not  here  specifically  mentioned,  yet  it  is  directly 
referred  to,  and  a  contrast  stated,  though  tacitly,  between  His  death  and  His  life. 
How  was  it  that  God  was  reconciled  to  man,  and  man  to  God  ?  It  was  by  the  death 
of  His  Son.  Now,  if  such  effects  are  ascribed  to,  and  naturally  flow  from  the  death 
of  Christ,  much  more  may  we  look  for,  and  naturally  expect  consequences,  even  if 
possible  surpassing  these,  springing  from  His  life.  It  is  not  so  much  His  media- 
torial life,  as  affording  opportunities  for  the  fruits  of  His  death  to  appear,  and 
hereby  manifesting  its  incalculable  efficacy  ;  as  by  the  transference,  as  it  were,  of 
what  gave  worth  and  efficacy  in  the  death,  to  the  activity  and  energy  in  the 
life.  And  what  was  it  which  rendered  the  death  or  sacrifice  of  Christ  infinitely 
meritorious  ?  It  was  not  that  He  was  a  man,  or  even  a  perfect  man,  but  that  He 
was  the  God-man.  Oh,  what  encouragement,  and  what  a  firm  ground  of  confidence 
does  the  apostle's  reasoning  in  this  view  of  the  case  afford  to  the  genuine  believer 
in  the  name  of  Christ  I  Transfer  the  infinite  worth  of  character,  as  giving  value 
and  efficacy  to  the  death  of  Christ — transfuse  all  this  into  His  mediatorial  life,  and 
what  vitality  and  power  concentrate  not  only  here ;  but  how  are  all  these  pledged 
as  a  guarantee  that  the  foundation  which  was  laid  in  the  death  will  be  reared  into 
a  glorious  edifice  by  the  life  of  Christ.  If  His  death  effected  so  much,  much  more 
rather  will  His  life  more  than  perfect  all.  HI.  The  third  step  in  the  process  op 
THE  apostle's  REASONING  REFERS  MORE  IMMEDIATELY  TO  MAN,  and  Carries  with  it  iuto 
the  bosom  of  the  genuine  beUever  the  most  irresistible  evidence  of  its  truth  and 
power.  Having  become  the  subject  of  this  reconciliation,  he  is  conscious  to  him- 
self that  a  thorough  change  hath  passed  upon  his  state  and  character  as  in  the 
eight  of  God.  Lately  he  was  dead  whilst  he  lived;  but  now  "hath  he  been 
quickened  to  newness  of  life,"  and  "is  aUve  unto  God,  through  Jesus  Christ." 
Originally  his  inner  man  was  a  spiritual  chaos,  without  form  and  void ;  but  now 
he  is  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  "A  new  heart  has  been  given  him,  and  a  new 
spirit  put  within  him."  Lately  his  mind,  being  carnal,  was  enmity  against  God, 
but  this  enmity  is  now  transfused  into  friendship.  Once  he  loved  sin,  and  derived 
his  chief  enjoyment  from  the  ways  of  it ;  but  now  he  is  a  lover  of  God,  and  God's 
law  is  his  delight.  Now,  observe  how  forcibly  to  the  experienced  Christian  the 
oouolusion  is  which  the  apa&tle  draws  in  the  text — "  much  more  being  reconciled. 


389  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  t. 

we  shall  be  saved  by  Christ's  life."  What  hath  been  already  wrought  in  the  heart 
of  the  believer  is  an  earnest  and  a  pledge  of  what  God  will  continue  to  do,  and 
delight  in  doing.  Hath  He  changed  rebellion  into  loyalty,  He  will  never  fail  to 
reward  with  the  smiles  of  His  approval  the  acts  of  loyalty  cheerfully  and  submis- 
sively  rendered.  Hath  He  changed  enmity  into  affection,  He  will  never  cease  to 
draw  forth  renewed  and  more  ardent  expressions  of  this  heaven-bom  love.  In 
short,  if  our  heavenly  Father  came  graciously  near  when  we  were  repulsive.  He  will 
never  leave  as  now  that  He  hath  rendered  us  attractive.  (D.  Logan.)  Reconciled 
and  saved  : — 1.  Among  the  ten  thousand  plants  that  clothe  the  naked  world,  none 
are  found  where  the  execution  falls  short  of  the  design.  Nor  among  the  countless 
tribes  of  animals  does  God,  in  any  case,  appear  to  have  begun  a  work  and  stopped 
in  the  middle.  He  never  made  an  unfinished  flower  or  insect ;  and  it  were  strange 
if  He  should  make  an  unfinished  saint.  2.  "  Wherefore  hast  Thou  made  all  men 
in  vain ?  "  "I  saw  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked.  .  .  .  Verily  I  have  cleansed  my 
heart  in  vain,  and  washed  my  hands  in  innocenoy.  For  all  day  long  have  I  been 
plagued."  These  plaints  prove  that  Providence  is  not  so  easily  read  as  nature. 
But  that  is  because  Providence  is  not,  like  creation,  a  finished  work.  Take  a  man 
to  a  house  when  the  architect  is  in  the  middle  of  his  plan,  what  is  perfect  order  to 
the  architect,  to  the  other  will  be  confusion  ;  and  so  stands  man  amid  that  vast 
scheme  of  Providence  which  God  began  six  thousand  years  ago,  and  may  not  finish 
for  as  many  thousand  years  to  come.  Baised  to  the  throne  of  Egypt,  Joseph  saw 
why  God  had  permitted  him  to  be  sold  into  slavery  and  oast  into  prison.  And 
raised  to  heaven,  the  saint,  now  that  God's  works  of  Providence  stand  before  him 
in  all  their  completeness,  shall  take  his  harp,  and  sing,  "  Just  and  true  are  Thy 
ways,  Thou  King  of  Saints."  8.  Now,  God's  work  in  grace  forms  no  exception  to 
His  works  in  nature  and  in  Providence.  A  man  designs  a  great  literary  work,  and 
he  dies ;  or  throwing  it  aside  for  something  else,  he  leaves  the  world  but  a  frag- 
ment of  it.  The  studio  of  the  painter  has  unfinished  pictures ;  our  streets  have 
unfinished  houses ;  and  man  has  many  a  plan  lodged  in  his  busy  brain  that  he 
never  or  but  partly  executes.  But  where  God  begins  a  good  work  He  carries  it  on 
to  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Consider — I.  Oub  statb  bt  matdbe — we  are  the 
enemies  of  God.  1.  Some  things  we  are  to  believe  on  the  simple  authority  of  God'a 
Word.  There  are  others,  again,  in  which,  "  as  face  answereth  to  face  in  water," 
so  the  state  of  our  hearts  answereth  to  the  statements  of  God's  Word ;  and  such  is 
the  case  with  Paul's  saying,  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God."  For  was 
there  ever  a  saved  man  who  did  not  feel  when  he  was  converted  that  he  was 
conquered?  This  enmity  does  not  lie  in  bad  habits,  education,  or  other  such 
circumstances.  It  is  not  like  a  cold  which  any  one  may  take,  but  a  consumption 
which  is  constitutional  and  hereditary ;  and  what  are  all  these  sins  and  crimes 
which  the  apostle  describes  as  works  of  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  19) ;  but,  like  the  flushed 
cheek,  languid  eye,  and  bounding  pulse  of  fever,  the  symptoms  of  an  enmity  that 
lies  lurking  in  every  heart  ?  The  temptations  that  call  out  the  enmity  no  more 
create  it  than  the  showers  and  sunshine  create  the  deadly  hemlock  which  has  its 
seed  in  the  soil.  2.  Nor  is  this  all.  Consumption,  fell  and  deadly  as  it  is,  usually 
attacks  but  one  organ.  The  constitution  may  be  otherwise  sound.  The  best 
things,  indeed,  have  their  defects — there  are  spots  in  the  sun ;  there  is  more  or  less 
of  alloy  in  all  gold  ;  and  weeds  deform  the  fairest  gardens.  But  whenever  circum- 
stances occur  to  call  it  out,  this  enmity  affects  the  whole  man ;  so  that  he  is  as 
much  under  its  influence  as  every  sail,  yard,  mast,  and  timber  of  a  ship  are  under 
the  government  of  her  hehn.  True,  that  does  not  always  appear ;  but  no  more 
does  the  fire  that  sleeps  in  the  cold  flint,  until  there  be  a  collision  with  steel.  The 
carnal  mind  not  only  has,  but  is,  enmity  against  God.  Enmity  is  of  its  very 
nature,  as  it  is  of  the  nature  of  grass  to  be  green,  or  sugar  to  be  sweet,  or  vinegar 
to  be  sour.  If  it  were  not  so,  man  would  not  need  to  be  born  again  to  get  a  new 
heart ;  like  a  watch  that  had  but  started  a  jewel,  or  lost  the  tooth  of  a  wheel,  it 
were  enough  to  be  repaired  without  being  renewed.  3.  What  a  proof  of  this  we 
have  in  the  treatment  of  Christ  by  man.  Fancy  a  drowning  man  putting  forth  his 
dying  strength  to  wound  the  hand  stretched  out  to  save  him  !  I  would  hold  any 
man  my  enemy  that  would  kill  my  son ;  and  if  men  by  nature  were  not  God'a 
enemies,  why  did  they  kill  His  Son?  why  do  they  still  reject  Him?  II.  Thb 
BECONCiLiATioN.  The  time  has  come  when  Jacob  must  face  an  angry  brother. 
He  had  taken  cruel  advantage  of  Esau's  necessities  and  ungodliness,  to  ptssess 
himself  of  the  birthright  and  the  blessing.  He  bad  to  settle  the  account  with  his 
brother  now ;  and  the  prospect,  as  well  it  might,  filled  him  with  alarm.    Bosy, 


T.]  ROMANS.  MS 

goflty,  fknoj  oonjares  op  a  dreadful  retribation.  What  shall  he  do?  Fight?  It 
is  vain  to  think  of  that.  Flee  ?  Encumbered  with  wives  and  little  ones,  it  is  vain 
to  think  of  fleeing.  One  refuge  is  still  open  to  him  I  He  betakes  himself  to  prayer ; 
wrestling  with  God  till  the  break  of  day.  I  have  seen  the  sun  set  on  a  troubled  sea 
where  the  billows  burst  in  white  foam  on  rocky  headlands,  and  roared  in  thuuders 
on  the  beach  ;  and  to-morrow  the  same  sun  set  on  the  same  sea,  smooth  as  a  glassy 
mirror.  A  change  as  great,  and  in  as  short  a  time,  has  passed  on  the  soul  of 
Jacob.  Yesternight  was  spent  in  an  agony  of  prayer  ;  and  this  night  he  lays  his 
head  in  sweet  peace  on  its  pillow.  The  long  estranged  brothers  have  embraced  and 
baried  in  one  grave  Esau's  wrongs  and  Jacob's  crimes — being  enemies,  they  were 
reconciled.  Blessed  change  to  Jacob ;  and  yet  but  a  faint  image  of  our  reconcilia- 
tion to  God  t  What  is  that  ?  what  does  it  imply  t  what  blessings  does  it  bring  ? 
We  shall  never  know  fully  till  we  get  to  heaven  ;  "  for  eye  hath  not  seen,"  &o. 
But  this,  meanwhile,  we  know,  reconciliation  is  sin  pardoned  ;  death  discrowned  ; 
peace  of  conscience ;  a  sense  of  Divine  love ;  a  sight  of  coming  glory.  III.  Tbb 
MSANS  OF  BscoNcri/UTioN.  A  man  lying  ander  sentence  of  death  has  sent  off  a 
petition  for  mercy,  and  waits  the  answer  in  anxious  suspense.  One  day  his  ear 
catches  rapid  steps  approach  his  door — they  stop  there.  The  chain  is  dropped ; 
the  bolts  are  drawn ;  a  messenger  enters  with  his  fate ;  the  sovereign  pities  the 
criminal,  bat  cannot  pardon  the  crime.  His  hopes  dashed  to  the  ground,  he  givea 
himself  up  for  lost.  And  now  the  messenger  draws  near,  and  tells  him  that  if  the 
king's  son  would  change  places  with  him  and  die  in  his  room,  that  would  satisfy 
justice,  and  set  him  free.  Drowning  men  will  catch  at  straws ;  not  he  at  that. 
The  king  give  op  his  son  i  If  there  is  no  hope  but  that,  there  is  no  hope  at  all  I 
Now  fancy,  if  you  can,  his  astonishment,  sinking  to  incredulity,  and  then  rising 
into  a  paroxysm  of  joy,  when  the  messenger  says,  I  am  the  king's  son ;  it  is  my 
own  wish,  and  my  father's  will  that  I  should  die  for  you  ;  take  you  the  pardon,  and 
give  me  the  fetters.  In  me  shall  the  crime  be  punished  ;  in  you  shall  the  criminal 
be  saved.  Such  love  never  was  shown  by  man  ;  only  by  God.  Did  David,  when 
he  considered  the  heavens  the  work  of  God's  fingers,  exclaim.  What  is  man  that 
Thou  art  mindful  of  him?  How  much  more  may  God's  people  break  out  into 
expressions  of  adoring  wonder,  when  they  stand  beneath  the  Gross.     IV.  Beoom> 

CILED  BT  THK   DEATH   OF   ChRIST,   HiS    PEOPLB    ABB    SAVED    BY   HiS   LIFE.        SuppOSe 

that  our  Lord,  having  satisfied  Divine  justice,  had  left  in  the  grave  a  body  which 
He  needs  no  more,  and  returned  to  the  bosom  of  His  Father,  still  the  Son  of  God, 
but  no  longer  also  the  Son  of  Man,  His  death  had  been  in  vain.  There  was  the 
medicine,  but  where  was  the  physician  to  administer  it  ?  When  we  die  our  work 
is  done.  Not  so  with  Christ.  He  had  a  great  work  to  do  after  His  death — a  work 
foreshadowed  on  the  day  of  atonement  in  the  temple.  The  high  priest,  having 
sacrificed  a  lamb,  carries  its  blood  into  the  holy  of  holies ;  offering  it  before  the 
mercy-seat.  By  and  by,  returning  with  the  blood,  he  takes  a  bunch  of  hyssop, 
and  sprinkles  it  in  red  showers  on  the  people.  Now  are  they  ceremonially  clean 
before  the  Lord ;  and  so  David,  with  his  eyes  no  doubt  on  better  blood,  prays. 
Sprinkle  me  with  hyssop  and  I  shall  be  clean  ;  wash  me  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than 
the  snow.  Even  so,  Jesus  rises  from  yonder  grave  and  ascends  to  yonder  throne, 
that  He  may  apply  to  His  people  the  benefits  of  His  redemption.  He  lives  to 
provide  for  our  wants  and  to  advocate  our  cause;  so  that  our  life  is  as  much 
dependent  on  His  as  that  of  the  branches  on  the  tree,  or  the  body's  various  members 
on  the  life  of  their  heart  and  head.  Because  He  liveth  we  live  also.  We  attach 
little  value  to  what  costs  us  little.  Of  all  men  they  are  the  most  careful  of  their 
money  who  have  earned  it  by  the  hardest  labour ;  they  guard  their  liberties  most 
jealously  who  have  bought  them  at  the  greatest  price.  The  great  price  at  which 
Christ  purchased  His  people  is  the  great  security  for  their  safety.  (T.  Guthrie, 
D.D.)  Double  assurance  : — How  anxious  the  apostle  was  in  all  his  letters  to 
convince  believers  in  Christ  that  their  position  was  absolutely  secure.  The  text 
suggests  the  following  train  of  thought.  I.  The  sad  state  into  which  sin  has 
DEGRADED  MAN.  '*  We  Were  enemies."  Not  simply  godless  and  careless,  but  rebels 
against  God.  Hence  the  heinousness  of  sin.  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against 
the  holiest  and  best  of  Beings,  and  implies  alienation,  guilt,  condemnation,  and  if 
persisted  in — death.  U.  The  happy  condition  into  which  grace  elevates  man. 
"Beconciled  to  God."  1.  The  exhibition  of  Divine  love,  in  the  sacrifice  of  Calvary, 
draws  men  to  God,  because  there  is  proclaimed  how  deep,  sincere,  and  pitiful  Ha 
is,  against  whom  sinners  have  revolted ;  how  ready  He  is  to  forgive  and  save.  2. 
To  be  reconciled  to  God  is  not  only  to  be  pardoned,  but  to  be  admitted  into  fellow- 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

ship  with  Him  ;  to  be  in  bannonj  with  His  will  and  purposes ;  to  acquiesce  in  the 
dispensations  of  Providence.  3.  What  honour  in  such  a  state  of  oneness  with  the 
Almighty.  Eeconciled  to  Him  we — (1)  Walk  with  Him.  (2)  Talk  to  Him  and  He 
to  us.  (3)  Work  with  and  for  Him.  (4)  Become  like  Him.  (5)  Become  prepared 
to  be  for  ever  with  Him.  IIL  Thz  Divine  means  by  which  that  gbeat  chanqb 
IS  EFFECTED.  "  Bj  the  death  of  His  Son."  The  voices  of  nature  call  us  to  grate- 
ful acknowledgment  of  the  great  and  good  Creator ;  but  the  loudest  and  sweetest 
tones  oome  from  Calvary.  By  the  death  of  God's  dear  Son,  we  see — 1.  The 
exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.  2.  The  ineffable  love  of  God.  Not  that  He  loved  His 
friends,  but  His  foes.  3.  The  substitutionary  character  of  the  Eedeemer's  offering. 
IV.  The  immovable  basis  upon  which  we  may  rest  odb  hope  oi"  complete  salva- 
tion. "  Much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  His  life."  The  death 
of  Christ  was  not  merely  to  save  us  from  the  consequences  of  sin,  but  from  the  love 
aiid  practice  of  it.  The  love  of  Christ  was  seen  in  His  life  as  well  as  in  His  death ; 
and  we  are  saved  from  sin  by — 1.  His  exemplary  earthly  life.  We  may  attain  to 
the  highest  life  by  imitating  Him,  and  in  proportion  as  we  become  like  Him  do  we 
please  God.  2.  His  exalted  heavenly  life.  He  lives  to  see  the  purposes  of  redemption 
fulfilled,  to  dispense  the  gifts  His  atoning  death  procured.  No  wonder  the  apostle 
staked  all  on  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  If  we  cannot  look  up  to  a  risen  and  reigning 
Eedeemer,  then  our  preaching  and  faith  are  vain,  we  are  yet  in  our  sins.  (F,  W.  Brown.) 
A  double  contrast,  and  an  argument  drawn  therefrom  : — I.  Contrasted  conditions  in 
THE  HISTORY  OF  THOSE  WHO  WEBB  NOW  CHRISTIANS.  1.  "  We  Were  euemics." 
Some  had  answered  to  the  description  given  in  chap,  i.,  others  had  doubtless  been 
more  virtuous  heathen,  or,  like  Paul,  blameless  as  touching  the  righteousness  ol 
the  Jewish  law ;  but  the  description  "  enemies,"  is  applied  to  all  (Bom.  viii.  7). 
"  We  were  reconciled  to  God."  Beconciliation  may  be  mutual,  or  only  one  party 
may  need  to  be  influenced  by  its  power.  The  latter  is  the  case  here ;  we  are  the 
only  parties  needing  to  be  reconciled  (see  2  Cor.  v.  18).  This  is  effected  by  Christ's 
death,  as  the  manifestation  of  the  love  of  God.  U.  Contrasted  conditions  in  thb 
HISTORY  OF  Christ.  1.  His  death.  Death  is  a  time  of  captivity,  therefore  of  weak- 
ness. Christ's  death  was  surrounded  by  circumstances  of  sorrow  and  shame.  2. 
His  life.  The  life  which  followed  His  death,  when  He  led  captivity  captive,  when 
sorrow  was  exchanged  for  the  •'  joy  set  before  Him,"  and  the  Cross  for  the  throne. 
III.  The  ARGUMENT  drawn  from  this  double  contrast.  If  God's  Son  by  death  could 
reconcile  His  enemies,  how  much  more  by  His  life  will  He  complete  and  perfect 
their  salvation,  now  that  they  are  His  friends.  If  in  weakness  He  could  accomplish 
the  greater,  how  much  more  in  strength  can  He  insure  the  less.  If  by  imprison- 
ment in  the  tomb  He  could  give  us  the  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God,  how  much  more 
can  and  will  He  now  sustain  us  in  that  freedom.  (W.  Harris.)  Converting  mercy 
a  pledge  of  preserving  grace : — I.  The  position  here  assumed.  Note — 1.  The  change 
which  Christians  have  undergone.  This  change  has  been  effected.  Let  us  separately 
advert  to  these  two  particulars.  (1)  They  were  enemies  to  God.  This,  indeed,  is 
naturally  the  state  of  all  men.  "  Being  by  nature  bom  in  sin,  they  are  children 
of  wrath."  It  is  not,  however,  by  imputation  only,  but  also  by  wicked  works. 
They  dislike  His  holiness,  His  law.  His  service.  To  dislike  God,  who  is  goodness  ; 
to  hate  His  service,  which  is  happiness ;  to  have  lost  His  favour,  which  is  better 
than  life ;  to  be  exposed  to  His  wrath,  which  is  a  consuming  fire ;  who  can 
conceive  the  real  wretchedness  of  such  a  state  !  (2)  Such  was  once  the  state  of 
those  who  are  now  real  Christians.  But  it  is  their  state  no  longer,  (a)  They  are 
now  "  reconciled  to  God."  His  wrath  is  turned  away  from  them.  They  are  brought 
into  a  state  of  peace  and  friendship  with  God.  (b)  Their  nature  has  undergone  a 
most  wonderful  alteration.  They  are  become  new  creatures  in  principle  and 
practice.  They  now  love  God  and  find  pleasure  in  His  ways.  From  enemies  they 
have  been  made  friends  ;  from  rebels,  children ;  from  vessels  of  wrath,  monuments 
of  grace  and  mercy.  2.  The  astonishing  way  in  which  this  change  has  been  effected. 
(1)  By  what  means?  "  By  the  death  of  His  Son."  It  is  plain  that  the  whole 
benefit  of  this  reconciliation  rests  with  man.  God  cannot  be  profited  by  it ;  but  it 
was  God  who  brought  it  about.  In  His  infinite  mercy  He  projected  so  great  m 
blessing  to  mankind.  In  His  infinite  wisdom  He  devised  a  plan  for  effecting  it. 
And  when,  according  to  this  plan,  it  was  expedient  that  His  only-begotten  Son 
should  suffer  for  sinners.  He  "  spared  Him  not,  but  dehvered  Him  up  for  us  all." 
He  delivered  Him  up  as  a  sacrifice  to  justice.  (2)  Under  what  circumstances  ? 
"  When  they  were  enemies."  Previously  to  any  disposition  on  their  part,  to  any 
sorrow  felt,  anj  contrition  expressed,  any  desire  of  forgiveness  manifested,  any 


4nuv.  T.]  ROMANS.  885 

petition  for  mercy  offered,  God  planned  their  return  to  Him,  and  provided  the  way. 
II.  Thb  infebenck  drawn  from  it.  "  Much  more  being  reconciled,  they  shall  be 
saved  by  His  life."  True  Christians  in  their  reconciliation  with  God  have,  indeed, 
undergone  a  great  and  a  glorious  change.  But  the  work  is  not  yet  complete.  The 
great  obstacle  is  removed.  Their  sins  are  pardoned  and  their  souls  are  reoewed. 
But  they  are  as  yet  renewed  only  in  part.  The  carnal  mind,  though  weakened, 
is  not  utterly  subdued.  Their  great  adversary  constantly  harasses  tbem;  while 
the  world  assails  them  with  all  its  formidable  weapons.  Now  the  natural  tendency 
of  all  these  united  obstacles  is  to  oppose  their  progress  ;  nay,  to  drive  them  back, 
and  to  leave  them  at  last  to  perish  in  sin  and  wrath.  Effectual  provision  is  made 
for  their  security.  He  who  died  to  reconcile  them  by  His  blood,  now  liveth  to 
preserve  them  by  His  power.  Observe,  then,  the  whole  force  of  the  inference  in 
the  text.  Hath  God  done  so  much  for  His  people,  and  will  He  do  no  more? 
Certainly  not.  On  the  contrary,  if  He  has  done  the  greater  work  for  them,  much 
more  will  He  do  the  less.  If  He  pitied  them  when  enemies,  much  more  will  He 
love  them  when  friends.     (E.   Cooper.)  The  Christian   encouraged   to   expect 

Jinal  salvation: — Mankind,  in  all  ages,  have  been  prone  to  extremes.  If  we  reject 
the  doctrine  of  infallible  perseverance,  which  has  no  foundation  in  Scripture, 
and  has  a  tendency  to  lull  asleep  in  carnal  security,  there  is  danger  lest  we  conceive 
that  the  continuance  and  final  salvation  of  God's  people  is  a  matter  of  uncertainty. 
The  consequence  is,  that  some,  who  might  otherwise  go  on  comfortably  in  the  ways 
of  God,  are  enervated  and  cast  down,  while  their  dejection  and  sorrow  is  very 
discouraging  to  others.  To  offer  a  preventative  I  have  chosen  this  passage,  from 
which  I  would  observe — I.  Of  whom  the  apostle  here  speaks.  The  context  shows  he 
does  not  speak  of  mankind  in  general — or  of  mere  nominal  Christians — but  of  those 
who  have  obtained  peace  with  God  through  Christ.  II.  The  state  buch  were  in 
WHEN  the  grace  OF  GoD  FOUND  THEM.  1.  They  Were  "  without  strength  "  (ver.  6), 
and  without  ability  to  recover  themselves  ;  ignorant,  and  vdthout  ability  to 
enlighten  themselves ;  guilty,  depraved,  and  wretched,  and  without  strength  to 
expiate  their  guilt,  change  their  depraved  nature,  or  remove  their  miseries.  2.  But 
did  they  not  deserve  that  God  should  help  and  save  them  ?  No ;  for  they  were 
"  ungodly  "  (ver.  6),  devoid  of  the  knowledge,  fear,  love,  favour,  image,  and  enjoy- 
ment of  God  (chap.  iii.  10,  11).  3.  They  not  only  had  no  merit,  but  they  had 
demerit,  for  they  were  "  sinners  "  (ver.  8).  4.  Nay,  they  were  "  enemies  "  (ver.  10), 
to  God's  nature  and  attributes,  to  His  will,  word,  and  ways,  manifested  by  the 
carnal  mind,  their  disobedience  to,  or  rebellion  against  His  laws,  their  fretfulnesa 
and  murmuring  against  His  dispensations.  III.  What  God  has  already  done  for 
them.  He  has  given  His  Son  (see  vers.  6-8).  And  consider — l.His  dignity  (John 
i.  1 ;  Col.  i.  13-17  ;  Heb.  i.  2),  and  His  dearness  to  His  Father,  whom  the  Father 
gave  to  die.  2.  The  unworthiness  of  the  persons  for  whom  He  suffered ;  how  this 
demonstrates  God's  love,  as  they  were  enemies,  &c.  Ho  has  justified  them  by 
Christ's  death,  reconciled  them  to  Himself,  and  united  their  hearts  in  love  to  Him. 
And  this  He  has  done  on  the  most  easy  condition,  viz.,  repentance  and  faith.  IV. 
The  ground  hereby  laid  for  hoping  that  He  will  do  all  that  remains  to  be  done. 
"  We  shall  be  saved  by  His  life  " — that  is,  sanctified  and  glorified.  The  solidity  of 
onr  hope  in  this  respect  will  appear  from  three  particulars.  1.  From  what  He 
has  done  already.  The  incarnation,  life,  sufferings,  death,  resurrection,  &c.,  of 
God's  Son,  have  afforded  much  greater  displays  of  Divine  wisdom,  power,  and 
love,  than  any  other  that  can  possibly  be  made.  To  save  the  lost,  to  reconcile  the 
enemy,  to  heal  the  sick,  to  raise  the  dead,  were  greater  and  more  difiBcult  than  to 
guard  the  found,  to  preserve  the  friendly,  to  keep  in  health  the  restored,  to  sustain 
the  life  of  the  quickened  and  revived,  and  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  2.  From  the 
situation  of  the  person  from  whom  this  remaining  good  is  to  be  done.  If  not  less 
weak,  unworthy,  and  guilty  than  they  were  before,  yet  they  are  better  disposed, 
and  less  opposed  to  the  work  to  be  done  in  them  and  for  them.  Therefore  there  is 
less  obstruction  in  the  way.  3.  From  the  nature  of  the  means  employed  to  do  it. 
If,  when  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  by  the  death  of  God's  Son,  much  easier  is  it 
that  when  made  His  friends  we  should  be  preserved  and  saved  to  the  uttermost  by 
His  life.  For  life  is  more  powerful  than  death  ;  especially  Ufe  after  death  ;  Ufe  for 
evermore.  {Joseph  Benson.)  Conflict  prolonged  unnecessarily : — The  battle  of 
New  Orleans  was  fought  after  the  treaty  of  peace  had  been  signed  at  Ghent,  the 
news  of  which  arrived  soon  after.  And  this  is  what  conflict  with  God  means — 
warfare  continued  when  there  is  no  longer  any  occasion  for  it.  (W.  Baxevdale.) 
Salvation  by  Chrisft  life : — 1.  The  resurrection  and  life  of  Jesus  are  the  Bars 
VOL.   I.  23 


886  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  v. 

pledge  of  the  resurrection  and  life  of  all  His  people.  2.  Christ,  in  His  present  life  at 
God's  right  hand,  is  invested  with  "  power  to  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  the 
Father  hath  given  Him."  3.  Jesus  is  employed  in  interceding  for  His  people  :  and 
the  evidence  of  God's  full  satisfaction  in  the  finished  work  of  His  Son,  afforded  by 
His  rising  to  life  from  the  grave,  gives  us  the  most  assured  confidence  that  He 
never  pleads  in  vain,  that  the  Father  heareth  Him  always.  4.  All  the  arrange- 
ments of  providence  are  in  His  hands.  He  not  only  exercises  a  general  super- 
intendence of  the  affairs  of  the  world  for  the  advancement  and  final  triumph  of 
His  spiritual  kingdom ;  there  is  a  minuter  care — a  care  which  extends  to  each 
particular  individual  of  His  subjects  in  his  passage  through  life.  6.  By  the  power 
which  is  committed  to  Him  in  His  meditorial  life,  He  will  perfect  the  salvation  of 
His  people,  by  raising  them  at  last  from  the  grave.  He  is  "  Lord  of  the  dead." 
Their  spirits  are  with  Him,  Their  bodies,  though  for  a  time  left  under  the  power 
of  the  last  enemy,  are  stUl  His.  He  will  "  redeem  them  from  death,  He  will 
ransom  them  from  the  power  of  the  grave."  He  ransomed  them  by  price  on  earth : 
He  will  redeem  them  by  power  in  heaven.  (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  salvation  oj 
believers  carried  on  by  the  life  of  Christ  in  heaven : — I.  The  lifb  of  Christ.  1.  Its 
present  sphere — (1)  In  the  glory  which  He  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world 
was.  (2)  At  the  Father's  right  hand  of  power.  2.  Its  present  occupation.  (1) 
He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession.  (2)  All  power  in  heaven  and  earth  which 
has  been  given  Him  He  employs,  {a)  To  serve  His  friends,  (b)  To  extend  His 
dominion.  IL  How  we  aee  saved  by  this  LirE.  He — 1,  Perpetuates  the  justification, 
and  liberty  of  access  to  God,  procured  by  Him  for  us,  when  we  first  believed  on 
Him.  2.  Frustrates  the  attempts  of  our  adversaries  to  injure  us.  3.  Beplenishes 
us  with  grace  for  the  furtherance  of  our  sanctification  in  the  use  of  the  appointed 
means.  4.  Revives  us  with  Divine  support  and  consolation  in  seasons  of  extremity. 
(J.  Leifchild,  D.D.)  The  genuine  Christian  : — I.  Is  the  sdbject  or  a  great  hobal 
CHANGE  IN  HIS  RELATION  TO  GoD.  All  Were  onco  "  enemies  to  God."  The  language 
presents  to  us  two  facts — 1.  The  most  terrible  condition  in  which  it  is  possible  to 
conceive  a  moral  creature.  "  Enemies  to  God."  The  fact  that  men  are  not 
conscious  of  this  is  no  proof  that  it  does  not  exist.  Emotion  often  settles  down 
into  a  principle  of  action  too  regular  to  become  a  matter  of  consciousness.  The 
father's  love,  which  in  its  first  stage  was  a  warm  emotion,  in  the  course  of  years 
becomes  a  principle  of  action,  that  rules  the  life  and  explains  the  conduct  ; 
and  thought  concentrated  on  the  object,  can  at  any  time  bring  up  this  emotion. 
1.  There  are  facts  which  indicate  a  man's  state  of  mind  towards  another.  If,  e.g., 
I  find  a  man — (1)  Habitually  acting  contrary  to  my  well-known  wishes.  (2) 
Habitually  ignoring  and  shunning  those  who  are  my  avowed  friends.  (3)  As- 
sociating with  my  determined  opponents,  he  proves  himself  my  enemy  in  each 
case.  In  such  waj  s  as  these,  sinful  men  demonstrate  their  enmity  to  God,  whatever 
they  may  say.  2.  But  what  a  state  is  this  to  be  in  1  (1)  How  ungrounded  1  •'  They 
hated  Me  without  a  cause."  (2)  How  guilty  I  hating  the  infinitely  Righteous  and 
the  infinitely  Good.  (3)  How  mad  1  a  worm  raising  its  head  against  the  thunders 
of  the  universe.  "  Hast  thou  an  arm  like  God  ?  "  &c.  2.  A  suggestion  which  serves 
to  correct  a  theological  error — that  God  was  an  enemy  whose  love  had  to  be 
purchased,  whereas  it  is  quite  the  other  way.  II.  Has  been  thus  changed  by  means 
OP  THE  death  of  Christ.  We  were  "  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  His  Son." 
How  is  enmity  to  be  destroyed  ?  There  is  only  one  way  in  which  from  the  con- 
stitution of  mind  it  is  possible — by  love.  This  God  does  by  the  death  of  Christ,  which 
is — 1.  The  grandest  effect  of  God's  love.  The  universe  is  an  effect  of  His  love, 
but  this  is  the  grandest.  2.  The  mightiest  demonstration  of  God's  love.  It  is 
impossible  for  the  human  mind  to  conceive  of  anything  more  convincing.  All 
arguments  and  facts  bearing  on  this  subject  seem  to  concentrate  in  this.  This  is 
the  great  focal  and  ultimate  exhaustive  argument.  3.  The  special  organ  of  God's 
love.  The  Cross  is  the  great  instrument  of  His  Spirit,  in  convincing,  converting, 
justifying,  and  sanctifying  sinners.  It  is  that  by  '*  which  the  world  is  crucified 
unto  us,"  &o.  III.  That  he  has  been  thus  changed  by  Christ's  death  is  an 
invincible  argument  that  his  salvation  will  be  completed.  "  Much  more." 
The  following  thoughts  may  develop  the  force  of  Paul's  a  fortiori  reasoning. 

1.  The  most  difficult  part  of  the  work  has  already  been  accomplished.  Any  power 
may  destroy  an  enemy,  but  it  requires  the  highest  power  to  destroy  enmity.  Th« 
reconciler  or  peacemaker  is  the  divinest  character  in  the  universe.  This  work  has 
been  done ;   what  remains  to  be  done  is  the  development  of  this  new  affection. 

2.  This  most  difficult  part  of  the  work  has  been  accomphshed — (1)  When  yoa  wert 


out.  ▼.]  EOMANS.  88T 

in  the  most  repulsive  condition.  Enemies  repel  us  from  acts  of  kindness.  "  Yen- 
geance  for  enemies,"  says  corrupt  human  nature.  "  Scarcely  for  a  righteous  man 
\vill  one,"  <&c.  (2)  By  a  dying  Saviour ;  the  remaining  and  easier  part  of  the 
work,  now  we  are  in  a  more  pleasing  position,  is  acoompUshed  by  a  living  Saviour. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Yer.  11.    And  not  only  so,  but  we  Joy  in  God  tbrougb  our  Lord  Jesus  Christy 
from  whom  we  have  received  the  atonement. — Joy  in  God : — I.    Joy  in  God 
IS  THE  CLIMAX  OF  CHRISTIAN  PBiviLEGE.      1.   In  the  wholc  passage  from  ver.  1 
we   have  an  account  of    the  new  feelings  that  are  introduced   by   faith   into 
the  heart  of  a  believer.     (1)  Peace  with  God,  of  whom  we  could  never   think 
formerly,  if  we  thought  of  Him  aright,  but  with  disquietude.      (2)  Exultation 
in  the  hope  of  glory.     (3)  Exultation,  even  in   tribulations,  the  process  which 
manifests  a  work  of  grace  here,  and  so  serves  to  confirm  all  our  expectations  of  a 
harvest  of  glory  and  blessedness  hereafter.     2.   And  indeed  how  can  it  be  other- 
wise, the  apostle  reasons.     He  hath  already  given  us  His  Son,  will  He  not  with  Him 
freely  give  us  all  things  ?    And  now  that  He  has  done  so  much  in  circumstances  so 
unlikely,  will  He  not  carry  on  the  work  of  deliverance  to  its  final  accomplishment 
when  circumstances  have  changed  ?    It  is  thus  that  the  believer  persuades  himself 
into  a  still  more  settled  assurance  of  the  love  of  God  to  him  than  before  ;  and 
whereas  (ver.  2)  he  only  rejoiced  in  the  hope,  he  now  rejoices  in  possession,     3.  To 
feel  as  if  you  were  in  the  company  of  God — to  have  delight  in  this  feeling  and  find 
that  the  minutes  spent  in  communion  are  far  the  sweetest  intervals  of  your  earthly 
pilgrimage — to  have  a  sense  of  God  all  the  day  long,  and  that  sense  of  Him  in  every 
way  so  delicious  as  to  make  the  creature  seem  vain  and  tasteless  in  the  comparison 
is  certainly  not  a  common  attainment ;  yet  no  true  saint  can  be  altogether  a  stranger 
to  it.     "  Eejoice  evermore,"  says  the  apostle,  "  the  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  earth 
rejoice,"  says  the  patriarch.     It  is  easy  to  walk  in  the  rounds  of  a  mechanical 
observation.     It  is  easy  to  compel  the  head  to  obedience  against  the  grain  of  the 
heart.    It  is  very  easy  to  bear  towards  God  the  homage  of  respect,  or  fearfulness, 
or  solemn  emotion.     To  serve  Him  as  a  master  to  whom  you  are  bound  in  the  way 
of  obligation  is  more  the  tendency  of  nature  than  to  serve  Him  as  a  friend  to  whom 
you  are  bound  by  the  heart.    But  is  not  the  latter  the  far  more  enviable  habit? — to 
have  the  spirit  of  adoption  and  cry  out  Abba,  Father,  ratber  than  to  drivel  before 
Him  among  the  restraints  and  the  reluctances  of  a  slave  ? — to  do  His  will,  not  as  if 
by  the  force  of  a  compulsory  law,  or  as  if  under  the  stipulation  to  discharge  the 
articles  of  a  bond,  or  as  if  pursued  by  an  unrelenting  taskmaster  ?    This  is  the 
way  in  which  God's  will  is  apt  to  be  done  on  earth ;  but  it  is  not  the  way  in  heaven 
— where  the  doing  of  His  pleasure  is  not  a  drudgery  for  wLich  they  get  their  meat 
and  drink,  but  where  their  meat  and  drink  is  to  do  the  will  of  God,  where  the 
presence  of  God  ever  enlivens  them,  and  their  own  pleasure  is  just  His  pleasure 
reflected  back  again.    To  carry  onward  the  soul  to  this  were  to  work  upon  it  a 
greater  transformation  than  to  recall  it  from  profligacy  to  mere  external  reforma- 
tion,   n.  Many  abk  strangers  to  this  joy.      1.  There  are  those  who  care  little 
about  the  matters  of  the  soul  and  eternity,  who  hve  as  if  the  visible  theatre  which 
surrounds  them  were  their  all  ;  all  they  mind  is  earthly  things,  and  of  joy  in  God 
they  have  no  comprehension.     Give  them  a  warm  habitation,  stock  it  well  with  this 
world's  comforts,  and  surround  them  with  a  thriving  circle  of  companionship,  and 
they  would  have  no  objection  to  be  done  with  God  and  eternity  for  ever.    When  the 
preacher  speaks  of  the  woefulness  of  their  spiritual  condition,  their  response  is, 
••  We  pay  our  debts  ;  we  can  hft  an  unabashed  visage  in  society ;  we  compassionate 
the  necessitous,"  <fec.,  &c.     We  do  not  deny  this,  but  we  charge  you  with  joying  in 
the  creature,  and  not  at  all  in  the  Creator  ;  and,  to  verify  your  woefulness,  you  have 
only  to  read  the  future  history  of  this  world.    That  scene,  on   which  you  have 
fastened  your  affections  so  closely  that  you  cannot  tear  them  away  from  it,  will  soon 
be  torn  away  from  you.    It  is  then  that  God  will  step  in.    And  had  your  joy  been 
in  Him,  then  heaven  would  have  been  your  fit  habitation.    But  as  the  tree  falleth 
eo  it  lies ;  and  you  rise  from  the  grave  with  the  taste,  the  character,  the  feelings 
whicH  you  had  when  you  breathed  your  last ;  and  so  all  that  is  in  your  heart,  carry- 
ing upon  it  a  recoil  from  Him,  will  meet  with  nothing  but  that  which  must  give 
dread  and  disturbance  to  your  carnal  affections ;  and  these  affectiors  will  wander  in 
vain  for  the  objects  which  solaced  them  upon  earth.    It  is  thus  that  he  who  soweth 
to  the  fiesh,  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption.     2.  There  are  others  who  make  the 
interest  of  their  soul  a  topic  of  great  care  and  thought ;  who  have  recourse  to  active 


888  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [obab.  ▼. 

measnres  in  the  prosecution  of  this  great  interest,  and  are  all  alive  to  the  great 
object  of  being  right  with  God.  It  is  indeed  a  most  natural  forth-setting  of  the 
whole  man  on  such  an  occasion,  to  proceed  on  the  principle  of  "  work  and  win," 
just  as  an  ordinary  workman  does.  It  is  not  his  work  or  his  master  that  gives  him 
pleasure,  but  only  the  receipt  of  his  wages.  There  is  many  a  seeker  after  life 
eternal,  toiling  with  all  his  might,  who  has  no  joy  in  God — satisfied  if  he  can  escape 
hell  and  reach  heaven;  but  who  does  not  reflect  that  it  is  altogether  essential  to 
this  blessedness  to  have  such  a  taste  for  the  Divine  character  as  to  be  glad  in  the 
contemplation  of  it — to  have  such  a  liking  for  the  Divine  life  as  that  the  life  itself 
shall  be  reward  enough  for  him.  Without  this,  all  he  can  do  is  but  the  bodily 
exercise  that  profiteth  little  ;  and  that,  instead  of  heightening  his  affection  for  God, 
may  only  exasperate  the  impatience,  and  aggravate  the  weariness  and  distaste  that 
he  feels  in  His  service.  III.  How  is  this  privilege  to  be  obtained.  There  is  a 
high  ground  of  spiritual  affection  and  of  joy  in  God,  to  which  you  would  like  to  be 
elevated.  But  you  see  nothing  between  you  and  that  lofty  region,  saving  a  range  of 
precipice  that  you  cannot  scale,  and  against  which  you  vainly  wreak  all  the  native 
energies  that  belong  to  you.  Let  one  door,  hitherto  unobserved,  be  pointed  out,  open 
to  all  who  kuock  at  it,  and  through  which  an  easy  and  before  unseen  ascent  conducts 
you  to  the  light  and  purity  and  enjoyment  of  tbose  upper  regions  after  which  you 
aspire  ;  and  what  other  practical  effect  should  all  the  obstacles  and  impossibilities 
you  have  before  encountered  have  upon  you,  than  just  to  guide  your  footsteps  to  the 
alone  way  of  access  that  is  at  all  practicable  ?  This  is  just  the  open  door  of  Christ's 
mediatorship.  1.  It  has  been  objected  to  the  gospel — (1)  That  it  exacts  an  unnatural 
and  unattainable  elevation  of  character;  and  this  is  a  most  likely  objection  to 
proceed  from  him  who  looks  at  this  economy  with  half  an  eye.  (2)  The  very  same 
people  may  also,  on  looking  at  another  side  of  this  dispensation,  be  heard  to  object 
to  the  f  reeness  of  the  gospel.  2.  Now  these  two  parts  are  those  which  give  support 
and  stability  to  each  other.  It  is  just  by  faith  that  you  enter  upon  peace  and  hope 
and  love  and  joy  ;  through  Jesus  Christ,  not  by  working  for  the  atonement,  but 
simply  by  receiving  the  atonement,  that  you  are  translated  into  this  desirable  habit | 
of  the  souL     (1\   Chalmers,  D.D.)  Joy  in  God  through  Christ : — There  ia 

a  remarkable  peculiarity  in  Paul's  disposition.  Thwarted  in  his  movements, 
yet  he  is  not  despondent.  Exposed  to  persecution,  yet  he  is  not  embittered 
in  his  feeUngs.  He  ever  rejoices  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God ;  and  not 
only  so,  but  joy  and  triumph  pervade  the  very  heart  of  his  trials.  Singular, 
and  aside  from  revelation,  inexplicable  circumstance,  that  a  man  so  sorely  tried, 
should  have  derived  his  only  joy  from  an  invisible,  incomprehensible  source  1 
Not  so  does  human  nature  joy  in  God.  Yet  it  is  strange  that  man  should 
not  seek  his  chief  happiness  in  the  Author  of  his  being.  If  it  were  not  now 
essentially  deranged,  the  world  of  mankind  would  be  advancing  in  its  cycles  of  holy 
happiness  around  the  throne  of  unsulhed  blessedness  with  the  harmony  and 
celerity  with  which  the  planets  move  on  in  their  majestic  orbits  around  the  source 
of  material  light.  Until  man,  then,  shall  be  led  to  seek  his  happiness  in  God,  not 
only  must  be  be  in  pursuit  of  shadows,  but  be  defeating  the  true  and  nltimate 
purpose  of  his  being.  But  how  shall  he  be  brought  to  joy  in  God  ?  I  need  not  ask 
whether  it  would  have  been  possible,  had  we  been  left  to  the  dim  light  of  nature, 
to  look  up  to  God  as  the  source  of  joy.  The  great  spirit  of  natural  religion  comes 
not  within  the  definite  purview  of  a  finite  mind.  He  is  too  retired  and  silent  to 
influence  our  habitual  emotions.  Let  us  think  of  God  as  the  omnipotent  Creator, 
the  beneficent  Father  of  the  universe.  Man  may  not  fail  to  be  wrapt  in  admiration 
as  he  casts  his  eye  over  the  beauty  and  brightness  of  creation;  but  when  the 
thunders  utter  their  voices,  and  the  cloud  surcharged  with  the  element  of  death 
approaches  nearer  and  yet  nearer,  shall  not  fear  and  trembling  take  hold  on  him  ? 
The  wiser  heathen  thought  that  God  was  good;  but  "  how  can  man  be  just  with 
God  ?  "  was  their  natural  inquiry.  What  is  the  Divine  goodness  but  that  ail- 
pervading  feeling  of  God's  mighty  heart,  which  leads  Him  to  promote  the  highest 
happiness  of  His  moral  universe  by  at  once  rewarding  the  righteous  and  punishing 
the  wicked  ?  It  is  in  vain  to  say  ttiat  your  conviction  of  God's  goodness  fortifies 
your  heart  against  all  prognostications  of  evil.  If  you  feel  that  you  have  sinned, 
you  must  know  that  you  enjoy  no  harmonious  alliance  with  your  Maker  and  Judge. 
Have  you  no  fear  of  Him  when  you  think  that  He  may  be  strict  to  mark  iniquity? 
Can  you  commit  yourself  with  conscious  and  joyous  safety  to  His  supreme  disposal. 
I  contend  that  it  is  impossible  to  joy  in  God,  unless  He  be  revealed  to  man's  distinct 
and  intimate  knowledge ;  unless  we  have  been  made  to  feel  that  He  takes  a  deep 


CHIP.  T.]  ROMANS.  889 

and  deathless  interest  in  our  welfare ;  has  no  pleasure  in  oar  death ;  yea,  that  He 
may  glorify  His  own  name,  and  illustrate  the  stability  of  His  throne,  in  our  salva- 
tion. Now,  where  can  be  gathered  any  satisfactory  knowledge  of  God,  except  from 
the  Word  of  God  Himself?  As  the  sun  reveals  to  us  the  beauties  and  sublimitiea 
of  God's  works,  so  does  Jesus  Christ,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  unveil  the  glories  of 
the  eternal  throne.  Through  Him  all  the  attributes  of  Deity  shine  forth  with 
vindicated  and  resplendent  lustre,  yet  sweetly  attempered  to  human  vision,  God, 
the  great,  the  unsearchable  One,  is  brought  down  to  us  in  such  an  attitude  that  wa 
cannot  fail  to  comprehend.  God,  the  infinite  Spirit,  is  brought  near  to  our  hearts. 
Let  us  appeal  to  the  true  Christian,  and  I  ask  him  whether  it  be  not  solely  through 
Christ  that  he  is  enabled  to  joy  in  God  as  the  Ruler  of  the  universe,  and  to  rejoice 
in  the  contemplation  of  His  perfections  f  Whether  a  sense  of  God's  favour  in 
Christ  be  not  more  to  him  than  the  riches  and  honours  and  pleasures  of  the  world  ? 
'•  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  their  strength. "  Or  let  us  summon  in  testimony  the  new- 
born soul.  You  were  transfixed  with  the  arrows  of  remorse  and  dread.  You 
wandered  about  vainly  seeking  peace  for  your  soul.  God  shined  into  your  mind  to 
give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  Himself  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  "  ; 
and  then  it  was  that  the  tear  was  wiped  away  and  that  your  heart  leaped  for  joy. 
Or,  we  might  transport  you  to  the  bed  of  death.  See  there  the  dying  Christian  I 
Why  does  he  not  flinch  from  the  king  of  terrors  ?  Oh,  it  is  the  remembrance  that 
God  is  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself ;  it  is  the  deathless  conviction 
of  his  soul  that  God,  even  his  own  God  in  Christ,  will  never  leave,  and  never  forsake 
him.  (R.  W.  Dickenson,  D.D.)  Joy  in  a  reconciled  God  : — "  And  not  only  so." 
It  is  the  second  time  in  which  these  words  occur,  and  a  similar  expression  is  nsed 
(ver.  2).  The  apostle  had  been  mentioning  great  privileges,  and  had  gone  to  yet 
greater ;  from  silver  to  gold,  and  from  gold  to  the  priceless  crystal ;  and  when  he  had 
reached  conceivably  the  highest  point,  he  adds,  "And  not  only  so."  There  ia 
always  in  Christian  privilege  a  yet  beyond.  The  ancient  mariners  spoke  of  Ultima 
Thule,  the  end  of  the  universe ;  but  more  venturous  prows  forced  their  way  to  a 
new  world,  so  we  concluded  in  the  early  days  of  Christian  experience  that  we  never 
could  enjoy  greater  privileges,  but  we  have  pushed  far  beyond,  and  at  the  end  of  all 
there  will  be  written,  "  And  not  only  so."  The  text  seems  to  me  to  describe  the 
progress  of  a  soul  towards  God.  I.  The  first  step  is  rather  implied  than  expressed. 
There  was  a  time  when  we  had  not  received  the  reconciliation,  and  were  madb 
SENSIBLE  that  wb  NEEDED  IT.  1.  We  woro  led  to  see  that  from  necessity  of  Hia 
nature  God  must  be  angry  with  us.  A  being  who  has  no  anger  against  evil  has  no 
love  towards  goodness.  This  is  a  painful  discovery,  but  a  very  simple  one.  One 
would  think  that  every  man  ought  to  see  this,  but  no  man  does  see  it  till  the  Spirit 
of  God  convinces  him  of  sin,  and  even  then  the  natural  heart  endeavours  to  shut 
its  eyes  to  it.  2.  Another  degree  of  this  same  step  is  a  consciousness  that  we  are 
at  enmity  with  God.  "  Why,"  says  one,  "  I  pay  respect  to  God,  and  go  to  a  place 
of  worship,  and  therefore  I  am  not  at  enmity  with  Him."  Yet  listen  ;  I  am  certain 
that  if  I  could  assure  you  that  there  was  no  God,  and  consequently  no  need  of 
repentance,  and  no  fear  of  punishment,  and  consequently  no  need  of  pardon,  it 
would  be  a  relief  to  many.  3.  A  further  portion  of  this  step  is  the  perception  that, 
in  order  to  perfect  reconciliation  with  God,  there  must  be  something  done  Godward, 
by  which  the  insult  and  injury  done  to  His  law  shall  be  recompensed  ;  and,  next, 
a  thorough  change  in  us  before  we  can  walk  with  God  in  perfect  communion.  In 
order  to  reconciliation  it  is  not  enough  that  one  party  should  be  forgiving,  the  other 
must  yield  too.  5.  The  last  degree  of  this  step  is  the  desire  to  be  reconciled  to 
God.  This  is  the  dawn  of  grace,  and  a  blessed  dawn  it  is.  H.  The  next  step  is 
BECEiviNO  the  RECONCILIATION.  Observo  how  we  are  reconciled.  1.  It  is  not  by 
working  out  a  reconciliation  ;  although  this  is  the  first  instinct  of  a  man  who  finds 
himself  at  enmity  with  God.  The  heart  suggests  a  multitude  of  expedients^ 
ceremonialism,  amendment,  future  carefulness,  &c.,  &o.  But  the  text  does  not  say 
that  we  have  made  any  atonement.  We  do  not  make  it,  or  buy  it,  or  complete  it, 
we  receive  it.  It  is  a  free  gift.  We  receive  it  perfect.  2.  The  process  of  receiving 
reconciliation.  (1)  The  man  being  already  on  the  first  step,  knowing  that  he  wanta 
reconciliation,  believes  the  truth  about  the  gospel.  Now,  the  gospel  is  that  recon- 
ciliation, which  is  made  for  every  soul  that  believes  in  Jesus.  God  is  not  reconciled  to 
anybody  who  will  not  believe  in  Christ,  but  He  is  reconciled  to  every  soul  that  does. 
(2)  The  next  step  is  to  become  a  believer,  because  reconciled.  (3)  Then  peace 
flows  into  the  soul  as  the  result  of  the  reconciliation.  (4)  Then  the  heart  drops 
her  former  enmity  to  God.    IIL  The  third  step  is  joy  qi  God.    1.  No  man  ever 


890  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaj.  ▼. 

rejoices  in  God  except  he  who  receives  the  atonement.  Sappose  a  man  should  say, 
"  I  do  not  want  au  atonement ;  I  am  a  good  man,  and  always  have  been ;  I  have  not 
broken  the  law."  Well,  he  will  rejoice  in  himself,  but  if  we  have  nothing  of  our  own, 
and  have  simply  to  receive  salvation  as  a  matter  of  the  free  grace,  then  we  joy  in 
God.  2,  The  moment  a  man  is  reconciled  to  God  his  view  of  God  alters  entirely.  A 
neighbour  has  done  you  a  displeasure,  perhaps  he  is  a  very  excellent  man,  but  you 
read  everything  he  does  in  the  evil  light  of  suspicion.  If,  however,  by  a  discovery 
of  bis  kindness  you  escape  from  prejudice,  his  whole  conduct  wears  another  aspect. 
So  the  soul  when  reconciled  to  God  from  that  moment  reads  Him  aright.  3.  He 
delights  in  God.  (1)  In  His  very  existence  and  person.  That  there  is  a  God  is  to 
the  Christian  supreme  bliss.  The  infidel  may  say  there  is  no  God,  but  if  that 
were  true  I  should  have  lost  my  father,  my  friend,  my  all.  The  Christian  feels  that 
his  hope  of  prevailing  over  injustice  and  wrong  lies  in  the  fact  that  there  ia  a 
reigriiug  God  who  will  set  all  things  right  at  last.  And  since  we  believe  there  is  to 
be  a  fuller  revelation  of  Himself  in  heaven,  is  not  that  our  main  reason  for  longing 
to  be  there?  As  loyal  subjects  rejoice  that  they  have  a  king,  as  affectionate  children 
rejoice  that  they  have  a  father,  as  a  loving  spouse  rejoiceth  that  she  hath  a  husband ; 
so  do  we,  but  infinitely  beyond  all  this,  rejoice  that  we  have  a  God,  (2)  In  His 
character.  All  the  attributes  of  God  are  themes  of  joy  :  His  power ;  His  mercy ; 
His  immutability ;  His  faithfulness  to  His  promises,  &c.,  <fec.  (3)  In  His  sovereignty. 
Before  our  reconciliation  we  cavil  at  the  Divine  will,  and  set  up  our  own.  But,  the 
moment  we  are  reconciled  we  consent  that  Jehovah  should  do  as  He  wills.  What 
better  rule  could  be  than  the  absolute  empire  of  love  ?  What  can  be  better  as  a 
government  for  mankind  than  the  absolute  authority  of  one  so  good,  so  true,  so 
holy,  and  so  just  ?  (4)  Under  all  His  dispensations.  Of  course  we  joy  in  God 
under  comfortable  dispensations.  Query,  whether  we  do  not  then  very  much  divide 
our  joy  between  the  comforts  and  the  God ;  but  in  dark  times,  when  the  comforts  all 
go,  we  can  joy  in  God  if  reconciled.  4.  Joy  in  God  is — (1)  The  happiest  of  all 
joys.  (2)  The  most  elevating.  Those  who  joy  in  wealth  grow  avaricious ;  in  their 
friends,  too  often  lose  nobility  of  spirit  ;  but  he  who  boasts  in  God  grows  like  God. 
(8)  Solid  ;  there  are  good  reasons  for  it.  (4)  Abiding.  If  I  rejoice  in  the  sun,  it 
sets  ;  if  in  the  earth,  it  shall  be  burnt  up  ;  if  in  myself,  I  shall  die ;  but  to  triumph 
in  One  who  never  fails  or  changes,  this  is  lasting  joy .  Conclusion :  The  only  sad  reflec- 
tion is,  that  there  are  so  many  who  know  nothing  about  joy  in  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Thej&y  of  salvation : — There  are  various  kinds  of  joy — 1.  Maternal :  such  as  was 
expressed  by  Eve  at  the  birth  of  Cain,  or  Hannah  at  the  birth  of  Samuel.  2.  The 
mariner's :  when,  after  a  long  and  dreary  absence,  he  again  beholds  his  native 
land.  3.  The  warrior's:  such  as  David  experienced  when  the  women  went 
cut  to  greet  their  youthful  champion  with  their  songs.  4.  That  of  the  emanci- 
pated :  such  as  tiiat  of  the  slaves  on  that  memorable  morning  when  their  liberty 
was  proclaimed.  6.  The  nation's :  at  the  coronation  of  a  king.  These  are 
instances  of  legitimate  joy;  but  what  are  these  when  compared  with  the  "  joy  of 
salvation  "  ?  I.  In  the  nature  of  salvation  are  contained  all  the  elements  op 
THE  highest  jot.  Suppose  yourself  to  be  a  prisoner  driven  away  to  an  inhospit- 
able clime — as  the  Poles  were — there  to  toil  in  gloomy  mines ;  and  suppose 
yourself  suddenly  restored  to  liberty  and  home.  Suppose  ycu  were  sick,  nigh 
unto  death,  and  a  skilful  band  should  restore  you.  Or  suppose  yourself  con- 
demned to  die  as  a  criminal,  and  the  royal  clemency  should  send  you  a  full  and 
free  pardon,  when  you  had  mounted  the  scaffold  and  were  expecting  death. 
Salvation  is  all  this,  and  more  (Isa.  Ixi.  8.)  U.  Mant  mistakes  have  been  madb 
ON  this  8DBJECT.  The  joy  we  contend  for  arises  out  of  a  sense  of  pardon,  peace, 
reconciliation  with  God.  (Psa.  xxxii.  2;  Isa.  lii.  7,  9;  Rom.  viii.  1,  3.)  This 
reconciliation  is  complete  (chap.  viii.  33,  89),  honourable  and  abiding ;  we  therefore 
assert  every  Christian  has  reason  for  being  joyful.  To  prevent  mistake — note — 
1.  That  we  do  not  assert  this  joy  to  be  perfect.  Some  imagine  there  can  be  no 
joy  if  it  be  not  of  the  highest  kind,  without  alloy  or  interruption.  Persona 
entertaining  such  extravagant  notions  are  sure  to  be  disappointed.  We  are 
imperfect  creatures  in  an  enemy's  country,  and  surrounded  by  temptations.  Is  it 
always  mid-day  ?  Is  there  no  dawn,  and  no  evening?  Is  it  always  midsummer  ? 
Is  there  no  spring,  and  no  autumn  ?  And  why,  then,  expect  joy  in  perfection,  or 
not  at  all  ?  2.  We  must  not,  therefore,  be  surprised  if  the  Christian  is  sometimes 
depressed.  8.  There  is  often  more  joy  experienced  than  we  are  inclined  to  believe, 
and  tban  others  give  us  credit  for.  Suppose  you  were  to  be  deprived  of  your 
Christian  privileges,  then  you  would  value  your  present  enjoyments.    We  only 


OBAT.  ▼.]  ROMANS.  891 

know  the  real  valne  of  oar  mercies  when  we  have  lost  them.  III.  Let  ds  view 
THIS  AS  A  UATTEB  0?  FACT.  1.  Christians  might,  and  ought  to  be  happy,  for  there 
is  every  provision  and  reason  for  it  (James  i.  5;  Luke  xi.  13).  Perhaps  some 
Christian  will  reply,  '•  I  am  not  as  happy  as  I  expected,  or  as  I  was  wont  to  be." 
Very  possibly.  But  perhaps — 1.  You  have  grieved,  quenched,  and  so  expelled  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Business  may  have  been  encroaching  more  than  is  legitimate.  (2) 
You  have  given  way  to  a  petulant  and  angry  spirit.  (3)  You  have  been  regarding 
religion  as  a  privilege,  and  not  as  a  duty.  Idle  Christians  never  can,  and  never 
ought  to  be  happy.  If,  then,  the  Christian  is  not  joyful  in  God,  it  is  his  own 
fault.  There  is  guilt  as  well  as  folly  in  such  a  stats  of  mind.  2.  Now  let  us  look 
at  those  who  have  illustrated  the  joy  of  salvation.  See  it  exemplified — (1)  In  the 
conduct  of  Christians  during  the  time  of  trial  (Hab.  iii.  17 ;  Acts  xx.  24 ;  2  Cor. 
Tii.  4).  Think  of  the  apostles  and  martyrs.  (2)  In  the  peace  which  pervades  the 
various  holy  communities  of  Christians  (Isa.  xxvi.  1,  4).  (3)  In  the  peace  which 
has  always  been  the  result  of  real  religious  revivals.  (4)  But  the  fullest  examples 
of  it  yet  remain  to  be  seen.  This  is  clear  from  the  prophecies.  The  golden  age 
of  the  Church  and  the  world  is  yet  future.    IV.  Let  us  now  inquire  whetheb 

SALTATION   WILL   WABBANT   SUCH   PEELINGS   OP   DELIGHT.      1.   What    is    the   object    in 

which  the  Christian  rejoices  ?  Certainly  not  himself,  his  attainments,  or  his 
merits  (Gal.  vi.  12).  But— (1)  In  God  the  Father.  (2)  The  Son.  (3)  The  Holy 
Ghost.  (4)  In  the  prospect  of  eternal  glory.  2.  Do  not  these  objects  then  justify 
as  in  cultivating  the  highest  joy  ?  At  present,  however,  the  Christian's  joy  is  only 
in  the  bud,  "  it  doth  not  vet  appear  what  it  shall  be."  3.  If  you  submit  to  this 
salvation,  yoa  will  fill  all  heaven  with  joy ;  for  "  there  is  joy  in  heaven  among  the 
angels  of  God,"  &c.  4.  Compare  the  Christian's  with  the  worldling's  joy  (Prov. 
xiv.  13;  Eccles.  ii.  2,  vii.  3,  6).  (G.  Dukes,  M.A.)  Christian  joy  :—l.  The 
desire  of  happiness  is  the  most  powerful  and  influential  principle  of  human 
nature.  It  is  common  to  man  in  every  circumstance  of  life— the  prince  in  his 
palace,  and  the  peasant  in  his  cottage,  <&c.  It  is  that  which  governs  our  feelings, 
forms  our  plans,  and  directs  our  pursuits.  2.  This  desire  is  lawful  and  beneficial ; 
it  corresponds  with  the  design  of  man's  creation,  and  is  in  harmony  with  the  will 
of  his  Creator.  The  glory  of  God  is  connected  with  the  happiness  of  His  creatures. 
To  promote  these,  the  commands  and  promises  were  given,  and  the  plan  of 
redemption  executed.  3.  Why,  then,  is  there  so  much  misery  in  the  world  ?  The 
cause  is  the  influence  of  sin  in  the  heart  and  on  the  conduct.  Sin  is  the  greatest 
enemy  to  the  welfare  of  man.  Consider  : — I.  The  source  pbom  which  the  joy  op 
THE  Chbistian  IS  DERIVED.  It  does  uot  proceed  from  himself,  or  the  objects 
around  him — it  is  not  the  false  joy  produced  by  self-complacency,  or  by  the 
possessions  and  amusements  of  the  world.  The  believer  rejoices  in  God — in  Him 
who  is  perfectly  blessed  in  Himself,  and  who  is  the  only  source  of  real  happiness  to 
His  creatures.  The  Christian's  joy  arises  from — 1.  Keconciliation  with  God  (Isa. 
Ixi.  10).  He  views  God,  not  as  an  enemy,  but  as  a  friend.  2.  Communion  with 
God.  Reconciliation  will  promote  confidence,  and  this  will  lead  to  intercourse. 
The  Christian  '•  dwells  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,"  holds  delightful  fellow- 
ship with  the  Father  of  spirits,  and  gets  nearer  heaven  in  devout  meditation, 
ardent  desire,  and  warm  affections.  3.  A  participation  in  the  blessedness  of  God. 
The  Lord  is  his  portion  :  all  the  perfections  of  Jehovah  are  engaged  for  his  welfare, 
and  all  the  promises  of  His  Word  are  designed  for  his  comfort  and  encouragement. 
He  enjoys  God  in  everything ;  in  the  bounties  of  Providence,  as  well  as  in  the 
ordinances  of  religion.  He  has  mp  ny  blessings  now  in  possession — peace  of  mind, 
Ac,  but  he  has  the  fulness  of  joy  reserved  for  him,  of  which  he  has  now  the 
foretaste.  U.  The  medium  through  which  this  joy  is  communicated.  Christ  ia 
the  medium  of — 1.  Reconciliation  with  God.  This  arises  from  that  satisfaction 
which  He  made  to  Divine  Justice  by  His  voluntary  death  on  the  Cross.  Those 
"who  were  enemies,  are  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  His  Son."  2.  Communion 
with  God.  "No  man  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by  Him."  3.  All  spiritual 
blessings.  In  Him  there  is  treasured  up  a  fulness  of  grace,  to  pardon,  to  sanctify, 
to  comfort,  to  direct,  to  support  tinder  aU  the  trials  and  duties  of  life,  and  to 
prepare  for  eternal  glory ;  and  of  His  fulness  all  true  believers  have  •*  received 
grace  for  grace."  IH.  The  properties  by  which  the  Christian's  joy  is  dis- 
tinguished. "  The  joy  of  the  hypocrite  is  but  for  a  moment  "  ;  "  the  pleasures  of 
sin  are  but  for  a  season  "  ;  "  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked  is  short."  This  joy  is 
distinguished  from  these,  as  it  is — 1.  Spiritual  in  its  nature.  It  is  not  that  which 
depends  on  external  circumstances.     It  is  deeply  rooted  in  the  heart,  the  propas. 


S92  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  t. 

Beat  of  happiness.    It  is  there  that  the  desire  of  happiness  dwells ;  and  tiil  the 
heart  is  filled  the  desire  will  not  be  gratified.     2.  Holy  in  its  influence.    Carnal 
mirth  has  a  tendency  to  dissipate  the  mind  and  to  corrupt  the  heart ;  for  its  source 
is  polluted.    But  Christian  joy  purifies  the  mind,  by  bringing  it  into  close  contact 
with  all  that  is  worthy  of  its  noblest  powers.     3.  Permanent.     The  fountain  from 
which  it  flows  is  inexhaustible;  and  as  the  Christian   pilgrim  advances  in  his 
journey  heavenward  he  arrives  nearer  its  source.     Conclusion :  1.  Learn  the  value 
of  true  religion.     It  is  friendly  to  the  best  interests  of  man.     2.  Let  those  who  are 
destitute  of  this  joy  seek  it  by  immediate  application  to  the  Saviour  of  sinners. 
3.  Let  the  Christian  seek  an  increase  of  spiritual  joy.         True  happinett : — I. 
Whence  it  proceeds — from  God.     II.  What  is  its  natube — we  joy  in  God  as — 
1.  The  God  of  all  grace.    2.  Our  covenant  God  and  Father.    3.  Our  everlasting 
portion.    III.  How  it  is  debivbd — through   Christ,  &o.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)        The 
atonement : — I.  What  is  meant  by  the  atonement.  At-one-ment,  i.e.,  reconciliation. 
This — 1.  Supposes  that  there  must  have  been  some  disagreement ;  not  so  now. 
Mark  the  aggravating  circumstances  with  which  man's  rebellion  is  characterised. 
It  is — (1)  Most  unnatural  rebellion ;  it  is  the  rebellion  of  children  against  the 
parent  of  their  existence.    (2)  Most  ungrateful ;  it  is  the  rebellion  of  chUdren  that 
have  been  nourished  and  have  been  brought  up.     (3)  Most  hopeless.    Bebel  man 
could  not  reconcile  himself ;  he  could  furnish  no  consideration  sufiSciently  valu- 
able ;  his  fellow-man  could  not  help  him ;  an  angel's  arm  could  not  rescue  him 
from  impending  ruin.     2.  Divine  in  its  appointment.     (1)  To  the  Divine  Father 
it  belonged  to  say  what  should  be  done  on  this  awful  emergency.     It  was  His 
sovereign  will  and  pleasure  that  Jehovah  Jesus  should  assume  our  nature,  and 
that  in  our  nature  He  should  live,  and  die,  and  that  His  death  should  be  a  proper 
atonement  for  the  sins  of  our  guilty  race.    "  It  became  Him,  for  whom  are  all 
things,"  (fee.     Did  it  so  ?    Why,  there  are  many  so-called  Christians  who  will  not 
hesitate  to  affirm  that  it  became  the  Divine  Being  to  do  no  such  thing.     But  "  let 
God  be  true,  though  every  man  be  a  liar."    Jehovah  alone  was  competent  to  say 
what  it  became  Him  to  do.    And  He  who  alone  was  competent  to  say  what  ought 
to  be  done,  and  what  became  Him  to  do,  had  alone  the  right.     What  1  had  man  at 
the  bar  the  right  ?    Would  this  be  allowed  in  any  well-regulated  government  ?    3. 
Complete  in  its  nature.     (1)  Those  typical  atonements,  which  shadowed  forth  this 
great  sacrifice,  were  imperfect — (a)  In  their  nature,  because  in  the  mere  blood  of  an 
animal  there  was  no  real  intrinsic  worth,     (b)  In  their  very  design.    They  were 
only  intended  to  be  shadows  of  better  things  to  come,    (c)  In  the  fact  of  their 
repetition ;    because  if  one  bad  been  complete  why  then  repeat  the  sacrifice  ? 
(2)  But  we  are  told  that  Christ  was  offered  "  once  for  all,"  and  once  offered,  it  was 
complete ;  eternal  redemption  was  procured.     The  sufferings  of  our  Saviour  were 
intense;   but  yet  without  the  dignity  of  Christ  as  a  Divine  person,  they  could 
have  been  of  no  avail.    That  is  the  point  that  stamped  His  sufferings  with  infinite 
value.    Hereby  justice  receives  its  demands ;  the  holiness  of  God  is  preserved 
untarnished ;  the  wisdom  of  God  is  testified  in  devising  such  an  expedient ;  the 
inviolable  truth  of  God  is  preserved ;  the  Divine  penalty  of  the  law  is  inflicted ;  sin 
becomes  remissible ;  the  greatest  hatred  to  sin  is  expressed,  while  the  greatest  com- 
passion to  the  sinner  is  manifested.    4.  Unchanging  in  its  efficacy.     There  are 
some  remedies  that  are  efficacious  for  a  time  only  ;  but  this  sovereign  remedy  has  not 
lost  its  power  through  the  revolution  of  years.   II.  What  is  it  to  BECErvE  the  atone- 
ment ?     1.  It  must  be  received  by  an  act  of  the  mind,  on  conviction  that  it  is  the 
truth.    2.  But  it  may  be  admitted  by  the  understanding,  where  it  is  not  cordially 
and  experimentally  received.     And  no  man  will  ever  experimentally  receive  the 
atonement  till  he  has  received  another  great  truth  antecedent  to  this — the  universal 
depravity  and  guilt  of  man.    These  two  things  are  connected  together.    If  I  am 
not  a  sinner,  or  if  sin  be  a  very  trivial  thing,  where  is  the  necessity  of  atonement  t 
But  if  I  am  a  sinner,  and  if  the  demerit  of  sin  be  beyond  all  that  I  can  conceive, 
why,  then,  there  must  be  an  atonement,  or  I  am  undone.    3.  It  must  be  practically 
received.     That    man  does  not  truly  and  really  glory  in  the  Cross  of  Christ 
who  is  not,  by  the  Cross  of  Christ,  crucified  to  the  world,  and  the  world  crucified 
unto  Him.      HI.  Whebe  the  atonement  is  thus  eeceived,  geeat  will  bb  the 
JOT.     1.  We  have  joy.    Before  you  received  the  atonement  you  had  sorrow.    At 
last  you  were  directed  to  the  atonement,  and  you  ventured  on  it ;  you  received  the 
reconciliation,  sorrow  fled  away,  and  joy  sprung  up  in  your  heart.     2.  We  "  joy  in 
God."     We  do  not  merely  joy  in  justification,  nor  in  this  reconciliation,  nor  in 
introduction  to  the  throne,  nor  in  the  prospect  of  glory  that  awaits  as  yonder,  nor 


«HA».  ▼.]  EOMANS.  898 

tribnlation,  and  (vers.  1-4)  althongh  there  may  be  gronnds  of  joy.  No ;  if  any  man 
joy  or  glory  let  him  *'  glory  in  the  Lord."  (1)  "  We  joy  in  God  Himself."  He 
that  has  received  the  atonement  •'  dwells  in  God,  and  God  in  him."  And  where  he 
dwells  he  joys.  "He  joys  in  God,"  in  all  He  has — in  His  wisdom  to  guide  and 
direct,  in  His  power  to  guide  and  defend,  in  His  grace  to  renew  and  save.  (2)  But 
how  can  we  thus  joy  in  God?  '•  Through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Fallen  man, 
even  from  the  first  moment  of  his  apostacy  to  this  hour,  has  never  approached  his 
Creator  with  success,  but  through  the  intervention  of  blood.  "  I  am  the  way,"  &c. 
3.  How  rational  is  this  joy.  Not  like  the  joy  of  the  wicked,  for  which  no  reason 
can  be  given.  4.  How  pure.  Those  who  dwell  here  dwell  in  a  sacred  and  holy 
atmosphere  ;  there  is  nothing  to  defile.  Not  like  the  polluting  joys  of  sin.  6.  How 
lasting.  Not  like  the  short-lived  joys  of  the  wicked,  which  are  "  like  the  crackling 
of  thorns  under  a  pot."  Conclusion  :  Learn — 1.  How  vital  to  evangelical,  saving 
religion,  is  this  great  doctrine  of  the  atonement.  2.  That  this  life-giving  religion  is 
a  joy-producing  religion.  Eeligi<in  is  the  life  of  all  our  delights,  and  the  soul  of  all 
our  joys.  3.  That  this  life-giving,  joy  producing  religion  may  be  ours  even  now. 
"We  have  now  received  the  atonement."  4.  That  we  who  have  realised  this 
religion  will  not  wish  to  monopohse  it  ourselves.  Monopoly  in  religion  is  the 
worst  monopoly  of  all.  {R.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  atonement  a  subjective  fact : — 
The  word  "  atonement "  means  reconciliation,  and  this  is  the  old  English  meaning — 
at-one-ment.  Thus  Shakespeare,  "  He  seeks  to  make  atonement  between  the  Duke 
of  Glo'ster  and  our  brothers."  Learn  that  the  atonement  is — I.  A  conscious 
POSSESSION  OF  THE  SOUL.  "  We  have  now  received."  He  does  not  speak  of  it  as  a 
fact  accomplished  years  ago,  nor  as  a  speculative  doctrine,  but  as  something  of 
which  he  and  his  readers  were  at  that  moment  conscious.  It  is  one  thing  for 
man  to  have  an  atonement  in  his  theology,  discuss  it  with  ability  and  defend  it 
with  enthusiasm,  and  another  thing  for  him  to  have  it  as  a  blessed  experience.  As 
a  mere  doctrine — 1.  It  often  makes  a  man  an  arrogant  bigot ;  but  as  a  feeling' 
always  an  humble  saint.  2.  It  may  light  men  to  hell,  and  may  tbere  aggravate 
their  misery.  As  a  feeling  it  will  conduct  them  to  heaven,  and  encircle  them  with 
the  light  of  immortality.  II.  A  conscious  possession  of  the  soul  imparted  by 
Christ.  "  By  whom."  Christ  is  the  Great,  the  only,  Reconciler  of  the  soul  to  God. 
"  God  is  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself."  How  ?  In  the  only  way 
in  which  reconciliation  could  be  affected.  By  affording  the  strongest  possible 
demonstration  of  Divine  love.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &c.  Legislation, 
philosophy,  ethics,  religion,  civilisation,  poetry — none,  nor  all  of  these,  can  bring 
this  at-one-ment  into  the  soul.  This  is  the  exclusive  work  of  Christ.  III.  A 
conscious  possession  of  the  soul,  inspibino  it  with  jot  in  the  Eternal.  "  We 
joy  in  God."  The  joy  springs  from  the  assurance  that  the  Almighty  is  once  more 
our  friend.  This  joy  may  include — 1.  Thanksgiving,  which  inspires  the  songs  of 
immortality ;  the  reconciled  soul  traces  its  atonement  to  the  free,  tender,  boundless 
love  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Security.  If  God  is  our  friend.  His  love  is 
unchangeable,  His  power  almighty.  His  resources  ilhmitable.  And  what  a  sense 
of  security  must  His  friendship  inspire!  3.  Adoration.  Had  we  a  friend  that 
bestowed  upon  us  the  highest  favours,  inspiring  our  gratitude,  and  whose  promises 
and  capacities  assured  ns  of  our  security,  if  he  were  imperfect  in  moral  character, 
we  could  not  heartily  rejoice  in  his  friendship.  Moral  admiration  is  the  highest 
element  of  joy  :  and  this  requires  moral  excellence  in  the  object.  God  has  this  in 
an  infinite  degree.  Thus,  if  He  is  our  friend,  we  may  well  rejoice  in  Him,  with 
the  most  ecstatic  rapture  and  triumphant  delight.  Conclusion :  Learn — 1.  The 
paramount  necessity  of  human  nature — atonement  with  God.  2.  To  appreciate 
the  intervention  of  Christ,  by  whom  alone  it  can  be  affected.  No  system  of  belief, 
no  code  of  morality  can  accomplish  it.  To  the  gospel  men  must  look.  3.  The 
test  of  genuine  religion — joy  "  in  God."  The  world  has  joy  in  creatures  and  in 
worthless  things — the  joy  of  the  truly  good  is  joy  in  God  Himself.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Christ's  vicarious  suffering  : — A  physician  testifies :  I  have  been  chargeable  with 
forgetfulness  of  God,  and  with  disobedience  to  His  commands ;  so  that  I  am 
numbered  amons;  those  whom  He  has  threatened  with  punishment.  How,  then, 
oan  I  escape  ?  Such  is  the  constitution  of  my  mind ;  such  has  been  my  education 
as  a  man  of  honour ;  such  is  my  regard  to  the  inviolability  of  my  own  word,  and 
such  my  contempt  for  whatever  has  the  semblance  of  falsehood ;  that,  were  God  to 
allow  His  threatening  to  remain  unfulfilled,  in  consequence  of  forgiving  me, 
**  simply,  immediately,  and  unconditionally,"  I  could  not  esteem  or  pay  homage  to 
Eis  character,  even  though  constrained  to  acknowledge  Him  as  the  governor  of  the 


894  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  t; 

world.  Bat,  said  he,  I  have  read  of  atonement  on  the  principle  of  yicarioaa 
suffering.  It  was  exhibited,  under  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  in  the  erection  of  the 
brazen  serpent,  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  paschal  lamb,  and  in  the  ceremony  of  the 
scape-goat.  This  principle  is,  in  fact,  a  law  of  Providence,  which  is  traceable 
throughout  society,  in  every  age,  and  in  every  state  of  advancement.  It  forms  the 
link  of  connection  between  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New ;  and  now  that,  in 
fieriousness,  I  am  led  to  ask,  How  can  a  sinner  be  washed  from  his  guUt  ?  reason, 
feeling,  and  observation,  unite  with  the  authority  of  Scripture  in  disposing  me  to 
rest  on  the  expiatory  efficiency  of  Christ's  vicarious  suffering.  To  me  has  been 
given  faith  in  Jesus  Christ*:  and,  I  now  perceive,  that  pardon  conferred,  in  con- 
sideration of  what  my  Saviour  has  endured,  sheds  a  lustre  both  over  the  milder 
and  more  awful  attributes  of  the  Divine  character.  My  soul  is  satisfied ;  my  heart 
is  enlarged ;  my  eye  is  fixed  in  admiration  of  the  glory  of  God,  as  it  appears  "  in 
the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  (Wilson^t  Dissertation  on  the  ReasonahUneu  of  Chris' 
tianity,) 

Vers.  12-21.  By  one  man  sin  entered  Into  the  world,  and  death  hy  sin;  and  so  death 
passed  upon  all  men. — The  entrance  of  sin  into  the  world : — Sin  entered  as  a  fbe 
into  a  city,  a  wolf  into  a  fold,  a  plague  into  a  house  ;  as  an  enemy  to  destroy,  a 
thief  to  rob,  a  poison  to  infect.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Introduction  of  sin  into 
the  world : — The  word  "  entered  "  indicates  the  introduction  of  a  principle  till  then 
external  to  the  world,  and  the  word  "  by  "  throws  back  the  responsibility  of  the 
event  on  him  who,  as  it  were,  pierced  the  dyke  through  which  the  irruption  took 
place.  Paul  evidently  holds,  with  Scripture,  the  previous  existence  of  evil  in  a 
superhuman  sphere.  Assuredly  no  subsequent  transgression  is  comparable  to 
this.  It  created,  here  below,  a  state  of  things  which  subsequent  sins  only  served  to 
confirm.  If  the  question  is  asked,  how  a  being  created  good  could  perpetrate  such 
an  act,  we  answer  that  a  decision  like  this  does  not  necessarily  suppose  evil  in  its 
author.  There  is  in  moral  life  not  only  a  conflict  between  good  and  evil,  but  also 
between  good  and  good,  lower  good  and  higher  good.  The  act  of  eating  the  fruit 
of  the  tree  on  which  the  prohibition  rested,  was  not  illegitimate  in  itself.  It  became 
guilty  only  through  the  prohibition.  Man,  therefore,  found  himself  placed — and 
such  was  the  necessary  condition  of  the  moral  development  through  which  he  had 
to  pass — between  the  inclination  to  eat — an  inclination  innocent  in  itself,  but 
intended  to  be  sacrificed — and  the  positively  good  Divine  order.  At  the  instigation 
of  an  already  existent  power  of  revolt,  man  drew  from  the  depths  of  his  liberty  a 
decision  whereby  he  adhered  to  the  inclination  rather  than  to  the  Divine  Will,  and 
thus  created  in  his  whole  race,  still  identified  with  his  person,  the  permanent 
proclivity  to  prefer  inclination  to  obligation.  {Prof.  Godet,  D.D.)  Sin  and 
death : — I.  The  obigin  and  diftosion  of  sin.  1.  As  to  the  origin  of  sin.  "  By 
one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world."  (1)  Sin  is  "  the  transgression  of  the  law," 
and  the  "one  man"  by  whom  it  entered  into  the  world  was  Adam.  He  was  created 
after  the  image  of  the  Almighty,  and  placed  in  Eden,  where  we  behold  a  test  of 
obedience,  "  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,"  with  regard  to  which,  "  the 
Lord  God  commanded  the  man,  saying,  .  .  .  thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it."  Here, 
then,  was  the  law,  showing  the  right  of  God  to  command,  the  obligation  of  man  to 
obey,  and  the  responsibility  and  the  final  account  which  man  must  render  to  the 
Almighty  for  his  conduct.  Satan,  animated  by  malignant  hatred  to  God  and 
holiness,  became  the  tempter,  that  he  might  introduce  sin.  Our  first  parents 
yielded,  an  event  which  changed  the  path  of  nature,  and  whose  mighty  conse- 
quences will  be  felt  throughout  eternity.  (2)  The  transgression  of  our  first  parents 
was  of  vast  and  heinous  amount.  There  are  some  who  have  been  inclined  to  treat 
it  with  levity,  and  have  sometimes  inquired,  ••  What  mighty  offence  could  there  be 
in  the  eating  of  an  apple  ?  "  In  answer,  note  the  sins  connected  with  this  trans- 
gression. There  was — (a)  Unbelief,  because  they  denied  the  right  to  command  and 
the  penalty  that  existed,  (fc)  Ambition,  because  they  aspired  to  be  as  gods,  distin- 
guishing between  good  and  evil,  (c)  Sensuality,  because  they  wished  to  gratify 
mere  animal  appetite,  (d)  Ingratitude,  because  they  turned  against  that  God  who 
had  spread  around  them  every  enjoyment.  2.  As  to  its  diffusion,  "all  have  sinned." 
(1)  As  it  is  impossible  that  an  evil  tree  should  bring  forth  good  fruit,  so  it  was 
impossible,  when  the  nature  of  our  first  parent  had  become  corrupted,  that  one  of 
his  descendants  could  enter  into  the  world  except  as  being  a  partaier  of  corruption 
also.  Each,  then,  enters  the  world  possessing  what  we  term  original  sin.  (2) 
This  important  doctrine  is  indicated  in  Gen.  v.  3,  where  Adam  is  said  to  have 


em*.  T.]  ROMANS.  89S 

begotten  a  eon  "  in  his  own  likeness,  after  his  own  image,"  apparently  in  contrast 
to  the  fact  that  he  was  formed  "  after  the  likeness  of  God."  The  same  doctrine  is 
affirmed  in  the  inquiries  of  Job  and  Bildad,  "  Who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  oat  of 
an  unclean?  Not  one."  "How  can  he  be  clean  that  is  born  of  a  woman?" 
There  is  the  confession  of  David,  "Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity."  There  is 
the  statement  of  Christ,  "  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh."  There  is  the 
asseveration  of  the  apostle,  "  The  old  man  is  corrupt,  according  to  the  deceitful 
lusts."  (3)  Now,  that  original  sin  always  produces  actual  transgression.  Hence  it 
is  that  the  children  of  the  flrst  man  exemplify  in  themselves  unbeUef,  ambition, 
sensuality,  and  ingratitude.  Whatever  modification  may  have  been  formed  by 
education,  example,  or  interest,  this  one  fact  remains,  that  man  everywhere  is  a 
sinnen  The  charges  of  Scripture  are  without  exception  or  Umit:  "All  flesh  has 
corrupted  his  way  upon  the  earth."  "  There  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no  not  one." 
"The  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil."  II.  Thb  oaiani 
Ain>  DIFFUSION  OF  DEATH.  1.  The  Origin  of  death  "  by  sin."  Man  was  formed  with 
a  Busceptibihty  of  being  affected  by  the  prospect  of  reward,  and  by  the  fear  of 
punishment.  Obedience  was  connected  with  the  one,  and  disobedience  with  the 
other ;  and  thus  the  most  powerful  of  motives  was  put  in  action  to  aspire  to 
good,  and  to  avoid  evil.  Now,  death  was  a  penalty  presented  as  the  result  of 
transgression  (Gen.  ii.  16, 17,  iii.  17, 19).  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  Corporeal 
death  was  included,  but  much  more,  viz.,  spiritual  and  eternal  death ;  i.e.,  the 
debasement  of  human  nature  consequent  upon  its  alienation  from  God,  the  with- 
drawment  of  the  Divine  friendship,  the  terrors  of  the  conscience  at  the  prospect 
beyond  the  grave,  the  consummation  of  all  this  by  the  entrance  of  the  soul  into  a 
state  of  retribution  for  ever.  2.  The  diffusion  of  death.  "  Death  passed  upon  all 
men."  In  Adam  all  die ;  all  men  are  sinners,  and  therefore  against  all  men  the 
penalty  is  still  standing.  (1)  Corporeal  death  is  a  penalty  which  is  exacted  from 
all  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Adam.  (2)  The  ages  at  which  the  allotment  ia 
suffered  vary.  There  is  the  child  at  the  mother's  breast,  the  youth  in  the  spring- 
tide of  gaiety  and  buoyant  spirits,  the  man  in  the  maturity  of  wisdom  and  of  power, 
the  aged  bending  under  the  decrepitude  of  years.  (3)  The  method  in  which  the 
allotment  is  suffered  varies.  The  convulsions  of  nature  ;  war  ;  famine ;  accident ; 
disease,  slow  and  sudden.  And  yet,  amid  the  variety  of  modes,  seasons,  the 
path  is  the  same.  All  these  things  are  but  so  many  avenues  leading  down 
to  the  one  narrow  house,  which  has  been  appointed  for  all  living.  3.  Spiritual 
death  constitutes  the  state  of  every  man  by  nature.  Every  man  in  consequence  of 
that  state  of  spiritual  death,  is  also  in  peril  of  proceeding  to  receive  the  recompense 
of  it  in  the  agonies  of  death  eternal.    III.  Those  reflections  by  which  oub  views 

OF  THE  COMBINED  OBIQIN  AND  THE  DIFFUSION  OF  SIN  AND  DEATH  MAT  BE  DULY  SANCTI- 
FIED. 1.  It  becomes  us  to  perceive  and  to  lament  over  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of 
sin.  2.  We  are  called  upon  also  to  admire  the  riches  of  that  Divine  mercy  which 
has  provided  a  remedy  against  an  evil  which  is  so  dreadful.  (J.  Parsons.)  Death 
by  sin,  and  sin  by  man : — I.  The  obeat  ccesb  of  the  world.  1.  In  its  physical 
application.  All  the  pains  that  our  body  has  to  endure  are  but  the  efforts  of  death 
to  master  it ;  and  those  pains  are  rendered  worse  because  they  awaken  the  fear  of 
death.  It  is  because  accidents  and  disease  are  so  often  fatal  that  they  are  so 
greatly  dreaded,  and  their  pains  so  bitterly  endored.  2.  In  its  social  results. 
Friendships  shattered,  homes  broken  up,  hearts  bleeding,  does  not  the  mere 
mention  of  these  daily  facts  remind  as  what  a  curse  death  is.  The  graves  of  good 
men,  and  of  beloved  ones  bear  witness  to  more  terrible  things  about  death  than  can 
be  expressed.  3.  Spiritual  death,  all  that  is  the  opposite  of  purity,  peace,  love,  joy, 
i.e.,  of  eternal  life  is  meant  in  Scripture  by  death.  This  death,  which  is  insensi- 
bility, corruption,  helplessness,  ruin,  is  wide-spread.  Every  soul  is  either  a  temple 
or  a  tomb,  a  sanctuary  or  a  sepulchre.  Let  the  life  of  God  be  wanting,  and  the  soul 
is  dead.  Over  such  death  good  men  lament,  angels  may  wail,  and  the  Spirit  of  God 
grieves.  II.  The  obiginal  cause  oi  death.  "Sin."  Death  is  not  here  naturally. 
It  invaded  the  world  and  is  here  because  sin  is  here.  Some  find  a  difficulty  in 
admitting  that  physical  death  is  the  result  of  sin ;  our  bodies  must  die,  they  say, 
altogether  apart  from  it.  In  answer  may  we  not  ask — 1.  May  not  our  physical 
nature  be  so  injured  by  sin,  that  we  cannot  tell  from  our  present  knowledge  what 
it  might  primarily  have  been  ?  May  not  sin  have  introduced  some  mortal  element 
that  makes  death  now  a  necessity,  or  have  expelled  some  immortal  element  that 
■would  have  made  death  impossible  ?  2.  Can  we  not  see  that  the  God  who  translated 
Enoch  and  Elijah  could  have  so  translated  all  the  human  race,  supposing  it  were 


396  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  It 

necessary  that  they  should  go  ?  or— 3.  Can  we  not  see  that  but  for  sin  death  might 
have  been  without  pain  or  fear  ?  Even  now  to  the  Christian  death  resembles  sleep. 
To  the  sinless  the  analogy  might  have  been  still  more  true.  But  explain  it  how 
we  may,  the  teaching  of  the  Scripture  is  that  death  is  the  penalty  of  sin.  Shall 
not  we  count  sin,  then,  our  deadliest  enemy,  and  contend  with  it  as  such?  IIL 
The  vast  iNrLUENCB  of  man.  "By  one  man."  It  was  the  hand  of  man  that 
opened  the  world's  gates  to  sin  and  to  death.  What  the  force  of  no  foe  from 
without  could  accomplish,  happened  through  the  compliance  of  a  traitor  within. 
But  the  text  says  that  "  by  one  man  sin  entered,"  Ac.  Oh,  the  stupendous  power, 
the  momentous  responsibility  of  that  one  man  I  Had  that  "  one  man  "  resisted 
temptation  all  might  have  been  otherwise.  We  should  have  inherited  stronger 
natures,  nobler  habits,  and  holy  tendencies.  But  the  "  one  man  "  who  stood  in  the 
very  forefront  of  the  battle  used  the  will  he  had  (and  without  which  will  he  could 
not  have  had  any  virtue),  and  chose  to  sin.  And  to-day  our  ancestors'  sins,  even 
back  to  the  sin  of  the  first  sinner,  have  exercised  their  share  of  influence  in  making 
us  what  we  are.  Our  yielding  to  temptation  is  none  the  less  guilty  than  Adam's. 
For  if  our  nature  is  weaker  and  our  tendencies  more  debased,  we  have  in  the 
sufferings  and  deaths  of  generations  a  warning  such  as  he  could  not  have  known. 
So  without  charging  home  on  our  "  first  father  "  more  than  his  due  proportion  of 
guilt,  we  summon  him  here  as  an  unanswerable  witness  to  the  vast  influence  of 
individual  men.  Our  sins  should  ever  be  discouraged,  our  virtues  excited  by  the 
remembrance  that  "  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin." 
Conclusion :  Let  us  thank  God  for  the  gospel  that  so  gloriously  meets  at  every 
point  the  sad  suggestions  of  our  text.  1.  Is  death  in  the  world  ?  Its  conqueror, 
He  who  has  taken  its  sting  and  crushed  its  power,  is  the  ever  living,  ever  present 
Christ.  2.  Is  sin  in  the  world,  working  its  fearful  ravages  as  the  precursor 
of  death?  The  Saviour  from  sin  is  even  more  intimately  one  with  this 
same  human  race.  As  "  one  man"  sinned,  '•  one  man"  has  redeemed  the  world. 
And  where  sin  abounded,  grace  doth  much  more  abound.  (U.  R.  Thomas.) 
On  the  fallen  state  of  man  : — I.  The  sinfulness  of  our  fallen  state. — 1.  What  it 
is,  or  wherein  the  sinfulness  of  our  fallen  state  doth  consist.  2.  Not  only  particular 
expressions  and  passages,  but  the  whole  of  Divine  revelation,  concerning  Christ's 
coming  into  the  world  to  save  His  people  from  their  sins,  proceeds  upon  a  supposi- 
tion of  this  truth,  that  sin  has  entered  into  the  world,  and  that  all  have  sinned. 
3.  Sin  has  in  it  an  unlikeness,  or  contrariety  and  opposition,  to  the  very  nature  of 
God.  Sin  is  a  transgression  of  the  Divine  law,  and  betrays  want  of  loyalty  to  our 
supreme  Lord — rebellion,  and  a  contempt  or  denial  of  His  authority  and  right  of 
sovereignty  over  us.  Sin  is  also  dishonouring  to  God,  and  robs  Him  of  that  glory, 
honour,  and  service  we  owe  to  Him.  Sin  likewise  carries  in  it  the  baseness  of 
ingratitude  to  God,  our  kind  Benefactor.  Further,  sin  brings  confusion  into  our 
frame,  turning  our  affections  from  God  to  the  creatures,  and  exalting  the  passions 
and  appetites  to  reign  over  reason,  and  counteract  the  dictates  of  conscience. 
Again,  sin  brings  deformity,  pollution  and  defilement  on  our  souls ;  effacing  that 
likeness  to  God,  and  conformity  to  His  law,  which  is  their  beauty  and  glory ; 
stamping  them  with  the  likeness  of  the  prince  of  darkness,  and  making  them  vile 
and  filthy.  U.  The  misebt  of  oub  fallen  state.  "Death  by  sin,  and  so  death 
passed  upon  all  men."  1.  Let  us  consider  what  this  misery  is,  or  what  is  implied 
in  that  death  which  entered  into  the  world  by  sin.  They  are  exposed  to  manifold 
miseries  in  this  life — to  internal  miseries  in  the  soul — the  distress  that  flows  from 
vile  affections  and  disordeily  appetites.  Further,  the  death  which  is  here  said  to 
have  entered  into  the  world  by  sin,  no  doubt  includes  natural  death,  or  the  separa- 
tion of  soul  and  body.  The  second,  or  eternal  death,  is  by  far  the  worst  and  most 
dreadful  part  of  the  misery  to  which  we  are  exposed  by  sin.  2.  Sad  experience,  in 
all  ages  and  in  all  nations,  witnesseth  that  troubles  of  various  kinds  are  incident 
to  the  children  of  men  while  they  live  and  that  death  is  the  common  lot  of  all 
mankind.  Death  or  misery  is  the  punishment  which  sin  deserves;  its  just 
reward.  Death  or  misery  is  the  fruit  of  sin  connected  with  it  and  allotted  to  it 
by  the  law  of  God ;  God  having  expressly  threatened  to  Adam,  "  In  the  day  thou 
eatest,  thou  shalt  surely  die."  The  honour  of  the  Divine  veracity  requires  that  sin 
be  punished.  The  connection  established  betwixt  sin  and  punishment  is  not  a  mere 
arbitrary  constitution,  but  founded  upon  the  infinite  pnrity,  rectitude,  and  goodness 
of  God.  The  same  thing  may  be  argaed  from  the  Divine  justice  and  righteousness. 
Of  this  He  has  given  a  most  awful  and  striking  display  in  the  sufferings  and  death 
which  Christ,  as  our  substitute,  endured  when  He  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in 


CHAP,  v.]  BOMANS.  897 

Hia  own  body  on  the  tree.  Nay,  this  the  very  goodness  of  God,  and  the  end  of 
His  governaient,  as  the  kind  and  merciful  Kuler  of  the  world,  require.  When 
the  Lord  caused  His  goodness  to  pass  before  Moses,  He  proclaimed,  as  one 
part  of  it,  "  That  He  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty  " ;  intimating  that  even 
His  punislnng  the  guilty  is  an  act  of  His  goodness  and  love.  3.  The  great- 
ness of  that  misery  to  which  we  are,  by  sin,  become  liable.  (T.  Fernie,  31. A.) 
The  introduction  and  consequences  of  sin: — 1.  The  question  of  the  origin  of  evil  has 
exercised  and  perplexe  I  the  understandings  of  men  in  every  age.  The  theories  of 
most  of  the  ancient  philosophers  on  this  point  involved  far  greater  difficulties  than 
that  which  they  were  introduced  to  account  for.  And  how  could  it  be  otherwise? 
for  the  principles  of  the  subject  lie  beyond  the  range  of  the  human  faculties.  2. 
Even  the  Christian  revelation  does  not  profess  to  give  a  full  explanation ;  for  it 
does  not  countenance  the  presumptuous  atterupts  of  men  to  be  "  wise  above  what 
is  written."  It  is  a  religion  of  faith  ;  and  God  expects  that  all  His  rational  creatures 
should  be  willing  to  receive  with  humility,  and  thankfulness,  the  measure  of  know- 
ledge with  respect  to  Himself  and  His  ways  which  He  is  pleased  to  communicate. 
It  is  also  a  religion  of  practice.  It  was  never  intended  to  furnish  materials  for  mere 
Intellectual  exercise.  3.  In  conformity,  then,  with  these  leading  characteristics  of 
our  religion,  the  gospel  revelation,  although  it  does  not  profess  to  give  a  full  expla- 
nation of  the  origin  of  evil,  does  yet  give  us  some  information  which  calls  for  the 
exercise  of  humble  faith  and  is  intended  to  promote  the  purposes  of  practical  god- 
liness. The  substance  of  the  information  is  given  in  the  text.  I.  "  By  one  man  sin 
ENTERED  INTO  THE  WORLD."  From  this  we  leam  that  God  was  not  the  author  of  sin, 
it  formed  no  part  of  our  constitution  as  it  came  from  the  hand  of  its  Creator.  But 
although  man  was  able  to  stand,  he  was  also  liable  to  fall ;  and  he  did  fall  through  the 
temptation  of  the  devil.  The  introduction,  then,  of  sin  into  the  world  was  the  joint 
work  of  Satan  and  of  man.  II.  In  what  way  did  this  first  sin  of  our  tirst  parent 

BEAR  upon  the  CHARACTER  AND  CONDITION  OF  HIS  POSTERITY?       1.    DoCS  the  tCXt  mean 

merely  that  the  first  man  was  the  first  that  sinned,  and  that  all  his  descendants 
have  also  sinned  in  like  manner,  following  his  bad  example  ?  There  is  a  great  deal 
more  in  the  matter  than  this.  (1)  The  Scriptures,  and  especially  the  whole  subse- 
quent part  of  the  chapter,  represent  all  Adam's  posterity  as  implicated  both  in  the 
guilt  and  in  the  punishment  of  his  first  transgression.  The  trial  of  Adam,  under 
the  covenant  of  works,  was  substantially  the  trial  of  the  human  race.  Adam  was  a 
fair  specimen  of  human  nature,  and  his  conduct  was  a  fair  test  of  what  human 
nature  could  do,  and  would  do,  when  placed  in  certain  circumstances,  and  subjected 
to  certain  influences.  (2)  But  Adam  was  not  only  a  fair  specimen  of  human  nature, 
he  was  also  the  federal  nead  and  representative  of  all  his  posterity.  In  consequence 
of  this,  all  men  sinned  in  him,  and  fell  with  him,  and  are  justly  subjected  to  all  the 
penal  consequences  of  Adam's  first  sin.  2.  Adam  lost  communion  with  God.  It 
was  no  longer  consistent  with  the  hohness  of  the  Divine  character  to  hold  fellow- 
ship with  a  being  who  had  rebelled  against  His  authority.  Adam,  accordingly,  was 
expelled  from  Eden,  where  he  was  wont  to  hold  personal  intercourse  with  the  Father 
of  his  spirit.  So  all  his  posterity  are  born  where  they  cannot  in  the  ordinary  course 
of  things  expect  to  be  visited  with  any  intimations  of  a  Father's  care  and  love.  3. 
From  this  all  the  other  consequences  of  Adam's  sin  upon  hia  posterity  are  derived. 
These  are  all  comprehended  under  the  word  "death."  The  sanction  attached  to  the 
covenant  of  works  was,  that  "  in  the  day  he  broke  it  he  should  surely  die."  (1) 
That  the  word  "  death  "  here  means  more  than  the  separation  of  the  soul  and  the  body 
is  evident,  for  the  denunciation  was  not  literally  fulfilled.  At  the  same  time,  we  are 
expressly  informed  that  temporal  death  was  a  consequence  of  Adam's  transgression. 
We  are  too  much  in  the  habit  of  looking  upon  death  just  as  the  natural  conse- 
quence of  our  bodily  constitution,  and  of  the  physical  influences  to  which  we  are 
subjected.  But  had  man  not  fallen,  he  had  never  died,  nor  been  subjected  to  those 
influences  which  now  are  the  proximate  causes  of  death  ;  but  he  would  have 
flonrished  for  ever  in  undecaying  health.  (2)  Death,  then,  involves  something  more 
than  dissolution.  Men  are  naturally  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins "  ;  kept  in  a 
state  of  distance  and  alienation  from  God,  the  truth  of  which  fact  rests  upon 
grounds  independent  of  the  truth  that  man's  moral  nature  is  derived  from  Adam. 
This  might  be  proved  in  many  cases  by  an  appeal  to  a  man's  consciousness,  and  by  aa 
mpa)  tial  examination  of  the  state  of  the  world,  and  the  moral  aspect  of  human 
society.  This  condition  is  not  only  one  of  sinfulness,  but  one  of  misery.  The  true 
happiness  of  a  rational  and  immortal  creature  can  consist  only  in  the  favour  of  God. 
Everything  else,  although  it  may  afford  pleasure  for  a  time,  is  in  reality  only  a  vaia 


898  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [crnr.  ▼. 


show  of  happiness,  and  can  aJSord  no  permanent  enjoyment.  (3)  But  there  is  a 
more  alarming  sense  still  in  which  the  word  "  death  "  is  used.  The  apostle  tells  ua 
that  "the  wages  of  sin  is  death,  but  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  through  Jesua 
Christ  our  Lord,"  where,  from  the  contrast  between  the  two  parts  of  the  statement, 
it  follows  necessarily  that  the  death  which  is  the  wages  of  sin  must  be  eternal  death, 
that  16,  the  endurance  of  everlasting  misery  in  hell.  4.  The  reason  of  man  has 
often  alleged  that  it  is  inconsistent  with  justice  to  involve  men  in  the  penal  conse- 
quences of  an  offence  which  they  did  not  commit.  To  which  the  full  and  adequate 
answer  is — *'  Nay,  but,  O  man,  who  art  thou  that  repUest  against  God?"  At  the 
same  time,  before  any  one  can  show  that  he  is  treated  unjustly,  the  objector  must 
show  that,  if  he  had  been  placed  in  Adam's  circumstances,  he  would  not  have  fallen 
as  Adam  did,  but  would  have  held  fast  his  integrity.  And  this  is  a  position  which 
few  individuals  will  be  presumptuous  enough  to  maintain.  Besides,  our  actual  trans- 
gressions  are  independent  of  the  particular  manner  in  which  they  originated.  It  ia 
our  duty  to  state  plainly  and  openly  all  the  doctrines  revealed  to  us  in  Scripture ; 
and  if  vricked  men  wiU  pervert  the  doctrines  of  Scripture  their  blood  be  upon  their 
own  head.  5.  But,  remember  that  God  did  not  abandon  all  intercourse  with  the 
human  race  when  He  drove  Adam  from  paradise.  Immediately  after  the  fall.  He 
held  out  an  intimation  of  a  DeUverer,  and  by  a  series  of  wonderful  dispensations  He 
made  preparations  for  the  manifestation  of  Him  who  was  to  destroy  the  works  of 
the  devil  Accordingly,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  God  sent  into  the  world  His  only- 
begotten  Son  for  the  purpose  of  delivering  men.  On  the  ground  of  what  Jesua 
Christ  did  and  suffered,  every  man  is  warranted  to  come  to  Christ  that  he  may 
receive  salvation.  The  offers  of  the  gospel  are  addressed  to  you,  and  if  you  do  not 
accept  of  them,  you  remain,  of  course,  in  your  sins ;  but  the  guilt  is  entirely  your 
own,  you  have  rejected  the  counsel  of  God  against  yourselves  and  judged  yourselves 
unworthy  of  eternal  life.  {W.  Cunningham,  D.D.)  Original  tin : — This  doctiine 
may  be  regarded  as  it  respects  the  disposition  to  sin,  and  as  it  respects  the  guilt  of 
it.  These  two  particulars  are  distinct.  The  corruption  of  human  nature  means  ita 
tendency  to  sin.  The  guilt  of  them  who  wear  that  nature  means  their  evil  desert 
on  account  of  sin.  I.  The  fact  of  thb  sinful  disposition — 1.  Can  only  be  gathered 
from  man's  sinful  doings  or  desires.  We  do  not  need  to  dig  into  a  spring  to 
ascertain  the  quality  of  its  water,  but  to  examine  the  quality  of  the  stream  which 
flows  from  it.  We  have  no  access  to  the  hearts  of  the  inferior  animals,  and  yet  we 
can  pronounce  from  their  doings  on  their  disposition.  We  speak  of  original  ferocity 
in  the  tiger.  This  means  that,  as  the  fountain  on  the  hill-side  is  formed  and  filled 
up  before  it  sends  forth  the  rills  which  proceed  from  it,  so  a  ferocious  quality  of 
nature  exists  in  the  tiger  before  it  vents  itself  forth  in  deeds  of  ferocity ;  and  it  ia 
a  quality  not  due  to  education,  provocation,  chmate,  accident,  or  to  anything 
posterior  to  the  formation  of  the  animal  itself ;  it  is  seen,  both  from  the  universality 
and  unconquerable  strength  of  this  attribute,  that  it  belongs  essentially  to  the 
creature.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  understanding  here  the  difference  between 
original  and  actual.  Could  the  cruelties  of  a  tiger  be  denominated  sins,  then  all 
the  cruelties  inflicted  by  it  during  the  course  of  its  whole  life — then  would  these  be 
its  actual  sins.  These  mi^ht  vary  in  number  and  in  circumstances  with  different 
individuals,  yet  each  would  have  the  same  cruel  disposition.  It  is  thus  that  we 
verify  the  doctriue  of  original  sin  by  experience.  Should  it  be  found  true  of  every 
man,  that  he  is  actually  a  sinner,  then  he  sins,  not  because  of  the  mere  perversity 
of  his  education,  the  peculiar  excitements  to  evil  that  have  crossed  his  path,  the 
noxious  atmosphere  he  breathes,  or  the  vitiating  example  that  is  on  every  side  of 
him  ;  but  purely  in  virtue  of  his  being  a  man.  And  to  talk  of  the  original  sin  of 
our  species,  thereby  intending  to  signify  the  existence  of  a  prior  and  universal  dis- 
position to  sin,  IS  just  as  warrantable  as  to  affirm  the  most  certain  laws,  or  the 
soundest  classifications  in  natural  history.  2.  There  is  not  enough,  it  may  be 
thought,  of  evidence  for  this  fact,  in  those  glaring  enormities  which  give  to  history 
so  broad  an  aspect  of  wicked  violence.  For  the  actors  in  the  great  drama  are  few, 
and  though  satisfied  that  many  would  just  feel  and  do  alike  in  the  same  circum- 
stances— there  is  yet  room  for  affirming  that,  in  the  unseen  privacies  of  social  and 
domestic  Ufe,  some  are  to  be  found  who  pass  a  guileless  and  a  perfect  hfe  in 
this  world.  Now  it  is  quite  impossible  to  meet  this  affirmation  by  passing  all  the 
individuals  of  our  race  before  you,  and  pointing  out  the  actual  iniquity  of  the  heart 
or  life,  which  proves  them  corrupt  members  of  a  corrupt  family.  You  cannot  make 
ail  men  manifest  to  each  man ;  but  you  may  make  each  man  manifest  to  liimself. 
7oo  may  appeal  to  his  conscience,  and  in  defect  of  evidence  in  his  outward  history 


OBAP.  T.]  ROMANS.  899 

700  may  accompany  him  to  that  place  where  the  emanating  fountain  of  sin  is  situ- 
ated. You  may  enter  along  with  him  into  the  recesses  of  his  heart,  and  there  detect 
the  preference  to  its  own  will,  the  slight  hold  that  the  authority  of  God  has  over  it. 
We  dispute  not  the  power  of  many  amiable  principles  in  the  heart  of  man,  but 
which  work  without  the  recognition  of  God.  It  is  this  ungodliness  which  can  be 
fastened  on  every  child  of  Adam.  From  such  a  fountain  innumerable  are  the 
streams  of  disobedience  which  will  issue ;  and  though  many  of  them  may  not  be  so 
deeply  tinged,  yet  still  in  the  fountain  itself  there  is  independence  of  God.  Pat  out 
our  planet  by  the  side  of  another,  where  all  felt  the  same  delight  in  God  that  angels 
feel,  and  are  you  to  say  of  such  a  difiference  that  it  has  no  cause  ?  Must  there  not 
be  a  something  in  the  original  make  and  a  constitution  of  the  two  families  to 
account  for  such  a  diversity  ?  3.  We  are  quite  aware  that  this  principle  is  but  faintly 
recognised  by  many  expounders  of  human  virtue.  And  therefore  it  is  that  we  hold  it 
indeed  a  most  valid  testimony  in  behalf  of  our  doctrine,  when  they  are  rendered 
heartless  by  disappointment ;  and  take  revenge  upon  their  disciples  by  pouring  forth 
the  bitterest  misanthropy  against  them.  Even  on  their  own  ground,  original  sin 
might  find  enough  of  argument  to  make  it  respectable.  4.  The  existence  of  man's 
corruption,  then,  is  proved  from  experience  ;  how  it  entered  into  the  world  is  alto- 
gether a  matter  of  testimony.  "  By  one  man,"  says  our  text,  "  sin  entered  into  the 
world."  He  came  out  pure  and  righteous  from  the  hand  of  God;  but  Adam,  after 
he  had  yielded  to  temptation,  was  a  changed  man,  and  that  change  was  permanent, 
and  while  God  made  man  after  His  own  image,  the  very  first  person  who  was  born 
into  the  world,  came  to  it  in  the  image  of  his  parent.  This  is  the  simple  statement, 
and  we  are  not  able  to  give  the  explanation.  The  first  tree  of  a  particular  species 
may  be  conceived  to  have  come  from  the  Creator's  hand  with  the  most  exquisite 
flavour.  A  pestilential  gust  may  have  passed  over  it,  and  so  changed  its  nature, 
that  all  its  fruit  afterwards  should  be  sour.  After  this  change  it  may  be  con- 
ceived to  have  dropt  its  seeds,  and  all  the  future  trees  rise  in  the  transformed  like- 
ness of  the  tree  from  which  they  sprung.  If  this  were  credibly  attested,  we  are  not 
prepared  to  resist  it ;  and  as  little  are  we  entitled  to  set  ourselves  in  opposition  to 
the  Bible  statement  that  a  moral  blight  came  over  the  character  of  our  great  pro- 
genitor ;  and  that  a  race  proceeded  from  him  with  that  very  taint  of  degeneracy 
that  he  had  taken  on.  5.  Another  fact  announced  in  this  passage  is  the  connection 
between  the  corruption  of  our  nature  and  its  mortality.  This  brings  out  in  another 
way  the  distinction  between  actual  and  original  sin.  All  have  not  sinned  after  the 
pimilitude  of  Adam's  transgression,  i.e.,  by  a  positive  deed  of  disobedience ;  infants 
e.g.  The  death  that  they  undergo  is  not  the  fruit  of  any  actual  iniquity,  but  of  that 
moral  virus  which  has  descended  from  the  common  fountain.  And  what  is  this 
bat  the  original  and  constitutional  aptitude  that  there  is  to  sinning,  a  disposition 
that  only  yet  exists  in  embryo,  but  which  will  come  out  into  deed  so  soon  as  powers 
and  opportunities  are  expanded.  The  infant  tiger  has  not  yet  performed  one  act  of 
ferocity,  but  we  are  sure  that  all  the  rudiments  of  ferocity  exist  in  its  native  consti- 
tation.  The  tender  sapling  of  the  crab-tree  has  not  yet  yielded  one  sour  apple,  but 
we  know  that  there  is  an  organic  necessity  for  its  producing  this  kind  of  fruit.  And 
whether  or  not  we  should  put  to  the  account  of  this  the  boisterous  outcry  of  an 
infant,  the  constant  exactions  it  makes,  and  its  spurning  impatience  of  all  resistance 
and  control,  so  as  to  be  the  little  tyrant  to  whose  brief  but  most  effective  authority 
the  entire  circle  of  relationship  must  bend,  still  the  disease  is  radically  there. 
Original  sin,  then,  as  it  respects  the  inborn  depravity  of  our  race,  is  at  one  with  the 
actual  experience  of  mankind.  II.  We  should  further  proceed  to  show  in  how  far 
original  sin,  as  it  respects  the  imputation  of  guilt  to  all  who  abe  undeb  it,  is  at 
ONE  WITH  THE  MORAL  SENSE  OF  MANKIND.  Experience  takes  cognisance  of  whether 
such  a  thing  is,  and  so  is  applicable  to  the  question  whether  a  depraved  tendency  to 
moral  evil  is  or  is  not  in  the  human  constitution.  The  moral  sense  of  man  takes 
cognisance  of  whether  such  a  thing  ought  to  be,  and  whether  man  ought  to  be  dealt 
with  as  a  criminal  on  account  of  a  tendency  which  came  unbidden  by  him  into  the 
world.  1.  To  determine  the  question  we  should  inquire  how  much  man  requires 
to  have  within  his  view,  ere  his  moral  sense  be  able  to  pronounce  conclusively.  One 
may  see  a  dagger  projected  from  a  curtain,  grasped  by  a  human  hand,  directed 
against  the  bosom  of  an  unconscious  sleeper ;  and,  seeing  no  more,  he  would  infer 
that  the  individual  was  an  assassin.  Had  he  seen  all  he  might  have  seen  that  he 
was  in  fact  an  overpowered  victim,  an  unwilling  instrument  of  the  deed.  The  moral 
sense  would  then  instantly  reverse  the  former  decision  and  transfer  the  charge  to 
those  who  were  behind.   2.  Now,  the  mind  of  man,  in  order  to  be  made  up  as  to  the 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oa»».  t. 

moral  character  of  any  act,  needs  to  know  only  what  the  intention  was  that  origi- 
nated the  act.    An  act  against  the  will  indicates  no  demerit  on  the  part  of  him  who 
performed  it.     But  an  act  with  the  will  gives  us  the  full  impression  of  demerit. 
How  the  disposition  got  there  is  not  the  question  which  the  moral  sense  of  man, 
when  he  is  unvitiated  by  a  taste  for  speculation,  takes  any  concern  in.   Give  us  two 
individuals — one  of  whom  is  revengeful  and  profligate,  and  the  other  kind  and 
godly,  and  our  moral  sense  leads  us  to  regard  the  one  as  blameable  and  the  other 
as  praiseworthy.    And  in  so  doing  it  does  not  look  so  far  back  as  to  the  originating 
cause  of  the  distinction.     3.  What  stumbles  the  speculative  inquirer  is  this,  he 
thinks  that  a  man  born  with  a  sinful  disposition  is  bom  with  the  necessity  of  sin- 
ning, which  exempts  him  from  all  imputation  of  guiltiness.    But  he  confounds  two 
things  which  are  distinct,  viz.,  the  necessity  that  is  against  the  will  with  the 
necessity  that  is  with  the  will.    The  man  who  struggled  against  the  external  force 
that  compelled  him  to  thrust  a  dagger  into  the  bosom  of  his  friend,  was  operated 
upon  by  a  necessity  that  was  against  his  will ;  and  you  exempt  him  from  aU  charge 
of  criminality.    But  the  man  who  does  the  same  thing  at  the  spontaneous  bidding 
of  his  own  heart,  this  you  irresistibly  condemn.     The  only  necessity  which  excuses 
a  man  for  doing  evil,  is  a  necessity  that  forces  him  by  an  external  violence  to  do  it, 
against  the  bent  of  his  will  struggling  most  honestly  and  determinedly  to  resist  it. 
But  if  the  necessity  be  that  his  will  is  bent  upon  the  doing  of  it,  then  such  a  neces- 
sity just  aggravates  the  man's  guiltiness.     4.  It  is  enough,  then,  that  a  disposition 
to  moral  evil  exists ;  and  however  it  originated,  it  calls  forth,  by  the  law  of  cor 
moral  nature,  a  sentiment  of  blame  or  reprobation.    If  it  be  asked  how  this  can  be, 
we  reply  that  we  do  not  know.  It  is  not  the  only  fact  of  which  we  can  offer  no  other 
explanation  than  that  simply  such  is  the  case.     We  can  no  more  account  for  our 
physical  than  for  our  moral  sensations.    When  we  eat  the  fruit  of  the  orange-tree 
we  feel  the  bitterness ;  but  we  do  not  know  how  this  sensation  upon  our  palate 
stands  connected  with  a  constitutional  property  in  the  tree,  which  has  descended  to 
it  through  a  long  line  of  ancestry.    And  when  we  look  to  the  bitter  fruit  of  trans- 
gression, and  feel  upon  our  moral  sense  a  nauseating  revolt,  we  do  not  know  how 
this  impression  stands  connected  with  a  tendency  which  has  been  derived  through 
many  centuries.    But  certain  it  is  that  the  origin  of  our  depravity  has  nothing  to 
do  with  the  sense  and  feeling  of  its  loathesomeness  wherewith  we  regard  it.    6. 
There  is  an  effectual  way  of  bringing  this  to  the  test.  Let  a  neighbour  inflict  moral 
wrong  or  injury ;  will  not  the  feelii;g  of  resentment  rise  immediately?    Will  you 
stop  to  inquire  whence  he  derived  the  malice,  or  selfishness,  under  which  you  suflerf 
Is  it  not  simply  enough  that  he  wilfully  tramples  upon  your  rights  ?    If  it  be  under 
some  necessity  which  operates  against  his  disposition,  this  may  soften  your  resent- 
ment.    But  if  it  be  under  that  kind  of  necessity  which  arises  from  the  strength  of 
his  disposition  to  do  you  harm,  this  will  only  stimulate  your  resentment.    And 
thinkest  thou,  0  man,  who  judgest  another  for  his  returns  of  unworthiness  to  you, 
that  thou  wilt  escape  the  judgment  of  God  ?    6.  These  remarks  may  prepare  the 
way  for  all  that  man  by  his  moral  sense  can  understand  in  the  imputation  of  Adam's 
sin.    We  confess  that  no  man  is  responsible  for  the  doings  of  another  whom  he 
never  saw,  t  id  who  departed  this  Ufe  many  centuries  before  him.  But  if  the  doings 
of  a  distant  ancestor  have  in  point  of  fact  corrupted  his  moral  nature,  and  if  this 
corruption  has  been  transmitted  to  his  descendants,  then  we  can  see  how  these 
become  responsible,  not  for  what  their  forefathers  did,  but  for  what  they  themselves 
do  under  the  corrupt  disposition  that  they  have  received  from  their  forefather. 
According  to  this  explanation,  every  man  still  reapeth  not  what  another  soweth,  but 
what  he  soweth  himself.    Every  man  eateth  the  fruit  of  his  own  doings.    IIL  Iw 
ATTEMPTING  TO  VINDICATE  THE  DEALINGS  OF  GoD  with  the  species,  let  US  begin  with  the 
portion  now  within  hearing.    What  have  you  to  complain  of  ?     You  say  that,  with- 
out your  consent,  a  corrupt  nature  has  been  given  you,  and  that  so  sin  is  unavoid- 
able, and  yet  there  is  a  law  which  denounces  upon  this  sin  the  torments  of  eternity. 
Well, is  this  an  honest  complaint?    Do  you  really  feel  your  corrupt  nature, and  are 
you  accordingly  most  desirous  to  be  rid  of  it  ?    Well,  God  is  at  this  moment  holding 
out  to  you  in  offer  the  very  relief  which  you  now  tell  us  that  your  heart  is  set  upon. 
Does  not  God  wipe  His  hands  of  the  foul  charge  that  His  sinful  creatures  would 
prefer  against  Him,  when  He  says,  "  Turn  unto  Me  and  I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit 
upon  you  "  ?    Who  does  not  see  that  every  possible  objection  which  can  be  raised 
against  the  Creator  is  most  fully  and  fairly  disarmed  by  what  He  offers  to  man  in 
the  gospel  ?     And  if  man  will  persist  in  charging  upon  God  a  depravity  that  He 
both  asks  and  enables  us  to  give  up,  did  not  we  firmly  retain  it  by  the  wilful  grasp 


iBAT.  T.]  ROMANS.  401 

of  oar  own  inolinationa,  is  it  not  plain  that  on  the  day  of  reckoning  it  wUl  be  clear 
that  the  complaints  of  man,  because  of  his  corruption,  have  been  those  of  a  hypo- 
crite, who  secretly  loved  the  very  thing  he  so  opeuly  complained  of.  We  may  con- 
ceive a  man  murmuring  at  being  upon  a  territory  over  which  there  is  spread  a  foul 
atmosphere  charged  with  all  the  elements  of  discomfort  and  disease,  and  at  length 
to  be  wrapped  in  some  devouring  flame  which  would  burn  up  every  creature  within 
its  vortex.  But  let  God  point  his  way  to  another  country,  where  freshness  was  in 
every  breeze,  and  the  whole  air  shed  health  and  fertility  and  joy  over  the  land  thai 
it  encompassed — let  Him  offer  all  the  facilities  of  conveyance  so  as  to  make  it  turn 
simply  upon  the  man's  will,  whether  he  should  continue  in  the  accursed  region  or 
be  transported  to  another.  And  will  not  the  worthless  choice  to  abide  rather  than 
to  move,  acquit  God  of  the  severity  wherewith  He  has  been  charged,  and  unmask 
the  hypocrisy  of  all  the  reproaches  which  man  has  uttered  against  Him  ?  What  is 
true  of  the  original  corruption  is  also  true  of  the  original  guilt.  Do  you  complain  of 
that  debt  under  the  weight  and  oppression  of  which  you  came  into  the  world?  What 
ground,  we  ask,  is  there  for  complaining,  when  the  offer  is  fairly  put  within  your  reach, 
of  a  most  free  and  ample  discharge,  and  that  not  merely  for  the  guilt  of  original,  but 
also  for  the  whole  guUt  of  your  proper  and  personal  sinfulness.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 
Original  gin,  a  scientific  fact : — Now  he  who  would  deny  original  sin  must  contradict 
all  experience  in  the  transmission  of  qualities.  The  very  hound  transmits  his 
pecnliaritie^,  learnt  by  education,  and  the  Spanish  horse  his  paces,  taught  by 
art,  to  his  offspring,  as  a  part  of  their  nature.  If  it  were  not  so  in  man,  there 
could  be  no  history  of  man  as  a  species ;  no  tracing  out  the  tendencies  of 
a  race  or  nation ;  nothing  but  the  unconnected  repetitions  of  isolated  in- 
dividuals, and  their  lives.  It  is  plain  that  the  first  man  must  have  exerted  on 
his  race  an  influence  quite  peculiar;  that  his  acts  must  have  biassed  their 
acts.  And  this  bias  or  tendency  is  what  we  call  original  sin.  {F.  W.  Robertson.) 
Original  sin: — Probably  no  one  will  seriously  deny  the  fact  which  is  asserted 
throughout  the  Bible  that  "  all  are  under  sin,"  that "  in  many  things  we  offend  all." 
The  universality  of  sin,  apart  from  all  theories  as  to  its  origin,  or  the  cause  of  its 
universality,  is  a  fact  of  experience  as  incontestable  as  any  universal  statement 
about  the  human  race  can  be.  This  is  different  from  the  doctrine  of  original  sin ; 
it  is  an  assertion  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  all  human  beings  whom  we  know,  all  of 
whom  any  record  exists  have,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  shown  in  one  point  or  another 
a  weakness  and  corruption  of  nature,  a  faultiness — to  use  the  lowest  term — which 
in  most  cases  rises  to  occasional  wickedness,  in  some  to  the  most  extreme  and  con- 
tinuous depravity.  But  it  has  been  pointed  out  by  a  great  theologian  of  our  own 
time,  that  when  such  a  fact  as  this  can  be  afiSrmed  of  every  representative  of  a  race 
composed  of  such  various  sorts,  under  such  various  conditions  of  time  and  place, 
as  the  human  race,  the  fact  points  to  a  law.  No  fact  can  be  universal  unless  some 
law,  some  general  cause,  lies  behind  it.  We  may  not  always  know  what  it  is,  but 
we  believe  that  it  is  there  though  we  have  not  yet  discovered  it.  It  is  simply  im- 
possible for  us  to  think  that  the  universal  phenomenon  of  sin  is  due  to  chance ; 
that  men,  differently  constituted  and  differently  placed  as  they  are,  should  all  have 
fallen  into  sin  by  accident.  There  must  be,  then,  some  law  corresponding  to  the 
fact  and  explaining  it.  Such  a  law  is  that  which  we  assert  in  asserting  the  doctrine 
of  original  sin.  For  this  doctrine  does  not  simply  declare  that  all  men  sin — that 
would  be  merely  a  re-statement  of  the  universal  fact,  a  summary,  not  a  law  ;  but 
it  asserts  that  this  is  the  result  of  inheritance  depending  upon  the  physical  relation 
of  one  generation  to  another,  and  that  each  human  being  briugs  with  him  into  the 
world  a  tendency  to  sin,  which  is  due  to  no  act  or  wish  of  his  own,  but  is  the  working 
out  of  far-off  causes  among  the  dim  origins  of  the  human  race.  That  is  the  law 
which,  according  to  the  Bible  and  the  Church,  lies  behind  and  explains  the 
universal  fact  of  sin.  There  might  be  another  explanation,  another  law.  It  might 
be  maintained  that  every  soul  was  freshly  created  by  God,  that  it  came  into  the 
world  unaffected  by  the  previous  conditions  of  the  race,  untainted  by  any  stain  of 
will  or  deed  of  its  human  ancestry,  and  that  by  the  direct  act  of  its  Creator  every 
such  soul  has  been  made  to  fall  into  sin ;  so  that  the  phenomenon  of  universal 
sinfulness  is  simply  a  repetition  in  millions  and  millions  of  cases  of  an  act  of  God's 
controlling  power  by  which  men  are  allowed — nay,  impelled— to  become  evil.  This 
is  a  conceivable  theory ;  but  the  consuience  of  every  Christian  must  revolt  from 
such  a  travesty  of  God's  love  and  human  free-will.  Whatever  the  mystery  of  sin 
may  be— and  I  am  not,  of  course,  attempting  (the  Church  has  never  attemptpd)  to 
explain  its  origin,  its  first  appearance  in  God's  universe — we  must  at  ieasl  bring  it 
VOL. L  26 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [cmap.  t. 

into  harmony  with  what  we  know  of  God's  will  and  of  His  methods  in  other  parts 

of  His  action.     And  it  is  sorely  nure  consistent  with  our  knowledge  of  the  aniverse 

to  say  that  sin  is  due  to  one  great  cause  acting  uniformly  throughout  the  humaa 

race  than  to  ascribe  it  to  so  many  repeated  separate  acts  of  God's  will.    We  dare 

not  believe  that  God  directly  wills  that  any  soul  should  sin,  but  we  can  see  that 

indirectly,  and  in  consequence  of  one  of  the  great  general  laws  of  His  action,  He 

may  allow  men  to  reap  the  fruit  of  human  sin  even  if  the  harvest  should  be  their 

own  continuance  in  sin.    That,  apart  from  the  question  of  redemption,  is  the 

Christian  doctrine  of  original  sin.    It  depends  upon  a  general  law,  the  law  of  the 

intimate  relation  of  human  beings  one  to  another — the  solidarity,  as  it  is  called,  of 

the  human  race.    Indeed,  but  for  this  relation,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  Christianity 

could  be  an  intelligible  system  at  alL    If  we  do  not  share  in  the  sinfulness  of  our 

forefathers,  neither  do  we  share  in  the  redemption  won  for  us  by  Christ,  the  spiritual 

Head  of  our  race.    For  "  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made 

alive."    If  men  are  simply  separate  atoms,  unrelated  to  each  other  save  by  the 

similarity  of  outward  form  and  nature,  how  can  they  be  Christ's  brethren?    If 

they  do  not  constitute  a  body,  how  is  Christ  the  Head?    (Hon.  and  Rev.  A.  T. 

Lyttelton.)  Original  tin :    why   God  did  not  arrett  itt   eonsequencei : — Was 

it  compatible  with  Divine   perfection    to    let    this    succession    of    generations, 

stained  with  original  vice,  come  into  the  world?     God  certainly  might  have 

annihilated  the  perverted  race  in  its  head,  and  replaced  it  by  a  new  one ;  bat 

this  would  have  been  to  confess  Himself  vanquished  by  the  adversary.    He  might, 

on  the  contrary,  accept  it  such  as  sin  had  made  it,  and  leave  it  to  develop  in  the 

natural  way,  holding  it  in  His  power  to  recover  it ;  and  this  would  be  to  gain  a 

victory  on  the  field  of  battle  where  He  seemed  to  have  been  conquered.    Conscience 

Bays  to  which  of  these  two  courses  God  must  give  the  preference,  and  Scripture 

teaches  us  which  He  has  preferred.    {Prof.  Godet.)        Original  tin : — Sin  is  bom 

in  a  child  as  surely  as  fbre  is  in  the  flint — it  only  waits  to  be  brought  oat  and 

manifested.    (W.  F.  Hook,  D.D.)        Original  tin  acted  as  an  extinguisher  ;  and 

therefore  the  soul  is  born  in  darkness  and  cannot  see  until  enlightened  by  the  Holy 

Spirit.     {A.  Toplady,  M.A.)        Original  tin  : — Our  father  Adam  had  a  great  estate 

enough  at  first,  but  he  soon  lost  it.    He  violated  the  trust  on  which  he  held  his 

property,  and  he  was  cast  out  of  the  inheritance,  and  turned  adrift  into  the  world 

to  earn  his  bread  as  a  day  labourer  by  tilling  the  ground  whence  he  was  taken.  Hia 

eldest  son  was  a  vagabond ;  the  first-bom  of  our  race  was  a  convict  upon  tioket-of< 

leave.    If  any  suppose  that  we  have  inherited  some  good  thing  by  natural  descent, 

they  go  very  contrary  to  what  David  tells  us,  when  he  declares,  •'  Behold,  I  was 

shapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me."  Our  first  parents  were 

ntter  bankrupts.    They  left  as  nothing  but  a  heritage  of  old  debts,  and  a  propensity 

to  accumulate  yet  more  personal  obligations.    Well  may  we  be  poor  who  come  into 

this  world  "heirs  of  wrath,"  with  a  decayed  estate  and  tainted  blood.    (C.  H, 

Spurgeon.)        Original  tin,  a  root: — A  pious  minister,  having  preached  on  the 

doctrine  of  original  sin,  was  afterwards  waited  on  by  some  persons,  who  stated 

their  objections  to  what  he  had  advanced.    After  hearing  them,  he  said,  "  I  hope 

yoa  do  not  deny  actual  sin  too  ?  "    '•  No,"  they  replied.    The  good  man  expressed 

his  satisfaction  at  their  acknowledgment ;  but,  to  show  the  foUy  of  their  opiniona 

in  denying  a  doctrine  so  plainly  taught  in  Scripture,  he  asked  them,  '•  Did  you  ever 

see  a  tree  growing  without  a  root  ?  "    (7.  G.  Wilson.)        The  misery  of  man's  sinful 

state : — Note — I.   That  all  mankind  abb  made  miseeablb.     This  needs  no  proof. 

Sad  experience  in  all  ages  confirms  the  truth  of  this  assertion.    II.  That  this 

MiSEBY  CAME  iTFOK  MEN  BY  THE  FALL.  Man  Came  uot  ont  of  God's  hand  with  the  tear 

in  his  eye,  or  sorrow  in  his  heart,  or  a  burden  on  his  back.    Death  never  could 

enter  the  gates  of  the  world  till  sin  set  them  wide  (Gen.  iii^.     And  then  one  sin 

let  in  the  flood,  and  many  sins  followed  and  increased  it.    The  first  pilot  dashed 

the  ship  on  a  rock,  and  then  all  that  were  in  it  were  cast  into  a  sea  of  misery.    lU. 

What  that  miseby  is.    Note — 1.  Man's  loss  by  the  fall.     He  has  lost  communion 

with  God.     (1)  A  saving  interest  in  God  as  his  God.    Man  could  then  call  God  his 

own  God,  his  Friend,  his  Portion,  being  in  covenant  with  Him.     (2)  Sweet  and 

comfortable  society  and  fellowship  with  God  (Gen.  iii.  8).    Thus  man  lost  God 

(Eph.  il.  12),  the  greatest  and  the  fountain  of  all  other  losses.     Had  the  sun  been 

tor  ever  darkened,  it  had  been  no  such  loss  as  this.  Man  is  a  mere  nothing  without 

God ;  a  nothing  in  nature  without  His  common  presence,  and  a  nothing  in  happinesa 

without  His  gracious  presence  (Psa.  xxx.  5 ;  Ixiii.  3).    2.  What  man  is  brought 

under  by  the  fall.    (1)  God's  wrath  (Eph.  li.  3).    (2)  Hia  ourse  (Gal.  iii.  10).    t. 


0HA7.  v.]  ROMANS.  403 

What  man  is  liable  to  in  conseqaenoe.  (1)  In  this  world,  (a)  To  all  the  miseries 
of  this  life.  First,  outward  miseries,  as,  God's  curse  upon  the  creature  for  our  sake 
(Gen.  iii.  17) ;  calamities,  such  as  sword,  famine,  and  pestilence ;  miseries  on  men'a 
bodies,  sickness,  pains,  4c. ;  on  our  estates,  as  losses,  wrongs,  and  oppressions ;  on 
our  names,  by  reproach,  disgrace,  <feo. ;  on  our  employments;  on  our  relat.ons. 
Secondly,  inward  spiritual  miseries,  as  "  blindness  of  mind  "  (Eph.  iv.  13  ;  1  Cor. 
iv.  4),  "a  reprobate  sense"  ^chap.  i.  28),  "strong  delusions"  (2  Thess.  ii.  11), 
"  hardness  of  heart "  (chap.  u.  6),  "  vile  affections  "  (chap.  i.  26),  fear,  sorrow,  and 
horror  of  conscience  (Isa.  xxxiiL  14).  {b)  At  the  end  of  this  life,  man  is  liable  to 
death  (chap.  vi.  23).  (2)  In  the  world  to  come,  (a)  The  punishment  of  loss — of 
all  the  good  things  of  this  life  ;  of  aU  the  good  things  which  they  are  enjoyed  here ; 
tile  favourable  presence  and  enjoyment  of  God  and  Christ  (Matt.  xxv.  41) ;  of  aU 
the  glory  and  blessedness  above,  (b)  The  punishment  of  sense.  Conclusion :  1. 
See  here  the  great  evil  of  sin.  2.  Woeful  is  the  case  of  all  who  are  in  a  state  of 
nature.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Man'afall : — Let  us  consider — I.  That  sin  which  bt 
ONE  MAN  ENTERED  INTO  THE  woBLD.  1.  What  this  sin  was,  and  how  it  came  to  be 
committed.  The  sin  itself,  as  to  the  outward  act,  was  tlie  eating  of  the  tree  of 
knowledge  contrary  to  the  command  of  God.  The  manner  of  doing  it  may  be 
collected  from  Gen.  iii.  compared  with  other  Scriptures.  2.  Its  heinousness.  (1) 
It  contained  many  sins,  (a)  Direct  disobedience  and  rebellion  against  God.  (&) 
Unbelief,  (c)  Inordinate  indulgence  to  the  sensual  appetite,  (d)  Pride  and 
covetousness.  («)  An  envious  discontent  with  God.  (/)  Sacrilege;  for  God  was 
robbed,  (g)  Idolatry  ;  because  the  trust  due  to  God  only  was  transferred  to  the  devil, 
and  because  they  made  a  tree  a  god  to  themselves,  and  expected  from  it  greater 
benefits  than  their  Maker  would  bestow,  (h)  Ingratitude,  (i)  Injustice  and  cruelty 
against  all  their  posterity.  (2)  It  had  special  aggravations,  (a)  It  was  committed 
in  a  direct  manner  against  God,  and  struck  at  all  His  perfections  at  once.  His 
Majesty  was  treated  by  it  with  irreverence.  His  truth  was  arraigned,  as  though 
He  had  spoken  what  was  equivocal  or  false.  His  Omnipotence  was  impeached, 
by  the  hope  of  escaping  an  evil  certainly  threatened  ;  His  goodness  was  contemned 
by  ingratitude.  Finally,  His  omnipresence,  wisdom,  justice,  and  holiness  all  shared 
in  the  affront.  (6)  It  was  perfectly  voluntary,  being  done  against  the  clearest 
light,  (c)  The  broken  command  was  an  easy  one,  for  it  required  nothing  to  be  done, 
but  only  somewhat  to  be  forebome.  (d)  The  sin  was  committed  in  paradise,  a 
delightful  spot,  honoured  with  the  special  presence  of  God  and  friendly  communion 
with  Him.  (e)  This  sin  was  the  first  in  our  world,  which  gave  birth  to  the  innume- 
rable sins  and  calamities.  II.  The  concebn  which  all  men  have  in  the  fibst  sin. 
1.  All  men  suffer  and  die  through  it  (vers.  14-17).  2.  It  belongs  in  the  guilt  of  it 
to  all  men.  '*  All  have  sinned."  How  7  Why,  in  Adam,  their  common  father  and 
head.  (See  also  vers.  18,  19.)  III.  The  sbeadful  consequences  of  the  fibst  sik 
TO  all  the  fosxebitt  of  Adam.  1.  Natural  death,  with  a  long  train  of  miseries  in 
life  preceding  it.  2.  The  punishments  of  another  world.  3.  One  which  commencea 
in  every  man  on  the  first  union  of  soul  and  body — the  want  of  habitual  rectitude, 
or  of  effectual  principles  to  incline  and  enable  him  to  do  what  is  pleasing  to  God, 
together  with  the  inherency  of  an  evil  habit  and  bias  prompting  and  disposing  him 
to  sinful  actions.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  us  learn  from  the  first  sin  growing  into  such 
an  enormous  size,  though  conversant  about  a  matter  in  itself  inconsiderable,  never 
to  account  the  doing  of  anything  which  God  forbids  a  slight  trespass,  and  never  to 
venture  on  it  under  such  a  pretence  (1  Cor.  v.  6 ;  James  iii.  5).  2.  Let  us  be  deeply 
humbled  before  God,  for  original  sin  without  as,  even  that  of  our  first  parents, 
which,  though  not  done  by  as  is  yet  upon  us  by  a  just  imputation,  and  for  original 
sin  within  us.  3.  Let  us  see  that  we  abuse  not  this  doctrine  by  charging  all  on^ir 
sins  so  to  the  score  of  original  corruption,  as  by  the  presence  of  a  necessity,  either 
to  take  an  unbounded  Uberty  in  sinning  or  to  extenuate  the  guilt  of  what  we  do 
knowingly  with  free  and  fuU  consent  of  will.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  incumbent  on 
as  to  watch,  strive,  and  pray  the  more  carefully  and  earnestly  against  sin  as  it  easily 
besets  as.  4.  Let  us  take  occasion  from  the  view  of  our  fall  in  the  first  Adam,  with 
its  sad  consequences,  to  admire  and  thankfully  use  the  way  of  our  recovery  in  the 
second,  which  is  in  exact  opposition  to  the  former,  only  with  superior  efficacy  and 
advantage.  (Hubbard-Puritan.)  Human  depravity  : — It  is — I.  Total  in  rra 
INFLUENCES  ovEB  THE  MIND.  Even — 1.  The  Understanding.  2.  The  conscience. 
8.  The  wUl.  4.  The  affections.  II.  Univebsal  in  its  pbevalence  among  mankind.  It 
exists  in  all — 1.  Ages.  2.  Countries.  8.  Communities.  4.  Families.  6.  Individuals. 
UI.  Ikhebbst  IX  OUB  SAXUBS  vt  CONSEQUENCE  OF  THE  FALL.    1.  The  Origin  of  sin  is  in 


401  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0HA».  T. 

the  creature,  not  in  the  Creator.  2.  Accordingly,  man  was  created  pure  and  holy.  3. 
But  almost  the  first  thing  recorded  of  him  is  his  fall.  4.  The  results  of  the  fall — ita 
degradation  and  misery  of  man — pass  from  one  generation  to  another.  ( T.  Raffles,  D.D.) 
The  need  of  healing : — 1.  "  The  traits  of  greatness  and  of  misery  in  man  are  so 
dear,"  says  Pascal,  *'  that  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  true  religion  should 
teach  us  that  there  is  in  him  some  great  principle  of  greatness,  and  at  the  same 
time  some  great  principle  of  misery."  2.  In  Gen.  iii.  we  see  the  beginning  of  all 
that  dreary,  mean,  disfiguring  misery  that  rudely  clashes  with  the  honour  of 
humanity,  as  the  heir  of  a  great  house  entering  upon  his  envied  heritage  is  sad- 
dened for  life  as  he  is  told  the  secret  of  some  shameful  cloud  upon  the  name  he 
boasts,  some  taint  of  dishonour  or  wretchedness  that  is  in  his  veins — so  we  learn 
the  great  blot  on  our  scutcheon :  how  it  is  that  we  can  be  so  noble  and  so  base — it 
is  because  "by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin."     I.  Lbt  us 

TBY   TO   BEE    HOW   NATURALLY  FAITH    MAT  LINK    THE   BECOED   OP  THE   FALL  WITH  THB 

FACTS  OF  ouB  PBESENT  STATE.     1.  There  is  a  clear  and  famiUar  analogy  between 
our  childhood  and  the  childhood  of  our  race.     We  look  back,  and  in  both  cases 
the  utmost  effort  of  our  thought  fails  long  before  it  draws  near  to  the  first  dawn  of 
life  and  consciousness ;  in  both  cases  there  is  much  that  we  must  take  on  trust, 
here  relying  upon  the  words  of  earthly  parents,  there  upon  the  Word  of  God.    And 
we  then  come  to  find,  in  both  cases,  that  life  itself  is  a  verification  of  that  which 
we  have  thus  received  by  faith.     (1)  For  as  we  try  to  recall  the  first  years  of  our 
own  lives,  the  lines  which  we  can  retrace  through  our  school-days  grow  faint  and 
uncertain  as  they  enter  the  furthest  past,  till  in  the  far  distance  of  childhood  only 
a  few  points  of  quivering  light  appear,  Uke  the  scattered  lamps  of  a  straggling 
suburb,  and  then  the  tracks  of  consciousness  are  utterly  lost  in  impenetrable  haze. 
It  is  from  others  that  we  learn  the  story  of  those  earliest  days.     It  is  faith  in 
others,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,  which  links  our  present  and  our  past.     But 
then,  as  we  go  on  living  by  this  faith,  accepting  the  manifold  conditions  of  the 
state  assigned  to  us,  the  witness  of  experience  day  by  day  confirms  our  trust.     (2) 
Now,  is  it  not  even  exactly  thus  with  the  dim  childhood  of  mankind  ?    We  travel 
back  along  the  centuries  towards  the  beginning  of  our  race ;  presently  the  guidance 
of  history  falters  and  then  stops ;  then  tradition  fails  us  long  before  we  get  to  the 
boyhood  of  humanity ;  at  last  even  science  is  irresolute,  and  only  offers  us  hypo- 
thesis.   Natural  reason  tells  us  as  little  of  the  childhood  of  humanity  as  memory 
can  tell  us  of  our  own.     But  then,  from  behind  the  veil,  there  comes  the  voice  of 
the  Father  of  Spirits,  whose  eyes  did  see  our  substance  yet  being  imperfect,  and 
He  alone  tells  us  how  man  first  became  a  living  soul,  and  what  were  the  conditions 
of  his  dawning  thought ;  from  Him  we  learn  how  our  new  life  was  lifted  up  by  the 
inward  strength  of  His  own  holiness,  by  the  unchecked  fulness  of  His  grace  ;  He 
teaches  us  what  was  the  trial  of  those  early  years,  and  what  choice  first  called  our 
freedom  into  exercise.     And  then  He  shows  us  the  beginning  of  our  sin  and  all  its 
devastating  work.    All  that  wondrous  vision  of  man's  infancy  He  offers  to  our 
faith.    But  here  again  Faith  is  not  left  to  stand  alone.    By  experience  we  find 
ourselves  to  be  just  what  that  strange  revelation  would  lead  us  to  expect:  confused, 
uncertain  of  onr  proper  place,  bewildered  between  our  ideal  and  our  caricature, 
contented  neither  with  virtue  nor  with  vice ;  we  have  forces  striving  in  us  which 
are  and  are  not  ourselves,  we  have  desires  from  which  we  recoil,  and  aversions 
for  which  we  long,  so  that  sometimes  it  almost  seems  as  though  man  might  have 
called  himself  fallen,  even  if  God  had  never  told  him  how  he  fell.     U.  Yes,  it  is  true 
indeed  that,  as  Pascal  says,  "The  mtsteby  of  the  fall  and  of  the  teansmission 
OF  obiginal  sin  is  a  mtstebt  at  once  most   eemotb  fbom  oub  knowledge,  and 
MOST  essential  TO  ALL  KNOWLEDGE  OF  ouBSELVES."    "  It  is,  indeed,  itself  incom- 
prehensible, but  without  it  we  are  incomprehensible."    1.  The  facts  of  life  force 
our  thoughts  to  the  recognition  of  the  fall,  just  as  the  attractions  and  repulsions 
of  the  heavenly  bodies  guide  the  astronomer  to  beheve  in  the  existence  of  an  un- 
discovered star.     And  so  it  has  come  to  pass  that  the  doctrine  of  the  fall  has  been 
at  once  the  most  scornfully-rejected  and  the  most  generally  acknowledged  truth  in 
all  the  Christian  faith.      Surely  it  is  both  true  and  strange  that  a  b«lief  which 
seems  at  first  so  hard  to  realise,  which  is  often  thrust  away  with  a  confident  im- 
patience, can  yet  appeal  to  a  vast  army  of  witnesses,  often  unconscious,  sometimes 
incredulous,  of  that  which  they  have  attested.    2.  Plato  compares  the  soul  in  its 
present  plight  to  the  form  of  the  god  Glaucus,  immortal  and  miserable,  crippled 
and  battered  by  the  waves,  disfigured  by  the  clinging  growth  of  shells  and  sea- 
weed, 80  that  the  fishermen  as  they  catch  sight  of  him  can  hardly  zeoognise  hifl 


our.  ▼.]  ROMANS.  40S 

ancient  nature.  However  it  may  be  misnamed,  however  the  moral  sense  may  be 
crushed  down  to  die  under  fatalism  and  despair,  still  there  is  the  witness  to  • 
corruption,  s  perversion  of  humanity,  wide  as  the  world  and  deep  as  life.  The 
witness  of  all  our  experience,  of  all  current  language,  all  common  expectations, 
about  the  ways  of  man  ;  the  witness  of  daily  life,  of  our  journals  with  their 
columns  full  of  ceaseless  news  about  the  fruits  of  sin ;  the  witness,  interpreting  all 
else,  of  our  own  hearts,  all  converge  upon  the  truth  of  a  world-wide  disfigurement 
of  human  life,  a  pervading  taint  through  all  our  history,  a  sense  of  something 
wrong  in  the  ethical  basis  of  our  nature,  thrust  into  every  movement  of  the  will. 
3.  And  then,  it  may  be,  our  minds  will  stagger  and  our  hearts  begin  to  sink  at  the 
dreary  vision  of  that  vast  desolating  gloom :  "  there  is  none  good,  then,  no,  not 
one."  There  be  many  that  say,  '•  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?  "  The  lies  of  tlie 
cynic  and  the  pessimist  claim  kindred  with  our  thoughts.  "  Yes,"  they  say,  "  all 
this  is  true,  and  we  had  better  simply  acquiesce  in  it.  What  have  we  to  do  with 
those  vague  ideals  which  have  made  so  many  restless  and  miserable  ?  When  will 
men  frankly  recognise  their  proper  level,  and  live  there,  and  renounce  those  fruit- 
less, wasteful  hopes."  III.  Oh,  then,  if  that  worst  of  all  infidelity,  the  disbelief  in 
goodness,  the  despair  of  holiness,  begins  to  creep  about  your  souls,  then  turn  and 
gaze,  where  through  the  rent  cloud  the  pure  white  hght  of  God  Himself  has 
broken  through.  One  break  there  is  in  that  uniform  tenor  of  our  history,  even  the 
surpassing  miracle  of  a  sinless  life.  lY.  Ws  cam  afford  to  realise  and  face  thb 
BIN  or  THE  WORLD,  THE  SINFULNESS  OF  ouB  OWN  HEARTS  ;  WO  Can  bear  to  kuow 
the  worst  because  we  know  the  best,  because  the  darkness  is  past,  and  the  true 
Light  now  shineth,  because  we  can  tubn  fbou  the  qloom  of  sinful  history  to 
THE  perfect  glory  OF  THE  HOLINESS  OF  Christ.  "  In  Him  is  no  sin,  "  "  the  Life 
was  manifested,  and  we  have  seen  it,  and  shew  unto  you  that  eternal  life  which 
was  with  the  Father,  and  was  manifested  unto  us."  "The  Word  was  God,"  '•  and 
the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  ns,  and  we  beheld  His  glory,  the  glory 
as  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father."  (F.  Paget,  D.D.)  What  is  chance?— 
1.  All  death  is  a  solemn  and  fearful  thing.  When  it  comes  to  an  old  person  one 
cannot  help  feeling  it  often  a  release ;  but  when  death  comes  suddenly  to  people  in 
the  prime  of  life  we  cannot  help  asking,  *'  What  is  this  death  ?  this  horrible  thing 
which  takes  husbands  from  their  wives,  and  children  from  their  parents,  and  those 
who  love  from  those  who  love  them  ?  What  right  has  it  here,  under  the  bright 
Bun,  among  the  pleasant  fields,  destroying  God's  handiwork,  just  as  it  is  growing  to 
its  prime  of  beauty  and  usefulness  ?  "  And  there,  by  the  bedside  of  the  young  at 
least,  we  do  feel  that  death  must  be  the  enemy  of  a  loving,  life-giving  God,  as 
much  as  it  is  hated  by  poor  mortal  man.  And  then  we  feel  there  must  be  some- 
thing between  man  and  God.  What  right  has  death  in  the  world  if  man  has  not 
Binned  ?  And  then  we  cannot  help  saying  further,  "  This  cruel  death  t  it  may 
come  to  me,  young  and  healthy  as  I  am.  It  may  come  to-morrow,  this  minute, 
by  a  hundred  diseases  or  accidents  which  I  cannot  foresee  or  escape,  and  carry  me 
off  to-morrow.  And  where  would  it  take  me  to?"  2.  But  perhaps  yoo  young 
people  are  saying  to  yourselves,  "  Tcu  are  trying  to  frighten  us,  but  you  shall  not. 
We  know  very  well  that  it  is  not  a  common  thing  for  a  young  person  to  die,  and 
therefore  the  chances  are  that  we  shall  not  die  young,  and  it  will  be  time  enough  to 
think  of  death  when  death  draws  near."  Well,  what  do  you  mean  by  chance  ? 
What  are  these  wonderful  •'chances"  which  are  to  keep  you  alive  for  forty  or  fifty 
years  more  ?  Did  you  ever  bear  a  chance  ?  Did  any  one  ever  see  a  great  angel 
called  Chance  flying  about  keeping  people  from  dying?  What  is  chance,  which 
you  fancy  so  much  stronger  than  God  ?  3.  Perhaps  you  will  say,  "  All  we  meant 
was  that  God's  will  was  against  our  dying. "  Then  why  put  the  thought  of  God 
away  by  foolish  words  about  chance  7  For  it  is  God  only  who  keeps  you  alive,  and 
He  who  makes  you  live  can  also  let  you  not  live.  4.  Then  again,  it  is  not  as  you 
fancy,  that  when  God  leaves  you  alone  you  live,  and  when  He  visits  you  you  die — 
but  the  very  opposite.  Our  bodies  carry  in  them  from  the  very  cradle  the  seeds  of 
death.  We  live  because  God  does  not  leave  us  alone,  but  keeps  down  those  seeds 
of  disease  and  death  by  His  Spirit,  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  Life.  6.  God's  Spirit  of 
Life  is  fighting  against  death  in  our  bodies  from  the  moment  we  are  born.  And, 
as  Moses  says,  when  He  withdraws  His  Spirit  then  we  are  turned  again  to  our 
dust.  So  that  our  living  a  long  time  or  a  short  time  does  not  depend  on  chance, 
or  on  our  own  health  or  constitution,  but  entirely  on  how  long  God  may  choose  to 
keep  down  the  death  which  is  ready  to  kill  us  at  any  moment,  and  certain  to  kill 
Bs  Booner  or  later.    6.  And  therefore  I  ask  yoa,  *'  For  what  does  God  keep  yoa 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

alive?"  Will  a  man  keep  plants  in  his  garden  which  bear  neither  fruit  nor 
flowers ;  or  stock  on  his  farm  which  will  only  eat  and  never  make  profit ;  or  a 
servant  in  his  hoase  who  will  not  work  7  Much  more,  will  a  man  keep  a  Ber\ant 
who  will  not  only  be  idle  himself,  but  quarrel  with  his  fellow-servants,  and  teach 
them  to  disobey  their  master?  And  yet  God  keeps  thousands  in  His  garden,  and 
in  His  house,  for  years  and  years,  while  they  are  doing  no  good  to  Him,  and  doing 
harm  to  those  around  them.  7.  Then  why  does  not  God  rid  Himself  of  them  at 
once  and  let  them  die,  instead  of  cumbering  the  ground  ?  I  know  but  one  reason. 
If  they  were  only  God's  plants,  or  His  stock,  or  His  servants,  He  might  do  so. 
But  they  are  His  children,  redeemed  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  God  preserves  you 
from  death  because  He  loves  you.  Oh,  do  not  make  that  truth  an  excuse  for  for- 
getting and  disobeying  your  heavenly  Father  I  Why  does  any  good  father  help 
and  protect  his  children  ?  Not  as  beasts  take  care  of  their  young,  and  then  as 
soon  as  they  are  grown  up  cast  them  oft  and  forget  them ;  but  because  he  wishes 
them  to  grow  up  like  himself,  to  be  a  comfort,  help,  and  pride  to  him.  And  God 
takes  care  of  you  and  keeps  you  from  death  for  the  very  same  reason.  God  desires 
that  you  should  grow  up  like  Himself.  8.  But  if  you  turn  God's  grace  in  keeping 
you  alive  into  an  excuse  for  sinning — if,  when  God  keeps  you  alive  that  you  may 
lead  good  lives,  you  take  advantage  of  His  fatherly  love  to  lead  bad  lives,  and 
basely  presume  on  His  patience,  what  must  you  expect  ?  God  loves  you,  and 
you  make  that  an  excuse  for  not  loving  Him ;  God  does  everything  for  you,  and 
you  make  that  an  excuse  for  doing  nothing  for  God ;  God  gives  you  health  and 
strength,  and  you  make  that  an  excuse  for  using  your  health  and  strength  just  in 
the  way  He  has  forbidden.  What  can  be  more  ungrateful  ?  What  can  be  more 
foolish  ?  Oh,  if  one  of  our  children  behaved  to  us  a  hundredth  part  as  shamefully 
as  most  of  us  behave  to  God,  what  should  we  think  of  them  ?  Oh,  beware !  God 
is  patient ;  but  "  if  a  man  will  not  turn,  He  will  whet  His  sword."  And  then,  woe 
to  the  careless  and  ungrateful  sinner.  God  will  take  from  him  his  health,  or  his 
blind  peace,  and  by  affliction,  shame,  and  disappointment,  teach  him  that  his  youth, 
health,  money,  and  all  that  he  has,  are  his  Father's  gifts,  and  that  his  Father 
will  take  them  away  from  him  till  he  cries,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven 
and  before  Thee.  Father,  take  me  back,  for  I  have  sinned,  and  am  not  worthy  to 
be  called  Thy  child,"  (C.  Kingsley,  M.A.)  A  historical  parallel : — The  apostle's 
argument  turns  entirely  upon  a  parallel  between  the  effects  of  Adam's  sin  and  those  of 
Christ's  righteousness.    I.  Hk  is  accordingly  obliged  to  olamoe  back  upon  thb 

BESCLTB    which    FOLLOWED  UPON   THE    FIBST   HAN'S    TBANSOBESSION   OF  LAW.      1.    The 

point  to  be  proved  is  this :  Sin  and  death  spread  to  all  mankind  "  through  one 
man."  The  proof  is  this :  All  men  betwixt  Adam  and  Moses  died.  Why  ?  Not, 
argues  St.  Paul,  for  any  transgression  of  their  own,  but  for  Adam's.  At  first  one 
may  object,  sin  was  in  the  world.  Why  should  they  not  have  died  for  their  own 
sin  ?  (1)  But  remember  that  Paul  has  already  taught  us  to  discriminate  betwixt 
sin  committed  against,  and  sin  committed  without  law.  Without  a  law  sin  may  be 
present  as  a  defect  of  nature  or  fault  of  will,  but  sin  as  a  violation  of  statute  can 
enter  only  where  the  statute  is  known.  "  Where  no  law  is  there  can  be  no  trans- 
gression "  (chap.  iv.  15).  This  he  now  supplements  by  "  sin  is  not  imputed  where 
there  is  no  law  "  (ver.  13),  axioms  which  carry  with  them  all  the  stronger  assurance  of 
truth,  that  they  not  only  echo,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do,"  but  are  in  accord  with  all  that  our  Lord  taught  us  concerning  Him  who 
is  perfect  love.  (2)  Turning  next  to  the  bearing  of  these  legal  maxims  upon  the 
position  of  men  betwixt  Adam  and  Moses,  one  cannot  fail  to  see  that  it  applies  to 
them  roundly,  yet  with  qualifications.  That  they  sinned  "  without  law,"  and 
therefore  •'  not  after  the  fashion  of  Adam's  transgiession  "  (ver.  14),  is  true  in  the 
main,  but  only  partially  true  of  some  of  them.  St.  Paul  himself  implies  as  much 
by,  **  even  over  them  that  had  not  sinned  "  as  Adam  did.  For  although  the  ages 
before  Moses,  hke  the  vast  heathen  world  ever  since,  possessed  no  statute  recog- 
nised to  have  come  from  heaven  which  denounced  death  as  the  penalty  of  trans- 
gression, such  as  Adam  or  the  Jews  bad,  and  therefore  could  not  break  the  statute 
with  their  eyes  open  in  the  same  degree ;  yet  they  still  retained  (chap,  i.)  the 
relics  of  natural  conscience,  testifying  to  the  eternal  rules  of  right  and  wrong,  and 
testifying  quite  clearly  enough  to  render  some  of  them  at  least  inexcusable.  Bat 
in  many  of  them  conscience  was  undeveloped,  false  judgments;  in  all,  it  was 
defective,  prescribing  only  certain  rules  of  duty,  and  very  feebly  declaring,  if  at  all, 
the  penalty  for  disobedience.  Besides,  this  inadequacy  of  the  moral  sense,  being  a 
portion  of  that  subjection  of  human  nature  to  the  consequences  of  transgression 


CHAP.  T.]  ROMANS.  407 

for  which  vre  sre  seeking  to  acoount,  needs  itself  to  be  aooounted  for.  2.  After  all 
fair  deductions  have  been  allowed  for,  let  the  question  be  put  broadly :  Were  the 
sins  committed  without  revealed  law  such  that,  had  there  been  no  antecedent 
transgression,  they  would  have  been  in  the  bulk  of  cases  punishable  with  eternal 
death  J  I  think  St.  Paul's  reasoning  compels  us  to  reply  that  they  were  not. 
Suppose  it  conceivable  for  a  new-created  moral  agent  to  be  left  in  that  condition 
of  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  Divine  will,  and  to  sin,  his  fall  would  not  entail  such 
a  penalty  as  actually  followed  the  transgression  of  Adam.  Here,  then,  were  men 
dying  for  thousands  of  years  under  a  penalty  which  was  originally  attached  to  the 
express  violation  of  a  known  law,  but  not  attached  to  such  sins  as  they  themselves 
could  commit.  Before  Adam  there  had  been  placed  a  clear  command  with  precise 
warnings.  Deliberately  breaking  it,  he  died.  But  his  posterity  could  not  so  sin. 
Before  them  no  such  positive  law  had  been  set.  To  them  no  such  consequences 
had  been  foretold.  They  made  no  such  deliberate  choice.  Yet  on  all  of  them 
alike  falls  that  same  penalty.  TLere  is  the  fact.  Is  there  any  other  explanation 
of  it  except  St.  Paul's,  viz.,  that  they  died  because  Adam  sinned  ;  because  the 
sentence  passed  on  the  first  man  for  his  transgression  included  his  posterity  in 
its  sweep,  be  their  personal  offences  what  they  might ;  and  from  this  point  of  view 
it  does  supply  an  explanation  for  what  must  otherwise  appear  inexplicable.  More- 
over, if  it  be  once  admitted,  it  materially  alters  the  complexion  of  all  the  subsequent 
gins  of  mankind.  Those  later  sins  of  the  "  men  without  law  '*  might  not  be  such 
"transgressions"  as  of  themselves  to  entail  "death."  Yet  it  is  impossible  to  out 
them  off  from  their  guilty  origin  in  the  "  one  transgression  "  which  went  before. 
If  the  race  be  one,  and  its  whole  sin  be  the  fruit  of  one  culpable  and  deliberate  act 
of  original  rebellion,  then  it  is  clear  that  the  total  mass  of  moral  evil  must  con- 
tinue to  be  stained  throughout  with  the  dark  hue  of  its  origin.  3.  It  need  hardly 
be  added  that  in  the  case  of  adults  under  Christianity,  sin  has  to  a  great  extent 
recovered  the  type  of  Adam's  first  transgression.  The  law  has  long  since  been 
republished  with  plain-spoken  promises  and  penalties.  Most  of  us  have  chosen 
evil  with  the  clearest  knowledge.  Still,  even  we  can  be  proved  to  underlie  the 
penalty,  not  of  our  own,  but  of  Adam's  sin.  For  time  was  when  we,  too,  had  ••  no 
law."  As  children  we  knew  nothing  of  sin  or  duty,  of  the  Lawgiver  or  the  penalty. 
Yet  we  were  subject  then  to  death.  4.  All  this,  however,  is  not  preliminary  merely, 
but  parenthetic.  Now  that  the  sweeping  lapse  of  a  race  into  death  through  the 
single  act  of  a  representative  man  has  been  proved,  he  is  prepared  at  the  close  of 
ver.  14  to  resume  his  interrupted  sentence  begun  in  ver.  12.  He  does  not  resume 
it,  and  the  reason  is  very  notable.  He  has  caught  sight  of  differences  betwixt  the 
two  cases  which  make  the  parallel  in  some  points  a  contrast.  The  cases  are 
similar,  but  not  equal.  Is  there  any  shortcoming  ?  On  the  contrary,  there  is  a 
glorious  excess.  The  apostle,  therefore,  forbears  to  conclude  his  parallel,  but 
abruptly  exclaims — II.  "  But  not  as  thb  tbespass,  bo  also  is  the  feee  gitt  I " 
(ver.  15).  1.  One  point  of  superiority  is  developed  in  ver.  15,  "  If  by  the  trespass 
of  the  one,"  &c.  Here  are  two  similar  procedures  on  the  part  of  God,  by  which  a 
vast  mvlitude  of  human  beings  is  involved  in  each  case  in  the  fate  of  one  man. 
The  one  application  of  the  principle  turns  out  to  be  a  terrific  disaster  which  over- 
whelms countless  millions  of  unhappy  beings  in  the  judgment  and  ruin  that  over- 
take their  transgressing  representative.  The  other  is  a  blessed  provision  of  Divine 
kindness  brought  in  to  remedy  the  sad  efforts  of  the  former  through  the  action  of 
a  better  and  abler  Representative.  This  argument  bears  upon  us  in  two  ways. 
1.  Do  we  feel  the  fact  of  universal  condemnation  for  a  single  man's  sin  to  be 
baffling  ?  Then  learn  the  best  use  to  be  made  of  this  hard  fact.  If  anything  can 
relieve  the  difficulty  it  must  be  when  grace  pledges  itself  to  save  on  the  same 
principle.  It  is  at  least  something  to  discover  that  it  is  a  principle  of  the  Divine 
administration  and  not  an  isolated  occurrence.  There  comes  out  (to  say  no  more) 
a  certain  noble  consistency  in  God's  treatment  of  us.  When  the  very  principle 
which,  on  its  first  application,  in  Adam  worked  disaster,  turns  its  hand,  so  to  say, 
in  the  gospel,  to  work  a  remedy  for  its  own  ruin,  is  there  not  a  certain  poetical 
justice,  or  dramatic  completeness,  in  the  twofold  scheme  ?  May  not  the  one  be 
intended  to  be  read  in  the  light  of  the  other  ?  Is  it  not  conceivable  that  both 
applications  of  the  one  rule  to  the  Two  Heads  of  Humanity  may  be  requisite  to 
make  up  that  plan  of  Omniscience,  of  which  each  were  but  a  broken  part  ?  At  all 
events  one  thing  is  plain.  The  more  keenly  any  one  feels  the  hardship  of  being 
involved  without  his  will  in  the  condemnation  of  another,  with  so  much  the  more 
joyous  eagerness  ought  he  to  embrace  the  parallel  way  of  escape  which  has  beea 


MS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  \mu,  f. 

bronght  nigh  by  the  obedience  of  Another.  2.  Are  yoa  one  who  Btambles,  not  at 
the  fall  in  Adam,  but  at  the  doctrine  of  a  free  pardon  in  Christ  apart  from  merits 
of  your  own  f  Have  yoa  never  considered  to  whom  you  are  indebted  for  your  Bin 
and  condemnation  ?  Surely,  if  you  must  take  death  at  another  man's  hand,  yoa 
may  as  well  take  life  too  1  Is  it  not  idle  to  quarrel  with  the  way  in  which  God 
would  set  ns  right,  since  it  is  in  this  very  way  that  we  have  got  wrong.  3.  Another 
point  of  superiority  arises :  one  of  fact  no  less  than  of  logic.  "  Not  as  through  one 
that  sinned,  so  is  the  gift,"  (&c.  (ver.  16,  B.Y.).  In  order  to  men's  condemnation 
there  needed  but  the  one  trespass  of  Adam.  In  order  to  our  being  declared 
righteous,  there  need  "  many  trespasses"  to  be  wiped  out  in  blood.  The  Bestorer's 
work  might  perhaps  have  followed  close  on  the  fall  by  an  instant  purging  of  the 
"first  transgression,"  and  an  instant  replacing  of  the  lapsed  race  in  recovered 
purity  again.  There  would  in  that  event  have  been  no  room  for  the  superiority  St. 
Paul  seems  here  to  have  in  his  eye.  But  it  pleased  the  Most  High  to  suffer  sin  to 
make  its  way  through  the  world  till  it  had  grown  to  be  a  burden  intolerable  to  the 
earth.  Then  at  length  came  the  "  free  gift "  of  an  atonement  which  covered  all. 
It  is  the  same  with  individual  experience.  Is  it  not  after  a  man  has  for  years 
abused  his  freedom  to  choose  the  wrong,  adding  to  the  inherited  fault  under  which 
he  is  condemned  a  crowd  of  illegal  acts,  that  the  "  free  gift  which  justifies  "  is 
usually  revealed  to  the  soul  ?  Then  when  it  comes  to  a  mature  and  experienced 
offender,  grown  penitent  at  last,  how  widely  must  it  abound  1  4.  Another  point  of 
euperiority  remains :  "  If  by  the  trespass  of  the  One,"  &c.  (ver.  17,  B.Y.).  The 
results  to  be  expected  from  redemption  are  grander  than  the  results  of  the  fall  were 
disastrous.  This  sounds  fabulous,  for  the  disaster  entailed  on  mankind  by  the  fall 
of  "  the  One  "  might  well  appear  too  fearful  ever  to  be  overtopped  by  any  subse- 
quent advantage ;  that  disaster  Paul  does  not  attempt  to  soften.  "  Death  reigned" ; 
it  not  only  "  entered  "  and  "  passed  through  unto  all  "  (ver.  12),  it  is  man's  king. 
A  triple  crown  it  wears :  over  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  Over  against  this  last  ex- 
tremity of  ill,  what  can  Jesus  bring  us  of  excelling  good  1  Why,  merely  to  undo 
that  curse  calls  for  the  abolishing  of  death.  To  discrown  our  tyrant — no  more ; 
and  set  them  free  who  are  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  his  bondage ;  is  not  this  as 
much  as  man's  highest  hope  dare  look  for  ?  But  superabounding  grace  conceives 
a  higher  triumph.  The  Deliverer  turns  a  rescue  into  a  conquest.  The  curse  is 
reversed  till  it  becomes  a  blessing.  Having  brought  back  life,  Christ  raises  life  to 
glory.  Death  is  discrowned,  but  only  to  set  a  crown  upon  the  head  of  the 
redeemed.  Not  "  death  reigns  "  any  more,  but  we  "  reign  in  life."  {J.  Oswald 
Dyket,  D.D.)         The  great  parallels : — I.  "The  univebsal  diffcsion  of  death  bt 

THE   DEED  OF  ONE   UAN  (vcrS.  12-14).      IL    ThE  SUFEBIOEITT  OF  THE  FACTOBS  ACTINO 

IN  Chbist's  wobe  oveb  the  oobkespondiko  factob  in  the  WORE  OF  Adam  (vers.  15-17)* 
IIL  The  certainty  of  equality  in  bespect  or  extension  and  effect  between 
the  second  work  and  the  fibst  (vers.  18-19).    lY.  The  indication  of  the  tbub 

PAST     PLATED     BY    THE     LAW     BETWEEN     THESE     TWO     UNIVEBBALS     OF      DEATH      AND 

juoHTEOusMEss  (vcrs.  20-21).  Adam  and  Christ : — I.  Adam.  Through  Him  we  are 
all — 1.  Subject  to  suffering,  sorrow,  and  death.  2.  Debarred  from  entrance  into 
Paradise.  3.  Kept  from  eternal  happiness.  II.  Christ.  By  Him — 1.  Our  sins 
are  atoned  for.  2.  We  are  entirely  freed  from  guilt.  3.  Eternal  life  is  granted 
to  as.  4.  Immortal  happiness  is  our  portion.  (J.  H.  Tarson.)  Adam  and 
Christ : — I.  The  faballel.  1.  Both  stand  in  a  federal  relation  to  mankind.  2. 
In  both  cases  the  effect  of  individual  action  is  transferred.  S.  The  effect  in  both 
oases  is  coextensive.  U.  The  contbabt.  1.  The  effects  in  the  one  case  are — sin, 
condemnation,  death ;  in  the  other — grace,  justification,  life.  2.  In  the  one  they 
follow  by  just  consequence,  in  the  other  by  grace.  3.  In  the  one  are  suffered 
involuntarily ;  in  the  other  are  enjoyed  by  faith.  4.  In  the  one  they  proceed  from 
one  sin;  in  the  other  cover  many  offences.  6.  In  the  one  they  terminate  in 
death ;  in  the  other  in  everlasting  life.  III.  The  conclusion.  1.  If  sin  has  de- 
stroyed all,  grace  can  save  all.  2.  If  sin  has  abounded,  grace  doth  much  more  abound. 
3.  n  sin  has  reigned  unto  death,  grace  reigns  unto  eternal  life.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Adam  and  Christ: — Where  frost  and  snow  have  abounded  in  winter,  there  spring, 
sunshine,  and  gladness  will  abound  still  more.  Where,  at  Passion-tide,  Herod's 
cunning,  Pilate's  cowardice,  the  Pharisees'  envy,  Judas's  treachery,  and  the  blind 
*'  Crucify,  Crucify  I  "  of  the  mob  have  risen  high,  there,  on  Easter-mom,  the  halle- 
lujah of  angels  and  the  Church  around  the  triumphant  Saviour  will  rise  still  higher. 
Here  are  oontraeted—  I.  Tub  one  tbansoression  and  the  one  obedience.  1.  What, 
I  hear  itobjeotod,  is  it  not  arbitrary  and  unjust  that  the  fall  of  (he  first  man  should 


OBAF.  v.]  BOMANS.  40i 

involve  all  sacoeeding  generations,  and  scatter  them,  as  children  of  misery,  apon 
fields  of  thorn,  as  chUdren  of  death  upon  churchyards  ?  But,  is  it  not  simple 
matter  of  fact  that  some  fate  —explain  it  as  we  may — does,  again  and  again,  strew 
OS,  as  children  of  misery  and  death,  upon  the  earth  ?  2.  And  if  further  it  be 
objected  that,  as  Abraham  was  once  nerved  for  endurance  by  the  vision  of  hia 
posterity,  so  Adam  must  needs  have  been  deterred  if  the  thought  of  the  ruin  hanging 
over  the  sons  of  men  had  been  granted  him  in  time.  But  was  such  prevision 
wanting?  In  the  blessing,  "  Beplenish  the  earth,  and  subdue  it,"  Adam  sees  him- 
self set  at  the  head  of  an  entire  economy  ;  his  lot  is  to  be  the  lot  of  his  heirs  and 
posterity.  By  the  image  of  God  born  with  him,  by  his  covenant-fellowship  with 
God,  by  the  paternal  warnings  of  the  hostile  powers  against  which  the  Garden  of 
Eden  was  to  be  fenced  and  guarded,  by  the  highest  aim  of  eternal  life,  were  not  the 
fullest  means  of  security  imparted  to  the  first  man  ?  3.  And  when  the  fall  took 
place,  think  you  that  God  should  have  annihilated  the  human  race  ?  Annihilation 
is  no  redemption,  and  to  yield  the  game  to  Satun  is  no  victory.  Then  only  is  evil 
overcome  by  good  when  Divine  love  makes  itself  a  sacrifice.  Who  will  doubt,  when 
over  again!^t  the  one  Adam  stands  the  one  Christ,  who  with,  "  It  is  written,"  wields 
a  victorious  sword,  and  becomes  tbe  dispenser  of  every  heavenly  blessing.    11.  Thb 

DOMINION  07   ONB  DEATH   IND  THK  DOMINION  07  ONE  LIFE.     1.  YoU  are  fdlliiliar  with  ths 

doubt  of  the  unity  of  the  race,  which  appeals  to  the  various  shapes  of  the  skull,  different 
complexions,  divers  tongues,  &o.  But  Paul  believes  in  the  unity  of  the  race,  and 
knows  one  family  of  Adam,  when,  in  Athens,  he  speaks  of  one  blood,  of  which  the 
nations  are  made ;  and  when  he  says,  "  Is  God  the  God  of  the  Jews  only  ? — is  He 
not  the  God  of  the  Gentiles  also  ?  "  2.  And  what  sombre  witnesses  to  this  unity 
Paul  summons  I  First  sin  itself,  which  shows  itself  far  as  humanity  exteuds.  But 
at  the  same  time  he  points  to  death,  which  is  the  lot  of  all  men,  not  merely  of  those 
struggling  with  poverty,  but  of  those  nursed  in  luxury ;  not  merely  of  those  feeble 
through  age,  but  of  children  with  their  morning  and  May- tide  freshness ;  not  merely  of 
those  branded  with  vice,  but  to  the  truly  good,  comes  the  stern  creditor  who  demands 
of  all  the  payment  of  the  debt  of  life  1  3.  Nothing  is  more  unnatural  than  for  God's 
image,  instead  of  declining  gently,  and  then  being  quietly  transplanted  ;  instead  of 
entering  into  glory  by  a  transfiguration,  to  fall  a  prey  to  violent  dissolution,  and  be 
devoured  by  corruption.  In  outer  death  an  inner  death  is  imaged ;  the  sting  of 
death  is  sin,  the  wages  of  sin  is  death.  Sin  is  absence  from  the  source  of  all  life — 
from  God — and  is  therefore  deadly  in  nature.  The  one  separation  is  punished  by 
the  other ;  separation  between  tbe  soul  and  God  by  separation  between  soul  and 
body  ;  yea,  by  a  separation  which  rends  in  twain  the  soul  itself.  But  if  a  house  be 
divided  against  itself,  how  can  it  stand?  III.  The  condemnation  on  all,  and  thb 
ABOUNDING  QBACE  70B  ALL.  "What  is  man,  that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him?" 
Nothing  more  wretched  than  man  in  his  sin,  in  his  death — a  lost  son,  a  dethroned 
king.  "  What  is  man,  that  Thou  visitest  him  ?  "  Nothing  higher  in  dignity  than 
man  ;  far  above  angels ;  since  the  Son  of  God  assumes  human  nature,  and  by  His 
incarnation,  passion,  resurrection,  outpouring  of  His  Spirit,  makes  fallen  humanity 
partaker  of  the  Divine  nature.  Four  dispensations  of  God  with  mankind  are  here 
to  be  described.  The  original  one  in  Paradise ;  the  second  in  the  fall,  where, 
without  intermission,  death  is  preaching  repentance,  and  to  every  life-history  affixes 
the  black  seal  bearing  the  inscription,  "  And  he  died  "  ;  the  third  dispensation  under 
the  law,  which  came  between  the  fall  and  the  rising  again,  that  sin  might  abound, 
tiiat  is,  become  more  and  more  perceptible ;  the  fourth  in  the  fulness  of  time.  Now 
that  you  have  been  driven  from  the  first,  you  will  not  deny.  Are  you  living  in  the 
second,  in  utter  indifference,  a  man  utterly  without  conscience,  not  even  alarmed  by 
a  command  of  God  ?  Or  are  you  Uving  under  the  law,  pursued  by  sin,  not  merely 
as  sin  but  also  as  a  punishment  ?  Or  do  you  know,  in  addition  to  tiie  weakness 
and  guilt  of  the  first  Adam,  the  power,  the  riches,  and  the  grace  of  the  second  ? 
Have  you,  under  the  Cross,  come  under  the  shelter  of  the  strong  arm,  mightier  than 
a  Samson  who,  in  his  death,  embracing  the  pillars  of  the  idol-temple,  buried  four 
thousand  of  the  worshippers?  Have  you  felt  the  arm  which,  stretched  out  in 
Golgotha,  overturned  the  idol-temple  of  sin  and  the  gloomy  prison-house  of  death  ? 
And  as  David  once  cut  off  the  giant's  head  with  the  giant's  sword,  have  you  learnt 
nnder  the  Cross  that  death  is  conquered  by  death  ;  death  as  the  wages  of  sin  by  death 
as  a  sacrificial  offering  ?  (R.  Koegel,  D.D.)  The  analogy  between  the  manner  of  man'* 
condemnation  tn  Adam  and  justification  in  Christ : — I.  The  tact  on  which  thb 
ANALOQY  pboceeds.  1.  Stated  (ver.  12).  2.  Proved  (vers.  13, 14).  II.  The  points  ra 
WBiOB  n  DOSS  BOX  BOLD.   1.  The  free  gift  transcends  the  ofienoe,  it  reaches  not  only 


410  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  t. 

as  far,  but  in  those  who  receive  it  effects  much  more  good  than  the  offence  did  eyil 
(ver.  15) ;  for  the  free  gift  neutralises  the  effect  not  only  of  one  offence  but  of  many 
(ver.  16);  not  only  destroys  death  but  brings  abundance  of  life  (ver.  17).  III.  Thb 
POINTS  IN  WHICH  IT  DOES  HOLD.  1.  One  offeuce  (marg.)  occasioned  the  condemna- 
tion of  all;  one  righteousness  (marg.)  provides  for  the  justification  of  all  (ver.  1^. 
2.  In  one  man  many  sinned,  in  one  shall  many  be  made  righteous  (ver.  19).  IV. 
The  suMsriNQ  up  of  the  whole.  1.  Grace  abounds  over  sin  (ver.  20).  2,  Death  is 
swallowed  up  of  life.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  principle  on  which  justification  pro^ 

ceeds :  that  of  mediation : — Mediation  is  the  principle  on  which  human  society  is 
based  and  constituted.  Ever  since  the  creation  of  the  first  pair,  all  have  been 
born  and  preserved  by  it.  The  dominion  conferred  on  the  man  in  Eden  (Gen.  i. 
28)  was  not  to  be  achieved  singly,  but  in  society.  Even  here  cor  blessings  come 
through  mediation.  Yet  not  our  blessings  only.  The  fact  that  men  have  it  in  their 
power  to  do  us  good  involves  also  that  of  doing  us  mischief.  This  constitution  of 
society  is  precisely  that  which  made  it  possible  for  the  first  man  to  involve  himself 
and  all  his  posterity  in  sin  and  ruin,  and  for  the  "  Second  Man  "  to  provide  salva- 
tion  and  glory  (ver.  18).    I.  Both  Adam  and  Christ  were  Divinelt  appointed  and 

RESPONSIBLE     REPRESENTATIVES     OF    THB    WHOLE     HUMAN    RACE.       1.    Adam    WaS    itS 

natural  head ;  but  he  was  much  more.  All  men  are  affected  by  the  conduct  of 
Adam,  in  a  wider  sense  than  that  in  which  children  are  affected  by  the  conduct 
of  their  parents.  All  children  bom  into  the  world  to  the  end  of  time  will  be 
affected  by  the  one  offence  of  Adam  just  in  the  same  sense  and  to  the  same  extent 
as  his  own  children  were  affected  by  it.  And  this  is  not  simply  because  he  was  the 
natural  head.  Koah  was  also  the  natural  head  of  all  tbe  men  who  have  existed  since 
the  deluge ;  but  it  is  never  intimated  that  he,  by  his  one  recorded  sin,  entailed  a 
curse  upon  all  his  posterity.  But  it  is  plainly  aflBrmed  that  Adam,  by  his  one  offence, 
has  done  so.  For  he  was  also  the  federal  head  of  the  race.  God  dealt  with  the 
entire  race  in  and  through  him.  To  him  were  entrusted  the  interests  of  all  his 
descendants.  Had  he  proved  faithful  these  would  have  been  bom  into  the  world 
holy  and  happy,  and  would  each  have  commenced  his  probation  on  terms  as  favour- 
able as  Adam's.  But  he  failed  ns,  and  thus  induced  our  ruin.  2.  Now  Adam  is  a 
type  of  Christ  in  that  he  was  a  Divinely  constituted  representative  of  the  race. 
Adam  was  created  in  the  "  image  "  of  God.  But  Christ,  the  beloved  Son,  *'  is  the 
image  of  the  invisible  God."  The  race,  therefore,  in  its  very  creation,  sustained 
special  relationship  to  Him.  And  it  was  fitting  that  He,  whose  image  in  man  had 
been  marred  by  the  fall  of  the  first  man,  should  Himself  become  man  in  order  to  its 
restoration.  For  we  are  predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  His  "  image."  Adam,  as 
our  first  head  and  representative,  failed  in  his  fidelity,  and  thereby  betrayed  and 
ruined  our  interests ;  Christ,  our  Second,  has  gloriously  succeeded.  II.  The  like- 
ness BETWEEN  Adam  and  Christ  is  one  of  essential  opposition,  because  that  Adam 
has  affected  us  for  evil,  Christ  for  good.  1.  The  judgment  to  condemnation  on 
account  of  Adam's  sin  involved  the  penalty  of  moral  death  for  all  his  posterity. 
Not  that  any  positive  evil  principle  was  infused  into  our  nature,  but  rather  that  the 
Holy  Spirit,  in  fellowship  with  whom  all  spiritual  life  is  sustained,  was  then  penally 
withdrawn,  and  that  being  so  men  became  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  "In 
Adam  all  died."  2.  The  judgment  to  condemnation  on  account  of  Adam's  sin 
was  a  judgment  to  bodily  death  (Gen.  iii.  17-19).  And  this  in  all  probability 
resulted  from  the  penal  withdrawment  of  the  Spirit  of  life.  Naturally  liable  to 
death  man  must  have  been;  ».«.,  regarded  as  a  creature  whose  animal  life  is  an 
organic  successional  growth,  sustained  by  material  food.  So  long  as  he  remained 
innocent  he  had  the  pledge  and  sacrament  provided  against  this  liability  in  "  the 
tree  of  life."  But  as  soon  as  he  had  sinned,  he  was  subjected  to  the  vanity  which 
was  the  lot  of  the  lower  creatures,  denied  access  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  surrendered 
to  the  dissolution  which  had  already  been  the  natural  termination  of  the  existence 
of  the  inferior  orders.  But  "  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made 
alive"  (1  Ccr.  xv.  22  ;  John  v.  28,  29).  And  though  the  restoration  of  immortal  life 
to  the  bodies  of  His  people  is  deferred,  the  quickening  Spirit  is  a  pledge  and  earnest 
that  He  who  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  their  mortal  bodies 
(chap.  viii.  11).  3.  The  judgment  to  death,  on  account  of  sin,  was  a  judgment  to 
everlasting  death.  As  "  grace  reigns  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life  by 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,"  even  so  (unobstructed)  sin  reigns  in  death,  by  offending 
Adam,  unto  everlasting  death.  In  the  very  nature  of  things  it  cannot  be  otherwise. 
For  to  doom  a  man  to  death  at  all  is  to  doom  him  to  endless  death.  No  one  evei 
^  thinks  of  a  criminal  being  sentenced  to  death  for  so  many  years.    The  dead  have 


▼.]  ROMANS,  4U 

no  power  to  recover  life.  And  this  is  as  true  of  spiritnal  as  of  p^hysical  death.  The 
fact  is  that  sin  reigns  in  death,  and  by  death  is  its  dread  dominion  sustained.  IIL 
Thb  obaob  of  redemption,  which  is  by  Jesds  Christ,  not  only  meets,  and  avails 

TO  OODNTERACT,  THB   CORSE   ENTAILED   FROM   AdAM  AT  EVERY   POINT,  BUT  ABOUNDS  FAB 

BEYOND  EVEN  THAT.  1.  Adam  entailed  upon  us  the  curse  of  one  offence  only.  He 
doubtless  committed  other  sins ;  but  they  have  involved  us  in  no  disadvantages.  If, 
therefore,  Christ  had  made  provision  for  nothing  beyond  the  cancelling  of  the  judg- 
ment on  account  of  that,  the  parallel  between  the  first  and  Second  Man  would  have 
been  at  that  point  complete.  But  He  has  done  much  more  (ver.  ]  6).  And  not  only 
so,  but  being  justified,  there  is  provision  made  to  secure  our  continued  acceptance. 
Nor  does  even  a  lapse  out  off  the  offeuder  from  hope:  but,  because  God  has  just 
ground  on  which  to  '*  multiply  to  pardon,"  a  fallen  David  and  a  backsliding  Peter 
may  be  restored.  Therefore  the  word  of  exhortation  (Gal.  vi.  1),  and  the  word  of 
eompansionate  love  (1  John  ii.  1,  2).  Thus  richly  does  the  grace  of  Christ  super- 
abound  over  the  curse  from  Adam.  2.  The  apostle's  position  clearly  implies  that 
the  number  of  the  saved  through  Christ  will  far  exceed  that  of  the  finally  lost 
through  Adam.  It  is  not  intended  to  intimate,  however,  that  any  are  really  lost 
on  account  of  Adam's  sin  alone.  The  apostle  clearly  assumes  that  there  are  none 
Boch  (vers.  16,  18).  And  have  we  not  an  assurance  here  that  all  infants,  incapables, 
Jto.,  shall  through  Christ  inherit  everlasting  life  f  But  those  who  resist  grace  and 
refuse  salvation  thereby  make  the  sin  of  Adam  their  own,  and  in  that  sin  they  shall 
perish.  But — 3.  The  apostle  further  intimates  that  those  who  avail  themselves  of  the 
redemption  which  is  by  Jesus  Christ  shall  be  elevated  to  a  far  higher  state  of  glory 
and  blessedness  than  could  have  been  inherited  by  onfallen  man  (vers.  17,  20,  21). 
Conclusion :  1.  This  review  of  the  Divine  administration  calls  for  ardent  and 
adoring  gratitude.  2.  We  must  learn  to  regard  sin  with  ever-increasing  hatred.  8. 
Let  all  avail  themselves  with  glad  alacrity  of  the  gift  of  grace  through  Christ  {W. 
Tyson.) 

Vers.  18,  14.  For  until  the  law  sin  was  In  the  world :  but  sin  is  not  imputed 
where  there  la  no  law.  Nevertheless  death  reigned  £rom  Adam  to  Hoses. — The 
$in  of  thou  who  died  before  the  law  : — 1.  Sin  supposes  law.  2.  But  sin  was  in  the 
world  before  the  law.  3.  Hence  there  is  a  law  in  the  conscience  to  which  all  men 
are  amenable.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  reign  of  death  is — I.  Perpeidated  bt  sin. 
n.  Universal.  Because  all  have  sinned  either  against — 1.  Positive  commands,  aa 
Adam.  2.  Or  the  moral  law  written  in  the  heart.  3.  Or  in  the  Word  of  God.  III. 
Absolute.  He  strikes  where  and  when  he  pleases — the  young  and  old,  (to.  IV. 
Ibbbsistiblb.  All  must  bow  to  his  sceptre.  V.  Would  be  eternal,  but  for  the 
interposition  of  Christ.  {Ibid.)  In  Adam  all  die  : — 1.  Some  say  that  there  can  be 
no  criminality  where  there  is  not  wilful  transgression  of  the  law :  and  therefore  God 
coold  not  impute  guilt  from  birth  to  every  child  of  Adam.  To  this  we  answer,  that 
there  is  no  other  way  of  explaining  the  certain  facts.  All  men  suffer  the  penalty  of 
sin  and  death.  Now,  why  ?  Our  explanation  is  that  they  are  primarily  held  guilty 
before  God.  To  deny  this  is  to  involve  the  question  in  yet  greater  darkness.  It  ia 
to  charge  God  with  inflicting  suffering  upon  our  whole  race  without  a  reasonable 
cause.  2.  Paul  argues  in  the  text  that  death  had  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses,  and 
therefore  could  not  have  resulted  merely  from  the  violation  of  the  Mosaic  law.  Ik 
took  effect  on  myriads  who  had  no  law  to  guide  them  but  the  dictates  of  conscience 
or  of  tradition,  and  on  children  who  died  in  unintelligent  infancy.  But  death  is  the 
practical  imputation  of  sin  :  and  such  imputation  implies  the  existence  of  a  broken 
law.  What  law,  then,  can  it  be,  but  God's  command  to  Adam  ?  And  what  breach 
of  it,  but  his  transgression  t  And  therefore,  it  was  because  they  were  regarded  aa 
having  been  implicated  in  Adam's  sin,  that  they  were  surrendered  to  the  tyranny 
of  death.  Yet  their  criminality  was  very  different  from  his.  Theirs  was  indirect 
and  accredited,  while  his  was  direct  and  real.  Theirs  was  unconscious  and  involun- 
tary, his  deliberate  and  intentional.  Theirs  was  through  the  crime  of  another,  hia 
through  his  own.  His  was  the  root,  and  in  its  damage  the  branches  equally  suffered. 
He  was  the  fountain,  and  in  its  defilement  all  the  stream  of  human  existence  waa 
polluted.  3.  Nor  does  this  contravene  our  natural  sense  of  justice.  We  ascribe 
blameworthiness  to  wrong  states  and  tendencies  of  disposition,  without  staying  to 
inquire  how  these  were  originated.  A  commoner  may  be  elevated  to  the  peerage, 
and  thus  confer  titles  and  dignity  on  all  future  generations.  Or  a  nobleman,  con- 
victed of  treason,  may  involve  his  posterity  in  poverty  and  ignominy.  4.  Now,  this 
procedure  on  the  part  of  God  may  strike  you  at  first  as  unjust   And  so  it  would  be,  if 


411  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  ▼. 

it  stood  alone.  Bat — I.  Wr  uust  consideb  it  hi  oonnection  with  God's  obeat 
BCHEUB  or  BEDEM7TI0N.  Paul  invariably  links  the  two  together.  Here  he  showi 
that  Adam's  headship  is  a  type  of  Christ's  :  and  if  in  one  all  men  have  been  made 
einners,  so  in  the  other  all  have,  at  least  conditionally,  been  restored  to  righteous- 
ness. Similarly  in  1  Cor.  zv.  he  affirms  that  "  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ 
shall  all  be  made  alive."  II.  Oub  buih  bt  thb  tall  does  not  entail  on  cs  the 
DOOM  aw  FINAL  PEBDiTioN.  The  life  to  come  is  always  set  forth  as  the  retributive 
consequence  of  the  present.  And  no  principle  is  more  clear  or  more  frequently 
stated  than  that  each  man  must  give  an  account  of  himself  before  God,  and  receive 
the  reward  of  his  own  doings.  We  are  here  treated  as  sinners  for  Adam's  sake :  but 
hereafter,  if  so  treated,  it  will  be  for  our  own  sake.  The  necessary  loss  which  we 
have  sustained  by  the  fault  of  another  is  limited  and  temporal;  it  will  be  oar 
own  fault  if  we  make  it  absolute  and  eternal.  This  arrangement,  then,  has  simply 
altered  the  conditions  of  our  probationary  life.  There  are  two  distinct  courses  which 
such  probation  may  take.  1.  Men  might  be  created  holy,  and  be  left  to  obey  or 
disobey.  In  the  former  case  their  righteousness  would  be  sealed  to  them  for  ever ; 
but  in  the  latter  they  must  forfeit  it  for  ever.  In  this  way  the  probation  of  angels 
was  accomplished :  and  that  of  Adam  and  Eve.  2.  The  other  mode  is  that  of  souls 
originally  depraved,  but  furnished  with  adequate  means  of  self-recovery  through 
grace.  And  this  is  the  method  adopted  in  regard  to  all  the  posterity  of  Adam  and 
Eve ;  and  it  is  with  reference  to  it  that  they  are  all  bom  under  the  imputation  of 
the  first  great  transgression.    III.  Compabs  these  two  altebnatives,  that  tou 

MAY   SEE    how    MTICH   HOBS    DESIRABLE   THAT   ONE    IS,   IN   WHICH   WE   FIND    OURSELVES 

concebned.  We  see  what  our  probation  now  is,  and  how  easy  it  is  for  as, 
through  God's  grace  in  Christ,  to  escape  perdition,  to  triumph  over  our  native 
depravity,  and  to  lay  hold  on  eternal  life.  But  suppose  the  opposite  method  had 
been  adopted,  do  you  think  that  your  eternal  safety  would  have  been  more  likely  or 
certain  than  it  is  now  7  Is  it  not  probable  that  the  great  majority  of  mankind  would 
act  as  Adam  and  Eve  did?    lY.  The  immense  pbepondebance  of  good  which 

ACCBUES  TO   THE    SAVED,   THBOUOH    THE   ECONOMY  OF  OBACE    IN    CbBIST.      There    iS    % 

mighty  superiority  in  the  Saviour's  headship  above  that  of  Adam.  The  altimata 
benefits  of  our  salvation  will  infinitely  exceed  the  little  temporary  sufferings  of  our 
loss  and  ruin  through  the  fall.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  us  tremble  at  the  thought  of 
sin,  when  we  survey  its  terrible  results  in  the  ravages  of  death.  2.  Be  convinced 
of  sin,  and  stirred  up  to  seek  salvation  from  it.  8.  Let  us  confidently  accept  and 
embrace  the  salvation  of  the  gospel.  4.  Here  is  an  argument  for  submission  and 
patience  under  the  ills  of  life.  Our  subjection  to  affliction  and  sorrow  is  not  meant 
to  be  our  permanent  and  everlasting  state.  {T.  G.  Horton.)  The  educating  power 
^mortality  : — Dr.  Bushnell,  in  his  "Moral  Uses  of  Dark  Things,"  shows  how  man 
ean  never  be  at  his  best  without  the  influences  of  alarm  and  threatening,  for  these 
mbble  him  to  appreciate  critical  situations,  and  develop  in  him  the  grand  qualities 
of  Jantion  and  prudence.  Surely  God  knew  what  was  needed  to  bring  the  royal 
S^ments  of  our  nature  to  full  account  when  He  put  death  into  the  world,  hiding  a 
Me)reT  under  a  curse.  It  is  a  schoolmaster  we  should  be  thankful  for,  since  without 
wire^6hould  lack  expression  for  most  that  is  finest  and  tenderest  in  ourselves.  We 
^ftii^-afford  to  miss  the  educating  power  of  mortality  and  its  sorrows — the  sugges- 
3n^.%I^  the  burial  scene  and  the  last  farewell,  the  lessons  of  sick-room  duty,  the 
'HiiiiS'of  dying-bed  consolation  and  grace.  We  need  the  discipline  of  suffering 
(^dim£V,  the  culture  of  fear  and  danger,  the  wakenings  of  latent  virtue  in  fattJ 
~~eifty*and  accident.  Something  must  reveal  to  us  the  fittest  ways  of  pity  and 
^8^4he  dearest  facilities  of  affection,  the  noblest  means  of  philanthropy,  the 
""  I  of  patience,  the  holiest  opportunities  of  sympathy,  the  sweetest  uses 
Hhe  highest  service  of  piety.  And  in  a  world  where  death  is  we  have 
Who  la  the  flgure  of  Him  that  was  to  come. — The  figure  of  Him  that 
if^If  we  see  great  streams  of  people  journeying  from  every  direction 
Tidi^inhlmon  destination,  wejinfer  that  this  spot  must  be  the  centre  of  some 
pOT^[IIH£fon.  It  is  a  pretty  sight  to  stand  some  summer  Sabbath  morning 
g^n^  Hs!tt^gi''M|^d,  and  see  the  lanes  dotted  with  pilgrims  wending  their  way  towards 
I'^urck  of  Gi^.  Suppose  a  wayfarer  encounters  groups  of  travellers,  and  the 
It^^iie  tl^tcws^the  adjacent  town,  finds  the  crowds  increasing,  and  the  interest 
Vtfev^ijV  face.  He  asks  the  object  of  this  unusual  excitement,  and  learns 
i99tfi]&>8tone  of  a  great  temple  is  to  be  laid  by  a  great  man  ;  that  there 
^pcS^^  %nd  a  gala-day  of  banners,  music,  and  rejoicing.  So  does  a 
~  'bape  of  past  history  disclose  the  Uvea  of  many  men  trading 


OHA».  T.]  ROMANS.  41M 

towards  one  point ;  and,  standing  as  we  do  upon  our  gospel  vantage-gronnd,  we  ean 
see  a  long  procession  of  lives  tending  in  their  acts  and  history  to  one  point ;  we  can 
hear  the  music  of  many  a  deed  celebrating  beforehand  one  greater  deed  than  all. 
There  was  a  divinity  shaping  the  ends  of  many  of  the  lives  of  the  Old  Testament 
worthies,  to  the  purpose  that  they  might  be  typical  of  that  life  which  is  our  life,  and 
by  which  our  stifled  souls  might  breathe  again  with  their  destined  immortality.  A 
mark  had  been  impressed  upon  the  lives  of  men  in  earlier  times,  and  a  map  had 
been  sketched  upon  the  page  of  history,  whose  lines  converged  towards  the  one  great 
central  fact,  that  Jesus  Christ  should  come  into  the  world.  If  we  look  amongst  the 
men  whose  lives  were  eminently  typical  of  the  Redeemer,  we  shall  not  find  one  in 
whose  case  it  will  be  a  more  easy  task  to  trace  the  parallel  than  that  of  Adam.  But 
just  in  proportion  as  the  similarity  is  striking,  so  will  the  points  of  difference  be 
prominent.  I.  Points  of  corbespondencb.  1.  Both  were  formed  by  and  came 
directly  from  God.  Here,  of  course,  we  speak  of  Jesus  in  His  humanity.  In  the 
method  of  his  birth  the  first  man  differed  from  all  the  rest  of  his  posterity,  and 
the  only  parallel  we  find  to  it  is  in  the  miraculous  conception  of  the  Child  of 
Bethlehem,  Of  course,  even  in  this,  the  points  of  difference  are  greater  than  those 
of  likeness.  But  it  was  the  breath  of  the  Lord  which  breathed  into  Adam's  nostrils 
the  breath  of  life ;  it  was  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  which  overshadowed  the  Virgin.  2. 
Both  were  formed  in  the  same  glorious  likeness,  designed  as  the  mirrors  to  refect 
the  life  and  image  of  the  Author  of  all  life.  And  as  in  Adam,  ere  he  fell,  the 
unblushing  cheek,  where  shame  had  been  "  ashamed  to  sit,"  formed  the  mirror  which 
reflected  the  likeness  of  the  Father,  so  was  that  same  likeness  printed  on  the  form 
and  feature  of  the  spiritual  life  of  Jesus  Christ,  so  that  He  could  claim  His  heavenly 
pedigree,  and  declare,  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  3.  The 
fatherhood  of  both  over  a  numerous  race.  (1)  The  tawny  slave  who  hoes  the  rice- 
field  in  the  burning  sun  ;  the  dark-eyed  denizens  of  China  and  of  India ;  the  fiery 
Afghan ;  the  tall  Circassian ;  the  dwarfish  Hottentot ;  the  fur-clad  dweller  amidst 
northern  ice;  and  the  naked  panter  in  the  tropic  heat;  the  homeless  Jew  and 
clannish  Gentile ;  the  readers  of  the  Koran,  of  the  Shasters,  of  the  Bible  ;  the  wor- 
shipper of  the  sun,  of  Juggernaut,  and  of  Jesus  ;  each  creature  who  bears  the  form 
and  likeness  of  a  man,  dates  his  paternity  to  Adam.  (2)  The  seed  of  the  Second 
Adam  shall  be  also  numerous.  All  souls  are  His,  purchased  by  Him,  that  they  may 
be  born  again  through  Him.  And  though  the  work  of  regeneration  by  no  means 
keeps  pace  with  the  increase  of  the  race,  He  shall  yet  "  see  His  seed,''  and  that  seed 
dhall  outnumber  sand  or  stars  for  multitude,  and  be  gathered  out  of  all  lands.  And 
they  shall  bear  the  family  feature  clear  in  life  and  lineament.  As  by  nature  they 
onoe  "  bore  the  image  of  the  earthly,"  so  by  the  redundant  grace  of  this  new  birth 
shall  they  bear  impressed  upon  them  the  "  image  of  the  heavenly."  4.  The  lordship 
and  dominion  with  which  each  was  invested.  (1)  Man  was  made  only  "  a  little 
lower  than  the  angels,"  and  has  been  "  crowned  with  glory  and  honour."  He  holds 
dominion  over  the  very  work  of  God's  own  hand ;  he  wounds  the  earth  that  it  may 
give  him  food.  All  things  are  put  beneath  his  feet ;  the  beasts  range  plain  and 
mountain-side,  but  they  cannot  range  so  widely  as  the  thought  of  man ;  the  birds 
soar  high,  but  they  cannot  cleave  their  way  to  such  fair  altitudes  as  man's  ambition 
may  attain ;  the  fishes  dive  down  into  the  ocean  gorge,  but  they  cannot  pierce  to 
such  a  deep  profound  as  that  intelligence  which  marks  mankind  and  sets  the  human 
over  the  brute  creation.  (2)  And  if  a  man  is  thus  large  in  lordship  and  dominion, 
how  much  more  the  Son  of  Man,  who  came  to  reassert  the  creature's  claim  after  it 
had  been  flung  away,  by  sharing  His  own  dominion  with  that  creature.  The 
dominion  of  Jesus  is  illimitable.  While  man  is  made  a  little  lower.  He  is  made  "  so 
much  better  than  the  angels,  as  He  hath  by  inheritance  obtained  a  more  excellent 
name  than  they."  For  when  the  power  of  Omnipotence  showed  forth  its  mightiest 
sinew,  it  was  when  it  "  wrought  in  Christ,  and  raised  Him  from  the  dead,"  &e. 
(Eph.  i.  20-23).  6.  The  conjugal  union  ordained  by  God  respecting  them.  Paradise 
was  inadequate  to  appease  the  need  of  the  first  man,  and  bring  him  to  rest,  till 
woman  was  created.  And  so  the  Maker  hushed  him  into  a  deep  sleep,  and  from  hia 
side  He  took  the  comrade  meet  for  him,  and  made  his  happiness  complete.  Now  thi& 
is  one  of  the  most  striking  types  of  Christ's  union  with  His  Church.  He  is  the  Bride- 
groom, and  that  Church  is  "  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife."  Adam  and  Eve  were  not 
more  intimately  and  emphatically  one  flesh  than  Christ  and  the  Christian  are  onu 
spirit.  "  This  is  a  great  mystery ;  but  I  speak  concerning  Christ  and  the  Church." 
II.  Points  of  contrast.  1.  '*  The  first  Adam  was  of  the  earth,  earthy ;  the  Second 
Adam  was  the  Lord  from  heaven."    2.  The  first  Adam  possessed  the  Divine  image, 


414^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  f. 

and  effaced  it ;  the  Second  Adam  put  on  the  haman  image,  that  He  might  restore  in 
US  the  Divine.  The  serpent  hissed  its  evil  breath,  and  filined  the  brightness  which 
God  had  spread  over  His  creature's  brow ;  and,  just  as  the  foul  vapour  on  a  looking- 
glass  blurs  the  reflections  on  its  disc,  so  did  the  image  stamped  by  the  Creator  there 
become  distorted  and  disturbed.  But  Christ  rubbed  off  the  taint  of  the  tempter's 
breath,  and  wrote  the  name  of  God  upon  the  creature  in  His  own  blood.  8.  The 
■pirit  of  apostate  Adam  was  proud,  onbelieving,  discontented,  and  rebellions ;  that 
of  the  Second  Adam  was  humble,  submissive,  obedient,  and  faithful.  4.  The  first 
Adam  was  the  medium  of  death,  while  the  Second  brought  salvation  and  life.  6. 
S7  the  first  Adam  paradise  was  lost;  by  the  Second  that  paradise  is  regained.  {A, 
Mursell.)  Adam  a  type  of  Christ: — I.  As  the  federal  head  of  mankind.  IL 
Ab  the  sottbcs  of  life — natural — redeemed.  III.  As  the  cause  of  univeesal  but 
wiDBLT  OPPOSITE  EXPEBiENOES — sln,  death — life,  righteousness.  IV.  As  the  pboto- 
ttfb  or  HUMAN  MATUBB — earthly — heavenly.  V.  As  the  bulbb  of  the  wobld — 
natural — Divine.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Adam  a  type  of  Christ : — This  is  the  earliest 
and  deepest  of  all  the  types ;  God  the  Spirit  grasps  the  first  fact  of  man's  history,  and 
therewith  prints  the  lesson  of  man's  redemption.  Note — I.  The  aobeement  between 
the  type  and  the  Antitype.  1.  Adam  and  Christ  were  the  true  sources  or  heads  of 
their  respective  families.  (1)  There  are  two  conceivable  methods  of  constituting 
humanity ;  one,  to  make  each  man  independent  of  all ;  the  other,  to  make  the  first 
man  the  head  and  source  of  humanity.  This  latter  method  our  Maker  has  adopted, 
and  it  is  useless  to  question  whether  the  other  would  have  been  better.  When  the  bird 
is  shut  up  in  a  cage,  it  is  better  that  it  should  not  dash  itself  against  the  bars.  It 
was  in  an  attempt  to  be  as  God  that  our  first  parents  fell.  If  we  would  escape  their 
fate,  we  should  abandon  speculations  and  address  ourselves  to  facts.  In  point  of 
fact  we  all  come  into  the  world  with  darkened  minds  and  wayward  hearts,  which 
the  Scriptures  explain  by  the  fall.  Some  complain  of  the  difficulties  they  find  there 
on  this  subject ;  but  the  difficulty  lies,  not  in  the  Scriptures,  but  in  the  fact.  Crea- 
tures manifestly  the  head  of  creation,  nnder  the  government  of  an  omnipotent  and 
beneficent  Being,  lie  in  sin  and  suffering,  and  have  done  so  from  age  to  age,  without 
intermission  or  mitigation.  This  is  the  difficulty ;  all  Bible  difficulties  are  small 
when  compared  with  this.  (2)  The  first  man  stood  as  head  and  representative  of 
the  race.  His  fall  brought  all  down.  At  the  bead  he  stands,  and  at  first  the  line 
of  march  is  narrow :  on  the  apex  one ;  and  behind  him  two  or  three  walk  abreast : 
broader  and  broader  grows  the  stream,  until,  in  our  day,  the  file  of  marsh  is  a 
million  of  millions  deep.  On  the  other  side  stands  He  that  was  to  come.  Alone  He 
stands  at  the  head ;  aJready  a  multitude,  which  no  man  can  number,  tread  the 
pilgrim's  path ;  and  now  we  look  forward  to  that  time  when  the  stream  of  the 
Second  Adam's  children  shall  be  co-extensive  and  coincident  with  that  of  the  first. 
2.  These  two  representatives  stood  side  by  side  from  the  first,  and  redemption  began 
to  flow  from  Christ  as  soon  as  sin  was  brought  in  by  Adam.  The  promise  sprang  at 
the  gate  of  Eden,  an  echo  of  the  curse.  Christ  began  to  act  as  the  Head  of  the 
redeemed  the  moment  that  the  first  man  became  the  head  of  a  fallen  race.  Under 
the  earlier  economies  many  felt  the  drawing  of  the  unseen  Christ,  and  in  the  days 
of  His  personal  ministry,  although  He  manifested  Himself  only  to  the  lost  sheep  of 
the  house  of  Israel,  He  had  compassion  on  the  surrounding  heathen,  and  hastened 
forward  to  the  day  of  their  redemption.  3.  On  both  sides  it  is  by  birth  that  the 
members  are  united  to  their  head  and  his  destiny.  We  have  been  bom  to  this 
inheritance  of  sin  and  suffering ;  we  cannot  shake  it  off.  But  be  of  good  cheer, 
prisoner  of  hope:  if  by  a  corresponding  new  birth  yon  are  one  with  the  Second 
Adam,  you  have  no  cause  to  weep.  You  cannot,  indeed,  escape  from  being  a  man  ; 
but  if  you  are  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  second  birthright  is  as  irrevocable 
as  the  first.  It  is  a  fixed  principle  of  natural  science  that  species  do  not  change. 
But  that  which  is  impossible  with  man  is  possible  with  God.  He  has  undertaken 
in  the  gospel  to  make  a  new  creature.  II.  The  diffebencb.  The  chief  point  lies 
in  this,  that  whereas  Adam's  seed  derive  from  their  head  sin  and  death,  Christ's 
seed  derive  from  their  Head  righteousness  and  life.  One  of  the  strangest  facts  in 
history  is  that  multitudes  are  proud  of  their  first  birth,  and  do  not  give  themselves 
any  concern  about  a  second.  Under  this,  however,  there  are  many  specific  points 
of  difference.  1.  While  Adam's  seed  possess  the  moral  nature  of  their  head  com- 
plete, Christ's  possess  His  moral  nature  only  in  part.  When  we  derive  a  sinful 
nature  from  the  first  man,  we  have  previously  no  better  nature,  that  may  mingle 
with  it  and  mitigate  its  evil.  In  me,  that  is  in  my  fiesh — in  all  that  I  derive  from 
man  my  father — there  dwelleth  no  good  thing.     But  on  the  other  hand,  the 


OBAT.  T.]  ROMANS.  4U 

regeneration  is  the  getting  of  a  new  natnre,  indeed,  through  anion  in  spirit  with 
Christ ;  bat  it  is  gotten  by  one  who  previously  possessed  an  evil  nature,  and  that 
evil  nature  is  cast  down  from  the  throne,  but  not  cast  forth  from  the  territory. 
The  two  contend  against  each  other ;  and  there  is  not  peace,  but  a  sword  (see  Bom. 
Tii.).  The  union  with  Christ  in  the  regeneration  is  likened  to  the  grafting  of  a  fruit- 
tree.  The  tree  at  the  first,  which  springs  from  seed,  is  wholly  evil.  When  it  ia 
grafted  it  is  made  good ;  but  not  so  completely  as  it  was  originally  made  evil.  In 
some  way,  however,  the  remnants  of  the  old  will  be  filtered  out ;  and  nothing  shall 
enter  heaven  that  would  defile  its  golden  streets  or  be  a  jar  in  its  new  song.  2.  The 
two  bands  are  not  equally  numerous.  Adam's  company  includes  absolutely  the 
whole  of  the  human  race ;  Christ's  company  is  contained  within  it,  and  is  therefore 
necessarily  smaller.  Adam's  company  consists  of  all  the  born,  and  Christ's  of  all 
the  bom-again.  God's  creatures  of  the  old  and  new  creation  seem  to  envelop  each 
other,  after  the  manner  of  a  sphere  within  a  sphere,  the  most  precious  being 
embedded  in  the  heart.  Humanity,  comparatively  small  in  bulk,  is  surrounded  by 
the  mightier  mass  of  beasts  that  perish.  In  the  heart  of  humanity  lie  the  regenerate — 
the  true,  vital  seed  of  the  kingdom  ;  and  the  crust  that  surrounds  tbem  will  crumble 
and  be  east  away.  When  the  earth  and  all  that  it  contained  have  passed  away, 
Christ  and  Christians  will  remain,  inheritors  together  and  alone  of  the  eternal  life. 
8.  Although  we  inherit  this  corruption  from  the  first  man,  we  personally  have  no 
relation  to  him  ;  we  received  it  from  the  last  that  stood  before  us  in  the  line.  But 
from  Christ  our  life  flows  as  its  fountain,  and  each  generation  of  believing  men 
continue  to  draw  their  spiritual  life  and  justifying  righteousness  immediately  from 
Him.  The  new  creature  does  not  propagate  its  kind.  If  the  first  Adam  were 
annihilated,  man  would  still  be  born  in  sin ;  but  if  Christ  were  no  more  Christ, 
there  could  be  no  more  for  any  man  a  new,  a  holy  life.  The  difTerence  is  some- 
what like  that  between  a  tree  propagating  its  kind  by  seed  and  one  sustaining  its 
branches.  When  once  the  seed  is  ripened  and  oast,  the  progenitor  tree  may  be 
burned.  But  even  when  the  branch  has  been  put  forth  by  the  tree,  the  branch 
is  ever  directly  dependent  on  the  tree.  If  the  tree  should  die,  all  the  branches 
would  die  too.  Adam  might  say,  I  was  the  tree,  and  ye  grew  from  the  seed  which  I 
shed  ;  but  Christ  says,  "  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches."  And  as  Christians  hold 
directly  of  Christ,  Christ  holds  individually  by  Christians.  The  Head  endures  pain 
when  the  members  are  injured.  How  safe  is  that  life  which  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God  I  4.  The  gain  by  the  second  Adam  is  greater  than  the  loss  by  the  first  (ver.  15). 
He  pays  our  debt,  and  makes  us  rich  besides.  He  sets  free  the  slave,  and  makes 
him  a  son.  "  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more  abound."  (W.  Amot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.  But  not  as  the  offence,  so  also  is  tht  firee  gift — The  o fence  and  the  free 
gift : — 1.  The  offence  originated  with  man,  the  free  gift  in  the  grace  of  God.  2. 
The  offence  operated  necessarily  by  a  just  law,  the  gift  is  free  through  Jesus  Christ. 
3.  The  offence  results  in  death,  the  free  gift  abounds  unto  everlasting  life.  (J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  The  o  fence  and  the  free  gift : — If  from  the  offence  of  one — so  insig- 
n&cant  in  its  way — there  could  go  forth  an  action  which  spread  over  the  whole 
multitude  of  mankind,  will  not  the  conclusion  hold  a  fortiori  that  from  the 
grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  through  this  grace  of  one  man,  acting  on  the  opposite 
side,  so  powerful  and  rich  as  they  are,  there  must  result  an  action,  the  extension  of 
which  shall  not  be  less  than  that  of  the  offence,  and  shall,  consequently,  reach  the 
whole  of  that  multitude  ?  If  a  very  weak  spring  could  inundate  a  whole  meadow, 
would  it  not  be  safe  to  conclude  that  a  much  more  abundant  spring,  if  spread  over 
the  same  space  of  ground,  would  not  fail  to  submerge  it  entirely  ?  {Prof.  Godet.) 
The  first  and  second  Adam  compared  in  reference — I.  To  the  UNrvKRSAUtTT  op 
THEiB  INFLUENCE.  The  first  Adam  destroyed  all,  the  second  has  obtained  grace  for 
all — with  this  difference,  that  in  the  former  case  the  ruin  came  inevitably,  but  the 
reception  of  the  grace  is  suspended  upon  man's  free  choice.  II.  To  the  intensitt 
or  THEIB  nmuENCE.  The  first  Adam  has  by  one  sin  given  occasion  to  all  sin  ;  the 
second  has  by  one  act  of  grace  expiated  all  sin — ^with  this  difference,  that  Adam's 
sin  in  itself  was  not  greater  than  any  other  sin,  but  the  grace  of  Christ  outweighs 
the  aggregate  guilt  of  all  sin.  III.  To  the  final  results  op  theib  influence. 
The  first  Adam  has  subjected  mankind  to  the  bondage  of  death,  the  second  f^onfers 
upon  all,  who  will  receive  it,  dominion  in  life — with  this  difference,  that  V.  e  fulness 
of  grace  in  Christ  not  only  meets  the  curse  in  Adam,  but  far  surpasses  he  grace 
originally  conferred  upon  man.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Life  in  Ghrin  contm.  i  u  with 

ieatk  in  ^datn :— Note— I.  The  intbimsio  natube  op  the  thinos  hebe  coisxBAsxED ; 


4ie  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  V. 

and  we  shall  see  that  if  the  one  arrangement  could  be  adopted  by  God,  much  more 
likely  is  it  that  the  other  wonld  be  also,  as  being  more  strictly  congenial  with  all 
that  we  know  of  His  glorious  character.  God  might  pennit  us  to  sin  and  suffer  in 
Adam,  with  reference  to  some  future  good  to  come  out  of  it :  He  might  permit  it  in 
harmony  with  His  wisdom,  holiness,  and  love ;  but  still  He  could  have  no  delight 
in  it  for  its  own  sake.  Yet  we  find  that  He  has  seen  it  right  to  permit  these  things 
to  transpire :  how  much  more,  then,  may  we  believe  in  the  arrangement  of  grace, 
by  which  salvation  is  brought  to  our  ruined  race !  But  how  do  we  know  the  feelings 
of  the  Most  High  in  reference  to  this  matter  ?  What  reason  have  we  for  supposing 
that  it  pleases  Him  more  to  give  us  life  in  Christ  than  to  see  as  die  in  Adam  ?  We 
take  our  views  from  His  own  word  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7  ;  Psa.  Ixxxvi.  5,  15,  cxlv.  8,  9  ; 
Ezek.  xviii.  23,  31,  32,  xxxiii.  11 ;  John  iii.  16,  iv.  16).  Say  not,  then,  complain- 
ingly  that  God  has  permitted  you  to  die  in  Adam,  but  rather  believe  that  He  delights 
to  give  you  life  in  Christ.  II.  That  obace  beIiATes  to  a  iarqeb  nuubeb  of  ibanb- 
OBESsioNS  THAN  DID  THE  FiBST  CONDEMNATION  (vcr.  16).  The  gift  by  One  is  quite 
unlike  the  sin  by  one,  inasmuch  as  in  the  sin  there  was  but  one  oSence  committed, 
and  instantly  judgment  upon  it ;  whereas,  in  the  matter  of  the  gift  by  grace,  there 
is  forgiveness  ensured  for  many  offences.  Hitherto,  we  have  been  regarding  the  sin 
of  mankind  as  one,  and  in  that  one  sin  all  men  became  guilty  before  God.  Let  as, 
then,  look  at  the  nature  and  the  number  of  our  offences,  all  of  which  need  to  and 
can  be  forgiven  through  the  atoning  work  of  Christ.  There  are  the  sins  of  oar 
ungodly  life ;  there  are  also  our  sins  since  we  entered  on  a  godly  career.  We  are 
daily  guilty  of  omissions  of  duty,  or  grievous  shortcomings  in  the  mode  of  fulfilling 
our  obligations.  But  beyond  all  this,  there  are  positive  faults  and  evils  in  the  best 
of  us.  Yet — blessed  be  God  1 — these  sins,  however  numerous,  may  be  all  pardoned 
through  the  blood  of  Christ ;  for  the  free  gift  is  of  many  offences  unto  justification. 
in.  That  obace  is  essentially  a  steongeb  pbinciple  than  sin  (ver.  17).  Life  ia 
more  mighty  than  death.  The  range  of  death  is  limited  ;  it  can  only  ravage  that 
which  already  exists.  But  life  is  a  creative  power  to  whose  possible  achievements 
we  can  assign  no  limits.  Death  is  a  negative  principle,  Ufe  a  positive  one.  Death 
is  a  condition  of  the  creature,  life  has  its  source  and  fulness  in  the  infinite  Creator. 
Under  the  domination  of  death  we  are  made  its  groaning  and  unwiUing  victims ; 
but  under  the  reign  of  life  we  are  cai:^ht  up  to  the  throne,  and  share  with  gladness 
in  the  monarch's  might  and  joy.  {T.  G.  Horton.)  The  grace  of  God — I.  Tran- 
scends sin.  1.  In  its  origin.  Sin  proceeds  from  the  offence  of  one  man  and 
destroys  many ;  grace  proceeds  from  God  through  one  man,  Jesus  Christ,  and 
therefore  not  only  reaches  many,  but  abounds.  2.  In  its  operation.  One  offence 
brought  condemnation,  but  grace  not  only  counteracts  the  effects  of  that  one  offence 
but  of  many  others.  3.  In  its  results.  One  offence  brought  death,  but  grace  wher- 
ever received  not  only  gives  back  life,  but  gives  it  more  abundantly.  11.  Is  co- 
extensive WITH  sin.  1.  It  cannot  reach  further  because  it  presupposes  sin.  2.  It  does 
reach  as  far,  because  the  free  gift  unto  justification  of  life  is  unto  all  men,  because 
the  many  made  sinners  might  also  be  made  righteous.  3.  If  grace  anywhere  fails 
it  is  not  through  any  limitation  of  its  action,  but  through  the  wilful  impenitency  of 
man.      {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Honey  from  a  lion : — This  text  affords  many  openings 

for  controversy.  It  can  be  made  to  bristle  with  difficulties.  It  would  be  easy  to  set 
up  a  thorn-hedge  and  keep  the  sheep  out  of  the  pasture,  or  to  so  pelt  each  other  with 
the  stones  as  to  leave  the  fruit  untasted.  I  feel  more  inclined  to  chime  in  with 
that  ancient  father  against  whom  a  clamorous  disputant  shouted,  "  Hear  me  1  Hear 
me  ! "  "  No,"  said  the  father,  "I  will  not  hear  you,  nor  shall  you  hear  me,  but  we 
will  both  be  quiet  and  Lear  what  Christ  has  to  say."  Note — I.  The  appointed  way 
OF  oub  SALVATION  IS  BY  THE  FBEE  GIFT  OF  GoD.  Salvatiou  is  bcstowed — 1.  Without 
regard  to  any  merit,  supposed  or  real.  Grace  is  not  a  fit  gift  for  the  righteous,  but 
for  the  undeserving.  It  is  according  to  the  nature  of  God  to  pity  the  miserable  and 
forgive  the  guilty, "  for  He  is  good,  and  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  2.  Irrespec- 
tive of  any  merit  which  God  foresees  will  be  in  man.  Foresight  of  the  existence  of 
grace  cannot  be  the  cause  of  grace.  God  Himself  does  not  foresee  that  there  will 
be  any  good  thing  in  any  man,  except  what  He  foresees  that  He  will  put  there.  3. 
Without  reference  to  conditions  which  imply  any  desert.  But  I  hear  one  murmur, 
•'  God  will  not  give  grace  to  men  who  do  not  repent  and  believe."  I  answer,  **  God 
gives  men  grace  to  repent  and  believe,  and  no  man  does  so  till  first  grace  is  given 
him."  Kepentance  and  faith  may  be  conditions  of  receiving,  but  they  are  not 
conditions  of  purchasing,  for  salvation  is  without  money  and  without  price.  4.  Over 
the  head  of  sin  and  in  the  teeth  of  rebellion.    "  God  commendeth  Bis  love  toward 


CHAP.  T.l  ROMANS.  417 

OS,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,"  &o.  Many  of  ns  have  been  saved  by  grace 
of  the  most  abounding  and  extraordinary  sort.  6.  Throngh  the  one  man  Jesus 
Christ.  People  talk  about  a  "one  man  ministry."  I  was  lost  by  a  one  man 
ministry  when  father  Adam  fell  in  Eden,  but  I  was  saved  by  a  one  man  ministry 
when  Jesus  bore  my  sin  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  II.  It  is  certain  that  great 
sviLS  HAVE  COME  TO  OS  BY  THE  FALL.  1.  We  have  lost  the  Garden  of  Eden  and  all 
its  delights,  privileges,  and  immunities,  its  communion  with  God,  and  its  freedom 
from  death.  2.  We  have  been  bom  to  a  heritage  of  sorrow.  3.  We  came  into  the 
world  with  a  bias  towards  evil.  4.  We  are  made  liable  to  death,  and  are  sure  to  bow 
onr  heads  beneath  the  fatal  stroke.  5.  While  we  live  we  know  that  the  sweat  of 
our  brow  must  pay  the  price  of  our  bread.  6.  Our  children  must  be  born  with 
pangs  and  travaiL    III.  From  the  fall  we  infer  the  more  abcndakt  certainty 

THAT  SALVATION  BY  GRACE  THROUGH  ChRIST  JeSCS  SHALL^COME  TO  BELIEVERS.     For — 1, 

This  appears  to  be  more  delightful  to  the  heart  of  God.  I  can  understand  that  God, 
having  so  arranged  it  that  the  human  race  should  be  regarded  as  one,  should  allow 
the  consequences  of  sin  to  fall  upon  succeeding  generations  of  men;  but  yet  I  know 
that  He  takes  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  any,  and  finds  no  delight  in  afflicting 
mankind.  If  God  has  so  arranged  it  that  in  the  Second  Adam  men  rise  and  live,  it 
seems  to  me  most  gloriously  consistent  with  His  gracious  nature  and  infinite  love 
that  all  who  believe  in  Jesus  should  be  saved  through  Him.  2.  It  seems  more 
inevitable  that  men  should  be  saved  by  the  death  of  Christ  than  that  men  should  be 
lost  by  the  sin  of  Adam.  It  might  seem  possible  that,  after  Adam  had  sinned,  God 
might  have  said,  "  Notwithstanding  this  covenant  of  works,  I  will  not  lay  this 
burden  upon  the  children  of  Adam  "  ;  but  it  is  not  possible  that  after  the  eternal 
Son  of  God  has  become  man,  and  has  bowed  His  head  to  death,  God  should  say, 
•*  Yet  after  all  I  will  not  save  men  for  Christ's  sake."  3.  Look  at  the  difference  as 
to  the  causes  of  the  two  effects.  Look  at  the  occasion  of  our  ruin—*'  the  offence  of 
one  " — a  finite  being,  who  therefore  cannot  be  compared  in  power  with  the  grace  of 
the  infinite  God ;  the  sin  of  a  moment,  and  therefore  cannot  be  compared  for  force 
and  energy  with  the  everlasting  purpose  of  Divine  love.  The  grace  of  God  is  like 
His  nature,  omnipotent  and  unlimited.  God  is  not  only  gracious  to  this  degree  or 
to  that,  but  He  is  gracious  beyond  measure ;  we  read  of  "  the  exceeding  riches 
of  His  grace."  He  is  "the  God  of  all  grace."  4.  The  difference  of  the  channels 
by  which  the  evil  and  the  good  were  severally  communicated  to  us.  In  each  case 
it  was  "  by  one,"  but  what  a  difference  in  the  persons  I  (1)  Let  us  not  think  too 
little  of  the  hpad  of  the  human  family.  Yet  what  is  the  first  Adam  as  compared 
with  the  Second?  He  is  but  of  the  earth,  earthy,  but  the  Second  Man  is  the  Lord 
from  heaven.  Surely,  then,  if  Adam  with  that  puny  hand  of  his  could  pull  down 
the  house  of  our  humanity,  that  greater  Man,  who  is  also  the  Son  of  God,  can  fully 
restore  us.  (2)  Adam  commits  one  fault  and  spoils  us,  but  Christ's  achievements 
are  many  as  the  stars  of  heaven.  (3)  Adam  did  but  eat  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  but 
Christ  died.  Is  there  any  comparison  between  the  one  act  of  rebellion  in  the 
garden  and  the  matchless  deed  of  superlative  obedience  upon  the  Cross  of  Calvary 
which  crowned  a  life  of  service  ?  6.  From  the  text  you  may  derive  a  great  deal  of 
comfort.  (1)  A  babe  is  born  into  the  world  amid  great  anxiety  because  of  its 
mother's  pains  ;  but  while  these  prove  how  the  consequences  of  the  fall  are  with 
ns  ("  in  sorrow  shalt  thou  bring  forth  children "),  they  also  assure  us  that  the 
Second  Adam  can  abundantly  bring  ns  bliss  through  a  second  birth.  (2)  Inasmuch 
as  we  have  seen  the  thorn  and  the  thistle  because  of  one  Adam,  we  may  expect  to 
see  a  blessing  on  the  earth  because  of  the  Second  Adam.  Therefore  with  unbounded 
confidence  do  I  believe  the  promise :  "  Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir- 
tree,  and  instead  of  the  briar  shall  come  up  the  myrtle-tree,"  &o.  (3)  Did  not  the 
Lord  say,  "In  the  sweat  of  thy  brow  shalt  thou  eat  bread"?  Ought  not  your 
labour  to  be  an  argument  by  which  your  faith  shall  prove  that  in  Christ  Jesus  there 
remaineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God.  (4)  Did  the  first  Adam  through  his 
disobedience  lift  the  latch  for  death  ?  It  is  surely  so.  Therefore  I  believe  with 
the  greater  assurance  that  the  Second  Adam  can  give  life  to  these  dry  bones,  can 
awake  all  these  sleepers,  and  raise  them  in  newness  of  Ufe.  IV.  If  from  the  fall 
OF  Adam  such  great  results  flow,  greater  results  must  flow  from  the  grace  op 
God  and  the  gift  bt  grace,  which  is  by  one  man,  Jesus  Christ.  Suppose  that 
Adam  had  never  sinned,  and  we  were  unfallen  beings,  yet  our  standing  would  have 
remained  in  jeopardy.  We  have  now  lost  everything  in  Adam,  and  so  the  uncertain 
tenure  has  come  to  an  end  ;  but  we  that  have  believed  have  obtained  an  inheritance 
which  we  hold  by  a  title  which  Satan  himself  cannot  dispute :  "  All  things  are  yours, 
VOL.  I.  27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

and  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."  By  the  great  transgression  of  Adam  we 
lost  our  life  in  him  ;  but  in  Christ  we  live  again  with  a  higher  and  nobler  life.  The 
Lord  Jesas  has  also  brought  ns  into  a  nearer  relationship  to  God  than  we  could 
have  possessed  by  any  other  means.  We  were  God's  creatures,  but  now  we  are  His 
sons.  We  have  lost  paradise,  but  we  shall  possess  that  of  which  the  earthly  garden 
was  but  a  lowly  type  :  we  might  have  eaten  of  the  luscious  fruits  of  Eden,  but  now 
we  eat  of  the  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven ;  we  might  have  heard  the  voice 
of  the  Lord  God  walking  in  the  garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day,  but  now,  like  Enoch, 
we  may  walk  with  God  after  a  nobler  and  closer  fashion.  We  are  now  capable  of  a 
joy  which  unf alien  spirits  could  not  have  known — the  bliss  of  pardoned  sin.  The 
bonds  which  bind  redeemed  ones  to  their  God  are  the  strongest  which  exist.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  love  of  God  is  a  love  which  gives  another  love  ;  it  is  the  grace 

of  a  Father  giving  the  love  of  a  Brother.  (Prof.  Godet.)  The  advantage*  accruing 
to  the  race  from  the  fall : — How  common  and  bitter  is  the  outcry  against  our  first 
parent  for  the  mischief  he  entailed  on  his  posterity  ;  and  it  were  well  if  the  com- 
plaint ended  there,  but  it  glances  from  Adam  to  his  Creator.  "  Did  not  God 
foresee  that  he  would  abuse  his  liberty,  and  know  all  the  baneful  consequences 
of  the  act?  Why,  then,  did  He  permit  it?"  Because  He  knew  that  "not  as 
the  offence,  so  is  the  free  gift " ;  that  the  evil  resulting  from  the  former  was 
not  as  the  good  resulting  from  the  latter,  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  it. 
If  Adam  had  not  fallen — I.  Christ  had  kot  died,  and  thb  world  had  missed 
THE  MOST  AMAZING  DISPLAY  OF  God's  LOVE.  So — 1.  There  could  have  been  no 
such  thing  as  faith  in  God  thus  loving  the  world;  nor  faith  in  Christ  as  "loving 
as,  and  giving  Himself  for  us  "  ;  nor  faith  in  the  Spirit  as  renewing  the  image  of 
God  in  our  hearts.  2.  The  same  blank  could  have  been  left  in  our  love.  We  might 
have  loved  God  as  our  Creator  and  Preserver,  but  we  could  not  have  loved  ffim 
under  the  nearest  and  dearest  relation.  We  might  have  loved  the  Son  of  God  as 
being  "  the  brightness  of  His  Father's  glory,"  but  not  as  having  borne  our  sins. 
We  could  not  have  loved  the  Spirit  as  revealing  to  us  the  Fatber  and  the  Son,  as 
opening  our  eyes  and  turning  us  from  darkness  to  light,  &c.  3.  Nor  could  we  have 
loved  our  neighbour  to  the  same  extent :  "  If  God  to  loved  us  we  ought  to  love  one 
another."  II.  We  had  missed  the  innumerable  benefits  which  flow  thbouoh  ocb 
8UFFERIN0S.  Had  there  been  no  suffering,  a  considerable  part  of  religion,  and  in 
some  respects  the  most  excellent  part,  could  have  had  no  place.  1.  Upon  this 
foundation  our  passive  graces  are  built ;  yea,  the  noblest  of  them — the  love  which 
endureth  all  things.  Here  is  the  ground  for  resignation,  for  confidence  in  God,  for 
patience,  meekness,  gentleness,  longsuffering,  &c.  2.  These  afford  opportunities 
for  doing  good  which  could  not  otherwise  have  existed.  III.  Heaven  would  havb 
been  less  olobious.  1.  We  should  have  missed  the  fruit  of  those  graces  which 
could  not  have  flourished  but  for  our  struggle  with  sin  here.  Superior  nobleness 
on  earth  means  superior  happiness  in  heaven.  2.  We  should  have  missed  the 
reward  which  will  accrue  to  innumerable  good  works  which  could  not  otherwise 
have  been  wrought,  such  as  relief  of  distress,  &c.  3.  We  should  have  missed  the 
"exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  "  which  is  to  be  the  recompense  of  our  hght 
affliction.  IV.  Gob  salvation  would  have  been  less  secure.  Unless  in  Adam  all 
had  died,  every  man  must  have  personally  answered  for  himself,  and,  as  a  con- 
sequence, if  he  had  once  sinned  there  would  have  been  no  possibility  of  his  rising 
again.  Now  who  would  wish  to  hazard  eternity  on  one  stake?  But  under  the 
economy  of  redemption  if  we  fall  we  may  rise  again.  Conclusion :  See,  then,  how 
little  reason  there  is  to  repine  at  the  fall  of  our  first  parents,  since  herefrom  we 
may  derive  such  unspeakable  advantages.  If  God  had  decreed  that  millions  should 
suffer  in  hell  because  Adam  sinned  it  would  have  been  a  different  matter;  but  on 
the  contrary,  He  has  decreed  that  every  man  may  be  a  gainer  by  it,  and  no  man 
can  be  a  loser  but  through  his  own  choice.    {J.  Wesley,  M.A.) 

Ver.  16.  And  not  as  It  was  by  one  that  sinned,  so  is  the  gift. — The  Adamie  and 
Christian  dispensations : — I.  The  Adamic.  1.  One  offence  brought  condemnation. 
2.  Upon  all  mankind.  3.  By  a  just  and  inevitable  law.  II.  The  Christian.  1. 
Grace  is  free.  2.  Brings  justification.  3.  For  all.  4.  From  many  offences. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  one  and  the  many  : — With  the  one  sinner  is  contrasted  the 
multitude  of  the  justified.  What  a  difference  between  the  power  of  the  spark  which 
sets  fire  to  the  forest  by  lighting  a  withered  branch,  and  the  power  of  the  instrument 
which  extinguishes  the  conflagration  at  the  moment  when  every  tree  is  on  fire,  and 
makes  them  all  live  again.     {Prof.  Godet.)        Chritt  and  the  many  : — He  gave  His 


I.  ▼.]  EOMANS.  419 

life  a  ransom  for  many  (Matt.  xx.  28) ;  His  blood  was  shed  for  many  (Matt. 
xxvi,  28;  Mark  xiv.  24);  He  bare  the  sins  of  many  (Isa.  liii.  11,  12);  by  His 
knowledge  He  justifies  many  (Isa.  liii.  11) ;  He  brings  many  sins  to  glory  (Heb. 
ii.  10).  The  many  are  a  multitude  which  no  man  can  number  (Rev.  vii.  9). 
(T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Salvation  a  free  gift : — One  excuse  which  awakened  sinners 
are  accustomed  to  allege  in  their  own  defence  is,  that  they  wish  to  love  God  with 
all  their  heart,  but  cannot.  They  do,  indeed,  wish  to  be  saved,  but  they  are  not 
willing  to  be  saved  in  God's  way ;  that  is,  they  are  not  willing  to  accept  salvation 
as  a  free  gift.  They  would  do  anything  to  buy  it,  but  will  not  take  it  without 
money  and  without  price.  Suppose  that  you  were  very  sick,  and  were  told  by  the 
phTsician  that  there  was  but  one  medicine  in  the  world  which  could  save  your  life, 
and  this  was  exceedingly  precious  ;  that  you  were  also  told  that  there  was  but  one 
person  in  the  world  who  had  any  of  this  in  his  possession ;  and  that,  although  he 
was  willing  to  give  it  to  those  who  asked,  he  would  on  no  account  sell  any. 
Suppose  this  person  to  be  one  whom  you  had  treated  with  great  neplect  and 
contempt,  injured  in  every  possible  way.  How  exceedingly  unwilling  would  you  be 
to  send  to  him  for  the  medicine  as  a  gift :  you  would  rather  purchase  it  at  the 
expense  of  your  whole  fortune.  You  would  defer  sending  as  long  as  possible ;  and 
when  you  found  you  were  daily  growing  worse,  and  nothing  else  could  save  you, 
you  would  be  obliged,  however  reluctantly,  to  send  and  ask  for  some.  Just  so 
nnwilling  are  sinners  to  apply  to  God  for  salvation,  as  a  free  gift ;  and  they  will 
not  do  it  until  they  find  themselves  perishing,  and  that  there  is  no  other  hope  for 
them.  (E.  Payson.)  Sin  the  occasion  of  glorifying  God  : — I  do  believe  that  sin  in 
itself  has  the  same  aspect  as  afiaiction — that  it  makes  room  for  the  mercy  of  God. 
I  hardly  dare  say  what  Augustine,  when  speaking  of  the  fall  and  of  the  sin  of 
Adam,  and  looking  to  all  the  display  of  grace  that  followed  it,  said.  He  said, 
"  beata  culpa  " — "  happy  fault,"  as  if  he  thought  that  by  means  of  sin  the  grace 
of  God  is  so  magnified  and  displayed  he  might  call  it  a  •*  happy  fault."  I  will  not 
go  so  far.  I  scarcely  do  more  than  repeat  what  that  great  master  in  Israel  once 
said  ;  but  I  do  say  this,  that  I  cannot  imagine  an  occasion  for  glorifying  God  equal 
to  the  fact  that  man  has  sinned.  God  so  loved  the  world  as  to  give  Christ  to  die 
for  sinners,  and  how  could  this  have  been  if  there  had  been  no  sin  ?  The  Cross  is 
a  constellation  of  glory  that  is  brighter  than  creation  itself.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  17.  For  If  by  one  man's  offence  death  reigned  by  one. — The  reign  of  death 
and  the  reign  in  life : — I.  The  eeion  of  death.  1.  Established  by  one  man's  sin. 
2.  Universal.  8.  Irresistible.  II.  The  reign  in  life.  1.  Effected  through  grace. 
2.  Glorious.  8.  Eternal  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  reign  of  death  and  the  reign  in 
life  : — When  the  empty  vessel  of  the  human  heart  has  once  become  filled  with  the 
fulness  of  grace  and  righteousness,  the  sinner  is  raised  to  the  place  of  a  "  king  in 
life  " — an  antithesis  to  "  death  reigned."  But  the  apostle  has  too  lively  a  convic- 
tion of  spiritual  realities  to  say  here  '*  life  shall  reign."  Death  reigns :  it  is  a 
tyrant.  But  life  does  not  reign ;  it  makes  kings.  Instead  of  a  sombre  state  of 
things  which  bears  sway  as  a  reign  of  death,  it  is  here  the  individuals  themselves 
who,  having  personally  appropriated  righteousness,  reign  personally  in  the 
luminous  domain  of  life.  Compare  on  this  reign  what  Paul  said  (chap.  iv.  13),  of 
the  inheritance  of  this  world;  then  the  glorying  (chap.  v.  11);  finally,  chap, 
viii.  17.  "  In  life  "  does  not  denote  a  period — i.e.,  eternal  life,  but  the  mode  or 
nature  of  the  reign  of  believers.  A  new,  holy,  inexhaustible  and  victorious  vitality 
will  pervade  those  "  receivers  of  righteousness,"  and  make  them  so  many  kings. 
If  the  collective  condemnation  could  make  each  of  them  a  subject  of  death,  the 
conclusion  therefrom  should  be  that  their  individual  justification  will  make  each  of 
them  a  king  in  life.  (Prof.  Godet.)  The  reign  of  death  and  the  reign  in  life  : — 
I,  The  evil  introduced  into  the  world  by  Adam.  The  reign  of  death.  There 
was  a  time  when  Death  was  a  stranger  in  the  world.  It  was  sin  which  brought 
him  here.  But  the  consequences  did  not  end  here.  Sin  gave  to  death  a  fearful 
dominion  over  the  whole  globe  on  which  man  dwelt.  Hence  he  is  represented  as  a 
monarch.  Men  love  him  noi  and  are  daily  resisting  his  power,  but  he  laughs  to 
scorn  their  efforts,  and  the  contest  ends  in  their  lying  down  in  the  dust.  The 
wide  world,  is  his  only  kingdom.  Into  heaven  he  never  entered,  and  in  hell  he 
cannot  destroy.  The  soul,  too,  is  brought  under  his  dominion.  There  is  not  one  of 
QB  who  is  not  by  nature  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  II.  The  blessing  intbo- 
sncED  BY  Christ.  A  reign  in  life.  1.  Life  is  here  opposed  to  death,  and  expresses 
»  state  of  spiritual  existence.    But  they  who  have  received  this  precious  benefit 


420  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  T. 

not  only  live,  they  "  reign  in  life."  This  implies— (1)  Power.  They  have  over- 
come their  enemies,  as  well  as  escaped  from  them ;  not  merely  freed  themselves 
from  their  tyranny,  but  attained  a  dominion  over  them,  (o)  They  were  once  the 
subjects  of  Satan,  they  now  "  bruise  him  underneath  their  feet,"  (b)  The  world 
once  held  them  in  thraldom,  but  the  world  also  is  overcome,  (c)  Once,  too,  they 
were  governed  by  lawless  passions,  but  now  they  reign  as  lords  over  their  own 
soul.  They  "mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,"  they  "crucify  the  flesh  with  the 
affections  and  lusts. "  Not  that  their  victory  is  complete.  Their  throne  is  secure, 
but  it  is  surrounded  by  rebels  who  incessantly  disturb  its  peace.  Satan  still  assails, 
the  world  still  tempts,  sin  still  rages.  (2)  Dignity.  And  what  so  truly  great  and 
noble  as  to  be  masters  of  ourselves?  'Wliat  so  base  as  to  be  the  slaves  of  sin? 
(3)  Heaven.  There  the  Christian  will  indeed  live  and  reign.  He  will  have 
attained  a  complete  triumph  over  all  his  enemies.  "  To  him  that  overcometh  will 
I  grant  to  sit  with  Me  on  My  throne,"  &c.  He  who  once  suffered  with  Christ, 
shall  be  "  glorified  together  with  Him."  What  a  glorious  change  is  this,  that  the 
feeble  mortals  who  were  once  the  trembling  victims  of  death,  should  thus  "  reign 
in  life."  2.  And  to  whom  are  they  indebted  for  this  wondrous  change?  To 
themselves  ?  The  dead  cannot  raise  themselves  to  life.  To  the  father  who  ruined 
them  ?  He  made  them  the  children  of  wretchedness,  and  then  he  went  away  and 
left  them  to  their  misery.  To  legions  of  angels  ?  All  their  mighty  hosts  could  not 
reanimate  one  lifeless  body,  much  less  quicken  and  glorify  a  ruined  soul.  One 
Being  only  was  able  to  accomplish  this  glorious  change,  but  He  was  the  very  Being 
who  seemed  the  least  likely  to  accomplish  it,  for  it  was  His  righteous  vengeance 
which  had  sent  death  into  the  world,  and  His  voice  which  proclaimed  Him  its 
king.  By  Him,  however,  was  death  dethroned ;  by  Him  to  the  utter  exclusion  of 
all  others,  to  the  utter  rejection  of  all  our  claims  to  any  part  of  the  honour  of  the 
work.  III.  Who  are  the  persons  fob  whom  this  great  blessing  is  designed? 
All  the  human  race  ?  Clearly  not.  The  ungodly  lives  of  thousands  around  us 
would  at  once  disprove  such  an  assertion.  All  men  indeed,  in  consequence  of  the 
interference  of  Christ,  are  under  a  dispensation  of  mercy ;  a  free  and  full  salvation 
is  offered  them,  and  they  are  invited  to  accept  it.  But  men  will  not  accept  it. 
Those  who  have  received  this  salvation  are  the  men  for  whom  the  kingdom  is 
prepared.  They  are  described  as — 1.  "Beceiving  abundance  of  grace."  (1) 
•'  Grace  "  is  that  free  favour  which  God  has  manifested  towards  His  sinful  children, 
providing  a  sacrifice  for  their  iniquities,  sending  them  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation, 
and  making  them  actually  partakers  of  its  blessings.  (2)  "  Abundance  of  grace  " 
signifies  not  only  a  sufficiency,  but  grace  enough  and  to  spare.  And  look  at  what 
part  we  may  of  the  mystery  of  redemption,  we  discover  at  once  the  propriety  of  the 
term.  The  wisdom  which  planned  and  the  power  which  executed  this  stupendous 
scheme,  and  the  love  which  called  this  power  and  this  wisdom  into  exercise,  are  all 
infinite.  The  glory  of  the  salvation  treasured  up  for  sinners  in  Christ,  the  freedom 
with  which  it  is  communicated,  the  characters  of  those  on  whom  it  is  bestowed, 
all  bear  witness  to  the  boundless  extent  of  the  Divine  mercy.  2.  *•  The  gift  of 
righteousness."  (1)  This  may  possibly  mean  that  renewal  of  the  heart  unto 
holiness,  which  the  redeemed  sinner  receives  from  the  free  bounty  of  his  Saviour. 
But  the  apostle  seems  rather  to  refer  here  to  the  same  righteousness  of  which  he 
speaks  in  the  following  verse,  the  obedience  or  righteousness  of  Christ,  It  is  this 
which  enables  the  Lord  to  pour  out  the  abundance  of  His  grace  on  His  apostate 
children.  He  imputes  to  them  the  merits  of  His  dear  Son,  and  then  He  pardons, 
accepts,  and  rewards  them,  without  weakening  His  authority  or  tarnishing  His 
glory.  (2)  The  apostle  calls  it  a  gift,  because  it  is  by  an  act  of  mercy  that  it  is 
transferred  to  us;  he  speaks  of  it  as  an  abundant  gift,  because  it  completely 
satisfies  the  demands  of  God's  unalterable  law.  Its  merit  is  infinite.  It  is  a  robe 
BO  pure,  that  he  who  wears  it,  stands  before  God  without  spot  or  blemish;  so 
splendid,  that  it  covers  all  his  shame ;  so  freely  offered,  that  all  the  naked  may 
array  themselves  in  it,  and  all  rejoice  in  it  as  the  garment  of  salvation.  IV.  Thb 
CERTAINTY  o»  THEiB  RECEIVING  IT.  The  apostle  may  mean — 1.  That  the  efficacy 
of  the  righteousness  of  Christ  to  procure  life  is  greater  than  that  of  the  offence  of 
Adam  to  cause  death ;  that  the  salvation  of  the  Christian's  soul  is  even  more 
certain  than  the  death  of  his  body,  secured  to  him  by  more  numerous  and  solemn 
declarations,  and  involving  in  it  the  honour  of  more  of  the  Divine  perfections. 
Justice  and  faithfulness  demand  his  body  for  corruption,  but  mercy  unites  with 
faathfulness  and  justice  in  raising  his  soul  to  the  kingdom  of  life,  2.  That  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  is  more  than  sufiicient  to  repair  the  destructive  oonse- 


fHA».  T.]  ROMANS.  421 

qnences  of  Adam's  transgression.  It  does  not  place  the  believer  in  the  state  in 
which  he  would  have  been  had  Adam  never  fallen  ;  it  does  more  ;  it  places  him  in 
a  more  secure  and  far  more  exalted  state.  In  other  words,  we  may  gain  more  by 
Christ  than  we  lost  by  Adam.  The  one  made  an  honourable  temple  a  mournful 
heap  of  ruins ;  the  other  can  not  only  raise  up  the  temple  again  out  of  its  ruins,  but 
can  make  the  latter  house  far  more  glorious  than  the  former.  When  man  was  first 
created  God  looked  on  him  and  pronounced  him  good ;  but  when  His  beloved  Son 
redeems  him,  He  calls  him  His  inheritance  and  portion  ;  he  comes  and  dwells  in 
Him,  and  loves  Him  more  than  all  the  creatures  of  His  hand.  (C  Bradley,  M.A.) 
Believers  receive  in  Christ  more  than  they  lost  in  Adam  : — I.  Better  righteousness. 

II.  Firmer  standing.  Ill,  Higher  glory.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Abundance 
of  grace. — Overflowing  kindness  and  blessing.  All  fulness  of  grace  in  Christ 
(Col.  i.  19  ;  Eph.  iii.  8).  Justifying  grace,  sanctifying  grace,  glorifying  grace  (Rom. 
viii.  29,  30).  Grace  for  grace  (John  i.  16),  or  grace  upon  grace  (Phil.  ii.  27). 
He  gives  more  grace  (James  iv.  6) ;  and  makes  aU  grace  to  abound  (2  Cor.  ix.  8). 
He  gives  His  sheep  not  only  life,  but  life  more  abundantly  (John  x.  10).  Ezekiel's 
river  realised  (Ezek.  xlvii.  1-5 ;  cf.  Eph.  iii.  19).  (Ibid.)  Individual  influence : — 
No  warhke  host  delivered  the  children  of  Israel  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  but 
one  man — Moses.  No  senate  of  statesmen  raised  Israel  to  a  pitch  of  greatness  that 
proclaimed  to  the  world  the  glory  and  safety  of  a  theocratic  nation,  but  one  man — 
David.  No  school  of  divines  gave  to  England  the  Bible  in  the  mother  tongue,  but 
one  man — Wycliffe.  No  learned  society  discovered  America,  but  one  man — 
Columbus.  No  association  of  science  revealed  the  clue  to  interpret  the  laws  of  the 
heavenly  bodies,  but  one  man — Galileo.  No  parliament  saved  English  liberties, 
but  one  man — Pym.  No  assembly  of  theologians  wrote  the  book  which,  next  to 
the  Bible,  has  had  the  most  potent  influence  on  the  English  language  and  on 
English  hearts,  but  one  man — Bunyan.  No  confederate  nations  rescued  Scotland 
from  her  political  and  ecclesiastical  enemies,  but  one  man — Knox.  And  the  same 
might  be  said  of  almost  every  great  step  since  in  the  progress  of  the  race. 
Doubtless  these  men  found  their  coadjutors  ;  but  all  through  the  ages  God  has  put 
immense  honour  upon  individuals.    {J.  Guest.) 

Ver.  18.  Therefore  as  by  the  offence  of  one  Judgment  came  upon  all  men  to  con- 
demnation.— Condfmnation : — I.  Its  cause.  Sin.  II.  Its  miskbies.  1.  Physical. 
2.  Spiritual.  8.  Eternal  III.  Its  core.  1.  Justification.  2.  Freely  offered. 
8.  Through  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  contrast  between 
a  state  of  condemnation  and  grace  : — I.  In  their  origin.  1.  The  one  originates  in 
Bin.  2.  The  other  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  II.  In  their  evidences.  1. 
The  one  is  distinguished  by  disobedience.     2.  The  other  by  the  obedience  of  faith. 

III.  In  their  relation  to  the  law.  1.  The  law  exposes  sin,  and  increases  con- 
demnation. 2.  Grace  removes  both  yet  magnifies  the  law.  IV.  In  their  results. 
1.  Condemnation  brings  death  temporal,  eternal.  2.  Grace  confers  a  new  hfe  on 
earth  and  a  glorious  and  blissful  hfe  in  the  world  to  come.  (Ibid.)  The  media- 
torial system  : — 1.  One  of  the  chief  glories  of  Christianity  is  this — it  is  the  religion 
of  facts.  These  facts  are  few,  extraordinary,  and  eternal  and  universal  in  their 
aspects.  2.  In  the  context  we  have  two  classes  of  facts.  (1)  Dark  melancholy 
facts,  (a)  Sin  is  in  the  world ;  it  has  quenched  its  lights,  destroyed  its  liberties, 
embittered  its  enjoyments.  History,  observation  and  our  own  consciousness  con- 
vince us  of  this.  (6)  Death  is  in  the  world.  It  has  reigned  from  Adam  to  this 
day.  Individuals,  families,  nations,  the  world  are  dying.  Every  sepulchre, 
funeral,  illness,  pulse,  reminds  us  that  the  dust  is  to  be  our  home,  (c)  Both  sin 
and  death  have  entered  the  world  by  the  same  man,  Adam.  The  origin  of  evil  is  a 
deep  mystery,  but  its  introduction  to  our  world  is  a  historical  fact  clearly  stated  in 
the  Bible.  God  made  Adam  the  father,  the  priest  of  the  world,  but  Adam  ruined 
it  and  himself.  Adam  was  the  original  sinner,  and  we  his  children  sin  and  die. 
(2)  Bright  and  animating  facts,  (a)  Grace  is  in  the  world.  "  Grace  hath 
abounded."  God  was  under  no  obligation  to  show  or  continue  grace  to  tbis  world. 
He  might  withdraw  it ;  that  would  leave  man  a  demon  in  character,  who  would 
soon  kindle  around  himself  the  fires  of  an  universal  heE.  Grace  alone  keeps  the 
world  from  becoming  the  victim  of  its  own  transgression,  (b)  There  is  a  higher, 
nobler  life  than  this.  "Grace  reigns  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life." 
Eternal  Uf e  means  freedom  from  sin,  which  is  the  destroyer  of  the  innocence,  happi  - 
ness  and  utihty  of  man  ;  freedom  from  the  penalties  of  violated  law  ;  and  freedom 
from  annihilation.    It  means  an  existence  without  sin,  misery,  or  end.    (c)  This 


4a»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ORAr.  ▼, 

grao*  and  eternal  life  flow  to  man  through  the  same  channel,  "  Christ  Jesus  th« 
Lord."  3.  The  apostle  states  these  great  truths — (1)  To  convince  Jews  and 
Gentiles  that  both  were  equally  indebted  to  Christ  for  sadvation.  The  Gentile  had 
the  law  written  on  his  conscience,  and  the  Jew  had  the  law  outwardly  written,  and 
both  transgressed,  so  that  both  needed  a  Saviour.  (2)  To  set  forth  the  nature  and 
number  of  benefits  derived  through  the  mediation  of  Christ.  L  The  existencb  op 
THE  HUMAN  BACE  BESTS  ON  THE  MEDIATION  OF  Jesus.  1.  "The  Lord  Commanded 
the  man,  saying,  ...  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  thou  shalt  not  eat 
of  it ;  for  in  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof,  thou  shalt  surely  die."  A  phrase  which 
must  have  meant  either  absolute  annihilation  or  the  dissolution  of  soul  and  body, 
and  the  consequent  punishment  of  both  in  hell.  But  Adam  did  sin.  Was  his 
existence  quenched  ?  Was  he  driven  to  hell  t  No.  Was  he  spared  on  the  ground 
of  rectitude  ?  No  ;  for  if  justice  could  have  spared  him  for  one  hour,  it  could  have 
spared  him  for  ever.  But  he  was  spared ;  and  as  he  could  not  have  been  spared  on 
the  ground  of  justice,  he  must  have  been  spared  on  the  ground  of  grace,  and  if  on 
the  ground  of  grace,  then  it  was  through  the  mediation  of  Christ,  for  grace  reigns 
only  through  Him.  2.  A  new  system  was  introduced,  and  Adam's  forfeited  being 
was  spared,  and  his  species  was  to  be  multiplied  because  the  Second  Adam  had 
been  appointed  to  be  the  Great  Head  and  Saviour  of  the  human  kind.  But  if  our 
very  existence  is  an  effect  of  the  great  mediatorial  scheme,  all  the  means,  comforts, 
and  hopes  of  our  existence  are  also  effects  of  the  same  scheme.  In  Him  all  things 
consist.  3.  Under  the  government  of  the  Son  of  Man  the  human  race  has  already 
grown  into  extraordinary  numerical  greatness,  and  is  to  continue  to  augment  in 
strength,  moral  and  physical  excellence,  grandeur  and  happiness,  for  perhaps 
millions  of  years  to  come.  It  is  natural  to  think  so,  if  we  consider  the  honour 
which  God  has  already  bestowed  on  our  nature,  by  raising  it  to  union  with  Him- 
self ;  that  four  thousand  years  were  occupied  in  preparations  for  the  advent ;  the 
extensive  provisions  that  have  been  made  for  the  future  accommodation  of  our  race 
in  another  world ;  that  the  agency  of  the  Church  is  in  its  infancy ;  that  the  sciences 
and  arts,  matter  and  mind,  have  hardly  yet  presented  their  first  oblations  to 
Christianity.  4.  Christ  is  to  be  honoured  here  more  than  He  has  yet  been.  It  was 
on  earth  He  was  bom,  died,  first  published  His  salvation,  qualified  Himself  for  His 
mediatorial  crown.  Here,  also.  He  is  to  be  acknowledged  as  the  Lord  of  all.  The 
mediation  of  Christ  is  the  basis  of  human  existence,  and  the  means  of  restoration 
to  light,  purity  and  glory.  II.  The  mediatoet  aoenot  or  Jesus  Chkibt  peocuees 
niMOBTALm  FOB  MAN.  1.  Mau's  existence  is  not  limited  to  this  narrow,  dark 
sphere.  Our  immortality  and  the  knowledge  of  it  are  the  gifts  of  Christ.  His 
existence  in  the  invisible  world  is  the  greatest  proof  we  have  of  its  reality.  His 
resurrection  and  ascension  are  the  most  convincing  arguments  for  a  future  world. 
He  lives.  We  shall  live.  2.  It  is  true  that  an  endless  existence  will  be  a  curse  to 
the  wicked  ;  but  let  not  the  author  of  immortality  be  blamed  for  that.  Remember — 
(1)  Existence  is  a  blessing;  history  and  consciousness  prove  that.  (2)  Nothing 
can  render  existence  a  curse  but  sin.  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  any  creature.  The 
Creator  Himself  will  not  render  a  perfectly  holy  being  unhappy.  (3)  Christ  is  now 
able  and  willing  to  take  away  sin  from  us.  Yes, He  is  willing,  and  if  you  are  so  too, 
your  existence  is  safe  for  ever.     III.  The  mediation  op  Chbist  has  fuenished  xjs 

WITH   A    SYSTEM    OP    MEANS    TO     PBEPABE     D8    FOB    A    HAPPY    IMMOBTALITY.      "  Grace 

reigns  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Here  is 
the  essence  of  the  gospel.  This  is — 1.  A  system  of  grace.  The  doctrine  of  human 
merit  is  at  once  unphilosophical  and  unscriptural.  Man's  salvation  is  all  of  grace. 
Its  origination,  discovery,  application,  and  perfection  in  heaven  is  grace.  Let  us  trust 
and  triumph  in  gospel-grace.  2.  A  system  of  righteousness  also.  It  justifies  man 
before  God,  and  justifies  God  in  doing  so  before  His  own  intelligent  universe.  Here, 
then,  is  a  scheme  that  is  just  to  all.  It  injures  none;  it  benefits  the  universe. 
Conclusion :  From  the  whole  we  may  infer — 1.  That  Christianity  is  infinitely 
superior  to  natural  religion.  It  reveals  more,  and  its  revelations  are  warm,  loving, 
transforming.  2.  Christ  is  the  most  extraordinary  and  interesting  Being  in  the 
universe.  How  vast  His  sphere  I  How  benevolent  His  agency  1  How  Divine  Hia 
character !  In  all  things  He  has  the  pre-eminence.  3.  Let  us  rejoice  in  Chris- 
tianity while  parting  with  friends  in  death.  Christ  lives,  they  live.  We  shall  also 
live.  (Caleb  Morris.)  The  two  representatives  of  the  race: — The  words  "judg- 
ment came  "  and  "  the  free  gift  came,"  are  not  part  of  the  original,  but  are  intro- 
duced to  complete  the  sense.  In  the  margin  you  read,  "by  one  offence,"  instead 
of,  "  by  one  man's  offence,"  and  also  "  by  one  righteousness  "  (righteous  act]  instead 


CHA».  T.]  ROMANS,  428 

of  "  by  the  righteousness  of  one."  Dean  Alford  translate?  the  ^erse — "As  through 
one  trespass  the  issue  was  unto  all  mentocondemnation;  even  so  through  one  righteous 
act,  the  issue  was  unto  all  men  to  justification  of  life."  Note,  then — I.  The  loss  to 
AiiL  MEN  THROUGH  Adam.  1.  There  is  no  principle  more  widely  conceded  than  that 
of  representation.  Our  national,  municipal,  and  social  arrangements,  are  all  more 
or  less  representative.  We  honour  the  son  of  a  good  man,  not  merely  for  his  own 
excellence,  but  also  for  the  sake  of  his  father.  We  suspect  the  son  of  a  bad  man, 
even  although  we  know  no  evil  of  him  personally.  No  one  im  amines  that  there  is 
any  injustice  in  this.  Those  who  suffer  by  it  are  pitied,  but  their  misfortune  is 
recognised  to  be  the  natural  consequence  of  their  connection  with  those  whom  they 
represent.  On  the  other  hand  we  never  grudge  to  others  any  advantage  which  they 
may  gain  by  it.  2.  Now  this  principle  is  everywhere  recognised  in  the  Bible.  We 
read  that  the  "  Lord  our  God  is  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers 
apon  the  children,"  &c.  We  see  the  descendants  of  Canaan  punished  for  their  pro- 
genitors' offence ;  the  Edomites  excluded  from  their  birthright  because  their  father 
Esau  had  despised  it ;  how  the  wives  and  children  of  Achan  and  those  of  Dathan 
and  Abiram  were  destroyed  because  of  the  sin  of  their  relatives.  We  find  Jesus 
Himself  declaring  that  vengeance  was  about  to  descend  upon  the  children  of  those 
who  slew  the  prophets.  And  when  we  read  the  story  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  that 
awful  record  seems  to  demand  no  less  an  explanation  than  that  "  all  the  righteous 
blood  shed  upon  the  earth  "  was  exacted  at  the  hands  of  that  generation.  "  His 
blood  be  upon  us  and  upon  our  children  " ;  and  in  the  story  of  the  Jews  through 
eighteen  centuries,  who  can  fail  to  perceive  the  cleaving  of  the  curse  ?  3.  The  loss 
which  has  come  to  all  men  through  the  trespass  of  Adam  is  an  instance  of  this 
great  law  of  representation.  Adam  was  the  head  of  our  race.  He  could  neither 
stand  nor  fall  alone.  That  which  we  see  upon  a  small  scale  when  the  fortunes  of 
a  family  depend  upon  the  conduct  of  some  member,  or  when  the  history  of  a  nation 
is  determined  by  some  one  statesman's  decision — that  took  place  upon  the  vastest 
scale  when  Adam  was  placed  upon  his  probation  in  Eden.  What  was  the  tragic 
issue  we  all  know.  The  head  of  the  family  gambled  away  his  fair  inheritance, 
bequeathing  only  to  us  the  bitter  entail  of  his  corruption  and  death.  The  forbidden 
fruit  turned  out  to  be  a  deadly  poison,  and  the  pale  infection  has  spread  through 
all  the  race.  Adam  had  been  created  in  the  likeness  of  God.  But  when  Adam 
begat  a  child  {Gen.  v.  3),  it  was  in  the  image  of  a  depraved  and  fallen  man.  The 
perversity  which  appears  in  early  childhood,  the  proneness  to  error  even  of  the 
wisest  and  most  virtuous,  the  callous  indifference  to  the  will  of  Heaven  which 
characterises  the  majority,  the  common  selfishness  and  the  black  list  of  daily 
crimes  are  witnesses  of  the  curse  that  broods  over  the  nations.  Moreover,  there  is 
in  the  conscience  of  every  one  of  us  the  knowledge  that  we  have  our  own  sad  share 
in  the  inheritance  of  the  fall.  4.  There  is  something  painful  in  this  view  of  life. 
To  be  bom  under  the  condemnation  of  God,  who  can  bear  to  think  of  it?  As  Paul 
points  out  in  this  very  chapter,  death,  the  wages  of  sin,  comes  even  upon  those 
"who  have  not  sinned  after  the  similitude  of  Adam's  transgression";  i.e.,  the 
sentence  comes  upon  those  who  have  not  personally  incurred  it.  Torturing  pains 
and  untimely  death  are  allotted  to  our  little  babes,  and  to  those  who,  by  reason  of 
disease  or  imperfection  of  brain,  are  at  no  period  of  their  lives  responsible.  God 
forbid  that  because  of  this  we  should  challenge  the  Divine  justice.  If  I  suffer 
wrong  to-day  because  of  the  crime  or  foUy  of  some  ancestor,  the  wrong  be  upon  the 
head  of  the  offender,  not  upon  the  law  I  Yet  if  this  were  the  whole  truth  we  might, 
indeed,  be  perplexed  and  broken-hearted.  But,  thank  God,  there  is  a  counter- 
balancing fact,  viz. — n.  The  gain  to  all  men  through  Jesus  Christ.  By  His 
righteous  act  there  is  an  issue  onto  all  men  towards  acquittal  resulting  in  life.  We 
have  in  this  new  fact  a  new  operation  of  the  representative  principle.  It  pleased 
God  to  make  His  Divine  Son  a  Second  Great  Head  of  the  human  race,  that  "as  in 
Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive  "  (1  Cor.  xi.  3).  As  our 
Representative  He  paid  the  penalty  of  our  sins.  "  He  bare  our  sins  in  His  own 
body  on  the  tree."  As  our  Representative  He  fulfilled  all  righteousness,  "  that  we 
might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him."  From  the  first  Adam  a  poison 
passed  into  the  lives  of  all  men.  From  the  Second  an  antidote  passed  into  the  Uvea 
of  all  men.  The  statements  have  respect  not  to  a  portion  of  the  race,  not  to  an 
elect  few,  but  to  all  men.  1.  We  owe  to  Christ  the  very  fact  of  our  existence.  The 
warning  to  Adam  respecting  the  forbidden  fruit  was,  "  In  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof 
thou  shalt  surely  die."  Had  the  sentence  been  speedily  executed,  then,  in  the 
deepest  of  all  senses,  we  should  r^U  have  died  in  Adam,  for  wa  should  never  have 


424  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  ▼. 

been  bom.  What  was  it  that  arrested  the  course  of  the  law  ?  Not  justice,  surely ; 
but  grace  (John  i.  17).  It  was  because  of  the  obedience  of  Christ,  foreseen  and 
mercifully  taken  into  account,  that  Adam  was  spared,  and  that  our  birth  into 
this  world  became  possible.  2.  All  men  owe  much  more  than  this.  When  we 
oome  to  inspect  human  nature,  we  find  there  that  which  cannot  be  accounted  for 
by  our  descent  from  the  fallen  Adam.  Those  v.  ho  have  had  to  deal  with  abandoned 
women  declare  that  beneath  all  their  degradation  they  have  discovered  something 
left  of  womanhood  and  modesty.  Those  who  have  moved  freely  among  the  vilest 
men  of  the  land,  have  found  in  the  deepest  heart  of  the  blackest  reprobates  some- 
thing of  good.  In  every  man,  side  by  side  with  a  corruption  whose  issue  is  unto 
condemnation,  there  exists,  also,  a  pure  influence,  whose  issue,  could  it  but  prevail, 
is  unto  justification  of  life.  Whence  comes  this  influence  ?  Is  it  a  part  of  our 
heritage  from  the  first  Adam  ?  We  cannot  believe  it.  Can  a  clean  thing  come  out 
of  an  unclean  ?  Do  men  gather  grapes  on  thorns,  or  figs  on  thistles  7  Whatever  of 
generosity,  of  purity,  is  found  in  any  human  heart ;  whatever  gracious  disposition, 
or  kindly  motive,  or  noble  inspiration ;  whatever  is  sweet  and  child-like  in  the 
young ;  whatever  is  modest,  and  gentle,  and  winsome  in  woman ;  whatever  is  brave, 
and  loyal,  and  faithful  in  man  is  some  portion  of  that  heritage  of  good  which  has 
come  to  us  from  Christ,  the  federal  Head  and  redeeming  Representative  of  our  raca. 
Conclusion  :  We  are  here  to-day,  losers  and  gainers  by  this  principle  of  represent 
tation.  The  first  Adam  and  the  second  are  in  every  one  of  us.  We  have  inherited 
from  both.  We  have  inherited  a  sinful  and  corrupt  nature.  We  have  inherited 
also  a  better  nature.  We  stand  now  upon  our  own  personal  probation.  We  are 
summoned  now  to  make  our  choice  between  the  "  natural  man  "  that  is  in  us,  and 
the  "  Spiritual  Man  "  that  is  in  us.  The  issue  is  for  eternity,  and  "why  wiU  ye 
die  ?  "  Choose  not  that  forbidden  fruit,  whose  bitter  end  is  death,  or  at  the  last 
the  just  God  must  needs  ratify  your  choice,  and  you  will  perish  in  the  second  death. 
Choose  rather  to  live.  Let  that  life  which  was  bestowed  for  Christ's  sake  be  used 
in  Christ's  service,  (W.  J,  Woods,  B.A.)  Our  loss  through  Adam  and  our  gain 
through  Christ : — 1.  Some  points  of  importance  are  lost  in  the  authorised  rendering. 
"  The  offence  of  one  "  is,  in  the  original,  "  one  offence,"  or  '•  one  trespass,"  as  in 
Matt.  vi.  14.  The  word  properly  expresses  a  fall  by  the  side  of  the  path  of  duty. 
"  The  righteousness  of  one  '•  is,  in  the  same  way,  in  the  original,  "  one  act  of 
righteousness."  The  whole  redeeming  work  of  Christ  is  here,  then,  summed  up  into 
a  single  act  of  righteousness.  The  next  verse  explains  the  expression  by  intro 
ducing  the  equivalent  word  obedience,  and  if  further  explanation  were  needed,  St. 
Paul  himself  gives  it  in  Phil.  ii.  8.  "  Obedient  even  unto  death,  yea,  the  death  of 
the  Cross  " ;  not  a  death  by  itself  as  a  single  isolated  deed,  but  as  a  crown  of  life — 
the  self-sacrifice  begun  in  incarnation,  continued  through  the  earthly  life,  and  con- 
summated on  Calvary.  Through  this  one  act  of  righteousness  the  free  gift  through 
the  grace  of  Jesus  (ver.  15),  "  bringeth  all  men  unto  the  justification  of  life,"  i.e., 
bringing  with  it  the  absolution  which  has  life  in  it,  the  free  forgiveness  which  gives 
that  unity  with  God  which  is  the  eternal  life  of  the  soul.  This  is  the  first  change 
of  rendering.  2.  The  next  is  perhaps  yet  more  important.  The  fourfold  omission 
in  ver  19  (A.V.)  of  the  definite  article  is  a  very  serious  loss.  St.  Paul  did  not  write 
Greek  at  random.  In  ver.  16  he  omits  the  article,  for  there  his  purpose  was  to 
contrast  the  singleness  of  the  sin  which  brought  condemnation  to  the  multitudes 
with  the  sins  which  elicited  and  evoked  compassion  ;  but  in  vers.  16,  17  and  19  the 
particular  one  man  who  brought  sin  and  death  is  designedly  set  in  contrast  with 
the  particular  one  man  who  brought  in  r;race  and  life.  The  other  pair  of  omissions 
in  this  verse  is  equally  serious.  Many  were  made  sinners,  many  were  made 
righteous,  is  a  culpable  gloss  upon  St.  Paul's  language.  St.  Paul  was  not  afraid  to 
say  judgment  came  upon  all  men ;  the  free  gift  came  upon  all  to  justification  of 
life ;  nor  that  the  many  were  made  sinners  and  the  many  were  made  righteous ;  the 
all  in  the  one  verse  and  the  many  in  the  other  are  equivalent  terms.  St.  Paul's 
object  was  to  show  the  universality  of  redemption.  Christ,  by  His  one  sacrifice 
made  a  full,  perfect,  and  sufficient  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world. 
Although  they  will  not  come,  He  yet  speaks  in  that  universal  "  whosoever  will." 
The  gracious  work  of  Christ  in  redeeming  is  co-extensive  with  the  disastrous  work 
of  Adam  in  ruining — ••  As  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive." 
As  through  the  disobedience  of  one  man,  the  many — the  universe  of  humanity — 
were  made  or  placed  on  the  footing  of  sinners,  even  so  through  the  obedience  of 
th*  One  shall  tiie  many  be  constituted  as  righteous.    {Dean  Vaughan.) 


OEAP.  T.]  XOMANS.  425 

Ver.  19.  For,  by  the  obedience  of  one  many  were  made  sinners,  and  by  the 
obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  made  righteous. — One  man^s  disobedience  and  it$ 
consequence : — I.  Man  was  made  in  the  image  of  God,  which  consisted  partly — 1. 
In  his  power  over  all  terrestrial  creatures  (Gen.  i.  26 ;  Psa.  viii.  5,  6).  Hence  he 
gave  names  (Gen.  ii.  19.  20).    2.  In  the  perfection  of  his  nature,  endued  with — 

(1)  Reason.  (2)  Will  (3)  Knowledge  (Col.  iii.  9,  10).  (4)  True  holiness  (Eph. 
iv.  24).  n.  MjlS  fell  from  this  high  estate  through  disohedience  (Gen.  ii.  16, 
17,  iii  1,  &c.).  1.  How  this  was  done.  (1)  Through  Satan's  temptation,  which  was 
managed  with  great  cunning,  (a)  He  enters  the  serpent,  the  subtlest  creature. 
(5)  Sets  upon  the  woman,  the  weaker  vessel  (1  Pet.  iii.  7).  (c)  Propounds  a 
doubtful  question  (Gen.  iii.  1).  (d)  Dtnies  the  truth  of  God's  threatenings  (ver. 
4).     («)  Gives  a  contrary  promise  and  uses  the  name  of  God  to  confirm  it  (ver.  5). 

(2)  Through  the  woman's  fault,  (a)  In  entering  into  a  dispute  with  the  devil,  (b) 
In  douiiting  the  truth  of  God's  command,  (c)  In  eating  the  fruit.  (3)  Through 
the  man's  fault.  In  taking  the  fruit  at  her  hands.  2.  What  was  involved.  (1) 
He  broke  the  first  command,  by  infidelity,  ingratitude,  contempt  of  God,  and 
ambition  to  be  like  God  (Gen.  iii.  6).  (2)  Hearkened  to  the  devil's  word  before 
God's.  (3)  Pleased  his  wife  rather  than  God.  (4)  Murdered  his  whole  posterity 
(John  viii.  44).  (5)  Minded  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  more  than  the  law  of  God.  (6) 
Stole  God's  fruit.  (7)  Coveted  God's  attributes.  III.  Through  this  disobedience 
ALL  his  posterity  WERE  MADE  SINNERS.  1.  By  imputation.  (1)  In  that  all  sinned 
in  him  (vers.  12,  16-18 ;  Heb.  vii.  9,  10).  (2)  In  that  all  died  in  him  (chap.  vi. 
23;  1  Cor.  xv.  22).  (3)  All  were  then  in  his  loins;  so  that  he  was  the  common 
father  of  all  mankind;  therefore  called  Adam,  i.e.,  man  in  general  (Gen.  v.  1).  2. 
By  inhesion.  All,  through  Adam's  sin — (1)  Are  born  in  sin  (Psa.  Ii.  5  ;  Job  xiv. 
4 ;  Eph.  ii.  3 ;  John  iii.  3).  Hence  only  is  it  that  children  die.  (2)  Do  actually 
commit  sin,  which  shows  all  mankind  to  be  polluted  with  it  and  inclined  to  it 
(Eccles.  vii.  20 ;  Prov.  xx.  9 ;  1  Kings  viii.  46  ;  Gal.  iii.  22 ;  1  John  i.  8-10).  3. 
The  whole  man  is  defiled  with  sin  and  continually  subject  to  it.  (1)  The  under- 
standing (1  Cor.  i.  19,  20,  ii.  14).  (2)  The  mind  and  conscience  (Titus  i,  16).  It  is 
stupid  (1  Tim.  iv.  2),  or  else  troubled.  (3)  The  memory  (2  Pet.  i.  21).  (4)  The 
thoughts  and  the  imagination  (Gen.  vi.  6),  which  appears  in  their  vanity  and  dis- 
order. (5)  The  wQl  and  affections  (John  i.  13;  Col.  iii.  2).  (6)  The  body  (1  Thess. 
V.  23).  It  is  not  now  servicealile  to  the  soul,  but  a  clog  to  it ;  yet  it  tempts  it  to 
Bin.  4.  Hence  our  original  sin  is  the  corrupt  fountain  from  which  all  our  actual 
sins  flow  (James  i.  14).  Some  relics  of  it  remain  in  the  best  saints  (Gal.  v.  17). 
Conclusion :  1.  This  should  make  ns  humble  (Job.  xv.  14-16).  2.  Hence  we 
should  earnestly  desire  to  be  made  new  creatures ;  and  go  to  Christ,  the  Second 
Adam,  that  we  may  be  made  righteous  by  Him,  as  we  are  sinners  by  the  first. 
(Bp.  Beveridge.)  One  man's  obedience  and  its  consequences : — I.  Who  is  this  Onk 
SPOKEN  OF?  Note — 1.  All  mankind  being  contained  in,  and  so  fallen  with  Adam, 
God  raised  up  another  Adam,  by  whom  they  might  rise  (1  Cor.  xv.  45).  Who  being 
promised,  as  soon  as  the  first  fell  (Gen.  iii.  15)  is  called  the  Second  Man  (1  Cor. 
XV.  47).  2.  This  was  no  less  a  Person  than  the  Son  of  God  made  Man  (John  i.  14 ; 
1  Tim.  iii.  16).  For  He  took  the  nature  of  man  into  His  Divine  Person  (Heb.  ii.  16). 
3.  Hence  the  whole  nature  of  man  was  so  fully  and  really  contained  in  Him  as  in 
the  first  Adam  (1  Cor.  xv.  22).  4.  This,  the  Second  Man,  had  an  advantage  over 
the  first,  that  whereas  the  other  was  but  a  man  made  in  the  likeness  of  God,  this 
was  God  made  in  the  likeness  of  man  (Phil.  ii.  6,  7).  II.  What  was  the  obedience 
OF  this  One  ?  1.  He  did  no  sin,  was  not  guilty  in  the  least  (Isa.  Uii.  9  ;  1  Pet.  ii. 
22 ;  1  John  iii.  6  ;  John  viii.  46).  2.  He  did  whatsoever  the  law  required,  and  so 
remained  perfectly  righteous  in  all  things  (Matt.  iii.  15  ;  Heb.  viL  26-28  ;  John  xv. 
10,  iv.  34).  3.  He  was  obedient,  even  to  death  itself  (Phil.  ii.  8) ;  so  He  underwent 
that  death  which  the  first  Adam  had  deserved  for  all  mankind.  III.  In  what  sense 
ARE  MANT  MADE  RIGHTEOUS  BY  One  7  In  the  Same  sense  as  they  are  sinners  by  one. 
1.  By  having  Christ's  righteousness  as  we  had  Adam's  sin  imputed  to  us.  (1)  No 
man  can  be  pronounced  righteous  by  God,  unless  he  be  really  so  (Prov.  xvii.  15 ; 
Isa.  V.  23).  (2)  But  no  man  is  really  righteous  in  himself  (Eccles.  vii.  20).  (3) 
Hence  it  is  impossible  we  should  be  accepted  as  righteous  before  God,  unless  we 
have  some  other  righteousness  imputed  to  us  (chap.  iv.  6,  11).  (4)  Hence  Christ 
was  pleased  to  be  obedient  even  unto  death  for  us  ;  that  bo  by  His  obedience 
imputed  to  us  we  might  be  accepted  as  righteous.  For — (a)  Our  righteousness  is 
plainly  asserted  to  be  only  in  Christ  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  He  was  made  sin  for  us.  O'li 
kins  were  laid  on  Him  (Isa.  liii.  6) ;  so  His  righteousness  on  us  (Phil.  iii.  8,  9 ;  Eph. 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

i.  6).  (b)  He  is  expressly  called  "  Our  righteouBness  "  (Jer.  xxiii.  6,  xzxiii.  16 ;  1 
Cor.  i.  30).  (c)  He  is  called  our  Surety  (Heb.  vii.  22),  who,  being  bound  for  us, 
paid  in  our  stead  what  the  law  required  of  us.  (d)  Christ's  whole  obedience  was 
only  upon  our  account,  and  for  our  sakes  (Gal.  iv.  4,  6) ;  so  that  by  His  obedience 
the  law  is  perfectly  fulfilled  in  us  (chap.  viii.  3,  4).  2.  We  are  made  righteous  by 
Christ  as  sinners  by  Adam,  inherently.  He — (1)  Mortifies  our  sins  (1  John  iii.  8  ; 
Acts  iii.  26  ;  1  John  i.  7-9).  (2)  Gives  repentance  (Acts  v.  31).  (3)  Sanctifies  our 
whole  nature  (1  Cor.  i.  80,  vi.  11 ;  Eph.  v.  25-27).  (4)  Enables  us  to  do  good 
works  (John  xv.  4,  5;  Titus  ii.  14;  Phil,  iv,  11-13).  Conclusion:  1.  Thank  God 
for  Christ.  2.  Put  your  whole  trust  in  Him  only,  for  grace  as  well  as  pardon.  3. 
Let  it  be  your  great  care  to  be  in  the  number  of  those  who  are  made  righteous  in 
Christ,  in  believing  in  Him.  4.  Live  as  becometh  righteous  persons.  {Ibid.) 
Man^s  first  sin : — Is  there  a  human  being  to  be  found  who,  after  reflection,  and 
speaking  honestly,  would  affirm  of  himself,  "  I  have  never  sinned  "  ?  We  are  aware 
of  the  existence  of  great  ignorance  concerning  the  extent  of  sin,  and  the  evil  of 
sin ;  and  we  know  men  are  exceedingly  reluctant  to  confess  even  those  sins  of  which 
they  are  conscious ;  but  we  do  not  think  there  is  a  man  who,  after  serious  reflection, 
is  entirely  unconscious  of  guilt.  Furthermore,  is  there  a  man  who  would  say  of  a 
fellow  human  being,  however  dearly  loved  and  highly  prized,  "  I  do  not  believe  that 
person  has  ever  sinned  "  ?  Verily,  our  consciousness  and  our  observation  confirm 
the  Bible  doctrine,  "  There  is  none  that  doeth  good ;  no,  not  one  I "  I.  The  tact 
AND  TEE  ciBcnMSTANCES  OF  uan's  fibst  BIN.  1.  The  first  siu  was  Adam's  failure 
under  trial  as  the  representative  of  the  human  race.  Say  that  this  test  was  simple ; 
then  how  adapted  to  inexperience,  and  how  fitted  to  show  whether,  in  filial  depen- 
dence,  man  would  serve  God  or  not.  Do  you  refuse  to  judge  of  the  quarter  whence 
the  wind  blows  by  the  course  of  the  thistle-down,  or  by  the  path  of  the  smoke ;  and 
would  you  wait  for  information  until  you  could  see  the  vane  of  some  lofty  tower  ? 
Do  you  not  measure  the  heat  of  a  summer's  day  by  the  moistened  brow,  and  judge 
of  the  cold  of  winter  by  the  smarting  skin,  far  more  frequently  than  by  the  scale  of 
the  thermometer  ?  2.  Man  was  specially  tempted  to  the  first  sin.  3.  Temptation 
was  necessary  in  man's  probation.  Could  probation  be  conducted  apart  from  this 
trying  process  ?  Is  not  the  coin  tested  in  the  balance  ?  Is  not  silver  proved  in  the 
fining-pot  ?  Is  not  gold  tried  in  the  furnace  ?  Are  not  the  elements  of  a  chemical 
compound  made  manifest  by  analysis  ?  Is  not  the  strength  of  metal  or  timber 
relied  upon  after  proof  ?  As  in  our  law  courts,  no  prisoner  is  recognised  as  guilty 
until  his  crime  has  been  proved ;  so,  in  God's  moral  government,  no  procedure  is 
based  on  character  until  the  chai'acter  is  made  manifest  by  the  light  of  conduct. 
4.  The  first  sin  of  man  was  (tested  by  any  standard)  a  great  transgression.  Actions 
must  be  judged  by  the  principle  involved  in  them.  In  eating  the  forbidden  fruit 
did  not  Adam  transgress  a  law  ?  In  transgressing  this  law  did  not  Adam  reject  the 
Divine  authority  and  cast  off  his  allegiance  to  God  ?  In  thus  sinning  did  not  Adam 
resist  the  power  of  the  strongest  motives  on  the  side  of  obedience  ? — motives  arising 
from  his  obligations  to  the  kindness  of  God  ;  motives  connected  with  the  full  and 
flowing  fountains  of  pleasure  and  of  advantage  by  which  he  was  encompassed ;  and 
from  the  fact  that  he  was  being  proved,  and  that  upon  his  conduct  were  suspended 
tremendous  results  ?  Moreover  the  image  of  God  was  within  him — revelations  of 
God  surrounded  him;  and  under  the  power  of  these  multiplied  motives  and 
influences  his  attention  was  fixed  on  one  defined,  intelligible,  and  distinct  require- 
ment. It  was  not  an  easy  thing  for  Adam  to  sin  against  God.  (1)  Observe  that 
human  nature,  at  its  best  state,  is  not  to  be  trusted  ;  and  that  it  universally  fails 
where  the  failure  is  of  most  consequence.  (2)  See  the  tremendous  responsibility 
which  our  influence  over  each  other  involves.  (3)  Learn  the  utility  of  experience 
in  the  trial  of  temptation.  (4)  Look,  by  the  aid  of  the  facts  we  are  considering,  into 
the  philosophy  of  sinning.  II.  The  results  of  man's  first  sin.  Trace  them  in 
the  transgressors  themselves.  We  know  not  what  interval  existed  between  the  evil 
act  and  a  sense  of  its  iniquity.  Delusion  may  have  continued  through  some  time. 
At  length,  however,  an  inward  monitor  gave  notice  of  the  fault;  disapprobation  and 
self-condemnation,  with  their  keen  smart,  succeeded ;  and  Adam  tasted  the  bitter- 
ness of  sin.  1.  Learn  hence  the  enormous  evil  of  any  one  sin  ;  and  profit  in  this 
department  of  knowledge  by  the  experience  of  others.  2.  Know  also  the  certainty 
of  punishment  where  pardon  is  not  vouchsafed.  3.  Mark  the  limit  of  Divine  inter- 
ference with  human  conduct.  (S.  Martin.)  Man's  disobedience  and  Christ's 
obedience : — I.  Man's  disobedienos.  1.  Its  consequences.  2.  Perpetration.  3» 
Extent,     n.  Chsisz'b  obkdiencx.      1.  Its  nature.     2.  Operation.      3.  Besnlt. 


flHA».  v.]  EOMANS.  427 

(J.  Lytht  D.D.)  The  condition  of  man  a  sinner  and  man  made  right$ou» 

contrasted:—!.  Unbelief  and  faith.  2.  Enmity  and  love.  3.  Banishment  from 
God  and  acceptance  with  God.  4.  Disobedience  and  righteousness.  6.  Misery 
and  bliss.  6.  Curse  and  blessing.  7.  Death  and  life.  8.  Paradise  lost  and 
paradise  regained.      (D.  M'Nicoll.)  Of   our  fall  in  ^dam  .-—Consider— 1. 

Who  that  one  man  was.  Adam  (ver.  14).  2.  What  his  disobedience  was.  Hi3 
first  sin,  the  eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  which  opened  the  door  to  death  (ver.  12). 
8.  Whom  it  concerned;  "many";  the  "all"  (ver.  14).  The  alteration  is  noi 
without  reason,  for  there  is  an  exception  here  of  Christ.  It  reached  many  men,  but 
not  all  simply ;  he,  and  he  only,  was  excepted.  4.  How  it  touched  them ;  they 
were  "  made  sinners  "  by  it.  There  are  two  ways  how  men  might  be  made  sinners 
by  the  disobedience  of  Adam,  viz.,  either  by  imputation  or  imitation.  The  last  is 
not  meant.  (1)  Because  some  of  those  many  who  are  made  sinners  are  not  capable 
of  imitation  or  actual  sin,  viz.,  infants.  (2)  Because  we  are  made  righteous,  not 
by  the  imitation,  but  imputation  of  Christ's  righteousness ;  but  as  we  are  made 
righteous  by  the  one,  so  we  are  made  sinners  by  the  other.   I.  What  sin  of  Adam's 

IT  WAS  THAT  THET  WHO  SINNED  AND  FELL  WITH  HIM,  SINNED  AND  FELL  IN.     His  first  siu, 

the  eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit.  This  was  the  sin  that  broke  the  covenant  of 
works.  Other  sins  of  Adam  are  not  imputed  to  them,  more  than  those  of  any  other 
private  persons.  So  then,  Adam  quickly  betaking  himself  to  the  covenant  of  grace, 
and  placing  himself  under  another  head  as  a  private  man,  ceased  to  be  the  head  in 
the  covenant  of  works.  Adam  had  all  his  children  in  one  ship  to  carry  them  to 
Immanuel's  land ;  by  his  uegligence  he  dashed  the  ship  on  a  rock,  and  broke  it  all 
in  pieces  ;  and  so  he  and  his  lay  foundering  in  a  sea  of  guilt.  Jesus  Christ  lets  out 
the  second  covenant  as  a  rope  to  draw  them  to  the  shore.  Adam  for  himself  lays 
hold  on  it,  while  others  hold  by  the  broken  boards  of  the  ship,  till  they  be  by  the 
power  of  grace  enabled  to  quit  them  too,  as  he  was.  II.  Who  were  they  that 
SINNED  AND  FELL  IN  Adam.  All  mankind,  descending  from  him  by  ordinary  genera- 
tion. So— 1.  Christ  is  excepted.  Adam's  sin  was  not  imputed  to  the  man  Christ. 
He  was  separated  from  sinners  (Heb.  vii.  26),  and  was  not  infected  with  the  plague 
whereof  He  was  to  be  the  cleanser.  And  so  Christ  comes  not  in  under  Adam  as 
head,  but,  as  in  the  text,  is  opposed  to  Adam  as  another  head.  Christ  was  indeed 
a  Son  of  Adam  (Luke  iii.).  And  it  was  necessary  He  should  be  so,  that  He  might 
be  our  near  kinsman,  and  that  the  same  nature  that  sinned  might  suffer.  But  He 
came  not  of  him  by  ordinary  generation — He  was  born  of  a  virgin.  And  upon  this 
account  He  came  not  in  under  Adam  in  the  covenant  of  works  ;  for  Christ  was  not 
bom  by  virtue  of  that  blessing  of  marriage  given  before  the  fall  (Gen.  i.  28),  but  by 
virtae  of  a  covenant-promise  made  after  the  fall  (Gen.  iii.  15).  So  that  Adam  could 
represent  none  in  that  covenant,  but  such  as  were  to  spring  from  him  by  virtue  of 
that  blessing.  2.  All  mankind  besides  sinned  and  fell  with  Adam  in  that  first 
transgression.  His  sin  of  eating  the  forbidden  fruit  is  imputed  to  them.  Consider 
— (1)  The  Scripture  plainly  testifies  that  all  sinned  in  him  (ver.  12).  Hence 
it  is  plain  that  death  has  not  come  into  the  world  but  in  pursuit  of  sin ;  all  die,  for 
aJl  have  sinned.  (2]  All  fell  with  him  into  misery  by  that  sin.  Now,  a  just  God 
wHl  not  involve  the  mnocent  with  the  guilty  in  the  same  punishment,  (o)  All  fell 
under  condemnation  (vers.  16,  18).  (b)  All  fell  under  the  loss  of  God's  image,  and 
the  corruption  of  nature  with  him  (Psa.  K.  5).  (c)  All  the  punishments  inflicted 
on  Adam  and  Eve,  for  that  sin,  as  specified  in  Gen.  iii.,  are  common  to  mankind, 
their  posterity ;  and  therefore  the  sin  must  be  so  too.  III.  How  the  fibst  sin  op 
Adam  ooues  to  be  imputed  to  us.  The  great  reason  of  this  is,  because  we  are  all 
included  in  Adam's  covenant.  The  covenant  was  made  with  him,  not  only  for  him- 
self, but  for  aU  his  posterity.  1.  Consider  here — (1)  It  was  the  covenant  of  works, 
the  condition  whereof  was  perfect  obedience.  (2)  It  was  made  with  Adam  for 
himself.  That  was  the  way  he  himself  was  to  attain  perfect  happiness  ;  his  own 
stock  was  in  that  ship.  (3)  It  was  made  not  only  for  himself,  but  for  all  his 
posterity  descending  from  him  by  ordinary  generation.  So  that  he  was  not  here  as 
a  private,  but  as  a  public  person,  the  moral  head  and  representative  of  all  mankind. 
Hence  the  Scripture  holds  forth  Adam  and  Christ,  as  if  there  had  never  been  any 
but  these  two  men  in  the  world  (1  Cor.  xv.  47).  And  this  he  does,  because  they 
were  two  public  persons,  each  of  them  having  under  them  persons  represented  by 
them  (vers.  14, 18).  2.  But  some  may  be  ready  to  say,  we  made  not  choice  of  Adam 
for  that  purpose.  Answer — (1)  God  made  the  choice,  who  was  as  meet  to  make  it 
for  us  as  we  for  ourselves.  And  "  who  art  thou  that  repliest  against  God?  "  (2) 
Adam  was  oar  natural  head,  the  common  father  of  as  aU  (Acts  xvii.  26),  and  who 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

was  80  meet  to  be  trusted  with  the  concerns  of  all  mankind  as  he  ?  3.  Bat  to  cleat 
further  the  reasonableness  of  this  imputation,  consider — (1)  Adam's  sin  is  imputed 
to  us,  because  it  is  ours.  For  God  doth  not  reckon  a  thing  ours,  which  is  not  bo 
(chap.  ii.  2).  If  a  person  that  has  the  plague  infect  others,  and  they  die,  they  die, 
by  their  own  plague,  and  not  by  that  of  another.  (2)  It  was  free  for  God  either  to 
have  annihilated  aU  mankind,  or  to  have  given  them  no  promise  of  eternal  hfe. 
Was  it  not,  then,  an  act  of  grace  in  God  to  make  such  a  rich  covenant  as  this  ?  and 
would  not  men  have  consented  to  this  representation  gladly  in  this  case?  (3)  Adam 
being  made  after  the  image  of  God  (Gen.  i.  26)  was  as  capable  to  stand  as  any 
aftei  wards  could  be  for  themselves  ;  and  this  was  a  trial  that  would  soon  have  been 
over,  while  the  other  would  have  been  continually  a-doing,  had  men  been  created 
independent  of  him.  (4)  He  had  natural  affection  the  strongest  to  engage  him. 
He  was  our  father,  and  all  we  the  children  that  were  in  his  loins,  to  whom  we  had 
as  good  ground  to  trust  as  to  any  other  creature.  (5)  His  own  stuck  was  in  the 
ship ;  his  aU  lay  at  stake  as  well  as  ours.  Forgetting  our  interest,  he  behoved  to 
disregard  his  own,  for  he  had  no  separate  interest  from  ours.  No  man  quarrels, 
that  when  a  master  sets  his  land  in  tack  to  a  man  and  his  heirs  upon  conditions, 
if  the  first  possessor  break  the  bargain,  the  heirs  be  denuded  of  it.  (6)  All  that 
quarrel  with  this  dispensation  must  renounce  their  part  in  Christ ;  for  we  are  made 
righteous  by  Him,  as  sinners  are  made  guilty  by  Adam.  If  we  fall  in  with  the  one, 
why  not  with  the  other  ?  We  chose  Christ  for  our  head  in  the  second  covenant  no 
more  than  we  did  Adam  in  the  first  covenant.  IV.  Infebences.  1.  See  the 
dreadful  nature  of  sin  ;  one  sin  could  destroy  a  world.  2.  Let  this  be  a  lesson  to 
parents  to  do  nothing  that  may  bring  ruin  on  their  children.  Many  times  children 
are  destroyed  by  their  parents  through  their  bad  example  and  government.  3. 
This  doctrine  affords  a  lesson  of  humility  to  all.  The  rich  have  no  cause  to  boast 
of  their  wealth,  for  they  have  as  sad  a  heritage  as  the  poor  and  needy.  4.  View  and 
wonder  at  the  redemption  purchased  for  sinners  by  Christ.  5.  Quit  your  hold  of 
the  first  Adam  and  his  covenant,  and  come  to  and  unite  with  Christ  by  faith, 
and  lay  hold  on  His  covenant  (1  Cor.  xv.  22).  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Tlte  fall  and 
the  atonement : — These  are  the  two  main  facts  involved  in  the  text.  Eound  these 
there  has  gathered  a  vast  cloud  of  theological  formulas  which  render  it  difficult  to 
discern  them  in  their  simplicity  and  integrity.  I  have  a  few  suggestions  to  make, 
which  are  simple  and  hang  well  together.  1.  We  can  hardly  begin  to  reflect  on  the 
fall  without  asking,  "Why  did  God  permit  it?  why  make  man  so  that  he  not  only 
could,  but  almost  must,  fall  away  from  his  original  righteousness  ?  "  The  very 
moment  we  begin  to  reflect  on  the  fall  we  are  confronted  by  the  origin  of  evil.  Why 
did  God  permit  it  to  invade  and  stain  His  universe?  2.  So,  again,  with  that  other 
fact,  •'  How  could  the  obedience,  or  sacrifice,  of  the  one  just  Man  avail  for  the 
salvation  of  the  whole  sinful  race  ?  How  is  it  so  to  tell  on  those  who  have  fallen 
from  righteousness  as  to  recover  them  to  the  love  and  service  of  righteousness  ?  To 
tell  us  that  these  problems  are  insoluble  is  to  contradict  the  inspired  apostle.  To 
warn  us  against  intermeddling  with  tbem  is  to  pour  contempt  on  the  labours  of 
eighteen  centuries.  And,  worse  still,  it  is  to  bid  us  suppress  an  inbred  and 
unconquerable  tendency,  viz.,  that  when  we  believe  certain  facts  we  cannot  but  try 
to  frame  some  reasonable  conception  of  them,  in  which  each  shall  hold  its  due  place 
and  form  part  of  an  intelligible  and  harmonious  whole.  I,  The  fall.  1.  We 
start  from  a  point  familiar  and  approved.  (1)  If  God  were  to  surround  Himself, 
not  with  mere  automata  that  would  mechanically  obey  the  impulses  of  His  will,  but 
with  creatures  capable  of  love  and  obedience.  He  must  give  them  wiUs  of  their 
own  and  leave  them  free.  A  mechanical  or  compelled  goodness  is  not  a  goodness 
at  all.  If  the  angels  are  incapable  of  sin  they  are  also  incapable  of  righteousness. 
If  they  are  not  free  to  choose  between  good  and  evil,  but  are  kept  by  the  power  and 
will  of  God,  then  their  goodness  is  God's  goodness,  and  not  their  own.  If  the  stars 
keep  their  courses  only  by  an  involuntary  and  unconscious  obedience  to  natural 
laws,  there  is  nothing  noble,  because  there  is  nothing  free,  in  their  obedience.  But 
if,  as  some  of  our  poets  have  dreamed,  each  "heavenly  body  "  is  but  the  vesture  of 
some  great  spirit,  then  the  very  stars  become  moral,  because  voluntary,  agents,  who 
render  a  willing  and  constant  obedience  to  the  laws  imposed  upon  them.  2.  Now, 
what  the  choice  of  God  would  be  we  may  infer  from  our  own  preference.  Just  aa 
we  prefer  to  have  even  a  dog  about  us  to  all  the  mechanical  toys  ever  invented  :  or 
just  as  we  love  to  have  chiUlren  about  us  whose  love  we  can  win,  who  are  capable 
of  a  true  because  voluntary  goodness,  so  we  may  reasonably  believe  God  would 
choose  to  surround  Himself  with  many  orders  of  creatures,  each  capable  of  loving 


«HA».  T.J  ROMANS.  429 

Him  of  its  own  will,  and  of  rendering  Him  a  free  and  glad  obedience.  3.  But  this 
very  capacity  involves  an  alternative.  Those  who  can  freely  lift  their  wills  into 
accord  with  the  will  of  God,  can  also  deflect  their  wills  from  Hia.  And  was  it  not 
well-nigh  inevitable  that,  in  the  infinite  possibilities  of  existence,  some  of  them 
should  strike  out  a  path  for  themselves,  and  take  that  rather  than  keep  the  path 
marked  out  for  them  by  God  ?  How  else  were  they  to  prove  to  themselves  that 
their  wills  were  their  own,  and  free?  4.  This  free  will,  if  a  great  is  also  a  most 
perilous  endowment ;  for  there  is  a  certain  charm  in  asserting  it.  It  is  not  mere 
depravity  which  prompts  a  child  to  do  that  which  he  knows  he  ought  not  to  do. 
The  temptation,  although  he  may  be  unconscious  of  it,  is  the  charm  of  assuring 
himself  and  showing  others  that  he  is  free,  that  he  is  not  a  mere  link  in  the  chain 
of  necessity,  not  a  mere  pipe  in  the  fingers  of  others  to  sound  what  stop  they 
please.  Who  has  not  felt  this  fascination,  and  done  that  which  he  knew  would 
yield  him  neither  pleasure  nor  profit,  simply  in  order  that  he  might  feel  and  assert 
his  freedom  ?  And  who  that  has  felt  this  charm  can  doubt  that  when  myriads  of 
creatures  had  been  called  into  being  gifted  with  free  will,  some  of  them  would  be 
sure  to  prove  their  freedom  by  trying  whether  or  not  their  wills  were  their  own  ? 
5.  Our  argument  leads  us  straight  into  that  great  mystery — the  origin  of  evil.  Evil 
is  in  the  world,  in  the  universe,  by  no  Divine  fiat  or  decree.  It  is  not  of  God'a 
making,  but  of  our  own.  And  from  this  gift  of  a  will  free  to  select  its  own  path  and 
take  its  own  course  have  sprung  all  the  miseries  of  evil.  What  God  intended  for 
our  good,  as  our  special  honour  and  distinction,  we  have  turned  to  our  own  harm. 
Bat  before  any  man  complains  that  so  perilous  a  gift  has  been  conferred  upon  him, 
and  that  he  is  called  to  rule  and  control  it,  let  him  remember  the  alternative — 
incapability  of  conscious  and  voluntary  choice  of  righteousness  and  love.  If  any 
man  would  prefer  to  sink  so  low  as  that,  it  certainly  is  hard  to  see  what  God  made 
him  a  man  for.  But  does  any  such  man  exist?  11.  Its  consequences.  When 
men,  in  the  exercise  of  their  free  will,  have  fallen  into  sin,  they  begin  to  make 
excuse.  They  say,  "  It  is  human  to  err.  Sin  is  commo»  to  all  ;  how,  then,  can  I 
hope  to  escape  it  ?  "  This  is  one  of  the  saddest  consequences.  2.  Men  condemn 
even  while  they  excuse  themselves.  All  the  while  thev  feel  that  sin  has  alienated 
them  from  the  life  of  God;  that  He  is  displeased  with  them ;  that  they  are  debased ; 
and  that  God  must  be  propitiated.  And  thus  men  are  made  both  reckless  and 
hopeless.  On  the  one  hand,  sin  seems  so  human,  so  inevitable,  that.it  can  hardly 
be  very  wrong ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  so  alien  to  God  that  He  can  hardly  be 
expected  to  pardon  it.  IH.  Feom  these  cousequences  we  get  some  of  our  best 
AND  SIMPLEST  CONCEPTIONS  OF  EEDEMPTioN.  1.  What  is  the  answer  of  the  Divine 
grace  to  the  feeling  of  doubt  and  despair  ?  It  is  this.  While  we  are  yet  sinners, 
God,  in  the  person  of  BUs  Son,  comes  down  and  dwells  among  us.  He  virtually 
says  to  us,  "  See,  much  as  I  hate  the  sins  which  have  degraded  and  enslaved  you, 
fellowship  with  Me  is  not  impossible.  I  am  in  your  midst  to  bless  you  by  turning 
every  one  of  you  away  from  your  sins.  So  far  from  being  separated  from  you,  I 
have  become  one  with  yon,  that  you  may  become  one  with  Me,  partaking  your 
nature  that  you  may  partake  Mine."  2.  Men  say,  "  It  is  human  to  sin  ;  so  long  as 
we  are  men  we  can  hardly  hope  to  avoid  it."  "  Nay,"  replies  Christ ;  "  for,  see,  I, 
too,  am  a  man ;  and  which  of  you  convicteth  Me  of  sin  ?  So  far  from  sin  being  an 
essential  part  of  manhood,  or  a  necessary  adjunct  of  it,  you  feel  that  I  am  a  higher 
style  of  man,  precisely  because  I  never  at  any  time  transgressed  My  Father's 
commandments,  because  I  make  it  My  will  to  do  His  will."  This,  then,  is  a  chief 
way  in  which  the  redemption  of  Christ  comes  to  tell  on  men,  in  which  they  are 
atoned  to  the  God  against  whom  they  have  sinned.  Our  wills  are  ours,  then  ;  but 
they  are  ours  that  we  may  make  them  His.  And  not  till  we  do  make  them  His 
shall  we  be  recovered  from  the  fall,  and  know  the  power  of  His  redemption.  (S. 
Cox,  D.D.)  The  Lord  our  righteousness : — I.  The  obediencb  of  Christ.  1. 
Personally  and  privately,  in  regard  to  His  own  moral  character.  He  fulfilled  all 
righteousness.  He  alone,  of  all  the  human  race,  has  maintained  from  first  to  last 
a  perfectly  spotless  character  before  the  tribunal  of  God.  2.  Officially,  Christ's 
obedience  was  equally  perfect.  He  came  into  the  world  to  fulfil  a  public  mission, 
as  the  Lord's  servant,  and  at  the  close  it  was  not  necessary  for  Him  to  bewail 
shortcomings  or  to  avow  Himsplf  an  unprofitable  servant  (John  xvii.  4).  Nor  was 
His  an  easy  task.  He  needed  more  meekness  than  Moses,  more  wisdom  than 
Solomon,  more  watchfulness  than  Isaiah,  and  more  couiage  than  Daniel.  Yet 
never  in  all  His  public  course  did  He  betray  an  unworthy  spirit  or  act  unwisely. 
Ko  doing  or  saying  of  His  requires  to  be  covered  with  the  cloak  of  charity.     8.  A4 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  ▼, 

a  sacrificial  victim  for  sin,  we  find  Christ  equally  obedient.  He  received  this 
commandment  from  the  Father,  that  He  should  lay  down  His  life  for  His  sheep. 
This  He  was  to  do  by  surrendering  Himself  into  the  hands  of  wicked  men.  He 
might  have  refused  and  have  consumed  His  enemies.  He  might  have  come  down 
even  from  the  Cross,  and  declined  to  shed  His  heart's  best  blood  for  such  a  thank- 
less race  ;  but  no,  He  submitted  to  it  all  without  a  murmur.  His  own  language 
was,  "  The  cup  which  My  Father  hath  given  Me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?  "  (c/.  Isa. 
liiL  4-6,  10;  PhiL  ii.  8;  Heb.  ii.  10).  II.  The  way  in  which  we  abb  made  bighteodb 
BT  THIS  OBEDIENCE.  1.  By  the  eternal  purpose  of  God  Himself.  He  gave  His  Ssn 
to  achieve  such  mighty  results  for  as,  and  He  accepts  us  in  the  Beloved,  and 
imputes  to  us  a  righteousness,  which  is  purely  of  grace,  and  through  faith  in  Christ. 
"  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  2.  The  ground  of  this 
imputation,  nndoubtedly,  is  the  perfect  obedience  of  Christ,  our  Head ;  and  the 
principle  of  it  is,  that,  because  of  our  union  with  Christ,  what  belongs  to  Him 
comes  to  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  us.  He  takes  our  sins,  that  we  may  take  His 
righteousness.  3.  Yet,  in  looking  at  Christ's  obedience  as  the  ground  of  our 
righteousness,  we  must  view  it  as  a  whole.  We  cannot  say  that  one  part  of  the 
blessing  we  derive  from  Christ  is  to  be  ascribed  to  His  sinless  life,  and  another  to 
His  vicarious  suffering.  We  take  a  whole  Christ  as  a  whole  Saviour.  4.  Yet  in 
this  gift  of  righteousness  we  find  these  three  blessings.  (1)  Pardon.  This  we  have 
in  Christ's  obedience  unto  death.  That  death  owes  its  merits  to  His  preceding 
spotless  life.  (2)  Holiness.  This  relates  to  the  present,  as  pardon  to  the  past,  and 
we  owe  it  to  Christ's  holy  life,  setting  us  an  example  ;  to  His  mediatorial  labours^ 
teaching  us  the  law ;  and  to  His  sacrificial  death,  constraining  our  love,  and 
procuring  for  us  the  Spirit,  by  whose  indwelling  we  are  quickened,  renewed^ 
changed  into  the  Divine  likeness,  and  enabled  to  walk  as  becometh  saints.  (3) 
Heaven.  This  relates  to  the  future.  Even  if  we  were  pardoned,  and  made  holy,  we 
could  by  no  means  earn  for  ourselves  a  title  to  glory.  It  is  God's  free  gift :  bestowed 
upon  us  only  for  the  sake  of  the  perfect  obedience  of  Christ,  who  hath  purchased 
this  inheritance,  and  secured  it  for  us.  It  is  He  who  both  washes  us  from  our  sins 
and  makes  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  His  Father  for  ever.  Conclusion :  1. 
Behold,  then,  the  Scripture  doctrine  of  substitution,  which  ascribes  our  salvation, 
not  to  our  own  obedience,  but  to  the  obedience  of  Christ.  This  is — (1)  A  conceivable 
arrangement :  it  is  in  harmony  with  equity  and  justice,  provided  only  that  the 
substituted  victim  of  suffering  be  a  voluntary  one,  and  that  he  be  not  a  permanent 
loser  by  what  he  endures.  (2)  An  arrangement,  analogous  to  much  that  we  see  in 
nature  and  providence,  and  especially  to  the  hereditary  law  of  association,  which 
obtains  among  all  mankind.  (3)  Necessity.  For  without  it  no  member  of  our 
fallen  race  could  ever  have  risen  to  hoUness  and  happiness  at  all.  (4)  An  accom- 
plished reality,  for  Christ  hath  actually  suffered  for  our  sins,  once  for  all, 
and  put  them  away  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself  (Heb.  ix.  26-28).  2.  A  few 
practical  inferences.  (1)  Christian  believer,  see  your  dependence  on  Jesus, 
and  rejoice  in  it.  Cultivate  a  simple  and  confiding  faith  in  Him,  and  believe 
that  if  your  salvation  be  the  reward  of  His  obedience,  there  is  no  limit  to 
what  God  is  able  and  willing  to  do  for  you.  (2)  Penitent  inquirer,  behold  the 
way  of  righteousness,  and  walk  in  it.  Come,  as  a  sinner,  to  the  throne  of 
grace ;  and  ceasing  from  your  own  works,  enter  by  faith  into  spiritual  rest. 
(3)  Ye  unconverted,  we  point  you  to  the  Cross.  There  see  what  sin  has  done. 
Eeflect,  repent,  return  unto  the  Lord,  for  He  will  have  mercy  upon  you,  and 
to  our  God,  for  He  will  abundantly  pardon.  (T.  G,  Horton.)  The  mechanism  of 
heredity : — Why  should  children,  bom  with  tainted  constitutions  and  damaged 
prospects,  suffer  blamelessly  for  their  father's  iniquity  ?  Precisely  as,  on  the  con- 
trary, children  benefit  gratuitously  through  the  goodness  of  their  parent.  For  the 
marvellous  mechanism  of  heredity  does  not  merely  transmit  evU.  It  is  also,  and 
indeed  preponderantly,  the  machinery  by  which  the  physical,  mental,  and  spiritual 
acquisitions  of  bygone  generations — the  accumulated  and  stored  wealth  of  the  ages 
— are  conveyed  to  the  future  and  preserved  for  posterity.  There  is  an  inheritance 
of  strength  and  intellect,  grace  and  goodness,  as  well  as  of  disease  and  vice  and  evil. 
Nay,  this  last  is  but  a  misuse  and  perversion  of  God's  beneficent  and  stupendous 
contrivance  of  heredity.  To  escape  the  entail  of  ill,  you  must  snap  the  mechanism 
of  transmission,  and  so  forfeit  the  entail  of  blessing.  It  is  as  if  you  should  propose 
that  each  generation's  acquisition  of  property,  tools,  inventions,  arts,  and  appli- 
ances should  be  destroyed,  and  the  next  generation  compelled  to  begin  afresh  on 
the  bare,  barren  soil.    Progress  were  impossible,  civilisation  but  the  rolling  of  m 


our.  T.]  ROMANS.  4S1 

Sisyphns'  stone,  the  haman  race  no  longer  an  organic  unity,  without  continuity, 
without  history,  without  moral  solidarity.  Take  from  my  life  and  actions  this 
awful  prerogative  of  the  transmission  of  good  and  evil,  and  you  rob  it  of  all  dignity 
and  depth  of  perspective ;  you  degrade  it  to  the  narrowest  dimensions  of  self-centred 
insigniticance ;  you  divest  my  actions  of  all  far-reaching  influence  and  unselfish 
consequence;  you  isolate  my  being  from  all  impersonal  interests  and  ennobling 
Bympathies.  Cut  asunder  the  fine  meshes  of  heredity,  and  you  dissolve  the  ties  of 
Section  that  bind  the  generations  together,  tmd  reduce  humanity  to  a  chaos  of 
trivial  atoms,  without  roots  in  the  past,  without  part  in  futurity,  devoid  of  large 
possibilities  of  achievement,  and  therefore  destitute  of  strong  moral  motive. 
Heredity  ordained  by  Heaven  for  blessing,  through  sin  becomes  a  vehicle  of  evil. 
{Prof.  Elmslie,  D.D.) 

Vers.  20,  21.  The  lav  entered  that  tho  olTence  might  abound.  But  where  sin 
abounded,  grrace  did  much  more  abound. — The  offence  abounding  through  the  law  : — 
The  vrise  physician  often  gives  medicine  to  bring  the  disease  from  within  to  the 
surface,  and  make  it  abound,  so  to  speak,  with  the  view  of  driving  away  the  dis- 
order, and  so  enabling  health  to  reign  in  the  system  of  his  patient.  The  skilful 
surgeon,  by  diet  and  hot-water  fomentations,  develops  the  abscess  in  order  that  he 
may  be  able  to  effectually  remove  it.  In  like  manner  God  in  His  infinite  love  and 
wisdom  allowed  the  law  to  enter  '•  that  the  offence  might  abound,"  with  the  ulti- 
mate purpose  "  that  as  sin  hath  reigned  unto  death,  even  so  might  grace  reign 
through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Law  deveJaj^ 
ing  Hn : — 1.  The  apostle  begins  the  present  argument  in  ver.  12,  breaking  off  for 
the  time;  and  instead  of  completing  tho  comparison,  turning  aside  to  show  the 
nniversal  and  lamentable  effects  of  sin.  St.  Paul  was  sufficiently  acquainted  with 
the  continent  of  Divine  truth  to  be  able  to  wander  without  losing  sight  of  the 
cardinal  points.  To  put  a  man  unacquainted  with  a  country  half  a  mile  from  the 
main  road  would  make  his  safe  return  somewhat  doubtful.  Many  are  in  this  state 
in  respect  of  gospel  truths.  But  Paul  could  venture  to  take  a  by-road  to  reach  a 
by-purpose,  and  then  return  safely  to  the  place  whence  he  started.  2.  At  the  close 
of  ver.  14  he  comes  again  in  contact  with  his  main  purpose,  that  the  reader  might 
not  lose  sight  of  it,  and  to  show  that  he  knew  exactly  his  whereabouts — '*  who  is 
the  figure  of  Him  that  was  to  come."  But  instead  of  going  on  to  prove  their 
resemblance,  he  again  digresses  to  show  first  their  unlikeness.  3.  In  ver.  18  he 
again  returns  to  his  chief  purpose,  namely,  to  show  that  the  first  Adam  and  the 
second  were  In  one  respect  similar.  The  "  offence  "  stands  alone.  There  was  but 
"  one  "  offence  from  Adam  to  Moses,  for  there  was  no  law  to  be  transgressed,  i.e., 
no  covenant.  God  made  a  covenant  with  Adam  as  the  representative  of  mankind ; 
but  that  covenant  was  broken.  Man,  therefore,  had  no  covenant  to  break  in  the 
period  indicated.  God  gave  His  law  to  the  sea,  to  the  birds,  &c.,  without  saying  a 
word  to  them:  they  were  too  small  for  Him  to  enter  into  covenant  with  them.  But 
man  was  created  on  so  large  a  scale  that  God  could  not  legislate  for  him  without 
covenanting  with  him.  The  "  offence,"  in  the  apostle's  sense  here,  was  not  possible 
to  man  in  the  absence  of  a  covenant.  Mankind  from  Adam  to  Moses  were  daily 
adding  to  the  mass  of  their  corruption,  but  the  offence  continued  to  remain  "  one  " 
and  the  same  all  through.  However,  in  the  time  of  Moses  we  find  mankind  again 
brought  under  a  covenant — "  the  law  entered  that  the  offence  might  abound."  I. 
The  qivinq  or  the  law  occasioned  the  development  of  sin.  1.  Sin  always  revives 
in  the  presence  of  law  (chap.  vii.  9).  The  pure  and  fiery  light  of  the  command- 
ment awakes  it,  excites  it,  and  draws  out  its  energies.  (1)  Sin  in  Israel  had  been 
sleeping  during  the  Egyptian  bondage  and  deliverance ;  and  the  trials  encountered 
during  the  journey  to  Sinai  only  made  sin  dream  fitfully  and  say  an  occasional 
angry  word  between  wakefulness  and  sleep,  just  enough  to  show  that  it  only  wanted 
opportunity  to  rouse  itself.  But  when  the  nation  arrived  at  Sinai  they  received  the 
most  marvellous  exhibition  of  the  Divine  glory.  It  might  have  been  thought  that 
sin  had  received  such  a  deep  wound  that  it  would  never  again  be  able  to  raise  ita 
head.  But  no ;  "  they  made  a  calf  in  those  days."  Wonderful  1  But  it  was  only 
the  necessary  consequence  of  the  giving  of  the  law.  (2)  Sin  is  still  the  same. 
Man  is  not  conscious  of  his  enmity  to  God  when  the  commandment  does  not  shine 
upon  his  conscience.  His  enmity  is  like  the  match  in  his  waistcoat  pocket.  There 
is  fire  in  it,  but  it  is  asleep.  It  only  needs  to  be  brought  into  contact  with  some- 
thing harder  than  itself  to  become  a  flame.  So  the  young  man's  guilty  heart  is  full 
of  the  fire  of  enmity,  but  it  is  asleep.     When  he  comes  to  rub  against  God's  law, 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  t. 

Bin  "takes  occasion  by  the  commandment"  to  develop  itself.  2.  The  entrance 
of  the  law  occasioned  the  development  of  sin,  because  man  cannot  be  developed 
without  developing  his  sin.  This  principle  manifests  itself  everywhere.  When 
tares  have  been  sown  mixed  with  wheat,  all  the  influences  which  promote  the 
increase  of  the  wheat  promote  the  growth  of  the  tares.  Look  at  the  young  babe. 
Well,  if  the  little  one  is  to  be  developed,  his  sin  must  be  developed  with  him.  Aa 
true  as  he  will  be  a  three-feet  man,  he  will  be  a  three-feet  sinner  at  the  same  time. 
The  internal  enemies  of  many  a  country  would  not  be  nearly  as  formidable  were 
it  not  for  the  educational  advantages  they  have  enjoyed.  The  danger  and  the 
horribleness  of  their  deeds  increase  in  the  same  proportion  as  their  knowledge.  In 
the  face  of  that,  were  it  not  better  to  keep  all  knowledge  from  them  ?  No !  that  is 
not  the  method  of  the  Divine  government.  The  voices  of  nature,  providence,  and 
inppiration  teach  the  contrary.  Humanity  must  be  developed,  though  that  be 
impossible  without  developing  its  sin.  And  inasmuch  as  the  law  entered  to  develop 
man,  it  of  necessity  therefore  occasioned  the  development  of  his  sin  likewise.  11. 
The  law  entered  foe  the  puepose  of  developing  sin.  It  entered  in  order — 1.  To 
develop  sin  in  its  heinousness  and  frightfulness,  so  that  the  evil  of  its  nature  aa  it 
strikes  against  God  and  militates  against  man  might  be  made  patent  to  all.  There 
is  deceitfulness  in  sin.  It  wears  a  garment  so  attractive  that  no  creature  is  free 
from  the  danger  of  being  bewitched  by  it.  It  deceived  even  the  angels.  It  capti- 
vated  oar  first  parents.  Sin  was  having  fair  weather  before  the  law  entered.  The 
earth  was  sitting  quietly  under  its  heavy  and  torpid  authority.  But  at  last  there 
dawned  the  day  of  its  visitation.  In  the  presence  of  God's  holy  law  the  splendour 
of  its  raiment  begins  to  fade ;  its  horrible  look  makes  many  refuse  it  their  loyalty 
any  longer.  The  entrance  of  sin  supposes  the  entrance  of  all  the  dispensation  of 
the  Old  Testament,  which  terminated  in  the  advent  and  death  of  Christ.  And 
there,  on  the  Cross,  was  finished  the  work  of  stripping  sin  of  all  its  robes.  Thence- 
forth it  stood  in  all  the  nakedness  of  its  shame  before  an  astonished  universe.  2. 
To  develop  its  strength,  and  accomplish  its  destruction.  God  is  not  afraid  of  sin. 
By  the  time  of  the  Incarnation  sin  had  been  completely  developed.  Corrupt 
religion  could  not  before,  and  can  never  again,  produce  such  a  court  as  that  of  the 
high  priest  in  Jerusalem.  There  is  no  hope  that  paganism  will  ever  again  produce 
such  a  faithful  representative  of  itself  as  Pontius  Pilate.  Hell  will  never  again  see 
the  day  when  it  can  steel  and  whet  a  tool  so  dangerous  as  Iscariot.  AU  the  hosts 
of  sin  are  on  the  field  in  the  memorable  struggle  with  the  Prince  of  Life,  so  that 
the  foe  can  never  complain  that  all  his  forces  were  not  on  the  spot  (CoL  ii.  14,  15). 
Sin  stiU  continues  the  war,  but  it  only  shoots  like  a  coward  ;  shoots  and  runs  at 
the  same  time.  Let  us  therefore  take  heart ;  let  us  arm  ourselves  with  all  the 
armour  of  God  that  we  may  pursue  and  help  to  drive  it  out  of  the  world.  There  is 
a  complete  victory  over  sin  to  every  one  that  believeth  in  Christ.  {Evan  Phillips.) 
Law  and  grace : — I.  The  design  op  the  law.  1.  Not  to  occasion  sin.  2.  But  to 
develop — (1)  Its  extent.  (2)  Its  guilt.  (3)  Its  misery.  II.  The  eelation  of  thb 
LAW  to  graob.  1.  It  prepares  the  way  for  its  manifestation.  2.  It  sets  forth  its 
transcendent  excellency.  2.  It  disposes  the  sinner  to  receive  it  by  making  him 
conscious  of  his  need.  III.  The  supeeabodndinq  op  grace.  1.  It  surpasses  the 
extent  of  human  guilt.  2.  Believes  its  misery.  3.  Secures  more  happiness  to 
man  and  more  glory  to  God.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Law  and  grace: — There  is  no 
point  upon  which  men  make  greater  mistakes  than  upon  the  relation  between  the 
law  and  the  gospel.  Some  men  put  the  law  instead  of  the  gospel ;  others  put  the 
gospel  instead  of  the  law ;  some  modify  both,  and  preach  neither ;  and  others 
entirely  abrogate  the  law,  by  bringing  in  the  gospel.  Many  think  that  the  law  ia 
the  gospel,  and  who  teach  that  men  by  good  works  may  be  saved.  On  the  other 
hand,  many  teach  that  the  gospel  is  a  law,  by  obedience  to  which  men  are  meri- 
toriously saved.  A  certain  class  maintain  that  the  law  and  the  gospel  are  mixed, 
and  that  partly  by  the  law,  and  partly  by  grace,  men  are  saved.  Consider  the  text 
— I.  As  CONCERNING  THE  WORLD.  1.  The  objcct  of  God  in  sending  the  law  was 
"  that  the  offence  might  abound."  There  was  sin  in  the  world  long  before ;  and 
where  that  law  has  never  been  heard,  there  is  sin, — because,  though  men  cannot 
sin  against  the  law  which  they  have  never  seen,  yet  they  can  all  rebel  against  the 
light  of  nature,  against  the  dictates  of  conscience,  and  against  that  traditional 
remembrance  of  right  and  wrong  (chap.  i.  20).  The  law  makes  offences  "  abound," 
because — (1)  It  tells  us  that  many  things  are  sins  which  we  should  never  have 
thought  to  be  so  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  additional  light.  What  man  by  the  light 
of  conscience  would  keep  holy  the  Sabbath  day  ?    Moreover,  if  in  the  term  "  law  " 


'SA*.  T.]  ROMANS.  483 

we  comprehend  the  ceremonial  ritual,  we  can  plainly  see  that  many  things,  in 
appearance  quite  indifferent,  were  by  it  constituted  sins — the  eating  of   animals 
that  do  not  chew  the  cud  and  divide  the  hoof,  the  wearing  of  linsey-woolsey,  and 
all  seem  to  have  no  sin  in  them,  but  the  law  made  them  into  sine,  and  so  made  the 
offence  to  abound.     (2)  Law  has  a  tendency  to  make  men  rebel.    Human  nature, 
rises  against  restraint.    I  had  not  known  lust  except  the  law  had  said, "  Thou  shalt 
not  covet."    So  evil  are  we,  that  we  conceive  at  once  the  desire  to  commit  an  act, 
simply  because  it  is  forbidden  (chap.  vii.  7,  8,  11).    The  law  is  not  faulty,  but  sin 
uses  it  as  an  occasion  of  offence,  and  rebels  when  it  ought  to  obey.    Augustine  says, 
"  The  law  is  not  in  fault,  but  our  evil  and  wicked  nature ;  even  as  a  heap  of  lima 
is  still  and  quiet,  until  water  be  poured  thereon,  but  then  it  begins  to  smoke  and 
bom,  not  from  the  fault  of  the  water,  but  from  the  nature  and  kind  of  the  lime 
which  will  not  endure  it."    (3)  The  law  increases  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  by  removing 
all  excuse  of  ignorance.    Until  men  know  the  law,  their  crimes  have  at  least  a 
paUiation  of  partial  ignorance,  but  when  the  code  is  spread  before  them,  theii 
offences  become  greater,  since  they  are  committed  against  light  and  knowledge. 
The  more  hght  the  greater  guilt — the  law  affords  that  light,  and  so  causes  us  to 
become  double  offenders.    But  does  it  not  seem  very  harsh  that  God  should  give  ua 
a  law  which  will  not  justify,  but  indirectly  cause  our  condemnation  to  be  greater  ? 
But  there  is  a  gracious  purpose  even  here.    Natural  men  dream  that  by  a  stricl 
performance  of  duty  they  shall  obtain  favour ;  but  the  law  never  came  to  save  men 
It  came  on  purpose  to  make  the  evidence  complete  that  salvation  by  works  is 
impossible,  and  thus  to  drive  the  elect  of  God  to  rely  wholly  on  the  finished  salva- 
tion of  the  gospel.     2.  The  superabundance  of  grace.     (1)  Grace  excels  sin  in  ths 
numbers  it  brings  beneath  its  sway.     It  is  written  that  in  all  things  Jesus  shall 
have  the  pre-eminence  :  and  why  is  this  to  be  left  out  ?    Can  we  think  that  Satan 
will  have  more  followers  than  Jesus  ?     Oh,  no ;  for  while  it  is  written  that  the 
redeemed  are  a  multitude  that  no  man  can  number  ;  it  is  not  recorded  that  the  lost 
are  beyond  numeration.    Think  for  a  moment  of  the  army  of  infant  souls  who  are 
now  in  heaven.     (2)  Grace  doth  "  much  more  abound,"  because  a  time  shall  come 
when  the  world  shall  be  all  full  of  grace ;  whereas  there  has  never  been  a  period 
when  it  was  wholly  given  up  to  sin.     (3)  Hath  the  world  lost  its  possessions  by  sin, 
it  has  gained  far  more  by  grace?    True,  we  have  been  expelled  from  Eden,  but  we 
have  through  Jesus  a  fairer  habitation.    Did  we  lose  natural  life  and  subject  our- 
selves to  painful  death  by  sin  ?    Has  not  grace  revealed  an  immortality  for  the 
sake  of  which  we  are  too  glad  to  die  ?    Jesus  has  clothed  us  with  a  Divine  righteous- 
ness, far  exceeding  the  robes  of  created  innocence.     II.  As  concerning  thb  human 
HEABT.     1.  The  law  causes  the  offence  to  abound — (1)  By  discovering  sin  to  the 
soul.    When  once  the  Holy  Ghost  applies  the  law  to  the  conscience,  secret  sins  are 
dragged  to  light,  little  sins  are  magnified  to  their  true  size,  and  things  apparently 
harmless  become  exceedingly  sinful.    John  Bunyan  says  that  "  the  Interpreter  took 
Christian  by  the  hand  and  led  him  into  a  very  large  parlour  that  was  full  of  dust, 
because  never  swept ;  in  which  after  he  had  reviewed  it  a  little  while,  the  Interpreter 
called  for  a  man  to  sweep.    Now,  when  he  began  to  sweep,  the  dust  began  so  abun- 
dantly to  fly  about,  that  Christian  had  almost  therewith  been  choked.    Then  said 
the  Interpreter  to  a  damsel  that  stood  by,  '  Bring  hither  water,  and  sprinkle  the 
room ' ;  the  which  when  she  had  done,  it  was  swept  and  cleansed  with  pleasure. 
Then  said  Christian, '  What  means  this  ?  '    The  Interpreter  answered, '  This  parlour 
is  the  heart  of  man.    The  dust  is  his  original  sin  and  inward  corruptions.    He  that 
began  to  sweep  at  first,  is  the  law;  but  she  that  brought  the  water,  and  did  sprinkle 
it,  is  the  gospel.    Now  whereas  thou  sawest,  that  as  soon  as  the  first  began  to 
sweep,  the  dust  did  so  fly  about,  that  the  room  could  not  by  him  be  cleansed,  but 
that  thou  wast  almost  choked  therewith  ;  this  is  to  show  thee  that  the  law,  instead 
of  cleansing  the  heart  (by  its  working)  from  sin,  doth  revive  (chap.  vii.  9),  put 
strength  into  (1  Cor.  xv.  66)  and  increase  it  in  the  soul  (ver.  20),  even  as  it  dotb 
discover  and  forbid  it,  for  it  doth  not  give  power  to  subdue.    Again,  as  thou  sawest 
the  damsel  sprinkle  the  room  with  water,  upon  which  it  was  cleansed  with  pleasure ; 
this  is  to  show  thee  that  when  the  gospel  comes  in  the  sweet  and  precious  influences 
thereof  to  the  heart,  so  is  sin  vanquished,  and  the  soul  made  clean,  through  the 
laith  of  it,  and  consequently  fit  for  the  King  of  glory  to  inhabit.' "     (2)  By  showing 
as  how  very  black  we  are.     Some  of  ua  know  that  we  are  sinners.    It  is  very  easy 
to  say  it,  but  it  does  not  appear  exceedingly  sinful  tiU  the  law  comes.    How  many 
do  we  find  who  are  saying,  •'  There  may  be  a  httle  amiss  at  the  top,  but  I  am  vei  y 
good-hearted  at  bottom."    If  you  saw  some  fruit  on  the  top  of  a  basket  that  waa 
VOL.  1.  28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  t. 

not  quite  good,  would  you  buy  the  basket  because  they  told  you, "  Aye,  but  they  are 
good  at  the  bottom  "  ?  No ;  yon  would  say,  "  They  are  sure  to  be  the  best  at  the 
top,  and  if  they  are  bad  there,  they  are  sure  to  be  rotten  below."  (3)  By  discover- 
ing to  us  the  depravity  of  our  nature.  We  are  all  prepared  to  charge  the  serpent 
with  our  guilt,  or  to  insinuate  that  we  go  astray,  from  the  force  of  ill  example — but 
the  Holy  Spirit  dissipates  these  dreams  by  bringing  the  law  into  the  heart.  Then 
the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  are  broken  up,  the  chambers  of  imagery  are  opened, 
the  innate  evil  of  the  very  essence  of  fallen  man  is  discovered.  (4)  By  bringing 
home  the  sentence  of  condemnation.  It  mounts  the  judgment  seat,  puts  on  the 
black  cap,  and  pronounces  the  sentence  of  death.  (5)  By  discovering  the  power- 
lessness  occasioned  by  sin.  It  not  only  condemns  but  it  actually  kills.  He  who 
once  thought  that  he  could  repent  and  believe  at  pleasure,  foids  in  himself  no 
power  to  do  either  the  one  or  the  other.  2.  Grace  excels  sin— (1)  In  its  measure 
and  efficacy.  Though  your  sins  are  many,  mercy  hath  many  pardons.  (2)  Sin 
shows  us  its  parent,  and  teUs  us  our  heart  is  the  father  of  it,  but  grace  surpasseth 
sin  there,  and  shows  the  Author  of  grace — the  King  of  kings.  (3)  Just  as  sin 
makes  us  sick,  and  downcast,  and  sad,  so  does  grace  make  us  far  more  joyful  and 
free.  Sin  unfits  us  for  heaven.  Grace  makes  us  fit  companions  for  seraphs  and 
the  just  made  perfect.  (G.H.  Spurgeon.)  The  triumphs  of  sin  and  of  grace: — 
I.  Thb  TBIUMPH8  OF  SIN.  1.  As  they  regard  the  material  world.  Sin  has  altered 
its  character — defaced  its  beauty — tarnished  its  splendour.  Disorder  has  been 
introduced,  and  various  evils  have  been  realised.  2.  As  they  regard  the  moral 
nature  of  man.  If  the  evil  were  merely  external,  it  would  be  comparatively  imma- 
ierial,  but  it  is  internal.  The  whole  man  is  infected  with  the  leprosy  of  sin.  His 
members  are  not  consecrated  to  God,  but  to  iniquity.  His  understanding  is  enve- 
loped in  dense  darkness.  His  reason  is  proud,  and  unyielding  to  God.  His  afieC' 
tions  are  perverted,  cold,  and  sensual.  His  will  is  stubborn  and  intractable.  All 
his  powers,  passions,  capacities,  and  emotions,  have  been  affected  by  sin.  3.  As 
they  regard  death  and  the  grave.  What  fearful  desolations  they  effect  I  They 
dim  the  lustre  of  the  eye,  extinguish  the  light  of  genius,  tarnish  the  bloom  of 
beauty,  wither  the  arm  of  vigour,  and  reduce  the  frame  of  man  to  dust.  4.  As 
they  regard  the  remote  and  awful  consequences  of  iniquity.  The  loss  of  the  soul, 
banishment  from  God,  the  utter  withdrawal  of  His  favour,  the  agony  of  conscience, 
the  society  of  devils  and  wicked  spirits,  and  the  consciousness  that  this  degradation, 
ruin,  and  misery,  will  endure  unmitigated  for  ever.  II.  The  sdpehiob  and  mobb 
SPLENDID  TBiUMPHS  OF  DiviNE  GRACE.  1.  In  the  full  and  spontaneous  forgiveness 
which  it  bestows.  It  removes  the  oppressive  burden  of  sin — it  speaks  peace  to  the 
conscience ;  and  whatever  might  have  been  his  offences,  it  assures  the  justified 
individual  that  his  sins  have  been  all  forgiven.  2.  In  the  character  of  those  opera- 
tions which  it  secures.  It  not  merely  justifies  the  person,  but  renovates  the  nature, 
implants  new  principles,  induces  new  feelings,  inspires  love  to  prayer,  and  com- 
municates that  strength  and  consolation  which  we  require  while  residents  in  this 
world.  3.  In  the  inheritance  which  it  assigns.  Best  from  labour,  tranquillity  after 
agitation  and  alarm,  freedom  from  temptation,  advancement  to  ineffable  dignity — 
the  possession  of  a  glorious  and  an  enduring  kingdom,  and  the  promise  of  an 
unfading  and  immortal  crown.  4.  In  the  complete  and  glorious  resurrection  of 
the  body  for  which  it  provides.  5.  In  the  eventual  number  of  the  redeemed.  They 
shall  embrace  every  age,  country,  condition,  class.  A  number,  which  no  man  can 
enumerate,  shall  be  rescued  from  sin,  delivered  from  the  grave,  and  advanced  to 
the  bliss  and  glory  of  heaven.  Conclusion  :  This  subject  should — 1.  Tend  to 
correct  many  errors  with  regard  to  the  doctrine  of  election :  the  fact  of  the  fall, 
the  extent  of  Divine  mercy,  the  number  of  the  saved.  2.  Induce  us  to  institute  an 
inquiry  whether  we  have  ever  realised  the  power  of  that  grace  which  so  gloriously 
triumphs.  3.  Inspire  us  as  regards  the  future,  and  induce  us  to  make  greater 
exertions  to  secure  and  extend  the  triumphs  of  Divine  mercy.  (J.  Leif child,  D.D.) 
Sin  abounding,  and  grace  superabounding : — These  glowing  words  fitly  crown  the 
parallel  the  apostle  traces.  From  its  triumphal  climax  he  surveys  the  expanded 
triumphs  of  grace  and  sin  in  a  reign,  or  conquered  dominion,  on  which  the  common 
Bun  never  sets,  and  which  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  ever  floods  with  glory;  an 
empire  which,  like  the  mystic  ladder,  first  establishes  its  footing  on  earth,  and 
finally  loses  itself  in  the  glories  of  heaven.  We  will  range  our  exposition  under 
the  following  heads :  I.  EListobical.  1.  The  curtain  is  uplifted,  and  the  background 
scenery  represents  visions  of  paradisial  beauty.  And  now  for  the  characters  ;  for 
••all  the  world's  a  stage."    First  enters  primeval  man,  fresh  from  his  Maker's 


«BAP.  ?.]  ROMANS,  4S5 

hand ;  and  then  woman,  his  ministering  angeL  Slinking  stealthily  from  behind, 
next  enters  the  serpent.  The  lights  pale,  and  visions  grow  dark  and  dim,  as  the 
next  actor.  Sin,  enters  like  a  disastrous  eclipse ;  and  it  entered  not  alone — it  entered 
trailing  its  grim  shadow  after  it,  "Death  entered  by  sin."  The  plot  thickens. 
"  Moreover,  the  law  entered,"  that  men  might  know  their  duty,  and  in  the  light  of 
that  their  guilt,  and  in  the  light  of  both  their  doom,  and  in  the  light  of  all  seek  the 
remedy.  As  the  result — Sin  is  seen  to  abound :  it  enters  and  re-enters,  rolling  its 
thunderous  clouds  across  the  stage  ;  for  in  the  fierce  light  of  the  law  its  magnitude 
and  intensity  are  clearly  seen,  and  sin  takes  occasion  from  that  very  law  to  riot  and 
multiply  itself  the  more.  But  by  this  time  another  actor  has  entered  on  the  stage  ; 
the  seed  of  the  woman  appears,  with  the  ransom  flowing  from  bis  side,  the  serpent 
squirming  under  his  heel.  2.  In  the  second  long  act,  covering  the  Old  Testament 
period,  the  shadows  seem  to  deepen,  and  the  confusion  to  become  more  confounded. 
3.  In  the  third  brief,  but  grand  act,  the  Deliverer  steps  on  the  stage,  takes  the 
room  of  the  sinner,  and  sublimely  dies,  rises,  ascends  to  glory,  and  sends  forth  His 
twelve  champions  for  the  spiritual  conquest  of  the  world.  4.  During  the  next,  or 
fourth  act,  the  mingling  elements  of  light  and  darkness,  good  and  evil,  life  and 
death,  have  been  in  fierce,  hot  strife ;  life  and  light  evermore  rising  triumphant 
over  sin  and  death.  6.  In  the  fifth,  and  last,  grand  act,  Satan  shall  fall  from  his 
usurped  dominion,  and  the  "  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  have  become  the  kingdoms 
of  our  God,"  (&o.  U.  Doctbinai..  The  text  is  the  culminating  point  of  a  passage 
which,  like  all  that  precedes,  has  for  its  objects  the  vindication  and  illustration  of 
justification  by  faith.  If  this  Divine  method  of  salvation  can  be  shown  to  have 
primeval  precedent  in  the  Edenic  Dispensation,  and  to  root  and  ramify  its  funda- 
mental principles  in  the  Divine  administration  of  our  world  and  in  the  moral  and 
social  constitution  of  man,  no  stronger  argument  for  the  great  doctrine  could  well 
be  adduced.  This  is  just  what  our  apostle  does.  He  traces  a  parallel  between  the 
First  Adam  and  the  Second.  Both  being  representative,  each  is  sho^vn  to  stand 
out  in  his  unity  as  "  the  one,"  in  relation  to  "  the  many."  The  two  Adams  present 
strong  points  of  parallelism.  By  one  we  fell,  and  by  one  we  rise.  The  points  of 
contrast  are  these :  Adam's  sin  brought  temporal  death  ;  but  Christ  brings  eternal 
life.  Again,  Adam  had  nothing  directly  to  do  with  our  actual  sins,  but  Christ's 
atonement,  besides  neutralising  the  effects  of  Adam's  sin,  neutralises  also  the  effects 
of  our  innumerable  actual  transgressions,  in  the  cases  of  all  who  believe.  Finally, 
those  who  do  beUeve,  not  only  rise  to  the  position  they  would  have  had  under  a 
sinless  Adam,  but  to  one  immeasurably  higher,  even  to  a  very  royalty  of  bUss. 
HL  ExposiTioNAL.  Taking  the  causes  as  they  occur,  consider : — 1.  "  Moreover 
the  law  entered," — a  term  triply  compound — means  to  enter  in  by,  or  alongside  of, 
or  immediately  upon;  and  thus  conveys  the  idea  that  if  "  sin  entered,"  if  "death 
entered  "  here  comes  another  entrance  upon  the  back  of  these — that  of  immutable 
Moral  Law.  Adam,  from  the  moment  be  sinned,  ceased  to  be  our  representative ; 
and  at  that  same  moment,  therefore,  the  paradisial  dispensation  ceased.  But  not 
so  Eternal  Law.  It  therefore  stepped  prominently  into  view,  after  the  special 
paradisial  arrangements  had  passed  away.  And  it  was  highly  desirable  that  it 
should,  that  men  might  see  their  own  portrait,  and  read  their  own  ruin,  and  be 
thereby  led,  as  by  a  schoolmaster,  to  seek  for  the  remedy.  Being  now  a  broken 
law,  it  had  to  be  arrayed  in  its  terrors,  as  well  as  expanded  in  its  intrinsic  loveliness. 
Hence  its  successive  promulgations,  which  culminated  at  Sinai,  and  ran  on  through 
the  Mosaic  Economy  in  p&rallel  lines  of  wrath  and  love,  till  He  came  who  has 
reconciled  all  these  contrarieties,  and  "  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself."  2. 
The  result  of  this  exhibition  was  that  the  "  offence  did  abound."  In  the  pure  mirror 
of  the  law  sin  was  first  seen  to  abound ;  and  then,  by  kicking  against  the  law's 
restraints,  sin  rebelliously  took  occasion  more  and  more  to  abound.  With  what 
fearful  rapidity  it  did,  may  be  read  in  the  awful  fact  that  htmaan  crime  sprung  to 
its  climactic  stage  in  the  first  generation.  The  first  human  birth  in  our  world 
was  that  of  a  murderer,  the  second  that  of  his  victim.  What  then  ?  Was  the  law 
to  blame  for  that?  Far  be  it  I  The  law  must  be  proclaimed;  and  in  numberless 
instances  it  did  put  an  arrest  on  sin,  and  guided  primeval  men  into  its  "  ways  of 
pleasantness,  and  its  paths  of  peace."  But  those  who  would  not  be  guided,  wrested 
it  to  their  ruin.  Our  apostle  meets  that  objection  in  chap.  vii.  12,  13.  3.  Mark 
the  sin-neutralising  energy  of  Divine  grace: — "Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did 
much  more  abound."  (1)  It  is  an  undoubted  fact,  for  Paul  here  declares  it  without 
qualification,  limitation,  or  reserve.  (2)  It  is  a  continuous  fact ;  for  it  belongs  to 
tile  present  as  truly  and  fully  as  ever  it  did  to  the  past.    (S)  It  is  an  evangelical 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [eoAt.  ▼. 

fact;  for  it  implies  that  the  only  onre  for  sin  is  grace.    It  is  not  the  fear  of  hell 
that  will  make  a  bad  man  good.    (4)  It  is  a  world-wide  fact.    Confront  me  with  a 
sinner.    In  agony  he  asks,  Is  there  any  mercy  for  me  ?    I  tell  you  yes,  for  does  not 
Paul  say,  where  sin  abounds,  grace  superabounds  ?    4.  Sin  is  said  to  "  reign,"  and 
that  onto  death.     It  not  only  "  abounds,"  it  tyrannises.    Was  there  ever  despot 
like  sin  ?    Was  there  ever  taskmaster  like  Satan,  plying  his  drudges  with  a  whip 
of  scorpions,  and  ever  saying  to  them,  as  Pharaoh  did  to  the  Hebrews,  "  get  you  to 
your  burdens  "  ?    Was  there  ever  bondage  like  that  of  the  drunkard,  like  that  of 
the  sensualist  ?    And  "  sin  reigns  unto  death," — or  as  in  a  previous  verse,  "  death 
reigns."    The  "  fear  of  death,"  we  read,  "  keeps  many  all  their  life  long  subject 
to  bondage."    Well  is  he  described  as  "  the  king  of  terrors,"  the  most  universal 
and  relentless  of  all  devastating  conquerors.     One  stronger  than  he  has  grappled 
with  him ;  ''and  the  last  enemy,  death,  shall  be  destroyed."    6.  In  direct  antagonism 
to  sin's  usurped  dominion,  grace  reigns  ;  and  "  unto  eternal  life."    The  antithesis 
is  perfect.    We  may  not  say  that  grace  tyrannises,  for  its  reign  is  essential  liberty ; 
but  it  dominates  and  is  destined  to  final  triumph.    Love  shall  be  the  conqueror,  as 
Bure  as  God  is  love.    6.  Observe  on  what  principle  grace  reigns :  not  through  mere 
arbitrary  choice,  as  if  God  could  act  in  caprice;  not  through  mere  absolute 
sovereignty,   as   if   God  were   personified   despotism ;   not   through  mere  blind 
indulgence,  as  if  God  were  too  facile  to  be  firm,  too  fond  to  be  inflexibly  wise 
and  good  ;  but  through  righteousness ;  or  on  some  wise,  safe,  and  righteous  ground 
on  which  mercy  might  flow  freely,  but  not  licentiously  and  destructively.    And 
how  is  this  secured?    7.  "By  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,"  by  His  merits  and  world- 
embracing  propitiation,  on  the  ground  of  which  "  God  can  be  just,  while  the 
justifier  of  the  ungodly  who  believe  in  Jesus."    IV.  Practical.     Too  many,  alas, 
who  need  no  proof  that  "  sin  abounds,"  still  urge.  But  has  God  any  superabounding 
grace  for  me  ?    Let  Jesus  reply :  "  Look  unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of 
the  earth."    He  "  gave  Himself  a  ransom  for  all " ;  then  He  is  a  ransom  for  thee. 
A  "  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,"  He  has  expiated  thine.    "  But  I 
have  sinned  grievously."    What  I  too  greviously  for  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
God's  Son,  which  oleanseth  from  all  sin  "  ?    You  never  did  a  worse  sin  than  to  vent 
an  insinuation  like  that.    Do  you  still  want  more  witness  ?    Pray  what  sort  do  yon 
desiderate  1    A  voice  from  heaven  ?    Here  are  voices  without  number.    Turn  to 
Eev.  xxii.  17.    Or  is  it  earthly  testimony  you  want  1    Think  of  the  once  scofi&ng 
and  profligate  Eochester,  of  the  once  God-defiant  adventurer,  John  Newton,  of  the 
once  profanely  boisterous  Bunyan.    Or  is  it  the  testimony  of  the  redeemed  in 
heaven  you  want  to  hear?    Open  the  Apocalypse  at  random,  and  thereby  turn 
aside  the  heavenly  veil,  and  your  eyes  will  see  them  casting  their  crowns  at  the 
Deliverer's  feet,  and  your  ear  will  catch  the  refrain — "  Unto  Him  that  loveth  us  I " 
••Worthy  the  Lambl"  &c.     [T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)        Abounding  sin ;  overabounding 
grace ; — 1.  "  The  law  entered  that  the  offence  might  abound. "    The  sin  was  already 
there.     Deep  in  the  constitution  of  humanity  the  poison  was  already  working,  and 
God  would  have  it  developed  in  full  manifestation.     The  driving  of  evil  out  to  the 
surface,  where  all  can  see  it  in  the  broad  daylight,  is,  as  in  some  deadly  forms 
of  fever,  the  first  step  towards  the  cure.    But  Paul  had  not  ventured  to  entertain 
the  thought  unless  he  bad  known,  as  no  man,  save  perhaps  Luther,  has  ever  known, 
the    superabounding,  the    overmastering   power  of  grace.    2.   The  problem  of 
problems  is,  how  can  a  righteous  and  loving  God  endure  and  perpetuate  a  world 
like  this  while  a  breath  would  abolish  its  sin  and  misery  for  ever.    But  it  lives  on. 
The  life  of  a  human  spirit  is  an  awful  endowment.    By  no  act  of  ours  it  comes 
to  us.    And  the  influences  which  mould  it  are  but  partially  under  our  control. 
There  is  a  man  who  was  educated  to  be  a  jail-bird  from  his  infancy.    He  never  had 
his  eye  upon  the  form  of  a  nobler  life.    You  cannot  say  that  there  are  no  seeds  of 
great  thoughts  and  virtues  in  him.     He  would  be  torn  limb  from  limb  before  he 
would  betray  his  comrade.    But  his  chance  in  life  has  been  a  poor  one.     His  whole 
life  is  a  battle  with  society.     Society  masters  him,  chains  him,  and  will  infallibly 
crush  him  at  last.    And  yet  that  man  must  drag  on  his  burden  ;  and  passionately 
as  he  may  long  to  die,  it  is  God's  will  that  he  shall  bear  the  burden  of  that  life 
through  eternity.    He  may  mend  his  life ;  God's  mercy  puts  that  within  his  reach ; 
but  if  he  win  not  mend  it,  he  shall  bear  it  for  ever.    3.  How  many  myriads 
are  there  who,  were  the  choice  offered  to  them,  would  answer,  "  Let  me  die  and 
have  done  with  it  for  ever."    Annihilation  has  been  the  supreme  hope  of  many  a 
creed.    And  why  ?    Because  * '  Sin  reign  etb  unto  death  "  everywhere.    Life  is  good : 
the  wodd  is  faur.    The  storms,  deserts,  and  earthquakes,  woold  have  no  Wnof 


.  ▼.]  ROMANS.  437 

for  man  if  there  were  not  wilder  storms  and  barer  deserts  within.  But  self 
hannts  him  as  a  spectre.  "The  things  that  I  would,  those  I  do  not ;  the  things 
that  I  would  not,  those  I  do  " ;  and  the  doing  these  things  is  death.  Here,  then, 
are  men  by  millions,  living  by  no  will  of  their  own,  fighting  a  losing  battle  through 
life ;  or  refusing  to  fight  it,  and  giving  it  up  in  despair,  grovelling  with  the  beasts, 
cursing  with  the  fiends,  filling  the  world  with  woe.  Doubtless  there  are  lights  as 
well  as  shadows  in  the  picture.  But  looking  at  the  broad  world,  the  shadow 
masters  the  sunlight.  Take  one  day's  honest  service  with  a  city  missionary,  and 
judge  for  yourselves.  There  is  the  "  struggle  for  life  "  everywhere;  but  Death,  if 
want,  disease,  and  misery  are  his  hctors,  everywhere  wins.  Death  is  the  broad 
term  which  covers  the  whole  work  of  sin.  Death  is  but  the  culmination  of  a  process. 
The  sinner  carries  his  torment  with  him — a  life  poisoned  at  the  springs,  a  life  which 
God  will  not  suffer  him  to  lay  down.  4.  And  Paul  has  the  daring  seutence,  *•  The 
law,  sent  of  God,  entered  that  the  offence  might  abound."  Many,  startled,  try  to 
soften  the  words.  "  God  hath  sent  the  law  to  correct,  but  its  result  was  the 
increase  of  sin,"  is  the  sense  to  which  they  would  modify  it.  But  the  words  will 
not  bear  it,  and  the  argument  refuses  to  adopt  it.  God  sent  the  law  that  the  offence 
might  abound.  Not  sin — that  is,  the  sinful  thought  and  purpose— but  the  offence, 
the  act  and  manifestation  of  sin.  The  poison  there,  it  should  not  lurk  there ;  it 
should  be  pressed  into  full  development.  "  The  Mosaic  law,"  say  cautious  com- 
mentators, "with  all  its  minute  regulations,  difficult  and  impossible  to  fulfil, 
which  made  men  despair  of  legal  obedience,  and  prepared  them  to  receive  the 
righteousness  which  is  by  faith."  I  think  the  larger  view  the  true  one.  All  law, 
in  a  sin-loving,  God-hating  world,  has  for  its  first  fruit  the  insurrection  of  human 
passion  and  self-will.  Every  declaration  of  the  character  and  the  will  of  God 
to  sinners  seems  at  first  but  to  madden  the  spirit  and  blacken  the  tone  of  their 
transgression.  "  Sin  by  the  commandment  becomes  exceeding  sinful."  It  is  true 
of  all  dispensations,  even  the  highest.  When  men  saw  the  Father  in  the  Son  they 
hated  Him  ;  and  the  hatred  of  the  generation  to  which  the  revelation  was  made, 
broke  out  in  the  most  damning  crime  in  the  history  of  the  universe.  The  revela- 
tion reproved,  and  by  reproving  maddened  the  sinner.  Only  when  the  grace  with 
which  the  revelation  was  charged  penetrated  the  hard  crust  of  their  natures 
could  men  begin  to  understand  the  counsel  developed  in  our  text.  Every  manifesta- 
tion of  light  at  first  seems  but  to  reveal  darkness.  Every  manifestation  of  God  at 
first  seems  but  to  deepen  and  darken  sin.  The  great  revelation  developed  the  great 
transgression,  and  through  that,  "  grace  has  reigned,  through  righteousness,  unto 
eternal  life,  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Let  us  consider  as  follows : — I.  Grace. 
Grace  is  love  in  a  certain  relation — the  love  of  a  Eedeemer  working  to  its  ends.  It 
represents  the  whole  sum  of  the  forces  by  which  the  love  that  would  redeem  aims 
at  the  accomphshment  of  its  hope.  Its  incarnation  is  Christ.  Christ  is  the  gift 
of  grace.  Grace  is  the  manifestation  and  action  of  that  fatherly  love  which  could 
not  rest  in  its  native  glory  and  blessedness,  while  one  prodigal  was  wandering, 
while  one  tear  was  wept,  one  groan  uttered  in  the  universe,  which  its  suffering  and 
sacrifice  might  spare.  '*  Ye  ^ow  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  but  the  measure  of 
it  One  only  knows.  That  grace  is  the  reigning  conqueror  of  sin.  That  triumphs 
where  law  fails.  II.  The  eelation  between  geacb  and  sin.  1.  Sin  is  the 
condition  of  its  manifestation.  No  sin,  no  grace.  Through  a  lost  world  Christ  is 
to  win  His  most  glorious  Crown.  Grace  and  sin  are  the  twin  antagonists ;  opposed 
as  light  and  darkness.  If  one  reigns  the  other  is  destroyed ;  and  God  suffers  sin 
to  be  born  because  He  knows  that  grace  can  conquer  it.  2.  There  is  a  glory  which 
no  fiat  of  Omnipotence  even  can  create,  which  grace,  by  the  conquest  of  sin,  can 
win  and  wear  through  eternity.  No  sin,  no  grace,  and,  in  the  highest  sense,  no 
glory.  The  joy  of  the  prodigal  come  home,  the  joy  of  the  father  in  his  return ; 
these  are  the  glorious  joys  of  earth,  of  heaven.  HI.  The  belation  between  grace 
AND  EiGHTEousNESS.  Graco  must  reign  through  righteousness,  if  it  reign  at  aU. 
Imputed  righteousness,  some  cry  ;  inherent  righteousness,  others.  Neither  the  ona 
nor  the  other,  I  venture  to  think.  The  apostle  has  a  broader  meaning,  which 
covers  both.  Inherent  righteousness  is  a  vain  show,  if  it  be  not  rooted  in  the  perfect 
righteousness ;  while  imputed  righteousness  is  a  mere  fiction,  if  no  image  of  itself 
be  generated  in  the  soul.  The  broad  principle  here  may  be  thus  expressed  : — 1. 
The  righteous  soul  alone  is  blessed.  To  some,  grace  may  suggest  a  kindly  remission 
of  penalty.  That  wece  feasible  enough  if  a  man's  worse  torment  and  curse  were 
not  himself.  The  problem  to  be  solved  is  within ;  there  the  fountain  of  bitter 
waters  has  to  be  healed.    And  it  is  there  that  grace  reigns  through  righteousness. 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  ▼.' 

An  inward  harmonj,  healing,  quickening  is  its  promise ;  it  presents  to  him  a 
righteousness  which  is  a  man's  righteousness,  and  yet  is  God's ;  a  righteousneaa 
not  awfully,  hopelessly  above  him ;  a  righteousness  which,  while  his  sad  worn 
heart  drinks  in,  the  love  which  streams  from  Calvary  enters  and  enshrines  itself  in 
his  heart.  2.  The  righteousness  which  is  by  grace  has  a  glory  and  blessedness  all 
its  own.  Grace  reigns  through  righteousness ;  it  is  a  joyous,  glorious  reign.  The 
work  of  grace  is  to  shrine  righteousness  in  man's  heart  of  hearts  ;  to  teach  him  not 
to  obey  it  only,  not  to  honour  it  only,  but  to  love  it.  Loving  Christ,  it  is  God'g 
own  righteousness  which  man  loves  and  holds.  Through  love,  he  has  a  joy  in  all 
righteous  thoughts  and  righteous  deeds,  which  is  part  of  his  joy  in  Christ  hia 
Saviour.  IV.  The  complete  and  final  end  of  God.  "  Unto  eternal  life." 
Death  is  simply  isolation.  The  cutting  the  body  off  from  free  communion  with 
its  world.  And  what  is  life  ?  The  opposite  of  isolation.  It  is  the  faculty  of 
communion  with  all  things.  The  soul's  death  is  the  paralysis  of  its  faculty  to 
all  that  a  soul  was  made  to  commune  with,  till  it  becomes  without  truth,  righteous- 
ness, and  holiness,  without  God  and  without  hope,  because  without  life.  The 
soul's  quickening  is  the  rekindling  of  the  energy  of  its  powers,  the  re-occupation 
of  the  glorious  range  of  its  faculty  to  commune  with,  to  possess,  and  to  enjoy 
all  that  God  has  made  a  soul  to  live  for,  all  whereby  a  soul  may  live  eternally. 
The  work  of  grace  is  as  the  baptism  of  a  new  life  for  man.  Conclusion :  ••  Lord, 
are  there  few  that  be  saved  ?  "  The  Lord  gives  no  answer  but  the  text.  This 
we  know,  that  the  end  which  God  foresees  shall  repair  all  the  waste,  and  repay  all 
the  sorrow  with  which  sin  has  filled  the  world.  How  wide,  how  vast,  how  glorious 
this  work  of  overabounding  grace,  which  of  us  may  dare  to  guess  ?  "  But  strive 
thou  to  enter  in  at  the  straight  gate."  The  end  for  which  the  Redeemer  is  waiting, 
the  issue  for  which  heaven  is  hoping,  depend  in  their  measure  upon  you.  You 
can  frustrate,  you  can  forward  the  great  consummation.  (cT".  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.) 
Abounding  sin  and  superabounding  grace: — I.  "Sin  abounds."  This  appears — 1. 
From  its  extensive  prevalence.  It  is  not  a  local  evil,  like  many  natural  evils ;  but 
it  is  an  universal  mischief.  This  the  apostle  has  shown  in  chaps,  i.  and  ii. 
However  men  may  differ  in  their  customs,  wherever  you  go,  sin  reigns.  2.  From 
the  immense  number  of  sins  that  are  constantly  committed.  If  we  include,  as  we 
ought,  our  sins  of  omission,  and  our  sins  of  thought,  who  can  enumerate  his  errors 
(Gen.  vi.  6).  From  the  first  dawn  of  reason,  through  infancy,  childhood,  youth, 
and  riper  years,  even  to  the  end  of  human  life,  we  are  offending  against  God 
(Psa.  xl.  12).  3.  From  the  eagerness  with  which  men  sin.  How  are  our  iniquities 
cultivated  by  art  1  they  become,  as  it  were,  a  trade.  Men  sin  "  as  with  a  cart-rope," 
*•  vrith  both  hands  earnestly,"  and  what  plans  are  formed  for  the  execution  of  it ! 
4.  In  some  seasons  and  places  iniquity  unusually  abounds  ;  and  persons  arrive  at 
a  certain  pitch  of  wickedness,  beyond  which  God  will  not  suffer  them  to  go.  Thus 
it  was  with  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  &c.  5.  Consider  all  the  aboundings  of  sin  in 
the  aggravations  of  it.  Thus,  no  doubt,  Judas,  vrith  the  knowledge  he  possessed, 
was  far  more  criminal  than  Pilate.  Rehgious  education  tends  greatly  to  aggravate 
the  sins  of  those  who  continue  in  them ;  and  when  sins  are  committed  against  the 
special  goodness  and  mercy  of  God,  they  are  also  greatly  aggravated.  6.  Sin  will 
appear  to  abound,  if  you  advert  to  the  calamitous  effects  which  it  has  produced. 
God  would  not  suffer  His  creatures  to  endure  so  much  misery  if  He  were  not  greatly 
displeased  with  their  sins.  The  earth  is  cursed  for  man's  sake.  7.  The  prudence 
of  man  in  framing  human  laws  is  another  proof  of  the  same  truth.  Why  are 
bonds  and  oaths  necessary  in  our  affairs  ?  Why  must  we  have  locks,  and  bolts,  and 
bars,  to  our  habitations  ?  Why  must  we  have  judges  and  magistrates,  prisons  and 
gibbets  ?  The  reason  is,  that  sin  so  much  abounds.  8.  Recollect  also  the  numerous 
and  painful  diseases  which  invade  the  human  frame.  H.  Grace  supebabounds. 
Grace  signifies  "  the  free  favour  of  God  "  towards  sinful  and  undeserving  creatures ; 
and  it  stands  opposed  in  Scripture  to  the  merit  or  wages  of  works  performed 
(Eph.  ii.  8,  9 ;  Rom.  vi.  23).  Grace  abounds — 1.  In  the  whole  business  of  salvation, 
from  first  to  last.  It  originated  in  the  heart  of  God,  who  pitied  us  in  our  low 
estate ;  and  devised  a  plan  of  salvation ;  to  us  perfectly  easy,  to  Himself  highly 
honourable.  It  was  God  who,  unasked,  presented  to  the  world  that  "  unspeakable 
gift."  Grace  is  admirably  displayed  in  the  glorious  person  and  the  perfect  work  of 
the  Son  of  God.  "  Ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  &o."  2.  In  the 
gospel  of  Christ,  which,  on  that  account,  is  itself  called  "The  grace  of  God" 
(Titus  ii.  11,  12).  3.  In  the  free  and  full  justification  of  the  sinner  who  believes 
(1  Tim.  i.  14).    But  it  is  not  only  said  that  "grace  abounds,"  but  that  it  "much 


CHAP.  T.]  ROMANS.  439 

more  abounds."  We  derive  more  frcm  Christ  than  we  lost  in  Adam.  Conclusion : 
1.  Let  ns  diligently  study  the  doctrine  of  grace.  2.  Let  us  be  concerned,  above  all 
things,  to  be  partakers  of  this  grace.  3.  What  a  source  is  here  of  consolation,  even 
for  the  chief  of  sinners.  4.  What  abundant  cause  is  here  for  praise — ardent, 
constant  praise  I  5.  This  subject  furnishes  us  with  a  mighty  incentive  to  holiness. 
(G.  Burder.)  Good  triumphing  over  evil : — In  the  widest  sense  sin  always  implies : 
law;  opportunity  of  knowing  law;  capacity  to  obey  or  transgress  law;  and  an  actual 
deviation  from  law.  The  last  is  the  idea  to  be  attached  to  it  here.  "  Grace  "  means 
the  religion  of  Christ  in  the  heart  as  the  life  of  heavenly  love  ;  and  the  system  of 
Christ  in  the  world  as  a  system  of  Divine  mercy.  I  attach  the  latter  idea  to  it 
here.  I.  In  this  chapter  there  are  several  things  stated  about  sin  and  grace. 
1.  That  they  are  actually  in  our  world.  Sin  is  a  dark  fact  everywhere  seen — a  force 
turning  men  in  the  wrong  direction.  Grace  is  here  too,  as  a  corrective  and  restoring 
force.  Human  actions  here  result  from  two  opposite  principles.  You  cannot  trace 
all  history  to  sin,  nor  can  you  trace  all  to  grace.  In  both  you  find  a  solution  of  all 
its  phenomena.  It  is  a  fact  that  sin  is  in  this  world — sin  is  not  in  heaven.  It  is  a 
fact  that  grace  is  in  this  world — grace  is  not  in  hell.  2.  That  they  come  into  our 
world  through  the  agency  of  man.  Sin  came  by  Adam ;  grace  by  the  "  second 
Adam."  There  was  a  time  when  sin  was  not.  All  was  holy.  There  was  a  time 
when  there  was  no  grace — the  world  needed  none.  3.  That  they  exercise  an 
immense  influence  upon  the  race.  (1)  The  sin  of  Adam  made  "many  sinners," 
the  grace  of  Christ  made  "  many  righteous."  (2)  The  sin  of  Adam  brought  con- 
demnation upon  the  race ;  the  grace  of  Christ  has  brought  justification  to  many. 
(3)  The  sin  of  Adam  leads  to  death ;  the  grace  of  Christ  to  "  eternal  life."  (4)  The 
influence  of  grace  far  transcends  that  of  sin.  II.  Where  sin  arounded,  grace  did 
AND  wiLii  MUCH  MORE  ABOUND.  1.  In  relation  to  the  individual.  Take  the  case  of 
one  of  the  most  corrupt  sons  of  Adam,  a  Manasseh,  or  a  Sanl ;  and  if  grace  take 
possession  of    his  mind,  you  may  say  grace  will  "much  more  abound"  tliere. 

(1)  The  influence  of  grace  there  will  be  of  a  higber  kind,  (a)  Life-giving.  Any- 
thing can  destroy,  (b)  Justifying.  One  sin  condemns.  (2)  The  influence  of  grace 
there  will  be  of  a  mightier  kind.  Sin  can  never  attain  a  mastery  over  every  part 
of  human  nature.  It  can  never  carry  with  it  the  conscience.  The  conscience  will 
be  ever  against  it.  But  grace  carries  with  it  conscience.  Take  Paul  as  an  illustra- 
tion. 2.  In  relation  to  the  aggregate  race.  It  mnst  be  confessed  that  up  to  the 
present  moment  sin  has  had  the  sway.  But  consider — that  it  is  highly  probable  that 
the  generations  of  those  that  have  appeared  on  earth,  will  be  far  out-numbered  by 
those  that  are  yet  to  come.  The  following  things  suggest  this.  (1)  The  gradual 
method   of    God's  procedure— creation,  civilisation,  redemption,  are  all  gradual. 

(2)  The  state  of  past  generations.  (3)  The  representations  of  Scripture.  (4)  The 
omnipotenoy  that  is  on  the  side  of  grace.     3.  Throughout  the  universe  of  God. 

(1)  It  will  spread  new  and  brighter  views  of  God's  character  through  the  universe. 

(2)  Enhance  the  moral  force  that  binds  to  holiness  in  the  universe.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  Grace  abounding  : — During  the  Indian  mutiny,  a  number  of  British 
soldiers  with  their  wives  and  children  were  besieged  in  Lucknow  by  thirty  thousand 
rebels  under  Nana  Sahib.  The  food  and  ammunition  were  nearly  exhausted. 
General  Havelock  was  their  only  hope,  but  he  had  to  march  through  fifty  miles  of 
the  enemy's  country  in  order  to  reach  them.  Death  stared  upon  them  on  every 
hand.  Jessie  Brown,  the  wife  of  a  Scotch  corporal,  lay  on  the  ground  weak  and 
famishing;  but  suddenly  she  sprang  up,  and  cried,  "Hark!  there  is  the  Scotch 
battle-cry ;  thank  God  1  "  No  one  heard  that  cry  but  Jessie  Brown,  and  many  of 
the  garrison  thought  she  was  suffering  from  brain  fever.  In  a  short  time,  she 
again  cried,  "  Hear  it  now,  then ;  the  Campbells  are  coming !  "  They  listened, 
and  at  last  the  shrill  music  of  the  bagpipes  fell  on  their  ears.  The  whole  garrison 
fell  on  tl  eif  faces  before  God,  and  never  before  was  there  such  a  thanksgiving 
service  in  Lacknow.  Ere  long,  the  plumes  of  the  Scotchmen  were  seen  playing  in 
the  breeze,  Havelock  and  Outram  reached  the  city  gates,  their  gallant  heroes 
marched  in  to  res<^np  heir  countrymen,  and  in  less  than  ten  minutes  Lucknow  was 
a-ring  with  HaUelujahs.  But,  friends,  what  was  the  relief  of  Lucknow  compared 
with  the  relief  of  humanity  ?  Nothing,  and  less  than  nothing.  We  were  rescued, 
not  from  Lucknow,  but  from  the  city  of  condemnation.  We  were  rescued,  not  by 
Havelock,  but  by  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God.  We  were  rescued,  not  from  the 
fangs  cf  Nana  Sahib  and  his  monsters,  but  from  the  fangs  of  Satan  and  his  black 
phalanx.  We  were  rescued,  not  from  physical  bondage,  bnt  from  the  most  terrible 
ioul  bondage.    The  ancient  prophets,  like  the  Scotchwoman  in  Lucknow,  testified 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [OBAf.  T. 

that  they  could  hear  the  approaching  footsteps  of  a  Deliverer,  but  the  world  wsia 
slow  to  believe  them.  "  These  poor  prophets  have  fevered  brains — they  are 
deceived  by  hallucinations,"  said  the  silly  world.  But  when  every  star  of  hope  was 
about  to  die — Hark !  the  sound  of  music  was  heard  from  afar.  Whence  did  the 
sound  proceed?  It  was  the  music  of  angel-choristers  over  the  fair  fields  of 
Ephratah.  And  one  night,  the  great  Deliverer  reached  our  world,  He  broke  the 
iron  band  of  the  besiegers.  He  opened  the  massive  gates,  and  He  re-opened  the  way 
from  the  city  of  condemnation  to  the  city  of  eternal  glory.  Let  us  fall  on  our  faces, 
like  the  garrison  of  Lucknow  before  us,  to  thank  God  for  His  wondrous  grace. 
"  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more  abound."  (J.  Ossian  Davies.)  The 
reign  of  grace : — The  righteous  Lord  sits  upon  that  throne,  but  His  face  has  no 
frown  upon  it — His  voice  has  no  terror  in  it.  On  whatever  part  of  that  throne  you 
cast  your  eye,  you  see  it  inscribed  with  grace  in  all  its  variety  of  application  to  your 
circumstances.  There  is  grace  to  blot  out  your  trespasses,  though  they  be  "  red 
like  crimson."  There  is  grace  to  purify  your  hearts,  though  they  be  full  of  all 
uncleanness.  There  is  grace  to  subdue  your  enemies,  though  they  "  come  upon  you 
as  a  flood."  There  is  grace  to  console  you  amidst  all  your  sorrows,  though  they  be 
great,  and  multiplied,  and  protracted.  Tiiere  is  grace  to  guide  you  through  life,  to 
cheer  you  at  death,  and  to  carry  you  to  heaven ;  and  as  surely  as  God  sits  upon 
that  throne  of  grace,  so  surely  will  He  listen  to  the  prayers  that  you  proffer  at  His 
footstool,  and  uphold  the  character  which  He  Himself  has  enstamped  upon  it,  by 
freely  tendering  and  imparting  to  you  whatsoever  you  ask  in  sincerity  and  faith. 
(A.  Thomson,  D.D.)  That  as  sin  hath  reigned  unto  death,  even  so  might  grace 
reign. — Observe — I.  How  the  apostle  collects  in  one  picture  the  subjects  of  his 
ABODMENT.  1.  Siu.  2.  Death.  3.  Grace.  4.  Righteousness.  5.  Life.  II.  How 
HB  OB0UP8  THEM.  1.  Grace  exalted  in  the  midst.  2.  Sin  and  death  hath  conquered 
foes  on  the  left.  3.  Righteousness  and  life,  the  trophies  of  victory,  on  the  right. 
IIL  How  the  name  of  Asau  is  forgotten  and  buried,  but  the  name  of  Jesus  shall 
flourish  for  ever.  (<7.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  reign  of  sin  and  of  grace: — I.  Thb 
REIGN  OF  sm.  1.  Its  origin.  2.  Extent.  3.  Terror.  4.  Consummation  in  death. 
II.  The  reign  of  grace.  1.  Its  nature.  2.  Means.  3.  Consummation  in  eternal 
life.  (Ibid.)  The  reign  of  sin  and  of  grace  : — I.  Sin's  reign  is — 1.  An  usurpa- 
tion— God  is  the  only  rightful  ruler.  2.  Rebellion — opposition  to  God  and  His 
authority.  3.  Unnatural — contrary  to  men's  better  judgment  and  sense  of  right. 
4.  Despotic — compelling  men  even  unwillingly  to  obey  it.  5.  Tyrannical  and 
oppressive — the  source  of  present  suffering.  6.  Cruel  and  destructive — ends  in 
eternal  death.  7.  Deceitful  and  seductive — promises  ease  and  gratification. 
8.  Resistless — all  human  attempts  to  terminate  it  in  vain.  9.  Powerfully  supported 
—justice  and  a  broken  law  its  strength  (1  Cor.  xv.  66).  II.  The  beign  of  grace. 
1.  Grace  exercises  a  power  corresponding  with  that  of  sin.  (1)  Mighty,  (2)  Exten- 
sive. (3)  Supported  by  law.  2.  It  not  merely  acts,  but  reigns.  (1)  In  the  world 
therefore,  men  are  salvable.  (2)  In  each  beUever,  therefore,  a  believer  is  actually 
saved.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Reigning  grace :— Consider — I.  Grace  in  its 
BBiONiNO  ACTS.  1.  Come  with  me  to  the  valley  of  vision.  See,  strewn  there,  the 
dried  bones  of  the  house  of  Israel.  0  death  1  we  come  this  day  to  see  thee  cast 
from  thy  throne.  But  who  shall  do  it  ?  Come  forth,  ye  ministers  of  Christ,  and 
see  what  ye  can  do.  Here  are  souls  spiritually  dead.  Behold,  Chrysostom  speaks, 
and  now  Whitfield,  Esaias,  Jeremy,  Ezekiel,  Daniel.  Alas!  eloquence,  and  wisdom, 
aiid_  zeal,  cannot  wake  the  soul  of  the  spiritually  dead.  But  hearken,  the  voice 
i^ivine  exclaims,  "  Grace,  arise  and  quicken  these  dead  souls,"  and  behold,  grace 
tands  before  you  in  the  form  of  incarnate  God,  and  I  hear  Him  say,  "  Thus  saith 
he  Lord,  ye  dry  bones  live."  It  is  done,  and  in  the  place  of  a  charnel-house  now 
4and8  a  great  host  full  of  life,  and  who  shall  soon  be  clothed  with  glory.  "  Grace 
-eigns  unto  eternal  life."  2.  Behold  another  scene.  The  man  is  alive;  but  no 
sooner  is  he  quickened  than  he  feels  the  terrible  bondage  of  sin.  He  has  been  a 
Irunkard,  a  swearer,  and  all  else  that  is  vile;  but  now  he  feels  that  this  mode  of 
Ufewill  surely  end  in  eternal  death,  and  he  therefore  longs  to  escape.  But  see  how 
he  IB  bound  with  chains,  and  held  in  bondage  by  seven  devils.  Ye  who  understand 
how  to  reform  mankind,  come  and  ply  your  arts  upon  him  and  see  what  ye  can  do. 
But  grace  speaks  the  word,  and  says,  "Get thee  hence,  Satan,  let  the  man  be  free"; 
and  free  he  is,  no  more  to  be  a  slave.  Now  he  hates  the  things  which  once  he 
loved.  His  nature  is  changed.  Grace  reigns  unto  eternal  life.  3.  Come  with  me 
A*  ?''!*'.*"*^'^  scene.  There  in  the  prison-house  of  conviction  sits  a  miseifable  wretch. 
Ask  him  why,  and  his  answer  is,  "  I  have  sinned ;  within  me  there  is  an  aoousin^ 


OBAP.  v.]  ROMANS.  441 

eonsoienoe,  the  foretaste  of  the  wrath  to  come."  Come,  ye  sons  of  mirth,  and  see 
what  ye  can  do  for  this  poor  prisoner.  Come,  ye  that  are  masters  of  the  art  of 
consolation,  see  what  ye  can  do.  In  vain  even  the  minister  himself,  knowing  the 
blessings  of  the  gospel,  sets  Lefore  the  man  the  riches  of  Christ's  love.  But  now 
grace  comes  bearing  in  his  hand  the  Cross,  crying,  "  Look  hither,"  and  when  the 
prisoner  lifts  his  eyes  he  sees  a  Saviour  bleeding  on  the  tree,  and  in  a  moment  a 
smile  takes  the  place  of  his  sorrow.  "  Rise,"  saith  grace,  "  thou  art  free ;  shake 
thyself  from  the  dust."  Oh  I  grace  Divine,  thou  art  indeed  triumphant,  where 
despair  itf elf  had  triumphed.  4.  And  now  the  sinner,  set  free  both  from  the  chains 
of  his  old  lusts  and  of  his  old  despairings,  journeys  to  the  palace  of  justice,  and 
there,  enthroned  on  light,  he  beholds  a  glorious  King.  He  trembles ;  when  lo, 
reigning  grace  who  sits  smiling  upon  a  throne  of  love,  stretcheth  out  its  sceptre  and 
says,  "  Live,  live."  At  that  sound  the  sinner  revives ;  he  looks  up,  and  ere  he  has 
fully  seen  the  wondrous  vision,  he  hears  another  voice — "  Thy  sins  which  are  many 
are  all  forgiven  thee."  And  now  the  sinner,  bowing  low  before  the  throne  of  mHrcy, 
begins  to  kiss  its  feet  with  rapture,  and  mercy  cries,  "  Go  and  rpjoioe,  for  thou  art 
my  son  who  was  lost,  but  art  found;  who  was  dead,  but  is  alive  again."  5.  The 
man  his  now  become  a  forgiven  one — a  saint ;  but  grace  has  not  ceased  to  reign, 
nor  has  he  ceased  to  need  its  reign.  'Tis  after  sin  is  forgiven  that  the  battle  begma. 
There  has  never  such  a  fight  been  seen  on  earth  as  that  man  must  wage  who  hopes 
to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Young  Christian,  dost  thou  tremble? 
Remember  Elijah  and  his  servant.  "  More  are  they  that  are  for  us  than  all  they 
that  be  against  us."  The  soldier  of  Christ  shall  stand,  for  underneath  him  are  the 
everlasting  arms ;  he  shall  tread  upon  his  enemies  and  shall  destroy  them.  6.  The 
man,  being  kept  in  temptation,  has  a  work  to  do  for  his  Lord,  and  there  is  no  case 
where  grace  reigns  more  powerfully  than  in  the  use  which  God  makes  of  such  infirm 
creatures  as  His  servants  are.  Do  you  see  Peter  afraid  of  a  little  maid  ?  Wait 
awhile.  Some  six  or  seven  weeks  have  passed,  and  there  is  a  great  crowd  in  the 
streets.  Who  is  to  preach  to  them  ?  Grace — to  thine  honour  let  it  be  told — thou 
didst  not  select  John  who  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross,  nor  Zelotes — no,  Peter 
who  denied  his  Master,  must  come  forth  to  own  Him  afresh.  Perhaps  his  heart 
whispers  to  him,  "  Simon,  8(m  of  Jonas,  what  doest  thou  here?  "  The  cock  crows, 
Simon ;  what  doest  thou  here  ?  But  that  day,  three  thousand  baptisms  tell  how 
grace  can  reign  in  the  feeblest  instrumentality.  7.  Come  to  another  spot,  and  see 
how  grace  can  reign  where  you  little  think  it  would  ever  live  at  all.  The  sea 
is  agitated  with  a  great  storm,  and  Jonah  has  just  been  thrown  into  the  sea.  A 
fish  has  swallowed  him  ;  and  yet  he  lives.  Grace  is  there  preserving  his  life ;  she 
speaks  to  Leviathan—  he  comes  up  upon  the  dry  land,  and  vomits  forth  the  prophet. 
Have  you  ever  been  in  a  strait  and  a  trouble  so  difficult  that  you  imagined  there 
was  no  deliverance?  If  you  ever  have,  I  turn  you  to  your  own  history  as  an 
illustration  of  how  grace  can  reign  in  redeeming  you  out  of  the  most  terrible  trials. 
I  shall  need  to  give  you  but  one  other  picture,  grace  reigning  in  the  hour  of  death, 
and  triumphing  in  the  moment  of  our  entrance  into  heaven.  When  you  come  to 
die,  grace  shall  bear  you  up  in  the  midst  of  Jordan,  and  you  shall  say,  "  I  feel  the 
bottom,  and  it  is  good."  When  the  cold  waters  shall  chill  your  blood,  grace  shall 
warm  your  heart.  When  the  light  of  earth  is  being  shut  out  from  you  for  ever, 
grace  shall  lift  the  curtains  of  heaven,  and  give  you  visions  of  eternity ;  and  when 
at  last  the  spirit  leaps  from  time  into  eternal  space,  then  grace  shall  be  with  you  to 
conduct  you  to  your  Father's  house.  II.  Grice  sitting  on  its  throne.  1.  The 
throne  is  placed  on  the  eternal  hills  of  God's  immutable  purpose  and  decree.  The 
throne  itself,  standing  upon  those  lofty  hills,  has  for  its  pedestal  Divine  fidelity. 
The  thrones  of  monarchs  rock  and  reel,  but  this  is  settled  and  abideth  for  ever. 
The  throne  of  many  a  dynasty  has  been  cemented  bv  blood,  and  so  is  this,  but  with 
the  precious  blood  of  the  Son  of  God.  Nay,  as  if  this  did  not  suffice,  this  throne 
is  settled  by  the  eternal  oath.  God  swears  by  Himself  because  He  can  swear  by  no 
greater,  that  by  two  immutable  things  wherein  it  was  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  we 
might  have  strong  consolation  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  Christ.  2.  And  now  look 
upward.  The  steps  are  the  Divine  openings  of  Providence  as  He  gradually  develops 
His  mighty  scheme.  And  see  on  either  side  two  lions  ready  to  guard  and  protect 
it.  That  very  justice  which  once  seemed  to  stand  in  the  way  of  grace  is  one  of  the 
lions  which  guard  the  throne;  and  that  very  holiness  which  seemed  once  to  put  a 
barrier  between  thy  soul  and  bliss,  now  stands  there  as  a  mighty  one  to  guard  the 
throne  of  sovereign  grace.  3.  Now  look  upward.  I  see  upon  that  throne  a  Lamb 
that  has  been  slain.     The  eyes  of  grace  are  the  suns  of  the  spiritual  universe ;  the 


44t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0HA».  T. 

bands  of  grace  scatter  lavish  bounties  throughout  all  the  Church  of  the  firstborn. 
4.  See  above  the  throne,  and  above  Him  that  sits  thereon,  the  crown.  Was  ever 
such  a  crown  ?  Nay,  'tis  not  one,  'tis  many ;  there  are  many  crowns  and  many 
jewels  in  each  of  the  many  crowns.  And  whence  came  these  crowns  of  grace  ? 
They  have  been  won  in  fields  of  fight,  and  been  given  by  grateful  hearts.  {C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Life  instead  of  death : — Sometimes  the  condition  of  a  Churcn  and 
community  is  like  that  of  famine-stricken  Leyden,  when  it  was  besieged  by  Philip's 
popish  army.  Within  the  beleaguered  town  death  reigned.  Its  brave  defenders 
were  starving  by  thousands.  Succour  was  waiting  for  them  in  the  Dutch  fieet, 
which  could  not  reach  the  city.  But  the  heroic  Hollanders  sluiced  the  dykes  and 
let  in  the  sea,  and  as  the  rescuing  fleet  swept  in,  they  flung  the  loaves  of  bread  to 
the  overjoyed  crowds  which  thronged  the  canals  of  Leyden.  Then  pouring  into  the 
great  Protestant  cathedral,  they  made  its  arches  ring  with  thanksgiving  unto  God^ 
their  Deliverer.  Brethren,  let  as  sluice  the  dykes  of  pride,  and  selfishness,  and 
unbelief.  The  waters  of  salvation  will  flow  in.  Where  death  reigned  life  shall 
enter.  (T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. — I.  Jksus.  Hoshea  is,  in 
Hebrew,  a  *'  Saviour."  To  this  word  the  Jews  added  the  first  syllable  of  the  name 
Jehovah,  making  the  whole  Jehoshua,  or  Joshua,  or,  in  its  Greek  form,  Jesus ;  and 
by  this  addition  the  name  came  to  mean  a  Saviour  appointed,  given,  sent  by  God. 
1.  Now  what  does  Jesus  save  us  from?  (1)  From  hell.  Now  "hell"  ia  chiefly 
the  condition  of  those  who  have  come  to  hate  God.  It  is  not  merely  a  place — 
though,  no  doubt,  all  bad  people  meet  together  at  last  in  one  particular  locality ; 
but  it  is  more  especially  a  condition  of  heart  and  mind.  "  But,"  you  say,  "  who  is 
it  that  hates  God  ?  "  Let  us  consider.  Christ  is  the  representative  and  exact 
likeness  of  God.  Now,  when  He  was  on  earth,  He  went  about  doing  good.  But 
for  all  that  did  men,  as  a  rule,  like  Him  ?  No  I  and  in  hating  Christ,  they  hated 
God.  It  is  possible  then  to  come  into  that  most  terrible  condition  of  hating  God. 
But  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  saves  us  from  such  a  fate,  for  He  wins  our  hearts  for 
God,  and  makes  us  love  what  God  loves,  and  hate  what  God  hates.  (2)  From  sin. 
Picture  to  yourselves  a  boy  who  has  broken  one  of  his  father's  oonmiands,  and  is 
expecting  to  be  severely  punished.  Suppose  the  boy  to  say,  •'  All  that  I  care  about 
is  to  escape  the  punishment.  I  don't  mind  grieving  my  father  nor  setting  a  bad 
example."  Tou  would  not  have  a  very  high  opinion  of  such  a  boy.  A  good  son 
would  be  grieved  at  having  done  wrong,  and  would  desire  to  be  kept  from  doing 
wrong  again.  And  so  it  is  with  the  Christian.  He  is  chiefly  anxious  about  being 
kept  from  sinning.  (3)  From  death.  Though  death  triumphs  for  a  time,  Jesus  at 
last  wrests  the  prey  from  his  grasp,  by  raising  the  dead  out  of  their  graves.  2.  Con- 
sider what  it  cost  Jesus  to  become  the  Saviour.  I  have  heard  of  a  soldier  who  saw 
that  an  arrow  was  being  aimed  at  the  heart  of  his  friend,  and  that  his  friend  could 
be  saved  only  if  he  threw  himself  in  the  way.  Well,  he  did  throw  himself  in  the 
way;  he  shielded  his  friend — but  it  was  at  the  cost  of  his  own  hfe.  It  was 
necessary  that  Jesus,  in  order  to  become  the  Saviour  of  His  people,  should  interpose 
Himself  between  them  and  their  danger ;  should  receive  the  shaft  in  His  own 
breast ;  and  die  that  they  might  live.  3.  Jesus  is  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost." 
You  may  have  all  the  will  to  help  your  neighbour,  and  yet  not  have  the  power.  A 
man  once  caught  another  who  was  falling  over  a  precipice,  and  held  him ;  but  he 
was  not  strong  enough  to  hold  him  long,  so  at  last  he  was  obliged  to  let  go,  and  the 
other  was  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  rocks  below.  He  had  the  will ;  he  had  not  the 
power.  But  Christ  has  both.  He  is  "  mighty  to  save  " ;  and  you  may  be  sure  that 
He  can  save  you,  if  only  you  will  let  Him.  II.  Christ.  "  Jesus  "  refers  to  the 
person,  "  Christ "  to  the  office.  Christ  is  the  Greek  word  for  "  Messiah,"  and  means 
anointed.  In  the  old  days  prophets,  priests,  and  kings  were  anointed  for  the 
purpose  of  showing  that  they  were  set  apart  for  a  particular  office,  and  that  God 
would  give  them  fitness  for  it.  1.  Now,  Jesus  is  our  Prophet.  A  prophet  is  one 
who  not  merely  foretells  future  things,  but  one  who  forth-tells,  i.e.,  explains  to  man 
what  God  and  the  will  of  God  are.  Jesus  does  this  partly  by  His  word,  partly  by 
Himself.  Jesus  is  a  perfect  likeness  of  His  Father.  Have  you  ever  stamped  a 
seal  upon  hot  wax  ?  You  know  how  the  seal  and  the  impression  exactly  correspond. 
So  Jesus  and  God  exactly  correspond.  2.  Priest.  In  Jewish  times  the  High  Priest 
stood  in  the  place  of  the  whole  people.  Now  these  priests  were  the  types  or 
shadows  of  the  great  High  Priest  who  was  coming ;  and  when  Jesus  had  accom- 
plished His  work  and  entered  into  heaven,  there  ever  to  make  intercession  for  us, 
their  office  was  done  away  with — they  were  no  longer  wanted.  So  now  there  is  n» 
one  to  stand  between  as  and  God,  but  Christ  Himself.     Nor  do  we  want  any  one 


CHAP.  TL]  ROMANS.  44t 

else.  He  is  sufScient.  3.  King,  not  only  of  His  people,  but  also  of  the  whole 
world.  And  Jesus  obtained  His  kingdon  by  His  obedience  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  Cross.  He  had  to  carry  the  Cross  before  He  received  the  crown. 
Time  is  given  to  people  to  obey,  but  if  they  persist  in  refusing  to  accept  Hia 
authority,  a  terrible  punishment  is  in  store  for  them  (Psa.  ii.).  III.  Our  Lord. 
The  world  says,  "  We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us" :  but  Christians  say, 
"  We  are  glad  and  thankful  to  obey  His  rule."  Now,  why  do  Christians  say  this? 
Because — 1.  He  is  what  He  is.  Men  are  proud  to  serve  a  great  monarch ;  the  more 
BO  if  he  is  a  good  man.  But  what  must  it  be  to  Rerve  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords?  and  not  only  to  serve  Him,  but  to  be  admitted  to  His  friendship?  2.  He 
has  done  so  much  for  them,  and  they  love  Him.  Some  years  ago  a  poor  black 
woman  was  put  up  for  auction  at  a  slave-market.  She  was  very  much  afraid  of 
being  given  over  into  the  hands  of  some  cruel  master,  when  a  good  man  who  was 
passing  by,  and  who  bated  slavery  with  all  his  heart,  happened  to  hear  her  sad 
story,  and  purchased  her  himself.  But  as  soon  as  he  had  purchased  her  he  set  her 
free.  The  woman  had  not  expected  this,  and  she  was  transported  with  joy,  but  she 
could  not  be  persuaded  to  leave  her  benefactor.  For  she  said,  "  He  redeemed  me ! 
he  redeemed  me ! "  And  after  she  had  served  him  faithfully  for  many  years,  still, 
when  she  was  spoken  to  about  her  loving  service,  she  could  only  give  as  the 
explanation  of  it,  "  He  redeemed  me !  he  redeemed  me  I  "  Because  Christ  redeemed 
US  with  His  blood,  we  are  delighted  to  be  allowed  to  enter  His  service,  and  work  for 
Him.  "  We  love  Elim,  because  He  first  loved  us."  3.  The  service  of  Christ  is  true 
happiness.  I  never  yet  found  a  truly  happy  man  who  was  not  a  real  Christian. 
Gay,  jovial,  laughing,  joking  people,  who  were  not  Christians,  I  have  met  with  in 
abundance;  but  I  have  lived  long  enough  to  know  that  an  uneasy  and  restless 
heart  maj  lie  onder  a  bright  face.    (G.  Calthrop,  M.A.) 


CHAPTEE  "VL 

Vbbs.  1-6^.  V;hal.^a]l  ve  say  then  ?  Shall  we  continue  In  tin,  that  grace  may 
abound  1'-zOT(^ce  and  sift^ — 1.  This  question  was  prompted  by  a  sentence,  the  very 
cadence  otrdrich^emea  to  be  still  alive  in  the  apostle's  memory  (chap.  v.  20).  It 
is  well  to  trace  the  continuity  of  Scripture — to  read  the  letter  of  an  inspired  writer 
as  you  would  read  any  other,  as  an  entire  composition,  through  which  there  possibly 
runs  the  drift  of  one  prevailing  conception.  2.  The  tenure  upon  which  eternal  life  is 
given,  and  upon  which  it  is  held  under  the  economy  of  the  gospel,  Paul  makes 
abundantly  manifest  by  such  phrases  as  •«  grace,"  and  "  free  grace,"  and  "  justifi- 
cation of  faith  and  not  of  works,"  and  the  "  gift  of  righteousness  "  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  "  receiving  of  the  atonement "  on  the  other.  And  yet  the  apostle, 
warm  from  the  delivery  of  these  intimations,  and  within  a  single  breath  of  having 
uttered  that  where  there  was  abundance  of  guilt  there  was  a  superabundance  of 
grace  in  store  for  it — when  met  by  the  question  of  What  then  ?  shall  we  do  more  of 
this  sin,  that  we  may  draw  more  of  this  grace?  on  his  simple  authority  as  a 
messenger  from  God  he  enters  his  solemn  caveat  against  the  continuance  of  sin. 
Lavish  as  the  gospel  is  of  its  forgiveness  for  the  past,  it  has  no  toleration  either 
for  the  purposes  or  for  the  practices  of  sin  in  the  future.  Couple  these  two  verses, 
and  learn  from  the  simple  change  of  tense  two  of  the  most  important  lessons  of 
Christianity.  With  the  first  of  these  verses  we  feel  ourselves  warranted  to  offer 
the  fullest  indemnity  to  the  worst  and  most  worthless.  Your  sin  has  abounded ; 
but  the  grace  of  God  has  much  more  abounded.  No  sin  is  beyond  the  reach  of  the 
atonement — no  guilt  of  so  deep  a  dye  that  the  blood  of  a  crucified  Saviour  cannot 
wash  away.  But  the  sinner  should  also  look  forward,  and  forget  not  that  the  same 
gospel  which  sheds  an  oblivion  over  aU  the  sinfulness  of  the  past,  enters  upon  a  war 
of  extermination  against  future  sinfulness.  3.  The  term  "  dead,"  in  the  phrase 
"  dead  unto  sin,"  may  be  understood  forensically.  We  are  dead  in  law.  The  doom 
of  death  was  upon  us  on  account  of  sin.  Conceive  that  just  as  under  a  civil 
government  a  criminal  is  often  put  to  death  for  the  vindication  of  its  authority  and 
for  the  removal  of  a  nuisance  from  society,  so,  under  the  jurisprudence  of  Heaven, 
an  utter  extinction  of  being  was  laid  upon  the  sinner.  Imagine  that  the  sentence 
is  executed — that  by  an  act  of  extermination  the  transgressor  is  expunged  from 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

God's  animated  creation.  There  could  be  no  misanderstanding  of  the  phrase  if  joa 
were  to  say  that  he  was  dead  unto  or  dead  for  sin.  But  suppose  God  to  have 
devised  a  way  of  reanimating  the  creature  who  had  undergone  this  infliction,  the 
phrase  might  still  adhere  to  him,  though  now  alive  from  the  dead.  And  in  these 
circumstances,  id  it  for  us  to  continue  in  sin — we  who  for  sin  were  consigned  to 
annihilation,  and  have  only  by  the  kindness  of  a  Saviour  been  rescued  from  it? 
Now  the  argument  retains  its  entireness,  though  the  Mediator  should  interfere  with 
His  equivalent  ere  the  penalty  of  death  has  been  inflicted.  We  were  as  good  as 
dead,  for  the  sentence  had  gone  forth,  when  Christ  stepped  between,  and,  suffering 
it  to  light  upon  Himself,  carried  it  away.  Does  not  the  God  who  loved  righteous- 
ness and  hated  iniquity  six  thousand  years  ago,  bear  the  same  love  to 
righteousness  and  the  same  hatred  to  iniquity  still?  And  well  may  not  the 
sinner  say — Shall  I  again  attempt  the  incompatible  alliance  of  an  approving 
in  God  and  a  persevering  sinner;  or  again  try  the  Spirit  of  that  Being  who, 
the  whole  process  of  my  condemnation  and  my  rescue,  has  given  such  proof  of 
most  sensitive  and  unspotted  holiness  ?  Through  Jesus  Christ,  we  come  again 
unto  the  heavenly  Jerusalem ;  and  it  is  as  fresh  as  ever  in  the  verdure  of  a  perpetual 
holiness.  How  shall  we  who  were  found  unfit  for  residence  in  this  place  because  of 
sin,  continue  in  sin  after  our  readmittance  therein  1  4.  But  while  we  have  thus 
insisted  on  the  forensic  interpretation  of  the  phrase,  yet  let  us  not  forbear  to  urge 
the  personal  sense  of  it,  as  implying  such  a  deadness  of  affection  to  sin,  such  an 
extinction  of  the  old  sensibility  to  its  allurements  and  its  pleasures,  as  that  it  has 
ceased  from  its  wonted  power  of  ascendency  over  the  heart  and  character  of  him 
who  was  formerly  its  slave.  So  the  apostle  (vers.  5,  6)  goes  on  to  show  that  we  are 
planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  His  death.  He  is  now  that  immortal  Vine,  who 
stands  for  ever  secure  and  beyond  the  reach  of  any  devouring  blight  from  the  now 
appeased  enemy  ;  and  we  who  by  faith  are  united  with  Him  as  so  many  branches, 
share  in  this  blessed  exemption  along  with  Him.  And  as  we  thus  share  in  Hia 
death,  so  also  shall  we  share  in  His  resurrection.  By  what  He  hath  done  in  oar 
stead.  He  hath  not  only  been  highly  exalted  in  His  own  person ;  but  He  hath 
made  us  partakers  of  His  exaltation,  to  the  rewards  of  which  we  shall  be  promoted 
as  if  we  had  rendered  the  obedience  ourselves.  This  tallies  with  another  part  of  the 
Bible,  where  it  is  said  that  Christ  gave  Himself  up  for  us,  that  He  might  redeem  us 
from  all  iniquity  and  purify  us  unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people  zealous  of  good 
works.  5.  Now  how  comes  it  that  because  we  are  partakers  in  the  crucifixion  of 
Christ,  so  that  the  law  has  no  further  severity  to  discharge  upon  us,  that  this 
should  have  any  effect  in  destroying  the  body  of  sin,  or  in  emancipating  us  from 
the  service  of  sin  ?  How  is  it  that  the  fact  of  our  being  acquitted  leads  to  the  fact 
of  our  being  sanctified?  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Spirit  of  God  both 
originates  and  carries  forward  the  whole  of  this  process.  He  gives  the  faith  which 
makes  Christ's  death  as  available  for  our  deliverance  from  guilt ;  and  He  causes 
the  faith  to  germinate  all  those  moral  and  spiritual  influences  which  bring  about 
the  personal  transformation  that  we  are  inquiring  of.  But  these  He  does,  in  a  way 
that  is  agreeable  to  the  principles  of  our  rational  nature ;  and  one  way  is  through 
the  expulsive  power  of  a  new  affection  to  dispossess  an  old  one  from  the  heart. 
You  cannot  destroy  your  love  of  sin  by  a  simple  act  of  extermination.  You  cannot 
thus  bid  away  from  your  bosom  one  of  its  dearest  and  oldest  favourites.  Our  moral 
nature  abhors  the  vacuum  that  would  thus  be  formed.  But  let  a  man  by  faith 
look  upon  himself  as  crucified  with  Christ,  and  the  world  is  disarmed  of  its  power 
of  sinful  temptation.  He  no  longer  minds  earthly  things,  just  because  better  things 
are  now  within  his  reach,  and  "  our  conversation  is  in  heaven — whence  we  also 
look  for  the  Saviour  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  And  this  is  in  perfect  analogy  with 
familiar  exhibitions  of  our  nature  in  ordinary  affairs.  Let  us  just  conceive  a  man 
embarked,  with  earnest  ambition,  on  some  retail  business,  whose  mind  is  wholly 
taken  up  with  the  petty  fluctuations  tiiat  are  taking  p'aoe  in  prices  and  profits 
and  customers  ;  but  who  nevertheless  is  regaled  by  the  annual  examination  of 
particulars  at  the  end  of  it,  with  the  view  of  some  snug  addition  to  his  old  acoa> 
mulations.  You  must  see  how  impossible  it  were  to  detach  his  affections  from  the 
objects  and  the  interests  of  this  his  favourite  course  by  a  simple  demonstration  of 
their  vanity.  But  suppose  that  either  some  splendid  property  or  some  sublime 
walk  of  high  and  hopeful  adventure  were  placed  within  his  attainment,  and  the 
visions  of  a  far  more  glorious  afiBuence  were  to  pour  a  light  into  his  mind,  which 
greatly  overpassed  and  so  eclipsed  all  the  fairness  of  those  homeher  prospects  that 
he  was  wont  to  indulge  in — is  it  not  clear  that  the  old  affection  which  he  could  never 


CHAP.  VI.]  ROMANS.  445 


foregoing  chapters  are  a  proof 
gospel— that  the  only  way  in  which  we  can  be  pardoned  is  through  our  trusting 
exclasively,  not  to  what  we  have  ourselves  done,  but  to  Christ  and  His  atonement. 
Nay ;  we  have  the  principle  that  the  more  sin  has  abounded,  so  much  the  more 
superabundant  and  triumphant  is  the  free  favour  of  God.  2.  To  many  this  has 
always  appeared  to  be  very  perilous  teaching.  It  seems  to  offer  no  security  for 
practical  virtue — if,  indeed,  it  does  not  actually  put  a  premium  upon  sin.  What 
else  is  that  but  to  say  that  we  may  sin  the  more  in  order  to  make  God's  forgiving 
mercy  the  more  illustrious  ?  Of  course,  if  anything  approaching  to  this  were  a 
fair  deduction  from  the  doctrine  of  justification,  then  such  a  doctrine  would  be 
grossly  immoral.  But  the  same  objection  was  taken  in  St.  Paul's  day  against  St. 
Paul's  teaching ;  and  he  met  it  by  a  vigorous  repudiation.  Indeed  his  answer  to 
it  formed  the  second  main  section  of  his  theological  system,  since  in  that  answer 
he  developed  the  whole  theory  of  Christian  holiness.  And  the  charge  of  immoral 
tendency,  which  glanced  harmlessly  off  St.  Paul  and  the  Church  of  his  time,  may 
very  well  prove  equally  harmless  against  the  evangelical  Churches  of  modern  date. 
Remember,  the  free  acquittal  of  a  penitent  believer  is  not  the  end  of  the  gospel, 
but  only  the  means.  Now,  if  free  justification  turn  out  on  trial  not  to  save  a  man 
from  his  sin,  but  to  encourage  him  in  it ;  then  it  turns  out  to  be  a  cheat,  like  all 
other  gospels  or  recipes  for  working  deliverance  which  men  have  ever  concocted 
or  experimented  with  before  Christ  and  after  Him  I  The  question,  therefore,  is  a 
vital  one.  It  just  means  this  :  Is  the  gospel  a  success  or  a  failure  ?  3.  St.  Paul's 
instant  reply  is  a  blunt  and  staggering  one.  It  amounts  to  this  :  such  an  abuse 
of  free  grace  is  unthinkable  and  out  of  the  question.  Christians  are  people  who, 
in  the  mere  fact  of  becoming  Christians,  passed  through  an  experience  which  put 
a  virtual  end  to  their  sinful  life.  Such  a  difiQculty  is  purely  intellectual,  arising 
in  the  minds  of  men  who  try  to  comprehend  the  gospel  from  the  outside  without 
having  first  experienced  it.  But,  then,  when  once  this  intellectual  difficulty  lias 
been  started  by  a  non-Christian  objector,  the  Christian  craves  to  find  an  intellectual 
answer.  That  my  Christian  faith  is  inconsistent  with  persisting  in  sin,  I  feel.  How 
it  comes  to  be  thus  inconsistent  with  it,  1  want  also  to  see.  4.  It  is  under  this 
view  that  St.  Paul  proceeds.  "  Are  you  ignorant  of  what  every  Christian  is 
supposed  to  know — how  as  many  of  us  as  were  baptised  into  Christ,  were 
baptised  into  His  death  ?  "  Well,  then,  it  follows  that  *'  we  were  buried  along 
with  Him  by  means  of  that  baptism  of  ours  into  His  death,  for  the  express 
purpose,  not  that  we  should  remain  dead  any  more  than  He  did,  but  that,  just  as 
He  was  raised  from  the  dead,  so  we  also  should  walk  in  a  new  life."  In  the  case 
of  converts  in  the  primitive  Church,  conversion  was  always  publicly  attested,  and 
its  inward  character  symbolised,  by  the  initiatory  rite  of  baptism.  For  them 
nothing  could  seem  more  natural  than  to  look  back  upon  their  baptismal  act 
whenever  any  question  arose  as  to  what  their  conversion  really  meant.  Its  most 
general  meaning  was  this,  that  it  put  baptised  believers  into  the  closest  possible 
relationship  with  Christ,  their  Second  Adam,  of  whose  "  body"  they  were  thence- 
forward to  be  *'  members,"  whose  fortunes  they  were  thenceforward  to  share.  But 
if  baptism  seal  our  incorporation  into  the  Representative  Man  from  heaven  ;  who 
does  not  know  that  the  special  act  of  Jesus  with  which  of  all  others  we  are 
brought  most  prominently  into  participation,  is  nothing  else  than  His  death  and 
burial  ?  That  central  thing  about  Christ  on  which  my  faith  has  to  fasten  itself  is 
His  expiatory  death  upon  the  Cross  for  sin.  Am  I  to  be  justified  through  Him  at 
all  ?  Then  it  is  "  through  faith  in  His  blood  "  (chap.  iii.  25).  Have  I,  an  enemy, 
been  "  reconciled  to  God  "  by  His  Son  at  all  ?  I  was  reconciled  "  by  the  death  of 
His  Son"  (chap.  v.  10).  To  that  death  upon  the  Cross  of  expiation  which  was 
attested  by  His  three  days'  burial  the  gospel  directs  the  sinner's  eye,  and  on  that 
builds  his  trust  for  pardon  and  peace  with  God.  And  the  great  rite  which  certified 
the  world  and  me  that  I  am  Christ's,  was  before  all  else  a  baptism  into  the  death 
of  Him  who  died  for  me  1  5.  All  this  St.  Paul  treats  as  a  Christian  commonplace. 
Its  bearing  on  our  continuing  in  sin  is  obvious.  Conversion  through  faith  in 
Christ's  propitiation  is  seen  to  be  essentially  a  moral  change,  a  dying  to  sin.  The 
nerve  of  the  old  separate,  selfish,  sinful  life  of  each  man  was  cut  when  the  man 
merged  himself  in  his  new  Representative,  and  gave  np  his  personal  sins  to  be 
judged,  condemned,  and  expiated  in  his  Atoner's  Cross.  Now,  how  can  a  man 
who  has  gone  through  an  experience  like  that  continue  in  sin  ?    For  him  the  old 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ota».  n. 

bad  past  is  a  thing  dead  and  buried.  Old  things  are  passed  away,  eTeiything  has 
become  new.  Such  a  man  can  no  more  go  back  to  be  what  he  was  before,  fed  as 
he  felt,  or  act  as  he  used  to  act,  than  Jesus  Christ  could  rise  out  of  His  grave  to 
be  once  more  the  Victim  for  onexpiated  guilt  and  the  Sin-bearer  for  a  guiltj  race. 
6.  The  Christian  dies  to  his  old  sin  that  he  may  begin  to  live  to  holineFS  and  God. 
This  is  the  express  design  God  had  when  He  put  our  sins  to  death  in  His  dear 
Son's  Cross.  Faith  in  Cbrist  makes  ns  morally  incorporate  with  Him  in  spirit,  aa 
well  as  legally  embraced  under  Him  as  our  Representative.  Christ  is  our  Head  in 
that  He  represents  us  before  the  law,  so  that  in  His  death  all  who  are  His  died  to 
sin.  Christ  is  no  less  our  Head  to  quicken  as  as  His  members,  and  in  His  living 
again  we  all  live  anew.  The  will  and  the  power  to  walk  in  new  moral  life  are 
therefore  guaranteed  to  us  by  our  faith.  Christian  faith  is  very  far  from  a 
superficial,  or  inoperative,  or  merely  intellectual  act,  such  as  a  man  can  do 
vrithout  his  moral  character  being  seriously  affected  by  it.  It  is  connected  with 
the  deep  roots  of  our  moral  and  religions  nature.  It  changes  the  main  current 
of  our  ethical  life.  Those  who  have  been  baptised  into  Christ  and  say  they  trust 
in  His  death  as  the  ground  of  their  peace  with  God,  are  bound  to  satisfy  themselves 
that  their  faith  is  of  a  sort  Jo  kill  sin,  and-to-maintain  the  life  of  righteousness. 
{J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.)  f  'The^urity  of  the  gospel  dispenscUiov, : — That  the  gospel 
dispensation,  instead  of  remxing  the  principles  of  moral  obligation,  strengthens  and 
renders  the  sin  committed  under  its  light  the  most  inexcusable,  may  be  illustrated — I. 
Fbom  thb  natubb  and  pebfections  of  God.  He  is  a  being  of  absolute  purity.  Being 
thus  perfect  in  Himself,  He  must  love  every  resemblance  of  His  own  perfection  in  any 
of  His  intelligent  creatures ;  and  the  more  nearly  they  resemble  Him,  the  more 
must  they  be  the  objects  of  His  favour.  II.  Fbom  the  chabacteb  and  offices  of 
THE  Redeemeb.  The  Redeemer  is  the  beloved  Son  of  God,  one  with  the  Father ;  and, 
therefore,  the  arguments  drawn  from  the  perfections  of  God,  to  illustrate  the  parity 
of  the  gospel  dispensation,  are  equally  conclusive  with  respect  to  the  Redeemer.  In 
His  several  offices,  no  less  than  in  His  personal  character,  Christ  invariably  pro- 
moted the  cause  of  righteousness.  For  this  He  sustained  the  office  of  a  prophet ; 
for  this  He  became  our  great  High  Priest,  to  restore  that  intercourse  which  sin  had 
interrupted.  For  this  end,  too.  He  became  our  King ,  and  gave  as  a  system  of 
laws  suited  to  that  state  of  reconciliation.  Now,  such  being  EUs  character, 
sach  the  offices  which  He  sustained  as  our  Redeemer,  and  such  the  end  for  which 
He  did  sustain  them,  it  follows,  by  necessary  consequence,  that  the  dispensation 
of  the  gospel,  so  far  from  relaxing  the  obligations  of  moral  duty,  tends  powerfully 
to  confirm  them.  HI.  From  that  pebfbot  bttlb  of  uobal  conduct  which  thb 
GOSPEL  PBEscBiBES.  It  is  at  ouce  the  most  simple,  the  most  pure  and  perfect  that 
ever  was  deUvered  to  the  world ;  as  superior  to  the  much-famed  systems  of 
philosophers  as  its  Divine  author  was  superior  to  them.  It  lays  the  foundation  of 
moral  duty  in  the  heart,  the  true  spring  of  action ;  and  by  one  simple  principle  of 
which  every  heart  is  susceptible,  even  the  principle  of  love,  it  provides  for  the  most 
perfect  moral  conduct,  and  for  the  proper  discharge  of  the  duties  of  life.     lY.  Fbou 

A  CONSIDEBATION   OF  THB  BBIOHT  EXAMPLES  WHICH  ABE   SET  BEFOBE  T7S  IN  THB  OOBPEIi. 

"V.  Fbom  the  poweeftjl  aid  which  the  gospel  pbomises  to  enable  vs  to  obssbvb 

ITS  PBECEPT8,  AND   IMITATE   THE   BRIGHT  EXAMPLES  WHICH  IT   SETS  BEFOBE   VB.      The 

gracious  Author  of  this  Divine  influence  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Spirit  of  God,  the 
third  person  in  the  ever  blessed  Trinity.  VI.  Fbom  the  ultimate  end  and  design 
OF  THE  WHOLE  SCHEME.  The  great  end  of  the  gospel  scheme  undoubtedly  is  to 
bring  us  to  a  state  of  perfect  felicity  in  the  glorious  kingdom  of  our  God ;  to  the 
full  enjoyment  of  that  immortality  which  our  Saviour  hath  revealed.  With  the 
attainment  of  this  glorious  end,  holiness,  or  moral  purity,  and  inseparably  con- 
nected, both  in  the  nature  of  things  and  by  the  positive  laws  of  God's  moral 
government.  1.  In  the  nature  of  things,  the  unholy  or  immoral  must  be  excluded 
from  heavenly  happiness.  They  are  incapable  of  it.  There  is  no  conformity 
between  the  dispositions  which  they  have  cultivated  and  the  joys  of  the  celestial 
regions.  2.  It  is  not  only  in  the  nature  of  things,  but  by  the  positive  law  of  God's 
moral  government,  that  the  unrighteous  are  excluded  from  heaven  and  happi- 
ness. (G.  Goldie.)  Perversions  of  evangelical  truth : — 1.  What  shall  we  say 
then?  Say  to  what?  To  the  great  affirmation  that  man  is  justified  freely  by 
God's  grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Shall  it  be  this :  Let 
ns  persist  in  sin  that  grace  may  multiply?  How  sharply  Paul  turns  upon  the 
immoral  suggestion  I  It  is  a  corruption  not  to  be  endured.  2.  But  why  did  the 
ai^ostle  sabmit  a  conclusion  like  that  to  his  readers  ?     He  knew  that  his  doctrine 


.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  4<T 

did  not  contain  it,  but  hs  knew  that  a  corrupt  human  heart  and  a  perverted 
nnderstanding  oould  pat  it  in.  That  the  conolusion,  or  its  equivalent,  has  been 
asserted,  and  that  often,  where  if  submitted  as  a  proposition  it  would  be  rejected 
with  loathing,  it  is  not  without  a  subtle  influence,  is  matter  of  observation.  I. 
Thxks  abb  those  who  thine  that  it  is  possiblk  to  contindic  in  sin  and  bk 
SAVED.  1.  How  often  one  is  forced  to  notice  that  men  may  combine  a  love  of 
evangelical  doctrine  with  love  of  money  and  a  shrewdness  that  makes  men  who 
are  not  evangelical  shrug  their  shoulders.  We  have  known  men,  great  wrestlers 
in  prayer,  whose  lives,  and  the  whisperings  of  whose  doings,  have  made  us 
ashamed.  Moral  confusion  is  at  the  bottom  of  these  inconsistencies.  Our 
evangelical  doctrines  are  not  to  blame.  The  fault  and  the  failure  is  in  those 
who  profess  them  while  only  half-perceiving  them,  and  ignore  their  moral  issues. 
2.  Paul  shows  os  that  grace  comprises  not  only  a  gracious  act  of  pardon  done  by 
Ood  in  the  believer's  interest,  but  also  an  active  principle  of  sanctification  in  the 
believer's  soul.  The  abounding  of  grace  is  only  manifested  in  the  breakiog  of 
sin's  power  and  the  destruction  of  sin's  principle.  Grace  is  the  enemy  of  sin,  not 
its  covering.  He  who  is  saved  by  grace  is  not  a  leper  clad  in  white  raiment,  but 
a  leper  healed.  Grace  is  not  beauty  thrown  over  the  deformity  of  some  foul 
sickness  ;  it  is  health.  It  is  life  counter-working  death,  and  no  man  can  continue 
in  gin  and  yet  be  saved  by  grace.  3.  But  still,  Is  not  grace  a  gift  ?  Certainly. 
Bat  God  gives  life.  Tet  life  is  not  something  external  to  the  creature  to  whom  it 
is  given.  It  is  not  like  a  string  of  beads  round  the  neck  or  a  ring  on  the  finger. 
The  gift  of  life  to  a  dead  stick  after  that  manner  would  leave  it  a  dead  stick  stUl. 
Hear  a  parable.  Early  one  summer  morning  I  came  upon  an  orchard.  The  trees 
were  beautiful,  and  fruit  was  abundant.  I  wandered  on  until  I  came  upon  a  tree 
having  neither  bloom  nor  fruit.  I  said,  "  Tou  poor,  lost  tree,  what  can  you  be 
doing  here?  I  marvel  you  are  not  removed."  Upon  which  this  tree  replied, 
tartly,  "  Ton  are  in  a  great  mistake.  I  am  neither  poor  nor  lost."  "Well,"  I 
said,  "  yoa  have  neither  leaves  nor  fruit,  and,  I  should  judge,  no  sap."  "  What 
has  that  to  do  with  it  ?  "  it  broke  out.  "  Tou  seem  not  to  know  that  a  great 
saviour  of  trees  has  been  down  here,  and  I  have  believed  his  gospel,  and  am 
saved  by  grace.  I  have  accepted  salvation  as  a  free  gift,  and,  though  I  have 
neither  leaves  nor  fruit,  I  am  saved  all  the  same."  I  looked  at  it  with  pity  and 
said,  "  You  are  a  poor  deluded  tree ;  you  are  not  saved  at  all.  Tou  are  dead  and 
good-for-nothing,  despite  all  your  talk  about  grace  and  redemption.  Life,  that  is 
salvation.  When  I  see  you  laden  with  fruit,  I  shall  say, '  A^  I  that  poor  tree  is 
saved  at  last ;  it  has  received  the  gospel  and  is  saved  by  grace.'  "  As  I  turned 
away,  I  heard  it  saying,  "  Tou  are  not  sound  ;  you  do  not  understand  the  gospel." 
And  I  thought,  so  it  is,  as  with  trees  so  with  men.    II.  Anotheb  fobu  or  this 

ANTINOUIANISM  of  the   HEABT   connects  itself    I&tMEDLATELT  WITH    THE     DEATH    OF 

Ghbist.  Men  talk  and  act  frequently  as  if  in  Christ's  shed  blood  there  was  a 
shelter  from  the  consequence  of  their  sins,  even  though  they  remain  in  their 
sins.  They  harbour  covetousness,  envy,  hate,  and  pride  ;  they  stain  their  hands 
with  dishonesty,  and  then,  with  their  stained  hands  uplifted  in  the  face  of  God, 
aver  that  they  beUeve  in  the  death  of  Christ  for  their  sins,  and  are  saved.  This  is 
not  the  gospel  Paul  preached.  He  asks,  "How  shall  we  who  died  to  sin  live  any 
longer  therein  ?  "  He  who  has  by  faith  appropriated  the  expiatory  death  of  Jesus, 
in  and  by  that  act  died  to  sin.  In  the  apostle's  day,  baptism  was  the  open 
signification  of  the  death.  It  was  as  the  burial  of  one  who  had  died.  It  would 
be  a  new  thing  to  see  a  dead  man  going  on  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  So  the 
saved  man  does  not  persevere  in  sin ;  how  should  he  ?  He  has  died  to  it.  Sin 
has  no  further  claim.  Who  can  claim  anything  of  the  dead  ?  He  is  not  sinless. 
Sin,  alas  1  is  not  dead,  but  he  is  dead  to  it.  He  has  not  got  beyond  its  trouble,  but 
he  has  got  beyond  its  bondage.  Faith  in  Christ's  death  as  our  means  of  pardon, 
includes  also  His  life  as  the  principle  of  our  sanctification.  As  one  delightfully 
said,   "The  Cross  condemns  me  to  be  holy."      (W.   Hubbard.)  Distorted 

doctrines  : — A  man's  nose  is  a  prominent  feature  in  his  face,  but  it  is  possible  to 
make  it  so  large  that  eyes  and  mouth  and  everything  are  thrown  into  insignifi- 
cance, and  the  drawing  is  a  caricature  and  not  a  portrait.  So  certain  important 
doctrines  of  the  gospel  can  be  so  proclaimed  in  excess  as  to  throw  the  rest  of  the 
truth  into  the  shade,  and  the  preaching  is  no  longer  the  gospel,  but  a  caricature, 
and  a  caricature  of  which  some  people  seem  mightily  fond.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Inconsistency  : — I.  The  co;  duct  of  mant  professed  Christuns  indicates — 1. 
That  they  have  some  knowledge  of  grace.    2.  That  they  do  not  heartily  receive  it 


0 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vi. 

because  of  sin.  3.  That  they  rather  use  it  as  a  shelter  for  sin.  II.  Such  conddci 
IS  ABOMINABLE,  becausB  it — 1.  Tempts  God.  2.  Is  irrational.  3.  Courts  certaiq 
.destruction.  4.  Is  impossible  where  grace  is  really  active.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
]The  abuse  of  Divine  mercy: — A  certain  member  of  that  parliament  wherein  % 
'statute  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  was  passed  was  an  ardent  promoter  of  that  Act. 
He  asked  his  steward  when  he  returned  to  the  country,  what  the  people  said  of  that 
statute.  The  steward  answered,  that  he  heard  a  labouring  man  say,  that  whereas 
formerly  he  worked  six  days  in  the  week,  now  he  would  work  but  four ;  which  abuse 
of  that  good  provision  so  affected  the  pious  statesman  that  he  could  not  refrain 
from  weeping.  Lord,  Thou  hast  made  many  provisions  in  Thy  Word  for  my 
support  and  comfort,  and  hast  promised  in  my  necessities  Thy  supply  and 
protection ;  but  let  not  my  presumption  of  help  from  Thee  cause  my  neglect  of 
any  of  those  means  for  my  spiritual  and  temporal  preservation  which  Thou  hast 
enjoined.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God  forhid.  Hew  shall  we  that  are  dead  to  sin 
live  any  longer  therein  7 — Death  to  sin : — Abounding  sin  is  the  occasion  of 
abounding  grace,  but  abounding  grace  is  for  the  destruction  of  abounding  sin.  It 
is  absurd  to  suppose  that  a  medicine  should  aggravate  the  disease  it  cures.  I. 
Believers  abe  dead  to  sin.  1.  In  their  condition  before  God.  2.  In  their 
character  in  consequence  of  it.  3.  Forensically ;  in  the  eye  of  the  law.  4. 
Experimentally ;  in  point  of  fact.  5.  In  their  affection  for  it.  6.  In  its  power 
over  them.  Or,  to  put  it  another  way,  behevers  have  died  to  sin  legally  in 
justification ;  personally  in  sanctification  ;  professedly  in  baptism  ;  and  will  die 
completely  to  it  in  glorification.  II.  This  is  accomplished — 1.  By  participation 
in  Christ's  death  who  died  for  it.  2.  By  communication  of  the  power  of  Christ 
in  killing  it.  3.  By  profession  made  in  baptism  of  renouncing  it.  Death  to  sin 
is  the  necessary  consequence  of  union  with  Christ,  who  delivers  from  its  depraving, 
condemning,  and  reigning  power.  (T.  Robinson.)  Converted  men  dislike  tin : — 
An  Arminian  arguing  with  a  Calvinist  remarked,  '•  If  I  believed  your  doctrine,  and 
was  sure  that  I  was  a  converted  man,  I  would  take  my  fill  of  sin."  "  How  much 
sin,"  replied  the  godly  Calvinist,  "  do  yon  think  it  would  take  to  fill  a  true 
Christian  to  his  own  satisfaction?"  Here  he  hit  the  nail  on  the  head.  "How 
can  we  that  are  dead  to  sin  live  any  longer  therein  ?  "  A  truly  converted  man 
hates  sin  with  all  his  heart,  and  even  if  he  could  sin  without  suffering  for  it,  it 
would  be  misery  enough  to  him  to  sin  at  all.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Breaking 
with  sin  : — The  Christian's  breaking  with  sin  is  undoubtedly  gradual  in  its 
realisation,  but  absolute  and  conclusive  in  its  principle.  As,  in  order  to  break 
really  with  an  old  friend  whose  evil  influence  is  felt,  half  measures  are  insuffi- 
cient, and  the  only  efficacious  means  is  a  frank  explanation  followed  by  a 
complete  rupture  which  remains  like  a  barrier  raised  beforehand  before  every  new 
solicitation  ;  so  to  break  with  sin  there  is  needed  a  decisive  and  radical  act,  a 
Divine  deed  taking  possession  of  the  soul  and  interposing  henceforth  between  the 
will  of  the  believer  and  sin  (Gal.  vi.  14).  This  Divine  deed  necessarily  works 
through  the  action   of  faith  in  Christ's  sacrifice.      (Prof.   Godet.)  The  two 

lives  (text  and  ver.  11): — I.  The  contrasted  lives:  "Life  in  sin,"  and  "being 
alive  unto  God."  The  contrast  is  such  that  the  unspiritual  can  perceive  it,  though 
unable  to  understand  it.  The  ungodly  may  say,  "  We  neither  know  nor  care 
whether  a  man  is  justified  or  not,  but  we  do  know  whether  he  keeps  the  law  of 
conscience,  whether  he  acts  up  to  his  professed  principles,  whether  he  does  that 
which,  apart  from  his  profession,  we  know  to  be  right.  But  how  is  it  that  the 
world  is  able  to  form  these  judgments  ?  Was  the  civilised  world  qualified  to  do 
this  in  the  days  of  Cicero  or  of  Pericles  ?  Was  there  to  be  found  then,  or  is  there 
to  be  found  now,  where  Christianity  is  not,  anything  approximating  the  same 
jealousy  of  conscience,  &c.,  which  those  who  now  boast  that  they  are  men  of  the 
world  often  exhibit?  Surely  not.  If  worldly  men  are  competent  judges  of 
Christian  principle,  it  is  because  the  atmosphere  breathed  by  true  Christians  ha» 
stimulated  its  life  and  awakened  its  conscience.  The  world  is  indebted  to  the 
Christianity  it  is  ready  to  revile  for  its  power  to  call  Christians  to  its  bar.  Note  : 
1.  What  is  meant  by  "  living  in  sin."  The  term  has  been  almost  appropriated  to 
describe  certain  forms  of  bold  and  unblushing  transgression  of  moral  law.  If  a 
man  is  a  known  drunkard,  adulterer,  or  rogue,  he  is  said  to  "live  in  sin";  and 
no  one  excuses  or  palliates  his  conduct.  But  the  corruption  of  human  nature 
goes  down  deeper,  and  the  ravages  of  sin  are  far  more  extensive  than  this.  That 
man  is  "living  in  sin  "— (1)  Who  can  sin  without  remorse.  If  a  man  sins  and 
his  only  thought  is,  "How  shall  I  escape  the  indignant  scorn  of  the  world?"  h« 


eair.  tl]  ROMANS,  449, 

is  taking  pleasure  in  angodlinesB,  he  is  only  happy  in  the  absence  of  Ood.  (2) 
Who  does  what  he  knows  to  be  wrong,  but  palliates  it  by  pleading  the  force  of 
circumstances,  the  nature  of  society,  or  the  custom  of  the  world.  (3)  Who 
habitually  neglects  to  do  that  which  God  and  his  conscience  have  often  called 
upon  him  to  accomplish.  •'  To  him  who  knoweth  to  do  good  and  doeth  it  not,  to 
him  it  is  sin."  It  is  not  enough  that  a  man  should  avoid  the  practice  of  evil ;  ha 
must  not  be  lacking  in  generosity,  good  temper,  self-restraint,  religious  emotion, 
zeal  and  work  for  God  and  man.  (4)  Who  finds  pleasure  in  the  commission  of 
sin,  hankers  after  forbidden  sweets,  and  would  like  to  go  where  he  could  escape 
detection.  To  sum  up,  "  All  ungodliness  is  sin."  To  be  without  God,  to  act 
irrespectively  of  His  authority,  to  find  pleasure  in  what  is  opposed  to  His  will,  is 
to  live  in  sin  and  bring  the  consequences  of  such  a  life  down  upon  the  soul.  2. 
What  is  meant  by  being  "alive  unto  God."  By  being  "alive  to  "  anything  is 
meant  a  vivid  conception  of  its  reality,  a  joy  in  its  presence,  a  devotion  to  its 
interests.  Thus  one  man  is  alive  to  business,  another  to  his  reputation,  another 
to  truth.  One  man  is  alive  to  beauty  in  nature  or  art,  he  is  therefore  quick  to 
discern  its  presence,  keen  to  criticise  its  counterfeits,  filled  with  joy  when 
surrounded  with  its  exponents.  Another  man  is  alive  to  literature  or  science, 
his  ear  is  sensitive  to  every  message  from  the  great  world  of  letters  and  invention, 
and  the  world  exists,  so  far  as  he  is  concerned,  to  sustain  and  furnish  material 
for  his  favourite  pursuit.  One  man  is  alive  to  the  well-beinfr  of  his  own  country, 
and  another  to  the  wider  interests  of  man.  With  the  help  of  these  illustrations  we 
may  assume  that  a  man  is  alive  unto  God — (1)  When  he  fully  recognises  the  signs 
of  the  presence  of  God.  Habitual  transgression  or  neglect  of  the  laws  of  God  is 
incompatible  with  the  condition  of  a  man  who  sees  God  everywhere.  That  man 
is  ••  alive  to  God  "  to  whom  God  is  not  a  theory  by  which  be  can  conveniently 
account  for  the  universe,  or  a  name  for  certain  human  concepiions  of  nature  and 
its  workings,  or  an  invention  of  priestcraft  to  terrify  the  soul,  or  a  philosophic 
concept  the  presence  or  absence  of  which  has  little  to  do  with  life  or  happiness, 
but  the  great  and  only  reality,  the  prime  and  principal  element  of  all  his  thoughts. 
No  one  fully  recognises  the  presence  of  God  unless  he  has  advanced  beyond  the 
teaching  of  nature,  and  received  from  Holy  Scripture,  from  the  inward  operations 
of  the  Spirit  in  his  own  heart,  more  than  philosophical  speculations  can  give  him. 
If  alive  unto  God,  every  revelation  of  His  infinite  essence  suggests  to  our  quickened 
spirit  the  presence  of  our  Father  and  our  Friend.  (2)  When  the  sense  of  the 
Divine  Presence  awakens  all  the  energies  and  engages  all  the  faculties  of  his 
nature.  If  duly  conscious  of  the  Divine  Presence,  we  shall  render  the  appro- 
priate homage  of  our  entire  being.  Then  every  place  is  a  temple,  every  act  is  a 
sacrifice,  every  sin  the  pollution  of  a  sacred  place,  the  defilement  of  a  holy  day. 
It  is  morally  impossible  for  one  who  is  alive  unto  God  to  imagine  that  he  is 
doing  too  much  to  express  his  sense  of  reverence,  gratitude,  or  obligation.  In 
one  word,  self  is  subdued  to  Him,  and  human  will  is  lost  in  God's.  (3)  When  he 
finds  his  highest  desires  gratified.  If  we  are  alive  unto  God,  we  shall  find  that 
we  are  following  the  bent  of  our  true  nature.  He  that  drinketh  of  the  water  given 
him  by  Christ,  shall  never  thirst  after  those  draughts  of  carnal  pleasure  to  be  found 
in  the  broken  cisterns  of  human  invention,  and  it  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water 
springing  up  to  everlasting  life.  II.  The  two  lives  have  been  described  and 
contrasted,  Ufe  in  sin  and  life  unto  God.     It  would  be  difficult  to  conceivb  o» 

TWO   MODES   of   LIFE    MORE    OBTIOUSLY   OPPOSED   TO   ONE   ANOTHER.      They   Cannot    OO- 

exist  in  the  same  spirit.  1.  If  sin  is  delighted  in,  God  is  dreaded.  There  is  no 
tendency  in  human  nature  by  means  of  which  sin  can  be  remedied  or  undone. 
The  punishment  of  sin  is  death,  i.e.,  moral  ahenation  of  heart  from  God,  sinful 
habit  and  tendency.  Consequently  every  sin  carries  in  itself  its  own  perpetuation 
and  the  germ  of  further  transgression.  2.  A  life  unto  God  supposes  a  spirit  to 
whom  the  nearness,  the  perfections,  the  work  of  the  Lord  are  unutterable 
delights ;  to  whom  the  whole  universe  is  a  transparent  medium,  through  and 
behind  which  is  seen  the  face  of  the  Eternal  God.  III.  How  shall  those  that 
ARE  LIVING  IN  SIN  EVER  LEAEN  TO  BE  ALIVE  UNTO  GoD  ?  1.  The  charge  had  beou 
brought  that  that  gospel  looked  leniently  on  sin,  and  the  apostle  boldly  takes  it  up, 
admits  its  seeming  plausibility,  anticipates  its  possible  force,  and  answers  it  by 
showing  what  was  involved  in  that  faith  which  justifies  the  soul.  The  life  unto 
God  can  never  supervene  in  a  soul  which  has  been  living  in  sin,  "  except,"  says 
he,  "  through  a  death  unto  sin."  Justification  implies  the  removal  of  its  penalty, 
its  non-imputation,  the  exhaustion  of  its  sting,  the  annihilation  of  its  wages.  Our 
VOL.  I.  29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  n, 

new  and  holy  life  is  not  the  ground  of  oar  justification,  nor,  strictly  speaking,  the 
consequence  of  our  pardon  and  acceptance  vrith  God ;  but  it  is  in  one  sense  the 
pardon  itself,  the  way  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  slays  that  enmity  within  us 
which  was  the  great  curse  of  sin.  ••  How  shall  we  that  are  dead  to  sin  live 
any  longer  therein?"  2.  As  far  as  his  illustration  is  concerned,  the  apostle 
states  a  truism  when  he  says  that  one  who  is  dead  to  sin  cannot  live  any  longer 
therein.  A  man  who  is  dead  to  sin  may  be  carried  away  from  his  standing-ground 
by  some  terrible  and  novel  blast  of  temptation ;  but  it  is  a  contradiction  in 
terms  to  assert  that  he  can  "live  in  sin,"  3.  What,  then,  is  meant  by  "death 
to  sin  "  ?  (1)  Not  a  desperate  fear  of  the  consequences  of  sin.  This  fails  to 
repress  gross  vice  and  crime.  There  are  no  cowards  so  great  as  those  who  often 
make  violent  assault  on  the  life  and  property  of  others.  They  choose  darkness 
that  they  may  avoid  detection  ;  they  are  armed  to  the  teeth  when  they  go  against 
feebleness  and  womankind.  Multitudes  tremble  at  the  preaching  of  righteousness, 
temperance,  and  judgment  to  come,  but  sin  as  if  they  never  trembled.  Fear  may 
have  kept  you  back  from  the  commission  of  sin,  and  warned  you  to  paths  of 
honour  and  usefulness,  and  yet  never  have  slain  the  desire  after  what  is  hateful 
to  God.  (2)  Not  respect  to  the  opinion  of  the  world.  The  good  opinion  of  our 
fellow-citizens  is  a  powerful  motive  to  virtue ;  but  if  it  is  our  only  one,  there  is 
nothing  eternal  in  our  virtue.  Then  if  our  circumstances  were  changed,  we 
should  change  also.  Let  us  be  put  back  to  times  when  a  lower  honour  prevailed 
in  business  or  in  society,  we  should  be  forced  back  to  the  undeveloped  morality  of 
the  past,  and  "  live  in  "  the  practice  of  what  we  now  see  to  be  "sin."  (3)  Not 
mere  self-respect.  There  are  those  who  are  careless  about  the  world's  respect 
as  long  as  they  can  secure  their  own.  This  reverence  for  conscience,  and  inde- 
pendence of  the  judgment  of  others,  is  closely  akin  to  the  highest  virtue,  but  yet 
as  an  ultimate  principle  it  is  not  sufficient.  The  proud  independence  of  mankind 
may  speedily  run  up  into  an  audacious  independence  of  God.  Self-respect  may 
rapidly  blossom  into  self-idolatry.  (4)  "  Death  to  sin  "  is  not  secured  by  orthodox 
creed,  ceremonial  exactness,  or  even  religious  zeal.  These  are  all  occasionally 
confounded  with  it,  but  they  may  be  all  compatible  with  a  "life  of  sin."  Church 
history  is  full  of  proofs  that  neither  articles,  nor  sacraments,  nor  profession,  nor 
even  great  sacrifices  for  religion,  avail  to  slay  the  sin  of  the  heart  or  render  the 
eoul  alive  to  God.  (5)  By  this  process  of  exclusion  we  have  brought  the  meaning 
of  the  phrase  "  death  to  sin  "  to  a  much  more  limited  group  of  experiences.  The 
apostle  identifies  it  with  union  to  Christ,  that  which  he  sometimes  calls  "  faith  in 
His  blood,"  "baptism  into  Christ,"  or  "living  by  faith  on  the  Son  of  God," 
because  "  Christ  liveth  in  us."  Paul  knew  he  was  appealing  to  a  safe  and  sure 
tribunal  when  he  went  right  to  the  consciousness  of  his  converts.  "  Likewise 
reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord."  It  is  certain  that  the  apostle  would  not  have  these  Bomans 
reckon  thus  unless  it  were  true.  Observe,  it  is  not  merely  that  they  are  to  reckon 
that  Christ  died  for  their  sins,  but  they  are  also  to  reckon  that  they  too  are  dead 
unto  sin  through  Jesus  Christ.  4.  The  way,  then,  in  which  this  change  is  effected 
is  by  union  with  Christ— (1)  In  His  Passion.  "  By  the  Cross  the  world  is  crucified 
unto  me  and  I  unto  the  world  " ;  "I  am  crucified  with  Christ";  "If  we  be  dead 
with  Him,  we  shall  also  live  with  Him."  We  are  "  buried  with  Him  by  baptism 
into  His  death."  The  thought  often  recurs  that  our  faith  in  Him  nails  our  own 
hands  to  the  cursed  tree  and  films  our  eye  on  worldly  glory.  If  we  have  taken  up 
this  thought  into  our  entire  spiritual  nature,  that  "  Christ  died  for  our  sins,"  then 
we  are  dead.  As  we  become  alive  to  what  the  death  of  Christ  really  is  and  means, 
how  it  prepares  the  only  way  by  which  a  new  life  could  enter  our  race,  and  a  new 
spirit  be  given  to  transgressors,  by  which  God  could  justify  the  ungodly,  and  still 
be  just ;  it  is  not  difficidt  to  understand  that  faith  in  Christ,  that  union  to  Christ, 
involves  dying  with  Christ  to  sin.  A  true  and  deep  faith  in  Christ,  a  recognitiou 
by  mind  and  heart  of  His  work,  is  such  an  intuition  of  law,  such  a  sense  of  God, 
such  a  revelation  of  the  evil  of  sin,  such  a  burning  of  the  heart  against  the  world, 
the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  that  the  apostle  was  justified  in  saying  that  Christians 
might  reckon  themselves  dead  unto  sin.  (2)  In  His  life  and  resurrection.  The 
new  life  of  the  soul  is  a  resurrection-life,  charged  with  all  the  associations  and 
aspirations  which  would  be  possessed  by  one  who  had  passed,  through  dying, 
_-  from  death  to  life.  The  life  unto  God  fiows  out  of  the  Ufe  of  God  in  the 
((j,  soul.      (H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.)  Christ's  legislative  glory  to  be  preached : — 

The  following  carious  incident  once  happened  to  a  clergyman.     One  day,  after 


OBJLP.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  451 

E reaching,  a  gentleman  followed  him  into  the  vestry,  and,  putting  a  £10  note  into 
is  hand,  thanked  him  most  energetically  for  the  great  comfort  he  had  derived 
from  his  sermon.  The  clergyman  was  very  much  surprised  at  this,  but  still  more 
80  when  shortly  afterwards  the  same  thing  again  took  place  ;  and  he  determined 
to  sift  the  affair  to  the  bottom,  and  find  out  who  this  man  was  that  was  so 
comforted  by  his  discourse.  He  discovered  that  he  was  a  person  at  that  very 
time  living  in  the  most  abominable  wickedness  and  in  the  very  depths  of  sin. 
"  Certainly,"  said  he  to  himself,  "  there  must  be  something  essentially  wrong  in 
my  preaching  when  it  can  afford  comfort  to  such  a  profligate  as  this  I  "  He 
accordingly  examined  into  the  matter  closely,  and  he  discovered  that,  whilst  he 
had  been  preaching  Christ's  sovereignty,  he  had  quite  forgotten  his  legislative 
glories.  He  immediately  altered  the  style  of  his  sermons,  and  he  soon  lost  his 
munificent  friend.  I  am  told  that,  by  preaching  Christ's  legislative  glory,  I  also 
have  driven  some  from  my  chapel.  Pray  for  me,  my  brethren,  that  I  may  still 
preach  doctrine,  and  that  Longacre  may  become  too  hot  for  error  in  principle  or 
sin  in  practice;  pray  for  me  that  with  a  giant's  arm  I  may  lash  both.  (Howels,  ^—^ 
of  Longacre.)  The  atonement  gives  no   encouragement   to   sin : — There  is  no     ^'~^J 

influence  more  mischievous  on  the  morals  of  a  people  than  to  interpret  the  ^^ 
atonement  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it  independent  of  good  works,  if  to  the  atone- 
ment you  give  any  other  than  purely  legal  connection.  If  it  includes  state  of 
nature  and  character  in  its  connections,  then  must  it  stand  for  ever  associated 
with  human  endeavour  and  conditioned  upon  it.  Else  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus 
becomes  a  harbour  for  thieves — a  port  into  which  sinners  can  at  any  moment 
Bteer  with  all  their  sins  on  board,  the  moment  that  the  winds  of  conscience  begin 
to  blow  a  little  too  hard  and  threaten  wreck  to  their  peace.  And  this  is  what  I 
call  a  plain  accommodation  of  sinners,  and  hence  a  premium  on  sin.  For  sin  is 
sweet  to  the  natural  man,  sweet  to  his  pride,  his  cruelty,  his  senses  ;  and  who 
would  not  sin  and  have  the  sweetness  of  it,  if  when  he  found  it  troublesome  he 
could,  by  the  saying  of  a  prayer,  or  the  utterance  of  a  charmed  word,  be  in  an 
instant  delivered  from  it  for  ever  ?  And  yet  I  believe  that  in  just  this  supposition 
multitudes  in  Christendom  are  living.  Salvation  is  something  to  be  visited  upon 
them,  independent  of  their  conduct ;  nay,  in  spite  of  their  conduct.  Jesus  is  a 
cabalistic  word  which,  no  matter  how  they  live,  if  they  but  whisper  it  with  their 
dying  gasp  into  the  ear  of  death,  he  is  bound  to  pass  them  up  into  heaven  and  not 
down  into  hell,  where  their  deeds  would  consign  them  and  which  their  characters 
fit.  They  cheat,  they  lie,  they  slander,  they  hate,  they  persecute,  but  then  is  not 
there  mercy  for  all  ?  Will  not  faith  save  a  man  ;  and  have  not  they  faith  ?  And 
are  they  not  told  that  God  will  do  anything  in  answer  to  prayer  ;  and  did  you  ever 
see  men  pray  as  fast  as  these  fellows  can  when  they  are  sick  ?  This  is  what  I  call 
making  Christ  a  harbour  for  thieves  and  Christianity  a  premium  on  sin.  This  ia 
what  I  call  the  most  horrible  perversion  of  the  gospel  plan  of  salvation  conceivable  I 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Death  to  sin,  a  difficulty  : — There  is  nothing  so  hard  to  die  as 
sin.  An  atom  may  kill  a  giant,  a  word  may  break  the  peace  of  a  nation,  a  spark 
barn  up  a  city;  but  it  requires  earnest  and  protracted  struggles  to  destroy  sin  in  the 
soul.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 


Vers.  3,  4.  Enow  ye  not  that  as  many  as  were  baptised  into  Jesns  Christ  were 
baptised  Into  His  death  ? — Christian  baptism : — I.  What  it  is — 1.  A  sign  of  grace 
2.  A  mystery  of  faith.  3.  A  seal  of  the  covenant.  H.  What  it  bequibes.  The 
death  of  the  old  man.  JII.  What  nis.iNTENDED  to  secure — spiritual  and  eternal 
life.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Vhristianbaptism^ — I.  Its  biqnificance  and  natube. — 1.  It 
was  nonovelty.  Pifius.  lustrations  had  been  practlSM  tbf  ageTamong  the  Hindoos, 
"EgyptlSBg,  "Grreeks,  and  Eomans.  The  Jews  also,  in  addition  to  the  legal  ablutions, 
baptised  proselytes.  John  practised  the  same  ceremony.  And  when  Christ  adopted 
this  ordinance,  it  must  have  been  with  the  same  general  significance,  viz.,  initiation 
into  a  n&g-mode-ol_life.  The  past  was  to  be  renounced  and  forgotten','  knd  a  new, 
l)igher  and  hnlipr  osirpfr  entered  upon.  Hence  baptism  was  regarded  among  the 
philosophers  and  Eabbis  as  a  new  birth  :  not  that  it  produced  any  real  change  of 
heart,  but  was  a  solemn  and  public  separation  from  a  former  course  of  life,  and  a 
new  start  on  a  more  hallowed  career.  Now,  this  is  exactly  the  idea  of  baptism  in 
the  New  Testament.  It  is  like  a  Rubicon  crossed :  or  a  river  which  divides  two 
continents  occupied  by  hostile  nations.  2.  Such  being  the  general  idea  of  baptism, 
what  is  its  specific  meaning  in  the  Christian  system  ?  Christian  baptism  generally 
i»  baptism  into  Christ.    Just  as  one  may  be  baptised  into  Hindooism,  Judaism,  or 


•6> 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cms.  n. 

Mahometsnism,  so  may  a  man  be  baptised  into  Christianity,  or  Christ.  But  Paul 
describes  it  as  baptism  into  "  Christ's  death "  :  and  here  we  shall  see  how 
essentially  it  differs  from  baptism  into  any  other  form  of  religion.  To  be  baptised 
into  Moses  or  Mahomet  would  not  signify  to  be  baptised  into  his  death,  but  only 
the  acknowledgment  of  their  authority.  Baptism  into  Christ's  death  is  expressed 
four  times,  and  by  as  many  different  phrases,  in  this  passage.  (1)  "  Baptised  into 
His  death."  We  think  of  the  death  of  Christ  as  the  central  and  most  momentous 
event  of  His  mediatorial  mission.  He  was  put  to  death  by  wicked  men,  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  world  in  its  depraved  condition  ;  but  He  also  died  in  the  sinner's 
stead,  and  for  sin,  that  He  might  condemn  and  cancel  it,  and  deliver  His  people  from 
its  curse.  By  it,  therefore,  we  express  our  acquiescence  in  that  death,  both  as  a 
protest  against  the  wickedness  of  the  world,  and  as  an  atoning  sacrifice  for  human 
sin.  If  so,  we  are  expected  to  be  dead  to  the  world  which  slew  Him ;  and  to  the 
sins  for  which  He  died.  (2)  "Buried  with  Him  by  baptism."  The  interment  of 
Christ  gave  conclusive  evidence  of  the  reality  of  His  death.'  The  world  had  done 
with  Him,  and  He  with  it.  To  denote  therefore  the  absoluteness  of  our  death  in 
Christ,  we  are  said  to  be  buried  with  Him — as  a  man  who  is  completely  done  with 
this  life  is  said  to  be  "  dead  and  buried."  (3)  "  Planted  together  in  the  likeness  of 
His  death."  The  idea  is  that  of  growing  together  into  one,  as  a  new  branch  grafted 
into  an  old  stock.  Our  death  is  entirely  owing  to  the  death  of  Christ ;  yet  it  is  only 
in  the  Ukeness  of  His  death  that  we  die.  There  are  points  of  difference  as  well  as 
of  resemblance.  He  died  for  sin,  we  die  to  sin ;  He  died  vicariously,  we  for  our- 
selves. His  death  was  to  cover  the  guilt  of  sin  ;  ours  is  to  escape  from  its  pollution 
and  power ;  His  death  was  physical,  ours  spiritual.  (4)  •'  Our  old  man  is  crucified," 
"that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed."  By  the  old  man  we  understand  our 
unrenewed  moral  disposition  (Eph.  iv.  22,  23) ;  by  "  body  of  sin,"  the  fact  that  our 
lower  animal  nature  is  the  great  occasion  and  instrument  of  sin.  Jesus  died  a 
death  of  slow,  lingering  torment  and  ignominy.  And  our  death  to  sin  is  one  of 
corresponding  painfulness,  difficulty,  and  seeming  dishonour.  So  Paul,  in  the 
Galatians,  twice  declares  that  he  is  "  crucified  with  Christ "  (Gal.  ii.  20 ;  vi.  14), 
Indeed  the  whole  idea  of  this  passage  is  repeated  in  several  others  (see  Col.  ii. 
11-13  ;  1  Pet.  iii .  18-iv.  6).  How  the  world  scoffs  at  a  man  who  gives  up  his  sins  ! 
/Tl>  The  subsequent  state  of  the  baptised  as  dead  to  sin.  Now  we  are  said  to  be 
^~^ad  to  anything  when  we  have  ceased  to  be  under  its  influence,  and  have  become 
indifferent  to  it.  Thus  many  a  passion  of  human  love  or  hate  dies  away,  and  the 
heart  is  perfectly  unmoved  by  the  presence  of  its  once  exciting  object.  Or  a  man 
utterly  alters  his  studies  and  pursuits,  and  becomes  callous  to  speculations  or 
adventures  which  once  had  fired  him  with  uncontrollable  ambition.  In  Uke  manner 
a  converted  man  is  dead  to  his  former  life  of  sin.  He  is  a  new  creature  in  Christ 
Jesus.  Old  things  have  passed  away,  and  all  things  have  become  new  (2  Cor.  v.  17). 

1.  He  is  indifferent  to  its  pleasures  (Gal.  v.  19-26).  2.  He  has  renounced  its 
principles  and  practices.  3.  These  things  he  has  been  enabled  to  do.  "  Dead  to 
sin,"  he  is  emancipated  from  its  bondage.  He  is  raised  up  from  the  death  of  sin, 
as  Christ  from  the  grave,  by  the  glorious  power  of  the  Father,  and  so,  filled  with  the 
Spirit,  he  is  able  to  walk  in  newness  of  life.  Christian  baptism : — I.  The  moral 
SIGNIFICANCE  OF  ouB  BAPTISM  INTO  Cheist — our  baptism  into  His  death.  1.  The 
forms  of  expression  are  elliptical.  For  just  as  Christ  gave  commandment  to 
"  baptise  into  the  name  of  the  Father,"  &c.,  the  meaning  was  that  they  were  to  be 
baptised  into  the  faith  and  for  the  service  of  the  Triune  God ;  so  here,  to  be 
baptised  into  Christ  and  His  death  is  to  be  baptised  into  the  faith  of  Christ  crucified. 

2.  Regarded  from  its  human  side  baptism  is  an  act  by  which  a  man  makes  open 
profession  of  faith  in  Christ  as  his  Saviour  and  Lord  ;  an  act  in  which  he  makes 
full  renunciation  of  self  and  sin,  and  unites  himself  to  the  Church  (1  Cor.  xii. 
12,  <fec.).  It  does  not,  however,  constitute  its  subject  a  really  living  member;  it  is 
but  a  material  act  which  cannot  possibly  of  itself  have  any  moral  effect.  Thus, 
though  Simon  had  been  baptised,  he  had  neither  part  nor  lot  in  the  Christian 
salvation.  But  the  faith  of  which  baptism  is  the  profession  does  bring  its  possessor 
into  Uving  fellowship  with  Christ.  3.  This  faith  is  in  Christ's  death,  and  really  brings 
its  possessor  into  union  with  Christ.  Hence  by  our  baptism  into  Christ's  death,  wo 
were  buried  with  Him.  It  is  very  commonly  supposed  that  there  is  here  a  refer- 
ence to  immersion  :  but  the  apostle  does  not  say  that  we  were  buried  in  baptism, 
but  that  we  were  "  buried  together  with  Christ  by  means  of  the  baptism  into  Hia 
death."  That  is  to  say,  if  we  have  that  faith  of  which  baptism  is  the  open 
profession,  then  are  we  brought  into  such  legal  and  effective  anion  with  Christ  as 


CHAP,  yt.]  ROMANS  458 

that  we  are  treated  by  God  as  though  we  had  been  crucified  when  Christ  was 
crucified,  and  buried  when  He  was  buried.  4.  But  there  is  yet  a  further  moral 
significance  in  this  act  of  faith,  viz.,  a  confession  that  the  believer  himself,  because 
of  his  sins,  deserves  to  die  ;  that  but  for  the  death  of  his  Divine  Substitute  he  must 
himself  have  died ;  that  he  hates  and  renounces  those  sins  which  thus  imperilled 
his  own  soul  and  caused  such  agony  to  his  Redeemer ;  and  that  he  thankfully  and 
with  all  his  heart  avails  himself  of  this  provision  of  salvation  from  sin.  It  is  not 
consistent  with  our  profession  of  faith  that  we  shou^i^-^fntinue  in  sin.  For  "  how 
shall  we  that  died  to  sin,  live  any  longer  therein  ?  '^/Ilj^a  pukpose — that  like  as 
Christ  was  raisedr^o  we,  being  quickened  togeth??-^wimilUl,  should  walk  in 
newness  of  life.  l.yThough  Jesus  died.  He  does  not  continue  dead.  He  died  unto 
sin  once.  By  tk«i  one  death  He  satisfied  the  demand  of  the  law,  and  having 
satisfied  that  demand.  He  could  legally  claim  a  complete  justification  from  sin 
(ver.  7).  But,  being  so  justified,  death  had  no  further  dominion  over  Him.  He 
was  therefore  raised  on  account  of  our  justification  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  i.e., 
by  His  power,  working  out  His  will  and  purpose,  according  to  the  demands  of  His 
glory.  2.  For  the  glory  of  the  Father  demanded  the  resurrection  of  His  Son  on 
two  accounts.  (1)  To  clear  Him  from  false  accusations.  The  Jews  condemned 
Hun  as  a  blasphemer,  because  that  He  had  called  God  His  owu  Father,  making 
Himself  equal  with  God.  No  doubt  the  Jews  were  right,  if  the  claim  had  not  been 
true.  But  it  was  true.  And  to  prove  its  truth,  and  vindicate  His  Son,  the  glory 
of  the  Father  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  (2)  To  attest  the  sufficiency  of  His  atoning 
death.  Not  according  to  man's  arrangement,  but  "  by  the  determinate  counsel  and 
foreknowledge  of  God,"  Jesus  was  "delivered"  to  death  to  expiate  sin.  It  was 
declared  that  His  death  should  effectually  accomplish  this  purpose.  But,  in  proof 
thereof,  it  was  needful  that  He  should  rise  again.  For  how  could  we  have  trusted 
in  Him  for  salvation,  and  how  could  it  have  been  consistent  with  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  if  the  sinless  One  had  continued  under  the  power  of  death  after  the  demands 
of  justice  had  been  fully  satisfied  ?  Therefore  the  glory  of  the  Father  could  not 
Buffer  that  Holy  One  to  see  corruption.  3.  But  we  are  baptised  into  Christ's  death, 
and  by  that  baptism  buried  with  Him,  in  order  that  we  also  might  participate  His 
restored  and  glorious  life.  For,  as  in  our  Representative,  so  also  in  us  these  things 
of  necessity  go  together,  namely — (1)  Death  to  sin  and  burial  in  death  ;  (2)  Justifica- 
tion from  sin  in  consequence  of  that  death ;  and — (3)  Restoration  to  holy  and 
prevaiUng  life.  If  in  Christ  we  have  not  been  made  alive  to  God,  then  it  is  quite 
certain  that  we  have  not  been  justified  in  Christ.  4.  Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that, 
both  by  profession  and  by  privilege.  Christian  men  are  bound  to  renounce  a  life  of 
sin,  and  to  live  a  life  of  holiness.  That  we  may  do  this  effectually,  we  have  but  to 
attend  to  two  things  ;  namely — (1)  To  be  indeed  what  we  profess  ourselves  to  be, 
believers  in  the  saving  work  and  power  of  Jesus ;  and — (2)  To  do,  with  resolute 
courage,  what  we  are  bidden  to  do,  even  to  yield  ourselves  to  the  service  of  God  as 
those  who  are  alive  from  the  dead.  Doing  these  things,  we  shall  no  longer  continue 
in  sin,  but  shall  reign  in  life  by  One,  Jesus  Chii&t.  (iV.  Tyson.)  Therefore  we  are 
boiled  with  Him  by  baptism  into  iea.th.-fBaptism — a  burialp>—l.  Paul  does  not  say 
that  all  unbelievers  and  hypocrites,  &c.,  wm>fH?e4>ap  llzedTaTeDapti  zed  into  our  Lord's 
death.  He  intends  such  as  come  to  it  with  their  hearts  in  a  right  state.  2.  Nor 
does  he  intend  to  say  that  those  who  were  rightly  baptized  have  all  of  them  entered 
into  the  fulness  of  its  spiritual  meaning;  for  he  asks,  "Know  ye  not?"  Some 
perhaps  saw  in  it  only  a  washing,  but  had  never  discerned  the  burial.  I  question  if 
any  of  us  yet  know  the  fulness  of  the  meaning  of  either  of  Christ's  ordinances. 
Baptism  sets  forth  the  death,  burial,  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  our  participa- 
tion therein.  Its  teaching  is  twofold.  Consider — L  Oub  EEPRESENTATrvE  union 
WITH  Christ  as  a  truth  to  be  believed.  Baptism  as  a  burial  with  Christ  signifies — 
1.  Acceptance  of  the  death  and  burial  of  Christ  as  being  for  us.  We  are  not 
baptized  into  His  example,  or  His  life,  but  into  His  death.  We  hereby  confess  that 
all  our  salvation  hes  in  that  which  we  accept  as  having  been  incurred  on  our 
account.  2.  An  acknowledgment  of  our  own  death  in  Christ.  My  burial  with 
Christ  means  not  only  that  He  died  for  me,  but  that  I  died  in  Him,  so  that  my 
death  with  Him  needs  a  burial  with  Him.  Suppose  that  a  man  has  actually  died 
for  a  certain  crime,  and  now,  by  some  wonderful  work  of  God,  he  has  been  made  to 
live  again.  Will  he  commit  that  crime  again  ?  But  you  reply,  "  We  never  did  die 
80."  But  that  which  Christ  did  for  you  comes  to,  and  the  Lord  looks  upon  it  as, 
the  same  thing.  You  have  died  in  Christ's  death,  and  now  by  grace  you  are  brought 
np  again  into  newness  of  Ufe.    Can  yon,  after  that,  turn  back  to  the  accursed  thing 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

ffhioh  God  bates  ?  3.  Burial  with  a  view  to  rising.  If  you  are  one  with  Christ  at 
all,  yoa  mast  be  one  with  Him  all  through.  Since  I  am  one  with  Christ  I  am  what 
Christ  is  :  as  He  is  a  living  Christ,  I  am  a  living  spirit.  So  far  the  doctrine :  is  it 
lot  a  precious  one  ?  Shall  the  members  of  a  generous,  gracious  Head  be  covetous 
and  grasping  ?  Shall  the  members  of  a  glorious,  pure,  and  perfect  Head  be  defiled 
with  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  and  the  follies  of  a  vain  life  ?  If  believers  are  indeed  so 
ntifled  with  Christ  that  they  are  His  fulness,  should  they  not  be  hoUnBesstae^? 
OuB  REALISED  UNION  WITH  Chkist  as  a  matter  of  experience.  There  is-lCDeath^ 
To  the  dominion  of  sm.  If  sin  commands  us  we  wiH  not  obey ^^  for  vtfe»aEeid^ra_ 
•tTTttSTiufhority.  '  Sm  cannot  retgn  over  UT,  thoSgh'lt  hiayXssail  us  and  wort  us 
harm:  (27  To  the  desire  of  any  such  power.  The  law  in  the  members  would  fain 
Qfge-te-sin,  but  the  Ufe  of  the  heart  constrains  to  holiness.  (3)  To  the  pursuits 
and  aims  of  the  sinning  life.  We  are  in  the  world,  and  have  to  Uve  as  other  men 
do,  carrying  on  our  ordinary  business;  but  all  this  is  subordinate,  and  held  in 
as  with  bit  and  bridle.  (4)  To  the  guidance  of  sin.  Our  text  must  have  had  a  very 
forcible  meaning  in  Paul's  time.  An  average  Boman  of  that  period  was  a  man 
accustomed  to  the  amphitheatre.  Taught  in  such  a  school,  he  was  cruel  to  the  last 
degree,  and  ferocious  in  the  indulgence  of  his  passions.  A  depraved  man  was  not 
regarded  as  being  at  all  degraded ;  not  only  nobles  and  emperors,  but  the  publio 
teachers  were  impure.  When  those  who  were  regarded  as  moral  were  coiTupt,  you 
may  imagine  what  the  immortal  were.  See  here  a  Boman  converted  by  the  grace  of 
God  1  What  a  change  is  in  him  I  His  neighbours  say,  "  You  were  not  at  the 
amphitheatre  this  morning."  "  No,"  he  says,  "  I  am  totally  dead  to  it.  If  you  were 
to  force  me  to  be  there,  I  must  shut  my  eyes,  for  I  could  not  look  on  murder  com- 
mitted in  sport  1 "  The  Christian  did  not  resort  to  places  of  Uceotiousness  ;  be  was 
dead  to  such  filthiness.  The  fashions  of  the  age  were  sujpirthat"€^istians  could 
not  consent  to  them,  and  so  they  became  dead  to  society.  '2.  Burial).)  This  is — (1) 
The  seal  of  death,  the  certificate  of  decease.  There  have  been  iastS^hces  of  persons 
being  buried  alive,  and  I  am  afraid  that  the  thing  happens  with  sad  frequency  in 
baptism,  but  it  is  unnatural,  and  by  no  means  the  rule.  But  if  I  can  say  in  very 
truth,  "  I  was  buried  with  Christ  thirty  years  ago,"  I  must  surely  be  dead.  (2) 
The  displaying  of  death.  When  a  funeral  takes  place,  everybody  knows  of  death. 
That  is  what  baptism  ought  to  be.  The  beUever's  death  to  sin  is  at  first  a  secret, 
but  by  an  open  confession  he  bids  all  men  know  that  he  is  dead  with  Christ.  (3) 
The  separateness  of  death.  The  dead  man  no  longer  remains  in  the  house.  A 
corpse  is  not  welcome  company.  Such  is  the  believer :  he  is  poor  company  for 
worldhngs,  and  they  shun  him  as  a  damper  upon  their  revelry.  (4)  The  settledness 
of  death;  for  when  a  man  is  dead  and  buried  you  never  expect  to  see  him  come 
home  again.  They  tell  me  that  spirits  walk  the  earth  ;  I  have  my  doubts  on  the 
subject.  In  spiritual  things,  however,  I  am  afraid  that  some  are  not  so  buried  with 
Christ  but  that  they  walk  a  great  deal  among  the  tombs.  The  man  in  Christ 
cannot  walk  as  a  ghost,  because  he  is  alive  somewhere  else  ;  he  has  received  a  new 
being,  and  thereSJrS'te  cannot  mutter  and  peep  among  the  dead  hypocrites  around 
him.  3.  I^urreqtion.  (1)  This  is  a  special  work.  All  the  dead  are  not  raised, 
but  our  Lora^-Bimi'self  is  "  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  slept."  He  is  the  First- 
begotten  from  among  the  dead.  As  to  our  soul  and  spirit,  the  resurrection  has  begun 
upon  us,  and  will  be  complete  as  to  our  body  at  the  appointed  day.  (2)  By  Divine 
power.  Christ  is  brought  again  "  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father."  Wh? 
did  it  not  say,  "  by  the  power  of  the  Father  "  ?  Ah,  glory  is  a  grander  word  ;  for 
all  the  attributes  of  God  are  displayed  here.  There  was  the  Lord's  faithfulness; 
for  He  had  declared  that  His  Holy  One  should  not  see  corruption.  His  love.  I  am 
sure  it  was  a  delight  to  the  heart  of  God  to  bring  back  life  to  the  body  of  His  dear 
Son.  And  so,  when  you  and  I  are  raised  out  of  our  death  in  sin,  it  is  not  merely 
God's  power,  or  God's  wisdom  that  is  seen,  it  is  "  the  glory  of  the  Father."  If  the 
tiniest  spark  of  spiritual  life  has  to  be  created  by  "the  glory  of  the  Father,"  what 
will  be  the  glory  of  that  life  when  it  comes  into  its  full  perfection,  and  we  shall  be 
like  Christ,  and  see  Him  as  He  is  1  (3)  This  resurrection  life  is — (z?)  "Rnjjirp]Y  ppw. 
We  <ire  to  "  walk  in  newness  of  life."  (b)  Active.  The  Lord  does  not  allow  us  to 
sit  down  contented  with  the  mere  fact  that  we  Uve,  nor  allow  us  to  spend  our  time 
in  examining  whether  we  are  alive  or  no  ;  but  He  gives  us  His  battle  to  fight.  His 
house  to  build,  His  farm  to  till.  His  children  to  nurse,  and  His  sheep  to  feed,  (c) 
Unending.  '*  Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead  dieth  no  more."  (d)  Not  under  tbe 
law  or  under  sin.  Christ  came  under  the  law  when  He  was  here,  and  He  had  our 
sin  laid  on  Him,  and  therefore  died ;  but  after  He  rose  again  there  was  no  sin  laid 


OBAP.  n.]  BOMANS.  465 

on  Him.  In  Hia  resoneotion  both  the  sinner  and  the  Surety  arefree.  What  had 
Christ  to  do  after  Hia  rising?  To  bear  any  more  sinf  No,  AgS^gt  tpJlve^nto 
God.  That  is  where  you  and  I  are.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  ^^uried  alivt  ^sa. 
xixi.  12 ;  Bom.  viii.  6,  and  text) ; — The  subject  would  perhaf^^BSggwi-trterrible 
physical  calamity,  such  as  the  closing  of  a  coalpit  upon  toiling  miners ;  or  of  an 
interment  ere  life  was  extinct.  But  there  are  other  senses  in  which  men  are  buried 
alive.  I.  In  an  dnfortonate  sense.  Men  are  often  buried  alive — 1.  For  the  want 
of  opportunities  of  mental  development.  How  frequently  we  hear  men  say  in 
certain  spheres  and  conditions  that  they  are  buried  alive  !  There  is  an  amount  of 
mental  life  in  all  men.  But  the  development  of  that  life  requires  certain  external 
conditions  and  favourable  opportunities.  Sometimes,  indeed,  but  rarely,  we  find 
men,  through  the  force  of  genius,  breaking  through  the  most  unfavourable  circum- 
stances ;  but  the  millions  remain  in  the  mental  grave  of  thoughtlessness  and 
ignorance.  Englishmen  have  at  last  realised  the  magnitude  of  this  calamity  ;  the 
loss  which  it  involves  to  commerce,  literature,  and  moral  influence.  2.  Through 
the  infirmities  of  age.  Some,  thirty  or  forty  years  ago,  played  prominent  parts  in  tha 
drama  of  public  life ;  but  where  are  they  to-day  ?  We  are  constantly  reading  of  tha 
death  of  an  old  Waterloo  hero,  or  Trafalgar  veteran,  or  distinguished  statesman,  or 
great  scholar,  who  have  not  been  heard  of  for  years.  This  is  a  sad  entombment, 
one  that  awaits  us  all  if  we  live  long  enough.  3.  Through  the  envy  of  their  con- 
temporaries.  This  was  perhaps  what  David  meant.  Malice  always  wishes  to 
murder,  and  to  bury.  Many  a  noble  man  in  Church  and  State,  who  is  too  truthful 
to  temporise,  too  independent  to  cringe,  is  kept  in  the  background  by  envy.  No 
invitation  shall  be  given  to  him  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  the  movements  of  hia 
party,  no  mention  shall  be  made  of  his  doings  in  the  organs  of  their  clique.  II.  In 
a  CBiMiNAL  sense  (Bom.  viii.  6).  In  the  case  of  all  unrenewed  men,  the  soul,  tha 
conscience  with  all  its  Divine  instincts  and  sympathies,  is  buried  in  the  flesh,  in  tha 
sense  in  which  a  slave  is  buried  who  has  no  liberty  of  action.  Hence  Paul  speaks 
of  it  as  "  carnally  sold  under  sin."  A  man  may  be  a  merchant,  artist,  author;  but 
the  inspiration  of  his  business,  the  glow  of  his  genius,  the  tinge  and  form  of  his 
thoughts,  will  be  flesh  rather  than  spirit.  Nay,  he  may  be  a  religionist,  and  that 
of  the  most  orthodox  stamp  :  but  his  creed  and  devotions  will  '*  be  after  the  law  of 
a  carnal  commandment,"  and  his  Christ  "  known  only  after  the  flesh."  III.  In  a 
VIBTU0U8  sense.  "We  are  buried  with  Him  by  baptism  unto  death."  Not  the 
baptism  of  water,  but  of  that  holy  fire  that  bums  up  all  corrupt  carnalties.  What 
is  buried  here  ?  Not  the  mental  faculties,  for  these  are  quickened  into  action ;  not 
the  conscience — no,  this  is  brought  out  of  its  grave  and  put  upon  the  throne.  But 
the  old  man  with  its  corruptions  and  lusts.  Whilst  this  carnal  "  I  "  is  buried,  the 
moral  '•  I"  is  quickened  and  raised.  "Nevertheless  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ 
liveth  in  me."  Now,  this  is  a  virtuous  burying  alive.  It  means  being  dead  indeed 
unto  sin,  and  alive  unto  righteousness.  As  you  must  bury  the  seed  in  the  earth 
before  you  can  have  the  living  plant,  so  you  must  bury  the  carnal  nature  before  yoa 
have  spiritual  life.  (D.  Thomat,D.D.)  Dead  and  buried  with  Christ: — In  the 
fourth  century,  when  the  Christian  faith  was  preached  in  its  power  in  Egypt,  » ' 
young  brother  sought  out  the  great  Macarius.  "  Father,"  said  he,  '*  what  is  tha 
meaning  of  being  dead  and  buried  with  Christ  ?  "  ''Myson^^^^BSXered  Mac 
♦^^ou[  remember  imr  dear  brother  who  died,  and  wasJuaMIft.  short- time.ftinc.e2_G^ 
jiowto^ia.g^»'^"i  '^"fl  telLbin?  all  the  unkind  thihgs  you  everiear.d--of  him,  an  " 
weare  gladhe^isjead,  and  thankful  to  be  rid  of  him,  for  he  was  such  a  worry  to  u^ 
^nd  causedjBo  mucE^scomf ort  in  the  Church.  Gqj_my  son,  andjay  that,  and  he^pi 
lyhi^t  hp  will  ftTTHwpif."  The  young  man  was  surprised,  and  'douT)ted  whether  h6\^ 
Really  understood;  but  Macarius  only  said,  " Do  as  I  bid  you,  my  son,  and  coiqe- 
and  tell  me  what  our^eparted  brother  8ay£"  TEe  young  man  did  as  he  was 
commanded,  and  returned.  "Well,  and  what  did  our  brother  say?"  asked 
Macarius.  "  Say,  father  !  "  he  exclaimed ;  "  how  could  he  say  anything  ?  Ha  is 
dead."  "  Go  now  again,  my  son,  and  repeat  every  kind  and  flattering  thing  you 
have  ever  heard  of  him ;  tell  him  how  much  we  miss  him ;  how  great  a  saint  ha 
was  ■,  what  noble  work  he  did ;  how  the  whole  Church  depended  upon  him ;  and 
come  again  and  tell  me  what  he  says."  The  young  man  began  to  see  the  lesson 
Macarius  would  teach  him.  He  went  again  to  the  grave,  and  addressed  many 
flattering  things  to  the  dead  man,  and  then  returned  to  Macarius.  "  He  answers 
nothing,  father;  he  is  dead  and  buried."  "You  know  now,  my  son,"  said 
the  old  father,  "what  it  is  to  be  dead  with  Christ.  Praise  and  blame  equally 
are  nothing  to  him  who  is  really  dead  and  buried  with  Christ."         That  UJc* 


V 


\/ 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

as  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead  hy  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we 
also  should  walk  In  newness  of  life. — Christ's  resurrection  and  ours  for  the  glory 
of  God : — It  glorifies  His  omnipotence.  For  if  creation  required  omnipotence,  so 
does  the  new  creation.  It  glorifies  His  wisdom ;  for  what  wisdom  is  required  to 
"  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  " !  To  reconcile  sinful  man  to  a  holy  God. 
It  glorifies  His  justice;  for  how  could  God  have  forgiven  us,  except  at  the  expense 
of  His  justice,  had  He  not  received  atonement  in  the  person  of  Jesus ;  and  how 
could  He  have  given  us  any  comfort  in  that  atonement,  if  He  had  not  raised  Jesus 
from  the  dead,  and  thus  show  us  that  the  price  of  our  redemption  was  fully  paid, 
and  we  were  set  free  ?  It  glorifies  His  truth ;  for  God  had  said  that  jijhould  be  so, 
and  we  had  to  wait  for  the  fulfilment  of  His  promise,  and  in--tKe'fulne33~olHime 
Jesus  came,  died,  and  rose  again.  {Bp.  Montagu  Villiers.)  (^Resurrection-life, 
1.  The  chapter  connects  the  historical  resurrection  of  Christ  wittJFflie-spnrltual 
resurrection  of  the  heart  by  the  golden  link  of  "  baptism."  2.  We  have  to  consider 
what  is  the  "newness  of  life  "  in  which  we  are  to  "  walk,"  or  •*  walk  about,"  the 
metaphor  referring  to  our  ordinary  '*  walk  "  in  the  beaten  track  of  every-day  life ; 
for  this  is  "  the  newness  of  life  "  which  God  loves — not  the  striking  out  of  some 
novel  path,  but  the  old  path  trodden  every  day  with  •'  new  "  affections  and  "  new  " 
attainments.  And  may  we  not  aU  say  that  there  has  been  now  quite  enough  of  old, 
dull,  religious  duties,  enough  of  worldly-mindedness,  enough  of  things  which  have 
done  nothing  else  but  disappoint  us,  enough  of  things  that  die?  And  could  there 
be  a  better  season  than  this  Easter  for  starting  afresh  upon  the  journey  of  life  ? 
Look  at  this  life  as  "  new" — I.  In  the  ubthod  of  its  formation.  1.  There  is  a 
natural  life  which  we  all  obtain  from  our  father  and  mother.  It  carries  an  entail 
from  Adam — a  stream  of  corruption  and  a  camal-mindedness.  But  Jesus  took 
manhood,  and  did  His  mediatorial  work,  that  He  might  become,  like  another 
Adam,  the  root  of  another  pedigree.  Our  entrance  into  the  lineage  takes  place  by 
an  act  of  spiritual  union  to  Christ.  2.  Now  see  the  processes  of  that "  life."  When 
Christ  died  on  the  Cross  our  nature  died  in  Him.  And  now  Christ,  being  the  Head, 
rising,  draws  up  the  body.  First,  in  this  present  life,  our  souls  begin  to  be  drawn 
up  to  ascending  desires,  to  nearer  communion,  to  loftier  enjoyments,  to  a  more 
heavenly-mindedness.  Afterwards,  at  the  resurrection,  by  the  same  process,  our 
bodies  will  be  raised  up.  II.  In  its  own  constitution.  God's  way  of  making  a 
"  new  "  thing  is  not  man's  way.  God  uses  up  the  "  old  "  materials ;  but,  by  His 
Qsing  and  moulding  them,  makes  them  "  new."  Thus,  "  the  new  heavens  and  the 
new  earth "  will  only  make  another  heaven  and  earth  formed  out  of  the  old 
materials.  Or,  take  that  expression,  "  a  new  heart."  God  does  not  annihilate  a 
man's  original  temperament — remove  his  old  habits,  and  tempers,  and  feelings,  and 
make  another  man  with  him  ;  but  He  restrains,  sanctifies,  and  elevates  the  man'a 
primary  character.  The  characteristic  of  his  unconverted  state  is  the  characteristic 
of  his  converted  condition;  but  "new"  feelings  have  given  "  new"  directions  to 
old  things ;  and  "  new  "  principles  have  given  another  development ;  and  •'  new  " 
grace  has  given  "  new  "  power :  and  so,  though  he  is  the  '*  new  man,"  he  is  "  the 
old  man"  still  I  IH.  Thb  "new"  element  thrown  in  to  uaeb  a  "new  man." 
Love.  Of  this  command  we  read  that  it  is  "  old  "  and  "  new."  St.  John  in  a 
breath  calls  it  both.  •'  Old,"  in  the  letter ;  "  new,"  in  the  spirit.  "  Old,"  as  an 
naiversal  obligation ;  "  new,"  in  the  standard.  "  Old,"  in  the  fact ;  "  new,"  in  the 
motive.  *•  As  I  have  loved  you,  that  ye  also  love  one  another."  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Christ's  resurrection  and  our  newness  of  life : — I.  The  resurrection  of  our  Lord 
WAS  ATTENDED  WITH  GLORY.  It  was  glorious — 1.  In  itself  the  most  marvellous 
occurrence  in  history.  2.  In  contrast  with  Christ's  humiliation.  3.  In  its  effects. 
He  was  raised — (1)  "For  our  justification."  (2)  To  secure  our  own  resurrection. 
(3)  That  through  His  life  of  intercession  He  might  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that 
come  unto  God  by  Him.  4.  As  to  its  cause,  for  it  was  a  display  of  the  glory  or 
power  of  the  Father.  But  it  was  more  than  a  miracle  of  power,  for  all  the  attributes 
of  God  united  their  glory  in  it,  love,  wisdom,  justice,  and  mercy.  The  veil  which 
concealed  the  sacred  presence  was  rent  from  top  to  bottom  ;  and  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  was  seen  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead.  5.  Because  of  its  sequel 
in  reference  to  our  Lord.  Once  hath  He  suffered,  but  it  is  once  for  all.  His 
victory  is  final.  And  now,  therefore,  to  the  child  of  God  death  furnishes  a  couch 
of  rest,  and  is  no  longer  a  dark  and  noisome  prison  cell.  The  body  is  sown  in 
corruption,  but  it  is  raised  in  incorruption  and  immortality.  II.  The  faevllbl  in 
our  experienob  is  also  full  of  olort.  Partakers  of  His  death,  we  are  also 
partakers  of  His  xesuneotion.    This  body  of  ours  will  have  its  share  in  it  in  daa 


«HAP.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  46T 

time.  The  spirit  has  its  resurrection  even  now ;  but  we  are  "  waiting  for  the 
adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  our  body,"  1.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  that  we 
should  be  made  alive  in  Christ.  2.  This  quickening  is  a  needful  part  of  sanotifica- 
tion.  Sanctification,  in  its  operation  upon  our  character,  consists  of  three  things. 
First,  Jesus  strikes  at  the  heart  of  evil.  His  death  makes  us  die  to  sin.  After  this 
we  are  buried  with  Christ,  and  of  this  burial  baptism  is  the  type  and  token.  To 
complete  our  actual  sanctification  we  receive  heavenly  quickening,  "  for  he  that 
believeth  in  Him  hath  everlasting  life."  3.  Being  thus  quickened  you  are  partakers 
of  a  new  life.  You  are  not  like  Lazarus,  who  had  the  same  life  restored  to  him. 
True,  you  have  that  same  life  about  you.  But  your  true  life  has  come  to  you  by 
your  being  born  again  from  above.  In  this  there  is  a  striking  display  of  the  glory 
of  God.  It  is  one  of  the  highest  displays  of  Divine  power.  4.  Thus  we  have  a  pre- 
eminent security  for  future  perfection.  If  He  raised  us  up  when  we  were  dead  in 
sin,  will  He  not  keep  us  alive  now  that  we  live  unto  Him  ?  This  life  springeth  up 
unto  eternal  life.  You  shall  surely  behold  His  face  whose  life  is  already  within 
your  breast.  III.  The  life  is  emphatically  new.  I  expect  to  rcaJ,  "  even  so  we 
also  should  be  raised  by  the  glory  of  the  Father  "  ;  but  it  is  not  so.  It  is  in  Paul's 
mind  that  we  are  raised  together  with  Christ ;  but  his  thought  has  gone  further, 
even  to  the  activity  which  comes  of  life  ;  and  we  read,  "  that  we  also  should  walk 
in  newness  of  life,"  As  much  as  to  say,  "  I  need  not  tell  you  that  you  have  been 
quickened  as  Christ  was ;  but  since  you  have  been  made  alive,  you  must  show  it 
by  your  walk  and  conduct."  But  he  reminds  us  that  this  Ufe  has  much  newness 
about  it.  This  new  life  is — 1.  A  life  which  we  never  before  possessed — an  exotic, 
a  plant  of  another  clime.  It  is  not  written, "  You  hath  He  fostered,  who  had  the 
germs  of  dormant  life"  ;  but,  "  You  hath  He  quickened,  who  were  dead  in  trespasses 
And  sins."  You  had  no  Ufe,  you  had  nothing  out  of  which  Ufe  could  come.  Eternal 
Ufe  is  the  gift  of  God,  2.  New  in  its  principles.  The  old  Ufe  at  its  very  best  only 
said,  "  I  must  do  right  that  I  may  win  a  reward."  Now  you  are  moved  by  gratitude, 
now  you  serve  not  as  a  servant,  but  as  a  child.  It  is  your  joy  to  obey  out  of  love,  and 
not  from  slavish  fear.  3.  Swayed  by  new  motives.  You  Uve  now  to  please  God ; 
aforetime  you  Uved  to  please  yourself,  or  to  please  your  neighbours.  4.  One  which 
has  new  objects.  You  aim  higher ;  yea,  at  the  highest  of  aU  ;  for  you  live  for  God's 
glory.  5.  One  of  new  emotions.  Your  fears,  hopes,  sorrows,  and  your  joys  are 
new.  6.  One  of  new  hopes  ;  we  have  a  hope  of  immortality  ;  a  hope  so  glorious, 
that  it  causes  us  to  purify  ourselves  in  preparation  for  its  realisation.  7.  One  of 
new  possessions.  God  has  made  us  "  rich  in  faith."  Instead  of  groaning  that  life 
is  not  worth  having,  we  bless  God  for  our  being,  because  of  our  well-being  in  Christ, 
We  have  peace  like  a  river,  and  a  secret  joy  which  no  man  taketh  from  us.  We 
drink  of  a  weU  which  none  can  dry  up  ;  we  have  bread  to  eat  that  the  world  knows 
not  of.  8.  One  by  which  we  are  brought  into  a  new  world.  I  often  compare  myself 
to  a  chick,  which  aforetime  was  imprisoned  in  the  sheU,  In  that  condition  I  neither 
knew  myself,  nor  aught  that  was  about  me,  but  was  in  a  chaos,  as  one  unborn. 
When  the  sheU  was  broken,  Uke  a  young  bird  I  was  weak  and  full  of  wonderment 
at  the  life  into  which  I  had  come.  That  young  Ufe  felt  its  wings  and  tried  them  a 
little.  It  moved  with  trembling  footsteps,  essaying  a  new  walk.  It  saw  things  it 
never  dreamed  of.  IV.  The  walk  which  comes  out  of  this  life  is  new.  1.  The 
new  life  that  God  gives  us  is  exceedingly  active.  I  have  never  read  that  we  are  to 
lie  down  and  sleep  in  the  newness  of  Ufe.  I  greatly  question  whether  you  have  new 
Ufe  if  you  do  not  walk.  2.  This  activity  of  Ufe  induces  progress.  If  we  are  really 
quickened  we  shall  march  on,  going  from  strength  to  strength.  3.  This  walk  is  to 
be  in  newness  of  Ufe.  I  see  a  Christian  man  coming  back  from  a  place  of  question- 
amusement.  Did  he  go  there  in  newness  of  Ufe  ?  The  old  man  used  to  go  in  that 
direction.  When  a  man  has  made  a  bargain  which  will  not  bear  the  light ;  is  that 
done  in  newness  of  life  ?  When  an  employer  grinds  down  the  workman  ;  is  that 
done  in  newness  of  Ufe?  Put  off  the  old  man.  If  Christ  has  quickened  you, 
walk  in  newness  of  Ufe.  4.  This  Ufe  should  be  one  of  joyful  vivacity.  A  healthy 
Christian  is  one  of  the  Uveliest  creatures  on  earth.  Newness  of  Ufe  means  a  soul 
aglow  with  love  to  God,  and  therefore  earnest,  zealous,  happy.  Come,  my  soul,  if 
Christ  has  raised  thee  from  the  dead,  do  not  live  after  the  fashion  of  the  dark  grave 
which  thou  hast  quitted.  Live  a  God-like  life;  let  the  divine  in  thee  sit  on  the 
throne,  and  tread  the  animal  beneath  its  feet.  "  It  is  easier  said  than  done,"  cries 
one.  That  depends  upon  the  Ufe  within.  Life  is  fuU  of  power.  I  have  seen  an 
iron  bar  bent  by  the  growth  of  a  tree.  Have  you  never  heard  of  great  paving-stones 
being  lifted  by  fungi,  which  had  pushed  up  beneath  them  ?    If  you  choose  to  con- 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  yfc 

tract  your  souls  by  a  sort  of  spiritual  tight-lacing,  or  if  you  choose  to  bend  your- 
selves down  in  a  sorrow  which  never  looks  up,  you  may  hinder  your  life  and  its  walk ; 
but  give  your  life  full  scope,  and  what  a  walk  you  may  have  1  Conclusion :  I  have 
seen  boys  bathing  in  a  river  in  the  morning.  One  of  tbem  has  just  dipped  his  toes 
in  the  water,  and  he  cries  out,  as  he  shivers,  "  Oh,  it's  so  cold  I  "  Another  has 
gone  in  up  to  his  ankles,  and  he  also  declares  that  it  is  fearfully  chilly.  But  see  \ 
another  runs  to  the  bank,  and  takes  a  header.  He  rises  all  in  a  glow.  You 
Christian  people  are  paddling  about  in  the  shallows  of  religion,  and  just  dipping 
your  toes  into  it.  Oh,  that  you  would  plunge  into  the  river  of  life  I  How  it  would 
brace  you  1  What  tone  it  wo.uli,giAfe^  jjou  !  In  for  it.  Be  a  Christian,  out  and  out. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)      )^ewnes8  of  lifci: — When  the  gospel  was  first  preached,  its 


\' 


novelty  must  have  impressed  Doth  Jew  and  Gentile.  Not  only  was  the  Christian 
doctrine  something  fresh  in  the  history  of  human  thought ;  the  Christian  morality 
was  something  new  in  the  sphere  of  the  individual  and  social  existence  of  mankind. 
The  novelty  may  not  strike  us  as  it  struck  the  men  of  thp J''"*  fif"^^ry.  but  still 
Christianity  summons  all  men  to  "  newness  of  life."  (  The  new  Iifej[fl-JDQM^N2E£. 
WITH  A  NEW  BiBiH,...jEvery  human  life  has  a.  beginnif[§,'  BU  With  IM  spiritual  life ; 
there  is  what  is  cp^d  regeneration,  in  which  the  birth  of  the  body  is  followed  by 
tESt  of  the  soul.-Tlft  Is  QUICKENED  BY  A  NEW  powEB.  Mysterious  even  to  the  present 
men  of  science "^^r^KF^ecret  of  vitality.  We  "can  only  account  for  the  new  and 
spiritual  life  of  Christianity  by  accepting  the  doctrine  that  the  Holy  SpiritJakes 
possession  of  the  nature,  vivifying  it  with  a  celestial  vitality  and  energy ./(J^nOIs 
iNSPffiEJO-^Y  A  NEW-^BHtcTELiL-  What  is  it  which  distinguishes  the  life  of  tHe^Jfiris- 
iTan  from  that  of  the  w^rl(]Ur7TmspirituaImanT~ItlB  the  prevalence  and  power  of 
Divine  love  ifi  liis  nature.  riVy Is  pebfected  in  an  eveb  new  immobtalitt.  The 
life  of  the  body  perishes ;  iSfifthe  life  of  the  Christian  is  renewed  day  by  day ;  ago 
and  infirmity  have  no  power  over  it ;  even  death  fails  to  destroy  it ;  in  fact,  its 
iairest  blossom  and  its  richest  fruit  appear  only  beneath  celestial  influences,  and 
when  the  Omnipotent  "  makes  all  things  new."  [Family  Churchman.)  Newness 
of  life : — 1.  We  are  called  upon  this  Easter  morning  to  contemplate  the  master 
miracle  of  Divine  love  as  set  against  and  triumphing  over  the  masterpiece  of  Satan's 
malignity.  As  death  must  be  regarded  as  the  supreme  development  of  evil,  so 
resurrection  must  be  regarded  as  the  highest  triumph  of  good.  Now  not  only  does 
God  triumph  over  death,  but  He  actually  employs  the  enemy  to  produce  this  greater 
benefit.  2.  The  question  of  Nicodemus  is  a  natural  one.  He  might  well  conclude, 
"  I  must  of  necessity  carry  my  old  self  along  with  me  to  the  grave."  Not  so,  •'  Ye 
must  be  born  again."  But  what  form  of  birth  is  there  for  the  man  grown  old  in 
habits  of  sin  ?  The  great  discovery  was  not  made  until  from  the  womb  of  death 
there  arose  the  new-born  man,  "  the  first-begotten  of  the  dead,"  "  the  firstborn  of 
many  brethren !  "  and  from  that  time  forward  it  became  possible  for  the  sinner  to 
be  severed  from  the  incubus  of  the  past,  and  to  rise  into  newness  of  life  in  virtue  of 
his  union  with  Christ.  3.  Now,  observe  the  difference  between  God's  way  of  dealing 
with  fallen  man,  and  ours.  Nicodemus  objects,  "  How  can  a  man  be  born  when  he 
is  old,"  &c.  A  moment's  reflection  will  show  us  that  the  change  in  itself  is  exceed- 
ingly desirable.  But  all  that  we  can  suggest  is  to  patch  up  the  old  creature  ;  but  a 
thing  seldom  looks  well  after  it  is  mended,  and  it  becomes  less  and  less  serviceable 
the  more  frequently  it  is  mended  ;  and  the  fact  of  its  being  patched  indicates  that 
it  is  nearly  worn  out,  and  will  soon  be  laid  aside.  But  a  man  with  a  new  garment 
makes  a  fresh  start.  Now  God  does  not  mend — He  recreates,  and  He  presses  death 
into  the  service,  and  through  that  we  rise  to  newness  of  life,  in  which  we  are  able 
to  stand  free  from  sin.  4.  As  we  go  into  the  country  at  this  springtime,  and  gaze 
on  the  opening  leaves  and  flowers,  the  newness  of  everything  powerfully  impresses 
us.  God  might  have  restored  nature  by  a  process  of  repair ;  but  no  1  until  the 
withered  dead  leaf  is  swept  away  into  the  tomb  of  corruption  the  new  leaf  does  not 
unfold  itself  ;  but  as  soon  as  the  old  is  dead  and  lAiried  there  arises  a  newness  of 
life.  How  like  the  work  of  God  1  The  most  skilful  artist  who  endeavours  to 
imitate  nature  cannot  reproduce  nature's  freshness.  So  there  are  many  imitations 
of  religion,  but  they  are  all  devoid  of  that  virgin  freshness  which  is  only  produced 
by  the  touch  of  the  Life-giver.  5.  As  the  Lord  teaches  us  this  lesson  in  nature,  so 
He  enforces  it  by  the  striking  symbolism  of  one  of  the  sacraments.  Baptism  is  not 
a  mere  washing ;  it  is  a  burial  and  a  resurrection.  Not  that  the  mere  outward 
observance  of  the  ordinance  can  ever  produce  this ;  there  must  be  faith  in  the 
operation  of  God.  When  I  have  this  whether  it  takes  place  at  the  moment  of 
baptism,  or  after,  or  before,  makes  no  diftereuce.    The  point  is  this,  that  when  my 


CHAP.  Yi.]  BOMANS.  459 

faith  lays  hold  on  the  operation  of  God,  manifested  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ, 
and  which  is  symbolised  in  baptism,  then  that  ordinance  in  itself  is  a  pledge  that 
the  reality  of  the  blessing  which  the  ordinance  typifies  is  actually  mine.  6.  With 
these  thoughts  in  our  minds,  I  want  you  to  observe  that  Paul  says  that  we  are 
buried  and  raised  up  again  with  a  definite  object,  viz.,  the  walk  in  newness  of  life. 
You  cannot  walk  in  a  place  if  yon  do  not  reach  that  place ;  and  I  cannot  walk  in 
newness  of  life  without  having  first  of  all  been  introduced  into  a  condition  of  new- 
ness of  life.  As  ye  have  therefore  received  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  even  so  walk  in 
Him.  And  now  what  are  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  this  newness  of  life  f 
I.  The  nswnkss  of  relationship  to  God.  In  the  old  life  we  felt  there  was  some- 
thing wrong  between  God  and  us ;  we  desired  that  that  something  should  be  set 
right,  and  we  hoped  gradually  to  win  His  approval  by  a  Ufe  of  consistency.  Soine 
of  us  laboured  very  hard,  and  yet  the  end  was  disappointment.  How  was  all  this 
to  be  changed,  and  every  barrier  to  confidence  and  love  swept  away  ?  Not  by 
patching  ourselves  up.    We  saw  ourselves,  represented  by  Christ,  as  enduring  the 

Senalty  of  the  law ;  and  were  content  to  reckon  ourselves  as  crucified  with  Christ ; 
ut  "  he  that  is  dead  is  justified  from  sin,"  and  so  we  found  that  there  was  now  no 
further  condemnation  for  us  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  From  the  grave  we  rose  into 
newness  of  life,  and  our  first  experience  was  the  discovery  that  God  was  a  reconciled 
Father.  II.  Newness  of  poweb.  Faith  introduced  me  into  this  blessed  condition ; 
faith  is  to  be  the  law  of  my  experience  in  it.  There  is  a  power  now  working  within 
me ;  the  power  of  God,  whose  mighty  Spirit  has  taken  possession  of  me,  and  ia 
working  out  His  purposes  within  me.  Electricians  tell  us  that  our  nervous  system 
is  80  constituted  that  under  the  force  of  electricity  we  can  perform  prodigies  of 
strength  and  endurance  which  would  be  impossible  under  ordinary  circumstances. 
We  will  suppose  this  book  to  contain  a  weight  of  several  pounds.  I  hold  it  out  at 
arm's  length.  Presently  the  sense  of  fatigue  comes  insupportable,  and  my  arm 
must  fall  to  my  side  ;  but  turn  on  a  current  of  electricity  to  the  outstretched  arm, 
and  I  am  able  to  sustain  the  weight  indefinitely,  without  any  such  sense  of  fatigue. 
Where  does  my  part  in  the  matter  he  ? — not  in  struggling  to  force  my  arm  to  do 
what  it  is  too  weak  to  do,  but  in  yielding  my  member  to  the  power  which  can  enable 
it  to  accomplish  what  is  otherwise  impossible.  I  have  to  see  to  it  that  no  non-con- 
ductor breaks  the  invisible  stream  of  power ;  and  that  is  just  what  I  have  to  see  to 
in  my  spiritual  experience.  Am  I  in  full  connection  with  Divine  Omnipotence  ? 
*'  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  that  strengtheneth  me."  Now  do  you  not  see 
the  difference  between  going  about  the  work  of  life  flurried  with  anxiety  and 
weighted  with  care,  now  straining  every  nerve  in  an  agony  of  effort,  and  now,  weary 
and  discouraged,  sinking  into  lethargy,  and  the  quiet,  happy  confidence  of  him  who 
is  walking  in  newness  of  life,  assured  that,  whatever  may  arise,  the  new  life  within 
him  is  equal  to  any  and  every  emergency.  HI.  Newness  of  ohabacteh.  I  meet 
with  a  great  many  who  do  not  seem  to  expect  this.  How  many  of  us  are  there  who 
have  80  very  much  of  the  old  self  about  us  that  even  our  fellow-Christians  cannot 
help  being  distressed  and  pained  at  it  ?  "  Are  we  walking  in  newness  of  Ufe  ?  "  Are 
the  old  features  passing  away  ? — have  they  passed  away  ?  Too  who  were  naturally 
uncontrolled,  are  your  natural  passions  well  in  hand? — not  in  your  hand — in 
Christ's  hand  ?  You  who  were  ready  to  say  a  bitter  word  without  thinking  how 
much  pain  it  might  give,  who  rather  plumed  yourself  on  being  blunt  even  to  rude- 
ness, is  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  beginning  to  rest  upon  you  ?  You,  whose 
gifts  of  conversation  were  apt  to  degenerate  into  idle  gossip,  have  you  learned  to 
keep  the  little  member  in  its  place  ?  Are  you  doing  all  to  the  glory  of  God  ?  What 
manner  of  man  are  we  ?  We  are  children  of  the  resurrection.  When  we  get  down 
to  the  exchange,  to  the  workshop,  do  we  forget  that  ?  The  glorious  beauty  of  the 
Lord  our  God  is  for  us  ;  ffis  freshness,  purity,  the  very  bloom  of  newness  of  life,  is 
ours.  Shake  yourself  loose  of  every  encumbrance,  turn  your  back  on  every  defile- 
ment, give  yourself  over  like  clay  to  the  hand  of  the  Potter,  that  He  may  stamp 
upon  you  the  fulness  of  His  own  resurrection  glory,  that  we,  beholding  as  in  a 
mirror  the  glories  of  the  Lord,  may  be  changed  from  glory  unto  glory  as  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.  (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  Newness  of  life: — I.  Its  connection 
WITH  Chbist's  resurbection.  "Like  as" — 1.  Material  things  maybe  compared 
to  material  and  spiritual  to  spiritual ;  but  is  not  this  comparison  of  a  moral  revela- 
tion to  a  physical  transaction  arbitrary  and  fanciful  ?  The  answer  is  that  the  source 
and  motive  power  of  the  two  are  the  same.  The  manner  and  proportion  of  the 
Divine  action  at  the  tomb  of  Christ,  whea  they  are  addressed  to  sense,  enable  us  to 
trace  and  measure  them  in  the  mystery  of  the  soul's  life  when  they  are  addrebsed 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

to  spirit.  2.  Something  of  the  same  kind  may  be  observed  in  the  case  of  the  hnman 
mind.  A  mind  capable  of  writing  a  great  poem  or  history,  and  of  governing  at  the 
same  time  a  great  country,  is  not  to  be  met  with  every  day.  But  when  we  do  find 
the  two  things  combined  it  is  reasonable  to  compare  the  book  with  the  policy  of  the 
king  or  statesman,  on  the  ground  that  both  are  products  of  a  single  mind ;  and  it  is 
further  reasonable  to  expect  certain  qualities  common  to  the  two  forms  of  work. 
This  is  Paul's  position ;  Christ's  resurrection  and  the  soul's  regeneration  are  works 
of  one  powerful,  wise,  and  loving  will.  3.  Nature  can  no  more  give  us  newness  of 
life  than  a  corpse  can  raise  itself.  Prudence,  advancing  years,  the  tone  of  society, 
family  influences,  may  remodel  our  habits,  but  Divine  grace  alone  can  raise  us  from 
the  death  of  sin  to  the  life  of  righteousness.  Reflect  on  that  terrible  reality— spiri- 
tual death.  The  body  is  in  the  fuU  flush  of  its  powers,  the  mind  is  engaged  with  a 
thousand  truths,  but  neither  boisterous  spirits  nor  intellectual  fire  can  galvanise  the 
spirit  into  life.  The  spiritual  senses  do  not  act — the  eyes,  ears,  mouth,  of  the  soul 
are  closed.  Its  hands  and  feet  are  bandaged  with  the  graveclothes  of  selfish  habit. 
It  cannot  rise,  and  must  lie  on  in  its  darkness,  and  the  putrefaction  of  its  spiritual 
tomb.  And  a  great  stone  has  been  rolled  to  the  door — the  dead  weight  of  corrupt 
and  irreligious  opinion  which  bars  out  the  light  and  air  of  heaven  and  makes  the 
prison-house  secure.  How  is  such  an  encumbrance  to  be  thrown  off  ?  Even  if 
angels  should  roll  away  the  stone,  how  can  life  be  restored,  unless  He  who  is  its 
Lord  and  Giver  shall  flash  into  this  dead  spirit  His  own  quickening  power  ?  II. 
The  characteristics  common  to  both.  1.  Eeality.  (1)  Christ  really  died.  The 
piercing  of  His  side  proves  this ;  and  being  truly  dead  He  really  rose,  (a)  Some 
say  only  in  the  heart  of  His  disciples.  But  supposing  such  a  process  of  imagina- 
tion to  have  taken  place  in  the  case  of  two  or  three,  is  it  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
it  could  have  occurred  simultaneously  to  many,  (&)  Nor  was  it  a  phantom  that 
rose.  Had  that  been  the  case  it  would  surely  have  been  found  out,  by  the  women, 
by  Peter,  by  the  eleven  to  whom  He  said,  •'  A  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones  as  ye 
Bee  Me  have,"  and  by  Thomas.  Undoubtedly  His  risen  body  had  added  qualities  of 
subtlety  and  glory  ;  but  these  did  not  destroy  its  reality.  "  It  had  been  sown  in  dis- 
honour ;  it  was  raised  in  glory,"  &c.  (2)  So  the  soul's  newness  of  life  must  be, 
before  everything,  real,  (a)  What  avails  it  to  be  risen  in  imagination  and  in  the 
good  opinion  of  others,  if  having  a  name  that  we  live  while  yet  we  are  dead  ?  Is  it 
well  for  a  dead  soul  to  be  periodically  galvanised  by  unmerited  flattery  into  awkward 
mimicries  of  the  language  and  action  of  Christian  life?  (6)  What  is  the  value  of 
the  mere  ghost  of  a  moral  renewal;  of  prayers  without  heart,  actions  without 
religious  principle,  religious  language  in  advance  of  conviction  and  feeling  ?  Ah, 
the  phantoms  of  a  renewed  life  stalk  through  the  world  and  the  Church — picturesque 
in  the  distance,  and  like  wax -work  figures  hard  to  distinguish  from  the  living.  There 
is  the  phantom  life — (i)  Of  imagination  when  a  lively  fancy  has  thrown  around 
religion  the  charm  of  an  intense  interest  without  touching  religious  principle,  (ii) 
Of  strong  physical  feeling  where  occasional  bursts  of  religious  passion  are  mistaken 
for  discipline  and  surrender  of  the  will,  (iii)  Of  sheer  good  nature,  when  however 
much  is  done,  it  is  done  without  inward  reference  to  God  and  His  law.  (iv)  Of  good 
taste,  where  it  is  simply  taken  for  granted  that  certain  religious  properties  belong  to 
a  particular  social  position — phantoms  each  and  all ;  for  they  melt  into  thin  air 
under  the  harder  stress  of  service  or  sorrow.  They  may  not  safely  challenge  the 
"Handle  Me "  of  the  risen  Jesus.  So  then  the  first  lesson  is  genuineness.  Feel 
more  deeply  than  you  talk— act  as  you  feel  in  your  best  moments.  2.  Durability. 
(1)  Jesus  did  not  rise  that,  like  Lazarus,  He  might  die  again.  "I  am  alive  for  ever- 
more." "  Death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  Him."  His  triumphant  life  could 
not  be  exchanged  again  for  a  life  of  sin  and  suffering.  (2)  So  should  it  be  with  the 
Christian.  His,  too,  should  be  a  resurrection  once  for  all.  I  say  should  be,  for  God's 
grace  does  not  put  force  upon  us.  The  Christian  must  reckon  himself  to  be  dead 
indeed  unto  sin,  &o.  And  if  this  seems  hard  to  flesh  and  blood  the  Christian  will 
remember  that  he  has  forces  at  his  command  equal  to  cope  with  them.  If  the 
risen  Christ  be  in  us  the  body  is  dead  because  of  sin,  &c.  Once  risen  with  Christ  we 
need  die  no  more.  God  will  certainly  be  true,  and  we  have  but  to  cling  to  Him  and 
keep  a  tight  hand  upon  ourselves.  Nothipg'tFSi^without  can  avail  to  destroy  our 
life  if  it  be  not  seconded  from  within.  Lbiiis  XIM.  went  year  by  year  through  his 
Lenten  and  Easter  duties  and  then  fell  baftk-lntojfebauchery— a  hideous  libel  on  the 
1  teaching  of  Christ's  resurrection.  And  yet  what  if  we  with  slighter  temptations  repeat 
his  experiences?  3.  Secrecy.  (1)  Much  of  Christ's  risen  life  was  hidden  from  the  eyes 
[of  men.    His  visible  presence  after  His  resurrection  was  the  exception  rather  than 


OBAP.  ▼!.]  BOMANS.  461 

the  rale ;  and  by  this  the  disciples  were  gradually  trained  for  their  future.  It  was 
a  gentle  passage  from  the  days  of  Christ's  ministry  to  the  days  of  that  invisible 
presence  which  was  to  last  to  the  end  of  time.  But  who  can  doubt  what  the  risen 
CJhrist  was  doing?  He  needed  not  strength  as  we  need  it,  but  communion  with  the 
father  was  His  one  glory  and  joy.  (2)  Who  can  fail  to  see  here  a  lesson  and  a  law 
for  Christian  life  ?  Much  and  llic  more  important  side  of  it  must  be  hidd  n.  No 
doubt  our  business,  families,  &c.,  have  their  claims  ;  but  where  there  is  a  will  there 
is  a  way,  and  time  must  be  made  for  prayer,  self-questioning,  &o.  Alaa  for  souls 
who  shrink  from  solitude  and  secret  communion  with  God.  Does  not  the  forest 
tree,  while  flinging  its  trunk  and  branches  high  towards  the  heavens,  strike  its  roots 
for  safety  and  nourishment  ever  deeper  into  the  soil  beneath  ?  (Canon  Liddon.) 
The  several  degrees  of  personal  religion  : — Progress  in  the  new  life,  commenced  at  the 
time  of  the  second  birth,  is  more  desirable  than  success  in  business,  or  growth  from 
infancy  to  manhood.  It  is  in  this  text  urged  as  a  duty,  and  proposed  as  a  favour, 
in  consideration  of  the  resurrection  of  our  Eedeemer  from  the  dead.  I.  I  explain 
THB  WORDS  OF  MT  TEXT.  The  Apustlc  Paul,  who  experienced  in  his  own  progressive 
attainments  the  influence  of  Christ's  resurrection,  holds  it  up  to  the  view  of  the 
behoving  Romans  as  the  reason  and  the  means  of  their  walking  forward  "  in  new- 
ness of  life."  ".JWalkingJ'  indicates  not  only  vital  action,  but  also  progress  from  _ 
one  place  to  another.  That  "  walking  in  newness  of  Ufe  "  which  is  urged  in  the  ~ 
text7in  consideration  of  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord,  must  of  course  signify  both \ 
the  "exercise  of  the  Christian  life  in  all  its  parts  and  relations  and  our  progressive 
tepfovement  in  piety/^  IB  I  describe,  from  the  Scriptures,  the  several  distinct 
jWaREiS_QSL_lERS0NALNueS4iNMENT  IN  TRUE  RELIGION.  1.  The  state  of  mind  which 
exists  in  the  earliest  stage  of  true  religion  is  characterised  by  anxiety  to  escape 
tro5a_fixil_and  ^njoy  salvation.  The  anxiety  of  the  young  believer  must  be  dis- 
imguished  from  that^  unconverted  minds.  This  is  easy  in  theory,  but  difficult  in 
practice.  When  we  act,  it  is  with  imperfect  instruments  ;  with  faculties  corrupted 
by  sin  and  disordered  by  our  passions.  It  is  the  Spirit,  however,  that  helps  our 
infirmities.  The  Christian  is  anxious  to  be  delivered  from  sin  ;  the  unrenewed  man 
cares  only  for  its  consequences.  The  anxiety  of  the  believer  if  from  the  Holy 
Spirit,  is  exercised  with  a  spiritual  discernment  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  is 
influenced  by  an  ardent  desire  to  enjoy  righteousness,  and  hoUness,  and  happiness 
in  Christ ;  the  anxiety  of  the  unconverted  is  a  blind,  unholy  pa-<^Qn,  pungent 
indeed,  but  indefinite,  and  equivocal  in  respect  to  all  these  objects.  (^^O)  The  state 
of  mind  enjoyed  by  the  Christian  in  the  second  grade  of  spiritual  atwtinments  is 
characteri8e4.bj-admiratipn  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  salvation  which  He  administers. 
Great  power,  magnanimity,  and  condescension  are  in  their  own  nature  admirable  r 
infinite  perfection  is  an  object  of  the  admiration  of  all  intelligent  creatures ;  and, 
in  a  certain  sense,  the  Divine  excellency  is  admired  by  the  unregenerate.  Christians, 
too,  from  the  very  commencement  of  their  new  Ufe,  and  throughout  every  stage  of 
their  progress,  feel  an  admiration  for  God  in  Christ :  nor  does  it  cease  in  heaven  ; 
bat  in  this  stage,  after  having  ascertained  their  own  interest  in  the  grace  of  God,  it 
becomes  the  most  prominent  part  of  their  character.  They  admire  the  dignity  of 
the  mediatory  Person,  God  manifested  in  the  flesh  :  the  attributes  and,  especially, 
the  love  of  God  in  Him ;  the  wisdom  of  the  plan  devised  for  our  redemption 
through  a  covenant  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure ;  and  His  fitness  in  everything 
to  our  condition,  in  whom  it  pleased  the  Father  that  all  fulness  should  dwell. 
They  admire  the  tenderness  of  His  compassion,  the  fortitude  displayed  in  His 
Bufferings,  the  gracious  Spirit  which  rests  upon  Him,  and  which  He  Uberally 
communicates,  grace  for  grace,  from  His  own  fulness  to  our  wants.  They  admire 
the  place  on  high,  where  He  is  enthrone«Ho  light,  and  into  which  they  have  now 
themselves  a  sure  hope  of  admission.  (ajjcEifeJybixd^eriqd  of  ChrisJian-prQ^  — 
is  characterised  by  a  thirst  for  religionsKnowledge.  In  every  art  or  science,  the 
1tSriod"i»©sfr  f avotrrable  to  thd  ardent  pursuit  ot  Knowledge  is  immediately  after  the 
habits  and  the  language  pecuhar  to  it,  and  at  first  strange,  have  become  familiar 
and  easy  ;  after  a  high  admiration  of  the  objects  of  study  is  felt  by  the  learner  ; 
and  before  the  actual  business  of  life  demands  his  chief  attention.  There  is  a 
similar  period  in  the  religious  life  of  man.  The  knowledge  of  Divine  things, 
always  desirable  and  useful,  is  pursued  vrith  peculiar  ardour  so  soon  as  we  have 
attained  to  that  patient  admiration  of  its  glorious  objects  which  accompanies  the 
full  assurance  of  hope.  Then  the  speculative  powers  of  the  mind,  enlightened  by 
the  Hol^?*ljhost,  search  for  knowledge,  and  procure  it  on  account  of  its  own  intrinsic 
worth.  \[i.)/£hQ  fourth  period  of  Christian  progress  is  characterised  by  pubhc  spirit 


J 


4m  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  vi. 

in  promoting  the  interests  of  the  Church.  A  benevolent  disposition  towards  man- 
kind,  and  a  special  regard  for  the  godlj,  are  coeval  with  the  Christian  life ;  and 
wheresoever  these  exist,  there  will  also  be  some  exertions  for  promoting  the  good  of 
the  house  of  the  Lord  :  but  it  requires  great  progress  in  the  new  life  before  any  one 
ifl  characterised  by  self-denial  in  the  Church's  service  similar  to  that  of  Moses, 
who  chose  affliction  with  the  people  of  God ;  by  an  enlightened  ardour  in  the  work 
of  righteousness,  like  Elijah  the  prophet ;  and  by  such  disinterestedness  as  was 
practised  by  Paul  the  apostle.  This  is  not  a  blind  devotion  to  the  interests  of  a 
party,  but  a  spirit  of  magnanimity  and  liberality,  fostered  and  directed  by  the 
Word  of  God.  5.  The  fifth  degree  of  progress  in  personal  piety  is  characterised  by 
heavenly-mindedness.  6.  The  highest  rank  in  personal  godliness  on  earth  is 
attained  by  those  who  willingly  suffer  for  Christ's  sake.  Voluntary  martyrdom  for 
any  cause  is  an  evidence  of  personal  resolution  and  sincerity — the  highest  which 
man  can  give  of  his  attachment  to  the  cause  he  has  espoused.  And  it  is  easy  to 
show  that  the  disciple  who  willingly  carries  the  cross,  for  which  he  is  misrepre- 
sented and  maligned  by  his  contemporaries,  rises  far  superior  in  heroism  to  the 
patriot  soldier  who,  encouraged  by  the  honours  of  a  military  life,  and  cheered  by 
the  voice  of  applause  loudly  raised  by  his  country,  exposes  himself  to  danger  and 
to  death.  Reason,  as  well  as  Divine  revelation,  of  course,  justifies  the  Christian 
in  sacrificing  cheerfully  the  honours  and  comforts  of  this  life,  and  even  life  itself, 
when  they  come  in  competition  with  the  honour  which  cometh  from  God  and 
with  the  never-ending  enjoyments  of  the  heavenly  life.  The  duty  and  the  reward 
of  such  a  sacrifice  are  sufficiently  obvious:  "  Whosoever  shall  lose  his  life  for  My  sake 
and  the  gospel's,  the  same  shall  save  it "  ;  but  the  disposition  of  mind  to  perform  the 
duty  in  view  of  the  high  reward  is  a  rare  attainment  in  grace.  The  Lord  Himself  will, 
however,  bestow  it  according  to  His  good  pleasure,  in  those  extraordinary  times  of  trial 
which  call  for  it,  upon  them  whom  the  King  delighteth  to  honour.  (A.  McLeod,  D.D.) 
Freshness  of  being : — 1.  In  everything  which  is  really  of  God  there  is  a  singular 
freshness;  it  is  always  like  that  "tree  of  life,  which  bare  twelve  manner  of  fruits, 
and  yielded  her  fruit  every  month  " ;  there  is  a  continual  novelty.  And  yet  some 
people  speak  of  the  sameness  of  a  religions  life.  2.  Through  a  new  spirit,  endowed 
with  a  new  heart,  by  a  new  and  living  way,  in  obedience  to  a  new  commandment, 
with  mercies  new  to  us  every  morning,  carrying  a  new  name,  we  travel  to  a  new 
heaven  and  a  new  earth,  where  we  shall  sing  a  new  song  for  ever  and  ever.  Well 
might  Christ  say,  •'  Behold  I  make  all  things  new."  3.  If  there  be  a  time  when  we 
ought  specially  to  study  •'  newness,"  surely  it  is  now  in  this  springtime,  when  the 
resurrection  of  Christ  is  telling  us  of  risen  beings  coming  forth  to  new  affections, 
and  higher  enterprises.  Therefore  let  us  study  "newness."  4.  For  who  has 
not  a  great  deal  which  he  would  get  rid  of  f  Old  levels  of  thought,  old  appetites, 
clingings,  selfishnesses,  prejudices,  sins  I  And  may  we  not  be  thankful  that  we 
have  to  do  with  a  religion  which  is  always  giving  grace  through  new  opportunities, 
for  new  actions,  whose  very  essence  is  a  daily  renovation,  and  whose  key-note  all 
along  is  resurrection  ?  I.  What  is  "  newness  "  ?  1.  It  is  better  than  creation. 
Beautiful  as  must  hav«  been  the  Holy  Child,  as  He  lay  a  babe  at  Bethlehem,  the 
same  form,  risen  from  the  tomb,  was  lovelier.  The  heavens  and  the  earth  of 
innocence  were  fair.  But  "  tbe  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  "  which  are  to  be, 
shall  exceed  the  glories  of  Eden.  2.  The  good  that  comes  out  of  evil  is  better  than 
the  good  which  has  never  been  soiled.  The  old  goes  to  make  the  new.  The  old 
passions,  the  old  bias,  the  old  elements  of  the  natural  man,  go  to  make  the  strength, 
the  elevation  of  the  new  creation,  the  same,  yet  not  the  same.  II.  Let  us  tbacb 
WHEEE  the  "  newness"  LIES.  1.  There  is  set  a  "new  "  motive,  "God  loves  me. 
How  can  I  show  Him  that  I  do  indeed  love  Him  who  has  been  so  exceedingly  kind 
to  me  ?  "  2.  Bars  and  fetters  have  been  falling  off  from  that  man's  soul,  and  he 
feels  a  "  new  "  principle.  He  is  emancipated  from  a  long,  dark  bondage.  And  he 
goes  forth  into  the  old  world,  its  scenes  are  just  the  same,  but  a  "  new  "  sunshine 
lies  npon  everything,  it  is  the  medium  of  his  "  new-bom  "  peace,  it  is  a  smile  of 
God.  And  oh  I  how  changed  that  world  looks  to  him.  3.  And  so  his  standard  is 
always  rising.  He  leaves  the  past  attainments  behind,  as  nothing  to  the  heights 
which  are  opening  before  him.  He  has  ever  a  new  ambition,  therefore  he  enter- 
prises new  works  for  God.  And  all  the  while,  Christ  reveals  Himself  to  him  with 
ever-increasing  clearness.  Some  new  view  of  some  old  truth,  some  yet  nntasted  sense 
of  his  own  pardon,  is  always  breaking  upon  his  wondering  mind.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Christianity  the  renewal  of  the  race : — 1.  Christianity  has  become  to  as  such  an 
•veiy-dayandoldthiog,  bo  different  from  the  amazing,  inspiring  miraole  which  onoa 


OHAP.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  46S 

it  was,  that  we  fail  to  realise  how  Divine  a  revolution  it  was  intended  to  effect.  Tet 
Christ  and  His  apostles  tried  to  impress  upon  us  that  the  gospel  was  not  a  slightly 
improved  Judaism,  not  a  mere  scheme  to  produce  the  average  morality  of  men,  but 
a  vast  reversal  of  the  past,  a  fresh  beginning  for  the  future.  "  May  we  know  what 
this  new  teaching  is?"  cried  the  votaries  of  obsolete  philosophies  on  Mars  Hill. 
The  writer  to  the  Hebrews  describes  Christ  as  a  new  and  living  way  to  God.  St. 
Paul  describes  conversion  as  putting  off  the  old  man,  with  his  affections  and  lusts, 
and  putting  on  the  new  man,  and  says:  "If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new 
creature ;  old  things  are  passed  away,  behold  they  are  come  new."  And  St.  Peter 
epeaks  of  "  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."  And 
St.  John  in  the  Apocalypse  talks  of  *'  a  new  name  "  and  "  a  new  song,"  and  a  "  new 
Jerusalem  descending  out  of  heaven  from  God,"  and  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne 
said:  "Behold,  I  make  all  things  new."  Life  from  the  dead — newness  of  life — 
that  was  the  conception  which  the  apostles  and  evangelists  had  formed  of  Christi- 
anity. 2.  It  was  not  that  any  ostensible  change  had  taken  place  in  the  world 
around  them.  Men  married,  and  gave  in  marriage,  and  sinned,  and  suffered,  and 
lied,  as  before.  Heathenism  hardly  deigned  to  cast  one  single  glance  upon  Christi- 
anity, or,  if  so,  simply  scorned  it  as  an  insane  enthusiasm  or  hated  it  as  an  execrable 
superstition.  And  that  despised  handful  of  artisans  and  fishermen  was  right, 
and  the  world,  with  all  its  powers,  and  splendours,  was  wrong.  Not  with  the  diadem, 
and  the  purple,  the  wisdom  of  Greece,  the  venerable  institutions  of  Jerusalem, 
were  the  truth,  and  the  force,  and  the  glory  of  the  future.  With  them  was  the 
ebbing,  with  these  was  the  flowing  tide.  The  peopled  walls  of  tbe  amphitheatre 
broke  into  yells  of  sanguinary  exultation  when  the  tiger  sprang  upon  some  aged 
martyr  ;  but  the  hope  and  the  meaning  of  all  human  life  were  with  him,  and  not 
with  them.  3.  "  Yes,"  the  cynic  will  coldly  answer,  "  the  world  goes  mad  at  times, 
and  this  was  one  of  the  world's  strange  delusions ;  but  we  have  changed  all  that." 
Now  we  have  come  to  the  time  when  every  little  nobody  can  pose  in  the  attitude  of 
immense  superiority  to  the  ignorant  superstition  of  Christians.  First  comes  the 
materialist,  who  thinks  himself  great  because  he  cannot  beheve  in  anything  which 
he  cannot  grasp  with  both  hands.  "  Why  should  I  accept,"  he  asks,  "  anything 
which  I  cannot  verify  ? "  But  he  forgets  to  ask  whether  for  the  truths  which  he 
rejects  there  can  be  any  verifying  faculty  but  that  spiritual  faculty  of  which  he 
denies  the  very  existence.  When  we  are  assured  by  the  materialist  that  man  is 
but  an  animal,  that  he  is  a  chance  product  of  evolution  ;  that  what  he  takes  for 
his  thoughts  are  only  a  chemical  change  of  the  molecules  in  the  grey  substance  of 
his  brain — at  everything  of  this  kind  Christians  can  only  smile,  not  in  anger,  but 
in  deep  sorrow.  If  a  man  resolutely  closes  his  eyes  we  cannot  greatly  respect  his 
asservation  that  there  is  no  sun  in  heaven  ;  if  a  man  declares  that  there  is  no  God, 
are  we  astonished  if  he  has  purposely  atrophied  within  himself  the  faculty  by 
which  alone  we  are  able  to  believe  that  God  is  ?  Christianity  has  less  than  nothing 
to  dread  from  this  dry  and  dusty  s.v  stem  which  supremelv  fails  to  account  for  the 
human  consciousness  and  the  moral  nature,  and  which  offers  to  men's  unquench- 
able spiritual  yearnings  nothing  but  a  chaos  of  brute  forces  blindly  evolving  order 
out  of  mazy  dream.  But  next  we  have  the  pessimist  telling  us,  with  a  bitter  sneer, 
that,  after  all,  our  Christianity  has  hopelessly  failed.  It  is  one  of  the  notes  of 
condemnation  of  these  moral  systems  that  they  all,  unlike  Christianity,  despair  of 
man.  Pessimism  tells  us  by  the  voice  of  Schopenhauer  that  the  human  race  always 
tends  from  bad  to  worsp,  and  that  there  is  no  prospect  for  it  but  ever-deepening 
confusion  and  wretchedness.  It  asserts  with  Von  Hartmann  that  existence  is 
unspeakably  wretched,  and  society  will  ever  grow  worse  ;  and  with  Carlyle,  "  More 
dreaty,  barren,  base,  and  ugly  seem  to  me  all  the  aspects  of  this  poor,  diminishing, 
quack  world,  doomed  to  a  death  which  one  can  only  wish  to  be  speedy.'*-  4.  To  all 
such  slanders  and  caricatures  of  humanity  Faith  gives  her  unwavering  answer.  To 
the  matenalist  she  opposes  her  unalterable  conviction  that  the  worlds  were  made 
by  the  Wui-i  of  God,  and  that  He  is  the  Governor  among  the  nations.  To  the 
pessimist  sh«  answers  that  though  the  road  trodden  by  the  long  procession  of 
humanity  seems  often  to  be  rough  and  devious,  and  often  even  to  sweep  down  into 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  it  is  yet  a  road  which  does  not  plunge  into  the 
abyss,  but  is  ever  leading  us  nearer  to  our  God.  5.  But  Faith  can  appeal  not  only 
to  intuition,  but  to  reason,  to  experience,  and  to  history.  Admitting  that  change 
does  not  always  or  necessarily  imply  advance,  she  can  yet  show  that  even  amid  the 
most  vehement  moral  earthquakes  of  history  mankind  has  still  ever  found  in 
Christianity  the  secret  of  rej  uvenescence  and  of  victory.     Humanity  may  some- 


V 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n, 

times  advance  over  ruins,  but  humanity  advances  still.  The  Church  tamed  the 
barbarians  and  silenced  the  scoffers  ;  upon  the  disencumbered  debris  of  past  super- 
stition she  rebuilt  the  fairer  and  firmer  fabric  of  her  reformed  faith ;  and  now  what- 
ever ruins  may  ensue,  we  feel  secure  that  God  will  once  again,  as  ever  heretofore, 
lay  the  stones  of  His  Church  with  fair  colours,  and  her  foundations  with  sapphires, 
and  that  her  walls  should  be  salvation  and  her  gates  brass.  6.  But  after  so  many 
splendid  victories,  when  it  has  undoubtedly  blessed  the  world,  how  is  it  that  men 
allow  themselves  so  easily  to  speak  slightingly  and  scornfully  of  Christianity  as  they 
do  ?  I  answer,  it  is  our  fault.  A  man  must  be  ignorant  indeed  if  he  does  not 
know  how  Christianity  changed  the  life  and  character  of  the  whole  civilised  pagan 
world.  What  need  have  I  to  tell  yon  how  it  rescued  the  gladiator,  how  it  emanci- 
pated the  slave,  how  it  elevated  womanhood,  how  it  flung  over  childhood  the  aegis 
of  its  protection,  how  it  converted  the  wild,  fierce  tribes  from  the  icy  steppes  and 
broad  rivers  of  the  North,  how  it  built  from  the  shattered  fragments  of  the  Boman 
empire  a  new  created  world,  how  it  saved  learning,  how  it  baptized  and  recreated 
art,  how  it  inspired  music,  how  it  placed  the  poor  and  the  sick  under  the  angel 
wings  of  mercy,  and  entrusted  to  the  two  great  archangels  of  reason  and  conscience 
the  guidance  of  the  young  ?  And  is  not  Christianity  exactly  what  it  ever  was  ?  Is 
her  force  spent  ?  Where  is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  ?  Is  His  hand  shortened  that 
it  cannot  save,  or  His  ears  heavy  that  they  cannot  hear  ?  God  is  where  and  what 
He  was.  It  is  not  the  "  I  am  that  I  am  "  who  has  changed,  but  it  is  we  who  are 
dead,  faithless,  hollow  and  false.  The  new  life  of  the  gospel  is  as  full  of  fire  as  it 
ever  was  ;  but  because  we  have  never  truly  felt  and  tested  it  we  work  no  miracles, 
we  cast  out  no  devils,  we  subdue  no  kingdoms.  God  never  does  for  man  the  work 
which  He  has  assigned  to  man  himself  to  do.  It  is  of  no  use  for  us  to  say,  "  Well, 
God  will  mend  all."  We  must  help  Him.  Ahandfulof  peasants,  beaten,  imprisoned, 
treated  as  the  offscouring  of  all  things,  faced  pagan  Borne  in  the  plenitude  of  her 
despotism,  made  whole  armies  drop  their  weapons  before  their  defenceless  feet.  If 
they,  with  so  little,  did  so  much,  how  is  it  that  we,  with  so  much,  do  so  little  ?  Of 
what  use  is  it  for  us  to  cry,  "Awake,  0  arm  of  the  Lord? "  It  is  we  who  must 
awake.  If  Christianity  does  not  prosper,  it  is  only  because  the  vast  majority  of  as 
are  Christians  in  name  alone.  We  no  longer  feel  that  newness  of  life  ;  we  multiply 
organisations,  but  we  enkindle  no  enthusiasm :  we  posture,  and  pray,  and  boast, 
and  babble,  and  rail  at  one  another,  and  Christ  stands  far  away  ;  we  give  a  guinea 
to  a  missionary  society,  and  think  that  we  have  discharged  all  our  responsibihties 
to  the  heathen  world.  Thus  our  Christianity  is  smitten  with  vulgarity ;  it  is 
commonplace,  tamed  out  of  its  heroic  faith  and  its  splendid  passion.  If  in  one 
single  congregation  the  fire  of  God  burst  forth  again  in  every  heart  as  in  some  of 
those  congregations  of  the  early  Christians — yea,  if  there  were  but  one  man  hero 
and  there  capable  of  a  God-like  and  absolute  self-sacrifice — how  would  such  a  man 
flash  the  vivid  thrill  of  nobleness  into  ten  thousand  hearts  ;  how  would  life  move 
again  among  the  dry  bones  of  the  valley  of  vision  I  To  very  few  in  the  long 
generations  is  it  given  to  achieve  a  mighty  work  like  this ;  but  to  every  one  of  us 
it  is  given  to  help  it  forward  and  to  carry  it  on.  Every  one  of  us  can  at  least  catch 
some  faint  and  feeble  and  twinkling  spark  from  that  unemptiable  fountain  of  eternal 
light.  (Archdn.  Farrar.)  The  new  life  in  the  nation  and  the  family : — 1.  The 
prophets  were  interested  not  only  in  their  own  nation,  but  i*  the  world  around 
them.  Christianity  always  suffers  when  it  is  dwarfed  into  individualism,  or  when 
it  is  made  simply  selfishness  expanded  to  infinity.  If  Christianity  was  meant  to  be 
a  new  life  in  the  world,  it  surely  ought  to  exercise  a  profound  influence  upon  every 
nation.  But  can  we  honestly  say  that  in  any  lofty  sense  even  those  kingdoms 
which  call  themselves  Christian  have  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and  of  His 
Christ  ?  2.  The  earliest  of  the  prophets  is  Amos,  and  he  begins  his  book  by  looking 
at  the  seven  neighbouring  nations,  each  of  which  he  is  compelled  to  condemn,  and 
then  turning  to  his  own.  The  voice  of  prophecy  has  long  dwindled  down  into 
smooth  generalities ;  but  suppose  one  true  prophet  were  hving,  and  were  to  turn 
his  gaze  upon  the  nations  of  Europe,  would  he  be  content  to  indulge  in  the  song  of 
*'  Peace  on  earth  "  ?  Strange  peace,  when  there  are  in  Europe  upwards  of  thirteen 
millions  of  men  under  arms.  Look  at  the  relations  of  European  nations.  The 
Kaffir,  the  Hindu,  the  Australian,  &c.,  have  not  the  footsteps  of  our  race  among 
them  been  dyed  in  blood?  Two  crimes  fling  their  lurid  light  over  every  land. 
There  is  the  crime  of  the  man-stealer,  which  makes  whole  regions  of  Africa  red 
with  human  blood;  and  the  yet  more  ruinous  crime  of  selling  to  the  natives  a  filthy 
poison  christened  gin  or  rum.    We,  the  Pharisees  of  the  world,  in  the  name  oi 


OBAT.  TX.]  EOMANS.  465 

Free  Trade,  ate  inoculating  the  world  with  a  virus  of  a  deadly  pestilence.  It  is 
greed  which  prevents  Germany  and  England  and  America  from  combining  at  once 
as  righteous  and  noble  nations  ought  to  do,  to  prevent  this  decimation  of  the  Dark 
Continent.  3.  If  Amos  were  alive  in  these  days  would  he  not  cry, "  Thus  saith  the 
Lord,  For  three  transgressions  of  Russia,  and  for  four,  I  will  not  turn  away  the 
punishment  thereof,  because  her  Church  is  torpid,  and  her  upper  classes  unbelieving. 
For  three  transgressions  of  Germany,  and  for  four,  will  I  not  turn  away  the  punish- 
ment thereof,  because  she  has  the  spirit  of  militarism,  and  is  grasping  and  insolent. 
For  three  transgressions  of  France,  and  for  four,  I  will  not  turn  away  the  punish- 
ment thereof,  because,  unwarned  by  the  collapse  and  catastrophe  of  twenty  years 
ago,  she  still  suffers  her  sons  to  flood  Europe  with  filthy  literature,  and  has  erased 
from  her  statute-book  the  name  of  God  "  ?  Might  not  such  a  prophet  also  proceed 
to  mention  the  names  of  Spain,  Italy,  and  Turkey,  and  after  looking  around  at 
these  nations,  what  would  he  say  of  England  7  *'  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  For  three 
transgressions  of  England,  and  for  four,  I  will  not  turn  away  the  punishment 
thereof  Are  not  men  estimated  for  what  they  have  far  more  than  for  what  they 
are?  Are  there  not  spurious  goods  and  lying  advertisements 7  Are  there  no 
sweaters'  dens?  Is  not  Christ  sold  for  filthy  lucre?  Are  not  thousands  ruined  by 
gambling  7  Are  there  not  in  London  alone  a  number  equal  to  the  whole  population 
of  Norwich  of  lost,  degraded  beings  7  Are  there  not  streets  as  full  as  Sodom  of 
youths  who  have  poisoned  their  own  blood  and  the  blood  of  generations  yet  to 
come  ?  Is  it  no  crime  that  in  spite  of  the  warning  of  fifty  years,  drink  should  still 
continue  to  be  the  potent  curse  which  has  folded  this  nation  round  and  round  in 
its  serpent  coils  ?  4.  Dare  we  say  otherwise  than  that  Christian  nations  are  not 
walking  in  newness  of  Ufe  ?  Let  none  of  you  say,  "  It  does  not  concern  me."  It 
does  concern  you  ;  and  every  one  of  us  is  guilty  and  responsible  so  far  as  we  have 
suffered  Christ  in  our  lives  to  become  nothing  but  a  name,  and  Christianity  in  our 
examples  to  be  dwarfed  and  dwindled  into  a  sectarian  squabble  or  a  paltry  form. 
Look  at  America  sixty  years  ago.  One  boy — William  Lloyd  Garrison — confronts 
enraged  statesmanship,  and  alone,  with  the  dagger  of  the  assassin  flashing  every 
day  across  his  path,  proclaimed  to  the  slave  States  of  America  the  duty  of  emanci- 
pation, and  lived  to  carry  the  great  plan  which  as  a  boy  he  had  devised.  Look  at 
England  fifty  years  ago — filled  with  sullen  discontent,  with  starving  poor ;  children 
in  factories  were  made  a  holocaust  to  Mammon ;  women  bent  double  ;  half -naked 
men  dragging  waggons  of  coal,  Uke  beasts  of  burden,  in  wet,  black  collieries  ;  the 
streets  were  alive  with  ignorance  and  vices.  Then  arose  Anthony  Astley  Shaftes- 
bury. We  cannot  all  be  great  heroes,  but  we  may  be  humble  soldiers  in  that  great 
army  when  the  Son  of  God  goes  forth  to  war.  5.  For  is  there  not  one  of  us  who 
does  not  belong  to  some  family  ?  And  always  the  corner-stone  of  the  common- 
wealth is  the  hearthstone.  The  chief  hope  for  any  country,  the  chief  element  for 
England's  safety,  now  lies  in  the  purity  of  her  homes.  If  you  can  do  nothing 
more,  every  one  of  yon  may  perform  in  your  home  the  high  duty  of  patriotism.  If 
the  Spartans  were  invincible,  if  the  Romans  carried  into  the  world  their  majestic 
institutions,  it  was  because  Spartan  and  Roman  mothers  would  tolerate  no 
effeminate  sons,  no  lackadaisical  daughters.  Let  us  each  try  so  to  illustrate  the 
workings  of  the  new  life  that  by  thus  kindling  throughout  the  length  and  breadth 
of  England  myriads  of  twinkling  points  of  light  there  may  be  one  broad  glow  of  t^^ 
Christianity  throughout  the  world.  {Ibid.)  _  The  new  life  in  the  itidimdMcd  : —  '^ 
1.  As  the  family  is  the  unit  of  the  nation,  so  the  individual  is  the  unit  of  the 
family.  We  get  at  the  inmost  meaning  of  what  the  gospel  was  intended  to  achieve 
when  we  ask,  "  What  should  the  new  Ufe  effect  for  each  separate  soul  ?  "  2.  Look 
out  into  the  world  around  you  and  see,  as  Ezekiel  saw,  the  torn  and  wandering 
flock,  sheep  without  a  shepherd,  scattered  on  the  dark  hills  in  the  dark  and  cloudy 
day.  Many  simply  shrug  their  shoulders  at  the  sight  in  despair.  They  say  all  this 
curse  is  irretrievable.  Some  have  nothing  but  scorn  and  contempt.  Not  so  Christ. 
There  is  nothing  irretrievable  with  God.  3.  And  how  did  the  Lord  of  Mercy  work  ? 
It  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  Divine  will  to  convert  the  whole 
world,  as  it  were,  by  one  hghtning  flash.  Such  compulsory  conversion  is  no  con- 
version. Christ's  word  was,  as  ours  ought  to  be,  largely  with  the  individual.  He 
came  to  a  land  full  of  misery.  He  saw  the  blind,  the  halt,  the  leper,  &c.,  and  He 
cured  the  incurable  who  came  to  and  believed  on  Him.  But  far  Diviner  was  the 
miracle  which  He  wrought  upon  the  souls  of  all  who  received  Him.  The  official 
religionism  and  ritual  and  priestliness  had  wholly  failed  to  touch  t'nis  mass  of  sin 
and  misery.    But  He  turned  the  wretch erl  to  his  Father  in  heaven,  and  shed  on  tie 

VOL.  X.  ao 


466  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  fl. 

Bonis  of  the  hnmble  and  the  penitent  the  pure  eternal  ray  of  His  transcendent  love. 
Then  each  soul,  however  lost  and  fallen,  revealed  the  beauty  which  was  in  it ;  and 
as  when  one  nplifts  a  torch  in  a  cavern  full  of  gems,  and  they  awaken  into  million- 
fold  lustre,  so  at  the  touch  of  Christ's  heavenly  sympathy  each  soul  flashed  back 
its  inward  gleam  of  peculiar  light.     4.  Herein  lies  the  secret  of  our  regeneration, 
and  of  the  regeneration  of  the  world.     The  publicans  were  hated,  and  naturally 
hated,  as  the  greedy  jackals  of  a  distasteful  oppression.    Yet  even  of  these  wretches 
Christ  did  not  despair.    One  loving  word  to  Zaccheus,  and  lo !  one  half  of  hia 
goods  he  gives  to  the  poor ;  one  loving  word  to  Matthew,  and  lo !  he  springs  up  an 
evangelist  and  an  apostle.    And  so  it  was  with  yet  more  miserable  outcasts.     The 
woman  that  was  a  sinner,  lost  to  purity,  to  innocence,  to  womanhood — yet  He 
Buffered  her  to  wash  His  feet  with  her  tears  and  to  wipe  them  with  the  hairs  of  her 
head.  The  dying  malefactor,  even  he  repented  and  heard  the  gracions  words,  "This 
day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  paradise."    And,  as  though  to  show  us  that  these 
were  not  accidental  cases,  He,  the  Friend  of  publicans  and  sinners,  embraced  the 
degradation  of  all  sinners  alike  in  His  pearl  of  parables — the  parable  of  the  prodigal 
son.    It  was  the  revelation  of  God  as  a  loving  Father ;  it  was  not  any  weak  and 
beggarly  observances,  it  was  not  any  threats  of  a  bodily  hell  which  made  multi- 
tudes holy  in  a  world  of  paganism,  where  heretofore  the  very  ideal  of  holiness  had 
been  unknown.  And  herein  lies  the  essential  and  the  irrevocable  evidence  of  Christi- 
anity— the  changed  lives  of  multitudes  of  Christian  men.     5.  But  here  we  come 
back  to  the  momentous  question — Christ  has  saved  a  multitude  whom  no  man  can 
number,  but  are  we  saved  ?    The  work  of  salvation  is,  and  it  must  be  personal ;  it 
must  be  not  only  Christ  for  us,  but  Christ  in  us.    Alas,  multitudes  know  nothing  of 
personal  salvation — because  they  love  their  sins  better  than  their  Saviour,  or  out  of 
carelessness,  defiance,  or  despair,  and  some  because  of  the  religiosity  which  they 
mistake  for  religion  have  been  ossified  into  mere  function  and  routine,  and  their 
Bouls  are  rotting  asleep  amid  formula  and  rites ;  but  the  vast  majority,  I  think, 
chiefly  because  they  have  not  faith  to  believe  that  they  can  be  healed  and  Christ 
can  heal  them.    Tou  know,  many  of  you,  that  you  are  living  in  a  stnte  of  sin — 
sloth,  or  dishonesty,  or  hatred,  or  falsehood,  or  impurity,  or  habitual  discontent. 
You  do  not  love  your  sin  ;  it  may  be  that  you  loathe  it,  and  yet  you  have  become  a 
slave  to  it.     You  are  like  the  leper,  who  thinks  his  leprosy  is  altogether  incurable. 
I  bid  you  shake  off  this  despair ;  I  bid  you  hope.     Fly  into  the  stronghold.    You 
are  the  slaves  of  sin ;  but  Christ  came  to  ransom  you  from  sin.     You  think  that 
you  can  never  be  bom  again  when  you  are  old.     So  did  Nicodemus ;  yet  he  became 
a  servant  of  Christ.     Christ  is  mighty  to  save.     6.  He  saves  in  many  ways.    Some- 
times gently  and  gradually  He  wins  the  soul  with  cords  of  love ;  sometimes  He 
rends  from  the  destroyer ;  sometimes  He  breaks  the  hard  soul  with  the  blows  of 
affliction ;  sometimes  He  makes  it  soft  with  the  gracious  rain  of  sorrow ;  but  so 
lopg  as  there  is  one  sign  of  hope  He  will  not  break  the  bmi^d  reed  nor  quench  the 
ouldering  wick.     {Ibid.)        The  new  life  in  religion  ;-«*.  pan  we  say  Christianity 
itill  is  a  new  life ?    Does  it  achieve  one  thousandth  pari^i^Pwhat  it  was  intended  to 
achieve  ;  and  if  not,  what  is  the  reason  ?    Why  has  the  Church  been  smitten  with 
the  curse  of  a  spiritual  sterility  ?    It  is  one  of  the  sophisms  of  infidel  argument  to 
charge  upon  Christianity  the  crimes  and  faults  of  men  who  have  acted  in  flagrant 
contradiction  to  its  spirit.     The  representatives  of  the  Church  have  in  many  an  age 
condoned  vice,  leagued  with  tyranny.  But  to  charge  these  crimes  on  Christianity  is 
absurd  and  false ;  they  are  to  be  charged  on  anti-Christ.     Satan  is  ten-fold  Satan 
when  he  dons  the  cowl  or  the  mitre,  and  would  pass  himself  off  as  an  angel  of 
light.     And  a  religion  may  retain  the  name  and  the  semblance  of  a  religion  long 
after  it  is  dead ;  and  when  a  rehgion  has  lost  its  Kfe  how  deep  the  death  1     "  If  the 
light  that  is  within  us  is  darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness  1  "    Christianity  was 
meant  to  be  the  salt  of  the  earth,  but  "  if  the  salt  has  lost  its  savour  wherewith 
shall  it  be  salted  ?  "     •'  He  shall  baptize  you  vrith  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire  " ; 
but  when  men  have  ceased  to  believe  ifext  there  is  so  much  as  a  Holy  Ghost,  how 
shall  spiritual  miracles  be  wrought  ?C^  Now,  the  one  peril  of  all  religions  is  to 
lose  their  life,  to  lose  their  fire.     We  iSlt  of  false  religions,  but  no  religion  worthy 
of  the  name  can  be  wholly  false.    The  value  of  religions  may  sometimes  be  more 
easily  tested  by  their  results  than  by  their  doctrines.,  by  their  fire  than  by  their 
abstract  truths.     Confucianism,  for  instance,  is  now  arid  and  empty  enough,  and 
yet  Confucius  once  taught  great  truths.     Buddhism  is  the  religion  of  masses  of  the 
human  race,  and  is  rife  with  error ;  and  yet  Buddhism  is  still  kept  alive  by  ita 
great  demand  for  self-conquest  and  self-sacrifice.     Mahommedanism,  notwith> 


CHAP.  ▼!.]  ROfilA^S.  467 

Btonding  all  its  deadly  degeneracies,  saved  Arabia  from  idolatry,  and  its  demand 
for  abstinence  has  been  to  many  nations  an  inestimable  boon.  Each  of  these 
religions  has  sunk  into  inanition,  because  their  priests  have  suffered  their  votaries 
to  make  a  mere  fetish  of  their  formnlse,  and  to  violate  their  essential  life.  Judaism 
stood  incomparably  above  other  religions  in  its  Divine  origin,  but  it  proved  to  be  no 
exemption  from  this  law  of  decay.  Is  it  possible  that  Christianity  could  undergo 
a  fate  so  terrible,  and  become  no  better  than  a  phantom  ?  Yes.  Many  a  time  has 
nominal  Christendom  been  tamed  out  ojLits  splendid  passion,  and  sunk  into  Phari- 
saism, and  lost  its  renovating  power,  f^.^ow,  when  any  faith  has  sunk  into  this 
condition,  when  it  has  got  to  rely  malvi^y  upon  worthless  symbols  and  pompous 
claims,  it  is  for  the  time  dead.  It  needs  resurrection, and  A^Jiew  Pentecost.  And 
the  Christian  Church  has  had  many  such.  The  work  of  Benedict,  Wycliffe,"Huss, 
S^avonarola,  anH  Francis  of  Assisi,  was  but  a  successful  rekindling  of  dead  or  dying 
claims.  So,  too,  it  was  when  Luther  disinterred  the  true  gospel  from  the  heaped 
dfhris  of  priestly  falsehoods.  So,  too,  was  it  when  George  Fox  made  men  believe 
once  more  in  the  living  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  with  every  human  soul.  So,  too, 
was  it  when  Wesley  and  Whitefield  awoke  the  full-fed  and  torpid  Church  of  Eng- 
land. And  80  it  would  be  now  if  among  the  many  echoes  God  would  send  us  one 
voice — but  one  man  with  his  soul  so  electric  with  the  fire  off^P^  that  he  would 
make  us  feel  that  God  is  face  to  face  with  every  one  of  us.  ^(M«fThe  real  question 
to  ask  about  any  form  of  religious  belief  is,  "  Does  it  kindle  thenQre  of  love  ?  "  Does 
it  make  the  life  stronger,  sweeter,  more  noble  ?  Does  it  run  through  society  like  a 
cleansing  flame  ?  There  is  no  error  more  fatal  than  the  notion  that  correct  belief 
or  church  membership  are  of  any  value  whatever  in  comparison  with  righteousness 
of  life.  Just  as  a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  lion,  bo  a  good  heretic  or  a 
righteous  schismatic  may  be  immeasurably  dearer  to  God  and  nearer  to  heaven 
than  is,  or  can  be,,gjbad  Christian,  /^TflSow  necessary  is  it,  then,  that  our  religion, 
which  is  so  Divinely  great  and  truB,^ould  not  degenerate  in  our  hands  into  a 
pompous  system  or  an  outward  formalism.  And  yet  is  there  no  danger  of  this  ? 
What  is  the  state  of  things  in  Christian  England,  and  what  is  predominantly  occu- 
pying its  attention  ?  You  know  that  of  all  the  fifteen  hundred  millions  now  alive 
only  one  in  three  is  even  yet  a  nominal  Christian ;  that  in  Europe  at  this  moment 
thirty-six  millions  of  men  are  in  arms.  You  know  the  vice,  the  squalor,  the  misery 
of  these  great  cities ;  you  know  how  in  this  awful  city  there  are  tens  of  thousands  of 
the  unemployed,  of  paupers,  of  criminals,  of  drunkards,  of  prostitutes ;  and  that 
there  are  at  least  two  millions  and  a  half  who  scarcely  ever  enter  any  house  of  God. 
And  when  you  have  gazed  long  enough  on  this  weltering  sea  of  shame  and  misery, 
you  turn  to  the  professors  of  religion  and  find  two  hundred  and  seventy  rival  sects, 
and  the  Church  of  the  nation  rent  asunder  by  questions  as  to  who  can  fail  to  ask,  '*  Is 
this  the  outcome  of  nineteen  centuries  of  Christianity  ?  "  Is  it  about  such  questions 
that  the  new  life  is  concerned  ?  Is  Nero  fiddling  during  the  burning  of  Eome  a  sadder 
spectacle?  6.  Oh,  if  Christianity  is  ever  f  uUy  to  be  what  it  was  meant  to  be,  if  it  is  to  be 
something  more  than  a  clamour  of  contending  sects  and  contending  parties ;  if  it  is  to 
be  a  new  life  and  a  new  walk,  then  it  must  inspire  once  more  such  a  sense  of  eternity, 
Buch  a  sense  of  the  near,  immediate  presence  of  God,  such  a  behef  in  the  infinite 
love  of  Christ  and  the  power  of  His  resurrection,  such  a  consciousness  of  the  Spirit, 
as  shall  restore  it  once  more  to  its  olden  glory,  and  make  it  adequate  to  fulfil  th 
vast  promise  of  its  Lord,  "He  that  believeth  on  Me,  the  works  that  I  do  shall  he  db 
also,"  &c.  (Ibid.)  The  present  pleda£.of  life  to  come : — 1.  The  argument  of  tl^e 
text  is  that  the  hope  of  a  new  life,  like  Christ's,  beyond  the  grave  ought  to  find  its^ 
justification  in  a  new  life  here ;  that  on  either  side  of  the  grave  the  life  of  the  ^ 
spirit  is  the  same.  2.  It  is  commonly  supposed  that  the  fact  of  immortality  can 
only  be  established  by  some  external  evidence  such  as  the  resurrection  of  Christ ; 
but  the  text  refers  us  to  the  ultimate  proof  both  of  that  and  of  the  resurrection  of 
all  in  whom  a  life  like  Christ's  dwells.  And  here  the  eye-witnesses  of  Christ's 
resurrection  have  no  advantage  over  us,  and  the  unlearned  man  is  on  a  level  with 
the  critic.  3.  The  peculiarity  of  man  is  the  blending  in  him  of  two  kinds  of  life. 
There  is,  first,  that  the  lower  animals  possess ;  but  in  this  there  is  for  man  no 
more  than  the  lowest  animals.  It  seeks  nothing,  sees  nothing,  and  says  there  is 
nothing  beyond.  One  who  has  not  first  come  to  the  truth  of  immortality  in  a 
higher  line  of  thought  can  never  discover  it  by  any  process  of  physiological  explana- 
tion. "  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh."  From  things  that  are  merely 
temporal  we  can  never  attain  to  certainty  of  things  eternal.  The  life  of  flesh  and 
blood  has  here  all  its  satisfactions,  its  goal  and  end.     It  is  as  perishable  as  the 


V 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  n. 

things  on  which  it  feeds.  4.  But  on  the  stock  of  this  animal  life  is  manifest  a  bnd 
prophetic  of  an  unfolding  which  is  independent  of  the  material  world.  What  the 
apostle  calls  "  newness  of  life  "  is  not  merely  new,  but  radically  distinct  from  all 
other  life,  and  unfolds  itself  in  an  opposite  way.  Search  its  annals,  and  you  will 
find  them  luminous  with  the  names  of  those  who,  for  the  sake  of  living  in  a  world 
of  higher  satisfaction,  refused  to  live  in  a  world  of  inferior  content.  From  the 
Good  Shepherd  giving  His  Ufe  for  the  sheep  to  the  martyr  of  Erromanga  perishing 
in  his  mission  to  cannibals,  we  see  a  moral  hfe  developing  in  a  way  diametrically 
opposite  to  the  animal  life,  declaring  itself  independent  of  the  material  things  that 
are  sought  by  a  life  which  is  for  this  world  alone.  5.  Will  this  life,  then,  survive  7 
The  answer  must  come  from  the  life  itself.  Life  is  a  conclusive  witness  to  the 
nature  of  life,  as  Jesus  said,  ••  Though  I  bear  record  of  Myself,  yet  My  record  is  true, 
for  I  know  whence  I  came,  and  whither  I  go."  We  accept  the  witness  which  the 
animal  hfe  bears  to  its  perishable  nature,  when  we  see  it  shrink  instinctively  from 
death  as  its  destruction.  We  must  equally  accept  the  witness  of  the  moral  life  to 
its  imperishable  nature,  when  we  see  it  instinctively  welcome  death  as  its  deliverer. 
What  is  it,  then,  that  we  see  in  the  multitude  who  in  the  spirit  of  Christ  have 
turned  their  backs  on  a  transitory  world  in  preference  for  that  which  they  seek  as 
eternal  ?  Evidently  a  mighty,  vital  force  overmastering  the  imperious  dictates  of  a 
lower  Ufe.  Now  is  this  a  delusion,  a  dream  ?  Look  at  this  newness  of  life,  walking 
down  the  ages  with  the  torch  of  truth  and  the  gifts  of  love ;  look  at  the  transcendent 
inspirations  by  which  it  transforms  brutish  into  Christly  natures  1  See  now  what 
would  follow  on  the  hypothesis  of  its  termination  at  death,  viz.,  that  the  self -pre- 
serving instinct  of  the  lower  life  of  selfish  appetite  is  trustworthy,  but  that  the  self- 
preserving  instinct  of  the  moral  life  catches  at  a  shadow ;  that  the  highest  and 
holiest  aspirations  of  Jesus,  and  of  all  who,  like  Jesus,  have  sought  a  higher  world 
through  the  sacrifice  of  a  lower,  have  only  been  a  deceitful  lure  to  an  utter  loss. 
6.  Our  own  personal  certitude  of  immortality  depends  on  the  development  which 
we  give  to  this  newness  of  life  in  ourselves.  Long  ago  was  this  pointed  out  in 
Cicero's  remark  that  the  presage  of  a  future  life  takes  the  deepest  root  in  the  most 
exalted  souls.  To  one,  therefore,  who  seeks  to  be  convinced  of  his  immortality,  I 
would  say  not  *•  Hear  or  read  this,"  but  "  Be  this."  He  who  lacks  a  working  belief 
of  his  immortality  cannot  borrow  it,  but  must  cultivate  it  by  creating  the  moral  soil 
in  which  it  grows.  The  actual  resurrection  of  Christ  is  something,  but  that  new- 
ness of  Ufe  which  is  the  earnest  of  the  inheritance  is  better.  But  let  the  old  Ufe  get 
uppermost,  with  its  selfish  desires  and  gratifications,  and  the  inward  witness  which 
the  new  Ufe  bears  to  an  eternal  hope  will  grow  faint  and  mute  (chap.  viii.  13). 
(J.  M.  Whiton,  Ph.D.)  Newness  of  life: — "I  understand,"  said  this  chief  to  a 
congregation  which  he  was  caUed  to  address  at  Plymouth,  in  the  year  1837,  "  that 
many  of  you  are  disappointed  because  I  have  not  brought  my  Indian  dress  with 
me.  Perhaps  if  I  had  it  on  you  would  be  afraid  of  me.  Do  you  wish  to  know  how 
I  dressed  when  I  was  a  pagan  Indian  ?  I  will  tell  you.  My  face  was  covered  with 
red  paint,  I  stuck  feathers  in  my  hair,  I  wore  a  blanket  and  leggings,  I  had  silver 
ornaments  on  my  breast,  a  rifie  on  my  shoulder,  a  tomahawk  and  scalping-knife  in 
my  belt.  That  was  my  dress  then.  Now,  do  you  wish  to  know  why  I  wear  it  no 
longer  ?  You  wiU  find  the  cause  in  2  Cor.  v.  7,  *  Therefore,  if  any  man,'  Ac. 
When  I  became  a  Christian,  feathers  and  paint  were  done  away ;  I  gave  my  silvw 
ornaments  to  the  mission  cause ;  scalping-knife  done  away,  tomahawk  done  away 
— that  my  tomahawk  now,"  said  he,  holding  up  at  the  same  time  a  copy  of  the  Tern 
Conmiandments,  in  his  native  language.  "  Blanket  done  away.  Behold  I  "  he 
exclaimed,  in  a  manner  in  which  simpUcity  and  dignity  of  character  were  combined, 
"  Behold  1  aU  things  are  become  new." 

Vers.  5-7.  For  If  we  have  been  planted  together  In  the  likeness  of  His  death. — 

Planted  together  with  Christ : — The  idea  is  not  of  two  or  three  plants  aU  put  into  the 
same  ground,  though  that  would  to  a  certain  extent  express  blessedness — to  be  near 
Him  is  blessed,  to  have  walked  the  same  earth  is  blessed,  to  have  a  similar  nature  is 
blessed  ;  but  the  meaning  here  is  far  deeper.  The  idea  is  of  one  plant  with  various 
branches  (Johnxv.  1).  The  root  is  Christ;  we, the  branches,  are  grafted  in  by  beUeving. 
The  plant  out  of  the  dry  ground  had  no  form  nor  comeliness ;  He  came  down  and 
emptied  Himself  of  His  glory,  and  went  down  into  death  that  we  migbt  be  planted  in 
the  same  ground  and  in  the  same  grave.  You  see  the  same  thing  in  yuur  gardens  ; 
the  plant  put  down  into  the  ground,  no  appearance  of  Ufe,  no  buds,  no  fruit  there : 
yei  if  it  were  not  put  into  the  ground  there  would  never  be  buds  or  fruit.    So, 


mux.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  469 

"  except  a  oom  of  wheat  fall  into  the  groand  and  die,  it  abideth  alone  ;  but  if  it 
die  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit."  Here  we  have  the  planting  of  the  Tree  of  Life, 
which,  springing  up  in  the  Resurrection,  "  bears  twelve  manner  of  fruits,  and  the 
leaves  of  the  tree  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations."  We  are  planted  in  union 
with  Him,  in  the  likeness  of  His  death ;  but  when  the  spring  comes,  and  the  light, 
and  dewB  of  God  operate  upon  the  plant,  we  know  what  the  consequences  are ;  it 
puts  forth  buds,  and  leaves,  and  fruit.  And  what  a  beautiful  thing  it  is  I  The 
branches  of  the  tree  whose  root  was  planted  in  winter,  are  the  very  branches  which 
eontain  its  fragrance  and  beauty  in  the  summer-time.  It  was  winter-time  with 
Jesus  when  He  was  put  down  into  the  ground ;  but  springtime  and  summer  are 
coming,  when  the  Tree  of  Life  shall  put  forth  its  fruit,  and  we  shall  be  in  the 
likeness  of  His  resurrection ;  even  God  Himself  shall  delight  to  rest  under  that 
shade,  and  eat  His  pleasant  fruit.  {M.  Rainsford,  B.A.)  Planted  first : — A  short 
time  ago  a  gentleman  was  preaching  in  the  open  air;  his  subject  was  growth  in 
grace.  At  the  close  of  the  meeting  a  man  approached  him  and  said,  "  Our  minister 
has  been  preaching  some  excellent  sermons  on  that  subject,  and  I  have  been 
trying  to  grow  in  grace  this  long  time,  but  I  find  I  never  can  succeed."  The 
preacher,  pointing  to  a  tree,  said,  "  Do  you  see  that  tree  ?  "  "  Yes,"  was  the 
wondering  reply.  "  Well,  it  had  to  be  planted  before  it  could  grow.  In  like 
manner  you  must  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  Christ  before  you  can  begin  to  grow." 
The  man  understood  his  meaning,  and  went  away  to  find  Christ ;  and  soon  he  was 
rooted  in  Christ,  and  brought  forth  fruit  to  His  praise.  Improving  the  root  of 
virtue  : — I  will  mention  a  very  striking  illustration  of  the  difference  between  men's 
striving  to  improve  one  or  another  individual  good  quality,  and  the  improving  the 
common  root  of  all  of  them,  and  thereby  improving  them  all  at  once.  The  former 
is  the  way  in  which  a  human  artificer  works — a  statuary,  for  instance,  sometimes 
making  a  finger,  sometimes  a  leg,  and  so  on — while  the  latter,  the  workmanship  of 
the  Divine  Artificer,  is  Uke  the  growth  of  a  plant  or  a  tree,  in  which  all  the  various 
parts  are  swelhng  out  and  increasing,  or,  as  we  term  it,  growing  a^Sbe  same  time. 
{William  Wilberforce.)  ^  The  UTieims  df~CKrisf^i~fe8urrection  .-^^^The  resurrec- 
tion of  our  Lord  Jesus  ift^apt  to  beconsidefed  mainly  as  a  proof  ofme  truth  of  the 
Christian  faith,  or  in  the  light  of  the  guidance,  the  support,  the  comfort  it  affords 
in  our  thoughts  about  the  dead.  But  the  apostle  would  have  us  consider  it  as  the 
mould,  the  type,  the  model  of  our  life  and  character.  "  The  likeness  of  Hife 
resurrection."  How  can  we  be  anything  like  so  preter-natural  an  event  7  ^J 
Now,  one  answer  may  be,  that  at  the  general  resurrection  the  bodies  of  ChristiaHa 
will  rise  just  as  Christ  rose.  This  is  undoubtedly  true,  but  Paul  is  not  here 
thinking  of  that.  He  is  thinking  of  the  soul  and  character,  and  he  says  that  this 
resurrection  is  to  be  modelled  on  that  of  our  Lord.  The  true  Christian  here  is 
crucified  with  Christ ;  is  buried  with  Christ ;  and  rises  with  Christ.  Call  this 
mysticism  if  you  will ;  it  bears  two  certificates  on  its  front — the  certificate  of 
apostoUc  authority  and  of  Christian  experience.  St.  Paul  will  have  it  that  a  • 
Christian  must  die,  be  crucified  with  Chrisi  That  mass  of  undisciplined  desires 
and  passions  which  is  the  governing  body  in  the  life  of  man  in  a  state  of  nature, 
and  which  the  apostle  calls  "  the  body  of  sin,"  must  not  do  what  it  would — its 
hands  must  be  nailed  to  a  cross ;  it  must  not  go  whither  it  would — its  feet  must 
be  nailed  to  a  cross  ;  it  must  linger  on  that  cross  to  which  the  Divine  Will  would 
fain  attach  it  untU  it  dies  ;  and  then  it  must  be  buried  out  of  sight  so  as  to  have 
no  further  contact  with  the  world  in  which  it  lived  and  worked  its  evil  will  in  the 
days  gone  by.  /*  3.  jjjNow,  this  death  to  sin  must  not  be  a  fainting  fit  or  a  swoon. 
Jesus  really  dieo^npon  the  Cross,  and  St.  Paul  insisted  on  a  real  death  to  sin  in  the 
convert  to  Christianity.  The  points  of  likeness  between  a  true  Christian's  life  and 
the  life  of  our  risen  Lord  relate — I.  To  the  past.  1.  Each  has  experienced  a 
resurrection,  and  if  the  likeness  be  a  true  one,  in  each  case  the  resurrection  is  real. 
When  our  Lord  rose  He  took  leave  of  death  for  good  and  all.  "  Christ,  being 
raised  from  the  dead,  dieth  no  more,"  (fee.  And  a  Christian  life  which  is  planted  in 
the  likeness  of  Christ's  resurrection,  will  resemble  it  in  its  freedom  from  relapses 
into  the  realm  of  death.  Sin  is  the  tomb  of  the  soul,  and  if  we  have  risen,  let  us 
be  sure  that  we  do  not  return  into  it.  "  Likewise  reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be 
dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto  God."  2.  Not  that  St.  Paul  would  have 
OS  believe  that  a  baptized  or  a  converted  man  cannot  sin  if  he  would.  He  knows 
nothing  of  any  theory  of  indefectible  grace.  There  is  no  absolute  impossibility  in 
the  relapse  of  a  regenerate  Christian  into  spiritual  death,  but  there  should  be  the 
highest  moral  probabihty  against  anything  of  the  kind.     The  strength  which  haa 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lU 

been  given  the  Christian  warrants  him  in  reckoning  himself  "  dead  indeed  unto 
sin,"  although  he  still  may  be  "  overtaken  in  a  fault."  3.  Now,  what  is  the  case 
with  a  large  number  of  Christians  nowadays?  So  far  are  some  of  us  from  dying 
no  more,  that  we  might  almost  seem  to  sink  down  into  the  tomb  at  regular 
intervals.  4.  One  predispnsing  cause  of  this  is  the  empire  of  habit.  Habit  is  a 
chain  which  attaches  us  with  subtle  power  to  the  past,  whether  that  past  be  good 
or  evil.  It  is  linked  on  to  the  action  of  the  understanding,  the  affections,  and  the 
wiU.  It  was  meant  by  our  Creator  to  be  a  support  of  the  life  of  grace  ;  but  when 
the  soul  has  been  enchained  by  sin  habit  is  enlisted  in  the  service  of  sin,  and 
promotes  a  return  to  the  grave  of  sin,  even  after  the  soul's  resurrection  to  the  life 
of  grace.  5.  And  do  we  not  too  often  invite  the  reappearance  of  old  habits  by 
haunting  the  tombs  from  which  we  have  risen,  by  playing  with  the  apparatus  of 
death,  by  visits  to  old  haunts,  by  reading  old  books,  by  encouraging  old  imaginations 
that  are  fatally  linked  to  the  debasement  of  the  past  ?  "  How  shall  we  that  are 
aead  to  sin  live  any  longer  therein  ?  "  Surely  we  cannot  dally  with  the  ancient 
enemy,  we  cannot  risk  the  reassertion  of  that  power  of  habit  of  which  we  had 
broken  the  chains,  we  cannot  forget  that  at  our  moral  resurrection  the  whole  power 
of  habit  was  to  be  transferred  to  the  account  of  the  life  of  grace.  II.  To  the 
PBESENT.  1,  The  greater  part  of  our  Lord's  resurrection  life  was  hidden  from 
the  eyes  of  men.  (1)  During  the  forty  days  retirement  was  the  rule,  and  BKa 
appearances  to  His  disciples  were  so  many  suspensions  of  that  rule.  Now,  a 
Ckristian  life  which  is  planted  in  the  likeness  of  Christ's  resurrection  will  be  to  a 
great  extent  withdrawn  from  the  eyes  of  men.  A  Christian  must,  indeed,  '*  let  his 
light  so  shine  before  men,"  &c. ;  but  the  life  of  private  prayer,  of  self-discipline, 
of  motive  faith,  hope,  and  love,  must  in  a  true  Christian's  career  altogether 
preponderate  over  his  external  activities,  and  if  it  does  it  will  thereby  promote 
those  activities.  The  forest  tree  ere  it  rears  its  branches  to  the  skies  strikes  its 
roots  far  and  deep  into  the  soil  beneath  ;  and  an  active  Christian  life  which  is  not 
rooted  in  devotion  to  an  unseen  Master  will  speedily  degenerate  into  the  existence 
of  a  philanthropic  machine,  looking  for  its  reward  to  imposing  statistics,  to  florid 
newspaper  reports,  to  the  applause  of  public  meetings,  and  generally  to  the  praise 
of  men.  (2)  Publicity  is  the  order  of  our  day,  and  the  press,  the  railway,  the 
telegraph  all  conspire  to  oblige  men  to  Uve  before  the  eyes  of  their  fellows ;  every- 
body is  observed,  discussed,  interviewed.  No  doubt  this  publicity  has  its  good  side. 
It  may  supply  motives  against  wrong-doing,  where  none  of  a  higher  order  are 
recognised ;  but  who  can  doubt  that  it  tends  to  impair  that  disinterestedness  which 
is  the  very  bloom  of  the  higher  Christian  life  ;  that  it  tends  to  make  the  world's 
standard  of  excellence  the  standard  also  of  the  servants  of  Christ ;  that  it  impairs 
that  note  of  likeness  to  Christ  in  His  resurrection,  a  life  hidden  with  Christ  in 
God  ?  (3)  It  was  the  sense  of  this  truth  which  was  the  strength  of  monasticism. 
Like  other  human  efforts  to  give  practical  expression  to  a  religious  truth,  monasticism 
made  its  full  share  of  mistakes ;  but  the  truth  remains  for  ever,  that  the  life  lived 
wholly  before  the  eyes  of  men,  and  probably  with  a  view  to  the  approval  of  men, 
cannot  be  in  the  likeness  of  Christ's  resurrection.  2.  Another  note  of  our  Lord's 
risen  Ufe  was  that  when  He  did  appear  to  His  apostles  He  had  a  lesson  to  teach,  a 
warning  or  a  blessing  to  convey,  as  the  reason  for  each  separate  act  of  contact  with 
those  around  Him.  Consider  the  account  of  His  interviews  ;  each  does  a  separate 
work  which  had  to  be  done,  and  does  it  with  a  point  and  a  thoroughness  which  we 
cannot  mistake.  And  here  must  we  not  admit  that  we  modern  Christians  are 
unlike  Him  ?  Our  life  too  often  resembles  those  story  books  whose  aim  is  to  excite 
continuous  amusement  in  the  reader,  and  yet  not  to  have  any  discoverable  moral 
whatever  attached  to  them.  We  shrink  from  speaking  the  word  in  season ;  we 
shrink  from  giving  a  reason  for  the  hope  that  is  within  us.  Can  we  wholly  escape 
responsibility  for  the  consequences  of  our  silence,  for  the  moral  downward  career, 
for  the  darkened  or  dying  faith  of  those  with  whom  we  may  have  been  brought 
into  contact?  "  You  may  have  forgotten  an  interview  which  we  had,"  so  said  a 
stranger  to  an  older  friend,  "twenty  years  ago.  At  the  time  I  did  not  thank  you 
for  what  you  said ;  I  was  angry  with  you  ;  but  I  must  tell  you  now  that  under  God 
I  owe  you  my  soul."  IH.  To  the  futube.  Our  Lord's  risen  life  was  passed  in 
anticipation  of  the  event  which  was  close  to  it — forgetting  the  sepulchre  which  was 
behind,  and  reaching  forward  to  the  ascension  which  was  before.  And  so  it  should 
be  with  us.  Here  we  have  no  continuing  city ;  we  seek  one  to  come  ;  we  look  not 
for  the  things  that  are  seen  and  temporal,  but  for  the  things  that  are  not  seen  and 
eternal.    Earthly  greatness,  as  a  rule,  ends  with  the  grave ;  the  greatness  of  Jesos 


CHA».  Ti.]  ROMANS.  47t 

on  earth  begins  with  it.  Why  should  it  not  be  so  in  the  life  of  the  spirit  ?  We 
should  have  done  with  the  tomb  of  sin  for  good  and  all.  When  this  new  life  is 
planted  in  the  soul  old  things  indeed  have  passed  away ;  behold  all  things  have 
become  new  1  (Canon  Liddon.)  Assimilation  through  faith : — 1.  The  text  is  an 
effort  to  convey  by  a  curious  and  vigorous  figure  the  close  spiritual  assimilation 
which  faith  produces  between  the  Christian  and  Christ.  What  St.  Paul  says 
literally  is,  that  believers  have  "  grown  together  into  one  "  with  Christ,  so  as  to 
become  of  like  nature  with  Him  in  the  matter  of  His  death.  2.  But  how  can  any 
inward  change,  passing  in  the  mind  of  a  man  to-day,  be  said  to  bear  a  likeness  to 
what  happened  when  Christ  bare  our  sin?  Easily  enough.  Consider  the  moral 
significance  of  Christ's  death  for  sin.  Was  it  not,  to  begin  with,  the  first  full 
recognition  ever  made  on  this  earth  of  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  of  the  integrity  of  the 
law  ?  The  Son,  being  of  one  mind  with  the  Father,  owned  that  sin  was  hateful, 
and  the  Divine  law  holy,  and  its  sentence  just.  Now,  whenever  I  with  my  whole 
heart  accept  of  that  death  as  reconciling  me  to  God  by  satisfying  His  law  on  my 
behalf,  do  I  not  enter  into  sympathy  with  God's  point  of  view,  just  as  His  own  Son 
did  ?  Can  we  call  such  an  experience  anything  but  spiritual  incorporation  into 
the  likeness  of  Christ's  death  ?  The  man  who  has  got  such  a  view  of  his  own  sin 
does  in  a  very  real  sense  die  in  his  heart  to  sin.  Seek  to  know  the  fellowship  of 
Christ's  sufferings;  become  conformed  to  His  death ;  then  the  old  evil  self  must 
die  within  the  bosom,  killed  by  the  Cross  that  killed  our  Saviour.  3.  If  faith  in 
the  Cross  of  Christ  prove  thus  effectual  to  cut  the  nerve  of  a  sinful  life,  surely  we 
shall  also  "grow  together  with  Him  in  the  likeness  of  His  resurrection."  The 
very  object  for  which  Christ  and  our  old  sinful  self  died,  is  that  the  believer,  once 
set  free  from  sin,  should  be  point  by  point  conformed  to  the  likeness  of  the  risen 
Jesus.  It  may  appear  to  some  as  though  this  thing  which  we  call  faith  were  too 
feeble  or  uncertam  for  a  work  so  great.  What  1  may  one  say,  shall  a  man  reverse 
his  tastes,  break  his  habits,  and  change  his  Ufe  into  the  likeness  of  One  so  unlike 
him  as  Jesus  Christ,  merely  because  he  puts  faith  in  Christ  to  save  him  ?  What 
is  there  in  this  '*  faith  "  to  work  so  astounding  a  revolution  ?  4.  The  answer  to 
that,  in  part  at  least,  is  this :  that  we  have  really  no  deeper  or  more  powerful 
agent  for  working  any  such  change  than  just  this  same  faith.  It  combines  the 
strongest  motives  and  most  sustaining  elements  in  character ;  such  as  confidence, 
loyalty,  affection,  reverence,  authority,  and  moral  attractiveness.  You  constantly 
find  that  large  bodies  of  men,  parties  in  the  State,  armies  in  the  field,  schools  of 
opinion,  whole  nations  even  at  critical  moments,  are  swayed  simply  by  the  trans- 
cendent influence  of  one  outstanding  trusted  leader.  Still  more  absorbing  is  the 
influence  which  an  individual  may  acquire  over  one  other  soul  that  entirely  believes 
in  him.  Take  a  single  element  in  "  faith  " — the  mere  persuasion  of  one  man  that 
another  is  able  and  willing  to  aid  him  in  his  enterprises.  Let  it  be  a  flxed  idea 
with  a  poor  individual  that  some  influential  friend  will  back  him  up  in  his  business, 
and  that  in  such  backing  lies  his  best  chance  of  success.  What  is  there  he  will  not 
do  rather  than  forfeit  assistance  from  that  quarter  on  which  all  his  hopes  are 
built  ?  Add  to  such  a  selfish  expectation  of  help  the  far  deeper  bond  of  personal 
reverence  or  of  proud  admiring  love.  Let  the  relation  become  like  that  of  some 
tried  and  faithful  lieutenant  to  a  gallant  leader,  or  like  that  of  a  maiden  to  the 
lover  whom  she  both  believes  in  and  doats  upon.  Can  bounds  be  set  to  the  power 
of  faith  like  theirs  ?  Let  the  object  of  such  devotion  be  really  noble  and  wise,  who 
shall  say  how  far  baseness  and  selfishness  may  be  burnt  out  of  the  heart  that 
cleaves  to  the  idol  it  has  chosen  for  itself?  Let  that  idol  be  itself  erring  or 
misguided,  who  wiU  wonder  if  the  soul  that  worships  it  be  dragged  down  the  same 
devious  and  unhappy  path  to  share  the  same  fall  f  If  to  all  this  you  could  add  in 
a  rare  instance  some  overwhelming  obligation  of  a  strictly  moral  kind,  like  a  bond 
of  gratitude  deep  as  life  for  a  benefit  never  to  be  forgotten,  or  a  claim  of  supreme 
authority  no  less  sacred  than  a  father's,  more  subduing  than  a  king's — who  does 
not  see  that  in  such  a  faith  as  that  you  would  have  the  mightiest  of  all  forces 
within  human  experience?  5.  This  is  our  faith  in  Christ — this,  but  beyond 
analogy  greater  and  more  masterful,  because  human  parallels  are  infinitely  too 
weak  to  express  it.  The  Christian  trusts  in  Jesus,  but  not  as  a  man  trusts  in  hia 
fellow's  support,  for  our  Saviour  is  the  mighty  God.  The  Christian  is  tied  to  Jesus 
with  s  heart  devotion  based  on  reverence  and  warming  into  love ;  but  not  as 
women  cling  to  their  lovers,  or  partisans  to  their  hero-chieftain,  for  our  Saviour 
commands  a  reverence  which  is  worship,  and  wins  an  affection  which  is  supreme. 
The  Christian  owes  to  Josus  obedience  for  the  s^vice  He  has  rendered,  and  for  the 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

right  He  possesses  to  command ;  bat  not  nnder  sach  limitations  as  always  enriron 
hnman  authorities,  even  the  highest,  since  our  Saviour  is  Lord  of  the  conscience  aa 
well  as  of  the  heart,  and  His  moral  mastery  is  absolute,  as  His  judgment  shall  be 
final.  Does  it  seem,  then,  any  longer  a  thing  futile  or  unreasonable  to  say,  that 
through  such  faith  as  that  a  man  may  come  to  grow  together  into  one  with  the 
Divine  Object  of  his  devotion,  until  the  man's  life  is  penetrated  with  Christ's  spirit 
and  conformed  in  everything  to  His  matchless  likeness  ?  6.  Still,  the  tie  which 
links  a  believer  to  His  Saviour  offers  points  of  contrast  quite  as  striking.  Men  do 
get  assimilated  no  doubt  to  the  objects  of  their  earthly  devotion.  Still  no  anion 
wrought  by  any  such  faith  on  earth  can  adequately  represent  the  unique  life- 
junction  which,  through  a  special  act  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  makes  these  twain  one — 
the  living  Head  of  God's  new  family  and  each  lowly,  trusting  siimer  who  cleaves  to 
Jesus  as  his  spiritual  life.  For  one  thing,  the  union  of  a  believing  soul  to  Jesus 
has  its  roots  in  a  certain  mysterious  oneness  which  God's  gracious  will  has 
established  between  the  heirs  of  salvation  and  their  new  representative  and  Second 
Adam,  the  Lord  from  heaven.  For  another  thing,  this  relationship  involves  not  a 
portion  only  of  the  man's  experience,  not  some  transient,  or  secular,  or  subordinate 
interest,  but  the  believer's  very  self — his  true  and  deepest  being.  It  is  the  old 
man  which  is  crucified  with  Christ,  that  moral  personaUty  which  has  hitherto  been 
the  very  centre  and  source  of  all  my  words  and  actions.  The  beUever's  very  self 
hangs  thenceforward  on  Christ's  self.  His  spiritual  being  is  new  made,  for  it  ia 
informed  by  another  Spirit  as  its  inspiring  and  ruling  influence,  even  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  whom  Jesus  gives.  Such  a  change  as  this  is  effected,  indeed,  by  faith.  But 
Buch  faith  comes  of  the  operation  of  God.  When  the  old  man  dies  and  the  new 
man  lives  in  a  human  being  there  is  an  evident  re-birth ;  and  for  that  we  must 
postulate  an  immediate  operation  of  the  Divine  Giver  of  life.  (J.  Oswald  Dykes, 
D.D.)  Knowing  this,  that  oar  old  man  Is  craclfled  with  Him. — The  old  man : — 
Why  Ib  original  sin  called  the  "  old  man  "?    Because — I.  It  is  debivbd  feom  thb 

XLDEST   OB   FIBST  AdAH.      JI.   It  IS   FIRST   IM   EVEBT   ONE  (1  Gor.  XV.  46).      IIL    It   IS 

TO  BE  DONE  AWAY  (Heb.  viii.  13;  2  Cor.  v.  17).  IV.  Of  its  cunning  and  obaft. 
As  old  men,  by  reason  of  their  abundant  experience,  are  more  wise  and  subtle 
than  others;  this  "old  man"  is  cunning  to  deceive.  Oh,  what  excuses  doea  it 
bring  for  ain,  what  pretences  I  It  hath  much  of  Adam  ;  but  it  hath  somewhat  of 
the  wise  and  old  serpent  too,  for  it  was  begot  betwixt  them  both.  Conclusion : 
Observe  that  when  the  apostle  calls  original  sin  "  our  old  man,"  he  distinguishes  it 
from  ourselves.  It  is  ours,  too,  nearly  cleaving  to  us ;  but  it  is  not  ourselves. 
Whence  we  must  learn  to  put  a  difference  betwixt  the  corruption  of  nature,  and 
nature  itself.  Man's  nature  is  from  God ;  but  the  corruption  of  man's  nature  is 
from  himself.  (P.  Vinke,  B.D.)  The  crucifixion  of  the  old  man: — I.  The  olb 
HAN.  1.  Old  as  Adam,  in  nature,  habit,  spirit.  2.  His  features.  3.  His  vigour. 
II.  His  cbucifixion.  1.  Effected  with  Christ.  2.  The  process.  (1)  Painful.  (2) 
Protracted.  (3)  Voluntary.  III.  The  necessitt  of  it.  1.  That  the  body  of  sin 
^.ybe  destroyed.  ^.  Thgiwe  may  be  emancipated  from  its  service.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
^l!^^ol^jnaji^ruciHed  :^^Tj^'E\eTj  new  man  is  two  men  ;  he  is  what  he  was  and  not 
wKrEe~was :  the  oldTiSture  and  the  new  exist  in  each  regenerate  individual.  That 
old  nature  the  apostle  calls  a  man,  because  it  is  a  complete  manhood  after  the 
image  of  fallen  Ad^m.  He  calls  it  the  "  old  man,"  because  it  is  as  old  as  Eden's 
first  transgression*/?i?Every  Christian  has  a  new  nature  which  was  implanted  in  him 
through  the  Spirit*S  working.  That  new  nature  utterly  hates  and  loathes  evil ;  so 
that  finding  itself  broug^'^  into  contact  with  the  old  nature,  it  cries,  "  0  wretched 
man  that  I  am,"  &c.|;'^  Hence  a  warfare  is  set  up  within  the  believer's  bosom  ; 
the  new  hfe  struggles^^ainst  the  old  death,  as  the  house  of  David  against  the 
house  of  Saul,  or  as  Israel  against  the  Canaanites.  Neither  nature  can  make  peace 
with  the  other.  Either  the  earthy  water  must  quench  the  heavenly  fire,  or  the 
Divine  fire,  like  that  which  Elijah  saw,  must  lick  up  all  thfejvater  in  the  trenches 
of  the  heart.  It  is  war  to  the  knife,  exterminating  war.^^^HE  old  man  Ufc>?o 
»iB  in  the  likeness  of  Christ's  death  by  cbucifixion.  ^Dur^Lord  died-^OA 
true  and  real  death.  The  Eoman  oflQcer  would  not  have ^Veil  up  the  bodygne 
bad  not  made  sure  that  He  was  dead,  and  made  assurance  doubly  sure  by  piercing 
our  Lord's  side.  There  was  no  make-believe  ;  it  was  no  phantom  which  bled,  and 
the  death  was  no  syncope  or  swoon.  Even  thus  it  must  be  with  our  old  propensities ; 
they  must  not  be  mewed  up  by  temporary  austerities,  or  laid  in  a  trance  by  fleeting 
reveries,  or  ostentatiously  buried  alive  by  religious  resolves  and  professions  ;  they 
most  actually  die.  Sometimes  persona  who  are  really  alive  appear  as  dead,  becaass 


CHAT.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  47> 

death  reigns  over  a  part  of  their  bodies ;  their  hands  are  powerless,  their  eyes  closed, 
every  member  palsied  ;  yet  they  are  not  dead.  So  have  I  known  some  that  have 
given  up  a  part  of  their  sins.  But  no  man  shall  enter  heaven  while  one  propensity 
to  sin  lies  in  him,  for  heaven  admits  nothing  thi^^ollutes.  "  Without  holiness  no 
man  shall  see  the  Lord."  Sin  must  be  slain.^^y^  voluntary  death.  Christ  said, 
"I  lay  down  My  life  for  the  sheep  .  .  .  no  mSn  taketh  it  from  Me,  but  I  lay  it 
down  of  Myself."  Jesus  need  not  have  died.  Such  must  be  the  deatb  of  sin 
within  us.  Some  men  part  with  their  sins  with  the  intention  of  coming  back  again 
to  them  if  they  can ;  like  Lot's  wife  they  set  out  to  leave  Sodom,  but  their  eyes 
«how  where  their  hearts  would  be.  They  fight  sin  as  stage-players ;  it  is  mimic 
conflict,  they  do  not  hate  sin  in  reality.  Ah !  but  we  must  have  our  whole  hearts 
burning  with  an  intensity  of  desire  to  get  rid  of  our  sins ;  and  such  we  shall  feel  if 
there  be  a  work  of  grace  in  ou^^uul.  The  execution  of  sin,  then,  must  be 
undertaken  with  a  willing  mind. ^aJA  violent  death.  By  wicked  men  Christ  was 
taken,  and  by  violent  hands  put  (»^Hth.  Sin  struggles  awfully  in  the  best  of  men, 
especially  be^^etting  and  constitutional  sins.  One  man  is  proud,  and  what  prayers 
and  tears  it  costs  him  to  bring  the  neck  of  old  pride  to  the  block !  Another  man  is 
grasping,  and  how  he  has  to  lament  because  his  gold  will  corrode  within  his  soul  t 
Some  are  of  a  murmuring  spirit,  and  to  conquer  a  spirit  of  contention  is  no  easy 
task.  Tet,  cost  us  what  it  may,  these  sins  must  die.  Violent  may  be  the  death 
and  stem-  the  struggle,  but  we  must  nail  that  right  hand,  ay,  and  drive  home  the 
nail.  (  4y/A  painful  death.  The  sufifering  of  crucifixion  was  extreme.  So  the 
deathSei  sin  is  painful  in  all,  and  in  some  terribly  so.  Read  Bunyan's  "  Grace 
Abounding,"  and  see  how  year  after  year  that  wonderful  mind  of  his  had  red-hot 
harrows  dragged  across  all  its  fields.  Some  are  brought  unto  s^ivation  much  more 
easily,  but  even  they  find  that  the  death  of  sin  is  painful.^  5.  Vn  ignominious 
death.  It  was  the  death  which  the  Roman  law  accorded  only*t6-felons,  serfs,  and 
Jews.  So  our  sins  must  be  put  to  death  with  every  circumstance  of  self-humiliation. 
I  am  shdcked  with  some  people  who  glibly  rehearse  their  past  lives  up  to  the  time 
of  their  supposed  conversion,  and  talk  of  their  sins  which  they  hope  have  been 
forgiven  them,  with  a  sort  of  smack  of  the  lips,  as  if  there  was  something  fine  in 
having  been  so  atrocious  an  offender.  If  you  ever  do  tell  anybody  about  your 
wrong-doin};,  let  it  be  with  shame  and  confusion  of  face.  Never  let  the  devil  pat 
yon  on  the  back  and  say,  "  You  did  me  a  good  turn  in  those  days."  *'  Theojd^an 
18  crucified  with  him."  Who  boasts  of  being  related  to  a  crucified  felondr~jWA 
lingering  death.  A  man  crucified  often  lived  for  days,  and  even  for  a  weeK^sOur 
old  man  will  linger  on  his  cross.  Each  one  of  our  sins  has  a  horrible  vitality  about 
it.  Exppet-to  have  to  fight  with  sin,  till  you  sheathe  your  sword  and  put  on  your 
crown. /7.x  visible  death.  If  there  is  no  visible  difference  between  you  and  the 
world,  trepfind  upon  it  there  is  no  invisible  difference.  If  a  man's  outward  life  la 
not  right,  I  shall  not  feel  bound  to  believe  that  his  inward  hfe  is  acceptable  to  God. 
"Ah,  sir,"  said  one  in  Rowland  Hill's  time,  "  he  is  not  exactly  what  I  should  like, 
but  he  has  a  good  heart  at  bottom."    Tlie  shrewd  old  preacher  replied,  "When 

.  yon  go  to  market  and  buy  fruit,  and  there  are  none  but  rotten  apples  onJ^B^^p  of 
the  basket,  you  say  to  the  market  woman,  '  These  are  a  very  bad  lot.'  "(C^^xhis 
CBUCiFixiON  is  WITH  Christ.  There  is  no  death  for  8in_except  in  theiJeSth  of 
Christ.     Your  killing  of  your  sin  is  not  in"70tirpoWer. '^  Tf  yoa  go  to  the  command- 

'ffignts  of  God,  OT  to  the  fear  and  dread  of  hell,  you  will  find  such  motives  as  they 
suggest  to.  be  as  powerless  in  you  for  real  action  as  they  have  proved  themselves 
to  be  on  the  general  world.  You  must  get  to  Christ,  nearer  to  Christ,  and  you  will 
overcome  sin.  Conclusion :  1.  Fight  with  your  sins.  Hack  them  in  pieces,  as  Samuel 
did  Agag,  let  not  one  of  them  escape.  Revenge  the  death  of  Christ  upon  your  sins, 
but  keep  to  Christ's  Cross  for  power  to  do  it.  2.  If  you  will  not  have  death  unto  sin, 
you  shall  have  sin  unto  death.  There  is  no  alternative,  if  you  do  not  die  to  sin  you 
shall  die  for  sin ;  and  if  you  do  not  slay  sin,  sin  will  slay  you.  (C.  U.  Spurgeon.) 
The  old  man  crucified : — L  What  does  the  apostle  mean  by  our  old  man  ?  Simply 
our  natural  self,  with  all  its  principles  and  motives,  its  outgoings,  actions,  corrup- 
tions, and  belongings ;  not  as  God  made  it,  but  as  sin,  and  Satan,  and  self  have 
marred  it.  The  old  Adam  never  changes ;  no  medicine  can  heal  the  disease,  no 
ointment  can  mollify  the  corruption  ;  it  can  only  be  got  rid  of  by  death.  In  Psa. 
xiv.  1-3  we  have  God's  view  of  our  sad  case.  In  chap.  iii.  the  apostle  quotes  this 
passage  to  prove  the  universal  depravity  of  human  nature,  and  the  necessity  for 
thfl  gospel  which  it  was  his  privilege  to  proclaim.  II.  What  does  it  mean  to  bs 
"  CBDcmED  with  Him  "  ?    1.  This  expression  implies  that  we  have  suffered  in  Christ 


4 


474  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  v^ 

— (1)  A  penal  death  (Gal.  iii.  13).  I  have  been  crucified  with  Christ  and  soffered 
the  penalty  which  the  law  demands  and  the  sin  of  the  old  Adam  deserves.  This 
corrupt  self  was  executed  under  the  sentence  of  law  on  the  Cross.  (2)  A  lingering, 
painful  death.  The  knowledge  that  I  have  been  crucified  with  Christ  will  be  a 
constraining  motive  for  mortifying  my  members  which  are  on  the  earth,  and  make 
me  try  to  crucify  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts  (Gal.  v.  24).  (3)  A  voluntary 
death.  Christ  was  crucified  as  a  voluntary  agent,  and  the  Christian  voluntarily 
identifies  his  lot  with  the  crucified  One  (Gal.  vi.  14).  2.  See,  then,  the  importance 
of  the  statement  "  crucified  with  Christ."  It  is — (1)  An  act  of  sovereign  grace, 
for  God  gives  us  union  with  Christ  when  He  was  crucified  for  sin.  (2)  The 
realisation  of  this  union.  Christ  lives  in  the  man  who  has  union  with  Christ,  and 
the  man  who  has  union  with  Christ  lives  in  Christ,  and  here  lies  the  power  for  the 
practical  crucifixion  of  the  affections  and  lusts.  (3)  It  is  the  knowledge  of  this 
union  which  constrains  us  to  go  out  with  Him  beyond  the  camp,  bearing  the  cross, 
despising  the  shame.  III.  The  object  of  this  CRUciFinoN.  "  The  body  of  sin  "  is 
another  form  of  expression  for  the  "  old  man."  It  is  not  the  human  nature  defiled 
by  sin,  nor  the  human  body  burdened  by  sin,  that  is  to  be  destroyed  (Phil.  iii.  21),  but 
it  is  the  sin  that  defiled  and  possessed  it.  Because  sin  has  so  poisoned  the  whole 
body,  it  is  called  the  body  of  sin.  The  word  "  destroyed  "  is  the  strongest  possible. 
It  is  the  same  as  that  used  in  1  Cor.  zv.  26,  and  translated  "  bring  to  nought " 
(1  Cor.  i.  28),  "  put  down  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  24),  abolished  (2  Tim.  i.  10),  »  made  of  none 
effect "  (Gal.  iii.  17),  "  done  away  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  14).  IV.  Its  effect — "  that  hence- 
forth we  should  not  serve  sin,"  or  "  be  slaves  to  sin."  How  can  we  be  slaves  to  a 
thing  that  is  extinct  ?  to  a  power  that  is  abolished  ?  to  a  principle  that  is  set  at 
nought,  made  nothing  of,  put  down?  See,  then,  what  inconsistent  and  infatuated 
creatures  we  are  when  we  minister  in  anyone  to  sin.  {M.  Rainsford,  B.A.)  The 
twofold  Junction  of  personal  Christianity  .'-tl/llTS  CBUomriNO  fdnction.  It  crucifies 
— 1.  Not  any  of  his  nature's  faculties  or  sensibilities.  It  energises,  refines,  and 
develops  these.  2.  Not  any  of  the  ties  of  his  moral  obligations.  On  the  contrary, 
it  gives  a  stronger  revelation  of  duty,  and  mightier  motives  to  obey.  Christianity 
crucifies  the  corrupt  character,  called  "  the  old  man,"  not  because  it  is  the  original 
character  of  humanity,  which  was  holy,  but  because  it  is  the  first  character  of 
individual  men.  This  crucifixion  is — (1)  A  painful  process.  Crucifixion  was  the 
most  excruciating  death  that  the  craelty  of  the  most  malignant  spirit  could  devise. 
To  destroy  old  habits,  gratifications,  &o. ,  is  a  painful  work.  It  is  as  the  catting 
off  a  limb,  the  plucking  out  of  an  eye,  &o.  (2)  A  protracted  process.  No  wound 
was  inflicted  upon  the  most  vital  part,  that  the  agony  might  be  perpetuated.  The 
agonised  life  gradually,  drop  by  drop,  ebbed  away.  There  is  nothing  so  hard  to 
die  as  sin.  An  atom  may  kill  a  giant,  a  word  may  break  the  peace  of  a  nation,  a 
spark  bum  up  a  city ;  but  it  requires  earnest  and  protracted  struggles  to  destroy 
sin  in  the  soul.  No  man  grows  virtuous  in  a  day.  (3)  A  voluntary  process. 
Christ's  crucifixion  was  voluntary.  It  is  so  with  the  crucifixion  of  "  the  old  man." 
No  one  could  do  it  for  as.  No  one  can  do  it  either  without  our  consent  or  against 
it.  If  "the  old  man  "  is  to  be  crucified,  we  must  nail  him  to  the  cross,  ^^ts 
BEStiRBECTioN  FUNCTION.  "  We  shall  be  also  in  the  likeness  of  His  resurreCttjn." 
The  spiritual  life  of  a  Christian  is — 1.  A  revived  life.  It  was  not  a  new  life  that 
Jesus  had  when  He  came  forth  from  His  grave : — it  was  the  old  revived.  The 
spiritual  life  of  a  Christian  is  that  life  of  supreme  love  to  God  which  Adam  had, 
which  belongs  to  our  nature,  but  which  sin  has  destroyed,  and  buried  under  evU 
passions  and  corrupt  habits.  2.  A  Divinely  produced  life.  "  None  but  God  can 
raise  the  dead,"  &c.  3.  An  interminable  life.  "  I  am  He  that  liveth,"  said  Christ, 
•'  and  was  dead,  and  am  alive  for  evermore."  Once  the  true  spiritual  life  of  the  soul 
is  raised  from  its  grave,  it  will  die  no  more.  It  is  an  "everlasting  life."  4.  A 
glorious  life.  How  glorious  was  the  resurrection  body  of  Christ  (Eev.  i.  13-18). 
♦•We  shall  be  like  Him,"  &c.  The  subject  teaches  us — 1.  The  value  of  evangelical 
religion  :  which  is  to  destroy  in  man  the  bad,  and  the  bad  only,  and  to  revive  the 
good.  2.  The  test  of  evangelical  religion,  which  is  dying  unto  sin,  and  Uving  unto 
holiness.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  That  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed. — The 
body  of  sin  weakened : — The  whole  body  of  sin,  indeed,  is  weakened  in  every 
believer,  and  a  deadly  wound  given  by  the  grace  of  God  to  his  corrupt  nature  ;  yet, 
as  a  dying  tree  may  bear  some  fruit,  though  not  so  much,  nor  that  so  full  and  ripe, 
as  before ;  and  as  a  dying  man  may  move  his  limbs,  though  not  so  strongly  as 
when  he  was  in  health,  so  original  corruption  in  a  saint  will  be  stirring,  though 
bot  feebly ;  and  thoa  hast  no  cause  to  be  disccuraged  because  it  stirs,  but  to  be 


OHAP.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  475 

comforted  that  it  can  but  stir.  The  body  of  tin :— Sin,  in  Scripture,  is  called  "  a 
body,*'  because  made  up  of  several  members ;  or  as  the  body  of  an  army,  con- 
sisting of  many  troops  and  regiments.  It  is  one  thing  to  beat  a  troop,  or  put  a 
wing  of  an  army  to  flight,  and  another  thing  to  rout  and  break  the  whole  army. 
Something  hath  been  done  by  moral  principles,  like  the  former ;  they  have  got  some 
petty  victory,  and  had  the  chase  of  some  gross  and  external  sins ;  but  then  they 
were  fearfully  beaten  by  some  other  of  sin's  troops.  As  the  sea,  which  loses  as 
much  in  one  part  of  the  land  as  it  gains  in  another  ;  so  what  they  got  in  a  seeming 
victory  over  one  sin,  they  lost  again  by  being  in  bondage  to  another,  and  that  a 
worse,  because  more  spiritual.  But  faith  is  uniform,  and  routs  the  whole  body  of 
sin,  so  that  not  one  single  lust  stands  in  its  unbroken  strength  (ver.  14).  {W. 
Gumall.)  The  body  of  nn : — Original  corruption  is  a  body  of  sin,  1.  In  that  a 
body  though  it  seems  never  so  beautiful  and  fair,  yet  it  is  in  itself  but  made  of  base 
matter,  so  sin,  though  it  may  seem  specious  and  alluring,  yet  it  is  but  an  abomina- 
tion.  2.  As  a  body,  being  material,  is  visible ;  so  original  sin  discovers  itself  to 
every  one  that  without  prejudice  will  look  to  find  it.  It  is  discernible  in  its  effects 
daily.  8.  As  the  body  hath  divers  members,  so  sin.  4.  As  a  body  is  beloved  and 
provided  for,  so  is  sin  (Bom.  xiii.  12).  Who  would  willingly  part  with  the  least 
member  of  his  body?  But  if  something  of  this  body  must  be  parted  with,  it  is  but 
hair  and  nails.  And  thus,  till  that  day  in  which  God  puts  forth  His  almighty 
power  to  make  us  willing,  we  are  loath  to  leave  any  sin.  5.  Sin,  as  a  body,  hath 
strength  in  it,  and  tyranny  is  exercised  by  it.  6.  It  is  called  here  especially  "  a 
body  "  by  the  apostle,  to  answer  to  the  metaphor  of  "  crucifying."  Only  bodies 
can  be  crucified,  and  this  sin  is  "crucified  with  Christ."  (P.  Vinke,  B.D.) 
Destruction  of  the  body  of  tin : — Five  persons  were  studying  what  were  the  best 
means  to  mortify  sin.  One  said,  to  meditate  on  death  ;  the  second,  to  meditate  on 
judgment ;  the  third,  to  meditate  on  the  torments  of  hell ;  the  fourth,  to  meditate 
on  the  joys  of  heaven ;  the  fifth,  to  meditate  on  the  blood  and  sufferings  of  Christ : 
and  certainly  the  last  is  the  choicest  and  strongest  motive  of  all.  If  ever  we  would 
cast  off  our  despairing  thoughts,  we  must  dwell  much  upon  and  apply  this  precious 
blood  to  our  own  souls.  {S.  Brooks. )  Destruction  of  the  body  of  tin : — Destroyed, 
not  merely  subdued,  but  annihilated — stripped  of  its  dominion,  deprived  of  its  life, 
annulled  as  to  authority  and  energy,  and  finally  as  to  existence.  Our  sinful  nature 
not  to  be  improved  but  destroyed.  Its  place  to  be  taken  by  a  holy  and  Divine 
nature.  As  the  old  man  dies  the  new  man  lives.  Either  grace  must  destroy  sin 
or  sin  the  soul.  Four  things  observed  in  the  destruction  of  the  body  of  sin.  I. 
The  UEBiTOBions  causb.  The  crucifixion  of  Christ.  II.  The  efficient  oausb. 
The  Holy  Spirit  (Eom.  viii.  13).  III.  The  instrdmental  cause.  The  gospel  of 
God's  grace  (1  Pet.  i.  22).  IV.  The  mode.  The  infusion  of  new  principles  and 
affections  (Gal.  v.  16 ;  2  Cor.  v.  14).  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  That  henceforth  we 
should  not  serve  sin. — The  Christian  should  not  terve  sin: — I.  It  has  cost  hih 
EKOUQH  ALREADY.  Sin  ucver  yields — 1.  Beal  pleasure.  2.  Solid  satisfaction.  II. 
It  is  contrary  to  the  designs  of  eternal  love.  III.  Its  punishment  is  vert 
great.  It — 1.  Destroys  peace  of  mind.  2.  Obscures  fellowship  with  Jesus.  8. 
Hinders  prayer.  4.  Brings  darkness  over  the  soul.  lY.  It  crucifies  the  Lord 
AFRESH  AND  PUTS  HiM  TO  AN  OPEN  SHAME.  Can  you  bear  that  thought?  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Slaves  to  sin : — When  the  morning  sun  is  bright,  and  the  summer 
breezes  are  gently  blowing  from  the  shore,  the  little  river-boat  is  enticed  from  the 
harbour  to  start  on  her  trip  of  pleasure  on  the  clear,  calm  sea.  All  Nature  seems 
to  enlist  in  her  service.  The  fair  wind  fills  her  sails,  the  favourable  tide  rolls 
onward  in  her  course,  the  parted  sea  makes  way  for  her  to  glide  swiftly  and  merrily 
on  her  happy  voyage ;  but  having  thus  been  her  servants,  and  carried  her  whither 
she  would,  these  soon  become  her  masters,  and  carry  her  whither  she  would  not. 
The  breeze  that  swelled  her  sails  has  become  a  storm,  and  rends  them  ;  the  waves 
that  quietly  rippled  for  her  pleasure  now  rise  in  fury,  and  dash  over  her  for  her 
destruction ;  and  the  vessel,  which  rode  in  the  morning  as  a  queen  upon  the  waters, 
sinks  before  night  comes  on,  the  slave  of  those  very  winds  and  waves  which  had 
beguiled  her  to  use  them  as  her  servants.  So  it  is  with  sin.  (Canon  Morse.) 
For  lie  that  Is  dead  Is  freed  from  sin. — Freed  from  sin:  —  To  arrive  at  the 
meaning  of  these  words,  we  must  consider  that  law  regards  all  punishment  in  the 
light  of  satisfaction-  By  a  crime,  the  law  has  been  aggrieved  ;  and  by  the  punish- 
ment, the  law  is  satisfied.  When,  therefore,  the  guilty  person  has  undergone 
sentence,  the  law  has  no  further  claim  upon  that  man.  I.  Christ  died  and  under- 
went TEE  BXXREUE  puNisHUENi  OF  THE  LAW.    1.  He  was  the  One,  only,  sinless  being 


47t  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

that  ever  valked  the  earth.  But  He  "  was  made  sm."  The  sins  of  the  world  gathered 
upon  th%t  spotless  One,  and  He  was  treated  as  if  He  was  one  concentrated  essence  of 
sin.  2.  When  He  died,  it  was  death  indeed.  No  other  death  was  like  that.  (1)  Is  death 
the  rending  of  the  fine  tissue  by  which  spirit  and  body  are  mysteriously  one  ?  His 
was  the  most  sensitive  and  delicate  frame  that  ever  was  seen — and  the  soul  of  Jesus 
broke  through  its  tabernacle — the  body  went  its  way  to  the  sepulchre — the  soul 
winged  its  flight  to  Paradise — and  Jesus  died.  (2)  Is  death  the  parting  from  those 
whose  love  makes  life?  The  tender  farewell  to  Mary,  and  the  beloved  disciple, 
showed  the  dying  of  the  heart  of  Jesus.  (3)  Is  death  separation  from  God  ?  Then 
there  was  a  passage  in  that  dark  valley  which  Jesus  walked  without  a  ray  of  Hia 
Father's  presence.  3.  But  the  death  passed,  and  it  could  never  be  repeated.  It 
was  not  compatible  with  the  justice  of  God  that  Jesus  should  die  again.  U.  Sss 
BOW  THIS  BEABS  CPON  0UBSELVE8.  1.  It  is  God's  plan  always  to  deal  with  man  as 
seen  in  some  federal  head.  The  whole  of  our  race  fell  in  the  first  Adam,  and 
became  involved  in  his  condemnation.  Is  it  arbitrary  ?  See  the  balance.  Christ 
came  to  be  a  federal  Head.  As  the  natural  members  of  our  body  gather  up  into 
the  natural  head,  so  spiritual  believers  gather  op  into  Christ.  2.  Observe  the  con- 
sequence of  this  representative  system.  As  soon  as  ever  yoa  are  really  united  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  have  died  in  your  covenant  Head.  There  was  a  sentence 
of  death  against  yoa  which  must  be  executed — but  in  Christ  you  have  undergone 
it.  What  is  the  result  ?  You  can  never  be  required  to  pay  the  forfeit  which  has 
been  paid,  or  to  die  the  death  which  has  been  died — it  is  done  in  Christ,  and  yoa 
are  dead — and  "  he  that  is  dead  is  freed  from  sin."  And  as  impossible  as  it  would 
be  that  God  should  take  His  risen  Son,  and  nail  Him  to  that  Cross  again,  so  im- 
possible is  it  that  God  should  ever  demand  satisfaction  at  your  hand  for  any  of 
those  sins,  which  being  once  laid  on  Christ,  have  already  received  satisfaction  ia 
the  death  of  your  Redeemer.  3.  This  was  the  only  conceivable  way  in  which  it 
was  possible  that  any  man  should  be  "freed  from  sin."  God's  government  of  thia 
world  is  a  moral  government,  and  it  is  essential  to  moral  government  that  every 
sin  should  have  its  retribution.  Therefore,  God  laid  it  down  at  the  first,  "  The  soid 
that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  But  He  vindicated  His  truth,  and  upheld  the  law, 
when,  gathering  the  sins  of  all,  and  laying  them  upon  one  great  Substitute,  Ha 
crucified  all  in  One,  saw  all  dead  that  He  might  acknowledge  all  alive — and  simply 
carried  out  the  one  grand  principle,  "  He  that  is  dead  is  freed  from  sin."  4.  Look 
at  the  condition  of  a  man  who  is  "freed  from  sin."  Had  sin  never  entered  into 
oar  world — or,  having  entered,  had  it  been  simply  forgiven  by  a  word — we  should 
have  been,  I  suppose,  just  as  Adam  was.  We  should  have  lived  in  a  beautiful 
garden,  where  we  should  have  eaten  sweet  fruit,  and  done  gentle  labour,  and  at  times 
we  should  have  enjoyed  the  presence  of  God,  and  had  some  measure  of  commonion 
with  Him.  Conclusion :  It  is  a  certain  fact  that  no  other  process,  except  the  grace 
of  Christ — no  fear  of  punishment,  no  hope  of  reward,  no  self-respect,  no  considera- 
tion for  human  affection,  have  ever  proved  sufficient  in  this  world  to  make  men 
really  good.  But  let  a  man  be  once  brought  under  a  real  feeling  that  through  the 
grace  of  Christ  he  is  free  from  condemnation — let  him  begin  to  look  at  that  Saviour 
as  hia  own  Friend,  and  live,  day  by  day,  in  converse  with  that  love,  and  contempla- 
tion of  that  example,  and  we  know  what  is  the  consequence.  We  know  how  the 
mind  of  Christ  enters  into  that  man's  spirit,  and  how  the  pattern  of  Christ  becomes 
reflected  upon  his  conduct.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Dead  with  Christ ;— -What  is 
it  to  be  dead  f  We  all  know  what  it  is  to  turn  away  from  the  grave  side,  in  which 
we  have  laid  to  its  last  rest  the  cold  body  of  a  friend.  All  is  done  and  over  now. 
Something  has  been  in  the  world  which  will  never  be  again.  A  story,  a  presence 
with  its  good  and  evil,  with  its  joys  and  sorrows  is  wiped  out.  Everything  is 
ended.  The  great  silence  closes  over  it,  as  the  waters  cIobc  over  a  sunken  ship, 
and  leaves  no  sign.  It  is  all  dead  and  over !  We  have  said  the  last  word ;  we 
have  taken  the  last  look.  Now,  let  it  go  I  Come  away  1  Leave  it  to  lie  hidden  1 
For  you  must  go  your  way  without  it.  That  is  death,  and  we  are  dead  if  we  are  in 
Christ.  We  have  buried  our  old  manhood.  That  old  natural  self  of  ours — the 
man  in  as  that  is  bom  and  lives  its  little  day  and  dies — the  self,  as  is  by  human 
laws,  as  a  creature  of  this  earth — that  is  with  us  no  longer.  It  has  had  its  day.  It 
has  done  its  business.  We  have  wrapped  it  in  its  white  shroud.  We  have  carried 
it  out  to  its  burial ;  down  in  the  dark  grave  we  have  laid  it ;  it  is  buried,  with 
Christ's  burial.  All  that  old  past,  so  onerous,  so  tangled,  so  burdened,  so  sick — it 
is  all  gone  and  over,  as  completely  as  a  life  that  is  dead.  Never,  never  can  it  be 
again.    The  blood  of  Christ's  death  lies  between  us  and  it ;  and  it  cannot  touch  us. 


.  VI.]  ROMANS.  477 

Its  sorrows,  its  sins,  are  remote  and  alien,  as  the  voice  of  a  torrent  that  we  have 
crossed  in  the  night,  whose  dull  and  smothered  roar  oomes  to  oar  ears  only  in  faint 
gnsts  of  wind.  The  old  is  dead  and  buried.  (H.  S.  Holland.)  Freedom  from 
tin: — The  original  means  justified  or  acquitted  from  sin — absolution  from  its  guilt 
and  merited  penalty.  Law  has  received  its  rightful  claim  in  the  Person  of  the 
Surety.  Freed  from  sin's  penalty,  we  are  also  freed  from  its  power.  We  are  dead 
to  sin,  because  in  Christ  we  have  died /or  sin.  Consequently  we  are  also  freed  from 
its  practice  (Job  iii.  19;  Rom.  vii.  24;  1  John  iii.  6-9).      {T.  Robinson,  D.D.) 

Yers.  8-11.  Now  If  we  be  dead  with  Christ  ...  we  shall  also  live  with  w<wi, — 
Death  and  life  with  Christ : — To  be  dead  with  Christ  is  to  hate  and  turn  from  sin ;  and 
to  live  with  Him  is  to  have  our  hearts  and  minds  turned  towards  God  and  heaven. 
To  be  dead  with  sin  is  to  feel  a  disgust  at  it.  We  know  what  is  meant  by  disgust. 
Take  the  case  of  a  sick  man,  when  food  of  a  certain  kind  is  presented  to  him;  consider 
how  certain  scents,  or  tastes,  affect  certain  persons,  and  you  will  be  at  no  loss  to  de- 
termine what  is  meant  by  disgust  at,  or  deadness  to,  sin.  On  the  other  hand,  consider 
how  pleasant  a  meal  is  to  the  hungry,  or  some  enlivening  odour  to  the  faint ;  how 
refreshing  the  air  is  to  the  languid,  or  the  brook  to  the  weary  and  thirsty ;  and 
you  will  understand  what  is  implied  in  being  alive  with  Christ.  Our  animal 
powers  cannot  exist  in  all  atmospheres ;  certain  airs  are  poisonous,  others  Ufe- 
giving.  So  is  it  with  spirits  and  souls:  an  unrenewed  spirit  could  not  live  in 
heaven,  he  would  die  ;  an  angel  could  not  Uve  in  bell.  The  natural  man  cannot 
live  in  heavenly  company,  and  the  angelic  soul  would  pine  and  waste  away  in  the 
company  of  sinners,  unless  God's  presence  were  continued  to  it.  To  be  dead  to 
Bin  is  to  be  so  minded  that  the  atmosphere  of  sin  oppresses,  distresses,  and  stifles 
us — that  it  is  painful  and  unnatural  to  us  to  remain  in  it.  To  be  alive  with  Christ 
is  to  be  so  minded  that  the  atmosphere  of  heaven  refreshes,  enlivens,  stimulates, 
invigorates  us.  To  be  alive  is  not  merely  to  bear  the  thought  of  religion,  to 
assent  to  its  truth,  to  wish  to  be  religious ;  but  to  he  drawn  towards  it,  to  loio-it, 
to  delight  in  it,  to  obey  it.  (J.  H.  Newman,  P.P.)  \t)eath  anduU/iicUh  C/»rt«t_A- 
"  Skin  for  skin,"  said  Satan,  "all  that  a  man  hath  wilT "be  give  for  his  life."  ~"fie 
was  wrong,  however,  as  the  event  proved.  There  is  one  thing  a  man  will  not  give 
for  his  life  if  he  has  got  it ;  and  that  is,  the  favour  of  God.  And  yet  let  as  do 
justice  to  the  maxim,  for  there  is  great  truth  in  it :  What  is  life  ?  "  !Ui  Thy  favour 
is  life  " ;  so  that  if  a  man  holds  this  favour  at  all  costs — if  he  will  be  content  to 
part  with  anything  and  everything  in  the  universe  before  he  will  part  with  God's 
favour,  it  is  but  carrying  out  Satan's  maxim  thoroughly.  My  text  develops  to  us 
the  great  secret  of  life.  I.  "  If  we  be  dead  with  Christ."  It  does  not  say,  if  we 
are  dead  in  Christ ;  but  dead  with  Christ.  It  is  not  a  case  of  conformity,  but  of 
identity ;  not  of  imitation,  but  of  participation.  But  the  question  is.  In  what  sense 
did  Christ  die,  or  to  what  purpose  ?  "  He  died  unto  sin."  Now,  when  you  say  that 
we  die  unto  sin,  and  that  Christ  died  unto  sin,  do  you  mean  the  same' thing?  In 
the  common  way  of  expression,  when  a  man  says  that  a  Christian  dies  unto  sin,  he 
means  that  he  dies  unto  its  influence.  Now,  sin  never  had  any  influence  over 
Christ,  and  therefore  how  could  He  die  unto  sin  in  that  sense  ?  What  did  Christ 
die  unto?  1.  He  died  under  the  condemnation  of  sin,  "  The  Lord  laid  upon  Him 
the  iniquity  of  us  all."  He  died  "  under  the  law,"  met  its  demands,  bore  its 
penalty  ;  then  what  followed  ?  The  condemnation  was  completely  averted.  But  if 
that  is  true  you  must  adopt  that  interpretation  exclusively  in  regard  to  ourselves, 
i.e.,  we  die  unto  the  condemnation  of  sin.  '•  Therefore  there  is  no  condemnation 
to  them  that  are  in  Christ."  That  is  a  blessed  truth ;  and  does  not  the  whole 
history  of  Christian  experience  depend  upon  the  recognition  of  it?  All  the 
experience  of  sorrow  and  suffering,  of  bondage  and  of  a  servile  spirit,  result  from 
not  entering  into  that  truth.  You  cannot  have  a  stronger  term  than  the  word 
death.  2.  Prior  to  Christ's  dying  to  sin  He  died  under  the  condemnation  of  sin. 
The  law  did  its  full  work  upon  Him ;  He  was  never  emancipated  from  its  con- 
demnation until  He  thoroughly  realised  it.  The  believer  experimentally  passes 
through  something  of  that  kind  before  he  dies  with  Christ  to  the  condemnation  of 
sin.  Who  ever  comes  to  Christ  to  escape  condemnation,  but  the  man  over  whom 
that  condemnation  is  pressing?  Here  is  the  great  distinction  between  real  and 
nominal  conversion.  One  man  has  gone  through  a  process  of  self-condemnation, 
and  the  other  has  not.  The  one  man  apprehends  the  value  of  salvation  ;  the  other 
does  not.  The  one  man  has  learnt  the  curse  of  sin  ;  the  other  has  not.  Death  ia 
the  necessary  consequence  of  sin.    If  I  sin,  it  mast  somehow  or  other  pass  on  me. 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [amr.  n, 

I  must  die,  or  I  must  be  connected  with  One  who  has  died.  In  some  way  or  other 
God's  righteous  sentence  must  be  executed.  II.  "  We  shall  also  live  with  Him." 
As  sure  as  life  followed  in  Christ's  case,  so  surely  will  it  follow  in  our  case.  The 
life  spoken  of  in  the  text  is  the  resurrection  life  ;  it  is  the  life  that  follows  death. 
Mark,  concerning  that  life,  that  it  is — 1.  An  endless  life.  He  died  unto  sin  once. 
Death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  Him :  He  dieth  no  more.  Then  there  is  no 
more  death  to  you.  We  have  done  with  death  if  we  are  believers.  "  If  a  man 
believe  on  Me,  he  hath  eternal  life,  and  he  shall  never  die."  "  He  is  passed  from 
death  unto  life."  You  may  say,  "  There  go  the  mourners  in  the  street,  and  the 
man  of  God  is  in  the  hearse."  No,  he  is  not.  Death  was  a  laying  aside  of  the  body 
of  sin  and  death,  that  life  might  be  emancipated.  Life  is  locked  up  here.  To  open 
the  door,  and  let  the  man  free,  is  that  death  ?  2.  A  life  unto  God.  But  did  not 
Christ  •'  live  unto  God  before  He  died  "  ?  Certainly ;  but  He  lived  onder  the  law, 
and  died  under  it.  It  was  a  kind  of  bondage  that  He  was  under.  Hence  He  says, 
"  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with  ;  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accom- 
plished 1  •'  From  the  moment  of  His  death,  what  followed  ?  Complete  emancipa- 
tion ;  the  law  was  no  longer  over  Him  ;  the  curse  was  no  longer  on  Him.  Now, 
till  we  die  with  Christ,  we  are  under  the  law,  cursed  by  the  law ;  the  spirit  of 
bondage  is  in  our  hearts.  Our  consciences  must  be  "  purged  from  dead  works 
to  serve  the  living  God."  It  is  only  when  a  man  is  emancipated,  and  knows  it, 
that  he  leads  a  Ufe  of  liberty;  it  is  then  he  feels,  "  Condemnation  is  gone;  God  is 
my  Father ;  we  are  reconciled  " ;  and  then  he  runs  in  the  way  of  God's  command- 
ments. 3.  A  life  in  heaven.  At  His  ascension  Christ  went  to  heaven  ;  and  there 
He  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  And  so  we  are  risen  with  Christ;  we  are  seated 
with  Christ  in  heavenly  places ;  our  conversation  is  in  heaven.  The  way  is  laid 
open — that  new  and  living  way  through  the  body  of  Christ.  So  that  we  do  not 
wait  for  the  final  glory  to  know  something  of  the  blessedness  of  heavenly  experience. 
4.  The  life  of  an  acknowledged  Son  of  God  with  power.  It  is  true  that  during 
Christ's  ministry  a  voice  from  heaven  said  before  the  disciples,  "This  is  My 
beloved  Son  "  ;  but  there  was  no  declaration  of  that  with  power.  Christ  walked 
about  as  "  a  Man  of  sorrows."  At  the  resurrection  there  was  indeed  a  proclamation 
of  the  Son  with  power.  And  how  is  it  in  our  case  ?  "  To  as  many  as  receive  Him  " 
to  them  does  He  "give  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God."  The  power  of  Christ 
becomes  theirs.  "  We  can  do  all  things  by  the  power  of  Christ,  which  dwelleth  in 
ns."  "  When  I  am  weak  then  am  I  strong."  "My  strength  is  perfect  in  weak- 
ness." 6.  A  life  which  involved  the  full  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Christ  never 
had  that  to  dispose  of  till  "  He  ascended  up  on  high."  Now,  from  the  moment  we 
are  dead  with  Christ  we  receive,  and  are  temples  of,  the  Holy  Ghost.  6.  A  life 
of  glorious  anticipation.  His  experience  is  not  perfect ;  He  is  still  waiting.  Christ 
'  has  not  got  His  Church ;  and  do  we  wait  for  our  body  ?  When  we  die,  as  it  is  called, 
we  are  separated  from  the  body,  and  we  wait  to  be  united  to  it.  Is  not  that  like  the 
intermediate  -state-ofOhritrt,  wlt»4a.jgaiting  above  for  His  body  ?  {Capel  Molineux, 
B.A.)  jibeath  and  life  in  Christ  :-^The  apostles  never  travelled  far  from  the 
simple  fBetfr-Ql-Chriat!ja.life,  death,-  resurrection,  ascension,  exaltation,  and  second 
advent.  What  a  rebuke  this  should  be  to  those  who  are  ever  straining  after 
novelties.  Our  business  is  the  old  labour  of  apostolic  tongues,  to  declare  that 
Jesus,  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.    L  The  facts  befebbed 

TO  CONSTITUTE  THE   GL0EI0TJ8  GOSPEL  WHICH   WE  PBEACH.      1.   That   JeSUS    died.      He 

who  was  Divine,  and  therefore  immortal,  bowed  His  head  to  death.  This  is  the 
second  note  in  the  gospel  scale.  The  first  note  is  incarnation.  Christ  died  as — 
(1)  A  sacrifice.  (2)  A  substitute.  (3)  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  There  was 
a  great  gulf  fixed,  so  that  if  we  would  pass  to  God  we  could  not,  neither  could  He 
pass  to  us.  There  was  no  way  of  filling  up  this  gulf,  unless  there  should  be  found 
one  who,  like  the  old  Roman,  Curtius,  would  leap  into  it.  Jesus  comes.  Into  the 
grave  Christ  plunged,  the  gulf  is  bridged,  and  God  can  have  communion  with  man  ! 
2.  But  Jesus  rises.  Can  ye  imprison  immortality  in  the  tomb  1  Death  is  overcome, 
and  thus,  having  delivered  Himself,  He  is  able  also  to  deliver  others.  Sin,  too, 
was  manifestly  forgiven.  Christ  was  in  prison  as  a  hostage ;  now  that  He  ia 
suffered  to  go  free,  it  is  a  declaration  on  God's  behalf  that  He  has  nothing  against 
us ;  our  substitute  is  discharged ;  we  are  discharged.  "  He  rose  again  for  our 
justification."  Nay  more,  inasmuch  as  He  rises  from  the  dead.  He  gives  us  a 
pledge  that  hell  is  conquered.  3.  Jesus  is  now  living.  He  does  not,  after  forty 
days,  return  to  the  grave  :  He  departs  from  earth  from  the  top  of  Olivet,  and  now 
at  His  Father's  right  hand  He  sits,  the  Lord  of  Providence,  expecting  the  hour  when 


OSAV.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  479 

His  enemies  shall  be  made  His  footstool ;  and  the  all-prevalent  Intercessor.  4. 
Jesas  lives  for  ever.  (1)  '•  Death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  Him."  Disease 
may  visit  the  world  and  fill  the  graves,  but  no  disease  or  plagae  can  tonoh  the 
immortal  Saviour.  (2)  It  would  be  a  strange  doctrine  if  any  man  should  dream 
tiiat  the  Son  of  Ood  would  again  offer  His  life  a  sacrifice.  (3)  Since  He  lives  for 
ever,  then  no  foes  can  overcome  Him,  and  His  people's  eternal  life  is  sure.   II.  Thb 

OliOBIOnS  WOBK    WHICH    BVEBT    BELISVEB    FEELS    WITHIN    HIM.        The     apOStle    Only 

mentions  death,  resurrection,  life,  and  life  eternal  to  show  our  share  in  them.  1.  Aa 
Christ  was,  so  we  also  are  dead.  We  are  dead  to  sin  because — (1)  Sin  can  no  more 
condemn  as.  I  cannot  claim  a  debt  of  a  dead  debtor,  and  although  I  be  a  debtor 
to  the  law,  yet  since  I  am  dead,  the  law  cannot  claim  anything  of  me,  nor  can  sin 
inflict  any  punishment  upon  me.  He  that  is  dead  is  freed  from  sin ;  we  are  free 
from  all  its  jurisdiction.  (2)  We  defy  its  power.  Sin  had  been  sitting  on  a  high 
throne  in  our  heart,  but  faith  pulled  the  tyrant  down,  and  though  it  still  survives 
to  vex  us,  yet  its  reigning  power  is  destroyed.  2.  If  we  be  thus  dead  with  Christ, 
let  OS  see  that  we  live  with  Him.  It  is  a  poor  thing  to  be  dead  to  the  world  unless 
we  are  alive  nnto  God.  Death  is  a  negative,  and  a  negative  in  the  world  is  of  no 
great  use  by  itself.  Just  as  Jesus  had  a  new  life  after  death,  so  have  we  a  new  life 
after  death.  But  we  must  prove  it,  as  Jesus  did,  by  infallible  signs.  8.  Christ 
lives  for  ever,  and  so  do  we.  Sin  made  us  die  once  in  Adam,  but  we  are  not  to  be 
slain  by  it  again.  4.  Like  Jesus,  we  live  unto  God.  (1)  The  forty  days  which 
Christ  spent  on  earth  He  Uved  unto  Ood,  comforting  His  saints,  manifesting  His 
person,  giving  forth  gospel  precepts.  For  the  few  days  we  have  to  Uve  here  on 
earth  we  must  live  to  comfort  the  saints,  to  set  forth  Christ,  and  to  preach  the 
gospel  to  every  creature.  (2)  And  now  that  Christ  has  ascended  He  lives  unto  God 
to  manifest  the  Divine  character.  Christ  is  the  permanent  revelation  of  an 
invisible  God.  Christian,  God  is  to  be  seen  in  you ;  you  are  to  show  forth  the 
Divine  longsufferlng,  tenderness,  kindness,  patience.  (3)  Christ  lives  unto  God, 
for  He  completes  the  Divine  purpose  by  pleading  for  His  people,  by  carrying  on 
His  people's  work  above.  You  are  to  live  for  the  same.  (4)  Jesus  lives  unto  God, 
delighting  Himself  in  God.    Live  in  the   same  way.  Christian.     III.  The  facts 

ABB  FLEDOES  OF  THE  GLOBT  WHICH  IB  TO  BE  BEVEALED  IN  US.      Christ  died.      We    shall 

die.  Christ  rose,  and  so  shall  we.  I  do  not  think  we  get  enough  joy  out  of  our 
resurrection.  Resurrection  will  be  our  marriage-day.  Body  and  soul  have  been 
separated,  and  they  shall  meet  again  no  more  to  be  divorced.  Anticipate  that 
happy  day.  No  sin,  no  sorrow,  no  care,  no  decay,  no  approaching  dissolution  I 
He  lives  for  ever  in  God :  so  shall  you  and  1 1  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Dead 
and  alive  with  Christ : — I.  Dead  with  Chbisi.  Cmci^dJsitiLHiraerJi  JudlctaHyj-^ 
^_^  B''"'°  r^'i^Hyr  tj  Hj»ritnft11y,  as  to  sin  itseU.  II.  Life  with  OHinsT.~~^ 
ir~Judicially,  absolved  from:' sin  by' God*8  own  sentence.  2.  Spiritually, 
through  His  own  nature  communicated  to  as.  3.  Experimentally,  in  the 
enjoyment  of  God  with  Him  for  ever,  (T.  Eobinson.)  Iiea4_Jndeed,but 
living  : — I.  The  basis  or  the  apostle's  sentimbnt.  1.  Is  laid  in  the  past. 
(1)  The  death  of  Christ.  Christ  died  for  our  sins.  Millions  of  deaths  have 
passed  unobserved  as  leaves  fall  from  the  trees  in  autumn.  A  few  deaths  have 
arrested  attention  and  been  a  source  of  great  benefit  to  the  countries  to  which 
the  dying  belonged.  Never  a  death  like  that  of  Jesus  Christ — never  one  that  has 
attracted  such  attention,  never  one  from  which  such  benefits  have  flowed.  (2) 
Christ  died  unto  sin  once,  and  when  He  thus  died  He  had  no  more  to  do  with  sin, 
either  as  tempting  Him,  or  as  requiring  to  be  atoned  for.  He  had  borne  the  sins : 
He  bore  them  no  longer  when  He  had  atoned  for  them.  He  had  been  surrounded 
by  sin;  but  now  He  had  passed  away  from  that  sphere  in  which  He  had  been 
brought  into  contact  with  it,  and  henceforth  and  for  evermore  all  was  to  be  holy. 
2.  There  is  also  a  basis  of  prophecy.  Respecting  Christ  and  His  people.  Paul 
saw  a  grand  future  for  Christ  and  the  Church.  Paul's  earliest  inspiration  was  as 
a  prophetic  author.  The  glowing  hope  which  the  apostle  cherished  was  of  Christ's 
coming  again,  and  of  the  resurrection  and  the  glorification  of  His  people  at  the  last 
day  1  The  wonderful  prophecy  is  sketched  in  chap.  viii.  18-24.  II.  The  bearing 
or  THE  FAST  AKD  THE  FTjTUBE  UPON  THE  PRESENT.  History  is  not  good  for  much  if  it 
be  not  connected  with  the  present,  and  those  who  indulge  in  speculations  as  to 
prophecy  without  connecting  them  with  the  present,  are  not  doing  much  that  will 
be  of  avail  for  themselves  or  others.  When  we  lock  at  history  and  prophecy  in  the 
Bible  we  have  not  two  islands  separated  from  one  another,  but  two  continents 
joined  by  an  isthmus — the  present.    We  stand,  then,  at  the  meeting  point  of  the 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

past  and  foture  ;  and  the  past  and  future  have  both  to  do  with  us,  and  oar  whole 
spiritual  life  is  based  upon  the  history  of  the  past  and  the  prophecies  of  the  future. 
1.  Paul  fixes  upon  the  historical  fact  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins,  and  he  will  not 
let  that  for  an  instant  go.  But  without  turning  Christ's  death  into  a  myth,  he 
gives  it  a  spiritual  meaning,  and  teaches  that  between  us  and  Christ  there  comes 
an  identification  and  sympathy,  through  which  we  feel  like  Him  and  act  like  Him 
and  become  one  with  Him,  imitating  His  example  and  becoming  conformed  to  His 
image.  2.  With  regard  to  Christ's  resurrection,  Paul  spiritualises  it  and  indicates 
its  relation  to  our  Christian  holiness:  "That  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of 
life."  Without  turning  Christ's  resurrection  into  a  myth,  he  makes  it  a  moral 
power  working  in  us,  so  that  we  rise  from  the  death  of  sin  to  the  life  of  righteous- 
ness. 3.  As  it  regards  future  and  present,  Paul  says,  "  We  shall  hve  together  with 
Him."  Without  losing  sight  of  Christ's  glorious  reign,  and  of  our  resurrection 
through  His  power  at  the  last  day,  the  connection  shows  that  he  had  in  his  mind 
the  thought  of  a  risen  life,  now  enjoyed  by  the  beUever,  of  which  the  words  just 
cited  are  the  irresistible  proofs.  Thus  he  thinks  of  Christ's  resurrection  as  repeated 
in  the  believer's  life,  and  the  believer's  resurrection  as  antedated  and  as  rehearsed 
in  his  present  holy  life.  4.  Note  the  wonderful  effect  upon  our  morality  and  our 
religion  of  these  ideas.  (1)  Common  morality,  as  it  is  recognised  in  the  world,  is 
just  resistance  to  temptation  to  vice.  But  according  to  Paul,  Christian  morahty 
consists  in  dying  to  sin.  The  idea  is  that  of  becoming  insensible  to  sin,  even  as 
Christ  was.  (2)  Christian  piety  is  living  with  Christ,  rising  to  such  a  level  of  life 
that  we  become  one  with  Christ,  and  there  is  a  spirit  of  devotion,  of  patience,  of 
activity,  like  that  of  Christ.  (3)  So  with  regard  to  religion  altogether.  Religion 
now  is  in  the  estimation  of  some  people  rather  degrading  than  otherwise.  It  is  just 
the  opposite.  It  is  a  rising  in  the  spiritual  universe :  it  is  a  getting  nearer  to 
heaven,  through  getting  nearer  to  Christ — getting  into  fellowship  with  Christ. 
Conclusion :  As  we  think  of  all  this— 1.  The  first  conviction  that  is  produced  in  our 
minds  is  that  of  tremendous  deficiency.  2.  But  we  have  at  hand  an  immeasurabls 
power  of  improvement  in  the  truths  and  promises  of  the  gospel,  and  in  the  promise 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Our  aims  as  Christians  should  be  very  high,  very  noble.  We 
shall  never  realise  those  ends  ang  phjents  in  our  own  strength,  but  God  will  help 
us.  (John  Stoughton,  D.D.)  fftunew  life  j — I.  Owes  its  existencb  to  the  im- 
DWELLiNQ  OF  THE  HoLY  Ghost.  wo  (fdctrinS  of  the  New  Testament  can  be  clearer 
than  this  (John  i.  12 ;  James  i.  18  ;  Pet.  i.  23 ;  John  iii.  6).  These  developments 
of  our  religious  history  are  not  natural,  but  supernatural.  No  kind  of  education, 
no  original  endowment  of  genius,  no  acquired  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge, 
can  adequately  account  for  the  phenomena  in  question.  To  receive  that  life  at  all 
is  to  obtain  it  from  God.  The  Spirit,  once  received,  must  remain  in  the  heart. 
What  the  soul  is  to  the  body,  to  give  it  vitality,  so  must  the  Holy  Ghost  be  to  the 
Boul,  to  give  it  eternal  life.  H.  Is  maintained  by  faith  in  Christ  and  communion 
WITH  Him  (ver.  11).  HI.  Is  a  devotion  or  the  whole  being  to  Christ  (1  Cor.  vi. 
20).  Here  we  see  an  entire  change  in  the  aims  and  purposes  of  a  man's  Hfe :  such 
a  change  as  must  influence  and  control  all  his  activity  and  behaviour.  Men, 
naturally,  "  seek  their  own,"  or  else  they  devote  themselves  to  some  fellow-creature, 
or  to  the  good  of  their  country,  or  the  service  of  their  sovereign :  but  the  peculiarity 
of  the  Christian's  life  is  that  it  is  consecrated  to  Christ.  This  means — 1 .  That  he 
seeks  In  every  possible  way  to  promote  the  glory  of  the  Saviour,  by  acknowledging 
His  name,  by  declaring  His  goodness,  by  enforcing  His  claims.  2.  That  he  is 
always  anxious  to  further  the  great  work  of  Christ,  which  is  to  save  sinners,  and 
to  set  up  the  kingdom  of  God.  3.  That  he  is  careful  at  all  times  to  consult  the 
will  of  Christ  and  to  do  it.  This  devotedness  vrill  follow  Christ  through  good 
and  ill  report.  IV.  Assimilates  the  character  to  that  of  Christ.  We  would  be 
in  the  world  as  He  was  in  the  world.  It  is  the  height  of  our  ambition  to  be  like 
Jeans  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  V.  Derives  its  happiness  from  the  love  of  Christ. 
Happiness  is  the  very  life  of  life ;  and  the  soul  of  happiness  is  love.  And  what 
love  can  satisfy  the  heart  of  the  believer  except  the  love  of  Christ  ?  To  love  Jesas, 
and  to  be  loved  by  Him,  are  the  two  perennial  sources  of  the  believer's  joy ;  the 
two  poles  of  his  moral  life.  It  is  his  consolation  in  every  trial,  bis  compensation  in 
every  loss,  and  his  everlasting  reward.  (T.  G.  Horton.)  Living  with  Chritt:— 
Believers  live  with  Christ.  I.  Judiciallt — absolved  from  death  by  God's  own 
sentence  (2  Cor.  v.  15).  II.  Spiritually — through  His  own  nature  communicated 
to  us  (Gal.  ii.  20).  HI.  Experimentally— in  the  enjoyment  of  God  with  Him  for 
e  I  er  (Pea.  zzi.  6).    (T.  Robimon,  D.D.)       Knowing  that  Christ  \»isig  raised  Crom 


.  TX.]  ROMANS.  4Bt 

the  dead  dleth  no  more.— 0/  the  remrreetion : — The  two  principal  words  of  the 
passage  are  "  knowing  "  (ver,  9),  and  "  coonting  "  (ver.  11).  Knowing  and  calling 
ourselves  to  account  for  our  knowledge  :  two  points  needing  ever  to  be  conjoined. 
Oft  we  hear,  but  small  reckoning  we  make  of  it.  What  Christ  did  at  Easter  we 
know ;  but  to  what  then  we  are  to  do  we  give  no  great  regard.  Now  this  Scripture 
teaches  us  that  Christian  knowledge  is  not  a  knowledge  without  all  manner  of 
•ooount,  but  that  we  are  accountants  for  it,  especially  in  the  matter  of  Christ's 
resurrection.  I.  Oub  knowiko.  1.  The  means  of  it.  Not  by  actual  vision,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  apostles,  but  by  their  testimony  which  is — (1)  Ample — for  all  the 
Apostles  were  witnesses,  and  if  they  are  not  enough  five  hundred  saw  Christ  risen 
(1  Cor.  XV.  6).  (2)  Trustworthy.  For  the  witnesses— (a)  Were  not  credulous,  but 
otherwise  (Mark  xvi.  11 ;  Luke  xxiv.  11,  13,  41 ;  Matt,  xxviii.  17 ;  John  xx.  25). 
That  is  ever  best  known  that  is  most  doubted  of;  and  as  Augustine  says,  "  All  this 
doubting  was  by  them  made,  that  we  might  be  out  of  doubt,  and  know  that  Christ 
is  risen."  (ft)  Lost  their  living  and  their  life  by  their  testimony.  2.  The  particulars. 
(1)  That  Christ  is  risen.  Death  is  a  fall;  it  came  with  the  fall  of  Adam,  and  was 
a  fall  from  which,  but  for  one  thing,  there  had  been  no  rising.  But  by  Christ's 
rising  it  falls  out  to  be  a  fall,  from  which  we  may  get  up  again.  For  if  one  be 
risen  another  may  be ;  and  if  Christ  rose  in  our  nature  then  is  our  nature  risen ; 
and  if  our  nature  then  our  persons  may  be  (ver.  4).  Bernard  well  observes,  "  thai 
Christ  is  risen  only  but  not  wholly,"  till  we  be  risen  too.  This  then  we  know, 
first,  that  death  is  a  fall,  not  like  that  of  Pharaoh  into  the  sea,  who  never  came  up 
more,  but  like  that  of  Jonas  (Matt.  xxv.  41^ ;  not  like  that  of  the  angels  into  the 
bottomless  pit,  there  to  stay  for  ever,  but  like  that  of  men  into  their  beds ;  not  as 
a  log  or  stone  to  the  ground,  which,  where  it  falleth  there  it  lieth  still ;  but  as  of  a 
wheat  com  which  is  quickened  and  springeth  up  again.  (2)  That  Christ  now  dieth 
not  as  the  widow's  son,  ruler's  daughter,  and  Lazarus  did.  And  if  we  only  rise  as 
they  did,  this  mortality  of  ours  will  be  to  us  as  the  prisoner's  chain  from  which  he 
escapes  only  to  be  pulled  back  again ;  but  if  we  rise  as  Christ  rose,  then  our  resurrec- 
tion will  be  no  return  to  the  same  hfe,  but  a  passing  over  to  a  new.  (3)  That  from 
henceforth  "death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  Him."  Three  times  in  chap  v. 
Paul  saith,  ••  death  reigned,"  as  if  it  were  some  mighty  monarch  having  great 
dominions.  And  so  it  is ;  for  how  many  dangers,  diseases,  miseries,  there  be  of 
this  mortal  life  in  which  we  Uve  under  death's  jurisdiction  and  arrest ;  and  if  we 
escape  them  we  are  still  under  the  fear  of  them  which  is  death's  dominion  too  (Job 
xviii.  14).  And  when  we  are  out  of  this  life  unless  we  are  in  Christ  we  are  not  out 
of  his  dominion.  But  he  hath  no  dominion  over  Christ ;  Christ  hath  dominion  over 
him  (Heb.  ii.  14  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  55).  3.  The  reasons.  The  Bomans  loved  to  see  the 
grounds  of  what  they  received  and  not  the  bare  articles.  Indeed  it  might  trouble 
them  why  Christ  should  need  to  rise  since  they  saw  no  reason  why  He  should  die. 
The  truth  is  we  cannot  speak  of  His  rising  well  without  mention  of  what  He  rose 
from.  The  two  are  never  separated  by  the  apostle,  and  their  union  serves  many 
good  purposes.  It  shows  His  human  nature  and  weakness  in  dying,  and  His  Divine 
nature  and  power  in  rising ;  His  two  offices — His  priesthood  and  sacrifice  in  His 
death,  and  His  kingdom  in  the  glory  of  His  resurrection ;  His  two  main  benefits — 
the  death  of  death  in  His  death,  and  the  reviving  of  hfe  in  His  resurrection ;  the 
two  moulds  wherein  our  lives  are  to  be  cast.  Of  them  both,  then,  briefly — (1)  The 
cause  of  His  dying.  "  Sin."  To  sin  He  died ;  and  yet  not  simply  to  sin,  but  with 
reference  to  us,  i.e. ,  He  would  save  us,  and  because  else  He  could  not  save  us.  By 
justice  sin  must  have  death — our  death,  for  the  sin  was  ours.  This  His  love  to  us 
could  not  endure ;  therefore  that  we  might  not  die  to  sin  He  died.  But  why 
"once"?  Because  that  was  enough  "to  take  away"  (John  i.  29),  "to  abolish" 
(Acts  iii.  19),  "to  draw  dry  "  (Heb.  ix.  28),  utterly  to  exhaust  all  the  sins,  of  all  the 
sinners,  of  all  the  world.  The  excellency  of  His  Person  that  performed  it,  the 
excellency  of  the  obedience  He  performed,  and  the  excellency  of  the  humility  and 
charity  wherewith  He  performed  it,  were  of  such  value  as  made  His  once  dying  "  a 
plenteous  redemption"  (See  Eph.  ii.  7,  iil.  20;  1  Tim.  i.  14).  (2)  The  cause  of 
His  living — God  who  had  by  His  death  received  full  satisfaction,  reached  Him,  as 
it  were.  His  hand  and  raised  Him  to  life  ;  and  not  only  raised  Him,  but  for  tliat 
cause  exalted  Him  (Phil.  ii.  8,  9),  to  live  with  Him  in  glory  for  ever.  For  as  when 
He  lived  to  man  He  lived  to  much  misery,  so  now  He  liveth  to  God  He  liveth  in  all 
felicity  (Psa.  xxxvi.  9).  II.  Ocb  account.  1.  Of  our  comings  in.  An  account 
there  is  growing  to  us  by  Christ's  rising  of  much  benefit.  The  hope  of  gaining 
»  better  life  is  oor  comfort  against  the  fear  of  losing  this  (1  Pet.  L  8) ;  and 
VOL.   X.  81 


48S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

through  this  we  comfort  ourselves  in  bereavement  (1  Thess.  iv.  18 ;  John  zi.  23), 
and  in  regard  to  the  issue  of  our  work  (1  Cor.  zt.  58).  2.  Of  our  goings  out.  (1) 
The  sum  or  charge  of  which  account  is  set  down  in  these  words  that  we  be  like  Christ ; 
that  what  He  hath  wrought  for  us  He  wrought  in  us.  (a)  Like  Him  in  His  dying : 
for  He  died  not  only  to  offer  a  sacrifice  for  us  but  to  leave  an  example  to  us.  Like 
Him,  too,  in  His  rising :  for  He  arose  not  only  that  we  might  be  begotten  to  a 
lively  hope,  but  also  that  we  might  be  planted  in  the  likeness  of  His  resurrection. 
(6)  Like  Him  in  His  living  to  God.  (2)  The  discharge  and  means  of  it.  "  In  JesuB 
Christ  our  Lord  "  (ver.  11).  Out  of  Christ  we  can  do  nothing  towards  this  account ; 
but  in  and  with  Him  enabling  us  to  it  we  can  do  all  things.  And  enable  us  He  will 
as  not  only  having  passed  the  resurrection,  but  being  the  Besurrection  itself.  If 
in  the  days  of  His  flesh  there  went  virtue  out  from  even  the  edge  of  His  garment, 
much  more  from  His  own  seU,  and  those  two  principal  and  powerful  actions 
of  His  own  self,  there  issueth  a  Divine  power :  from  His  death  a  power  working 
in  the  old  man,  or  flesh,  to  mortify  it ;  from  His  resurrection  a  power  working  on  the 
new  man ,  or  spirit,  to  quicken  it.  A  power  able  to  roll  back  any  stone  of  an  evil  cus- 
tom and  to  dry  up  any  issue  though  it  have  run  upon  us  twelve  years  long.  And  this 
power  is  that  Divine  quality  of  grace  which  we  receive  from  Him.  (Bp.  Andrewe$. ) 
The  undying  one : — Note — I.  The  beality  of  the  besubbection  :  *•  Christ  being 
raised  from  the  dead."  1.  The  resurrection  asserts  a  truth  not  always  learnt  from 
Nature,  viz.,  that  the  spiritual  is  higher  than  the  materiaL  There  are  no  doubt 
abstract  arguments  which  go  to  prove  this ;  but  the  resurrection  assures  us  that  the 
laws  of  animal  existence  may  be  set  aside  in  obedience  to  a  higher  spiritual  interest. 
2.  The  resurrection  is  not  merely  an  article  of  the  Greed ;  like  Christ's  eternal  son- 
ship,  which  belongs  to  another  sphere,  and  is  believed  on  account  of  the  trust- 
worthiness of  Him  who  has  taught  it.  But  that  Christ  rose  is  a  fact  which  depends 
on  the  same  sort  of  testimony  as  any  event  in  the  life  of  Caesar ;  with  this  differ- 
ence, that  no  one  ever  died  to  maintain  that  Caesar  defeated  Yercingetoriz  or 
Pompey.  Our  Lord  was  seen  five  times  on  the  day  that  He  rose,  and  six  separate 
appearances  are  afterwards  recorded ;  while  it  is  implied  that  they  were  only  a  few 
of  those  which  actually  occurred.  And  when  He  was  gone.  His  apostles  went  forth 
especially  as  "  witnesses  of  His  resurrection,"  and  were  prepared  to  attest  its  truth 
with  their  blood.  3.  If  this  testimony  concerned  a  poUtical  occurrence,  or  a  fact 
of  natural  history,  nobody  would  think  of  denying  its  cogency  ;  and  those  who 
reject  the  resurrection  quarrel,  for  the  most  part,  not  with  the  proof,  but  with  the 
supposition  that  such  a  thing  could  ever  happen.  Look,  they  say,  at  the  fixed 
order  of  nature ;  year  after  year  it  is  what,  within  our  memories,  it  always  has  been. 
When  man  dies  his  body  mingles  with  the  dust  for  good  and  all ;  he  does  not,  so 
far  as  we  can  see,  break  the  bonds  of  death.  The  fixed  order  of  nature  1  (1)  Fixed 
by  whom  or  what  ?  By  some  fated  necessity  ?  But  you  know  that  you  can  speak, 
move,  act,  or  the  reverse,  as  you  wilL  And  surely  this  may  be  also  true  of  the 
highest  Being  of  all.  For  that  such  a  Being  exists.  Nature  assures  you  by  its 
existence ;  and  that  He  is  an  ordering  and  disposing  Intelligence,  the  order  and 
symmetry  of  Nature  assure  you  too.  The  order  of  Nature,  then,  is  fixed  not  by  fate, 
but  by  a  will  which  can  at  pleasure  innovate  upon  it.  The  power  to  work  miracles 
is  implied  in  the  power  which  created  Nature.  (2)  "  God  can  work  them,"  you 
say ;  "  but  will  He  ?  Are  not  miracles  a  libel  upon  His  wisdom  and  far-sighted- 
ness ?  God  in  creation  is  the  supreme  engineer ;  it  is  only  the  unskilful  workman 
who,  having  set  his  machine  in  motion,  has  to  trust  in  his  hand  in  order  to  correct 
some  defect,  or  to  communicate  some  new  impulse  for  which  no  provision  was  made 
originally."  (a)  But  the  universe  is  something  more  than  a  machine;  since  it 
contains  not  merely  matter,  but  free  spirits,  able  consciously  to  yield  or  to  refuse 
obedience  to  the  true  law  of  their  being.  A  God  is  much  greater  than  a  supreme 
engineer.  He  is  a  moral  governor,  a  father.  His  first  care  is  for  His  intelligent 
offspring ;  and  the  universe  was  framed  for  them.  If  man  had  not  been  created, 
miracle  might  have  been  superfluous.  But  if  the  education  and  redemption  of  a 
rational  soul  be  God's  noblest  purpose  in  creation,  then  we  shall  expect  Him  to  make 
the  world  of  matter  instruct  and  improve  us,  by  deviating,  if  need  be,  from  ita 
accustomed  order,  as  well  as  by  observing  it.  (b)  We  may  go  further.  The  order 
of  nature,  no  doubt,  teaches  the  believer  the  precious  lesson  that  order  is  a  law  of 
the  Divine  Mind.  But  for  thousands  upon  thousands  that  order  paralyses  the 
spiritual  sense.  If  we  could  watch  a  fellow-creature  continuing  undeviatingly  a 
single  movement  for  twenty  years,  we  should  come  to  look  at  him  also  as  a 
machine,  instead  of  as  a  free  agent.    And  so  many,  marking  how  anderiatiag  Qod'l 


«BA».  n.]  ROMANS.  488 

work  is,  presame  that  it  must  always  be  what  it  has  hitherto  been ;  and  snoh  men 
gradually  come  to  think  of  this  visible  scene  as  the  whole  universe  of  being.  They 
drop  out  of  mind  that  more  wonderful  world  beyond  it ;  they  forget  Him  who  is  the 
King  of  this  world  as  well  as  of  that.  Nay,  there  are  times  when  the  physical 
world  lies  like  a  weight,  or  like  a  nightmar  ,  upon  our  thoughts  ;  when  we  long  for 
some  higher  promise  of  blessedness  and  perfection  than  any  which  a  fixed  order  of 
Nature  can  give,  (c)  Christ's  resurrection  breaks  down  the  iron  wall  of  uniformity 
which  goes  so  far  to  shut  out  God.  It  tells  us  that  matter  is  controlled  by  mind  ; 
that  there  is  a  Being  who  is  not  bound  by  the  laws  of  the  universe ;  that  He  ia 
their  Master.  God  had  said  this  before,  but  never  so  clearly  as  in  the  resurrection 
of  our  Lord.  If  ever  interference  with  the  order  of  the  world  was  required  it  was 
here.  When  Jesus  died  the  purest  of  lives  seemed  to  have  ceased  to  be.  The 
holiest  of  doctrines  appeared  to  have  died  away  amid  blasphemies.  Apart  from  the 
question  who  the  SuSerer  was,  there  was  the  question  whether  a  righteous  God 
did  really  reign :  and  the  resurrection  was  the  answer.  It  was  the  finger  of  God 
visibly  thrust  down  amid  the  things  of  sense ;  disturbing  their  usual  order  ;  bidding 
men  know  and  feel  that  the  truths  which  Christ  has  taught  us  about  God  and  the 
soul  are  higher  and  deeper  than  any  which  are  written  on  the  face  of  Nature.  U. 
Thk  pebpetditt  of  Christ's  risen  life.  1.  The  resurrection  was  not  an  isolated 
miracle,  done  and  over,  leaving  things  as  they  had  been  before.  The  Risen  Christ 
is  not  like  Lazarus,  destined  again  to  be  a  tenant  of  the  grave.  Christ  rises  for 
eternity:  "He  dieth  no  more."  His  risen  body  is  made  up  of  flesh,  bones,  Ac, 
bat  it  has  superadded  qualities.  It  is  so  spiritual  that  it  can  pass  through  closed 
doors.  It  is  beyond  the  reach  of  those  causes  which  bring  down  our  bodies  to  the 
dnst.  Throned  in  the  heavens  now,  It  is  endowed  with  the  beauty  and  glory  of  an 
eternal  youth — "  Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead  dieth  no  more."  2.  Nor  is  this, 
in  itself,  a  new  miracle.  The  real  miracle  was  that  the  sinless  Christ  should  have 
died  at  all.  Death  was  an  innovation  upon  the  true  conditions  of  His  existence ; 
and  the  resurrection  was  but  a  retnrn  to  His  rightful  and  normal  immortality. 
Adam  died  because  he  sinned.  If  Adam  had  not  sinned  he  would  not  have  died. 
But  when  the  Second  Head  of  our  race  appeared,  cut  off  from  the  entail  of  corrup- 
tion  by  His  supernatural  birth,  and  exhibiting  in  His  life  absolute  conformity  to 
eternal  moral  law,  He  was,  by  the  terms  of  His  nature,  exempt  from  the  law  of 
death.  In  His  case,  death  was  a  momentary  innovation  upon  the  true  law  of  being. 
And  therefore  when  He  had  paid  the  mighty  debt  which  the  human  family  owed  to 
the  deeply-wronged  righteousness  of  God,  life  resumed  its  suspended  sway  in  Him  as 
in  its  Prince  and  Fountain  (See  Rev.  i.  18  ;  Acts  ii.  24).  3.  Now  observe  how  the 
perpetoity  of  the  life  of  the  Risen  Jesus  is  the  guarantee  of  the  perpetuity  of  the 
Chnrob.  (1)  Alone  among  all  forms  of  society,  the  Church  is  insured  against 
dissolution.  The  Roman  Empire  seemed  to  our  Lord's  contemporaries  destined  to 
last  for  ever.  Since  then  it  has  vanished,  and  other  kingdoms  have  in  turn  gone  their 
way.  Nor  is  there  any  probabiUty  that  any  one  of  the  existing  forms  of  civil 
government  will  last.  And  there  are  men  who  tell  as  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ 
is  no  exception  to  the  rale.  We  Christians  know  that  they  are  wrong,  because 
Christ's  Church  draws  strength  from  sources  which  cannot  be  tested  by  our  political 
or  social  experience.  For  indeed  she  is  endowed  with  Christ's  own  undying  life 
(Matt,  zxviii.  20).  (2)  But,  although  insured  against  dissolution,  she  is  not 
insured  against  vicissitudes.  Her  Lord  is  Divine,  but  her  members  are  human. 
She  has  not  always  triumphed ;  she  has  been  corrupted,  and  division  has  followed, 
so  that  she  no  longer  presents  a  united  front  to  the  powers  of  evil.  And  there  have 
been  times  when  it  has  seemed  as  if  the  world  was  right.  But  that  which  is  so 
striking  in  her  history  is  her  power  of  self -restoration.  The  tendency  to  dissolution 
has  clearly  been  arrested  by  an  inward  influence  against  which  ordinary  circum- 
stances could  not  prevail.  What  is  this  but  the  presence  of  Him  who,  being  raised 
from  the  dead,  dieth  no  more  ?  And  who  shall  forecast  the  future  ?  This  only  is 
oertain — she  will  exist  while  the  world  shall  last  (Psa.  xlvi.  6,  6).  (3)  It  may 
indeed  be  said,  "  Why  should  I  rejoice  in  the  perpetuity  of  the  Church  ?  To  me 
Christianity  is  a  personal  matter."  Such  isolated  Christianity  is  not  that  of  the 
New  Testament.  Christ  came  to  found  a  Divine  society,  and  the  life  of  Christians 
comprises  duties  to,  and  privileges  intimately  bound  up  with  that  society.  Glorious 
things  are  spoken  of  thee,  thou  city  of  God ;  because  thou  art  the  home  of  the 
living  Christ ;  because,  as  in  thy  chequered  story,  thoa  traversest  the  centuries, 
thoa  dost  always  bear  with  thee,  in  thy  assured  and  indestructible  vitality,  the 
eertificate  of  thy  Lord's  deathless  life.    HI.    Tbb  seobxt  and  uodeIi  or  rsBsa- 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

VERANCB  ra  THE  LITE  OF  GODLINESS.  1.  Christ  risen  from  death,  who  dieth  no 
tDore,  is  the  model  of  our  new  life  in  grace.  Jast  as  He  left  His  tomb  on  Easter 
momiDg,  once  for  all,  so  §hoald  the  soul,  once  risen,  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin. 
There  must  be  no  hovering  about  the  sepulchre,  no  treasuring  the  grave-clothes, 
no  secret  hankering  after  the  scent  and  atmosphere  of  the  guilty  past.  You  have 
great  need  to  persistently  set  your  affections  on  things  above;  that  you  desire 
passionately  to  live  as  those  who  are  alive  from  the  dead.  2.  Not  that  God,  having 
by  His  grace  raised  us  from  death,  forces  us  whether  we  will  or  no  to  live  on  con- 
tinuously. The  Church  has  indeed  received  from  the  King  of  kings  a  charter  of 
perpetuity.  But  to  no  mere  section  of  the  universal  body,  and  much  more  to  no 
single  soul  on  this  side  the  grave,  is  it  said  that  "  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail 
against"  it.  The  examples  of  Judas,  Demas,  the  Galatians,  and  Paul  himself 
trembling  lest  he  himself  should  be  a  castaway,  are  conclusive  of  this.  No  force  is 
put  upon  as ;  no  man  is  carried  up  to  heaven  mechanically  if  he  prefers  to  go 
downwards,  or  even  does  not  sincerely  desire  to  ascend.  3.  But  how  can  we  rejoice 
in  our  risen  Lord  if  we  are  so  capable,  in  our  weakness,  of  being  untrue  to  His 
example  ?  I  answer,  because  that  life  is  the  strength  as  well  as  the  model  of  our 
own  (Eom.  viii.  11).  The  Risen  Christ  in  us  is  **  the  hope  of  glory."  (Canon  Liddon.) 
Christ's  resurrection  not  a  return  to  the  former  life: — No  one  who  has  studied  St. 
Paul's  Epistles  can  have  failed  to  observe  the  distinction  which  they  draw  between 
the  result  of  Christ's  death  and  the  effect  of  His  resurrection.  The  death  destroys 
death,  the  resurrection  gives  life.  The  effect  of  His  death  on  human  nature  was 
instantaneous,  once  and  for  ever,  as  death  itself  is,  the  fleeting  of  a  breath  in  a 
moment,  and  a  passing  out  of  this  world  for  ever.  But  in  His  resurrection  is  the 
gift  of  life,  eternal  life,  always  to  be  enjoyed,  and  of  infinite  extension ;  not  the 
mere  extinction  of  darkness  by  a  sudden  gleam,  but  the  dispersion  of  an  equable, 
serene,  and  constant  light.  Christ's  resurrection  imparts  a  new  life.  Why  ?  This 
I  will  try  to  answer.  I.  When  He  bose  from  the  dead,  it  was  not  to  |eetubn 
TO  His  fobmeb  ufe.  His  nature  entered  into  new  relations  with  God  and  man ; 
His  body  experienced  a  mighty  change ;  it  became  a  spiritual,  glorified  body. 
This  thought  of  Christ's  onward  passage  to  a  new  and  more  glorious  life  will  add 
another  sense  to  the  words  already  so  full  of  meaning,  "  Christ  our  Passover." 
Israel,  saved  by  grace,  rescued  from  Egypt,  was  cut  off  from  his  enemies,  passed 
over  the  Bed  Sea,  and  onward  to  the  promised  land,  fulfilling  the  prophecy,  "  Out 
of  Egypt  have  I  called  My  son."  Had  the  Jews,  on  the  other  hand,  passed  over 
the  Bed  Sea,  and  on  seeing  their  enemies  perish  in  its  waters,  returned  in  safety  to 
Egypt,  would  that  have  been  a  fulfilment  of  the  promise?  No  more  would  our 
Lord's  resurrection  have  satisfied  God's  design  of  mercy,  had  He  merely  risen  to 
return  to  His  former  state.  It  would  have  been,  according  to  the  homely  but 
lively  image  of  an  old  divine,  "  As  when  a  prisoner  escapes  from  prison  with  a 
chain  stiU  hanging  from  his  wrist,  by  which  death,  that  hath  still  dominion  over 
him,  shall  draw  him  back  into  his  own  hands."    II.  Soue  seasons,  founded  on 

SCRIPTtJBE,   WHY  OtJB   BLESSED   SaVIOUB  AT   HiS   BESDBBECTION    DID  NOT   COMB   BACK, 

BUT  WENT  ONWABD  TO  A  NEW  AND  oLOBiFiED  STATE.  For  Instance,  the  scheme  of 
redemption  through  Christ  is  this : — Man  was  created  in  a  body  free  from  pain, 
and  not  destined  to  die ;  but  he  sinned,  and  with  sin  came  death ;  his  body  became 
liable  to  pain  and  death,  as  his  soul  to  sin ;  and  his  condition  of  body  and  soul 
descended  to  his  family.  Christ  Jesus  came  to  restore  man  to  his  first  estate  ;  an 
estate  in  which  originally  death  had  no  part  So  He  overcame  death  by  giving  np 
His  life  of  His  own  vrill  to  it,  instead  of  suffering  it  to  be  taken  from  Him  by  force ; 
and  while  in  the  arms  of  death,  of  His  own  will  He  rose  again  ;  thence  He  became 
a  new  creature,  the  first  of  a  new  race,  the  second  Adam,  the  spiritual  forefather  of 
another  family,  which  He  could  not  have  been  had  He  merely  risen  from  death  to 
come  back  to  His  former  life.  Death  was  instantaneous  and  for  a  moment,  even 
while  He  drew  His  last  breath  and  gave  up  the  ghost.  The  resurrection  is 
permanent,  continuous,  of  infinite  extension.  Death  is  an  interval  in  the  economy 
of  the  world,  as  sin ;  life  is  eternal,  as  God.  An  army  retreating  before  over- 
whelming numbers  flies  over  a  bridge,  already  mined :  it  is  their  means  of  rescue, 
their  passage  to  a  safe  frontier :  but  they  do  not  linger  on  it ;  their  eyes  are  set 
upon  the  road  beyond.  Now  it  has  saved  them  in  their  extremity,  and  they  regard 
it  for  ever  with  thankfulness  and  emotion  ;  even  its  ruin  and  havoc  is  dear  to  their 
light,  for  by  it  alone  have  they  been  saved — saved  for  victory  and  peace  in  the 
happy  lajid,  "where  the  vricked  cease  from  troubling  and  the  weary  are  at  rest." 
ITT,  What  pbacticaji  effect  has  this  doctbine  of  the  besubbeotion  xtpon  our> 


OHAP.  TX.]  ROMANS.  485 

SBLTss  ?  The  same  qnestion  may  be,  and  by  persons  of  a  certain  disposition  is, 
often  asked  concerning  every  doctrine  of  the  gospel.  The  great  practical  result  of 
this  teaching  I  believe  to  be,  that  Christians  are  made  aware  of  the  unspeakable 
blessings  of  their  present  communion  with  Christ.  Their  eyes  are  opened  to  the 
glory  of  the  estate  into  which  they  have  been  translated.  They  cease  to  regard 
their  religion  as  belonging  to  the  past,  and  to  the  future,  but  learn  to  live  upon  its 
blessings  in  the  present.  Go  to  St.  Paul :  hear  him,  how  he  pours  out  of  his 
abundant  heart  the  utterance  of  his  joy  in  the  blessings  shed  by  Christ  upon  EUa 
own.  Do  his  words  refer  only  to  heaven  to  come  ?  or  are  they  not  rather  a  descrip- 
tion, for  the  most  part,  of  the  privileges  of  the  Christian  upon  earth  ?  Go  to  St. 
Peter,  and  mark  the  nobleness  of  his  demeanour,  the  resolute  will,  the  clear 
conviction,  the  happy  assurance  of  his  faith,  as  he  appears  in  his  later  history, 
and  in  his  own  letters  to  the  Church.  How  did  this  change  of  character  arise  ?  By 
his  spiritual  communion  with  Christ,  and  the  sense  of  present  enjoyment  and 

Eower  which  the  possession  of  such  blessings  ensures.  Go  to  St.  John :  you  see  a 
'ivine  peace,  a  heavenly  love  that  lies  like  moonlight  upon  the  waves  of  a  restless 
world.  Is  the  expression  of  his  face  the  look  of  one  who  merely  lingers  in  the  past, 
or  looks  to  expected  joy  in  a  distant  day  to  come  ?  Is  it  not  rather  the  peace  of 
present  joy,  a  reflection  of  the  thought  which  his  own  pen  has  translated  from  the 
words  of  Christ,  signifying  the  present  sunshine  of  the  Christian's  life — "  He  is 
passed  from  death  unto  life  "?  «•  Forward  I  "  is  the  Christian  motto,  founded  on 
the  Master's  history.  He  went  on  through  death  to  life,  not  backward,  no,  not 
even  back  to  the  Ufe  so  pure  and  lovely  as  that  which  He  laved  on  earth  before  He 
died ;  bat  forward  to  a  more  glorious  estate,  and  in  His  glory  we  see  the  earnest  of 
our  inheritance.  {CaTion  Furse.)  Christ's  immortality  : — At  the  door  of  the 
grave  lies  a  whole  sheaf  of  sceptres.  Death  sits  in  the  palace  of  the  sepulchre, 
and  the  potentates  of  earth  are  his  cup-bearers  ;  and,  as  the  old  blind 
monarch  staggers  around  his  palace,  ever  and  anon  he  trips  on  some  new 
fallen  coronet.  They  set  up  Charlemagne  in  his  grave,  and  put  a  crown  on 
his  pulseless  temples,  and  a  sceptre  in  his  lifeless  hand ;  yet  that  could  not  bring 
back  his  kingdom.  Our  King  is  immortal  I  (Te  De  Witt  Talmarje.)  For  in  that 
He  died.  He  died  unto  Bin  once. — Christ's  death  and  life : — I.  The  Lord's  death. 
We  arrive  most  easily  at  what  the  apostle  intends  by  bis  phrase,  "  He  died  unto 
sin,"  if  we  start  from  a  familiar  form  of  speech.  Nothing  is  more  impressive  than 
the  sudden  and  total  stop  which  death  puts  to  the  relationships  of  life.  Of  him 
who  died  only  an  hour  ago,  we  say  that  he  is  done  with  this  world.  Whatever 
interest  he  possessed  in  it  is  at  an  end.  The  ties  which  bound  him  to  it  are  cut. 
From  every  obligation  which  it  imposed  on  him  he  is  discharged.  Yesterday  the 
man  formed  a  busy  unit  in  the  complicated  system  of  society,  entangled  by  a  thou- 
sand threads  of  family,  trade,  and  pubUc  life.  In  the  thick  of  it  all,  how  has  one 
swift  scythe-sweep  cut  him  clear  1  Neither  love,  nor  hate,  nor  desire,  nor  care, 
comes  here  to  move  him  more.  His  world  is  elsewhere;  his  life  is  far  away. 
When  we  apply  this  definition  of  the  phrase  to  the  case  of  Jesus,  and  inquire  what 
is  meant  by  affirming  of  Him,  "  The  death  that  He  died.  He  died  unto  sin  (ver.  10, 
E.  v.),  two  thoughts  emerge.  1.  The  connection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  with  sin  in  His 
earthly  life  was  the  most  complete  possible  for  a  sinless  person  to  have.  *•  He 
knew  no  sin"  by  that  sad  experimental  knowledge  which  implies  its  entrance 
within  the  soul  to  stain  and  wreck  it.  When  you  have  named  this  exception  yon 
have  named  all.  What  else  have  we  to  do  witii  it  which  He  had  not  ?  Ours,  not 
His,  is  the  doing  of  sin  with  the  will's  consent ;  whatever  follows  on  the  doing  of  it 
was  His  as  weU  as  ours — e.g.,  (1)  In  the  constitution  of  His  body,  bom  with  the 
same  frailty  and  exposure  to  ill  as  we  all  share ;  in  the  curse  of  sweat  for  daily 
bread,  when  He  wrought  at  the  bench  ;  in  the  endurance  of  fatigue  and  want.  (2) 
His  soul  shared  the  same  curse  ;  for  if  it  is  sin  which  turns  the  honey  of  affection 
into  gall,  He  surely  had  His  share  of  distrust,  unkindness,  misconstruction, 
treachery.  If  fear  of  death  be  born  of  sin,  may  we  not  compare  with  that  the  mys- 
terious gloom  which  deepened  over  the  Christ  as  His  career  drew  towards  its  end? 
(3)  And  then  the  awful  experience  of  forsakenness  on  the  Cross  gives  a  hint  of  deeps 
of  spiritual  distress  which  we  are  unable  to  sound.  Connection  with  sin  I  He  was 
aU  sin's  own ;  its  prey,  surrendered  for  some  Divine  necessity  to  the  devourer ;  the 
choicest  portion  ever  seized  upon  to  be  borne  down  to  the  keeping  of  sin's  child, 
death,  within  sin's  home,  the  grave.  2.  The  whole  of  this  connection  with  sin 
is  said  to  have  terminated  at  death.  (1)  It  has  not  been  so  with  any  other  man. 
Hen  who  stand  on  the  verge  of  the  anseen  world  have  no  reason  to  look  forward  to 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n. 


the  sot  of  dying  as  an  escape  either  from  sinfol  habits,  or  from  the  jadgment  of 
heaven  upon  their  misdeeds.  So  far  from  that,  the  instinctive  voice  of  conscience 
confirms  the  declaration  of  Holy  Writ  that  "  after  death  comes  the  judgment." 
Nor  is  there  the  slightest  ground  for  supposing  that  death  can  operate  as  a  purifier. 
It  is  far  more  rational  to  apprehend  that  the  human  spirit,  when  set  free  from  the 
restraints  of  the  present  state,  and  flung  loose  in  all  its  abused  but  magnificent 
strength  to  do  what  it  pleases,  may  indulge  in  the  spiritual  sins  of  pride,  hatred, 
and  defiance  of  God  on  a  scale  rarely  if  ever  beheld  on  earth.  (2)  But  what  no 
other  man's  death  can  be  expected  to  do  was  done  by  the  death  of  Jesus  the  sinless. 
It  closed  His  connection  with  sin,  for  that  had  been  outward,  not  inward ;  a  guilt- 
less submission  to  sin's  penalty,  not  a  guilty  surrender  to  sin's  power ;  that  of  a 
sufferer  who  owes  a  death  to  justice  for  imputed  sins  of  other  men.  Once  that 
death  was  paid,  His  connection  with  imputed  sin  was  of  necessity  dissolved.  IL 
Feom  such  a  death  as  this  there  could  issue  only  ufb  unto  God,  1.  Jesus 
having  ceased  to  be  under  the  power  of  the  world's  sin  could  not  but  live  anew. 
For  to  "  die  unto  sin  "  must  mean  to  die  unto  death.  When  the  law's  sentence  has 
been  endured,  and  the  power  of  sin  as  guilt  has  been  exhausted,  the  royalty  of 
death  is  over.  It  was  "  not  possible  "  that  Jesus  should  be  holden  of  death.  2. 
The  life  which  emerges  when  sin  and  death  have  been  died  to,  is  a  life  "  unto  God." 
The  new  state  of  human  existence  is  the  negation  of  the  old — its  clear  contrary. 
It  is  more ;  it  is  its  counterpart.  It  is  nothing  which  the  old  life  was,  as  a  life  nnto 
sin ;  it  is  everything  which  the  former  was  not.  3.  Thus,  having  seen  how  the 
earthly  condition  of  Jesus  involved  a  close  contact  with  sin,  we  can  readily  trace 
the  contrast  which  His  risen  life  has  to  offer.  (1)  Over  against  that  body,  ^ive  to 
sin  and  consequently  heir  to  infirmity,  mortality,  and  pain  ;  over  against  its  expo- 
sure to  waste  and  want  and  weariness,  its  mean  necessities,  its  honourless  condition 
when  men  tore  it  and  marred  it  with  shameful  violence  and  insult,  must  be  set  a 
godlike  organ  for  Divine  life  to  inhabit,  and  now  found  fit  to  move  amid  celestial 
scenes  with  unfatigued  stren^^th,  and  to  be  the  centre  in  its  unwithering  beauty  of 
celestial  homage  as  it  sits  upon  the  throne  of  God.  O  grave  in  Joseph's  garden, 
where  is  thy  victory  ?  (2)  To  this  changed  constitution  of  His  body  falls  to  be 
added  a  corresponding  change  also  in  Christ's  manner  of  life.  Lifted  up  far  above 
the  reach  of  sorrow,  reproach,  vexation,  or  wrong.  He  inhabits  now  the  cloudless, 
passionless  dwelling-place  of  God.  Within  such  a  Divine  home  had  dwelt  the 
Everlasting  Bon  before  the  days  began  when  He  lived  unto  sin.  To  it  He  has  now 
borne  back  from  earth  a  human  nature — the  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  which,  living 
here  below,  lived  unto  sin,  and  dying,  died  unto  it,  but  now  that  it  liveth  again, 
liveth  for  ever  unto  God.  {J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.)  Christ  dying  for  our  $in, 
and  living  for  our  salvation : — With  the  consciousness  of  past  transgression  must 
ever  be  associated  in  man's  mind  the  anticipation  of  future  punishment.  Con- 
science almost  forestalls  the  declaration  of  Holy  Writ,  "that  he  which  doeth 
wrong  shall  suffer  for  the  wrong."  And  reason,  by  itself,  wonld  tell  us  that  as  we 
cannot  undo  the  error  committed,  so  neither  can  we  escape  the  penalty  deserved. 
To  be  awakened,  therefore,  only  under  a  dispensation  of  natural  religion, 
would  set  before  us  judgment  without  mercy  ;  but,  happily  for  us,  the  awakening 
is  under  a  dispensation  of  love  that  goes  back  to  cancel  the  record  of  past  sin,  and 
goes  forward  to  insure  the  constant  communication  of  grace.  Accordingly  we  have 
a  Saviour  who  died  once,  and  who  ever  lives.  I.  The  reasons  of  Christ's  death, 
stated  in  part.  1,  There  are  two  interpretations  of  the  expression,  "  He  died  unto 
sin,"  by  reason  of  sin  in  Himself,  or  on  account  of  sin  in  others.  The  former  is 
utterly  untenable,  inasmuch  as  *'  He  knew  no  sin."  Then  He  must  have  died  on 
account  of  others ;  a  view  which  there  are  abundance  of  Scriptures  to  confirm,  as 
there  were,  in  the  former,  abundance  of  Scriptures  to  contradict.  It  is  on  account 
of  the  sinless  offering  for  sin  that  we  charge  him  who  rejects  it  with  consummate 
folly,  and  that  we  cheer  him  who  accepts  it  with  unbounded  solace.  Has  Christ 
died  for  you  ?  is  our  demand  of  the  former  ;  then  how  can  you  answer  it,  that  yoa 
do  not  live  for  Christ  ?  Has  Christ  died  for  you  ?  is  our  demand  of  the  latter ; 
then  how  can  you  doubt  that  you  shall  live  with  God  for  ever  ?    2.  Christ  died — 

(1)  For  the  conviction  of  sin.  Why  was  such  a  victim  needed  ?  Why,  excepting 
that,  from  the  immensity  of  the  ransom  offered,  might  be  inferred  the  enormity  of 
the  guilt  and  the  imminence  of  the  peril  ?  It  is  not  from  human  nature,  even  in 
its  most  distorted  and  degraded  aspects,  that  we  learn  what  an  evil  thing  is  sin ; 
our  true  estimate  must  be  grounded  on  that  which  it  cost  to  redeem  the  sinner. 

(2)  To  remove  or  cancel  sin.    His  death  is  adequate  to  the  necessities  of  all  who 


OOiP.  tl]  ROMANS.  487 

believe.  Not  only  does  the  apostle  declare  that  there  is  "  no  condemnation  to  them 
which  are  in  Christ  Jesns,"  but  he  asks  the  question,  "  Who  is  he  that  con- 
denmeth  7  "  only  that  he  may  answer  it  by  another,  Is  it  not  "  Christ  that  died?  " 
n.  Thb  pubposes  for  which  He  liveth  ?  1.  To  guide.  ♦•  I  am  the  way,"  &o. 
He  lives  to  act  as  a  Captain  in  guiding  many  sons  to  glory.  2.  To  govern.  ••  All 
power  is  given  unto  Me,  in  heaven  and  in  earth."  He  is  silently,  therefore,  but 
effectually,  working  round  all  things  to  the  establishment  of  His  own  wiU.  All 
nature  is  subject  to  His  will,  nay.  He  works  even  by  unwilling  instruments ;  the 
evil  passions  and  principles  of  men  all  are  constrained  by  Him  to  compass  the  end 
designed.  He  is  the  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church  ;  we  may,  therefore,  repair 
to  Him  in  every  difficulty,  and  commit  to  Him  every  consequence.  3.  "  To  make 
intercession  for  us."  III.  The  practical  issue  or  the  whole  matter.  You  are  placed 
here  in  the  position  of  those  for  whom  the  Son  of  God  once  died  unto  sin,  and  for 
whom  He  now  lives.  Conviction  of  sin  is  thus  placed  before  you  with  an  alterna- 
tive ;  to  be  condemned  by  Christ's  death,  or  to  be  saved  by  His  life.  It  is  no  com* 
mon  responsibility  which  lies  upon  such  as  are  now  solemnly  reminded  that  for 
them  ••  Christ  died  unto  sin  once."  But  neither  is  it  a  precarious  comfort,  or  a 
dubious  assurance,  which  arises  to  them  from  the  consideration,  "  In  that  He 
liveth.  He  liveth  unto  God."  He  lives  for  the  glory  of  God,  for  the  good  of  His 
Church,  for  the  triumph  of  the  gospel,  for  the  salvation  of  the  sinner,  for  the 
complete  overcoming  of  death,  and  of  him  that  has  the  power  thereof,  for  every 
conceivable  purpose  of  diffusing  happiness  and  dispelling  misery,  and  it  may  be  for 
far  higher  purposes  than  have  ever  entered  into  the  imagination  of  man.  But,  for 
whatever  else  He  lives,  He  lives  to  guide,  and  to  govern,  and  to  intercede  for  yoa. 
(r.  Dale,  M.A.) 

Vers.  11-14.  Likewise  reckon  ye  also  yoTirselves  to  be  dead  Indeed  nnto  sin,  bnt 
alive  nnto  God  through  Jesus. — Death  a  duty : — The  Bible  speaks  of  three  kinds 
of  deaths.  1.  That  which  is  a  necessary  event — the  death  of  the  body.  2.  That 
which  is  a  moral  crime — death  in  trespasses  and  sins.  3.  That  which  is  a  righteous 
obligation — death  unto  sin.  This  is  a  death  which  every  man  should  die,  though 
few  men  do  so.  It  is  a  death  which  requires  earnest  individual  effort,  and  involves 
the  agonies  of  a  self-crucifixion.  What  is  meant  by  being  "  dead  indeed  nnto 
sin"  ?  I.  Negativklt.  It  does  not  mean — 1.  Being  dead  to  the  existence  of  sin. 
Every  soul  should  realise  this.  Without  a  due  regard  to  this  we  shall  be  incompe- 
tent to  appreciate  the  history  of  Providence.  2.  Being  dead  to  the  memory  of  our 
own  sins.  We  can  and  ought  never  to  forget  the  fact  that  we  have  sinned.  The 
memory  of  the  fact  will  serve  to  restrain  from  the  wrong,  to  stimulate  to  the  right ; 
it  will  heighten  our  gratitude  to  pardoning  mercy,  and  swell  the  joys  of  eternity. 
8.  Being  dead  to  the  effects  of  our  sin  upon  our  own  history.  The  pardon  of  sin 
does  not  free  us  from  all  the  effects  of  sin.  The  law  of  moral  causation  goes  on. 
The  sins  that  we  have  in  youth  committed  against  our  constitution,  intellect, 
interests,  follow  us  to  old  age.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of  Job.  4.  Being  dead  to  the 
ruinous  workings  of  sin  around  us.  David  beheld  the  way  of  transgressors  and 
was  grieved.  So  did  Jeremiah.  So  did  Paul  at  Athens.  So  did  Christ,  &o.  So 
must  all  good  men.  We  are  to  battle  against  it.  II.  Positively.  It  may  involve 
three  things.  1.  The  death  of  aU  interest  in  its  attractions.  Sin  in  our  world  has 
wonderful  attraction.  The  taste,  the  skill,  the  genius  of  ages,  have  been  expended 
in  investing  it  with  all  conceivable  charms.  But  the  holy  soul  sees  through  it, 
and  is  disgusted.  To  it,  all  its  attractions  are  but  as  a  spangled  dress  that  robes 
an  ugly  theatrical.  2.  The  death  of  all  desire  for  its  pleasures.  Sin  has  "pleasures 
for  a  season."  The  holy  soul  has  higher — the  pleasures  of  a  purified  imagination, 
an  exalted  hope,  a  God-inspiring  soul,  an  approving  conscience,  a  smiling  God.  3. 
The  death  of  all  fear  about  its  penalties.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  burial  of  the 
past : — 1.  Life  is  a  series  of  fresh  beginnings.  We  cannot  really  undo  the  past, 
but  still  we  have  to  do  as  much  towards  it  as  we  can.  Nothing  is  more  natural 
than  to  say  to  ourselves,  "  Let  me  begin  again  ;  all  this  has  been  a  very  foolish 
mistake ;  I  am  very  sorry  that  I  took  the  turn  I  did."  The  beginning  again  ii 
made  impossible  by  the  indelible  character  of  what  we  have  done.  Besides  the 
reputation  we  have  acquired,  there  is  the  memory  of  our  past  life.  If  we  could 
but  wipe  out  the  past,  and  retain  the  experience  that  we  have  gained  without  the 
pain  and  sin  through  which  we  gained  it,  that  would,  as  it  seems,  wholly  satisfy 
our  need,  and  we  could  really  commence  afresh.  We  do  not  quite  ask  to  be  put  on 
the  same  level  as  we  might  have  reached  if  we  had  been  more  careful,  more  in 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  (chap.  n. 

earnest.  What  we  ask  for  is  to  be  enabled  to  fight  the  next  battle  withont  the 
burden  of  the  past  on  as.  We  want,  in  short,  to  bnry  a  great  deal  of  the  past,  and 
not  have  its  presence  haant  us  any  more.  2.  To  this  need  Easter  Day  is  the 
answer.  You  are  at  full  liberty  to  do  all  you  ask.  Let  not  the  memory  of  sin 
haunt  you  with  any  such  daunting  terrors  or  shames.  Bury  the  dead  past  with  all 
its  sins;  on  this  one  condition,  that  you  are  "  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord."  If  you  can  learn  from  the  past  your  weak  points,  yonr  besetting  sins ; 
if  you  can  gather  out  of  it  that  which  came  from  God,  and  that  which  you  can  use 
in  the  service  of  God,  then,  by  all  means,  bury  the  rest,  and  defy  its  power ;  and 
live  in  the  power  of  the  Son  of  God.  3.  It  is  true  that  every  deed  passes  into  the 
substance  of  our  being,  and  we  can  never  be  after  it  what  we  were  before.  But  for 
all  that,  the  sins  that  we  have  committed  must  not  be  allowed  to  work  upon  ua 
beyond  the  measure  that  God  has  assigned  to  them.  You  have  sinned,  and  you 
cannot  be  what  you  were,  nor  what  you  might  have  been.  But  you  still  can  be  a 
servant  of  God,  and  even  your  past  sins  can  become  in  His  hands  instruments  of 
His  will.  The  fall  of  David  gave  us  the  thirty-second  Psalm ;  the  fall  of  St.  Peter 
fitted  him  to  strengthen  his  brethren.  The  weakness  of  St.  Paul  taught  us  the 
lesson,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee ;  for  My  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weak- 
ness." There  is  even  in  evil  a  good  element ;  and  out  of  sin  we  may  draw 
strength  ;  and  when  we  have  drawn  out  all  that  may  help  as  for  the  future,  we 
need  not  fear  to  bury  aU  the  rest.  Christ  has  expressly  taken  all  that  on  Himself. 
We  have,  in  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  the  certain  assurance  that  they 
who  Uve  unto  Him  need  fear  no  condemnation.  4.  Not  with  the  past  is  our  chief 
business,  but  with  the  present  and  the  future.  Let  me  then  give  a  few  cautions  to 
those  who  really  desire  to  reckon  themselves  to  be  dead  unto  past  sins,  but  alive 
unto  God.  It  is  not  at  all  uncommon  to  find  that  a  high  festival  like  Easter  gives 
as  a  sense  of  recovered  freedom,  and  a  sort  of  confidence  in  our  strength  to  win 
the  battle.  And  then  this  excitement  wears  off,  and  we  are  not  only  back  where 
we  were  before,  but  have  the  additional  weakness  caused  by  an  additional  defeat. 
Now — I.  Bewabe  of  confoundino  a  sliqht  bepulse  with  a  eegulab  defeat,  and 
of  allowing  your  enemy  to  win,  not  because  you  are  really  beaten,  but  because  you 
merely  fancy  you  are.  A  temptation  comes  to  you  in  the  shape  of  an  evil  thought. 
Do  not  yield  as  if  the  evil  thought  were  as  bad  as  the  evil  word  or  deed.  Cast  out 
the  foe,  and  let  him  not  drive  you  to  sinful  actions.  Or,  again,  if  yoa  have  actually 
given  way,  do  not  say  that  this  is  complete  defeat.  Fight  every  inch  of  ground. 
However  much  you  may  be  defeated,  the  mere  fact  of  your  having  kept  up  the 
battle  retains  you  on  Christ's  side,  and  ensures  you  His  help.  II.  In  recommenc- 
ing the  battle  with  sin,  despise  mot  the  dat  of  small  thikos.  Life  to  our  foolish 
eyes  seems  not  so  earnest,  not  so  solemn  as  we  had  thought  it.  We  had  been 
prepared  for  something  extraordinary,  and  we  find  nothing  that  is  not  common- 
place. We  are  like  soldiers  who  have  been  drilled  for  a  pitched  battle,  and  then 
find  nothing  but  a  war  of  outposts,  and  so  become  discontented  and  careless.  But 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  as  much  shown  in  small  things  as  in  great.  The 
microscope  proves  that  God's  hand  will  fashion  the  wing  of  an  insect  as 
carefully  as  the  grandest  and  most  complicated  animal  structure.  So,  too,  is  it  in 
the  spiritual  world ;  and  the  Creator  would  have  the  slightest  impulse  of  the  will 
as  perfect  and  as  pure  as  the  deliberate  choice  of  the  reason.  IH.  Be  mot  content 
WITH  negatives.  Do  not  only  resist  temptation,  but  seek  to  serve  God  by  diligent 
discharge  of  duties,  by  kindness,  by  turning  your  thoughts  to  your  Father  in 
heaven,  to  the  Cross  of  your  Eedeemer.  And  I  put  the  first  of  these  first,  though 
the  last  is  the  most  important,  because  it  is  with  the  first,  the  outer  duties,  that  we 
always  have  to  begin.  Begin  with  such  duties,  for  those  you  are  justified  in  even 
forcing  yourself  to  do,  and  however  much  your  inclination  may  lead  you  another 
way,  still  these  duties  are  to  be  done.  I  cannot,  in  the  same  sense,  bid  you  force 
yourself  to  love  God  and  Christ ;  but  God  will  most  assuredly  give  you  at  last,  if 
not  at  once,  the  power  of  loving  Him  if  you  are  doing  yoijr  best  to  obey  Him,  and 
when  thoughts  of  Him  and  of  Christ  enter  your  heart,''do  not  turn  away.  (Bp. 
Temple. )  Life  in  death  : — I.  Paul  herb  exhobts  to  the  acceptance  of  an  idhai. 
scheme  of  life.  1.  The  facts  of  Christian  experience  are  to  be  recognised.  The 
moral  antagonism  of  "  flesh  "  and  '•  spirit,"  represented  by  the  dispositions  of  the 
body  and  mind,  is  to  bo  reckoned  with  (chap.  vii.  21,  23).  2.  They  are  to  b« 
interpreted  in  agreement  with  the  facts  of  Christ's  crucifixion  and  resurrection. 
(1)  The  body  being  "  mortal,"  we  are  to  regard  it  as  suffering  the  penalty  of  sin, 
even  m  oar  Lord's  body  was  crucified.    (2)  Morally  its  promptings  and  tendenoief 


VI.]  BOMANS.  489 

•re  not  to  be  accepted  as  the  law  of  conduct,  bnt  to  be  subordinated  to  the  purer 
and  higher  impulses  of  the  spirit,  which  has  already  entered  upon  the  resurrection 
life,  being  mystically  united  to  Christ  Jesus  (ver.  13).    II.  The  practical  influencb 
or  THIS  UPON  CONDUCT.     1.  This  is  not  to  be  a  merely  abstract  distinction  ;  it  is  to 
be  acknowledged  as  the  law  according  to  which  we  are  to  act,  just  as  elsewhere  the 
apostle  exhorts  Christians  not  to  consider  themselves  dead  to  sin,  but  to  become  so 
(Gal.  V.  24 ;  Col.  iii.  5).     2.  Nor  is  this  to  be  understood  as  a  violation  of  our 
physical  nature,  as  if  the  spirit  were  to  be  benefited  at  the  expense  of  the  body. 
Asceticism  is  not  countenanced  by  Paul  or  his  Master.     3.  It  is  but  an  assertion  of 
the  true  order  of  our  nature,  in  which  conscience  and  the  spiritual  impulses  are  de 
jure  the  ruling  authority  and  power.     Our  appetites  and  affections  are  not  evil  in 
themselves,  but  become  so  when  allowed  to  rule.    4.  The  spirit  in  which  thia 
Bervice  is  to  be  rendered  is  one  of — (1)  Liberty;  for  the  tyranny  of  sin,  the  worst 
of  masters,  is  thus  broken.     (2)  Sacrifice ;  of  ourselves  to  God  through  Christ ; 
the  sacrifice  being  possible  and  acceptable  through  association  with  that  of  Hia 
Cross.     So  it  is,  in  a  sense,  a  crucifixion,  through  which  death  voluntarily  endured 
in  one  sphere,  conduces  to  life  in  a  higher  one.    5.  All  this  is  not  to  be  regarded 
as  a  mere  taking  for  granted  or  figurative  supposition,  but  is  an  exercise — (1)  Of 
faith,  identifying  us  with  Christ.     (2)  Of  free  wiU  determining  that  the  ideal  shall 
be  realised.    III.   The  encodraoement  to  this  course,      1.   A  promise.     "  Sin 
shall  not,"  &o.    2.  The  nature  of  the  Divine  economy  under  which  we  elect  to 
live.     As  we  are  incapable  of  obeying  the  law,  and  the  law,  when  unfulfilled, 
tends  to  death,  we  can  only  rely  upon  God's  grace  or  favour,  which  abolishes  not 
only  the  penalty  of  sin,  but  its  influence,  presence,  and  attraction.     (St.  J.  A.  Frere.) 
Dead  but  alive : — 1.  How  intimately  the  believer's  duties  are  interwoven  with  hia 
privileges  1    Because  he  is  aUve  unto  God  he  is  to  renounce  sin,  since  that  corrupt 
thing  belongs  to  his  e:tate  of  death.    2.  How  intimately  both  his  duties  and  hia 
privileges  are  bound  up  with  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord !     3.  How  thoughtful  ought  we 
to  be  upon  these  matters  ;  reckoning  what  is  right  and  fit ;  and  carrying  out  that 
reckoning  to  its  practical  issues.     We  have  in  our  text — I.  A  great  fact  to  bb 
beckoned  upon.     1.  The  nature  of  this  fact.     (1)  We  are  dead  with  Christ  to  sin 
by  having  borne  the  punishment  in  Him  (vers.  6,  7).     (2)  We  are  risen  with  Him 
into  a  justified  condition,  and  have  reached  a  new  life  (ver.  8).     (3)  We  can  no 
more  come  under  sin  again  than  He  can  (ver.  9).     (4)  We  are  therefore  for  ever 
dead  to  its  guilt  and  reigning  power  (vers.  12-14).     2.  This  reckoning  is  based  on 
truth,  or  we  should  not  be  exhorted  to  it.    (1)  To  reckon  yourself  to  be  dead  to 
sin,  so  that  you  boast  that  you  do  not  sin  at  all,  would  be  a  reckoning  based  on 
falsehood,  and  would  be  exceedingly  mischievous  (1  Kings  viii.  46  ;  1  John  i.  8). 
None  are  so  provoking  to  God  as  sinners  who  boast  their  own  fancied  perfection. 
(2)  The  reckoning  that  we  do  not  sin  must  either  go  upon  the  antinomian  theory, 
that  sin  in    the  believer  is  no  sin,   which  is  a  shocking  notion  ;  or    else  oar 
oonacience  must  tell  us  that  we  do  sin  in  many  ways  ;  in  omission  or  commission, 
in  transgression  or  short-coming,  in  temper  or  in  spirit  (Jas.  iii.  2 ;  Eccles.  vii.  20 ; 
Bom.  iii.  23).     (3)  To  reckon  yourself  dead  to  sin  in  the  scriptural  sense  is  full  of 
benefit  both  to  heart  and  life.    Be  a  ready  reckoner  in  this  fashion.     II.  A  obbat 
itCssoN  to  bs  put  in  practice  (ver.  12).    1.  Sin  has  great  power ;  it  is  in  yon, 
and  will  strive  to  reign.    It  remains  as — (1)  An  outlaw,  hiding  away  in  your  nature. 
(2)  A  plotter,  planning  your  overthrow.     (3)  An  enemy,  warring  against  the  law 
of  your  mind.     (4)  A  tyrant,  worrying  and  oppressing  the  true  life.    2.  Its  field  of 
battle  is  the  body.    (1)  Its  wants — hunger,  thirst,  cold,  &o. — may  become  occasions 
of  sin,  by  leading  to  murmuring,  envy,  covetousness,  robbery,  &o.    (2)  Its  appetitea 
may  crave  excessive  indulgence,  and  unless  continually  curbed,  will  easily  lead  to 
evil.     (3)   Its  pains  and  infirmities,  through  engendering  impatience  and  other 
faults,  may  produce  sin.     (4)  Its  pleasures  also  can  readily  become  incitements  to 
sin.     (5)  Its  influence  upon  the  mind  and  spirit  may  drag  our  noble  nature  down 
to  the  grovelling  materialism  of  earth.    3.  The  body  is  mortal,  and  we  shall  be 
completely  delivered  from  sin  when  set  free  from  our  present  material  frame.  If 
indeed  grace  reigns  within.    Till  then  we  shall  find  sin  lurking  in  one  member  or 
another.     4.  Meanwhile  we  must  not  let  it  reign.     (1)  If  it  reigned  over  us  it  would 
be  our  god.     It  would  prove  us  to  be  under  death,  and  not  alive  unto  God.     (2)  It 
would  cause  us  unbounded  pain  and  injury  if  it  ruled  only  for  a  moment.    Con- 
tusion :  Sin  is  within  as,  aiming  at  dominion ;  and  this  knowledge,  together  with 
the  fact  that  we  are  nevertheless  alive  onto  God,  should — 1.  Help  our  peace ;  for 
we  perceive  that  men  may  be  truly  the  Lord's,  even  though  sin  struggles  withia 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vfc 

them.  2.  Aid  onr  caution  ;  for  our  Divine  life  is  well  worth  preserving,  and  needs 
to  be  guarded  with  constant  care.  3.  Draw  us  to  use  the  means  of  grace,  since  in 
these  the  Lord  meets  with  us  and  refreshes  our  new  life.  Let  as  come  to  the  table 
of  communion  and  to  all  other  ordinances,  as  alive  unto  God ;  and  in  that  maimer 
let  us  feed  on  Christ.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Dead  to  $in  and  alive  unto  God  : — The 
great  object  of  this  chapter  is  to  establish  the  alliance  between  a  sinner's  acceptance 
through  Christ  and  his  holiness.  And  here  there  is  a  practical  direction  given  for 
carrying  this  alliance  into  effect.  1.  Now,  if  these  phrases  be  taken  in  their 
personal  sense  they  would  mean  that  we  are  mortified  to  the  pleasures  and  tempta- 
tions of  sin,  and  alive  to  nothing  but  the  excellencies  of  God's  character,  and  a 
sense  of  our  obligations  to  Him ;  or  in  other  words,  we  are  to  reckon  ourselves  holy 
in  order  that  we  may  become  holy.  It  were  a  strange  receipt  for  curing  a  man  of 
his  dishonesty,  to  bid  him  reckon  of  himself  that  he  is  an  honest  man.  How,  by 
the  simple  act  of  counting  myself  what  I  really  am  not,  can  I  be  transferred  to 
that  which  I  choose  to  imagine  of  myself  ?  How  can  I  reckon  that  to  be  true 
which  I  know  to  be  false?  We  have  heard  much  of  the  power  of  imagination ;  but 
this  is  giving  it  an  empire  that  exceeds  all  which  was  before  known.  2.  Now  you 
free  the  passage  of  these  difficulties  by  taking  the  phrases  f  orensically.  To  be  dead 
unto  sin  is  to  be  in  the  condition  of  one  on  whom  death,  the  sentence  of  sin,  has 
already  been  inflicted — if  not  in  his  own  person,  in  that  of  his  representative.  To 
be  alive  unto  God  is  to  live  in  the  favour  of  God — to  which  we  have  been  admitted 
through  Christ.  To  reckon  that  Christ  died  for  the  one  purpose,  and  that  He 
brought  in  an  everlasting  righteousness  for  the  other,  is  to  reckon,  not  on  a  matter 
of  fancy,  but  on  a  matter  proposed  on  the  evidence  of  God's  own  testimony  to 
faith.  And  when,  instead  of  looking  downwardly  on  the  dark  and  ambiguous  tablet 
of  oar  own  character,  we  look  upwardly  to  the  Saviour,  we  rest  on  the  completeness 
of  ft  finished  expiation  and  perfect  obedience,  and  transfer  our  reckoning  from  a 
ground  where  conscience  gives  us  the  lie,  to  a  ground  where  God,  who  cannot  lie, 
meets  as  with  the  assurances  of  His  truth.  3.  But  it  may  be  said,  might  not  this 
be  an  untruth  also  ?  The  apostle  says  to  his  converts,  "  Beckon  yourselves  dead 
unto  sin  " — but  is  it  competent  to  address  any  one  individual  at  random,  to  reckon 
himself  in  this  blessed  condition?  Might  not  he,  in  so  reckoning,  be  as  deluded  as 
in  the  other  reckoning  ?  I  answer,  It  is  nowhere  said  that  Christ  died  so  for  me  in 
particular,  as  that  the  benefits  of  His  atonement  are  mine  in  possession ;  but  it  is 
everywhere  said  that  He  so  died  for  me  in  particular,  as  that  the  benefits  of  Hia 
atonement  are  mine  in  offer.  They  are  mine  if  I  will.  Such  terms  as  "  whosoever," 
and  "  all,"  and  "  any,"  and  "ho,  every  one,"  bring  the  gospel  redemption  specifi- 
cally to  my  door ;  and  there  it  stands  for  acceptance  as  mine  in  offer,  and  ready  to 
become  mine  in  possession  on  my  giving  credit  to  the  word  of  the  testimony.  The 
terms  of  the  gospel  message  are  so  constructed  that  I  have  just  as  good  a  warrant 
for  reckoning  myself  dead  unto  sin,  as  if  I  had  been  singled  out  by  name.  4.  And 
what  is  more.  You  will  not  acquire  a  virtuous  character  by  imagining  that  you 
have  it.  But  there  is  another  way  in  which  it  may  be  acquired.  Not  by  any  false 
reckoning  about  your  actual  character  ;  but  by  a  true  reckoning  about  your  actual 
condition.  It  is  not  by  imagining  I  am  a  saint  that  I  will  become  so ;  but  by 
reflecting  on  the  condemnation  due  to  me  as  a  sinner — on  the  way  in  which  it  has 
been  averted  from  my  person — on  the  passage  by  which,  without  suffering  to 
myself,  I  have  been  borne  across  the  region  of  vindictive  justice,  and  conclusively 
placed  on  the  fair  and  favoured  shore  of  acceptance  with  God.  The  sense  and  the 
reckoning  of  all  this  may  transform  me  from  the  sinner  that  I  am  into  the  saint 
that  I  am  not.  How  shall  I,  now  that  I  have  been  made  alive  again,  continue  in 
that  hateful  thing,  of  whose  malignant  tendencies  in  itself,  and  of  whose  utter 
irreconcilableness  to  the  will  and  character  of  God,  I  have,  in  the  death  of  my 
Representative  and  my  Surety,  obtained  so  striking  a  demonstration  ?  6.  Mark, 
then,  the  apostle's  receipt  for  holiness.  It  is  not  that  you  reckon  yourself  pure, 
but  that  you  reckon  yourself  pardoned.  And  how  it  should  fall  with  the  efficacy 
of  a  charm  on  a  sinner's  ear,  when  told  that  the  first  stepping-stone  towards  that 
character  of  heaven  after  which  he  has  been  so  hopelessly  labouring,  is  to  assure 
himself  that  all  the  guilt  of  his  past  ungodliness  is  now  done  away— that  the 
ransom  of  iniquity  is  paid,  and  that  by  Christ's  death  the  penalties  of  that  law  he 
so  oft  has  broken  shall  never  reach  him.  It  is  this  which  brings  home  to  the 
believer's  heart  the  malignity  of  sin ;  it  is  this  which  opens  to  him  the  gate  <A 
heaven,  and,  disclosing  to  his  view  the  glories  of  that  upper  region,  teaches  him 
(hat  it  is  indeed  a  land  of  sacredness ;  it  is  this  which  inclines  has  footstep*  Uong 


.  VI.]  ROMANS.  491 

the  path  to  immortality,  whieh  the  death  of  Christ  alone  has  rendered  accessible ; 
it  is  tkiB  which  conforms  his  character  to  that  of  the  celestial  spirits  who  are  there 
before  him ;  for  the  will  of  Christ,  whom  he  now  loves,  is  that  he  should  be  like 
nnto  him  ;  and  the  grateful  wish  and  grateful  endeavour  of  the  disciple,  draw 
forth  from  his  labouring  bosom  that  prayer  of  faith,  which  is  sure  to  rise 
with  acceptance,  and  is  sure  to  be  answered  with  power.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 
Dead  to  tin,  alive  to  God: — I,  What  it  is  we  abe  to  beckon  oubbelveb  ab  bkino. 

1.  Dead  unto  sin.  (1)  He  who  is  dead  is  bereft  of  all  power  of  thought  or  action.  We 
may  call  him  by  his  old  familiar  name,  but  he  knows  it  not.  We  may  appeal  to 
him  by  all  in  which  he  used  to  be  most  keenly  interested,  but  our  words  fall 
unheeded.  (2)  Such  it  is  to  be  dead  to  sin.  Temptation  comes  to  him  who  is  dead 
to  Bin  and  finds  no  part  in  him.  Old  sins  which  were  once  full  of  attraction  he  now 
cares  not  for ;  and  they  have  no  power  over  him.  They  are  as  much  matters  of  indif- 
ference to  him  as  last  year's  news,  or  last  year's  fashions.  2.  Alive  unto  God.  (1)  To 
be  alive  to  anything  is  to  take  a  keen  interest  in  it.  The  mother  is  alive  to  the 
needs  of  her  children  ;  the  tradesman  to  the  variations  of  the  market ;  the  general 
to  every  point  of  advantage  for  his  own  forces,  or  of  diflBculty  to  those  of  his  adver- 
sary. (2)  The  Christian  is  alive  towards  God.  He  is  sensitive  to  His  smallest 
revelation.  He  listens  for  every  whisper  of  His  Spirit.  He  recognises  His  presence 
in  all  things.  He  is  alive  towards  God  because  he  has  learned  that  he  lives  on  God. 
Like  the  flower  that  ever  opens  its  petals  to  the  sun  and  closes  them  when  the  light 
and  warmth  of  its  rays  are  withdrawn,  so  the  Christian  soul  is  ever  open  to  all  the 
influences  of  God,  and  closed  to  the  dark  and  chilling  atmosphere  of  the  world.  II. 
What  bioht  have  wb  thus  to  beckon  odeselves  as  dead  unto  sin  and  alivb  unto 
Gk)D  ?  Because  we  are  members  of  Him  who  died  unto  sin  once,  and  who  now  for 
ever  hveth  unto  God.  1.  Jesus  our  Head  and  Eepresentative  lived  a  life  that  was 
completely  dead  nnto  sin  (John  xiv.  30),  and  His  final  struggle  with  it  was  on  the 
Cross,  which  was  the  completion  of  His  death  unto  sin.  "  Which  of  you  convinceth 
Me  of  sin  f  "  is  His  own  challenge  to  His  enemies,  and  one  by  one  they  were  forced 
to  own  His  sinlessness.    Judas,  Pilate,  the  penitent  thief,  the  Boman  centurion. 

2.  He  Hveth  unto  God.  Throughout  His  earthly  ministry  He  did  so.  From  the 
first  He  is  "  the  Son  of  Man  who  is  in  heaven  "  ;  He  is  never  alone,  for  His  Father 
is  with  Him.  But  it  is  in  His  resurrection  that  He  is  visibly  shown  to  be  living 
nnto  God.  3.  It  is  into  Him  that  we  are  incorporated.  Therefore  as  He  died  unto 
Bin  and  liveth  unto  God,  it  is  both  our  duty  and  our  right  that  we  should  thus 
claim  the  privilege  He  has  won  for  us.  III.  The  benefit  which  we  gain  by  tht7B 
BEOKONiNO  otTBSELVES.  1.  To  believe  that  we  can  do  a  thing  goes  a  long  way  in 
enabling  us  to  do  it.  We  may  have  the  power,  yet  if  we  do  not  believe  that  we  have 
it,  we  lose  all  its  benefits.  This  belief  does  not  make  the  power,  but  it  makes  it 
operative.  In  like  manner,  to  reckon  ourselves  to  be  anything  is  a  great  help 
towards  being  it.  No  doubt  if  we  reckon  ourselves  to  be  what  we  are  not  we  are 
guilty  of  self-deceit  and  vanity.  But  in  seeking  to  avoid  this  mistake  we  must  not 
fall  into  its  opposite  by  refusing  to  claim  what  it  is  our  right  and  duty  to  claim.  2. 
As  Christians  we  have  a  right  to  reckon  ourselves  dead  to  sin  and  alive  to  God,  and 
the  fact  that  we  can  claim  it  will  go  far  to  make  the  claim  a  reality.  When  we 
reaUse  that  our  true  position  is  that  we  are  dead  to  sin  we  can  face  temptation  with 
certainty  of  success.  When  we  are  assured  that  we  are  alive  to  God  we  can  feel 
more  confidence  that  He  is  living  in  us,  and  that  His  life  will  be  perfected  in  us. 
Many  a  battle  has  been  lost  through  fear  which  would  have  been  won  if  the 
defeated   army  had   only  "reckoned  themselveB*'  equal  to  the   conflict.      IV. 

How   BIAY  WS  BB    BXTBX   THAT  THIS    BEOKONINO   IS    NO   UEBE   FEAT  OF  lUAOINATION   OB 

FioTjBB  OF  SPEECH,  BUT  A  SOLID  FACT?  1.  As  a  matter  of  fact  we  do  not  find 
ourselves  to  be  dead  to  sin.  If  it  does  not  now  win  us  by  its  open  allurements, 
it  lies  in  wait  for  our  own  unguarded  moments.  Neither  are  we  yet  truly  alive  unto 
God.  Our  moods  vary.  We  are  keenly  alive  to  Him  at  one  hour,  and  cold  and 
indifferent  the  next.  2.  There  is  but  one  way  by  which  our  actual  condition  may 
be  made  to  correspond  with  our  ideal ;  "  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  (1)  It 
is  because  we  are  united  to  Him  that  we  may  reckon  ourselves  dead  to  sin.  (2)  It 
is  because  He  to  whom  we  are  united  is  "  our  Lord,"  that  we  have  confidence  that 
that  which  He  bids  us  to  be  we  may  be.  The  more  we  realise  that  He  is  Lord  of 
oar  inmost  being,  just  so  far  will  He  bring  it  into  subjection  to  Himself,  and  mould 
it  after  His  own  pattern.  Is  not  all  power  given  to  Him  ?  Has  He  not  therefore 
power  to  make  us  indeed  dead  to  sin  and  alive  unto  God  ?  Believe  it.  Trust  Him. 
{Canon  Vernon  Hutton.)        Dead  to  tin  and  alive  unto  God  through  Christ: — L 


492  TRB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n. 

What  it  is  to  be  dead  ttnto  era.  Obviously  the  opposite  of  being  dead  in  sin.  As 
he  who  is  dead  has  nothing  more  to  do  with  earthly  things,  so  be  who  is  dead  to  sin 
has  nothing  to  do  any  more  with  sin  or  its  attractions.  II.  What  is  it  to  be  Aiiivx 
ukto  God  ?  To  be  full  of  life  for  Him — to  be  altogether  active  and  on  the  alert  to 
do  His  will.  III.  What  is  it  to  beckon  odkselves  dead  indeed  unto  sin  ?  To 
believe,  esteem  yourselves  dead  to  it.  Eegard  this  as  truly  your  relation  to  sin  ;  it 
shall  have  no  more  dominion  over  you.  IV.  What  is  meant  by  receonino  ioub- 
SELVES  alive  INDEED  UNTO  GoD  THBouGH  Jesus  Christ  ?  That  you  are  to  expect 
to  be  saved  by  Christ  and  to  calculate  on  this  salvation  as  your  own.  V.  What  is 
IMPLIED  IN  THE  EXHORTATION  ?  That  there  is  an  adequate  provision  for  realising 
these  blessings  in  fact.  A  precept  requiring  us  to  account  ourselves  dead  to  sin  and 
alive  to  God,  would  be  utterly  untenable  if  no  provisioti  were  made  for  its  accom- 
plishment. VI.  What  is  implied  by  complying  with  this  injunction?  1. 
Believing  such  a  thing  to  be  possible.  2.  Ceasing  from  all  expectation  of  attaining 
this  state  of  ourselves.  3.  A  present  willingness  to  be  saved  from  sin,  and  the 
actual  renunciation  of  all  sin  as  such.  4.  An  entire  committal  of  our  whole  cas« 
to  Christ,  not  only  for  the  present,  but  for  all  future  salvation  from  sin.  5.  The 
foreclosing  of  the  mind  against  temptation,  in  such  a  sense  that  the  mind  truly 
expects  to  live  a  life  purely  devoted  to  God.  Christians  in  this  state  of  mind  no 
more  expect  to  commit  small  sins  than  great  sins.  Hating  all  sin  for  its  own  sake 
and  for  its  hatefulness  to  Christ,  any  sin,  however  small,  is  to  them  as  murder.  6. 
That  the  Christian  knows  where  his  great  strength  lies.  He  knows  it  does  not  lie 
in  works,  but  only  in  Christ  received  by  faith.  Conclusion :  1.  This  text  alone 
entirely  justifies  the  expectation  of  living  without  sin  through  all-abounding  grace. 
2.  To  teach  that  such  an  expectation  is  a  dangerous  error  is  to  teach  unbelief. 
Dangerous  to  expect  salvation  from  sin  f  If  so,  what  is  the  gospel  worth  ?  Some 
expect  to  have  to  count  themselves  not  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  somewhat 
alive  to  it,  and  in  part  alive  to  God  through  all  their  mortal  life.  It  follows  as 
quite  a  thing  of  course  that  expecting  no  complete  victory  over  sin  they  will  use  no 
appropriate  means,  since  faith  stands  foremost  among  those  means,  and  faith  must 
include  at  least  a  confidence  that  the  thing  sought  is  possible  to  be  attained.  An 
elder  I  knew  rose  in  a  meeting  and  told  the  Lord  he  had  been  living  in  sin  thus  far, 
and  expected  to  go  on  in  sin  as  long  as  he  lived  ;  he  had  sinned  to-day  and  should 
doubtless  sin  to-morrow,  and  so  on — and  he  talked  as  calmly  about  it  all  as  if  it 
were  foolish  to  make  any  ado,  as  well  as  impossible  to  attempt  any  change  for  the 
better.  How  horrible  I  Suppose  a  wife  should  say  to  her  husband,  "  I  love  you 
some,  but  you  know  I  love  many  other  men  too."  And  yet  this  is  not  to  be  com- 
pared in  shocking  guilt  and  treason  with  the  case  of  the  Christian  who  says,  "  I 
expect  to  sin  every  day  I  live,"  with  unmoved  carelessness.  Too  expect  to  be  a 
traitor  to  Jesus  each  day  of  your  life ;  to  crucify  Him  afresh  each  day ;  and  yet  yoa 
talk  about  having  a  good  hope  through  grace  !  But  tell  me,  does  not  every  true 
Christian  say,  "  Do  not  let  me  live  at  all  if  I  cannot  live  without  sin ;  for  how  can 
I  bear  to  go  on  day  by  day  sinning  against  Him  I  so  much  love  I  "  (C  G.  Finney, 
D.D.)  Dying  to  sin  and  living  to  God  : — Paul's  object  in  this  chapter  is  to  exhibit 
the  inconsistency  of  sin  with  the  Christian  faith  and  position.  We  are,  he  says, 
planted  together  with  Christ,  and  baptized  into  His  death  that  we  may  pass  with 
Him  into  a  new  life.  There  is  only  one  kind  of  perfect  human  life,  the  life 
exemplified  in  Jesus  Christ ;  and  to  this  there  is  only  one  possible  path,  viz.,  death- 
The  grub  cannot  pass  to  the  higher  life  of  the  dragon-fly  without  first  sickening  and 
becoming  dead  to  all  the  life  it  has  been  familiar  with,  and  we,  in  order  to  enter 
the  true  life  of  man,  must  die  to  the  old.  I.  What  is  it  to  be  dead  to  sin  ?  1. 
To  be  beyond  its  power  to  inflict  penalty  upon  us.  If  a  servant  has  come  to  a  settle- 
ment with  his  master  there  remains  no  longer  any  bond  between  them.  Now  the 
wages  of  sin  is  death,  and  our  wages  have  been  paid  in  the  death  of  Christ.  The 
law  has  no  claim  upon  a  man  who  has  suffered  its  extreme  penalty,  and  this  the 
old  legal  phraseology  of  Scotland  brought  out  when  it  spoke  of  criminals  being 
justified  in  the  Grassmarket,  when  they  were  hung  there.  By  death  they  cleared 
scores  with  the  law.  Thus  we  have  by  the  death  of  Christ  the  removal  of  our  guilt. 
2.  To  be  irresponsive  to  the  appeals  of  sin.  How  unmoved,  how  irresponsive  the 
dead  are  1  Let  the  master  shout  at  his  slave's  dead  body ;  not  one  finger  stirs  to  obey 
his  orders.  Was  the  dead  man  vain  and  fond  of  applause  ?  the  acclaims  of  a  world 
bring  no  smile  of  pleasure  to  his  face  now.  Was  he  mean  and  greedy  ?  Fill  the 
dfad  hand  with  gold ;  the  fingers  will  not  close  upon  it.  The  soldier  who  a  few 
months  before  sprang  forward  at  the  sound  of  the  bugle,  now  knows>  no  differenoa 


'.  Yi.]  ROMANS.  4a§ 

between  the  charge  and  the  retire.  The  most  passionate  kiss  that  love  presses  on 
the  face  of  the  dead  wins  no  acknowledgment,  no  returning  embrace.  Such  is  the 
insensibility  of  the  true  Christian  who  avails  himself  of  his  position.  The  man  who 
was  led  by  his  appetites,  and  could  not  walk  the  streets  without  sinning,  sets  the 
Gross  of  Christ  before  him,  and  finds  he  can  as  little  sin  as  if  he  were  a  corpse.  3. 
Not  only  a  complete  but  a  final  severance  from  sin.  Death  is  a  state  from  which 
Bo  one  returns  to  the  old  life.  So  it  was  with  Paul  himself,  who  realised  his  posi- 
tion in  Christ.  (1)  There  are  animals  which  hibernate,  and  for  all  practical 
purposes  are  dead  for  a  season  ;  they  cease  to  be  a  terror  to  their  natural  prey,  they 
entirely  abandon  their  haunts  and  habits ;  but  when  the  warmth  of  spring  pene- 
trates to  their  temporary  burying-place  there  is  a  revival  of  their  old  instincts, 
energies,  and  habits.  With  many  persons  the  abandonment  of  sin  is  a  mere 
hibernation.  For  a  while  they  seem  to  have  lost  all  taste  for  their  old  ways,  and, 
in  the  ardour  of  a  newly  conceived  idea  of  life,  the  man  is  impregnable  to  all  that 
would  lead  him  from  it.  He  is  wrapped  up  in  his  new  and  strong  resolve,  and 
while  that  lasts  he  is  insensible  to  the  storms  that  would  drive  him  from  his  path. 
Or  something  has  made  the  world  distasteful ;  his  prospects  have  been  blighted, 
and  he  withdraws  from  his  former  keen  engagement  in  this  world's  affairs.  Or 
there  comes  to  the  man  of  pleasure  higher  and  better  impulses  ;  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
strives  with  him,  or  some  outward  event  warns  him,  and  for  the  present  he  becomes 
dead  to  the  sohcitations  of  appetite.  Or  a  young  person  comes  under  the  influence 
of  some  one  who  does  live  a  consecrated,  unseltish,  Christ-like  hfe,  and  the  influ- 
ence is  commanding  while  it  lasts.  All  those  temporary  abandonments  of  sin  are 
mere  sleeps,  or  states  of  torpor ;  the  soul  of  sin  lives  on  securel.-  underneath  the 
lethargic  surface,  and,  when  the  period  of  slumber  passes  and  the  cause  of  insensi- 
bility has  exhausted  itself,  will  return  again  with  renewed  and  stronger  life  to  all 
its  old  habits  and  ways.  (2)  Men  sometimes  commit  suicide.  They  see  that  things 
have  gone  so  far  wrong  as  to  be  irretrievable.  To  go  into  hiding  and  wait  for  a 
better  time  is  in  vain ;  carefully  weighing  probabihties,  they  conclude  that  their 
severance  from  the  world  must  now  be  final.  This  requires  a  clear  judgment  and  a 
strong  will.  The  same  deUberate  and  decisive  finality  of  action  is  required  of  as. 
Less  than  this  will  not  do.  We  cannot  get  into  a  new  life  in  any  other  way  than 
by  dying  to  the  old.  Yet  how  many  of  us  stand,  like  Nero,  with  the  dagger  at  our 
throat  but  with  a  hand  far  too  nervous  to  drive  it  home.  It  is  this  great  act  of  will 
that  marks  the  second  birth.  II.  What  is  meant  by  living  to  God  ?  This  aspect 
of  our  participation  with  Christ  is  more  important.  1.  To  die  to  sin  is  but  a  neces- 
sary preliminary.  By  itself  it  is  incomplete  and  ineffective.  Death  can  never  form 
a  desirable  state,  but  only  life,  and  it  is  because  death  of  this  kind  promises  fuller 
life  that  we  pass  through  it.  2.  Some  persons,  however,  are  dead  to  siu,  but  they 
are  dead  to  everything  else.  Keligion,  instead  of  enlivening  and  enlarging  them, 
seems  to  benumb  and  deaden  them.  For  aU  the  active  good  they  do  they  might  as 
well  be  in  the  grave.  The  poor  man  who  needs  help  would  as  soon  think  of  knocking 
at  a  tombstone  as  of  knocking  at  their  door ;  active  beneficence  on  their  part  would 
startle  us  as  if  the  sheeted  dead  had  come  to  our  aid.  Where  there  is  fulness  of 
life  there  is  activity,  joy,  love,  intensity ;  not  coldness,  selfish  caution,  parsimony, 
and  seclusion  from  the  woes,  the  joys,  the  interests  of  men.  3.  And  where  there  is 
life  it  will  appear ;  burying  the  seed  beneath  the  clod,  the  life  that  is  in  it  will  work 
its  way  through,  and  show  what  it  is.  The  body  of  Christ  could  not  be  held  under 
the  power  of  death,  and  if  the  Spirit  of  life  that  was  in  Him  be  really  in  us,  that  life 
will  break  through  all  that  overlies  it.  And  if  you  do  not  fill  your  life  with  Chris- 
tian activities,  and  your  heart  with  Christian  joys,  they  will  soon  be  filled  and 
flooded  with  the  old  life.  Do  not  make  it  needful  that  men  should  feel  your  pulse, 
or  hold  a  mirror  to  your  mouth  to  see  if  you  be  really  aUve ;  but  let  it  be  seen  by 
the  brightness  of  your  vision,  by  the  activity  of  your  step,  by  the  force  and  helpful- 
ness of  your  hand,  that  you  have  a  more  abundant  life.  4.  This  life,  like  Christ's 
resurrection  hfe,  is  real.  Our  Lord  took  pains  to  prove  that  His  risen  body  was  not 
a  phantom.  Our  risen  life  must  be  equally  substantial.  From  the  fijst  some 
have  had  a  name  to  Uve  while  really  dead.  Their  appearance  of  newness  does 
not  bear  scrutiny;  they  are  airy  nothings,  pithless,  pretentious,  disappointing 
appearances ;  they  imitate  the  conduct  of  those  who  have  real  life,  or  they  are 
liited  up  and  carried  along  by  the  crowd  around  them,  but  when  left  to  act  in  their 
own  strength  they  are  found  to  be  powerless — dead.  All  about  tl;  m  is  unreal ;  the 
religious  expressions  thev  use  are  borrowed,  learned  as  a  foreign  tongue,  so  that 
you  can  readily  detect  the  accent.    Their  prayers  are  forced ;  their  whole  reUgiooi 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [<m».  n, 

life  is  a  make-up ;  not  an  actaal,  constant,  self-snpporting,  free  life.  Strive  to  be 
true,  to  stand  upon  your  feet,  to  act  upon  convictions  of  your  own,  to  epeak  as  you 
feel,  without  being  an  echo  of  other  persons.  Be  sure  that  in  yourself  there  is  a 
true,  risen  life.  {Marcus  Dods,  D.D.)  Dying  to  sin  and  living  unto  Qod  : — The 
apostle  exhorts  us  to  reckon  ourselves  to  be — I.  "  Dead  unto  bin."  1.  This  involves 
death  (1)  To  its  ensnaring  artifices.  Moses  "  chose  rather  to  suffer  affliction  with 
the  people  of  God,  than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season."  Hence  we 
learn  that  sin  is  not  without  its  pleasures,  and  that  if  we  will  cast  in  our  lot  with 
the  people  of  God  we  must  lay  our  account  with  losing  them,  (a)  But  these  plea- 
sures last  but  for  a  season.  f&)  They  are  only  pleasures  when  viewed  in  a  false 
light.  Let  but  the  light  of  trutn  dawn  in  upon  the  soul,  and  we  find  that  we  have 
been  embracing  disappointment  and  vanity  and  pain  (ver.  21).  (2)  To  theindweUing 
love  of  it.  This  will  follow  on  the  true  discovery  of  its  nature.  When  we  are  con- 
scious of  having  bad  a  deception  practised  upon  us,  our  hatred  is  proportionate  to 
the  measure  of  our  former  love.  We  find  that  we  have  been  nursing  a  viper  in  our 
bosom,  and  therefore,  on  discovering  it,  we  are  anxious  to  oast  it  away.  (3)  To  its 
reigning  power.  This,  indeed,  is  the  only  true  mortification  of  sin.  "  Mortify, 
therefore,  your  members  which  are  upon  the  earth."  Let  the  natural  man  be 
pierced  through  and  through,  until  ye  have  crucified  the  whole  "  body  of  sin."  The 
head  of  pride  mnst  be  crowned  with  thorns ;  the  hands  of  covetousness  must  be 
pierced  with  nails  ;  the  unruly  appetites  must  be  put  off  with  vinegar  and  gall.  Tea, 
the  whole  man  must  be  laid  in  the  grave,  must  be  buried  with  Christ,  in  order  that 
with  Christ  also  it  mav  rise  to  newness  of  life.  2.  Here  is  the  design  of  all 
religious  ordinances,  via^pjiat  the  root  of  bitterness  may  be  destroyed  in  the  soul. 
We  are  buried  with  Christ  in  baptism,  in  faith  that  our  corruptions  shall  be 
drowned,  even  as  the  Egyptians  were  when  they  lay  dead  on  the  seashore.  We 
approach  the  Lord's  table  in  faith  that  the  food  which  we  there  receive  spiritually  into 
the  soul  shall  operate  as  a  poison  to  all  those  corruptions  which  yet  reign  within 
us.  Every  prayer  we  offer  up  is  a  blow  at  sin ;  every  self-denial  we  practise  is  to 
Btarve  out  corruption  from  the  soul.  But,  in  order  to  the  completeness  of  this  death 
of  sin  within  us,  it  is  needful  that  we  take  away  all  the  means  of  life.  "  Fire 
is  as  effectually  put  out  by  taking  wood  away  as  by  throwing  cold  water  upon  it." 
We  must  take  care  to  blockade  all  the  avenues  of  temptation  ;  we  must  intercept 
those  supphes  which  "  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride 
of  life,"  are  for  ever  conveying  into  the  soul.  II.  "  ALrva  unto  God."  We  are 
not  to  give  a  dead  carcase  to  a  living  God ;  neither,  on  the  other  hand,  when  the 
members  of  the  old  man  have  been  crucified,  are  they  to  remain  idle.  No ;  after 
they  are  buried,  they  are  to  rise  again,  and  be  laid  as  a  free-will  offering  on  the 
altar  of  God.  Being  dead  to  sin  we  must  henceforth  be  alive  to  God.  1.  To  the 
honour  of  God's  name.  2.  To  the  interests  of  His  kingdom.  3.  To  the  glory  of 
His  grace  in  the  entire  sanctification  of  our  souls.  Conclusion :  1.  All  comes  to  as 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  If  there  be  any  subjugation  of  the  power  of  sin  in 
the  soul,  "  His  right  hand  hath  got  the  victory  " ;  if  there  be  any  quickening  to  a 
renewed  existence.  He  it  was  who  began,  and  who  must  complete  the  work,  2.  Let 
shame  prompt  you  to  die  to  sin.  If  Christ  died  for  sin,  the  least  we  can  do  is  to  die 
to  sin.  3.  Let  giatitude  prompt  us  to  "  live  to  God."  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Dying 
to  sin  and  living  unto  God : — I.  The  believer's  true  position.  1.  Dead  to  sin : 
to — (1)  Its  attractions.  (2)  Dominion.  (3)  Condemnation.  2.  Alive  unto  God. 
(1)  His  pre;  once.  (2)  His  favour.  (3)  His  influence.  (4)  His  authority.  11.  The 
MEANS  through  WHICH  IT  IS  ATTAINED— Jcsus  Christ.  1.  Faith  in  Him.  2.  Identi- 
fication with  Him.  III.  The  duty  of  BEALisiNa  this.  1.  Theoretically.  2. 
Experimentally.  3.  Practically.  IV.  The  motives  by  which  it  is  enforced — 
"  likewise."  [J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christians  dead  unto  tin  and  alive  unto  God  : — 
We  are  reminded  that  Christians  are — I.  "Dead  indeed  unto  sin."  1.  This 
implies  more  than  their  avoiding  sin.  A  man  from  fear  of  loss,  hope  of  advantage, 
or  from  reference  to  his  reputation,  may  be  induced  to  avoid  what  he  loves  :  and 
there  are  many  who  are  ready  to  wish  that  it  were  lawful  to  indulge  in  sin.  Lot's  wife 
left  Sodom,  but  her  heart  was  in  it  still,  and  if  all  those  were  to  become  pillars  of  salt 
who  profess  to  forsake  the  world,  while  hankering  after  it,  we  should  hardly  be  able 
to  move  about.  2.  Christians  are  mortified  to  sin.  The  Christian's  aversion  to  sin  is 
natural,  and  we  know  that  all  natural  aversions  operate  universally.  It  is  not  to 
Bome  particular  vice  to  which  he  may  have  no  constitutional  propensity  or  little 
temptation.  If  it  were  lawful  to  say  to  a  mother,  "  Why  you  may  take  your  child 
•nd  throw  it  oat  of  the  window,"  she  ooold  not  do  it    And  why  f    Has  she  not 


our.  n.]  ROMANS,  495 

strength  to  open  the  window  7  Has  she  not  arms  to  throw  it  out  ?  Oh  I  but  it 
would  violate  every  feeling  of  her  nature  ;  it  would  be  impossible  :  and  this  would 
be  a  safer  prevention  than  any  argument  or  threatening  against  it.  So  the  Christian 
*  doth  not  commit  sin  " — that  is,  as  others  do,  and  as  he  once  did — "  for  His  seed 
remaineth  in  him  ;  and  he  cannot  sin  because  he  is  born  of  God."  3.  You  see  how 
the  apostle  treats  this  matter :  "  How  shall  we,  who  are  dead  to  sin,"  by  profession, 
by  obligation,  by  inclination,  "live  any  longer  therein?  "  (ver.  2).  As  no  creature 
can  live  out  of  its  own  element,  so  it  is  impossible  for  the  Christian,  now  that  he  is 
regenerated,  to  live  in  sin.  H.  "  Alive  unto  God."  If  there  were  no  iuFtanoe  of 
immorality  in  the  world,  I  should  want  no  other  proof  that  man  was  a  fallen  crea- 
ture than  his  insensibility  and  indifference  towards  God.  That  a  subject  should 
be  dead  to  his  sovereign,  a  child  to  his  father,  the  creature  to  his  Maker,  a  bene- 
ficiary to  hie  benefactor;  can  you  imagine  that  God  made  man  with  such  a 
disposition  as  this  ?  Now  real  religion  must  commence  in  the  destruction  of  this 
insensibility.  Christians  are  alive  unto — 1.  God's  favour.  While  many  ask,  "  Who 
will  show  us  any  good?  "  he  prays,  "Lord,  lift  up  the  light  of  Thy  countenance 
upon  me."  He  knows  and  feels  now  that  "  His  favour  is  life,"  and  His  "  loving- 
kmdness  better  than  life."  This  makes  him  happy,  whatever  may  be  his  outward 
eondition.  2.  His  presence.  Is  the  sanctuary  now  attractive  to  him  ?  It  is 
principally  because  it  is  "the  place  where  His  honour  dwelleth."  Does  he  love  the 
retirement  of  the  closet  ?  It  is  because  there  he  holds  communion  with  his  God. 
He  loves  the  company  of  the  godly  because  they  remind  him  of  God,  and  considers 
heaven  as  the  perfection  of  his  happiness  because  he  will  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord. 
3.  His  glory.  It  is  this  that  led  the  apostle  therefore  to  say,  "  Whether  we  eat  or 
drink,"  &c.  Hence  he  sympathises  with  the  cause  of  God  in  all  its  variations.  If 
professors  fall  away,  and  bring  a  scandal  upon  it,  he  is  sorrowful.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  the  Word  of  the  Lord  runs  and  is  glorified,  and  if  believers  walk  in  the  fear 
of  the  Lord,  in  this  he  rejoices.  III.  "  Through  Jesus  Christ  odr  Lord."  As — 1. 
Their  Example.  In  His  principles,  temper,  practice,  they  see  the  character  which 
we  have  described  fully  embodied.  In  Him  there  was  no  sin  ;  He  always  did  the 
things  that  pleased  the  Father :  He  was  our  religion  incarnate.  2.  Their  Teacher. 
He  has  set  before  us  those  arguments  and  motives  which  have  the  greatest  tendency 
to  turn  us  from  sin  and  to  God,  so  that  we  may  be  dead  to  the  one  and  alive 
to  the  other.  3.  Their  dying  Friend.  Is  it  possible  for  me  to  love  and  live  in  that 
which  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory  ?  4.  Their  meritorious  Saviour.  When  He  died 
for  their  sins  He  at  the  same  time  obtained  for  them  grace  for  trial,  duty,  and  con- 
flict. IV.  "  Reckon  yourselves  "  as  such.  1.  In  order  to  maintain  the  conduct 
that  is  suitable  to  such  ;  for  your  conduct  should  correspond  with  your  character 
and  your  condition.  The  way  to  know  what  you  ought  to  do  is  always  to  consider 
what  you  are.  2.  In  order  to  keep  you  from  wondering  at  the  treatment  of  such. 
3.  In  order  that  ye  may  rejoice  in  the  portion  of  such.  If  the  world  frowns  on  you, 
God  smiles ;  if  they  condemn  you.  He  is  near  to  justify.  You  may  be  losers  in  His 
service,  but  you  can  never  be  losers  by  it.  {W.  Jay.)  Alive  unto  God: — This 
means  that  a  man — I.  Breathes  God's  life.  There  was  a  man  taken  out  of  the 
water  apparently  dead.  The  physician  came  and  breathed  into  the  nostrils  and 
mouth  of  the  poor  fellow,  and  then  pressed  the  breast ;  breathed  in  again  and 
pressed  the  breast.  At  last  he  had  the  joy  of  hearing  a  gasp,  and  then  of  seeing 
the  opened  eye.  "  Alive  unto  God  "  means  that  God  has  breathed  into  you  His 
breath  ;  the  breath  of  life  and  of  righteousness.  II.  Puts  forth  effort.  There 
is  a  picture  in  Brussels  of  a  man  thought  dead  of  the  plague.  He  was  not  dead. 
After  a  time,  awaking,  he  felt  he  was  nailed  up  in  the  coffin,  and  the  picture  shows 
him  to  be  in  the  act  of  pushing  up  the  lid.  So  it  is  with  the  man  who  is  "  alive 
unto  God."  He  puts  forth  efforts,  and  he  repeats  them  till  he  is  delivered.  III. 
Bequireb  food,  to  sustain  the  new  life.  IV.  Desires  the  knowledge  of  God. 
What  efforts  some  men  make  to  acquire  knowledge  of  earthly  things.  The  Chris- 
tian, whilst  not  despising  that  knowledge,  desires  especially  to  know  God.  V. 
Resists  sin.  There  is  that  fight  going  on.  The  unconverted  man  reasons — "  Don't 
sin,  because  you  may  be  found  out."  The  devil  strikes  him  down  to  the  ground, 
and  he  says,  "  There  is  no  life  in  him  now."  But  how  is  it  with  the  Christian  when 
Satan  endeavours  to  overcome  him?  He  has  God's  armour  on,  and  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit,  and  he  stands,  because  he  is  alive  unto  God.  VI.  Bears  the  cross. 
Being  "alive  unto  God,"  and  having  Christ's  love  in  the  soul,  we  can  lift  up  and 
carry  the  heaviest  burden  with  rejoicing  of  heart,  for  we  have  His  life;  the  life  that 
Christ  had,  that  same  life  is  in  us.    Conclusion  :  1.  Is  it  not  being  alive  in  faith  to 


4M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [eHA».  Tl. 

Ood  ?  It  is  not  alive  nnto  creeds,  bat  unto  God.  It  is  faith  in  the  presence  of 
God.  2.  It  also  is  alive  in  hope  to  God — tfiat  hope  which  is  the  anchor  holding  on 
amidst  all  earth's  tempests  and  all  the  wild  sea's  roar.  3.  It  is  alive  in  love  to  God. 
What  will  not  the  soul  endure  for  those  whom  it  loves  I  It  imitates  the  example  of 
those  who  have  its  affection.  {W.  Birch.)  The  transfer  of  life  to  God : — In  the 
days  of  King  John  of  England  the  dignity  of  the  English  crown  was  brought  to  its 
lowest  King  John  submitting  to  the  Pope  as  a  vassal,  and  before  the  Pope's 
legate,  taking  off  his  crown,  he  handed  it  to  the  legate,  who  took  it,  put  it  down  for 
a  moment  to  show  his  possession  of  it,  then  handed  it  back  to  John  to  be  held  by 
him  as  a  vassal  of  Eome.  But  this  incident  illustrates  how  we  Christians  can  die 
to  ourselves,  yet  be  living  for  Christ.  We  take  our  life  in  our  hands,  and  hand  it 
over  to  God.  But  see,  He  lifts  it  again  and  holds  it  out  towards  us,  saying,  "  Take 
this  life  and  use  it  for  Me,  as  My  vassal,  My  servant."  (J.  Hamilton.)  Eolinett 
the  GhurcKt  life  : — Holiness  is  the  life  of  the  Church  ;  it  is  this  that  makes  the 
Church  a  Uving  body,  and  consequently  the  means  and  agent  of  its  own  growth  and 
happiness.  A  living  thing  grows  from  itself,  and  not  by  accession  from  without,  as 
a  house  or  a  ship  grows.  A  flower  does  not  grow  by  adding  a  leaf  to  it,  nor  a  tree 
by  fastening  a  branch  to  it,  nor  a  man  by  fixing  a  limb  to  his  frame.  Everything 
that  has  life  grows  by  a  converting  process,  which  transforms  the  food  into  means 
of  nourishment  and  of  growth  and  enlargement.  A  holy  Church  lives,  and  its 
holiness  converts  aU  its  ordinances  and  provisions  into  means  of  deep-rooted,  solid, 
enlarged,  and  beautiful  holiness.    (T.  W.  Jenkyn,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  Let  not  sin  therefore  reign  In  your  mortal  body. — The  retgn  of  sin : — 
"  Let  not  sin  reign  "  because  it  is — I.  A  ttrannio  beiom.  1.  Sin  has  usurped  its 
sway  over  the  heart.  It  forms  no  part  in  the  original  plan  of  our  world.  2.  It 
gains  the  ruling  power  gradually.  If  the  criminal  knew  from  his  first  sin  the 
tremendous  power  it  would  have  upon  his  hfe  his  downward  course  would  have 
been  arrested.  The  chain  was  drawn  tighter  by  degrees.  3.  As  Britons  we  hate 
everything  oppressive,  the  public  sentiment  is  against  all  tyrants ;  still  the  greatest 
of  all  is  tolerated  in  the  hearts  of  thousands.  II.  A  msaoNOURABLE  beion. 
Occasionally  we  are  obliged  to  blush  at  the  deeds  done  in  the  name  of  England. 
But  as  a  rule  we  are  proud  of  our  country,  not  eo  much  on  account  of  its  wealth 
and  military  strength  as  the  position  it  has  gained  for  uprightness.  Sin  is 
dishonourable  to  God  and  to  man.  It  is  the  transgression  of  the  best  law,  and  the 
highest  ingratitude.  III.  A  destbcctive  beion.  Peace,  moral  beauty,  and  strength 
are  destroyed  wherever  sin  has  the  ruling  power.  It  is  a  cancer  that  eats  its  way 
gradually,  yet  effectually,  to  the  very  roots  of  our  being.  Conclusion :  Subjects  we 
must  be ;  it  is  for  us  to  decide  under  whose  government.  We  cannot  govern  our- 
selves, we  must  serve  either  righteousness  or  sin.  How  thankful  we  ought  to  be 
that  there  is  a  higher,  stronger,  purer  power  ready  to  eater  the  heart  and  rule  there. 
We  are  under  no  obligation  to  let  sin  have  the  throne.  The  Spirit  is  willing  to 
govern  if  man  will  open  his  heart.  {Jenkin  Jones.)  The  reign  of  sin  : — I.  What 
IS  re  FOB  BIN  TO  BEiGN  ovEB  US.  1.  AU  men  are  sinful  (Bom.  iii.  10-12).  2. 
There  is  no  sin  but  all  men  by  nature  are  prone  to  (Psa.  li.  5).  8.  But  there 
is  some  sin  that  every  one  is  inclined  to  more  than  others  (Psa.  xviii.  23),  by — (1) 
The  constitution  of  his  body  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  (2)  Vocation.  (3)  Custom  (Jer.  xiii. 
23).     (4)  Condition  in  the  world  (Prov.  xxx.  8,  9).     (5)  Temptations  (1  Pet.  v.  8). 

4.  The  sins  we  are  most  inclined  to  may  have  a  prevalency  over  us,  either — (1) 
Partial  (Eom.  viii.  20,  21),  or — (2)  Plenary,  without  resistance  (Rom.  vi.  12,  20). 

5.  When  sin  has  a  fuU  prevalency  in  us  it  is  said  to  reign  over  us.  Because  we — 
(1)  Are  subject  to  its  power.  (2)  Obey  its  motions  (Gom.  vi.  16,  vii.  6).  II.  Wht 
bHOTJLD  NOT  SIN  BEION  OVEB  US.  Bccause — 1.  It  has  no  right  or  title  to  this 
kingdom,  but  only  God  as — (1)  Our  Creator.  (2)  Preserver  (Acts  xvii.  28).  (3) 
Jtledeemer  (1  Cor.  vi.  20).  2.  We  are  buried  with  Christ  by  baptism  into  His  death, 
and  so  are  free  from  sin  (Eom.  vi.  1-3,  7,  10,  11,  14).  3.  If  it  reign  in  as  it  will 
ruin  us  (Rom.  vi.  23).  HI.  How  shall  we  obtain  the  victobt  oveb  it.  By — 1. 
Faith  in  Chyist.  2.  Prayer  (Psa.  cxix.  133  ;  Rom.  vii.  24).  3.  Watchfulness  (Prov. 
iv.  23).  IV.  Uses.  1.  Of  examination.  That  is  a  reigning  sin — (1)  Which  is  your 
chief  end  and  greatest  pleasure  (Col.  iii.  5;  Phil  iii.  19).  (2)  Which  is  made 
habitual  by  custom  (Jer.  xiii.  23).  (3)  Which  your  thoughts  run  most  upon  and 
study  most  for  (1  John  iii.  8,  9).  (4)  Which  we  most  willingly  submit  to  (John 
viii.  44;  Eom.  vi.  13,  vii.  21,  22).  (5)  Which  we  we  do  not  love  to  hear  reproved. 
(6)  That  for  whose  sake  we  commit  others  (Psa.  xviii,  23),  as  David's  murder  iot 


VI.1  ROMANS.  497 

•daltery.  (7)  Which  distracts  as  in  holy  duties  (1  John  ii.  15).  2.  Of  exhortation. 
Consider — (1)  Sin  is  the  greatest  slavery  in  the  world  (2  Pet.  ii.  19 ;  Titus  iii.  3). 
(2)  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  redeem  thee  from  it  (Bom.  iii.  26).  (3)  If  sin 
reign  in  thee,  thoa  hast  no  part  in  Christ  (Matt.  vi.  24),  for  Satan  reigns  over  thee 
(2  Tim.  ii.  26).  (4)  Thou  wilt  have  but  bad  wages  for  thy  service,  (a)  In  this  life 
— the  torture  of  a  guilty  conscience — a  curse  on  thy  estate  (Mai.  ii.  2) — the  wrath 
of  an  offended  God  (Psa.  vii.  11).  (6)  In  the  life  to  come — separation  from  God — 
imprisonment  in  hell  (ver.  23).      (Bishop  Beveridge.)  The  tyranny  of  sin : — I. 

The  tykannt  op  bin.  It  has — 1.  Made  the  body  mortal.  2.  Developed  its  lusts. 
8.  Through  it  enslaved  the  soul.  II.  Thb  duty  of  besistinq  it.  1.  We  ought, 
because  Christ  has  redeemed  us.  2.  We  can,  through  grace.  8.  We  must  if  we 
voald  be  saved.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  An  indomitable  will  needed: — If  a  man  has 
a  strong  besetment,  he  must  treat  it  as  he  would  a  savage  dog.  He  must  keep  it 
kennelled  and  chained,  and  never  suffer  it  to  go  beyond  its  tether,  however  it  may 
bark  or  growl.  He  will  have  to  say  to  it  every  now  and  then,  "Down,  sir."  He 
will  sometimes  require  the  stern  resoluteness  expressed  in  John  Foster's  saying, 
"  This  soul  shall  either  conquer  this  body  or  shall  leave  it."  Ruthless,  bloodless, 
indomitable  will  is  needed  sometimes  in  order  that  a  man  may  fight  well  the  battle 
of  his  life.  Sin  dwelling  in  but  not  reigning  over  the  believer : — 1.  Some  would 

substitute  here  in  place  of  "  mortal,"  as  hable  to  death,  the  idea  of  actual  death  in 
Christ.  Bin  having  been  plucked  of  its  sting,  our  Saviour  having  received  it  in 
His  own  body,  therefore  there  is  no  more  power  in  our  adversary  to  inflict  its 
mortal  poison  upon  us ;  he  is  not  only  disarmed  of  his  right  to  condemn  us,  but 
of  all  ability  to  tyrannise  over  us.  In  virtue  of  fiis  defeat  he  will  not  obtain  the 
dominion  over  our  hearts  unless  we  let  him.  Our  resistance,  backed  as  it  is  by  the 
plea  of  a  Saviour  crucified,  and  by  the  power  of  a  Saviour  exalted,  will  be  greatly 
too  much  for  him.  We  who  have  been  baptized  into  Christ  are  somewhat  in  the 
same  circumstances  that  the  children  of  Israel,  after  being  baptized  into  Moses  in 
the  Red  Sea,  were  in  reference  to  the  tyranny  of  Egypt.  Their  enemy  was  engulfed 
in  that  abyss  over  which  they  found  a  shielded  way  ;  and,  placed  beyond  his 
dominion,  it  was  now  their  part  to  exchange  the  mastery  of  Pharaoh  for  the  mastery 
of  God;  but  those  who  rebelled  were  cut  off  in  the  wilderness.  2.  And  this  analogy 
does  not  fail  us  if  we  take  "  mortal  "  in  the  customary  signification.  While  in  these 
mortal  bodies,  we  are  only  on  a  road  through  the  vdlderness  of  earth  to  the  blessed- 
ness of  heaven.  All  who  are  really  partakers  with  Christ  in  His  death  have  got 
over  a  mighty  barrier.  They  have  been  carried  through  the  strait  gate  of  acceptance, 
and  have  now  to  travel  along  the  narrow  way  of  duty  and  discipline,  "  not  after  the 
flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit."  Let  not  sin  reign  over  us  on  the  passage  that  we  have 
yet  to  traverse.  Let  us  stifle  every  rising  inclination  for  the  carnalities  of  Egypt, 
and  come  not  under  the  power  of  those  lusts  which  war  against  the  soul,  till 
we  reach  the  spiritual  Canaan  where  every  incUnation  to  evil  shall  cease  to  exist 
and  so  cease  to  annoy  us.  3.  We  cannot  fail  to  perceive  how  widely  diverse  the 
injunction  would  have  been,  if  instead  of,  "  Let  not  sin  reign,"  Paul  had  said,  "  Let 
sin  be  rooted  out";  or  if,  instead  of  saying,  •' Obey  not  its  lusts,"  he  had  bid  us 
eradicate  them.  The  more  enviable  state,  of  course,  would  be  to  have  no  inclina- 
tion to  evil,  and  could  we  attain  that  higher  state,  we  would  become  on  earth  what 
angels  are  in  heaven ;  but  if  doomed  to  the  lower  state  during  all  our  abode  here, 
then  we  may  understand  that  the  life  of  a  Christian  is  a  struggle  of  two  adverse 
elements,  and  the  habitual  prevalence  of  one  of  them,  and  that  sin  is  not  to  be 
exterminated,  but  to  be  kept  at  bay.  Let  us  try  to  banish  it,  and  defeated  in  this 
effort,  we  may  give  up  in  heartless  despair  the  cause  of  our  sanctification ;  but 
trying  to  dethrone  it,  and  succeeding  in  this  effort,  while  we  mourn  its  hateful 
company,  we  may  both  keep  it  under  control  and  calmly  look  onward  to  the  hour  of 
release.  We  cannot  obtain  such  a  victory  as  that  we  shall  never  feel  the  motions 
of  the  flesh,  but  we  may  obtain  such  a  victory  as  that  we  shall  not  walk  after  the 
flesh.  The  enemy  is  not  so  killed  as  that  we  are  delivered  from  his  presence ;  but, 
by  an  unremitting  strenuousness  on  our  part,  we  may  keep  him  so  chained  as  that 
we  shall  be  delivered  from  his  power.  4.  The  time  is  coming  when,  freed  from 
every  opposing  tendency,  we  shall  expatiate  over  the  realms  of  ethereal  purity  and 
love — just  as  the  time  is  coming  when  the  chrysalis  shall  burst  with  unfettered 
wing  from  the  prison  in  which  it  is  now  held  ;  and  where,  we  doubt  not,  that  it  ia 
aspiring  and  growing  into  a  meetness  for  traversing  at  large  the  field  of  light  and 
air  above  it.  This  representation  of  indwelling  sin — I.  Conduces  to  the  peach 
<Hr  ▲  BEUETBB.  The  very  occurrence  of  a  sinful  desire,  or  feeling,  haiassea  a 
VOL.  I.  82 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

delicate  oonsoience,  and  he  may  be  led  to  suspect  therefrom  his  interest  in  the 
promises.  Bat  it  will  quiet  him  to  be  told  that  there  is  a  distinction  between  the 
saint  who  is  struggling  below  and  the  saint  who  is  triumphing  above.  U.  Comduoes 
TO  THE  belieteb's  peogbess,  for  it  leads  to  a  most  wholesome  self -distrust  which, 
for  one  thing,  will  save  him  from  needlessly  thrusting  himself  into  a  scene  of 
temptation.  God  will  grant  succour  against  the  onsets  which  temptation  maketh 
upon  us,  but  He  does  not  engage  Himself  to  stand  by  us  in  the  presumptuous 
onsets  which  we  make  upon  temptation.  III.  Leads  us  to  such  measubes  as  hat 
STBENQTHEN  THE  OBACious  PAST  OF  ouB  CONSTITUTION  for  every  such  eucouuter  as 
cannot  be  shunned.  Temptation  will  come,  though  we  should  never  move  a  step 
towards  it.  What,  then,  is  the  best  method  of  upholding  the  predominance  of  the 
good  principle  over  the  evil  one  ?  A  fresh  commitment  of  ourselves  in  faith  and  in 
prayer  to  Him  who  first  put  the  good  principle  into  our  hearts— another  act  ol 
recurrence  to  the  fulness  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus — a  new  application  for  strength 
from  the  Lord  our  Sanctifier  to  meet  this  new  occasion  for  strength  which  He 
Himself  has  permitted  to  cross  our  path.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Follow  after 
holiness : — I.  How  must  wb  do  this  ?  1.  By  breaking  the  power  of  sin  (ver.  12). 
2.  By  yielding  ourselves  to  God  (ver.  13).  II.  Is  rr  possible  ?  Grace  destroys — 1. 
The  dominion  of  sin  (ver.  14).  2.  The  love  of  sin  (ver.  15).  HI.  Why  ought  wb 
TO  DO  it  ?  It  is  required — 1.  By  the  obedience  of  faith  (ver.  16).  2.  By  gratitude 
to  God  for  His  gracious  help  (ver.  17).  3.  By  our  merciful  emancipation  from  the 
bondage  of  sin.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  obligation  of  a  holy  life : — I.  Its  elements, 
1.  Subjection  of  natural  lusts.  2.  Benunciation  of  the  service  of  sin.  3.  Conse> 
cration  of  all  the  powers  to  God.  II.  Its  possrEiLrrr  (ver.  14).  As  Christians — 1. 
We  are  not  under  the  law.  2.  But  under  grace.  3.  Consequently  receive  dominion 
over  sin.  UI.  Its  indispensable  necessity.  Because — 1.  Grace  requires  it.  2. 
Practice  determines  to  whom  we  belong.  8.  Obedience  is  the  perfection  of 
righteousness.    {Ibid.) 

Yer.  13.  Neither  yield  ye  yoarselves  as  Instmments  of  nnrighteonsness  unto 
sin:  but  yield  yourselves  unto  God. — Yielding : — Yielding  is  an  image  carried  over 
from  the  world  of  matter  into  the  world  of  mind.  In  every  case  of  yielding  you 
have  pressure  meeting  with  resistance  and  overcoming  it.  Note  then — I.  Thh 
PBESSUEE.  There  are  many  kinds  of  pressure.  When  your  shoe  pinches  you 
it  presses  upon  one  small  point  only,  but  the  kindly  pressure  of  the  air  is  upon 
every  part  of  your  body.  And  such  is  Heaven's  gentle  pressure  upon  your  soul. 
God  presses  us  through — 1.  The  experiences  of  life.  These  Eomans  before  their 
yielding  were  great  pleasure-seekers,  and  Paul  asks  what  they  had  gained  by  it  all. 
The  answer  is,  nothing  but  shame  and  death  (vers.  21,  23).  They  were  like  their 
own  Caesar,  who,  when  at  the  height  of  his  glory,  asked,  "  And  is  this  all  ?  "  Chry- 
Bostom  tells  us  that  the  pressure  of  disgust  at  heathen  pleasures  brought  him  to  the 

E "elding  point,  and  that  many  young  men  in  his  day  had  the  same  experience.  And 
[e  is  the  same  in  every  age.  At  a  Jewish  wedding  the  priest  places  an  empty 
wineglass  on  the  floor,  and  the  bridegroom,  setting  his  heel  opon  it,  splinters 
it  into  fragments.  The  strange  custom  is  meant  to  remind  the  newly-married  pair 
that  their  earthly  happiness  is  just  as  fragile.  If  so,  we  must  ask  whether  there  is 
no  cup  for  mortals  that  can  never  be  broken.  Thus  life  puts  upon  us  a  strong 
pressure  which  should  make  us  yield  unto  God.  2.  His  law.  This  Epistle  is  full 
of  this  pressure.  It  says,  You  are  under  God's  law  and  you  ought  to  obey  it.  But 
you  are  ever  breaking  it.  What,  then,  are  you  to  do?  Escape  from  its  terrors 
there  is  none  but  by  yielding.  The  law  drives  the  law-breaker  into  the  open  arms 
of  the  Law-f ulfiUer.  3.  His  love.  Paul  has  very  great  faith  in  the  power  of  this 
pressure.  He  states  all  the  facts  of  Christ's  life  and  death,  and  shows  how  they  ah 
reveal  God's  kindness  to  sinners.  He  does  everything  to  win  attention  to  Christ's 
redeeming  love,  for  he  knows  how  it  can  bring  the  soul  up  to  the  bending  tempera- 
tnre.  Often  the  quietest  and  gentlest  influences  conquer  resistance  that  defies  all 
other  pressure.  Arctic  explorers  frozen  in  amid  blocks  of  ice  would  fain  set  them- 
selves free  by  main  force,  but  in  vain.  But  the  sun  at  length  smiles  upon  the 
stubborn  snow-mountain,  and  grim  winter  lets  go  his  hold  and  quietly  yields. 
Thus  the  resistance  of  our  frozen  hearts  is  melted  away  by  Divine  love.  4.  In 
pressing  a  man  towards  Christ  the  Holy  Spirit  often  unites  these  three  and  other 
kinds  of  pressure.  II.  Man's  besistance.  1.  There  is  a  resistance  called  vi$ 
inerticB,  i.e.,  the  power  of  doing  nothing.  That  rock  which  came  thundering  down 
the  hill,  and  now  blocks  the  highway  by  its  dead  weight,  overcomes  all  the  pressure 


.  TJ.]  ROMANS,  499 

one  hundred  men  can  bring  to  bear  upon  it.  And  some  offer  a  rock-like  resistance 
to  Ood.  Their  habits  are  all  against  God,  and  they  won't  consider  whether  their 
habits  should  be  changed.  Habit  is  the  Latin  word  habet ;  it  has  them.  They  ar« 
slaves  with  a  wish  to  be  free.  2.  But  others  resist  of  set  purpose.  The  murderers 
of  Stephen  were  of  this  class.  Some  do  this  who  are  outwardly  respectable ;  theirs 
is  resistance  without  violence.  Others  do  not  care  to  hide  their  resiirtance.  "  I 
hated  the  gospel,"  one  confessed,  "and  my  soul  hissed  against  it  as  cold  water 
hisses  when  it  meets  fire."  The  resisting,  defying  power  of  man's  will  is  awfuL 
Milton  in  "  Paradise  Lost  "  makes  this  the  explanation  of  Satan's  character. 
I  have  read  that  the  physician  who  attended  a  dying  nobleman,  famed  for  his 
genius  and  godlessness,  one  day  overheard  him  saying,  "  Shall  I  yield  t  Shall 
I  pray  ?  "  The  physician  held  in  his  breath  for  the  answer,  as  the  dying  man  was 
not  aware  that  any  one  was  within  earshot.  After  a  pause,  the  dying  poet  said, 
firmly,  "No,  no  weakness  I"  Ah  I  there  it  is;  yielding  seems  weakness  to  the 
onhumbled  heart.  Think  of  it — a  weakness  to  yield  to  God  and  Christ,  to  eternal 
truth  and  mercy  I  III.  Thb  tieldinq-point.  That  point  is  reached  when  man's 
resistance  gives  way  under  God's  pressure.  1.  The  Christian  life  begins  with  an 
act  of  yielding.  The  Christian  does  not  yield  as  the  defeated  soldier  yields  to 
his  foe  who  slays  him,  but  with  the  consent  of  all  that  is  within  him,  as  one 
"alive  from  the  dead."  Often  a  small  thing,  as  it  seems  to  us,  makes  the  happy 
day  that  fixes  the  choice  on  the  Saviour.  The  turning-points  of  life  are  like  the 
water-partings  of  great  rivers,  where  a  raindrop's  destiny  is  often  decided  by  a 
breath  of  wind.  While  the  gentlest  touch  may  make  the  pressure  greater  than  the 
resistance,  there  must  be  a  yielding  in  every  case,  and  it  must  be  a  yielding  of  the 
whole  man  for  the  whole  life.  A  rich  Australian  in  his  youth  was  a  poor  plough- 
boy.  A  free  passage  was  offered  to  him.  By  faith  in  that  offer  he  left  his  native 
land,  crossed  the  deep,  began  life  anew,  and  so  became  a  rich  landowner.  That 
offer  was  to  him  "a  faithful  saying  and  worthy  of  acceptation,"  but  his  belief 
of  it  did  him  no  good  till  he  had  yielded  himself  to  it  in  every  possible  way. 
2.  The  Christian  life  from  beginning  to  end  is  a  yielding.  The  Roman  Christians 
had  yielded  in  conversion,  and  Paul  wishes  them  to  rise  to  the  highest  life,  and  his 
message  to  them  is  still,  "  Yield."  They  are  the  best  Christians  who  are  best  at 
Yielding,  and  who  are  always  in  the  yielding  mood.  8.  The  passage  (vers.  12-23) 
is  full  of  military  images.  The  last  verse  means,  "  The  soldier's  wages — the  rations 
— of  sin  is  death,"  it  is  not  merely  a  punishment  in  the  future.  And  the  exact 
meaning  of  our  text  is,  offer  yourselves  as  volunteers  unto  God,  and  all  your 
faculties  of  mind  and  body  as  soldiers'  weapons  in  the  cause  of  holiness.  When 
war  breaks  out  many  an  officer  who  might  enjoy  every  luxury  at  home,  who  is  even 
an  heir  to  a  peerage,  offers  to  serve  his  country  on  the  battlefield.  He  offers 
himself  by  an  act  of  the  will,  and  the  spirit  of  that  act  is  carried  into  his  whole 
service.  His  heart  is  stirred  to  its  depths  by  soldierly  ambition.  Borne  was  a  city 
of  soldiers,  and  every  Roman  would  thoroughly  understand  the  apostle  when  he 
nrged  them  to  be  the  courageous  and  devoted  soldiers  of  Christ.  You  see,  then, 
that  this  yielding  is  not  an  abject,  spiritless,  lazy  thing.  It  is  the  beginning  of  a 
life  of  great  energy.  "  Yield  yourselves  unto  God,  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the 
dead."  Have  you  ever  spent  an  hour  with  the  convalescent,  ••alive  from  the 
dead  "  ?  Did  you  ever  see  such  zest  in  the  work  and  enjoyments  of  life  ?  Well, 
that  shonld  be  the  spirit  of  those  who  have  devoted  themselves  to  the  service  of 
their  God.  Almost  every  verse  in  this  chapter  testifies  to  the  apostle's  anxiety  that 
they  would  be  whole-hearted  in  the  service  of  Christ.  When  Moshesh,  the  chief  of 
the  Basutos,  received  the  missionaries,  he  advised  his  chiefs  to  have  one  foot  in  the 
Church  and  the  other  out.  But  one  chief  became  an  earnest  Christian,  and  said  to 
Moshesh,  "  I  put  only  one  foot  in  the  Church  at  first,  as  you  advised  me,  but  the 
love  of  Christ  soon  drew  in  my  whole  body."  The  apostle  counsels  each  Roman 
convert  to  give  his  whole  soul  and  body.  For  he  who  does  not  yield  everything 
really  yields  nothing.  The  true  yielder  moves  together  when  he  moves  at  all. 
Calvin  chose  for  his  seal  and  motto  a  hand  holding  a  heart  on  fire,  with  the 
words,  "I  give  thee  all.  I  keep  back  nothing."  The  apostle  (ver.  19)  pleads 
with  them  to  serve  Christ  now  as  they  used  to  serve  Satan.  (J.  Wells,  M.A.) 
Yield  unto  God : — L  Thb  duty  rrsEU.  1.  In  general  it  implies,  that  whatever  we 
possess,  all  that  we  are,  or  have,  or  can  do,  should  be  consecrated  to  God,  and 
devoted  to  His  service  and  honour.  The  being  which  we  have  is  derived  from 
Him  ;  every  blessing  which  we  enjoy  is  the  fruit  of  His  bounty ;  every  talent  with 
which  we  are  distinguished  was  freely  bestowed  by  Him.     To  Hun,  therefore,  they 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

ought  to  be  entirely  sarrendered,  and  in  the  advancement  of  His  glory  at  all  times 
employed.  2.  More  particularly,  we  must  yield  to  God  our  immortal  souls,  ■wiih. 
all  the  intellectual  powers  which  they  possess.  (1)  We  must  dedicate  our  under- 
standing to  the  Father  of  Lights,  to  be  illuminated  by  Him  with  saving  knowledge, 
to  be  employed  in  contemplating  His  nature  and  perfection ;  above  all,  to  know 
Jesus,  and  Him  crucified,  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge.  (2)  We  must  dedicate  our  will  to  that  holy  rule  of  resignation  which  David 
expressed  when  he  said,  "  Here  I  am,  let  the  Lord  do  unto  me  what  seemeth  good 
in  His  sight,"  and  which  David's  Lord  expressed  in  circumstances  infinitely  more 
trying,  "Father,  not  My  vrill,  but  Thine  be  done."  (3)  We  must  consecrate  our 
memories  to  be  treasures  of  Divine  truth,  our  affections  to  the  pursuit  of  those 
things  which  are  above,  our  senses  to  the  salutary  discipline  of  self-denial,  and  oar 
members  as  instruments  of  holiness  to  God.  3.  All  our  possessions  and  enjoy- 
ments must  be  devoted  to  God.  U.  Fob  what  pubfoses  we  abb  thus  to  yxeld 
OUBSELVES  UNTO  GoD.  1.  We  are  to  yield  ourselves  to  God,  to  do  whatsoever  He 
commands ;  in  all  instances  of  duty,  to  give  a  prompt  and  cheerful  obedience  to  His 
authority.  2.  We  must  yield  ourselves  to  God  not  only  to  do  but  to  suffer  His  will. 
We  are  already  in  the  hand  of  God,  by  our  essential  dependence ;  let  us  likewise  be 
BO  by  our  own  consent  and  choice.  This  is  the  true  balm  of  life.  It  is  this  that 
softens  adversity,  and  alleviates  the  load  of  sorrow.  In  this  we  nnite  the  noblest 
duty  which  we  can  perform,  and  the  most  precious  benefit  which  we  can  reap.  3. 
We  must  yield  ourselves  to  God,  to  be  disposed  of  by  His  providence,  as  to  our  lot 
and  condition  in  the  world.  4.  As  we  must  be  resigned  to  the  will  of  God  with 
respect  to  our  outward  lot,  so  we  must  be  satisfied  with  His  disposal,  as  to  the 
measure  of  spiritual  gifts  which  He  is  pleased  to  bestow  on  us.  Should  He  make 
ns  but  as  the  foot,  we  must  be  as  well  contented  as  if  He  had  made  us  the  hand  or 
the  head,  and  rejoice  that  we  are  found  qualified  for  being  even  the  least  honoor- 
able  member  in  Christ's  mystical  body.  in.  The  manneb  in  which  wb  ought  to 
PEBFOBM  THIS  DUTY  07  TiELDiNO  ouBSELVES  UNTO  GoD.  1.  Before  WO  Can  perform 
this  duty  in  an  acceptable  manner,  it  is  necessary  that  we  have  just  views  both  of 
God  and  of  ourselves.  We  must  yield  ourselves  to  God  like  condemned  rebels, 
who  cast  themselves  on  the  mercy  of  their  sovereign.  Yet,  while  sensible  of  our 
miserable  state,  we  must  also  have  a  view  of  those  riches  of  mercy  which  are  open 
to  the  chief  of  sinners.  2.  We  must  yield  ourselves  unto  God  with  serious,  atten- 
tive, and  awakened  minds.  We  must  remember  that  yielding  ourselves  to  God 
will  involve  in  it  the  renouncing  of  many  favourite  engagements,  the  performing  of 
many  difficult  duties,  and  the  mortifying  of  many  desires,  which  hitherto,  perhaps, 
it  has  been  the  whole  plan  of  our  lives  to  gratify.  3.  In  yielding  ourselves  onto 
God,  our  hearts  must  be  humbled  with  deep  repentance,  for  having  so  long  gone 
astray  from  Him  and  His  service.  4.  We  must  yield  ourselves  onto  God  without 
any  secret  reserve  or  Umitation,  imploring  that  He  may  take  the  full  possession  of 
our  hearts,  and  cast  out  of  them  whatever  opposeth  or  exalteth  itself  against  Him. 
5.  All  this  must  be  done  with  an  explicit  regard  to  the  Lord  Jeeus  Christ,  through 
whom  alone  we  have  access  to  the  Father.  IV.  Enfobob  thk  bxhobtatioh  bt 
SOKE  motives  and  ABOtJ&iENTS.  1.  Need  I  represent  to  you  the  necessity  of  this 
duty?  Can  you  withdraw  yourselves  from  being  the  property  of  God  as  His 
creatures  t  Can  you  evade  the  dispensations  of  His  providence,  or  snatch  from  Him 
those  issues  of  life  and  death  which  are  incontrollably  in  His  hands  ?  2.  Consider 
the  reasonableness  of  this  duty.  If  there  is  reasonableness  in  acknowledging  our 
debts,  and  in  being  thankful  for  our  benefits ;  if  there  is  reasonableness  in  sab- 
mitting  to  be  guided  by  unerring  wisdom,  and  to  be  disposed  of  by  infinite  goodness ; 
it  is  that  we  should  yield  ourselves  to  that  God  who  made  us,  who  preserves  and 
hath  redeemed  us,  and  hath  pledged  His  faithfulness  to  conduct  all  those  to  happi- 
ness who  put  their  confidence  in  Him.  3.  And  this  leads  me  to  the  last  argument 
which  I  shall  use  for  enforcing  this  exhortation,  which  is  the  advantage  with  which 
it  will  be  attended.  At  the  same  time  that  we  yield  ourselves  to  God,  He  gives 
Himself  to  us  in  all  the  fulness  of  His  grace.     (R.  Walker.)  Yielding  ths 

membert  a$  instrument*  : — I.  Yield.  Present :  allusion  to  enhance  on  military 
service.  U.  Yield  what  ?  "  Your  members."  The  whole  man,  more  especially 
the  bodily  members,  which  are  the  organs  of  internal  principles.  HL  What  as  f 
"Instruments" — ^weapons,  arms.  The  members  are  weapons  used  on  one  side 
or  the  other  of  the  conflict  between  sin  and  righteousness  ;  employed  in  the 
service  of  one  or  other  of  two  masters  or  sovereigns.  The  body  is  an  arsenal 
of  arms  or  a  warehouse  of  tools  for  good  or  evil.    (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)        Yielding 


aur.  TL]  ROMANS.  501 

tmto  Ood : — The  word  "  yield  "  in  Lake  ii.  22  means  "  present,"  and  so  it 
does  in  Acts  xxiii  23,  24,  and  in  Eph.  v.  27.  "  Yielding,"  then,  is  to  present 
oarselves  to  God  as  His  servants.  His  property,  wholly  consecrated  to  Him. 
Consider — I.  The  seasons  why  it  is  o0b  duty  to  tield  oobselves  unto  God. 
Because — 1.  He  is  absolute  sovereign,  and  we  must  do  His  will.  It  is  obviously, 
theref»re,  the  greatest  folly  and  danger  to  have  a  will  opposed  to  Him  in  any 
respect.  2.  He  is  of  infinite  excellence.  He  not  only  must  and  will  rule,  but  He 
ought  to  rule.  Who  should  possess  supreme  power  but  that  Being  who  is  wise, 
generous,  patient,  faithful,  true,  and  infinitely  so  beyond  all  His  creatures  ?  3. 
He  has  absolute  right  to  rule.  For  whom  ought  all  our  faculties  and  powers  to  be 
employed  but  for  Him  who  is  their  Maker  7  To  what  can  we  trace  our  blessings 
but  to  His  bounty  ?  He  made  these  faculties  and  the  objects  around  us  so  exactly 
suited  to  our  wants.  4.  He  has  redeemed  us.  Far  less  benefit  than  this  bestowed 
by  a  fellow  creature  would  make  us  yield  ourselves  as  debtors  to  him  all  our  lives. 
6.  Our  best  interests  in  time  and  in  eternity  are  involved  in  tliis  step.  To  refuse 
to  obey  this  command  is  to  refuse  to  be  enriched  by  His  bounty,  to  be  preserved  by 
His  care,  to  taste  of  His  love,  and  to  enjoy  His  glory.  II.  The  extent  of  this 
COMMAND.  It  does  not  mean  that  you  are  to  submit  your  power,  though  you  must 
do  that.  God  will  not  suffer  any  of  His  creatures  eventually  to  persevere  in 
opposition  to  Him ;  and  therefore  we  are  now,  before  that  moment  of  compulsion 
eomes,  called  to  submit.  1.  It  is  His  revealed  will  that  each  sinner  who  hears  the 
gospel  should  believe  on  His  Son,  look  for  sanctification  of  his  nature  through  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  depend  on  Him  to  bring  him  to  everlasting  happiness,  and 
come  to  an  unreserved  obedience  to  the  whole  of  His  law  who  is  our  rightful  Lord. 
2.  But  this  is  not  all.  The  passage  obviously  means,  "  Present  yourselves  a  Uving 
sacrifice  to  God."  While  it  requires  us  to  resign  ourselves  absolutely  to  the  whole 
will  of  God,  it  calls  upon  us  to  give  Him  all  our  faculties,  and  to  devote  our 
affections  to  Him.  He  has  planted  in  us  the  powers  of  fear,  of  hope,  of  desire,  of 
delight,  of  love:  it  is  His  will  that  all  these  affections,  especially  the  master 
affection,  love,  should  be  occupied  chiefly  with  Him  ;  we  are  to  love  Him  supremely, 
and  all  the  rest  will  follow.  He  who  yields  himself  to  God,  yields  all  his  property, 
his  influence,  his  time,  whatever  he  possesses,  for  it  is  God's.  (Baptist  Noel,  M.A.) 
Yielding  to  God : — I.  The  precept.  To  yield  implies  that  two  persons  have  been 
opposed  one  to  the  other,  and  that  now  one  submits  to  the  other.  This  submission 
may  be  a  wilUng  or  unwilling,  unreserved  or  reserved,  permanent  or  temporary.  1, 
As  between  man  and  God,  to  yield  implies  that  there  is  a  great  gulf  which  sin  has 
caused  to  exist  between  man  and  God.  There  is  no  love  to  God  in  man's  natural 
heart.  Hence  the  unrest  and  misery  of  so  many  men.  They  are  not  at  peace  with 
God.  2.  Into  the  midst  of  this  moral  chaos  God  has  descended,  and  in  the  person 
of  His  Son  has  opened  a  way  by  which  the  sinner  may  be  received  back  to  God. 
And  hence  the  language  of  God  to  the  sinner  is,  "  Be  ye  reconciled."  "  Yield 
yourselves  unto  God."  3.  This  submission  must  be  accompanied  by  heartfelt 
sorrow  for,  and  a  determination  to  forsake  sin,  and  faith  in  Christ.  4.  It  must  be 
a  willing  submission.  There  must  be  no  reserve,  no  condition,  no  hanging  back. 
6.  It  must  be  a  permanent  submission,  not  only  for  the  present,  but  for  the  future,  for 
time  and  for  eternity.  H.  Why  it  should  be  obeyed.  "  Yield  "  because — 1.  It 
is  your  duty.  There  is  in  the  hearts  of  Englishmen  a  strong  feeling  of  the  principle 
of  duty.  That  famous  signal — "  England  expects  every  man  to  do  his  duty,"  rings 
through  the  hearts  of  thousands  when  they  hear  it.  And  it  is  that  which  carries 
the  Englishman  wherever  his  country  calls  him.  But,  alas  !  there  may  be  a  sense 
of  duty  as  regards  man,  and  no  such  sense  as  regards  God.  But  still  remember 
that  it  is  your  duty.  (1)  God  is  your  Creator.  Why  were  you  called  into  being  ? 
Go  and  ask  yon  tiny  insect  and  yon  blade  of  grass,  which,  if  they  could  speak 
woold  say,  "For  God."  And  for  what  is  the  most  wonderful  of  God's  creatures 
except  to  obey  Him  ?  (2)  God  is  your  king.  Satan  exercises  a  mighty  power,  but 
his  is  an  usurped  dominion.  (3)  God  is  your  benefactor.  Whence  your  life, 
health,  comforts  ?  Whence  the  forbearance,  the  goodness  through  the  mercy  of 
God  to  you  ?    (4)  If  you  are  not  yielding  yourselves  unto  God  you  are  yielding 

Joorself  to  some  false  god.  It  is  impossible  that  man  can  serve  two  masters.  2. 
t  is  our  life.  (1)  Forgiveness  is  life.  As  long  as  a  man  has  nnforgiven  sin 
npon  his  conscience,  that  man  is  dead  in  the  sight  of  God.  There  is  free  and 
unconditional  forgiveness  promised  to  all  who  believe  in  the  Saviour.  (2)  The 
new  birth  is  life.  Have  you  ever  thirsted  for  this  life?  It  is  told  us  of  the 
wounded  upon  the  field  of  Waterloo,  that  what  they  longed  foi  daring  that  terrible 


602  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

night,  wa3  not  the  relief  which  surgical  aid  could  afford,  not  an  escape  from  that 
hloody  field,  but  simply  water  to  quench  their  burning  thirst.    Have  you,  beneath 
a  sense  of  sin,  a  sense  of  your  wounds  thirsted  for  the  water  of  life?    "  Ho,  every 
one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters."     3.  It  is  your  death  if  yon  refuse  to 
yield  (Matt.  xxv.  30,  41,  46).      IH.  There  abb   many  ways  in  which  it  mat  bb 
MET.     1.  By  obedience.    But  you  may  ask,  "  How  am  I  to  do  it  ?  "    Just  as  the 
Lord  Jesus  said  to  the  man  with  the  withered  hand, ' '  Stretch  forth  thy  hand,"  and 
the  man  stretched  it  forth  and  it  was  whole ;  so,  in  the  same  way,  if  a  sinner  present 
feels  guilty  and  helpless,  and  hears  the  word  of  command,  and  makes  the  effort, 
praying  for  the  Divine  assistance,  seeking  to  obey  the  precept,  that  man  will  find 
the  needed  help  afforded  him.    Just  as  when  Peter  was  sinking  beneath  the  waves, 
and  cried  out,  "  Lord,  save  me,"  and  the  Lord  caught  the  sinking  apostle,  do  you 
say,  from  the  bottom  of  your  heart,  now,  at  this  moment,  "  Lord,  save  me  "  ;  and 
in  the  effort  you  shall  find  that  God  does  save  you.    2.  By  a  refusal,  "  We  will  not 
have  this  Man  to  reign  over  us."    "  I  love  pleasure ;  I  dislike  self-denial  and 
religious  efforts."     Now,  I  would  not  deny  that  there  are  such  things  as  the 
pleasures  of  sin  ;  but  remember  they  are  for  a  season  only.    Afterwards,  there  is 
*'  the  worm  that  dieth  not,"  &o.    But  I  doubt  whether  you  do  find  that  those 
pleasures  of  sin  satisfy  you.    "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."    And 
though  there  may  be  tbe  noisy  laugh,  and  the  outward  appearance  of  indifference, 
yet  I  believe  that  no  one  can  hear  God's  word  and  remain  in  indifference,  without 
some  qualms  of  conscience,  some  dread  of  eternity.    Oh,  then,  beware  how  you 
say,  "  I  will  not  yield."    ••  See  that  ye  refuse  not  Him  that  speaketh,"  &c.    3.  By 
attempting  a  compromise ;  by  delay,  for  example.    You  wish  for  time.    Now,  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  neutrality  in  religion.    There  may  be  neutrality  as  between 
states  ;  between  man  and  man ;  but  there  is  no  such  thing  as  neutrality  in  the  case 
of  man's  service  to  God.     "  He  that  is  not  with  Me,  is  against  Me."    Besides,  if 
you  now  despise  the  mercy  of  God,  and  use  the  promise  of  mercy  as  an  excuse  for 
continuance  in  sin,  what  right  have  you  to  expect  that  God  will  continue  to  show 
mercy  ?    Ton  may  say,  "  Was  there  not  mercy  for  that  man  who  entered  the  vine- 
yard at  the  eleventh  hour,  and  for  the  thief  upon  the  cross?    Their  case  waa 
altogether  different  from  yours.    The  instance  of  a  delayed  repentance  is  very 
different  from  the  case  of  a  late  repentance.     They  had  not  had  the  invitation  and 
warning  before  as  you  have.     Besides,  how  do  you  know  that  at  any  future  time 
you  will  be  one  whit  more  willing  ?    The  chances  are,  humanly  speaking,  that 
you  will  be  less  willing.    It  is  told  of  one  who  gained  his  livelihood  by  searching 
the  nests  which  were  built  in  the  cliff,  that  upon  being  let  down  from  the  summit, 
he  gained  a  footing  on  a  jutting  crag  beneath.    He  suddenly  let  go  the  rope  by 
which  he  had  descended.    His  position  was  most  critical.     The  rope  was  swaying 
backwards  and  forwards  in  the  air,  and  each  time  it  came  less  near  to  him  than 
before.    He  saw  his  danger ;  he  saw  the  necessity  of  instant  decision.     He  must 
either  seek  to  grasp  it  by  jumping  from  his  crag,  or  it  may  be  lost  for  ever.     There 
was  no  time ;  it  must  be  done  at  once.    He  did  it.    He  sprang  from  his  orag ;  he 
seized  upon  the  rope,  and  he  was  saved.    And  so,  if  you  are  conscious  that  at  this 
moment  you  are  an  unsaved  sinner,  you  have  but  one  course  open  to  you.    It  is 
that  you  now  yield  yourself  to  God.    "Behold,  now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is 
the  day  of  salvation."    {Emiliits  Bayley,   B.D.)        Yielding  to  God: — I.  Yield. 
Free  enlistment  to  God  as  our  lawful  sovereign.    No  forced  service :  a  willing  heart 
the  best  sacrifice  (2  Cor.  ix.  7).  Willingness  of  spirit  and  weakness  of  fiesh  accepted 
(Mark  xiv.  38).    The  work  done  not  so  much  regarded  as  the  will  to  do  it.    II. 
f  0UB8ELVE8.    Not  merely  your  estate.    The  whole  man  (1  Thess.  v.  23).    The 
Macedonians  first  gave  themselves,  then  their  substance  (2  Cor.  viii.  5).     Self 
surrender  the  fruit  of  love.     Love's  language  is  Psa.  cxvi.  16.     The  heart  is  man's 
citadeL      That  surrendered  the  whole  man  yields.    All  our  offerings  worthless 
without  ourselves  (Prov.  xxiii.  26).    Ananias  gave  his  goods,  not  himself.    To  yield 
ourselves  wholly  to  God  is  the  conquest  of  His  grace.    Christ's  people  a  free-will 
offering  in  the  day  of  His  power  (Psa.  ox.  3).     The  means  of  effecting  it,  the 
constraining  power  of  His  love  (2  Cor.  v.  14),     HI.  Unto  God.    1.  Your  rightful 
sovereign.    2.  The  best  of  masters.    3.  Your  Father  through  Christ.    Not  to  yield 
ourselves  to  God  is  to  yield  oursBlves  to  sin.    {T.  Robinson,  D.D.)        Yielding  to 
God : — In  1845  Hugh  Miller,  as  he  tells  us  in  his  "  First  Impressions  of  England," 
▼isited  Olney,  the  home  of  the  poet  Cowper.     It  was  then  a  Babel  of  blackguards. 
He  thou!i;ht  that  all  the  bad-looking  fellows  in  England  had  been  drawn  together 
there.    Two  prize-figliters,  named  Bendigo  and  Caunt,  were  about  to  fight  for  tiaa 


OBAP.  TL]  ROMANS.  0Ot 

championship  and  three  hundred  guineas.  After  ninety-three  rounds  Bendigo 
beat.  Hugh  Miller  saw  him  after  the  fight  standing  at  the  door  of  a  whisky  shop, 
with  his  face  all  bruised.  What  would  Hugh  have  said  if  any  one  had  prophesied 
that  that  battered  pugilist  should  be  "  born  again  "  in  his  old  age,  and  become  an 
earnest  student  of  the  Bible,  and  worker  for  Christ  ?  The  idea  of  that  man  taking 
to  the  Bible  !  Not  very  likely.  Like  Sarah,  he  might  have  laughed  at  the  prophecy. 
The  scene  changes.  Thirty  years  have, passed,  and  Bendigo  is  now  about  sixty 
years  of  age,  and  is  in  gaol  for  the  twenty-seventh  time.  One  Sabbath  he  hears  in 
prison  an  address  on  David  and  Goliath.  Bendigo  listened,  as  the  subject  was  just 
in  his  line.  He  understood  it  aU :  Goliath  was  just  another  Gaunt.  He  forgot 
where  he  was,  so  interested  was  he ;  and  at  the  close  bawled  out,  "  Bravo,  I'm 
glad  the  httle  'un  won."  He  kept  thinking  about  it  in  his  cell,  and  decided  that 
somebody  must  have  helped  the  little  one  to  kill  the  big  giant.  Next  Sabbath  the 
sermon  was  on  Sbadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abednego.  He  fancied  that  the  name  of 
the  third  was  Bendigo,  and  said  to  himself,  "  If  one  Bendii^o  may  be  saved,  why 
not  another  f  "  The  subject  for  the  following  day  was  **  The  Tw:  Ive  Fishermen  " ; 
again  he  was  thoroughly  interested,  as  he  was  a  keen  fisher  himself.  The  next 
sermon  was  about  the  seven  hundred  left-handed  men  in  the  twentieth  chapter  of 
Judges;  once  more  he  is  all  ear,  being  himself  a  left-handed  man.  The  Bible 
seemed  to  him  a  very  strange  book ;  it  was  all  written  for  himself  I  Upon  getting 
oat  of  gaol  he  found  his  old  companions  waiting  for  him  ;  but  he  declared  that  he 
would  never  enter  another  public-house.  He  went  to  a  mission  meeting ;  and  that 
very  night,  on  his  way  home,  he  fell  on  his  knees  in  the  snow,  and  yielded  himself 
to  the  Saviour.  He  had  been  in  twenty-one  matched  fights,  and  had  not  been 
beaten  in  one  ;  "  but,"  said  he,  *•  when  I  came  to  the  Cross  of  Christ,  I  was  quite 
beat  at  the  first  round."  He  was  then  doing  his  desperate  utmost  to  master  the 
ABC,  that  he  might  be  able  to  read  God's  blessed  book ;  and  he  wound  up,  the 
reporter  said,  by  declaring,  '*  If  God  could  save  Bendy,  He  could  save  anybody." 
{J.  Wells,  M. A.)  Surrender  to  God: — The  apostle  has  just  warned  his  reader* 
not  to  surrender  their  limbs  and  bodily  organs  to  sin  as  the  conquered  surrendei 
their  weapons  to  the  conqueror.  Now  he  is  pressing  upon  them  to  whom  they 
should  surrender,  not  only  their  limbs  and  organs,  but  their  whole  being,  their 
very  selves.  We  notice  that  such  surrender — I.  Fulfils  the  supreme  ddtt  oi 
LITE.  It  is  surrender — 1.  To  the  rightful  Sovereign  of  the  soul.  2.  To  the  loving 
Father.  3.  To  the  sacrificial  Redeemer,  and  therefore — 4.  To  the  absolute  Pro- 
prietor of  the  soul.  So  that  whatever  other  duties  a  man  discharges  if  this 
surrender  is  neglected,  or  defied,  he  is  unloyal,  unfilial,  a  moral  felon.  II. 
Realises  the  biohest  satisfaction  of  life.  A  man  may  yield  labour,  time, 
money  to  God,  and  find  no  satisfaction  ;  but  if  he  yields  his  very  self,  the  needle 
has  found  the  magnet,  the  river  has  reached  the  ocean,  and  there  is  rest.  Why? 
Because  in  that  surrender — 1.  The  self  contradictions  of  human  hearts  are 
harmonised.  The  harp  of  human  nature  is  then  in  the  hand  of  the  Infinite  Harpist. 
2.  The  intellect  becomes  the  docile  scholar  of  the  True  Teacher.  "  Speak  Lord, 
for  Thy  servant  heareth."  3.  Conscience  has  accepted  the  Perfect  Guide.  III. 
Ensures  the  noblest  usefulness  of  life.  It  was  this  that  made  Paul  what  he 
was.  All  things  answer  their  highest  ends  just  as  they  are  completely  within 
the  realm  of  law,  i.e.,  just  as  they  are  most  completely  surrendered  to  God. 
Conclusion :  To  those  who  surrender  themselves  to  God — 1.  The  enigma  of  duty  is 
solved.  2.  The  secret  of  peace  is  found.  3.  The  way  to  usefulness  is  dicovered. 
{U.  R.  Thomas.)  Surrender  must  be  complete: — It  is  related  in  Roman  history, 
that  when  the  people  of  CoUatia  stipulated  about  their  surrender  to  the  authority 
and  protection  of  Rome  the  question  was  asked,  "  Do  you  deUver  up  yourselves, 
the  Collatine  people,  your  city,  your  fields,  your  water,  your  bounds,  your  temples, 
your  utensils,  all  things  that  are  yours,  both  human  and  Divine,  into  the  hands  of 
the  people  of  Rome?"  And  on  their  replying,  "We  deliver  up  all,"  they  were 
received.  (J.  Harris.)  Surrender  must  be  unconditiovnl : — At  the  battle  of  Fort 
Donelson,  when  ready  for  the  final  assault.  General  Buckner,  the  Confederate 
commander,  proposed  an  armistice  to  settle  terms  of  capitulation.  Grant  wanted 
no  armistice.  He  knew  his  advantage,  and  replied,  "  No  terms  but  unconditional 
and  immediate  surrender  can  be  accepted.  I  propose  to  move  immediately  upon 
your  works."  Buckner  surrendered.  (C.  E.  Little,  M.A.)  Submission  the  best 
defence  : — Having  offended  the  Romans,  whose  power  was  incomparably  superior 
to  their  own,  the  Tusculans  were  threatened  with  vengeance  by  the  marching  of 
Camillus,  at  the  head  of  a  considerable  army,  towards  their  country.    Conscious  of 


SM  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [dUF.  n, 

their  inability  to  cope  with  such  an  adversary,  they  adopted  the  following  method 
of  appeasing  him : — They  declined  to  make  resistance,  set  open  their  gates,  and 
apphed  themselves  quietly  to  their  proper  business,  resolving  to  submit  since  they 
found  it  impossible  to  contend.  Camillus,  on  entering  their  city,  was  struck  with 
their  prudence,  and  spake  as  follows :  "  You  only,  of  all  people,  have  found  out  the 
true  method  of  abating  the  Boman  fury;  and  your  submission  has  proved  your 
best  defence.  Upon  these  terms  we  can  no  more  find  it  in  our  hearts  to  injure 
you,  than,  upon  other  considerations,  you  could  have  found  power  to  oppose 
us."  Thus  the  chief  inducement  for  a  sinner  to  submit  to  God  is  a  persuasion 
that  He  is  not  inexorable,  but  that  there  is  forgiveness  with  Him  through  Jesus 
Christ.  Self  devotion    a    Christian  duty: — I.   The    state    of   those    hebb 

ADDBESSED.  1.  As  the  apostle  did  not  speak  to  disembodied  spirits,  or  to  persons 
literally  raised  he  must  refer  to  a  spiritual  resurrection.  Nor  does  he  speak 
of  such  as  have  escaped  great  dangers,  or  been  recovered  from  great  afflictions, 
although  these  may,  in  a  sense,  be  said  to  be  "alive  from  the  dead."  But  he 
speaks  of  a  resurrection  from  a  death  of  sin  to  a  life  of  righteousness.  This 
death  is  alluded  to  in  CoL  ii.  13 ;  Eph.  ii.  1.  2.  To  be  alive  from  this  death 
includes  repentance  unto  life  (Acts  zi.  18) ;  living  faith,  whereby  the  just  live  (Heb. 
X.  38);  justification  of  life  (chap.  v.  18);  regeneration;  the  being  "risen  with 
Christ,"  even  from  temporal  death,  and  to  eternal  life,  as  it  respects  a  title  to, 
meetness  for,  expectation,  prospect,  and  anticipation  of  it.  II.  The  sxhobtation 
oiVBN  TO  theu.  1.  *'  Yield  yourselves,"  exhibit,  present,  place  as  a  sacrifice  at 
the  altar.  That  which  we  are  to  present  is  not  merely  our  prayers,  praises,  alms, 
duties,  but  "  ourselves,"  our  persons,  souls  and  bodies,  to  God,  who  does  not  want 
••  ours  but  us,"  that  we  may  belong  to  Him,  may  be  appropriated  to  Him  only. 
Thus  St.  Paul  (Acts  xxvii,  23).  2.  But  how  are  we  to  present  ourselves  to  God? 
As  subjects  to  a  king ;  as  servants  to  a  master  (ver.  16) ;  as  soldiers  to  their 
general — hence  the  word  used  for  "instruments  denotes,  properly,  military 
weapons;  as  children  to  a  father;  as  a  wife  to  a  husband;  as  a  man's  field  or 
house  may  be  said  to  be  at  his  disposal,  to  be  cultivated  or  employed  as  he  pleases. 
8.  Thus  we  are  to  yield  or  present  to  God  all  our  members,  faculties,  talents,  time: 
we  should  consider  they  may  be  *'  instruments  "  and  weapons  "  of  unrighteous- 
ness," employed  in  the  service  of  sin,  fighting  for  it,  and  for  its  master,  Satan, 
against  God ;  or  they  may  be  "  instruments  and  weapons  of  righteousness," 
employed  in  the  promotion  of  piety  and  virtue  for  God's  service  and  glory,  fighting 
His  battles,  and  opposing  the  designs  of  our  spiritual  enemies.  III.  MoTtvES 
XNFOBciNo  THE  SXHOBTATION.  1.  Justico  and  reasou ;  we  are  God's  by  creation, 
preservation,  redemption.  2.  Gratitude  to  God  for  His  inestimable  mercies.  3. 
Love  to  man.  4.  And  even  self-interest  requires  it.  (J.  Benson.)  Alternating 
between  amendment  and  relapse : — Lady  Montagu,  in  one  of  her  letters,  describes 
in  her  own  peculiar  way  a  stormy  passage  which  she  had  just  made  across  the 
Bristol  Channel.  She  tells  of  a  lady  on  the  steamer  whose  fears  were  divided 
between  being  lost  herself  and  losing  her  smuggled  headdress.  She  had  bought  a 
fine  point-lace  cap  which  she  was  contriving  to  conceal  from  the  custom-house 
officers.  When  the  wind  grew  high  and  the  little  vessel  creaked,  she  fell  very 
heartily  to  her  prayers,  and  thought  wholly  of  her  soul.  When  it  seemed  to  abate 
she  returned  to  the  worldly  care  of  her  headdress.  This  easy  transition  from  her 
soul  to  her  headdress,  and  the  alternate  agonies  that  both  gave  her,  made  it  hard 
to  determine  which  she  thought  of  greatest  value.  This,  we  fear,  is  a  little  picture 
of  many  lives  as  they  cross  the  channel  between  the  two  eternities — alternating 
from  amendment  to  relapse  ;  driven  now  by  some  sudden  calamity  to  think  of  the 
soul,  but  with  every  lull  in  the  dark  providence  falling  back  to  caress  some 
smuggled  habit  from  the  land  of  sin.  Surrender  of  the  soul  to  God : — Horace 
Bushnell  was  a  teacher  in  Yale  College  at  a  time  of  religious  awakening  there ; 
and  although  not  an  atheist,  not  an  infidel,  was  greatly  disturbed  by  doctrinal 
unrest.  He  was  settling  his  opinions ;  he  was  passing  through  that  tumultuous 
period  known  in  the  experience  of  most  diligent  inquirers,  in  which  he  could  raise 
more  questions  than  he  could  answer.  The  pupils  under  him  were  profoundly 
affected  by  the  religious  movement  in  the  college.  His  great  manliness,  his 
benevolence,  his  social  feeling,  caused  him  extreme  pain  in  view  of  the  fact  that 
he  seemed  to  stand  in  the  way  of  the  religious  reformation  of  his  own  scholars. 
He  paced  up  and  down  his  room,  meditating  on  his  personal  duty,  and  finally  cams 
to  this  proposition :  "  I  have  no  doubt  that  there  is  a  distinction  between  right 
and  wrong.    I  feel  sore  on  that  one  point ;  am  I  willing  to  act  according  to  my 


CBAr.  n.]  ROMANS.  805 

belief?  I  have  perfect  confidence  that  there  is  a  distinction  between  right  and 
wrong ;  am  I  willing  to  throw  myself  over  the  line  between  the  wrong  and  the 
right,  towards  the  side  of  the  right,  and  hereafter  consecrate  myself  irrevocably, 
utterly,  affectionately,  to  the  following  of  the  best  religious  light  I  possess  ?  "  He 
knelt  down.  He  consecrated  himself  to  the  performance  of  all  duty  known  to  him. 
He  rose  with  a  forehead  white,  and  the  light  of  a  star  in  his  soul.  Were  all  his 
doubts  dissipated  at  an  instant's  notice?  Not  at  all.  But  they  were  like  the 
mighty  pines  on  the  mountain  tops  after  the  lightning  had  smitten  them.  They 
do  not  fall,  but  they  cease  to  grow.  They  are  no  longer  trees  ;  they  are  timber.  He 
went  on  and  on,  until  he  came  to  be  a  prince  with  God,  one  of  the  leaders  of 
religious  discussion,  one  of  the  most  spiritually-minded  of  theologians.  I  do  not 
accept  all  his  speculations ;  but  the  element  in  him  that  strikes  all  men  who  once 
fairly  see  it  is  his  spirituality.  It  strikes  even  those  of  a  faith  opposed  to  his.  I 
think  that  our  friends  in  the  Liberal  school  in  theology  revere  the  memory  of 
Horace  Bushnell  for  his  sermons  on  the  new  life  as  well  as  for  his  philanthropio 
efforts.  But  the  central  thing  in  him,  the  pillar  of  fire  which  led  him  into  the 
promised  land,  was  surrender  to  God,  or  to  what  he  knew  to  be  duty,  and  to  the 
whole  of  it.  At  the  instant  of  irreversible,  affectionate  surrender,  at  the  instant 
of  that  adjustment  of  the  lenses  of  his  soul,  God  flashed  through  him.  (/. 
Cook.)  Gospel  service  : — I.  "  As  those  who  ase  auve  fbom  the  dead."  This 
cots  up  legaUsm  by  the  roots.  To  work  legally  is  to  work  for  life ;  to  work 
evangelically  is  to  work  from  life.  You  are  not  here  called  upon  to  enter  the  service 
of  God,  as  those  who  have  life  to  win ;  but  to  enter  the  service  of  God,  as  those 
who  are  already  alive — as  those  who  can  count  upon  heaven  as  their  own.  In  this 
expression  there  are  three  distinct  suggestions  all  regarding  that  new  gospel  service 
apon  which  we  enter  at  the  moment  of  our  release  from  the  sentence  and  state  of 
death.  1.  The  hopefulness  of  such  a  service.  The  same  work  that,  out  of  Christ, 
would  have  been  vain  for  all  the  purposes  of  acceptance,  is  no  longer  vain  in  the 
Lord.  The  same  labour  that  would  have  been  fruitless  may  now  be  fruitful  of 
such  spiritual  sacrifices  as  are  acceptable  to  God  through  Christ.  The  same 
offerings  which  would  have  been  rejected  as  an  equivalent  for  the  wages  of  a 
servant  may  now  be  rejoiced  over  and  minister  complacency  to  the  spirit  of  our 
heavenly  Father,  when  rendered  as  the  attentions  of  His  reconciled  children.  2. 
The  principle  of  such  a  service — gratitude  to  Him  who  had  received  us.  "  Ye  are 
not  your  own,  ye  are  bought  with  a  price,"  <fec.  It  is  just  yielding  up  to  Him  in 
service  that  which  He  has  conferred  upon  us  by  donation.  It  is  turning  to  its 
bidden  use  the  instrument  He  has  put  into  our  hands.  3.  The  power  for  the 
service.  The  faith  which  receives  Christ  receives  power  along  with  Him  to  become 
one  of  God's  children.  The  instant  of  our  believing  is  the  instant  of  our  new 
birth.  The  same  faith  which  reconciles  is  also  the  faith  which  regenerates ;  and 
you,  in  yielding  yourselves  to  the  service  of  God,  will  be  upheld  by  the  influences 
which  descend  on  the  prayer  of  faith.  H.  "  And  your  membees  as  the  instbu- 
HENTS  of  righteousness  UNTO  GoD."  How  naturally  the  apostle  descends  from 
the  high  principle  to  the  plain  work  of  obedience  1  To  yield  yourselves  unto  God 
is  a  brief  expression  of  that  act  by  which  you  submit  your  person  and  bind  over  all 
your  performances  to  His  will.  To  yield  your  members  as  the  instruments  of 
righteousness  unto  God  is,  in  the  language  of  the  lawyers,  like  an  extension  of  the 
brief.  Did  you  at  one  time  put  forth  your  hand  to  depredation  or  violence — now 
let  it  be  the  instrument  of  service  to  your  neighbour  and  honest  labour  for  your 
families.  Did  your  feet  carry  yon  to  the  haunts  of  profligacy — now  let  them  carry 
you  to  the  house  of  prayer  and  of  holy  companionship.  Did  your  tongue  utter 
forth  evil  speakings — let  it  now  be  the  organ  of  charity  and  peace,  and  let  the  salt 
of  grace  season  its  various  communications.  Did  your  eyes  go  abroad  in  quest  of 
foolishness — let  the  steadfast  covenant  now  be  made  with  them  that  they  may  be 
tamed  away  from  every  intruding  evil.  Did  you  give  your  ears  to  the  corrupting  jest, 
or  to  the  refined  converse  that  is  impregnated  with  every  charm  but  that  of  Christi- 
anity— let  them  now  be  given  up  to  the  lessons  of  eternal  wisdom,  and  to  the  accents 
of  those  who  fear  the  Lord  and  talk  often  together  of  His  name.  In  this  way  you 
turn  your  members  into  so  many  instruments  of  righteousness.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 
Christians  serving  God  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead : — As,  then,  Lazarus,  or 
the  son  of  the  poor  widow  of  Nain,  or  the  saints  which  arose  after  the  crucifixion  of 
Christ,  mast  have  conceived,  and  felt,  and  acted,  under  impressions  peculiarly 
their  own ;  so  those  who  are  spiritually  alive  from  the  dead,  who  are  quickened  by 
the  Divine  Spirit,  have  conceptions,  and  feelings,  and  impressions,  which  dis» 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  ti. 

tingoish  them  from  the  rest  of  mankind  ;  we  may  observe,  then — I.  GhristianB,  m 
those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead,  are  to  yield  themselves  onto  God,  with  litxi<t 

PBBCEFTIONS   OF   THE   THINOS   WHICH   ABE   NOT  SEEM  AND   ETERNAL.      Had  the  earthly 

house  of  your  tabernacle  been  dissolved,  and  your  spirits  permitted  to  take  their 
flight  to  an  eternal  world,  and  for  a  season  to  dwell  there ;  with  what  vivid  percep- 
tions of  Divine  things  should  yon  afterwards  have  yielded  yourselves  unto  God  I 
Oh,  how  subduing  would  be  the  visions  of  heaven  !  And  are  not  you  Christiana 
alive  from  the  dead?  Has  not  God  quickened  you  ?  Has  He  not  given  yon  that 
faith  which  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for  ;  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen  ? 
Is  not  your  conversation  in  heaven  7  Have  you  not  obtained  affecting,  realising 
views  of  an  eternal  world  ?  Calculating  everything  by  the  standard  of  God  mani- 
fest in  the  flesh,  God  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  to  Himself,  living,  and  dying, 
and  rising,  and  ascending,  and  interceding  for  men,  what  impressions  do  you 
receive?  What  an  overwhelming  evil  does  sin  appear,  what  an  importance 
attaches  to  the  soul,  and  to  heaven,  and  eternity,  and  holiness,  and  everything 
connected  with  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light !  By  enlightening  your  onder- 
standings,  God  has  given  yon  an  impulse,  a  new  nature,  and  has  awakened  your 
consciences,  and  engaged  your  affections,  and  made  obedience,  and  zeal,  and 
devotedness  delightful.  Then  quench  not  the  heavenly  light,  counteract  not  the 
heavenly  impulse,  resist  not  the  Divine  nature,  but  yield  yourselves  unto  God,  by 
dying  unto  sin,  by  living  unto  God,  by  glorifying  God  with  your  bodies,  and  with 
your  spirits  which  are  God's.  IL  Christians,  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the 
dead,  are  to  yield  themselves  unto  God,  tjndeb  a  sense  or  Divine  favoub,  and 
WITH  sentiments  OF  oBATiTCDB  AND  JOT.  If  you  are  alive  from  the  dead,  it  is  all 
gain  and  no  loss.  How  much  do  you  owe  to  God  and  Christ,  and  the  riches  of  His 
grace  I  You  were  earthly,  sensual,  devilish ;  now  you  are  pure,  peaceable,  without 
partiality,  and  without  hypocrisy;  full  of  mercy  and  of  good  fruits.  Yon  were 
children  of  the  wicked  one ;  now  you  are  children  of  God.  Once  you  were  con- 
demned ;  now  there  is  no  condemnation  to  you.  You  are  now  the  children  of  God, 
and  the  inheritance  is  yours.  You  have  nothing,  however,  in  all  this  that  you  have 
not  received.  All  is  of  grace.  When  you  can  determine  what  you  owe  to  God, 
and  to  Christ,  and  His  grace ;  then  you  have  ascertained  your  obligations  to  God 
in  being  alive  from  the  dead.  Oh,  what  an  impelling,  absorbing  gratitude,  should 
influence  your  hearts,  and  souls,  your  thoughts,  your  words,  and  works.  IH. 
Christians,  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead,  are  to  yield  themselves  unto  God 

THAT   THEY   HAY  BE   INSTRUMENTAL  IN  CONVINCINa  OTHEBS   OF  THE  BSALITY  OF  THINGS 

HOT  SEEN.  You  are  designed  to  live  a  life  so  spiritual,  so  holy,  so  heavenly,  a  life 
which  so  marks  your  connection  with  eternity,  that  you  may,  by  that,  testify 
to  your  brethren,  and  save  their  souls  alive;  this  will  be  no  less  effioaoioos 
than  miracles,  and  signs,  and  wonders.  Your  own  personal  salvation  is  not 
the  only  thing  connected  with  religion  which  you  are  to  care  about,  and 
to  promote.  Higher  aims  are  to  be  yours;  for  you  are  designed  for  higher 
and  nobler  purposes.  You  are  to  show  forth  the  praises  of  Him  who  hath  called 
yoa  out  of  darkness  into  the  marvellous  light  of  the  gospel.  Yoa  are  to  be  to 
the  Lord  for  a  name;  for  an  everlasting  sign  that  shall  not  be  oat  off.  (AT. 
Jacluon,) 

Yer.  14.  For  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  yon. — Domineering  tin  (a  Lenten 
sermon): — There  are  different  states  of  "sin."  There  is  sin  latent,  and  fully 
manifest ;  there  is  sin  yon  are  striving  to  subdue,  and  sin  dominant.  It  is  con- 
cerning fhis  last  state  that  we  have  this  promise — "  Sin  shall  not  lord  it  over 
you."  And  there  is  a  state  beyond  this  when  the  sin  is  so  conquered  that  it  it 
actually  changed  into  grace.  A  besetting  sin,  a  characterising  virtue;  strong 
passions,  ardent  love ;  fear,  humility ;  credulity,  faith ;  weakness,  leaning  on  the 
strong.  Consider — I,  How  the  state  of  domineering  sin  is  fobmed.  1.  We  must 
never  forget  that  it  is  in  sin's  nature  to  grow.  Weeds  very  generally  grow  faster 
than  flowers.  And  this  is  the  process.  First,  an  empty  space ;  a  life  unfenced ; 
no  sense  of  danger ;  no  watch ;  no  self-distrust ;  no  trust  in  God.  Under  such 
conditions  "sin,"  in  some  form  or  other,  must  come  in  and  get  stronger  and 
stronger  and  stronger,  till  it  over-crops  and  over-shadows  the  whole  moral  being 
of  the  man.  2.  Sin  has  a  strange  power  of  hiding  itself,  partly  because  Satan 
can  "  turn  himself  into  an  angel  of  light,"  and  trace  everything  in  forms  of  beautiful 
colours,  and  partly  because  "  sin  "  warps  the  judgment  and  dims  the  eye.  And 
•till  more  it  hardens  the  heart  and  sears  the  conscience].    U.  How  rr  q  to  bb 


CBAP.  n.]  ROMANS.  gffl 

OTEBoouK.  I  will  suppose  the  ease  of  one  who  has  been  oonsoioas  of  the  growth 
of  some  "  sin  "  in  his  own  heart,  and  who  is  very  desirous  of  getting  rid  of  it. 
What  should  you  do  ?  1.  Thank  God  that  you  have  this  consciousness  and  desire. 
It  is  a  proof  that  the  Holy  Spirit  has  not  left  you.  2.  Claim  this  as  the  ground  of 
yoor  argument  with  God :  "  Lord,  Thou  hast  showed  me  my  sin,  and  made  it 
hatefuL  Now,  Lord,  complete  Thine  own  work."  3.  Having  said  this  to  God, 
attend  to  the  little  things.  Listen  for  the  still  small  voices,  and  act  out  at  once 
every  conviction  and  any  better  desire  which  God  has  given  you.  4.  Next,  have 
some  definite  work  in  hand  which  is  for  God's  service  and  Christ's  sake.  Impart 
what  you  feel  and  what  you  know.  By  warming  another's  heart,  you  best  warm 
your  own.  A  work  for  Christ  is  a  great  antagonism  to  a  domineering  sin.  6. 
Then  take  care  of  the  first  signs  of  declension  from  what  you  now  begin  to  do. 
Bemember  that  in  your  heart  there  is  a  great  danger  of  a  re-action  taking  place. 
6.  Do  not  be  discouraged  by  your  feeling  and  the  returning  of  besetting  sins.  A 
religious  life  is  a  campaign  ;  and  in  that  campaign  some  battles  will  be  victories, 
and  others  defeats.  The  great  principle  is  how  to  rally  after  defeat.  7.  Be  very 
oarefol  to  encourage  the  habit  of  silent  prayer  at  the  critical  moment,  when  yoa 
know  that  you  are  getting  into  danger,  when  you  feel  the  enemy  is  strong.  8. 
Bemember  that  spiritual  life  is  in  Christ.  He  is  the  life,  and  nothing  lives  but  a» 
it  is  in  onion  with  Him.  Then,  as  He  says,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 
9.  There  must  be  the  constant  inward  breathing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  you.  H» 
most  prompt,  guide,  strengthen,  give  both  the  will  and  the  power.  The  only  way 
to  get  rid  of  any  •'  sin  "  is  to  put  God  In  His  right  place.  (<7.  Vaughan,  M.A.} 
Sin  dethroned  : — I.  The  Bvn,  which  we  abb  encoubaqed  to  besist.  The  dominion 
of  sin.  St.  Paul  represents  sin  as  a  mighty  usurper,  exercising  absolute  dominion 
over  the  sinner,  taking  the  heart  for  his  throne,  and  the  members  for  bis  slaves 
(ohap.  v.  20,  21 ;  vi.  12,  20).  By  a  successful  stratagem  sin  obtained  the  supremacy 
OTer  our  first  father ;  and  his  posterity,  while  they  remain  in  their  natural  state, 
have  never  been  able  to  break  the  yoke  (1  John  v.  19).  This  dreadful  dominion  of 
■in  is  promoted — 1.  By  ignorance  of  God's  will  In  some  countries  this  is  almost 
total ;  m  ours  it  is  partial,  and  in  a  great  measure  wilful  (chap.  i.  28 ;  John  iii.  19). 
2.  By  our  corrupt  passions  and  sensual  propensities,  which  will  be  gratified,  though 
health,  reputation,  yea,  life  itself,  are  at  stake  (Job.  xv.  16 ;  Isa.  v.  18).  3.  By  the 
worldly  interests  of  men,  to  which  they  readily  give  the  decided  preference,  when 
they  happen  to  clash  with  their  duty  to  God.  Thus,  for  the  sake  of  the  world,  the 
guests  invited  to  the  gospel-feast,  with  one  consent,  desired  to  be  excused ;  and  the 
rich  man  departed  from  Jesus  full  of  sorrow.  4.  By  the  powerful  temptations  of 
Satan.  5.  By  the  countenance  and  example  of  the  multitade.  Sinners  readily 
follow  the  multitude  to  do  evil.  The  broad  road  that  leads  to  destruction  ia 
thronged  with  travellers.  IL  The  means  affobdeo  fob  oub  encodbaqement  in 
BB8I8TINO  SIN :  "  for  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace."  1.  Grace  is  here 
opposed  to  the  law,  and  signifies  the  gospel  (John  i.  17 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  1 ;  Acts  xiv.  3). 
2.  The  law  was  a  system  of  just,  but  awful  severity,  and  God  had  wise  and  holy 
designs  in  the  establishment  of  it  (chap.  v.  20).  It  was  introduced  among  the 
Jews,  not  that  they  might  be  justified  by  it,  but  that,  by  discovering  how  far  they 
fell  short  of  the  obedience  it  required,  they  might  be  more  deeply  impressed  with  a 
sense  of  their  abounding  sins ;  and  thus  it  became  a  schoolmaster  to  lead  them  to 
Christ  (Gal.  iii.  24),  and  that  so,  where  sin  had  abounded,  grace  might  much  more 
abound  (chap.  v.  20).  3.  Now,  believers  in  Christ  are  "  not  under  the  law  " ;  they 
are  "  dead  to  the  law  "  (chap.  vii.  4) ;  they  are  "  deUvered  from  the  law  "  (chap, 
▼ii  6).  By  these  expressions  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  they  are  discharged  from 
obedience  (1  Cor.  21) ;  but  they  are  no  longer  under  the  law  considered  as  a 
covenant,  the  terms  of  which  are,  ••  the  man  that  doeth  them  "  (all  and  every  one 
perfectly)  "  shall  Uve  in  them"  (Gal.  iii.  12).  Christ  hath  fulfilled  all  righteous- 
ness for  His  people  (chap.  x.  4).  Being  accounted  righteous  through  faith  in 
Christ,  they  are  redeemed  from  the  curse  of  the  law  (chap.  viii.  1,  2).  4.  Christians 
possess  greater  advantages  for  the  destruction  of  sin  than  those  under  the  law.  (1) 
While  the  law  justly  demanded  obedience,  it  afforded  no  aid  for  the  performance  of 
ii.  Nor  could  it  encourage  any  one  to  hope  for  pardon  in  case  of  disobedience. 
The  case  is  now  altered.  We  are  not  called  to  "  Mount  Sinai  "  to  hear  the  terrible 
threatenings  of  the  law ;  but  we  are  come  to  "  Mount  Sion,"  where  grace  and 
mercy  are  published.  (2)  The  law  included  the  substance  of  all  the  holy  precepts 
now  contained  in  the  New  Testament ;  but  in  the  gospel  they  are  expanded  and 
fall  blown,  and  appear  in  all  the  beauty  of  holiness.     (3)  There  is  a  more  abundant 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  lU 

measure  of  the  Holy  Spirit  poured  out  npon  the  people  of  God,  by  which  they  not 
only  attain  a  clearer  knowledge  of  His  will,  bat  a  larger  degree  of  His  graciona 
assistance  in  overcoming  sin  (Heb.  viii.  10).  (4)  All  grace  is  treasured  up  in  Jesos 
for  the  nse  of  His  people ;  and  of  this  fulness  they  may  receive,  daily,  grace  for 
grace  (John  i.  16 ;  Phil.  iv.  13 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  9).  (5)  The  love  of  Christ  is  another 
grand  assistant  in  our  victory  over  sin.  Love  is  tne  most  strong  and  generous  of 
all  the  passions,  and  the  hardest  service  becomes  easy  when  this  prevails  (2  Cor. 
V.  14).  (6)  The  grace  of  the  gospel  affords  yet  further  aid  in  this  great  conflict  by 
the  cheering  views  it  presents  of  everlasting  glory  (chap.  viii.  31 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  65 ; 
1  John  iii.  3).  Conclusion :  1.  Who  can  behold  the  general  dominion  of  sin  over 
the  world  without  the  deepest  concern  (Jer.  ix.  1).  2.  Having  learned  that  no 
means  are  effectual  to  stop  the  progress  of  sin  but  those  afforded  by  the  gospel 
of  grace,  let  this  serve  to  render  the  gospel  more  precious.  8.  This  subject 
effectually  refutes  that  vile  slander  which  is  so  unjustly  cast  on  the  doctrines  of 
grace,  that  they  are  conducive  to  sin  and  unfriendly  to  holiness.  (G.  Burder.) 
Believers  free  from  the  dominion  of  sin : — We  have  here — I.  A  pbculiab  position. 
"  Ye  are  not  under  the  law."  1.  We  no  longer  dread  the  curse  of  the  law  which 
those  who  are  under  the  law  may  well  do.  The  careless  try  to  shake  off  the 
thought,  but  still  more  or  less  it  disturbs  them ;  but  when  once  awakened  the 
dread  of  punishment  fills  them  with  terror.  Now  believers  have  no  such  fear,  for 
oar  sin  was  laid  upon  Jesus,  who  "  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law, 
being  made  a  curse  for  us."  2.  We  no  longer  drudge  in  unwilling  obedience, 
seeking  to  reach  a  certain  point  of  merit.  The  man  under  the  law  who  is  awakened 
labours  as  men  who  tug  at  the  oar  to  escape  from  a  tempest.  But,  alas  I  he  has 
no  power  to  attain  even  to  his  own  ideal.  His  servile  works  are  ill  done,  and  fail 
to  yield  him  peace.  Now  Christ  has  fulfilled  the  law  for  us,  and  we  rest  in  that 
finished  work.  We  now  obey  out  of  love,  and  delight  in  the  law  after  the  inner 
man.  3.  We  are  no  longer  uncertain  as  to  the  continuance  of  Divine  love.  Under 
the  law  no  man's  standing  can  be  secure,  since  by  a  single  sin  he  may  forfeit  his 
position.  But  the  merit  of  Christ  is  always  a  constant  and  abiding  quantity  ;  if, 
therefore,  we  rest  thereon,  our  foundation  is  always  secure.  "  If,  when  we  were 
enemies,"  &c.  4.  We  are  no  longer  afraid  of  the  last  great  day.  Judgment  is  a 
terrible  word  to  those  who  are  hoping  to  save  themselves,  for  their  doings  are  sure 
to  be  found  wanting.  But  judgment  has  no  terror  in  it  to  a  behever,  *'  Bold  shall 
I  stand  in  that  great  day,"  <fec.  6.  We  have  no  slavish  dread  of  God.  The  soul 
onder  the  law  stands  as  the  Israelites  did,  far  off  from  the  mountafa,  with  a  bound 
set  between  themselves  and  the  glory  of  God.  But  we  have  access  with  boldness  to 
the  throne  of  grace,  and  we  delight  to  avail  ourselves  of  it.  "  Perfect  love  has  cast 
out  fear."  "  Stand  fast,  therefore,  in  the  liberty,"  &c.  II.  A  special  assurance. 
"  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you."  1.  This  is  a  very  needful  assurance. 
(1)  All  around  us  we  see  sin's  operations  and  deadly  results ;  and  we  cry  in  alarm, 
"  It  will  surely  drag  me  down  one  of  these  days,"  but  the  dread  fear  is  removed  by 
the  assurance,  "  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you."  (2)  Alas,  the  evil  assails 
ourselves,  and  we  are  apt  to  be  cast  down.  Here  the  sweet  assurance  cheers  us — 
"  Resist  the  devil,  and  he  will  flee  from  you."  (3)  Sometimes  sin  forces  its  way 
into  our  souls  and  rouses  our  inward  evil  to  an  awful  degree.  Readers  of  the 
"  Holy  War  "  will  remember  how  Diabolus  besieged  Mansoul  after  it  had  been 
occupied  by  Immanuel.  After  many  battles  and  cunning  plots  the  enemy  entered 
into  the  city,  fiUed  all  the  streets  with  the  yells  of  his  followers,  and  polluted  the 
whole  place ;  but  yet  he  could  not  take  the  castle,  which  held  out  for  ImmanueL 
So  sin  may  vex  you  and  thrust  itself  upon  you,  but  it  cannot  become  your  heart's 
lord.  (4)  Sometimes  sin  prevails,  and  we  are  forced  in  anguish  to  confess  that  we 
have  fallen  beneath  its  power.  Still  a  temporary  defeat  is  not  sufQcient  to  effect  a 
total  subjugation.  Though  the  believer  fall  he  shall  rise  again.  (5)  There  are 
times  when  we  feel  greatly  our  danger ;  our  feet  have  almost  gone,  our  steps  have 
well-nigh  slipped  ;  then  how  sweetly  doth  this  assurance  come,  "  The  Lord  is  able 
to  keep  you  from  falling."  2.  This  assurance  secures  us  from  the  danger  of  being 
ander  the  absolute  sway  of  sin.  What  is  meant  by  this  ?  (1)  There  are  men  who 
live  in  sin,  and  yet  they  do  not  appear  to  know  it ;  but  you  shall  be  instructed,  so 
that  when  you  sin  you  shall  be  well  aware  of  it.  (2)  Many  men  live  in  gross  sin 
and  are  not  ashamed,  they  are  at  ease  in  it ;  but  God  has  so  changed  your  nature 
by  His  grace  that  when  you  sin  you  shall  be  like  a  fish  on  dry  land,  yon  sball  be 
out  of  your  element,  and  long  to  get  into  a  right  state  again.  (3)  An  ungodly  man 
loves  Bin,  bat  as  for  you,  you  shall  bate  yourself  to  thii:^  yon  ever  consented  to  ita 


«HAr.  TZ.]  ROMANS.  COf 

eolioitatioas.  8.  This  assurance  is  oonfirmed  bj  the  context — "  Sin  shall  not  hava 
dominion  over  you,"  because  you  are  dead  to  it  by  virtue  of  your  union  to  Ohrist. 
Besides,  you  live  in  Christ  in  newness  of  life  by  reason  of  His  living  in  you.  Yoa 
are  bound  for  victory  and  you  shall  have  it.  III.  A  bemabkable  reason.  "  For  ye 
are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace."  Those  who  are  under  the  law  must 
always  be  under  the  dominion  of  sin,  because — 1.  The  law  condemns  immediately 
upon  transgression,  and  affords  no  hope  and  no  encouragement.  It  is  not  so  with 
those  who  are  under  grace,  for  they  are  freely  forgiven.  The  amazing  love  of  God 
when  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  creates  a  desire  for  better  things,  and  what  the  law 
could  not  do  grace  accomplishes.  2.  The  law  drives  to  despair,  and  because  there 
is  no  hope  the  sinner  will  often  plunge  into  iniquity.  The  child  of  God  saith, 
♦'  God,  for  Christ's  sake,  hath  cast  my  sins  behind  His  back,  and  I  am  saved.  Now, 
for  the  love  I  bear  His  name,  I  will  serve  Him  with  all  my  might."  3.  The  law 
rouses  the  opposition  of  the  heart.  There  are  many  things  which  people  never 
think  of  doing  till  they  are  forbidden.  Lock  up  a  closet  and  say  to  your  children* 
"  Never  enter  that  closet,  nor  even  look  into  the  keyhole,"  and  they  who  have  never 
wanted  to  look  into  the  dingy  old  corner  before  now  pine  to  inspect  it.  Law,  by 
reason  of  our  unruly  nature,  creates  sin.  But  when  we  are  under  grace  we  love 
God  for  His  love  to  us,  and  labour  to  please  Him  in  all  things.  4.  The  law  affords 
no  actual  help.  All  it  does  is  to  say,  "  Thou  shalt,"  and  "  Thou  shalt  not  "  ;  but 
grace  brings  the  Holy  Spirit  into  the  soul  to  work  in  us  holy  affections  and  a  hatred 
of  sin,  and  hence  what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh, 
grace  accomphshes  for  us  by  its  own  almighty  power.  6.  The  law  inspires  no  love, 
and  love  after  all  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  Law  is  hard  and  cold,  like  the  two 
tables  of  Moses.  Look  at  the  legalist ;  he  is  a  bondslave,  and  nothing  more.  But 
grace  fires  a  man  with  love  to  God  and  enthusiasm  for  holiness.  The  most  pleasing 
service  in  the  world  is  that  which  is  done  from  motives  of  affection  and  not  for 
wages.  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.)  The  upper  hand : — I  shall  use  the  text  as — I.  A  test. 
Has  sin  dominion  over  you  ?  If  so,  then  you  are  not  a  believer.  Try  your  own 
selves  by  this  test.  You  may  be  under  the  dominion  of  sin,  while  successfully 
resisting  some  forms  of  it ;  but  if  there  be  but  one  sin  that  usurps  authority,  then 
sin  has  dominion  over  you.  Satan  does  not  send  to  all  men  the  same  temptations. 
The  sin  is  adapted  to  the  constitution.  1.  Some  are  under  the  dominion  of  sin 
in  the  form  of  anger.  Those  who  have  a  quick,  hot  temper,  are  like  the  small  pot 
that  quickly  boils  over  and  scalds  terribly.  There  are  others  whose  temper  is 
rather  slower  in  coming  up,  but  when  it  has  once  risen  it  will  last  long,  and  make 
them  sulky  and  unforgiving.  Now  if  any  man  says,  "  My  temper  is  so  bad  that  I 
cannot  curb  it,"  that  temper  has  got  dominion  over  him,  and,  according  to  my  text, 
he  is  not  a  Christian.  If  the  grace  of  God  does  not  help  us  to  bridle  that  lion  that 
is  within  us,  what  has  it  done  for  us  ?  2.  The  propensity  of  others  is  to  murmur. 
I  know  some  who  grumble  at  everything.  Trade  is  always  bad  with  them,  and  as 
for  their  meals — instead  of  being  thankful  to  God  they  are  perpetually  finding  fault. 
Their  very  garments  are  never  to  their  minds.  The  weather  never  suits  them. 
Now  if  any  man  murmurs,  he  may  be  a  Christian  needing  to  be  purged  of  this 
defilement,  but  if  you  say,  "  I  cannot  help  murmuring,"  then  it  has  got  dominion 
over  you.  You  must  wage  war  against  it,  for  if  you  are  a  child  of  God  this  sin 
shall  not  have  dominion  over  you.  3.  With  others  the  reigning  sin  is  covetous- 
ness.  I  do  not  say  that  they  should  be  indifferent  to  business,  but  why  so 
penurious?  "  Covetousness  is  idolatry."  Of  course  you  may  fall  into  fits  of 
covetousness  and  yet  be  Christians,  but  if  you  are  habitually  covetous  then 
your  covetousness  has  got  dominion  over  you,  and  according  to  the  text  you  cannot 
be  a  child  of  God.  Do  then  as  the  good  man  did  who  had  resolved  to  give  a  pound 
to  some  good  cause,  and  the  devil  tempted  him  not  to  do  it.  Said  he,  "  I  will  give 
two  now."  The  devil  said,  "  Nay,  you  will  be  ruining  yourself."  Said  he,  "  I  will 
give  four."  Another  temptation  came,  and  he  said,  "  I  will  give  eight ;  and  if  the 
devil  does  not  leave  off  tempting  me  I  do  not  know  to  what  lengths  I  shall  go,  but 
I  will  be  master  of  him  somehow."  Do  anything  rather  than  let  the  golden  calf 
run  over  you.  4.  Perhaps  the  sin  of  pride  may  be  in  the  ascendant.  Now,  I  do 
not  say  that  you  are  no  Christian  because  you  occasionally  forget  the  lowliness  and 
modesty  that  become  you,  but  I  do  say  that  if  you  tell  me  that  you  cannot  help 
being  proud,  then  pride  is  your  master  and  Christ  is  not.  5.  The  dominant  sin  of 
many  is  sloth.  Is  there  any  reigning  sin  in  your  hearts  ?  Never  mind  what  it  is. 
Then  Christ  cannot  be  in  your  soul,  for  "When  He  comes.  He  comes  to  reign." 
II.  A  FBouiBB.    It  does  not  say  that  sin  shall  not  dwell  in  yoo.    In  the  holiest 


H%  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  ft 

there  is  enoagh  sin  to  destroy  if  it  were  not  for  the  grace  of  Ood,  which  reetrsiiu 
its  deadly  operation.  Nor  are  yon  told  that  yoa  shall  never  fall  into  sin.  Need  I 
mention  snch  as  David  ?  The  security  is  that  "  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over 
you."  The  fair  and  lovely  dove  may  fall  into  the  mire,  but  the  mire  has  not  any 
dominion  over  it ;  but  let  the  swine  go  there,  and  it  rolls  in  it,  for  the  mire  has 
dominion  over  its  nature.  Notice — 1.  A  few  of  the  general  reasons  for  the  promise. 
Sin  cannot  get  confirmed  dominion  over  the  child  of  God  because — (1)  God  hath 
promised  that  it  shall  not.  (2)  Ton  belong  to  Christ,  and  He  bought  you  at  such  a 
price  that  He  will  never  lose  you.  (3)  The  Holy  Spirit  has  come  to  dwell  in  you. 
(4)  The  Spirit  has  begun  a  good  work  in  you,  and  it  is  His  rule  never  to  leave  His 
work  unfinished.  (5)  There  is  in  every  Christian  a  new  nature  which  cannot  die 
and  which  cannot  sin — "  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life,"  "  ft 
living,  incorruptible  seed,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever."  Now,  if  this  seied  be 
incorruptible,  then  sin  cannot  corrupt  it;  if  it  abideth  for  ever,  then  sin  cannot 
expel  it.  (6)  Your  will  is  not  the  slave  of  sin.  Ton  sin,  but  if  you  could  you  never 
would  sin.  The  bent  and  bias  of  your  mind  axe  towards  righteousness.  Now,  if 
such  be  tiie  case,  sin  can  never  get  dominion  over  your  whole  nature,  for  the 
sovereignty  of  all  your  manhood  lies  with  Him  who  possesses  the  mastery  of  your 
will  and  your  afifections.  Ton  know  how  Bunyan  represents  Feeble-mind  in  the 
oave  of  Giant  Slaygood.  The  giant  had  picked  him  up  on  the  road,  and  taken  him 
home  to  devour  him  at  his  leisure ;  but  Feeble-mind  said  he  had  one  comfort,  for 
he  had  heard  that  the  giant  could  never  pick  the  bones  of  any  man  who  was 
brought  there  against  his  will.  2.  The  reason  given  in  the  text — "  For  ye  are  not 
Duder  the  law,  but  under  grace."  There  are  two  principles  in  the  world  that  are 
supposed  to  promote  holiness— law  and  grace.  (1)  It  is  a  popular  notion  that  if 
you  tell  men  their  duty,  prove  the  authority  of  the  law-giver,  and  show  the  penalty 
of  wrong-doing — this  will  give  a  just  bias  to  their  inclination,  and  help  to  keep 
their  conduct  right.  All  history  goes  to  show  that  this  is  without  proof.  Those 
who  are  under  the  law  are  always  under  sin.  The  moment  we  are  commanded  not 
to  do  a  thing,  such  is  our  perverse  disposition,  we  try  to  do  it.  Even  the  terrible 
penalties  of  hell  have  failed  to  inspire  fear  or  promote  holiness.  When  was  there 
ever  so  much  sheep-stealing,  and  theft,  and  highway  robbery,  and  forgery,  as  when 
men  were  hanged  for  these  things?  (2)  There  is  another  principle, however,  which 
is  a  main  instigator  to  righteousness — the  principle  of  grace  and  faith.  Grace  does 
not  say  to  a  man,  "  You  must  do  this  or  you  shall  be  punished,"  but  it  says  this, 
"  God,  for  Christ's  sake,  has  forgiven  you ;  you  are  saved ;  heaven  is  yours ;  now, 
for  the  love  you  bear  to  God,  who  has  done  this  for  you,  what  will  yoa  do  for 
Him  7  "  A  constraining  power,  strong  as  death,  has  availed  to  consecrate  the  lives 
of  those  who  have  felt  the  sacred  spell.  III.  An  encouhagement.  1.  There  are 
not  a  few  who  are  strangers  to  the  holy  jealousy  which  keeps  a  watch  over  the  heart 
and  a  guard  upon  the  lips,  lest  they  should  sin.  Cultivate  this  jealousy ;  be  very 
watchful,  and  let  the  text  animate  you.  2.  There  are  some  who  are  consciously 
very  weak.  Be  encouraged.  Sin  shall  no  more  get  dominion  over  the  weak  than 
over  the  strong.  The  spark  shall  not  be  quenched,  nor  the  braised  reed  broken. 
8.  There  are  those  who  are  fighting  with  some  great  sin.  Put  this  cool  water  to 
your  lips  and  be  refreshed.  You  shall  conquer  yet ;  fight  on  I  4.  There  are  those 
who  have  been  lately  converted.  Your  chains  are  broken,  but  there  are  some  links 
that  are  left  hanging,  and  sometimes  they  will  catch  hold  of  a  nail,  and  you  will 
think  you  are  tied  up  again.  But  if  you  have  given  your  heart  to  Christ  you  shall 
yet  be  helped.  6.  Perhaps  I  address  a  backslider.  Do  you  now  hate  your  sin  ? 
Do  you  cry  unto  God  for  mercy,  and  rest  in  the  work  of  Jesus  ?  If  so,  be  of  good 
courage  still,  you  shall  be  saved.  (Ibid.)  For  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  bnt 
trnder  grace. — Orace  the  deliverer  from  the  bondage  of  sin: — 1.  Man  is  constituted 
to  obey  1  Thus  constituted,  his  nature  was  provided  for.  Upon  his  first  entrance 
on  the  stage  of  being  he  was  placed  under  the  dominion  of  holiness.  But  man 
severed  himself  from  God.  In  the  first  act  of  disobedience,  however,  he  was 
obedient  to  Satan,  and  at  every  step  in  his  subsequent  history  we  find  him  stiU 
under  his  dominion.  2.  Man  has  never  been  able  to  free  himself  from  this 
bondage.  Philosophy  has  not  helped  him ;  and  our  text  declares  law  has  not. 
But  we  are  to  consider  that  which  does.  Notice — I.  The  aspect  of  snr  as  a 
iwsoNiON.  1.  The  willing  character  of  it.  The  consciousness  of  humanity  ever 
charges  itself  with  voluntary  submission  to  such  a  dominion.  Moreover,  the  Bible 
declares  that  man  chooses  it.  2.  Its  deceitful  character.  Having  the  "onder- 
ptanding  darkened."    Satan  promised  onr  first  parents  to  be  as  gods — he  meani 


eBAT.  n.]  ROMANS.  iii 

them  to  be  the  opposite.  3.  Its  gradual  character.  Like  the  conquest  of  a 
eonntry,  step  by  step  new  territory  is  won,  and  dominion  gained  in  the  heart  of  ii, 

4.  Its  cruel  character.  All  its  servants  are  slaves,  and  are  led  on  to  disaster  and 
death.  The  cruelty  of  this  dominion  is  seen  in  the  increase  of  evil  desires,  and  the 
diminution  of  pleasures  to  be  derived  from  them ;  every  desire  ultimately  ending 
in  dissatisfaction  and  pain.  II.  The  imabllitt  of  law  to  fbee  fsou  this 
DomNioN.  1.  Law  manifests  sin.  "  By  law  comes  knowledge  of  sin."  Think  of 
the  flame  from  the  volcano  revealing  cities  and  plains  in  the  far-oS  distance.  So 
law  enlightens  conscience,  casts  its  glare  into  the  innermost  recesses  of  the  whited 
■epolchre,  and  discovers  a  dead  soul.  2.  Law  causes  disquietude  about  sin, 
■howing  its  character  and  consequences.  3.  Law  revives  the  strength  of  sin  (chap. 
vii.  8).  III.  The  delivebiko  poweb  of  obace.  1.  The  law  which  condemns  sin 
is  satisfied.  We  are  delivered  from  sin  as  a  curse.  Christ  bare  our  transgressions. 
This  curse  had  dominion  over  us — made  us  fear  death,  judgment,  &o.  2.  "  The 
law  of  the  Spirit  of  Life  "  is  imparted  to  us.  "  Nevertheless  I  live,  yet  not  I,  bat 
CSirist  Uveth  in  me."  Sin  may  exist,  but  it  cannot  reign  in  the  heart  of  a  Christian. 
(See  preceding  context.)    Christ  has  promised  that  this  Spirit  shall  quicken  life  in 

05.  Let  us  escape  from  the  slavery  of  sin,  and  become  the  servants  of  righteous- 
ness, and  "yield  ourselves  "  unto  Christ.  (T,  G.  Uorton.)  Believers  not  under 
the  law  but  under  grace  : — I.  They  abe  not  undeb  the  law.  1.  The  law  of  which 
the  apostle  is  speaking  is  not  of  man's  making,  but  is  the  law  of  God ;  and  is  unlike 
any  human  law.  Note,  e.g. — (1)  Its  universality.  Man's  laws  are  confined  to 
particular  governments  and  countries.  But  the  law  of  God  is  meant  for  every 
ereature  He  has  made.  (2)  The  length  to  which  it  goes.  Human  laws  lay  down 
rnles  for  the  conduct  of  the  outward  man,  and  even  then  do  not  take  notice  of  every 
instance  of  iniquity.  But  God's  commandment  is  "  exceeding  broad."  It  passes 
sentence  on  the  very  thoughts,  and  makes  no  allowances  whatever  for  sin.  Sins 
which  we  are  apt  to  look  upon  as  small  and  pardonable  are  in  God's  sight  without 
excuse.  (3)  The  sentence  which  it  passes.  Human  laws  make  great  distinctions 
between  one  crime  and  another.  God's  law  makes  no  differences,  and  its  sentence 
is,  in  every  instance,  death.  2.  The  state  of  those  for  whom  this  law  was  made. 
This  law  is  made  for  man.  Is  man  then  a  fulfiller  of  this  law  ?  It  is  an  awful 
tmth  that,  so  far  from  being  frightened  out  of  any  evil  practice  by  knowing  that  it 
is  forbidden  by  the  law  of  God,  his  knowing  it  to  be  forbidden  makes  him  feel  a 
greater  relish  for  it,  and  so  much  the  more  desirous  to  commit  it  (chap.  vii.  8).  3. 
Believers  are  not  under  the  law.  They  are  not  under — (1)  The  curse  and  condem- 
nation  of  the  law  (Gal.  iii.  13  ;  CoL  ii.  14 ;  chap.  viii.  33,  34).  (2)  The  law  is  "  the 
covenant  of  works  " — a  dispensation  in  which  he  is  taught  to  look  for  acceptance 
with  God  as  the  consequence  of  his  own  merits.  The  law  of  God  says,  '*  He  that 
doeth  these  things  shall  live  by  them."  Now,  the  Saviour  does  not  say,  "Earn 
bat  heaven  by  your  works — establish  a  righteousness  of  your  own,  and  yon  shall 
purchase  heaven  by  it."  No ;  but  He  says,  "  I  have  been  your  Law-fulfiller,  and 
My  righteousness  is  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe."  H.  The  belieteb 
IB  UNDEB  obacb.  1.  He  is  "  under  "  the  "  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  He 
is  a  man  whom  the  free  and  undeserved  love  of  his  Bedeemer  has  chosen  unto  life 
etemaL  He  is  placed  under  a  dispensation  in  which  all  he  has,  and  all  he  hopes 
to  have,  are  freely  given  him,  "  not  for  works  of  righteousness  which  he  has  done," 
but  as  "  the  gift  of  God,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  2.  He  is  under  grace, 
because  the  grace  of  the  Divine  Spirit  enters  in  and  dwells  in  him.  His  soul  is 
made  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  illuminated,  sanctified,  and  comforted 
by  that  glorious  inhabitant.  III.  The  coksequence  of  beino  not  umdeb  the  law, 
BUT  UNDEB  OBACE.  "Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,"  because — 1.  "The 
love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  your  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto 
yoa."  A  sense  of  the  unspeakable  mercy  which  our  Lord  has  shown  us  begets  such 
lively  feelings  of  gratitude  and  love  that  to  delight  in  that  which  God  abhors 
becomes  a  thing  impossible.  Our  heart  bums,  on  the  other  hand,  with  holy 
fervour  to  render  our  redeemed  life  unto  the  Lord  (2  Cor.  v.  16).  2.  You  are  a 
partaker  of  a  new  nature  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  Sin  is  not  indeed  utterly  destroyed,  but  it 
has  no  longer  the  dominion.  {A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  Grace,  not  law,  the  motive  for 
Tioliness  : — Wherein  lies  the  force  of  the  reason  advanced  ?  What  is  there  in  the 
eovenant  of  grace,  as  set  in  contrast  with  the  covenant  of  works,  on  which  to  rest 
the  above  declaration  ?  At  first  sight  we  might  be  apt  to  suppose  (arguing  from  the 
tendencies  and  susceptibilities  of  the  human  constitution)  that  men  would  be  more 
energetic  after  holiness  if  left  to  earn  heaven  for  themselves  than  ii  invited  to 


Jll  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaj.  t«, 

accept  it  as  a  gift.  But  on  second  thoughts  this  will  not  be  found  so.  Look  at — 
I.  The  covenant  of  wobks.  1.  As  it  requires  perfect  obedience  without  containing 
any  provision  for  pardon,  mediation,  or  escape,  will  it  not  produce  despair  and  even 
recklessness  to  fallen  beings  in  whom  there  is  a  tendency  to  sin,  and  a  decay  in  all 
the  powers  of  resistance,  and  who  at  the  best  can  only  give  an  imperfect  obedience, 
which  is  of  no  avail?  2.  Such  is  the  constitution  of  our  nature  that  the  prospect 
of  success  is  indispensable  for  vigour  and  exertion.  Place  me,  therefore,  under  a 
covenant  of  works — shut  out  from  me  all  notices  of  a  Eedeemer — read  me  that,  by 
keeping  them,  I  may  insure  myself  a  blessed  immortality — and  I  shall  either  fold 
my  arms  in  inactivity  or  resign  myself  to  my  sinfulness.  Why  mortify  imperious 
desires,  why  deny  craving  appetites  in  the  face  of  a  moral  certainty  that  I  could  not 
come  up  to  what  the  law  demanded,  and  that,  if  I  failed,  I  was  irretrievably  con- 
demned? No,  there  must  be  some  provision  in  the  case  of  failure,  else  will  there 
never  be  any  effort  to  obey.  There  must  be  room  for  second  thoughts  for  repent- 
ance, otherwise  will  the  law,  with  all  its  rewards,  be  set  at  nought  as  unadapted  to 
the  beings  on  whom  it  is  imposed.  II.  The  covenant  of  obace.  1.  There  is  an 
energy  of  motive  of  the  most  powerful  character.  There  is  more— immeasurably 
more — to  lead  to  the  hatred  of  sin  and  the  striving  after  holiness  in  the  fact  that 
Christ  died  for  me  than  in  a  thousand  statute  books  with  multiplied  enactments 
and  many  rewards.  Only  let  this  fact  seat  itself  in  the  soul,  and  it  must  excite 
such  love  to  the  Being  who  bought  us  with  His  blood — such  abhorrence  of  the  sin 
which  caused  that  blood  to  be  shed — as  will  urge  a  man  to  exert  every  power  that 
he  may  not  crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh.  And  as  he  gathers  all  his  strength  to 
the  overcoming  of  evil,  ur^ed  by  the  freeness  of  salvation  as  proffered  to  him — 
every  blessing  reminding  him  of  Calvary,  every  promise  being  eloquent  of  the  great 
propitiation — and  thus  the  whole  Christian  system  exciting,  in  all  its  workings, 
recollections  which  make  him  shun  even  the  appearance  of  evil — oh,  will  he  not 
furnish  the  strongest  practical  evidence  that  St.  Paul  advanced  an  argument  which 
made  good  his  proposition  when  he  gave,  "  Ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under 
grace  "  as  his  reason  for  saying,  "  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you  "  ?  2.  The 
words  are  also  a  promise  or  prophecy.  (1)  They  point  to  Divine  assistance.  They 
assure  us  of  the  aids  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  mortification  of  evil  passions,  the 
abandonment  of  evil  pursuits,  and  in  the  attainment  of  holiness  and  righteousness. 
(2)  Hence  the  gospel  makes  victory  possible — nay,  sure — exciting  the  spirit  and 
then  providing  the  means  of  resistance.  It  does  all  which  the  moral  combatant 
can  need ;  so  that  he  who  would  have  succumbed  at  once,  feeling  the  case  to  be 
desperate,  had  he  been  brought  under  the  law,  girds  himself  to  the  task  of  the 
resisting  of  sin  because  brought  under  grace.     (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Ver.  15.  What  then  7  Shall  we  sin,  because  we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under 
grace  7 — The  doctrines  of  grace  do  not  lead  to  sin : — 1.  Grace  is  the  soul  of  the 
gospel :  without  it  the  gospel  is  dead.  Grace  is  the  music  of  the  gospel ;  without 
it  the  gospel  is  sUent  as  to  all  comfort.  From  the  "  A  "  to  the  "  Z  "  in  the  heavenly 
alphabet  everything  in  salvation  is  all  of  free  favour,  nothing  of  merit.  •'  By  grace 
are  ye  saved  through  faith,"  <fec.  2.  No  sooner  is  this  doctrine  set  forth,  however, 
than  men  begin  to  cavil  at  it ;  it  is  so  humbling  to  human  pride.  God  alone  is 
exalted  in  the  sovereignty  of  His  mercy ;  this  is  not  pleasant  to  the  great  minda  of 
our  philosophers  and  the  broad  phylacteries  of  our  morahsts.  Straightway  comes 
the  objection  that  such  doctrine  must  lead  to  licentiousness.  3.  Now  I  admit  that 
some  turned  the  grace  of  God  into  lascivionsness ;  but  cannot  every  truth  be 
perverted  ?  Is  there  not  an  almost  infinite  ingenuity  in  wicked  men  for  making 
evil  out  of  good  ?  But  let  us  act  like  rational  men.  We  do  not  find  fault  with 
ropes  because  men  have  hanged  themselves;  nor  do  we  destroy  the  wares  of 
Sheffield  because  edged  tools  are  the  murderer's  instruments.  4.  Looking  back  in 
history  I  see  upon  its  pages  a  refutation  of  the  oft-repeated  calumny.  Who  were 
the  men  that  held  these  doctrines  most  firmly  ?  Men  like  Owen,  Charnock,  Manton, 
Howe,  and  Cromwell.  What  kind  of  men  were  these  ?  Every  historian  will  tell 
you  that  the  greatest  fault  was  that  they  were  too  precise  for  their  generation,  so 
that  they  were  called  Puritans.  And  if  we  are  ever  to  see  a  godly  England  we  must 
have  a  gospelised  England.  The  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  promotes  real  holi- 
ness. I.  The  salvation  which  it  brings  is  salvation  fbom  the  poweb  of  sdj. 
What  we  mean  by  salvation  is  deliverance  from  the  love  of  habit  and  desire  of 
sin.  Now  if  that  boon  is  the  gift  of  Divine  grace,  in  what  way  will  it  produce  sin  ? 
The  worse  men  are  the  more  gladly  would  we  see  them  embracing  this  truth,  for 


our.  TL]  ROMANS.  518 

ihey  most  need  it.  n.  Its  pbinciplb  of  love  has  been  found  to  possess  tbbt 
OBEAT  POWEB  ovEB  MEN.  Id  the  iDfancj  of  histoij  nations  dream  that  crime  can 
be  put  down  by  severity,  but  experience  corrects  the  error.  Our  forefathers  dreaded 
forgery,  and  made  it  a  capital  offence.  Yet  the  constant  use  of  the  gallows  was 
never  sufficient  to  stamp  out  the  crime.  But  some  offences  have  almost  ceased 
when  the  penalty  has  been  lightened.  1.  Love  makes  sin  infamous.  If  one  should 
rob  another  it  would  be  sufficiently  bad ;  but  suppose  a  man  robbed  a  friend  who 
had  helped  him  often  when  he  was  in  need,  every  one  would  say  that  his  crime  was 
most  disgraceful.  2.  Love  has  a  great  constraining  power  towards  the  highest 
form  of  virtue.  Deeds  to  which  a  man  could  not  be  compelled  on  the  ground  of 
law,  men  have  cheerfully  done  because  of  love.  Would  our  brave  seamen  man  the 
lifeboat  to  obey  an  Act  of  Parliament?  Kemember  chap.  v.  7,  8.  Goodness  wins 
the  heart,  and  one  is  ready  to  die  ;or  the  kind  and  generous.  Look  how  men  have 
thrown  away  their  lives  for  great  leaders.  The  wounded  French  soldier,  when  the 
surgeon,  searching  for  the  bullet  cut  deeply,  cried  out,  "  A  little  lower  and  you  will 
touch  the  Emperor."  Love  to  Jesus  creates  a  heroism  of  which  law  knows  nothing. 
All  Church  history  is  a  proof  of  this.  3.  Love,  too,  has  often  changed  the  most 
unworthy.  We  have  often  heard  of  the  soldier  who  had  been  flogged  and 
imprisoned,  and  yet  would  get  drunk  and  misbehave  himself.  At  last  the  com- 
manding officer  said,  "  I  have  tried  almost  everything,  I  will  try  one  thing  more. 
You  seem  incorrigible,  but  I  will  freely  forgive  you."  The  man  was  greatly  moved 
by  this,  and  became  a  good  soldier.  A  man  woke  up  one  morning  from  his  drunken 
sleep  and  saw  his  only  child  getting  his  breakfast.  Coming  to  his  senses  he  said  to 
her,  "  Millie,  why  do  you  stay  with  me?"  She  answered,  "Because  you  are  my 
father,  and  I  love  you."  He  looked  at  himself,  and  saw  what  a  ragged,  good-for- 
nothing  creature  he  was,  and  he  answered  her,  "  Millie,  do  you  really  love  me?" 
The  child  cried,  *'  Yes,  father,  and  I  will  never  leave  you,  because  when  mother 
died  she  said,  *  Millie,  stick  to  your  father,  and  always  pray  for  him,  and  one  of 
these  days  he  will  give  up  drink  and  be  a  good  father  to  you ' ;  so  I  will  never  leave 
yoa."  Is  it  wonderful  that  Millie's  father  became  a  Christian  ?  According  to  our 
moralists  she  should  have  said,  "You  are  a  horrible  wretch  I  I  have  stuck  to  you 
long  enough ;  I  must  now  leave  you,  or  else  I  shall  be  encouraging  other  fathers  to 
get  drunk."  Under  such  dealing  I  fear  Millie's  father  would  have  drank  himself 
into  perdition.  But  the  power  of  love  made  a  better  man  of  him.  Hear  another 
story.  There  lived  in  Cheapside  one  who  feared  God  and  atteuded  the  secret 
meetings  of  the  saints  ;  and  near  him  there  dwelt  a  poor  cobbler,  whose  wants  were 
clften  relieved  by  the  merchant ;  but  the  man,  from  hope  of  reward,  laid  an  inform- 
ation against  his  kind  friend  on  the  score  of  religion.  This  accusation  would  have 
brought  the  merchant  to  death  by  burning  if  he  had  not  found  a  means  of  escape. 
Keturning,  the  injured  man  behaved  more  liberally  than  ever.  The  cobbler,  how- 
ever, avoided  him,  but  one  day  was  obliged  to  meet  him,  and  the  Christian  man 
asked  him  gently,  "  Why  do  you  shun  me  ?  I  know  all  that  you  did  to  injure  me, 
but  I  never  had  an  angry  thought  against  you.  Let  us  be  friends."  Do  you  marvel 
that  they  clasped  hands  and  that  ere  long  the  poor  man  was  found  at  the  Lollards' 
meeting  ?  The  Lord  knows  that  bad  as  men  are  the  key  of  their  hearts  hangs  on 
4he  naQ  of  love.  III.  Its  opeeations  abe  connected  with  a  speciaij  eevelation 
or  the  evil  of  bin.  Iniquity  is  made  to  be  exceeding  bitter  before  or  when  it  is 
forgiven.  A  burnt  child  dreads  the  fire.  By  the  operations  of  grace  we  are  made 
weary  of  sin ;  we  loathe  both  it  and  its  imaginary  pleasures.  It  is  a  thing  accursed, 
even  as  Amalek  was  to  Israel.  IV.  It  makes  a  man  a  new  creature  in  Cheist 
Jesus.  His  ignorance  is  removed,  his  affections  are  changed,  his  understanding  ia 
enlightened,  his  will  is  subdued,  his  desires  are  refined,  his  life  is  changed — in  fact, 
he  is  as  one  new-born,  to  whom  all  things  have  become  new.  All  beings  live  accord- 
ing to  their  nature,  and  the  regenerated  man  works  out  the  holy  instincts  of  his 
renewed  mind.  A  new  heart  makes  aU  the  difference.  Given  a  new  nature,  and 
then  all  the  propensities  run  in  a  different  way.  V.  It  pbovides  cleansing  through 
atonement.  The  blood  of  Jesus  sanctifies  as  well  as  pardons.  The  sinner  learna 
that  his  free  pardon  cost  the  life  of  his  best  Friend.  What  I  live  in  the  sin  which 
slew  Jesus  ?  Impossible  I  Thus  you  see  that  the  gifts  of  free  grace,  when  handed 
down  by  a  pierced  hand,  are  never  likely  to  suggest  self-indulgence  in  sin,  but  the 
very  reverse.  VI.  It  secures  dailt  helps  from  God's  Holy  Spirit,  who  deigns  to 
dwell  in  every  man  whom  God  has  saved  by  His  grace.  1.  He  leads  believers  to  be 
much  in  prayer,  and  what  a  power  for  holiness  is  found  in  this.  2.  The  renewed 
man  is  also  quickened  in  conscience ;  so  that  things  which  heretofore  did  not  strike 
VOL.  I.  Q'd 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

him  as  sinfal  are  seen  in  a  clearer  light,  and  are  consequentlj  condemned.  8.  The 
good  Spirit  leads  as  into  high  and  hallowed  intercourse  with  God,  and  I  defy  a  man 
to  live  upon  the  mount  with  God  and  then  come  down  to  transgress  like  men  of  the 
world.  Thou  art  of  another  race  ;  "  thy  speech  betrayeth  thee."  The  perfume  of 
the  ivory  palaces  will  be  about  thee,  and  men  wUl  know  that  thou  hast  been  in  other 
haunts  than  theirs.  VII.  It  elevates  the  entire  man.  1.  What  do  men  most 
think  about?  Bread-and-butter,  house-rent,  and  clothes,  and  are  as  children  play- 
ing with  little  sand-heaps  on  the  seashore ;  but  the  believer  in  free  grace  walks 
among  hills  and  mountains,  and  his  mental  stature  rises  with  his  surroandings,  and 
he  becomes  a  thoughtful  being,  communing  with  sublimities.  The  man  has  now 
obtained  a  different  view  of  himself.  He  says,  •'  I  am  one  of  God'a  chosen,  joint- 
heir  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  as  such  I  cannot  be  godless,  nor  live  for  the  common 
objects  of  life."  2.  He  rises  in  the  object  of  his  pursuit.  He  feels  that  he  is  bom 
for  Divine  purposes,  and  he  feels  that  God  has  loved  him  that  His  love  may  flow 
forth  to  others.  God's  choice  of  any  one  man  has  a  bearing  upon  all  the  rest.  We 
are  each  one  as  a  lamp  kindled  that  we  may  shine  in  the  dark  and  light  np  other 
lamps.  3.  New  hopes  come  crowding  on  him.  His  immortal  spirit  enjoys  glimpses 
of  the  endless.  As  God  has  loved  him  in  time  he  believes  that  the  like  love  will 
bless  him  in  eternity.  Conclusion :  A  profligate  son  had  been  a  grief  to  his  father ; 
he  had  robbed  and  disgraced  him,  and  at  last  brought  his  grey  hairs  in  sorrow  to 
the  grave.  He  attended  his  father's  funeral  and  stayed  to  hear  the  will  read,  having 
f  uUy  made  up  his  mind  that  he  was  cut  off  with  a  shilling ;  and  he  meant  to  make 
it  very  unpleasant  for  the  rest  of  the  family.  To  his  great  astonishment  the  wUl 
ran  something  like  this :  "  As  for  my  son  Bichard,  though  he  has  wasted  my  sub- 
stance and  grieved  my  heart,  I  would  have  him  know  that  I  consider  him  still  to 
be  my  own  dear  child,  and,  in  token  of  my  undying  love,  I  leave  him  the  same  share 
as  the  rest  of  his  brothers."  He  left  the  room  mastered  by  the  surprising  love  of 
his  father.  Said  he  to  the  executor,  "  You  surely  did  not  read  correctly  f  "  •*  Tea 
I  did :  there  it  stands."  "  Then  I  feel  ready  to  curse  myself  that  I  ever  grieved  my 
dear  old  father.  Oh,  that  I  could  fetch  him  back  again  I  "  Love  was  bom  in  tha^ 
base  heart  by  an  unexpected  display  of  love.  May  not  your  case  be  similar  T  Our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  dead,  but  He  has  left  it  in  His  will  that  the  chief  of  sixmera 
are  objects  of  His  choicest  mercy.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  16-18.  Enow  ye  not  that  to  whom  ye  yield  yourselves  servants  to  obey. — 

The  service  of  sin  and  the  service  of  righteousness : — I.  The  obiteeion  or  both— 
obedience.  A  disobedient  servant  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  Disobedienoe 
vitiates  service  and  ensures  formal  dismissal  from  it.  By  obedience  to  the  behests 
of  sin  sinners  are  to  be  distinguished.  Sin's  code  is  the  ten  commandments  with 
the  "  nots  "  omitted ;  and  the  world  swarms  with  men  and  women  who  yield  the 
most  constant  and  earnest  obedience  to  each.  From  these  the  servants  of  righteous- 
ness are  distinguished  not  by  their  profession,  garb,  postures,  ritual,  and  shibboleth 
of  righteousness,  but  by  their  obedience  to  the  commands  of  righteousness.  Many 
will  present  themselves  before  the  Great  Tribunal  on  other  grounds,  but  the  King 
of  Eighteousness  will  judge  them  exclusively  by  this  criterion.  **  Not  every  one 
that  said  unto  the  Lord,  Lord,"  &o.  II.  The  chabactebistics  of  the  two  sebvioss. 
1.  The  service  of  sin  is — (1)  Wrong.  A  usurper  is  served  in  a  way  which  wrongs 
the  lawful  master  and  the  rightful  law ;  and  inasmuch  as  men  were  made  for 
righteousness  they  wrong  themselves.  (2)  Fruitless  (ver.  21).  Sin's  service  is 
disappointing,  and  sinners  are  deluded  in  it.  Apart  from  what  it  ends  in,  '*  the  way 
of  transgressors  is  hard."  (3)  Euinous — "  sin  unto  death"  (see  also  ver.  23).  2.  The 
service  of  righteousness  is — (1)  As  the  name  implies,  rignt.  That  should  settle 
the  matter.  Only  when  a  man  yields  to  it  does  he  put  himself  right  with  God,  the 
law,  his  own  conscience,  the  universe.  (2)  Fruitful.  Its  "  ways  are  ways  of  pleasant- 
ness," &C.  Even  in  this  life  it  is  worth  aU  it  costs.  Righteousness  is  a  good 
master  and  pays  as  it  goes  along.  (3)  Eternally  profitable — hfe  is  the  guerdon  o£ 
righteousness.  III.  The  change  fbom  one  sebvice  to  the  otheb.  1.  All  men  are 
servants.  Man  was  not  made,  and  will  never  become  independent.  Servitude  is 
the  law  of  his  nature,  and  of  the  two  masters  he  must  serve  one.  2.  All  men  have 
been  the  servants  of  sin.  They  are  born  in  it  and  continue  in  it ;  some  all  theif 
lives,  others  ap  to  a  certain  point.  3.  All  men  may  become  servants  of  righteous- 
ness. (1)  By  a  definite  act  of  self-devotion.  (2)  By  a  precious  act  of  Divine 
acceptance.  {J,  W.  Bum.)  Master  or  servant : — One  day  a  Mr.  Charles  was 
about  to  start  from  home  to  fulfil  a  preaching  appointment,  when  rough  weather 


.  yt]  ROMANS.  BIS 

Bet  in,  and  he  hesitated  whether  he  ought  to  brave  the  storm.  He  oonsnlted  a  Mr. 
John  Evans  on  the  point.  "  Tell  Mr.  Charles,"  was  the  message  returned,  "  that  il 
he  is  a  master  he  may  stay  at  home,  but  if  a  servant  he  ought  to  keep  his  appoint- 
ment." (Christian  Jtrumal.)  Obedience  to  Christ : — Come  to  Him.  "  I  do  not 
know  what  it  is  to  come,"  says  one.  Well,  coming  to  Christ  is  simply  the  trusting 
Him.  You  are  guilty,  trust  Him  to  save  you.  "  But  if  I  do  that,"  says  one,  "  may 
I  then  go  on  and  live  as  I  did  before?"  No,  that  you  cannot.  If  a  ship  at  sea 
needed  to  be  brought  into  harbour,  and  they  took  a  pilot  on  board,  he  would  say  to 
the  captain,  "  Captain,  if  you  trust  me  I  will  get  you  into  the  harbour  all  right;  let 
that  sail  be  taken  down."  But  they  do  not  reef  it.  "  Here,"  says  he,  "  attend  to 
the  tiller  and  steer  as  I  bid  you."  But  they  did  not  attend.  "  Well,"  says  the  pilot, 
'*  I  thought  you  said  you  trusted  me."  "  Yes,"  says  the  captain,  "  and  you  said 
that  if  we  trusted  you  you  would  get  into  port,  and  we  are  not  into  port."  "  No, 
but  I  understood  if  yon  trusted  me  you  would  do  as  I  bade  you.  It  cannot  be  a 
true  trust  that  is  disobedient  to  my  command."  If  then  you  trust  Christ  you  must 
do  as  He  bid  you,  take  up  His  cross  and  follow  Him,  and  then  that  trust  of  yours 
shall  surely  have  its  reward.  You  shall  be  saved  now,  and  saved  for  ever.  The 
devil's  slaves  : — If  a  pirate,  or,  worse,  the  master  of  a  slave-ship,  has  made  a  good 
thing  of  his  unlawful  traffic,  I  do  not  see  why  he  should  reluctate  about  going  into 
a  lawful  traffic  on  the  ocean,  because  he  does  not  know  what  the  ocean  will  do  to 
him.  If  a  man  is  safe  in  sailing  against  God's  laws  and  everything  that  is  good, 
how  much  more  will  God  prosper  him  if  he  applies  to  legitimate  commerce  the  same 
skill  and  enterprise  and  industry  that  he  is  now  applying  to  that  which  is  illegiti- 
mate. I  have  seen  men  work  ten  times  as  hard  to  be  vUlains  as  they  would  have 
been  obliged  to  work  to  be  honest  men.  The  greatest  slaves  I  know  anything  about 
are  those  whom  the  devil  has  got  the  upper  hand  of,  and  whom  he  is  compelling  to 
dodge  between  the  supreme  law  of  God  and  their  worldly  prosperity.  They  may 
secure  some  sort  of  prosperity,  but,  you  may  depend  upon  it,  they  work  hard  for  it. 
(H.  W,  Beecher.)  Moral  slavery  : — James  II.,  on  his  death-bed,  thus  addressed 
his  son,  •'  There  is  no  slavery  like  sin  and  no  Uberty  like  God's  service."  Was  not 
the  dethroned  monarch  right  7  What  think  you  of  the  fetters  of  bad  habits  ?  What 
think  you  of  the  chains  of  indulged  lust  ?  The  drunkard  who  cannot  resist  the 
craving  for  the  wine — know  yon  a  more  thorough  captive  ?  The  covetous  man  who 
toils  night  and  day  for  wealth — what  is  be  but  a  slave  ?  The  sensual  man,  the 
ambitions  man,  the  worldly  man,  those  who,  in  spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  con- 
science, cannot  break  away  from  enthralment — what  are  they,  if  not  the  subjects  of 
a  tyranny  than  which  there  is  none  sterner,  and  none  more  degrading  ?  (H.  MelviU, 
B.I).)  Ye  have  obeyed  from  the  heart  that  form  of  doctrine. — The  apostolical  form 
of  doctrine : — I.  What  is  it  ?  H.  How  shoxjld  it  be  beceived  ?  III.  What  is  its 
BiTECT?  IV.  What  feelings  ought  this  bestjlt  to  inspirb?  [J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Obedience  to  the  form  of  doctrine: — 1.  The  question,  Whose  servants  are  ye? 
resolves  itself  into  a  matter  of  fact.  The  apostle,  on  looking  to  his  disciples,  pro* 
nonnces  them  by  the  test  of  obedience  to  have  become  the  servants  of  righteous* 
ness.  And  he  not  only  affirms  this  change,  but  he  assigns  the  cause  of  it.  They 
obeyed  from  the  heart.  There  might  have  been  the  form  of  a  yielding ;  but  some 
latent  duplicity  brought  a  flaw  unto  it  by  which  it  was  invalidated.  Now  God  be 
thanked,  says  the  apostle,  this  is  not  the  way  with  you.  I  look  at  your  fruit,  and 
I  find  it  the  fruit  of  holiness.  I  look  at  your  life,  and  I  find  it  to  be  the  life  of  the 
servants  of  God.  2.  But  what  is  it  that  they  are  said  here  to  obey  from  the  heart  ? 
The  term  "  doctrine  "  in  the  original  may  signify  the  thing  taught,  or  the  process  of 
teaching — a  process  which  may  embrace  many  items,  and  consist  of  several  distinct 
parts,  to  obey  which  from  the  heart  is  just  to  take  them  all  in  with  the  simplicity 
and  good  faith  in  which  a  child  believingly  reads  its  task-book.  This  last  view  is 
very  much  confirmed  by  the  import  of  the  Greek  equivalent  for  "  form,"  viz.,  a 
mould  that  impresses  its  own  shape  to  the  yielding  substance  whereunto  it  is  applied. 
And  it  would  be  still  more  accordant  with  the  original  if  we  render  the  whole 
sentence.  The  mould  or  model  of  doctrine  •'  into  which  ye  have  been  delivered. " 
Christian  truth,  in  its  various  parts  and  various  prominences,  is  likened  unto  a 
mould,  into  which  the  heart  or  soul  of  man  is  cast  that  it  may  come  oat  a  precise 
transcript.  3.  It  should  be  obedient  to  every  touch,  and  yield  itself  to  every 
character  that  is  graven  thereupon.  It  should  feel  the  impression,  not  from  one  of 
its  truths  only,  but  from  all  of  them,  else,  like  the  cast  which  is  in  contact  with 
the  mould  but  at  a  single  point,  it  will  shake  and  fluctuate,  and  be  altogether  want- 
ing in  settled  conformity  to  that  with  the  likeness  of  which  it  ought  to  be  every- 


SM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

where  enoompaesed.  You  know  how  difficult  it  is  to  poise  one  body  upon  another 
when  it  has  only  got  one  narrow  place  to  stand  upon,  and  that,  to  secure  a  posi- 
tion of  stability,  there  must  at  least  be  three  points  of  support  provided.  There  is 
Bomething  akin  to  this  ere  the  mind  of  an  inquirer  is  rightly  grounded  and  settled 
on  the  basis  of  God's  revealed  testimony.  How  it  veers  and  fluctuates,  when  holding 
only  by  one  article  and  fails  of  a  sufficiently  extended  grasp  on  the  truths  of 
Christianity  I  How  those  who  talk,  e.g. ,  of  the  bare  fact  of  faith  vacillate  and  give 
way  in  the  hour  of  temptation.  How  those  who  admit  bath  the  righteousness  of 
Christ  and  the  regeneration  of  their  own  characters  to  be  alike  indispensable,  have 
nevertheless  been  brought  to  shipwreck  ;  and  that  just  because,  though  adhering  in 
words  to  these  two  generalities,  they  have  never  spread  them  abroad  over  their 
whole  history  in  the  living  applications  of  prayer  and  watchfulness.  They  need  the 
filling  up  of  their  lives  and  hearts  with  the  whole  transcript  of  revelation.  One 
doctrine  does  not  suffice  for  this,  for  God  in  His  wisdom  has  thought  fit  that  there 
shall  be  a  form  or  scheme  of  doctrine.  The  obedience  of  the  heart  unto  the  faith 
is  obedience  unto  all  that  God  proposes  for  the  belief  and  acceptance  of  those  who 
have  entered  on  the  scholarship  of  eternity ;  and  for  this  purpose  there  must  be 
not  a  mere  assent  of  the  understanding  to  any  given  number  of  articles,  but  a 
broad  coalescence  of  the  mind  with  the  whole  expanse  and  magnitude  of  the  book 
of  God's  testimony.  4.  A  scheme  of  doctrine,  then,  implies  more  truths  than  one ; 
and  St.  Paul  has  now  gone  beyond  the  announcement  of  his  one  individual  item. 
He  was  very  fuU  on  Christ  as  the  propitiation  for  sin,  and  on  the  righteousness  of 
Christ  as  the  plea  of  acceptance  for  sinners ;  and  then,  when  he  came  to  the  question. 
Shall  they  who  are  partakers  of  this  benefit  continue  in  sin  that  they  may  get  still 
more  of  the  benefit?  he  pronounces  a  negative.  Here  there  was  not  one  truth,  but  a 
compound  of  truths ;  a  mould  graven  on  both  sides  of  it  with  certain  various  cha- 
racters, and  the  softened  metal  that  is  poured  therein  yields  to  it  all  round  and 
takes  the  varied  impression  from  it.  And  so  of  him  who  obeys  from  the  heart  the 
form  of  doctrine  into  which  he  is  delivered.  He  does  not  yield  to  one  article  and 
present  a  side  of  hardness  and  of  resistance  to  another  article.  He  is  thoroughly 
softened  and  humbled  under  a  sense  of  sinfulness,  and  most  willingly  takes  the 
salvation  of  the  gospel  on  the  terms  of  the  gospel.  He  does  not,  like  the  sturdy 
controversialist,  cuU  out  from  the  Word  his  own  favourite  position ;  but,  like  the  little 
child,  he  follows  on  to  know  the  Lord,  just  as  the  revealed  things  offer  themselves 
to  his  docility  and  notice  on  that  inscribed  tablet  which  the  Lord  hath  placed 
before  him.  5.  The  way  for  you  to  make  good  the  transition  from  sin  to  righteous- 
ness is  to  have  the  same  obedience  of  faith.  It  is  to  spread  out  the  tablet  of  your 
heart  for  the  pressure  thereupon  of  all  the  characters  that  are  graven  on  the  tablet 
of  revelation  ;  it  is  to  incorporate  in  your  creed  the  necessity  of  a  holy  life,  in  imita- 
tion and  at  the  will  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  along  with  a  humble  reliance  on  His  merits 
as  your  alone  meritorious  plea  for  acceptance  with  the  Father ;  it  is  to  give  up  the 
narrow,  intolerant,  and  restrictive  system  of  theology  which,  by  vesting  a  right  of 
monopoly  in  a  few  of  its  favourite  positions,  acts  hke  the  corresponding  system  of 
trade  in  impeding  the  fuU  circulation  of  its  truths  and  of  its  treasure  through  that 
world  within  itself,  which  is  made  up  of  the  powers  and  affections.  Be  your  faith 
as  broad  and  as  long  as  is  the  record  of  all  those  communications  that  are  addressed 
to  it — and  be  very  sure  that  it  is  only  when  you  yield  yourselves  up  in  submission 
to  aU  its  truths  that  you  can  be  made  free  from  sin  by  sharing  in  the  fulfilment  of 
all  its  promises.  6.  You  often  hear  of  the  power  of  the  truth.  It  is  a  just  and 
expressive  phrase,  and  is  adverted  to  in  the  text.  But  this  power  of  the  truth  is 
the  power  of  the  whole  truth.  Mutilate  the  truth  and  you  cripple  it.  Pare  it 
down  and  you  paralyse  its  energies.  And  thus,  as  you  hope  to  be  rescued  from  the 
tyraimy  of  sin  by  the  power  of  Christian  truth,  you  must  foster  the  whole  of  it. 
Divide,  and  you  darken.  The  whole  of  that  light  which  one  truth  reflects  upon 
another  is  extinguished  when  the  inquirer,  instead  of  looking  fearlessly  abroad 
over  the  rich  and  varied  landscape  of  revelation,  fastens  his  intent  regards  on  one 
narrow  portion  of  the  territory  and  shuts  out  the  rest  from  the  eye  of  his  contempla- 
tion. Yet  let  us  not  think  that  we,  of  our  proper  energy,  can  supply  as  it  were  the  first 
condition  on  which  our  deliverance  from  sin  is  made  to  turn.  The  glory  of  this  is 
due  to  grace,  which  has  softened  your  hearts  under  the  impression  of  the  truth, 
which  has  moved  you  to  an  aspiring  obedience  thereto,  which  will  lead  you,  I 
trust,  to  carry  out  the  principle  into  practice,  which  will  vent  itself  upward  to  the 
sanctuary  in  prayer,  and  bring  down  that  returning  force  which  can  nnchain  yoa 
Acom  the  bondage  of  oorraption  and  give  yoa  impulse  and  strength  for  all  ths 


eatr.  vi.]  ROMANS.  517 

services  of  righteousness.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  The  form  of  teaching  : — 
There  is  room  for  difference  of  opinion  as  to  what  Paul  precisely  means  by 
"  form  "  here.  It  signifies  originally  a  mark  made  by  pressure  or  impact ;  thea 
a  mould,  pattern  or  example,  then  the  copy  of  such  an  example  or  pattern, 
or  the  cast  from  such  a  mould.  It  also  means  the  general  outline  which 
preserves  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  a  thing.  Now  we  may  choose 
between  these  two  meanings  in  our  text.  If  the  apostle  means  type  in  the  latter 
sense  of  the  word,  then  the  rendering  "  form  "  is  adequate,  and  he  is  thinking  of 
the  Christian  teaching  which  had  been  given  to  the  Boman  Christians  as  possessing 
certain  well-defined  characteristics  which  distinguished  it  from  other  kinds  of 
teaching — such,  for  instance,  as  Jewish  or  heathen.  But  if  we  take  the  other 
meaning,  then  he  is,  in  true  Pauline  fashion,  bringing  in  a  vivid  and  picturesque 
metaphor  to  enforce  his  thought,  and  is  thinking  of  the  teaching  which  the  Boman 
Christians  had  received  as  being  a  kind  of  mould  into  which  they  were  thrown,  a 
pattern  to  which  they  were  to  be  conformed.  I.  Paul's  gospel  was  a  definitb 
BODY  OF  TEACHING.  The  gospcl  in  its  first  form  as  it  comes  to  men  fresh  from  God 
is  not  a  set  of  propositions,  but  a  history  of  deeds  that  were  done  upon  earth. 
And,  therefore,  is  it  fitted  to  be  the  mould  of  every  character.  Jesus  Christ  did 
not  come  and  talk  to  men  about  God,  and  say  to  tbem  what  His  apostles  afterwards 
said,  "  God  is  love,"  but  He  lived  and  died,  and  that  mainly  was  His  teaching 
about  God.  He  did  not  come  to  men  and  lay  down  a  theory  of  atonement  or  a 
doctrine  of  propitiation,  or  theology  about  sin  and  its  relations  to  God,  but  He 
went  to  the  Cross  and  gave  Himself  for  us,  and  that  was  His  teaching  about  sacri- 
fice. He  did  not  say  to  men,  "  There  is  a  future  life,  and  it  is  of  such  and  such  a 
sort,"  but  He  came  out  of  the  grave  and  He  said,  "  Touch  Me,  and  handle  Me.  A 
spirit  hath  not  fiesh  and  bones,"  and  therefore  He  brought  life  and  immortality  to 
light,  by  no  empty  words  but  by  the  solid  realities  of  facts.  He  did  not  lecture 
upon  ethics,  but  He  lived  a  perfect  human  hfe  out  of  which  all  moral  principles 
that  will  guide  human  conduct  may  be  gathered.  And  so,  instead  of  presenting  us 
with  a  botanic  collection  of  scientifically  arranged  and  dead  propositions.  He  led  us 
into  the  meadow  where  the  flowers  grow,  living  and  fair.  His  life  and  death,  with 
all  that  they  imply,  are  the  teaching.  Let  us  not  forget,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
the  history  of  a  fact  is  not  the  mere  statement  of  the  outward  thing  that  has 
happened.  Christian  teaching  is  the  facts  plus  their  explanation  ;  and  it  is  that 
which  differentiates  it  from  the  mere  record  which  is  of  no  avail  to  anybody.  So 
Paul  Himself  in  one  of  His  other  letters  puts  it.  This  is  his  gospel :  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  "  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the  Scriptures,  and  He  was  buried,  and 
rose  again  the  third  day,  according  to  the  Scriptures."  That  is  what  turns  the 
bald  story  of  the  facts  into  teaching,  which  is  the  mould  for  Ufe.  II.  This  teach- 
INO  IS  IN  Paul's  judgment  a  modld  ob  pattekn  according  to  which  men's  lives 
ABB  to  bb  oomfobmed.  There  can  be  no  question  but  that,  in  that  teaching  as  set 
forth  in  Scripture,  there  does  lie  the  mightiest  formative  power  for  shaping  our 
lives,  and  emancipating  us  from  our  evil.  Christ  is  the  type,  the  mould  into  which 
men  are  to  be  cast.  The  gospel,  as  presented  in  Scripture,  gives  us  three  things. 
It  gives  us  the  perfect  mould  ;  it  gives  us  the  perfect  motive ;  it  gives  us  the  perfect 
power.  And  in  all  three  things  appears  its  distinctive  glory,  apart  from  and  above 
all  other  systems  that  have  ever  tried  to-affect  the  conduct  or  to  mould  the  character 
of  man.  We  have  in  the  Christ  the  one  type,  the  one  mould  and  pattern  for  all 
striving,  the  "  glass  of  form,"  the  perfect  Man.  And  that  likeness  is  not  repro- 
duced in  us  by  pressure  or  by  a  blow,  but  by  the  slow  and  blessed  process  of  gazing 
until  we  become  Uke,  beholding  the  glory  until  we  are  changed  into  the  glory.  It 
is  no  use  having  a  mould  and  metal  unless  you  have  a  fire.  It  is  no  use  having  a 
perfect  Pattern  unless  you  have  motive  to  copy  it.  If  we  can  say,  "  He  loved  me, 
and  gave  Himself  for  me,"  then  the  sum  of  all  morality,  the  old  commandment 
that  "  ye  love  one  another,"  receives  a  new  stringency,  and  a  fresh  motive  as  well 
as  a  deepened  interpretation,  when  His  love  is  our  pattern.  The  one  thing  that 
will  make  men  willing  to  be  as  Christ  is  their  faith  that  Christ  is  their  Sacrifice  and 
their  Saviour.  Still  further,  the  teaching  is  a  power  to  fashion  life,  inasmuch  as 
it  brings  with  it  a  gift  which  secures  the  transformation  of  the  believer  into  the 
likeness  of  his  Lord.  Part  of  "  the  teaching  "  is  the  fact  of  Pentecost ;  part  of  the 
teaching  is  the  fact  of  the  ascension ;  and  the  consequence  of  the  ascension  and 
the  sure  promise  of  the  Pentecost  is  that  all  who  love  Him,  and  wait  upon  Him, 
shall  receive  into  their  hearts  the  "  spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus,"  which  shall  make 
them  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death.    lU.  This  mocld  sbauiiss  osbdibncb. 


«18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [oha».  n. 

By  the  very  nature  of  the  teaching,  assent  drags  after  it  sabmission.  Yon  can 
please  yoarself  whether  you  let  Jesus  Christ  into  yonr  minds  or  not,  but  if  you  do 
let  Him  in,  He  will  be  Master.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  taking  Him  in  and  not 
obeying.  And  so  the  requirement  of  the  gospel  which  we  call  faith  has  in  it  quite 
as  much  of  the  element  of  obedience  as  of  the  element  of  trust.  And  the  presence 
of  that  element  is  just  what  makes  the  difference  between  a  sham  and  a  real 
faith.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  _  Moulded  by  the  truth  : — The  gospel  here  is 
compared  to  a  mould  into  which  the  soul  is  deUvered.  We  take  our  character; 
from  the  truth  we  receive.  Our  affections  are  moulded,  formed,  fashioned,  directed 
by  the  gospel  we  obey.  Sometimes  it  is  compared  to  a  mirror  (2  Cor.  iii.  8). 
The  gospel  reveals  to  us  Jesus,  and  as  we  look  into  that  glass  the  light  falls  upon 
our  souls  and  assimilates  us  to  Him.  Here  it  is  a  mould.  We  are  cast  into  the 
mould  of  the  truth  which  from  the  heart  we  obey.  The  gospel  is  not  only  a  direct- 
ing power,  but  a  transforming  influence ;  you  cannot  believe  it  without  being' 
moulded  by  it.  Any  man  who  says  he  believes  it,  whose  character  is  not  moulded 
by  it,  is  deceiving  himself.  How,  then,  can  this  be  corrected  ?  Not  by  poring  over 
the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  our  own  poor  hearts,  but  by  examining  the  testimony 
God  has  given  us  concerning  Christ,  by  mixing  faith  with  the  promises  given  us, 
that  by  them  we  might  be  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  The  entrance  of  His 
Word  will  not  only  give  light  to  our  understandings,  but  it  will  transform  us  into 
His  image ;  and  as  we  receive  the  doctrine  into  our  hearts,  we  shall  be  delivered 
into  it  as  into  a  mould,  and  our  tastes  and  character  and  desires  and  ways  and 
aims,  will  be  fashioned  thereby.  This  is  the  constant  teaching  of  Scripture  (Eph. 
ii.  10  ;  Luke  i.  74 ;  Titus  ii.  11).  {M.  Rainsford,  B.A.)  Branded  with  the  truth : — 
It  was  the  custom  to  impress  a  distinctive  mark  or  brand  on  the  slaves  belonging  to 
different  masters.  A  slave  might  thus,  by  no  uncommon  metonymy,  be  spoken  of 
as  belonging  to  a  certain  mark,  the  mark  being  put  for  the  master  whose  mark  it 
was;  and  when  a  slave  was  transferred  from  one  master  to  another,  as  being 
delivered  over  to  a  new  mark  or  brand,  that  is,  to  a  new  proprietor  or  master,  to 
whom,  or,  by  the  same  figure,  to  whose  mark  he  was  then  to  consider  his  person 
attached  and  his  service  and  obedience  due.  This  is  probably  the  true  meaning, 
"  Ye  have  obeyed  from  the  heart  that  mark  [or  brand]  of  doctrine  to  which  ye  have 
been  delivered  over  " ;  this  translation  giving  every  word  its  full  and  proper  effect. 
They  passed  from  one  service  to  another,  distinguished  by  a  new  mark,  to  which, 
as  reminding  them  of  their  new  master,  and  the  appropriate  symbol  of  his  property 
in  them  and  his  power  over  them,  they  were  thenceforward  to  render  their  obedient 
service.  The  "  doctrine  "  of  Christ  is  the  distinguishing  badge,  or  appropriate  mark, 
of  all  His  servants.  They  bear  the  profession  and  impress  of  His  truth  ;  and,  under 
the  influence  of  that  truth,  they  serve  Him  as  the  Master  who  has  stamped  its 
impression  upon  them,  in  a  spirit  of  reverential  love.  (ii.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Trans- 
formation of  grace  : — A  short  time  ago  the  manufacturers  of  lighting  gas  were  puzzled 
to  know  how  to  dispose  of  the  coal-tar  left  in  the  retorts.  A  more  useless,  nauseous 
Bubstance  was  hardly  known  to  exist.  Chemistry  came  to  the  rescue,  and  to-day 
not  less  than  thirty-six  marketable  articles  are  produced  from  this  black,  vile,  sticky 
elime — solvents,  oils,  salts,  colours,  flavours.  You  eat  a  bit  of  delicious  confec- 
tionery, happily  unconscious  that  the  exquisite  taste  which  you  enjoy  so  keenly 
comes  from  coal-tar ;  you  buy  at  the  druggist's  a  tiny  phial  of  what  is  labelled  "  Otto 
of  Roses,"  Uttle  dreaming  that  the  dehcious  perfume  is  wafted,  not  from  "  the  fields 
of  Araby,"  but  from  the  foul  gas  retort.  Christianity  is  a  moral  chemistry.  Well 
"were  it  for  nations  if  it  held  a  higher  place  among  their  social  economics.  Tar- 
saving  is  all  well  enough,  but  soul-saving  is  better.  Grace  transforms  a  villain  into 
an  honest  man,  a  harlot  into  a  holy  woman,  a  thief  into  a  saint.  Where  foetid 
exhalations  of  vice  alone  ascended,  prayer  and  praise  are  to  be  found  ;  where  moral 
miasmata  had  their  lair,  righteousness  and  temperance  pitch  their  tent.  Every 
sort  of  good  thing  is  produced  by  godliness,  and  that  too  in  hearts  once  reeking  with 
all  manner  of  foulness.  Should  not  this  stay  every  persecuting  hand,  hush  every 
railing  tongue,  and  incite  every  sanctified  spirit  to  continued  and  increasing  energy. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Beln^  then  made  free  ftom  sin,  ye  became  the  servants  of 
righteousness. — Freedom  from  sin  and  subjection  to  righteousness : — I.  Thb  bondagb 
BDPPosED.  Those  only  can  be  made  free  who  were  the  subjects  of  bondage.  Many 
resent  this  charge  and  exclaim,  as  the  Jews  did,  '•  We  were  never  in  bondage  to  any 
man."  And  so  long  as  man  remain  under  the  infatuation  that  they  are  free,  they 
will  never  welcome  the  tidings  of  a  deUverance.  We  are  in  bondage — 1.  To  a  law 
irhioh  we  have  violated.     A  perfect  nature  was  capable  of  performing  the  require* 


CHAT,  u.]  ROMANS.  619 

ments  of  a  perfect  law ;  bat  an  imperfect  nature  never  can  meet  those  requirements. 
Those,  therefore,  who  are  seeking  acceptance  with  God  by  the  works  of  the  law,  are 
Tinder  the  curse — bound  and  sentenced  by  it.  2.  To  a  God  whum  we  have  displeased. 
Perfectly  sensible  that  "  God  is  love,"  we  also  believe  that  He  is  a  God  of  justice. 
God's  character,  regarded  as  a  whole,  demands  that  He  should  maintain  the  honour 
of  His  law ;  and  therefore  He  is  bound  by  every  principle  of  His  nature,  and  by 
every  qualification  of  His  office  as  the  Euler  of  the  universe,  to  punish  the  sinner. 
8.  To  corruptions  which  he  has  indulged.  (1)  Man  has  fallen  under  the  govern- 
ment  of  the  passions,  of  which  there  are  three  classes — the  animal,  which  lead  to 
all  manner  of  impurity ;  the  malevolent,  which  lead  to  all  manner  of  cruelty  ;  and 
the  secular,  which  go  to  make  men  altogether  base  and  sordid.  (2)  There  are  also 
intellectual  sins  under  which  men  are  bound,  and  even  sold — pride,  a  presumptuous 
obtrusion  into  things  sacred  and  prohibited,  and  infidelity  in  rejecting  the  testimony 
which  God  has  given  of  His  Son.  But  whether  men  are  bound  by  the  intellectusi 
or  sensual  sins,  they  are  alike  slaves.  4.  To  the  world  which  we  have  idolised. 
There  are  some  who  would  not  for  worlds  rebel  against  the  laws  of  fashion.  They 
would  rather  commit  an  enormous  sin  against  God  than  they  would  violate  the  etiquette 
of  this  world.  The  man  who  is  devoted  to  the  love  of  money  is  just  as  much  bound 
as  ever  one  who  was  fastened  to  the  galleys  for  life.  The  man  who  loves  the 
pleasures  of  this  world,  though  he  turns  from  them  with  disgust  again  and  again, 
yet  to-morrow  it  is  just  the  same  thing  over  and  over  again.  And  as  to  the  ambi- 
iioQS,  see  what  slaves  they  are — how  servile  when  they  have  an  object  to  accomplish ; 
how  insolent  when  that  object  is  once  attained  ;  and  how  dissatisfied  with  the  highest 
pinnacle  to  which  hitman  ambition  can  soar.  6.  To  a  death  which  we  cannot  shun. 
Some  "  are  all  their  life-time  subject  to  bondage  through  fear  of  death,"  either  the 
act  itself  or  the  consequences.  II.  Thb  freedom  that  is  bestowed.  1.  From  the 
guilt  of  sin  by  virtue  of  the  expiatory  death  and  all-atoning  sacrifice  of  the  Divine 
Bedeemei.  2.  From  the  punishment  of  sin.  The  chain  is  broken — the  debt  is 
cancelled — the  indictment  is  rebutted,  and  the  justified  believer  can  say,  '•  Who 
shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  "  3.  From  the  dominion  of  sin. 
How  can  I  love  that  which  crucified  the  Saviour  ?  4.  Ultimately  from  the  presence 
of  sin.  There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  anything  that 
defileth  or  that  worketh  abomination.  UI.  The  suBSEgcENT  subjection  ob  sub- 
OBDiNATioN.  "Ye  became  the  servants  of  righteousness."  1.  By  faith  in  the 
doctrine  of  righteousness  (ver.  17).  All  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  are  according 
to  godliness.  They  fix  salvation  on  the  great  principles  of  eternal  rectitude ;  for 
God  does  not  forgive  merely  by  an  act  of  clemency ;  but  by  an  act  of  equity.  2.  Love  to 
the  principle  of  righteousness.  3.  Submission  to  the  rule  of  righteousness — God's 
will — not  our  opinion — not  the  laws  of  our  fellow-creatures.  4.  Studious  determina- 
tion and  constant  aim  towards  the  practice  of  universal  righteousness.  {€.  Bradley, 
M.A.)  Our  change  of  masters : — 1.  Man  was  made  to  rule.  He  was  intended  for  a  king, 
who  should  have  dominion  over  the  beasts  of  the  field,  &o.  Yet  is  it  equally  true  that 
he  was  made  to  serve.  He  was  placed  in  the  garden  to  keep  it,  and  to  dress  it,  and 
to  serve  his  Maker.  Throwing  off  his  allegiance  to  his  rightful  Master,  he  has 
become  the  slave  of  evil  passions.  2.  When  God  of  His  infinite  mercy  visits  man 
by  His  Spirit,  that  Spirit  does  not  come  as  a  neutral  power,  but  enters  with  full 
intent  to  reign.  Man  cannot  serve  two  masters,  but  he  must  serve  one.  Alexander 
conquered  the  world,  and  yet  he  became  the  captive  of  drunkenness  and  his 
I>as8ionate  temper.  Eome  had  many  slaves,  but  he  who  wore  her  purple  was  the 
most  in  bonds.  High  rank  does  not  save  a  man  from  being  under  a  mastery : 
neither  does  learning  nor  philosophy.  Solomon,  the  most  sagacious  ruler  of  his 
age,  became  completely  subject  to  his  fleshly  desires.  3.  Who,  then,  shall  be  man's 
master?  Our  text  speaks  of  "  being  made  free  from  sin,"  and  in  the  same  breath 
it  adds,  "  Ye  became  the  servants  of  righteousness."  There  is  no  interregnum. 
Man  passes  from  one  master  to  another,  but  he  is  always  in  subjection.  Consider — 
I.  OuB  CHANGE  OF  MASTEB8.  1.  In  describing  this  revolution  we  will  begin  with  a 
word  or  two  upon  our  old  master  "  sin."  We  were  not  all  alike  enslaved,  but  we 
were  all  under  bondage.  (1)  Sin  has  its  liveried  servants.  If  you  want  to  see  these 
dressed  out  in  their  best  or  their  worst,  go  to  the  prison,  or  to  the  places  of  vicious 
amusement.  Many  of  them  wear  the  badge  of  the  devil's  drudgery  upon  their 
backs  in  rags,  upon  their  faces  in  the  blotches  born  of  drunkenness,  and  in  their 
very  bones  in  the  consequences  of  their  vice.  (2)  But  great  folks  have  many 
servants  who  are  out  of  livery,  and  so  has  sin.  We  were  not  aU  open  transgressors. 
Selfish  caution  lestiaius  from  overt  acts  of  transgression.    Hypocrites  are  wore* 


5Sd  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (CHA».  n. 

slaves  than  others,  because  they  are  laid  under  the  restraints  of  religion  without 
their  consolations,  and  practise  sins  without  their  pleasures.     (3)  The  servants  ol 
sin  are  not  all  outdoor  servants.    Many  keep  their  sin  to  themselves.     They  are 
excellent  in  their  outward  deportment ;  but  they  are  the  indoor  servants  of  Satan 
for  all  that.     (4)  There  are,  however,  many  who   were  once  outdoor  servants, 
sinning  openly  and  in  defiance   of  all  law.      2.   Believers  are  made  free  from 
sin.     (1)  From   the  condemnation  of  sin  (chap.  viii.  1).     (2)  From  the  guilt  of 
sin.    As  you  cannot  be  condemned  so  does  the  truth  go  further,  you  cannot  even 
be  accused.     ••  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?  "     (3)  From 
the  punishment  of  sin.     (4)  From  its  reigning  power,    3.  How  came  we  to  be 
free  ?    (1)  By  purchase,  for  our  Saviour  has  paid  the  full  redemption  money.    (2) 
By  power.    Just  as  the  Israelites  were  the  Lord's  own  people,  but  He  had  to  bring 
them  out  of  Egypt,  so  has  the  Lord  by  power  broken  the  neck  of  sin  and  brought 
as  up  from  the  dominion  of  the  old  Pharaoh  of  evil  and  set  us  free.     (3)  By 
privilege.     "  Unto  as  many  as  believed  ELim,  to  them  gave  He  the  privilege  to 
become  the  sons  of  God."    His  own  royal,  majestic,  and  Divine  decree  has  bidden 
the  prisoners  go  forth.    (4)  By  death.    If  a  slave  dies  his  master's  possession  in 
him  is  ended.    "  He  that  is  dead  is  free  from  sin."    (5)  By  resurrection.    A  new 
life  has  been  given  to  us  ;  we  are  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.     4.  Ye  became 
the  servants  of  righteousness.    A  righteous  God  has  made  us  die  to  sin ;  a  new  and 
righteous  life  has  been  infused  into  us,  and  now  righteousness  rules  and  reigns  in 
Qs.     The  text  says  we  are  enslaved  to  righteousness,  and  so  we  wish  to  be.    II. 
Thb  beasons  fob  oub  change.    1.  We  changed  our  old  master  because  we  were 
illegally  detained  by  him.    Sin  did  not  make  us,  does  not  feed  us,  has  no  right  to 
QS  whatever.     Besides,  our  old  master  was  as  bad  as  bad  could  be.    We  ran  away 
from  him  because  we  had  never  any  profit  at  his  hands.    "  What  fruit  had  ye 
then  ?  "    Ask  the  drunkard,  the  spendthrift,  any  man  that  lives  in  sin,  what  he  has 
gained  by  it,  and  we  will  find  it  is  all  loss.    Beside  that,  our  old  master  brought 
shame.    *'  Those  things  whereof  ye    are   now  ashamed."    Moreover,  its  wages 
are  death.    2.  But  why  did  we  take  up  with  our  new  Master  ?    In  the  first  place, 
we  owe  ourselves  wholly  to  Him  ;  and  in  the  next  place,  if  we  did  not,  He  is  so 
altogether  lovely,  that  if  we  had  a  free  choice  of  masters  we  would  choose  Him  a 
thousand  times  over.     His  service  is  perfect  freedom  and  supreme  delight.    He 
gives  us  even  now  a  payment  in  His  service.    III.  The  conseqdences  of  this 
CHANGE.     1.    That  you   belong  wholly  to  your  Lord.      Numbers  of  professing 
Christians  seem  mostl;^  to  belong  to  themselves,  for  they  never  gave  God  anything 
that  cost  them  a  self-denial.     But  if  you  are  really  saved,  not  a  hair  of  your  heads 
belongs  to  yourselves  ;  Christ's  blood  has  either  bought  you  or  it  has  not,  and  if  it 
has,  then  you  are  altogether  Christ's.    Just  as  a  negro  used  to  belong  to  the  man 
that  bought  him,  every  inch  of  him,  so  you  are  the  slave  of  Christ ;  you  bear  in 
your  body  the  brand  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  your  glory  and  your  freedom  lie  therein. 
2.  Because  you  are  Christ's  His  very  name  is  dear  to  you.     You  are  not  so  His 
slave  that  you  would  escape  from  His  service  if  you  could ;  you  want  to  be  more 
and  more  the  Lord's.     Where  there  is  anything  of  Christ  there  your  love  goes 
forth.     Hadyn  one  day  turned  into  a  music-seller's,  and  asked  for  some  select  and 
beautiful  music,  and  was  offered  some  of  his  own.    "  Oh,"  said  Haydn,  "  I'll 
have  nothing  to  do  with  that."    "  Why,  sir,  what  fault  can  you  find  with  it?" 
"  I  can  find  a  great  deal  of  fault  with  it,  but  I  will  not  argue  with  you,  I  do  not 
want  any  of  his  music."     "  Then,"  said  the  shopkeeper,  *'  I  have  other  music,  but 
it  is  not  for  such  as  you."    A  thorough  enthusiast  grows  impatient  of  those  who  do 
not  appreciate  what  he  so  much  admires.    You  can  be  no  friend  of  mine  if  you  are 
not  a  friend  of  Christ's.     3.  All  your  members  are  henceforth  reserved  for  Christ. 
When  Satan  was  your  master  you  did  not  care  about  Christ,  you  went  wholly  in  for 
evil.    You  did  not  require  to  be  egged  on  to  it.     Now  you  ought  not  to  want  your 
ministers  or  Christian  friends  to  stir  you  up  to  good  works  ;  you  ought  to  be  just 
as  eager  after  holiness  as  you  were  after  sin.     As  you  have  given  the  devil  first- 
rate  service,  let  Christ  have  the  same.     Some  of  you  never  stood  at  any  expense — I 
wish  we  could  serve  Christ  thus  unstintedly.     The  poor  slaves  of  sin  not  only  do 
not  stop  at  expense,  but  they  are  not  frightened  by  any  kind  of  loss.     See  how 
many  lose  their  characters  for  the  sake  of  one  short  hour  of  sin.     Thoy  ruin  their 
peace  and  think  nothing  of  it.     They  will  lose  their  health,  too ;  nay,  they  will 
destroy  their  souls  for  the  sake  of  sin's  brief  delights.    In  the  same  way  should  we 
serve  our  Lord.     Be  willing  to  lose  character,  health,  life,  all,  if  by  any  means  you 
may  glorify  Sim  whose  servant  you  have  become.    Oh,  who  will  be  my  Maater'i 


«HAr.  VI.]  ROMANS.  521 

servant  ?  Do  yon  not  see  Him  ?  He  wears  apon  His  head  no  diadem  but  the 
orown  of  thorns ;  His  feet  are  still  rubied  with  their  wounds,  and  His  hands  are 
still  bejewelled  with  the  marks  of  the  nails.  This  is  your  Master,  and  these  are 
the  insignia  of  His  love  for  you.  What  service  will  you  render  Him?  That  of  a 
mere  professor,  who  names  His  name  but  loves  Him  not?  That  of  a  cold 
religionist,  who  renders  unwilling  service  out  of  fear  ?  Do  not  so  dishonour  Him. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  strictness  of  the  law  of  Christ : — 1.  The  apostle  is  not 
content  with  speaking  half  the  truth ;  he  does  not  merely  say  that  we  are  set  free 
from  guilt  and  misery,  but  he  adds,  that  we  have  become  the  slaves  of  Christ.  He 
has  not  bought  us,  and  then  set  us  loose  upon  the  world.  He  has  given  us  that 
only  liberty  which  is  really  such,  bond-service  to  Himself,  lest  if  left  to  ourselves 
we  should  fall  back  again  to  the  cruel  bondage  from  which  He  redeemed  us.  2. 
This  needs  insisting  on ;  for  a  number  of  persons  think  that  they  are  not  bound  to 
any  real  service  at  all,  now  that  Christ  has  set  them  free.  Men  often  speak  as  if 
the  perfection  of  human  happiness  lay  in  our  being  free  to  choose  and  to  reject. 
Now  we  are  indeed  free,  if  we  do  not  choose  to  be  Christ's  servants,  to  go  back  to 
the  old  bondage.  We  may  choose  our  master,  but  God  or  mammon  we  must 
serve.  We  cannot  possibly  be  in  a  neutral  state.  Yet  a  number  of  persons  think 
their  Christian  liberty  lies  in  being  free  from  all  law,  even  from  the  law  of  God. 
In  opposition  to  this  great  mistake,  St.  Paul  reminds  his  brethren  in  the  text  that 
when  they  were  "  made  free  from  sin,"  they  "  became  the  servants  of  righteous- 
ness." He  says  the  same  in  other  Epistles  (1  Cor.  vii.  22,  23 ;  Col.  iii.  22,  24 ; 
1  Cor.  ix.  21).  3.  Beligion,  then,  is  a  necessary  service  ;  of  course  it  is  a  privilege 
too,  but  it  becomes  more  and  more  of  a  privilege,  the  more  we  exercise  ourselves  in 
it.  The  perfect  Christian  state  is  that  in  which  our  duty  and  our  pleasure  are  the 
same,  it  is  the  state  in  which  the  angels  stand ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  us,  except  in 
part.  Upon  our  regeneration  indeed,  we  have  a  seed  of  truth  and  holiness  planted 
within  us,  a  new  law  introduced  into  our  nature  ;  but  still  we  have  that  old  nature 
to  subdue,  a  work,  a  conflict  all  through  life.  4.  Now  most  Christians  will  allow 
in  general  terms  that  they  are  under  a  law,  but  they  admit  it  with  a  reserve ;  they 
claim  for  themselves  some  dispensing  power.     I.  What  is  the  sobt  op  man  whok 

THB    WORIiD   ACCOCNTS   BKSPECTABLE    AND    BELIOIOU8?      At   bcst    he    is    SUCh    aS    this. 

He  has  a  number  of  good  points  to  his  character,  but  some  of  these  he  has  by 
nature,  others  he  has  acquired  because  outward  circumstances  compelled  him 
to  acquire  them.  He  has  acquired  a  certain  self-command,  because  no  one  is 
respected  without  it.  He  has  been  forced  into  habits  of  diUgence,  punctuality,  and 
honesty.  He  is  courteous  and  obliging  ;  and  has  learned  not  to  say  all  he  thinks 
and  feels,  or  to  do  all  he  wishes  to  do  on  all  occasions.  The  great  mass  of  men,  of 
course,  are  far  from  this;  but  I  am  supposing  the  best — viz.,  those  who  only  now 
and  then  will  feel  inclinations  or  interest  to  run  counter  to  duty.  Such  times 
constitute  a  man's  trial;  they  are  just  the  times  on  which  he  is  apt  to  consider 
that  he  has  a  leave  to  dispense  with  the  law,  when  it  is  simply  the  law  of  God, 
without  being  also  the  law  of  self,  and  of  the  world.  He  does  what  is  right,  while 
the  road  of  religion  runs  along  the  road  of  the  world ;  when  they  part  company 
awhile  he  chooses  the  world,  and  calls  his  choice  an  exception.  For  instance — 1. 
He  generally  comes  to  church,  it  is  his  practice ;  but  some  urgent  business  or 
scheme  of  pleasure  tempts  him — he  omits  his  attendance  ;  he  knows  this  is  wrong, 
and  says  so,  but  it  is  only  once  in  a  way.  2.  He  is  strictly  honest  in  his  dealings ; 
it  is  his  rule  to  speak  the  truth,  but  if  hard  pressed,  he  allows  himself  now  and 
then  to  say  a  slight  falsehood.  He  knows  he  should  not  lie,  he  confesses  it ;  but  he 
thinks  it  cannot  be  helped.  3.  He  has  learned  to  curb  his  temper  and  his  tongue ; 
but  on  some  unusual  provocation  they  get  the  better  of  him.  But  are  not  all  men 
subject  to  be  overtaken  with  ill  temper?  That  is  not  the  point ;  the  point  is  this — 
that  he  does  not  feel  compunction  afterward,  he  does  not  feel  he  has  done  any 
thing  which  needs  forgiveness.  4.  He  is  in  general  temperate ;  but  he  joins  a 
party  of  friends  and  is  tempted  to  exceed.  Next  day  he  says  that  it  is  a  long  time 
since  such  a  thing  happened  to  him.  He  does  not  understand  he  has  any  sin  to 
repent  of,  because  it  is  but  once  in  a  way.  Such  men,  being  thus  indulgent  to 
themselves,  are  indulgent  to  each  other.  Conscious  of  what  might  be  said  against 
themselves  they  are  cautious  what  they  say  against  others.  These  are  a  few  out 
of  a  multitude  of  traits  which  mark  an  easy  religion — the  religion  of  the  world ; 
which  would  cast  in  its  lot  with  Christian  truth,  were  not  that  truth  so  very  strict, 
and  quarrels  with  it — because  it  will  not  suit  itself  to  emergencies,  and  to  the  tastes 
of  individuals.     IL  Tbis  is  the  si»i>  of  aBiiioioN  wbiob  Si.  Pauii  tibiuallx 


523  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  n. 

WUINS    UB   lOAINST,    AS    OFTEN   AS   HE   SPEAKS   OF   THE   GOSPEL   AS   BEINO   A  LAW   AND    A 

BERViTUDB.  1.  He  indeed  glories  in  its  being  such ;  for,  as  the  happiness  of  all 
ereatures  lies  in  their  performing  their  parts  well,  where  God  has  placed  them,  so 
man's  greatest  good  lies  in  obedience  to  God's  law  and  in  imitation  of  God's 
perfections.  Therefore  Paul  insists  on  the  necessity  of  Christians  '•  fulfilling  the 
righteousness  of  the  law."  Hence  James  says,  "  Whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole 
law,  and  yet  offend  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all."  And  oar  Saviour  assures  us 
that,  "  Whosoever  shall  break  one  of  these  least  commandments,"  &c.,  and  that 
"  Except  our  righteousness  shall  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees,"  which  was  thus  partial  and  circumscribed,  "  we  shall  in  no  case  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  And  when  the  young  man  came  to  Him,  He  pointed 
out  the  "  one  thing  "  wanting  in  him.  Let  us  not  then  deceive  ourselves  ;  what 
God  demands  of  us  is  to  be  content  with  nothing  short  of  perfect  obedience — to 
avail  ourselves  of  the  aids  given  us,  and  throw  ourselves  on  God's  mercy  for  our 
shortcomings.  2.  But  the  state  of  multitudes  of  men  is  this — their  hearts  are 
going  the  wrong  way,  and  their  real  quarrel  with  religion  is  not  that  it  is  strict,  but 
that  it  is  religion.  If  I  want  to  travel  north,  and  all  the  roads  are  cut  to  the  east, 
of  course  I  shall  complain  of  the  roads.  So  men  who  try  to  reach  Babylon  by 
roads  which  run  to  Mount  Sion  necessarily  meet  with  thwartings,  crossings, 
disappointments,  and  failure.  They  go  mile  after  mile,  watching  in  vain  for  the 
turrets  of  the  city  of  Vanity,  because  they  are  on  the  wrong  road ;  and,  unvnlling 
to  own  what  they  are  really  seeking,  they  find  fault  with  the  road  as  circuitous  and 
wearisome.  3.  But  religion  is  a  bondage  only  to  those  who  have  not  the  heart  to 
like  it.  Accordingly,  in  ver.  17,  St.  Paul  thanks  God  that  his  brethren  had  "  obeyed 
from  the  heart  that  form  of  teaching,  into  which  they  had  been  delivered. "  We 
Christians  are  cast  into  a  certain  mould.  So  far  as  we  keep  within  it,  we  are  not 
sensible  that  it  is  a  mould.  It  is  when  our  hearts  would  overflow  in  some  evil 
direction,  then  we  consider  ourselves  in  prison.  It  is  the  law  in  our  members 
warring  against  the  law  of  the  Spirit  which  brings  us  into  a  distressing  bondage. 
Let  us  then  see  where  we  stand,  and  what  we  must  do.  Heaven  cannot  change  ; 
God  is  "  vrithout  variableness  or  shadow  of  turning."  His  law  is  from  everlasting 
to  everlasting.  We  must  change.  We  must  go  over  to  the  side  of  heaven.  Never 
had  a  soul  true  happiness  but  in  conformity  to  God.  We  must  have  the  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  hfe  in  our  hearts,  "  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  may  be  fulfilled  in 
us."  4.  Some  men,  instead  of  making  excuses,  such  as  I  have  been  considering, 
and  of  professing  to  like  religion,  all  but  its  service,  boldly  object  that  religion  is 
unnatural,  and  therefore  cannot  be  incumbent.  Men  are  men,  and  the  world  is 
the  world,  and  that  life  was  not  meant  to  be  a  burden,  and  that  God  sent  us  here 
for  enjoyment,  and  that  He  will  never  punish  us  for  following  the  law  of  our  nature. 
I  answer,  doubtless  this  life  was  meant  to  be  enjoyment ;  but  why  not  a  rejoicing 
in  the  Lord  ?  We  were  meant  to  follow  the  law  of  our  nature ;  but  why  of  our  old 
nature  and  not  of  our  new  ?  Now  that  God  has  opened  the  doors  of  our  prison- 
house,  if  men  are  still  carnal,  and  the  world  sinful,  and  the  life  of  angels  a  burden, 
and  the  law  of  our  nature  not  the  law  of  God,  whose  fault  is  it  ?  We  Christians 
are  indeed  under  the  law,  but  it  is  the  new  law,  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 
We  are  under  grace.  That  law,  which  to  nature  is  a  grievous  bondage,  is  to  those 
who  live  under  the  power  of  God's  presence,  what  it  was  meant  to  be,  a  rejoicing. 
{J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.)  True  liberty: — "Is  it  your  opinion,"  said  Socrates, 
**  that  liberty  is  a  fair  and  valuable  possession  ?  "  *'  So  valuable,"  replied 
Euthydemus,  "that  I  know  of  nothing  more  precious."  "But  he  who  is  so 
far  overcome  by  sensual  pleasure  that  he  is  not  able  to  practise  what  is  best,  and 
consequently  the  most  eligible — do  you  count  this  more  free,  Euthydemus  ?  " 
"Far  from  it,"  replied  the  other.  "You  think,  then,"  said  Socrates,  "that 
freedom  consists  in  being  able  to  do  what  is  right,  and  slavery,  in  not  being  able  ; 
whatever  may  be  the  cause  that  deprives  us  of  the  power  ?  "  "I  do,  most 
certainly."  "  The  debauchee,  then,  you  must  suppose  is  in  this  state  of  slavery  ?  '• 
"I  do,  and  with  good  reason."  {Xenophon.)  True  liberty: — ^You  think  the 
charter  would  make  you  free — would  to  God  it  would.  The  charter  is  not  bad  if 
the  men  who  use  it  are  not  bad.  But  will  the  charter  make  you  free  ?  Will  it  free 
you  from  slavery  to  ten-pound  bribes  ?  Slavery  to  gin  and  beer  ?  Slavery  to  every 
spouter  who  flatters  your  self-conceit,  and  stirs  up  bitterness  and  headlong  rage  in 
you  ?  That,  I  guess,  is  real  slavery ;  to  be  a  slave  to  one's  own  stomach,  one's  own 
pocket,  one's  own  temper.  Will  the  charter  cure  that?  Friends,  you  want  more 
than  Acts  of  Parliament  can  give.    Englishmen  1    Saxons  1    Workers  of  the  great 


Ti.]  ROMANS.  623 

eool-headed,  strong-handed  nation  of  England,  the  workshop  of  the  world,  the 
leader  of  freedom  for  seven  hundred  years ;  men,  you  say  you  have  common  sense  I 
then  do  not  humbug  yourselves  into  meaning  "  license "  when  you  cry  for 
"  liberty."  Who  would  dare  refuse  you  freedom?  for  the  Almighty  God  and  Jesus 
Christ,  the  poor  man  who  died  for  poor  men,  will  bring  it  about  for  you,  though 
all  the  mammonites  of  the  earth  were  against  you.  A  nobler  day  is  dawning  for 
England — a  day  of  freedom,  science,  industry.  But  there  will  be  no  true  freedom 
without  virtue,  no  true  science  without  religion,  no  true  industry  without  the  fear 
of  God  and  love  to  your  fellow-citizens.  Workers  of  England,  be  wise,  and  then 
you  must  be  free,  for  you  will  be  fit  to  be  free.  (G.  Kingsley,  M.A.)  The  liberty 
of  the  believer : — The  liberty  of  the  subject  could  never  be  preserved  in  a  lawless 
state  of  society,  but  violence  and  tyranny  would  reduce  to  a  slavish  obedience  the 
weak  and  the  timid.  The  pallacUum  of  civil  liberty  is  law;  law  well  defined, 
excluding  the  fluctuations  of  caprice  on  one  side,  and  of  aggression  on  the  other ; 
law  rigorously  executed  also,  for  the  best  code  is  a  dead  letter  if  it  be  not 
accompanied  by  a  living  and  firm  executive.  So  the  liberty  of  the  believer  is 
secured  by  the  law  of  God,  when  brought  under  its  guidance  and  government. 
While  living  under  the  misrule  of  his  fallen  nature,  he  is  the  sport  of  every 
capricious  imagination,  and  successively  the  slave  of  his  predominant  passions 
(ver.  16.)  But  let  Christ's  government  be  set  up,  and  he  becomes  Christ's 
freeman ;  "  sin  has  no  more  dominion  over  him  " ;  he  is  no  longer  its  wretched 
captive,  but  is  under  gracious  law,  for  "  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  tiiere  is 
liberty."    (G.  H.  SalUr.) 

Vers.  19,  20.  I  speak  after  the  maimer  of  men. — Apostolic  exhortation: — ^I.  Its 
MBTHOD.  "After  the  manner  of  men,"  i.e.,  (Gr.)  humanly — as  men  ordinarily 
speak,  borrowing  any  illustrations  from  common  life.  Spiritual  subjects  are  made 
plainer  by  familiar  comparisons,  and  so  preachers  should  use  simple  language  and 
homely  illnstratioDS.  This  was  exemplified  in  Christ,  and  inspired  writers  in 
general.  The  most  useful  preachers  have  ever  been  those  who  speak  most 
humanly.  The  arrow  too  high  flies  over  the  head ;  too  low  falls  short  of  the  mark. 
II.  The  reason  fob  the  method.  "  The  infirmity  of  your  flesh  " — imperfect  know- 
ledge through  the  flesh — an  apology  for  the  use  of  the  expression  "  slaves,"  &o. 
Some  beUevers  are  stiU  babes  and  carnal  (1  Cor.  iii.  1-4 ;  Heb.  v.  12-14) ;  others 
are  spiritual  and  of  a  full  age.  In  God's  family  are  fathers,  young  men,  little 
children  (1  John  ii.  12-14).  The  flesh  is  an  impediment  to  the  apprehension  of 
truth.  Carnal  nature  views  holiness  not  as  liberty  but  as  bondage.  Arguments 
and  modes  of  speaking  to  be  adapted  to  the  hearer's  state.  Let  not  the  mature  and 
enlightened,  then,  cavil  at  methods  adapted  to  reach  the  immature  and  ignorant 
andi  vice  versA.  HI.  Its  substance.  1.  A  reminiscence.  "  As  ye  have  yielded  your 
members  "  servants — (1)  To  uncleanness,  a  characteristic  of  heathen  life  in  general 
(chap.  i.  24).  Uncleanness  is  sin  against  oneself :  unchastity  of  Ufe.  All  sin  is 
uncleanness;  some  sins  especially  so  (chap,  xiii  13).  The  greatest  slave  is  he 
who  serves  sensual  pleasures.  (2)  To  iniquity — unlawfulness — what  is  opposed  to 
God's  law,  and  even  the  laws  of  human  society  (Luke  xviii.  4).  Uncleanness  and 
iniquity  include  the  whole  circumference  of  sin  (Matt.  xv.  19).  (3)  Unto  iniquity 
— to  the  practice  of  iniquity  as  a  result ;  to  an  always  still  greater  progress  and 
depth  in  iniquity.  The  practice  is  the  necessary  effect  of  the  bondage.  Sin  allows 
none  of  its  servants  to  remain  idle.  2.  An  enforcement  of  duty.  "Even  so  now" 
— as  heartily  and  thoroughly,  and  in  consideration  of  the  past  "yield  your 
members" — (1)  Servants  to  righteousness.  Still  servants,  but  to  righteousness 
instead  of  sin.  Christ  gives  His  disciples  a  yoke,  but  it  is  an  easy  one.  Servitude 
to5  righteousness  means  truest  liberty.  (2)  Unto  holiness — so  as  to  practise  and 
grow  in  it.  Holiness  is  that  which  is  in  accordance  with  God's  wUl,  and  embraces 
the  whole  man  (1  Thess.  v.  23).  It  is  a  matter  of  growth.  The  faithful  perfor- 
mance of  one  duty  prepares  for  that  of  another.  Victory  over  one  sin  strengthens 
ns  for  victory  over  a  second.  The  practice  of  righteousness  confirms  the  principle 
of  holiness.  Gracious  acts  strengthen  gracious  habits,  as  labour  adds  to  muscle. 
(T.  Robimon,  D.D.)  Will  ye  be  the  servants  of  sin  or  the  servants  of  God  t — To 
determine  your  choice  consider — I.  The  contrast.  1.  Sin  conducts  you  from 
iniquity  to  iniquity.  2.  God  will  lead  you  in  the  path  of  holiness.  H.  The  im- 
mediate consequences.  1.  The  fruit  of  sin  is  shame.  2.  Of  faith  is  holiness.  HI. 
The  final  besult.  1.  The  wages  of  sin  is  death.  2.  The  gift  of  God  eternal  life. 
(/.  Lyth,  D.D.)        Forsake  the  service  of  sin  ;  enter  the  service  of  righteoxtsness ;— 


634  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP.  n. 

Then  you  escape — 1.  Out  of  disgraceful  impurity  into  true  holiness  (vers.  19-21). 
2.  Out  of  dishonourable  servitude  into  true  freedom  (vers.  20-22).  3.  Out  of  death 
and  condemnation  into  eternal  life  (vers.  21-23).  (W.  Hauck.)  Two  ways  and  two 
ends  ;— I.  The  one  was  bittee  sebvitddb  ;  the  other  sweet  libebtt.  II.  The  one 
has  DISGRACEFUL  NOTORIETY ;  the  Other  PRAISEWORTHY  MODESTY.  III.  The  one  has 
ETERNAL  DEATH  ;  the  other  ETERNAL  LIFE.  Note  what  Jesus  says  of  these  two  ways 
and  their  ending  (Matt.  vii.  13).  (W.  Ziethe.)  The  slavery  of  sin  unlawful — a 
ground  of  hope  to  the  sinner : — Luther's  domestic,  Elizabeth,  in  a  fit  of  displeasure, 
left  his  service  without  notice.  She  subsequently  fell  into  sin  and  became  dan- 
gerously ill.  Luther  visited  her,  and,  taking  his  seat  by  her  bedside,  she  said,  "  I 
have  given  my  soul  to  Satan."  "  Why,"  rejoined  Luther,  •'  that's  of  no  conse- 
quence. What  else  ?  "  ••  I  have,"  continued  she,  "  done  many  wicked  things  ; 
but  this  is  what  most  oppresses  me,  that  I  have  deliberately  sold  my  poor  soul  to 
the  devil,  and  how  can  such  a  crime  ever  find  mercy  ?  "  "  Elizabeth,  Usten  to 
me,"  rejoined  the  man  of  God.  "  Suppose,  while  you  lived  in  my  house,  you  had 
sold  and  transferred  all  my  children  to  a  stranger,  would  the  sale  or  transfer  have 
been  lawful  and  binding?"  "  Oh  no,"  said  the  deeply  humbled  girl,  "for  I  had 
no  right  to  do  that."  "  Very  well,  you  had  still  less  right  to  give  your  soul  to  the 
arch-enemy ;  it  no  more  belongs  to  you  than  my  children  do.  It  is  the  exclusive 
property  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  He  made  it,  and  when  lost  also  redeemed  it ; 
it  is  His,  with  all  its  powers  and  faculties,  and  you  can't  give  away  and  sell  what 
is  not  yours ;  if  you  have  attempted  it,  the  whole  transaction  was  unlawful,  and 
entirely  void.  Now,  do  you  go  to  the  Lord,  confess  your  guilt  with  a  broken  heart 
and  a  contrite  spirit,  and  entreat  Him  to  pardon  you,  and  take  back  again  what 
is  wholly  His  own.  And  as  for  the  sin  of  attempting  to  alienate  His  rightful 
property,  throw  that  back  upon  the  devil,  for  that,  and  that  alone  is  his."  The 
girl  obeyed,  was  converted,  and  died  full  of  hope.  Changed  vxes  : — Among  the 
spoils  taken  when  Alexander  conquered  and  captured  Darius  was  a  richly  jewelled 
cabinet  or  casket  in  which  the  Persian  king  kept  his  perfumes  and  sweet  ointments. 
It  was  carried  to  Alexander,  who  at  once  turned  it  to  another  and  nobler  use,  and 
added  a  syllable  to  its  name.  He  placed  in  it  his  copy  of  the  "  Iliad,"  saying, 
"  This  shall  no  longer  be  called  myrrh-box,  but  Homer-box."  What  the  "myrrh, 
box  "  became  by  passing  under  Alexander's  hands  illustrates  what  the  soul  becomes 
by  passing  under  the  hands  of  its  Divine  Inspirer.  By  unseen  influences  (as 
certainly  as  by  the  miracle  touch)  God  adds  to  the  graces  of  "  a  chosen  vessel "  the 
gift  of  spiritual  power  and  expression.  He  makes  it  empty  that  He  may  fill  it  with 
greater  riches.  For  when  ye  were  the  servants  of  sin,  ye  were  free  from  righ- 
teousness.— The  servants  of  sin : — 1.  There  is  no  condition  so  sad  as  that  of  a 
slave  ;  and  no  slavery  so  hard  as  that  of  sin.  There  was  once  a  tyrant  who  ordered 
one  of  his  subjects  to  make  an  iron  chain  of  a  certain  length.  The  man  brought 
the  work,  and  the  tyrant  bade  him  make  it  longer  still.  And  he  continued  to  add 
link  to  link,  till  at  length  the  cruel  taskmaster  ordered  his  servants  to  bind  the 
worker  with  his  own  chain,  and  cast  him  into  the  fire.  That  hardest  of  tyrants, 
the  devil,  treats  his  slaves  in  like  manner.  At  first  the  chain  of  sin  is  light,  and 
could  easily  be  cast  oS.  But  day  by  day  Satan  bids  his  victims  add  another  link. 
The  servant  of  sin  grows  more  hardened,  daiing,  reckless  in  his  evil  way.  He  adds 
sin  to  sin,  and  then  the  end  comes.  2.  Very  often  the  slaves  of  sin  do  not  know 
that  they  are  slaves.  They  talk  about  their  freedom  from  restraint,  they  tell  us 
they  are  their  own  masters,  that  the  godly  are  slaves.  Once  I  visited  a  madhouse. 
Some  had  one  delusion,  some  another.  One  thought  he  was  a  king,  another  the 
heir  to  a  fortune.  But  one  thing  they  all  believed,  that  they  were  in  their  right 
minds.  3.  The  servants  of  sin  bear  about  the  marks  of  their  master.  I  have  seen 
gangs  of  convicts  working  on  Dartmoor.  You  could  not  mistake  them  for  anything 
else  if  they  were  dressed  in  the  best  of  clothing.  The  word  convict  is  stamped  upon 
every  grey  face,  as  plainly  as  the  Government  mark  is  stamped  upon  their  clothing. 
The  servants  of  sin  have  their  marks  also.  Look  at  the  shifty  eyes,  and  downward 
glance  of  the  knave  and  the  false  man ;  the  flushed  brow  and  cruel  eyes  of  the 
angry  man ;  the  weak  lips  and  trembling  hand  of  the  drunkard.  4.  The  servants 
of  sin  have  their  so-called  enjoyments,  these  are  the  baits  with  which  the  tyrant 
gets  them  into  his  power.  For  a  time  the  way  of  transgressors  is  made  easy  and 
pleasant.  The  broad  road  is  shaded,  and  edged  with  fair  fruits  and  flowers.  A 
saint  of  old  once  saw  a  man  leading  a  herd  of  swine,  which  followed  him  wilUngly. 
When  the  saint  marvelled,  the  man  showed  him  that  they  followed  him  for  the 
sake  of  the  sweet  food  in  his  hand,  and  knew  not  whither  they  were  going.    So  the 


OHii.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  S96 

servants  of  sin  follow  Satan  for  the  sake  of  the  sweet  things  which  he  offers,  and 
know  not  that  they  are  going  to  their  death,  even  the  living  death  of  a  lost  souL 
{J.  H.  W.  Buxton,  M.A.)  Freedom  from  righteousnets  :—Stsinding  altogether 
outside  it,  having  no  relation  to  it,  destitute  of  it,  entirely  unaffected  by  it ; 
strangers  therefore  to  its  happy  and  gainful  service.  Possessing  a  freedom  which 
is  a  bane  and  a  bondage.  A  planet's  freedom  from  the  law  which  preserves  it  in 
its  orbit ;  a  child's  freedom  from  the  restraints  of  a  happy  home.  This  freedom 
pleases  the  flesh,  but  ruius  the  man  ;  it  is  not  mercifully  given,  but  madly  taken  ; 
it  is  Satan's  miserable  choice, "  Better  to  reign  in  hell  than  serve  in  heaven."  Note 
the  latent  irony  of  the  text ;  "  Ye  were  free  "  ;  but  what  kind  of  freedom  ?  A  free- 
dom akin  to  that  of  hell.  Freedom  from  righteousness  a  man's  greatest  misery ; 
freedom  in  righteousness  his  greatest  mercy.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Liberty  and 
restraint : — You  hear  every  day  greater  numbers  of  foolish  people  speaking  about 
liberty,  as  if  it  were  such  an  honourable  thing ;  so  far  from  being  that,  it  is,  on  the 
whole,  and  in  the  broadest  sense,  dishonourable,  and  an  attribute  of  the  lower 
creatures.  No  human  being,  however  great  or  powerful,  was  ever  so  free  as  a  fish. 
There  is  always  something  that  he  must  or  must  not  do ;  while  the  fish  may  do 
whatever  he  likes.  All  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  put  together  are  not  haU  so 
large  as  the  sea,  and  all  the  railroads  and  wheels  that  ever  were  or  will  be  invented, 
are  not  so  easy  as  fins.  You  will  find,  on  fairly  thinking  of  it,  that  it  is  his  restraint 
which  is  honourable  to  man,  not  his  liberty ;  and,  what  is  more,  it  is  restraint 
which  is  honourable  even  in  the  lower  animals.  A  butterfly  is  more  free  than  a 
bee,  but  you  honour  the  bee  more  just  because  it  is  subject  to  certain  laws  which 
fit  it  for  orderly  function  in  bee  society.  And  throughout  the  world,  of  the  two 
abstract  things,  liberty  and  restraint,  restraint  is  always  the  more  honourable.  It 
is  true,  indeed,  that  in  these  and  all  other  matters  you  never  can  reason  finally 
from  the  abstraction,  for  both  hberty  and  restraint  are  good  when  they  are  nobly 
chosen,  and  both  are  bad  when  they  are  badly  chosen  ;  but  of  the  two,  I  repeat,  it 
is  restraint  which  characterises  the  higher  creature,  and  betters  the  lower  creature; 
and  from  the  ministering  of  the  archangel  to  the  labour  of  the  insect,  from  the 
poising  of  the  planets  to  the  gravitation  of  a  grain  of  dust — the  power  and  glory  of 
all  creatures  and  all  matter  consist  in  their  obedience,  not  in  their  freedom.  The 
Bun  has  no  liberty,  a  dead  leaf  has  much.  The  dust  of  which  you  are  formed  has 
no  hberty.    Its  Uberty  will  come — with  its  corruption.     (J.  Euskin.) 

Yer.  21.  What  fruit  had  ye  then  In  those  things  whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed  t — 
The  characters  of  sin : — Sin  is  here  arraigned  in  all  the  periods  of  time.  I.  For  thb 
FAST  AS  UNFRUITFUL.  "  What  fruit  had  ye  ?  "  Sin  ought  to  produce  something  :  for 
it  costs  much.  Now,  for  a  man  to  labour  and  give  up  all  the  advantages  of  religion 
for  nothing  is  hard  indeed  t  And  is  not  this  the  case  ?  Eead  the  history  of  wicked 
nations,  families,  individuals.  Does  the  sinner  ever  gain  what  deserves  the  name 
of  "  fruit  "  ?  It  promises  much,  but  how  does  it  perform  ?  (Job  xx.  11-14).  Sinful 
gratifications  continue  no  longer  than  the  actions  themselves ;  for  then,  conse- 
quences begin  to  be  thought  of;  reason  ascends  the  throne,  and  scourges;  oon- 
Ecience  awakes,  and  condemns.  Suppose  the  swearer  was  to  tell  us  what  he  has 
gained  by  his  oaths,  the  drunkard  by  his  cups,  the  sensualist  by  his  uncleanness, 
the  prodigal  by  his  extravagance,  the  proud,  the  envious,  the  malicious,  by  indulging 
their  vile  tempers ;  suppose  the  sinner  was  to  balance  his  accounts  at  the  end  of  a 

iear,  of  a  week,  of  a  day — surely  he  must  find  that  his  gains  do  not  counterbalance 
is  loss,  his  pleasures  do  not  make  him  amends  for  his  pains  even  in  the  lowest 
degree.  II.  For  the  present  as  disgraceful.  "  Ye  are  now  ashamed."  And 
well  ye  may,  for  there  is  nothing  so  scandalous  as  sin.  It  is  not  a  shame  to  be 
poor  and  distressed — but  it  is  shameful  to  be  a  fool,  a  base  coward,  a  traitor  to  the 
best  of  kings,  and  to  be  ungrateful  to  the  kindest  of  friends.  1.  There  is  a  natural 
ehame  which  arises  from  the  commission  of  sin.  This  it  was  that  made  our  first 
parents  hide  themselves,  so  closely  did  shame  tread  on  the  heels  of  guilt.  This 
class  of  emotions  may  be  in  a  great  measure  subdued  by  continuance  in  sin ;  for 
some  "  glory  in  their  shame."  But  this  is  not  general  (Job  xxiv.  15-17).  Hence 
they  not  only  elude  observation — which  they  would  not  do  if  there  was  anything 
that  tended  to  their  praise,  but  frame  excuses.  But  why  deny  or  palliate  ?  Why 
plead  mistake,  ignorance,  surprise,  infirmity  unless  disparaging  to  character  ?  The 
sinner  is  ashamed  even  to  meet  himself,  and  finally  abandons  the  moral  world, 
and  mingles  only  with  those  of  his  own  quality ;  for  here  mutual  wickedness  creates 
mutoal  confidence,  and  keeps  them  from  reproaching  one  another.   2.  There  is  also 


526  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

a  gracious  shame  which  accompanies  "  repentance  nnto  life."  (1)  This  does  not 
spring  from  a  fear  of  discovery,  but  from  a  sense  of  the  odiousness  of  sin.  The  real 
penitent  is  now  ashamed  of  things  which  pass  uncensured  in  the  world,  and  which 
once  produced  no  uneasiness  in  himself.  (2)  This  will  be  in  proportion  to  our  per- 
ception of  the  glory  and  goodness  of  God.  The  more  we  think  of  His  patience  while 
we  are  rebelling,  of  His  mercy  in  pardoning  us  and  adopting  us  into  His  family 
after  all  our  provocations,  the  more  shall  we  be  affected  with  our  vileness  in  offend- 
ing Him.  3.  There  is  also  a  penal  shame.  For  God  has  so  ordered  things  that  it 
a  man  be  not  ashamed  of  his  sins,  he  shall  be  put  to  shame  by  them.  (1)  How 
often  is  the  transgressor  dishonoured  in  this  world !  See  the  miser.  "  He  is  a 
proverb  and  a  by-word."  See  the  extortioner.  How  many  "  curse  his  habitation  "  I 
"  A  wicked  man  is  loathsome,  and  cometh  to  shame."  (2)  But  this  will  be  more 
especially  the  case  hereafter.  The  wicked  will  "  rise  to  shame  and  everlasting  con- 
tempt " — ashamed  in  themselves ;  and  contemned  by  each  other,  by  saints,  by 
angels,  and  by  the  Judge  of  all.  III.  Fob  the  future  as  destructive.  "  The  end 
of  these  things  is  death."  1.  The  death  of  the  body  was  the  produce  of  sin.  2. 
There  are  many  instances  recorded  of  God's  inflicting  death  immediately  upon 
sinners  in  a  way  of  judgment.  3.  Death  sometimes  attends  sin  as  a  natural  conse- 
quence of  vice.  How  frequently  do  persons,  by  anger,  intemperance,  and  such  like 
courses,  hasten  on  dissolution,  and  become  self-murderers  t  A  physician  of  great 
repute  has  given  it  as  his  opinion  that  scarcely  one  in  a  thousand  dies  a  natural 
death.  4.  But  what  the  apostle  principally  intends  is  the  "  second  death."  (1)  It 
Ib  a  dreadful  end.  Nothing  that  we  can  here  feel  or  fear  deserves  to  be  compared 
with  it.  (2)  It  is  a  righteous  end.  Hence  the  wicked  themselves  will  be  speechless. 
(3)  It  is  a  certain  end.  From  what  quarter  can  you  derive  a  hope  to  escape? 
The  power  of  God  enables  Him,  His  holiness  excites  Him,  His  truth  binds  Him  to 
inflict  this  misery.  Conclusion :  Mark  the  difference  between  the  service  of  sin  and 
the  service  of  God.  It  holds  in  all  the  articles  we  have  reviewed.  If  sin  be  unfruitful, 
"  godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things."  If  tin  is  shameful,  holiness  is  honourable 
and  glorious.  If  sin  ends  in  death,  religion  ends  in  "  everlasting  life."  {W,  Jay.) 
The  Christian's  review  : — I.  What  fruit  had  you  in  the  works  or  sin  ?  1.  They  are 
not  innocent.  If  we  permit  the  noblest  object  God  ever  built  to  take  the  place  of 
God  in  our  esteem,  and  every  unregenerate  man  does,  God  must  feel  Himself 
robbed  and  insulted.  2.  They  are  not  rational.  (1)  It  surely  is  most  reasonable 
that  men  put  themselves  under  the  guidance  of  their  Maker,  and  obey  Him  in  all 
things,  and  on  Him  place  supremely  their  affections.  But  none  of  these  is  true 
of  the  ungodly.  (2)  They  consist  in  the  gratification  of  their  appetites  and  passions, 
not  in  those  pursuits  that  elevate  the  mind  and  mend  the  heart.  3.  They  are  not 
satisfying.  That  which  is  neither  innocent  nor  rational,  we  should  not  expect  would 
be  satisfying  ;  we  should  promptly  declare  it  impossible.  God  has  made  the  brute 
creation,  but  not  man,  to  be  satisfied  with  the  gratifications  of  appetite.  Of  them 
God  has  not  required  a  higher  aim,  nor  even  this  ;  He  requires  nothing.  Of  man 
He  requires  that  we  give  Him  our  hearts,  and  man  He  has  made  capable  of  a  higher 
enjoyment  through  the  medium  of  the  moral  affections  than  through  the  gratifica- 
tions of  appetite.  And  He  requires  us  to  be  happy  through  this  higher  medium. 
He  will  not  be  satisfied  that  our  noblest  powers  lie  dormant ;  and  while  He  is  not 
so,  neither  shall  we  be.  4.  They  are  not  calculated  to  elevate,  but  to  depress  their 
nature.  They  take  pleasure  in  objects  beneath  the  dignity  of  their  being.  I 
remember  the  disgust  it  gave  me  when  I  read  of  one  of  the  emperors  of  antiquity 
that  most  of  his  time  was  spent  in  catching  flies.  Though  a  mere  child  when  I 
met  with  this  historical  fact,  I  involuntarily  inquired,  why  his  crown,  and  throne, 
and  sceptre  ?  A  beggar  boy  might  succeed  as  well  as  he  in  his  sordid  occupation. 
But  why  did  he  appear  meanly  occupied,  but  as  I  compared  his  employment  with 
some  nobler  business  that  might  have  occupied  him  ?  5.  They  are  not  abiding. 
What  joy  they  have,  and  it  is  far  beneath  what  they  might  have,  is  fleeting  and 
transitory.  Every  object  on  which  their  joy  depends  is  perishing — is  a  dying  and 
a  transitory  object.  They  were  not  created  to  be  the  permanent  food  of  an  immortal 
mind.  To  expect  permanent  bliss,  and  base  the  hope  of  it  on  that  which  worms 
can  devour,  and  thieves  break  through  and  steal,  is  to  expect  grapes  of  thorns  and 
figs  of  thistles ;  is  to  sow  to  the  wind  and  reap  the  whirlwind  ;  is  to  pierce  ourselves 
through  with  many  sorrows.  6.  They  are  dangerous,  being  guilty  and  forbidden. 
That  a  nature  capable  of  loving  his  Maker  should  fix  his  supreme  attachment  else- 
where is  offering  God  a  perpetual  insult,  and  exposing  the  offender  to  the  indigna- 
tion and  wrath  of  the  holy  and  jealoos  Jehovah.    Having  noticed  how  entirely 


CHAP.  VI.]  BOMANS.  627 

without  any  fruit  or  enjoyment  was  the  good  man  in  his  unconverted  state  in  those 
things  which  he  once  tried  to  enjoy  we  shall — II.  View  him  dndee  the  operation 

OF  THAT  SHAME  AND  REGRET  TO  WHICH  HIS  PAST  CONDUCT    HAS    SUBJECTED   HIM.       He    is 

brought  to  see  that  God  is  worthy  of  his  whole  heart,  and  that  he  has  withheld  it, 
and  has  worshipped  and  served  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator,  who  is  over  all, 
God  blessed  for  ever.  He  becomes  conscious  of  a  quarrel  with  his  Maker,  but  for 
no  reason  that  he  dare  now  assign.  Every  attribute  of  His  nature  is  glorious,  and 
every  act  of  His  government  holy,  and  just,  and  good.  And  still  the  sinner  has 
placed  the  supreme  love  on  some  idol,  and  refused  to  love  and  worship  his  Maker 
and  his  Redeemer.  "  Then  shalt  thou  be  ashamed,"  says  the  prophet  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord,  "  and  never  open  thy  mouth  any  more,  because  of  thy  shame,  when  I 
am  pacified  toward  thee  for  all  that  thou  hast  done."  And  the  Psalmist  says, 
"Thou  makest  me  to  bear  the  iniquities  of  my  youth."  His  shame  is  greatly 
enhanced  by  the  consideration  that  he  must  now  be  indebted,  as  he  always  has  been, 
for  all  his  benefits  to  one  whom  he  has  always  expelled  from  his  affections.  He 
sees,  too,  that  the  ground  of  his  preference  for  idols  was  a  depraved  heart,  that 
would  prefer  anything  to  God,would  love  a  stock  or  a  stone  more  than  the  infinitely 
adorable  and  kind  Creator  ;  and  in  the  meantime  would  not  be  convinced  that  the 
course  he  took  ruined  him,  that  his  misplaced  affections  polluted  and  belittled  his 
mind,  and  that  he  was  ensnared,  and  impoverished,  and  destroyed  by  the  works  of 
his  own  hands.  Now  it  is  that  the  man  becomes  filled  with  shame  and  confusion 
of  face.    III.  The  end  of  these  things  would  naturally  have  been,  to  the  now 

BEQENERATE  MAN,  AND  MUST  BE  TO  ALL  MEN  WHO  DO  NOT  REPENT,  DEATH.       1.    A  COUISe 

of  sin  leads  to  bad  society.  If  men  will  be  transgressors,  they  must  of  necessity 
associate  with  men  of  similar  pursuit.  Make  the  attempt  to  collect  a  company  of 
Bober,  serious,  thoughtful,  ungodly  men,  and  if  you  do  not  soon  discover  that  no 
Buch  society  can  be  formed,  then  have  we  very  much  mistaken  the  true  state  of  the 
world.  2.  A  course  of  sin  absorbs  precious  time.  Unregenerate  men  throw  away 
▼eiT  many  years  of  their  probation.  All  that  time  that  the  Christian  must  spend 
in  his  closet,  in  the  study  of  the  Bible,  and  in  the  duties  of  domestic  worship,  the 
nngodly  have  to  spare.  This  shortens  life,  and  begets  the  habit  of  not  thinking — 
ihe  habit  of  placing  the  mind  in  an  attitude  of  listlessness  and  inattention,  than 
which  no  habit  can  be  more  ruinous  to  one  whose  happiness  in  this  life  and  in  the 
life  to  come  depends  so  much  on  prompt  and  vigorous  action.  If  we  are  to  reach 
heaven,  and  would  be  prepared  for  it,  we  must  form  soon  the  very  opposite  habit, 
and  must  learn  to  husband  well  every  hour  that  lies  between  us  and  the  grave.  3. 
A  conrse  of  sin  is  death,  as  it  leads  to  the  adoption  of  bad  sentiments,  and  engenders 
an  erroneous  creed.  There  is  an  whole  system  of  infidelity  taught  and  beheved  in 
the  promiscuous  associations  of  the  ungodly.  It  may  not  be  styled  infidelity,  and 
lectures  may  not  be  given  in  the  formal  didactic  mode,  but  the  result  may  be  the 
Bame.  4.  A  course  of  sin  benumbs  the  right  affections.  It  tends  to  destroy  filial 
confidence,  and  fraternal,  and  parental,  and  conjugal  affection.  Devotion  to  some 
idol  easily  becomes  stronger  than  any  of  the  natural  relationships,  and  thus  neutral- 
ises many  a  restraint,  that  the  God  of  nature,  as  the  infidel  would  name  Jehovah, 
has  imposed.  But  when  we  pass  these  and  speak  of  the  religious  affections,  it 
hardly  need  be  said  that  all  these  are  suppressed  and  quenched  by  a  course  of  sin. 
5.  A  course  of  sin  ends  in  death  as  it  nourishes  the  unhallowed  passions.  Men 
grow  worse  day  by  day  while  they  remain  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  under  the 
bonds  of  iniquity.  Their  position  is  never  stationary,  but  their  course  downward, 
downward,  downward  toward  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever,  6.  A  course  of 
sin  tends  to  death  as  it  offers  constant  provocation  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  On  the 
operations  of  His  Spirit  we  are  dependent  for  life  and  salvation.  There  is  no 
amount  of  means,  or  force  of  human  eloquence,  or  impetus  of  natural  resolution 
that  can  arrest  the  course  of  sin.  Men  will  not  try  to  stop  themselves,  nor  allow 
themselves  to  be  stayed  in  their  course  by  any  human  power.  Hence  our  only  hope 
is  that  God  will  make  them  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power.  But  every  act  of  sin 
is  resistance  made  to  the  efforts  of  His  mercy  and  the  influence  of  His  Spirit. 
(D.  A.  Clark.)  Apples  of  Sodom :  or  the  fruits  of  sin  ; — The  son  of  Sirach  prudently 
advised,  "  Judge  none  blessed  before  his  death  ;  for  a  man  shall  be  known  in  his 
children."  This  holds  good  concerning  the  family  of  sin  :  for  it  keeps  a  good  house 
which  is  full  of  company  and  servants  ;  it  is  served  by  the  possessions  of  the  world, 
courted  by  the  unhappy,  flattered  by  fools,  and  feasted  all  the  way  of  its  progress. 
But  if  we  look  to  what,  are  the  children  of  this  splendid  family,  and  see  what  issue 
Bin  produces,  it  may  help  to  untie  the  charm.    Sin  and  concupiscence  marry 


528  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  ti. 

together  and  feast  highly ;  but  the  children  of  their  filthy  union  are  ugly,  foolish, 
and  ill-matured — shame  and  death.  These  are  the  fruits  of  sin — apples  of  Sodom, 
fair  on  the  outside,  but  within  full  of  ashes  and  rottenness.  And  the  tree  with  ita 
fruits  go  together ;  if  you  will  have  the  mother,  you  must  take  the  daughters.  In 
answer  to  the  question  of  the  text  we  are  to  consider — I.  What  is  the  sum  total  of 
THE  PLEASDBES  OF  SIN.  Most  of  them  will  be  found  very  punishments.  1.  To  pass 
over  the  miseries  ensuing  from  envy,  murder,  and  a  whole  catalogue  of  sins,  every 
one  of  which  is  a  disease,  we  may  observe  that  nothing  pretends  to  pleasure  but  the 
lusts  of  the  flesh,  ambition,  and  revenge.  These  alone  cozen  us  with  a  fair  oatside; 
and  yet  on  a  survey  of  their  fruits  we  shall  see  how  miserably  they  deceive  us.  2. 
For  a  man  cannot  take  pleasure  in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  unless  he  be  helped  forward 
by  inconsideration  and  foUy.  Grave  and  wise  persons  are  extremely  less  affected 
by  them  than  the  hare-brained  boy.  It  is  a  strange  beauty  that  none  but  the  blind 
or  blear-eyed  can  see.  3.  The  pleasures  of  intemperance  are  nothing  but  the  relics 
and  images  of  pleasure,  after  nature  has  been  feasted ;  for  so  long  as  she  needs,  and 
temperance  waits,  pleasure  stands  by :  but  as  temperance  begins  to  go  away,  having 
done  the  ministries  of  nature,  every  morsel  and  drop  is  less  delicious  and  endurable, 
but  as  men  force  nature  to  stay  longer  than  she  would.  4.  With  these  pretenders 
to  pleasure  there  is  so  much  trouble  to  bring  them  to  act  an  enjoyment,  that  the 
appetite  is  above  half  tired  before  it  comes.  An  ambitious  man  must  be  wonder- 
fully patient ;  and  no  one  buys  death  and  damnation  at  so  dear  a  rate  as  he  who 
fights  for  it,  enduring  heat  and  cold  and  hunger  ;  and  who  practises  all  the  auster- 
ities of  the  hermit,  with  this  difference  that  the  one  does  it  for  heaven  and  the 
other  for  hell.  And  as  for  revenge,  its  pleasure  is  like  that  of  eating  chalk  and 
coals,  or  hke  the  feeding  of  a  cancer  or  a  wolf ;  the  man  is  restless  tiU  it  be  done, 
and  when  it  is  every  one  sees  how  infinitely  removed  he  is  from  satisfaction.  5. 
These  sins,  when  they  are  entertained  with  the  greatest  fondness  from  without, 
must  have  little  pleasure,  because  there  is  a  strong  faction  against  them.  Some- 
thing within  strives  against  the  entertainment,  and  they  sit  uneasy  on  the  spirit, 
when  the  man  is  vexed  that  they  are  not  lawful.  They  are  against  a  man's  con- 
science, i.e.,  against  his  reason  and  his  rest.  6.  The  pleasure  in  those  few  sins  that 
pretend  to  it  is  a  little  limited  nothing,  confined  to  a  single  faculty,  to  one  sense ; 
and  that  which  is  the  instrument  of  sense  is  its  torment.  By  the  faculty  through 
which  it  tastes  it  is  afflicted,  for  so  long  as  it  can  taste  it  is  tormented  with  desire, 
and  when  it  can  desire  no  longer  it  cannot  feel  pleasure.  7.  Sin  hath  little  or  no 
pleasure  in  its  enjoyment  because  its  very  manner  of  entry  and  production  is  by  a 
curse  and  a  contradiction.  Men  love  sin  because  it  is  forbidden,  some  out  of  the 
spirit  of  disobedience,  some  by  wildness,  some  because  they  are  reproved,  many  by 
importunity  ;  and  sins  grow  up  with  spite,  peevishness,  and  wrath.  8.  The 
pleasures  in  the  enjoyment  of  sin  are  trifling  because  bo  transient ;  if  they  be  in 
themselves  little  this  makes  tliem  still  less  ;  but  if  they  were  great  this  would  change 
the  dehght  into  torment.  Add  to  this  that  it  so  passes  away  that  nothing  pleasant 
remains  behind :  it  is  like  the  path  of  an  arrow ;  no  man  can  tell  what  is  become 
of  the  pleasures  of  last  night's  sin.  9.  Sin  has  in  its  best  advantages  but  a  trifling 
pleasure,  because  not  only  God,  reason,  conscience,  honour,  interest,  and  laws  soar 
it,  but  the  devil  himself  makes  it  troublesome  ;  so  that  one  sin  contradicts  another 
and  vexes  the  man  with  a  variety  of  evUs.  Does  not  envy  punish  flattery,  and  self- 
love  torment  the  drunkard  ?  Which  is  the  greater,  the  pleasure  of  prodigalities  or 
the  pain  of  the  consequent  poverty  ?  10.  Sin  has  so  little  relish  that  it  is  always 
greater  in  expectation  than  possession.  If  men  could  see  this  beforehand  they 
would  not  pursue  it  so  eagerly.  11.  The  fruits  of  its  present  possession,  the 
pleasures  of  taste,  are  less  pleasant,  because  no  sober  or  intelligent  man  likes  it  long. 
He  approves  it  in  the  height  of  passion  and  under  the  disguise  of  temptation,  bat 
at  all  other  times  he  finds  it  ugly  and  unreasonable,  and  the  remembrance  abates 
its  pleasures.  II.  What  fruits  and  relishes  sin  liEAVES  behind  it  by  its  natural 
EFFICIENCY.  1.  Paul  compriscs  them  under  the  scornful  appellation  of  "  shame." 
The  natural  fruits  of  sin  are — (1)  Ignorance,  (a)  Man  was  first  tempted  by  the 
promise  of  knowledge ;  he  fell  into  darkness  by  believing  that  the  devil  held  forth 
to  him  a  new  light.  It  was  not  likely  that  good  should  come  from  so  foul  a  begin- 
ning :  the  man  and  the  woman  knew  good,  and  all  that  was  oflered  them  was  the 
experience  of  evil.  Now  this  was  the  intioduction  of  ignorance.  When  the  under- 
standing suffered  itself  to  be  so  baffied  as  to  study  evil,  the  will  was  so  foolish  as  to 
fall  in  love  with  it,  and  they  conspired  to  undo  each  other.  For  when  the  will  began 
to  love  it,  then  the  onderstanding  was  set  on  work  to  advance,  approve,  believe  it. 


CHAJ.  tl]  ROMANS.  52$ 

»nd  to  be  factions  on  behalf  of  the  new  purchase.  Not,  however,  that  the  under- 
standing received  any  natural  diminution,  but  received  impediment  by  new  propo- 
sitions. It  lost  and  willingly  forgot  what  God  taught,  went  from  the  fountain  of 
truth,  and  gave  trust  to  the  father  of  lies.  (6)  It  is  certain  that,  if  a  man  would  ba 
pleased  with  sin,  or  persuade  others  to  be  so,  he  must  do  it  by  false  propositions. 
Who  is  a  greater  fool  than  an  atheist  who  sees  rare  effects  and  denies  their  cause, 
an  excellent  government  without  a  prince  ?  But  in  persuading  men  to  this  the  devil 
never  prevailed  very  far,  although  he  has  prevailed  in  a  thing  almost  as  senseless, 
viz.,  idolatry,  which  not  only  makes  God  after  man's  image,  but  in  the  likeness  of 
a  cat,  &o.  But  he  has  succeeded  yet  farther  in  prevailing  upon  men  to  believe  that 
evil  is  good  and  good  evil,  that  fornication  can  make  them  happy  and  drunkenness 
wise,  and  that  sin  has  pleasure  and  good  enough  in  it  to  make  amends  for  the  pains 
of  damnation.  Sin  has  no  better  argument  than  a  fly  has  to  enter  a  candle.  Such 
is  the  sinner's  philosophy,  and  no  wiser  are  his  hopes,  viz.,  that  he  can  in  an  instant 
make  amends  for  the  evils  of  years,  or  else  that  he  shall  be  saved  whether  he  will 
or  no,  or  that  heaven  shall  be  had  for  a  sigh ;  i.e.,  he  hopes  without  a  promise  and 
believes  that  he  shall  have  mercy  for  which  he  never  had  a  revelation.  If  this  be 
knowledge  or  wisdom  then  there  is  no  such  thing  as  folly  or  madness,  (c)  There 
are  some  sins  whose  very  formality  is  a  lie.  Superstition  could  not  exist  if  men 
beUeved  that  God  was  good,  wise,  free,  aud  merciful,  and  no  man  would  do  in 
private  what  he  fears  to  do  in  public  if  he  knew  that  God  sees  him  there  and  will 
bring  that  work  of  darkness  into  the  light.  He  who  excuses  a  fault  by  telling  a  lie, 
beUeves  it  better  to  be  guilty  of  two  faults  than  one.  The  first  natural  fruit  of  sin 
then  is  to  make  a  man  a  fool,  and  this  is  shame  enough.  (2)  But  sin  also  makes 
a  man  weak,  unapt  to  do  noble  things  ;  by  which  is  not  meant  a  natural  disability, 
for  it  is  equally  ready  for  a  man  to  will  good  as  evil ;  the  understanding  being  con- 
vinced the  hand  can  obey,  and  the  passions  be  directed  to  God's  service.  But 
because  they  are  not  used  to  it,  the  will  finds  a  diflBculty  to  do  them  so  much 
violence.  There  is  a  law  in  the  members,  and  he  that  gave  that  law  is  a  tyrant, 
and  the  subjects  of  it  slaves  ;  who  often  love  their  fetters  and  labour  hard ;  the 
basest  of  services  for  the  most  contemptible  rewards.  And  then  custom  brings  in  a 
new  nature  and  makes  a  bias  in  every  faculty.  Two  things  aggravate  the  slavery  and 
weakness  of  the  sinner,  (n)  He  sins  against  his  own  interest.  He  knows  tliat  he  will 
be  ruined  by  it,  but  the  evil  custom  remains,  {b)  Custom  prevails  against  experience. 
Though  the  man  has  been  disgraced  and  undone  it  will  not  cure  him.  (3)  Sin  naturally 
introduces  a  great  baseness  on  the  spirit,  expressed  sometimes  by  the  devil's  entering 
into  a  man.  Men  fall  by  this  into  sins  of  which  there  can  be  no  reason  given,  which 
no  excuse  can  lessen,  and  which  are  set  oS  by  no  allurements.  2.  Although  these 
are  the  shameful  effects  of  sin,  yet  there  are  some  sins  which  are  directly  shameful 
in  their  nature,  and  every  one  of  which  has  a  venomous  quality  of  its  own.  Thus 
the  devil's  sin  was  the  worst  because  it  came  from  the  greatest  malice ;  Adam's 
because  it  was  most  universal ;  Judas'  because  against  th€  most  excellent  Person. 
This  is  a  strange  poison  in  sin  that  of  so  many  sorts  every  one  of  them  should  ba 
the  worst.  Every  sin  has  an  evil  spirit  of  its  own  to  manage  and  embitter  it,  but  to 
some  sins  shame  is  more  appropriate,  such  as  lying,  lust,  vow  making,  and  incon- 
stancy. And  such  is  the  fate  of  sin  that  the  shame  grows  more  and  more  ;  we  lie 
to  men  and  excuse  it  to  God.  And  the  shame  wiU  follow  the  sin  beyond  the  grave. 
ni.  What  are  its  consequences  by  its  demekit  and  the  wkath  of  God  which  it 
HAS  deserved.  1.  The  impossibility  of  concealment.  No  wicked  man  ever  went 
off  the  scene  of  his  unworthiness  without  a  vile  character.  The  intolerable  appre- 
hensions of  sinners  themselves,  and  the  slightest  circumstances  often  bring  to  light 
what  was  transacted  behind  the  curtains  of  light.  2.  Sin  itself ;  and  when  God 
punishes  in  this  way  He  is  extremely  angry,  for  then  it  is  not  medicinal  but  exter- 
minating. One  evil  invites  another,  and  when  the  Holy  Spirit  is  quenched  the  man 
is  left  to  the  mercy  of  his  merciless  enemy.  3.  Fearful  plagues,  and  even  when 
God  forgives  the  sinner  retribution  is  not  wholly  withheld.  It  is  promised  through 
Christ  that  we  shall  not  die,  but  not  that  we  shall  not  be  smitten.  (1)  There  are 
some  mischiefs  which  are  the  proper  scourges  of  certain  sins  and  attend  them — 
drunkenness  by  giddiness,  lying  by  being  given  over  to  believe  a  lie,  &c.  (2) 
There  are  some  states  of  sin  which  expose  a  man  to  all  mischief  by  taking 
off  every  guard.  (3)  The  end  of  all  this  is  death  eternal.  (Jeremy  Taylor.) 
The  fruits  of  sin : — I.  It  is  unprofitable.  '•  What  fruit  had  ye  ?  "  1.  Some  sins 
are  plainly  mischievous  to  the  temporal  interest  of  men,  as  tending  either  to  the 
distorbanoe  of  their  minds,  or  the  endangering  of  their  health  aud  lives,  or  to 
VOX-  I.  Qi 


eSO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  fl. 

the  prejudice  of  their  estates,  or  the  blasting  of  their  good  name.  2.  There 
are  other  sins  which,  though  they  are  not  so  visibly  attended  with  mischievoaa 
consequences,  bring  no  real  advantage  either  in  respect  of  gain  or  pleasore ; 
such  are  the  sins  of  profaneness  and  swearing.  3.  Even  those  sins  which 
make  the  fairest  pretence  to  be  of  advantage  to  us,  when  all  accounts  are 
oast  up  will  be  found  in  no  degree  able  to  perform  and  make  good  what  they  so 
largely  promise.  (1)  Some  pretend  to  bring  in  great  profit,  and  tempt  worldly- 
minded  men;  such  are  the  sins  of  covetousneas  and  oppression,  of  fraud,  and 
falsehood,  and  perfidiousness.  (2)  Others  pretend  to  bring  pleasure,  which  is  a 
temptation  to  sensual  men ;  such  are  the  sins  of  revenge,  and  intemperance,  and 
lust.  II.  It  is  shameful.  Most  men  when  tbey  commit  a  known  fault  are  apt  to 
be  ashamed  whenever  they  are  put  in  mind  of  it.  Some,  indeed,  have  gone  so  far 
in  sin  as  to  be  past  all  shame  (Jer.  vi.  15).  But  yet  even  these,  when  they  become 
sensible  of  their  guilt  so  as  to  be  brought  to  repentance,  caimot  then  but  be  ashamed 
of  what  they  have  done.  Sin  contains  in  it  whatsoever  is  justly  accounted  infamons, 
together  with  all  the  aggravations  of  shame  and  reproach  that  can  be  imagined. 
And  this  will  appear  by  considering  sin — 1.  In  relation  to  ourselves.  (1)  The  natural 
deformity  of  sin  renders  it  shamefuL  Men  are  apt  to  be  ashamed  of  anything  in 
them  that  looks  ugly.  Now,  in  regard  to  oar  souls,  sin  hath  all  the  monstrousness 
which  we  can  imagine  in  the  body,  and  much  more.  It  is  the  blindness  of  cor 
minds,  the  crookedness  of  our  wills,  and  the  monstrous  irregularity  of  our  affec- 
tions and  appetites,  the  misplacing  of  our  powers  and  faculties — all  which  is  ugly 
and  unnataral.  There  is  hardly  any  vice  but  at  first  sight  hath  an  odious  appear- 
ance. Drunkenness  and  passion,  pride  and  falsehood,  covetousness  and  cruelty,  are 
matter  of  shame  in  the  sincere  opinion  of  all  mankind.  And  though  a  man,  by  the 
frequent  practice  of  any  of  these  vices,  may  not  be  so  sensible  of  the  deformity  of 
them  in  himself,  yet  he  quickly  discerns  the  ugliness  of  them  in  others.  (2)  It  la 
a  great  dishonour  to  our  nature,  (a)  Therefore  the  Scripture  likens  it  to  the  meanest 
condition  among  men — slavery.  So  that  to  be  a  sinner  is  to  be  a  slave  to  some  vile 
passion  or  irregular  desire ;  it  is  to  part  with  one  of  the  most  valuable  things  in  the 
world,  our  liberty,  upon  low  and  unworthy  terms,  (h)  There  is  no  greater  argument 
of  a  degenerate  spirit  than  to  do  such  things  as  a  man  would  blush  to  be  surprised 
in,  and  would  be  troubled  to  hear  of  afterwards,  and  which  is  more,  after  he  hath 
been  convinced  of  this,  to  have  so  little  self-command  as  not  to  be  able  to  free 
himself  from  this  bondage,  (c)  And  that  sin  is  of  this  shameful  nature  is  evident, 
in  that  the  greatest  part  of  sinners  take  so  much  care  to  hide  their  vices  (1  Thess. 
▼.  7).  (3)  It  is  a  great  reproach  to  our  understandings  and  a  foul  blot  upon  oar 
prudence  and  discretion.  Either  men  do  not  understand  what  they  do  when  they 
commit  sin,  or,  if  they  do  know,  they  do  not  consider  what  they  know.  Did  men 
attentively  consider  what  it  is  to  offend  God,  who  "  is  able  to  save  or  to  destroy," 
they  would  discern  so  many  objections  against  the  thing,  and  would  be  filled  witiii 
each  fears  of  the  fatal  issue  and  event  of  it,  that  they  would  not  dare  to  venture 
upon  it  (Psa.  xiv.  4 ;  Deut.  zxxii.  28,  29).  No  man  can  engage  in  a  sinful  coarse 
without  being  so  far  infatuated  as  to  be  contented  to  part  with  everlasting  happi- 
ness and  to  be  miserable  for  ever.  So  that,  if  it  be  a  disgrace  to  a  man  to  do  thmgs 
riainly  against  his  interest,  then  vice  is  the  greatest  reproach  that  is  possible.  (4) 
We  choose  this  disgrace,  and  willingly  bring  this  reproach  upon  ourselves.  We  pity 
an  idiot,  but  every  one  despiseth  him  who  plays  the  fool  out  of  carelessness  and  a 
gross  neglect  of  himself.  And  this  is  the  case  of  a  sinner;  there  is  no  man  that 
sinneth  but  because  he  is  wanting  to  himself;  he  might  be  wiser  and  do  better,  and 
will  not.  2.  In  respect  of  God.  (1)  Whenever  we  commit  any  sin,  we  do  it  before 
Him  to  whom  of  all  persons  in  the  world  we  ought  to  pay  the  most  profound  reve- 
rence. (2)  He  likewise  is  incomparably  our  greatest  benefactor,  and  there  is  no 
person  in  the  world  to  whom  we  stand  so  much  obliged,  and  from  whom  we  can 
expect  80  much  good.  (3)  We  are  ashamed  to  be  guilty  of  any  fault  before  persona 
who  are  clear  of  anything  of  the  like  nature.  Men  are  not  apt  to  be  ashamed  before 
those  who  are  their  fellow-criminals.  Now,  whenever  we  commit  any  sin,  it  is  in 
the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  hath  no  part  with  us  in  it,  and  whose  nature 
is  as  contrary  to  it  as  can  be.  (4)  We  are  apt  to  be  ashamed  to  do  anything  before 
those  who  detest  what  we  do.  To  do  a  wicked  action  before  those  who  are  not 
offended  at  it,  or  perhaps  take  pleasure  in  it,  is  no  such  matter  of  shame.  Now, 
of  all  others,  God  is  the  greatest  hater  of  sin,  and  the  most  perfect  enemy  to  it  in 
the  whole  world  (Hab.  i.  3 ;  Psa.  v.  4,  6).  (6)  We  are  ashamed  likewise  to  do  any- 
thing that  ig  eTil  and  onseemly  before  those  who  we  are  afraid  will  naake  known 


omr.  TX.]  BOMANS.  fill 

and  expose  the  folly  of  them.  Now,  whenever  we  sin,  it  is  before  Him  who  will  most 
certainly  one  day  bring  all  oar  woiks  of  darkness  into  the  open  light.  (6)  We  are 
ashamed  and  afraid  to  commit  a  fault  before  those  who  we  believe  will  call  as  to 
an  account  for  it  and  punish  us  severely.  Now,  whenever  we  commit  any  wicked- 
ness, we  do  it  under  the  eye  of  the  great  Judge,  whose  omnipotent  justice  stands  by 
D8  ready  armed  and  charged  for  oar  destrnction,  and  can  in  a  moment  cut  as  o£f. 
in.  It  is  fatal.  No  fruit  then  when  ye  did  these  things ;  shame  now  thai  you 
come  to  reflect  upon  them ;  and  death  at  the  last.  The  principal  ingredients  of 
this  miserable  state.  1.  The  anguish  of  a  guilty  conscience,  "  the  worm  that  dies 
not."  Though  God  should  inflict  no  positive  punishment,  yet  this  is  a  revenge 
which  every  man's  mind  would  take  upon  him.  2.  Another  ingredient.  The  hvely 
apprehension  of  the  invaluable  happiness  which  tbey  have  lost  by  their  own  obsti- 
nacy and  foolish  choice.  3.  A  qaick  sense  of  intolerable  pain  aggravated  by — (1) 
The  consideration  of  the  past  pleasures  which  they  have  enjoyed  in  this  life.  (2) 
The  despair  of  any  future  ease ;  and  when  misery  and  despair  meet  together,  they 
make  a  man  completely  miserable.  {Abp.  Tillotson.)  The  fruits  of  sin: — I  know 
a  man  at  the  present  moment — a  man  I  said,  but,  alas  I  poor  wretched  mortal,  ha 
looks  hardly  like  a  man.  I  saw  him  in  rags,  shivering  in  the  drenching  rain  but 
yesterday.  He  came  of  reputable  parents ;  I  knew  his  relatives  well.  He  had 
Bome  four  hundred  pounds  or  more  left  him  a  few  years  ago.  As  soon  as  ever  he 
could  get  hold  of  it  he  came  to  London,  and  in  about  a  month  he  spent  it  all  in  a 
hideous  whirlwind  of  eviL  He  went  back  a  beggar  and  in  rags,  full  of  horrible 
sickness,  loathsome,  and  an  outcast.  Since  that  time  he  has  been  so  often  aided 
by  his  friends  that  they  have  entirely  given  him  up,  and  now  this  poor  wretch,  with 
scarce  enough  rags  to  bide  his  nakedness,  has  no  eye  left  to  pity  him,  and  no  hand 
to  help  him.  He  has  been  helped  again  and  again  and  again  ;  but  to  help  him 
appears  to  be  useless,  for  at  the  very  first  opportunity  he  returns  to  his  old  sins. 
The  workhouse,  the  hospital,  the  grave  are  his  portion,  for  he  seems  unable  to  rise 
to  the  dignity  of  labour,  and  no  one  will  harbour  him.  I  could  fairly  cry  at  the 
sight  of  him,  but  what  can  be  done  for  him  if  he  will  destroy  himself  by  his  sins  ? 
If  you  say  to  him,  "  Why  do  your  friends  not  notice  you  ?  "  he  will  tell  you,  "  They 
cannot  notice  me."  He  has  brought  his  mother  to  the  grave ;  he  has  wearied  out 
everybody  who  has  pitied  him,  for  his  life  has  been  so  thoroughly  bad  that  it  excites 
no  pity,  but  disgusts  his  own  relatives.  For  the  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  I  will  try 
this  unhappy  man  again,  and  intend  to-morrow  to  see  him  washed,  and  clothed, 
and  fed,  and  put  in  a  way  of  hvelihood,  but  I  have  very  slender  hope  of  being  of 
any  lasting  service  to  him,  for  he  has  been  tried  so  often.  Yet  I  never  saw  a  wretch 
in  such  misery.  He  is  emaciated,  ragged,  and  has  known  hanger,  and  cold,  and 
nakedness  month  after  month,  and  unless  he  mends  his  ways  this  will  be  his  lot 
till  he  dies.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  fruits  of  sin: — I  remember  once  seeing  a 
mob  of  revellers  streaming  out  from  a  masked  ball  in  a  London  theatre  in  the  early 
morning  sunlight,  draggled  and  heavy-eyed,  the  rouge  showing  on  the  cheeks,  and 
the  shabby  tawdriness  of  the  foolish  costumes  pitilessly  revealed  by  the  pure  Hght. 
Bo  will  many  a  life  look  when  the  day  dawns  and  the  wild  riot  ends  in  its  unwel- 
come beams.  {A.  ilaclaren,  D.D.)  The  fruits  of  sin  : — Evil  premeditated  is  evil 
at  its  best — attractive,  desirable,  full  of  promises  which  the  senses  can  onderstand 
and  the  passions  love ;  but  evil  perpetrated  is  evU  at  its  worst — hideous,  hateful, 
stripped  of  its  Ulusions  and  clothed  in  its  native  misery.  In  his  anger  at  finding 
Jesus  not  to  be  the  Christ  he  had  hoped  for  and  desired,  Judas  deserted  and 
betrayed  Him ;  in  the  terrible  calm  that  succeeded  indulgence  he  awoke  to  the 
reahties  within  and  about  him,  saw  how  blindly  he  had  lived  and  hated,  how  far 
the  Messianic  ideal  of  Jesus  transcended  his  own.  {A.  M.  Fairbaim.)  The  un- 
fruitfulness  of  tin : — It  is  recorded  of  himself  by  one  who,  in  his  unconverted  state, 
was  as  remarkable  for  his  gay  and  reckless  disregard  of  religion  as  he  afterwards, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  became  for  his  spirituality  and  devotedness,  that  when  some 
of  his  dissolute  companions  were  once  congratulating  him  on  his  distinguished 
felicity,  a  dog  happening  at  the  time  to  come  into  the  room,  he  could  not  forbear 
groaning  inwardly  and  saying  to  himself,  "  Oh  that  I  were  that  dog  I  "  The 
unfruitfulness  and  misery  of  sin : — One  of  the  surest  means  by  which  Satan  keeps 
men  under  his  power  is  by  keeping  them  in  ignorance  of  their  state.  Did  they 
'once  see  what  sin  really  is,  they  would  quickly  leave  it.  Our  text  sets  sin  before 
ns  in  its  true  colours,  and  shows  us  what  it  is  when  stripped  of  every  covering.  I. 
Sin  YIELDS  NO  PBESEST  FBUiT,  nothuig  which  deserves  the  name  of  fruit.  It  may 
foinish  some  short  gratification,  but  this  is  not  froit.    Sin  makes,  indeed  large 


S32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  J0H4».  n. 

promises,  bat  it  cannot  fulfil  them.  Compare  Eve  in  the'Ga^den  of  Eden,  Judas, 
the  Prodigal  Son.  II.  Sin  is  followed  bt  shame.  Shame  is  that  confusion  of 
mind  which  arises  from  a  consciousness  of  guilt.  For  a  time  men  may  sin  without 
feeling  shame,  but  a  day  is  coming  when  every  "  hidden  thing  of  darkness  "  will  be 
brought  to  light.  Look  at  Peter  when  he  saw  his  guilt  in  having  denied  his  Master. 
III.  Sin  ENDS  IN  DEATH  (Jas.  i.  15 ;  Gen.  ii.  17).  Death  is  the  certain  consequence 
of  sin.  Death,  in  this  sense,  means  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  the  favour,  the 
presence,  and  the  Spirit  of  God.  Consider  these  things,  forsake  sin,  and  turn  to 
God.  (E.  Cooper.)  The  unprojitdbleness  of  sin : — Walking  in  the  country,  I  went 
into  a  barn  where  I  found  a  thresher  at  his  work.  I  addressed  him  in  the  words  of 
Solomon:  "In  all  labour  there  is  profit."  Leaning  upon  his  flail,  with  much 
energy  he  answered,  •'  Sir,  that  is  the  truth,  but  there  is  one  exception  to  it:  I  have 
long  laboured  in  the  service  of  sin,  but  I  have  got  no  profit  by  my  labour."  "  Then 
you  know  something  of  the  apostle's  meaning  when  he  asked,  '  What  fruit '  ?  &c. " 
"  Thank  God,"  said  he,  "  I  do ;  and  I  also  know  that  even  '  being  made  free  from 
Bin,'  <feo."  How  valuable  this  simple  faith  in  the  Word  of  God  1  and  how  true  is 
the  saying  of  a  deceased  writer  that  "  piety  found  in  a  bam  is  better  than  the 
most  splendid  pleasure  of  a  palace  I  "  (W.  Jay.)  The  folly  of  sin : — It  is  not 
only  a  crime  that  men  commit  when  they  do  wrong,  but  it  is  a  blunder.  "  The 
game  is  not  worth  the  candle,"  according  to  the  French  proverb.  The  thing  that 
you  buy  is  not  worth  the  price  you  pay  for  it.  Sin  is  like  a  great  forest  tree  that 
we  sometimes  see  standing  up  green  in  its  leafy  beauty  and  spreading  a  broad 
shadow  over  half  a  field ;  but  when  we  get  round  on  the  other  side  there  is  a  great 
dark  hollow  in  the  very  heart  of  it,  and  corruption  is  at  work  there.  It  is  like  the 
poison-tree  in  travellers'  stories,  tempting  weary  men  to  rest  beneath  its  thick 
foliage,  and  insinuating  death  into  the  limbs  that  relax  in  the  fatal  coolness  of  its 
shade.  It  is  hke  the  apples  of  Sodom,  fair  to  look  upon,  but  turning  to  acrid  ashes 
on  the  unwary  lips.  It  is  like  the  magician's  rod  that  we  read  about  in  old  books. 
There  it  lies ;  and  if,  tempted  by  its  glitter  or  fascinated  by  the  power  that  it  proffers 
you,  you  take  it  in  your  hand,  the  thing  starts  into  a  serpent  with  erected  crest  and 
sparkling  eye,  and  plunges  its  quick  barb  into  the  hand  that  holds  it,  and  sends 
poison  through  all  the  veins.  (A.  Maclaren,  DM.)  Sin  sadly  recollected: — I 
heard  one  of  the  best  men  I  ever  knew,  seventy-five  years  of  age,  say,  "  Sir,  God 
has  forgiven  all  the  sins  of  my  hfetime,  I  know  that ;  but  there  is  one  sin  I  com- 
mitted at  twenty  years  of  age  that  I  never  will  forgive  myself  for.  It  sometimes 
comes  over  me  overwhelmingly,  and  it  absolutely  blots  out  my  hope  of  heaven." 
(T.  Df  Witt  Talmage.)  Terrible  fruits  of  sin : — The  worldly  spirit  makes  posses- 
sion thfl  otject  of  Life.  Christ  makes  being,  character,  the  object.  The  world  asks, 
"  What  do  you  possess  ?  "  God  asks,  "  What  are  you  ?  "  A  gentleman  once  said 
to  a  wicked  man,  "  You  do  not  look  as  if  you  had  prospered  by  your  wickedness." 
**  I  have  not  prospered  at  it,"  cried  the  man.  "  With  half  the  time  and  energy  I 
have  spent  I  might  have  been  a  man  of  property  and  character.  But  I  am  a  home- 
less wretch  ;  twice  I  have  been  in  State  prison.  I  have  made  acquaintance  with  all 
sorts  of  miseries ;  but  I  tell  you,  my  worst  punishment  is  in  being  what  I  am." 
Without  doubt  it  would  be  delightful  to  have  the  possessions  of  an  angel,  but  it 
would  be  ten  thousand  times  better  to  be  an  angel.  Not  what  have  I,  but  what  am 
I  ?  not  what  shall  I  gain,  but  what  shall  I  be  ?  is  the  true  question  of  life.  The 
wages  of  sin  in  time : — The  author  of  evil  has  ever  tempted  with  a  lie,  and  offers 
what  it  is  not  in  his  power  to  give.  "  Te  shall  be  as  gods,"  was  his  first  promise ; 
*•  ye  shall  not  surely  die."  But  mark  its  fulfilment :  the  image  of  God  was  shat- 
tered ;  "  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin."  And  when  the  Second  Adam 
was  shown  "  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,"  the  devil  said,  "All  this  power  will  I 
give  Thee,  and  the  glory  of  them :  for  that  is  deUvered  unto  me  ;  and  to  whomso- 
ever I  will,  I  give  it "  (Dan.  ii.  21 ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  11,  12).  It  was  false.  It  is 
always  so.  In  answering  the  question,  What  are  the  wages  of  sin  in  time?  my 
reply  must  be — I.  Sin  does  not  pat  what  it  promises.  I  do  not  deny  that  sin  has 
its  pleasures,  nor  that  the  worldly  may  obtain  certain  advantages  not  to  be  found 
in  the  way  of  reUgion ;  but  I  assert  that  those  who  have  made  the  perilous  trial 
have  not  received  what  they  expected ;  sin  has  paid  them  in  debased  coin.  Take, 
e.g. — 1.  The  pleasures  promised  by  the  sensual  appetites,  painted  in  voluptuous 
day-dreams,  or  as  sung  by  poets  who  profane  the  gift  of  song ;  all  is  bright,  exhila- 
rating, deUcious ;  but  the  palled  profligate  wiU  tell  you  that  the  mad  pleasure  was 
disappointing  as  well  as  brief,  and  that  there  is  a  thirst  left  which  it  is  sin  to 
Batiafy  and  agony  to  deny.    While  for  those  who  have  thrown  themselTes  into  the 


ORir.  VI.]  ROMANS.  538 

eorrent  of  worldly  dissipation,  till  the  jaded  soal  has  ceased  to  live  for  Qod,  nothing 
is  more  common  than  the  self -condemning  excuse  that  they  are  weary  of  a  life 
which  they  persuade  themselves  they  are  obliged  to  lead.  2.  And  so  it  is  with 
wealth,  the  glittering  bait  which  some  pursue  in  despite  of  the  laws  of  God,  but 
many  more  by  that  respectable  covetousuess  which  hardens  the  heart  to  the  love 
of  Ood  and  man  and  the  influence  of  His  Spirit.  And  for  what  ?  It  is  idle  to 
undervalue  the  comforts  which  wealth  can  command ;  but  it  would  be  as  idle  to 
deny  that  the  pleasure  of  possession  is  alloyed  by  its  cares,  and  fades  quickly  with 
its  novelty ;  that  the  habits  formed  by  acquiring  frequently  preclude  from  enjoying 
(Eccles.  viii.  11).  3.  Praise,  honour,  power,  again,  are  among  sin's  promises,  but 
lose  their  worth  precisely  as  far  as  they  are  obtained  by  sin.  As  the  result  of  honest 
duty  and  self-sacrifice,  especially  when  from  holier  motives,  these  have  their  value, 
but  when  attained  by  sinful  compliances,  or  hypocritical  pretence,  in  the  unwilling 
judgment  of  the  inner  man,  as  honours  undeserved  they  are  worthless,  and  con- 
science contradicts  the  voice  of  praise ;  and  the  fruits  of  reputation,  which  are  held 
oat  as  an  encouragement  to  persevering  duty,  when  grasped  by  the  hand  of  sin, 
become  like  apples  of  Sodom.  Again  sin  has  shuffled  her  wages ;  she  has  paid  her 
servants  with  a  lie.  II.  But  we  are  not  to  think  that  sin  has  no  wages  in  this 
LIFE.  She  has  them,  and  for  the  most  part  they  are  duly  paid.  Note — 1.  The 
effects  of  sin  upon  man's  outward  fortunes  and  circumstances,  which,  although  not 
oniform  when  they  do  foUow,  they  follow  as  the  effects  of  sin  ;  when  they  do  not 
follow,  it  is  because  they  have  been,  in  spite  of  sin,  diverted  or  delayed.  The  ruined 
spendthrift,  who  has  destroyed  the  means  of  gratification  while  strengthening  the 
appetite  for  indulgence,  and  who  has  involved  others,  perhaps,  in  common  misery; 
the  palled  voluptuary,  who  has  overtaxed  the  powers  of  nature,  and  bears  passions 
still  unslaked  in  an  effete  and  feeble  body,  suffering,  weary,  and  querulous,  unloving 
and  unloved,  the  very  wreck  of  what  was  once  a  man ;  the  doting  drunkard,  alter- 
nating his  miserable  hours  of  mad  mirth  and  maudlin  penitence,  enslaved  by  a 
habit  which  disgusts  although  it  masters  him,  and  sinking  with  weakened  mind 
and  trembling  limbs  to  an  early  grave ;  the  poor  lost  woman,  whom  folly  led  on  to 
sin,  and  sin  launched  into  the  full  current  of  passion,  and  her  name  became  a 
reproach,  and  the  door  of  return  was  shut,  and  excitement  was  a  necessity,  and 
there  was  remorse  and  loathing,  but  no  penitence,  till  vice  and  disease  had  done 
their  ghastly  work,  and  death  closed  the  short  and  fevered  scene ;  the  dishonoured 
man  of  business,  who,  under  the  cover  of  a  high  character,  was  tempted  to  gamble 
with  his  credit,  then  to  retrieve  his  losses  by  dishonesty,  till  his  astute  schemes 
broke  down  by  their  own  weight,  the  disguise  fell  off,  and  amidst  the  curses  of  those 
whom  he  has  impoverished  and  betrayed  he  sinks  into  disgrace  and  ruin ;  or,  most 
fearful  retribution  of  all,  the  irrehgious  parent,  heart- struck  to  see  his  children  re- 

E reducing  his  own  vices  and  pressing  on  deafiy  on  the  road  to  endless  ruin  to  which 
e  first  had  pointed  them  the  path — these  are  witnesses  which  meet  us  everywhere, 
all  testifying  that  the  wages  of  sin  are  sorrow,  diappointment,  and  misery,  all  re- 
plying with  melancholy  unanimity  to  the  apostle's  question.  "  The  end  of  those 
tlungs  is  death."  2.  But  the  outward  course  of  retribution  is  crossed  by  many 
exceptions,  and  often,  indeed,  the  heaviest  judgment  here  may  be  prosperity. 
"  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols :  let  him  alone."  There  are,  besides,  many  sins  telling 
less  sensibly  upon  the  outward  circumstances  of  those  who  commit  them.  (1) 
There  is  a  sore  and  uneasy  conscience.  In  the  heart's  secret  tribunal,  even  when 
the  sin  is  unknown  to  others,  there  is  a  verdict,  and,  to  some  extent,  a  penalty,  and 
the  sinner  finds  himself  self-condemned  and  self -punished.  Nor  is  the  penalty  a 
light  one.  At  first  the  suffering  is  acute,  and  even  though  the  perverse  will  spurns 
against  the  correction,  still  conscience  perseveres,  and,  though  in  feebler  accents, 
she  reiterates  her  sentence ;  still,  though  there  may  be  no  longer  a  pang  of  sharp 
remorse,  there  is  in  the  bosom  a  dull  but  wearing  sore.  More  terrible  is  the  duU 
apathy  of  a  seared  conscience,  as  it  hes  heavily,  though  motionless,  on  the  sinner's 
spirit,  damping  each  emotion  of  hope,  and  keeping  down  each  stirring  of  penitence, 
inflicting  the  fearful  retribution  for  pleadings  unheard  and  warnings  disregarded, 
that  warnings  can  be  regarded  and  pleadings  can  be  heard  no  longer.  (2)  Hence, 
too,  the  sinner  is  thrown  out  of  harmony  even  with  external  things.  The  intel- 
lectual pleasures  which  belong  to  science  may  not  be  greatly  affected,  perhaps,  by 
habits  of  sin ;  but  the  simpler  taste  for  nature's  beauty — one  of  the  purest  and 
healthiest  of  our  instinctive  sentiments— is  dulled  and  enervated,  if  not  destroyed, 
by  self-indulgence.  And  so  it  is,  and  still  more  sadly,  with  the  social  affections ; 
•in  robi  them  of  their  parity  and  pleasure.    I  am  not  speaking  of  its  outward 


634  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  lu 

manifestations,  which  break  up  the  peace  of  families.  The  domestic  affections  are 
often  secretly  poisoned  by  sin,  even  when  not  outwardly  violated  or  apparently 
ruffled  ;  and  there  is  many  a  heart  on  which  the  smile  and  voice  of  love  fall  cold 
and  cheerless,  because  it  has  within  an  uneasy  conscience,  or  lawless  passions,  or 
thoughts  it  dares  not  divulge ;  and  there  is  a  felt  and  painful  contrast  between  its 
own  polluted  self  and  the  innocent  purity  of  those  who  share  its  home.  (3)  Hence, 
too,  results  a  peevish  and  restless  dissatisfaction,  venting  itself  on  others.  (4)  And 
we  are  thus  led  to  the  most  fearful  of  sin's  wages  in  time,  involving,  as  it  does,  the 
Btill  more  fearful  wages  of  eternity — hardness  of  heart  and  the  grieving  and 
quenching  of  God's  Spirit.  God's  Spirit  will  not  always  strive  with  rebelhous 
man.  He  requires  our  co-operation,  though  He  gives  us  the  will  and  the  power ; 
and  He  ceases  to  plead  and  aid  when  He  pleads  and  aids  in  vain.  There  are 
warnings,  merciful  though  solemn  warnings,  and  the  last  loving  pleadings  of  Him 
who  wiUeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner;  but  at  length  the  trial  is  over,  the  probation 
has  failed,  and  he  who  might  have  been  a  vessel  made  for  heaven,  a  temple  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  is  "  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind."  "  The  light  within  is  dark- 
ness ;  and  how  great  is  that  darkness  !  "  We  must  not  omit,  in  reckoning  up  the 
sinner's  payment  here,  his  forebodings  of  what  is  to  come  hereafter.  {Bp.  Jackson. ) 
The  evil  effects  of  past  sin  on  a  believer : — The  apostle's  question  is  addressed  to 
Christians,  and  he  says  not  only  that  they  had  no  fruit  in  their  sins,  whilst  they 
were  living  in  them,  but  that  now,  after  they  had  abandoned  them,  they  were  stiU 
ashamed.  See  also  Ezek.  xxxvi.  31 ;  xvi.  62.  To  the  child  of  God,  the  penal 
consequences  of  guilt  are  for  ever  remitted,  and  the  dominion  of  the  principle  of  evil  is 
dethroned.  StiU  in  many  ways  does  his  past  iniquity  ever  continue  to  molest  him, 
and  to  the  end  of  his  days  wiU  not  cease  to  mingle  painfully  in  his  otherwise 
joyous  and  blessed  cup.  How  often,  for  example,  are  a  Christian's  efforts  at 
usefulness  impeded  by  the  recollection  that  others  have  of  what  he  once  was.  It 
ia  said  of  one  of  the  most  eminent  ministers  in  modern  times,  that  at  an  early 
period  of  his  life,  deeply  tinctured  with  infidelity,  he  made  active  efforts  to  instU 
its  principles  into  others.  With  some  he  awfully  succeeded,  and  these,  at  a  later 
and  a  better  period,  he  sought  anxiously  but  fruitlessly  to  reclaim  from  the  fearful 
sin  into  which  he  had  himself  been  the  means  of  seducing  them.  What,  think 
you,  would  have  been  his  answer  to  the  apostle's  "  What  fruit  had  ye  then  in  those 
things  whereof  you  are  now  ashamed  ?  "  Would  he  not  have  said,  truly  then  they 
were  fruitless  and  unsatisfactory,  but  now  they  are,  and  ever  will  remain,  sources 
of  the  bitterest  shame  and  sorrow.  Then,  again,  every  exercise  of  a  sinful  principle 
contributes  to  the  formation  of  an  evil  habit.  The  more  and  the  longer  it  is 
acted  on,  the  stronger  the  habit  becomes ;  and  the  stronger  the  habit  is,  the  more 
difficult,  of  course,  will  it  afterwards  be  to  subdue  and  eradicate  it ;  the  more 
constantly  and  readily  will  the  mind  yield  to  every  little  temptation  thj.t  may  arise 
to  excite  it,  and  the  more  naturally  will  the  thoughts  recur,  when  most  unbidden 
and  most  distasteful,  to  the  scenes  of  their  former  associations.  Thus  does  the 
indulgence  of  sinful  propensities  heap  up  fuel  for  future  difficulties  and  future  pain. 
Every  corrupt  habit  forms  a  barrier  to  what  will  then  be  our  leading  object  in  life, 
to  grow  in  grace  and  purity — and  increases  the  number  and  strength  of  the  enemies 
we  shall  have  to  contend  with  ;  while  ideas,  easily  and  involuntarily  arising  within 
us,  which  our  former  courses  have  suggested,  but  which  we  now  loathe  and  detest, 
will  add  to  our  pain  and  self-reproach  and  confusion  of  face.  Oh,  how  can  men 
talk  lightly  of  sin  ?  how  can  they  go  on  from  day  to  day  in  reckless  and  obstinate 
perseverance  in  ways  that  are  ungodly  and  corrupt  ?  Why  is  it  that  they  will  rather 
lay  up  for  themselves,  as  it  were,  a  pile  that  will  comsume  themselves,  and  forget 
the  end  that  must  arrive  at  last?  (J.  Newland,  A.M.)  Remorse  of  a  wasted 
life : — The  following  epitaph  was  written  by  Lord  Byron  to  the  memory  of  his 
thirty-third  birthday,  "  Here  lies  in  the  eternity  of  the  past,  from  whence  there  is 
no  resurrection  of  the  days,  whatever  there  may  be  for  the  dust,  the  thirty-third 
year  of  an  ill-spent  life ;  which,  after  a  lingering  disease  of  many  months,  sunk 
into  a  lethargy  and  expired  on  January  22,  1821,  leaving  a  successor  inconsolable 
for  the  very  loss  which  occasioned  its  existence."  {J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  The 
law  of  seed-sowing  and  after  harvest : — The  season  of  the  year  reminds  us  of  that 
great  and  universal  law  of  seed-sowing  and  harvest.  The  name  Autumn  in  its 
original  signifies  to  increase.  The  law  that  fruitage  follows  seed-sowing  is  as  evident 
in  tkie  moral  universe  as  in  the  physical.     Conduct  has  its  reward.     I.  The  sowino 

OF  VICE    HAS    ITS   LEGITIMATE   AND  NECES8ABT    HARVEST.       1.    Tlie  habit  of   vicC  foUoWS 

Vice.    Tho  wistaria,  thrown  out  its  little  tendrils.    How  very  feeble  are  the;  at  &iaL 


CHAP,  n.]  BOMANS.  585 

As  they  feel  their  way  for  support  they  seem  to  plead  for  help.  You  build  for  them 
a  trellis,  and,  by  and  by,  those  tendrils  have  become  so  strong  that  they  puU  the 
posts  aside,  and  on  the  walls  they  even  move  the  solid  brick.  As  I  have  watched 
and  admired  this  vine  with  its  cataract  of  bloom,  I  have  thought  of  the  growth  and 
force  of  the  habit  of  wrong-doing.  2.  Conscience  grows  weaker.  3.  The  loneliness 
of  vice  is  part  of  the  harvest.  Men  say,  "  I  do  not  believe  that  there  are  lost  souls 
in  God's  universe."  You  can  see  many  of  them  in  this  world.  As  they  sink  in 
vice  they  become  isolated.  4.  The  evil  propensities,  passions,  appetites,  grow 
stronger  by  exercise.  5.  Spirituality  is  crowded  out  by  worldliness.  The  mental 
and  spiritual  vision  is  blinded.  It  is  a  silent  progress  of  decadence — a  silent, 
steady  ripening  of  the  sown  seed.  We  stand  upon  one  of  the  Alps  and  see  the 
avalanche  as  it  plunges  thunderingly,  irresistibly  downward.  At  first  it  was  but  a 
bit  of  soft  snow,  little  harder  than  the  common  snow,  that  began  to  move.  So  a 
lost  soul  begins  its  downward  course  in  a  seeming  harmless  thought  or  whim,  but 
at  last  the  final  destruction  is  sudden,  awful.  II.  This  law  is  tboe  in  the  mentaii 
WOBLD.  III.  It  is  also  tbue  of  the  spiritual  world.  1.  Bight-doing  also  ends  in 
habit,  and  habit  in  character.  A  man  said  of  his  father,  and  it  was  true,  "  He 
could  not  be  dishonest  if  he  tried."  Life-long  honesty  makes  character,  and  that 
determines  action.  2.  Christian  experience  is  enjoyed.  3.  Christian  motives 
erystalise  in  deeds,  and  these  latter  bring  their  reward.  4.  A  sweet  communion 
with  Christ.  5.  A  communion  of  spiritually  developed,  kindred  souls.  6.  A  stead- 
fast hope  that  adverse  influence  can  no  more  move  than  can  a  child  shake  with  its 
tiny  finger  the  great  pyramid.  7.  A  likeness  to  Christ.  8.  Heaven  is  the  final 
fruit,  "the  end  everlasting  life."  Conclusion:  In  nature  God  does  not  arrest  and 
change  growth  to  something  else.  There  is  a  different  law  applied  in  the  moral 
nniverse.  A  man  is  growing  wrong,  the  harvest  is  nearly  ripened,  when  all  is 
changed,  and  there  is  a  new  seed-sowing  and  a  new  harvest.  Here  is  then  the  test 
by  which  to  measure  ourselves.  Is  the  fruitage  within  us  one  of  humility,  of 
desire  for  usefulness,  for  the  spirit  of  Christ  ?  {R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.)  The  compara- 
tive desirableness  of  the  service  of  sin  and  the  service  of  God : — I.  As  to  present 
ENJOTMENT.  '*  What  fruit  had  ye  then  ?  "  1.  The  "  fruit "  of  particular  principles 
is  the  conduct  which  they  produce — the  fruit  of  a  particular  course  of  conduct  the 
consequences  to  which  it  leads.  He  appeals  to  themselves  whether  their  new 
service  was  not  even  now  happier,  more  honourable  and  more  useful ;  whether  ita 
present  fruit  was  not  richer  in  its  relish  and  more  excellent  in  its  nature.  "  What 
fruit  1" — "Wild  grapes,"  "clusters  that  were  bitter";  "grapes  of  gall."  Such 
were  the  fruits,  if  we  understand  the  question  as  meaning  what  kind  of  fruit  had 
ye  ?  2.  But  it  may  strongly  convey,  as  such  questions  often  do,  their  having  had 
CO  frait ;  in  which  case  "  fruit "  signifies  benefit.  It  is  not  a  fair  and  just  descrip- 
tion of  the  service  of  sin  to  denominate  it  "the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness"? 
It  is  true,  there  are  pleasures  in  sin.  These  are  the  allurements  to  its  service. 
Yet,  still,  the  question  may  be  emphatically  put — What  fruit  have  they  ?  Is  there 
any  real  solid  satisfaction  worthy  of  a  rational,  immortal,  accountable  being? 
(1)  What  fruit  in  prosperity — from  the  ungodly  use  of  Divine  bounties  ?  It  is  true 
that  the  more  thoroughly  a  man  can  divest  himself  of  all  the  restraints  of  religious 
principle — the  more  insensible  his  conscience  becomes — the  more  complete  will  be 
his  enjoyment  in  the  service  of  sin.  But  is  it  not  fearful  for  a  reasonable  creature 
to  call  that  a  relish  to  prosperity  which  is  the  deepest  curse  with  which  humanity 
can  load  itself — the  curse  of  moral  insensibility? — How  different,  how  much  purer, 
richer,  and  worthier  is  the  relish  imparted  to  prosperity  by  the  service  of  God  1 
He  enjoys  this  world  best,  who  receives  it  from  God,  uses  it  for  God,  and  enjoys 
God  with  it.  (2)  And  in  adversity,  what  fruit  of  his  service  has  the  slave  of  sin 
when  prosperity  is  withdrawn  ?  Has  his  master  any  comfort  for  him  then  ?  any 
stay  to  his  sinking  heart,  any  balm  for  his  wounded  spirit  ?  Alas !  if,  having 
served  sin,  he  looks  to  sin  for  comfort!  While  prosperity  continued,  the  poor  slave 
was  taxed  to  the  uttermost  for  the  pampering  of  the  "  lusts  of  the  flesh,"  and  when 
these  have  got  all,  the  tyrant  has  nothing  for  his  infatuated  and  abject  drudge  but 
the  smile  of  bitter  scorn,  or  the  stingings  of  angry  reproach.  How  different  in 
adversity  the  condition  of  the  servant  of  God !  The  Master  whom  he  serves  is 
•'  the  God  of  all  comfort."  He  has  a  sweeter  smile  for  His  faithful  servants  in 
their  distresses  than  in  their  prosperity.  He  "  sheds  His  love  abroad  in  their 
hearts."  He  gives  them  "  everlasting  consolation  and  good  hope."  And  in  Himself 
they  still  retata  "  the  portion  of  their  inheritance  and  cup."  When  He  covers 
their  sky  with  clouds,  He  "  paints  a  rainbow  on  the  storm";  and  the  darker  tha 


596  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n, 

eload,  the  brighter  are  the  tints  of  the  symbol  of  reconciliation  and  peace.  And 
has  not  "the  fruit  of  affliction  been  to  take  away  sin,"  the  highest  and  richest 
of  all  profit?  •'  Ye  have  your  fruit  onto  holiness,"  which  is  fruit  unto  happiness. 
II.  As  TO  SUBSEQUENT  BEFLECTioN.  Of  scrvice  of  siu  all  who  ever  come  to  see  it 
aright  are  ashamed  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  31,  32 ;  xvi.  62,  63),  a  feeling  which  can  never 
have  place  as  to  the  service  of  God — except  indeed  the  shame  of  having  so  imper- 
fectly fulfilled  its  duties.  They  are  ashamed  of — 1.  Their  folly.  There  is  no 
infatuation  hke  that  which  prefers  the  service  of  sin  to  the  service  of  God  I  It  is 
the  preference  of  degradation  to  honour;  of  the  most  miserable  of  slaveries 
to  the  most  blessed  of  liberties ;  of  earth  to  heaven  ;  of  time  to  eternity  ;  of  Satan 
to  God !  2.  Their  ingratitude.  When  they  think  of  God  as  the  Source  of  every 
joy,  and  who  "  has  not  spared  His  own  Son,"  and  feel  aright  their  obligations  to 
Him,  they  look  back  with  bitter  self-reproach  on  the  vileness  of  that  ingratitude 
which  their  previous  course  involved.  They  blush  for  the  baseness  of  having  lived 
in  rebellion  against  rich  and  unmerited  kindness ;  and  especially  of  having  slighted 
His  mercy.  III.  In  theib  xjltimatk  consequences.  "  Death  "  is  the  end  of  one : 
*'  life  "  of  the  other.  The  one  closes  in  eternal  confirmation  in  sin,  alienation 
from  God,  a  sense  of  His  wrath,  and  consequent  misery ;  the  other  in  eternal 
confirmation  in  perfected  holiness,  spotless  likeness  to  God,  communion  with  Him, 
the  enjoyment  of  His  love,  unmarred  and  uninterrupted  by  sin,  and  consequent 
happiness;  happiness  without  aUoy,  without  abatement,  and  without  cessation. 
But  while  such  are  the  ends,  respectively,  of  the  two  services,  there  is  one  marked 
difference  between  tbem.  The  one  is  wages — a  merited  reward ;  the  other  a  gift — a 
gratuitous  bestowment  (ver.  23).    {R.  Wardlaw,  D,D.) 

Yet.  22.  But  now  being  made  ftee  from  sin. — The  freedom  and  dignity  of  the 
Christian : — I.  Wk  abe  "  fbeb  fbom  bin."  1.  We  are  free  from — (1)  Its  guilt  and 
pollution.  Sin  is  represented  as  an  evil  of  enormous  magnitude.  It  is  said  to  be  a 
plague  and  a  leprosy,  foul,  odious,  detestable.  But  now  there  is  a  fountain  opened 
for  sin  and  for  uncleanness.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from 
all  sin."  (2)  Its  curse  and  condemnation.  "  So  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law 
are  under  the  curse."  The  acts  of  our  disobedience  are  innumerable,  and  the 
curse  of  heaven  comes  down  where  sin  is.  But  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from 
the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us."  Therefore  is  there  now  to  us  no 
condemnation.  (3)  Its  tyranny.  Before  our  conversion  it  did  reign ;  we  obeyed 
not  God  but  sin.  Since  our  conversion  sin  has  not  had  dominion  over  us  ;  for  we 
are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace.  (4)  Its  sting  and  bitterness.  There  is  no 
comfort,  no  peace,  as  long  as  we  are  indulging  sin  and  under  the  power  of  it. 
Christ  makes  us  free.  His  precious  blood,  presented  to  us,  pacifies  and  purifies  the 
conscience.  (5)  All  its  consequences  perfectly  and  for  ever.  "  The  wages  of  sin  ia 
death  "  ;  but  '•  he  that  believeth  My  sayings,"  says  Jesus  Christ,  "  shall  never  see 
death."  "  Thanks  be  to  God  who  giveth  us  the  victory  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
2.  We  are  made  free.  There  is  some  power  exerted  upon  us  distinctly  Divine  :  we  call 
it  grace  or  the  work  of  God.  God  calls  us  to  come  forth  from  our  bondage  ;  and  we, 
hearing  His  voice,  do  come  ;  but  the  power  which  gives  us  the  abiUty  to  assert  our 
freedom  is  His  own.  This  freedom  is  ascribed — (1)  To  the  Father :  "  Tou  hath  He 
quickened  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  "  ;  "  We  give  thanks  to  the  Father, 
who  hath  translated  us  out  of  the  kingdom  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of  Hia 
dear  Son."  (2)  To  Christ.  He  was  anointed  to  preach  the  opening  of  the  prison 
doors  to  them  who  are  bound  ;  "  and  if  the  Son  shall  make  us  free,  we  shall  be  free 
indeed."  (3)  To  the  Holy  Ghost.  "Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is 
liberty."  The  plan  emanates  from  the  Everlasting  Father  ;  the  carrying  of  it  into 
execution  is  the  work  of  the  Son  ;  and  its  application  to  our  minds,  by  which  we 
are  personally  made  free,  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  The  instruments 
employed.  (1)  The  truth.  "Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make 
you  free."  (2)  Grace;  and  the  more  we  know  of  it,  the  better  we  understand  the 
riches  of  the  grace  of  God.  (3)  The  ministry.  "  I  have  sent  thee  to  open  their  eyes 
and  to  turn  them  from  darkness  to  light,"  &o.  And  all  these  conspire  and  unite. 
n.  Wb  become  "  8EBVANT8  OF  GoD."  Our  delivcrance  from  sin  is  in  order  to  this. 
1.  This  name,  "  servant,"  is  a  name  of  glory  because  it  has  been  borne  by  Christ, 
and  by  the  most  distinguished  men  that  ever  Uved.  Moses,  Job,  David,  Paul,  James. 
These  triumphed  in  nothing  so  much  as  rendering  service  in  their  free  state  to  God. 
TTia  service  is  perfect  freedom.  2.  How  is  it  brought  about  ?  We  first  receive  the 
truth ;  the  blessings  of  the  gospel,  freeing  us  from  sin,  are  brought  by  faith  and 


SBAP.  tl]  ROMANS,  587 

knowledge  into  oar  nature.  The  natural  e£fect  of  this  is  confidence  and  lova 
towards  God.  We  cease  to  be  afraid ;  the  spirit  of  bondage  gives  way ;  and  ths 
Spirit  of  adoption  comes  in  its  stead.  This  new  view  of  God  induces  consecration, 
"We  yield  ourselves  unto  God  as  those  that  are  alive  from  death,  and  our  members 
SB  the  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God.  3.  What  will  the  Master  have  as 
to  do  ?  It  is  required  in  a  servant  that  there  be — (1)  Integrity.  (2)  Faithfulness. 
(3)  Diligence.  (4)  Affection.  III.  Our  feuit  is  unto  holiness.  1.  Beautiful 
fruit ;  "  fruit  meet  for  repentance."  "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace, 
long-suffering,"  <Sro.  "  Holy  fruits  "  :  that  is,  fruits  that  are  vital,  fi  esh,  blooming, 
luscious.  2.  There  never  has  been  any  fruit  unto  holiness  separate  from  the 
principles  of  the  gospel.  There  may  be  morals,  dry  and  barren,  but  there  is  no 
holiness  but  as  it  arises  out  of  faith  and  love  towards  Jesus.  3.  In  order  to  fruit- 
fulness  there  must  be  cultivation.  There  must  be  a  diligence  and  a  care  that  we 
show  forth  in  our  tempers  and  practice  the  various  points  of  that  blessed  light  and 
beauty  which  is  called  in  the  text  holiness.  IV.  The  end  is  everlasting  life.  The 
end  is  everything.  If  it  were  so  that  the  course  of  religion  in  this  world  were  a 
course  of  sorrow,  if  the  end  were  everlasting  life,  it  were  worth  the  while  to  walk 
it.  But  it  is  not :  the  way  is  peace,  the  path  is  light,  the  progress  is  joy,  and  then 
the  end  is  everlasting  life.  The  more  I  see  of  this  life,  the  more  I  feel  that  it  is  a 
poor,  dissatisfied  life.  Irrespective  of  God,  it  is  not  worth  having.  And  I  am 
increasingly  persuaded  that  the  hfe  to  come  is  unbounded,  and  perpetual,  and 
everlasting  activity,  conscious  purity,  splendid  glory,  and  rest  in  His  beatific  vision. 
(J.  Straiten.)  The  redeemed  soul : — I.  As  gloriously  emancipated.      1.  It  is 

"  made  free  from  sin  " — from  its  power,  its  guilt,  and  its  consequences.  2.  Thia 
emancipation  is  the  most  real,  valuable,  and  lasting  of  any.  II.  As  Divinely  con- 
8BCRATED.  "  Become  servants  to  God."  His  service  is  the  most — 1.  Keasonablo. 
2.  Free.  It  insures  the  free  action  of  all  the  powers  of  the  soul.  3.  Honourable. 
What  an  honour  to  be  employed  by  Him !  III.  As  prosperously  employed. 
*•  Fruit  unto  holiness."  Holiness  is  the  perfection  of  being.  "  Having  the  fruit  to 
holiness  "  implies  that  every  thought,  word,  and  deed  bears  towards  perfection. 
IV.  Ab  everlastingly  blessed.  "  The  end  everlasting  life."  Life  without  end. 
1.  Free  from  all  evil.  2.  Possessed  of  all  good.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Eight  I 
left  I  right  t — I.  The  first  stage  of  the  Christian  journey  is  conversion,  "  now 
being  made  free  from  sin."  What,  then,  is  this  "freedom  from  sin"?  What, 
then,  this  emancipation  we  get  at  the  Cross  ?  Sin  is  here.  Sin  is  in  us,  sin  is  on 
as.  Sin  has  flung  on  oar  soul  the  double  coiled  chain  of  penalty  and  power.  We 
are  prisoners  bound  by  the  two-twisted  grapple  of  guilt,  but  it  is  all  snapped  and 
shivered  in  the  surrender  of  the  soul  to  the  Lord.  "  He  hath  sent  Me  to  proclaim 
liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound." 
Here's  the  gospel  for  you.  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  upon  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 
"  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us.** 
*'  Who  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."  "  While  we  were 
yet  sinners  Christ  died  for  us."  Every  fraction  of  my  awful  debt  Christ  has 
rendered,  and  now  I  am  pardoned,  justified,  "  reconciled  unto  God  by  the  death  of 
His  Son,"  and  God  righteously  bestows  upon  me  the  full  remission  of  my  sins, 
♦•  that  He  might  be  just  and  the  justifier  of  him  that  believeth  in  Jesus."  I  am,  in 
conversion  to  Christ,  free  from  sin,  its  penalty.  Yet  once  more,  conversion  brings 
freedom  from  the  power  and  presence  of  sin.  Slaving  in  the  rice  fields  of  sin  was 
1 1  hoeing  along  in  the  heat  of  the  plain  of  hell  was  1 1  manacled  was  1 1  But, 
"  happy  day  1 "  on  the  horizon  a  broad  sail  appeared,  and  a  vessel  bore  down  to  the 
terrible  shore,  and  lo,  the  blood-stained  banner  of  the  Cross  of  Christ  waved  its 
welcome  to  my  weary  soul,  and  I  lifted  myself  from  the  swamps  and  fled,  and 
plunged  into  tne  deep  with  a  cry  for  help.  ♦'  Lord, save  me,  I  perish."  Help  came, 
salvation  came,  the  Lord  walked  on  the  wave  and  brought  me  on  board,  and  "  I 
fell  down  at  His  feet  as  if  dead."  11.  The  second  station  on  the  line  to  glory  is 
what  we  call,  for  want  of  a  better  name,  conduction,  "  become  servants  to  God." 
You  know  what  conduction  in  physical  science  is.  It  is  the  communication  of 
heat  from  one  body  to  another  by  contact.  There  must  be  touch,  or  there  will  be 
no  passing  along  of  the  caloric  wave.  Can't  you  realise  this  "  natural  law  in  the 
spiritual  world  "  ?  It  is  the  secret  of  effective  service  to  God.  Examine  the 
extremities  and  see  that  the  touch  is  certain.  Is  your  soul.  Christian  worker,  in 
contact  with  God  ?  Is  your  soul.  Christian  worker,  in  contact  with  man  ?  Have 
you  regeneration  from  God  ?  Have  you  sympathy  with  man  ?  A  soul  saved,  and 
B  sool-seeker.    That  is  service.    Bring  the  soul  into  living  contact  with  the  living 


C88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

God,  and  the  Divine  heat  by  the  law  of  conduction  will  ripple  its  waves  throagh 
the  mass  of  humanity  till  all  the  earth  shall  acknowledge  Him  ;  "  and  they  shall 
teach  no  more  every  man  his  neighbour,  and  every  man  his  brother,  saying,  Enow 
the  Lord  :  for  they  shall  all  know  Me,  from  the  least  of  them  unto  the  gneatest  of 
them,  saith  the  Lord."  But  where  shall  I  work?  How  shall  I  serve ?  how  labour 
for  God  on  the  earth  ?  Where  you  are  called,  there  preach.  Serve  God  with  your 
new  life  where  He  gave  it  you.  Serve  you  your  God  by  doing  His  will  in  "  the 
trivial  round,  the  common  task."  "  Who  sweeps  a  room  as  for  His  laws  makes 
that  and  the  action  fine."  Be  a  "  servant  to  God."  HI.  The  third  platform  we 
reach  on  this  royal  route  to  heaven  is  consechation  :  "  Ye  have  your  fruit  unto 
holiness."  Eowland  Hill  says  truly,  "  he  wouldn't  give  a  fig  for  a  man's  religion 
if  his  very  cat  wasn't  the  better  of  it !  "  Be  a  fruiterer  in  the  Christian  life,  not  a 
florist.  It  was  said  of  one  of  those  perfection-florists,  "  Ay,  he's  perfect,  he  says, 
but  ask  his  wife  I  "  Many  will  pray  that  will  never  pay,  and  yet  paying  not  praying 
is  the  "  fruit  unto  holiness."  To  one  of  those  florists  of  holiness  I  once  lent  my 
last  coin,  and  I've  never  seen  it  nor  him,  and  it's  ten  years  now  since  he,  with  three 
or  four  hundred  more  of  the  coins  of  others  to  keep  mine  company,  took  his  spring- 
heeled  flitting  in  the  bonnie  moonlight !  Many  will  talk  that  will  never  walk,  and 
yet  walk  not  talk  is  the  "  fruit  unto  holiness."  The  world  needs  Christs,  be  you  a 
Christ !  Live  holiness  by  living  Christ,  for  the  blessing  is  not  an  it,  but  a  "  He." 
Christ  in  you,  working  through  you,  that  "  we  should  be  to  the  praise  of  His  glory." 
IV.  And  now,  the  terminus  of  this  railway  journey  to  "  the  regions  beyond "  is 
what  we  call,  also  for  the  want  of  a  better  name,  and  to  keep  to  our  "  cons  "  for 

J  four  memory's  sake,  coNonEGATioN,  "  the  end,  everlasting  life."  Bight  has  been, 
eft  has  been,  right  again  has  been,  it  is  now  straight  on  !  On  screams  the  engine 
trhistle,  and  the  piston  plunges,  and  the  wheels  move.  Night  1  Thunders  the  iron  steed 
on  its  ringing  track,  smoothly  on,  steadily  on,  into  the  darkness.  (John  Robertson.) 
The  blessedness  of  believers : — I.  Theib  freedom  fbom  sin.  Consider — 1.  Wherein  thia 
freedom  consists.  It  does  not  mean  that  they  are  made  free  from  the  being  of  sin. 
This  will  be  the  case  by  and  by,  when  they  shall  be  like  Christ  as  well  as  see  Him 
as  He  is.  But  it  does  mean  that  they  are  free  from — (1)  Its  penal  consequences. 
Christ  hath  redeemed  them  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  them. 
(2)  As  to  its  empire.  "  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,  for  ye  are  not  under 
the  law,  but  under  grace."  And  what  is  grace  if  it  suffers  sin  to  conquer?  (3) 
From  its  love.  Persons  may  leave  what  they  do  not  loathe,  and  still  may  be  hanker- 
ing after  it.  This  was  the  case  with  the  Israelites  and  Lot's  wife,  but  it  is  not  the 
case  with  the  real  Christian.  The  streams  of  sin  are  embittered  to  him  ;  he  can 
never  love  that  again  which  killed  Him,  who  is  all  his  salvation  and  all  his  desire. 
And  this  aveUBion  extends  not  to  sins  to  which  he  has  no  propensity,  but  to  his  darling 
lusts,  to  those  which  are  as  dear  as  a  right  eye  or  a  right  hand.  2.  But  a  deliverance 
supposes  a  Deliverer.  Did  they  make  themselves  free  ?  Did  creatures,  ministers,  or 
angels  ?  No,  it  was  the  work  of  God  Himself.  II.  Theib  consecbation  to  God's 
SEEViCB.  Negative  religion  is  not  enough.  It  is  not  enough  that  you  cease  to  do  evil ; 
you  must  learn  to  do  well.  It  is  not  enough  that  you  are  made  free  from  sin ;  you 
must  become  the  servants  of  God.  1.  God  has  every  claim.  We  are  His  absolutely. 
He  made  us.  Were  He  to  suspend  His  sustaining  influence  we  should  relapse  into 
nothingness.  And  you  are  not  your  own  in  a  much  nobler  sense  ;  you  are  bought 
with  a  price,  and  therefore  you  are  bound  to  glorify  God,  &c.  2.  Notice  the 
nature  of  this  service.  (1)  There  is  a  sense  in  which  all  are  God's  servants. 
Nebuchadnezzar  was  "  the  rod  of  His  anger  and  the  staff  of  His  indignation,  but 
he  meant  not  so,  neither  did  his  heart  think  so."  He  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  to 
praise  Him,  and  restrains  the  remainder  of  it,  just  as  the  miller  draws  off  the  hatch 
and  lets  in  as  much  water  as  the  grinding  requires,  and  then  lowers  it  again  and 
restrains  the  rest.  (2)  But  there  are  servants  from  conviction  and  disposition. 
They  are  made  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power,  and  hold  themselves  at  His  dis- 
posal, asking,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  (3)  This  service  is  not 
confined  to  oflBcial  characters.  Moses,  Job,  David,  &o.  Ministers  are  called  the 
servants  of  God,  but  the  name  itself  is  applicable  to  all  real  Christians.  The 
highest  angel  is  no  more  than  a  servant  of  God,  and  the  poorest  believer  on 
earth  is  nothing  less.  The  man  of  five  talents  can  serve  God  as  well  as  the  man  ol 
ten.  (4)  This  service  is  not  confined  to  attendance  upon  the  means  of  grace. 
These  are  not  religion,  but  are  the  means,  because  they  are  those  things  in  the  use 
of  which  we  obtain  the  supply  of  the  Spirit  to  go  forth  and  live  to  God  entirely. 
Whether,  therefore,  a  Christian  is  on  the  throne  or  on  the  bench,  in  the  shop  or  on 


•BAP.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  539 

the  road,  he  may  be  still  eerving  God  and  have  the  testimony  that  he  pleases  God. 
(5)  This  service  is  passive  as  well  as  active.  They  also  serve  who  wait,  and  they 
who  suffer.  And  perhaps  God's  people  never  glorify  Him  more  than  in  the  fires. 
Perhaps  nothing  impresses  others  so  much  as  the  passive  graces  in  Christians.  III. 
Thkib  pbebent  pbivileoes.  The  fruit  of  a  tree  is  something  from  which  we  derive 
pleasure  and  profit,  and  by  which  it  is  known  and  identified.  "  Herein  is  My 
Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit."  What  fruit  ?  1.  True  profit.  In  the 
days  of  Job,  infidels  asked,  "  What  is  the  Almighty,  that  we  should  serve  Him  ?  " 
&e.,  and  in  the  days  of  Malachi  they  were  audacious  enough  to  say,  "  It  is  vain  to 
serve  God,"  &o.  To  all  which  the  apostle  returns  a  perfect  answer  :  "  Godliness  is 
profitable  to  all  things,"  Ac.  2.  Safety.  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against 
us?"  3.  Peace.  ••  Great  peace  have  they  that  love  Thy  law."  "  Thou  wilt  keep 
him  in  perfect  peace,"  <&c.  4.  Pleasure  that  deserves  the  name,  pleasure  that 
reaches  the  very  soul,  and  produces  sunshine  and  satisfaction  there.  "  Blessed  are 
the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound,"  &o.  5.  Health,  if  it  be  good  for  you ;  sick* 
ness,  if  it  be  good  for  you ;  wealth,  if  it  be  good  for  you  ;  reputation,  if  it  be  good 
for  you;  for  "no  good  thing  will  He  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly." 
Therefore  the  Saviour  says,  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  <fec.  IV.  Theib 
FINAL  BLESSEDNESS.  "  The  end  everlasting  life."  (W.  Jay.)  The  blessed  state  of 
believers : — I.  Thet  abe  fbeb  fbom  bin.  1.  Its  accumulated  guilt.  2.  Its  tyranny. 
8.  Its  love.  4.  Its  defilement.  II.  They  abb  the  servants  of  Goo.  1.  Governed 
by  His  will.  2.  Supported  by  His  grace.  3.  Interested  in  His  cause.  III.  Theib 
PBurr  18  UNTO  holiness.  The  fruit  of  their — 1.  Heart.  2.  Lips.  3.  Lives.  IV. 
THsm  END  IS  svEBLASTiNO  LIFE.  A  State  of — 1.  Uninterrupted  and  eternal  miion 
with  Christ.  2.  Active  and  delightful  employment.  3.  The  highest  enjoyment. 
(Biblical  Museum.)  Servants  to  God. — God's  servants : — I.  The  ground  of  theib 
SBBViCE.  They  are  God's  property  (Titus  ii.  14  j  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20 ;  1  Pet.  i.  18). 
II.  Its  dionitt.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  be  a  servant  of  an  earthly  monarch  ;  bat 
what  a  dignified  and  dignifying  service  is  spoken  of  here  I  Contrast  it  with  that  oat 
of  which  we  are  taken.  HI.  Its  fbeedou.  Observe  the  words  "  become  servants." 
Although  the  introduction  to  His  service  is  an  act  of  grace  towards  you,  you  are 
not  forced  into  it  contrary  to  your  will  (2  Cor.  v.  14).  It  is  a  service  of  love,  the  yoke 
is  easy  and  the  burden  light.  This  service  is  perfect  freedom.  IV.  Its  fbtvileoeb. 
A  good  master — 1.  Provides  for  his  servants,  thinks  for  his  servants.  Oh,  how 
God's  servants  are  provided  for  I  what  angels'  food,  what  raiment,  what  protection  i 
2.  Upholds  his  servants,  and  our  Master  will  uphold  His.  His  name  is  upon  them, 
His  honour  is  identified  with  them,  their  cause  is  His.  If  one  of  the  servants  of  the 
Queen,  representing  us  in  a  foreign  land,  be  insulted,  in  a  moment  the  whole  country 
is  in  arms.  V.  Its  characteristics  and  duties.  1.  A  good  servant  is  described  to 
as  in  Scripture ;  he  has — (1)  A  watchful  eye.  "  As  the  eyes  of  servants  look  unto 
the  hands  of  their  masters,"  <&o.  In  Eastern  countries  instead  of  giving  directions 
by  word  of  mouth,  they  are  often  given  merely  by  indications  of  the  hand  or  of  the 
eye.  A  good  servant  will  have  the  eye  of  faith  on  the  Master's  hand,  and  watch 
the  indication  of  the  Master's  eye,  that  there  may  be  no  delay  in  serving ;  and  the 
promise  is,  "I  will  guide  thee  with  Mine  eye."  (2)  A  hstening  ear :  "  Speak,  Lord, 
for  Thy  servant  heareth."  (3)  A  ready  foot.  "  I  will  run  in  the  way  of  Thy  command- 
ments."  (4)  A  ready  heart.  •' An  offering  of  a  free  heart  wUl  I  give  Thee."  (5) 
A  submissive,  obedient  will.  2.  There  is  a  beautiful  directory  for  servants  of  the 
Lord  in  2  Tim.  i.  and  ii.  A  good  servant  must — (1)  Be  a  praying  servant.  "  Stir 
np  the  gift  of  God  that  is  in  thee."  (2)  Not  be  ashamed  of  his  master.  "  Be  not 
thou  therefore  ashamed  of  the  testimony  of  our  Lord."  (3)  Hold  fast  the  truth. 
••  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words."  (4)  Be  true  to  his  trust.  "  That  good  thing 
which  was  committed  unto  thee,  keep  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  dwelleth  in  us."  (5) 
Be  ••  strong  in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  (6)  "  Endure  hardness."  (7) 
Study  "to  show  himself  approved  unto  God."  (8)  "Flee  youthful  lusts:  but 
follow  righteousness,"  &c.  (9)  Persevere  (chap.  iii.  14).  VI.  Its  future.  How 
the  Spirit  loves  to  light  up  that  future  (Col.  iii.  24  ;  John  xii.  26  ;  Eev.  xxii.  ;  Luke 
xii.  37)1  (M.Rainsford.)  Te  have  your  £ralt  unto  holiness. — Fruit  unto  holiness  : — 
I.  God's  glory  bequiees  it  (John  xv.  8).  II.  Chbist's  fulness  bequires  it.  Foe 
what  purpose  has  He  this  fulness,  but  that  He  may  give  it  out  to  us  as  the  root  to  the 
branches  grafted  into  it.  What  we  want  is  faith  to  draw  upon  that  fulness.  There  is 
life,  truth,  strength,  holiness  enough  in  Jesus,  to  carry  us  triumphantly  through  every 
diflBculty ;  but  the  stint  and  straitening  is  in  our  own  faith.  III.  The  Spirit's  inhabi- 
XATioN  BKQUiBBS  IT.    Will  God  put  His  Spirit  into  as,  and  be  content  that  we  should 


CM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAF.  it. 

walk  at  the  low  rate  at  which  men  walk  who  have  no  auch  privileges  7  "  The  fruit 
of  the  Spirit  is  love,"  Ac.  IV.  The  saint's  peack  beqoires  it.  How  mach  unhappi- 
ness  we  bring  upon  ourselves  by  the  devious  ways  we  take,  the  dark  paths  we  wander 
into,  and  by  the  neglect  of  the  means  God  has  provided  for  our  being  strengthened 
and  helped,  and  for  our  having  the  joy  of  the  Lord  for  our  strength.  {Und.) 
Fruit  unto  holinesi : — 1.  Two  great  principles  pervade  and  rule  the  universe — sin 
and  holiness.  There  are  but  these  two.  There  will  ever  be  these  two.  Now  that 
the  second  has  entered,  it  would  seem  neither  can  be  wholly  destroyed.  2.  It  is  to 
one  of  these  two  principles  we  are  directed  in  the  text.  As  the  dark  ground  on 
which  it  may  best  appear,  look  first  at  the  other.  Evil,  wrong,  sin — the  first  word 
betokening  its  nature,  the  second  its  opposition  to  right,  the  third  its  relation  to 
law — what  a  curse  it  has  been  to  creation  1  Gather  in  thought  all  the  evils  which 
now  afflict  humanity,  add  to  them  all  those  under  which  creation  groans,  add  still 
all  those  which  in  another  world  will  continue  for  ever — and  you  see  the  elements 
of  that  evil  thing  which  has  mysteriously  sprung  up  in  God's  universe ;  which  He 
hates,  which  angels  deplore,  and  which  we  call  sin.  It  is  like  emerging  from  a 
dark  tunnel  to  sweet  air  and  clear  sunshine,  to  turn  from  this  subject  to  the  one 
before  us.  I.  What  is  holiness?  1.  It  has  many  counterfeits.  (1)  You  see 
yonder  the  Pharisee.  Men  call  him  holy,  because  he  wears  a  holy  garment  with  a 
broad  phylactery,  is  unctuous  in  his  speech,  loud  in  his  profession,  fluent  in  hia 
prayers.  (2)  In  ancient  times  you  might  have  seen  another  sort  of  man,  in  a  cell, 
wearing  a  filthy  garment,  living  upon  roots,  scowling  on  the  outside  world,  for 
which  he  did  nothing,  and  pretending  thus  to  "  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body." 
(3)  Yonder  is  another  character,  absorbed  about  spiritual  subjects,  a  great  authority 
on  abstruse  doctrines,  yet  withal  exclusive,  proud,  "  soon  angry,"  intolerant, 
unlovely  at  home.  (4)  Or  look  at  a  collective  scene.  See  that  crowd  thronging  to 
hear  a  favourite  preacher,  or  to  swell  the  enthusiasm  of  a  public  meeting,  or  to 
observe  some  saint's  day,  all  wearing  the  air  of  reUgiousness,  and  all  yielding  them- 
selves to  the  fascination  of  spiritual  excitement.  Now  far  be  it  from  me  to  suggest 
that  it  may  not  exist  in  some  of  these,  but  they  are  not  the  thing.  2.  The  simplest 
definition  of  holiness  is  conformity  to  God.  So  far  as  we  can  understand  God's 
holiness,  it  consists  in  infinite  rectitude  of  thought,  feeling,  nature,  and  it  ia 
essential  to  Him,  so  that  without  it  He  could  not  be.  He  is  the  Holy  One.  This 
holiness  regulates  all  He  does.  But  who  can  stand  in  His  holy  place  to  gaze  upon 
and  imitate  Him  ?  Though  we  cannot  do  this,  however,  recollect  He  has  given  us 
reflections  of  His  holiness.  1.  God's  Word  is  a  reflection  of  Himself.  In  a  book 
you  get  a  man's  thoughts  and  spirit.  All  its  injunctions  and  prohibitions  are  on 
the  side  of  holiness.  By  common  consent  it  is  "  the  Holy  Bible,"  and  we  are  like 
God,  holy  as  He  is  holy,  in  proportion  as  we  "look  into  the  perfect  law,"  catch 
and  reflect  its  image.  2.  Not  in  a  book  only,  but  in  a  living  person  has  God 
exhibited  EUs  holiness.  How  holy  Christ  was  1  If  you  cannot  imitate  the  original, 
then  look  at  the  copy.  Our  holiness  consists  in  being  Uke  Christ.  As  you  look  at 
Christ,  too,  you  see  what  holiness  is  not,  as  well  as  what  it  is.  It  is  not  asceticism. 
Christ  "  was  in  the  world  "  ;  yet  He  was  holy.  It  is  not  absence  from  temptation. 
He  was  in  "  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin."  It  is  not  morbid 
sensibility,  ever  weighing  experience  and  scrutinising  motive.  Christ  was  active, 
*'  went  about  doing  good,"  was  healthy  in  His  moral  temperament.  It  was  not 
nnnaturalness,  the  assumption  of  anything  peculiar,  whether  in  dress,  speech,  or 
behaviour.  Christ  was  perfectly  natural ;  the  light  shone  because  it  was  there. 
3.  Though  this  is  perhaps  a  sufficient  definition,  it  is  not  a  complete  one,  for  there 
are  elements  which  go  to  make  up  our  holiness  which  could  not  exist  in  Christ.  In 
order  to  holiness  in  us  there  must  be  contrition  for  sin,  and  this  of  course  Jesos 
had  not.  4.  Still,  the  definition  is  not  complete.  Were  it  possible  to  express  in  a 
word  the  nature  of  absolute  holiness,  we  could  not  do  better  than  adopt  the  word 
"  Love."  God  is  love,  Christ  was  love,  and  the  nearest  approach  we  can  make  to 
perfect  holiness  is  pure  love.  U.  Why  should  wb  be  holt?  Why  should  we 
not;  what  reason  can  be  urged  for  sin?  It  is  unreasonable.  Holiness  is  the 
highest  reason.  1.  Consider — (1)  It  was  God's  original  purpose  with  regard  to  us. 
And  this  first  purpose  He  has  steadily  adhered  to.  How  holy  the  creature  He 
f  ormed  1  "God  made  man  upright."  In  the  "  image  of  God  created  He  man." 
How  powerful  this  motive  I  God  meant  us,  made  us,  to  be  holy.  As  sin  does  not 
destroy  law,  nor  alter  the  Divine  perfection,  so  neither  does  it  disturb  the  Divine 
purpose.  (2)  If  anything  can  be  stronger  as  a  motive  than  that  "  good  and  accept- 
able and  perfect  will  of  God,"  it  ia  to  be  found  in  the  great  work  of  Christ    "  Qod 


OBAF.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  641 

•o  loved  the  world."  Why?  To  promote  the  interests  of  holiness,  to  vindicate 
His  own  and  to  secure  that  of  His  creatures.  The  atonement  of  Christ  does  both. 
(3)  Nor  did  He  only  die  for  this.  For  this,  too,  He  lives  and  reigns.  The  £rst  gift 
Be  bestowed  after  His  ascension  was  the  royal  one  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  work 
is  emphatically  to  promote  holiness.  2.  In  thus  gathering  motives  from  the  throne, 
the  CroBB,  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  forget  not  personal  ones.  The  apostle  urges  these 
strongly.  (1)  Tour  profession.  You  have  made  this,  have  been  baptized,  taken 
upon  you  the  badge  of  discipleship.  What  means  this  ?  "  How  shall  we  who  are 
thns  by  profession  dead  to  sin,  hve  any  longer  therein  J  "  Consistency  with  what 
you  profess  requires  holiness.  Either  give  up  your  profession,  or  give  up  sin — the 
two  are  incompatible.  (2)  Nor  this  only.  If  believers,  you  are  one  with  Christ ;  as 
such,  should  be  like  Him.  He  was  raised  from  death  by  the  glorious  power  of  the 
Father ;  we  should  rise  too.  (3)  Still  farther ;  recollect  your  sinful  nature.  "  The 
old  man,"  corrupt  according  to  deceitful  lusts,  is  legally  destroyed.  Not  only  are 
motives  to  sin  withdrawn,  but  right  is  removed.  Therefore  "  reckon  "  this  to  be 
your  state,  and  "  yield  not  your  members  as  its  instruments."  3.  Motives  of  a  less 
personal  kind  yet  remain.  As  believers  formed  into  a  collective  fellowship,  the 
object  of  the  Church  is  twofold — its  own  culture,  and  the  benefit  of  the  world.  Both 
these  will  be  best  secured  by  growing  holiness.  UI.  How  uay  holiness  bb  best 
BEOTJBEDf  1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not  without  effort.  Wishing,  desire,  will  not  avail. 
If  this  fruit  is  ever  to  be  secured,  it  must  be  cultivated,  nurtured,  tended,  and 
sometimes  watered  with  tears.  A  careless  soul  wiU  never  be  a  holy  one.  As  little 
is  it  to  be  obtained  without  Divine  help.  With  a  corrupt  nature,  a  vigilant  adver- 
sary, and  a  sinful  world,  as  little  can  a  spark  live  in  the  ocean,  or  fruit  grow  on  a 
rock,  as  the  celestial  principle  flourish  without  help  from  above.  Divine  in  its 
nature,  it  requires  Divine  succour,  and  none  but  the  Spirit  of  God  can  sanctify  the 
soul.  (2)  Not  suddenly,  all  at  once.  As  the  sun  does  not  at  once  reach  the  zenith, 
nor  the  summer  its  solstice,  nor  the  fruit  its  maturity,  so  neither  does  holiness  at 
onoe  secure  the  ascendency  in  any  souL  It  is  a  habit  rather  than  an  act.  2. 
Positively.  HoUness — (1)  Must  have  a  basis  of  intelligence.  How  often  the 
apostle  prays  that  believers  may  increase  "  in  knowledge."  Would  you  be  holy  ? 
Think  on  Divine  things.  The  mind  grows  by  what  it  feeds  on.  (2)  Is  a  thing  of 
the  heart.  If  you  would  be  holy,  "  keep  your  heart  with  all  diligence."  It  is  the 
citadel.  (3)  Is  a  matter  of  practice.  Sin  within  is  bad  ;  allowed  to  come  out,  it  ia 
worse,  not  only  for  its  influence  upon  others,  but  on  self  too.  There  is  no  exercise 
so  hallowing  as  communion  with  God.  Entering  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of 
Jesus,  we  are  surrounded  by  the  fragrant  incense  which  will  perfume  our  very 
garments,  and  be  exhaled  in  the  breath  of  our  lips.  As  Moses,  radiant  from  the 
Mount,  so  shall  we  reflect  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  Like  him,  we  may  "  wist  not," 
but  others  will  see,  and  will  take  such  knowledge  of  us  as  will  bless  and  stimulate 
them.  Conclusion :  1.  Holiness  is  within  the  reach  of  all.  Many  things  are  not 
so.  Wealth,  fame,  honour,  position  may  be  coveted  by  many,  who  strive  to  obtain, 
but  win  not.  The  highest  distinction  to  be  won  on  earth  is  open  to  the  meanest. 
2.  Holiness  is  not  destroyed  by  occasional  failures.  Try,  try  again  ;  the  steps 
backward  may  help  the  spring  forward ;  the  wave  receding  becomes  stronger  in 
its  rebound.  3.  The  conscious  absence  of  perfect  holiness  should  endear  the 
atonement.  "  If  any  man  sin  " — and  who  does  not  daily  ? — •'  we  have  an  Advocate 
with  the  Father,"  &c.  4.  In  heaven  holiness  will  be  complete.  {J,  Viney.) 
Fruitfulness  a  Christian's  glory  : — As  the  glory  of  a  healthy  apple-tree  is  its  fruit,  so 
the  glory  of  a  genuine  Christian  is  his  usefulness.  He  does  not  merely  blossom 
cut  with  a  good  profession ;  he  bears  fruit  with  all  his  might  and  main.  There  is 
not  a  sapless  twig  or  a  barren  bough  on  the  whole  tree  which  is  planted  by  the  rivers 
of  grace  but  yieldeth  its  fruit  every  month.  (T.  L.  Cuyler.)  Fruit  unto  holiness : — 
It  is  remarkable  that  Paul  speaks  of  holiness  as  the  fruit,  and  not  as  the  principle 
of  our  service  to  God — as  the  effect  which  that  service  has  upon  the  character,  and 
not  as  the  impelling  moral  power  which  led  to  the  service.  And  this  accords  with 
▼er.  19,  where  they  who  had  yielded  their  members  servants  to  iniquity  are  repre- 
sented as  having  thereby  reaped  fruit  unto  iniquity — or,  in  other  words,  as  haviug, 
by  their  own  sinful  work,  aggravated  and  confirmed  the  sinfulness  of  their  own 
characters.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  they  who  had  yielded  their  members  servants 
to  righteousness,  are  represented  as  having  reaped  thereby  fruit  unto  holiness — or, 
in  other  words,  they,  by  doing  that  which  was  right,  rectified  their  own  moral 
frames;  and  a  perseverance  in  holy  conduct  made  them  at  length  to  be  holy 
oreatures.    This  is  the  very  process  laid  down  in  the  verse  before  us.    lu  virtue  ol 


649  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  U, 

having  become  serrants  to  God,  they  had  their  frait  unto  holiness.  No  doubt  there 
is  a  germ  of  holiness  at  the  very  outset  of  the  new  life,  but  still  a  coarser  principle 
of  it  may  predominate  at  the  hrst ;  and  the  finer  principles  of  it  may  grow  into 
estabUshment  afterwards.  The  good  things  may  be  done,  somewhat  doggedly  as  it 
were,  at  the  will  of  another ;  but  the  assiduous  doing  of  the  hand  may  at  length 
carry  along  with  it  the  delight  of  the  heart ;  and  this  certainly  marks  a  stage  of 
higher  and  more  saintly  advancement  in  personal  Christianity.  It  evinces  a 
growing  assimilation  to  God — who  does  what  is  right,  not  in  force  of  another's 
authority,  but  in  force  of  the  free  and  original  propensities  of  His  own  nature  to  all 
that  is  excellent.  By  such  a  blessed  progress  of  sanctification  as  this  do  we  at 
length  cease  to  be  servants  and  become  sons ;  the  Spirit  of  adoption  is  shed  upon 
us,  and  we  feel  the  glorious  liberty  of  God's  own  children.  And  when  the  transition 
is  so  made  that  the  work  of  servitude  becomes  a  work  of  felicity  and  freedom,  then 
is  it  that  a  man  becomes  like  unto  God,  and  holy  even  as  He  is  holy.  One  most 
important  use  to  be  drawn  from  this  argument  is,  that  you  are  not  to  suspend  the 
work  of  Uteral  obedience  till  ^ou  are  prepared  for  rendering  unto  God  a  spiritual 
obedience.  In  every  case  it  is  right  to  be  always  doing  what  is  agreeable  to  the 
will  of  God.  There  may  be  a  mixture  at  first  of  the  spirit  of  bondage,  so  that  the 
apostle  would  say  of  these  babes  in  Christ,  "  I  speak  unto  you  not  as  unto  spiritual 
but  as  unto  carnal " ;  yet  still  it  is  good  to  give  yourselves  over,  amid  all  the  crude 
and  embryo  and  infant  conceptions  of  a  young  disciple,  to  the  direct  service  of 
God.  Break  loose  from  your  iniquities  at  this  moment.  Turn  you  to  all  that  ia 
palpably  on  the  side  of  God's  law.  Do  plainly  what  God  bids,  and  on  the  direct 
unpulse,  too,  of  God's  authority ;  and  the  fruit  of  your  thus  entering  upon  His 
service  will  be  the  perfecting  at  length  of  your  own  holiness,  purified  from  the 
flaw  of  legal  bondage  or  of  mercenary  selfishness — a  holiness  that  finds  its  enjoy- 
ment in  the  service  itself,  and  not  in  the  hope  of  the  great  reward  which  is  to  come 
after  the  keeping  of  the  commandments ;  but  a  holiness  upheld  by  the  present 
experience,  that  in  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  there  is  a  great  reward. 
(T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)      And  the  end  everlasting  life. — The  believer'' »  end : — I.  Thebb 

IB   SOMETHINQ   VERY   SOLEMN   IN  THAT   WOBD,    "THE   END  1  "   (PrOV.    XXiii.    18).      What 

of  our  end  ?  Look  around  you  and  see  the  speculations,  the  anxieties,  the  labours 
of  the  men  of  this  world — they  all  will  have  an  end ;  see  men  of  pleasure,  hving  for 
pleasure — the  laughter,  the  songs,  the  entertainments  and  revelliugs  will  all  have 
an  end ;  and  this  world  will  have  an  end.  Every  day,  every  journey,  every  conflict, 
every  life  has  an  end.  What  of  our  end  ?  It  is  sure ;  the  end  will  come,  and  it 
may  be  very  near.  "  Oh,  that  we  were  wise,  that  we  did  consider  our  latter  end." 
Yet  death  is  not  the  end  of  yon.  The  dust  will  return  to  the  earth  whence  it  came, 
but  the  spirit  will  have  gone  to  God  who  gave  it — whether  clothed  in  the  righteouS' 
ness  and  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  or  not,  is  the  solemn  question.  H.  But  the 
text  speaks  of  the  believeb's  end.  The  end  of  his  pilgrimage,  his  conflict,  his 
prayers,  his  faith ;  "  receiving  the  end  of  your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your 
souls,"  or  as  it  is  here  expressed,  "everlasting  life."  Who  can  fully  comprehend 
the  subject  ?  Life  is  the  perfection  of  being,  and  everlasting  life  is  the  perfection  of 
life.  All  that  the  love  of  God  can  bestow,  all  that  the  blood  of  Christ  can  procure, 
aU  that  the  indwelling  Holy  Ghost  can  enable  us  to  enjoy,  this  is  everlasting  life — 
the  fruition  of  the  fruit  of  all  the  travail  of  Christ's  soul,  the  enjoyment  of  all  the 
fulness  of  God,  everlastingly  to  behold  His  glory,  to  be  assimilated  to  Christ,  to  have 
mortality  swallowed  up  of  life — this  is  "  everlasting  life."  The  consummation  of 
all  possible  privileges,  the  fulfilment  of  all  Divine  promises,  the  issue  of  all  God's 
purposes,  God's  rest  of  love.  How  small  the  world  looks  in  contrast  with  such  an 
end,  and  what  a  poor  consolation  will  it  be  for  any  of  us  to  have  attained  even  the 
whole  world,  if  we  lose  it.  (M.  Rainsford.)  The  life  everlasting  : — More  than 
1200  years  ago,  when  Bishop  Paulinus  came  to  Edwin,  king  of  Deira,  and  asked 
permission  to  preach  the  good  news  to  his  people,  that  monarch  gathered  his  nobles 
and  wise  men  to  take  counsel  together.  Then  one  of  the  thanes  arose  and  said, 
"  Truly  the  life  of  a  man  in  this  world,  compared  with  the  life  we  wot  not,  is  on  this 
wise  :  It  is  as  when  thou,  0  king,  art  sitting  at  supper  with  thy  oldermen  and  thanes 
in  the  time  of  winter,  when  the  hearth  is  lighted  in  the  midst  and  the  hall  is  warm, 
but  without  the  rains  and  the  snow  are  falling,  and  the  winds  are  howling ;  then 
oometh  a  sparrow  and  flieth  through  the  house,  she  cometh  in  by  one  door  and 
goeth  out  by  another.  While  she  is  in  the  house,  she  f  eeleth  not  the  storm  of 
winter,  but  yet  when  a  httle  moment  of  rest  is  past  she  flieth  again  into  the  storm 
and  passeth  from  ooi  eyes.    So  is  it  with  the  life  of  man ;  it  is  but  for  a  moment } 


eup.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  548 

what  goeth  afore  it,  and  what  oometh  after  it,  wot  we  not  at  all.  Wheiefore  if 
these  strangers  can  tell  us  anght,  that  we  may  know  whence  man  cometh  and 
whither  he  goeth,  let  us  hearken  to  them  and  follow  their  law."  This  beautiful 
parable  is  a  witness  to  us  both  of  the  darkness  of  man  without  Christ,  and  also  of 
the  greatness  of  the  gift  which  God  has  given  us  through  His  Son.  God  has  not 
made  us  for  Himself,  redeemed  us  through  Christ,  given  us  His  Spirit  to  dwell  in 
and  sanctify  us,  to  cast  us  into  the  abyss  of  death.  The  whole  revelation  of  the 
gospel,  as  admirably  summed  up  in  the  Apostles'  Creed,  is  a  pledge  that  our  end  ia 
everlasting  life.  Note  by  way  of  introduction  that  this  life  will  be — 1.  A  continua- 
tion  of  a  present  personid  life.  2.  A  fully  developed  and  perfected  spiritual  life,  of 
which  we  have  the  pledge  and  foretaste  here.  Hence  our  Lord  speaks  of  both  in 
the  same  terms  (Matt.  xzv.  46  ;  John  iii.  36,  v.  24  ;  1  John  iii.  14, 15).  From  what 
we  know,  therefore,  of  the  spiritual  life  here,  we  may  gather  what  it  will  be  by  and 
by.  Everlasting  life  will  be — I.  The  complete  and  final  emancipation  fbom  bin. 
Here  we  have  victory  over  its  dominion,  but  it  never  ceases  to  harass  us.  Here  we 
may  go  to  the  fountain  for  cleansing,  but  the  defilement  which  necessitates  this  is  a 
sore  trial.  But  yonder  there  will  be  no  tempter,  no  predisposition  to  evil,  no  bad 
examples,  no  world  to  allure,  no  flesh  to  weaken  and  ensnare.  II.  The  immediatb 
KNOWLEDGE  OF  GoD.  We  havc  that  here  too  (John  xvii.  3),  but  how  fragmentary  ia 
it !  We  know  but  in  part,  and  see  only  through  a  glass  darkly.  We  know  Him, 
yet  we  know  Him  not.  We  hear  but  a  whisper  of  God's  ways  and  see  but  the  skirt 
of  His  robe.  But  we  shall  then  see  Him  as  He  is,  and  know  even  as  we  are  known 
— know  His  character,  attributes,  work,  ways,  and  have  in  that  knowledge  fully,  aa 
we  have  it  now  in  a  measure,  everlasting  life.  lU.  A  life  of  action.  True,  heaven 
is  described  as  a  perpetual  Sabbath ;  and  compared  with  this  feverish  state  the  life 
to  come  will  be  a  life  of  rest — rest  from  sorrow,  suffering,  conflict,  doubt,  weariness, 
and,  above  all,  from  sin.  But  rest  without  action  is  monotonous,  and  more  irk- 
some than  toil ;  and  it  cannot  be  that  the  whole  condition  of  our  existence  will  be 
ehanged,  and  our  very  nature  unmade,  when  we  enter  the  heavenly  rest.  1.  What 
is  the  rest  of  the  heavenly  host?  They  indeed  cry  "Holy,  holy,  holy,"  as  they 
veil  their  faces,  but  they  have  wings  and  feet  as  servants  ever  ready  to  do  the  will 
of  Him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne.  And  we  read  that  they  are  "  ministering 
spirits"  (Heb.  i.),  and  surely  if  we  are  to  be  "like  the  angels  "we  shall  be  like 
them  in  this.  As  for  the  service,  I  do  not  imagine  that  the  glorified  will  have 
reached  such  perfection  as  to  need  no  instruction  or  aid.  There  will  be  no  sin  and 
no  infirmities,  but  there  will  still  be  diversities  of  character  and  attainment.  And 
then  who  knows  what  opportunities  of  service  will  be  afforded  in  the  distant 
provinces  of  God's  kingdom,  and  on  what  errands  of  mercy  and  hope  we  may  be 
employed.  2.  God  "  worketh  hitherto."  His  rest  has  been  a  rest  of  action.  And 
if  we  are  to  be  like  Him  our  life  will  be  one  of  ceaseless  beneficence.  lY.  A  life  im 
THB  immediate,  unveiled  pbesencb  of  Christ.  One  element,  of  course,  will  be 
reunion  with  those  we  have  loved  on  earth ;  but  eternal  communion  with  Christ 
will  be  its  perfection,  in  that  will  be  comprehended  all  that  the  heart  can  desire. 
Paul  had  dear  friends,  yet  when  he  looked  forward  to  his  heavenly  rest,  everlasting 
onion  with  Christ  was  the  burden  of  his  hope.  Yet  that  was  because  to  him  to  live 
was  Christ.  Here  we  enjoy  Christ's  presence  by  faith ;  but  our  communion  ia 
interrupted,  and  He  is  unseen.  But  in  the  life  to  come  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is, 
behold  His  glory,  inherit  the  kingdom  He  has  prepared  for  us,  and  share  His  throne 
for  evermore.  {Bp.  Perowne.)  Everlasting  life,  an  education: — Eternal  life  ia 
not  a  gift  as  of  something  fixed,  finished,  accomplished,  and  passed  over.  It  is  a 
gift  as  education  is.  It  is  something  wrought  patiently  and  long  in  a  man.  Eternal 
Ufe  is  a  gift  to  us  as  the  sunlight  is  to  the  flowers — an  influence  which  enters  into 
them  and  fashions  them.  Eternal  life  from  the  hand  of  God  is  a  gift  to  mankind, 
as  healing  is  a  gift  from  the  physician  to  the  patient.  It  is  that  which  is  slowly 
wrought  in  them.  Eternal  life  is  wrought  in  us  by  the  power  of  the  Highest,  by 
the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  the  hope  of  the  future  is  that  God's  Spirit, 
entering  into  the  soul,  will  give  it  eternal  life.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Everlasting 
life  :  its  progressiveness : — Eternity  will  be  one  glorious  morning,  with  the  sun  ever 
elimbing  higher  and  higher ;  one  blessed  springtime,  and  yet  richer  summer — every 
plant  in  full  flower,  but  every  flower  the  bud  of  a  loveUer,     {H.  Melvill,  BJ).) 

Ver.  23.  For  the  wages  of  sin  Is  death ;  but  the  gift  of  God  Is  eternal  life. — The 
wages  of  sin  and  the  gift  of  God : — I.  The  wages  of  sin  is  death.  "  Wages  "  here 
means  "  the  rations  "  supplied  as  pay  to  a  soldier.    If  sin  is  your  commander,  joo 


544  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAP.  Ylk 

will  have  "  death  "  to  eat  as  your  pay.  "  Sin "  is  treated  as  a  person,  even  aa 
"  God  "  is,  and  the  more  we  treat  it  as  a  living  enemy,  the  more  we  are  likely  to 
fight  against  it  manfully.  "  Death  "  may  be  defined  as  separation.  Spiritual  death 
is  a  present  separation  from  God.  Physical  death  is  a  separation  of  body  and  soul, 
and  the  separation  of  both  from  this  world.  Eternal  death  is  final,  total  separa- 
tion of  body  and  soul  from  heaven,  and  from  God  for  ever.  Now  we  are  prepared 
to  unravel  the  sentence.  1.  God  treats  "  sin "  as  a  master.  "Whosoever  oom- 
mitteth  sin,  is  the  servant  of  sin,"  and  "  his  servants  ye  are  to  whom  ye  obey." 
Now  sin  is  any  violation  of  God's  will  which  a  man  does  with  his  eyes  open.  We 
can  make  no  scale  of  sin.  The  only  measure  of  the  sin  is  the  Ught  which  it  darkens, 
and  the  grace  which  it  resists.  Bad  temper  at  home — pride  and  unkindness — want 
of  truth — self-indulgence  and  sloth — lust  and  uncleanness — meanness — "  covetoos- 
ness,  which  is  idolatry  " — a  cherished  scepticism — and  all  the  negatives — no  prayer, 
no  love  to  God,  no  usefulness — all,  and  many  else,  are  equally  '  •  sin."  2.  Kvezy 
"  sin  J^hasjts"  wage  "  ;  and  the  devil  is  the  paymaster.  (1)  He  promises,  indeed, 
very  different  '•  wages  "  from  what  he  gives.  He  promises  the  gay,  and  the  affec- 
tionate, and  the  satisfying.  But  God  has  drawn  up  the  compact,  and  He  has  shown 
it  to  you,  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  (2)  Now  the  expression  implies  that  there 
is  a  deUberate  engagement — a  title.  You  nave  a  right  to  your  "  wages."  A  servant 
can  claim  his  "  wages,"  and  the  master  must  give  them  :  for  whosoever  "  sins  "  is 
doing  his  employer's  work.  (3)  Let  me  tell  you  what  it  is.  First,  to  destroy  your 
own  soul ;  then  to  spread  a  contagion,  and  hurt  others'  souls,  so  to  increase  your 
master's  kingdom,  and  give  him  another  and  another  victim  1  Is  that  all?  No. 
To  insult  God — to  grieve  the  Holy  Ghost — to  rob  Christ  of  a  jewel — that  is  the 
work  which  every  one  who  "  sins  "  is  doing  for  his  employer.  (4)  And  often  it  ia 
very  hard  woik.  How  hard  a  man  of  the  world  is  working ;  and  how  Uttle  he 
knows  of  the  employer  he  is  working  for.  And  shall  not  the  wages  be  a  propor- 
tionate wages  ? — the  more  work,  the  more  pay.  (5)  The  "  wages  "  generally  given 
are  to  be  paid  soon ;  not  all  at  once,  they  accumulate.  Happy  are  you  if  you  at 
once  recognise  it  as  your  "  wages,"  and  determine  that  you  wUl  earn  no  more  of 
them  1  Happy  if  you  resolve,  "  I  will  quit  the  service  1  "  For,  if  not,  the  "  wages  " 
will  go  on  being  paid.  Little  by  little,  the  separation  from  the  good  and  the  pure 
will  widen.  The  Bible  wiU  be  put  further  and  further  aside.  Gulfs  will  come  in 
between  you  and  God.  And  out  at  that  distance,  the  soul  will  have  got  very  cold; 
heavenly  things  will  wither  !  But  there  is  a  great  deal  unpaid  yet.  Perhaps  there 
will  come  a  separation  unmitigated  by  any  real  hope  of  a  reunion  :  to  go  out — 
where  ?  To  a  land  of  darkness  1  No  voice  in  the  valley  I  no  arm  in  the  crossing  I 
And,  then,  separation  for  ever  !  Separation  from  that  father  of  yours,  that  mother, 
that  husband,  that  wife,  that  child,  that  saint,  that  church,  that  happy  fellowship, 
that  God  I  U.  "  The  gift  of  God  is  etebnai  life."  Here,  too,  is  service — real, 
severe,  lifelong.  And  "wages"?  Yes;  certain  wages — wages  in  a  most  just 
degree.  But  it  would  not  be  right  to  call  them  so.  "  Wages "  do  not  precede 
the  work.  But  here  the  "  wages "  do  precede  the  work.  You  do  not  work 
to  get  your  "  wages,"  but  you  work  because  you  have  them.  But  they  are 
infinitely  disproportioned  to  the  work ;  rather,  all  the  work  is  so  bad,  that  it 
wants  to  be  forgiven,  and  a  part  of  the  wages  is  that  God  does  forgive.  But  were 
it  "  wages,"  and  deserved,  it  would  not  be  half  so  happy  as  now — to  be  an  unearned 
thing — a  gift  of  the  love  of  God  1  What  would  heaven  be,  were  it  not  a  gift  ? 
Nevertheless,  it  is  "  wages."  God  is  just  to  give  it,  because  deserved  by  "  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord."  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  wages  of  sin  and  the  gift  of  God : — 
I.  The  first  fact.  St.  Paul  does  not  say,  "  The  punishment  of  sin  is  death,"  how- 
ever true  that  may  be.  He  uses  the  word  "  wages."  These  we  earn — 1.  When  we 
dishonour  our  bodies.  (1)  We  do  this  when  yfe  forget  them,  or  withhold  from  them 
that  on  which  their  health,  and  vigour,  and  usefulness  depend.  We  see  this  on  a 
large  scale  when  we  face  the  terrible  effects  of  preventible  disease.  Now,  is  it  not 
a  sin  to  allow  bad  air,  water,  drainage,  filth,  and  overcrowding  to  court  these 
fiends,  and  bid  them  come  and  do  their  work  among  us  ?  We  say  pestilence  is  the 
judgment  of  God,  and  so  it  is  ;  but  it  is  His  judgment  on  wilful  neglect,  bhndness, 
selfishness,  and  wrong.  (2)  When  you  give  way  to  drunkenness,  destroying  thereby 
the  high  faculties  of  your  manhood ;  when  you  yield  to  lust,  surrendering  your- 
selves to  "  the  strange  woman  "  ;  when  you  throw  the  reins  on  the  neck  of  pleasure, 
and  chase  it  wherever  it  may  lead  you ;  when  in  this  way  you  lay  deep  and  sure 
the  seeds  of  premature  decay,  are  you  not  learning  by  the  bitterest  experiences  that 
**  tiaa  wages  of  sin  is  death  "  ?    Trifle  not  with  the  body.    Forget  not  it  waa  mad* 


OBAP.  n.]  ROMANS.  SiS 

by  God's  hand,  and  redeemed  by  Christ's  blood.  Dishonour  not  that  which  shoald 
be  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  sins  of  the  body  will  bring  their  awful 
retribution.  It  will  come  as  a  curse  upon  yourselves,  and,  perhaps,  upon  your 
children.  2.  Wheii-we~«tifie-tbe-*«i«e-ef-e©n«ciefioe  within- us.  (1)  Every  time 
you  do  what  you  know  to  be  wrong,  every  time  you  surrender  yourselves  to  a 
thought  which  you  know  to  be  evil,  you  are  earning  the  wages  of  sin  which  are 
death — death  to  all  peace  of  mind,  to  all  noble  feeling,  to  all  nobility  of  character, 
to  all  solid  suocesB  in  life.  You  go  off  with  companions  and  give  way  to  drink. 
Well,  what  of  the  morning?  You  feel  that  you  have  lost  caste  at  home,  among 
the  friends  whose  respect  you  value,  and  you  hate  and  loathe  yourself.  (2)  And 
80  it  is  whenever  A  duty  is  sacrificed  to  a  selfiph  pleasure,  whenever  there  is  the 
least  departure  from  strict  integrity,  for  the  consequence  must  be  uneasiness  of 
mind,  a  load  upon  the  heart  which  cannot  be  laughed  off  or  drunk  away ;  for  God 
has  ordered  it.  Let  me  beg  you  not  to  stifle  the  voice  of  conscience.  It  will  surely, 
sooner  or  later,  be  heard.  If  you  do  not  heed  its  gentle  remonstrances,  it  will 
thunder  condemnation.  Say  not  that  you  make  good  resolutions,  but  that  you  are 
too  feeble  to  keep  them.  Ask  God,  by  His  Spirit,  to  make  yon  a  man,  and  not 
suffer  you  to  be  a  miserable  weakling.  Trust  to  yourselves,  and  you  are  no  match 
for  the  deviL  3.  Wfeen  we  reject  the  offers  of  the  gospel  (Prov.  i.  24,  &c.).  There 
is  no  sin  so  awful  in  its  character  and  so  terrible  in  its  results  as  unbelief.  That 
sin  some  of  you  are  committing  every  day,  every  hour  ;  and  its  wages  are  death — 
death  to  that  peace  which  a  man  can  only  know  when  he  has  been  cleansed  by  the 
blood  of  Christ ;  death  to  that  hope  of  a  happy  hereafter  which  a  firm  trust  in  hia 
Saviour  alone  can  bring  to  him,  and  the  death  which  never  dies.  What  I  have  as 
the  consequence  of  my  sin,  either  here  or  hereafter,  I  have  earned,  and  must  have. 
I^^may^  by^  God's  grace,  give  up  my  sin,  but  the  wages  of  sin  are  shown  in  my 
Bh(ittered  health,  and,  it  may  be,  by  the  sickliness  of  my  children.  And  if  the 
death  of  the  body  sees  me  unsaved,  how  my  misery  will  be  deepened  when  I  am 
constrained  to  say,  "  I  have  earned  damnation."  II.  The  second  fact.  Poor, 
lost,  unworthy  sinners  may  have  eternal  life  in  Christ,  and  that  as  a  gift  from  God, 
and  not  as  something  which  is  to  be  had  in  another  world,  but  something  which 
may  be  had  in  this.  See  you  not  what  a  grand,  brave,  and  noble  thing  it  is  to  live 
in  this  world  knowing  that  we  belong  to  God,  that  our  bodies  are  His,  our  minds 
His,  our  souls  His,  and  that,  by  His  grace,  we  are  using  them  to  His  glory  ?  Then 
choose  ye  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve.  {J.  Burbidge.)  Wages  ? — or  gift  t 
— The  more  important  any  matter  is,  the  more  need  there  is  that  we  view  it 
in  a  right  light.  A  human  face  rich  with  expression,  or  a  monument  of  archi- 
tecture rich  with  grandeur,  or  a  bit  of  landscape  rich  with  beauty,  cannot  have 
all  that  is  in  them  set  forth  in  one  picture.  Even  a  picture  cannot  set  forth  the 
Christian  life :  it  must  be  experienced  to  be  known.  I.  The  wages  system  of 
HUMAN  EXISTENCE.  lu  all  departments  work  is  a  marketable  article,  of  which  wages 
ir- the  price.  The  one  balances  the  other.  Wages,  as  distinguished  from  other 
modes  of  income,  is  something  that  stands  due  though  the  account  is  seldom  pre- 
sented :  they  are  paid  directly  to  the  man  after  a  period  of  work  is  finished.  St. 
Paul  says  that  sin  is  an  employer  of  labour.  It  pays  wages,  is  bound  by  strong  law 
to  do  so.  True  it  does  not  pay  in  full  as  work  is  done,  but  will  in  the  end  clear  up 
the  debt.  This  is  one  system  under  which  men  live.  Not  always  is  this  a  matter 
of  definite  purpose,  but  it  is  ol  prevailing  disposition.  Their  trust  in  this  system 
is  not  always  strong — are  they  likely  after  all  to  earn  much  that  is  desirable  ?  But 
things  cannot  drive  them  hard  under  a  God  who  is  good.  Unhappily  they  are  not 
apprehending  what  their  decision  means — that  it  is  wages  and  the  paymaster  sin. 
Let  us  remove  any  ambiguity  about  the  terms  of  this  contract :  the  wages  of  sin  is 
death.  Thesew^es  are  openly  paid.  The  instalments  he  pays  hint  the  kind  of 
final  reeompense  to  be  paid  in  the  end :  he  now  pays  in  disorders,  loss,  calamity, 
disease,  discontent,  hatred,  uneasy  forebodings.  He  cannot  hide  the  character  of 
these  payments.  God  has  revealed  this  as  the  recompense.  This  system  go€«  on 
nochecked  because  sin  is  what  it  is ;  it  rests  upon  the  nature  of  things,  God  is  the 
one  source  of  life ;  if  He  is  forsaken  death  must  be  the  result.  Am  I  working  for 
8o  sad  a  result  ?  II.  The  fkee  gift  system  of  human  existence.  We  now  pass 
into  a  different  climate  of  things.  It  is  as  if  we  had  been  walking  along  the 
northern  side  of  a  mountain  in  the  springtime,  within  the  chill  shadow  of  its  peaks, 
where  the  lingering  wind  of  winter  is  blowing  across  the  slushy  snow,  the  fields 
bare — and  now  had  travelled  round  the  mountains  into  the  southerly  sunshine. 
We  have  removed  from  the  presence  of  a  rigorous  employer  to  that  of  a  most 
VOL.  I.  8d 


511  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

munificent  friend ;  from  hard  earned  wages  to  generous  gift ;  life  instead  of  death. 
It  seems  very  evident  that  the  gift  system  of  living  is  brighter  than  the  wages 
system  of  living.  There  must  be  some  powerful  prejudice  to  make  men  choose  the 
latter.  In  other  matters  between  God  and  men  in  the  world  the  gift  system  is 
actually  at  work  and  men  do  not  quarrel  with  it.  Providence  not  less  than  grace  is 
pervaded  by  this  system.  What  do  we  render  for  the  sunlight ;  are  weal  of  body 
or  mind,  safety,  earned  ?  A  pure  wages  system  in  the  world  would  mean  death. 
Sin  pays  like  sin ;  God  gives  like  God.  He  will  give  life,  real,  unbounded,  happy. 
It  la  too  great  to  be  earned.  And  this  is  a  gift  from  Him  whom  we  have  greatly 
wronged.  In  Christ  the  wages  system  has  been  broken  down.  Christ  has  earned 
the  gift  for  us.  {J.  A.  Kerr  Bain,  M.A.)  Wages  versus  gift: — I.  Sin  and 
ITS  WAGES.  1.  Sin  a  service,  (1)  Not  an  independence,  as  the  world  thinks.  (2) 
A  service  to  which  wages  are  attached ;  each  sin  has  its  consequence.  2.  These 
wages  are  "  death,"  and  are  invariably  paid.  II.  God  and  His  gift.  A  gift— (1)  To 
those  who  are  not  earning  it,  for  they  are  in  the  service  of  another.  (2)  To  those  who 
do  not  want  to  earn  it,  for  they  have  yielded  themselves  to  another  service.  (3)  To 
those  who  cannot  earn  it,  for  they  cannot  atone  for  one  sin,  and  their  very  efforts 
to  do  so  impair  God's  one  condition  (Eph.  ii.  8,  9).  (4)  Which  all  mayiaye  for 
the  taking  (Isa.  Iv.  1 ;  Eev.  xxii.  17).  2.  That  gift  is  eternal,  (1)  Christ  Himself. 
Life  (a)  From  Christ,  depending  solely  on  His  substitution,  {b)  In  Christ,  oars 
only  by  appropriation,  (c)  A  part  of  Christ,  continued  to  us  only  by  indwelling. 
(2)  Eternal  life  (a)  Begun  when  Christ  began,  (b)  Begun  to  us  when  we  grasped 
it.  (c)  Continuing  till — eternity.  (J.  U.  Rogers,  M.A.)  Death  and  life  :  the  wage 
and  the  gift : — I.  Death  is  the  wages  of  sin.  1.  Death  is  the  natural  result  of  all 
sin.  When  man  acts  according  to  God's  order  he  lives ;  but  when  he  breaks  his 
Maker's  laws  he  does  that  which  causes  death.  (1)  The  further  a  man  goes  in 
iniquity,  the  more  dead  he  becomes  to  holiness :  he  loses  power  to  appreciate  the 
beauties  of  virtue,  or  to  be  disgusted  with  the  abominations  of  vice.  You  can  sin 
yourself  into  an  utter  deadness  of  conscience,  and  that  is  the  first  wage  of  your  sin. 
(2)  Death  is  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  God.  Can  two  walk  together  except 
they  be  agreed  ?  Man  iliay  continue  to  beUeve  in  the  existence  of  God,  but  for  all 
practical  purposes  God  to  him  is  really  non-existent.  (3)  As  there  is  through  sin 
a  death  to  God,  so  is  there  a  death  to  all  spiritual  things  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  (4)  Inas- 
much as  in  holy  things  dwells  our  highest  happiness,  the  sinner  becomes  an 
unhappy  being;  at  first  by  deprivation  of  the  joy  which  spiritual  Ufe  brings  with  it, 
and  afterwards  by  suffering  the  misery  of  spiritual  death  (Eom.  ii.  9).  2.  TJie 
killing  power  of  some  sins  is  manifest  toall  observers.  (1)  See  how  by  many  diseases 
and  deliriums  the  drunkard  destroys  himself ;  he  has  only  to  drink  hard  enough, 
and  his  grave  will  be  digged.  The  horrors  which  attend  upon  the  filthy  Instagf 
the  fiesh  I  will  not  dare  to  mention ;  but  many  a  body  rotting  above  ground  shall 
be  my  silent  witness.  (2)  We  have  all  known  that  sins  of  the  fiesh  kill  the  fiesh ; 
and  therefore  we  may  infer  that  sins  of  the  mind  kill  the  mind.  Death  in  any  pari 
of  our  manhood  breeds  death  to  the  whole.  3.  This  tendency  is  in  every  case  the 
same.  Even  the  Christian  cannot  fall  into  sin  without  its  being  poison  to  him.  If 
you  sin  it  destroys  your  joy,  your  power  in  prayer,  your  confidence  towards  God. 
If  you  have  spent  evenings  in  frivolity  with  worldlings,  you  have  felt  the  deadening 
influence  of  their  society.  4.  Death  is  sin's  due  reward,  and  it  must  be  paid.  A 
master  employs  a  man,  and  it  is  due  to  that  man  that  he  should  receive  his  wages. 
Now,  if  sin  did  not  entail  death  and  misery,  it  would  be  an  injustice.  It  is  necessary 
for  the  very  standing  of  the  universe  that  sin  should  be  punished.  They  that  sow 
must  reap.  The  sin  which  hires  you  must  pay  you.  6.  This  wage  of  sin  is  in 
part  received  by  men  now  as  soldiers  receive  their  rations,  day  by  day.  "  If  ye  live 
after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die  " — such  a  life  is  a  continued  dying.  "  She  that  liveth 
in  pleasure  is  dead  while  she  liveth."  The  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him  that 
believeth  not  on  the  Son  of  God;  it  is  there  already.  6.  But  then  a  Boman 
soldier  did  not  enlist  merely  for  his  rations ;  his  chief  pay  often  lay  in  the  share  of 
the  booty  which  he  received  at  the  end  of  the  war.  Death  is  the  ultimate  wage  of 
Bin.  Sin  will  perpetuate  itself,  and  so  for  ever  kill  the  soul  to  God,  and  goodness, 
and  joy  and  hope.  Being  under  the  ever-growing  power  of  sin,  it  will  become 
more  and  more  a  hopeless  thing  that  you  should  escape  from  death  which  thus 
settles  down  upon  you.  7.  The  misery  of  the  misery  of  sin  is  that  it  is  earned.  If 
men  in  the  world  to  come  could  say,  "  This  misery  has  come  upon  us  arbitrarily, 
quite  apart  from  its  just  results,"  then  they  would  derive  some  comfort.  But  when 
Ihey  will  be  obliged  to  own  that  it  was  their  own  choice  in  choosing  sin,  this  will 


.  Tl.]  EOMANS.  647 

BOoarge  them  indeed.  Their  sin  is  their  hell.  8.  It  will  be  the  folly  of  follies  to  go 
on  working  for  such  a  wage.  Hitherto  they  that  have  worked  for  sin  have  found  no 
profit  in  it  (ver.  21).  Why,  then,  will  you  go  further  in  sin  ?  9.  It  ought  to  be  the 
grief  of  griefs  to  each  of  as  that  we  have  sinned.  Oh,  misery,  to  have  wrought  so 
long  in  a  service  which  brings  such  terrible  wages  1  10.  It  must  certainly  be  a 
miracle  of  miracles  if  any  sinner  here  does  not  remain  for  ever  beneath  the  power 
of  sin.  Sin  has  this  mischief  about  it,  that  it  strikes  a  man  with  spiritual  paralysis, 
and  how  can  such  a  palsied  one  ward  off  a  further  blow  ?  It  makes  the  man  dead  ; 
and  to  what  purpose  do  we  appeal  to  him  that  is  dead  ?  What  a  miracle,  then, 
when  the  Divine  life  comes  streaming  down  into  the  dead  heart  1  What  a  blessed- 
ness when  God  interposes  and  finds  a  way  by  which  the  wage  most  justly  due  shall 
not  be  paid  1  II.  Etebnal  life  is  the  gift  of  God.  1.  Eternal  life  is  imparted 
by  grace  through  faith.  (1)  The  dead  cannot  earn  Ufe.  Both  good  works  and  good 
feelings  are  the  fruit  of  the  heavenly  life  which  enters  the  heart,  and  make  aa 
conscious  of  its  entrance  by  working  in  us  repentance  and  faith  in  Christ.  (2)  Since 
we  received  eternal  life  we  have  gone  on  to  grow.  Whence  has  this  growth  come  ? 
Is  it  not  still  a  free  gift  ?  (3)  Yes,  and  when  we  get  to  heaven,  and  the  eternal  life 
shall  there  be  developed  as  a  bud  opens  into  a  full-blown  rose ;  then  we  shall  confess 
that  our  life  was  all  the  free  gift  of  God  in  Christ.  2.  Observe  what  a  wonderful 
gift  this  is,  "  the  gift  of  God."  (1)  It  is  called  •'  life"  par  excellence,  emphatically 
"  hfe,"  true  life,  real  life,  essential  life.  This  does  not  mean  mere  existence,  but 
(he  existence  of  man  as  he  ought  to  exist— in  union  with  God,  and  consequently  in 
holiness,  health,  and  happiness.  Man,  aa  God  intended  him  to  be,  is  man  enjoying 
life :  man,  as  sin  makes  him,  is  man  abiding  in  death.  (2)  Moreover,  we  have  life 
eternal,  too,  never  ending.  3.  It  is  life  in  Jesus.  We  are  in  everlasting  union  with 
the  blessed  person  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  therefore  we  hve.  Conclusion :  1.  Let 
us  come  and  receive  this  Divine  life  as  a  gift  in  Christ  Jesus.  If  any  of  you  have 
been  working  for  it,  end  the  fooUsh  labour.  Believe  and  live.  Eeceive  it  as  freely 
as  your  lungs  take  in  the  air  you  breathe.  2.  If  we  have  accepted  it  let  us  abide 
in  it.  Let  us  never  be  tempted  to  try  the  law  of  merit.  3.  If  we  are  now  abiding 
in  it,  then  let  us  live  to  its  glory.  Let  us  show  by  our  gratitude  how  greatly  we 
prize  this  gift.  (C  H.  Spurgeon. )  Death  and  life  : — The  Word  of  God  abounds 
with  striking  oontSftsts,  which  picture  the  opposite  character  and  portion  of  the  two 
great  classes  into  which  all  mankind  are  divided  before  God.  Poverty  and  riches, 
slavery  and  freedom,  darkness  and  light ;  but  no  contrast  is  so  forcible  as  that 
between  death  and  life.  I.  Pj5a.th.  J>  Its  origin.  It  is  the  wages  of  sin.  The 
apostle  sets  before  us  what  fallen  man  loves,  what  he  dreads,  and  the  union  between 
the  two.  Fallen  man  loves  sin  and  dreads  death.  Yet  the  death  he  dreads  is  the 
inevitable  consequence  of  the  sia.  he  loves.  Sin  is  discovered  under  two  distinct 
aspects.  It  is — (1)  Whatever  is  UoLio  accordance  with  the  character  of  God.  All 
deviations  from  truth  and  holiness.  (2)  Whatever  is  Jiot  in  accordance  with  the 
law  of  God.  All  that  goes  beyond,  and  all  that  falls  short  of  this  Divine  standard, 
is  sin.  (3)  Now  death  is  not,  therefore,  what  men  sometimes  call  it,  the  debt  of 
nature.  It  is  the  righteous  recompense  by  which  God  shows  His  displeasure  against 
sin.  He  has  set  such  a  mark  upon  it  as  compels  every  individual  to  feel  and  show 
in  his  own  person  the  guiltiness  of  this  accursed  thing.  i%  Its  nature.  Death  is 
separation.  We  call  it  dissolution.  (1)  Bodily  death  is  the  separation  of  the  soul 
from  the  body.  (2)  Spiritual  death  is  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  God,  in  whose 
favour  is  life.  (3)  Eternal  death  is  the  perpetual  separation  of  both  body  and  soul 
from  God's  presence  and  favour.  This  is  called  in  Scripture  *'  the  second  death  " 
(Eev.  XX.  14).  H.-LxeC  1.  How  is  it  procured?  (1)  At  the  fii'st,  life  was  the 
gift  of  God.  It  was  solely  of  His  goodness,  and  for  His  glory.  And,  as  at  the  first 
creation,  so  in  the  new.  Life  is  not  the  wages  of  our  obedience.  It  was  forfeited 
by  sin ;  it  can  never  be  recovered  on  the  ground  of  our  own  merit.  Death  is 
rendered  to  ns  in  justice.  Life  can  only  be  restored  to  us  in  grace.  The  very  God 
whose  honour  we  have  outraged  by  sin,  comes  forward  to  "  seek  and  save  the  lost," 
(2)  It  is  a  free  gift  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  but  not  so  far  as  Christ  was  con- 
cerned. Before  He  could  obtain  life  for  us,  He  must  taste  death  for  every  man 
(Heb.  ii.  9).  (3)  Christ  is  also  the  fountain  that  contains  this  Ufe.  Itis  treasured 
np  in  Him  for  all  who  will  come  to  Him  for  it  (1  John  v.  12 ;  John  z.  14).  2.  In 
what  does  it  consist  ?  It  is  in  all  respects  the  opposite  to  the  death.  It  is  the 
antidote  to  spiritual  death,  for  it  brings  us  into  imion  with  God.  It  is  the  destruc- 
tion of  bodily  death ;  for  it  secures  to  the  glorified  body  and  soul  an  everlasting  homa 
In  God's  presence,  where  is  "  fulness  of  joy  and  pleasure  for  evermore."   (W.  Conway^ 


MS  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  ti. 

M.A.)  Hard  work  and  bad  pay ;  no  work  ajid  rich  reward : — I.  Habd  wobk  ake  bad  pat. 
1.  Who  are  the  servants  who  receive  the  pay  ?  (1)  All  by  nature.  We  are  slaves 
bom  npon  the  estate  of  sm.  (2)  But  we  are  servants  also  by  voluntary  choice. 
(3)  The  servants  of  Satan  are  many.  His  workshop  is  the  world.  Go  where  yoa 
please  you  find  his  liveried  servants.  Unlike  other  employers  he  never  diminishes 
the  number  of  his  bands,  for  if  any  are  by  grace  persuaded  to  leave  his  service  it 
goes  much  against  his  grain.  It  matters  not  to  him  whether  trade  be  slack  or 
otherwise,  he  can  always  find  employment  for  all.  (4)  Tljej  belong  to  all  Ages, 
Children  not  in  their  teens,  and  lads  not  out  of  them,  are  every  day  through  the 
medium  of  onr  police  courts  astonishing  even  a  sinful  world  with  their  proficiency 
|n  guilt ;  and  side  by  side  with  them  stands  the  criminal  whose  locks  have  grown 
white  in  the  service  of  the  same  relentless  master.  (5)  They  belong  to  all,  grades 
of  society.  In  the  sight  of  God  there  is  not  much  to  choose  between  Bethnal 
Green  and  Belgravia,  Westbourne  and  Whitechapel.  Kings,  princes,  statesmen, 
and  paupers  are  all  equally  his  servants.  2.  TWwork  they  have  to  perfem.  To 
be  Satan's  servant  is  no  sinecure.  (1)  To  one  he  says,  *'  Get  rich  "  :  and  at  the 
word  of  command  the  poor  wretch  at  once  begins  to  toil,  and  laborious  toil  it  is. 
The  miser  is  a  lump  of  incarnate  misery.  (2)  To  another  he  gives  an  order 
Bummed  np  in  the  word  dfink,  and  there  is  no  slavedom  more  killing  both  to  body 
and  soul  than  slavedom  t*©  the  drink.  He  who  enters  a  drunkard's  grave  has 
worked  hard  for  the  result.  (3)  He  sets  another  to  obtain  pleaffore.  Men  will 
even  in  the  most  lawful  pleasures  do  that  which  if  required  of  them  in  an  ordinary 
day's  work  would  be  the  subject  of  much  grumbling.  Who  does  not  know  by 
experience  that  a  day's  pleasuring  is  more  tiring  than  an  equal  number  of  hours' 
work  ?  And  how  much  more  is  this  true  with  the  gay  man  of  the  world.  Possessed 
with  the  evil  spirit,  he  goes  hither  and  thither  seeking  rest  and  finding  none.  The 
quiet  of  the  home  he  terms  slow,  so  he  launches  into  a  whirlpool  of  dissipation, 
and  singing  "Begone,  dull  care."  The  pleasure  that  once  enchanted  him  by 
frequent  indulgence  becomes  insipid  ;  something  stronger,  more  vicious  is  needed 
to  stimulate  his  jaded  spirits.  He  goes  from  bad  to  worse,  until  at  last  every 
sinful  pleasure  has  in  its  turn  been  tried,  and  in  its  turn  grown  tame.  Of  all  the 
miserable  sights  on  earth  that  of  an  aged  roui  is  the  most  miserable.  (4)  Satan 
Bets  a  fourth  to  act  the  hypocrite,  and  for  this  service  he  pays  the  highest  wages, 
and  right  he  should,  for  the  work  must  be  tremendous.  How  great  a  strain  to  have 
always  to  remember  the  part  he  has  to  act.  But  whatever  the  work  may  be  to 
which  the  sinner  is  set  it  is  work  without  a  pause.  Satan  has  no  old  pensioners 
permitted  to  end  their  days  in  peaceful  idleness.  3.  The  wages  paid  them.  (1) 
The  death  of  the  body  is  but  the  result  of  sin.  For  six  thousand  years  men  have 
been  receiving  the  wages  of  death.  But  death  here  is  placed  in  contrast  to 
••  eternal  life,"  and  means  eternal  death.  (2)  Sin  pays  some  of  its  wages  on 
account,  it  gives  sometimes  an  instalment  of  hell  on  earth.  The  wretched 
debauchee  often  finds  it  so.  Mark  his  haggard  countenance,  his  trembling  gait, 
follow  him  to  the  hospital — nay,  don't — let  his  end  remain  secret ;  terrible  are  the 
wages  he  receives  on  account.  And  yet  after  all  this  is  nothing.  Eternity  is  one 
long  pay  day,  and  the  wages  paid  is  death.  II.  No  woek  and  eich  beward.  1. 
The  pivot  word  is  "gift."  God  absolutely  refuses  to  sell  salvation.  He  will  give 
to  any,  but  barter  with  none.  2.  The  blessing  specified.  "Eternal  life";  and 
this  the  Lord  permits  His  children  to  enjoy  on  earth  ;  for  as  part  of  the  wages  of 
sin  is  paid  on  account  in  this  life,  so  even  in  this  life  foretastes  of  the  gift  of  God 
are  enjoyed  by  the  saints.  Peace  with  God,  quiet  trustfulness  as  to  the  future, 
beside  a  thousand  other  joys,  are  some  of  the  clusters  of  the  grapes  of  Eschol,  that 
refresh  the  wearied  one  on  his  journey  to  the  land  where  the  vine  grows.  And  how 
about  the  end,  when  the  gift  is  received  in  full  ?  3.  Forget  not  the  channel  through 
whom  it  flows;  it  is  a  gift  to  thee,  because  thy  Lord  paid  all.  {A.  G.  Broum.) 
The  wages  question : — Men  are  bom  to  serve.  The  majority  are  materially.  All 
are  morally.  Only  a  choice  of  service  open  to  us — the  service  of  sin,  or  of  righteous- 
ness. We  are  keen  on  "  the  wages  question  "  in  matters  material;  much  more 
ought  we  to  be  in  matters  moral.  Of  these  two  services  mark — I.  Thk  contbabt 
w  THEiB  BEGINNINGS.  1.  The  setvice  of  sin  is  at  first  promising.  (1)  Its  demands 
are  easy.  To  serve  Satan,  self,  the  world,  is  attractive  to  human  nature.  Like 
prospectuses  promising  30  per  cent.  (2)  AndJt  begins  well.  At  first  delightful. 
Pays  dividends  at  first.  2.  The  service  of  righteousness  is  at  first  unpromising, 
(1)  Its  demands  are  high.  The  opposite  of  those  of  sin.  Self-control,  seif-denial, 
self -sacrifice.    Service  of  virtae  and  truth.    Hence  it  begins  with  sorrow,  conviction 


CHI*.  Ti.]  ROMANS.  649 

of  sin,  penitence.  (2)  And  no  wages  can  be  earned  therein.  An  apparently  hard 
service,  slow  progress.  When  done  all,  unprofitable  servants,  (R.V.)  "  free  gift." 
All  we  get  comes  undeserved.  II.  The  coktkast  in  theib  issues.  1.  The 
service  of  sin  ends  badly.  (1)  It  issues  in  death.  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death." 
"  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  Death,  physical,  moral,  eternal. 
Sinner  like  some  decoyed  drudge  worked  to  death.  Yet  the  .setvica  has  a  fatal 
fascination  for  many.  (2)  And  death  deserved.  These  wages  are  earned.  Had 
power  of  choice,  are  responsible.  Will  be  paid  in  full.  But  sin  pays  them,  not 
God.  Hate  it,  not  Him  !  2.  The  service  of  righteousness  ends  blessedly.  (1)  It 
issues  in  eternal  life.  "  Gift  of  God  is  eternal  life."  A  service  which  is  its  own 
reward,  which  ennobles,  which  confers  "glory,  honour,  immortality"  upon  its 
servants."  The  servant  is  taken  into  partnership,  is  lifted  up  to  the  throne, 
partakes  of  the  King's  life.  It  has,  if  not  wages,  an  exceeding  great  reward, 
passing  all  possible  desert.  (2)  Which  not  only  consummates,  but  accompanies  it. 
It  is  through  and  "  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,"  who  supplies  the  working  strength. 
Hence  this  hard  service  becomes  easy.  Hence  it  does  not  weaken  and  wear  us  out 
like  human  and  sinful  service,  but  we  are  renewed  day  by  day.  "  In  Him  is  hfe." 
(S.  E.  Keeble.)  The  wages  of  sin  inevitable  : — £«&apd  is  contrary  to  the  laws  of 
God  and  of  God's  nnlverse.  It  is  as  impossible  as  that  fire  should  not  burn,  or 
water  run  up  hill.  Your  sins  are  killing  you  by  inches ;  all  day  long  they  are 
sowing  in  you  the  seeds  of  disease  and  death.  There  are  three  parts  of  you — body, 
mind,  ftnd  spirit;  and  every  sin  you  commit  helps  to  kill  one  oi  these  three,  and  in 
many,  cases  to  kill  all  three  together.  The  bad  habits,  bad  passions,  bad  methods 
q1  thought,  in  which  they  have  indulged  in  youth,  remain  more  or  less,  and  make 
them  worse  men.  sillier  men,  less  useful  men,  less  happy  men,  sometimes  to  their' 
lives'  end ;  and  they,  if  they  be  true  Christians,  know  it,  and  repent  of  their  early 
sins,  and  not  once  for  all  only,  but  all  their  lives  long,  because  they  feel  that  they 
have  weakened  and  worsened  themselves  thereby.  It  stands  to  reason  that  it 
should  be  so.  li-aman loses  Ms  way  and  finds  it  again,  he  is  so  much  the  less, 
forward  on  his  way,  surely,  by  all  the  time  he  has  spent  in  getting  back  into  the 
road.  If  a  child  has  a  violent  illness  it  stops  growing,  because  the  life  and  nourish- 
ment which  ought  to  have  gone  towards  its  growth  are  spent  in  curing  the  disease. 
And  so,  if  a  man  has  indulged  in  bad  habits  in  his  youth,  he  is  but  too  likely  (let  him 
do  what  he  wiU)  to  be  a  less  good  man  for  it  to  his  life's  end,  because  the  Spirit  of 
God,  which  ought  to  have  been  making  him  grow  in  grace,  freely  and  healthily  to 
the  stature  of  a  perfect  man,  to  the  fulness  of  the  measure  of  Christ,  is  striving  to 
conquer  old  habits  and  cure  old  diseases  of  character,  and  the  man,  even  though 
he  does  enter  into  life,  enters  into  life  halt  and  maimed.  {Canon  Eingsley.) 
Sin  and  its  wages  : — We  have  to  notice  three  words.  I.  Sin.  "  Sin  is  the  trans- 
gression of  the  law."  Its  fundamental  idea  is  deviation  from  the  law,  as  a  standard 
of  excellence  or  as  a  rule  of  conduct.  Now,  the  law  supposes  a  lawgiver,  and  the 
possibility  of  God's  law  being  disobeyed,  i.e.,  that  it  has  to  do  with  moral  agents. 
Well,  then,  we  have  to  think  of  them  as  failing  from  some  cause  or  other  to  do  God's 
will,  which  is  sin.  Sin  is  set  forth  under  three  aspects.  1.  A3  ^principle  orjaw 
(chap.  viii.  2).  (1)  As  sin  is  the  rejection  of  God's  authority,  the  refusal  to  let 
Him  reign  over  us,  it  follows  that  by  it  we  set-xipxjur  own  will  in  opposition  to  His. 
See,  then,  what  such  autonomy  involves,  (a)  The  basest  ingratitude,  for  who  can 
deny  that  we  owe  all  our  powers  and  happiness  and  our  very  being  to  God  ?  (6) 
An  imputation  upon  God's  character,  viz.,  that  He  is  unworthy  to  govern  us,  that 
His  will  is  unjust.  His  law  unkind,  (c)  Bebellion  against  Him.  {d)  Usurpation 
of  His  pl'ice;  and  hence  idolatry  and  self-deification.  (2)  Why  shouliany  creature 
throw  off  God's  authority  and  govern  himself?  It  must  be  for  some  object  of  self- 
gratification  incompatible  with  obedience  to  God.  Now,  God's  law  seeks  the 
greatest  good  of  all ;  and  therefore,  to  set  it  at  nought  for  the  sake  of  personal 
indulgence,  is  to  violate  the  principle  of  benevolence.  (3)  This  selfishness  may 
assume  a  great  variety  of  forms.  Many  men  have  as  many  different  ways  of 
enjoying  themselves,  yet  all  may  be  equally  selfish.  Some  are  sensual,  some  are 
covetous,  others  ambitious,  and  not  a  few  are  fired  with  the  intellectual  passion  for 
fame.  2. -As -an  -ant.. or.  anf.s.  The  law,  though  in  principle  always  one,  has 
nevertheless  many  particular  precepts,  and  is  outraged  by  the  violation  of  any  of 
those  precepts.  There  are  3ina_of_deed,  oi.speech,  .oi  deportment,  xjllooks,  ol 
motive,  de&ira,  imagination,  thought,  of  negation,  and. omission.  All  these  are  the 
outgrowth  of  that  self-will  and  selfishness  in  which  sin  essentially  consists,  3.  A» 
^  j^te.    Hence,  we  read  of  men  being  "born  in  sin,"  and  remaining  "dead  in 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n. 

trespasses  and  sins."  Before  we  commit  anj  acta  of  sin,  and  as  the  source  of  all 
ve  do  commit,  we  have  a  sinful  nature — a  bias  to  go  and  to  do  wrong.  The 
thoroughly  sinful  soul  may  be  said  to  live  in  sin  always.  Sin  is  its  element  smd 
vital  air.  It^ives  without  God.  11.  Death.  1.  Spiritual  dnath.  The  soul  is  dead 
when  destitute  of  holiness  and  happiness ;  of  the  disposition  to  do  well,  and  of 
the  power  to  enjoy  God.  It  admits  of  degrees ;  the  more  it  prevails,  the  more  it 
grows,  and  the  commission  of  sin  inevitably  paves  the  way  for  the  perpetration  of 
many  more  ;  and  the  final  stage  is  reached  when  the  conscience  is  seared  as  with 
a  hot  iron,  proof  against  every  appeal,  and  resolutely  bent  on  his  own  eternal 
destruction.  2.  Eternal  death.  Let  us  suppose  a  man,  whose  soul  is  dead  through 
sin,  removed  out  of  this  world  into  the  next,  and  what  shall  we  behold  concerning 
him?  His  case  is  a  million-fold  more  terrible  than  before.  For — (1)  It  is 
confirmed  unalterably  for  ever.  Though  countless  ages  roll  over  his  head,  he  that 
is  unholy  must  be  unholy  still ;  he  that  is  filthy  must  be  filthy  still.  (2)  Besides, 
he  is  still  the  subject  of  the  law  of  progress ;  and  therefore,  as  the  ages  of  his 
immortality  advance,  each  will  leave  him  worse  than  it  found  him.  (3)  This 
development  of  evil  will  be  incalculably  accelerated  and  aggravated  by  the  absence 
of  everything  enjoyed  on  earth,  and  which  helped  either  to  restrain  the  malignity 
of  the  disposition  or  to  relieve  the  wretchedness  of  the  feelings.  (4)  The  positive 
infliction  of  punishment  as  a  token  of  God's  anger  at  sin.  III.  Wages.  This 
word  denotes  a  relation  of  equity  between  sin  and  death.  The  sinner  earns  death 
as  his  rightful  recompense.  This  connection  is — 1.  Natural.  You  have  only  to 
study  the  human  mind,  its  laws  of  association  and  of  working,  to  be  convinced 
that  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  must  bring  forth  death.  2.  Judicial.  The  wicked  are 
turned  into  hell  by  a  just  and  holy  God ;  and  the  same  reasons  which  send  them 
there  must  avail  to  keep  them  there.  They  have  no  power  to  make  themselves 
good,  and  being  immortally  evil  they  must  be  immortally  shut  oat  from  heaven. 
Certainly  God  will  not  lay  upon  the  wicked  more  of  these  terrible  "wages"  than 
tiiey  individually  deserve.  But  who  shall  determine  the  full  and  adequate  deserts 
of  sin  ?  Conclusion :  1.  Christians  should  not  live  in  sin,  but  utterly  hate  and 
discard  it,  and  earnestly  strive  to  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  They 
have  done  with  it  as  a  state ;  let  them  have  done  with  it  as  a  law,  and  in  its 
individual  acts.  2.  Here  is  a  message  of  warning  to  the  ungodly.  Saa  lor  what 
wages  you  are  working ;  part  are  being  paid  now,  but  immense  arrears  are  being 
treasured  op  in  the  future.  Too  think  you  are  working  for  pleasure,  for  gold,  fo? 
honour,  but  lo!  it  is  for  death.  {T.  O.  Horton.)  Death  the  wages  of  sin: — I. 
WsAT  SIN  18.  1.  Original  sin.  Sin  bears  date  with  our  very  being,  and  indeed  we 
were  sinners  before  we  were  bom  (Eph.  ii.  8).  There  are  some  who  deny  this  to 
be  properly  sin  at  all,  because  nothing  can  be  truly  sin  which  is  not  voluntary. 
But  original  corruption  in  every  infant  is  voluntary,  not  indeed  in  his  own  person, 
but  in  Adam  his  representative.  Pelagians,  indeed,  tell  us  that  the  sons  of  Adam 
came  to  be  sinners  only  by  imitation.  But,  then,  what  are  those  first  inclinations 
which  dispose  us  to  such  bad  imitations  ?  2.  Actual  sin  may  be  considered — (1) 
According  to  the  subject-matter  of  it.  (a)  Xbe.  ^\^  o'  our  words  (Matt.  xii.  37). 
{b)  The  sin  of  oor  external  actions,  theft,  murder,  Uncleanness ;  and  to  prove 
wnich  to  be  sins,  no  more  is  required  but  only  to  read  over  the  law  of  God,  and 
where  the  written  letter  of  the  law  comes  not,  men  are  "  a  law  to  themselves."  (c) 
The  sin  of  our  de^res.  Desires  are  sin,  as  it  were,  in  its  first  formation.  For  as 
soon  as  the  heart  has  once  conceived  this  fatal  seed,  it  first  quickens  and  begins 
to  stir  in  desire ;  so  that  the  ground  and  the  principal  prohibition  of  the  law  is, 
"  Thoa  shalt  not  covet."  Indeed,  action  is  only  a  consummation  of  desire ;  and 
eould  we  imagine  an  outward  action  performable  without  it,  it  would  be  rather  the 
shell  and  outside  of  a  sin  than  properly  a  sin  itself.  (2)  According  to  the  measure 
of  it ;  and  so  also  it  is  distinguished  into  several  degrees,  according  to  which  it  is 
either  enhanced  or  lessened  in  its  malignity,  (a)  As  when  a  man  is  engaged  in  a 
sinful  course  by  surprise  and  infirmity,  (b)  When  a  man  pursues  a  course  ol  sin 
against  the  reluotancies  of  an  awakened  conscience ;  when  salvation  waits  and 
knocks  at  the  door  of  his  heart,  and  he  both  bolts  it  out  and  drives  it  away ;  when 
he  fights  with  the  word,  and  struggles  with  the  Spirit ;  and,  as  it  were,  resolves  to 
perish  in  spite  of  mercy  itself,  and  of  the  means  of  grace  (Isa.  L  6  ;  JoLu  ix.  41). 
(e)  When  a  man  sins  in  defiance  of  conscience ;  so  breaking  all  bonds,  so  trampling 
npon  all  convictions,  that  he  becomes  not  only  nntractable,  bat  finally  incorrigible. 
And  this  is  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  impiety,  which  shuts  the  door  of  mercy  and  seals 
the  decree  of  danmation.    Now  this  difiers  from  original  sin  tirafl*  that  that  il 


OBif.  JU]  ROMANS.  851 

properly  the  seed,  this  the  harrest;  that  merits,  this  actually  procures  death.  For 
although  as  soon  as  ever  the  seed  be  oast  in  there  is  a  design  to  reap ;  yet,  for  the 
most  part,  Ood  does  not  actually  put  in  the  sickle  till  continuance  in  sin  has  made 
the  sinner  ripe  for  destruction.  II.  What  is  included  in  dbath  which  is  hkhb 
AiiLOTTED  FOB  THK  simneb's  waoes  ?  1.  Death  temporal.  We  must  not  take  it  ai 
the  separation  of  the  soul  from  the  body,  for  that  is  rather  the  consummation  of 
death,  the  last  blow  given  to  the  falling  tree.  (1)  Look  upon  those  forerunners  of 
death — diseases ;  they  are  but  some  of  the  wages  of  sin  paid  us  beforehand.  And 
to  the  diseases  of  the  body  we  may  add  the  consuming  cares,  and  trouhlea  .oLtiia 
mind,  aU  made  necessary  by  the  first  sin  of  man,  and  which  impair  the  vitals  as 
much  as  the  most  visible  diseases  can  do.  (2)  To  these  we  may  subjoin  the 
miseries  which  attend  our  condition ;  as  the  shame  which  makes  men  a  scorn  to 
others  and  a  burden  to  themselves ;  which  takes  o£F  the  gloss  and  air  of  all  other 
enjoyments,  and  damps  the  vigour  and  vivacity  of  the  spirit.  Also  the  miseries  of 
poverty  which  leave  the  necessities  and  the  conveniencies  of  nature  unsupplied. 
Now  all  these  things  are  so  many  breaches  made  upon  our  happiness  and  well> 
being,  without  which  life  is  not  life,  but  a  thin,  insipid  existence.  2.  Dfath 
et«nM})  In  comparison  of  which  the  other  can  scarce  be  called  death,  but  only  a 
transient  change  ;  easily  borne,  or  at  least  quickly  past.  (1)  It  bereaves  a  man..9i|^ 
all  the  pleasures  and  comforts  which  he  enjoyed  in  this  world.  How  will  the 
druolcard,  the  epicure,  and  the  wanton  bear  the  absence  of  those  things  that  alone 
used  to  please  their  fancy  and  to  gratify  their  lust  1  (2)  It  bereaves  the  soul  of 
th»  beatific  fruition  of  Ood  (Psa.  xvi.  11).  (3)  It  fills  both  body  and  soul  with 
angaish  (Luke  zvi.  24).  III.  In  what  bespect  death  is  pbopebly  called  "  thb 
WAGES  or  SIN."  1.  Because  wages  presuppose  service.  And  undoubtedly  the 
service  of  sin  is  of  all  others  the  most  laborious.  It  will  engross  all  a  man's 
industry,  drink  up  all  his  time  ;  it  is  a  drudgery  without  intermission,  a  business 
without  vacation.  Such  as  are  the  commands  of  sin,  such  must  be  also  the 
service.  But  the  commands  of  sin  are  for  their  number  continual,  for  their 
vehemence  importunate,  and  for  their  burden  tyrannical.  (1)  Take  the  voluptuous, 
debauched  epicure.  What  hour  of  his  life  is  vacant  from  the  slavish  injunctions  of 
his  vice  ?  Is  he  not  continually  spending  both  his  time  and  his  subsistence  to 
gratify  his  taste?  And  then,  how  uneasy  are  the  consequences  of  his  luxury  I 
when  he  is  to  grapple  with  surfeit  and  indigestion  ?  (2)  The  intemperate  drinker ; 
is  not  his  life  a  continual  toil  ?  To  be  sitting  up  when  others  sleep,  and  to  go  to 
bed  when  others  rise ;  to  be  exposed  to  quarrels,  to  have  redness  of  eyes,  a 
weakened  body  and  a  besotted  mind  ?  (3)  The  covetous,  scraping  usurper :  it  is  a 
question  whether  he  gathers  or  keeps  his  pelf  with  most  anxiety.  2.  Because 
wages  do  always  imply  a  merit  in  the  work  requiring  such  a  compensation.  It  is 
bat  equitable  that  he  who  sows  should  also  reap  (Oal.  vi.  8).  (1)  But  to  this  some 
make  the  objection  that  since  our  good  works  cannot  merit  eternal  life,  neither  can 
our  sins  merit  eternal  death.  But  to  merit,  it  is  required  that  the  action  be  not 
dae ;  but  every  good  action  being  commanded  by  the  law  of  God  is  thereby  made 
due,  and  consequently  cannot  merit;  whereas,  a  sinful  action  being  altogether 
ondue  and  not  commanded,  but  prohibited,  it  becomes  properly  meritorious ;  and 
according  to  the  malignity  of  its  nature,  it  merits  eternal  death.  (2)  But  soma 
further  urge  that  a  sinful  action  is  but  of  a  finite  nature,  and  proceeds  from  a 
finite  agent ;  and  consequently  there  is  no  proportion  between  that  and  an  eternal 
punishment.  Bat  we  answer  that  the  merit  of  sin  is  not  to  be  rated  either  by  the 
act  or  the  agent ;  but  by  the  proportions  of  its  object,  and  the  greatnecB  of  the 
person  against  whom  it  is  done.  Being  committed  against  an  infinite  majesty, 
it  rises  to  the  height  of  an  infinite  demerit,  (a)  Sin  4ft  a  direct  .stroke  at  God's 
sovereignty.  We  read  of  the  kingdom  of  Satan  in  contradistinction  to  the  kingdom 
of  God,  into  which  sin  translates  God's  subjects.  No  wonder  if  God  punishes  sin, 
which  is  treason  against  the  King  of  kings,  with  death  ;  for  it  puts  the  question 
"  Who  shall  reign  ? "  (6)  Sin  strikes  at  God's  very  being  (Psa.  xiv.  1).  Sin  would 
step  not  only  into  God's  throne,  but  also  into  His  room.  Conclusion :  Sin  plays 
the  bait  of  a  little,  contemptible,  siUy  pleasure  or  profit ;  but  it  hides  that  fatal 
hook  by  which  that  great  catcher  of  souls  shall  drag  them  down  to  his  eternal 
execution.  "Fools  make  a  mock  at  sin."  Fools  they  are  indeed  for  doing  so. 
But  is  it  possible  for  anything  that  wears  the  name  of  reason,  to  be  so  much  a 
fool  as  to  mock  at  death  too  f  In  every  sin  which  a  man  deliberately  commits, 
he  takes  down  a  draught  of  deadly  poison.  In  every  last  which  he  cherishes, 
he  embraces  a  dagger  and  opens  his  bosom  to  destruction.    Se  who  likea  th« 


iSi  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tt 

wages,  let  him  go  about  the  work.  {R.  South,  D.D.)  Eternal  life: — ^I.  Iif 
KATURB.  A  life  of— 1.  Perfect .imnannity  from  all  the  sufferings  and  dangers  to 
which  we  are  here  exposed.  2.  Bje-eminent  intellectual,  enjoyment — "Here 
we  know  in  part,"  &c.  3.  SQfiial.h,appiness.  4.  Ujospotted  hG4ine8s.  6.  Incessant 
a<^wty.  6.  E)ndless  toproy.enient.  II.  The  fbeenesb  of  its  disposition.  1.  It 
cannot  be  purchased.  2.  It  is  not  the  reward  of  merit.  3.  It  is  everything; 
leading  to  it  is  the  gift  of  God.  The  promises  by  which  the  believer  is  led  to 
expect  it — the  great  change  by  which  he  has  become  entitled  to  it  and  qualified 
for  its  enjoyment — the  Lord  Jesus,  by  whose  merit  eternal  life  was  purchased — all 
these  are  gifts  of  God.  III.  The  medium  through  which  it  flows.  1.  For  this 
end — to  put  men  in  possession  of  eternal  life — the  Redeemer  was  given ;  for  this 
purpose  He  laboured,  suffered,  instituted  His  gospel,  and  sent  forth  His  ministers. 
2.  We  should,  however,  do  great  injustice  to  this  subject,  were  we  not  to  observe 
that  Christ  died- — (1)  Toprocure  pur  pardon,  in  consequence  of  which  the  sentence 
of  the  law  is  reversed,  and  believers  freed  from  that  death  to  which  their  crimes 
had  exposed  them.  (2)  Ta  deliver -as  from  a  state  of  moral  death.  (3)  Toeeeure 
out  adoption  into  God's  family,  which  entitles  to  this  eternal  life.  (4)  To  create  in 
na  that  holiness  of  heart  and  life  which  makes  us  "meet  to  be  partakers  of  the 
inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."  (5)  To  communicate  that  grace  which  enables 
us  to  lay  hold  on  eternal  life.  (J.  Rigg.)  Etemairiife  : — I.  Is  not  wholly  in 
TEE  FUTURE  WORLD.  This  life  begins  here  at  the  moment  of  conversion,  when  the 
soul  passes  from  death  into  hfe.  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  Ufe.  The  righteous 
do  enter  into  life,  become  heirs  of  life,  enjoy  ante-pasts  of  the  infinite  fulness  which 
is  to  be  hereafter  revealed.  These  foretastes  ioJOlKe  freedom  from  condemnation, 
commimion  with  God,  and  growing  Likeness  to  Him.  The  soul  is  divested  of  the 
fear  of  death,  and  Christ  fills  the  believer  with  His  joy,  and  that  joy  is  full.  Satis- 
faction comes  from  what  we  are,  and  not  from  what  we  get.  I  have  seen  homes  of 
princely  wealth  which  were  but  brilliantly  garnished  sepulchres,  their  luxury  • 
Bolemn  mockery ;  and  I  have  seen  homes  of  poverty  full  of  the  joy  of  God,  the 
peace  of  the  eternal  life  begun.  It  is  false  to  conceive  of  the  Christian  life  as  a  joy- 
less way  of  self-denial  trod  by  us  to  purchase  a  bliss  beyond.  II.  Is  the  same  and 
IB  NOT  THE  same  TO  EVERY  SAVED  SOUL.  1.  Heavcu  is  not  a  sea  of  bliss  in  whieh 
each  of  us  is  to  float  in  equal  content.  In  heav.eQ,.as  here,  there  is  an  infinite 
^lariety.  What  a  vast  transition  from  an  oyster  to  the  leviathan  I  T^ere..is  Ane 
glory  of  the  sun,  another  of  the  moon,  another  of  the  stars.  The  penitent  thief  is 
^^  saved  as  truly  as  Paul ;  but  one  has  built  on  hay,  wood,  and  stubble,  and  is 
*•  scarcely  saved  " ;  the  other  receives  "  an  entrance  abundantly  " ;  one  gives  the 
fag-end  of  a  godless  life  to  Christ  and  is  "  saved  so  as  by  fire  "  ;  the  other  can  say, 
"  I  have  fought  a  good  fight."  The  riches,  joys,  and  capabilities  of  -the  ^celestial 
Iif e  are  measured  by  the  service  rendered  ;  *•  to  every  man  according  to  his  works," 
"five  cities,"  or  "ten  cities,"  as  the  case  may  be.  Secular  papers  often  make 
Cl!!ft'  merry  about  the  statement  that  "  scaffold  penit^te  "  are  received  to  heaven.  It  is 
true  that  grace  does  save  such.  But  their  heaven  is  not  Paul's  heaven.  2.  In  three 
respects  heaven  is  the  same  to  all.  (1)  In  .freedom  from  sin.  Harlots  and  mur- 
derers, washed  in  the  cleansing  blood,  are  as  free  from  defilement  as  angels.  The 
malefactor  is  made  as  pure  as  a  babe.  (2)  In  freedom  from  physical  and  mental 
pain,  and  sorrow.  There  will  be  no  anxiety,  distrust ;  no  pang  or  grief.  (3)  No 
death.  Perpetual  freedom  from  all  these  is  a  common  blessing  to  all.  3.  It  may 
be  objected  that  if  one  is  wholly  happy,  according  to  his  capacity,  what  matters  it 
if  there  be  those  of  larger  capacities  than  his  ?  A  snail  is  happy,  I  answer,  so  is  a 
lark.  Is  there  nothing  to  choose  between  them  ?  There  is  a  short  radius  to  a  child's 
circumference  of  happiness.  A  man  has  a  thousand-fold  larger  scope.  Is  there  no 
preference?  The  ear  of  one  is  satisfied  with  a  rude  melody;  another  man  is  thrilled 
to  the  depths  of  his  being  by  delicious  harmonies.  Is  there  no  preference?  There 
is  no  room  for  question.  What  a  contrast  between  one  who  is  a  single  remove  from 
a  laughing  idiot,  and  an  angel  of  God  1  We  are  to  "  seek  for  honour  and  glory," 
even  an  entrance  that  shall  be  "  administered  abundantly."  III.  Is  increasingly 
GLORIOUS  FOB  EVER.  Memory  shall  lose  nothing,  the  mind  pervert  nothing,  and  the 
■  heart  shall  repel  nothing.  All  that  God  has  shall  be  spread  out  and  open  to  us  for 
ever  in  riches  of  grace  inconceivable  in  their  glory  and  infinitude.  The  possibilities 
of  the  soul  are  beyond  conception.  God  reveals  Himself  to  the  righteous  through 
the  ages,  their  capacities  ever  enlarging  and  the  reality  for  ever  increasing— joy, 
power,  blessedness,  beyond  all  thought  1  These  all  are  the  gift  of  God,  bought, 
ftnd  given  to  beUevers.      {Prof.   Herrick   Johnson.)         Eternal   life :— L    Ibb 


OHAY.  ▼!.]  ".r-T'^'T     MOMANS.  S58 

oiFT.  1.  Life.  Mfjei,,  jtaciial,  lifa,  and  lile  evexXasting,  are  very  frequent  designa- 
tions of  the  salvation  of  the  gospel  (John  xvii.  1,  2).  This  life  consists  of — (1)  A 
right  stats. of  afiectioix  and  feeling  toward  God,  the  Father  of  our  spirits,  combined 
with  a  happy  consciousness  of  His  love  and  favour  toward  us.  Where  this  life  is, 
there  is  freedom  from  guilt.  (2)  A  renewed  state  of  the  affections  and  will :  the 
law  of  Oediaapprovad,  and  the  love  of  God  is  established  in  the  heart,  as  its  supreme 
and  goveining  motive.  (3)  Honour  and  happiness,  the  enjoyment  of  true  pleasure, 
derived  from  tbe  purest  sources  of  holiness,  and  love,  and  fellowship  with  heaven. 
(4)  A  hlessed  aetivity  of  the  soul,  engaged  in  the  worship  and  service  of  Jehpvah. 
Where  these  exist,  the  soul  lives,  fulfils  its  proper  functions,  answers  the  ends  of  its 
creation,  and  realises  its  most  true  and  noble  bliss.  We  sometimes  call  this  life 
integrity,  which  is  wholeness  or  soundness  of  being  :  sometimes  rectitude,  which  is 
erectness  and  strength  :  and  sometimes  sanctity,  which  is  separatedness  from  evil 
and  devotedness  to  God.  2.  The  epithet^."  eternal."  (1)  This  word  denotes  everlast- 
ingness  of  duration.  (2)  But  where  this  is,  there  must  also  be  uncorruptt  dness  or  per* 
faction  of  nature.  (3)  And  where  this  perfection  relates  to  a  spiritual  creature  like 
man,  there  must  be  incessancy  of  progress,  or  development.  IL  Its  iULiiiuxons  cha< 
BACTEB.  1.  It  is  the  gift  of  God,  inasmuch  as — (1)  No  man  possesses  it  by  nature. 
(2)  No  man  could  procure  it  for  himself.  2.  We  are  to  receive  it  as  such,  in  simplicity 
of  spirit  and  with  grateful  joy.  And  let  us  learn  not  to  look  at  anythiug  in  ourselves 
to  justify  our  expectation  of  it :  and  let  us  not,  when  we  find  nothing  but  demerit  in 
ourselves,  be  disheartened,  but  beheve  that  when  we  were  fit  only  for  everlasting  punish* 
ment,  God  stepped  forward  to  grant  unto  us  eternal  life.  This  He  has  doue  from  the 
impulse  of  His  own  amazing  generosity  and  love.  HI.  The  medium  of  its  bestowment, 
1.  God  gives  it  to  us  through  Jesus  Christ,  not  in  an  arbitrary  manner,  but  on  the 
ground  of  what  He  has  done  and  suffered  in  our  stead.  2.  So,  we  accept  it  through 
Christ  (1  John  v.  11).  Indeed,  we  may  say  that  Jesus  is  our  eternal  life.  It  is  by 
being  found  in  Him  that  we  have  pardon  and  holiness,  happiness  and  heaven.  When 
we  reach  the  celestial  world,  we  shall  find  that  there  as  well  as  here,  Christ  is  "  all  in 
all."  (T.  G.Horton.)  Eternal  life  a  gift: — 1.  Men  are  so  accustomed  to  the 
exchange  of  equivalents,  that  any  other  course  comes  with  an  element  of  surprise. 
If  the  reward  be  not  in  the  grosser  form  of  money,  or  in  that  which  money  can 
purchase,  still  it  is  true  that  one  earns  his  wages.  These  may  be  the  wages  that 
improved  faculties  would  add — the  reward  of  an  approving  conscience,  of  a  sense  of 
g^efulness — perhaps  a  sense  of  Jnocfiased  influence  for  good,  by  reason  of  that 
which  has  been  faithfully  and  unselfishly  done;  or  in  the  very  highest  possible 
service  of  philosophic  endeavour  or  Christian  duty.  In  all  these  there  is  that  feel* 
ing  of  reward  expected,  because  it  has  been  earned.  The  idea  of  a  gift  coming  to 
>ne  suddenly  and  undeserved  he  does  not  entertain,  except  as  a  fiction,  such  as  may 
.yOuase  him  as  a  day-dream.  And  more  than  all  is  one  surprised  to  find  that  he 
is  the  recipient  of  such  a  gift  from  one  unknown,  or  one  to  whom  he  has  stood  in 
the  relation  of  neglect,  peihaps  of  hostility.  2.  At  the  same  time  it  is  true  that 
men  are  receiving  gifts  from  au  other,  where  they  cannot  make  any  return  whatever. 
Everything  ttiat  comes  to  us  from  the  past  is  a  gift.  Individual  minds  have  toiled 
and  studied,  and  we  reap  the  fruits  of  their  patience,  skill,  and  success.  We  make 
the  lightning  to  run  on  our  errands,  and  we  take  the  vapour  that  lifts  the  lid  of  the 
kettle  to  propel  the  mammoth  ship  across  the  sea,  or  the  car  which  carries  us  over 
mountains,  or  sets  in  motion  thousands  of  factories  all  over  our  land.  This  we 
received  from  those  to  whom  it  came  as  an  inspiration  of  Providence,  and  an  opera- 
tion of  intelligent,  unwearied  power.  Tineiinatitutiou  of  society  comes  to  us  a  grant 
from  the  past.  We  pay  for  our  primary  schooling ;  but  for  the  great  thoughts  of 
men  who  nave  lived,  what  returns  can  we  make?  What  to  any  of  the  great  philo- 
sophers who  brought  us  the  laws  and  principles  we  possess?  How  shall  we  com- 
pensate the  artist  whose  gifts  quicken  our  minds  to  higher  perceptions  of  beauty, 
or  the  poet  who  sings  us  into  the  Elysium  of  thought  1  There  are  still  higher 
endowments  that  come  to  us  from  those  whom  we  only  know  by  those  impressions 
made  upon  us  by  their  chivalric  career,  and  to  whom  we  can  make  no  more  return 
than  we  by  lighting  matches  can  add  to  the  splendour  of  the  distant,  brilliant  sun. 
So,  if  a  man  should  say,  "I  expect  only  that  which  I  have  earned,  and  demand 
only  that  which  I  have  deserved  and  have  properly  acquired,"  and  should  iJbat 
prayer  be  answered,  he  would,  to-day,  be  a  beggared  savage.  Thu8_^we  see  how 
many  of  the  things  which  we  enjoy  have  com^e  to  us  as  gifts.  And  it  is  the 
desire  of  every  noble,  unselfish  mind  to  carry  on  to  the  future  their  beneficent 
influence,  that  the  coming  generation  may  surpass  the  present.    3.  Turn  now  to 


fiM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  n. 

the  things  which  come  from  God.  For  these  many  make  no  acknowledgmentt 
whatever ;  while  He  continues  to  shower  His  gifts  upon  them.  He  gives  life  through 
Christ.  The  life  of  the  present  is  an  undeserved  gift.  It  is  not  the  reward  of  oar 
deserts.  The  faculties  of  mind,  aU  opportunities  for  enjoyment,  and  all  inspirations 
of  thought  and  effort — these  are  not  earned  by  us.  No  man  can  stand  up  and  say, 
"  I  have  done  so  and  so,  and  God  owes  me  that."  God  gives  the  sanshine  and  the 
^hpwer.  They  come,  not  because  we  deserve  them.  They  come  sometimes  in  the 
face  of  protest.  He  gives  the  great  inspirations  of  thought  to  man,  and  great  delive- 
ranee  to  nations  from  impending  calamity.  He  gives  to  the  individual  soul  all  he 
possesses,  and  to  society  all  it  has.  This  argument  as  to  the  right  of  the  race  to 
eternal  life  lies  at  the  basis  of  our  thought  this  morning.  The  parallel  in  natural 
life  is  the  same.  No  man  has  a  right  to  exist  in  infancy.  It  is  the  gift  of  God  ; 
and  no  man  has  earned  the  right  to  happiness  in  the  present,  and  to  hope  in  the 
future.  It  is  the  gift  of  God.  Eternal  Ufe,  however,  is  the  best  gift  of  God.  But  .. 
it  is  a  gift  that  comes  only  on  certain  conditions.  Sunshine  requires  the  open  eye,  kii 
but  a  man  may  refuse  to  open  his  eye ;  still  it  is  God's  gift.  So  we  do  not  receive 
inspiration  from  any  great  mind,  except  as  we  bring  our  mind  into  responsiveness 
to  it.  So  we  do  not  receive  eternal  life  unless  the  conditions  are  accepted  with 
which  God  invests  His  gift— hnmble  penitence  for  sin  and  faith  in  Christ.  Sin 
earns  wages,  but  eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  God,  as  personal  life  is  a  bestowment :  it 
crowns  and  glorifies  all  others.  Here  is — L  A  secret  of  the  Chbistun's  umbest. 
Life  is  not  something  to  be  earned.  The  soul  of  the  Christian  who  thus  views  it 
grows  restless  and  troubled,  like  Galilee's  waves,  till  the  feet  of  the  Lord  brought 
them  to  a  level.  It  is  dark,  as  was  the  mount,  until  the  Lord  rose,  in  the  luminous 
majesty  of  His  presence,  above  it.  11.  The  secbet  of  peace,  in  simply  accepting 
this  Divine  gift  from  the  source  of  infinite  compassion  and  grace.  Sometimes  this 
peace  may  come  suddenly,  filling  the  soul  with  glory ;  sometimes  it  may  come  after 
long,  weary  searchiog  for  it ;  sometimes  at  the  end  of  life ;  when  the  light  of  life 
has  almost  gone  out,  as  it  flickers  in  the  socket  and  speech  falters,  I  say,  "  I  can  do 
nothing ;  I  take  the  gift  of  God  1 "  Then  comes  "  the  peace  which  passeth  all 
nnderstanding."  III.  The  bubdek  which  bests  on  hiu  who  bejects  eternal  lub. 
When  one  comes  to  us  with  a  great  thought  or  a  rare  opportunity,  and  we  turn 
away  to  a  trivial  theme,  we  grieve  him.  Let  us  not  thus  treat  God.  Here  is  the 
gift  of  eternal  life.  Shall  I  put  it  aside  as  if  it  were  the  merest  summer  breeze 
which  by  my  hand  I  could  arrest  and  push  back  into  the  air  ?  I  may,  as  I  may 
put  aside  sunshine  itself,  by  shutting  my  eyes  to  it.  The  responsibility  is  mine. 
IV.  The  impulse  or  Christian  sebvice.  Freedom  and  gladness  come  from  other 
gifts,  but  here  is  the  supreme  one  of  all.  When  received  by  us,  what  service  is  too 
hard,  what  sacrifice  too  vast,  what  worship  too  exultant !  If  this  consciousness 
comes  into  our  soul,  then  no  sword  or  stake  can  fright  us,  for  our  life  is  interlocked 
with  heaven.  The  realisation  of  it  dispels  our  sorrows  and  forbids  our  tears.  V. 
The  sweetness  of  heaven.  Gratitude  for  God's  gift  impels  every  touch  of  the 
heavenly  harp.  It  gives  the  melody  to  every  song,  and  joy  to  aJl  the  work  of 
^^  heaven.  {R.  8.  Starrs,  D.D.)  Life  in  Christ: — A  new  convert  said,  "I  could 
not  sleep,  thinking  over  that  passage, '  Whosoever  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  life;  * 
and  so  I  got  up,  and  lighted  a  candle,  and  found  my  Bible,  and  read  it  over,  <  Who> 
soever  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  life.'"  "  Why,"  says  some  one,  "  didn't  you  know 
that  was  in  the  Bible  before?"  "Oh,  yes,"  he  replied,  "I  knew  it  was  in  the 
Bible,  but  I  wanted  to  see  it  with  my  own  eyes,  and  then  I  rested."  (T.  De  Witt 
<&  Talmage.)  The  gift  of  Ood : — I  was  out  on  the  Pacific  coast,  in  California,  two 
or  three  years  ago,  and  I  was  the  guest  of  a  man  that  had  a  large  vineyard  and  a 
large  orchard.  One  day  he  said  to  me,  "  Moody,  whilst  you  are  my  guest,  I  want 
you  to  make  yourself  perfectly  happy,  and  if  there  is  anything  in  the  orchard  or  in 
the  vineyard  you  would  like,  help  yourself."  Well,  when  I  wanted  an  orange,  I  did 
not  go  to  an  orange-tree  and  pray  the  oranges  to  fall  into  my  pocket,  but  I  walked 
np  to  a  tree,  reached  out  my  hand,  and  took  the  oranges.  He  said,  "  Take,"  and  I 
took.  God  says,  *•  Take,"  and  you  do  it.  God  says,  "  There  is  My  Son."  ••  The 
wages  of  sin  is  death ;  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life."  Who  will  take  it  now  ? 
4^^,  Eternal  life  the  gift  of  Ood : — A  man  may  as  well  think  of  buying  light  trom  the 
sun,  or  air  from  the  atmosphere,  or  water  from  the  well-spring,  or  minerals  from 
the  earth,  or  fish  from  the  sea,  t&c,  as  think  of  buying  salvation  from  God  with 
any  kind  of  price.  The  sun  gives  his  light,  the  atmosphere  its  air,  the  well-spring 
its  v?ater,  the  earth  its  minerals,  the  sea  its  fish ;  all  man  has  to  do  is  to  take  them 
and  use  them.  So  God  has  given  salvation  to  man.  All  he  has  to  do  is  to  use  it| 
In  the  066  of  means,  and  enjoy  ii    (J.  Bate.) 


>.  vn.]  ROMANS.  6SS 


OHAFTEB  Yn. 

▼bbi.  1-6.  Know  79  not,  bretlireii .  .  .  bow  that  tbe  law  batli  domlnlOB  orer  a 
I  long  as  be  livetb  ? — Believer$  not  under  the  law  aa  a  covenant  of  workt : — 
L  All  mem  abe,  matuballt,  umdeb  the  law  as  a  ootbnant  of  wobes.  1.  Aa 
men.  God  made  man  capable  of  moral  government ;  he  was  naturally  bound  to 
obey  the  will  of  his  Maker.  The  moral  law :  perfect  obedience  to  this  law  could 
never  entitle  him  to  any  greater  degree  of  happiness,  yet  God  was  pleased  to  super- 
add a  promise  of  everlasting  life  upon  obedience,  to  which  He  annexed  His  awful 
sanction,  "  In  the  day  that  thou  sinnest,  thou  shalt  surely  die."  This  is  what  we 
call  a  covenant :  as  such  it  was  proposed  on  the  part  of  God,  and  it  was  accepted 
on  the  part  of  man.  Now  as  this  covenant  was  made  with  Adam  as  the  federal 
head,  so  all  men  are  naturally  under  it.  2.  As  sinners.  In  this  view  sinners  are 
under  the  law  as  a  broken  covenant,  which  therefore  can  afford  no  relief  to  them 
that  seek  salvation  by  it  (Gal.  ill.  10-12).  II.  To  be  dndeb  the  law,  and  especially 
AS  A  BBOESN  COVENANT,  IS  A  HOST  DBEADFUL  THING.  1.  The  law  requires  perfect, 
universal,  and  everlasting  obedience  of  all  that  are  under  it.  Now  this  law  is  not 
abolished  or  made  void,  either  by  Christ  or  by  any  of  His  apostles.  "  I  am  not 
come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil ;  for  verily  I  say  unto  you,  till  heaven  and  earth  pass, 
one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law,  till  all  be  fulfilled  "  (Matt.  t. 
17, 18 ;  Bom.  iii.  81).  How  dreadful  then  is  such  a  state,  since  no  mere  man  can 
thus  keep  it.  And  while  the  Christian  betakes  himself  to  the  mercy  of  God  in 
Christ,  as  his  only  hope,  the  sinner  supports  his  vain  confidence  in  the  supposition 
that  God  will  not  insist  on  His  claim.  2.  It  denounces  against  every  transgressor  the 
most  awful  curse  (James  ii.  10,  11;  Gal.  iii.  10).  HI.  Manx  have  obtained  a 
ALOBioDS  delivebance  OUT  OF  THIS  DBEADFXiL  STATE.  In  Christ  they  are  made 
brethren  :  ••  Enow  ye  not,  brethren."  IV.  They  who  abe  delivebed  fbom  this  statb 
ABB  to  be  distinodisbed  fbou  othebs  in  the  minister  of  the  Wobd.  Addressing 
himself  to  believers,  Paul  appeals  to  their  spiritual  knowledge  and  judgment, "  Enow 
ye  not."  1.  There  is  a  knowledge  peculiar  to  the  saints,  whereby  they  know  the 
things  that  are  excellent;  they  have  judgment  to  distinguish  betwixt  truth  and 
error ;  an  inward  principle  (1  John  ii.  27 ;  ▼.  20)  which  teaches  them  the  knowledge 
of  every  truth  necessary  for  consolation  or  salvation.  2.  One  great  reason  why 
many  Imow  not  the  truth,  is  not  merely  owing  to  their  ignorance  of  it,  but  often  to 
their  prejudice  against  it.  3.  Sound  and  saving  knowledge  hath  respect  not  only 
to  the  truth  itseU,  but  also  to  the  use  we  are  to  make  of  it.  4  It  is  no  inconsider- 
able part  of  our  happiness  when  we  are  called  to  minister  nnto  such  as  know  the 
truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Conclusion :  1.  If  all  men  are  naturally  under  the  law  as 
a  covenant  of  works,  who  can  wonder  if  they  seek  life  by  that  covenant  7  Natural 
light,  natural  conscience  can  discover  no  other  way  of  salvation.  2.  If  all  are 
miserable  who  are  onder  the  law,  especially  as  a  broken  covenant,  this  calls  upon 
men  who  are  under  a  profession  of  religion  to  examine  themselves  as  to  their  state 
before  God.  8.  If  believers  are  delivered  from  the  law  as  a  covenant,  yet  still  let 
them  remember,  "  They  are  nnder  the  law  to  Christ."  4.  If  true  beUevers  are  to 
be  distinguished  from  others  in  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  let  them  distinguish 
themselves,  not  only  by  a  public  profession,  but  also  by  a  becoming  walk  and 
conversation.  {J.  Stafford.)  The  believer's  relation  to  the  law  and  to  Christ : — I. 
The  believeb's  fobueb  connection  with  the  law.  1.  The  law,  considered  in  the 
figurative  capacity  of  a  husband,  had  a  right  to  full  and  implicit  subjection.  But 
alas  I  all  mankind  had  violated  the  authority  of  this  first  husband;  they  had 
abused  his  rights,  resisted  his  claims,  and  thus  exposed  themselves  to  the  fatal 
consequences  of  his  just  denunciations.  2.  Yet,  miserable  as  this  state  is,  men  in 
general  are  insensible  of  it.  They  still  show  attachment  to  the  law,  despite  their 
disobedience ;  and  place,  as  a  wife  does  on  her  husband,  infatuated  dependence. 
As  God  said  to  Eve,  "  Thy  desire  shall  be  to  thy  husband,"  so  it  is  with  the  sinner 
as  to  the  law.  II.  The  dissolution  of  this  connection.  This  consists  in  the 
tinner's  deliverance  from  the  obligation  to  obedience  as  the  condition  of  life,  and 
from  the  curse  attending  disobedience.  1.  When  and  how  does  this  take  place  f 
The  answer  is — "  The  law  hath  dominion  over  a  man  as  long  as  he  liveth."  .  .  .  "  Ya 
are  become  dead  to  the  law."  Here  is  the  decease  of  one  of  the  parties,  by  which 
the  union  is  dissolved.  2.  This  decease  refeis  to  the  death  of  the  believer  in  Christ 
(chap,  vi  7,  8),  who  bore  the  curse  of  the  law  in  his  stead  (Gal.  iii.  13).  Thus  the 
ifiecta  of  the  fixst  husband's  displeasure  cannot  reach  them.    3.  And  not  only  is  the 


55S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  va 

curse  of  the  law  removed,  but  our  connection  with  it,  as  a  condition  of  life,  is  for 
ever  done  away,  as  effectually  as  the  relation  between  husband  and  wife  is  dissolved 
by  death.  III.  He  is  then  "married  to  another,"  <fto.,  which  expresses  thh 
believee's  new  relation  with  Jesus  (see  also  Eph.  v.  30-32  ;  John  iii.  29  ;  Rev. 
xxi.  2).  1.  To  this  new  husband  all  believers  are  subject.  They  feel  his  authority 
as  that  at  once  of  rightful  claim  and  of  tender  affection.  They  delight  in  obeying 
Him  who  loves  them.  And  in  Him  they  are  truly  blessed.  He  smiles  upon  them, 
and  enriches  them  with  a  dowry  of  spiritual  treasures.  2.  This  connection,  being 
with  "  Him  who  is  raised  from  the  dead,"  is  indissoluble  (chap.  vi.  9).  The  Husband 
never  dies ;  nor  do  they  ever  die  to  whom  He  stands  thus  related.  "  Joined  to  the 
Lord,  they  are  one  spirit ;  "  and  the  spiritual  union  is  lasting  as  eternity.     IV.  Taa 

CONSISTENCY   OF    THIS    NEW   CONNECTION     WITH   AliL    THE    BIGHTS    AND    CLAIMS   OF   THB 

FIRST  HUSBAND.  These  claims  were  just,  and  had  a  right  to  be  fully  implemented. 
The  believer  has  not  satisfied  them  in  his  own  person  ;  but  his  Substitute  has  by 
His  obedience  and  death  "  magnified  the  law  and  made  it  honourable."  Hence  the 
law's  claims  upon  him  cease  as  completely  as  the  claims  of  a  husband  when  dead 
on  the  surviving  wife.     V.  The  absolute  necessity  of  the  dissolution  of  kuu 

CONNECTION  WITH   THE   LAW,  IN   ORDER   TO   A   SINNER's  BEING  JOINED  TO  ChRIST.      The 

two  connections  cannot  subsist  together.  The  sinner  who  is  joined  to  Christ  must 
die  completely  to  the  law.  While  he  retains  any  connec'dou  with  it,  in  the  way  of 
seeking  or  expecting  life  from  it,  he  is  not  united  to  Christ,  As  the  worship  of 
idols  was  styled  adultery,  when  practised  by  that  people  whom  Jehovah  had 
espoused  to  Himself — so  all  such  connection  with  the  law  is  unfaithfulness  to  our 
Divine  Husband.  He  must  be  "  all  our  salvation,  and  all  our  desire."  Let  no  one, 
however,  think  that  we  are  pleading  for  freedom  from  the  law  as  the  rule  of  life. 
Its  obligation  in  this  sense  remains  immutable  (chap.  iii.  31;  1  Cor.  ix,  21,  Ac). 
VI.  The  blessed  effects  of  the  dissolution  of  the  connection  with  the  law,  and 
THB  formation  OF  THE  UNION  WITH  Christ.  The  "  bringing  forth  fruit  unto  God." 
The  fruit  meant  is,  no  doubt,  holy  obedience  and  service  (chap.  vi.  22).  Such  fruit 
is  as  naturally  the  effect  of  union  to  Christ,  as  the  fruit  of  the  womb  is  the  expected 
result  of  the  marriage  relation.  No  fruit  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  can  be 
produced  while  the  former  connection  continued  (ver.  6).  They  who  are  "  under  the 
law  are  in  the  flesh  " ;  and  can  bring  forth  no  fruit  but  "  unto  death."  AH  is 
devoid  of  the  only  principle  of  acceptable  service — "  faith  working  by  love."  There 
is  no  true  fruit  unto  God  produced  till  the  connection  with  the  law  has  been 
dissolved,  and  that  vsith  Christ  has  been  formed  (vers  6).  The  fears  of  the  law, 
uniting  with  the  pride  of  self-righteousness,  may  produce  considerable  outward 
conformity  to  the  precepts  of  the  law  ;  whilst  there  is  no  true  principle  of  godliness 
within.  There  may  be  much  in  the  eyes  of  men  that  is  amiable ;  while  in  the 
sight  of  God  all  the  service  is  rendered  in  the  "  oldness  of  the  letter  " — under  the 
influence  of  the  principles  of  the  old,  is  service  in  "  newness  of  spirit,"  i.e.,  to 
serve  God  in  sincerity,  under  the  influence  of  those  principles  and  views  and 
dispositions  which  constitute  a  mind  renewed  by  the  Spirit  of  God  (Ezek.  xzxvi. 
26).  (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Ti-ue  Christian  liberty  implies — I.  Freedom  from 
THE  COMPULSORY  ACTION  OF  LAW.  It  Can  neither — 1.  Alarm ;  2.  Condemn ;  3.  Become 
a  source  of  bondage.  U.  The  freedom  of  devoted  love  to  Christ.  1.  Who  has 
won  the  heart ;  2.  Constrains  our  service ;  3.  By  His  death  and  resurrection.  (J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  Dead  to  the  law,  married  to  Christ : — 1.  The  apostle  has  illustrated 
the  transference  that  takes  place  at  conversion  by  the  emancipation  of  a  slave  whose 
services  are  due  to  the  lawful  superior  under  whom  he  now  stands  enrolled.  The 
apostle  now  turns  to  those  who  know  the  law,  and  deduces  from  the  obligations 
which  attach  to  marriage,  the  same  result,  i.e.,  an  abandonment  by  the  believer  of 
those  doings  which  have  their  fruit  unto  death,  and  a  new  service  which  has  its 
"  fruit  unto  God."  2.  There  is  a  certain  obscurity  here  arising  from  the  apparent 
want  of  sustained  analogy.  True,  the  obligations  of  marriage  are  annuUed  by  the 
death  of  one  party ;  but  Paul  only  supposes  the  death  of  the  husband.  Now  the 
law  is  evidently  the  husband,  and  the  subject  the  wife.  So  that,  to  make  good  the 
resemblance — the  law  should  be  conceived  dead,  and  the  subject  alive.  Yet,  in 
reading  the  first  verse,  one  would  suppose  that  it  was  on  the  death  of  the  subject, 
and  not  of  the  law,  that  the  connection  was  to  be  dissolved.  It  is  true  that  the 
translation  might  have  run  thus,  "  The  law  hath  dominion  over  a  man  so  long  as 
it  liveth  " ;  but  this  does  not  suit  so  well  with  ver.  4,  where,  instead  of  the  law 
baving  become  dead  unto  us,  we  have  become  dead  unto  it ;  so  that  some  degree  of 
that  confusion  which  arises  from  a  mixed  analogy  appears  unavoidable.     It  ao 


nuf.  yn.]  ROMANS.  867 

happens,  too,  that  either  supposition  stands  linked  with  very  important  truth — so 
that  by  admitting  both,  this  passage  becomes  the  envelope  of  two  important  lessons. 
L  The  law  may  be  regarded  as  dead  ;  and  he  our  former  husband,  now  taken  out 
of  the  way,  has  left  us  free  to  enter  upon  an  alliance  with  Christ.  1.  The  death  of 
the  law  did  indeed  take  place  at  the  death  of  Christ.  It  was  then  that  He  blotted 
out  the  handwriting  of  ordinances  that  was  against  us.  It  was  then  that  the  law 
lost  its  power  as  an  offended  Lord  to  take  vengeance  of  our  tresspases.  Certain 
venomous  animals  expire  on  the  moment  that  they  have  deposited  their  sting  and 
its  mortal  poison  in  the  body  of  their  victim.  Aud  thus  there  ensues  the  death  of 
both  sufferer  and  assailant.  And  on  tbe  Cross  there  was  just  such  a  catastrophe. 
2.  Without  Christ  the  law  is  in  living  force  against  us.  Men  under  earnestness, 
whc  have  not  found  their  way  to  Christ,  stand  related  to  it  as  the  wife  does  to  an 
outraged  husband  :  a  state  of  appalling  danger  and  darkness  from  which  there  is  no 
rehef,  but  in  the  death  of  that  husband.  3.  The  illustration  of  our  text  opens  a 
way  for  just  such  a  relief  as  would  be  afforded  by  the  death  of  the  first  tyrarmical 
husband,  and  by  the  substitution  of  another  in  his  place,  who  had  cast  the  veil  of 
oblivion  over  the  past,  and  who  admits  us  to  a  fellowship  of  love  and  confidence. 
Christ  would  divorce  you,  as  it  were,  from  your  old  alliance  with  the  law;  and 
welcome  you,  instead,  to  a  new  and  friendly  alliance  with  Himself.  He  bids  you 
cease  from  the  fellowship  altogether.  4.  And  to  deUver  this  contemplation  from 
any  image  so  revolting  as  that  of  our  rejoicing  in  the  death  of  a  former  husband ; 
and  finding  all  the  relief  of  heaven  in  the  society  of  another,  you  have  to 
remember  that  the  law  has  become  dead — not  by  an  act  which  has  vilified  the  law 
or  done  it  violence,  but  by  an  act  which  has  magnified  the  law  and  made  it  honour- 
able. 4.  When  a  sense  of  the  law  brings  remorse  or  fearf ulness  into  your  heart, 
transfer  your  thoughts  from  it  as  your  now  dead,  to  Christ  as  your  now  Hving 
husband.  U.  The  believer  mat  be  regarded  ab  dead.  The  other  way  by  which 
marriage  may  be  dissolved  is  by  the  death  of  the  wife.  And  so  the  relationship 
between  the  law  and  the  subject  may  be  dissolved  by  the  death  of  the  subject 
(ver.  4).  The  law  has  no  more  power  over  its  dead  subject  than  the  husband  has 
over  his  dead  wife.  1.  This  brings  us  back  to  the  conception  already  so  abund  mtly 
insisted  on,  that  in  Christ  we  all  died  in  law  ;  so  that  the  law  can  have  no  further 
reckoning  with  us,  having  already  had  that  reckoniug  in  the  person  of  Him  who 
was  our  Surety  and  our  Representative.  And  just  as  tbe  criminal  law  has  done  its 
utmost  upon  him  whom  it  has  executed,  so  the  law  can  do  no  more  in  the  way  of 
vengeance  with  us,  having  already  done  all  with  Him  who  was  smitten  for  our 
iniquities.  2.  After  our  old  relationship  with  the  law  is  thus  put  an  end  to,  the 
vacancy  is  supplied  by  Him  who,  after  having  removed  the  law  through  His  death 
out  of  the  station  it  had  before  occupied,  then  rose  again  and  now  stands  in  its 
place.  The  wife  owes  a  duty  to  her  second  husband  as  well  as  her  first.  It  is 
true  that  with  the  former  the  predominant  feeling  may  have  been  that  of  obligation 
mixed  with  great  fearfulness ;  and  that,  with  the  latter,  the  predominant  feeling 
may  be  sweet  and  spontaneous  affection.  But  still  it  is  evident  that  there  will  be 
service,  possibly  much  greater  in  amount  and  certainly  far  worthier  in  principle. 
Under  the  law  we  are  bidden  to  do  and  live ;  under  Christ  we  are  bidden  to  hve  and 
do.  In  working  to  the  law  it  is  all  for  ourselves  that  we  may  earn  a  wage  or  a 
reward.  In  working  to  Christ  it  is  all  the  freewill  offering  of  love  and  thankfulness 
(2  Cor.  V.  16).  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Marriage  xoith  Christ : — 1.  The  dissolution 
of  the  former  marriage.  2.  The  new  marriage.  3.  Its  fruits.  The  behever, 
released  from  the  law  by  dying  in  fellowship  with  the  death  of  Christ,  is  free  to  enter 
into  a  new  union  with  the  risen  Christ,  in  order  to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  holiness 
to  God's  honour.    (Archdeacon  Gifford.) 

Yer.  4.  Te  also  are  become  dead  to  tbe  lav  by  the  body  of  Christ :  that  ye 
shoold  be  married  to  another. — The  sinner  married  to  the  law — the  believer  married 
to  the  Lord : — The  sinner,  before  believinq,  is  married  to  the  law.  1.  This 
marriage  involves  certain  obligations  that  correspond  to  those  that  grow  out  of  the 
conjugal  relation.  The  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife,  and  his  duty  is  to  live  with 
her,  provide  for  her,  and  love  her ;  the  wife's  duty  is  to  be  subject  to  her  husband, 
consulting  his  will,  and  acting  faithfully  for  his  interests.  If  the  law,  then,  be  the 
sinner's  husband,  we  may  say,  "  Submit  yourselves  unto  your  own  husbands  as  unto 
the  Lord."  This  is  your  duty,  and  it  is  also  your  interest.  The  ten  rules  of  your 
husband's  house  are  equitable  and  good,  tending  as  much  to  promote  your  own 
'  happiness  as  his  honour.    2.  This  marriage  is  of  the  Lord.    God  ikas  joined  th« 


658  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [Ohap.  to. 

parties  together ;  the  marriage  was  made  in  heaven.  As  soon  as  he  is  bom,  the 
sinner  is  espoused  to  the  law,  je&,  before,  and  there  is  nothing  unfair  in  placing  a 
sinner  nnder  a  constitntion  which  is  perfectly  good.  It  is  just  as  fair  for  God  to 
marry  the  sinner  to  the  law  without  his  consent  as  to  bring  him  into  existence  with- 
out it.  But,  in  one  sense,  the  sinner  has  consented.  Our  first  parents  consented 
for  themselves  and  their  offspring,  and  had  you  been  present  personally  when  the 
covenant  was  made  with  them,  you  could  not  have  refused  and  been  innocent ;  and 
bad  Adam  and  Eve  acted  faithfully,  the  arrangement  would  have  been  extolled  as 
wise  and  good.  3.  The  chief  reason  why  objections  are  made  is,  that  it  is  an 
nnhappy  marriage.  In  the  case  of  unhappy  marriages,  it  is  commonly  remarked 
that  there  is  fault  on  both  sides.  But  this  cannot  be  said  of  this,  for  the  Husband 
is  uniformly  holy,  just,  and  good,  and  the  spouse  that  faithfully  does  His  will  is  sure 
of  happiness.  But  if  He  be  once  offended,  woe  then  to  the  offender ;  for  He  will 
never  again  be  reconciled.  Suppose  you  expostulate,  "  I  wish  to  do  Thy  will,"  He 
will  reply,  "  Speak  not  of  wishes,  but  do  it."  "  But  I  have  done  it  in  almost  every 
particular."  "  That  is  not  enough ;  My  will  must  be  altogether  done."  "  But  I 
am  sorry,  and  mean  to  reform."  "  But  you  cannot  now  repair  the  injury  you  have 
done."  *•  But  may  I  not  be  forgiven  ?  "  "  No — there  is  no  forgiveness  in  My 
nature,  the  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  4.  But  such  an  unhappy  marriage  were 
well  dissolved."  True,  but  the  marriage  is  not  easily  dissolved.  It  is  always  a 
difficult  thing  to  break  a  marriage.  Yet  in  ordinary  cases  the  wife  may  desert  her 
husband,  or  obtain  a  divorce.  But  desertion  or  divorce  is  impossible  in  this  case. 
What  God  has  joined  together,  man  cannot  and  dare  not  put  asunder.  The 
husband,  though  deeply  injured,  will  not  consent  to  a  separation.  Ton  may  become 
eo  depraved  as  almost  to  forget  that  he  has  any  claim  upon  you.  But  he  will 
follow  you  still,  and  assert  his  right  to  jou  as  long  as  you  live.  There  is  only  one 
way  of  escape,  viz.,  to  get  married  to  Him  that  was  raised  from  the  dead.  Your 
■econd  Husband  will  give  ample  satisfaction  to  your  first.  He  will  take  all  your 
responsibilities  on  Himself,  and  deliver  you.  II.  The  belibveb  is  habbied  to  the 
LoBD.  Of  the  second  marriage  you  may  notice,  just  as  of  the  first,  that — 1.  It 
involves  certain  obligations.  The  spouse  is  bound  just  as  before  to  be  subject  to 
her  husband  in  all  things.  The  identical  regulations  of  the  first  husband  are  found 
word  for  word  in  the  house  of  the  second.  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  command- 
ments." "  He  that  hath  My  commandments  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that 
loveth  Me."  2.  It  is  of  the  Lord,  though  it  is  never  consummated  without  the 
consent  of  parties.  The  believer  is  espoused  to  Christ  before  he  is  bom,  but  the 
marriage  is  not  completed  until  consent  is  given  freely  and  cordially.  But  mark 
the  wonders  of  Christ's  love  1  He  has  provided  the  Spirit  to  operate  on  the  heart, 
and  make  ns  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power.  He  has  instituted  the  Christian 
ministry  and,  like  Abraham's  servant,  every  minister  is  bound  to  go  to  the  intended 
bride  and  tell  her  of  the  riches  and  honours  of  his  Master's  Son,  in  order  to  gain 
her  consent.  3.  It  is  a  happy  marriage — as  happy  as  the  other  is  miserable. 
Christ  loves  that  sinner  as  He  loves  Himself.  "  No  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own 
flesh,  but  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it."  In  having  Christ,  you  have  all  things — 
pardon,  strength,  support,  and  a  title  to  glory.  As  Elkanah  said  to  his  disconsolate 
spouse,  so  Christ  says  to  His — "  Am  not  I  better  to  thee  than  ten  sons  ?  "  4.  It  is 
one  that  can  never  be  dissolved.  Whom  Christ  espouses.  He  espouses  for  ever. 
May  the  spouse  then  do  as  she  pleases  ?  No ;  does  a  woman  feel  encouraged  to 
insult  her  husband  because  she  knows  he  will  not  put  her  away?  No ;  she  knows 
he  has  various  ways  of  expressing  his  displeasure,  though  he  does  not  insist  on  a 
separation.  .The  want  of  his  love,  the  frown  on  his  face,  will  be  felt  by  an 
affectionate  woman  to  be  dreadful  enough.    III.  Befobb  a  pebson  can  be  habbied 

TO    THE    LoBD    HIS    UABBIAGB   WITH    THE    LAW   UUST    BE    DISSOLVED.      1.    This   iS   in 

accordance  with  both  the  law  of  God  and  of  man,  and  the  apostle  assumed  it  as 
admitted  and  well  known.  As  long  as  both  you  and  the  law  are  aUve  the  marriage 
mast  stand  (ver.  1).  2.  How,  then,  is  it  possible  for  a  sinner  to  be  set  at  liberty  7 
Only  by  death.  No  doubt  the  death  of  either  party  would  dissolve  it,  but  the 
Ensband  cannot  die ;  He  is  immortal.  It  is  your  death,  sinner,  that  must  cat  the 
eonnection.  8.  But  how  can  the  spouse  that  dies  be  married  to  another?  It  is  the 
party  that  survives,  that  gets  married  a  second  time.  (1)  But  this  spouse  dies  not 
personally,  but  by  substitute — by  "the  body  of  Christ."  Being  represented  by 
Christ,  ye  were  virtually  in  His  person  or  body  when  He  died.  You  admire  the 
generosity  of  the  Armenian  prince  who  proposed  to  the  conqueror  to  give  his  life 
M  (he  tansom  of  his  bride,  what  say  you  to  the  generosity  of  Jesos  ?    The  bride 


our.  vn.]  ROMANS,  S59 

WM  SO  overcome  that  she  eoald  attend  to  nothing  else.  "  What  did  70a  think  of 
Cyras?  "  said  her  husband.  *'  I  never  observed  him.  I  was  thinking  of  that  man 
who  proposed  to  give  his  life  for  mine."  Herein,  indeed,  is  love,  and  if  Christ's 
professed  sponse  refuse  to  return  the  affection,  let  her  be  anathema  maranatha. 
(2)  But  the  believer  dies  to  the  law  also  in  spirit — his  hope  and  his  self-righteous 
confidence  die.  Married  to  the  law  he  was  at  one  time  alive,  cherishing  the  hope 
of  being  able  to  please  it,  and  ultimately  to  enter  glory.  But  "  the  commandment 
came,  sin  revived,  and  he  died."  Through  the  law  itself  he  became  dead  to  the 
law.  Its  spirituality,  its  exceeding  breadth  and  purity,  put  an  end  to  its  legal 
hopes  and  dependencies.  But  observe  it  is  not  the  law,  apart  from  the  body  of 
Christ ;  but  the  law  as  magnified  and  made  honourable  in  that  body.  In  the  Cross 
we  see  as  never  before  the  awful  strength  and  vengeance  of  the  law.  If  the  spouse 
is  alarmed  and  reduced  to  despair  when  she  hears  her  husband's  words,  she  dies 
altogether  when  she  beholds  his  doings.  She  no  longer  hopes  to  appease  his  anger 
by  her  repentance,  reformation,  promises,  or  duties.  4.  At  the  very  time  the  spouse 
becomes  dead  to  the  law  she  becomes  united  to  the  Lord.  The  date  of  her  death  is 
also  the  date  of  her  marriage ;  hence  there  is  mourning  and  rejoicing  on  the  same 
day.  There  is  a  strange  mixture  of  emotions  experienced,  which  it  is  difficult  to 
describe.  6.  Let  Ood's  people,  then,  realise  their  privileges,  and  know  that  they 
are  free.  Some  who  are  professedly  married  to  the  Lord,  act  as  if  their  first 
marriage  remained  still  in  force.  But  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace  ; 
and  when  the  law  comes  to  yon  demanding  allegiance,  and  threatening  wrath  as 
formerly,  refer  it  at  once  to  the  Lord  Jesus.    IV.  It  is  onlt  when  the  fibst 

KABBIAOS  IS   DISSOLVKD  AND  THE   SECOND  CONTRACTED  THAT   FBUIT  IS   BBOUOHT   FOBTH 

UNTO  God.  1.  The  fruit  of  the  first  marriage  is  unto  death  (ver.  5).  The  offspring 
of  the  first  marriage  is  sin,  and  as  soon  as  it  comes  into  existence  it  begins  to  reign 
over  its  ovm  parent,  and  that  unto  death.  It  will  murder  your  precious  soul ;  aye, 
and  your  husband  will  give  it  authority  for  this  purpose — ' '  The  strength  of  sin  is 
the  law."  He  will  at  last  in  justice  abandon  his  guilty  spouse  to  her  own  monster 
offspring — the  fruit  of  her  infidelity  ;  and  sin  shall  hold  her  in  everlasting  death. 
S.  But  the  fruit  of  the  second  marriage  is  unto  God,  viz.,  holiness  (chap.  vi.  22) ; 
which  has — (1)  Its  commencement  in  genuine  repentance.  (2)  Its  essence  in  love 
to  God  and  to  His  plans.  (3)  Its  external  manifestation  in  the  obedience  of  the  life. 
{J.  Lyon.)  Married  to  Christ : — L  To  His  memory.  1.  When  the  negroes  of 
the  Southern  States  of  America  were  set  free,  they  were,  in  many  cases,  placed  in 
a  position  of  deep  misery.  Their  cry  reached  the  ears  of  many  in  the  North,  and 
amongst  those  who  went  to  the  rescue  was  a  young  man  of  education,  refinement, 
social  position,  and  wealth,  who,  soon  after  commencing  his  arduous  work,  sickened 
and  died.  Arrangements  were  made  to  convey  the  body  to  the  family  sepulchre ; 
but  many  who  had  been  fed,  clothed,  instructed  and  comforted  by  their  deceased 
friend,  entreated  that  his  dust  might  be  allowed  to  sleep  in  the  scene  of  his 
generous  labours.  The  mother  consented,  and  the  father ;  but  the  consent  of 
another  was  necessary.  Could  any  wonder  if  it  was  but  tardily  given  f  At  length 
his  betrothed  gave  her  cordial  assent,  declaring  that  she  would  live  where  her  elect 
husband  had  died,  aud  by  devoting  herself  to  his  work,  would  be  married  to  his 
memory.  2.  More  than  eighteen  centuries  ago  the  Son  of  God  came  from  heaven 
to  our  earth.  He  went  about  doing  good.  He  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on 
the  tree ;  He  rose  again,  and  ascended  into  heaven.  But  there  is  a  remembrance 
of  these  things  by  the  writings  of  the  evangelists  and  apostles.  By  testimony,  the 
Jesus  of  the  past  is  with  us.  The  birth  at  Bethlehem,  the  teaching,  miracles, 
crucifixion,  resurrection,  and  ascension,  can  only  be  memories.  Let  us  be  married 
to  His  memory — (1)  By  frequently  thinking  of  all  that  He  was,  and  did,  and  suffered. 
We  cannot  visit  Bethlehem,  Nazareth,  and  Calvary,  but  we  can  think  of  them.  (2) 
By  cherishing  affections  corresponding  with  such  thoughts.  Thus  thinking,  grati- 
tude and  love  will  spring  up  in  our  hearts.  Let  us  cherish  these  plants.  (3)  B7 
contentedly  living  on  this  earth  so  long  as  we  have  a  work  of  God  to  do.  Christ 
came  to  this  world,  and  remained  until  His  work  was  finished.  His  memory  seems 
to  say.  Pray  not  to  be  taken  out  of  the  world,  but  ask  for  help  to  complete  your 
work.  (4)  By  working,  so  far  as  we  can,  the  works  He  wrought.  He  healed,  and  we 
may  be  great  healers.  He  comforted,  and  the  weakest  may  be  a  son  of  consolation. 
He  instructed,  and  all  who  have  religious  knowledge  may  instruct.  He  made  peace, 
and  a  httle  child  may  be  a  peace-maker,  (5)  By  intelligently  and  devoutly 
observing  the  ordinance  of  remembrance  which  He  founded  (1  Cor.  xi.  23-25).  11. 
To  THB  FsiiLowsHif  AND  THE  sBBvios  OF  THE  uTiNO  Chbisi.    The  law,  as  giveu  by 


500  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {cHA*.  m, 

Moses,  has  no  claim  upon  us  now.  Prescription  and  exclusive  sanctity  as  to  place 
of  worship  is  dead ;  human  priesthood,  carnal  sacrifices,  ritualism,  symbolism,  the 
whole  Mosaic  economy  is  dead.  Let  us  then  be  married  to  the  living  CJhrist — 1.  By 
the  non-recognition  of  the  Mosaic  institutes.  As  they  who  are  married,  forsaking 
all  other,  cleave  to  each  other  as  long  as  both  shall  live,  so  the  disciple  of  Jesus 
must  cease  to  be  a  disciple  of  Moses,  or  refuse  to  be,  if  tempted  to  be.  2.  By  looking, 
and  continuing  to  look  to  Him,  for  every  good  thing.  All  that  we  really  need,  the 
mediation  of  Jesus  Christ  can  secure.  3.  By  cherishing  and  expressing  true  love 
for  Him.  Some  appear  to  be  content  with  knowledge  without  love,  and  others 
reduce  their  love  to  mere  obhgation  for  redemption  from  hell.  But  see  1  Cor.  xvi. 
22.  4.  By  obeying  His  commandments.  Verily,  these  are  not  grievous ;  but  if 
they  were,  true  love  would  make  the  yoke  easy  and  the  burden  light.  This  is  one 
test  which  Jesus  gave  His  disciples  (John  xiv.  15).  5.  By  recognising  Himself  in  His 
disciples,  and  by  ministering  to  His  needy  ones  for  His  sake.  6.  By  defending  His 
name  and  His  mission.  7.  By  devoting  ourselves  to  advance  the  aim  of  His  media- 
tion— to  save  the  world.  Conclusion  :  1.  I  know  of  no  illustration  of  marriage  to 
the  Saviour's  memory  and  mission  equal  to  the  example  of  the  Apostle  PauL  He 
describes  his  own  death  to  the  law  and  marriage  to  Christ,  and  his  previous  marriage 
to  the  law  and  death  unto  Christ,  in  Phil.  iii.  5-10.  Paul  knew  what  he  was  writing 
when  he  wrote  the  text,  and  as  a  wife  submits  herself  to  her  own  husband  as  her 
head,  is  subject  to  him  in  everything,  reverences  him,  helps  him,  makes  his  cares, 
joys,  honours,  and  burdens  her  ovra,  and  blends  her  life  with  his,  so  did  Paul  live 
for  Christ.  2.  One  motive  by  which  we  should  be  constrained  to  seek  and  to  cherish 
union  with  Jesus  Christ  is  this — that  only  thereby  can  we  live  as  God's  children. 
The  reference  in  the  text  is  to  the  fruit  of  marriage.  Elsewhere,  with  another 
reference,  the  same  truth  is  presented  (Gal.  ii.  22,  23 ;  Eph.  v.  9  ;  Col.  i.  5,  6,  10). 
The  fruit  here  named  is  reconciliation  to  and  oneness  with  God.  It  is  light  in  the 
spirit,  love  in  the  heart,  and  righteousness  in  the  life.  It  consists  of  all  the  fruits 
of  holiness  and  righteousness  and  godliness.  Peter  names  them  as  virtue,  &a. 
(2  Pet.  i.  5-7).  John  represents  them  as  all  included  in  love.  Jesus  represents 
union  with  Himself  as  essential  to  all  usefulness  (John  xv.  5).  3.  All  coming 
short  of  this  is  traceable  to  non-union  with  Christ.  Some  religious  people  marry 
themselves  to  a  system  of  theology,  and  the  fruit  is  pride  and  bigotry  ;  others  to  a 
round  of  ceremonies,  and  the  fruit  is  self-deception  and  hypocrisy  ;  others  to  what 
they  account  "the  Church,"  and  the  fruit  is  a  form  of  godliness  without  the 
power  ;  others  to  a  sect,  and  the  fruit  is  envy,  hatred,  malice,  and  all  uncharitable- 
ness  ;  others  but  partially  identify  themselves  with  Christ,  and  the  fruit  is  inde- 
cision, confusion,  and  various  evil  works.  The  world,  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes, 
and  the  pride  of  life  make  this  union  partial ;  in  the  degree  that  it  is  not  entire, 
there  cannot  be  fruit  unto  God  (Psa.  xlv.  10, 11).  (S.  Martin.)  The  believer^ »  new 
relations  : — I.  Dead  to  thk  L-^w.  1.  This  imparts  release  from  its — (1)  Condemna- 
tion. (2)  Penalty.  (3)  Bondage.  2.  Is  effected  by  the  body  of  Christ  sacrificed  for  us. 
n.  Mabresd  to  Chbist.  1.  The  nature  of  this  union.  2.  The  honour  of  it.  3.  The 
result  of  it.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Make  a  confidant  of  the  Lord  Jesiu : — Make  a 
confidant  of  the  Lord  Jesus — tell  Him  all.  You  are  married  unto  Him  :  play  the 
part  of  a  wife  who  keeps  no  secrets  back,  no  trials  back,  no  joys  back  ;  teU  them 
all  to  him.  I  was  in  a  house  yesterday  where  there  was  a  httle  child,  and  it  was 
said  to  me,  *'  He  is  such  a  funny  child."  I  asked  in  what  way,  and  the  mother 
said,  "  Well,  if  he  tumbles  down  and  hurts  himself  in  the  kitchen,  he  will  always 
go  upstairs  crying  and  tell  somebody,  and  then  he  comes  down  and  says,  •  I  told 
somebody  ' ;  and  if  he  is  upstairs  he  goes  down  and  tells  somebody,  and  when  he 
comes  back  it  is  always,  '  I  told  somebody,'  and  he  does  not  cry  any  more."  Ah ! 
well,  I  thought,  we  must  tell  somebody:  it  is  human  nature  to  want  to  have 
sympathy,  but  if  we  would  always  go  to  Jesus,  and  tell  Him  all,  and  there  leave  it, 
we  might  often  dismiss  the  burden,  and  be  refreshed  with  a  grateful  song.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  5-6.  But  when  we  were  in  the  flesh,  the  motions  of  stn,  which  were 
by  the  law,  did  work  in  our  members  to  bring  forth  fruit  imto  death. — 
The  law  and  sin : — We  often  know  that  we  are  ill  without  knowing  precisely 
what  is  the  matter  with  us,  and  this  was  the  case  with  the  large  mass  of 
human  beings  in  the  pre-Christian  world ;  and,  therefore,  first  of  all,  God  opened 
the  eyes  of  men  to  see  what  their  case  really  was.  Nature  and  conscience  did 
something  in  this  way  for  the  heathen  nations.    The  law  of  Moses  did  a  great  deal 


OOP.  tn.]  ROMANS.  561 

more  for  the  Jews.    By  the  law  was  a  knowledge  of  sin.    The  law  was  the  lantern 
burning  with  a  bright  moral  light,  and  revealing  the  dark  and  unlovely  forms  which 
haman  life  had  assumed  during  long  centuries,  under  the  impetus  and  the  operation 
of  sin.     But  the  law  only  discovered  to  the  patient  his  real  condition  ;  it  did  not, 
it  could  not,  cure  him.    It  only  made  his  misery  the  more  intense  by  making  it 
more  intelligent.    It  made  the  moral  demand  for  a  real  remedy  greater  than  ever, 
but  it  did  not  supply  that  for  which  it  made  men  crave.  {Canon  Liddon.)    Flesh : — 
The  term,  denoting  the  soft  parts  of  the  body,  which  are  the  usual  seat  of  agreeable 
or  painful  sensations,  is  applied  in  Biblical  language  to  the  whole  natural  man,  in 
so  far  as  he  is  yet  under  the  dominion  of  the  love  of  pleasure  or  the  fear  of  pain, 
that  is  to  say,  of  the  tendency  to  self-satisfaction.    The  natural  complacency  of  the 
ego  with  itself — such  is  the  idea  of  the  word  in  the  moral  sense  in  which  it  is  so 
often  used  in  Scripture.     (Prof.  Godet.)        The  law  the  innocent  occasion  of  sin : — 
Though  the  sun  is  not  only  necessary  for  the  light,  but  for  the  healthy  condition  of 
our  globe,  yet  its  bright  beams  are  the  occasion  of  unhealthy  efSuvia  arising  from 
many  substances.  The  fault,  however,  lies  not  in  the  sun,  but  in  the  inward  corrupt 
state  of  the  substances  in  question.     So  the  law,  intended  to  produce  beneficial 
results,  became,  owing  to  the  depraved  condition  of  man's  heart,  the  innocent 
occasion  of  sin.     (C.  Neil,  M.A.)        The  misery  of  an  unregenerate  state: — Observe 
here  three  things  in  sin  which  tend  to  make  men  miserable.     1.  Its  reigning  power. 
Wherever  sin  reigns  in  the  heart,  it  will  prevail  in  the  life ;  and  how  miserable 
must  that  man  be  whose  heart  is  in  love,  in  league  with  sin  ?     2.  Its  condemning 
power.    This  ariseth  from  man's  disobedience  ;  the  curse  must  follow  the  offence 
(1  Cor.  XV.  26).     8.  Its  irritating  power.    And  this  is  what  our  apostle  refers  to  in 
oar  text.     By  this  I  understand  that  evil  propensity  of  heart  which  takes  occasion 
to  sin  from  everything  it  meets  with :  every  object  which  is  presented,  even  the 
pure  and  holy  law  of  God,  through  the  evil  temper  of  our  hearts,  is  liable  to  be  so 
abused  as  to  excite  us  to  sin.     Learn  hence — I.  That  they  who  abb  in  the  flesh 
CANNOT  PLEASE  GoD.     1.  Let  OS  inquire  into  the  meaning  of  this  expression.     (1) 
Some  tell  us  that  we  are  to  understand  a  man's  being  under  the  government  of  a 
carnal  law,  viz.,  the  old  dispensation.     But  surely  all  who  were  under  that  old 
testament  were  not  unable  to  please  God  (Heb.  xi.).    (2)  The  term  is  sometimes 
taken  in  a  good  sense,  as  in  Gal.  ii.  20:  Phil.  i.  21,  22.     (3)  At  other  times  it  is 
used  in  a  bad  sense,  as  in  chap.  viii.  5,  &o.,  where  the  apostle  fully  explains  himself. 
(4)  The  term  is  taken  for  man,  and  whatsoever  is  in  him,  both  good  and  evil.    In 
this  sense  our  Lord  uses  the  term  (Matt.  xvi.  17 ;  John  i.  13,  iii.  5,  6).    Our  apostle 
(Gal.  y.  13,  16,  17)  uses  the  term  in  the  same  sense  as  in  our  text,  as  if  it  were 
synonymous  with  sin.    By  these  passages  it  fully  appears  that  flesh  is  put  for  the 
corruption  of  our  nature  (Psa.  li.  5).     2.  If  it  be  asked  why  they  who  are  in  the 
flesh  cannot  please  God,  I  answer,  because  they  are  in  the  flesh.     To  say  that 
men  are  in  the  flesh,  is  to  say  much  more  than  that  flesh  is  in  them.    We  read  of 
the  flesh  lusting  against  the  spirit  in  the  same  person,  and  the  spirit  against  the 
flesh ;  but  how  dreadful  must  be  the  condition  of  that  man  who  is  all  flesh,  all 
sin  1  yet  such  is  the  description  which  the  searcher  of  hearts  gives  a  man  as  a  fallen 
creature  (Gen.  vi.  5 ;  Psa.  liii.  2,  3).    How,  then,  can  such  an  one  please  God  ? 
They  have  no  heart  to  fear,  love,  or  serve  Him.    And  as  they  who  are  in  the  flesh 
cannot  please  God  ;  so  neither  can  God  be  pleased  with  them  (Psa.  v.  4,  5,  vii,  11). 
If  God  be  holy,  He  must  necessarily  hate  sin  and  sinners.    As  they  are  in  a  state 
of  sin,  they  are  under  the  curse ;  and  as  their  temper  is  suited  to  their  state,  they 
must  be  hateful  in  His  sight  (Hab.  i.  13  ;  Prov.  xv.  8,  xxi.  27  ;  Eccles.  vii.  29 ;  Jer, 
ii.  21).     II.  That  the  true  cause  of  all  sin  is  in  ourselves,  as  may  fully  appear 
by  the  motions  of  sin  in  our  members.     1.  So  long  as  a  man  is  in  a  state  of  sin, 
the  motions  of  sin  will  powerfully  work  in  all  the  members  of  the  body,  and  in  all 
the  faculties  of  the  soul.    I  know  that  some  conclude  that  sin  is  only  seated  in  the 
body,  and  they  have  invented  a  variety  of  methods  in  order  to  eradicate  sin  out  of 
the  body ;  but  when  they  have  done  all,  still  the  heart  remains  as  bad  as  ever. 
"  The  works  of  the  flesh  "  (Gal.  v,  20,  21)  are  principally  seated  in  the  soul.     What 
the  soul  conceives,  the  body  executes.    2.  Now  if  these  motions  of  sin  work  in  our 
members,  what  can  be  the  reason  why  they  are  so  little  lamented  ?  because  men 
love  them ;  nor  can  we  wonder  at  it,  if  we  consider  that  these  motions  are  a  part 
of  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt  with  its  affections  and  lusts.    These  things  are 
nnlamented,  because  they  are  no  more  burdensome  ;  for  if  a  man  be  dead  in  sin  lie 
will  have  no  sensations,  and  consequently  will  have  no  spiritual  complaints.     III. 
Tbax  even  thb  holx  law  of  God,  which  pbohibixs  sin,  akd  condemns  vob  it,  cam 
TOL.  u  86 


SOS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  to, 

H1STXB  HELP  TBXU,  BUT  BATHZB  FB0V0KB8  THBM  TO  SIK.      "The  mOtioilB  Of  sillB  which 

were  by  the  law."    Not  effected,  but  occasioned  by  the  law.    Not  that  the  law  gives 
any  just  occasion  to  sin  (vers.  8, 11).   1.  The  law,  as  commanding  perfect  obedience, 
and  not  giving  any  supply  of  grace,  will  have  this  tendency  (ver.  9).    2.  The  law, 
as  prohibiting  men  from  evil,  hath  much  the  same  tendency.    It  is  but  like  a  very 
weak  dam,  in  the  way  of  a  mighty  current ;  it  seems  to  stop  its  course  for  a  moment 
till  it  gain  greater  strength,  by  reason  of  a  greater  quantity  of  water,  then  it  rushes 
forward  and  bears  down  all  before  it.    3.  The  law,  as  condemning  men  for  sin,  hath 
sometimes  this  tendency  (Jer.  ii.  25).    "I  shall  perish  for  ever,  I  will  therefore 
say  to  my  soul,  Take  thy  fiU  of  sin.    Let  as  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die." 
IV.  That  "  the  wages  of  sdj  is  death."    {J.  Stafford.)         A  state  of  nature  avd 
a  itate  of  grace : — Let  us  consider  the  persons  described  by  the  apostle  in  respect 
of — I.  Theib  tobmeb  state.     1.  '•  When  we  were  in  the  flesh  " ;  i.e. — (1)  Under  the 
eamal  ordinances  of  the  Mosaic  law  (Gal.  iii.  3,  iv.  1-3),  which  could  not  msike 
him  that  did  the  service  perfect  as  to  his  conscience  (see  Heb.  vii.  18,  19,  ix.  fr-lO, 
X.  1-4).     (2)  Under  the  law  as  a  covenant  of  works.     ^3)  Not  in  Christ  (Bom.  viii. 
1,  2),  and  therefore  not  justified.    (4)  Not  in  the  Spirit,  arid  therefore  unrenewed 
and  carnal  (Rom.  viii.  5-8;  John  iii.  5-7).    2.  While  in  this  state  "the  motions 
of  sins  " — desires  after  unlawful  things,  inordinate  desires  after  lawful  things,  dis- 
positions contrary  to  the  mind  of  Christ — these  which  are  manifested  and  irritated 
"by  the  law"  as  well  as  prohibited  and  condemned,  "  did  work  in  our  members 
to  bring  forth  fruit  unto  death " ;  such  fruit  as  would  have  issued  in  eternal 
death,   if   God,    in    His   mercy,    bad    not   interposed.     The   law    forbids    sin, 
and    condemns  to  death  for  it,  but  does  not  deliver  it.     II.   Theib  new  ob 
Chbistian  state.     1.  "But  now  we  are  delivered  from  the  law,"  &o. — (1)  From 
the  ceremonial  law.    This  kept  the  people  employed  in  external  things,  and  so 
hindered  spiritual  worship  and  service.     (2)  From  the  moral  law,  as  a  covenant 
of  works  or  means  of  justification,  but  not  as  a  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ, 
or  a  rule  of  life  when  we  are  brought  to  Him.    2.  This  implies — (1)  Pardon  and 
freedom  from  guilt,  condemnation,  and  wrath.    (2)  Confidence  towards  God  and 
peace  with  Him.     (3)  Gratitude  and  love  to   Him,  causing  us  to   desire  and 
to  endeavour  to  obey  Him.    (4)  Union  and  commuuion  with  Him.    3.  The  ground 
of  our  deliverance,  "  that  being  dead  wherein  we  were  held."  The  law  is  spoken  of 
figuratively,  as  a  person  to  whom  we  were  in  subjection,  as  a  wife  to  her  husband, 
during  his  life ;  but  the  abrogation  of  the  covenant,  which  is,  as  it  were,  its  death, 
releases  us  from  its  authority,  so  far  as  that  it  cannot  condemn  us,  if  we  are 
united  to  Christ.      IH.    The   end  fob  which  thet  webe  bbouoht  ikto  this 
BTATB.    That  we  might  "  serve  " ;  worship  (Matt.  iv.  10),  obey  (chap.  vi.  16^,  and 
promote  God's  cause  (John  xii.  26).     To  serve  "  in  the  oldness  of  the  letter, '  is  to 
serve  merely  in  the  strength  of  our  natural  powers.    But  we  must  serve  in  the 
strength  of  grace.    1.  The  former  is  to  serve  in  a  mere  external  way,  regarding 
only  the  exterior  of  Divine  worship  and  the  letter  of  the  law.    We  must  worship 
God  in  the  spirit  (Phil.  iii.  3  ;  John  iv.  23,  24),  inwardly,  and  by  His  Spirit;  and 
must  regard  chiefly  the  spiritual  meaning  of  His  laws  (chap.  ii.  28,  29).     2.  The 
former  is  to  serve  in  a  legal  righteousness,  unpardoned,  unchanged.    We  must 
serve  in  an  evangelical  righteousness  (Phil.  iii.  9).    3.  The  former  is  to  serve  in 
unbelief,  and  in  a  spirit  of  bondage.    This  in  faith,  and  in  a  spirit  of  adoption 
(chap.  viii.  15  ;  Gal.  iv.  6)  and  a  hope  of  immortality.    4.  The  former  is  to  serve 
from  fear  of  God,  and  from  fear  of  death  and  hell :  this,  from  love  to  God  as  a  Father, 
and  in  consequence  of  His  love  to  us.    5.  The  former  is  to  serve  with  reluctance, 
finding  His  service  a  drudgery ;  this,  with  delight,  finding  it  perfect  freedom. 
6.  The  former  is  to  be  scanty,  inconstant,  mercenary,  and  selfish  in  our  services : 
this  is,  to  be  abundant,  unwearied,  generous,  and*  disinterested.     (Jot.  Benton.) 
Under  the  law  arid  under  grace:  mah't  condition: — I.  Undeb  thb  liAW.    1.  Enslaved 
by  sinful  dispositions.    2.  Exposed  to  death.    3.  Serving  in  the  letter.    II.  Undeb 
enACK.  1.  Free.   2.  Quickened  by  the  Spirit.   3.  Serving  in  newness  of  life.    {J.Lyth, 
D.D.)    But  now  we  are  delivered  £rom  the  law. — The  glorious  deliverance,  and  ruw 
obedience  of  all  true  believers  : — 1.  The  great  design  of  the  gospel  is  to  make  men  holy, 
in  order  to  their  becoming  happy.    2.  To  this  end  Christ  lived  and  died,  "  that  He 
might  redeem  unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people."    "  If,  therefore,  the  Son  make  us 
free,  then  shall  we  be  free  indeed."    Of  this  freedom  my  text  speaks.     The  nature 
and  extent  of  this  privilege  will  appear  when  viewed  in  contrast  with  our  state  ol 
sin  (ver.  5),  the  misery  of  which  consists  in  the  reigning,  the  condemning,  and  th« 
ixiitating  power  of  sin.    Now  *'  from  all  these  things  we  are  delivered ;  from  tb« 


Tn.]  BOMANS.  Mt 

reigning  power  by  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  Jesus  Christ ;  from  its  condemning 
power  by  the  obedience  and  death  of  Christ ;  from  its  irritating  power  in  some  good 
measure  already,  and  we  shall  ere  long  obtain  a  perfect  and  everlasting  deliverance." 
8.  Now  the  end  of  oar  being  thus  delivered  is  that  our  obedience  should  bear  soma 
good  proportion  to  our  new  state,  principles,  and  privileges.  "  As  ye  have  received 
A  new  spirit  out  of  Christ's  fulness,  let  it  be  your  daily  labour  and  pursuit  not  only 
to  observe  the  outward  letter  requiring  external  obedience  to  God,  but  in  a  spirituid 
manner"  (chap.  ii.  29).    Learn,  hence — I.  That  deuvebancs  out  or  thb  btatb  or 

MATCBE,  FBOU  UNDEB  THE  FOWEB  Or  SIM,  AND  THE  BIOOCB  OF  THE  LAW,  IS  AM  UNSPEAK- 
ABLE BLEssiNO.  1.  Herein  is  freedom  from  the  law  of  death.  It  is  a  law  of  death, 
as  it  commands  obedience,  but  gives  no  strength  for  obedience ;  as  it  curseth  for 
disobedience,  yet,  through  the  corruption  of  our  nature,  becomes  the  occasion  of 
sin,  and  so  brings  upon  the  sinner  condemnation.  2.  When  does  this  commence? 
Although  the  purpose  was  from  everlasting,  and  takes  its  rise  from  the  free  love  of 
the  Father,  yet  the  actual  bestowment  of  this  privilege  is  upon  believing :  when  by 
the  Spirit  of  grace  they  become  dead  to  the  law  by  the  body  of  Christ.    II.  Thax 

DBLIVEBANCB   FBOU   THE   LAW  IS  A  POWSBFOL  MOTIVE,  AMD  A  SPECIAL  UBAMS  Or  OOSPEIc 

OBEDIBNCZ,  IM  ALL  THEM  THAT  BELizvB.  1.  It  is  a  powcrful  motive.  (1)  In  general, 
all  our  deliverances,  whether  from  sin,  from  dangers,  or  from  death,  are  to  be  viewed 
as  fresh  obhgations  to  serve  the  Lord.  This  is  the  grand  argument  constantly  used 
in  the  Divine  word.  The  goodness  of  Qod  should  lead  to  repentance.  Distinguish- 
ing mercies  are  special  claims  of  Qod  for  new  obedience  (Exod.  xx.  2,  3  ;  John  viiL 
14 ;  Ezra  ix.  13,  14 ;  Psa.  ciii.  1-4,  oxvi.).  (2)  But  what  shall  we  say  of  that  great 
special  mercy,  which  is  the  glory  of  the  gospel  (chap.  viii.  32 ;  John  iii.  16 ; 
Bom.  xii.  1).  Our  obedience  unto  God  is  never  more  pleasing  to  Him  than  when  it 
flows  from  this  noble  principle.  2.  It  is  a  special  means  of  gospel-obedience.  (1) 
As  it  removes  all  hindrances.  How  can  the  soul  act  for  God,  that  is  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sin  ?  It  must  first  live  before  it  can  act ;  but  this  deliverance 
includes  in  it  spiritual  life.  The  sonl,  in  its  natural  state,  is  not  only  dead  in  its 
moral  powers,  but  also  in  law,  being  under  the  curse  ;  how  then  can  it  do  anything 
truly  pleasing,  or  acceptable  unto  God  ?  Can  such  an  one  love  God  ?  rather  is  hia 
heart  full  of  enmity  against  Him.  (2)  As  it  qualifies  the  soul  for  spiritual  services. 
It  may  be  said  of  every  natural  man,  that  he  has  no  heart  suited  to  the  duties  of 
reUgion  (Dent.  xxix.  4).  But  in  order  to  prepare  them  for  His  service  the  Lord 
promises  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit,  Ac.  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-27).  (3)  As  it  animates 
to  all  evangelical  obedience.  It  is  not  only  the  Ufe,  but  also  the  spring  of  action 
(2  Cor.  V.  14).    III.  That  to  sebvb  God,  im  newness  or  bfibit,  and  mot  in  thb 

OLDNBSS    or    THE    LETTBB,    IB    THE    DISTINOUISHIMO     PBTVILEOE    OF    THOSE    WHO    ABB 

OBLIVBBED  FBOM  THB  LAW.  1.  They  servc  God.  They  not  only  profess  themselves 
to  be  His  servants,  but  they  do  serve  Him.  It  is  their  delight  so  to  do,  and  they 
are  grieved  when  they  are  taken  off  from  His  service.  They  serve  Him  in  the  duties 
of  public  and  social  worship,  in  their  secret  devotions,  in  their  daily  callings ;  they 
serve  Him  always  and  at  all  times  ;  in  their  afflictions,  by  a  cheerful  submission  ; 
in  their  enjoyments,  by  improving  them  to  His  glory  (1  Cor.  x.  3).  2.  They  serve 
Ood,  not  in  the  oldness  of  the  letter.  What  the  letter  of  the  law  is  may  be  learnt 
by  consulting  the  doctrine  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  of  old  (Matt,  v.),  together 
with  the  antidote  given  us  by  Christ  Himself.  We  may  also  find  much  the  same 
doctrine  maintained  by  the  Church  of  Borne.  But  why  blame  the  Pharisees  and 
Papists  ?  Alas !  how  often  have  we  condemned  their  sin,  and  yet  have  been  guilty 
of  the  same  folly  1  3.  They  serve  Him  in  newness  of  spirit,  or  with  a  new  spirit. 
They  cannot  satisfy  themselves  merely  with  external  service,  lip  labour,  or  a  Ufelesa 
profession.  They  well  know  that  God  is  a  spirit,  and  they  that  worship  Him  must 
do  it  in  spirit  and  in  truth  ;  that  their  worship  mast  not  only  be  real,  in  opposition 
to  hypocrisy,  but  spiritual,  in  opposition  to  all  that  is  otuiial  and  corrupt.  In  a 
word,  it  must  be  suited  to  their  new  state  (Phil.  iii.  3).  lY.  That  mew  obediemob, 
OB  TBiTB  HOLINESS,  IB  THB  woBK  OF  God's  fbee  spibtp.  "  I  wlU  put  My  Spirit  within 
you."  (J.  Stafford.)  The  believer's  freedom : — I.  Its  natubb.  Discharge  from 
the  law  (B.y.).  1.  The  law  "holds" — (1)  As  a  master  does  his  slaves — taking 
every  precaution  against  their  escape.  (2)  As  justice  does  condemned  criminals  in 
the  stone  walls  of  a  prison.  (3)  As  death  does  its  victims  in  the  security  of  the 
grave.  2.  The  believer's  freedom  from  the  law,  therefore,  is — (1)  Liberty  from 
bondage.  (2)  Immunity  from  punishment.  (3)  Life  from  the  dead.  II.  Its 
hbams.  The  death  of  one  party  or  the  other.  1.  The  A.Y.  represents  the  law  as 
dead,  whidi  expresses  an  important  truth.    The  law  as  a  covenant  ia  abrogated  for 


tU  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

one  thing,  and  all  its  demands  are  exhausted  for  another.  As  a  Tenomons  reptile 
is  sometimes  killed  by  leaving  its  sting  in  the  yictim  it  has  stung  to  death,  so  the 
law,  in  executing  its  vengeance  on  Jesus  our  substitute,  died.  Christ  rendered  it 
all  the  obedience  it  could  demand  by  His  life,  and  expiated  all  the  offences  it  con- 
demned by  His  death.  Consequently,  being  dead,  it  has  no  hold  on  the  believer. 
(1)  The  dead  master  has  no  hold  on  his  slave.  "  If,  therefore,  the  Son  shall  make 
you  free,"  c&c.  (2)  Justice,  dead  in  a  sense  by  the  satisfaction  of  all  its  claims,  has 
no  hold  on  its  once  condemned  criminal.  (3)  Death,  being  now  abolished  by  the 
death  of  Christ,  and  swallowed  up  in  victory,  its  victims  are  free.  2.  The  R.V. 
represents  the  believer  as  dead — another  important  truth.  (1)  The  master  has  no 
hold  on  a  dead  slave.  (2)  Justice  has  no  hold  on  a  dead  criminal.  And  bo  the 
believer,  by  dying  with  Christ,  enters  into  freedom  from  both  bondage  and  condemna- 
tion. But — (3)  Christ's  death  was  followed,  and  inevitably,  by  resurrection,  and 
therefore  by  union  with  Him  the  believer  is  dead  to  death.  III.  Its  effects. 
•♦  That  we  should  serve."  Liberty  is  not  licence.  We  are  discharged  from  the  law 
as  a  covenant,  but  not  as  a  rule  of  life.  Our  liberty  is  transference  to  another 
Master,  whose  service  is  perfect  freedom  and  whose  law  is  the  "perfect  law  of 
liberty."  So,  then,  the  believer  serves — 1.  Not  in  the  oldness  of  the  letter.  There 
is  a  way  of  literal  conformity  to  all  the  precepts  of  the  law  which  is  consistent 
with  breaking  every  one  of  them.  We  may  have  no  idols  of  wood  and  stone,  and 
yet  worship  self,  wealth,  &o.  We  may  not  actually  take  a  man's  life,  but  we  may 
murder  his  interests  and  reputation.  We  may  commit  adultery  in  thought  as  well 
as  in  deed,  &c.  2.  But  in  the  newness  of  the  spirit.  (1)  By  the  help  of  the  Spirit 
who  makes  all  things  new.  (2)  By  new  motives.  (3)  In  a  new  way.  {J.  W.  Burn.) 
That  we  should  serve  In  newness  of  spirit,  and  not  in  the  oldness  of  the  letter. — 
The  old  service  and  the  new : — I.  Newness  of  spibit  implies  such  principles, 
dispositions,  and  views,  as  the  Spirit  of  God  implants  in  hearts  which  He  renews. 
Serving  in  the  spirit  is  a  service  of  filial  obedience  to  Him  who  gave  Himself  for  as, 
as  constrained  by  His  love,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  the  privileges  of  the  grace 
of  the  new  covenant.  Believers  have  thus,  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
become  capable  of  serving  God  with  that  new  and  Divine  nature  of  which  they 
partake,  according  to  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  law,  as  His  children,  with  cordial 
affection  and  gratitude.  It  is  the  service  not  of  the  hireling  but  of  the  son ;  not  of 
the  slave  but  of  the  friend ;  not  with  the  view  of  being  saved  by  the  keeping  of  the 
law,  but  of  rendering  grateful  obedience  to  their  almighty  Deliverer.  II.  The 
OLDNESS  OF  THE  LETTEB  rcspects  such  scrvice  as  the  law,  by  its  light,  authority,  and 
terror,  can  procure  from  one  who  is  under  it,  and  seeking  life  by  it,  without  the 
Spirit  of  God  and  His  sanctifying  grace  and  influence.  Much  outward  conformity 
to  the  law  may  in  this  way  be  attained  from  the  pride  of  self -righteousness,  without 
any  principle  better  than  that  of  a  selflsh,  slavish,  mercenary,  carnal  disposition, 
influenced  only  by  fear  of  punishment  and  hope  of  reward.  Serving,  then,  in  the 
oldness  of  the  letter,  is  serving  in  a  cold,  constrained,  and  wholly  external  manner. 
Such  service  is  essentially  defective,  proceeding  from  a  carnal,  unrenewed  heart, 
destitute  of  holiness.  In  this  way  Paul  describes  himself  (Phil,  iii.)  as  having 
formerly  served,  when  he  had  confldence  in  the  "flesh,"  as  he  there  designates 
such  outward  service.  Serving  in  newness  of  spirit  and  in  oldness  of  the  letter  are 
here  contrasted,  as  not  only  different,  but  as  incompatible  the  one  with  the  other. 
{R.  Haldane.)  Believers  serve  in  newness  of  spirit  as  they  serve — 1.  According  to 
the  spirit  of  the  law  which  is  love.  2.  With  their  spirit,  instead  of  an  outward 
formal  service.  3.  From  a  new  and  spiritual  nature  created  in  them.  4.  By  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  who  dwells  within  (chap.  viii.  1,  2,  9,  11).  6.  With  new 
means  and  in  new  ways.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  true  spirit  of  service : — In 
the  heroic  days  when  Xerxes  led  his  army  in  Greece,  there  was  a  remarkable  con- 
trast between  the  way  in  which  the  Persian  soldiers  and  the  Grecian  warriors  were 
nrged  to  combat.  The  unwilling  hosts  of  Persia  were  driven  to  the  conflict  by 
blows  and  stripes  from  their  officers ;  they  were  either  mercenaries  or  cowards,  and 
they  feared  close  contact  with  their  opponents.  They  were  driven  to  their  duty  as 
beasts  are,  with  rods  and  goads.  On  the  other  side  the  armies  of  Greece  were 
small,  but  each  man  was  a  patriot  and  a  hero,  and  hence  when  they  marched  to  the 
conflict  it  was  with  quick  and  joyous  step,  with  a  martial  song  upon  tbeir  lips,  and 
when  they  neared  the  foe  they  rushed  upon  his  ranks  with  an  enthusiasm  and  a  fury 
which  nothing  could  withstand.  No  whips  were  needed  for  the  Spartan  men-at- 
arms — like  high-mettled  chargers  they  would  have  resented  the  touch  thereof ;  they 
were  drawn  to  battle  by  the  oords  of  a  man,  and  by  the  bands  of  patriotic  1ot« 


CBAT.  m.]  ROMANS.  56S 

they  were  boand  to  hold  their  posts  at  all  hazards.  "  Spartans,"  would  their 
leaders  say,  "  your  fathers  disdained  to  number  the  Persians  with  the  dogs  of  their 
flock,  and  wiU  you  be  their  slaves  ?  Say  ye,  is  it  not  better  to  die  as  free  men  than 
to  live  as  slaves  ?  What  if  your  foes  be  many,  yet  one  lion  can  tear  in  pieces  a 
far-reaching  flock  of  sheep.  Use  well  your  weapons  this  day!  Avenge  your 
slaughtered  sires,  and  fill  the  courts  of  Shushan  with  confusion  and  lamentation  I " 
Such  were  the  many  arguments  which  drew  the  Lacedsemonians  and  Athenians  to 
the  fight — not  the  whips  so  fit  for  beasts,  nor  the  cords  so  suitable  for  cattle.  This 
illustration  may  set  forth  the  difference  between  the  world's  service  of  bondage, 
and  the  Christian's  religion  of  love :  the  worldling  is  flogged  to  his  duty  under  fear, 
and  terror,  and  dread,  but  the  Christian  man  is  touched  by  motives  which  appeal 
to  hia  highest  nature ;  he  is  affected  by  motives  so  dignified  as  to  be  worthy  of  the 
sons  of  God ;  he  is  not  driven  as  a  beast,  he  is  moved  as  a  man.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  7-25.  To  whom  does  the  passage  refer  f — (1)  To  the  unregenerate.  It  haa 
been  much  discussed  whether  this  section  describes  a  justified  man,  or  a  man  still 
anforgiven.  The  latter  view  was  held  by  Origen  and  the  Greek  fathers  generally. 
The  former  was  adopted  by  Augustine  and  the  Latin  fathers  generally.  It  waa 
received  in  the  West  during  the  Middle  Ages ;  and  by  the  Reformers.  It  is  now  held, 
I  believe,  by  most  Calvinists.  Among  Arminians  the  view  of  the  Greek  fathers  pre- 
vails. It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  this  is  the  older  opinion,  and  was  theirs  who 
spoke  the  language  in  which  this  Epistle  was  written.  That  this  section  describea 
Paul's  own  experience  before  justification,  I  hold  for  the  following  reasons.  1.  la 
the  last  section  we  saw  a  great  change  take  place  in  Paul,  a  change  from  life  to 
death.  This  change  brought  him  into  the  state  described  in  ver.  5.  Bat  in  ver.  6 
Paul  says,  and  he  never  wearies  to  repeat  it,  that  another  change,  as  glorious  asthia 
was  sad,  had  been  wrought  in  him  by  the  power  of  God.  The  completeness  of  thia 
change  has  been  frequently  set  before  us  (chaps,  v.  10,  vi.  11,  22,  vii.  6).  Paul  ia 
dead  to  sin,  set  free  from  its  service,  dead  to  the  law  which  formerly  bound  him  to 
a  orael  master.  This  second  change  must  be  located  between  ver.  13,  which  givea 
the  purpose  of  the  first  change,  and  chap.  viii.  1,  which  describes  the  state  of  those 
who  enjoy  the  second.  And  since  vers.  14-25  deal  with  one  subject,  we  must  put 
the  second  change  either  between  vers.  13  and  14  or  between  chaps,  vii.  and  viii. 
Now  we  have  no  hint  whatever  between  vers.  13  and  14  of  a  change.  But  in  ohap. 
viii.  1  the  change  is  written  in  characters  which  no  one  can  misunderstand.  The 
words  "  made  me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  "  proclaim  in  the  clearest  language  that 
the  bondage  of  vers.  23,  25  has  passed  away.  2.  Again,  this  section  contradicts  all 
that  Paul  says  about  himself  and  the  Christian  life.  He  here  calls  himself  a  slave 
of  sin,  and  groans  beneath  its  bondage.  He  is  a  calamity-stricken  man.  But  in  the 
last  chapter  he  describes  his  readers  as  dead  to  sin,  and  set  free  from  its  service.  In 
what  sense  could  a  Roman  Christian  dare  to  reckon  himself  dead  to  sin,  if  this  sec- 
tion were  a  picture  of  the  liberty  from  sin  enjoyed  by  an  apostle  ?  Paul  here  saya 
that  sin  dwelling  in  his  flesh  is  the  true  author  of  his  actions.  But  in  the  next 
•hapter  he  says  that  they  who  live  after  the  flesh  will  die.  He  here  declares  that  he 
works  oat  that  which  is  bad.  But  in  chap.  ii.  9  he  teaches  that  upon  all  who  do  so 
the  anger  of  God  will  fall.  If  these  words  refer  to  a  justified  person,  they  stand 
absolutely  alone  in  the  New  Testament.  3.  It  has  been  objected  that  the  language 
of  this  section  is  inapplicable  to  men  not  yet  justified.  But  we  find  similar  lan- 
guage in  the  lips  of  pagans.  "  What  is  it  that  draws  as  in  one  direction  while 
striving  to  go  in  another ;  and  impels  us  towards  that  which  we  wish  to  avoid  ?  " 
(Seneca).  "  We  understand  and  kiiow  the  good  things,  but  we  do  not  work  them 
out "  (Euripides).  "  I  have  evidently  two  souls,  .  ..  for  if  I  had  only  one  it  would 
not  be  at  the  same  time  good  and  bad ;  nor  would  it  desire  at  the  same  time  both 
honourable  and  dishonourable  works,  nor  would  it  at  the  same  time  both  wish  and 
not  wish  to  do  the  same  things.  But  it  is  evident  that  there  are  two  souls ;  and 
that  when  the  good  one  is  in  power,  the  honourable  things  are  practised ;  but  when 
the  bad,  the  dishonourable  things  are  attempted  "  (Xenophon).  "  I  know  what  sort 
of  bad  things  I  am  going  to  do  :  but  passion  is  stronger  than  my  purposes.  And 
this  is  to  mortals  a  cause  of  very  great  evils  "  (Euripides).  "I  desire  one  thing: 
the  mind  persuades  another.  I  see  and  approve  better  things :  I  follow  worse 
things  "  (Ovid).  These  passages  prove  that  in  many  cases  men  are  carried  along 
against  their  better  judgment  to  do  bad  things,  and  that  even  in  pagans  there  is  an 
inward  man  which  approves  what  God's  law  approves.  4.  What  Paul  says  else- 
where about  hia  religious  state  before  justification  confirms  the  description  of 


568  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [oha».  va.' 

himself  here  given.  He  was  a  man  of  blameless  morality  (Phil.  iii.  6) ;  It  was  in 
ignorance  that  he  persecuted  the  Church  (1  Tim.  i.  13) ;  he  was  zealous  for  God 
(Acts  zxii.  3) ;  a  Pharisee  of  the  strictest  sect  (Acts  zxvi.  5) ;  no  doubt  he  sought  to 
Bet  up  a  righteousness  of  his  own  (Bom.  z.  3).  Of  such  a  man's  inner  life  we  have 
a  picture  in  this  section.  His  conscience  approves  the  law :  he  makes  every  effort 
to  keep  it :  his  efforts  only  prove  his  moral  powerlessness,  and  reveal  the  presence 
of  an  enemy  in  whose  firm  grasp  he  lies  :  he  seeks  to  conquer  inward  failure  by 
strict  outward  observance,  and  perhaps  by  bloody  loyalty  to  what  he  considers  to  be 
the  cause  of  God.  In  the  conscientious  Pharisee  we  have  a  man  who  desires  to  do 
right,  but  actually  does  wrong.  And  the  more  earnestly  a  man  strives  to  obtain  the 
favour  of  God  by  doing  right,  the  more  painfully  conscious  will  he  be  of  his  failure. 
6.  It  has  been  objected  to  the  view  here  advocated  that  all  this  is  the  experience  of 
many  justified  persons.  But  this  only  proves  that  the  change  in  us  is  not  yet  com- 
plete, and  Paul  makes  this  a  matter  of  reproach  (1  Cor.  iii.  1-4).  On  the  other 
hand,  there  are  thousands  who  with  deep  gratitude  acknowledge  that,  while  this 
section  describes  their  past,  it  by  no  means  describes  their  present  state.  Day  by 
day  they  are  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  them.  6.  Then  why 
did  Paul  puzzle  plain  people  by  using  the  present  tense  instead  of  the  past  ?  Let 
the  man  who  asks  this  question  write  out  the  section  in  the  past  tense.  "  I  was  a 
man  of  fiesh :  I  saw  another  law  fighting  against  me,  and  leading  me  captive : 
I  cried,  '  Calamity-stricken  man,' "  &o.  The  life  and  reality  of  the  section  are 
gone.  To  realise  past  calamity,  we  must  leave  out  of  sight  our  deliverance  from  it. 
The  language  of  the  last  section  made  it  easy  to  do  this.  Paul's  description  of  his 
murder  by  the  hand  of  sin  was  so  sad  and  so  real  that  he  forgot  the  life  which 
followed.  Hence  when  he  came  to  speak  of  the  state  in  which  that  murder  placed 
him,  it  was  easy  to  use  the  present  tense.  Of  this  change  of  the  point  of  view  we 
have  already  had  other  examples.  In  chap.  iii.  7,  Paul  throws  himself  into  the 
position  of  one  guilty  of  falsehood,  and  sets  up  for  himself  an  excuse.  In  chap.  iv. 
24,  he  stands  by  the  writer  of  Genesis,  and  looks  upon  the  justification  of  himself 
and  his  readers  as  still  future.  In  chap.  v.  1,  he  urges  them  to  claim  peace  with 
God  through  justification.  In  chap.  v.  14,  after  contemplating  the  reign  of  death 
from  Adam  to  Moses,  he  looks  forward  to  the  future  incarnation  of  Christ.  In  chap, 
vi.  5,  he  speaks  in  the  same  way  of  the  resurrection  life  in  Christ.  We  shall  also 
find  him,  in  chap.  viii.  30,  throwing  himself  into  the  far  future,  and  looking  back 
upon  the  nearer  future  as  if  already  past.  This  mode  of  speech  is  common  in  all 
languages.  But  it  is  a  conspicuous  feature  of  the  language  in  which  this  Epistle  was 
Written.  7. 1  cannot  agree  with  those  who  say  that  Paul  refers  in  this  section  to  the 
state  of  babes  in  Christ  (1  Cor.  iii.  1) ;  and  in  the  next,  to  fuU  salvation.  The  next 
chapter  certainly  describes  Paul's  own  experience,  which  was  that  of  fall  salvation. 
And  the  language  of  this  section  is  frequently  used  by  those  who  are  only  in  part 
saved  from  sin.  But  the  least  babe  in  Christ  has  experienced  a  resurrection  from 
the  dead  (Col.  ii.  13),  and  a  deliverance  purchased  with  the  blood  of  Christ.  Of  such 
resurrection  and  deliverance  there  is  no  hint  in  this  section,  till  the  last  vers(>  of  it 
proclaims  the  dawn  of  a  brighter  day.  8.  If  the  above  interpretation  be  correct,  we 
have  in  this  section  the  fullest  description  in  the  Bible  of  the  natural  state  of  man. 
Even  in  the  immoral  there  is  an  inner  man  which  approves  the  good  and  hates  the 
bad.  But  this  inner  man  is  powerless  agaiust  the  enemy  who  is  master  of  his  body, 
and  who  thus  dictates  his  conduct.  In  spite  of  his  better  self  the  man  is  carried 
along  the  path  of  sin.  This  is  not  contradicted,  nor  its  force  lessened,  by  Paul's 
admission  in  chap.  ii.  26,  that  even  pagans  do  sometimes  what  the  law  commands. 
Their  obedience  is  only  occasional  and  imperfect,  whereas  the  law  requires  constant 
and  complete  obedience.  A  man  who  breaks  the  laws  of  his  country  is  not  saved 
from  punishmeut  by  the  occasional  performance  of  noble  and  praiseworthy  acts. 
Although  men  unforgiven  sometimes  perform  that  which  deserves  approbation,  they 
are  utterly  powerless  to  rescue  themselves  from  the  power  of  sin,  and  to  obtain  by 
good  works  the  favour  of  God.  (Prof.  Beet.)  The  character  described  in  the 
seventh  chapter  of  Romans : — Attend  to — I.  Thb  commencement  of  the  stbugolb 
OF  SIN  IN  THE  VEBT  FORMATION  OF  THE  Chbistian  ohabacteb.  In  this  proccss  there 
are  three  features.  1.  The  rectification  of  our  judgment  on  the  subject  of  our  rela- 
tion to  God.  This  is  what  is  called  conviction  of  sin.  It  arises  from  a  perception 
of  the  meaning  of  the  law  of  God,  attention  to  the  Scriptures.  Things  once  deemed 
innocent  are  now  seen  to  be  evil,  and  sins  once  deemed  trifling  are  now  felt  to  be 
awful.  The  law  appears  with  its  avenging  eye,  and  reiterating  its  demands.  The 
mind  is  ski])£ed  ol  its  vain  hope  of  escaping  Dirine  justioe.    Thia  ooQviction  may 


CHAT,  yn.]  ROMANS.  B6T 

be  produced  gradually,  or  suddenly.  It  may  be  attended  with  terror,  or  it  may  be 
serene.  2.  A  strife  on  tbe  part  of  the  mind  to  get  out  of  the  state.  That  conviction 
of  Bin  which  has  no  influence  on  the  conduct,  is  not  a  true  conviction.  Now  the 
most  painful  part  of  the  Christian  life  commences.  The  individual,  from  a  percep- 
tion  of  the  holiness  of  God  and  the  evil  of  sin,  sets  himself  to  avoid  sin.  But  sin, 
indignant  at  the  restraint,  like  a  mighty  torrent  before  a  feeble  barrier,  collects  all 
its  strength,  and  bears  all  down  before  it.  It  makes  him  sensible  of  its  strength  by 
the  vanity  of  his  efforts  to  check  it.  Temptation  takes  him  as  easily  as  a  whirlwind 
lifts  a  straw.  He  returns  to  renew  his  defeated  resolutions,  but  only  to  have  them 
defeated  again.  In  what  a  state  must  this  leave  the  mind!  3.  A  clear  discovery  of 
the  gospel  mode  of  deliverance,  and  the  full  application  of  tbe  mind  to  it.  Now 
commences  the  Ufe  of  faith ;  for  as  that  which  is  sown  is  not  quickened  except  it  die, 
80  the  faith  that  gives  the  mind  up  to  Christ,  to  be  saved  by  His  merits  and  sanc- 
tified by  His  grace,  arises  out  of  the  death  of  self -conflict.  What  is  the  consequence  ? 
Peace  takes  possession  of  the  mind.  There  is  a  principle  formed  in  the  mind,  and 
fixed  there,  directly  opposed  to  sin,  and  getting  the  mastery  over  it.  The  struggle 
may  be  violent,  but  grace  is  sure  to  prevail,  and  every  fresh  victory  leads  to  a  further 
one ;  until  the  very  habits  and  tastes  of  tbe  mind  become  on  the  side  of  piety,  and 
the  man  feels  as  in  the  firm  grasp  of  the  hand  of  his  God.  This  is  regeneration. 
II.  The  illustbation  and  confirmation  op  all  this  in  the  chapteb  before  us. 
1.  The  opinion  of  several  eminent  commentators  is  that  Paul  here  refers  to  himself 
and  men  generally  in  an  unconverted  state,  and  under  the  law,  and  of  that  natural 
approbation  which  they  have  of  what  is  good,  though  quite  unable  to  follow  it. 
They  maintain  that  the  language  would  not  suit  any  other  than  an  unconverted 
man,  inasmuch  as  in  the  conflict  sin  is  represented  in  every  instance  as  getting  the 
victory.  But  I  think  this  opinion  to  be  wrong,  for — (1)  It  is  contrary  to  all  that  we 
know  of  the  apostle  and  his  history.  When  was  he  ever  in  this  state  of  bondage  to 
sin?  Before  conversion  he  was  a  Pharisee  of  the  strictest  sort :  he  was  not  only  in 
his  own  opinion  free  from  this  miserable  bondage,  but  he  imagined  that  he  was  able 
to  keep  all  the  law  of  God.  (2)  The  language  employed  is  far  too  strong  for  any 
man  in  an  unconverted  state.  Can  any  such  man  say,  "  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God 
after  the  inward  man  "  ?  2.  There  is  another  opinion  totally  adverse  to  this,  viz., 
that  the  apostle  is  speaking  in  his  state  as  a  Christian  at  the  time  he  wrote  this 
Epistle.  This  opinion,  however,  I  conceive  to  be  equally  wrong.  (1)  It  does  not 
agree  with  the  design  of  the  apostle,  which  was  to  convince  that  the  law  of  God  was 
neither  an  instrument  of  justification  nor  of  sanctification ;  but  the  gospel  of  both. 
He  has  shown  in  the  previous  chapters  that  it  was  not  an  instrument  of  justifica- 
tion. In  this  chapter  he  begins  to  show,  that  neither  was  the  law  an  instrument  of 
sanctification,  in  that  it  was  "  weak  through  the  flesh  "  ;  that  it  could  only  stir  and 
goad  sin  by  being  used  to  oppose  it ;  that,  therefore,  we  must  look  out  for  some- 
thing else,  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Now  how  would  it  have  accorded  with  this  design, 
to  have  shown  that  the  mature  Christian  would  not  be  able  to  keep  the  law,  nor  to 
become  sanctified  ?  That  would  be  proving  too  much,  in  that  not  only  the  law  but 
the  gospel  could  not  be  the  iustrument  of  sanctification,  and  would  be  quite  foreign 
to  his  design.  (2)  And  as  it  does  not  conform  to  his  design,  so  neither  does  it  agree 
with  the  progressive  representations  of  this  and  the  following  chapters.  The 
seventh  chapter  should  never  have  been  separated  from  the  eighth.  And  who  does 
not  see  that  the  man  in  the  eighth  chapter  is  in  a  very  diflerent  state  from  the  man 
in  the  seventh,  though  the  same  man  ?  (3)  It  is  not  agreeable  to  truth  and  experi- 
ence. It  is  not  true  of  confirmed  Christians  that  they  always  do  the  evil  they  would 
not,  and  fail  to  do  the  good  that  they  would.  Some  half-hearted  and  sluggish 
Christians  may  be  "  carnal,  sold  under  sin  "  ;  their  "  old  man"  may  be  as  strong  in 
them  at  the  last  as  it  is  at  the  first.  But  it  is  not  true  of  such  Christians  as  Paul, 
who  tells  us  that  he  "  kept  under  his  body,"  and  "  brought  it  into  subjection."  It 
is  not  true  of  such  Christians  as  John  describes  when  he  says,  "  Whoso  is  born  of 
God,  doth  not  commit  sin."  Nay,  David  says  of  good  men  that  "they  do  no 
iniquity  ;  they  walk  in  Thy  way."  3.  Then  what  is  the  alternative  ?  Look  at  the 
person  whom  I  described  in  the  incipient  stages  of  the  formation  of  the  Christian 
character.  See  if  his  case  does  not  agree  with  every  part  of  the  representation  and 
design  of  the  apostle.  There  is  one  objection,  however.  Was  he  not  Paul  a 
Pharisee  up  to  the  time  of  his  conversion  ?  And  did  not  that  in  one  instant  change 
him  into  a  decided  disuiple  of  Jesus  Christ?  How  then  can  the  representations  of  this 
chapter  be  true  of  him  in  this  point  of  view?  Answer:  (1)  He  is  speaking  of  what 
is  oommon  to  converted  persons  at  large.    If,  therefore,  hia  extraordinary  conver- 


fee  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oB&r.  va 

non  had  not'allowed  him  to  go  through  that  precise  experienoe,  he  Tronld  not  be 
prevented  from  speaking  of  himself  in  this  manner,  as  that  which  belongs  to  all  con- 
verted persons.  Such  a  mode  of  speaking  is  common  in  the  Scriptures.  (2)  It  is  not 
improbable  that  the  apostle  did  go  through  something  of  this  kind  during  the  interval 
which  elapsed  between  his  saying,  "  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  and  Ananias 
coming  to  give  him  sight  along  vnth.  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  might  learn  in 
those  three  days  and  nights  all  that  about  sin,  about  the  excellence  of  the  law,  about 
human  imbecility,  and  about  the  mode  of  Divine  deliverance  which  he  here  describes, 
and  which  many  often  do  not  learn  in  as  many  years.  Conclusion  :  Is  it  asked. 
Why  dwell  on  such  minute  parts  of  Christian  experience?  We  think  them  of 
importance  to  correct  false  views  of  religion.  How  many  are  apt  to  suppose  that 
religion  consists  in  a  few  feelings  and  sentiments  of  a  religious  nature,  and  in  a  super- 
ficial change  of  the  mind  and  of  the  behaviour  1  But  religion  is  a  change  of  character  ; 
it  is  the  death  of  sin  in  the  soul,  commencing  with  a  painful  condict,  but  proceeding 
to  an  habitual  and  a  general  victory :  and  nothing  short  of  this  will  warrant  the  hope  of 
a  state  of  salvation.  (J.  Leifchild,  D.D.)  The  moral  history  of  the  inner  man  illus- 
trated by  this  passage : — At  the  outset  we  observe  two  remarkable  things.  1.  Two  dis- 
tinct forces  (ver.  15),  represented  as  if  they  were  two  Egos,  the  one  hating  what  the 
other  does,  the  one  willing  to  do  what  the  other  strenuously  refuses.  What  are 
these  ?  (1)  The  moral  desire,  going  ever  with  the  law  of  God — which  is  "  holy, 
just,  and  good."  (2)  The  animal  choice  following  ever  the  "law  of  sin  in  the 
members."  The  choice  and  the  desire,  which  ought  ever  to  be  one  in  the  one  being, 
are  in  man's  case  two.  All  are  bound  to  admit  the  existence  of  this  fact,  however 
they  may  differ  in  their  methods  of  explaining  it.  2.  The  development  of  these  two 
powers  in  the  same  person.  The  language  shows  a  kind  of  underlying  personality 
in  which  these  two  selves  live — "  the  wretched  man  "  (ver.  24) ;  *'  the  inner  noan," 
the  moral  core  of  our  nature — the  man  of  the  man.  That  there  should  be  an 
opposition  between  the  desire  and  the  choice  of  different  men  is  a  remarkable  fact. 
But  that  each  man  should  be  a  self-divided  kingdom,  a  self -created  battleground  on 
which  heaven  and  hell  fight  their  campaigns,  is  a  fact  as  wonderful  as  it  is  evident. 
Here  we  have  the  inner  man  —  I.  In  absolute  subjection  to  thb  flesh — 
thoroughly  animalised.  It  is  the  state  prior  to  the  advent  of  the  commandment 
(ver.  10),  when  "  sin  was  dead,"  and  the  man  fancied  himself  morally  "alive."  The 
Boul  of  infants,  of  course,  is  in  this  state.  It  is  the  creature  of  bodily  appetites  and 
desires.  It  seems  wise  and  kind  that  the  mind  should  for  a  time  lie  dormant  in 
these  frail  organisations — that  the  muscles,  limbs,  and  nerves  might  get  strength. 
But  the  language  is  evidently  intended  to  apply  to  adults.  And  are  not  millions 
walking  after  the  flesh,  and  living  to  the  flesh  ?  the  great  question  of  their  exis- 
tence being — "  What  shall  we  eat,  and  what  shall  we  drink,  and  wherewithal  shall 
we  be  clothed  ?  "  The  passage  teaches  that  the  state  of  the  soul  in  this  stage  of  its 
history  is — 1.  A  state  of  unconscious  sin.  "  Without  the  law  sin  was  dead."  It 
produced  no  compunction.  The  soul  was  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sin."  There  is 
no  moral  struggle  against  it.  Still,  though  sin  is  not  a  matter  of  consciousness,  it 
is  sin.  (1)  It  is  a  violation  of  our  constitution.  Were  we  like  the  brute,  without 
intellect  or  conscience,  it  would  be  proper  to  give  fuU  play  to  all  our  animal  impulses 
and  desires.  But  as  we  have  souls  connecting  us  with  moral  law,  whose  well-being 
consists  in  the  possession  of  virtue,  and  which  outlive  the  body,  to  allow  the  body 
a  mastery  over  the  soul  is  a  more  monstrous  anomaly  than  the  enthroning  of  a  ruth- 
less savage  as  the  monarch  of  a  civilised  people.  (2)  It  is  a  violation  of  the  design 
of  our  being.  Why  are  we  thus  organised  ?  That  our  spiritual  nature  might  be 
buried  in  the  material,  that  the  Divine  spark  might  be  extinguished,  or  even  clouded 
by  the  animal  nature  ?  No.  The  body  is  designed  as  a  temple  in  which  the  soul  is 
to  worship,  an  organ  by  which  the  soul  is  to  subordinate  the  material  universe  to 
its  service.  (3)  It  is  a  violation  of  Biblical  injunctions.  We  are  commanded  "  to 
mortify  the  flesh,"  &c.,  to  keep  in  subjection  our  bodies,  <fec.  2.  A  state  of  false  life. 
"  I  was  alive  without  the  law  once  " — without  the  understanding  of  the  law.  In  this 
fleshy  stage  of  being,  man  is  so  destitute  of  all  sense  of  responsibility,  and  all  con- 
■viotions  of  sin,  that  he  fancies  everything  right.  He  Uves,  it  is  true.  See  him 
revelling  in  pleasure,  or  bustling  In  business.  There  is  lite,  but  it  is  a  false  life  ; 
not  that  of  an  intelligent  moral  being,  made  to  act  to  the  glory  of  God.  It  is  the 
life  of  a  dying  man,  who  in  his  delirium  fancies  himself  strong  and  hale ;  it  is  the 
life  of  a  maniac  who  acts  under  the  impression  that  he  is  a  king.  Such,  then,  is 
the  state  of  man  in  the  first  stage  of  his  soul's  history.  II.  In  tiolent  batthnob 
wiTB  IBS  rhssa  (vers.  9-24).    In  the  first  stage  the  conscience  was  asleep.    Not  so 


CBAT.  TD.]  ROMANS.  tm 

now.  A  new  era  has  dawned — conscience  is  roused  from  her  long  slumbers,  and  a 
Boene  of  terrible  conflicts  has  commenced.  This  second  stage — 1.  Is  introduced  by 
a  spiritual  revelation  of  the  Divine  law.  "The  commandment  came."  The  law  of 
God  flashed  on  the  conscience  and  revetJed  the  true  moral  position.  The  bodily  eye 
would  never  be  developed  without  light.  It  would  of  course  be  a  perfect  organism, 
bat  it  would  not  yield  the  sensation  of  sight.  So  with  the  conscience.  It  is  a 
perfect  organism,  but  without  God's  law  it  will  never  see.  Bring  "  the  command- 
ment "  upon  it,  and  it  will  give  the  man  a  new  world.  When  the  beams  of  morning 
play  upon  the  eyeball,  the  slumbering  tribes  awake  ;  so  when  the  light  of  God's  law 
breaks  on  the  conscience,  the  man  awakes  to  his  true  condition.  The  revelation 
gives  him  three  horrific  feelings.  (1)  The  feeling  of  utter  wrongfulness.  He  looks 
within  and  finds  "no  good  thing."  He  feels  towards  the  commandment  as  Hamlet's 
wicked  mother  felt  towards  her  reproving  son — •'  Thou  turn'st  mine  eyes  into  mj- 
very  soul,"  &o.  (2)  The  feeling  of  miserable  slavery,  (a)  In  corporeal  slavery  the 
soul  may  rise  on  the  wings  of  devotion,  may  revel  in  thought:  but  here  the  spiritual 
faculties  are  manacled,  (b)  Death  puts  an  end  to  physical  and  political  slavery ; 
but  this  spiritual  slavery,  death  has  no  power  to  destroy.  (3)  The  feeling  of  moral 
death.  Sin  woke  into  consciousness,  and  "I  died."  The  law  was  "found  to  be 
unto  death."  It  "  slew  "  him.  What  is  the  feeling  of  the  criminal,  who  has  been 
cheering  his  doleful  state  with  the  delusive  hope  of  pardon,  when  the  executioner 
tells  him  the  fatal  hour  is  come  ?  What  is  the  feeling  of  the  young  man  whose 
blood  is  warm,  heart  buoyant,  and  hopes  high,  when  the  physician  tells  him  that  a 
fatal  plague  has  seized  him  7  The  feeling  of  death  1  What  is  it  ?  The  question 
produces  a  cold  shiver  throughout  the  frame.  But  the  feeling  of  death  in  relation 
to  the  soul,  what  can  be  more  horrific  ?  2.  Is  characterised  by  a  struggle  to  get 
deliverance  by  the  law.  In  the  first  stage  the  law  was  disobeyed,  but  then  there 
was  no  feeling  about  it ;  it  was  done  mechanically.  But  now  there  is  a  struggle  for  a 
deliverance  by  the  law.  (1)  And  this  is  futile,  because  the  revelation  of  the  law 
stimulates  the  tendency  to  disobey  it.  "  It  wrought  in  me  all  manner  of  concu- 
piscence." Without  the  law  sin  was  dead.  To  our  depraved  nature,  "  stolen  waters 
are  swset."  The  moment  a  thing  is  prohibited  our  desire  to  obtain  it  is  increased.  (2) 
And  the  struggle  is  painful,  because  whilst  the  law  stimulates  the  tendency  to  sin,  it 
deepens  the  impression  of  its  enormity.  It  is  when  couscience  approves  of  what  we 
practically  oppose  that  our  life  becomes  intolerable.  Thus  the  sinner  in  this  state  cries 
out,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am,"  &c.  This,-then,  is  the  second  stage  of  the  soul's 
history.  Some  reach  it  and  agonise  there  for  ever.  Cain,  Belshazzar,  Judas,  did. 
Some  reach  it  as  did  the  thousands  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  thence  pass  on  to 
the  peaceful  and  perfect  stage  of  being.  IIL  In  victorious  sovereignty  over  thk 
rLEBH.  "  I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  1.  The  deliverance  comes 
not  by  the  law.  The  law  brought  on  the  conflict.  The  law  exposed  the  disease,  but 
had  no  remedy ;  the  slavery,  but  it  could  not  emancipate  ;  the  danger,  but  it  could 
not  deliver.  2.  As  an  illustration  of  the  enormity  of  sin.  It  is  sin  that  has 
reduced  man  to  this  state  in  which  he  cries  out,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am," 
Ac.  3.  As  a  proof  of  the  glory  of  the  gospel.  Science,  education,  law,  the  utmost 
human  ingenuity  and  effort,  none  of  these  can  deUver  man.  The  gospel  alone  oan 
do  it,  has  done  it,  does  it,  and  will  do  it.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7-lS.  What  shall  we  say  then?    Is  the  law  sin?     God  forbid. — Ths 

law  : — I.  Its  nature — 1.  Moral  2.  Spiritual.  3.  Exemplified  by  the  particular 
commandment  quoted.  II.  Its  use — 1.  To  describe  the  nature.  2.  Detect  the 
presence.  3.  Eeveal  the  sinfulness  of  sin.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  law  vindicated 
and  commended  : — I.  The  law  vindicated.  The  apostle  had  aflSrmed  that  the  law 
constituted  that  to  be  sinful,  that  without  the  law  could  have  had  no  such 
character — nay,  that  the  law  caUed  forth  sinful  affections  which,  but  for  its  pro- 
vocation, might  have  lain  dormant.  And  he  seems  now  to  feel  as  if  this  might 
attach  the  same  sort  of  odiousness  to  the  law  that  is  attached  to  sin  itself.  This 
he  repels  with  the  utmost  vehemence.  1.  The  law  acts  as  a  discoverer  of  sin  (ver. 
7).  But  it  is  no  impeachment  against  the  evenness  of  a  ruler,  that  by  its  applica- 
tion you  can  discover  what  is  crooked.  On  the  contrary,  its  very  power  of  doing 
BO  proves  how  straight  it  is  in  itself.  The  light  may  reveal  an  impurity  which 
could  not  be  recognised  at  night ;  yet  who  would  ever  think  of  ascribing  to  light 
any  of  that  pollution  which  it  reveals.  It  were  indeed  strange  if  the  dissimilarity 
erf  two  things  should  lead  us  to  confound  them.  When  one  man  stands  before  yoa 
loll  of  moraJ  worth,  and  another  full  of  vice,  the  presence  of  the  first  may  generate 


570  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vu, 

a  keener  repagnancy  towards  the  second ;  and  this  not  surely  becaase  they  haye 
anything  in  common,  but  because  they  have  everything  in  wide  and  glaring 
opposition.  And  the  same  of  sin  and  of  the  law.  2.  The  law  aggravates  thia 
deformity  by  making  sin  more  actively  rebellious  (ver.  8).  The  law  not  oaring  the 
desire  of  man's  heart  towards  any  forbidden  indulgence,  this  desire  is  thereby 
exasperated.  The  man  who  sins  and  thinks  no  more  of  it  may  never  repeat  it  till 
its  outward  influences  have  again  oome  about  him,  it  may  be,  long  after;  but  the 
man  who  is  ever  brooding  under  a  sense  of  guilt  has  the  image  of  allurement 
present  to  his  thoughts  during  the  whole  time  when  they  are  not  present  to  his  senses. 
And  thus  the  law  turns  out  an  occasional  cause,  why  with  him  there  should  be 
both  a  more  intense  fermentation  of  the  sinful  appetites  than  with  another,  who  is 
reckless  of  law  and  undisturbed  by  its  accusing  voice.  And  what  adds  to  the  help- 
lessness of  this  calamity  is,  that  while  the  law  thus  gives  a  new  assailing  force  to 
his  enemies,  it  affords  no  force  of  resistance  to  the  man  himself.  Depriving  him  of 
the  inspiring  energy  that  is  In  hope,  it  gives  him  in  its  place  the  dread  and  the 
desperation  of  an  outlaw.  And  yet  the  law  here  is  not  in  fault.  It  is  sin  which  ia 
in  fault,  which,  at  sight  of  law,  strengthened  itself  the  more  in  its  own  character. 
3.  And  it  is  in  this  sense  only  that  the  law  is  the  occasion  of  death.  (1)  This  sore 
infliction  is  due  to  sin,  which  taketh  occasion  by  the  law.  The  very  company  of  a 
good  man  may  so  degrade  in  his  own  eyes  a  bad  man  as  that,  with  the  desperate 
feeling  of  an  outcast  he  might  henceforth  give  himself  over  to  the  full  riot  of 
villainy,  and  even  become  a  murderer;  and  so  entail  upon  himself  a  death  of 
vengeance.  But  who  would  ever  think  of  laying  either  his  own  blood,  or  the  blood  of 
his  victim,  to  the  door  of  him  whose  excellence  had  only  called  out  into  display  the 
hatefulness  of  his  own  character  ?  (2)  Then  again,  sin  slays  its  victim  by  a  process 
of  deception  of  which  the  law  is  made  the  instrument.  It  may  do  this  in  various 
ways — (a)  As  the  man's  remorse  broods  over  the  transgression,  so  sin  may  take 
advantage  by  leading  the  man  to  dwell  as  constantly  on  the  temptation  which  led 
to  it.  {b)  Or  it  may  represent  the  man  to  himself  as  the  doomed  victim  of  a  law 
that  can  never  be  appeased,  and  thus,  through  means  of  this  law,  may  drive  him 
onward  to  recklessness,  (c)  Or  it  may  soothe  him  by  setting  forth  the  many 
conformities  to  honesty,  or  temperance,  or  compassion,  or  courteousness,  by 
which  he  still  continues  to  do  the  law  honour,  {d)  It  may  even  turn  his  very 
compunction  into  a  matter  of  complacency,  and  persuade  him  that,  in  defect  of  his 
obedience  to  the  law,  he  at  least  gives  it  the  homage  of  his  regret.  4. "  For  without 
the  law  sin  is  dead  "  (ver.  8) — dead  in  respect  of  all  power  to  condemn,  and  in 
respect  of  its  inability  to  stir  up  the  alarms  of  condemnation  :  and  as  to  its  power 
of  seducing  or  enslaving  you  by  means  of  a  remorse  or  terror.  And  in  the  next 
verse  Paul  is  visited  with  the  remembrance  of  his  own  former  state,  when,  ignorant 
as  he  was  of  the  exceeding  breadth  of  God's  commandment,  he  looked  forward  to 
a  life  of  favour  here  and  of  blessedness  hereafter,  on  the  strength  of  his  many  out- 
ward and  literal  observations.  He  was  thus  alive  without  the  law  once ;  and  it  was 
not  till  the  commandment  came — not  till  he  was  made  to  see  what  its  lofty  demands 
were,  and  what  his  wretched  deflcienoies  therefrom,  that  sin  revived  in  him,  and 
dislodged  him  from  his  proud  security,  and  made  him  see  that,  instead  of  a 
victorious  claimant  for  the  rewards  of  the  law,  he  was  the  victim  of  its  penalties. 
This  state  (see  also  ver.  9)  is  the  prevalent  state  of  the  world.  Men  live  in  tolerable 
comfort  and  security  because  dead  to  the  terrifying  menaces  of  the  law.  It  is 
because  the  sinner  is  thus  without  the  law  that  he  sees  not  the  danger  of  his  con- 
dition. And  thus  it  is  that  it  is  so  highly  important  when  the  Spirit  lends  His 
efficacy  to  the  Divine  law — when  he  thereby  arouses  the  careless  sinner  out  of  his 
lethargies,  and  persuades  him  to  flee  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  him.  II. 
The  law  commended.  The  apostle  having  cleared  the  law  from  all  charge  of 
odiousness,  now  renders  it  the  positive  homage  which  was  due  to  its  real  character — 
as  the  representation  of  all  moral  excellence.  If  the  law  be  the  occasion  of  death, 
or  of  more  feU  depravity,  it  is  not  because  of  any  evil  that  is  in  its  character,  which 
is  holy  and  just  and  good  (ver.  12).  This  may  lead  to  the  solution  of  a  question  by 
which  the  legal  heart  of  man  often  feels  itself  exercised.  Why  should  the  law, 
that  is  now  deposed  from  its  ancient  office  of  minister  unto  life  to  that  of  minister 
unto  death,  still  be  kept  up  in  authority,  and  obedience  to  it  be  as  strenuously 
required  ?  In  order  that  God  should  will  our  obedience  to  the  law,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  give  to  it  the  legal  importance  and  efficacy  that  it  had  under  the  old 
dispensation.  At  the  outset  of  our  present  system,  the  Spirit  of  God  moving  upon 
ohaoB  educed  the  loveliest  forms  of  hill  and  dale  and  mighty  ocean  ana  waving 


esAP.  vn.]  ROMANS.  571 

forests,  and  all  that  richness  of  bloom  and  verdure  which  serves  to  dress  the  land- 
scapes of  nature.  And  it  is  said  that  God  saw  everything  to  be  good.  Now  there 
was  no  legality  in  this  process.  The  ornaments  of  a  flower,  or  tree,  or  the  mag- 
nificence of  outspread  scenery,  cannot  be  the  offerings  by  which  inanimate  matter 
purchases  the  smile  of  the  Divinity.  The  Almighty  Artist  loves  to  behold  the  fair 
composition  that  He  Himself  has  made ;  and  wills  each  of  His  works  to  be  perfect 
in  its  kind.  And  the  same  of  the  moral  taste  of  the  Godhead.  He  loves  what  is 
wise  and  holy  and  just  and  good  in  the  world  of  mind ;  and  with  a  far  higher 
affection.  And  the  office  of  His  Spirit  is  to  evolve  this  beauteous  exhibition  out  of 
the  chaos  of  ruined  humanity.  And  to  forward  this  process  it  is  not  necessary 
that  man  be  stimulated  to  exertion  by  the  motives  of  legalism.  All  that  is  necessary 
is  submission  to  the  transforming  operations  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  willingness 
to  follow  His  impulses.  And  must  God,  ere  He  can  gratify  His  relish  for  the 
higher  beauties  of  morality  and  of  mind,  first  have  to  make  a  bargain  about  it  with 
His  creatures  ?  So,  then,  though  the  old  relationship  between  you  and  the  law  is 
dissolved,  still  it  is  this  very  law  with  the  requirements  of  which  you  are  to  busy 
yourselves  in  this  world ;  and  with  the  graces  and  accomplishments  of  which  you 
must  appear  invested  before  Christ  at  the  judgment-seat.  It  was  written  first  on 
tables  of  stone,  and  the  process  was  then  that  yon  should  fulfil  its  requisitions  as 
yoor  task,  and  be  paid  with  heaven  as  a  reward.  It  is  now  written  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  on  the  tablets  of  your  heart ;  and  the  process  is  now  that  you  are  made  to 
delight  in  it  after  the  inward  man.  With  gold  you  may  purchase  a  privilege  or 
adorn  your  person.  You  may  not  be  able  to  purchase  the  king's  favour  with  it ; 
but  he  may  grant  you  his  favour,  and  when  he  requires  your  appearance  before 
him,  it  is  stUl  in  gold  he  may  require  you  to  be  invested.  And  thus  of  the  law.  It 
is  not  by  your  own  righteous  conformity  thereto  that  you  purchase  God's  favour ; 
for  this  has  been  already  purchased  by  the  pure  gold  of  the  Saviour's  righteousness, 
and  is  presented  to  all  who  believe  on  Him.  But  still  it  is  with  your  own  personal 
righteousness  that  you  must  be  adorned.  (T.  Chalmert,  D.D.)  The  excellence  of 
the  law  : — I.  It  exposes  sim.  1.  Its  nature.  2.  Its  existence  in  the  heart.  3.  Its 
activity  (vers.  7,  8).  II.  It  condemns  the  sinneb.  1.  Destroys  his  self-com- 
placenoy.  2.  Awakens  conscience.  3.  Pronounces  sentence  of  death  (vers.  9,  10). 
in.  Demonbtbates  its  own  pertection.  1.  By  the  display  of  its  own  nature, 
holy,  just,  good.  2.  By  exhibiting  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.  (J.  Lyth,  D.  D.) 
Nay,  I  had  not  known  sin  but  by  the  la.w.— Revelation  of  sin  by  the  law  : — 
Sin  lies  concealed  in  man,  however  fair  and  refined  he  may  appear  to  the  world, 
just  as  even  in  ice  there  exists  hundreds  of  degrees  of  latent  heat.  The  argument 
is  that  the  law  brings  to  light  sin,  and  is  not  its  parent  nor  in  any  sense  responsible 
for  its  existence,  as  it  is  not  its  physician  nor  capable  of  removing  its  guilt  and 
remedying  its  effects  (chap.  iii.  20).  The  law  does  not  in  any  sense  create  or  cause 
sin  by  exerting  any  deleterious  influence,  as  the  frost,  by  withdrawing  the  heat 
from  water,  freezes  it.  Nay,  the  function  of  the  law  is  to  reveal  and  expose  sin, 
as  the  office  of  the  sun  is  to  bring  to  light  the  dust  and  dirt  which  existed,  but 
escaped  notice  before  its  rays  entered  the  apartment.  (C.  Neil,  M.A.)  The  merci- 
fulness of  the  law  in  the  revelation  of  sin : — Just  as  a  mirror  is  not  an  enemy  to  the 
ugly  man,  because  it  shows  him  his  very  self  in  all  his  ugliness,  and  just  as  a 
medical  man  is  not  an  enemy  to  the  sick  man,  because  he  shows  him  his  sickness, 
for  the  medical  man  is  not  the  cause  of  the  sickness  nor  is  the  mirror  the  cause  of 
the  ugliness,  so  God  is  not  the  cause  of  the  sickness  of  our  sin  or  its  ugliness, 
because  He  shows  it  to  us  in  the  mirror  of  His  Word  and  by  the  Physician  Christ, 
who  came  to  show  us  our  sins  and  to  heal  them  for  us.  (T.  H.  Leary,  D.C.L.)  Sin 
aroused  by  the  law  : — A  contented  citizen  of  Milan,  who  had  never  passed  beyond  its 
walls  during  the  course  of  sixty  years,  being  ordered  by  the  governor  not  to  stir  beyond 
its  gates,  became  immediately  miserable,  and  felt  so  powerful  an  inclination  to  do 
that  which  he  had  so  long  contentedly  neglected,  that  on  his  application  for  a 
release  from  this  restraint  being  refused,  he  became  quite  melancholy,  and  at  last 
died  of  grief.  How  well  this  illustrates  the  apostle's  confession  that  he  had  not 
known  lust,  unless  the  law  had  said  unto  him,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  1  "  "  Sin," 
saith  he,  "taking  occasion  by  the  commandment,  wrought  in  me  all  manner  of 
concupiscence."  Evil  often  sleeps  in  the  soul,  until  the  holy  command  of  God  ia 
discovered,  and  then  the  enmity  of  the  carnal  mind  rouses  itself  to  oppose  in  every 
way  the  will  of  God.  "  Without  the  law,"  says  Paul,  '•  sin  was  dead."  How  vain  to 
hope  for  salvation  from  the  law,  when  through  the  perversity  of  sin  it  provokes 
our  evil  hearts  to  rebellion,  and  works  in  us  neither  repentance  nor  love.    (<7.  fi. 


571  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHir.  m. 

Spurgeon.)  The  conviction  of  tin : — I.  What  XT  ikolcdsb.  1.  Knowledge  of  ain. 
2.  Consciousness  of  it.  8.  Sense  of  its  demerit  and  punishment.  II.  How  n  is 
PBODUOBD^by  the  law,  which — 1.  Detects  ;  2.  Exposes  ;  3.  Condemns  it.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  I  had  not  known  luat,  except  the  law  had  said,  Thou  shalt  not  covet — 
Paul's  early  experience  : — In  this  picture  of  his  inner  life  Paul  gives  us,  without 
intending  it,  a  very  high  idea  of  the  purity  of  his  life  as  a  child  and  a  young  man. 
He  might,  when  confronted  with  the  nine  commaDdments,  have  to  the  letter 
claimed  for  himself  the  verdict,  Not  guilty,  like  the  young  man  who  said  to  Jesus, 
"  All  these  things  have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up."  But  the  tenth  commandment 
cut  short  all  this  self-righteousness,  and  under  this  ray  of  the  Divine  holiness  he 
was  compelled  to  pass  sentence  of  condemnation.  Thus  there  was  wrought  in  him, 
Pharisee  though  he  was,  without  his  suspecting  it,  a  profound  separation  from 
ordinary  Pharisaism,  and  a  moral  preparation  which  was  to  lead  him  to  Christ  and 
His  righteousness.  To  this  so  mournful  discovery  was  added  {Se  ver.  8)  by  and 
by  a  second  and  more  painful  experience.  (Prof.  Godet.)  Sin  taking  occasloB 
by  the  commandment,  wrought  In  me  all  manner  of  concupiscence. — Sin  and  iu 
work  in  relation  to  the  law  : — I.  Sin.  Indwelling  sin  ;  depravity  inherent  in  fallen 
humanity,  personified  as  something  living  and  intelligent.  II.  Its  occasion — the 
law,  which  shows  it  in  its  true  character.  Sin  is  in  its  nature  opposition  to  God 
and  His  law  (chap.  viii.  7).  The  presence  of  the  law,  therefore,  is  the  occasion  foi 
ein  to  act.  It  is  to  sin  as  water  to  hydrophobia.  Corruption  arouses  itself  to  resist 
the  law  which  opposes  it.  Sick  men  and  children  often  desire  what  is  forbidden, 
because  it  is  so.  The  law  and  sin  act  on  each  other  as  an  acid  and  an  alkali.  Th« 
effect  of  the  contact  is  like  the  effervescence  of  the  mixture.  II.  lis  wobe.  1. 
"  Wrought,"  produced,  called  into  operation.  Sin  is  an  active  principle  stirring  up 
evil  thoughts,  <&c.  Its  nature  is  to  foam  against  the  law  as  water  against  a  barrier. 
2.  "  In  me."  Sin's  activity  viewed  as  internal,  not  external.  3.  "  All  manner  " — 
both  as  to  kind  and  degree.  The  heart  is  like  a  neglected  garden  full  of  all  sorts 
of  weeds.  Lust  may  shrink  into  a  dwarf  or  swell  into  a  giant.  Covetousness  and 
lust  are  hydras,  monsters  with  many  heads.  4.  "  Of  concupiscence."  Inordinate 
sinful  desire.  From  sin  springs  lust,  as  the  stream  from  the  fountain.  Evil  desire 
not  restrained  brings  forth  sin  in  the  act  (James  i.  15).  Already  in  the  heart  it  is 
excited  by  the  law  which  forbids  it.  Weeds  seeming  dead  in  winter  shoot  up 
in  the  warmth  of  spring.  Vipers  torpid  in  the  cold  are  excited  to  life  and  action  by 
the  fire.  Like  a  revived  viper,  sin  hisses  against  the  law  which  disturbs  it.  (T. 
Eobinton,  D.D.)  The  law  irritates  sin: — A  rock,  flung  into  the  bed  of  some 
headlong  stream,  would  not  arrest  the  stream,  but  only  cause  it,  which  ran  swiftly 
yet  silently  before,  now  furiously  to  foam  and  fret  round  the  obstacle  which  it  found 
in  its  path.  {Abp.  Trench.)  Restraint  quickens: — The  child  is  often  most 
strongly  tempted  to  open  gates  which  have  been  specially  interdicted.  If  nothing 
had  been  said  about  them,  probably  he  would  not  have  cared  to  open  them.  The 
law  rouses  sin: — Sin  full-grown  defies  law  because  it  is  a  law:  resists  restraint 
because  it  is  restraint ;  contests  authority  with  God  because  He  is  God.  Says  Gain, 
as  depicted  by  Lord  Byron  in  colloquy  with  Lucifer :  "  I  bend  to  neither  God  nor 
thee."  Lord  Byron  knew  whereof  he  affirmed.  That  is  the  legitimate  heroism  of 
Bin.  Sin  runs  to  passion:  passion  to  tumult  in  character:  and  a  tumultuous 
character  tends  to  tempests  and  explosions,  which  scorn  secrecies  and  disguises. 
Then  the  whole  man  comes  to  light.  He  sees  himself,  and  others  see  him,  as  he 
is  in  God's  sight.  Those  solemn  imperatives  and  their  awful  responses :  ' '  Thou 
shalt  not " — "  I  will " ;  *•  Thou  shalt "— "  I  will  not  "—make  up,  then,  all  that  the 
man  knows  of  intercourse  with  God.  This  is  sin,  in  the  ultimate  and  finished  type 
of  it.  This  it  what  it  grows  to  in  every  sinner,  if  unchecked  by  the  grace  of  God. 
Every  man  unredeemed  becomes  a  demon  in  eternity.  {Austin  Phelps.)  For 
without  the  law  sin  was  dead. — Unawakened: — I.  Without  the  law — in  its 
appUcation  to  the  conscience,  or  in  the  knowledge  of  its  spirituality  and 
extent.  It  is  easy  to  have  the  law  and  yet  to  be  without  it,  which  is  the 
case  of  most.  An  unawakened  man  has  the  law  in  his  hand ;  he  reads  it : 
an  awakened  man  has  it  in  his  conscience ;  he  feels  it :  a  regenerate  man 
has  it  in  his  heart ;  he  loves  it.  II.  Sin  was  dead — 1.  As  to  any  conscious- 
cess  of  its  existence.  2.  Comparatively  as  to  its  activity.  3.  As  to  any  knowledge 
of  its  true  character  as  opposed  to  God's  law.  The  strong  man  armed  keeps  hia 
house  and  goods  in  peace.  The  heart's  opposition  to  the  law  only  bound  by  its 
presence.  Sin  dead,  and  put  to  death,  two  different  things;  it  is  deatd  in  the 
iwawaked,  but  put  to  death  in  the  believer.    Sin  never  has  more  power  over  a  man 


OBir.  vn.]  ROMANS.  67t 

than  when  dead  in  him,  is  never  less  dead  than  when  it  appears  or  is  felt  to  ba 
80.  It  has  to  be  aroused  into  life  before  it  is  actnally  put  to  death.  Dead  in  tha 
boqI,  it  shows  that  the  soul  is  dead  in  sin.  Sin  was  alive  in  the  Publican,  but  dead 
in  the  Pharisee  (Luke  zviii.  10-14).  It  must  be  roused  to  life  and  slain  here,  or 
live  for  ever  hereafter.  {T.  Eobinson,  D.D.)  For  I  wan  alive  without  the  law 
once;  but  when  the  commandment  came,  sin  revived,  and  I  died. — The  sinner 
without  and  under  the  law  : — I.  Withodt  the  law.  1.  Alive.  2.  But  sin  is  dead. 
n.  Undbb  the  law.  1.  Dead.  2.  But  sin  lives.  III.  The  rationale  of  thb 
OHANOE.  1.  A  change  not  of  moral  condition  but  of  moral  consciousness.  2. 
Effected  by  the  revelation  of  the  law.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Paul  unthout  and  under 
the  law  : — I  thought  all  was  well  with  me.  Was  I  not  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews  7 
Was  I  not  a  Pharisee  ?  Was  I  not  strict  and  zealous  T  But  all  that  time  I  was  in 
reality  "  without  the  law."  I  knew  it  then  in  the  letter  only,  not  in  its  spirit  and 
power.  But  "  when  the  commandment  came,"  when  it  was  brought  home  to  my 
conscience,  when  my  eyes  were  opened,  then,  '*  sin  revived,"  gained  a  new 
vitahty,  sprang  into  life  as  a  serpent  that  had  been  frozen  and  was  thawed.  I  felt 
it  in  all  its  power ;  I  knew  it  in  its  guilt  and  condemnation ;  I  was  as  one  who 
had  received  a  death-blow;  I  despaired,  my  heart  died  within  me.  {F,  Bourdillon.) 
Conscience  quickened  by  the  law : — 1.  Paul  had  lived  with  a  conscience,  but  one 
that  was  not  rightly  instructed.  He  had  kept  his  conscience  on  his  side,  though 
he  was  liviug  wickedly.  But  there  came  a  time  of  revelation  in  which  his  con- 
science took  sides  against  him.  And  the  result  was  that  right  before  him  rose  his 
whole  lifetime  of  sin,  by  which,  as  it  rushed  upon  him,  he  was  swept  away  slain. 
"  I  used,  before  I  knew  what  God's  true  light  was,  to  be  active  and  complacent ; 
but  when  that  spiritual  law  was  revealed  to  me,  all  my  life  seemed  like  the  unfold- 
ing  of  a  voluminous  history  of  transgression.  And  I  fell  down  before  the  vision  as 
one  dead."  2.  The  difference  between  a  man  when  his  conscience  is  energised 
and  when  his  conscience  is  torpid  is  a  difference  as  great  as  that  between  a  man 
that  is  dead  and  a  man  that  is  alive  and  excited  to  the  utmost  tension  of  endeavour. 
8.  Excitement  is  itself  a  matter  of  prejudice  ;  but  no  one  objects  if  it  is  the  excite- 
ment of  enterprise ;  if  it  is  physical  or  civic  excitement.  When  it  becomes  moral, 
then  men  begin  to  fear  wild-fires  and  fanaticisms.  4.  Now  excitemeut  is  only 
another  name  for  vitality.  Stones  have  no  excitability.  The  vegetables  rank 
higher,  because  they  are  susceptible  of  excitement,  although  they  cannot  develop 
it  themselves.  An  animal  ranks  higher  than  a  vegetable,  because  it  has  the  power 
of  receiving  and  developing  excitability.  Man  is  the  highest ;  the  capacity  of 
excitability  marks  his  position  in  the  scale  of  being.  6.  Now,  when  excitement  is 
ont  of  all  proportion  to  the  importance  of  the  objects  presented,  or  the  motive 
powers,  then  there  is  an  impropriety  in  it ;  and  this  prejudice  against  it  has  arisen 
from  its  abuse.  There  have  been  moral  excitements  that  are  disastrous ;  but 
these  are  effects  of  a  prior  cause,  namely,  absence  of  wholesome  excitement 
before.  You  will  find  frequently  where  Churches  are  dead  that  there  will  come  a 
period  of  fanatical  revival  influence.  It  is  reaction,  the  violent  attempt  of  life  to 
reinstate  itself.     But  at  its  worst  this  is  far  better  than  death.      I.  Kationaii 

MOBAL  excitement  LEADS  MEN  TO  APPLY  TO  THEIE  LIFE  AND  CONDUCT  THE  ONLT 
TBDE   STANDABD,   NAMELY,   THAT   OF   RIGHT  AND   WRONO,  Upon   a   rCVCaled  groUnd.      1. 

Ordinarily,  men  judge  their  conduct  by  lower  standards.  Most  men  judge  of  what 
they  are  by  the  relations  of  their  conduct  to  pleasure  and  pain,  profit  and  loss; 
that  is,  by  the  law  of  interest.  Bat  if  that  is  all,  how  mean  it  is  !  Men  are  apt  to 
measure  themselves  as  they  stand  related  to  favour.  That  is,  they  make  others' 
opinions  of  them  the  mirror  in  which  to  look  upon  their  own  faces.  Now,  it  is 
true  that  a  man's  reputation  is  apt  to  follow  closely  upon  his  character,  bat  there 
is  an  interval  between  that  men  skip.  Men  measure  themselves  by  the  law  of 
influence,  and  by  ambitious  aspirations.  Then  public  sentiment,  fashions,  customs, 
the  laws  of  the  community,  are  employed  by  men  to  give  themselves  a  conception 
of  what  they  are.  2.  Now  not  one  of  these  measurings  is  adequate.  No  man 
knows  what  he  is  that  has  only  measured  himself  by  them.  A  man  desires  to 
know  what  he  is  as  a  man,  and  he  calls  in  his  tailor.  He  only  judges  him  as  a 
man  with  clothes.  He  calls  in  his  shoemaker.  He  only  judges  him  with  relation 
to  shoes.  He  calls  in  the  surgeon  and  the  physician,  and  they,  having  examined 
him  in  every  part,  pronounce  him  sound  and  healthy.  Is  there  nothing  more  ? 
Yes,  there  are  mental  organs.  Then  call  in  the  psychologist.  Has  the  man  yet 
eome  to  a  knowledge  of  what  he  is  ?  Is  there  nothing  to  be  conceived  of  as  moral 
principle?     Is  there  nothing   called   manhood,  in  distinction  from  the  animal 


674  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  m. 

organism,  Ao.  ?  3.  We  need  to  go  higher  before  we  can  consider  this  case  settled. 
It  mnst  be  submitted  to  the  chief  justice  sitting  in  the  court  of  the  soul.  Conscience 
calls  in  review  all  these  pre-judgments ;  not  because  they  are  wrong  in  themselves, 
but  because  they  are  inadequate.  Conscience  introduces  the  laws  of  God.  Men 
are  called  to  form  a  judgment  of  what  they  are,  not  so  much  from  what  they  are  to 
society  as  from  what  they  are  in  the  sight  of  God.  You  never  can  get  tms  jadg< 
ment  except  where  conscience  has  been  illuminated  by  the  Divine  Spirit.  I  am 
only  measured  when  the  soul  is  measured  ;  and  only  can  it  be  measured  when  it  it 
pot  opon  the  sphere  of  the  eternal  world,  and  upon  the  law  of  God.  This  is  the 
first  great  element  that  enters  into  moral  excitability.    II.  Ak  xmobeaskd  semsi. 

BIUIT   OF  OONSCIENCK   IS   ONE    07  THE   HOST    lUPOBTANT  BESULTS   OV  OENEBil.   HOBAIi 

EXCITEMENT.  1.  The  not  using  of  one's  conscience  works  lethargy  and  blindness. 
But  when  the  conscience  is  fired  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  it  awakes  and  glows.  Yoa 
know  what  it  is  to  have  your  hand  numb ;  and  what  it  is  to  have  it  acutely 
sensitive.  You  know  what  it  is  to  have  the  eye  blurred,  and  what  it  is  to  have  it 
clear.  So  conscience  may  exist  in  a  state  in  which  things  pass  before  it,  and  it 
does  not  see  them ;  but  lies  at  the  door  like  a  watch-dog  that  is  asleep,  past  which 
goes  the  robber  into  the  house  and  commits  his  depredations  undisturbed.  It  is  a 
great  thing  for  a  man  to  have  a  conscience  that  rouses  him  up  and  makes  him 
more  and  more  sensitive ;  but  just  as  soon  as  the  conscience  becomes  sensitive,  it 
brings  a  man's  sins  to  a  more  solemn  account  than  before.  2.  There  are  many 
things  that  we  adjudge  to  be  sinful.  A  man  says,  "  Profanity  or  dishonesty  is 
sinful " ;  but,  after  all,  he  has  a  good-natured  way  of  dealing  with  these  things.  If 
men  were  as  good-natured  to  their  enemies  as  they  are  to  their  own  sins,  there 
would  be  much  less  conflict  in  the  world.  A  man  had  a  huge  rock  in  his  field.  He 
did  not  want  to  waste  time  to  remove  it ;  he  planted  ivy,  and  roses,  and  honey- 
suckles about  it,  to  cover  it  up ;  and  he  invited  people  to  come  and  see  how  beautiful 
it  is.  A  certain  part  of  his  farm  was  low,  moist,  and  disagreeable ;  and,  instead  of 
draining  it,  he  planted  mosses,  ferns,  rhododendrons,  &c.,  there;  and  now  he 
regards  that  as  one  of  the  handsomest  parts  of  his  farm.  And  men  treat  their 
faults  so.  Here  is  a  man  that  has  a  hard  and  ill  temper ;  but  he  has  planted  all 
about  it  ivy  and  roses  and  honeysuckles.  He  thinks  he  is  a  better  man  because 
all  his  imperfections  are  hidden  from  his  sight.  Here  is  a  man  that  does  not 
drain  his  swamps  of  evil  courses,  but  covers  them  over  with  mosses  and  various 
plants,  and  thinks  he  is  better  because  he  is  more  beauteous  in  his  own  eyes.  Men 
lose  their  conviction  of  the  hatefulness  of  sins,  they  get  so  used  to  them.  But  there 
come  times  when  God  makes  sin  in  these  respects  appear  so  sinful  that  they 
tremble  at  it.  You  know  how  bonds  go  up.  To-day  they  are  worth  a  hundred; 
to-morrow  they  are  a  hundred  and  five.  And  then  when  it  is  understood  that 
they  are  going  up,  they  begin  to  rush ;  and  in  the  course  of  a  few  months  they 
have  got  up  to  two  or  three  hundred.  When  a  man  is  running  up  values  on  his 
sins,  they  do  not  go  down  again.  Under  the  power  of  an  illuminated  conscience 
a  man  says,  first,  "  Why,  sin  is  sinful  I  "  Next,  "  It  is  very  sinful!  "  Next,  ♦'  It 
is  exceedingly  sinful  1 "  Next,  "  It  is  damnably  sinful  1 "  3.  The  next  fact  of  this 
reviving  of  the  conscience  is  that  it  brings  into  the  category  of  sins  a  thousand 
things  that  before  we  never  have  called  such.  When  gold  comes  into  the  assay 
office,  they  treat  it  as  we  do  not  treat  ourselves.  It  is  carefully  weighed,  and 
during  the  process  it  is  worked  up  to  the  very  last  particle.  Yea,  the  very  sweep- 
ings of  the  floor  are  gathered  and  assayed  again.  Now  men  throw  in  their  conduct 
in  bulk,  and  do  not  care  for  the  sweepings ;  and  vastly  the  greatest  portion  of  it 
comes  out  without  being  brought  to  any  test.  But  it  is  to  the  last  degree  important 
that  there  should  come  periods  in  which  men  are  obliged  to  bring  into  the  category 
of  sins  those  practices  which  otherwise  they  would  call  their  faults,  or  weaknesses. 
4.  In  New  York  there  is  a  board  of  health.  And  how  much  dirt  there  was  found 
the  moment  there  was  an  authority  to  make  men  look  for  it.  It  is  not  half  as  dirty 
as  it  was  a  little  while  ago ;  but  the  dirt  is  more  apparent,  because  it  is  stirred 
up.  Only  give  a  clearer  sense  of  what  is  right  to  men,  and  they  will  instantly  see 
in  themselves  much  wrong  that  they  have  not  before  discovered.  The  probability 
is  that  now,  in  New  York,  there  is  more  apprehension  of  danger  from  a  want  of 
cleanliness  than  there  has  been  during  the  last  twenty-five  years  put  together. 
This  has  arisen  from  the  iucreased  sensibiUty  of  men  on  the  subject,  and  the 
appUcation  of  a  higher  test  to  it.  There  is  special  need  of  an  awakened  conscience 
to  bring  to  light  these  things,  that  are  not  less  dangerous  because  men  do  not  know 
of  them,  but  all  the  more  dangerous.    III.  An  awakened  conscisnos  oamnoz  fqid 


CBir.  m.]  ROMANS,  (75 

rsAOB  nf  ANT  MEBB  OBKDisNcs.  There  ia  this  benefit — that  when  ODoe  a  man'i 
ooDsoience  has  begun  to  discriminate,  he  naturally  betakes  himself  to  reformation 
to  satisfy  his  conscience.  Bat  his  conscience  becomes  exacting  faster  than  he  can 
learn  how  to  perform.  So  that  the  more  he  does,  the  less  he  is  satisfied.  Here 
stands  an  old  house,  that  has  been  a  hundred  years  without  repair.  The  old 
master  dies,  and  a  new  man  comes  in.  He  sends  for  the  architect,  who  commences 
searching,  and  it  is  found  that  there  is  decay  all  through  the  building.  Fart  leads 
to  part,  and  disclosure  to  disclosure,  and  decay  to  decay ;  and  it  seems  as  though 
it  were  almost  impossible  ever  to  make  it  good.  That  is  but  a  faint  emblem  of  the 
work  of  reformation  in  the  human  soul.  A  house  offers  no  resistance  to  his 
attempts  to  renovate  it ;  but  the  human  disposition  is  an  ever-fertile,  ever-growiug, 
ever-recreating  centre.  And  a  man  is  conscious  that  the  more  he  tries  to  regulate 
it,  the  harder  it  is  to  do  it.  A  man  who  has  been  drinking  all  his  life,  and  lost  his 
name  and  his  business,  and  nearly  ruined  his  family,  attempts  to  reform.  After  a 
month  he  says,  "  I  never  had  so  much  trouble  in  all  my  experience.  It  has  seemed 
as  though  everything  went  against  me,  and  was  determined  that  I  should  not  lead 
a  good  life,  and  I  am  almost  in  despair."  Oh,  yes.  Laws  are  like  fortifications. 
They  are  meant  to  protect  all  that  are  inside,  and  repel  all  that  are  outside ;  and, 
if  a  man  gets  outside  and  attempts  to  come  back,  he  must  do  it  against  the  cross- 
fire of  the  garrison.  No  man  departs  from  the  path  of  rectitude  that,  when  hr 
oomes  back,  does  not  come  back  by  the  hardest.  There  is  the  experience  of  the 
apostle,  "  When  I  would  do  good,  evil  was  with  me.  I  perceived  that  the  law  was 
holy  and  just  and  good,  and  I  approved  it  in  the  inward  man.  But  the  more  1 
straggled  to  obey  it  the  worse  I  was.  "  O  wretched  man  that  I  am,"  &o.  Then 
rose  op  before  him  that  which  must  rise  up  as  the  ground  of  comfort  in  every 
awakened  soul — namely,  Jesus  Christ.  IV.  Thb  only  refuob  or  an  kxcited  con- 
■oncNCK,  as  a  judge  and  schoolmaster,  must  bb  to  brino  thb  bodij  to  Christ.  A 
child  is  taken  by  a  teacher  out  of  the  street,  wretchedly  clad,  bad  in  behaviour,  and 
wofally  ignorant.  The  old  nature  is  strong.  Still  he  begins  to  study  a  little, 
while  he  plays  more.  He  is  fractious,  and  comes  to  grief  every  day  ;  but  by  and 
by  he  comes  to  that  point  where  he  feels  himself  to  be  a  bad  scholar,  and  in  a  flood 
of  tears  goes  to  the  teacher  and  says,  "  It  is  useless  to  try  and  make  anything  out 
of  me,  I  am  so  bad."  The  teacher  puts  his  arm  round  the  child,  and  says, 
"Thomas,  if  I  can  bear  with  you,  can  you  with  me?  I  know  how  bad  yon  have 
been.  Bat  I  love  yon;  and  I  will  give  you  time,  and  you  shall  not  be  rained." 
Cannot  you  conceive  that,  ander  such  circumstances,  there  might  spring  up  in  the 
heart  of  the  child  an  intense  feeling  of  gratitude.  And  so  the  teacher  carries  the 
child  from  day  to  day.  Now  this  is  just  the  work  that  God's  great  heart  does  for 
men.  And  where  there  is  a  man  that  has  a  rigorous  conscience,  let  him  take 
refuge  with  one  that  says,  "  Shift  the  judgment-seat.  I  will  not  judge  you  by  the 
law  of  justice,  but  by  the  law  of  love  and  of  patience."  By  faith  and  love  in  Christ 
Jesus  we  may  find  rest.  {H.  Ward  Beeeher.)  Place  of  the  law  in  $alvation  of 
titmert : — 1.  Salvation  has  been  provided ;  the  world's  chief  need  now  is  a  sense  of 
sin.  Food  is  not  wanting,  but  hunger.  There  is  healing  balm ;  where  are  the 
broken  hearts  ?  Christ's  work  is  complete ;  we  need  that  of  the  Spirit.  2.  This 
chapter  is  the  history  of  a  holy  war,  and  in  the  text  yoa  have  a  bird's-eye  view  of 
the  whole  campaign.  In  the  books  of  Moses  you  may  find  the  same  three  things 
it  contains.  (1)  In  Egypt  Israel  were  slaves,  yet  were  satisfied  with  its  carnal 
comforts.  This  is  like  Paul's  first  life,  with  which  he  was  quite  satisfied,  "  I  was 
alive,"  &o.  (2)  The  exodus,  comprehending  the  Bed  Sea,  the  perils  of  the  wilder- 
ness, and  the  passage  of  Jordan,  correspond  to  Paul's  escape,  "  The  commandment 
oame,"  &o.  (3)  The  promised  land,  with  its  plenty,  liberty,  and  worship,  corre- 
sponds to  Paul's  new  life  in  the  kingdom  of  God.    We  have  here — I.  A  life  which 

A   HAN  ENJOYS  IN   AND   OF  HIMSELF  BEFORE   HE   KNOWS   GOD.      *'  I  WaS  alivo   without 

the  law  once."  1.  The  natural  state  of  fallen  man  is  here  called  life,  and  else- 
where death.  In  God's  sight  it  is  death ;  in  man's  imagination  life.  Paul  gives 
his  view  of  his  unconverted  state  when  he  was  in  it.  Ask  him  now  about  it,  and 
he  will  declare,  "  I  was  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  2.  But  how  could  he  be  so 
blind  as  to  count  himself  just  with  God  while  running  counter  to  the  law  ?  The 
explanation  is,  he  was  alive  "  without  the  law."  He  could  not  have  lived  vnth  it. 
Why  have  men  so  mach  peace  in  sin?  Because  they  live  without  God's  law. 
Daring  speculators  cook  accounts  in  order  to  stave  off  the  evil  day.  Bolder  cheai.3 
modify  the  law  of  God,  that  its  incoming  may  not  disturb  their  repose.  There  is  a 
malformation  in  some  member  of  your  body,  and  you  are  ordered  to  wear  an 


07ft  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHW.  m, 

instrnment  to  bring  it  back  to  a  normal  condition.  Dreading  the  pain  of  the 
anticipated  operation,  you  secretly  take  a  cast  of  your  own  crooked  limb,  and 
thereon  mould  the  instrument.  When  the  instrument  so  prepared  is  laid  upon  the 
limb,  the  limb  will  feel  easy,  but  it  will  not  be  made  straight  Thus  men  cast  upon 
their  own  hearts  their  conception  of  the  Divine  law,  and,  for  form's  sake,  apply 
the  thing  that  is  labelled  God's  Word  to  their  own  hearts  again,  but  the  application 
never  makes  them  cry,  and  the  crooked  parts  are  not  made  straight.  The  process 
is  pleasant,  and  it  serves  the  deceiver  for  a  religion.  IL  The  escape  from  that 
TALSE  LIFE  BY  A  DYiNO '.  "  The  Commandment  came,  sin  revived,  and  I  died."  1. 
*'  The  commandment  came."  (1)  It  is  no  longer  an  imitation  law,  but  the 
unchanging  will  of  the  unchanging  God,  with  the  demand,  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am 
holy";  and  the  sentence,  "The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  (2)  This  new- 
comer is  felt  an  intruder  within  the  conscience,  and  an  authority  over  it.  Hitherto 
the  man  had  procured  a  painted  fire,  but  now  the  law  becomes  a  consuming  fire, 
working  its  way  into  all  the  interstices  of  his  heart  and  his  history.  This  com- 
mandment came  into  the  man,  and  found  him  "  enmity  against  God."  2.  "  Sin 
revived  "  at  the  entrance  of  this  visitant,  and  thereby  he  first  felt  sin,  like  a  serpent 
creeping  about  his  heart,  and  loathed  its  presence.  (1)  Hitherto  the  disease  was 
undermining  his  life,  without  giving  him  pain.  The  evil  spirit  met  no  opposition, 
and  therefore  produced  no  disturbance.  "The  commandment  (ver.  7)  did  not  cause 
but  only  detected  sin.  The  course  of  his  life  was  like  a  river,  so  smooth  that  an 
observer  could  not  tell  whether  it  is  flowing  at  all.  A  rock  revealed  the  current  hj 
opposing  it.  But  the  rock  that  detects  the  movement  did  not  produce  it ;  neither 
is  it  able  to  reverse  it.  The  river  rises  to  the  difficulty,  and  rushes  down  more 
rapidly  than  before.  It  is  thus  with  the  commandment,  it  has  power  to  disturb, 
but  none  to  renew.  (2)  The  difference  between  a  man  who  is  "  without  the  law  " 
and  a  man  into  whose  conscience  "  the  commandment  has  come,"  is  not  that  the 
one  continues  sinning  and  the  other  has  ceased  to  sin.  It  is  rather  that  the  one 
tastes  the  pleasures  of  sin,  such  as  they  are,  while  the  other  writhes  at  its  bitter- 
ness. (3)  The  coming  of  the  commandment  for  the  conviction  of  sin  is  not 
necessarily  the  work  of  a  day  or  an  hour.  In  Paul's  case  the  process  was  short. 
During  that  journey  to  Damascus,  it  seems  to  have  begun  and  ended.  But  in 
most  cases  the  law  enters  the  conscience  as  a  besieging  army  wins  a  fortress,  by 
slow  and  gradual  approaches.  Sometimes  the  will  drives  back  the  law ;  at  other 
times  the  law,  under  cover,  perhaps,  of  some  providential  chastening,  renews  the 
assault,  and  gains  a  firmer  footing  further  in.  But  whether  by  many  successive 
stages,  or  by  one  overwhelming  onset,  the  issue  is,  "  Sin  revived,  and" — 3.  "I 
died."  The  life  in  which  he  had  hitherto  trusted  was  extinguished  then.  (1) 
Convictions  rose  and  closed  round  like  the  waves  of  a  flowing  tide,  until  they 
quenched  his  vain  hope.  Departments  of  his  heart  and  history,  which  till  now 
he  had  thought  good  against  the  final  judgment,  were  successively  flooded  by  the 
advancing,  avenging  law.  Prayers,  penances,  and  a  long  catalogue  of  miscellaneous 
virtues,  floating  down  the  stream  of  daily  life,  had  coalesced  and  consolidated,  as 
wood,  hay,  stubble,  stones,  mud,  carried  down  by  a  river  sometimes  aggregate  into 
an  island  in  the  estuary.  The  heap  seemed  to  afford  a  firm  footing  for  the  fugitive 
in  any  emergence.  (2)  Upon  this  heap  "  the  commandment  came  "  with  resistless 
power.  It  rose  like  the  tide  over  the  pieces  of  merit  on  which  the  man  had  taken 
his  stand,  and  blotted  them  out.  Where  they  lay,  nothing  now  remains  but  a 
fearful  looking  for  of  judgment.  (3)  But  stiU  the  commandment  comes.  The 
convict,  trembling  now  for  his  life,  abandons  all  that  seems  doubtful,  and  hastily 
gathering  the  best  and  surest  parts  of  his  righteousness,  piles  them  beneath  his 
feet.  He  will  no  longer  give  himself  out  as  a  saint ;  he  even  owns  that  he  is  a 
sinner.  He  claims  only  to  have  sinned  less  than  some  he  knows,  and  to  have  done 
some  good  things  which  might,  at  least,  palliate  the  evil.  The  law  pays  no  respect 
to  this  refuge  of  lies,  and  shows  no  pity  to  the  fugitive.  Wave  follows  wave,  until 
the  law  of  God  has  covered  all  the  righteousness  of  men,  and  left  it  lying  deep  in 
everlasting  contempt.  (4)  This  death  of  false  hope  is,  as  its  name  indicates,  like 
the  departure  of  the  spirit.  Disease  having  gained  a  footing,  makes  its  approaches. 
Member  after  member  is  overtaken  and  paralysed.  The  soul  abandons  one  by  one 
the  less  defensible  extremities,  and  seeks  refuge  in  its  own  interior  fastnesses. 
Still  the  adversary,  holding  every  point  that  he  has  gained,  presses  on  for  more. 
To  one  remaining  foothold  the  distressed  occupant  clings  a  while  ;  but  that  refuge, 
too,  the  inexorable  besieger  takes  at  last.  Chased  by  the  strange  asurper  from 
everj  part  of  its  long-cherished  home,  the  life  flickers  over  it  a  moment,  like  tlM 


OTAT.  Tn.]  ROMANS,  6?f 

flame  of  an  expiring  lamp,  and  then  darts  away  into  the  unseen.  So  perished  the 
hope  of  the  self-righteous  man.  He  died.  What  then  ?  III.  Hb  lives  in  another 
UTB.  1.  No  interval  of  time  separated  the  two.  The  death  that  led  from  one  life 
was  the  birth  into  another.  We  do  not  read,  '*  I  am  dead,"  but,  "  I  died."  It  is 
the  voice,  not  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living.  The  dead  never  tell  us  how  they 
died.  The  death  through  which  Paul  passed  at  conversion  is  like  that  which  lays 
a  Christian's  weary  body  in  the  grave,  and  admits  his  spirit  into  the  presence  of 
the  Lord.  "  He  that  believeth  on  Me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live." 
The  fact,  like  the  person,  has  two  sides.  If  you  stand  on  this  side  and  look,  he 
dies.  If  you  stand  on  that  side  and  look,  he  is  born.  2.  Throughout  the  whole  of 
his  previous  history,  Paul  had  stood  on  the  ground  and  breathed  the  atmosphere 
of  his  own  merits.  Probably,  like  other  people,  he  had  frequently  to  remove  from 
place  to  place  in  that  region.  But  even  the  law  could  not  drive  him  forth.  What 
the  law  could  not  do,  God  did  by  sending  His  Son.  Christ  brought  His  righteous- 
ness into  contact  with  Paul's.  Now,  the  law  chasing  him  once  more,  chased  him 
over.  Out  of  his  own  merits  went  the  man  that  moment,  and  into  Christ.  Then 
he  died ;  and  from  the  moment  of  his  death  he  lived.  Henceforth  you  find  him 
continually  telling  of  his  life,  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  " ;  '•  Our 
life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  3.  Let  the  line  be  distinctly  marked  between  what 
the  law  can,  and  what  it  cannot  do.  It  may  shake  down  all  the  foundations  of  a 
man's  first  hope,  but  it  cannot  bear  away  the  stricken  victim  from  the  ruins.  It 
can  make  the  sinner  more  miserable,  but  it  cannot  make  him  more  safe.  It  is  only 
when  Christ  comes  near  with  a  better  righteousness  that  even  the  commandment, 
raging  in  the  conscience,  can  drive  you  from  your  own.  We  owe  much  to  that 
flaming  justice  which  made  the  old  life  die,  but  more  to  that  love  which  received 
the  dying  as  he  fell  into  life  eternal.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  condemnatory 
power  of  the  law  :  —  I.  In  the  way  of  pkeliminabt  observation  it  may  be 
noticed  that  by  the  law  here  mentioned  we  are  to  understand  the  moral  law. 
It  is  the  moral  law  which  says,  "Thou  shalt  not  covet,"  as  we  read  in  ver.  7. 
It  is  by  the  moral  law  we  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  sin,  as  we  see  from  the 
text,  compared  with  chap.  iii.  20.  It  is  to  the  moral  law,  as  a  covenant  of  works, 
that  believers  are  dead  in  consequence  of  their  union  with  the  living  head  of  the 
Church.  It  is  by  the  moral  law  that  sin  takes  occasion  to  deceive  and  destroy  man- 
kind, as  you  read  in  ver.  11.  And  finally,  it  is  the  moral  law  which  is  holy,  just, 
and  good,  in  its  precepts,  promises,  and  even  threatenings.  U.  Consider  thb 
FALSE  OPINION  which  Paul  entertained  of  himself  before  his  conversion.  So  com 
pletely  was  he  blinded  by  sin,  that  he  falsely  imagined  himself  to  be  alive — that  is, 
he  thought  that  he  had  well-grounded  hopes  of  the  favour  of  God  and  of  eternal 
life,  while  in  reality  he  was  dead  in  trespasses  and  in  sins.  He  was  therefore  at 
that  time  under  the  influence  of  a  strong  delusion.  It  will  be  of  great  consequence 
here  to  mark  out  the  circumstances  which,  through  the  blindness  of  his  mind, 
occasioned  his  mistake,  that  so  we  may  place  a  beacon  upon  the  rock  which,  with- 
out the  interposition  of  Divine  grace,  had  proved  fatal  to  the  apostle.  He  laid 
great  stress  on  his  religious  education  (Acts  xxii.  3).  Now,  this  was  in  itself  a  very 
distinguished  privilege.  But  Paul  in  his  unconverted  state  did  not  understand 
the  proper  improvement  of  it.  Instead  of  rendering  these  advantages  subservient 
to  a  higher  end,  he  valued  himself  so  mnch  upon  them  that  he  thought  they  would 
contribute  towards  his  acceptance  with  God.  Another  circumstance  which, 
through  the  blindness  of  his  mind,  tended  to  mislead  him  was  his  full  connection 
with  the  Jewish  Church,  whereby  he  was  entitled  to  a  variety  of  high  external 
privileges.  Had  these  things  been  kept  in  their  proper  place  and  rendered  sub- 
servient to  a  higher  end,  they  would  have  formed  such  beauties  of  character  as  to 
render  it  an  object  of  admiration.  But,  alas !  Paul  being  at  this  time  under  the 
influence  of  a  self-righteous  spirit,  he  considered  these  as  constituting  his  title  to 
eternal  life,  and  so  foolishly  concluded  that  he  was  "  alive,"  while  in  reality  he  was 
under  the  sentence  and  the  power  of  death,  both  spiritual  and  eternal.  But  further, 
Paul's  delusion  in  his  unconverted  state  was  chiefly  owing  to  his  deep  ignorance 
of  the  purity,  spirituaUty,  and  extent  of  the  holy  law  of  God.  A  thorough,  inward, 
deep,  and  personal  conviction  of  sin  is  that  which  lies  at  the  very  foundation  of 
Tit^  Christianity,  and  all  religion  without  this  must  be  delusion  for  without  a 
sense  of  sin  men  will  not  come  to  the  Saviour,  and  unless  they  come  to  the  Saviour 
they  must  be  irrecoverably  undone.  III.  The  means  that  week  blessed  op  God 
for  correcting  the  erroneous  opinion  which  Paul  entertained  of  his  spiritual  state 
while  a  Pharisee.  1.  The  first  means  employed  by  God  for  discovering  his  real 
Toi^  X.  37 


678  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOE.  [chap.  tii. 

character  was  the  coming  of  the  commandment.  The  Lord  Jesus,  appearing  to  him 
when  he  was  near  to  Damascus,  sent  by  His  Spirit  the  law  or  commandment  home 
to  his  conscience  in  the  extent  of  its  requisitions,  with  such  light,  authority,  and 
energy  as  produced  a  complete  revolution  of  sentiment.  This  iscovery  destroyed 
the  very  foundation  of  the  delusive  hop»s  of  eternal  life  which  he  previously  enter- 
tained. 2.  Another  means  here  mentioned  which,  under  Divine  influence, 
subserved  the  purpose  of  correcting  the  erroneous  opinion  which  Paul,  when  a 
Pharisee,  entertained  of  himself  was  the  reviving  of  sin.  In  the  apostle's  state  of 
unregeneracy  sin  lived  in  its  latent  powers  and  principles  ;  but  through  the  blind- 
ness of  his  mind  he  did  not  perceive  its  existence,  neither  was  he  sensible  of  its 
various  operations  in  his  soul.  But  when  the  commandment  came  with  light, 
authority,  and  energy,  he  obtained  such  a  view  of  the  numberless  evils  of  his  own 
heart  which  he  never  saw  before ;  that  sin  which  once  appeared  to  be  dead,  now 
revived.  And  this  is  the  first  view  in  which  sin  appears  to  be  alive  in  the  soul  of  a 
true  penitent.  Again,  sin  revived  upon  the  coming  of  the  commandment,  because 
that  commandment,  being  enforced  by  the  power  of  the  supreme  Lawgiver,  vested 
sin  with  a  power  to  condemn.  Sin  revived  in  him  on  the  coming  of  the  command- 
ment also,  because  the  more  the  holy  law  urged  obedience,  the  keener  opposition 
did  the  heart  naturally  corrupted  give  to  the  requirements  of  the  law.  And  now 
sin  was  found  not  only  to  exist,  but  to  exist  in  all  its  power  and  strength.  3.  The 
next  means  which,  under  Divine  influeuce,  corrected  the  mistaken  apprehension 
which  Paul  once  entertained  of  himself  was  that  which  is  here  mentioned,  "  I 
died."  The  death  here  mentioned  is  nothing  else  than  the  death  of  legal  hope ; 
and  yet  no  sinner  wUl  submit  to  this  kind  of  death  till  the  law  is  applied  to  his 
conscience  by  the  Holy  Ghost  convincing  him  of  gmlt  and  of  its  tremendous 
demerit.      {John  Russell.)  The  law  and  the  gospel : — The  main   design  of 

the  apostle  in  this  chapter  is  to  show  that  the  law  would  not  give  peace 
of  mind  to  the  troubled  sinner.  Note  man's  condition — I.  Without  thb  law. 
"When  I  was  unacquainted  with  its  high,  spiritual  demands,  I  was  peaceful 
and  self-satisfied.  I  lived  an  eartlily  life,  trusting  to  my  own  righteous- 
ness. II.  Under  the  law.  When  the  law  was  revealed  to  me  in  its  purity  and 
integrity,  I  discovered  my  sinfulness,  and  fell  down  as  one  slain.  III.  Above  the 
LAW.  Having  found  that  there  is  no  life  in  the  law,  I  turned  to  the  gospel.  This 
is  the  purpose  of  the  law — a  schoolmaster.  In  Christ  I  found  life.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  Want  of  conviction  the  source  of  mistaken  apprehensions : — We  have  here 
— I.  The  good  opinion  which  Paul  once  had  o»  himself,  while  he  was  in  ak 
unbegenebate  state.  "  I  was  alive."  This  is  no  uncommon  thing.  Many  have 
deceived  themselves  with  a  name  to  live,  while  they  are  dead.  He  doubtless  refers 
to  the  time  when  he  was  a  Pharisee ;  and  there  were  such  persons  long  before  the 
Pharisees  (Job.  xxx.  12  ;  2  Kings  z.  16-31 ;  Isa.  zxix.  13,  Iviii.  1,  2,  Ixv.  5).  Con- 
cerning Paul  himself,  read  Phil.  ill.  5.  And  yet,  when  it  pleased  God  to  call  hini 
by  His  grace,  he  saw  himself  "  the  chief  of  sinners."  What  an  amazing  change 
was  here  I  Though  once  alive  in  his  presumptions  and  performances,  he  finds 
himself  dead  in  law,  dead  in  sin.  11.  The  gbound  of  the  apostle's  mistake. 
"  I  was  without  the  law."  1.  Not  that  the  apostle  could  be  so  ignorant  as  to 
imagine  that  he  was  without  law ;  for  as  a  Jew  he  had  the  written  law,  and  as  a 
Pharisee  he  made  his  boast  of  it,  and  expected  life  by  his  own  obedience  to  it.  2. 
He  means,  "  I  was  alive  without  the  law  in  its  purity  and  spirituality.  I  only 
considered  the  letter,  especially  I  fell  in  with  the  glosses  of  our  Eabbins.  But 
when  I  was  led  to  view  t^e  law  in  all  its  extent  and  spirituality,  I  saw  my  mistake 
— I  condemned  myself  as  a  most  miserable  sinner."  3.  While  men  aim  only  at 
the  external  law,  there  is  little  difficulty  in  obeying  its  precepts ;  but  when  they 
consider  it  as  the  very  image  of  God  Himself,  it  is  no  wonder  if  their  fears  begin 
to  be  awakened.  Without  the  law,  separated  from  and  uninfluenced  by  it,  the 
sinner  receives  no  uneasiness  ;  but  if  it  be  impressed  upon  his  conscience,  all  his 
vain  bopes  are  at  an  end.  So,  then,  the  true  reason  of  the  apostle's  mistake  was 
the  want  of  better  acquaintance  with  the  law.  They  who  have  most  light  have  the 
lowest  thoughts  of  themselves.  Hence  we  see — (1)  That  there  is  much  carnal 
security  in  every  unregenerate  man  (Luke  xi.  21).  The  children  of  God  may  be 
often  in  fear  and  doubt.  If  they  look  to  the  glories  of  heaven  they  think  them- 
selves altogether  unworthy  of  them  :  it  they  look  to  the  horrors  of  hell  their  hearts 
die  witbin  them :  while  sinners  have  none  of  these  sorrows ;  securely  they  live, 
and,  very  often,  peacefully  they  die  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  4).  Now  and  then  their  consciences 
maj  render  them  oneasy ;  but  the  old  stupidity  returns,  and  there  may  be  little 


CHAP,  m.]  BOMANS.  971 

interraptioQ  as  to  their  quiet.  Oh,  but  it  would  be  their  greatest  mercy  to  have  it 
interrupted  by  the  coming  of  the  law  in  its  purity  and  power.  (2)  There  is  much 
presumption  as  the  ground  of  their  security  (John  viii.  41,  54,  55).  (3)  There  ia 
also  much  false  joy,  as  the  offspring  of  groundless  hope,  built  upon  their  religious 
education,  church  privileges,  pride,  self-love,  and  their  self-comparison  with  those 
that  are  more  grossly  wicked ;  but  all  this  is  being  without  the  law,  or  the  not 
judging  of  themselves  by  the  right  rule.  III.  The  means  by  which  his  mistake 
WAS  RECTIFIED,  1.  The  Commandment  came,  the  law,  in  its  pure  and  holy  precepts. 
Now,  if  it  be  inquired  how  it  is  that  the  law  comes  home  to  the  conscience,  we 
answer,  It  is  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  He  opens  the  blind  eye  to  discern  the 
purity  of  the  object  presented,  and  exerts  His  almighty  power  to  put  the  sinner 
upon  comparing  his  heart  and  life  with  this  law,  and  to  hold  him  to  it.  2.  Sin 
revived.  (1)  Sin  more  and  more  appeared,  and  made  itself  manifest.  (2)  It  awoke 
and  more  powerfully  exerted  itself.  While  Satan  can  keep  men  quiet  in  carnal 
security  he  is  content ;  but  no  sooner  does  a  man  begin  to  be  weary  of  his  yoke 
and  cry  out  for  deliverance,  than  Satan  apprehends  the  loss  of  a  subject.  Then  he 
endeavours  to  excite  and  provoke  his  lusts  to  the  uttermost,  in  order  to  overwhelm 
his  sonl  with  despair.  (3)  It  revived  as  to  its  guilt,  or  its  condemning  power.  He 
once  thought  that  sin  was  dead  ;  but  the  law,  when  it  came,  plainly  discovered  to 
him  its  sting,  *'  For  the  sting  of  death  is  sin."  3.  "  I  died."  "  I  saw  myself  to  be 
in  a  state  of  death  and  condemnation.  I  found  myself  insuflScient  to  anything. 
All  my  attempts  were  fruitless,  and  I  lay  at  the  foot  of  mercy  without  any  claim  or 
plea."  In  this  hopeless  and  helpless  state  does  Christ  find  us  when  He  comes  to 
bring  us  salvation.  Oh,  how  precious  is  pardon  to  the  ungodly,  hope  to  the  hope- 
less, mercy  to  the  miserable  I  Conclusion  :  A  word — 1.  To  such  as  are  dead,  while 
they  think  themselves  alive.  How  necessary  is  self-examination  I  The  apostle, 
having  been  convinced  of  his  past  mistake,  earnestly  recommends  this  (2  Cor.  xiii. 
6).  2.  Those  that  feel  themselves  dead,  bless  God  for  the  discovery.  Where  God 
hath  made  this  discovery  of  sin,  He  will  lead  the  heart  to  Him  who  is  able  to  subdue 
sin.  3.  Let  all  who  have  received  life  from  Christ  seek  daily  supplies  from  Him. 
Guard  against  all  sin  as  contrary  to  that  new  life  you  have  in  and  from  Christ 
(Col.  iii.  1).  (J.  Stafford.)  The  effect  of  law  on  obedience: — The  terrors  of  the 
law  have  much  the  same  effect  on  our  duty  and  obedience  as  frost  has  on  a  stream 
— it  hardens,  cools,  and  stagnates.  Whereas,  let  the  shining  of  Divine  love  rise 
npon  the  soul,  repentance  will  then  flow,  our  hardness  and  coldness  thaw  and  melt 
away,  and  all  the  blooming  fruits  of  godliness  flourish  and  abound.  (Toplady.) 
Death  of  the  moral  sense  : — The  gambler  that  can  take  another's  money,  and  feel 
no  compunction  of  conscience  at  his  villainy,  who  can  continue  to  walk  the  streets 
as  if  he  were  an  honest  man,  while  all  the  time  a  gambler's  money  is  in  his  pocket 
and  a  gambler's  joy  in  his  heart,  illustrates  how  thoroughly  sin  can  get  the  mastery 
of  a  human  being.  How  many  people  can  lie  in  the  way  of  slander,  in  the  way  of 
innuendo,  in  the  way  of  suspicion,  and  still  sleep  at  night  as  if  they  were  as  innocent 
as  babes.  Such  people  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  You  run  a  pin  into  your 
body  and  you  scream,  because  it  is  a  live  body.  And  so,  while  conscience  is  aJive, 
the  thrust  of  a  wicked  thought  through  it  causes  exquisite  torture.  But  when  one 
can  lie,  and  steal,  and  be  drunken — when  these  barbed  iniquities  can  be  driven 
day  by  day  into  the  very  centre  of  a  man's  life,  and  conscience  receives  the  stab 
without  a  spasm — then  is  it  dead.  And  this  is  the  law,  that  with  whatever  faculty 
you  sin,  the  sin  which  that  faculty  commits  kills  the  corresponding  moral  sense. 
Hence,  sin  is  moral  suicide ;  the  drug  works  slowly  but  surely.  The  spirit  which 
is  compelled  to  eat  of  it  is  thrown  gradually  into  a  torpor,  which  deepens  and 
deepens  with  every  breath,  until  the  capacity  for  inspiration  is  fatally  weakened 
and  the  spirit  dies.  {W.  H,  H.  Murray.)  Experience  teaching  the  value  of  grace  : — 
In  the  olden  time  when  the  government  of  England  resolved  to  build  a  wooden 
bridge  over  the  Thames  at  Westminster,  after  they  had  driven  one  hundred  and 
forty  piles  into  the  river,  there  occurred  one  of  the  most  severe  frosts  in  the 
memory  of  man,  by  means  of  which  the  piles  were  torn  away  from  their  strong 
fastenings,  and  many  of  them  snapped  in  two.  The  apparent  evil  in  this  case  was 
4  great  good ;  it  led  the  commissioners  to  reconsider  their  purpose,  and  a  sub- 
stantial bridge  of  stone  was  erected.  How  well  it  is  when  the  fleshly  reformations 
of  nnregenerate  men  are  broken  to  pieces,  if  thus  they  are  led  to  fly  to  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  in  the  strength  of  His  Spirit  are  brought  to  build  solidly  for  eternity. 
Lord,  if  Thou  sufferest  my  resolves  and  hopes  to  be  carried  away  by  temptations  and  the 
force  of  my  corruptions,  grant  that  this  blessed  calamity  may  drive  me  to  defend 


580  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  jtu 

wholly  on  Thy  grace,  which  cannot  fail  me.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon. )  Moral  life  and  death  : 
— The  death  of  sin  is  the  life  of  man ;  and  the  life  of  death  is  the  sin  of  man.  {Calvin.) 
And  the  commandment  which  was  ordained  to  life,  I  found  to  he  unto  death. — 
The  fatal  effects  of  the  law  : — Suppose  a  person  liable  to  two  bodily  disorders  of  a 
different  kind.  He  is  weak,  but  the  means  taken  to  restore  health  and  strength 
raise  a  fever  in  his  veins.  If  we  could  keep  him  weak,  he  might  live  ;  as  it  is,  he 
dies.  So  it  might  be  eaid  of  the  law,  that  it  is  too  strong  a  medicine  for  the  human 
soul.  (Prof.  Jowett.)  The  origirial  aiid  the  actual  relation  of  man  to  law: — 
1.  The  reader  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles  is  struck  with  the  seemingly  disparaging 
manner  in  which  he  speaks  of  the  moral  law.  •'  The  law  entered  that  the  ofEence 
might  abound  " ;  "  the  law  worketh  wrath  " ;  "  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  "  over 
the  believer,  because  he  is  "  not  under  the  law,"  has  "  become  dead  to  the  law," 
is  "  delivered  from  the  law,"  and  "  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law."  This  phrsise- 
ology  sounds  strange.  "Is  the  law  sin?  "  is  a  question  which  he  himself  asks, 
because  aware  that  it  will  be  likely  to  start  in  the  mind  of  some  of  his  readers.  2. 
The  difficulty  is  only  seeming,  and  the  text  explains  it.  The  moral  law  is  suited 
to  produce  holiness  and  happiness.  It  was  ordained  to  life.  If  everything  in  man 
had  remained  as  it  was  created,  there  would  have  been  no  need  of  urging  him  to 
"become  dead  to  the  law,"  to  be  "delivered  from  the  law,"  &c.  8.  The  original 
relation  between  man  and  the  moral  law  was  precisely  like  that  between  nature  and 
its  laws.  There  has  been  no  apostasy  in  the  system  of  matter.  The  law  of  gravi- 
tation rules  as  it  did  on  the  morning  of  creation.  The  law  here  was  ordained  to 
life,  and  the  ordinance  still  stands  and  will  stand  until  a  new  system  of  nature  and 
a  new  legislation  for  it  are  introduced.  But  the  case  is  different  with  man.  He  is 
out  of  his  original  relations  to  the  law  and  government  of  God,  and  therefore  that 
which  was  ordained  to  bim  for  life,  he  now  finds  to  be  unto  death.  The  food  which 
is  suited  to  minister  to  the  health  of  the  well  man,  becomes  death  to  the  sick  man. 
4.  Let  ns  now  consider  some  particulars  in  which  the  commandment  is  found  to 
be  unto  death.  The  law  of  God  shows  itself  in  the  human  soul  in  the  form  of  a 
sense  of  duty.  Every  man  hears  occasionally  the  words,  "  Thou  shalt ;  thou  shalt 
not,"  and  finds  himself  saying  to  himself,  "  I  ought;  I  ought  not."  This  is  the 
voice  of  law  sounding  in  the  conscience.  Cut  into  the  rock  of  Sinai  or  printed  in 
our  Bibles,  it  is  a  dead  letter ;  but  wrought  into  the  fabrio  of  our  own  constitution, 
and  speaking  to  our  inward  being,  the  law  is  a  possessing  spirit,  and  according  as 
we  obey  or  disobey,  it  is  a  guardian  angel  or  a  tormenting  fiend.  We  have  dis- 
obeyed, and  therefore  the  sense  of  duty  is  a  tormenting  sensation  ;  the  command- 
ment which  was  ordained  to  life  is  found  to  be  unto  death,  because — I.  It  places 
MAN  UNDEB  A  coNTiNUAii  EESTBAiNT.  1.  To  be  reined  in  and  thwarted  renders  a 
man  uneasy.  The  universal  and  instinctive  desire  for  freedom  is  a  proof  of  this. 
Now,  the  sense  of  duty  opposes  the  wishes,  thwarts  the  inclination,  and  imposes  a 
restraint  upon  the  desires  and  appetites  of  sinful  man.  If  his  inclination  were  only 
in  harmony  with  his  duty,  there  would  be  no  restraint  from  the  law ;  in  doing  his 
dnty  he  would  be  doing  what  he  liked,  2.  There  are  only  two  ways  whereby  con- 
tentment can  be  introduced  into  the  soul.  If  the  Divine  law  could  be  altered  so 
that  it  should  agree  with  man's  sinful  inclination,  he  could  be  happy  in  sin.  But 
this  method,  of  course,  is  impossible.  The  only  other  mode,  therefore,  is  to 
change  the  inclination.  Then  the  conflict  between  our  will  and  our  conscience  is 
at  an  end.  And  this  is  to  be  happy.  3.  But  such  is  not  the  state  of  things  in  the 
anrenewed  soul.  Duty  and  inclination  are  in  conflict.  And  what  a  dreadful 
destiny  awaits  that  soul  for  whom  the  holy  law  of  God,  which  was  ordained  to  life 
and  joy,  shall  be  found  to  be  unto  death  and  woe  immeasurable !  II.  It  demands 
A  PEBPETUAL  EFFOBT  PBOM  HIM.  1.  No  crcature  likes  to  tug  and  to  lift.  Service 
must  be  easy  in  order  to  be  happy.  (1)  If  you  lay  upon  one's  shoulders  a  burden 
that  strains  his  muscles  almost  to  the  point  of  rupture,  you  put  him  in  physical 
pain.  His  physical  structure  was  not  intended  to  be  subjected  to  such  a  stretch. 
In  Eden  physical  labour  was  pleasure  because  the  powers  were  in  healthy  action. 
Before  the  Fall,  man  was  simply  to  dress  and  keep  a  garden ;  but  after,  he  was  to 
dig  up  thorns  and  thistles,  and  eat  his  bread  in  the  sweat  of  his  face.  And  now 
the  whole  physical  nature  of  man  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together,  waiting 
for  the  redemption  of  the  body  from  this  penal  necessity  of  perpetual  strain  and 
effort.  (2)  The  same  fact  meets  us  when  we  pass  to  the  moral  nature.  By  creation 
it  was  a  pleasure  for  man  to  keep  the  law  of  God.  Holy  Adam  knew  nothing  of 
effort  in  the  path  of  duty.  By  apostasy,  the  obligation  to  keep  the  Divine  law 
became  xesolaiye.    It  was  no  longer  easy  for  man  to  do  right,  and  it  has  never 


«BA».  vn.}  ROMANS.  881 

been  easy  or  spontaneoae  to  him  since.  2.  Now  in  this  demand  for  a  perpetaal 
efFort,  we  see  that  the  law  which  was  ordained  to  life  is  foand  to  be  unto  death. 
The  commandment,  instead  of  being  a  pleasant  friend  and  companion,  has  become 
a  rigorous  task-master.  It  lays  out  an  uncongenial  work,  and  threatens  punish- 
ment if  not  done.  And  yet  the  law  is  not  a  tyrant.  It  is  holy,  just,  and  good. 
This  work  which  it  lays  out  is  righteous  work,  and  ought  to  be  done.  The  wicked 
disinclination  has  compelled  the  law  to  assume  this  attitude.  That  which  is  good 
was  not  made  death  to  man  by  a  Divine  arrangement,  but  by  man's  transgression 
(vers.  13,  14).  For  the  law  says  to  every  man  what  St.  Paul  says  of  the  magistrate: 
"  Rulers  are  not  a  terror  to  good  works,  but  to  the  evil,"  &c.  Conclusion  :  We  are 
taught  by  the  subject,  as  thus  considered — 1.  That  the  mere  sense  of  duty  is  not 
Christianity.  For  this  alone  causes  misery  in  a  soul  that  has  not  performed  its 
duty.  The  man  that  doeth  these  things  shall  indeed  live  by  them  ;  but  he  who  has 
not  done  them  must  die  by  them.  Great  mistakes  are  made  at  this  point.  Men 
have  supposed  that  an  active  conscience  is  enough,  and  have  therefore  substituted 
ethics  for  the  gospel.  "  I  know,"  says  Kant,  •'  of  but  two  beautiful  things  :  the 
starry  heavens  above,  and  the  sense  of  duty  within."  But  is  the  sense  of  duty 
beautiful  to  a  being  who  is  not  conformed  to  it  ?  Nay,  if  there  be  any  beauty,  it  is 
the  beauty  of  the  lightnings,  terrible.  So  long  as  man  stands  at  a  distance  from  the 
moral  law,  he  can  admire  its  glory  and  its  beauty ;  but  when  it  comes  home  to  him 
and  becomes  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart,  then  its  glory  is 
swallowed  up  in  its  terror ;  then  he  who  was  alive  without  the  law  becomes  slain 
by  the  law ;  then  this  ethical  admiration  of  the  Decalogue  is  exchanged  for  an 
evangelical  trust  in  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  meaning  of  Christ's  work  of  redemption. 
The  law  for  an  alienated  and  corrupt  soul  is  a  burden.  Christ  is  well  named  the 
Redeemer,  because  He  frees  the  sinful  soul  from  all  this.  He  delivers  it  from  the 
penalty  by  making  satisfaction  to  the  broken  law.  He  delivers  it  from  the  restraint 
and  irksome  effort  by  so  changing  the  heart  that  it  becomes  a  dohght  to  keep  the 
law.  Obedience  then  becomes  a  pleasure,  and  the  service  of  God  the  highest  liberty. 
{Prof.  Shedd.)  Mistaken  apprehensions  of  the  law  destructive  to  the  souls  of  men : — 
1.  The  law  of  God  is  one  of  the  greatest  blessings  that  He  ever  bestowed 
UPON  THIS  WORLD,  for  "  it  was  ordained  unto  life."  1.  Our  apostle  refers  to  the 
true  nature  and  use  of  the  law  when  first  given  to  man  in  his  innocency.  It 
proposed  life  upon  reasonable  terms,  such  as  were  in  the  power  of  man  to  give, 
and  such  as  were  proper  for  God  to  require  and  accept  (Gal.  iii.  12).  Life  is  put 
for  present  happiness  and  future  glory,  and  both  might  have  been  obtained  by  the 
law.  2.  But  perhaps  it  may  be  objected,  whatever  blessing  it  might  have  been  to 
man  obedient  to  all  its  requirements,  could  any  blessing  arise  to  him  who  found 
the  commandment  to  be  unto  death  ?  Yes,  if  by  seeing  himself  lost  and  rained  by 
the  law,  he  sought  salvation  in  Christ.  Not  that  the  law  can  bring  man  to  Christ 
of  itself,  but  as  it  shows  a  man  his  need  of  Christ.    II.  The  law,  which  might 

once   have   given   life   to   the   obedient,    is   now   no   longer  able   TO   DO    IT.       An 

objection  has  been  started,  taken  from  the  case  of  the  young  man  who  inquired : 
"  Good  Master,  what  good  thing  shall  I  do  that  I  may  have  eternal  life?  "  Christ 
refers  him  to  the  law  ;  but  it  is  very  evident  that  our  Lord's  immediate  design  was 
to  convince  him  of  sin.  Had  this  young  man  been  convinced  of  sin,  Christ  would 
probably  have  given  him  a  more  direct  answer  to  his  inquiry.  Instead  of  this,  he 
was  directed  to  the  law,  and  not  for  justification  but  for  conviction — to  take  off  his 
heart  from  all  legal  expectations,  that  he  might  become  a  proper  subject  of  Christ's 
kingdom.  III.  Sin  must  be  the  gbbatest  and  the  worst  of  evils,  as  it  turns 
THE  blessing  tNTO  A  CURSE.  "  The  Commandment  I  found  to  be  unto  death." 
Nor  is  this  the  only  instance.  It  aims  at  the  same  end  in  all  its  operations.  Nor 
need  we  wonder  at  this  ;  for  if  it  hath  done  the  greater,  it  will  effect  the  less. 
Blessings  still  abound  among  us,  but  alas  1  how  are  they  abused  to  the  most 
licentious  purposes  1  Or,  on  the  other  hand,  if  men  do  not  presume,  yet  they  are 
under  the  influence  of  a  kind  of  secret  despair.  The  blessings  of  the  gospel  are 
either  too  great  to  be  obtained,  or  too  good  to  be  freely  bestowed.  In  fine,  what  is 
there  which  is  not  abused  to  the  worst  of  purposes  ?  Wisdom,  courage,  riches, 
honours,  pleasures,  all  excellent  in  their  natures,  yet  sin,  in  the  heart,  turns  all 
into  a  curse  1  IV.  Whether  men  look  to  the  law  for  life  or  disregard  it, 
THEY  must  equally  FIND  IT  DEATH  TO  THEIR  SOULS.  It  is  truc  the  apostlc  found 
that  to  be  death  from  which  he  formerly  expected  life ;  but  did  this  lead  him  to 
disregard  the  law  ?  Far  from  it ;  he  declares  it  to  be  holy  and  just  and  good. 
Nay,  his  complaints  are  all  taken  from  his  want  of  greater  conformity  to  it.    Y.  Ir 


S8S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  nfc 

A  POOB  SIMNEB  WOULD  OBTAIN  A  TITLB  TO  ETEBNAL  LITE,  BB  HHBT  NOT  BEBK  IT  BT 
OBEDIENCE   TO   THE   LAW,  BUT   BY  FAITH   IN  ChRIST.      (J".  Stafford. )  FOr  StO,  tftklnS 

occasion  by  the  commandment,  deceived  me,  and  by  It  slew  me. — Sin'a  u»t  of 
the  law: — I.  Fob  deception.  Sin's  nature,  like  Satan's,  is  to  deceive.  Eve  was 
seduced  by  Satan  through  the  commandment  (Gen.  iii.  1-6).  How  intensely  evil 
must  that  be  which  makes  so  vile  a  use  of  what  is  good.  Sin — 1.  Seduces  men  to 
break  the  law,  and  so  works  their  ruin.  2.  Persuades  men  to  an  equally  fatal 
extent  that  they  are  able  to  keep  it.  A  man's  case  is  never  worse  than  when 
e:specting  heaven  from  his  works.  Israel  was  thus  deceived  (chap.  x.  8) ;  and  the 
Pharisee  (Luke  xviii.  11).  3.  Excites  to  rebellion  against  it  as  if  opposed  to  our 
good  (ver.  8).  II.  Fob  death.  Sin,  like  Satan,  only  deceives  to  destroy.  This 
death  is — 1.  Judicial  death :  the  condemnation  of  the  law.  2.  Moral  death : 
despair  of  ever  being  able  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  law.  3.  Spiritaal 
death  :  the  execution  of  the  sentence  of  the  law.  (T.  Rohimmi,  D.D.)  The 
deeeitfulnest  and  ruinousnest  of  sin  : — The  metaphor  is  taken  from  a  robber  who 
leads  a  man  into  some  by-path  and  then  murders  him.  The  word  principally 
denotes  an  innate  faculty  of  deceiving.  We  read  of  the  deceitfulness  of  riches 
(Matt.  xiii.  22) ;  the  deceitfulness  of  unrighteousness  (2  Thess.  ii.  10),  which  is 
their  aptitude,  considering  the  sinful  state  and  the  various  temptations  of  men,  to 
deceive  them  with  vain  hopes  and  to  seduce  them  into  crooked  paths.  Once  it  is 
put  for  sin  itself  (Eph.  iv.  22).  Here,  as  it  is  joined  with  sin,  it  denotes  that 
habitual  deceit  that  is  in  indwelling  sin,  whereby  it  seduceth  men  and  draweth 
them  off  from  God  (Heb.  xii.  13).  I.  Sin  is  of  a  subtle  and  deceiving  natubb. 
Sin  deceives  the  souls  of  men — 1.  As  it  blinds  their  understandings  (cbap.  i.  21, 
22  ;  Eph.  iv.  18).  This  blindness  of  the  mind  consists  in  ignorance  of  God  and  of 
our  own  interests,  giving  us  light  thoughts  of  sin  and  extenuating  it.  2.  As  it 
presents  various  false  appearances  to  the  fancy  in  order  to  engage  the  affections. 
It  allures  with  the  specious  prospect  of  riches,  but  it  steals  away  our  best  treasure  ; 
it  flatters  us  with  hopes  of  honour  and  happiness,  but  rewards  with  disgrace  and 
misery  ;  it  promises  liberty,  but  binds  us  with  fetters  stronger  than  iron  (Prov.  xvi. 
25).  3.  It  has  a  great  advantage  in  its  very  situation  :  it  is  within,  ever  present, 
and  sometimes  it  makes  a  man  become  a  tempter  to  himself.  There  is  nothing 
either  within  or  without  but  may  be,  and  often  is,  turned  into  the  nature  of  sin. 
The  very  heart  is  deceitful,  and  it  aims  to  deceive  the  superior  powers  of  the  soul. 
Who  can  tell  how  many  ways  it  has  to  deceive  itself  ?  It  calls  evil  good,  and  good 
evil.  4.  As  it  turns  aside  the  thoughts  from  the  punishment  of  sin.  5.  Finally, 
as  it  sometimes  lead  men  to  think,  that  because  they  are  sinners,  the  great  God  is 
become  their  enemy,  and  that  there  is  no  hope  of  reconciliation  through  Christ. 
II.  Where  sin  hath  deceived  it  will  also  kill,  either  here  ob  hereafteb. 
The  apostle  intends  that  it  brought  him  into  a  state  of  aggravated  condemnation,  or, 
as  it  were,  delivered  him  over  to  eternal  death,  so  that  the  more  he  reflected  upon 
it,  the  more  was  he  convinced  that  he  had  been  grossly  imposed  upon  by  the  fasci- 
nating power  of  sin  (Job  xx.  12-14 ;  Prov.  xx.  17,  vi.  32,  33 ;  James  iii.  15). 
Achan  thought  to  obtain  a  goodly  prize ;  but  how  did  sin  wound  his  conscience  and 
at  length  slay  his  soul !  UI.  The  deceitfulness  of  sin  in  the  heart  of  man  is 
unsearchable.  "  The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,"  and  if  the  heart  be  so 
deceitful,  what  must  sin  be  when  it  gets  possession  of  such  an  heart !  As  we  know 
not  the  hearts  of  one  another,  so  neither  do  we  fully  know  our  own  hearts.  Who 
can  tell  how  our  hearts  would  act  if  suitable  objects,  inclinations,  and  temptations 
were  to  unite  and  concur  at  any  time  ?    (eT'.  Stafford.) 

Ver.  12.  Wherefore  the  law  Is  holy,  and  the  commandment  holy,  and  Jnst, 
and  good. — The  law  : — I.  Its  natiire.  It  is — 1.  Universal  in  its  extent.  It  is 
binding  at  all  times,  in  all  places,  and  upon  all.  2.  Perpetual  in  its  obligation  :  it 
can  allow  of  no  change.  Other  laws,  the  ceremonial  laws,  e.g.,  may  be  abrogated  or 
altered,  but  the  moral  law,  being  founded  upon  the  Divine  nature,  knows  no  change. 
"  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,"  &a.  3.  Perfect  in  its  character.  Being  tha 
expression  and  emanation  of  the  perfect  nature  and  will  of  God,  "  the  law  of  the 
Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul."  4.  Spiritual  (ver.  14).  It  comes  from  God 
who  is  Spirit ;  and  it  demands  of  man  spiritual  obedience.  6.  "  Holy  " ;  free  from 
all  spot  and  blemish.  6.  "  Just,"  founded  upon  the  eternal  principles  of  right. 
7.  "  Good,"  benevolent  in  its  design,  tending  to  promote  happiness,  and  promising 
life  to  those  that  observe  it.  II.  Its  excellence  and  importance.  This  is  implied 
in  its  nature ;  but  it  will  further  appear  if  we  consider — 1.  It  was  originally  im- 


OBAT.  vn.]  ROMANS.  68S 

planted  in  tbs  constitution  of  man's  natare.  A  written  law  was  not  necessary,  for 
the  love  of  God,  the  essential  principle  of  this  law,  was  bound  up  in  the  constitution 
of  Adam  (Oen.  i.  27  ;  Bom.  ii.  15).  And  it  is  the  purpose  of  God  to  replace  the  law 
in  the  position  which  it  originally  occupied ;  to  rewrite  it  upon  man's  heart.  2.  In 
the  giving  of  this  law  at  Sinai  we  see  another  illustration  of  its  excellence.  (1)  The 
law  contained  in  the  ten  commandments  was  given  directly  by  word  of  mouth  from 
God.  All  the  other  commandments  were  given  through  Moses.  (2)  It  was  written 
twice  by  the  finger  of  God  upon  both  sides  of  the  tables,  perhaps  covered  the  whole 
of  them  to  show  that  there  was  to  be  no  addition  or  alteration.  (3)  It  was  written 
not  upon  parchment,  but  upon  stone,  to  show  its  perpetual  obligation.    3.  Our  Lord 

(1)  Ever  recognised  it,  vindicated  its  authority,  expounded  its  import,  and  enforced 
it  by  His  own  sanction  and  teaching.  (2)  Not  only  taught  the  law,  but  practised  it, 
rendering  it  a  perfect  and  sinless  obedience.  (3)  Honoured  it  by  undergoing  the 
penalty  which  it  threatens  against  all  that  break  its  enactments.  HI.  Its  use.  1. 
To  mankind  at  large — (1)  It  exhibits,  magnifies,  and  explains  the  character  of  God. 

(2)  It  teaches  men  the  principles  of  right  and  wrong,  and  how  they  are  bound  to 
act  with  reference  to  God,  their  neighbour,  and  themselves.  The  gospel  has  in  no 
sense  superseded  or  abrogated  the  law.  It  comes  in  as  a  supplemental  system, 
saving  man  from  the  penalty  which  the  law  threatens,  and  placing  man  in  a  posi« 
tion  whereby  he  may  render  obedience  to  that  law.  2.  But  whilst  saying  this  a 
considerable  difiQculty  suggests  itself  as  to  the  relation  of  the  believer  to  the  law. 
We  find  a  class  of  passages  which  appear  to  teach  its  eternal  obligation  upon  all 
men  (Matt.  v. ;  Bom.  iii.  31,  aiii.  10 ;  James  L  25,  ii.  8).  But  we  find  other 
passages  which  appear  to  teach  that  the  Christian  is  not  under  the  law  (1  Tim.  i.  9  ; 
Bom.  vi.  14,  vii.  6).  How  are  we  to  understand  this?  The  true  believer  is  not 
under  the  law — (1)  As  a  ground  9I  condemnation  or  as  a  ground  of  justification. 
Inasmuch  as  Christ  has  perfectly  obeyed  the  law,  and  atoned  for  the  law's  breach, 
tbat  work  is  imputed  and  made  over  to  him  that  believes,  so  that  he  is  delivered 
from  the  condemnation  of  the  law  (Bom.  viii.).  So  far  therefore  as  his  judicial 
standing  before  God  is  concerned,  he  and  the  law  are  altogether  separated.  (2) 
In  regard  to  sanctification.  When  a  man  beUeves  truly  in  Christ,  he  has  not  only 
imputed  to  him  the  merits  of  Christ,  but  he  has  imparted  to  him  the  power  of 
Christ's  new  life.  He  is  born  again  of  the  Spirit.  And  where  that  Holy  Spirit  is, 
every  desire  which  He  inspires,  every  principle  which  He  suggests,  is  holy.  The 
man  is  no  longer  under  the  law  as  a  handwriting  against  him,  for  he  has  its  principle 
implanted  in  his  heart,  and  he  can  say,  "  Oh,  how  I  love  Thy  law  ;  it  is  my  medita- 
tion all  the  day."  8.  Of  what  nse  then  is  the  law  to  a  believer?  I  answer  that  if 
the  work  of  grace  were  perfected  within  us,  that  if  we  acted  in  perfect  harmony  with 
the  instincts  and  quickenings  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  would  be  of  no  use.  But 
inasmuch  as  the  work  of  grace  is  not  perfected  within  us,  inasmuch  as  there  is  a 
tendency  oftentimes  towards  evil,  the  law  of  God  is  necessary  for  him  who  is  not 
under  the  law,  but  under  grace.  (1)  In  keeping  us  under  grace.  The  law  not  only 
leads  him  as  to  a  schoolmaster  first  of  all  to  Christ,  but  keeps  him  trusting  in  the 
Saviour.  (2)  In  restraining  the  believer  from  sin.  There  are  those  who  think 
there  is  but  one  motive  which  ought  to  infiuence  a  Christian's  heart — love,  and  no 
doubt  perfect  love  would  be  enough.  But  we  are  not  perfect,  and  therefore, 
though  we  are  delivered  from  the  fear  of  bondage  and  the  fear  of  terror,  yet  the 
fear  of  reverence  ought  ever  to  influence  the  Christian.  4.  As  regards  the  uncon. 
verted,  the  law  is  of  great  importance.  (1)  As  a  restraining  principle  to  keep  them 
back  from  open  and  notorious  sin.  (2)  As  a  convincing  principle  (ver.  9).  (3)  Aa 
a  principle  of  conversion.  "  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul." 
Use  it  honestly,  prayerfully,  perseveringly,  and  you  will  find  you  can  have  no  rest, 
until  it  has  shut  you  up  into  the  faith,  until  it  has  been  the  means  of  driving  yoa 
to  that  refuge  which  is  open  for  the  sinner  in  Christ.  {E.  Bayley,  B.D.)  The 
law  holy  and  just  and  good : — Observe — L  The  DOCTRnrB  laid  down  in  my  text.  1. 
The  law  has  different  meanings.  At  one  time  it  stands  for  the  whole  religion  of 
Moses;  aa  when  the  Jews  are  said  to  "  make  their  boast  of  the  law."  In  another 
place  it  means  the  ceremonies  which  formed  a  prominent  part  of  that  religion ;  in 
which  sense  "  the  law  had  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come."  But,  very  frequently 
the  ten  commandments  are  meant,  as  here.  (1)  By  quoting  the  tenth  command- 
ment in  ver.  7,  Paul  shows  that  the  whole  argument  relates  to  the  moral  law.  (2) 
This  allusion  also  explains  the  repetition  in  the  text.      The  whole  law,   bat 

J>artioularly  that  commandment  to  which  I  have  alluded,  is  "holy,  just,  and  good," 
8)  The  selection  of  this  particular  command  shows  that  Paul  viewed  it  aa  • 


584  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [out   m. 

Bpiritual  law ;  extending,  not  to  actions  only,  but  to  desires.  He  never  knew  what 
the  law  was  till  this  tenth  commandment  came  with  power  to  his  conscience  ;  e.g., 
the  sixth,  he  thought,  forbad  only  actual  murder ;  the  seventh,  actual  adultery ; 
the  eighth,  actual  stealing.  But  when  at  length  it  was  said,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
covet,"  he  then  perceived  that  even  the  desire  of  things  forbidden  was  sinful.  2. 
What,  then,  is  the  doctrine  laid  down  by  St.  Paul  concerning  this  heart-searching 
law  ?  (1)  It  is  holy,  (a)  The  things  which  it  forbids  are  evil ;  the  dispositions 
which  it  requires  are  excellent,  (b)  By  what  standard  shall  we  estimate  holiness 
and  unhohness  ?  There  is  none  other  but  the  will  and  character  of  God.  Those 
actions  and  dispositions  which  are  agreeable  to  His  nature,  and  which  resemble 
His  inimitable  perfections,  are  holy ;  those  of  a  contrary  kind  are  unholy.  Qod's 
law  is  the  very  copy  of  His  own  Holy  character ;  were  it  perfectly  obeyed  man 
would  be  holy,  as  God  is  holy.  (2)  It  is  just,  (a)  God  could  require  nothing  short 
of  this.  Anything  less  than  entire  purity  of  heart  is  not  only  different  from  God's 
nature,  but  directly  opposed  to  it.  We  may,  without  offence,  be  less  wise  or 
powerful ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  admit  the  thought  of  His  consenting  that  we 
shall  be  less  holy.  God  made  man  "  in  His  own  image,  and  after  His  own  like- 
ness" ;  •'  God  made  man  upright."  Was  it  unreasonable  to  require  that  man  should 
preserve  this  holy  likeness?  (b)  But  you  may  object  that  we  have  now  lost  our 
original  likeness  to  God  ;  and  tnat  it  is  therefore  no  longer  just  to  demand  from  us 
perfect  obedience.  But  God's  rights  cannot  be  diminished  by  any  change  in  our 
condition.  A  bankrupt  has  lost  the  power  of  paying  his  debts ;  yet  it  is  still  just 
in  the  creditor  to  demand  them,  especially  when,  aa  is  the  case  with  men,  the 
bankruptcy  is  the  result  of  wickedness.  (3)  It  is  good.  The  whole  of  it  tends  to 
our  welfare.  If  we  had  never  broken  it,  there  would  have  been  no  such  thing  as 
Borrow ;  and,  if  men  would  govern  their  hearts  and  lives  by  it,  the  world's  miseries 
would  soon  have  an  end.  For  what  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  its  requirements  ? 
Love  to  God  above  all,  love  to  our  neighbour  as  to  ourselves.  Now  we  know  that 
love  is  happiness.  The  joys  of  heaven  will  consist  of  perfect  love  to  God,  and  the 
mutual  love  of  each  other.  H.  Its  pbactical  uses.  Learn — 1.  A  lesson  of  the 
deepest  self-abasement.  The  law,  when  first  given  to  man,  only  made  known  to 
him  his  duty  ;  but  ever  since  the  fall  it  has  taught  '*  the  knowledge  of  sin."  The 
law  is  holy ;  but  what  are  we  ?  Moreover,  the  doctrine  shuts  out  all  excuse.  We 
cannot  complain  of  the  law,  for  it  is  just  and  good.  Yet  have  we  all  our  Uvea  acted 
contrary  to  it.  2.  A  lesson  of  despair.  Whatever  it  may  have  been  to  man  in  a 
state  of  innocence,  it  is  now  the  ministration  of  condemnation.  It  pronounces  a 
curse  on  every  transgressor ;  it  worketh  wrath  ;  it  has  shut  us  up  like  prisoners, 
under  a  charge  of  sin  so  fully  proved  that  it  cannot  be  evaded.  From  aU  this  let 
UB  learn  that  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  no  fiesh  can  be  saved.  Perfect  obedience  is 
necessary  if  we  are  to  be  justified  by  it.  Can  you,  then,  stand  up  and  claim  a  full 
acquittal  ?  If  once  you  have  sinned  your  soul  is  lost.  Learn  this  and  you  will 
then  be  prepared  to  hear  of  a  Saviour,  who  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the 
law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us,  and  despair  will  prove  the  parent  of  hope  and  joy. 
8.  How  you  ought  to  walk  and  please  God.  The  law  is  what  it  ever  was,  holy,  and 
just,  and  good.  And  therefore,  though  it  cannot  justify  us  as  a  covenant,  it  must 
still  instruct  us  as  a  guide.  {J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  law  holy  and  just  and  good : — 
I.  Holt.  1.  In  principle.  2.  In  requirement.  8.  In  operation.  4.  In  tendency. 
As  a  whole  and  in  each  commandment  it  bears  the  character  and  expresses  the 
mind  and  will  of  Him  who  is  infinitely  holy,  and  requires  only  what  is  holy  and  pure 
(Micah  vi.  8).  II.  Just.  It  demands  what  is  just  and  right  and  nothing  more,  and 
requires  only  what  man  was  made  capable  of  rendering.  It  tends  to  promote 
justice  and  righteousness  everywhere ;  and  secures  to  each  his  due — God,  our 
neighbour,  ourselves.  HI.  Good — useful,  beneficial,  tending  to  the  happiness  of 
man.  The  commandment  broken  was  Paradise  lost ;  the  commandment  observed 
will  be  Paradise  restored.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  law  holy  and  just  and 
good: — Some  think  these  high  characters  are  given  to  the  law  as  being  holy,  in 
teaching  us  our  duty  towards  God  ;  just  in  prescribing  our  duty  towards  our  neigh- 
bour, and  good  in  regard  to  ourselves.  Others  thus,  the  law  is  holy  respecting  the 
matter  of  it,  because  it  prescribeth  holy  things ;  just  in  propounding  rewards  and 
punishments,  and  good  in  respect  to  the  end,  leading  to  holiness  and  happiness. 
But  I  think  we  ought  to  carry  the  point  much  further  :  all  these  titles  are  given  to  the 
law,  both  in  relation  to  the  Author,  the  matter,  and  the  end  of  the  law.  The 
Author  of  the  law  is  holy,  just  and  good ;  so  is  the  doctrine  or  matter  contained  in 
the  law ;  and  bo  is  the  end  proposed  by  the  law.     (J.  Stafford.)        The  excellence  oj 


OHAf.  TO.]  ROMANS.  68ft 

the  law : — Holy  in  its  origin,  just  in  its  requirements,  good  in  its  purpose.  {Archdn. 
Farrar.)  The  holy  law  : — Holy  in  its  nature,  just  in  its  form,  good  in  its  end. 
{r.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Perfection  of  the  law : — God's  justice  is  seen  in  the  law  given 
to  man  as  the  universal  law  of  his  existence.  To  give  law  to  rational  creatures  is 
the  prerogative  of  their  Creator,  and  His  law  is,  by  an  inevitable  consequence,  holy, 
just  and  good ;  it  neither  prohibits  nor  enjoins  anythiDg  that  is  not  in  the  most 
perfect  accordance  with  the  infinite  perfections  of  God  and  the  true  and  best  interests 
of  man.  "  It  represents  Him  as  the  Eighteous  Governor  of  the  universe,  whose 
laws  are  in  perfect  consistency  with  the  principles  of  equity,  and  whose  character  is 
in  accordance  with  His  laws.  Referring  to  these  principles  of  morality  which  are 
engraven  on  the  heart  of  man,  it  declares  that  they  were  engraven  by  the  finger  of 
God,  and  that  conscience  is  His  vicegerent,  speaking  to  us  in  His  name,  and 
making  known  to  us  the  principles  of  His  moral  administration.  And  it  unfolds  a 
more  copious  code  of  morality,  in  which  the  same  principles  are  revealed,  for  our 
better  information  and  surer  guidance — principles  which,  being  engraven  in  the 
book  of  nature,  and  revealed  in  the  written  Word,  are  infallibly  certain,  and  ought 
to  be  regarded  as  a  true  manifestation  of  the  righteous  character  of  Him  who  is  the 
Author  alike  of  nature  and  of  revelation."  (J.  Buchatian.)  The  law  and  the 
gospel : — I.  Their  difference.  1.  In  time  and  mode  of  original  relation.  The  law 
is  coeval  with  creation ;  the  gospel  was  made  known  after  the  fall.  The  law  is 
discoverable  by  the  light  of  nature,  the  gospel  is  a  hidden  mystery.  2.  The  law 
addresses  man  as  a  creature,  the  gospel  as  a  sinner.  3.  Command,  the  character- 
istic of  the  law ;  promise  of  the  gospel  is  the  promise  of  life  in  Christ.  Contrast 
between  the  covenant  of  Sinai  and  the  covenant  of  grace.  4.  The  law  condemns,  the 
gospel  justifies.  Law  only  acquits  or  condemns,  mercy  is  revealed  in  the  gospel. 
5.  The  law  requires,  the  gospel  enables.  No  enabling  power  in  a  command ;  motive 
and  power  supplied  by  the  gospel.  II.  Their  harmony.  1.  There  is  no  real  antago- 
nism. (1)  Tlie  law  prepares  the  way  for  the  gospel.  (2)  The  gospel  fulfils,  and  so 
establishes  the  law.  There  are  two  ways  of  dealing  with  law,  repeal  and  relaxation. 
Neither  mode  supposable  m  Divine  government.  How  can  man  be  saved  and  yet 
the  law  upheld  ?  Perfect  obedience  the  one  condition  of  life.  Christ  undertakes 
for  man.  Fulfilment  in  man's  own  person.  Faith  lays  hold  of  precepts  as  well  as 
promises.  The  law  is  a  rule  of  life,  written  on  the  heart.  The  gospel  secures  its 
fulfilment  for  man  and  in  man.  (a)  Assigns  its  just  place  and  value  to  the  Law  in 
the  Christian  scheme.  (6)  Assigns  its  just  place  and  value  to  the  gospel.  Con- 
elusion ;  1.  How  sure  a  foundation  laid  for  the  believer's  hope.  2.  How  sure  a 
provision  made  for  the  believer's  holiness.     {E.  Bayley,  B.D.) 

Yer.  13.  Was  then  that  which  is  good  made  death  to  me  7  Ctod  forbid. — The  law 
vindicated  : — The  text  is  explanatory  of  two  statements  apparently  contradictory, 
viz.,  that  the  law  is  holy,  <fec.,  and  that  this  law  worked  death.  1.  The  apostle 
foresaw  that  a  difficulty  might  arise,  so,  with  his  anxiety  to  be  clear,  he  assumes 
the  position  of  objector.  "Was  then  that  which  was  good,"  &o.  Death  here 
means  the  depraving  influence  of  sin  upon  the  moral  nature  of  its  victim.  The 
expression  '•  working  in  me  "  favours  the  notion,  as  does  the  result  of  it  as 
described  in  the  last  clause  of  the  verse.  "  Exceeding  sinful "  is  tantamount  to 
"  death."  This  being  so,  the  apostle's  meaning  is — The  law  has  been  shown  to  be 
holy,  Ac.  ;  but  death  is  an  evil ;  is  it  then  true  that  this  evil  can  be  wrought  by  that 
which  is  so  good  ?  Here  is  the  difficulty.  2.  Now  for  the  answer.  There  is — 
(1)  The  usual  emphatic  denial.  "  God  forbid."  (2)  The  explanation,  which  is  that 
the  law  is  not  the  cause  of  this  evil  condition  of  death,  but  sin  using  the  law  as  an 
occasion.  Suppose  a  person  afflicted  with  a  certain  disease.  He  partakes  of  food, 
but  this  food,  by  reason  of  certain  ingredients,  in  themselves  wholesome,  nourishes 
and  feeds  the  disease.  The  man  dies.  The  cause  of  death  was  not  the  food  but 
the  disease,  working  through  that  wliich  was  good.  In  like  manner  sin,  that  it 
might  appear  in  its  true  character,  that  the  fearful  malignity  of  its  virus  might  show 
itself,  becomes  exceedingly  sinful,  i.e.,  stronger  and  stronger  through  the  command- 
ment, which  is  holy,  &c.  The  extreme  heuiousness  of  sin  is  demonstrated  by  this 
fact — its  conversion  of  that  which  was  best  and  holiest  into  an  instrument  of  so 
much  evil.  {A.J.  Parry, )  But  sin,  that  It  might  appear  sin,  working  death  In  me 
by  that  which  Is  good. — The  work  of  sin  : — 1.  Sin  slays  by  that  which  is  good.  2. 
That  thereby  it  may  accomplish  an  act  worthy  of  its  nature.  3.  And  that  thereby 
(final  end)  this  nature  may  be  manifested  clearly.  {Prof.  Godet.)  The  deadly 
nature  of  sin  manifested ; — It  is  as  though  there  were  a  certain  poisoned  river,  and 


S86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

ft  parent  had  often  said  to  his  children,  "  Drink  it  not,  my  children,  it  is  sweet  at 
first,  but  soon  it  will  bring  on  yon  pains  most  fearfal,  and  death  will  shortly 
follow.  Do  not  drink  it."  But  these  children  were  very  wilful  and  would  not 
beUeve  it ;  and,  albeit  that  sometimes  a  dog  or  an  ox  would  drink  of  it  and  be 
sore  pained  and  die,  they  did  not  believe  in  all  its  injurious  effects  to  them.  But 
by  and  by  One  made  like  unto  themselves  drank  of  it,  and  when  they  saw  Him  die 
in  anguish  most  terrible,  then  they  understood  how  deadly  must  be  the  effects  of 
this  poisoned  stream.  When  the  Saviour  Himself  was  made  sin  for  us  and  then 
died  in  griefs  unutterable,  then  we  saw  what  sin  could  do,  and  the  exceeding 
sinfulness  of  sin  was  displayed.  To  use  another  illustration :  yon  have  a  tame 
leopard  in  your  house,  and  you  are  often  warned  that  it  is  a  dangerous  creature  to 
trifle  with ;  bat  its  coat  is  so  sleek  and  beautiful,  and  its  gambols  are  so  gentle  that 
yon  let  it  play  with  the  children  as  though  it  were  the  well-domesticated  cat :  yon 
cannot  have  it  in  your  heart  to  put  it  away ;  you  tolerate  it,  nay,  you  indulge  it  still. 
Alas,  one  black  and  terrible  day  it  tastes  of  blood,  and  rends  in  pieces  your  favourite 
child,  then  you  know  its  nature  and  need  no  further  warning ;  it  has  condemned 
itself  by  displaying  the  fell  ferocity  of  its  nature.  So  with  sin.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Silent  soul  operations  : — What  a  loom  we  carry  in  ns  I  We  stand  by  the  side  of  a 
Jacquard  loom,  and  wonder  how  wit  could  invent  a  machine  that  should  act  so  like 
life.  We  wonder  how  any  apparatus  can  be  constructed  to  produce  a  fabric  which 
shall  come  out  with  figures  on  it  of  birds,  and  men,  and  all  manner  of  figures 
wrought  apparently  by  the  intelligent  intent  of  the  machine  itself.  But,  strange  as 
that  may  seem,  it  is  not  to  be  thought  of  in  comparison  with  that  loom  which, 
without  crank  or  shuttle,  is  perpetually  producing  fabrics  which  every  sort  of  figure 
in  the  form  of  reason,  and  moral  sentiments,  and  social  affections,  and  passions  and 
appetites.  What  a  vast  activity  there  is  going  on  in  the  human  mind  so  silently 
that  there  ia  no  clanking  heard  1  We  go  by  men  every  day  in  each  of  whom  are 
these  fiery,  flashing  elements  of  power.  Here  are  companies  of  them,  here  is  an 
army  of  them,  here  is  a  city  fuU  of  them,  and  there  is  the  vastest  activity  in  the 
mind  of  each ;  and  who  can  conceive  what  is  going  on  in  the  multitude  of  beating, 
throbbing  lives  which  are  flaming  forth  and  reaching  out  to  the  uttermost  in  every 
direction,  all  as  silent  as  the  dew  which  is  distilled  on  the  myriad  flowers  in  the 
meadow?    Eeally  vast,  infinite,  is  this  activity,  when  you  think  of  it;  and  yet  it 

foes  on  in  perfect  silence.     (H.  W.  Beecher.)        The  perversion  of  the  moral  law : — 
.   ThK  FOBM  of  ErPKESSION  IS  OBVIOUSLT  INTENDED  TO  THBOW  EMPHASIS  ON  THE  FALSB 
AND  ABMOBMAIj  RELATION  OF  CAUSE  AND  EFFECT  HEBE  SPOKEN  OF.     Wo  do  UOt  WOUdcr  at 

evil  producing  evil,  and  good  good ;  but  the  cause  to  which  the  apostle  here  points 
OS  is  Uke  that  of  wholesome  food  producing  the  effects  of  poison,  of  pure  air  and 
other  conditions  of  health  issuing  only  in  disease  and  death,  and  the  idea  he  wishes 
to  bring  out  is,  that  it  is  the  worst  and  most  appalling  characteristic  of  sin  that  it 
sometimes  manifests  its  presence  by  a  result  of  this  unnatural  kind.  It  is  sad 
enough  when  men  become  vitiated  and  degraded  by  the  operation  of  influences  that 
appeal  directly  to  their  evil  desires.  But  we  are  here  taught  of  a  more  subtle 
manifestation  of  sin.  It  is  possible  for  sin  to  get  hold  of  the  very  instruments  of 
goodness,  and  to  turn  these  to  its  own  ends.  The  law  of  God  instead  of  enlightening 
and  quickening,  may  lead  to  destruction.     II.  The  pabticuiiAB  wat  in  which  thb 

APOBTIiB  contemplates  THE  DiVINE  LAW  AS  BBINOINO  ABOUT  THIS   UNNATUBAL  BESULX 

is — 1.  By  awakening  in  the  soul  a  discord  which  the  law  itself  cannot  heal.  (1) 
Conscience,  i.e.,  the  sense  of  right  in  us,  appealed  to  by  the  moral  law,  may  be 
strong  enough  to  disquiet  where  it  is  not  strong  enough  to  rule.  The  eternal 
reaUties  present  themselves  in  many  instances  under  form  of  an  outward  law, 
which  secures  the  consent  of  our  reason  and  conscience,  but  which  has  no  power 
to  subdue  the  passions  or  govern  the  will.  (2)  Now  for  the  man  who  is  in  this  state 
of  mind,  the  law,  in  itself  good,  becomes  a  minister  of  death  and  not  of  life.  It  has 
killed  out  the  lower  life  and  happiness,  and  yet  it  has  not  borne  to  the  blessedness 
of  the  life  of  the  spirit.  There  are  many  people  who  would  have  been  far  happier 
as  animals  tlaa  as  men;  and  better  to  be  a  mere  animal,  with  the  animal's 
untroubled  satisfaction,  better  to  be  a  creature  without  reason  and  conscience, 
if  reason  and  conscience  cannot  control  your  life,  for  then  you  would  be  no  longer 
humiliated  by  the  ever-recurring  feeling  that  you  cannot  keep  out  of  degradation ; 
then  yon  would  be  free  to  revel  in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  without  one  pang  of 
remorse.  2.  By  infusing  a  new  intensity  into  our  sins.  (1)  We  become  worse 
people  because  we  have  a  moral  nature.  The  barren  or  scanty  soil  will  grow  neither 
A  good  crop  nor  a  bad,  but  if  a  rich  soil  is  left  uncultured  its  very  fertility  and 


eatr.  vii.]  ROMANS.  687 

riohne!!S  may  manifest  itself  by  the  rampant  growth  of  noxious  weeds  and  thorns. 
So  it  is  with  man's  spiritual  nature.  In  the  merely  animal  nature  the  passions  ara 
natural  tendencies  seeking  their  own  needs,  but  in  man  they  cannot  remain  as  they 
are  in  the  animal.  They  draw  unto  them  a  kind  of  false  boundlessness  stolen  from 
the  higher  nature.  If  you  ask  me  how  this  comes  about,  I  answer  that  the  sinful 
man  is  ever  trying  to  find  in  sinful  gratification  the  happiness  which  God  and 
goodnens  alone  can  give  him.  Evil  inclinations  and  desires  would  never  be  so 
intense  in  us,  if  it  were  not  that  we  are  trying  to  obtHin  a  fictitious  happiness  out 
of  them.  The  spiritual  nature,  capable  of  Divine  satisfaction,  could  never  be  happy 
in  the  pleasures  of  the  brute,  if  it  were  not  that  insensibly  we  made  these  things 
assume  a  deceptive  show  of  the  blessedness  for  which  as  spiritual  beings  we  were 
made.  But  these  earthly  pleasures  can  never  be  commensurate  with  a  nature  made 
in  God's  image,  capable  of  sharing  in  a  Divine  and  eternal  life.  You  have  some- 
thing in  your  craving  for  spiritual  food  which  these  husks  can  never  satisfy,  but  we 
may  make  them  seem  to  satisfy.  (2)  I  may  illustrate  this  by  what  sometimes 
happens  in  our  social  relations.  We  sometimes  see  a  man  of  a  refined  nature 
wreck  his  happiness  by  union  with  a  woman  immeasurably  his  inferior,  and  we 
explain  the  mistake  by  saying  that  it  was  not  the  weak,  silly  creature  that  the  man 
really  loved,  but  a  being  of  his  own  imagination,  invested  with  ideal  charms,  into 
which  he  had  unconsciously  transformed  her,  and  in  that  case  it  may  be  said  that 
it  was  the  very  elevation  of  the  man's  nature  that  made  him  capable  of  forming 
such  an  ideal  that  was  the  secret  of  the  wreck  of  his  happiness  and  the  ruin  of  his 
life.  In  like  manner  may  we  pronounce  that  all  men  who  seek  their  happiness  in 
the  things  of  the  world  are  the  fools  of  their  fancy.  The  very  infinitude  of  our 
nature  makes  it  possible  for  us  to  paint  the  idols  of  time  and  sense  with  imaginary 
glory,  and  to  waste  upon  them  a  disproportionate  devotion.    III.  The  foreqoino 

TRAIN  OP  thought  FINDS  CONFIRMATION  IN  ONE  PECULIAB  FEATURE  OF  THE  TEACHING  OF 

St.  Pattl.  In  treating  of  particular  sins  it  is  his  characteristic  to  place  by  the  side  of 
the  sin  of  which  he  is  speaking  the  grace  of  which  it  may  be  said  to  be  the  counterfeit. 
We  find  him  rebuking  the  sin  of  drunkenness  not  by  simply  denouncing  it  as  bad,  but 
by  contrasting  the  false  and  spurious  illusion  of  the  drunkard  with  another  and 
legitimate  means  of  spiritual  exhilaration.  "  Be  ye  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein 
is  excess,  but  be  ye  filled  with  the  Spirit."  Again,  with  regard  to  the  sin  of  covetous- 
ness.  "  Trust  not  in  worldly  riches,  but  in  the  living  God."  The  covetous  man  is 
unconsciously  trying  to  find  in  money  the  happiness  that  can  be  found  only  in  God. 
Let  me  illustrate  this.  1.  Tliere  is  a  sense  in  which  so  common  a  vice  even 
as  drunkenness  may  be  said  to  work  death  in  us  in  virtue  of  its  likeness  to  what  is 
good.  The  capacity  of  religion  is  a  capacity  to  forget  and  cast  behind  us  the 
stains  of  the  past,  to  feel  no  more  the  earthly  troubles,  and  to  rise  into  a  region 
where  the  interests  and  agitations  of  time  become  dwarfed,  to  an  ecstacy  of  spiritual 
emotion  where  we  can  have  communion  with  things  eternal  and  unseen.  It  is  of 
this  experience  of  religion  the  vice  I  speak  of  can  give  a  spurious  imitation.  It  can 
make  us  forget  for  a  moment  the  past ;  it  can  lift  for  a  time  into  a  rapturous 
elevation  above  care  and  sorrow,  and  transport  the  sin-stained  soul  into  a  sham 
heaven  of  sensuous  enjoyment.  Ah  I  it  is  but  a  sham  self -forgetfulness,  and  its 
joyous  transports  are  succeeded  by  an  awakening  to  more  hideous  realities.  In 
salvation  through  Christ  can  we  find  complete  obliteration  of  the  sins  of  the  past,  and 
••  the  peace  of  God  that  passetb  all  understanding."  2.  The  secret  of  the  mastery 
which  covetousness  gains  over  so  many  minds.  Paul  finds  in  this,  that  the  love  of 
money  is  misdirected  worship.  The  covetous  man  is  an  idolator,  and  gives  to 
mammon  the  trust,  homage,  and  surrender  that  are  intended  for  the  living  God.  In 
its  seeming  omnipotence,  in  its  capacity  to  gain  us  all  our  hearts  can  wish,  money 
may  present  a  certain  sham  resemblance  to  that  to  which  our  capacity  of  religion 
points.  Now  the  one  thing  which  makes  man  a  religious  being  and  shows  that  he 
was  made  for  God  is  the  capacity  of  absolute  trust.  I  want  in  my  conscious  help- 
lessness some  presence  near  me  in  whose  all-embracing  power  I  can  find — come 
good,  come  ill,  come  life,  come  death — the  rock  and  refuge  of  my  soul.  Ah  !  but  it 
is  this  capacity  which  can  find  its  true  object  only  in  God,  that  makes  it  possible 
for  me  to  waste  on  aU  manner  of  objects  a  boundless  devotion.  We  cannot  serve 
God  and  mammon,  yet  mammon  presents  to  many  a  strange  resemblance  to  Him 
who  has  power  to  prostrate  and  save.  Sin,  again,  working  ruin  and  death  in  us 
by  that  which  is  good.  (J.  Caird,  D.D.)  On  the  quality  of  vice  :—I.  That 
vice  possesses  some  unknown  malignant  quality  may  be  inferred  from  the 
observation  that  the  consequences  of  it  bear  no  proportion  to  our  immediath 


068  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  nu 

BBHTiuEirrs  coNCERNiNO  IT.  BevelatioD  represents  it  as  sweet  in  the  mouth 
and  bitter  in  the  belly.  II.  That  vice  possesses  a  malignity  with  which  we 
are  at  present  but  very  imperfectly  acquainted,  may  be  concluded  from  thb 

ACTlVIin  07  THIS  QTJAIiITT  AND  THE  UNEXPECTED  BUT  CEBTAIN  PBOOBES8  WHICH 
IT    MAKES    WHEKEVEB    IT    HAS    BEEN     ONCE     ADMITTED.        It    is     an     infeCtiOD     which 

from  the  slightest  taint  spreads  actively  throughout  the  whole  character.  And  it 
exhibits  the  very  same  progress  in  societies  as  in  individuals.  III.  That  vice 
possesses  a  malignity  unknown  to  us  appears  from  the  bemorse  which  follows  it, 

AND  THE  unaccountable   TEEEOBS  WITH  WHICH  IT   AGITATES   THB   MIND.      As  SOOD  aS  it 

has  gained  your  confidence,  it  stings  your  bosom.  It  is  a  friend  who  flatters  you 
into  a  bad  action  for  some  purpose  of  his  own,  and  then  leaves  you  to  your  reflec- 
tions. IV.  That  vice  possesses  some  uncommon  malignity  of  quality  is  evident 
from  this  remarkable  observation,  that  the  consequences  of  it  almost  always 

BEACH   BEYOND  THB   MAN  HIMSELF   WHO   COMMITS   IT,  AND   AFFECT   NUMBERS   OF   OTHEB 

PEOPLE.  The  vices  of  every  individual  affect  his  neighbourhood  and  disturb  the 
circle,  whatever  it  is  to  which  he  is  attached.  The  vices  of  the  children  affect  the 
parents,  and  the  vices  of  the  parents  result  upon  the  family,  and  upon  all  who  may 
have  transactions  with  it.  The  vices  of  the  magistrate  affect  the  district  over 
which  he  presides ;  the  vices  of  the  minister  or  sovereign  affect  the  nation  which 
they  guide,  and  often  pull  down  enormous  ruin  upon  the  community.  V.  The 
same  doctrine  arises  and  receives  new  force  from  a  genebal  view  of  the  wobld 
AND  of  its  establishments.  Mankind  are  collected  everywhere  into  societies  ;  these 
societies  are  bound  by  laws  and  united  under  distinct  governments.  What,  then,  is 
the  great  object  of  laws  and  of  society  itself?  To  protect  from  injury,  or,  in  other 
words,  to  restrain  vice.  The  different  estabUshments  of  religion  have  the  same 
object.     VI.  The  mahgnity  of  vice  will  be  made  manifest  from  a  view  of  thb 

EFFECTS  WHICH,  NOTWITHSTANDING  ALL  THE  PRECAUTIONS  WE  CAN  TAKE,  IT  HAS  PRODUCED 

AND  IS  PRODUCING  DAILY  AMONG  MANKIND.  The  earthquakes  which  overturn  the 
cities  are  not  more  fatal  than  the  extensive  and  continued  movements  with  which 
it  agitates  our  system.  No  barriers  avail,  no  defences  are  found  sufficient.  Though 
mankind  are  everywhere  arrayed  against  it,  yet  it  breaks  in  and  spreads  misery  and 
destruction  round  it.  The  happiness  of  individuals,  the  peace  of  families,  the 
order  of  society,  and  the  harmony  of  nations  are  swept  before  it.  In  private  and 
public  life  what  disorders  and  distress  does  it  accumulate!  It  produces  want, 
infamy,  and  death.  But  the  effects  of  it  in  private  hfe,  amazing  as  they  are,  fall 
vastly  short,  both  in  number  and  extent  of  mischief,  of  its  effects  in  public.  Hera 
it  acts  upon  a  larger  theatre,  and  displays  itself  more  fully  as  it  acts  without 
restraint.    VII.  It  will  complete  this  argument  to  observe  that  revelation  agrees 

PBEFECTLY  WITH  REASON   IN  HEB  VIEWS  OF  VICE,  AND  HOLDS  IT  OUT  AS  THE   SAME  MALIS- 

MANT  AND  FATAL  ENEMY.  On  the  Other  hand,  representing  vice  as  the  source  of 
misery,  Scripture  discovers  the  Supreme  Being,  the  wise  and  benevolent  Parent  of 
His  creation,  as  obstructing  its  progress ;  extracting,  in  the  first  instance,  all  the  good 
possible  from  it ;  and,  in  the  last,  taking  the  strongest  measures  to  defeat  and  expel 
it  finally  from  the  system.  (J.  Mackenzie,  D.D.)  The  monster  dragged  to  light: — 
I.  To  MANY  MEN  SIN  DOES  NOT  APPEAR  SIN.  1.  In  all  men  there  is  an  ignorance  of 
what  sin  is.  Man  will  not  come  to  the  light  lest  he  should  know  more  than  he 
wishes  to  know.  Moreover,  such  is  the  power  of  self-esteem  that  the  sinner 
seldom  dreams  that  he  has  committed  anything  worse  than  little  faults.  2.  This  is 
due — (1)  To  that  dulness  of  conscience  which  is  the  result  of  the  fall.  (2)  To  the 
deceitf  nlness  both  of  sin  and  of  the  human  heart.  Sin  assumes  the  brightest  forma 
even  as  Satan  appears  as  an  angel  of  light.  And  the  heart  loves  to  have  it  so,  and 
is  eager  to  be  deceived.  We  will,  if  we  can,  extenuate  our  faults.  (3)  To  ignorance 
of  the  spirituality  of  the  law.  If  men  read,  e.g.,  "  Thou  shalt  do  no  murder,"  they 
say,  "I  have  never  broken  that  law."  But  they  forget  that  he  that  hateth  hia 
brother  is  a  murderer.  If  I  wilfuUy  do  anything  which  tends  to  destroy  or  shorten 
life,  I  break  the  command.  3.  Thus  you  see  a  few  of  the  reasons  why  sin  cheats 
impenitent  and  self-righteous  minds.  This  is  one  of  the  most  deplorable  results  of 
sin.  It  injures  us  most  by  taking  from  us  the  capacity  to  know  how  much  we  are 
injured.  Sin,  like  the  deadly  frost,  benumbs  its  victim  ere  it  slays  him.  Man  is  so 
diseased  that  he  fancies  his  disease  to  be  health,  and  judges  healthy  men  to  be 
under  wild  delusions.  He  loves  the  enemy  which  destroys  him,  and  warms  at  his 
bosom  the  viper.  The  most  unhappy  thing  that  can  happen  to  a  man  is  for  him  to  be 
sinful  and  to  judge  his  sinfulness  to  be  righteousness.  The  persecutor  hounded  his 
fellow  creature  to  prison  and  to  death,  but  he  thought  he  verily  did  God  service.  With 


flBAP.  Tn.]  ROMANS.  S8| 

the  angodly  this  pestilential  influence  is  very  powerful,  leading  them  to  cry  "  peace, 
peace,"  where  there  is  no  peace.  And  also  even  John  Newton,  in  the  slave  trade, 
never  seemed  to  have  felt  that  there  was  any  wrong  ;  nor  Whitefield  in  accepting 
slaves  for  his  orphanage  in  Georgia.  4.  Before  we  can  be  restored  to  the  image  of 
Christ,  we  must  be  taught  to  know  sin  to  be  sin  ;  and  we  must  have  a  restoration  of 
the  tenderness  of  conscience  which  would  have  been  ours  had  we  never  fallen.  A 
measure  of  this  discernment  and  tenderness  of  judgment  is  given  to  us  at  conver- 
sion ;  for  conversion,  apart  from  it,  would  be  impossible.  Unless  sin  is  seen  to  be  sin, 
grace  will  never  be  seen  to  be  grace,  nor  Jesus  to  be  a  Saviour.  II.  Whebe  sin  is 
MOST  CLEABLT  SEEN,  IT  APPEABs  TO  BE  SIN.  1.  There  is  a  depth  of  meaning  in  the 
expression,  "  Sin,  that  it  might  appear  sin" — as  if  the  apostle  could  find  no  other 
word  so  terribly  descriptive  of  sin  as  its  own  name.  (1)  He  does  not  say,  "  Sin, 
that  it  might  appear  like  Satan."  No,  for  sin  is  worse  than  the  devil,  since  it 
made  the  devil  what  he  is.  Satan  as  an  existence  is  God's  creature,  and  this  sin 
never  was.  Sin  is  even  worse  than  hell,  for  it  is  the  sting  of  that  dreadful  punish- 
ment. (2)  He  does  not  say,  "Sin,  that  it  might  appear  madness."  Truly  it 
is  moral  insanity,  but  it  is  worse  than  that.  (3)  There  are  those  who  see  sin  as  a 
misfortune,  but  this,  although  correct,  is  very  far  short  of  the  true  view.  (4)  Others 
have  come  to  see  sin  as  a  folly,  and  so  far  they  see  aright,  for  "  a  fool  "  is  God's 
own  name  for  a  sinner.  But  for  all  that,  sin  is  not  mere  want  of  wit  or  mistaken 
judgment,  it  is  the  wilful  choice  of  evil.  (5)  Some,  too,  have  seen  certain  sins  to  be 
"crimes."  When  an  action  hurts  our  fellow-men,  we  call  it  a  crime  ;  when  it  only 
ofifends  God,  we  style  it  a  sin.  If  I  were  to  call  you  criminals,  you  would  be  dis- 
gusted ;  but  if  I  call  you  sinners,  you  will  not  be  at  all  angry ;  because  to  offend 
man  is  a  thing  you  would  not  like  to  do,  but  to  offend  God  is  to  many  persons  a 
small  matter.  2.  Sin  must  appear  to  be  sin  against  God ;  we  must  say  with  David, 
"  Against  Thee,  Thee  only,  have  I  sinned,"  and  with  the  prodigal,  "  Father,  I  have 
sinned  against  heaven  and  before  Thee."  Think  how  odious  a  thing  sin  is.  (1)  Our 
offences  are  committed  against  a  law  which  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good.  To  break 
a  bad  law,  may  be  more  than  excusable,  but  there  can  be  no  excuse  when  the 
commandment  commends  itself  to  every  man's  conscience.  (2)  The  Divine  law  is 
binding,  because  of  the  authority  of  the  Lawgiver.  God  has  made  us,  ought  we  not  to 
■eive  Him?  Tet,  after  all  Hi»  goodness,  we  have  turned  against  Him  and  harboured 
His  enemy.  Had  the  Eternal  been  a  tyrant,  I  could  imagine  some  dignity  in  a  revolt 
against  Him;  but  seeing  He  is  a  Father,  sin  against  Him  is  exceeding  sinful.  Sin 
is  worse  than  bestial,  for  the  beasts  only  return  evil  for  evil ;  it  is  deviUsh — for  it 
returns  evil  for  good.  3.  It  would  appear  that  Paul  made  the  discovery  of  sin  as 
sin  through  the  light  of  one  of  the  commands  (ver.  7).     III.  The  sinfulness  of  sim 

IS   MOST   CLEAELY   SEEN   IN   ITS   PEEVEBTING  THE    BEST  OP   THINGS  TO  DEADLY  PUEPOSES. 

"Working  death  in  me  by  that  which  is  good."  God's  law,  which  ordained  to  life, 
for  "  He  that  doeth  these  things  shall  Uve  in  them,"  is  wilfully  disobeyed,  and  so 
sin  turns  the  law  into  an  instrument  of  death.  It  does  worse  still.  It  is  a  strange 
propensity  of  our  nature,  that  there  are  many  things  which  we  lust  after  as  soon  as 
they  are  forbidden.  1.  How  many  there  are  who  turn  the  abounding  mercy  of  God, 
as  proclaimed  in  the  gospel,  into  a  reason  for  further  sin !  2.  There  are  indi- 
viduals who  have  greatly  sinned,  and  escaped  the  natural  consequences.  God  has 
been  very  longsuffering ;  and  therefore  they  defy  Him  again,  and  return  pre- 
sumptuously to  their  former  habits.  3.  Look  again  at  thousands  of  prosperous 
sinners  whose  riches  are  their  means  of  sinning.  They  have  all  that  heart  can 
wish,  and  instead  of  being  doubly  grateful  to  God  they  are  proud  and  thoughtless, 
and  deny  themselves  none  of  the  pleasures  of  sin.  4.  The  same  evil  is  manifested 
when  the  Lord  threatens.  5.  We  have  known  persons  in  adversity  who  ought  to 
have  been  led  to  God  by  their  sorrow,  but  instead  have  become  careless  of  all 
reUgion,  and  cast  off  aU  fear  of  God.  6.  Familiarity  with  death  and  the  grave  often 
hardens  the  heart,  and  none  become  more  callous  than  grave-diggers  and  those 
who  carry  dead  men  to  their  graves.  7.  Some  transgress  all  the  more  because  they 
have  been  placed  under  the  happy  restraints  of  godliness.  As  gnats  fly  at  a  candle 
as  soon  as  ever  they  catch  sight  of  it,  so  do  these  infatuated  ones  dash  into  evil. 
The  younger  son  had  the  best  of  fathers,  and  yet  he  could  never  be  quiet  till  he  had 
gained  his  independence,  and  had  brought  himself  to  beggary  in  a  far  country. 
8.  Men  who  live  in  times  when  zealous  and  holy  Christians  abound,  are  often  the 
worse  for  it.  When  the  Church  is  asleep  the  world  says,  "  Ah,  we  do  not  believe 
your  religion,  for  you  do  not  act  as  if  you  believed  it  yourselves,"  but  the  moment 
the  Chuxch  bestirs  herself,  the  world  cries,  "  Ihey  are  a  set  of  fanatics ;  who  oaa 


S90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cttiP.  WB. 

put  up  with  their  ravings  ?  "  Sin  is  thus  seen  to  be  exceeding  sinful.  The  Lord 
brings  good  out  of  evil,  but  sin  brings  evil  out  of  good.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Thatsla 
by  the  commandment  mlgbt  become  exceeding  slnfuL — Sin  ettahlished  by  the  law: — 
1.  In  the  natural  world  there  are  several  elements  that  are  generally  beneficent, 
notwithstanding  that  certain  combinations  among  them  are  pernicious.  But  in  the 
moral  world  there  is  an  element  which  is  wholly  and  always  bad,  viz.,  evil  or  sin. 
This  is  a  mighty  and  permanent  reality,  and  is  perceived  in  some  degree  by  all, 
however  dull  their  apprehension.  But  to  apprehend,  in  any  due  measure,  its 
extreme  malignity  is  a  rare  attainment ;  for  it  infects  the  very  judgment  which  is 
to  estimate  it.  2.  But  nothing  is  more  necessary  than  that  there  should  be  a  clear 
onderstanding  of  the  quality  of  sin,  and  a  strong  impression  of  it,  because  fatal  cou- 
sequences  are  involved  in  insensibility.  The  man,  not  aware  what  a  dreadful 
serpent  he  has  to  deal  with,  being  easy  in  its  presence,  playing  with  it,  will  certainly 
be  destroyed.  3.  In  what  way  are  men  to  be  apprised  of  the  quality  of  sin  ?  All 
men,  indeed,  are  in  some  general  manner  apprised  of  it,  by  seeing  what  dreadful 
mischief  it  does ;  but  this  gives  but  a  crude  and  limited  apprehension  of  it.  It  is 
the  Divine  law  spiritually  apprehended  that  must  expose  the  essential  nature  ol 
"that  abominable  thing."  4.  As  the  Maker  of  creatures  who  are  to  be  wholly 
dependent  on  Him,  God  must  necessarily  have  them  under  His  sovereign  authority. 
He  must  have  a  will  with  respect  to  the  state  of  their  dispositions  and  the  order  of 
their  actions.  And  He  must  perfectly  know  what  is  right  for  them.  He  would 
therefore  prescribe  a  law  unless  He  should  will  to  constitute  His  creatures  such 
that  they  must  necessarily  act  right,  leaving  no  possibility  of  their  going  wrong.  In 
that  case,  there  would  be  no  need  of  a  formal  law.  But  the  Almighty  did  not  so 
constitute  any  natures  that  we  know  of.  Even  angels  could  err  and  fall.  There- 
fore a  law  is  appointed.  And  proceeding  from  a  perfectly  holy  Being,  it  could  not 
do  less  than  prescribe  a  perfect  holiness  in  all  things ;  for  a  law  not  requiring 
perfect  rectitude  would  give  a  sanction  to  sin.  And  again,  a  law  from  such  an  Author 
cannot  accommodate  itself  to  an  imperfect  and  fallen  state  of  those  on  whom  it  is 
imposed ;  for  this  would  allow  all  the  vast  amount  of  unholiness  beyond.  The 
economy  of  mercy  is  quite  another  matter.  That  reveals  a  possibility  of  pardon 
to  the  creature's  failure  of  conformity  to  the  Divine  law ;  but  it  pardons  the 
failure  as  guilt.  And  look  into  the  sacred  volume,  and  see  whether  the  law 
has  been  accommodated  to  man's  imperfection.  Can  we  conceive  how  law 
could  be  more  high  and  comprehensive  than  as  there  set  forth  ?  (J.  Foster.) 
The  sinfulness  of  sin  (Children's  Sermon) : — The  course  usually  taken  to  explain  the 
meaning  of  words  is  to  use  other  words.  We  do  not  say  that  laziness  is  lazy,  that 
goodness  is  good,  that  cowardice  is  cowardly.  We  try  to  exhibit  in  different  words 
what  these  things  mean.  And  yet  Paul,  when  he  tells  us  what  sin  really  is,  can 
call  it  by  no  worse  name  than  its  own.  Notice  the  things  to  which  the  Bible  likens 
sin — darkness,  scarlet  and  crimson,  filth,  chains  of  slavery,  incurable  disease,  gall  of 
bitterness,  poison,  the  sting  of  an  adder,  the  burning  of  fire,  death.  And  we  obtain 
the  proper  idea  of  sin  when  we  place  it  beside  the  holy  law.  Put  coal  beside 
a  diamond,  and  it  will  seem  all  the  blacker.  Look  up  at  the  clouds  some  stormy 
day,  when  the  sun  breaks  out  for  a  moment  between  them,  and  they  appear  the 
darker  and  more  dismal.  So  God  would  have  us  look  at  sin  in  close  comparison 
with  His  holy  law,  so  that  we  may  see  how  exceeding  sinful  it  is.  I.  It  is 
DECEITFUL  (ver.  11).  It  makes  many  fair  promises,  but  always  breaks  them.  It 
holds  out  many  joys,  but  gives  much  sorrow.  There  once  sailed  from  New  Orleans 
a  steamer  laden  with  cotton,  which,  while  being  taken  aboard,  became  slightly 
moistened  by  rain.  During  the  first  part  of  the  voyage  all  went  well,  but  one  day 
there  was  a  cry  of  "  Fire  1 "  and  in  a  few  moments  the  ship  was  enveloped  in  flames. 
The  damp  and  closely  packed  cotton  had  become  heated ;  it  smouldered  away,  until 
at  last  it  burst  out  into  flame,  and  nothing  could  stop  it.  Now,  that  is  like  sin  in 
the  heart.  All  the  while  it  is  working  away,  but  no  one  perceives  it,  until,  in  an 
unexpected  moment,  it  breaks  out  into  some  awful  deed  of  wickedness.  Beware, 
then,  of  this  fatal  cheat.  "  Take  heed  lest  any  of  you  be  hardened  by  the  deceitful, 
ness  of  sin."  II.  It  makes  unclean.  It  puts  a  soil  upon  us  which  all  the  soap 
and  water  in  the  world  cannot  wash  away.  It  defiles  and  pollutes  the  whole  soul, 
and  is  likened  in  the  Bible  to  leprosy.  HI.  It  is  ruinous.  Sin  is  a  master  who 
always  pays  with  death.  Years  ago  a  young  man  went  to  Mexico.  The  war  which 
broke  out  not  long  after  put  an  end  to  the  business  of  all  Americans  residing  there, 
and  to  his  among  the  rest.  When  the  war  closed  he  presented  to  the  Government 
A  claim  for  the  loss  of  a  silver  mine,  which  he  said  he  owned  in  Mfsxico,  and  waa 


OUP.  m.]  ROMANS.  n% 

paid  £84,000.  He  dashed  aboat  for  a  time  in  great  style.  Bat,  suspicions  being 
aroused,  gentlemen  were  sent  to  Mexico  to  ascertain  the  truth.  The  whole  thing 
proved  a  fraud,  and  the  young  man  was  sentenced  to  solitary  confinement  for  ten 
years.  Unable  to  bear  his  shameful  fate,  he  poisoned  himself,  thus  fulfilling  that 
passage:  "He  that  pursueth  evil,  pursueth  it  to  his  own  death."  Another  young 
man,  an  Englishman,  related  to  persons  of  high  rank,  having  committed  forgery  in 
order  to  keep  np  a  dissipated  life,  was  sentenced  to  be  hung.  While  in  prison 
ft  minister  went  to  see  him,  and  urged  him  to  repent  of  his  sins,  and  trust  in  Jesus, 
who  was  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  He  listened  with  much  impatience,  and  then 
•aid  :  "  Sir,  I  honour  your  motives.  I  am  not  ignorant  of  the  truths  you  have  been 
■tating.  But  I  am  not  so  mean  and  cowardly  as  to  cry  for  mercy,  when  I  know  it 
cannot  be  shown  me.  I  cannot  feel,  and  I  wiU  not  pray."  Then,  pointing  to  the 
pavement  on  which  he  stood,  he  continued,  "  Tou  see  that  stone:  it  is  an  image  of 
my  heart,  insensible  to  all  the  impressions  you  are  striving  to  make."  Is  not  the 
way  of  the  transgressor  hard  ?  Some  of  the  heathen,  to  please  their  gods,  go  out 
in  a  little  boat,  with  a  vessel  in  their  hand  to  fill  it  with  water.  By  degrees  the 
boat  becomes  fuller  and  fuller,  sinks  to  its  edge,  trembles  for  an  instant,  and  then 
goes  down  with  its  occupant.  And  this  is  just  what  is  continually  going  on  with 
•very  sinner.    IV.  It  is  hateful.     It  is  hateful  on   all  the  accounts  we  have 

i'ast  noticed,  because  it  is  deceitful,  defiling,  and  ruinous.  And  it  is  hateful  in 
ts  own  nature,  because  it  is  directly  opposed  to  the  holy  God.  There  are 
three  solemn  scenes  in  the  Bible  which  lead  us  to  determine  that  sin  must 
be  unspeakably  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  drowning  waters  of  th« 
Deluge,  the  crucifixion  of  God's  beloved  Son,  and  the  devouring  fires  of 
hell,  are  all  most  certain  witnesses  of  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.  (E. 
Woodt.)  The  sinfulm^ss  of  sin  : — I.   There  is  a  great  deal   of   evil  and 

SINFULNESS  ts  BIN.  1.  In  the  general.  This  may  appear — (1)  By  the  names 
of  sin.  What  evil  is  there  but  sin  is  invested  with  the  name  thereof  ? — filthiness 
(Ezek.  xxxvi.  25) ;  nakedness  (Eev.  iii.  18) ;  blindness  (Matt.  xv.  14) ;  folly  (Psa. 
Ixxxv.  8) ;  madness  (Luke  xv.  17  ;  Acts  xxvi.  11) ;  death  (Eph.  ii.  1) ;  an  abomina- 
tion (Prov.  viii.  7) ;  and  because  there  is  no  word  that  can  express  the  evil  of  sin 
the  apostle  calls  it  "exceeding  sinful."  (2)  The  effects  of  sin.  (a)  Separation 
from  God  the  chief  good  (Isa.  lix.  2).  (6)  Union  to  Satan  (John  viii.  44).  Sin 
makes  us  the  children  of  the  devil,  (c)  The  death  of  Christ  (2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  1  Pet. 
ii.  24).  (d)  A  general  curse  upon  the  whole  creation  (Gen.  iii.  17).  (e)  The  soiling 
and  staining  of  all  our  glory,  and  the  image  of  God  in  us  (Kom.  iii.  23).  (/) 
Horror  of  conscience,  {g)  Sin  is  that  brimstone  that  heU-fire  feeds  upon  to  all 
eternity.  2.  More  particularly — (1)  The  sin  of  our  nature,  (a)  That  leprosy 
is  worst  which  is  most  universal  and  over-spreading.  Now  sin  spreads  over  all 
oar  faculties :  our  understanding,  reason,  will,  affections,  (b)  That  disease  is 
worst  which  is  most  incurable ;  and  no  human  remedy  has  been  found  for  sin. 
(e)  That  is  most  formidable  which  is  most  unwearied,  and  sin  is  as  un- 
wearied as  the  fountain  in  sending  up  water.  (2)  The  sin  of  our  hearts  and 
thoughts.  These  are  the  most  incurable,  and  are  the  parents  of  all  our  sinful 
actions  (Psa.  xix.  12,  13).  By  them  our  former  sin  that  was  dead  is  revived 
again,  and  hath  a  resurrection  by  our  contemplating  it  with  delight.  Thereby 
also  a  man  may  possibly  sin  that  sin  in  effect  which  he  never  did  commit  in 
act.  Thereby  a  man  may  or  doth  repent  of  his  very  repentance.  (3)  As  for  the 
sin  of  our  lives  and  practice,  especiaUy  living  under  the  gospel,  the  evil  thereof  is 
very  great ;  for — (a)  Sin  under  the  gospel  is  sinning  against  the  remedy,  and  against 
the  greatest  obligations.  By  our  sinning  under  the  gospel  we  sin  against  mercy 
and  grace,  and  thereby  engage  God,  our  greatest  friend,  to  become  our  greatest 
adversary.  (6)  The  more  repugnancy  there  is  betwixt  the  sin  and  the  sinner  the 
greater  is  the  sin.  Now,  there  is  a  special  repugnancy  betwixt  the  gospel  and  a  man 
that  sins  under  the  gospel ;  for  he  professes  the  contrary,  and  therefore  sin  there  is 
the  greater,  (c)  The  more  hurtful  any  sHi  is  the  greater  is  that  sin  :  sinning  under 
the  gospel  is  very  hurtful  to  ourselves ;  as  poison  taken  in  something  that  is  warm 
is  the  most  venomous,  so  sin  under  the  gospel  is  the  deadliest  poison,  because  it  is 
warmed  with  gospel  heat ;  and  it  is  hurtful  to  others,  because  they  are  hardened, 
(d)  The  more  that  a  man  casts  contempt  upon  the  great  things  of  God  by  his  sin 
the  greater  and  worse  is  his  sin.  Sins  under  the  gospel  cast  contempt  upon  the 
glory  of  God,  the  glorious  offer  of  His  grace,  (e)  The  more  costly  and  chargeabla 
any  bJ%  is  the  worse  it  is.  Now,  a  man  that  sins  under  the  gospel  cannot  sin  at  so 
eheap  «  rate  as  another  (Luke  xii.  47).    II.  Thouoh  there  be  thus  uucb  bvil 


592  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chas.  tu, 

m  SIN,  THIS  DOTH   NOT  APPEAB  TO   MAN   UNTIL    HE    TTJBNS    UNTO   GoD :   till    then    hil 

Bin  is  dead,  but  then  it  is  revived.  1.  For — (1)  Till  then  a  man  is  in  the  dark ; 
and  who  can  see  the  greatness  of  an  evil  in  the  dark  ?  (2)  Till  then,  grace,  the 
contrary,  is  not  placed  in  the  soul ;  one  contrary  doth  show  the  other.  (3)  And  till 
then  sin  is  in  Its  own  place.  Water  is  not  heavy  in  its  own  place,  in  the  river ; 
but  take  but  a  pailful  of  water  out  of  the  river  and  you  feel  the  weight  of  it.  Now, 
till  a  man  turn  unto  God  sin  is  in  its  own  place,  and  therefore  its  sinfulness  doth 
not  appear.  2.  But  you  will  say,  How  comes  this  to  pass  ?  (1)  I  answer,  Sin  is  a 
spiritual  thing ;  and  a  man  that  liveth  by  sense  cannot  see  what  is  spiritual.  (2) 
A  man  is  blind  unto  what  he  loves  ;  till  a  man  turn  unto  God  he  loves  his  sin,  and 
therefore  the  evil  of  sin  doth  not  appear.  (3)  The  more  blinds  a  man  hath  that 
cover  his  sin  the  less  he  sees  it ;  now,  before  a  man  turn  unto  God  all  his  morality 
is  but  a  blind.  "  True,"  says  he,  "  I  am  a  sinner  ;  but  I  pray  and  perform  duty, 
therefore  am  not  so  great  a  sinner."  (4)  The  more  a  man  looks  upon  sin  the  less 
it  appears  to  be.  There  he  sees  profit,  pleasure,  and  this  makes  his  sin  appear 
little.  (5)  Sometimes  by  the  providence  of  God  sin  meets  with  good  events  ;  and 
holiness  meets  with  bad  events  in  the  world,  and  so  the  evil  and  sinfulness  of  sin  ia 
hidden.  (6)  The  less  a  man  is  at  the  work  of  private  examination  the  less  sin 
appears  to  be  sin.  III.  When  a  man  tubns  unto  the  Lord,  then  bin  appeaks  im 
ITS  SINFULNESS.  For  then — 1.  He  is  weary  and  heavy-laden  under  the  burden  of 
his  sin ;  the  more  weary  he  is  the  more  sin  appears  evil  (Matt,  xi  28).  2.  Then  he 
sees  God,  and  not  till  then  ;  the  more  a  man  sees  the  glory,  goodness,  wisdom,  and 
holiness  of  God  the  more  sin  appears  in  its  sinfulness  (Isa.  vi.  6 ;  Job  xlii.  5,  6). 
3.  Then  a  man  sees  Christ  crucified,  and  not  till  then ;  and  there  is  nothing  can 
give  us  such  a  sight  of  sin  as  that  (chap.  iii.  20).  4.  When  a  man  hath  got  the 
true  prospect  of  hell,  and  of  the  wrath  of  God,  then  sin  appears  sinful.  6.  When 
a  man's  heart  is  filled  with  the  love  of  God,  and  possessed  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
then  sin  appears  to  him  to  be  very  sinful  (John  xvi.  8).  {W.  Bridge,  M.A.) 
The  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin : — I.  As  to  the  sin  itself.  It  is  a  sin  which  is 
inward  in  the  heart,  not  outward  in  the  life  (ver.  17).  A  sin  which  gives  being  to 
all  other  sins,  and  gives  strength  for  the  performance.  A  sin  which  dwelleth  in 
us  (ver.  17),  is  ever  present  with  us  (ver.  21),  an  inherent,  deceitful,  tyrannical 
evil  (vers.  11,  20,  28),  is  ever  presenting  occasion  of  sinning,  and  pushing  on  the 
soul  to  acts  of  sin.  What  can  this  be  but  the  sin  of  our  nature,  or  that  perverse 
propensity  to  sin  which  is  derived  as  a  punishment  of  the  first  man's  first  offence  I 
1.  It  is  a  plague  which  has  infected  the  whole  man.  The  understanding,  what  is 
it  but  the  seat  of  darkness,  misapprehension,  and  error  ?  (Eom.  iii.  11).  What  is 
the  will  but  enmity  and  rebelHon  against  God  (John  v.  40)  f  The  affections, 
which  are  as  wings  to  raise  the  soul  to  God  and  heavenly  things,  are  turned  qnite 
downwards,  being  set  on  things  on  the  earth.  Conscience  itself  is  become  defiled 
by  this  sinful  sin,  so  that  it  neither  witnesses,  reproves,  or  judges,  according  to 
God's  direction,  but  becomes  first  easy,  then  remiss,  next  hardened  and  feared. 
Tea,  our  very  memories  are  drawn  over  to  the  corrupt  part ;  like  leaky  vessels, 
whatever  is  good  and  pure  they  let  out,  and  keep  in  little  but  what  is  filthy  and 
evil.  Yea,  these  very  bodies  of  ours  are  become  vile  bodies,  through  sin  that 
dwelleth  in  us ;  subject  to  diseases  and  corruptions,  and  are  tempters  of  the  soul 
to  sin,  and  servants  of  it  in  all  outward  acts  of  sinning  (ver.  5).  2.  It  is  the  cause 
of  all  those  sins  which  are  in  the  life  (Jas.  i.  14).  This  is  the  fountain,  particular 
sins  are  but  the  streams.  3.  This  sin  of  our  nature  is,  virtually,  all  sin.  Sin  in 
the  gross,  in  all  the  seeds  of  it ;  the  combustible  matter  which  only  waits  for  out- 
ward occasions  and  temptations  to  blow  it  into  a  flame  ;  it  is  a  body  which  hath 
many  members,  and  it  is  working  in  order  to  make  provision  for  them  all.  4.  It 
is  more  durable  and  abiding  than  all  other  sins,  therefore  more  exceedingly  sinful. 
It  may  change  its  course  in  a  natural  man,  but  it  never  loses  its  power.  5.  It  is 
exceeding  sinful  sin,  because  it  is  ever  encompassing  and  warring  against  the  soul, 
in  whom  it  dwells.  It  envenoms  every*action,  every  thought  and  duty,  which 
proceed  from  the  regenerate  themselves.  6.  It  is  an  hereditary  evil ;  all  men  are 
defiled  with  it,  therefore  all  are  concerned  in  it  (1  Cor.  xv.  22.)  H.  How,  or  by 
what  means  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  this  bin  appears.  "That  sin  by  the 
commandment  might  become  exceeding  sinful."  1.  By  the  commandment,  there- 
fore, we  are  to  understand  the  whole  moral  law  which  the  Spirit  of  God  has  given 
on  purpose,  and  which  He  ever  makes  use  of  to  convince  of  sin.  2.  How  sin  ia 
made  by  the  commandment  to  appear  exceeding  sinful?  (1)  The  law  or  com- 
mandment shows  the  soul  that  it  is  against  God ;  it  is  a  depravation  of  His  whole 


CBAP.  vn.]  BOMANS.  89) 

image,  a  contrariety  to  His  whole  will,  opposite  to  His  jnstioe,  holiness,  and  trnth, 
and  enmity  to  all  His  purposes  of  grace  and  mercy.  That  law  which  condemns  sin 
In  the  act,  much  more  condemns  it  in  the  principle.  (2)  It  shows  the  soul  that 
death  which  God  has  threatened  against  it  (Eph.  ii.  3).  That  is  the  dismal  peal 
which  it  rings  in  the  sinner's  ears.  (3)  Another  way  in  which  the  law  convinces 
of  the  exceeding  fulness  of  this,  and  of  all  other  sins,  is  by  burdening  the  con- 
Bcienoe  with  a  sense  of  it.  It  brings  God's  word  and  man's  sin  together  (Psa. 
li.  3).  But  think  not  that  the  law  does  this  of  itself.  The  law  is  but  the  instru- 
ment or  means  of  conviction,  the  Spirit  is  the  great  efficient  (John  xvi.  10).  The 
law  is  the  glass  wherein  sin  is  seen,  the  Spirit  holds  it  up  to  the  sinner,  and  causes 
him  to  see  his  own  face  in  it.  The  law  is  the  hammer,  but  it  is  the  Spirit  that 
works  by  it.  III.  Wht  is  it  that  God  suffers  the  motions  op  sin,  in  such 
WHOM  He  knows  to  be  His  own,  to  be  bo  exceeding  violent  and  dkeadfdl? 
In  general  it  is  that  the  sin  of  our  nature  might  always  appear  sin.  1.  Therefore 
such  a  fight  as  this  sets  and  keeps  open  a  spring  of  repentance  towards  God 
always.  The  sin  of  our  nature  is  what  we  are  to  be  humbled  for,  and  to  repent  of, 
every  day  we  live  (Ezek.  xvi.  61).  2.  Another  use  of  the  prevalency  of  corrupt 
nature  in  the  saints  is  to  divorce  them  from  their  own  righteousness,  and  to  slay 
carnal  confidence  in  them  all  their  life  long.  3.  It  is  to  show  the  suitableness  of 
Christ  as  the  believer's  surety,  and  to  stir  us  up  unto  more  earnest  believing  every 
day.  4.  These  workings  of  sin  are  of  use  to  make  us  very  watchful  in  our  Chris- 
tian walk.  Where  there  is  godly  mourning  there  will  be  godly  fear;  both  are 
where  there  is  a  due  apprehension  of  the  sinfulness  of  that  sin  that  dwelleth  in  us. 
Uses  :  1.  Is  there  so  much  sin  in  us  ?  Let  this  silence  all  murmurings  against 
God  under  the  burden  of  our  afflictions.  2.  Is  the  sin  of  our  nature  so  exceeding 
sinful  ?  Then  let  the  youngest  lay  it  to  heart.  3.  Does  sin  by  the  law  become 
exceeding  sinful  7  Then  the  law  is  a  blessing  as  well  as  the  gospel.  The  one 
shows  what  the  disease  is,  the  other  directs  to  the  only  remedy.  4.  See  the 
wisdom  of  God  in  making  the  greatest  contraries  work  together  for  His  people's 
good.  Even  the  working  of  sin  in  the  regenerate  is  a  means  of  quickening  their 
trust  upon  Christ  and  their  life  in   Him.      {John  Hill.)  The  sinfulnest  of 

sin : — We  can  best  estimate  the  extent  of  any  good  by  filling  our  minds  with 
the  vastness  of  the  evil  which  that  good  was  destined  to  take  away.  If  I  were 
standing  upon  the  margin  of  the  sea,  and  pondered  the  greatness  of  its  capacity, 
and,  as  I  thought,  some  vast  mountain  were  to  roll  itself  into  its  bosom  and 
disappear,  would  not  the  thought  help  me  to  the  exceeding  depth  of  those  mighty 
waters?  So,  by  God's  grace,  the  contemplation  of  the  enormity  of  my  "  sin  *'  will 
assist  me  to  some  measure  of  that  love  in  which  that  enormity  has  been  absorbed. 
I.  What  is  ••  bin  "  ?  1.  The  transgression  of  the  law.  Our  first  parents  had  a 
law — "Thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it."  They  transgressed  that  one  law,  and  it  was 
"  sin."  We  have  one  law — love.  We  transgress  it,  and  it  is  "  sin."  2.  Rebellion 
— the  resistance  of  a  human  mind  against  the  sovereignty  of  its  Creator.  It  little 
matters  in  comparison  what  may  be  the  act:  the  fact  is  the  important  thing.  Man 
measures  "sin"  by  the  injury  it  inflicts  upon  society,  or  upon  the  sinner.  God 
measures  it  by  the  degree  of  its  rebellion  against  Himself.  3.  No  "  sin  "  is  single. 
You  commit  some  offence,  and  it  breaks  all  God's  laws.  "  Whosoever  shall  offend 
in  one  point  is  guilty  of  all."  (1)  The  principle  of  obedience  is  a  single  thing:  the 
man  that  has  broken  one  law  has  violated  this  principle,  and  therefore  he  is  as 
much  a  breaker  of  the  law  as  if  he  had  broken  a  thousand  things.  (2)  All  God's 
law  is  one — "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God."  He  that  had  done  one  "sin," 
did  not  love  God.  (3)  If  you  take  any  one  "  sin,"  you  will  be  surprised  to  find  how 
many  "  sins  "  lie  rolled  and  coiled  up  in  that  little  compass.  Remember,  first,  that 
all  "  sins  of  commission  "  begin  in  "  sins  of  omission."  And  if  you  add  to  that  the 
thought,  the  desire,  the  motive,  the  act  itself  and  its  consequences,  and  when  you 
put  ail  this  over  aejainst  the  mercies,  how  will  that,  which  once  looked  one,  swell 
oat  a  thousandfold  ?  H.  What  does  sin  do  ?  1.  Any  sin  occupies  a  certain  space, 
and  there  is  a  certain  period  of  sinning.  The  spot  and  the  period  may  be  very 
small ;  nevertheless,  that  was  God's  place,  and  "  sin  "  had  no  right  to  be  there. 
Therefore  that  sin  was  a  trespasser.  It  came  wrongfully  upon  God's  territory. 
2  It  did  much  more  than  "  trespass."  By  your  sin  you  have  taken  a  jewel  out  of 
the  crown  of  God.  Therefore  I  charge  upon  every  sin  with  robbery.  3.  Further, 
when  God  draws  the  real  character  of  a  murderer,  he  rlraws  it  thus — "  Whoso 
Bheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed  ;  for  in  the  image  of  God 
made  He  man."  Now,  "  the  image  of  God  "  is  innocence,  and  purity,  and  love, 
VOL.  I.  S8 


CM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  m. 

Bnt  sin  violates  these,  and  therefore  breaks  God's  image  and  is  a  murderer.  Bat 
of  what  sort  ?  The  most  aggravated  possible.  For  if  there  had  been  only  one 
"  sin,"  that  one  "  sin  "  would  have  required  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  to  wash  it 
out.  And  if  it  be  thus  with  all  "  sin,"  how  much  more  must  it  be  with  some  of 
you  who  •'  crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh  "  ?  III.  Wheee  will  it  end  t  I  have 
Baid  that  every  sin  lies  in  a  series ;  and  none  can  calculate  what  will  be  the  chain 
of  consequences,  which  shall  stretch  on  and  on  beyond  time  into  eternity.  The 
Bible  tells  us  of  an  awful  state  in  which  a  soul  may  pass  into  a  hopeless  and 
nnpardonable  condition.  First  there  comes  the  grieving ;  then  the  resisting ;  then 
the  quenching ;  then  the  blaspheming  of  the  Spirit ;  and  so  the  reprobate  state 
draws  on.  But  it  is  quite  clear  that  every  sin  which  a  man  wilfully  does  is  another 
and  another  step  in  advance  towards  the  unpardonable  state :  and  in  all  sin  there 
is  a  tendency  to  run  faster,  faster,  as  it  makes  progress.  Indeed,  there  is  not  a 
"  sin  "  which  has  not  death  bound  up  in  it.  A  sin  leads  to  a  habit,  a  habit  to  a 
godless  state  of  mind,  and  the  godless  state  of  mind  to  death.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
A  grave  charge: — Why  didn't  Paul  say  exceeding  "black,"  or  "horrible"? 
Because  there  is  nothing  in  the  world  so  bad  as  sin.  For  if  yon  call  it  black  there 
is  no  moral  excellency  or  deformity  in  black  or  white ;  black  is  as  good  as  white. 
If  you  call  sin  "  deadly,"  yet  death  hath  no  evil  in  it  compared  with  sin.  For 
plants  to  die  is  not  a  dreadful  thing ;  is  part  of  the  organisation  of  nature  that 
successive  generations  of  vegetables  should  spring  up,  and  in  due  time  should  form 
the  root-soil  for  other  generations  to  follow.  If  you  want  a  word  you  must  come 
home  for  it.  Sin  must  be  named  after  itself.  I.  Sin  is  in  itself  "  exobediko 
BiNTUL."  1.  It  is  rebellion  against  God.  It  was  God's  right  that  whatsoever  He  in 
wisdom  and  goodness  made  should  serve  His  purpose,  and  give  Him  glory.  The 
stars  do  this.  The  world  of  matter  does  this.  We,  favoured  with  thought,  affection, 
a  high  spiritual  and  immortal  existence,  were  especially  bound  to  be  obedient  to 
Him  that  made  us.  Ah,  it  is  "  exceeding  sinful "  when  the  crown-rights  of  Him 
upon  whose  will  we  exist  are  ignored  or  contravened  1  2.  How  exceeding  sinful  is 
this  rebellion  against  such  a  God  1  God  is  good  to  the  fullest  extent  of  goodness. 
It  were  heaven  to  serve  Him.  Ah  I  sin  is  base  indeed,  a  rebellion  against  monarch's 
gentlest  sway,  an  insurrection  against  parent's  tenderest  right,  a  revolt  against 
peerless  benignity  1  3.  What  an  aggravation  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin  is  this :  that 
it  rebels  against  laws,  every  one  of  which  is  just  I  The  State  of  Massachusetts  at 
first  passed  a  resolution  that  they  would  be  governed  by  the  laws  of  God  until  they 
found  time  to  make  better  ?  WiU  they  ever  improve  upon  the  model  ?  The  law 
forbids  that  which  is  naturally  evil,  and  commends  that  which  is  essentially  good. 
4.  Sin  is  "  exceeding  sinful,"  because  it  is  antagonistic  to  our  own  interest,  a 
mutiny  against  our  own  welfare.  Whenever  God  forbids  a  thing  we  may  rest 
assured  it  would  be  dangerous.  What  He  permits  or  commends  will,  in  the  long 
mn,  be  in  the  highest  degree  conducive  to  our  best  interests.  Tet  we  spurn  these 
commands  like  a  boy  that  is  refused  the  edged  tool  lest  he  cut  himself,  and  he  will 
cut  himself,  not  believing  in  his  father's  wisdom.  6.  Sin  is  an  upsetting  of  the 
entire  order  of  the  universe.  In  your  family  you  feel  that  nothing  can  go  smoothly 
unless  there  is  a  head  whose  direction  shall  regulate  all  the  members.  6.  If  yon 
want  proof  that  sin  is  exceedingly  sinful,  see  what  it  has  done  already  in  the  world. 
Who  withered  Eden  ?  Whence  come  wars  and  fightings  but  from  your  own  lusts 
and  from  your  sins  ?  What  is  this  earth  to-day  but  a  vast  cemetery  ?  All  its 
surface  bears  relics  of  the  human  race.  Who  slew  all  these  ?  Who  indeed  bat 
sin?  II.  Some  pa^ticulab  sins  abe  exoeedino  sinful  above  ant  obdinabt 
TBANSOBEssioN.  Of  this  kind  are  sins  against  the  gospeL  To  reject  faithful 
messengers  sent  from  God,  loving  parents,  earnest  pastors,  diligent  teachers ;  to 
slight  the  kind  message  that  they  bring  and  the  yearning  anxiety  that  they  feel  for 
as.  To  set  at  naught  the  dying  Saviour,  whose  death  is  the  solemn  proof  of  love ; 
to  play  false  towards  Him  after  having  made  a  profession  of  your  attachment  to 
Him ;  to  be  numbered  with  His  Church  and  yet  to  be  in  alliance  with  the  world ; 
to  sin  against  light  and  knowledge ;  to  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit ;  to  go  on  sinning 
after  you  have  smarted;  to  pash  onward  to  hell,  all  tiiis  is  "  exceeding  sinfaL" 
((7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  14-25  (Whole  passage).  The  whole  falls  into  three  cyoles,  eaeh  closing 
with  a  sort  of  refrain.  It  is  Uke  a  dirge ;  the  most  sorrowful  elegy  which  ever  pro- 
ceeded from  a  human  heart.  The  first  cycle  embraces  vers.  14-17.  The  second, 
which  begins  and  ends  almost  in  the  same  way  as  the  first,  is  contained  in  vers. 


.  Tn.]  ROMANS.  195 

18-20.  The  third,  which  differs  from  the  first  two  in  form,  but  is  identical  with 
them  in  substance,  is  contained  in  vers.  21-23,  and  its  conclusion,  vers.  24,  25,  is 
at  the  same  time  that  of  the  whole  passage.  It  has  been  sought  to  find  a  gradation 
between  these  three  cycles.  Lange  thinks  that  the  first  refers  rather  to  the  under- 
standing, the  second  to  the  feelings,  the  third  to  the  conscience.  But  this  distinction 
is  artificial,  and  useless  as  well.  For  the  power  of  the  passage  lies  in  its  very 
monotony.  The  repetition  of  the  same  thoughts  and  expressions  is,  as  it  were,  the 
echo  of  the  desperate  repetition  of  the  same  experiences,  in  that  legal  state  wherein 
man  oan  only  shake  his  chains  without  succeeding  in  breaking  them.  Powerless  he 
writhes  to  and  fro  in  the  prison  in  which  sin  and  the  law  have  confined  him,  and  in 
the  end  of  the  day  can  only  utter  that  cry  of  distress  whereby,  having  exhausted  his 
force  for  the  struggle,  he  appeals,  without  knowing  Him,  to  the  Deliverer.  (Prof. 
Oodet.)  Man's  natural  incapability  of  good : — I.  Whence  it  aeises.  1.  The 
law  is  spiritual.  2.  Human  nature  is  carnal.  II.  How  it  discovebs  itseli*.  1.  In 
the  contradiction  of  practice  and  conviction ;  this  proves  that  the  law  is  good,  but 
sin  worlrs  in  us  (vers.  15,  17).  2.  In  the  inefficacy  of  our  resolutions;  this  shows 
that  sin  is  more  powerful  than  our  good  purposes  (vers.  18-20).  8.  In  the  failure 
of  our  good  desires ;  this  indicates  that  our  delight  in  what  is  good  is  overpowered 
by  the  love  of  evil.  III.  What  should  bb  its  effect  ?  It  should  inspire — 1.  An 
earnest  aspiration  for  deliverance.  2.  Gratitude  for  the  salvation  of  the  gospel.  3. 
A  firm  resolution  to  embrace  it.  ({J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  condition  of  the  awakened 
$inner : — He  feels  himself — 1.  At  variance  with  God's  law  (ver.  14).  2.  At  variance 
with  himself  (vers.  15-17).  3.  Utterly  helpless  (vers.  18,  19).  4.  The  slave  of  sin 
(vers.  20-23).  6.  Miserable  and  without  hope,  excepting  in  Christ  (vers.  24,25). 
{Ibid.)  Legal  experience  a  defeat : — The  interpretation  of  this  passage  has  been 
embarrassed  by  the  unnecessary  assumption  that  it  must  describe  either  a  regenerate 
or  an  unregenerate  man.  The  alternative  question  as  we  should  state  it  is,  Is  this 
set  forth  as  a  distinctively  evangelical  experience,  or  as  one  of  a  legal  type,  in 
whomsoever  it  may  be  found?  If  this  is  the  real  point,  then  both  classes  of 
interpreters  may  be  partly  right  and  partly  wrong,  for  the  passage  may  describe  the 
experience  which  is  but  too  common  in  Christians,  and  be  purposely  set  forth  as 
defective  in  the  evangelical  element,  as  abnormal  to  a  proper  Christian  state,  and  as 
exemplifying  the  operation  of  law  rather  than  of  gospel  in  the  work  of  sanctification. 
And  this  is  our  idea  of  it.  The  arguments  on  both  sides  are  inconclusive.  Those 
vhomake  out  the  case  of  a  converted  man  point  to  the  use  of  "  I  "  and  "  me,"  and 
of  the  verbs  in  the  present  tense,  as  though  Paul  told  of  his  present  state.  They 
further  point  to  such  expressions  as  to  sin  as  "  what  I  hate  "  and  "  the  evil  which  I 
would  not " ;  also  to  such  language  respecting  hoUness  as,  "  what  I  would,"  "  I 
delight  in  the  law  of  God,  after  the  inward  man,"  and  "I  myself  serve  the  law  of 
God."  Bat,  on  the  contrary,  those  who  insist  on  making  out  an  unconverted  man, 
have  their  equally  strong  expressions,  which  seem  only  appropriate  to  one  yet  anre- 
generate;  such  as,  "  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin,"  "sin  that  dwelleth  in  me," 
"how  to  perform  that  which  is  good  I  find  not,"  "  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my 
members,"  "  oh,  wretched  man  that  I  am  I  "  &o.  Thus  they  in  a  measure  balance 
and  neutralise  each  other.  But  the  two  classes  of  expressions  taken  together  show 
a  state  of  mind  which  may  have  much  which  is  truly  Christian,  while  yet  the  experi- 
ence as  a  whole  is  sorrowfully  legal  and  weak.  The  gospel  offers  something  more 
victorious  and  blissful.  I.  The  dbift  and  necessities  of  the  apostle's  abqument 
REQUIRE  this  VIEW.  In  Order  to  prove  the  need  of  the  gospel  salvation,  and  its 
efficacy,  he  demonstrates  in  the  early  chapters  the  universality  of  sin  and  ruin,  and 
the  impossibility  of  justification  by  the  law.  Then  he  brings  forward  Christ's 
atoning  sacrifice,  and  the  offer  of  a  free  pardon  to  the  penitent  believer,  and  defends 
the  scheme  from  the  charge  of  doing  away  with  the  need  of  holiness.  And  this 
occupies  him  nearly  to  the  middle  of  this  seventh  chapter,  when  there  remains  the 
important  question.  Whether  the  law,  though  a  failure  as  to  justification,  may  not 
suffice  as  a  sanctifying  influence  ?  Is  Christ  as  necessary  for  sanctification  as  for 
justification  ?  If  that  be  not  discussed,  and  settled  against  the  law,  then  Paul's 
argument  is  plainly  incomplete :  not  only  so,  but  if  the  experience  here  given  be 
his  own  at  the  time,  and  the  normal  experience  of  saints,  he  seems  to  concede  a 
failure  in  the  gospel.  II.  The  passage  taken  as  a  whole,  apart  from  binglh 
BXPRE88I0N8,  NECESSITATES  THE  SAME  VIEW.  After  all  that  cau  bo  urged  from  words 
and  phrases  indicative  of  a  regard  for  hoUness  and  a  dislike  of  gin,  the  all -signifi- 
cant fact  remains,  that  there  is  nothing  but  utter,  habitual  defeat  I  Not  a  note  of 
▼iotory  is  anywhere  heard.    The  only  word  of  cheer  is  in  a  parenthetical  clause : 


596  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  tii, 

"  I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord  " ;  which  he  throws  in  by  way  of 
anticipation  of  the  deliverance  which  he  depicts  in  the  next  chapter,  as  the  result 
of  another  and  far  higher  experience.  This  unrelieved  aspect  of  defeat  shows  that 
Paul  writes  here  of  legal  failure  and  not  of  gospel  success.    III.  This  view  is  cob- 

BOBOBATED   BY  THE    PCBPOSELT  CONTBASTED  EXPERIENCE  WHICH  IMMEDIATELY  FOLLOWS. 

The  eighth  chapter  tells  only  of  victory.  It  cannot  possibly  mean  the  same  generic 
experience  as  the  preceding  one  of  lamentation  and  defeat.  Both  cannot  be  truly 
evangelical,  though  both  may  be  found  in  converted  men.  It  must  be  Paul's  intent 
to  call  men  out  of  the  first  into  the  second,  as  the  genuine  gospel  state  into  which 
he  himself  had  entered.  For,  mark,  he  not  only  uses  the  same  impersonation,  but 
the  expressions  in  the  eighth  chapter  are  specifically  chosen  to  represent  the  contra- 
diction of  the  state  in  the  seventh  chapter.  Thus  in  the  seventh:  "I  am  carnal," 
and  "  in  me,  that  is,  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth  no  good  thing  " ;  but  in  the  eighth : 
"  Who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit,"  and  "  To  be  carnally-minded 
is  death,  but  to  be  spiritually-minded  is  life  and  peace."  In  the  seventh:  "I  see 
another  law  .  .  .  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my 
members " ;  "  who  shall  deUver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  but  in  the 
eighth  :  "  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free  from  the 
law  of  sin  and  death."  In  the  seventh  :  "  Oh,  wretched  man  that  I  am  1 "  but  in  the 
eighth  :  •'  There  is  now  no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  This 
contrast  of  language  hardly  allows  one  to  think  otherwise  than  that  Paul  sets  forth 
the  legal  experience  in  the  seventh  chapter,  and  the  evangelical  in  the  eighth.  lY. 
These  is  a  fdetheb  cobboboeation  in  the  mobe  inspibinq  and  hopeful  view 
WHICH  it  presents  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.  The  idea  that  the  highest  type  of 
attainment  is  described  in  the  seventh  chapter,  is  greatly  discouraging  to  the  more 
earnest  believers,  while  it  acts  as  an  opiate  to  the  consciences  of  the  worldly-minded. 
The  Church  sadly  needs  lifting,  first  out  of  worldliness,  and  secondly  out  of  legahty. 
Christians  mast  learn  that  sanctification,  as  well  as  justification,  is  by  faith  ;  that 
spiritual  victory  is  not  by  natural  law,  but  by  grace.  {W.  W.  Patton,  D.D.)  For 
we  know  that  the  law  is  spiritual :  but  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin. — Ttie 
spirituality  of  the  Divine  law  and  the  sinfulness  of  man: — I.  The  chabacteb  op  the 
Divine  law.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  moral  law  is  meant;  for  the  cere- 
monial could  not  be  denominated  spiritual,  being  composed  of  external  rites,  not  in 
themselves  holy,  although  adapted  to  promote  holiness,  ard  especially  to  typify  a 
holier  dispensation.  But  the  moral  law  is  entirely  spiritaaL  It  directs  to  what  is 
essentially  right  and  pure,  and  requires  perfect  purity  in  man.  The  substance  of  it 
is  given  in  Matt.  xxii.  37.  1.  The  requirements  of  this  law  are  such  as  necessarily 
imply  a  spiritual  obedience.  Not  only  are  they  the  requirements  of  an  infinitely 
holy  Being,  who  is  a  Spirit,  but  the  very  root  and  spring  of  the  obedience  itself  is  a 
spiritual  exercise.  It  is,  in  its  nature,  distinguished  from  all  the  practices  of 
paganism,  from  all  human  enactments,  and  even  from  the  ritual  injunctions  of  the 
Mosaic  law.  There  might  be  a  strict  and  regular  obedience  to  the  letter  of  such 
laws,  without  a  right  state  of  feeUng  towards  the  authority  which  enjoined  them. 
But  to  the  moral  law  of  God  there  can  be  no  real  obedience  except  so  far  as  it  is  the 
obedience  of  love.  There  is  no  possibility  of  substituting  appearances  for  realities,  pro- 
fession for  action,  or  actions  themselves  for  affection  and  principle.  The  law  therefore 
reaches  theinmost  thoughts.  2.  The  spirituaUty  of  the  law  is  also  shown  bythe  exten- 
siveness  of  its  demands.  It  requires  obedience  to  be  not  only  pure  in  its  nature,  but 
perfect  in  its  amount.  Love  to  God  must  not  be  contaminated  by  a  single  sinful  thought. 
It  is  a  law  for  the  whole  heart,  and  requires  all  that  man  possessed  when  God  created 
him  in  His  own  image.  It  allows  of  no  change — it  admits  of  no  deficiency — it 
makes  no  allowances — it  bends  to  no  circumstances.  Nor  should  it  be  forgotten 
that  this  applies  to  the  duties  of  the  second  table,  as  well  as  those  of  the  first.  As 
the  one  requires  perfect  love  to  God,  producing  spotless  obedience  to  Him,  so  the 
other  requires  perfect  love  to  man,  producing  spotless  conduct  towards  our  neigh- 
bour. Nor  are  its  demands  satisfied  by  external  compliances.  The  world  may  be 
content  with  politeness,  but  the  law  of  God  enjoins  inward  righteousness  and  bene- 
volence, such  as  is  fit  to  be  looked  upon  by  the  eye  of  Omniscience,  and  worthy  to 
be  approved  by  Him  who  formed  the  nature  of  man  to  be  the  image  of  His  own,  II. 
The  impression  produced  on  the  mind  which  hath  a  eight  appbehension  of  the 
liAW.  "  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin."  The  word  carnal  is  sometimes  used  to 
denote  an  entire  alienation  from  God.  But  here,  as  in  some  other  passages,  it  is 
used  in  reference  to  the  imperfect  state  of  Christians.  In  comparison  with  the 
spiritaality  of  the  law,  the  hohest  of  men  are  carnal .     The  apostle  felt  conscious  of 


oup.  vn.]  ROMANS.  Wl 

his  own  imperfection,  just  in  proportion  as  he  discerned  the  holiness  of  the  law. 
And  when  he  describes  himself  as  "  lold  under  sin,"  it  intimates  how  deep  his  con- 
viction was.  Notwithstanding  the  freedom  which,  since  his  conversion,  he  had 
obtained  from  his  former  prejudices  and  sins,  he  still  found  some  fetters  remaining. 
"  He  had  not  yet  attained,  neither  was  he  already  perfect."  On  this  we  remark — 1. 
That  a  right  knowledge  of  the  law  must  convince  every  one  of  the  utter  impossi- 
bility of  obtaining  salvation  by  it.  You  then  perceive  how  you  have  failed,  and 
therefore  how  impossible  it  is  to  stand  on  the  ground  of  self-righteousness.  Mea- 
sared  by  the  standard  of  right,  it  is  altogether  defective  and  defiled.  It  is  an  error  to 
suppose  that  although  the  case  is  bad,  yet  it  may  be  mended  by  doing  now  the  best 
yon  can.  There  is  little  probability  of  your  doing  the  best  you  can ;  but  if  you  did, 
still  the  case  is  net  essentially  altered.  You  are  still  a  sinful  creature,  and  therefore 
the  law  still  condemns  you.  2.  That  the  confession  of  the  apostle  was  made  long 
after  his  conversion.  It  is  therefore  an  indication  that  the  holiest  of  men  are  not 
wholly  set  free  from  the  sin  of  our  nature.  Paul,  with  all  his  holy  attainment  and 
fervent  zeal,  needed  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,  lest  he  should  be  exalted  above  measure. 
3.  There  should  be  an  earnest  desire  and  aim  to  obtain  greater  freedom  from 
carnality  and  sin.  In  the  twenty-second  and  following  verses  Paul  did  not  content 
himself  with  making  coufession ;  he  sought  deliverai)ce ;  he  consented  to  the  law 
that  it  was  good ;  and  such  was  his  delight  in  it,  that  he  sought  conformity  to  it 
more  and  more. •.Nor  can  there  be  any  genuine  piety  towards  God  where  there  is 
not  a  hatred  of  sin,  and  a  prevailing  concern  to  be  delivered  from  its  influence,  as 
well  as  its  curse.  Conclusion  :  Infer  from  this — 1.  How  needful  is  it  to  "  Behold 
the  Lamb  of  God,  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  2.  Learn  to  value  the 
means  of  grace,  and  seek  improvement  in  the  use  of  them.  3.  Cherish  a  spirit  of 
dependence  on  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  rendereth  His  own  means  effectual.  4.  Main- 
tain a  spirit  of  watchfulness,  in  order  to  be  steadfast  and  faithful  unto  death. 
{Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)  Believers  carnal  in  comparison  with  the 
law  which  is  spiritual : — Men  are,  usually,  strangers  to  themselves ;  but  the  law 
discovers  to  us  our  sin  and  misery.  He  who  knows  that  the  law  is  spiritual  sees 
himself  to  be  carnal.  I.  All  tbue  believers  abe  made  acquainted  with  the 
BPiBiTUALiTT  OF  THE  LAW.  By  Comparing  these  words  with  1  Cor.  ii.  14  we  learn 
that  the  apostle,  being  spiritual,  was  led  to  see  that  spirituality  in  the  law  of  which 
men  are  ignorant  in  their  unregenerate  state.  1.  The  law,  i.e.,  the  moral  law,  is 
spiritual.  The  apostle  had  already  declared  it  to  be  holy,  and  just,  and  good;  and 
now  he  adds,  "  The  law  is  spiritual."  The  general  reasons  given  for  this  are  the 
law  is  spiritual,  as  it  proceeds  from  God,  who  is  a  pure  Spirit ;  as  it  directs  men  to 
that  worship  of  God  which  is  spirit"  M  ;  as  it  can  never  be  answered  by  any  man  who 
hath  not  the  Spirit ;  as  it  is  a  spiritual  guide,  not  only  of  our  words  and  actions,  but 
also  reaching  the  inward  man ;  and  as  it  requires  that  we  perform  the  things  which 
are  spiritual  in  a  spiritual  manner.  All  these  things  may  be  included ;  but  spiritual 
is  to  be  understood  as  set  in  opposition  to  carnal.  The  law  requires  a  righteousness 
in  which  there  is  nothing  but  what  savours  of  the  Spirit.  Now  if  this  be  a  true 
representation,  who  would  not  confess  with  our  apostle, "  Lord,  I  am  carnal ;  when 
I  think  of  Thy  law  I  am  ashamed  of  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes  "(Job  xv. 
14-16).  2.  All  true  believers  are  made  acquainted  with  the  spirituality  of  the  law. 
*'  We  know  that  the  law  is  spiritual."  This  expression  weU  agrees  with  ver.  1. 
Others,  who  make  their  boast  of  it,  and  of  their  conformity  to  it,  know  not  what 
they  say.  They  only  know  it  who  love  it.  They  can  never  know  it,  or  love  it, 
nnlesB  it  be  first  written  in  their  hearts.  And  this  light  bringeth  heat  with  it.  The 
right  knowledge  of  God  in  the  soul  begets  in  it  love  to  Him.  A  supernatural  sanc- 
tified knowledge  of  God  is  the  law  of  God  written  in  the  heart.  And  this  will  be 
attended  with  obedience ;  and  this  obedience,  though  it  be  not  absolutely  perfect 
as  to  any  one  of  the  commands,  yet  it  will  have  respect  to  them  all,  and  from  this 
respect  to  the  law  will  flow  evangelical  grief  and  sorrow  whenever  we  break  it  or 
oome  short  of  it.      II.  The  best  or  saints,  compabino  theik  heakts  and  lives 

WITH   the   SPIRITDALITT  OF   THE  LAW,  WILL  FIND  GREAT   REASON  TO   COMPLAIN    OF  THEIB 

BEUAiNiNO  OABNALiTT.  We  canuot  suppose  that  the  apostle  had  so  much  cause  to 
complain  as  we  have ;  but  he  might  see  and  feel  more  than  we  do,  because  he  was 
more  spiritual.  Complaints  of  the  remaining  power  of  sin,  so  far  from  being 
evidences  that  we  are  strangers  to  the  grace  of  Christ,  will  prove  that  He  hath  begun 
to  convince  us  of  sin  and  to  make  it  hateful  to  us.  Abraham,  when  viewing  the 
parity  of  the  Divine  nature,  confesseth  himself  but  dust  and  ashes,  and  utterly 
nnworthy  to  hold  oonverae  with  God.    Jacob  confesseth  himself  not  worthy  of  the 


598  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

least  mercy.  Job  abhors  himself,  and  repents  in  dast  and  ashes.  Isaiah  cries  out, 
•'  Woe  is  me,  for  I  am  undone,  because  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips  ;  for  mine  eyes 
have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  Conclusion  :  1.  It  is  not  likely  that  any 
who  are  made  acquainted  with  the  spirituality  of  the  law  should  pretend  to  sinless 
perfection.  2.  If  believers  themselves  are  carnal,  then  they  cannot  be  justified  by 
their    best  obedience.     {J.    Stafford.)  The    law,    man,  and    grace : — I.   Thh 

SPIRITUALITY  OP  THE  LAW.  In  its — 1.  Source.  2.  Nature.  3.  Requirements.  4. 
Application.  5.  Means.  6.  Effects.  IL  The  impotence  of  human  natueb.  1. 
Carnal  in  its — (1)  Proclivities.  (2)  Aims.  (3)  Desires.  (4)  Acts.  2.  Sold  under 
sin.  (1)  Degraded.  (2)  Oppressed.  (3)  Enslaved.  III.  The  consequent  need 
OF  SAVING  GBACE.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Carnality  and  slavery  : — A  fundamental 
lack :  pungent  convictions  of  sin.  Tendency  to  apologise  for  it  as  a  disease,  mis- 
fortune, heredity,  &c.  Theo.  Parker  defines  sin  "a  faU  forward."  No  sense  of  its 
enormity  and  deformity  is  to  be  found.  Compare  chaps,  i.  and  ii.,  in  which  it  is 
held  up  before  us  as  monstrous  and  hideous.  Here  Paul  makes  two  statements  :  as 
to — I.  Carnality.  There  is  in  the  very  nature  sin  and  guilt,  like  grain  in  wood, 
temper  in  metal.  There  is  a  drift,  always  downward,  never  upward  ;  a  relish  for 
sin  ;  a  fatal  facility  toward  transgression.  It  is  this  carnal  mind  that  constitutes 
the  essence  of  enmity  to  God  (chap.  viii.).  This  carnality  betrays  itself  in  native 
and  habitual  resistance — 1.  To  law.  Even  when  recognised  as  holy,  just,  and  good. 
The  very  existence  of  a  command  incites  to  rebellion  (cf.  chap.  viMW).  2.  To  Ught 
(cf.  John  iii.  19,  20).  Men  are  like  bugs  under  a  stone  :  turn  up  the  stone  and  they 
run  to  their  holes.  3.  To  love.  Even  the  tender  persuasions  of  grace  are  resisted 
by  the  sinner.  II.  Captivity.  "  Sold  under  sin."  There  is  a  voluntary  surrender 
to  the  power  of  evil.  1.  Dominion  of  evil  thoughts,  opening  the  mind  to  the 
entrance  of  images  of  lust,  and  cheiishing  imaginations  and  corrupt  desires.  2. 
Sway  of  vicious  habits.  Even  when  the  bondage  is  felt  to  be  heavy  the  sinner  will 
rivet  bis  own  chains  (cf.  Prov.  xxiii.  35).  3.  Control  of  Satan.  For  the  sake  of  a 
brief  pleasure  found  in  sin  men  will  submit  to  slavery  under  the  implacable  foe  of 
God  and  man.  {Homiletic  Monthly.)  Sold  under  sin. — Thraldom  of  tin  : — I  have 
seen  a  print  after  Correggio,  in  which  three  female  figures  are  ministering  to  a  man 
who  sits  foot-bound  at  the  root  of  a  tree.  Sensuality  is  soothing  him.  Evil  Habit 
is  nailing  him  to  a  branch,  and  Ptepentance  at  the  same  instant  of  time  is  applying 
a  snake  to  his  side.  When  I  saw  this  I  admired  the  wonderful  skill  of  the  painter. 
But  when  I  went  away  I  wept,  because  I  thought  of  my  own  condition.  Of  that 
there  is  no  hope  that  it  should  ever  change.  The  waters  have  gone  over  me.  But 
out  of  the  black  depths,  could  I  be  heard,  I  would  cry  out  to  all  those  who  have  set 
a  foot  in  the  perilous  flood.  Could  the  youth,  to  whom  the  flavour  of  his  first  wine 
is  delicious  as  the  opening  scenes  of  life  or  the  entering  upon  some  newly-discovered 
paradise,  look  into  my  desolation,  and  be  made  to  understand  what  a  dreary  thing 
it  is  when  a  man  shall  feel  himself  going  down  a  precipice  with  open  eyes  and  a 
passive  will — to  see  his  destruction  and  have  no  power  to  stop  it,  and  yet  to  feel  it 
all  in  a  way  emanating  from  himself  1  {Charles  Lamb.)  Sold  to  sin: — One  of 
these  victims  said  to  a  Christian  man, "  Sir,  if  I  were  told  that  I  couldn't  get  a  drink 
until  to-morrow  night  unless  I  had  all  my  fingers  cut  off,  I  would  say,  '  Bring  the 
hatchet  and  cut  them  off  now.' "  I  have  a  dear  friend  in  Philadelphia  whose 
nephew  came  to  him  one  day,  and  when  he  was  exhorted  about  his  evil  habit  said, 
*'  Uncle,  I  can't  give  it  up.  If  there  stood  a  cannon,  and  it  was  loaded,  and  a  glass 
of  wine  were  set  on  the  mouth  of  that  cannon,  and  I  knew  that  you  would  fire  it  off 
just  as  I  came  up  and  took  the  glass,  I  would  start,  for  I  must  have  it."  Oh,  it  is  a 
sad  thing  for  a  man  to  wake  up  in  this  life  and  feel  that  he  is  a  captive  !  He  says, 
I  could  have  got  rid  of  this  once,  but  I  can't  now.  I  might  have  lived  an  honour- 
abls  life  and  died  a  Christian  death ;  but  there  is  no  hope  for  me  now ;  there  is  no 
escape  for  me.  Dead,  but  not  buried.  I  am  a  walking  corpse.  I  am  an  apparition 
of  wbat  I  once  was.  I  am  a  caged  immortal  beating  against  the  wires  of  my  cage 
in  this  direction ;  beating  against  the  cage  until  there  is  blood  on  the  wires  and 
blood  upon  my  soul,  yet  not  able  to  get  out.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  For  that 
which  I  do  I  allow  not. — A  common  experience : — Every  Christian  can  adopt  the 
language  of  this  verse.  Pride,  coldness,  slothfulness,  and  other  feelings  which  ha 
disapproves  and  hates,  are,  day  by  day,  reasserting  their  power  over  him.  He 
struggles  against  their  influence,  groans  beneath  their  bondage,  longs  to  be  filled 
with  meekness,  humility,  and  all  other  fruits  of  the  love  of  God,  but  finds  he  can 
neither  of  himself,  nor  by  the  aid  of  the  law,  effect  his  freedom  from  what  he  hates, 
or  the  full  performance  of  what  he  desires  and  approves.    Every  evening  witnesaes 


CHAP,  nt.]  ROMANS.  699 

his  penitent  confession  of  his  degrading  bondage,  his  sense  of  ntter  helplessness, 
and  his  longing  desire  for  aid  from  above.  He  is  a  slave  looking  and  longing  for 
liberty.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  The  had  in  the  good : — Once  a  man  appeared  in  Athens 
who  gave  out  that  he  could  read  character  correctly  at  sight.  Some  cf  the  disciples 
of  Socrates  brought  their  master  forward,  and  bade  the  physiognomist  try  his  power 
upon  him.  "One  of  the  worst  types  of  humanity  in  the  city,"  he  declared;  "a 
natural  thief,  a  constitutional  liar,  a  sad  glutton."  At  this  moment  the  friends  of 
Socrates  interrupted  with  rebuke  and  denial.  But  Socrates  stopped  them  to  say 
that  the  man  was  too  certainly  and  sadly  right,  that  it  was  the  struggle  of  his  life 
to  master  just  these  defects  of  character.  *'  I  am  more  afraid  of  my  own  heart  than 
of  the  Pope  and  all  his  cardinals,"  said  Martin  Luther.  "For  that  which  I  do,  I 
allow  not ;  for  what  I  would,  that  do  I  not ;  but  what  I  hate,  that  do  I,"  exclaimed 
St.  Paul.  Principles  and  conduct  at  variance  : — It  is  one  thing  to  give  assent  to 
good  principles,  it  is  quite  another  to  put  them  in  practice.  A  bright  little  Kansas 
boy  was  sent  home  from  school  for  bad  behaviour.  A  kind  neighbour  said  to  him, 
•'  Wilhe,  I  am  sorry  to  hear  such  an  account  of  you.  I  thought  you  had  better 
principles."  •'  Oh,"  he  answered,  "it  wasn't  the  principles;  my  principles  are  all 
right,  it  was  my  conduct  they  sent  me  home  for. "  For  what  I  would,  that  do  I  not. — 
This  BiXuj  is  not  the  full  determination  of  the  will,  the  standing  with  the  bow  drawn 
and  the  arrow  aimed ;  but  rather  the  wish,  the  inclination  of  the  will — the  taking  up 
the  bow  and  pointing  at  the  mark,  but  without  power  to  draw  it.  {Dean  Alford.) 
If  then  I  do  that  which  I  would  not — The  Christian's  conflict : — 1.  The  Christian 
is  not  yet  a  just  man  made  perfect,  but  a  just  man  fighting  his  way  to  perfection. 
The  text  is  taken  up  with  this  war — the  conflict  which  arises  from  the  flesh  lusting 
Bgainst  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh.  2.  It  is- a  puzzle  to  many  that 
a  man  should  do  what  is  wrong  while  he  wills  what  is  right ;  and  grieve  because  of 
the  one,  and  press  on  towards  the  other.  But  this  is  not  singular.  The  artist 
does  not  the  things  that  he  would,  and  does  the  things  that  he  would  not.  There 
is  a  lofty  standard  to  which  he  is  constantly  aspiring,  and  even  approximating ;  yet 
along  the  whole  of  this  path  there  is  a  humbling  comparison  of  what  has  been 
attained  with  what  is  yet  in  the  distance.  And  thus  disappointment  and  self- 
reproval  are  mixed  up  with  ambition — nay,  with  progress.  3.  Now  what  is  true  of 
art  is  true  of  religion.  There  is  a  model  of  unattained  perfection  in  the  holy  law  of 
God.  But  just  in  proportion  to  the  delight  which  believers  take  in  the  contempla- 
tion of  its  excellence,  are  the  despondency  and  the  shame  wherewith  they  regard 
their  own  mean  imitations  of  it.  Yet  out  of  the  believer's  will  pitching  so  high, 
and  his  work  l^ging  so  miserably  after  it,  there  comes  that  very  activity  which 
guides  and  guarantees  his  progress  towards  Zion.  4.  Paul  once  was  blameless  in 
the  righteousness  of  the  law,  so  far  as  he  understood  of  its  requirements.  But  on 
his  becoming  a  Christian  he  got  a  spiritual  insight  of  it,  and  then  began  the  warfare 
of  the  text — for  then  it  was  that  his  conscience  outran  his  conduct.  He  formerly 
walked  on  what  he  felt  to  be  an  even  platform  of  righteousness ;  but  now  the  plat- 
form was  as  if  lifted  above  him.  Then  all  he  did  was  as  he  would ;  but  what  he 
now  did  was  as  he  would  not.  His  present  view  of  the  law  did  not  make  him 
shorter  of  it;  but  it  made  him  feel  shorter.  6.  Figure,  then,  a  man  to  be  under 
such  aspirings,  but  often  brought  down  by  the  weight  of  a  constitutional  bias; 
and  there  are  a  thousand  ways  in  which  he  is  exposed  to  the  doing  of  that  which 
he  would  not.  Should  he  wander  in  prayer — should  crosses  cast  him  down  from 
his  confidence  in  God — should  any  temptation  woo  him  from  purity,  patience,  and 
charity — then  on  that  high  walk  of  principle  upon  which  he  is  labouring  to  uphold 
himself,  will  he  have  to  mourn  that  he  doeth  the  things  which  he  would  not ;  and 
ever  as  he  proceeds,  will  he  still  find  that  there  are  conquests  and  achievements  of 
greater  difficulty  in  reserve  for  him.  And  so  it  follows  that  he  who  is  highest  in 
acquirement  is  sure  to  be  deepest  in  lowly  and  contrite  tenderness.  6.  In  the  case 
of  an  unconverted  man  the  flesh  is  weak  and  the  spirit  is  not  willing  ;  and  so  there 
is  no  conflict.  With  a  Christian,  the  flesh  is  weak  too,  but  the  spirit  is  willing ; 
and  under  its  influence  his  desires  will  outstrip  his  doings ;  and  thus  will  he  not 
only  leave  undone  much  of  what  he  would,  but  even  do  many  things  that  he  would 
not.  But  the  will  must  be  there.  The  man  who  uses  the  degeneracy  of  his  nature 
as  a  plea  for  sinful  indulgence  is  going  to  the  grave  with  a  lie  in  his  right  hand. 
That  the  will  be  on  the  side  of  virtue  is  indispensable  to  Christian  uprightness. 
Wanting  this,  you  want  the  primary  and  essential  element  of  regeneration.  7. 
God  knows  how  to  distinguish  the  Christian,  amid  all  his  imperfections,  from 
another  who,  not  visibly  dissimilar,  is  nevertheless  destitute  of  heartfelt  desirous- 


600  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  th. 

ness  after  the  doing  of  His  will.  Let  me  suppose  two  vehicles,  both  upon  a  mgged 
road,  where  at  last  each  was  brought  to  a  dead  stand.  They  are  alike  in  the  one 
palpable  circumstance  of  making  no  progress ;  and,  were  this  the  only  ground  for 
forming  a  judgment,  it  might  be  concluded  that  the  drivers  were  alike  remise,  or 
the  animals  alike  indolent.  And  yet,  on  a  narrower  comparison,  it  may  be  observed, 
from  the  loose  traces  of  the  one,  that  all  exertion  had  been  given  np ;  while  with 
the  other  there  was  the  full  tension  of  a  resolute  and  sustained  energy.  And  so  of 
the  Christian  course.  It  is  not  altogether  by  the  sensible  motion,  or  the  place  of 
advancement,  that  the  genuineness  of  the  Christian  character  is  to  be  estimated. 
Man  may  not  see  all  the  springs  and  traces  of  this  moral  mechanism,  but  God  sees 
them ;  and  He  knows  whether  all  is  slack  and  careless  within  you,  or  whether  there 
be  the  full  stretch  of  a  single  and  honest  determination  on  the  side  of  obedience. 
8.  In  ver.  17  there  is  a  peculiarity  that  is  worth  adverting  to.  St.  Paul  throughout 
utters  the  consciousness  of  two  opposite  principles  which  rivalled  for  dominion  over 
his  now  compound  because  regenerated  nature ;  and  he  sometimes  identifies  himself 
with  the  first  and  sometimes  with  the  second.  In  speaking  of  the  movements  of 
the  flesh,  he  sometimes  says  that  it  is  I  who  put  forth  these  movements.  •'  I  do 
that  which  I  hate,"  &c.,  &g.  Yet  notice  how  he  shifts  the  application  of  the  ••  I " 
from  the  corrupt  to  the  spiritual  ingredient  of  his  nature.  It  is  I  who  would  do 
that  which  is  good,  &c.  And,  to  fetch  an  example  from  another  part  of  his  writings, 
it  is  truly  remarkable  that,  while  here  he  says  of  that  which  is  evil  in  him,  "It  is  no 
more  I,"  &c.,  there  he  says  of  that  which  is  good  in  him,  "  Nevertheless  not  me,  but 
the  grace  of  God  that  is  in  me."  We  bring  together  these  aflSrmations  to  make 
more  manifest  that  state  of  composition  in  which  every  Christian  is.  In  virtue  of 
the  original  ingredient  of  this  composition,  he  does  well  to  be  humbled  under  a 
sense  of  his  own  innate  and  inherent  worthlessness.  And  yet,  in  virtue  of  the 
second  or  posterior  ingredient,  the  higher  faculties  of  his  moral  system  are  now  all 
on  the  side  of  new  obedience.  9.  And  the  apostle,  at  the  end  of  this  chapter,  lays 
before  us  the  distinction  between  the  two  parts  of  the  Christian  nature  when  he 
says,  that  with  the  mind  I  myself  serve  the  law  of  God,  and  with  the  flesh  the  law 
of  sin.  But  ever  remember  that  it  is  the  part  of  the  former  to  keep  the  latter  under 
the  power  of  its  presiding  authority.  Were  there  no  counteracting  force,  I  would 
serve  it ;  but,  with  that  force  in  operation,  sin  may  have  a  dwelling-place,  but  it 
shall  not  have  the  dominion.  When  the  matter  is  taken  up  as  a  matter  of  humilia- 
tion, then  it  cannot  be  too  strongly  insisted  upon  that  it  is  I  who  am  the  sinner ; 
but  when  it  is  taken  up  as  a  topic  of  aspiring  earnestness,  it  cannot  be  too  strongly 
urged  on  every  Christian  to  feel  that  his  mind  is  with  the  law  of  God  ;  and  though 
the  tendencies  of  his  flesh  be  with  the  law  of  sin,  yet,  sustained  by  aid  from  the 
sanctuary,  does  he  both  will  and  is  enabled  to  strive  against  these  tendencies  and 
to  overcome  them.  10.  It  is  under  such  a  feeling  of  what  he  was  in  himself  on  the 
one  hand,  and  such  an  earnestness  to  be  released  from  the  miseries  of  this  his 
natural  condition  upon  the  other,  that  Paul  cries  out,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am, 
who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  1 "  And  mark  how  instantaneous  the 
transition  is  from  the  cry  of  distress  to  the  gratitude  of  his  felt  and  immediate 
deliverance — "  I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord."  This  we  hold  to  be  the 
exercise  of  every  true  Christian  in  the  world.  Evil  is  present  with  him,  but  grace 
is  in  readiness  to  subdue  it ;  and  while  he  blames  none  but  himself  for  all  that  is 
corrupt,  he  thanks  none  but  God  in  Christ  for  all  that  is  good  in  him.  (T,  Chalmert, 
D.D.)  I  consent  unto  the  law  that  it  Is  good. — Believers  consent  unto  the  law 
that  it  t«  good : — I.  Believers,  in  the  midst  of  all  theih  complaints,  mat  yet 

FIND    MANY   EVIDENCES   OF   TRUE    GRACE     IN    THEIR    HEARTS.         1.     There    are    fcW    but 

generally  have  the  evidences  hinted  at  in  my  text — an  hatred  to  sin,  a  love  to 
holiness.  Whenever  a  godly  man  sins,  he  always  does  the  evil  which  he  allows 
not ;  but  when  wicked  men  do  evil,  they  do  it  with  both  hands  earnestly.  The 
wicked,  too,  love  evil,  but  the  Christian  ever  consents  to  the  law  that  it  is  good.  2. 
Now  this  consent  is  the  effect  of  likeness  or  similarity.  A  man  must  be  changed 
into  the  very  image  of  the  law  before  he  will  consent  to  it  that  it  is  good.  The  soul 
must  renounce  all  obedience  to  the  old  law  of  sin,  and  give  up  itself  wholly 
to  receive  the  impression  of  the  law  of  God;  and  then,  having  the  law  written 
npon  his  heart,  he  will  inwardly  consent  to  it  and  outwardly  obey  it.  8.  The  image 
thus  impressed  abideth ;  and  where  that  is,  there  must  be  ground  of  evidence  that 
such  an  one  belongs  to  God.  For  as  in  the  old  creation  you  are  constrained  to 
ronfesB  there  must  be  some  first  cause  ;  so,  wherever  we  find  the  new  creature,  we 
iivight  to  oonolade  that  this  is  the  work  of  God.    II.  These  etidenceb  abb  mo* 


.  TU.]  ROMANS  601 

4LWATS  vjjkis  AKD  LEQiBLE.  Weakness  of  grace,  strength  of  corruption,  assaults  of 
temptation,  have  a  sad  tendency  to  obscure  the  evidences  even  of  the  best  of  saints. 
So  it  was  with  Job  (Job  xxiii.  8-11).    III.  It  sometimes  requires  the  exercise  op 

ORBAT   WISDOM   IM    ORDER   TO    FIND    OUT    THOSE     EVIDENCES    WHICH     MAT     REMOTE     ATL 

DOUBTS  AND  FEARS.    This  was  SO  evcD  with  the  apostle.    IV.  If  a  man,  under  ali. 

HIS  WEAKNESS  AND  COMPLAINTS,  CAN  FIND  IN  HIS  HEART  LOVE  TO  THE  LAW  OF  GoD, 
HE    MAT — NAT,    HE   OUGHT   TO — LOOK    UPON    IT    AS    AN     INDISPUTABLE    EVIDENCE    OF    HIS 

BEING  REGENERATE.  This  is  the  grand  point  the  apostle  would  arrive  at ;  with  this 
conclusion  he  seems  to  rest  satisfied.  (J.  Stafford.)  Sensitiveness  increases  with 
soul  development : — The  greater  the  soul's  development,  the  greater  its  sensitive- 
ness. This  explains  the  spiritual  throes  of  saintly  men — why  Fen^lon  and  Edwards 
write  hard  things  against  themselves,  while  Diderot  and  Hume  put  on  the  robes  of 
self-complacency.  The  higher  the  development,  the  more  vulnerable.  Matter  in 
an  inorganic  state  is  untroubled ;  but  as  soon  as  it  begins  to  take  living,  pulsating 
form,  and  becomes  replete  with  nerve-power,  it  begins  to  be  vulnerable,  and  has  to 
fight  its  way  through  antagonists.  The  corn  yet  unsprouterl  mocks  the  frost;  but 
when  the  tiny  blade  appears  above  the  soil,  the  frost  preys  upon  its  tenderness,  and 
the  weeds  plot  against  it.  A  cold-blooded  animal  runs  into  few  dangers  in  coming 
into  the  world.  A  warm-blooded  animal  meets  more ;  man,  most  of  all.  And 
when,  in  man,  we  pass  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  part  of  his  being,  we  find  his 
sensitiveness  and  vulnerability  increasing  at  every  step.  The  mind  feels  pain 
quicker  than  the  body ;  the  conscience  and  the  heart  are  tenderer  to  the  touch  of 
stings  than  the  reason.  And  so  it  is  we  naturally  look  for  and  find  the  greater 
sensitiveness  in  the  souls  that  have  been  most  quickened,  and  that  are  largest  in 
their  development.  The  keenness,  then,  of  your  sense  of  sin,  shows  not  that  yoa 
are  a  greater  sinner  than  other  men,  but  that  your  spirituality  is  more  quickly  and 
painfuUy  convulsed  by  the  intrusive  poison.  The  pain  you  feel  bears  the  clearer 
witness  to  your  heavenly  life.  The  harmony  of  the  law  and  conscience  : — Con- 
science  1.     Is    A    LAW    IN    THE    HEART.       II.     NeEDS    TO    BE    ENLIGHTENED    BT    THE 

REVELATION  OF  THE  LAW.  III.  CONSENTS  TO  AND  JUSTIFIES  THE  LAW.  IV.  CON- 
DEMNS THE  SINNER.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  sinner  without  excuse  : — I.  Because 

HE   VIOLATES   KNOWN   LAW.       II.    BecaUSC    THE   LAW    IS   GOOD.        III.     BeCaUSO   HE  ACTS 

IN  OPPOSITION  TO  HIS  OWN  CONVICTIONS.  {Ibid.)  Now  then  It  is  no  more  I  that 
do  it,  but  sin  that  dwelleth  in  me.  —  Indwelling  sin: — I.  The  importance  of 
THE  SUBJECT.  Redemption  is  deliverance  from  sin.  Hence  the  theory  of  redemp- 
tion and  its  practical  application — i.e.,  both  our  theology  and  our  religion  are 
determined  by  our  views  of  sin.  1.  As  to  theory.  (1)  If  there  is  no  sin  there  is  no 
redemption.  (2)  If  sin  consists  merely  in  action,  and  can  be  avoided,  then  redemp- 
tion  is  a  small  matter.  (3)  But  if  sin  is  a  universal  and  incurable  corruption  of  our 
nature,  then  redemption  is  the  work  of  God.  2.  As  to  practice.  The  religious 
experience  of  every  man  is  determined  by  his  view  of  sin.  It  is  his  sense  of  guilt 
which  leads  him  to  look  to  God  for  help,  and  the  kind  of  help  he  seeks  depends 
apon  what  he  thinks  of  sin.  II.  The  nature  of  indwelling  sin.  The  Scriptures 
teach — 1.  The  entire  and  universal  corruption  of  our  nature.  2.  That  this  corrup- 
tion manifests  itself  in  all  forms  of  actual  sin,  as  a  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits.  3. 
That  regeneration  consists  in  the  creation  of  a  new  principle,  a  germ  of  spiritual 
life,  and  not  in  the  absolute  destruction  of  this  corruption.  4.  That  consequently 
in  the  renewed  there  are  two  conflicting  principles — sin  and  grace,  the  law  of  sin 
and  the  law  of  the  mind.  6.  That  this  remaining  corruption,  as  modified  and 
strengthened  by  our  actual  sins,  is  what  is  meant  by  indwelling  sin.  III.  The 
proof  of  this.  1.  Scripture,  whi<h  everywhere  teaches  not  only  tbat  the  renewed 
fall  into  actual  sins,  but  that  they  are  burdened  by  indwelling  corruption.  2. 
Personal  experience.  Conscience  upbraids  us  not  only  for  actual  sins,  but  for  the 
immanent  state  of  our  hearts  in  the  sight  of  God.  3.  The  recorded  experience  of 
the  Church  in  all  ages.  IV.  Its  great  evil.  1.  It  is  of  greater  turpitude  than 
individual  acts.  Pride  is  worse  than  acts  of  haughtiness  or  arrogance.  2.  It  is  the 
fruitful  source  of  actual  sins.  3.  *It  is  beyond  the  reach  of  the  will,  and  can  only 
be  subdued  by  the  grace  of  God.  V.  What  hope  have  we  in  relation  to  it? 
The  new  principle  is  generally  victorious,  constantly  increases  in  strength,  and  con- 
stitutes the  character.  It  has  on  its  side  God,  His  Word,  His  Spirit,  reason,  and 
conscience.  The  final  victory  of  the  new  principle  is  certain.  We  are  not  c  :^aged 
in  a  doubtful  or  hopeless  conflict.  VI.  The  means  of  tictort.  1.  The  Word. 
Bacraments  and  prayer.  By  the  assiduous  use  of  these,  the  principle  of  evil  is 
weakened  and  that  of  grace  is  strengthened.     2.  Acts  of  faith  in  Christ,  who  dwells 


602  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  th. 


in  oar  heart  by  faith.  3.  Mortification — refusing  to  gratify  evil  propensities  and 
keeping  under  the  body.     {C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  The  prevalence  of  indwelling  gin:— 

These  words  must  not  be  understood  as  an  attempt  to  escape  from  the  responsibilities 
of  occasional  violations  of  Divine  law  in  opposition  to  a  habitual  will  to  yield 
obedience,  by  transferring  them  to  something  that  was  in  Paul  but  not  of  him. 
They  are  rather  a  strong  and  enigmatic  statement  of  the  conclusion  to  which  his 
premises  fairly  led  him — that  these  exceptional  transgressions  were  not  the  true 
exponents  of  his  character;  that,  notwithstanding  these,  he  "  in  his  mind"  was  "  a 
servant  of  the  law  of  God  "  (ver.  26).  When  the  apostle,  speaking  of  his  labours, 
says,  "  Not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  that  was  with  me  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  10),  he  does  not 
mean  that  he  did  not  perform  them,  but  that  he  performed  them  under  the  influence 
of  the  grace  of  God.  When  he  says,  ♦'  I  Uve  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  " 
(Gal.  ii.  20),  he  means  merely  that  to  Christ  he  was  indebted  for  the  origin  and 
maintenance  of  his  new  and  better  life.  And  here  he  means  not  to  deny  that  he  did 
those  things,  but  to  assert  that  he  did  them  under  an  influence  that  was  no  longer 
the  dominant  one  in  his  mind.  Suppose  a  good  man — say  Cranmer — from  the 
terror  of  a  violent  death  should  make  a  temporary  denial  of  the  faith,  would  not 
every  one  understand  what  was  meant  by  "  It  was  not  Thomas  Cranmer,  but  his 
fear,  that  dictated  the  recantation  "  ?    {J.  Brown,  D.D.)  Sin  dwells  even  where 

it  does  not  reign : — I.  When  evil  is  done  by  any  man  aoainst  his  uind,  will,  ob 

FBSE   CONSENT,   IT   HAY,   IN   SOME   SENSE,   BE   SAID    NOT    TO    BE     HIS    SIN.       This    iS   an 

inference  deduced  from  the  two  preceding  verses — viz.,  that  since  he  did  not 
approve,  but  hated  sin,  he  might  justly  conclude,  "  It  is  no  longer  I,  my  whole  self, 
much  less  is  it  my  better  self,  as  renewed  by  the  power  of  Divine  grace."  But 
before  a  man  can  take  comfort  from  this  consideration,  he  must  be  able  to  see  that 
there  is  no  consent,  either  express  and  formal,  or  interpretative  and  virtual.  By 
express  consent  we  intend  a  man's  yielding  up  himself  to  any  lust,  as  Cain  expressly 
consented  to  the  murder  of  his  brother,  and  Judas  to  betray  his  Lord  and  Master. 
But  a  virtual  consent  is,  when  we  yield  to  that  from  which  such  a  sin  will  probably 
follow :  thus  a  man  that  is  violently  intoxicated,  if  he  kill  any  one,  &g.,  he  may 
virtually  be  said  to  will  whatever  wickedness  he  may  commit,  though  for  the  present 
he  knoweth  not  what  he  doth.  On  the  other  hand,  where  sin  is  hateful,  the  believer 
may,  and  ought  to,  form  his  estimate,  not  from  the  corrupt,  but  from  the  better 
part  of  himself.     II.  There  is  a  obeat  duterence  between  the  eeoeneeatb  and 

TH^   TINBEOENERATE,   BOTH  IN  THEIR  INWABD  CONFLICTS  AND  THEIB   DAILY  BINS.      This 

difference  may  be  learnt  from — 1.  The  nature  of  the  principles  engaged  in  this  con- 
flict. The  conflict  may  be  known,  whether  it  be  natural  or  spiritual,  from  the 
quality  of  the  principles  which  are  engaged  in  it.  If  only  the  understanding  or 
knowledge  be  set  against  sin,  or  if  conscience  be  the  only  opposing  principle,  this, 
as  it  may  be  found  in  an  unregenerate  man,  is  very  different  from  the  conflict  which 
was  found  in  our  apostle,  and  in  all  true  believers.  2.  The  nature  of  the  motives 
by  which  it  is  carried  on.  These  motives  are  many  and  various,  suited  to  the 
principles  of  the  persons  engaged  in  the  conflict — such  as  the  fear  of  man,  the  loss 
of  worldly  interest,  character,  or  reputation,  the  loss  of  bodily  health,  &o. — and  the 
greatest  principle  may  be  that  of  self-love,  or  the  love  of  human  applause,  all  which 
considerations  when  alone,  and  when  they  are  the  sole  grounds  or  motives  in  men's 
opposition  to  sin — these  and  such  like  motives,  as  they  spring  from  pride,  flattery, 
and  self-love,  in  opposition  to  the  love  of  God,  are  no  better  than  a  prostitution  of 
spiritual  things  to  carnal  purposes,  and  therefore  they  are  far  from  affording  any 
good  evidence  that  such  a  heart  is  right  with  God.  3.  The  different  desires,  aims, 
and  ends  proposed  in  the  conflict.  The  highest  and  best  that  can  be  proposed  by  a 
rational  creature  is  the  glory  of  God ;  but  no  such  end  was  ever  proposed  by  an 
unregenerate  man ;  no,  not  in  any  one  action — not  in  his  best  frames  or  highest 
attainments ;  and  yet  without  this  men  do  but  serve  themselves  and  not  God.  4. 
The  manner  of  sinning,  both  as  to  temper  and  behaviour.  When  believers  sin — 
(1)  It  is  not  with  their  full  and  free  consent,  at  any  time,  or  upon  any  occasion. 
Once  they  did  as  fully  and  freely  consent  to  it  as  any  other  sinners  in  the  world 
(Eph.  ii.  2),  but  now  it  is  not  so.  (2)  Yet  sin  does  not  reign  in  them,  as  it  once 
did,  or  as  it  now  does  in  others.  (3)  They  do  it  not  habitually  and  customarily,  as 
they  once  did,  and  as  others  still  do.  (4)  They  do  it  not,  as  Satan  does,  out  of 
malice  and  hatred  against  God.  (5)  They  do  not  abide  or  continue  in  it  and  under 
it,  as  others  do,  or  as  they  themselves  once  did.  (6)  They  sin  not  without  the  loss 
of  their  peace  and  comfort  as  others  do,  or  as  they  themselves  once  did.  (7)  It  is 
generftlly  out  of  weakness,  and  not  out  of  wickedness ;  it  is  for  want  of  strength  to 


OBAP.  Tn.]  ROMANS.  603 

conquer,  or  it  is  through  infirmity.     III.  That  tbb  best  of  saints  abe  not  only 

UABIiB   to   SIM,  BUT  THET  HATB  ALSO  SIN  DWEIiLINO  WITHIM  THSH.      It  is  SVldeut  that 

we  must  understand  original  sin  or  corruption  in  the  immediate  actings  of  it  in  the 
heart  of  a  believer.  If  it  be  inquired,  "  Why  does  our  apostle  call  the  corruption 
of  human  nature  the  sin  that  dwelleth  in  us  7  "  we  answer — because — 1.  It  bath 
taken  possession  of  us,  and  its  abode  is  in  us  as  its  house.  2.  Of  its  permanency 
or  its  fixed  and  stated  abode  in  us.  It  dwelleth  in  us,  not  merely  as  a  stranger  or  a 
guest.    3.  It  is  a  latent  evil,  and  herein  lies  much  of  its  security.    («/.  Stafford.) 

1.  Endeayoub  to  EXPLAIN  THE  TEXT.  The  apostlc  did  not  mean  to  offer  any 
apology  for  sin  ;  he  did  not  mean  to  tell  us  that  it  did  not  emanate  from  himself. 
No;  he  was  conscious  it  did,  and  this  humiliating  truth  was  eminently  blest  to  bim, 
as  it  has  been,  and  ever  will  be,  to  all  the  family  of  heaven.  1.  He  was  justified 
completely  from  sin.  Tbis  is  the  glory  of  tbe  Christian  religion.  Every  other 
religion  bmds  man  hand  and  foot,  soul  and  body ;  but  there  is  this  glorious  provi- 
sion in  the  covenant  of  the  Eternal  Three :  in  the  work  of  the  Son,  and  in  the 
fulfilment  of  the  covenant  offices  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  sinner  is  justified  by 
faith  in  Christ,  and  the  condemnation  is  transferred  from  the  sinner  to  sin.  2. 
Sin  was  dethroned  in  the  apostle's  affections.  **  For,"  says  he,  •*  the  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death." 
Sin  is  such  a  monster  that  no  one  can  confine  it  but  the  Almighty.  He  is  destined 
to  die,  and  that  too  in  a  threefold  manner.  (1)  By  famine  ^chap.  xiii.  14).  (2) 
By  poison.  Mercy  is  the  food  of  the  soul  and  the  poison  of  sm  (Psa.  cxxx.  3,  4). 
(3)  By  suicide.  H.  The  lessons  which  the  believeb  ib  destined  to  leabn  fbou 
THE  CEASELESS  ATTACKS  OF  INDWELLING  SIN.  1.  We  learn  sin  in  its  origin  and  evil, 
necessarily  connected  with  what  we  experience,  with  what  God  has  been  pleased  to 
reveal  to  us.  2.  The  glory  of  Jesus  Christ  as  a  Mediator  between  God  and  man. 
3.  Self-knowledge.  And  this  lies  at  the  root  of  all  religion.  It  is  the  foundation 
of  everything  that  is  excellent.  4.  Wisdom  and  circumspection.  We  read  of 
some  who  are  "  taken  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will " ;  and,  indeed,  their  own 
will  is  fully  identified  with  his  will ;  and  this  is  the  reason  he  takes  them  captive  bo 
easily.  6.  Sympathy.  Sinners  not  changed  by  the  grace  of  God  hate  each  other, 
not  their  sins.  Awful  consideration  I  they  love  sin  but  hate  sinners ;  they  hate 
too  the  consequences  of  sin,  when  obliged  to  feel  them ;  but  sin  itself  they  love. 
Not  BO  when  man  has  been  changed  into  the  image  of  the  living  God — he  is  taught 
to  love  and  pity  the  sinner,  while  he  abhors  his  sin.  6.  His  absolute  dependence 
on  a  covenant  God  for  everj'thing,  and  to  prize  that  dependence.  7.  Gratitude  in 
the  midst  of  the  deepest  calamities.  8.  Sin  is  suffered  to  dwell  within  us,  to  pre- 
pare  the  saint  for  heaven.  The  daily  conflict  within  gradually  lessens  his  attach- 
ment to  the  things  of  time  and  sense.     [W.  Howels.) 

Ver.  18.  For  I  know  that  In  me  (that  Is,  In  my  flesh)  dwelleth  no  good  thing  : 
for  to  will  Is  present  with  me ;  but  how  to  perform  that  which  is  good  I  find 
not. — Grace  in  believers  weakened  by  the  JUsh: — I.  There  ib  no  good  thino 
BT  NATT7BE  FOUND  IN  ANY  UNRENEWED  HEART.  And  wheic  there  Is  HO  good  there 
must  be  much  evil.  II.  The  people  of  God,  whose  eyes  abb  enliobtened  by 
Divine  grace,  are  fully  convinced  that  in  their  flesh  dwelleth  no  good  thing. 
I  know  it,  says  our  apostle.  It  is  a  part  of  the  new  nature  to  know  it ;  for  grace  is 
a  Divine  light  in  the  soul,  discovering  the  true  nature  of  things.  III.  The  childben 
OF  God  not  only  know  this  want  of  any  good  in  themselves,  but  they  acknow- 
ledge it  wheneveb  they  think  that  God  may  thereby  be  gloeified.  This,  I 
doubt  not,  was  the  principal  design  of  our  apostle  here.    IV.  Notwithstanding  all 

THIS,  YET  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD  HAVE   ALWAYS   SOMETHING  WITHIN   THEM   WHICH   MAY  BE 

pbopeely  called  a  will  to  do  good.  '•  To  will  is  present  with  me."  V.  Att,  the 
PEOPLE  OF  God  find  that  theib  performance  of  good  is  neveb  equal  to  theib 
desires.  "  How  to  perform  that  which  is  good  I  find  not."  (J.  Stafford.) 
Nature  and  grace  in  the  same  individual : — I.  We  have  all  felt  the  exceeding 
difference  between  the  tone  and  temper  of  the  mind  at  one  time  fbom  what  it  is 
AT  anotheb.  1.  Many  of  you  can  recollect  that  under  a  powerful  sermon,  in  church, 
you  caught  something  like  the  elevation  of  heaven  ;  and  that  when  you  passed  into 
another  atmosphere,  the  whole  of  this  temperament  went  into  utter  dissipation.  And 
again,  how  differently  it  fares  with  us  in  devotional  retirement,  and  in  the  world  1 

2.  And  many  who  are  not,  in  the  spiritual  sense  of  the  term,  Christians,  will  not 
be  surprised  when  they  are  told  of  two  principles  in  our  moral  constitution — which, 
by  the  ascendancy  of  the  one  or  the  other,  may  cause  the  same  man  to  appear  in 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHlF.  Til, 

two  eharacters  that  are  in  diametrio  opposition — and  of  two  sets  of  tendencies,  one 
of  which,  if  followed  ont,  woald  liken  them  to  the  seraphs,  and  the  other  to  the 
veriest  grab-worm.  3.  We  appeal  to  a  very  common  experience  among  novel- 
readers — how  they  kindle  into  heroism,  and  melt  into  tenderness,  and  appear  while 
under  the  spell  to  be  assimilated  to  that  which  they  admire.  And  yet  all  fleea 
when  again  ushered  into  the  scenes  of  familiar  existence.  There  is  one  principle 
of  onr  constitution  that  tends  to  sublime  the  heart  up  to  the  poetry  of  human  life  ; 
and  there  is  another  that  weighs  the  heart  helplessly  down  to  the  prose  of  it.  4. 
A  conspicuous  instance  of  the  same  thing  is  the  susceptibility  of  the  heart  to  music. 
Yon  have  seen  how  the  song  that  breathed  the  ardour  of  disinterested  friendship 
blended  into  one  tide  of  emotion  the  approving  sympathies  of  a  whole  circle.  It 
is  hard  to  imagine  that  on  the  morrow  the  competitions  and  jealousies  of  rival 
interest  will  be  as  busily  active  as  before,  and  will  obliterate  every  trace  of  the 
present  enthusiasm.  And  yet  there  is  in  it  no  hypocrisy  whatever.  The  finest 
recorded  example  of  this  fascination  is  that  of  the  harp  of  David  on  the  dark  and 
turbulent  spirit  of  Saul.  During  the  performance  all  the  furies  by  which  his  bosom 
was  agitated  seem  to  have  been  lulled  into  peacefulness.  II.  Let  vb  unfold  thb 
USES  of  this  incident  in  the  abqument  befoke  OS.  1.  (1)  Saul  was  refreshed  and 
became  well  under  the  operation  of  this  music.  In  which  case  it  was  his  duty  to 
call  in  the  harp  on  the  very  first  approaches  of  the  threatening  visitation  ;  for  by  it 
alone,  it  seems,  could  his  tranquillity  be  upheld.  (2)  Further  conceive  of  Saul  on 
the  strength  of  the  foreign  application,  ever  at  hand  and  never  neglected,  conquering 
the  rebellious  tendencies  of  his  inner  man.  (3)  Consider  how  Saul  should  have 
felt  as  well  as  acted,  under  the  consciousness  of  what  he  natively  was.  Should  he 
not  have  been  humbled  when  he  bethought  him  that,  to  sustain  his  moral  being, 
he  had  to  live  on  supplies  from  abroad,  because  in  himself  there  was  the  foul  spirit 
of  a  maniac  and  a  murderer ;  and  it  would  have  become  this  monarch,  even  when 
feeling  at  his  best,  to  loathe  his  savage  propensities  in  dust  and  in  ashes.  (4)  That 
sense  of  depravity  which  prompted  the  self-abasement  of  his  spirit  would  prompt 
an  unceasing  recurrence  to  that  by  which  its  outbreakings  were  repressed  ;  and  so 
the  more  intense  his  detestation  of  his  own  character,  would  be  the  vigour  and 
eflScaoy  of  that  alone  practical  expedient  by  which  his  character  was  transformed. 
2.  And  thus,  in  all  its  parts,  does  it  hold  of  a  Christian.  (1)  He  feels  that  in  him- 
self  he  is  like  Saul  without  the  harp.  The  streams  of  his  disobedience  may  not  be 
of  the  same  tinge,  but  they  emanate  like  his  from  the  heart.  The  Christian  feels 
that  in  that  part  of  his  constitution  which  is  properly  his  own,  there  is  a  deeply- 
seated  corruption,  the  sense  of  which  never  fails  to  abash  and  to  humble  him.  (2) 
What,  then,  is  it  which  serves  to  mark  him  as  a  Christian  ?  Not  most  assuredly 
that  he  is  free  of  a  carnal  nature,  but  that  he  has  access  to  an  influence  without, 
fay  which  all  its  rebellious  tendencies  are  thereby  overborne.  The  Christian  hath 
learned  whither  to  flee  in  every  hour  of  temptation ;  and  thus  it  is  that  a  purifying 
infiaence  descends  upon  his  souL  (3)  There  was  a  personal  agent  called  in  by  Saul 
— the  son  of  Jesse.  In  the  former  case,  the  power  to  soothe  lay  materially  and 
dirertly  in  the  music — though,  to  bring  it  into  contact  with  the  organ  of  hearing, 
there  needed  one  to  perform  it.  In  the  latter  case,  the  power  to  sanctify  lies 
materially  and  directly  in  the  doctrine — though,  to  bring  it  into  contact  with  the 
organ  of  mental  perception,  there  needed  to  present  it  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose 
office  it  is  to  bring  all  things  to  our  remembrance.  And  so,  when  like  to  be 
overborne  by  the  tyranny  of  your  own  evil  inclinations,  is  it  your  part,  depending 
on  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  go  forth  and  meet  His  manifestations,  as  He  takes  of  the 
things  of  Christ  and  shows  them  unto  your  soul ;  and  the  heart  will  be  kept  in  the 
love  of  God  ;  and  this  will  attune  it  out  of  all  discord  and  disorder.  In  conclusion, 
learn  from  these  observations  how  it  is  that  by  means  of  a  power  external  to  the 
mind  of  man,  he  may  be  so  transformed  as  to  become  a  new  creature.  If  eloquence, 
or  romance,  or  poetry,  or  music  attune  the  heart  to  nobler  and  better  feelings  than 
those  by  which  it  is  habitually  occupied,  shall  we  wonder  that,  upon  faith  realising 
the  promises  and  the  prospects  of  the  gospel,  the  heart  shall  be  translated  into  a  new 
state  ?  What  music  can  be  sweeter  to  the  soul  than  when  peace  is  whispered  to 
it  from  on  high ;  or  what  lovelier  vision  can  be  offered  to  its  contemplation  than 
that  of  heaven's  Lord  and  of  heaven's  family  ;  or  what  more  fitted  to  lay  the  coarse 
and  boisterous  agitations  of  a  present  world  than  the  light  which  has  pierced  across 
the  grave  and  revealed  the  peaceful  world  that  is  beyond  it  ?  {T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 
Willing  inability : — How  much  waste  there  is  in  the  world  1  Beauty,  and  no  ey« 
to  see  it :  moBio,  and  no  ear  to  hear  it ;  food,  and  no  creature  to  eat  it ;  land,  barren  foe 


«HA».  vn.)  ROMANS.  605 

vant  of  cultivation.  As  in  nature,  so  among  men.  Paul  was  not  peculiar  in  his 
experience.  There  is — I.  Much  native  talent  undeveloped.  Parents  pay  no 
attention  to  the  natural  aptitudes  of  their  children.  One  has  vocal  powers,  another 
musical,  others  artistic,  poetic,  oratorical,  or  mechanical.  In  after  life,  when  a 
bom  singer  feels  the  rising  of  music  in  his  soul,  he  would  sing,  but  oannot,  because 
lacking  the  acquired  skill.  So  with  the  artist  and  the  engineer.  This  is  waste ; 
loss  to  the  community  and  to  the  individual.  Many  a  gifted  soul  has  been  compelled 
to  say,  "  I  would,  but  I  can't ;  and  I  can't,  not  because  I  want  the  ability,  but  tba 
acquired  art."  II.  Much  skilled  talent  unused.  Men  who  have  educated  their 
minds,  trained  their  fingers,  and  matured  their  natural  aptitudes,  cannot  employ  them. 
1.  Cannot  find  an  appropriate  sphere  for  them.  They  must  live,  and  so  are  obliged 
to  do  something  less  genial  and  remunerative.  The  man  who  should  have  been  at 
the  plough  is  in  the  pulpit,  and  the  man  who  should  have  been  in  the  pulpit  ia 
behind  a  counter.  Thiese  misplaced  men  say,  "  I  would  do  better,  but  can't."  2. 
Many  who  have  found  appropriate  spheres,  cannot  do  their  best,  because  they  are 
hindered  and  discouraged.  (1)  Many  a  skilled  artisan  would  do  more  and  better 
work  if  better  placed.  Many  a  servant  would  be  better  with  better  masters.  And 
many  a  Christian  worker  would  do  more  if  there  were  fewer  hindrances  and  more 
helpful  and  stimulating  conditions.  (2)  Men  who  can  rise  above  such  conditions 
are  not  always  the  best.  They  have  often  more  force  than  intellect  or  goodness. 
There  are  many  men  and  women  who  have  good  heads,  warm  hearts,  and  skilled 
fingers,  but  lack  force,  because  the  body  is  disordered.  The  helm,  the  compass,  the 
captain,  and  the  sea  may  be  all  right,  but  if  there  is  no  steam  in  the  machine  the 
vessel  will  make  no  headway.  III.  Much  natural  affection  unexpressed.  There 
may  be  sap  in  the  plant,  but  if  there  is  no  sun  there  will  be  no  flower  or  fruit. 
Many  hearts  want  sunshine ;  the  cold  chills  them.  They  recoil  from  uncongenial 
influences.  1.  Sometimes  the  head  is  so  full  of  cares  that  the  heart  has  no  play. 
The  mind  may  be  so  distracted  that  it  has  no  time  to  think  of  the  claims  of  the 
heart,  or  no  time  or  power  to  respond  to  its  promptings.  2.  There  are  many  who 
can,  and  who  do,  both  think  and  feel,  but  "cannot"  for  want  of  means.  How 
gladly  would  you  do  many  things  for  those  you  love  I  But  the  hand  is  empty,  the 
heart  swells,  and  the  tongue  is  dumb.  "  The  good  I  would  do,  I  do  not,"  because 
I  cannot.  IV.  Much  sincere  and  ardent  piett  unmanifestbd.  "  When  I  would 
do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me."  £vU  stands  Uke  a  sentinel  at  the  door  of  the 
heart  to  prevent  good  getting  out,  and  if  it  gets  out,  to  distort,  cripple,  and  pollute 
it.  1.  If  veneration  struggles  to  express  itself  in  prayer,  incarnate  evil  is  at  the 
heart  and  lips  pleading  "  no  time  "  ;  and  if  it  struggles  through,  and  makes  time, 
then  it  distracts  the  thoughts.  2.  If  our  affections  would  rise  up  to  God,  incarnate 
evil  is  there  to  fetter  the  soul ;  and  if  it  escapes,  then  it  presents  innumerable  idola 
to  eye  and  heart.  3.  If  benevolence  would  show  itself,  incarnate  selfishness  bars 
the  way ;  and  if  you  overcome  it,  it  will  fill  you  with  low  motives.  4.  If  your 
affections  try  to  be  beautiful  and  tender,  an  evil  temper  distorts  and  pollutes  them. 
5.  The  life  of  the  soul  may  be  chilled  and  dwarfed  by  the  want  of  piety  in  those 
around  you.  Conclusion :  1.  It  is  possible  for  a  man  to  feel  himself  to  be  greater 
than  his  little  world,  and  greater  than  he  can  make  it.  2.  God  does  not  expect 
more  from  us  than  we  are  capable  of  being  and  doing.  Virtue  under  difficulties  ia 
of  finer  quality  than  under  more  favourable  circumstances,  and  God  regards  quality 
more  thnn  quantity.  The  widow's  mite  was  of  more  value  than  the  greater  offerings 
of  the  rich.  He  regards  and  rewards  "  the  willing  mind  "  where  nothing  more  ia 
possible.  3.  We  might  have  been  better  than  we  are.  None  of  us  have  made  the 
best  use  of  our  opportunities.  4.  We  might  have  done  better  than  we  have  done. 
There  is  more  cause  for  humility  than  for  complaint.  5.  We  may  do  better  in  the 
future.  There  is  no  cause  for  despair.  Let  us  not  forget  that  it  is  in  little  things 
that  love  best  expresses  itself.  Oh  that  we  may  so  live  and  die  that  we  may  receive 
from  the  Master,  "  She  hath  done  what  she  could."  {Wickhmn  Tozer.)  Ineffi- 
cacious convictions  : — 1.  It  may  be  true  that  the  apostle  was  describing  a  man  under 
the  bondage  of  the  Jewish  law,  but  it  is  no  less  true  that  he  might  have  uttered 
these  words  concerning  himself.  But  it  must  have  been  a  humiliating  confession. 
How  much  he  wished  the  case  to  be  otherwise !  Adam  did  not  more  fervently  wish 
it  possible  to  go  back  into  paradise.  2.  But  we  have  sometimes  heard  confessions, 
in  something  like  the  same  terms,  made  in  a  very  different  spirit.  Confessions 
that  certainly  there  is  something  very  wrong  with  us ;  but,  then,  there  is  no  helping 
it ;  it  is  the  common  condition  of  man.  I.  Let  us  descbibb  this  statb  or  uind. 
A  clear  apprehension  as  to  the  necessity  of  a  serious  attention  to  certain  great 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHi».  TO. 

concerns,  and  an  earnest  desire  that  these  great  concerns  were  doly  attended  to. 
But,  still,  they  are  not  or  in  no  such  manner  as  it  is  felt  they  ought.  Some  fatal 
prevention  lies  heavy  on  the  active  powers,  like  the  incubus  in  a  dream.  Again 
and  again  the  conviction  returns  upon  the  man ;  and  he  wishes  and  resolves,  but 
nothing  is  done.  He  wishes  some  mighty  force  might  come  upon  him,  and  would 
be  almost  willing  to  be  terrified  by  portentous  phenomena.  But  nature  ia  quiet, 
spirits  do  not  encounter  him,  and  he  remains  unmoved.  II.  How  couss  so 
DEPLOBABLB  A  CONDITION  of  a  being  "  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels  "  ?  It 
comes  of  the  disorder  and  ruination  of  our  nature.  What  is  the  disorder,  the 
ruination  of  anything,  but  its  being  reduced  to  a  state  that  frustrates  the  purpose 
of  its  existence,  be  it  a  machine,  a  building,  or  an  animal  T    III.  But  what  shaUi 

A    MAN,    CONSCIOUS    OF    AND     LAUENTHtO     SUCH    A    STATE    OF    HIND,     DO?        Shall    he 

absolve  himself  from  all  duty  respecting  it  ?  Soothe  himself  into  a  stupid  content 
ment  ?  Besign  himself  to  despair  ?  Infallibly  the  time  must  come  when  he  will 
feel  that  this  was  not  the  way.  No ;  he  has  a  solemn  work  to  do,  and  he  mast 
think  of  means.  The  immediate  cause  of  this  inefficacy  is,  that  the  motives  are 
not  strong  enough.  We  want  to  be  under  a  constant,  mighty,  driving  power  of 
good  motives.  When  a  mariner  sufiFers  a  long,  dead  calm,  how  oft  he  looks  up  at 
the  sails,  and  says,  "  Oh,  if  the  winds  would  but  blow  I "  Now,  there  may  be 
persons  who  will  aver  that  a  man  can  do  no  more  respecting  his  motives  than  the 
mariner  respecting  the  winds.  We  must  think  dififerently,  and  wish  to  inquire 
what  practicable  means  he  may  find  for  strengthening  the  operation  of  good  motives 
upon  his  mind.  1.  We  must  deeply  think  what  it  is  that  all  the  great  motives  are 
required  for.  What  in  us,  for  us,  by  us  ?  This  serious  thinking  will  tend  to  render 
luminously  distinct  those  grand  considerations  which  ought  to  constitute  our  chief 
motives.  2.  Then  these  being  acknowledged,  it  should  be  our  study  to  aggravate 
the  force  of  those  considerations  in  all  ways.  *'  There  is  something  that  needs  to 
be  reinforced.  It  should  be  so  to-day."  We  should  watch  for  anything  to  be 
added  to  their  power,  seize  on  everything  that  can  be  thrown  into  the  scale. 
Observe  how  this  takes  place  in  the  case  of  a  motive  which  falls  in  with  our  natural 
inclination.  The  motive,  then,  of  itself,  as  by  an  instinct  for  its  good,  catches  all 
these  things  that  serve  to  strengthen  it.  Without  our  care  it  avails  itself  of  each 
casual  thought,  each  passing  impression.  Observe,  too,  how  fast  the  very  worst 
motives  may  grow  upon  a  man,  and  he  never  intend  it  I  Oh  I  not  such  the  condi- 
tion of  the  good  ones!  3.  But,  besides  this  general  vigilance,  there  must  be  a 
direct,  earnest  effort  to  bring  before  the  mind  those  realities  which  are  adapted  to 
make  the  right  impressions.  And  here  we  appeal  to  the  man  who  laments  in  the 
language  of  the  text,  and  say,  "  Cannot  you  do  this  ?  "  And  if  he  is  sincere  he  vrill 
be  willing  to  sustain  a  painful  repetition  of  these  applications.  And  if  he  feels  that 
the  motive  takes  hold  of  him,  oh,  let  him  be  earnest  that  it  may  be  retained  and 
prolonged  1  4.  In  connection  with  this,  it  will  be  well,  by  an  exercise  of  thought, 
to  endeavour  to  combine  all  the  motives  that  tend  to  the  same  effect.  But  take 
special  care  of  admitting  an  evil  or  doubtful  principle  into  this  combination. 
Bevenge  may  work  to  the  same  point  as  justice ;  but  here  the  companionship  of  the 
bad  will  vitiate  the  good.  Each  good  motive  must,  to  be  of  any  essential  value,  be 
part  of  a  whole  system.  There  must  be  a  vital  circulation  of  the  holy  principles 
through  the  whole  soul.  The  single  part  cannot  by  itself  have  pulsation  and 
warmth  and  life.  5.  Our  concern  respecting  the  influence  of  motives  upon  us 
must  be  directed  to  this  indispensable  point — the  earnest  cultivation  of  vital 
religion.  This  alone  can  put  conscience  into  them.  6.  Dwell  often  on  the  most 
instructive  and  impressive  examples.  And  also  there  are  many  affecting  scenes  and 
events  applicable  to  the  principles  that  should  move  us  (the  death  of  friends, 
dreadful  deaths,  &e.).  7.  Choose  the  society  which  furnishes  the  best  incitements. 
8.  Motives  work  best  in  fire,  that  is,  in  the  warmth  and  animation  of  the  passions. 
Where  these  are  faint,  so  will  be  the  actuating  principles.  Where,  then,  there  ia 
little  fire  of  soul,  let  it  not  be  wasted  on  trifiing  things,  but  applied  and  consecrated 
to  give  efficacy  to  the  best  principles.  When  there  are  barely  combustibles  enough 
for  offering  a  sacrifice,  it  were  sacrilege  to  take  them  away  for  baubles  and  amuse- 
ments. But  there  is  fire  enough  in  heaven  for  all  our  noblest  uses,  and  we  want  it 
as  much  as  Elijah,  when  his  altar  and  offering  were  drenched  in  water.  But  Ood 
has  put  into  our  hands  that  which  will  bring  it  down.  He  has  promised  the  Divine 
energy  of  His  Holy  Spirit  to  those  that  ask  Him.  Then  what  have  we  to  say  to 
Him  ?  ••  Oh !  infuse  into  these  convictions,  these  motives.  Thine  own  omni- 
potence 1    Here  is  a  solemn  consideration  that  glimmers  in  my  mind — make  it 


CHAT.  Tn.]  ROMANS.  607 

lighten  I  Here  are  the  motiyes  which  Thon  hast  sent ;  but  there  is  something 
between  them  and  me ;  oh  I  make  them  break  in  apon  me  I  Here  is  a  languid,  un- 
availing striie  of  the  better  principles  against  an  overpowering  force ;  oh !  arm 
those  principles  with  all  that  there  is  in  heaven  that  belongs  to  them,  and  then  my 
deadly  oppressors  wiU  be  drawn  away  1  Here  is  a  wretched  corrupted  nature  averse 
to  Thee  Skud  all  that  is  good ;  oh  !  lay  Thy  new-creating  hand  upon  it  and  it  will  be 
for  ever  Thine  I "    {John  Foster.) 

Ter.  19.  For  the  good  that  I  would  X  do  not :  but  the  evil  that  I  would  not, 
th&t  I  do. — The  inward  conflict : — I.  The  two  I's  ;  the  I  that  wills ;  the.  I  that 
does.  n.  The  strdqole  between  thsm.  III.  The  result.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Chrittiant  not  to  overlook  the  grace  they  have  : — The  sight  Christians  have 
of  their  defects  in  grace,  and  their  thirst  after  greater  measures  of  grace,  make 
them  think  they  do  not  grow  when  they  do.  He  who  covets  a  great  estate, 
because  he  hath  not  so  much  as  he  desires,  therefore  he  thinks  himself  to  be 
poor.  Indeed,  Christians  should  seek  after  the  grace  they  want,  but  they  must 
not  therefore  overlook  the  grace  they  have.  Let  Christians  be  thankful  for  the  least 
growth ;  if  you  do  not  grow  so  much  in  assurance,  bless  Ood  if  you  grow  in  sin- 
cerity ;  if  you  do  not  grow  bo  much  in  knowledge,  bless  Ood  if  you  grow  in  humility. 
If  a  tree  grows  in  the  root,  it  is  a  true  growth ;  if  you  grow  in  the  root-grace  of 
humility,  it  is  as  needful  for  you  as  any  other  growth.  {T.  Watson.)  Two 
hearts  : — ^A  well-known  missionary  tells  of  a  poor  African  woman  who  once  said  to 
him  that  she  had  two  hearts,  one  saying,  "  Come  to  Jesus,"  the  other  saying, 
"  Stay  away  "  ;  the  one  bidding  her  to  do  good,  and  the  other  bidding  her  to  do 
evil ;  so  that  she  knew  not  what  to  do.  He  read  to  her  the  seventh  chapter  of  the 
Bomans.  When  he  came  to  the  verse,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  1  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?"  she  said,  "Ah,  Massa,  that  me;  and 
me  know  not  what  to  do."  And  when  he  afterwards  added  the  words,  '*  I  thank 
Ood  through  Jesus  Christ,"  and  explained  them,  she  burst  into  tears  of  grateful 
joy.  A  rising  barometer  : — The  barometer  indicates  approaching  changes  of 
weather — not  by  the  high  and  low  stand  of  the  mercury  in  its  tube,  but  by  the  rising 
or  falling  of  the  mercury.  If  a  low  barometer  indicated  storm,  then  there  never 
would  be  fair  weather  on  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  where  the  rarity  of  the  at- 
mosphere causes  a  perpetual  low  barometer.  But  on  the  mountains,  as  everywhere 
else,  the  value  of  the  barometric  warnings  lies  in  the  tendency  which  they  reveal. 
In  like  manner,  many  a  poor  Christian,  surrounded  by  disadvantages  and  draw- 
backs, as  by  an  atmosphere  affording  too  little  oxygen  and  lacking  in  pressure, 
displays  to  his  own  despondent  self-examination  a  very  low  barometer  of  moral 
character  and  attainment.  For  his  comfort  we  say,  "  Do  not  be  discouraged ;  but 
take  many  readings,  and  find  out  whether  the  mercury  is  rising.  It  is  not  a  high, 
but  a  rising  barometer  that  should  give  you  joy."  (Christian  World  Pulpit.) 
Contrary  influences : — The  picture  in  the  South  Kensington  Museum  called  • '  Con- 
trary Winds  "  well  illustrates  the  opposing  influences  of  which  we  all— especially 
those  who,  like  the  drunkard,  have  long  been  the  slaves  of  an  evil  habit — are  more 
or  less  the  subjects.  A  toy  vessel  is  in  a  tub  of  water.  Two  Uttle  boys  are  seen 
bending  over  the  tub,  exactly  opposite  each  other,  blowing  with  all  their  might,  in 
order  to  get  the  mimic  barque  to  go.  Which  shall  prove  the  more  powerful,  which 
shEill  eventually  conquer  in  the  case  of  the  soul,  of ttimes  seems  a  doubtful  question. 
The  real  and  the  ideal : — I.  These  is  a  faculty  in  the  mind  which  PHiLosoPHEBa 
CALL  IDEALITV.  1.  It  is  that  quality  which  figures  to  our  inward  self  something 
higher  and  more  perfect  than  the  actual ;  showing  all  things,  not  as  they  are,  but  as 
they  might  be.  2.  See  how  this  principle  operates  upon  matter.  A  diamond  in  the 
rough  is  hardly  better  than  quartz  crystal ;  but  the  lapidary  sees  in  it  a  blazing 
star.  He  has  an  idea,  and  he  reproduces  it  on  his  wheel.  Then  how  much  higher 
is  the  diamond  than  it  was  in  its  undeveloped  state  I  3.  This  quality  is  at  work 
upon  society.  It  is  the  root  of  refinement  in  language.  It  is  at  work  upon  dress. 
It  removes  conduct  far  away  from  the  gross  and  the  vulgar,  and  gives  a  conception 
under  which  the  family  becomes  nobler.  It  presents  a  view  of  the  sweetness  of 
affection  which  makes  love  more  elevating  and  stimulating.  4.  This  principle, 
moreover,  is  the  root-stock  of  faith — that  quality  by  which  we  discern  relations  and 
conditions,  above  all  that  nature  knows,  or  that  the  ordinary  thoughts  of  men  have 
created.  We  hear  men  talking  of  reveries  and  poets'  dreams.  I  tell  you,  the  best 
things  in  this  world  are  the  things  that  men  themselves  create,  and  that  fill  the  air 
roond  about  them  with  strange  thoughts,  and  noble  desires,  and  higher  intercourse 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 


than  everthe  vulgar  necessities  of  life  pennit.  II.  This  QUALrrr  enters  ikto  moramtt 

AND  BELIGION,  BOTH  TOB    THEIB  ELEVATION  AND    THEIB   VEXATION.        1.    Of  sincere  and 

earnest  Christians  four-fifths  might  trace  their  troubles  to  not  knowing  the  difference 
between  ideal  and  real  standards  of  conduct.  Not  Paul  alone,  but  a  great  companj 
bear  witness,  "  The  good  that  I  would  I  do  not,"  <fec.  Is  there  anything  this  morning 
that  seems  to  yon  meaner  than  a  lie  ?  And  yet  you  will  tell  lies  before  next  Satur- 
day, and  be  ashamed  of  it,  and  wish  you  had  not,  and  swear  that  you  will  never 
do  it  again,  and  then  do  it.  There  is  not  a  man  here  who  has  not  a  sense  of 
what  is  honourable ;  but  you  are  jostled  by  anger,  rivalry,  fear,  avarice,  and  the 
vision  fades  in  the  actual,  and  goes  out,  and  you  enter  into  a  vulgar  bargain  with 
your  neighbour  by  which  you  gain  and  he  loses,  and  if  the  grace  of  God  is  with  you 
you  are  ashamed  of  it.  So  all  the  way  through  life.  2.  No  man's  real  conduct 
comes  up  to  his  ideal  if  he  has  the  slightest  faculty  and  exercise  of  ideality.  How 
low,  poor,  unfruitful,  the  man  who  never  has  a  sight  of  anything  higher  than  that 
which  he  every  day  does  !  A  man  without  a  desire  is  not  a  man  ;  he  is  an  animal. 
And  there  is  a  perpetual  struggle  going  on  in  the  attempt  to  harmonise  the  ideal 
with  the  real.  And  this  is  the  very  groundwork  of  religious  endeavour ;  and  it 
works  both  ways.  A  man  that  is  honestly  trying  to  conform  his  life  to  the  principles 
of  Christ  must  become  a  miserable  man.  I  cannot  conceive  of  anything  so  horrible 
to  a  fine-strung  nature  as  to  have  a  vivid  ideal  of  love,  as  made  manifest  by  Christ, 
and  then  to  measure  by  that  the  actual  development  of  love  in  his  own  life.  As 
ideality  takes  on  the  colours  of  things  beautiful,  so  it  intensifies  the  colours  of  things 
ugly.  It  is  when  the  ideal  comes  down  and  gives  a  heightened  glory  to  truth  that 
transgression  becomes  intolerable  and  unbearable  ;  and  many  persons  are  so 
weighed  down  by  it  that  it  deranges  their  whole  balance  of  mind.      III.  Sudden  ob 

RAPID  REALISATION  OF  THE  IDEAL  IS  NOT  TO  BE  EXPECTED.      If  a  CannOU  ball  should  be 

fired  through  an  organ,  and  I  should  say,  *'  Return,  you  ball ;  and  you,  broken 
pipes,  get  up  and  put  yourselves  in  your  places,"  it  would  not  be  more  absurd  than 
for  a  man  to  say  to  himself,  "  Now  everything  in  me  has  got  to  be  harmonious  at 
once."  Harmony  in  a  man  is  the  result  of  a  life-long  education  and  drill.  A 
man  feels,  "  It  was  my  duty  to  have  acted  thus  and  so."  Yes,  just  as  it  is  the  duty 
of  my  apple-trees  to  bear  fruit ;  but  my  apple-trees  will  not  bear  fruit  until  they 
are  grown.  And  a  man  wants,  in  every  process  of  his  development,  to  wait  for  its 
ripeness.  No  one  expects  a  young  man  just  graduated  from  the  law  school  to  be 
an  old-headed  lawyer  at  the  beginning.  He  may  have  the  making  of  one;  bat 
there  must  be  a  great  deal  of  unfolding  by  which  he  shall  come  to  it.  No  man 
imputes  blame  to  the  child  because  he  does  not  know  the  exercise  of  the  gymnasium 
at  first.  And  yet  it  is  supposed  that  when  a  man  is  converted  the  whole  weight  of 
responsibility  instantly  rests  upon  him  ;  and  men  feel,  "  There  I  come  short ;  there 
I  overreach ;  and  God  sets  down  great  black  marks  against  me "  ;  and  one  and 
another  give  up.  Now,  rawness  is  not  sinfulness,  nor  is  imperfection  disobedi- 
ence. Where  a  man  knows  what  he  ought  to  do,  and  can  do  it,  but  deliberately 
omits  it,  that  is  a  sin;  but  the  omission  is  not  sinful  in  one  who  is  not  competent 
or  who  does  not  know.  How  much  more  the  Psalmist  knew  than  we  do  (read 
Psa.  ciii.  13-17).  It  is  under  the  benediction  of  this  God  that  I  say  to  nervous  and 
self-condemnatory  people,  who  fear  God  and  desire  to  obey  His  commandments, 
but  who  are  constantly  stumbling  from  imperfections,  Be  not  ashamed ;  for  you 
are  nnder  the  administration  of  a  God  that  pities  as  a  father  pities,  and  that  bears 
with  the  world's  imperfections  as  a  schoolmaster  bears  with  the  imperfections  of 
his  scholars.  If  a  child  of  eight  cannot  write  a  fine  hand,  how  shall  a  man  without 
a  period  of  education  write  the  invisible  letters  that  come  from  the  inspiration  ol 
God's  Spirit  1     IV.  The  attempt  to  realise  ideals  is  nearer  perfection  in  thosb 

GREAT  NATURES  WHO  HAVE  BEEN  AT  ONCE  THE  STARS  THAT  GUIDED  HUMAN  NATDBB 
XJPWAED,   THAN    THE     COMETS     THAT   HAVE     FALLEN     ON     IT    AND     BLASTED    MAN'S    HOPES. 

Jonathan  Edwards  was  a  type  of  Christianity  that  flew,  and  he  has  developed  a 
conception  of  possible  being.  It  is  transcendent  literature  that  we  cannot  afford 
to  lose  ;  and  yet,  let  men  take  Edwards'  writing  to  test  themselves  by,  and  it  will 
drive  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  out  of  every  thousand  into  despair ;  and  they 
will  say,  *•  If  that  is  the  test  of  being  a  Christian,  I  am  not  one,  and  I  never  ean 
be  one."  And  by  holding  up  this  conception  before  the  young  and  the  infirm,  we 
shut  the  dooi  of  heaven.  It  throws  a  pall  over  the  Christian  life  ;  whereas  the 
voice  of  wisdom  says,  "  All  her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths 
are  peace."  "  Come  unto  Me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest.  Take  My  yoke ;  it  is  easy. 
Take  My  burden ;  it  l?light. "    Y.  Thb  wat  of  religion  in  this  uattbb  is  a  obbaz 


CBAT.  m.]  ROMANS.  609 

DEAL  EASiEB  THAN  THE  WAT  OF  NATOBK.    The  waj  upwaid  18  easier  than  the  way 
downward.     At  every  step  gained  the  complication  grows  less,  and  the  impulse 
grows  more.     The  religion  of  the  New  Testament  is  hopeful.    It  is  dark  only  to 
those  who  know  what  it  is,  and  whose  reason  recognises  it  as  being  holy,  just,  and 
good,  but  who  deliberately  say,  "  I  will  have  none  of  it."    They  are  on  the  same 
plane  with  him  who  knows  very  well  what  fire  is,  but  who  says,  "  I  do  not  care,  I 
will  walk  in  the  fire."    So  he  can,  and  he  will  take  the  consequences.     They  are 
on  the  same  plane  with  the  man  who  says,  "  I  know  that  drink  fires  the  blood ; 
nevertheless  I  will  drink."     So  it  is  throughout  the  whole  sphere  of  God's  law  of 
moral  conduct.     God  says  to  every  man  that  wants  to  learn,  "I  will  give  you 
time,  opportunity,  and  encouragement ;  and  I  will  forgive  all  your  infirmities  and 
transgressions  so  long  as  your  face  is  toward  the  heavenly  land  " ;  but  if  a  man 
says,  "  I  do  not  care  for  the  heavenly  land,"  and  does  not  strive  to  rise  toward  it,  but 
follows  his  own  devices,  woe  be  to  him.     {H.  Ward  Beecher.)         The  Christian't 
conquest  over  the  body  of  sin : — The  text  is  one  of  those  hard  places  of  St.  Paul 
which,  as  St.  Peter  says,  the  ignorant  and  unstable  wrest  to  their  own  destruction. 
For  the  proper  stating  of   this  case  of  conscience  there  must  be  considered — I. 
What  aee  the  proper  causes  which  place  men  and  keep  them  in  this  state  of 
A  necessity  of  sinning,  so  that  we  cannot  do  the  good  we  would?  &c.     1.  The 
evil   state  of    our    nature  which   we  may  know   by  experience.      2.    The    evil 
principles  which  are  sucked  in  by  the  greatest  part  of  mankind.    We  are  taught 
ways  of  going  to  heaven  without  forsaking  our  sins,  repentance  without  restitution, 
oharity  without  hearty  forgiveness  and  love,  trust  in  Christ's  death  without  con- 
formity to  His  life,  once  in  God's  favour  always  in  it,  that  God's  laws  are  for 
a  race  of  giants.    No  wonder,  then,  that  men  slacken  their  industry,  and  so  find  sin 
prevail.     3.  Bad  habits.     An  evil  custom  is  as  a  hook  in  the  soul  which  draws  it 
whither  the  devil  pleases.     Thus  evil  natures,  principles,  and  manners  are  the 
causes  of  our  imperfect  willing  and  our  weaker  acting  in  the  things  of  God.    But 
what  then?     Cannot  sin  be  avoided  7     Cannot  a  Christian  mortify  the  deeds  of  the 
body,  or  Christ  cleanse  us  from  our  sins  ?     The  next  particular  to  be  inquired 
of  is — II.  Whether  or  no  it  be  necessary  and  therefore  possible  for  a  servant 
OF  God  to  hate  evil  and  avoid  it  ?    "  He  that  saith  he  hath  not  sinned  is  a  liar  "  ; 
but  what  then  ?    Because  a  man  has  sinned  it  does  not  follow  that  he  must  do  so 
always.     "  Go  and  sin  no  more,"  saith  Christ.      The  case  is  confessed  "  that  all 
have  sinned  "  ;  but  is  there  no  remedy  ?     God  forbid.     There  was  a  blessed  time 
to  come,  and  it  has  long  since  come ;  "  Yet  a  little  while  and  iniquity  shall  be 
taken  oat  of  the  earth,  and  righteousness  shall  reign  among  you  "  ;  for  this  is 
the  day  of  the  gospel.     When  Christ  comes  to  reign  in  our  heart  by  His  Spirit, 
Dagon  and  the  Ark  cannot  stand  together — we  cannot  serve  Christ  and  Belial.    As 
in  the  state  of  nature  no  good  thing  dwells  within  us,  so  when  Christ  rules  in  us 
no  evil  thing  can  abide.     "  Every  plant  that  my  heavenly  Father  hath  not  planted 
shall  be  rooted  up."     "  With  men  this  is  impossible,  but  with  God  all  things  are 
possible."    As  there  is  a  state  of  carnality  in  which  a  man  cannot  but  obey  the 
flesh ;  so  there  is  a  state  of  spirituality,  when  sin  is  dead  and  righteousness  aUve. 
In  this  state  the  flesh  can  no  more  prevail  than  the  spirit  could  in  the  other.  Some 
men  cannot  but  choose  to  sin  (chap.  viii.  7) ;  but  we  are  not  in  the  flesh,  and  if  we 
walk  in  the  Spirit  we  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  (see  1  John  iii.  9  ;  Matt, 
vii.  18).     Through  Christ  that  strengtheneth  us  we  can  do  all  things.     So  it  is 
necessary  and  possible  to  mortify  sin  and  escape  the  slavery  of  "the  good  that  I 
would  I  do  not,"  <fec.     III.  In  what  degree  this  is  to  be  effected,  for  no  man  can 
Bay  he  is  to#i,lly  free  from   sin.     All  men's  righteousness  will  be  found  to  be 
unrighteous  if  God  shall  enter  into  j  udgment  with  us  :  therefore  after  our  inno- 
cence, we  must  pray  for  pardon.    But  concerning  good  men,  the  question  is  not 
whether  or  no  God  could  not  in  the  rigour  of  justice  blame  them  for  their  indis- 
cretion, or  chide  them  for  a  foolish  word  and  a  careless  action,  a  fearful  heart  and 
trembling  faith ;  these  are  not  the  measures  by  which  He  judges  His  children  ;  but 
the  question  is  whether  any  man  that  is  covetous,  proud,  or  intemperate,  can  at 
the  same  time  be  a  child  of  God  ?    Certainly  he  cannot.    But  then  we  know  that 
God  judgea^us  by  Jesus  Christ,  i.e.,  with  the  allays  of  mercy ;  with  an  eye  of 
pardon ;  wreh  the  sentences  of  a  father.     By  the  measures  of  the  gospel  He  will 
*'  judge  every  man  according  to  his  works."    These  measures  are — 1.  In  general, 
this.  A  Christian's  innocence  is  always  to  be  measured  by  the  plain  lines  of  the  com- 
mandments, but  is  not  to  be  taken  into  account  by  uncertain  fond  opinions  and 
scruples  of  zeaious  or  timorous  persons.  Some  men  say  that  every  natural  inclination 
VOL.   L  89 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

to  a  forbidden  object  is  a  sin  ;  if  so,  then  a  man  sins  whether  he  resists  his  inclinations 
Of  not.  And  there  is  no  difference  but  this  :  he  that  yields,  sins  greatest ;  and  he  that 
never  yields,  but  fights  on,  sins  oftenest :  hence  the  very  doing  our  duty  supposes 
sin.  But  God  judges  of  us  only  by  the  commandment  from  without,  and  from  the 
conscience  within.  He  never  intended  His  laws  to  be  a  snare  to  us.  He  requires 
of  us  a  sincere  heart  and  a  hearty  labour  in  the  work  of  His  commandments :  He 
calls  upon  us  to  avoid  all  that  His  law  forbids  and  our  consciences  condemn.  2.  In 
particular — (1)  Every  Christian  is  bound  to  arrive  at  such  a  state  that  he  have 
remaining  in  him  no  habit  of  any  sin  whatever.  Our  old  man  must  be  crucified ; 
the  body  of  sin  must  be  destroyed.  (2)  He  that  commits  any  one  sin  by  choice 
and  deliberation  is  an  enemy  of  God,  and  under  the  dominion  of  the  flesh.  (3) 
Every  Christian  ought  to  attain  to  such  a  state  as  that  he  shall  never  sin,  even  by 
passion,  i.e.,  no  passion  ought  to  make  him  choose  a  sin.  (4)  The  Christian  must 
strive  to  gain  so  great  a  dominion  over  his  sins  that  he  be  not  surprised  on  a 
sudden.  This  indeed  is  a  work  of  time,  and  it  is  well  if  it  ever  be  done,  but  it 
must  be  attempted.  IV.  By  what  instruments  all  this  is  to  be  done.  1.  Faith. 
He  that  hath  faith  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  can  remove  mountains :  "  All 
things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth."  We  pray  in  the  Te  Deum,  ••  Vouchsafe, 
O  Lord,  to  keep  us  this  day  without  sin."  Have  we  any  faith  when  we  so  pray  ? 
2.  Watchfulness — by  running  away  from  temptation,  being  always  well  employed, 
and  laying  in  provisions  of  reason  and  religion.  3.  The  mortification  of  sin,  which 
should  be  so  complete  that  no  nest  egg,  no  principles  of  it  or  affections  to  it,  be 
willingly  or  carelessly  left.  But  if  sin  be  thus  eradicated  some  argue  that  we  shall 
become  proud.  But  how  should  pride  spring  up  if  there  be  no  remains  of  sin  left  ? 
Will  a  physician  purposely  leave  the  relics  of  a  disease  and  pretend  he  does  it  to 
prevent  a  relapse  ?  Is  not  a  relapse  more  likely  if  the  sickness  be  not  wholly 
cured  ?  4.  Experiment.  Let  us  never  say  that  we  cannot  be  quit  of  our  sin  before 
we  do  all  we  can  to  destroy  it.  Put  the  matter  to  the  proof,  and  trust  to  the  all- 
sufficiency  of  grace.  5.  Caution  concerning  thoughts  and  secret  desires.  "  Lust,  when 
it  is  conceived,  bringeth  forth  death";  but  if  it  be  suppressed  in  the  conception  it 
comes  to  nothing.  6.  If  sin  hath  gotten  the  power  of  you,  consider  in  what 
degree  it  has  prevailed ;  if  only  a  little,  the  battle  will  be  more  easy,  and  the  victory 
more  certain.  But  then  be  sure  to  do  it  thoroughly.  If  sin  has  prevailed  greatly, 
you  have  much  to  do  ;  therefore  begin  betimes.  Conclusion :  Every  good  man  is 
a  new  creature,  and  Christianity  is  a  Divine  frame  and  temper  of  spirit,  which,  if 
we  pray  heartily  for  and  obtain,  we  shall  find  it  as  hard  and  uneasy  to  sin  as  now 
we  think  it  to  abstain  from  our  most  pleasing  sins.     {Jeremy  Taylor.) 

Vers.  21-25.  I  find  then  a  law,  that,  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  Is  present  with 

me. — The  inward  conflict : — There  is  no  word  with  which  we  are  more  familiar  than 
•*  conflict."  We  see  strife  everywhere ;  amongst  the  elements  of  nature,  the 
beasts  and  birds,  nations  and  families.  On  the  arena  of  political,  mercantile, 
and  social  life  there  is  ever  a  ceaseless  conflict  between  opposing  interests  and 
wills.  But  there  is  no  strife  so  severe  as  that  which  is  carried  on  between 
the  principles  of  good  and  evil  in  the  soul.  I.  The  gkodnd  of  the  Chbistian's 
COMPLAINT.  "  The  law  in  his  members,"  which — 1.  Prevents  him  from  attaining 
that  standard  of  excellence  which  is  presented  before  him  in  the  Word  of  God. 
He  "cannot  do  the  things  that  he  would."  His  desire  is  to  be  perfectly  con- 
formed to  the  law  of  God,  but  it  is  thwarted  by  corrupt  inclinations,  and  often  he  is 
betrayed  into  acts  which  he  bitterly  deplores.  2.  Hinders  the  full  development  of 
his  spiritual  life.  Every  Christian  has  the  outline  of  Christ's  ima^e.  Just  as  the 
oak  is  folded  up  within  the  acorn ;  just  as  the  first  beam  of  hght  is  the  sure 
precursor  of  noon  ;  just  as  in  the  child  there  is  the  man,  so  in  grace  are  all  the 
elements  of  glory.  The  imperfection  of  Christ's  image  in  the  Christian  arises  solely 
from  the  corruptions  of  his  nature ;  hence  it  is  like  the  sun  obscured  by  a  mist,  or 
a  plant  whose  vitality  is  impaired  by  a  poisonous  atmosphere.  The  brightest  light 
bums  but  dimly  if  the  atmosphere  is  impure,  and  an  instrument  tbat  is  out  of  tune 
will  give  forth  discordant  notes,  even  though  the  hand  of  a  master  should  sweep 
the  chords.  It  is  this  corrupt  nature  that  weakens  your  faith,  contracts  yonr 
knowledge,  and  damps  your  zeal.  3.  It  produces  much  mental  distress.  How  can 
there  be  peace  when  there  is  constant  warfare  within?  How  can  "  a  holy  God" 
look  with  approval  on  beings  so  sinful  ?  Hence  doubt,  discouragement,  and  fear. 
Moreover,  anxiety  is  sometimes  felt  as  to  the  result  of  the  conflict.  II.  The  soubcs 
or  IBB  Chbisxiam's  hofe.    1.  Deliverance  from  the  power  of  «Til  comes  to  as  from 


flBAY.  m.]  ROMANS.  611 

without,  not  from  within.  Sin  never  works  its  own  care,  nor  does  the  sinner  ever 
release  himself  from  its  miserable  bondage.  A  poison  may  lose  its  virulence,  and 
for  a  broken  or  a  wounded  limb  nature  has  a  healing  art.  But  who  ever  heard  of 
sin  dying  out  from  the  soul?  2.  This  deUverance  is  vouchsafed  to  as  by  God 
through  Christ.  In  no  other  way  can  deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin  be 
achieved.  A  man  who  has  nothing  to  oppose  to  temptation  but  the  power  of  his 
will,  or  his  fear  of  consequences,  is  like  a  man  walking  on  thin  ice.  Christianity 
finds  an  infinite  evil  and  proposes  an  infinite  remedy.  Beholding  us  under  the 
dominion  of  sin,  it  provides  for  us  release,  for  "  if  the  Son  make  you  free,  ye  shall 
be  free  indeed."  And  He  does  so  through  His  Spirit.  What  we  need  is  no  external 
reformation,  such  as  law  or  moral  precepts  effect,  but  an  inward  and  spiritual 
change.  And  God  alone  can  do  this.  It  matters  not  what  is  the  evil  that  yoa 
dread,  by  the  grace  of  God  you  can  overcome  it.  3.  This  deliverance  will  be 
progressive  and  eventually  final.  There  may  be  many  an  alternate  victory  and 
defeat ;  but  courage,  the  work  is  begun,  and  perfect  freedom  will  come  at  length. 
(H.  J.  Gamble.)  The  inward  conflict : — Notice — I.  Thb  leadino  desibe  of  aUi 
TBDK  BELIEVEB8 :  "  they  would  do  good."  1.  Every  real  Christian  would  be 
conformed  to  the  will  of  God  in  heart  and  life.  Whatever  advance  be  has  made, 
he  is  still  sensible  of  deficiency,  and  presses  after  higher  attainments.  2.  The 
spiritual  principle  imparted  in  regeneration  has  a  necessary  tendency  to  what 
is  good.  What  the  enlightened  understanding  approves  the  sanctified  will  prefers. 
3.  This  prevailing  inclination  of  the  will  to  what  is  good  is  a  manifest  token  of 
Divine  grace,  for  it  is  God  that  worketh  in  us  to  will.  The  will  is  the  man,  and 
the  obedience  of  the  will  is  the  obedience  of  the  man  (2  Cor.  viii.  12).  II.  Thb 
IMPEDIMENTS  TO  THIS  DESIBE:  "  evU  is  present  with  me."  1.  Sudden  and  an- 
seasonable  discursions  of  the  mind,  unfitting  and  indisposing  us  for  duty  (Job. 
XV.  12;  Jer.  iv.  14).  2.  Unbelieving  jealousies  and  suspicions,  either  with  respect 
to  ourselves  or  God.  Faith  animates  the  soul,  but  unbeUef  weakens  and  destroys 
its  energies.  If  the  soul  makes  some  efforts  heavenwards  this  clips  its  wings  (Psa. 
xlii.  5 ;  Ixxiii.  13  ;  Ixxxvii.  9).  3.  Unworthy  motives  and  sinister  ends.  We  are 
in  danger  of  being  influenced  by  selfishness,  pride,  or  legality,  in  all  our  religious 
duties ;  and  ere  we  are  aware  they  become  polluted  with  some  evil  which  is  present 
with  as  (Isa.  Iviii.  3  ;  Zech.  vii.  5).  4.  Worldly  thoughts  and  cares.  If  we  do  not 
decline  the  invitation  of  the  gospel,  and  go  to  our  farms  and  our  oxen,  yet  oar 
farms  and  our  oxen  will  come  to  us.  In  running  the  Christian  race  we  must  lay 
aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  which  easily  besets  us ;  and  the  world  is  a  weight 
sufficient  to  impede  our  spiritual  progress  (Psa.  cxix.  25).    III.  Thb  season  wht 

THB   ATTAINMENTS   OF   BELIEVEBS   ABK    80    INADEQUATE    TO    THEIB  WISHES   AND  DESIBES. 

"  I  find  then  a  law,"  that  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me.  1.  This 
"  law  "  is  indwelling  sin,  which  is  said  to  be — (1)  A  law  in  the  members  (ver.  23), 
not  only  because  it  resides  in  the  members,  but  because  it  employs  them  in 
its  service.  (2)  The  law  of  sin  and  death,  being  that  which  impels  to  sin  and  leads 
to  death  (Bom.  viii.  2;  James  i.  15).  2.  It  is  a  law  within  us,  which  we  carry  with 
as  into  the  closet,  into  the  temple,  into  the  city,  into  the  wilderness,  and  even  to  a 
sick  and  dying  bed.  It  mingles  with  our  choicest  duties,  and  spoils  our  sweetest 
enjoyments.  It  makes  this  world  a  Bochim,  a  place  of  tears  (Eom.  vii.  24 ;  2  Cor. 
T.  2).  3.  Indwelling  sin  still  has  the  force  of  law,  maintaining  a  complete 
ascendency  over  every  unrenewed  heart ;  and  though  it  was  not  a  law  to  Paul,  yet 
it  was  a  law  within  him,  and  the  source  of  daily  vexation.  Conclusion :  1.  We  see 
that  the  Christian  is  better  known  by  what  he  would  be  than  by  what  he  really  is. 
If  his  progress  were  as  rapid  as  his  desires  are  strong,  how  happy  would  he  be  1  2. 
The  best  of  men  have  no  need  to  be  proud  of  their  performances,  every  work 
is  marred  in  their  hands.  3.  Since  the  saints  on  earth  have  no  perfection  in 
themselves,  let  them  be  thankful  for  that  perfection  they  have  in  Christ  (Col. 
ii.  10).  4.  We  see  the  difference  between  the  hypocrite  and  the  real  Christian. 
Sin  has  the  consent  of  the  will  in  the  one,  but  it  is  not  so  with  the  other.  5.  It  is 
no  wonder  that  amidst  the  conflicts  and  dangers  of  the  present  state  the  Christian 
longs  to  be  in  heaven  (Bom.  viii.  22,  23).  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  inward 
conflict : — I.  The  condition  of  thb  awakened  sinneb.  1.  Miserable.  2.  Salutary. 
3.  Hopeful.  4.  Perilous.  II.  The  stabtlino  discoveby  of  the  awakened  sinneb. 
He  finds — 1.  That  he  is  not  free  to  do  good.  2.  That  evil  predominates  over  him. 
3.  That  this  is  the  law  of  his  corrupt  nature.  HI.  The  happy  change  effected 
BY  Chbist  in  the  heabt  of  the  awakened  sinneb.  1.  Condemnation  succeeded 
by  peace.     2.   Sorrow  by  joy.     3.  Complaining  by  gratitude.     4.  Conflict  by 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  yn. 

conquest.      {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  daily  struggle  : — A  "  law  "  here  means  an 

habitual  thing :  as  we  speak  of  the  laws  of  nature,  the  laws  of  electricity,  &o.  I. 
Thb  law  of  the  new  man.  1.  The  Christian  "  would  do  good,"  &c.  The  desires 
are  an  index  of  the  affections.  K  a  man  loves  a  thing  he  desires  that  thing.  The 
mother  parted  from  her  child  desires  her  child  again ;  the  patriot,  far  from  his 
country,  desires  and  seeks  to  return  to  it.  The  child  of  God  would  do  good,  not 
merely  to  escape  hell,  but  because  he  has  a  love  for  holiness.  2.  He  delights 
in  what  is  good  (ver.  22).  "0  how  I  love  Thy  law  1  "  is  the  language  of  all  the 
children  of  God,  What  excites  the  repugnance  of  the  unrenewed  mind  is  delightful 
to  the  new  mind.  "  I  love  it,  though  my  utmost  efforts  only  show  me  how  far 
I  come  short  of  its  perfection  ;  I  welcome  it,  though  it  condemns,  and  I  long 
to  wake  up  after  its  perfect  image."  3.  He  actually  does  good.  We  have  no  right 
to  use  a  lower  language  than  God  uses ;  and  therefore  every  child  of  God  is  called 
upon  to  do  good,  and  may  do  good,  and  God  is  well  pleased  with  the  good  he  does. 
God  hears  the  prayers  and  praises  of  His  people,  and  lias  complacency  in  them, 
God  marks  the  labours  of  love  of  His  people,  and  will  reward  them.  As  far 
as  anything  we  do  is  of  the  new  nature  it  is  good,  for  whatever  is  of  the  Spirit 
is  spiritual,  and  whatever  springs  from  the  new  nature  is  of  God ;  "  for  we  are 
His  workmanship,  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works."  And  not  only 
BO,  but  being  a  law,  it  lasts,  and  being  lasting,  he  will  persevere  in  doing  good. 
"  He  that  endureth  to  the  end,  the  same  shall  be  saved."  II.  But  that  the  Christian 
may  know  the  conflict  he  is  to  maintain,  let  us  look  at  the  law  of  the  old  man. 
*'  I  find  a  law,  that  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me."  1.  Now  this 
is  not  the  mere  sense  of  natural  conscience  that  now  and  then  reproves  and  then 
evil  inclinations  rise  and  burst  like  the  waters  when  they  are  dammed  up  ;  for  the 
spiritual  conflict  issues  in  habitual,  I  do  not  say  invariable,  victory.  If  a  man  were 
all  holy,  as  he  wiU  be  in  heaven,  there  would  be  no  conflict ;  but  if  a  man  is 
a  heavenly  scion  grafted  by  the  Spirit  npon  the  old  nature,  so  that  the  old  stem 
is  still  corrupt,  whilst  the  new  branches  of  the  new  tree  are  holy,  and  therefore  their 
fruit  good,  then  there  will  remain  the  old  stem.  Still  in  the  old  man  the  imagina- 
tions, desires,  affections,  motives,  are  always  downward,  earthward,  sinward  ;  the 
desires,  aspirations,  affections,  hopes  of  the  new  man  are  pure  and  heavenward  and 
Godward  :  so  you  have  the  man  as  he  was,  and  the  new  man  as  through  grace  he 
is.  No  man  this  side  of  heaven  is  out  of  the  reach  of  sin  and  out  of  the  danger  of 
temptation.  Opportunity  acting  upon  sinful  inclination  may  lead  the  best  of  men 
to  fall  into  sin.  2.  Then  we  have  an  evil  world.  This  world  which  is  ever  about 
us,  in  our  families,  relationships,  business  ;  the  world  vfith  all  its  show  and  pride, 
tempting  some  with  its  pleasures,  baiting  the  hook  for  others  with  its  riches,  how 
tempting  a  world  it  is — when  the  Christian  would  do  good  it  is  present  with  him. 
3.  And  when  the  believer  would  do  good,  the  evil  spirit  is  present  with  him.  Satan 
with  his  emissaries  is  trjing  to  hinder,  harass,  and  destroy.  Conclusion  :  1.  Does 
not  this  teach  us  that  we  have  constantly  to  watch  and  pray,  that  we  enter  not  into 
temptation  ?  If  you  have  not  looked  upon  your  Christian  Ufe  as  a  conflict,  you 
have  not  taken  a  right  view  of  it.  2.  And  then,  is  there  not  in  all  this  an  encourage- 
ment to  go  continually  to  Him  in  whom  we  have  righteousness  and  strength  ?  "  If 
any  man  sin  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,"  Sso.  {Canon  Stowell.)  The 
bondage  of  sin: — I.  Whebein  it  consists.  1.  The  will  desires,  approves, 
attempts  what  is  good.  2.  But  is  overpowered  and  led  captive  by  that  which 
is  evil.  II.  Why  is  it  the  sodece  of  so  much  misery?  Because  it  makes  man 
at  variance — 1.  With  himself.  2.  With  the  law  of  God.  3.  With  his  own 
interest,  bringing  condemnation  and  death.  III.  How  we  may  be  delivkeed 
FEOM  it.  1.  By  the  grace  of  God.  2.  Through  Christ.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 
law  of  sin  in  believers  an  evil  ever  present : — Learn — I.  That  there  is  an  evil 
PRINCIPLE  EVEN  IN  THE  HEARTS  OF  TRUE  BELIEVERS.  By  uature  it  is  treated  as  our 
familiar  friend  (ver.  20) ;  not  as  a  wayfaring-man,  or  as  a  stranger  that  tarrieth  for 
a  night.  It  is  ever  ready  to  betray  ns  into  evil,  or  to  interrupt  us  in  duty,  so  that 
when  we  would  do  good  evil  is  present  with  us,  at  all  times,  in  all  places,  and  in  all 
duties.  II.  This  abidino  principle  has  the  force  and  power  of  a  law.  As  the 
word,  when  applied  to  the  principle  of  grace,  in  ver.  18,  implies  not  merely  the 
presence,  but  also  the  activity  of  it ;  so  here.  And  though  it  be  weakened,  yet  its 
nature  is  not  changed,  and  this  teacheth  us  what  endeavours  it  will  use  for  regain- 
ing its  former  dominion ;  and  what  advantage  it  has  against  us.  It  "  doth  easily 
beset  us."  An  inmate  may  dwell  in  an  house,  and  yet  not  be  always  meddling ; 
but  this  law  bo  dwells  in  us  that  when  with  most  earnestness  we  desire  to  be  q^oit 


OBAf.  TO.]  ROMANS.  618 

of  it,  with  most  violence  it  will  force  itself  upon  as.  "  Wherefore  let  him  that 
tbinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."    lU.  Thocoh  this  law  bb  natuh* 

AUiT   PBEBENT    WITH    ALL   MEN,    TST    IT    IS    THB    DISTINOniSHINQ     FBIVILEOS   07   SOUB 

TO  FEEL  IT,  AND  TO  MouBN  ooNTiMUALLY  UNDEB  IT.  1.  How  few  are  there  who  are 
concerned  about  it  1  As  it  is  natural  to  us,  so  most  men  are  ready  to  imagine, 
either  that  there  is  no  such  principle  within  them,  or  that  if  there  be,  it  cannot  be 
sinfol,  but  only  constitutional.  Others  represent  it  as  belonging  to  the  very  essence 
of  the  soul,  and  they  conclude  it  is  all  in  vain  for  any  to  strive  against  it.  But  our 
apostle  clearly  distinguishes  between  sin  and  the  faculties  of  the  soul.  The 
inhabitant  must  be  different  from  the  house  in  which  it  dwelleth.  2.  If  there  be 
such  a  law  of  sin,  it  is  our  duty  to  find  it  out.  What  will  it  profit  a  man  to  have 
a  disease  and  not  to  discover  it ;  a  fire  lying  secretly  in  his  house  and  not  to  know 
it?  So  much  as  men  find  of  this  law  in  them,  so  much  they  will  abhor  it  and  no 
more.  Proportionably  also  to  their  discovery  of  it  will  be  their  earnestness  for 
grace.  IV.  That  thet  who  feel  this  evil  law,  eveb  present  with  them,  will 
COMPLAIN  most  WHEN  THET  AIM  BEST.  When  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with 
me.  (J.  Stafford.)  Heart,  its  aberrations  : — The  compass  on  board  an  iron 
vessel  IS  very  subject  to  aberrations ;  yet,  for  all  that,  its  evident  desire  is  to  be 
true  to  the  pole.  True  hearts  in  this  wicked  world,  and  in  this  fleshly  body,  are 
all  too  apt  to  swerve,  but  they  still  show  their  inward  and  persistent  tendency  to 
point  towards  heaven  and  God.  On  board  iron  vessels  it  is  a  common  thing  to  see 
a  compass  placed  aloft,  to  be  as  much  away  from  the  cause  of  aberration  as 
possible;  a  wise  hint  to  us  to  elevate  our  affections  and  desires;  the  nearer 
to  God  the  less  swayed  by  worldly  influences.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  For  I 
delight  In  the  law  of  God  after  the  Inward  man.  —  Delight  in  the  law: — L 
Indicates  the  tendency  of  the  heabt.  II.  May  co-exist  with  M0CH  evil. 
m.  Has  its  full  expression  in  a  holy  life.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Delight  in 
the  law  of  God : — I.  Why  ?  1.  Because  it  is  the  transcript  of  the  mind  and 
will  of  God  our  Father.  2.  Because  it  is  salutary  and  beneficial  both  to  ourselves 
and  to  others.  3.  Because  it  is  congenial  to  our  renewed  nature.  II.  How 
HANiFESTED?  1.  By  Studying  it.  2.  By  practising  it.  3.  By  trying  to  bring  others 
nnder  its  acknowledged  authority.  The  word  avvi'iSofiai  is  a  very  strong  expression, 
implying  real  sympathy  and  inward  harmony  with  the  commandments.  You  might 
as  well  talk  of  a  person  without  an  ear  for  music  delighting  in  the  oratorios  of 
Mendelssohn,  as  of  one  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  delightiug  in  the  Divine  law. 
No  unrenewed  person  ever  yet  delighted  in  the  law  as  the  law  of  God,  and  that  too 
"  in  the  inward  man."  A  rebel  may  be  able  to  see  the  wisdom  of  the  measures 
framed  by  the  monarch  for  the  guidance  of  his  subjects,  but  he  cannot  delight  in 
them  in  his  innermost  soul  as  the  laws  proceeding  from  the  throne.  For  this 
there  must  be  a  change  in  his  mind,  he  must  become  loyal.  (C7.  Neil,  M.A.) 
Delighting  in  the  law  of  God : — I.  Different  senses  of  the  term  "  law."  1.  That 
which  binds :  hence  the  law  of  God  as  a  rule  of  life  whether  revealed  in  the 
Scriptures  or  in  the  heart.  2.  The  law  as  distinguished  from  the  prophets.  8. 
The  law  as  distinguished  from  the  gospel.  4.  The  whole  revelation  of  God  as  con- 
tained in  the  Scriptures.  This  is  the  sense  in  which  the  word  is  often  used  in  the 
Psalms,  and  in  which  we  now  take  it.  II.  What  is  meant  by  delighting  in  it.  In 
general  this  is  "to  regard  with  lively  satisfaction  and  pleasure."  But  what  the 
expression  really  implies,  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  object.  To  delight  in  a 
landscape  expresses  a  different  state  of  mind  from  delighting  in  a  friend,  and  delight 
in  a  poem  from  delighting  in  the  law  of  God.  There  is — 1.  An  aesthetic  delight  in 
the  Scriptures  such  as  Lowth  strongly  expresses  in  his  "  Hebrew  poetry."  Many 
admire  tiie  histories,  prophecies,  and  portraiture  of  character  in  the  Bible.  2.  An 
intellectual  delight  in  the  wisdom  of  its  laws  and  institutions.  The  principles  of 
its  jurisprudence  and  government  have  been  the  admiration  of  statesmen.  3.  A 
mere  delight  in  the  purity  of  its  precepts.  This  is  exhibited  by  those  who  deny  its 
Divine  origin.  All  this  is  different  from  what  is  meant  in  the  text.  HI.  Trub 
delight  in  the  law  of  God  is  due  to  the  influence  of  the  Spirit.  1.  This 
influence  is — (1)  A  subjective  change  in  the  mind  analogous  to  opening  the  eyes  of 
the  blind ;  such  a  change  as  imparts  the  power  of  spiritual  vision.  This  is  not 
enough.  A  man  may  have  the  power  of  vision  in  a  dark  room.  (2)  It  produces  a 
revelation  of  the  truth  in  its  true  nature  and  relations.  This  is  experienced  much 
more  abundantly  at  some  times  than  at  others.  2.  The  effect  of  these  operations 
is — (1)  An  apprehension  of  the  truth  and,  consequently,  of  the  Divine  origin  of  the 
l«w.     (2)  An  appreciation  of  its  excellence.     (3)  An  experience  of  its  power  to 


«14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  th. 

sanctify,  console,  gaide,  (fee.  (4)  An  acquiescence  in  it  and  rejoidng  in  it  as  an 
exhibition  of  God's  character,  the  rule  of  duty,  the  plan  of  salvation,  the  person 
and  work  of  Christ  and  the  future  state.  Conclusion  :  The  more  we  delight  in  the 
law  of  God  the  more  we  shall  be  conformed  to  it,  and  the  better  able  to  teach  it. 
(C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  Delight  in  the  law,  a  good  sign  of  a  gracious  heart : — 1.  Of  the 
blessed  man  the  Psalmist  says  (Psa.  i.)  that  "  his  delight  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord," 
and  therefore  doth  he  meditate  in  it,  day  and  night.  That  which  is  the  burden  of 
a  carnal  heart  is  the  delight  of  the  renewed  soul.  This  was  the  happy  experience 
of  our  apostle.  In  the  preceding  verse  he  speaks  of  a  living  principle  within  him, 
willing  that  which  is  good.  Here  he  carries  his  thoughts  further :  for  to  delight  in 
the  law  of  God  is  more  than  to  will  that  which  is  good.  2.  The  word,  here  rendered 
•'  delight,"  is  not  found  anywhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  The  apostle  makes  use 
of  an  uncommon  word  to  express  unspeakable  satisfaction.    I.  It  is  the  distinguish- 

INO  CHARACTER  OP  A  GOOD  MAN,  THAT  HE  DELIGHTS  IN  THE  LAW  OF  GoD.   1.  The 

children  of  God  delight  to  know  and  do  the  will  of  their  Father  (1  John  v.  3).  2. 
As  every  child  of  God  hath  his  measure  of  light  to  behold  the  excellency  of  the 
Divine  law,  so  he  hath  his  measure  of  delight  in  it.  3.  If  you  love  the  law  of  God, 
you  will  take  pleasure  in  it,  even  though  it  condemns  yon ;  you  will  not  wish  it  were 
changed  for  one  less  holy.    You  will  also  meditate  upon  it,  and  study  conformity  to 

it.      II.   A  TRUE  DELIGHT  IN  THE  LAW  OF  GoD   IS  AN  UNSPEAKABLE    BLESSING.       1.    Such 

a  delight  must  spring  from  love ;  and  you  know  how  studious  love  is  to  please ; 
preferring  the  will  of  the  object  beloved  to  its  own  will.  So  love  to  God  will  turn 
all  duty  into  delight.  2.  This  delight  in  the  law  of  God  supposeth  some  good  degree 
of  conformity  to  the  object  beloved.  In  all  love  three  things  are  necessary.  Good- 
ness in  the  object,  knowledge  of  that  goodness,  and  suitableness,  or  conformity. 
These  three  things  united  beget  love,  and,  if  they  increase,  they  will  produce  that 
delight  which  our  apostle  professes  in  the  law  of  God.  3.  This  delight  can  never 
be  produced,  but  by  seeing  the  law  as  it  is  in  Christ.  It  was  in  the  heart  of  Christ : 
"Thy  law  is  within  My  heart."  By  viewing  the  law  in  Christ,  the  believer  unites 
the  law  with  the  gospel,  and  they  mutually  embrace  each  other  :  while  both  agree 
to  promote  the  happiness  of  the  creature,  and  the  glory  of  the  Creator  and  Redeemer. , 
III.  Although  this  delight  is  a  proof  op  odb  conformity  to  Christ,  tet  oub 

APOSTLE  WOULD   NOT   HAVE   DB   CONCEIVE   TOO   HIGHLY  OF  IT  IN  THE  PRESENT  IMPERFECT 

BTATK.  There  is  something,  even  in  believers  themselves,  which  does  not,  cannot 
delight  in  the  law  of  God.  So  far  as  a  man  is  sanctified,  so  far  will  he  delight  in 
the  law  of  God,  and  no  further.  There  is  flesh  as  well  as  spirit  in  the  best  of  saints 
upon  earth.  {J.  Stafford.)  The  opposing  laws  : — I.  The  conflict.  1.  It  is  a 
strife  between  two  instincts  called  laws.  The  law  of  God  desires  to  obtain  the 
mastery  over  the  soul.  But  the  law  of  nature  resists  its  influence.  2.  This  strife 
originates  the  fact  of  our  dual  nature.  The  inner  man  is  the  spirit  of  life  which 
naturally  has  heavenly  instincts  and  desires.  But  the  "  members  "  composed  of 
the  ea*tli  naturally  desire  earthly  things.  Hence  the  two  desires  do  pull  different 
ways.  3.  The  strife  exists  because  the  fall  of  man  into  sin.  Originally  man's 
higher  nature  was  obedient  to  God.  He  sinned  through  yielding  to  the  outer  man. 
Through  his  higher  instincts  yielding  to  bodily  impulses,  he  cast  to  the  wind  all  the 
nobler  feelings  of  the  inner  man.  II.  The  nature  of  this  conflict.  1.  It  is,  in  a 
Christian  man,  a  strife  between  what  he  loves  and  what  he  hates,  between  what  h\5 
knows  to  be  right  and  for  his  good  and  what  he  knows  will  be  his  ruin.  2.  Although 
we  are  conscious  of  this  fact,  still  we  find  the  law  of  sin  prevailing.  In  the  warfare 
we  find  that  the  spiritual  law  and  desire  and  knowledge  often  get  the  worst  of  it, 
ni.  What  is  the  moral  influence  of  this  inevitable  conflict?  1.  To  teach  ns 
not  to  expect  too  much  in  this  world.  We  are  not  to  be  cast  down  by  failure.  Half 
of  those  who  go  back  do  so  owing  to  discouragement.  They  are  too  sanguine.  We 
are  not  to  look  upon  life  in  this  world  as  life  in  heaven,  where  it  will  be  without 
temptation.  But — 2.  We  are  not  to  relax  in  our  struggles.  The  fact  of  our  having 
to  fight  shows  that  God  never  intended  us  to  enter  heaven  without  doing  something 
to  show  that  we  are  worthy  of  the  reward.  We  may  not  be  able  to  obtain  a  victory 
at  present,  but  we  may  hold  our  own  and  make  advance.  Conclusion  :  We  learn — 
1.  That  it  is  not  always  knowledge  of  what  is  right  nor  love  of  what  is  good  that 
eaves  a  man.  The  inner  man  may  delight  in  Divine  things,  but  worldly  things  may 
be  too  strong  for  him.  What  are  you  to  do,  then  ?  Fight,  strive.  2.  That  wo  long 
for  that  time  when  our  higher  nature  shall  be  victorious,  and  our  lower  nature 
purified.  3.  How  foolish  it  is  to  meet  worldly  temptations  with  worldly  weapons. 
The  arm  of  flesh  can  never  resist  flesh.    Arguments,  reasonings,  &o.,  are  vain. 


OUP.  th.]  BOMANS.  615 

4.  To  appreciate  the   heavenly  armoar,  and  the  sanctifying  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.     5.  Humility,  and  that  victory  is  not  to  the  strong.      (J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.) 
Why  am  I  thus  J — L  In  evebt  true  Christian  the  rulinq  power  in  him  delights 
IN  the  law  or  God.     1.  The  new  nature  cannot  sin  because  it  is  born  of  God.    We 
are  made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  therefore  delight  in  the  law  of  God. 
(1)  We  would  not  wish  to  have  one  syllable  of  that  law  altered,  though  it  condemns 
as.   We  perceive  it  not  as  truth  established  by  investigation,  but  as  truth  all  radiant, 
shining  in  its  own  majesty.     (2)  Nor  would  we  have  the  spirituality  of  the  law  in 
any  degree  compromised.    We  are  not  only  pleased  with  the  law  as  we  read  it,  but 
with  the  very  spirit  of  the  law.    He  never  thinks  that  God  is  too  exacting.     (3)  We 
desire  to  have  no  dispensation  from  the  law.    In  the  Church  of  Kome  indulgences 
are  regarded  as  a  blessing.     We  ask  no  such  favour.     A  license  even  for  a  moment 
would  be  but  a  liberty  to  leave  the  paths  of  light  and  peace  to  wander  in  dark- 
ness and  danger.     (4)  We  desire  to  keep  the  law  according  to  the  mind  of  God.    If 
it  were  proposed  to  us  that  we  should  have  whatever  we  should  ask  for,  the  gift  we 
should  crave  beyond  every  other  is  holiness.    2.  Now,  every  Christian  that  has  that 
desire  within  his  soul  will  never  be  satisfied  until  that  desire  is  fulfilled,  and — (1) 
This  shows  that  we  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man.     (2)  This, 
however,  is  proved  in  a  more  practical  way  when  the  Christian  overcomes  many  of 
the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind.     Often  in  striving  to  be  holy  he  has  to  put 
himself  to  much  stern  self-denial;   but  he  does  it  cheerfully.     When  a  man  is 
wiUing  to  bear  reproach  for  righteousness  sake,  then  it  is  that  the  man  gives  proof 
that  he  delights  in  the  law  of  God.    II.  Where  there  is  this  delight  in  the  law 
or  God,  tet  there  is  another  law  in  the  members  conflicting  with  it.    Paul 
could  see  it  first,  and  then  he  had  to  encounter  it,  and  at  length  to  some  extent 
he  was  enthralled  by  it.     1.  There  is  in  each  one  of  us  a  law  of  sin.     (1)  It  may 
be  seen  even  when  it  is  not  in  operation,  if  our  eyes  are  lightened.     Whenever  I 
hear  a  man  say  he  has  no  propensity  to  sin,  I  infer  at  once  that  he  does  not  live  at 
home.    Sometimes  it  is  dormant.     Gunpowder  is  not  always  exploding,  but  it  is 
always  explosive.     The  viper  may  be  coiled  up  doing  no  damage  ;  but  it  hath  a 
deadly  virus  beneath  its  fangs.     (2)  Sin  generally  breaks  forth  suddenly,  taking  as 
by  surprise.     (3)  But  note  when  there  is  most  money  in  the  house,  then  is  the 
likeliest  time  for  thieves  to  break  in ;  and  when  there  is  most  grace  in  the  soul  the 
devil  will  try  to  assault  it.   Pirates  were  not  accustomed  to  attack  vessels  when  they 
went  out  to  fetch  gold  from  the  Indies  :  they  always  waylaid  them  when  they  were 
coming  home.    Let  us  be  more  watchful  than  in  seasons  of  tranquility.     (4)  It  is 
remarkable  how  sin  will  show  itself  in  the  holiest  of  duties.     When  you  feel  that 
you  ought  to  pray,  do  you  not  find  sometimes  an  unwillingness  ?    When  your  soul 
is  led  away  with  thoughts  of  things  Divine,  straight  across  your  soul  there  comes  a 
bad  thought.   Or  perhaps  you  get  through  your  devotion  with  much  delight  in  God ; 
but  presently  there  steals  over  your  mind  a  self-satisfaction  that  you  have  prayed 
so  well  that  you  must  be  growing  in  grace.    Perhaps,  again,  you  did  not  feel  any 
liberty  in  prayer,  and  then  you  will  murmur  you  might  as  well  give  up  praying.   2. 
And  this  law  in  his  members  •'  wars  against  the  law  of  the  mind."    There  must  be 
two  sides  to  a  war.     (1)  We  have  known  this  warfare  on  this  wise.    A  wrong  desire 
has  come  and  we  have  utterly  loathed  it,  but  it  has  followed  us  again  and  again. 
We  have  been  harassed  with  doubts,  yet  the  more  bitterly  we  have  detested  them 
the  more  relentlessly  they  have   pursued   us.     Mayhap,  a  hideous  sentiment  is 
wrapped  up  in  a  neat  epigram,  and  then  it  will  haunt  the  memory,  and  we  shall 
strive  to  dislodge  it  in  vain.     (2)  Whence  these  evils  ?     Sometimes  from  Satan ; 
but  most  conamonly  temptation  derives  strength  as  well  as  opportunity  from  the 
moods  or  habits  to  which  our  own  constitution  is  prone.     (3)  But  the  war  carried 
on  by  this  evil  nature  is  not  always  by  the  continual  besieging  of  the  soul,  at  times 
it  tries  to  take  us  by  assault.    When  we  are  off  our  guard  up  it  wiU  come  and 
attack  us.    3.  This  warring  brought  Paul  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin.    Not 
that  he  means  he  wandered  into  iuimoraUties.    No  observer  may  have  noticed  any 
fault  in  the  apostle's  character,  but  he  could  see  it  in  himself.    It  is  a  captivity  like 
that  of  the  Israehtes  in  Babylon  itself  when  a  chUd  of  God  is  suffered  to  fall  into 
some  great  sin.   But,  long  before  it  comes  to  that  pass,  this  law  of  sin  brings  us  unto 
captivity  in  other  respects.     While  you  are  contending  against  inbred  sin  doubts 
will  invade  your  heart.     Surely  if  I  were  a  child  of  God  I  should  not  be  hampered 
in  devotion  or  go  to  a  place  of  worship  and  feel  no  enjoyment.   Oh,  what  a  captivity 
the  soul  is  brought  into  when  it  allows  inbred  sin  to  cast  any  doubts  upon  its  safety 
in  Christ.     III.  It  is  some  comfort  that  this  war  is  an  interesting  phasb  or 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  va, 

Cheistun  evidence.  Such  as  are  dead  in  sin  have  never  made  proof  of  any  of 
these  things.  These  inward  conflicts  show  that  we  are  alive.  The  strong  man 
while  he  keeps  the  house  will  keep  it  in  peace.  It  is  when  a  stronger  than  he 
comes  to  eject  him  that  there  is  a  fight.  Do  not  be  depressed  about  it.  The  best 
of  God's  saints  have  suffered  in  this  very  same  manner.  Look  up  yonder  to  those 
saints  in  their  white  robes  1  Ask  them  whence  their  victory  came.  The  richest 
consolation  comes  from  the  last  verse.  Though  the  fight  may  be  long  and  arduous, 
the  result  is  not  doubtful.  You  will  have  to  get  to  heaven  fighting  for  every  inch  of  the 
way ;  but  you  will  get  there.  (C.  If.  Spurgeon.)      The  Christian  warfare  and  victory  :— 

1.  A  BELrEVEB  DELIGHTS  IN  THE  LAW  OF  GoD  (vcr.  22).  1.  Before  a  man  comes  to  Christ 
he  hates  the  law  of  God  (chap.  viii.  7)  on  account  of — (1)  Its  purity.  It  is  infinitely 
opposed  to  all  sin.  But  natural  men  love  sin,  and  therefore  they  hate  the  law,  as 
bats  hate  the  light  and  fly  against  it.  (2)  Its  breadth.  It  extends  to  all  their  out- 
ward actions,  seen  and  unseen ;  to  every  idle  word ;  to  the  looks  of  their  eye ;  it 
dives  into  the  deepest  caves  of  their  heart ;  it  condemns  the  most  secret  springs  of 
sin  and  lust  that  nestle  there.  (3)  Its  unchangeableness.  If  the  law  would  let 
down  its  requirements  then  ungodly  men  would  be  well  pleased.  But  it  is  anchange* 
able  as  God.  2.  When  a  man  comes  to  Christ  this  is  all  changed.  He  can  say, 
"  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man."  "  0  how  I  love  Thy  law." 
•'I  delight  to  do  Thy  wiU."  There  are  two  reasons  for  this:  (1)  The  law  is  no 
longer  an  enemy.  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  me  from  the  curse  of  the  law,"  &o.  (2) 
The  Spirit  of  God  writes  the  law  on  the  heart  (Jer.  xxxi.  33).  Coming  to  Christ 
takes  away  our  fear  of  the  law ;  the  Holy  Spirit  coming  into  oar  heart  makes  as 
love  the  law."  IL  A  tbue  believer  feels  an  opposing  law  in  his  members  (ver. 
23).  When  a  sinner  comes  flrst  to  Christ,  he  often  thinks  he  will  never  Bin  any 
more.  A  little  breath  of  temptation  soon  discovers  his  heart,  and  he  cries  out,  "  I 
see  another  law.  Observe — 1.  What  he  calls  it,  "another  law";  quite  different 
from  the  law  of  God — "  a  law  of  sin  "  (ver.  25) ;  "  a  law  of  sin  and  death  "  (chap, 
viii.  2).  It  is  the  same  law  which  is  called  "the  flesh"  (Gal.  v.  17);  "the  old 
man"  (Eph.  iv.  22);  "your  members"  (Col.  iii.) ;  "a  body  of  death"  (ver. 
24).  2.  What  His  Iaw  is  doing — "warring."  There  never  can  be  peace  in  the 
bosom  of  a  believer.  There  is  peace  with  God,  but  constant  war  with  sin.  Some- 
times, indeed,  an  army  lies  in  ambush  quiet  till  a  favourable  moment  comes.  So  the 
lusts  often  lie  quiet  till  the  hour  of  temptation,  and  then  they  war  against  the  soul. 
The  heart  is  like  a  volcano,  sometimes  it  slumbers  and  sends  up  nothing  but  a  little 
smoke ;  but  the  fire  will  soon  break  out  again.  Is  Satan  ever  successful  ?  In  the 
deep  wisdom  of  God  the  law  in  the  members  does  sometimes  bring  the  soul  into 
captivity.  Noah  was  a  perfect  man,  and  walked  with  God,  and  yet  he  was  drunken. 
Abraham  was  the  "  friend  of  God,"  and  yet  he  told  a  lie.  Job  was  a  perfect  man, 
and  yet  he  was  provoked  to  curse  the  day  of  his  birth.  And  so  with  Moses,  David, 
Solomon,  Hezekiah,  Peter,  and  the  apostles.  (1)  Have  you  expesienced  this  war 
fare  ?  It  is  a  clear  mark  of  God's  children.  (2)  If  any  of  you  are  groaning  under 
it — (a)  Be  humbled.  (6)  Let  this  teach  yoa  your  need  of  Jesus,  (c)  Be  not  dis- 
couraged. Jesus  is  able  to  save  you  to  the  uttermost.  III.  The  feeling  of  a  believes 
DURING  this  warfare.  1.  He  feels  vnretched  (ver.  24).  There  is  nobody  in  this 
world  so  happy  as  a  believer.  He  has  the  pardon  of  all  his  sins  in  Christ.  Still 
when  he  feels  the  plague  of  his  own  heart  he  cries,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  1 " 

2.  He  seeks  deliverance.  If  lust  work  in  your  heart,  and  you  lie  down  contented 
with  it,  you  are  none  of  Christ's !  3.  He  gives  thanks  for  victory.  Truly  we  are 
more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us ;  for  we  can  give  thanks  before 
the  fight  is  done.  (R.  M.  McCheyne,  M.A.)  Sin — conflict  with — victory  over: — 
We  have  here — I.  Paul's  experience.  1.  That  there  were  within  himself  two  con- 
flicting principles.  2.  That  these  principles  were  under  the  direction  of  opposing 
intelligences — "  Warring."  The  conflict  is  not  a  collision  between  blind  forces.  la 
every  war  there  is  intelligence  on  both  sides.  The  "  law  of  the  mind  "  is  under 
the  direction  of  the  "  Captain "  of  our  salvation.  That  of  "  the  members  "  is 
under  the  direction  of  the  devil.  The  "  Holy  War  "  in  the  "  Town  of  Man-soul " 
is  more  than  a  poetic  dream.  3.  That  the  tendency  of  sin  is  to  make  men  slaves  to 
itself.  When  sin  is  indulged  in  for  a  length  of  time  the  power  of  resistance  is 
weakened,  and  man  becomes  the  helpless  prey  of  the  foe.  Witness  the  miser, 
sensualist,  opium  eater,  drunkard,  &o.  The  grasp  of  sin  is  a  tenacious  one.  It 
rallies,  too,  after  many  a  defeat,  and  clings  with  deadly  obstinacy  oftentimes  to 
those  most  "  valiant  for  the  truth."  II.  Paul's  emotions  in  the  face  of  his 
SSfSBiSNOES.    He  felt — 1.  "  Wretched."    2.  Loathsome.    Sin  was  as  hatefal  as  a 


«BAi.  m.]  ROMANS.  617 

oorpee  is  to  living  men.  8.  Helpless.  "Who  shall  deliver  me?"  4.  Hopeless. 
The  whole  verse  seems  a  wail  of  despair.  "  Who  shall,"  Ac.  III.  Paul's  dblivee- 
ANOB.  "  I  thank  God,"  &o.  The  darkest  hoar  is  nearest  the  dawn.  This  deliver- 
ance was — 1.  From  God.  God  alone  is  able.  "  Who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  ?  " 
It  is  He  only  who  giveth  as  the  victory,  &o.  2.  Through  Christ.  Paul  knew  of  no 
other  way.  His  good  moral  life  (Phil,  iii.),  his  mental  culture  (Acts  zvii.),  his 
zeal  for  the  cause  of  God  (2  Cor.  xi.) ;  in  none  of  these  does  he  hope.  IV.  Paul's 
INTEBENOE  FBOM  THE  WHOLE.  "  So  then  with  the  mind,"  &o.  Victory  is  at  hand. 
The  enemy  is  routed  from  the  citadel.  1.  The  better  part  of  his  nature — the 
immortal  part — was  in  the  service  of  God.  2.  Only  the  inferior  part — the  mortal 
members  of  the  flesh — were  in  any  sense  in  the  service  of  sin.  {R.  T,  Howell. ) 
Victory  amid  strife  : — 1.  Such  is  the  weary  conflict  which  Adam's  fall  entailed  on 
all  born  in  the  way  of  nature.  In  paradise  there  was  no  disturbance ;  God  had 
made  them  for  Himself,  and  nothing  had  come  between  them  and  God.  They 
knew  not  sin,  and  so  knew  not  what  it  was  to  sin ;  they  could  not  even  fear  sin 
which  they  knew  not.  Man  lived  as  he  willed,  since  he  willed  what  God  com- 
manded ;  he  lived  enjoying  God,  and  from  Him,  who  is  good,  himself  was  good. 
2.  To  fall  altered  the  whole  face  of  man.  Easy  was  the  command  to  keep.  The 
heavier  was  the  disobedience  which  kept  not  a  command  so  easy.  And  so,  because 
man  rebelled  against  God,  he  lost  the  command  over  himself.  He  would  not  have 
the  free,  loving,  bhssful  Bcrvice  of  God ;  and  so  he  was  subjected  to  the  hateful, 
restless  service  of  his  lower  self.  Every  faculty  became  disordered.  Yet  is  there, 
even  in  unregenerate  man,  some  trace  of  his  Maker's  bands.  He  cannot  truly 
serve  God,  but  he  cannot,  until  he  has  wholly  destroyed  his  soul's  life,  tranquilly 
serve  sin.  Yet,  •'  lust  of  the  flesh,  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  pride  of  Ufe,"  are  the  more 
powerful.  He  obeys,  though  unwillingly,  "  the  law  of  sin  "  which  he  had  taken 
upon  himself ;  not  wholly  lost,  because  not  willingly.  3.  Such  was  our  state  by 
nature,  to  heal  which  our  Redeemer  came.  He  willed  to  restore  us ;  but  He  willed 
not  to  restore  us  without  cost  and  trial  of  ours.  He  wills  that  w«  should  know 
how  sore  a  thing  is  rebellion  against  God.  He  willeth  to  restore  to  us  the  mastery 
over  ourselves,  but  through  ourselves ;  to  give  us  the  victory,  but  by  overcoming  in 
as.  The  strife  then  remains.  To  have  no  strife  would  be  a  sign  not  of  victory, 
bat  of  slavery,  not  of  life,  but  of  death.  But  the  abiding  state  whereof  Paul  speaks 
cannot  be  that  in  which  a  Christian  ought  to  be.  "  To  be  sold  under  sin,"  (which 
is  only  said  of  the  most  wicked  of  the  wicked  kings  of  Israel),  to  be  "  carnal,"  to 
**  serve  with  the  flesh  the  law  of  sin,"  to  be  "  brought  under  captivity  to  it,"  cannot 
be  our  state  as  sons  of  God  and  members  of  Christ.  If  this  were  so,  where  were 
the  "  liberty  wherewith  Christ  has  made  us  free  "  ?  To  what  end  would  be  the  gifts 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  power  of  Christ  within  as.  His  armour  of  righteousness, 
wherewith  He  compasses  us  ?  No  1  the  end  of  the  Christian's  conflict  must  be,  not 
defeat,  but  victory.  There  are,  says  an  ancient  father,  four  states  of  man.  In  the 
first,  man  struggles  not,  but  is  subdued ;  in  the  second,  he  struggles,  and  is  still 
eabdued ;  in  the  third,  he  struggles,  and  subdues ;  in  the  fourth,  he  has  to  struggle 
no  more.  The  first  state  is  man's  condition  when  not  under  the  law  of  God.  The 
second  is  his  state  under  the  law,  but  not  with  the  fulness  of  Divine  grace.  The 
third,  wherein  he  is  in  the  main  victorious,  is  under  the  full  grace  of  the  gospel. 
The  fourth,  of  tranquil  freedom  from  all  straggle,  is  in  the  blessed  and  everlasting 
peace.  4.  But  however  any  be  under  the  power  of  grace,  they,  while  in  the  flesh, 
must  have  conflict  still.  It  would  not  be  a  state  of  trial  without  conflict.  In  us, 
although  re-born  of  God,  there  yet  remains  that  "infection  of  nature  whereby 
the  desire  of  the  flesh  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God."  "  If  we  say  that  we  have 
no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves."  6.  Yet  through  this  very  truth  some  deceive,  some 
distress  themselves  wrongly.  They  argue  in  opposite  ways.  We  have  a  nature 
ready  to  burst  out  into  sin,  unless  it  be  kept  down  by  grace.  But  by  grace  it  may 
be  kept  down  increasingly.  What  is  evil  ought  to  be  continually  lessened ;  what  is 
good  ought  to  be  strengthened.  Yet  this  infection  within  us,  although  of  "the 
nature  of  sin,"  unless  our  will  consent  to  its  suggestions  ;  and  so  long  as,  by  God's 
grace,  we  master  it,  is  not  sin,  but  the  occasion  of  the  victories  of  His  grace. 
People  distress  themselves  by  not  owning  this;  they  deceive  themselves  if  they 
make  it  the  occasion  of  carelessness.  The  one  says,  "  My  nature  is  sinful,  and 
therefore  I  am  the  object  of  God's  displeasure,"  the  other,  "My  nature  is  sinful, 
and  therefore  I  cannot  help  it,  and  am  not  the  object  of  God's  displeasure,  although 
I  do  what  is  wrong."  The  one  mistakes  sinfulness  of  nature  for  actual  sin,  the 
Other  excuses  actu^  sin  because  his  nature  is  sinful.    Each  is  untrue.    A  man  ia 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼» 

not  the  object  of  God's  displeasure,  on  account  of  the  remains  of  his  inborn 
corruption,  if  he  in  earnest  strive  with  it.  If  he  strive  not  in  earnest  with  it.  he 
is  the  object  of  God's  displeasure,  not  on  account  of  the  sinfulness  of  his  nature, 
"but  on  account  of  his  own  negligence  as  to  that  sinfulness  of  nature,  or  his  sinful 
concurrence  with  it.  Nothing  is  sin  to  us,  which  has  not  some  consent  of  the  will. 
We  are,  then,  to  have  this  conflict ;  we  ought  not,  by  God's  grace,  in  any  of  the 
more  grievous  sins,  to  be  defeated  in  it.  6.  This  conflict  is  continual.  It  spreads 
through  the  whole  life,  and  through  every  part  in  man.  Man  it  besieged  on  all  sides. 
No  power,  faculty,  sense,  is  free  from  it.  But  though  the  whole  man  is  besieged 
thus,  his  inward  self,  where  God  dwells,  is  hemmed  in,  but  not  overcome,  unless 
his  will  consents.  "  Sin  lieth  at  the  door."  The  will  holds  the  door  closed ;  the 
will  alone  opens  the  door.  If  thou  open  not  the  door  thyself,  sin  cannot  enter  in. 
Do  thou  submit  thy  own  will  to  God,  and  God  will  subject  this  contrary  wiU  to  thee. 
Thou  canst  not  have  victory  unless  thou  be  assaulted.  Fear  not.  Bather  thou 
mayst  take  it  as  a  token  of  God's  love,  who  sets  thee  in  the  conflict.  He  will 
uphold  thee  by  His  hand,  when  the  waves  are  boisterous.  So  shalt  thou  have  the 
victory  through  His  Spirit.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  But  I  see  another  law  In  my 
members,  warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind. — The  dual  nature  and  the  duel 
within  : — I.  Theee  are  in  all  believers  two  principles.  1.  The  first  in  order  of 
time  is  the  old  Adam  nature.  It  is  bom  of  and  with  the  flesh.  Some  fancy  that 
it  is  to  be  improved,  gradually  tamed  down  and  sanctified ;  but  it  is  enmity  against 
God,  and  is  not  reconciled  to  God ;  neither,  indeed,  can  be.  (1)  This  old  nature 
lives  in  our  members ;  its  nest  is  the  body,  and  it  works  through  the  body.  There 
are  certain  appetites  of  ours  which  are  perfectly  allowable,  nay,  even  necessary; 
but  they  can  be  very  easily  pushed  to  sinful  extremes.  (2)  The  sin  which  lurks  in 
the  flesh  will  grow  weaker  in  proportion  as  the  holy  principle  grows  stronger  ;  and 
it  is  at  no  time  to  be  tolerated  or  excused,  but  we  are  to  figbt  against  it,  and  conquer 
it.  2.  When  we  are  born  again  there  is  dropped  into  our  soul  the  living  and 
incorruptible  seed  of  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  akin  to  the  Divine  nature,  and  cannot 
sin,  because  it  is  born  of  God.  It  is  at  deadly  enmity  with  the  old  nature,  which  it 
will  in  the  end  destroy ;  but  it  has  its  work  to  do,  which  will  not  be  accomplished 
all  at  once.  II.  The  existence  of  these  two  principles  necessitates  a  conflict. 
The  lion  will  not  lie  down  with  the  lamb.  Fire  will  not  be  on  good  terms  with 
water.  Death  will  not  parley  with  life,  nor  Christ  with  Belial.  The  dual  life 
provokes  a  daily  duel.  1.  The  conflict  is  not  felt  by  all  young  Christians  at  the 
first.  Christian  life  may  be  divided  into  tbree  stages.  (1)  That  of  comfort,  in 
which  the  young  Christian  rejoices  in  the  Lord.  (2)  That  of  conflict.  The  more 
of  this  the  better.  Instead  of  being  children  at  home  we  have  grown  into  men, 
and  therefore  we  must  go  to  war.  Under  the  old  law,  when  a  man  was  married,  or 
built  a  house,  he  was  excused  from  fighting  for  a  season,  but  when  that  was  over, 
he  mi  st  take  his  place  in  the  ranks  ;  and  so  is  it  with  the  chUd  of  God.  (3)  That 
of  contemplation ;  in  which  the  beUever  sits  down  to  reflect  upon  the  goodness  o£ 
the  Lord  towards  him,  and  upon  all  the  good  things  in  store  for  him.  This  is  the 
land  Beulah,  which  Bunyan  describes  as  lying  on  the  edge  of  the  river,  and  so  near 
to  the  Celestial  City  that  you  can  hear  the  music  and  smeU  the  perfumes  from  the 
gudens  of  the  blessed.  That  is  a  stage  which  we  must  not  expect  to  reach  just 
now.  2.  The  reason  of  the  fight  is  this  ;  the  new  nature  comes  into  our  heart,  to 
rule  over  it,  but  the  carnal  mind  is  not  willing  to  surrender.  A  new  throne  is  set 
up,  and  the  old  monarch,  outlawed,  and  made  to  lurk  in  holes  and  corners,  says  to 
himself,  "  I  wiU  not  have  this.  I  will  get  the  throne  back  again."  (Read  the 
"  Holy  War.")  And  let  me  warn  you  that  the  flesh  may  be  doing  us  most  mischief 
when  it  seems  to  be  doing  none.  During  war  the  sappers  and  miners  will  work 
underneath  a  city,  and  those  inside  say,  "  The  enemy  are  very  quiet ;  what  can 
they  be  at  ?  "  They  know  their  business  well  enough,  and  are  laying  their  mines 
for  unexpected  strokes.  Hence  an  old  divine  used  to  say  that  he  was  never  so 
much  afraid  of  auy  devil  as  he  was  of  no  devil.  To  be  let  alone  tends  to  breed  a 
dry  rot  in  the  soul.  III.  This  warfare  sometimes  leads  us  into  captivity.  This 
sometimes  consists  in — 1.  The  very  rising  of  the  old  nature.  The  old  nature 
suggests  to  you  some  sin :  you  hate  the  sin,  and  you  despise  yourself  for  lying  open 
to  be  tempted  in  such  a  way.  The  very  fact  that  such  a  thought  has .  crossed  your 
mind  is  bondage  to  your  pure  spirit.  You  do  not  fall  into  the  sin  ;  you  shaKe  off 
the  s'^rpent,  but  you  feel  its  slime  upon  your  souL  What  a  difference.  A  spot  of 
ink  on  my  coat  nobody  perceives ;  but  a  drop  on  a  white  handkerchief  everybody 
at  once  deteota.    The  very  passing  of  temptation  across  a  renewed  soul  brings  u 


.  vu.]  ROMANS.  619 

into  captivity.  I  saw  in  Borne  a  very  large  and  well  exeoated  photograph  of  a 
street  and  an  ancient  temple ;  bat  I  noticed  that  right  across  the  middle  was  the 
trace  of  a  mule  and  a  cart.  The  artist  had  done  his  best  to  prevent  it,  bnt  there 
was  the  ghost  of  that  cart  and  mule.  An  observer  unskill«d  in  art  might  not  notice 
the  mark,  but  a  careful  artist,  with  a  high  ideal,  is  vexed  to  see  his  work  thus 
marred  ;  and  so  with  moral  stains,  that  which  the  common  man  thinks  a  trifle  is  a 
great  sorrow  to  the  pure-hearted  son  of  God,  and  he  is  brought  into  captivity  by  it. 
2.  The  loss  of  joy  through  the  uprising  of  the  flesh.  You  want  to  sing  the  praises 
of  God,  but  the  temptation  comes,  and  you  have  to  battle  with  it,  and  the  song 
gives  place  to  the  battle-shout.  It  is  time  for  prayer,  but  somehow  you  cannot 
control  your  thoughts.  In  holy  contemplation  you  try  to  concentrate  your  thoughts, 
but  somebody  knocks  at  the  door,  or  a  child  begins  to  cry,  or  a  man  begins  to  grind 
an  organ  under  your  window,  and  how  can  you  meditate  ?  All  things  seem  to  be 
against  you.  Little  outside  matters  which  are  trifling  to  others  will  often  prove 
terrible  disturbers  of  your  spirit.  3.  Actual  sin.  We  do,  in  moments  of  forget- 
fulnesa,  that  which  we  would  willingly  undo,  and  say  that  which  we  would  willingly 
unsay.  The  spirit  was  willing,  but  the  flesh  was  weak ;  and  then  the  consequence 
is,  to  a  child  of  God,  that  he  feels  himself  a  captive.  He  has  yielded  to  treacherous 
banishments,  and  now,  like  Samson,  his  locks  are  shorn.  He  goes  out  to  shake 
himself  as  he  did  aforetime,  but  the  Philistines  are  upon  him,  and  it  will  be  a 
happy  thing  for  him  if  he  does  not  lose  his  eyes,  and  come  to  grind  at  the  mill  like 
a  slave.  lY.  This  wabfabe,  and  this  occasional  tbiumpb  of  the  flesh,  makk  us 
LOOK  to  Chbist  fob  victobt.  Whenever  there  is  a  question  between  me  and  the 
devil  my  constant  way  is  to  tell  the  accuser,  "  Well,  if  I  am  not  a  saint  I  am  a 
sinner,  and  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  therefore  I  will  go  to  Christ, 
and  look  to  Him  again."  That  is  the  way  to  conquer  sin,  as  well  as  to  overcome 
despair ;  for,  when  faith  in  Jesus  comes  back  to  your  soul,  you  will  be  strong  to 
fight,  and  you  will  win  the  victory.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  conflict  in  natural 
and  spiritual  persons  : — Note  here — 1.  The  combatants  or  champions — the  law  of 
the  mind,  and  the  law  of  the  members.  Grotius  distinguisheth  of  a  fourfold  law 
— (1)  The  law  of  God ;  recorded  in  Scripture.  (2)  The  law  of  the  mind ;  the  judg- 
ment between  things  honest  and  dishonest.  (3)  The  law  of  the  members ;  the 
carnal  or  sensual  appetite.  (4)  The  law  of  sin  ;  the  custom  of  sinning.  To  com- 
plete which  we  must  add — (5)  The  law  of  original  sin  propagated  by  generation, 
which  is  strengthened  by  custom,  and,  together  with  our  sensual  appetite  depraved, 
makes  up  the  law  of  sin.  (6)  The  law  of  sanctifying  grace  infused  in  regeneration ; 
which  completes  the  law  of  the  mind.  2.  The  equality  of  this  fight ;  sin  indwelling 
fighting  against  grace  indwelling,  there  being  a  pitched  battle,  in  which  some  graces 
and  corruptions  bear  the  ofi&ce  oJE  commanders,  others  of  common  soldiers.  3.  The 
disparity  of  the  fight,  managed  by  way  of  '*  rebellion  "  on  the  part  of  sin,  by  way 
of  loyality  and  authority  on  the  part  of  grace.  4.  The  dubiousness  of  the  fight, 
both  parties  often  fighting,  as  it  were,  with  equal  prowess  and  success  ;  sometimes 
one,  sometimes  the  other,  seeming  to  get  the  better  (Exod.  xvii.  11).  6.  The  sad 
event  too  often  on  the  better  side  which  is  led  captive.  In  which  term  yet  there  is 
a  mixture  of  comfort ;  sin,  when  in  triumph,  acting  as  a  tyrant,  not  as  a  lawful 
sovereign.  The  law  of  the  mind  may  be  overborne  by,  but  never  indents  with,  the 
law  of  the  members.  Withal,  note  in  the  text  a  mixture  of  civil  and  military  terms 
to  illustrate  the  spiritual  conflict ;  there  being  a  law-suit,  as  well  as  a  pitched  battle, 
between  grace  and  corruption.  I.  In  eveby  man,  especially  in  the  beoenerate, 
thebe  is  a  conflict  between  the  law  of  the  mind  and  the  law  of  thb  membebs. 
1.  This  appears — (1)  By  the  testimony  of  nature  speaking  in  the  heathen—*'  Video 
meliora,  proboque :  Deteriora  sequor."  (2)  By  testimony  of  Scripture — (a)  As  to 
the  godly  (Gal.  v.  17).     (&)  As  to  the  unregenerate  (Mark  vl.  26 ;  Eom.  ii.  14,  15). 

(3)  By  every  man's  experience.  2.  Concerning  this  conflict  note  as  follows — (1)  As 
the  great,  so  the  httle,  world  (man)  is  made  up  of  contraries.  The  outward  man  of 
contrary  elements,  health,  and  sickness;  the  inward  man,  of  contrary  principles, 
reason  and  passion,  conscience  and  sense.  (2)  Man  is  both  an  actor  in,  and  a 
theatre  of,  the  greatest  action  and  noblest  conflict  in  the  world.  He  that  conquers 
himself  is  a  nobler  hero  than  Alexander,  who  conquered  a  great  part  of  the  world 
(Prov.  xvi.  32).  (3)  In  the  state  of  innocency  there  was  no  conflict :  in  the  state  of 
glory  there  will  be  no  conflict,  there  being  no  corruption  to  combat  with  grace.  In 
infants  there  is  a  conflict ;  in  a  state  of  corruption  there  is  no  spiritual  conflict, 
because  there  is  no  renewing  grace  to  combat  with  corruption  (Luke  xi.  21,  22). 

(4)  The  natural  confiict  is  in  every  godly  man,  the  spiritual  conflict  is  in  nr  natartJ 


«30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

man.  This  I  note  to  allay  the  fears  of  drooping  saints.  (5)  As  the  great  wisdom 
of  God  lies  in  governing  the  great  world  made  op  of  contraries,  so  the  great  wisdom 
of   a  godly  man  lies  in  goveming  the  little  world  made  np  of  like  contraries. 

(6)  This  government  lies  principally  in  discerning  these  conflicting  contraries,  and 
improving  their  contrariety  for  the  advantage  of  the  outward  and  inward  man.  In 
this  government  Christ  is  principal  (Psa.  ox.  2) ;  a  saint  instrumental  (Hos.  xi.  12). 

(7)  This  singular  wisdom  is  attainable  in  the  use  of  ordinary  means,  and  that  by 
the  meanest  who  have  grace  to  follow  Christ's  conduct ;  yet  not  by  the  power  of 
free-will  or  human  industry,  but  by  the  bounty  of  free  and  special  grace  (2  Tim.  iii. 
15 ;  James  i.  5 ;  Rom.  ix.  16).  (8)  It  cannot  be  expected  that  any  unregenerate 
person  should  understand  to  purpose  the  difference  between  these  two  conflicts ; 
because  he  hath  no  experience  of  this  double  state,  and  double  principle. 
n.  Wheeein  doth  the  natural  and  spiritual  conflict  differ?  1.  In  the 
ground  or  cause  of  the  fight;  which — (1)  In  the  unregenerate,  is — (a)  Natural 
principles,  or  the  relics  of  God's  image  in  the  understanding.  The  notion  of  a 
deity,  and  of  loving  my  neighbour  as  myself,  cannot  be  razed  out  of  any  man's 
heart ;  nor  can  these  principles  lie  always  idle,  but  will  more  or  less  be  in  action 
against  corrupt  inclinations.  (6)  Acquired  principles,  from  education  and  custom. 
This  light  discovers  more  of  sin's  obliquity  and  danger,  thereby  laying  on  stronger 
restraint,  through  fear,  shame,  &g.  (c)  The  natural  temper  of  the  body,  which 
indisposes  to  some  special  sins,  and  disposes  to  some  special  graces,  or  the  reverse. 
(d)  The  contrariety  of  one  lust  to  another.  Thus  ambition  says,  "  spend " ; 
covetousness,  "  spare  "  ;  revenge  incites  to  murder  ;  self-love  restrains,  for  fear  of 
a  halter.  Here,  now,  is  a  combat,  but  only  between  flesh  more  refined  and  flesh 
more  corrupted.  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  regenerate,  the  combat  ariseth  from 
the  antipathy  of  two  contrary  natures  perfectly  hating  each  other  (Gal.  v.  17).  Of 
all  affections,  love  and  hatred  are  most  uncompoundable.  A  godly  man  hates  sin 
as  God  hates  it,  not  so  much  for  its  danger  as  for  its  loathsomeness.  As  in  persons, 
so  much  more  in  principles,  there  is  a  mutual  abomination  (c/.  Psa.  cxxxiz. 
22 ;  Prov.  xiix.  27 ;  Psa.  xcvii.  10,  cxix.  128 ;  Rom.  viii.  7).  Enemies  may,  but' 
enmity  can  never,  be  reconciled.  2.  In  the  object  or  matter  of  conflict ;  which — 
(1)  In  a  natural  man,  is — (a)  Grosser  evils  that  startle  the  conscience.  (&)  Infamona 
evils  that  are  attended  with  worldly  fear  or  shame ;  or — (cj  Some  particular  evils 
that  cross  temper,  education,  or  custom,  &c.  (2)  But  in  spiritual  persons  it  is — (1) 
Little  sins,  as  well  as  great.  (2)  Secret  sins,  as  well  as  open.  (3)  The  first  risings, 
as  well  as  the  gross  acts.  (4)  Sins  which  promise  worldly  safety,  credit,  profit, 
contentment,  as  well  as  those  sins  that  threaten  the  contrary.  (6)  In  a  word,  all 
moral  evil ;  hatred  and  antipathy  being  of  the  whole  kind  (Psa.  cxix.  128) ;  especially 
of  those  evils  which  most  endanger  the  new  man  (Psa.  xviii.  23) ;  and  such  as  are 
beloved  sins  (Matt,  xviii.  8,  9).  3.  In  the  subject  of  the  conflict.  In  natural  men 
the  fight  is  in  several  faculties;  reason  fighting  against  sense  and  passion,  or  the 
conscience  against  the  corrupt  inchnation  of  the  will ;  whence  the  fight  is  more  at 
a  distance  by  missile  arms.  But  in  the  regenerate  the  fight  is  more  close  in  the 
same  faculty ;  the  wisdom  of  flesh  and  spirit  counteracting,  in  the  same  under- 
standing, the  lustings  of  the  flesh  and  spirit  in  the  same  will ;  whence  the  fight  is 
between  veterans  of  approved  courage,  grace  and  corruption  immediately ;  which 
at  first,  haply,  was  managed  by  the  spear-men  and  targetiers,  reason  and  interest. 
The  former  is  like  the  fight  of  the  soldiers  of  fortune,  more  lazy,  and  by  way  of 
siege ;  the  latter  more  keen  and  vigorous,  by  way  of  assault  and  onslaught,  like 
that  of  Scanderbeg,  who  fought  with  his  enemies  breast  to  breast  in  a  box  or  grate. 
4.  In  their  weapons.  The  natural  man's  weapons  are,  like  himself,  carnal ;  to  wit, 
natural  or  moral  reason,  worldly  fears  or  hopes,  and  sometimes  spiritual  fears  or 
hopes,  but  carnalised — i.e.,  slavish  and  mercenary.  But  the  regenerate  man's 
weapons  are  spiritual  (2  Cor.  i.  4) ;  to  wit,  gracious  interest,  and  all  the  spiritual 
armour  (Eph.  vi.  11-18).  5.  In  the  manner  of  the  fight.  The  natural  man's 
combat  is  more  mercenary ;  admits  of  more  parleys.  But  the  spiritual  man,  as 
such,  fights  it  out  to  the  last,  and  will  give  no  quarter.  The  former  is  like  the 
strife  between  wind  and  tide,  which  often  come  about,  and  are  both  of  one  side ; 
the  latter  is  like  the  dam  and  the  tide,  that  strive  till  one  be  borne  down  ;  or  like 
stream  and  tide  meeting  and  conflicting  till  one  hath  overborne  the  other.  6.  In 
the  extent  of  the  conflict,  in  relation  to  its  subject  and  duration.  (1)  The  extent  of 
the  subject  is  double — (a)  As  to  the  faculties ;  the  seat  of  war  in  the  regenerate  is 
every  faculty,  flesh  and  spirit  being  ever  mixed ;  as  light  and  darkness  in  every 
j^oint  of  air  in  the  twilight  (1  Thess.  v.  23).    So  tiiat,  in  the  regenerate,  there  ia  al 


.  vn.)  BOMANS.  831 

the  same  time  both  a  civil  and  a  foreign  war ;  that  in  the  same  faculty,  this  in  one 
faculty  against  another.  Contrariwise,  in  the  unregenerate,  there  is  usually  nothing 
but  a  foreign  war  between  several  faculties,  there  being  nothing  of  spiritual  good  in 
their  wills  and  affections,  to  set  the  same  faculty  against  itself,  (h)  As  to  acts,  it 
extends  to  every  act  of  piety  and  charity,  especially  if  more  spiritual  (ver.  21) ;  for 
which  the  natural  man  hath  no  conflict,  but  against  them.  Nor,  indeed,  doth  he 
know  experimentally  what  spiritual  acts  of  piety  are.  But  the  regenerate  find  it 
by  constant  experience ;  faith  and  unbelief,  humanity  and  pride,  ever  opposing  and 
counter-working  each  other ;  whence  he  is  forced  to  cut  his  way  through  his  enemies, 
and  to  dispute  it  step  by  step.  Others  may  seek,  but  he  strives  (Luke  xiii.  24),  and 
takes  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  a  holy  violence  (Matt.  xi.  12).  (2)  As  to  the 
extent  or  duration  of  the  war,  which,  being  in  the  regenerate  irreconcilable, 
must  needs  be  interminable,  like  the  war  between  the  Romans  and  Carthaginians  ; 
or  as  fire  and  water  will  fight  for  ever,  if  together  for  ever.  In  the  natural  man, 
contrariwise,  the  quarrel  is  soon  taken  up;  as  between  the  Romans  and  other 
nations ;  there  being  not  that  antipathy  between  reason  and  corruption  as  there  is 
between  grace  and  corruption.  7.  In  the  concomitants  and  consequents  of  the 
fight.  (1)  Godly  men  sin  more  with  knowledge,  but  wicked  men  more  against 
knowledge.  (2)  The  fight  in  natural  men  seeks  only  the  repression,  not  the  sup- 
pression, of  sin ;  to  lop  the  superfluous  branches,  not  stub  up  the  root ;  to  charm 
the  serpent,  not  to  break  its  head.  But  the  spiritual  fight  seeks  the  full  mortifica- 
tion and  abolition  of  sin  (chap.  vi.  6),  and  the  complete  perfection  of  grace  (Phil.  iii. 
10-14).  {Roger  Drake,  D.D.)  The  conflict  and  captivity ;  or  the  law  of  the  mind 
and  the  law  in  the  members : — I.  The  law  of  the  minh.  The  mind  has  laws  of 
sensation,  perception,  apprehension,  imagination,  comparison,  memory,  reasoning, 
and  volition.  But  that  law  of  which  the  apostle  speaks  is  a  law  which  has  relation 
to  morals  and  religion.  It  is  that  law  in  virtue  of  which  we  consent  to  the  law  of 
God  that  it  is  good,  and  delight  therein  after  the  inward  man  (vers.  16,  22) ;  that 
I  law  which  prompts  us  to  good,  and  restrains  us  from  evil  (ver.  19)  ;  that  law  which 
congratulates  and  makes  us  glad  when  we  render  it  obedience  (2  Cor.  i.  12),  but 
which  reproves  and  makes  us  miserable  when  we  dare,  agsiinst  its  warnings,  to  do 
that  which  is  evil  (Rom.  ii.  14,  15,  and  this  whole  section).  In  one  word,  that  law 
is  "  conscience."  But  we  observe  more  particularly — 1.  That  it  is  of  the  very 
essence  of  this  law  to  affirm  the  binding  force  over  the  man  of  truth,  goodness,  and 
righteousness.  Its  proper  function  is,  not  to  determine  what  is  right  in  any  given 
case,  but  to  affirm  that  the  right  is  a  matter  of  moral  obligation  in  all  cases.  The 
function  of  conscience  is  not  to  make,  perceive,  or  define  law,  but  to  affirm  that  we 
are  bound  to  the  lawful  and  right.  Conscience,  as  is  indicated  by  the  very  name, 
involves  a  complex  knowledge.  It  includes  a  knowledge  of — (1)  Myself  as  capable 
of  moral  actions.  (2)  Of  an  external  law  of  righteousness,  according  to  the  require- 
ments of  which  I  am  bound  to  act ;  and — (3)  Of  the  fact  that  I  am  so  bound. 
2.  That  this  law,  while  it  does  morally  bind,  nevertheless  does  not  compel,  but 
only  impel.  (1)  Prospectively,  it  impels  to  the  right,  or  restrains  from  the  wrong, 
and  therefore  acts  as  a  motive  force  affecting  the  determinations  of  the  will. 
(2)  Retrospectively,  it  congratulates  the  mind,  when  the  right  has  been  chosen  and 
achieved  in  opposition  to  the  solicitations  of  wrong;  and  reproaches  the  mind, 
when  the  wrong  has  been  elected  and  done  in  opposition  to  the  inner  consciousness 
of  duty  (Heb.  x.  22 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  16).  3.  That  this  law  has  its  ground  in  the  reality 
of  moral  distinctions.  That  of  which  it  affirms  the  binding  force  is  something 
distinct  from  and  independent  of  itself.  It  recognises  the  distinction  between  right 
and  wrong,  good  and  evil,  because  that  it  has  a  special  aptitude  for  such  recogni- 
tion ;  and,  on  the  same  ground,  it  affirms  its  own  peculiar  relationship  to  these 
discriminated  things  as  a  moral  subject.  4.  That  this  law  involves  implicitly  the 
recognition  of  an  absolute  and  infallible  Administrator  of  righteousness.  For  it 
not  only  affirms  that  the  law  is  binding,  but  also  that  it  will  certainly  be  in  the  end 
enforced.  The  joy  of  a  good  conscience,  and  the  remorse  of  an  evil  one,  are,  in  no 
case,  pronounced  by  conscience  itself  to  be  final  awards,  but  only  premonitory  and 
anticipative.  II.  The  law  in  the  members.  1.  This  is  the  law  of  the  animal 
organism,  which,  inasmuch  as  it  pertains  to  that  in  man  which  is  lower,  ought 
always  to  be  subject  to  that  which  is  superior.  2.  Now  this  law  is  in  itself,  and 
within  its  proper  sphere,  perfectly  right  and  good  (Gen.  i.  28).  It  includes— (1)  The 
appetites  of  hunger  and  thirst,  which  are  at  the  base  of  all  the  labour  of  mankind, 
to  insure  a  continuous  supply  of  food.  (2)  The  susceptibility  of  pain  and  in j  ury, 
which  is  at  the  foundation  of  all  manufacture,  architecture,  hunting,  and  war. 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  vn, 

/3)  The  social  and  family  affections,  which  are  developed  in  marriage,  in  the  cara 
of  children,  and  in  the  love  of  relatives  and  race.  III.  The  conflict  betweeh 
THE  TWO.  1.  In  man's  complex  consciousness  the  two  laws  meet.  Both  alike  are 
laws  of  his  nature,  and  obedience  to  both,  within  certain  Umits,  is  required.  So 
long  as  they  impel  onwards  in  the  same  direction  there  can  be  no  difi&culty.  Within 
its  own  domain  the  inferior  law  is  right.  But  it  must  not  break  through  the  fences 
set  up  by  the  moral  law.  It  must  not  provide  for  the  defence,  support,  or  enjoy- 
ment of  the  animal  life  by  any  means  that  offend  against  truth,  justice,  and  mercy. 
2.  It  is  just  here  that  the  conflict  begins.  The  law  in  the  members,  regardless  of 
any  rule  of  morality,  impels  onward  to  the  attainment  of  one  end  only,  the  preserva- 
tion and  self-satisfaction  of  the  animal  Ufe.  Then  the  law  of  the  mind  interposes 
to  arrest  that  action.  Then  the  inferior  law,  made  all  the  more  clamorous  by  the 
invention  of  authority,  may  prevail,  and  the  whole  man  will  be  delivered  captive  to 
that  other  "  law  "  which  is  described  as  "  the  law  of  sin  and  death"  (James  i.  14, 15). 
(W.  Tyson.)  Spiritual  fluctuations : — As  the  needle  of  a  compass,  when  it  is 
directed  to  its  beloved  star,  at  the  first  waves  on  either  side,  and  seems  indifferent 
to  the  rising  or  declining  sun,  and  when  it  seems  first  determined  to  the  north, 
remains  a  while  trembling,  and  stands  not  still  in  full  enjoyment  till  after  first  a 
great  variety  of  motion,  and  then  an  undisturbed  posture  ;  so  is  the  piety,  and  so 
is  the  conversion  of  a  man,  wrought  by  degiees  and  several  steps  of  imperfection ; 
and  at  first  our  choices  are  wavering,  convinced  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  yet  not 
persuaded ;  and  then  persuaded,  but  not  resolved  ;  and  then  resolved,  but  deferring 
to  begin ;  and  then  beginning,  but,  as  all  beginnings  are,  in  weakness  and  un- 
certainty ;  and  we  fly  out  often  in  large  indiscretions,  and  we  look  back  to  Sodom, 
and  long  to  return  to  Egypt;  and  when  the  storm  is  quite  over,  we  find  little 
kubblings  and  unevennesses  upon  the  face  of  the  waters,  and  often  weaken  our 
own  purposes  by  returns  of  sin.  {Jeremy  Taylor.)  Sin  tolerated  and  sin  kept 
tU>wn : — What  swarms  of  rabbits  the  traveller  sees  on  the  commons  and  fields  near 
Leatherhead  (in  Surrey),  and  yet  a  few  mUes  further  on  at  Wootton  one  scarcely 
sees  a  single  specimen  of  that  prolific  race.  The  creature  is  indigenous  to  both 
places,  but  at  Leatherhead  he  is  tolerated,  and  therefore  multiplies,  while  at  the 
other  places  the  gamekeepers  diligently  shoot  down  all  they  see.  Sins  are  natural 
to  all  men,  but  it  makes  all  the  difference  whether  they  are  fostered  or  kept  under ; 
the  carnal  mind  makes  itself  a  warren  for  evil,  but  a  gracious  Spirit  wages  constant 
war  with  every  transgression.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  24,  25.  0  wretched  man  that  I  am !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of 
this  death  7 — Soul  despotism  : — I.  The  soul's  oppressive  despot.  "  The  body  of 
this  death."  What  is  meant  by  this  ?  Corrupt  animalism.  What  is  elsewhere 
called  the  flesh  with  its  corruptions  and  lusts.  The  body,  intended  to  be  an  instru- 
ment and  servant  of  the  soul,  has  become  its  sovereign,  and  keeps  all  its  power  of 
intellect  and  conscience  in  subjection.  Corrupt  animalism  is  the  moral  monarch  of 
the  world.  It  rules  in  literature,  in  politics,  in  science,  and  even  in  churches. 
This  despot  is  death  to  all  true  freedom,  progress,  happiness.  II.  The  soul's 
BTBUOGLB  TO  BE  FBEE.  This  implies — 1.  A  quickened  consciousness  of  its  condi- 
tion. "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  1  "  The  vast  majority  of  souls,  alas  !  are  utterly 
insensible  to  this  ;  hence  they  remain  passive.  What  quickens  the  soul  into  this  con- 
sciousness ?  •'  The  law. "  The  light  of  God's  moral  law  flashes  on  the  conscience  and 
startles  it.  2.  An  earnest  desire  for  help.  It  feels  its  utter  inability  to  haul  the 
despot  down  ;  and  it  cries  mightily,  "  Who  shall  deliver  me  ?  "  Who?  Legislatures, 
moralists,  poets,  philosophers,  priesthoods?  No;  they  have  tried  for  ages,  and  have 
failed.  Who  ?  There  is  One  and  but  One,  and  to  Him  Paul  alludes  in  the  next  verse 
and  the  following  chapter.  "  Thanks  be  to  God,"  &c.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  cry 
of  the  Christian  warrior : — The  cry  not  of  •'  a  chained  captive  "  to  be  set  free,  bat  of 
a  "  soldier  in  conflict "  who  looks  round  for  succour.  He  is  in  the  fight ;  he  sees  the 
enemy  advancing  against  him,  with  spear  in  hand,  and  chains  ready  to  throw  over 
him  ;  the  soldier  sees  his  danger,  feels  his  weakness  and  helplessness,  yet  has  no 
thought  of  yielding  ;  he  cries  out,  "  Who  shall  deliver  me  ?  "  But  it  is  not  the  cry 
of  a  vanquished  but  of  a  contending  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ.  (F.  Bourdillon.) 
Victory  in  the  hidden  warfare  : — To  enter  into  the  full  meaning  of  these  words,  we 
must  understand  their  place  in  the  argument.  The  great  theme  is  opened  in  chap. 
L  16.  To  establish  this,  Paul  begins  by  proving  in  the  first  four  chapters  that  both 
Jew  and  Gentile  are  utterly  lost.  In  the  fifth  he  shows  that  through  Christ  peace 
with  God  may  be  brought  into  the  conscience  of  the  sinner.   In  the  sixth  he  proves 


CHAP,  vn.]  ROMANS.  623 

that  this  truth,  instead  of  being  any  excuse  for  sin,  was  the  strongest  argument 
against  it,  for  it  gave  freedom  from  sin,  which  the  law  could  never  do.  And  then,  in 
this  chapter,  he  inquires  why  the  law  could  not  bring  this  gift.  Before  the  law  was 
given,  man  could  not  know  what  sin  was,  any  more  than  the  unevenness  of  a 
crooked  line  can  be  known  until  it  is  placed  beside  something  that  is  straight.  But 
when  the  law  raised  before  his  eyes  a  rule  of  holiness,  then,  for  the  first  time,  bis  eyes 
were  opened ;  he  saw  that  he  was  full  of  sin ;  aud  forthwith  there  sprang  up  a  fearful 
struggle.  Once  he  had  been  "  alive  without  the  law  "  ;  he  had  lived,  that  is,  a  Ufa 
of  unconscious,  self -contented  impurity  ;  but  that  life  was  gone  from  him,  he  could 
live  it  no  longer.  The  law,  because  it  was  just  and  good,  wrought  death  in  him  ; 
for  it  was  a  revelation  of  death  without  remedy.  "  Tiie  law  was  spiritual,"  but  he 
was  corrupt,  "  sold  under  sin."  Even  when  his  struggling  will  did  desire  in  some 
measure  a  better  course,  still  he  was  beaten  down  again  by  evil.  "  How  to  perform 
that  which  was  good  he  found  not."  Yea,  "  when  he  would  do  good,  evil  was  present 
with  him."  In  vain  there  looked  in  upon  his  soul  the  blessed  countenance  of  an 
external  holiness.  Its  angel  gladness,  of  which  he  could  in  no  way  be  made  par- 
taker, did  but  render  darker  and  more  intolerable  the  loathsome  dungeon  in  which 
he  was  perpetually  held.  It  was  the  fierce  struggle  of  an  enduring  death  ;  and  inita 
crushing  Hgony,  he  cried  aloud  against  the  nature,  which,  in  its  inmost  currents,  sin 
had  turned  into  corruption  and  a  curse.  '•  O  wretched  man  that  I  am ! "  &c.  And  then 
forthwith  upon  this  stream  of  misery  there  comes  forth  a  gleam  of  light  from  the 
heavenly  presence ;  "  I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Here  is  deliver- 
ance for  me  ;  I  am  a  redeemed  man  ;  holiness  may  be  mine,  and,  with  it,  peace  and 
joy.    Here  is  the  full  meaning  of  these  glorious  words.     I.  Thev  lie  at  the  root 

OF   SUCH    EXERTIONS   AS  WE    MAICE    FOR   THOSE  WHOM   SIN  HAS   BROUGHT  DOWN  VERY  LOW. 

1.  They  contain  the  principle  which  should  lead  us  most  truly  to  sympathise  with 
them.  This  great  truth  of  the  redemption  of  our  nature  in  Christ  Jesus  is  the  only 
link  of  brotherhood  between  man  and  man.  To  deny  our  brotherhood  with  any  o£ 
the  most  miserable  of  those  whom  Christ  has  redeemed,  is  to  deny  our  own  capacity 
for  perfect  holiness,  and  so  our  true  redemption  through  Christ.  2.  Here,  too,  is 
the  only  warrant  for  any  reasonable  efforts  for  their  restoration.  Without  this, 
every  man,  who  knows  anything  of  the  depth  of  evil  with  which  he  has  to  deal, 
would  give  up  the  attempt  in  despair.  Every  reasonable  effort  to  restore  any  sinner, 
is  a  declaration  that  we  believe  that  we  are  in  a  kingdom  of  grace,  of  redeemed 
humanity.  Unbelieving  men  cannot  receive  the  truth  that  a  soul  can  be  thus 
restored.  They  believe  that  you  may  make  a  man  respectable ;  but  not  that  you 
can  heal  the  inner  currents  of  his  spiritual  life,  and  so  they  cannot  labour  in 
prayers  and  ministrations  with  the  spiritual  leper,  until  his  flesh,  of  God's  grace, 
comes  again  as  the  flesh  of  a  little  child.  To  endure  this  labour,  we  must  believe 
that  in  Christ,  the  true  Man,  and  through  the  gift  of  His  Spirit,  there  is  deliverance 
from  the  body  of  this  death.  II.  It  is  at  the  root  also  of  all  real  efforts  fob 
OURSELVES.  1.  Every  earnest  man  must,  if  he  sets  himself  to  resist  the  evil  which 
is  in  himself,  know  something  of  the  struggle  which  the  apostle  here  describes ; 
and  if  he  would  endure  the  extremity  of  that  conflict,  he  must  have  a  firm  belief 
that  there  is  a  deliverance  for  him.  Without  this,  the  knowledge  of  God's  holiness 
is  nothing  else  than  the  burning  fire  of  despair.  And  so  mauy  do  despair.  They 
think  they  have  made  their  choice,  and  that  they  must  abide  by  it ;  and  so  they  shut 
their  eyes  to  their  sins,  they  excuse  them,  they  try  to  forget  them,  they  do  every- 
thing but  overcome  them,  until  they  see  that  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  for  them,  if 
they  will  claim  it,  a  sure  power  over  these  sins.  And,  therefore,  as  the  first  conse- 
quence, let  us  ever  hold  it  fast,  even  as  our  life.  2.  Nor  is  it  needful  to  lower  the 
tone  of  promise  in  order  to  prevent  its  being  turned  into  an  excuse  for  sin.  Here, 
as  elsewhere,  the  simple  words  of  God  contain  their  own  best  safeguard  against 
being  abused  ;  for  what  can  be  so  loud  a  witness  against  allowed  sin  in  any  Chiistian 
man  as  this  truth  is  ?  If  there  be  in  the  true  Christian  life  in  union  with  Christ 
for  every  one  of  us  this  power  against  sin,  sin  cannot  reign  in  any  who  are  living  in 
Him.  To  be  in  Christ  is  to  be  made  to  conquer  in  the  struggle.  So  that  this  is  the 
most  quickening  and  sanctifying  truth.  It  tears  up  by  the  roots  a  multitude  of 
secret  excuses.  It  tells  us  that  if  we  are  alive  in  Christ  Jesus,  we  must  be  new 
creatures.  And  herein  it  destroys  the  commonest  form  of  self-deception — the 
allowing  some  sin  in  ourselves,  because  in  other  things  we  deny  ourselves,  because 
we  pray,  because  we  give  alms,  &c.  And  this  self-deception  is  put  down  only  by 
bringing  out  this  truth,  that  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  for  us,  in  our  struggle  with 
"the  body  of  this  death,"  an  entire  conquest,  if  we  will  but  honestly  and  earnest!/ 


624  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  yxu 

olaim  it  for  oorselres ;  so  that  if  we  do  not  conquer  sin,  it  mast  be  becaase  we  are 
not  believing.  3.  This  will  make  us  diligent  in  all  parts  of  the  Christian  life, 
because  ij.1  will  become  a  reality.  Prayer,  the  reading  of  God's  Word,  <fcc.,  will  be 
precious  after  a  new  sort,  because  through  them  is  kept  alive  our  anion  with 
Christ,  in  whom  alone  is  for  us  a  conquest  over  the  evil  which  is  in  us.  So  that, 
to  sum  up  all  in  one  blessed  declaration,  "  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ 
Jesus  will  make  us  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."  {Bp.  S.  Wilberjorce.) 
The  body  of  death : — I.  What  is  meant  by  the  body  or  death  of  which  the 
BELTEVEB  COMPLAINS.  1.  ludwelliug  siu  is  Called  the  body  of  this  death,  as  it  is  the 
effect  and  remains  of  that  spiritual  death  to  which  all  men  are  subject  in  onre- 
generacy.  2.  The  remains  of  sin  in  the  believer  is  called  the  body  of  this  death, 
on  account  of  the  deadness  and  dulness  of  spirit  in  the  service  of  God,  which  it  so 
often  produces.  3.  Bemaining  depravity  is  called  the  body  of  death,  because  it 
tends  to  death.  (1)  It  tends  to  the  death  of  the  body.  As  it  was  sin  that  brought 
us  under  the  influence  of  the  sentence  of  dissolution  ;  as  it  is  sin  that  has  intro- 
duced into  the  material  frame  of  man  those  principles  of  decay  which  will  bring  it 
to  Uie  grave ;  as  it  is  sin  which  is  the  parent  of  those  evil  passions  which,  aa 
natural  causes,  war  against  the  health  and  life  of  the  body,  so  it  is  the  in-bred  sins 
of  the  believer  that  require  his  flesh  to  see  the  dust.  (2)  But  this  is  not  aU. 
Bemaining  depravity  tends  to  spiritual  and  eternal  death,  and  on  this  account, 
also,  is  justly  called  the  body  of  this  death.  II.  Tee  gbie7  and  pain  which 
BEUAiNiNO  depravity  OCCASIONS  TO  THE  BELIEVES.  1»  Bemaining  depravity  is  thus 
painful  and  grievous  to  the  Christian,  from  his  acquaintance  with  its  evil  and 
malignant  nature.  2.  Bemaining  sin  is  thus  painful  to  the  Christian,  from  the 
constant  struggle  which  it  maintains  with  grace  within  the  heart.  Even  in  emi- 
nent saints  the  contest  is  often  singularly  obstinate  and  painful ;  for  where  there 
is  strong  grace  there  are  also,  sometimes,  strong  corruptions.  Besides,  where 
there  is  eminent  spirituality  of  mind,  there  is  an  aspiration  after  a  freedom  from 
imperfections  which  scarcely  belongs  to  the  present  state.     III.  Thb  eabnest 

LONGINGS  AND  CONFIDENT  AND  JOYFUL  ABSDBANCE  OF  DELIVERANCE  FBOU  INDWELL- 
ING SIN  WHICH  THE  CHRISTIAN  ENTERTAINS.  1.  Mark  his  camest  longings — "  Who 
shall  deliver  me?"  The  language  implies  how  well  the  Christian  knows  he  cannot 
deUver  himself  from  the  body  of  sin.  This  is  the  habitual  desire  of  his  soul — the 
habitual  object  of  his  pursuit.  For  this  end  he  prays,  he  praises,  he  reads,  he 
hears,  be  communicates.  So  earnest,  in  short,  is  his  desire  of  deliverance,  that  he 
welcomes  with  this  view  two  things  most  unwelcome  to  the  feelings  of  nature — 
affliction  and  death.  2.  Mark  bis  confldent  and  joyful  assurance  of  deliverance. 
Weak  in  himself,  the  Christian  is  yet  strong  in  the  Lord.  All  the  victories  he  has 
hitherto  achieved  have  been  through  the  faith  and  by  the  might  of  the  Bedeemer. 
All  the  victories  he  shall  yet  acquire  shall  be  obtained  in  the  same  way.  3.  Mark 
the  gratitude  of  the  Christian  for  this  anticipated  and  glorious  deliverance.  Sin 
is  the  cause  of  all  the  other  evils  in  which  he  has  been  involved,  and  when  sin  is 
destroyed  within  and  put  for  ever  away,  nothing  can  be  wanting  to  perfect  his 
blessedness.  Well  then  does  it  become  him  to  cherish  the  feeling  and  utter  the 
language    of    thankfulness.      {James    Eirkwood.)  The    spectre    of    the    old 

nature : — 1.  Some  years  ago  a  number  of  peculiar  photographs  were  circulated 
by  spiritualists.  Two  portraits  appeared  on  the  same  card,  one  clear  and  the 
other  obscure.  The  fully-developed  portrait  was  the  obvious  likeness  of  the 
living  person ;  and  the  indistinct  portrait  was  supposed  to  be  the  likeness 
of  some  dead  friend,  produced  by  supernatural  agency.  The  mystery,  however, 
was  found  to  admit  of  an  easy  scientiflo  explanation.  It  not  anfrequently 
happens  that  the  portrait  of  a  person  is  so  deeply  impressed  on  the  glass  of  the 
negative,  that  although  the  plate  is  thoroughly  cleansed  with  strong  acid,  the 
picture  cannot  be  removed,  although  it  is  made  invisible.  When  such  a  plate  is 
used  over  again,  the  original  image  faintly  reappears  along  with  the  new  portrait. 
So  is  it  in  the  experience  of  the  Christian.  He  has  been  washed  in  the  blood  of 
Christ ;  and  beholding  the  glory  of  Christ  as  in  a  glass,  he  is  changed  into  the  same 
image.  And  yet  the  ghost  of  his  former  sinfulness  persists  in  reappearing  with  the 
image  of  the  new  man.  So  deeply  are  the  traces  of  the  former  godless  Ufe  impressed 
upon  the  soul,  that  even  the  sanctiflcation  of  the  Spirit,  carried  oa  through  discipline, 
burning  as  corrosive  acid,  cannot  altogether  remove  them.  2.  The  photographer  also 
has  a  process  by  which  the  obliterated  picture  may  at  any  time  be  revived.  And  so  it 
was  with  the  apostle.  The  sin  that  so  easily  beset  him  returned  with  fresh  power  in 
ciicumstanoes  favourable  to  it.  I.  The  "  body  oi'  oeaxb  "  is  not  soMsxHUia  xhax  has 


CHAP.  Tn.]  ROMANS.  625 

ooiix  TO  vs  TBOU  wiTHOTiT,  an  infected  garment  that  may  be  thrown  aside  whenever 
we  please.  It  is  our  own  corrupt  self,  not  oar  individual  sins  or  evil  habits.  And 
this  body  of  death  disintegrates  the  purity  and  unity  of  the  soul  and  destroys  the 
love  of  God  and  man  which  is  its  true  life.  It  acts  like  an  evil  leaven,  corrupting 
and  decomposing  every  good  feeling  and  heavenly  principle,  and  gradually  assimi- 
lating our  being  to  itself.  There  is  a  peculiar  disease  which  often  destroys  the 
silkworm  before  it  has  woven  its  cocoon.  It  is  caused  by  a  species  of  white  mould 
which  grows  rapidly  within  the  body  of  the  worm  at  the  expense  of  its  nutritive 
fluids  ;  all  the  interior  organs  being  gradually  converted  into  a  mass  of  flocculent 
vegetable  matter.  Thus  the  silkworm,  instead  of  going  on  in  the  natural  order  of 
development  to  produce  the  beautiful  winged  moth,  higher  in  the  scale  of  existence, 
retrogrades  to  the  lower  condition  of  the  inert  senseless  vegetable.  And  like  this  is 
the  effect  of  the  body  of  death  in  the  soul  of  man.  The  heart  cleaves  to  the  dust 
of  the  earth,  and  man,  made  in  the  image  of  God,  instead  of  developing  a  higher  and 
purer  nature,  is  reduced  to  the  low,  mean  condition  of  the  slave  of  Satan.  II.  Nonb 

BDT  THOSE  WHO  HAVE  ATTAINED  TO  SOME  MEASURE  OP  THE  EXPEBIENCE  OF  St.  PaUI. 
CAN   ENOW   THE   TOLL   WRETCHEDNESS   CAUSED   BY  THIS  BODY   OP   DEATH.      The  CarclcSS 

have  no  idea  of  the  agony  of  a  soul  under  a  sense  of  sin  ;  of  the  tyranny  which  it 
exercises  and  the  misery  which  it  works.  And  even  in  the  experience  of  many 
Christians  there  is  but  little  of  this  peculiar  wretchedness.  Conviction  is  in  too 
many  instances  superficial,  and  a  mere  impulse  or  emotion  is  regarded  as  a  sign  of 
conversion  ;  and  hence  many  are  deluded  by  a  false  hope,  having  hLtle  knowledge 
of  the  law  of  God  or  sensibility  to  the  depravity  of  their  own  hearts.  But  such  was 
not  the  experience  of  St.  Paul.  The  body  of  corruption  that  he  bore  about  with 
him  darkened  and  embittered  all  his  Christian  experience.  And  so  it  is  with  every 
true  Christian.  It  is  not  the  spectre  of  the  future,  or  the  dread  of  the  punishment 
of  sin,  that  he  fears,  for  there  is  no  condemnation  to  those  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus  ; 
but  the  spectre  of  the  sinful  past  and  the  pressure  of  the  present  evil  nature.  The 
sin  which  he  fancied  was  so  superficial  that  a  few  years'  running  in  the  Christian 
course  would  shake  it  off,  he  finds  is  in  reality  deep-rooted  in  his  very  nature,  requiring 
a  life-long  battle.  The  fearful  foes  which  he  bears  in  his  own  bosom — sins  of  un- 
restrained appetite,  sins  that  spring  from  past  habits,  frequently  triumph  over  him ; 
and  all  this  fills  him  almost  with  despair— not  of  God,  but  of  himself — and  extorts 
from  him  the  groan,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  I "  &c.  III.  The  evil  to  be 
CURED  IS  BEYOND  HUMAN  REMEDY.  The  various  influences  that  act  upon  ns  from 
without — instruction,  example,  education,  the  discipline  of  hfe — cannot  deliver  as 
from  this  body  of  death.  IV.  The  work  is  Christ's  and  not  man's.  We  are  to 
fight  the  battle  in  His  name  and  strength,  and  to  leave  the  issue  in  His  hands.  He 
will  deliver  us  in  His  own  way  and  time.  Conclusion :  We  can  reverse  the  illustra- 
tion with  which  I  began.  If  behind  our  renewed  self  is  the  spectral  form  of  our 
old  self,  let  us  remember  that  behind  all  is  the  image  of  God  in  which  we  were 
created.  The  soul,  however  lost,  darkened,  and  defaced,  still  retains  some  linea- 
ments of  the  Divine  impression  with  which  it  was  once  stamped.  The  image  haunts 
ns  always ;  it  is  the  ideal  from  which  we  have  fallen  and  towards  which  we  are  to  be 
conformed.  To  rescue  that  image  of  God,  the  Son  of  God  assumed  our  nature,  lived 
our  life,  and  died  our  death ;  and  His  Spirit  becomes  incarnate  in  our  heart  and 
life,  and  prolongs  the  work  of  Christ  in  us  in  His  own  sanctifying  work.  And  as  our 
nature  becomes  more  and  more  like  Christ's,  so  by  degrees  the  old  nature  photo- 
graphed by  sin  upon  the  soul  will  cease  to  haunt  us,  and  the  image  of  Christ  will 
become  more  and  more  vivid.  And  at  length  only  one  image  will  remain.  We  shall 
see  Him  as  He  is,  and  we  shall  become  like  Him.  {H.  Macmillan,  LL.D.)  The 
body  becoming  a  second  personality : — The  writer  represents  himself  as  having  two 
personalities — the  inner  man,  and  the  outer  man,  i.e.,  the  body.  A  word  or  two 
about  the  human  body.  I.  It  is  in  the  unregenerate  man  a  PERsoNALrrY.  "  I 
am  carnal,"  that  is,  I  am  become  flesh.  This  is  an  abnormal,  a  guilty,  and  a 
perilous  fact.  The  right  place  of  the  body  is  that  of  the  organ,  which  the  mind 
should  use  for  its  own  high  purpose.  But  this,  through  the  pampering  of  its  owr 
senses,  and  through  the  creation  of  new  desires  and  appetites,  becomes  such  a  power 
over  man  that  Paul  represents  it  as  a  personality,  the  thing  becomes  an  ego.  II. 
As  A  PERSONALITY  IT  BECOMES  A  TYRANT.  It  is  represented  in  this  chapter  as  a 
personality  that  enslaves,  slays,  destroys  the  soul,  the  inner  man.  It  is  a  "  body  of 
death."  It  drags  the  soul  to  death.  When  man  becomes  conscious  of  this  tyranny, 
as  he  does  when  the  *•  commandment "  flashes  upon  the  conscience,  the  soul 
becomes  intensely  miserable,  and  a  fierce  battle  sets  in  between  the  two  personalities 
Toi..  I.  40 


626  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [obai.  to. 

in  man.  Theman  cries  out,  "What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved?"  "Who  shall  deliver  me  7" 
m.  As  ATTBANT  IT  CAN  ONLY  BE  CBUSHED  BY  Christ.  In  the  fierce  battle  Obrist  came 
to  the  rescue,  and  struck  the  tyrant  down.  In  this  Epistle  the  writer  shows  that 
man  struggled  to  deliver  himself — 1.  Under  the  teachings  of  nature,  but  failed  (see 
chap.  i.).  He  became  more  enslaved  in  materialism.  2.  Under  the  influen/>e  of 
Judaism,  but  failed.  By  the  deeds  of  the  law  no  man  was  justified  or  made  right. 
Under  Judaism  men  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquities.  Who,  or  what,  then 
could  deliver  ?  No  philosophers,  poets,  or  teachers.  Only  one.  '•  Thanks  be  to  God 
through  Jesus  Christ."  (D.  Thomas,  B.I).)  The  body  of  death  .-—I.  St.  Paul  was 
not  thinking  with  any  fear  of  death.  Indeed,  toil-worn  and  heart- wearied  as  he  was, 
he  often  would  have  been  glad,  had  it  been  the  Lord's  will.  There  was  something 
that  to  a  mind  like  Paul's  was  worse  than  death.  It  was  the  dominion  of  the  carnal 
nature  which  strove  to  overrule  the  spiritual.  The  body  of  sin  was  to  him  "  the 
body  of  death."  Who  should  deliver  him  from  it  ?  2.  Now,  is  the  feeling  from 
which  such  a  cry  as  Paul's  proceeds  a  real  and  noble  feeling,  or  is  it  the  mere  outcry 
of  ignorance  and  superstition  ?  There  are  not  wanting  those  who  would  say  the 
latter.  "  Why  trouble  ourselves,"  says  one  of  these  apostles  of  the  new  religion  of 
science,  "  about  matters  of  which,  however  important  they  may  be,  we  do  know 
nothing,  and  can  know  nothing?  We  live  in  a  world  full  of  misery  and  ignorance  ; 
and  the  plain  duty  of  each  and  all  of  us  is  to  try  and  make  the  little  comer  he  can 
influence  somewhat  less  miserable  and  ignorant.  To  do  this  effectually,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  be  possessed  of  only  two  beliefs ;  that  we  can  learn  much  of  the  order  of 
nature ;  and  that  our  own  will  has  a  considerable  influence  on  the  course  of  events." 
That  is  all  that  we  need  attend  to.  Any  idea  of  God  and  a  moral  law  belongs  to 
cloudland.  But  is  there  not  an  instinct  within  us  which  rebels  against  this  cool 
setting  aside  of  everything  that  cannot  be  seen  or  handled  ?  And  is  that  instinct  a 
low  one  ?  or  is  it  the  instinct  of  minds  that  come  nearest  to  Divine  ?  3.  Which  is 
the  higher  type  of  man — which  do  you  feel  has  got  the  firmer  grip  of  the  realities  of 
life — the  man  calmly  bending  over  the  facts  of  outward  nature,  and  striving  to 
secure,  as  far  as  he  can,  conformity  to  them :  or,  the  man,  like  Paul,  believing  that 
there  was  a  moral  lav.  of  which  he  had  fallen  short,  a  Divine  order  with  which  he 
was  not  in  harmony — good  and  evil,  light  and  darkness,  God  and  the  devil,  being  to 
him  tremendous  realities — his  soul  being  the  battle-field  of  a  war  between  them,  in  the 
agony  and  shock  of  which  conflict  he  is  constrained  to  cry  out  for  a  higher  than  human 
help  ?  I  should  say  the  man  in  the  storm  and  stress  of  the  spiritual  battle ;  and  I 
should  say  that  to  deny  the  reality  of  the  sense  of  such  a  conflict  was  to  deny  facts 
which  are  as  obvious  to  the  spiritual  intelligence  as  the  fact  that  two  and  two  make 
four  is  to  the  ordinary  reason,  and  was  to  malign  facts  which  are  much  highdlr  and 
nobler  than  any  mere  fact  of  science,  as  the  life  of  man  is  higher  and  nobler  than 
the  life  of  rocks  or  seas.  4.  Minds  wholly  engrossed  with  intellectual  or  selfish 
pursuits  may  be  unconscious  of  this  conflict,  and  disbelieve  its  existence  in  other 
minds.  So  may  minds  that  have  reached  that  stage  which  the  apostle  describes  as 
"  dead  in  sin  " ;  but  to  other  minds,  minds  within  which  conscience  still  lives, 
within  which  exclusive  devotion  to  one  thought  or  interest  has  not  obliterated  every 
other,  this  conflict  is  a  stern  reality.  Who  that  has  lived  a  life  with  any  spiritual 
element  in  it,  and  higher  than  the  mere  animal's  or  worldling's,  has  not  known  that 
consciousness,  and  known  its  terror  and  power  of  darkness  when  it  was  roused  into 
active  life  ?  It  is  of  this  consciousness  Paul  speaks.  Under  the  pressure  of  it  he 
cries  out,  "  Who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ? "  5.  And  what 
answer  does  he  find  to  that  cry  ?  Does  the  order  of  nature,  or  the  powers  of  his  own 
will  help  him  here  ?  Does  not  the  very  sight  of  the  unbroken  calm  and  steadfast 
regularity  of  the  law  and  order  of  external  nature  add  new  bitterness  to  the  conviction 
that  he  has  forgotten  a  higher  law  and  disturbed  a  still  more  gracious  order  ?  Is 
not  the  very  conviction  of  the  weakness  of  his  own  will  one  of  the  most  terrible 
elements  in  his  distress  ?  Speak  to  a  man  under  this  consciousness  of  the  power  of 
sin  about  finding  help  to  resist,  through  studying  the  laws  of  that  nature  of  which 
he  is  himself  a  part,  and  through  exercising  that  will,  whose  feebleness  appals  him, 
and  you  mock  him,  as  if  you  spoke  to  a  man  in  a  raging  fever  of  the  necessity  of 
studying  his  own  temperament  and  constitution,  and  of  the  duty  of  keeping  himself 
cool.  What  is  wanted  in  either  cass  is  help  from  some  source  of  energy  outside 
himself,  who  should  restore  the  wasted  strength  from  his  own  fountains  of  life — who 
should  say  to  the  internal  conflict,  "  Peace,  be  still."  And  that  is  what  Paul  found 
in  Christ.  He  found  it  nowhere  else.  It  is  not  to  be  found  in  knowledge,  in 
science,  in  philosophy,  in  nature,  in  culture,  in  self.    6.  Now,  how  did  Paul  find 


CHA».  \n.]  ROMANS.  62T 

this  in  Christ  ?  How  may  all  find  it?  He  was  speaking  about  something  infinitely 
more  terrible  than  the  punishment  of  sin,  viz.,  the  dominion  of  sin.  What  h« 
wanted  was  an  actual  deliverance  from  an  actual  foe — not  a  promise  of  exemption 
from  some  future  evil.  And  it  was  this  that  Paul  realised  in  Christ.  To  him  to 
live  was  Christ.  The  presence  and  the  power  of  Christ  possessed  him.  It  was  in 
this  he  found  the  strength  which  gave  him  the  victory  over  the  body  of  death.  He 
found  that  strength  in  the  consciousness  that  he  was  not  a  lonely  soldier,  fighting 
against  an  overpowering  enemy,  and  in  the  dark,  but  that  One  was  with  him  who 
had  come  from  heaven  itself  to  reveal  to  him  that  God  was  on  his  side,  that  he  was 
fighting  God's  battle,  that  the  struggle  was  needed  for  his  perfecting  as  the  child  of 
God.  It  was  in  the  strength  of  this  that  he  was  able  to  give  thanks  for  his  deliver- 
ance from  the  "  body  of  death."  7.  The  consciousness  of  this  struggle,  the  engage- 
ment in  it  in  the  strength  of  Christ,  the  victory  of  the  higher  over  the  lower,  are  in 
all  the  necessary  conditions  of  spiritual  health  and  continued  life.  To  deny  the 
reality  of  that  conflict,  and  of  the  Divine  life  for  which  it  prepares  us,  does  not 
prove  that  these  are  not  real  and  true.  I  take  a  man  who  does  not  know  the  "  Old 
Hundredth  "  from  "  God  Save  the  Queen,"  and  play  him  a  piece  of  the  sweetest 
mnsic,  and  he  says  there  is  no  harmony  in  it.  I  show  a  man  who  is  colour-blind  two 
beautifully  contrasted  tints,  and  he  sees  but  one  dull  hue  :  but  still  the  music  and  the 
beauty  of  the  colours  exist,  though  not  for  him,  not  for  the  incapable  ear  and  the  un- 
discerning  eye.  So  with  the  spiritual  life.  It  is  for  the  spiritual.  {R.  H.  Story,  D.D.) 
The  body  of  death  : — In  Virgil  there  is  an  account  of  an  ancient  king,  who  was  so 
unnaturally  cruel  in  his  punishments,  that  he  used  to  chain  a  dead  man  to  a  living 
one.  It  was  impossible  for  the  poor  wretch  to  separate  himself  from  his  disgusting 
burden.  The  carcase  was  bound  fast  to  his  body,  its  hands  to  his  hands,  its  face  to 
his  face,  its  lips  to  his  lips ;  it  lay  down  and  rose  up  whenever  he  did  ;  it  moved 
about  with  him  whithersoever  he  went,  till  the  welcome  moment  when  death  came 
to  his  relief.  And  many  suppose  that  it  was  in  reference  to  this  that  Paul  cried 
out :  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  1  "  &c.  Whether  this  be  so  or  not,  sin  is  a  body 
'of  death,  which  we  all  carry  about  with  us.  And  while  I  do  not  wish  to  shock  your 
taste,  yet  I  do  wish  to  give  you  some  impression  of  the  unclean,  impure,  offensive 
nature  of  sin.  And  think — if  our  souls  are  polluted  with  such  a  stain — oh  !  think 
what  we  must  be  in  the  eyes  of  that  God  in  whose  sight  the  very  heavens  are  not 
clean,  and  who  charges  His  angels  with  folly.  {E.  Woods.)  The  body  of  death  : — 
Doddridge  thus  paraphrases  the  latter  half  of  this  verse :  "  Who  shall  rescue  me, 
miserable  captive  as  I  am,  from  the  body  of  this  death,  from  this  continued  burden 
which  I  carry  about  with  me,  and  which  is  cumbersome  and  odious  as  a  dead  carcase 
tied  to  a  living  body,  to  be  dragged  along  with  it  wherever  it  goes  ?  "  He  adds  in  a 
note :  "  It  is  well  known  that  some  ancient  writers  mention  this  as  a  cruelty  practised 
by  some  tyrants  upon  miserable  captives  who  fell  into  their  hands ;  and  a  more 
forcible  and  expressive  image  of  the  sad  case  represented  cannot  surely  enter  into 
the  mind  of  man."  "Of  this  atrocious  practice  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
instances  is  that  mentioned  by  Virgil  when  describing  the  tyrannous  conduct  of 
MezentiuB : — 

The  living  and  the  dead  at  his  command 

Were  coupled,  face  to  face,  and  hand  to  hand ; 

Till,  choked  with  stench,  in  loathed  embraces  tied. 

The  lingering  wretches  pined  away  and  died. — (Dryden.) 

Doddridge  is  not  by  any  means  singular  in  his  opinion  that  the  apostle  derives  an 
allusion  from  this  horrid  punishment ;  although  perhaps  the  text  is  suflBciently 
intelligible  without  the  illustration  it  thus  receives.  Philo,  in  an  analogous  passage, 
more  obviously  alludes  to  it,  describing  the  body  as  a  burden  to  the  soul,  carried 
about  like  a  dead  carcase,  which  may  not  till  death  be  laid  aside."  (Kitto.)  During 
the  reign  of  Eichard  I.  the  following  curious  law  was  enacted  for  the  government  of 
those  going  by  sea  to  the  Holy  Land — "He  who  kills  a  man  on  shipboard  shall  be 
bound  to  the  dead  body  and  thrown  into  the  sea ;  if  a  man  be  killed  on  shore  the 
slayer  shall  be  bound  to  the  dead  body  and  buried  with  it."  I  thank  God  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.— Christ  the  Deliverer  :— I.  Man's  need.  1.  While  man  is,  in 
special  organs,  inferior  to  one  and  another  of  the  animals,  he  is  collectively  by  far 
the  superior  of  every  one.  And  yet,  large  as  he  is,  man  is  not  happy  in  any  propor- 
tion to  his  nature,  and  to  the  hints  and  foregleams  which  that  nature  gives.  He 
has,  in  being  clothed  with  flesh,  all  the  points  of  contact  with  the  physical  world 
that  the  ox  or  the  falcon  has.    He  is  born ;  he  grows  up  with  all  the  instincts  and 


628  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOS.  [chap.  Tn. 

passions  of  animal  life,  and  without  them  he  coold  not  maintain  his  foothold  opon 
the  earth.  But  man  is  also  a  creature  of  affections,  which,  in  variety,  compass  and 
force,  leave  the  lower  creation  in  a  vivid  contrast.  He  is  endowed  with  reason, 
moral  sentiment  and  spiritual  life  ;  but  he  has  learned  but  very  imperfectly  how  to 
carry  himself  so  that  every  part  of  his  nature  shall  have  fair  play.  The  animal 
propensities  are  predominant.  Here,  then,  begins  the  conflict  between  man's 
physical  life  and  his  moral  life — the  strife  of  gentleness,  purity,  joy,  peace,  and 
faith,  against  selfishness,  pride,  and  appetites  of  various  kinds.  2.  To  all  souls  that 
have  been  raised  to  their  true  life  the  struggle  has  been  always  severe.  To  have 
the  power  over  our  whole  organisation  without  a  despotism  of  our  animal  and  selfish 
nature  is  the  problem  of  practical  life.  How  can  I  maintain  the  fulness  of  every 
part,  and  yet  have  harmony  and  relative  subordination,  so  that  the  appetites  shall 
serve  the  body,  and  the  affections  not  be  dragged  down  by  the  appetites ;  so  that  the 
moral  sentiments  and  the  reason  shall  shine  clear  and  beautiful  ?  H.  What 
BE&iEniES  HAVE  BEEN  PBOPOSED 1  1.  To  givc  way  to  that  which  is  strongest,  has  been 
one  special  method  of  settling  the  conflict.  EiU  the  higher  feelings  and  then  let  the 
lower  ones  romp  and  riot  like  animals  in  a  field — this  gives  a  brilliant  opening  to 
life ;  but  it  gives  a  dismal  close  to  it.  For  what  is  more  hideous  than  a  sullen  old 
man  burnt  out  with  evil  ?  When  I  see  men  suppressing  all  qualms,  and  going  into 
the  full  enjoyment  of  sensuous  life,  I  think  of  a  party  entering  the  Mammoth  Cave 
with  candles  enough  to  bring  them  back,  but  setting  them  all  on  fire  at  once.  The 
world  is  a  cave.  They  that  burn  oat  all  their  powers  and  passions  in  the  beginning 
of  life  at  last  wander  in  great  darkness,  and  lie  down  to  mourn  and  die.  2.  Another 
remedy  has  been  in  superstition.  Men  have  sought  to  cover  this  conflict,  rather 
than  to  heal  it.  3.  Others  have  compromised  by  morality.  But  this,  which  is  an 
average  of  man's  conduct  with  the  customs  and  laws  of  the  time  in  which  he  lives, 
comes  nowhere  near  touching  that  radical  conflict  which  there  is  between  the  flesh 
and  the  spirit.  4.  Then  comes  philosophy,  and  deals  with  it  in  two  ways.  It  pro- 
pounds to  men  maxims  and  wise  rules.  It  expounds  the  benefit  of  good,  and  the 
evils  of  bad  conduct.  And  then  it  proposes  certain  rules  of  doing  what  we  cannot 
help,  and  of  suffering  what  we  cannot  throw  off.  And  it  is  all  very  well.  So  is 
rose-water  where  a  man  is  wounded  unto  death.  It  is  not  less  fragrant  because  it 
is  not  remedial ;  but  if  regarded  as  a  remedy,  how  poor  it  is  I  5.  Then  comes 
scientific  empiricism,  and  prescribes  the  observance  of  natural  laws ;  but  how  many 
men  in  life  know  these  laws?  How  many  men  are  bo  placed  that  if  they  did 
know  them,  they  would  be  able  to  use  them  ?  Ton  might  as  well  take  a  babe  of 
days,  and  place  a  medicine  chest  before  it,  and  say,  "  Rise,  and  select  the  right 
medicine,  and  you  shall  live."  HI.  What,  then,  is  the  final  remedy?  What  does 
Cheistianity  offer  in  this  case  ?  1.  It  undertakes  to  so  bring  God  within  the 
reach  of  every  being  in  the  world,  that  He  shall  exert  a  controlling  power  on  the 
spiritual  realms  of  man's  nature,  and,  by  giving  power  to  it,  overbalance  and  over- 
bear the  despotism  of  the  radical  passions  and  appetites.  There  is  a  story  of  a 
missionary  who  was  sent  out  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  slaves ;  but  he  found  that 
they  went  forth  so  early,  and  came  back  so  late,  and  were  so  spent,  that  they  could 
not  hear.  There  was  nobody  to  preach  to  them  unless  he  should  accompany  them 
in  their  labour.  So  he  went  and  sold  himself  to  their  master,  who  put  him  in  the 
gang  with  them.  For  the  privilege  of  going  out  with  these  slaves,  and  making  them 
feel  that  he  loved  them,  and  would  benefit  them,  he  worked  with  them,  and  suffered 
with  them  ;  and  while  they  worked,  he  taught ;  and  as  they  came  back  he  taught ; 
and  he  won  their  ear ;  and  the  grace  of  God  sprang  up  in  many  of  these  darkened 
hearts.  That  is  the  story  over  again  of  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  2.  Many  things 
can  be  done  under  personsJ  influence  that  you  cannot  in  any  other  way.  My  father 
said  to  me,  when  I  was  a  little  boy,  "  Henry,  take  these  letters  to  the  post-oflSce." 
I  was  a  brave  boy;  yet  I  had  imagination.  I  saw  behind  every  thicket  some 
shadowy  form ;  and  I  heard  trees  say  strange  and  weird  things ;  and  in  the  dark 
concave  above  I  could  hear  flitting  spirits.  As  I  stepped  out  of  the  door,  Charles 
Smith,  a  great  thick-lipped  black  man,  who  was  always  doing  kind  things,  said,  "  I 
will  go  with  you."  Oh  1  sweeter  music  never  came  out  of  any  instrument  than  that. 
The  heaven  was  just  as  fuU,  and  the  earth  was  just  as  full  as  before ;  but  now  I  had 
somebody  to  go  with  me.  It  was  not  that  I  thought  he  was  going  to  fight  for  me. 
But  I  had  somebody  to  succour  me.  JUet  anything  be  done  by  direction  and  how 
different  it  is  from  its  being  done  by  personal  inspiration.  "  Ah !  are  the  Zebedees, 
then,  BO  poor?  John,  take  a  quarter  of  beef  and  carry  it  down,  with  my  compli- 
aoento.     Mo,  stop ;  fill  up  that  chest,  put  in  those  cordials,  lay  them  on  the  cart. 


OBAr.  m.]  ROHTANS.  629 

and  bring  it  round,  and  I  will  drive  down  myself."  Down  I  go  ;  and  on  entering 
the  house  I  hold  out  both  hands,  and  say,  "  Why,  my  old  friend,  I  am  glad  I  found 
you  out.  I  understand  the  world  has  gone  hard  with  you.  I  came  down  to  say 
that  you  have  one  friend,  at  any  rate.  Now  do  not  be  discouraged  ;  keep  up  a  good 
heart."  And  when  I  am  gone,  the  man  wipes  his  eyes,  and  says,  "  God  knows  that 
that  man's  shaking  my  hands  gave  me  more  joy  than  all  that  he  brought.  It  was 
himself  that  I  vsnted."  The  old  prophet,  when  he  went  into  the  house  where  the 
widow's  son  lay  dead,  put  his  hands  on  the  child's  hands,  and  stretched  himself 
across  the  child's  body,  and  the  spirit  of  life  came  back.  Oh,  if,  when  men  are  in 
trouble,  there  were  some  man  to  measure  his  whole  stature  against  them,  and  give 
them  the  warmth  of  his  sympathy,  how  many  would  be  saved  I  That  is  the 
philosophy  of  salvation  through  Christ — a  great  soul  come  down  to  take  care  of 
little  souls ;  a  great  heart  beating  its  warm  blood  into  our  little  pinched  hearts, 
that  do  not  know  how  to  get  blood  enough  for  themselves.  It  is  this  that  gives  my 
upper  nature  strength,  and  hope,  and  elasticity,  and  victory.  Conclusion  :  We  learn 
— 1.  What  is  a  man's  depravity.  When  you  say  that  an  army  is  destroyed,  you  do 
not  mean  that  everybody  is  killed ;  but  that,  as  an  army,  its  complex  organisation 
is  broken  up.  To  spoil  a  watch  you  do  not  need  to  grind  it  to  powder.  Take  out 
the  mainspring.  "Well,  the  pointers  are  not  useless."  Perhaps  not  for  another 
watch.  "  There  are  a  great  many  wheels  inside  that  are  not  injured."  Yes,  but 
what  are  wheels  worth  in  a  watch  that  has  no  mainspring  ?  What  spoils  a  compass  ? 
Anything  which  unfits  it  for  doing  what  it  was  intended  to  do.  Now,  here  is  this 
complex  organisation  of  man.  The  royalties  of  the  soul  are  all  mixed  up.  Where 
eonsoience  ought  to  be  is  pride.  Where  love  ought  to  be  is  selfishness.  Its 
sympathy  and  harmony  are  gone.  It  is  not  necessary  that  a  man  should  be  all  bad 
to  be  ruined.  Man  has  lost  that  harmony  which  belongs  to  a  perfect  organisation. 
And  so  he  lives  to  struggle.  And  the  struggle  through  which  he  is  passing  is  the 
cause  of  human  woe.  2.  Why  it  is  that  the  divinity  of  Christ  becomes  so  important 
in  the  development  of  a  truly  Christian  life.  As  a  living  man,  having  bad  the 
experiences  of  my  own  soul,  and  having  been  conversant  with  the  experiences 
of  others,  what  I  want  is  power.  And  that  is  what  they  lack  who  deny 
the  Divinity  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  God  can  cleanse  the  heart.  Man  cannot. 
And  that  God  whom  we  can  understand  is  the  God  that  walked  in  Jerusalem,  that 
suffered  upon  Calvary,  and  that  lives  again,  having  lifted  Himself  up  into  eternal 
spheres  of  power,  that  He  might  bring  many  sons  and  daughters  home  to  Zion. 
{H.  Ward  Beecher.)        The  believefs  gratitude  to  God  through  Christ : — I.  Souls 

GROANINO  UNDER  THE  BODY  OF  SIN  AND  DEATH  CAN  FIND  NO  RELIEF  BUT   THROUGH  JeSUS 

Christ.  None  but  an  almighty  Saviour  is  suited  to  the  case  of  a  poor  sinner.  This 
doctrine  reproves  the  Church  of  Borne,  and  others,  for  directing  men,  not  to  Christ, 
but  to  themselves ;  to  their  vows,  alms,  penances,  and  pilgrimages ;  or,  to  their 
greater  watchfulness  and  strictness  in  life.  But  as  Luther  observes,  "  How  many 
have  tried  this  way  for  many  years,  and  yet  could  get  no  peace."  Now,  what  is 
there  in  Christ  that  can  relieve  a  soul  ?  1.  The  blood  of  Christ,  which  was  shed 
as  an  atoning  sacrifice  for  sin.  2.  A  perfect  and  everlasting  righteousness.  This 
our  apostle,  doubtless,  had  in  view :  for  he  immediately  adds  (chap.  viii.  1). 
"Christ  is  made  unto  us  of  God,  wisdom  and  righteousness."  3.  The  Spirit  of 
Christ  which  is  given  to  all  true  believers,  as  an  abiding  principle,  teaching  them  to 
fight  and  war  with  sin.  H.  That  souls  thus  exercised,  finding  relief  only  in  Christ, 
will  actually  receive  and  embrace  Him.  None  will  receive  Christ,  but  they  only 
who  axe  taught  to  see  their  need  of  Him.    III.  They,  who  see  this  relief  in  Christ, 

WHO    EEOEIVB    AND   EMBRACE    IT,  MUST   AND   WILL   GIVE   THANKS   TO   GoD   FOR  IT.      The 

angels,  those  disinterested  spirits,  bringing  the  joyful  news  to  our  apostate  world, 
sung,  *•  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  for  peace  on  earth,  and  good  will  towards 
men."  And  surely,  if  we  who  are  redeemed  to  God  by  His  blood,  should  hold  our 
peace  on  so  joyful  an  occasion,  "  the  stones  would  immediately  cry  out."    IV.  All 

THOSE  who   have   RECEIVED  ChRIST,  AND   HAVE   GIVEN   THANES  TO   GoD  FOB  HiM,  WILL 

LOOK  UPON  Him  as  their  Lord  and  their  God.  {J.  Stafford.)  Nothing  can  equal 
the  gospel : — There  is  nothing  proposed  by  men  that  can  do  anything  like  this 
gospeL  The  religion  of  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  is  the  philosophy  of  icicles ;  the 
religion  of  Theodore  Parker  was  a  sirocco  of  the  desert  covering  up  the  soul  with 
dry  sand ;  the  rehgion  of  Benan  is  the  romance  of  believing  nothing ;  the  religion 
of  Thomas  Carlyle  is  only  a  condensed  London  fog ;  the  religion  of  the  Huxleys  and 
the  Spencers  is  merely  a  pedestal  on  which  human  philosophy  sits  shivering  in  the 
Bight  of  the  soul,  looking  up  to  the  stars,  offering  no  help  to  the  nations  that  crouch 


630  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tru 

and  groan  at  the  base.  Tell  me  where  there  is  one  man  who  hta  rejected  that 
gospel  for  another,  who  is  thoroughly  satisfied,  and  helped,  and  contented  in  hia 
Bcepticism,  and  I  will  take  the  car  to-morrow  and  ride  five  hundred  miles  to  see 
him.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Victory  through  Christ : — I  can  well  remember  a 
portion  of  a  sermon  which  I  heard  when  I  was  only  five  years  of  age.  I  recollect 
the  cast  of  the  preacher's  features,  the  colour  of  his  hair,  and  the  tone  of  his  voice. 
He  had  been  an  officer  in  the  army,  and  was  in  attendance  on  the  Duke  of  Welling- 
ton during  the  great  battle  of  Waterloo.  That  portion  of  the  sermon  which  I  can 
BO  well  remember  was  a  graphic  description  of  the  conflict  which  some  pious  souls 
have  experienced  with  the  powers  of  darkness  before  their  final  victory  over  the  fear 
of  death.  He  illustrated  it  by  drawing  in  simple  words  a  vivid  description  of  the 
battle  at  Waterloo.  He  told  us  of  the  cool  and  stem  nature  of  the  •'  Iron  Duke," 
who  seldom  manifested  any  emotion.  But  the  moments  came  when  the  Duke  waa 
lifted  out  of  his  stern  rut.  For  a  short  time  the  English  troops  wavered,  and 
showed  signs  of  weakness,  when  the  Duke  anxiously  exclaimed,  "  I  would  to  God 
that  Blucher  or  the  night  had  come ! "  After  a  while  a  column  of  the  French  waa 
driven  before  the  English  guards,  and  another  column  was  routed  by  a  bayonet- 
charge  of  an  English  brigade.  Wellington  then  calculated  how  long  it  would  take 
to  complete  the  triumph.  Taking  from  his  pocket  his  gold  watch,  he  exclaimed, 
"  Twenty  minutes  more,  and  then  victory  I  "  When  the  twenty  minutes  had  passed 
the  French  were  completely  vanquished.  Then  the  Duke,  again  taking  out  hia 
watch,  held  it  by  the  short  chain,  and  swung  it  around  his  head  again  and  again, 
while  he  shouted,  "  Victory  I  Victory  I "  the  watch  flew  out  of  his  hand,  but  he 
regarded  gold  as  only  dust  compared  with  the  final  triumph.  This  graphic  descrip- 
tion made  a  powerful  impression  on  my  childish  mind.  Young  as  I  was,  I  at  once 
saw  the  aptness  of  the  illustration.  I  often  dreamt  about  it,  and  told  other  lada 
the  story.  When  I  was  a  weeping  penitent,  praying  for  pardon,  and  struggling  with 
unbelief,  the  scene  of  Waterloo  came  before  me ;  but  the  moment  the  light  of  the 
Saviour's  smile  fell  upon  my  heart,  I  instinctively  sprang  to  my  feet  and  shouted, 
♦'  Victory  1  Victory  1  "  Many  times,  since  I  have  been  exclusively  engaged  in  con- 
ducting speciaJ  services,  my  memory  has  brought  before  me  the  preacher  and  the 
part  of  the  sermon  which  I  heard  when  I  was  only  five  years  of  age,  and  this  haa 
had  its  influence  on  me  in  my  addresses  to  both  old  and  young.  {T.  Oliver.)  So 
then  with  the  mind  I  myself  serve  the  law  of  God ;  but  with  the  flesh  the  law  of 
Bin. — I.  Of  WHOM D0E8  THE  APOSTLE  SPEAK?  Of  thoso — 1.  Who  are  euUghtened.  2. 
But  still  under  the  law.  II.  What  does  he  affiem  bespecting  them  ?  1.  That  they 
naturally  approve  the  law.  2.  Yet  serve  sin.  III.  What  is  the  neoessaky  conclusion  ? 
1.  That  there  is  no  deliverance  by  the  law,  or  by  personal  effort.  2.  But  by  Christ 
only.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Believers  serve  the  law  of  God,  though  hindered  by  the  law  of 
sin: — I.  The  life  of  a  believer  is  chiefly  taken  up  in  bervino  the  law  of  God. 
For  this  end  the  law  is  written  upon  his  heart,  and,  therefore,  he  serves  God  with 
his  spirit,  or  with  his  renewed  mind.  His  whole  man,  all  that  can  be  called  him- 
self, is  employed  in  a  life  of  evangelical  and  universal  obedience.  II.  The  believeb 

MAY  MEET  WITH   MANY  INTERRUPTIONS  WHILE   HE  IS  AIMING  TO  SERVE  THE  LAW   OF   GoD. 

"  With  my  flesh  the  law  of  sin."  1.  Had  our  apostle  contented  himself  with  the 
former  part  of  this  declaration,  it  would  doubtless  have  been  matter  of  great  dis- 
couragement to  the  children  of  God.  But  when  we  find  that  the  apostle  himself 
confesseth  his  weakness  and  imperfection,  whose  heart  would  not  take  courage,  and 
go  forth  more  boldly  to  the  conflict  than  ever  ?  2.  After  all  the  encouragement 
afforded  to  the  mind  of  a  believer,  yet  this  is  a  very  humbling  subject.  We  may 
learn  hence,  how  deeply  sin  is  inwrought  in  our  nature.     HI.  Although  the 

BELIEVER   MEETS  WITH    MANY  INTEERUPTIONS,  YET   HE    HOLDS   ON   SERVING   THE  LAW  0» 

God,  even  when  he  is  delitbbed  from  all  condemnation.  I  ground  this  observa- 
tion on  the  dose  connection  in  which  these  words  stand  with  the  first  verse  of  the 
next  chapter.  They  are  delivered  from  condemnation,  and  yet  they  serve  the  law 
of  God,  because  they  are  delivered.    (•/.  Stafford.) 


OBMt.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  681 


CHAPTER  Vin. 

The  place  of  tJie  chapter  in  the  argument : — The  struggle  has  passed  away  and  the 
oonqaeror  and  the  conquered  are  side  by  side.  The  two  laws  mentioned  in  the  last 
chapter  have  changed  places,  the  one  becoming  mighty  from  being  powerless,  the 
Dther  powerless  from  being  mighty.  The  helplessness  of  the  law  has  been  done 
away  in  Christ,  that  its  righteous  requirement  may  be  fulfilled  in  us  who  walk  not 
after  the  flesh  but  after  the  Spirit.  The  apostle  returns  upon  his  previous  track 
that  he  may  contrast  the  two  elements,  not  as  in  the  previous  chapter  in  conflict 
with  each  other,  hopelessly  entangled  by  "  occasion  of  the  commandment,"  but  in 
entire  separation  and  opposition.  These  two,  the  flesh  and  the  spirit,  stand  over 
against  one  another,  as  hfe  and  death,  as  peace  and  enmity,  with  God.  Do  what  it 
win  the  flesh  can  never  be  subjected  to  the  Jaw  of  God.  {Proj,  Jowett.)  The 
connection  between  chaps,  vii.  and  viii. : — The  eighth  chapter  of  Eomans,  and  the 
preceding  one,  are  the  most  profound  psychological  passages  in  the  Bible  ;  and  in 
the  higher  spiritual  elements  they  are  more  profound  than  anything  in  literature. 
The  seventh  chapter  is  the  problem  of  conscience.  The  eighth  is  a  solution  of  that 
problem  by  the  formulas  of  love.  In  the  seventh,  a  just  man,  tender  of  conscience 
and  clear  of  understanding,  with  an  active  ideality,  Beeks  to  make  a  symmetrical 
life  and  perfect  character — a  thing  which  is  impossible  in  this  world.  Under  such 
circumstances  every  mistake  rebounds,  and  every  imperfection  is  caught  upon  the 
sensitive  conscience,  and  becomes  a  source  of  exquisite  suffering  and  of  discourage- 
ment ;  BO  that,  from  the  necessary  conditions  of  human  Ufe,  a  just  man  will  be 
made  miserable  in  proportion  as  he  seeks  more  vehemently  to  be  just.  One  way 
out  of  this  trouble  would  be  to  lower  the  standard  of  character  and  to  lower  the 
moral  value  of  conduct.  But  the  ease  that  comes  from  lowering  our  rule  of  right 
and  our  responsibilities  to  it  is  degrading.  Thus  to  seek  ease  F:ends  us  down  toward 
animals  ;  and  that  is  the  true  vulgarity.  It  is  better  to  die  in  the  prison-house  of 
the  seventh  of  Romans  than,  missing  the  eighth,  to  get  relief  in  any  other  direction. 
The  problem  of  the  higher  moral  life  is  how  to  maintain  a  higher  transcendent 
ideal  of  character  and  conduct,  and  yet  have  joy  and  peace,  even  in  the  face  of  sins 
and  imperfections.  That  is  the  problem.  Ani  its  solution  can  only  be  found  in 
one  direction — in  the  direction  of  Divine  love.  A  proper  conception  of  God  in  the 
aspect  of  love,  and  a  habit  of  bringing  the  instruments,  and  customs,  and  laws  of 
paternal  love  to  the  consideration  of  our  personal  religious  life,  will  go  far  to 
enlighten,  stimulate,  and  comfort  us.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Out  of  the  seventh  chapter 
into  the  eighth : — I  defy  any  man  to  accomplish  this  except  by  that  one  word  *'  Christ." 
He  who  attempts  it  is  like  a  leaf  caught  in  the  eddy  of  a  stream  :  it  whirls  round 
and  wants  to  get  down  the  stream,  but  cannot  go.  The  seventh  of  Eomans  ia 
an  eddy  in  which  the  conscience  swings  round  and  round  in  eternal  disquiet ;  the 
eighth  is  the  talisman  through  which  it  receives  the  touch  of  Divine  inspiration, 
and  is  lifted  above  into  the  realm  of  true  Divine  beneficence.  Or  the  transition  %y 
may  be  illustrated  thus — During  the  Indian  Mutiny,  when  the  English  army  were  ^ 
shut  up  in  a  city,  besieged,  almost  at  the  point  of  death  from  starvation,  and  deci- 
mated by  the  constant  assaults  of  the  adversary,  a  Scotch  lassie,  who  belonged  to  a 
Highland  regiment,  all  at  once  thought  she  heard  the  sound  of  bagpipes  afar  off ; 
and  the  soldiers  laughed  her  to  scorn.  But  after  a  little  time  others  heard  it.  And 
then  there  came  in  note  after  note.  By-and-by  the  sounds  of  the  instruments  of 
a  full  military  band  were  recognised.  And  soon,  from  out  of  the  forest,  came  the 
relief  army,  that  broke  up  the  siege  and  gave  them  deliverance.  And  with  flying 
colours  and  glorious  music  they  came  marching  up  to  the  now  released  city.  Such 
is  the  difference  between  the  seventh  chapter  and  the  eighth.  For  here,  in  the 
seventh,  is  that  first,  far-off  note  of  victory.  After  that  descant  of  his  own  wretched- 
ness, and  poverty,  and  moral  imbecility,  comes  the  exclamation :  •'  I  thank  God 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord ."  Then,  in  the  eighth  chapter,  he  breaks  into  a 
discussion  of  the  spirit-life  and  the  redemption  of  the  flesh,  and  there  are  snatches, 
again  and  again,  of  that  victorious  note,  growing  stronger  and  fuller,  till  he  comes 
clear  down  to  the  end,  when  he  breaks  out :  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love 
of  Christ  ?  "  <fcc. :  and  there  comes  in  the  flying  banners,  the  band  and  the  full  army. 
(Ibid.)  Living  in  the  eighth  chapter: — A  minister  was  once  expounding  the 
seventh  and  eighth  chapters  of  Romans  to  a  class  of  coloured  Bible-women,  deeply 
experienced  as  to  their  hearts,  but  very  ignorant,  as  he  supposed,  in  their  heads. 
After  he  had  been  talking  quite  eloquently  for  a  little  while,  au  old  coloured  womail 


eaS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (cha».  Tin, 

interrupted  him  with :  "  Why,  honey,  it  'pears  like  yon  don't  understand  them 
chapters."  "  Why  not,  auntie?  "  he  eaid.  *•  What  is  the  matter  with  my  explana- 
tion ?  "  ••  Why,  honey,"  she  said,  "  you  talk  as  if  we  were  to  live  in  that  seventh 
chapter,  and  only  pay  little  visits  to  the  blessed  eighth."  ••  Well,"  he  answered, 
"  ^at  is  just  what  I  think.  Don't  you  ?  "  With  a  look  of  intense  pity  for  his 
ignorance,  she  exclaimed :  "  Why,  I  lives  in  the  eighth."  Bishop  TempWa 
testimony : — ^Bishop  Temple,  preaching  his  farewell  sermon  in  Exeter  Cathedral, 
took  for  his  text  Bom.  viii.  38,  39.  This  eighth  chapter,  he  said,  always  had  a 
strange  fascination  for  him  above  all  other  chapters  in  the  New  Testament.  He 
did  not  speak  of  himself  as  having  lived  in  the  spirit  of  such  a  chapter,  but  he 
had  found  in  it  a  picture  of  the  man  he  would  fain  have  been  if  he  could.  There 
was  support  in  it  which  he  had  turned  to  over  and  over  again  for  nearly  fifty  yeara 
and  never  without  finding  fresh  power  within  it  to  help  him  on.  The  life  therein 
pourtrayed  was  the  life,  If  his  weakness  permitted,  he  desired  to  realise ;  and  he 
urged  upon  his  hearers  to  keep  the  chapter  before  them,  to  read  it,  repeat  it  con- 
stantly,  making  it  the  pattern  they  were  endeavouring  to  realise  while  they  were 
striving,  in  accordance  with  St.  John's  exhortation,  to  purify  themselves  even  as 
Christ  is  pure.  The  chapter  as  a  spiritual  palace : — Astyages  determined  on  the 
death  of  the  infant  Gyrus.  He  summoned  Harpagus,  an  officer  of  his  court,  and 
committed  to  him  the  destruction  of  the  royal  babe.  Harpagus  gave  the  babe  to 
the  herdsman  Mithridates  that  he  might  expose  him  in  the  mountains.  But  Spaco, 
the  wife  of  the  herdsman,  adopted  the  babe  instead.  Therefore  Cyrus  grows  up  in 
the  peasant's  hut.  He  thinks  the  herdsman  and  his  wife  to  be  his  parents.  Ignorant 
of  his  birth,  of  his  rightful  destiny,  of  the  palace  and  kingly  state  which  were  really 
his,  he  thinks  himself  only  a  peasant's  child.  At  last  the  secret  of  Cyrus's  birth 
and  rightful  place  gets  known,  and  he  goes  on  to  be  the  man  standing  out  in  such 
grand  figure  amid  the  dimness  of  that  early  time.  What  may  be  only  legend  about 
Cyrus  is  too  sadly  fact  about  too  many  Christians.  They  too  often  think  them- 
selves but  peasants  when  they  are  really  kings.  They  dwell  in  huts  when  God  has 
built  a  palace  for  them.  And  the  difficulty  is  that  even  when  they  may  they  will 
not  see  the  palace  in  which  God  means  that  they  shall  dwell.  This  chapter  is  the 
spiritual  palace  in  which  God  would  have  His  children  dwell.  Let  us  glance  at  it. 
I.  There  is  in  it  no  condemnation  (ver.  1).  II.  Eeal  intbbnal  spibituai.  abilitt 
(vers.  2-4).  Christ  is  not  simply  for  the  Christian  in  the  no  condemnation ;  Christ 
is  also  in  the  Christian  in  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  life.  III.  The  spirit  op  adoption 
(ver.  15),  i.e.,  there  is  for  the  Christian  a  genuine  son-placing.  IV.  The  witness 
OF  THE  Spirit  (ver.  16).  V.  Heirship  (ver.  17).  Poor  the  Christian  may  be  here,  but 
he  walks  the  earth  with  all  the  wealth  of  heaven  in  reversion.    VI.  The  certaintx 

THAT  ALL  THINGS  WORK  TOGETHER  FOB  GOOD.    VII.  NoTHIKG  THAT  CAN  REALLY  BArFLE  HIM, 

FOB  TBiuMPH  IS  HIS  SURELY  SINCE  GoD  IS  ON  HIS  SIDE  (vers.  31-39).  {Homilctic  Review.} 
There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  which  are  In  Christ  Jesus. — 
No  condemnation : — There  is  therefore  "  now  no  condemnation  to  them  which  are 
in  Christ  Jesus. "  This  is  the  result  of  the  complete  Divine  provision  which  is 
made  for  our  justification.  There  is  therefore  "  now  no  condemnation  " ;  this  does 
not  mean  at  this  time,  although  that  is  perfectly  true,  but  the  word  "  now  "  means 
in  this  state  of  things.  "No  condemnation."  There  is  no  damnatory  sentence 
against  them.  There  is  no  curse  hanging  like  a  thundercloud  over  their  heads. 
There  is  no  penal  consequence  following  them.  *•  Who  walk  " — that  is,  who  act 
and  who  live  "  not  after  the  flesh  " — that  is,  not  under  the  influence  of  the  things 
which  appeal  to  the  eye  and  to  the  ear  of  the  body — not  under  the  power  of  the 
feelings  which  these  things  chiefly  awaken  and  appeal  to,  and  not  according  to  the 
impulses  and  desires  of  human  nature  in  its  unsanctified  state.  Who  walk  "  not 
after  the  flesh,"  but  after  the  Spirit" — that  is,  in  obedience  to  the  dictates  of  the 
Spirit,  and  in  response  to  the  propensities  of  a  soul  possessed,  not  by  the  world  and 
by  the  things  of  the  world,  but  possessed  and  moved  in  all  its  impulses  and  in  all  its 
resolutions  by  the  Spirit  of  God  and  the  Spirit  of  holiness.  I.  There  is  no  con- 
demnatory SENTENCE  IN  EXECUTION  AGAINST  CHRISTIANS  NOW.      BelicverS   in    Chlist 

Jesus  sin.  And  their  sins  are  noticed  by  God,  and  God  is  displeased  with  them  ; 
and  God  sometimes  chides  and  corrects  Christians  for  their  sins,  but  He  does  not 
treat  Christians  as  criminals.  God  deals  with  Christians  as  with  children.  There 
is  no  sentence  of  condemnation  in  execution  against  the  disciples  of  Christ — none 
is  being  executed  outwardly.  Christians  are  exposed  to  suffering,  but  when  they 
are  corrected,  the  chastisement  is  paternal ;  when  they  are  checked,  the  restraint 
is  pitiful  and  loving ;  when  they  are  disciplined,  the  training  is  in  kindness ;  whea 


our.  Tin.]  ROMANS,  68S 

thej  &re  called  to  die,  death  to  them  is  but  the  commencement  of  a  new  and  an 
everlasting  life ;  so  that  it  may  be  said  with  reference  to  them,  that  all  things  work 
together  for  their  good.  No  sentence  of  condemnation  is  being  executed  against  a 
Christian  now  outwardly,  and  none  inwardly.  You  see  that  such  a  sentence  might 
be  executed  in  a  Christian's  body,  or  in  a  Christian's  circumstances  ;  or  it  might  be 
executed  inwardly  without  touching  the  body  and  without  afifecting  the  circum- 
stances through  such  feelings  as  fear  and  remorse.  But,  "  being  justified  by  faith, 
we  have  peace  with  God."  II.  There  is  no  sentence  of  condemnation  becobded 
roB  EXEcoxioN.  The  disciple  of  Christ  is  not  reprieved,  but  pardoned;  and  his 
pardon  is  full  and  complete.  Suppose  that  you  wish  to  save  some  criminal  under 
a  sentence  of  death,  what  must  you  do  for  him  ?  You  must  first  get  a  remission 
of  the  capital  punishment.  The  next  thing  that  you  must  do  for  that  man  is 
to  get  him  restored  to  his  family  and  friends  and  to  his  foiiner  social  position ; 
and  when  yon  have  done  that,  you  must  adopt  some  means  by  which  to  change 
the  heart  and  the  character  of  that  man ;  and  then  you  must  effect  the  restora- 
tion of  bis  possessions.  This  is  the  salvation  that  God  dispenses  to  as.  The 
man  who  trusts  in  Jesus  Christ  is  immediately  brought  back  to  the  position  of 
a  righteous  being,  and  all  the  providences  of  God  and  the  government  of  God 
have  toward  that  man  a  thoroughly  paternal  aspect.  "  Behold  what  manner  of 
love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God." 
m.  The  absence  of  all  condeunation  is  accounted  fob  bt  that  which  Christ 
IB  to  the  soul  that  belies  upon  Him.  Christ  Jesus  is  the  Lamb  of  God  which 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  appropriates  the  sin- 
offering  to  the  believer,  so  that  all  its  sufficiency  becomes  ours  when  we  trust  to  it. 
Observe  further,  that  Christ  Jesus  is  the  High  Priest  who  ever  lives  to  make 
intercession  for  as,  and  faith  in  Jesus  gives  us  a  personal  interest  in  that  interces- 
sion. Again,  Christ  Jesus  is  the  second  Adam,  by  whose  obedience  many  are 
to  be  made  righteous,  and  faith  in  Jesus  makes  that  obedience  the  garment  of  oar 
salvation.  So  that  if  all  this  be  true,  you  see  at  once  how  impossible  it  is  that 
there  should  be  any  condemnation  to  those  who  are  in  Christ  Jesns.  But  a 
question  may  arise.  How  may  I  know  that  I  am  trusting  in  God's  Christ  ?  The 
reality  of  oar  reliance  in  the  Christ  of  God  is  proved  by  the  character  and  styls 
of  oar  life — •'  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit."  Jesus  Christ 
leads  all  His  disciples  to  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit.  (S.  Martin.) 
The  privilege  of  the  $aints : — I.  The  persons  mentioned.  Those  which  are  in 
Christ  Jesus.  Yea,  so  near  and  close  an  nnion  as  this  indeed  in  the  true  nature 
of  it,  as  that  sometimes  from  hence  we  shall  find  the  Church  called  by  the  name 
of  Christ  Himself,  as  1  Cor.  xii.  12.  Though  Christ,  considered  personally,  is  full 
and  absolute  in  Himself,  yet,  considered  relatively  and  mystically,  so  He  is  not  full 
and  complete  without  believers  who  are  members  of  Him.  We  shall  further 
inquire  into  the  causes  and  grounds  of  this  union.  1.  We  are  knit  to  Christ, 
and  made  one  with  Him  by  His  Spirit.  Look  as  that  member  of  the  body 
is  not  united  to  the  head,  that  is  not  animated  and  informed  with  the  same  soul 
that  is  in  the  head,  so  neither  is  that  Christian  truly  united  to  Christ  who  is  not 
quickened  and  enlivened  by  that  Spirit  which  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  If  any  man 
have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  he  is  none  of  His  (ver.  9).  The  second  Adam  is 
made  a  quickening  spirit  (1  Cor.  zv.  45).  And  He  quickeneth  whom  He  will  (John 
T.  21 ;  1  John  iv.  21).  2.  Another  bond  whereby  we  are  knit  to  Christ  is  faith, 
which  is  a  special  gift  and  fruit  of  the  Spirit ;  whereby,  secondarily,  we  are  united 
to  Him,  and  lay  hold  on  that  righteousness  which  is  in  Him,  and  receive  all  that  grace 
which  is  offered  and  tendered  by  Him  in  the  gospel.  The  just  shall  live  by  faith 
(Gal.  V.  6).  We  through  the  Spirit  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by  faith  (Gal.  ii. 
20).  The  life  only  I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God. 
This  is  a  very  high  honour  and  dignity  unto  them,  and  so  to  be  accounted  of  by 
them ;  and,  accordingly,  it  should  have  answerable  effects  and  operations  upon  them, 
as — (1)  To  exceeding  joyfulness  and  exultation  in  this  their  condition  :  we  see  how 
all  men  for  the  most  part  do  rejoice  in  the  excellency  of  their  relations,  wives  in 
their  husbands,  children  in  their  parents.  The  nearer  is  the  anion  to  those  who 
are  of  worth  and  renown  the  greater  is  the  contentment ;  why,  thus  it  should  now 
be  with  believers  in  regard  of  Christ.  (2)  It  should  work  us  to  a  conformity  to 
Christ  in  our  carriage ;  being  one  with  Him  we  should  behave  ourselves  suitably  to 
Him.  It  is  a  shame  for  those  who  are  one  with  Christ  to  walk  in  ways  of  oppo- 
sition to  Him.  (3)  It  may  encourage  God's  servants  to  depend  upon  Him  for  all 
things  fitting  and  convenient  for  them,  and  to  persuade  themselves  of  His  favoat 


634  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  no. 

towards  them.  Therefore  He  will  hear  their  prayers.  And,  on  the  other  side, 
those  that  wrong  them  may  be  advised  to  take  heed  how  they  do  so,  for  He  takes 
their  wrongs  as  done  to  Himself.  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  Me  ? "  Isa. 
IxiT.  9,  &o.  And  so  much  may  be  spoken  of  the  first  description  of  the  persons 
here  mentioned,  taken  from  their  state  and  condition.  2.  The  second  is  taken 
from  their  life  and  conversation  ;  "  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh  but  after  the  Spirit." 
These  two  they  go  still  together ;  anion  with  Christ  and  holiness  of  life  they  are 
inseparable.  This  passage  before  us  is  considerable  here  of  as  two  manner  of  ways, 
separately  and  jointly.  Separately,  and  so  it  consists  of  two  distinct  branches — 
the  negative  and  the  affirmative.  The  negative  is  in  these  words,  which  walk  not 
after  the  flesh.  The  affirmative  in  these,  but  after  the  Spirit.  (1)  To  look  upon  it 
in  the  negative.  Those  that  are  true  believers,  and  that  are  mystically  united  to 
Christ  Jesus,  they  do  not  walk  after  the  flesh.  This  is  one  character  which  is  upon 
them.  Thus,  "  They  which  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affections 
and  lusts  "  (Gal.  v.  24).  For  the  better  understanding  of  this  point,  it  is  worth 
oar  while  to  inquire  what  it  is  to  walk  after  the  flesh,  and  who  they  are  which  are 
said  thus  to  walk.  By  the  flesh,  then,  we  are  here  to  understand  not  only  that  part 
of  man  which  is  commonly  so  called,  to  wit,  the  bodily  lump ;  but  by  flesh  here  is 
meant  corrupt  nature,  that  is,  that  part  of  the  man  which  is  nnsanctified  and  un> 
regenerate  in  him.  Not  only  the  depravation  of  the  inferior  faculties  of  the  soal, 
which  we  commonly  call  sensuality,  but  also  a  corruption  of  the  superior,  namely, 
the  mind  and  understanding  and  will.  Now,  to  walk  after  this  flesh  it  is  to  be 
wholly  led  and  carried  and  guided  by  the  motions  of  it.  Then  men  walk  after  the 
flesh  when  their  whole  course  is  carnal,  when  they  are  carnal  in  their  judgments, 
following  the  dictates  and  suggestions  of  carnal  reason ;  and  carnal  in  their  affec- 
tions, setting  their  hearts  and  desires  upon  carnal  things ;  and  carnal  in  their  lives, 
conversing  and  bestirring  themselves  in  carnal  ways.  To  walk  after  the  flesh  is  not 
only  to  have  the  flesh  in  us;  but  to  have  the  flesh  prevailing  in  us,  and  to 
give  ourselves  up  to  the  power  and  dominion  of  it.  There  is  a  walking  in  the 
flesh,  and  there  is  a  walking  after  the  flesh,  as  the  Apostle  Paul  does  plainly  dis- 
tinguish them  concerning  himself  (2  Cor.  z.  2,  3).  (2)  The  second  is  the  affirma- 
tive, but  walk  after  the  Spirit.  Those  who  are  the  children  of  God  and  true  believers, 
they  are  careful  to  do  this.  And  so  they  are  represented  in  Scripture.  Hence  they 
are  said  to  walk  in  the  Spirit,  to  walk  in  newness  of  life,  to  serve  in  newness  of 
Spirit,  to  walk  with  Gcd,  to  have  their  conversation  in  heaven,  and  such  phrases 
as  these  are.  What  is  to  be  understood  by  walking  after  the  Spirit  we  may  gather 
from  what  was  said  of  the  contrary,  namely,  of  walking  after  the  flesh  ;  and  that 
is,  to  be  guided  and  led  and  directed  by  the  blessed  and  gracious  Spirit  of  God  in 
all  our  ways.  Walking,  it  is  a  continued  motion ;  it  is  a  motion  of  perseverance ; 
and  so  does  denote  constancy  in  him  that  uses  it.  And  thus  it  is  with  those  that 
are  in  Christ.  They  walk  thus  :  the  ground  and  foundation  of  this  truth  is  the 
conformity  of  the  members  to  the  Head,  and  the  obedience  to  the  workmanship  to 
Him  who  is  the  workman  and  fashioner  of  it.  The  union  of  a  believer  with  Christ, 
and  the  relation  wherein  he  stands  unto  Him,  is  not  empty  and  fruitless,  but  is 
powerful  and  efficacious  to  a  godly  and  holy  hfe.  Where  there  is  an  union  with 
Christ's  person  there  is  a  communion  in  His  graces  and  an  habitation  of  His  Spirit 
in  us.  Therefore,  accordingly,  we  may  judge  of  the  one  by  the  other.  We  may 
know  what  we  are  by  considering  how  we  walk,  and  what  is  the  frame  and  course 
of  our  lives  (1  John  i.  6,  7).  3.  We  may  look  upon  it  in  its  connection  and 
conjunction  of  the  parts  of  it  with  one  another.  (1)  Here  is  the  addition  of  the 
one  to  the  other,  in  that  walking  after  the  Spirit  must  be  joined  with  not  walking 
after  the  flesh.  It  is  not  enough  for  any  to  abstain  from  acts  of  wickedness,  but  they 
must  also,  and  moreover,  perform  acts  of  gooduess.  (2)  Here  is  the  exclusion  of  the 
one  by  the  other.  Walking  in  the  flesh,  it  does  take  away  walking  after  the  Spirit 
(Gal.  V.  16 ;  Phil.  iii.  19, 20).  There  is  no  man  that  can  serve  two  masters,  especially 
such  kind  of  masters  as  these  are.  U.  The  second  is  the  pbivileoe  ob  benefit 
BBLONGiNa  to  these  pebsons  ;  and  that  is  freedom  and  exemption  from  wrath  and 
condemnation.  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them.  Now  for  the  better  prosecution 
of  it  at  this  present  time,  we  may  look  upon  it  as  it  hes  here  in  the  text  three  manners 
of  ways,  especially — ^First,  in  its  specification.  Secondly,  in  its  amplifications. 
Thirdly,  in  its  restriction  or  limitation.  1.  In  consideration  of  what  Christ  hath 
done  for  them.  Those  who  are  true  believers,  and  who  are  incorporated  into  Christ 
Jesus,  Christ  hath  done  that  for  them  which  does  absolutely  and  necessarily  exempt 
them  aud  free  them  from  condemnation.    As  to  instance  in  some  particiUara — (1) 


OBAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  035 

He  hath  by  Hia  blood-shedding  taken  away  the  guilt  of  sin  from  them.  What  ia 
the  guilt  of  sin?  It  is  the  desert  of  sin,  vrhich,  by  order  of  Qod's  justice,  does  bind 
the  sinner  over  to  punishment.  This  now  by  Jesus  Christ  is  taken  -  away  from  all 
believers  (John  i.  29  ;  Psa.  zxzii.  12).  This  is  that  which  Christ  by  His  death  hath 
obtained  for  us,  that  sin  should  not  be  imputed  to  us  (Isa.  xzzviii.  17).  (2)  As  He 
hath  taken  away  the  guilt  of  sin  from  us,  and  freed  us  from  condemnation  in  that 
respect,  so  He  hath  likewise  imputed  His  righteousness  to  us,  and  freed  us  from 
condemnation.  (3)  Christ  hath  fully  answered  the  law,  which  is  the  strength  of 
sin,  fully  paying  the  debt  which  was  owing  upon  our  account,  both  by  enduring  the 
penalty  and  doing  that  which  the  law  requireth  of  us  to  be  done  by  us  (chap.  x.  i). 
2.  Now,  further,  it  is  clear  also  that  He  hath  done  so  from  consideration  of  what 
He  is  to  us.  God  justifies  Christ,  and  in  Him  justifies  us ;  sanctifies  Christ,  and 
through  Him  sanctifies  us  ;  glorifies  Christ,  and  in  Him  glorifies  us.  He  saves  us 
not  only  personally,  as  we  are  such  and  such  particular  men — Peter,  or  James,  or 
John — considered  in  individuo ;  but  also  relatively,  with  respect  had  to  EUs  Son,  as 
we  are  parts  and  members  of  the  mystical  body  of  Christ,  and  are  knit  and  united 
to  Him  as  members  to  the  Head.  There  is  no  condemnation  to  those  who  are  the 
children  of  God,  because  they  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  From  the  circumstance  of  their 
life  and  conversation,  because  they  "  walk  not  after  the  flesh  but  after  the  Spirit." 
An  holy  conversation  in  life  shall  have  a  happy  condition  after  life  ;  and  there  is  no 
condemnation  at  all  which  does  follow  upon  it.  (1)  Here  is  the  extent  of  the  benefit 
or  privilege  itself  in  the  expression  of  universality  :  there  is  no  condemnation 
whatsoever.  This  is  true  according  to  all  the  references  of  it.  First,  as  to  the 
ground  or  matter  of  condemnation.  There  is  nothing  which  does  afford  occasion 
hereunto.  (2)  In  reference  to  the  parties  condemning.  No  condemnation  to 
neither.  Where  there  is  nobody  to  condemn  there  can  be  no  condemnation.  (3) 
^In  reference  to  the  kinds  of  condemnation  itself:  neither  present  nor  future,  neither 
temporal  nor  eternal.  The  persons  to  whom  the  privilege  does  belong  in  the 
indefiniteness  of  the  expression,  "  Those  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  that  walk," 
&e.,  whosoever  they  be.  This  privilege  of  exemption  from  hell  is  not  restrained 
only  to  some  few  particular  Christians,  but  to  all  saints  and  believers  in  general 
without  exception.  The  reason  of  it  is  this,  because  all  are  members  of  Christ, 
one  as  well  as  another.  This  is  matter  of  comfort  and  encouragement  to  the 
poorest  and  meanest  Christian  that  hath  the  truth  of  grace  in  him.  The  weakest 
believer  hath  an  interest  in  eternal  salvation  as  well  as  the  greatest,  even  as  the 
Apostle  Paul  himself.  This  is  no  ground  for  any  to  set  themselves  any  stint  or 
measure  in  holiness,  or  the  improvement  of  grace  in  them ;  no,  but  rather  to  push 
on  to  perfection,  as  the  apostle  himself  did,  for  his  particular  (Phil.  iii.  13,  14). 
Though  every  Christian  shall  be  alike  saved  from  condemnation,  yet  those  which 
are  eminent  Christians,  and  do  abound  in  grace  above  others,  they  have  an  advan- 
tage in  two  particulars.  First,  in  the  degrees  of  comfort  here  in  this  world.  And, 
secondly,  in  the  degrees  of  glory  in  the  world  to  come.  The  restriction  or  limita- 
tion. '*  To  those  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  who  walk  after  the  Spirit,"  &c.,  and 
none  besides.  The  ground  of  this  truth  is  this,  because  all  the  benefit  we  have 
from  Christ  flows  from  our  union  and  communion  with  Him.  Now  the  use  and 
application  of  all  which  hath  been  said  to  ourselves  may  be  reduced  to  two  heads 
especially.  1.  For  matter  of  comfort  and  consolation.  First  of  all,  here  is  ground 
of  very  great  encouragement  and  rejoicing  to  all  true  believers  which  are  regenerate 
and  born  again,  and  incorporated  and  united  to  Christ,  they  are  freed  from  condemna- 
tion ;  and,  upon  that  account,  from  the  greatest  evil  that  their  natures  are  capable 
of.  (1)  If  we  speak  of  the  evil  of  sin.  God's  children  they  are  not  wholly  exempt 
from  this  while  they  live  here  in  this  world.  They  have  sin  still  abiding  in  them. 
Yea,  but  it  is  not  in  them  so  as  to  expose  them  to  condemnation  for  all  that. 
What  a  great  advantage  and  happiness  is  this,  if  it  be  but  duly  and  seriously 
considered.  (2)  As  to  the  evil  of  the  affliction.  It  is  a  very  great  comfort  and 
encouragement  in  this  likewise.  The  saints  and  servants  of  God,  while  they  live  here 
in  this  world,  they  are  subject  to  various  afflictions:  "Many  are  the  afflictions  of 
the  righteous  "  (Psa.  xxxiv.  19).  Yea,  but  as  long  as  they  are  freed  from  condemna- 
tion, this  may  very  much  satisfy  and  content  them.  That  though  they  are  afflicted 
yet  they  are  not,  nor  shall  not,  be  condemned.  Freedom  from  condemnation  may 
swallow  all  other  evils  and  inconveniences.  That  because  they  are  afflicted  there- 
fore they  are  not  condemned.  Their  present  affliction  secures  them  from  future 
condemnation.  This  is  that  which  the  Apostle  Paul  does  expressly  declare  unto  us 
there  in  that  place  (1  Cor.  xi.  31 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17).    The  second  improvement  of  this 


6^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHir.  yrta. 

point  iB  in  a  way  of  oonnsel  and  admonition,  and  that  to  a  twofold  purpose  and 
effect.  First,  to  be  careful  to  make  good  oar  interest  in  Christ.  And,  secondly, 
to  be  careful  to  order  aright  our  lives  and  conversations.  (Thomas  Horton.) 
Absolute  safety  in  Christ : — I.  Thk  incompakablk  ppsiTiosr  Chbistian  believebs 
ooouPT.  "  In  Christ  Jesus."  This  expression — 1.  Is  in  keeping  with  what  our  Lord 
said  in  parable  of  vine  and  branches,  and  may  be  illustrated  by  reference  to  Noah's 
safety  in  ark;  manslayer's  security  in  city  of  refuge.  2.  Means — in  His  hands, 
thoughts,  company,  confidence,  heart ;  to  possess  Him,  and  to  be  possessed  by  Him ; 
to  live  in  the  circle  of  His  love,  and  embrace  of  His  power.  3.  No  wonder  the 
highest  ambition  of  the  apostle  was  "  to  be  found  in  Him."  To  be  in  Christ  now 
is  the  preparation  for  being  with  Him  for  ever.  U.  The  inestiuablb  blessinos 
Chbistian  believebs  enjoy.  "  No  condemnation,"  1.  This  does  not  mean — (1) 
There  is  no  accusation;  for  Satan  and  our  own  hearts  will  accuse  and  seek  to 
condemn.  (2)  No  ill  deserts ;  for  the  life  will  not  be  perfect,  there  will  be  a  constant 
falling  short  of  the  glory  of  God.  2.  We  are  free  from  condemnation,  because  our 
Surety  has  died  and  satisfied  the  claims  of  Divine  justice  for  us.  Then — (1)  We 
can  look  back  with  joy.  All  wrong  has  been  forgiven.  (2)  We  can  look  around. 
No  officer  of  justice  ready  to  arrest  us,  no  sword  of  judgment  ready  to  fall  upon  as. 
(3)  We  can  look  forward  and  upward.  The  grave,  the  judgment-seat,  have  no 
terrors,  for  God  will  glorify  those  whom  He  justifies.  3.  "  No  condemnation  "  is  but 
the  negative  side  of  salvation.  There  is  a  positive  side;  for  we  are  not  only  freed 
from  death,  but  lifted  into  life.    lU.  The  iNFALLiBiiS  evidence  by  which  wb  uay 

KNOW   WHETHEB   OB  NOT   SUCH   POSITION   AND    BLESSEDNESS    ABE    0UB3.       "  Who   Walk 

not,"  Ao.  The  words  have  been  omitted  in  B.V.,  but  we  may  take  and  use  them 
here  as  embodying  truths  frequently  expressed  elsewhere.  (F.  W.  Brown.)  The  great 
assimilation  ;  or,  man  christianised : — Man  in  Christ  is — I.  Fbeed  fbom  bin.  The 
great  inquiry  of  the  world  has  been,  How  can  man  be  thus  freed  ?  All  temples, 
synagogues,  mosques,  and  churches,  have  recognised  the  momentousness  of  the 
question.  The  struggles  of  expiring  victims — the  deep  groans  of  humanity — have 
borne  it  aloft  to  the  throne  of  the  Eternal.  The  Eternal  Himself  has  deigned  to 
solve  the  difficulty,  and  to  answer  the  inquiry.  1.  Though  man  is  not  freed  from 
sin  as  a  matter  of  recollection,  or  from  its  natural  sequences,  or  indiscriminately 
and  unconditionally.  Still  in  the  highest  sense  he  is  consciously  and  progressively 
freed  from  the  evil  forces  that  enchain  his  being,  to  rise  to  altitudes  far  transcending 
those  from  which  he  fell.  2.  This  freedom  is  effected  by  the  redeeming  agency  of 
Christ.  Christ,  in  the  entirety  of  His  history,  is  condemnatory  and  destructive  of 
all  sin.  Let  a  man  be  in  communion  with  Christ,  and  with  the  certainty  and 
uniformity  of  law  his  sin  shall  be  destroyed.  No  being  but  Christ  can  hush  the 
moral  thunders  which  rumble  in  the  conscience ;  no  sacrifice  but  Hia  can  teach  the 
tremendous  evil  of  sin  —no  power  but  His  can  burst  the  bonds  of  evil  habits — no 
spirit  but  His  can  engage  the  heart's  affections,  and  restore  them  to  the  right  object. 
II.  Advanced  in  uobal  excellency.  1.  He  realises  the  true  idea  of  Divine  holiness. 
"  That  the  righteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us."  The  law  is  a  tran- 
script of  the  moral  and  transcendent  excellency  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  man's 
heart  becomes  its  abode.  His  holiness  is  not  among  the  indigenous  conceptions  of 
the  human  mind,  such  as  Roman  bravery,  Grecian  beauty,  Stoic  passivity,  and 
Pharisaical  sanctity  1  Christ  is  our  "  sanctification."  2.  He  minds  the  Spirit. 
The  Divine  Spirit  speaks,  and  he  attends  to  what  is  said.  3.  He  has  a  peaceful  life. 
4.  He  has  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  IH.  Destined  to  futcbe  oloeification  (vers.  10, 11). 
Though  he  is  freed  from  sin,  and  advanced  in  spiritual  excellency,  still  he  must  die ; 
but  born  to  die,  he  dies  to  live.  In  the  case  of  Christ  Himself,  death  was  the 
condition  of  a  higher  life.  The  mind  must  die  to  one  life  to  live  another :  it  must 
renounce  one  set  of  ideas  and  dispositions  to  embrace  higher  ones.  All  around  as 
seem  to  be  the  germs  of  the  future.  Man  in  the  future  is  the  continuation  of  man 
in  the  present.  The  principle  of  life  casts  off  its  exuvite,  and  constructs  other  and 
higher  organisms.  IV.  Will  enjoy  the  qloby  which  belongs  to  Cheist  Hiuselt 
(ver.  17 ;  cf.  1  John  iii.  2 ;  Phil.  iii.  20,  21).  {J.  Davies.)  At  peace  with  God : — 
I.  Thb  Chbibtlan'b  state.  "In  Christ."  A  union — 1.  Vital.  2.  Visible.  EL 
His  chabacteb.  He  walks — 1.  Not  after  the  flesh — crucifixion :  regulation.  2.  After 
the  Spirit — guidance  :  co-operation.    HI.  His  pbivileqe.    ♦•  No  condemnation  "  for 

1.  Past  offences.    2.  The  corruption  of  his  nature.    3.  His  defective  service.    4. 

His  involuntary  errors.     {W.  W.  Wythe.)        No  condemnation : — L  The  apostlb 

POTH   NOT   SAY  THEBE   IS   NOW   NO   AFFLICTION   OB  COEBEOTION.      It  is   OHC   thing   tO   b« 

ftfiUcted,  another  thing  to  be  condemned  (1  Cor.  xi.  32).  Grace  seoares  from  eternal. 


Tin.]  ROMANS.  637 

not  from  temporal,  evils.     God  oanDot  condemn  and  yet  love,  bat  He  can  chasten 
and  yet  love ;  nay,  He  chastens  because  He  loves.     IL  The  u>08tls  dotb  not  sat 
VBBBB  IS  no  hatter  OF  coNDEUNATioN.     There  is  a  vast  diSerenoe  between  what  is 
deserved  and  what  is  actually  inflicted.   There  is  in  all  a  corrupt  nature,  which  puta 
forth  itself  in  evil  motions.    lU.  It  is  God's  oondem:nation  only  vbou  which  wb 
ABB  xzEUpiBD.     1.  Men  condemn.    What  more  common  than  for  the  godly  to 
have  their  persons  and  practices,   strict  walking,   condemned.      Oh,   they  are 
hypocrites,  factious,  unnecessarily  scrupulous,  proud,  and  what  not  1     Sometimes 
the  condemnation  is  only  verbal,  going  no  further  than  bitter  words,  wherein  their 
names  are  aspersed  and  their  cause  blackened.     Sometimes  it  rises  even  to  tha 
taking  away  of  their  lives  (James  v.  6).    But  yet  God  condemns  not  (Psa.  xxxvii. 
32,  33).    2.  Sometimes  conscience  condemns  (1  John  iii.  21).     The  inferior  judge 
condemns  in  the  court  below,  but  the  supreme  Judge  acquits  and  justifies  in  the 
court  above.    3.  Satan  too  condemns.    He  that  is  but  God's  executioner  will  take 
apon  him  to  be  a  judge.   And  as  his  pride  puts  him  upon  judging,  so  his  malice  puts 
mm  apon  condemning.     IV.  The  particle  "  now  "  is  to  be  taken  notice  of.    I 
sappose  the  apostle  doth  not  intend  by  it  to  point  to  any  circumstance  of  time,  as, 
namely,  the  present  time  of  life,  or  the  present  time  of  the  gospel.     I  make  this  to 
be  only  a  causal  particle ;  since  things  are  so,  as  the  apostle  had  made  out  in  his 
preceding  discourse,  there  is  now — or  upon  all  this — no  condemnation.   The  apostle 
crowds  the  force  of  all  that  he  had  said  by  way  of  argument  into  this  little  word, 
and  lays  the  whole  stress  of  his  conclusion  upon  it.     V.  The  obiqinal  will  bear  it 
tr  we  bead  it — "  NOT  ONE  condemnation."    Such  is  the  grace  of  God  to  believers, 
and  such  is  their  safety  in  their  justified  estate,  that  there  is  not  so  much  as  one 
eondemnation  to  be  passed  upon  them,  the  pardon  being  plenary  and  full  (Jer.  1.  20). 
VI.  The  apostle  speaks  indefinitely  with  respect  to  the  subject.     He  takes 
all  in  Christ  into  the  privilege.    Had  he  spoken  in  the  singular  number,  many  poor, 
weak  Christians  would  have  been  afraid  to  have  applied  this  blessedness  to  them- 
selves.    The  difference  in  Paul's  expressing  himseU  is  very  observable.     Take  him 
in  the  former  chapter  where  he  is  bewailing  sin,  there  he  goes  no  further  than 
himself.    But  now,  where  he  is  treating  of  privileges,  he  speaks  altogether  in  the 
plural,  as  taking  in  the  whole  body  of  believers.    VII.  The  positivb  is  iNCLnDED  in 
the  neoativs.    They  shall  not  only,  apon  their  being  in  Christ,  be  looked  upon  as 
not  guilty,  or  barely  kept  out  of  hell,  but  they  shall  be  judged  completely  righteous, 
and  they  shall  also  be  eternally  glorified.     (T.  Jacomb,  D.D.)        No  condemna- 
tion:— We  have  here — I.  A  new  xba.     There  has  been  a  transition — 1.  In  the 
history  of  the  Divine  dispensation.     "  Now  "  we  are  no  longer  under  the  law  of 
rite  and  precept,  but  under  a  covenant  of  gospel,  wherein  promise  takes  the  place 
of  threat,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given  to  enlighten  and  sanctify.    2.  In  the 
experience  of  Christian  UFe.  The  actual  experience  of  believers  comes  to  correspond 
with  God's  dispensation.    In  the  previous  chapter  the  conflict  of  sin  is  described. 
••  Now "  we  have  the  victory.    IL   A  new  condition — "  In  Christ  Jesus."    1. 
Spiritual  incorporation.    2.  Vital  anion.    3.  Efficient  transfer.     The  Holy  Spirit, 
on  the  part   of  God,  and  faith,  on  the  part  of  man,  are  the  instruments.     4. 
Practical  reality.     It  is  no  superficial  theory  which  fails  before  the  progress  of 
philosophy  and  reason.    It  is  a  certainty.    C^d's  plan  and  aU  things  in  heaven 
and  earth — conscience,  death,  judgment,  Ao. — will  arrange  themselves  finally  in 
accordance  with  it.     III.  A  new  freedom — '•  No  condemnation."    1.  The  state 
goes  before,  involves,  and  it  is  itself  greater  than  the  privilege.    Ton  may  bestow  a 
gift  on  a  strange  child,  but  on  your  own  you  lavish  affection  and  indulgence.    The 
Christian  is  adopted  into  the  family  of  God  and  possesses  a  child's  privileges  thereby. 
3.  Condemnation  is  more  than  sin — the  simple  transgression  of  the  law.     It  is 
more  than  guilt — liability  to  punishment.    It  is  doom  pronounced  after  proved 
guilt.    3.  Observe,  the  freedom  does  not  remove  the  fact  nor  the  guilt  of  tin,  but 
arrests  its  effect — the  punishment  is  repealed.     To  those  who  are  not  of  Christ  the 
sentence  is  still  unrepealed.     4.  "  No  condemnation."     (1)  None  from  God      He 
has  cast  all  our  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.     (2)  None  from  the  law.    Because 
the  penalty  has  been  paid.     (3)  None  from  conscience.     There  is  no  condemnation 
like  that  of  an  awakened  conscience  until  the  blood  of  Christ  speaks  peace. 
(4)  None  from  sin.     If  God  has  forgiven  it,  it  cannot  rise  to  condemnation.     (5) 
None  at  judgment.     Conclusion :   The   subject — 1,   Urges  those  who   have  the 
evidence  of  faith  to   take   firm   gospel   ground,    to  realise  all  that  is  intended 
by  this  negative  way  of  putting  the  doctrine  oJE  justification.     Live  up  to  your 
l^vileget.    8.  Addresses  the  Christless  soul.     Tou  may  be  religious,  but  yov 


638  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  nn. 

are  not  falling  into  Qod's  method.  Ton  are  labouring  for  that  which  is  not 
bread,  and  periehing  within  sight  of  plenty.  {Percy  Strutt.)  Real  Chriatiam, 
absolved  from  condemnation : — I.  The  pebsonb  descbibed.  Those  who  are  "  in 
Christ  Jesus."  There  is  no  phrase  more  frequently  employed  in  the  New  Testament 
to  denote  a  real  Christian  than  this.  1.  The  phrase  means  something  more 
than  the  being  a  Christian  by  a  baptismal  admission  to  the  visible  Church.  Bat — 
2.  They  represent  Christ  as  a  "  refuge,"  in  which  believers  take  shelter  from  that 
"  wrath  of  God,"  which  naturally,  by  reason  of  sin,  rests  upon  every  man.  n.  The 
BLESSING  WHICH  THEY  ENjoT — "  No  Condemnation."  1,  Then  we  are  led  to  infer  that 
out  of  Christ  Jesus  there  is  "condemnation  "  ;  and  this  is  a  truth  which  Scripture 
everywhere  proclaims.  Our  own  state,  then,  as  we  stand  by  ourselves,  is  one 
of  certain  ruin.  It  is  in  vain  for  as  to  flatter  ourselves  that  we  can  ward  off 
this  impending  anger  by  throwing  around  our  characters  the  supposed  defence  of 
natural  moral  virtues.  God  regards  os  as  transgressors,  and,  viewing  us  in  that 
light,  He  cannot  but  inflict  upon  us  sin's  tremendous  penalty.  "  He  that  hath 
not  the  Son  hath  not  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."  2.  But  for 
the  Christian  there  is  "  no  condemnation."  Being  "  in  Christ,"  God  no  longer 
regards  him  as  standing  alone,  and  not  as  he  was  in  Adam.  As  one  with  Adam,  he 
had  Adam's  guilt  imputed  to  him.  But  now,  being  one  with  Christ,  Christ's 
righteousness  is  imputed  to  him.  Now  God  loves  him,  and  blesses  him,  for  the 
B^e  of  Him  who  has  become  his  Saviour.  III.  The  evidenob  affobdkd  of 
iHBiB  BEiNQ  IN  POSSESSION  OF  THE  BLESsiNo — "  Walk  Hot  after  the  flesh,  but 
after  the  Spirit."  You  have  heard  men  speak  of  resting  on  Jesus;  they  have 
talked  of  His  merit,  of  His  dying  for  their  sins,  and  they  have  professed  to  believe 
on  His  name.  But  the  profession  of  faith  has  been  everything,  and  the  practice  of 
faith  has  been  nothing.  Now  the  text  only  expresses  what  is  expressed  in  Scripture 
over  and  over  again ;  that  every  child  of  God  will  be  a  lover  of  practical  piety. 
Faith  in  Christ  will  always  bring  forth  the  fruit  of  holiness.  {W.  Curling,  M.A.) 
Present  discharge  from  condemnation  must  produce  a  present  joy  : — Open  the  iron- 
bound  door  of  the  condemned  cell,  and  by  the  dim  light  that  struggles  through  its 
bars  read  the  sovereign's  free  pardon  to  the  felon,  stretched,  pale  and  emaciated, 
upon  his  pallet  of  straw ;  and  the  radiance  you  have  kindled  in  that  gloomy 
dungeon,  and  the  transport  you  have  created  in  that  felon's  heart,  will  be  a  present 
realisation.  You  have  given  him  back  a  present  life,  you  have  touched  a  thousand 
chords  in  his  bosom,  which  awake  a  present  harmony ;  and  where,  just  previous, 
reigned  in  that  bosom  sullen,  grim  despair,  now  reigns  the  sunlight  joyoosnessof  a 
present  hope.  Be  yours,  then,  a  present  and  a  full  joy.  (0.  Winslow,  D.D.)  No 
condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus : — I.  When  a  sinneb  closes  with  Chbist, 
God  takes  him  on  the  instant  into  beconcilution.  He  should  therefore  feel  his 
conscience  to  be  relieved  from  the  guilt  and  dread  of  his  sins ;  and,  instead  of  being 
any  longer  burdened  with  them  as  so  many  debts  subject  to  a  count  on  some  future 
day,  he  has  a  most  legitimate  warrant  for  looking  on  the  account  as  closed.  Christ 
hath  made  atonement,  and  with  it  God  is  satisfied ;  and  if  so,  well  may  yoa  be 
satisfied.  II.  Who  they  abe  that  have  this  inbstiuablb  pbivileob.  1.  They 
are  in  Christ.  But  lest  we  should  wander  into  a  region  of  obscurity,  let  as  not 
forget  that,  for  the  purpose  of  being  admitted  into  this  state  of  community  with 
the  Saviour,  the  one  distinct  thing  which  yoa  have  to  do  is  to  believe  in  Him. 
There  is  nothing  mystical  in  the  act  by  which  you  award  to  Him  the  credit  for  His 
declarations ;  and  this  is  the  act  by  which  you  are  grafted  in  the  Saviour.  As  yoa 
hold  fast  the  beginning  of  your  confidence  and  persevere  therein,  the  tie  will  be 
strengthened  ;  the  relationship  will  become  more  intimate  ;  the  communications  of 
mutual  regard  will  become  more  frequent,  and  more  familiar  to  your  experience. 
2.  They  walk  not  after  the  flesh  but  after  the  Spirit.  (1)  Your  release  from 
condemnation  is  suspended  on  your  being  in  Christ  Jesus.  But  it  is  not  so  sus- 
pended on  your  walking  not  after  the  flesh,  &c.  The  first  is  the  origin  of  your 
justification;  the  second  is  the  fruit  of  it.  Mark  the  embarrassment  of  that 
disciple  who  postpones  his  enjoyment  of  tbie  privilege  until  he  is  satisfied  with 
himself  that  be  walketh  not  after  the  fiesh  but  after  the  Spirit.  Look  to  the  heavy 
disadvantage  under  which  he  toils  at  the  work  of  new  obedience ;  and  how  the 
spirit  of  bondage  is  sure  to  be  perpetuated  within  him.  There  may  be  the  outward 
compliance  of  a  slave,  but  none  of  the  inward  graces  or  aspirations  of  a  saint.  The 
truth  is,  that  if  this  immunity  from  condemnation  is  a  thing  purchased  by  as 
because  of  oar  walking  not  after  the  fiesh,  then  will  conscience  ever  be  sug- 
gesting to  as  that  the  purchase  has  not  been  made  good  ;  and  all  the  jealousies  of 


OHAP.  vm.]  ROMANS.  639 

A  bargain  will  ever  and  anon  rise  ap  between  the  parties.  God  will  be  feared« 
or  distrusted;  bat  He  cannot  be  loved  under  sach  an  economy.  (2)  There  is  a 
better  way  of  ordering  this  matter.  Deliverance  from  condemnation  is  not  the  goal, 
but  the  starting-post  of  the  Cluristian's  race ;  and,  instead  of  labouring  to  make 
good  the  inaccessible  station  where  forgiveness  shall  be  awarded  to  him,  he  is  sent 
forth  with  the  inspiration  of  one  who  knows  himself  to  be  forgiven  on  the  way  of 
all  the  commandments.  Delivered  from  the  engrossment  of  his  before  slavish 
apprehensions,  he  can  now  with  new-bom  liberty  walk  after  the  Spirit  on  the  path 
of  a  progressive  holiness.  First  trust  in  the  Lord,  and  then  be  doing  good.  A 
workman  to  whom  a  tool  is  indispensable,  you  would  never  bid  him  work  for  the 
tool,  but  you  would  put  the  tool  into  his  hand  and  bid  him  work  by  it.  (3)  But 
mark  this  distinction  between  the  consequence  and  the  cause,  though  it  gives  to 
the  obedience  of  a  believer  its  proper  place,  does  not  make  that  obedience  less  sore. 
What  the  worldly  or  hypocritical  professor  thinks  to  be  faith  is  nought  but  fancy  or 
worse  if  it  be  not  followed  by  the  walk  of  godliness.  It  is  just  as  true  as  if  your 
virtue  were  the  price  of  your  salvatiou,  that  there  will  be  no  salvation  for  you  if 
yoo  have  no  virtue.  The  ultimate  design  of  the  gospel  economy  is  to  make  those 
who  sit  under  it  zealous  of  good  works,  (r.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  No  condemnation 
to  them  that  are  in  Ghritt  Jenu : — I.  Thb  conde&inatiom  here  mentioned.  As  to 
its  direct  and  proper  notation,  it  signifies  judgment  against  one.  The  non-con- 
demnation of  persons  in  Christ  may  be  proved  by,  or  is  grounded  upon — 1. 
Their  justification.  He  that  is  a  justified  man  cannot  be  a  condemned  man,  for 
these  two  are  contrary  and  incompatible.  2.  Their  sanctification.  Wherever  the 
union  is  with  the  Son  there  is  sanctification  by  the  Spirit.  Now  such  as  are 
sanctified  shall  never  be  condemned  (Be v.  xx.  6),  for  upon  this  the  power  and 
dominion  of  sin  is  taken  away,  the  bent  of  the  heart  is  for  God,  and  there  is  the 
participation  of  the  Divine  nature.  8.  Their  union  with  Christ.  Those  that  are 
■o  near  to  Christ  here,  shall  they  be  set  at  an  eternal  distance  from  Him  hereafter  ? 
will  the  Head  be  so  severed  from  His  members  ?  Besides,  upon  this  union  there  is 
interest  in  aU  that  Christ  hath  done  and  suffered ;  he  that  is  in  Christ  hath  a  right 
to  all  of  Christ.  II.  The  application.  1.  This  proclaims  the  misery  of  all  who 
are  not  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  cloud  is  not  so  bright  towards  Israel  but  it  is  as  dark 
towards  the  Egyptians.  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in  Christ ; 
what  more  sweet  ?  but  there  is  nothing  but  condemnation  to  them  who  are  out  of 
Christ;  what  more  dreadful?  (1)  It  is  God  Himself  who  will  be  your  judge,  and 
who  will  pass  the  condemnatory  sentence  upon  yon.  (2)  Think  with  yourselves 
what  this  condemnation  is.  (3)  The  condemnatory  sentence  being  once  passed 
it  will  be  irreversible  and  irresistible.  (4)  The  unbeliever  will  be  condemned  by 
himself.  (6)  This  condemnation  will  be  the  sadder  to  such  who  Uve  under  the 
gospel,  because  they  will  lie  under  the  conviction  of  this,  that  they  have  foolishly 
brought  all  this  misery  upon  themselves.  2.  I  would  exhort  you  to  make  sore  of 
this  exemption  from  condemnation.  What  can  be  so  worthy  of  our  utmost 
endeavours  1  what  pitiful  trifies  and  very  nothings  are  all  other  things  in  com- 
parison of  these  1  What  are  we  to  do  that  it  may  be  to  as  no  condemnation  ?  (1) 
Let  sin  be  condemned  in  you  and  by  yon.  For  sin  must  either  be  condemned  by 
you,  or  you  for  it.  (2)  Condemn  yourselves  and  God  will  not  condemn  you.  (3) 
Speedily  get  your  peace  made  with  God  through  Christ  Jesus.  (4)  Pray  that  it 
may  be  to  yon  exemption  from  condemnation.  Of  all  evils  deprecate  this  as  the 
greatest  eviL  (5)  Make  sure  of  faith,  which  secures  us  from  condemnation,  both 
as  it  is  the  grace  which  anites  to  Christ,  and  also  as  it  is  the  great  con- 
dition of  the  gospel  upon  which  it  promises  Ufe  and  salvation.  Unbelief  is 
the  damning  sin,  and  faith  is  the  saving  grace.  (6)  Get  into  Christ,  so  as 
to  be  in  Christ  Jesus.  For  they,  and  they  only,  are  out  of  the  danger  of  con- 
demnation.  3.  I  would  speak  to  those  who  are  in  Christ,  to  excite  them  to  be  very 
thankful  and  highly  to  admire  the  grace  of  God.  How  doth  the  traitor  admire  the 
grace  and  clemency  of  his  prince  who  sends  him  a  pardon  when  he  expected  his 
trial  and  sentence  to  die  ?  And  as  you  must  be  thankful  to  God  the  Father,  so, 
in  special,  to  Jesus  Christ ;  it  is  He  who  was  willing  to  be  condemned  Himself  that 
He  might  free  you  from  condemnation.  4.  The  main  tendency  and  drift  of  this 
truth  is  comfort  to  believers.  This  no  condemnation  is  the  ground  of  all  consolation. 
(1)  Get  assurance  in  your  own  souls  that  there  is  to  you  no  condemnation.  It 
18  a  sad  thing  to  live  under  peradventures  about  this.  (2)  Let  this  happiness  be  a 
great  incentive  to  holiness.  It  is  good  to  infer  duty  from  mercy.  (T.  Jacomb,  D.D.) 
In  Christ  no  condemnation : — 1.  Paul  having  said,  "  So  then  with  the  mind  I  my- 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHA».  rxa. 

self  serve  the  law  of  God ;  but  with  the  flesh  the  law  of  sin,"  goes  on  to  say,  withoat 
any  break,  "  There  is  therefore  now,"  &c.  Believers  are  in  a  state  of  conflict,  but 
not  in  a  state  of  condemnation.  The  man  to  whom  every  sin  is  a  misery  is  the 
man  who  may  with  confidence  declare,  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation." 
2,  The  text  is  written  in  the  present  tense.  This  "  now  "  shows  how  distinctly  the 
statement  of  non-condemnation  is  consistent  with  that  mingled  experience  of  the 
seventh  chapter.  With  all  my  watching  and  warring,  yet  will  I  rejoice  in  the  Lord 
even  now  ;  for  •*  there  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation."  3.  Observe  onr  apostle's 
change  of  expression.  When  he  is  speaking  about  the  inward  contention  he  speaks 
of  himself,  but  when  he  comes  to  write  upon  the  privileges  of  the  children  of  God, 
he  speaks  of  them  in  general  terms.  His  is  the  confession,  and  theirs  is  the  confi- 
dence. Note — I.  A  BEFUTATiON  OF  THB  OLD  SERPENT'S  GOSPEL.  Say  "  There  is  no 
condemnation,"  and  this  false  gospel  is  before  you.  The  serpent  promulgated  this 
in  Eden,  when  he  said,  "  Ye  shall  not  surely  die."  Some  teach  that  you  may  live 
in  sin,  and  die  impenitent,  but  at  death  there  is  an  end  of  you.  Others  tell  us  that 
if  you  die  unforgiven  it  will  be  a  pity,  but  you  will  come  round  in  due  time,  after  a 
purgatorial  period.  Here  is  Paul's  refutation.  They  would  be  condemned,  every 
one  of  them,  if  it  had  not  been  that  they  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  word  "  now  "  is 
as  applicable  to  these  condemned  ones  as  to  those  who  are  freed  from  condemna- 
tion. "  He  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already."  There  is  nothing  but 
condemnation  so  long  as  they  remain  in  that  state.  "  He  that  believeth  not  shall 
not  see  life ;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."  II.  A  descbiption  o»  thb 
believeb's  position — •'  in  Christ  Jesus."  1.  By  faith.  By  nature  I  am  in  myself, 
and  in  sin,  and,  therefore,  condemned ;  but  when  I  fiy  to  Christ,  and  trust  alone  in 
His  blood  and  righteousness.  He  becomes  to  me  the  cleft  of  the  rock,  wherein  I  hide 
myself.  "He  that  believeth  shall  not  come  into  condemnation."  2.  As  onr  federal 
head.  This  is  the  teaching  of  chap.  t.  As  you  were  in  Adam  you  sinned,  and  there- 
fore yon  were  condemned ;  and  as  you  were  in  Christ  through  the  Divine  covenant 
of  grace,  and  Christ  fulfilled  the  law  ior  you,  you  are  justified  in  Him.  S.  By  a 
vital  union.  This  is  the  teaching  of  chap.  vi.  (vers.  4, 5).  We  are  actually  one  with 
Christ  by  living  experience.  4.  By  a  mystical  union  (chap.  vii.  1-4).  Shall  the 
spouse  of  Christ  be  condemned  with  the  world  ?  "  Christ  loved  His  Church,  and 
gave  Himself  for  it " ;  shall  she  be  condemned  despite  His  death  ?  III.  A  descbip- 
TiON  OF  THE  BELIEVEB'S  WALE — "  who  Walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit." 
In  B.  Y.  this  sentence  is  omitted,  and  rightly  so.  The  oldest  copies  are  without 
it,  the  versions  do  not  sustain  it,  and  the  fathers  do  not  quote  it.  How,  then,  did 
it  get  into  the  text  ?  Probably  by  general  consent,  in  order  that  the  great  truth  of 
the  non-condemnation  of  those  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus  might  be  guarded  from  that 
antinomian  tendency  which  would  separate  faith  from  good  works.  But  the  fear 
was  groundless,  and  the  tampering  with  Scripture  was  unjustifiable.  Where  did 
the  man  who  made  the  gloss  get  his  words  from  ?  From  ver.  4.  A  man  in  Christ 
has  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  he  walks  according  to  His  guidance.  He  is  also 
quickened  into  the  possession  of  a  new  nature  called  the  spirit — the  spirit  of  life  in 
Christ  Jesus.  He  is  no  longer  in  the  flesh,  he  has  become  a  spiritual  man.  Ob- 
serve carefully  that  the  flesh  is  there,  only  he  does  not  walk  after  it.  Combine 
the  two  clauses.  On  the  one  hand  look  to  Christ  alone,  and  abide  in  Him ;  and 
then  look  for  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  who  is  to  be  in  you.  By  faith  we  are 
in  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  is  in  us.  lY.  The  absolution  of  the  belieteb  : 
"  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation."  This  is — 1.  A  bold  speech.  Free 
grace  makes  men  speak  bravely  when  their  faith  has  a  clear  view  of  Jesas. 
2.  A  proved  fact.  The  demonstrations  of  mathematics  are  not  more  clear  and 
certain  than  the  inference  that  if  we  are  in  Christ,  and  Christ  died  in  our  stead, 
there  can  be  no  condemnation  for  ns.  3.  A  broad  assertion.  No  condemnation — 
(1)  On  account  of  original  sin,  though  the  believer  was  an  heir  of  wrath  even  as 
others.  (2)  For  actual  sin,  though  he  greatly  transgressed  and  came  far  short  of 
the  glory  of  God.  If  you  read  to  the  end  of  the  chapter  you  see  how  unreserved 
Paul  was  in  his  statement  (vers.  33,  34).  Paul  makes  all  heaven  and  earth  and 
hell  to  ring  with  his  daring  challenge.  4.  An  abiding  statement.  It  was  true  in 
Paul's  day,  and  it  is  just  as  true  at  this  moment.  If  you  are  in  Christ  Jesus  there 
is  now  no  condemnation.  6.  A  joyful  realisation.  If  you  have  ever  been  burdened 
with  a  sense  of  sin  you  vrill  know  the  sweetness  of  the  text.  6.  The  most  practical 
thing  that  ever  was,  because  the  moment  a  man  receives  this  assurance  into  hit 
soul  his  heart  is  won  to  his  loving  Lord,  and  the  neck  of  his  sinfulness  is  broken 
with  a  blow.    (C.   H.  Sturgeon.)        The  hUtted  experience  qf  those  who  of  i% 


CKAr.  Tm.]  ROMANS.  6a 

Christ: — I.  Thet  abb  fbeed  from  condemnation.     II.  Thet  abb  host  oleablt 

DISTINaUISHBD  FBOH  THOSE   WHO  RBBIAIN  UNDEB  CONDEMNATION.       1.   By  the  temper  of 

their  minds  (ver.  5).  2.  By  the  condition  of  their  hearts  (ver.  6).  3.  By  their 
relation  to  God  (vers.  7,  8).  4.  By  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  (ver  9). 
in.  Thet  abe  blessed  with  the  hope  of  a  betxeb  lifb.  The  Spirit — 1.  Lives  ia 
them,  though  their  bodies  are  mortal  through  sin.  2.  Is  the  earnest  of  a  mora 
glorious  hfe.  3.  Will  ultimately  quicken  their  mental  bodies  and  fashion  them 
like  unto  Christ  (vers,  10,  11).  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  taints*  union  with  Christ : — 
Note,  by  way  of  introduction — 1.  The  difference  betwixt  saints  being  in  Christ, 
and  Christ  being  in  them.  Christ  is  in  the  believer  by  His  Spirit  (1  John  iv.  13; 
1  Cor.  xii.  13);  the  believer  is  in  Christ  by  faith  (John.  i.  12).  Christ  ia  in  the 
believer  by  inhabitation  (Eph.  iii.  17) ;  the  bt-liever  is  in  Christ  by  implantation 
(John  XV.  2  ;  Bom.  vi.  3).  Christ  in  the  believer  implieth  hfe  and  influence  from 
Christ  (Col.  iii.  4 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5) ;  the  believer  in  Christ  implieth  communion  and 
fellowship  with  Christ  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  When  Christ  is  said  to  be  in  the  believer,  it 
is  in  reference  to  sanctification  ;  when  the  believer  is  said  to  be  in  Christ,  it  is  in 
order  to  justification.  2.  This  union  in  Scripture  is  set  forth  sometimes  by  the 
saints  abiding  in  Christ  and  Christ  abiding  in  them  (John  xv.  4 ;  1  John  iii.  24) ; 
sometimes  by  Christ's  living  in  them  (GaL  ii.  20,  &o.) ;  sometimes  by  that  oneness 
that  is  betwixt  Christ  and  them  (John  xvii.  21,  22).  And  some  make  that 
gathering  together  in  one  all  things  in  Christ  (Eph.  i.  10)  to  point  to  this  union.  3. 
The  Scripture  speaks  of  a  threefold  union.  (1)  The  union  of  three  persons  in  one 
nature,  as  in  the  Trinity.  (2)  The  union  of  two  natures  in  one  person,  as  in  Christ. 
(3)  The  union  of  persons,  where  yet  persons  and  natures  are  distinct.  This  is  the 
mystical  union  which  is  betwixt  Christ  and  believers,  concerning  which  note— I. 
Its  natubb.  Here  is — 1.  Union  but  no  transmutation,  confusion,  or  commixtion. 
Believers  are  united  to  Christ,  but  yet  not  so  as  that  they  are  changed  or  transformed 
into  the  very  essence  or  being  of  Christ  (so  as  to  be  Christed  with  Christ,  as  some 
too  boldly  speak) ;  or  that  He  is  changed  or  transformed  into  the  essence  and  being 
of  believers.  Christ  is  Christ  still,  and  believers  are  but  creatures  still.  2.  Union 
of  persons,  but  not  personal  union.  And  here  Ues  the  difference  between  the 
mystical  union  and  the  hypostatical  union.  There  is  this  nature  and  that  nature 
in  Christ,  but  not  this  person  and  that  person.  In  the  mystical  union  the  person 
of  Christ  is  united  to  the  person  of  the  believer,  for  faith  being  the  uniting  grace, 
and  this  faith  receiving  the  person  of  Christ,  it  must  also  unite  to  the  person  of  Christ. 
In  the  marriage-union  it  is  person  joined  to  person,  and  so  it  is  in  the  mystical 
union.  3.  But  this  union  is  not  personal ;  it  is  but  mystical.  Otherwise  it  would 
be  so  many  behevers,  so  many  Christs  ;  and  then  the  believer  would  have  no  sub- 
sistence but  in  Christ.  II.  Its  several  kinds  or  branches.  1.  The  legal  union. 
The  ground  of  this  is  Christ's  suretyship  (Heb.  vii.  22).  In  law  the  debtor  and  the 
surety  are  but  one  person  ;  and  therefore  both  are  equally  liable  to  the  debt ;  and  if 
the  one  pay  it  it  is  as  much  as  if  the  other  had  paid  it.  So  it  is  with  Christ  and  us. 
2.  The  moral  union.  It  is  called  moral  from  the  bond  or  ground  of  it,  which  is 
love.  There  is  a  real  oneness  between  friend  and  friend.  There  is  a  mutual, 
hearty  love  between  Christ  and  believers,  and  by  virtue  of  this  there  is  a  real  and 
close  union  betwixt  them.  III.  The  Scripture  resemblances  by  which  it  is  set 
roBTH.  1.  That  of  husband  and  wife.  Christ  and  believers  stand  in  this  rela- 
tion. He  is  their  husband,  they  His  spouse  (2  Cor.  xi.  2) ;  married  to  Christ 
(Rom.  vii.  4) ;  betrothed  to  God  and  Christ  (Hos.  ii.  19) ;  their  name  is  Hephzibah 
and  Beulah  (Isa.  Ixii.  4).  This  union,  in  the  very  height  of  it,  the  apostle  brings 
down  to  Christ  and  believers  (Eph.  v.  28,  29).  2.  That  of  the  head  and  members. 
In  the  body  natural  there  is  a  near  and  close  union  between  these  two.  Thus  it  is 
with  Christ  and  believers  in  the  body  mystical ;  He  is  the  Head,  they  are  the 
several  members  (Col.  i.  18 ;  Eph.  i.  22  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  27 ;  Rom.  xii.  5).  3.  That  of 
the  root  and  branches.  There  is  also  union  betwixt  these  ;  otherwise  how  should 
the  one  convey  juice,  sap,  nourishment,  growth,  to  the  other?  So  it  is  with  Christ 
and  believers ;  He  is  the  Root,  they  the  branches  (John  xv.  5).  You  read  of  being 
planted  and  ingrafted  into  Christ  (Rom.  vi.  5,  xi.  17,  &o.) ;  of  being  rooted  in  Christ 
(Col.  ii.  7).  4.  The  foundation  and  the  building.  In  a  building  all  the  stones  and 
timber,  being  joined  and  fastened  together  upon  the  foundation,  make  but  one 
structure.  So  it  is  here.  Believers  are  God's  building,  and  Christ  is  the  founda- 
tion in  that  building  (1  Cor.  iii.  9,  11 ;  Eph.  ii.  20).  As  a  man  builds  upon  the 
foundation  and  lays  the  stress  of  the  whole  building  upon  that ;  so  the  true  Christian 
builds  upon  Christ ;  all  his  faith,  hope,  confidence,  is  built  upon  this  sure  founda- 
VOL.   I.  41 


64S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  t°HA*-  ▼ni, 

tion  (Psa.  xxviii.  26).  Hence  also  they  are  said,  As  lively  stones  to  be  built  up  in 
a  spiritaal  house,  &c.  (1  Pet.  ii.  6).  6.  That  of  meat  or  food.  That  which  a  man 
feeds  upon  and  digests,  it  is  incorporated  with,  and  made  a  part  of  himself.  The 
believing  soul  by  faith  feeds  upon  Christ,  so  that  Christ  becomes  one  with  him  and 
he  one  with  Christ  (John  vi.  65,  56).  IV.  Its  properties.  It  is — 1.  A  sublime 
union,  in  respect  of — (1)  Its  nature.  Next  to  the  union  of  the  Three  Persons  in 
the  sacred  Trinity,  and  the  hypostatical  union  of  the  two  natures  in  Christ,  the 
mystical  union  is  the  highest.  (2)  Its  origin.  The  more  supernatural  a  thing  is 
the  more  sublime  it  is ;  now  this  union  is  purely  supernatural  as  to  the  thing,  and 
also  as  to  the  person  to  whom  it  belongs.  (3)  The  high  and  glorious  privileges  and 
consequents  of  it.  (4)  Its  mysteriousness.  The  union  of  the  body  and  soul  in 
man  is  a  great  mystery ;  but  the  union  of  Christ  and  the  believer  is  a  far  greater. 
2.  A  real  union.  Not  a  notional,  fantastic  thing,  or  something  that  dull  persons 
please  themselves  with  the  thoughts  of  (John  xvii.  22).  3.  A  spiritual  union. 
Not  a  gross,  corporeal  union.  The  husband  and  the  wife  are  one  flesh,  but  he  that 
is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  spirit.  4.  A  near,  intimate  union  (1  Cor.  vi.  17).  5. 
A  total  union  (1  Cor.  vi,  15).  6.  An  immediate  union.  Christ  and  the  believing 
soul  they  touch  each  the  other.  There  is  nothing  that  doth  intervene  or  interpose 
between  Christ  and  it.  7.  An  indissoluble  union.  Christ  and  believers  are  so 
firmly  joined  together  that  none  shall  ever  be  able  to  part  them.     (T.  Jacomb,  D.D.) 

Yer.  2.  For  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  batb  made  me  £ree 
from  the  law  of  sin  and  death. — Law  cancelling  law  : — 1.  Few  words  are  oftener 
on  our  lips  than  the  word  law.  But  we  are  in  danger  of  using  the  word  as  though 
laws  were  impersonal  forces,  independently  of  a  controlling  mind.  2.  But  a  law  is 
not  a  force.  It  is  only  the  invariable  manner  in  which  forces  work.  Better  still,  it 
is  the  unvarying  method  in  which  God  is  ever  carrying  out  His  infinite  plans. 
How  wise  and  good  it  is  that  God  generally  works  in  this  way,  so  that  we  are  able 
to  calculate  with  unvarying  certainty  on  natural  processes.  3.  And  when  He  wills 
some  definite  end  He  does  not  abrogate  the  laws  that  stand  in  His  way,  but  cancels 
Iheir  action  by  laws  from  higher  spheres  which  counterwork  them,  e.g..  The  flight 
of  birds  is  due  to  very  different  causes  from  a  balloon's.  Balloons  float  because 
they  are  lighter,  but  birds  are  heavier.  The  law  of  the  elasticity  of  the  air  sets  the 
bird  free  from  the  law  of  gravitation  that  would  drag  it  to  the  ground.  In  the 
autumn  fields  the  children,  in  gathering  mushrooms,  unwittingly  eat  some  poisonous 
fungus  which  threatens  them  with  death.  Some  antidote  is  given,  which,  acting  as 
"  the  law  of  life,"  counterworks  the  poison,  and  sets  the  children  "  free  from  the 
law  of  death,"  which  had  already  commenced  to  work  in  their  members.  So  the 
law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  spring  sets  the  fiowers  free  from  the  law  of  death  of 
winter.  And  "  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus,"  set  Lazarus  "  free 
from  the  law  of  sin  and  death  "  which  imprisoned  him  in  the  tomb.  And. 
similarly,  the  law  of  life  communicated  through  the  Holy  Spirit  will  set  us  "  free 
from  the  law  of  sin  and  death  "  which  reigns  in  our  hearts.  I.  There  is  in  each 
ONE  OF  ITS  '•  THE  LAW  OP  SIN  AND  DEATH."  1.  This  evil  tendency  is  derived  from 
our  connection  with  the  human  family.  Eaces  and  children  alike  are  affected  by 
the  sins  and  virtues  of  their  ancestors.  In  every  man  there  is  a  bias  towards  evil, 
just  as  in  the  young  tiger  there  is  predisposition  to  feed  on  flesh,  and  in  the  duckling 
to  swim.  2.  That  tendency  survives  conversion.  ••  The  fiesh  lusteth  against  the 
Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh."  Its  strivings  may  be  suppressed ;  but  it 
is  still  there,  only  waiting  till  His  repressive  influences  are  withdrawn  to  spring  up 
in  all  its  pristine  vigour.  Conversion  is  the  insertion  of  a  new  principle  of  life, 
side  by  side  with  the  old  principle  of  death.  Consecration  is  simply  the  act  by 
which  we  put  the  culture  of  our  spirit  into  the  blessed  hands  of  Jesus.  There  is 
nothing,  therefore,  in  either  of  these  acts  to  necessitate  the  crushing  out  of  any 
principle  of  the  old  nature.  II.  God  does  not  mean  us  to  be  enslaved  by 
SIN.  What  a  contrast  between  chap.  vii.  23,  24,  and  the  joyous  outburst  of  this 
text!  The  one  is  the  sigh  of  a  captive,  this  the  song  of  a  freed  bond-slave.  1. 
Captivity  :  you  have  its  symbol  in  the  imprisoned  lion,  or  royal  eagle ;  you  have  it 
in  the  disease  which  holds  the  sufferer  down  in  rheumatism  or  paralysis.  But 
there  are  forms  of  spiritual  caj)tivity  equally  masterful.  Selfishness,  jealousy, 
envy,  and  ill-will,  sensual  indulgence,  the  love  of  money.  2.  But  it  is  not  God'a 
^ill  that  we  should  spend  our  days  thus.  We  were  born  to  be  free ;  not,  however, 
to  ao  fis  we  choose,  but  to  obey  the  laws  of  our  true  being.  When  we  fiee  an  eagle 
we  never  suppose  that  he  will  be  able  to  dive  for  fish  as  a  gull,  or  to  feed  on  froita 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  Stt 

as  a  humming-bird.    But  henceforth  it  will  be  able  to  obey  the  laws  of  its  own 
glorious  nature.    III.  We  become  fbee  by  the  operation  of  "thh  law  of  thh 
Spuut  of  life."     "The  law  of  sin  and  death  "  ia  cancelled  by  "  the  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  life."    Life  is  stronger  than  death ;  holiness  than  sin ;  the  Spirit  than 
man.     The  mode  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  work  is  thus — 1.  He  reveals  to  ns  that  in  tho 
intention  of  God  we  are  free.     So  long  as  you  consider  captivity  your  normal  state 
and  expect  notliing  better  there  is  little  hope  of  deliverance.    2.  He  makes  us  very 
sensitive  to  the  presence  of  sin.    3.  He  works  mightily  against  the  power  of  eviL 
4.  He  enables  us  to  reckon  ourselves  "  dead  indeed  unto  sin  "  (chap.  vi.  11).    This 
is  the  God-given  way  of  overcoming  the  suggestions  of  sin.    When  sin  approaches 
us  we  have  to  answer  :  *'  He  whom  thou  seekest  is  dead,  he  cannot  heed  or  respond." 
Conclusion:  1.  "Walk  in  the  Spirit";  "  Hve  in  the  Spirit";  yield  to  the  Spirit. 
Do  not  be  content  to  have  merely  His  presence,  without  which  you  could  not  be  a 
Christian,  but  seek  His  fulness.    Let  Him  have  His  way  with  you.    And  in  pro- 
portion  as  the  law  of  the  Spirit  becomes  stronger,  that  of  the  flesh  will  grow 
weaker,  until  ' '  as  you  have  yielded  your  members  servants  to  oncleanness  and  to 
iniquity,"  you  will  now  yield  them  to  righteousness  unto  holiness.    2.  And  as  you 
find  the  Spirit  of  life  working  within  you  you  may  be  sure  that  you  are  in  Jesus 
Christ,  for  He  only  is  the  element  in  whom  the  blessed  Spirit  can  put  forth  His 
energy.    He  is  "the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus."     (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)        The 
law  of  sin : — I.  The  law  of  sin.   1.  The  word  "  law  "  taken  properly  is  the  edict  of  a 
person  in  authority,  wherein  he  orders  something  to  be  done,  backing  his  or  their 
commands  with  promises  of  rewards,  as  also  their  prohibitions  with  threatenings 
of  punishment.    In  this  sense  there  is  a  law  of  sin.    For — (1)  A  law  is  a  command- 
ing thiug  :  it  lays  its  imperative  injunctions  upon  men  and  expects  their  obedience 
(chap.  vii.  1).    Now,  in  this  rt  spect  sin  is  a  law ;  therefore  you  read  of  the  reigning 
of  sin,  of  obeying  sin,  of  the  dominion  of  sin  (chap.  vi.  12,  14).    The  subject  is  not 
more  under  the  law  of  his  Sovereign,  nor  the  servant  of  his  master,  than  the  sinner 
is  ander  the  laws  of  sin.     As  there  is  this  domination  on  sin's  part  so  there  is 
subjection  on  the  sinner's  part ;  no  sooner  doth  it  command,  but  it  is  presently 
obeyed  (Matt.  viii.  9).      And  where  it  commands  and  is  obeyed  there  it  condemns, 
which  distinguishes  it  from  all  other  laws.     It  rules  of  itself  properly,  but  it 
condemns  as  it  lays  the  foundation  of  condemnation  by  another — the  law  of  God. 
And  this  speaks  the  inexpressible  misery  of  the  unregenerate.     (2)  A  law  is  backed 
with  rewards  and  punishments  for  the  furtherance  of  men's  obedience.    Answerably 
now  to  this,  sin  will  be  pretending  to  rewards  and  punishments,  which,  though  in 
themselves  they  are  but  sorry  things,  yet  they  have  a  great  power.    For  instance, 
sinner,  saith  sin,  do  but  obey  me,  and  pleasure,  honour,  profit,  shall  be  thine.    But 
if  these  enticing  arguments  will  not  do,   sin  then  threatens  derision,  poverty, 
persecution,  and  what  not.    But  note — That  sin  considered  as  simply  commanding 
is  not  a  law,  but  it  then  becomes  formally  and  completely  a  law  when  the  sinner 
obeys ;  so  then  he  owns  the  power  of  it.    The  laws  of  usurpers,  merely  as  imposed 
by  them,  are  no  laws,  because  not  made  by  persons  in  lawful  authority ;  but  if  a 
people  freely  own  these  usurpers  and  willingly  put  themselves  under  subjection  to 
them,  then,  to  them  their  laws  become  valid  and  obligatory.   2.  The  word  "  law  "  ia 
taken  improperly  for  anything  that  hath  an  impelling  virtue  in  it.     It  hath  the 
force  of  a  law,  and  doth  that  which  a  true  law  uses  to  do.    And,  therefore,  when 
sin  is  the  principle  which  eflBcaciously  excites  a  person  to  those  things  which  are 
suitable  to  its  own  nature,  there  sin  may  be  called  a  law.     II.  Its  mods  of 
OPERATION.     1.  Sin  exerts  its  powers  in  its  vehement  urging  to  what  is  evil.    Sin  in 
the  habit  is  altogether  for  sin  in  the  act ;  indwelling  sin  is  wholly  for  dwelling  in 
sin.    Though  there  was  no  devil  to  tempt  the  graceless  sinner,  yet  that  law  of  sin 
which   is  in  himself  would  be  enough  to  make  him  sin.     Corrupt  nature  is 
continually  soliciting  and  exciting  the  unsanctified  man  to  what  is  evil ;  it  will  not 
let  him  alone  day  or  night  unless  he  gratify  it.     What  an  instance  was  Ahab  of  this. 
Sin  put  him  upon  the  coveting  of  Naboth's  vineyard,  and  this  it  did  with  such 
violence  that  he  would  eat  no  bread  because  he  could  not  have  his  will  (1  Kings 
xxi.  5 ;  see  Prov.  iv.  16).     2.  This  law  of  sin  shows  itself  in  its  opposing  and  hinder- 
ing of  what  is  good.    It  is  a  law  which  always  runs  counter  to  God's  law.     Doth 
that  call  for  such  and  such  duties  ?    Are  there  some  convictions  upon  the  sinner's 
cont^cience  about  them  ?    Doth  he  begin  a  little  to  incline  to  what  is  good  ?    How 
doth  sin  now  bestir  itself  to  make  head  in  the  soul  against  these  convictions  and 
good  inclinations !     III.  Its  miserable  bondage.     Such  being  under  the  law  of 
sin,  it  follows  that  they  are  under  bondage  the  very  worst  imaginable.    We  pit/ 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼m. 

those  who  live  under  tyrants.    But,  alas !  what  is  that  if  compared  with  this.    The 
state  of  nature  is  quite  another  thing  than  what  men  imagine  it  to  be  ;  they  think 
there  is  nothing  but  freedom  in  it,  but  God  knows  it  is  quite  otherwise  (2  Pet.  ii.  19). 
To  better  convince  you  of  the  evil  and  misery  of  this  bondage,  and  excite  to  the 
most  vigorous  endeavours  to  get  out  of  it,  note — 1.  That  bondage  to  sin  is  always 
accompanied  with  bondage  of  Satan.     The  devil's  reign  depends  upon  the  reign  of 
sin ;  he  rules  in  the  children  of  disobedience,  and  takes  men  captives  at  his  will. 
Shall  a  damned  creature  be  thy  sovereign — he  who  will  be  thy  tormentor  hereafter  ? 
2.  What  sin  is.     (1)  Look  upon  sin  in  itself.    It  is  the  vilest  thing  that  is :  the  only 
thing  which  God  never  made.    It  is  the  only  thing  that  God  cannot  do.     (2)  Look 
upon  sin  in  the  management  of  its  power.    Usurpers  often  make  good  laws  ;  and 
indeed  they  had  need  use  their  power  well  who  get  it  ill.     The  philosopher  tells  us 
that  the  intention  of  the  legislator  is  to  make  his  subjects  good  ;  but  sin's  intention 
is  only  to  make  its  subjects  bad.    Then,  this  sin  is  not  only  out  of  measure  sinful 
in  the  exercise  of  its  power,  but  it  is  also  out  of  measure  tyrannical.    All  the  Neros, 
Galigulas,  Domitians,  &c.,  that  ever  lived  were  nothing  to  it.     This  first  acted  the 
part  of  a  tyrant  in  them  before  they  acted  the  part  of  tyrants  over  others.     The 
tyranny  of  sin  appears  in  many  things.      Its  commands  are — (a)  Innumerable. 
(b)  Contrary.    Lust  clashes  with  lust  (Titus  iii.  3).     (c)  Rigorous.     It  must  have 
full  obedience  or  none  at  all  (Eph.  ii.  3).    (d)  Never  at  an  end.    (e)  So  imperious 
and  cruel  that  its  vassals  must  stick  at  nothing.    3.  That  it  is  a  soul  bondage. 
The  bondage  of  Israel  in  Egypt  was  very  evil,  yet  not  comparable  to  this,  because 
that  was  but  corporal  and  external,  but  this  is  spiritual  and  internal.    There  may 
be  a  servile  condition  without  and  yet  a  free  and  generous  soul  within ;  but  if  the 
soul  itself  be  under  servitude  then  the  whole  man  is  in  servitude.    4.  That  of  all 
bondage  this  is  the  most  unprofitable.     As  to  other  bondage  the  master  may  be 
cruel  enough,  but  then  he  makes  some  amends  by  giving  good  wages ;  but  the 
sinner  serves  that  master  which  pays  him  no  wages  at  all — death  excepted  (chap, 
vi.  21).     6.  That  the  worst  of  this  bondage  is  that  they  who  lie  under  it  are 
altogether  insensible  of  it.   Where  it  is  external  and  civil  bondage  men  groan  under 
it,  would  fain  be  rid  of  it  (Exod.  ii.  23).    But  the  poor  deluded  sinner,  Uke  some 
distracted  persons,  plays  with  his  chains.    6.  That  it  is  the  most  hurtful  and  most 
dangerous  bondage :  for  it  makes  way  for  and  most  certainly  ends  in  eternal  death. 
Death  puts  an  end  to  other  bondage  (Job  iii.  18, 19) ;  but  the  worst  of  spiritual 
bondage  follows  after  death.    Tou  have  in  the  text  the  law  of  sin  and  the  law  of 
death  coupled  together  (see  also  chap.  vi.  16,  21,  23).     (T.  Jacomb,  D.D.)        The 
law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ : — 1.  Men  of  the  world  think  that  the  gospel  has  to 
do  only,  or  chiefly,  with  death,  and  that  its  atmosphere  is  generally  repressive.    But 
the  fact  is  the  reverse.   The  gospel  gives  life  for  death,  joy  for  sorrow  ;  a  conquering 
power  of  soul  to  meet  the  disability  of  the  flesh ;  an  abounding  sphere  beyond  this 
world.    2.  Every  life  force  is  mysterious.    We  cannot  explain  the  forces  of  nature. 
Nor  can  we  explain  the  mystery  of  this  unique  transformation,  but  we  may  study 
its  effects  and  ask  ourselves  if  they  are  revised  in  us.    Contemplate  the  change 
wrought — I.  In  huuan  activities.     I  will  not  select  one  whose  life  has  been 
abandoned,  but  who  is  no  stranger  to  religion,  and  who  has  led  an  outwardly 
correct  hfe  under  the  guidance  of  self-respect,  and  with  regard  to  the  good  opinion 
of  others.    When  renewed  by  the  Spirit  of  God  and  freed  from  the  law  of  sin  and 
death  he  comes  under  the  control  of  new  influences.  The  love  of  Christ  constrains, 
not  prudence  or  sagacity.     The  charm  of  the  Scriptures  and  of  the  sanctuary  is 
something  never  known  before.     Resistance  to  sin  is  not,  as  before,  a  feeble, 
prudential  avoidance,  but  a  vehement  hate.    Love  for  holiness  is  ardent,  and 
Christian  work  not  a  burden,  but  a  joy.     II.  On  one's  mental  convictions.     I 
would  not  refer  to  the  scoffer,  but  rather  to  one  who  regards  himself  orthodox. 
He  accepts  Christianity  as  the  most  rational  interpretation  of  nature.    He  accepts 
also  the  historic  Christ,  and  redemption  as  well.    But  when  such  a  person  is  born 
again,  and  sees  God  as  his  own  Father,  and  the  Saviour  as  his  own  Redeemer ; 
when  he  sees  the  atonement,  not  as  a  philosophic  scheme,  but  as  a  transcendent 
fact,  involving  greater  resources  than  those  of  creation,  a  patience  and  love  that 
shrunk  not  from  the  Cross,  then  a  flood  of  Ught  bursts  on  epistle,  gospel  and 
apocalypse,  and  a  glory  in  the  future  rises  on  his  view  which  is  unspeakable.    This 
intellectual  elevation  comes  not  from  a  study  of  the  catechism,  from  a  course  of 
eloquent  sermons,  or  from  mere  reflection  upon  the  Word  of  inspiration,  but  as  the 
result  of  that  transforming  power  called  **  the  Spirit  of  life  ia  Christ  Jesus."    III. 
Oa  XHB  XBMPSB  or  HIS  HEABZ.     The  ordinary  attitude  of  a  thoughtful  mind  toward 


esAT.  vm.]  EOMANS.  645 

the  realities  of  religion  is  one  of  wonder  and  admiration.  Yet  all  this  Bentimentality 
is  inert  and  inoperative.  There  is  no  personal  affection  for  the  Saviour.  Some- 
times the  character  of  an  acquaintance  is  dim  and  commonplace,  until  some  critical 
exigency  arises  which  gives  beauty  and  worth  to  that  character.  Then  a  personal 
and  passionate  attachment  is  roused.  So  with  the  waking  of  the  new  life  in  the 
Boul,  Christ  appears  in  new  and  alluring  loveliness.  He  seems  no  more  afar  off, 
but  near  at  hand,  in  closest  fellowship  day  by  day.  With  such  a  Saviour,  daily 
duties  are  delights  however  humble.  The  temper  of  heart  is  changed  toward 
Christ's  followers  as  well.  The  Christian  loves  his  brethren  for  the  Master's  sake. 
His  love  is  not  founded  on  social  or  intellectual  considerations,  but  grows  out  of 
spiritual  unity  and  kinship,  because  of  likeness  to  Christ.  This  change  of  temper 
and  taste  is  the  result  of  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  alone.  IV. 
In  the  expectations  of  the  future.  All  men,  pagan  as  well  as  Christian,  look 
forward  to  a  future  existence.  Unconverted  men  hope  to  be  Christians  before  they 
die,  but  their  ideas  of  the  future  are  dim.  With  the  believer  death  is  seen  to  be 
but  a  transitional  step,  the  mere  portal  to  the  shrine.  While  the  world's  law  is 
death  in  life,  the  gospel's  law  is  life  in  death.  So  the  gospel  fronts  the  world. 
Which  is  the  better  ?  Conclusion :  Learn — 1.  That  it  is  in  this  gospel  that  life 
asserts  its  freedom.  All  departments  of  thought  and  effort,  religious  and  secular, 
are  alike  ennobled  and  quickened.  2.  This  is  a  life  which  tends  to  consummation 
and  perfection.  The  snow-bound  field  lies  bare  beneath  the  fetters  of  frost.  It 
seems  dead  and  barren,  but  with  the  melting  warmth  of  spring  there  comes  a 
verdure  in  place  of  ice  and  snow.  All  things  are  changed.  So  when  this  spiritual 
life  force  is  allowed  to  exert  its  renewing  and  transforming  energy  on  the  soul  of 
man,  life  is  perfected  and  crowned.  (R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.)  The  Christian  liberty 
achieved;  or,  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  making  free  from  the  law  of  tin  and 
death : — The  "therefore  now  "  does  not  introduce  an  inference  from  the  immediately 
preceding  argument — which  could  not  warrant  it — but  one  grounded  on  the  pre- 
viously afSrmed  effectiveness  of  the  gospel  to  accomplish  that  for  believers  which 
the  law  never  could.  The  justifying  ground  of  this  discharge  from  condemnation 
was  set  forth  in  chap.  iii.  21-26.  The  principle  upon  which  it  proceeds  was 
illustrated  in  chap.  v.  12-21.  The  persons  to  whom  it  is  extended,  and  the  new  life 
of  which  they  become  the  participators  was  specified  in  chap.  vi.  1-11.  The  reason 
for  the  impotence  of  the  law  was  stated  in  chap.  vi.  14,  and  this  impotence  had 
supplied  the  theme  for  illustration  in  chap.  vii.  6-25,  and  the  power  of  the  gospel 
which  had  been  distinctly  stated  in  ver.  6,  with  an  eye  to  which  the  apostle  had 
penned  (ver.  25).  Note — I.  The  law  of  bin  and  death  from  the  poweb  of 
WHICH  BELIEVERS  OBTAIN  DELIVERANCE  IN  Chbist.  It  will  be  obscrvcd  that  the 
apostle  does  not  speak  of  two  laws,  but  of  the  one.  Not  that  the  two  things  are 
one,  but  that  the  one  "  law  "  pervades  them  both,  and  binds  them  together  (chap. 
V.  12-21;  Ezek.  xviii.  4;  James  i.  15;  Eph.  ii.  1-5,  iv.  17-19).  This  one  law 
renders  it  impossible  that  the  sinner  can  of  himself  regain  the  possession  of 
innocence  and  peace,  and  evermore  impels  him  onwards  and  downwards  in  the 
fearful  descending  circle  of  transgression  and  punishment.  Man  in  the  very  act  of 
sinning  dies ;  or,  being  already  dead,  plunges  into  a  still  deeper  death  (Heb.  ix.  14). 
II.  The  SPHERE  within  which  liberation  has  been  provided — "  In  Christ."  1. 
In  Christ  the  double  necessity  of  man's  case  has  been  provided  for ;  the  twofold 
diflBoulty  has  been  solved ;  the  one  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  other  by 
His  life  (chap.  iv.  25,  cf.  v.  18,  21).  2.  The  actual  liberation  is  conferred  on  men 
only  as  they  become  united  to  Christ.  It  is  indeed  true  that  there  has  come  a 
dispensation  of  grace  and  renewed  probation  to  all  men ;  but  the  actual  discharge 
from  condemnation,  and  the  liberty  from  the  "  law  of  sin  and  death,"  do  not  come 
to  any  but  to  those  who  are  found  in  Christ  by  faith  {cf.  Eph.  1).  III.  For  all 
those  who  are  in  Christ  the  liberation  is  actually  accomplished.  1.  "  There 
is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  which  are  in  Christ " :  He  was  con- 
demned on  their  account,  and  they  were  condemned  in  Him.  He  died  for  their 
sins,  and  they  died  in  Him  (chap.  vi.  7,  8).  2.  The  liberation  from  sin  is  secured 
to  believers  in  the  active  life  ;  "  for  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life,"  &c.  (1)  The  law 
of  sin  is  a  law  of  death  ;  and  the  "  law  of  the  Spirit  "  is  a  law  of  life.  Sin  deals 
death,  and  thereby  perpetuates  both  itself  and  its  punishment ;  but  •*  the  Spirit " 
inspires  life,  and  thereby  liberates  both  from  sin  and  death,  and  insures  everlasting 
victory  and  blessedness.  (2)  But  how  does  the  law  of  this  new  life  in  Christ  exert 
within  us  its  liberating  power?  Does  it  seize  upon  us  from  without,  as  the  Spirit 
of  inspiration  seized  upon  the  prophets?     Or  does  it  come  upon  as  as  a  new 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  no. 

constituent  element  of  being  ?  Or  is  it  not  the  law  of  a  new  life  which  is  infused 
into  our  spirit  by  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  (3)  The  new  law  acts  upon  the  conscience 
through  the  medium  of  the  light  and  truth  of  the  gospel  (John  xvli.  3  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  6 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  23).  This  liviDg  and  abiding  Word  supplies — (a)  That  precious  knowledge  of 
the  redemption  in  Christ  which  provides  peace  for  the  guilty  conscience,  (b)  That 
knowledge  of  the  royal  and  perfect  law  of  liberty  which  is  a  sure  and  sufScient  guide 
for  conscience  in  the  practical  life,  (c)  That  knowledge  of  God,  as  a  God  of  love,  aa 
our  God  and  Father  in  Christ,  which  imparts  joyous  courage  and  prevaihng  power  to 
conscience.  Conclusion :  1.  Secure  this  glorious  liberty.  (1)  Ponder  well  the  terrible 
power  of  this  law,  and  the  dreadful  consequences  of  remaining  beneath  its  doirtfnion. 
(2)  There  is  now  in  Christ  a  perfect  liberty  from  this  law  available  for  all  who  will 
accept  it.  Lay  hold,  by  faith,  of  the  hope  now  set  before  you  in  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
2.  Having  secured  this  inestimable  liberty  see  that  you  hold  it  fast.  {W.  Tyson.) 
The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ : — I.  Thb  law  of  the  Spibit  signifies  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  which  He  unites  the  soul  to  Christ,  in  whose  righteous- 
ness it  therefore  partakes,  and  is  consequently  justified.  This  law  is  the  gospel, 
whereof  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  Author,  being  the  authoritative  rule  and  the  instru- 
ment by  which  He  acts  in  the  plan  of  salvation.  It  is  the  medium  through  which 
He  promulgates  the  Divine  testimony ;  by  which  also  He  convinces  of  sin  and 
testifies  of  the  almighty  Saviour.  The  gospel  may  be  properly  denominated  a  law, 
because  it  bears  the  stamp  of  Divine  authority,  to  which  we  are  bound  to  "  submit" 
(chap.  X.  3).  It  requires  the  obedience  of  faith  (chap.  i.  5 ;  xvi.  26) ;  and  when 
men  refuse  this  submission,  it  is  said  that  they  have  not  "  obeyed  the  gospel " 
(chap.  X.  16).  Although,  therefore,  the  gospel  is  proclaimed  as  a  grace,  it  is  a  grace 
accompanied  with  autLority,  which  God  commands  to  be  received.  Accordingly,  it 
is  expressly  called  a  "  law  "  (Isa.  ii.  3 ;  Micah  iv.  2) ;  and  in  Psalm  ex.  2,  referring 
to  the  power  exerted  by  its  means,  it  is  said,  "  The  Lord  shall  send  the  rod  of  thy 
strength  out  of  2Uon.  Rule  thou  in  the  midst  of  thine  enemies  " — namely,  by  thine 
almighty  power.  The  gospel,  then,  is  the  law  of  the  Spirit  by  which  He  rules,  and 
the  rod  of  His  strength,  by  which  He  effects  our  salvation,  just  as,  in  chap.  i.  16,  it 
is  denominated  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  The  gospel  is  itself  called 
"the  Spirit,"  as  being  administered  by  the  Holy  Spirit  (2  Cor.  iii.  8).  II.  Thb 
GOSPEL  IS  THE  LAW  OP  THB  Spibit  OF  LIFE,  the  ministration  of  which  "  giveth 
life,"  in  opposition  to  the  "  letter  "  or  old  covenant  that  killeth  (2  Cor.  iii.  6  ;  cf. 
John  tI.  63 ;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  14 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  45).  Christ  is  the  life  itself,  aud  the 
source  of  life  to  all  creatures.  But  here  the  life  is  that  which  we  receive  through 
the  gospel,  as  the  law  or  power  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus,  which  the 
apostle  calls  "  the  life  of  God "  (Eph.  iv.  18).  HI.  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of 
LIFE  IN  Christ  Jesus.  Jesus  Christ  is  set  before  us  in  two  aspects.  As  God,  the 
Spirit  of  life  resides  essentially  in  Him ;  but  as  Mediator,  the  Spirit  of  life  has  been 
given  to  Him  to  be  communicated  to  all  who  are  one  with  Him.  On  this  account 
the  Spirit  was  not  given  in  His  fulness  (John  vii.  39)  till  Jesus  Christ  as  Mediator 
had  entered  into  heaven,  when  the  Father,  solemnly  receiving  His  satisfaction, 
gave  this  testimony  of  His  acceptance,  in  pouring  out  the  abundance  of  the  Spirit 
on  His  people  (John  xvi.  7 ;  Eph.  i.  3).  That  the  Spirit  of  hfe  is  in  Jesus  Christ, 
not  only  as  God,  but  also  as  Mediator,  is  a  ground  of  unspeakable  consolation.  It 
might  be  in  Him  as  God,  without  being  communicated  to  men ;  but  as  the  Head  of 
His  people,  it  must  be  diffused  through  them  as  His  members,  who  are  thus  com- 
plete in  Him.  Dost  thou  feel  in  thyself  the  sentence  of  death  ?  Listen,  then — 
"  This  is  the  record,  that  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life ;  and  this  life  is  in  His 
Son."  "  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life."  "  Because  I  live  ye  shall  Hve 
also."  This  life,  then,  is  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  is  communicated  to  beUevers  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  by  whom  they  are  united  to  Christ,  and  from  whom  it  is  derived 
to  all  who  through  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  are  in  Him.  (R.  Haldane.) 
Law  of  the  Spirit  of  life : — The  "law  "  in  the  text,  whether  that  of  "  the  Spirit  of 
life  in  Christ  Jesus,"  or  that  "  of  sin  and  death,"  is  a  constraining  influence — a 
moral  force,  an  active  power — an  agency  that  acts  mightily  on  the  soul.  And  it  is 
plain  from  the  statements  made  regarding  them,  that  these  laws  respectively  are 
paramount  at  the  time ;  they  govern  the  whole  being,  either  one  or  the  other  sits 
upon  the  inner  throne  of  a  man  and  governs  him.  It  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death 
— of  happiness  or  of  misery,  of  freedom  or  of  slavery,  of  everlasting  weal  or  eternal 
woe.  L  The  inquiry  relates  to  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  This  must  be  an 
influence  or  force  which  is  evil,  which  is  the  parent  of  sin,  driving  us  along  in  the 
path  of  transgresBioni  and  which  is  not  only  of  the  nature  of  spiritual  death,  bat 


«eA»,  Tin.]  ROMANS.  Hf 


wbioh  also  issues  in  eternal  death.  1.  In  order  that  we  may  ascertain  its  natare, 
let  Bome  thought  be  given  to  the  process  by  which  it  is  first  established  in  the 
human  soul.  2.  As  a  mighty  force  this  law  is  seen  in  those  ruling  passions  of 
mankind  which  discard  the  authority  of  God.  What  is  supreme  love  of  money  but 
Belf-gratification  at  the  expense  of  one's  allegiance  to  the  Most  High.  3.  We 
farther  discover  the  might  of  this  law  of  sin  and  death  in  the  sins  of  man  against 
his  fellow-man.  When  one  overreaches  another  in  trade,  does  he  not  gratify  his 
desire  for  gain  at  the  expense  of  another  ?  II.  Somb  general  chabactebistics  or 
THIS  LAW.  1.  It  is  often  subtle  in  its  actings.  2.  It  is  a  law  of  death  as  well  as  of 
sin.  3.  It  is  slavery.  This  law  of  sin  and  death  befools  and  degrades,  and  it  is  an 
unmitigated  despotism.  Woe  to  the  soul  under  its  unrestrained  power  1  4.  It  has 
had  control  universally.  III.  We  have  to  ask  concerning  the  law  of  the  Spirit 
OF  LIFE  IN  Christ  Jesus.  "  The  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus."  1.  It  is  a  Divine 
implantation.  "The  Spirit  of  life  "  is  undoubtedly  "  the  Holy  Spirit,"  who  is  the 
Author  of  spiritual  life  in  the  soul.  "  When  He  cometh,  He  shall  convince  the 
world  of  sin. "  Until  He  speaks  inwardly,  the  mind  seems  unaware  of  the  presence 
and  power  of  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  It  is  also  His  gracious  office  to  attract  the 
Boul  to  a  vital  union  with  Christ.  Under  the  blessed  light  which  He  kindles  around 
and  within  the  heart,  the  redemption  of  Christ  appears  in  its  true  aspect  as  most 
fall,  glorious,  and  adapted  to  save.  2.  As  the  other  is  a  law  of  sin  and  death,  this 
is  one  of  obedience  and  life.  Self-love  now  seeks  its  gratification  in  pleasing  God 
and  doing  His  will.  3.  Observe  throughout  that  it  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  To  those 
who  receive  Him,  He  gives  the  privilege  to  become  the  sons  of  God.  The  Cross  of 
Christ  slays  the  enmity  of  the  heart.  IV.  This  law  sets  free  from  the  other. 
If  it  be  establisht-d  as  the  governing  principle  the  other  cannot  be.  They  are  in 
their  own  nature  opposites.  Self-love  is  gratified  in  the  one  case,  in  opposition  to  the 
claims  of  God  and  the  well-being  of  others  ;  in  the  other,  by  obedience  and  devotion 
to  the  supreme  law  of  our  being,  love  to  God  and  man.  Conclusion :  1.  The 
adaptation  of  the  religion  of  Christ  to  man.  2.  We  discover  where  true  freedom 
and  true  happiness  are  found.  3.  What  we  all  need,  and  what  the  world  needs,  is 
to  be  delivered  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death  by  the  working  in  us  of  this  ennobling 
force.  What  a  glorious  object  of  pursuit  I  How  well  worth  all  self-sacrifice  I  (H, 
Wilkes,  D.D.)  Believers  are  freed  through  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life : — 

I.  The  deliverance  obtained — 1.  By  nature  we  are  aU  (chaps,  vi.,  vii.)  in 
spiritual  bondage.  We  are  "  sold  under  sin,"  and  so  necessarily  are  under 
death  (chap.  v.  12).  The  law  of  sin  and  the  law  of  death  are  one  and 
the  same  principle  disclosing  itself  in  different  manifestations  and  degrees. 
Poisonous  fruit  is  sap  worked  up,  legitimately  developed.  2.  This  evil  principle 
drives  man  from  God.  (1)  As  it  is  darkness  (1  John  i.  5-7 ;  ii.  9),  it  drives 
him  from  the  fountain  of  soul-light.  (2)  As  it  is  death,  from  the  fountain  of 
life  (Acts  xvii.  28).  3.  From  this  evil  principle  believers  are  made  free.  Not  from 
death,  though  its  sting  is  taken  away ;  nor  even  from  sin  perfectly.  But  over 
against  death  faith  sees  the  resurrection  placed,  and  over  against  sin  the  umblemished 
perfection  of  the  redeemed.  II.  The  aoenct  whereby  this  deliverance  is  accom- 
plished. Law  counteracting  law.  1.  The  term  "  law  "  may  mean — (1)  A  certain 
code  like  the  Decalogue  and  the  laws  of  nations.  (2)  A  principle  operating  with  all 
the  regularity  and  fixedness  of  statute — in  which  sense  laws  of  thought,  gravitation, 
refraction,  are  laws.  2.  The  latter  is  the  signification  here.  (1)  The  "  law  of  the 
Spirit  "  this  new  victorious  law  is  called.  It  is  contrary  to  whatever  is  of  the  flesh. 
In  its  origin,  nature,  mode  of  working,  it  is  Divine.  From  God  it  comes.  For 
God  it  moves.  To  God  it  leads.  (2)  It  is  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life.  As  the 
same  Spirit  is  named  the  Spirit  of  wisdom,  counsel,  &c.  (Isa.  xi.  2),  of  holiness 
(chap.  i.  4),  of  truth  (John  xiv.  17 ;  xv.  26),  because  He  makes  wise,  holy,  leads 
into  all  truth,  so  He  is  here  named  the  Spirit  of  life,  as  He  leads  into  life,  and  works 
life.  Of  all  soul-life  He  is  the  Author,  Promoter,  Kegulator,  Perfecter  (John  vi.  63 ; 
1  Pet.  iii.  18).  This  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  as  the  stronger  man  casts  out  the 
strong  (Luke  xL  22).  Water  poured  into  a  vessel  expels  the  air.  HI.  The  spherh 
within  which  this  agency  is  bo  efficiently  operative.  Like  laws  of  nature,  it 
works  within  certain  limits.  Iron,  not  glass,  will  conduct  electricity.  Dews, 
droughts,  hurricanes  are  conditioned  by  varied  zones  of  atmospheric  circumstances; 
BO  outside  the  region  of  ' '  bein^  in  Christ  Jesus  "  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  does 
not  effect  its  hallowing  results  upon  our  souls.  Within  that  radius,  however,  its 
might  is  sovereign.  It  frees  believers.  Conclusion  :  Note — 1.  The  urgent  import- 
ance of  ascertaining  which  of  these  laws  is  supreme  in  our  soul.    If  not  oonscioui 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

of  resistance  to  the  law  of  sin,  we  are  under  its  sway.  We  may  even  be  troubled 
about  the  commission  of  certain  sins,  and  give  heed  to  certain  duties,  and  yet  be  in 
utter  servitude  to  it  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  31).  2.  The  great  need  of  asking  the  promised 
Spirit  (Matt.  vii.  11 ;  Luke  x.  13).  Regeneration,  sanctifioation  only  obtainable 
through  His  power.  3.  The  duty  of  consciously  living  in  this  freedom,  not  confusing 
liberty  with  license  (Luke  i.  74,  75).  Carefulness  against  presumption  and  despon- 
dency alike  is  indispensable  (Eph.  vL  11-13).  4.  The  strong  consolation  of  know- 
ing that  ultimate  perfection  can  be  calculated  upon  with  all  the  certainty  of  a  result 
of  "  law."  Given  the  reign  of  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  a  soul,  then  amid  and 
in  spite  of  all  conflicts  the  beauty  of  the  renewed  life  will  be  patent  and  increase 
(Psa.  cxxxviii.  8  ;  Heb.  xii.  23;  xiiL  21).  {J.  Gage,  B.D.)  The  law  of  the  Spirit 
frees  from  the  law  of  sin : — Note — 1.  The  Spirit  frees  from  the  law  of  sin.  In 
reference  to  this  you  may  consider  Him  either  essentially  as  He  is  God,  or  per 
sonally.  As  it  is  the  Son's  proper  act  to  free  from  the  guilt,  so  it  is  the  Spirit's 
proper  act  to  free  from  the  power  of  sin,  it  belonging  to  the  Son  to  do  all  without 
and  to  the  Spirit  to  do  all  within.  That  which  God  once  said  in  reference  to  the 
building  of  the  temple — "Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit" — is 
applicable  here.  2.  This  is  done  by  the  Spirit  of  Hfe.  This  refers  either  to  the 
Spirit  as  He  is  a  living  Spirit,  or  refers  to  the  time  when  the  Spirit  quickens  and 
thus  regenerates,  or  to  the  method  of  regeneration  itself.  The  Spirit  who  renews, 
when  He  renews,  by  renewing,  brings  sin  under.  3.  It  is  the  law  of  the  Spirit  by 
which  this  is  done.  Here  is  law  against  law,  the  power  and  efficacy  of  the  Spirit 
against  the  power  and  efficacy  of  sin  (Eph.  iii.  20).  The  law  of  sin  has  a  moral 
and  a  physical  power ;  and  so  with  the  Spirit.  He  hath  His  moral  power,  as 
He  doth  persuade,  command,  &c. ;  and  He  hath  His  physical  power,  as  He  dotb 
strongly,  efficaciously  incline  and  impel  the  sinner  to  such  and  such  gracious  acts ; 
yea,  as  He  doth  effectually  change  his  heart,  make  him  a  new  creature,  dispossess 
sin  of  its  regency,  and  bring  him  under  the  government  of  Christ.  And  herein  the 
law  of  the  Spirit  is  above  the  law  of  sin.  Set  corrupt  nature  never  so  high,  yet  it 
is  but  a  finite  thing,  and  so  hath  but  a  finite  power ;  but  the  Spirit  is  an  infinite 
being,  and  puts  forth  an  infinite  power.  For  the  better  opening  of  the  truth  in 
hand,  note — I.  The  necessity,  sufeicienct,  efficacy  of  the  poweb  op  the  Spikit 
IN  freeing  men  feom  the  poweb  of  sin.  1.  The  necessity  of  the  power  of  the 
Spirit.  Omnipotency  itself  is  requisite  thereunto ;  that  is  the  strong  man  which 
keeps  the  palace  till  Christ,  through  the  Spirit  (which  is  stronger  than  it),  comes 
upon  it  and  overcomes  it.  'The  power  of  nature  can  never  conquer  the  power  of 
sin,  for  nature's  greatest  strength  is  on  sin's  side.  That  the  power  of  the  Spirit  is 
thus  necessary  if  you  consider  that — (1)  Sin  is  in  possession.  (2)  It  hath  been  so 
a  long  time.  (3)  Its  dominion  is  entire;  it  hath  all  on  its  side.  When  there  is  a 
party  within  a  kingdom  ready  to  fall  in  with  the  foreign  force  that  comes  to  depose 
the  tyrant,  he  may  with  more  facility  be  vanquished ;  but  if  all  the  people 
nnanimously  stick  to  him,  then  the  conquest  is  the  more  difficult.  Christ  said, 
"  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh  and  hath  nothing  in  Me  "  ;  so  the  poor  sinner 
may  say,  "  The  sin-subduing  Spirit  comes,  but  He  finds  nothing  in  me  to  close  with 
Him."  (4)  The  natural  man  likes  the  power  of  sin.  (5)  Sin  is  very  resolute  for 
and  in  the  maintaining  of  what  it  hath ;  it  will  fight  it  out  to  the  last,  and  die 
rather  than  yield.  (6)  Satan  sets  in  with  it,  and  upon  all  occasions  gives  it  all  the 
help  he  can,  as  allies  do.  2.  Its  sufficiency.  As  Christ  is  able  to  save  to  the 
ntmost  from  sin's  guilt,  so  the  Spirit  also  is  able  to  save  to  the  utmost  from  sin's 
power.  God  once  said  to  Paul,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee  "  (2  Cor.  xii.  9). 
Now,  as  that  grace  is  sufficient  to  bear  up  under  the  heaviest  afflictions,  so  this 
grace  is  sufficient  to  bring  down  the  strongest  corruptions.  Who  is  sufficient  for 
these  things?  Why  He,  and  none  but  He,  who  hath  infinite  power.  8.  Its 
efficacy.  (1]  He  doth  not  only  in  a  moral  way  advise,  counsel,  persuade  the  sinner 
to  cast  off  sin's  bondage,  but  puts  forth  an  insuperable  strength  upon  him,  and  so 
goes  through  with  the  work.  (2)  When  He  comes  about  this  or  any  other  saving 
act.  He  doth  not  leave  the  sinner's  will  in  suspense,  but,  in  a  way  congruous  to  its 
liberty,  He  overcomes  and  determines  it  for  God  against  sin,  so  as  that  it  shall  neither 
hesitate  nor  make  any  resistance  to  His  grace.  II.  In  what  ways  the  Holy 
Spibit  doth  exert  His  poweb.  1.  He  effectually  works  upon  the  understanding, 
that  being  the  leading  faculty.  (1)  Whereas  He  finds  it  under  darkness,  He  acts 
as  a  Spirit  of  illumination,  filling  the  soul  with  saving  knowledge.  It  required 
Omnipotency  to  say,  "Let  there  be  light";  no  less  a  power  is  requisite  to  the  Having 
enlightening  of  the  sinner  (Eph.  ▼.  8).    But  this  being  done,  sin  is  broken  in  iia 


«BAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  ft49 

power  by  it ;  for  ignorance  is  one  of  its  royal  forts.  (2)  Whereas  it  lies  under  sad 
mistakes,  therefore  the  Spirit  doth  rectify  it  and  makes  it  to  judge  aright.  (3) 
Whereas  it  is  full  of  high  and  proud  thonghts,  of  strange  imaginations  and  reason- 
ings, He  casts  them  down  (2  Cor.  x.  5).  2.  He  then  proceeds  to  the  will.  (1)  Of  all  the 
faculties,  sin  contends  most  for  the  will,  which,  when  it  hath  once  gained,  it  will  not 
«asily  part  with.  And  so,  too,  the  Spirit  contends  most  for  the  will.  He  puts  forth  the 
greatest  efficacy  of  His  grace  for  the  setting  of  that  right  and  straight  for  God,  that 
it  may  choose  and  cleave  to  His  holy  commands  in  opposition  to  the  laws  and  com- 
mands of  sin.  (2)  Yet  though  He  acts  thus  eflScaciously,  He  doth  not  at  all  violate 
its  liberty,  but  exerts  all  this  power  in  such  a  way  as  agrees  with  that  liberty  (Psa. 
ex.  3;  Cant.  i.  4).  He  removes  that  averseness,  obstinateness,  reluctancy,  that  is 
in  it  against  what  is  holy  and  spiritual.  3.  In  acting  on  the  affections,  He  dis- 
engages them  from  sin,  and  sets  them  directly  against  it,  and  so  freeing  the  sinner 
from  the  love  of  sin.  Application  :  1.  Let  such  who  desire  this  mercy  betake 
themselves  to  the  Spirit  for  it.  (1)  See  that  you  pray  in  faith,  believing  in  the 
suflSciency  of  His  power.  (2)  Let  all  other  means  be  joined  with  prayer.  They 
are  but  means,  and  therefore  not  to  be  relied  upon ;  yet  they  are  means,  and  there- 
fore not  to  be  neglected.  2.  Let  such  who  are  made  free  from  this  law  of  sin  own 
the  Spirit  of  life  as  the  author  of  their  freedom,  and  ascribe  the  glory  of  it  to  Him. 
3.  Greatly  to  love  and  honour  the  Spirit.  4.  As  you  have  found  the  law  of  the 
Spirit  in  your  first  conversion,  so  you  should  live  under  the  law  of  the  Spirit  in 
your  whole  conversation.  5.  Set  law  against  law — the  law  of  the  Spirit  against  the 
law  of  sin.     (T.  Jacomb,  D.D.)  The  believer's  freedom  from  the  law  of  sin  ;— 

I.  The  leadino  teems  of  the  text.  1.  By  the  "Spirit  of  life"  we  are  here  to 
understand  the  Holy  Ghost.  Men  are  spiritually  dead ;  the  animal  and  intellectual 
life  remains ;  but  the  spiritual  life — the  life  which  connects  man  with,  and  qualifies 
him  for  the  enjoyment  of  God — was  extinguished  by  the  fall,  and  can  only  be 
restored  by  the  '•  Spirit  of  life."  And  hence  we  are  said  to  be  "  bom  again  "  of  the 
Spirit.  And  as  it  is  His  office  to  restore  spiritual  life,  so  He  maintains  it.  All 
•*  good  "  comes  from  Him  and  depends  on  Him.  2.  He  is  called  "the  Spirit  of  life 
in  Christ  Jesus."  Because — (1)  We  are  indebted  to  Christ  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  It  is  owing  to  Christ's  meritorious  sacrifice  that  we  are  enabled  and  entitled 
to  receive  the  Spirit.  (2)  It  is  the  office  of  Christ  to  dispense  the  Spirit.  From 
His  "  fulness  "  it  is  that  we  are  to  "  receive  grace  upon  grace."  II.  The  law  of 
THE  Sphiit  of  life  IN  Chbist  Jesus.  By  this  we  are  to  understand  the  gospel, 
applied  by  the  Spirit's  power  to  the  hearts  of  men.  The  gospel  is  often  called  a 
law — "  The  perfect  law  of  liberty  "  ;  •'  The  isles  shall  wait  for  His  law  "  ;  "  The 
law  of  Messiah  shall  go  forth  from  Jerusalem  to  thp  ends  of  the  earth."  What  law 
ever  went  forth  from  Jerusalem  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  but  the  gospel?  1.  A  law 
is  an  enactment  or  command  issuing  from  supreme  authority,  fuJly  published  and 
made  known,  and  enforced  by  sanctions  of  reward  to  the  obedient,  or  of  punishment 
against  the  disobedient.  This  constitutes,  when  it  is  published  or  made  known, 
the  mle  of  action,  the  standard  of  character,  and  the  ground  of  decision  and  judg- 
ment ;  this  is  law  in  general.  The  gospel  answers  to  this  general  definition  in 
every  particular.  (1)  It  is  an  enactment  or  command.  It  comes  with  authority. 
It  is  not  a  statement  of  historical  facts,  an  exhibition  of  truth,  a  collection  of 
promises  only ;  it  comes  to  us  with  authority,  that  the  facts  should  be  credited, 
the  truths  received,  the  blessings  included  in  the  promises  sought  by  us ;  so  it 
may  be  said  of  as  that  we  are  God's  witnesses  that  the  gospel  is  a  "  law."  Where 
there  is  no  knowledge  of  the  gospel  there  can  be  no  obligation  to  receive  it ;  but 
the  moment  the  gospel  comes  to  a  man,  from  that  time  it  becomes  binding  upon 
his  conscience,  and  it  is  at  his  peril  if  he  neglect  or  disobey  it.  (2)  It  is  enforced 
by  sanctions  ;  there  is  reward  to  the  obedient,  punishment  for  the  disobedient.  (3) 
It  issues  from  the  highest  authority  in  the  universe.  (4)  It  is  duly  published  and 
made  known.  Whatever  may  be  said  of  the  condition  of  those  who  live  in  the 
"  dark  places  of  the  earth,"  generally  speaking,  at  least,  ignorance  of  the  gospel 
among  ourselves  is  wilful,  and  therefore  criminal.  (5)  It  constitutes  the  standard 
of  character  and  the  rule  of  decision.  "  God  will  judge  the  secrets  of  all  hearts," 
says  Paul,  "  according  to  my  gospel."  2.  But  why  is  it  called  the  Spirit's  law  ? 
Because  it  is  the  instrument  by  which  the  Spirit  most  efficiently  operates  upon  the 
understanding,  the  will,  the  conscience,  and  the  character  of  the  man.  By,  and 
with  it,  he  operates  with  the  force  and  the  authority  of  a  law,  overcoming  and 
reducing  and  governing  the  mind.  The  power  that  accomplishes  the  great  work  of 
regeneration  is  the  power  of  the  Spirit;  but  the  instmment  fie  employs  is  tha 


650  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

"Word  of  truth."  III.  The  law  of  sin  and  of  death.  1.  By  this  some  ander- 
stand  the  moral  law  considered  in  its  application  to  fallen  man,  as  the  covenant  ol 
■works.  This  law,  when  given  to  man  innocent  and  holy,  in  the  possession  of 
Divine  and  spiritual  life,  was  well  adapted  to  his  case.  But  when  man  became  a 
transgressor,  then  that  which  "  was  ordained  unto  life  "  began  to  operate  unto 
death.  It  is  the  •'  law  of  sin  "  to  all  the  unconverted,  its  very  object  being  to 
«•  make  sin  appear  exceeding  sinful."  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  Let  a 
man  apply  it  to  his  own  character,  and  it  will  prove,  to  the  conviction  of  his  con- 
science, that  he  is  a  sinner ;  and,  of  course,  wherever  it  proves  sin  it  pronounces 
the  sentence  of  death.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  2.  But  others 
understand  (and  the  general  scope  of  St.  Paul's  argument  is  favourable  to  the 
opinion)  the  sinning  principle  in  the  nature  of  fallen  man.  Wherever  this  prin- 
ciple of  unsubdued  enmity  to  God  and  holiness  exists  in  the  heart,  it  will  manifest 
itself  in  outward  acts  of  sin.  And  these  acts  become  habits,  by  repetition ;  and  thus 
sin  becomes  master.  There  his  law  is  "  a  law  of  death."  Wherever  there  is  sin  in 
the  root,  there  is  death  in  the  fruit ;  "  the  end  of  these  things  is  death."  •'  Sin, 
when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."    IV.  The  law  of  the  Spikit  of  lifb 

MAKES  us  free   FROM  THE  LAW  OF  SIN  AND  DEATH."      1.    This   is   trUO   of   the   laW  of 

sin  and  death,  understood  as  the  covenant  of  works,  the  broken  moral  law.  It  is  in 
reference  to  this  that  the  apostle  seems  to  be  speaking  in  ver.  1.  Before  they  wert 
"  in  Christ,"  they  were  condemned  by  the  law  for  having  broken  it.  But  no  soonei 
did  they  put  their  souls,  by  penitence  and  faith,  into  the  Saviour's  hands,  than  all 
the  mass  of  transgressions  and  guilt  which  rested  upon  them  was  removed.  And 
now  "  there  is  no  condemnation,"  they  are  "made  free  from  "  the  condemnatoiy 
demands  of  the  moral  law,  from  the  curse  of  the  covenant  of  works.  2.  But  true 
believers  are  delivered  from  the  sinning  principle  which  contaminates  our  fallen 
nature.  "  Sin  shall  have  no  dominion  over  you."  V.  Practical  inferences.  The 
salvation  of  Christ  is — 1.  Of  indispensable  necessity.  It  is,  in  fact,  "the  one 
thing  needful "  ;  "  our  souls  without  it  die."  2.  A  present  salvation.  "The  law 
of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free."  3.  That  connected  with 
satisfactory  evidence  of  its  existence.  St.  Paul  does  not  speak  as  if  he  were 
at  all  doubtful;  as  if  it  were  a  business  of  mere  conjecture  or  probability,  of 
inference  or  anticipation.  He  had  a  consciousness  of  his  freedom.  4.  A 
personal  affair.  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me 
free.      (Jabez    Bunting,    D.D.)  Freedom  from  law  achieved  by  law : — We 

see  this  principle  at  work  in  the  material  world.  A  higher  law  comes  into  play 
and  over-rides  ordinary  law.  Thus  dynamic  law  subjugates  mechanical  force, 
as  in  the  steam-engine ;  chemical  law,  in  turn,  annihilates  dynamic  force ;  and 
intellectual  power  is  superior  to  vital  law,  and  moral  to  intellectual.  The  lower 
laws  take  effect  upon  the  lower  natures.  The  mechanical  law  of  gravitation  affects 
stones ;  but  let  a  higher  law  of  afl&nity  come  into  operation,  and  those  stones  will 
be  transformed  into  other  combinations,  such  as  gases,  which  will  be  above  the 
laws  of  gravitation,  and  will  form  food  for  plants,  &o.  Mechanical  law,  however 
applied,  cannot  convert  stones  into  bread.  Chemical  law  can.  If  you  mechanically 
pound  ice  or  melt  it,  you  can  get  nothing  but  water ;  but  chemistry  transforms  it 
into  power,  and  gas,  and  food.  In  the  text  the  apostle  is  presenting  to  us 
in  the  kingdom  of  grace  what  is  taking  place  in  the  kingdom  of  nature — law 
conquering  law — e.g.,  a  human  body  subject  to  chemical  law  ferments,  putrifies, 
decays ;  but  the  vital  law  holds  all  these  in  check.  It  is  only  when  the 
higher   vital  law   is   gone   that  the  lower  law  reigns.      (Percy  Strutt.)  The 

two  law$ : — I.  What  is  meant  by  "  law."  1.  Law  is  an  authoritative  code 
framed  by  a  master  for  the  regulation  of  his  servants.  But  when  we  speak  of  the 
laws  of  nature,  we  denote  the  process  by  which  events  invariably  follow  each  other. 
The  law  which  accountable  creatures  are  bound  to  obey  is  one  thing  ;  the  law,  in 
virtue  of  which  creatures  are  always  found  to  make  the  same  exhibition  in  the  samo 
circumstances,  is  another.  2.  It  is  not  difficult,  however,  to  perceive  how  the  same 
term  came  to  be  applied  to  things  so  distinct.  For  law,  in  the  first  sense  of  it,  is 
not  applicable  to  a  single  command  which  may  never  be  repeated.  True,  Uke  all 
the  others,  it  is  obeyed,  because  of  that  general  law  by  which  the  servant  is  bound 
to  fulfil  the  will  of  his  master ;  yet  it  does  not  attain  the  rank  of  such  a  denomina- 
tion unless  the  thing  enjoined  be  habitual.  Thus  the  order  that  doors  shall  be 
shut,  or  that  none  shall  be  missing  after  a  particular  hour,  or  that  Sabbath  shall 
be  observed,  may  be  characterised  as  the  laws  of  the  family — not  the  random  orders 
of  the  current  day.    Now  this  common  circumstance  of  uniformity  has  extended 


vnx.)  SOMAN  S.  661 

the  application  of  the  term  "law."  Should  you  drop  a  piece  of  heavy  matter,  nothing 
is  more  certain  nor  more  constant  Uian  its  descent — just  as  if  constrained  so  to  do 
ky  the  authority  of  a  universal  enactment  on  the  subject,  and  hence  the  law  of 
gravitation.  Or,  if  light  be  made  to  fall  on  a  polished  surface,  nothing  more 
mathematically  sure  than  the  path  by  which  it  will  be  given  back  a^'n  to  the  eye 
of  the  beholder,  and  hence  in  optics  the  law  of  reflection.  Or  if  a  substance  float 
upon  the  water,  nothing  more  invariably  accurate  than  that  the  quantity  of  fluid 
displaced  is  equal  in  weight  to  that  of  the  body  which  is  supported  ;  and  all  this  from 
a  law  in  hydrostatics.  But  the  difference  lies  just  here.  The  one  kind  of  law  is  framed 
by  a  living  master  for  the  obedience  of  Uving  subjects,  and  may  be  called  juridical 
law.  The  other  is  framed  by  a  hving  master  also,  for  it  is  God  who  worketh  all  in 
all ;  but  obedience  is  rendered  by  the  force  of  those  natural  principles  wherewith  the 
things  in  question  operate  in  that  one  way  which  is  agreeable  to  their  nature.  This 
kind  of  law  would  by  philosophers  be  called  physical  law.  II.  In  which  of  thesk 
TWO  SENSES  SHALL  WE  UNDEB8TAND  "  LAW  "  IN  THE  TEXT.  To  determine  tMs,  wc  shall 
begin  with  the  consideration  of — 1.  The  law  of  sin  and  death.  It  is  quite  obvious 
that  this  is  not  a  law  enacted  in  the  way  of  jurisprudence.  It  is  neither  more  nor 
less  than  the  sinful  tendency  of  our  constitution.  It  is  called  a  law  because,  like 
the  laws  of  gravitation  or  electricity,  it  has  the  property  of  a  moving  force,  inas- 
much as  it  incessantly  aims  after  the  establishment  of  its  own  mastery.  Death 
comes  as  regularly  and  as  surely  in  the  train  of  our  captivity  to  sin  as  the  fruit  of 
any  tree,  or  the  produce  of  any  husbandry,  does  by  the  laws  of  the  vegetable 
kingdom.  2.  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  just  expresses  the  tendency  and  the 
result  of  an  operative  principle  in  the  mind  that  has  force  enough  to  arrest  the 
operation  of  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  The  aflection  of  the  old  man  meets  with  a 
new  affection  to  combat  and  to  overmatch  it.  If  the  originating  principle  of  sin  be 
shortly  described  as  the  love  of  the  creature,  the  originating  principle  of  the 
spiritual  life  might  also  be  briefly  described  as  the  love  of  the  Creator.  These  two 
appetites  are  in  a  state  of  unceasing  hostihty.  The  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit, 
and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh.  III.  The  second  of  these  laws.  1.  Is  called — 
(1)  The  law  of  the  Spirit,  because  referable  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  whose  agency  the 
new  moral  force  has  been  made  to  actuate  the  soul  and  give  another  direction  to 
the  whole  history.  (2)  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life,  because  he  in  whom  this  law 
is  set  a-going  is  spiritually  minded  ;  and  as  to  be  carnally  minded  is  death,  so  to  be 
spiritually  minded  is  life.  It  is  Uke  the  awakening  of  man  to  a  new  moral  existence, 
when  he  is  awakened  to  the  love  of  that  God  whom  before  he  was  glad  to  forget ; 
like  a  resurrection  from  the  grave  when,  aroused  from  the  deep  obhvion  of  nature, 
man  enters  into  living  fellowship  with  his  God.  It  is  only  now  that  he  has  begun  to 
hve.  2.  When  does  this  visitation  of  the  Spirit  descend  upon  the  soul  T  This  is 
shown  by  the  words  "  In  Christ  Jesus."  As  surely  as  when  you  enter  a  garden  of 
sweets  one  of  your  senses  becomes  awakened  to  the  perfumes  ;  as  surely  as  when 
emerging  from  the  darkness  of  a  close  apartment  to  the  glories  of  an  unclouded 
day  another  of  your  senses  is  awakened  to  the  light  and  beauty,  so  surely  when 
you  enter  within  the  fold  of  Christ's  mediatorship,  and  are  united  with  Him,  then 
there  is  an  awakening  of  the  inner  man  to  the  beauties  of  holiness.  We  refer  to  a 
law  of  nature,  the  impression  of  every  scene,  in  which  he  is  situated,  on  the  senses 
of  the  observer  ;  and  it  is  also  by  the  operation  of  such  a  law  that,  if  in  Christ,  we 
become  subject  to  a  touch  that  raises  as  to  spiritual  life,  and  maketh  us  susceptible 
of  all  its  joys  and  all  its  aspirations.  8.  What  have  we  to  do  that  we  may  attain 
this  condition.  I  know  of  no  other  instrument  by  which  the  disciple  is  grafted  in 
Christ  Jesus,  even  as  the  branches  are  in  the  vine,  than  faith.  And  "  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  given  to  those  who  beUeve."  "The  promise  of  the  Spirit  is  unto  faith."  (T. 
Chalmers,  DJ).)  Delivered  from  the  law  of  sin : — Sin  and  death  are  partners 
of  one  throne  and  issue  one  law  (c/.  vers.  14,  21).  To  obey  the  one  is  to  obey  the 
other.  In  former  days  Paul  was  compelled  to  do  the  bidding  of  sin.  But  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  set  him  free  by  making  His  own  will  the  rule  of  Paul's  life.  Just  so  a 
conqueror,  by  setting  up  his  own  laws  in  a  conquered  country,  makes  the  former 
laws  invalid.  That  the  country  obeys  the  new  laws  is  a  proof  of  conquest. 
Similarly,  the  presence  and  guidance  of  the  Spirit  have  made  Paul  free  from 
the  rule  of  sin.  This  is  not  a  change  of  bondage,  but  freedom  from  all  bondage. 
For  the  law  of  the  Spirit  is  the  wiU  of  our  Maker,  and  therefore  the  law  of  our 
being.  And  to  obey  the  law  of  our  beiug  is  the  only  true  freedom.  "In  Christ." 
Paul's  deliverance  took  place  objectively  in  the  human  body  of  Christ  (chap.  iii. 
24) ;  subjectively,  by  Paul's  spiritual  union  with  the  risen  Saviour  (chap.  vi.  11). 


66i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nu,' 

{Prof.  Beet.)  Fret  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death : — I.  The  misery  of  all  men 
BT  NATURE.  And  that  it  consists  of  a  state  of  bondage  and  captivity,  which  is  here 
in  this  Scripture  called  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  We  shall  speak  of  the  law  of 
sin.  Sin,  in  those  which  are  unregenerate,  does  exercise  a  tyrannical  power  and 
aathority  over  them,  therefore  it  hath  the  denomination  of  a  law  given  unto  it ; 
not  that  it  hath  anything  which  is  good  or  lawful  or  regular  in  it,  for  it  is  properly 
the  transgression  of  a  law.  But  it  is  called  a  law  in  regard  of  that  rule  which 
it  bears  in  the  hearts  of  all  those  that  are  entangled  with  it.  This  is  the  condition 
of  sin,  that  it  carries  with  it  the  nature  of  a  law  to  the  subjects  of  it.  First,  in  the 
constant  actings  of  it ;  sin  is  like  a  law  so.  Things  which  are  acted  by  law  they 
are  acted  with  a  great  deal  of  constancy.  The  ordinances  of  heaven  and  earth,  the 
sun,  moon,  and  stars,  they  keep  their  course  by  a  settled  decree  which  is  upon 
them.  Even  so  is  it  also  with  those  who  are  carried  by  this  law  of  sin  ;  it  is  that 
which  is  usual  with  them,  they  make  a  constant  course  and  practice  of  it  as  their 
trade  and  life.  Secondly,  it  hath  the  motion  of  a  law  in  that  men  are  carried  to  it 
powerfully  and  irresistibly  without  opposition.  So  is  sin  to  an  unregenerate 
person ;  it  commands  him  and  has  power  over  him,  it  rules  and  reigns  in  him. 
This  is  first  of  all  grounded  upon  that  curse  which  was  laid  upon  man  for  his  first 
rebellion.  But,  secondly,  sin  gets  a  great  deal  of  power  by  custom,  which  has  the 
force  of  a  second  nature  with  it,  and  in  that  regard  the  notion  of  a  law.  The 
Ethiopian  may  as  soon  change  his  skin,  and  the  leopard  his  spots,  as  they  may 
cease  to  do  evil  that  are  accustomed  to  it.  Now,  for  the  further  illustration  of  it, 
we  may  take  notice  of  the  misery  of  this  bondage  in  these  following  aggravations. 
First,  in  the  subject  of  this  thraldom ;  and  that  is  the  soul  itself — the  immortal 
soul — that  part  of  man  which  had  the  image  of  God  in  a  special  manner  imprinted 
upon  it.  For  this  to  be  in  slavery  and  servitude  is  a  very  sad  business  indeed. 
We  know  in  the  way  of  the  world  how  bondage  is  usually  aggravated  from  the 
qnality  and  condition  of  the  person  that  is  brought  into  it.  Secondly,  consider  it 
also  in  the  persons  which  men  are  in  thraldom  to  by  it,  and  that  is  to  Satan  and 
his  instruments.  For  a  man  to  be  in  bondage  to  a  stranger  it  is  not  very  desirable, 
but  to  be  in  bondage  to  an  enemy  or  adversary  is  very  abominable.  Thirdly,  there 
is  an  aggravation  also  in  it  from  the  nature  and  quality  and  condition  of  the 
servitude  itself,  in  all  the  circumstances  of  it.  Of  all  servants  we  count  them  to 
be  in  the  worse  case  that  are  sold.  To  this  we  may  further  add  the  insensiblenesa 
of  this  their  condition  which  is  usually  attendant  hereupon.  We  count  them  most 
desperately  miserable  who  discern  not  the  misery  which  they  are  in,  as  mad  men 
that  sing  in  their  chains.  And  so  much  may  be  spoken  of  the  first  branch 
of  a  natural  man's  captivity,  as  it  is  considerable  in  his  thraldom  to  evil  expressed 
here  in  the  text  by  the  law  of  sin.  The  second  is  as  it  is  considerable  in  hifl 
obligation  to  punishment :  and  that  is  here  also  expressed  by  the  law  of  death, 
which  is  added  and  joined  to  the  other  and  goes  along  with  it.  There  is  a  three- 
fold death  which  the  Scripture  makes  mention  of,  and  they  are  all  of  them  the 
wages  of  sin.  First,  natural  death,  which  consists  in  the  separation  of  the  soul 
from  the  body  (chap.  v.  12).  Secondly,  there  is  also  a  spiritual  death,  which 
consists  in  a  deprivation  of  the  image  of  God  upon  the  soul,  and  the  withdrawing 
of  His  favour  from  it.  When  a  man  is  void  of  all  grace  and  comfort  too,  he  is  then 
thus  far  in  a  state  of  death  (Eph.  ii.  1).  Thirdly,  there  is  eternal  death  also,  which 
consists  in  the  separation  of  soul  and  body  from  God  for  ever  in  hell.  Therefore 
let  OS  accordingly  look  upon  sin  and  death  in  this  conjunction.  Let  us  not  separate 
or  divide  these  things  which  God  hath  thus  put  together,  but  in  all  temptations  to 
the  one  think  of  the  other.  II.  The  second  is  the  happy  recovery  and  restoration 
OF  believers  by  grace  in  these  words,  "  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ 
Jesus  hath  made  me  free."  First,  here  is  the  remedy  itself  which  is  mentioned, 
"  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  which  is,"  &c.  Where,  first,  of  the  meaning  of  the 
words.  First,  there  are  three  terms  here  before  os  ;  there  is  life,  and  the  Spirit  of 
life,  and  the  law  of  the  Spirit.  By  life  here  we  are  to  understand  the  grace 
of  holiness  and  sanctification.  By  the  word  Spirit  joined  to  life  we  are  to  under- 
stand either  the  original,  because  it  is  wrought  by  the  Spirit,  or  the  activity  and 
intention  of  it.  By  the  law  of  the  Spirit  we  are  to  understand  the  power  and 
efficacy  of  it.  For  law  it  is  a  word  of  command  and  hath  prevalency  with  it.  Now 
the  point  which  is  here  observable  of  us  is  thus  much,  that  in  the  human  nature  of 
Christ  tliere  is  a  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life.  There  is  a  fulness  and  sufficiency  of  all 
grace  and  holiness  in  Christ  considered  as  He  was  man.  This  the  Scripture  doth 
sufiiciently  intimate  and  confirm  unto  us  in  sundry  places  of  it,  as  in  CoL  L  19,  "  It 


CHAP,  vni.]  ROMANS.  66t^ 

pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell."  This  was  requisite  thus 
to  be  upon  a  twofold  ground  and  consideration  especially — First,  in  regard  of  the 
personal  union  of  His  human  nature  with  His  Divine.  Secondly,  as  this  was 
requisite  in  regard  of  His  personal  union,  so  also  in  regard  of  His  work  of  mediator- 
ship.  First,  take  it  in  the  preparatory  reference  ;  and  so  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ, 
it  did  fit  Him  and  dispose  Him  and  qualify  Him  for  the  work  of  the  mediatorship. 
This  we  may  conceive  it  to  have  done  in  these  respects — First,  in  the  sanctifying  of 
the  flesli  of  Christ  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin.  Secondly,  it  also  dignified  this 
nature  and  advanced  it  above  all  other  creatures.  Thirdly,  this  Spirit  of  life 
in  Christ  it  did  also  fill  His  human  nature  with  as  much  grace  as  it  was  capable 
of,  and  with  all  these  perfections  whereunto  the  nature  of  grace  doth  reach  and 
extend  itself.  Again,  further,  it  is  also  considerable  in  the  exertions  and  trans- 
actions of  it.  Whatever  Christ  did  as  mediator,  He  was  more  particularly  enabled 
hereunto  from  this  Spirit  of  life.  As  first  of  all,  it  was  this  which  quickened  Him 
and  encouraged  Him  in  His  entrance  upon  it.  Secondly,  it  likewise  sustained 
Him,  and  upheld  Him  in  the  very  performance  itself.  Thirdly,  in  that  moreover 
it  at  last  revived  Him  and  raised  Him  from  the  dead.  Adam,  he  brought  down 
our  nature  and  subjected  it  to  a  great  deal  of  disparagement  by  his  transgression  ; 
but  Christ  by  His  purity  and  holiness  hath  set  it  up,  and  taken  off  that  disparage- 
ment from  it  which  was  formerly  upon  it.  Again,  further,  here  is  comfort  as  to  the 
point  of  continuance  of  grace  and  perseverance  in  it.  Forasmuch  as  that  grace  and 
hohness  which  we  now  partake  of  under  the  gospel,  it  is  in  good  and  safe  hands. 
The  grace  which  we  had  given  us  in  Adam  we  lost,  but  that  grace  which  we  have 
now  in  the  new  covenant  we  have  it  upon  better  and  surer  terms,  being  such  as  ia 
now  rooted  in  Christ  as  the  proper  subject  of  it.  This  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  it  is 
in  Christ  Jesus.  The  second  is  the  efiScacy  of  this  remedy  upon  St.  Paul  and  all 
other  believers,  "  Hath  made  me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death":  where  the 
remedy  is  as  larf^^e  as  the  disease,  and  the  plaster  as  broad  as  the  sore.  Here  is 
the  law  of  the  Spirit  in  opposition  to  the  law  of  the  flesh,  and  the  law  of  life 
in  opposition  to  the  law  of  death  in  us.  First,  as  to  matter  of  justification.  This 
holiness  of  Christ  it  frees  us  from  the  law  of  death  and  condemnation.  But 
secondly,  it  holds  good  in  point  of  sanctification  likewise.  The  pure  and  holy 
nature  of  Christ  is  the  spring  and  original  of  all  holiness  in  us.  "  And  of  His  fulness 
do  we  all  receive,  and  grace  for  grace,"  as  the  apostle  tells  us  (John  i.  12).  The 
Spirit  of  God  does  not  bestow  grace  upon  us  immediately,  but  He  bestows  it  upon 
us  through  Christ.  Let  us  learn  from  hence  to  bless  God  for  Christ,  and  give  Him 
the  glory  of  His  own  holiness  in  us.  (Thomas  Horton.)  Spiritual  emancipation : 
— The  word  '*  law  "  may  denote  commandment,  or  the  customary  habit  or  state  of 
any  creature.  In  the  one  sense  we  talk  of  the  laws  of  God,  or  the  laws  of  kings  ; 
in  the  other  sense  we  talk  of  the  laws  of  nature,  of  matter,  or  of  mind.  It  seems 
much  better  to  understand  the  verse  according  to  the  second  or  subjective  use  of 
the  word  "  law,"  and  then  its  reference  is  seen  to  be  to  the  believer's  sanctifica- 
tion. I.  Man's  natdral  state  op  moral  thbaldom.  1.  There  is  a  principle  of 
depravity  in  every  human  heart  (Bom.  iii.  23 ;  Gal.  iii.  22).  The  whole  work 
of  Christ,  as  tasting  death  for  every  man,  is  based  upon  the  assumption  that 
all  the  world  is  guilty  before  God ;  for  if  not,  there  must  be  some  for  whom  Christ 
has  not  died,  inasmuch  as  they  needed  no  atonement.  Yet  where  are  these  to  be 
found  ?  This  principle  of  evil  may  be  described  according  to  its  various  modes  of 
manifestation.  It  is — (1)  The  love  of  the  creature,  in  opposition  to  the  love  of  the 
Creator.  (2)  Self-will,  or  self-assertion,  in  opposition  to  the  will  of  God  and  the 
requirements  of  His  law.  (3)  Sensualism,  in  contrast  with  that  which  is  intellectual 
and  spiritual.  (4)  Pride  and  self-preference.  (5)  Selfishness  and  self-seeking.  (6) 
A  tendency  to  falsehood  and  guile.  2.  This  principle  operates  with  the  regularity 
of  a  natural  law,  determining  all  our  volitions  and  affpctions.  Man  sins  with  the 
same  certainty  that  an  apple,  loosened  from  the  tree,  drops  to  the  ground.  It  ia 
natural  for  the  sun  to  rise  and  set,  for  the  moon  to  wax  and  wane,  for  the  tides  to 
ebb  and  flow,  for  the  seasons  to  revolve,  and  for  the  generations  of  men  to  be  born 
and  die :  to  do  otherwise,  in  any  of  these  instances,  would  imply  a  miracle  or 
a  violence  done  to  the  uniformity  of  nature.  So  likewise  it  is  natural  and 
inevitable  that  men,  unrenewed  by  grace,  should  sin.  8.  This  law  of  sin  is 
likewise  a  law  of  death.  God  by  express  enactment  has  appointed  death  as  the 
wages  of  sin.  "The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  But  in  addition  to  that 
external  decree,  there  is  an  internal  tendency  in  sin  to  fructify  in  death  (James 
i.  16),  and  to  destroy  the  life  of  the  soul.     II.  The  statb  ow  uoBAii  iwubox 


654  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [cBLf.  wnu 

AOHiBVED  FOR  tJ8  BY  THE  GOSPEL.  1.  There  is  a  principle  of  life  in  them  that 
believe.  They  live,  by  having  their  minds  enlightened  with  the  knowledge  of  God, 
by  feeling  the  burden  of  their  sins  removed,  and  by  being  able  to  look  up  to  God 
with  filial  confidence  and  trust,  by  having  the  conscience  cleansed  from  dead  works 
to  serve  the  living  God,  by  being  inspired  with  new  emotions,  animated  by  new 
aims.  2.  This  life  is  imparted  and  sustained  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  not  self- 
generated,  but  it  is  given  from  above.  He  who  receives  it  is  born  of  the  Spirit. 
3.  This  principle  of  life  operates  with  the  regularity  of  a  law.  The  Spirit  takes  up 
His  residence  in  the  breast  of  the  converted  man,  and  goes  on  working  till  every 
thought  is  brought  into  subjection  to  Christ,  and  the  work  of  the  believer's 
sanctification  is  complete.  4.  This  Spirit  of  life  is  realised  only  by  oar  being  in 
Christ,     (r.  Q.  Eorton.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  For  what  the  law  could  not  do,  In  that  It  was  weak  through  the 
flesh. — The  requirement  of  the  law  : — I.  The  Divine  purpose  for  man,  whether  im 
THE  Old  Testament  ob  the  New,  is  the  same.  The  reader  who  turns  from  the 
one  to  the  other  seems  to  have  passed  into  a  new  world.  The  things,  such  as 
sacrifices,  &c.,  that  seemed  of  most  importance  in  the  one,  seem  of  no  importance 
at  all  in  the  other.  But  under  seeming  divergence,  there  is  essential  unity — a 
unity  that  comes  to  the  surface  in  the  text.  Here  we  read  of  "  the  righteousness," 
or  better  still,  "  the  requirement  of  the  law."  Now  what  was  this  ?  Not  what  it 
seemed  to  the  great  mass  of  the  Jews.  Had  the  Pharisee  who  prayed,  "  God,  I 
thank  Thee,"  Ac,  been  asked,  he  would  have  given  a  list  of  things  to  be  done  or 
avoided.  But  now  and  then  a  prophet  caught  a  glimpse  of  this  purpose.  Now  it 
is  the  Preacher,  "  Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter,"  &o.  Then  it  is 
Isaiah  (Iviii.  6,  7).  Now  it  is  Micah  (vi.  8).  Then  it  is  David  in  the  fifty-first 
Psalm,  "  The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  spirit,"  &c.  The  end  of  the  law  was 
not  to  make  formalists,  but  good  men.  And  the  purpose  of  God  is  the  same  under 
the  Christian  dispensation.  What  God  desires  is  not  certain  forms,  services,  emo- 
tions, but  the  renewal  of  the  whole  nature,  inner  and  outer.  II.  Christ  has  comh 
that  God's  purpose  might  be  completely  attained.  Attained  as  it  never  could 
have  been  in  any  other  way — that  it  might  be  "  fulfilled  "  in  us.  The  architect 
sees  in  vision  a  glorious  building.  As  yet  it  is  empty.  The  masons  labour  and  it 
is  filled  full,  completed,  realised.  The  father  has  a  dream  for  his  son  just  starting 
in  life.  When  the  son  lives  that  life  and  becomes  the  pride  of  his  father,  he  fulfils 
it  What  St.  Paul  means  is  that  our  Father  has  had  a  dream  for  us.  And  that 
that  dream  might  be  accomplished,  that  we  might  become  good,  "  God  sent  His 
own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  and  for  sin."  And  in  Christ  He  did  all  that 
was  needed.  He  condemned  sin  just  where  it  needs  condemning,  in  the  sinner's 
heart.  He  made  a  full  and  complete  atonement.  He  supplied  the  mightiest  of  all 
motives  to  a  new  life  in  the  constraining  love  of  Christ.  And  He  promised  the 
most  effectual  of  all  help  in  the  gift  of  His  Spirit.  Have  we,  too,  a  dream  ?  Do 
we  want  to  be  true  children  of  God  ?  Christ  is  the  only  Way.  Trust,  love,  and 
follow  Him,  and  you  shall  have  "  the  righteousness  of  the  law  "  fulfilled  in  you. 
III.  There  is  but  one  process  by  which  this  purpose  can  be  attained.  The 
sphere  in  which  it  is  to  be  done  is  that  of  active,  not  of  contemplative  life.  In 
business  and  home  duties  and  cares  we  have  to  decide  whether  we  will  yield  to  the 
cravings  of  the  flesh  or  the  promptings  of  the  Spirit.  And  it  is  as  we  walk  in  that 
Spirit,  and  take  up  our  cross  and  deny  ourselves,  that  we  grow  up  into  Christ, 
become  Uke  Him,  and  God's  plan — our  perfection  and  happiness — is  fulfilled  in  us. 
(J.  Ogle.)  Law  helpless  : — The  "  Laocoon  "  may  serve  as  an  artistic  embodiment 
of  Rom.  vii.  14  to  end.  But  the  issues  of  the  struRgle  differ.  Laocoon  is  overcome ; 
St.  Paul  conquers,  in  the  grace  of  Christ.  Self-efiort  for  righteousness  is  a  hopeless 
struggle.  St.  Paul  found  the  "  more  excellent  way."  I.  There  is  one  thing  man 
MUST  somehow  attain — it  is  "righteousness."  1.  Except  for  this  pursuit  of 
rigbtt^ousness,  it  is  not  worth  being  a  man  at  aU.  Without  it  how  is  man  higher 
than  the  beast  ?  No  man  really  lives  save  as  he  pursues  this.  No  man  can  ever 
be  satisfied  save  as  he  attains  this.  2.  But  what  is  righteousness  ?  It  is — (1) 
Conformity  of  inward  conditions  and  outward  conduct.  It  is  of  the  lack  of  this 
harmony  St.  Paul  complains.  This  he  called  unrighteousness.  (2)  Conformity  ol 
both  spirit  and  conduct  to  the  revealed  will  of  God.  For  that  must  be  our  stanoard. 
8.  Taking  these  ideas  of  righteousness  then,  it  appears  that  men  wholly  fail  to 
attain  it  by  self-effort.  And  self-effort  ends  in  a  despairing  sense  of  the  power  oi 
sin.    Then  arises  the  question — Can  we  attain  righteousness  by  any  helps  we  oan 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  tSU 

■ecure?    Try  two.    II.  The  orrER  of  help  by  the  law.     What  is  law?    The 

glain  statement  of  what  is  right,  made  to  us  with  befitting  sanctions.  This  cannot 
elp  ns  to  righteousness.  Because — 1.  Of  its  nature.  It  can  only  disclose  sin  and 
condemn.  "I  had  not  known  sin,  but  by  the  law."  It  cannot  give  life.  2.  Of 
the  corruption  of  man.  He  is  "weak  through  the  flesh";  he  "cannot  do  the 
thing  that  he  would."  There  is  no  hope  of  ever  making  flesh  render  perfect 
obedience.  It  is  plain  that  "  law  is  helpless."  III.  The  offer  or  help  by  God.  This 
help  is  in  no  sense  intended  to  set  law  aside.  It  is  the  offer  of  power  to  obey. 
And  the  offer  is  made  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  came  into  the  world  bringing 
a  new  force  of  Divine  hfe.  How,  then,  does  God  in  Christ  help?  Not  as 
law  does,  trying  to  shape  conduct  and  force  the  flesh,  but  by  quickening 
the  spirit,  renewing  the  will,  moulding  the  inclination,  inspiring  the  soul 
with  love  to  God,  and  holy  desires.  And  this  succeeds.  Thus  urged  and  inspired, 
the  spirit  can  master  the  flesh,  and  win  the  righteousness  which  the  law  requires. 
{R.  Tuck.)  The  law^s  inability  to  justify  and  save : — I.  Of  what  law  doth  thb 
APOSTLE  HERE  SPEAK  ?  God's  owu  law,  in  its  strict  and  proper  acceptation,  viz., 
that  revelation  which  the  great  Law-giver  hath  made  of  His  will,  therein  binding 
the  reasonable  creature  to  duty.  But  what  law  of  God?  Either  that  primitive 
law  which  He  imposed  upon  Adam  (and  in  him  upon  all  mankind),  upon  the  keep- 
ing of  which  He  promised  life,  upon  the  breaking  of  which  He  threatened  death  ; 
or  else,  that  law  which  He  gave  Israel  from  Sinai,  namely,  the  decalogue  or  moral 
law,  which  was  but  a  new  draught  of  the  law  first  made  with  Adam.     II.  What  is 

THE   THING    IN    SPECIAL   WHICH    THE    LAW    COULD    NOT   DO  ?        1.    YoU    read     (ver.    1)    of 

exemption  from  condemnation.  Now  this  the  law  could  not  do ;  the  law  can 
condemn  millions,  but  it  cannot  save  one.  2.  Yon  read  (ver.  2)  of  being  made 
free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  Herein,  too,  was  the  law  impotent ;  it  might 
lay  some  restraints  upon,  but  never  bring  down  the  power  of  sin.  3.  There  is  the 
blessed  empire  of  the  spirit  over  the  flesh,  as  also  the  full  and  perfect  obeying  of 
the  law's  commands  ;  neither  of  these  could  the  law  tffect.  4.  Reformation  of  life 
the  law  could  not  do.  6.  The  text  speaks  of  the  condemning  of  sin ;  the  law  can 
condemn  the  sinner,  but  not  (in  a  way  of  expiation)  sin  itself.  6.  There  is  the 
reconciling  of  God  and  the  sinner,  the  satisfying  of  infinite  justice,  the  justifying 
of  the  guilty,  the  giving  of  a  right  and  title  to  heaven.  Now  the  law  was  under  an 
impossibility  of  effecting  any  of  these.  III.  What  is  the  weakness  of  the  law 
HERB  SPOKEN  OF  ?  1.  The  word  is  used  to  set  forth  any  debility,  whether  it  b« 
natural  or  preternatural,  as  being  occasioned  by  some  bodily  disease.  The  apostle 
speaks  of  the  weakness  of  the  commandment  (Heb.  vii.  18),  and  weak  and  beggarly 
elements  (Gal.  iv.  9).  Here  a  higher  law  was  in  his  eye,  and  yet  he  attributes 
weakness  to  it  also  ;  it  could  not  do  because  it  was  weak,  and  it  was  weaJc  because 
it  could  not  do.  2.  This  weakness  of  the  law  is  not  partial,  but  total ;  it  is  not  the 
having  of  a  lesser  strength,  but  the  negation  of  all  strength.  A  man  that  is  weak 
may  do  something,  though  he  cannot  do  it  vigorously,  exactly,  and  thoroughly  ;  but 
now  (as  to  justification  and  salvation)  the  law  is  so  weak  that  it  can  do  nothing. 
rV.  What  the  flesh  is  here  by  which  the  law  is  made  thus  weak  ?  The  corrupt, 
sinful,  depraved  nature  that  is  in  fallen  man.  Observe  that  the  weakness  of  the 
law  is  not  from  the  law  itself,  but  from  the  condition  of  the  subject  with  whom  it 
hath  to  do.  When  man  was  in  the  state  of  innocency,  the  law  (Samson  like)  was 
in  its  full  strength,  and  conld  do  whatever  was  proper  to  it ;  yea  (as  to  itself),  it  ia 
able  yet  to  do  the  same  ;  but  the  case  with  us  is  altered ;  we  cannot  now  fulfil  this 
law,  nor  come  up  to  what  it  requires  of  us,  and  therefore  it  is  weak.  The  strongest 
sword  in  a  weak  hand  can  do  but  little  execution  ;  the  brightest  sun  cannot  give 
light  to  a  blind  eye.  The  law  strengthens  pin,  and  sin  weakens  the  law  (1  Cor.  xv. 
56).  1.  The  special  matter  of  the  law's  weakness.  (1)  With  respect  to  justification 
(chap.  iii.  20 ;  Gal.  ii.  16,  21,  iii.  11,  21,  22 ;  Acts  xiii.  39).  (2)  In  reference  to 
eternal  life.  It  never  yet  carried  one  sinner  to  heaven.  Consider  it  as  the  covenant 
of  work,  so  its  language  is  "  do  and  live  "  (chap.  x.  5).  Now  man  in  his  lapsed 
state  cannot  do  according  to  the  law's  demands,  therefore  by  it  there  is  no  life  for 
him.  2.  The  grounds  or  demonstrations  of  the  law's  impotency.  (1)  It  requires 
that  which  the  creature  cannot  perform.  Before  the  law  can  do  any  great  thing  for 
a  person  it  must  first  be  exactly  fulfilled ;  for  though  man  hath  lost  his  power  the 
law  hath  not  lost  its  rigour.  Though  the  sinner  be  as  the  poor  broken  debtor,  yet 
the  law  will  not  compound  with  him,  but  will  have  full  payment  of  the  whole  debt. 
Now  this  is  impossible.  (2)  The  law  doth  not  give  what  the  creature  needs;  it  asks 
above  his  strength  and  gives  below  his  want,     (a)  He  must  have  grace,  sanctifies- 


6M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  yin, 

tion,  holiness,  &o.,  bat  the  law  will  not  help  him  to  these.  It  is  holy  itself,  bat  it 
cannot  make  others  holy ;  it  can  discover  sin,  but  it  cannot  mortify  sin.  The  law 
is  a  killing  thing,  but  it  is  of  the  sinner,  not  of  the  sin  ;  it  hath  by  reason  of  the  flesh  a 
quite  other  effect ;  for  it  doth  rather  enliven,  increase,  and  irritate  sin,  as  water 
meeting  with  opposition  grows  the  more  fierce  and  violent;  and  the  disease,  the 
more  it  is  checked  by  the  medicine,  the  more  it  rages  (chap.  vii.  8).  (b)  The  law 
calls  for  duty,  but  it  gives  no  strength  for  the  performance  of  it,  Pharaoh-like,  who 
exacted  brick  but  allowed  no  straw,  (c)  Great  is  the  sinner's  need  of  faith ;  for 
without  this  no  justification,  no  peace  with  God,  no  heaven.  Now  the  law  knows 
nothing  of  faith  ;  nay,  it  is  diametrically  opposite  to  it  (Gal.  iii.  12).  (3)  The  law 
could  not  do,  because  it  could  not  heal  that  breach  which  sin  had  made  betwixt 
God  and  the  sinner.  It  can  make  no  reparation  for  what  is  past.  Suppose  the 
sinner  could  for  the  future  come  up  to  a  full  conformity  to  the  law,  yet  the  law 
would  be  weak,  and  the  creature  could  not  thereby  be  justified,  because  reparation 
and  satisfaction  must  be  made  for  what  is  past,  which  to  make  is  impossible  to  the 
law.  Apphcation :  1.  Here's  matter  of  deep  humiliation  to  us.  How  should  we 
lament  that  sinful  nature  by  reason  of  which  the  law  cannot  do  that  for  us  which 
otherwise  it  would  I  2.  It  is  necessary  that  I  should  vindicate  the  honour  of  the 
law,  and  obviate  mistakes  and  bad  inferences.  (1)  Notwithstanding  this  weakness 
of  the  law,  yet  give  it  that  honour  and  reverence  which  is  its  due.  Bemember 
whose  law  it  is,  as  also  what  an  excellent  law  it  is  in  itself  (chap.  vii.  12).  (2) 
Take  heed  that  you  do  not  cast  off  the  law  upon  the  pretence  of  its  weakness,  for 
it  is,  notwithstanding,  obligatory  to  all  (chap.  iii.  31).  (3)  Neither  must  you  look 
upon  the  law  as  altogether — (a)  Weak.  For  though  as  to  some  things  it  be  under 
a  total  impotency,  yet  as  to  other  things  it  still  retains  its  pristine  power.  It  cannot 
take  away  sin,  or  make  righteous,  or  give  life,  but  as  to  the  commanding  of  duty,  the 
directing  and  regulating  of  the  life,  the  threatening  of  punishment  upon  the  viola- 
tion of  it,  here  it  can  do  whatever  it  did  before,  (b)  Useless.  For  though  the 
law  be  not  of  use  as  to  justification,  yet  it  is  of  use  as  a  monitor  to  excite  to 
duty,  as  a  rule  to  direct,  as  a  glass  to  discover  sin,  as  a  bridle  to  restrain  sin,  as  an 
hatchet  to  break  the  hard  heart,  as  a  schoolmaster  to  whip  you  to  Christ  (Gal.  iii. 
24).  3.  Was  the  law  thus  unable  to  do  for  the  sinner  what  was  necessary  '  he 
done  ?  then  never  look  for  righteousness  and  life  from  and  by  the  law.  It  highly 
concerns  every  man  in  the  world  to  make  sure  of  righteousness  and  life ;  bat  theso 
are  only  to  be  had  in  Christ  in  the  way  of  believing,  not  in  the  law  in  the  way  of 
doing.  4.  See  here  the  admirable  love  of  God,  and  be  greatly  affected  with  it.  The 
law  was  weak ;  and  now  the  merciful  God  finds  out  another  way  ;  He  sent  His  own 
Son  in  the  likeness,  &c.  {T.  Jacomb,  D.D.)  The  impotence  of  the  law  : — I.  What 
IS  IT  THAT  THE  LAW  COULD  NOT  DO  ?  It  could  Hot  fulfil  in  US  its  owu  righteousuess. 
It  could  not  cause  us  to  exemplify  that  which  itself  had  enacted.  As  to  any 
efficiency  upon  us,  it  was  a  dead  letter,  and  did  as  little  for  the  morality  of  the 
world  as  if  struck  with  impotency  itself,  and  bereft  of  all  the  means  or  the  right  of 
vindication.  1.  The  apostle  introduces  a  caution,  that  he  might  not  appear  to 
derogate  from  the  law.  The  law  was  not  weak  in  itself,  but  through  the  flesh. 
There  is  a  native  efficiency,  in  all  its  lessons  and  enforcements,  which  is  admirably 
fitted  to  work  out  a  righteousness  on  the  character  of  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed. 
It  is  no  reflection  on  the  penmanship  of  a  beautiful  writer  that  he  can  give  no 
adequate  specimen  of  his  art,  on  the  coarse  or  absorbent  paper  which  will  take  on 
no  fair  impression.  Nor  is  it  any  reflection  on  the  power  of  an  accomplished 
artist  that  he  can  raise  no  monument  thereof  from  the  stone  which  crumbles  at 
every  touch.  And  so  it  is  because  of  the  groundwork,  and  not  of  the  law,  that  the 
attempt  has  failed.  2.  And  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  fulfilment  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  law  in  us  was  a  thing  to  be  desired — not  merely  that  the 
universe  might  become  richer  in  virtue,  but  that  the  law  might  in  us  achieve  the 
vindication  of  its  honour.  It  could  not  do  the  first,  through  the  weakness  of  the 
flesh.  And  as  little  can  it  do  the  second,  excepting  in  those  on  whom  it  wrfaka 
the  vengeance  of  its  insulted  authority.  (1)  It  does  not  work  in  the  persons  of  the 
impenitent  the  virtues  which  it  enjoins,  nor  fulfil  in  this  sense  its  own  righteous- 
ness upon  them.  But  it  wreaks  upon  these  persons  the  vengeance  which  it 
threatens,  and  in  this  sense  may  be  said  to  make  fulfilment  of  its  righteousness. 
(2)  In  the  persons  who  walk  after  the  Spirit — how  can  the  law,  in  reference  to 
them,  acquit  itself  of  its  juridical  honours?  for  they  too  have  offended.  Let  ua 
«ee — II.  How  the  gospel  adjusts  this  DEnciENCY.  There  was  something  more 
than  a  Spirit  necessary  to  work  in  us  a  righteousness — even  a  sacrifice  to  make 


CMAT.  vra.]  ROMANS.  657 

atonement  for  onr  gailt.  1.  The  first  step  was  to  make  ample  reparation  for  the 
injuries  sustained  by  the  law,  and  so,  by  satisfying  its  rights,  making  a  full  vindi- 
cation of  its  righteousness.  That  law  which  was  written  on  tables  of  stone  had  to 
be  appeased  for  its  violated  honour  ere  it  was  transferred  into  the  fleshly  tablets  of 
oar  heart.  The  blood  of  remission  had  to  be  shed  ere  the  water  of  regeneration 
could  be  poured  forth ;  and  so  the  Son  of  God  came  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh, 
and  became  a  sin-offering,  and  sustained  the  whole  weight  of  sin's  condemnation, 
and,  after  ascending  from  the  grave,  had  that  Holy  Ghost  committed  unto  Him 
mider  whose  power  all  who  put  their  trust  in  Him  are  enabled  to  walk  not  after  the 
flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit.  Thus,  historically,  the  atonement  took  place  before  the 
more  abundant  ministration  of  the  Spirit.  2.  And  so  also,  personally,  a  belief  in 
that  atonement  has  the  precedency  to  a  sanctifying  operation  over  the  sinner's 
heart.  Not  till  we  accept  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Lord  our  righteousness  shall  we 
experience  Him  to  be  the  Lord  our  strength.  Conclusion :  1.  In  order  that  the 
righteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  it  is  not  enough  that  we  walk  as 
spiritual  men.  The  more  spiritual  in  fact  that  you  are,  the  greater  will  your  sensi- 
bility  be  to  the  remaining  deficiencies  of  your  heart  and  temper  and  conversation. 
So  that  to  the  last  half -hour  even  of  a  most  triumphant  course  in  sanctification, 
you  must  never  lose  sight  of  Him  on  whom  has  been  laid  the  condemnation  of  all 
your  offences,  and  count  for  your  justification  before  God  on  nothing  else  than  on 
Jesus  Christ  and  on  Him  crucified.  2.  However  zealously  the  righteousness  of 
Christ  must  be  contended  for  as  the  alone  plea  of  a  sinner's  acceptance,  yet  that 
the  benefit  thereof  rests  upon  none  save  those  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after 
the  Spirit.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  The  law's  failure  and  fulfilment : — The  law  of 
God  is  perfect.  You  cannot  add  anything  to  it,  nor  take  anything  from  it,  without 
spoiling  it.  There  is  nothing  wrong  but  the  law  condemns  it,  and  there  is  nothing 
right  but  the  law  approves  it.  The  soul  of  it  is  contained  in  one  word,  "love  "  ; 
but  it  comprehends  every  form  of  duty  which  springs  out  of  our  relationship  to  God 
or  man.  I.  What  the  law  cam  and  cannot  do.  It  cannot  save  a  lost  souL 
The  law,  as  originally  given  to  Adam,  would  have  produced  in  him  a  perfect  hfe. 
But  we  have  fallen,  and  this  has  made  the  law  weak  for  the  accomplishment  of 
God's  purpose  of  justification.  The  law  of  England  protects  honest  men,  and 
deters  many  from  committing  crime ;  but  it  is  practically  powerless  in  the  case  of 
some  habitual  criminals.  The  defect  is  not  in  the  law,  but  in  the  person  with 
whom  it  has  to  deal.  1.  It  sets  before  us  a  straight  path.  Up  the  mountain  side 
I  see  the  way  to  the  summit.  But  I  have  fallen  into  an  abyss,  and  cannot  stir. 
Now  that  path,  like  the  law,  cannot  help  me  to  follow  it.  Still,  it  is  useful  to  know 
the  way.  2.  It  shows  ns  our  deflections  and  stains.  It  is  Uke  the  looking-glass, 
which  cannot  take  away  a  single  spot,  but  can  only  show  where  it  is.  3.  It 
npbraids  us  for  our  sin,  but  it  cannot  forgive.  4.  It  gives  no  inclination  to  do  the 
right,  but  often  creates  the  contrary  inclination  (chap.  vii.).  There  are  some  things 
men  would  not  think  of  doing  if  they  were  not  forbidden.  6.  It  does  not  lend  us 
any  aid  towards  the  fulfilment  of  its  commands.  6.  When  we  have  broken  the  law 
it  brings  no  remedy.  Of  mercy  the  law  knows  nothing.  On  one  occasion  some 
workmen  were  quarrying  some  rocks ;  and  having  made  all  ready  for  a  blast — 
drilled  the  holes,  filled  them  with  gun-cotton,  and  connected  the  fuzes — they 
warned  every  one  away  from  the  place  of  danger.  Then  the  fuzes  were  lighted,  and 
the  workmen  withdrew ;  but,  to  their  horror,  they  saw  a  little  boy,  attracted  by  the 
lights,  running  towards  them.  Those  strong  men  shouted  to  the  boy,  "  Go  back  ! 
go  back  1 "  But  of  course  the  boy,  having  the  same  nature  as  the  rest  of  us,  only 
went  the  more  quickly  into  the  danger.  Still  the  men  cried,  "  Go  back !  go  back  I " 
They  were  like  the  law,  powerless  ;  not  because  their  voices  were  weak,  but  because 
of  the  material  with  which  they  had  to  deal.  But  the  mother  of  the  boy  heard  the 
call,  and  seeing  his  fearful  peril,  dropped  on  one  knee,  opened  her  arms  wide,  and 
called,  "  Come  to  mother  1  come  to  mother !  "  The  boy  stopped,  hesitated  a 
moment,  then  ran  to  her  embrace,  and  so  escaped  the  danger.  What  all  the  phouts 
of  the  strong  men  could  not  do,  the  gentle  voice  of  the  mother  accomplit^hed. 
Their  voices  were  like  the  law,  which  says,  "  Go  back !  go  back  1  "  Her  voice  was 
hke  the  sweet  sound  of  the  gospel,  "  Come  to  Jesus  I  come  to  Jesus  I  "  Note — II. 
God's  gloexous  method.  1.  He  sends.  He  does  not  wait  for  us  to  come  to  Him. 
2.  He  sends  His  Son.  He  had  but  one.  His  Only-begotten ;  but  that  He  might 
"  bring  many  sons  unto  glory,"  He  sent  that  one.  3.  He  sends  Him  in  the  flesh. 
"  Verily  He  took  not  on  Him  the  nature  of  angels."  There  He  is,  bone  of  our  bone, 
and  flesh  of  our  flesh.  4.  He  sends  Him  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh.  His  flesh 
TOIi.  I.  42 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Ttu. 

was  like  sinfol  flesh,  but  it  was  not  sinful  flesh.  5.  He  sends  EUm  on  account  of 
Bin.  6.  He  sends  Him  to  be  a  sacri&ce  for  sin.  Our  sin  was  laid  on  Him ;  and 
when  God  came  to  visit  sin  He  found  it  laid  on  Christ,  and  He  smote  it  there. 
"  For  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust."  7.  He  thus 
condemns  sin  in  the  flesh.  Christ's  death  condemned  sin.  You  may  find  strong 
words  with  which  to  censure  sin,  and  no  words  can  be  too  strong.  But  sin  was 
never  so  condemned  as  when  Jesus  died.  This  blot  must  put  out,  not  the  candles 
and  the  moon  and  the  stars,  but  the  sun  himself.  This  poison  is  so  virulent  that 
the  immortal  must  die.  Now  is  sin  condemned  as  the  vilest  thing  in  the  universe. 
It  has  forced  the  hand  of  Divine  justice  to  smite  down  even  Christ  Himself  instead 
of  guilty  men.  III.  God's  gloeious  achievement.  1.  In  Christ  the  righteousness 
of  the  law  is  fulfilled.  It  is  vindicated.  I,  guilty  by  God's  law,  am  condenmed  to 
punishment.  But  I  am  one  with  Christ.  He  stands  for  me.  He  takes  the  sin  as 
though  He  had  committed  it,  and  suffers  what  I  ought  to  have  suffered ;  and  so 
God's  law  is  vindicated.  Thus  the  righteousness  of  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  every 
believer,  because  his  accepted  Substitute  and  Surety  has  borne  the  punishment. 
"  Then  there  is  an  end  of  the  law,"  says  one.  Stay,  if  a  man  disobeys,  and  is 
punished,  he  does  not  thereby  escape  from  the  duty  of  obedience.  The  law  is 
always  our  creditor  for  a  perfect  obedience.  Now,  there  could  not  have  been  such 
obedience  rendered  to  the  law  even  by  sinless  Adam  as  the  Christ  rendered  to  it. 
I  take,  to-  day,  the  perfect  obedience  of  my  Lord,  and  appropriating  it  by  faith,  I 
call  Him,  ''The  Lord  my  righteousness."  2.  The  righteousness  of  the  law  is 
fulfilled  in  the  Christian  by  the  grace  of  God.  When  we  believe  in  Christ  we  not 
only  receive  pardon,  but  also  renewal.  I  speak  for  all  who  love  Christ.  Tou  do 
long  to  obey  Him.  Ay,  and  you  do  obey  Him.  You  have  laid  aside  the  works  of 
the  flesh.  You  love  God,  and  you  love  your  neighbour.  And  though  not  perfectly, 
yet  in  a  large  measure,  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  you.  I  would  try  to  live  as  if  my 
salvation  depended  upon  my  works  alone ;  and  yet  I  do  so  knowing  all  the  while 
that  I  am  justified  by  faith,  and  not  by  the  works  of  the  law.  Thus  present  obedi- 
ence is  actually  rendered.  3.  This  righteousness  is  fulfilled  through  Christ.  The 
obedience  to  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  us  out  of  gratitude  to  Christ.  (1)  What  the  law 
could  not  do,  the  dying  Christ  has  done.  His  sacrifice  makes  us  hate  evil.  Naming 
the  name  of  Christ,  we  "  depart  from  iniquity " ;  for  we  realise  that  it  was  not 
Boman  soldiers  and  rabble  Jews  alone  who  nailed  Him  to  the  tree,  but  it  was  our 
Bins  that  did  it.  (2)  Gratitude  to  Christ  also  incites  us  to  the  good.  Shall  He  do 
all  this  for  me,  and  I  do  nothing  for  Him  ?  If  He  gave  His  life  for  me,  then  I 
will  give  my  life  to  Him.  He  has  bought  it ;  He  deserves  it ;  and  He  shall  have  it. 
I  will  no  longer  live  to  the  flesh,  since  in  the  flesh  Christ  condemned  my  sin.  Thus 
the  holy  law  is  cheerfully  fulfilled.  4.  This  righteousness  is  fulfilled  in  the  energy 
of  the  Spirit ;  "  in  us,  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit."  God  not 
only  works  for  us,  but  He  also  works  in  us  "  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good 
pleasure."  The  Spirit  applies  the  work  of  Christ  to  the  aoul.  Why  should  not 
every  one  receive,  by  the  Spirit,  this  new  life  at  this  moment  ?  Then  it  wUl  grow, 
for  we  "  walk  after  the  Spirit " ;  we  do  not  stand  still.  As  we  obey  the  law  of  God, 
we  shall  receive  more  and  more  of  His  power ;  for  it  is  written,  that  He  is  "  given 
to  tbem  that  obey  Him."  He  first  teaches  us  to  obey,  and  then,  when  we  obey, 
He  dwells  with  us  in  greater  fulness ;  and  then  "  the  righteousness  of  the  law  ia 
fulfilled  in  us."  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  impotency  of  the  late  through  the  flesh: — 
The  voice  of  Sinai  was  powerless  to  save,  because  our  flesh  was  too  weak  to  throw 
off  the  bondage  of  sin.  Just  so  a  rope  is  powerless  to  save  the  drowning  man  who 
has  not  strength  to  grasp  it.  Whereas  even  such  might  be  saved  by  the  living 
arms  of  a  strong  man.  If  the  flesh  could  do  what  the  mind  approves,  the  law 
would  be  able,  by  revealing  the  badness  of  the  rule  of  sin,  to  dethrone  it, 
and  thus  save  us.  Bat  the  flesh  cannot  drive  out  its  dread  inhabitant. 
Consequently  the  law,  which  caimot  breathe  new  strength  into  the  flesh,  but 
only  faiowledge  into  the  mind,  is  too  weak  to  save  us.  {Prof.  Beet.)  The 
veaknesg  of  the  law  : — Now  in  this  verse  we  have— first,  a  defect  implied ;  and 
secondly,  a  defect  supplied.  The  defect  supplied  in  these,  "  God  sending  His  own 
Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,"  &o.  I.  The  defect  ihpued — 
"  What  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was,"  &o.  First,  to  speak  of  the  defect  itself, 
••  WTiat  the  law  could  not  do."  What  could  not  the  law  do  ?  Why  it  could  not 
justify  us,  or  free  us  from  sin  and  condemnation.  It  could  not  make  us  perfectly 
holy  and  righteous  in  the  sight  of  God.  This  is  likewise  held  forth  to  us  in  diven 
oUter  places  besides  (Acts  xviii.  38,  39 ;  Gal.  iii  21 ;  Heb.  vii.  18).   Now  this  imper- 


eBAP.  TUi.]  ROMANS.  659 

fection  and  insufficiency  which  is  in  it  will  further  appear  unto  us  in  these  regards  : 
first,  because  the  law  does  not  offer  to  us  any  pardon  or  forgiveness  of  those 
things  which  are  done  against  the  law.  The  law  it  hath  in  it  an  accusing  power,  but 
it  hath  not  in  it  an  absolving  power ;  it  threatens  the  curse,  but  it  does  not  tender 
the  promise.  It  is  the  ministration  of  condemnation,  but  it  is  not  the  ministration 
of  life.  And  accordingly  we  meet  with  divers  expressions  in  Scripture  to  that  effect 
(Gal.  iii.  10 ;  James  ii.  10 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  6,  &c.).  Secondly,  the  law,  as  it  does  not 
tender  forgiveness,  so  neither  does  it  give  faith  whereby  to  apprehend  and  lay  hold 
upon  forgiveness  which  is  tendered.  Now  this  the  law  doth  not  do,  but  only  the 
gospel ;  the  law  does  neither  reveal  faith  to  us  nor  work  it  in  us.  Thirdly,  the  law 
does  not  give  us  any  power  neither,  whereby  to  keep  the  commandments  of  God, 
but  leaves  us  in  this  point  cJtogether  feeble.  Why,  but  if  the  law  be  not  able  to 
justify  us,  "  wherefore,  then,  serreth  the  lawf  "  as  the  apostle  makes  the  expostula- 
tion (Gal.  iii.  19).  To  this  we  answer  as  the  apostle  there  answers  himself,  that  it 
serves  in  regard  of  transgressions,  and  so  is  useful  to  these  following  purposes : 
first,  as  a  looking-glass,  wherein  to  see  our  own  ugliness  and  deformity.  When 
we  reflect  upon  our  own  lives  and  ways  and  then  compare  them  with  the  law  of 
God,  then  we  see  how  short  they  are,  and  how  far  from  true  perfection.  Secondly, 
it  serves  as  a  schoolmaster  to  lead  us  and  drive  us  to  Christ ;  while  it  discovers  to 
as  onr  own  imperfection  it  carries  us  to  seek  for  protection  in  another,  that  is,  in 
Him.  As  the  stings  of  the  fiery  serpents  drave  the  Israelites  to  look  up  to  the  brazen 
serpent,  so  the  stings  of  the  law  they  drive  us  to  look  up  to  Christ ;  and  as  the 
needle  makes  way  for  the  thread,  so  does  the  law  make  way  for  the  gospel.  Thirdly, 
it  serves  as  a  rule  of  life  and  new  obedience  which  we  are  to  conform  ourselves 
onto.  The  second  is  the  occasion  of  this  defect  whence  the  law  was  thus  unable, 
and  that  is  here  expressed  to  be  "  by  the  flesh."  It  was  a  thing  never  yet  done 
that  any  one  which  was  a  mere  man  did  fulfil  the  law.  And  this  (to  give  you 
some  account  of  it)  may  be  thus  demonstrated  to  us  as  coming  thus  to  pass. 
First,  from  the  inbred  concupiscence  which  all  men  are  infected  withal :  those 
which  have  in  them  a  principle  which  does  continually  oppose  and  fight  against 
the  law,  they  are  not  able  to  fulfil  the  law.  Now  this  have  all  men  in  this  world, 
even  the  best  that  are;  therefore  they  are  not  able  to  fulfil  it.  That  this  principle 
it  is  very  much  battered  and  mortified,  and  in  a  great  measure  subdued,  but 
yet  it  is  not  whoUy  removed.  The  second  may  be  taken  from  that  actual  sin 
which  fiows  from  original,  as  there  is  in  us  a  corrupt  nature  which  does  indispose 
ns  to  the  keeping  of  the  law,  so  there  are  also  in  us  many  daily  transgressions 
which  do  plainly  take  us  off  from  keeping  of  it.  Thirdly,  it  may  be  also 
demonstrated  from  the  weakness  and  imperfection  of  grace.  Fourthly,  it  may 
be  likewise  shown  from  the  nature  of  the  law  itself,  and  that  is  that  it  is  spiritual. 
The  law  requires  more  than  the  outward  action,  also  the  inward  affection  ;  and  not 
only  some  imperfect  endeavour,  but  also  the  perfectest  degree  of  obedience  which 
can  be  performed.  Lastly,  it  is  from  hence  clear  that  none  can  here  in  this  present 
life  fulfil  the  law  from  that  necessity  which  lies  upon  every  one  to  pray  for  the  for- 
giveness of  sins.  Our  inabihty  which  we  have  voluntarily  brought  upon  ourselves 
does  not  hinder  God  from  exacting  that  which  is  His  own.  The  use  of  this  point 
may  be  to  humble  us  in  the  sight  of  our  own  insufficiency  and  misery  which  is  upon 
as,  especially  when  we  shall  consider  that  we  have  brought  it  upon  ourselves.  All 
evils  are  at  any  time  so  much  the  more  tedious  as  we  ourselves  have  any  hand  in 
procuring  them  and  bringing  them  about.  II.  The  second  is  the  defect  supplied 
— ••  God  sending  His  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,"  &c.  There  are  three 
main  particulars  here  observable  of  us :  first,  the  Author  of  our  deliverance,  and 
that  is  God.  Secondly,  the  means  of  our  deliverance,  and  that  is  Christ.  Thirdly, 
the  effect  of  our  deliverance,  and  that  is  the  condemnation  of  sin :  "  God  sending 
forth  His  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin  condemned  sin,"  &c. 
We  begin  with  the  first,  the  Author  or  principal  Efficient,  and  that  is  here  signified 
to  be  God.  And  when  we  speak  of  this  there  are  three  things  here  further  consider- 
able. First,  the  goodness  of  God.  And  secondly,  the  wisdom  of  God.  And  thirdly, 
the  power  of  God.  All  these  in  this  dispensation.  First,  here  was  the  exceeding 
goodness  and  mercy  of  God,  that  when  He  saw  and  observed  into  what  a  condition 
we  had  brought  ourselves  did  not  now  leave  us  in  this  condition,  but  sought  out, 
and  found  out  a  way  for  the  delivery  of  us.  This  was  the  exceeding  riches  of  mercy 
which  is  here  to  be  taken  notice  of  by  ns.  And  this  it  may  be  further  amplified 
from  divers  considerations.  First,  from  the  state  in  which  we  stood  to  Himself, 
•nd  that  is  of  enmity  and  hatred  (ver.  10).    Secondly,  from  the  state  in  which  Ha 


MO  ^HE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OBAf.  rm- 

Btood  to  as.  It  was  God  that  was  first  wronged,  and  yet  it  was  God  that  first  began 
to  think  of  the  means  of  reconciliation.  Thirdly,  His  independency  apon  as  :  He 
stood  in  no  need  of  us,  He  could  have  done  well  enough  without  us.  Fourthly,  His 
preterition  and  passing  by  of  other  creatures  who  by  their  creation  were  more 
glorious  than  ourselves.  What  does  all  this  serve  for  but  to  enlarge  our  hearts  more 
in  thankfulness  to  God  who  has  done  so  graciously  for  us  and  with  us  f  The  second 
is  the  wisdom  of  God ;  God  in  His  wisdom.  And  that  especially  in  observing  this 
order  and  method.  First,  He  would  suffer  us  to  be  miserable  before  He  would  make 
as  absolutely  and  eternally  happy.  The  law  must  first  be  "weak  through  the  fiesh" 
before  God  sends  His  Son.  Thirdly,  here  was  also  His  power.  And  whilst  here  in  this 
text  our  salvation  is  reduced  to  God  as  the  principal  Author  and  Efficient  of  it,  it 
is  hereby  made  to  be  strong  salvation,  especially  if  we  consider  in  what  a  case  we 
were  before  He  undertook  it.  Though  the  law  were  unable  to  save  us,  yet  God  for 
all  that  is  not  unable.  Hence  it  is  that  the  Scripture  still  represents  our  salvation 
to  as  under  this  notion.  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God  and  thy  Saviour  "  (Isa.  xliii.  3, 
12,  <fec.).  "  The  mighty  God,"  Ac.  (Isa.  ix.  6).  If  it  were  in  any  hands  besides 
His  we  might  jointly  fear  the  miscarriage  of  it.  The  second  particular  branch 
considerable  in  the  second  general  of  the  text  is  the  means  of  deUverance,  and  that 
is  here  expressed  to  be  the  sending  of  Christ,  in  these  words,  "  God  sending  His 
own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin."  In  which  passage  we  have 
three  things  more  considerable  of  us  :  first,  the  person  sent,  and  that  is  the  Son  of 
God,  God's  own  Son.  Secondly,  the  manner  of  sending  Him,  and  that  is  "  in  the 
likeness  of  sinful  flesh."  Thirdly,  the  end  for  which,  and  that  is  "  for  sin."  We 
begin  with  the  first  of  these,  viz.,  the  person  sent,  God's  "  own  Son."  And  there 
are  no  less  than  three  main  articles  of  our  Christian  faith,  all  at  once,  which  are 
here  exhibited  unto  us.  First,  here  is  the  Godhead  and  Divinity  of  Christ.  Secondly, 
here  is  the  manhood  and  incarnation  of  Christ.  And  thirdly,  here  is  the  union  of 
the  two  natures  of  Christ  in  one  person.  The  second  is  the  manner  of  sending  Him, 
"  In  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh."  This  we  may  take  notice  of  to  this  purpose, 
namely,  to  show  unto  us  how  requisite  it  is  for  ourselves,  in  whatever  business  we 
andertake,  especially  of  great  consequence,  to  have  our  call  and  mission  from  God, 
that  He  sends  us  and  appoints  us  thereunto.  When  He  calls  us,  and  designs  as,  and 
sets  us  apart,  as  He  did  Christ,  we  may  expect  help  from  Him.  Secondly,  in  order 
to  God's  acceptance  and  approbation.  It  will  from  hence  be  more  pleasing  to  God 
what  we  do,  and  well  taken  by  Him.  Thirdly,  in  order  likewise  to  success.  There 
is  likehhood  of  some  good  to  follow  upon  that  performance  which  is  undertaken  by 
designation  from  God.  The  third  thing  here  considerable  is  the  end,  and  that  is 
expressed  to  be  '•  for  sin."  For  sin,  that  is,  to  be  an  offering  for  sin  (2  Cor.  v. 
21).  Now  God  had  herein  a  regard  to  a  double  consideration:  first.  His  own 
glory,  as  sin  was  opposite  to  that.  And  secondly,  our  good,  as  sin  was  opposite  to 
this  likewise.  What  does  all  this  teach  as  ?  First,  from  hence  to  take  notice  of 
the  grievous  and  fearful  nature  of  sin.  That  which  could  not  be  holpen  but  by  the 
sending  of  the  Son  of  God  into  the  world,  that  was  certainly  no  small  grievance,  nor 
to  be  reckoned  so  by  us.  Secondly,  let  us  not  set  up  that  which  Christ  came  to  take 
away,  lest  we  thereby  make  His  coming  of  no  effect  unto  us.  The  third  and  last 
is  the  effect  or  accompUshment  of  it :  Christ's  obtaining  of  the  end  for  which  He 
came,  and  God's  obtaining  of  the  end  for  which  He  sent  Him,  in  these  words — He 
condemned  sin  in  the  flesh.  There  are  two  things  here  considerable  of  us  :  first, 
that  which  Christ  did.  And  secondly,  the  state  or  condition  which  He  did  it  in. 
That  which  He  did  was  the  condemnation  of  sin.  The  state  which  He  did  it  in 
was  in  the  fiesh,  as  it  is  here  expressed  unto  us.  In  this  dispensation  of  God,  for 
the  condemning  of  sin  by  Christ,  there  were  divers  things  at  once  remarkable,  and 
so  considerable  of  us  :  first,  God's  infinite  justice,  in  that  He  would  not  let  sin  go 
anpunished.  Secondly,  God's  infinite  mercy,  in  that  He  would  punish  sin  in  the 
surety,  and  not  in  the  proper  person  himself  that  had  offended.  Thirdly,  God's 
infinite  wisdom,  in  contriving  of  a  way  for  the  uniting  and  reconciling  of  these  two 
attributes  together.  His  justice  and  His  mercy.  Perfect  justice  satisfied,  and  perfect 
mercy  enlarged.  Fourthly,  God's  infinite  power,  in  that  He  could  do  that  which 
none  other  could  do  besides.  Let  as  take  heed  of  speaking  and  pleading  for  sin 
which  is  thus  condemned  by  God  Himself ;  seeing  He  has  passed  sentence  upon  it, 
let  as  not  open  our  mouths  for  it.  (Thomas  Horton,  D.D.)  The  weakness  of  the 
law  and  the  power  of  the  gospel : — I.  Thb  weakness  of  the  law.  It  could  not — 1. 
Give  peace  to  the  conscience.  2.  Renew  the  affections.  3.  Sanctify  the  life.  Corrupt 
flesh  too  rebellious  and  mighty  to  be  controlled  by  it.  II.  The  foweb  of  the  qospeu 


.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  661 

1.  The  atonement  of  Christ  gives  peace  to  the  eonscience.  2.  The  grace  of  Qod 
renews  the  heart.  8.  The  Holy  Spirit  by  His  indwelling  consecrates  the  life.  (J. 
J.  S.  Bird,  M.A.)        The  believer^ t  deliverance  : — I.  What  God  has  dons  fob  cb. 

1.  He  has  done  what  the  law  could  not  do.  This  moral  law  is  the  great  code  of 
holy  requirement,  enjoined  by  God  upon  all  His  Intelligent  creatures  for  the  double 
purpose  of  forming  their  characters  and  regulating  their  lives.  Now  the  law  is 
found  totally  unable  to  accomplish  this  object  by  reason  of  our  weakness  and 
depravity.  It  is  the  flesh  which  is  too  weak  to  bear  the  pressure  of  the  law,  just  as 
there  are  pebbles  too  friable  to  bear  the  friction  of  polishing,  or  just  as  there  are 
mirrors  too  distorted  and  dingy  to  reflect  any  light.  2.  "  God  has  sent  His  own  Son 
in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh."  (1)  We  thus  see  that  what  the  law  could  not  do  no 
creature  in  the  universe  could  do.  To  bring  any  pure  created  nature  into  contact 
with  man's  depravity  would  tend  not  to  remove  that  depravity,  but  only  to 
jeopardise  the  higher  nature.  Thus,  with  two  streams,  the  one  clear  and  the  other 
turbid,  when  they  mingle,  it  is  not  the  clear  stream  which  purifies  the  turbid  one, 
but  the  reverse.  Only  God  Himself  could  be  trusted  to  mingle  intimately  with 
mankind,  and  lay  hold  upon  the  seed  of  Adam  to  raise  it  up  from  defilement  and 
misery.  (2)  He  has  sent  that  Son  "  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh."  The  Saviour 
shared  in  our  infirmities,  but  yet  He  was  without  sin.  Though  "  born  of  a  woman," 
He  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners."  3.  This  was  "  for 
sin."  If  this  be  taken  in  the  general  sense  of  "  on  account  of  sin,"  or  "  with 
reference  to  sin,"  still  we  must  think  principally  of  His  great  atoning  death.  It 
was  on  the  Cross  that  the  Lamb  of  God  took  away  the  sin  of  the  world  (1  Pet.  ii. 
24).  4.  God  thus  "  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,"  i.e.,  Christ  on  the  Cross  condemned 
sin  to  lose  its  hold  upon  mankind,  and  despoiled  it  of  its  tyrannous  control ;  or  else 
condemned  to  destruction  the  sin  which  is  in  our  flesh.  Here  we  see  how  Jesus 
saves  His  people  from  their  sius.  This  word  "  condemned  "  suggests  a  comparison 
with  ver.  1.  The  condemnation  which  should  have  come  upon  us  has  come  upon 
our  sins  instead.  And  thus,  while  we  are  forgiven,  we  are  also  delivered  from  the 
thraldom  of  sin,  that  henceforth  we  should  serve  it  no  more.  II.  What  God  has 
WBOUOHT  IN  us.  1.  Nothing  is  more  clear  than  that  Christ  intends  His  people  to  be 
actually  holy  (Titus  ii.  11,  and  iii.  3-6).  Here,  then,  we  see  the  double  glory  of 
the  gospel  over  the  law.  It  can  do  what  the  law  cannot  do,  in  that  it  can  confer  on 
na  a  full  and  sufficient  pardon,  and  also  save  us  from  the  continued  dominion  of 
sin,  and  cause  us  to  walk  in  newness  of  life.  If  a  man  hate  God  and  his  neighbour, 
it  can  make  him  love  them ;  if  he  be  a  drunkard,  it  can  make  him  sober ;  if  an 
idolater,  it  can  turn  him  from  his  idols ;  if  a  liar,  it  will  make  him  truthful,  &q. 

2.  Let  us,  then,  see  how  it  is  that  God  works  this  mighty  change  within  as.  (1) 
Our  hearts  are  won  to  holiness  and  the  love  of  God  by  the  incarnation  and  suffer- 
ings of  His  Son.  (2)  They  are  set  free  to  a  life  of  holiness  by  the  removal  of  o«tr 
guilt  and  condemnation  by  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus.  (3)  They  are  directly  strengthened 
and  vivified  for  a  career  of  holy  hving  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
purchase  of  Jesus'  death,  and  the  gift  of  His  exaltation.  (T.  G.  Morton.)  The 
Christian  plan  : — I.  The  occasion  of  its  intbodoction.  The  inefficiency  of  the  law. 

I.  What  could  not  the  law  do  ?  That  which  man  as  a  sinner  required  for  his  sal- 
vation. It  could  neither  regenerate  nor  justify.  Man  wanted  both  the  nature  for 
and  the  title  to  heaven,  and  the  law  could  give  neither.  2.  Why  the  law  could  not 
do  this  ?  (1)  Not  because  there  is  anything  in  it  essentially  inimical  to  happiness : 
law  is  essentially  good.  "  It  was  weak  through  the  flesh,"  i.e.,  in  consequence  of 
man's  depravity.  It  cannot  make  man  happy,  because  man  is  corrupt.  (2)  This 
weakness  of  law  is  its  glory.  It  is  the  glory  of  law  that  it  cannot  stoop  to  human 
imperfections  ;  were  it  to  do  so  the  order  of  the  moral  universe  would  be  destroyed. 

II.  The  history  of  its  development.  "  God  sending  His  own  Son,"  <fec.  Observe 
— 1.  The  mission  of  Jesus.  "  God  sent "  Him  to  do  what  the  law  could  not  do — 
regenerate  and  justify.  Sovereign  love  is  the  primal  spring.  2.  The  incarnation 
of  Jesus.  "  In  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh."  Only  the  likeness.  His  humanity 
was  necessary  as  an  example  and  as  an  atonement.  3.  The  sacrifice  of  Jesus.  For 
•  •'  sin-ofifering,"  &c.  III.  The  design  of  its  operation.  He  did  not  come  to 
abrogate,  relax,  or  supersede  law.  but  to  fulfil  it,  that  "  its  righteousness  might  be 
fulfilled  "  in  the  sinner.  The  Christian  plan  does  this  by  presenting  law — 1.  In  its 
most  attractive  forms.  In  tho  life  of  Jesus.  2.  In  connection  with  the  greatest 
motives  to  obedience.  In  Christ  you  see  God's  infinite  respect  for  law  as  well  as 
His  love  for  sinners,  3.  In  connection  with  the  greatest  helper — tlie  Holy  Spirit. 
**It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  Away,"  dc.     (D.  Thonuu,  D.D.)        Tlie  ttate  of 


662  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tiu. 

Christianity  to-day  : — 1.  The  text  is  a  distinct  Btatement  that  Judaism  had  come 
tc  the  end  of  its  infiuence.  It  had  educated  them  to  a  point  where,  while  men  had 
need  of  more,  it  had  nothing  more  to  give.  2.  We  hear  men  speak  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion  like  Paul  spoke  of  the  Jewish.  It  is  patronisingly  said.  It  has  done  a 
good  work ;  but  men  are  so  far  educated  by  it  now  that  it  is  no  longer  able  to  meet 
the  want  of  our  times ;  but  from  some  source  we  are  to  expect  a  latter-day  glory, 
which  will  be  to  Christianity  what  Christianity  was  to  Judaism.  I.  What  abe  thk 
EVIDENCES  THAT  Cheistianity  IS  BEGiNNiNO  TO  WANE  ?  1.  It  is  Said  that  Churchism 
is  wearing  out.  (1)  But,  even  if  that  were  true,  the  Church  is  no  more  religion 
than  the  masonry  of  the  aqueduct  is  the  water  that  flows  in  it.  Schools  are  a  very 
different  thing  from  intelligence,  though  intelligence  uses  them  as  instruments. 
Churches  may  change  without  changing  in  one  single  iota  the  substance  of  religion. 
(2)  But  besides  this,  the  spirit  of  man,  in  religion,  intermits.  There  has  never  been 
a  steady  growth  in  anything — neither  in  science  nor  government.  If,  then,  there 
is  now  a  decadence  of  interest  in  religion,  it  might  show  simply  that  we  are  in  one 
of  these  stages  of  temporary  inactivity.  2.  It  may  be  said  that  the  thinking  men, 
particularly  in  the  direction  of  science,  are  less  and  less  believers  in  revelation. 
And  the  statement  has  some  truth  in  it.  But  in  the  history  of  the  race  we  And  that 
one  element  usually  takes  precedence  of  every  other,  and  absorbs  everything,  cheat- 
ing the  other  elements.  In  some  ages  it  is  the  reUgious  element ;  in  others  it  is 
cold,  hard  thought ;  then  this  has  given  way  to  periods  of  enthusiastic  and  even 
superstitious  devotion.  Just  now  we  are  in  a  period  of  mere  material  investigations. 
But  we  shall  certainly  come  to  another  period  ere  long.  If  now  the  spiritual  ele- 
ments are  cheated,  the  time  will  soon  come  when  these  things  will  begin  to  balance 
themselves.  So  soon  as  that  growth  which  seems  to  unsettle  the  old  faith  has 
adjusted  itself,  the  religious  wants  of  the  soul  reassert  themselves,  and  ere  long  the 
old  statements  are  overlaid  with  new  religious  developments,  and  with  religious 
truth  in  new  forms.  II.  What  abe  the  evidences  that  Chkistianitt  is  not  on  thb 
WANE  ?  1.  Is  faith  giving  place  to  indifference  ?  On  the  contrary,  probably  never 
was  there  an  age  in  which  there  was  so  deep  a  religious  faith  as  now.  What  men 
call  a  want  of  faith  is  oftentimes  only  unwillingness  to  accept  so  httle  as  hitherto 
has  been  included  in  the  articles  of  faith.  It  is  the  reaching  out  of  the  soul  in  new 
aspirations.  It  is  asking  for  more,  not  for  less.  2.  Is  the  devotional  spirit  decayed? 
It  is  changing  and  ought  to  change.  As  progress  in  intelligence  raises  men  into  a 
better  conception  of  God,  and  their  own  place  in  creation,  there  will  be  a  new  mode 
of  reverence,  a  new  method  of  devotion.  The  element  of  love  has  greatly  increased, 
Bo  that  there  is  now  far  more  of  the  filial  spirit.  The  devotional  spirit,  though  far 
less  ascetic  than  it  was,  is  more  prevalent ;  and  in  the  community  there  is  far  more 
respect  for  reHgion  than  formerly.  3.  Never  was  there  such  a  spirit  of  propagation 
as  now.  Never  were  so  much  pains  taken  to  rear  men  for  teaching  the  faith.  Never 
was  there  so  large  a  demand  for,  and  supply  of  its  instruments,  in  the  form  of 
rehgiouB  books  and  papers  :  and,  above  all,  never  was  there  such  a  spirit  of  building 
churches,  and  supplying  them  in  waste  and  destitute  places.  4.  Is  the  family  to-day 
less  or  more  under  the  influence  of  a  true  spiritual  Christianity  than  it  formerly 
was  7  There  never  was  a  period  when  there  were  so  many  high-toned  and  pure 
Christian  families  as  to-day.  5.  Has  the  Christian  religion  shown  any  signs  of 
failing  as  a  reforming  power  in  its  application  to  the  morals  of  the  day  ?  Is  there 
less  conscience,  less  hope,  less  desire  to  purify  the  individual  and  the  community  ? 
Beligion  dying  ?  What,  then,  mean  the  execrations  of  wicked  men  ?  The  Church 
losing  its  power  ?  Why,  then,  are  men  so  complaining  of  its  intrusion,  telling  ua 
to  stay  at  home  and  preach  the  gospel,  and  not  to  meddle  with  things  that  do  no* 
concern  us  ?  It  is  the  light  which  streams  from  the  gospel  which  wakes  the  owls 
and  the  bats.  6.  Has  the  Christian  spirit  lost  its  power  over  government  and  publia 
affairs  ?  I  think  the  conscience  of  our  community  never  was  so  high  as  it  is  to-day. 
Everywhere  is  the  gospel  leavening  pubUo  administrations,  and  raising  up  an 
intelligent  Christian  public  sentiment  which  is  itself  as  powerful  upon  governments 
as  winds  are  upon  the  sails  of  ships.  If  these  things  be  so,  are  we  quite  ready  yet 
to  assume  the  condition  of  mourning  ?  On  the  contrary,  of  all  periods  of  the  world 
this  would  be  the  last  that  I  should  have  chosen  to  lift  up  my  hands  in  despair  and 
say,  Eeligion  is  dying  out,  and  must  yield  to  a  new  dispensation.  Conclusion  :  1. 
We  may  expect  some  changes,  but  none  other  than  to  deepen  religious  life  and  faith 
in  religious  truth.  There  will  be  a  better  understanding  of  the  human  heart,  and 
better  modes  of  reaching  it  with  religious  truth.  But  no  amount  of  change  in  these 
external  instrumentalities  wUl  affect  in  the  slightest  degree  the  power  oi  fcbe 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS,  663 

sdigious  element.  2.  The  instrumentalities  of  religion  hereafter,  we  may  believe,  will 
b«  more  various.  Laws,  and  customs,  and  instruments,  being  filled  with  a  religious 
spirit,  will  become  means  of  grace  to  a  degree  that  hitherto  they  have  never  done.  3. 
Many  think  that  preaching  is  worn  out :  a  great  deal  of  preaching  is  worn  out.  Many 
think  churches  useless  :  a  great  many  churches  are  useless.  But  would  you  judge 
the  family  in  the  same  way?  Would  you  say  that  fatherhood  is  worn  out  because 
there  are  a  great  many  poor  husbands  and  fathers  ?  4.  There  never  was  a  time, 
young  men,  when  you  had  so  little  occasion  to  be  ashamed  of  Christ  or  of  religion. 
If  men  all  around  you,  with  all  manner  of  books  and  paper,  are  telling  you  glozing 
tales  of  the  decadence  of  religion,  say  to  them,  "  Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead,"  but 
follow  thou  Christ.  It  is  a  falsehood.  Tlie  glory  of  religion  never  was  so  great.  Ita 
need  was  never  more  urgent.  Its  fruits  were  never  more  ample.  Its  ministers  were 
never  more  inspired  by  God's  ministering  angels  than  now.  {H.  Ward  Beecher.) 
God  sending  His  own  Son  In  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin. — God's  own 
Son  : — Emphatic  to  mark — 1.  The  greatness  of  His  love.  2.  The  adequacy  of  the 
means  for  the  salvation  of  men.  (T.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Of  Christ's  being  the 
natural  and  eternal  Son  of  God : — 1.  Christ  was  God's  Son,  Notice  the  several 
attestations  of  this  great  truth.  That  of  John  Baptist  (John  i.  34) ;  of  Nathaniel 
(John  i.  49) ;  Peter  (Matt  xvi.  16) ;  the  Centurion  (Matt,  xxvii.  54) ;  the  Eunuch 
(Acts  viii.  37) ;  Martha  (John  xi.  27) ;  the  devils  themselves  (Matt.  viii.  29 ;  Mark 
iii.  11).  Christ  often  asserted  His  Sonship  ;  and  the  Father  in  a  most  solemn  and 
open  manner  attested  it  (Matt.  iii.  17,  xvii.  5).  2.  But  Christ  is  here  said  to  be  God's 
•'  own  Son."  In  the  original  it  is  "  the  Son  of  Himself,"  or  His  "  proper  Son  "  (as 
ver.  32).  God  is  Christ's  proper  Father  (John  v.  18).  He  is  not  barely  a  son,  but  a 
Bon  in  a  peculiar  manner.  Consider  Him — I.  Compabativelt.  And  so  He  is  thus 
styled  to  distinguish  Him  from  all  other  sons.  For  God  hath  sons — 1.  By  creation, 
as  e.g.,  the  angels  (Job  i.  6,  xxxviii.  7),  and  Adam  (Luke  iii.  38).  2.  By  the  grace  of 
regeneration  and  adoption  (John  i.  12,  13;  James  L  18;  Gal.  iv.  3;  Eph.  i.  5).  3. 
By  nature  ;  one  that  is  a  son  of  another  rank  and  order.  In  this  respect  God  hath 
but  one,  namely,  Christ.  Upon  which  account  He  sometimes  appropriates  the 
paternal  relation  in  God  unto  Himself  (Luke  x.  22 ;  John  xiv.  2).  And  elsewhere 
He  distinguishes  betwixt  God  as  being  His  FaJ^er  and  being  the  Father  of 
believers  (John  xx.  17).  II.  Absolutely,  and  abstractedly  from  all  other  sons,  so 
He  is  God's  own  proper  Son.  The  expression  points  to  His  being  eternally  be- 
gotten, and  to  His  being  begotten  in  the  Divine  essence.  As  to  the  latter,  the  Son 
was  begotten  in  that  essence  rather  than  out  of  it.  And  some  tell  us  that  here  we 
are  not  to  consider  Christ  essentially  as  He  is  God,  but  personally  as  the  Divine 
essence  subsists  in  Him  as  the  second  person.  In  the  first  consideration  as  He 
was  God  He  had  the  Divine  essence  in  and  of  EQmself,  and  so  He  could  not  be 
begotten  to  it,  for  He  was  God  "  from  Himself."  In  the  second  notion,  as  He  was 
God  personally  considered,  or  as  He  was  the  second  person  and  the  Son,  so  He  was 
of  the  Father  and  not  of  Himself ;  for  though  He  was  God  of  Himself,  yet  He  was 
not  Son  of  Himself  (see  John  vii.  29;  Psa.  ii.  7;  Prov.  vii.  22-30;  Micah  v.  2;  John 
i.  14,  18,  iii.  16,  18  ;  1  John  iv.  9).  There  are  three  properties  belonging  to  Christ 
in  His  Sonship  which  are  incommunicable  to  any  other.  1.  He  is  a  Son  co-equal 
with  His  Father  (John  v.  18;  Phil.  ii.  6).  2.  He  is  a  Son  co-essential  with  the  Father 
(John  X.  30;  Col.  i.  15;  Heb.  i.  3).  3.  He  is  the  co- eternal  Son  of  God  the  Father 
(Kev.  i.  8,  ii.  8  ;  Heb.  i.  5,  8).  Application :  1.  Is  Christ  thus  God's  own  Son?  I 
infer  then — (1)  That  He  is  God.  Not  a  God  by  office  only,  not  a  made  God,  but 
God  truly,  properly,  essentially  (1  John  v.  20).  Generation  is  always  the  produc- 
tion of  another  iu  the  same  nature  ;  Uke  ever  begets  like ;  as  it  is  said  of  Adam  he 
begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness  after  his  image  (Gen.  v.  3),  and  must  it  not  be  so 
here  in  the  Father's  begetting  of  Christ?  (2)  That  He  is  a  very  great  and  glorious 
person.  Though  Christ's  dignity  and  pre-eminence  is  not  the  ground  of  His  Son- 
ship,  yet  His  Sonship  is  the  ground  of  His  dignity  and  pre-eminence.  (3)  That  the 
work  of  redemption  was  a  very  great  work,  for  God  sent  His  own  Son  about  it. 
The  greater  the  person  who  is  employed  in  a  work  the  greater  is  that  work.  2.  Was 
Christ  God's  own  Son?  Let  me  from  hence  urge  a  few  things  upon  you.  (1) 
Study  Christ  much  in  this  relation,  that  you  may  know  Him  as  the  proper,  natural, 
essential  Son  of  God  (1  Cor.  ii.  2  ;  Phil.  iii.  8).  But — (a)  In  all  your  inquiries  be 
sure  you  keep  within  the  bounds  of  sobriety  (1  Cor.  iv.  6).  Do  not  pry  too  far  into 
those  secrets  which  God  hath  locked  up  from  you ;  content  yourselves  with  what 
He  bath  revealed  in  His  Word  and  stay  there,  (b)  Join  study  and  prayer  together. 
He  studies  this  mystery  best  who  studies  it  most  upon  His  knees.     This  is  not 


664  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB,  [chap.  na. 

savingly  to  be  known  without  special  and  supernatural  illumination  from  Christ 
through  the  Spirit  (Matt.  xvi.  16,  17 ;  John  i.  18 ;  1  John  v.  28).     (2)  Behave  Him 
to  be  such,  and  believe  on  Him  as  such.    The  first  we  call  dogmatical,  the  second 
justifying  and  saving  faith.    (3)  How,  then,  should  all  honour  and  adore  Him  ? 
Certainly  upon  this  Sonship  the  highest,  yea,  even  Divine  adoration  itself  is  due  to 
Him  (John  v.  23).    Give  Him— (a)  The  honour  of  worship  (Heb.  i.  6).     (6)  The 
honour  of  obedience  (Matt.  zvii.  6).     (4)  Admire  and  wonder  at  the  greatness  of 
God's  love  in  His  sending  of  Him.    {T.  Jacomb,  D.D.)        Chritt's  mission  : — Before 
close  handling  this  subject  note — 1.  This  sending  of  Christ  strongly  implies  Hi» 
pre-ezistence.    That  which  is  not  cannot  be  sent.    And  one  would  think  the 
Scriptures  are  so  clear  in  this  that  there  should  not  be  the  least  controversy  about 
it.    For  they  tell  us  that  Christ  was  in  Jacob's  time  (Gen.  zlviii.  16) ;  in  Job'E  time 
(Job  xix.  25) ;  in  the  prophets'  time  (1  Peter  i.  11) ;  in  Abraham's  time,  yea,  long 
before  it  (John  viii.  56,  &c.) ;  in  the  Israelites'  time  (1  Cor.  z.  9) ;  Isaiah's  time  (John 
xii.  41).    How  fully  and  plainly  is  His  pre-existence  asserted  in  John  i.  1-3 ;  Eph. 
iii.  9 ;  Col.  i.  16,  17 ;  Heb.  i.  2 ;  John  zvii.  5 ;  Phil.  ii.  6.    2.  His  personality,  by 
which  I  mean  He  existed  before  He  took  flesh,  not  as  a  thing,  quality,  dispensation, 
or  manifestation,  but  as  a  proper,  personal  subsistence.     And  He  must  be  so,  or 
else  He  could  not  be  the  subject  of  this  sending.    For  He  is  sent  to  take  the  lie- 
ness  of  sinful  flesh  upon  Him.    3.  The  distinction  that  is  betwizt  the  Father  and 
Christ.    One  sends  and  the  other  is  sent.    The  Father  and  the  Son  are  one  in 
nature  and  essence,  yet  they  are  distinct  persons.    The  apostle  had  spoken  of  the 
Spirit  in  the  former  verse ;  in  this  He  speaks  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son,  thus 
teaching  the  Trinity.    I  will  endeavour  now : — I.  To  cleab  up  thb  nature  of  tecb 
ACT.    1.  Negatively.    This  sending  of  Christ  was — (1)  Not  His  ineffable  and  eternal 
generation,  or  sonship  grounded  upon  that.     He  was  sent  who  was  the  Son  of  God, 
but  He  was  not  the  Son  of  God  as  He  was  sent ;  His  Sonship  was  the  result  of  His 
generation,  not  of  His  mission.    (2)  Not  any  local  secession  from  His  Father,  or 
any  local  motion  from  the  place  where  He  was,  to  some  other  place  where  He  was 
not.    The  Father  sent  Him  to  this  lower  world,  yet  here  He  was  before ;  the  Father 
sent  Him  from  heaven,  yet,  as  to  His  Godhead,  He  remained  in  heaven  still  (1  John 
iii.  13).    So  when  He  ascended,  He  went  from  earth,  and  yet  He  was  on  earth  still 
as  to  His  spiritual  presence  (Matt,  zzviii.  20).    Man  He  went  from  us,  but  as  God 
He  is  as  much  with  us  as  ever.    2.  Affirmatively,  this  sending  of  Christ  lies — (1) 
In  God's  choosing,  appointing,  ordaining  Him  from  everlasting  to  the  office  and 
work  of  the  Mediator  (1  Peter  i.  20).     (2)  In  God's  qualifying  and  fitting  of  Him 
for  His  great  work.     God  never  puts  a  person  upon  any  special  service  but  first  He 
qualifies  him  for  that  service.     Christ  must  have  a  body  to  fit  Him  for  djing  and 
suffering,  that  God  provided  for  Him  (Heb.  z.  5).    And  whereas  He  must  also  have 
the  Spirit,  that  too  the  Father  doth  furnish  Him  with  (Isa.  zlii.  1 ;  John  iii.  34). 
(3)  In  God's  authorising  and  commissioning  Him  to  what  He  was  to  be  and  to  do. 
Christ  had  a  commission  from  God  under  hand  and  seal  (John  vi.  27).    As  princes 
when  they  send  abroad  their  ambassadors  or  appoint  their  officers,  they  give  them 
their  commissions  sealed  to  be  their  warrant  for  what  they  shall  do ;  so  God  the 
Father  did  with  Christ.    (4)  In  the  Father's  authoritative  willing  of  Him  to  take 
man's  nature  upon  Him,  and  in  that  nature  so  to  do,  and  so  to  suffer  (Heb.  z.  7 ; 
John  z.  18 ;  Phil.  iL  8).     (5)  In  God's  trusting  of  Him  with  His  great  designs. 
When  we  send  a  person  about  our  affairs,  we  repose  a  trust  in  him,  that  he  will  be 
faithful  in  the  management  of  our  concerns.    H.  To  answer  an  objection,  and 
BEMOVB  ▲  DimcuLTT.    That  which  hath  been  spoken  seems  to  derogate  from  the 
greatness  and  glory  of  Christ's  person  :  for  if  God  sent  Him,  then,  argue  some.  He 
is  inferior  to  the  Father.    But— 1.  Sending  doth  not  always  imply  inferiority  or  in- 
equality ;  for  persons  who  are  equal  upon  mutual  consent  may  send  each  the  other. 
And  thus  it  was  between  God  the  Father  and  Christ.     When  the  master  sends  the 
servant,  he  goes  because  he  must ;  but  when  the  Father  sends  the  Son  He  goes 
readily,  because  His  will  falls  in  with  His  Father's  will  (John  x.  36,  cf.  xvii.  19 ; 
Bom.  viii.  32,  cf.  Gal.  ii.  20).     2.  We  must  distinguish  of  a  twofold  inferiority, 
one  in  respect  of  nature,  and  one  in  respect  of  office,  condition,  or  dispensation. 
As  to  the  first,  Christ  neither  was  nor  is  in  the  least  inferior  to  the  Father.    In 
lespeot  of  this  He  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God.    As  to  the  second, 
Christ  being  considered  as  Mediator,  it  may  be  said  of  Him  that  He  was  inferior  to 
the  Father  (Phil.  ii.  7,  8 ;  John  xiv.  28).    III.  To  inquire  into  the  grounds  and 
REASONS  OF  Ghrist'b  inssioN.    In  the  general,  some  must  be  sent.     Since  neither 
the  law,  nor  anything  else,  oould  operate  to  any  purpose  towards  the  advancing  of 


«bJl».  Tin.]  EOMANS.  <65 

God's  bonoar  and  the  promoting  of  the  sinner's  good,  it  was  necessary  that  God 
Himself  should  interpose  in  some  extraordinary  way ;  which  thereupon  He  accord- 
ingly did  in  the  sending  of  Christ.  But  more  particularly,  suppose  a  necessity  of 
sending,  yet  why  did  God  pitch  upon  His  Son?  Might  not  some  other  person  have 
been  sent,  or  might  not  some  other  way  have  been  found  ?  I  answer,  No  ;  Christ 
the  Son  must  be  the  very  person  whom  God  will  send.  And  Him  He  pitched  upon 
because — 1.  He  was  the  person  with  whom  the  Father  had  covenanted  about  this 
very  thing.  2.  God  saw  that  was  the  very  best  way  which  could  be  taken.  He  had 
great  designs  to  carry  on,  as,  e.g.,  to  let  the  world  see  what  an  evil  thing  sin  was, 
how  impai-tial  His  justice  was,  what  an  ocean  of  love  He  had  in  His  heart,  and  to 
lay  a  sure  foundation  for  the  righteousness  and  salvation  of  believers.  Now  there 
was  no  way  for  the  accomplishing  of  these  comparable  to  this  of  God's  sending  His 
Son.  3.  As  this  was  the  best  and  the  fittest  way,  so  He  was  the  best  and  the  fittest 
person  to  be  employed.  This  appears  from,  and  was  grounded  upon — (1)  His  two 
natures,  the  hypostatical  union  of  both  in  His  person.  He  was  God  (John  i.  1 ; 
Phil.  ii.  6 ;  1  John  v.  20  ;  Bom.  ix.  5  ;  Isa.  ix.  6 ;  Tit.  ii.  13).  He  was  also  man 
(1  Tim.  ii.  5) ;  then,  too.  He  was  God-man  in  one  person  (Col.  ii.  19).  Now  who 
oonld  be  so  fit  to  bring  God  and  man  together  as  He  who  was  Himself  both  God 
and  man  ?  (2)  His  glorious  attributes ;  His  power,  wisdom,  mercy,  goodness, 
faithfulness,  holiness,  <&o.  (3)  His  Sonship  and  near  relation  to  God.  Who  so  fit 
to  make  others  the  adopted  sons  of  God  as  He  who  was  Himself  the  natural  Son  of 
God  ?  (4)  The  glory  and  dignity  of  His  person  as  the  image  of  God  (Col.  i.  15 ; 
Heb.  1.  3).  Now  who  so  fit  to  restore  man  to  God's  image  as  that  man  who  was 
the  essential  image  of  God  ?  4.  He  was  the  only  person  that  could  be  sent,  for 
none  but  He  could  accomplish  man's  redemption.  (1)  There  were  evils  to  be 
endured,  which  were  above  the  strength  of  any  mere  creature  to  endure.  (2)  There 
were  evils  to  be  removed — the  wrath  of  God,  the  guilt  of  sin,  the  curse  of  the  law — 
which  no  mere  creature  was  able  to  remove.  (3)  There  were  also  blessings  to  be 
procured,  as  reconciliation  with  God,  justification,  adoption,  eternal  salvation, 
which  no  such  creature  possibly  could  procure.  Practical  improvement :  1.  Was 
Christ  sent  ?  and  did  God  thus  send  Him  ?  What  doth  this  great  act  of  God  call 
for  from  us  ?  (1)  To  admire  God.  Here  is  the  greatest  thing  that  ever  God  did, 
or  ever  will  do  ;  it  was  much  that  He  should  make  a  world,  but  what  is  the  making 
of  a  world  to  the  sending  of  a  Son  ?  (2)  To  admire  the  love  of  God  the  Father,  and 
alway  to  entertain  good  thoughts  of  Him  (Eph.  i.  3-5).  Some  gracious  persons  lie 
under  the  temptation  that  they  can  with  more  comfort  think  of  the  Son  than  of  the 
Father.  But  surely  God  is  love,  and  this  very  sending  of  His  Son  represents  Him 
as  full  of  mercy,  goodness,  and  grace.  (3)  To  love  Christ  greatly.  God  sent  Him, 
but  how  willing  was  He  to  be  sent  upon  the  errand  of  your  salvation  1  (4)  To 
imitate  Christ  with  respect  of  His  being  sent.  Thus,  never  go  till  you  be  sent, 
then  go  readily.  (5)  To  take  heed  that  yon  do  not  rest  with  the  external  sending 
of  Christ.  There  is  a  twofold  sending  of  Him — (a)  To  be  man.  (&)  Into  man.  He 
that  would  hope  for  salvation  by  Christ  must  have  the  latter  as  well  as  the  former 
sending.  (6)  To  believe  in  Him  (1  John  iii.  33,  xvii.  3).  2.  It  affords  abundant 
matter  of  comfort  to  all  sincere  Christians.  Did  God  send  Christ?  (1)  Surely, 
then,  great  was  His  good  will  towards  you  (Luke  il.  14).  (2)  Then  He  is  in  good 
earnest  in  the  matters  of  salvation.  (3)  Then  you  need  not  fear  but  that  the  work 
of  redemption  is  completed.  When  such  a  person  sends,  and  such  a  person  is  sent, 
the  thing  shall  be  done  effectually  and  thoroughly.  (4)  Enow  to  your  comfort  He 
hath  not  yet  done.  As  to  His  own  satisfaction  He  hath  no  more  to  do,  but  as  to 
your  glory  and  happiness  He  will  yet  do  more.  His  first-sending  was  to  make  the 
purchase.  His  second  shall  be  to  put  you  into  possession.     (5)  Set  this  against  all. 

(a)  Against  the  weakness  of  the  law.    That  which  tbe  law  could  not  do,  Christ  did. 

(b)  Against  the  guilt  of  sin.  Upon  Christ's  sending  presently  yon  read  of  the 
condemning  of  sin.  (Ibid.)  Christ  contemplated  in  His  relation — I.  To  God. 
1.  He  is  God's  own  Son.  2.  Sent  by  God.  II.  To  the  law.  1.  He  sustains.  2. 
Magnifies.  8.  Fulfils  it.  III.  To  man.  1.  He  visits  him.  2.  Assumes  his  nature. 
3.  Dies  for  him.  IV.  To  sin.  1.  He  atones  for  it.  2.  Condemns  it.  8.  Destroys 
it.  {J.  Lytk,  D.D.)  Condemned  sin  in  the  flesh. — How  God  condemned  sin  : — 1. 
Ever  since  man  has  fallen,  two  thing;;  have  been  desirable.  The  one,  that  he 
should  be  forgiven ;  the  other,  that  he  should  be  led  to  hate  the  sin  into  which  he 
has  fallen,  and  love  the  holiness  from  which  he  has  become  alienated.  It  were 
impossible  to  make  a  man  happy  unless  both  be  equally  realised.  If  his  sins  were 
iorgiven,  and  yet  he  loved  sin,  his  prospects  were  dark.     If  he  ceased  to  loT«  siXW 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

and  yet  were  lying  nnder  the  guilt  of  it,  his  conscience  would  be  tortured  with 
remorse.  By  what  process  can  man  be  both  justified  and  sanctified  ?  2.  Human 
reason  suggests  that  a  law  should  be  given  to  man  which  he  should  keep.  Thig 
has  been  tried,  and  the  law  which  was  given  was  the  best  law  that  could  be  framed. 
If,  therefore,  that  law  should  fail  to  make  men  what  they  should  be,  the  fault  will 
not  be  in  the  law,  but  in  the  man.  As  the  text  says,  it  was  "  weak  through  the 
flesh."  It  could  not  do  what  God  never  intended  it  should  do.  The  law  cannot 
forgive  sin,  nor  create  a  love  of  righteousness.  It  can  execute  the  sentence,  but  it 
can  do  no  more.  Now,  in  the  text  we  are  told  how  God  interposed  to  do  by  His 
grace  what  His  law  could  not  do.  I.  What  God  did.  He  sent  His  Son.  II. 
What  was  thb  immediate  result  of  this?  God  "condemned  sin."  1.  The  very 
fact  that  God  was  under  necessity,  if  He  would  save  men  and  yet  not  violate  His 
justice,  to  send  His  Son,  condemned  sin.  2.  The  life  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  on 
earth  condemned  sin.  You  can  often  condemn  an  evil  best  by  putting  side  by  side 
with  it  the  palpable  contrast.  There  was  a  condemnation  of  sin  in  Christ's  very 
look.  The  Pharisees  and  all  sorts  of  men  felt  it.  They  could  not  fail  to  see 
through  His  life  what  crooked  lives  their  own  were.  3.  God  condemned  sin  by 
allowing  it  to  condemn  itself.  Most  men  deny  that  their  particular  transgressions 
are  at  all  heinous.  But  God  seemed  to  say,  "  I  will  let  sin  do  what  it  can ;  and 
men  shall  see  henceforth  what  sin  is  from  that  sample."  And  what  did  sin  do? 
Sin  murdered  the  perfect  man,  and  thus  convicted  itself.  4.  God  condemned  sin 
by  suffering  Christ  to  be  put  to  death  on  account  of  sin.  Its  heinousness  demanded 
no  lesser  expiation.  "But  why  did  not  God  exercise  the  sovereign  prerogative  of 
mercy,  and  at  once  forgive  sin?"  How,  then,  could  God  have  condemned  sin? 
"  But  if  the  righteous  law  be  really  so  spiritual,  and  carnal  man  so  weak,  why  not 
alter  the  law  and  adapt  it  to  the  exigency  ?  "  I  reply  again,  because  such  a  proce- 
dure would  not  condemn  the  sin.  On  the  contrary,  it  would  condemn  the  law. 
III.  How  THIS  DOES  what  THE  LAW  COULD  NOT  DO.  There  were  two  desirable  things, 
you  will  remember,  that  I  started  with.  1.  That  the  offender  should  be  pardoned. 
You  can  clearly  see  how  that  is  done.  If  Jesus  did  suffer  in  my  stead,  henceforth 
it  becomes  not  only  mercy  that  absolves  me,  but  justice  that  seals  my  acquittal.  2. 
But  how  does  this  tend  to  make  men  pure  and  haters  of  sin  ?  When  the  Holy 
Spirit  comes  with  power  into  a  man's  heart,  and  renews  his  nature,  forthwith  the 
impure  are  made  chaste,  the  dishonest  are  made  honest,  and  the  ungodly  are 
made  to  love  God.  And  by  the  same  means  there  comes  into  the  heart  an 
enmity  against  the  sin  which  caused  the  suffering  of  Christ.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Sin  condemned  in  the  flesh  : — "  The  law  "  here  means  that  law  of  constraint,  acting 
from  without  as  precept  and  motive,  which  came  to  a  head,  in  the  dispensation  of 
Moses.  It  is  singular  that  this  law^-called  "  the  ministration  of  condemnation  " — 
could  not  condemn  sin  in  the  flesh,  or  secure  the  fulfilment  of  its  own  righteousness. 
This  unfitted  it  to  become  an  instrument  of  salvation.  It  could  give  us  no  help  to  get 
free  from  that  very  evil  to  which  it  was  itself  most  opposed.  I.  The  great  require- 
ment. Condemnation  of  sin  in  the  flesh  signifies — 1.  That  the  condemnation  should 
pass  from  a  mere  threatening  to  an  actual  punishment  in  human  nature.  Con- 
demnation can  exist  as  a  threatening,  and  if  so,  sin  may  be  condemned  in  the  law  ; 
but  when  sin  is  condemned  in  the  flesh,  there  must  be  the  actual  infliction  of  punish- 
ment. 2.  Such  a  condemnation  as  shall  issue  in  the  accomplishment  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  law.  The  great  problem  is  how  to  condemn  sin  effectually,  and 
yet  save  the  sinner.  II.  The  insufeicient  provision.  The  law  was  unable  to  do 
this.  It  could  not  condemn  sin  in  the  flesh  through  the  weakness  of  the  flesh.  If 
terror  could  frighten  man  out  of  sin,  the  law  has  terror.  If  the  relation  of  duty 
could  secure  the  performance  of  duty,  the  law  reveals  duty.  If  the  exhibition  of 
holiness  could  allure  to  the  law  of  holiness,  the  law  exhibits  that  picture.  But  the 
corruption  of  the  flesh  is  too  strong  for  the  law  to  conquer.  III.  The  perfect 
ACCOMPLISHMENT.  The  gospcl  coudemus  sin  in  the  flesh.  1.  By  the  incarnation  of 
Jesus.  Sin  cannot  be  adequately  condemned  {i.e.,  punished)  as  an  abstraction,  but 
only  in  human  nature,  i.e.,  in  the  same  nature  in  which  it  was  committed,  other- 
wise the  threatening  remains  a  dead  letter.  2.  By  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  "  For 
sin  "  means  "  an  offering  for  sin."  God  laid  on  Christ  the  condemnation  of  the  law. 
But  how  could  Christ  more  effectively  bear  the  punishment  of  the  law  than  any 
other  man  ?  (1)  By  virtue  of  His  headship  of  His  people.  If  the  head  suffers,  the 
whole  body  being  identified  with  that  head,  suffers  also.  A  nation  makes  peace  or 
war  by  the  minister  who  is  in  power.  So  Christ  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body. 
(2)  By  virtue  of  His  innocence.   He  had  no  sins  of  His  own  to  atone  for.    Thus  Ha 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  667 

coald  be  accepted  instead  of  sinners.  (3)  By  reason  of  His  divinity.  The  blow  of 
jastice  must  have  destroyed  any  merely  human  being,  but  it  could  not  destroy 
Christ.  He  was  able  to  exhaust  the  penalty,  and  yet  to  survive.  (P.  Strutt.)  The 
condemnation  of  sin  in  the  flesh : — How  did  God  condemn  sin  in  the  flesh,  {.«.,  in 
human  nature  generally?  1.  By  exhibiting  in  the  person  of  His  Incarnate  Son  the 
same  flesh  in  substance  but  free  from  sin,  He  proved  that  sin  was  in  the  flesh  only 
as  an  unnatural  and  usurping  tyrant.  Thus  the  manifestation  of  Christ  in  sinless 
humanity  at  once  condemned  sin  in  principle.  For  this  sense  of  condemnation  by 
contrast  see  Matt.  xii.  41,  42  ;  Heb.  xi.  7.  But — 2.  God  condemned  sin  practically 
and  effectually  by  destroying  its  power  and  casting  it  out ;  and  this  is  the  sense 
especially  required  by  the  context.  The  law  could  condemn  sin  only  in  word,  and 
could  not  make  its  condemnation  effectual.  Christ  coming  "  for  sin "  not  only 
made  atonement  for  it  by  His  death,  but  uniting  man  to  Himself  "  in  newness  of 
life  "  (chap.  vi.  4)  gave  actual  effect  to  the  condemnation  of  sin  by  destroying  its 
dominion  "in  the  flesh"  through  the  life-giving,  sanctifying  power  of  His  Spirit. 
(Archdeacon  Gifford.)  ChrisVs  holy  life  a  living  condemnation  of  sin : — The  flesh 
in  Him  was  like  a  door  constantly  open  to  the  temptations  of  pleasure  and  pain  ; 
and  yet  He  constantly  refused  sin  any  entrance  into  His  will  and  action.  By  this 
persevering  and  absolute  exclusion  He  declared  it  evil  and  unworthy  of  existing  in 
humanity.  This  was  what  the  law,  "  because  of  the  flesh,"  which  naturally  sways 
the  human  will,  could  not  realise  in  any  man.  The  law  could  undoubtedly  condemn 
Bin  on  paper,  but  Christ  condemned  it  in  a  real  living  human  nature.  Hence  the 
reason  why  He  must  appear  in  flesh.  For  it  was  the  very  fortress  where  sin  had 
established  its  seat  that  it  behoved  it  to  be  attacked  and  conquered.  Like  the  hero 
spoken  of  in  the  fable.  He  required  Himself  to  descend  into  the  infected  place  which 
He  was  commissioned  to  cleanse.  Thus  from  the  perfectly  holy  life  of  Jesus  there 
proceeds  a  conspicuous  condemnation  of  sin  ;  and  it  is  this  moral  fact,  the  greatest 
of  the  miracles  that  distinguished  this  life,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  goes  on  reproduc- 
ing in  the  Ufe  of  every  believer,  and  propagating  throughout  the  entire  race.  This 
will  be  the  victory  gained  over  the  law  of  sin  (ver.  2).  Thus  we  understand  the 
connection  between  the  •' condemned "  of  ver.  3  and  the  "no  condemnation"  of 
ver.  1.  In  His  Ufe  He  condemned  that  sin,  while  by  remaining  master  of  ours, 
would  have  brought  it  into  condemnation.  The  condemnation  of  sin  in  Christ's  life 
is  the  means  appointed  by  God  to  effect  its  destruction  in  ours.     (Prof.  Godet.) 

Ver.  4.  That  the  righteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  In  ns. — Righteous- 
ness fulfilled  : — I.  The  design  of  God  in  thus,  by  Chbist,  oondemnino  bin 
IN  THE  FLESH.  The  penalty  of  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  us  when,  as  members  of 
Christ's  body  by  spiritual  union,  we  are  freed  from  condemnation;  but  it  is  in 
sanctification  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  is  fulfilled — i.e.  when  we  have  the 
law  written  in  our  heart,  and  obedience,  flowing  without  constraint,  is  the  inward 
instinct  and  law  of  hfe.  Bear  in  mind  that  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."  In 
this  respect  the  law  and  the  gospel  are  one.  But  as  two  dispensations  or  modes  of 
treatment  they  differ  in  toto.  The  action  of  the  law  is  by  precept  and  constraint — 
it  seeks  to  guide  from  without — urging  its  minute  details  upon  a  reluctaut  heart. 
The  gospel  frees  us  from  this  bondage  of  verbal  precepts  and  details,  and  by 
the  manifestation  of  God's  love  awakens  love,  thus  beginning  where  the  law  left 
off,  with  love,  which  was  the  end  of  the  commandment.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
way  of  obedience  that  we  cannot  by  love  accomplish.  Note — 1.  That  the  gospel 
does  not  destroy  the  law.  ''Do  we  make  void  the  law  through  faith? — nay,  we 
establish  the  law."  We  are  free  from  the  law  only  that  we  may  be  under  the  law 
to  Christ.  2.  That  the  salvation  of  the  gospel  is  not  only  a  salvation  from  wrath, 
but  from  sin.  3.  That  however  imperfectly  this  salvation  is  realised  by  us  it  may 
be  fully  accomplished — a  righteousness  fulfilled.  II.  The  persons  in  whom  this 
DESIGN  IS  accomplished — "  In  us  who  walk,"  <fec.  1.  Only  in  proportion  as  the  spirit 
works  within  can  we  take  full  possession  of  our  privilege  as  believers  in  Christ,  as 
free  from  the  bondage  of  the  law.  Hence  it  is  that  character  becomes  the  test  of 
our  Christian  state.  2.  Character  is  determined  by  the  prevailing  principle  (or  law) 
which  governs  the  lite.  Two  such  principles  divide  all  mankind — the  flesh  and  the 
spirit.  3.  Christian  experience  is  a  practical  realisation  of  the  spiritual  life.  It  is 
not  thinking  or  feeling,  but  walking  after  the  spirit.  They  who  sit  down  in  spiritual 
sloth  are  not  walking  after  the  spirit,  and  therefore  we  have  no  evidence  of  their 
acceptance  with  God.  Examine  yourselves.  Is  your  life  Christ-like,  or  worldly  f 
(P.  Strutt.)        The  righteousness  of  the  law  fulfilled : — In  this  verse  the  apostle  laya 


•68  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  fm. 

down  the  end  of  God's  sending  His  Son  in  the  flesh  for  the  condemnation  of  sin, 
and  that  is, "  that  the  righteoasness  of  the  law  might  be  folfilled  in  as."  There  are 
two  general  parts  which  are  here  observable  of  ns.  First,  the  benefit  itself  which 
is  conveyed  by  Christ,  and  that  is,  a  fulfilling  of  the  righteousness  of  the  law  in  us. 
Beeondly,  the  qualification  of  the  persons  who  have  particular  interest  in  this  bene- 
fit, and  those  are  they  "  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh  but  after  the  spirit."  I.  We 
begin  with  the  first,  viz.,  the  benefit  itself.  ••  That  the  righteousness  of  the  law," 
&o.  Where  first  we  are  to  explain  the  words,  and  then  to  come  to  the  doctrine 
observable  from  them.  That  whatsoever  the  law  could  demand  and  require  of  as, 
the  same  is  fully  satisfied  and  fulfilled  by  Christ.  He  hath  fulfilled  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  law  in  oar  behalf.  For  the  opening  of  this  present  point  onto  us,  we 
must  know  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  may  be  taken  two  manner  of  ways. 
There  is  a  double  right  which  the  law  of  God  does  challenge  in  us — a  preceptive  or 
commanding  right,  and  a  vindicative  or  avenging  right.  Now  both  these  rights 
has  Christ  satisfied  and  discharged  for  us.  First,  He  hath  satisfied  the  right  of 
obedience,  in  that  He  hath  fulfilled  the  whole  law  of  God  in  our  stead.  Secondly, 
He  hath  satisfiedt  he  right  of  punishment,  in  that  He  hath  endured  all  the  wrath 
which  was  due  unto  us  for  our  transgression  of  this  law.  Thirdly,  Christ's  satisfac* 
tion  of  the  law,  as  concerning  obedience  unto  it,  is  accounted  as  oars ;  insomuch  as  the 
righteousness  of  the  law  is  said  to  be  fulfilled  in  us.  Fulfilled  in  us ;  how  is  that  ?  Not  in 
our  persons,  but  in  our  Surety.  In  regard  of  the  intention  and  purpose  of  God  Himself, 
who  does  bestow  Christ  upon  us  to  this  end  ;  Christ  was  given  by  God  for  righteous- 
ness, and  for  righteousness  in  this  explication,  namely,  of  full  and  perfect  observa- 
tion of  the  whole  law.  The  nse  and  improvement  of  this  point  to  ourselves  in  a  way 
of  application  comes  to  this — 1.  As  a  word  of  singular  comfort  to  all  the  true 
servants  of  God  which  groan  nnder  the  burden  of  their  own  failings  and  omissions. 
2.  We  may  hence  also  take  notice  of  the  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  which 
hath  made  such  a  happy  repair  of  that  righteousness  which  we  lost  in  Adam  ; 
and  that  upon  two  considerations  it  is  more  full  and  complete.  (1)  It  is  more  full 
and  complete.  For  Adam's  obedience  to  the  law,  it  could  at  the  most  have  been  no 
more  than  just  answerable  and  adequate  to  the  law.  Yea,  but  now  Christ's  obedi- 
ence, through  the  excellency  and  infiniteness  of  the  person,  is  transcendent  and  far 
above  the  law.  As  for  a  King's  Son  to  pay  our  debt  for  us  is  a  more  transcendent 
and  meritorious  act  than  our  own  payment  of  it  would  be,  from  the  dignity  and 
transcendency  of  the  person ;  even  so  is  it  here.  (2)  As  this  righteousness  of  Christ 
is  more  full  and  complete,  so  it  is  also  more  certain  and  sure.  The  second  follows, 
that  whatever  could  be  required  of  us  for  punishment  is  discharged  likewise.  This 
must  needs  be  so  npon  this  account — First,  God's  acceptation  of  Christ  for  a  full 
and  suflBcient  redemption.  Secondly,  Christ's  suffering  itself,  which  was  of  the  whole 
anger  and  wrath  of  God,  expressed  in  all  particulars.  Thirdly,  the  infiniteness  of 
the  person.  II.  Now  the  second  is  the  qualification  of  the  persons.  "  Who  walk 
not, "  Ac.  From  hence  observe,  first  in  general,  that  all  men  indifferently  have  not  a 
chare  in  the  comforts  of  the  gospel.  Therefore  let  none  too  rashly  and  over-hastily 
apply  them  to  themselves.  Secondly,  in  particular  observe  this,  that  justification 
and  sanctifi  cation  must  go  together  ;  they  only  who  walk  after  the  spirit  have 
Christ's  righteousness  imputed  to  them,  and  have  the  law  fulfilled  in  them.  Secondly, 
because  Christ  came  by  water  as  well  as  by  blood ;  there  is  His  spirit  as  well  as 
His  merit.  Thirdly,  because  God  is  exact  and  complete  in  His  works  in  us ;  and 
BO  as  He  justifies,  so  also  will  He  sanctify.  It  shows  the  vanity  of  those  who  hope 
to  be  saved  by  Christ,  while  they  live  in  all  manner  of  sin.  Those  that  walk  in  the 
epirit,  they  have  here  an  evidence  of  their  justification  from  their  sanctification. 
We  see  here  that  it  is  not  enough  to  abstain  from  evil,  but  we  must  also  do  good. 
(Thomas  Horton,  D.D.)  Therighteousnessofthelaw  accomplished  in  the  believer  : — 
1.  The  exalted  chakacteb  of  the  law.  1.  Emanating  from  a  Being  infinitely  per- 
fect, it  follows — (1)  That  the  law,  designed  to  be  a  transcript  of  God,  must  be  in 
every  respect  perfect.  "  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect."  (2)  That  the  law  being 
perfectly  holy,  all  its  requirements  must  be  equally  so.  It  cannot  compromise,  nor 
soften  down  a  single  enactment.  2.  In  requiring  this,  the  creature  shall  have  no 
ground  for  impeaching  the  Divine  goodness.  As  if  fearful  of  perplexing  the  mind 
with  a  multitude  of  enactments,  our  Lord  has  presented  one  precept,  the  perfect 
keeping  of  which  involves  a  virtual  fulfilment  of  all  (Matt.  xxii.  37).  What  an 
unfolding  of  the  wisdom  of  God  is  here !  In  securing  to  Himself  the  supreme  love 
of  His  creatures,  He  wins  a  willing  obedience  to  every  precept  of  His  law.     II.  In 

VHAT  SEKSE  IS  THE  BIGHTEOUBNEBB  OF  IHB  LAW  ACCOMPLISBEO   IK   THE   BKLIXTXB?      1., 


HHAT.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  CSt 

Not  in  our  own  persons.  Where,  then,  wonld  be  the  weakness  of  the  law?  The 
law  has  never  yet  received  a  complete  fulfilment  in  any  fallen  creature.  Where  is 
the  creature  who  can  assert  his  plea  of  perfect  love  to  God?  2.  The  Lord  Jesaa 
fulfilled  the  righteousness  of  the  law  in  the  behalf  of  His  people.  He  only  oould  do 
«o  who  was  Himself  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners."  The 
first  step  in  this  wondrous  achievement  was  His  being  made  under  the  law.  Having 
made  Himself  amenable  to  the  law.  He  then  proceeds  to  its  fulfilment.  Trace  the 
outline  of  His  obedience.  Is  the  grand  moving  spring  of  the  law,  love  ?  Where 
was  ever  seen  such  love  to  God  as  our  Surety  displayed  ?  And  did  not  that  affection 
constrain  Him  to  a  supreme  consecration  to  His  Father's  glory  ?  In  addition  to 
supreme  love,  was  there  not  the  most  perfect  sanctity  of  life  ?  Accompany  Him 
to  the  baptismal  waters,  and  hear  Him  exclaim,  "  Thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all 
righteousness."  Then  follow  Him  to  Calvary,  and  behold  His  obedience  onto 
death — was  there  ever  such  a  law-fulfiller  as  the  Son  of  God  ?    III.  In  what  wat 

ARE  WE  TO  RECONCILE  THE  HONOUBINO  OF  THE    LAW  BY  CHRIST,  AND   THE  FULFILMENT  0» 

ITS  RioHTEousNESs  IN  US  ?  The  difficulty  is  solved  by  a  reference  to  the  federal 
union  of  Christ  and  Has  Church.  Standing  to  His  people  in  the  relation  of  a  cove< 
nant  Head,  the  law  being  fulfilled  by  Him  in  a  legal  sense,  it  was  virtually  a  fulfil- 
ment of  the  law  by  us,  His  obedience  being  accepted  in  lieu  of  ours  ^2  Cor.  v.  21 ; 
Bom.  y.  19).  Thus  every  humble  sinner  who,  feeling  the  plague  of  his  own  heart, 
breaking  away  from  his  dependence  upon  a  covenant  of  works,  and  reposing  in 
simple  faith  beneath  the  righteousness  of  the  Incarnate  God,  shall  never  come  into 
condemnation.  IV.  The  riohtful  claimants  of  this  privileoed  state  are  described 
A8  those  who  wale,  (&o.  A  Christian  may  be  ensnared  and  stumble,  but  he  walks 
not  after  the  fiesh.  "  A  just  man  faUeth  seven  times,  and  riseth  up  again."  An 
unrighteous  man  falls,  but  where  he  falls  he  lies.  "  He  that  is  unrighteous  is 
unrighteous  still."  But  those  in  whom  the  righteoasness  of  the  law  is  fulfilled  in 
their  Surety,  and  in  whom  a  gospel  righteousness,  an  evangelical  obedience,  is 
performed  by  themselves,  "  walk  after  the  Spirit."  Conclusion:  1.  Behold,  what 
an  open  door  does  this  subject  set  before  the  humble,  convinced  sinner.  The  law, 
now  honoured  as  it  never  was — think  you  that  tbe  Lord  will  reject  the  application 
of  a  single  sinner  who  humbly  asks  to  be  saved?  2.  Saints  of  God,  keep  the  eye 
of  your  faith  immovably  fixed  upon  Christ,  your  sole  pattern.  Our  Lord  did  not 
keep  that  law  that  His  people  might  be  lawless.  The  "  righteousness  of  the  law  is 
fulfilled  in  us  "  when  we  "  walk  aiter  the  Spirit,"  in  conformity  to  Christ's  example. 
(0.  Witulow,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6,  6.  For  they  that  are  after  the  flesh  do  mind  the  things  of  the  flesh. — 

Description  of  regenerate  and  unregenerate  : — The  word  "  flesh  "  is  here  to  be  taken 
not  in  the  natural  sense,  but  in  the  moral ;  and  the  word  "  Spirit "  is  here  to  be 
taken  for  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  regeneration.  First,  the  universality  of  these  two 
states  and  conditions  of  men  ;  and  secondly,  the  contrariety.  First,  to  take  notice 
of  the  universality  of  these  two  states  and  conditions,  as  they  do  divide  and  make 
np  the  whole  world ;  for  so  they  do.  All  men  living  are  one  of  these  two. 
Therefore  let  as  every  one  search  and  examine  ourselves  in  this  particular,  and 
observe  how  the  case  is  here  with  us ;  whether  we  are  such  as  are  after  the  flesh, 
or  which  are  after  the  Spirit.  As  there  is  not  a  middle  place  betwixt  heaven  and 
hell,  so  there  is  not  a  middle  state  neither  betwixt  sin  and  grace.  This  it  may  be 
much  discovered  by  us  according  to  the  principles  that  prevail  in  us ;  by  what  we 
most  delight  in  and  give  ourselves  to.  The  second  is  in  reference  to  the  contrariety, 
in  that  they  are  opposed  here  one  to  the  other  (Gal.  v.  17).  The  contrariety  of  these 
two  sorts  of  persons  one  to  the  other  is  considerable  in  sundry  particulars ;  as, 
first,  the  contrariety  of  their  principles  which  they  are  carried  by,  and  that  is,  of 
flesh  and  of  Spirit  (Gal.  t.  17).  There  is  a  different  law  and  rule  and  principle, 
which  does  act  and  move  the  servants  of  God  than  does  other  persons.  Secondly, 
the  contrariety  of  their  aims  and  projects  and  designs.  Those  who  have 
different  and  contrary  ends  which  they  do  set  down  and  propound  to  themselves, 
they  must  needs  be  contrary  to  one  another.  Thirdly,  the  contrariety  of  their 
oourses  and  actions  and  conversations.  This  is  another  thing  which  makes  up  this 
contrariety  to  us  as  observable  in  them.  The  consideration  of  this  point  is  thus 
far  useful  to  us.  First,  as  it  gives  an  account  of  that  enmity  which  is  in  the  one 
to  the  other  (Gal.  v.  29  ;  John  xv.  19).  Secondly,  we  see  here  also  how  unsuitable 
it  is  for  those  who  are  good  to  have  intimate  society  and  familiarity  with  those 
who  are  evil.    Thirdly,  we  have  from  hence  a  discovery  likewise  of  the  excellency  of 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [OHA».  »^ . 

the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  of  the  efiBcacy  and  power  of  the  gospel,  which  makes  such 
an  admirable  change  and  alteration  as  ^e  may  observe  it  to  do.  This  is  the  nature 
of  conversion,  to  deliver  us  from  the  power  of  darkness,  and  to  translate  us  into  the 
kingdom  of  Christ,  as  the  apostle  expresses  it  to  us  there  in  that  place  in  Col.  ii.  13. 
The  second  is  the  difference  of  properties  as  belonging  to  these  persons,  and  that 
is,  that  the  former  do  mind  the  things  of  the  flesh,  the  latter  the  things  of  the 
Spirit.  First,  to  speak  of  the  former,  which  is  the  property  of  all  carnal  and 
anregenerate  persons,  such  as  are  yet  abiding  and  continuing  in  the  state  of  nature, 
and  here  expressed  to  be  after  the  flesh.  This  is  that  which  is  here  declared  of 
them,  as  proper  to  them,  that  they  do  mind  the  things  of  the  flesh.  When  it  is 
said  here  that  carnal  persons  do  mind  carnal  things,  and  they  that  are  after  the 
flesh  the  things  of  the  flesh,  this  minding  it  may  admit  of  a  various  explication 
to  us.  First,  they  mind  them  in  a  way  of  apprehension,  that  is,  they  understand 
them,  and  know  what  belongs  unto  them ;  they  are  well  skilled  and  expert  in  them. 
This  is  one  property  of  carnal  and  worldly  persons,  that  they  are  best  seen  and 
knowing  in  such  things  as  these  are.  Worldly  men  are  best  able  to  judge  of  worldly 
matters ;  as  for  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  matters  of  grace  and  holiness,  here  they 
are  plainly  ignorant  and  unlearned.  Every  one  is  still  most  capable  and  appre- 
hensive of  such  kind  of  matters  as  he  hath  a  proper  genius  for  and  inclination  to ; 
now  this  have  carnal  persons  to  worldly  things.  Secondly,  in  a  way  of  affection. 
They  mind  them,  that  is,  they  favour  them  and  relish  them  and  ta!ke  delight  in 
them.  Worldly  persons,  their  hearts  are  set  upon  the  world,  and  it  is  the  most 
delightful  thing  to  them  of  anything  else.  Thirdly,  in  a  way  of  contemplation. 
They  mind  them,  that  is,  they  think  upon  them ;  such  things  as  these  are  the 
chiefest  study  and  meditation,  and  which  their  thoughts  are  most  exercised  about. 
Fourthly,  in  a  way  of  activity  and  contrivance.  They  mind  the  things  of  the  flesh, 
that  is,  they  lay  out  chiefly  for  it.  They  bend  their  chiefest  study  and  endeavour 
to  promote  such  things  as  these  are.  They  seek  opportunities  for  the  flesh,  and  they 
seek  how  to  accompUsh  and  to  improve  these  opportunities.  Now,  the  ground  of  all 
this  is  twofold.  First,  that  inward  principle  which  does  act  in  them  and  prevail  in 
them.  This  is  a  sure  rule,  that  everything  doth  after  its  kind.  Nature  it  is  a 
most  certain  principle  wherever  it  is.  Secondly,  there  is  Satan  also  who  has  a 
further  stroke  and  influence  hereupon.  He  is  the  spirit  that  works  in  the  children 
of  disobedience  (Eph.  ii.  2).  He  makes  it  his  business  to  promote  these  things  in 
them,  by  his  suggestions  and  instigations  and  concurrences  and  assistances  of 
them.  The  consideration  of  this  point  may  be  thus  far  useful  to  us.  First,  as  a 
sad  discovery  to  us  of  the  state  and  condition  of  the  generality  of  people  in  the 
world.  Secondly,  we  may  learn  from  hence  the  necessity  of  regeneration  and  the 
work  of  the  new  creature,  in  order  to  a  holy  life  to  be  led  by  us,  and  the  freeing  of 
us  from  the  power  and  dominion  of  sin  in  us,  because  so  long  as  men  are  carnal 
they  will  be  sure  to  do  carnal  things.  The  second  is  the  property  of  those  who  are 
spiritual  and  regenerate,  and  that  is,  that  such  as  these  they  do  mind  the  things  of 
the  Spirit ;  that  is,  heaven  and  heavenly  things,  grace  and  holiness.  First,  spiritual 
persons,  they  have  their  minds  enlightened  to  discern  of  spiritual  things.  The 
reason  why  most  kinds  of  people  do  so  little  regard  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  is 
indeed  because  they  do  so  Uttle  know  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  nor  understand  that 
excellency  which  is  in  them.  That  which  men  do  not  know,  they  do  not  desire. 
Secondly,  as  spiritual  persons  have  an  enlightening  of  their  understanding  to 
discern  these  things ;  so  they  have  a  touch  also  upon  their  hearts  to  suit  with 
them,  and  to  correspond  unto  them.  Thirdly,  they  have,  moreover,  the  Spirit  of 
God  Himself  dwelling  and  abiding  in  them,  who  is  a  faithful  monitor  to  them  and 
exciter  of  them  to  that  which  is  good.  The  use  of  this  point  to  ourselves  may  be 
drawn  forth  into  sundry  particulars.  First,  as  it  calls  us  to  search  and  examination 
of  our  estate  in  this  respect,  and  to  see  how  it  is  indeed  with  us.  There  is  nothing 
more  necessary  for  Christians,  and  those  that  profess  religion,  than  to  be  able  to 
make  it  out  to  themselves  that  they  are  such  as  are  truly  regenerate  and  after  the 
Spirit.  So  again,  as  for  the  affection  to  these  things  ;  let  us  examine  that.  ^Men 
are  then  said  to  mind  those  things  indeed  when  they  savour  them,  and  have  some 
Tfilish  of  them.  Now,  how  is  it  to  this  ?  Alas  1  there  are  a  great  many  people 
that  do  it  not  at  all.  The  Word  and  the  sacraments  and  prayer  and  the  com- 
munion of  saints,  it  may  be  they  are  present  at  them,  and  in  a  formal  and 
customary  manner  partakers  of  them,  but  they  relish  no  sweetness  in  them  at  all. 
And  so  likewise  for  contemplation.  What  are  the  things  which  we  chiefly  medil  ate 
and  think  upon  in  our  greatest  retirements,  when  we  are  solitary  and  alone  hj 


OKir.  Tm.]  ROMANS.  «n 

onrselves?  Is  it  these  things  of  the  Spirit ;  yea,  or  no?  "O  how  I  love  Thy 
law  I  "  saya  David,  •'  it  is  my  meditation  all  the  day  "  (Psa.  oxix.  97).  Again,  for 
counsel  and  contrivance  and  design.  How  is  it  here?  What  is  the  business 
which  we  do  most  of  all  study,  and  endeavour  and  beat  our  brains  about  ?  Is  it 
the  great  things  of  the  world,  how  to  improve  ourselves  and  enlarge  ourselves  here ; 
or  is  it  to  get  grace  into  our  hearts  ?  (Thomas  Horton,  D.D.)  The  things  of  the 
flesh  and  the  things  of  the  Spirit: — I.  "  The  things  of  thb  flesh"  are  the  bodily 
appetites,  sympathies,  and  propensions.  These  are  its  great  forces  moving  its 
members  and  organs.  These  are — 1.  Good  when  subordinated  to  the  interests  of 
the  soul.  When  they  are  controlled  by  a  holy  intelligence  they  are  blessed  hand- 
maids to  the  Spirit.  2.  Bad  when  they  are  allowed  to  hold  empire  over  the  soul. 
This  they  do  in  all  unrenewed  natures ;  the  curse  of  humanity  is  when  the  body 
rules  the  intellect  and  conscience  too.  "What  shall  we  eat;  what  shall  we 
drink  ?  "  <feo.  II.  The  things  of  the  Spirit  are  its  moral  intuitions,  rational 
dictates,  intuitive  longings,  and  varied  powers  of  thought  and  sentiment.  These 
are — 1.  Good  when  they  control  the  things  of  the  flesh,  when  they  hold  the  body 
in  absolute  subjection — use  it  as  an  instrument.  2.  Bad  when  they  are  devoted  to 
the  things  of  the  flesh.  They  are  often  thus  devoted ;  souls  are  everywhere 
prostituted  to  animalism.  (D.  Thomas,  D.  D.)  The  opposition  between  the  thing$ 
of  the  flesh  and  the  things  of  the  Spirit : — I.  As  human  to  Divine  (Matt.  xvi.  23). 
II.  As  EARTHLY  TO  HEAVENLT  (Phil.  iii.  19 ;  Col.  iii.  2).  III.  As  SIN  to  holiness 
(Gal.  V.  19-23).  {Archdeacon  Gifford.)  Minding  the  things  of  the  flesh  : — It  is  not 
necessary  that  you  mind  all  the  things  of  the  flesh  in  order  to  constitute  you  a 
carnal  man.  It  is  enough  to  fasten  this  character  upon  you,  that  you  have  given 
yourself  over  to  the  indulgence  or  the  pursuit  even  so  far  as  one  of  these  things. 
A  sinner  may  not  be  a  debauchee,  and  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  may  be  an 
aspiring  politician.  But  whatever  the  reigning  passion  may  be,  if  it  have  the 
effect  of  attaching  you  to  some  one  object  that  is  in  the  world,  and  which  with  the 
world  will  terminate  and  perish — then  still  your  mind  is  in  subjection  to  an  idol, 
and  the  death  of  the  carnally  minded  is  your  inheritance  and  your  doom.  Be  not 
deceived,  then,  ye  men,  who,  engrossed  with  the  cares,  and  observant  of  all  the 
sobrieties  of  business,  are  not  addicted  to  the  influences  of  dissipation ;  nor  ye, 
who,  heedless  of  wealth  s  accumulations,  can  mix  an  occasional  generosity  with  the 
squanderings  of  intemperance  and  riot ;  nor  ye,  who,  alike  exempted  from  sordid 
avarice  or  debasing  sensuality,  have  yet,  in  pursuit  of  an  ascendency  over  the  mind 
and  the  measures  of  your  fellow  men,  made  power  the  reigning  felicity  of  your 
existence ;  nor  yet  even  ye,  who,  without  any  settled  aim  after  one  or  the  other  of 
these  gratifications,  fluctuate  in  giddy  concern  from  one  of  the  world's  frivolities  to 
another.  None  of  you  mind  all  the  things  of  the  flesh ;  yet  each  of  you  mind  one 
or  the  other  of  these  things,  and  that  to  the  entire  practical  exclusion  of  the  things 
of  the  Spirit  from  the  preference  of  your  habitual  regards.  We  do  not  charge  you 
with  a  devotion  of  heart  to  all  these  things  in  the  world  which  are  opposite  to  the 
love  of  the  Father,  any  more  than  we  charge  you  with  idolatrously  falhng  in 
obeisance  to  all  the  divinities  of  a  heathen  polytheism.  But  still,  if  only  one  of 
these  divinities  be  your  God,  there  were  enough  to  constitute  you  an  idolater,  and  to 
convict  you  of  a  sacrilegious  disvowal  of  the  King  who  is  eternal  and  immutable. 
And  so,  your  one  earthly  appetite,  though  free  from  the  tyranny  of  all  the  others ; 
your  habit  of  ungodliness,  though  it  be  the  only  one  that  breaks  out  into  visible 
expression  in  the  history  of  your  life — of  itself  renders  you  a  carnal  man ;  of  itself 
drives  you  from  the  spiritual  territory;  of  itself  proves  that  you  are  still  one  of 
the  children  of  this  world ;  and  that  you  have  not  passed  from  death  unto  life. 
(T.   Chalmers,  D.D.)  The  carnal  and  spiritual  mind: — I.  The  marks  of  the 

OABNALLY  MINDED.  1.  They  "mind  the  things  of  the  flesh."  The  "flesh"  is 
the  body,  man's  animal  nature,  the  seat  of  sensual  appetite  and  passion.  It  is 
through  the  organs  and  the  senses  of  the  flesh  that  we  engage  in  the  actiV^ies  of 
the  world,  and  participate  in  its  enjoyments  or  sorrows.  "  The  things  of  the 
flesh,"  therefore,  are  all  the  things  of  this  present  Ufe,  apart  from  any  connection 
with  that  which  is  unseen  and  eternal.  These  are  summed  up  in  chap.  i.  as  "  the 
creature,"  which  is  worshipped  and  served  rather  than  the  Creator.  Tb^y  are 
spoken  of  by  John  as  "all  that  is  in  the  world  "  (1  John  ii.  15,  16).  This  "all  " 
is  further  defined  as  "the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride 
of  Ufe  " — covetousness,  sensuality,  and  ambition.  To  "  mind  "  these  things  is  to 
think  a  great  deal  about  them,  to  set  our  affections  upon  them,  and  to  satisfy  our 
■ools  wi&  their  possession  (Luke  xii.  16-20).     (1)  The  things  of  the  flesh  m»jf  be 


672  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  vnu 

guiltily  minded,  even  when  the  objects  of  our  pursuit  are  such  as  may  be  lawfully 
desired.  Who  can  complain  of  our  addicting  ourselves  honestly  to  the  toils  of 
business,  or  enjoying  in  moderation  the  pleasures  of  the  table  and  the  home  ?  To 
the  Christian  man  they  are  blessings  and  means  of  holiness  ;  to  the  carnally  minded 
they  are  curses  and  snares.  (2)  It  is  not  necessary  to  mind  all  the  things  of  th« 
flesh  in  order  to  be  carnally  minded.  There  may  be  pursuits  and  pleasures  which 
you  hate ;  but  if  there  be  others  in  which  you  immerse  yourself,  it  is  enough  to 
stamp  you  as  a  carnal  man.  You  need  not  sail  on  every  sea  to  be  a  voyager  on  the 
water ;  and  so  you  need  not  follow  after  every  wickedness  to  be  a  child  of  the  devil. 

i3)  Carnally  mindedness  refers  not  to  occasional  impulses  or  feelings,  but  to  the 
labitual  bent  and  disposition  of  the  soul.  The  carnal  man  may  be,  at  times,  the 
subject  of  good  desires,  and  may  form  good  resolutions ;  while  the  spiritual  man 
may  often  have  to  struggle  with  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  be  for  a  moment  cast 
down  by  them.  Our  real  character  may  be  determined  by — (a)  Our  secret  medita- 
tions (Prov.  xxiii.  7).  (b)  The  crises  of  our  history.  There  are  times  which  compel 
us  to  show  whether  we  love  God  or  the  world  most,  (c)  The  practical  outgrowth 
of  our  principles  and  disposition.  We  are  known  by  our  fruits  (1  John  iii.  7, 10). 
2.  "To  be  carnally  minded  is  death."  (1)  Their  present  state  is  one  of  death. 
The  soul  is  devoid  of  those  affections,  experiences,  joys,  in  which  the  true  life  of  a 
spirit  consists.  (2)  Hence  their  doom  in  the  future  is  to  be  banished  from  God 
for  ever.  They  sow  to  the  flesh,  and  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption.  This  is  the 
"second  death."  3.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God."  True,  there  may 
be  no  full  consciousness  of  this,  but  still  it  is  there  ready  to  be  brought  out  when 
occasion  arises.  A  man  may  hate  his  neighbour  and  yet  not  discover  his  resent* 
ment  for  years ;  but  at  length  that  neighbour  may  confront  him  in  some  such  form 
as  shall  instantly  bring  it  out.  4.  "It  is  not  subject  to  His  law,  neither  indeed 
can  it  be.  So  then  they  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God."  And 
why  7  Because  thev  are  still  unforgiven  as  to  past  offences ;  and  because 
also,  in  all  seeming  goodness,  there  is  the  total  lack  of  a  true  and  accept* 
able  purpose.  II.  The  mabks  of  the  spieittjallt  minded.  1.  They  mind  the 
things  of  the  Spirit.  (1)  The  things  which  He  has  revealed,  or  the  spiritual 
gifts  which  He  has  imparted — all  that  concerns  us  spiritually  and  in  relation  to 
eternity,  in  contradistinction  from  all  that  concerns  us  only  materially  and 
temporally  (1  Cor.  ii.  9-16).  (2)  All  the  joys,  states,  and  experiences  of  our 
spiritual  nature  which  are  produced  within  us  by  the  realising  contemplation  of 
those  sublime  and  enduring  realities.  Justification,  forgiveness,  the  sense  of  that 
forgiveness,  sanctification,  advancement  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  peculiar 
privileges  of  Divine  sonship,  together  with  all  the  gladdening  prospects  of  ultimate 
glory.  2.  He  who  minds  the  things  of  the  Spirit  shows  it  by  making  constant 
efforts  to  acquire  them.  He  takes  pleasure  in  meditating  upon  them,  in  conversing 
about  them,  and  in  listening  when  others  describe  them.  Then  he  must  needs 
read  about  them  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  must  be  frequently  found  in  closest 
communion  with  God.  "  To  be  spiritually  minded  is  life  and  peace."  (1)  It  is 
"life,"  inasmuch  as  it  quickens  the  soul  in  its  nobles  attributes,  awakens  it  to  its 
highest  functions,  and  fills  it  with  its  purest  pleasures.  Not  to  be  spiritually 
minded  leaves  the  nund  of  man  but  partially  developed,  and  shuts  up  its  most 
Godlike  faculties  in  darkness,  torpor,  and  neglect.  (2)  Must  not  such  a  state  be 
one  of  "  peace  "  f  The  carnal  mind  can  have  no  peace.  It  is  troubled  from  both 
within  and  without.     (T.  G.  Horton.)        The  carnal  and  spiritual  mind : — I.  Thb 

TEXT  DIVIDES   MEN   INTO   TWO  CLASSES,  AND  ONLY  TWO.      The  test  Of  these  tWO  claSSCS 

is  the  bent  and  inclination  of  their  minds  towards  carnal  or  spiritual  things.  It  is 
important  to  determine  to  which  we  belong.  We  cannot  do  so  by  any  conventional 
test.  II.  The  test  is  cabried  into  the  inneb  man.  1.  It  is  "minding"  the 
things  of  the  flesh  or  spirit  that  determines  character ;  what  a  man  ia  rather  than 
what  he  does.  God  looks  at  the  heart,  and  no  outward  act  can  deceive  Him.  2. 
"  Minding  the  things,"  &c.,  includes  the  exercise  of  the  affections.  III.  Man  beallt 
IS  what  his  nature  is.  The  prevailing  instincts  of  the  heart  determine  the 
external  habits  of  life.  Character  is  determined  from  within,  not  from  without. 
A  man  may  live  in  a  church  all  his  life.  This  wiU  not  make  him  a  saint.  Yoa 
may  sow  wheat  and  barley  and  flax  in  the  same  soil  and  under  the  same  conditions, 
softened  by  the  same  shower,  warmed  by  the  same  sun  ;  but  these  influences  only 
lead  to  the  development  of  the  different  species  according  to  their  own  intrinsio 
natures.  Circumstances  may  repress  the  outward  manifestation  of  character  as  » 
man  may  avoid  worldly  amusements  from  a  sense  of  impropriety,  &c. ;  bat  SDcb 


mtr.  Tm.]  BOMANS.  679 

I — . 

abstinence  does  not  prove  him  to  be  a  spiritual  man.  lY.  The  psi^CTioAii  appuoa< 
TioN  OP  THIS  PBiNciPLB.  In  regard  to — 1.  Prayer.  2.  Beading  the  Bible.  3. 
Christ.  4.  The  world  and  the  things  of  the  world.  5.  The  unseen  world.  (F.  Strutt.) 
Carnal  and  tpiritual  mindedness: — I.  Thb  antithesis  of  oabnal  a»d  bpibitual 
uiNSEDNESB  (ver.  5).  1.  The  contrasted  classes.  (1)  They  that  are  after  the  flesh. 
"  The  flesh  "  means  the  body  (Job  iv.  15,  xxi.  6) ;  the  present  life  (Phil.  i.  24) ;  all 
that  in  religion  is  outward  (chap.  iv.  1 ;  Oal.  iii.  4) ;  corrupt,  vitiated  human 
nature  with  all  its  sinful  habits  (John  iii.  6 ;  Bom.  vii.  18).  This  last  is  its  signifi- 
cation here.  To  be  after  the  flesh — (a)  We  need  not  live  in  profligacy.  Passions 
may  be  dormant,  while  not  provoked.  Dynamite  is  harmless  till  fired.  The 
particles  of  clay  may  temporarily  subside  from  muddy  water  till  the  liquid  is 
agitated  again :  then  fresh  discolorations  arise.  (6)  Nor  indulge  in  every  form  of 
evil.  In  the  mountain  range  of  a  man's  iniquity  certain  peaks  may  start  sheer 
above  the  general  level  of  the  chain,  (c)  Nor  flagrantly  wicked  in  any  one  thing. 
If  only  the  mind  be  steeped  in  frivolities,  forgetful  of  anything  but  self -gratification, 
we  are  in  the  flesh,  (d)  We  may  even  experience  longings  after  nobler  soul-attainments 
(Matt.  xix.  16-22).  Just  as  there  are  manifold  depths  of  complete  submersion,  at 
six  or  sixty  fathoms,  so  there  are  souls  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (Mark 
xii.  34),  others  as  whited  sepulchres  (Matt,  xxiii.  27),  others  "  of  your  father  the 
devil "  (John  viii.  44).  (2)  They  that  are  after  the  Spirit,  (a)  Such  are  renewed 
in  heart.  The  change  they  have  experienced  is  deeper  than  reformation.  They 
are  not  Uke  irised  minerals  whose  surface  is  made  gleam  with  all  rainbow  colours 
while  the  centre  is  lustreless,  opaque,  (b)  They  desire  unreserved  consecration  to 
Ood's  service,  (c)  Their  portrait  is  drawn  in  the  Beatitudes.  2.  Their  diSerent 
conduct.  (1)  Those  after  the  flesh  mind  worldly  advantages,  honours,  pleasures. 
Deeds  often  beautiful  adorn  them.  The  soldier  dies,  leading  a  forlorn  hope  for  his 
country.  A  daughter  withstands  temptation,  and  toils  herself  into  a  premature 
grave  that  her  aged  parents  may  have  a  roof  and  bread.  But  no  nature  can 
transcend  the  principles  of  its  own  life.  Water  cannot  rise  naturally  above  its  own 
level.  (2)  Those  after  the  Spirit  mind  what  is  holy,  despite  many  impulses  of  dis- 
position and  training.  Like  the  sunflowers,  which  turn  after  the  light,  they  try  to 
keep  looking  to  Jesus  (Heb.  xii.  2).  Note — (a)  We  may  know  our  spuitaal  position 
by  observing  what  things  we  mind.  A  bar  of  steel,  by  what  it  "  minds,"  will  show 
whether  it  is  magnetised  or  not.  Our  conduct,  hke  the  hands  of  our  watches,  tells 
out  the  unseen  movements  within,  {b)  The  old  nature  cannot  be  sanctified,  it  must 
be  crucified  (Gal.  v.  24).  II.  The  diffebent  besults  of  such  antithetic  positions 
(vers.  6-8).  1.  The  consequences  are — (1)  That  to  be  carnally  minded  is  death. 
This  is — (a)  Alienation  from  all  godliness  and  spiritual  movements,  as  physical 
death  is  separation  from  activities  of  bodily  existence.  The  heart-chords  of  the 
carnally  minded  never  respond  to  the  Spirit's  touch,  as  no  plays  of  thought  or  feel- 
ing flit  over  the  pallid  face  of  a  corpse  though  touched  by  the  friendliest  hand. 
Tet  the  spiritually  dead  are  neither  incapacitated  for,  nor  insensible  to,  sensual 
pleasures  (Phil.  iii.  9 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  13).  (&)  Not  so  much  negation  of  spiritual  com- 
forts as  positive  hunger  of  unsatisfied  desires,  desolations  consequent  on  indulged 
passions.  Cain  (Gen.  iv.  13),  Esau  (Gen.  xxvii.  34),  Judas  (Matt,  xxvii.  3),  felt  it 
to  be  so.  (c)  Always  takes  hold  on  eternal  perdition.  The  tap-root  of  the  sin-tree 
strikes  into  the  inmost  recesses  of  human  nature  (chap.  vi.  23).  Present  soul-death 
is  prophetic  of  future.  (2)  To  be  spiritually  minded,  (a)  Life,  the  complete  opposite 
of  death  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  1-7),  including  delight  in  God,  power  for  good,  conformity  to 
Christ's  character,  holy  activity,  and  eternal  felicity.  At  present  this  life  is  subject 
to  many  fluctuations,  dishealths,  langnors ;  but  as  given  of  the  Spirit  and  hid  with 
Christ  in  God  (Col.  iii.  3)  it  is  deathless  (chap.  v.  17 ;  John  xiv.  19).  (6)  Peace. 
This  is  not  exemption  from  all  disquietudes,  but  in  spite  of  them ;  like  a  river 
flowing  amid  dark  cliffs  with  its  curves  lit  up,  and  its  ripples  glancing  in  the  sun- 
light, the  peace  of  the  believer,  luminous  in  the  shining  of  God's  reconciled  counte- 
nance, courses  on,  diffusing  comforts,  serenities,  joys.  In  contrast  with  the  wild 
tumult  of  fleshly  lusts  this  peace  signifies  the  harmony  grace  estabUshes  between 
the  sinner  and  his  God,  his  fellow-men,  and  the  several  parts  of  his  own  being.  It 
counterworks  the  soul's  anxieties  on  the  chief  grounds  whence  they  arise.  It  is  a 
peace  the  world  knows  not  of  (Isa.  lix.  8),  and  cannot  take  away  (John  xiv.  27).  It 
is  a  distinct  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22).  It  passeth  all  understanding  (Phil. 
iv.  7).  2.  Why  the  consequences  are  so.  (1)  Carnal  mindedness  is  death,  "  because 
the  carnal  heart  is  enmity  against  God."  The  hatred  quiescent  for  a  time  may  be 
very  intense,  as  Saul's  against  David  (1  Sam.  xxvi.  4).  The  flame  lies  latent  in  flint 

YOL.    I.  43 


«7«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [omr.  vm. 

till  the  applied  steel  evokes  it.  Vesuvius  is  not  always  in  active  eruption.  The 
strength  of  this  enmity  is  evidenced  from  the  fact  that  the  only  time  when  man  got 
an  opportunity  of  striking  at  God  he  struck  at  Him  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ 
(Acts  ii.  23).  The  carnal  heart  "is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God."  From  the 
very  necessity  of  its  nature  it  "  cannot  be  "  (chap.  vii.  14),  and  such  enmity  against 
the  God  of  all  life  can  mean  nothing  else  than  death.  (2)  Since  they  that  have 
their  habitat  within  the  sphere  of  fleshly  influences  as  fishes  have  theirs  within  the 
waters — cannot  please  God.  Neither  in  their  more  manifestly  sinful  ways,  nor  the 
common  transactions  of  daily  life  (Prov.  xxi.  4),  nor  their  most  solemn  services 
(Psa.  XV.  6 ;  Isa.  i.  13-15 ;  Ixvi.  3 ;  Gen.  iv.  5).  What  can  the  Divine  dis- 
pleasure mean  but  death?  Note — (a)  The  primary  cause  of  man's  indifference 
to  gospel  truth  and  ordinances.  The  dead  are  deaf.  Scientists  love  to  hear 
of  inventions,  social  reformers  of  philanthropies,  merchants  of  commerce, 
because  they  are  alive  to  these  things,  (b)  Heaven  would  be  no  fehcity  for 
any  unregenerate  soul.  Its  sorest  misery  is  in  meeting  with  God  in  the  glory  of 
His  holiness  (Eev.  vi.  16).  (c)  The  beUever's  peace  will  be  proportionate  to  his 
minding  the  things  of  the  Spirit.  The  growing  stream  floats  more  and  larger 
burdens  on  its  bosom,  (d)  The  unmitigated  dogmatism  of  ver.  8  should  lead 
us  to  repentance.  Better  that  a  man  should  not  be  born  than  not  please  hia 
God  (Matt.  xxvi.  24).  (e)  The  measure  of  our  pleasing  God  is  the  measure  of 
our  Christianity  (Heb.  xi.  6 ;  John  viii.  29 ;  1  John  iii.  22).  {James  Gage,  B.D.) 
The  carnal  and  the  spiritual : — I.  The  different  states  of  mind  desckibed  by 
THE  APOSTLE.  1.  To  be  "  camally-minded,"  to  "  walk  after  the  flesh,"  to  "  live 
after  the  flesh,"  to  "  mind  the  tbings  of  the  flesh,"  are  plainly  convertible  terms,  all 
meaning,  not  a  proper  care  for  the  welfare  of  the  body,  but  the  practical  exhibition 
of  that  evil  principle  of  fallen  man  which  in  the  following  verse  is  said  to  be  enmity 
against  God — not  to  be  subject  to  His  law ;  nay,  to  be  necessarily  hostile  to  it. 
Camal-mindedness,  therefore,  consists  in  the  presiding  love  and  pursuit  of  those 
sinful  objects  of  time  and  sense  which  alienate  the  heart  from  God,  subdue  it  to 
the  powers  of  death,  and  deliver  it  into  the  snare  of  the  enemy  of  mankind,  to  be 
led  captive  at  his  will.  2.  But  "  they  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh 
with  its  affections  and  lusts."  Spiritual-mindedness  is  a  principle  decidedly  opposed 
to  that  which  I  have  described — to  pass  through  things  temporal  as  not  to  lose  the 
things  eternal — to  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight — to  slight  and  scorn  the  pleasures  of 
sin,  animated  by  that  sanctified  ambition  which  seeks,  through  undeserved  mercy, 
the  recompense  of  an  eternal  reward — this  is  spiritual-mindedness.  II.  Such  is 
the  great  contrast  between  the  characters  I  have  described ;  and  vast  as  is  the 
difference  of  these  states  of  heart  will  also  be  that  of  the  ends  to  which  thbt 
INTALLIBLT  LEAD.  1.  To  be  camally-minded  is  death.  To  live  after  the  flesh  is  a 
present  death — a  moral  incapacity  for  the  pursuits  and  duties  of  a  heavenly  and 
immortal  hfe ;  it  is  to  be  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  One  thus  minded  is  an  alien 
from  the  commonwealth  of  the  true  Israel,  a  stranger  to  the  covenant  of  evangelical 
promise,  having  no  Scriptural  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world.  He  may  be  a 
living  treasury  of  knowledge,  capable  of  many  impressions  from  religious  objects, 
capable  of  performing  many  external  duties :  he  may  have  a  form  of  godliness,  a 
name  to  Uve;  but  holy  and  spiritual  things,  in  their  predominant  importance, 
strike  not  his  mind  nor  possess  his  heart.  2.  But  to  be  spiritually-minded  is  life 
and  peace.  Carnal  passions  are  subdued  and  mortifled,  and  the  Spirit  is  life, 
because  of  righteousness ;  it  is  capable  of  a  spiritual  existence.  "  The  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  Hfe  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  the  spiritually-minded  man  free  from  the 
law  of  sin  and  death.  Like  as  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  even  so  he  is  enabled  to  walk  in  newness  of  life."  He  is  sensible  of  all 
the  privileges  and  delights  of  a  spiritual  life.  He  is  passed  from  the  death  of  sin  to 
the  life  of  grace ;  and  the  death  of  the  body  shall  be  but  the  gate  and  entrance  of 
endless  being,  both  to  body  and  to  soul.  Conclusion  :  1.  Learn  we  then  from  this 
Scripture  the  necessity  of  an  entire  renewal  of  the  heart.  To  be  carnaUj -minded 
is  present  death  ;  and  as  well  might  the  lifeless  corpse  gift  itself  with  the  powers 
of  being  and  motion,  as  unassisted  man  restore  himself  to  spiritual  existence,  and 
live  by  the  exertion  of  his  own  energies  to  God  and  goodness.  2.  Learn,  also,  how 
ill  they  judge,  and  how  idly  they  dream  of  happiness,  who  prefer  living  after  the 
flesh  to  living  after  the   spirit.      {R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.)  The  contrasted 

characters;  or,  the  carnally  and  spiritually  minded: — We  have  here  depicted — L 
Those  to  whom  the  Christian  liberty  has  not  comb.  1.  Their  moral  state  and 
character.    They  are  in  the  flesh.    Hence  they  "  mind  tto  things  of  the  fleah." 


«HAr.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  §tB 

The  flesh  has  bound  down  the  mind  to  its  sole  service  (Phil.  iii.  19  ;  Col.  iii.  2 ;  Bom. 
xiii.  14).  Under  the  dominion  of  this  law  they  walk  (Eph.  ii.  2).  What,  then,  is 
this  strangely  fascinating  power?  The  term  {aap^)  properly  denotes  the  fleshy 
part  of  living  animal  bodies.  It  is  also  sometimes  used  for  the  whole  human 
person.  And  it  is  clearly  used  here  and  elsewhere  for  fallen  and  sinful  human 
nature  (John  iii.  6,  7;  Eom.  vii.  18;  Gal.  v.  17-21).  But  why?  (1)  Not  because 
our  Lord  or  His  apostles  held  our  physical  nature  to  be  in  itself  sinful.  In  Adam 
the  flesb  was  as  spotless  as  the  spirit,  and  Christ,  "  who  was  made  flesh,"  waa 
nevertheless  siuless  (chap.  i.  3;  John  i.  14;  1  John  iv.  2,  3 ;  Heb.  vii.  26).  (2) 
Not  because  sin  was  supposed  to  affect  the  physical  constitution  only.  For  it  ia 
obvious  that  the  physical  part  of  man,  by  itself,  is  altogether  incapable  of  sin.  A 
mere  animal  cannot  transgress  a  moral  law.  Sin  properly  pertains,  not  to  the  body, 
but  to  the  soul  (Mic.  vi.  7).  (3)  But  because — (a)  Sin  first  found  its  access  to  the 
human  will  through  the  medium  of  bodily  sense,  (b)  By  means  of  this  it  still 
maintains  its  dominion  within  the  souL  (c)  Man  suffers  his  spiritual  faculties,  by 
which  the  animal  nature  ought  to  be  governed  and  transformed,  to  be  delivered  over 
in  servitude  to  the  flesh.  2.  To  be  in  this  sinful  condition  "  is  death  "  (chap.  vii.  9; 
Luke  XV.  24 ;  1  John  v.  12  ;  John  v.  40,  vi.  53 ;  Eph.  ii.  1-5  ;  Rom.  vi.  1-23  ;  Col.  iii. 
1-4;  Bom.  vii.  9-13,  24).  Man's  true  life  is  not  animal,  but  spiritual.  If  he  attaina 
not  to  this,  or  by  transgression  forfeits  it,  he  does  not  really  Uve.  And  so  long  as  he 
is  content  with  earthly  good,  he  is  perpetually  sinking  down  into  the  "  second 
death."  3.  This  state,  with  its  consequent  course  of  life,  is  death  because  it  ia 
*'  enmity  against  God  " — is  directly  subversive  of  His  appointment  and  order.  The 
true  life  of  intelligent  beings  must  consist  in  conformity  to  the  Creator's  purpose 
and  arrangements.  The  carnal  mind  being  of  necessity  the  very  antithesis  of  God'a 
order,  it  is  not,  it  never  can  be,  subject  to  God's  law.  II.  The  charactebistics  of 
THOSE  TO  WHOM  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIBERTY  HAS  COME.  1.  Their  whole  course  of  life  ia 
determined  and  regulated  by  the  Spirit.  The  new  Spirit  of  life,  imparted  to  them 
in  Christ,  has  set  them  "  fiee  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."  They  are,  indeed, 
still  in  the  body,  but  the  flesh  is  but  a  tabernacle  and  organ  of  the  spirit.  For  they 
now  live  in  the  Spirit — "  mind  "  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  and  "  walk  "  according  to 
the  Spirit.  Not,  indeed,  that  they  neglect  the  body,  or  despise  all  earthly  good,  but 
even  while  occupied  with  mundane  things  they  learn  to  make  them  helpful  to  their 
true  spiritual  interests.  2.  To  be  thus  spiritually  minded — (1)  Is  hfe.  It  not  only 
tends  to,  but  springs  from,  and  promotes  life.  (2)  Peace.  The  carnal  mind  is  at 
war  with  God — with  all  the  Divine  plans,  purposes,  and  arrangements — and  is  there- 
fore evermore  fruitful  of  discord  and  misery.  But  the  "  spiritual "  mind  brings 
man  into  harmony  with  God,  and  with  nature,  physical,  intellectual,  and  moral. 
Then,  too,  the  things  with  which  the  spiritual  mind  is  preoccupied,  are  so  serenely 
steadfast  and  sure,  as  to  communicate  something  of  their  own  placid  character  to 
the  soul  ol  him  who  thus  Uvea  in  familiar  fellowship  with  them.  Conclusion : 
Observe — 1.  That  there  is  no  hope  of  securing  the  salvation  of  any  man  while  he 
continues  contented  with  "  the  things  of  the  flesh."  The  first  thing  needful  is  to  work 
in  him  a  living  conviction  that  his  present  course  of  life  is  vain,  foolish,  and  wicked. 
2.  That  the  new  life  in  the  Spirit  can  be  sustained  only  by  continued  attention  to 
its  interests.  "  They  that  are  after  the  Spirit "  do  mind  "  the  things  of  the  Spirit," 
and  such  "minding  "  is  "  Ufe  and  peace."  (W.  Tyson.)  The  contrast  between  the 
carnally  minded  and  the  spiritually  minded  : — I.  External.  Two  classes  of  character 
evident.  1.  The  one  busied  about  earthly  things,  and  governed  by  their  corrupt 
inclinations.  2.  The  other  caring  for  heavenly  things,  and  therefore  denying  them- 
selves that  they  may  please  God.  II.  Internal.  This  difference  is  essential ;  in 
the  heart.  1.  The  one  is  spiritually  dead.  2.  The  other  is  alive  unto  God,  and 
enjoys  His  unspeakable  peace.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  contrast  between  the  uncon- 
verted and  the  regenerate  appears — I.  In  their  character.  1.  The  one  is  sensual.  2. 
The  other  spiritual.  II.  In  iheib  experience.  1.  The  one  experiences  death  and 
misery.  2.  The  other  life  and  peace.  III.  In  their  relation  to  God.  1.  The 
one  is  an  enemy,  and  cannot  please  God.  2.  The  other  a  friend,  and  enjoys  com- 
munion with  God.  IV.  In  their  prospects.  1.  The  one  must  perish,  for  he 
is  none  of  Christ's.  2.  The  other  shall  live  for  ever,  for  he  shall  be  quickened 
from  the  grave.  {Ibid.)  Nature  and  spirit : — Whatever  these  words  may  mean 
one  thing  is  clear — the  apostle  does  teach  a  radical  difference  between  the  physical 
and  the  spiritual  natures  of  man.  Some  philosophers  teach  that  there  is  no  differ- 
ence between  matter  and  mind ;  that  the  operations  which  we  call  mental  or 
spiritual,  and  those  which  we  recogvise  as  physical,  are  all  produced  by  thd  same 


676  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  vm. 

foroM.  This  denial  of  the  distinction  between  the  physical  and  the  spiritual  realms, 
which  makes  thought  only  a  chemical  function,  and  conscience  nothing  but  a  heredi- 
tary affection  of  the  nervous  system,  Paul  does  not  justify.  Which  is  nearer  right  7 
Let  us  hear  what  a  philosopher  (Mr.  W.  T.  Harris,  of  Concord)  says  about — I.  The  law 
OF  NATDBAi.  THINGS.  "  The  world  of  uature,  to  which  man  is  enslaved  by  his  bodily 
wants  and  necessities,  is  a  world  of  selfishness  and  cruelty.  The  means  of  gratifica- 
tion for  one  body  are  obtained  and  used  at  the  expense  of  another."   Is  not  that  true  ? 

1.  Every  natural  thing  grows  at  the  expense  of  something  else.  The  sand  of  the 
beach  is  worn  from  the  rocks  of  the  shore  by  the  action  of  the  waves.  But  what 
the  beach  gains  the  cliffs  lose.  The  corn  grows  out  of  the  earth,  but  only  at  the 
expense  of  the  soil  in  which  it  grows,  and  of  other  plants,  that  stand  stunted 
under  its  shadow.  Just  so  the  body  of  the  animal  lives  and  grows  at  the  expense 
of  other  living  things.  2.  The  law  of  natural  growth  is  the  law  of  all  movement 
or  manifestation  of  physical  power.  Every  force  that  is  expended  is  borrowed.  If 
I  drive  one  croquet  ball  against  another,  the  force  imparted  to  the  second  one  is  lost 
by  the  first  one.  The  fire  burns,  but  it  is  only  as  the  wood  gives  up  the  heat  that 
was  latent  in  it.  The  oxygen  of  the  air  and  the  carbon  of  the  wood  unite  to  pro- 
duce the  flame ;  and  whatever  force  is  in  the  flame  existed  before  the  fire-  was 
kindled.  3.  The  great  physical  law  which  the  philosophers  call  the  law  of  the 
correlation  of  forces,  or  the  conservation  of  energy,  governs  all  these  changes. 
Every  steam-engine  is  an  example  of  the  conversion  of  heat  into  motion ;  every 
hot  axle  is  an  instance  of  the  conversion  of  motion  into  heat ;  every  machine  belt 
from  which  the  spark  flies  to  the  knuckle  shows  heat  converted  into  electricity ; 
every  building  set  on  fire  by  lightning  shows  electricity  converted  into  heat.  What 
is  lost  by  one  form  is  gained  by  another.  II.  The  law  of  spiritual  things.  "The 
law  of  spirit  is  harmony,  and  not  mere  contention.  All  spiritual  struggle  must 
have  reconciliation  for  its  object.  The  equal  shall  look  in  the  face  of  equal,  and 
through  mutual  recognition  each  shall  reinforce  the  other.  Thus  each  is  doubly 
strong;  strong  in  himself  and  strong  in  his  friend.  Combination  is  the  great 
principle  of  spirit,  and  its  forms  are  numerous  in  the  practical  and  in  the  theoreti- 
cal world."  This  statement  will  also  be  verified  by  your  experience.  1.  You  and  I 
sit  down  hungry  to  a  scanty  mt^al.  There  is  barely  enough  for  one.  If  my  needs 
are  satisfied  you  get  nothing ;  if  you  are  filled  I  must  go  hungry.  But  you  and  I 
sit  down  with  eager  minds  to  talk  about  some  moral  or  spiritual  truth.  It  is  a 
truth  known  to  me,  but  unknown  to  you,  and  in  our  conversation  you  gain  from  me 
this  truth.  Have  I  deprived  myself  of  anything  in  imparting  to  you  this  truth? 
On  the  contrary,  I  have  gained  by  giving.  (1)  I  have  a  stronger  hold  upon  the 
truth  than  I  had.  If  I  give  a  man  my  coat  I  have  one  coat  the  less  ;  but  if  I  give 
a  man  my  thought  it  is  less  likely  now  that  I  shall  part  with  it.  I  have  not  only  a 
stronger  hold  upon  it,  but  a  greater  joy  in  it.  Two  faggots  burn  more  freely  than 
one  ;  and  my  enthusiasm,  in  the  pursuit  and  possession  of  this  truth,  is  rekindled 
when  you  take  fire.  (2)  Truth  grows  in  the  mind  itself  by  communicating  it.  Not 
only  do  the  mental,  like  the  bodily  powers,  gain  strength  by  exercising  them  ;  there 
is  a  kind  of  increase  here  to  which  the  body  affords  no  analogy.  The  most  pro- 
ductive mind  is  the  most  prolific  mind.  Production  fertilises  the  intellect.  It  is 
when  the  mind  is  paying  out  its  wealth  most  lavishly  that  its  revenues  are  largest 

2.  Other  spiritual  gifts  besides  knowledge  follow  in  their  growth  the  same  law.  (1) 
Hope  is  increased  by  imparting  it.  If  I  have  strong  confidence  in  the  success 
of  any  enterprise,  and  if  I  succeed  in  inspiring  others  with  my  confidence,  it  is  not 
at  any  expense  to  my  own  expectation.  The  same  thing  is  true  of — (2)  Courage. 
A  brave  man  inspires  others  to  heroism,  but  his  own  courage  is  not  diminished 
when  it  enters  into  other  souls;  it  is  stimulated  and  invigorated.  (3)  The  one 
central  element  of  the  spiritual  life,  love — the  love  that  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law. 
3  We  say  sometimes  in  our  prayers  that  God  is  not  impoverished  by  giving  nor 
enriched  by  withholding.  That  is  true  of  Him  because  He  is  a  Spirit,  and  because 
the  law  of  His  nature  and  of  His  action  is  a  spiritual  law.  But  man  is  a  spirit  also; 
and  the  saying  is  therefore  true  of  man.  By  giving  man  is  not  impoverished — by 
giving  spiritual  gifts.  A  man's  temporal  possessions  may  sometimes  be  diminished 
by  bestowing  them,  but  the  man's  true  self  is  enlarged  by  every  bounty  that  it  dis- 
penses. III.  Have  we  not  verified  the  doctrine  taught  by  the  Concord  philosopher? 
And  in  doing  so  have  we  not  found  the  steongest  reason  for  relieving  with  Paul, 
that  there  is  a  radical  difference  between  the  physical  and  the  spiritual  world  ? 
Do  not  the  body  and  the  spirit  belong  to  different  kingdoms  ?  Is  there  not  a  higher 
nature  in  man  which  is  not  subject  to  tJbe  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  and^ 


OHAP.  vm.]  ROMANS.  677 

of  which  physical  science  knows  absolutely  nothing?  And  is  there  not,  therefore, 
reason  for  believing  that  the  death  of  the  body,  which  is  under  physical  law,  is  not 
the  death  of  the  higher  nature,  which  is  not  under  physical  law;  that  the  spirit  of 
man  may  continue  to  exist  after  the  body  has  ceased  to  exist  ?  1.  Man  is  not  wholly 
mortal,  but  neither  is  he  wholly  immortal.  He  is  flesh  as  well  as  spirit.  In  which 
of  these  realms  does  he  chiefly  live?  Is  his  ruling  love  given  to  the  things  of  the 
flesh  or  to  the  things  of  the  Spirit  ?  If  the  former  is  true  of  him,  then  the  law  of  hia 
nature  is  the  law  of  the  lower  realm.  The  things  on  which  his  heart  is  chiefly  set 
are  things  which  he  can  only  have  by  depriving  his  fellows.  The  very  condition  of 
his  life  is  warfare,  and  the  warfare  into  which  his  ruling  choice  enlists  him  is  fierce 
and  fatal ;  sooner  or  later  the  devourers  themselves  must  be  devoured.  The  mind- 
ing of  the  flesh  is  death.  2.  It  is  a  sad  and  bitter  life  that  any  man  leads  who  sets 
his  chief  affections  on  the  possessions  and  goods  of  the  material  world.  Because 
he  is  a  spiritual  being  his  ruling  choice  ought  to  take  a  higher  range.  The  gains 
that  are  most  precious  to  him  are  those  that  fall  to  him  while  he  is  enriching 
others.  S.  It  is  quite  possible  for  man  to  carry  this  spiritual  force  down  into  the 
lower  realm,  there  to  subjugate  the  devourers.  It  is  possible  to  substitute  the 
principle  of  communion  and  combination  for  the  principle  of  competition  in  the  getting 
and  the  using  of  material  things.  That,  indeed,  is  the  very  law  of  progress  in 
civilisation.  And  the  thousand  wars  of  old  will  never  cease,  and  the  thousand 
years  of  peace  will  never  come,  till  men  stop  putting  their  trust  in  the  methods  of 
competition  and  begin  to  build  the  fabric  of  their  industrial  and  social  life  on  the 
principle  of  co-operation — till  they  walk  no  longer  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the 
Spirit.  That  day  will  not  be  hastened  by  disputing  or  fighting  or  legislating,  any 
more  than  the  growing  of  the  grass  will  be  hastened  by  firing  cannon  over  your  lawn, 
or  marching  troops  across  it,  or  making  speeches  to  it.  But  you  and  I,  in  our  time, 
can  have  something  of  the  light  and  glory  of  it  in  our  homes  and  in  our  lives  if  we 
will  only  treasure  the  truth  we  have  found  to-day.  (W.  Gladden.)  Spiritual 
affinity  : — He  that  delights  in  God  doth  not  much  delight  in  anything  else.  The 
world  appears  in  an  eclipse.  The  astronomer  saith,  if  it  were  possible  for  a  man 
to  be  lifted  up  as  high  as  the  moon,  the  earth  would  seem  to  him  as  a  little  point. 
If  we  could  be  lifted  to  heaven  in  our  affections,  all  earthly  delights  would  seem  as 
nothing.  When  the  woman  of  Samaria  had  met  with  Christ,  down  goes  the  pitcher  ; 
she  leaves  that  behind.  He  who  delights  in  God,  as  having  tasted  the  sweetness  in 
Him,  doth  not  much  mind  the  pitcher — he  leaves  the  world  behind. 

Ver,  6.  Por  to  he  carnally  minded  Is  death. — The  carnal  and  the  spiritual  mind : 
— I.  The  oabnal  mind.  1.  The  disposition.  (1)  The  expression  is  an  abstract 
one.  The  apostle  touches  a  principle  which  he  finds  at  work,  and  laying  hold  of  it 
says,  "  I  wish  you  to  look  at  it  so  that  you  may  see  its  nature  and  tendency,"  just 
as  a  physician  might  describe  the  symptoms  of  a  disease.  (2)  This  disease  is 
named  the  mind  of  the  flesh.  This  "  minding  "  is  like  other  verbs  in  which  the 
organ  gives  the  name  to  the  act.  When  we  put  our  hand  to  a  thing  we  handle  it, 
the  eye,  to  eye  it,  the  affections,  to  affect  it.  "  Minding  the  flesh  "  is  not  gross 
vice,  but  simply  worldly  mindedness.  2.  The  consequence.  To  be  carnally  minded 
is — (1)  Death,  (a)  It  is  the  forerunner  of  eternal  death.  For  such  a  disposition 
could  never  find  a  home  in  heaven.  (6)  A  sign  of  present  spiritual  death — a  dead- 
ness  to  spiritual  things.  (2)  Enmity  against  God — a  condition  which  men  do  not 
realise.  Only  conscious  of  indifference  or  ignorance,  they  resent  the  charge  of 
eimiity.  But  the  apostle  describes  a  tendency,  ready  at  any  moment,  at  any 
pressure  of  God's  demands,  to  break  out  in  hostility.  (3)  Is  not  subject  to  the  law 
of  God.  "  Law  "  here  is  equivalent  to  "  will."  The  law  which  worldly  mindedness 
follows  is  what  it  and  not  what  God  likes.  It  must  he  taken  away.  (4)  Cannot 
please  God.  II.  Thb  spibitual  mind.  1.  How  it  is  produced.  "  If  so  be  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you."  No  man  is  spiritually  minded  by  nature. 
Bespecting  this  Holy  Spirit,  note — (1)  His  importance.  The  dispensation  under 
which  we  live  is  called  the  "  dispensation  of  the  Spirit."  While  Christ  is  our  only 
hope,  upon  the  Holy  Spirit  depends  our  entire  success.  (2)  His  mystery  (John  iii.  8). 
(3)  His  position.  It  is  safer  to  honour  Him  too  much  than  too  little  when  we 
know  that  the  sin  of  neglecting  Him  will  never  be  forgiven  either  in  this  world  or 
in  the  world  to  come.  (4)  The  privUegea  He  introduces — regeneration,  help, 
comfort,  sanctification.  2.  Its  characteristics.  (1)  Life.  Material  life  is  union  of 
body  and  soul.  True  life  in  the  mind  is  contact  with  the  objects  which  draw  out 
all  its  snsceptibilities.    On  becoming  spiritually  minded  we  enter  on  a  new  worid  of 


«78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

spiritual  realities.  As  experienced  here,  it  is  spiritaal  life ;  as  experienced  here* 
after,  it  will  be  eternal  life.  All  other  life  is  death  because  it  is  in  union  with 
perishing  things  and  all  its  elements  are  dying.  (2)  Peace.  Life  in  sunshine.  In 
proportion  as  we  become  spiritually  minded  is  our  peace  secured.  And  that  peace 
rests  not  upon  a  foundation  which  may  be  disturbed  by  conscience,  poverty,  or 
bereavement.  "  Nothing  can  separate  us,"  Ac.  3.  The  privilege  of  which  this 
mind  is  the  seal — Christ's  Spirit.  A  man  may  have  much  that  bears  the  semblance 
of  piety — a  head  stored  with  knowledge,  a  mouth  full  of  argument,  a  life  full  of 
work.  "  But  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."  As  a 
matter,  then,  of  fact,  every  man  may  test  his  condition  and  state  by  this  proof. 
(P.  Strutt.)  Carnal  and  spiritual  mindedness  and  their  effects : — I.  The  death 
HEBE  SPOKEN  OF  is  Something  more  than  penal  death.  1.  It  is  not  future,  but 
present,  and  arises  from  the  obtuseness  or  the  extinction  of  certain  feelings  and 
faculties  which,  if  awake  to  their  corresponding  objects,  would  uphold  a  life  of 
thoughts  and  sensations  and  regards,  altogether  different  from  the  life  of  un- 
regenerate  men.  Just  figure  an  affectionate  father  to  have  all  the  domestic  feelings 
paralysed.  Then  would  you  say  of  him  that  he  had  become  dead  to  the  joys  and 
the  interests  of  home.  And  the  death  of  the  carnally  minded  is  a  death  to  aU  that 
is  spiritual — a  hopeless  apathy  in  all  that  regards  our  love  to  God  and  righteousness. 
2.  And  such  a  death  is  not  merely  a  thing  of  negation,  but  of  positive  wretched- 
ness. For  with  the  want  of  all  that  is  spiritual  about  him,  there  is  still  a 
remainder  of  feeling  which  makes  him  sensible  of  his  want,  and  a  remorse  and  a 
terror  about  invisible  things,  even  amid  the  busy  appliance  of  this  world's  opiates. 
And  there  are  other  miseries  which  spring  up  from  the  pride  that  is  met  with 
incessant  mortification — from  the  selfishness  that  comes  into  collision  with  selfish- 
ness— from  the  moral  agonies  which  essentially  adhere  to  malice  and  hatred,  and 
from  the  shame  that  is  annexed  to  the  pursuits  of  licentiousness.  All  these  give  to 
the  sinner  his  foretaste  of  hell  on  this  side  of  death.  II.  From  what  we  have  said 
of  the  death  of  those  who  are  carnally,  you  will  be  at  no  loss  to  understand  what 
is  meant  by  the  life  of  those  who  are  spimtttally  minded.  We  read  of  those 
who  are  alienated  from  the  life  of  God,  and  to  this  it  is  that  they  find  readmittance. 
The  blood  of  Christ  hath  consecrated  for  them  a  way  of  access ;  and  the  fruit  of 
that  access  is  deliaht  in  God — the  charm  of  confidence,  of  a  new  moral  gladness 
in  the  contemplation  of  God's  character,  an  assimilation  of  their  own  character 
to  His,  and  so  a  taste  for  charity  and  truth  and  holiness;  and  a  joy,  both  in  the 
cultivation  of  all  these  virtues  and  in  the  possession  of  a  heart  at  growing  unison 
with  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  These  are  the  ingredients  of  a  present  life,  which 
is  the  token  and  the  foretaste  of  life  everlasting.  III.  The  peace  of  those  who 
ABE  SPiBiTUALLT  MINDED.  There  are  two  great  causes  of  disturbance  to  which  the 
heart  is  exposed.  1.  A  brooding  anxiety  lest  we  shall  be  bereft  or  disappointed  of 
some  object  on  which  our  desires  are  set.  The  man  who  is  spiritually  minded  rises 
above  this,  for  there  is  an  object  paramount  to  all  which  engrosses  the  care  of  a 
worldly  man  ;  and  so  what  to  others  are  overwhelming  mortifications,  to  him  are 
but  the  passing  annoyances  of  a  journey.  To  him  there  is  an  open  vista  through 
which  he  may  descry  a  harbour  and  a  home,  on  the  other  side  of  the  stormy 
passage  that  leads  to  it ;  and  this  he  finds  enough  to  bear  him  up  under  all  that 
vexes  and  dispirits  otber  men,  2.  There  is  nought  in  the  character  of  the 
spiritually  minded  that  exempts  them  from  the  hostility  of  other  men ;  but  there 
is  the  sense  of  a  present  God  in  the  feeling  of  whose  love  there  is  a  sunshine  which 
the  world  knoweth  not;  and  there  is  the  prospect  of  a  future  heaven  in  whose 
sheltering  bosom  it  is  known  that  the  turbulence  of  this  weary  pilgrimage  will  soon 
be  over ;  and  there  is  even  a  charity  that  mellows  our  present  sensation  of  painful- 
ness,  and  makes  the  revolt  that  is  awakened  by  the  coarse  and  vulgar  exhibition  of 
human  asperity  to  be  somewhat  more  tolerable.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  To  be 
spiritually  minded  is  life  and  peace. — Spiritual  mindedness  : — I.  Its  nature. 
Note — 1.  The  objects  which  a  spiritually  minded  man  regards.  There  is  a 
spiritual  as  well  as  a  material,  an  intellectual,  and  a  moral  world — a  world  the 
existence  and  contents  of  which  are  not  ascertained  by  the  exercise  of  the 
«ens»3,  nor  by  the  mere  exercise  of  intellectual  energy;  "for  eye  hath  not 
seen,'*  &o.  They  are,  however,  graciously  revealed  to  ns  by  the  Spirit  in 
the  Scriptures ;  th'^'y  comprehend  the  existence,  character,  and  government  of 
God ;  the  responsibility,  guilt,  and  depravity  of  man ;  the  person,  character,  and 
mediatorial  work  of  the  Eedeemer ;  the  instructions  and  influences  of  the  Holy 
Spirit ;  the  graces  which  adorn  the  Christian  character  ;  and  the  glory  to  which 


out.  rm.]  BOMANS.  6T9 

the  believer  is  gracioasly  destined.  2.  The  manner  in  which  a  spiritually-minded 
man  regards  these  objects.  He  has  a  spiritual  discernment,  in  the  exercise  of 
which  he  regards  spiritual  things  in  a  totally  different  way  than  he  did  before. 
The  things  themselves  remain  the  same,  but  he  is  changed.  He  regards  them  now 
— (1)  Devoutly.  He  meditates  on  them  not  as  matters  of  mere  speculation,  but  as 
the  means  of  holiness  and  of  eternal  life.  You  may  think  of  religion  in  all  its 
aspects  and  yet  be  as  far  from  all  spiritual  contact  with  religion  itself  as  the 
astronomer  is  from  the  star  he  contemplates.  But  if  you  think  of  them  devoutly, 
your  thoughts  will  be  accompanied  with  such  feelings  as  correspond  with  their 
character  and  importance.  (2)  Supremely.  Not  that  he  disregards  those  which 
are  secular  and  temporal,  but  to  him  their  importance  is  secondary ;  "  he  seeks  first 
the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness."  (3)  Habitually.  It  is  no  uncommon 
thing  for  a  worldly-minded  man,  under  the  influence  of  strong  excitement,  to  direct 
his  attention  to  spiritual  things,  and  with  some  degree  of  anxiety.  But  his  regard 
is  as  transitory  as  the  excitement  by  which  it  was  occasioned.  But  spirituality  is 
the  law  of  the  mind  of  a  spiritually-minded  mau,  and  it  displays  itself  both  by  its 
resistance  to  evil  and  by  its  pursuit  of  good.  (4)  Practically.  Its  internal  influence 
on  the  heart  is  indeed  invisible,  but  this  is  always  connected  with  visible  effects, 
like  the  sap  which  secretly  circulates  through  the  tree,  and  then  exhibits  its 
existence  by  the  fruit.  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  3.  The  general 
principles  by  which  a  spiritually-minded  man's  regard  to  these  objects  is  regulated. 

(1)  A  firm  beUef  in  the  existence  of  spiritual  things.  (2)  A  solemn  conviction  of 
the  Divine  presence.  (3)  An  obedient  regard  to  Divine  authority.  (4)  A  holy  love 
to  the  Divine  character.  (5)  A  penitential  conviction  of  guilt.  (6)  The  prospect 
of  standing  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  II.  The  life  akd  peace  with 
WHICH  spiRiTOAii  MINDEDNE8S  IS  CONNECTED.  1.  To  be  Spiritually  minded  is  life. 
This  life  is — (1)  Real.  A  speculative  knowledge  of  the  gospel  is  not  life ;  nor  is  a 
performance  of  the  ceremonies  of  rehgion  ;  nor  a  visible  union  with  the  Church. 
These  things  may  adorn  the  worldly-mmded  professor,  as  fragrant  flowers  adorn  the 
Ufeless  corpse.     There  is  no  life,  unless  yoo  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God. 

(2)  Is  of  the  highest  and  noblest  character.  The  lowest  degree  of  life  is  vegetable 
life  ;  the  next  is  animal ;  the  next  is  intellectual.  But  beyond  all  these  is  spiritual 
life,  which  assimilates  its  possessor  to  its  Divine  source.  2.  To  be  spiritually 
minded  is  peace.  This  peace  arises  from — (1)  Pardon,  for,  ••  being  justified  by 
faith  we  have  peace  with  God."  (2)  Confidence  in  God;  "Thou  wilt  keep  him 
in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee."  (3)  The  smile  of  God,  when  we 
walk  in  the  light  of  His  countenance.  (4)  Peace  in  affliction  ;  for  "  in  the  world 
ye  shall  have  tribulation,  but  in  Me  ye  shall  have  peace. "  (5)  Peace  in  death  ;  for 
"  mark  the  perfect  man,  and  behold  the  upright,  for  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace." 
III.  The  means  bt  which  spibitdal  mindedness  may  be  pboduced  and  pbomotbd. 
1.  Carefully  avoid  everything  which  is  opposed  to  spirituality  of  mind.  2.  Con- 
template the  Word  of  God  in  the  exercise  of  faith.  3.  Pray  without  ceasing.  (J. 
Alexander.)  Spiritual  mindednest : — I.  Wherein  this  state  of  mind  consists. 
In — 1.  Renewal  of  the  mind  by  the  Spirit  (John  iii.  6,  7).  2.  Abstraction  of  the 
mind  from  the  world.  3.  Exercise  of  the  mind  on  spiritual  objects.  U.  With 
WHAT  this  state  OF  MIND  IS  IDENTIFIED.  "  To  be  Spiritually  minded,"  according 
to  "  the  wise  men  after  the  flesh,"  is  to  be  mad ;  according  to  the  votaries  of  sensual 
pleasure,  is  to  be  melancholy ;  according  to  the  Word  of  God,  "  hfe  and  peace." 
Spirituality  of  mind  is — 1.  The  evidence  of  spiritual  life.  It  is  not  natural  to  nor 
acquired  by  man.  No  cause  is  adequate  to  the  production  of  it  but  the  Holy 
Ghost.  He,  therefore,  who  is  "  spiritually  minded  "  has  the  witness  of  the  Spirit 
that  he  is  "  bom  of  God."  In  the  feelings  of  life  experienced,  and  the  functions 
of  life  performed,  there  is  the  evidence  of  life.  2.  The  element  of  a  happy  life. 
"  To  be  spiritually  minded  is  life  and  peace."  It  yields  pure  and  permanent 
•njoyment  when  all  other  sources  fail,  and  in  every  variety  and  change  of  circum- 
stance, and  is  productive  of  perfect  felicity  in  heaven.  3.  The  earnest  of  eternal 
life — both  as  a  pledge  that  it  shall  be  given,  and  as  a  part  already  given  (vera. 
29,  30 ;  John  iv.  14).  HI.  How  this  state  of  mind  mat  be  obiginated  and 
PBOMOTED.  By — 1.  Dependence  on  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  Attendance  on  the  means 
of  grace.  The  Spirit  ordinarily  works  by  means,  the  chief  of  which  are  the  study 
of  the  Scriptures,  private  devotion,  and  public  worship.  3.  Seclusion  from  the  world. 
Not  that  lawful  occupation  is  incompatible,  but  there  is  in  the  world  much  that  has 
a  tendency  to  sensualise  the  mind ;  and  the  further  we  remove  from  the  sphere  of  ita 
attnustion,  the  better  for  the  cultivation  of  this  grace.  4.  Christian  converse.  When 


680  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha?.  Tint 

Christ  talked  with  two  of  His  disciples  by  the  way,  their  hearts  burned  within  them. 
6.  Meditation  on  death  and  the  world  to  come.  The  subject  may  be  viewed  and 
improved — 1.  As  a  test  of  character.  2.  As  an  excitement  to  joy.  {O.  Corney.) 
The  spiritual  mind  : — I.  What  it  is.  The  mind  which  the  Holy  Spirit  infuses  into 
the  regenerate,  and  which  desires  and  pursues  after  spiritual  things.  In  its  more 
advanced  and  perfect  form,  it  is  the  enthronement  of  the  Divine  will  over  the 
human ;  the  voluntary  subjection  of  the  whole  man  to  a  Divine  influence,  whereby 
Christ  is  formed  in  as.  II.  Whence  have  we  it  ?  1.  Its  efficient  cause  is  the  Holy 
Spirit.  To  awaken  conscience  from  its  sleep,  to  turn  the  will  from  its  waywardness, 
to  eradicate  the  seeds  of  evil,  and  to  fill  the  heart  with  love  for  whatever  is  holy,  i» 
the  province  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  of  Him  only :  "  That  which  is  bom  of  the  flesh 
la  flesh,"  <fec.  2.  The  instrumental  means  is  "  the  Word  of  God,"  which  by  the 
Spirit,  is  made  "effectual  in  them  that  believe."  "  Sanctification  of  the  Spirit, 
and  belief  of  the  truth,"  go  together.  The  Spirit  uses  the  truth  to  obtain  influential 
access  to  man's  soul,  in  all  its  parts — to  the  understanding,  that  it  may  be  opened ; 
to  the  judgment,  that  it  may  be  convinced  ;  to  the  will,  that  it  maybe  subdued ;  to 
the  conscience,  that  it  may  be  restored  to  its  rightful  supremacy ;  to  the  affections, 
that  they  may  be  set  on  God  and  heaven.  III.  In  what  forms  does  it  manifest 
ITSELF  ?  1.  In  the  quickened  condition  of  the  religious  sensibilities  ;  the  transformn- 
tion  of  "  the  heart  of  stone  into  the  heart  of  flesh."  "  To  be  carnally-minded  is 
death."  While  a  man  is  in  this  state,  he  is  dead  to  all  the  objects  and  interests  of 
the  spiritual  world.  Of  "  the  beauty  of  holiness  "  he  has  no  knowledge.  The  favour 
of  God  has  no  part  In  his  aspirations,  and  the  eternal  and  unseen  never  occasion  a 
serious  thought.  Hence,  awakened  sensibility  is  the  first  sign  of  an  inner  life. 
We  feel  spiritually.  Thare  is  a  keen  sensitiveness  to  the  presence  of  evil.  The 
favour  of  God  is  life  to  us.  True,  it  may  be  "  life  "  without  •'  peace."  But  life  it 
is,  and  must  be.  Spiritual  emotions,  be  they  painful  or  be  they  joyous,  can  come 
only  from  a  spiritual  mind.  A  tear  is  as  good  a  sign  of  life  as  a  emile.  But 
remember  that  this  awakened  sensibility  is  a  thing  of  degrees.  The  mind  of  the 
Spirit  belongs  as  truly  to  "  the  babe  in  Christ "  as  to  "  the  perfect  man  " ;  to  the 
awakened  sinner,  in  his  first  convictions,  as  to  the  triumphant  saint  just  entering  on 
his  rest.  There  must  be  life  in  us,  while  we  are  manifesting  any  of  the  functions 
of  life.  2.  In  the  increasing  prevalence  of  religious  thoughts  and  affections.  "  They 
that  are  after  the  Spirit  do  mind  the  things  of  the  Spirit."  The  thoughts  make  the 
man,  and  the  thoughts  are  the  man.  He  is  "  carnal,"  if  he  gives  the  first  and 
largest  place  in  his  heart  to  the  things  of  the  world  ;  he  is  •«  spiritual,"  if  he  gives 
that  pre-eminence  to  the  exercises  of  faith.  3.  In  the  centering  of  its  best  affections 
in  a  personal  Saviour,  as  the  medium  through  which  the  soul  orders  all  its  inter- 
course with  the  heavenly  world.  IV.  Its  fruits  and  experiences.  *'  Life  and 
peace."  There  is  the  life  and  peace  of — 1.  The  resting  and  settled  heart.  The  Ufe 
of  carnal-minded  men  is  one  of  miserable  unrest,  which  comes  of  their  doing  violence 
to  a  law  of  their  being.  They  have  taken  up  with  something  below  that  which  their 
souls  were  made  and  fitted  for.  But  the  spiritual  man  in  the  midst  of  a  conflicting, 
shifting,  uncertain,  and  unstable  world,  rests  in  the  Lord.  2.  The  resigned  and  sub- 
missive will,  walking  confidently  after  Divine  guidance.  In  the  embarrassments  of 
moral  choice,  in  the  oppositions  of  conflicting  duties,  we  look  to  have  the  mind  of 
the  Spirit.  3.  Spiritual  liberty.  There  is  a  service  which  may  be  laborious,  exact, 
and  costly,  but  it  is  the  service  of  a  bondsman — of  one  who  is  labouring  to  obey, 
before  he  has  been  fully  brought  to  believe.  But  the  spiritual  mind  changes  con- 
straint into  cheerfulness,  and  duty  into  happiness,  and  the  restless  activity  of  a 
self -devised  and  legal  worship  into  the  calm  repose  of  a  commanded  and  accepted 
Bacrifice.  4.  Devotion.  For,  having  the  Spirit,  we  have  in  ourselves  an  agency  for 
helping  our  infirmities.  He  moulds  us  into  the  praying  form,  suggests  to  us  praying 
thoughts,  forms  in  us  the  praying  habit.  V.  The  best  means  of  attaining  it.  1. 
Prayer  for  the  influences  of  that  Spirit  through  whom  this  great  gift  comes  to  us. 
The  most  eminent  effusions  of  the  Spirit  were  not  only  afforded  to  prayer,  but 
appear  to  have  taken  place  at  the  very  time  these  sacred  exercises  were  being  per- 
formed (Ezek.  xxxvi.  37 ;  Acts  ii.  1).  2.  The  cultivation  of  such  tempers  as  are 
most  congruous  with  His  revealed  character,  and  calculated  to  invite  His  gracious 
presence  in  our  sonls.  ««  Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God."  A  Spirit  of  "  love," 
He  is  grieved  at  the  indulgence  of  envious  and  malignant  passions.  A  Spirit  of 
"  supplication,"  He  is  grieved  when  we  grow  remiss  in  the  exercises  of  devotion. 
He  cannot,  as  a  Spirit  of  "  holiness,"  remain  in  a  heart  to  be  the  companion  of 
BDf orsoken  sin.    And  as  we  most  not  grieve  the  Author  of  the  spiritual  mind,  so  w« 


«UP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  681 

mast  be  careful  not  to  "  quench  "  His  sacred  influences.  The  gifts  of  the  Spirit  are 
not  bestowed  upon  us  to  lie  idle.  Their  fruitfulness  depends  upon  their  being  kept 
in  constant  exercise.  3.  All  those  tendencies  which  the  apostle  includes  under  the 
name  of  the  "  carnal  mind,"  must  be  brought  into  subjection.  The  flesh  and  the 
Spirit  cannot  reign  together.  Hence  we  are  required  to  "  mortify  the  deeds  of  the 
body."  And  this  we  do  by  denying  them  indulgence.  4.  The  observance  of  stated 
seasons  of  religious  retirement.  5.  Making  subservient  thereto  things  which  are  not 
spiritual — pressing  into  a  sanctified  service  every  turn  in  the  lot  of  life.  "  It  is  a 
great  art,"  as  Bishop  Hall  says,  "  to  learn  the  heavenly  use  of  earthly  things."  As 
the  raging  fire  turns  everything  which  is  cast  into  it  into  its  own  nature ;  or 
as  the  flower  makes  common  use  of  the  rain  and  the  snow-drift,  the  sunbeam, 
and  the  dew,  to  minister  to  the  nourishment  and  support  of  its  own  vitality ; 
BO,  by  the  power  of  a  Divine  affinity,  does  the  spiritual  mind  assimilate  all 
things  to  itself.  6.  The  study  of  those  practical  models  of  Christian  character 
which  are  given  to  us  in  the  Holy  Scripture.  7.  Above  all  looking  to  Christ, 
the  great  Exemplar,  as  in  all  things,  so  in  this.  (D,  Moore,  M.A.)  The 
spiritual  mind : — We  often  hear  it  said  of  one  or  another  individual,  "  He  is  a 
very  spiritual  person,"  or  "He  is  very  unspiritual."  What  is  meant  by  these 
expressions  ?  In  the  first  place,  the  passage  informs  us  that  "  to  be  spiritually- 
minded  "  is  opposed  to  being  "  carnally-minded."  The  sensual  thought,  the  eyea 
that  rove  after,  the  imagination  that  shapes,  the  soul  that  hankers  for,  forbidden 
pleasures,  are  anti-spiritual.  Again,  while  the  spiritual  is  opposed  to  the  carnal 
mind,  we  learn  from  other  passages  of  Scripture  it  is  more  than  what  we  commonly 
signify  by  morality.  A  man  may  be  honest  in  his  worldly  affairs,  blameless  in 
every  earthly  relation,  without  being  truly  spiritual ;  for,  besides  the  earthly  and 
human  relations  in  which  we  stand,  we  sustain  relations  heavenly  and  Divine.  A 
supreme,  uncreated  excellence  must  sanctify  and  draw  us  on  to  another  citizenship 
than  that  we  hold  amid  these  clay-built  abodes,  before  the  spiritual  mind,  with  its 
"life  and  peace,"  can  be  unfolded  within  us.  Once  more,  "  to  be  spiritually-minded," 
while  standing  in  opposition  to  what  is  "  carnal,"  and  completing  what  is  "moral," 
is  also  the  significance  of  what  is  "  formal."  The  outward  observances  and  institu- 
tions of  our  religion  have  no  sense  but  to  express  and  awaken  the  exercises  of  our 
spiritual  nature.  According  as  we  go  through  these  punctual  rites  of  prayer  and 
praise,  communion  and  consecration,  with  a  worldly  or  a  spiritual  mind,  they  will 
be  a  mechanical  and  unmeaning  mockery  to  us,  or  the  very  reflections  of  the  gates 
of  heaven.  But  the  spiritual  mind,  while  opposed  to  what  is  carnal,  completing 
what  is  moral,  has  of  course  a  position  and  intrinsic  quality  of  its  own,  which  we 
mast  go  beyond  all  terms  of  negation  and  comparison  to  set  forth.  To  be  spiritually- 
minded,  then,  is  to  have  a  sense,  a  conviction,  and  inward  knowledge  of  the  reality, 
solidity,  and  permanent  security  of  spiritual  things.  It  is  to  beUeve  and  see  that 
there  is  something  more  in  God's  universe  than  outwardly  appears;  something 
more  than  this  richly  compounded  order  of  material  elements,  with  all  its  beauty ; 
something  beyond  the  sharply  defined  glittering  objects  that  crowd  the  landscape. 
It  is  to  understand  that  day  and  night,  seed-time  and  harvest,  summer  and  winter, 
are  not  the  only  facts  possibly  subject  to  the  notice  of  the  undying  soul.  It  is  to 
be  aware  that  even  the  broad  streets  and  mighty  pathways  which  the  astronomer 
descries,  laid  out  from  globe  to  globe,  do  not  embrace  the  whole  or  highest  survey 
of  God's  creation.  But  beyond,  within,  or  above  all,  there  verily  is  a  scene,  a 
society  of  lofty,  intelligent  existence,  where  are  brighter  displays  of  God's  nearness 
and  love.  The  spiritual  mind  not  only  sees,  as  in  cold  vision,  the  inner  or  upper 
world  gloriously  triumphing  in  its  stability  over  the  passing  kingdom  of  earth  and 
sense,  but  enters  into  relation  with  it,  feels  surrounded  by  it,  bows  to  it,  and 
realises  an  inspection  from  the  living  firmament  of  its  power.  Mortal  creature, 
spirit  of  Almighty  inspiration,  clothed  in  flesh  I  believest  thou  only  in  what  comes 
to  thee  through  these  five  windows  of  the  senses,  so  advantageously  placed  to  let  in 
the  notices  of  material  things ;  or  wilt  thou  credit  that  thy  Maker  also  fashioned 
thy  heart  to  yield  for  the  entrance  of  Himself  and  retinue  of  attending  spirits  T 
Breather  of  earthly  air,  yet  partaker  of  a  heavenly  privilege ;  birth  of  yesterday, 
yet  heir  of  immortaUty ;  mystery  to  thyself,  definite  figure,  illimitable  being !  thy 
feet  do  not  more  surely  gravitate  to  the  earth  than  thy  inward  nature  holds  of  a 
loftier  sphere.  Awake  to  thy  spiritual  relations ;  live  up  to  their  solemn  dignity. 
{C.  A.  Bartol.)  True  piety  peacefully  pleasant : — To  be  thus  minded  is  life  and 

peace ;  or  the  life  of  true  piety  is  a  life  of  peaceful  pleasure.  1.  A  life  of  holiness 
is  calculated  to  fill  the  mind  with  the  richest  enjoyment,  and  raise  it  to  its  highert 


689  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [omt.  iva, 

state  of  improvement.  The  objects  of  contemplation  that  lie  before  the  believing 
mind  are  dignified  and  worthy  its  occupancy.  2.  A  life  of  piety  furnishes  the  heart 
with  those  affections  which  give  it  the  highest  pleasure,  and  best  promote  its 
improvement.  There  is  no  small  object  in  God's  kingdom.  If  He  ia  not  the 
immediate  object  of  the  affections  of  His  people,  still  they  have  a  noble  object.  If 
they  love  His  law,  His  gospel,  His  government,  His  Church,  or  even  the  humblest 
individual  in  His  household,  there  is  no  one  of  these  affections  of  which  angels 
would  be  ashamed.  3.  Piety  cultivates  a  better  conscience  than  can  be  found  in 
the  carnally-minded.  Other  things  being  equal,  he  is  far  the  happiest  man  who 
has  the  purest  conscience,  who  most  promptly  applies  for  its  decision,  and  most 
cheerfully  obeys  its  dictates.  Still,  in  every  good  man,  conscience  is  more  or  less 
honoured  and  cultivated,  while  in  the  opposite  character  it  is  hated  and  neglected 
as  Heaven's  unwelcome  sentinel.  4.  A  life  of  piety  promotes  happiness.  To  be 
spiritually-minded  is  life  and  peace.  This  is  a  point  that  will  generally  be  con. 
ceded.  It  is  said,  however,  that  there  are  some  whom  religion  has  made  unhappy. 
They  are  cut  off  from  the  pleasures  of  sense,  while  their  hopes  of  glory  and  their 
enjoyment  of  God  are  too  inoperative  to  render  them  happy.  That  in  many  cases 
this  appears  to  be  true  there  is  no  doubt ;  but  there  can  be  as  little  doubt  that  the 
failure  is  chargeable,  not  to  religion,  but  to  its  absence.  5.  There  is  opened  before 
the  believer  a  vast  resource  of  comfort.  He  has  joy  in  G6d  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  whom  having  not  seen  we  love,  and  in  whom  though  now  we  see  Him  not, 
yet  believing,  we  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  He  has  fellowship 
with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  He  enjoys  the  ministry  of  angels. 
He  is  conscious  of  penitence,  and  has  ordinarily  a  hope  of  forgiveness.  He  is  per- 
mitted through  rich  grace  to  cast  an  eye  forward  toward  heaven  as  his  everlasting 
home.  6.  The  covenant  that  binds  him  to  his  Lord  is  an  everlasting  covenant, 
well  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure.  Hence,  while  he  is  assured  that  to  live  is  Christ, 
he  is  equally  confident  that  to  die  would  be  gain.  What  he  shall  be  it  does  not 
yet  appear.  (D.  A.  Clark.)  Death  and  life: — 1.  Two  of  the  sublimest  words 
in  the  language,  expressing  two  of  the  sublimest  facts  of  our  experience ;  but  What 
is  life  ?  What  is  death  ?  The  answers  take  us  far  out  of  our  depth.  Life  presents 
itself  to  ns  in  a  series  of  activities,  governed  by  purpose  ;  and,  in  the  case  of  con- 
scious life,  it  exhibits  the  delightful  forms  of  intelligence  and  feeling.  Life,  then, 
as  we  generally  see  it,  is  bright,  beautiful,  and  attractive.  But  of  the  inner  springs 
which  regulate  these  activities,  of  the  essential  nature  of  life  we  are  ignorant.  So 
with  death.  The  aspect  in  which  it  presents  itself  to  us  is  dark  and  repellent.  We 
know  it  as  the  cessation  of  the  cheerful  activities  of  life,  the  dissolution  and  decay 
of  the  fair  material  form.  It  appears  to  us,  therefore,  as  a  great  enemy.  2.  But 
the  way  we  look  at  both  death  and  life  is  partial  and  illusive.  This  verse  gives  UB 
the  views  of  one  occupying  a  point  of  view  different  to  the  one  we  are  accustomed  to 
take.  I.  Death  coNsirEEEO  as  the  minding  of  the  etjEsh.  1.  That  death  is  the 
cessation  of  activities  which  befalls  the  living  body,  is  a  natural,  but  cannot  even 
we  see  it  is  a  partial  way  of  viewing  it  ?  For  what  we  deplore  when  our  friends  die 
is  not  chiefly  the  disappearance  and  decay  of  their  bodies,  but  the  withdrawal  of 
that  mind  and  heart  from  our  society  of  which  the  body  was  but  the  instrument. 
2.  The  answer  which  these  words  give  to  the  question,  What  is  death  ?  speak  of 
what  it  means  to  the  conscious  soul.  A  soul  which  finds  its  aims  and  expends  its 
energies  in  catering  for  the  needs  and  pleasures  of  its  bodily  instrument,  is  virtually 
dead.  And  why  ?  First,  if  the  aims  of  the  soul  be  confined  to  its  perishing  tene- 
ment, it  follows  that  the  soul's  occupation  and  pleasures  will  be  gone  when  the  body 
dies.  And,  besides,  there  is  the  ignoble  procedure  of  making  it  the  chief  employ- 
ment of  the  higher  powers  of  our  nature  to  cater  for  the  lower.  Now,  the  Scriptures 
are  very  far  from  countenancing  neglect  of  the  body ;  they  exalt  it  as  the  instrument 
of  Christian  service,  the  temple  of  God.  And  a  body  in  cheerful  health  is  no  small 
aid  to  the  attainment  of  health  of  soul .  What  is  called  death  of  the  soul  here,  is 
not  such  minding  of  the  body  as  promotes  its  efficiency  for  worthy  work,  but  such 
minding  of  it  as  makes  the  soul  the  slave  of  the  body,  its  chief  object  to  minister  to 
its  indulgences  and  pleasures.  3.  That,  I  need  not  say,  is  a  very  different  thing 
from  death  as  we  understand  it.  Is  there  any  reason  why  things  so  different  should 
be  called  by  the  same  name?  What  is  the  death  of  the  body  ?  When  the  constant 
changes  which  go  forward  in  the  body  nourish  and  preserve  its  life,  it  lives ;  but 
when  they  cease  to  do  that,  then  it  dies.  But,  observe,  a  dead  body  does  not  cease 
to  be  the  subject  of  changes ;  on  the  contrary,  they  go  forward ;  they  consist  of  the 
repulsive  changes  oi  lingering  decay  and  corruption^    Now  does  not  that  justify  tb« 


muf.  Tnx.1  ROMANS.  683 

parallel  of  the  apostle  ?  The  death  of  the  soul  is  not  its  ceasing  to  think,  to  feel, 
to  wUl,  but  its  thinking,  feeling,  willing  in  base  unworthy  ways,  as  unlike  its 
proper  ways  of  acting  as  the  odious  processes  of  bodily  corruption  are  unlike  the  fair 
processes  of  life.  II.  Life  considered  as  the  minding  of  the  spirit.  The  soul's 
occupying  itself  mainly  with  aims  and  efforts  belonging  to  its  higher  nature.  It 
recognises  its  duties  to  others  and  to  God,  and  its  endeavours  are  made  to  discharge 
these  though  at  cost  of  self-denial  to  the  body.  To  follow  Christ  is  its  life-task.  To 
be  approved  of  Christ  its  reward ;  to  see  Christ,  and  to  resemble  Him,  its  eternal 
happiness.  These  are  the  things  it  "  minds,"  and  the  body  is  the  servant  which 
aids  it  in  doing  so.  The  ideal,  indeed,  is  not  reached  here,  but  the  ceaseless  and 
earnest  effort  after  the  ideal  is  the  conflict  of  the  Christian  Ufe.  He  who  engages 
in  it  minds  the  things  of  the  Spirit.  And  in  proportion  as  it  is  attained,  and  the 
soul,  rising  superior  to  the  claims  of  the  flesh,  feasts  its  powers  on  the  things  unseen 
and  eternal,  and  labours  at  its  task  here  with  reference  to  them,  and  to  Him  who 
dwells  there,  in  that  proportion  the  soul  lives ;  occupies  itself  in  a  way  which  trains 
it  for  immortality,  and  prepares  it  to  see  God.      {T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.)  To  be 

carnally  minded  is  death : — First,  the  subject,  the  carnal  mind.  This  we  may  see 
made  good  in  the  several  branches  of  it.  As,  first  of  all,  take  it  in  the  minJ  and 
understanding,  which  is  the  higher  part  of  the  soul,  that  which  should  rule  all  the 
rest.  This  is  corrupted,  and  so  tending  to  death  (thus  chap.  i.  22,  and  Eph.  iv.  8). 
And  we  may  see  it  in  these  several  distempers,  as — First,  there  is  ignorance  of  the 
things  of  God  and  which  concern  our  own  eternal  salvation  (Jer.  iv.  22  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  54). 
Secondly,  as  there  is  ignorance  in  the  mind,  so  there  is  also  a  curiosity  and  an  affec- 
tation of  the  knowledge  of  such  things  as  belong  not  to  us.  Again,  darkness  of 
apprehension  when  we  are  taught,  as  the  disciples,  slow  of  heart  (Luke  xxiv.  25  ; 
Mark  xvi.  14).  Thus  we  see  the  carnality  of  our  reason  and  higher  part.  This 
may  serve  to  humble  us,  and  lay  us  low  in  our  own  thoughts.  That  which  is  best 
of  us,  it  is  by  nature  tainted  in  us.  This  shows  us  what  ill  judges  of  the  things  of 
God  and  the  matters  of  religion  such  persons  are  as  are  merely  carnal,  and  have  no 
more  but  the  light  of  reason  in  them,  which  is  so  much  dimmed  and  obscured  by 
sin,  is  as  if  blind  men  were  to  judge  of  colours,  which  is  very  improper  and  imperti- 
nent. Secondly,  as  there  is  corruption  in  the  understanding,  so  likewise  in  the  will 
and  affections.  "  The  flesh  lusts  against  the  Spirit "  (Gal.  v.  17).  And  (ver.  24) 
the  affections  and  lusts  they  are  both  joined  together,  as  who  should  say  lustful 
affections.  This  first  of  all  teaches  us  how  impotent  and  unable  any  one  is  by 
nature  to  his  own  conversion,  while  we  are  depraved  in  every  part  of  us.  Secondly,  we 
see  here  also  God's  goodness  in  His  powerful  and  victorious  grace,  in  that  He  suffers 
corruption  to  break  out  no  further  sometimes  than  it  does,  if  not  by  wholly  removing 
it,  yet  at  least  by  restraining  it.  Now  further,  secondly,  here  is  considerable  of  us 
the  predicate,  what  is  declared  concerning  it  as  to  the  evil  and  mischievousness  of 
it,  and  that  is,  that  it  hath  the  name  of  death  fastened  upon  it.  The  Spirit  of  God 
makes  choice  of  such  an  expression  as  might  most  of  all  terrify  us,  and  move  all 
such  persons  as  are  yet  remaining  in  their  natural  condition  to  labour  to  come  out 
of  it.  First,  it  is  in  sort  and  in  a  certain  sense  temporal  or  natural  death.  This 
is  not  always  presently,  or  actually,  or  in  effect,  as  experience  does  many  times  show. 
First,  it  is  so  originally,  and  as  the  first  occasion  of  this  death.  Secondly,  it  is  death 
also  demeritoriously.  It  is  that  which  does  deserve  death.  Thirdly,  this  carnal 
mind  is  oftentimes  also  temporal  death  actually  and  in  the  consequence  of  it. 
There  is  many  a  man  who  by  his  sin  and  wickedness  does  hasten  and  procure  hia 
own  end.  "  Be  not  over-much  wicked ;  why  should'st  thou  die  before  thy  time  ?  " 
says  the  preacher  in  Eccles.  vii.  17.  Secondly,  it  is  death  also  spiritually,  which  is 
somewhat  further  here  intended.  It  is  enmity  against  God,  as  it  follows  in  the  next 
verse  to  the  text,  and  it  is  a  deprivation  of  the  life  of  God  which  should  be  in  us. 
Thirdly,  it  is  also  death  eternal.  And  this  is  that  which  is  principally  intended  here 
in  this  place,  as  the  worst  and  greatest  of  all.  •'  The  wages  of  sin  is  death  "  (Eom. 
vi.  23).  There  are  divers  persons  who  have  great  need  to  this  purpose  to  be 
awakened  out  of  this  dead  condition.  First,  all  worldlings,  who  savour  of  nothing 
but  of  the  earth  and  of  the  things  of  the  earth.  Secondly,  here  may  likewise  be 
warned  and  admonished  occasionally  from  this  present  truth,  all  such  persons  as 
content  themselves  in  a  mere  abstaining  from  grosser  sins  and  the  outward  acts  of 
the  flesh.  Thirdly,  hereby  also  are  admonished  all  vain-glorious  and  Pharisaical 
persons,  who  have  nothing  in  them  but  a  form  of  godliness.  To  set  home  this 
further  upon  us,  let  us  take  in  these  considerations  vdth  us.  First,  that  this  carnal 
mind  perverts  the  greatest  human  excellences  and  perf'  o-ions  which  are  consider- 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  nn. 

able  in  any ;  the  wits,  and  parts,  and  understandings,  and  such  things  as  these.  A 
man  that  has  these  without  grace,  he  is  bat  a  dead  man  for  all  that.  Secondly,  this 
carnal  mind  corrupts  even  the  best  duties ;  it  makes  those  performances  which 
being  considered  in  their  own  nature  are  good,  yet  coming  from  such  a  person  that 
performs  them  to  be  turned  to  sin  unto  him,  because  the  principle  from  which  he 
performs  them  is  not  right  in  him  (Prov.  xxi.  27).  This  carnal  mind  envenoms 
the  greatest  comforts,  and  takes  away  the  profitable  use  of  all  the  creatures  that  are 
for  us.  Hence  it  is  that  it  is  expressed  indefinitely,  "  to  be  carnally-minded  is 
death  " ;  namely,  whatever  condition  a  man  be  in,  in  regard  of  the  world,  whether 
rich,  or  noble,  or  powerful,  or  whatever  we  can  think  of.  The  second  is  the  end  of 
the  spiritual,  which  is  expressed  in  two  terms  to  us,  in  life  and  in  peace.  Each  of 
these  is  such  as  is  consequent  to  spiritual-mindedness  in  those  who  are  tho 
subjects  of  it.  First,  spiritual-mindedness  is  life.  That  is  one  thing  which  is 
attributed  to  it  as  a  privilege  attending  upon  it.  Secondly,  for  spiritual  life.  This 
spiritual-mindedness  is  life  in  sundry  regards.  First,  originally,  as  proceeding 
and  springing  from  this  life.  Those  that  are  spiritually-minded,  they  are  so  from 
the  Spirit  of  life  which  is  in  Christ  Himself,  and  communicated  to  them  who  are 
members  of  Him.  Secondly,  objectively.  Spiritual-mindedness  is  spiritual  life 
so  also.  Forasmuch  as  the  matter  of  it,  it  is  conversant  about  things  of  that  nature, 
as  grace,  and  conversion,  and  regeneration,  and  such  things  as  these.  Thirdly, 
operatively.  Spiritual-mindedness  is  spiritual  life  likewise  so.  Forasmuch  as  it 
does  very  much  tend  to  the  preserving,  and  strengthening,  and  nourishing,  and 
increasing  of  this  spiritual  life  in  us.  The  third  and  last  notion  of  life  which  is  here 
signified,  and  that  indeed  which  is  mainly  intended,  is  that  it  is  life  eternal.  The 
second  is  peace,  which  may  be  taken  either  in  the  generical  notion  or  in  the 
specifical.  If  we  take  it  generically  and  comprehensively,  so  it  does  imply  in  it  all 
kind  of  happiness  at  large,  it  being  usual  with  the  Hebrews  to  express  all  kinds  of 
good  whatsoever  under  this  name,  so  as  when  they  wished  to  any  persons  peace, 
they  did  under  that  expression  pray  for  their  absolute  welfare  and  success.  If  we 
take  it  specifically  and  restrictively,  so  it  does  point  out  that  blessing  which  is  pro- 
perly and  peculiarly  so-called,  and  that  in  all  the  several  kinds  and  distributions  of 
it  And  thus,  indeed,  do  I  rather  take  it  here  in  this  place,  the  blessing  of  peace, 
as  it  is  called,  and  which  God  hath  promised  to  bestow  on  His  people  (Psa.  xxix.  11 ; 
cxix.  165  ;  Prov.  iii.  17  ;  Rom.  ii.  10 ;  Gal.  vi.  16),  <feo.  And  peace,  as  I  said,  in  the 
full  extent.  First,  with  God  Himself  (chap.  v.  1),  &o.  Secondly,  with  man's  own 
self.  Peace  of  conscience,  tranquility  of  spirit,  quietness  of  mind.  Grace  it  is  of  a 
calming  and  composing  nature,  it  puts  all  things  into  a  state  of  quietness.  Thirdly, 
with  others  (Prov.  xvi.  7).  The  ground  of  aU  this  is,  first,  the  gift  and  legacy  of 
Christ.  Secondly,  the  nature  of  grace  itself,  and  the  manner  of  the  working  of  it ; 
for  it  composes  the  passions  of  the  mind,  and  scatters  the  distempers  of  it ;  and 
from  thence  occasions  peace  unto  it.  This  may  serve  to  show  as  the  great  difference 
betwixt  the  children  of  God  and  other  men ;  betwixt  those  that  are  spiritually- 
minded  and  those  that  are  carnal.  As  for  this  latter,  they  have  no  share  in  peace 
as  belonging  unto  them  (Isa.  Ivii.  20,  21).    (Thomat  Horton,  D.D.) 

Yers.  7,  8.  Because  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God. — The  carnal  mind : 
— I.  Its  attitude  towabds  God.  1.  Enmity.  (1)  Hating  the  thought  of  God. 
(2)  Resisting  the  grace  of  God.  2.  Insubordination — transgressing  the  law  of 
God.  3.  Utter  incompatibility  vrith  His  nature.  H.  God's  attitude  towabds  it. 
1.  He  can  only  regard  it  with  displeasure.  2.  This  is  evident  from  His  Word, 
procedure,  and  threatenings.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  enmity  of  the  carnal  mind  ; 
— I.  Its  OBJECT.  God  who  is — 1.  The  kindest  of  beings;  from  His — (1)  Creative 
goodness.  (2)  Sustaining  care.  2.  The  most  lovable.  3.  The  greatest.  He  is 
infinite  in  wisdom,  power,  Ac.  11.  Its  subject.  1.  The  mind — the  noblest  part 
of  man,  because — (1)  Rational.  (2)  Free.  2.  The  carnal  mind — carnal  because  of 
its — (1)  Descent.  (2)  Affections.  (8)  Exercises.  IH.  Its  evidences.  1.  Aver- 
sion from  communion  with  God.  2.  Wilful  disobedience  to  His  known  commands. 
3.  Opposition  to  Him.  4.  Hatred  to  His  followers.  Conclusion  :  This  teaches  na 
— 1.  That  aU  mankind  are  naturally  degenerate.  2.  That  an  entire  change  of 
mind  is  necessary  to  salvation.  3.  That  this  change  should  be  our  serious  concern. 
{Biblical  Treasury.)  The  enmity  of  the  carnal  mind : — I.  In  what  sense  abe  wb 
TO  understand  THIS  ENMITY  TO  GoD  ?  1.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  unre- 
peuerate  man  is  at  enmity  with  God  according  to  the  character  which  he  usually 
forms  of  Him.   He  commonly  thinks  of  God  only  as  a  great,  wise,  and  good  Being ; 


oaxt.  Till.]  EOMANS.  686 

and  be  feels  no  sentiment  of  opposition  to  the  attributes  of  wisdom,  greatness,  or 
goodness.  But  His  supreme  authority  as  the  governor  of  the  world.  His  infinite 
purity  and  holiness  as  hating,  and  His  justice  as  avenging,  sin  are  kept  out  of 
sight ;  a  being  is  framed  in  their  imagination  very  much  resembling  themselves. 
2.  This  enmity  is  not  to  be  considered  as  personal,  but  rather  as  a  dislike  of  tho 
government  which  God  exercises,  and  of  the  laws  which  restrain  us  from  any 
course  we  are  desirous  to  pursue,  or  require  from  us  what  we  feel  no  disposition  to 
perform  ;  and  enmity  against  them  may  be  properly  said  to  be  enmity  against  God, 
for  it  resists  His  authority.  Hence  the  carnal  mind  "  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of 
God."  3.  Again,  we  are  not  to  understand  that  the  carnal  mind  is  totally  destitute 
of  everything  that  is  good.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  there  is  in  all  a  natural 
tendency  to  approve  and  do  things  which  it  has  pleased  God  to  condemn  and 
forbid,  and  a  natural  dislike  of  many  duties  which  He  has  thought  fit  to  enjoin, 
n.  What  proofs  of  this  do  we  expebienob  in  ourselves  ob  see  in  others? 
Do  we,  upon  the  careful  review  of  our  lives,  perceive  that  the  love  of  God  has  been 
our  fiist  and  ruling  principle,  that  our  chief  desire  has  been  to  glorify  His  name, 
and  to  fulfil  His  commands  f  And  do  we  find  the  same  disposition  in  others  ?  Are 
the  sins  committed  in  the  world  committed  through  ignorance  ?  Does  the  sinner 
repent  of  them  and  forsake  them  as  soon  as  he  hears  they  are  contrary  to  the 
Divine  will  7  Do  our  children  discover  a  bias,  even  from  their  early  infancy,  to 
what  is  right  ?  Alas  I  I  need  not  proceed  in  an  inquiry  which  begins  already  to 
assume  the  air  of  sarcasm.  Let  us,  however,  press  the  matter  home  upon  our  own 
consciences.  Do  not  we  find  it  a  labour  to  do  what  is  right  ?  Does  not  even  self- 
interest  lose  its  efficacy?  And  when  our  fears  of  misery,  or  our  desires  of  happi- 
ness, induce  us  to,  attempt  God's  service,  how  numerous,  how  powerful  are  the 
difficulties  which  arise  to  deter  us !  Conclusion  :  Let  us  learn — 1.  Humiliation. 
To  be  at  enmity  with  God  is  indeed  a  deplorable  state  of  mind,  for  it  is  enmity  with 
perfect  truth,  justice,  goodness,  purity.  2.  The  unspeakable  value  of  an  atone- 
ment. Great  as  our  vileness  may  be,  there  is  a  way  in  which  we  may  have  access 
to  God,  and  in  which  He  will  receive  us  graciously.  3.  The  necessity  of  Christian 
vigilance,  of  self-denial,  and  earnest  suppMcation  for  the  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.      (J.    Venn,    M.A.)  The   enmity    of  the   carnal  mind: — This  enmity 

involves — L  A  feeling  on  the  part  of  him  who  is  its  owner  of  HosiiLiTlr 
AGAINST  God.  1.  This  necessarily  comes  out  of  the  very  definition  of  the  carnal 
mind.  If  the  law  of  God  be  a  law  of  supreme  love  toward  Himself,  how  is  it 
possible  for  that  mind  to  be  in  subjection  to  such  a  law  whose  affections  are  wholly 
set  on  the  things  of  the  world  ?  It  not  only  is  not  subject  to  this  law,  but  it  cannot 
be  so — else  it  were  no  longer  carnal.  2.  But  this  is  not  only  logically  true,  it  is 
also  true  physically  and  experimentally.  There  is  no  power  in  the  mind  by  which 
it  can  change  itself.  It  can,  e.g.,  constrain  the  man  in  whom  it  resides  to  eat  a 
sour  apple  rather  than  a  sweet.  But  it  cannot  constrain  him  to  like  a  sour  apple 
rather  than  a  sweet ;  and  it  has  just  as  Httle  power  over  the  affections  toward  God 
as  it  has  over  the  taste.  There  are  a  thousand  religious-looking  things  which  can 
be  done ;  but,  without  such  a  renewal  of  the  Spirit  as  the  Spirit  itself  cannot 
achieve,  these  things  cannot  be  dehgbted  in.  We  can  compel  our  feet  to  the 
house  of  God,  but  we  cannot  compel  our  feelinps  to  a  sacred  pleasure  in  its 
exercises.  We  can  bid  our  hands  away  from  depredation,  but  we  cannot  bid  away 
covetousness.  3.  And  when  I  charge  you  with  enmity  against  God  you  may  be 
ready  to  answer,  that  really  we  are  not  at  all  aware  of  it.  On  which  we  have  to 
observe,  that  your  greatest  enemy  will  excite  no  malevolent  feeling  so  long  as  you 
do  not  think  of  him.  When  one  is  in  a  deep  and  dreamless  slumber  his  very 
resentments  are  hushed  into  oblivion.  And  so  of  you  who  are  not  awake  unto  God 
— are  you  no  judges  of  the  recoil  that  would  come  upon  your  spirits  did  He  but 
stand  before  you  in  all  His  truth,  justice,  jealousy,  and  holiness.  The  manifesta- 
tion of  God  as  He  actually  is  would  call  forth  of  its  hiding-place  the  unappeasable 
enmity  of  nature  against  Him.  II.  If  we  cannot  please  God  we  necessabilt 
DISPLEASE  Him  ;  nor  need  we  to  marvel  why  all  they  who  are  in  the  flesh  are  the 
objects  of  His  dissatisfaction.  We  may  do  a  thousand  things  that,  in  the  exterior 
of  them,  bear  a  visible  conformity  to  God's  will,  and  yet  cannot  be  pleasing  to  Him. 
They  may  be  done  from  the  dread  of  His  power,  or  to  appease  the  restlessness  of 
an  alarmed  conscience,  or  under  the  influence  of  a  religion  that  derives  all  its 
power  from  education  or  custom,  and  yet  not  be  done  with  the  concurrence  of  the 
heart.  And  however  multiplied  the  offerings  may  be  which  we  laid  on  the  altar  of 
such  a  reluctant  obedience,  they  will  not  and  cannot  be  pleasing  to  God.     Would 


686  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  wol 

any  father  amongst  you  be  satisfied  with  such  a  style  of  compliance  and  submission 
from  your  own  children  ?  So  the  frown  of  an  offended  Lawgiver  resteth  on  every 
one  who  lives  in  habitual  violation  of  His  first  and  greatest  commandment.  That 
enmity  which  now  perhaps  is  a  secret  to  himself  will  become  manifest  on  the  great 
occasion  when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  laid  open,  and  the  justice  of  God 
will  then  be  vindicated  in  dealing  with  him  as  an  enemy.  Conclusion  :  It  is  only 
by  taking  a  deep  view  of  the  disease  that  you  can  be  led  adequately  to  estimate  the 
remedy.  There  is  a  way  of  transition  from  the  carnal  to  the  spiritual ;  from  the 
enmity  to  the  love  of  God,  and  that  is  through  Christ.  The  trumpet  giveth  not  an 
uncertain  sound,  for  it  declares  the  remission  of  sin  through  the  blood  of  Jesus, 
and  repentance  through  the  Spirit  which  is  of  His  giving  ;  and  your  faith  in  the 
one  will  infallibly  bring  down  upon  you  all  the  aids  and  influences  of  the  other. 
(T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  The  enmity  of  the  carnal  mind  against  God  : — An  enemy 
may  be  reconciled,  a  carnal  man  may  become  spiritual ;  but  "  enmity,"  in  the 
abstract,  cannot  be  reconciled,  and  therefore  the  carnal  mind  must  be  crucified  and 
destroyed.  Consider — I.  The  obligations  which  kational  creatdees  abe  undeb 
TO  LOVE  God.  1.  He  possesses  every  perfection,  and  in  Him  every  perfection  is 
infinite.  2.  He  stands  to  us  in  the  important  relations  of  Creator,  Preserver,  and 
Benefactor.  3.  He  has  so  loved  the  world  as  to  give  His  only  begotten  Son  for  its 
salvation.  4.  His  requirements  are  reasonable.  Can  He  require  anything  less 
than  the  supreme  love  of  Himself  ?  Is  He  not  worthy  of  our  unlimited  confidence  ? 
II.  The  mannee  in  which  the  enmitt  of  the  cabnal  mind  against  God  dis- 
COVEEB  ITSELF.  In — 1.  Disobcdience  of  the  commands  of  God.  2.  Neglect  of 
communion  with  God.  3.  Dislike  to  the  image  of  God,  as  reflected  upon  His 
people.  4.  Aversion  to  the  method  of  salvation  which  God  has  revealed  in  the 
gospel.  5.  Delight  in  the  society  of  persons  who  are  ahenated  from  God.  III. 
The  lessons  which  the  subject  is  calculated  to  atfoed  us.  We  see — 1.  How 
deplorable  is  the  state  of  man  compared  with  what  he  was  when  he  came  out  of  the 
Divine  hands.  2.  That  those  persons  are  much  mistaken  who,  whilst  they  are 
severe  in  condemning  all  offences  which  affect  society,  think  little  of  the  evil  of 
such  sins  as  are  committed  principally  against  God,  3.  The  necessity  of 
regeneration.       (Essex    Congregational    Remembrancer.)  The   enmity   of  the 

carnal  mind  against  God : — I.  The  mind  op  man  is  caenal.  By  the  "  mind  " 
we  are  to  understand  all  the  powers  of  the  soul,  and  the  affections.  It  is 
called  carnal,  because  its  desires  and  delights  are  fleshly  (John  iii.  6).  1.  The 
understanding  of  man,  however  rational,  is  carnal  (Col.  ii.  18).  (1)  In  its  concep- 
tions of  the  Divine  Being,  of  His  worship,  and  of  the  way  of  acceptance  with  Him 
(chap.  i.  23).  (2)  In  its  ideas  of  the  holy  law  of  God  (chap.  vii.  14).  (3)  In  its 
views  of  the  gospel.  Some  understand  by  it  nothing  but  the  history  of  Christ ; 
others  only  a  set  of  good  precepts  ;  others  a  kind  of  new  law,  offering  us  salvation 
on  easier  terms  than  the  old  law.  "The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of 
the  Spirit  of  God."  Many  hear  the  truths  of  the  gospel  plainly  preached  for  years, 
and  never  understand  them.  To  many  others  its  great  doctrines  seem  nonsense, 
and  they  revile  them  accordingly.  And  the  apostle  says  it  cannot  be  otherwise 
(1  Cor.  ii,  14).  2,  The  will  is  also  carnal.  "  It  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God." 
It  rejects  those  things  which  are  truly  good  and  excellent,  while  it  chooses  those 
things  which  are  bad  and  hurtful  (John  v.  40).  3.  The  affections,  such  as  hope, 
desire,  and  love,  are  also  carnal  (ver.  5).  "  What  shall  we  eat  ?  or,  What  shall  we 
drink?  or,  Wherewithal  shall  we  be  clothed?  "  These  are  the  inquiries  of  carnal 
persons ;  not,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  not,  How  shall  I  please  and  glorify 
God  ?  II.  Man,  being  caenal,  is  in  a  state  of  enmitt  against  God.  This  is  the 
very  essence  of  sin  ;  the  transfening  that  love,  which  is  due  to  God,  to  His  creatures, 
and  to  sin.  It  is  turning  our  backs  upon  Him,  as  if  He  whom  angels  adore  were 
not  worthy  of  our  notice.  The  carnal  man — 1.  Takes  no  pleasure  in  the  perfections 
of  God.  That  glorious  attribute,  holiness,  is  peculiarly  obnoxious  to  him.  2. 
Greatly  dislikes  the  spiritual  worship  of  God.  That  which  constitutes  the  joy  of 
angels  and  the  redeemed,  is  a  burden  :  and  therefore  wholly  omitted,  or  very  care- 
lessly performed.  3.  Is  in  opposition  to  the  law  of  God.  The  law  is  holy,  and 
just,  and  good ;  it  requires  only  that  we  Bhould  love  Him  supremely,  and  our  neigh- 
bour disinterestedly.  God  certainly  has  a  right  to  require  this ;  and  it  is  our  most 
reasonable  service  ;  but  the  carnal  mind  refuses  submission.  Nor  is  the  enmity  of 
the  carnal  mind  against  the  gospel  less  than  that  against  the  law.  The  proud 
Pharisee  disdains  to  submit  to  the  righteousness  of  Cbrist ;  the  carnal  worldling, 
intent  upon  his  land,  his  oxen,  &c.,  begs  to  be  excused  ;  the  vain  philosopher,  puffed 


OBAF.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  687 

Tip  with  his  mental  acquirements,  cavils  at  all  its  humbling  doctrines.   4.  Contemns 
or  hates  God's  people.     {G.  Burder.)        The  enmity  of  the  carnal  mind  againtt 
Ood: — I.  Its  manifestations.     Enmity  against  God.     1.  In  His  truth.     This  is 
shown  (Psa.  1.  17  ;  Hos.  vii.  12) — (1)  In  men's  unwillingness  to  believe  any  Divine 
truth,  or  to  meditate  upon  it.     Men  shun  the  thoughts  of  what  they  do  not  love. 
It  is  hard  to  believe  Divine  truths ;  because  they  are  against  the  interests  of  our 
lusts,  and  the  more  Divine,  the  more  unwilling  are  we  to  close  with  them.     If  the 
Word  lays  hold  upon  a  man,  he  endeavours  to  shake  it  off  as  a  man  would  a  ser jeant 
who  comes  to  arrest  him  (chap.  i.  28).    Have  not  men  often  had  secret  wishes  that 
some  truths  were  blotted  out  of  the  Bible  ;  because  they  face  their  consciences,  and 
damp  their  pleasures?    When  men  cannot  shake  off  a  truth,  but  it  sticks  fast  in 
them,  yet  they  have  no  pleasure  in  the  consideration  of  it,  which  would  be  if  there 
were  a  love  to  God ;  for  men  love  to  read  over  the  letters  which  are  sent  by  them 
to  whom  they  have  an  affection.     (2)  In  their  opposition  to  it.     God's  truths  cast 
against  a  hard  heart  are  like  balls  thrown  against  a  stone  wall,  which  rebound  the 
further  from  it.    Sin,  as  a  garrison  in  a  city,  is  up  in  arms  upon  any  alarm  from  its 
adversary  (1  ^ngs  xxii.  8 ;  John  iii.  19,  20).     (3)  If  men  do  entertain  truth,  it  is 
not  for  truth's  sake,  but  for  some  other  by-end.    Judas  follows  Christ  for  the  bag. 
(4)  If  men  do  entertain  truth,  it  is  with  unsettled  affections,  and  much  mixture. 
The  Jews  cry  Hosannah  to  Christ  one  day,  and  crucify  Him  the  next.     Some  were 
willing  to  rejoice  in  John's  light,  which  gave  a  lustre  to  their  minds,  not  in  his  heat, 
which  would  have  given  warmth  to  their  affections.     Our  hearts  are  Uke  lute 
strings,  changed  with  every  change  of  weather,  with  every  temptation.    (5)  In  a 
carnal  improvement  of  truth.    Some  endeavour  to  make  truth  subservient  to  lust, 
as  when  men  hear  of  God's  willingness  to  pardon  they  will  argue  from  hence  for 
deferring  their  repentance  (Psa.  xciv.  7).    Wicked  men  father  their  sins  upon  God's 
Word.    A  liar  will  find  a  refuge  inEahab's  lie  for  preserving  the  spies.     Some  will 
Tenture  into  all  kind  of  wicked  company,  from  Christ's  example.    As  the  sea  turns 
fresh  water  into  salt,  so  a  carnal  heart  turns  Divine  things  to  carnal  ends.    2.  In 
the  duties  God  doth  enjoin.     (1)  Unwillingness  to  it.     If  men  do  come  to  God,  it 
is  a  constrained  act,  to  satisfy  conscience.     If  conscience,  like  a  taskmaster,  did 
not  lash  them  to  duty,  they  would  never  perform  it.     If  we  do  come  willingly  it  is 
for  our  own  ends  (Isa.  xxvi.  16).    This  unwillingness  is  a  wrong  to  His  providence, 
as  though  we  stood  not  in  need  of  His  assistance,  and  a  wrong  to  His  excellency,  as 
though  there  were  no  amiableness  in  Him  to  make  His  company  desirable.     (2) 
Slightness  in  the  duty,     (a)  In  respect  of  time.     As  men  reserve  the  dregs  of  their 
life,  their  old  age,  to  offer  up  their  souls  to  God  ;  so  they  reserve  the  dregs  of  the 
day,  their  sleepy  times,  for  the  offering  their  service  to  God.     (h)  In  respect  of 
frame.     We  think  any  frame  will  serve  God's  turn.     In  worldly  business  you  may 
often  observe  a  liveliness  in  man ;  but  change  the  scene  into  a  motion  towards  God, 
and  how  suddenly  does  this  vigour  shrink.     (3)  Weariness  in  it.    How  tired  are  we 
in  the  performance  of  spiritual  duties,  when  in  the  vain  triflings  of  time  we  have 
a  perpetual  motion  I     How  will  many  force  themselves  to  dance  and  revel  a  whole 
night,  when  their  hearts  will  flag  and  jade  at  the  first  entrance  into  a  religious 
service  (Mai.  i.  13).     (4)  Neglect  of  expecting  answers  to  prayer.     They  care  not 
whether  their  letters  come  to  God's  hands  or  no,  and  therefore  care  not  much  for 
any  returns  from  Him ;  whereas  if  v^e  have  any  love  for  a  person  we  send  to,  or 
value  of  a  thing  we  send  for,  we  should  expect  an  answer  every  post.    If  God  does 
not  answer  us,  naturally  we  cast  off  the  duty,  and  say  with  those  in  Job  (chap,  xxi, 
15).     They  pray  not  out  of  conscience  of  the  command,  but  merely  for  the  profit ; 
and  if  God  makes  them  wait  for  it,  they  will  not  wait  His  leisure,  but  solicit  Hira 
no  longer.    II.  Its  causes  and  kemedies.     1.  Dissimilitude  between  God  and  a 
natural  man.     As  likeness  in  nature  and  inclinations  is  a  cause  of  love,  so  dissi- 
militude and  unsuitableness  is  a  cause  of  hatred.     God  is  infinitely  holy,  man 
Oorrupt.    Darkness  and  light,  heaven  and  hell,  are  directly  contrary,  so  is  Chriat 
and  Belial.    The  remedy,  then,  will  be  to  get  a  renewed  nature,  the  image  of  God 
new-formed  in  the  soul.    2.  Guilt.     Men  fly  from  God  out  of  shame ;  they  consider 
the  debts  they  owe  God  are  great,  and  naturally  debtors  fly  from  their  creditors. 
Terror  is  essential  to  guilt,  and  hatred  to  a  perpetual  terror.   The  remedy,  then,  is  to 
labour  for  justification  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  which  is  only  able  to  remove  that 
guilt  which  engenders  our  hatred.     3.  God's  crossing  the  desires  and  interests  of 
the  flesh.    All  hatred  arises  from  an  opinion  of  destructiveness  in  the  object  hated. 
And  a  sirmer  being  possessed  that  his  darling  sin  is  inconsistent  with  the  holiness 
of  Qod'B  law,  hates  God  for  being  of  a  nature  so  contrary  to  that  which  he  loves. 


«88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tm. 

The  Jews  expecting  an  earthly  grandeur  hy  the  Messiah  was  the  cause  that  theT 
were  the  more  desperate  enemies  to  Christ.  The  remedy,  then,  is  to  have  a  high 
esteem  of  the  holiness  and  wisdom  of  the  law  of  God,  and  the  advantages  He  aima 
at  for  our  good  in  the  enjoining  of  it  (I  John  v.  3).  4.  Love  of  sin.  The  more  we 
love  that  which  hath  an  essential  enmity  against  God,  the  more  we  must  hate  that 
which  is  most  contrary  to  it.  Light  must  be  odious  when  darkness  is  lovely.  The 
remedy,  then,  is  to  endeavour  for  as  great  a  hatred  of  sin  as  thou  hast  of  God  ;  to 
look  upon  sin  as  the  greatest  evil  in  itself,  the  greatest  disadvantage  to  thy  happi- 
ness. 5.  Injury  we  do  to  God.  Whereas  the  person  injured  might  rather  hate, 
yet  the  person  injuring  hath  often  the  greatest  disaffection.  Joseph's  mistress 
first  wronged  him,  and  then  tated  him.  Saul  first  injured  David,  and  then 
persecuted  him.  The  remedy,  then,  is  to  endeavour  a  conformity  to  God's  holy 
will ;  to  think  with  thyself  every  morning,  What  shall  I  do  this  day  to  please  God  ? 
6.  Slavish  fear  of  God.  Men  are  apt  to  fear  a  just  recompense  for  an  injury  done 
to  another  ;  and  fear  is  the  mother  of  hatred.  A  fear  of  God  as  an  inexorable 
judge  that  we  have  highly  wronged  will  nourish  an  enmity  against  Him.  Then, 
be  much  in  communion  with  God ;  strangeness  is  the  mother  of  fear  ;  we  dread 
men  sometimes,  because  we  know  not  their  disposition.  Consider  much  the  loveli- 
ness and  amiableness  of  His  nature,  His  ardent  desire  that  thou  wouldst  be  His 
friend  more  than  His  enemy.  7.  Pride.  Men  lift  up  the  pride  of  reason  against 
the  truth  of  God,  and  the  pride  of  heart  against  the  will  of  God.  Then  endeavour 
after  humility.  8.  Love  of  the  world  (1  John  ii.  15 ;  James  iv.  4).  Despise  the 
world,  and  the  devil  hath  scarce  any  bait  and  argument  left  to  move  thee  to  an 
enmity  against  God.  III.  The  impkovejtent.  1.  The  information  to  be  derived 
from  the  subject.  (1)  How  desperate  is  the  atheism  in  every  man's  heart  by  nature  I 
The  desperateness  of  this  natural  enmity  will  appear — (a)  In  that  it  is  as  bad,  and 
in  some  respects  worse,  than  atheism.  An  atheist  does  not  so  much  affront  God  as 
a  man  who  walks  as  if  there  were  no  God.  The  atheist  barely  denies  God's  being, 
the  other  mocks  Him  (Jer.  xxxii.  33.)  (b)  In  that  it  is  of  the  same  nature  with  the 
devil's  enmity.  Natural  men  have  a  diabolical  nature  (John  viii.  44  ;  Matt.  xvi.  33), 
and  every  natural  man  is  a  friend  to  the  devil.  There  are  but  two  sovereigns  in  the 
world,  one  rightful,  and  the  other  usurping.  If  we  are  enemies  to  the  right 
sovereign,  we  must  be  friends  to  the  usurper  (2  Cor.  iv.  4).  (2)  What  an  admirable 
prospect  may  we  take  here  of  God's  patience  1  (Eom.  iii.  4).  (3)  Hence  follows  the 
necessity  of  regeneration.  This  division  between  God  and  His  creature  will  not  admit 
of  any  union  without  a  change  of  nature.  (4)  Hence  follows  the  necessity  of  applying 
to  Christ.  It  is  Christ  only  that  satisfies  God  for  us,  by  the  shedding  of  His  blood, 
and  removes  our  enmity  by  the  operation  of  His  Spirit.  2.  Exhortation.  (1)  To 
sirmers.  Lay  down  thy  arms  against  God.  Lament  this  enmity,  and  be  humbled 
for  it.  (2)  To  rep;enerate  persons,  (a)  Possess  your  hearts  with  great  admirations 
of  the  grace  of  God  towards  you,  in  wounding  this  enmity  in  your  hearts  and 
changing  your  state  (chap.  v.  10,  11).  (b)  Inflame  your  love  to  God  by  all  the  con- 
siderations you  can  possibly  mnster  up.  Outdo  thy  former  disaffection  hy  a  greater 
ardency  of  love,  (c)  Watch  against  the  daily  exertings  and  exercises  of  this  enmity. 
3.  Motives.  (1)  Consider  the  disingenuity  of  this  enmity,  (a)  God  hath  been  good 
to  us.  He  is  love,  and  we  are  out  of  love  with  love  itself  (1  John  iv.  8).  (b)  God 
hath  been  importunate  in  entreaties  of  us.  (2)  This  enmity  is  the  greatest  foUy, 
because  God — (a)  Is  the  most  lovely  object,  (b)  Is  the  chiefest  good,  and  the 
fountain  of  all  goodness,  (c)  Cannot  possibly  do  us  wrong,  (d)  Cannot  be  hurt  by 
us.  It  is  a  folly  among  men  to  show  their  enmity  where  they  cannot  hurt,  (e)  But 
though  thou  canst  not  hurt  God,  yet  thou  dost  mightily  wrong  thyself.  Thy  shot 
will  fall  before  it  reach  Him,  but  His  arrows  will  both  reach  thy  heart  and  stick  in 
it.  (3)  Consider  the  misery  of  such  a  state,  (a)  Thou  canst  not  possibly  escape 
vengeance,  (b)  Thou  dost  even  force  God  to  destroy  thee.  {S.  Chamock,  B.D.) 
Man't  natural  enmity  to  God : — I.  Man  hates  i  he  chaeacteb  of  God  as  a  lawgiver. 
n.  Man  hates  the  sovereignty  of  God.  God  is  the  Supreme  Being ;  all  things  being 
made  by  Him  and  for  Him.  His  right  to  accomplish  His  own  desires.  But  what 
if  the  plans  of  a  sovereign  God  require  the  abandonment  of  our  most  beloved  objects? 
Must  we  then  cordially  submit?  Yes,  you  must  either  love,  or  hate  a  sovereign 
God.  III.  The  carnal  mind  hates  the  merct  of  God.  Here  we  seem  to  be  in  even 
more  glaring  inconsistency  with  consciousness  than  in  any  former  assertion.  If 
the  mercY  of  God  consisted  in  the  mere  direct  gratification  of  the  wants  of  men, 
our  position  were  then  false.  This  vague  notion  is  wonderfully  prevalent  in  the 
world,  but  is  infinitely  removed  from  the  sublime  and  holy  attribute  called  mercy 


nu.  Tm.]  ROMANS,  689 

in  the  Scriptures.  It  was  mercy  that  bowed  the  listening  ear  to  Abel's  prayer ;  it 
was  grace  that  inclined  him  to  make  the  acceptable  offering.  What  was  the 
effect  of  that  display  of  grace  to  fallen  man  ?  It  kindled  the  passions  of  hell  in  the 
bosom  of  Cain,  and  the  hatred,  which  could  find  no  vent  toward  the  God  of  mercy, 
fell  in  murderous  stroke  upon  an  innocent  brother.  At  last  the  Son  of  God  came,  the 
Messenger  of  mercy.  From  the  cradle  to  the  tomb,  He  drew  forth  the  rage  and 
malice  of  men.  The  relations  of  life  are  such,  that  the  religious  principles  of  one 
person  may  very  greatly  interfere  with  the  schemes  of  profit  or  pleasure  formed  by 
another;  and  these  religious  principles  are  the  fruits  of  God's  mercy  But  the 
carnal  mind,  thwarted  and  checked,  feels  a  hatred  of  those  principles,  and  thus  of 
the  mercy  which  caused  them.  That  renovated  power  of  conscience  is  from  the 
blessed  Spirit.  But  how  is  it  treated  ?  We  have  reason  to  fear  that  the  greater 
part  who  hear  the  gospel,  dread  and  detest  those  very  feelings  and  conditions  of  the 
mind.  God  has  no  other  mercy  than  a  holy  mercy ;  no  other  merciful  treatment 
of  thee  than  to  make  thee  holy.  If  this  please  thee  not,  it  is  because  thou  hast  the 
carnal  mind  which  hates  God.  Remarks  :  1.  The  supreme  love  of  the  creature  is  a 
dreadful  evil.  2.  •*  Except  a  man  be  born  again  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God." 
{E.  N.  Kirk,  A.M.)  The  carnal  mind  enmity  against  God : — The  apostle  does  not  say 
it  is  opposed  to  God  merely,  but  it  is  positive  enmity.  It  is  not  black,  but  blackness ; 
it  is  not  rebellious,  it  is  rebellion ;  it  is  evil  in  the  concrete,  sin  in  the  essence.  It  is 
unnecessary,  therefore,  to  explain  that  it  is  "  enmity  against  God."  It  does  not 
charge  manhood  with  an  aversion  merely  to  the  dominion,  laws,  or  doctrines  of 
Jehovah ;  but  it  strikes  a  deeper  and  a  surer  blow.  I.  The  truthfulness  of  this 
OBEAT  STATEMENT.  It  necds  no  proof  since  it  is  written  in  God's  Word.  But  did  I 
need  witnesses,  I  would  conjure  up — 1.  The  nations  of  antiquity,  and  tell  you  of  the 
awial  deeds  of  mankind.  2.  The  delusions  of  the  heathen.  I  would  drag  their 
gods  before  you ;  I  would  let  you  witness  their  horrid  obscenities,  the  diabolical  rites 
which  are  to  them  most  sacred  things.  Then  after  you  have  heard  what  the  natural 
religion  of  man  is,  I  would  ask  what  must  his  irreligion  be?  3.  The  best  of  men 
who  have  been  always  the  readiest  to  confess  their  depravity.  4.  Your  conscience. 
Didst  thou  never  hear  the  heart  say,  "  I  wish  there  were  no  God  "  ?  Have  not  all 
men  at  times  wished  that  our  religion  were  not  true  ?  Now  suppose  a  man  wished 
another  dead,  would  not  that  show  that  he  hated  him  ?  Or  has  not  thine  heart  ever 
desired,  since  there  is  a  God,  that  He  were  a  little  less  holy.  Has  it  never  said, 
♦«  Would  to  God  these  sins  were  not  forbidden  "  P  II.  The  univebsality  of  thm 
EVIL.  1.  As  to  all  persons.  There  is  in  the  carnal  mind  of  an  infant,  enmitj 
against  God;  it  is  not  developed,  but  it  lieth  there.  Young  lions  when  tamed  and 
domesticated  still  have  the  wild  nature,  and  were  liberty  given  them,  would  prey 
as  fiercely  as  others.  So  with  the  child.  And  if  this  applies  to  children,  equally 
does  it  include  every  class  of  men.  2.  At  aU  times.  "  Oh,"  say  some,  ••  it  may  be 
true  that  we  are  at  times  opposed  to  God,  but  surely  we  are  not  always  so."  Yes, 
but  mark,  the  wolf  may  sleep,  but  it  is  a  wolf  still ;  the  sea  is  the  house  of  storms, 
even  when  it  is  glassy  as  a  lake  ;  and  the  heart,  when  we  perceive  not  its  ebullitions, 
is  still  the  same  dread  volcano.  3.  The  whole  of  the  mind  is  enmity  against  God. 
Look  at — (1)  Our  memory.  We  recollect  evil  things  far  better  than  those  which 
savour  of  piety.  (2)  The  affections.  We  love  a  creature,  but  very  seldom  the 
Creator ;  and  when  the  heart  is  given  to  Jesus,  it  is  prone  to  wander.  (3)  The 
imagination.  Only  give  man  something  that  shall  well-nigh  intoxicate  him,  and 
how  will  his  imagination  dance  with  joy !  (4)  The  judgment — how  ill  it  decides. 
(5)  The  conscience-  how  blind  it  is.  I  might  review  all  our  powers,  and  write  upon 
the  brow  of  each,  •'  Traitor  against  God  I "  IH.  The  great  enormity  of  this 
GUILT.  1.  What  is  God  to  us  ?  He  stands  to  us  in  the  relationship  of  a  Creator ; 
and  from  that  fact  He  claims  to  be  our  King.  He  is  our  Legislator,  our  Law-maker  • 
and  then,  to  make  our  crime  still  worse  and  worse,  He  is  the  ruler  of  providence  ; 
for  it  is  He  who  keeps  us  from  day  to  day ;  and  I  ask,  is  it  not  high  treason  against 
the  Emperor  of  heaven  that  we  should  be  at  enmity  with  God  ?  2.  But  the  crime 
may  be  seen  to  be  worse  when  we  think  of  what  God  is.  God  is  the  God  of  love. 
Do  you  hate  God  because  He  loves  you?  IV.  The  doctrines  to  be  deduced  from 
THIS.  Is  the  carnal  mind  at  enmity  against  God  ?  1.  Then  salvation  cannot  be  by 
merit,  it  must  be  by  grace.  2.  Then  an  entire  change  of  our  nature  is  necessary. 
3.  This  change  must  be  worked  by  a  power  beyond  our  own.  An  enemy  may 
possibly  make  himself  a  friend;  but  enmity  cannot.  {C.  H.  Spur g eon.)  The 
natural  enmity  of  the  mind  against  God: — It  is  no  contradiction  to  the  state- 
ment  of  the  text,  and  no  proof  of  love  to  God— I.  Teat  wb  do  uany  thihos  thai 
YOL.   I.  14 


690  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  rai. 

ABB   AOBEEABLB   TO   HiS    LAW    WITH    THE    WILLIMG    CONSENT   OF  THE    MIND.        PropOSS 

the  question,  Would  not  I  do  this  good  thing,  or  abstain  from  this  evil  thing, 
though  God  had  no  will  in  the  matter  ?  If  you  would,  then  put  not  down  what  is 
altogether  due  to  other  principles  to  the  principle  of  love  to  God  or  a  desire  of 
pleasing  Him.  You  may  have  a  very  large  share  of  estimable  principles :  but  an 
enlightened  discerner  of  the  heart  may  look  unto  yon  and  say,  "  I  know  you,  that 
ye  have  not  the  love  of  God  in  you."  For  when  He  puts  in  for  that  share  of  your 
heart  which  you  give  to  wealth,  or  pleasure,  or  reputation,  then  is  not  God  a 
weariness?  How  would  you  like  the  visit  of  a  man  whose  presence  broke  up  some 
arrangement  that  you  had  set  your  heart  upon  ?  or  marred  the  enjoyment  of  som« 
favourite  scheme  that  you  were  going  to  put  into  execution  ?  Now,  is  not  God  just 
Buch  a  visitor?  Yes;  and  to  admit  Him,  with  all  His  high  claims  and  spiritual 
requirements  into  your  mind,  would  be  to  disturb  you  in  the  enjoyment  of  objects 
which  are  better  loved  and  more  sought  after  than  He.  It  is  because  your  heart  is 
occupied  with  idols  that  God  is  shut  out  of  it.  There  is  nothing  monstrous  in 
all  this  to  the  men  of  our  world  ;  but  how  must  the  pure  eye  of  an  angel  be  moved 
at  such  a  spectacle  of  worthlessness !  That  the  bosom  of  a  thing  formed  should 
feel  cold  or  indifferent  to  Him  who  formed  it — that  not  a  thought  or  an  image 
should  be  so  unwelcome  to  man  as  that  of  his  Maker — that  the  creature  should 
thus  turn  round  on  its  Creator — there  is  a  perversity  here,  which  time  may  palliate 
for  a  season,  but  which  must  at  length  be  brought  out  to  its  adequate  condemna- 
tion, n.  That  a  God  divested  of  all  which  can  make  Him  bepulsive  to  sinnees 
SHOULD  BE  idolised  AT  TIMES  by  many  a  sentimentalist.  It  would  form  no  deduc- 
tion from  our  enmity  against  the  true  God  that  we  give  an  occasional  hour  to  the 
worship  of  a  graven  image ;  and  it  is  just  of  as  little  significancy  to  the  argument 
ttiat  we  feel  an  occasional  glow  of  affection  or  of  reverence  towards  a  fictitious  being 
of  our  own  imagination.  If  there  be  truth  in  the  Bible,  it  is  there  where  God  has 
made  an  authentic  exhioition  of  His  nature  ;  and  if  God  in  Christ  be  an  offence  to 
you — if  you  have  no  relish  for  spiritual  communion  with  such  a  God — then  be 
assured  that,  amid  the  painted  insignificancy  of  all  your  other  accomplishments, 
your  heart  is  not  right  with  God.  III.  That  we  do  many  things  with  the  dibect 
OBJECT  OF  doing  THAT  WHICH  IS  PLEASING  TO  GoD.  Why,  I  may  both  hate  and  fear 
the  man  whom  I  may  find  it  very  convenient  to  please.  I  may  comply  by  action ; 
but  I  may  abominate  the  necessity  which  constrains  me.  A  sovereign  may  over- 
rule the  humours  of  a  rebellious  province  by  the  presence  of  his  resistless  military ; 
but  you  would  not  say  that  there  was  any  loyalty  in  this  forced  subordination.  IV. 
That  wb  do  what  God  wills  because  He  wills  it.  The  terror  of  His  power  may 
constrain  you  to  many  acts  of  obedience.  Thieves,  and  swearers,  and  Sabbath- 
breakers  may,  under  the  fear  of  the  coming  vengeance,  give  up  their  respective 
enormities,  and  yet  their  minds  be  altogether  carnal.  There  may  be  the  obedience 
of  the  hand,  while  there  is  the  gall  of  bitterness  in  the  heart  at  the  necessity  which 
constrains  it.     (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God : — 

This  must  needs  be  so,  because  man  hath  fallen  from  God  through  his  first  trans- 
gression in  Adam,  and  so  broken  that  sweet  peace  and  league  which  was  betwixt 
God  and  him.  Now,  till  this  be  repaired  and  made  up  again  in  Christ,  there  must 
needs  be  enmity  following  thereupon.  *'  Their  iniquities  have  separated  betwixt 
them  and  their  God."  For  this  purpose  we  must  know  thus  much  :  First,  that  as 
friendship  does  properly  consist  in  willing  and  nilling  the  same  things,  so  enmity 
does  properly  consist  in  willing  and  nilling  the  contrary.  But  then,  again,  secondly, 
carnaJ  men  are  said  to  hate  God,  according  to  that  notion  and  apprehension  which 
they  have  of  Him,  and  that  is,  indeed,  very  opposite  and  contrary  to  themselves. 
And  so  now  I  have  done  with  the  first  general  part  of  the  text,  which  is  the  doc- 
trine or  proposition  itself  in  these  words :  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against 
God."  Th3  second  is  the  proof  or  confirmation  of  this  doctrine  in  these  words : 
"  For  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be."  These  words 
may  be  considered  of  us  two  manner  of  ways :  either,  first  of  all,  simply  and 
absolutely,  as  they  lie  in  themselves;  or,  secondly,  respectively  and  argumentatively, 
in  their  inference  and  textual  connection.  First,  here  is  the  simple  pravity  and 
disparagement  of  the  carnal  mind.  It  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God.  Corrupt 
nature  it  is  a  rebel  against  God's  law,  as  it  is  enmity  against  God  Himself  (Gen. 
vi.  6 ;  Psa.  liii.  1,  23  ;  Iviii,  8-5).  This  is  so,  and  will  appear  to  be  so,  upon  these 
considerations  :  First,  from  the  prevalency  of  another  law  in  such  persons  in  whom 
this  carnal  mind  is.  Secondly,  another  ground  of  this  point  may  be  taken  from  the 
spirituality  of  the  law  of  God.    Thirdly,  there  is  likewise,  moreover,  observable  such 


3HAP.  ▼in.l  ROMANS.  691 

a  perverseness  in  man's  heart  by  nature,  as  that  the  law  of  God  it  rather  makes 
him  worse  than  makes  him  better.  This  point  which  we  are  now  upon,  first,  serves 
to  give  us  an  account  of  so  much  transgiession  of  the  taw  as  there  is ;  namely,  from 
hence,  that  men's  carnal-mindedness  does  still  remain  in  them.  Secondly,  we  learn 
from  hence  also  how  to  come  to  be  conformable  to  God's  law,  and  to  be  obedient  to 
the  commands  of  it ;  and  that  is,  by  denying  and  contradicting  our  carnal  reason. 
Thirdly,  this  gives  us  also  an  account  of  that  wickedness  which  is  sometimes 
observable  even  in  persons  of  great  parts,  and  wits,  and  natural  accomplishments ; 
namely,  because  they  are  as  yet  but  carnal.  One  thing  more  before  I  pass  this 
branch ;  and  that  is  the  phrase  which  is  here  used  for  subjection.  The  word  in 
the  Greek  signifies  such  a  kind  of  subjection  as  is  after  an  orderly  manner,  as  of 
soldiers  in  battle  to  their  commander ;  which,  being  here  denied  to  the  wisdom  of 
the  flesh,  does  intimate  thus  much  to  us  :  that  carnality  it  is  an  irregular  business, 
and  such  as  is  much  out  of  order ;  from  whence  it  comes  not  to  be  so  obedient  as  it 
should  be  to  the  law  of  God.  Where  there  is  nothing  but  confusion,  there  cannot 
be  expected  subjection,  but  every  evil  work.  The  second  is  the  additional  ampUfi- 
cation,  as  it  is  not,  so  it  cannot  be  neither.  A  carnal-miuded  person,  he  cannot  be 
subject  to  the  law  of  God.  This  is  grounded  upon  those  following  considerations : 
First,  the  blindness  which  by  nature  is  in  man's  mind.  He  that  cannot  see,  cannot 
practise,  because  he  wants  light  to  direct  him.  Secondly,  the  will,  that  is  likewise 
out  of  frame ;  that  has  a  particular  perverseness  upon  it,  and  is  obstinate  against 
that  which  is  good.  Thirdly,  the  affections.  They  are  out  of  order  too  in  all  the 
kinds  of  them— love  and  hatred,  and  fears  and  grief,  and  anger  and  joy,  Ac,  all  out 
of  course.  To  all  these  we  may  add  some  further  considerations  besides,  as,  first  of 
all,  custom  in  sinning.  This  makes  the  impotency  of  doing  good  to  be  so  much 
the  more,  and  the  impossibility  to  be  so  much  the  greater.  Secondly,  it  cannot 
likewise  from  the  just  ja  igment  of  God  Himself  towards  it,  while  He  gives  up  some 
persons  above  the  rest  to  a  reprobate  mind  and  to  a  hard  heart,  whereby  sin  is 
made  in  some  manner  and  in  some  sense  necessary  to  them.  But  if  they  cannot, 
why,  then,  there  is  no  i  t  done.  This  seems  to  make  for  their  excuse.  To  this 
we  answer.  That  this  does  not  excuse,  for  all  that,  because  it  is  such  an  impotency 
and  inability  as  man  hath  voluntarily  brought  upon  himself.  Now  further,  secondly, 
we  may  take  them  respectively  and  argumentatively  in  the  force  of  their  connec- 
tion ;  for  it  is  not  subject.  The  Apostle  Paul  does  from  hence  prove  that  the  carnal 
mind  is  an  enemy  to  God,  because  it  keeps  not  God's  law.  From  whence  we  may 
observe  thus  much :  That  disobedience  to  God  is  a  conviction  of  enmity  against 
Him.  The  ground  whereof  is  this  :  because  the  law  of  God  is  that  which  is  most 
near  and  dear  unto  Him.  His  will  is  Himself,  and  His  sovereignty  is  that  which 
He  most  stands  upon  of  anything  else.  Secondly,  let  us  hereby  also  judge  and 
estimate,  and  take  account  of  ourselves,  and  see  how  far  we  are  God's  friends, 
which  is  not  so  much  by  pretences  as  by  obedience.  (Thomas  Horton,  D.D.)  The 
enmity  of  the  human  heart  against  God : — I.  Some  common  grounds  of  mistake  on 
THIS  SUBJECT.  1.  Men  may  be  unconscious  of  their  opposition,  and  hence  infer 
that  it  has  no  existence.  Many  circumstances  may  conduce  to  this  unconscious- 
ness. (1)  Men  generally  are  without  any  habitual  and  strong  impression  of  the 
reality  of  the  Divine  existence  ;  and,  therefore,  their  enmity  has  little  opportunity 
to  exhibit  itself.  (2)  Opposition  may  also  be  kept  in  check  by  a  sense  of  our  own 
weakness  and  God's  power.  But  conscious  impotence  is  no  indication  of  a  heart 
friendly  to  the  Most  High ;  for  give  to  the  sinner  the  means  of  successful  opposi- 
tion, and  then  his  disposition  will  begin  to  exert  itself,  una  wed  and  unrestrained. 
(3)  Mere  carelessness  may  keep  the  sinner  in  ignorance  of  the  interior  operations 
of  his  depravity  to  the  holiness  and  sovereignty  of  God.  2.  The  homage  of  respect 
paid  by  many  to  religion  and  its  institutions  may  be  alleged  as  an  evidence  that 
they  are  not  enemies  to  their  Maker.  But  the  force  of  education,  the  power  of 
conscience,  the  beneficial  influence  of  Christian  institutions,  the  love  of  human 
estimation,  the  energy  of  servile  fear,  are  sufficient  to  account  for  all  the  religion 
of  miregenerate  men.  3.  Nor  is  the  glow  of  imaginary  love  to  the  Divine  Being, 
sometimes  felt  by  unconverted  men,  any  proof  that  they  are  not  His  enemies. 
They  may  form  erroneous  conceptions  of  His  character,  contemplating  Him  as  devoid 
of  all  those  attributes  which  are  terrible  to  the  unholy.  The  most  sordid  and 
malignant  beings  may  conceive  of  a  God  to  whom  their  hearts  would  feel  no 
repugnance.  4.  The  social  sympathies  and  the  decencies  of  life  are  regarded  by 
many  as  proofs  of  some  innate  sparks  of  love  to  God.  The  mistiike  here  arises 
from  confounding  mere  instincts  and  the  refinements  of  enlightened  self-love  with 


•82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  via 

real  benevolence,  and  from  overlooking  that  system  of  restraints  which  Divine 
Providence  is  pleased  to  employ  as  essential  to  a  dispensation  of  mercy.  A  suffi- 
cient evidence  of  the  radical  deficiency  of  these  social  virtues  is  that  they  often 
exist  in  conjunction  with  manifest  indifference  or  open  opposition  to  any  practical 
acknowledgment  of  God.  Many  a  polite  and  even  hamane  man  would  blush  more 
deeply  to  be  found  on  bis  knees  in  prayer  than  to  be  seen  at  the  gaming-table  or 
the  race-ground.  II.  Mobb  direct  pboofs  ik  its  support.  The  native  enmity  of 
the  human  heart  against  God  maybe  inferred  from — 1.  Its  entire  selfishness.  The 
popular  philosophy  maintains  that  ultimate  regard  to  self  is  the  grand  law  of  our 
being,  and  ridicules  the  notion  of  disinterested  goodness.  If  it  be  so,  love  to  God  is 
impossible.  For  against  the  Divine  requisitions,  selfishness  arises,  exasperated  and 
alarmed.  It  can  love  nothing  which  does  not  secure  the  gratifications  it  covets. 
In  the  same  proportion  as  it  sees  its  plans  thwarted,  itself  condemned  and  exposed 
to  hell,  its  enmity  is  roused  against  God.  2.  The  erroneous  and  preposterous 
views  which  have  been  commonly  entertained  by  mankind  respecting  God's  character 
and  government.  (1)  Look  at  those  destitute  of  the  light  of  revelation.  The 
religious  rites  of  the  great  body  of  mankind  have  been  degrading  and  impious,  aa 
the  objects  of  their  religious  veneration  were  impure  and  cruel.  (2)  Look  at  those 
who  sit  under  the  sunshine  of  the  gospel.  Do  we  not  observe  among  nominal 
Christians  a  strong  tendency  to  error  and  practical  unbelief?  3.  The  general 
conduct  of  mankind  to  God.  (1)  "  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts."  Every  trifle 
can  engross  the  mind ;  but  a  place  within  it  can  scarcely  be  found  for  musings  on 
the  adorable  attributes  of  Him  by  whom  it  was  made.  The  Scriptures  are  neglected, 
or  read  only  as  the  record  of  curious  facts,  and  fervent  prayer  is  odious.  This 
general  reluctance  to  spiritual  duties  is  unaccountable,  if  there  be  no  repugnancy 
in  the  human  heart  to  intimate  communion  with  God.  (2)  Do  we  not  observe 
everywhere  a  disregard  and  resistance  of  the  authority  of  God  ?  A  dislike  of  the 
law,  in  its  spirituality  and  strictness,  involves  opposition  to  Him  by  whom  it  was 
given,  and  of  whose  moral  purity  it  is  a  transcript.  **  The  carnal  mind  is  .  .  .  not 
subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be."  Sinners  are  *'  enemies  to  God 
by  wicked  works."  To  please  the  unholy,  He  must  abandon  His  sceptre,  or  rule 
only  for  their  benefit.  (3)  How  can  we  account  for  the  treatment  which  God's 
messengers  have  received  from  an  ungodly  world,  unless  there  is  naturally  a  strong 
aversion  to  pure  religion,  and  consequently  enmity  against  that  God  from  whom  it 
proceeds?  Unkindness  to  an  ambassador,  who  acts  simply  in  accordance  with  his 
instructions,  is  universally  accounted  an  insult  to  the  court  from  which  he  derived 
his  commission.  (4)  How  has  Christ  been  treated  by  sinners  T  4.  Experience. 
Every  real  Christian  is  ready  to  charge  himself  with  rebellion.  And  is  this  universal 
consent  of  such  as  are  most  deeply  imbued  with  spiritual  Christianity,  and  have 
noticed  most  faithfully  the  interior  actings  of  their  depravity,  to  be  accounted 
nothing  ?  5.  The  Scriptures  have  settled  tho  question.  Deny  the  native  enmity 
of  the  heart  to  God,  and  its  leading  doctrines  become  wholly  unintelligible.  What 
will  you  make  of  regeneration  ?  Does  not  reconciliation  import  a  previous  state  of 
variance  between  the  parties  ?    Conclusion  :  This  humiliating  subject  teaches  us — 

1.  The  importance  of  those  restraints  which  a  wise  and  benevolent  Providence  is 
pleased  to  employ  in  the  government  of  mankind.  Conceive  of  all  restraints  with- 
drawn from  a  world  like  this,  full  of  the  enemies  of  God.  No  tongue  can  describe, 
no  fancy  can  paint,  the  complicated  scenes  of  guilt  and  misery  which  would  ensue. 

2.  The  mysterious  love  of  God  to  our  apostate  world.  (J.  Woodbridge,  D.D.) 
Man's  enmity  against  God : — I.  In  generai.  1.  It  is  to  be  understood  of  nature  and 
not  of  actions  only.  Every  action  of  a  natural  man  is  an  enemy's  action,  but  not 
an  action  of  enmity.  And  as  waters  relish  of  the  mineral  vein  they  run  through, 
eo  the  actions  of  a  wicked  man  are  tinctured  with  the  enmity  they  spring  from. 
Godly  men  may  do  an  enemy's  action,  but  they  are  not  in  a  state  of  enmity.  They 
may  fall  into  sin  as  a  man  into  a  ditch,  but  they  lie  not  in  it.  But  a  natural  man 
is  in  a  state  of  universal  contrariety.  (1)  All  times.  It  is  called  a  '•root  of 
bitterness,"  for  while  it  remains  a  root,  it  will  remain  bitter.  (2)  In  every  sinful 
act.  Though  the  interest  of  particular  sins  may  be  contrary  to  one  another, 
covetousness  and  prodigality  cannot  agree,  but  they  are  all  in  league  against  God. 
As  all  virtuous  actions  partake  of  the  nature  of  love  to  God  ;  so  all  vicious  actions 
are  tinctured  with  inward  enmity.  (3)  Against  all  the  attributes  of  God.  For  sin 
being  an  opposition  to  the  law  of  God,  is  consequently  a  contrariety  to  His  will,  and 
His  understanding,  and  therefore  to  all  those  attributes  which  flow  from  His  vnll, 
fks  goodness,  righteousness,  truth ;  and  His  understanding,  as  wisdom,  knowledge. 


OHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  698 

2.  This  enmity  is  habitually  seated  in  the  mind  (Eph.  ii.  3 ;  James  iii.  15).  The 
mind  thus  infected  is  like  those  eminent  persons  that  spread  the  contagion  of 
their  vices  to  all  their  attendants.  The  other  faculties,  like  common  soldiers,  fight 
for  the  prey  and  booty  ;  but  the  mind,  the  sovereign,  fights  for  the  superiority,  and 
orders  all  the  motions  of  the  lower  rout.  There  is — (1)  As  opposed  to  desire. 
Thus  man  hates  God,  because  he  turns  from  Him.  By  sin  we  stand  indebted  to 
Qod,  and  therefore  have  an  aversion  from  Him  ;  as  debtors  hate  the  sight  of  their 
creditors,  and  are  loath  to  meet  them.  God's  purity  is  too  dazzling  for  sinful  men, 
and  therefore  they  cannot  look  upon  God,  but  are  like  sore  eyes  that  are  distempered 
with  the  sun.  (2)  A  detestation  opposite  to  love  (Col.  i.  21).  This  is — (a)  Natural, 
which  we  call  antipathy.  Sin  being  the  greatest  evil,  is  naturally  most  opposite  to 
God,  who  is  the  greatest  good.  So  that  God  can  never  be  reconciled  to  sin,  or 
sin  to  God.  (b)  Acquired,  which  is  grounded  upon  diversity  of  interests.  The 
interest  of  a  sinner  as  such  consists  in  gratifying  the  importunities  of  his  lusts ; 
and  the  interest  of  God  lies  in  vindicating  the  righteousness  of  His  commands. 
This  is  either  direct  (John  xv.  24)  or  implicit.  Men  love  not  the  things  that  God 
loves,  and  therefore  may  be  said  to  hate  Him.  H.  In  particdlar — 1.  Negatively. 
We  hate  not  God — (1)  As  God.  Which  is  impossible,  because  God,  absolutely 
considered,  hath  all  tne  attractives  of  love ;  as  a  man  cannot  will  sin  as  sin,  because 
it  is  purely  evil,  and  therefore  cannot  be  the  object  of  the  desire.  We  never  yet 
met  with  any  so  monstrously  base  as  to  hate  a  creature  as  a  creature,  or  man  as 
man ;  not  a  serpent  as  a  creature,  but  as  it  is  venomous.  (2)  As  Creator  and 
Preserver.  Hatred  always  supposes  some  injury,  or  the  fear  of  some ;  and  our 
hatred  doth  evaporate  when  we  find  our  supposed  injuries  recompensed  by  benefits 
What  servant  can  disdain  his  master  for  feeding  him  ?  or  what  child  hate  his  father 
for  begetting  and  maintaining  him?  2.  Positively.  We  hate  God — (1)  As  a 
Sovereign.  Man  cannot  endure  a  superior ;  he  would  be  uncontrollable  (Psa.  xii.  4  ; 
Exod.  V.  2).  We  hate  God  as  a  lawgiver,  as  He  prohibits  sin  (Luke  xix.  27).  It  is 
impossible  that  man  should  do  otherwise,  because  it  is  as  natural  to  us  to  abhor 
those  things  which  are  troublesome  as  to  please  ourselves  in  things  agreeable. 
The  sea  foams  most,  and  casts  up  most  mire,  when  restrained  by  some  rock,  or 
bounded  by  the  shore.  (2)  As  a  Judge.  Fear  is  often  the  cause  of  hatred.  All 
men  have  a  fear  of  God,  not  of  offending  Him,  but  of  being  punished  by  Him. 
Corruption  kindles  this  enmity,  but  fear,  like  a  bellows,  inflames  it.  This  hatred 
of  God  is  stronger  or  weaker,  according  as  the  fear  is,  and  therefore  in  hell  it  is  in 
its  meridian  and  maturity.  (3)  In  His  very  being.  When  this  fear  rises  high,  or 
men  are  under  a  sense  of  punishment.  All  men  are  actuated  by  a  principle  of  self- 
preservation,  and  when  men  look  upon  God  as  a  punisher  of  their  crimes,  if  they 
could,  by  the  undeifying  of  God,  rescue  themselves  from  those  fears,  there  is  self- 
love  and  enmity  enough  against  God  in  them  to  quicken  them  to  it.  Did  none  of 
you  ever  please  yourselves  in  the  thoughts  how  happy  you  should  be,  how  free  in 
your  lustful  pleasures,  if  there  were  no  God  ?  Now  all  hatred  includes  a  virtual 
murder.  If  he  who  hates  his  brother  is  a  murderer,  he  that  hates  God  is  a 
murderer  of  God.  Man  would  have  God  at  the  greatest  distance  from  him,  and 
there  is  no  greater  distance  from  being  than  not  being  (Job  xxi.  14;  Psa.  xiv.  1). 
{S.  Chamock,  B.D.)  MarCa  enmity  againtt  God  at  a  Sovereign  is  seen  in  : — I.  Thb 
BBEACH  OF  God's  LAWS.  If  obcdience  be  a  sign  of  love,  disobedience  is  an  argu- 
ment of  hatred  (John  xv.  14).  Then  in  the  breach  of  it  all  those  attributes  are 
despised.  This  enmity  appears  in — 1.  Unwillingness  to  know  the  law  of  God. 
Men  hate  the  light,  which  would  both  discover  their  spots  and  direct  their  course 
(Zech.  vii.  11 ;  Bom.  iii.  10  ;  Isa.  xxviii.  12,xxx.  10,  11).  And  when  any  motion  of 
the  Spirit  thrusts  itself  in  to  enlighten  them,  they  "  exalt  themselves  against  the 
knowledge  of  God  "  (2  Cor.  x.  5)  and  resist  the  Holy  Ghost.  Men  are  more  fond  of 
the  knowledge  of  anything  than  of  God's  will.  2.  UnwilUngness  to  be  determined 
by  any  law  of  God.  When  men  cannot  escape  the  convincing  knowledge  of  the  law, 
^ey  set  up  their  carnal  resolutions  against  it  (Jer.  xliv.  15 ;  Mai.  iii.  13 ;  Psa. 
Ixxviii.  10).  Men  naturally  affect  an  unbounded  liberty,  and  would  not  be  hedged 
in  by  any  law  (Jer.  ii.  24).  Hence  man  is  said  to  make  void  the  law  of  God  (Psa. 
exiz.  126 ;  Matt.  xt.  6).  3.  The  violence  man  offers  to  those  laws  which  God  doth 
most  strictly  enjoin,  and  which  He  doth  most  delight  in  the  performance  of.  The 
more  spiritual  the  law,  the  more  averse  the  heart  (chap.  vii.  8, 14).  Men  will  grant 
God  the  lip  and  the  ear,  but  deny  Him  that  which  He  most  calls  for,  viz.,  the 
heart.  4.  Hatred  to  conncience,  when  it  puts  a  man  in  mind  of  God's  law.  This  is 
evidenced  by  our  etifling  it  when  it  dictates  any  practical  conclusions  from  the  law. 


694  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

Now,  since  men  hate  their  own  consciences  it  is  clear  that  they  hate  God  Himself, 
because  conscience  is  God's  officer  in  them.  5.  Setting  up  another  law  in  him  in 
opposition  to  the  law  of  God  (chap.  vii.  23).  This  men  do  when  they  plead  for  sins 
as  venial,  and  below  God  to  notice.  6.  In  being  at  greater  pains  and  charge  to 
break  God's  law  than  is  necessary  to  keep  it.  How  will  men  rack  their  heads  to 
study  mischief,  wear  out  their  time  and  strength  in  contrivances  to  satisfy  some 
base  lust,  which  leaves  behind  it  but  a  momentary  pleasure,  attended  at  length  with 
inconceivable  horror,  and  cast  off  that  yoke  which  is  easy  and  that  burden  which  is 
light,  in  the  keeping  whereof  there  is  great  reward.  7.  In  doing  that  which  is 
just  and  righteous  upon  any  other  consideration  rather  than  of  obedience  to  God's 
will,  i.e.,  when  men  will  obey  Him  only  so  far  as  may  comport  with  their  own  ends. 
8.  In  being  more  observant  of  the  laws  of  men.  The  fear  of  man  is  a  more 
powerful  curb  to  retain  men  in  their  duty  than  the  fear  of  God.  What  a  contempt 
of  God  is  this ;  it  is  to  tell  God  I  will  break  the  Sabbath,  swear,  revile,  revel,  were 
it  not  for  the  curb  of  national  laws,  for  all  Thy  precepts  to  the  contrary,  9.  In 
man's  unwillingness  to  have  God's  laws  observed  by  any.  Man  would  not  have 
God  have  a  loyal  subject  in  the  world.  What  is  the  reason  else  of  the  persecution 
of  those  who  would  be  the  strictest  observers  of  God's  injunctions  ?  10.  In  the 
pleasure  we  take  to  see  His  laws  broken  by  others  (chap.  i.  32).  11.  In  setting 
UP  OTHER  BOVEEEiGNS  IN  THE  STEAD  OP  GoD.  If  wc  did  dethrone  God  to  set  up  an 
angel,  or  some  virtuous  man,  it  would  be  a  lighter  affront ;  but  to  place  the  basest 
and  filthiest  thing  in  His  throne  is  intolerable.  1.  Idols.  2  Self.  This  is 
properly  the  old  Adam,  the  true  offspring  of  the  first  corrupted  man.  This  is  the 
greatest  antichrist,  the  great  antigod  in  us,  which  sits  in  the  heart,  the  temple  of 
God,  and  would  be  adored  as  God  ;  would  be  the  chiefest  as  the  highest  end  (2  Tim. 
iii.  2).  Sin  and  self  are  all  one  ;  what  is  called  a  living  in  sin  in  one  place  (chap. 
▼i.  2)  to  self  in  another  (2  Cor.  v.  15).  3.  The  world.  When  we  place  this  in  our 
heart,  God's  proper  seat  and  chair,  we  deprive  God  of  His  propriety,  and  do  Him 
the  greatest  wrong  (Col.  iii.  5).  The  poor  Indians  made  a  very  natural  and 
rational  consequence,  that  gold  was  the  Spaniards'  god,  because  they  hunted  so 
greedily  after  it.  4.  Sensual  pleasures  (2  Tim.  iii.  4).  A  glutton's  belly  is  said  to 
be  his  god,  because  his  projects  and  affections  are  devoted  to  the  satisfaction  of 
that,  and  he  lays  in  not  for  the  service  of  God.  6.  Satan.  Every  sin  is  an 
election  of  the  devil  to  be  our  lord.  As  the  Spirit  dwells  in  a  godly  man  to  guide 
him,  so  doth  the  devil  in  a  natural  man,  to  direct  him  to  evil  (Eph.  ii.  2,  3).  What 
a  monstrous  baseness  is  this,  to  advance  an  impure  spirit  in  the  place  of  infinite 
purity;   to  effect  that  destroyer  above  our  preserver  and  benefactor.     III.  In 

USURPING    God's    PREROOATrVE,  AND    EXACTING    THOSE    OBSERVANCES    WHICH   BELONG    TO 

God.  1.  In  challenging  titles  and  acts  of  worship  due  only  to  God.  2.  In  lording 
over  the  consciences  and  reasons  of  others.  Whence  else  springs  the  restless  desire 
in  some  men,  to  model  all  consciences  according  to  their  own  wills  and  their  anger. 
3.  In  prescribing  rules  of  worship  which  ought  only  to  be  appointed  by  God.  4. 
In  subjecting  the  truth  of  God  to  the  trial  of  reason.  5.  In  judging  futiare  events, 
as  if  we  had  been  of  God's  privy  council  when  He  first  undertook  any  great  action 
in  the  world.  6.  In  censuring  others'  state  (Luke  xii.  14).  {Ihid.)  Man't 
enmity  against  the  attributes  of  God.  Against — I.  The  holiness  of  God.  1.  In 
sinning  under  a  pretence  of  religion.  Many  resolve  upon  some  ways  of  wickedness, 
and  then  rake  the  Scripture  to  find  out  at  least  excuses  for,  if  not  a  justification  of 
their  crimes.  Many  that  have  wrung  estates  from  the  tears  of  widows  and  heart- 
blood  of  orphans,  think  to  wipe  off  aU  their  oppression  by  some  charitable  legacies 
at  their  death.  It  is  abominable  when  men  sin  for  God's  glory.  2.  In  charging 
sin  upon  God.  3.  In  prescribing  rules  of  worship,  which  ought  only  to  be  appointed 
by  God  (Gen.  iii.  12,  iv.  9 ;  2  Sam.  xi.  35).  If  we  find  a  way  to  lay  our  sins  at 
God's  door,  we  think  then  to  escape  His  justice.  But  it  is  a  foolish  consideration ; 
for  if  we  can  fancy  an  unholy  God,  we  have  no  reason  to  think  Him  a  righteous 
God.  3.  In  hating  the  image  of  God's  holiness  in  others.  He  that  hates  the 
picture  of  a  prince  hates  the  prince  also.  He  that  hates  the  stream  hates 
the  fountain  ;  he  that  hates  the  beams  hates  the  sun.  4.  In  having  debasing 
notions  of  the  holy  nature  of  God.  God  made  man  according  to  His  own 
image,  and  we  make  God  according  to  ours.  It  is  a  question  which  idolatry 
is  the  greatest,  to  worship  an  image  of  wood  or  stone,  or  to  entertain  monstrous 
imaginations  of  Goil.  It  provokes  a  man  when  we  liken  him  to  a  dog  or  a 
toad.  5.  In  our  un worth  v-  and  perfunctory  addresses  to  God.  God  is  so  holy, 
that  were  our  services  as  retined  and  pure  as  those  of  the  angels,  yet  we  oould 


9Bkr.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  695 

I 

not  serve  Him  suitably  to  His  holy  nature  (Joshua  xxiv.  19) ;  therefore  we  deny  this 
holiness  when  we  come  before  Him  without  due  preparation.  6.  In  defacing  the 
image  of  God  in  our  own  souls  (Eph.  iv.  24).  II.  The  wisdom  of  God.  1.  In 
Blighting  the  laws  of  God.  Since  God  hath  no  defect  in  His  understanding,  His 
will  must  be  the  best  and  wisest;  therefore  they  that  make  alteration  in  Hia 
precepts  practicaUy  charge  Him  with  folly.  2.  In  defacing  the  wise  workmanship 
of  God.  The  soul,  the  image  of  God,  is  ruined  and  broken  by  sin.  If  a  man  had 
a  curious  clock  which  had  cost  him  many  years'  pain  and  the  strength  of  his  skill 
to  frame,  for  a  man  to  break  it  would  argue  a  contempt  of  the  workman's  skill. 
8  Censuring  His  ways  (Isa.  xlv.  9  ;  Job  xl.  2).  A  reproof  argues  a  superiority  in 
authority,  knowledge,  or  goodness.  4.  Prescribing  rules  and  methods  to  God 
(Jonah  iv.  1 ;  Luke  ii.  48).  III.  The  surFioiENCT  of  God.  1.  In  secret  thoughts  of 
meriting  by  any  religious  act.  As  though  God  could  be  indebted  to  us,  and  obliged 
by  us.  In  our  prosperity  we  are  apt  to  have  secret  thoughts  that  our  enjoyments 
were  the  debts  God  owed  us,  rather  than  gifts  freely  bestowed  upon  us.  Hence  it 
is  that  men  are  more  unwilling  to  part  with  their  righteousness  than  with  their 
sins,  and  are  apt  to  challenge  salvation  as  a  due,  rather  than  beg  it  as  an  act  of 
grace.  2.  Trying  all  ways  of  helping  ourselves  before  we  come  to  God.  Having 
hopes  to  find  that  in  creatures  which  is  only  to  be  found  in  an  all-sufficient  God. 
3.  In  our  apostasies  from  God.  When,  after  fair  pretences  and  devout  applications, 
we  grow  cold  and  thrust  Him  from  us,  it  implies  that  God  hath  not  that  fulness  in 
Him  which  we  expected,  4.  In  joining  something  with  God  to  make  up  our 
happiness.  Though  men  are  willing  to  have  the  enjoyment  of  God,  vet  they  are 
not  content  with  Him  alone,  but  would  have  something  else  to  eke  Him  out ;  as 
though  God  had  not  in  Himself  a  sufficient  blessedness  for  His  creatures,  without 
the  additions  of  anything  else.  The  young  man  in  the  gospel  went  away  sorrowful 
because  he  could  not  enjoy  God  and  the  world  both  together  (Matt,  xix,  21,  22). 
If  we  would  light  up  candles  in  a  clear  day,  what  do  we  imply  but  that  the  sun  has 
not  light  enough  in  itself  to  make  it  day !  IV.  The  omniscience  op  God.  1, 
When  we  commit  sin  upon  the  ground  of  secrecy.  2.  When  men  give  liberty  to 
inward  sins.  God  "  trieth  the  heart,  and  searcheth  the  reins."  Manasseh  is 
blamed  for  setting  up  strange  altars  in  the  house  of  God ;  much  more  may  we  for 
setting  up  strange  imaginations  in  the  heart,  which  should  belong  to  God. 
Hypocrisy  is  a  plain  denial  of  His  omnisciency.  Are  we  not  more  slight  in  the 
performance  of  private  devotions  before  God  than  we  are  in  our  attendances  in 
public  in  the  sight  of  men.  3.  When  men  give  way  to  diversions  in  a  duty.  It 
wrongs  the  majesty  of  God's  presence  that  when  He  speaks  to  us  we  will  not  give 
Him  so  much  respect  as  to  regard  Him ;  and  when  we  speak  to  Him  we  do  not 
regard  ourselves.  What  a  vain  thing  is  it  to  be  speaking  to  a  scullion  when  the 
king  is  in  presence  I  Every  careless  diversion  to  a  vain  object  is  a  denial  of  God's 
presence  in  the  place.  V.  The  mebct  of  God.  1.  In  the  severe  and  jealous 
thonghts  men  have  of  God.  Men  are  apt  to  charge  God  with  tyranny,  whereby 
they  strip  Him  of  the  riches  of  His  glorious  mercy.  The  worship  of  many  men 
is  founded  upon  this  conceit,  whereby  they  are  frighted  into  some  actions  of 
adoration,  not  sweetly  drawn.  We  hate  what  we  fear.  2.  Slighting  His  mercy 
and  robbing  Him  of  tl  e  end  of  it.  The  wilful  breaking  of  the  prince's  laws,  upon 
the  observance  whereof  great  rewards  are  promised,  is  not  only  a  despising  his 
sovereignty,  but  a  slighting  his  goodness.  Often  this  enmity  rises  higher ;  and 
wh  !ieas  men  should  fear  him,  they  rather  presume  to  sin  (chap.  ii.  4  ;  Eccles.  viii. 
11).  VI.  The  justice  of  God.  1.  In  not  fearing  it,  but  running  under  the  lash  of 
it.  2.  In  sinning  under  the  strokes  of  justice.  Men  will  roar  under  the  stroke,  but 
not  submit  to  the  striker.  3.  In  hoping  easily  to  evade  it  (Psa.  1.  21 ;  Psa.  x.  11). 
{Ibid.)  Hatred  to  God  manifested  : — "  After  all,  I  do  not  hate  God.  No,  sir ; 
you  will  not  make  me  believe  that.  I  am  a  sinner,  I  know,  and  do  many  wicked 
thiogs ;  but,  after  all,  I  have  a  good  heart — I  don't  hate  God."  Such  was  the 
language  of  a  prosperous  worldling.  He  was  sincere,  but  sadly  deceived.  A  few 
months  afterwards  that  God  who  had  given  him  so  many  good  things  crossed  hia 
path  in  an  unexpected  manner.  A  fearful  freshet  swept  dow»  the  valley  and 
threatened  destruction  to  this  man's  large  flour-milL  A  crowd  was  watching  it, 
in  momentary  expectation  of  seeing  it  fall ;  while  the  owner,  standing  iu  the  midst 
of  them,  was  cursing  God  to  His  face,  and  pouring  out  the  most  horrid  oaths.  He 
no  longer  doubted  that  he  hated  God.  But  nothing  in  that  hour  of  trial  came  out 
of  his  mouth  which  was  not  previously  in  his  heart.  A  traitor  suspected  and 
eoiivicter.  .—I.  To  discover  ihis  enmity.     The  carnally  minded  man  ia  enmity 


696  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  fin, 

against  God — 1.  As  a  servant.  2.  As  a  sabject.  n.  Deplobb  this  enmitt.  1. 
What  an  injustice  it  is  I  2.  What  an  infamy  it  is  1  3.  What  an  injury  is  this  to 
yourself  1  IIL  Seek  delivebance  fbom  it.  1.  It  can  never  be  done  but  by  th* 
Holy  Ghost.  2.  It  can  only  be  done  by  deliverance  from  the  great  guilt  of  not 
having  loved  God.  Nothing  but  the  love  of  Jesus  can  soften  your  heart  and  do 
away  with  its  enmity.     (C.  H.  Sj^urgeon.) 

Yer.  8.  So  then  they  that  are  In  the  flesh  cannot  please  God. — Pleasing  God: — 
Men's  happiness  is  to  please  them  upon  whom  they  depend,  and  upon  whose  favour 
their  wellbeing  hangs.  It  is  the  servant's  happiness  to  please  his  master,  the 
courtier's  to  please  his  prince.  Now  certainly  all  creatures  depend  upon  the 
Creator,  •'  for  in  Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being."  Then  of  all  things 
it  concerns  ns  most  how  to  please  Him,  and  if  we  do  so  we  shall  assuredly  be  happy, 
and  it  will  not  matter  whom  else  we  displease  (Psa.  zxxi.  19 ;  xxxvi.  7).  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  how  incomparable  is  the  misery  of  them  who  cannot  please  God,  even 
though  they  did  both  please  themselves  and  all  others  for  the  present  I  Now,  if 
you  ask  who  they  are  that  are  such,  the  words  speak  it :  ••  They  that  are  in  the 
flesh,"  not  they  in  whom  there  is  flesh,  for  there  are  remnants  of  that  in  the  most 
Bpiritual  man  in  this  life.  The  ground  of  this  is  chiefly  twofold.  I.  Because  ibei 
IBB  KOT  m  Jesus  Christ,  in  whom  His  soul  is  well  pleased  (Matt.  iii.  17 ;  xvii.  5). 
Whoever  are  not  in  Jesus  Christ  certainly  cannot  please  God,  do  what  they  can, 
because  God  hath  made  Christ  the  centre,  in  which  He  would  have  the  good 
pleasure  of  sinners  meeting  with  His  good  pleasure ;  and  therefore  "  without  faith 
it  is  impossible  to  please  God,"  not  so  much  for  the  excellency  of  the  act  itself  as 
for  the  well-pleasing  object  of  it,  Christ.  God's  love  is  well  pleased  with  the 
excellency  of  His  person,  and  His  justice  with  the  sufficiency  and  worthiness  of 
His  ransom,  and  without  this  compass  there  is  neither  satisfaction  to  the  one  nor 
to  the  other.  Therefore,  if  you  would  please  God,  be  pleased  with  Christ,  and  you 
cannot  do  Him  a  greater  pleasure  than  believe  in  Him  (John  v.  xxiii.).    U.  Suoh 

AS  ABE   IN  THE   FliESH   CANNOT   FBAME   THEIB   SPIRITS,  AEFECTIONS,  AND   WAYS  TO  God'S 

GOOD  PLEASURE,  for  their  very  mind  is  enmity  to  God,  and  cannot  be  subject  to  His 
law  (Jer.  ii.  34).  1.  It  is  not  the  business  yoa  have  undertaken  to  please  God,  but 
to  please  yourselves,  or  to  please  men.  The  very  beginning  of  pleasing  God  is 
when  a  soul  falls  in  displeasure  at  itself  and  abhorrence  of  himself  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2 ; 
Psa.  li.  17).  God  never  begins  to  be  pleasant  to  a  soul  till  it  begins  to  fall  out  of 
love  with  itself.  Therefore  you  may  conclude  this  of  yourselves,  that  with  many 
of  you  God  is  not  well  pleased,  though  you  have  all  Church  privileges  (1  Cor.  x.  2-5), 
not  only  because  these  works  of  the  flesh  that  are  directly  opposite  to  His  own 
known  will,  such  as  fornication,  murmuring,  &o.,  abound  among  you,  but  even 
those  of  you  that  may  be  free  from  gross  opposition  to  His  holy  will,  your  nature 
hath  the  seed  of  all  that  enmity,  and  you  act  enmity  in  a  more  covered  way. 
Certainly,  though  now  you  please  yourselves,  yet  the  day  shall  come  that  you  shall 
be  contrary  to  yourselves,  and  all  to  you  (1  Thess.  ii.  15),  and  there  are  some 
earnests  of  it  in  this  life.  Many  wicked  persons  are  set  contrary  to  themselves,  and 
all  to  them;  they  are  like  Esau,  their  hand  against  all,  and  all  hands  against  them ; 
yea,  their  own  consciences  continually  vexing  them ;  this  is  a  fruit  of  that  enmity 
between  man  and  God,  and  if  you  find  it  now,  you  shall  find  it  hereafter.  2.  But 
as  for  you  that  are  in  Jesus  Christ,  who,  being  displeased  with  yourselves,  have 
fled  into  the  well-beloved,  in  whom  the  Father  is  well  pleased,  to  escape  God's 
displeasure,  I  say  unto  such,  your  persons  God  is  well  pleased  with  in  Christ,  and 
this  shall  make  way  and  place  for  acceptance  to  your  weak  and  imperfect  perform- 
ances. But  I  would  charge  that  upon  you,  that  as  you  by  believing  are  well  pleased 
with  Christ,  so  you  would  henceforth  study  to  walk  worthy  of  your  Lord  into  all 
well  pleasing  (Col.  i.  10).  If  you  love  Him,  you  cannot  but  fashion  yourselves  so 
as  He  may  be  pleased.  {Hugh  Binning.)  Pleasing  God : — I.  The  impossibilitt 
or  A  CABNAL  MiNO  PLEASiNQ  GoD.  Thls  spriugs  from  the  necessity  of  the  case. 
1.  As  dwelling  in  a  nature,  every  faculty  of  which  is  in  hostility  to  His  government 
and  being,  it  is  impossible  that  it  can  please  Him.  2.  There  being  no  personal 
acceptance  of  those  who  are  in  the  flesh,  whatever  they  do  cannot  be  accepted  of 
God.  First  the  person,  and  then  the  gift,  is  God's  order  (cf.  Queen  Esther's  inter- 
view with  Ahasuerus  and  Jacob's  meeting  with  Esau).  How  can  you  do  that  which 
is  well  pleasing  to  a  holy  God  while  your  person  is  to  Him  an  object  of  just  abhor- 
rence? 8.  The  absence  of  faith  in  the  unregenerate  must  render  all  tha  religious 
doings  of  the  smner  displeasing.    "  For  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  pleaao 


OBAP.  Tin,]  ROMANS.  69T 

Him."  How  can  he  please  God  whose  whole  existence  is  a  direct  denial  of  God  ? 
"  He  that  believeth  not  hath  made  God  a  liar  1 "  Your  unbelief  is  a  practical  denial 
of  His  existence.  And,  in  your  non-subjection  to  His  law,  you  exclude  Him  from 
the  government  of  Hia  own  world.  4.  And  what  is  the  entire  absence  of  love  to 
God  but  another  confirmation  of  the  same  truth?  The  great  constraining  motive 
of  the  sacrifice  with  which  God  is  pleased  is  love,  and  "  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the 
law."  n.  Thk  character  of  those  with  whom  God  is  pleased.  They  are — 1.  A 
spiritual  people,  and  God,  who  is  a  Spirit,  must  dehght  in  that  which  harmonises 
with  His  own  nature.  2.  They  are  an  accepted  people,  and  therefore  their  persons 
are  pleasing  to  Him.  The  delight  of  the  Father  in  Christ  reveals  the  secret  of  Hia 
delight  in  us.  "  This  is  My  beloved  Sou,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  3.  But  it 
is  a  universal  pleasing  of  God  which  the  Scriptures  prescribe  and  enforce  (Col.  i. 
10 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  2  ;  1  John  iii.  22).  4.  But  what  are  some  of  the  footprints  of  this 
walk?  (Ij  Unreserved  obedience.  (2)  Walking  by  faith.  As  unbelief  is  most 
dishonouring,  so  faith  is  most  honouring  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  (0.  Winslow,  D.D.) 
They  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God  : — The  designation  of  the  persons  that 
is  in  these  words — "  They  that  are  in  the  flesh."  The  discovery  of  their  condition 
in  these  cannot  please  God.  We  begin  with  the  first.  The  designation  of  the  per- 
sons, those  that  are  in  the  flesh.  Now  to  be  in  the  flesh,  according  to  the  language  of 
Scripture,  is  taken  two  manner  of  ways,  either  in  a  good  or  in  an  indifferent  sense,  or 
ft  bad  and  unwarrantable  sense.  First,  to  be  so  in  a  good  or  in  an  indiEferent  sense, 
and  so  to  be  in  the  flesh  is  no  more  than  to  partake  of  human  nature.  Thus,  "  The 
life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  "  (Gal.  ii.  20).  But,  secondly,  there  is  also  being 
in  the  flesh  in  a  bad  and  corrupt  sense,  by  taking  flesh  metonymically  for  sin,  as  it 
is  oftentimes  taken  in  Scripture.  The  second  is  the  predicate,  in  the  discovery  of 
the  condition  belonging  to  such  persons,  and  that  is,  that  they  cannot  please  God, 
viz.,  whilst  they  so  remain  and  continue.  This  may  be  taken  by  us  two  ways, 
either  as  denoting  the  state  or  the  life,  the  condition  or  the  conversation.  First, 
take  it  in  the  first  sense,  "  They  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God  " — that  is, 
such  persons  as  are  yet  remaining  in  a  state  of  nature  and  unre^feneracy  ;  these  are 
loathsome  and  displeasing  to  God.  Now  it  remains  that  we  should  show  what  is 
here  declared  of  such  persons,  that  they  cannot  please  God.  Fust,  take  it  for  their 
persons.  They  are  unpleasing  to  Him  in  reference  to  them  (Psa.  liv.  6,  vii.  11 ; 
Hab.  i.  13).  There  is  no  leprous  or  contagious  person  that  is  more  displeasing  in 
the  eyes  of  man  than  a  carnal  and  unregenerate  person  is  displeasing  to  the  eyes 
of  God.  The  ground  of  this  unpleasingness  may  be  thus  far  accounted  to  us: 
first,  because  they  are  out  of  Christ,  who  is  the  primarily  Beloved  (Eph.  i.  6 ;  Matt, 
iii.  17).  In  Him  as  the  termination  of  His  well  pleasing,  and  in  Him  also  as  the 
conveyance ;  in  Him  for  Himself,  and  in  all  others  for  His  sake.  All  men  are  so 
far  well  pleasing  to  God  as  they  are  in  Christ.     Now  carnal  persons  are  not  incor- 

?>rated  into  Christ,  therefore  they  cannot  be  well  pleasing  to  God  in  such  a  condition, 
hey  are  in  themselves  and  in  their  own  nature  unlovely.  Secondly,  unregenerate 
persons  cannot  please  God,  because  they  want  faith.  Thirdly,  they  are  altogether 
unlike  God,  and  so  cannot  be  pleasing  to  Him  in  that  respect  likewise.  We  know 
that  liking  is  founded  in  hkeness,  and  complacency  in  correspondency.  Fourthly, 
we  need  go  no  further  for  the  proof  of  this  point  than  the  text  itself,  if  we  look 
apon  it  in  the  coherence  of  it,  and  how  these  carnal  persons  are  therein  described 
as  are  after  the  flesh,  as  do  mind  the  things  of  the  flesh,  are  in  a  state  of  death,  in 
a  state  of  enmity,  in  a  state  of  impotency,  and  inability  of  subjection  to  the  law  of 
God.  How  is  it  then  possible  that  such  as  these  should  be  pleasing  to  God  ?  The 
second  is  in  reference  to  their  actions.  They  cannot  please  Him  so  neither.  The 
actions  of  carnal  men  are  unpleasing  to  God  considered  in  themselves,  because 
they  proceed  not  from  a  right  principle  in  them,  nor  are  directed  to  a  right  end  by 
them.  Sweetness  of  nature,  and  ingenuity,  and  moral  accomplishments  are  very 
commendable  in  themselves,  and  do  make  men  acceptable  in  their  converse  one 
with  another,  but  yet  they  are  not  sufficient  alone  to  make  men  acceptable  in  the 
eyes  of  God.  Men  are  sensible  sometimes  of  their  actual  sins,  and  have  cause  so 
to  be — of  their  murders,  and  adulteries,  and  drunkenness,  and  thefts,  and  such 
courses  as  these,  which  now  and  then  do  a  little  astonish  them  and  work  some 
kind  of  horror  in  them.  But  what  mav  they  then  think  of  the  sin  of  their  nature, 
which  is  the  occasion  of  all  these  to  them  ?  For  a  man  to  be  of  a  sickly  constitu- 
tion is  more  than  to  have  a  particular  distemper  or  fit  of  sickness  upon  him.  For 
fhis  purpose,  and  to  aggra-vate  this  so  much  the  more  unto  us,  consider  these  things 
further.    First,  that  this  corrupt  nature,  where  it  remains  unchanged  in  any 


€98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  nxL 

person,  it  does  expose  him  to  all  hind  of  sin,  considered  at  large,  of  what  nature  op 
kind  soever.  There  is  no  sin  which  a  man  is  secure  of  who  is  still  remaining  in 
his  unregenerate  condition,  but  he  is  not  only  capable  of  it,  but  inclinable  to  it. 
Secondly,  where  men  are  yet  in  the  flesh  and  unchanged  in  their  nature,  they  are 
exposed  to  the  return  of  sin  again,  after  some  temporary  forbearance  of  it  and  absti- 
nence from  it.  There  is  nothing  which  is  a  principle  of  mortiflcation  but  only 
sanctifying  and  saving  grace.  Thirdly,  this  state  of  nature  does  make  men  to 
commit  sin  with  more  dehght  and  eagerness  of  prosecution.  Those  that  are  in 
their  natural  condition,  they  are  in  a  sad  and  miserable  condition.  And  they  are 
so  especially  upon  this  account  which  is  here  expressed  in  the  text,  because  they 
cannot  please  God,  which  carries  a  great  deal  more  in  it  than  we  are  presently 
sensible  of,  or  do  easily  apprehend.  They  do  not  or  cannot  please  God ;  their  case 
is  very  terrible  and  dangerous.  Thus  it  is,  and  will  appear  to  be  so  according  to 
sundry  explications.  First,  as  it  is  an  obstruction  to  prayer  and  the  receiving  of 
that.  "  We  know  that  God  hears  not  sinners,"  said  the  blind  man  in  the  gospel 
(John  ix.  31),  and  "he  that  regards  iniquity  in  his  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  his 
prayer  "  (Psa.  Ixvi.  18).  Secondly,  it  deprives  men  of  blessings  and  the  comfort- 
able influences  of  God's  providence.  God  will  curse  his  very  blessings  and  turn 
his  comforts  into  the  greatest  crosses  unto  him ;  as  we  see  it  was  with  the  Israe- 
lites, when  God  was  offended  and  displeased  with  them:  He  gave  them  quails 
and  manna  in  wrath.  Thirdly,  it  exposes  to  temptations  and  the  assaults  of 
the  spiritual  enemy.  "  Whoso  pleaseth  God  shall  be  kept  from  many  snares," 
But  he  that  does  not  so,  he  shall  be  given  up  to  them.  Lastly,  it  excludes  from 
heaven  and  eternal  happiness  and  salvation  at  last.  {Thomas  Horton,  D.D.) 
Men  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God : — The  phrase  notes  a  man  drowned  in  corrup- 
tion. We  say  of  a  man  overcome  of  anger :  he  is  in  heat ;  of  a  drunkard :  he  is 
in  beer  or  wine.  So  Simon  Magus  is  said  to  be  in  the  gall  of  bitterness.  They 
cannot  please  God.  Nor  their  persons,  nor  their  thoughts,  words,  or  actions,  till 
they  be  renewed.  Snow  can  never  be  made  hot  while  it  is  snow.  Fire  will  dissolve 
it  into  water ;  then  it  may  be  made  hot.  So  the  carnal  man  in  that  estate  cannot 
please  God,  but  change  him  into  a  sanctified  estate,  and  then  he  can.  A  man  may 
be  prudent,  learned,  liberal,  do  many  beautiful  things  in  nature,  and  yet  not  please 
God.  An  evil  tree  cannot  bring  forth  good  fruit.  Velvet  is  good  matter  to  make  a 
garment,  yet  it  may  be  so  marred  in  the  cutting  that  it  shall  never  obtain  the  name 
of  a  good  garment.  Pieces  of  timber  are  good  matter  for  a  house,  but  they  must 
be  artificially  framed.  An  unregenerate  man  gives  alms,  and  in  giving  sins  :  not 
because  he  gives,  but  because  he  gives  not  in  the  manner  he  should.  {Elnathan 
Parr,  B.A.)  Men  in  their  natural  state  cannot  please  God  : — To  please  God  is  of 
infinite  importance.  Since  He  is  omniscient  and  omnipresent,  we  cannot  escape 
His  observation  :  since  He  is  Almighty,  He  has  our  life,  and  all  things  belonging 
to  us,  continually  at  His  disposal,  can  make  us  happy  or  miserable  in  a  thousand 
different  ways.  He  is,  therefore,  the  most  dreadful  enemy  or  the  most  beneficial 
friend  we  can  have.     Of  what  infinite  consequence,  then,  to  be  in  His  favour. 

I.  What  is  meant  by  being  "  in  the  flesh.  "  This  expression  is  often  used  to 
signify  being  in  the  body  (Phil.  i.  22,  24  ;  1  Tim.  iii.  16  ;  1  Pet.  iv.  1,  2,  6  ;  1  John 
iv.  2,  8) ;  but  this  is  not  its  meaning  here,  for  many  in  the  body  have  pleased  God. 
Nor  is  the  living  merely  in  sensuality  and  the  sins  of  the  flesh  referred  to  (Gal.  v. 
16-21),  though  undoubtedly  such  cannot  please  God.  But  what  is  intended  is  the 
being  in  our  natural  state  (Gen.  vi.  3  compared  with  viii.  21 ;  Eph.  ii.  3).  This 
implies — 1.  The  being  unpardoned,  or  in  a  state  of  condemnation  in  consequence 
of  not  being  "  in  Christ  "  (chap.  vii.  4-6 ;  viii.  1).  2.  Unregenerated  (John  iii.  6). 
3.  Under  the  power  of  our  animal  and  corrupt  nature,  the  "  law  in  our  members  " 
leading  us  captive  to  sin.  4.  "  Carnally  minded  " ;  minding  the  body  rather  than 
the  soul ;  visible  and  temporal  things  rather  than  invisible  and  eternal ;  preferring 
nature  to  grace,  and  the  creature  to  the  Creator ;  being  governed  by  carnal  maxims ; 
actuated  by  carnal  views  ;  influenced  by  carnal  desires  ;  engaged  in  carnal  pursuits. 

II.  In  what  sense  such  "  cannot  please  God,"  and  how  this  appeabs  to  be  a  fact. 
1.  While  thus  in  the  flesh,  such  persons  are  not  in  God's  favour.  (1)  They  are 
not  humbled  and  penitent,  without  which  none  can  be  accepted  (Isa.  Ivii.  15; 
Ixvi.  2 ;  1  Pet.  v.  5,  6 ;  James  iv.  10).  (2)  They  are  not  believers ;  and  without 
faith  there  is  no  justification,  nor  can  we  please  God  (Heb.  xi.  4-6  ;  John  iii.  36 ; 
chap.  iv.  23-25 ;  v.  1 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  5).  (3)  Their  carnal  min.^  is  not  subject  to  His 
law.  Nay,  is  enmity  against  Him.  That  we  should  be  spiritually  minded  is  for 
sur  good  ;  but  the  carnal  mind  opposes  this  good,  and  "  to  be  carnally  minded  is 


CBAF.  Ttn.]  ROMANS.  699 

death."  2.  Henoe  it  follows  that  their  services  are  not  accepted  of  Ood,  and 
that  their  ways  do  not  please  Him.  Not  being  justified,  they  have  not  love  to  Ood 
(chap.  V.  5),  and  without  love  no  service  is,  or  can  be,  pleasing  to  God.  3.  Bat 
perhaps  it  will  be  objected — (1)  "  Cannot  they  pray,  hear  the  Word  ?  "  &o.  Yes  ; 
but  not "  worship  God  in  spirit  and  truth,"  which,  while  destitute  of  the  Spirit,  they 
cannot  do,  and  not  doing,  they  are  incapable  of  pleasing  Him  :  they  do  not  mix 
faith  with  the  word  that  is  heard,  "  receive  the  truth  in  love,"  and  obey  it  from 
the  heart.  (2)  But  "  cannot  they  preserve  an  unblamable  conduct,  give  alms," 
Ao.  7  Certainly ;  but  this  does  not^ please  God,  as  not  being  done  from  a  right 
principle,  "  faith  working  by  love  " :  to  a  right  end,  the  glory  of  God ;  in  a  right 
spirit,  humihty,  purity,  benevolence,  zeal,  Ac.  ;  and  by  a  right  rule,  the  will  of 
God,  and  out  of  conscience  toward  Him  (Gal.  v.  6 ;  1  Cor.  z.  31 ;  Col.  iii.  17). 
lU.  Ths  sure  uabe  whsrebt  we  hay  know  whether  we  are  in  this  state  (ver.  9). 

1.  By  receiving  the  Spirit  we  pass  from  a  carnal  to  a  spiritual  state  (John  iii.  6). 

2.  By  the  Spirit  dwelling  in  us  we  continue  in  that  state  (text ;  Gal.  v.  1&-25). 
Hereby  we  know  that  we  are  in  the  Spirit  (1  John  iii.  24).  3.  But  we  must  receive 
and  keep  this  Spirit  as  a  Spirit  of — (1)  Adoption  (vers.  15-16  ;  Gal.  iv.  4) ;  (2)  Re- 
generation (Tit.  iii.  5  ;  John  iii.  4-5) ;  productive  of  its  proper  fruits.  {J.  Benson.) 
Man'i  well-being  :  its  condition  and  obstruction  : — I.  The  condition  of  man's  well- 
being.  To  "  please  God,"  which  implies — 1.  That  God  is  a  pleasable  Being.  The 
Eternal  is  neither  callous  nor  morose.  2.  It  is  possible  for  man  to  please  Him.  It 
is  wonderful  that  any  creature,  however  high,  should  be  able  to  please  a  Being  so 
infinitely  happy  in  Himself;  but  it  is  more  wonderful  that  insignificant,  fallen 
man  should  have  this  power.  3.  How  can  man  please  God  ?  Not  by  singing 
eulogistic  hymns,  or  offering  complimentary  prayers,  or  observing  ceremonial 
ordinances.  "  To  what  purpose  is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices  unto  Me  ?  " 
How  then  ?  (1)  By  loving  supremely  what  He  loves  most.  We  are  pleased  with 
those  who  love  the  objects  most  dear  to  our  hearts.  (2)  By  devotion  to  those 
objects  which  interest  Him  most.  4.  In  the  pleasing  of  Him  is  man's  well-being. 
(1)  Is  man's  happiness  in  a  peaceful  conscience  ?  Then  the  conscience  must  have 
ft  sense  of  God's  approval.  The  fear  of  His  displeasure  terrifies  it,  the  assurance 
of  His  approval  is  its  heaven.  (2)  Is  man's  happiness  in  gratified  love?  The 
loving  heart  is  in  anguish  until  it  hears  the  "  well  done  "  of  the  loved  one.  (3)  Is 
man's  happiness  in  full  development  of  his  active  powers  ?  Then  where  can  these 
powers  have  snch  stimulus  and  scope  as  it  endeavours  to  please  the  Infinite? 
n.  The  obstruction  to  man's  well-being.  Being  "  in  the  flesh. "  What  is  meant 
by  this  ?  Not  merely  existing  in  the  flesh :  thus  we  all  exist ;  but  having  the  flesh 
for  our  master  instead  of  our  menial.  The  man  who  thus  dwells  in  the  flesh  gets — 
1.  Fleshly  views  of  the  universe.  All  above,  around,  beneath  him  is  materialism. 
His  eyes  are  too  gross  to  discern  the  spiritual  significance  of  things  ;  his  ear  too 
heavy  to  catch  the  spiritual  melodies  of  the  world.  2.  Truth.  "  He  judges  after 
the  flesh."  If  he  has  a  theology,  it  is  a  sensuous  thing.  3.  Greatness.  He  has 
no  idea  of  greatness  apart  from  splendid  costumes,  magnificent  dwellings,  and 
brilliant  equipages.  4.  Happiness.  He  associates  happiness  with  whatever  pleases 
the  tastes,  charms  the  senses,  satisfies  the  appetites,  and  gratifies  the  lasts. 
5.  God.  He  makes  God  such  an  one  as  himself,  and  gives  Him  human  thoughts 
and  passions.  Now  the  soul  in  such  a  state  has  lost  the  desire  and  the  power  to 
please  God.  But  the  gospel  comes  to  enfranchise  the  soul  from  the  flesh  and  to 
restore  to  it  its  absolute  sovereignty  over  tl  e  hoij.  This  deliverance  is  a  new 
birth.    "  He  that  is  bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,"  &o.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  But  ye  are  not  In  the  flesh,  but  In  the  Spirit. — We  are  not  in  the  flesh, 
hut  alas  !  the  flesh  is  still  in  us  ;— "  A  boat  has  been  sailing  on  the  salt  ocean,  it 
has  come  through  many  a  storm,  and,  half  full  of  briny  water,  it  is  now  sailing  on 
the  fresh  water  of  the  river.  It  is  no  longer  in  the  salt  water,  but  the  salt  water  is 
in  it.  The  Christian  has  got  off  the  Adam-sea  for  ever.  He  is  in  the  Christ-sea 
for  ever.  Adam  is  still  in  him,  which  he  is  to  mortify  and  throw  out,  but  he  is  not  in 
Adam."  First,  take  it  simply  in  itself,  "  ye  are  not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit  "; 
where  we  have  signified  to  us  the  state  and  condition  of  the  children  of  God  and 
the  opLaion  which  St.  Paul  has  of  them ;  and  that  is,  not  to  be  "  carnal,  but 
spirituaL  "  That  is,  they  are  not  wholly  swayed  by  their  own  corruption,  but  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  them.  This  is  so  far  considerable  of  us  as  it  teaches  how  to  judge 
both  of  ourselves  and  other  men.  First,  for  ourselves.  It  is  a  point  which  may 
be  very  well  improved  by  the  children  of  God  under  temptation,  when  as  Satan, 


7W  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  no, 

joining  with  their  own  misgiving  hearts,  wonld  go  about  to  persuade  them  that 
they  have  no  grace  at  all  in  them,  because  they  have  it  in  them  mingled  with  some 
corruption.  They  should  not  hearken  or  give  heed  to  such  suggestions  as  these  are. 
Again,  secondly.  This  also  teaches  ns  how  we  should  look  upon  other  men  who  are 
the  saints  and  servants  of  God,  in  the  midst  of  those  wealmesses  and  infirmities 
which  they  are  sometimes  compassed  withal.  There  are  many  malicious  persons  in 
the  world  who,  if  at  any  time  they  do  by  chance  espy  anything  which  is  amiss  in 
God's  children,  they  can  commonly  see  nothing  else.  If  they  see  some  flesh  in 
them,  they  can  see  nothing  of  the  spirit ;  and  they  are  apt  both  to  account  of 
them  and  to  call  them  according  to  that  which  is  worst  in  them.  Now  secondly. 
We  may  also  look  upon  it  reflexively,  as  coming  from  the  apostle.  He  gives  this 
testimony  of  these  believing  Bomans  to  whom  he  wrote  for  their  particular,  that 
they  were  spiritual.  And  here  two  things  more.  First,  his  knowledge  of  their  state 
and  condition  in  grace  for  the  thing  itself.  While  he  sees  it,  he  does  intimate  that 
he  knows  it,  and  discerns  it,  and  takes  notice  of  it,  to  be  so  indeed  with  them,  that 
they  were  such  as  were  in  the  state  of  grace.  Now  here  it  may  be  demanded,  How 
he  came  to  do  so?  To  this  we  answer:  Divers  manner  of  ways.  First,  by  the 
judgment  of  charity.  Secondly,  by  a  special  spirit  of  discerning  which  was  vouch- 
safed unto  him.  Thirdly,  the  apostle  speaks  not  here  to  the  Bomans  at  large,  but 
only  to  the  believers  amongst  them :  "  To  all  that  be  at  Bome,  beloved  of  God  and 
saints,"  as  it  is  Bom.  i.  7.  Now  farther,  secondly,  he  signifies  this  his  knowledge 
and  apprehension  of  them.  Why  does  he  so  ?  For  two  reasons.  First,  I  say, 
hereby  to  testify  the  good  opinion  which  himself  had  of  them.  He  had  in  the 
verse  before  declared  the  sad  estate  of  carnal  persons.  Now,  lest  they  should  think 
that  he  had  mentioned  this  in  reference  to  them,  he  now  adds  this  unto  it  by  way 
of  exception.  Secondly.  For  their  further  encouragement  and  progress  in  goodness. 
It  is  a  good  incentive  to  any  to  be  better  when  they  are  commended  for  what 
already  they  are.  The  second  is  the  proof  or  argument  for  the  confirmation  of  it,  in 
these,  "  If  so  be  the  spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you."  First,  take  it  absolutely  in  itself: 
"  The  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  you."  This  is  spoken  not  only  of  the  Bomans,  as 
belonging  to  them  alone,  but  as  common  to  all  believers,  who  have  likewise  a  share 
in  it.  When  it  is  said  both  here  and  in  other  places,  "  That  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells 
in  the  children  of  God  "  there  are  three  things  which  are  implied  in  this  expres- 
Bion.  First,  I  say,  here  is  implied  presence.  He  dwells  in  them — that  is.  He  is  in 
them.  There  is  a  special  and  peculiar  presence  which  the  Spirit  of  God  doth  take 
ap  in  the  children  of  God.  Secondly,  when  it  is  said  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells 
in  us ;  hereby  is  signified  not  only  His  presence,  but  His  activity  and  operation. 
And  this  does  express  itself  in  sundry  performances  of  His  towards  us.  First,  of 
instructing  and  teaching  us.  Secondly,  as  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  us  to  teach 
as  what  is  to  be  done,  so  to  provoke  and  stir  us  up  to  the  doing  of  it  upon  all  occa- 
sions. Thirdly,  He  dwells  in  as  also  to  restrain,  and  mortify,  and  subdue  sin  in 
as.  Fourthly,  He  dwells  in  us  so  as  to  improve  and  to  set  home  upon  us  all  the 
ordinances  and  means  of  grace.  Fifthly,  in  a  way  of  comfort  and  special  consola- 
tion, while  he  evidences  to  us  our  state  and  condition  in  grace,  and  gives  us  hope 
of  future  salvation,  which  is  that  which  He  likewise  does  for  us.  Sixthly  and 
lastly.  He  dwells  in  us  so  as  to  repair  us,  and  to  reform  us  there  where  we  are 
amiss,  and  have  any  decays  of  grace  and  goodness  in  us.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  a 
good  landlord  and  inhabitant  in  that  soul  in  which  He  dwells,  who  will  not  suffer 
it  to  run  to  ruin.  The  consideration  of  this  point,  thus  explained,  may  be  thus  far 
osefol  to  us — First,  as  it  teaches  us  accordingly  to  suffer  Him  to  dwell  largely  in  us, 
we  should  give  up  ourselves  to  Him,  as  rooms  and  lodgings  to  Him.  Secondly,  it 
should  teach  us  to  give  all  respect  that  may  be  to  Him.  Take  heed  of  grieving 
Him,  of  resisting  Him,  of  vexing  Him,  of  despising  Him,  and  the  like.  Thirdly, 
we  should  from  hence  give  all  respect  to  the  saints  and  servants  of  God,  upon  this 
consideration  amongst  the  rest.  Is  it  so  indeed  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells 
in  His  children  1  Then  let  us  take  heed  of  vnronging  or  injuring  any  such  persons 
as  these  are,  either  by  word  or  deed.  And  that  is  the  second  thing  implied  here  in 
dwelUng,  to  wit,  activity  and  operation.  The  third  and  last  is  abode  and  continu- 
ance. Dwelling  it  is  an  act  of  daily  and  constant  residence.  And  this  is  further 
observable  in  the  Spirit  of  God  in  reference  to  His  children.  He  is  in  them,  not  only 
as  in  an  inn,  but  as  in  a  mansion  house ;  nor  as  a  lodger  only,  but  as  an  inhabitant 
who  is  resolved  not  to  remove  from  them  (John  xiv.  16).  This  is  so  upon 
these  grounds.  First,  the  unchangeableness  of  His  nature.  Secondly,  the  love  of 
Ood  towards  His  children.    Thirdly,  the  power  of  God.    This  is  conducing  here* 


.  vm.]  ROMANS.  701 

onto  likewise.  There  is  none  who  is  able  to  dispossess  Him  or  torn  Him  oat. 
Now  farther,  secondly,  we  may  look  upon  it  argumentatively,  and  in  connection 
with  the  words  immediately  preceding,  "Ye  are  not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the 
Spirit ;  because  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you."  So  that  the  Spirit's  in- 
habitation, it  is  an  argument  and  proof  of  regeneration.  (Thomas  Horton,  D.D.) 
If  80  be  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  you. — The  Spirit  of  God : — There  used  in 
old  times  to  be  a  controversy  respecting  the  divinity  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  But  this 
has  died  out.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  question  almost  without  meaning.  We  might  as  well 
deny  the  humanity  of  man,  or  the  divinity  of  God.  But  more.  As  the  spirit  of  man 
is  the  inmost  essence  of  man,  so  the  Spirit  of  God  is  the  inmost  essence  of  God — the 
holy  of  holies  in  the  Divine  nature.  There  are  only  two  definitions  of  the  Divine 
essence  in  the  New  Testament,  and  both  agree  with  this — "  God  is  a  Spirit,"  "  God 
is  love."  I.  Many  DiFFicuLxras  abe  bemoted  by  dealino  with  this  bpiritdai. 
ASPECT  OF  the  Divine  natdbe.  As  whon,  for  instance,  we  ask,  "  What  is  man  ?  " 
The  answer  is — not  his  body,  but  his  spirit,  his  inward  affections ;  as  further,  when 
we  ask  what  it  is  that  distinguishes  man  from  the  brute?  we  still  answer — his 
inward  affections.  So  also,  when  we  ask,  what  God  is  ?  whilst  we  know  there  is 
much  which  we  cannot  answer,  yet  when  we  think  of  Him  as  a  Spirit,  it  is  then 
that  we  can  best  understand  Him.  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,  but  there 
is  a  true  likeness  of  God  in  Christ,  because  Christ  is  one  with  God,  through  the 
Spirit  of  goodness  and  wisdom.  And  vnth  that  same  Spirit  bearing  witness  with 
our  spirits,  we  also  may  be,  in  our  humble  measure,  one  both  with  the  Father  and 
with  the  Son.  II.  This  places  is  theib  pbopeb  light  all  those  wobds  and  phbases 
WHICH  ABE  DSED  TO  DESCBiBE  THE  DiviNE  NATDBE.  In  proportioH  as  they  describe 
the  Divine  Being  under  the  form  of  goodness,  truth,  and  wisdom,  as  the  breath 
which  is  the  animating  life  of  our  souls  and  of  religion,  in  that  proportion  they 
describe  Him  as  He  is.  In  proportion  as  they  describe  Him  under  the  form  of 
impressions  taken  from  nature  or  man,  in  that  proportion  they  are  but  parables  and 
figures.  Bock,  fortress,  shield,  champion,  shepherd,  husband,  king,  and  the  great 
name  of  Father,  these  are  all  admirable  words,  so  far  as  tbey  express  the  spiritual 
relations  of  the  Almighty  towards  us,  but  they  would  mislead  if  they  were  taken  in 
gross,  literal  sense.  And  so,  much  more  it  is  true  of  the  anthropomorphic  expres- 
sions, such  as  fear,  jealousy,  anger;  or  the  metaphysical  expressions,  each  of 
which  taken  separately  would  lead  us  away  from  the  spiritual,  which  is  the 
essential  nature  of  God.  III.  This  same  aspect  of  the  Divine  natube  tells  us 
HOW  it  is  that  God  wills  that  the  wobld  should  be  bbodght  to  Hih,  not  bt 

COMPULSION,  but  BY  THE  WILLING  ASSENT  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OF  MAN  FINDING  ITS  COMMUNION 

WITH  THE  Spibit  OF  GoD.  The  world  must  be  converted  to  Christ  by  the  internal 
evidence  of  the  spirit  of  Christianity.  IV .  It  is  this  which  makes  the  diffebencb 
BETWEEN  THE  VABI0U8  OFFENCES  AGAINST  DiviNE  THINGS.  Whatever  mistakes  a  man 
may  make  concerning  the  outward  form  in  which  the  Divine  truth  is  manifested 
shall  be  forgiven,  even  though  he  blaspheme  the  Son  of  Man  Himself.  For  every 
earthly  manifestation  must  be  liable  to  misunderstanding,  and  therefore  blasphemy 
against  the  Son  of  Man  is  not  against  the  holy  and  loving  Jesus,  but  against  some 
false  conceptions  we  have  formed  of  Him  in  our  own  minds.  For  such  blasphemies 
the  Son  of  Man  has  assured.  He  has  Himself  asked  the  Father  to  '•  forgive  them,  for 
they  know  not  what  they  do."  But  if  there  be  any  one  who  hates  goodness  because 
it  is  goodness,  who  closes  his  heart  against  purity  and  holiness,  because  they  are 
pure  and  holy,  such  an  one  has  blasphemed  not  the  mere  outward  form,  but  the 
essence  of  God  Himself.  For  this  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  there  is  no  forgive- 
ness.     V.   It  is  the  ETERNAL  SPIBIT  OF  GOODNESS  AND  TEUTH  WHICH   MUST  WRITE   HiS 

COMMANDS  ON  OUR  HEARTS.  The  letter  killeth,  it  is  the  Spirit  that  gives  life.  Signs 
and  ordinances  of  religion  derive  all  their  force  from  the  directness  with  which 
they  are  addressed  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  our  intelligence,  conscience,  and  affec- 
tions. VI.  Thus  the  Spibit  is  the  life,  the  libebty,  and  the  enebgy  of  thb 
WHOLE  human  kind,  of  cach  successive  age  and  each  individual  soul.     YU.  It  is 

THIS  ELEMENT  WHICH  FOBMS  THE  CONNECTING  THBEAD  OF  THOSE  ARTICLES  AT  THB  CLOSK 

OF  THE  Apostles' Creed.  1.  The  "holy  universal  Church."  The  old  heathen 
religions  did  not  tend  to  raise  the  thoughts  of  men  to  holiness,  and  therefore  they 
were  not  holy.  The  old  Jewish  religions  was  confined  to  a  single  nation,  and 
therefore  it  was  not  truly  spiritual.  The  Christian  Church  is  intended  to  make 
men  good,  and  therefore  it  is  holy  and  the  work  of  a  holy  God.  It  is  universal,  and 
therefore  is  the  work  of  a  universal  Spirit.  2.  "  The  communion  of  saints."  The 
fellowship  and  friendship  which  good  men  of  the  most  diverse  opinion!  asd 


708  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Titt. 

characters  have  or  onght  to  have  for  one  another,  is  the  most  powerfal  means 
whereby  the  Spirit  of  Ood  works,  and  gives  the  most  decisive  proof  of  the  existence 
of  a  Holy  Spirit.  3.  "The  forgiveness  of  sins  "is  realised  by  the  witness  of  the 
Spirit.  4.  "  The  resurrection  of  the  body "  is  directly  attributed  to  this  same 
Spirit  (ver.  11).  5.  "  The  life  everlasting  "  is  the  undying  vitality  of  those  affec- 
tions and  graces  which  are  part  of  the  essence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  These 
bave  their  immortality  from  the  same  source  as  the  eternal  existence  of  God 
Himself.  {Dean  Stanley.)  The  indwelling  Spirit : — God  the  Son  has  graciously 
vouchsafed  to  reveal  the  Father  to  His  creatures  from  without ;  God  the  Holy 
Ghost,  by  inward  communications.  The  condescension  of  the  blessed  Spirit  is  as 
incomprehensible  as  that  of  the  Son.  He  has  ever  been  the  secret  Presence  of  God 
vdthin  the  creation :  a  source  of  life  amid  the  chaos,  bringing  out  into  form  and 
order  what  was  at  first  shapeless  and  void,  and  the  voice  of  truth  in  the  hearts  of 
all  rational  beings,  tuning  them  into  harmony  with  the  intimations  of  God's  law, 
which  were  externally  made  to  them.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  from  the  beginning 
pleaded  with  man  (Gen.  vi.  3).  Again,  when  God  took  to  Him  a  peculiar  people, 
the  Holy  Spirit  was  pleased  to  be  especially  present  with  them  (Neh.  ix.  20; 
Isa.  Ixiii.  10).  Further,  He  manifested  Himself  as  the  source  of  various  gifts, 
intellectual  and  extraordinary,  in  the  prophets  and  others  (Exod.  xxxi.  3,  4; 
Numb.  xi.  17-25).  These  were  great  mercies ;  yet  are  as  nothing  compared  with 
that  surpassing  grace  with  which  we  Christians  are  honoured  ;  that  great  privilege 
of  receiving  into  our  hearts,  not  the  mere  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  but  His  very  presence, 
Himself  by  a  real  not  a  figurative  indwelling.  When  our  Lord  entered  upon  His 
ministry,  He  acted  as  though  He  were  a  mere  man,  needing  grace,  and  received  the 
consecration  of  the  Holy  Spirit  for  our  sakes.  He  became  the  Christ,  or  Anointed, 
that  the  Spirit  might  be  seen  to  come  from  God,  and  to  pass  from  Him  to  us.  And 
therefore  the  heavenly  gift  is  called  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  that  we  might  clearly 
anderstand  that  He  comes  to  us  from  and  instead  of  Christ  (Gal.  iv.  6 ;  John  xx. 
22,  xvi.  7).  Accordingly  this  •'  Holy  Spirit  of  promise  "  is  called  "  the  seal  and 
earnest  of  an  Unseen  Saviour. "  He  has  come,  not  merely  in  the  way  of  gifts,  or  of 
influences,  or  of  operations,  as  He  came  to  the  prophets,  for  then  Christ's  going 
away  would  be  a  loss,  and  not  a  gain,  and  the  Spirit's  presence  would  be  a  mere 
pledge,  not  an  earnest ;  but  He  comes  to  us  as  Christ  came,  by  a  real  and  personal 
visitation  (chap.  viii.  9,  11;  1  Cor.  vi.  19;  2  Cor.  vi.  16;  Eom.  v.  6,  viii.  16). 
Here  let  us  observe,  before  proceeding,  what  indirect  evidence  is  afforded  us  in 
these  texts  of  the  divinity  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Who  can  be  personally  present  at 
once  with  every  Christian  but  God  Himself  ?  This  consideration  suggests  both  the 
dignity  of  our  Sanctifier  and  the  infinite  preciousness  of  His  Office  towards  us. 
To  proceed :  The  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  body  and  soul,  as  in  a  temple.  Evil  spirits 
indeed  have  power  to  possess  sinners,  but  His  indwelling  is  far  more  perfect ;  for 
He  is  all-knowing  and  omnipresent.  He  is  able  to  search  into  all  our  thoughts,  and 
penetrate  into  every  motive  of  the  heart.  Therefore  He  pervades  us  as  light 
pervades  a  building,  or  as  a  sweet  perfume  the  folds  of  some  honourable  robe  ;  so 
that,  in  Scripture  language,  we  are  said  to  be  in  Him,  and  He  in  us.  It  is  plain 
that  such  an  inhabitation  brings  the  Christian  into  a  state  altogether  new  and 
marvellous,  far  above  the  possession  of  mere  gii  exalts  him  inconceivably  in  the 
scale  of  beings,  and  gives  him  a  place  and  an  office  which  he  had  not  before 
(2  Pet.  i.  4 ;  John  i.  12 ;  2  Cor.  v.  17  ;  1  John  iv.  4 ;  1  Cor.  vi  19,  20 ;  2  Tim.  ii. 
21).  This  wonderful  change  from  darkness  to  light,  through  the  entrance  of  the 
Spirit  into  the  soul,  is  called  regeneration,  or  the  new  birth.  By  His  coming  all 
guilt  and  pollution  are  burned  away  as  by  fire,  the  devil  is  driven  forth,  sin, 
original  and  actual,  is  forgiven,  and  the  whole  man  is  consecrated  to  God.  And 
this  is  the  reason  why  He  is  called  "  the  earnest  "  of  that  Saviour  who  died  for  ns, 
and  will  one  day  give  us  the  fulness  of  His  own  presence  in  heaven.  Hence,  too. 
He  is  our  •'  seal  unto  the  day  of  redemption  "  ;  for  as  the  potter  moulds  the  clay,  so 
He  impresses  the  Divine  image  on  us  members  of  the  household  of  God.  II.  Next, 
I  must  speak  briefly  concerning  the  manner  in  which  the  gift  of  grace  manifests 
itself  in  the  regenerate  soul.  1.  The  heavenly  gift  of  the  Spirit  fixes  the  eyes  of  our 
mind  upon  the  Divine  Author  of  our  salvation.  By  nature  we  are  blind  and  carnal ; 
but  the  Holy  Ghost  reveals  to  us  the  God  of  mercies,  and  bids  us  recognise  and 
adore  Him  as  our  Father  with  a  true  heart.  He  impresses  on  us  our  Heavenly 
Father's  image,  which  we  lost  when  Adam  fell,  and  disposes  us  to  seek  His 
presence  by  the  very  instinct  of  our  new  nature.  He  restores  for  us  that  broken 
bond  which,  proceeding  from  above,  connects  together  into  one  blessed  family  all 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ROMANS,  709 

that  is  anywhere  holy  and  eternal,  and  eeparates  it  off  from  the  rebel  world  which 
oomes  to  nought.  Being  then  the  sons  of  God,  and  one  with  Him,  oar  souls  moimt 
up  and  cry  to  Him  continually  (ver.  15).  Nor  are  we  left  to  utter  these  cries 
in  any  vague  uncertain  way  of  our  own  ,  but  Christ  left  His  sacred  prayer  to  be  the 
voice  of  the  Spirit.  2.  The  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost  raises  the  soul,  not  only 
to  the  thought  of  God,  but  of  Christ  also  (1  John  L  3  ;  John  xiv.  23).  The  Spirit 
came  especially  to  "  glorify  "  Christ ;  and  vouchsafes  to  be  a  shining  light  within 
the  Church  and  the  Christian,  reflecting  the  Saviour.  First,  He  inspired  the 
evangelists  to  record  h  life  of  Christ ;  next.  He  unfolded  their  meaning  in  the 
Epistles.  He  had  made  history  to  be  doctrine  ;  He  continued  His  sacred  comment 
in  the  formation  of  the  Church,  superintending  and  overruling  its  human  instru- 
ments, and  bringing  out  our  Saviour's  words  and  works,  and  the  apostles' 
illustrations  of  them,  into  acts  of  obedience  and  permanent  ordinances,  by  the 
ministry  of  saints  and  martyrs.  Lastly,  He  completes  His  gracious  work  by 
conveying  this  system  of  truth,  thus  varied  and  expanded,  to  the  heart  of  each 
individual  Christian  in  whom  He  dwells.  Thus  He  vouchsafes  to  edify  the  whole 
man  in  faith  and  holiness  (2  Cor.  x.  5).  St.  John  adds,  after  speaking  of  "  our 
fellowship  with  the  Father  and  His  Son  " :  "  These  things  write  we  unto  you,  that 
your  joy  may  be  full."  What  is  fulness  of  joy  but  peace  ?  Joy  is  tumultuous  only 
when  it  is  not  full ;  where  He  is,  *'  there  is  liberty  "  from  the  tyranny  of  sin,  from 
the  dread  of  an  offended  Creator.  Doubt,  gloom,  impatience  have  been  expelled ; 
joy  in  the  gospel  has  taken  their  place,  the  hope  of  heaven  and  the  harmony  of  a 
pure  heart,  the  triumph  of  self-mastery,  sober  thoughts,  and  a  contented  mind. 
How  can  charity  towards  all  men  fail  to  follow  ?  (J.  U.  Newman,  B.D.)  The 
indwelling  of  the  Spirit : — I.  Thb  tact.  The  law  of  progress  obtains  in  all  the 
dispensations.  The  old  was  grandly  material,  appealing  to  our  sensuous  nature, 
and  preparatory,  adapted  to  the  childhood  of  the  race.  The  coming  of  Christ 
introduced  a  better  state  of  things,  and  substituted  realities  for  symbols.  Bot 
although  He  performed  mighty  works  and  "spake  as  man  never  spake,"  yet  a  more 
glorious  dispensation  was  to  succeed  (John  i.  60,  xiv.  12),  which  is  to  ultimate  in 
uie  reign  of  grace  on  earth,  in  heaven  itself,  and  in  the  finished  glory  of  the  saints. 
Bat  does  the  Spirit  in  this  His  peculiar  dispensation  dwell  in  man  ?  Bead  John 
xiv.  16,  17  ;  the  text ;  1  Cor.  iii.  16 ;  2  Tim.  i.  14 ;  1  John  iv.  4.  II.  Its  natubb 
AND  EXTENT.  1.  Is  It  a  real  dwelling,  or  are  those  Scriptures  to  be  understood  in  a 
figurative  sense?  We  believe  in  the  omnipresence  of  the  Spirit  (Psa.  cxxxix.  7). 
But  omnipresence  is  an  attribute ;  the  indwelling  of  which  we  speak  is  that  of  a 
person,  a  voluntary  presence — a  presence  that  may  be  withdrawn — that  is  circum- 
■oribed  and  conditioned — that  has  no  affinity  with  sin,  and  consequently  is  never 
realised  in  an  unbelieving  heart.  It  is  a  presence  that  may  be  grieved,  offended, 
and  driven  away,  and  is  therefore  not  an  attribute,  but  a  person.  2.  Neither  is  this 
presence  to  be  regarded  simply  as  a  Divine  influence.  Person  is  the  being  who 
acts ;  influence  is  the  effect  of  the  action,  and  the  question  is,  Is  it  the  influence  or 
the  person  of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  dwells  in  the  heart  of  believers?  Practically,  it 
is  both ;  for  wherever  the  Spirit  in  His  personal  presence  is,  there  will  His  influence 
be  felt.  He  does  not  stand  or  send  His  messages  ;  but  He  enters  within,  instructing 
MB  by  His  wisdom,  making  as  happy  in  the  consciousness  of  His  fellowship  and 
protection.  III.  Its  hobai.  and  spibitual  effects.  1.  A  more  accurate  and  dis- 
criminating understanding  of  the  Scriptures.  The  more  practical  portions  of  God's 
Word  are  level  to  the  capacity  of  children.  Still  there  are  "  some  things  hard  to  be 
nnderstood,"  things  into  which  even  the  angels  desire  to  look — the  deep  things  of 
God.  To  the  unbelieving  the  Scriptures  are  a  sealed  book.  It  is  not  learning  nor 
genius  that  breaks  the  seal ;  its  Divine  Author  is  its  true  interpreter,  even  the 
Spirit  of  truth  that  dwells  within  as  (1  Cor.  ii.  11).  Could  you  entertain  in  your 
family  the  most  scholarly  man  of  the  age,  have  familiar  access  to  bis  mind  and 
heart,  thus  becoming  more  and  more  initiated  into  his  style  and  spirit,  such 
acquaintance  would  give  a  quickened  impulse  to  your  mind,  a  keener  relish  for  his 
writings,  and  a  key  to  their  true  exposition.  The  believer  is  supposed  to  entertain 
One  of  boundless  intelligence,  who  is  continually  unfolding  the  sublimest  truths, 
and  arousing  his  mental  energies  by  new  and  startling  discoveries  of  the  great 
Christian  verities  ;  and  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  be  under  such  tuition  without 
greatly  enlarged  mental  capacities  for  knowing  and  interpreting  the  Scriptures, 
whose  author  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  A  greater  unity  among  Christians.  Strife  and 
division  were  among  the  earliest  developed  evils  in  the  apostoUc  Church  (1  Cor.  iii. 
i).    This  was  a  viost  undesirable  state  of  things,  marring  the  beauty  and  symmetry 


TOi  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

of  Christianity.    Bnt  Christ  anticipated  this  evil  fJohn  zvii.  21).     Unity  among 
Christians  is  a  desirable  thing  in  itself,  and  notning  so  wins  the  world  to  a 
believing  reception  of  the  gospel,  and  nothing  so  effectually  works  scepticism  as 
strifes  and  divisions.    And  if  Christ's  prayer  is  to  be  answered,  there  will  be  a 
drawitig  together  of  Christian  hearts — One  Lord,  one  faith,  and  one  Spirit.    To 
hasten  a  result  so  devoutly  to  be  wished,  we  may  employ  outward  and  visible 
means ;  we  may  hold  "  union  conventions " ;  but  a  real  heart  union,  finding  its 
expression  in  visible  fellowship,  in  co-operative  labours,  wiU  be  realised,  just  as  the 
Holy  Spirit  finds  indwelling  in  believers  and  in  the  Church.    3.  Purity  of  life.  The 
Spirit  is  holy,  and  will  not  dwell  in  a  heart  that  harbours  even  the  thought  of  sin. 
But  when  He  does  enter  He  brings  every  thought,  power,  and  passion  into  cordial 
obedience  to  Christ.     His  presence  is  a  continual  corrective  and  restraint,  an 
abiding  stimulus  to  a  right  Ufe.    Were  you  entertaining  a  highly  honoured  guest, 
everything  in  the  domestic  arrangement  would  be  ordered  to  suit  his  taste.  Sinning 
in  a  behever  is  something  more  than  transgression ;  it  is  sacrilege.    4.  A  more 
attractive  Christian  life.     Persons  intimately  associated  become  assimilated  ;  and 
if  the  Holy  Spirit  should  assume  form  or  expression,  it  would  be  the  most  attractive 
conceivable.    He  is  sometimes  represented  in  the  form  of  a  dove,  because  of  His 
grace  and  beauty.    A  palace  enriched  with  all  works  of  art,  surrounded  by  all 
natural  beauties,  may  well  symbolise  the  regenerated  human  heart  where  the 
Spirit  dwells,  making  the  life  not  sad  but  songful.    5.  A  more  effective  Christian 
life.     (S.  B.  Burchard,  D.D.)        The  indwelling  of  the  Spirit : — That  which  gives 
being  to  a  Christian  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ  dwelling  in  him.    He  is  to  a  Christian 
what  the  soul  is  to  a  man.     Consider  what  a  thing  the  body  is  without  the  soul,  how 
defiled  and  deformed  a  piece  of  dust  it  is.    Truly  the  soul  of  man  by  nature  is  in  no 
better  case  tiU  this  Spirit  enter ;  it  hath  no  light  in  it,  no  life  in  it  (Eph.  iv.  18).  The 
eye  of  the  mind  is  put  out,  and  if  it  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness  I  And  from 
this  woeful  defect  flows  the  alienation  of  the  whole  soul  from  the  life  of  God,  that 
primitive  light  being  eclipsed,  the  soul  is  separated  from  the  influence  of  heaven. 
Man  was  once  the  dwelling-place  of  princely  and  Divine  graces,  the  Lord  Himself 
was  there  ;  and  then  how  comely  and  beautiful  was  the  soul  I     But  now  it  is  like 
the  desolate  cities,  in  which  the  beasts  of  the  desert  lay,  and  their  houses  are  full 
of  doleful  creatures,  where  owls  dwell,  and  satyrs  dance,  where  wild  beasts  cry,  and 
dragons  in  the  pleasant  places  (Isa.  xiii.  21,  22  ;  Jer.  1.  39).     The  Bethel  is  become 
a  Beth-aven,  the  house  of  God  become  a  house  of  vanity ;  by  the  continual  repair 
of  vain  thoughts,  the  house  of  prayer  is  turned  into  a  den  of  thieves  and  robbers. 
Now,  judge  if  there  be  not  need  of  a  better  guest  than  these.    Now,  when  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  enters  into  this  vile,  ruinous  cottage.  He  creates  a  new  light  within,  which 
makes  a  man  behold  the  light  shining  in  the  gospel;  and  behold  all  things  are  new, 
himself  new,  the  world  new,  and  Godnew.  And  as  the  Spirit  enlightens,  so  He  enlivens ; 
He  kindles  a  holy  fire  in  his  affections  to  consume  his  corruption.   This  Spirit  makes 
a  Christian  soul  move  willingly  toward  God ;  it  is  an  active  principle  that  cannot 
rest  till  it  rests  in  its  place  of  eternal  rest  and  delight  in  God.    And  then  the  Spirit 
reforms  this  house  by  casting  out  all  these  wild  beasts  that  lodged  in  it,  the  savage 
and  unruly  affections  that  domineered  in  man.     There  are  idols  in  the  heart,  and 
these  must  be  cleansed  out.    And  all  this  the  Spirit  will  not  do  alone,  but  honours 
you  with  the  fellowship  of  this  work ;  and  therefore  you  must  lay  your  account, 
that  the  reformation  of  this  house,  for  so  glorious  a  guest,  will  be  laborious.     How 
infinitely  is  that  compensed !     When  He  shall  take  up  house  fully  in  you,  it  will 
satisfy  you  to  the  full.    In  the  meantime,  as  He  takes  the  rule  and  command  of 
your  house,  so  for  the  present  He  provides  for  it,  and  oh,  how  sweet  and  satisfying 
is  it  I  (chap.  xiv.  17).     What  a  noble  train  doth  the  Spirit  bring  along  with  Him 
to  furnish  this  house  1     Many  rich  and  costly  ornaments  hang  over  it  and  adorn  it, 
to  make  it  like  the  king's  wife,  all  glorious  within ;  such  as  the  ornament  of  a  meek 
and  quiet  spirit  (1  Pet.  iii.  4) ;  the  clothing  of  humility,  simple  in  show,  but  rich  in 
substance  (1  Pet.  v.  6).    And  being  lodged  within,  what  sweet  fruits  is  the  Spirit 
daily  bringing  forth  to  feed  and  delight  the  soul  withal  I  (Gal.  v.  22,  23).    And  He 
is  a  Spirit  of  consolation,  and  therefore  of  all  the  most  worthy  to  be  received  into 
onr  hearts,  for  He  is  a  bosom  comforter  (John  xiv.  16).     (Hugh  Binning.)        The 
indwelling  of  the  Spirit : — As  Jerusalem  was  the  glory  of  the  world,  because  of  the 
temple  of  God,  so  are  the  regenerate  of  all  men  most  glorious,  because  they  are 
the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost.    In  matters  of  the  world,  an  unregenerate  man  may 
be  before  us  ;  but  in  this  he  cannot.     He  may  have  gold  in  his  purse,  but  we  have 
God  in  our  hearts,  the  right  owner  of  them,  which  is  the  top  of  our  happiuesfc 


OKAr.  Tm.]  ROMANS.  90C 

Tenants  make  havoo  and  snfifer  all  things  to  fall  to  rain,  but  owners  are  slwajs 
repairing ;  when  the  devil  held  our  hearts  all  was  cat  of  frame ;  ignorance  ruled  in 
our  mind,  rebellion  in  the  will,  disorder  in  the  affections  ;  but  the  coming  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  enlightens,  leads  into  all  truth,  certifies  of  the  favour  of  God,  f ashioneth 
to  every  good  work,  and  enricheth  with  all  spiritual  grace,  all  those  in  whom  He 
dwelleth.    Even  as  fire  makes  iron  fiery,  so  the  Spirit  makes  us  spiritual.     This  is 
that  Spirit  which  is  the  Comforter,  which  cheereth  and  sustaineth  the  desolate 
and    despairing    conscience,    and    feedeth    it    with    heavenly    manna.      Surely 
the    conscience    of     a    regenerate    man    is    a    very    paradise    in    which    God's 
good  Spirit  dwelleth  not  for  a  short  time,  but  for  ever.     (Elnathan  Parr,  B.A.) 
Aetualnest  of  the  indwelling  of  God  : — How  often  and  how  simply  it  is  said,  "  The 
Holy  Ghost  dwelleth  in  you  "  (ver.  11 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  16,  vi.  9).    This  is  the  normal 
Christian  state.     1.  The  Holy  Spirit  lifts  us  out  of  and  above  ourselves  ;  the  very 
flesh  is  not  like  the  flesh  of  those  who  are  its  slaves.     Physically  it  is  the  same, 
but  it  is  more  spiritual,  less  clamorous  in  its  appetites ;  as  iron,  glowing  vrith  the 
fire  wherewith  it  is  penetrated,  has  other  qualities,  and  is  flexible  as  it  was  not 
before.     In  the  case  where  long-lived  sensualism  has  done  its  work,  you  see  in  the 
bloated  countenance  that  the  flesh  has  changed  for  the  worse.    Where  the  spiritual 
life  has  long  transformed  the  soul,  yon  see,  as  in  some  pictures  of  great  saints,  the 
flesh  spiritualised.    2.  We  speak  of  having  talents,  attainments,  possessions,  as 
things  which,  more  or  less,  men  dispose  of  as  they  will.     St.  Paul  speaks  of  another 
possession.    God  the  Holy  Ghost  so  puts  Himself  at  the  command  of  His  creatures 
that  we  may  have  Him  for  our  own,  or,  alas  1  alienate,  grieve  Him  away,  quench 
His  light.    Nay,  so  does  He  will  to  put  Himself  at  the  disposal  of  God's  redeemed 
that  His  holy  inspirations  await  their  invitations.     His  Divine  thoughts  inform 
their  human  thoughts,  so  that  they  can  hardly  or  not  at  all  tell  what  are  their 
thoughts  what  His  ;  only  they  know  that  all  which  is  good  is  His  ;  they  are  but  the 
harp  whose  strings  vibrate  as  His  breath  passes  over  them,  and  yield  what  harmony 
He  wills.    3.  He  acts  from  within.    They  are  not  merely  the  motions  of  grace,  as 
they  fell  on  Saul,  or  now,  too,  touch  every  heathen  heart  which  will  respond  to  His 
touch.    It  is  not  only  a  voice  like  that  to  Socrates,  withholding  him  from  what 
God  in  His  providence  willed  him  not  to  do.     It  does  not  merely  strengthen  man's 
natural  generous  feelings,  such  as  made  Scipio  a  greater  conqueror  when  he  gave 
back  to  her  betrothed  the  captive  virgin  of  intense  beauty  than  when  his  earthly 
glories  were  crowned  at  the  field  of  Zama  ;  for,  by  the  unknown  grace  of  God,  he 
had  conquered  himself.     Nor  is  it  only  like  that  overpowering  grace  to  which  the 
long-resisting  soul  at  length  yields  and  ends  its  weary  rebellions,  and  casting  itself 
at  its  Father's  feet,  is  again  enfolded  in  His  arms ;  "  the  dead  is  again  alive,  the 
lost  is  found."    The  office  which  God  the  Holy  Ghost  vouchsafes  to  take  towards 
Christians    is  indwelling.     4.    To  communicate  Himself   is  the  being  of    God. 
Inseparable  is  the  Trinity.     Where  one  person  is  there  is  the  whole.    For  the  Son 
dwells  in  the  Father  and  the  Father  in  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  reposes  and 
habitates  in  the  Father  and  the  Son.    And  so  our  Lord  expresses  the  loving  com- 
munication of  the  Father  and  the  Son  to  those  who  do  His  commandments  and 
love  Him  (John  xiv.  23).     Yet  in  some  special  way  it  is  God  the  Holy  Ghost  who 
dwelleth  in  us.    His  presence  within  us  is  the  pledge  of  our  resurrection  to  life 
eternal  (ver.  11),  and  is  our  bond  of  union  with  Christ.    If  He  dwelleth  in  us  our 
prayers  are  not  our  prayers  only,  but  His  prayers  in  us.     God,  informing  our 
thoughts,  suggesting  our  longings,  pleads  with  God  (ver.  15 ;  1  John  iv.  16).     5. 
What  the  soul  is  to  the  body  that  God  is  to  the  soul.     The  life  of  the  body  is  the 
soul,  the  life  of  the  soul  is  God.     We  know  not  where  the  soul  is,  but  through  it  we 
live,  we  think,  we  love.     So  through  God  indwelling  the  soul  we  have  our  spiritual, 
eternal  hfe  begnn  in  us ;  we  think  all  the  good  thoughts  we  have.     Our  good  is  not 
chiefly  or  primarily  ours,  but  His  who,  dwelling  in  us,  worketh  in  us  to  will  and  to 
do,  and  rejoiceth  in  His  works  in  us.     6.  What  an  existence,  awful  for  the  very 
greatness  of  the  love  of  God  1    What  a  tingling  closeness  of  God !  (Col.  i.  27). 
Holy  is  this  church,  because  consecrated  to  God,  because  where  His   own  are 
gathered  in  His  name  there  is  He.     Holy  to  us  is  any  picture  of  our  Bedeemer, 
because  it  images  to  us,  as  man  can  conceive.  His  countenance  of  tender  love. 
But  all  these  are  material  things ;  you  are  the  living  image  of  God ;  you  are  the 
living  temples  of  God.    As  then  you  would  not  defile  this  temple,  as  you  would  not 
tread  and  trample  under  foot  a  likeness  of  your  Eedeemer,  reverence  yourselves. 
Bring  not  detiUng  thoughts  into  your  souls;  it  is  to  bring  them  into  the  very 
presence  of  God.     Utter  not  polluting  words  with  the  tongue,  wherewith  God  tha 
vol..  I.  45 


706  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  no. 

Holy  Ghost  enableth  you  to  call  God  your  Father,  Jesus  your  Lord.  And,  what 
follows  from  this,  defile  not  those  living  temples  wherein  He  dwells.  When  Satan 
tempts  you,  remember  what  a  greatness  God  has  given  you,  to  have  in  the  hostelry 
of  your  souls  God  as  your  guest,  to  abide  there,  if  you  wUl,  for  ever.  Give  your- 
selves anew  this  day  to  Him  who  gave  Himself  to  you.  He  alone  knows  what  an 
intolerable  loss  it  is  to  lose  Him,  our  God,  for  ever  I  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Now 
If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His. — A  fatal  deficiency  : — 
Note — I.  The  bemakkable  title  heee  given  to  the  Holt  Spirit — "  the  Spirit 
of  Christ."  He  is  so  called  because — 1.  He  especially  rested  upon  Christ.  The 
manhood  of  Christ  was  begotten  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  When  our  Lord  was 
baptized  the  Spirit  descended  upon  Him  like  a  dove,  and  then  was  "  led  of  the 
Spirit  into  the  wilderness  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil."  Then  He  returned  into 
Galilee  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  When  He  began  to  preach  His  first  words  were, 
"  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  Me."  His  ministry  stood  in  the  power  of  the 
Spirit.  All  through  His  life  the  Spirit  of  God  rested  upon  Him  in  fulness  of  power, 
for  God  "  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  unto  Him."  2.  He  is  given  to  us  by 
Christ.  "  He  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire."  Jesus  spake 
of  giving  to  men  living  water,  and  this  spake  He  of  the  Spirit.  After  His  resurrec- 
tion He  breathed  on  His  disciples,  and  said,  "  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and 
having  procured  Him  by  His  ascension  poured  Him  out  at  Pentecost.  3.  Christ 
lived  peculiarly  in  the  Spirit.  "  Spirit  "  in  the  text  is  in  opposition  to  the  "  flesh." 
Never  did  the  flesh  rule  Christ.  Nay,  He  even  forgot  to  eat  bread,  finding  meat  to 
eat  which  even  His  disciples  knew  not  of.  Never  was  He  moved  by  any  sensuous 
passion,  or  by  a  motive  of  fleshly  tendency.  Some  have  high  ambitions,  but  not 
He.  The  flesh  that  lusteth  for  vengeance  had  no  rule  in  Him,  but  the  Spirit  of 
holiness  and  love.  The  objects  He  aimed  at  were  all  spiritual.  4.  He  quickens  the 
entire  mystical  body  of  Christ.  All  the  members  of  that  body  are  distinguished  by 
this — that  they  are  spiritual  men,  and  seek  after  spiritual  things.  The  true  Church 
being  in  herself  a  spiritual  body,  acts  in  a  spiritual  manner,  and  strives  after 
spiritual  objects.  True  religion  consists  not  in  outward  forms,  peculiar  garbs,  or 
modes  of  speech,  or  anything  that  is  ritualistic  and  external.  "  The  kingdom  of 
God  is  .  .  .  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  II.  The  neces* 
BiTT  OF  possessing  THE  SpmiT  OF  Cheist.  1.  This  is  needful  in  every  case.  "  If 
any  man."  It  may  be  urged  that  some  have  an  especially  amiable  disposition. 
True,  but  the  fairest  flowers,  as  surely  as  the  foulest  weeds,  are  none  of  Christ's  if 
they  are  not  of  the  Spirit's  own  planting.  This  one  lack  is  fatal  to  the  noblest 
character,  and  Christ  disowns  utterly  every  man  who  has  not  His  Spirit  in  him. 
This  must  be  said  concerning  the  ministers  and  oflScers  of  churches.  2.  This  is 
put  in  opposition  to  everything  less  than  itself.  For  instance,  there  are  some  who 
glory  in  the  name  of  Christians,  as  if  the  name  were  some  great  thing.  It  is  not 
wearing  the  name  of  Christ,  but  having  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  will  prove  us  to 
be  accepted.  3.  But  the  text  is  expressly  in  opposition  to  "  the  flesh."  We  are 
either  in  the  flesh  or  in  the  Spirit.  He  who  is  in  the  flesh — (1)  Is  ruled  by  the 
flesh,  but  the  man  who  is  in  the  Spirit  labours  to  keep  it  under.  (2)  Trusts  to  the 
flesh.  He  looks  to  his  own  works  for  salvation ;  but  the  man  who  has  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  counts  all  his  good  works  to  be  dross,  and  trusts  in  Jesus.  (3)  Worships  in 
the  flesh,  but  the  man  who  has  the  Spirit  desires  not  to  see  but  to  beheve,  not  to 
smeU  but  to  think.  The  sound  of  truth  is  better  to  the  spiritual  man  than  tinkling 
bells  and  the  noise  of  pipes  and  bellows.  HI.  The  evidences  of  having  thb 
Spirit.  If  you  have  the  Spirit — 1.  He  has  led  you  to  Christ.  2.  You  will  honour 
Christ,  for  the  Spirit  delights  to  glorify  Christ  by  taking  of  the  things  of  Christ  and 
showing  them  to  us.  3.  He  wiU  make  you  Uke  Christ,  who  lived  for  God,  who  was 
in  constant  communion  with  the  Father,  was  always  spiritual,  always  true,  and 
always  ready  to  do  good  to  aU.  4.  He  will  show  Himself  by  His  open  actions  in 
the  heart,  making  us  hate  everything  that  is  evil,  making  brave  for  God  and  truth, 
and  joyful  and  hopeful  in  God.  IV.  The  sad  conskqdekces  of  not  having  the 
Spirit.  He  is  none  of  Christ's.  Ah,  if  I  am  none  of  His  whose  am  I?  The 
devil's.  And  where  are  you  if  you  are  not  Christ's  ?  On  the  way  to  judgment  and 
eternal  condemnation.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Having  the  Spirit  of  Christ : — The 
antecedent  is  in  these  words,  "  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ."  The  con- 
sequent in  these,  "  He  is  none  of  His."  We  begin  with  the  first  general,  viz.,  the 
antecedent,  "  If  any  man  hath  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ."  where  there  are  divers 
points  observable.  And  first  of  all,  for  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  to  speak  to  that,  what 
we  are  to  understand  by  this.     The  second  is  in  reference  to  Christ  as  He  ia 


tour.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  707 

Mediator,  God  and  man.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  called  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  this 
respect  also,  and  that  for  two  reasons  more.  First,  He  is  called  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
as  He  is  in  a  special  manner  bestowed  upon  Him  and  received  by  Him  (John  iii. 
34 ;  Luke  iv.  1 ;  John  i.  14  ;  Col.  i.  19).  Second,  He  is  called  the  Spirit  of  Christ  not 
only  as  bestowed  upon  Him,  but  as  bestowed  by  Him.  And  of  His  fulness  we  do 
all  receive  grace  for  grace.  The  consideration  of  this  point  may  be  thus  far  useful 
to  us,  as  it  may  teach  us  a  special  ground  for  the  honouring  and  extolling  of  Christ. 
A  second  term  which  we  may  take  notice  of  in  this  first  part  of  the  text  is  the 
having  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  is  here  implied  to  be  such  as  Christians  are 
indeed  capable  of.  Now  this  it  relates  especially  to  the  work  of  grace  and  holiness 
in  their  hearts.  This  having  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  considerable  in  two  particu- 
lars. Firstly,  take  it  as  to  matter  of  conversion,  and  the  working  of  grace  in  them  at 
first.  Those  who  are  true  believers,  they  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  them  thus, 
as  they  are  changed  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds.  Every  man  by  nature  has  an  evil 
spirit  in  him.  This  Spirit  of  Christ  has  gracious  and  holy  desires  and  inclinations 
which  do  belong  unto  it ;  a  spiritual  favour  and  a  spiritual  delight,  and  an  affecting 
of  spiritual  things  above  all  other  things  besides.  Where  this  Spirit  of  Christ 
comes  it  brings  every  thought  into  captivity  unto  the  obedience  of  Christ.  Secondly, 
take  it  as  to  matter  of  communion.  A  third  thing  which  we  may  here  observe  from 
this  present  passage  before  us  is  the  word  of  uncertainty  or  ambiguity,  "  If  any  man 
hath  not,"  &c. ,  as  implying  that  there  are  some  that  have  not,  and  that  even  also  of 
those  sometimes  who  pretend  to  have.  And  so  now  I  have  done  with  the  first 
general  part  of  the  text,  viz.,  the  antecedent,  "If  any  man  have  not,"  &c.  The  second 
is  the  consequent,  in  these  words, "  He  is  none  of  His  " — none  of  His ;  that  is,  belongs 
not  to  Him,  has  no  interest  in  Him,  is  no  member  of  Him.  This  is  the  Btate  and 
condition  of  all  those  who  want  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  But  it  may  be  illustrated  to 
us  from  sundry  considerations,  as  first,  because  they  have  nothing  whereby  to  knit 
them  and  unite  them  to  Christ.  Whosoever  they  be  that  are  Christ's  they  must  be 
knit  and  united  to  Him,  and  made  one  with  Him.  By  His  Spirit  Christ  dwells  in 
our  hearts  and  makes  us  also  to  dwell  in  Him,  which  accordingly  those  persona 
that  want  do  not  belong  unto  Him,  nor  are  any  of  His.  Secondly,  those  which 
have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  they  are  none  of  Christ's,  because  they  have  not  faith 
whereby  to  apprehend  and  lay  hold  upon  Him.  Thirdly,  those  who  have  not  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  they  are  none  of  His,  because  they  have  not  a  principle  of  spiritual 
life  in  them  whereby  to  bring  forth  fruits  unto  Him.  Fourthly,  those  who  have 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  they  are  none  of  His,  because  they  are  altogether  unlike 
Him  and  different  from  Him,  yea,  indeed  contrary  to  Him.  While  it  is  said  here 
that  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  he  is  none  of  His,  this  is  to  be  taken 
by  us  as  exclusive  of  anything  else  which  might  be  conceived  to  make  up  this  defect. 
We  will  instance  some  few  particulars  which  do  sometimes  deceive  many  people  in 
this  regard.  First,  strength  of  parts,  or  common  and  ordinary  illumination  in 
spiritual  and  Divine  truths.  Secondly,  sweetness  of  nature  and  temper  and  consti- 
tution ;  it  is  not  this  which  will  suffice  neither.  Thirdly,  common  morality  and 
civil  righteousness.  It  is  not  this  which  will  serve  neither  without  the  Spirit  of 
Christ,  Fourthly,  the  outward  badge  of  religion,  and  the  privileges  of  the  visible 
Church.  It  is  not  this  neither  which  does  entitle  to  Christ  without  His  Spirit. 
Lastly,  it  is  not  Christian  alliance,  or  relation  to  those  who  have  grace  and  godliness 
and  goodness  in  them.  The  consideration  of  this  point  may  be  drawn  forth  into 
this  following  improvement.  To  this  purpose  we  may  take  notice  of  a  threefold 
spirit  in  men,  which  is  exclusive  of  this  Spirit  of  Christ  in  them,  and  so  separating 
of  them  from  Him.  First,  their  own  spirit.  Secondly,  the  spirit  of  the  world. 
Thirdly,  the  spirit  of  Satan.  This  exclusion  of  relation  to  Christ,  and  of  interest 
in  Him  as  His  members,  is  very  grievous  and  prejudicial.  And  that  in  the  con- 
sideration of  three  particulars  especially.  First,  in  point  of  grace  ;  and  secondly, 
in  point  of  comfort ;  and  thirdly,  in  point  of  salvation.  Whether  have  we  Hia 
Spirit  or  no  ?  Those  who  have  Christ's  Spirit  do  very  much  relish  and  favour  the 
truths  of  Christ.  Again,  how  stand  we  affected  to  sin  and  evil  ways,  either  in 
ourselves  or  others?  The  Spirit  of  Christ  wherever  it  is  is  a  mo/tifying  Spirit 
(Gal.  V.  24).  And  so  for  others,  who  are  the  children  of  God,  and  are  members  of 
Christ,  how  stand  we  affected  to  them  likewise  ?  And  finally,  for  our  lives  and 
conversations  and  outward  man,  this  Spirit  of  Christ,  where  it  is,  it  will  have  an 
influence  upon  thif  also.  If  we  live  in  the  Spirit  we  shall  also  walk  in  the  Spirit 
(Gal.  V.  25).  This  Spirit  will  actuate  and  regulate  us  in  every  performance. 
Thirdly  and  lastly,  in  a  way  of  excitement.     Here  is  that  which  may  stir  us  all  up 


7W  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nn. 

to  labour  for  this  Spirit  of  Christ,  as  being  that  whereupon  depends  all  our  interest 
in  Him  and  benefit  by  Him.  First,  take  it  more  largely,  and  which  seems  here 
principally  to  be  intended  in  the  text,  and  as  we  have  handled  it  all  this  while,  that 
Spirit  of  Christ  which  does  animate  all  His  members,  and  does  express  itself 
in  them.  We  should  be  persuaded  from  hence  to  endeavour  after  it,  and  to 
labour  for  it,  that  we  may  be  able  to  find  it  in  ourselves.  But  secondly,  take  it 
more  emphatically.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  for  that  Spirit  of  His,  which  did  more 
eminently,  and  in  a  special  manner,  put  forth  itself  in  His  own  person,  whUe  He 
lived  here  upon  earth  as  a  pattern  and  example  to  us.  We  may  consider  it  in 
sundry  particulars.  First,  it  was  a  Spirit  of  meekness  and  humility  and  lowliness 
of  mind.  Secondly,  a  Spirit  of  patience  in  the  wrongs  and  injuries  which  He 
endured.  Thirdly,  a  Spirit  of  pity  and  compassion  and  tenderness  of  heart, 
especially  to  the  souls  of  men,  and  in  reference  to  their  eternal  salvation.  Fourthly, 
a  Spirit  of  love  and  condescension,  and  sweetness  of  carriage  towards  all  that  He 
conversed  withal.  And  yet  fifthly  also,  a  Spirit  of  zeal.  Last  of  all,  a  Spirit  of  fruit- 
fnlness  and  communicativeness  and  edification.  He  went  about  doing  good.  The 
Bom  of  all  comes  to  this,  that  we  endeavour  for  our  particulars  to  have  the  like  in 
some  degree  and  measure  infused  into  us ;  and  that  so  much  the  rather  that  we 
may  be  assured  of  His  owning  of  us  another  day.  {Thomas  Horton,  D.D.)  The 
Spirit  of  Christ : — To  have  Qie  Spirit  of  Christ  is  to  be  possessed  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  directs  and  sanctifies  the  believer  in  Jesus  by  the  Word  of  God.  I. 
The  Spibit  of  Christ  towabds  God.  This  Spirit — 1.  Begets  and  forms  a  Christ- 
like character.  "  We  are  created  in  Christ  unto  good  works."  The  Spirit  changes 
the  bias  of  a  man.  Christianity  is  Christ  in  yon.  2.  Gives  a  Christlike  devotion. 
This  is  not  a  prayerful  age.  But  holy  lives  ever  have  been  much  in  communion 
with  God.  If  Jesus  needed  prayer,  much  more  do  we.  3.  Leads  to  Christlike 
obedience.  Christ's  life-motto  was,  "I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God."  Obedience 
to  God  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  this  obedience  Jesus  made  the  test  of  discipleship. 
This  Spirit  puts  Christ  before  creeds,  the  truth  before  traditions,  principle  before 
policy,  faith  before  feelings.  It  puts  piety  into  practice,  devotion  into  duty,  love 
into  labour,  grace  into  giving,  and  power  into  prayer.  II.  The  Spibit  of  Christ 
TOWARD  MAN.  Christ's  Spirit — 1.  Was  full  of  sympathy  with  man.  Sympathy 
means  to  suSer  with  another.  As  a  substitute  Jesus  suffered  with  man  in  his 
sins ;  He  "  Himself  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."  And  if  any  man 
have  the  Spirit  of  Christ  he  will  have  something  of  that  vicarious  sympathy  for 
man's  redemption.  Men  of  God  have  felt  at  times  this  soul-burden ;  the  Church 
of  God  has  seasons  of  agonising  for  the  salvation  of  sinners.  2.  Labours  to  save 
men.  Labour  is  the  expression  of  Christ's  sympathy  for  man.  The  Spirit  of 
Christ  is  not  exclusive,  but  aggressive.  Our  devotion  to  Christ  is  ever  measured  by 
cur  sacrifice  and  toil  to  save  men.  Christ  suffered  to  provide  redemption,  and  the 
Christian  must  suffer  to  apply  it.  Thus  it  is  "  the  Church  fills  up  that  which  is 
lacking  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ."  {J.  P.  Thorns.)  Every  Christian  possesses 
the  Spirit  of  Christ : — I.  What  is  implied  in  being  Christ's.  1.  There  ie  a  sense 
in  which  all  men  are  His,  by  right  of — (1)  Creation  (John  i.  3 ;  Col.  i.  16).  (2) 
Preservation  (Col.  i.  17).  (3)  Eedemption  (1  Cor.  vi.  20).  2.  But  Christ's  true 
followers  belong  to  Him,  as — (1)  Subjects  to  a  prince  (Psa.  ii.  8 ;  Matt.  xxii.  11 ; 
Phil.  ii.  11).  (2)  Servants  to  a  master  (chap.  xiv.  7-9;  2  Cor.  v.  14,  15).  (3) 
Friends  (John  xv.  13-15).  (4)  Brethren  and  sisters  (Heb.  ii.  11,  12).  (5)  Children 
to  a  father  (Heb.  ii.  13).  (6)  A  spouse  to  a  husband  (chap.  vii.  4 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  2  ; 
Eph.  V.  25-32 ;  Rev.  xix.  7).  (7)  Branches  to  a  tree  (John  xv.  1).  (8)  Members  to 
the  head  of  the  body  (1  Cor.  xii.  12,  27 ;  Eom.  xii.  5 ;  Eph.  i.  22,  23).  II.  What  u 
MEANT  BT  THE  Spibit  OF  Chbist.  Not,  as  some  think,  merely  the  mind  of  Christ, 
but  the  Spirit  of  God,  is  here  intended  (see  context).  1.  This  is  called  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  because — (1)  He  had  it,  and  has  it  without  measure  (John  iii.  34 ;  Rev. 
iii.  1).  (2)  He  has  purchased  it  for  His  followers  by  His  death.  (3)  He  has 
received  it  for  them  (Psa.  Ixviii.  18  ;  Acts  ii.  33).  (4)  He  has  promised  it  to  them. 
2.  As  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  promise  of  the  Father,  emphatically  (Acts  i.  4),  so  also 
of  the  Son  (Luke  xxiv.  49;  John  xiv.,  xv.,  xvi.).  He  actually  confers  it  (John  iv. 
10,  vii.  38 ;  Acts  ii.  38,  39).  III.  How  it  appeabs  that  we  most  have  this  Spibit 
IN  ordeb  to  be  Christ's.  We  cannot  be  Christ's  unless  we — 1.  Know  Him  (John 
X.  14,  27),  but  we  cannot  know  Him  without  the  Spirit  of  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  27  ;  Gal. 
L  16 ;  John  xvi.  14).  2.  Love  Him  (1  Cor.  xvi.  22),  but  we  cannot  love  Him  with- 
out that  Spirit,  the  fruit  of  which  is  love  (Gal.  v.  22  ;  Eom.  v.  5).  8.  Obey  Him  (2 
Oat.  y.  15 ;  Bom.  xiv.  7 ;  John  xv.  14,  xiv.  21 ;  Heb.  v.  9),  but  we  cannot  obey  Him 


rm.}  ROMANS.  709 

without  the  inspiration  and  aid  of  His  Spirit  (John  zt.  6;  3  Oor.  iii.  6).  4.  Have 
an  interest  in  Him.  and  are  able  to  say,  "  My  beloved  is  mine  and  I  am  His,"  bat 
this  interest  in  Him  we  cannot  have  without  His  Spirit  (1  Cor.  zii.  13).  6.  Are 
anited  with  Him,  members  with  their  head ;  bat  this  we  cannot  have  withoat  His 
Spirit.  6.  We  have  His  mind  in  as ;  bat  this  we  cannot  have  withoat  His  Spirit ; 
meekness,  long-suffering,  goodness,  &o.,  being  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  7.  Are  new 
ereatures  (2  Cor.  v.  17  ;  Eph.  iv.  21-24),  and  it  is  impossible  we  shoald  be  so  with- 
oat His  Spirit  (Titos  iiL  5).  {Joseph  Benson.)  Having  the  Spirit  a  test  of  being 
ChrisfM : — Ignatius,  the  martyr,  used  to  call  himself  Theophorus,  or  the  God- 
bearer,  "  because,"  said  he,  "  I  bear  about  with  me  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  truly 
every  Christian  is  a  God-bearer.  That  man  is  no  Christian  who  is  not  the  subject 
of  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit — he  may  talk  well,  he  may  understand  theology 
— he  will  be  the  child  of  nature  finely  (hressed,  but  not  the  living  child.  He 
may  be  a  man  of  so  profound  an  intellect,  so  gigantic  a  soul,  so  comprehen- 
sive a  mind,  and  so  lofty  an  imagination,  that  he  may  dive  into  all  the  secrets 
of  nature,  may  know  the  path  which  the  eagle's  eye  hath  not  seen,  and  enter 
into  depths  where  the  ken  of  mortals  reacheth  not,  but  he  shall  not  be  a 
Christian  with  all  his  knowledge ;  he  shall  not  be  a  son  of  God  with  all 
his  researches,  unless  he  understands  what  it  is  to  have  the  Holy  Ghost 
dwelling  in  him  and  abiding  in  him,  yea,  and  that  for  ever.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
A  comely  disposition: — Nothing  is  more  desirable  than  a  pleasant  disposition. 
Without  it  we  cannot  be  happy  ourselves  nor  make  others  happy.  When  we  have 
lost  oar  temper  we  wake  up  to  new  appreciation  of  proper  equipoise  of  nature. 
But  a  man  says,  "I  can't  help  it."  You  can  help  it  by  having  His  disposition. 
The  Spirit  of  Christ  was  a  Spirit  of — I.  Gentleness.  True,  He  scathed  the  hypo- 
crite ;  but  for  the  most  part  His  words  and  demeanour  were  inoffensive.  This  is 
remarkable  when  we  bear  in  mind  His  omnipotence.  Little  children,  who  always 
avoid  a  rough  man,  rushed  into  His  presence.  Invalids,  who  shuddered  at  any 
other  touch,  asked  Him  to  put  His  hand  on  their  wounds.  His  footstep  would  not 
have  woke  up  the  faintest  slumber.  The  calmness  of  His  look  shamed  boisterous 
Gennesaret  into  placidity.  How  little  of  that  gentleness  we  have !  My  sister's  arm 
was  put  out  of  joint  and  the  neighbours  came  and  pulled  till  her  anguish  was  great, 
bat  to  no  purpose.  When  the  surgeon  came  with  one  touch  it  was  all  right.  So 
W8  go  down  to  our  Christian  work  with  so  rough  a  hand  that  we  miserably  fail. 
The  dew  of  one  summer  night  does  more  good  than  ten  whirlwinds.  II.  Self- 
BAOBiEicB.  Suppose  by  one  course  of  conduct  you  could  win  a  palace,  while  by 
another  you  might  advantage  men  at  the  cost  of  your  life,  which  would  you  choose? 
Christ  chose  the  latter.  How  little  of  that  spirit  we  have !  Two  children  went  out 
on  a  cold  day ;  the  boy  with  hardly  any  garments  at  all,  and  the  girl  in  a  coat  that 
she  had  outgrown,  and  she  said,  "  Johnny,  come  under  my  coat."  He  said,  "  It  is 
too  short."  "  Oh,"  she  said,  "  it  will  stretch."  But  the  coat  would  not  stretch 
enough,  so  she  took  it  off,  and  put  it  upon  the  boy.  That  was  self-sacrifice. 
When  the  plague  was  raging  in  Marseilles,  the  College  of  Surgeons  decided  that 
there  must  be  a  post-mortem  examination,  in  order  that  they  might  know  how  to 
meet  and  arrest  that  awful  disease.  And  there  was  silence  till  Dr.  Guion  rose  and 
said,  "  I  know  it  is  certain  death ;  but  somebody  must  do  it.  In  the  name  of  God 
and  hnmanity  I  will."  He  accomplished  the  dissection  and  died  in  twelve  hours. 
That  was  self-sacrifice  that  the  world  understands.  IH.  Humilitt.  The  Lord  of 
heaven  and  earth  in  the  garb  of  a  rustic.  He  who  poured  all  the  waters  of  the 
earth  oat  of  His  hand  begging  a  drink.  Walking  in  common  sandals,  seated  with 
pabUcans  and  sinners.  How  Uttle  you  and  I  have  of  a  spirit  like  that !  We  gather 
a  few  more  dollars  than  other  people,  or  get  a  little  higher  social  position,  and  how 
we  strut  and  want  people  to  know  their  places  I  IV.  Pbayeb.  You  cannot  think 
of  Jesns  without  thinking  of  prayer.  Prayer  for  little  children  :  "  I  thank  Thee, 
O  Father,"  &c.  Prayer  for  His  friends :  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  be  with  Me 
where  I  am."  Prayer  for  His  enemies :  "  Father,  forgive  them,  they  know  not 
what  they  do."  Prayer  for  all  nations :  "  Thy  kingdom  come."  How  soon  our 
knees  get  tired  1  We  want  more  prayer  in  the  house,  in  the  social  circle,  in  the 
Church,  in  the  legislative  hall,  among  the  young,  among  the  old.  The  moment 
when  the  Diet  of  Nuremberg  were  signing  the  edict  that  gave  deliverance  to  Pro- 
testants, Luther  was  praying  in  his  private  room  about  it.  Without  any  communi- 
«ation  between  the  two  Luther  rose  from  his  knees,  rushed  out  into  the  street,  and 
cried,  "  We  have  got  the  victory  !  The  Protestants  are  free  I  "  That  was  prayer 
getting  the  answer  straight  from  the  throne.    Y.  Wobe.    Christ  was  always  busy. 


71©  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  nil.' 

Hewing  in  the  carpenter's  shop.  Helping  the  lame  man  to  walk.  Caring  the 
child's  fits.  From  the  day  on  which  they  found  Him  "  about  His  Father's  busi- 
ness," to  the  time  when  He  said,  "  I  have  finished  the  work,"  &c. ,  it  was  work  all 
the  way.  We  want  the  work  easy  if  we  are  to  perform  it,  the  religious  service 
short  if  we  are  to  survive  it.  Oh  for  more  of  that  better  spirit  which  determines  a 
man  to  get  to  heaven  and  to  take  everybody  with  him.  Busy  in  the  private  circle, 
in  the  Sabbath  school,  in  Church,  busy  everywhere  for  God  and  Christ,  and  heaven. 
(T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  A  practical  appeal : — Note — I.  The  necessity  of  having 
THE  Spibit  op  God  dwellino  in  ub.  (Vers.  9-11.)  1.  The  Spirit  here  spoken  of 
is  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  He  is  variously  described  as  "the  Spirit  of  God,"  "  the 
Spirit  of  Christ,"  and  "  the  Spirit  of  Him  that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead." 
Beside  all  which,  it  is  intimated  that  for  the  Spirit  to  dwell  in  us,  is  the  same 
thing  as  for  "  Christ "  to  be  in  us.  This  mode  of  speaking  is  quite  accordant  with 
Paul's  common  habit  (Eph.  iii.  16-19).  To  be  "strengthened  with  might  by  the 
Spirit  in  the  inner  man,"  and  for  "  Christ  to  dwell  in  our  hearts  by  faith,"  and  for 
as  to  be  "  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God,"  are  descriptions  of  one  and  the  same 
experience.  So  also  Eph.  ii.  18,  22.  Compare  our  Lord's  discourses  (John  ziv. 
10,  11,  15-21,  XV.  26,  xvi.  7-15).  These  strange  and  involved  expressions  imply 
how  distinct  the  personality,  and  how  intimate  the  unity,  between  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost ;  and  how  completely  all  conspire  in  every  part  of  the  redeeming 
plan.  The  Holy  Ghost,  then,  may  be  called  the  Spirit  of  God,  inasmuch  as  He 
Cometh  forth  from  God.  He  is  also  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  inasmuch  as  He  repre- 
sents Christ,  and  is  sent  by  Him  to  do  the  Saviour's  work.  Further,  to  have  the 
Spirit  is  to  have  Christ,  because  it  is  only  through  the  Spirit  that  Jesus  can  take 
up  His  residence  within.  It  follows,  accordingly,  that  to  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
in  us,  means  something  more  than  merely  to  have  a  disposition  resembling  Christ's. 
It  means  that  we  have  God  Himself  to  dwell  vrithin  our  breasts.  Let  us  not  shrink 
from  the  full  avowal  of  this  momentous  truth  (1  Cor.  iii.  16,  vi.  19 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16 ; 
Isa.  Ivii.  15).  2.  This  possessing  God's  Spirit  is  essential  to  our  salvation.  **  If 
any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,"  he  may  have  many  virtues  and  much 
seeming  religion,  but  he  is  none  of  Christ's.  The  reason  of  this  is  evident ;  for 
without  the  Spirit  no  man  can  truly  repent.  Believe  in  Christ.  Love  God  and 
keep  His  commandments.  II.  How  ws  siat  know  ip  we  have  the  Spibit  (see 
ver.  13).  1.  What  are  "the  deeds  of  the  body?"  (Col.  iii.  6-10;  Eph.  iv.  22-32; 
Bom.  xiii.  12-14 ;  Q  1.  v.  19-21 ;  1  Peter  iv.  3).  (1)  The  grosser  immoralities  of 
gluttony,  drunkenness,  revellings,  and  debauchery.  (2)  The  envious  and  vindictive 
passions  of  our  selfish  nature.  (3)  The  sins  of  the  tongue.  (4)  The  evil  covetings 
of  the  heart.  2.  What  is  meant  by  mortifying  them  ?  To  mortify  the  flesh  is  to 
wage  war  against  it,  and  to  cross  it  instead  of  indulging  it.  This  is  the  constant 
battle  of  the  believer's  life ;  and  in  its  full  extent  it  is  not  the  battle  of  life  to  any 
but  a  Christian.  IIL  The  happiness  of  such.  "  They  shall  live."  And  further, 
"  if  Christ  be  in  you,  the  body  is  dead  because  of  sin ;  but  the  spirit  is  life  because 
of  righteousness."  Though  the  conflict  be  hard  and  painful,  it  is  not  in  vain  or 
without  an  adequate  reward  (Gal.  vi.  8).  This  "life,"  which  belongs  to  spiritual- 
mindedness,  is  a  life  of  joy,  which  begins  on  earth,  and  then  is  consummated  in 
heaven.  IV.  "Thebefobb  we  abb  debtobs  not  to  the  flesh,  to  uve  afteb 
THE  FLESH."  1.  We  owc  it  HO  allegiance,  and  need  no  longer  be  in  subjection  to 
its  imperious  bidding.  We  are  emancipated  from  its  tyranny  by  the  power  of  the 
Son  of  God,  who  is  able  to  make  us  "  free  indeed."  2.  On  the  other  hand,  you  are 
debtors  to  the  Spirit,  to  live  after  the  Spirit.  You  owe  your  own  soul  much,  both 
to  make  up  for  past  neglects  and  injuries,  and  to  bring  it  up  to  that  high  standard 
of  excellence,  in  which  alone  it  can  find  its  perfection.  And  remember  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  dwells  within  you,  and  if  you  surrender  yourself  to  Him  He  will  work 
in  you  "  all  the  good  pleasure  of  His  goodness  "  (Eph.  i.  17-20;  Col.  i.  9-13 ;  1  Thess. 
V.  23,  24, 28).  (T.  O.  Horton.)  ChrisVa  moral  temper : — I.  Is  identical  with  that 
OF  THE  OEEAT  GoD.  "  The  Spirit  of  God  "  and  "  the  Spirit  of  Christ "  are  identical. 
"  I  and  My  Father  are  one."  Christ's  temper  was— 1.  Essentially  benevolent.  "  He 
came  not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them."  His  severest  reproofs  were  but 
the  bass  notes  in  the  harmonies  of  His  loving  nature.  The  blows  He  struck  at  the 
sinner  were  but  to  break  his  chains  and  set  him  free.  2.  Forgivingly  benevolent. 
Examples  are  numerous :  the  woman  in  Simon's  house  ;  the  paralytic ;  His  prayer 
for  His  enemies.  3.  Earnestly  benevolent.  His  benevolence  was  a  burning  pas- 
sion. "  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour,"  (fee,  "0  Jerusalem,"  <fec.  Now  all  this 
is  identical  with  the  moral  temper.    Do  you  want  to  know  how  God  feels  towarda 


CHAP,  vin.]  ROMANS.  711 

you  as  a  sinner  ?  The  biography  of  Christ  will  answer,  II.  Is  communicable  to 
MAN.  For — 1.  Man  is  pre-eminently  adapted  to  receive  it.  He  is  not  formed  to 
receive  evil ;  it  is  repugnant  to  his  conscience.  The  soul  is  made  to  live  in  love  as 
its  vital  atmosphere.  2.  Man  is  pre-eminently  in  want  of  this.  It  is  the  only 
Spirit  that  can  expel  the  demon  passions  of  evil  that  reign  within,  that  can  light 
up  his  soul  with  truth  and  blessedness.  3.  Man  has  pre-eminent  helps  to  this. 
The  Scripture,  the  life  of  Christ,  the  ministry,  &c.  III.  Deteemines  the  condition 
OF  MAN.  "  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  be  is  none  of  His."  1.  None 
of  His  loyal  subjects.  All  who  have  this  disposition  delight  in  His  law.  All  others 
are  miserable  vassals.  They  serve  Him,  but  against  their  will.  2.  None  of  His 
docile  disciples.  Love  is  essential  to  Christian  knowled^je.  Without  it  men  may 
be  speculators,  cavillers,  dogmatists,  but  not  teachable  disciples.  3.  None  of  His 
loving  friends.  The  want  of  this  is  enmity  to  Christ.  4.  None  of  His  co-heirs. 
From  this  subject  we  learn  that  Christianity  is — (1)  A  life,  not  a  creed  or  form. 
(2)  A  Divine  life.     The  true  Christian  is  one  with  the  Infinite.     {Bomilist.) 

Ver.  10.  And  If  Christ  be  In  you,  the  body  Is  dead  because  of  sin ;  but  the  Spirit 
Is  life  because  of  righteousness. — The  indwelling  of  Christ: — I.  Fob  the  pkesent 

THE  INDWELLING  OF  ChRIST  IN  BELIEVERS,  BY  HlS  SpIBIT,  REMOVES  THE  POWER  OF  DEATH 

FROM  THE  SPHERE  OF  THEIR  SPIRITUAL  NATURE  ONLY.  1.  From  that  nature,  howevcf, 
it  is  removed.  For  "  if  Christ  be  in  you,  .  .  .  the  Spirit  is  life  because  of 
righteousness  "  (1  John  v.  12).  But  on  account  of  what  "  righteousness  "  ?  Surely 
not  our  own,  for  apart  from  Christ  we  have  none.  Under  law,  indeed,  being  alive, 
we  should  have  continued  to  live,  if  we  had  maintained  a  perfect  righteousness 
(chap.  X.  5).  But  under  the  gospel,  being  found  dead,  we  must  first  be  made  to 
live,  in  order  to  become  holy.  This  "  righteousness,"  therefore,  is  that  "  righteous- 
ness of  God  which  is  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ"  (chap.  iii.  22  ;  v.  17,  18).  That  one 
thing  which  of  necessity  precedes  our  life  in  Christ  is  justification  in  Christ  (2  Cor. 
V.  21;  Rom.  iv.  1-13,  22-25),  which  is  bence  called  a  "justification  of  life" 
(chap.  V.  18).  2.  The  new  life,  however,  does  not  as  yet  extend  beyond  the  spirit. 
*'  The  body  is  dead  because  of  sin,"  and  for  the  furtherance  of  the  great  mediatorial 
purpose.  The  postponement  of  the  completed  "  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption 
of  their  body"  (ver.  23),  is  made,  not  on  account  of  any  sin  yet  remaining  in 
beUevers  (ver.  1),  but  on  account  of  the  sin  of  the  world,  in  so  far  as  the  deferring 
of  their  redemption  from  death  promotes  the  world's  salvation.  And  how  needful 
and  wise  that  it  should  be  so  I  How  obviously  inconsistent  with  a  state  of  proba- 
tion it  would  have  been  for  believers  to  be  exempted  from  death  !  If  only  these 
at  the  end  of  their  probation  were  translated  to  heaven,  how  completely  would  the 
free  exercise  of  the  human  will,  in  respect  to  matters  of  religion  and  the  free 
development  of  human  character,  be  fettered  or  overborne  I  Not  to  insist  upon  the 
anguish  which  would  come  into  every  stricken  household  if  death  were  known  to  be 
the  precursor  of  hell ;  nor  to  think  how  dark  and  dreary  this  world  would  become 
if  there  were  in  it  no  cemeteries  in  which  were  to  be  found  the  treasured  remains 
of  those  who  sweetly  sleep  in  Jesus,  awaiting  the  call  to  a  deathless  life.  Let  any 
one  try  to  imagine  what  possible  advantage  there  could  accrue  from  such  an 
arrangement.  Therefore  Christians  must  continue  to  die,  that  they  may  "  fill  up 
that  which  is  behind  of  the  afiflictions  of  Christ  .  .  .  for  His  body's  sake,  which  is 
the  Church  "  (Col.  i.  24).    II.  The  removal  of  the  dominion  of  death  from  the 

BODIES  OF  BELIEVERS  IB  BUT  DELAYED  TILL  THE  SaVIOUB'S  SECOND  COMING  (c/.  Heb.  ix, 

28  ;  John  vi.  39,  40 ;  Rom.  viii.  19-23  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  16 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  42-54).  Of  tbis 
believers  have  a  double  earnest.  1.  The  objective  fact  that  God  raised  the  body  of 
Jesus.  So  strongly  did  the  apostle  feel  upon  this  point  as  to  maintain  that  the 
whole  fabric  of  Christianity  stands  or  falls  vrith  it  (1  Cor.  xv.  12-23).  2.  The 
subjective  fact  of  the  indwelling  of  the  resurrective  Spirit.  *'  If  the  Spirit  of  Him 
who  raised  up  Jesus  .  .  .  dwell  in  you."  (1)  If  we  are  entitled  to  that  Spirit  as 
the  life  of  our  souls,  we  have  an  equal  title  to  the  same  Spirit  as  the  life  of  our 
bodies.  (2)  This  assurance  is  made  still  stronger  by  the  fact  that  the  indweUing  of 
this  Spirit  sanctifies  and  marks  out  for  the  Lord  these  very  bodies  in  which  He 
dwells.  The  living  temple  claimed  by  Him,  consecrated  by  His  glorious  presence, 
and  made  to  become,  even  here  and  now,  the  instrument  of  His  purposes,  can 
never  be  suffered  to  remain  a  permanent  prey  to  corruption.  This  "  is  the  earnest 
of  our  inheritance  "  (Eph.  i.  14).  Therefore,  professed  Christians, — 1.  Abjure  the 
flesh  and  its  debasing  service.  You  are  in  no  sense  such  debtors  to  the  flesh  as  to 
ke  required  to  live  according  to  its  desires.    Either  yoa  mast  slay  the  sinful  flesh. 


719  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  nn.' 

or  it  will  slay  you  (ver.  13).  2.  Bemember  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  yours.  Say 
not  that  you  are  unequal  to  the  work  (Phil.  iv.  13).  3.  When  called  to  endure 
Buffering  and  death,  shrink  not  as  though  they  were  tokens  of  God's  displeasure, 
but  rather  be  comforted  that  herein  you  are  called  to  share  the  sufferings  of  your 
Lord,  and  to  further  His  redeeming  work  (Phil.  iii.  10,  11).  4.  And  bear  in  mind 
that  the  state  of  suffering  on  account  of  sin  is  but  for  a  time  (chap.  vi.  5 ;  2  Tim. 
11,  12).  {W.  Tyson.)  Christ  in  believers,  notwithstanding  death,  is  a  sure  pledge 
and  earnest  of  eternal  life  : — I.  The  supposition.  "  If  Christ  be  in  you  "  (2  Cor. 
xiii.  5  ;  Col.  i.  27).  1.  Christ  is  in  us — (1)  Objectively.  As  the  things  we  think  of 
and  love  are  in  our  hearts  and  minds,  so  Christ  is  in  us,  as  He  is  apprehended  and 
embraced  by  faith  and  love  (Eph.  iii.  17 ;  1  John  iv.  18).  (2)  Effectively.  So 
Christ  is  in  us  by  His  Spirit  and  gracious  influence.  Now,  the  effects  of  His  Spirit 
are — (a)  Life  (Gal.  ii.  20).  (b)  Likeness  or  renovation  of  our  natures  (Gal.  iv.  19 ; 
2  Cor.  V.  17).  (c)  Strength  oy  the  continued  influence  of  His  grace  to  overcome 
temptation  (1  John  iv.  4 ;  Phil.  iv.  12 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  10 ;  Heb.  xiii.  21).  2.  None  are 
Christians  but  those  who  have  Christ  in  them.  (1)  Because  we  must  be  partakers 
of  Christ  before  we  can  be  partakers  of  any  benefit  purchased  by  Him  (1  John  v. 
12).  (2)  Where  Christ  once  enters,  there  He  takes  up  His  abode,  not  to  depart 
thence  (1  John  iii.  24  ;  John  xiv.  23,  xv.  5).  (3)  Where  Christ  is.  He  rules  and 
reigns  (CoL  ii.  6).  II.  The  concession.  "The  body  is  dead  because  of  sin." 
Because — 1.  The  sentence  is  passed  (Gen.  ii.  17 ;  Heb.  ix.  27).  As  we  say  of  a 
condemned  man,  he  is  a  dead  man.  2.  Sin  is  the  cause  of  death.  (1)  The 
meritorious  cause.  Death  is  not  a  natural  accident,  but  a  punishment ;  we  die  not 
as  the  beasts  die,  or  as  the  plants  decay  (chap.  v.  12  ;  vi.  23).  Sin  procured  it,  and 
the  law  ratifies  it.  As  regards  the  faithful,  though  their  sins  be  forgiven,  yet  God 
would  leave  this  mark  of  His  displeasure  and  teach  the  world  the  sure  connection 
between  death  and  sin.  (2)  Its  end  and  use.  (a)  To  finish  transgression  and 
make  an  end  of  sin.  (6)  To  free  us  from  the  natural  infirmities  which  render  us 
incapable  of  that  happy  life  in  heaven  which  is  intended  for  us.  (3)  Had  it  not 
been  for  sin,  we  had  never  had  cause  to  fear  dissolution.  HI.  The  assertion  ob 
COBRECTION,  "  The  Spirit  is  life  because  of  righteousness."  In  which  observe — 1. 
That  believers  have  a  life,  notwithstanding  death  (John  xi.  25).  Though  the  union 
between  body  and  soul  be  dissolved,  yet  not  their  union  with  God.  2.  This  life  is 
to  be  understood  of  body  and  soul  (ver.  11).  (1)  The  soul,  being  the  noblest  part, 
is  most  happily  provided  for ;  being  purified  from  all  her  imperfections,  is  brought 
into  the  sight  and  presence  of  God  (Luke  xx.  38 ;  Heb.  xii.  23).  (2)  At  the 
resurrection  the  soul  shall  assume  its  body  again  (Phil.  iii.  21 ;  John  vi.  40).  3. 
The  grounds  are — (1)  The  Spirit  is  life.  He  doth  not  draw  His  argument  from  the 
immortality  of  the  soul,  for  that  is  common  to  good  and  bad ;  but  from  the  new 
life  wrought  in  us  by  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  beginning  and  earnest  of  a  blessed 
immortality  (1  John  iii.  15;  1  Pet.  i.  23).  (2)  The  meritorious  cause  is  the 
righteousness  of  Christ.  When  once  forgiven,  we  are  out  of  the  reach  of  the 
second  death  (1  Cor.  xv.  56;  Heb.  ii.  14, 15).  Conclusion :  To  enforce  the  great 
things  of  Christianity.  1.  To  live  holily.  (1)  The  comforts  of  Christianity  are  not 
common  to  all  indifferently,  but  suspended  on  this  condition,  "  if  Christ  be  in  you," 
by  His  sanctifying  Spirit  (Eph.  i.  4 ;  2  Cor.  v.  5).  (2)  From  the  concession,  "  the 
body  is  dead " ;  sentence  is  passed,  and  in  part  executed ;  this  awakeneth  us  to 
think  of  another  world,  and  to  make  serious  preparation  (chap.  vi.  12 ;  Gal.  vi.  8). 
(3)  The  corrective  assertion  that  there  is  the  life  promised  for  body  and  soul, 
breedeth  the  true  spirit  of  faith  (2  Cor.  iv.  13,  14),  true  diligence  and  godliness 
(1  Cor.  XV.  58),  and  patience  (chap.  ii.  7).  (4)  It  is  the  effect  both  of  the  Spirit's 
renewing,  and  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  2.  To  die  comfortably.  Christianity 
affordeth  the  proper  comfort  against  death,  as  it  is  a  natural  and  penal  evil  (Heb, 
ix.  27).  Heathens  could  only  teach  them  to  submit  to  it  out  of  necessity,  or  as  a 
debt  to  nature,  or  an  end  of  the  present  miseries ;  but  for  us  the  sting  of  it  is 
gone  (1  Cor.  xv.  66)  and  the  property  is  altered  (1  Cor.  iii.  22).  {T.  Manton,  D.D.) 
True  life  : — I.  Its  efficient  cause — Christ  in  you.  II.  Its  development.  1.  The 
body  dies,  through  sin,  preparatory  to  Ufe.  2.  The  spirit  lives,  through  righteous- 
ness, as  the  earnest  of  a  better  life.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christ  our  life : — He 
dwells  in  as.  I.  As  the  soubob  of  life.  1.  By  faith.  2.  In  the  power  of  His 
Word  and  Spirit.  3.  Producing  a  new  birth  unto  righteousness.  II.  As  the  SriErr 
OF  life.  1.  Quickening.  2.  Sanctifying.  3.  Invigorating  the  soul.  4.  By 
righteousness.  III.  As  thk  eabnest  of  life.  1.  The  body  is  mortal  through  sin. 
S.  fihall  be  raised  again  in  glory.     3.  By  the  same  Spirit  that  now  dwelleth  in  as. 


«Bip.  viu.]  ROMANS.  Tit 

4.  By  whom  also  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead.  (Ibid.)  Body  and  spirit : — 
A  gifted  poet  (Eev.  W.  Calvert)  has  feigned  a  most  iiiBtractive  allegory,  to  illustrate 
the  connection  and  history  of  the  body  and  soul,  with  respect  to  the  Christian 
believer.  He  calls  the  soul  Psyche,  and  the  body  Sarx,  which  are  the  proper 
terms  in  the  Greek.  These  two  start  forth  together  on  the  pilgrimage  of  life.  At 
the  outset  of  their  journey  both  are  equally  small,  infantile,  and  feeble.  Ere  long, 
however,  it  is  seen  that  Sarx  grows  faster  than  his  more  delicate  companion,  and 
begins  to  exercise  an  ascendency  over  her.  Alas  1  if  she  were  abandoned  to  his 
tyranny,  she  would  in  time  be  reduced  to  the  most  abject  slavery,  and  finally  sink 
with  her  despotic  lord  into  the  abyss  of  eternal  woe.  But  the  discordant  pilgrims 
are  met  by  a  radiant  stranger,  Christ  the  Lord.  To  Him  Psyche  lends  a  charmed 
ear,  as  He  tells  her  of  her  heavenly  parentage  and  immortal  destiny,  and  bids  her 
take  up  arms  aijainbt  her  coarse  and  cruel  master,  nor  rest  till  she  has  brought  him 
down  to  his  proper  position  as  her  slave.  It  is  only  by  subjecting  him  that  she  can 
either  secure  her  own  freedom  or  fit  him  for  being  her  equal  and  honoured 
companion  hereafter.  Fired  by  the  Lord's  exhortations,  and  assisted  by  His 
prowess.  Psyche  asserts  her  liberty,  assumes  superiority,  and  attempts  the 
subjugation  of  the  flesh.  When  symptoms  of  this  change  appear,  Sarx,  like  an 
insolent  giant,  is  fir^t  disdainful,  then  indignant,  and  finally  takes  up  cudgels 
against  hi^  fair  companion.  This  opposition  calls  forth  all  her  strength,  and,  aided 
by  her  Saviour,  she  at  length  obtains  the  victory,  binds  the  strong  man  with  cords 
and  fetters,  and  compels  him  to  follow  her  footsteps,  obedient  to  her  pleasure. 
Many  a  treacherous  effort  doth  he  make,  if  Psyche  remits  her  watchfulness  and 
eare,  to  regain  his  forfeited  dominion ;  but,  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  she  maintains 
her  headship,  waxing  stronger  and  stronger  as  the  pilgrimage  advances,  until  at  its 
close  she  seems  endowed  with  the  might  of  an  angel,  while  her  vanquished 
companion  has  sunk  into  the  imbecility  of  an  infant.  Thus,  though  the  "  outward 
man  perish,"  "the  inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day"  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  A  little 
longer,  the  day  of  trial  closes,  and  their  pilgrimage  comes  to  an  end.  Sarx, 
exhausted,  sinks  on  the  cold  strand  and  dies;  while  Psyche,  released  and  happy, 
passes  on,  to  cross  the  silver  stream  and  enter  the  flowery  land  beyond.  Yet  is  not 
her  former  companion  forgotten.  The  Lord  hath  marked  the  spot  where  he  fell, 
and  will  return  again,  at  the  last  day,  to  bid  him  rise  from  the  dust,  and  rejoin  the 
glorified  Psyche  in  the  skies.  {T.  O.  Horton.)  The  body  dead  because  of  sin : — 
The  work  of  the  Spirit  in  us  does  not  pour  the  ehxir  of  immortality  into  the 
material  frame,  however  much  it  may  strengthen  and  prepare  the  imperishable 
spirit  for  its  immortal  well-being.  After  Christ  hath  made  a  temple  of  our  body, 
there  remaineth  a  virus  in  the  fabric  that  sooner  or  later  will  work  its  dissolution. 
Were  the  body,  by  some  preternatural  operation,  to  be  wholly  delivered  of  its 
corrupt  ingredient,  we  do  not  understand  why  death  should  interpose  between  our 
earthly  and  heavenly  state  ever.  And  accordingly,  on  nature's  dissolution,  they 
who  remain  alive  must,  to  become  incorruptible,  at  least  be  changed.  And  the 
reason  why  those  in  whom  Christ  dwells  have  still  a  death  to  undergo,  is  that  sin 
still  adheres  to  them — and  the  wearing  down  of  the  body  by  disease,  and  the 
mouldering  of  it  into  dust,  and  then  its  reascent  from  the  grave — would  appear  to 
be  the  steps  of  a  refining  process,  whereby  the  now  vile  body  is  changed  into  a 
glorious  one — the  soul's  suitable  equipment  for  the  delights  and  the  services  of 
eternity.  For  death,  in  the  case  of  Christians,  cannot  surely  be  because  of  the 
judicial  sentence  on  transgression ;  for  those  who  believe  in  Christ  are  delivered 
from  this  (ver.  1).  It  cannot  be  that  by  any  death  of  ours  we  eke  out,  as  it  were, 
the  satisfaction  which  hath  been  already  rendered  for  sin.  A  believer's  death,  then, 
must  be  to  root  out  the  existence  of  sin.  It  is  not  inflicted  upon  him  as  the  last 
discharge  of  the  wrath  of  God,  but  is  sent  as  a  release  from  the  plague  which 
adheres,  it  would  seem,  as  long  as  the  body  adheres  to  us.  Now  tbis  fact  that  the 
body  is  still  subjected  to  death  because  of  sin  is  the  strongest  experimental 
argument  for  heaven  being  a  place  to  which  sin  can  find  no  entry.  It  is  not  in  the 
way  of  penalty  that  the  Christian  has  to  die— for  the  whole  of  that  penalty  has 
already  been  sustained.  It  is  not  exacted  from  him  as  the  payment  of  a  debt — for 
Christ  our  surety  hath  paid  a  full  and  a  satisfying  ransom.  It  is  not  to  help  out 
the  justification  which  is  already  complete  in  Him,  nor  to  remove  a  flaw  from  that 
title-deed  which  we  have  received  perfect  from  His  hand.  It  stands  connected, 
in  short,  with  the  sanctification  of  the  believer.  The  justice  of  God  would  have 
recoiled  from  the  acceptance  of  a  sinner,  and  so  an  expiation  had  to  be  made  ;  and 
Qu  holiness  of  that  place  where  God  dwelleth  would  have  recoiled  from  tb* 


714  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  no. 

approaches  of  one  whose  character  was  still  tainted  with  sin,  even  though  its  guilt 
had  been  expiated ;  and  so  it  is,  that  there  must  be  a  sanctification  as  well  as  an 
atonement.  For  the  one,  Christ  had  to  suffer  and  to  die  ;  for  the  other,  man  has 
also  to  die,  and  so  to  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  And  it 
is  indeed  a  most  emphatic  demonstration  of  heaven's  sacredness,  that,  to  protect 
its  courts  from  violation,  not  even  the  most  pure  and  sainted  Christian  upon  earth, 
can,  in  his  present  earthly  garb,  find  admittance  therein.  (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 
The  doom  and  destiny  of  the  body  : — I.  The  moetal  doom  of  thb  flesh.  •'  The 
body  is  dead  because  of  sin."  1.  The  fact  is  that  Christians  die  even  as  others. 
If  Christians  were  not  to  die,  as  other  men,  what  else  could  be  done  with  them  ? 
(1)  Imagine  the  wicked  dying  at  various  ages  and  in  the  usual  way,  while  the  holy 
lingered  on  to  extreme  old  age,  waiting  for  the  consummation  of  all  things — what 
then  ?  Why,  this  detention  would  be  an  unutterable  disappointment  and  torture. 
They  wish  not  to  live  here  always.  When  they  have  filled  up  the  ordinary  term  of 
hnman  life  they  have  a  desire  to  depart  and  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better. 
Better  by  far,  that,  having  served  their  generation  according  to  the  will  of  God,  they 
should  fall  on  sleep ;  that,  like  a  shock  of  corn  fully  ripe,  they  should  be  gathered 
into  the  Master's  garner.  Besides,  so  marked  a  departure  from  the  law  of  mortality, 
in  favour  of  believers,  would  destroy  the  essential  conditions  of  our  present  life  as  a 
probation  for  eternity.  How  could  we  be  said  to  walk  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight, 
when  we  beheld  the  way  in  which  religion  suspended  the  laws  of  nature,  and  placed 
a  most  conspicuous  difference  between  the  evil  and  the  good  ?  (2)  Look,  then,  at 
the  alternative.  Suppose  that  every  believer  might  expect  a  miraculous  translation 
like  that  of  Enoch  and  Elijah ;  then,  plainly,  such  a  translation  must  be  accom- 
panied by  a  transformation  as  well,  for  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom 
of  God  ;  and  such  a  transformation  will  take  effect  on  those  who  are  alive  at  Christ's 
coming  (1  Cor.  xv.  51-52).  But  now  such  a  procedure  would  be  highly  impolitic 
and  injurious,  for  it  would  constitute  a  perpetually  recurring  miracle,  and  destroy 
the  probationary  character  of  man's  career  on  earth.  Belief  in  Christianity  would 
then  be  inevitable,  and  unbelief  impossible.  2.  The  reason  is  assigned — "  because 
of  sin."  (1)  Our  death,  like  that  of  other  men,  is  a  mark  or  expression  of  God's 
anger  at  sin  ;  and  we  are  forcibly  taught  by  it  how  fearful  a  thing  it  is  to  fall  into 
the  hands  of  the  living  God.  It  was  just  in  this  way  that  Moses  was  treated  ;  when, 
though  his  sin  was  forgiven,  he  was  still  prevented  by  it  from  entering  the  promised 
land.  (2)  Death  may  possibly  stand  connected  with  some  special  sin.  John  speaks 
of  a  sin  unto  death;  that  is,  a  sin  which,  though  forgiven,  demands  that  our  fleshly 
life  should  be  required  of  us.  (3)  We  may  regard  sin  as  intimately  connected  with 
the  body ;  so  much  so  as  to  render  it  doubtful  whether  any  believer  ever  wholly 
escapes  from  its  virus  and  contamination  so  long  as  he  remains  in  the  flesh  ;  and 
therefore  it  is  better  for  this  tabernacle  to  be  taken  down,  like  an  old  Hebrew  house 
incurably  infected  with  the  leprosy,  and  destroyed  because  of  sin.  II.  Its  eventual 
BESusciTATioN  AND  EEcovERT  (ver.  11).  The  doctrinc  of  the  resurrection  is  peculiar 
to  the  Bible.  The  peculiarity  to  be  observed  is  that  here  our  resurrection  is  ascribed 
to  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  also  to  the  Father.  Jesus  Himself  claims 
to  be  "  the  resurrection  and  the  life."  All  that  is  done  by  any  one  of  the  adorable 
Trinity  may,  in  some  sense,  be  said  to  be  done  by  the  others  as  well ;  for  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  are  one.  But  still  there  is  a  reason  why  the  resurrection  is 
here  ascribed  to  the  Spirit.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  giver  of  life  to  the  soul  of  the 
believer ;  and  the  same  Spirit,  who  is  the  author  of  our  holiness,  is  also  to  be  the 
resuscitator  of  our  lower  nature.  Hence,  we  learn  the  connection  there  is  between 
present  holiness  and  future  glory.  As  sin  is  the  defilement  of  the  flesh,  and 
occasions  its  consignment  to  decay  and  corruption,  so  holiness  sanctifies  the  flesh, 
and  tends  to  its  conservation  and  incorruptioru  The  body  may  be  temporarily 
dissolved,  but  it  is  not  to  be  lastingly  destroyed.  Therefore  the  surest  pledge  you 
can  have  of  a  joyful  resurrection  is  the  conscious  possession  of  the  Spirit  of  holiness 
now.  Conclusion :  1.  It  the  body  be  dead  because  of  sin,  let  us  keep  it  in  subjec- 
tion. 2.  Yet,  if  this  body  is  to  rise  again  by  virtue  of  the  Spirit  dwelling  in  it,  let 
OS  not  despise  it.  3.  Let  us  have  patience  under  bodily  affliction  and  submission 
in  death.  4.  Let  us,  while  seeking  to  live  as  long  as  we  can,  be  also  willing,  at  God's 
behest,  to  die  and  lay  this  body  down.  {T.  G.  Horton.)  The  Christian  aspect  of 
death : — I.  Its  present  limit.  1.  It  is  associated  with  a  moral  cause  as  its  expla- 
nation. The  death  of  the  body,  apart  from  the  gospel,  could  be  accounted  for  only 
by  causes  such  as  a  physician  could  furnish.  Its  great  lesson  would,  however,  thuv 
be  k>s4.    To  the  heathen  death  was  a  gloomy  necessity,  and  its  only  lesson  was  that 


aup.  Tin.]  ROMANS.  71S 

men  should  seize  the  joys  of  the  passing  hoar.  The  gospel  associates  death  with 
sin,  and  its  removal  with  the  removal  of  sin.  It  is  intended  as  a  witness  for  God 
that  sin  is  au  evil  thing.  2.  Death  in  the  case  of  believers  is  limited  to  the  body. 
There  are  three  classes  of  death.  Spiritual  death,  which  has  ceased  to  exist  in  the 
beUever.  "To  be  spiritually  minded  is  life."  Eternal  death,  which  has  been 
•bolished  by  Christ.  '•  He  that  believeth  on  Me  shall  never  die."  Bodily  death, 
from  which  believers  are  not  exempt ;  but  it  is  limited  to  the  lowest  part  of  our 
natore.  The  body  is  indeed  dead,  but  the  spirit  is  life.  3.  Death  in  this  limited 
dominion  is  associated  with  the  believer's  welfare.  Why  does  Paul  say,  "  because 
of  sin  "  ?  Is  it  that  there  is  some  remainder  of  condemnation  for  sin  which  is  still 
to  be  executed  on  the  believer  himself?  If  so,  how  can  it  be  said,  "  There  is  now 
no  condemnation  "?  If  it  be  in  wratb,  why  does  the  apostle  say,  "All  things  are 
yours,  whether  life  or  death  "  ?  "  The  body  is  dead  because  of  sin,"  in  mercy.  It 
Bhall  work  good.  It  shall  be  a  process  of  refinement,  a  furnace  for  gold.  Let  the 
captive  of  sin  be  redeemed,  and  the  hand  of  death  shall  take  off  bis  prison  dress, 
And  he  shall  be  clothed  upon  with  his  house  which  is  from  heaven.  4.  Death, 
thus  confined  to  a  narrowed  dominion,  and  even  then  made  subservient  to  our  good, 
is  altogether  subservient  to  the  higher  power  which  occupies  the  centre  of  our  being. 
Death  has  been  forced  out  of  the  metropolis  of  his  empire,  and  now  * '  the  spirit  is 
life  because  of  righteousness."  (1)  As  its  cause,  when  righteousness  works  and 
produces  this  life,  viz.,  "  the  righteousness  of  faith."  "  He  that  believeth  in  Him 
nath  everlasting  life."  (2)  As  its  end.  "  That,  being  made  free  from  sin,  we  might 
have  our  fruit  unto  holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting  hfe."  (P.  Strutt.)  The 
blened  experience  and  hope  of  a  true  Christian : — I.  What  is  the  eelioion  op  a 
TRUE  Christian?  1.  It  does  not  chiefly  consist — (1)  In  any  opinions  which  he  may 
embrace,  however  scriptural  and  correct.  (2)  In  any  modes  or  forms  of  piety,  how- 
ever excellent.  (3)  In  preserving  an  inoffensive  and  blameless  conduct  before  men. 
(4)  In  what  are  termed  good  works,  whether  done  to  the  bodies  or  souls  of  men. 
2.  But  in  being  •'  in  Christ,"  and  having  ♦'  Christ  in  him."  These  two  phrases  are 
not  quite  synonymous,  yet  they  imply  each  other,  and  cannot  be  separated  (John 
xiv.  20).  (1)  The  former  is  used  in  chap.  viii.  1,  xvi.  7 ;  1  Cor.  i.  30  ;  2  Cor.  v.  17 ; 
1  Thess.  iv.  14 ;  Bev.  xiv.  13.  It  implies — (a)  Having  an  interest  in  Him,  as  a 
woman  in  her  husband  (chap.  vii.  4).  {b)  Union  with  Him,  as  a  branch  with  the 
tree  in  which  it  grows,  (c)  Or  a  member  with  the  head  of  the  body  to  which  it 
belongs.  (2)  The  other  implies  that  Christ  is  in  us,  as  the  leaven  in  the  meal,  the 
sap  of  the  root  in  the  branch,  as  the  light  of  the  sun  in  the  air,  as  the  heat  of  the 
fire  in  the  coal  or  the  iron.  He  is  in  us — (a)  As  our  wisdom,  enlightening  us  in  the 
knowledge  of  God  and  ourselves,  so  as  to  produce  repentance ;  and  of  Christ,  so  as 
to  beget  confidence  (chap.  xv.  12  ;  Eph.  i,  12,  13)  and  love.  (6)  As  our  righteous- 
ness, producing  justification,  peace  with  God,  and  a  hope  of  immortality,  (c)  As 
our  sanctification,  delivering  us  from  the  power,  and,  at  length,  from  the  whole 
influence  of  sin,  consecrating  us  to  God,  and  conforming  us  to  His  image,  (d)  As 
our  redemption,  that  having  redeemed  our  whole  persons  by  price,  He  may  rescue 
all  by  power.  (3)  Christ  is  thus  "formed  in  us."  On  our  part,  by  faith  (John 
xvii.  20-23 ;  Gal.  ii.  20;  Eph.  iii.  17),  and  on  the  part  of  God  by  His  Spirit  (John 
xiv.  20 ;  1  John  iii.  24  ;  Bom.  viii.  8,  9).    II.  This  religion,  at  present,  proddceb 

NO   MATERIAL   CHANGE   IN   THE    BODY,    WHICH   STILL   REMAINS   "DEAD   BECAUSE   OV   SIN." 

1.  The  body  is  under  sentence  to  die  (Gal.  iii.  19  ;  Heb.  ix.  27).  (1)  It  is  in  its  own 
nature  mortal,  having  all  the  seeds  of  dissolution,  bringing  upon  us  old  age  and 
death,  even  if  particular  diseases  should  be  escaped.  (2)  It  is  encompassed  with 
infirmities  and  exposed  to  diseases.  (3)  It  is  a  constant  clog  to  the  soul,  impeding 
its  motions  and  preventing  its  activity.  Hence  we  "  groan,  being  burdened  " 
(2  Cor.  V.  4).  2.  All  this  is  because  of  sin  ;  the  sin  of  our  first  parents  (chap.  v.  12), 
being  seminally  one  with  them,  or  through  the  derivation  of  our  nature  from  them, 
just  as  Levi  paid  tithes  to  Melchisedec  in  Abraham  (Heb.  vii.  9, 10) ;  besides  which 
we  have  committed  actual  sins,  the  wages  of  which  are  death  (chap.  vi.  23).  3. 
Here  we  have  the  true  reason  why  "  the  world  knoweth  us  not "  as  being  the 
children  of  God.  They  only  judge  by  appearance,  and  hence  they  conclude  that 
all  that  is  said  of  Christians  as  having  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  being  new  creatures, 
is  mere  enthusiasm.    For  they  have  no  idea  of  any  spiritual  change.     HI.  This 

RXLIOION    PRODUCES   A   BLESSED     CHANGE     IN   THE    INNER   MAN.         "The    Spirit    is    life 

because  of  righteousness,"  in  which  clause  the  opposition  to  the  former  is  three- 
fold :  spirit  is  opposed  to  body,  life  to  death,  and  righteousness  to  sin.  1.  Man 
consists  of  a  sool  as  well  as  a  body,  which  soul  will  live  when  the  body  dies.  2.  This 


7M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohaf.  Tin. 

spiritual  part  is  by  nature  involved  in  moral  death  (Eph.  ii.  1-5  ;  Col.  ii.  13),  tindtf 
wrath  (Eph.  iv.  18),  and  "  carnally  minded  "  (chap.  viii.  6).  But  by  "  Christ  in  it " 
it  is  made  "  alive  from  this  death  "  (chap,  vi,  13).  Christians  Uve  by  Him,  through 
His  influence ;  to  Him,  in  fulfilling  His  will ;  like  Him,  a  wise,  holy,  useful,  happy 
life.  3.  This  spiritual  life  they  have  "  because  of,"  or  through,  •*  righteousness  " 
(John  XX.  31,  vL  53,  57,  xi.  25,  26;  GaL  ii.  20).  Through  justifying  righteousness 
they  have  the  favour  of  God,  through  sanctifying  righteousness  they  have  the  image 
of  God ;  through  practical  righteousness,  or  obedience,  they  walk  with  God,  and 
obtain  more  and  more  of  a  spiritual  mind.  Through  the  same  righteousness  they 
have  eternal  life.  Through  their  justification  they  are  entitled  to  it ;  through  theii 
eanctification  they  are  fitted  for  it ;  through  practical  obedience  they  are  in  the  way 
to  it;  and  through  faith  (Heb.  xi.  1)  they  have  an  earnest  of  it  (John  vi.  47). 
Happiness  is  indeed  the  result  of  the  whole.  Justification,  and  the  favour  of  God, 
bring  peace,  hope,  and  joy ;  eanctification  brings  deliverance  from  restless  and  dis- 
tressing lasts  and  passions ;  practical  righteousness  brings  the  approbation  of  God, 
and  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience.    lY.  This  rglioion  will  hebbatteb  pbo- 

DITOZ,  OB  BE  BEWABDED  WITH,  A  UOST  lUPOBTANT  CHANGE,  EVEN  OF  THE  OUTWABD  UAN. 

For  "  il  the  Spirit  of  Him  that  raised,"  &c.  Not  only  is  immortality  implied,  but 
this  mortal  body  also  shall  be  quickened.  The  bodies  of  all,  indeed,  will  rise  from 
their  graves  (John  v.  28,  29),  but  the  righteous  only  to  what  is  worthy  the  name  of 
life.  For  this  we  have  Christ's  promise  (John  vi.  39-44,  54),  of  which  we  have 
pledges  in  His  resurrection  (1  Cor.  xv.  12-20)  and  His  Spirit's  indwelling.  The 
mortal  body  shall  be  quickened.  1.  That  we  may  be  judged  in  the  body  for  "  the 
deeds  done  in  the  body."  2.  That  the  children  of  the  great  King,  and  the  brethren 
and  sisters  of  the  Son  of  God,  may  not  be  found  naked,  but  clothed  with  an  external 
glory,  exactly  answering  to,  and  perfectly  descriptive  of,  their  internal  graces  and 
virtues.  3.  That  we  may  be  conformable  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  body  as  well  as  soul, 
and  so  fit  to  dwell  with  Him  (1  Cor.  xv.  47-49).  4.  In  honour  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
whose  temples  our  bodies  now  are.  5.  That  our  triumph  over  Satan  may  be 
perfectly  complete,  no  part  of  us  being  lost.  6.  And  with  respect  to  all,  that  we 
may  rise  higher  from  the  ruins  of  the  fall  than  the  state  we  had  been  in  before 
(1  Cor.  XV.  36-38,  42-44).  {J.  Benson.)  Believers  not  subject  to  spiritual  death: — 
For  the  first,  to  wit,  the  evil  itself,  that  is  here  expressed  to  be  mortality  or  bodily 
death,  the  body  is  dead.  Dead — that  is,  subject  to  death.  This  is  the  state  of  the 
body,  and  even  in  the  servants  of  God  themselves,  in  whom  Christ  Himself  dwells 
by  His  Spirit,  are  subject  to  death  as  well  as  others.  The  bodies  of  Christians  are 
frail  and  mortal  as  well  as  the  bodies  of  any  other  men.  This  is  grounded  partly 
npon  the  general  sentence  which  is  passed  upon  all  men  (Heb.  ix.  27).  And  partly 
also  upon  those  frail  principles  whereof  the  godly  themselves  do  consist  in  their 
natural  condition.  It  is  no  wonder  for  dust  to  return  to  dust.  First,  to  teach  as  to 
be  frequently  in  the  thoughts  and  meditations  hereof,  we  should  look  upon  oor 
bodies  as  mortal  and  corruptible,  even  the  best  that  are  here  in  this  world.  That 
they  have  this  treasure  in  earthen  vessels.  Secondly,  we  should  hence  be  persuaded 
against  all  inordinate  care  of  the  body,  pampering  of  it,  and  glorying  in  the  excel- 
lencies and  accomplishments  of  it ;  for,  alas  !  it  will  quickly  be  dissolved  and  lie  in 
the  dust.  Thirdly,  let  us  not  from  hence  be  offended  at  the  troubles  of  the  children 
of  God  here  in  this  life,  that  they  are  in  deaths  oft.  While  their  bodies  are  subject 
to  death,  it  is  no  marvel  that  their  lives  are  also  subject  to  affliction.  Though 
Christ  be  in  you,  yet  the  body  which  you  carry  about  you  is  dead.  And  that  is  the 
first  particular  here  considerable,  which  is  the  evil  itself.  The  second  is  the  occasion 
of  this  evil,  or  the  ground  whereupon  it  proceeds,  and  that  is  guilt.  The  body  is 
dead  because  of  sin  (chap.  v.  12).  It  is  sin  which  exposes  all  men,  both  good  and 
bad,  to  the  stroke  of  death.  First,  take  it  remotely,  because  of  sin ;  that  is,  of  the 
first  sin  and  transgression  that  was  in  the  world.  Secondly,  because  of  sin  ;  that 
is,  because  of  actual  sin,  and  sin  considered  more  immediately  and  proximately. 
There  is  a  double  influence  which  sin  may  be  said  to  have  upon  death  as  causal  of 
it.  First,  it  hath  sometimes,  and  in  some  cases  and  persons,  a  physical  and  pro- 
ductive influence  upon  it,  as  immediately  and  directly  effecting  it,  and  bringing  it 
about.  There  are  abundance  of  persons  in  the  world  whose  very  sins  are  their  death 
by  their  luxury,  and  wantonness,  and  intemperance — "  the  body  is  dead  because  of 
sin. "  But  secondly,  it  is  always  so  in  a  moral,  and  considered  demeritoriously.  So 
that  wherever  there  is  death  there  is  sin  antecedent  to  it.  The  consideration  of  this 
point  may  be  thus  far  useful  to  us,  as  it  may  serve,  first,  to  convince  as  of  the 
grievous  nature  of  sin,  and  to  humble  us  under  the  guilt  and  sense  of  it,  as  being 


CHAP,  vm.]  ROMANS.  71T 

that  which  brings  so  much  evil  and  mischief  with  it,  as  consequent  upon  it.  And 
if  we  are  uot  sensible  of  it  as  it  is  an  offence  and  dishonour  to  God,  jet  let  us  at 
least  be  sensible  of  it  as  it  is  a  grievance  and  annoyance  to  ourselves,  and  occasions 
the  greatest  evil  to  us  of  anything  else.  And  so  let  us  learn  to  justify  God  in  Hia 
dealings  with  us,  and  to  condemn  ourselves  as  the  causes  of  our  own  suffering. 
The  second  is  the  qualification,  "But  the  Spirit  is  life  because  of  righteousness." 
Wherein,  as  in  the  former,  we  have  two  particulars  more.  First,  the  benefit  itself ; 
and  secondly,  the  ground  of  this  benefit.  First,  for  the  benefit  itself,  "  The  Spirit 
is  Hfe."  This,  it  is  life,  or  lives  (as  some  translations  carry  it),  namely,  the  hfe  of 
grace  here,  and  the  life  of  glory  hereafter.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  words.  And 
the  point  which  we  learn  from  them  is  this — that  God's  children,  although  they  be 
mortal,  in  regard  of  their  bodies,  yet  they  are  in  a  state  of  immortality  in  regard  of 
their  souls :  •'  The  Spirit  is  life."  While  we  say  that  God's  children  do  live  in  regard 
of  their  souls,  this  is  not  to  be  taken  exclusively,  but  rather  emphatically;  not 
exclusively,  as  denying  the  immortality  of  the  souls  of  other  men,  but  emphatically, 
as  fastening  a  special  immortality  upon  these.  But  now  when  it  is  said  here  in  the 
text  that  the  souls  of  God's  children  live,  we  are  to  take  it  in  a  twofold  explication. 
First,  for  the  life  of  grace.  They  live  such  a  life  as  this  even  when  their  bodies  ara 
in  a  manner  dead,  that  is,  subject  or  near  unto  it.  "  The  just  shall  Uve  by  faith" 
(chap.  i.  17).  There  may  be  a  lively  and  vigorous  soul  in  a  withered  and  decayed 
body.  Then  when  the  flesh  is  ready  to  perish,  yet  the  spirit  may  flourish  (2  Cor. 
iv.  17).  This  is  so  upon  this  account — first,  because  they  are  lives  of  a  several 
nature  and  kind.  Now  thus  it  is  with  the  flesh  and  the  spirit,  with  the  body  and 
the  soul,  the  life  of  nature  and  the  life  of  grace.  These  are  lives  of  a  different  kind, 
and  so  they  do  not  mutually  depend  one  upon  the  other.  These  things  which  are 
hurtful  to  the  one,  they  do  not  prejudice  the  other.  Secondly,  there  is  this  also  in 
it,  that  the  good  of  one  is  sometimes  so  much  the  more  advanced  and  promoted  by 
the  prejudice  of  the  other.  Those  who  are  always  well  and  in  health,  they  do  for 
the  most  part  little  consider  of  their  latter  end,  neither  are  they  so  careful  to  pro- 
vide for  a  better  world  ;  whereas  those  who  are  sick,  they  are  often  put  upon  such 
thoughts  as  these  are.  Those  tenants  who  have  often  warning  given  them  to  depart 
out  of  their  house,  they  are  careful  to  provide  themselves  a  dwelling  somewhere 
else.  The  consideration  of  this  point  may  be  thus  far  useful  to  us.  First,  as  it  may 
Berve  for  an  encouragement  to  the  children  of  God  in  the  midst  of  all  those  bodily 
infirmities  which  they  are  subj^^ct  to  here  in  this  Ufe.  What  though  their  bodies 
decay,  yet  their  souls  and  spirits  may  live ;  and  this  is  that  which  is  chiefly  to  be 
looked  after  by  them.  There  are  a  good  many  people  in  the  world  whose  care  is 
all  taken  up  about  their  outward  man.  Secondly,  here  is  that  also  which  calls  us  to 
search  and  self -inquiry.  And  whether  does  sickness  and  weakness  and  diseases  and 
distempers  of  body  make  us  better  or  no  in  our  spirits  and  inward  man  ?  The 
second  is  the  life  of  glory.  The  Spirit  is  life — that  is,  it  lives  such  a  Ufe  as  this. 
This  is  grounded  not  only  upon  the  nature  of  the  soul  itself,  which  cannot  die,  but 
more  especially  upon  the  decree  and  purpose  and  promise  of  God  Himself,  who 
hath  appointed  us  to  obtain  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  apostle  elsewhere 
speaks.  The  use  of  this  point  is  very  comfortable  against  the  inordinate  fear  of 
death.  And  so  as  for  death  in  any  other  way  whatsoever,  here  is  that  which  does 
serve  very  much  to  mollify  and  mitigate  it  to  them,  and  the  thoughts  of  it  either  aa 
to  their  ov?n  particular  persons  or  to  their  Christian  friends  dying  in  the  Lord. 
That  though  it  be  a  privation  of  one  Ufe,  yet  it  is  a  promotion  of  another ;  and 
though  it  separates  the  soul  from  the  body,  and  other  friends  here  below  in  the 
world,  yet  it  joins  it  so  much  the  closer  to  Christ,  and  makes  them  partakers  of  a 
better  estate  and  condition  in  a  better  place.  If  Christ  be  in  them,  though  the  body 
be  dead,  yet  the  Spirit  is  life.  And  that  is  the  first  particular  which  is  here  observ- 
able and  considerable  of  us  in  this  second  general,  to  wit,  the  benefit  itself.  The 
second  is  the  ground  of  this  benefit,  and  that  is  expressed  in  these  words,  "  Because 
of  righteousness."  We  are  to  understand  two  things,  either  first  of  aU  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ  imputed,  which  gives  us  a  right  and  title  to  salvation ;  or  else, 
secondly,  inherent  righteousness,  as  a  condition  required  in  that  subject  which  shall 
indeed  be  saved :  in  either  sense  it  is  because  of  righteousness.  This  shows  us, 
first,  what  great  cause  we  have,  all  that  may  be,  to  labour  to  get  into  Christ,  and  to 
endeavour  to  become  members  of  His  body,  that  so,  partaking  of  His  righteous- 
ness, we  may  consequently  partake  of  His  salvation  and  of  eternal  life  itself. 
Secondly,  seeing  our  souls  came  to  Uve  by  virtue  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ, 
menting  and  prooaring  at  the  bands  of  God  this  Ufe  for  as,  this,  then,  shows  us  ho\r 


718  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  rm. 

tar  we  are  indeed  beholden  to  Christ,  and  what  cause  we  have  to  be  thankful  to 
Him,  even  as  much  as  to  one  who  has  redeemed  us  from  death  itself  and  hath 
bestowed  life  upon  us.  And  so  now,  according  to  this  interpretation  of  the  words, 
we  have  here  in  this  present  verse  set  forth  unto  us  the  admirable  effects  of  the 
being  of  Christ  in  believers,  and  that  in  two  points  especially.  First,  in  point  of 
mortification,  there  is  a  killing  of  sin  in  them ;  the  body  is  dead  because  of  sin. 
Secondly,  in  point  of  vivification,  grace  is  alive  and  active  in  them.  The  Spirit  is 
life  because  of  righteousness.  The  ground  hereof  is  taken,  first,  from  the  nature  of 
all  life  in  general,  which  is  to  be  operative  and  active.  Secondly,  from  the  end  of 
spiritual  life  in  particular,  which  is  especially  to  serve  God.  (Thomas  Horton,  D.D.) 
delivered  from  sin  rather  than  from  its  natural  consequences : — Some  of  the  hardest 
burdens  which  men  bear  are  the  consequences  of  their  past  weaknesses  and  sins. 
There  is  a  certain  deep  and  lasting  satisfaction  in  making  expiation  for  one's 
offences,  and  in  recognising  in  one's  own  soul  the  evidences  of  a  genuine  sorrow ; 
but  when  the  sin,  instead  of  retreating  into  the  background,  walks  with  us  day  by 
day  in  its  effects  and  results,  there  are  times  when  the  bravest  spirit  grows  faint 
and  discouraged  in  such  companionship.  One  feels  in  such  moments  as  if  the  sin 
ought  to  be  blotted  out  in  its  material  effects  as  truly  as  in  its  spiritual  results.  But 
this  cannot  be.  No  such  promise  is  anywhere  to  be  found  in  the  revelation  of  God's 
purpose  to  men.  We  are  dehvered  from  our  sins,  and  that  is  matter  for  deep  and 
eternal  rejoicing ;  but  we  are  not  and  cannot  be  delivered  wholly  from  the  conse- 
quences of  our  sins.  Those  offences  have  become  operative  causes  in  the  universal 
order  of  things,  and  we  must  stand  by  and  see  results  flow  from  them,  no  matter 
how  agonising  the  spectacle  may  be.  But  this  experience,  though  often  intensely 
painful,  ought  not  to  be  crushing ;  it  is  from  our  sins  and  not  from  their  effects 
that  we  care  most  to  be  delivered.  That  deliverance  is  for  eternity ;  the  effects  are 
for  time  only.  But  there  is  in  the  immutability  of  the  law  which  preserves  the 
evil  that  men  do  in  hfe  a  sublime  and  awful  vindication  of  the  steadfastness  and 
eternal  justice  of  Him  who  forgiveth  our  iniquities — who  has,  in  fact,  borne  them. 
Once  forgiven  for  Christ's  sake,  these  iniquities  are  washed  clean  from  the  booI; 
but  there  is  constant  need  that  he  who  has  gone  through  this  ordeal  shall  see 
clearly  the  awful  crime  of  offending  against  the  laws  of  fife,  and  that  he  shall  be 
accompanied  perpetually  by  the  witnesses  to  this  great  truth.  When  the  conse- 
quences of  former  weaknesses  and  sins,  accompanying  us  year  after  year,  become 
to  us,  not  avenging  Furies,  but  angels  of  Divine  justice,  this  companionship  will  not 
dismay  us,  but  will  serve  as  a  new  inspiration.  One  may  make,  even  of  the  con- 
sequences of  his  sins,  sources  of  strength  rather  than  of  weakness.  He  who  accepts 
these  things  as  the  inevitable  results  of  his  own  action,  and  recognises  in  them  the 
working  of  an  immutable  and  righteous  law,  will  be  kept  humble  by  them,  will  be 
restrained  from  other  departures  from  rectitude,  and  will  draw  from  their  com- 
panionship a  deeper  and  deeper  sense  of  that  misery  from  which  he  has  escaped, 
and  of  the  permanent  joy  and  peace  into  which  he  has  entered. 


KND   OF  VOIiUlOi  L 


/ 


/. 


P„nc«or  T«eoloq.cal  Semmarj-Speer  Ubrar| 


11012  01127  8258 


DATE  DUE 

mms^m 

- 

»- 

V    ».                       -    ■ 

i  feA,a,iJ., 

JX- 

^yrw'- 

rkiii^i 

; 

HitMU 

umki 

1  niiu' 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 

