cif  Pr/i 


\t    rii40    ^, 


fic»r>" 


6 


THE 

Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,     on    the    Verses  of    the    Bible 


Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  '^XELL,  A.  M. 
JOSHUA 

JUDGES 
RUTH 


"^^^^^^"^ 


New  York 


Chicago 


Toronto 


Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA, 

Teb  Titlb  07  THs  BooE. — This  book,  like  several  others  of  the  historical  books 
of  Soriptnre,  derives  its  name  from  its  contents.  It  records  almost  exclusively  the 
acts  of  Joshua  in  fulfilment  of  the  commission  laid  upon  him  from  God  by  the 
hand  of  Moses  (c/.  Deut.  xxxi.  7,  8),  and  terminates  with  Joshua's  death  and 
burial.  Hence  it  very  appropriately  bears  in  the  Hebrew  the  simple  title  of  Joshua : 
in  the  LXX  thai  of  'Iijoovc  "Savr}  or 'Ii^irovc  vibe  "Savri.    (T.  E.  Espin,  B.D.) 

The  Axtthoeship  op  thb  Book. — ^The  Jewish  rabbins  and  early  CJhristian  writers 
all  supposed  this  book  to  have  been  written  by  Joshua  himself;  but  this  is  an 
impossible  assumption,  for  besides  telling  of  his  death  it  alludes  to  a  number  of 
things  that  did  not  happen  untU  long  after  that  event  {see,  e.g.,  zv.  63  compared 
with  Judg.  six.  10-12 ;  and  xix.  47,  with  Judg.  xviii.  7,  27  teq.).  In  fact,  like 
the  other  historical  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  it  is  an  anonymous  writing,  and 
when  critically  examined  is  seen  to  have  been  originally  united  to  the  Pentateuch, 
and  to  have  been  composed  in  the  same  manner.  It  is  made  up  of  extracts  from 
various  narratives,  pieced  together  by  a  later  hand  in  the  manner  of  Eastern 
historians,  and  in  its  present  form  cannot  be  much  earlier  than  the  time  of  Ezra. 
Most  modem  critics  are  agreed  that  the  documents  used  by  the  editor  were  mainly 
three — ^the  Jehovistic  (known  to  critics  by  the  symbol  JE),  of  the  eighth  or  ninth 
century ;  the  Deuteronomistic  (D)  of  the  seventh ;  and  the  Priestly  (P)  of  the  fifth. 
To  the  Jehovistic  document  belong  in  the  main  chapters  ii.  1-viii.  29 ;  ix.  1-xi.  9 ; 
xxiii.,  xxiv.,  and  a  few  short  fragments  in  other  chapters.  To  the  Deuteronomist  are 
assigned  chapters  i. ;  viii.  30-35 ;  xi.  10-xiii.  14 ;  xiv.  6-15,  and  some  other  small 
portions ;  while  the  remainder,  including  the  greater  part  of  the  account  of  the 
division  of  the  territory,  comes  from  the  priestly  writer.  Its  geographical  details 
are  characterised  by  great  vagueness,  except  as  regards  the  portion  of  the  land 
which  was  held  by  Jews  after  the  exile.    {Chambers^t  Encyclopcedia.) 

The  Chbonoloot  of  thb  Book. — ^The  chronological  dates  presented  in  this  book 
are  few.  1.  We  are  informed  (iv.  19)  that  the  passage  of  the  Jordan  took  place 
"  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  first  month."  The  year  is  not  specified,  but  would  seem 
to  have  been  the  fortieth  after  the  exodus.  Thus,  if  the  date  of  the  exodus  be 
assumed  to  be  b.c.  1490  that  of  the  invasion  of  Canaan  will  be  B.C.  1450. 
2.  The  duration  of  Joshua's  wars  with  the  Canaanites  is  spoken  of  loosely  in 
xi.  18,  as  "many  days."  Inferences  can,  however,  be  drawn  from  the  words  of 
Caleb  (xiv.  7, 10),  which  enable  us  to  determine  this  point  with  some  approach  to 
definiteness.  Caleb  speaks  of  himself  as  forty  years  old  when  he  was  sent  by 
Moses  from  Eadesh  to  spy  out  the  land.  When  he  came  before  Joshua  to  prefer 
his  claim  to  Hebron,  the  conquest  of  Canaan  was  accomplished,  and  he  was  then 
eighty-five.    Since  the  mission  of  the  spies  took  place  in  the  summer  of  the  second 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 


year  after  the  exodus  (Num.  xiii.  20) — and  the  whole  period  from  the  exodus  to  the 
crossing  of  Jordan  is  estimated  at  forty  years — it  would  appear  that  Caleb  was 
thirty-eight  years  old  when  he  passed  through  theEedSea,  and  seventy-eight  when 
he  passed  through  Jordan.  Thus  a  period  of  seven  years  is  left  for  the  campaigns 
of  Joshua.  Josephus,  indeed  (Ant.  v.  1,  19),  speaks  of  these  wars  as  lasting  only 
five  years.  The  difference,  however,  is  not  great.  Josephus  himself  speaks  of  five 
complete  years  as  occupied  by  the  conquest,  and  Caleb  probably  employed  round 
numbers  after  the  Hebrew  mode.  3.  The  duration  of  Joshua's  rule,  and 
consequently  the  number  of  years  covered  by  the  records  of  this  book,  is  far  more 
uncertain.  We  have  no  definite  information  as  to  the  age  of  Joshua  at  the  date  of 
the  exodus,  or  indeed  at  any  other  period  previous  to  his  death  when  he  was  an 
hundred  and  ten  (xxiv.  19).  If,  however,  we  suppose  him  to  be  of  the  same  age  as 
Caleb,  a  supposition  probable  in  itself  and  supported  by  the  expression  used  of  him 
in  Ex.  xxxiii.  11  ("  a  young  man  "),  he  will  have  been  about  seventy-eight  years 
old  when  he  invaded  Canaan,  and  have  been  at  the  head  of  Israel  not  much  less 
than  thirty-two  years  altogether  after  the  death  of  Moses.  Or  if  we  assume  seven 
years  for  the  wars  against  the  Canaanites,  he  wUl  have  survived  about  twenty-five 
years  after  his  retirement  to  Timnath-serah.  This  accords  sufficiently  weU  with 
the  notice  (xxiii.  1)  which  places  the  parting  words  and  acts  of  Joshua  "  a  long 
time  after  that  the  Lord  had  given  rest  unto  Israel  from  aU  their  enemies  round 
about."  Josephus,  however  (Ant.  v.  1,  29),  states  that  Joshua's  rule  after  the 
death  of  Moses  lasted  for  twenty-five  years,  and  that  he  had  previously  been  forty 
years  associated  with  Moses.  This  would  fix  Joshua's  age  at  the  time  of  the 
exodus  at  forty-five,  an  age  perhaps  hardly  so  suitable  as  thirty-eight  to 
the  language  of  Ex.  xxxiii.  11.  Ewald,  Fiirst,  and  others  regard  the  statement 
of  Josephus  as  probable,  and  as  in  aU  likelihood  of  ancient  authority.  Others  [e.g., 
Clem.  Alex.  " Strom."  i.  21;  Theoph.  "Ad  Autolyc."  iii.  24)  name  twenty-seven 
years  as  the  length  of  Joshua's  government ;  while  Eusebius  ("  Prsepar.  Evang." 
X.  14)  states  that  some  assigned  thirty  years  to  it.    (T.  E.  Espin,  B.D.) 

The  Object  of  the  Book. — The  object  of  the  book  is  to  magnify  the  inviolable 
covenant  faithfulness  of  Jehovah  in  the  fulfilment  of  His  promises  (xxi.  43-45),  by 
the  historical  information  as  to  the  conquest  by  the  covenant  people  of  the  land  of 
Canaan  promised  to  their  fathers,  and  their  inheritance  of  it  (i.  2-6),  through 
the  Almighty  assistance  of  Jehovah,  under  the  guidance  of  Joshua,  Moses'  minister, 
who  had  been  called  to  effect  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divine  promise,  according 
to  an  appointment  recorded  in  the  law  itself  (Deut.  xxxi.  7).  (Prof.  C.  F.  Keil.) 
The  Book  of  Joshua  is  one  of  the  most  important  writings  in  the  Old  Covenant, 
and  should  never  be  separated  from  the  Pentateuch,  of  which  it  is  at  once  both  the 
continuation  and  completion.  Between  this  book  and  the  five  books  of  Moses  there 
is  the  same  analogy  as  between  the  four  Gospels  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 
The  four  Gospels  give  an  account  of  the  transactions  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Christian 
legislature,  just  as  the  first  five  books  of  the  Bible  give,  for  the  most  part,  of  the 
doings  of  Moses,  the  Jewish  legislator ;  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  as  a  book, 
bears  the  same  relation  to  these  Gospelfi  as  the  Book  of  Joshua  to  the  Pentateuch. 
{Dr.  A.  Clarkt.) 

The  Contents  of  the  Book. — It  falls  into  three  great  divisions : — 1.  The  conquest 
of  the  land  (i.-xii.).  This  part  is  historical,  both  in  form  and  substance.  It 
relates  the  main  operations  by  which  the  people  under  Joshua  obtained  possession 
of  Canaan.  The  chief  points  are :  The  sending  of  the  spies  and  the  crossing  of 
the  Jordan  (ii.-iv.) ;  the  fall  of  Jericho  (v.  13-vi.  27) ;  the  capture  (after  a  reverse) 
of  Ai  (vii.-viii.  29) ;  the  treaty  with  the  Gibeonites  (ix.) ;  the  defeat  of  the  leagued 
kings  of  the  south  at  the  battle  of  Beth-horon  (x.) ;  and  the  defeat  of  a  similar 
confederacy  in  the  north  near  the  waters  of  Merom  (xi.).  It  is  obvious  that  many 
details  are  omitted,  for  a  long  list  of  conquered  kings  is  given  at  the  close  (lii.) ; 
and  it  is  stated  (xi.  18)  that  "  Joshua  made  war  a  long  time  with  aU  those  kings." 
Yet  the  narrator  makes  it  particularly  clear  that  it  is  a  holy  war  he  is  describing, 
for  he  tells  us  of  the  miraculous  manner  in  which  the  Jordan  was  crossed  (iii.) ; 
describes  the  observance  of  the  Passover  (v.  2-12) ;  dwells  upon  the  sin  of  Achan 
as  the  cause  of  the  reverse  at  Ai  (vilj  ;  and  relates  the  confirming  of  the  Covenant 
atEbal  and  Gerizim  (viii.  80-35).  2.  The  partition  of  the  land  (liii.-xxii.).  This 
part,  while  historical  in  form,  is  topographical  and  legislative  in  contents.  Here 
the  main  points  are :  After  a  sketch  of  the  land  to  be  divided  (xiii.  1-7),  and  of  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  vU 

territory  already  assigned  to  the  tribes  east  of  the  Jordon  (xiii.  &-33),  Hebron  is 
given  to  Caleb  (xiv.  6-15),  and  the  three  tribes,  Judah,  Ephraim,  and  half 
Manasseh,  receive  their  portions  in  the  western  territory  (xv.-xvii.).  Afterwards, 
the  Tabernacle  being  set  up,  the  remaining  tribes,  except  Levi,  receive  theirs 
(xviii.-xix.  48),  a  special  inheritance  being  assigned  to  Joshua  (xix.  49-51) ;  the 
cities  of  refuge  and  the  cities  of  the  Levites  are  set  apart ;  and  the  two  tribes  and  a 
half  who  had  assisted  in  the  conquest  are  sent  to  their  homes  (xx.-xxii.).  Here 
again,  while  the  details  are  very  unequal,  the  sacred  character  of  all  the  proceedings 
is  clearly  indicated.  The  inheritances  are  distributed  by  lot  (xiv.  2 ;  xviii.  6,  10), 
the  cities  of  refuge  and  the  Levitical  territory  have  a  religious  reference  (xx.-xxi.), 
and  the  jealousy  of  the  people  for  national  unity  of  religion  is  shown  in  the  matter 
of  the  altar  Ed  (xxii.  10-34).  3.  The  leader's  farewell  (xxiii.,  xxiv.).  This  part  is 
mostly  hortatory.  Joshua  warns  the  people  against  idolatry,  renews  the  Covenant 
with  solemn  ceremony,  and  incorporates  a  record  of  the  transaction  in  the  Book  of 
the  Law.  The  book  closes  with  an  account  of  the  death  and  burial  of  Joshna  and 
of  Eleazar  (xxiv.  29-33).    {Prof.  Jot,  BoberUon.) 


THE   BIBLICAL   ILLUSTEATOB. 

JOSHUA. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Vebs.  1-9.  Kow  after  the  death  of  Moses  . . .  the  Lord  spake  nixto  Joshua. — The 

death  of  the  old  lawgiver : — I.  The  death  of  Moses  was  ushebed  in  bt  no  decay. 
In  this  respect  it  was  a  striking  exception  to  the  rule.  His  mental  vigour  was 
unimpaired  when  he  passed  away.  We  have  evidence  of  this  in  that  wonderful 
book  of  Deuteronomy,  which  Jesus  loved  to  ponder  and  to  quote.  Witness  also 
the  grand  swan-song  into  which  he  bursts  before  its  close,  pouring  forth  the  sum 
and  substance  of  all  his  warnings  and  exhortations  in  a  flood  of  molten  emotion. 
Witness  the  beatitudes  that  follow,  wherein  the  seer  pierces  with  prophetic  eye 
the  dark  future  and  perceives  the  final  consummation,  when  Jehovah  shall  remove 
all  iniquity  from  Israel  and  write  His  law  upon  their  hearts.  Surely  such  exercises 
as  these  betoken  a  mind  in  a  state  of  the  highest  vigour  and  activity.  And  as 
it  was  with  the  mind  so  was  it  with  the  body.  Moses  had  no  look  of  a  dying 
man  as  he  left  the  camp  and  climbed  to  Nebo's  brow ;  no  painful  and  protracted 
iUness,  no  decrepit  old  age.  What  a  blessed  exodus  was  this ;  more  a  translation 
than  a  death.  An  active,  useful,  holy  life ;  a  speedy  death — could  there  be  a  greater 
blessing  if  we  have  to  die?  II.  The  death  of  Moses  was  embittered  by  no  eegret. 
Moses  was  not  dragged  up  that  hill  unwillingly,  like  a  malefactor  to  his  doom. 
There  was  no  indulgence  in  rebellious  sentiment  and  anxiety ;  no  nervous  and 
fearful  activity  in  winding  up  the  affairs  of  life ;  but  contrariwise,  there  was  pro- 
found, calm,  and  courageous  submission  to  the  Divine  wUl.  In  good  time  let  us 
honestly  face  all  the  possible  sorrow  and  disappointment,  and  learn,  like  him,  to 
overcome  through  faith,  obedience,  and  humility.  HI.  His  death  was  darkened 
BY  NO  DISMAY.  Of  all  the  multitude  in  Israel  that  loved  him,  not  one  was  with  him. 
Alone,  alone,  alone,  he  has  passed  into  the  presence  of  his  Maker.  Yes,  and  we  too, 
whatever  the  circumstances  of  our  end,  however  tender  and  unsleeping  the  ministry 
of  loving  hearts  and  gentle  hands  that  soothes  our  dying  moments,  alone  must  enter 
death's  dark  door  and  be  ushered  into  the  presence  of  our  God.  Alone,  yet  not 
unfriended,  if  we  know  Jesus  who  is  there ;  alone,  yet  undismayed,  if  like  Moses  we 
trust  in  Him,  for  He  has  said, "  I  will  be  with  thee."  IV.  The  death  of  Moses  was 
brightened  by  great  consolation.  (A.  B.  Mackay.)  Death  enters  into  God's 
plans : — Joshua  must  succeed  Moses  and  be  God's  servant  as  he  was.  He  must  aim 
at  this  as  the  one  distinction  of  his  life ;  he  must  seek  in  every  action  to  know  what 
God  would  have  him  to  do.  Happy  man  if  he  can  carry  out  this  ideal  of  life  1  No 
conflicting  interests  or  passions  will  distract  his  soul.  The  power  that  nerves  his  arm 
wiU  not  be  more  remarkable  than  the  peace  that  dwells  in  his  soul.  He  wiU  show  to 
all  future  generations  the  power  of  a  "  lost  will,"  not  the  suppression  of  all  desire, 
according  to  the  Buddhist's  idea  of  bliss,  but  all  lawful  natural  desires  in  happy  and 
harmonious  action,  because  subject  to  the  wise,  holy,  and  loving  guidance  of  the 
will  of  God.  Thus  we  see  among  the  other  paradoxes  of  His  government  how  God 
uses  death  to  promote  life.  The  death  of  the  eminent,  the  aged,  the  men  of 
brilliant  gifts  makes  way  for  others,  and  stimulates  their  activity  and  growth. 
When  the  champion  of  the  forest  falls  the  younger  trees  around  it  are  brought 
more  into  contact  with  the  sunshine  and  fresh  air,  and  push  up  into  taJIer  and  more 


2  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

fully  developed  forms.  In  many  ways  death  enters  into  God's  plans.  Not  only 
does  it  make  way  for  the  younger  men,  but  it  has  a  solemnizing  and  quickening 
effect  on  aU  who  are  not  hardened  and  dulled  by  the  wear  and  tear  of  life.  What  a 
memorable  event  in  the  spiritual  history  of  families  is  the  first  sudden  affliction, 
the  first  breach  in  the  circle  of  loving  hearts !  First,  the  new  experience  of  intense 
tender  longing,  baffled  by  the  inexorable  conditions  of  death  ;  then  the  vivid  vision 
of  eternity,  the  reality  of  the  unseen  flashing  on  them  with  living  and  awful  power, 
and  giving  an  immeasurable  importance  to  the  question  of  salvation;  then  the 
drawing  closer  to  one  another,  the  forswearing  of  all  animosities  and  jealousies, 
the  cordial  desire  for  vmbroken  peace  and  constant  co-operation ;  and  if  it  be  the 
father  or  the  mother  that  has  been  taken,  the  ambition  to  be  useful — to  be  a  help, 
not  a  burden,  to  the  surviving  parent,  and  to  do  what  Uttle  they  can  of  what  used 
to  be  their  father's  or  their  mother's  work.  Death  becomes  actually  a  quickener  of 
the  vital  energies ;  instead  of  a  withering  influence,  it  drops  like  the  gentle  dew,  and 
becomes  the  minister  of  life.  {W.  G.  Blaikie,  JD.D.)  Death  makes  room  for 
others : — And  some  great  names  must  be  removed  to  make  way  for  lesser  names 
that  have  growing  sap  in  them  and  real  capability  of  beneficent  expansion.  Some 
great  trees  must  be  cut  down  to  make  room  for  lesser  trees  that  mean  to  be  great 
ones  in  their  time.  We  owe  much  to  the  cutting-down  power  of  death,  the 
clearing  power  of  the  cruel  scythe  or  axe.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Onward,  through, 
and  over : — Moses  was  dead.  His  work  was  done.  It  was  rounded  off  so  far  as 
he  was  concerned,  and  so  he  went  to  his  reward.  There  is  a  lesson  of  no  small 
importance  to  you  and  me.  Our  business  is  to  do  the  duty  that  lies  next  us. 
That  duty  may  only  seem  to  be  a  fragment  of  what  we  desire  to  accompUsh,  but 
it  is  all  we  are  answerable  for,  and  to  do  our  portion  well  is  to  stand  clear  with 
conscience  and  with  God.  In  the  construction  of  a  door,  one  man  makes  the  panels, 
another  makes  the  frame,  another  fits  it  together,  and  a  fourth  hangs  it  by  ita 
hinges.  The  panel  maker  has  a  very  imperfect  portion  of  the  work  to  show  as  the 
result  of  his  toil,  but  he  has  done  his  part  and  fulfilled  his  mission  whether  the 
door  ever  swings  in  its  place  or  no.  Your  business  and  mine  is  to  fulfil  the  injunc- 
tion, whether  in  our  daily  toil,  in  the  training  of  our  children,  in  the  work  of  the 
Church  or  whatever  other  duty  may  fall  to  us — "  Whatsoever  thine  hand  findeth  to  do, 
do  it  with  thy  might."  Our  hearts  may  find  to  do  a  good  deal  more ;  if  our  hand 
cannot  find  the  opportunity  to  work  out  the  heart's  desire,  we  are  accepted  for  what 
we  have  done  and  what  we  would  do  and  cannot ;  and  whatever  and  how-much- 
soever  remains  undone,  we  shall  ascend,  like  Moses,  to  our  own  Mount  Nebo  and  die 
in  a  flood  of  rosy  hght  with  Canaan  before  our  eyes  and  God's  "  Well  done  " 
sounding  in  our  ears.  The  man  who  carries  the  hod  of  mortar  up  the  ladder  does 
not  lay  a  single  brick,  but  in  his  measure  his  service  is  essential  and  as  worthy  as 
the  architect  that  planned  the  building,  or  the  mason  that  rears  its  walls.  From 
this  point  of  view,  servant  is  a  grander  name  than  seraph  or  archangel,  for  what 
would  these  be  if  they  did  not  serve  or  stand  and  wait  ?  Their  wings  would  droop 
and  their  celestial  glory  would  be  quenched  in  night.  "  Moses'  minister."  That 
is  what  Joshua  is  called.  It  is  another  word  for  servant.  He  ministered  to,  that  is, 
he  served  Moses ;  and  herein  lies  another  lesson,  for  he  was  thereby  a  servant  also 
of  the  Lord.  He  who  well  serves  the  Lord's  servant  serves  that  servant's  Master, 
and  He  says,  "Ye  did  it  unto  Me."  Oh  for  a  full  and  perfect  measure  of  this  rich 
interchange,  this  interlinking  of  lives  and  sympathies,  servants  of  each  other,  vying 
in  a  holy  rivalry  as  to  who  shall  be  the  lowUest,  readiest,  willingest  servant  of  the 
servants  of  the  Lord  1  "  Spake  to  Joshua."  Joshua  was  born  when  Moses  was  an 
exile  and  a  stranger  hidden  for  his  life  among  the  wilds  of  Midian.  There's 
another  lesson  of  great'value  in  this.  It  did  not  seem  hkely  then,  did  it  ?  that  Moses 
should  ever  be  a  leader  of  men,  the  emancipator  of  a  nation.  Providence  sees  and 
plans  for  a  long  time  ahead  of  our  to-day,  and  holds  in  reserve  agents  and  forces 
that  we  cannot  see ;  and  because  we  cannot  see  them  we  doubt  and  question  and  in 
the  face  of  the  unlikely  we  say,  '•  It  cannot  be."  That  solitary  pale-faced  and  half- 
starved  monk  in  a  German  cell ;  how  is  he  to  shake  all  Europe  and  makt'  the  Pope 
tremble  on  his  throne  ?  There  is  nothing  more  unlikely  :  and  yet  Frederic,  Prince 
of  Saxony,  is  being  placed  by  God  upon  his  throne  to  be  a  ready  and  brave  helper 
when  the  time  came ;  and  before  Luther  left  his  cell.  Providence  had  sprung  upon 
the  world  the  printing  press,  which  was  to  be  Luther's  deadliest  artillery.  God's 
plans  are  laid ;  His  movements  are  in  process,  and  for  the  fulfilment  of  every  par* 
pose  that  He  cherisheth  there  shall  come  the  hour  and  the  man.  Now  mark,  that 
this  is  true  in  our  own  individual  history  and  experience.    Every  humble  and 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSHUA.  3 

trustful  disciple  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  ward  of  Divine  Providence.  Listen :  "  The 
God  of  my  mercy  shall  prevent  me  " ;  that  is,  shall  go  before  me.  You  look  forward 
with  an  anxious  eye  and  heart  to  some  possible  contingency,  and  say,  "It  is  sure 
to  happen."  Time  passes,  and  perhaps  it  does  happen  ;  but  you  find  that  mean- 
while God  hath  stationed  at  that  point  something  or  somebody  that  acts  as  a  buffer 
to  the  blow,  and  although  your  Moses  may  fail  you  at  your  need,  some  Joshua 
comes  in  to  fiU  the  gap  and  meet  the  need  of  the  moment  to  the  full.  "  Therefore 
arise."  There  is  an  old  saying  that  there  is  much  virtue  in  an  "  if  "  ;  it  appears  to 
me  that  there  is  much  virtue  in  this  word  "therefore."  Moses  is  dead,  therefore 
arise.  Eemembering  who  Moses  was  and  how  entirely  Moses  was  depended  on,  it 
would  seem  more  natural  to  say,  "  Therefore  lie  still ;  this  is  a  blow  from  which 
you  cannot  recover."  When  he  was  alive  you  often  asked  him  to  take  you  back  to 
Egypt  for  safety's  sake.  Now  that  he  is  dead,  you  had  better  take  yourselves  back, 
for  ii  you  are  not  drowned  in  an  attempt  to  pass  the  river,  the  Canaanites  will  dig 
your  graves  on  the  other  side.  Now  is  not  that  the  kind  of  "  therefore  "  with  which 
the  Church  of  God  is  sadly  familiar,  and  with  which  those  who  have  relationship 
with  faint-hearted  people  have  a  saddening  acquaintance  ?  A  stay  and  pillar  of  the 
Church  dies  or  removes,  "  therefore  nothing  can  be  done ;  what  can  we  do  without 
him  ?  "  Here  is  a  man  who  starts  in  business.  Things  do  not  advance  as  he 
wishes.  He  therefore  must  shut  up  his  shop,  be  content  to  collapse.  Surely  that 
logic  will  be  laughed  at.  WeU,  do  not  let  us  hear  it  in  the  Church ;  do  not  let  us 
say  it  in  presence  of  our  obstacles.  If  the  axe  is  blunt,  grip  it  with  both  hands  and 
put  more  strength  into  the  blow.  No  fretting,  no  retreating,  no  conferring  with 
doubts  and  fears.  Is  Moses  dead  ?  Therefore  arise  1  Cross  hands  over  the  dead 
hero's  coffin,  and  vow  to  Heaven  to  take  his  name  as  a  new  watchword,  and  to  cross 
the  Jordan  while  the  earth  is  still  fresh  upon  his  grave.  "  Go  over  this  Jordan." 
In  measuring  the  chances  of  doing  a  thing  you  must  take  into  account  who  orders 
it.  It  was  Napoleon  who  said  to  the  French  army,  "  Go  over  the  Alps."  It  would 
not  have  been  done  under  anybody  else's  guidance.  It  was  God  that  said  to 
Joshua,  "  Go  over  this  Jordan."  Then  though  it  be  as  deep  as  the  sea,  though 
it  swirl  like  a  whirlpool,  though  it  rush  like  Niagara,  he  wiU  go  to  yonder  side. 
There  is  just  one  other  lesson  that  I  would  fain  gather  from  these  suggestive 
words — "  The  land  which  I  do  give  them."  First,  God  had  said  to  them  while  in 
Egypt,  "  The  land  which  I  will  give  them."  Oh !  what  weary  years  of  waiting 
followed!  At  last  they  had  given  it  up.  They  said,  "Where  is  the  promise  of 
His  coming?"  Then  the  lash  of  the  taskmaster  fell  and  silenced  them.  Now 
they  are  in  sight  of  it,  and  He  says,  "  The  land  which  I  do  give  them."  The 
promise  is  in  the  very  act  of  being  fulfilled.  By  and  by  the  waters  parted  and  let 
them  through,  and,  as  they  stand  on  the  plains  of  Sharon,  or  lie  at  rest  under  the 
shadow  of  the  hiUs  of  Lebanon,  God  says,  "  The  land  which  I  have  given  them  I  " 
Mark  the  tenses,  how  they  change  :  "  I  wiU  give,  I  do  give,  I  have  given." 
Men  and  brethren,  that  is  God's  order.  He  is  faithful  that  promised.  (J.  J.  Wray.) 
Dignity  of  God's  service : — The  first  graveyard  which  meets  the  eye  in  the  Moravian 
cemetery  of  Hermhut  bears  the  inscription,  "  Christian  David,  the  servant  of  the 
Lord."  This  was  in  life  the  high  distinction  of  the  humble  and  apostolic  colleague 
of  Count  Zinzendorf,  and  was  even  recognised  by  the  Imperial  Council  of  Eussia 
when  the  Moravian  carpenter  had  occasion  to  appear  before  it.  Moses  and 
Joshua: — Moses'  work  ended  at  Jordan — Joshua's  began  at  Jordan.  History  ig 
vested  in  the  life  of  its  representative  men,  and  has  in  it  no  gaps.  The  mantle  of 
Elijah  falls  on  Elisha,  and  the  next  generation  was  provided  for  before  Moses 
went  up  into  Nebo.  Moses  wanted  to  go  over  Jordan.  It  seemed  to  him,  most 
likely,  that  he  died  before  his  time.  And  yet  his  work,  as  we  can  see  it  now, 
was  a  completed  and  a  nicely-rounded  one.  His  commission  was  to  bring  the 
Hebrews  to  the  Jordan  ;  Joshua's  commission  was  to  bring  them  over  the  Jordan 
and  estabUsh  them  in  Canaan.  We  are  to  learn  from  such  representative  inatancea 
that  when  a  man  is  interested  in  nothing  but  to  do  the  work  that  God  sets  him,  he 
win  never  die  till  the  work  is  done  thoroughly  and  successfully.  Among  the  little 
servants  of  God  there  are  no  fallen  buds,  and  among  the  adult  servants  of  God  no 
broken  columns.  (C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)  The  new  leader : — It  has  been  said, 
"  Great  men  have  no  successors."  But  if  we  mean  by  successor  one  who  takes  up 
the  work  where  his  predecessor  has  left  it,  and  develops  it  according  to  the  Divine 
ideal,  then  all  men,  great  and  small  alike,  have  successors.  As  Pascal  puts  it, 
"  You  cannot  produce  the  great  man  before  his  time,  and  you  cannot  make  h?TTi 
die  before  his  time ;  you  cannot  displace  nor  advance  him,  nor  put  him  back ;  yoa 


4  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

cannot  continue  his  existence,  and  replace  him,  for  he  existed  only  because  he  had 
his  work  to  do ;  he  exists  no  longer,  because  there  is  no  longer  anything  for  him  to 
do ;  and  to  continue  him  is  to  continue  a  useless  part."  A  worthy  successor  to  the 
great  leader  had  been  found.  The  Divine  choice,  a  choice  which  had  been  revealed 
to  Moses  before  his  death,  and  which  greatly  gladdened  his  heart,  had  fallen  upon 
Joshua.  There  were  reasons  for  this  choice  of  Joshua  which  we  do  well  to  consider ; 
for  if  his  preparation  for  this  high  place  was  not  so  romantic  or  so  miraculous  as 
that  of  Moses,  it  was  none  the  less  effective  and  Divine.  His  training  was,  like  ours, 
of  a  more  homely  pattern.  I.  It  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  Joshua's  likeage  had 
something  to  do  with  God's  choice.  His  parents  were  slaves,  and  though  the  bloody 
edict  enacted  in  Moses'  infant  days  had  long  since  been  repealed,  these  serfs  had 
felt  to  the  full  the  bitterness  of  bondage.  But  notwithstanding  all,  they  had  not 
lost  faith  and  hope  in  God ;  and  we  get  a  glimpse  into  their  souls'  state  through  the 
significant  name  they  gave  their  firstborn.  They  called  him  "  Hoshea,"  that  is 
"  Salvation."  Surely  their  infant's  name  is  the  very  echo  of  their  father  Jacob's 
dying  words  to  Dan,  "  I  have  waited  for  Thy  salvation,  0  Lord."  We  can  well 
believe  that  Joshua  was  brought  up  in  an  atmosphere  of  hope.  It  is  more  than 
likely,  from  what  we  know  of  the  habits  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,  that  in  a  corner 
of  his  father's  lowly  dwelling  stood  an  object  which  often  excited  his  childish  wonder 
and  curiosity.  It  was  a  mummy  case,  painted  all  over  with  strange  devices  and 
curious  figures,  which  with  its  somewhat  faded  richness  presented  a  strange  contrast 
to  the  mean  furniture  of  the  dwelling.  "Within  it,"  we  can  easily  imagine  hia 
mother  telling  him,  "are  preserved  the  bones  of  Joseph."  "But  why  do  you  keep 
Joseph's  bones  ?  "  "  Because  when  he  lay  dying  he  gave  commandment  concerning 
them,"  &c.  The  child  would  listen  and  ponder,  and  look  with  new  solemnity  on 
that  sacred  trust;  then  he  might  ask,  "Mother,  was  that  true  which  Joseph  said 
when  he  was  dying  ?  "    "  Yes,  my  boy."    "  Then  why  do  we  not  go  at  once — 

"  *  Mother,  oh  where  is  that  blissful  shore, 
Shall  we  not  seek  it  and  weep  no  more '  ?  " 

"  We  must  wait  God's  time.  We  are  His  people,  and  He  knows  what  is  best."  •'  Will 
it  be  long  till  that  day  comes ?  "  "I  cannot  tell,  but  I  do  not  think  it  will  be  very 
long,  for  God  said  to  our  great  father  Abraham  that  we  would  go  back  to  it  in  the 
fourth  generation,  and  the  time  must  be  near. "  Thus  the  influences  that  surrounded 
Joshua  in  his  youth  must  have  moulded  his  character  and  prepared  him  for  the 
place  he  took,  first  as  Moses'  lieutenant,  then  as  leader  of  Israel ;  and  the  assurance 
of  the  truth  of  Joseph's  dying  words  must  have  mollified  the  bitterness  of  that  cruel 
bondage.  Every  visitation  of  judgment  would  be  a  confirmation  of  his  faith,  and 
every  trial  a  purifying  furnace  to  remove  his  dross.  He  would  hear  from  his  father 
and  grandfather,  who  were  elders  of  the  important  tribe  of  Ephraim,  the  precise 
particulars  of  the  Divine  commission,  and  while  they,  with  the  other  elders,  were 
under  Moses  and  Aaron  attending  to  the  more  difficult  and  important  matters  in 
connection  with  the  proposed  Exodus,  it  is  very  likely  that,  following  his  natural 
bent  of  mind,  he  would  be  actively  employed  in  attempting  to  organise  the  people 
and  prepare  them  for  a  simultaneous  movement.  Thus  while  this  champion  first 
steps  into  the  arena  when  Israel  confronts  Amalek,  we  may  well  suppose  that  he  had 
done  yeoman's  service  before,  and  his  fitness  and  aptness  for  his  life's  work  must 
have  depended  in  great  measure  on  home  surroundings.  II.  Joshua's  character 
had  also  to  do  with  this  choice.  Its  constituent  elements  were  noble  and  simple, 
easily  understood  and  readily  appreciated.  He  was  every  inch  a  soldier,  brave  and 
manly,  simple  in  habit,  straightforward  in  speech,  cool-headed,  warm-hearted, 
energetic,  swift  in  thought  and  action.  He  was  firm  as  a  rock,  true  as  steel. 
Nothing  could  exceed  his  fidelity.  How  true  was  he,  above  all,  to  his  God !  So 
was  he  with  his  master.  He  never  failed  Moses.  At  all  times  he  was  jealous  for 
his  honour,  and  would  tolerate  nothing  derogatory  to  his  dignity  and  authority.  He 
was  even  true  to  his  enemies.  He  kept  his  word  and  carried  out  his  engagements, 
in  the  spirit  as  well  as  the  letter,  though  trapped  by  guile  into  the  making  of  them. 
His  courage  also  was  of  the  loftiest  kind.  It  could  face  not  only  enemies,  but,  harder 
far,  misguided  friends.  Like  all  noble  natures,  Joshua  was  also  unselfish,  humble, 
and  modest.  He  had  learned  to  obey,  and  was  therefore  fit  to  command.  His 
patience  and  hopefulness  were  also  very  marked,  and  much  needed  in  the  leader  of 
such  a  people  as  Israel.  He  was  able  to  endure  the  fatigues  of  the  march  as  well  as 
the  rush  of  battle,  not  fainting  under  the  hardships  of  the  weary  campaign,  but  ever 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSHUA.  5 

on  the  alert  to  pash  every  advantage  to  its  utmost  limit,  and  always,  by  his  cheerful 
bearing  and  cheery  words,  keeping  up  the  hearts  of  the  people.  He  was  a  leader 
alert,  circumspect,  prudent,  leaving  nothing  to  chance  or  the  chapter  of  happy 
accidents,  but  doing  everything  that  foresight  could  suggest  for  the  attainment  of 
the  end  in  view.  III.  Joshtja's  training  had  also  to  do  with  this  choice.  When 
he  was  put  at  the  head  of  the  people  he  was  no  novice.  Joshua  was  the  oldest  man 
in  the  camp  with  the  single  exception  of  Caleb ;  therefore  he  was  a  man  of  experience 
and  ripened  wisdom.  We  have  already  spoken  about  that  home  school,  in  which 
his  parents  were  the  teachers.  This  was  the  granitic  foundation  of  all  his 
subsequent  greatness.  He  was  also  taught  in  the  grand  and  stirring  school  of  the 
Exodus.  Here  God  Himself  was  Joshua's  teacher.  Great  national  events  have  a 
high  educational  value.  The  stimulus  of  stirring  times  is  deep,  formative,  and  all 
pervasive.  Still  another  school  furnished  Joshua  with  valuable  instruction,  and 
that  was  the  camp  of  Israel.  If  by  the  wonders  of  the  Exodus  he  was  taught  to 
know  God,  by  the  conduct  of  Israel  he  would  learn  to  know  man.  Day  by  day  he 
would  be  learning  how  to  command  and  lead.  And  without  doubt  the  crowning 
lessons  in  this  long  preparatory  course  would  be  imparted  in  the  tent  of  Moses. 
Moses*  tent  was  Joshua's  college.  And  the  very  fact  that  he  had  been  associated  so 
long  with  Moses  as  his  lieutenant  would  not  only  prepare  himself  but  also  the  minds 
of  the  people  for  this  change.  IV.  This  choice  of  Joshua  had  also  reference  to  the 
CHAEACTEB  OP  THE  WORK  that  had  to  be  done.  The  great  work  now  before  Israel  ia 
to  conquer  and  divide  the  land.  This  was  a  kind  of  work  most  congenial  to  Joshua, 
and  for  which  he  had  received  special  preparation.  He  is  the  right  man  for  the 
present  work,  as  Moses  was  the  right  man  for  the  past.  V.  Also,  this  significant 
choice  had  reference  to  the  great  plan  op  God  in  the  economy  of  redemption. 
"  Moses  My  servant  is  dead."  Thus  said  Jehovah.  Therefore  Moses  brought  no 
one  into  the  inheritance.  Israel  lost  sight  of  him  for  ever,  before  they  put  down  a 
foot  in  Canaan.  If  they  are  to  pass  over  that  Jordan,  and  possess  the  land,  it 
cannot  be  under  Moses.  This  act  of  leadership  is  deliberately  taken  out  of  his 
hands  by  God  Himself.  Surely  the  lesson  is  plain  to  all  who  know  the  essence  of 
the  gospel.  "  By  the  deeds  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  His  sight." 
The  law  brings  no  one  into  God's  heritage.  But  what  Moses  could  not  do  Joshua 
was  raised  up  to  accomplish.  If  we  would  enter  into  God's  inheritance  we  must 
turn  from  Moses  and  look  to  Joshua.  Who  was  he  ?  A  man  in  all  points  made 
like  his  brethren  ;  not  nurtured  in  Pharaoh's  palace  like  Moses,  but  born  with  them 
in  Goshen,  sharing  their  burdens,  labouring  side  by  side  with  them,  afflicted  in  all 
their  afflictions,  bearing  their  griefs  and  carrying  their  sorrows.  Who  cannot  see 
here  a  picture  of  God's  own  Son,  "  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law  "  ? 
Turn  from  the  law  to  the  gospel.  What  is  your  hope  of  glory,  Moses  or  Jesus  ? 
Yet  we  must  never  dream  that  Moses  and  Joshua  are  antagonistic.  There  is  no 
quarrel  in  God's  economies.  Just  as  Moses  and  Joshua  wrought  together  for  the 
same  great  end,  so  is  it  with  the  law  and  the  gospel.  {A.  B.  Mackay.)  Whom  do 
I  succeed  ? — Every  age  succeeds  an  age  marked  by  greatness  peculiarly  its  own. 
We  are  bom  now  into  a  grand  civilisation ;  it  admits  of  no  indolence,  or  reluctance 
as  to  work,  and  it  cannot  be  satisfied  by  what  is  petty,  perfunctory,  and  inexpensive 
as  to  the  strength  which  is  laid  out  upon  it.  History  brings  its  responsibilities. 
To  be  born  immediately  after  such  and  such  leaders  have  played  their  part  in  the 
world's  theatre  is  itself  to  have  a  cross  of  no  mean  weight  laid  upon  the  shoulder. 
We  may  close  our  eyes  and  think  nothing  about  these  things,  but  we  do  not  thereby 
make  them  the  less  realities,  nor  do  we  thereby  destroy  the  standard  of  judgment 
which  they  force  upon  us  and  by  which  our  life  wUl  be  tested.  Every  man  should 
say,  "  Whom  do  I  succeed?  Whose  are  these  footprints  near  the  place  whereon  I 
stand  ?  Has  a  giant  been  here — a  great  leader,  a  noble  sufferer,  a  patient  student, 
a  father  great  in  love,  a  mother  greater  still  ? — then  my  responsibility  begins  with 
their  greatness  and  goodness ;  what  I  have  to  do,"  the  soliloquist  should  say,  "  is  to 
go  on :  where  they  have  been  great,  I  must  try  to  be  greater  still — or  if  not  along 
tiieir  line,  along  some  line  of  my  own — so  that  the  ages  may  not  stagger  backwards, 
but  with  steadiness  and  majesty  of  strength  advance  from  one  degree  to  another  as 
the  light  increases  to  the  perfect  day."  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Promotion : — ^When  a 
merchant  has  a  vacancy  in  his  establisnment,  he  promotes  to  it  that  one  of  his 
servants  who  in  the  post  which  he  has  been  occupying  has  displayed  the  greatest 
measure  of  fidelity  and  perseverance ;  and,  when  a  youth  applies  for  a  situation,  the 
success  of  his  application  will  depend  on  the  report  which  his  former  employer  gives 
regarding  him  or  on  the  record  which  he  has  written  for  himself  in  school.    Bat  it 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

is  not  otherwise  in  the  providence  of  God.  Those  who  fill  hest  the  spheres  in  which 
they  have  been  placed  are,  in  general,  those  who  are  in  the  long  run  advanced  to 
higher  positions ;  while  they  who  despise  the  small  things  of  their  present  duties 
are  left  to  sink  into  still  deeper  obscurity.  {Christian  World  Pulpit.)  Death  and 
its  lessons : — The  man  to  whom  the  charge  is  addressed  is  the  inferior,  in  every 
way,  of  his  master.  A  good  man,  a  brave  soldier,  a  disinterested  head  of  the 
State — this  he  is.  But  the  zest  and  the  sparkle  has  gone  out  of  the  history  with 
Moses ;  the  passage  of  the  river  is  a  feeble  repetition  of  the  passage  of  the  sea ; 
and  the  scene  to  which  it  admits  Israel  is  one,  for  the  most  part,  of  comparatively 
"  common  day  " — alternations  of  fighting  and  resting,  victories  imperfectly  followed 
up,  acquiescences,  languid  and  faithless,  in  a  virtual  partition  of  Canaan  between 
Israel  and  Israel's  foe.  It  is  the  more  lifehke  as  a  picture  of  the  fortunes  of  our 
race.  It  is  thus  that  earth's  history  is  written,  it  is  thus  that  the  stream  of  time 
flows  on.  The  Moses  is  followed  by  the  Joshua,  the  morning  of  promise  by  the 
noonday  of  disappointment,  both  alike  pointing  onward,  onward  still,  to  a  sunset 
long  delayed,  and  an  evening  time  which  shall  at  last  be  light.  The  hero  of 
strategy  or  prowess — the  genius  of  discovery  or  imagination — the  prophet  of  earth 
or  heaven — lives  not  to  reap,  leaves  the  harvest  to  another,  looks  abroad  from  his 
Pisgah  upon  worlds  unconquered,  feels  at  last  that  he  rather  stops  the  onward 
march  of  a  generation  whose  turn  is  come.  It  is  well.  Man  must  be  little  if  he 
would  be  great — must  see  himseK  but  an  atom  in  the  universe  of  life  if  he  would 
do  anything  that  is  real  in  the  work  which  is  all  God's.  And  he  has  his  reward. 
The  man  that  "knows  the  blessedness  of  being  little  "  is  disembarrassed  of  the 
self -consciousness  which  is  battling  to  be  great.  That  energy  is  all  free  for  action 
which  loses  no  time  in  contemplating  itself.  That  "ability"  grows  apace  in 
vigour  which  remembers  that  it  is  of  "  God's  giving."  It  was  so  with  Moses.  His 
one  prayer  was,  "  Let  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  set  a  man  over  His  con- 
gregation." Upon  him,  when  he  was  found,  he  laid  his  hand,  presented  him 
instantly  to  the  congregation  as  the  man  of  the  future,  and  "  put  some  of  his  own 
honour  at  once  upon  him,  that  the  congregation  might  understand  and  be  obedient." 
He  has  his  reward.  This  it  is  which  eases  life  of  its  carefulness.  This  it  is  which 
makes  greatness  endurable  as  well  as  possible — the  thought  that  God  has  no  need 
of  it,  can  raise  up  even  from  the  stones  a  workman  and  a  patriot,  metes  not  with 
man's  measure  and  reckons  not  by  man's  years.  "I  am  the  Lord,  I  change 
not "  ;  therefore  ye  sons  of  men  can  both  quietly  serve  and  peacefully  faU  on  sleep. 
"  Moses  My  servant  is  dead."  Yes,  "  My  servant,"  though  he  once  "  spake  un- 
advisedly "  ;  yes,  "  My  servant,"  though  he  was  refused  his  heart's  prayer ;  yes, 
"  My  servant,"  though  he  might  not  go  over  Jordan.  "  Moses  My  servant  is  dead  " : 
even  when  we  are  judged,  we  are  but  chastened  ;  yea,  if  we  not  only  suffer  for  our 
sins,  but  even  sleep  1  "  Now  therefore  arise,  go  over  this  Jordan."  The  work  of 
God  is  not  ended.  Eather  are  we  always  on  the  brink  of  a  river  that  must  be 
crossed,  and  in  sight  of  a  land  that  has  to  be  conquered.  Who  can  look  around 
him  on  the  face  of  this  earth,  and  so  much  as  dream  that  Jordan  is  crossed,  that 
Canaan  is  occupied  ?  Who  could  live  this  life  if  he  did  not  feel  and  know  that 
effort,  that  progress,  is  its  law  ?  What  we  look  forth  upon,  from  the  spot  which  is 
"  this  present,"  is  a  work,  and  it  is  a  warfare.  With  our  guides  or  without  them, 
it  is  quite  evident  that  there  rolls  a  deep  and  a  rapid  river  between  us  and  rest, 
between  us  and  a  land  of  promise,  which  is  that  new  heaven  and  earth  wherein 
dwelleth  righteousness.  We  caimot  pretend  to  say  that  intelligence  such  as  we 
possess,  that  civilisation  such  as  we  have  attained,  that  religion  such  as  a  Christen- 
dom reahses,  is  satisfactory,  is  successful,  is  victorious,  whether  in  the  aspect  of 
happiness  or  in  the  aspect  of  good.  Everything  is  in  conflict,  everything  is  in 
struggle,  everything  is  (at  best)  in  a  condition  of  movement  and  in  a  condition  of 
hope.  The  plaia  of  Moab  is  our  world — a  cold,  broad  stream  divides  us  from  any- 
thing that  we  can  call  rest,  from  anything  that  we  can  call  possession.  "  My 
servant  is  dead,  now  therefore  arise,  and  go  over."  There  is  a  vacancy,  which  you 
must  fill.  That  is  one  lesson  of  death.  It  is  a  summons  to  the  living.  God  has 
lost  a  workman — will  you  take  his  place  ?  Terrible  would  it  be  for  this  nation  if 
either  growing  luxury  or  spreading  vice  should  diminish  the  supply  of  strong  men 
for  the  carrying  on  of  the  work  of  God  in  England.  It  is  not  the  decay  of  genius 
which  is  formidable — it  is  the  decay  of  strength.  Joshua  was  (in  many  senses) 
the  inferior  of  Moses,  but  that  inferiority  was  no  loss,  on  the  whole,  to  his  country; 
he  had  his  work,  as  Moses  had  his — and,  like  Moses,  he  did  it.  "  My  servant  is 
dead  ;  therefore  arise  and  go  over."    If  there  is  a  call  in  death,  there  is  also  an 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSHUA,  7 

encouragement.  See,  it  says  to  us,  what  life  is.  See  the  blessedness  of  God's 
Bervice.  Hear  Him  say  of  the  departed,  "  My  servant  "  stUl.  The  man  who  has 
served  God  in  his  generation  shall  never  die.  He  is  in  the  hands  of  God,  though 
it  be  out  of  the  sight  of  the  living.  "  My  servant  is  dead ;  arise  therefore,  and  go 
over,"  whither  he,  we  trust,  is  gone.  In  the  words  of  the  historic  parable  of 
Ascension  Day,  "  Take  ye  up  the  mantle  that  fell  from  him,  and  with  it  smite  the 
waters — that,  like  him,  and  after  him,  you  in  your  turn  may  pass  over  dryshod." 
{Dean  Vaughan.)  Arise,  go  over  this  Jordan. — The  campaign  commenced : — I.  What 
THE  LoED  SPAKE  UNTO  JosHUA ;  OE,  THE  ISSUE  OF  THE  ORDER.  Never  was  a  mightier 
task  assigned  to  any  man  than  to  Joshua  ;  and  yet  never  did  any  man  start  forth 
better  equipped  than  he,  for  observe,  the  Lord  gives  him — (1)  An  express  warrant ; 
(2)  glorious  and  gracious  promises ;  (3)  hearty  encouragement ;  (4)  clear  directions. 

II.  What  Joshua  cosimanded  the  people  ;  or,  his  proclamation  of  the  Lord's 
ORDER.  1.  His  obedience  is  prompt  and  unquestioning.  No  "wherewith"  is  inter- 
posed; no  sign  asked.  He  does  not  pause  or  procrastinate,  but  "then"  (ver.  10)  and 
there,  like  a  man  of  activity,  he  issues  the  order  to  the  tribes  through  their  officers, 
bidding  the  people  at  once  prepare  them  victuals  for  the  journey ;  yea,  strong  in 
faith,  and  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  announces  that  "  within  three  days  "  they  are 
to  cross  the  Jordan.  2.  As  Joshua's  obedience  was  prompt,  so  was  it  thorough. 
He  wiU  not  do  God's  work  by  halves,  nor  go  to  war  without  all  the  army.  IH. 
What  the  people  answered  Joshua  ;  or,  their  acceptance  of  the  Lord's  order. 
"  Only  be  strong,  and  of  good  courage  "  1  They  indicate  that  Joshua  had  re- 
hearsed in  their  ears  the  charge  that  God  had  given  him.  The  key  to  their  import 
is  found  in  the  clause,  "  thou  and  all  this  people  "  (ver.  2).  They  recognise  their 
union  with  their  captain.  Thus  their  exhortation  may  be  regarded  as  an  echo,  and 
an  acceptance  of  the  call  to  effort  and  endurance.  Lessons :  1.  There  is  great 
encouragement  here  for  all  who,  like  Joshua,  are  called  to  occupy  posts  of  authority, 
responsibility,  or  difficulty.  2.  The  same  consolation  belongs  to  every  Christian. 
We  all  have  a  warfare  to  accomplish,  a  Jordan  to  pass  over,  an  inheritance  to  seek. 
The  caU  of  God,  the  promises  of  God,  and  the  presence  of  God  are  our  warrant. 
3.  A  deeper  lesson  remains,  respecting  the  office  of  Jesus.  He  is  the  Captain  of 
the  Lord's  host.  (G.  W.  Butler,  M.A.)  Joshua  successor  to  Moses : — 1.  Every 
man  who  is  doing  anything  worth  working  at  is  some  one's  successor,  and  in  time 
must  be  succeeded  by  some  one.  Alas  for  the  man  who  succeeds  only  to  a  place 
to  occupy,  and  not  to  a  work  to  do !  Joshua  was  successor  to  a  grand  man  in  a 
wonderful  work.  2.  Every  man's  work  is  a  continuation.  "  The  workmen  die, 
but  the  work  goes  on."  3.  Every  man's  work  is  his  own.  It  differs  from  that  of 
him  who  went  before,  and  of  him  who  will  come  after.  Moses  had  been  trained 
in  Pharaoh's  court  and  among  Jethro's  flock  ;  Joshua  in  the  brickyards  of  Egypt 
and  in  the  army  of  Israel.  Each  had  been  fitted  for  the  work  he  was  to  do.  And 
every  man's  work  is  shaped  by  that  of  his  predecessor.  I.  God  gives  men  definite 
WORK  TO  do.  It  is  important  that  you  know  your  vocation.  God  has  called  you  to 
His  Likeness  and  His  service ;  to  be  as  Christ  was  in  the  world,  with  His  mind  in 
you  and  His  work  upon  your  hands ;  to  manifest  the  Father  to  men,  and  to  lead 
men  to  the  Father.  It  is  your  definite  work,  your  one  great  aim  as  Christians,  as 
God's  children,  whether  you  accept  it  or  not  —  your  only  worthy  aim.  II.  A 
definite  work  demands  an  equally  definite  law.  If  the  work  be  given,  the  law 
for  its  prosecution  must  be  given  also  from  the  same  source.  God  has  been  good 
to  His  people  in  perpetuating  for  them  the  written  Word,  enlarged  and  modified 
for  their  changing  conditions.  The  object-lessons,  which  were  needed  in  the 
childhood  of  the  race,  gave  way  to  the  precepts  which  might  better  guide  its  youth ; 
and  these  in  turn  yielded  to  the  statement  of  the  great  principles  of  all  right  feeling 
and  conduct,  with  the  declaration  of  which  the  canon  is  closed,  and  which  need  no 
addition,  because  they  are  adaptable  to  every  variety  of  condition  and  culture. 

III.  A  Divine  Helper.  When  the  Lord  gives  a  man  a  work  to  do  which  is  beyond 
his  power,  He  always  promises  the  needed  aid.  "  Go  over  this  Jordan,  and  divide 
this  land  among  My  people,"  says  the  Lord;  but  God  says  also,  "As  I  was  with 
Moses,  so  I  will  be  with  thee.  I  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  But,  beside 
the  promise  of  a  Divine  Helper,  Joshua  had  both  the  vision  of  His  person  and  the 
experience  of  His  aid.  We,  too,  may  listen,  and  hear  the  promise  coupled  with  the 
command.  We  also  may  look  up  and  see,  not  in  vision,  but  in  the  mirror  of  His 
Word,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  the  Lord  of  war  and  righteousness,  armed 
for  our  defence,  at  hand  for  our  deliverance.  No  life  is  worth  the  living  unless  it 
sets  before  itself  a  work  worthy  to  be  done.    No  life  can  do  a  worthy  work  save  as 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

it  recognises  the  Divine  law,  and  avails  itself  of  the  Divine  Helper.    With  thesa 
three  outward  conditions  of  his  success,  there  needed  one  quality  on  Joshua's  part 
to  make  it  sure,  and  that  was — IV.  A  bbave  heaet.    But  the  courage  came  from 
his  confidence  in  the  Divine  mission,  the  Divine  law,  and  the  Divine  Helper.    So, 
too,  may  it  be  for  us  all.    If  we  know  that  the  Lord  our  God  is  with  us,  we  shall 
not  be  afraid  nor  dismayed ;  but  we  too  shall  be  prospered,  and  shall  have  good 
success.     (Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.)        The  commission  of  Joshua  : — I.  The 
Divine  commission  is  given  to  men  who  abe  peculiably  bitted  fob  the  wobk.    In 
one  respect  all  men  are  weak  ;  but  in  their  weakness  they  must  not  be  weaklings. 
God  can  use  all  men ;  but  He  never  calls  one  to  a  burden  that  is  beyond  his  ability 
to  carry.     Man  must  become  worthy  or  wUling  before  God  will  commission  him 
to  any  work.     God  cannot  make  much  of  any  man  who  does  not  make  much  of 
himself.      We  too  often  speak  as  if  God  gives  man  his  character;  it  is  all 
wrong.    By   Divine    help  every    man    makes    himself    and    develops    his    own 
powers,  for  the   exercise  or   misuse  of   which  he  alone    is  responsible.    It  is 
every  man's  privilege  to    be  worthy    of    receiving  the    Divine  call.      n.  Thb 
souBCB  OF  all  STRENGTH  IS  GoD.    1.  God  wants    strong    men.    There    is    no 
strength  without   symmetry.     Samson's   strength  was   counterbalanced  by  hia 
moral    weakness.     Benedict    Arnold    ranked   among    the  nation's    heroes    at 
Ticonderoga,  but  the  lurking  perfidy  of  his  heart  betrayed  the  traitor  at  last.    The 
intellectual  brilliancy  of  an  Aaron  Burr  could  not  raise  him  to  any  greatness  so 
long  as  his  moral  nature  was  corrupt.     Washington  was  as  great  a  power  in 
national  affairs  on  account  of  his  moral  nature  as  from  his  oivio  deeds ;  so  of 
Lincoln  and  Grant.     2.  All  strength  springs  from  within.    You  cannot  make  any 
man  stronger  than  he  is.    Place  him  in  favouring  circumstances,  but  these  cannot 
control  him,  except  as  they  mark  his  weakness.    You  may  bolster  men,  but  this 
gives  no  manhood ;  may  extol  them  above  their  deserts,  but  aU  the  puffs  of  adula- 
tion make  them  no  stronger.    The  whole  world  cannot  make  any  man  to  be  worth 
more  than  he  is  in  himself.    This  strength  is  possible  to  all.     Take  away  bodily 
fear,  or  timidity  as  to  others'  opinions,  and  every  man  can  be  strong.    There  is  no 
sight  more  sublime  than  man  enduring  the  flames  that  scorch  him  in  the  path  of 
duty ;  mightier  than  the  mighty  rebukes  of  millions  as  he  walks  alone ;  undismayed, 
as  Christlike  he  stands  with  some  repentant  child  of  sin,  for  Christ's  sake.     The 
"  image  of  God  "  can  surpass  in  sublimity  and  divinity  all  else  the  world  has  ever 
seen,  because  the  measure  of  the  obstacles  he  overcomes  marks  the  heroism  of  hia 
own  soul.    3.  God  promises  help  in  thus  gaining  strength.     What  power  in  the 
words :  "  As  I  was  with  Moses,  so  I  will  be  with  thee,"  &c.    Stronger  yet  the  pro- 
mise :  "  The  Lord  thy  God  is  with  thee  whithersoever  thou  goest."    There  is  no 
strength  without  God.    Power  comes  only  when  the  watchward  is  "Immanuel." 
"I  can  do  aU  things,"  &c.    There  is  no  truly  great  man  who  is  ungodly. 
It  takes  a  great  hope  to  give  great  courage.      HI.  They  whose  strength  is  in 
God  abb  invincible.    There  is  no  such  bulwark  as  the  truth ;  no  such  power 
as  comes   from  the   consciousness  of  doing   right.    There  is  no    such  strength 
as  the  man  possesses  whose  conscience  is  clear.    One  such  man  can  chase  a 
thousand,  and  two  put  ten  thousand  to  flight.     It  is  not  necessary  for  men  with 
truth  on  their  side  to  take  up  the  world's  methods  in  their  plans  and  plottings. 
Men  in  whom  God  dwells  are  as  truly  unharmed  by  evil  as  they  are  by  the  storms 
that  can  do  no  more  than  wet  their  cheeks.     The  world  cannot  crush  God's 
children ;  it  can  crown  with  thorns,  but  it  cannot,  with  aU  its  might,  cast  off  from 
memory  the  crown  of  the  just.    It  can  build  bonfires,  make  dungeons,  and  sharpen 
sabres,  but  it  cannot  weaken  the  joys  that  count  all  these  only  as  symbols  of  their 
swift  entrance  upon  a  better  life.    IV.  The  bounds  of  all  successful  service  abb 
IN  THE  WRITTEN  WoRD.     So  f ar  as  history  has  a  voice,  God  has  never  left  Himself 
without  a  witness  of  His  truth.     Sinai's  law  was  but  the  expression  of  principles 
long  before  partially  known.     Twice  in  the  record  of  this  commission  of  Joshua 
the  condition  of  prosperity  is  given  as  obedience  "  to  all  the  law  "  made  known 
through    Moses :    "  Turn    not  from  it  to  the  right   hand  or  to  the  left,"  &c. 
It   was    this    same    law    that    should    never    depart    out  of    his  mouth ;    day 
and  night  he  should  meditate  upon  its  precepts,  and  watch  closely  "to  do 
according    to    all    that    is    written    therein:    for   then    thou    shalt    make    thy 
way  prosperous,"   &c.    The   truth   of   this    grand  principle  has  been   stamped 
upon  the  world  wherever  civilisation    has  gained  a  hold.     {David  0.   Hears.) 
Taking  possession  of  our  inheritance  : — I.  Take  a  survey  of  thb  inheritanob. 
1.  I  would  say  of  this  inheritance  which  God  has  prepared  for  His  saints,  and  hM 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSHUA.  9 

given  to  them  by  a  covenant  of  salt,  that  it  is  exceeding  broad.  All  that  we  can 
think  or  desire  is  ours  in  the  covenant  of  grace.  There  are  immeasurable  breadths 
and  lengths,  but  we  confine  ourselves  to  close  quarters.  Truly  "  there  is  very 
much  land  yet  to  be  possessed  "  1  Some  graces  you  must  have,  or  you  are  not 
saved ;  some  sins  must  at  once  be  driven  out  of  your  life  at  the  sword's  point,  or 
you  are  not  the  Lord's.  As  for  the  choicer  graces,  you  are  foolish  indeed  if  you 
think  of  doing  without  them  ;  and  as  for  the  less  violent  sins,  you  err  greatly  if 
you  spare  one  of  them.  2.  This  heritage  is  exceedingly  desirable.  When  sin  is 
driven  out,  and  we  come  to  live  in  God's  own  land,  then  we  find  precious 
treasure ;  we  dig,  and  we  are  enriched.  We  have  aU  things  in  Christ ;  yea,  in 
Him  we  have  aU  that  our  utmost  want  can  require.  3.  This  heritage,  upon 
which  we  are  now  looking  down  from  the  summit  of  our  faith,  is  full  of  variety. 
Here  are  Hermons  of  experience.  Tabors  of  communion,  Jabboks  of  prevailing 
prayer,  and  Cheriths  of  Divine  providence.  The  revelation  of  God  is  a  blessed 
country,  fuU  of  all  manner  of  delights.  They  that  live  in  Christ  dwell  in  spiritual 
realms,  which  for  light  and  joy  are  as  heaven  below.  Above  all  things,  it  is  "  Thy 
land,  0  Immanuel " !  11.  Glance  at  the  title  deeds  of  oxtr  inhebitakcb. 
I  would  not  mind  exhibiting  our  title  before  the  whole  bench  of  judges,  for  it  has 
no  flaw  in  it,  and  will  stand  in  the  highest  court.  1.  First,  notice  its  covenant 
character :  "  I  have  given  it  to  you."  You  will  find  the  full  conveyance  in  Gen. 
XV.  18-21.  Each  believer  may  say,  "  He  hath  in  Christ  Jesus  made  with  me  an 
everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure ;  and  therefore  do  I  possess  all 
spiritual  blessings,  and  shall  possess  them  world  without  end."  2.  Observe,  next, 
that  this  deed  of  gift  is  notable  for  its  graciousness.  How  does  it  run  ?  Which  I 
do  "  seU  "  to  them  ?  Ah,  no  1  It  is  no  sale,  but  a  free  gift.  3.  Note  well  the 
righteousness  of  our  title:  "Which  I  do  give  to  them."  The  Lord  God  has  a 
right  to  give  what  He  pleases,  for  "  the  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof, 
the  world,  and  they  that  dweU  therein."  Of  His  own  has  He  given  unto  us.  In  the 
great  sacrifice  of  His  dear  Son  He  has  satisfied  all  claims  of  justice,  and  He  acts 
justly  when  He  blesses  largely  those  for  whom  Jesus  died.  4.  Do  not  fail  to  see  its 
sureness :  "  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance."  "  I  do  give," 
Baith  He,  and  thus  He  stands  to  His  act  and  deed.  Oh,  children  of  God,  what  do  you 
think  of  your  title-deeds  ?  You  stand  possessed  of  your  kingdom  by  the  gift  of  Him 
who  has  a  right  to  give  what  He  pleases.  The  kingdom  is  given  you  because  it  is 
your  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  it  to  you.  Not  only  was  it  His  good  pleasure, 
but  it  remains  so.  What  great  simpletons  we  are  if  we  do  not  take  possession  of 
the  brave  country  which  is  ceded  to  us !  IH.  Let  us  make  a  move  towaeds  oub 
possessions.  There  is  your  land,  but  Jordan  rolls  between.  1.  The  first  thing  to 
do  in  this  matter  is  to  go  over  this  Jordan.  Come  out  from  the  world,  and  be 
separate.  The  land  of  gracious  experience  is  meant  for  you  to  dwell  in,  so  that  you 
may  be  recognised  as  the  Lord's  peculiar  people,  separated  unto  the  Most  High. 
Oh,  for  that  decisive  step  by  which,  like  Abraham,  you  come  out  from  your 
father's  house  that  you  may  be  a  sojourner  with  God  in  the  land  which  His  grace 
win  show  you  I  2.  Having  decided  for  the  Lord,  you  are  next  to  take  possession  by 
an  act  of  simple  faith.  Every  place  in  the  grace  country  upon  which  the  sole  of 
your  foot  shall  tread  is  yours.  You  will  remember  that  the  Eed  Indians  agreed  to 
sell  to  William  Penn  as  much  land  as  a  man  could  walk  round  in  a  day ;  and  I  do 
not  wonder  that  at  the  end  of  the  day  they  complained  that  the  white  brother  had 
made  a  big  walk.  I  think  I  should  have  put  my  best  leg  foremost  if  whatever  I 
could  put  my  foot  upon  would  be  mine  ;  would  not  you  ?  Why,  then,  do  you  not 
hurry  up  in  spiritual  matters  ?  Do  you  value  earthly  things  more  than  spiritual  ? 
Mark,  then,  that  if  you  put  your  foot  down  upon  a  blessing,  and  say,  "  This  is 
mine,"  it  is  yours.  What  a  very  simple  operation  is  the  claim  of  faith  1 
(<7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Every  place  that  the  sole  of  your  foot  shall  tread  upon,  that 
have  I  given  onto  you. — The  commission  for  the  conquest : — I.  It  was  Divine.  It  is 
important  to  bear  this  in  mind,  otherwise  we  shall  misunderstand  not  only  the 
whole  teaching  of  this  book,  but  the  whole  history  of  Israel  as  a  nation.  "  Deus 
vult"  is  written  on  every  page,  however  stained  with  blood.  Joshua  was  no 
bandit  or  freebooter,  eager  for  plunder ;  no  Alexander  or  Napoleon,  consumed  by 
the  lust  of  power  and  the  greed  of  empire.  He  was  simply  a  servant,  carrying  out 
the  commands  of  a  superior.  And  in  truth  there  was  a  Divine  necessity  for  this 
commission.  If  the  Divine  purposes  are  to  be  carried  out,  if  He  is  to  keep  His 
place  as  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth,  some  such  commission  was  a  necessity.  Is 
there  anything  analogous  to  this  in  the  spiritual  sphere  ?    There  is.    God  does  not 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

in  these  days  call  the  Christian  to  any  war  such  as  that  to  which  He  called  Joshua  ; 

yet  there  is  a  holy  war,  a  glorious  crusade,  in  which  He  would  have  us  all  warriors. 

Before  every  one  of  us  He  places  a  double  battlefield.     There  is  an  outer  fight,  and 

the  field  of  battle  is  the  whole  world,  according  to  the  gospel  commission,  "Go  ye 

into  all  the  world,"  &c.     There  is  also  an  inner  fight,  and  the  field  of  battle  is  the 

heart,  according  to  that  holy  exhortation  which  urges  us  to  bring  every  thought  into 

subjection  to  the  Lord  Jesus.     HI.  It  was  clear  in  its  teems.    No  doubt  could 

arise  in  the  mind  of  Joshua  as  to  what  God  desired  him  to  do.     "  Arise  "  !     The 

wilderness  journey  is  at  an  end  ;  the  time  to  take  possession  has  come.     Arise  from 

these  weary  disciplinary  wanderings  to  high  and  heroic  achievements.    Even  so  our 

commission  as  Christians  for  our  twofold  fight  is  clear  as  day,  and  as  emphatic  as 

the  Divine  lips  could  make  it.     Therefore  the  removal  of  every  valiant  soldier  of  the 

Cross  should  be  a  mighty  stimulus  to  those  left  behind.     We  best  revere   the 

memory  of  the  good  and  great  who  have  passed  away  by  giving  all  diligence  to  the 

work  which  was  so  dear  to  them.     IH.  It  was  difficult  to  caebt  out.     "  Go  over 

this  Jordan."     Joshua  is  here  put  in  as  great  extremity  as  was  Moses  at  the  Red 

Sea.     Aye,  and  the  crossing  of  the  Jordan  is  only  the  first  great  difficulty  among 

many.     Often,  in  like  manner,   obedience  to  the  gospel  commission  implies  the 

facing  of  difficulties  which  to  the  eye  of  sense  are  insuperable.     The  fight  of  faith 

is  never  easy.     IV.     It  was  terrible  in  its  consequences.     When  we  think  of  its 

bearing  on  these  Canaanites,  we  can  conceive  nothing  more  appalling.     These 

nations  were  like  the  grass  of  the  field,  and  Israel  was  God's  scythe  to  cut  them 

down.     What  a  contrast  to  all  this  have  we  in  the  commission  of  the  gospel  and 

the  present  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus.     When  on  earth  He  said,  "I  came  not  to 

destroy  men's  lives  but  to  save  them,"  and  the  work  He  has  given  His  followers 

now  to  do  is  a  work  of  salvation.     Surely,  then,  we  should  be  aU  the  more  eager  to 

carry  it  out.     V.  It  was  also  righteous.     In  this  case  nothing  was  done  in  undue 

haste.     The  Divine  patience  that  had  borne  with  these  evil  tenants  for  four  hundred 

years  was  marvellous  ;  and  they  grew  worse  and  worse  all  the  time.     The  gracious 

pause  of  forty  years,  after  He  had  made  bare  His  mighty  arm  before  all  flesh,  by 

the  wonders  done  in  Zoan's  field,  and  proclaimed  that  the  time  had  come  when  He 

was  to  give  this  land  to  Israel,  should  have  won  submission.     If  now  they  resist 

His  action,  it  is  at  their  peril.     If  the  war  in  which  Joshua  was  engaged  was 

righteous,  how  holy  is  that  war  by  which  righteousness  and  peace,  joy  and  goodwill, 

are  multiplied  on  the  earth.     The  man  who  consecrates  all  his  faculties  to  the 

downfall  of  evil,  first  within  and  then  without,  whose  life  is  one  long  struggle 

against  spiritual  wickedness,  acts  according  to  the  principles  of  eternal  rectitude. 

VI.  It  WAS  beneficial  in  its  results.     He  who  reads  history  cannot  fail  to  see 

that  impure  and  enfeebled  races  and  nations  have  been  the  prey  of  those  who  have 

been  comparatively  pure  and  strong  ;  and   thus,  by  conquest,  take  it  all  in  all, 

civilisation  has  been  advanced,  and  the  state  of  the  race  as  a  whole  ameliorated. 

Better  a  bad  limb  be  cut  off  than  the  whole  body  mortify.     Such  national  surgery 

may  be  terrible,  but  it  is  beneficial.     In  like  manner,  by  unflinching  valour  in  the 

fight  of  faith,  the  children   of   God   become  the   world's   best  benefactors.      In 

conquering  evil  within  and  without,  we  not  only  do  good  to  ourselves  but  to  the 

whole  human  race.     "  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth."    Without  this  preserving  salt 

of  Christlike  souls  how  soon  would  the  carcase  become  corrupt  and  the  eagles  of 

judgment  alight.     VII.  It  had  also  a  wide  befeuence  and  a  narrow  application. 

It  spoke  of  the  country  which  stretched  "  from  the  wilderness  and  this  Lebanon." 

Thus  the  inheritance  of  Israel  embraced  a  territory  of  great  richness,  beauty,  variety, 

and  compactness.     Yet  while  Joshua's  commission  embraced  the  whole  land,  the 

land  became  the  possession  of  Israel  only  as  it  was  subdued  acre  by  acre.     These 

ancient  warriors  bad  not  only  to  take  th'fe  title-deeds,  but  also  to  enter  into  possession. 

To  do  the  first  was  easy  ;  to  do  the  second  was  hard.     Even  so  is  it  with  the 

Christian.     He  has    indeed   a   goodly   heritage — a    whole     heaven    of   spiritual 

blessedness.     "  All  things   are   yours."     "  Blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in 

heavenly  places."    But  we   cannot  enjoy  one   of  these  blessings  apart  from  the 

conflict  of  faith.     (A.  B.  Mackay.)        Ownership  and  possession: — Here  is  a  great 

promise  with  a  sharp  hmitation :  "  Every  place  is  yours — but  every  place  only  as 

you   tread    upon   it,   occupy,   subdue,   possess  it."     A  most  instructive  parallel 

might  be  drawn  between  the  subjugation  of  Palestine  by  Israel  and  the  settlement 

of  America  by  the  English.     In  both  cases  tyranny  at  home  had  much  to  do  with 

the  movement,    for  the  Stuarts   of  England  and  the    Pharaohs   of  Egypt  held 

essentially  the  same  views  of  royal  prerogative.     In  both  cases  the  country  was 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSHUA.  11 

already  occupied  by  aborigines,   and    the    free,  wild  life   of  the  Jebusites   and 
the  Amorites  was  not  unlike  that  of   the  Iroquois  and  Sioux  Indians.     In  both 
cases  the  land  was  parcelled  out  before  it  was  actually  possessed.     In  both  cases 
possession  was  achieved  only  through  long  and  obstinate  struggle  with  an  enemy 
continually  defeated,  but  stubbornly  refusing  to  submit.    According  to  the  royal 
grants,  Massachusetts   and  Virginia  reached  through  to  the  Pacific  Ocean.     It 
required  five  minutes  to  draw  the  long  parallels  on  the  royal  map ;  it  needed  two 
centuries  actually  to  push  civilisation  across  the  continent,  and  the  work  is  not  yet 
finished.    Ownership  comes  before  possession,  and  is  useless  without  it.     The  Divine 
giving  is  always  done  along  this  line.     In  dealing  with  the  fields  and  the  forests,  God 
pours  out  sunshine  and  rain  unasked,  and  the  earth  can  only  lie  helpless,  now 
flooded  and  now  parched  with  heat.     But  in  dealing  with  men  made  in  His  image, 
God's  giving  is  a  far  finer  and  more  subtle  process.     There  is  in  it  a  wondrous 
delicacy  that  seems  to  fear  refusal,  that  is  busied  chiefly  with  finding  a  place  in 
which   the  gift   is  wanted.     He  gives  us   the  title-deed,  the  motive-power,   the 
strength,  the  gladness,  and  then  says,  "  Enter  and  possess."    We  are  all  familiar 
with  this  in  the  intellectual  realm.     You  put  into  your  son's  hand  a  Virgil  or  a 
Shakespeare.     "Now,"  you  say,  "he has  the  works  of  Shakespeare,  or  Virgil." 
Has  them  ? — he  has  the  possibility,  the  opportunity  !     It  is  a  great  thing  to  have 
that;  thousands  have  remained  ignorant  for  want  of  that.     But  when  you  possess 
an  author,  the  book  in  the  hand  wiU  be  only  a  subordinate  affair.     You  will  know 
the  man  himself  ;  lines  will  flash  out  upon  you  at  your  toil,  great  sweet  thoughts 
will  recur  in  dreams,  passages  wUl  intertwine  with  all  your  daily  task,  and  when 
you   possess  Shakespeare,  he  will  possess  you.    You  give  your  son  teachers  and 
schools — there  your  power  stops.     You  seat  your  daughter  at  the  piano,  but  for 
musical  power,  culture,  achievement — she  must  enter  into  and  possess  these,  or  she 
will  for  ever  stand  outside.     You  buy  a  home.     The  papers  are  signed,  the  deed  is 
recorded  ;  instantaneously  the  house  is  yours.    But  then  comes  the  process  of 
moving  into  it.     Every  season  you  move  a  little  further  in  ;  through  days  of  birth 
and  bridal  when  the  joy  bells  ring,  through  days  of  grief  when  all  the  beUs  are 
muffled,  you  are  growing  into  that  house,  and  when  men  ask,    "  Why  don't  you 
move  up  town  ?  "  you  say,  "  My  heart  is  here  ;  this  place  I  love."     So  Jesus  Christ 
comes  to  a  man  at  the  entrance  of  Christian  life,  and  puts  him  into  ownership. 
"  To  as  many  as  received  Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God." 
He  bestows  upon  us  the  title-deeds  unencumbered.     He  spreads  before  us  a  great 
territory,  and  says,  "  That  is  yours."    Forgiveness  for  sins  that  are  past,  an  inner 
quietness  which  naught  can  ruffle,  a  balm  for  life's  hurts  and  bruises,  a  daily 
strength  for  daily  needs,  a  courage  that  rises  with  obstacles  and  never  knows 
defeat,  all  this  is  ours — if  we  will  make  it  ours.     Ours  to  possess,  to  enjoy,  to 
experience.     There  is  an  old-fashioned  phrase  that  had  a  deal  of  truth  in  it — 
"experiencing  religion."    A  man  has  just  as  much  religion  as  he  has  experienced ; 
only  when  talking  of  our  experience  let  us  not  go  back  twenty  years — let  us  review 
the  last  twenty-four  hours.     How  was  it  with  me  last  evening  ?    Was  God  last  night 
in  my  soul,  was  I  filled  with  serenity  and  courage  and  devotion  to  other  souls,  not 
twenty  years  ago,  but  last  night  ?     Our  Bible  is  no  larger  than  our  reading  of  the 
Bible.     Some  men  have  a  Bible  consisting  of  a  few  Psalms  and  half  a  dozen  chapters 
in  the  Gospels.     Others  have  a  Bible  that  is  a  patchwork  of  half-remembered  texts, 
put  together  in  childhood  and  now  badly  faded.     A  man  with  a  rich,  deep  Christian 
experience  cannot  be  content  with  a  few  threadbare  chapters,  he  is  ever  reaching 
into  new  territory.     So  it  is  with  the  various  great  truths  of  the  Christian  religion 
— aU  are  ours,  but  ours  only  as  we  possess  them.     The  true  use  of  a  creed  is  not  to 
set  forth  what  men  must  believe,  but  to  record  what  men  do  believe.     And  the  man 
who  is  growing  will  find  his  creed  growing  too,  growing  indeed  more  simple,  but 
growing  stronger,  and  deeper,  and  broader.     A  grown  man  with  a  child's  religion 
is  like  a  man  trying  to  content  himself  with  nursery  toys — he  is  soon  disgusted 
with  his  attempt.     But  when  a  man  is  constantly  moving  onward,  then  one  truth 
after  another  will  reveal  its  inner  meaning  to  his  soul.     We  cannot  expect  that  all 
truths  will  be  equally  precious  in  any  one  day.     There  is  a  rotation  of  crops  in  the 
spiritual  life,  and  everything  is  "  beautiful  in  his  time."     There  is  always  one 
truth  that  shines  brightest,  as  there  is  always  one  star  on  the  meridian.     Other 
stars  will  foUow  and  culminate  in  their  season.     I  think  often  with  a  strange  awe 
of  the  first  settlers  of  the  Atlantic  States,  as  they  came  across  the  sea,  bearing  the 
maps  which  gave  them  rights  extending  to  the  Pacific.     This  is  just  the  condition  ^ 
of  some  of  us  to-day.     The  boundless  possibilities  of  Chri=;tianity  lie  betovo  i;  . 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x, 

Jesus  Christ  comes  to  us  saying,  "  It  is  all  yours — a  Christian  life,  a  Christian 
death,  a  Christian  heaven,  it  is  yours  if  you  will  take  it."  And  if  we  do  not  by 
voluntary  act  enter  into  what  He  offers,  then  the  offer  is  to  us  absolutely  worthless. 
The  truth  heard  Sunday  after  Sunday  is  then  only  a  genuine  damage,  making  the 
heart  each  week  less  sensitive,  less  responsive — "  it  hardens  all  within  and  petrifies 
the  feeling."  But  let  us  return  to  the  text  again.  "  Every  place  that  the  sole  of 
your  foot  shall  tread  upon" — surely  there  is  a  hint  here  of  the  slow  and  toUsome 
process  of  spiritual  acquisition.  I  do  not  hold  out  before  any  man  a  Christian  life 
that  is  free  from  effort.  Christianity  at  sight  is  always  a  delusion.  At  sight 
of  Jesus  we  are  indeed  ushered  into  new  relation  and  position.  But  then  comes 
the  path,  sometimes  winding  through  the  shadow,  sometimes  leading  straight  uphill, 
always  leading  heavenward  and  always  bright  with  an  unseen  Friend.  So  it  is  with 
the  entire  advance  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  Sometimes  when  we  are 
impatient  and  fretful  let  us  remember  that  here,  too,  walking  is  the  normal 
movement.  Why  God  doesn't  convert  India  to-day  is  to  us  a  mystery.  That  great 
movements  should  pace  so  slowly,  and  the  advance  be  so  measured  and  unequal, 
seems  to  us  incomprehensible.  One  other  suggestion  is  here — a  hint  that  the  farther 
a  man  travels  the  richer  he  becomes.  Mountain  range  or  lowly  vaUey,  forest  or 
verdant  meadow,  whatsoever  experience  of  God's  love  and  grace  we  pass  through, 
that  is  ours  for  ever.  We  learn  more  of  man's  weakness  but  more  of  God's 
power,  and  the  more  we  truly  know  the  gladder  shaU  we  reaUy  be.  New 
experiences  are  to  be  ours,  and  the  best  is  yet  to  come.  {W.  H.  P.  Faunce.) 
Foothold : — There  are  many  curious  legends  regarding  the  way  in  which  land  grants 
were  given  in  former  times.  We  read  of  one  man  who  got  from  his  king  as  much 
land  as  he  could  ride  round  whUe  the  king  slept ;  of  another  who  was  granted  as 
much  land  as  could  be  covered  by  a  buU's  hide,  which  he  cut  into  a  continuous 
narrow  strip,  capable  of  enclosing  a  large  area ;  of  a  third  who  was  promised  as 
much  land  as  a  bushel  of  barley  would  sow,  which  he  was  careful  to  sow  as 
sparsely  as  possible,  so  that  it  might  extend  the  borders  of  his  farm  to  the  utmost 
limits.  At  an  annual  fair,  held  in  August,  at  the  village  of  Carnwath,  in  Scotland, 
a  foot-race  is  run  as  the  tenure  by  which  the  property  in  the  neighbourhood  is  held 
by  the  Lockhart  family.  The  prize  is  a  pair  of  red  hose  or  stockings,  and  the  pro- 
prietor used  to  have  a  messenger  ready  whenever  the  race  was  run  to  tell  the 
result  to  the  Lord  Advocate  of  Scotland.  In  conformity  with  these  ancient  methods 
of  land-measuring,  God  promised  to  Moses  first,  and  renewed  His  promise  to 
Joshua  after  the  death  of  Moses,  that  He  would  give  the  Israelites  every  place  that 
the  sole  of  their  foot  should  tread  upon.  It  was  a  primitive  custom  to  measure  out 
the  land  that  was  to  be  cultivated  or  built  upon  by  the  foot ;  and  a  foot  is  still  one 
of  the  terms  of  measurement  among  us  derived  from  the  human  member.  By 
primitive  people  the  footprint  was  regarded  as  the  symbol  of  possession,  denoting 
that  the  land  had  been  marked  out  by  the  foot  of  the  individual,  and  so  acquired 
as  his  own  property.  Some  scholars  derive  the  origin  of  the  word  "  possession  " 
itself  from  pedis  positio,  the  position  of  the  foot ;  and  it  was  a  maxim  of  the 
ancient  jurists  that  whatever  a  person's  foot  touched  was  his.  On  the  tombs  of  the 
ancient  Romans,  Christians  and  pagans  alike,  is  often  sculptured  the  symbol  of  a 
foot,  to  indicate  that  these  tombs  were  the  property  of  the  persons  who  reposed  in 
them.  This  primitive  ceremony  will  also  explain  the  aUusion  in  Psalm  cviii., 
where  God  speaks  of  dividing  Shechem  and  meting  out  the  valley  of  Succoth, 
casting  His  shoe  over  Edom,  and  triumphing  over  Philistia,  and  in  this  way  taking 
possession  for  His  people  of  the  whole  land  of  Canaan,  while  the  Book  of  Ruth 
informs  us  that  taking  off  the  shoe  from  the  foot  signified  the  transfer  or  renun- 
ciation of  property  or  of  rights.  (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  Something  to  be  done  to 
gain  possession : — In  all  primitive  methods  of  allotting  land — strange  as  some  of 
them  may  appear  to  the  modem  legal  mind — there  was  something  to  be  done  by 
the  possessor  himself  in  order  to  get  possession.  His  tenure  was  made  valid  only 
by  some  personal  act  in  connection  with  the  property.  He  could  not  own  a  tract 
of  land  which  he  had  not  seen,  as  you  might  do  in  Australia,  or  New  Zealand,  or 
in  the  backwoods  of  America,  although  you  were  never  there.  It  was  necessary,  in 
order  that  the  land  should  become  his,  that  he  should  do  something  in  connection 
with  it  which  implied  a  personal  appropriation  on  the  spot.  This  is  the  true 
significance  of  the  curious  antique  rites  by  which  persons  got  possession  of  land. 
They  measured  it  with  their  feet,  not  only  in  marking  it  off,  but  also  by  passing 
frequently  to  and  fro  over  its  surface  in  ploughing  and  sowing,  and  all  the  other 
labours  required  for  its  cultivation,  and  thus  literally  obtained  a  foothold  in  it. 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSHUA.  13 

And  the  same  principle  holds  good  still,  although  these  quaint  archaic  customs  have 
long  been  discontinued.  As  regards  the  new  lands  in  the  colonies  bestowed  upon 
emigrants  by  Government,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  persons  to  whom  they 
are  allotted  should  cultivate  the  ground  and  erect  buildings  on  it  in  order  to  secure 
their  right  of  possession.  They  cannot  hold  their  lands  merely  upon  paper,  with- 
out ever  coming  near  them,  or  doing  anything  to  reclaim  them  from  the  wilder- 
ness. It  is  thus  a  universally  recognised  principle  that  the  right  of  ownership  of 
the  earth  is  acquired  by  human  labour,  man  bringing  himself  in  some  form  or 
other  into  direct  personal  contact  with  the  soil.  This  is  the  ultimate  ground  of 
ownership  to  which  all  can  appeal.  God  gave  Abraham  the  promise  of  possessing 
the  Holy  Land,  but  Abraham  did  not  get  the  fulfilment  of  that  promise  by  remain- 
ing in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees.  He  had  to  leave  his  home,  journey  over  the  wide 
intervening  desert,  and  traverse  on  foot  the  land  of  promise  from  end  to  end.  God 
intended  the  Israelites  to  measure  out  with  their  feet,  and  so  take  possession, 
according  to  immemorial  custom,  of  the  whole  region  from  Lebanon  to  the  desert, 
and  from  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Euphrates.  But  they  stayed  their  feet,  and 
actually  measured  only  a  little  strip  of  land,  which  was  parcelled  out  among  the 
twelve  tribes ;  while  the  Canaanites,  the  Philistines,  and  the  Syrians,  and  all  the 
desert  tribes,  were  allowed,  by  the  easy  terms  which  the  Israelites  made  with  them, 
to  possess  in  peace  by  far  the  largest  part  of  the  heritage  of  the  chosen  people. 
Even  in  the  palmiest  days  of  David  and  Solomon,  when  the  possessions  of  the 
Israelites  were  most  extensive,  they  never  reached  the  hmits  which  God  had 
intended  for  them.  The  great  lesson,  then,  which  the  text  conveys  to  us  is  that 
the  Israelites  owned  only  as  much  of  the  land  of  promise  as  they  actually  trod 
with  the  sole  of  their  foot.  They  had  a  large  promise,  but  it  was  to  be  made  good 
by  their  own  exertions.  It  is  God's  law,  true  of  your  spiritual  inheritance  as  of  the 
ancient  literal  inheritance  of  Israel,  that  only  as  much  as  you  measure  out  with 
the  sole  of  your  foot  is  truly  your  own.  You  have  the  Bible,  and  you  think  you 
know  it  well ;  and  yet  of  this  vast  religious  Uterature  you  only  really  know  a  mere 
fragment.  You  confine  your  reading  to  your  favourite  passages,  while  you  leave 
the  rest  unstudied ;  and  yet  it  is  in  these  neglected  parts  that  new  truth  is  most 
often  to  be  found.  Then  you  have  the  privileges  and  blessings  of  grace !  They 
are  great  and  extensive,  but  they  are  conditioned  by  the  same  law  that  only  what 
you  Live  up  to,  appropriate,  and  reaUse  of  them  is  your  own.  God's  superabound- 
ing  grace  is  limited  by  the  bounds  you  yourselves  put  upon  it.  If  you  are  made 
straitly,  God's  blessing  must  needs  straiten  to  you.  Your  salvation  is  just  as  much 
as,  and  no  more  than,  you  yourselves  experience  of  it.  Christ  says  to  you  in  every 
case,  "According  to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you."  Then  there  is  your  own  individual 
Christian  life.  What  a  vast,  unclaimed,  untrodden  land  of  promise  it  is !  You 
have  each  a  boundless  capacity  ;  "  you  are  made  to  seek,  to  long  for  the  infinite 
truth,  the  infinite  good,  the  infinite  love."  How  Uttle  have  the  greatest  saints  been 
able  to  fiU  up  the  grand  outline  which  God  sketched  out  at  first  when  He  made 
man  in  His  own  image !  How  far  short  have  you  all  come  of  God's  design  for  you, 
and  even  of  your  own  ideal !  You  have  contracted  the  bounds  of  your  being  and 
the  bounds  of  your  world  to  the  smallest  dimensions  by  your  devotion  to  the  petty 
and  passing  things  of  earth.  And  then  there  is  the  heavenly  Canaan,  the  true  land 
of  promise,  towards  which  you  profess  to  be  walking  day  by  day  as  pilgrims  and 
strangers  on  earth.  God  has  given  it  to  all  His  true  Israel;  but  they  shall 
only  possess  as  much  of  it  as  they  shall  tread  with  the  sole  of  their  foot.  You 
wiU  only  get  as  much  of  heaven  as  you  are  fit  for ;  and  in  the  case  of  many  I  fear 
that  wiU  be  but  a  very  small  bit.  {Ihid.)  All  the  land  of  the  Hittites. — The 
land  of  the  Hittites : — One  geographical  expression,  in  the  deUmitation  of  the 
country,  demands  a  brief  explanation.  While  the  country  is  defined  as  embracing 
the  whole  territory  from  Lebanon  to  the  Euphrates,  it  is  also  defined  as  consisting 
in  that  direction  of  "  all  the  land  of  the  Hittites."  But  were  not  the  Hittites  one 
of  the  seven  nations  whose  land  was  promised  to  Abraham  and  the  fathers,  and  not 
even  the  first  in  the  enumeration  of  these  ?  Why  should  this  great  north-eastern 
section  of  the  promised  domain  be  designated  "  the  land  of  the  Hittites  "  ?  The 
time  was  when  it  was  a  charge  against  the  accuracy  of  the  Scripture  record  that  it 
ascribed  to  the  Hittites  this  extensive  dominion.  That  time  has  passed  away, 
inasmuch  as,  within  quite  recent  years,  the  discovery  has  been  made  that  in  those 
distant  times  a  great  Hittite  empire  did  exist  in  the  very  region  specified,  between 
Lebanon  and  the  Euphrates.  The  discovery  is  based  on  twofold  data :  references 
in  the  Egyptian  and  other  monuments  to  a  powerful  people,  called  the  Eliita 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

(Hittites),  with  whom  even  the  great  kings  of  Egypt  had  long  and  bloody  wars ; 
and  inscriptions  in  the  Hittite  language  found  in  Hamah,  Aleppo,  and  other 
places  in  Syria.  There  is  still  much  obscurity  resting  on  the  liistory  of  this 
people.  That  the  Hittites  proper  prevailed  so  extensively  has  been  doubted  by 
some ;  a  Hittite  confederacy  has  been  supposed,  and  sometimes  a  Hittite  aris- 
tocracy exercising  control  over  a  great  empire.  The  only  point  which  it  is  neces- 
sary to  dwell  on  here  is,  that  in  representing  the  tract  between  Lebanon  and 
Euphrates  as  equivalent  to  "  aU  the  land  of  the  Hittites,"  the  author  of  the  Book 
of  Joshua  made  a  statement  which  has  been  abundantly  verified  by  recent 
research.  {W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.)  There  shall  not  any  man  be  able  to  stand 
before  thee. — Joshua  on  the  march : — "  There  shall  not  any  man  be  able,"  &c. 
"  Well,"  you  say,  "  it  does  not  require  any  great  courage  to  go  out  with  a  backing 
like  that. "  I  reply,  God  promised  Joshua  no  more  than  He  promises  you  and  me 
in  our  conflicts.  The  framer  of  the  universe,  the  chieftain  of  all  eternity,  has 
pledged  aU  His  resources  to  see  us  through,  and  He  promised  no  more  than  that  to 
Joshua.  His  first  undertaking  was  to  cross  the  river  Jordan  in  a  spring  freshet. 
You  might  as  weU  talk  of  wading  across  the  Hudson  river  at  Yonken  as  to  think 
of  wading  the  river  Jordan  at  the  season  of  which  I  am  speaking.  The  Canaanites 
on  the  other  side  felt  perfectly  secure.  But  one  day  Joshua  orders  out  his 
troops,  and  tells  them  to  faU  into  line.  "  Forward  :  march  I  "  They  pass  on 
towards  the  river,  and  it  seems  as  if  the  light  armed  troops,  and  the  spearmen,  and 
the  archers,  and  aU  their  leaders,  must  be  swept  down  in  the  fearful  flood.  Let 
them  prepare,  you  say,  for  a  watery  grave.  March  on.  Come  to  the  other  bank. 
They  reach  the  bank,  and  they  puU  themselves  up  its  steep,  thirty  or  forty 
feet  in  height — they  pull  themselves  up  the  h&nk  by  the  oleanders,  and  the 
tamarisks,  and  the  willows,  until  they  reach  the  top.  No  sooner  have  they 
climbed  up  this  high  bank  than  with  dash,  and  roar,  and  terrific  rush,  the  waters  of 
the  Jordan  break  loose  from  their  strange  anchorage.  God  never  makes  any  pro- 
vision for  the  Christian's  retreat.  He  clears  the  path  to  Canaan  if  we  go  ahead ; 
if  we  go  back,  we  die.  Victory  ahead !  Darkness,  flood,  ruin,  and  death  behind  1 
Ton  say  :  "  "Why  didn't  those  Canaanites  destroy  Joshua  and  his  troops  whUe  they 
had  a  chance  ?  Here  they  were,  on  a  bank  thirty  or  forty  feet  high.  There  were 
the  Israelites  under  Joshua  down  in  the  bed  of  the  stream.  Why  didn't  the 
Canaanites  fight  back  these  invaders  ?  "  The  promise  had  been  given,  and  the 
Lord  God  keeps  His  promise.  "  There  shall  not  any  man  be  able  to  stand  before 
thee  all  the  days  of  thy  life."  But  we  cannot  stop  here.  It  is  no  place  for 
Joshua's  troops  to  stay.  What  is  that  in  the  distance  ?  At  the  end  of  a  grove  of 
palms  eight  miles  long  is  the  chief  city  Jericho,  the  great  metropolis.  Take  it 
Joshua  must.  "  Take  it  Joshua  can't,"  say  the  unbelievers.  Joshua  rises  up  to 
his  full  stature,  and  he  gives  the  command.  He  feels  the  right  moment  has  come, 
and  he  says :  "  Shout !  for  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  city,"  and  the  command  is 
heard,  and  the  people  all  together  cry :  "  Down,  Jericho  !  down,  Jericho ! "  and 
that  long  line  of  solid  masonry  begins  to  quiver,  and  then  crash  go  the  walls,  the 
temples,  the  palaces,  until  the  earth  quakes,  and  the  heavens  are  blackened  with 
the  dust,  and  the  shriek  of  the  crushed  city  and  the  huzza  of  the  victorious 
Israelites  commingle.  This  is  no  place  to  stop.  "Forward :  march  1  "  There  is  a 
city  of  Ai  to  be  taken.  "  Oh  I "  says  a  scouting  party  just  come  back  from  that 
city,  "  you  can  take  that  very  easily.  Joshua,  you  need  not  go ;  you  stay,  and  a 
few  of  us  will  go  and  take  that  city."  They  started  out  in  pompous  order  to  take 
the  city  of  Ai.  The  men  of  Ai  came  out  and  gave  one  yell,  and  away  ran  the 
Israelites  like  reindeer.  Our  northern  troops,  at  Bull  Eun,  made  slow  time  com- 
pared with  those  Israelites  with  the  men  of  Ai  after  them.  We  have  no  right  to  go 
into  the  Lord's  conflict  having  only  half  our  force.  Body,  mind,  soul,  reputation, 
property — everything — must  be  marshalled,  equipped,  launched  for  God,  and 
against  our  enemies.  And  soon  the  retreating  army  come  up.  They  say :  "  Oh  I 
general,  we  are  all  cut  to  pieces.  Those  men  of  Ai  are  awful  people.  We  are  all 
cut  to  pieces."  Joshua  falls  down  on  his  face  in  chagrin.  But  how  did  God 
arouse  Joshua?  Did  He  address  him  in  some  complimentary  apostrophe?  No. 
He  says :  "  Get  thee  up.  Why  liest  thou  thus  on  thy  face  ?  "  Joshua  arose,  I 
suppose,  looking  mortified ;  but  his  old  courage  came  back  again.  He  marshals 
aU  the  Israelites,  and  he  says :  "  We  will  go  up  en  masse,  and  we  will  take  the  city 
of  Ai."  And  as  I  see  the  smoke  of  the  burning  city  curling  in  the  sky,  and 
as  I  hear  the  groans  of  the  defeated  men  of  Ai,  and  the  victorious  shout  of  the 
Israelites,  Joshua  hears  something  better  than  that :  "  There  shall  not  any  man 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSHUA.  15 

be  able,"  &c.  Joshua's  troops  cannot  stop  yet.  '•  Forward :  march ! "  says  Joshua ; 
for  there  is  the  city  of  Gibeon  ;  it  has  put  itself  under  the  wing  of  Joshua's 
protection,  and  Joshua  must  defend  it.  Joshua  makes  a  three  days'  march 
in  one  night.  Prepare  now  to  see  the  Gettysburgh,  the  "Waterloo,  the  Sedan 
of  the  ancients.  It  is  not  yet  quite  sundown  in  Joshua's  day,  and  we  will  have 
time  for  five  royal  funerals.  Who  wiU  preach  their  funeral  sermon  ?  Massillon 
preached  the  funeral  sermon  of  Louis  XIX.  Dr.  Eobert  South  preached  a  sermon 
commemorative  of  Charles  I.  Who  will  preach  the  funeral  sermon  of  these 
five  bad  kings?  Joshua.  And  what  shall  be  his  text?  "There  shall  not 
any  man  be  able,"  Ac.  "Oh,"  you  say,  "it  is  a  pity  to  bury  these  five  kings 
so  ignominiously."  No,  sir ;  before  that  rock  is  sealed  up  I  want  to  put  in 
five  more  beings,  first  having  them  beheaded — King  Alcohol,  King  Fraud,  King 
Lust,  King  Superstition,  King  Bigotry.  Have  them  all  in.  Cover  them  over 
with  a  mound  of  broken  decanters  and  the  debris  of  their  miserable  doings. 
Eoll  a  rock  against  that  cave  so  they  never  can  get  out.  Then  chisel  for  these 
last  five  kings  the  same  epitaph  you  had  for  the  other  five  kings ;  and  let  all 
the  Christian  reformers  and  philanthropists,  before  the  sun  of  their  protracted 
day  of  usefulness  is  ended,  come  up  and  read  it.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
Victory  assured  : — There  is  no  foe  to  your  growth  in  grace,  no  enemy  in  your 
Christian  work,  no  dreaded  form  of  evil  dominating  and  cursing  the  souls  of  men, 
which  was  not  included  in  your  Saviour's  conquests.  You  need  not  be  afraid  of 
them.  When  you  touch  them,  they  will  flee  before  you.  God  has  promised  to 
deliver  them  up  before  you.  There  shall  no  man  of  them  be  able  to  stand  before 
you.  Neither  Anakim  nor  fenced  cities  need  daunt  you.  You  are  one  of  the  con- 
quering legion.  Claim  your  share  in  the  Saviour's  victory.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
I  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee. — A  great  promise  : — I.  The  import  of  the 
PROMISE.  1.  It  includes  in  it  more  than  that  natural  and  essential  presence  of  God 
which  surrounds  all  beings  and  all  things ;  for  the  essence  of  God  is  diffused  through 
the  trackless  path  of  immensity.  2.  It  refers  to  God's  special  and  gracious  pre- 
sence. (1)  Friendship;  (2)  observation;  (3)  direction;  (4)  protection;  (5)  pro- 
vision. 3.  A  more  than  ordinary  communication  of  God's  presence  is  vouchsafed 
to  those  who  are  called  out  to  services  of  peculiar  difficulty,  to  offices  of  high 
responsibility.  11.  The  certainty  of  the  fui/Filment  of  this  promise.  I  feel 
assured  of  its  fulfilment  when  I  reflect — 1.  On  the  Author  of  this  promise.  "I  will 
be  with  thee.  I  will  not  leave  thee,"  &c.  "  God  is  not  a  man  that  He  should 
He,  neither  the  Son  of  man  that  He  should  repent."  2.  The  terms  in  which  the  pro- 
mise is  couched.  Repetition,  but  no  tautology.  3.  Experience.  Was  not  God  with 
Moses  ?  III.  The  advantages  which  the  fulfilment  of  this  promise  will  throw 
over  tour  whole  life.  Oh,  let  but  this  be  fulfilled,  and  you  are  safe  for  both  worlds, 
for  time  and  for  eternity  1  Mark  its  influence — 1.  On  the  hours  of  solitude.  Every 
real  Christian  wiU  wish  to  be  alone :  he  will  say,  "  I  am  never  less  alone  than  when 
alone."  2.  On  your  intercourse  with  society.  Others  will  take  knowledge  of  you, 
that  you  have  been  with  Jesus.  3.  On  your  conduct  Prudence ;  benevolence ; 
sanctity.  4.  On  afflictions  and  distresses.  If  God  be  with  us,  no  weapon  shall 
prosper  against  us,  no  trap  shall  catch  us,  no  pit  shall  ensnare  us.  6.  On  the  days 
of  life's  decline,  and  in  the  immediate  prospect  of  its  conclusion.  All  earthly 
attachments  are  doomed  to  be  dissolved  ;  but  God  is  ever  with  His  servants, 
especially  when  most  needed.  Lessons :  1.  Admire  the  astonishing  condescension 
and  grace  of  God,  that  He  should  thus  address  Himself  to  worms  of  the  earth,  to 
sinful  worms,  to  such  as  you  and  I  are !  2.  Let  me  ask  you  if  you  have  an  interest 
in  this  promise.  3.  Be  very  thankful  for  any  measure  of  the  fulfilment  of  this 
promise  which  you  may  have  enjoyed.  (G.  Clayton,  M.A.)  God  with  us  through 
life  : — I.  The  interest  which  God  takes  in  men's  lives.  1.  Every  event  is  closely 
observed  by  Him.  2.  He  often  comes  unsolicited  and  unthought  of.  Like  the 
mother  who,  while  attending  to  the  duties  of  her  household,  stiU  keeps  her  eye  on 
the  little  one  at  play,  that  she  may  interpose  in  time  of  danger.  II.  God  appeals 
to  His  past  conduct  to  encourage  His  servant  to  trust  in  Him.  1.  We  are 
influenced  more  by  the  past  conduct  of  a  friend  than  by  his  promises.  2.  There  are 
degrees  of  manifested  interest,  care,  and  love.  God  was  with  Moses — (1)  Con- 
tinuously, from  beginning  to  end.  (2)  Notwithstanding  a  variation  of  conduct  on 
the  part  of  His  servant.  (3)  Under  circumstances  of  great  provocation.  (4)  As  a 
Friend  of  infinite  resources.  (5)  As  an  unerring  Guide.  (6)  To  uphold  his  position 
against  any  usurpation  on  the  part  of  others.    HI.  The  bestowai.  op  the  blessinos 

mCLUDBD  IN  THIS  DECLARATION  WAS  HADE  DEPENDENT  TJPON  JoSHUA'S  OBEDIENCB.      Ho 


16  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

who  will  not  keep  God's  law  cannot  have  the  presence  of  God  with  him.  {A  London 
Clergyman.)  A  great  promise  : — I.  It  is  a  geeat  promise.  For  it  includes 
everything.  God's  presence  can  supply  wisdom,  can  give  strength,  and  will  insure 
success.  II.  It  was  to  a  great  man.  1.  He  was  humble.  2.  He  was  trained — 
had  followed  the  Jews  from  Egypt.  3.  He  was  good.  Not  one  notorious  sin  or 
evU  habit  is  recorded  of  him  as  there  is  of  nearly  every  other  noted  character  in 
Scripture.  He  was  the  only  one  who  withstood  the  test  of  the  wUderness  journey. 
III.  It  was  in  reference  to  a  great  work.     1.  The  conquering  the  promised  land. 

2.  The  organising  the  people.  3.  The  vindicating  the  power  and  glory  of  God. 
{Homilist^        Strengthening  medicine  for  God's  servants  : — I.  The  suitability  ov 

THE  consolation  WHICH  THESE  WORDS   GAVE   TO   JOSHXTA.      "  I   Will   not   fail   thcC,  nOr 

forsake  thee."  1.  This  must  have  been  very  cheering  to  him  in  reference  to  him- 
self. Joshua  may  possibly  have  been  somewhat  despondent  under  a  very  pressing 
sense  of  his  own  deficiencies ;  and  this  cheering  assurance  would  meet  his  case,  fi 
God  be  with  our  weakness  it  waxes  strong ;  if  He  be  with  our  folly  it  rises  into 
wisdom  ;  if  He  be  with  our  timidity  it  gathers  courage.  2.  The  consolation  given 
to  Joshua  would  be  exceedingly  suitable  in  the  presence  of  his  enemies.  Surely,  in 
the  presence  of  God,  Anakim  become  dwarfs,  strongholds  become  as  a  lodge  in  a 
garden  of  cucumbers,  and  chariots  of  iron  are  as  thistledown  upon  the  hillside 
driven  before  the  blast.  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?  "  They  that 
be  with  us  are  more  than  they  that  be  against  us,  when  once  the  Lord  of  hosts  is 
seen  in  our  ranks.  3.  This  consolation,  too,  was  sufficient  for  all  supplies.  Perhaps 
Joshua  knew  that  the  manna  was  no  longer  to  fall.  "  I  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  for- 
sake thee"  was  a  supply  which  would  meet  all  the  demands  of  the  commissariat. 
When  the  Lord  opens  all  His  granaries  none  shall  lack  for  bread,  and  when  He 
unlocks  His  wardrobes  none  shall  go  bare.  4.  Surely  this  word  must  often  have 
brought  consolation  to  the  heart  of  Joshua  when  he  saw  the  people  failing  him.  Oh, 
what  a  blessed  thing  it  is  in  a  false  and  fickle  world,  where  he  that  eats  bread  with 
us  lifts  up  his  heel  against  us,  where  the  favourite  counsellor  becomes  an  Ahithophel, 
and  turns  his  wisdom  into  crafty  hate,  to  know  that  "  there  is  a  Friend  that  sticketh 
closer  than  a  brother,"  one  who  is  faithful  and  gives  us  sure  tokens  of  a  love  which 
many  waters  cannot  quench !  H.  At  what  times  may  we  consider  this  promise  to 
BE  SPOKEN  to  OURSELVES  ?  1.  Surely  it  is  when  we  are  called  to  do  God's  work. 
Joshua's  work  was  the  Lord's  work.  Do  you  know  that  God  has  put  you  where 
you  are,  and  called  you  to  do  the  work  to  which  your  life  is  dedicated  ?  Then  go 
on  in  God's  name,  for,  as  surely  as  He  called  you  to  His  work,  you  may  be  sure 
that  to  you  also  He  says,  as  indeed  to  all  His  servants,  "  I  will  not  faU  thee,  nor 
forsake  thee."  2.  But  I  hear  some  of  you  say,  "  We  are  not  engaged  in  work  of 
such  a  kind  that  we  could  precisely  call  it  '  work  for  God.' "  Well,  but  are  you 
engaged  in  a  work  which  you  endeavour  to  perform  to  God's  glory  ?  Is  your 
ordinary  trade  one  which  is  lawful — one  concerning  which  you  have  no  doubt  as  to 
its  honest  propriety ;  and  in  carrying  it  on  do  you  follow  right  principles  only  ? 

3.  We  must,  if  we  are  to  have  this  promise,  take  God  into  our  calculations.  A  great 
many  persons  go  about  their  supposed  lifework  without  thinking  about  God.  You 
must  walk  by  faith  if  you  are  to  enjoy  the  privileges  of  the  faithful.  4.  We  must 
also  be  careful  that  we  walk  in  God's  ways.  Observe  that  the  next  verse  to  the 
text  runs  thus,  "  Be  strong  and  of  a  good  courage,"  and  then  the  seventh  verse  is  a 
singular  one,  "  Only  be  thou  strong,"  &c.  What  for?  To  obey  I  Does  it  want 
courage  and  strength  to  obey?  Why,  nowadays,  that  man  is  thought  to  be 
courageous  who  wiU  have  no  laws  of  God  to  bind  him ;  and  he  is  thought  to  be 
strong-minded  who  ridicules  revelation.  But  let  us  rest  assured  that  he  is  truly 
strong  of  mind  and  heart  who  is  content  to  be  thought  a  fool,  and  sticks  to  the  gooa 
old  truth,  and  keeps  the  good  old  way.  HI.  What  this  promise  does  not  pre- 
clude. 1.  This  promise  does  not  exclude  effort.  If  you  want  to  succeed,  use  every 
faculty  you  have,  and  put  forth  aU  your  strength ;  and  if  it  is  a  right  cause  you 
may  then  faU  back  on  this  promise.  2.  Neither  does  this  promise  preclude 
occasional  disaster.  Yes,  and  without  the  violation  of  any  law,  the  best  man  in  the 
world  must  expect  in  the  most  successful  enterprise  that  there  will  be  some 
discouragements.  Look  at  the  sea  :  it  is  rolling  in,  it  will  rise  to  fuU  tide  before 
long,  but  every  wave  that  comes  up  dies  upon  the  shore ;  and  after  two  or  three 
great  waves  which  seem  to  capture  the  shingle  there  comes  a  feebler  one  which 
sucks  back.  Very  well,  but  the  sea  will  win,  and  reach  its  fulness.  So  in  every 
good  work  for  God  there  is  a  back-drawing  wave  every  now  and  then.  God  will 
certainly  test  you,  but  He  will  not  fail  you,  nor  forsake  you.    8.  Nor,  again,  does 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSHUA.  17 

this  promise  preclude  frequent  tribulations  and  testings  of  faith.  In  the  auto- 
biography of  the  famous  Franck^  of  Halle,  who  built,  and,  in  the  hand  of  God, 
provided  for,  the  orphan-house  of  Halle,  he  says,  "  I  thought  when  I  committed 
myself  and  my  work  to  God  by  faith,  that  I  had  only  to  pray  when  I  had  need, 
and  that  the  supphes  would  come ;  but  I  found  that  I  had  sometimes  to  wait  and 
pray  for  a  long  time."  The  supplies  did  come,  but  not  at  once.  The  pinch  never 
went  so  far  as  absolute  want ;  but  there  were  intervals  of  severe  pressure.  There 
was  nothing  to  spare.  Every  spoonful  of  meal  had  to  be  scraped  from  the  bottom 
of  the  barrel,  and  every  drop  of  oil  that  oozed  out  seemed  as  if  it  must  be  the  last ; 
but  still  it  never  did  come  to  the  last  drop,  and  there  was  always  just  a  little  meal 
left.  God  has  not  promised  to  take  any  of  you  to  heaven  without  trying  your  faith. 
4.  This  promise  does  not  preclude  our  suffering  very  greatly,  and  our  dying,  and 
perhaps  dying  a  very  sad  and  terrible  death,  as  men  judge.  God  never  left  Paul, 
but  I  have  seen  the  spot  where  Paul's  head  was  smitten  off  by  the  headsman.  The 
Lord  never  left  Peter,  but  Peter,  like  his  Master,  had  to  die  by  crucifixion.  The 
Lord  never  left  the  martyrs,  but  they  had  to  ride  to  heaven  in  chariots  of  fire. 
IV.  What,  then,  does  the  text  mean,  if  we  mat  have  all  this  trial  happening  to 
us  ?  1.  Your  labour  shall  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  Press  on.  We  have  heard  of 
a  minister  who  added  only  one  to  his  Church  through  a  long  year  of  very  earnest 
ministry — only  one,  a  sad  thing  for  him  ;  but  that  one  happened  to  be  Eobert 
Moffatt,  and  he  was  worth  a  thousand  of  most  of  us.  Go  on.  If  «you  bring  but 
one  to  Christ,  who  shall  estimate  the  value  of  the  one  ?  2.  And  then  there  shall  be 
no  desertion  as  to  yourself,  for  your  heavenly  Friend  has  said,  "  I  wiU  not  forsake 
thee."  You  wiU  not  be  left  alone  or  without  a  helper.  You  are  thinking  of  what 
you  wUl  do  in  old  age.  Do  not  think  of  that :  think  of  what  God  will  do  for  you  in 
old  age.  Oh,  but  your  great  need  and  long  illness  wUl  wear  out  your  friends,  you 
say.  Perhaps  you  may  wear  out  your  friends,  but  you  will  not  wear  out  your  God, 
and  He  can  raise  up  new  helpers  if  the  old  ones  fail.  Oh,  but  your  infirmities  are 
many,  and  will  soon  crush  you  down :  you  cannot  live  long  in  such  circumstances. 
Very  well,  then  you  will  be  in  heaven ;  and  that  is  far  better.  But  you  dread  pining 
sickness.  It  may  never  come  ;  and  suppose  it  should  come,  remember  what  wiU 
come  with  it — '*  I  will  make  all  thy  bed  in  thy  sickness."  "  I  will  never  leave  thee, 
nor  forsake  thee" — so  runs  the  promise.  "Fear  thou  not,  for  I  am  with  thee; 
be  not  dismayed,  for  I  am  thy  God."  V.  Why  may  we  be  quite  sure  that  this 
PROMISE  will  be  FULFILLED  TO  US  ?  1.  I  auswer,  first,  we  may  be  quite  sure  because 
it  is  God's  promise.  Did  ever  any  promise  of  God  fall  to  the  ground  yet  ?  2.  Eest 
ye  well  assured  that  if  a  man  be  called  to  do  God's  work  God  wUl  not  fail  him, 
because  it  is  not  after  the  manner  of  the  Lord  to  desert  His  servants.  He  will  not 
push  His  servants  into  severe  conflicts  and  then  fail  them.  3 .  Besides,  remember  that 
should  God's  servants  fail,  if  they  are  really  God's  servants,  the  enemy  would  exult 
and  boast  against  the  Lord  Himself.  This  was  a  great  point  with  Joshua  in  after- 
days  (chap.  vii.  9).  If  the  Lord  raises  up  Luther,  and  does  not  help  Luther,  then  it 
is  not  Luther  that  fails ;  it  is  God  that  fails,  in  the  estimation  of  the  world. 
4.  Besides,  if  God  has  raised  you  up  to  accomplish  a  purpose  by  you,  do  you  think 
He  will  be  defeated  ?  Were  ever  any  of  His  designs  frustrated  ?  5.  Besides,  if  we 
trust  God,  and  live  for  God,  He  loves  us  much  too  well  to  leave  us.  It  is  not  to  be 
imagined  that  He  will  ever  put  a  load  upon  His  own  children's  shoulders  without 
giving  them  strength  to  bear  the  burden,  or  send  them  to  labours  for  which  He  will 
not  give  them  adequate  resources.  Oh,  rest  in  the  Lord,  ye  faithful.  {C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Be  strong  and  of  a  good  courage. — A  great  promise  and  a  stirring 
exhalation : — ^What  the  heathen  gods  are  fabled  to  have  done  with  some  of  their 
favourite  warriors,  God  here  and  now  does  to  this  His  first  soldier-saint,  sending 
him  forth  to  the  fray  invulnerable,  invincible.  By  faith  in  this  great  promise, 
Joshua  is  more  than  conqueror.  Poor  and  tame  in  comparison  is  the  "  Veni, 
vidi,  vici ! "  of  Kome's  great  hero.  God's  presence  is  pledged  to  Joshua  uncon- 
ditionally and  unalterably.  Oh,  highly  favoured  Joshua  I  Yes,  and  also  highly 
favoured  saints,  for  even  with  a  like  great  and  precious  promise  do  we  go  a  warfare 
against  evil.  In  regard  to  both  the  outer  and  the  inner  conflict  in  which  we  are 
engaged  we  should  always  remember  that  we  are  on  the  winning  side.  The  battle 
is  the  Lord's.  "  Forward  "  is  the  Divine  command.  We  are  not  to  make  up  our 
minds  for  defeat,  but  to  march  in  the  assurance  of  victory.  ••  My  grace  is 
sufficient  for  thee."  This  promise  gives  us  power  as  we  face  error  of  every  kind. 
The  enemies  of  the  gospel  in  these  days  are  proud  and  boastful.  If  we  were  to 
judge  by  their  shouts,  we  should  think  that  the  whole  fabric  of  Christianity  was 

2 


18  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

falling  to  pieces.  Have  we  anything  to  pit  against  these  enemies  ?  Most  assuredly. 
The  Divine  presence,  as  in  the  case  of  Joshua,  is  pledged  to  be  with  us.  This  great 
promise  given  to  Joshua  was  followed  up  by  a  stirring  exhortation.  Courage  1  this 
peal  of  bells  rings  out  in  all  its  changes.  Why  ?  Because  Joshua  was  a  coward? 
Nay,  he  had  the  heart  of  a  hon,  but  because  courage  is  the  fundamental  virtue  in 
every  saint  of  God,  in  every  soldier  of  righteousness,  in  every  witness  for  the  truth. 
One  of  the  great  wants  of  the  day  is  courage,  courage  to  confess  Christ  in  every 
company  and  on  aU  occasions  ;  courage  to  hold  fast  to  His  every  word  ;  courage  to 
do  aU  His  will ;  courage  to  follow  wherever  He  leads.  It  is  called  a  good  courage, 
and  no  virtue  better  deserves  the  epithet,  for  it  is  good  whether  we  consider  its 
qualities  or  its  achievements,  the  throne  on  which  it  sits  or  the  crown  with  which  it 
is  adorned.  It  is  good  courage  because  it  is  obedient,  not  self-wiUed,  obstinate, 
headstrong.  Again  and  again  the  greatest  exploits  of  courage  have  been  summed 
up  in  the  words,  "  I  must  obey  God."  Such  courage  is  of  the  highest  quaHty.  It 
can  never  quail,  because  conscious  of  eternal  rectitude.  It  is  a  good  courage  also 
because  it  is  studious  and  humble.  Its  aim  being  to  obey  aU  God's  will,  in  the 
spirit  as  weU  as  in  the  letter,  it  gives  all  diligence  to  know  God's  will.  Accordingly, 
the  hero  of  Jehovah  meditates  in  God's  law  day  and  night ;  takes  counsel  not  with 
flesh  and  blood,  but  with  the  living  oracles,  and  finds  therein  all  his  comfort, 
strength,  and  light.  This  good  courage,  being  obedient  and  studious,  is  also 
intelUgent.  It  observes  with  watchful  care  the  hints  of  Providence  and  the  checks 
of  conscience.  It  learns  better  every  day  what  God's  will  is  in  all  things.  Ke- 
member  that  such  courage  is  the  great  secret  of  success.  This  above  all  things 
frightens  our  great  adversary  the  devil.  Satan  has  no  dread  of  learning,  or  wisdom, 
or  riches,  but  he  does  fear  the  courage  of  a  soul  resting  in  communion  with  God. 
And  well  he  may,  for  this  courage  arms  the  soul  with  Divine  might.  {A .  B.  Mackay.) 
The  sources  of  Joshua's  strength  : — I.  A  faithful  past.  The  aloe  blooms  but  once 
in  a  hundred  years,  but  every  hour  of  all  that  century  is  needed  to  produce  the 
delicate  texture  and  resplendent  beauty  of  the  flower.  The  deed  of  a  Grace 
Darling  is  not  the  sudden  outburst  of  the  moment  that  gives  it  birth,  but  the 
result  of  long  years  of  self-discipUne,  courage,  and  ministry  to  others.  And  this 
summons  of  Joshua  to  the  leader's  place  in  Israel  was  the  guerdon  of  more  than 
eighty  years  of  faithful  service.  None  of  us  can  teU  for  what  God  is  educating  us. 
We  fret  and  murmur  at  the  narrow  round  and  daily  task  of  ordinary  Ufe,  not 
realising  that  it  is  only  thus  that  we  can  be  prepared  for  the  high  and  holy  ofl&ce 
which  awaits  us.  We  must  descend  before  we  can  ascend.  God's  wiU  comes  to 
thee  and  me  in  daily  circumstances,  in  little  things  equally  as  in  great ;  meet 
them  bravely ;  be  at  your  best  always,  though  the  occasion  be  one  of  the  very  least ; 
dignify  the  smallest  summons  by  the  greatness  of  your  response ;  so  the  call  wUl 
come  to  you  as  to  Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun,  Moses'  minister.  II.  A  distinct  call. 
The  supreme  inquiry  for  each  of  us,  when  summoned  to  a  new  work,  is  not  whether 
we  possess  sufficient  strength  or  qualification  for  it,  but  if  we  have  been  called  to 
it  of  God ;  and  when  that  is  so  there  is  no  further  cause  for  anxiety.  If  it  is  in  His  plan 
that  we  should  march  through  a  river,  or  attack  a  walled  town,  or  turn  to  flight 
an  army,  we  have  simply  to  go  forward.  Elvers  will  dry  up,  walls  wUl  fall  down, 
armies  shall  be  scattered  as  snow  in  summer.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  im- 
possibility when  God  says,  "  Forward,  soul,  arise,  go  over  this  Jordan  1  "  HI,  Thb 
SENSE  OF  THE  PRESENCE  OF  GoD.  There  havo  been  generals  whose  presence  on 
the  field  of  battle  has  been  the  presage  and  guarantee  of  victory.  Not  only  have 
they  inspired  the  soldiers  with  a  sense  of  confidence  in  their  leadership,  but  they 
have  encouraged  them  by  their  personal  prowess  and  bravery.  There  is  a  marvel- 
lous sense  of  security  and  courage  when  a  Christiana,  a  Mr.  Fearing,  or  a  Miss 
Much-Afraid  is  assured  of  the  presence  of  a  Greatheart,  who  has  never  turned  his 
back  on  a  foe.  And  a  lonely,  trembling  soul  dares  to  step  bravely  across  the 
margin  of  life  into  the  unknown  beyond :  to  go  down  unabashed  into  the  chUl 
■waters  of  death,  because  it  can  sing,  "  Thou  art  with  me ;  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  they 
comfort  me."  IV.  The  indwelling  of  the  Word  of  God.  Coal  contains  within 
its  texture  the  strength  absorbed  from  the  sun  in  bygone  ages ;  so  words  will  pass 
on  to  men  the  heroic  thoughts  which  thrilled  the  souls  of  those  who  spake  them 
first.  There  are  words,  as  there  are  strains  of  music,  which  cannot  be  uttered 
without  nerving  men  to  dare  and  do,  to  attempt  and  achieve.  A  woman  will  be 
strong  to  wait  and  suffer  for  long  years  m  the  strength  of  a  sentence  spoken  by  her 
lover  as  he  parted  from  her.  An  army  has  before  now  forgot  sleepless  nights 
and  hungry  marches  in  the  stirring  harangue  of  its  general.    And  is  not  this  what 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSHUA.  19 

the  prophet  meant,  when  he  said,  "  Thy  words  were  found  and  I  did  eat  them,  and 
Thy  words  were  unto  me  a  joy,  and  the  rejoicing  of  my  heart "  ?  and  what  Jesus 
meant  when  He  said,  "  The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  they  are  spirit,  and  they 
are  life "  ?  We  can  do  all  things  when  Christ  is  in  us  in  unthwarted  power. 
The  only  limit  lies  in  our  faith  and  capacity,  or,  in  other  words,  in  our  absolute 
submission  to  His  indwelling.  Little  children  can  overcome  when  there  is  within 
them  a  Stronger  than  their  foes.  Weaklings  may  do  exploits  when  the  Mighty 
Conqueror  who  travels  in  the  greatness  of  His  strength  makes  them  the  vehicle  of 
His  progress.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  strength  and  courage  needed  for  common 
life : — "  Be  thou  strong  and  very  courageous."  What  to  do  ?  To  lead  the  army  ? 
To  batter  down  strong  walls  and  enter  into  the  imminent,  deadly  breach  ?  Nay, 
all  this  is  left  out  of  sight ;  the  exhortation  to  be  "  strong  and  very  courageous  "  is 
given  solely  with  a  moral  application.  A  man  shows  himself  more  brave  in  an 
inflexible  adherence  to  the  law  of  God  as  the  the  rule  of  his  life  in  all  things  than 
in  any  feats  of  arms  or  deeds  of  daring.  I.  A  sufficient  rule  of  guidance  fob 
LIFE.  Joshua  had ;  we  have.  Our  law  is  the  whole  gospel,  as  requiring  from 
us  a  practical  and  loving  and  continuous  obedience.  To  be  "  strong  "  is  to  make 
endeavour  to  go  forward  and  grasp  something  in  the  Divine  life  ;  it  is  to  take  up  a 
certain  position  in  practical  obedience,  and  say  (not  ostentatiously  yet  clearly),  "  I 
am  here,  I  stand  by  this."  To  be  "  of  good  courage  "  is  to  maintain  that  position 
against  the  force  of  temptation  and  opposition  of  every  kind ;  is  to  say  firmly,  "  Here 
I  shall  abide,  I  cannot  go  back  from  this."  Well,  but  a  life  that  consists  of 
gaining  new  positions,  and  grasping  new  things,  and  defending  all  that  is  thus 
attained,  is  of  necessity  a  life  of  enterprise  and  progress.  And  such  a  life,  in 
this  world,  will  certainly  meet  with  a  great  deal  of  opposition,  silent  and 
declared,  and  will  require  a  great  deal  of  strength  and  courage  in  those  who  seek 
to  lead  it.  1.  Indeed,  we  might  truly  say  that  strength  and  courage  are  needed  at 
home,  and  with  ourselves,  before  we  meet  the  world  at  all.  The  critical  point 
of  the  struggle  is  within.  Let  me  be  strong,  then,  against  my  inferior  self  I 
Let  me  grip  him  hard,  and  wrestle  with  him,  until  he  is  overthrown  1  Let  me 
be  very  courageous  against  his  withering  and  insidious  suggestions.  2.  Then  also, 
strength  and  courage  are  needed  constantly  and  much  in  the  Church,  i.e.,  among 
Christian  people.  One  Christian  needs  to  be  strong  against  other  Christians — in 
this  way  as  well  as  in  others — that  every  Christian  has  his  own  inner  thought 
of  what  he  ought  to  be  and  do  ;  his  own  ideal,  as  we  call  it.  3.  Then  still  more  is 
courage  needed,  and  strength,  when  you  go  more  fully  out  into  the  world.  Here 
are  certain  principles  in  the  law  of  Christ,  as  the  regulative  system  of  a  Christian's 
life,  principles  of  honour  and  honesty,  of  purity,  sobriety,  love,  and  self-denial,  of 
humility  and  gentleness,  which  are  clearly  different  from  the  principles  that  obtain 
in  the  world  generally.  Not  that  contrary  principles  are  professed  openly  in  the 
world  except  by  a  few ;  but  that  contrary,  or  at  any  rate  far  inferior,  principles 
are  acted  upon,  through  the  world,  in  its  different  spheres,  commercial,  political, 
literary,  social,  is  just  as  certain  as  it  is  that  there  is  a  world  at  all.  One  great 
point  of  duty  with  Christians  just  now,  I  think,  ought  to  be  the  endeavour  to  live 
simple  lives,  so  as,  if  possible,  to  pull  back  this  drifting  society  of  ours  towards  the 
simplicity  it  has  lost.  4.  Again,  it  is  sometimes  necessary  to  speak  frankly  and 
boldly  in  condemnation  of  the  action  or  in  opposition  to  the  speaking  of  others. 

II.    How    WE   MAT   ATTAIN    THIS    TEMPER    AND     HABIT     OF     CHRISTIAN     COURAGE.       It     iS 

fed  by  truth,  by  the  law,  or  the  revealed  truth  of  God.  What  men  call  "  spirit," 
the  mere  dash  and  effervescence  of  nature,  will  soon  evaporate ;  but  when  the  soul 
has  found  the  flowing  fountains  of  strength,  and  drinks  of  the  same  day  by  day, 
her  courage  will  be  day  by  day  renewed.  Again,  not  only  must  we  take  the  Word 
of  God  iato  our  daily  thought  and  meditation,  but  beheving  the  wonderful  assurance  it 
gives  us  of  the  actual  presence  of  the  speaker,  the  Lord,  with  those  who  serve  Him, 
we  must  make  room  for  Him  in  our  daily  life,  and  lean  upon  the  almighty  arm,  and 
even  in  the  darkest  and  most  unsuccessful  moments  sit  silent  to  hear  the  great  reviving 
words,  "  The  Lord  thy  God  is  with  thee  whithersoever  thou  goest."  {A.Raleigh,  B.I).) 
The  charge  to  the  soldier  of  the  Lord: — I.  The  duty  of  courageous  strength. 
Christianity  has  altered  the  perspective  of  human  virtues,  has  thrown  the  gentler 
ones  into  prominence  altogether  unknown  before,  and  has  dimmed  the  brilliancy 
of  the  old  heroic  type  of  character ;  but  it  has  not  struck  those  virtues  out  of  its 
list.  Still,  there  is  as  much  need  in  the  lowliest  Christian  life  for  the  loftiest 
heroism  as  ever  there  was.  All  Christian  progress  is  conflict,  and  we  have  to 
fight,  not  only  with  the  evils  that  are  within,  but  if  we  would  be  true  to  the 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

obligations  of  our  profession  and  loyal  to  the  commands  of  our  Master,  we  have 
to  take  our  part  in  the  great  campaign  which  He  has  inaugurated  and  is  ever 
carrying  on  against  every  abuse  and  oppression,  iniquity  and  sin,  that  grinds 
down  the  world  and  makes  our  brethren  miserable  and  servile.  Be  strong  1  Then 
strength  is  a  duty;  then  weakness  is  a  sin.  Then  the  amount  of  strength  that 
we  possess  and  wield  is  regulated  by  ourselves.  We  have  our  hands  on  the 
sluice.  We  may  open  it  to  let  the  whole  fuU  tide  run  in,  or  we  may  close  it 
till  a  mere  dribble  reaches  us.  For  the  strength  which  is  strength,  and  not  merely 
weakness  in  a  fever,  is  a  strength  derived.  "Be  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the 
power  of  His  might."  Let  Christ's  strength  in.  Open  the  heart  wide  that  it  may 
come.  Keep  yourself  in  continual  touch  with  God,  the  fountain  of  aU  power. 
Trust  is  strength,  because  trust  touches  the  Eock  of  Ages.  But  courage  is  duty, 
too,  as  well  as  strength.  Power  and  the  consciousness  of  power  do  not  always 
go  together.  In  regard  of  the  strength  of  nature,  courage  and  might  are  quite 
separable.  There  may  be  a  strong  coward  and  a  weak  hero.  But  in  the  spiritual 
region,  strength  and  courage  do  go  together.  The  consciousness  of  the  Divine  power 
with  us,  and  that  alone,  will  make  us  bold  with  a  boldness  that  has  no  taint  of 
levity  and  presumption  mingled  with  it,  and  never  will  overestimate  its  own 
strength.  II.  The  duty  of  implicit  obedience  to  the  word  of  command.  Courage 
and  strength  come  first,  and  on  them  follows  the  command  to  do  all  according  to 
the  law,  to  keep  it  without  deflection  to  right  or  left,  and  to  meditate  on  it  day  and 
night.  These  two  virtues  make  the  perfect  soldier — courage  and  obedience.  But 
the  connection  between  these  two  is  not  merely  that  they  must  co-exist,  but  that 
courage  and  strength  are  needed  for,  and  are  to  find  their  noblest  field  of  exercise 
in,  absolute  acceptance  of,  and  unhesitating,  swift,  complete,  unmurmuring  obe- 
dience to,  everything  that  is  discerned  to  be  God's  will  and  our  duty.  For  the 
Christian  soldier,  then,  God's  law  is  his  marching  orders.  The  written  Word,  and 
especially  the  Incarnate  Word,  are  our  law  of  conduct.  Christ  has  given  us  Him- 
self, and  therein  has  given  a  sufficient  directory  for  conduct  and  conflict  which  fits 
close  to  all  our  needs,  and  will  prove  definite  and  practical  enough  if  we  honestly 
try  to  apply  it.  The  application  of  Christ's  law  to  daily  life  takes  some  courage, 
and  is  the  proper  field  for  the  exercise  of  Christian  strength.  If  you  are  not  a  bold 
Christian  you  will  very  soon  get  frightened  out  of  obedience  to  your  Master's 
commandments.  Courage,  springing  from  the  realisation  of  God's  helping 
strength,  is  indispensable  to  make  any  man,  in  any  age,  live  out,  thoroughly  and 
consistently,  the  principles  of  the  the  law  of  Jesus  Christ.  No  man  in  this 
generation  will  work  out  a  punctual  obedience  to  what  he  knows  to  be  the  will  of 
God,  without  finding  out  that  aU  the  Canaanites  are  not  dead  yet,  but  that  there 
are  enough  of  them  left  to  make  a  very  thorny  life  for  the  consistent  follower  of  Jesus 
Christ.  And  not  only  is  there  courage  needed  for  the  application  of  the  principles 
of  conduct  which  God  has  given  us,  but  you  will  never  have  them  handy  for  swift 
application  unless,  in  many  a  quiet  hour  of  silent,  solitary,  patient  meditation,  you 
have  become  familiar  with  them.  IH.  The  sure  victory  of  such  bold  obedience  : 
«'  thou  may  est  prosper  whithersoever  thou  goest  "  ;  "  thou  shalt  make  thy  way 
prosperous,  and  then  shalt  thou  have  good  success,"  or,  as  the  last  word  might  be 
rendered,  "  then  shalt  thou  •  act  wisely.' "  You  may  not  get  victory  from  an  earthly 
point  of  view,  for  many  a  man  that  lives  strong  and  courageous  and  joyfuUy 
obeying  God's  law  as  far  as  he  knows  it,  and  because  he  loves  the  Lawgiver,  goes 
through  life,  and  finds  that,  as  far  as  the  world's  estimate  is  concerned,  there  is 
nothing  but  failure  as  his  portion.  The  success  which  my  text  means  is  the 
carrying  out  of  conscientious  convictions  of  God's  wiU  into  practice.  That  is  the 
only  success  that  is  worth  talking  about  or  looking  for.  The  man  that  succeeds  in 
obeying  and  translating  God's  will  into  conduct  is  the  victor,  whatever  be  the 
outward  fruits  of  his  life.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Strength  and  courage  : — Joshua 
must  be  strong  and  very  courageous.  But  are  strength  and  courage  really  within 
our  own  power  ?  Is  strength  not  absolutely  a  Divine  gift,  and  as  dependent  on  God 
in  its  ordinary  degrees  as  it  was  in  the  case  of  Samson  in  its  highest  degree  ?  No 
doubt  in  a  sense  it  is  so ;  and  yet  the  amount  even  of  our  bodily  strength  is  not 
wholly  beyond  our  own  control.  As  bodily  strength  is  undoubtedly  weakened  by 
careless  living,  by  excess  of  eating  and  drinking,  by  all  irregular  habits,  by  the 
breathing  of  foul  air,  by  indolence  and  self-indulgence  of  every  kind,  so  undoubtedly 
it  is  increased  and  promoted  by  attention  to  the  simple  laws  of  health,  by  activity 
and  exercise,  by  sleep  and  sabbatic  rest,  by  the  moderate  use  of  wholesome  food,  as 
well  as  by  abstinence  from  hurtful  drinks  and  drugs.     And  surely  the  duty  of  being 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSHUA.  21 

strong,  in  so  far  as  such  things  can  give  strength,  is  of  far  more  importance  than 
many  thiak ;  for  if  we  can  thus  maintain  and  increase  our  strength  we  shall  be 
able  to  serve  both  God  and  man  much  better  and  longer  than  we  could  otherwise 
have  done.  But  in  Joshua's  case  it  was  no  doubt  strength  and  courage  of  soul  that 
was  mainly  meant.  Even  that  is  not  wholly  independent  of  the  ordinary  conditions 
of  the  body.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  no  doubt  memorable  cases  where  the 
elasticity  and  power  of  the  spirit  have  been  in  the  very  inverse  ratio  to  the  strength 
of  the  body.  By  cheerful  views  of  life  and  duty,  natural  depression  has  been 
counteracted,  and  the  soul  filled  with  hope  and  joy.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord,"  said 
Nehemiah,  "  is  the  strength  of  His  people."  Fellowship  with  God,  as  our  reconciled 
God  and  Father  in  Christ,  is  a  source  of  perpetual  strength.  Who  does  not  know 
the  strengthening  and  animating  influence  of  the  presence  even  of  a  friend, 
when  we  find  his  fresh  and  joyous  temperament  playing  on  us  in  some  season 
of  depression  ?  The  radiance  of  his  face,  the  cheeriness  of  his  voice,  the  elasticity 
of  his  movements  seem  to  infuse  new  hope  and  courage  into  the  jaded  soul.  When 
he  is  gone  we  try  to  shake  off  the  despondent  feeling  that  has  seized  us,  and  gird 
ourselves  anew  for  the  battle  of  life.  And  if  such  an  effect  can  be  produced  by 
fellowship  with  a  fellow-creature,  how  much  more  by  fellowship  with  the  infinite 
God  ! — especially  when  it  is  His  work  we  are  trying  to  do,  and  when  we  have  all 
His  promises  of  help  to  rest  on.  "  God  is  near  thee,  therefore  cheer  thee,"  is  a 
perpetual  solace  and  stimulus  to  the  Christian  soul.  (TF.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.) 
Christian  fortitude : — 1.  Fortitude  in  bearing.  2.  Fortitude  in  attempting  or  assailing. 
(D.  Featley,  D.D.)  God's  strength  made  perfect  in  human  weakness : — What  I  must 
all  they  whom  God  uses  be  strong  ?  Is  it  essential  that  there  should  be  strength  of 
limb  and  muscle  in  the  physical  and  moral  constitution  of  those  who  are  called  to 
do  the  Divine  biddings  in  the  world?  Because,  if  that  be  so,  we  who  are  like 
Ehud,  left-handed,  like  Gideon,  least  in  our  father's  house,  or  like  Saul  of  Tarsus, 
painfully  conscious  of  weakness,  can  never  get  beyond  the  rank  and  file  in  the  army 
of  the  Lord.  And  yet,  may  not  this  reiterated  appeal  indicate  that  the  heart  of 
Joshua  misgave  him,  and  that  he  was  conscious  of  his  utter  inadequacy  to  fulfil  the 
great  commission  that  was  thrust  upon  him  ?  Probably  he  had  never  dreamt  of  so 
high  an  honour,  so  vast  a  responsibility.  When,  therefore,  the  call  came  to  him  to 
assume  the  office  which  Moses  was  vacating,  his  heart  failed  him,  and  he  needed 
every  kind  of  encouragement  and  stimulus,  both  from  God  and  man.  "  Be  strong  " 
means  that  he  felt  weak;  "Be  of  good  courage "  means  that  he  was  affrighted ; 
"  Be  not  thou  dismayed  "  means  that  he  seriously  considered  whether  he  would 
not  have  to  give  up  the  task.  He  was  a  worm  and  no  man ;  how  should  he  deUver 
Israel  ?  It  is  when  men  are  in  this  condition  that  God  approaches  them  with  the 
summons  to  undertake  vast  and  overwhelming  responsibilities.  Most  of  us  are  too 
strong  for  Him  to  use  us,  too  full  of  our  own  schemes  and  plans  and  ways  of  doing 
things.  He  must  empty  us,  and  humble  us,  and  bring  us  down  to  the  dust 
of  death,  so  low  that  we  need  every  straw  of  encouragement,  every  leaf  of  help ;  and 
then  He  will  raise  us  up,  and  make  us  as  the  rod  of  His  strength.  The  world  talks 
of  the  survival  of  the  fittest.  But  God  gives  power  to  the  faint,  and  increases 
might  to  them  that  have  no  strength ;  He  perfects  His  strength  in  weakness,  and 
uses  things  that  are  not  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
Courage  necessary  : — It  is  said  of  Cromwell  that  when  he  had  gathered  some  raw 
troops,  being  much  in  doubt  about  their  courage,  he  determined  to  put  it  to  the  test 
before  employing  them  in  active  service.  He  therefore  placed  a  number  of  soldiers 
in  ambush,  in  a  wood  through  which  he  had  occasion  to  lead  his  new  regiment, 
and  when  these  rushed  out  suddenly  upon  the  new  levies  all  the  timid  among  them 
turned  and  fled.  These  Cromwell  sent  to  their  homes  as  unfit  for  his  service,  and 
so  commenced  the  training  of  the  men  who  became  known  to  history  as  his 
"  Ironsides."  A  dauntless  spirit  : — Pleopidas  hearing  that  his  enemy  was 
coming  to  give  him  battle  with  double  the  number  that  he  possessed  himself, 
replied  to  his  informant,  '*  So  much  the  better  for  us :  we  shaU  beat  so  many 
the  more."  So  should  the  Christian  view  the  trials  and  sorrows  of  this  life,  be 
they  never  so  many.  Through  Christ  they  may  all  be  overcome.  {Handbook  of 
Illustration.)  Unto  this  people  shalt  thou  divide  ,  .  .  the  land. — The  right 
people  for  the  land : — First  of  aU,  the  land  had  to  be  conquered ;  and  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  seeing  how  necessary  it  was  for  one  who  had  this  task  on  hand  to  be 
strong  and  of  a  good  courage,  and  to  meditate  on  God's  law.  Then  the  land  had  to 
be  divided,  and  the  people  settled  in  their  new  life,  and  Joshua  had  to  initiate  them, 
as  it  were,  in  that  life ;  he  had  to  bind  on  their  consciences  the  conditions  on  which 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

the  land  was  to  be  enjoyed,  and  start  them  in  the  performance  of  the  duties,  moral, 
social,  and  religious,  which  the  Divine  constitution  required.  Here  lay  the  most 
difficult  part  of  his  task.  They  had  not  only  to  be  planted  physically  in  groups 
over  the  country,  but  they  had  to  be  married  to  it  morally,  otherwise  they  had  no 
security  of  tenure,  but  were  Uable  to  summary  eviction.  It  was  no  land  of  rest  for 
idolaters  ;  all  depended  on  the  character  they  attained :  loyalty  to  God  was  the  one 
condition  of  a  happy  settlement.  Thus  we  see  the  connection  between  Joshua's 
devotion  to  the  book  of  the  law  and  success  in  the  great  work  of  his  life — "  then 
thou  shalt  make  thy  way  prosperous,  and  then  thou  shalt  have  good  success."  No 
doubt  he  would  have  the  appearance  of  success  if  he  simply  cleared  out  the 
inhabitants  who  were  so  degraded  by  sin  that  God  was  compelled  to  sweep  them  off, 
and  settled  His  people  in  their  room.  But  that,  after  all,  was  but  a  small  matter 
unless  accompanied  by  something  more.  It  would  not  secure  the  people  from  at 
last  sharing  the  fate  of  the  old  inhabitants  ;  so  far  at  least  that  though  they  should 
not  be  exterminated,  yet  they  would  be  scattered  over  the  face  of  the  globe.  And  so 
at  all  times,  in  dealing  with  human  beings,  we  can  obtain  no  adequate  and  satis- 
fying success  unless  their  hearts  are  turned  to  God.  Your  children  may  be  great 
scholars,  or  successful  merchants,  or  distinguished  authors,  or  brilliant  artists,  or 
even  statesmen ;  what  does  it  come  to  if  they  are  dead  to  God,  and  have  no  living 
fellowship  with  Jesus  Christ?  {W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.)  Turn  not  ...  to  the 
right  hand  or  to  the  left. — Joshua's  obedience  : — I.  Obedience  is  the  highest 
PRACTICAL  COURAGE.  The  world  counts  obedience  to  be  a  mean-spirited  thing,  and 
speaks  of  rebellion  as  freedom.  We  have  heard  men  say,  "I  will  be  my  own 
master ;  I  shall  follow  my  own  will."  To  be  a  free  thinker  and  a  free  liver  seema 
to  be  the  worldling's  glory.  Take  the  world's  own  martial  rule.  Who  is  accounted 
to  be  the  boldest  and  the  best  soldier  but  the  man  who  is  most  thoroughly  obedient 
to  the  captain's  command  ?  There  is  a  story  told  of  the  old  French  wars  which 
has  been  repeated  hundreds  of  times.  A  sentinel  is  set  to  keep  a  certain  position, 
and  at  nightfall,  as  he  is  pacing  to  and  fro,  the  emperor  himself  comes  by.  He 
does  not  know  the  password.  Straightway  the  soldier  stops  him.  "  Ton  cannot 
pass,"  says  he.  "But  I  must  pass,"  says  the  emperor.  "No,"  repUes  the  man, 
"  if  you  were  the  little  corporal  in  grey  himself  you  should  not  go  by,"  by  which,  of 
course,  he  meant  the  emperor.  Thus  the  autocrat  himself  was  held  in  check  by 
order.  The  vigilant  soldier  was  afterwards  handsomely  rewarded,  and  all  the 
world  said  that  he  was  a  brave  fellow.  Then  surely  it  is  not  a  mean  and  sneaking 
thing  for  a  man  to  be  obedient  to  Him  who  is  the  Commander-in-chief  of  the 
universe,  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  II.  The  exactness  op  obedienxe 
IS  the  essence  of  obedience.  The  world  saith,  "  We  must  not  be  too  precise." 
As  one  said  to  an  old  Puritan  once,  "  Many  people  have  rent  their  consciences  in 
halves;  could  not  you  just  make  a  Httle  nick  in  yours?"  "No,"  he  said,  "I 
cannot,  for  my  conscience  belongs  to  God."  "  We  must  live,  you  know,"  said  a 
money-loving  shopkeeper,  as  his  excuse  for  doing  what  he  could  not  otherwise 
defend.  "Yes,  but  we  must  die,"  was  the  reply,  "and  therefore  we  must  do  no 
such  thing."  We  are  probably  better  dead  if  we  cannot  live  without  doing  wrong. 
The  very  essence  of  obedience  lies  in  exactness.  Probably  your  child,  if  some- 
times disobedient,  would  still,  as  a  general  rule,  do  what  you  told  him.  It  would 
be  in  the  little  things  that  thoroughgoing  and  commendable  obedience  would  appear. 
Let  the  world  judge  of  this  for  itself.  Here  is  an  honest  man.  Do  people  say  of 
him,  "  He  is  such  an  honest  man  that  he  would  not  steal  a  horse  "  ?  No,  that 
would  not  prove  him  to  be  very  honest ;  but  they  say,  "  He  would  not  even  take  a 
pin  that  did  not  belong  to  him."  That  is  the  world's  own  description  of  honesty, 
and  surely  when  it  comes  to  obedience  to  God  it  ought  to  be  the  same.  If  I  profess 
to  obey  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  crucial  test  will  not  be  in  great  actions,  but  in 
little  ones.  HI.  The  path  of  obedience  is  generally  a  middle  path.  There  is  sure 
to  be  a  right  hand,  there  is  sure  to  be  a  left  hand,  and  both  are  probably  wrong. 
There  will  be  extremes  on  either  side.  I  believe  that  this  is  true  in  ten  thousand 
things  in  ordinary  life,  and  also  true  in  spiritual  things  in  very  many  respects. 
With  regard,  for  instance,  to  our  words ;  the  course  of  speech  generally  is,  on  the 
one  hand  to  say  too  much,  or  on  the  other  hand  to  say  too  little  ;  to  be  silent  when 
the  wicked  are  belore  us,  or  else  to  be  rash  with  our  lips  and  betray  a  good  cause 
through  our  rashness  in  defending  it.  There  is  a  time  to  speak,  and  there  is  a  time 
to  be  silent,  and  he  that  judgeth  well  will  mark  his  opportunities  and  take  the 
middle  course.  He  will  neither  be  garrulous  with  advice  that  is  not  required,  nor 
will  he  be  cowardly  and  dumb  when  he  ought  to  bear  testimony  for  Ms  Master. 


CHAP.  I.]  J^OSHUA.  23 

The  same  holds  good  with  regard  to  zeal.  We  have  some  abroad  nowadays  whose 
heads  are  very  hot.  They  talk  as  if  they  would  turn  the  world  upside  down,  whilst 
it  is  their  own  brains  that  need  first  to  be  turned  into  a  right  condition.  Theirs  is 
a  fire  which  burns  down  the  house  instead  of  burning  in  the  grate  and  warming  the 
household.  But  shall  we  therefore  not  be  zealous  ?  God  forbid !  There  is  a 
middle  course  of  true,  sensible,  prudent  zeal — adhering  to  the  truth,  and  never 
believing  that  people  can  be  converted  by  lies,  however  earnestly  bawled  into  their 
ears  ;  walking  within  the  bounds  of  God's  truth,  and  being  persuaded  that  the  best 
seed  to  sow  is  that  which  God  puts  into  the  basket  of  His  Word,  and  that  sinners 
are  not  to  be  saved  by  rash  statements  nor  by  extravagant  declamation,  but  that 
they  are  brought  to  Christ,  as  they  were  of  old,  by  the  simple  teUing  out  of  the  story 
of  the  Cross  affectionately,  and  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from 
heaven.  Here,  again,  "  turn  neither  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left."  IV.  The 
PATH  OF  RIGHT  IS  THE  PATH  OF  TRUE  PROSPERITY.  God  does  Hot  invariably  make  the 
doing  of  the  right  to  be  the  means  of  pecuniary  gain  to  us.  On  the  contrary,  it 
frequently  happens  that  for  a  time  men  are  great  losers  by  their  obedience  to 
Christ.  But  the  Scripture  always  speaks  as  to  the  long  run ;  it  sums  up  the  whole 
of  life — there  it  promises  true  riches.  If  thou  wouldst  prosper,  keep  close  to  the 
Word  of  God,  and  to  thy  conscience,  and  thou  shalt  have  the  best  prosperity. 
The  thief,  though  he  takes  a  short  way  to  get  rich,  yet  takes  such  a  dangerous  way 
that  it  does  not  pay  ;  but  he  who  walks  straight  along  the  narrow  road  shall  find 
it  to  be  the  shortest  way  to  the  best  kind  of  prosperity,  both  in  this  world  and  in 
that  which  is  to  come.  If  not,  if  we  get  no  outward  prosperity  here,  I  trust  you  and 
I,  if  we  love  Christ,  and  are  filled  with  His  Spirit,  can  do  without  it.  Well,  if  we 
must  be  poor,  it  will  soon  be  over,  and  in  heaven  there  shall  be  no  poverty.  Let  us, 
then,  run  all  risks  for  Christ.  He  is  no  soldier  who  cannot  die  for  his  country ; 
he  is  no  Christian  who  cannot  lose  life  itself  for  Christ.  (C.  H.  Sturgeon.) 
Obedience  the  condition  of  victory  : — Yes,  the  Lord  will  be  with  us  in  our  holy  war, 
but  He  demands  of  us  that  we  strictly  follow  His  rules.  1.  Our  victories  will  very 
much  depend  upon  our  obeying  Him  with  aU  our  heart,  throwing  strength  and 
courage  into  the  actions  of  our  faith.  If  we  are  half-hearted,  we  cannot  expect 
more  than  half  a  blessing.  2.  We  must  obey  the  Lord  with  care  and  thoughtful- 
ness.  3.  We  must  obey  with  universal  readiness.  We  may  not  pick  and  choose, 
but  must  take  all  the  Lord's  commands  as  they  come.  4.  In  all  this  we  must  go  on 
with  exactness  and  constancy.  Ours  is  to  be  a  straightforward  course,  which 
bends  neither  to  the  right  nor  to  the  left.  {Ibid.)  This  book  of  the  law  shall 
not  depart  out  of  thy  mouth  ;  but  thou  shalt  meditate  therein. — A  good  working 
Bible  : — Bare  botanical  specimens  are  found  by  diligent  searching.  It  is  by  earnest 
aind  prayerful  study  of  the  Bible  that  we  discover  truths  that  we  may  call  our  own. 
We  have  a  brother  who  has  been  working  in  the  gold  mines  of  California  for  many 
years.  He  has  a  watch-chain  that  he  greatly  values  because  the  gold  in  it  is  what 
he  searched  and  dug  out  of  the  mountain  himself  by  hard  labour  and  much 
sacrifice.  Truths  discovered  as  the  result  of  hard  study  are  very  precious  to  us. 
The  Bible  should  be  an  every-day  book  to  U3.  A  very  handsome  and  expensive 
Bible  on  the  parlour  stand,  covered  with  a  bric-A-brac,  is  of  little  value  as  compared 
with  a  good  working  Bible.  A  well-known  Sunday-school  worker  tells  of  going  into 
a  house  in  North  Wales.  As  he  sat  by  a  table  talking  with  a  little  girl,  he  picked 
up  a  Bible,  when  she  instantly  said,  "  That's  my  mother's  every-day  Bible,  sir ;  I'll 
give  you  the  Sunday  Bible  if  you  want  to  read."  We  all  need  an  every-day  Bible, 
one  that  can  be  handled  easily  and  conveniently — a  Bible  with  every  precious 
promise  and  every  verse  that  has  been  especially  helpful  to  us  mai"ked.  The  Jews 
were  commanded  to  read  the  Scripture  all  the  time,  to  wi-ite  it  upon  the  door-posts ; 
to  have  it  as  frontlets  between  their  eyes ;  to  talk  of  it  by  the  way,  and  teacti  it  to 
their  children  and  children's  children.  {Home  Messenger.)  God's  revealed  will  the 
only  safe  rule  for  all  individual  guidance,  and  the  only  legitimate  foundation  for  all 
national  law  : — I.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  evert  man  should  have  a 
SURE  guide  for  THE  DIRECTION  OF  HIS  STEPS.  1.  If  you  cousidcr  the  character  and 
condition  of  man,  the  truth  before  us  must  claim  universal  acknowledgment.  Man 
is  the  creature  of  God.  His  being,  powers,  and  blessings  are  all  derived  from  his 
Maker.  He  is  therefore  bound  to  please  Him  in  all  his  ways  and  works.  But  how 
is  this  to  be  done  ?  By  what  measure,  so  to  speak,  or  after  what  manner,  is  this  love 
to  be  expressed,  and  this  obedience  to  be  rendered?  2.  If  you  consider  man  not  only 
as  the  mere  creature  of  God,  but  as  a  creature  endued  with  an  immortal  soul,  the 
trath  before  us  will  be  still  more  apparent.    3.  If  you  consider  man  as  a  sinner 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

before  God,  exposed  to  all  the  dreadful  consequences  of  his  rebellion,  and  utterly 
without  abihty  to  help  himself,  the  truth  of  this  position  must  still  more  strikingly 
appear.  4.  If  you  consider  man  as  exposed  to  all  the  vicissitudes  of  this  life — as 
subject  to  sorrow,  suffering,  and  pain,  as  liable  to  sickness,  affliction,  and  all  the 
other  evils  incident  to  our  present  existence — the  truth  of  this  position  must  claim 
the  approbation  of  all.  5.  If  you  consider  man  in  reference  to  death,  judgment, 
and  eternity,  no  voice  can  ever  be  lifted  up  in  opposition  to  this  truth.  II.  Wherb 
IS  THIS  SURE  GUIDE  TO  BE  MET  WITH  ?  1.  Is  man  Capable  of  furnishing  himself  with 
such  a  rule  ?  Evidently  not ;  and  that  not  merely  as  the  negative  applies  to  him  as 
he  now  is,  but  even  supposing  him  to  be  what  he  once  was.  2.  Consider  the  greatness 
and  importance  of  the  matters  at  stake,  and  it  must  be  confessed  that  it  would  not 
be  safe  to  trust  in  any  provision  coming  from  such  a  human  source,  even  supposing 
it  possible  that  it  could  be  provided.  3.  A  provision  of  this  kind,  coming  from  any 
human  source,  would  fall  below  the  circumstances  and  condition  in  which  we  are 
placed,  and  therefore  could  never  meet  the  exigencies  of  our  case,  nor,  consequently, 
answer  the  end  proposed.  4.  The  law,  or  revealed  will  of  God,  is  the  only  safe  rule 
for  all  individual  guidance,  as  well  as  the  only  legitimate  foundation  for  all  national 
law.  No  man's  ways  or  works  can  be  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  who  throws 
aside  that  rule  and  walks  by  the  light  of  his  own  fire.    III.  The  benefit  ahb 

ADVANTAGES   OF   FOIiLOWIKG   THAT    RULE   AND   ABIDING   THEREBY.      1.   We   shall  have  Sk 

sure  guide  for  the  direction  of  our  steps.  2.  We  shall  find  everything  plain  before 
us.  3.  We  shall  avoid  the  grievous  mistakes  and  blunders  into  which  others  have 
fallen.  4.  We  shall  find  abundant  provision  for  every  emergency.  5.  We  shall  be 
safe  and  prosperous  here,  and  happy  and  blessed  hereafter.  Conclusion :  1.  What 
an  invaluable  deposit  are  the  sacred  Scriptures  as  committed  to  any  nation  or 
people !  2.  How  widely  have  we  departed  from  these  sacred  rules  1  3.  How  needful 
it  is  that  we  should  make  these  Holy  Scriptures  our  constant  study  and  daily  coun- 
sellors 1  {R.  Shinier.)  The  Christian's  law  : — "  This  book  of  the  law,"  saith 
God  to  Joshua.  And  both  in  our  text  and  in  the  verse  preceding  it  is  set  forth  as  a 
rule  claiming  his  observance  and  obedience,  from  which  he  may  not  swerve.  In  a 
peculiar  sense  we  apply  this  term  to  the  five  books  of  Moses,  and  in  a  yet  more 
limited  one  to  the  Decalogue.  And  since  the  New  Testament  contains  so  fully  and 
BO  peculiarly  the  revelation  of  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  thus  abounds 
with  the  language  of  invitation,  promise,  and  privilege,  it  may  seem  as  though  to 
us  the  oracles  of  God  had  no  other  voice,  and  that  the  Bible  is  not  to  us  the  "  book 
of  the  law  "  of  God.  But  while  we  are  jealous  of  God's  grace,  let  us  beware  of  a 
dangerous  error.  The  Bible  does  propound  to  us  a  law — the  very  law  of  the  two 
tables  is  unrepealed.  Not  the  Jewish  law  as  our  code  of  worship  or  practice,  not 
any  law  as  the  means  of  our  justification,  but  the  laws  of  Christian  holiness  and 
virtue.  Our  Bibles  must  be  our  lamps,  our  lights,  our  counsellors— our  oracles  of 
duty  no  less  than  of  comfort.  And  while  the  Cross  furnishes  the  motive,  while  the 
Spirit  is  the  Teacher,  the  Author  and  Giver  alike  of  will  and  power,  the  precepts 
and  prohibitions  of  the  Bible  must  be  our  guide,  as  the  by-paths  of  sin  and  ruin 
present  themselves  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left.  We  are  not  to  go  to  this 
book  of  God  for  our  creed  or  system  of  theology  alone,  but  for  our  code  of  morals 
and  practice.  For  the  Bible  is  neither  all  doctrine,  nor  all  promise ;  it  has  its  rules, 
its  precepts,  its  prohibitions.  Its  precepts  based  upon  its  doctrine,  yoked  graciously 
with  its  promises,  but  precepts  still.  You  are  placed  from  day  to  day  amid  duties 
and  temptations.  Your  God,  your  fellow-men  have  many  claims  upon  you ;  you 
stand  in  many  and  varied  relationships.  You  are  a  pilgrim  in  a  road  bestrewed 
with  pitfalls  and  beset  with  by-paths  of  sin  and  error ;  a  soldier  amid  many  and 
subtle  and  mighty  foes,  with  a  hard  field  to  fight ;  a  voyager  over  a  stormy  sea, 
amid  shoals  and  rocks  and  quicksands.  Your  Bible  is  your  guide,  0  pilgrun— your 
sword,  O  soldier— your  chart,  0  seaman !  What  else  shall  preserve  you  even  in 
sound  doctrine  in  these  dangerous  days  but  that  ye  be  "  mighty  in  the  Scriptures," 
and  so  reject  another  gospel,  though  its  preachers  wore  the  garb  and  semblance  of 
angels,  yea,  though  (were  it  possible)  they  were  angels  of  light?  Or  what,  in 
reference  to  your  practice,  shall  secure  you  against  the  workings  of  sin's  deceitful- 
ness— against  the  deep  devices  of  your  arch-enemy,  the  tempter — against  the  false 
and  unscriptural  principles  of  the  world  around,  the  spurious  morality  which  passes 
current  among  men — what  but  "this  book  of  the  law"?— this  book  which  in  its 
revelations  is  pure,  unerring,  truth— which  in  its  precepts  is  all  pure  in  holiness, 
all  perfect  in  virtue.  But  draw  near  to  it  ever  as  remembering  that  you  are  listening 
to  the  voice  of  God,    Bow  down  to  its  revelations  therefore  as  unerring,  to  its 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSHUA.  25 

requirements  as  authoritative  and  supreme.  (J.  C.  Miller,  D.D.)  Meditation 
and  obedience  : — Many  devout  Christians  tell  us  that  they  find  it  profitable  to  take 
even  a  single  verse  and  make  it  peculiarly  the  subject  of  their  thoughts  throughout 
each  day — to  make  it  the  little  vein  in  the  mine  which  they  more  particularly  work 
out.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  many  of  the  vain  and  sinful  thoughts  which  pass 
through  our  minds  and  grieve  the  devout  Christian  might  thus  be  shut  out  were 
the  thoughts  and  memory  preoccupied  with  Divine  truth.  And  if  any  particularly 
mourn  that  their  thoughts,  when  left  to  themselves,  are  so  discursive  and  unprofit- 
able, that  they  know  so  little  of  religious  meditation,  it  may  be  well  for  them  thus 
to  choose  one  verse  of  their  daily  portion  and  make  it,  so  to  say,  the  text  of  their 
day's  thoughts.  Let  them  endeavour  to  fix  its  meaning,  let  them  follow  out  the 
train  of  thought  to  which  it  leads,  let  them  pray  over  it  in  a  special  manner.  And 
all  this  with  a  view  more  particularly  to  self -application.  But  our  duty  ends  not 
here.  The  seaman  studies  his  chart  and  has  his  compasses  on  board,  not  for  mere 
scientific  experiments,  but  that  he  may  voyage  in  safety  to  the  haven  whither  he 
■would  go,  amid  the  rocks  and  shoals  and  quicksands  which  beset  his  track.  We 
may  not  then  imagine  that  all  is  done  when  our  verses  or  chapters,  our  portion, 
however  long,  is  again  punctually  gone  through.  There  is  a  danger  of  this,  as 
there  is  a  danger  of  a  mere  formal  lip-service  in  our  prayers.  For,  as  to  say  prayers 
is  not  necessarily  to  pray,  so  there  is  a  reading  of  the  Word  of  God  with  the  mind 
and  the  lip  only.  Our  hearts  must  be  the  readers,  as  our  hearts  must  be  the 
petitioners.  And  then  throughout  the  day  the  duties  here  enjoined  must  be  prac- 
tised, the  sins  denounced  forsaken  and  shunned,  the  tempers  here  set  forth  as 
unchristian  struggled  with,  the  promises  here  given  lived  on,  the  heaven  here 
proffered  sought,  the  Saviour  and  the  God  of  whom  we  read  glorified,  {ibid,) 
Meditation: — When  the  impious  King  Antiochus  entered  the  temple  of  Jeru- 
salem to  lay  it  waste,  his  first  act  was  to  remove  the  golden  altar  and  the 
candlestick,  which  was  also  of  gold.  The  devil  acts  in  the  same  manner  when 
he  intends  to  deprive  of  spiritual  good  that  soul  which  is  the  temple  of  the 
living  God :  he  takes  from  it  the  altar — that  is,  fervour  of  mind ;  he  removes  from 
it  the  candlestick — that  is,  the  light  which  makes  known  the  eternal  maxims. 
Then  thou  shalt  make  thy  way  prosperous. — The  prosperous  way  .-—God's  blessing 
is  ever  upon  His  people,  and  He  will  ever  cause  that  the  way  of  His  commandments 
shall  be  found  the  way  of  happiness  and  good.  Therefore  it  is  true  that  His  people's 
way  is  a  prosperous  way,  that  they  "have  good  success."  The  Old  Testament 
promise  is — "whatsoever  thou  doest  it  shall  prosper" — the  New,  "we  know  that 
all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  Is  not  such  a  man 
prospering  ?  All  may  be  disappointment  and  failure  to  flesh  and  blood,  and  in  the 
estimate  of  sense.  He  may  not  know  or  see  or  feel  his  prosperity  at  this  moment, 
and  while  "  all  things "  are  working  together.  But  when  they  have  worked  and 
their  end  is  seen,  that  end  shall  be  found  an  end  of  blessing  and  prosperity.  For 
in  the  emphatic  language  of  the  Psalm,  "  The  Lord  knoweth  the  way  of  the 
righteous."  His  path  with  them  may  be  dark,  and  hard,  and  thorny,  but  it  is 
right ;  for  their  path  towards  Him  is  obedience  and  holiness.  In  what  but  blessed- 
ness can  that  path  issue  "which  the  Lord  approveth"?  Would  ye  know,  then, 
whether  God's  blessing  is  at  this  moment  upon  your  path  ?  Is  it  a  path  in  which 
you  are  guided  by  His  Word,  in  which  you  are  taking  it  as  a  lamp  to  your  feet,  as 
your  counsellor  and  your  delight?  If  so — let  it  be  hard — it  is  blessed!  Let  it  be 
tedious — your  Father's  face  of  love  is  shining  full  upon  it.  Or  if  at  this  moment 
some  cloud  is  casting  over  it  its  gloomy  shadow,  that  cloud  will  soon  be  gone, 
having  burst  in  mercy  upon  your  head.  (J.  C.  Miller,  D.D.)  The  Lord  thy  God 
is  with  thee  whithersoever  thou  goest. — God  with  the  good : — The  Lord,  whose 
command  is  universal ;  God,  whose  power  is  invincible ;  the  Lord  thy  God,  whose 
mercies  are  incomprehensible,  is  with  thee  whithersoever  thou  goest.  If  the  Lord 
thy  God  be  with  thee.  His  wisdom  is  with  thee  to  direct  thee.  His  power  to  protect 
thee,  His  strength  to  support  thee.  His  goodness  to  maintain  thee.  His  bounty  to 
reward  thee.  His  word  to  encourage  thee,  and  if  thou  die  under  His  banner,  His 
angels  presently  to  carry  thee  into  heaven.  Where  the  Israelites  lamentably  deplore 
their  ill  success  in  war,  they  attribute  it  to  God's  absence.  "  Thou  goest  not  forth," 
say  they,  "  with  our  armies."  The  Lacedemonians,  being  overtaken  by  the  Persian 
horse  and  overwhelmed  with  great  flights  of  arrows,  did  notwithstanding  quietly 
sit  still,  without  making  any  resistance  at  all,  or  defence,  till  the  sacrifices  for 
victory  were  happily  ended;  yea,  though  many  were  sore  hurt,  and  some  slain 
oatrignt  before  any  good  sign  appeared  in  the  entrails ;  bat  as  soon  as  their  general. 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Pausanias,  had  found  good  tokens  of  victory,  and  persuaded  his  soldiers  of  the 
Divine  approbation  of  their  war,  they  arose,  and  with  excellent  courage  first  received 
the  charge  of  the  barbarians,  and  after  charged  them  afresh,  and  slew  Mardonius, 
the  Persian  general,  and  many  thousands  of  the  rest,  and  got  the  day.  If  the 
conjectural  hope  of  the  aid  and  assistance  of  a  sainted  deity  put  such  courage  and 
resolution  into  the  Lacedaemonians,  shall  not  faith  in  the  true  God  and  confidence 
in  His  help  breed  better  blood,  and  infuse  nobler  spirits  into  the  hearts  of  God's 
warriors  and  Christian  soldiers  ?  God  can  save  His,  and  overcome  the  enemy  as 
well  with  small  forces  as  with  great,  but  aU  the  forces  in  the  world  without  Him 
have  no  force  at  all.  (D.  Featley,  D.I).)  An  inspiring  presence : — When  Napoleon 
first  started  to  fight  our  country  and  Austria,  do  you  know  what  our  soldiers  called 
him?  It  was  "  Wee  One-hundred-thousand-men."  That  was  a  fine  name.  It  was 
a  grand  testimony  to  the  power  of  the  little  Napoleon  in  the  midst  of  his  army. 
They  asked  one  another,  "  Is  '  Wee  One-hundred-thousand-men '  in  the  army 
to-day?  "  He  was  worth  that  number  of  men.  Please  tell  me  at  what  figure  you 
rate  the  Son  of  God.  Is  He  in  the  battle  to-day  ?  {J.  Robertson.)  The  presence 
of  the  Master : — Bacon  has  well  said,  that  a  dog  is  brave  and  generous  when  he 
believes  himself  backed  by  his  master,  but  timid  and  crouching,  especially  in  a 
strange  place,  when  he  is  alone  and  his  master  away ;  and  a  human  master,  says 
the  philosopher,  is  as  a  god  to  the  dog. 

Vers.  10,  11.   Within  three  days  ye  shall  pass  over  this  Jordan. — Three  days' 
jiause : — I.  What  this  pause  meant.      "  Three  days  "   is  a  recognised  period  in 
Scripture  for  death  and  resurrection.    But  there  was  another  and  deeper  reason  for 
the  delay,  which  closely  touches  one  of  the  greatest  principles  of  the  inner  life. 
When  Israel  reached  its  banks,  the  Jordan  was  in  flood,  and  overflowing  the  low- 
lying  lands  on  either  side  of  its  bed.     Across  the  river  stood  Jericho,  embosomed 
in  palms  and  tamarisks,  in  a  very  pai'adise  of  exquisite  vegetation,  its  aromatic 
shrubs  and   gardens  scenting  the  air.     But   as  the  people  beheld  it,  all   their 
cherished  hopes  of  taking  it  by  their  own  energy  or  courage  must  have  been 
utterly  dissipated.     What  could  they  do  in  face  of  that  broad  expanse  of  rushing, 
foaming,  turbulent  waters  ?     Multitudes  have  come  to  the  brink  of  that  river,  and 
have  been  left  there,  waiting  on  its  banks,  that  they  might  consider  the  meaning  of 
those  impassable  waters,  and  carry  away  the  sentence  of  death  in  themselves. 
Abraham  waited  there  for  more  than  twenty  years  face  to  face  with  the  apparent 
impossibiUty  of  ever  having  a  son.     David  waited  there  for  almost  as  long,  and  it 
must  have  seemed  that  the  kingdom  foretold  to  him  as  a  youth  lay  on  the  other 
side  of  insurmountable  difficulties.     Many  a  saint  since  then  has  been  brought 
down  to  these  same  banks,  and  has  stood  to  witness  these  flowing  streams.     What 
though  the  promise  of  God  has  offered  all  manner  of  blessedness  and  delight ! 
That  river  !    That  flooded,  fordless,  bridgeless,  boatless  river !    Are  you  there  now  ? 
Do  not  hasten  from  it.     Stand  still  and  consider  it  until  the  energy  and  impetuosity 
of  your  seK-life  lies  down.     You  can  never  reach  the  blessed  life  by  resolutions,  or 
pledges,  or  forms  of  covenant ;  your  good  self  is  as  powerless  now  as  your  bad  self 
was  formerly ;  you  must  learn  that  your  strength  is  to  sit  still,  and  that  the  rich 
blessings  of  God  stored  in  Christ  for  you  are  an  absolute  gift  to  be  received  by  the 
outstretched  hand  of  faith.     II.  How  this  pause  was  spent.     During  this  space  of 
three  days  events  transpired  which  are  both  interesting  and  typical.     Amongst 
other  things  Jericho  was  entered  by  the  two  spies.     1.  Jericho  may  fitly  stand  for 
the  world  of  men  over  which  judgment  is  impending,  but  which  goes  on  its  way 
unheeding.    Eahab,  the  poor  outcast  of  Jericho,  who  had  such  strange  faith  in  God, 
entered  in  with  the  people  to  possess  the  land  that  flowed  with  milk  and  honey. 
She  is  thus  the  type  of  Gentile-sinners  who  are  permitted  to  share  in  the  unsearch- 
able riches  of  Christ,  to  sit  with  Him  in  the  heavenlies,  to  form  part  of  that  new 
race  which  is  gathering  around  the  true  Joshua,  the  Lord  from  heaven.    2.  During 
this  brief  pause  Joshua  also  had  an  opportunity  of  ascertaining  the  feelings  of  the 
two  tribes  and  a  half.    Are  not  these  the  type  of  Christians  to  whom  the  land  of 
promise  is  as  freely  open  as  to  others,  and  who  make  an  incursion  into  it  with  no 
thought  of  remaining?     They  are  willing  to  meet  and  measure  their  strength  with 
the  seven  nations  of  Canaan,  but  they  are  not  prepared  to  abandon  the  strong 
facinations  of  the  world,  and  to  settle  do%vn  to  a  life  hidden  with  Christ  in  God. 
The  end  of  such  is  but  too  clearly  suggested  by  the  fate  of  those  Eastern  tribes. 
They  had  their  much  grass,  but  they  became  gradually  cut  off  from  the  corporate 
life  of  Israel.    They  gave  few  great  names  to  the  roll  of  saints  and  heroes  emblazoned 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSHUA.  27 

on  Israel's  story.  They  fell  first  beneath  the  invasions  of  Assyria,  and  were  swept 
into  captivity,  from  which  they  never  returned.  III.  How  the  pause  ended.  On 
the  third  day  the  hosts  seem  to  have  come  nearer  the  river's  brink,  and  their  tents 
were  pitched  for  th£  night  within  close  proximity  to  the  hurrying  waters.  It  was 
then  that  Joshua  said  unto  the  people,  "  Sanctify  yourselves,"  &c.  From  which  it 
would  seem  that  the  wonder-working  power  of  God  is  dependent  upon  the  sanctifi- 
cation  of  His  people.  "  Why  art  Thou  as  a  mighty  man  that  cannot  save  ?  "  "  He 
could  do  no  mighty  works  there,  because  of  their  unbelief."  We  all  want  to  see 
wonders  wrought  by  God — in  our  own  characters,  that  the  fir-tree  may  replace  the 
thorn  and  the  myrtle  the  briar ;  in  our  homes,  that  the  desert  places  may  blossom 
with  roses ;  in  our  Churches,  that  they  may  arise  and  put  on  their  beautiful 
garments.  Oh !  for  another  Pentecost !  Oh !  to  see  converts  fly  as  doves  to  their 
windows !  And  why  is  it  that  we  strain  our  eyes  for  them  in  vain  ?  Is  it  not 
because  we  have  not  sanctified  ourselves  ?  Sanctification  means  the  cleansing  of 
the  soul,  and  the  putting  on  of  the  white  robes  of  purity  and  humility.  We  are  not 
clean  enough  for  God  to  use  us.  We  are  not  humble  enough  to  bear  a  great  success. 
{F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Grossing  the  Jordan: — Many  good  people  daily  pray 
against  sudden  death,  and  there  are  legitimate  reasons  for  so  doing  ;  but  to  a  child 
of  God  it  is  of  small  consequence,  for  death  will  never  find  him  unprepared  if  he  is 
living  in  communion  with  God.  We  will  enter  into  the  joy  of  our  Lord,  and  be  for 
ever  with  Him.  When  God's  children  have  their  candle  lighted  for  them,  and  they 
know  that  it  is  time  to  go  upstairs,  they  feel  glad  to  end  their  pilgrimage,  and  rest 
in  Jesus.  We  are  all  of  us  much  nearer  home  than  we  think.  It  wiU  be  greatly 
wise  to  talk  with  our  last  hours,  and  to  anticipate  that  time  when  the  message  shall 
come,  "Within  three  days  ye  shall  pass  over  this  Jordan."  I,  Observe  the 
TENOR  OP  THIS  NOTICE.  Noticc  that  there  are  three  leading  words  in  it :  "  prepare," 
"pass  over,"  "possess."  The  first  word  that  came  to  them  was,  "Prepare."  Be 
in  journeying  order.  The  soldier  carries  his  rations  with  him  when  he  has  to  make 
a  quick  march:  "Prepare  you  victuals."  Children  of  God,  be  ready  to  go  from 
this  world.  But  inasmuch  as  he  said,  "  Prepare  you  victuals  "  did  he  not  mean 
"  Begin  to  feed  on  food  of  that  sort  upon  which  you  are  henceforth  to  live  "  ?  The 
manna  would  cease  in  three  days,  and  never  fall  again.  After  they  crossed  the 
Jordan,  they  would  feed  on  the  corn  of  the  land.  Feed  on  Christ,  feed  on  spiritual 
food,  feed  on  the  pure  truth  of  God's  Word,  and  feed  your  souls  on  nothing  else. 
Know  the  taste  of  what  you  eat,  and  let  it  be  as  clear  and  definite  as  that  of  butter 
and  honey,  that  so  you  may  steadily  refuse  the  evil  and  choose  the  good.  Joshua 
meant — Stand  ready,  for  the  time  is  getting  very  short.  There  is  not  long  to  wait. 
Soon  you  wUl  have  traversed  the  stream,  and  landed  on  the  hither  shore.  How 
would  you  feel  if  you  knew  that  within  three  days  you  must  die  ?  The  exhortation 
given  in  ver.  13  is  one  which  may  be  useful  also  to  us:  "Eemember  the 
word."  It  is  a  grand  help  for  going  over  Jordan  if  we  will  remember  the 
word  of  the  Lord.  Our  faith  enables  us  both  to  live  and  to  die  on  the  promise  of 
God.  But  then  he  said  also,  "Sanctify  yourselves"  (chap.  iii.  5).  If  we 
knew  we  were  to  die  in  three  days,  should  we  not  wish  to  put  our  hearts,  our 
thoughts,  our  families,  into  a  better  state?  Since  we  may  die  suddenly,  let  us 
purify  ourselves  of  aU  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  spirit.  The  next  word  was, 
•'Pass  over  this  Jordan."  They  were  not  called  to  linger  on  the  brink,  nor  to  sit 
with  their  feet  in  the  stream,  but  to  cross  over  it.  Israel  had  been  forty  years  in 
the  wilderness,  and  surely  that  was  long  enough.  He  who  hath  served  his  God 
with  all  his  heart  wiU  not  wish  to  linger  a  moment  after  his  life-work  is  done.  You 
are  not  called  to  linger  on  the  bed  of  sickness  for  ages,  but  to  pass  over  to  your  rest. 
And  notice,  the  caU  was  not  to  go  down  into  the  Jordan  to  stop  there.  Blessed  be 
God,  we  are  not  going  down  into  the  grave  to  be  lost  there ;  but  we  make  use  of  it 
as  an  opened  door  to  paradise.  The  third  word  was  "possess."  They  were  to  pass 
the  river  to  possess  the  land  which  God  had  given  them.  We  possess  nothing  here. 
Those  goods  which  we  think  we  possess  melt  away  like  an  icicle  from  a  hot  hand. 
But  we  have  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan  treasures  worth  owning.  By  a  covenant 
of  salt,  God  has  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  everlasting  rest,  triumph,  happiness,  glory. 
II.  Observe  the  sequel  of  this  notice,  or  what  followed  upon  the  summons.  The 
first  thing  that  happened  to  Israel  was  this,  a  singular  faith  was  bestowed.  I  can 
hardly  believe  that  the  people  under  Joshua  were  the  children  of  those  unbelieving 
Jews  whose  carcases  f eU  in  the  wilderness ;  for  throughout  the  early  chapters  of 
Joshua  it  is  recorded  that  they  believed  Joshua,  whatever  he  said  to  them.  He 
had  strange  and  strong  things  to  utter,  bat  they  did  not  doubt  or  demur.    Now, 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

when  the  children  of  God  come  to  die,  those  of  them  who  have  heen  poor,  trembling 
things  before,  receive  new  courage  and  unwonted  strength,  and  even  minister 
comfort  to  those  who  are  stronger  than  themselves.  It  is  brave  to  see  how  Mr. 
Keady-to-halt  puts  his  crutches  away  when  he  is  going  over  Jordan.  Mr.  Feeble- 
mind  bids  them  bury  his  feeble  mind  in  a  dunghill,  for  it  would  be  of  no  use  to 
anybody.  The  Lord  will  give  us  more  grace,  and  we  shall  wonder  at  ourselves  that 
we  could  have  been  aforetime  so  distrustful.  "  At  eventide  it  shall  be  light." 
Next,  a  special  assurance  was  given :  "  To-morrow  the  Lord  will  do  wonders  among 
you"  (chap.  iii.  5).  The  Lord  is  always  working  marvels;  but  when  we 
come  to  cross  the  Jordan  we  shall  see  His  wonders  in  the  deep.  Next,  note 
that  the  people  had  with  them  a  conquering  leader.  Joshua  was  at  their  head,  to 
encourage  and  direct  them.  When  you  and  I  shall  pass  over  Jordan  we  shall  have 
Jesus  with  us.  He  says,  "  Be  of  good  cheer.  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 
But  what  next?  The  Israelites  had  a  clear  guidance  afforded  them  (chap.  iii.  4). 
You  have  been  through  many  experiences,  but  to  die  will  be  a  new  one.  Once  for 
all,  you  must  cross  this  Jordan,  therefore  the  Divine  presence  shall  go  before  you, 
and  show  you  the  way.  Oh,  yes,  you  shall  have  Divine  direction  when  the  darkness 
gathers  about  you !  With  Israel  a  forerunner  led  the  way.  So  our  great  High 
Priest  has  tasted  death  for  every  man.  Nor  did  the  forerunner  quit  the  scene,  for 
the  Divine  presence  remained.  The  priests  went  on  till  they  came  to  the  river-bed, 
and  descended  the  hollow,  going  on  to  the  very  centre  of  it.  There  they  stopped 
till  all  the  host  had  passed  over.  The  Lord  Jesus  will  go  before  you  as  your  great 
High  Priest,  your  propitiation  and  your  covenant ;  and  He  will  abide  with  you  in 
the  last  solemn  article  until  you  are  safe  landed  on  the  shore  of  the  land  of  promise. 
In  consequence  of  the  priests  going  down  into  the  river  the  stream  was  dried  up. 
Wonderful  sight  it  must  have  been  to  behold  the  waters  roll  back,  and  stand  in  a 
congealed  heap.  Thus  there  was  a  broad  passage-way  for  the  multitudes  of  Israel  to 
go  marching  through,  and  to  effect  the  crossing  rapidly.  Suppose,  when  you  come 
to  die,  the  Jordan  should  turn  out  to  be  no  river  at  all.  What  if  you  should  go  over 
dry-shod  ?  Why  should  it  not  be  so  ?  Death  is  a  pin's  prick  to  many.  Death  hath 
lost  its  terrors.  "  The  sting  of  death  is  sin,"  and  that  is  forgiven.  "  The  strength 
of  sin  is  the  law,"  and  that  is  fulfilled.  The  black  waters  have  failed ;  we  pass  over 
Jordan  dry-shod.  Then  notice,  the  people  were  very  quick  in  crossing.  Death  is 
short  work.  After  all,  what  is  the  act  of  death?  "What!  "  cries  one,  "  is  there 
not  a  terrible  amount  of  pain  connected  with  death  ?  "  I  answer,  "  No."  It  is  life 
that  has  the  pain  ;  death  is  the  finis  of  all  pain.  You  blame  death  for  a  disease  of 
which  he  is  the  cure.  You  imagine  a  thing  called  death  which  does  not  really 
exist.  In  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  we  shall  be  up  and  away  1  Therefore,  because 
you  will  haste  to  pass  over,  you  need  not  be  alarmed  at  so  short  a  trial,  which  will 
actually  turn  out  to  be  no  trial  at  all.  We  read  in  chap.  iv.  9  that  the 
Israelites  in  traversing  the  Jordan  left  a  memorial  behind.  You  also  will  bear 
your  testimony  in  departing :  you  will  set  up  your  memorial  for  your  children 
after  you,  and  they  shall  say,  "  Our  father  died  in  sure  and  certain  hope  of  being 
with  Jesus."  Even  if  your  death-bed  should  not  be  so  bright  as  some,  even  its 
clouds  may  not  be  without  their  effect.  A  holy  man  had  prayed  much  for  his 
boys  and  girls,  but  never  saw  them  converted,  and  this,  with  the  troubles  which 
grow  out  of  their  waywardness,  made  his  last  hours  to  be  sadly  clouded.  But 
mark  how  the  Lord  wrought  I  They  buried  their  father,  and  when  they  were 
met  together,  the  eldest  son  turned  to  his  brothers  and  remarked,  "  If  our  father, 
who  was  so  good  a  man,  was  so  troubled  in  death,  what  will  become  of  us 
when  we  die  ?  "  This  most  reasonable  remark  was  the  means  of  the  conversion 
of  the  brothers.  I  would  like  to  die  in  the  dark  if  it  would  bring  all  my  people 
to  the  Saviour.  Would  not  you  ?  One  thing  more :  they  also  raised  a  memorial 
on  the  other  shore.  They  piled  twelve  stones  upon  each  other  in  Canaan. 
You  and  I,  when  we  get  to  heaven,  shall  take  our  memorials  with  us,  and  pile 
them  up.  We  will  make  known  to  angels  and  principalities  and  powers  the 
manifold  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  to  us  in  life  and  death.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Jordan  at  hand : — I.  The  fiest  feeling  excited  by  the  announcement  must 
HAVE  been  that  OF  JOT  AND  TRIUMPH.  It  was  uot  alone  on  the  contrast  between 
its  fountains  and  depths  springing  out  of  valleys  and  hills,  and  the  arid  desolation 
of  the  great  howling  wUderness,  that  the  thoughts  of  the  Hebrew  rested,  but  on  the 
contrast  of  its  repose.  The  sorest  trials  of  his  life  had  not  probably  been  the 
hanger  and  the  thirst,  the  laborious  journey  and  the  tumult  of  the  battle,  but 
the  ceaseless  motion — the  movement  ever  on  and  on.    Rest,  rest  I  rest  anywhere. 


CHAP.  I.]  JOSRUA.  29 

but,  above  all,  in  the  land  that  flowed  with  milk  and  honey,  must  have  been  the 
innermost  desire  of  his  heart.  Is  not  all  this  applicable  to  ourselves  ?  It  is  not  the 
great  sorrows  of  our  experience  that  constitute,  after  all,  the  weariness  of  life  ;  but 
it  is  its  change,  its  sense  of  uncertainty,  the  consciousness  that  we  keep  nothing, 
call  nothing  absolutely  our  own.  II.  There  must  have  blended  with  it  a  great 
TRIAL  OF  FAITH.  The  choscu  land  was  indeed  close  at  hand.  It  seemed  as  if  they 
could  almost  touch  the  shore.  Just  beyond  gleamed  in  the  sunshine  the  towers  of 
Jericho,  and  blue  in  the  distance  were  the  hiUs  of  Judaea.  But,  close  as  they 
seemed,  Jordan  rolled  between,  and  they  could  not  but  ask  how  they  were  to  cross 
it.  What,  then,  of  that  other  Jordan,  which  we  all  must  cross  ?  that  death  we 
must  all  die  some  time  or  other,  and  through  which  alone  we  can  enter  into  our 
Canaan  ?  Let  us  make  sure  that  what  awaits  us  beyond  on  the  other  shore  is 
heaven,  and  not  the  darkness.  With  the  act  of  dying  we  have  nothing  whatever 
to  do.  It  is  in  God's  hands,  not  ours,  and  there  we  must  leave  it.  Has  not  the 
ark  gone  before?  III.  An  act  of  preparation  needed:  "Prepare  you  victuals." 
There  is  nothing  actually  corresponding  to  this  in  the  experience  of  "the  Christian 
when  he  is  called  to  cross  into  the  better  land.  Special  preparation  for  heaven, 
the  Christian  needs  none.  If  he  be  in  Christ,  that  is  enough  ;  he  is  safe.  If  he  be 
a  behever,  he  can  have  no  less ;  and  though  he  were  the  highest  of  saints  that 
ever  caught  the  light  of  the  face  of  God,  he  could  have  no  more  than  to  be  "  found 
in  Him,  not  having  his  own  righteousness,"  &c.  For  myself  I  can  conceive 
nothing  more  blessed  than  for  a  saint  to  pass  at  once  from  the  midst  of  his  work 
for  his  Master  into  the  enjoyment  of  his  Master's  presence.  Yet  I  admit  that  the 
near  sight  of  so  great  a  change  could  not  but  very  solemnly  affect  us,  were  the 
warning  given  to  ourselves.  There  would  be  an  intense  revival  of  faith  and  hope, 
and  in  that  close  sight  of  heaven  a  flinging  away  of  all  earthly  and  temporal  ties. 
(E.  Garbett,  M.A.)  "Prepare  you  victuals": — Sometimes  we  have  heard 
words  like  these  faU  from  Christian  workers :  "  I  have  faith  to  believe  that  God 
will  provide  the  means  necessary  to  carry  on  this  work,"  and  straightway  they 
assume  habilities  and  enter  into  engagements,  and  incur  debts,  in  violation  of 
the  plain  command,  "Owe  no  man  anything";  yea,  they  even  sometimes 
accuse  their  brethren  of  lack  of  faith  because  they  cannot  do  God's  work  in 
this  way.  This  is  not  good.  To  obey  is  better  than  to  profess  great  faith ;  and 
to  hearken  than  sentimental  unthinking  zeal.  What  would  we  have  thought 
of  Joshua  if  after  he  had  received  the  Divine  order  to  march  forward  he  had  said, 
•'  I  have  faith  to  believe  that  God  will  provide  the  food  necessary  for  victualling  the 
army  all  through  the  campaign  ;  our  commissariat  is  absolutely  safe,  for  it  is  in 
Divine  hands.  God  has  promised  to  be  with  me  as  He  was  with  Moses,  I  have  no 
need  to  think  of  these  things.  AU  I  have  got  to  do  is  to  hasten  forward."  Nay, 
nay  I  Joshua  manifested  his  faith  in  a  much  more  Divine  fashion.  "  Prepare  you 
victuals,"  he  said ;  do  not  expect  that  miraculous  supply  which  has  been  granted 
for  forty  years,  now  that  you  are  in  a  position  to  do  without  it.  You  are  no  longer 
helpless  children,  but  grown  men  able  to  provide  for  yourselves.  The  battle  is 
the  Lord's,  and  He  will  not  fail  us  nor  forsake  us,  but  we  must  use  all  reasonable 
foresight  in  carrying  on  His  work.  We  dare  do  nothing,  we  dare  omit  nothing,  out 
of  harmony  with  His  ways.  {A.  B.  Mackay.)  Self-help  necessary  : — Joshua 
reminds  us  of  the  famous  order  attributed  to  Cromwell,  "  Trust  in  God,  and  keep 
your  powder  dry."  His  piety  was  very  unhke  that  of  a  certain  Duke  of  Parma,  of 
whom  it  is  written  that,  in  a  great  crisis,  "  while  he  had  been  praying,  and  nothing 
more,  the  English  had  loeen  praying,  and  something  more."  He  acted  in  the  spirit 
of  the  proverb,  "  God  helps  those  who  help  themselves."  {T.  W.  M.  Lund,  M.A.) 
*'  Ye  shall  pass  over  "  : — "  Oh,"  but  they  might  have  said,  "  we  cannot  pass  over 
Jordan,  because  there  is  Jericho  right  in  front  of  us,  and  of  course  the  inhabitants 
will  call  in  the  Jebusites,  who  are  not  far  off,  at  Jerusalem,  and  these  wiU  fetch  in 
the  Hivites,  and  the  Amorites,  and  all  the  other  nations;  and  these  will  hotly 
dispute  the  passage  of  the  river,  and  it  will  be  out  of  the  question  to  force  our  way 
through  that  torrent,  and  fight  up  the  other  bank  against  such  foes."  Such  a  fear 
would  be  most  natural.  When  Caesar  tried  to  land  in  England,  what  did  the 
Britons  do  ?  They  rushed  into  the  water  off  Dover  to  meet  the  Eomans,  and  they 
fought  with  them  in  the  surf  of  the  sea.  It  was  natural  that  brave  men  should 
fight  the  invaders  in  the  water,  and  not  suffer  them  to  tread  their  soU.  Do  you 
suppose  that  the  Canaanites  were  less  brave  than  the  ancient  Britons  ?  Had  there 
not  been  a  speU  upon  them,  they  would  have  pressed  back  Israel  in  the  river  itself, 
and  would  not  have  allowed  them  to  enter  the  land.    Yet  Israel  passed  over  Jordan 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

at  the  appointed  time.  God  had  said,  "  Ye  shall  go  over,"  and  they  did  go  over  ; 
and  no  Canaanite,  Hivite,  or  Jebusite  dared  to  molest  them.  So  the  poor  child  of 
God  sighs,  "  Alas  !  when  I  come  to  die,  Satan  will  meet  me,  temptations  and  doubts 
and  fears  will  rush  upon  me."  We  read  in  chap.  iii.  16,  "  And  the  people  passed 
over  right  against  Jericho."  Fear  not,  0,  trembling  heart.  God  can  so  deal  with 
evU  spirits,  and  with  the  doubts  of  j'our  own  spirit,  that  they  shall  be  still  as  a 
stone  till  you  have  passed  over.  No  demon  shall  dare  to  peep  or  mutter.  No 
doubt  or  fear  shall  venture  near.  We  read,  "  All  the  Israelites  passed  over  on  dry 
ground,  until  all  the  people  were  passed  clean  over  Jordan."  Not  an  arrow  or  a 
stone  came  from  over  the  walls  of  Jericho.  Glory  be  to  the  name  of  the  Lord,  He 
made  the  hearts  of  Israel's  enemies  to  melt,  so  that  no  more  courage  remained  in 
them.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  12-18.  Ye  shall  pass  before  your  bretliren  armed. — Joshua's  demand  for 

the  services  of  the  trans-Jordanic  tribes  : — In  making  this  demand  he  declares  their 
duty  plainly,  supports  it  with  reasons,  and  enforces  it  with  firmness.  The  demand 
he  made  was  authoritative.  It  was  founded  on  a  past  transaction  to  which  they 
had  agreed.  He  showed  that  this  was  nothing  more  than  the  carrying  out  of  an 
arrangement  previously  made.  From  this  it  would  not  be  lawful  to  deviate,  for 
the  commandment  of  Moses  in  regard  to  this  was  the  word  of  the  Lord.  The 
demand  was  also  reasonable.  The  raw  lads  and  the  worn-out  soldiers,  as  well  as 
the  inferior  men,  may  stay  at  home  to  do  garrison  duty,  the  veterans  must  march 
with  him.  Surely  this  is  sensible.  It  is  always  wise  to  put  the  best  men  to 
the  most  difficult  work.  In  fulfilling  this  commission  of  the  true  Joshua,  has 
the  Church  always  acted  with  equal  wisdom  and  fidelity  ?  It  did  so  in  the  purest 
and  palmiest  days  of  missionary  effort,  when,  filled  with  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and 
love  and  power,  it  broke  forth  on  the  right  and  left  and  speedily  overran  the  known 
world.  Now  it  seems  as  if  all  the  mighty  men  of  valour  should  stay  at  home 
to  nurse  the  feeble  spark  of  the  Church's  vitality,  while  the  striplings  go  to  the 
wars.  Yea,  are  there  not  some  who,  instead  of  evangelising  among  the  heathen, 
expend  all  their  energy  in  proselytising  among  Christians?  The  demand  made 
by  Joshua  on  the  pastoral  tribes  was  also  equitable.  "  You  have  rest,"  he  might 
have  said ;  "  your  brethren  have  not.  You  got  rest  through  their  help,  therefore 
you  are  bound  to  help  them  to  the  same  blessing.  The  command  of  Moses  in 
regard  to  this  was  acquiesced  in  by  you,  therefore  truth  and  honour  require 
its  faithful  carrying  out."  Moreover,  what  an  unseemly  picture  it  would  have 
presented,  to  have  seen  part  of  the  nation  fighting  hard,  while  their  brethren  sat 
still  and  looked  on  in  ignoble  ease.  And  how  shortsighted  would  this  policy  of 
idleness  have  been.  Only  by  the  speedy  and  thorough  conquest  of  aU  the  land 
could  the  heritage  of  any  tribe  be  kept  in  pleasant  and  unquestioned  possession. 
To  march  with  Joshua  was  the  wisest,  as  well  as  the  most  seemly  thing  these 
tribes  could  do.  Surely  the  same  arguments  could  be  urged  with  equal  force  as 
incentives  to  tl  d  grand  work  of  world-wide  Christian  testimony.  {A.  B.  Mackay.) 
All  that  thou  commandest  us  we  will  do. — Brave  respo7ises : — The  response 
of  the  people  was  as  noble  in  its  way  as  that  of  their  leader.  There  is  a  holy 
rivalry  between  Israel  and  Joshua.  They  stir  each  other  up  to  the  great  work 
that  has  to  be  done.  The  outstanding  feature  in  the  response  of  the  people 
is  its  enthusiasm.  It  is  plain  from  their  response  that  they  are  heart  and 
soul  in  the  work  before  them,  that  they  are  only  waiting  for  their  leader's 
command  to  march  forth  a  band  of  heroes.  To  say  that  their  reply  to  Joshua  was 
hearty  would  be  to  do  them  injustice;  it  was  enthusiastic.  Every  soul  in  the 
camp  was  stirred  to  its  utmost  depth.  This  is  plain  from  the  readiness  with  which 
they  replied.  They  did  not  hang  back,  waiting  for  each  other  to  speak  out. 
Much  less  did  they  hunt  up  excuses  why  they  should  not  march.  They  did  not 
modify  or  minimise  their  responsibilities.  They  were  as  eager  to  follow  Joshua  as 
Joshua  was  to  follow  Jehovah.  This  enthusiasm  was  also  manifested  by  their 
cheerfulness.  These  men  had  not  only  promised  to  put  their  hands  to  this  work, 
but  also  made  it  plain  that  they  felt  it  their  highest  privilege  to  be  able  to  do 
60.  Oh  1  for  such  holy  enthusiasm  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  in  these  days !  The 
best  of  us  are  but  half-hearted  at  the  best,  and  some,  alas  1  seem  utterly  unable 
to  get  up  the  least  spark  of  enthusiasm  for  holy  things.  If  we  profess  to  be 
Christians,  if  we  profess  to  do  God's  work,  if  we  profess  to  respond  to  the  call 
of  the  true  Joshua,  let  us  do  it,  not  like  galley-slaves,  but  like  God's  freemen  ;  let 
us  do  it  as  those  who  think  His  service  our  highest  honour.     Joshua's  followers 


CHAP.  T.]  JOSHUA.  81 

were  also  unreserved  in  acknowledging  their  allegiance.  They  kept  nothing  back 
and  made  no  reservation.  They  asked  no  questions  and  imposed  no  conditions. 
Is  obedience,  prompt  and  unquestioning,  the  first  duty  of  a  soldier  ?  See  how 
splendidly  it  was  possessed  by  these  Israelites.  They  declare  that  it  is  not  for 
them  to  make  reply,  not  for  them  to  reason  why,  but  simply,  constantly,  to  do 
all  that  was  commanded  them.  And  if  such  glorious  allegiance  was  due  to  Joshua, 
much  more  it  is  due  to  our  great  Captain  of  salvation,  Jesus  Christ.  Whatsoever 
He  commands  in  His  Word  we  should  do.  Wheresoever  He  sends  us  in  His 
providence  we  should  go.  The  response  of  the  people  was  also  humble,  sincere, 
earnest,  and  hopeful.  A  slight  transformation  in  the  opening  words  of  ver.  17 
makes  their  meaning  more  clear.  It  should  read  thus:  "According  to  all  in 
which  we  hearkened  to  Moses  so  wUl  we  hearken  unto  thee."  They  do  not  here 
brag  of  their  obedience  to  Moses.  Though  better  than  their  fathers,  they  had 
nothing  to  boast  of,  and  conscious  of  their  own  weakness  they  merely  said,  "  We 
•will  try  to  make  our  best  obedience  to  Moses  the  model  of  our  obedience  to  you." 
And  there  is  good  hope  that  they  wiU  succeed  in  carrying  out  this  promise,  for  it  is 
plain  that  they  make  it  in  a  prayerful  spirit,  inasmuch  as  they  follow  it  up  by 
saying,  "Only  the  Lord  be  with  thee  as  He  was  with  Moses."  This  is  no 
impertinent  limitation,  qualifying  their  full  allegiance  as  already  given;  but  an 
earnest  prayer  that  Joshua  might  constantly  enjoy  the  Divine  guidance,  protection, 
and  blessing  vouchsafed  to  Moses.  Then  they  finish  their  response  by  words 
vehement  and  uncompromising :  "  Whosoever  he  be  that  doth  rebel  against  thy 
commandment,  and  will  not  hearken  unto  thy  words  in  all  that  thou  commandest 
him,  let  hun  be  put  to  death."  What  more  could  a  leader  desire  than  such 
a  spontaneous  manifestation  of  fidehty  ?  How  must  this  declaration  have 
strengthened  Joshua's  heart,  showing  so  clearly  as  it  did  that  his  appointment 
to  the  leadership  by  Jehovah  was  so  heartily  ratified  by  all  the  people.  {A.  B. 
Mackay.)  The  moral  advantages  of  good  organisation  : — 1.  Society  must  have 
leadership,  and  leadership  must  be  a  question  of  competence.  There  are  three 
things  about  the  true  leader  which  are  most  notable — (1)  He  must  be  directly  called 
of  God.  Moses  was ;  Joshua  was.  (2)  Being  directly  called  of  God,  he  will  walk 
constantly  in  the  Divine  counsel:  "This  book  of  the  law  shall  not  depart,"  &c. 
(3)  Walking  constantly  in  the  Divine  counsel,  he  shall  achieve  the  most  dis- 
tinguished success.  This  is  God's  promise.  2.  Organisation  is  as  much  required 
in  the  Church  as  in  the  army.  The  mature  thinker,  the  new-born  Christian,  the 
untried  youth,  the  undisciplined  mind,  and  the  cultivated  intellect,  caimot  be 
equal,  and  ought  not  to  have  equal  authority  in  the  Church.    I.  Such  organisation 

WOULD  FACILITATE  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OP  INDIVIDUAl  TALENT,      In  the   absence  Of  wlse 

organisation,  the  modest  man  will  be  ignored  or  crushed.  He  will  have  no  power 
and  no  disposition  to  cope  with  the  self-asserting  and  blustering  men  who  worship 
their  own  infallibility.  For  the  moment  insolence  will  vanquish  genius,  simply 
because  genius  disdains  the  rude  weapons  which  insolence  adopts,  and  cares  not 
to  fight  where   even  victory  ||would  be  disgrace,    n.  Such  organisation  would 

CONSOLIDATE    THE    CHRISTIAN    SOCIETT    ASSEMBLING    IN   ONB   PLACE.      The    army  Is    a 

compact  confederacy.  Its  consohdation  is  its  strength.  Break  up  its  wisely 
arranged  gradations,  and  its  power  is  paralysed.  The  same  principle  has  its 
bearing  upon  the  Church.  III.  Such  organisation  would  present  the  most 
roRMiDABLE  FRONT  TO  THE  ENEMT.  Every  man  in  his  place,  every  man  moving 
at  the  same  word  of  command,  every  man  living  for  the  common  good — let  that 
programme  be  carried  out,  and  no  power  can  withstand  the  united  influence  of 
Christ's  believers.  Disorder  is  weakness ;  disorder  is  waste  1  IV.  Such  organi- 
sation WOULD  PROMOTE  A  MOST  HEALTHFUL  SPIRITUAL  DisciPLiNB.  The  Organisation 
which  God  appoints  is  calculated  to  train  men  to  habits  of  self-dominion. 
The  young  man  is  held  in  check ;  the  passionate  man  is  subdued ;  the  lethargic 
man  is  quickened ;  and  each  nature  has  the  advantage  of  association  with  natures 
of  a  different  type.  The  organisation  thus  commended  is  not  merely  mechanical ; 
it  is  the  order  which  comes  of  a  living  love,  which  is  willing  to  do  the  most  good  in 
the  least  time.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Fidelity  to  engagements : — There  was  no 
going  back  from  their  word,  even  though  they  might  have  found  a  loophole  of 
escape.  They  might  have  said  that  as  the  conquest  of  Sihon  and  Og  had  been 
accomplished  so  easily,  so  the  conquest  of  the  western  tribes  would  be  equally 
simple.  Or  they  might  have  said  that  the  nine  tribes  and  a  hall  conld  furnish 
quite  a  large  enough  army  to  dispossess  the  Canaanites.  Or  they  might  have 
discovered  that  their  wives  and  children  were  exposed  to  dangers  they  had  not 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

apprehended,  and  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  the  entire  body  of  the  men  to 
remain  and  protect  them.  But  they  fell  back  on  no  such  after-thought.  They 
kept  their  word  at  no  small  cost  of  toil  and  danger,  and  furnished  thereby  a 
perpetual  lesson  for  those  who,  having  made  a  promise  under  pressure,  are  tempted 
to  retire  from  it  when  the  pressure  is  removed.  Fidelity  to  engagements  is  a  noble 
quality,  just  as  laxity  in  regard  to  them  is  a  miserable  sin.  Even  pagan  Rome 
could  boast  of  a  Eegulus  who  kept  his  oath  by  returning  to  Carthage,  though  it 
was  to  encounter  a  miserable  death.  In  Psahn  xv.  it  is  a  feature  in  the 
portrait  of  the  man  who  is  to  abide  in  God's  tabernacle  and  dwell  in  His  holy 
hill,  that  he  "  sweareth  to  his  own  hurt,  and  changeth  not."  (W.  G,  Blaikie,  D.D.) 
The  Lord  thy  God  be  with  thee. — Prayers  for  men  in  public  offices  : — Eulers  who 
answer  the  end  of  their  office  as  guardians  of  civil  and  religious  liberty  are  pillars 
of  a  land.  They  uphold  and  support  it,  and  keep  it  from  tottering  and  sinking.  We 
should  pray  for  them — 1.  That  they  may  be  endued  with  every  grace  and  virtue 
which  can  animate  to  the  faithful  and  diligent  execution  of  the  duties  of  their 
office.  If  piety,  true  patriotism,  and  zeal  for  the  interests  of  religion  are  at  present 
less  conspicuous  in  many  who  hold  civil  or  military  offices  than  they  have  been  in 
some  former  periods,  there  is  the  greater  need  to  beseech  Him,  with  whom  is  the 
residue  of  the  Spirit,  to  pour  out  abundantly.  2.  We  should  pray  that  all  in 
offices,  civil  or  military,  may  be  endued  with  the  gifts  and  talents  necessary  for  the 
honourable  discharge  of  their  several  offices.  Capacity  and  genius,  as  well  as  good 
dispositions,  are  requisite  for  serving  the  public.  It  is  from  Divine  influence  that 
rulers  diligently  search  what  conduct  is  just  and  wise;  hearken  to  salutary  advice, 
from  whatever  quarter  it  comes ;  and  have  clear  understandings  to  discern,  and 
sound  judgments  to  choose  the  right  path,  even  in  situations  the  most  intricate  and 
perplexed.  3.  We  should  pray  that,  in  consequence  of  good  dispositions  and 
eminent  abilities,  rulers  may  actually  adopt  the  measures  which  best  tend  to 
promote  the  public  good.  It  is  not  enough  that  a  ruler  avoids,  in  his  own  practice, 
whatever  may  embolden  wickedness,  and  recommends,  by  an  exemplary  conduct, 
that  righteousness  which  exalteth  a  nation.  He  must  vigorously  enforce  and 
execute  the  laws  already  established  for  restraining  wrong  and  wicked  lewdness, 
and  help  forward  the  enacting  of  such  new  laws  as  may  be  needful  for  restraining 
them  more  effectually.  4.  We  should  pray  God  to  prosper  the  endeavours  of  all  in 
civil  and  military  offices  for  promoting  the  public  good.     {John  Erskine,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Vees.1-24.  Joslina  .  .  .  cent  out  .  .  .  two  men  to  spy. — The  $piet  despatched : — 
L  The  position  in  which  Joshua  and  the  Iseaelites  were  placed.  It  was  a  difficult 
task  that  had  been  performed  by  Moses  ;  did  not  a  harder  remain  ?  It  was  some- 
thing to  lead  such  a  host  through  the  wilderness.  Surely  more  is  required  now  the 
armour  is  to  be  put  on,  active  service  entered,  and  they  brought  face  to  face  with 
their  foes.  But  was  not  Joshua  specially  called  to  the  onerous  duty  ?  Certainly  he 
was  1  We  have  been  called  to  a  work  individually,  collectively.  God  has  pro- 
mised success  in  it ;  the  work  is  that  of  dispossessing  before  possessing.  We  are  to 
enjoy  the  companionship  of  God  in  it.  Still,  like  Joshua,  we  have  to  depend  on 
that  word  of  promise.  The  comparison  is  in  our  favour.  We  have  the  example  of 
all  the  generations  from  Joshua  tUl  the  present.  These  have  been  strengthened  by 
the  life  of  Christ.  In  Him  we  have  a  volume  of  testimony  confirmatory  of  our 
highest  hopes.  II.  That  all  these  pkomises  do  not  pbeclude  the  use  op  pkopeb 
MEANS.  What  are  the  feelings  of  a  child  when  receiving  a  promise  from  an  earthly 
parent  ?  Does  not  the  promise  heighten  affection,  induce  carefulness,  and  prompt 
to  obedience  ?  Who  ever  knew  a  child  made  neglectful  by  a  well-timed  promise  ? 
Is  not  man  the  same  in  all  his  relations — is  he  not  still  a  man,  though  dealing  with 
God  ?  What  are  the  effects  of  His  promises— do  they  not  in  every  way  stimulate 
to  increased  affection  and  zeal  ?  To  expect  without  working  is  to  tempt  God — to 
work  without  expecting  is  to  dishonour  Him.  In  all  that  has  been  and  is  now 
doing  in  the  world  for  God,  we  find  the  principle  of  co-operation  prevailing.  God 
works  out  His  purposes  by  human  instrumentalities — men,  organised  into  Churches, 
in  their  collective  or  individual  capacity,  work,  and  God  crowns  with  sacoess.    Man 


CHAP,  n.]  JOSHUA.  33 

without  God  can  do  nothing.  God  without  man  does  nothing,  and  although  we 
have  the  assurance  that  through  our  instrumentality  the  fortresses  of  sin  shall  be 
vanquished,  and  the  flag  of  our  Master  float  upon  the  ramparts,  we  are  boimd  care- 
fully to  consider  our  steps,  and  to  use  aU  our  God-given  powers  to  accomplish  the 
object.  We  have  our  Jericho  in  the  world.  Adult  world — juvenile  world — spy  the 
land,  call  into  action  all  your  powers ;  God  will  surely  give  you  the  land  to  possess. 
III.  The  wxllingness  on  the  pabt  of  the  men  to  undebtake  the  difficult 
WORK.  They  respond  at  once  to  the  call  of  their  leader,  and  trusting  in  God  are 
honoured  with  success.  With  this  spirit  thoroughly  in  our  Churches,  what  a  large 
amount  of  work  we  should  do.  We  seem  to  think  the  time  for  special  workings 
and  special  deliverances  has  past.  Nay,  this  is  the  time ;  that  army  on  the  east  of 
Jordan  is  but  a  picture  of  ourselves.  The  work  is  before  us.  There  runs  a  river 
between  us  and  our  work ;  yes,  and  we  thank  God  for  it.  If  we  could,  we  would 
not  on  any  account  remove  it.  It  is  the  right  order  of  things.  He  that  would  do 
any  work  must  cross  it,  and  we  may  take  it  for  granted  the  width,  depth,  and 
swiftness  of  the  stream  will  be  proportioned  to  the  value  of  the  work.  Earnest 
workers  will  cross  it,  manfully  trusting  in  God,  and  these  are  the  only  successful 
workers.  {J.  H.  Snell.)  Beginning  at  the  right  point : — From  military  wisdom 
we  may  learn  the  moral  wisdom  of  always  striking  first  at  the  right  point.  Every- 
thing turns  upon  the  first  stroke  in  many  a  controversy  and  in  many  an  arduous 
battle.  Why  do  men  come  home  at  eventide  saying  the  day  has  been  wasted  ? 
Because  their  very  first  step  in  the  morning  was  in  the  wrong  direction,  or  the  very 
first  word  they  spoke  was  the  word  they  ought  not  to  have  uttered.  With  all  thy 
getting,  get  understanding  of  how  to  begin  life,  where  to  strike  first,  what  to  do  and 
when  to  do  it,  and  exactly  how  much  of  it  to  do  within  given  time.  If  you  strike 
the  wrong  place  you  will  waste  your  strength,  and  the  walls  of  the  city  will  remain 
unshaken.  A  blow  delivered  at  the  right  place  and  at  the  right  time  wUl  have 
tenfold  effect  over  blows  that  are  struck  in  the  dark  and  at  random :  however 
energetic  they  may  be,  and  however  well  delivered,  they  fall  upon  the  wrong  place, 
and  the  result  is  nothing.  That  is  what  is  meant  by  wasted  lives.  Men  have  been 
industrious,  painstaking,  even  anxious  in  thoughtfulness,  and  the  night  has  been 
encroached  upon  so  that  the  time  of  rest  might  be  turned  into  a  time  of  labour ; 
yet  all  has  come  to  nothing :  no  city  has  been  taken,  no  position  has  been  estab- 
lished, no  progress  has  been  made.  Why?  Simply  because  they  did  not  begin  at  the 
right  point.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Rahah. — An  unexpected  ally  of  the  Lord^s  host ;  or, 
Rahab  and  her  faith: — Imaginative  writers  have  pictured  Eahab  as  attired  in  gaudy 
costume,  going  about  the  city  with  her  harp  (Isa.  xxiii.  16),  and  at  this  very  time 
in  pursuit  of  her  evil  trade.  Others,  following  Josephus,  have  adopted  so  charitable 
an  estimate  of  her  profession  as  to  suppose  her  to  have  been  simply  a  tavern-keeper. 
May  we  not,  perhaps,  take  a  middle  line,  and  venture  to  believe  that  one  who  had 
become  a  believer  in  the  God  of  Israel  had  also,  ere  this,  repented  of  and  forsaken 
the  infamous  life  which  her  title  imports.  She  appears  from  the  narrative  to  be 
supporting  herself  by  her  own  industry,  in  the  preparation  and  dyeing  of  flax.  One 
thing  is  certain,  and  that  ia  that  pure  and  saving  faith  cannot  exist  with  foul  and 
deadly  sins.  In  reference  to  Eahab's  faith,  observe — I.  The  wondeb  of  its  exis- 
tence. Here  dwells  an  unfortunate  woman.  She  has  had  no  spiritual  advantages 
— no  Sabbaths,  no  Scriptures, no  teachers — and  yet  in  the  base  purlieus  of  a  Jericho, 
in  the  heart  of  that  poor  harlot,  like  a  fair  pearl  that  lies  within  a  rough  shell 
among  the  weeds  and  rocks  at  the  sea  bottom,  there  is  found  precious  faith,  faith 
that  finds  utterance  in  a  good  confession  (ver.  11).  Here  is  encouragement  for 
those  who  are  called,  in  the  providence  of  God,  to  minister  where  worldliness  and 
frivohty,  and  pride  and  bitter  opposition  to  the  truth  prevail.  Here,  too,  ia 
encouragement  for  those  who  minister  in  uncouth  regions,  where  sin  and  ignorance 
Beem  to  shut  out  hope  of  blessing.  Let  missionaries  and  visitors  in  alleys  and 
courts,  in  attics  and  cellars,  which  seem  Uke  nests  of  blasphemy  and  impurity,  take 
heart.  The  unholy  atmosphere  of  gin  palaces,  and  even  of  houses  like  that  in 
which  Joshua's  spies  sought  refuge,  cannot  exclude  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  nullify  the 
Gospel  message,  n.  Its  pbactical  opebation.  A  poetic  faith  may  lift  its 
possessor  to  the  heavens  in  ecstacies.  A  talking  faith  may  delight  the  hearers  with 
glowing  descriptions  of  supposed  experiences  and  imaginary  prospects.  But  the 
faith  that  saves  is  known  by  its  works.  Such  a  faith  was  Eahab's.  Her  faith 
wrought  with  her  works,  and  by  works  was  her  faith  made  perfect.  HI.  Its  savino 
TENDENCY.  The  characteristic  of  true  faith  is  ever  to  tend  towards  salvation.  Faith 
accepts  the  warnings  of  the  Word  of  God  as  true,  and  leads  men  to  flee  from  the 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

■wrath  to  come.    Now  we  shall  find  this  to  be  a  marked  characteristic  in  the  faith 
of  Eahab.     It  inclines  her  to  seek  salvation  both  for  herself  and  for  her  kindred. 
IV.  Its  ErcH  eeward.     Vain  are  man's  promises  of  help  except  God  approve  the 
pledge.     The  oath  of  the  spies  to  deliver  Kahab  and  her  house  had  availed  her 
nothing  had  not  God  Himself,  by  a  notable  miracle,  confirmed  their  word.     Joshua 
held  himself  bound  by  the  covenant  of  his  representatives  ;  but  what  was  more,  the 
Lord  accepted  Eahab's  faith  and  spared  her  house,  or,  when  the  walls  of  Jericho 
fell  down,  her  house  had  fallen  too,  for  it  abutted  on  the  wall.    But  it  fell  not,  but 
stood  unscathed  amid  the  overthrow,  a  monument  of  Divine  faithfulness  and  mercy. 
Nor  will  that  faithfulness  and  mercy  fail  to  save  any,  even  the  most  unworthy,  who 
has  entered  into  the  covenant  of  grace.     "  Our  life  for  yours !  "  may  every  ambas- 
sador of  the  gospel  say.     If  the  conditions  of  salvation  be  observed,  thy  house  and 
thy  hope  shall  stand,  though  a  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy  side,  and  ten  thousand  at 
thy  right  hand.     ((?.  W.  Butler,  M.A.)        A  parenthesis  of  grace  : — Let  us  look  at 
Eahab's  faith,  and  meditate  on  a  few  of  its  phases.     I.  Consider  the  hindrances  of 
her  faith.     1.  There  were  hindrances  which  arose  from  herself.     She  was  the  harlot 
Eahab.     Her  character  was  exceptionally  evil.     She  belonged  to  a  class  than  whom 
there  are  none  more  hardened,  inaccessible,  and  hopeless.     Moreover,  she  had  found 
her  calling  profitable,  and  therefore,  naturally  speaking,  would  be  the  more  firmly 
wedded  to  her  evil  ways.     Moreover,  Israel  is  coming  to  Jericho  for  the  purpose  of 
executing  the  Divine  vengeance  on  the  very  evils  of  which  she  is  guilty.     The  cry 
of  the  Canaanites  has  ascended  to  heaven;  in  long-suffering  patience  God  has 
■waited  till  now,  but  at  last  He  has  sent  forth  His  hosts  to  consume  them  utterly. 
How  much,  then,  was  there,  in  herself,  to  keep  Eahab  from  trust  in  Jehovah  1 
2.  There  were  also  hindrances  to  Eahab's  faith  arising  from  her  natural  friends. 
The   example  of  all  her  neighbours  would  encourage  her  in  a  path  of  unbelief. 
Her  faith  would  make  her   an  oddity    in    Jericho.     3.  There  were  hindrances 
to  her  faith  arising  from  her  natural  enemies.     Israel,  the  people  of   Jehovah, 
were    arrayed    against    her   and    her    people,   and    were    even    now    marching 
onward  to  their  destruction.     The  mission  of  Israel  is  not  one  of  mercy,  but  of 
judgment.     Their  feet  are  not  beautiful  upon  the  mountains,  bringing  good  tidings 
of  peace.     They  bring  no  gospel  to  the  Canaanites,  but  war,  disaster,  and  death  are 
in  their  invincible  path.     How  black  was  the  outlook  for  Eahab.    U.  Consider  the 
OPPORTUNITY  of  her  faith.    Faith  always  finds,  or  rather  God  always  gives  to  faith,  an 
opportunity  for  its  manifestation.     As  in  the  day  of   Sodom's  doom,  the  Lord 
delayed  till  righteous  Lot  had  escaped  to  Zoar,  saying,  "  I  cannot  do  anything  till 
thou  be  come  thither,"  so  now,  if  there  is  a  single  soul  in  Jericho  groping  after 
Him  in  the  darkness  of  vice  and  heathenism.  He  will  delay  the  march  of  His 
destroying  hosts,  to  give  that  soul  the  opportunity  which  it  requires  and  for  which 
it  longs.     He  can  do  nothing  in  judgment  till  that  one  soul  in  the  doomed  city  is 
brought  into  a  place  of  safety.     Thus  this  pause  in  the  Divine  and  just  act  of 
judgment,    this  parenthesis  of  grace,  this  long-suffering  of   God,   is   salvation. 
III.  Consider  THE  OPERATION  of  her  faith.  Eahab  showed  her  faith  by  her  works.  We 
cannot,  and  do  not,  defend  the  deliberate  falsehood  by  which  she  misled  her  fellow 
citizens  in  search  of  the  spies ;  but  we  must  remember  that  her  whole  training 
from  childhood  had  been  in  lies,  and  that  this  was  a  sudden  emergency.     She  was 
no  weU-instructed  saint,  walking  under  the  Ught  of  God's  countenance,  but  a  great 
sinner  groping  after  Him.     There  is  sufificient  in  her  conduct  to  manifest  a  heart  truly 
sincere  and  anxiously  solicitous  for  the  welfare  of  God's  people,  willing  to  risk  her 
O'wn  life  to  save  theirs.     IV.  Turn  now  to  the  confession  of  her  faith.     He  that 
beheves  with  the  heart  confesses  with  the  mouth.    AU  the  believing  add  to  their 
faith  virtue,  boldness  in  confessing  the  truth;  all  are  witnesses.      To   the   spies 
Eahab  said,  "  I  know  that  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  land,"  &c.     She  does  not 
say,  "  I  think,"  "  I  suppose,"  "  I  fear,"  but  "  I  know."     She  believes  as  firmly  in 
the  promises  of  God  as  any  in  Israel.    And  as  she  believes  in  the  promises  of  God, 
60  she  believes  in  the  God  of  the  promises.    How  clear  and  unmistakable  is  her 
confession  of  the  name  of  Jehovah;  how  high,  and  exalted,  and  spii^iuil;  how 
wonderful,  in  the  mouth  of  one  trained  from  infancy  to  worship  stocks  and  stones, 
trained  to  think  that  the  power  of  the  different  deities  was  local  and  circumscribed : 
"  The  Lord  your  God,  He  is  God  in  heaven    above,  and   in   earth   beneath "  ! 
V,  Next  let  us  ponder  the  trial  of  her  faith.     Faith  is  always  tested,  that  it  may  be 
manifested  as  Divine.    Had  Eahab  sought  to  add  anything  to  the  instructions  of 
the  spies,  had  she  consulted  her  own  ideas  as  to  the  best  means  of  ensuring  her 
safety,  she  would  have  manifested  her  folly,  and  would  have  misera'oly  failed. 


CHAP,  n.]  JOSHUA.  35 

So  trust  in  any  other  means  than  those  which  God  has  provided,  trust  in  anything 
but  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  is  a  manifestation  of  folly  and  a  sure  cause  of  failure. 
VI.  Consider  also  the  solicitude  of  her  faith.  She  was  anxious  not  only  about 
her  own  safety,  but  about  that  of  those  who  were  dear  to  her.  She  was  not 
selfishly  absorbed  in  looking  after  her  own  welfare,  content  if  she  herself  escaped  ; 
but,  with  true  affection,  arranged  for  the  rescue  of  her  relatives.  The  work  of 
Bahab,  in  bringing  in  others,  is  similar  to  that  of  every  saved  soul.  After  we  our- 
selves are  saved  we  are  not  to  rest  content ;  we  are  not  to  sit  down  in  idleness  and 
ease  because  all  is  well  with  us  for  ever.  We  are  to  bear  on  our  hearts  those  who 
are  stiU  exposed  to  the  Divine  judgment ;  we  are  to  be  up  and  doing,  instant  in 
season  and  out  of  season,  if  by  any  means  we  may  save  some.  YII.  Con- 
sider THE  EEWARD  of  her  faith.  When  the  dread  day  of  Jericho's  judgment  came, 
what  a  joy  must  it  have  been  to  Eahab  to  know  that  all  dear  to  her  were  safe.  But 
who  can  tell  the  rapture  of  those  who  have  saved  a  soul  from  eternal  death,  and 
covered  a  multitude  of  sins  ?  Surely  such  a  glorious  reward,  such  a  monument  of 
everlasting  renown,  is  worth  labouring  for,  worth  living  for,  worth  dying  for.  But 
turning  again  to  the  case  before  us,  why  did  the  multitudes  in  Jericho  thus  perish 
without  pity  ?  Was  it  because  the  cup  of  then.-  iniquity  was  full  ?  Yes,  truly, 
for  they  had  fearfuUy  corrupted  their  ways.  But,  while  many  sins  characterised 
the  Canaanites,  the  Holy  Ghost  selects  one  sin  as  emphatically  that  which 
caused  their  destruction.  Which  sin?  Unbelief.  That  which  distinguished 
Eahab  from  the  rest  was  not  superior  morality,  higher  intelhgence,  a  more 
exemplary  life,  a  better  natural  disposition,  but  faith  in  God.  She  believed; 
they  believed  not.  Because  she  believed,  she  was  saved ;  because  they  believed 
not,  they  perished.  Even  so,  many  sins  may  characterise  you,  and  each 
one  is  like  a  millstone  round  your  neck,  fitted  to  drag  you  down  to  endless  de- 
struction, but  your  great,  culminating,  condemning  sin  is  unbelief  (Mark  xvi.  16). 
But  Eahab  was  not  only  rescued  from  the  judgment  of  Jericho,  she  was  also 
received  into  the  number  of  God's  people.  Even  so  the  sinner  who  believes  in 
Jesus  is  not  only  saved  from  wrath  to  come,  but  is  received  into  the  Church,  the 
house  of  the  living  God,  there  to  be  instructed  more  fully  in  the  ways  of  God ;  there 
to  learn  aU  the  lessons  that  the  grace  of  God  can  teach ;  to  deny  ungodliness  and 
worldly  lust ;  to  hve  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world,  looking 
for  that  blessed  hope  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ.  {A.  B.  Mackay.)  RahaVs  reasoning  : — The  woman  had  an  eye  to 
Bee  and  an  ear  to  hear.  She  Imew  better  than  to  suppose  that  a  nation  of  slaves  by 
their  own  resources  could  have  eluded  all  the  might  of  Pharaoh,  subsisted  for  forty 
years  in  the  wilderness,  and  annihilated  the  forces  of  such  renowned  potentates  as 
Sihon  and  Og.  She  was  no  philosopher,  and  could  not  have  reasoned  on  the 
doctrine  of  causation,  but  her  common  sense  taught  her  that  you  cannot  have  extra- 
ordinary effects  without  corresponding  causes.  It  is  one  of  the  great  weaknesses  of 
modern  unbelief  that  with  all  its  pretensions  to  philosophy  it  is  constantly  accept- 
ing effects  without  an  adequate  cause.  Jesus  Christ,  though  He  revolutionised  the 
world,  though  He  founded  an  empire  to  which  that  of  the  Caesars  is  not  for  a 
moment  to  be  compared,  though  all  that  were  about  Him  admitted  His  supernatural 
power  and  person,  after  all  was  nothing  but  a  man.  The  gospel  that  has  brought 
peace  and  joy  to  so  many  weary  hearts,  that  has  transformed  the  slaves  of  sin  into 
children  of  heaven,  that  has  turned  cannibals  into  saints,  and  fashioned  so  many  an 
angelic  character  out  of  the  rude  blocks  of  humanity,  is  but  a  cunningly  devised 
fable.  What  contempt  for  such  sophistries,  such  vain  explanations  of  facts  patent 
to  all,  would  this  poor  woman  have  shown  I  How  does  she  rebuke  the  many  that 
keep  pottering  in  poor  natural  explanations  of  plain  supernatural  facts  instead  of 
manfully  admitting  that  it  is  the  arm  of  God  that  has  been  revealed  and  the  voice 
of  God  that  has  spoken.  {W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.)  Gradual  enlightenment: — If  we 
ask,  How  could  Eahab  have  such  a  faith  and  yet  be  a  harlot  ?  or  How  could  she 
have  such  faith  in  God  and  yet  utter  that  tissue  of  falsehoods  about  the  spies  with 
■which  she  deluded  the  messengers  of  the  king  ?  we  answer  that  light  comes  but 
gradually  and  slowly  to  persons  like  Eahab.  The  conscience  is  but  gradually 
enlightened.  How  many  men  have  been  slaveholders  after  they  were  Christians  1 
Worse  than  that,  did  not  the  godly  John  Newton,  one  of  the  two  authors  of  the 
Olney  hymns,  continue  for  some  time  in  the  slave  trade,  conveying  cargoes  of  his 
fellow-creatures  stolen  from  their  homes,  before  he  awoke  to  a  sense  of  its  infamy  ? 
Are  there  no  persons  among  as  calling  themselves  Christians  engaged  in  traffic  that 
brings  awful  destruction  to  the  bodies  and  souls  of  their  fellow-men  ?    That  Eahab 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

should  have  continued  as  she  was  after  she  threw  in  her  lot  with  God's  people  is 
inconceivable ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  how  she  was  living  when  she  first  comes 
into  Bible  history.  And  as  to  her  falsehoods,  though  some  have  excused  lying 
when  practised  in  order  to  save  life,  we  do  not  vindicate  her  on  that  ground.  All 
falsehood,  especially  what  is  spoken  to  those  who  have  a  right  to  trust  us,  must  be 
offensive  to  the  God  of  truth,  and  the  nearer  men  get  to  the  Divine  image,  through 
the  growing  closeness  of  their  Divine  fellowship,  the  more  do  they  recoil  from  it. 
Eahab  was  yet  in  the  outermost  circle  of  the  Church,  just  touching  the  boundary ; 
the  nearer  she  got  to  the  centre  the  more  would  she  recoil  alike  from  the  foulness 
and  the  falseness  of  her  early  years.  And  yet,  though  her  faith  may  at  this  time 
have  been  but  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  we  see  two  effects  of  it  that  are  not 
to  be  despised.  One  was  her  protection  of  the  Lord's  people,  as  represented 
by  the  spies ;  the  other  was  her  concern  for  her  own  relations.  {Ibid.) 
RahaVs  faith : — Faith  in  the  human  heart  is  a  Divine  work  and  a  Divine  wonder. 
Jesus  wondered  when  He  beheld  the  witness  of  it  in  the  message  of  the  centurion, 
and  in  the  cry  of  the  Syro-Phcenician,  and  sometimes  it  occurs  among  circumstances 
BO  strange  and  unlikely  as  to  compel  the  wonder  even  of  our  hard  hearts  and  dull 
minds.  The  faith  of  Eahab  is  of  this  class — strange,  unaccountable  on  merely 
natural  grounds.  That  this  plant  of  heavenly  renown  should  take  root  and  spring 
up  in  such  uncongenial  soil  is  what  we  do  not  naturally  look  for.  Her  faith 
reminds  us  of  a  tree  we  have  seen  in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland.  At  the  bottom 
of  a  wild  glen  stood  a  huge  boulder,  which  towered  high  above  those  which  had 
toppled  with  it  from  the  mountain  side,  and  it  had  a  strange  crown.  On  its  summit, 
as  if  rising  out  of  the  rock,  grew  a  young  tree — green,  vigorous,  and  healthy. 
From  its  peculiar  position,  it  attracted  the  notice  of  every  passer-by ;  it  was  the 
only  tree  for  miles  around,  and  there,  in  that  wilderness,  and  on  that  rock,  it  grew, 
planted  as  it  were  by  the  finger  of  God.  Even  so  the  faith  of  Eahab  is  a  great 
wonder,  a  tree  of  paradise,  planted  by  the  hand  of  God,  in  the  midst  of  a  wilderness 
of  moral  and  spiritual   desolation.  A    mixed    character : — They  are    mixed 

characters  and  mixed  actions  in  the  moral  sense ;  and  just  as  we  may  take  a 
conglomerate  mineral  and  single  out  one  ingredient  for  remark,  so  we  may  fix 
our  minds  upon  one  aspect  of  a  complex  action,  disregarding  all  other  aspects  for 
the  time,  with  admiration  or  condemnation.  It  is  what  we  do  continually.  We 
speak  highly  of  an  author's  genius — without  approval  of  his  principles ;  we  praise 
the  skill  of  some  diplomatist — whose  policy  we  strongly  condemn;  we  do  not 
grudge  our  admiration  to  the  powers  of  Napoleon — though  we  may  believe  him  to 
have  been  a  monster  of  iniquity.  In  a  famous  essay  John  Foster  illustrates 
decision  of  character  by  a  number  of  striking  instances.  He  refers  to  the 
untameable  soul  of  Milton  as  portrayed  in  "  Paradise  Lost "  ;  to  the  subhme  height 
to  which  Pompey  was  raised  by  his  ambitious  spirit ;  to  the  constancy  of  purpose 
with  which  a  Spaniard  pursued  and  at  last  accomplished  his  revenge;  to  the 
indefatigable  industry  with  which  a  ruined  spendthrift  regained  his  fortune  and 
died  a  miser.  But  none  is  so  foolish  as  to  accuse  the  essayist  of  commending 
obstinacy,  ambition,  revenge,  or  miserliness.  Now,  the  same  principle  must  be 
applied  to  an  interpretation  of  Scripture.  The  unjust  steward,  e.g.,  was  a  bad 
man :  he  was  selfish,  unprincipled,  a  downright  rogue.  But  withal  he  was 
prudent;  he  forecast  the  future;  he  directed  his  energies  towards  providing  for 
it ;  and  he  succeeded.  In  his  prudence,  then,  is  he  set  forth  as  an  example  for 
us,  (Sunday  School  Times.)  Our  hearts  did  melt. — The  powers  of  evil  in 
terror  : — I  think  that  testimony  stands  yet.  We,  who  are  fighting  Joshua's  battle 
to-day,  should  take  to  heart  this  word  that  has  leaked  out  from  the  headquarters 
of  the  devil's  army ;  and  the  word  is  this,  that  with  all  the  devil's  swagger,  and 
bravado,  and  bluster,  he  is  a  bigger  coward  than  we  are,  and  that  is  big  enough. 
He  is  really  not  so  bold  as  he  is  trying  to  pretend.  He  knows  that  the  doom  is 
coming,  and  Eahab  is  the  testifier ;  and  she  ought  to  know :  she  has  been  near 
him  and  is  intimate  with  the  latest  information  on  that  side.  I  say,  I  think  that 
we  should  all  take  this.  It  stands  here.  This  is  a  bit  of  the  Word  of  God  that 
"  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever."  And  its  great  value  to  you  and  me  who  are  fighting 
to-day  in  the  wars  of  the  Lord  under  the  heavenly  Joshua  is  that,  all  appearances 
to  the  contrary  notwithstanding,  the  fear  of  us  and  the  terror  of  us  are  working 
yonder  before  we  arrive.  God  is  making  a  way  for  His  conquering  purpose  before 
we  thunder  at  the  enemy's  gate.  Therefore  let  ub  nerve  ourselves.  Therefore  let 
us  be  strong.  Therefore  do  not  let  us  be  daunted  by  the  colossal  and  seemingly 
impregnable  powers  of  evil.    There  is  a  trembling  and  a  quivering  in  the  devil's 


CHAP,  n.]  JOSHUA.  37 

host.  "  Your  terror  is  fallen  upon  us."  Who  would  think  it,  to  read  the  secular 
press  ?  What  nonsense  clever  men  talk  about  religion,  as  if  it  were  a  feeble  kind 
of  thing,  such  as  they  would  call  in  Scotland  "  a  fozy  turnip  " — a  half -rotten, 
effete,  useless  thing.  "  We  are  going  to  have  reforms,  and  we  are  going  to  make 
things  a  great  deal  better,  but  we  will  have  no  religion."  Did  ever  anybody  hear 
such  addle-headed  talking  by  clever  men?  No  religion  I  Oh,  indeed!  You  are 
going  to  bow  out  Jesus  Christ  ?  You  ought  to  have  been  bom  a  long  while  before 
you  were,  if  you  are  going  to  do  that.  You  have  come  into  the  world  much  too 
late  to  put  it  right  without  Christ.  He  is  here,  and  He  means  to  be  here,  and  I 
trust  we  are  all  with  Him.  Oh,  what  encouragement  there  comes  to  us  out  of  this ! 
What  encouragement — that  the  kingdom  of  darkness  in  aU  its  domain  is  tottering 
to  its  fall,  and  it  knows  it  1  Strange  it  is  that  we  who  are  serving  under  the 
heavenly  Joshua,  and  have  all  these  things  to  fortify  us  and  to  infuse  strength  into 
us,  are  so  nervous  and  womanish.  Oh,  to  be  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power 
of  His  might,  and  to  be  strengthened  by  what  we  read  here  as  to  the  condition  of 
things  in  the  enemy's  camp  I  They  are  just  about  to  surrender  if  we  would  put  on 
a  bold  front.  {John  McNeill.)  The  Lord  your  God,  He  is  God.—  Our  God,  Ood 
over  all : — I.  The  Lord  totje  God.  I  am  aware  that  "  our  Lord  "  and  "  our  Saviour," 
and  so  on,  are  phrases  that  are  frequently  employed  thoughtlessly,  ignorantly,  and 
profanely ;  but  this  does  not  render  their  value  less.  Whatever  faith  is  in  exercise, 
80  that  the  believer  can  really  claim  his  affinity,  his  relationship,  it  is  most  blessed 
so  to  do.  Nay,  more ;  there  is  no  solid  happiness  and  permanent  peace  for  any 
child  of  Adam  until  that  child  of  Adam  can  claim  this  relationship :  "  the  Lord 
our  God."  But  oh !  "  wonder,  ye  heavens,  and  be  astonished,  0  earth,"  at  this 
amazing  condescension :  that  the  great  Eternal — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost — 
should  give  to  His  elect  family  each  of  the  Persons,  and  all  the  perfections  and 
attributes  of  seH-existent  Deity,  as  the  Church's  portion  and  inheritance.  II.  He 
IS  God  in  heaven.  As  for  myself,  the  fact  that  Jehovah,  the  covenant  God  of 
Israel,  is  "  my  God,"  makes  me  look  up  to  heaven  and  think  of  heaven  with  the 
utmost  confidence ;  aye,  without  a  scruple ;  aye,  upon  scriptural  assurance  of  calling 
it  my  home.  Now,  mark  two  or  three  things  arising  out  of  this  fact  that  "  He  is 
God  in  heaven  above."  All  the  records  of  heaven  written  and  kept  by  Him ;  all 
the  enjoyments  of  heaven  bestowed,  communicated,  imparted,  in  His  presence; 
all  the  inhabitants  of  heaven  His  own  choice.  His  own  redemption,  His  own 
workmanship.  He  is  absolute  Sovereign  "  in  heaven "  of  the  fixed  decrees  of 
heaven  ;  absolute  Sovereign  "  in  heaven  "  of  all  the  glories  of  heaven  ;  and  absolute 
Sovereign  "  in  heaven  "  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  heaven.  Oh  1  what  security  is 
here  I  "  The  Lord  your  God  is  God  in  heaven  above."  IH.  He  is  God  in  earth 
BENEATH.  Here  we  have  a  solution  of  the  mystery  of  His  providence.  He  is  God 
in  earth,  as  well  as  in  heaven ;  tell  Him  all  about  it.  Go  with  thy  sorrows,  thy 
cares,  thy  domestic  woes,  thy  bodily  afflictions,  thy  circumstantial  trials,  thy 
matters  of  business,  thy  little  things  as  well  as  thy  great  things ;  for  "  He  is  God  in 
earth.''  "  The  Lord  your  God  is  God  in  earth  beneath."  Oh  I  I  had  saved  myself 
a  thousand  sorrows  if  I  had  always  lived  upon  this  principle.  I  had  saved  myself 
a  thousand  woes,  if  I  had  Uved  as  if  there  was  "a  God  on  earth."  {J.  Irons.) 
Bind  tMs  line  of  scarlet  thread  in  the  window. — The  scarlet  line  : — In  Scripture  we 
find  the  blessing  of  God  and  the  curse  of  God  concentrated  not  only  in  individual 
souls,  but  also  in  cities.  Thus  Jerusalem  is  constantly  set  forth  in  Scripture  as  the 
city  of  blessing  (Psa.  xlviii.  1-3,  1.  2).  On  the  other  hand,  Jericho  is  the  city  of 
the  curse  (chap,  vi,  17).  These  two  cities,  then,  are  evidently  representative  cities. 
Jerusalem,  the  city  of  blessing,  represents  the  Church  of  God,  destined  to  eternal 
life.  Jericho,  the  city  of  the  curse,  represents  the  world,  alienated  from  God,  and 
destined  to  destruction.  And  then  what  will  Eahab  represent  but  those  who  are 
gathered  out  of  the  one  into  the  other,  not  on  account  of  anything  good  in  them- 
selves, any  natural  excellencies  or  attainments,  but  by  the  grace  of  God,  and 
according  to  His  good  pleasure.  And  specially  does  she,  herself  a  Gentile,  seem  to 
represent  those  of  the  Gentiles  who  are  brought  to  God.  Bahab's  faith  showed 
itself  in  this,  that  she  recognised  God.  She  looked  above  second  causes.  It  was 
not  Israel's  power  and  prowess,  but  God's  hand,  which  she  saw  (vers.  9-11).  All 
this  throws  much  light  on  the  nature  of  true  faith.  It  shows  us,  first,  that  living 
faith  carries  us  straight  to  God.  Our  hearts  are  very  prone  to  get  entangled  in 
second  causes — to  look  at  the  hand  of  man,  and  forget  the  hand  of  God.  The 
language  of  faith  is,  "  It  is  the  Lord."  It  elevates  the  heart  above  second  causes, 
and  enables  it  to  rest,  not,  it  may  be,  without  many  struggles,  on  the  will  and  arm 


38  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP.  n. 

of  God.  Again,  we  see  in  this  history  that  faith  is  the  principle  of  a  new  life. 
Eahab'slife  had  been  an  unhallowed  one,  and  she  had  sunk  lower  than  many  others 
in  Jericho.  But  now  through  Divine  grace  she  rises  higher  than  all  (Heb.  xi.  51). 
And  faith  is  always  the  same;  the  same  in  its  object,  which  is  God;  the  same  in 
its  principle,  which  is  His  grace  ;  the  same  in  its  result,  which  is  holiness  of  life. 
Eahab  believed  in  the  approaching  doom  of  Jericho ;  she  felt  that  its  days  were 
numbered.  The  true  Christian  now  believes  that  a  more  awful  and  universal 
judgment  is  coming  upon  the  world,  and  he  flees  from  the  wrath  to  come — flees  to 
the  only  Eefuge  from  the  storm.  But  Kahab  went  further.  She  wished  to  have 
some  assurance  that  her  life,  and  the  life  of  her  family,  would  be  spared.  It  is  not 
wonderful  that  she  should  have  desired  this  token ;  and  we  may  well  imagine  what 
comfort  she  must  have  felt  when  the  scarlet  line  was  floating  in  the  air  at  her 
window.  Very  solemn  thoughts  must  often  have  weighed  upon  her  heai-t — thoughts 
of  the  awful  destruction  which  awaited  her  fellow-townsmen  ;  but  she  felt  no 
anxiety  about  herself  and  family.  The  scarlet  line  silenced  every  fear.  And  if  it 
was  natural  in  Eahab  to  desire  a  token  of  her  safety,  is  it  not  even  more  natural  in 
the  true  Christian  to  desire  it  ?  And  one  there  is  which  is  granted  sooner  or  later 
to  those  who  walk  with  God.  It  is  not  always  given  at  once ;  often  it  grows  up  by 
degrees.  But  yet,  sooner  or  later,  it  is  given.  The  blood  of  Jesus  secures  pardon, 
and  also  produces  assurance.  But  notice  that  there  is  a  wide  difference  between 
the  two.  Forgiveness  is  one  thing;  the  knowledge  of  forgiveness  is  another. 
Forgiveness  of  sin  we  must  have,  to  be  Christians.  Assurance  is  a  privilege  which 
Christians  should  seek,  and  seek  until  they  find,  and  then  watch,  that  they  may 
retain  it.  If,  then,  you  would  have  the  scarlet  line  floating  at  the  window  of  your 
hearts,  you  must  trust  simply  in  Christ.  This  of  itself  is  enough  to  bring,  and 
does  often  bring,  assurance  ;  but  if  not,  endeavour  to  walk  with  God.  Be  diligent 
in  doing  His  will  and  work,  and  perhaps  God  will  meet  you  then,  and  wUl  crown 
some  act  of  faith  and  self-denial  and  devoted  service  with  a  true  token,  a  scarlet 
line  of  His  assurance-love.  Having  proceeded  thus  far  with  the  history  of  Eahab, 
we  must  say  a  few  words  about  its  conclusion.  What  a  difference  that  little  piece 
of  scarlet  line  made  I  It  was  not  a  mere  token  arranged  between  man  and  man ; 
it  was  sanctioned  in  heaven.  God's  eye  as  well  as  man's  was  fixed  upon  the  scarlet 
liue,  and  Eahab  was  protected.  And  if  that  scarlet  line  made  so  great  a  difference 
in  her  case,  and  secured  her  protection,  oh,  how  much  more  shall  the  blood  of 
Christ  secure  that  of  the  true  Christian  !  Is  it  sprinkled  upon  your  heart  ?  Does 
God's  eye  see  it  there  ?  Then  aU  your  sins,  however  many,  are  forgiven ;  all  your 
enemies,  however  strong,  will  be  overcome.  But  there  is  still  one  other  point 
to  be  noticed  in  Eahab's  history.  You  will  find  it  stated  in  chap.  vi.  55,  where 
it  says,  "  She  dwelleth  in  Israel  unto  this  day."  So  that  from  that  time 
forth,  though  she  had  been  a  sinner  of  the  Gentiles,  she  was  put  among  God's 
children,  reckoned  as  one  of  His  own  Israel ;  and  even,  we  learn  from 
Matt.  i.  5,  so  honoured  of  God  as  to  be  one  of  the  line  from  whom  Jesus  was 
descended.  And  do  we  not  learn  from  this  how  completely  the  blood  of  Jesus 
cleanses  from  all  sin  ?  how  real  a  thing  is  the  forgiveness  of  sins  ?  how  great 
and  entire  is  the  change  which  the  grace  of  God  makes  in  the  heart? 
(G.  Wagner.)        Rahab  saved  : — I.  The  sovereign  meectt  of  God  was  magnified 

IN  THE  previous  CHARACTER  AND  POSITION  OF  THE  INDIVIDUAL  TO  WHOM  IT  WAS  VOUCH- 
SAFED. II.  The  oneness,  the  primeval,  constant,  and  continued  roENTiTy  of  thb 
WAT  of  salvation,  from  the  blood  that  flowed  upon  Abel's  altar,  and  I  doubt  not 
upon  Adam's  also,  to  "  the  blood  of  sprinkling  that  speaketh  better  things  than  that 
of  Abel."  By  that  line — as  with  Eahab,  so  with  the  Church — the  messengers  that 
brought  it  to  her  and  taught  it  to  her  had  already  escaped ;  it  had  borne  their 
weight,  proved  its  efilcacy ;  and  the  Church  knows  it  to  be  strong  enough  still.  She 
knows  it  to  be  the  cable-line  which  rivets  her  to  the  anchor  of  hope,  "  sure  and 
steadfast,  which  entereth  into  that  within  the  veil."  Ah  1  who  that  has  ever  tried 
it,  who  that  has  ever  "  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  him,"  hath 
not  found  the  promise  fulfilled  in  his  happy  experience — "I  will  draw  them  with 
the  cords  of  love,  with  the  bands  of  a  man"!  Blessed  Jesus!  Thou  art  this 
"  scarlet  line,"  dyed  with  the  blood  of  propitiating  mercy.  III.  Another  exemplabt 
feature  in  the  act  of  Eahab's  faith  is  its  great  simplicity.  What  could  be  simpler 
than  tying  a  scarlet  line  in  a  window  ?  Had  the  gospel  assumed  a  more  scientific 
and  imposing  form — had  its  principles  been  more  elaborate  and  philosophical — had 
it  required  years  of  study  to  comprehend  it,  and  thereby  attached  some  literary 
reputalion  to  the  ultimate  adept  in  it — had  it  been  like  the  rabinnical  lore  of  the 


CHAP,  m.]  JOSHUA.  89 

Hebrews,  or  the  mythological  mysteries  of  the  Greeks,  beyond  the  reach  of  the 
vulgar,  and  a  consequent  badge  of  distinction  to  the  initiated — had  its  prophet 
required  us  to  do  some  great  thing — were  its  peculiar  privileges  obtainable  only  by 
the  pomp  of  a  ritual,  the  costliness  of  sacrifice,  or  the  toil  of  pilgrimage — then  the 
evangelical  Sion  had  never  been  destitute  of  its  thousands  of  devotees  and  ten 
thousands  of  disciples ;  but  when  it  appears  in  the  guise  of  a  system  of  which 
a  child  can  appreciate  the  beauty,  and  which  only  requires  the  spirit  of  a  child  to 
learn  and  entertain  it — when  "the  wayfaring  man,"  as  he  runs  upon  his  business, 
may  read  it — when  its  elastic  principles  expand  their  comprehensive  arms  to  the 
embrace  of  all  men,  and  like  the  outstretched  arms  of  its  crucified  Author  upon 
the  Cross  seem  to  offer  mercy  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left — when  its  whole 
system  is  summed  up  in  a  single  sentence,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved  " — then  the  world  turns  its  back  upon  the  Church,  is  ashamed 
of  the  fellowship  of  children  and  vulgar  and  illiterate  people,  the  simplicity  of  the 
truth  is  mistaken  for  vulgarity,  and  the  house  of  God  is  eschewed  and  avoided, 
because,  instead  of  the  sumptuous  drapery  and  tinselled  garniture  of  the  noble,  the 
poetical,  the  dramatic,  the  speculative,  and  the  vain,  its  only  ornament  and  ensign 
is  the  Cross  of  Christ — its  sole  phylactery  is  "the  scarlet  line  in  the  window." 
IV.  Eahab's  act  of  faith  extended  a  blessing,  as  eveey  act  of  faith  does,  to 
THE  WHOLE  FAMiLT.  She  gathered  her  father  and  mother  and  brethren  and  all  her 
kindred  into  her  house  ;  and  the  emblem  in  the  window  spared  them  all.  Yet  I 
suppose  it  will  scarcely  be  contended  that  it  was  the  bit  of  thread  that  saved  them, 
rather  than  the  covenant  of  which  that  thread  was  the  sign.  But  just  as  idle  is  the 
theory  that  the  sacrament  is  salvation,  instead  of  the  sign  of  the  Saviour;  as 
inaccurate  is  the  impression  that  faith  itself  saves,  and  not  His  blood  and  righteous- 
ness which  faith  appropriates.  Why,  there  is  no  more  saving  merit  in  faith  than 
there  is  in  works — not  a  jot.  I  am  not  saved  because  I  believe,  but  I  am  saved 
by  Him  Ib  whom  I  beUeve.  There  is  all  the  world's  difference  between  those 
propositions.     (J.  B.  Owen,  M.A.) 


CHAPTEB  m. 

Veb.  1.  JosbTia  rose  early  in  the  morning:. — Early  rising : — ^Why  does  Joshua 
rise  early  in  the  morning  ?  He  has  important  and  responsible  duties  to  discharge 
during  the  day,  and  this  may  be  one  reason.  Perhaps  this  has  been  his  habit 
during  a  long  succession  of  years,  and  now  it  is  as  easy  and  natural  to  him  as 
breathing.  Much  has  been  said  by  some  in  favour  of  early  rising,  and  it  has  been 
the  practice  of  many  distinguished  men.  Franklin  wrote  these  words,  "  The 
morning  has  gold  in  its  mouth."  Dean  Swift  declared  that  "  he  never  knew  any 
man  come  to  greatness  and  eminence  who  lay  in  bed  of  a  morning."  Doddridge, 
Barnes,  Wesley,  Judge  Hale,  and  others  we  could  name,  always  rose  before  five 
o'clock  in  the  morning.  As  we  look  upon  these  sayings,  and  consider  these 
examples,  should  we  affirm  that  early  rising  is  the  imperative  duty  of  every  man  ? 
There  are  certain  persons  who  live  to  do  evil,  only  evil,  and  that  continually.  The 
longer  they  remain  in  bed  the  better  it  will  be  for  themselves  and  others.  There 
are  some  who  live  a  life  of  sheer  indolence.  Since  their  sleeping  and  waking 
hours  are  equal,  so  far  as  others  are  concerned,  it  is  of  no  importance  when  they 
rise.  In  these  times,  too,  when  day  is  turned  into  night,  there  are  multitudes, 
especially  in  our  large  cities  and  towns,  who  cannot  go  to  rest  till  a  late  hour,  and 
to  whom  early  rising  is  therefore  a  physical  impossibility.  Besides,  no  hard  and 
fast  line  can  be  drawn  regarding  measures  of  sleep,  because  some  require  more 
than  others.  We  believe  it  would  be  highly  beneficial  to  the  bodies,  the  minds,  and 
the  souls  of  all,  if  the  old  custom — "  early  to  bed  and  early  to  rise  " — were  constantly 
observed.  Let  every  individual,  however,  endeavour  to  discharge  every  duty  which 
is  legitimately  imposed  upon  him ;  and  whether  this  is  done  by  day  or  by  night, 
he  will  fill  up  the  outline  of  work  which  God  gives  to  him,  and  find  acceptance 
in  His  sight.  (A.  McAtislane.)  They  removed  from  Shittlm,  and  came  to  Jordan. 
— "Advance"  is  the  strong  word  that  gathers  up  the  teaching  of  the  chapter. 
1.  The  advance  was  from  a  notable  past.  "  Finis  "  had  been  written  to  the  first 
▼olame  of  the  history  of    Israel ;  bondage  its  preface,  vengeance  its  introduction, 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

mercy  its  continual  illumination.  Sin  had  made  their  forty  years  a  wilderness,  in 
which  they  wandered  from  one  oasis  to  another  of  heavenly  grace  set  as  with 
palm-trees  and  wells  of  water.  And  the  present  was  rich  and  satisfying.  Eastern 
Palestine  was  overflowing  with  honey  and  oil  and  milk.  The  stately  oaks  of 
Bashan,  its  sheep  and  goats  and  mighty  bulls  waiting  to  be  herded  among  their 
riches,  its  abundant  pasturage  and  countless  watercourses,  quite  outrivaled  the 
land  beyond  the  river.  Here  they  were  already  in  possession ;  while  beyond,  fenced 
cities  and  disciplined  troops  forewarned  of  hardship  and  blood.  This  new  volume 
opened  to-day  will  show  no  such  lavishness  of  miraculous  helps.  StUl  the  word 
is  "  Advance."  If  the  leader  is  less,  the  people  are  more.  If  miracles  and  inter- 
ventions are  fewer,  courage  and  skill  and  power  are  greater.  God's  helps  are 
transferred  from  without  to  within  the  hearts  of  men.  He  works  best  for  them  by 
working  through  them.  2.  The  advance  was  a  long  step  toward  their  destiny. 
God's  purposes  never  turn  back.  His  plan  demanded  the  transfer  of  the  people 
across  the  Jordan.  Just  because  Eastern  Palestine  was  broader  and  richer,  they 
must  go  over.  Their  national  growth  and  mission  demanded  a  new  type  of  life. 
Israel  must  set  his  feet  by  the  shore  of  the  great  sea,  and  dwell  upon  the  roads 
traversed  by  caravans  and  armies.  Then  Alexandria  can  supply  its  spiritual 
philosophy,  Greece  its  culture  and  language,  Kome  its  law  and  wide  sway,  to  aid 
in  recording  and  extending  the  gospel.  Physical  geography  is  potent  in  civilisation. 
3.  Advance  requires  spiritual  preparation.  It  is  not  first  for  the  sake  of  earthly 
reward.  An  eternal  purpose,  a  holy  destiny  rules  the  progress.  Before  each 
Jordan  is  crossed,  the  people  must  be  sanctified,  the  leader  empowered.  The  past 
was  no  dead  past  to  bury  its  dead,  but  was  to  live  in  remembrance  of  deUver- 
ance  granted  and  mercies  showered,  of  disastrous  and  destructive  sins.  (C  M. 
Southgate.) 

Vers.  2-8.  When  ye  see  the  ark  ...  go  after  it. — The  good  superseded  by 
the  better : — Hitherto  the  IsraeUtes  had  been  led  on  their  way  by  the  pillar 
of  cloud.  But  now  that  was  to  be  seen  no  more.  With  the  death  of  Moses, 
apparently,  it  had  disappeared.  So  the  ark  is  to  take  the  place  of  the  pillar 
of  cloud.  It  is  better  that  there  should  come  sometimes  these  changes  of 
form— changes  in  the  method  of  the  Divine  communication  with  men,  or 
their  communication  with  Him,  though  we  are  apt  to  quarrel  with  them,  and 
to  be  greatly  afraid  when  they  seem  to  be  impending.  For  our  disposition  is 
60  strong  to  regard  the  means  as  the  end,  and  to  exalt  the  human  or  the  material 
at  the  expense  of  the  spiritual,  of  which  it  is  the  symbol,  that  we  need,  in  order 
to  be  kept  from  Wolatry,  to  have  these  visible  things,  these  material  props,  taken 
from  us,  so  that  we  may  be  led  to  trust  more  fully  in  the  unseen,  and  to  lean  only 
on  the  eternal  arm  of  God.  In  the  case  of  the  Israelites  it  was  a  higher  symbol 
that  was  now  to  take  the  place  of  the  pillar.  The  pillar  had  answered  its  pui-pose. 
It  had  served  to  show  the  people  the  way  they  should  go,  and  to  remind  them  of 
the  Divine  guardianship  ;  but  in  itself  it  had  no  special  suggestiveness.  But  with 
the  ark  it  was  otherwise.  It  had  a  sacredness  in  public  esteem,  inasmuch  as  it 
contained  the  tables  of  the  testimony.  It  was  the  repository  of  the  law.  The 
word  of  the  Lord  was  enshrined  in  it.  And  it  was  not  of  the  Divine  law  only  that 
it  spoke.  It  spoke  of  mercy  also,  of  clemency,  of  God's  forgiveness ;  for  the  lid  of 
it  was  the  mercy-seat.  So  that  while  it  was  a  symbol  of  law,  it  was  a  symbol  also 
of  hope  and  of  peace  to  those  who  might  be  mourning  their  inadequate  fulfilment 
of  the  law.  It  was,  then,  an  object  to  be  regarded  with  reverence,  and  was  in 
danger,  indeed,  of  being  regarded,  as  afterwards  it  was  in  fact,  with  superstitious 
reverence.  But  now,  in  our  day,  the  ark  has  gone  the  way  of  the  cloudy  pillar.  It 
too  has  disappeared.  Are  we  then  forsaken  ?  Have  we  nothing  to  guide  us  in  the 
strange  and  perilous  way  we  have  to  go  ?  It  is  only  the  voice  of  unbelief  that  can 
answer  "  No."  God  speaks  to  us,  not  as  He  spoke  to  our  fathers,  or  to  His  people 
in  ancient  days,  but  not  less  truly  than  He  spoke  to  them,  and  by  a  mightier 
though  a  gentler  voice,  and  by  a  symbol  infinitely  more  rich  in  meaning.  To  us  in 
these  later  days  He  has  spoken  by  His  Son.  And  what  is  the  Son  ?  He  is  the 
brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  person.  It  is  He 
•who  is  our  Guide  to  lead  us  forward  in  the  untrodden  ways.  Surely  the  pillar  and 
the  ark,  yes,  and  the  priest  also,  and  all  the  forms  and  ritual  of  the  old  covenant, 
might  well  vanish  away,  if  in  their  place  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Uving  God,  is 
to  come.  And  notice  this — that,  like  the  ark  which  was  a  type  of  Himself,  He  passes 
over  before  us  into  Jordan,  that  we  who  follow  Him  may  pass  through  it  in  safety. 


CHAP,  in.]  JOSHUA.  41 

Into  Jordan — for  between  us,  too,  and  the  land  of  our  hope  and  our  desire,  there 
rolls  a  deep  and,  as  it  seems  to  our  fears  at  times  perhaps,  an  impassable  stream. 
Men  of  all  times  have  had  their  hopes  of  a  better  world,  into  which  they  might 
enter  at  last.  And  we  have  had  our  hopes.  Those  especially  who  have  had 
weariness  and  disappointments  to  bear,  Uke  the  IsraeUtes  in  their  wanderings  in 
the  desert,  have  clung  to  the  thought  of  a  region  of  peace  and  joy  which  may 
be  their  inheritance  when  the  strife  is  over.  But  who  has  not  had  thoughts  of 
such  a  future  ?  of  such  a  destiny  ?  of  such  a  home  ?  We  have  much  here  that  is 
sweet — many  of  us — much  from  which  it  would  cost  us  not  a  little  to  part.  But  we 
have  not  all  that  we  need ;  and  in  how  many  ways  are  we  thwarted  t  Why,  the 
very  fruition  of  our  desires  serves  only  to  make  it  the  more  keen  I  Surely  there 
are  better  things  in  store — a  clearer  vision,  a  larger  life,  a  more  perfect  holiness. 
But  between  that  bright  world  which  our  imagination  paints  and  us  there  lies  the 
dark  and  deep  river.  Not  the  stream  of  death  merely.  It  is  sin  that  has  made  the 
stream  so  alarming.  We  have  done  wrong.  And  how  can  we  meet  with  God,  and 
how  can  we  enter  into  that  holy  Presence  ?  Well,  let  us  look  at  this  picture. 
Here  is  the  ark  of  the  Lord,  in  the  centre  of  Jordan ;  and  while  it  rests  there,  the 
people  by  hundreds  and  thousands  are  able  to  pass  over  to  the  other  shore  in 
safety.  Does  not  that  remind  us  of  another  scene  ?  •'  They  took  Jesus,"  you  read 
in  one  of  the  Gospel  accounts,  "and  led  Him  away.  And  He,  bearing  His  Cross, 
went  forth  unto  a  place  called  the  place  of  a  skull ;  and  they  crucified  Him,  and 
two  other  with  Him,  on  either  side  one,  and  Jesus  in  the  midst."  "  In  the  midst  " 
— the  centre  of  all  that  terrible  scene.  What  a  scene  it  is  1  Death  is  there ;  and 
death  the  most  shameful  and  agonising.  And  sin  is  there — sin  the  most  aggra- 
vated and  the  most  awful.  But  Christ  has  passed  over  before  us  into  this  deep  gulf 
of  iniquity  and  horror.  "  He  bore  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."  "  He 
tasted  death  for  every  man."  But,  thanks  be  to  God,  the  deep  waters  did  not 
overwhelm  Him.  He  entered  into  the  midst  of  them,  and  they  rolled  back  and 
acknowledged  Him  their  Master.  It  was  impossible  for  death  to  hold  Him.  He 
met  it,  and  triumphed  openly  over  it.  And  there  He  stands  in  the  centre  of  that 
Jordan  that  we  dread,  that  we,  trusting  in  Him  and  sharing  in  His  victory  and  His. 
joy  and  His  eternal  life,  may  pass  over  in  safety  and  peace.  {H.  Arnold  Thomas,  3I.A.). 
The  ark  of  covenant : — I.  The  line  of  the  march  :  "  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way 
heretofore."  The  way  was  unknown,  untried,  danger-encompassed.  Great  conflicts 
lay  in  it.  Great  trials  ;  trials  of  faith,  trials  of  courage,  trials  of  patience,  trials  o£ 
strength.  II.  The  Leader  of  the  march  along  the  unknown,  untried,  and  danger-j 
encompassed  way:  "  The  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord."  In  other  words,  Jesus 
was  the  Leader  of  the  inarch.  He  was  with  the  Church  in  the  wilderness — the  true] 
Joshua — the  Captain  of  "  the  sacramental  host  of  God's  elect."  HI.  The  march! 
ITSELF.  1.  It  was  to  be  a  prompt  following — unquestioning,  soldierlike.  To  the! 
high  summons,  "  Follow  Me,"  the  response  was  to  be,  "  Lord,  we  wiU  follow  Thee, 
whithersoever  Thou  goest."  2.  It  was  to  be  humble,  reverent  following.  "Come\ 
not  near  unto  it."  The  following  was  to  be  far :  far,  and  yet  near.  Near  because 
far.  Far,  through  a  perception  of  the  greatness  of  God ;  far,  through  a  conscious- 
ness of  unworthiness.  Far  in  that  sense,  and  therefore  near.  "  For  thus  saith  the 
High  and  Lofty  One,"  &c.  3.  It  was  to  be  a  trustful  following.  The  ark  of  the 
covenant  of  the  Lord  was  to  stand  out  clear  and  distinct,  that  each  and  all  might 
see  it ;  that  even  the  little  children  might  see  it.  There  was  to  be  no  crowding 
round  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord.  Nothing  was  to  intervene  between  the 
people  and  their  guide,  and  the  object  of  their  trust ;  not  even  Joshua.  They  were 
to  see  "no  man,  save  Jesus  only."  (W.  Crosbie,  M.A.,  LL.B.)  Difficulty: — I. 
We  need  new  grace  for  new  experiences.  Some  trial  which  we  have  never  before 
endured  is  to  be  borne  by  us.  Some  duty  which  we  have  never  before  discharged  is 
to  be  performed  by  us.  Some  relationship  that  is  entirely  new  is  to  be  formed  by 
us,  and  we  know  not  how  we  shall  bear  ourselves.  Let  us  take  courage.  He  who 
gave  these  minute  directions  to  His  ancient  people  will  not  fail  us ;  and  though  He 
may  not  come  to  us  with  such  specific  guidance.  He  will  yet  by  His  providence  and 
Spirit  give  us  the  help  we  need.  II.  When  we  have  to  cross  ant  river  of  difficulty, 
let  us  put  the  ark  of  the  covenant  into  the  middle  of  the  stream.  In  simple 
phrase,  when  we  come  to  a  difficulty,  let  us  see  Christ  in  it,  and  then  we  shall  be 
able  to  surmount  it.  He  turns  the  water  into  dry  land.  He  makes  our  difficulties 
stepping-stones  to  glory.  We  are  never  really  in  danger  when  we  can  see  Him. 
in.  There  are  no  degrees  of  difficulty  with  God.  Ail  things  are  equally  easy  to 
Omnipotence.    Let  us  not  limit  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  by  supposing  that  any  of  our 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

emergencies  are  too  great  for  Him  to  help  us  through  them.  {W.  31.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
The  influence  of  the  ark : — The  influence  of  the  ark  upon  the  popular  mind  finds  an 
analogy  in  the  middle  ages.  A  recent  writer,  speaking  of  civil  life  in  Siena,  says  : 
•«  In  the  centre  of  the  Republican  army  was  the  famous  Carroccio,  a  car  upon  four 
wheels,  drawn  by  four  pairs  of  oxen  covered  to  the  feet  in  rich  cloths.  A  horn  or 
«'  antenna  "  rose  from  the  centre  of  the  car  to  a  great  height,  upon  which  floated  the 
standard  of  the  Republic.  .  .  .  Lower  down,  about  the  middle  of  the  antenna,  a 
Christ  upon  the  Cross,  with  outspread  arms,  seemed  to  bless  the  army.  A  kind  of 
platform  in  the  front  of  the  car  was  reserved  for  the  most  vahant  soldiers,  told  off 
for  its  defence ;  behind  was  another  platform  for  the  trumpeters  and  musicians.  An 
act  of  religious  consecration  and  worship  was  celebrated  upon  the  car  before  it  left 
the  city,  and  white-robed  priests  accompanied  it  to  the  battlefield.  As  the  Carroccio 
of  Siena,  drawn  by  the  large  mild-eyed  oxen  of  Tuscany,  wound  its  way  through  the 
gates  and  down  the  sloping  olive-clothed  hills  from  the  city,  crowds  followed  its 
course  with  straining  eyes,  from  the  walls  and  ramparts  and  housetops.  The  loss  of 
the  Carroccio  was  to  the  Republic  like  the  loss  of  the  ark  of  the  Lord  to  the  Hebrews 
— the  greatest  public  calamity ;  and  all  that  each  city  possessed  of  the  most  valorous, 
the  nerve  and  flower  of  the  army,  was  chosen  to  act  as  the  guard  of  the  sacred  car ; 
the  fiercest  of  the  conflict  was  waged  around  it ;  and  its  presence  often  decided  the 
fate  of  the  battle."  Crossing  the  border : — It  was,  you  observe,  the  putting  forward 
of  their  most  precious,  their  priceless,  inheritance  to  the  very  forefront  of  the  camp, 
to  which  the  people  were  summoned  in  the  crossing  over  Jordan.  About  three- 
quarters  of  a  mile,  throughout  the  march,  was  to  separate  the  ark  and  its  bearers 
from  the  body  of  the  travelling  host.  Why  was  this  ?  God  does  nothing  in  vain. 
God  does  nothing  without  reason.  Let  us  see,  then,  whether  it  may  not  have  been 
in  view  of  another  journey  and  a  mightier  multitude  of  travellers  that  Joshua 
forbade  the  children  of  Israel  to  go  within  two  thousand  cubits  of  the  ark.  I.  Now 
it  certainly  does  appear  to  require  some  explanation,  for  it  is  a  very  strange  and 
very  improbable  direction,  that  the  most  valuable  of  all  the  property  the  people 
possessed,  that  the  very  emblem  of  their  character  as  the  people  of  Jehovah,  should 
be  ordered  to  the  most  exposed  of  all  places  in  the  expedition,  the  thousands  who 
would  have  rallied  for  its  defence  being  ordered  to  remain  nearly  a  mile  in  the  rear. 
You  recollect  how  God  punished  the  successors  of  these  pUgrims  for  exposing  the 
ark  in  the  battlefield  in  the  eyes  of  the  Philistines,  who  seized  it  and  carried  it 
away.  And  yet  here  you  have  that  same  consecrated  treasure  borne  by  a  handful 
of  priests,  not  only  in  the  front,  where  the  first  shock  from  the  Canaanites  is  certain 
to  be  felt,  but  left  unprotected  to  the  mercy  of  the  enemy  by  this  express  decree. 
Verily,  if  I  may  not  go  so  far  as  to  reckon  this  transaction  a  typical  one,  at  all  events  I 
am  unable  to  make  anything  of  the  wisdom  or  prudence  of  the  commandment,  unless 
I  see  in  it  a  picture  of  what  has  happened,  again  and  again,  not  to  the  symbols  of 
our  modern  Christianity,  but  to  that  Christianity  itself.  You  can  hardly  read  this 
chapter  without  being  reminded  of  words  written  when  ages  and  generations  had 
gone  by,  "  The  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal,  but  mighty  through  God." 
There  may,  no  doubt,  be  a  sense  wherein  the  Church  is  the  champion  for  the  truth, 
contending  earnestly  for  the  faith.  We  are  to  wrestle  against  flesh  and  blood,  and 
against  spiritual  wickedness,  rather  than  abandon  Christ's  gospel  to  its  foes.  But 
there,  nevertheless,  are  times  when  God  determines  to  dispense  with  the  valour 
even  of  the  Church,  and  works  the  mightiest  of  His  exploits  by  the  unsupported 
majesty  of  the  gospel  itself.  I  see  this  in  the  whole  history  of  Christianity,  from 
the  days  of  its  Founder  until  now.  The  history  of  Christianity  is  not  the  history  of 
men.  It  is  the  history  of  truth  triumphing  without  men,  and  even  ofttimes  in  spite 
of  men ;  so  that  it  has  been,  as  if  out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  of  sucklings,  that 
the  enemy  and  the  avenger  have  been  stilled,  that  God  might  have  aU  the 
praise.  We  are  Christians,  not  for  God's  security,  but  for  our  own.  We  were  not 
converted  as  if  He  needed  anything ;  we  want  the  ark,  not  the  ark  us ;  and  whenso- 
ever you  find  yourself  tempted,  in  prosperous  times,  to  boast  of  the  Church  as  if  she 
prospered  through  you,  or  whensoever,  in  adverse  times,  you  find  yourselves  lamenting 
over  a  dead  soldier  of  the  Cross,  "  My  father  1  my  father  I  the  chariot  of  Israel  and 
the  horsemen  thereof,"  then  remember  that  in  that  day,  when  all  the  godliness  the 
world  knew  had  laid  up  its  symbols  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  that  ark,  all  alone, 
cleft  in  twain  the  waters  of  a  river,  and  put  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  alien, 
giving  protection  to  thousands  but  receiving  none.  11.  But  now,  this  is  not,  you 
will  observe,  by  any  means  the  reason  that  was  given  by  Joshua  himself  why  the 
camp  should  not  come  nearer  to  the  ark.    The  reason  given  is,  that  the  ark  was  to 


CHAP,  in.]  JOSHUA.  43 

be  the  guide  of  the  travelling  host,  and  that  certain  very  obvious  advantages  wonld 
be  gained  by  the  putting  of  an  interval  betwixt  the  leaders  and  the  led.  "  Come  not 
near  unto  it,  that  ye  may  know  the  way  by  which  ye  must  go ;  for  ye  have  not 
passed  this  way  heretofore."  The  command  had  been  given  to  go  over  the  border 
into  the  country  of  the  Canaanites,  but  that  border  was  a  deep  and  a  rapid,  if  not  a 
very  wide,  river.  Had  the  travelling  host  come  up  all  together  to  the  banks  of  the 
Jordan  there  might  have  been  hard  work  to  muster  up  the  courage  and  the  faith 
requisite  for  the  crossing,  and  so  the  making  way  for  the  miracle.  On  the  other 
hand,  let  the  priests,  the  chief  men  of  the  congregation,  not  only  go  down  themselves 
into  that  perilous  river,  but  take  into  it  the  ark  of  the  covenant  whereof  they  are  the 
appointed  and  responsible  keepers ;  and  let  the  vanguard  of  the  people  not  come  up 
to  that  river  until  the  precious  chest,  with  its  bearers,  appears  in  safety  in  the  midst 
of  the  current,  and  until  that  miraculous  channel  has  been  cut,  and  remains  waiting 
for  them  to  follow  in  security  and  comfort,  and  by  this  means  you  get  the  Israelites 
into  Canaan  without  loss,  and,  furthermore,  without  risking  their  disobedience  or 
rebellion.  I  will  not  insist  on  the  merely  abstract  position  that  there  is  a  fitness  in 
putting  a  guide  at  some  distance  from  the  guided  in  matters  so  lofty  as  religion ;  that 
you  quicken  the  reverence  of  those  who  follow  or  obey  when  you  put  some  interval, 
whether  of  nature  or  of  time,  betwixt  the  leaders  and  the  led.  This,  indeed,  might 
be  illustrated  by  the  crossing  of  the  river  with  two  thousand  cubits  between  the  ark 
and  the  congregation.  "Come  not  near  it."  Follow  it,  but  treat  it  with  respect. 
Jesus,  in  a  sense,  still  commands  us,  "  Touch  Me  not."  Our  entire  business  consists 
in  this — "  If  any  man  will  be  My  disciple,  let  him  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  Me." 
"  He  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  His  steps."  "Whereas  it  surely 
needs  not  that  we  urge  it,  as  the  cardinal  defect  in  the  piety  of  most  of  us,  that 
we  forget  the  cubits  which  will  ever  separate  the  disciple  from  the  Master,  the 
servant  from  his  Lord.  EecoUect  that  it  was  when  Iscariot  came  near  enough, 
nearer  than  they  all,  to  kiss  the  Saviour,  that  he  sold  Him  to  His  enemies  for 
"  thirty  pieces  of  silver."  Therefore,  as  to  the  ark  which  hides  from  you  and  from 
your  children  the  things  which  belong  only  to  the  Lord  our  God,  follow  it,  but  "  come 
not  near  it,  that  ye  may  know  the  way  by  which  ye  ought  to  go."  But,  as  we  just 
now  observed,  this  also  is,  though  very  instructive,  wide  of  the  mark.  There  was 
not  merely  a  lesson  on  the  ark's  independence,  not  merely  another  lesson  on  the 
duty  of  reverence  on  the  side  of  the  Church,  the  chief  thing  was  that  the  ark  became 
a  better  guide  by  moving  on  in  front,  a  thousand  yards  before  the  children  of  Israel. 
It  must  surely  have  struck  you,  again  and  again,  that,  however  hard  it  is  for  us  to 
live  a  life  of  faith  eighteen  hundred  years  after  the  Founder  of  our  faith  left  the 
world,  it  must  have  been  very  much  harder  for  those  to  live  it  who  preceded  the 
Saviour  into  the  world.  We  speak  not  of  the  difference,  though  that  is  a  great  one, 
between  the  trusting  to  a  past  and  an  only  future  Eedeemer ;  we  refer  rather  to  the 
fact  that  Old  Testament  Christians  had  no  model,  no  pattern,  by  which  to  be 
strengthened  and  guided  in  their  sojourn  through  the  wilderness.  Prophets  might 
believe  that  Messiah  would  one  day  die;  but  prophets  could  scarcely  know  how 
Messiah  before  dying  would  live.  Well  might  they  "  search  what  or  what  manner 
of  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  them  did  signify,  when  they  testified  before- 
hand the  sufferings  of  Christ."  Well  they  might.  That  was  no  mere  curiosity.  It 
■was  because  they  too  had  sufferings  to  endure,  and  knew  well  enough  how  much 
easier  the  bearing  of  them  would  be  if  they  could  bear  them  within  sight  of 
Immanuel's.  Now,  that  is  just  what  we  can  do.  Eighteen  centuries,  like  the  two 
thousand  cubits  of  the  Hebrews,  divide  us  in  the  rear  from  the  living,  moving  man 
Christ  Jesus,  who,  before  tasting  death  for  every  man,  tasted  all  the  woes  and  the  wants 
of  life.  The  four  Gospels  are  the  eyes  with  which  we  keep  Him  in  view  who  has 
gone  on  in  front  to  mark  out  our  way.  If  I  exult  in  anything  about  the  writings  of 
the  Evangelists,  it  is  in  this — that  they  contain  my  Master's  anticipation  of  my 
little  walk  of  faith.  There  lives  not  the  believer  of  whose  life  there  was  not  a 
rehearsal  in  Immanuel's.  Not,  perhaps,  in  the  minuteness  and  exactness  of  its 
detail,  but  in  character  and  in  spirit.  I  can  come  into  no  strait  out  of  which  I  may 
not  be  helped  by  some  strait  of  my  Master's.  I  can  bear  no  burden  which  some 
burden  of  His  will  not  help  me  to  carry.  Our  enemies  are  the  same — not  that  I 
have  the  Pharisees,  or  that  He  had  Englishmen,  to  confound,  but  that  the  spirits  of 
both  are  alike,  and  the  weapons  that  must  conquer  both  common  to  my  Master 
and  to  me.  The  gist  of  this  consolation  is  not  that  Christ  bore  what  I  have  to  bear : 
it  is  that  He  got  through  it  aU,  that  it  did  not  destroy  Him,  that  He  is  alive  on  the 
other  side,  and,  which  is  better  than  all,  has  left  that  channel  which  His  faith  cut 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

•wide  open  for  me,  that  I,  like  my  Lord,  may  go  through  that  same  Jordan  on  dry 
ground.  That  is  the  point :  I  am  not  with  Christ  in  the  middle  of  the  river.  For 
then  how  do  I  know  that  the  waves  will  not  engulf  both  the  Master  and  the  servant  ? 
But  I  see  Him,  mark  you — just  as  the  Hebrews  beheld  their  priests — going  down  to 
every  one  of  my  sorrows.  I  see  that  faith  piles  up  the  waves  in  walls  on  either  hand, 
and  now  before  I  have  to  touch  that  water  I  can  catch  the  beautiful  spectacle  of  that 
triumphant  Forerunner  awaiting  me  on  the  opposite  bank,  or  else  standing  unhurt 
in  the  midst  of  the  billows ;  and,  having  Himself  "  overcome  the  sharpness  of  death," 
has  also  "  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers."  (H.  Christopherson.) 
Yet  there  shall  he  a  space  between  you  and  it. — Divine  guidance  not  to  be  obscured : — 
Some  have  thought  that  this  was  designed  as  a  token  of  reverence ;  but  in  that  case 
it  would  have  been  prescribed  long  before,  as  soon  as  the  ark  was  constructed,  and 
began  to  be  carried  with  the  host  through  the  wilderness.  The  intention  was,  "  that 
ye  may  know  the  way  by  which  you  must  go  "  (ver.  4).  If  this  arrangement  had 
not  been  made,  the  course  of  the  ark  through  the  flat  plains  of  the  Jordan  would 
not  have  been  visible  to  the  mass  of  the  host,  but  only  to  those  in  the  immediate 
neighbourhood,  and  the  people  would  have  been  liable  to  straggle  and  fall  into 
confusion,  if  not  to  diverge  altogether.  In  all  cases,  when  we  are  looking  out  for 
Divine  guidance,  it  is  of  supreme  importance  that  there  be  nothing  in  the  way  to 
obscure  the  object  or  to  distort  our  vision.  Alas,  how  often  is  this  direction 
disregarded !  How  often  do  we  allow  our  prejudices,  or  our  wishes,  or  our  worldly 
interests  to  come  between  us  and  the  Divine  direction  we  profess  to  desire !  At 
some  turn  of  our  life  we  feel  that  we  ought  not  to  take  a  decisive  step  without  asking 
guidance  from  above.  But  our  own  wishes  bear  strongly  in  a  particular  direction, 
and  we  are  only  too  prone  to  conclude  that  God  is  in  favour  of  our  plan.  We  do 
not  act  honestly ;  we  lay  stress  on  all  that  is  in  favour  of  what  we  like ;  we  think 
little  of  considerations  of  the  opposite  kind.  And  when  we  announce  our  decisions, 
if  the  matter  concern  others,  we  are  at  pains  to  tell  them  that  we  have  made  it 
matter  of  prayer.  But  why  make  it  matter  of  prayer  if  we  do  so  with  prejudiced 
minds  ?  It  is  only  when  our  eye  is  single  that  the  whole  body  is  full  of  light.  This 
clear  space  of  two  thousand  cubits  between  the  people  and  the  ark  deserves  to  be 
remembered.  Let  us  have  a  like  clear  space  morally  between  us  and  God  when  we 
go  to  ask  His  counsel,  lest  peradventure  we  not  only  mistake  His  directions,  but 
bring  disaster  on  ourselves  and  dishonour  on  His  name.  (W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.) 
/Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore. — The  untrodden  path: — ^Frequently,  in 
/  the  course  of  a  man's  life,  he  is  brought  to  a  standstill  before  some  new  difficulty 
(  of  which  tiU  then  he  has  had  no  experience.  Now  at  such  an  emergency  here  is 
the  answer  that  is  given  by  this  ancient  story :  Put  the  ark  of  God  in  the  river 
before  you,  and  keep  it  fully  in  your  sight,  then  though  it  be  overflowing  all  its 
banks  you  shall  go  over  dry  shod.  Let  us  take  a  few  instances.  There  is  the 
young  person  leaving  the  parental  home  and  beginning  independent  life.  The  lad 
has  known  all  the  experiences  of  school,  and  has,  perhaps,  also  made  trial  of  busi- 
ness duties,  while  yet  his  evenings  and  mornings  have  been  spent  in  the  loved 
society  of  the  family  circle  ;  but  now  he  is  to  go  forth  a  stranger  to  an  unknown 
city,  mayhap  even  to  cross  the  ocean  to  a  foreign  land.  Keep  the  ark  clearly  before 
you,  young  man,  and  you  have  nothing  to  fear.^-  The  mariner  who  can  use  hia 
quadrant  can  always  tell  where  he  is  if  he  can  but  get  a  glimpse  of  the  sun  at  noon- 
day ;  and  you  may  always  know  your  way  if  you  keep  unclouded  before  your  faith- 
eye  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness."f-  We  may  further  apply  this  principle  to  the  young 
woman,  on  the  day  when  she  leaves  her  father's  house  to  be  the  centre  of  the  home 
circle  of  another.  What  hopes  have  gravitated  towards  that  day  1  what  preparations 
have  been  made  for  it  I  what  congratulations  have  been  uttered  regarding  it  I  Yet 
now  that  it  has  dawned  there  is,  at  her  heart,  a  fluttering  of  strange  anxiety.  It  ia 
not  that  she  has  any,  the  slightest,  element  of  distrust  in  him  with  whom  she  haa 
linked  her  lot,  but  rather  that  she  distrusts  herself,  and  is  questioning  whether  she 
is  equal  to  the  new  duties  that  devolve  upon  her.  So  on  the  very  verge  of  the  river 
she  seems  to  stand  with  "reluctant  feet,"  as  if  she  hardly  dared  to  cross.  Let  her 
put  the  ark  in  the  river  and  keep  that  in  sight,  and  all  wUl  be  well.  Let  her 
resolutely  look  to  Jesus  as  her  Saviour  and  sovereign,  and  the  duties  of  her  new 
life  wiU  become  easy.  The  principle  on  which  I  am  now  insisting  is  also  admirably 
appropriate  to  the  case  of  those  who  find  themselves  face  to  face  with  a  difficult 
duty  such  as  has  never  before  confronted  them.  In  general  every  man's  life,  after 
he  has  fairly  set  out  upon  its  labours,  has  what  we  might  call  an  "  even  tenor." 
There  is  an  ordinary  routine  of  work  to  be  done.   But  now  and  then  this  tranquilhty 


CHAP,  m.]  JOSHUA.  45 

is  interrupted.  Something  comes  that  he  has  not  forecast.  He  is  distrustful  of 
himself  in  the  matter.  He  knows  not  what  to  do.  Now  here  again  our  practical 
maxim  becomes  valuable.  Send  the  ark  before  you  and  keep  it  in  sight.  Eemember 
Jesus  and  His  atoning  death.  Open  your  heart  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  then  you  will  be  guided  as  safely  through  your  difficulty  as  were  the  tribes 
through  the  swollen  river.  Not  for  spiritual  difficulties  alone,  not  for  religious 
duties  merely,  as  men  too  commonly  use  these  words,  does  our  maxim  hold.  To 
the  Christian  every  difficulty  is  a  spiritual  difficulty,  and  every  duty  is  a  religious 
duty,  and  so  in  every  emergency  he  is  warranted  to  look  to  Christ  ;  nay,  he  is 
guilty  of  a  sin  not  more  against  God  than  against  himself,  if  he  does  not.  The  ark 
is  as  much  in  its  proper  place  in  the  counting-house  as  in  the  family  or  in  the 
Church  ;  and  if  in  your  business  perplexities  you  had  more  recourse  to  Jesus  directly 
and  immediately,  without  letting  any  intervening  human  element  come  in  to  hide 
Him  from  your  thoughts,  you  would  more  frequently  have  deliverances  to  tell  of, 
and  would  find  yourselves  singing  "  new  Ebenezers  "  to  His  praise.  Depend  upon 
it,  you  will  not  soon  lose  yourselves  if  you  keep  Hun  in  view.  Some  years  ago  a 
party  of  travellers  were  passing  over  one  of  the  Swiss  mountains.  After  they  had 
gone  a  considerable  way  it  began  to  snow  heavily,  and  the  oldest  of  the  guides 
gravely  shook  his  head,  and  said,  "  If  the  wind  rises  we  are  lost."  Scarcely  had 
he  spoken  when  a  gale  arose,  and  the  snow  was  whirled  into  multitudinous  drifts, 
and  all  waymarks  were  obliterated.  Cautiously  they  moved  on,  not  knowing  where 
they  were,  and  almost  giving  themselves  up  for  lost.  At  length  one  of  the  guides, 
who  had  gone  a  short  way  before  them  to  search  out  the  path,  was  heard  shouting. 
"  The  cross !  The  cross  !  We  are  all  right."  And  what  had  the  cross  to  do  with 
it  ?  It  was  one  of  those  religious  memorials  which  we  so  frequently  meet  in  Roman 
Catholic  countries,  and  this  one,  set  up  at  first  by  some  private  individual  for  a 
personal  reason,  had  become  at  length  a  well-known  and  easily  recognised  landmark 
for  the  traveller.  Hence  the  moment  the  guide  saw  it  he  knew  where  he  was,  and 
what  direction  to  take.  But  what  was  true  of  that  symbol  in  their  case  is  true  in 
all  instances  of  the  thing  which  it  signifies  ;  for  we  may  always  know  where  we  are 
when,  with  our  faith-eye,  we  can  see  Christ  crucified.  That  reveals  every  peril,  and 
pierces  through  every  disguise  of  evil.  That  bars  the  way  to  every  dishonour,  and 
barricades  the  entrance  to  every  pathway  of  iniquity.  Keep  that,  therefore,  in  un- 
interrupted view,  and  you  will  never  lose  your  way.  But,  taking  another  line  of 
remark,  the  maxim  to  which  I  have  referred  may  be  appUed  to  those  who  are  called 
upon  for  the  first  time  to  bear  some  heavy  trial.  Sorrow,  in  some  form  or  other, 
must  come  upon  us  in  the  world.  But  the  commonness  of  it  does  not  make  it.s 
experience  a  whit  less  bitter  to  those  who  are  required  to  drink  its  cup.  No  matter 
how  many  others  have  suffered  before  us,  our  first  acquaintance  with  grief  is  ever 
keen  and  poignant.  I  shall  never  forget,  while  memory  lasts,  the  strangeness  of 
the  experience  thirough  which  I  passed  when  first  the  reaper  "  whose  name  is  Death  " 
came  into  my  home,  and  "  with  his  sickle  keen  "  cut  down,  at  one  thrust,  two  of 
my  children.  The  stroke  bhnded  me  for  the  moment,  and  I  was  like  one  utterly 
forlorn ;  but  when  at  length  I  opened  my  eyes,  I  saw  the  ark  in  the  river,  and  that 
instantly  steadied  me.  I  knew  then  where  I  was.  I  remembered  then  that  He  who 
had  done  it  was  my  covenant  God,  to  whom  I  had  given  my  little  ones  in  baptism, 
and  since  He  had  chosen  so  to  accept  my  gift,  I  asked  myself  why  I  should  be 
dismayed  ?  From  my  own  experience,  therefore,  I  can  attest  the  efficacy  of  this 
consolation,  and  commend  it  to  all  who  are  in  trouble,  more  especially  to  those  who 
have  been  bereaved.  Let  the  truth  symbolised  by  that  ark  be  but  accepted  in 
simple  faith,  and  even  in  the  moment  of  utter  desolation  there  will  come  the  calm- 
ness of  resignation,  and  the  confidence  which  only  the  hope  of  reunion  with  our 
loved  ones  can  impart.  This  alone  can  avail  us  at  such  a  time.  This  leads  me 
naturally  to  remark  that  the  maxim  which  I  have  been  illustrating  may  be  applied 
to  our  own  death.  However  many  we  may  have  seen  depart,  the  path  to  ourselves 
must  be  strange  and  untraversed.  Oh,  see  to  it  that  you  then  keep  Christ  in  view,  for 
He  alone  can  then  sustain  you.  Through  death  He  has  Himself  deUvered  them 
who,  through  fear  of  death,  have  been  aU  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage.  But 
there  may  be  some  who  have  never  yet  made  Jesus  their  Saviour  by  simple 
trust  in  Him ;  and  to  them  I  must  address  one  parting  word.  You  have  had  many 
difficulties  to  confront  in  the  past.  You  know  how  you  failed  before  them.  When 
your  business  went  from  beneath  you,  and  you  had  no  prop  to  lean  upon,  how 
dreary  were  you  then  without  the  Lord  I  When  your  child  died,  and  all  the  world 
seemed  to  you  draped  in  sadness,  how  utterly  prostrate  were  you  then  in  the  con- 


46  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

sciousness  that  you  had  no  hold  on  Christ !    When  you  were  laid  aside  with  serious 
sickness,  and  you  thought  that  you  should  die,  how  was  your  heart  filled  with 
dread  at  the  prospect  of  meeting  God  !     Oh,  let  the  experience  of  the  past  warn  you 
for  the  future!     If  you  failed  under  the  lesser  trials,  how  will  you  endure  the 
greater  ?     "  None  but  Clirist ;  none  but  Christ,"  said  Lambert  at  the  stake  ;  and 
there  is  none  else  can  be  a  real  helper  unto  you,  either  in  life  or  death.     Put  the 
ark  before  you,  then,  and  keep  it  full  in  view.     That  only,  but  that  always,  will 
make  the  channel  dry.      (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)         The  untrodden  path  and  the 
guiding  ark : — I.  The  untrodden  path.     Our  march  through  time  is  like  that  of 
men  in  a  mist,  in  which  things  loom  in  strangely  distorted  shapes,  unlike  their  real 
selves,  until  we  get  close  up  to  them,  and  only  then  do  we  discover  them.     So  for 
us  all  the  path  is  new  and  unknown  by  reason  of  the  sudden  surprises  that  may  be 
sprung  upon  us,  by  reason  of  the  sudden  temptations  that  may  start  up  at  any 
moment  in  our  course,  by  reason  of  the  earthquakes  that  may  shatter  the  most  solid- 
seeming  lives,  by  reason  of  the  sudden  calamities  that  may  fall  upon  us.     The 
sorrows  that  we   anticipate  seldom  come,  and  those  that  do  come   are  seldom 
anticipated.     The  most  fatal  bolts  are  generally  from  the  blue.     One  flash,  all  un- 
locked for,  is  enough  to  blast  the  tree  in  all  its  leafy  pride.     Many  of  us,  I  have 
no  doubt,  can  look  back  to  times  in  our  lives  when,  without  anticipation  on  our 
part,  or  warnmg  from  anything  outside  of  us,  a  smiting  hand  fell  upon  some 
of  our  blessings.     The  morning  dawned  upon  the  gourd  in  full  vigour  of  growth, 
and  in  the  evening  it  was   stretched  yellow  and  wilted  upon  the  turf.     Any- 
thing may  come  out  of  that  dark  cloud  through  which  our  life's  course  has  to  pass. 
And  there  are  some  things  concerning  which  all  that  we  know  is  that  they  must 
come.    n.  The  guiding  aek.    For  us  a  similar  thing  is  true.     Jesus  Christ  is  the 
true  Ark  of  God.    For  what  was  the  ark  ?    The  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence ; 
and  Christ  is  the  reality  of  the  Divine  presence  with  men.    The  whole  content  of 
that  ark  was  the  law  of  the  Lord.    And  Jesus  Christ  is  the  embodied  law  of  the 
present  God.    The  ark  was  the  sign  that  God  had  entered  into  this  covenant  with 
these  people,  and  that  they  had  a  right  to  say  to  Him,  "  Thou  art  our  God,  and  we 
are  Thy  people."    And  the  same  double  assurance  of  reciprocal  possession  and 
mutual  delight  in  possession  is  granted  to  us  in  and  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
So  He  becomes  the  guiding  Ark,  the  Shepherd  of  Israel.     His  presence  and  will 
our  directors.     The  law,  which  is  contained  and  incorporated  in  Him,  is  that  by 
which  we  are  to  walk.     The  covenant  which  He  has  established  in  His  own  blood 
between  God  and  man  contains  in  itself  not  only  the  direction  for  conduct,  but  also 
the  motives  which  will  impel  us  to  walk  where  and  as  He  enjoins.    And  so,  every 
way  we  may  say,  by  His  providences  which  He  appoints,  by  His  example  which  He 
sets  us,  by  His  gracious  Word  in  which  He  sums  up  all  human  duties  in  the  one 
sweet  obligation,  "  Follow  Me,"  and  even  more  by  His  Spirit  that  dwells  in  us,  and 
whispers  in  our  ears,  "  This  is  the  way ;  walk  ye  in  it,"  and  enhghtens  every 
perplexity,  and  strengthens  all  feebleness,  and  directs  our  footsteps  into  the  way  of 
peace ;  that  living  and  personal  Ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth 
is  still  the  guide  of  waiting  and  docile  hearts.    III.  The  watchful  following  : 
"  Come  not  near  unto  it,  that  ye  may  know  the  way  by  which  ye  ought  to  go."    In 
a  shipwreck  the   chances  are  that  the   boats  will   be  swamped   by  the   people 
scrambling  into  them  in  too  great  a  hurry.    In  the  Christian  life  most  of  the  mis- 
takes that  people  make  arise  from  their  not  letting  the  ark  go  far  enough  ahead  of 
them  before  they  gather  up  their  belongings  and  follow  it.    An  impatience  of  the 
half -declared  Divine  will,  a  running  before  we  are  sent,  an  acting  before  we  are 
quite  sure  that  God  wills  us  to  do  so  and  so,  are  at  the  root  of  most  of  the  failures 
of  Christian  effort,  and  of  a  large  number  of  the  miseries  of  Christian  men.    If  we 
would  only  have  patience  1  Three-quarters  of  a  mile  the  ark  went  ahead  before  a 
man  lifted  a  foot  to  follow  it.    And  there  was  no  mistake  possible  then.     Now  do 
not  be  in  a  hurry  to  act.    "  Raw  haste  "  is  "  half-sister  to  delay."    We  are  all 
impatient  of  uncertainty,  either  in  opinion  or  in  conduct ;  but  if  you  are  not  quite 
sure  what  God  wants  you  to  do,  you  may  be  quite  sure  that  He  does  not  at  present 
want  you  to  do  anything.     Wait  till  you  see  what  He  does  wish  you  to  do.     Better, 
better  far,  to  spend  hours  in  silent— although  people  that  know  nothing  about  what 
we  are  doing  may  call  it  indolent — waiting  for  the  clear  declaration  of  God's  will, 
than  to  hurry  on  paths  which,  after  we  have  gone  on  them  far  enough  to  make  it  a 
mortification  and  a  weariness  to  turn  back,  we  shall  find  out  to  have  been  not  His 
at  all,  but  only  oar  own  mistakes  as  to  where  the  ark  would  have  us  go.    And  that 
there  may  be  this  patience  the  one  thing  needful— as,  indeed,  it  is  the  one  thing 


CHAP,  m.]  JOSHUA.  47 

needful  for  all  strength  of  all  kinds  in  the  Christian  life — is  the  rigid  suppression 
of  our  own  wills.  Suppress  your  own  wills,  dwell  near  God,  that  you  may  hear 
His  lightest  whisper.  "  I  will  guide  thee  with  Mine  eye."  What  is  the  use  of  the 
glance  of  an  eye  if  the  man  for  whom  it  is  meant  is  half  a  mile  off,  and  staring 
about  him  at  everything  except  the  eye  that  would  guide  ?  And  that  is  where  some 
of  us  that  call  ourselves  Christian  people  are.  God  might  look  guidance  at  us  for 
a  week,  and  we  should  never  know  that  He  was  doing  it,  we  have  so  many  other 
things  to  look  after.  And  we  are  so  far  away  from  Him  that  it  would  need  a 
telescope  for  us  to  see  His  face.  "  I  will  guide  thee  with  Mine  eye."  Keep  near 
Him,  and  you  will  not  lack  direction.  {A.  Maclaren.  D.D.)  The  untravelled 
and  irretraceable  way  (with  Deut.  xvii.  16)  : — I.  Our  irFE,  like  Israel's  journey,  is 
BY  A  NEW  way:  " Yo  havo  not  gone  this  way  heretofore."  What  others  have  felt 
and  done  is  no  sure  chart  of  what  we  shall  do  and  feel.  The  ship  just  coming  in 
cannot  predict  what  will  be  the  voyage  of  the  one  just  starting  out.  Like  a  journey 
in  an  unfamiliar,  mountainous  country,  every  step  is  into  a  new  region ;  strange 
and  unexpected  scenes  arise.  11.  Life  is  also  by  an  irretraceable  way:  "Ye 
shall  no  more  return  that  way."  Like  Israel,  we  look  for  the  first  and  the  last  time 
upon  the  scenery  as  we  pass  through  it.  We  may  change  the  direction  of  life, 
correct  its  tendencies,  find  pardon  for  its  sins  and  follies,  but  we  never  can  retrace 
the  steps  aheady  taken.  III.  Our  experiences,  like  those  of  Israel,  are  fob 
PURPOSES  OP  discipline.  There  is  a  moral  strength,  patience,  perseverance,  and 
trust,  gotten  by  the  valleys  we  traverse,  the  steeps  we  climb,  and  the  magnitudes 
we  see.  One  day  Divine  wisdom  will  be  justified  in  all  eyes  for  this  uneven, 
circuitous  path  of  life.  IV.  Our  jouhrney  also  leads  to  the  promised  land,  and 
FIDELITY  WILL  BRING  US  THERE.  We  are  uot  iu  doubt  as  to  whither  we  go,  however 
unforeseen  the  way  may  be.  Calebs  and  Joshuas  even  now  bring  us  marvellous 
clusters  of  fruit  as  foretastes.  We  climb,  here  and  there,  Pisgahs,  to  be  refreshed  by 
the  prospect.  We  are  sure  that  when  our  feet  touch  that  "  darkly  flowing  river  "  it 
will  part,  and  we  shall  easily  go  over.  However  uncertain  the  future,  some  things 
are  sure.  A  few  great  truths,  sunk  deep  in  the  heart,  are  aU  we  absolutely  need 
for  the  journey.  God  never  leaves  the  soul  without  some  light.  As  Charles  Kingsley 
said,  in  the  London  fog:  "There  is  always  light  enough  to  get  home."  {T.S. 
Scott.)  Untrodden  ways : — I.  Thoughts  suggestive  of  consolation.  1.  Ke- 
member,  whether  your  way  in  providence  be  new  or  old,  it  is  not  a  way  of  your  own 
appointing.  A  higher  power  than  yours  has  led  you  to  your  present  standing-place. 
It  must,  therefore,  be  right.  /  God  has  never  erred  yet,  either  in  guiding  a  star  in 
its  orbit,  or  in  directing  the  chaff  from  the  winnower's  hand,  and  He  cannot  err  in 
steering  the  course  of  one  of  His  people.V  "  Say  ye  unto  the  righteous  it  shaU  be 
well  with  him  "  ;  f or  "  The  steps  of  a  good  man  are  ordered  by  the  Lord  :  and  He 
delighteth  in  his  way."  "  My  times  are  in  Thy  hand."  2.  Note  again,  your  present 
pathway  is  new  to  you,  but  it  is  not  new  to  your  God.  All  things  are  equally  pre- 
sent to  His  eye.  Nothing  comes  upon  Him  by  surprise.  3.  Eemember,  also,  the 
trials  which  seem  new  to  us  are  not  new  to  God's  people.  Joshua  said  to  the  tribes, 
"  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore  " ;  but  then  their  forefathers  had  gone 
through  the  Ked  Sea,  which  was  much  the  same  thing,  and  perhaps  on  a  greater 
scale  still.  Do  not,  therefore,  say  or  imagine  that  your  woes  are  peculiar.  Others 
have  suffered  as  much  as  you  are  enduring.  If  it  be  strange  to  you  it  is  only  to  you 
strange,  for  the  rest  of  God's  saints  have  suffered  the  same.  4.  But  suppose  our 
position  should  be  new,  the  labour  new,  the  affliction  new,  it  is  no  sort  of  reason  why 
it  should  be  any  the  more  dangerous.  It  is  folly  to  be  alarmed  at  new  things  because 
they  are  new.  There  may  be  less  danger,  after  all,  in  the  trial  you  dread  than  in 
that  which  you  are  bearing  to-day.  5.  And  suppose  that,  being  new,  it  were 
dangerous  ;  one  thing  is  very  clear,  namely,  that  fear  wUl  not  diminish  the  danger. 
To  fret,  and  worry,  and  mistrust,  will  that  prepare  you  for  what  is  coming?  WiUit 
aid  you  to  die  to  begin  this  day  to  "  feel  a  thousand  deaths  in  fearing  one  "  ?  No, 
if  the  worst  come  to  the  worst,  nothing  can  sharpen  your  sword  so  well  for  battle  as 
faith  in  the  ever-living  God.  6.  Hitherto  and  up  to  this  moment  we  have  found  our 
God  to  be  faithful  to  us.  These  present  crosses  which  are  now  upon  our  shoulders, 
we  say  we  would  rather  always  bear  them  than  have  new  crosses,  but  is  this 
wise?  Do  you  not  recollect  when  these  very  crosses  were  themselves  new? 
To-day's  grief  wiU  only  be  new  for  to-day  and  for  a  little  time  to  come ;  it  will 
soon  grow  old  if  we  live  long  enough,  and  we  shall  become  as  used  to  the  new 
trial  as  to  the  old.  7.  Moreover,  should  we  become  distrustful  whilst  passing 
by  a  way  which  we  have  never  trodden  before  if  we  recollected  that  progress 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

implies  a  change  of  difficulties  and  trials  ?  Who  wants  to  be  like  a  blind  horse 
\  going  round  a  mill  for  ever  and  ever,  feeling  the  lash  of  the  same  whip  at  the 
1  same  place,  and  dragging  the  same  machinery  round  without  advancing  ?  No, 
ilet  us  advance.  And  what  if  in  going  on  we  meet  with  sterner  trials?  Then 
180  let  it  be,  for  we  shall  receive  richer  grace.  8.  If  there  come  new  trials, 
'they  generally  end  the  old  ones.  I  do  not  know  what  my  trials  may  be  seven 
!  years  hence,  but  I  do  know  that  the  trials  of  this  mouth  will  not  then  disturb  me. 
When  we  bow  beneath  the  infirmities  of  age,  we  may  rest  assured  that  we  shall  not 
be  annoyed  by  the  temptations  of  boyhood,  nor  molested  by  the  vexations  of  middle 
life.  In  advancing,  there  are  prospects  of  gain  as  well  as  of  loss.  9.  Moreover, 
although  we  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore,  the  path  runs  in  the  right  direc- 
tion. The  children  of  Israel  had  their  faces  set  towards  the  promised  land. 
Courage,  brothers  and  sisters  !  The  way  may  be  rough  to  us,  but  it  is  the  King's 
highway,  leading  to  the  New  Jerusalem.  11.  A  few  sentences  of  direction.  Where- 
withal shall  a  man  be  guided  when  he  comes  to  a  way  which  he  has  not  passed 
heretofore  ?  When  our  way  is  devoid  of  familiar  footprints,  what  shall  we  do  ? 
1.  Be  most  concerned  to  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  obey  it.  Notice  that  this 
chapter  seems  taken  up  with  "  The  Lord  said  unto  Joshua,"  and  "  Joshua  said  unto 
the  people  of  Israel."  The  chief  point  in  every  dilemma  is  to  wait  till  you  hear 
the  Master's  voice.  2.  Distinctly  recognise  the  presence  of  the  covenant  God  of 
Israel  with  you.  We  never  travel  so  sweetly  over  the  rough  ways  of  this  life  as 
■when  we  see  that  God,  the  living  God,  the  God  of  the  covenant,  the  God  of  the 
mercy-seat,  the  God  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  the  God  of  the  recon- 
ciliation by  blood,  is  with  us  and  fulfilling  His  promise,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee 
nor  forsake  thee."  3.  Dismiss  from  your  soul  the  anxiety  which  arises  from  the 
idea  that  you  are  the  keeper  of  the  Divine  life  within  your  soul.  When  Israel 
marched  through  the  wilderness  some  tribes  were  before  and  some  were  behind  the 
ark,  as  if  they  were  guarding  it ;  but  on  this  occasion  the  ark  went  far  ahead  of 
them,  as  though  God  had  said,  "  You  My  people  are  no  protection  to  Me  ;  I  guard 
you."  Now  in  the  time  of  danger  the  priests  who  carry  the  ark  advance  into  the 
very  teeth  of  the  enemy,  and  into  the  bed  of  the  Jordan,  and  there  they  stand,  as 
though  the  eternal  God  threw  down  the  gauntlet  to  all  the  hosts  of  Canaan  and 
said,  "  Come  and  contest  it  with  Me  if  you  can.  I  have  left  My  people  behind ;  I 
alone  will  meet  you  ;  I  have  come  up  alone,  unattended,  and  I  defy  you  all."  God's 
grace  will  take  care  of  him  upon  whom  it  lights.  4.  As  further  directions  let  me 
briefly  say,  if  you  are  now  about  to  enter  into  a  great  trouble,  do  not  hurry, 
make  no  rash  haste.  If  the  grace  of  God  does  not  make  us  calm  in  the  time  of 
peril  and  suffering,  we  have  some  reason  to  question  whether  it  is  healthily  operating 
upon  our  spirits  at  all.  5.  But  next,  while  you  do  not  hurry,  do  not  hesitate. 
Not  one  man  of  aU  the  tribes  said,  "  I  must  wait  and  see  others  cross,  and  know 
whether  the  road  really  is  open."  At  the  moment  the  trumpets  sounded  the 
advance  they  all  went  on,  asking  no  questions.  Be  brave,  also,  and  go  straight 
on,  though  it  were  a  river  of  fire  instead  of  water.  If  Jehovah  bids  you,  the  way  is 
right ;  hesitate  not.  6.  There  is  one  direction  which  we  must  not  omit,  because  it 
is  put  by  itself  for  special  observance — it  is  this,  "  Sanctify  yourselves."  Whenever 
\?e  are  in  new  trials  a  voice  speaks  out  of  them,  saying,  "  Sanctify  yourselves."  I 
suppose  the  Israelites  washed  themselves  with  water  and  practised  the  ceremonial 
rights  which  made  them  clean  ;  so  the  child  of  God  should  come  afresh  in  time  of 
trouble  to  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  He  should  also  ask  for  grace  that  he  may 
purge  out  the  old  leaven.  III.  A  few  sentences  by  way  of  exciting  expectation. 
Before  us  rolls  this  river,  full  to  its  brim ;  beyond  the  river,  contention  and  strife 
await  us ;  let  us  Hft  up  our  hearts  to  God  and  trust  Him,  and  what  shall  then 
happen?  1.  Why,  first,  we  shall  discern  the  presence  of  the  living  God  (ver.  10). 
Anything  which  gives  us  an  opportunity  to  see  our  God  is  worth  having.  Even  the 
light  of  the  fiery  furnace,  if  no  other  light  can  reveal  that  fourth  who  is  like  the  Son 
of  God,  is  a  precious  light.  Thank  God  that  trouble  is  coming,  for  now,  as  through 
a  glass,  shall  you  behold  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  2.  What  next  will  happen  then  ? 
Why,  in  all  probability  the  difficulty  in  your  way  will  cease  to  be ;  for  while  the 
children  of  Israel  saw  the  living  God,  they  also  saw  a  totally  new  and  wonderful 

Ehenomenon.  God  does  interfere  in  ways  which  could  not  have  been  prognosticated 
y  those  who  best  understand  the  science  of  probabilities.  God  flings  down  the 
challenge  every  day  to  Satan  and  to  sin,  and  says,  "  Here  is  My  child  ;  I  put  him 
in  a  new  position  to-day ;  see  if  you  can  overcome  him  now."  To-morrow  God  will 
issue  the  same  challenge,  and  so  on  to  the  end.    Perhaps  this  new  trouble  has  oome 


CHAP,  in.]  JOSHUA.  49 

because  Satan  has  said,  "  Put  forth  now  Thine  hand  and  touch  his  hone,  and  his 
flesh,  and  he  will  curse  Thee  to  Thy  face  "  ;  but  God  is  saying,  "  Try  him,  try  him," 
only  with  this  view,  that  He  may  get  glory  by  causing  our  weakness  to  overcome  all 
the  strength  of  hell  through  grace  Divine.  3.  Is  this  all  that  we  have  to  expect  ? 
No,  we  shall  see  such  deliverances  that  we  shall  be  prepared  for  future  trials. 
Sometimes  a  trouble,  when  we  are  marvellously  brought  through  it,  becomes  a  kind 
of  stock-in-trade  for  us ;  we  look  back  upon  it  when  the  next  affliction  comes,  and 
we  say,  "  No,  I  am  not  afraid  ;  the  God  who  helped  me  on  that  occasion  can  help 
me  now."  4.  Lastly,  and  this  is  best  of  all,  and  will  please  the  children  of  God 
most — all  that  is  coming  to  you  wiU  magnify  Jesus  in  your  eyes.  Jesus  is  very  dear 
to  every  child  of  God,  but  to  the  most  tried  He  is  the  most  precious.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  untrodden  way  : — Another  year  is  numbered  with  the  past.  To  each  of  us  it 
has  been  marked  by  events  materially  affecting  us  for  weal  or  woe.  A  new  year, 
richly  laden  with  golden  possibilities,  is  now  opening  before  us.  What  may 
transpire  during  it  is  concealed  from  our  present  view.  "  Ye  have  not  passed  this 
way  heretofore."  Nor  need  we  be  dismayed  by  reason  of  this  obscurity;  indeed, 
we  would  not  have  it  otherwise.  All  that  we  require  in  going  forth  to  meet  what- 
ever may  arise,  is  to  realise  the  presence  with  us  of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  to 
follow  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  of  fire.  Several  important  truths  were  pictured  forth 
under  the  Jewish  dispensation  by  the  symbol  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  1.  The 
recognition  of  the  Divine  presence.  2.  The  duty  of  striving  after  the  honouring 
of  the  Divine  law.  3.  The  privilege  of  communion  with  God  through  the 
Mediator.  When  the  children  of  Israel  were  commanded  to  "go  after"  the  ark  of 
the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  they  were  in  fact  urged,  in  all  their  future  wanderings, 
to  seek  to  live  under  a  continual  sense  of  the  Divine  presence,  to  strive  to  honour 
the  Divine  law,  and  to  hold  fellowship  with  Heaven.  Even  so  let  it  be  with  you. 
Think  of  the  eye  of  God  as  being  upon  your  way ;  yea,  be  your  spirit  that  which  led 
one  to  say,  "  If  Thy  presence  go  not  with  me,  carry  me  not  up  hence."  Take  the 
principles  of  God's  own  Word,  and  act  upon  them.  Seek  counsel  and  help  from 
Heaven.  Lift  up  to  God  "  holy  hands."  Have  a  mercy-seat;  some  spot  sacred  to 
hallowed  and  refreshing  communion  with  God.  And,  pursuing  this  course,  the 
weeks  and  months  of  the  year  will  pass  happily  along  in  your  experience :  new 
duties  wiU  be  faithfully  performed,  new  temptations  successfully  resisted;  your 
witness  to  the  truth  will  be  decided  in  its  character  ;  strength,  both  for  service  and 
for  suffering,  will  be  secured  ;  and  "  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  your  God"  being  thus 
upon  you.  He  wiU  "  establish  the  work  of  your  hands."  There  are  two  ve/y  plain 
reasons  why  it  behoves  us  to  take  this  course.  (1)  Our  way  in  the  future  is 
unknown  to  us,  and  hence  we  need  to  be  Divinely  directed.  The  waters  of  doubt 
and  uncertainty  are  flowing  over  the  path  we  have  to  tread,  quite  obliterating  it 
from  our  view.  We  stand  to-day,  looking  on  to  the  goodly  land  beyond,  the  land 
of  light  and  love,  of  rest  and  peace,  of  beauty  and  blessedness,  of  eternal  purity 
and  uprightness,  but  we  cannot  tell  by  what  way  we  are  to  be  brought  into  its  full 
possession.  And  the  path  before  us  being  thus  an  unknown  one,  we  do  well  to 
yield  ourselves  up  to  the  guidance  of  our  God ;  and,  taking  this  course,  we  may 
rest  assured  that  He  will  conduct  us  in  safety,  and  bring  us  at  length  into  the 
fulness  of  His  rest.  (2)  The  future  is  new  to  us.  Events  and  experiences,  totally 
different  from  anything  we  have  had  before,  will  occur  to  us.  But,  living  as  in 
God's  presence,  and  in  obedience  to  His  will,  and  in  fellowship  with  Him  at  His 
throne,  arise  what  may,  we  shall  be  Divinely  supported.  {S.  D.  Hillman.) 
New  experiences  : — It  was  the  inipressiveness  of  a  new  experience.  A  ship's 
company  who  have  lived  together  for  a  few  weeks,  growing  accustomed  to  their 
shipboard  life,  at  last  draw  near  the  land  towards  which  they  have  been  sailing, 
and  it  is  always  striking  to  see  how  a  quietness  and  seriousness  seems  to  come  over 
them  in  the  last  hours  before  they  go  on  shore.  New  things  are  waiting  for  them 
there.  They  are  going  to  exchange  the  familiar  for  the  unfamiliar ;  so  there  is 
little  of  lightness  and  much  seriousness.  And  this  is  the  way  in  which  life  keeps 
its  solemnity.  Let  us  look  to-day  at  this  power  of  unprecedented  things,  and  try 
to  get  some  idea  of  the  true  way  to  approach  them.  Apply  it  first  of  all  to  the 
changes  which  are  coming  all  the  time  in  the  circumstances  of  our  lives.  If  you  go 
and  stand  in  the  midst  of  London,  or  climb  to  the  top  of  the  pyramids,  or  set  your- 
self in  the  middle  of  a  snowfield  of  the  Alps,  it  is  a  thrilling  and  delightful 
experience.  What  is  it  that  makes  it  so  ?  It  is  that  you  cai-ry  your  old  self  there. 
Some  accidental  parts  of  yourself  you  have  left  behind  in  Boston,  but  your 
essential  self,  with  your  habits  and   your  ways  of  thinking,  you  have  carried 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

there ;   and  the   wonder  is  to   feel  this  identity  of  yours  standing  among  these 
unfamiliar  things,  beaten  by  the  waves  of  this  strange  city  life,  frowned  on  by  the 
hoary  ages,  or  lighted  by  the  glory  of  the  everlasting  snows.    And  now  let  it  be 
the  going,  not  from  Boston  to  Egypt,  but  from  wealth  to  poverty,  from  poverty 
to  wealth,  from  health  to  sickness,  from  sickness  to  health,  from  one  business  to 
another  business,  from  one  home  to  another  home.     Oh,  when  any  of  the  changes 
of  life  draws  near  to  you,  whenever  God  is  leading  you  into  new  circumstances, 
clasp   with  new  fervour  and  strength  the  old  hand  which  you  have  long  been 
holding,  but  prepare  to  feel  it  send  new  meanings  to  you  as  it  clasps  your  hand  with 
a  larger  hold.     And  since  you  are  always  entering  into  some  new  life,  whether  it 
mark  itself  by  notable  outward  change  or  not,  always  hold  the  hand  of  God  in 
grateful  memory  of  past  guidance  and  eager  readiness  for  new — that  is,  in  love  and 
in  faith.     It  is  by  this  same  principle  that  we  are  able  to  picture  to  ourselves  the 
natural  and  healthy  way  by  which  men  ought  to  pass  from  one  period  or  age  of 
life  into  another.    A  young  man's  hfe  is  full  of  novelty.    Behind  him,  with  a  river 
rolling  between,  there  lies  that  despised  land  in  which  he  was  a  child,  bound  to 
obey  what  others  commanded,  and  not  knowing  enough  to  doubt  what  others  said 
was  true.    What  shaU  we  say  about  the  progress  which  the  boy  seems  to  have  made 
across  the  gap  that  lies  between  him  and  his  childhood  ?     Shall  we  not  certainly 
say  this,   that  the  progress    is  natural  and  healthy  and  good,  that  the  gap  is 
unnatural  and  bad  ?    I  think  there  is  no  better  condition  of  the  human  nature  to 
contemplate  than  that  of  a  young  man  dealing  truly  and  seriously  with  the  faith 
of  his  fathers  which  has  been  implicitly   his  childhood's  faith.     He  finds  new 
questions  rising  which  he  never  dreamed  of.    The  faith  which  is  shaping  for  hia 
manhood  evidently  is  to  not  be  whoUy  the  same  as  that  in  which  he  was  trained. 
He  is  to  see  more  of  God,  he  is  to  see  God  differently ;  but  the  essential  thing 
is  this,  that  it  is  to  be  the  same  God  whom  he  has  been  seeing,  that  he  is  still  to 
see.     It  is  to  be  an  enlargement  of  faith  as  he  makes  it  his  own,  not  a  flinging 
away  of  faith  with  a  mere  possibility  of  finding  it  again  some  day.     This  is  the 
meaning  of  a  boy's  or  a  young  man's  confirmation.     It  is  the  gathering  up  of  all 
the  faith  and  dutiful  impulse  of  the  past  that  it  may  go  before  the  life  into  the 
untried  fields.    All  this  applies  indeed  to  every  change  from  period  to  period  of 
life.    The  poetry  of  aU  growing  life  consists  in  carrying  an  oldness  into  a  newness, 
a  past  into  a  future,  always.    Take  what  you  beUeve  and  are,  and  hold  it  in  your 
hand  with  new  firmness  as  you  go  forward ;  but  as  you  go,  holding  it,  look  on  it 
with  continual  and  confident  expectation  to  see  it  open  into  something  greater  and 
truer.    I  think,  again,  that  the  picture  of  the  relation  between  the  old  and  the  new 
which  is  seen  in  our  story  throws  light  upon  the  true  method  and  spirit  of  all 
change  in  religious  opinions.     Men  and  women  do  go  on,  led  by  God,  step  by  step, 
until  they  come  where  what  has  seemed  to  them  to  be  true  seems  to  them  to  be 
true  no  longer,  and  something  which  they  once  disbelieved  has  opened  to  them  its 
soul  of  truth.    Another  spiritual  prospect  opens  to  them  which  they  never  saw 
before.     God  is  different ;  the  Bible  is  very  different ;  Christ  is  profoundly  different ; 
and  their  own  natures  reveal  to  them  sights  which  are  all  strange  and  unexpected. 
There  is  no  sense  of  newness  and  inexperience  in  the  world  like  that.    No  change 
of  outward  circumstances  can  for  a  moment  match  it.    "  You  have  not  passed  this 
way  before  "  seems  to  be  rung  into  the  soul's  ears  out  of  every  new  application  of 
the  new-leamt  truth  to  everything.    And  then,  just  then,  when  aU  seems  new,  and 
we  are  bewildered  and  exalted  with  the  opening  spiritual  prospect,  then  is  the  time 
to  call  up  the  ark  of  God,  which  may  have  fallen  in  the  rear,  and  to  set  it  clearly 
in  the  front.    Then,  when  you  are  going  forth  into  regions  of  spiritual  thought 
that  are  new  to  you,  then  you  need  to  put  all  the  honesty  and  purity  and  unselfish- 
ness of  your  nature  in  the  van  of  your  life ;  then  you  need  to  review  and  renew 
your  old  covenant  with  God  ;  then  you  want  to  have  all  your  earnestness,  all  your 
sense  of  the  value  of  truth,  refreshed  in  you.     The  principle  which  we, have  been 
studying  seems  to  furnish  again  the  law  of  all  more  distinctly  spiritual  life  and 
progress.    It  furnishes  the  law  of  the  conversion-time,  for  there  the  ntw  and  old 
nnite ;  we  pass  on  into  the  new  under  the  guidance  and  assurance  of  the  old.    If 
you  want  to  make  a  man  a  Christian,  how  shall  you  begin  ?    You  will  bid  him 
open  his  ears  and  hear  the  voice  of  a  Saviour  who  has  been  always  pleading.     You 
will  call  up,  out  of  the  past,  signs  of  God's  love  which  he  has  never  seen,  but  which 
have  been  always  there.    You  will  set  those  signs  of  a  love  which  has  always  been 
at  the  head  of  the  progress  which  is  yet  to  be.    You  will  say,  "  I  beseech  you 
therefore,  brother,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  you  present  your  body  a  living 


CHAP,  ni.]  JOSHUA.  61 

sacrifice  to  Him."  And  so,  as  the  host  of  the  Israelites  stopped  by  the  Jordan's 
bank  before  they  crossed,  until  the  old  ark  of  the  desert  had  swept  through  their 
ranks  and  taken  its  true  place  at  their  head,  the  believer's  new  conviction  and  hope 
waits  on  the  brink  of  the  new  hfe  tiU  the  mercies  of  the  past  have  swept  on  to  the 
front,  and  stand  ready  to  lead  into  the  yet  untrodden  fields  of  God.  All  this  does 
not  apply  only  to  the  one  critical  experience  of  the  spiritual  life  which  we  call 
conversion ;  it  is  true  of  all  spiritual  progress.  Never  let  your  Christian  life 
disown  its  past.  Let  every  new  and  higher  consecration  and  enjoyment  into  which 
you  enter  be  made  real  to  you  by  bringing  into  it  aU  that  Christ  has  already 
trained  within  you  of  grace  and  knowledge.  To  the  soul  which  dares  believe  the 
vast  and  precious  truth  of  God's  personal  love,  all  life  becomes  significant,  and  no 
past  is  so  dreary  that  out  of  it  there  will  not  come  up  some  ark  of  God  to  lead  us  to 
the  richer  things  beyond.  I  pass  to  one  more  application  of  our  principle.  It 
concerns  our  thoughts  about  the  new  life  which  awaits  the  soul  in  heaven.  We 
think  of  the  strangeness  of  that  life  into  which  they  pass  who  have  done  with  aU 
the  old  familiar  things  of  earth.  Once,  only  once,  for  every  man  it  comes.  "  We 
have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore,"  men  are  saying  to  themselves,  as  they  begin 
to  feel  their  path  slope  downward  to  the  grave.  It  is  that  consciousness  which  we 
see  coming  in  their  faces  when  they  know  that  they  must  die.  And  beyond  death 
lies  the  unknown  world.  "No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,"  said  Jesus;  but 
there  the  power  of  the  new  life  is  to  be  that  "  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  The 
highest,  truest  thought  of  heaven  which  man  can  have  is  of  the  fuU  completion  of 
those  processes  whose  beginning  he  has  witnessed  here,  their  completion  into 
degrees  of  perfectness  as  yet  inconceivable,  but  stiU  one  in  kind  with  what  he  is 
aware  of  now.  Having  this  thought  of  heaven,  aU  the  deepest  life  of  this  world 
is  leading  the  man  towards  it.  When  he  goes  in  there  at  last,  it  will  be  his  old  life 
with  God  that  leads  him.  It  will  be  his  long  deshe  to  see  God  which  at  last  intro- 
duces him  to  the  sight  of  God.  It  wiU  be  his  long  struggle  with  sin  which  finally 
prepares  him  for  the  world  where  he  can  never  sin.  The  powers  and  affections 
which  are  training  in  your  family,  your  business,  and  your  Church,  are  to  find  their 
eternal  occupation  along  the  streets  of  gold.  And  so  the  long  life  of  heaven  shall 
be  bound  to  the  short  life  of  earth  for  ever.  (Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.)  Never  this 
way  before : — 1.  "  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore."  Then  it  does  now 
seem  likely  that  the  good  Lord  expects  to  give  us  one  more  chance.  We  are 
always  entering  upon  new  periods  of  time.  Anniversary  days  mark  the  recurrence 
of  events  and  afford  opportunities  for  reflection.  Birthdays  and  death  days  are 
fuU  of  meaning.  What  we  ought  to  remember  is  the  undoubted  fact  that  in  thia 
twelvemonth  to  come  we  shall  find  ourselves  travelling  over  pretty  much  the  same 
route  we  went  last  year.  There  wiU  not  be  anything  extraordinarily  surprising. 
Differences  will  be  in  the  details.  2.  '♦  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore." 
Then,  in  the  fresh  chance  God  is  giving,  He  offers  Himself  to  be  our  helper  and 
friend.  Time,  time — unused,  unexhausted,  and  unknown — sweeps  about  our  poor 
little  seven  decades  of  living,  and  wiU  keep  its  course  resistlessly  on  after  the  end 
is  reached,  just  as  it  ran  its  course  before  we  were  born  into  its  beginning.  Thus 
all  the  songs  we  sing,  the  wails  we  utter,  and  the  prayers  we  make  must  choose 
expression  somewhere  among  the  combinations  of  seventy  years  allotted  to  each 
creature,  and  they  have  but  one  chance  at  a  time.  We  are  marched  up  according 
to  programme,  and  play  our  tune,  like  so  many  performers  in  a  concert  given  in  the 
presence  of  God.  During  this  year  the  concert  will  be  repeated.  The  programme 
remains  in  good  measure  unchanged.  We  failed  last  year.  The  chances  of  life  are 
open  again.  God  offers  to  help  us  along.  Our  parts  are  to  be  played  over.  Will 
we  accept  a  teacher  this  time,  or  not  ?  3.  '*  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  here- 
tofore." Then,  surely,  the  gifts  of  God's  love  on  ahead  of  us  have  not  been 
appropriated  by  others  nor  exhausted  by  ourselves.  There  comes  a  day  in  which 
any  one  can  afford  to  be  honestly  simple  and  unaffected  in  all  his  surroundings, 
and  reUnquish  this  folly  of  labouring  to  keep  up  appearances  for  mere  show. 
More  pitiful  folly  stiU  is  that  which  jealousy  engenders;  for  the  man  has 
ingeniously  wasted  his  time  in  distancing  others,  who,  when  distanced,  are  dead. 
He  has  triumphed,  but  nobody  is  in  the  grand  procession  which  he  had  imagined 
would  immediately  be  formed  in  his  honour.  It  makes  a  poor  show  to  have  no 
king  dragging  on  behind  the  chariot.  4.  "  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore," 
but  it  is  well  to  remember  that  the  ark  has  not  passed  this  way  heretofore  either. 
It  is  significant  here  to  notice  that  these  people  were  told  to  accept  God's  guidance 
implicitly.    The  fij:st  time  they  had  essayed  to  enter  Canaan,  their  own  folly  had 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

hindered.  Now  they  were  to  be  led  by  the  sign  of  God's  unfailing  love.  Herein 
is  instruction  for  wise  men  along  the  ages.  It  makes  life  a  new  thing  to  put  the 
ark  on  before  it.  God's  purpose,  infolded  in  a  human  life,  renders  the  life 
immortal.  "  The  Christian  cannot  die  before  his  time  " ;  that  time  God  fixes. 
5.  "  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore."  Now,  with  the  ark  on  ahead,  the  joy 
of  the  Lord  is  your  strength.  Once,  I  remember,  I  picked  up  a  small  bird  which 
had  fallen  on  the  pavement  by  my  feet.  I  sought  to  reinstate  it  among  the 
branches  overhead ;  but  the  creature  could  not  appreciate  my  generosity,  and  with 
passionate  eagerness  struggled  to  escape.  I  began  unconsciously  to  talk  aloud  to 
it,  "  Poor,  silly  thing  ;  why  do  you  not  trust  your  best  friend  ?  AH  I  want  is  to  get 
you  up  again  in  the  fork  of  the  tree.  You  are  making  it  harder  for  me  by  dashing 
BO  against  my  fingers ;  for  I  am  obliged  to  hold  you  firmly,  and  you  do  all 
the  hurting  yourself."  Why  is  it  we  all  struggle  so,  when  the  Lord  is  giving 
us  help  ?  We  enter  upon  untrodden  paths,  but  the  skies  are  bright,  and 
heaven  is  nearer,  and  the  good  God  is  overhead.  It  is  likely  most  of  us  will  recall 
the  story  of  Longfellow  in  his  romance.  Paul  Fleming  entered  that  little  chapel  of 
Saint  Gilgen.  On  the  tomb  above  his  head  was  the  inscription,  "Look  not  mourn- 
fully into  the  past,  it  comes  not  back  again.  Wisely  improve  the  present,  it  is 
thine.  Go  forth  to  meet  the  shadowy  future  without  fear  and  with  a  manly  heart." 
It  was  as  if  a  voice  came  into  his  ear  from  the  dead,  and  the  anguish  of  his 
thoughts  was  still.     {G.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)        The  new  year  and  the  new  way  : — 

1.  We  begin  the  new  year  with  anticipations,  wondering  what  it  hides  in  its  hands 
for  us.  The  limitations  of  human  ignorance  are  most  humiliating.  We  can  tell 
where  a  comet  vdll  be  in  a  thousand  years,  but  not  where  we  shall  be  to-morrow. 
We  have  plans,  projects,  purposes,  but  who  knows  aught  of  fulfilment,  realisation, 
certainty  ?  The  providence  of  God  is  ever  putting  pressure  upon  us — the  pressure 
of  necessity,  or  that  of  desire  and  inclination,  to  go  out  and  go  on ;  but  it  is  very 
much  in  the  dark  we  have  to  go.  To  God  the  Lord  belong  the  ongoings  of  life  and 
the  issues  of  death.     The  unknown  journey  ends  in  the  darkening  way  of  death. 

2.  The  mystery  of  life  is  thus  suggested  by  the  text ;  it  also  teaches  its  newness. 
How  many  things  are  going  to  happen  which  never  happened  to  us  before !  Old 
thoughts,  eternal  purposes  of  God,  are  ripening  for  us ;  and  God  never  repeats 
'Himself.  Thus  circumstanced,  what  charm,  what  spell  will  you  take  to  your  heart 
to  bear  you  on  and  through  to  safety  and  home  ?  Do  you  not  need — I.  The  living 
PEESENCE  ?  Amid  a  changing  world  there  is  a  changeless  God.  Standing  where  we 
do,  at  the  entrance  to  a  new  way,  "  we  are  like  those  who,  waiting  a  new  arrival, 
go  out  to  the  gate  to  look  for  one  who  is  coming — to  listen  for  a  footfall."  We 
feel  there  is  One,  without  whom  life  could  hardly  be  life,  or  bring  content. 
II.  Guidance.  A  guide  knows  and  directs.  He  knoweth  the  way  we  take.  The  word 
means,  not  mere  acquaintance  with,  but  anxiety  concerning  ;  careful  observation ; 
to  trouble  one's  self  about  the  matter.  It  is  thus  God  knows.  He  concerns 
Himself  about  our  way  through  life.  HI.  Mekcies.  God  knows  all  needs,  and 
He  provides.  He  will  not  leave  nor  forsake  thee  until  He  hath  done  that  which  He 
hath  spoken  to  thee  of.  Bread  shall  be  given — water  shall  be  sure.  Enough,  by 
care  and  patient  thrift,  for  living,  for  reasonable  desires,  for  all ;  more  for  some. 
But  unfailing  mercies  for  every  day,  for  always,  for  all.  And  this  because  "  having 
loved  His  own  who  are  in  the  world,  He  loves  them  to  the  end."  {W.  H.  Davison.) 
Religious  help  in  new  circumstances : — It  is  very  wonderful  how  the  element  of 
novelty  seems  to  penetrate  our  whole  life,  so  that  though  we  are  surrounded  by  the 
old  conditions  we  are  always  about  to  do  something  new.  The  things  which  we  do 
may  be  like  one  another  in  certain  broad  features,  yet  they  may  be  contra- 
distinguished by  fine  lines  of  difference  so  minute  and  delicate  as  to  be  seen  only 
by  the  closest  attention.  In  the  discrimination  and  right  estimate  of  such  lines 
lies  the  difference  between  a  life  that  is  lived  roughly  and  a  life  that  is  finely 
balanced  and  critically  calculated  and  arranged  in  every  detail  and  bearing. 
1.  "  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore,"  therefore  do  not  go  until  you  be 
assured  of  the  Divine  presence  and  protection.  What  is  the  way  ?  Is  it  a  new 
year  ?  Will  you  encounter  unknown  time  in  your  own  strength  ?  Is  it  a  new 
enterprise  ?  Dare  you  challenge  the  secret  resources  of  fortune  without  any  help 
but  your  own  ?  Is  it  a  new  discipline  ?  It  may  destroy  you  if  you  have  not  bread 
to  eat  that  the  world  knoweth  not  of.  The  great  historical  fact  upon  which  you 
have  to  rest  is  that  God  has  been  with  His  people  in  every  possible  variety  of 
circumstances,  and  that  His  love  never  changes  (Exod.  iii.  12 ;  Josh.  i.  5 ;  Prov.  iii. 
6-6 ;  Psa.  xxxvii.  5 ;  Isa.  xxx.  21).   2.  "  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore  " ;  it  iB 


CHAP.  III.]  JOSHUA.  53 

quite  right,  consequently,  to  take  new  ways  and  untried  paths  in  life.  (1)  Socially. 
New  companionships,  new  alliances,  new  partnerships ;  opening  up  our  friendly, 
conjugal,  and  commercial  life.  (2)  Nationally.  New  compacts,  new  wars,  new 
laws.  We  are  bound  by  every  consideration  arising  out  of  stewardship  and 
responsibility  to  try  new.  3.  "  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore  "  ;  there  are 
some  particulars  in  which  this  must  be  true  even  of  the  least  eventful  life.  (1)  Is 
it  an  uneventful  thing  for  a  young  man  to  leave  his  home  that  he  may  try  to  make 
his  way  in  the  world  ?  "  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore."  What  a  world 
it  is  !  "  FuU  of  temptations  and  hidden  snares,"  &c.  (2)  Is  it  an  uneventful  thing 
for  a  man  to  die  ?  What  is  beyond  ?  How  do  we  become  prepared  for  the  world 
unseen  ?  Is  that  world  more  sharply  divided  than  this ;  for  here  the  wicked  have 
some  enjoyments,  and  the  righteous  many  pains  ?  Is  it  true  that  in  this  world  we 
really  make  the  next  ?  This  is  a  journey  we  must  all  take ;  we  may  take  it  blindly, 
we  may  rush  upon  it  madly,  or  we  may  so  live  as  to  become  enabled  to  say, 
"  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commit  my  spirit."  4.  "  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way 
heretofore " — the  suggestion  is  not  human,  but  Divine ;  it  is  God  Himself  that 
proposes  to  guide  and  defend  the  Uves  of  men.  Before  we  pray.  He  answers  1 
Consider  how  true  it  is  that  all  the  great  proposals  which  have  made  our  life 
richer  and  better  have  come  from  God,  and  in  no  degree  from  our  own  poor 
wit  or  genius.  "It  is  not  good  for  the  man  to  be  alone" — that  is  one.  "Ye 
have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore  " — that  is  another.  "  Come  now,  let  us  reason 
together  " — that  is  a  third.  And  so  on  throughout  all  our  hfe.  [J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  unknown  year  and  the  untrodden  way  :  — We  are  entering  now  on  a  new  year, 
and  going  up  into  new  time  territory.  "  We  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore." 
And  it  becomes  us  to  be  more  than  usually  solicitous  to  know  the  way  by  which  we 
are  led,  and  the  whole  wiU  of  God  concerning  us  in  the  leading.  It  may  be  well, 
however,  to  take  heed  that  an  unprofitable  curiosity  does  not  usurp  the  place  of  a 
wholesome  solicitude.  It  is  as  true  now  as  it  was  when  our  Lord  spoke  the  words, 
that  "  times  and  seasons,"  eras  and  epochs,  are  put  in  God's  own  power.  Enough 
is  revealed  for  the  direction  of  practical  conduct.  Enough  is  conceded  for  the 
nourishment  of  childlike  faith.  We  feel,  then,  as  we  stand  on  the  margin  of  the 
year,  at  the  portal  of  its  days,  that  there  can  be  no  rehearsal  in  our  knowledge  of 
its  coming  events,  either  those  of  pubUc  importance  or  those  of  our  individual 
lives.  We  know  not  what  it  is  to  bring  forth ;  but  we  know  well  that  it  will  bring 
forth  something,  and  that  that  something  will  in  all  probability  be  important. 
When  we  know  the  parents,  we  can  guess  what  the  children  will  be.  This  year  is 
the  child  of  all  the  years,  and  especially  of  the  last  years  that  have  sped.  "  We 
have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore."  The  vista  of  the  bygone  years  was  never  so 
long  as  it  is  to-day.  Time  never  carried  such  a  burden  of  events  on  his  shoulders. 
History  never  held  in  her  bosom  so  many  mysteries  not  yet  solved,  so  many 
explanations  not  yet  given,  so  many  germs  for  future  flowering.  God  has  never 
had  so  much  on  hand  in  the  earth.  In  such  a  time,  with  what  emphasis  come  the 
Saviour's  words  to  us  :  "  Watch  :  what  I  say  unto  you  I  say  unto  all.  Watch  "  1 
"  We  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore."  We  may  be  going  to  pass  a  Jordan  of 
our  own  in  more  respects  than  one.  Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  we  are  now 
in  the  very  process  of  a  great  social  revolution,  affecting  not  merely  this  or  that 
separate  sphere  or  relation  in  human  affairs,  but  touching  the  very  basis  of  society, 
and  all  the  laws  under  which  men  live.  That  we  need  a  revival  is  certain.  It  is 
equally  certain  that  we  may  have  it  for  the  asking.  No  doubt  many  are  asking 
for  it,  unknown  to  us  ;  and  the  thing  asked  for  (God  grant  it)  may  be  on  its  way  ! 
But  we  discontinue  this  strain  of  supposition,  again  reminding  you  that  this  year 
we  are  not  far  from  Jordan,  and  that,  in  more  senses  than  one,  we  may  soon  be 
crossing  it.  We  are  somewhere  in  the  great  army  which  is  marching  onwards,  and 
not  only  ought  we  to  be  conscious  of  our  own  progress,  but  wisely  observant  of  the 
changes  that  are  going  on  around  us.  The  times  themselves  are  "put  in  God's  own 
power."  The  "  signs  "  of  the  times  are  held  out  for  our  instruction,  that  we  may, 
in  a  measure,  know  what  God  is  doing  and  what  we  ourselves  ought  to  do.  But 
it  will  be  well  to  make  a  much  narrower  and  more  personal  application  of  this 
principle.  We,  as  individuals,  we,  as  we  now  are,  have  not  passed  by  any  way  at 
all.  We  have  been  journeying  for  years,  but  always  changing  ;  so  that  now,  while 
the  same  in  personal  identity,  we  are  yet  morally  and  circumstantially  different. 
Our  letters  come  under  the  same  address,  but  they  are  opened  and  read  by  men  not 
quite  the  same.  We  have  not  sub-let  our  house,  and  yet  the  occupant  is  different. 
It  is  a  strange,  subtle  process  of  change  which  is  thus  going  on ;  but  it  is  as  certain 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  as  resistless  as  the  flow  of  time  itself.  Keeping,  then,  in  view  these  two  things — 
the  outward  and  the  inward  change — both  of  which  are  sure  to  go  on  during  the 
coming  year,  I  would  venture  to  utter  some  appropriate  watchwords  for  the  year — 
"notes"  of  the  life  we  must  aim  to  live  as  the  days  go  by.  1.  Vigilance.  Have 
the  senses  well  exercised  and  ready  for  quick  and  true  discernment  of  men  and 
things.  Without  something  of  this  sleepless  vigilance,  without  the  "inevitable 
eye,"  we  shall  lose  much  of  what  is  in  the  year,  and  in  the  year  for  us.  We  are 
travellers.  But  the  time  that  carries  us  forward  is  not  hke  an  old  stage-coach  that 
goes  lumbering  along  the  same  road  by  which  it  has  run  for  many  years,  the 
passengers  by  which  can  tell  exactly  what  objects  and  scenes  lie  along  the  line  and 
will  come  into  sight  at  a  particular  part  of  the  road  and  time  of  the  day.  We 
ascend  the  chariot  of  the  year,  and  it  rolls  where  never  chariot- wheels  have  left 
mark  before,  where  scenes  which  have  never  been  revealed  to  man  or  angel,  or  the 
actual  sight  of  God,  will  unfold  themselves.  No  one  can  tell  how  much  we  may 
miss  by  being  asleep  or  only  half -awake.  2.  Px'omptitude.  We  watch  for  occasions, 
that  we  may  seize  them ;  for  opportunities,  that  we  may  improve  them ;  for  friendly 
influences,  that  we  may  yield  to  them ;  for  adverse  powers,  that  we  may  resist 
them;  for  the  morning,  that  we  may  answer  "  girded!  "  to  its  labour-call ;  for  the 
evening,  that  we  may  enter  within  the  shadow  of  its  rest ;  for  temptation,  that  we 
may  vanquish  or  flee  from  it ;  for  privilege,  that  we  may  embrace  it ;  for  the  hour 
of  prayer,  that  we  may  pray ;  for  God  in  His  manifold  revealings  and  comings  to 
us,  that  we  may  receive  Him  as  our  God,  and  that  we  may  give  ourselves  to  Him 
more  than  "  heretofore."  3.  Courage  will  often  be  needed  to  do  what  the  hand 
finds  to  do.  The  possession  and  cultivation  of  moral  courage,  therefore,  is  another 
very  necessary  preparation  for  this  way  that  we  have  not  passed  heretofore.  We 
know  not  what  any  day  of  the  year  may  bring  forth  ;  but  we  know,  just  as  well  as 
we  know  that  the  days  are  coming,  that,  if  we  live  to  pass  through  them,  we  shall 
need  to  be  morally  brave,  or  fail.  We  know  that  the  craven  spirit,  with  which, 
alas!  we  are  so  ready  to  purchase  a  momentary  ease,  will  cover  us  with  shame,  and 
bring  defeat  and  dishonour  quickly  after  us  as  pursuers,  and  that  boldness  and 
confidence  will  carry  us  through.  4.  Gentleness  is  a  good  word  to  put  under  the 
shelter  of  courage,  and  a  good  thing  to  put  among  the  preparations  for  the  unknown 
year.  We  are  not  really  fitted,  in  the  fullest  sense,  for  the  journey  of  a  year,  imless 
we  are  full  of  tenderness,  unless  we  are  full  of  tears.  The  children  will  be  around 
us  wherever  we  are ;  for,  like  the  daisies,  hke  the  sparrows,  they  are  everywhere. 
The  young  will  be  rising  into  manhood  and  womanhood,  and  some  of  them  will  be 
looking  Zionwards  and  sensitively  watching  to  see  if  there  be  any  who  understand 
their  look,  so  as  to  look  back  and  help  and  welcome  them.  The  sick  wiU  be  suffering 
through  their  weary  days  and  nights ;  and  the  poor  will  be  struggling ;  and  those 
who  have  seen  better  days  will  be  coming  down  the  hiU  in  our  sight,  bearing  them- 
selves with  dignity  as  in  the  former  time,  although  now  the  wardrobe  is  but  poorly 
filled,  and  the  table  scantily  spread ;  and  the  sensitive  will  be  shrinking,  and  the 
miserable  will  be  praying ;  the  hopeless  wondering  if  any  help  will  come  to  them. 
What  a  world  to  live  in !  and  what  need  for  a  pitiful  gentleness !  Walk  softly,  then, 
and  have  a  care !  5.  We  should  be  poorly  furnished  for  the  way  we  have  not  been 
heretofore,  without  filial  confidence,  which  will  easily,  when  occasion  comes,  pass 
into  resignation.  There  will  be  much  to  try  faith  and  patience,  and  love  and  loyalty. 
God  knows  all ;  there  is  but  one  way  for  us — to  trust  Him  with  a  deep,  filial  trust, 
with  a  love  that  will  cast  out  all  fear,  and  to  resign  ourselves  utterly,  and  in 
everything,  to  His  most  holy  will.  6.  For,  whatever  comes,  there  will  always 
be,  not  only  need  and  occasion,  but  ground  and  reason,  for  serene,  invincible  hope- 
fulness. Good  is  better  and  stronger  than  evil.  Greater  is  the  world  above  than 
the  world  below  !  Greater  is  life  than  death.  Greater  is  this  year  than  any  of  its 
predecessors  (whatever  may  be  its  particular  events),  as  being  nearer  the  end,  when 
"life  and  immortality,"  in  the  heavenly  sense,  shall  "be  brought  to  light."  {A. 
Raleigh,  D.D.)  The  untrodden  and  unknown  way  : — We  may  speculate  and 
conjecture  about  what  is  to  befall  us,  or  to  befall  the  Church  and  the  world  in  the 
course  of  this  year ;  but  the  sagacity  of  the  wisest  statesmen  cannot  forecast  the 
events  of  the  near  future.  Neither  can  the  knowledge  of  the  most  learned  inform 
us  what  shall  be  on  the  morrow.  This  is  a  thought  that  may  humble  our  intellectual 
pride,  and  may  prevent  us  from  being  puffed  up  by  the  little  knowledge  to  which 
we  have  attained.  But  we  are  not  in  absolute  ignorance  of  what  will  probably  be 
the  nature  and  character  of  some  of  the  events  of  the  future.  We  know  that  as 
the  present  leaves  us  the  future  will  find  us.    We  enter  into  this  year  with  the 


CHAP,  ra.]  JOSHUA.  65 

character,  principles,  and  habits  that  marked  our  life  in  the  past.  Life  is  a  con- 
tinuous thing.  Character  becomes  a  continuous  thing.  Old  things  have  not  passed 
away  from  us  with  the  old  year,  and  all  things  have  not,  with  the  new  year,  become 
new  to  us.  This  is  a  solemn  and  an  awful  thought,  because  it  indicates  to  us  that 
not  only  do  we  enter  on  the  new  year  with  the  character  and  principles  of  the  past 
year,  and  that  if  we  enter  on  the  year  without  the  love  of  God  in  our  hearts,  we 
cannot  be  happy,  but  it  also  indicates  to  us  that  as  we  pass  from  the  days  of  time 
so  shall  we  enter  on  the  ever-revolving  and  endless  ages  of  eternity.  Let  us  give 
due  consideration  to  this  thought,  and  it  may,  through  the  grace  of  God,  by 
destroying  a  most  prevalent  and  fatal  delusion — the  delusion  by  which  multitudes 
deceive  and  ruin  their  souls,  that  somehow  or  other  to-morrow,  or  at  least  the  time 
of  death,  wUl  work  a  grand  transformation  of  their  state  and  character — awaken 
us  now,  in  the  precious  passing  present,  to  give  heed  to  the  things  of  our  peace,  that 
they  may  not  at  length  be  hid  from  our  eyes.  The  statement,  "  Ye  have  not  passed 
this  way  heretofore,"  is  not  inconsistent  with  our  knowledge  thus  far  of  the  future 
that  it  wUl,  to  a  great  extent,  take  its  colour,  complexion,  and  character  from  the 
present.  The  connection  between  years  as  measurements  of  men's  lives  is  not  that 
merely  of  antecedence  and  succession.  It  is  more.  It  is  a  connection  as  between 
cause  and  consequence  or  effect,  as  between  seed  and  fruit.  Time,  that  develops 
the  germ  in  the  acorn  into  the  stately  oak ;  time,  that  developeth  tares  from  then* 
seeds,  will  gradually  evolve  what  are  the  seeds  from  which  our  words  and  actions 
grow.  The  tree  of  character  wUl  be  known  by  its  fruits.  But  from  the  moral 
connection  between  past,  present,  and  future,  as  related  to  our  lives  and  characters, 
not  only  will  the  future  be  a  developing  time,  but  it  wiU  also  be,  because  of  this,  a 
time  of  reaping,  a  sort  of  harvest  time.  If  in  the  past  year  we  have  been  sowing 
to  the  flesh,  we  may  most  certainly  in  the  year  to  come  expect  to  reap  corruption. 
And  it  in  the  past  we  have  been  sowing  to  the  Spirit,  we  may  expect  to  reap  in  this 
year  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  in  love,  joy,  and  peace.  I  may  remark  that  the  words, 
"  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore,"  are  not  inconsistent  with  our  certain 
knowledge  that  the  days  of  the  new  year  will  introduce  us  to  duties,  trials,  tempta- 
tions, and,  it  may  be,  sufferings  similar  to  those,  if  indeed  not  greater  than  those 
of  the  past  year.  As  in  the  past,  so  in  the  future,  we  shall  be  called  to  serve  and 
glorify  the  Lord — to  love  the  Lord  with  aU  our  heart,  strength,  soul,  and  mind, 
and  ovx  neighbours  as  ourselves.  We  shall  be  called  to  work  the  work  of  God,  to 
believe  in  Jesus,  and  to  walk  as  He  also  walked.  We  shall  be  called  to  be  diligent 
in  business,  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord.  "  Study,"  therefore,  my  brother, 
"  to  show  thyself  approved  unto  God,  a  workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed," 
The  new  year  will  bring  with  it  new  trials,  new  afSictions.  But  as  in  the  past,  so 
in  the  future,  the  child  of  God  may  appropriate  for  his  comfort  the  words,  "  All 
things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God,  to  them  that  are  the  called, 
according  to  His  purpose."  Nothing  "  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of 
God  which  is  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  We  know  that  the  new  year  wUl  bring 
with  it  new  temptations.  The  passions  that  war  in  our  members  have  not  become 
extinct,  have  not  passed  away  with  the  old  year.  They  go  with  us  into  the  new 
year.  And  as  in  the  past,  so  in  the  future,  they  wiU  entice  us  into  sin.  Satan  has 
not  ceased  with  the  days  of  the  former  year.  He  enters  with  us  into  the  days  of 
this  year.  And  into  this  year  he  carries  aU  his  subtlety,  all  his  malice,  all  his 
guile.  We  know,  therefore,  that  new  temptations,  new  seducements  to  sin,  wUl  be 
laid  in  our  path.  The  world  has  lost  none  of  its  many  powers — none  of  its  many 
arts  of  deception.  We  may,  therefore,  expect  that  the  world  wUl  attempt  to  ensnare 
us  in  the  future,  just  as  it  attempted  to  allure  us  in  the  past.  But  we  must  listen 
to  the  word  that  admonishes  us,  "  Be  not  conformed  to  this  world,  but  be  ye  trans- 
formed by  the  renewing  of  your  minds."  The  new  year  may  bring  with  it  new 
forms  of  trial,  unexpected  sufferings  and  bereavements.  It  may  bear  to  us  the 
Bummons,  "  The  Master  is  come,  and  caUeth  for  thee."  We  cannot  teU.  But  this 
we  know,  that  preparedness  to  meet  that  summons — preparedness  to  meet  the  Lord, 
is  a  most  blessed  state  of  soul.  But  a  fourth  idea  is  involved  in  the  words,  "  Ye 
have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore  " ;  it  is  that  we  may  expect  to  witness  or  behold 
in  this  new  way,  in  this  untrodden  path,  new  displays  of  the  grace  and  power  of  the 
Lord,  the  leader  and  commander  of  His  people.  The  way  is  unknown  to  us,  but  it 
is  known  to  the  Lord.  And  we  are  sure  that  He  "  leadeth  His  people  by  the  right 
way,  that  they  may  go  to  the  city  of  habitation — to  that  city  whose  founder  and 
builder  ia  God."  (G.  Macaulay.)  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore  : — We 
are  travelling  onward,  but  the  future  is  hidden  from  our  eyes.    We  are  not  as  those 


56  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m. 

whose  path  lies  across  an  extensive  plain,  and  the  boundary  of  whose  vision  is  far 
away,  but  rather  like  those  who  are  journeying  in  a  deep  valley,  and  who  cannot 
see  the  storms  that  may  be  gathering  behind  the  mountains.  Our  horizon  is  very 
limited.  What  Jordans  we  may  have  to  cross  we  know  not.  But  we  have  an  ark, 
of  which  that  which  accompanied  Israel  is  but  a  faint  and  feeble  shadow — an  ark 
that  is  a  stronger  pledge  of  God's  faithfulness,  a  deeper  manifestation  of  His  love 
and  power.  The  Christian's  ark  is  Christ.  Jesus  journeys  with  him  through  all 
the  wilderness  into  the  land  of  promise.  Every  congregation  is  made  up  of  a 
number  of  minds,  no  two  of  which  would  probably  be  found  to  be  exactly  alike. 
There  are,  indeed,  many  points  of  resemblance  which  ought  not  to  be  overlooked. 
But  with  all  this  resemblance  there  is  much  diversity.  There  is  something  peculiar 
to  each  mind,  something  in  which  it  is  unUke  its  fellows.  Each  has  some  peculiar 
adjustment  of  its  natural  powers;  and  this  necessarily  causes  a  peculiar  and  dis- 
tinctive history.  Just  so  far  as  our  minds  are  similarly  constituted,  and  we  are 
infected  with  the  same  awful  disease,  and  united  to  the  same  Saviour,  and  influenced 
by  the  same  Spirit,  we  can  sympathise  with  each  other.  Just  so  far  as  there  is 
something  distinctive  in  our  minds,  modifying  our  experiences,  and  stamping  a 
peculiar  character  upon  our  history,  will  our  path  be  lonely ;  and  we  shaU  feel  that 
there  is  One  only  who  "  knoweth  the  way  that  we  take."  But  He  does  know  it,  and 
adapts  His  dealings  to  our  need.  Some  are  comparatively  free  from  trial,  others 
are  called  to  bear  their  yoke  in  their  youth.  Some  are  just  reached  by  the  wave — 
the  spray  only  seems  to  reach  them ;  others  are  immersed  in  its  depths — the  waves 
and  billows  pass  over  them.  And  the  history  of  these  last  bears  greater  resemblance 
to  the  varied  experience  of  Israel ;  and  yet  even  concerning  these,  with  whom  God 
has  already  dealt  so  mysteriously,  it  may  come  true  in  the  future,  "  Ye  have  not 
passed  this  way  heretofore."  There  may  be  some  who  are  already  entering  a  way 
that  is  new  and  mysterious  to  them.  There  was  perhaps  a  time  when  they  felt  no 
anxiety  or  alarm  about  the  great  subject  of  their  acceptance  with  God,  and  when 
the  pleasures  and  enjoyments  of  the  world  filled  up  their  thoughts;  but  a  new 
impression  has  been  made  upon  their  minds,  and  they  are  beginning  to  be  sensible 
that  there  is  a  great  purpose  for  which  they  have  been  created,  and,  alas !  they  have 
not  yet  fulfilled  it.  And  thus,  like  St.  Paul,  they  find  the  commandment  to  be 
"  unto  death."  "  The  law  worketh  wrath."  How  can  this  Jordan,  which  separates 
them  with  its  overflowing  waters  from  the  land  of  peace,  be  crossed  ?  There  is 
but  one  path  across  it,  and  that  path  is  Christ.  Jesus,  the  ark  of  our  covenant,  is 
gone  before  us.  But  there  is  another  period  in  our  lives  of  which  the  passage  of 
Israel  through  Jordan  is  a  more  exact  type.  We  must  acknowledge  that  there  is 
something  extremely  awful  in  such  a  conclusion  to  our  earthly  pilgrimage  as  death ; 
and  the  real  wonder  is,  not  that  there  are  some  who  through  fear  of  death  are  all 
their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage,  but  that  there  are  such  multitudes  to  whose 
thoughts  this  solemn  and  mysterious  event  is  scarcely  ever  present,  and  on  whose 
minds  it  makes  no  lasting  impression.  It  lies  quite  beyond  the  bounds  of  our 
present  experience.  We  may  perfectly  realise  all  the  circumstances  of  death  up  to 
the  moment  of  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  the  body — the  weakness,  weariness, 
and  pain  of  sickness,  the  tenderness  and  love  of  relations  and  friends  in  watching 
over  us,  and  in  smoothing  our  dying  pillow — because  in  aU  this  we  have  past 
experience  to  go  upon,  and  we  have  only  to  imagine  an  increase  of  that  which  we 
have  already  felt.  But  when  we  endeavour  to  advance  a  step  beyond  this,  and  to 
realise  the  mysterious  separation  of  the  soul  from  the  body,  the  loosening  and 
snapping  asunder  of  that  invisible  bond  which  unites  them,  we  feel  that  we  have 
stepped  into  a  new  region.  Our  past  experiences  fail  us ;  and  after  trying  much  to 
realise  it,  we  cannot  but  feel,  "  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore."  And  yet 
both  the  unknown  mystery  of  death  and  its  loneliness  have  been  fully  provided  for 
in  Him  who  "  through  death  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is 
the  devil."  For  Jesus,  the  ark  of  our  covenant,  has  gone  down  before  us  into 
Jordan.  The  dark  stream  of  Jordan  manifests  His  power  and  reflects  His  hght. 
And  thus  the  loneliness  of  death  is  overcome.  But  let  us  not  forget  that  it  is 
presumptuous  to  expect  this  blessed  hope  and  confidence  to  arise  in  our  hearts  in 
the  immediate  prospect  of  death  if  we  are  neglecting  and  slighting  the  ark  of  our 
covenant  at  this  moment.  The  symbol  of  God's  presence  did  not  meet  the  IsraeUtea 
for  the  first  time  at  the  brink  of  Jordan,  but  accompanied  them  throughout  all  their 
journey  in  the  wilderness.  Let  us  take  heed,  then,  to  the  impressive  words, 
"  Sanctify  yourselves."  As  we  have  been  •'  set  apart"  for  God  in  our  anconsciona 
infancy,  let  us  set  ourselves  apart  for  Him  through  faith  in  Christ  in  our  conscious 


CHAP,  in.]  JOSHUA.  67 

manhood.  Let  us  dedicate  onrselves  to  Him  -wholly,  unreservedly,  body,  soul,  and 
spirit.  (G.  Wagner.)  The  untrodden  and  unknown  way  : — 1.  We  need  a  guide 
to  lead  us  in  this  new  and  untrodden  way.  Travellers  in  strange  countries  are 
careful  not  only  to  furnish  themselves  with  a  chart  or  map  of  the  country  through 
which  they  may  be  travelling,  but  to  employ  a  guide  who  knows  the  country.  At 
every  station  at  which  travellers  are  wont  to  halt  in  Switzerland,  guides  are  waiting 
to  conduct  strangers  along  the  way  by  which  they  wish  to  go.  Prom  motives  of 
economy  or  self-confidence,  some  travellers  have  been  known  to  dispense  with  the 
help  of  a  guide,  and  have  lost  their  way,  missed  their  step,  and  perished.  In  the 
journey  of  life,  and  at  a  stage  such  as  this  at  which  we  have  arrived  to-day,  we  are 
reminded  that  we  need  one  to  go  before  us  and  lead  us  in  the  way.  We  have  in 
the  Word  of  the  Lord,  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  what  may  be  called  a  map  or  chart, 
exhibiting  the  general  outlines  and  prominent  features  of  the  country  through 
which  we  are  to  pass,  and  indicating  the  direction  of  the  path  and  way  along  which 
we  are  to  walk.  But  we  need  more  than  this — we  need  a  hving  guide.  And  that 
living  guide  is  not  a  fallible  man,  or  company  of  men,  but  is  the  Lord  Himself.  His 
knowledge  of  the  way  is  perfect ;  and  no  one  that  committed  himself  to  His  guidance 
ever  perished  by  the  way.  For  aU  His  resources  of  knowledge,  wisdom,  grace, 
righteousness,  and  power,  all  are  pledged  to  conduct  in  safety  to  the  bliss  of  heaven 
those  who  by  faith  foUow  Him.  2.  We  must  be  obedient  to  the  instructions  of  the 
heavenly  Guide.  La  order  to  this  we  must  be  distrustful  of  our  own  knowledgep 
and  wisdom.  Many  a  traveller  amidst  Alpine  passes  and  heights  has  fallen  and 
perished,  the  victim  of  self-confidence.  And  many  who  for  a  season  seemed  to  be 
obedient  unto  Christ  have  departed  from  Him  and  perished,  because  they  preferred 
their  ovm  wisdom  to  His.  But  it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  duect  his  own 
steps.  In  order  to  a  faithful  adherence  to  the  guidance  of  the  Lord,  we  must 
beware  of  false  and  deceitful  guides.  If  we  are  among  the  obedient  followers  of 
Christ,  we  shall  watch  for  the  intimations  of  His  wiU.  That  Word  shineth  in  thia 
dark  world  that  it  may  be  to  us  what  the  star  was  to  the  eastern  sages,  a  light  to 
guide  our  steps  to  the  heavenly  palace,  the  house  where  Jesus  now  reigns.  Yes,  it 
we  would  foUow  Christ  in  the  way.  His  Word  must  be  "a  lamp  unto  our  feet,  and 
a  light  unto  our  path."  As  obedient  followers  of  Christ  we  must  be  not  only  earnest 
and  humble  students  of  His  Word,  but  thoughtful  observers  of  His  works  in  providence 
and  in  grace.  3.  We  should  prepare  ourselves  for  following  our  heavenly  Guide 
and  Leader  in  the  way  heretofore  untrodden  by  us.  "  Sanctify  yourselves,"  said 
Joshua  to  the  people,  "for  to-morrow  the  Lord  wUl  do  wonders  among  you."  Thia 
involves  separation  from  all  that  is  unholy,  or  that  is  inconsistent  with  the  undivided 
and  entire  consecration  of  ourselves  in  heart,  purpose,  and  life  to  the  Lord.  And  it  re- 
quires that  we  dedicate  ourselves,  soul,  body,  and  spirit,  unto  the  Lord.  (G.  Macaulay.) 
Sanctify  yourselves. — Solemn  preparation  for  duty : — Sequester  yourselves  from 
all  earthly  employments,  and  set  apart  some  time  for  solemn  preparation  to 
meet  God  in  duty.  You  caimot  come  hot,  reeking  out  of  the  world  into  God'a 
presence,  but  you  wUl  find  the  influence  of  it  in  your  duties.  It  is  with  the 
heart  a  few  minutes  since  plunged  in  the  world,  now  at  the  feet  of  God,  just 
as  with  the  sea  after  a  storm,  which  still  continues  working  muddy  and  disquiet, 
though  the  wind  be  laid  and  storm  over:  thy  heart  must  have  some  time  to 
settle.  There  are  few  musicians  that  can  take  down  a  lute  or  viol  and  play 
presently  upon  it  without  some  time  to  tune  it.  When  thou  goest  to  God  in 
any  duty,  take  thy  heart  aside,  and  say,  "  0  my  soul,  I  am  now  addressing 
myself  to  the  greatest  work  that  ever  a  creature  was  employed  about.  I 
am  going  into  the  awful  presence  of  God,  about  business  of  everlasting  moment." 
(H.  G.  Salter.)  Prepare  for  season*  of  grace : — The  grace  of  God  at  all  times 
awaits,  forecomes,  accompanies,  follows,  encompasses  us.  It  is  everywhere,  for  it 
is  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  everywhere,  §ince  He  is  God.  But  although  grace  ia 
ever  around  and  in  those  who  have  not  finally  rejected  it,  there  are  special  seasona 
at  which  it  comes  to  individuals  and  to  the  Church — seasons  in  which  grace  doea 
not  only  trickle  down  as  the  dew,  but  runs  down  like  a  river,  sweeping  away  all  the 
barriers  of  earthliness,  and  bearing  us  onward  like  a  tide ;  seasons  which  if  we  misa 
we  know  not  what  we  lose :  the  wave  has  passed  by,  and  we  who  might  have  been 
borne  upon  its  crest,  and  carried  safe,  are  tossing  to  and  fro  on  a  perilous  sea. 
Such  seasons,  to  individuals,  are  the  first  drawings  of  the  child's  tender  soul  to 
God ;  its  first  stirrings  at  the  thought  that  it  is  not  a  citizen  of  this  earth,  that  it 
belongs  to  heaven,  to  eternity,  to  God ;  its  first  yearning  to  go  forth  out  of  itself  to 
be  for  ever  God'a.   Such  again  are  its  first  strong  uplif tings  in  prayer,  and  following 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

the  drawings  of  God,  and  pantings  after  communion  with  Him,  as  it  seeks  to  rise 
on,  and  on,  and  on,  tremblingly,  yet  aspiringly,  if  by  any  means  it  might  reach  to 
God !  or  its  quiet  waiting  within  itself,  if  so  be  He  would  come  down  to  it.  But 
although  He  comes  to  all  alike  who  look  for  Him,  He  doth  not  come  alike  to  all. 
He  filleth  all ;  but  all  do  not  alike  contain  Him.  Our  capacity  to  receive  Him,  is 
our  longing  for  Him.  The  greater  the  hunger  of  the  soul  after  righteousness,  the 
more  He  will  feed  and  satisfy  it  who  is  our  righteousness.  And  so,  whenever  God 
would  draw  near  to  man,  He  would  have  man  prepare  for  that  awful  nearness. 
"We  cannot  on  the  instant  change  our  whole  tone  of  mind.  We  cannot  at  one 
moment  jest,  the  next  be  devout ;  at  one  moment  care  for  earth,  the  next  for 
heaven ;  at  one,  love  the  creature  for  itself,  the  next  the  Creator  for  Himself. 
Nature  itself  tells  us  that  we  cannot  pass  suddenly  from  one  to  another.  If  we 
have  heavy  news  to  convey,  we  try  to  prepare  the  mind,  that  they  burst  not  at  once 
upon  it.  If  a  solemn  thought  crosses  the  soul  in  laughter,  it  recovers  itself,  as  it 
can,  hastily  and  confusedly  together,  and  the  very  disorder  of  the  mind  shows  that 
the  sudden  change  is  against  nature.  The  soul  feels  ashamed  that  it  was  so  relaxed 
before,  so  little  in  the  state  wherein  it  would  receive  the  Heavenly  Visitant.  And 
this  teaching  of  God  in  our  hearts  He  enforced  in  the  outward  nearness  of  His 
visible  presence.  When  He  willed  to  appear  in  awe  on  Mount  Sinai,  for  three  days 
was  the  congregation  to  prepare  itself.  Whether  in  chastisement  or  in  mercy  there 
is  a  season  of  preparation.  Whether  God  would  give  them  flesh  to  eat  in  the 
wilderness,  or  lead  them  over  Jordan,  or  take  out  from  among  them  him  who  had  tak'-n 
the  accursed  thing, it  is  still  one  word — "Sanctify  yourselves  against  to-morrow." 
If  such  was  the  preparation  for  the  type  and  shadow,  Avhat  for  the  reality  ?  If 
such  for  the  miraculous  sustenance  of  the  body,  what  for  the  food  of  the  soul  ? 
If  such  the  entrance  into  the  type  of  heaven,  what  when  heaven  and  earth  are 
united  in  one  ?  And  so  an  apostle's  voice  warns  us,  "  Let  a  man  examine  himself," 
sift  himself,  "  and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread  and  drink  of  that  cup."  And  God 
has  taught  the  Church  to  place  longer  seasons  of  preparation  before  the  greater 
mysteries  of  the  faith.  "  Sanctify  yourselves,"  saith  God — that  is,  "  separate 
yourselves  from  things  unholy,  that  ye  may  be  separated  unto  Me,  and  I  may 
hallow  you,  and  make  you  holy."  We  cannot  hallow  ourselves ;  but  we  can,  by 
His  grace,  put  off  things  unholy.  We  cannot  give  to  ourselves  Him,  the  True 
Bread  from  heaven,  nor  create  in  ourselves  hunger  after  Him,  our  righteousness ; 
but  we  can  abstain,  through  His  gracious  aid,  from  filling  our  bellies  with  the 
swine-husk  this  world's  goods,  and  vanities,  and  accursed  pleasures,  which  make 
men  loathe,  as  "  light  bread,"  "  the  manna  which  cometh  down  from  heaven." 
Oh,  then,  if  we  "  have  been  sometime  darkness,"  seek  we  now  to  be  "  light  in  the 
Lord."  Let  us  now  "  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness,  and  put  on  the  armour  of 
light."  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.I).)  Sanctify  yourselves  : — Is  it  possible  for  a  Christian 
to  sanctify  himself  ?  Yes;  for  man  has  a  part  to  play  in  his  own  sanctification. 
Man  must  co-operate  with  God  in  working  out  his  own  salvation.  Man  works,  God 
works,  and  the  result  is  man's  sanctification.  Many  Christians  have  failed  to 
recognise  this  union  of  the  human  and  the  Divine  Ln  the  work  of  their  sancti- 
fication, with  the  result  that  they  have  erred  greatly,  and  made  little  or  no  progress 
in  the  Divine  life.  For  example,  we  find  Christians  who  overlook  the  fact  that  man  is 
to  work  out  his  own  salvation  ;  they  say  it  is  all  of  God,  and  they  throw  themselves 
passively  on  God  for  their  sanctification.  This  course  of  action,  or  rather  want  of 
action,  ends  in  their  becoming  impractical  and  useless  Christians,  making  no 
progress  themselves  in  the  Divine  life,  and  of  no  use  to  the  Church  in  its  fight 
against  sin  and  Satan.  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  Christians  who  overlook  the 
fact  that  it  is  God  who  worketh  in  man  both  to  will  and  to  work.  Such  try  to 
work  out  their  salvation  in  their  own  strength  ;  they  seek,  by  power  of  will,  to 
overcome  their  weaknesses  and  their  sinful  tendencies,  and  in  this  they  are  largely 
successful.  They  attain  to  the  point  of  being  free  from  all  gross  and  outward  sins 
of  the  flesh.  But,  alas !  they  make  no  progress  in  eradicating  the  sin  of  their  heart. 
There  is  no  internal  change  of  heart  corresponding  with  the  outward  reformation  in 
life.  This  course  of  action  leads  to  spiritual  decay  and  death.  Man  cannot  sanctify 
himself.  The  work  of  sanctification  is  carried  on  in  the  heart  of  the  believer  by  the 
co-operation  of  the  human  and  the  Divine :  man  works,  God  works.  God,  in  all 
His  dealings  with  man,  in  grace,  recognises  man  as  a  free  agent,  capable  of 
receiving  or  rejecting  His  grace.  Man  is  not  passive,  he  is  active.  He  is  of  his 
own  free  will  to  yield  to  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  is  to  resist  sin.  He 
is  to  prove  how  he  may  most  successfully  overcome  temptation.     He  is  to  keep 


CHAP,  ni.]  JOSHUA.  59 

himself  unspotted  from  the  world.  He  is  ever  to  be  watchful.  In  fact,  he  is  to  act 
as  if  everything  in  his  sanctification  depended  upon  himself.  This  is  the  point 
which  I  wish  to  emphasise  to-day,  namely,  man's  work  in  his  own  sanctification. 
How,  then,  are  we  to  sanctify  ourselves  ?  I.  By  sepaeatinq  oukselves  feom  every 
KNOWN  SIN.  It  is  pre-supposed  that  we  are  true  Christians,  that  we  have  been  re- 
generated ;  for  no  sanctification  is  possible  before  conversion ;  the  order  is,  first 
justification,  then  sanctification.  The  seed  of  the  tree  of  righteousness,  planted  at 
conversion,  must  pass  through  many  stages  before  the  seed  has  grown  into  a  tree  of 
righteousness.  The  tender  plant,  the  sapling,  the  young  tree,  the  mature  tree. 
Before  it  comes  to  maturity,  it  has  to  be  watched  and  tended  and  watered  and  digcred 
about  and  pruned.  Its  growth  is  a  very  gradual  process.  Even  so  is  the  growth  of 
the  soul  in  holiness.  If  we  would  sanctify  ourselves  the  first  thing  we  must  do  is 
to  separate  ourselves  from  known  sin.  It  may  be  that  our  sin  lies  in  eating  and 
drinking  too  much.  Our  easy  circumstances  enable  us  to  live  a  life  of  leisure  and 
luxury.  If  we  wish  the  blessing  of  God,  we  must  separate  ourselves  from  these 
sins.  It  may  be  that  our  sin  lies  in  being  vain  and  proud  :  our  vanity  is  seen  in 
our  dress  and  in  our  behaviour;  our  pride  is  seen  in  our  bearing  to  equals  and 
inferiors.  If  we  wish  the  blessing  of  God,  we  must  separate  ourselves  from  these 
sins.  It  may  be  that  our  sin  lies  in  unbelief.  This  is  the  sin  of  sins.  We  limit 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  Practically,  we  say  God  can  do  this  for  me,  but  He  cannot 
do  this  other  thing — I  must  do  it  for  myself.  If  we  wish  the  blessing  of  God, 
we  must  separate  ourselves  from  this  sin  of  unbelief.  In  fact,  whatever  be  our 
known  sin,  we  must  separate  ourselves  from  it.  To  do  this  thoroughly  we  must  go 
about  it  with  firmness  of  purpose,  with  a  fixed  determination.  Which  of  us  have 
resisted  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin?  We  need  nerve  so  to  resist  sin.  The 
motto  of  the  Irish  family  of  O'Neill  is  "  The  Bloody  Hand."  It  had  its  origin  in 
the  following  incident : — In  days  of  old  the  leader  of  a  band  of  pirates  gave  out 
that  whoever  first  touched  the  land  they  were  making  for  should  be  possessor  of  it. 
One  of  the  band,  named  O'Neill,  determined  to  gain  it ;  he  pulled  ashore  with  all 
his  might,  but  a  rival  passed  him  when  near  the  shore.  What  was  to  be  done  ? 
Instantly  this  strong-nerved,  resolute,  determined  man  rose,  lifted  his  battle-axe, 
struck  off  his  hand,  threw  it  ashore,  and  so  touched  the  land  fijst.  This  nerve  and 
resolution  was  shown  to  gain  a  possession  of  land.  What  will  we  do  to  gain 
possession  of  ourselves  ?  Will  we  deal  thus  resolutely  with  sin  ?  Yes.  We  will  cut 
it  off,  and  cast  it  from  us.  I  make  a  distinction  between  known  sin  and  unknown 
sin.  If  we  live  up  to  the  light  we  have,  and  deal  faithfully  with  the  sin  which  God 
has  revealed  to  us  in  our  lives.  He  will  give  us  more  light.  This  is  what  is  meant 
by  gradual  sanctification.  The  more  we  know  of  the  holiness  of  God,  the  more 
wiU  we  know  of  our  own  want  and  hohness.  As  we  grow  in  grace,  our  spiritual  eye 
becomes  keener,  and  we  see  new  sins  in  our  life  which  were  not  manifest  before. 
When  we  discern  these  sins,  we  are  to  deal  with  them  at  once,  and  separate 
ourselves  from  them.  H.  Besides  separating  ourselves  from  every  known  sin,  it  is 
necessary,  if  we  would  be  ready  to  meet  with  God,  to  peepake  oub  hearts  and 
SHNDS.  Our  hearts  and  minds  must  be  set  on  God,  so  that  we  may  be  ready  to 
hear,  and  to  remember,  and  to  obey.  Every  appetite  and  passion  must  be  stilled ; 
the  cares  and  anxieties  and  the  work  of  the  world  are  to  be  set  aside.  We  must 
give  as  much  time  as  we  can  to  reading  and  meditating  upon  the  Word  of  God,  so 
filling  our  hearts  and  minds  with  the  truth.  We  must  spend  long  periods  in 
prayer,  following  the  example  of  our  blessed  Master,  who  spent  whole  nights  in 
prayer.  If  we  would  be  thoroughly  prepared  to  meet  God,  we  must  dwell  on  the 
thought  of  what  God  is — the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  the  King  of  kings,  the  Lord  of 
lords,  the  God  of  our  salvation.  We  must  come  to  God  in  a  spirit  of  expectant 
faith,  beUeving  that  He  is  able  and  willing  to  enrich  us  with  all  spiritual  blessing, 
and  that  He  will  give  to  each  of  us  the  very  blessing  which  we  need.  The  more  we 
are  prepared  in  heart  and  mind  to  meet  with  God,  the  greater  blessing  shall  we 
receive.  To  great  faith  our  gracious  Saviour  still  says :  "  Be  it  done  unto  thee 
even  as  thou  wilt."  (TT^m.  Galbraith.)  The  wise  conduct  of  human  life  : — The  wise 
conduct  of  human  life  is  foreshadowed  in  this  story.  The  crises  men  encounter  are 
to  be  met ;  the  Jordans  that  block  their  way  are  to  be  crossed,  as  Israel  met  its 
trial  hour,  as  Israel  passed  the  river  that  barred  it  from  its  possession.  I.  Men 
SHOULD  SANCTIFY  THEMSELVES.  A  rcHglous  frame  of  mind,  and  the  habit  of  looking 
at  life  from  a  religious  point  of  view,  are  acquirements  of  great  importance.  A 
true  Christian  soon  learns  by  experience  that  all  his  times  are  in  God's  hands. 
Each  new  difficulty  encountered  brings  to  mind  how,  in  the  past,  all  things  have 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

been  made  to  work  together  for  good ;  and  so,  though  "  perplexed,"  the  believer  ia 
not  "  in  despair."  II.  Men  must  follow  the  guidance  or  the  Divine  law  and  the 
Divine  love.  Sinai  and  Calvary  are  both  guide-posts  pointing  out  the  right  and 
the  safe  way.  God's  commandment,  as  well  as  God's  grace,  helps  men  out  of  their 
difficulties.  It  is  imperative,  in  times  of  trial,  that  they  should  trust  in  the  Divine 
mercy,  but  quite  as  important  that  they  should  do  what  seems  to  be  the  Divine  will. 
III.  Men  must  patiently  wait  God's  time.  Deliverance  out  of  difficulty  is  not 
always  immediately  granted.  The  Divine  promise  is  sure,  but  the  time  of  its 
fulfilment  is  not  announced.  Because  the  prayer  for  escape  from  threatening 
dangers  is  not  answered  in  a  moment,  let  us  not  therefore  "  cast  away  our  con- 
fidence, which  has  great  recompense  of  reward."  And  this  is  eminently  true  in 
regard  to  the  last  Jordan  which  we  are  required  to  cross.  Dying  grace  is  held 
in  reserve  for  dying  hours.  The  Lord  of  both  life  and  death  will  be  ready  when  the 
time  arrives.  The  dark  river  will  be,  not  a  barrier,  but  a  highway  lighted  by 
the  glory  beyond.     (Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.)        Sanctify  yourselves  : — I.  In 

DWELLING  upon  THE  PLACE  IN  God's  PLAN  OF  PREPAKED  MEN  AND  WOMEN.     There  are  men 

and  women  with  whom  God  wUl  work,  and  there  are  men  and  women  with  whom  He 
will  not  work.  Who  are  those  with  whom  God  will  work  ?  As  a  general  rule,  those 
who  sanctify  themselves  for  His  work ;  that  is,  separate  themselves  by  a  thoughtful 
detachment  from  other  engagements  to  make  this  work  of  His  the  prior  thing.   II.  Ik 

DWELLING  ON  THE  FACT  OF  OUB  ABSOLUTE  DEPEKDENCE  UPON  GOD.   Thls  is  trUC  in  all  thiugS. 

It  is  signally  true  in  the  work  of  setting  up  His  kingdom  in  the  earth.  There  were 
things  which  Israel  could  do.  There  were  things  which  they  could  not  do  without  a 
signal.  Divine  interposition.  Ever  and  again  the  Christian  Church  comes  to  the 
bank  of  some  swift  river.  The  obstacles  in  the  way  of  her  progress  are  like  Jordan 
with  full  banks.  Then  ever  let  her  sanctify  herself  with  the  humbling  but  precious 
thoughts  of  her  absolute  dependence  upon  a  Divine  intervention.  IH.  In  dwelling 
UPON  THE  NEED  OF  THE  DiviNE  PRESENCE.  This  was  a  thought  which  ever  Uved  with 
Moses :  "  If  Thy  presence  go  not  with  me,  take  us  not  up  hence."  The  presence  of 
God  is  sometimes  withdrawn.  Sometimes  it  is  especially  manifested.  A  leader 
needs  credentials.  A  leader  of  God's  people  needs  Divine  credentials.  The  work 
we  attempt  requires  God's  presence.  We  are  wholly  dependent  upon  God  to  bring 
us  across  the  river,  and  we  shall  need  His  presence  on  the  other  shore.  It  is 
sanctifying  to  couple  with  the  thought  of  our  dependence  on  God  this  other  of  the 
efficacy  of  His  presence.  IV.  In  dwelling  upon  the  reasons  fob  crossing  the 
Jordan.  The  land  was  to  be  subjugated  for  God.  It  was  to  be  taken  for  Him  and 
settled  for  Him,  and  thus  make  a  part  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  great,  main 
reason  for  desiring  to  see  God's  work  revived  is  that  His  kingdom  may  come  in 
power ;  that  the  city  and  the  nation  and  the  world  may  be  His.  V.  In  dwelling 
UPON  YTHAT  God  has  done.  This  is  the  day  of  common  sense  in  religious  matters. 
Our  fathers  were  superstitious.  In  these  days  science  has  come  to  the  forefront, 
and  the  religion  of  the  supernatural  has  been  superseded.  When  these  doubts  arise 
and  press  us,  when  they  beset  us  and  whisper  and  roar  about  us  in  the  air,  it  is 
good  to  remember  what  God  has  done.  The  God  of  the  Eed  Sea  is  the  God  of  the 
Jordan.  VI.  They  would  be  aided  in  sanctifying  themselves  by  reflecting 
UPON  WHAT  IT  WOULD  BE  TO  TURN  BACK — after  forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  to  turn 
back  once  more  and  give  up  the  hopes  of  entering  the  land  of  promise  ;  again  to  go 
from  camp  to  camp  in  a  maze  of  wanderings  and  die  in  the  wilderness.  Joshua 
and  Caleb  with  the  rest,  after  all  1  Would  not  this  thought  most  powerfully  move 
them  to  embrace  God's  service  ?  to  set  themselves  apart  to  utmost  co-operation  in 
His  plan,  with  unquestioning  faith  to  follow  the  ark  ?  Which  things  are  a  parable. 
Many  Churches,  many  Christians,  have  the  experience  of  coming  up  in  the  full 
view  of  great  blessings,  promised  blessings,  and  turning  back.  Is  it  so  irksome  a 
thing,  then,  to  make  the  kingdom  of  heaven  first,  th.it  we  are  willing,  after  all, 
even  after  getting  a  close  view  of  the  blessing,  after  God  has  promised  that  this 
blessing  shall  be  put  in  our  very  hands,  that  we  shall  turn  back  rather  than  sanctify 
ourselves?  {G.  R.  Leavitt.)  Success  in  Divine  work: — I.  The  condition  of 
SUCCESS  IN  WORK  FOB  GoD  IS  HOLINESS.  1.  Purity.  Spiritual  purity  means  power 
and  beauty.  It  has  a  passive  side  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  25).  But  it  has  an  active  side 
(Jas.  iv.  8).  2.  Consecration.  That  person,  possession,  or  thing  is  consecrated 
which  is  given  to  God  according  to  His  will  and  pleasure.  3.  Obedience.  No 
practical  holiness  is  possible  without  obedience.  For  what  is  sin  but  disobedience  ? 
4.  But  these  three — purity,  consecration,  and  obedience — do  not  set  before  us  a 
complete  idea  of  what  the  Bible  means  by  holiness.     It  must  have  an  inner  life  of 


CHAP,  ra.]  JOSHUA.  61 

which  these  are  but  the  outer  manifestations.  The  very  heart  of  it  is  the  indwelling 
presence  of  God's  Holy  Spirit.  11.  The  cause  of  the  Chtjkch's  success.  The 
Divine  power.  Christ  has  not  said,  "  Follow  Me "  to  any  one  to  whom  He 
has  not  also  said,  "My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee,  My  strength  is  made 
perfect  in  thy  weakness."  When  God  says,  "  Sanctify  yourselves,"  it  is  the 
height  of  presumption  and  unbelief  for  us  to  sit  down  and  say  we  cannot  do  it. 
The  Lord  is  able  to  fulfil  His  promises.  It  is  for  us  to  obey.  {Homilist.) 
Consecration  : — The  context  of  this  command,  which  gives  such  prominence  to  the 
wonders  which  God  will  do,  is  a  happy  correction  of  a  very  common  notion  respect- 
ing consecration,  as  though  it  were  some  great  giving  to  God  by  us,  some  surrender 
or  sacrifice  of  what  we  previously  held ;  in  fact,  a  sort  of  favour  conferred  upon 
Him,  whereas  it  is  only  the  readiness  to  receive  from  Him.  Consecration  is  not  a 
meritorious  work  of  our  own,  but  a  willingness  to  let  the  Lord  work  His  wonders 
upon  us.  It  simply  means  a  ready  recipiency.  Yet  even  this  recipiency  may 
involve  surrender  in  a  subordinate  way,  as  it  evidently  did  in  the  case  of  the 
Israelites.  They  could  not  possibly  receive  Canaan  without  giving  up  the  wilder- 
ness. That  command,  therefore,  "sanctify  yourselves,"  was  a  caU  to  heart-search- 
ing. It  pressed  home  to  all  their  thoughts  this  recognition,  "We  are  the  Lord's." 
It  could  not  long  remain  a  matter  of  doubt  with  any  whether  they  stood  ready  for 
God  to  lead  them  over  Jordan  or  not.  The  command  given  them  was  completely 
overshadowed  by  the  promise  that  followed,  and  yet  it  was  the  promise  itself  that 
tested  and  tried  the  very  intents  of  their  hearts.  It  continues  to  be  a  part  of  the 
manifold  wisdom  of  God  to  furnish  such  tests,  even  in  providing  our  richest  bless- 
ings. He  who  becomes  a  man  must  put  away  his  childish  things.  The  lingering 
child-nature  struggles  and  shrinks  from  the  sacrifice,  but  the  spirit  of  the  strong 
man  uprising  spares  not  the  old  treasures  as  he  reaches  on  to  the  new.  God  can- 
not fill  our  hands  with  His  great  and  good  gifts  till  we  drop  the  baubles  they  have 
held.  And  so  in  every  onward  step,  calling  us  to  some  surrender,  to  some  sacrifice. 
He  clears  away  the  superficial  wrappings  of  our  nature  to  learn  what  soundness 
exists  beneath.  (S.  F.  Smiley.)  To-morrow  the  Lord  will  do  wonders  among' 
you. — Critical  times  and  places  in  life : — It  was  an  hour  and  place  of  wonderful 
contrasts.  As  they  remembered  there  swept  vividly  before  their  thought  the 
recollection  of  the  harsh  experiences  through  which  they  had  passed — the  savagery 
of  the  roadless  country  they  had  traversed ;  the  trials  they  had  suffered  in  their 
restless  journey,  whose  hurry  allowed  no  opportunity  for  buUding  a  home.  The 
backward  look  recalled  nothing  but  weariness  and  sorrow — the  only  satisfying  thing 
about  it  the  fact  that  it  was  past.  But,  as  they  anticipated,  they  saw  a  fairer  vision 
■ — of  quiet  homes  ;  of  orchards  fragrant  with  blossoms  and  vineyards  purple  with 
grapes  ;  of  lands  securely  held ;  of  children  gathered  round  the  family  hearthstone ; 
of  all  the  blessings  of  organised,  coherent  society.  The  desert  and  the  garden  were 
both  in  full  view ;  and  their  joyful  expectation  was  that  henceforth  the  garden,  and 
not  the  desert,  was  to  be  their  home.  But — and  there  is  often  a  "  but "  between 
men's  hopes  and  their  realisation — but  between  the  desert  and  the  garden  there  was 
a  barrier.  The  stream  must  be  crossed  before  vision  could  change  to  possession  ; 
and  how  cross  it  ?  There  were  no  bridges  spanning  the  river  over  which  they  might 
march  in  solid  procession ;  there  were  no  boats  in  which  they  might  be  ferried  over 
in  little  companies ;  there  were  no  fords  through  which  they  might  pass  one  by 
one ;  the  boldest  swimmer  would  he  like  a  straw  in  that  hurrying  flood.  There  are 
critical  hours  in  all  lives.  Almost  every  experience  has  its  crises  and  turning-points 
of  greater  or  less  magnitude.  There  are  single  moments  and  actions  that  like 
rudders  steer  us  into  wide  seas  of  triumph  or  misfortune.  Sufficiency  of  prepara- 
tion to  meet  such  hours,  and  acuteness  enough  to  discover  when  they  come,  are 
indispensable  to  human  success.  There  is  one  truth  that  men  need  to  thoroughly 
learn  :  there  is  no  such  thing  as  "  good  luck  "  in  the  universe.  As  the  old  Chinese 
proverb  puts  it,  "  What  wUl  you  have  ?  says  God ;  pay  for  it  and  take  it."  Success 
is  not  an  inheritance  or  an  accident.  The  men  who  are  ready  for  emergencies  are 
the  men  who  win  the  victories.  History  is  full  of  brilliant  illustrations  of  this 
truth.  The  whole  course  of  empire  appears  to  pivot  on  single  men  and  isolated 
hours.  ,  There  was  a  critical  hour  in  the  history  of  the  rebellion  when  statesmanship 
confessed  itself  at  fault,  and  military  strategy  was  ineffectual,  and  the  nation  was 
almost  in  despair ;  but  when  Abraham  Linoohi  affixed  his  signature  to  the  Emanci- 
pation Proclamation,  and  announced,  as  the  policy  of  the  Government, "  Henceforth 
all  for  justice,"  a  new  power  entered  the  contest,  and  the  future  was  secure.  From 
that  hour  the  multiplied  forces  of  Omnipotence  were  auxiliaries.    The  muster- 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

roll  held  the  names  of  the  smallest  part  of  the  army.  The  morning  reveillS 
■wakened  a  host  unseen  by  mortal  eyes.  The  long  roU  of  the  drums  set  in  battle 
array  a  great  company  out  of  sight.  Side  by  side  with  the  nation's  flag  that 
waved  over  the  charging  lines  floated  the  ensign  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Every 
seeming  defeat  became  a  real  victory,  and  triumph  followed  triumph  until  the  last 
enemy  was  subdued.  The  single  act  of  the  single  man  was  the  principal  factor  in 
the  solution  of  the  vast  and  complicated  problem.  In  less  dramatic  form  the  same 
thing  may  sometimes  be  noted  in  individual  experience.  The  selection  of  a  busi- 
ness or  occupation  is  an  everyday  matter,  and  yet  what  vast  results  may  follow  the 
wisdom  or  folly  of  the  choice !  The  world  took  little  note  of  the  young  tutor  in 
Yale  College,  some  half-century  ago,  walking  up  and  down  his  room  considering 
whether  he  had  better  take  part  in  the  revival  movement  then  in  progress  ;  but  the 
decision  of  that  hour  reversed  all  the  previous  purposes  of  the  young  man's  life,  and 
gave  to  the  Church  of  God  Horace  Eushnell  with  his  wonderful  eloquence  and 
measureless  sweep  of  influence.  Young  men  do  well  to  be  serious  when  they  stand 
at  the  cross-roads  of  life,  considering  along  which  highway  they  will  travel.  In 
every  man's  life  there  comes  one  sovereign  hour — the  hour  when  he  makes  his  final 
choice  of  God  or  the  world,  and  settles  the  question  whether  he  wUl  pass  time  and 
eternity  in  the  wilderness,  or  make  himself  an  everlasting  home  in  the  Canaan  of 
promise.  All  preceding  experience  leads  up  to  that  hour;  all  after-experience 
takes  colour  and  substance  from  it.  {Sermons  iy  the  Monday  Club.)  The  wonders 
in  store  for  God's  people : — I.  Wondeks  ake  in  stoke  for  us  in  the  great  future 

TO  WHICH  WE  LOOK  FORWARD.      II.    We  MAY  BE  NOW  ON  THE  VERY  EVE  OF  THE  WONDEKS 

WHICH  God  has  provided  for  us,  and  which  shall  be  wrought  at  God's  time  and 
IN  God's  way.  We  cannot  lift  up  the  veU  which  hangs  over  the  future.  What 
manner  of  person  ought  I  to  be  ?  To-morrow  I  may  stand  before  God.  III.  It 
becomes  us  to  sanctify  ourselves  in  order  that  we  may  be  made  meet  for  thb 

WONDERS  which  WE  MUST  SEE  AND  PASS  THROUGH  WHENEVER  THEY  MAY   COME   UPON   US. 

{Pulpit  Studies.)  To-morrow:  spiritual  foresight: — This  "morrow "is  always 
coming  upon  prepared  hearts.  The  unsanctified  man  sees  nothing  of  all  the 
mysteries  of  God.  He  is  "  blind  and  cannot  see  afar  off."  "  Blessed  are 
the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  Will  the  Lord  come  to  those 
who  have  made  no  preparation  for  Him,  and  wUl  He  hasten  to  houses  whose 
door  is  shut  against  His  Anointed?  "  Blessed  is  that  servant  who  when  his  Lord 
cometh  shall  be  found  waiting."  A  beautiful  law  is  this,  by  which  Joshua  knows 
the  secret  of  the  Lord  a  full  day  before  it  is  known  by  others.  "  The  secret  of  the 
Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him."  If  the  light  comes  first  to  the  mountains,  need 
the  valleys  peevishly  complain?  As  a  matter  of  fact  some  men  are  privileged 
beyond  others  in  insight,  and  that  strange  sympathetic  anticipation  which  often 
assumes  prophetic  dignity  and  certitude.  Such  men  are  teachers  sent  from  God. 
The  spirit  that  is  in  them  is  a  spirit  of  rulership  and  command,  and  their  supremacy 
is  allowed  without  being  claimed.  Wonderful  is  the  gift  of  utterance ;  when  the 
poet  speaks  we  feel  that  he  has  said  something  which  we  wished  to  say  ourselves, 
and  which,  being  said,  we  know  to  be  wholly  true.  So,  too,  there  are  time-keepera 
appointed  by  God.  Sometimes  we  do  the  right  thing  at  the  wrong  hour,  and  thus 
our  blow  is  wasted  in  the  air.  Our  impatience  would  rush  upon  the  Jordan,  and 
we  should  be  drowned.  Lord,  teach  us  how  to  wait ;  and  when  Thy  commanding 
word  comes,  may  we  all  be  ready.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  God  reveals  His  purposes 
iy  degrees : — God  often  opens  His  hand  by  one  finger  at  a  time,  and  leaves  as  face 
to  face  with  some  plain  but  diflScult  duty,  without  letting  us  see  the  helps  to  its 
performance  till  we  need  to  use  them.  If  we  go  right  on  the  road  which  He  has 
traced  out  it  will  never  lead  us  into  a  blind  alley.  The  mountains  will  open  before 
us  as  we  come  near  what  looked  their  impassable  wall ;  and  some  narrow  gorge  or 
other,  wide  enough  to  ran  a  track  through,  but  not  wide  enough  to  be  noticed 
before  we  are  close  on  it,  will  be  sure  to  open.  The  attitude  of  expectation  of  God'g 
help,  whUe  its  nature  is  nnrevealed,  is  kept  up  in  Joshua's  last  instruction.  The 
people  are  bidden  to  sanctify  themselves  because  to-morrow  the  Lord  wUl  do  wonders 
among  them.  That  sanctifying  was  not  external,  but  included  the  hallowing  of 
spirit  by  docile  waiting  for  His  intervention  and  obedience  while  the  manner  of  it 
was  hidden.  The  secret  of  to-morrow  is  partly  made  known,  and  the  faith  of  the 
people  is  nourished  by  the  mystery  remaining,  as  well  as  by  the  light  given.  The 
best  security  for  to-morrow's  wonders  is  to-day's  sanctifying.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
This  day  will  I  begin  to  magnify  thee  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel. — God's  regard  for 
His  servants: — How  full  and  manifold  the  assurance  1    First,  I  will  magnify  thee. 


CHAP,  ui.]  JOSHUA.  63 

I  will  endue  thee  with  sapernatural  might,  and  that  will  give  you  authority  and 
weight  corresponding  to  the  position  in  which  you  stand.  Further,  this  shall  be 
but  the  beginning  of  a  process  which  will  be  renewed  as  often  as  there  is  occasion 
for  it.  "  This  day  I  will  begin."  You  are  not  to  go  a  warfare  on  your  own  charges, 
but  "  as  your  days, -so  shall  your  strength  be."  Moreover,  this  exaltation  of  your 
person  and  office  will  take  place  "  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel,"  so  that  no  man  of  them 
shall  ever  be  justified  in  refusing  you  allegiance  and  obedience.  And  to  sum  up — 
you  shall  be  just  as  Moses  was ;  the  resources  of  My  might  wiU  be  as  available  for 
you  as  they  were  for  him.  After  this,  what  misgivings  could  Joshua  have  ?  Could 
he  doubt  the  generosity,  the  kindness,  the  considerateness  of  his  Master  ?  It  is  an 
experience  which  has  been  often  repeated  in  the  case  of  those  who  have  had  to 
undertake  difficult  work  for  their  Master.  Of  all  our  misapprehensions  the  most 
baseless  and  the  most  pernicious  is  that  God  does  not  care  much  about  us,  and 
that  we  have  not  much  to  look  for  from  Him.  It  is  a  misapprehension  which 
dishonours  God  greatly,  and  which  He  is  ever  showing  Himself  most  desirous  to 
remove.  It  stands  fearfully  in  the  way  of  that  spirit  of  trust  by  which  God  is  so 
much  honoured,  and  which  He  is  ever  desirous  that  we  should  show.  And  those 
who  have  trusted  God,  and  have  gone  forward  to  their  work  in  His  strength,  have 
always  found  delightful  evidence  that  their  trust  has  not  been  in  vain.  Wliat  is 
the  testimony  of  our  great  Christian  philanthropists,  our  most  successful  mission- 
aries, and  other  devoted  Christian  workers?  Led  to  undertake  enterprises  far 
beyond  their  strength,  and  undergo  responsibilities  far  beyond  their  means,  we  know 
not  a  single  case  in  which  they  have  not  had  ample  proof  of  the  mindfulness  of  their 
Master,  and  found  occasion  to  wonder  at  the  considerateness  and  the  bountifulness 
which  He  has  brought  to  bear  upon  their  position.  And  is  it  not  strange  that  we 
should  be  so  slow  to  learn  how  infinite  God  is  in  goodness  ?  (W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.) 
Being  made  great : — It  was  a  great  undertaking  to  follow  Moses.  How  came 
Joshua  to  succeed  when  it  seemed  so  likely  he  would  fail  ?  1.  Because — looking  at 
the  human  side  of  the  question — (1)  he  did  not  foolishly  try  to  reproduce  his  master 
and  leader,  to  be  a  second  Moses,  but  wisely  strove  to  be  his  true  self,  and  to  do  the 
particular  work  which  God  gave  him  to  do ;  and  (2)  he  entered  upon  and  carried 
out  his  work  in  a  spirit  of  complete  devotedness  to  it ;  he  lived  to  accomplish  the 
one  thing  with  which  he  was  charged.  2.  Because — looking  at  the  Divine  side  of  it 
— God  was  with  him,  encouraging  and  sustaining  him.  God  made  him  great.  He 
magnified  him  in  the  sense  of  the  text,  i.e.,  He  raised  him  in  the  estimation  of  the 
people  so  that  he  received  as  much  honour  from  them  as  even  Moses  enjoyed.  God 
also  magnified  Joshua  by  making  him  strong,  worthy,  even  great  in  himself.  God 
held  such  close  intercourse  with  him,  so  guided  and  disciplined  him,  so  influenced 
and  inspired  him,  that  Joshua  became  a  thoroughly  true,  loyal-hearted  servant,  a 
godly  man  living  a  faittJul,  consecrated  hfe.  Without  the  latter  there  would  have 
been  something  unreal  about  the  former.  For  there  is — I.  A  greatness  wb  must 
DECUNB.  1.  We  may  not  seek  to  be  made  great  by  appearing  better  or  wiser  than 
we  are.  2.  We  may  not  wish  to  occupy  a  position  greater  than  that  which  we  can 
honourably  fill.  11.  A  greatness  to  be  coveted  and  attained.  How  should  we 
care  to  be  magnified?  We  should  aspire  to  the  two  elements  of  greatness  which 
God  gave  to  Joshua,  though  in  us  they  take  a  different  form.  1.  Honour  or  esteem. 
We  may  well  dispense  with  the  obsequious  or  the  ceremonious,  but  we  cannot  be 
indifferent  to  the  respectful.  Homage  we  can  do  without,  but  the  esteem  of  the 
wise  and  good  we  crave  and  should  secure.  2.  Influence.  In  the  home  in  which 
we  live,  in  the  school  in  which  we  teach  or  learn,  in  the  sphere  of  daily  activity,  in 
the  social  circle,  and  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  we  can  all  be  exerting  influence :  we 
can  be  such  and  can  hve  such  lives  that  we  shall  be  continually  restraining  from 
the  evil,  and  impelling  toward  the  right  and  the  true  course.  And  how  will  God 
magnify  us?  (1)  By  building  up  in  us  a  strong  Christian  character.  In  that 
strange  experience  through  which  God  caused  Joshua  and  Israel  to  pass  (chap,  ill.), 
both  he  and  the  priests  were  disciplined  in  faith,  in  obedience,  and  in  steadfastness. 
By  the  privileges  of  the  gospel  and  by  the  outworkings  of  His  providence  God  is 
building  us  up  in  these  and  in  other  attributes  of  character,  and  is  thus  "  making 
us  great "  and  strong  in  EUs  sight.  (2)  By  closely  associating  Himself  with  us. 
Joshua  was  magnified  in  the  sight  of  Israel  in  that  henceforth  he  was  known  to  be 
a  man  who  had  God  upon  his  side,  to  be  one  who  could  lean  on  God's  strength  and 
be  sustained.  God  magnifies  His  servant  now  by  causing  him  to  be  regarded  by  all 
who  know  him  as  one  who  walks  with  God,  with  whom  God  dwells,  on  whose  side 
the  Holy  One,  the  Almighty  One  is  ranged.    HI.  A  greatness  wb  can  extend  ob 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

coNFEB.  1.  We  magnify  God  when  we  adore  Him  and  celebrate  His  greatness  and 
His  faithfulness.  2.  We  magnify  Christ  when  we  commend  Him  and  His  gospel 
by  lip  and  by  life  :  when  we  constrain  others  to  know  and  feel  the  pricelessness  of 
His  love,  the  excellency  of  His  service,  the  greatness  of  BUs  promises  (see  Phil.  i.  20). 
3.  We  make  our  brethren  great,  in  the  best  sense,  when  we  lead  them  into  the  path 
of  heavenly  wisdom.  {W.  Clarkson,  B.A.)  Divine  honours  : — Joshua  has  not 
been  a  stranger  to  Divine  honours.  He  has  been  chosen  to  succeed  Moses,  and  so 
installed  into  the  highest  oflSce  in  Israel.  But  greater  honours  are  in  store  for  him  ; 
and  to-day  he  is  to  receive  some  of  these.  He  is  to  receive  them  not  for  self-glorifi- 
cation, but  to  glorify  God,  since  they  are  to  be  evidences  to  the  people  that  God 
is  with  him  as  He  was  with  Moses.  Much  is  said  about  worldly  honours,  and 
thousands  are  struggling  every  day  to  obtain  them.  They  are  characterised  by 
three  things,  which  we  would  do  well  to  remember.  They  are  few  in  number. 
Hence  the  great  majority  of  the  human  family  must  live  and  die  without  them. 
Their  duration  is  brief.  Suppose  they  are  bestowed  on  one  when  he  comes  of  age, 
and  that  he  is  allowed  to  retain  them  tiU  his  death,  which  is  not  always  the  case, 
they  can  only  be  his  for  about  fifty  years.  They  are  expensive  and  sometimes 
exceedingly  embarrassing.  To  maintain  them  numbers  have  been  brought  to  the 
margin,  if  they  have  not  been  driven  over  it,  of  monetary  ruin.  The  old  saying 
is  still  true  in  many  instances:  "  Uneasy  lies  the  head  that  wears  a  crown."  In 
view  of  these  characteristics  of  aU  worldly  honours,  we  may  weU  ponder  the  ques- 
tion, is  the  game  worthy  of  chase  ?  How  different  are  Divine  honours  I  All  can 
receive  them  if  they  please,  for  the  Lord  has  said  :  "  Them  that  honour  Me  I  will 
honour."  Like  the  soul  they  are  immortal ;  time  does  not  dim  them  ;  death  will 
not  touch  them,  and  in  eternity  they  will  shine  forth  with  a  radiance  above  the 
brightness  of  the  sun.  May  we  aU  aspire  to  the  honours  which  come  from  God 
only,  and  abundantly  obtain  them.  They  are  indeed  worthy  possessions.  {A. 
McAuslane.) 

Vers.  9-13.  Come  hither,  and  hear  the  words  of  the  Lord. — The  environment  of 

worship : — That  is  a  bold  challenge.  That  is  a  voice  we  need.  Every  age  wants 
some  Joshua,  some  mighty  soldier  of  the  Cross,  to  say,  "  Come,  hear  the  upper 
music,  the  Divine  melody,  the  holy  revelation."  Have  we  the  hearing  ear  ?  If  we 
could  hear  better  we  could  hear  more.  "Come  hither."  Does  that  indicate  a 
point  in  space,  a  place,  a  boundary,  a  sanctuary?  If  so,  it  would  be  quite  in 
keeping  with  Oriental  thought  in  general,  and  with  Jewish  habit  in  particular. 
Always  religious  exercise  was  associated  with  locality — with  the  mountain,  with 
the  city,  with  the  temple,  with  the  tabernacle,  with  the  terebinth,  with  some  place 
made  sacred  by  historic  communes  and  wrestlings  with  God.  Christ  said,  "The 
time  cometh  and  now  is  when  neither  in  this  mountain  nor  at  Jerusalem  (par- 
ticularly and  exclusively)  shall  men  worship  the  Father,"  but  wherever  there  is 
a  human  spirit  desiring  the  upward  way,  the  higher  light,  the  noonday  of  thought, 
and  hope,  and  peace,  wherever  there  is  such  a  soul  God  is  there,  and  God  is  the 
Author  of  it.  Yet  Jesus  Christ  Himself  went  into  the  synagogue  on  the  Sabbath 
day— one  of  the  evangelists  says,  "  as  was  His  custom."  Beware  lest  in  supposing 
ourselves  able  to  grasp  the  all  we  grasp  nothing.  The  universe  is  too  big  really  for 
any  one  of  us  to  grasp ;  we  had  better,  therefore,  have  a  little  place  cornered  off 
and  call  it  the  Church,  the  sanctuary,  the  little  temporary  hosteh-y  and  lodging- 
place.  Ail  the  earth  is  the  Lord's.  Men  are  now  in  danger  of  worshipping  totals, 
the  Unspeakable  All,  the  incognisable  infinite,  as  the  metaphysicians  call  it.  We 
may  believe  in  all  that  grandeur  of  immeasurableness,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  we 
go  home  every  evening.  Home— but  the  earth  is  the  Lord's :  why  do  you  not  live 
cut  in  the  open  air?  What  do  you  want  with  home?  you  are  a  worshipper  of 
Humanity,  all  space  :  why  do  you  go  home  ?  You  cannot  keep  away  from  the  old 
place:  the  loved  ones  are  there,  all  the  lives  that  make  your  life  a  possible  joy  are 
there;  all  the  holy,  shadowy,  tender  memories  are  there — the  old  seat,  the  old 
books',  the  old  fire  that  talks  as  it  crackles  and  blazes  are  there.  "  Come."  Why, 
the  mere  coming  does  us  good,  the  very  walk  to  church  reddens  the  blood.  The 
hunter  says  the  delight  is  in  the  chase ;  not  in  the  death  of  the  hunted  animal, 
but  in  the  flight,  the  leap,  the  bound,  the  dash.  The  coming,  the  act  of  locomotion 
and  the  act  signified  by  locomotion,  will  do  us  good.  For  what  purpose  shall  we 
come?  "Come  hither,  and  hear  the  words  of  the  Lord  your  God."  That  is  the 
purpose.  Not  to  hear  the  words  of  men.  We  are  now  hero  before  God  to  hear 
what  He  will  eay  unto  us—"  Speak,  Lord,  for  Thy  servant  heaieth."    What  shall 


CHAP,  in.]  JOSHUA.  65 

we  hear ?  Shall  we  hear  the  words  of  some  strange  deity?  Nay,  "  hear  the  words 
of  the  Lord  your  God."  It  is  a  family  meeting.  These  pronouns  seem  to  bring  us 
into  sacred  and  general  possession  of  things  in  common  with  God.  Tour  God,  our 
Father,  my  God,  your  fathers'  God :  these  are  the  terms  in  which  the  greatness 
and  the  nearness  of  God  are  typified  to  our  dull  imagination.  When  you  hear 
the  words  of  the  Lord  your  God  they  will  not  be  strange,  inarticulate,  un- 
translatable thunder;  they  will  be  gospels,  voices  of  music,  voices  of  welcome, 
tender  assurances,  great  offers  of  love,  sublime  propositions  of  pardon ;  you  will 
know  every  word  of  the  speech,  being  neither  affrighted  by  its  majesty  nor 
rendered  indifferent  by  its  condescension.  To  be  able  to  receive  such  words — is 
that  an  insignificant  sign?  To  know  God's  voice — is  not  that  an  evidence  of 
man's  greatness?  [J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Hereby  ye  shall  know  that  the  living  God 
is  among  you. — The  best  helper: — Observe  the  form  which  the  purpose  of  the 
miracle  assumes  there.  It  is  the  confirmation  of  the  Divine  presence,  not  with  the 
leader,  but  with  the  people  and  their  consequent  victory.  Joshua  grasped  the 
inmost  meaning  of  God's  word  to  himself,  and  showed  noble  self-suppression,  when 
he  thus  turned  the  direction  of  the  miracle.  The  true  servant  of  God  knows  that 
God  is  with  him,  not  for  his  personal  glorification,  but  for  the  welfare  of  God's 
people,  and  cares  little  for  the  estimation  in  which  men  hold  him,  if  they  will  only 
believe  that  the  conquering  God  is  with  them.  We  too  often  make  great  leaders 
and  teachers  in  the  Church  opaque  barriers  to  hide  God  from  us,  instead  of  trans- 
parent windows  through  which  He  shines  upon  His  people.  We  are  a  great  deal 
more  ready  to  say  "  God  is  with  him,"  than  to  add,  "  and  therefore  God  is  with  us, 
in  our  Joshuas,  and  without  them."  Observe  the  grand  emphasis  of  that  name, 
"the  living  God,"  tacitly  contrasted  with  the  dead  idols  of  the  enemies,  and 
sealing  the  assurance  of  His  swift  and  all-conquering  might.  Observe,  too,  the 
triumphant  contempt  in  the  enumeration  of  the  many  tribes  of  the  foe  with  their 
barbarous  names.  Five  of  them  had  been  enough,  when  named  by  the  spies' 
trembling  lips,  to  terrify  the  congregation,  but  here  the  hst  of  the  whole  seven  but 
strengthens  confidence.  Faith  delights  to  look  steadily  at  its  enemies,  knowing 
that  the  one  Helper  is  more  than  they  all.  This  catalogue  breathes  the  same 
spirit  as  Paul's  raptui-ous  list  of  the  foes  impotent  to  separate  from  the  love  of  God. 
Mark,  too,  the  long-drawn-out  designation  of  the  ark,  with  its  accumulation  of 
nouns,  which  grammatical  purists  have  found  difficult. — "the  ark  of  the  covenant 
of  the  Lord  of  all  the  earth  " ;  where  it  leads  they  need  not  fear  to  follow.  It  was 
the  pledge  of  His  presence,  it  contained  the  ten  words  on  which  His  covenant  wag 
concluded.  That  covenant»enlisted  on  their  side  Him  who  was  Lord  of  the  swollen 
river  as  of  all  the  fierce  clans  beyond ;  and  with  His  ark  in  front  their  victory  was 
sure.  Then  follows  the  command  to  elect  twelve  representatives  of  the  tribes,  for 
a  purpose  not  yet  explained ;  and  then,  at  the  last  moment,  the  manner  of  crossing 
is  disclosed,  to  the  silencing  of  wise  doubters  and  the  confirmation  of  ignorant 
faith.  The  brief  anticipatory  announcement  of  the  miracle  puts  stress  on  the 
arrest  of  the  waters  at  the  instant  when  the  priests'  feet  touched  them,  and  teUs 
what  is  to  befall  the  arrested  torrent  above  the  point  where  the  ark  stood,  saying 
nothing  about  the  lower  stretch  of  the  river,  and  just  hinting  by  one  word,  "  heap," 
the  parallel  between  this  miracle  and  that  of  the  passing  of  the  Eed  Sea  (Exod, 
XV.  8).  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  of  all  the 
earth. — The  emphasis  with  which  here  and  ver.  13  Jehovah  is  called  "  the  Lord 
of  all  the  earth  "  is  very  significant.  This  miracle  demonstrated  His  power  over 
all  nature.  He  who  can  by  His  word  suspend  the  operation  of  material  laws,  and 
whose  bidding  the  forces  of  the  world  obey,  is  the  supreme  ruler  of  the  world.  A3 
such  all  that  it  contains  is  at  His  sovereign  disposal.  As  "  the  living  God  "  has  the 
power,  so  "the  Lord  of  aU  the  earth  "  has  the  right  to  bestow  the  land  of  Canaan 
upon  whomsoever  He  pleases.  Joshua  and  Israel  were  under  no  delusion  in 
claiming  that  the  Most  High  had  given  them  this  land.  They  were  acting  under 
no  fanatical  impulse.  And  their  conduct  gives  no  sanction  to  crusades  elsewhere 
waged  by  those  who  have  imagined  themselves  the  special  favourites  of  heaven, 
and  pleaded  a  Divine  right  for  their  acts  of  rapine  and  bloodshed.  Israel's 
credentials  were  of  the  most  palpable  character.  The  miracle  which  attended 
their  march  was  God's  own  attestation  to  the  fact  that  they  were  working  Hia 
will.  And  as  Jehovah  is  the  Lord  of  aU  the  earth.  He  shall  one  day  be  universally 
worshipped  and  obeyed.  The  covenant  of  God  with  Israel  has  sometimes  been 
decried  as  the  offspring  of  a  narrow  mind,  which  would  limit  the  Divine  favour  to 
a  particular  nation.    But  it  is  here  joined  with  the  widest  universality;  and  one 

i 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

purpose  of  this  particular  miracle  wrouglit  on  Israel's  behalf  is  declared  (chap, 
iv.  24)  to  be  that  all  the  people  of  the  earth  might  learn  a  lesson  of  Jehovah's 
greatness.     (W.  H.  Green,  D.D.)        The  ark  of  God;   visible  aids  in  religion: — 
In  the  ark  Israel  saw  God  Himself,  and  yet  lost  none  of  their  faith  in  the  spiritual 
character  of  God.     When  the  ark  rested,  Israel  knew  that  God  was  among  them ; 
when  the  ark  moved,  then  Israel  believed  that  God  was  calling  them  to  journey  on 
again,  and  sang,  "  Let  God  arise,  and  let  His  enemies  be  scattered,"  &c.  ;  when, 
again,  the  ark  rested,  they  ceased  to  move  forward,  and  sang,  "  Return,  0  Lord, 
to  the  many  thousands  of  Israel."     There  was  ever  before  the  people  of  Israel  the 
words  of  that  commandment  which  forbade  their  ever  thinking  of  God  under  any 
human,  any  material  form,  so  that  they  had  to  content  themselves  with  the  ark  of 
the  covenant.     But  God,  all  this  time,  was  preparing  for  a  new  manifestation  of 
Himself  in  the  Person  of  the  Son,  who  was  to  take  upon  Him  the  form  of  His  own 
highest  creation,  so  that  no  longer  should  it  be  a  sin  to  think  of  God  under  the 
Ukeness  of  a  man.     The  man  who  depreciates  the  idea  of  a  visible  Church,  and 
rejects  externals  in  religion,  has  one  side  of  the  truth  very  clearly  revealed  to  him ; 
but  1  venture  to  think  that  not  only  is  this  one  side  insisted  on  to  the  exclusion  of 
another  equally  true,  but  his  position  is  maintained  against  certain  unalterable 
facts,  of  which  the  first  and  foremost  is,  that  our  souls,  through  which  alone,  he 
argues,  communion  may  be  held  with  God,  are  imprisoned  within  material  bodies, 
and  cannot  in  this  life,  in  the  ordinary  course,  receive  impressions  of  spiritual 
things  except  through  the  medium  of  those  bodies.     Israel  in  the  wilderness  was, 
no  doubt,  often  very  unworthy  of  the  high  calling  which  belonged  to  the  chosen 
people ;  but  they  did  succeed  in  living  a  life  from  which  everything  was  removed 
except  the  prospect  of  the  heavenly  rewards.     They  knew  they  should  not  inherit 
temporal  promises,   and  yet  they  patiently  lived  their  lives   in   expectation   of 
spiritual  things.     And  during  these  lives  they  were  guided  by  "the  ark  of  the 
covenant  of  the  Lord  of  all  the  earth,"  and  by  the  system  of  worship  provided  for 
them  by  God.     We  are  looking,  or  ought  to  be  looking,  for  like  heavenly  promises, 
and  while  we  are  in  the  flesh  we  shall  find  help,  comfort,  encouragement,  and 
strength  from  these  outward  ordinances,  which  God  has  given  us  in  His  holy 
Church.     (E.  Smith,  B.A.)        As  soon  as  the  soles  of  the  feet  .  .  .  shall  rest  in 
the  waters  of  Jordan. — Committal : — The  first  step  was  to  be  taken  in  the  waters. 
They  were  called  upon  not  only  to  face  the  difficulties,  but  to  enter  them.     They 
were  not  to  ask  God  to  prove  His  power  first.     They  were  to  trust  Him  first,  and 
then  should  they  see  as  they  followed  on  to  know  the  Lord,  "  His  giving  forth  "  to 
be  "prepared  as  the  morning."    How  fatal  had  been  a  halt,  although  but  one 
step  short  of  the  brim  of  the  waters  1     Even  the  foot  uplifted,  ready  to  fall  as 
soon  as  the  path  was  ready,   would  have  waited  in  vain.      The  promise  was 
addressed  only  to  the  faith  that,  without  seeing  signs  and  wonders,  could  yet 
believe.     That  one  step  taken  which  proved  their  faith,  and  placed  it  in  a  position 
of  entire  receptivity — then  God  could  prove  His  faithfulness  and  manifest  His 
power.     His  wonders  follow  at  once.     The  lesson  which  is  here  taught  us  is  of 
the  utmost  importance,  showing  us  the  very  essence  of  all  true  faith.     Mature 
faith  must  be  able  to  dare  and  to  endure,  with  no  other  stay  than  seeing  Him  who 
is  invisible.     Our  Father  does,  indeed,  stretch  out  the  hand  of  yearning  tenderness 
to  steady  the  tottering  steps  of  a  babe.     In  His  pity  and  compassion  He  will  not 
forbid  the  poor  cripple  his  staff ;  but  the  faith  of  full  years  and  of  steady  strength 
can  never  be  developed  by  continued  indulgence.     It  must  be  exercised  by  reason 
of  use.    Again,  that  God,  instead  of  giving  His  people  some  visible  aid  for  their 
crossing,  set  before  them   a  most  visible  hindrance,  doubling  the   danger  and 
difficulty  to  the  natural  eye,  is  in  perfect  accord  with  our  advanced  experience. 
Only  how  often  does  the  simplicity  of  our  faith  fail  to  equal  theirs.     It  is  the  first 
instinctive  impulse  of  unbelief  to  seek  a  sign — to  have  something  to  interpose 
between  itself  and  the  bare  word  of  God.     And  so,  how  often  is  the  question  asked : 
"  If  God  be  really  disposed  to  bring  me  into  this  glorious  liberty,  will  there  not  be 
at  least  some  token  of  it?    Shall  I  find  no  evidence  of  it  in  my  o\\n  altered 
feelings;    and  especially  will  not  the  Lord  prepare  the  way  by  lowering  the 
opposing  tide  of  temptation?"    The  word  of  our  God  needs  neither  sign  nor 
surety.     Be  it  a  promise,  or  be  it  a  command,  it  matters  not ;  for  every  command 
has  a  promise  for  its  kernel.     We  are  to  go  forward  to  obey  His  commands — 
forward  to  receive  His  promises — forward  in  faith — forward   though   difficulties 
double.    Again,  the  foot  dipped  in  the  brimming  waters  declares  emphatically  that 
faith  is  to  precede  feeling.     Nothing  that  we  discover  in  heart  or  life  need  hinder 


CHAP,  ni.]  JOSHUA.  67 

us  in  coming  to  Christ  to  seek  deliverance  from  it.  We  may  even  use  our  ■worst 
discoveries  as  our  plea  in  coming;  "For  the  whole  have  no  need  of  a  physician, 
but  they  that  are  sick."  Nor  will  my  sickness  make  the  Physician  displeased  with 
me  in  my  first  application  to  Him.  But  if  after  He  has  healed  me,  and  taught  me 
the  conditions  of  sustaining  health,  I  find  myself  again  unloving,  cold,  perturbed, 
fretted,  moody,  I  have  not  the  least  right  to  say  that  all  is  well,  and  that,  dis- 
regarding all  this,  I  am  to  believe  myself  fully  accepted  through  Christ.  Unless 
I  bring  this  disturbance  to  Him  for  confession,  forgiveness,  and  healing,  I  am 
utterly  at  fault.  Our  feelings  are  of  importance.  The  same  Creator  who  set  the 
faithful  nerves  as  sentinels  along  all  the  lines  of  the  senses,  to  give  due  warning  of 
danger  and  disease,  gave  a  corresponding  sensitiveness  to  our  souls.  >  Faith  is  not 
to  discharge  this  as  unnecessary,  but  to  retain  it  in  her  service.  If  it  be  well  with 
our  faith,  it  will  also  be  well  with  our  feelings.  {S.  F.  Smiley.)  When  does 
Divine  help  come  ? — When  we,  actually  going  forth  in  duty  as  He  has  told  us, 
according  to  the  directions  He  has  given,  laying  hold  by  faith  upon  His  promise, 
come  to  the  limit  of  our  strength — when  thus  our  feet  are  dipped  in  the  brim  of  the 
waters  of  our  Jordan,  His  great  help  does  come.  1.  Such  Divine  help  comes  in 
difficult  duty.  Though  duty  be  difficult,  when  we  go  forth  toward  it,  as  God  has 
ordered,  and  in  faith  in  His  promise,  we  may  be  certain  somehow  His  help  will 
meet  us,  2.  Such  Divine  help  comes  scattering  foreboded  inability,  e.g.,  the 
women  going  to  the  sepulchre,  asking,  anxiously,  "  Who  shaU  roll  away  the 
stone?"  but  going  on  and  finding  it  roUed  away  (Mark  xvi.  1-4).  3.  Such  Divine 
help  wUl  come  in  death.  See  what  Mr.  Greatheart  says  of  Mr.  Fearing  in  the 
second  part  of  "Pilgrim's  Progress."  The  whole  passage  is  most  exquisite. 
4.  Such  Divine  help  will  also  come  in  conversion.  There  is  that  Jordan  of 
belief  in  Jesus — of  the  absolute  commitment  of  the  self  to  Him  which  we  must 
pass  before  we  can  enter  the  Canaan  of  forgiveness,  and  God's  favour,  and  the 
noble  life.  Now  go  on  toward  it.  Cross  it.  But  you  have  no  feeling,  you  say ;  that 
is  not  to  the  matter.  But  you  do  not  know  such  feeling  as  other  people  say  they 
have ;  that  is  not  to  the  matter.  But  you  do  not  understand  how  it  can  be ;  you  need 
not ;  that  is  not  to  the  matter.  But  you  are  not  fit  to  make  the  crossing ;  you 
never  wiU  be  fitter  ;  that  is  not  to  the  matter.  This  is  enough.  God  teUs  you  to 
go  forth,  along  His  way  in  faith  of  His  promise ;  and  when  your  feet  but  touch  the 
brim  of  a  perfect  self-surrender,  you  are  His,  you  are  Christian.  His  forgiveness 
falls,  you  have  passed  into  the  Canaan  of  the  new  life.  {W.  Hoyt,  D.D.)  The 
ark  in  Jordan : — It  is  worth  noticing  the  use  which  in  the  passage  of  the  river  they 
made  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  The  piUar  of  fire  had  ceased  to  go  before  them. 
They  had  grown  into  the  ability  to  appreciate  a  better  and  more  spiritual 
symbolism.  Fire  meant  more  to  the  eye  than  a  little  box  of  acacia-wood,  but  the 
acacia  box,  considered  as  the  casket  of  the  Divine  autograph  of  the  two  tables, 
denoted  more  to  the  mind  and  heart ;  and  so  it  marks  a  growth  that  not  the  pillar, 
but  the  ark,  guided  them  across  the  river.  They  treated  the  ark  on  this  occasion 
reverently,  but  not  superstitiously.  They  used  it  not  as  a  "  charm,"  but  as  a 
symbol.  The  Israelites  on  a  later  occasion  used  it  as  a  charm  in  one  of  their 
battles  with  the  Philistines,  when  after  one  defeat  they  said  (1  Sam.  iv.  3).  To  the 
men  standing  on  the  brink  of  the  swollen  Jordan,  however,  the  ark  was  not  a 
charm,  a  power,  but  only  the  representative  of  a  power.  Their  own  faith  earned 
them  miraculous  passage,  and  not  the  little  acacia  chest;  and  they  felt  it  so. 
There  is  danger  of  our  coming  to  use  the  holy  things  of  our  religion  more  as  the 
IsraeUtes  used  the  ark  at  Ebenezer  than  as  they  used  it  at  the  river.  We  easily 
fall  into  a  way  of  attributing  Divine  potency  to  rites  and  ceremonies,  prayers, 
sanctuaries,  and  ordinances,  forgetting  that  these  things  are  only  types,  significant 
as  type«,  but  not  as  forces — that  the  power  of  Christianity  is  not  in  the  rites,  but  in 
the  faith  only  that  uses  them.  A  symbol  is  a  dangerous  thing:  the  Hebrews 
learned  that  lesson  at  Ebenezer.  A  symbol  is  a  precious  thing:  the  Hebrews 
learned  that  lesson  at  the  Jordan-crossing.  (C.  R.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)  Obeying 
God's  commands  : — The  Jordan  of  Canaan  stands  for  any  difficulty  which  the  Lord 
commands  us  to  encounter.  Between  us  and  the  goal  at  which  we  are  aiming, 
there  is  often  some  wide  Jordan  which,  at  the  time,  seems  to  us  to  be  very 
peculiarly  broad.  At  another  time,  when  the  stream  is  not  so  wide,  we  think  that 
we  might  dare  to  make  the  attempt,  but  just  now  the  thing  seems  too  hazardous. 
We  think  we  had  better  wait  for  a  little,  until  the  waters  abate.  So  we  stand  on 
the  brink  shivering,  and  dare  not  plunge  into  the  waves.  How  many  a  sinner  hag 
felt  thus,  as  he  has  heard  the  call  of  God  to  forsake  his  sins !     If  only  this  or  that 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

were  a  little  different,  he  thinks  he  might  venture,  but  just  now  the  opportunity 
seems  hardly  propitious.  To  the  believer  the  same  temptation  comes,  as  he  faces 
some  duty,  and  recognises  that  it  is  a  duty,  while  yet  he  shrinks  from  it  to-day. 
To-morrow,  he  argues,  will  be  a  more  favourable  season ;  and  so  he  too  refuses  to 
step  boldly  into  the  flood.  We  all  are  inclined  to  ask  that  the  billows  may  cease 
flowing  before  we  are  called  to  descend  into  their  very  midst.  Is  it  not  so  ?  Let  the 
example  of  this  people,  whom  we  have  so  often  condemned  with  a  kind  of  superior 
feeling  of  virtue,  spur  us  to  better  ways  of  heeding  the  command  of  God.  All  that 
we  need  to  be  sure  of  is  that  we  have  the  command  of  God.  Sure  of  that,  there 
is  only  one  thing  to  be  done  by  the  believer,  and  that  is  to  go  ahead.  If  God  says, 
"  Go  into  the  water,  and  when  you  get  there  the  way  will  be  made  clear,"  we  may 
be  sure  that  in  due  time  the  waters  will  cease.  Ours  is  to  go  ahead,  and  God's 
business  is  to  see  that  the  waters  abate.  If  we  do  our  part,  we  need  not  fear  but 
what  He  will  do  His.  "It  is  the  first  step  that  costs,"  is  a  proverb  as  true  in 
religious  matters  as  things  secular.  Many  an  undertaking  that  seemed  impossible 
when  we  started  has  become  very  easy  before  we  were  done  with  it.  Like  the  ten 
lepers  who  were  told  to  go  and  show  themselves  to  the  priests  before  a  spot  of  their 
leprosy  had  departed  from  them,  but  who  as  they  went  were  cleansed,  so  it  happens 
to  the  people  of  God :  as  they  go,  they  receive  the  fulness  of  blessing,  whereas  had 
they  waited  for  that  untU  they  were  willing  to  start,  they  would  have  received 
nothing  at  all.  How  many  blessings  do  you  suppose  you  have  failed  to  receive 
simply  because  you  have  refused  to  move  until  the  whole  way  was  made  clear  to 
you  ?  You  can  at  least  go  as  far  as  the  brink  of  the  water,  and  even  put  your  feet 
into  the  water,  without  being  drowned.  Why  not  try  that  much,  and  see  what  will 
happen?    Is  it  not  worth  while ?    (A.  F.  Schauffler,  D.D.) 

Veb.  14-17.  The  priests  .  .  .  before  the  people. — Ministers  as  leaders  of  the 
people: — It  is  not  always  that  either  priests  or  Christian  ministers  have  set  the 
example  of  going  before  in  any  hazardous  undertaking.  They  have  not  always 
moved  so  steadily  in  the  van  of  great  movements,  nor  stood  so  firmly  in  the  midst 
of  the  river.  What  shaU  we  say  of  those  whose  idea,  whether  of  Hebrew  priesthood 
or  of  Christian  ministry,  has  been  that  of  a  mere  office,  that  of  men  ordained  to 
perform  certain  mechanical  functions,  in  whom  personal  character  and  personal 
example  signified  little  or  nothing  ?  Is  it  not  infinitely  nearer  to  the  Bible  view 
that  the  ministers  of  religion  are  the  leaders  of  the  people,  and  that  they  ought  aa 
Buch  to  be  ever  foremost  in  zeal,  in  holiness,  in  self-denial,  in  victory  over  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil?  And  of  aU  men  ought  they  not  to  stand  firm? 
Where  are  Mr.  Byends,  and  Mr.  Facing-Both-Ways,  and  Mr.  Worldly- Wiseman 
more  out  of  place  than  in  the  ministry  ?  Where  does  even  the  world  look  more  for 
consistency  and  devotion  and  fearless  regard  to  the  wiU  of  God  ?  What  should  we 
think  of  an  army  where  the  officers  counted  it  enough  to  see  to  the  drill  and 
discipline  of  the  men,  and  in  the  hour  of  battle  confined  themselves  to  mere 
mechanical  duties,  and  were  outstripped  in  self-denial,  in  courage,  in  dash  and 
daring  by  the  commonest  of  their  soldiers  ?  Happy  the  Church  where  the  officers 
are  officers  indeed  1  Feeling  ever  that  their  place  is  in  the  front  rank  of  the  battle 
and  in  the  vanguard  of  every  perilous  enterprise,  and  that  it  is  their  part  to  set  the 
men  an  example  of  unwavering  firmness  even  when  the  missiles  of  death  are  whist- 
ling or  bursting  on  every  side.  (W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.)  As  they  that  bare  the  ark 
were  come  unto  Jordan. — The  passage  of  the  river  Jordan : — I.  That  whateveb 

DirnCULTIEB  MAT  ABISE  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  PILORIMAGE,  THE  MOST  FORMIDABLE  AWAITS 

HIM  AT  ITS  CLOSE.  Rcserve,  then,  your  resources.  Do  not  waste  your  moral  strength 
in  a  useless  sighing  over  ills  that  are  incident  to  human  hf  e,  and  which  are  blessings 
rather  than  curses  if  patiently  borne.  Eemember  that  some  really  formidable 
obstacle  may  ere  long  be  placed  in  your  path,  and  that  floods  of  suffering  may  be 
before  you.  The  lesser  troubles  wisely  borne  will  prepare  you  for  greater  ones — 
wiU  teach  you  calmly  to  meet  and  eventually  to  triumph  over  them,  as  did  the 
Israelites  when,  after  encountering  the  perils  of  their  desert-life,  they  came  at 
length  to  "  the  swellings  of  Jordan."     n.  That  God  has  provided  appropeiatb 

MEANS  BY  which  THE  DIFFICULTIES  INCIDENT  TO  THE  CuRISTIAN  LIFE  MAY  BE  OVERCOME. 

1.  He  endows  us  with  moral  courage.  Faith  in  God  will  give  us  firmness  in  times 
of  danger ;  we  shall  be  calm  when  others  are  agitated,  and  steadfast  when  others 
are  moved.  2.  He  vouchsafes  His  gracious  presence.  And  where  God  is  there  is 
peace  and  safety.  Victory  over  temptation,  comfort  in  trouble,  support  in  death, 
all  are  insured  by  the  presence  of  God.      3.  He  provides  a  guide.     It  was  not 


CHAP.  III.]  JOSHUA.  69 

under  Moses,  but  under  Joshua,  that  the  Israelites  crossed  the  Jordan,  yet  all  and 
more  than  Joshua  was  to  the  Israelites  the  Saviour  is  to  us ;  going  before  to  show 
us  the  way,  encouraging  us  by  His  example  and  sustaining  us  by  His  grace.  (JB'.  J. 
Gamble.)  The  crossing  of  the  Jordan  : — Our  subject  brings  before  us  a  scene 
which  in  many  of  its  features  reminds  us  of  that  memorable  night  in  which  the 
Lord  led  Israel  forth  by  that  unexpected  way,  through  the  waters  of  the  sea,  from 
the  house  of  bondage  into  liberty,  from  cruel  slavery  into  the  joy  of  a  new  national 
life.  Now  there  is  much  to  be  learned  from  considering  both  the  points  of  simi- 
larity and  of  contrast  in  those  two  memorable  events.  First  we  notice  that  in  both 
cases  there  was  a  going  down  into  the  element  of  water,  and  a  rising  up  out  of  it 
into  an  entirely  new  position — the  mystical  symbol  of  death,  and  burial,  and  of 
resurrection.  In  both  cases  by  this  passage  through  water  a  complete  separation 
was  effected  between  the  old  and  the  new  state  of  things,  and  in  both  cases  the 
passage  indicated  the  commencement  of  a  new  and  happy  career.  In  each  case  the 
water,  which  naturally  should  have  been  an  obstacle,  became,  we  may  say,  an 
assistance,  and  that  which  naturally  should  have  been  a  cause  of  danger  became  a 
means  of  safety.  And  in  both  cases  this  was  caused  by  a  distinct  Divine  interven- 
tion, and  in  each  case  that  manifestation  of  supernatural  power  was  associated  with 
a  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence,  though  the  symbols  in  the  two  cases  were  different 
— in  the  first  it  was  the  fiery  pillar,  in  the  second  it  was  the  ark  of  the  covenant. 
Nor  are  the  points  of  contrast  less  striking  than  the  points  of  agreement.  The 
frenzied  terror,  the  fearful  excitement  which  pervaded  that  terrified  multitude  at 
the  Bed  Sea  is  conspicuous  by  its  absence  on  this  occasion  ;  they  are  no  longer 
fleeing  from  destruction  and  death,  but  passing  on  to  a  higher  and  happier  kind  of 
life.  There  they  were  passing  from  a  fertile  land  into  a  howling  desert,  where  they 
would  have  to  depend  on  a  miracle  for  every  meal.  Here  they  were  passing  from  a 
waste  of  desert  into  a  fertile  land — a  land  that  flowed  with  milk  and  honey.  There 
we  hear  an  outburst  of  triumphant  enthusiasm  when  the  sea  was  crossed,  and  loud 
songs  of  triumph  rang  forth  from  the  vast  multitude  as  the  returning  wave  sub- 
merged the  Egyptians.  Here  aU  seems  to  have  been  calm  and  solemn ;  the  only 
expression  of  strong  feeling  was  the  setting  up  of  those  memorial  stones  as  if  a  deep 
and  lasting  recollection  of  this  great  fact  were  aimed  at  rather  than  an  evanescent 
excitement.  In  both  cases,  observe,  we  are  contemplating  a  scene  of  salvation,  yet 
is  there  a  great  difference  between  the  salvation  effected  in  the  one  case  and  in  the 
other.  In  both  cases  the  salvation  comes  through  a  divinely-appointed  Saviour ;  but 
even  between  these  there  is  a  contrast.  Moses  was  the  Saviour  from,  Joshua  was 
the  Saviour  into.  And  all  this  may  throw  much  light  upon  a  question  that  seems 
greatly  to  exercise  the  minds  of  some,  especially  just  at  present.  It  is  unquestion- 
ably a  fact  that  long  after  their  conversion  some  Christians  pass  through 
an  experience  so  marked  and  definite  in  its  character,  and  leading  to  such 
happy  and  unmistakable  consequences  in  their  subsequent  lives,  that  some 
teachers  give  to  this  great  inward  change  the  name  of  a  second  conversion. 
Others  speak  of  it  as  entire  sanctification,  and  urge  upon  all  indiscriminately 
the  necessity  of  passing  through  some  such  definite  experience.  Now  two 
things  are  equally  plain  from  this  narrative.  The  first  is,  that  the  crossing 
of  the  Jordan  did  mark  a  very  definite  epoch  in  the  history  of  the  Israelites, 
and  served  to  emphasise  a  crisis  in  their  history,  out  of  which  they  passed 
into  a  new  and  far  more  satisfactory  condition.  The  second  is,  that  this  crossing 
of  the  Jordan,  nevertheless,  would  not  have  been  necessary  at  all  but  for  the 
backsliding  and  perversity  and  unbelief  of  the  Israelites.  The  lesson  of  Divine 
power  exercised  over  the  very  elements,  and  over  that  element  which,  but  for  the 
intervention  of  an  omnipotent  hand,  must  have  destroyed  those  whom  it  now  pro- 
tected, and  the  pledge  that  such  a  miracle  contained  for  the  future — aU  this  would 
have  been  fresh  in  the  minds  of  the  Israelites  when  they  first  reached  Kadesh- 
Barnea,  and  would  have  required  no  repetition.  I  was  much  struck  with  the 
remark  of  a  dear  friend  of  mine.  Shortly  after  I  had  devoted  myself  entirely  to 
mission  work  he  said  to  me  with  great  emphasis,  "Now,  my  dear  brother,  you  are 
going  to  give  yourself  up  to  the  work  of  preaching  the  gospel,  and  I  hope  the  Lord 
wiU  give  you  many  converts.  But  whatever  you  do,  try  and  bring  them  in  at 
Kadesh-Barnea ;  don't  tell  them  that  they've  got  to  go  wandering  in  the  wilderness 
for  forty  years."  I  have  never  forgotten  his  words ;  and  how  I  long  for  you  young 
Christians  who  are  just  starting  forwards  from  the  Bed  Sea  that  you  may  be  spared 
these  forty  years  of  weary  wandering ;  that  it  should  not  be  necessary  for  you  to  go 
on  year  after  year  murmuring  over  your  doubts  and  fears,  your  disappointments 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  your  barrenness,  your  dulness  and  deadness,  your  infirmities  and  failures.  Oh, 
it  is  weary  work  this  1  I  pray  you  avoid  it.  We  have  seen  that  both  the  passage  of 
the  Eed  Sea  and  the  passage  of  the  Jordan  were  miracles  of  salvation  wrought  for 
Israel  by  God.  We  have  also  to  notice  that  they  are  both  instances  of  salvation  by 
water.  It  is  by  God's  judgment  upon  sin  that  we  are  to  be  saved  from  sin  ;  by  His 
judgment  upon  the  world  we  are  to  be  saved  from  the  world.  And  now  here  lies 
our  practical  lesson.  Whether  we  have  been  baptized  at  the  moment  of  our  con- 
version, and  actually  expressed  our  faith  in  Christ  for  justification  in  submitting  to 
the  ordinance,  as  probably  was  the  case  with  St.  Paul,  or  whether  we  are  baptized 
in  unconscious  infancy  before  our  faith  became  operative,  as  is  usually  the  case  with 
us  Church-people,  or  whether  we  are  baptized  long  after  justification,  as  in  the  case 
with  modern  Baptists,  we  cannot  become  truly  justified  without  passing  through 
that  which  the  ordinance  symbolises — death  and  resurrection.  Kise  from  the 
regrets  of  the  past  into  the  acquisitions  of  the  future.  Dry  your  tears,  and  claim 
your  heritage.  And  here  is  the  first  step,  "  Sanctify  yourselves :  for  to-morrow  the 
Lord  will  do  wonders  among  you."  Sanctify  yourselves.  This  is  God's  call  to 
those  of  us  who  would  fain  cross  over  the  Jordan.  Put  away  every  unclean  thing 
— all  that  interferes  with  the  Divine  operation.  And  the  next  lesson  is,  expect ! 
To-morrow  the  Lord  will  do  wonders  amongst  you.  Only  by  a  miracle  of  grace  can 
you  be  raised  to  your  true  level  of  Christian  experience,  and  brought  into  the  land 
that  flows  with  milk  and  honey.  Your  heavenly  Leader  seems  to  ask,  "  Believest 
thou  that  I  am  able  to  do  this  ?  "  Oh,  let  Him  be  answered  from  the  bottom  of 
your  heart  with  a  fervent  "  Yea,  Lord  ;  there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  Thee."  Then 
comes  the  great  fact,  the  pledge  and  presage  of  all  coming  victories:  "  Hereby  ye 
shall  know  that  the  living  God  is  among  you,"  &c.  Go  down  again  into  the  place  of 
death  and  burial,  but  see  your  Lord  there  before  you,  a  pledge  that  when  you  pass 
through  the  waters,  because  He  is  with  thee,  the  floods  shall  not  overflow  thee.  Go 
down  into  the  place  of  judgment,  and  see  thine  old  wilderness  life,  with  aU  its  way- 
wardness and  wilfulness,  judged,  condemned,  and  left  behind  thee  for  ever.  {W. 
Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  The  ark  and  the  crossing  of  Jordan : — I.  The  ciecumstances 
A3  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  PEOPLE  OF  IsRAEL.  It  docs  uot  appear  that  any  intimation 
was  given  to  the  Israelites  before  the  morning  of  the  day  on  which  they  crossed  the 
river  as  to  the  manner  in  which  their  passage  was  to  be  effected.  This  would  be  a 
great  trial  of  their  faith  ;  and  the  readiness  which  they  showed  to  go  on  when  the 
ark  did  move  was  a  clear  proof  that  their  faith,  through  the  grace  of  God,  stood  the 
trial ;  and  that  they  were  actuated  by  simple  trust  in  God,  believing  that  whatever 
He  said  should  be  done  would  surely  come  to  pass,  however  impossible  it  might  seem 
to  the  judgment  of  men.  The  fact  is  that  Israel  had  become  accustomed  to  the 
constant  exhibition  of  the  most  amazing  miracles.  They  had  been  delivered  from 
the  bondage  of  Egypt  by  a  succession  of  wonders.  As  our  minds  dwell  on  this 
strange  sight,  one  object  stands  forth  pre-eminently  conspicuous,  and  that  is  the  ark 
borne  by  the  priests.  The  ark  was  the  point  round  which  all  the  glory  of  the 
miracle  was  made  to  revolve.  As  the  people  passed  and  gazed  at  the  waU  of  waters, 
they  would  feel,  we  owe  our  safety  and  our  easy  passage  to  the  presence  of  the  ark, 
the  token  of  the  presence  of  Jehovah  Himself.  It  will  not  be  without  instruction  il 
we  notice  the  name  by  which  the  ark  was  called  in  connection  with  the  transaction 
before  us:  "the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your  God."  Here,  then,  was  a 
pledge  of  God's  truth  and  faithfulness.  He  who  was  showing  their  way  was  one  on 
whom  they  could  thoroughly  depend.  How  would  this  serve  to  stimulate  them,  to 
stir  up  their  hearts,  to  awaken  faith,  to  strengthen  hope  I  Thus  conspicuous  was 
the  ark  on  this  most  notable  day.  And  if  you  ask  why,  the  answer  is  twofold. 
First,  because  the  ark  was  to  remind  them  of  the  presence  of  God.  By  it  He  made 
to  His  people  that  most  welcome  of  announcements,  ever  fresh :  •'  I  will  dwell  in 
them  and  walk  in  them,  and  they  shall  be  My  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God." 
The  ark  was  also  a  type  of  Christ ;  and  though  Israel  might  not  see  the  lessons 
which  all  the  typical  economy  taught,  yet  God  would  magnify  His  Son  by 
exalting  that  which  pre-eminently  represented  Him.  II.  From  the  consideration 
of  Israel  let  xjs  turn  to  ourselves,  and  see  what  is  to  be  gathered  from  the 
HISTORY  before  us  for  instruction,  comfort,  and  encouragement,  as  far  as  our  own 
Christian  life  and  practice  are  concerned.  Is  it  not  true  that  if  we  are  among  the 
spiritual  Israel  of  God,  experience  of  difficulty  and  trial  is  constantly  falling  to  our 
lot?  Now  when  we  reflect  on  our  necessities,  cast  our  eyes  around  to  survey  our 
individual  position,  look  onwards  to  the  Canaan  which  we  love,  and  think  what  we 
must  encounter  before  its  shore  is  reached,  must  we  not  have  a  guide  and  a  defence  ? 


CHAP,  ni.]  JOSHUA.  71 

Obstacles  as  great  as  Jordan  with  its  overflowed  banks  and  swollen  stream  meet  us 
in  our  course  ;   uncertainties  in  respect  of   which  no   calculation   can,  humanly 
speaking,  be  made,  veil  the  future ;  intricacies  which  we  cannot  thread  are  con- 
stantly arising ;   enemies  seem  to  stand  upon  the  farther  shore,  and  to  threaten 
opposition  and  repulse  even  if  we  cross  the  stream.     To-day  all  may  be  fair  and 
smooth,  to-morrow  such  a  flood  may  arise  of  trouble,  adversity,  or  temptation,  as 
wUl  be  well-nigh  sufficient  to  sweep  us  quite  away.     Well,  let  it  be  so.    Believer, 
there  is  help  for  you  which  is  all-sufficient.     The  ark  is  going  before.     Hear  how 
the  Lord  speaks  (Isa.  xlii.  15,  16  ;  xliii.  1,  2).      Kemember  how  you  have  been 
guided  hitherto :  how  when  you  broke  from  the  bondage  of  Satan  and  of  sin,  the 
Lord  made  a  way  through  all  that  would  have  kept  back  your  soul.    If  He  of  whom 
the  ark  was  but  a  type,  if  Jesus  be  our  guide,  where  may  we  not  readily  go  ?     How 
precious  is  the  word,  "  He  goeth  before  them  "  (John  x.  4).     As  we  follow  our 
heavenly  Guide  we  may  well  believe  that  He  leads  us  forth  by  the  right  way,  that  we 
may  go  unto  a  city  of  habitations.     This  is  the  glad  portion  of  every  one  who  hves 
the  life  of  faith.      He  may  thus  individualise  the  covenant  truth  of  God,  and  make 
it  his  own.    But  not  only  so,  he  can  rest  in  the  assurance  that  this  covenant  truth 
is  the  common  heritage  of  all  the  saints,  and  so  learn  more  and  more  to  rejoice  that 
all  his  brethren  and  sisters  in  Christ  Jesus  have  the  same  guide,  the  same  defence, 
the  same  refuge  as  himself.     What  a  source  of  comfort  is  this  ;  inexhaustible,  over- 
flowing, ever  fresh  and  life-affording!     (C.  D.  Marston,  M.A.)         Jordan  driven 
iack  : — This  was  only  one  of  several  ways  of  entrance  that  might  have  been  chosen ; 
therefore  this,  the  most  unlikely  of  all,  must  have  been  chosen  for  special  purposes. 
Nor  are  these  difficult  to  find.    I.  By  this  wonderful  entrance  into  the  land  Joshua 
WAS  GREATLY  HONOUEED  (ver.  7).    It  was  a  wonder  wrought  by  Jehovah  to  estabUsh 
the  authority  of  Joshua.     It  was  a  fulfilling  of  the  promise  He  had  made,  to  be 
with  him  as  He  had  been  with  Moses.     It  was  an  emphatic  endorsement  of  the 
people's  enthusiastic  response.     It  was  His  own  seal  and  signature  placed  upon 
Joshua's  commission.     Surely  this  was  essential  to  united  and  effective  action  on 
the  part  of  those  he  led.    If  men  have  no  deep  confidence  in  their  commander,  they 
cannot  follow  cheerfully,  they  cannot  work  heartily.     Therefore,  when  God  calls  to 
office,  He  endows  with  aU  needful  honour ;  and  not  only  does  He  bestow  it  at  the 
beginning,  He  also  maintains  it  so  long  as  He  has  work  for  His  servants  to  do. 
Surely  such  a  record  as  this  should  teach  every  servant  of  God  to  leave  his  honour 
in  God's  keeping.    His  one  aim  should  ever  be  to  honour  God,  knowing  assuredly 
that  that  word  of  promise  is  never  broken,  "  Them  that  honour  Me  I  will  honour." 
Yea,  more  than  that,  He  wiU  also  cause  others  to  do  the  same.     H.  StiU  further, 
we  are  told  that  by  this  miracle  the  Divine  presence  was  revealed  (ver.  10) .    This 
wonder  gave  new  proof  of  His  guiding  presence,  and  such  an  assurance  was,  in 
their  present   circumstances,  peculiarly  appropriate.      The  manna  was  about  to 
cease.    In  like  manner  the  beckoning  banner  of  cloud  and  fire  is  furled  for  ever. 
No  longer  can  it  lead  them  forward,  for  their  rest  is  gained.    But  if  it  has  gone, 
Jehovah  has  not.    His  presence,  though  without  that  visible  manifestation,  is  as 
real  as  ever.    And  it  is  as  powerful ;  He  is  the  Uving  God,  not  dead  like  the  idols  of 
the  Canaanites,  or  the  ideas  and  abstractions  of  the  philosopher,  or  the  forces  and 
atoms  of  the  scientist.    Neither  is  He  inoperative ;  a  worn-out  energy,  a  decrepit 
force.    He  is  acting  everywhere,  by  aU  means,  at  all  times.    What  a  demonstration 
of  these  things  was  the  working  of  this  wonder.    If  it  has  been  said  of  a  great 
general  that  his  presence  with  the  army  was  worth  a  regiment,  how  much  more 
would  the  assurance  of  the  Divine  presence  strengthen  every  hero  in  Israel  to  chase 
a  thousand  foes.    HI.  Again,  by  this  miracle  success  was  guaranteed.    After  such 
a  brilliant  opening  of  the  campaign,  could  there  be  an  ignominious  end  ?     Im- 
possible 1    He  that  did  the  greater  wonder,  would  not  faU  in  accomplishing  the  less. 
God  never  abandons  His  work  half-way ;  He  never  leaves  it  marred  or  unfinished. 
IV.  Among  the  results  flowing  from  this  wonder,  not  the  least  important  was  its 
influence  on  Israel's  enemies.    The  Canaanites  were  terror-struck  (chap.  v.  1). 
This  great  event,  which  fiUed  the  hearts  of  the  IsraeUtes  with  confidence,  had 
just  the  opposite  effect  upon  their   enemies.      Nothing  could   have    dispirited 
them  more.      Who  could  stand  against  a  people  thus  favoured?      When  God 
makes  bare  His   arm  the  stoutest  heart  becomes  like  wax.     All  refuges  of  lies, 
every  false  security,  is  felt  more  fraU  than  a  gossamer  web.     {A.  B.  Mackay.) 
The  Jordanic  passage  :—l.  Standing  on  the  scene  of  that  affrighted  and  fugitive 
river  Jordan,  I  learn  that  obstacles,  when  they  are  touched,  vanish.    It  is  the 
trouble,  the   difficulvty,  the  obstacle  there  in  the  distance  that  seems  so  huge 


79  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  m. 

and  tremendons.  2.  Again :  this  Jordanio  passage  teaohes  me  the  completenesa 
of  everything  that  God  does.  Does  He  make  a  universe,  it  is  a  perfect  clock, 
running  ever  since  it  was  wound  up ;  fixed  stars  the  pivots,  constellations  the 
intermoving  wheels,  and  ponderous  laws  the  weights  and  mighty  swinging 
pendulum ;  the  stars  in  the  great  dome  striking  midnight,  and  the  sun  with  brazen 
tongue  tolling  the  hour  of  noon.  A  perfect  universe  1  No  astronomer  has  ever 
proposed  an  amendment.  Does  God  make  a  Bible,  it  is  a  complete  Bible. 
Standing  amid  its  dreadful  and  deUghtful  truths,  you  seem  to  be  in  the  midst  of 
an  orchestra,  where  the  wailings  over  sin,  and  the  rejoicings  over  pardon,  and  the 
martial  strains  of  victory  make  a  chorus  like  the  anthem  of  eternity.  Does  God 
provide  a  Saviour ;  He  is  a  complete  Saviour.  God — man.  Divinity — humanity 
united  in  the  same  person.  3.  Again,  I  learn  from  this  Jordanio  passage  that 
between  us  and  every  Canaan  of  success  and  prosperity  there  is  a  river  that  must 
be  passed.  "  Oh  1  how  I  should  like  to  have  some  of  those  grapes  on  the  other 
Bide,"  said  some  of  the  Israelites  to  Joshua.  "  Well,"  said  Joshua,  "  if  you  want 
some  of  those  grapes  why  don't  you  cross  over  and  get  them  ?  "  A  river  of  diffi- 
culty between  us  and  everything  that  is  worth  having.  That  which  costs  nothing 
is  worth  nothing.  God  makes  everything  valuable  difficult  to  get  at  for  the  same 
reason  that  He  puts  the  gold  down  in  the  mine,  and  the  pearl  clear  down  in  the 
sea ;  it  is  to  make  us  dig  and  dive  for  them.  We  acknowledge  this  principle  in 
worldly  things.  Would  that  we  were  wise  enough  to  acknowledge  it  in  religiona 
things.  Eminent  Christian  character  is  only  attained  by  Jordanio  passage.  No 
man  just  happens  to  get  good.  Why  does  that  man  faiow  so  much  about  the 
Scriptures  ?  He  was  studying  the  Bible  while  you  were  reading  a  novel.  He  was 
on  fire  with  the  sublimities  of  the  Bible  while  you  were  sound  asleep.  It  was 
by  tugging,  and  toiling,  and  pushing,  and  running  in  the  Christian  life  that  he 
became  so  strong.  In  a  hundred  SoKerinos  he  learned  how  to  fight.  In  a  hundred 
shipwrecks  he  learned  how  to  swim.  Tears  over  sin,  tears  over  Zion's  desolation, 
tears  over  the  impenitent,  tears  over  graves,  made  a  Jordan  which  that  man  had 
to  pass.  The  other  morning,  seated  at  my  table,  all  my  famUy  present,  I  thought 
to  myself  how  pleasant  it  would  be  if  I  could  put  them  all  in  a  boat,  and  then  get 
in  with  them,  and  we  could  pull  across  the  river  to  the  next  world,  and  be  there, 
and  be  there  all  together.  But  we  cannot  all  go  together ;  we  must  go  one  by  one. 
What  a  heaven  it  wiU  be  if  we  have  all  our  families  there !  Lord  God  of  Joshua, 
give  them  safe  Jordanic  passage  I  Every  Christian  will  go  over  dry-shod.  One 
word  of  comfort  from  this  subject  for  aU  the  bereft.  You  see  our  departed  friends 
have  not  been  submerged,  they  have  not  been  swamped  in  the  waters  ;  they  have 
only  crossed  over.  They  are  not  sick,  not  dead,  not  exhausted,  not  extinguished, 
not  blotted  out ;  but  with  healthier  respiration,  and  stouter  pulsation,  and  keener 
sight,  and  better  prospect,  crossed  over — their  sins,  their  physical  and  mental 
disquietude  aU  left  on  this  side.  Impassable  obstacle  Ijetween  them,  and  all  human 
and  Satanic  pursuit,  crossed  over.  Would  you  have  them  back  again  ?  Would 
you  have  them  take  the  risks  and  the  temptations  which  threaten  every  human 
pathway?  Would  you  have  them  cross  Jordan  three  times — in  addition  to  the 
crossing  already — crossing  again  to  greet  you  now,  and  then  crossing  to  go  back  to 
heaven?  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  The  passage  of  Jordan: — Behold,  in  this 
passage  of  Jordan,  first  of  all  a  picture  of  the  beginning  of  the  Christian's  earthly 
course.  As  we  stand  where  Israel  stood,  on  the  eastern  bank,  we  behold  a  fair 
inheritance,  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  rich  with  every  earthly  blessing, 
with  all  that  heart  could  wish.  But  as  between  Israel  and  Canaan  Jordan  rolled, 
a  great  and  immovable  barrier,  so  between  us  and  the  goodly  heritage  of 
spiritual  blessings  we  behold  the  swollen  river  of  God's  judgment  against  sin. 
How  can  we  who  are  siimers  enter  into  life  and  rest?  How  can  we  reach 
or  enjoy  such  blessings?  That  barrier  is  to  us  unsurmountable.  There  are 
no  fords  in  this  river ;  and  we  cannot  swim  across  it  as  the  spies  the  Jordan. 
Neither  is  there  any  bridge  above  the  waterflood.  But  look  again.  Behold  a 
mighty  wonder.  That  river  is  dried  up  and  driven  back.  That  barrier  has  been 
abolished,  and  the  empty  bed  lies  bare.  It  is  as  if  there  were  no  river.  What  baa 
abolished  the  barrier  ?  The  ark  of  God  alone.  By  means  of  it  Jordan  was  driven 
back.  And  as  the  ark  abolished  the  barrier  between  Israel  and  Canaan,  so  Christ 
has  abolished  death.  He  Himself,  in  His  own  body,  has  borne  all  the  weight  of 
the  flood  of  God's  judgment  against  sin.  He  has  finished  the  work  of  salvation, 
and  opened  up  a  new  and  living  way  through  His  own  body  into  the  land  ol 
spiritual  rest.    He  has  done  this,  and  done  it  alone.    Of  the  people  there  wag 


CHAP,  m.]  JOSHUA.  73 

none  with  Him.  No  hand  of  man  had  a  share  in  this  work,  even  as  no  man  in 
Israel  drove  Jordan  back.  And  Jesus  abolished  death  as  speedily  and  effectually 
as  that  flood  was  driven  back.  As  it  was  with  the  priests  in  Jordan  so  was  it  with 
the  great  High  Priest  in  the  waters  of  judgment.  Whenever  the  soles  of  His  feet 
touched  the  brim  of  the  deadly  flood  it  fled  away.  He  has  put  away  sin  by  the 
Bacrifice  of  Himself.  To  those  who  trust  in  Him,  so  far  as  safety  goes,  it  is  as  if  it 
did  not  exist.  Not  the  faintest  trickle  of  condemnation  can  damp  their  feet. 
"  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  Mark  also  how  the 
passage  was  made  by  Israel.  As  it  is  written,  "  By  faith  they  passed  through  the 
Bed  Sea  as  by  dry  land" ;  so  might  it  also  be  written  of  this  twin  event,  "By  faith 
they  crossed  the  Jordan  and  entered  into  the  inheritance  of  the  Lord."  By 
nought  that  we  can  do  can  we  gain  an  entrance ;  but  trusting  in  Him  who  has 
made  an  end  of  sin,  we  pass  from  death  to  life,  from  the  kingdom  of  darkness  to 
the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son.  As  Israel  passed  over  Jordan  by  faith  in  God, 
even  so  must  all  pass  from  condemnation  to  acceptance,  according  to  that  word  of 
the  gospel, "  Therefore  being  justified  by  faith  we  have  peace  with  God  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  And  right  gloriously  is  aU  such  confidence  justified, 
whether  in  the  case  of  Israel  or  of  any  sinner  that  beUeves.  Oh  I  how  safe  are 
they  who  put  their  trust  in  the  living  God,  who  enter  into  life  by  faith  in  Christ 
Jesus.  The  way  of  faith  is  absolutely  safe  for  all  who  walk  therein.  And  it  is  as 
simple  as  it  is  safe.  The  entrance  into  Canaan  was  the  simplest,  the  easiest,  the 
plainest,  that  could  be  devised.  A  httle  child  could  cross  the  emptied  river  as  well 
as  the  stoutest  warrior.  And  the  stoutest  warrior  had  to  go  the  same  way  as  the 
little  child.  It  was  a  path  that  suited  the  feeblest,  and  therefore  a  path  that 
Buited  the  strongest ;  and  no  one  could  make  any  mistake  about  it ;  the  wayfaring 
man,  though  a  fool,  could  not  err  therein.  Again,  note  that  this  way  of  entrance 
•was  free  to  aU.  No  one  was  prevented  from  crossing.  No  charge  was  made  for 
crossing.  Whosoever  would  was  welcome  to  enter  in.  The  fact  that  the  road  lay 
open  was  an  invitation  for  all  to  cross  to  the  goodly  land  of  rest.  Even  so,  though 
the  blessings  of  Canaan  are  not  to  be  compared  for  a  moment  with  the  glory  of 
God's  inheritance  of  grace,  stiU  entrance  into  this  heavenly  rest  is  free.  Without 
money,  and  without  price,  whosoever  will  may  enter  in.  But  we  cannot  conclude 
our  consideration  of  this  great  event  without  pointing  out  its  resemblance  to  that 
abundant  entrance  into  the  everlasting  kingdom,  ministered  to  all  those  who  with 
all  diligence  add  to  their  faith  courage,  knowledge,  temperance,  godliness, 
brotherly  kindness,  love.  The  grace  that  led  Israel  through  the  wilderness  for 
forty  years ;  the  grace  that  sustained  their  lives  amid  its  barren  sands ;  the 
grace  that  gave  them  bread  from  heaven  and  water  from  the  flinty  rock,  did  it  fail 
them  at  the  end  of  the  journey  ?  Nay  I  nay !  The  same  power  and  love  that  had 
fed  them  with  manna,  and  canopied  them  with  cloud  and  flame,  divided  the  waters 
of  Jordan  and  gave  them  abundant  entrance.  This  God  remains  our  God  for  ever. 
His  grace  can  never  faU  us.  {A.  B.  Mackay.)  The  priests  . . .  stood  firm  on  dry 
ground  in  the  midst  of  Jordan.  —The  priests  in  the  midst  of  Jordan ;  or.  Moral  firm- 
ness : — Observe  the  sublime  calmness  of  these  priests — these  leaders  of  the  people ; 
they  stood  firm  in  the  midst  of  the  waters  tiU  aU  passed  over.  The  circumstances 
suggest  two  remarks  about  their  firmness.  I.  That  it  was  rational  in  its  foun- 
dation. 1.  It  was  not  stolid  indifference.  2.  It  was  not  confidence  in  their  own 
power  to  keep  back  the  mountain  of  water.  3.  It  was  not,  of  course,  faith  in  the 
laws  of  nature.  These  men  were  firm  in  defiance  of  nature's  laws.  4.  What, 
then,  was  the  foundation  of  their  firmness?  The  word  of  God.  Now,  our  position 
is,  that  it  is  more  rational  to  trust  the  word  of  God  than  the  laws  of  nature.  (1) 
Because  His  words  bind  Him  to  action ;  the  laws  of  nature  do  not.  (2)  Because 
deviation  from  His  word  would  be  a  far  more  serious  thing  to  the  universe,  than 
deviation  from  the  laws  of  nature.  Were  He  to  deviate  from  His  word,  virtue 
would  be  at  an  end,  moral  government  would  be  disobeyed,  the  grand  barrier 
between  right  and  wrong,  truth  and  error,  heaven  and  hell,  would  be  broken  down  ; 
and  anarchy  and  misery  would  deluge  the  moral  creation.  (3)  Because  He  has 
departed  from  the  laws  of  nature,  but  has  never  swerved  an  iota  from  'Bis,  word. 
"  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,"  &c.  4.  Two  inferences  necessarily  flow 
from  the  foregoing  considerations — (1)  That  it  is  more  reasonable  to  walk  by  faith 
than  by  sight.  (2)  That  apparent  impossibilities  can  never  be  pleaded  against 
Divine  predictions.  II.  That  it  was  salutaet  in  its  mixuENCK.  1.  The  force  of 
human  influence.  The  nulhons  of  every  age  follow  the  few.  2.  The  philospphy 
of  useful  influence.    Fidelity  to  God  is  liie  spring  of  useful  influence.    {RomilixU) 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

No  river  there  ! — The  dying  words  of  Bishop  Haven  to  the  Eev.  Samuel  Upham, 
•who  went  to  see  him,  were,  "  Preach  a  complete  gospel :  a  whole  Christ,  a  whole 
heaven,  a  whole  hell,  the  whole  Bible  from  end  to  end."  His  physician  on  leaving 
said,  "Good-night,  bishop,"  and  he  answered,  "Good-night:  next  time  it  will  be 
'  Good-morning.'  "  Then  he  closed  his  eyes,  and  some  thought  the  spirit  had 
fled,  but  he  opened  them  again,  and,  looking  at  the  Eev.  Mr.  MaUalieu,  said,  "  I 
have  been  looking  for  the  cold  river,  but  there  is  no  river  there ;  only  a  broad  plain 
leading  up  to  the  throne."    Soon  afterwards  his  spirit  crossed  the  "  broad  plain." 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vebs.  1-24.  What  mean  ye  by  these  stones  7 — The  first  act  in  Canaan : — These 
stones  proclaimed  certaia  realities.  Taken  from  the  dry  bed  of  the  river,  they 
declared  God's  power  in  cutting  off  the  waters  before  the  ark  of  His  cove- 
nant; twelve  in  number,  one  stone  for  each  tribe,  they  declared  how  that  all 
Israel  had  entered  into  Canaan ;  set  up  together  in  Canaan,  they  witnessed  to 
Israel's  unity  in  that  land.  Moreover,  they  became  a  memorial  to  the  nation  of 
Jehovah's  work  for  them.  First,  these  stones  declared  Jehovah's  great  work  for 
His  people ;  even  Jordan  emptied  of  its  waters  before  the  ark  of  His  covenant,  and 
His  people  brought  thereby  iato  the  fulness  of  their  blessing.  Now  as  we  truly 
recognise  that  we  are  brought,  in  Christ,  into  the  heavenly  places,  our  first  action 
in  spirit  will  resemble  that  of  Israel :  we  shall  extol  God  for  His  power  and  might 
in  accomplishing  His  purpose  in  bringing  us  iato  such  blessing.  Christ,  our  ark, 
went  down  into  death  for  us,  exhausted  its  power,  stripped  it  of  its  might ;  and 
God  has  given  us,  who  were  dead  in  sins,  life  "  together  with  "  Christ  risen  from 
among  the  dead,  and  has  set  us  in  Him  in  the  fulness  of  blessing,  so  that  as  truly 
as  Israel  through  the  passage  of  the  Jordan  were  in  Canaan,  saints  now  are  in 
Christ  in  the  heavenly  places.  To  enter  into  this  grace,  it  is  necessary  to  keep 
before  our  hearts,  in  faith,  the  measure  of  God's  Divine  power  exercised  towards 
us,  the  exceeding  greatness  of  which  is  according  to  that  energy  and  might  of  His 
"  which  He  wrought,"  &o.  (Eph.  i.  20).  And  speaking  in  the  language  of  the  type 
under  our  consideration  as  "  clean  passed  over  "  Jordan,  the  Christian's  first  act 
should  be  the  heart  recognition  of  what  God  has  done.  We  are  across  the  river ;  to 
God  through  Christ  be  the  praise.  Next,  the  stones,  twelve  in  number,  "  accord- 
ing to  the  number  of  the  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel "  (vers.  5,  8),  spoke  of  the 
whole  of  Israel.  Christians  occupy  themselves  practically  with  spu-itual,  not 
national,  unity  ;  therefore  with  the  truth  that  all  saints  of  every  nation  are  one  in 
God's  sight  and  according  to  His  purpose.  Saints  are  seated  together  in  the 
heavenly  places  in  Christ,  the  one  common  place  of  blessing  for  all  who  believe. 
One  association  and  one  privilege  mark  all  saints,  and  all  equally  have  the  highest 
and  the  best  place.  Even  as  each  individual  believer  has  life  for  himself  "  to- 
gether"  with  Christ  risen  (Eph,  ii.  6),  so  have  all  believers  the  highest  privileges  in 
common  ;  they  are  by  God  made  "  to  sit  together  "  (Eph.  ii.  6).  The  pillar  of  twelve 
stones,  set  up  in  Gilgal,  became  a  memorial  to  the  nation  of  Jehovah's  work  for 
them.  The  question,  "  What  mean  ye  by  these  stones  ?  "  which  the  children 
would  ask  their  fathers  was  to  be  answered  by  a  relation  of  the  Lord's  doings. 
And  well  indeed  may  Christians  recount  to  their  children  what  God  has  wrought. 
Our  little  ones  should  be  grounded  in  the  great  truths  of  God's  Word.  Eedemp- 
tion,  resurrection,  and  ascension  facts  should  be  implanted  in  their  minds  and 
memories.  (H.  F.  Witherby.)  The  pile  of  stones  speaking  .-—It  is  an  outrage  to 
build  a  house  like  this,  occupying  so  much  room  in  a  crowded  thoroughfare,  and 
with  such  vast  toil  and  outlay,  unless  there  be  some  tremendous  reasons  for  doing 
it ;  and  so  I  demand  of  all  who  have  assisted  in  the  building  of  this  structure : 
"  What  mean  ye  by  these  stones?"  1.  We  mean  that  they  shall  be  an  earthly 
residence  for  Christ.  Jesus  did  not  have  much  of  a  home  when  He  was  here.  Oh, 
Jesus  1  is  it  not  time  that  Thou  hadst  a  house  ?  We  give  Thee  this.  Thou  didst 
give  it  to  us  first,  but  we  give  it  back  to  Thee.  It  is  too  good  for  us,  but  not  half 
good  enough  for  Thee.  2.  We  mean  the  communion  of  saints.  3.  We  mean  by 
these  stones  the  salvation  of  the  people.  We  did  not  build  this  church  for  mere 
worldly  reforms,  or  for  an  educational  institution,  or  as  a  platform  on  which  to 


CHAP.  IV.]  JOSHUA.  75 

read  essays  and  philosophical  disquisitions  ;  but  a  place  for  the  tremendous  work 
of  soul-saving.  Do  not  make  the  blunder  of  the  ship  carpenters  in  Noah's  time, 
who  helped  to  build  the  ark,  but  did  not  get  into  it.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
Stones  buried  and  raised : — I.  These  stones  were  most  emphatically  a  monument  of 
GBEAT  MIGHT.  The  hand  of  man  is  capable  of  great  achievements.  How  stupen- 
dous, how  unparalleled,  was  the  work  of  carrying  Israel  across  Jordan  in  this 
fashion ;  yet  how  easily,  how  quickly,  how  quietly,  was  it  all  done  1  11.  Yet  these 
stones  formed  a  monument  that  might  be  despised.  Simple  and  rude  it  was ;  it 
had  no  beauty  or  architectural  comeliness,  to  be  desired ;  it  was  nothing  more  than 
a  rough  pyramid  of  twelve  muddy  stones.  With  what  contempt  would  an 
Egyptian  look  down  upon  it.  But,  after  all,  ostentation  is  human,  simplicity  is 
Divine  ;  for  though,  from  a  human  point  of  view,  the  wonder  commemorated  here 
was  very  great,  what  was  it  from  the  Divine  ?  Nothing.  What,  after  all,  was  the 
opening  up  of  this  passage  to  Him  who  upholds  all  things  by  the  word  of  His 
power,  who  gathers  the  waters  in  the  hoUow  of  His  hand,  who  taketh  up  the  isles 
as  a  very  little  thing  ?  Nothing,  and  less  than  nothing.  It  was  easy  for  the  men 
of  Israel  to  raise  such  a  monument.  Yes ;  yet  it  was  harder  for  them  to  heap  up 
these  stones  than  for  God  to  heap  up  these  waters ;  and  all  the  might  that  reared  y 
the  pyramids  could  never  have  congealed  these  depths.    HI.  Again,  this  mond-  ^ 

MENT  HAD  A  WOKLDWIDE   REFEEENCE  AND  A  SPECIAL  APPLICATION.      Most  mOnumentS 

have  a  very  restricted  reference.  They  speak  to  a  poUtical  or  a  religious  com- 
munity ;  to  the  inhabitants  of  a  city  or  the  natives  of  a  country,  or  to  the  members 
of  a  common  faith ;  but  this  simple  monument  on  Jordan's  bank  has  a  voice  for 
all  mankind.  It  gives  a  declaration  of  God's  mighty  power,  so  clear  and  emphatic 
that  if  men  do  not  hear  its  testimony  it  is  because  they  have  stopped  their  ears. 
And  if  it  had,  for  the  human  race  as  a  whole,  a  great  lesson  to  teach,  it  was 
fraught  with  special  instruction  to  the  Israel  of  God.  To  all  men  it  cried,  *'  God  is 
mighty  "  ;  to  Israel  it  testified,  "  This  God  abides  thy  God  for  evermore."  He  is 
your  refuge  and  strength.  Therefore  this  monument  was  set  up  that  they  might 
remember  and  fear  the  Lord  for  ever  and  walk  in  His  ways,  and  do  His  command- 
ments. IV.  Other  lessons  are  taught  by  these  stones.  They  were  twelve  in 
number,  arranged  in  their  places  by  twelve  warriors,  one  from  each  tribe ;  there- 
fore it  is  plain  that  the  whole  people  are  represented  by  these  stones.  Also  there 
were  two  sets  of  twelve  stones :  one  set  in  the  bed  of  the  river,  buried  by  its  waters ; 
another  raised  from  the  bed  of  the  river,  and  piled  upon  its  bank.  Therefore  we 
have  here  the  whole  people  represented  in  two  different  aspects.  The  twelve 
buried  stones  speak  of  Israel  in  one  relation  ;  the  twelve  raised  in  another.  Think 
of  the  buried.  What  mean  ye  by  these  stones  ?  They  he  on  the  bottom  of  the 
river,  covered  by  its  muddy  waters.  They  represent  God's  chosen  people,  for  they 
are  twelve.  The  strange  place,  therefore,  in  which  they  lie,  must  be  a  representa- 
tion of  some  spiritual  and  important  truth  concerning  Israel.  What  is  it?  "By 
grace  are  ye  saved,  through  faith,  and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God." 
The  death  of  those  who  came  out  of  Egypt  made  this  very  plain.  Now  the 
children  have  arisen  in  place  of  the  fathers,  and  they  are  about  to  enter  in.  What 
is  their  title  to  the  inheritance  ?  Is  it  better  than  that  of  their  fathers  ?  Is  it  true 
that  they  are  worthy ;  that  they  have  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart,  and  have  not 
hfted  up  their  soals  unto  vanity,  nor  sworn  deceitfully?  Is  it  true  that  they  are 
righteous  ?  Can  they  claim  entrance  because  of  their  obedience  to  the  law  ?  Nay, 
by  the  law  shall  no  man  be  justified ;  and  this  burying  of  the  twelve  stones  most 
solemnly  emphasises  this  declaration.  "Flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  king- 
dom of  heaven."  The  sinner  must  leave  the  old  man  behind;  the  body  of  sin. 
must  be  destroyed  ;  we  must  be  born  again  ere  ever  we  see  or  enter  into  the  king- 
dom of  God.  Do  we  ask,  where  is  the  old  man,  the  body  of  sin  ?  The  Cross  and 
grave  of  Christ  give  answer :  it  is  gone,  clean  gone  for  ever ;  lost  sight  of,  as  these 
stones  in  the  bed  of  Jordan.  They  are  buried,  to  know  no  resurrection ;  yea,  God 
tells  us  He  has  cast  them  behind  His  back,  into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  a  far  deeper 
grave  than  Jordan.  Thr^ughAlaric  I.  the  Goths  first  learned  the  way  to  Eome. 
He  and  his  rugged  hosts  were  everywhere  invincible.  All  Italy,  luxurioi^s  and 
effeminate,  lay  at  his  feet.  He  extended  his  conquest  as  far  south  as  Sicily.  But 
at  Cosenza  in  Calabria  he  was  seized  with  a  deadly  malady.  When  he  died,  his 
followers  had  to  face  a  great  difficulty.  What  were  they  to  do  with  the  dead  body 
of  their  great  leader  ?  It  was  impossible  to  carry  it  back  over  Italian  plain  and 
snowy  Alp  to  the  dark  forests  of  his  fatherland.  It  dare  not  be  left  to  the  mockery 
and  desecration  of  the  caitiffs  he  had  conquered.    Therefore  they  determined  to 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

bury  it  in  the  bed  of  the  river  Busento.  They  set  their  captives  to  the  task  of 
diverting  the  stream  from  its  channel,  and  there  in  its  dry  bed  they  dug  the  grave 
of  Alaric.  Then,  when  he  was  buried  deep  in  his  rocky  tomb,  and  the  waters 
rolled  once  more  in  their  wonted  channel,  to  hide  for  ever  the  secret  of  this  strange 
sepulchre,  all  the  captives  were  put  to  death.  These  Goths  wished  to  give  their 
king  a  grave  which  no  hand  could  reach.  Even  such  a  grave  has  God  given  our 
sins,  and  here  in  these  stones  we  behold  a  picture  of  what  He  has  done.  We  are 
buried  with  Christ.  Eeckon  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin  but  alive  unto 
God  by  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  But  there  were  twelve  stones  raised  upon  the  bank 
as  well  as  twelve  buried  in  the  bed  of  Jordan,  and  we  may  well  ask,  "  What  mean 
ye  by  these  stones  ?  "  This  is  the  positive  side  of  the  same  truth  we  have  been 
considering.  As  the  buried  stones  speak  of  death,  so  the  raised  speak  of  resurrec- 
tion. We  are  not  only  buried  with  Christ,  but  are  also  quickened  with  Him, 
raised  with  Him,  and  seated  with  Him  in  heavenly  places.  The  twelve  buried 
stones  picture  our  place  on  account  of  sin ;  the  twelve  raised  declare  our  place  on 
account  of  righteousness.  The  first  speak  of  weakness ;  the  second  of  might.  The 
one  declares  all  "  old  things  are  passed  away  "  ;  the  other,  "  all  things  are  become 
new."  These  twelve  stones  set  on  Jordan's  bank  were  raised  from  Jordan's  bed. 
That  river,  as  it  were,  begot  them.  They  were  of  it,  from  it,  out  of  it.  Even  so 
the  Church  of  Christ  is  begotten  and  brought  forth  from  His  death.  The  agonies 
of  Christ  crucified  were  the  travail  pangs  of  the  new  creation.  As  His  people  are 
buried  with  Him,  so  are  they  quickened,  "  begotten  again  unto  a  lively  hope,  by  the 
resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead."  Yes,  it  is  a  "lively  hope."  The  great 
pyramid  of  Egypt  was  after  all  a  monument  of  despair,  "  the  eternal  abode "  of 
the  dead.  This  little  pyramid  of  Canaan  is  a  pyramid  of  hope,  placed  in  the 
goodly  land  conspicuously  and  permanently ;  reminding  those  that  believe  that  we 
are  not  only  raised  with  Christ,  but  seated  with  Him  in  heavenly  places — that  we 
are  henceforth  a  constituent  part  of  His  inheritance.  {A.  B.  Mackay.)  Voiceful 
stones  : — This  primitive  form  of  a  memorial  is  common  to  almost  all  nations.  Of 
this  character  are  the  Egyptian  obelisks  and  the  cairns  and  the  Druidical  circles  in 
England  and  Scotland.  The  text  is  the  question  of  the  children.  The  sight  of  the 
cairn  would  awaken  curiosity.  It  has  been  well  asked,  "  What  child  in  Altorf  but 
must  have  inquired  respecting  the  statue  of  William  Tell,  or  in  Lucerne  about  the 
lion  sculptured  by  Thorwaldsen  to  commemorate  the  deaths  of  the  Swiss  Guard  ?  " 
These  memorial  stones  would  remind  the  tribes  of  God's  greatness  and  good- 
ness. But  the  stones  must  have  tongues  in  order  that  their  testimony  may  be 
more  complete.  They  were  not  simply  to  be  memorial;  they  were  also  to  be 
declaratory.  .  .  .  Occupying  to-day  for  the  first  time  this  place  of  worship,  it  is 
fitting  that  we  should  ask  and  answer  the  old  question,  "What  mean  ye  by  these 
stones  ?  "  The  form  which  the  stones  have  taken  partly  answers  the  question. 
Turret,  tower,  and  spire  point  heavenward.  In  its  symmetry  and  sincerity  the 
whole  structure  preaches  the  need  of  truth  in  the  heart  and  life.  1.  These 
stones  express  our  conviction  of  the  world's  need  of  Christ's  gospel.  Sin  is  the 
terrible  fact  in  human  existence.  It  is  the  absence  of  wholeness  and  of  happiness ; 
of  Godlikeness  here,  and  of  heaven  hereafter.  It  has  separated  man  from  God, 
and  man  from  man.  It  is  the  prolific  parent  of  aU  our  woes.  In  the  fulness  of 
time  the  Christ  was  born.  One  element,  the  negative  element,  in  that  fulness  was 
the  world's  fruitless  effort  to  help  itself.  Mighty  Eome,  in  her  abject  helplessness, 
was  calling  for  a  dehverer.  Beautiful  Greece  was  stretching  out  her  hands  for  a 
healer.  Christ  was  both  to  both  so  far  as  they  received  Him.  The  experience  of 
the  world  must  be  that  of  each  individual.  God  says,  and  experience  echoes  the 
saying,  "  Thou  hast  destroyed  thyself."  Thank  God  He  speaks  this  other  word  : 
"  But  in  Me  is  thy  help."  2.  These  stones  express  our  faith  in  Christ's  gospel  to 
meet  the  world's  need.  To  each  man,  guilty  and  condemned,  it  offers,  through  the 
death  and  mediation  of  Christ,  a  full  and  free  pardon.  It  makes  the  redeemed 
here  have  foretastes  of  heaven.  It  harmonises  all  the  conflicting  interests  of 
human  society.  3.  These  stones  declare  our  faith  in  and  our  duty  toward  the 
aggressive,  the  missionary  side  of  Christ's  gospel.  It  means  to  conquer  the  world. 
It  wUl  do  it.  This  is  its  lofty  ambition  and  its  Divine  destiny.  In  this  respect  it 
stands  unique  among  the  rehgions  of  the  world.  We  are  not  to  satisfy  ourselves 
by  singing,  "Hold  the  f ort  1 "  we  must  shout,  "Storm  the  fort!"  Our  anti- 
mission  Church  is  an  anti-Christian  Church.  4.  These  stones  declare  our  faith  in 
our  distinctive  organic  order  as  a  body  of  Christians,  as  being  in  harmony  with 
Christ's  gospel.    [R.  S.  MacArthur.)        Stones  of  memorial: — I.  The  mejioiiy  of  v 


CHAP.  IT.]  JOSHUA.  77 

God's  goodness  is  honourino  to  God  Himself.  To  receive  favours  from  an 
earthly  friend,  and  then  to  forget  them,  and  to  act  as  if  they  had  never  been 
bestowed;  this  is  ingratitude,  base  and  contemptible.  How  much  worse  is  the 
conduct  of  those  who  are  insensible  to  and  negligent  of  the  favours  shown  by  God 
to  man !  Especially  should  redemption  wrought  by  the  Son  of  God  be  kept  in 
everlasting  remembrance.  The  least  we  can  do  is  to  praise  and  glorify  the  God  of 
grace.  H.  The  memobt  of  God's  goodness  is  a  stimulus  to  piety.  Remembrance 
feeds  the  flame  of  devotion,  of  love,  of  trust.  To  think  of  God's  favours  and  to  be 
thankful  is  "  a  good  thing,"  is  profitable  to  the  spiritual  life,  and  conducive  to 
fellowship  with  God,  and  to  true  happiness  and  contentment.  III.  The  memoet  of 
God's  goodness  is  an  encoueagement  in  time  of  teial,  dangee,  and  fear.  The 
distressed  and  harassed  may  weU.  call  to  mind  the  Divine  interpositions  of  the  past, 
which  will  lead  them  to  exclaim  :  "  The  Lord  hath  been  mindful  of  us  :  He  will 
help  us."  (Family  Churchman.)  The  memorial  stones : — I.  What  was  God's 
PURPOSE  ?  1.  The  memorial  was  to  be  an  aid  to  faith.  2.  It  had  the  purpose  of 
cherishing  gratitude.  3.  It  was  a  reminder  of  the  need  of  unity.  II.  What  are 
THE  prophetic  ASPECTS  OF  THIS  MEMORIAL  ?  1.  The  two  pilcs  of  stoucs,  according  to 
St.  Augustine,  represent  the  twelve  patriarchs  and  the  twelve  apostles ;  the  new 
Israel  on  the  bank  of  the  old  river,  the  old  in  the  midst  of  the  stream,  as  the 
"  buried  "  past.  Thus  the  "  memorial "  is  the  Church  of  Christ,  built  upon  the 
apostles,  the  one  Divine  Society,  which  is  founded  on  a  Eock,  and  against  which 
the  gates  of  hell  may  beat,  but  cannot  prevail ;  for  it  is  a  memorial  "for  ever." 

2.  As  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea  represents  baptism — God  "  safely  led  the  children 
of  Israel  Thy  people  through  the  Red  Sea,  figuring  thereby  Thy  holy  baptism " 
(Prayer  Book) — so  some  writers  have  seen  in  the  crossing  of  Jordan  a  figure  of  the 
pardon  for  sins  committed  after  baptism  ;  in  other  words,  an  image  of  repentance. 
Further,  as  after  passing  Jordan,  the  Passover  was  kept,  so  after  repentance  the 
Holy  Communion  is  received.  In  fact,  the  memorial  as  to  its  purposes  may  be 
compared  to  the  Holy  Eucharist;  that  is,  a  "  memorial"  of  the  death  and  passion 
of  Christ :  "  Do  this,  for  My  memorial "  ;  it  is  the  great  service  of  thanksgiving  for 
redemption,  as  its  name  announces  ;  and  it  is  a  pledge  of  unity,  for  "  we  being 
many  are  one  bread,  and  one  body :  for  we  are  all  partakers  of  that  one  Bread  " 
(1  Cor.  X.  17).  3.  Further,  as  through  Jordan  the  Hebrews  entered  the  land  of 
promise,  the  "  Holy  Land,"  so  penitence  must  be  introductory  to  a  holy  life,  which 
leads  to  heaven.  4.  It  may  be  noticed  that  by  some  modern  writers  Jordan  is 
regarded  as  the  river  of  death,  and  the  words,  "  How  wilt  thou  do  in  the  swelling 
of  Jordan?"  (Jer.  xii.  5)  to  be  applicable  to  the  fears  which  surround  death, 
through  which  all  must  pass  before  they  can  "  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  III. 
Lessons.  1.  To  sustain  our  faith  by  the  use  of  those  "  outward  and  visible  "  signs 
— the  Sacraments,  which  our  Lord  has  appointed  as  the  memorials  of  what  He  has 
wrought  for  us.  2.  To  make  our  lives  more  lives  of  thanksgiving,  and  especially 
by  receiving  the  Holy  Eucharist,  which  is  the  "  thanksgiving "  which  Christ 
ordained  to  be  offered  up  to  the  end  of  time,  "  till  He  come  "  (1  Cor.  xi.  26). 

3.  Further,  let  the  twelve  stones  remind  us  of  the  union  which  should  exist 
between  the  members  of  Christ;  for  whilst  we  are  bidden  to  "honour  all  men," 
the  apostle  says  further,  "love  the  brotherhood."  4.  The  cairn  of  stones  at 
Gilgal  should  teach  us  that  we  "as  lively  stones  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house, 
an  holy  priesthood,"  <&c.  (1  Pet.  ii.  6).  The  truest  witness  to  Christ  is  to  be 
found  in  the  lives  of  His  members,  those  who  make  Him  visible.  To  such,  the  power 
which  made  a  way  for  Israel  through  Jordan  will  not  fail  them,  and  the  promise 
will  be  fulfilled  by  the  Saviour  (Isa.  xliii.  2).  [Canon  Hutchings.)  Memorials : — 
I.  That  the  spiritual  life  should  be  one  of  continued  memorials.  Is  it  not  one 
continued  course  of  mercies  ?  And  as  these  mercies,  these  proofs  of  love  and  care 
telling  sweetly  of  the  provision  of  a  Father,  the  grace  of  a  Saviour,  the  presence  of 
a  Comforter,  are  manifested  day  by  day  and  hour  by  hour,  what  cry  so  fitting  as 
that  of  the  Psalmist,  "Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  forget  not  all  His  benefits  " ? 
How  delightful  to  look  back  and  trace  the  dealings  of  God  with  your  soul ;  or,  not 
confining  the  mind  to  spiritual  things,  to  see  how,  at  times,  especial  providences 
have  fallen  out,  telling  of  unceasing  watchfulness  on  the  part  of  the  Lord,  and 
calling  for  devout  acknowledgment  on  yours.  How  deMghtf ul  to  find  that  you  have 
not  overlooked  these  signs  of  goodness,  but  that  they  still  Uve  fresh  in  loving  recol- 
lection, and  that  here  on  earth  those  things  are  not  forgotten  which  assuredly  will 
furnish  themes  of  praise  hereafter  in  heaven.  It  has  been  so  all  along.  Observe 
Abraham  on  mount  Moriah;  Jacob  on  the  plain  by  Luz ;  Moses  after  Israel's  defeat 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  it. 

of  Amalek  at  Eephidim ;  Samuel  when  the  Philistines  had  fled  before  him ;  look 
at  the  cliildren  of  Israel  here  at  Gilgal ;  the  same  Spirit  moves  them  all.     II.  It  is 

USEFUL  TO  CONSIDER  WHAT  WE  SHOULD  COMMEMORATE,  AND  THE  MANNER  IN  WHICH  SUCH 

COMMEMORATION  SHOULD  BE  OBSERVED.  We  might  Speak  of  national  mercies,  and 
mercies  to  our  Church  ;  of  signal  benefits,  such  as  our  pure  creed,  our  heritage  of 
the  Word  of  God,  the  opening  of  wide  fields  for  Christian  enterprise,  the  revival  of 
the  spirit  of  religion,  which,  a  century  ago,  made  England  see  a  wondrous  resur- 
rection from  spiritual  death,  and  which  is  still  manifesting  itself  in  a  thousand 
forms  for  the  good  of  man.  Such  things  as  these  call  for  deep  thankfulness.  •  The 
Christian  community  which  can  recount  them  may  appropriate  the  language 
(Psa.  Ixxviii.  1-7).  But  just  in  proportion  as  thankfulness  fills  the  individual  heart 
will  the  general  mind  of  the  community  feel  its  expanding  power.  The  revival  of 
God's  work  in  this,  as  in  other  respects,  must  begin  in  the  individual,  and  the 
community  will  take  its  tone  from  the  majority.  And  if  we  learn  to  value  for 
ourselves,  by  personal  participation,  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  Jesus,  we 
are  prepared  to  appreciate  the  benefit  which  those  blessings  confer  on  the  com- 
munity :  if  we  really  set  up  our  memorials  for  saving  mercy  conferred  on  ourselves,  the 
Divine  goodness  shown  to  our  nation  and  our  Church  will  not  readily  be  overlooked. 
TIT.  Why  it  is  desirable  to  act  in  the  wat  that  has  been  pointed  out.  We  are 
prone  to  look  rather  at  our  sorrows  than  at  our  joys ;  to  brood  over  trouble  rather  than 
to  be  grateful  for  prosperity.  Poor  complaining  souls,  take  heed  lest  you  rebuke 
God.  Look  on  the  other  side.  Try  to  count  your  mercies.  "  My  mercies."  Yes  1 
The  help  God  has  given  you  over  and  over  again ;  the  difference  which  you  may 
find  between  your  trials,  which  are  so  great,  and  those  of  your  neighbour,  which  are 
even  greater ;  the  patience  and  long-suffering  with  which  God  has  borne  all  your 
repining,  your  murmuring,  your  forgetfulness  of  Him,  your  doubts  and  fears  and 
unbelief ;  the  grace  which  has  spared  you  instead  of  cutting  you  off  in  sin  and 
casting  you  down  to  hell ;  the  rich  privileges  and  means  of  spiritual  good  brought 
to  your  very  door  and  placed  within  your  reach,  set  by  your  side  from  time  to  time, 
with  merciful  perseverance  and  consideration  for  your  soul.  Let  us  be  well  assured 
that  if  we  kept  these  things  more  in  remembrance  the  spiritual  life  of  the  people  of 
God  would  iiourish  and  abound  to  an  extent  as  yet  not  generally  seen.  1.  There 
would  be  more  gratitude.  Fresh  exercises  of  praise  would  spring  from  hearts  whose 
thankfulness  would  be  from  time  to  time  more  specially  revived.  2.  There  would 
be  more  hope.  As  desires  after  mercies  might  arise,  they  would  not  be  vague,  but 
accompanied  by  well-grounded  expectations  based  on  the  past  experience  of  so  many 
mercies  remembered.  3.  There  would  be  more  faith.  When  dark  clouds  gather  we 
should  see  the  light  streak  where  they  would  ere  long  break,  the  golden  fringe  to 
show  that  the  sun  is  stiU  there.  We  should  feel  that  these  shadows  shall  be  dissi- 
pated as  others  have  been.  4.  There  would  be  more  happiness.  Where  gratitude 
and  hope  and  faith  abide,  repining  and  doubt  can  find  no  room.  (C.  D. 
Marston,    M.A.)  Memorials: — Memorials!      What    are    they?     For    what 

do  they  stand,  and  what  do  they  teach?  They  are  special  signs  of  Divine 
interposition  in  human  lives,  and  commemorate  some  event  or  circumstance 
claiming  special  remembrance  and  study.  I.  This  memorial  was  commemokativb 
AND  suggestive.  1.  It  commcmorated  a  new  departure.  They  had  not  been  this 
way  before,  they  had  never  stood  so  near  the  fulfilment  of  hope  as  they  did  now. 
This  is  typical  of  every  life.  We  all  have  our  new  departures,  times  of  marked  and 
decisive  change,  when  some  sudden  bend  in  the  road  completely  changes  the  track, 
leads  us  into  new  scenes  of  activity  or  rest,  giving  us  new  revelations  and  new 
experiences,  and  are  truly  periods  of  deep  interest,  epochs,  red-letter  days  in  our 
lives ;  we  cannot  forget  them,  and  have  raised  memorials  marking  them  as  points 
to  be  remembered  and  studied.  2.  It  commemorated  a  signal  mercy.  Every 
Christian  hfe  has  its  seasons  of  peculiar  need,  which  are  often  made  special  means 
of  grace.  And  should  he  not  raise  memorials  to  mark  both  the  trial  and  the  mercy  ? 
3.  It  commemorated  a  remarkable  deliverance.  What  a  sublime  spectacle!  When 
all  human  aid  is  unavailing,  and  nothing  can  save  but  direct  Divine  intervention, 
then  Jehovah  commands  the  waters  to  stand  up  upon  a  heap,  again  showing  His 
salvation  to  His  people.  Some  such  memorial  you  have  in  your  life.  Some  time 
of  pressing  need,  when  human  help  failed,  and  God  came  to  your  deUverance  by 
opening  up  a  path  tburough  the  deep  waters  for  you.  And  have  you  made  no  mark, 
no  sign,  put  up  no  lasting  reminder  ?  II.  The  value  of  such  memorials.  1.  They 
witness  for  God.  They  stand  at  different  points  on  the  ways  of  life,  bearing  silent 
but  telling  testimony  to  the  power  and  grace  of  the  Infinite  Father  in  some  time  oi 


CHAP.  IV.]  JOSHUA.  79 

sore  and  pressing  need,  confirming  our  faith  in  the  doctrine  of  the  conscious, 
abiding,  personal  presence  of  God  in  the  lives  of  His  people.     2.  They  remind  us  of 
mercies  received  in  the  past.     We  are  consciously  faulty  in  memory,  are  apt  to 
forget  the  blessings  already  received,  and  to  grow  impatient  and  fretful  when  things 
are  a  little  contrary  ;  then  it  is  of  service  to  us  to  go  back  a  little  in  our  history  to 
some  of  these  times  of  God's  special  nearness  to  us,  when  He  gave  us  such  unmis- 
takable proof  of  His  presence  and  grace  by  some  marked  deliverance,  some  special 
blessing,   or    some    signal  answer  to  prayer;   when  we  can  refresh  our  faulty 
memories  by  putting  our  hand  upon  some  place,  or  time,  or  event  in  our  life  that 
we  had  marked  by  a  stone  of  memorial,  as  a  record  of  faith  in  God  and  gratitude 
to  Him.     3.  They  inspire  confidence  and  hope  for  the  future.     Much  was  before 
them  to  perplex.     4.  They  check  despondency  and  gloom.     5.  They  supply  precious 
lessons  of  Divine  faithfulness.     God  would  have  us  raise  these  memorials  by  the 
way  to  remind  us  of  His  covenant  engagements.     The  past  shall  repeat  itself  in  our 
future.     6.  These  memorials  are  of  service  to  others.     The  pillar  at  Gilgal  was  not 
only  to  be  a  memento  of  the  sovereign  mercy  of  God  to  those  who  had  actually 
witnessed  the  cutting  off  of  the  waters  of  Jordan,  but  it  was  to  supply  to  posterity 
some  precious  lessons  of  Divine  majesty  and  love.     Much  so  it  is  with  the  memorials 
of  Christian  lives — they  exert  a  helping  influence  on  other  Uves.   7.  These  memorials 
supply  incentives  to  increased  devotion,  and  stimulate  to  loftier  praise.     In  this 
day   of    scepticism,    coldness,   indifference,    and    practical    infidelity,   when    the 
actual  presence  of   God  in  individual  lives  is  more  or  less  ignored,   it  is  both 
refreshing  and  reassuring  to  take  up  Christian  biography  and  hear  how  the  holy 
men  and  women  who  have  passed  into  the  Father's  house  accounted  for  similar 
events  in  their  Uves.    I  have  sometimes  seen  family  Bibles  marked  with  peculiar 
hieroglyphics  which  a  stranger  could  not  read  or  understand ;  but  ask  the  husband 
or  wife  to  tell  you  what  these  marks  mean,  and  you  will  find  that  each  has  a 
history  precious  and  sweet  to  the  marker.     They  are  pillars  that  have  been  raised 
to  remind  them  of  some  special  answer  to  prayer,  when  they  pleaded  that  promise ; 
or  when  some  extraordinary  light  broke  upon  the  mind,  on  a  certain  day,  as  they 
pondered  and  prayed  over  that  verse ;  or  perhaps  it  was  a  literal  f  uLfilment  of 
another  promise  on  which  they  had  rested  in  a  time  of  distressing  calamity,  and 
they  have  placed  these  memorials  there  to  call  to  mind  the  signal  mercy  of  God  in 
their  time  of  urgent  need,  and  they  would  as  soon  doubt  the  need  as  they  would 
the  source  of  supply.     "God  did  it  for  us,"  they  say,  "as  surely  as  He  divided 
Jordan  for  Israel  to  pass  over  to  Canaan."    I  have  also  heard  matured  Christian 
men  converse  together  on  God's  dealings  with  them,  and  have  felt  a  strange  thrill 
pass  through  me  as  one  of  them  has  put  his  hand  upon  some  pillar  in  his  life  and 
said,  "  Here  God  met  me,  and  I  communed  with  Him.    It  was  a  time  of  bitter  pain 
and  need,  and  I  was  bowed  down  to  earth  with  the  burden,  and  was  fainting  by  the 
wayside,  but  the  Lord  drew  very  near,  and  I  seemed  to  hear  His  voice  speaking  to 
me,   and  asking  me  to  tell  Him  about  the  pain,  and  I  was  drawn  out  to   tell 
Him    aU,    and   He   blessed   me    there,  by  giving  in  a  way  marvellous  to  me 
just  what  I  needed;  I  rose  up  a  strong  man,  and  the  grace  was  so  like  a 
miracle  that  I  put  up  this  memorial,   and  this  spot  is  very  dear  to  me,  for 
here  I  saw  God  face  to  face  and  my  life  is  preserved."     (J.  Higgins.)        The  stones 
buried  in  the  Jordan : — As  a  memorial  of  this  wonderful  passage,  twelve  stones 
were  selected  from  the  rocky  bed  of  the  river,  one  for  each  of  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel ;  and  these  were  borne  across  before  them  on  the  shoulders  of  twelve  men, 
and  planted  on  the  upper  terrace  of  the  valley  beyond  the  reach  of  the  aimual 
inundation.    In  this  manner  was  formed  the  first  sanctuary  of  the  Holy  Land, 
which  was  a  circle  of  upright  stones — like  one  of  the  so-called  Druidical  ckcles  in 
which  our  pagan   ancestors  worshipped  in   our  own   country.    But   besides  this 
memorial  which  was  set  up  on  the  western  bank  of  the  Jordan,  there  was  another 
set  up  in  the  bed  of  the  river  itself.     In  the  place  where  the  feet  of  the  priests  who 
bore  the  ark  of  the  covenant  stood,  in  the  centre  of  the  channel,  twelve  stones  like 
those  which  had  been  carried  across  to  the  opposite  bank  were  arranged  probably 
in  the  same  manner  ;  and  when  the  river,  whicli  had  been  temporarily  driven  back- 
wards to  allow  the  Israelites  to  cross,  returned  to  its  forsaken  bed,  its  dark,  muddy 
waters  flowed  over  the  buried  stones  and  hid  them  for  ever  from  view.     Thus  there 
were  two  monuments  of  the  miraculous  passage  of  the  Jordan  taken  from  the 
materials  of  its  owil  bed  ;  one  that  gave  rise  to  the  sacred  shrine  of  Gilgal,  which 
was  for  a  long  time  the  appointed  place  of  worship  in  the  land  ;  and  another  that 
was  buried  out  of  sight  for  ever  in  the  muddy  ooze  of  the  deep  rushing  river.     The 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

sacred  narrative  tells  us  what  were  the  purpose  and  meaning  of  the  monument  that 
stood  on  the  dry  land  and  was  visible  to  every  eye  ;  but  we  have  to  find  out  what 
were  the  purpose  and  meaning  of  the  monument  that  was  invisible  beneath  the 
waters  of  the  river.  The  place  where  they  entered  the  Holy  Land  is  unique.  There 
is  no  other  place  like  it  in  the  world.  It  is  the  deepest  chasm  on  the  surface  of  the 
earth — at  a  great  depth  below  the  level  of  the  sea.  Do  we  not  see  in  this  circum- 
stance a  symbol  of  the  deep  repentance  and  self-abasement  which  a  people  so 
sensual,  so  ignorant,  required  before  they  could  be  fitted  to  occupy  the  heights  of 
worship  in  God's  holy  heritage  ?  Then  look  further  at  the  fact  that  the  time  when 
the  IsraeUtes  crossed  the  Jordan  was  the  spring-time,  which  in  Palestine  is  the 
commencement  of  the  barley-harvest.  We  are  told  elsewhere  in  Scripture  that  the 
harvest  is  emblematical  of  the  judgment.  It  was  therefore  a  time  of  judgment 
when  the  Israelites  crossed  the  river ;  their  past  sins,  their  numerous  rebellions, 
and  outbursts  of  unbelief,  deserved  condemnation  and  punishment ;  their  iniquities 
rose  up  against  them,  and  demanded  their  exclusion  from  the  land  of  promise  as 
unworthy.  But  God  in  His  great  mercy  held  back  the  waters  of  the  Jordan,  the 
waters  of  judgment  and  death,  which  would  otherwise  have  overwhelmed  them, 
whilst  His  holy  ark  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  stream,  and  Israel  crossed  in  safety; 
a  token  surely  that  though  He  was  angry  with  them.  His  anger  had  passed  away, 
and  He  was  about  to  give  them  double  for  all  their  sins.  Look  further  still  at  the 
significant  fact  that  when  the  Israelites  had  erected  their  first  sanctuary  on  the 
other  side  of  Jordan,  on  the  soil  of  the  Holy  Land,  which  by  this  solemn  act  became 
their  own  inheritance,  they  were  immediately  circumcised,  and  thus  consecrated 
anew  to  the  Lord,  made  new  creatures,  as  it  were,  from  their  birth  to  Him.  So  that 
we  see  in  this  incident,  as  well  as  in  the  circumstance  that  the  older  generation 
which  had  left  Egypt  all  perished  in  the  wilderness,  and  only  their  children  entered 
the  Holy  Land,  what  we  may  regard  as  the  origin  and  illustration  of  our  Lord's 
saying,  "  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as  little  children,  ye  caimot  enter  the 
kingdom  of  heaven."  Seeing,  then,  that  all  the  incidents  and  circumstances  of  the 
passage  of  the  Israelites  across  the  Jordan  form  a  very  focus  of  symbolism,  we  are 
surely  warranted  in  looking  for  a  spiritual  significance  in  the  burying  of  the 
memorial  stones  in  the  bed  of  the  river.  The  Jordan  was  a  boundary  river, 
separating  between  the  wilderness  and  the  promised  land.  It  flowed  down  to  the 
dreary,  lifeless  solitude  of  the  Dead  Sea.  Its  waters,  laden  with  mud,  were  dark 
and  drumly,  and  concealed  their  bed  and  whatever  they  flowed  over  completely. 
Its  course  also  was  very  rapid  and  impetuous.  In  all  these  respects  it  was  a  most 
expressive  symbol  to  the  Israelites.  The  transition  from  the  wilderness  to  Canaan 
was  not  made  over  continuous  dry  land  ;  a  water-boundary  was  interposed,  through 
which  they  had  to  pass.  And  did  not  this  teach  them  that  in  the  passage  from  the 
wandering  hfe  of  the  desert  to  a  settled  home  in  the  land  of  promise  they  were  not 
to  continue  the  same  persons  in  the  new  circumstances  that  they  bail  been  in  the 
old ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  were  to  undergo  a  moral  change,  a  spiritual  reformation. 
They  were  to  be  made  a  holy  nation,  in  order  to  be  fit  occupants  of  the  Holy  Land. 
Their  passage  of  the  Jordan  was  therefore  a  baptism  of  repentance ;  the  river  at  the 
entrance  of  the  Holy  Land,  like  the  laver  at  the  entrance  of  the  tabernacle,  afforded 
a  bath  of  purification ;  and  the  memorial  stones  laid  in  the  bed  of  the  river,  over 
which  the  waters,  when  they  had  safely  crossed  on  dry  land,  returned,  burying  them 
for  ever  from  sight,  represented  the  fate  which  should  have  been  theirs  had  God 
dealt  with  them  according  to  their  sins.  And  just  as  the  scape-goat  carried  away 
the  sins  of  the  people,  confessed  on  its  head,  into  the  wilderness,  into  a  land  of 
f orgetfulness,  so  the  dark,  muddy  waters  of  the  Jordan  carried  away  the  stones 
which  represented  the  sins  of  the  Israelites  into  the  Dead  Sea,  there  to  be  engulphed 
for  ever.  All  baptism  is  in  a  spiritual  sense  the  crossing  of  a  boundary.  When  a 
child  is  baptized  it  crosses  a  boundary  between  nature  and  grace — between  ignorance 
and  knowledge.  And  when  in  later  life  we  are  baptized  with  a  spiritual  baptism, 
i)orn  again  of  water  and  the  Spirit,  we  cross  the  boundary  between  spiritual  death 
and  life— from  the  kingdom  of  Satan  to  that  kingdom  which  is  not  meat  and  drink, 
but  righteousness  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  Now  the  river  of  baptism 
is  a  river  of  death.  In  crossing  it  we  die  to  sin  and  live  to  righteousness.  In 
entering  into  the  new  life  the  old  life  perishes.  Through  the  death  of  the  old  man 
there  is  the  resurrection  of  the  new  man.  All  that  is  connected  with  the  old  life  of 
sin  and  unbehef  is  taken  from  us  and  carried  down  to  the  Dead  Sea.  The  body  of 
sin  is  drowned  in  the  waters  of  forgiveness,  and  shall  no  more  rise  up  against  us. 
Like  the  stones  in  the  bed  of  the  Jordan,  there  is  no  resurrection  for  that  which 


CHAP.  IT.]  JOSHUA.  81 

was  connected  with  our  former  dead  sinful  selves.  And  how  precious  is  the  signifi- 
cance of  the  buried  stones  when  looked  at  in  this  light !  It  is  not  a  truth  that 
pleases  the  intelligence  by  its  ingenuity  only ;  it  is  a  truth  that  satisfies  the  heart 
by  its  suitableness  to  its  wants.  How  comforting  and  reassuring  is  the  thought 
that  when,  through  faith  in  Christ,  we  have  crossed  from  a  state  of  nature  to  a  state 
of  grace,  all  our  sins  are  cast  into  the  sea  of  God's  mercy.  They  are  as  com- 
pletely buried  out  of  sight  as  the  stones  in  the  ooze  of  the  Jordan.  The  peace  that 
is  like  a  river  and  the  righteousness  that  is  like  the  waves  of  the  sea  flow  over  them. 
(H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  The  witness  of  the  stones: — 1.  They  were  stones  of 
witness,  for  in  after-years  they  powerfully  proclaimed  that  the  miracle  of  dividing 
the  water  of  the  Jordan  was  true,  since  they  were  raised  at  the  very  time ;  they  were 
erected  publicly  in  the  sight  of  the  people,  and  no  one  would  have  dared  to  make  such 
a  monument,  and  to  declare  that  it  commemorated  such  an  event,  had  the  miracle 
never  taken  place.  Scripture  miracles  are  attested  by  witnesses,  which  attestation 
distinguishes  them  from  the  so-caUed  miracles  of  the  heathen  world.  2.  And  the 
stones  of  Gilgal  were  stones  of  encouragement,  for  when  Israel  looked  on  them,  and 
recollected  that  they  recalled  God^^'ETpoXrerrTraTloubt  could  be  felt  that  God  was  able 
to  make  their  enterprise  a  success.  When  the  great  cities,  vast  wealth,  and  mighty 
armies  of  the  Canaanites  were  considered,  many  a  Hebrew  might  feel  his  heart  sink 
within  him  as  he  looked  on  the  rude  and  undisciplined  host  which  Joshua  had  led 
across  the  Jordan.  But  a  glance  at  the  stones  of  the  circle  of  Gilgal  would  dispel 
all  such  fears,  and  he  would  think — "  The  mighty  Jehovah  who  divided  the  waters 
of  Jordan  is  on  our  side ;  and  against  the  power  that  cleft  asunder  the  waves  of 
that  river  what  can  the  might  of  the  Amorites  avail  ?  Jehovah  is  with  us,  and 
against  Him  whose  word  divided  Jordan  vain  is  the  power  of  the  Canaanite,  and 
our  victory  is  absolutely  sure."  3.  But  while  these  stones  gave  encouragement  to 
Israel,  they  bore  witness  in  a  different  manner  to  their  enemies,  for  to  the  Canaanites 
they  were  stones  of  warning.  How  could  Amorite  or  Hittite  withstand  invaders 
whose  God  possessed  the  power  of  dividing  the  waters  of  Jordan  ?  They  had  run 
riot  in  sin ;  they  had  stifled  conscience  :  they  had  despised  warning ;  and  now  the 
day  of  mercy  was  past,  and  the  avengers  were  upon  them,  and  who  could  hope  to 
resist  their  power  and  to  escape  their  swords,  when  their  God  made  the  waters  of 
Jordan  to  stand  as  a  heap  in  the  day  when  His  people  passed  over  ?  Sin  wiU  not 
go  for  ever  unpunished ;  God's  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man,  and  cor- 
ruption shall  not  with  impunity  defile  the  fairest  portions  of  a  groaning  creation  : 
but  when  the  day  of  grace  has  passed,  the  day  of  vengeance  shall  certainly  follow. 
The  stones  in  Gilgal  are  gone,  the  circle  is  destroyed,  and  the  stony  witness  of 
encouragement  and  warning  is  no  longer  borne ;  but  there  are  stones  around  us 
now  which  give  their  witness,  and  our  ears  must  be  heavy  if  we  do  not  hear,  and 
our  minds  dull  if  we  do  not  understand,  the  testimony  that  they  deUver.  "  What 
mean  these  stones?"  1.  They  show  God's  power;  for  who  could  make  such 
mighty  foundation  rocks,  and  after  their  formation  could  heave  them  up  into  their 
present  lofty  heights,  but  a  Being  possessed  of  almighty  power  ?  2.  What  wisdom, 
too,  is  exhibited  in  their  formation!  What  a  wonderful  skill  is  shown  in  the 
selection  of  their  constituent  elements,  and  in  their  combination  according  to  a  fixed 
design  I  3.  And  what  goodness  also  do  these  stones  of  the  hills  manifest  ?  for  how 
useful  they  are  to  man,  and  how  it  stimulates  his  inventive  faculty  to  quarry,  shape, 
and  erect  them  as  monuments  to  beautify  the  creations  of  his  genius  !  Man  puts 
up  milestones  to  measure  the  length  of  his  journey,  and  God  also  erects  milestones 
to  mark  how  man  himself  is  advancing  on  that  journey  which  we  are  all  travelling. 
What  is  our  life  but  a  journey  ?  ever  advancing  and  ceaselessly  progressing  day  by 
day,  month  by  month,  and  year  by  year.  Life's  journey  is  to  many  painful  and 
wearisome.  The  morning  of  life,  with  its  freshness,  is  gone ;  the  noonday  sun 
beats  fiercely  on  our  heads  ;  the  novelty  of  changing  experiences  has  passed  away ; 
and  as  we  slowly  advance  along  the  highway  of  daily  life,  our  hearts  begin  to  get 
weary,  and  we  too  become  discouraged  "  because  of  the  way."  God  puts  up  His 
milestones  to  mark  our  progress  on  life's  journey,  and  as  we  pass  them  successively, 
it  is  solemn  to  notice  their  witness  and  their  character.  The  eyesight  begins 
to  grow  dim:  slowly,  indeed,  but  surely;  and  we  treat  the  fact  almost  with 
indifference.  It  is  a  mere  common  event,  but  it  is  another  milestone  on  the  road  of 
life,  to  show  that  the  end  will  before  long  draw  near.  The  hearing  is  duUed. 
Pleasant  sounds  can  no  more  be  enjoyed,  and  the  harmonies  of  nature's  and  of 
human  music  gratify  us  no  longer.  We  quietly  accept  the  inevitable,  perhaps  with 
a  sigh,  bat  at  all  events  with  resignation,  knowing  that  it  must  be  so ;  and  in  the 

6 


'■^' 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

heavy  ear  we  recognise  another  of  God's  milestones.  Memory  now  begins  to  falL 
We  cannot  trust  it  as  formerly,  and  do  not  attempt  to  tax  its  power  for  fear  that  it 
should  prove  treacherous.  Failing,  capricious  memory!  what  is  it  but  another 
milestone  placed  by  God  by  the  side  of  the  road  of  life  to  tell  us  that  we  have 
passed  over  the  greater  part  of  our  journey  and  are  drawing  near  to  home  ?  The 
milestones  of  the  way,  how  differently  they  affect  different  people !  Here  is  a  man 
going  away  from  his  country,  seeking  his  place  of  abode  in  a  distant  land,  and 
leaving  behind  him  all  he  holds  dear  in  thiS  world :  his  lands,  his  treasures,  and 
his  friends.  Milestones  are  sad  things  to  him,  for  they  tell  him  that  his  time  in 
the  land  in  which  all  his  pleasure  is  found  is  rapidly  passing  away.  But  here  is 
another  man,  returning  to  his  home.  He  has  been  in  a  foreign  land ;  has  made 
his  fortune :  has  landed  on  his  return  at  the  well-known  port,  and  is  journeying 
rapidly  along  the  highroad  to  his  loved  and  long-expected  home.  He  knows  a 
welcome  is  there :  dear  ones  are  all  looking  out  for  his  arrival,  and  his  greeting 
will  be  joyous,  while  he  will  not  merely  meet  them,  but  will  never  leave  them  again. 
How  quickly  he  walks !  How  slowly  the  milestones  seem  to  pass  !  The  heat  of  the 
sun,  the  length  of  the  way,  the  ups  and  downs  of  the  road,  are  all  nothing  to  him, 
for  the  thought  of  the  home  ever  drawing  nearer  and  nearer  makes  him  take  no 
notice  of  them  whatever.  So  it  should  be  with  us.  We  have  had,  perhaps,  our 
morning  of  life,  and  it  may  be  that  the  journey  is  beginning  to  grow  wearisome ; 
but  let  us  think  less  of  the  road  and  more  of  the  home.  {D.  G.  Whitley.) 
The  priests  .  .  .  stood  .  .  .  until  everything  was  finished. — The  way  of  dffi- 
culty  •• — I.  Eemembrance   of   God   is   the   only  encouragement  through  which 

SOME  PARTS  OF  LIFE'S  WAT  BECOME  BEAEABLE  AND  PASSABLE.  11.  God's  REGARD  TO 
THE    GREATER   TRIALS    OF    OUR   LIFE    DOES   NOT  CALL  OFF    HiS  ATTENTION  FROM  DETAILS. 

He  not  only  parted  the  waters,  but  He  waited  in  the  river,  both  in  power  and 
presence,  "until  everything  was  finished."  IH.  The  general  commandments  of 
THE  Bible  are  meant  to  regulate  and  control  the  specific  acts  of  our  life. 
'*  According  to  all  that  Moses,"  &o.  But  Moses  had  never  given  any  commands 
touching  the  actual  passage  of  the  Jordan.  Yet  Moses  had  commanded  an  implicit 
reliance  on  Divine  guidance  and  a  careful  obedience  to  Divine  requirements. 
Such  general  words  covered  all  the  particulars  of  the  case.  There  are  many 
things  in  the  family,  in  business,  in  the  Church,  and  in  the  world,  which  no 
specific  precept  may  touch ;  there  is  absolutely  no  place  which  we  can  occupy  in 
our  daily  life  which  in  principle  and  in  spirit  is  not  covered  by  the  Scriptures. 
IV.  While  Divine  patience  never  wearies  in  giving  us  necessary  help,  when 
God  goes  before  we  should  promptly  follow.  "  The  people  hasted  and  passed 
over,"  Whatever  motive  actuated  their  haste,  haste  was  the  right  thing  for  the 
time.  God  does  not  work  that  we  may  idly  look  on.  His  manifest  energy  is  a 
call  for  our  marked  diligence   (2  Sam.  v.  24).    V.  God,  who  makes  way  in  the 

VAN    OF   OUR   difficulties,    IS   NO   LESS   NECESSARY   TO    SECURE     OUR    REAR      (VCI.      11  ; 

Deut.  XXV,  17,  18).  Not  only  that  He  may  see  His  people,  but  that  He  may  save 
them.  He  besets  them  "behind  and  before."  {F.  G.  Marchant.)  The  people 
hasted. — Probably  the  majority  of  the  people  were  moved  by  fear,  but  some 
feelings  may  have  led  some  of  the  host  to  hasten,  and  other  considerations  others. 
I.  The  haste  of  feab.  This  also  leads  to  Canaan.  U.  The  haste  of  diligence. 
With  so  much  to  be  done,  each  had  need  to  remember,  "the  night  cometh." 
in.  The  haste  of  reverent  obedience.  God  does  network  mightily  and  command 
urgently  that  men  may  move  slothfully.  IV.  The  haste  of  compassion.  While 
the  people  tarried,  the  priests  must  wait.  No  man  ever  idles  without  expense  and 
inconvenience  to  some  one  else,  V.  The  hastb  of  unconscious  influence.  The 
quick  movement  of  a  few  would  communicate  itseK  to  all.  Our  pace  times 
that  of  our  companion,  and  his  that  of  others.  (Ibid.)  Quick  use  of  opjtor- 
tunity  .-—They  made  the  best  use  of  the  golden  opportunity  afforded  them,  and 
with  the  utmost  alacrity  and  diligence  hastened  across  the  river  while  thus  laid 
bare  for  them.  The  torrent  was  restrained  by  the  mighty  power  of  God  to  afford 
the  people  an  opportunity  to  pass  over  dry-shod.  But  there  was  no  time  for 
presumptuous  delays,  as  though  they  could  count  upon  an  indefinite  prolongation  of 
this  favoured  season,  and  might  postpone  crossing  until  it  suited  their  pleasure,  in 
the  confidence  that  God's  grace  would  wait  upon  their  dilatory  movements.  There 
was  no  disposition  on  the  part  of  any  to  remain  as  long  as  they  could  on  the 
wilderness  side,  with  any  chance  of  getting  into  Canaan  before  the  waters  should 
rush  back  again  into  their  accustomed  channel.  (JF,  H.  Green,  D.D.)  The 
people'i  haste  : — The  priests  and  the  ark  stood  still ;  but  "  the  people  hasted  and 


CHAP.  IV.]  JOSHUA.  83 

passed  over. "  Many  commentators  assume  that  they  hastened  from  fear.  Such 
haste  would  have  been  both  utterly  unseemly,  and  an  evil  omen  for  the  conquest. 
There  were  other  reasons  for  making  all  possible  haste.  "Were  they  not  keeping 
the  priests  of  God  with  their  arms  outstretched,  to  bear  up  their  holy  burden  ? 
And  moreover,  there,  distinct  before  them,  beautiful  in  the  soft,  rich  light  of  the 
early  morning,  lay  the  homes,  and  vineyards,  and  fields,  which  they  were  to 
possess.  A  few  steps,  and  their  feet  would  be  in  Canaan ;  a  few  moments,  and 
the  weary  waiting  of  years  would  end.  As  the  tired  labourer  hastes  at  the  first 
glimpse  of  his  home,  so  must  they  have  hastened.  There  may  have  been,  also, 
some  innocent  rivalry  to  be  among  the  first  to  touch  the  further  shore.  All  these 
motives,  indeed,  might  easily  combine  as  they  hastened  and  passed  over.  And 
shall  not  the  thought  that  Jesus  waits  till  all  be  gathered  in — waits,  without 
coming  yet  "  in  His  power  and  great  glory  " — shall  not  this  thought  stir  up  His 
Church,  not  only  to  be  looking  for,  but  hastening  His  coming  ?  The  love  of  Chi-ist 
constraining  us,  wiU  urge  us  onward.  And  who  that  has  had  "  the  eyes  of  the 
understanding  opened  "  to  behold  what  are  "  the  riches  of  glory  "  of  this  inheri- 
tance in  Christ  Jesus  would  not  fain  "  to  his  speed  add  wings,"  that  he  might 
enter  it  and  at  once  possess  it  ?  {S.  F.  Smiley.)  Come  ye  up  out  of  Jordan. — 
Firm  in  duty  : — We  can  fancy  how  the  people  who  had  reached  the  western  shore 
lined  the  bank,  gazing  on  the  group  in  the  channel,  who  stood  still  waiting  God's 
command  to  relieve  them  at  their  post.  The  word  comes  at  last,  and  is  im- 
mediately obeyed.  May  we  not  learn  the  lesson  to  stand  fixed  and  patient  wherever 
God  sets  us,  as  long  as  He  does  not  call  us  thence  ?  God's  priests  should  be  hke 
the  legionary  on  guard  in  Pompeii,  who  stuck  to  his  post  while  the  ashes  were 
falling  thick,  and  was  smothered  by  them,  rather  than  leave  his  charge  without 
his  commander's  orders.  One  graphic  word  pictures  the  priests  lifting,  or,  as  it 
might  be  translated,  "  plucking,"  the  soles  of  their  feet  from  the  shmy  bottom  into 
which  they  had  settled  down  in  their  long  standing  still.  They  reach  the  bank, 
marching  as  steadily  with  their  sacred  burden  as  might  be  over  so  rough  and 
slippery  a  road.  The  first  to  enter  were  the  last  to  leave  the  river's  bed.  God's 
ark  "goes  before  us,"  and  "is  our  rearward."  He  besets  us  behind  and  before, 
and  all  dangerous  service  is  safe  if  begun  and  ended  in  Him.  The  one  point  made 
prominent  is  the  instantaneous  rush  back  of  the  impatient  torrent  as  soon  as  the 
curb  was  taken  off.  Like  some  horse  rejoicing  to  be  free,  the  tawny  flood  pours 
down,  and  soon  everything  looks  "  as  aforetime,"  except  for  the  new  rock,  piled  by 
human  hands,  round  which  the  waters  chafed.  The  dullest  would  understand 
what  had  wrought  the  miracle  when  they  saw  the  immediate  consequence  of  the 
ark's  leaving  its  place.  Cause  and  effect  seldom  come  thus  close  together  in  God's 
dealings  ;  but  sometimes  He  lets  us  see  them  as  near  each  other  as  the  lightning 
and  the  thunder,  that  we  may  learn  to  trace  them  in  faith,  when  centuries  part 
them.  How  the  people  would  gaze  as  the  hurrying  stream  covered  up  their  path, 
and  would  look  across  to  the  further  shore,  almost  doubting  if  they  had  really 
stood  there  that  morning  !  They  were  indeed  "  Hebrews  " — men  from  the  other 
side — now,  and  would  set  themselves  to  the  dangerous  task  before  them  with 
courage.  Well  begun  is  half  done ;  'and  God  would  not  divide  the  river  for 
them  to  thrust  them  into  a  tiger's  den,  where  they  would  be  torn  to  pieces. 
Retreat  was  impossible  now.  A  new  page  in  their  history  was  turned.  The  desert 
was  as  unreachable  as  Egypt.  The  passage  of  the  Jordan  rounded  off  the  epoch 
which  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea  introduced,  and  began  a  new  era.  {A.  Maclaren, 
JD.D.)  Life  a  journey  : — I.  That  human  life  in  this  world  is  a  journey.  1. 
Change  of  scenery.  2.  Approach  to  an  end.  3.  Unsettledness  of  feeling.  Life's 
journey  is — (1)  Unremitting ;  (2)  irretraceable.  H.  That  human  lefk  in  this 
WORLD  is  a  journey  WHICH  WILL  HAVE  AN  END.  1.  OuT  end  is  Certain.  2.  It  is 
solemn.  IH.  Human  life  in  this  world  will  have  an  end  which  may  be  glorious. 
1.  It  may  be  glorious  in  the  courage  of  the  traveller.  2.  It  may  be  glorious  in 
the  destination  reached.  {Homilist.)  Those  twelve  stones  .  .  .  did  Joshua 
pitch  In  Gilgal. — The  double  monument  of  the  passage  of  the  Lord^s  host  across  the 
Jordan : — Many  fine  allegories  have  been  reared  upon  the  foundation  of  the 
twenty-four  stones  that  were  placed,  twelve  in  the  river-bed,  and  twelve  at  the 
encampment  in  Gilgal.  Some  have  spiritualised  them  as  types  of  death  and  the 
resurrection ;  others  have  seen  in  them  a  representation  of  the  prophets  and 
apostles  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  dispensations.  They  mean  that  the 
passage  of  the  Israelites  over  Jordan  is — I.  A  real  event.  The  history  that 
records  it  is  not  an  oriental  poem  or  a  patriotic  legend.    It  is  not  a  fine  conception 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

of  an  impassioned  imagination.  It  is  not  an  exaggeration.  We  have  before  us  a 
plain  matter  of  actual  history.  II.  A  significant  event.  1.  God  was  glorified. 
He  was  herein  exhibited  as  "  the  living  God  "  (chap.  iii.  10),  and  "  the  Lord  of  all  the 
earth  "  (chap.  iii.  11).  2.  Joshua,  moreover,  was  magnified,  and  shown  to  be  Moses' 
divinely-sanctioned  successor  (chap.  iii.  7).  3.  The  Israelites,  moreover,  were 
assured.  With  the  remembrance  of  the  naked  channel  of  Jordan,  what  cause  of 
trepidation  can  remain  ?  4.  By  this  miracle  their  enemies  were  appalled — namely, 
the  inland  Amorites,  the  immediate  spectators ;  and  the  Canaanites,  or  coast 
tribes  (Num.  xiii.  30)  in  the  distance,  who  heard  the  report  (chap.  v.  1).  The 
passage  took  place  "  right  against  Jericho  "  (chap.  iii.  16).  Oh,  portentous  sight  for 
the  inhabitants  of  that  fortress !  III.  A  pattern  eatent.  It  was  with  apparent 
reference  to  this  event  that  God  promised  His  people  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet 
Isaiah,  "  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,"  &c.  Let  us,  then,  claim  the 
promise,  and  embrace  the  consolation  that  this  history  declares  to  us  for  ourselves. 
And  what  can  we  do  in  these  "  swellings  of  Jordan  "  ?  Here  is  an  answer  to  our 
misgivings,  "  The  Lord  wiU  do  wonders  among  you  \  "  IV.  A  symbolical  event. 
1.  On  the  one  hand,  we  may  regard  the  passage  of  the  Jordan  as  a  glorious  and 
*•  abundant  entrance  "  into  the  promised  inheritance.  2.  On  the  other  hand,  we 
may  regard  it  as  illustrating,  not  only  the  triumphant  close,  but  also  the  hopeful 
beginning  of  the  believer's  course,  and  conversion,  not  death,  will  be  the  aspect  of 
Christian  experience  that  we  shall  recognise.  Application  :  1.  Are  you  yet  in  your 
sins  ?  and  do  you  long  to  experience  the  saving  change  of  the  new  birth  ?  But 
does  a  very  torrent  of  difficulties  seem  to  roll  at  their  fullest  height  between  you 
and  the  peace  and  pardon  you  long  to  enjoy  ?  Go  forward,  and  fear  not.  Jesus 
Himself  calls  you.  He  Himself  accompanies  you.  Every  hindrance  will  vanish 
if  you  obey  His  word.  2.  Are  you  already  amongst  God's  people?  Have  you 
anxieties,  difficulties,  obstructions,  in  your  course  of  life?  He  who  opened  a 
highway  through  the  Jordan  is  also  your  helper.  3.  Is  Jesus  your  hope,  and  do 
you  nevertheless  quail  when  you  think  of  the  hour  of  your  departure  hence,  when 
you  must  leave  all  you  love  here  below?  (Isa.  xliii.  1-8).  (G.  W.  Butler,  M.A.) 
The  stones  of  memorial : — I.  Great  events  deserve  commemoration.  In  them 
God  is  the  teacher.  Men  have  always  been  ready  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of 
their  own  great  deeds.  By  memorial  structures,  memorial  days,  memorial 
observances,  they  have  sought  to  keep  alive  the  knowledge  of  their  achievements 
and  to  foster  a  regard  for  the  sentiments  which  lived  in  them.  It  has  been  com- 
mon for  all  men  in  every  age  to  act  upon  the  principle  which  Daniel  V/ebster  - 
stated  when  the  corner-stone  of  the  Bunker  Hill  Monument  was  laid  :  "  Human 
beings  are  composed  not  of  reason  only,  but  of  imagination  also,  and  sentiment, 
and  that  is  neither  wasted  nor  misapplied  which  is  appropriated  to  the  purpose  of 
giving  right  direction  to  sentiments,  and  opening  proper  springs  of  feeling  in  the 
heart."  But  no  memorial  structure  elaborately  reared  to  perpetuate  right  feeling 
and  sentiment  could  subserve  this  end  as  fitly  and  fully  as  did  the  rude  circle  of 
stones  set  up  at  Gilgal.  It  nursed  no  pride  of  ancestry.  It  declared  God's 
"mighty  acts."  Eeminded  by  this  rude  memorial,  one  generation  praised  His 
works  to  another.  They  were  led  to  speak  of  the  glory  of  His  kingdom,  and  to 
talk  of  His  power.  H.  God  expects  the  children  to  become  interested  in  great 
EVENTS  OF  the  PAST.  It  was  for  the  children's  sake  that  the  circle  of  stones  was  set 
up  at  Gilgal.  It  was  to  awaken  their  curiosity.  God  wishes  the  children  to  ask  a 
great  many  questions.  In  this  way  He  would  have  them  learn  what  He  has  been 
doing  for  His  people  in  past  ages.  III.  God  expects  the  fathers  to  be  ready  to 
ANSWER  THE  CHILDREN'S  QUESTIONS.  The  stones  of  Gilgal  could  be  of  little  use  to 
those  children  whose  parents  did  not  keep  freshly  in  miud  the  events  com- 
memorated. They  would  become  a  monument  whose  inscription  had  faded  away. 
No  doubt  the  word  "  fathers  "  means  parents,  but  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  it 
does  not  mean  mothers  only  or  especially.  The  father  who  gives  over  to  the 
mother  the  religious  training  of  the  child  fails  in  the  special  duty  which  fatherhood 
imposes.  He  shirks  the  greatest  responsibility  of  life.  The  father  who  answers 
his  child's  questions  by  evasion  acts  unworthily.  "  My  wife  takes  care  of  the 
religion  of  the  family,"  a  busy  man  said.  But  this  is  not  God's  plan.  This 
father's  life,  in  many  respects  admirable,  failed  miserably  in  a  central,  essential 
duty.    For  this  failure  no  other  well-doing  could  compensate.     IV.  The  stones 

ERECTED  AT  GiLGAL  SUGGEST  MORE  LASTING  MEMORIALS  WHICH    GoD  HAS  SET  DP.      1.    A 

memorial  book.    Concerning  this  book  He  would  have  the  children  question  and 
the  fathers  give  answer.    How  has  this  book  been  made,  and  bj  what  providence 


CHAP.  IV.]  JOSHUA,  OS 

ha^  it  been  preserved  ?  2,  A  Church  with  memorial  rites.  What  do  baptism  and 
the  Lord's  Supper  have  to  tell  us  about  God's  ways  with  men  ?  3.  A  memorial  day. 
Sunday  is  God's  commemoration  day.  It  stands  a  lasting  memorial  of  the  greatest 
event  in  human  history.  {W.  G.  Sperry.)  The  memorial  stones  : — Gilgal,  the 
first  encampment,  lay  defenceless  in  the  open  plain,  and  the  first  thing  to  be  done 
would  be  to  throw  up  some  earthwork  round  the  camp.  It  seems  to  have  been  the 
resting-place  of  the  ark,  and  probably  of  the  non-combatants,  during  the  conquest, 
and  to  have  derived  thence  a  sacredness  which  long  clung  to  it,  and  finally  led, 
singularly  enough,  to  its  becoming  a  centre  of  idolatrous  worship.  The  rude  circle 
of  unhewn  stones  without  inscription  was,  no  doubt,  exactly  like  the  many  pre- 
historic monuments  found  all  over  the  world  which  forgotten  races  have  raised  to 
keep  in  everlasting  remembrance  forgotten  fights  and  heroes.  It  was  a  com- 
paratively small  thing ;  for  each  stone  was  but  a  load  for  one  man,  and  it  would 
seem  mean  enough  by  the  side  of  Stonehenge  or  Carnac,  just  as  Israel's  history  is 
on  a  smaU  scale  as  compared  with  the  world-embracing  empires  of  old.  Size  is 
not  greatness ;  and  Joshua's  little  circle  told  a  more  wonderful  story  than  its  taller 
kindred,  or  Egyptian  obelisks  or  colossi.  1.  These  grey  stones  preached  at  once 
the  duty  of  remembering  and  the  danger  of  forgetting  the  past  mercies  of  God. 
When  they  were  reared  they  would  seem  needless ;  but  the  deepest  impressions 
get  filled  up  by  degrees,  as  the  river  of  time  deposits  its  sands  on  them.  We  do 
not  forget  pain  so  quickly  as  joy,  and  most  men  have  a  longer  and  keener 
remembrance  of  their  injurers  than  of  their  benefactors,  human  or  Divine.  The 
stones  were  set  up  because  Israel  remembered,  but  also  lest  Israel  should  forget. 
We  often  think  of  the  Jews  as  monsters  of  ingratitude  ;  but  we  should  more  truly 
learn  the  lesson  of  their  history  if  we  regarded  them  as  fair,  average  men,  and 
asked  ourselves  whether  our  recollection  of  God's  goodness  to  us  is  much  more 
vivid  than  theirs.  Unless  we  make  distinct  and  frequent  efforts  to  recall,  we  shall 
certainly  forget  God's  goodness.  The  cultivation  of  thankful  remembrance  is  a 
very  large  part  of  practical  religion ;  and  it  is  not  by  accident  that  the  psalmist 
puts  it  in  the  middle,  between  hope  and  obedience  (Psa.  bcxviii.  7).  2.  The 
memorial  stones  further  proclaimed  the  duty  of  parental  instruction  in  God's 
mercies.  They  speak  of  a  time  when  tradition  was  the  vehicle  of  history ;  when 
books  were  rare,  and  monuments  were  relied  upon  to  awaken  curiosity  which  a 
father's  words  would  satisfy.  Notwithstanding  all  differences  in  means  of 
obtaining  knowledge,  the  old  law  remains  in  full  force,  that  the  parent  is  the 
natural  and  most  powerful  instructor  in  the  ways  of  God.  The  decay  of  parental 
religious  teaching  is  working  enormous  mischief  in  Christian  households  ;  and  the 
happiest  results  would  follow  if  Joshua's  homely  advice  were  attended  to,  "  Ye 
BhalJ  let  your  children  know."  3.  The  same  principle  which  led  to  the  erection 
of  this  simple  monument  reaches  its  highest  and  sacredest  instance  in  the 
institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  in  which  Jesus,  with  wonderful  lowliness,  con- 
descends to  avail  Himself  of  material  symbols  in  order  to  secure  a  firmer  place  in 
treacherous  memories.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  Lord  your  God  dried  up 
the  .  .  .  Jordan. — Hindrances  removed : — That  is  true.  We  saw  it.  We  were 
there.  It  is  happening  every  day.  Take  out  the  mere  detaQ  and  put  in  the  great 
picture,  and  what  is  it  ?  It  is  Divine  interposition  in  the  affairs  of  life.  It  is  God 
taking  away  all  hindrances  to  the  progress  which  He  Himself  has  purposed  and 
defined;  not  the  hindrances  to  your  progress,  but  the  hindrances  to  His  own 
progress  as  shown  through  your  life.  He  wiU  not  take  any  stones  out  of  our  way 
if  they  lie  between  us  and  ruin.  He  will  rather  embed  those  stones  a  Uttle  more 
firmly.  God  be  praised  for  His  hindrances  !  We  wanted  to  make  that  contract, 
and  could  not.  We  had  the  pen  in  hand  to  sign  it,  but  the  ink  would  not  flow,  or 
the  light  suddenly  gave  out,  and  we  dropped  the  pen.  What  did  it  ?  We  see  now 
•we  were  going  to  sign  away  our  birthright,  our  liberty,  our  honour,  our  conscience, 
and  we  were  doing  this  more  or  less  unconsciously,  and  God  said  "  No."  Blessed 
be  God  for  His  denials!  Sometimes  we  are  able  to  say,  "  Blessed  be  God  for  His 
bereavements  1 "  Let  God  alone.  Let  us  put  our  lives  just  into  His  hands  and  say, 
•'  Lord,  they  are  Thy  lives  more  than  ours.  Thou  hast  only  lent  them  to  us.  We 
would  not  spoil  one  moment  of  these  trembling  frailties  which  we  call  our  lives- 
Undertake  everything  for  us  and  use  us.  We  wUl  run  Thine  errands,  we  will  obey 
Thy  will,  we  will  do  what  Thou  dost  bid  us  do.  Lord,  undertake  for  ns.  Then  it 
there  is  a  river  in  the  way  Thou  wilt  dry  it  up,  if  there  is  a  Eed  Sea  in  the  way 
Thou  wilt  command  it  to  stand  back,  and  we  shall  walk  through  the  beds  of  rivers 
as  if  they  were  beds  of  roses."    You  would  be  greatly  comforted,  as  I  have  been  in 


86  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

a  thousand  instances,  by  reasoning  from  the  river  to  the  sea.  This  is  the  right 
method  of  inference,  by  induction  and  by  deduction.  What  has  God  done  for  us  in 
the  past?  Hear  David.  He  said:  •'  The  God  that  delivered  me  from  the  paw  of 
the  lion  and  from  the  paw  of  the  bear  will  deliver  me  from  this  uncircumcised 
Philistine.  I  will  strike  him  in  the  name  of  the  Eternal."  Was  it  a  rash  act  ?  It 
was  reasoned  piety.  Why  did  the  young  man's  blood  boU  for  one  moment  and 
then  subside  ?  It  was  all  the  piety  of  the  past  gathered  up  into  one  supreme 
stroke.  Sometimes  one  act  of  faith  condenses  a  lifetime  of  study,  experience,  and 
prayer.  Wondrously  doth  life  bring  its  own  power,  and  marvellously  doth  yester- 
day contribute  its  quota  to  the  forces  of  to-day.  When  a  great  man  advises  you 
upon  a  certain  course,  he  does  not  speak  for  the  moment.  For  a  quarter  of  a 
century  and  more  he  has  been  buried  in  the  study  of  law,  and  when  he  gives  you 
advice  that  could  be  written  down  in  a  line  he  puts  a  lifetime  into  that  hne. 
When  the  hoary  physician  touches  your  pulse  half  a  century  touches  it.  So  we 
should  thus  see  God  moving,  as  in  contemplation  and  in  faith,  from  the  Jordan  to 
the  Eed  Sea.  He  says  to  us,  as  we  near  the  sea:  "  What  about  the  Jordan?  Was 
there  one  drop  of  water  on  the  sole  of  your  feet  ?  "  No,  Lord,  there  was  not. 
"  Then,"  saith  He  in  reply,  "  as  with  the  Jordan,  so  with  the  Eed  Sea.  It  shall  be 
dried  up  as  it  it  had  never  been."  When  the  disciples  said,  "  How  can  we  feed 
this  multitude ?"  He  said,  "Did  I  not  feed  a  multitude  once.  What  lack  was 
there  then  ?  "  None.  "  Had  the  people  barely  enough  to  eat  ?  "  Nay.  "  How 
many  baskets  took  you  up  ?  "  Twelve.  And  He  helped  them  to  carry  out  that 
reasoning,  that  He  who  was  able  to  do  it  once  was  able  to  do  it  twice ;  and  if  He 
could  do  it  twice,  He  could  do  it  for  ever.  Here  is  the  historical  lesson  He  teaches 
us,  that  what  He  did  yesterday  He  is  going  to  do  to-morrow.  If  you  have  no  faith 
in  to-morrow,  surely  you  have  faith  in  your  own  recollection  of  yesterday.  There 
are  timid  souls  who  never  dare  look  at  to-morrow.  The  Lord  says  to  these,  "  Then 
think  about  yesterday  ;  that  is  over.  Now  what  was  done  to  you  yesterday  ?  You 
thought  your  heart  was  going  to  burst.  Did  your  heart  break  yesterday  ?  "  No. 
"  You  thought  all  things  were  against  you  yesternight.  Did  one  star  fall  out  of  its 
place?"  No,  Lord,  they  are  all  there.  "Then,"  saith  God,  "as  yesterday,  so 
to-morrow ;  as  the  Jordan,  so  the  Eed  Sea."  What  is  your  experience  ?  How 
have  you  been  treated  in  straits  and  perplexities  and  difficulties  ?  Who  cooled 
your  fever?  Who  brought  light  when  all  was  darkness  ?  Bacon  saith,  "  A  little 
learning  inclineth  to  atheism  "  ;  but  much  learning,  great  wisdom,  makes  a  man 
pray.  Whenever  you  doubt  God,  think  that  you  are  but  feebly  or  superficially 
instructed.  When  you  can  lean  upon  Him  four-square,  know  that  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  at  hand.  How  true  it  is  that  all  things  in  life  are  done  by  an  unseen 
power  in  so  far  as  they  are  either  good  or  bad.  The  devil  is  as  invisible  as  God. 
How  wonderful  a  thing  it  is  that  life  becomes  shaped  into  palaces  and  temples 
without  any  handling  of  our  own.  The  Jordan  was  dried  up  not  with  hands ; 
tile  Eed  Sea  was  dried  up — not  with  hands.  Hands,  poor  hands,  what  can  hands 
make  ?  "  The  hand  can  make  and  break  "  is  a  little  proverb,  I  would  suggest. 
Whatever  can  be  made  by  the  hand  can  be  unmade  by  the  hand.  God  Himself 
takes  all  primary  ministry  unto  His  own  power  and  employs  us,  even  when  we  are 
going  about  our  own  errands,  simply  as  His  messengers.  AU  life  as  it  grows 
wisjely  and  well  turns  and  tends  to  service.  Blessed  be  God,  there  is  a  bondage  of 
loye,  there  is  a  slavery  of  joy  1  Are  you  dreading  the  Jordan  ?  He  wiU  dry  it  up 
for  jou  if  you  put  your  trust  in  Him.  Are  you  dreading  the  Eed  Sea  ?  He  will 
blow  it  away  with  the  wind  of  His  mouth.  You  may  go  within  a  step  of  it,  nay, 
yoa  nay  touch  it,  but  the  moment  the  foot  of  faith  touches  that  sea,  the  sea  is 
gone,    (j,  Farker,  DJ).) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Veb.  1.  Tbelr  heart  melted  .  .  .  because  of  the  children  of  Israel. — Divins 

control  over  all : — Kings  and  princes,  captains  and  nobles,  are  most  perfectly  under 
the  control  of  God ;  not  only  their  counsels  and  operations,  but  their  very  spirits 
are  subject  to  the  influence  of  His  secret  and  all-pervading  dominion ;  they  are 
restrained  by  cowardice,  or  incited  by  courage ;  intimidated  by  fear,  or  emboldened 


CHAP,  v.]  JOSHUA.  87 

by  valour,  as  best  may  promote  the  purposes  of  Providence  and  the  interests  of  the 
Church.  More  has  often  been  effected  by  this,  wherein  has  appeared  no  human 
agency,  than  could  have  been  by  all  the  advantages  of  physical  strength.  It  has 
been  seen  in  the  procedure  of  the  Divine  government,  and  opening  of  the  secret 
counsels  of  heaven,  that  turns  the  most  peculiar  and  results  the  most  momentous 
have  proceeded  from  this  invisible  working  of  God.  But  for  this,  the  condition  of 
Israel,  as  frequently  appeared  in  review,  would  have  inspired  their  adversaries,  and, 
in  the  mere  opposing  of  force  to  force,  insured  to  them  triumph.  A  spirit  of 
blindness  and  infatuation  has  been  permitted  to  seize  the  enemies  of  the  Church, 
and  to  fall  upon  the  powers  of  the  world,  or  the  Lord's  people  had  again  and  again 
been  swallowed  up.  The  expedients  of  infinite  wisdom,  and  resources  of  almighty 
power,  never  fail :  they  are  innumerable,  and  always  at  command  ;  not  confined  to 
the  common  laws  of  nature,  but  comprehend  the  secret  dominion  of  spirits,  and  that 
unlimited  range  of  omnipotence,  by  which,  in  special  operations,  all  things  are  possible 
with  God,  and  present  to  instant  adoption,  as  the  purposes  of  His  love  may  requue, 
or  the  counsel  of  His  wiU  determine.     {W.  Seaton.) 

Vers.  2-9.  Make  thee  sharp  knives  and  circimicise. — The  circumcising  at 
Gilgal: — Even  those  comparatively  unenlightened  people  must  have  realised 
that  there  was  deep  spiritual  significance  in  the  administration  of  that  rite 
at  that  juncture.  On  more  than  one  occasion  they  had  heard  Moses  speak 
of  circumcising  the  heart,  and  they  must  have  felt  that  God  meant  to 
teach  them  the  vanity  of  trusting  to  their  numbers,  or  prowess,  or  martial 
array.  Their  strength  was  nothing  to  Him.  The  land  was  not  to  be  won 
by  their  might,  but  to  be  taken  from  His  hand  as  a  gift.  Self  and  the  energy 
of  the  flesh  must  be  set  aside,  that  the  glory  of  coming  victory  might  be  of  God  and 
not  of  man.  We  must  be  content  to  be  reckoned  among  the  things  that  are  not,  if 
we  are  to  be  used  to  bring  to  nought  the  things  that  are,  "  that  no  flesh  should 
glory  in  His  presence."  "We,  too,  must  have  our  Gilgal.  It  is  not  enough  to 
acknowledge  as  a  general  principle  that  we  are  dead  and  risen  with  Christ,  we 
must  apply  it  to  our  inner  and  outer  life.  We  have  no  warrant  to  say  that  sin  is 
dead,  or  that  the  principle  of  sin  is  eradicated,  but  that  we  are  dead  to  it  in  our 
standing,  and  are  dead  to  it  also  in  the  reckoning  of  faith.  But  for  this  we  need 
the  gift  of  the  Blessed  Spirit,  in  His  Pentecostal  fulness.  It  was  by  the  Eternal 
Spirit  that  our  Lord  offered  Himself  in  death  upon  the  Cross,  and  it  is  by  Him 
alone  that  we  can  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body.  For,  first,  the  spirit  of  seli  is  so 
subtle.  It  is  like  a  taint  in  the  blood,  which,  stayed  in  one  place,  breaks  out  in 
another.  Protean  in  its  shapes  and  ubiquitous  in  its  hiding-places,  it  requires 
omniscience  to  discover,  and  omnipresence  to  expel.  And,  secondly,  only  the  Spirit  of 
God  has  cords  strong  enough  to  bind  us  to  the  altar  of  death  ;  to  remind  us  in  the 
hour  of  temptation ;  to  enable  us  to  look  to  Jesus  for  His  grace ;  to  inspire  us  with  the 
passion  of  self-immolation ;  to  keep  us  true  and  steady  to  the  resolves  of  our  holiest 
moments ;  to  apply  the  withering  fire  of  the  Cross  of  Jesus  to  the  growth  of  our 
self-conceit  and  self -energy — for  all  these  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  is  indispensable. 
He  is  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus,  therefore  He  must  be  the  Spirit  of  death  to  all 
that  pertains  to  the  old  Adam.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  all  believers  have  been  cir- 
cumcised in  Christ ;  but  there  is  another  sense  in  which  it  is  needful  for  them  to  pass 
one  after  another  through  the  circumcision  of  Christ  which  is  not  made  with  hands, 
and  which  consists  in  the  putting  off  of  the  body  of  the  flesh.  To  that  all  who 
would  lead  a  life  of  victory  and  inherit  the  land  of  promise  must  submit.  The 
process  may  be  sharp,  for  the  knife  does  not  spare  pain.  But  it  is  in  the  hands 
of  Jesus,  the  lover  of  souls.  Oh,  shrink  not  from  it!  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
Christian  character : — The  more  a  man  learns  of  God,  the  more  he  knows  of  grace. 
If  we  would  apply  to  ourselves  spiritually  the  lessons  of  the  circumcision  in  the 
land,  we  must  give  the  grace  of  God,  which  led  to  the  circumcision,  full  place,  and 
remember  that  God  asks  for  the  devotion  of  His  people,  because  He  has,  in  Christ, 
brought  them  into  perfect  favour.  Was  it  by  observing  God's  ordinances,  or  was  it 
through  God's  almighty  grace  that  Israel  entered  the  land  of  promise?  They 
entered  it  as  a  nation  in  uncircumcision,  and  therefore  exclusively  by  God's 
sovereign  grace.  And  why  did  God  not  seek  for  circumcision  from  the  people 
of  Israel,  so  long  as  they  walk  in  the  wilderness  ?  The  wilderness  was  the  scene  of 
their  distrost  of  God.  A  distrusting  spirit  is  ignorant  of  God's  real  character,  and 
consequently  is  not  morally  fitted  for  separation  to  Himself;  but  God,  having 
brought  OS  by  His  grace  to  know  ourselves  to  be  in  the  heavenly  places  in  Christ, 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  V. 

seeks  separation  to  Himself,  corresponding  with  the  liberty  into  which  He  has 

brought  us.     Grace  known  and  realised  is  the  only  true  power  for  heart  separation 

to  God.     Circumcision  with  Israel  was  merely  a  carnal  ordinance,  and,  in  common 

with  aU  ordinances,  gave  neither  power  for  communion  with  God,  nor  for  conflict 

with  His  enemies.     It  was  a  sign  that  the  children  of  Israel  were  God's  earthly 

family,  and  a  people  separated  from  all  the  rest  of  mankind.     The  circumcision 

made  without  hands,  with  which  the  Christian  is  circumcised,  in  Christ,  is  a 

separation  to  God  from    the  whole  world.      As  the  people  of  Israel,  because 

brought  through  the  Jordan,   were  enjoined   by  God    to    be    circumcised,  and 

their  careless  wilderness  ways  were  allowed  no  longer,  so  the  Christian,  because 

he  has  died  with  Christ  to  the  world,  and  to  his  old  self,  is  exhorted  to  mortify 

his  members,  and  his  worldly  ways  are  no  longer  permitted.     This  mortification 

is  simply  self-denial,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Man  naturally  loves  sin ; 

he  loves  his  own  way  which  is  the  essence  of  sin ;  but  he  who  lives  in  Christ  is 

called  to  die  to  himself  in  daily  walk  and  conduct.     There  is  no  way  of  living  to 

Christ  but  by  dying  to  self.     It  was  by  no  means  sufficient  to  Israel  to  know  that 

they  went  across  the  Jordan,  in  order  to  enjoy  the  riches  of  the  inheritance ;  for 

until  circumcision  was  effected  none  of  Canaan's  food  was  spread  before  them,  nor 

were  they  called  to  conflict.    And  we  may  be  sure  that  so  long  as  we  walk  in  the 

flesh  and  please  ourselves,  there  can  be  no  communion — no  feeding  upon  Christ. 

Neither  can  there  be  any  victories  for  the  Lord,  unless  self  is  subdued.     Satan 

would  beguUe  the  youthful  believer  into  the  misty  atmosphere  of  a  Canaan  of  the 

imagination,  where  the  flesh  is  allowed   to   work.     In   this   aerial   Christianity, 

circumcision — self -mortification — is  not  permitted  ;  the  practical  result  of  being  dead 

with  Christ  is  not  allowed  to  wound  the  wiU.     But  there  is  no  stability  of  soul,  no 

solid  devotedness.     Such  a  believer  is  like  the  insect,  which,  well-nigh  composed  of 

wings,  and  possessing  scarcely  any  weight,  is  driven  from  the  flower  garden  by  the 

first  storm.     Sorrowful  as  is  the  result  of  letting  the  imagination  carry  away  the 

soul,  perhaps  the  effect  of  accepting  Divine  truth  in  intellectualisra  is  more  so.     A 

Christian  holding  the  doctrine  of  death  with  Christ,  and  resurrection  with  Christ, 

in  the  understanding  only,  goes  out  from  the  sunlight  of  God's  presence  into  a  land 

of  deathlike  coldness.      If  circumcision  in  its  spiritual  signification  were  rightly 

valued,  such   abuses   of  the  truth  of  God  would  certainly  find  no  place  in  the 

believer's  heart.     To  mortify  our  members  is  not  a  painless  exercise.     Saying, 

"  We  are  dead,"  is  not  mortifying;  but  it  is  to  deny  the  wishes  of  our  old  nature 

because  "  we  are  dead  "  (Eom.  viii.  13).     The  mere  fact  of  the  people  of  Israel's 

entrance  into  Canaan  did  not  constitute  them  at  liberty  before  God.     They  were 

brought  into  the  land  of  promise  by  the  passage  of  the  Jordan,  but  were  not 

pronounced  free  by  Jehovah  until  circumcised.     God's  liberty  for  His  people  is  that 

of  His  own  making,  and  therefore  perfect.     It  is  what  He  thoroughly  approves  and 

delights  in.    And  the  means  by  which,  step  by  step.  He  brings  His  people  into  the 

enjoyment  of  this  liberty,  is  grace.     If  we  are  God's  free  men,  it  is  evidently  in  the 

land  of  promise  that  we  have  liberty,  for  only  in  the  fulness  of  God's  favour  can  we 

experience  His  rolling  away  the  reproach  of  our  bondage.     (The  Gospel  in  the  Book 

of  Joshua.)         Why  was  circumcision  suspended  in  the  wilderness  ? — Some  have  said 

that,  owing  to  the  circumstances  in  which  the  people  were,  it  would  not  have  been 

convenient,   perhaps  hardly  possible,  to   administer  the  rite  on  the  eighth   day. 

Moving  as  they  were  from  place  to  place,  the  administration  of  circumcision  would 

often  have  caused  so  much  pain  and  peril  to  the  child,  that  it  is  no  wonder  it  was 

delayed.    And  once  delayed,  it  was  delayed  indefinitely.    But  this  explanation  is  not 

sufficient.     There  were  long,  very  long  periods  of  rest,  during  which  there  could  have 

been  no  difficulty.     A  better  explanation,  brought  forward  by  Calvin,  leads  us  to 

connect  the  suspension  of  circumcision  with  the  punishment  of  the  Israelites,  and 

with  the  sentence  that  doomed  them  to  wander  forty  years  in  the  wilderness.   When 

the  worship  of  the  golden  calf  took  place,  the  nation  was  rejected,  and  the  breaking 

by  Moses  of  the  two  tables  of  stone  seemed  an  appropriate  sequel  to  the  rupture  of 

the  covenant  which  their  idolatry  had  caused.     And  though  they  were  soon  restored, 

they  were  not  restored  without  certain  drawbacks — tokens  of  the  Divine  displeasure. 

Probably  the  suspension  of  circumcision  was  included  in  the  punishment  of  their  sins. 

They  were  not  to  be  allowed  to  place  on  their  children  the  sign  and  seal  of  a 

covenant  which  in  spirit  and  in  reality  they  had  broken.     But  it  was  not  an 

abolition,  only  a  suspension.      The  time  might  come  when  it  would  be  restored. 

The  natural  time  for  this  would  be  the  end  of  the  forty  years  of  chastisement. 

These  forty  years  have  now  come  to  an  end.    Doubtless  it  would  have  been  a  great 


CHAP,  v.]  JOSHUA.  89 

joy  to  Moses  if  it  had  been  given  him  to  see  the  restoration  of  circumcision,  but 
that  was  not  to  take  place  until  the  people  had  set  foot  on  Abraham's  land.  We 
may  well  think  of  it  as  an  occasion  of  great  rejoicing.  The  visible  token  of  his  being 
one  of  God's  children  was  now  borne  by  every  man  and  boy  in  the  camp.  In  a  sense 
they  now  proved  themselves  heirs  to  the  covenant  made  with  their  fathers,  and 
might  thus  rest  with  firmer  trust  on  the  promise — "  I  will  bless  them  that  bless  thee, 
and  curse  him  that  curseth  thee."  Two  other  points  demand  a  word  of  explanation. 
The  first  is  the  statement  that  "  all  the  people  that  were  born  in  the  wilderness  .  .  . 
they  had  not  circumcised  "  (ver.  5).  If  the  view  be  correct  that  the  suspension  of 
circumcision  was  part  of  the  punishment  for  their  sins,  the  prohibition  would  not 
come  into  operation  for  some  months,  at  all  events,  after  the  exodus  from  Egypt. 
We  think,  with  Calvin,  that  for  the  sake  of  brevity  the  sacred  historian  makes  a 
general  statement  without  waiting  to  explain  the  exceptions  to  which  it  was  subject. 
The  other  point  needing  explanation  is  the  Lord's  statement  after  the  circum- 
cision (ver.  9).  The  words  imply  that,  owing  to  the  want  of  this  sacrament,  they  had 
lain  exposed  to  a  reproach  from  the  Egyptians,  which  was  now  rolled  away.  What 
seems  the  most  likely  explanation  is,  that  when  the  Egyptians  heard  how  God  had 
all  but  repudiated  them  in  the  wilderness,  and  had  withdrawn  from  them  the  sign  of 
His  covenant,  they  malignantly  crowed  over  them,  and  denounced  them  as  a 
worthless  race,  who  had  first  rejected  their  lawful  rulers  in  Egypt  under  pretext  of 
religion,  and,  having  shown  their  hypocrisy,  were  now  scorned  and  cast  off  by  the 
very  God  whom  they  had  professed  themselves  so  eager  to  serve.  But  now  the 
tables  are  turned  on  the  Egyptians.  The  restoration  of  circumcision  stamps  this 
people  once  more  as  the  people  of  God.  ((?.  W.  Blaikie,  D.D.)  The  reproach  of 
Egypt : — By  this  reproach  we  are  to  understand  all  that  stigma  which  clung  to 
Israel  through  its  relation  to  Egypt.  This  stigma  had  two  aspects,  an  inner  and  an 
outer ;  an  active  and  a  passive.  It  consisted  in  that  feeling  of  humiliation  and 
self-reproach,  which  must  have  rested  on  the  heart  of  every  intelligent  and  pious 
IsraeUte  during  the  wilderness  wanderings.  And  it  also  consisted  in  the  feeling  of 
Bcorn  and  contempt  with  which  their  great  oppressors  the  Egyptians  must  have 
looked  upon  them  during  all  that  period.  In  its  inward  aspect,  the  reproach  of 
Egypt  was  caused  by  spiritual  assimilation  to  Egypt.  Moses  had  said,  "  The  Lord 
will  put  a  difference  between  the  Egyptians  and  Israel."  This  difference  was 
manifested  in  many  striking  ways,  during  the  progress  of  Israel's  gradual 
emancipation.  But  when  this  rite  was  in  abeyance,  this  difference  was  lost 
in  a  measure.  Physically,  there  was  no  difference  between  the  children  born  in 
Egypt  after  the  Exodus  and  those  born  in  the  wilderness.  Circumcision  was,  as  it 
were,  God's  brand  on  His  people  marking  them  for  His  own.  Its  lack  proclaimed 
that  they  were  "  Lo  Ammi,"  not  God's  people.  But  there  could  be  no  greater 
outward  stigma  than  this.  It  was  Israel's  glory  to  be  Jehovah's  peculiar  people 
and  to  bear  in  their  bodies  the  seal  of  His  covenant.  From  this  height  of  privilege 
they  looked  down  on  all  men.  For  an  Israelite,  therefore,  to  consider  his  position 
during  the  forty  years,  would  be  to  acknowledge  that  there  was  no  difference,  so  far, 
between  him  and  an  Egyptian.  Jehovah  was  no  longer,  in  this  mode  of  outward 
recognition,  his  God.  But  there  was  a  deeper  and  more  potent  assimilation,  of 
which  the  outward  and  physical  was  only  the  sign.  There  was  on  the  part  of  Israel 
assimilation  to  Egypt  in  spirit.  They  reproached  God  for  their  redemption,  saying 
that  He  had  brought  them  from  Egypt  to  destroy  them ;  they  actually  went  the 
length  of  appointing  a  leader  to  guide  them  back  to  the  house  of  bondage.  What 
could  be  more  grievous  than  such  sin?  what  could  more  plainly  show  their 
assimilation  in  heart  to  Egypt  ?  Therefore  to  a  pious  and  penitent  Israelite  there 
was  here  cause  for  the  deepest  abasement.  His  cry  in  self-reproach  would  be,  "  My 
sin  is  ever  before  me."  This  also  would  be  implied  in  the  inner  aspect  of  the 
reproach  of  Egypt.  But  in  addition  to  this  inner  aspect  of  the  reproach,  there  is 
also  the  outer  to  be  considered.  The  reproach  of  Egypt  not  only  consisted  in  those 
feelings  which  must  have  taken  possession  of  a  pious  Israelite,  but  also  in  those 
taunts  which  must  have  been  hurled  at  them  by  Egypt.  Their  haughty  taskmasters 
would  no  doubt  make  their  former  bondmen  a  subject  of  reproach  and  mocking 
Bcom.  They  would  look  down  upon  them,  and  speak  of  them  with  unutterable 
contempt.  They  would  describe  them  as  a  despicable  race  of  worthless  runaways. 
And  they  would  also  find  good  cause  for  merriment  in  the  prolonged  wanderings  in 
the  wilderness.  "  Where  are  all  their  high  hopes  ?  "  they  might  have  said.  "  They 
have  ended  in  smoke.  A  great  deal  better  off  they  are  now  than  they  were  with  us, 
hungering  and  thirsting  in  that  desert,  instead  of  living  on  the  fat  of  the  land  I    A 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

nice  wild-goose  chase  that  famous  Moses  has  led  them."  Such  was  the  reproach  of 
Egypt ;  but  here  and  now  it  is  rolled  away.  By  this  act  at  Gilgal  Israel  is  no 
longer  assimilated  to  Egypt  in  body.  The  knives  of  flint  have  again  put  a  difference 
between  Israel  and  Egypt.  Each  man  bears  in  his  body  the  mark  of  Jehovah's 
covenant.  And  seeing  the  land  of  Canaan  was  God's  gift  to  them  as 
Abraham's  seed,  and  to  Abraham's  seed  as  faithful  to  Jehovah,  i.e.,  as 
circumcised,  this  act  was  a  Divine  and  formal  conveyance  of  the  land  to  these 
men  of  Israel.  Thus  at  Gilgal  the  title-deeds  of  Canaan  were  signed,  sealed,  and 
delivered ;  and  thus  again,  the  reproach  of  Egypt  was  rolled  away.  Israel  is  no 
longer  a  homeless  wanderer  but  an  heir  of  God.  Also  the  assimilation  to  Egypt  in 
spirit  has  come  to  an  end.  No  longer  are  they  uncircumciscd  in  heart.  Never 
again  do  they  cast  a  longing,  lingering  look  behind.  Surely  this  transaction  is  also 
recorded  for  our  instruction  and  reproof.  Gilgal  says,  "  Put  off  the  old  man  with 
his  affections  and  lusts  ;  put  off  all  moral  and  spiritual  assimilation  to  the  world. 
Crucify  the  flesh  and  its  deceitful  lusts.  Mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body."  The 
great  need  of  the  present  age  is  to  be  brought  in  spirit  to  Gilgal,  i.e.,  to  learn  to  the 
very  centre  of  our  souls  the  spirit  of  self-sacrifice.  The  process  may  be  painful, 
like  cutting  off  a  right  arm  or  plucking  out  a  right  eye ;  yet  it  is  the  necessary 
sequel  of  entrance  into  God's  inheritance.  And  as  it  is  the  necessary  sequel  of 
entrance,  so  is  it  the  necessary  prelude  to  worship  and  to  victory.  There  can  be 
no  true  worship  of  God  except  our  hearts  are  cleansed  from  the  filthiness 
of  the  flesh.  There  can  be  no  true  victory  for  God,  either  within  or  with- 
out, except  our  souls  are  purged  from  the  power  of  sin.  (A.  B.  Mackay.) 
The  consecration  of  the  Lord's  host  at  Gilgal;  or,  a  revival: — The  need,  the 
tokens,  and  the  blessedness  of  this  revival  are  set  before  us.  (1)  Its  need  appears 
in  the  reproach  of  Epypt.  (2)  Its  tokens  are  the  restoration  of  ordinances.  (3)  Its 
blessedness  consists  in  the  return  of  favour.  I.  Let  us  first  dwell  upon  the  need  of 
Israel's  revival,  as  seen  in  the  repeoach  of  Egypt.  There  are  many  among  us  who 
have  indeed  left  Egypt.  To  the  questions,  "  Is  the  Lord  among  us,  or  not  ? — Are 
we  His  people  ?  "  they  can  humbly  answer  "  Yes  " ;  for  He  has  given  them  sure 
pledges  of  their  interest  in  the  everlasting  covenant.  And  yet,  if  asked  to  give  a 
reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  them,  they  would  not  be  ready.  The  answer  of  faith 
can  scarce  find  utterance  amid  the  sins  and  shortcomings  that  compass  them 
round,  and  testify  against  them.  Their  words,  their  tempers,  their  works,  their 
experiences,  all  seem  to  give  the  lie  to  their  Christian  profession  and  to  their  hope. 
The  world  of  unbelievers,  too,  joins  issue  against  them,  and,  discerning  their 
failures  and  inconsistencies,  derides  their  religion,  calls  them  hypocrites,  and 
prophesies  their  doom.  This  "  reproach  of  Egypt,"  lies  heavy  upon  God's  saints 
who  thus  walk  in  darkness.  II.  The  narrative  goes  on  to  tell  of  the  tokens  of 
Israel's  revival,  as  seen  in  the  restoration  of  ordinances.  As  the  sacrament  of 
baptism  perpetuates  and  expands  the  teaching  of  the  rite  of  circumcision,  so  that  of 
the  Lord's  Supper  repeats  the  lessons  of  the  Passover.  The  Christian  ordinance 
looks  back,  as  the  Jewish  sacrifice  looked  forward,  to  the  death  of  Jesus  as  our  sub- 
stitute. Since  the  fall  of  Adam,  there  has  been  but  this  one  way  of  salvation.  May 
we,  amid  our  fuller  privileges,  and  clearer  light,  approach  the  same  God  whom 
Israel  worshipped,  confiding  in  the  same  atonement,  and  renew  our  covenant  with 
Him  in  the  breaking  of  bread,  and  the  drinking  of  the  cup  of  blessing.  Our  feast 
similarly  commemorates  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future :  for  we  herein  shew 
forth  an  accomplished  redemption,  our  own  reconciliation  thereby,  and  our 
participation  in  our  Saviour's  love  at  the  marriage  feast  above.  III.  It  remains  for 
us  now  to  speak  of  the  blessedness  of  Israel's  revival,  as  seen  in  the  return  of 
FAVOUR.  1.  First,  the  Lord  expressly  declares  to  Joshua,  as  the  head  and  repre- 
sentative of  the  nation,  "  This  day  have  I  rolled  away  the  reproach  of  Egypt  from 
off  you."  Blessed  assurance  I  2.  Beside  the  answer  of  God  to  Joshua,  a  second 
gracious  token  was  granted.  The  enemy  was  still  as  a  stone.  With  blanched 
cheeks  and  palpitating  hearts,  the  Canaanitcs  looked  on  and  saw  the  people  all  en- 
camped at  Gilgal.  Now,  shall  not  Israel,  with  soldierly  decision,  seize  on  the 
opportunity,  and  ere  they  have  recovered  from  their  panic,  strike  a  decisive  blow, 
and  so  possess  the  land  ?  Such  is  not  the  Lord's  order :  but  until  the  fourteenth 
day  of  the  month  the  men  of  war  are  shut  up  in  their  tents ;  and  then,  as  though 
in  a  land  of  peace,  during  a  full  week  the  Passover  is  kept  throughout  their  families. 
3.  Was  it  not  providentially  ordered  by  a  loving  Father  that  Israel  should  be 
brought  into  the  land  at  the  tune  of  harvest?  Thus  temporal  supplies  shall  not 
faU  those  whom  God  accepts  and  approves:  thus,  also,  spiritual  provision  shall 


CHAP,  v.]  JOSHUA.  91 

never  fail  God's  people.  4.  The  close  of  the  chapter  presents  us  with  a  fourth  token 
of  the  return  of  favour  to  Israel,  in  the  manifestation  to  Joshua  of  the  great  Angel 
of  the  Covenant,  with  His  drawn  sword  lifted,  not  in  vengeance  against  Israel,  but 
against  their  foes.  This  was  the  promised  angel  who  should  go  before  them,  and 
lead  them   to   victory.     (G.  W.  Butler,  M.A.)         Gilgal: — I.  Attention   to   the 

SPECIAL   SERVICES   WHICH   WE   OWE   TO   GOD   OUGHT   TO   STAND   BEFOKE   ALL   OTHER   CON- 

siDEEATiONS.  What  is  religion  ?  The  question  seems  a  simple  one  ;  but,  indeed,  it 
is  one  the  true  answer  to  which  involves  a  great  deal.  The  term  is  a  most  compre- 
hensive one,  including  all  that  men  should  beheve  and  all  that  men  should  do.  A 
religious  person  is  one  whose  heart  has  been  imbued  with  Christian  truth,  and 
whose  affection  has  laid  hold  on  God  as  revealed  in  the  Scriptures  with  a  firm 
grasp ;  a  person  whose  life,  regulated  increasingly  by  such  principles,  manifests 
more  and  more  of  the  beauty  of  holiness.  In  religion,  then,  we  come  to  deal  with 
the  doctrine  and  the  practice  of  the  Bible.  It  tells  of  what  may  alarm,  and  what 
may  soothe.  It  shows  a  reality  of  wretchedness,  want,  guilt  and  death  in  which 
men  are  by  nature ;  and  a  reality  of  joy,  perfection,  righteousness  and  life  in  which 
they  may  be  by  grace.  It  appeals  to  men  as  immortal  beings,  urges  on  them  the 
consideration  of  their  immortal  interests,  and  in  the  words  of  Him,  around  whom 
all  true  religion  circles  and  to  whom  it  is  intended  to  lead,  charges  all  thus :  "  Seek 
ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness."  I  would  ask  you,  seriously, 
should  not  this  matter  have  our  first  and  most  solemn  consideration  ?  Is  there  any 
matter  which  ought  to  engage  us  before  this  ?  11.  We  mat  eepose  implicit  con- 
fidence IN  God  while  walking  in  His  ways  and  aiming  at  His  glory.  Men  are 
never  losers  by  religion.  The  man  who  can  style  himself  servant  of  Christ  has  a 
Master  whose  service  is  the  guarantee  for  every  possible  good.  Affairs  and  matters 
come  to  be  so  diiierently  weighed  and  estimated,  when  heavenly  wisdom  is  granted 
for  the  test,  that  it  is  no  wonder  to  find  men  reckoning  gains  and  losses,  probabilities 
and  duties,  by  a  standard  the  reverse  of  that  which  they  formerly  used.  What  if  we 
had  accosted  the  leader  of  the  hosts  of  Israel  when  he  promulgated  the  order  for  obser- 
ving circumcision  and  the  Passover  at  Gilgal  ?  Suppose  that  we  had  said,  Strike 
your  decisive  blow ;  push  on  at  once  ;  select  your  picked  men,  and  leave  the  rest  to 
fortify  your  position,  and  to  take  care  of  the  women  and  children ;  go  straight  up 
to  Jericho.  Your  rite  of  chcumcision  will  render  you  defenceless,  your  paschal 
feast  is  hardly  fitted  to  such  a  critical  position  and  such  unusual  cucumstances  as 
yours.  Suppose  that  we  had  argued  with  Joshua  thus.  Would  not  his  reply  have 
been,  "We  can  trust  God:  we  know  Him.  He  has  said,  'I  will  not  fail  you,  nor 
forsake  you '  "  ?  (C.  D.  Marston,  M.A.)  Time  taken  for  religious  duties  is  not 
lost : — ^Dr.  James  Hamilton  once  related  an  anecdote  which  illustrates  a  vital  question 
in  the  Christian  life.  A  writer  recounts  it  as  follows :  "  A  gallant  officer  was 
pursued  by  an  overwhelming  force,  and  his  followers  were  urging  him  to  greater 
speed,  when  he  discovered  that  his  saddle-girth  was  becoming  loose.  He  coolly 
dismounted,  repaired  the  ghth  by  tightening  the  buckle,  and  then  dashed  away. 
The  broken  buckle  would  have  left  him  on  the  field  a  prisoner  ;  the  wise  delay  to 
repair  damages  sent  him  on  in  safety  amid  the  huzzas  of  his  comrades."  The 
Christian  who  is  in  such  haste  to  get  about  his  business  in  the  morning  that  he 
neglects  his  Bible  and  his  season  of  prayer  rides  all  day  with  a  broken  buckle. 

Vers.  10-12.  Encamped  in  Gilgal,  and  kept  the  Passover. — Three  successive 
days : — ^Li  one  of  his  sonnets,  Matthew  Arnold  tells  of  an  interview  he  had  on  a 
day  of  fierce  August  sunshine,  in  Bethnal  Green,  with  a  preacher  whom  he  knew, 
and  who  looked  ill  and  overworked.  In  answer  to  the  inquiry  as  to  how  he  fared, 
"  Bravely  I "  said  he ;  "  for  I  of  late  have  been  much  cheered  with  thoughts  of 
Christ,  the  Living  Bread."  There  is  a  great  difference  between  the  strength  which 
may  be  supplied  from  without,  and  that  which  is  assimilated  within.  To  illustrate 
the  first.  We  tread  the  cathedral  close  and  examine  the  mighty  buttresses  that 
steady  the  ancient  walls.  What  though  the  •*  high  embowed  roof  "  presses  on  them 
with  aU  its  weight  to  make  them  bulge,  they  may  not  stir  an  inch  from  the  perpen- 
dicular so  long  as  those  masses  of  stone,  built  up  without,  forbid.  To  illustrate  the 
second.  We  must  visit  the  forest  glade,  where  giant  oaks  withstand  the  blasts  of 
centuries,  because  they  have  incorporated  into  their  hearts  the  properties  of  earth 
and  air,  becoming  robust,  and  sturdy,  and  storm-defying.  There  are  many  ways  in 
which  the  holy  soul  derives  strength  from  without.  It  is  buttressed  by  remon- 
strances and  appeals,  by  providences  and  promises,  by  the  fear  of  causing  grief,  and 
by  the  incitement  of  passionate  devotion.    But  if  these  were  all  they  would  be  in* 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T. 

sufficient.  We  need  to  be  strengthened  from  within,  to  have  within  ourselves  the 
strong  Son  of  God ;  to  know  that  the  Mightiest  is  within  us,  and  working  through 
us,  so  that  we,  even  as  He,  can  do  all  things.  In  this  old  record  we  may  discover 
without  effort  the  Living  Bread  under  three  aspects — the  Passover ;  the  corn  of  the 
land  ;  the  manna.  Each  of  these  consumed  one  of  three  successive  days.  I.  The 
PASSOVER.  How  little  we  understand  the  way  by  which  each  part  of  our  body  takes 
the  particular  nourishment  it  requires  from  the  food  we  eat.  But  we  know  that 
such  is  the  case,  and  that  bones,  muscles,  and  tissues  appropriate  their  sustenance 
from  the  common  store.  So  though  we  may  not  be  able  to  explain  the  philosophy 
of  the  process,  we  believe  and  are  sure,  that  as  we  hold  fellowship  with  Jesus  in 
quiet  hallowed  moments,  our  weakness  absorbs  His  strength,  our  impatience  His 
long-suffering,  our  restlessness  His  calm,  our  ignorance  His  wisdom.  "  He  is  made 
to  us  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption."  His  flesh  is  "true 
meat"  because  it  makes  us  strong  to  endure  and  do.  His  blood  is  "true  drink," 
because  it  satisfies  our  thirst,  and  makes  glad  our  heart.  But  let  it  ever  be  borne 
in  mind  that  as  no  uncircumcised  person  was  permitted  to  partake  of  the  Passover, 
so  none  who  are  living  in  wilful  sin  can  feed  on  the  flesh  and  blood  which  were 
given  for  the  life  of  the  world.  There  must  be  a  Gilgal  before  there  can  be  a  Pass- 
over in  the  deepest  and  fullest  sense.  This  is  why  you  have  no  zest  in  prayer,  no 
appetite  for  your  Bible,  no  enjoyment  in  the  ordinances  of  the  House  of  God.  You 
have  not  yet  put  away  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  you  have  not  yet  sub- 
mitted yourself  to  the  sharp  two-edged  sword,  you  have  not  yet  been  delivered  from 
the  reproach  of  Egypt,  you  have  not  yet  purged  out  the  leaven  of  insincerity  and 
falsehood.  II.  The  coen  of  the  land.  The  Paschal  Lamb  is  good,  but  the  corn 
of  the  land  includes  the  fruits,  and  honey,  and  bread-stuffs  that  grow  on  the  soil  of 
the  Besurrection-life.  The  ascension  of  Christ  may  be  considered  in  many  aspects, 
but  in  each  we  seem  to  stand  beneath  His  outstretched  hands  of  benediction,  as  they 
did  who  saw  Him  parted  from  them,  and  taken  up  before  their  adoring  gaze.  Happy 
indeed  are  they  who  also  in  heart  and  mind  thither  ascend,  and  with  Him  continu- 
ally dwell.  To  do  this  is  to  eat  of  the  corn  and  fruit  of  the  land.  IH.  The  manna. 
The  corn  began  before  the  manna  ceased.  The  one  overlapped  the  other  as  the 
thatch  of  a  hay-rick  or  the  feathers  of  a  bird.  God  does  not  wish  that  there  should 
be  those  intervals  of  apparent  desertion,  and  the  failure  of  supphes  of  which  so 
many  complain.  It  is  quite  likely  that  He  may  have  to  withdraw  the  extraordinary 
and  exceptional,  as  represented  by  the  manna  ;  but  He  will  wait  until  we  have 
become  accustomed  to  the  ordinary  and  regular  supplies  of  His  grace,  as  repre- 
sented by  the  com.  In  the  blessings  of  our  outward  life.  He  does  sometimes  humble 
us,  and  suffer  us  to  hunger.  The  brook  Cherith  dries  before  He  sends  us  to  Zare- 
phath.  But  as  to  the  inward  life.  He  gives  without  stint.  The  table  is  always 
prepared  before  us  in  the  presence  of  our  enemies — one  form  of  soul-sustenance  is 
within  reach  before  another  form  fails;  we  must  have  learned  to  feed  ourselves 
with  strong  meat  before  He  drops  the  spoon  with  which  He  had  been  wont  to  nourish 
us  with  milk.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  manna  ceased  on  the  morrow  after 
they  had  eaten  of  the  old  com  of  the  land. — Manna  and  corn : — Various  con- 
jectures have  been  formed  regarding  the  nature  of  the  manna,  which  every  morning 
whitened  like  hoar-frost  the  ground  around  the  encampment  of  the  Israelites  in  the 
wilderness.  It  was  indeed  a  miraculous  substance  in  the  sense  of  its  having  been 
provided  at  the  very  time  when,  and  in  the  very  circumstances  where,  it  was 
required.  But  we  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  in  itself  a  miraculous  sub- 
stance, a  material  previously  unknown,  created  specially  for  the  purpose  and  coming 
down  straight  from  heaven.  God  economises  the  supernatural  element  in  His 
working,  and  makes  use  of  ordinary  means  as  far  as  they  will  go.  He  who  used  the 
ordinary  thorny  growth  of  the  desert  as  the  medium  of  His  transcendent  revelation 
when  He  appeared  in  the  burning  bush,  and  converted  the  simple  shepherd's  rod  in 
the  hand  of  Moses  into  a  serpent,  and  made  it  the  instrument  of  compassing  the 
deliverance  of  Israel  by  signs  and  wonders,  would  in  all  hkelihood  employ  on  this 
occasion  a  substance  indigenous  to  the  desert,  as  the  basis  of  the  great  miracle 
which  He  wrought  for  the  supply  of  the  daily  bread  of  His  people.  Such  a  sub- 
stance might  well  have  been  the  white  hard  exudation  that  drops  from  the  thorns  of 
the  tamarisk  shrub,  and  frequently  covers  the  ground  to  a  considerable  extent,  which 
is  used  for  food  at  the  present  day  by  the  Arabs,  and  to  which  they  give  the  name 
of  manna.  We  cannot  expect  to  trace  an  exact  correspondence,  for  some  of  the 
qualities  and  conditions  of  the  manna  of  Scripture  were  unmistakably  supernatural 
It  is  sufficient  if  the  natural  object  could  serve  as  a  mere  fulcrum  for  the  miracle. 


CHAP,  v.]  JOSHUA.  93 

But  whatever  might  have  been  the  nature  and  origin  of  the  mysterious  substance 
which  God  made  use  of,  it  is  evident  that  the  manna  was  intended  to  serve  a  wise 
and  gracious  purpose  in  the  religious  economy  of  the  Israelites.  He  who  said  that 
if  we  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness  aU  other  things  that  we 
truly  need  will  be  given  to  us,  furnished  a  remarkable  illustration  of  the  truth  of  the 
promise  in  the  experience'  of  the  Israelites.  There  was  no  want  to  those  who  feared 
God  and  did  His  will  ;  bread  was  given  to  them  and  their  water  was  sure,  even  if 
the  bread  had  to  come  down  from  heaven  and  the  water  had  to  be  produced  from 
the  flinty  rock  by  the  smiting  of  the  miraculous  rod.  But  this  supernatural  life 
was  not  to  last  for  ever.  It  was  appropriate  to  the  wilderness,  God's  special 
dwelling-place,  as  it  were,  where  there  was  nothing  but  God  and  nature  ;  but  it  was 
not  suitable  to  the  promised  land,  where  all  the  conditions  of  a  natural  human  life 
existed,  and  which  was  the  haunt  of  man  as  well  as  the  scene  of  nature's  most 
beneficent  operations.  Accordingly  we  read  that  when  the  Israelites  first  tasted  of 
the  corn  of  Canaan  at  Gilgal,  the  manna  which  had  been  their  food  for  so  many 
years  previously  ceased  at  once.  The  natural,  which  is  always,  superseded  the 
supernatural,  which  is  only  occasional.  The  miracle  must  give  place  to  the  common 
processes  of  life.  The  manna  ceasing  when  the  Israelites  ate  of  the  corn  of  Canaan 
teaches  us  the  lesson  that  God's  help  is  given,  not  to  supersede  our  self-help,  but  to 
enable  us  to  help  ourselves.  No  one  can  truly  know  what  it  is  to  find  his  sufficiency 
in  God  but  he  who  puts  forth  aU  the  strength  which  he  himself  possesses.  It  is 
exactly  in  proportion  as  we  strive  to  do  all,  and  strive  in  vain,  that  we  can  have  an 
experimental  consciousness  of  God's  almighty  aid.  And  thus  the  believer  feels  that 
God's  strength  is  made  perfect  in  his  own  weakness.  The  difference  between  manna 
and  corn  is  most  suggestive.  Manna  was  a  supernatural  product  provided  directly 
by  Divine  power.  It  came  to  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  without  any  toil  or 
trouble  of  their  own.  No  tiller  of  the  ground  had  wrought  for  it  in  the  sweat  of  his 
face,  and  therefore  it  was  but  little  esteemed  by  the  Israelites.  They  soon  lost  their 
relish  for  it ;  it  became  tasteless  and  insipid,  and  their  souls  loathed  it  in  the  end. 
But  corn,  on  the  other  hand,  implies  and  involves  great  and  continuous  labour.  A 
sacrifice  is  made,  a  loss  sustained  in  parting  with  the  seed-corn.  There  is  much 
sweat  of  the  face  in  preparing  the  ground  for  its  reception ;  faith  is  exercised  in  en- 
trusting it  to  the  earth  ;  patience  and  hope  in  watching  its  growth  and  waiting  for 
its  ripening ;  and  toil  again  is  required  in  reaping,  storing,  and  preparing  the  harvest 
for  bread.  And  is  there  not  the  same  wide  difference  in  spiritual  things  between 
manna  and  corn — between  what  is  given  to  us  without  any  toil  or  trouble  of  our 
own,  and  what  is  wrought  out  for  us  and  in  us,  as  the  result  of  our  own  toil  and,  it 
may  be,  our  own  sad  experience  ?  No  doubt  we  should  prefer  manna  to  corn ;  we 
should  like  to  get  heavenly  blessings  straight  out  of  God's  hands.  But  the  rule  of 
the  Divine  kingdom  is  "  no  cross,  no  crown."  In  no  other  way  would  God's  spiritual 
or  natural  blessings  do  us  good.  Only  in  this  Divine  way  does  the  procuring  of 
them  act  as  a  heavenly  discipline,  counteracting  the  evil  tendencies  of  our  nature, 
enabling  us  to  sympathise  with  the  plans  and  hopes  of  God,  and  fitting  us  for  the 
enjoyment  of  His  everlasting  rest.  When  the  Israelites  entered  the  Holy  Land,  God 
gave  them  at  first  the  corn  of  their  enemies,  as  He  had  given  them  the  manna  of 
the  wilderness.  That  was  necessary — just  as  it  is  necessary  for  the  child  to  be  sup- 
ported at  first  by  its  mother's  nourishment,  and  the  young  plant  by  the  provision 
stored  up  in  the  seed.  But  this  old  corn  would  last  only  a  little  while  ;  it  would 
cease  as  the  manna  had  ceased.  When  it  was  done  the  Israelites  would  have  to 
sow  and  reap  their  fields  in  order  to  get  a  new  supply ;  they  would  have  to  provide 
for  themselves  by  the  toil  of  their  hands.  And  how  significant  of  the  new  life  which 
it  nourished  was  the  new  corn  in  these  circumstances !  The  Israelites  looked 
forward  from  the  wilderness  to  the  promised  land  as  the  place  of  consummation 
and  rest.  But  they  found  that  their  former  discipline  in  the  new  circumstances  was 
not  ended,  but  only  changed  in  its  character ;  that  amid  golden  cornfields  and  rich 
pastures  and  luxuriant  vineyards  they  would  have  to  practise  in  even  higher  degree 
the  virtues  which  the  wilderness-life  called  forth.  And  how  symbolical  was  the  new 
corn  of  the  land — the  bread  for  which  they  toiled  in  the  sweat  of  their  face — of  this 
life  of  self-conquest  and  devotion  which  it  sustained !  It  might  seem  that  their  life 
in  the  wilderness,  directly  supported  by  God  and  under  His  immediate  care,  was 
higher  and  more  heavenly  than  their  life  in  Canaan,  sowing  and  reaping  then-  fields, 
and  providing  for  their  wants  by  their  own  labour.  But  it  was  not  so ;  for  the 
wilderness-life  fed  by  the  manna  of  heaven  was  only  an  introduction  to,  and  a 
preparation  for,  the  higher  life  of  Canaan  fed  by  the  corn  of    earth.     And  let  na 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

remember  this  solemn  fact  when  we  are  tempted  to  think  that  life  spent  m  directly 
religious  acts  in  the  sanctuary,  at  the  communion-table,  in  the  closet,  a  holier  and 
more  acceptable  life  to  God  than  the  life  spent  in  the  place  of  business  and  in  our 
homes,  in  everyday  duties  and  labours.  The  incident  of  the  manna  of  the  wilder- 
ness giving  place  to  the  corn  of  Canaan  is  in  entire  harmony  with  all  God's  deahngs 
with  man.  The  dispensation  that  was  inaugurated  by  supernatural  manifestations 
is  carried  on  by  common  helps,  and  through  the  homely  experiences  of  human  life. 
The  supernatural  life  in  the  visible  presence  of  Jesus  must  merge  into  the  natural 
life  of  faith  and  hope  amid  ordinary  circumstances.  God  gives  at  appropriate  times 
meat  to  eat  which  the  world  knoweth  not  of — hidden  manna,  living  bread  direct 
from  heaven.  And  when  the  manna  is  withdrawn  and  we  are  supplied  with  corn — 
with  "  human  nature's  daily  food" — let  us  seek  to  profit  by  what  the  manna  has  done 
for  us  and  taught  us.  We  have  received  spiritual  food  that  we  may  have  grace  and 
strength  to  carry  on  the  common  duties  of  life.  We  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is 
gracious  on  the  Holy  Mount  that  we  may  follow  hard  after  Him  along  the  beaten 
paths  of  life.  (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  Not  manna,  hut  old  corn : — The  manna 
ceased  when  the  people  had  the  old  corn  of  the  land.  Now  the  question  is — I.  Was 

THE  OLD  CORN  OF  THE  LAND  ANT  LESS  WONDERFUL  THAN  THE  BREAD  OF  THE  WILDER- 
NESS ?  If  we  think  of  the  reproductive  energy  of  nature  we  are  amazed.  There  are 
always  apples,  pears,  grapes,  melons,  cherries,  gooseberries,  currants ;  there  is 
always  wheat  for  man,  and  corn  for  animals.  The  year  comes,  and  these  things 
come.  But  more  than  recurrence,  there  is  multiplication.  One  grain  of  wheat  will 
produce  from  20  to  100.  This  is  as  inexpUcable  a  wonder  as  was  the  manna,  and 
cannot  be  explained  without  the  recognition  of  two  facts — the  Divine  power,  and  the 
Divine  wisdom.  Life  and  growth  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord.  The  common 
mercies  of  life  are  direct  Divine  gifts.  But  look  at  another  fact — the  whole  material 
life  of  the  nation,  and  of  the  world,  depends  upon  the  harvest.  If  bread  be  dear 
there  is  less  to  spend  upon  other  things.  The  price  paid  for  bread  depends  upon 
the  abundance  or  deficiency  of  the  harvest ;  and  that  fixes  the  amount  of  production 
which  can  safely  be  ventured  upon ;  and  that  again,  the  wages  that  can  be  paid ; 
and  that  again,  the  condition  of  every  poor  man's  cottage,  and  of  every  rich  man's 
mansion  throughout  the  land,  and  throughout  the  world.  Manna!  An  inter- 
national aspect  of  the  question  is  thus  unfolded.  The  necessities  of  peoples,  and 
the  abrogation  of  distance,  and  their  separations  by  steam,  have  led  to  a  freer  ex- 
change of  commodities.  We  have  had  three  or  four  poor  harvests,  but  bread  has 
not  risen  as  it  must  otherwise  have  done!  Why?  Distant  supplies  have  been 
available :  we  are  not  now  dependent  only  on  our  own  harvest.     II.  Consider  the 

CEASING    OF    THE    MANNA   IN    CONNECTION    WITH     THE     DEVELOPMENT     OF     THE    PEOPLE'S 

LIFE.  The  gathering  of  manna  from  the  ground  was  a  short  and  simple  affair,  re- 
quiring neither  much  skill  nor  wit.  In  the  land  miracles  ceased,  and  means  had  to 
be  employed.  Gifts  are  not  so  helpful  as  labour.  To  earn  a  fortune  is  better  than 
to  inherit  one.  III.  The  ceasing  op  the  manna  suggests  the  kemov.u,  of  things 
ON  which  human  happiness  seems  here  wholly  to  depend.     rV.   Canaan  was  a 

TYPE  OF  heaven,  AND  THE  CEASING  OF  THE  BREAD  OF  THE  WILDERNESS  SUGGESTS 
THE    CONTRAST    BETWEEN    THE    CONDITION    OF   LIFE    HERE    AND   THERE.        We    shall    lose 

much  we  here  deem  essential,  but  it  is  far  better.  What  will  it  be  to  be  there  ?  It 
is  the  harvest-life  of  earth  and  time  and  the  redeemed  Church.  (TT^.  H.  Davison.) 
Corn  for  manna: — After  receiving  the  title-deeds  of  an  estate,  the  next  step  is  to 
enter  into  possession.  And  one  of  the  best  evidences  that  this  has  been  done,  is  to 
take  the  use  of  all  that  the  inheritance  contains.  Thus  the  Israel  of  God  acted. 
First  they  celebrate  the  solemn  feast  of  the  Passover,  and  then  partake  of  the  fruits 
of  the  land.  In  this  connection  two  things  are  coupled  together,  the  eating  of  the 
corn  and  the  cessation  of  the  manna.  I.  This  sudden  change  would  bring  to 
MIND  God's  power.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  our  ears  may  get  so  accustomed 
to  a  sound  as  to  be  unconscious  of  it.  In  like  manner  men  may  get  so  accustomed 
to  the  wonders  of  God's  might  as  to  be  unmoved  by  them.  But  this  sudden 
stoppage  of  the  manna  must  have  arrested  them  all.  It  would  be  as  if  the  sun  had 
risen  in  the  west.  How  strikingly  would  it  teach  them  that  this  was  a  gift  of 
Almighty  power !  The  manna  came  not  a  day  sooner  than  it  was  needed,  and  it 
did  not  stay  a  day  later.  They  beheld  the  manna  no  more :  but  they  saw  instead 
fields  white  unto  the  harvest,  and  the  power  of  Jehovah  matured  the  one  as  truly  as 
it  sent  the  other.  God  has  been  supplying  our  wants  of  mind,  body,  and  estate 
during  all  the  past  years  of  our  life ;  and  it  may  be  we  have  been  forgetting  that 
we  owe  all  to  Ilis  power ;  therefore,  to  rouse  us  to  this  consciousness,  He  cuts  off 


CHAP,  v.]  JOSHUA.  95 

these  supplies.  The  shock  is  great.  Astonishment  fills  our  hearts.  Sorrow  lays 
hold  on  us ;  indeed,  we  may  be  tempted  to  despair.  Is  this  seemly  ?  Nay.  If  we 
are  His  there  is  never  room  for  despair.  We  can  never  drift  beyond  His  love  and 
care.  He  who  has  provided  for  the  past  will  provide  for  the  future.  IL  The 
cessation  of  the  manna  would  also  magnify  His  qeace.  Whatever  their  feelings 
and  thoughts  and  deeds,  whatever  their  spiritual  state  during  these  years,  His 
supply  never  varied,  was  never  suspended  for  a  single  day.  And  surely  in  our 
earthly  course  we  too  have  had  experience  of  this  goodness  of  God.  Notwithstand- 
ing our  forgetfuLness,  thanklessness,  rebellion,  He  has  never  cast  us  off,  He  has 
never  left  us  to  ourselves.  He  who  has  thus  dealt  with  us  in  the  past,  will  continue 
to  do  so  to  the  end.  HI.  This  event  would  also  exalt  His  liberalitt.  There  is 
a  great  change  in  the  material  supplied  to  Israel  for  its  physical  wants.  But  it  ii  a 
change,  not  from  better  to  worse,  rather  from  good  to  better.  For  forty  years  they 
had  been  accustomed  to  food  of  the  same  flavour ;  now  there  is  great  diversity,  a 
supply  to  suit  every  taste.  During  these  past  years  the  supply  was  measured,  there 
was  a  fixed  quantity  for  each  ;  now  the  store  is  unlimited.  As  it  was  with  Israel  in 
regard  to  this  bodily  provision,  so  it  is  with  the  children  of  God  in  regard  to  that 
which  is  spiritual.  They  receive  grace  and  more  grace.  They  go  from  strength  to 
strength.  With  ever-increasing  capacity  comes  more  and  more  abundant  supply. 
And  this  law  not  only  regulates  the  Christian  experience  on  earth  and  in  time,  it 
will  also  hold  in  heaven  and  in  eternity.  Faith,  hope,  and  love  are  graces  that 
abide  for  ever.  TV.  This  cessation  of  the  manna  would  also  serve  to  display 
God's  cabefulness.  God  is  very  liberal,  but  with  all  His  liberaUty  there  is  no 
wastefulness.  God  always  appraises  His  gifts  at  their  true  value,  and  would  have 
us  do  the  same.  God  will  never  be  so  lavish  of  His  gifts  as  to  allow  them  to  be 
scorned  as  superfluous.  When  He  gives  them  the  abundance  of  Canaan  He  takes 
away  the  manna.  When  men  become  careless  or  indifferent  concerning  His 
heavenly  gifts,  we  need  never  be  surprised  if  He  takes  them  away.  V.  This 
cessation  of  the  manna  also  exhibited  God's  wisdom.  The  manna  was  suited 
to  the  state  of  the  people  in  the  wilderness,  it  was  not  so  convenient  an  article  of 
food  in  Canaan.  Whether  or  not  it  was  more  nourishing,  it  did  not  demand  the 
same  punctuality  and  regularity  in  gathering,  and  therefore  was  more  suitable  as 
the  supply  of  soldiers.  Corn  would  keep  for  an  indefinite  time,  manna  would  not ; 
therefore  for  those  whose  time  would  be  so  fully  occupied,  and  yet  whose  hours  of 
rest  and  work  would  be  so  uncertain,  the  corn  was  better.  Also  to  have  continued 
the  supply  regularly  or  intermittently,  even  for  those  who  were  not  fighting,  would 
have  bred  indolent  and  luxurious  habits.  It  is  good  for  man  to  be  busy.  As  it  is 
with  material  things  so  it  is  with  spiritual.  As  the  manna  was  taken  away,  so 
often  spiritual  experiences  vanish  to  make  room  for  others.  Anything  which  does 
not  serve  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  first  given  may  well  be  taken  away.  Thus 
we  find  as  we  pass  through  time  that  though  many  gifts,  good,  seasonable, 
necessary,  are  taken  away,  there  are  always  compensations  which  leave  us  no 
losers,  (a.  B.  Mackay.)  Corn  in  place  of  manna : — This  subject  leads  me,  first, 
to  speak  of  special  relief  for  special  emergency ;  and,  secondly,  of  the  old  com  of 
the  Gospel  for  ordinary  circumstances.  If  these  Israelites  crossing  the  wilderness 
had  not  received  bread  from  the  heavenly  bakeries,  there  would,  first,  have  been  a 
long  line  of  dead  children  half  buried  in  the  sand ;  then,  there  would  have  been 
a  long  line  of  dead  women  waiting  for  the  jackals  ;  then,  there  would  have  been  a 
long  line  of  dead  men  unburied,  because  there  would  have  been  no  one  to  bury 
them.  It  would  have  been  told  in  the  history  of  the  world  that  a  great  company  of 
good  people  started  out  from  Egypt  for  Canaan,  and  were  never  heard  of,  as 
thoroughly  lost  in  the  wilderness  of  sand  as  the  City  of  Boston  and  the  President 
were  lost  in  the  wilderness  of  waters.  What  use  was  it  to  them  that  there  was 
plenty  of  corn  in  Canaan,  or  plenty  of  corn  in  Egypt?  "^Tiat  they  wanted  was 
something  to  eat  right  there,  when  there  was  not  so  much  as  a  grass-blade.  In 
other  words,  an  especial  supply  for  an  especial  emergency.  That  is  what  some  of 
you  want.  The  ordinary  comfort,  the  ordinary  direction,  the  ordinary  counsel,  do 
not  seem  to  meet  your  case.  There  are  those  who  feel  that  they  must  have  an 
omnipotent  and  immediate  supply,  and  you  shaU  have  it.  Is  it  pain  and  physical 
distress  through  which  you  must  go  ?  Does  not  Jesus  know  aU  about  pain?  He  has 
a  mixture  of  comfort,  one  drop  of  which  shall  cure  the  worst  paroxysm.  Is  it  ap- 
proaching sorrow  ?  Have  you  been  calculating  your  capacity  or  incapacity  to  endure 
widowhood  or  childlessness  or  disbanded  home,  and  cried,  "  I  cannot  endure  it "  ? 
Oh,  worried  soul,  you  will  wake  up  amidst  all  your  troubles,  and  find  round  about 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  y. 

you  the  sweet  consolation  of  the  Gospel  as  thickly  strewed  as  was  the  manna  round 
about  the  Israelitish  encampment  I     Especial  solace  for  especial  distress.     Or  is  it 
a  trouble  past,  yet  present  ?    A  silent  nursery  ?    A  vacant  chair  opposite  you  at  the 
table  ?     Oh,  try  a  httle  of  this  wilderness  manna :  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  I  will 
never  forsake  thee."    "  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,"  &c.     But  after 
fourteen    thousand    six   hundred    consecutive  days  of  falling  manna — Sundays 
excepted — the  manna  ceased.    Some  of  them  were  glad  of  it.    You  know  they  had 
complained  to  their  leader,  and  wondered  that  they  had  to  eat  manna  instead  of 
onions.    Now  the  fare  is  changed.     Those  people  in  that  wandering  army  under 
forty  years  of  age  had  never  seen  a  cornfield,  and  now,  when  they  hear  the  leaves 
rustling  and  see  the  tassels  waving,  and  the  billows  of  green  flowing  over  the  plain 
as  the  wind  touched  them,  it  must  have  been  a  new  and  lively  sensation.    "Com!" 
cried  the  old  man,  as  he  opened  an  ear.     "Com!"    cried  the  children,  as  they 
counted  the  shining  grains.     "  Corn  I  "  shouted  the  vanguard  of  the  host,  as  they 
burst  open  the  granaries  of  the  affrighted  population,  the  granaries  that  had  been 
left  in  the  possession  of  the  victorious  Israelites.     Then  the  fire  was  kindled,  and 
the  ears  of  corn  were  thrust  into  it,  and,  fresh  and  crisp  and  tender,  were  devoured 
of  the  hungry  victors  ;  and  bread  was  prepared,  and  many  things  that  can  be  made 
out  of  flour  regaled  appetites  sharpened  by  the  long  march.     "And  the  manna 
ceased  on  the  morrow  after  they  had  eaten  of  the  old  corn  of  the  land."     Blessed 
be  God,  we  stand  in  just  such  a  field  to-day,  the  luxuriant  grain  coming  above  the 
girdle,  the  air  fuU  of  the  odours  of  the  ripe  old  corn  of  the  Gospel  Canaan.    "  Oh  1 " 
you  say,  "  the  fare  is  too  plain."    Then  I  remember  you  will  soon  get  tired  of  a 
fanciful  diet.     We  soon  weary  of  the  syrups  and  the  custards  and  the  whipped 
foam  of  fanciful  religionists,  and  we  cry,  "  Give  us  plain  bread  made  out  of  the  old 
com  of  the  Gospel  Canaan."    This  is  the  only  food  that  can  quell  the  soul's  hunger. 
Christ  is  the  Bread  of  Life,  and  taking  Him,  you  live  and  live  for  ever.    But,  you 
say,  corn  is  of  but  little  practical  use  unless  it  is  threshed  and  ground  and  baked. 
I  answer,  this  Gospel  corn  has  gone  through  that  process.     When  on  Calvary  all 
the  hoofs  of  human  scorn  came  down  on  the  heart  of  Christ,  and  aU  the  flails  of 
Satanic  fury  beat  Him  long  and  fast,  was  not  the  corn  threshed  ?    When  the  mills 
of  God's  indignation  against  sin  caught  Christ  between  the  upper   and  nether 
rollers,  was  not  the  com  ground?     Oh,  yes  I      Christ  is  ready.     His  pardon  all 
ready  ;  His  peace  all  ready  ;  everything  ready  in  Christ.    Are  you  ready  for  Him  ? 
There  is  another  characteristic  about  bread,  and  that  is,  you  never  get  tired  of 
it.     There  are  people  here  seventy  years  of  age  who  find  it  just  as  appropriate  for 
their  appetite  as  they  did  when,  in  boyhood,  their  mother  cut  a  slice  of  it  clear 
around  the  loaf.     You  have  not  got  tired  of  bread,  and  that  is  a  characteristic 
of  the  gospel.     I  notice,  in  regard  to  this  article  of  food,  you  take  it  three  times  a 
day.     It  is  on  your  table  morning,  noon,  and  night ;  and  if  it  is  forgotten,  you 
say,  "  Where  is  the  bread  ? "      Just  so  certainly  you  need  Jesus  three  times  a 
day.     Oh,  do  not  start  out  without  Him ;  do  not  dare  to  go  out  of  the  front  door, 
without  having  first  communed  with  Him  1    Before  noon  there  may  be  perils  that 
win  destroy  body,  mind,  and  soul  for  ever.     You  cannot  afford  to  do  without  Him. 
You  will,  during  the  day,  be  amidst  sharp  hoofs  and  swift  wheels  and  dangerous 
Bcaffoldings  threatening  the  body,  and  traps  for  the  soul  that  have  taken  some 
who  are  more  wily  than  you.    When  they  launch  a  ship  they  break  against  the 
side  of  it  a  bottle  of  wine.    That  is  a  sort  of  superstition  among  sailors.    But  oh, 
on  the  launching  of  every  day,  that  we  might  strike  against  it  at  least  one  earnest 
prayer  for  Divine  protection  1    Then  at  the  apex  of  the  day,  at  the  tiptop  of  the 
hours,  equidistant  from  morning  and  night,  look  three  ways.    Look  backward  to 
the  forenoon ;  look  ahead  to  the  afternoon ;  look  up  to  that  Saviour  who  presides 
over  all.    Bread  at  noon  I    When  the  evening  hour  comes,  and  your  head  is 
buzzing  with  the  day's  engagements,  and  your  whole  nature  is  sore  from  the 
abrasion  of  rough  life,  and  you  see  a  great  many  duties  you  have  neglected,  then 
commune  with  Christ,  asking  His  pardon,  thanking  Him  for  His  love.    That  would 
be  a  queer  evening  repast  at  which  there  was  no  bread.    This  is  the  nutriment  and 
life  of  the  plain  Gospel  that  I  recommended  you.    But  alas  for  the  famine-struck  1 
Enough  com,  yet  it  seems  you  have  no  sickle  to  cut  it,  no  mill  to  grind  it,  no  fire  to 
bake  it,  no  appetite  to  eat  it.    Starving  to  death,  when  the  plain  is  golden  with  a 
magnificent  harvest  I     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)        The  cetsation  of  the  manna: — 
The  special  supply  ceased  with  the  special  demand.  They  were  not  to  look  for  extra- 
ordinary relief  when,  with  due  diUgence  on  their  part,  the  ordinary  would  suffice. 
This  fact  suggests  some  important  points  with  regard  to  the  government  of  Qod. 


CHAP,  v.]  JOSHUA.  97 

1.  There  is  no  wastefulness  in  the  Divine  economy.  God  does  not  use  extraordinary 
means  where  the  ordinary  will  avail  to  accomplish  His  purposes.  We  can  easily 
conceive  how,  out  of  a  prodigality  of  power,  the  manna  might  have  been  continued 
long  after  the  land  of  Canaan  had  been  reached  ;  it  might  have  been  argued  that 
such  a  continuance  would  be  very  helpful  to  the  Israelites,  supplying  them  with  a 
perpetual  and  visible  reminder  of  God's  care  for  them.  The  answer  is,  that  at  any 
rate  such  a  continuance  was  not  granted  ;  and  further,  that  it  is  not  our  Father's 
way  to  permit  the  repetition  of  an  aid  the  absolute  necessity  for  which  has  departed. 
He  is  glorious  in  giving,  but  there  is  with  Him  no  expenditure  which  would  only 
tend  to  produce  in  the  long  run  a  contempt  for  His  daily,  His  common.  His  highest, 
gifts.  This  principle  is  of  widest  application.  "When  the  Lord  Jesus  came  to 
establish  His  kingdom,  He  wrought  miracles  in  abundance ;  but  when  in  the  course 
of  time  the  Church  became  firmly  established,  and  the  truth  of  the  gospel  was 
made  evident  by  its  renewing  power  over  men,  then  the  miracles  gradually  ceased, 
and  that  not  because  the  Church  had  gone  backward,  but  because  she  had  advanced, 
and  her  claims  could  rest  upon  proofs  of  a  more  spiritual  order.  This  principle 
receives  a  yet  further  illustration  in  the  fact  that,  whilst  the  Lord  displays  His 
power,  He  yet  takes  up  the  work  directly  only  when  man  is  compelled  to  lay  it 
down.  The  manna  of  the  desert  did  not  supplant  the  sowing  and  reaping  of 
Canaan.  Christ  will  raise  the  httle  child  to  life,  but  her  parents  must  &id  her 
something  to  eat.  Christ  will  speak  the  word  of  power,  only  possible  to  Him, 
"  Lazarus,  come  forth,"  but  human  hands  must  roll  away  the  stone,  and  unbind 
the  grave-clothes  from  the  man  risen  from  the  dead.  An  angel  struck  the  fetters 
from  the  limbs  of  Peter,  and  brought  him  out  of  the  prison,  but  after  that  the 
apostle  must  put  forth  his  own  efforts  in  order  to  escape  the  rage  of  his  persecutors. 
In  all  these  cases  a  Divine  power  might  have  accomplished  the  whole  transaction ; 
but  it  did  not,  and  it  does  not  now.  God  is  pleased  in  His  mercy  to  give  to  us 
certain  powers,  all  His  and  yet  ours,  ours  and  yet  His,  and  it  is  for  us  diligently  to 
U3e  them.  In  no  impious  sense  we  may  say  that  God  helps  those  who  help  them- 
selves. We  have  seen  that  there  is  with  God  no  useless  expenditure.  He  does 
what  is  sufficient,  but  not  more  than  sufficient,  for  the  occasion.  Now,  if  that  be 
true,  how  vast  in  His  eyes  must  be  the  needs  of  sinners,  how  heavy  the  task  of 
saving  them,  that  in  order  to  its  accomplishment  it  was  needful  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  should  come  to  suffer  and  die.  The  greatness  of  the  Eedeemer  argues  the 
magnitude  of  the  work  of  redemption.  2.  But  further,  whilst  there  is  no  waste  in 
the  Divine  economy,  yet  there  are  special  provisions  for  special  occasions.  There 
is  here,  if  we  can  lay  hold  of  it,  a  truth  for  us,  full  of  real  comfort,  instinct  with 
hope.  What  was  the  case  of  the  Israelites  ?  It  was  this.  By  no  ingenuity,  by  no 
conceivable  diligence  upon  their  part,  could  the  necessities  of  the  vast  host  of  men, 
women,  and  children  have  been  supplied  in  the  wilderness,  and  yet  these  very 
necessities  arose  because  at  the  command  of  the  Most  High  the  journey  from  Egypt 
to  Canaan  had  been  undertaken.  That  is,  it  was  the  path  of  duty  which  was  thus 
beset  with  difficulty.  That  being  so,  the  Israelites  could  rightly  look  up  to  God  to 
have  their  wants  supplied.  If  the  Lord  Jesus  bids  a  dozen  men  supply  five  thousand 
with  bread.  He  Himself  multiplies  the  tiny  store  until  there  is  enough  and  to  spare. 
If  He  commands  a  paralytic  to  take  up  his  bed  and  walk.  He  gives  the  strength  by 
which  the  command  can  be  accomplished.  The  manna  given  to  the  Israelites  in 
the  sanely  desert  is  a  symbol  of  the  most  helpful  truth,  that  God  will  not  fail  us  in 
any  difficulty  that  may  come  to  us  in  doing  His  wUI.  Our  principal  business  is  not 
to  perplex  ourselves  with  a  thousand  questions  as  to  how  we  may  accomplish  this 
or  that ;  our  anxiety  should  gather  about  an  earlier  point  and  a  simpler — namely, 
what  is  the  path  of  duty — have  we  a  right  to  enter  upon  such  and  such  manifest 
duties  and  burdens  ?  If  the  command  is  plain,  let  us  obey.  If  God  point  the  way, 
then,  even  if  it  visibly  lead  into  perplexing  responsibilities,  expectant  faith  is  the 
highest  reason,  and  the  soundest  wisdom  is  hope  in  Him.  Yes,  without  doubt,  we 
have  a  right  to  look  for  special  supplies  for  special  needs.  3.  There  remains  one 
more  truth  necessary  for  the  completion  of  the  subject  before  us,  namely,  th^t,  on 
the  whole,  the  ordinary  conditions  are  the  highest,  the  best,  the  most  abiding. 
Which  was  really  the  best  state,  the  wandering  or  the  settlement,  the  desert  or 
Canaan  ?  And  yet  the  first  condition  was  that  of  manifold  miracles,  the  water  from 
the  rock,  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  of  fire,  the  daily  manna;  the  latter,  that  in  which 
the  people  were  handed  over  to  the  ordinary  conditions  of  life — they  had  to  sow 
and  till  and  reap,  to  buy  and  sell,  even  as  we.  The  new  convert  has  experiences 
which  by  and  by  yield  to  firmer  principles ;  his  love  may  deepen  and  become 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

infinitely  stronger  in  its  influence  upon  him,  and  yet  some  of  the  peculiar  brightness 
of  the  early  days  may  have  departed.  There  are  times  of  great  exaltation,  of  move- 
ment, of  excitement,  in  the  history  of  churches,  but  it  has  yet  to  be  proved  that 
these  are  indeed,  all  things  considered,  the  best.  I  have  much  faith  in  quiet, 
plodding  work  in  our  churches,  in  the  continuous  use  of  such  means  of  grace  as 
God  gives  us,  the  common  corn  of  the  land.  I  have  much  faith  too  in  the  power 
of  a  quiet,  steady  Christian  life,  which  is  regularly  fed  with  the  Word  of  God  and 
with  prayer.  The  exaltation  of  the  special  above  the  ordinary  has  even  served  to 
keep  men  from  accepting  Jesus  Christ,  by  obscuring  the  simplicity  of  that  faith  by 
whichwe  are  saved.  {E.  Medley.)  Divine  giving  and  withholding: — I.  The  faith- 
fulness OF  God  to  His  fkiends.  II.  God  will  not  work  miracles  when  He  can 
MEET  His  children's  needs  bt  ordinary  methods.  III.  A  TEMPORAL  blessing  is 
sometimes  removed  when  it  has  WROUGHT  THE  DESIRED  SPIRITUAL  END.  (TT'.  Harris.) 
The  old  gospel  or  the  new  7 — In  the  pulpit  of  our  times  we  have  two  different 
gospels,  each  calling  itself  Christian  and  each  asserting  its  superior  excellence. 
The  one  is  satisfied  to  rest  on  the  testimony  of  God,  to  stand  by  the  old  landmarks, 
to  receive  the  traditions  of  Scripture  as  delivered  by  prophets  and  apostles,  and  with 
these  to  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  dehvered  to  the  saints.  The  other,  or 
new  gospel,  sets  out  from  the  principle  that  Christianity,  hke  any  other  system  of 
human  knowledge,  is  an  evolution  and  development.  There  is  no  absolute  standard 
of  truth  back  in  the  past ;  the  only  standard  is  in  man  himself— the  highly  educated 
man  of  the  present,  the  advanced  and  incomparable  man  of  the  future.  Some 
things  are  all  the  better  for  being  new.  But  religion  is  not  one  of  them.  In  a 
world  of  doubt  and  uncertainty,  it  is  no  small  proof  of  the  truth  and  excellence  of 
the  gospel  that  it  is  so  old,  that  it  has  been  so  long  tried  and  so  fully  tested — tried 
and  tested  in  the  crucibles  of  experiment,  in  the  very  fires  of  persecution.  1.  This 
is  the  gospel  which  first  converted  the  world.  It  was  not  liberalism,  but  the 
doctrine  of  Christ's  atonement  for  sin  and  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which 
converted  the  three  thousand  sinners  of  Jerusalem  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  WiU 
any  one  tell  us  how  long  it  would  have  taken  the  rose-water  gospel  of  our  modern 
dilettante  to  have  done  this  work  ?  2.  It  is  this  old  gospel  alone  that  has  sustained 
the  Christian  martyrs  of  all  ages  and  all  lands  under  their  trials  and  persecutions. 
Who  cares  for  science,  literature,  or  art,  when  racked  with  pain  and  passing  through 
the  valley  and  shadow  of  death  ?  Talk  to  us  of  God,  tell  us  of  heaven,  show  us  the 
way  to  God  and  heaven,  is  then  the  high  and  only  demand.  3.  It  was  the  preach- 
ing of  this  old  gospel  that  awakened  the  Church  to  new  life  and  produced  the  great 
reformation  of  the  sixteenth  century.  It  was  as  life  from  the  dead,  and  Pentecostal 
baptism  from  heaven,  when  God  raised  up  the  great  refoi-mers,  and  by  His  grace 
enabled  them,  with  a  restored  Bible,  to  proclaim  again  from  the  pulpit  and  the  press 
the  grand  distinguishing  truths  of  the  ancient  faith.  4.  This  again  is  the  only 
gospel  that  has  ever  founded  and  sustained  missions  to  the  heathen.  The  new 
gospel  of  moderatism,  of  sentiment  and  art,  or  philosophical  superiority  to  aU 
creeds  as  equally  good  or  indifferent,  has  never  aspired  to  the  dignity  of  converting 
the  world  to  Christ.  6.  Other  grounds  might  be  added  for  adherence  to  the  old 
gospel — as  that  it  has  produced  all  the  greatest  characters  in  history,  has  founded 
all  the  great  institutions  of  Christendom,  has  caused  all  the  great  revivals  of  religion 
in  the  Church,  has  been  adorned  by  all  the  greatest  preachers  and  evangelists  of  all 
ages — in  a  word,  has  accomplished  nine-tenths,  if  not  ninety-nine  hundredths,  of  all 
the  good  that  has  thus  far  been  accompUshed  in  the  world.  {Prof.  Leroy  J.  Hulsey.) 
Miracle  and  the  commonplace : — It  is  a  strange  thing  to  read  that  when  at  last  the 
long-promised  land  had  been  attained  there  should  be  a  diminution  of  the  splendour 
of  that  Divine  assistance  which  had  attended  the  chosen  people  throughout  their 
wanderings  in  the  wilderness.  "  The  manna  ceased  on  the  day  after  they  had  eaten 
the  old  corn  of  the  land."  That  is  to  say,  the  experience  of  the  Israelites  was  one 
which  swept  down  from  the  experience  of  splendid  and  wonderful  works  into  that 
of  ordinary,  commonplace  operation  of  the  laws  of  nature.  It  looks  a  backward 
step.  We,  too,  envy  those  who  lived  in  the  days  when  manna  fell  from  h(  nven  and 
the  water  came  forth  from  the  smitten  rock,  when  the  Jordan  was  cleft  in  twain, 
and  men,  without  striking  a  blow,  felt  that  the  Divine  arm  was  outstretched  on 
their  behalf.  Or  our  thoughts  may  go  back  to  the  life  of  Him  who  lived  in  the 
world,  not  merely  the  life  of  beauty,  but  the  life  of  power,  and  we  may  envy  those 
who  were  privileged  to  walk  at  His  side  and  see  His  hand  stretched  forth  to  touch 
the  leper  and  he  was  healed,  to  raise  the  dead  to  life  again.  The  dawn  of  early  life 
has  passed  away,  and  with  it  the  splendour  of  the  morning,  and  all  that  we  may 


CHAP,  v.]  JOSHUA,  99 

claim  is  to  live  in  a  light  which  has  faded  down  to  the  mere  light  of  common  day. 
It  is  a  step  downwards,  we  say,  from  those  days  of  wondrous  power  to  the  days  in 
which  we  can  trace  but  little  of  the  Divine  in  our  midst.  My  purpose  is  to  ask  you 
to  notice  that  so  far  from  this  transition  from  the  extraordinary  to  the  ordinary  being 
a  step  downwards  in  the  education  of  human  beings  it  is  distinctly  a  step  upwards : 
that  the  whole  story,  if  we  will  read  it  aright,  may  show  us  that  God  is  leading  us 
to  far  clearer  and  more  constant  manifestations  of  Himself.  Your  life  and  mine  is 
real  and  strong  in  proportion  as  it  is  filled  with  a  clear  conception  of  God,  in  pro- 
portion as  it  is  full  of  spiritual  vigour  within,  and  in  proportion  as  it  is  energetic 
towards  those  whom  we  meet  abroad.  In  those  three  relationships  life  finds  its 
perfection.  It  does  not  find  its  perfection  in  itself  alone ;  it  is  related  by  origin 
with  God.  And  therefore  it  cannot  grow  out  in  fruition  and  in  perfection  of  beauty 
at  all  except  in  certain  conscious  relationship  to  Him.  It  cannot  ripen  in  the  mere 
consciousness  of  God,  because  we  are  moral  beings  and  we  must  ripen  within  our- 
selves ;  neither  can  we  ripen  within  ourselves  without  relationship  to  our  feUow-men, 
for  God  has  put  us  in  the  midst  of  those  men  where  the  very  order  of  things  is  a 
social  order ;  and  we  grow  not  merely  by  the  law  of  our  own  inward  development, 
but  we  grow  also  by  the  law  of  contact  and  association  with  our  brother  men.  And 
if  you  wiU  look  at  this  story  which  teUs  us  of  the  transition  from  the  marvellous  to 
the  commonplace,  I  think  you  will  see  that  whether  you  regard  life  from  any  one  of 
these  three  points  you  are  asked  to  take  a  step  forward  and  to  move  higher.  1.  First, 
then,  the  relation  we  bear  to  God.  The  thought  which  underlies  our  regret  when  we  say 
that  we  wish  we  had  lived  in  the  days  of  more  marked  interposition  of  God  is  this — 
that  somehow  or  another  wherever  there  is  a  marvellous  or  miraculous  manifestation 
of  God  there  is  an  opportunity  of  knowing  Him  which  is  denied  to  us.  If  you  will 
reflect  you  will  see  that  on  the  contrary  the  demand  that  underlies  our  thought  is  a 
demand  which  is  destructive  of  our  conception  and  consciousness  of  God  sooner  or 
later.  What  are  we  saying  ?  We  are  saying  in  effect  this  :  we  want  to  be  back  in 
the  old  days  of  miracle,  and  we  want  the  Divine  made  known  to  us  through  His 
marvels.  What  is  that  but  saying,  "  0  Lord,  Thou  hast  made  the  world,  and  Thou 
hast  made  the  world  according  to  order,  and  laws  govern  that  world.  IBreak  Thy 
laws  that  we  may  know  Thee !  "  But  surely  that  is  to  demand  almost  an  im- 
possibility !  It  is  an  admission  that  we  have  but  little  conception  of  the  Divine 
working  at  all.  You  and  I  can  see  immediately  what  would  be  the  result.  That  which 
happens  constantly  ceases  to  be  extraordinary  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  and  there 
would  be  no  more  reason  for  believing  in  God  because  of  such  frequent  manifestations 
of  a  startling  character,  for  they  would  no  longer  be  of  the  very  character  which  we 
plead  is  their  essential  power.  But  you  say,  "  We  do  not  want  Him  to  do  this;  we 
do  not  want  Him  to  show  HimseK  thus  by  for  ever  breaking  up  His  laws,  and  being 
for  ever  doing  the  thing  which  we  now  deem  extraordinary,  but  we  do  ask  Him  to 
break  the  silence  and  let  us  see  some  startling  manifestation  of  His  presence."  And 
then  that  means  to  say  that  we  should  only  realise  Him  in  proportion  as  He  came 
and  stood  beside  us  veiled  in  these  splendours.  What,  then,  would  be  our  in- 
heritance in  God  ?  We  sliould  have  an  occasional  God,  not  a  permanent  one.  If 
we  have  any  vivid  conception  of  Him,  He  must  be  a  permanent  and  a  perpetual  God 
to  our  lives  and  our  souls.  What  you  and  I  want  is  not  a  God  of  occasional  work, 
but  the  God  of  a  perpetual  working  in  our  midst.  Therefore,  surely  we  are 
enlarging  our  thoughts  of  God  when  we  say,  "  God  is  not  only  in  the  startling 
things,  but  He  is  in  the  commonplace  things,  of  life  ;  God  is  not  only  in  the  cleft 
rock,  He  is  also  in  the  quiet  hill  and  in  the  soft  meadow ;  He  is  not  only  in  the 
cloven  sea  or  the  Jordan  struck  asunder,  but  He  is  in  the  little  burn  that  babbles  at 
our  feet."  Surely  that  gives  us  a  much  larger  and  nobler  idea  of  the  Divine  ;  that 
brings  us  into  closer  relationship  with  Him.  It  enlarges  our  conceptions ;  we  feel 
that  we  live  not  in  a  world  which  now  and  then  is  privileged  to  behold  God  as 
a  ruler,  marching  in  stately  procession  through  His  universe,  but  rather  as  the 
Father  of  His  children  who  dwells  with  them  at  all  times.  He  is  about  our  path 
and  our  bed  ;  His  tender  mercies  never  fail  to  the  sons  of  men,  but  are  over  all  His 
works.  2.  But  life  is  not  merely  made  up  thus  of  the  conceptions  which  we  have  of 
God,  but  it  is  made  up  of  our  own  personal  growth.  The  object  which  God  has,  if 
I  may  speak  with  all  reverence,  in  putting  us  into  this  little  world  for  the  tbi-ee 
score  years  auJ  ten  is  not  to  secure  our  happiness  nor  to  startle  us  into  a  kind  of 
hysterical  perception  of  His  presence,  but  to  educate  us  as  His  children.  And 
therefore,  when  we  ask  that  God  should  make  Himself  manifest  by  these  miracles 
and  wonders,  we  are  really  making  a  false  conception  of  our  own  powers  and 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

capabilities  in  relation  to  God.  For  by  what  faculty  do  you  perceive  God  ?  For 
everything  that  we  look  at  is  apprehended  by  one  faculty  or  other  that  we  possess. 
Do  I  expect  to  apprehend  Him  by  the  physical  eye  ?  Do  I  imagine  that  I  shall 
apprehend  Him  by  intellectual  effort  ?  Surely  those  are  only  conceptions  which 
belong  to  past  ideas,  crude  notions  of  God.  I  cannot  perceive  God  by  the  physical 
eye.  God  is  a  spirit  1  I  cannot  perceive  God  by  my  intellectual  powers,  because 
the  world,  by  wisdom,  knew  not  God,  and  if  He  be  God  at  all  to  me  He  is  the  Incom- 
prehensible One.  Then,  of  course,  the  miracle  and  the  wonder  are  outside  the  case, 
for  the  marvellous  can  only  speak  on  the  plane  of  things  physical  or  appeal  to  the 
power  of  the  mind,  the  intellectual  power  within  us.  Our  Lord  was  constantly 
teaching  that.  In  His  parable  of  Dives  and  Lazarus  He  uses  the  very  principle. 
Here  the  man  in  his  torment  imagines  that  a  wonder  will  convince  his  brethren. 
"  Send  Lazarus  I  Let  the  marvel  appear  !  "  And  the  only  answer  is,  "  If  they 
hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  persuaded  though  one  rose 
from  the  dead  " — in  other  words,  if  they  have  not  the  moral  capacity  to  follow  the 
teachings  of  Moses  and  the  prophets,  if  they  have  no  moral  affinity  and  sympathy 
with  the  prophets'  teaching,  no  wonder  will  give  them  that  capacity.  You  cannot 
create  a  capacity  by  a  wonder  outside  a  man.  You  cannot  make  a  blind  man  see 
red  because  he  cannot  see  pink ;  you  cannot,  by  intensifying  a  force  outside,  give 
him  a  faculty  which  is  lacking  in  himself.  The  way  in  which  you  can  understand 
God  is  by  the  exercise  of  yo' r  moral  faculties.  Jesus  Christ  was  the  greatest  moral 
teacher  that  ever  lived,  and  >vhat  is  Jesus  Christ's  emphatic  statement  concerning 
this  ?  He  says  there  are  two  faculties  by  which  God  can  be  apprehended,  one  is 
single-mindedness,  the  other  purity  of  heart.  For  so,  He  said,  "  Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  That  was  His  idea,  and  John,  the  beloved 
disciple  who  laid  his  head  upon  the  bosom  of  the  Christ,  uttered  the  same  principle 
when  he  said  that  the  only  way  by  which  God  could  be  apprehended  was 
by  the  exercise  of  a  loving  disposition.  A  loving  disposition  is  indispensable. 
You  cannot  perceive  Him  without  it,  and  you  can  understand  why.  The  reason 
is  written  down  on  the  very  surface.  How  can  you  understand  him  whose 
nature  is  loving  if  you  be  not  loving  also?  How  can  you  understand  him 
whose  nature  is  simple-minded  if  you  too  are  not  simple-minded  ?  The  faculty 
by  which  you  apprehend  God,  then,  is  not  the  intellectual,  not  the  physical, 
but  the  moral ;  and  hence  how  will  a  miracle  affect  your  moral  faculties  ? 
How  can  it  appeal  to  your  moral  powers  ?  So  that  when  you  have  asked  that  you 
should  have  a  miracle  to  show  you  God,  the  answer  of  the  thought  and  the 
answer  of  the  principle  is  the  same,  you  cannot  so  apprehend  God  unless  you 
previously  possess  the  moral  faculty  to  enable  you  to  grasp  Him.  And  if  you  will 
reflect  upon  it,  this  is  only  another  way  of  saying  what  is  true  of  everything  in  the 
world,  that  the  one  condition  by  which  you  can  understand  anything  or  anybody 
is  that  you  shall  be  in  some  degree  a  sharer  of  their  nature.  That  is  true  I  Let  us 
picture  to  ourselves  the  tourist  who  hurries  across  the  Atlantic,  and  hurries  through 
the  towns  of  Europe  in  order  to  see  or  "  to  do  "  the  Continent.  Place  him  down 
with  his  erratic  mind  untrained  before  the  greatest  masterpieces  of  art ;  plant  him 
in  the  chapel  at  Florence ;  let  him  stand  face  to  face  with  Michael  Angelo's 
creations  of  Night  and  Morning.  His  first  impression  will  be,  "  These  are  greatly 
over-praised  ;  why,  the  very  anatomy  is  faulty ;  I  cannot  see  why  people  should 
praise  these  things."  But  now  for  a  moment  imagine  that  there  drops  upon  that 
man's  soul  as  he  stands  there  some  little  portion  of  Michael  Angelo's  nature. 
What  a  transformation  takes  place  within  his  soul  in  his  power  of  perception 
at  that  moment!  Then  he  says  something  new;  then  these  "greatly  over- 
praised "  figures  begin  to  have  a  message  for  him ;  they  seem  to  speak  into 
his  life  now  because  Michael  Angelo  is  in  his  soul,  and  he  can  read  what 
Michael  Angelo  meant.  I  put  it  to  you  in  your  homes ;  measure  your  acquaint- 
ances, tabulate  them  in  your  own  mind,  and  see  what  the  result  is.  Only  where 
there  is  that  sort  of  affinity  you  can  really  enter  into  the  capacity  of  knowing 
one  another  in  the  true  friendly  sense;  and  what  is  the  secret  of  it  all?  Your 
power  of  knowing  and  entering  into  the  lives  of  these  people  depends  upon  your 
sharing  in  some  degree  their  nature.  It  is  the  same  surely  with  God.  We  talk  of 
knowing  God.  How  blind  and  foolish  we  are  1  Knowing  God,  the  measureless, 
pure  God,  the  bright  and  eternal  God,  the  God  whose  mercy  is  over  all  His  works. 
How  can  we  know  Him  if  we  be  not  righteous?  How  can  we  understand  Him  if 
we  be  not  holy?  How  can  we  enter  into  His  love  if  no  love  dwells  within  our  soul? 
It  is  the  moral  faculty,  it  is  the  possession  of  these  moral  qualities  which  are  power. 


CHAP,  y.]  JOSHUA.  101 

Hence,  when  the  message  comes  to  you,  "  Go  forward  1  rest  no  longer  upon  the 
miracle !  Eest  now  upon  the  ordinary  manifestations !"  it  is  as  if  it  said — and 
the  message  came  to  the  Israelites  as  it  comes  to  you  and  me — "  You  are  no  longer 
in  a  state  of  babyhood,  dependent  upon  these  things  outside  your  moral  nature." 
"  You  must  give  moral  co-operation  " — that  is  the  meaning  of  the  message.  You 
must  give  moral  co-operation  now  in  your  own  education,  for  only  by  that  moral 
co-operation  can  there  be  a  pure  apprehension  of  the  Divine  and  the  real  entering 
into  communion  with  Him.  Thus,  then,  it  is  a  step  upwards,  is  it  not  ?  a  step 
upwards  in  the  moral  education  of  men.  But  there  is  a  third  aspect  of  life. 
3.  Your  life  and  mine  is  a  life  of  association  with  others,  and  so  long  as  men  were 
in  the  state  in  which  they  were  surrounded  by  the  marvellous,  the  manna  fell  just 
where  they  could  gather  it  without  any  exertion,  but  the  corn  needed  to  be  sown, 
and  the  corn  needed  to  be  gathered  in  the  spot  where  it  grew,  and  therefore  the 
children  of  Israel  were  now  in  the  position  of  being  made  co-operators  in  the  work 
of  God.  And  so  it  is  for  you  and  me  to  understand  that  the  advantage  of  its 
coming  in  that  way  is  that  it  draws  us  into  partnership  with  the  work,  and  we  are 
promoted  to  a  stage  higher  when  we  are  sent  into  the  fields  to  gather,  and  when  we 
are  made  so  far  co-agents  with  God  that  in  the  great  work  of  the  distribution  of 
His  food  amongst  men  we  take  our  share.  {Bp.  Boyd  Carpenter.)  Old  corn : — 
The  old  corn  eaten  by  the  Israelites  was  to  them  a  verification  of  the  Divine  promise. 
Abraham  was  a  pilgrim  in  Canaan,  but  he  could  mentally  claim  the  whole  land 
for  his  descendants.  When  Lot  left  him  for  the  rich  plain  of  the  Jordan,  the  Lord 
said  to  him  (Gen.  xiii.  14-16).  This  was  a  great  promise  for  the  patriarch ;  also 
for  his  son  and  grandson,  to  whom  it  was  in  substance  repeated.  But  what  about 
those  Israelites  in  Egypt  whose  hands  and  faces  were  smeared  with  the  clay  of  the 
brickyards  ?  There  were  probably  times  when  they  thought  the  promise  was  for- 
gotten. But  the  promise  was  not  forgotten,  and  every  grain  of  the  old  corn  eaten 
by  the  Israelites  was  a  proof  of  God's  fidelity  to  His  word.  We  are  reminded  by 
com,  whether  old  or  new,  that  God  is  an  active  power  in  the  world.  We  may  talk 
about  germination  and  the  fructifying  influences  of  dew,  rain,  and  sunshine ;  but 
behind  all  secondary  causes  there  is  the  great  First  Cause.  In  Tibet  there  is  a 
sacred  tree  which  is  said  to  bear  on  its  leaves  hymns,  litanies,  and  pictures  of 
Buddha.  On  grains  of  corn,  it  we  look  aright,  we  shall  see  psalms  in  praise  of 
God's  truthfulness  and  pictures  of  God's  goodness.  He  whose  finger  has  yearly 
given  a  vitaUsing  touch  to  the  seed  in  the  ground,  and  shown  His  beneficence  in  a 
long  succession  of  harvests  has  not  failed,  and  will  not  fail,  in  either  His  threatenings 
or  His  promises.  The  corn  eaten  by  the  Israelites  was  old,  and  therefore  good 
corn.  LE  it  had  been  badly  harvested  it  would  have  sprouted,  and  when  parched 
or  made  into  cakes  would  have  lacked  the  right  flavour.  It  was  in  prime  condition, 
and  so  was  a  treat  to  the  Israelites  after  their  long  diet  of  manna.  In  the  Bible 
we  have  what  may  be  spoken  of  as  old  com.  The  truths  which  God  has  given 
for  the  nourishment  of  our  souls  are  not  of  recent  date,  but  bear  the  impress  of 
primitive  years.  We  are  not  to  despise  those  truths  because  they  are  old ;  if  they 
are  old,  they  are  a  glory  for  modern  times.  Whenever  the  Church  has  risen  to  new 
life,  it  has  been  because  of  a  return  to  biblical  beliefs  and  biblical  methods  of 
activity.  When,  however,  the  Church  has  become  little  more  than  a  gorgeously 
decorated  petrifaction,  it  has  been  revived  by  the  old  corn  of  simple  doctrine. 
Novelties  in  theology  may  be  attractive,  but  they  cannot  do  for  us  what  is  done 
by  doctrines  which  are  ancient  without  being  antiquated,  and  venerable  without 
being  enfeebled  by  years.  Much  as  men  have  grown  in  science  and  literature,  they 
have  not  so  grown  religiously  as  to  be  independent  of  the  atonement.  We  need  the 
old  truths,  and  we  can  no  more  do  without  them  for  our  souls  than  we  can  do 
without  bread  made  of  sound  corn  for  our  bodies.  {J.  Marrat.)  The  Divine  law 
of  economy  : — A  law  of  economy,  we  might  almost  say  parsimony,  prevails,  side  by 
side  with  the  exercise  of  unbounded  liberality.  Jesus  multiplies  the  loaves  and 
fishes  to  feed  the  multitude,  but  He  will  not  let  one  fragment  be  lost  that  remains 
after  the  feast.  A  similar  law  guides  the  economy  of  prayer.  We  have  no  right  to 
ask  that  mercies  may  come  to  us  through  extraordinary  channels  when  it  is  in  our 
power  to  get  them  by  ordinary  means.  If  it  is  in  our  power  to  procure  bread  by 
our  labour,  we  dare  not  ask  it  to  be  sent  direct.  We  are  only  too  prone  to  make 
prayer  at  the  eleventh  hour  an  excuse  for  want  of  diligence  or  want  of  courage  in 
what  bears  on  the  prosperity  of  the  spiritual  life.  It  may  be  that  of  His  great 
generosity  God  sometimes  blesses  us,  even  though  we  have  made  a  very  inadequate 
use  of  the  ordinary  means.    Bat  on  that  we  have  no  right  to  presume.    We  are 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

fond  of  short  and  easy  methods  -where  the  natural  method  would  be  long  and 
laborious.  But  here  cei-tainly  we  find  the  working  of  natural  law  in  the  spiritual 
world.  We  cannot  look  for  God's  blessing  without  diligent  use  of  God's  appointed 
means.  (W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.)  The  loss  of  one  kind  of  advantage  is  compensated 
by  the  advent  of  another : — In  childhood  and  early  youth  we  depend  for  our  growth 
in  knowledge  on  the  instructions  of  our  teachers.  What  puzzles  us  we  refer  to 
them,  and  they  guide  us  through  the  diflSculty.  If  they  are  wise  teachers  they  will 
not  tell  us  everything,  but  they  will  put  us  on  the  right  method  to  find  out.  StOl 
they  are  there  as  a  court  of  appeal,  so  to  speak,  and  we  have  always  the  satisfaction 
of  a  last  resort.  But  the  time  comes  when  we  bid  farewell  to  teachers.  Happily 
it  is  the  time  when  the  judgment  becomes  self-reliant,  independent,  penetrating. 
We  are  thrown  mainly  upon  our  own  resources.  The  manna  ceases,  and  we  eat 
the  fruit  of  the  land.  So  in  family  life.  The  affection  that  binds  parents  and 
children,  brothers  and  sisters,  to  one  another  in  the  family  is  both  beautiful  and 
delightful ;  and  it  were  no  wonder  if,  on  the  part  of  some,  there  were  the  desire  that 
their  intercourse  should  suffer  no  rude  break,  but  go  on  unchanged  for  an  indefinite 
time.  But  it  is  seldom  God's  wiU  that  family  life  shall  remain  unbroken.  Often 
the  interruption  comes  in  the  rudest  and  most  terrible  form — by  the  death  of  the 
head  of  the  house.  It  is  often  a  painful  and  distressing  change.  But  at  least  it 
wakens  up  all  who  can  do  anything ;  it  rescues  them  from  the  temptation  of  a 
slumbering,  aimless  life,  and  often  draws  out  useful  gifts  that  turn  their  lives  into  a 
real  blessing.  And  there  are  other  compensations.  As  old  attachments  are 
snapped,  new  are  gradually  formed.  And  even  in  old  age  a  law  of  compensation 
often  comes  in  :  children  and  children's  children  bring  new  interests  and  pleasures, 
and  the  green  hues  of  youth  modify  the  grey  of  age.  Then  there  is  the  happy 
experience  by  which  the  advent  of  spiritual  blessings  compensates  the  loss  of 
temporal.  Such  instances  are  not  uncommon  as  that  which  the  Kev.  Charles 
Simeon  gives,  in  speaking  of  some  blind  men  from  Edinburgh  whom  nearly  a 
century  ago  he  found  at  work  in  a  country  house  in  Scotland :  "  One  of  the  blind 
men,  on  being  interrogated  with  respect  to  his  knowledge  of  spiritual  things, 
answered,  '  I  never  saw  till  I  was  blind  ;  nor  did  I  ever  know  contentment  while  I 
had  my  eyesight,  as  I  do  now  that  I  have  lost  it ;  I  can  truly  affiim,  though  few 
know  how  to  credit  me,  that  I  would  on  no  account  change  my  present  situation 
and  circumstances  with  any  that  I  ever  enjoyed  before  I  was  blind.'  He  had 
enjoyed  eyesight  tiU  twenty-five,  and  had  been  blind  now  about  three  years." 
Lastly,  of  all  exchanges  in  room  of  old  provisions  the  most  striking  is  that  which 
our  Lord  thus  set  forth  (John  xvi.  7).  Very  precious  had  been  the  manna  that 
ceased  when  Jesus  left.  But  more  nourishing  is  the  new  corn  with  which  the  Spirit 
feeds  us.  Let  us  prize  it  greatly  so  long  as  we  are  in  the  flesh.  We  shall  know 
the  good  of  it  when  we  enter  on  the  next  stage  of  our  being.  Then,  in  the  fullest 
sensa,  the  manna  will  cease,  and  we  shall  eat  the  corn  of  the  land.  (Ibid.)  God 
considerate  : — How  gracious  is  the  gentle,  thoughtful  kindness  of  God,  wno  lets  us 
see  the  new  before  He  quite  takes  away  the  old,  accustoming  us  to  walk  before  He 
removes  the  chair  on  which  we  had  leant  so  long,  careful  that  we  should  be  able  to 
Bwim  before  He  removes  the  cork.  Do  not  fret  if  the  rhapsodies,  and  outbursts,  and 
exuberant  manifestations  of  earlier  days  have  ceased ;  it  is  better  to  live  by  the 
ordinary  laws  of  human  life  than  by  the  abnormal  and  miraculous.  And  after  all 
there  is  as  much  Divine  power  in  the  production  of  a  fig  and  pomegranate,  of  oil- 
olive  and  honey,  of  barley  and  wheat,  as  in  tho  descending  manna  ;  as  much  in  the 
transformation  of  the  moisture  of  earth  and  air  into  the  ruddy  grape  as  in  the 
miracle  of  Cana ;  as  much  in  the  maintenance  of  the  soul  in  hohness  and  righteous- 
ness aU  its  days  as  in  the  communication  of  unspeakable  visions  and  words  that 
may  not  be  uttered.     (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Vers.  13-15.  Nay;  but  as  Captain  of  the  host  of  the  Lord. — The  warrior 
Christian : — L  The  speciaij  significance  of  this  vision  to  Joshua.  "  The  Lord's 
host"  does  not  primarily  allude  to  those  Israelite  armies  encamped  beside  the 
overflowing  waters  of  the  Jordan,  but  to  other  and  invisible  hosts  encamped  all 
around  on  those  heights,  though  no  ear  ever  heard  the  call  of  the  sentries  at  their 
posts  of  duty,  or  saw  the  sheen  of  their  swords  flashing  in  the  sunlight,  or  beheld 
their  marshalled  ranks.  Those  troops  of  harnessed  angels  were  the  hosts  of  which 
this  wondrous  warrior  was  captain.  The  story  of  the  conquest  of  Canaan  is  not 
simply  the  account  of  battles  fought  between  Israel  and  the  Canaanites,  but  of  the 
results  of  a  conflict  yet  more  mysterious  and  far-reaching  between  the  bright 


CHAP,  v.]  JOSHUA.  103 

squadrons  that  follow  the  lead  of  the  captain  of  the  Lord's  host,  and  the  dark  bat- 
taUons  of  evil  entrenched  in  the  hearts  and  strongholds  of  the  enemies  of  God.  Is 
it,  therefore,  any  cause  for  wonder  that  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down ;  or  that  vast 
armies  were  scattered  without  a  blow  being  struck ;  or  that  the  land  was  subdued 
in  a  seven  years'  campaign?  These  achievements  were  the  earthly  and  visible 
results  of  victories  won  in  ihe  heavenly  and  sphitual  sphere  by  armies  which  follow 
the  Word  of  God  upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  hnen,  white  and  pure.  Those 
walls  fell  down  because  smitten  by  the  impact  of  celestial  hosts.  Those  armies  fled 
because  the  dark  powers  with  which  they  were  in  league  had  been  put  to  the  rout 
before  the  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth.  11.  The  signiticance  of  this  vision  to  the 
Chukch.  Throughout  the  world  of  nature  there  are  signs  of  conflict  and  collision. 
There  is  no  pool,  however  tranquil;  no  forest-glade,  however  peaceful;  no  isle 
bathed  by  southern  seas,  and  set  gem-like  on  the  breast  of  ocean,  however 
enchanting  ;  no  scene,  however  fascinating,  which  is  not  swept  by  opposing 
squadrons  contending  for  victory.  The  swift  pursue  their  prey,  the  strong  devour  the 
weak,  the  fittest  alone  survive  in  the  terrific  strife.  So  it  has  been  in  the  history  of 
our  race.  The  books  that  contain  the  records  of  the  past  are  largely  records  of  wars 
and  decisive  battles.  Their  pages  are  wet  with  tears  and  blood.  The  foundations 
of  vast  empires  have  been  laid,  like  those  of  African  palaces,  on  the  wiithing  bodies 
of  dying  men.  For  the  student  of  God's  ways  all  this  leads  up  to  a  more  tre- 
mendous struggle  between  darkness  and  light,  evU  and  good,  Satan  and  our  King. 
And  here  is  the  real  importance  of  the  ascension,  which  was  the  worthy  chmax  of 
the  wonders  of  the  first  advent,  as  it  will  introduce  the  glories  of  the  second. 
III.  The  significance  of  this  vision  to  oueselves.  We  sometimes  feel  lonely  and 
discouraged.  The  hosts  with  which  we  are  accustomed  to  co-operate  are  resting 
quietly  in  their  tents.  No  one  seems  able  to  enter  into  our  anxieties  and  plans. 
Our  Jerichos  are  so  formidable — the  neglected  parish,  the  empty  church,  the 
hardened  congregation,  the  godless  hoasehold.  How  can  we  ever  capture  these, 
and  hand  them  over  to  the  Lord,  like  dismantled  castles,  for  Him  to  occupy  ?  That 
problem  at  first  baffles  us,  and  appears  insoluble.  Then  we  vow  it  shall  be  untied, 
and  summon  all  our  wit  and  energy  to  solve  it.  We  study  the  methods  of  others 
and  copy  them  ;  deliver  our  best  addresses  and  sermons,  put  forth  herculean  exer- 
tions. We  adopt  exciting  advertisements  and  questionable  methods,  borrowed  from 
the  world.  Suppose  Israel  had  taken  lessons  in  scaling  walls  and  taking  fenced  cities 
from  the  Canaanites !  Or  that  the  people  had  made  an  attack  on  Jericho  with 
mi?;ht  and  main,  determined  to  find  or  make  a  breach  !  Fina]!-^.  in  our  hours  of 
disappointment,  when  we  have  tried  our  best  in  vain,  and  have  lallen,  as  the  sea- 
birds  who  dash  themselves  against  the  lighthouse  tower  fall  to  the  foot  with  broken 
wing,  it  is  well  to  go  forth  alone,  confessing  our  helplessness,  and  tarrying  for  the 
vision,  for  we  shall  then  be  likeliest  to  see  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host.  He  will 
undertake  our  cause.  He  will  marshal  His  troops  and  win  the  day,  He  will  fling 
the  walls  of  Jericho  to  the  ground.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  armed  angel  of  the 
covenant  appearing  to  Joshua : — I.  Joshua  \vent  fokth  to  be  alone  with  God. 
The  hour,  thought  of  for  forty  years,  had  now  arrived  ;  the  campaign  was  about  to 
begin,  and  everything  devolved  upon  him.  No  Moses  now  to  direct  him.  There 
was  the  impregnable  fortress  before  him.  A  long  siege  or  a  speedy  capture  alike 
impossible.  A  dilemma.  He  knelt  for  guidance.  H.  The  Lokd  came  to  be  alone 
with  Joshua.  1.  To  Abram,  a  wanderer.  He  appeared  as  a  wayfarer ;  to  Jacob, 
distressed  at  the  prospect  of  a  conflict  with  his  brother.  He  appeared  as  a  wrestler 
who  allowed  himself  to  be  overcome  ;  and  now,  to  the  warrior.  He  showed  Himself 
as  a  warrior.  This  teaches  that  there  is  no  condition  of  life  in  which  we  shall  not 
find  the  Lord  Jesus  in  full  sympathy  with  His  people.  2.  Joshua's  doubt  whether 
He  was  for  or  against  him  was  soon  set  at  rest.  So  will  yours,  if  your  heart  is 
right  with  Him.  3.  When  Joshua  knew  who  He  was,  he  fell  upon  his  face  and 
worshipped.  We  have  a  hke  assurance  that  Joshua  had.  "All  power  is  given 
unto  Me."  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway."  But  if  this  be  really  given  to  us  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  our  attitude  wiU  be  like  Joshua's.  (1)  Deeply  reverential  (Isa.  vi.  5). 
(2)  Entirely  submissive  to  the  Divine  will  (Acts  ix.  6).  4.  The  first  thing  the  Lord 
required — "Loose  thy  shoe,"  (fee.  So  now,  "Leave  worldly  cares,  cut  off  carnal 
indulgences,  and  give  yourself  up  wholly  to  Me."  "  And  Joshua  did  so.  .  .  .  And 
the  Lord  said  unto  Joshua,  See,  I  have  given  into  thine  hand,  Jericho,"  &c.  A 
similar  promise  is  given  to  us.  Jericho  is  a  type  of  the  world  (John  xvi.  33  ;  Eom. 
viii.  31 ;  1  John  iv.  4).  The  promise  was  definite :  "  I  have  given."  That  set 
Joshua's  uxind  at  rest.    Have  we  not  many  a  promise  as  definite  ?    Why  should  we 


104  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chit.  t. 

fear?  (see  1  John  v.  4).  5.  But  faith  does  not  mean  sitting  still  and  doing  nothing. 
The  land  was  given  to  them,  but  they  had  to  conquer  every  foot  of  it.  The 
Christian  conflict  is  no  less  a  conflict  because  "  a  fight  of  faith."  In  order  to  con- 
quer in  "  the  good  fight  of  faith,"  we  want — 1.  The  readiness  of  faith,  which  is 
found  only  in  our  realised  perfect  standing  in  Christ.  2.  The  prayer  of  faith. 
3.  Faith's  recognition  of  the  Divine  presence.  4.  Faith's  reverential  submission  to 
the  Divine  will.  6.  Faith's  energetic  obedience  to  the  Divine  commands.  {W.  J. 
Chapman,  M.A.)  The  Captain  of  the  Lord^s  host  still  with  us  : — We  see  in  Joshua 
an  observant  man  meditating  over  the  plans  of  the  morrow,  and  turning  in  upon 
his  own  thoughts  and  reflections,  yet  quick  to  note  the  presence  of  a  danger. 
Every  commander  of  men  must  have  an  eye  in  his  head.  He  must  be  quick  to 
note  the  presence  of  a  foe  or  to  detect  danger.  He  must  watch  as  well  as  meditate 
and  pray.  Joshua  was  quick  to  take  in  his  surroundings,  while  he  carefully 
weighed  problems  which  pressed  themselves  upon  him.  What  was  he  to  do  ?  It 
was  when  face  to  face  with  that  perplexing  question  that  Joshua  looked  up  and  saw 
an  armed  man.  Could  he  let  that  man  go  unchallenged  ?  Nay,  he  must  have  the 
courage  to  go  up  to  him.  That  courage  was  the  necessary  condition  of  the  revela- 
tion which  Joshua  was  about  to  receive.  The  cowards  in  the  Lord's  army  never 
receive  such  a  vision  as  this,  but  the  men  who  have  forgotten  themselves  in  their 
desire  to  serve  their  Lord.  Now  observe  what  Joshua  first  received.  He  received 
a  clear  revelation  that  the  One  to  whom  he  had  spoken  was  far  greater  than  he  had 
ever  imagined  Him  to  be.  In  other  words,  that  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host,  who 
alone  could  ensure  victory,  was  nearer  to  him  than  he  had  ever  dreamed.  Again, 
notice  that  the  character  of  this  revelation  was  adapted  to  the  nature  of  the  cir- 
cumstances by  which  Joshua  was  surrounded.  Now,  when  God  appeared  to  Moses, 
He  did  not  reveal  Himself  in  the  form  of  an  armed  man.  He  appeared  to  him  in 
a  flame  of  fire — a  flame  which  lit  up  the  bush,  but  did  not  consume  it.  Then  God 
appeared  in  the  mystery  of  fire :  and  that  was  just  the  kind  of  revelation  that 
Moses  needed.  But  now  things  were  different.  Joshua  had  to  pass  through  experi- 
ences through  which  even  Moses  had  not  to  pass.  The  religion  of  God  had  been  now 
established.  The  law  had  been  given,  even  the  ceremonial  instructions  had  been 
supplied  ;  but  now  the  nation  had  to  find  their  way  into  the  possession  of  the  pro- 
mised land.  God  had  given  them  Canaan,  it  is  true,  but  it  was  only  on  condition 
that  they  should,  in  His  strength,  conquer  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan.  Thus  the 
revelation  which  Joshua  needed  now  was  that  God  would  fight  for  them  and  with 
them.  He  therefore  appeared  before  Joshua,  not  as  a  flame  of  fire,  but  an  armed 
man,  with  His  sword  unsheathed.  Joshua  thus  learnt  that  the  result  of  the  conflict 
was  not  dependent  upon  his  wisdom  in  planning,  or  upon  his  courage  in  prosecuting 
the  campaign.  This  was  supremely  all  Joshua  needed  to  know.  It  is  this 
that  gives  courage  to  all  the  true  servants  of  the  Lord — the  assurance  that  they 
have  merely  to  obey  the  command  of  their  King  in  detail,  leaving  all  the  rest  with 
Him.  Next  observe  that  the  conditions  of  being  permitted  to  receive  any  command 
from  the  Divine  Captain  are  reverence  and  faith.  No  man  can  receive  from  Him 
orders  for  battle  until  he  has  learned  to  take  the  warrior's  sandal  from  off  his  foot 
and  bow  in  submissiveness  before  the  great  Captain  of  his  salvation.  It  was  when 
Joshua  had  learned  the  truest  reverence,  when  he  had  realised  that  the  very  place 
upon  which  he  stood  was  holy,  that  the  great  secret  was  given  him  how  to  take  Jericho. 
The  Lord  bade  Joshua  order  the  priests  first  of  all  take  the  ark,  and  then  com- 
mand seven  priests  to  blow  the  "  seven  trumpets  of  ram's  horns  "  before  the  ark 
of  the  Lord,  &c.  That  was  an  extraordinary  command,  and  an  extraordinary 
assurance,  and  they  required  very  exceptional  faith  in  God  to  act  upon  them. 
But  the  possession  of  that  faith  was  the  condition  of  victory.  So  is  it  still ;  if  we 
have  a  similar  faith,  the  triumph  is  ours.  Now  think  for  a  moment  of  Joshua's 
thoughts  after  all  this.  He  would  soliloquise  :  "  I  have  mourned  over  the  loss  of 
Moses  :  I  mourn  over  it  still ;  but  now  I  see  as  I  never  did  before  that  there  is  One 
who  can  make  up  for  that  loss.  I  have  not  to  look  to  Moses,  but  to  the  Master  who 
gave  Moses  his  commission  :  and  if  obeying  His  command  is  all  that  is  necessary 
for  me,  I  too  can  be  leader."  The  Lord's  cause  does  not  depend  upon  the  life  of 
any  hero,  however  great  he  may  be,  and  the  prosperity  of  the  gospel  the  wide  world 
over  shall  not  be  restrained  by  any  loss,  but  as  long  as  the  Church  is  faithful  to  its 
privileges  and  ready  to  obey  the  Master's  command,  we  as  the  Lord's  army  shall  go 
on  conquering  and  to  conquer,  until  at  last  the  shout  of  victory  will  be  heard,  and 
every  Jericho  of  worldliness  and  iniquity  will  be  laid  low.  {D.  Davies.)  Timely 
aid ;  or,  a  viiion  of  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host : — I.  The  tim«  o»  His  AfPSAB- 


CHAP.  T.]  JOSHUA.  105 

ANCB.,  1.  After  attending  to  "  religious  duties,"  "  circumcision  "  and  the  "  Pass- 
over." Joshua  knew  what  kind  of  beginning  was  likely  to  end  well ;  unlike  a 
number  of  modern  Christians.  2.  While  pursuing  his  appointed  work.  "  By 
Jericho."  Probably  alone,  yet  fearless  of  danger.  "  By  Jericho  "  for  some  impor- 
tant purpose.  God  visits  the  working  man.  Moses,  Gideon,  David,  Elisha,  sons 
of  Zebedee.  The  covetous  and  idle  are  rarely  called  by  God  to  great  work. 
II.  The  manner  of  His  appeaeancb.  1.  As  supreme  in  command :  "  Captain  of  the 
Lord's  host."  Captain  over  Joshua.  Whatever  be  our  abilities,  our  titles,  or  our 
claims  to  office,  we  must  yield  them  all  up  to  the  "  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host." 
2.  As  the  very  friend  Joshua  needed — in  the  character  and  dress  of  a  soldier.  3.  As 
justifying  the  war  in  which  he  was  about  to  engage.  There  are  wars  in  which  God 
will  engage — against  sin  and  the  devil.  The  victories  of  the  Church  are  bloodless. 
4.  As  encouraging  him  to  wage  it  valiantly.  ••  Drawn  sword. "  Beady  to  take  the 
defensive  or  the  offensive.  To  Abraham  He  said,  "  I  am  thy  shield."  To  the 
disciple  He  said,  "Follow  Me."  HI.  Oub  duty  in  relation  to  such  an  appear- 
ance. 1.  To  be  found  evincing  an  interest  in  Israel.  "Joshua  was  by  Jericho." 
2.  To  be  ready  to  lay  ourselves  at  Jesus'  feet,  saying,  "  What  saith  my  Lord  unto 
His  servant."  Say  anything,  Lord,  and  I  will  do  it.  Appoint  me  any  work,  and 
I  am  ready  to  perform  it.  {}V.  H.  Matthews.)  The  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host : — 
"  Art  thou  for  us  or  for  our  adversaries  ?  "  There  is  a  great  deal  in  this  bold 
challenge  which  commends  itself  to  our  admiration.  Joshua  knew  of  no  neutrality 
in  the  warfare  of  God.  The  stranger  must  be  friend  or  enemy.  Joshua  was  not 
like  so  many  Christian  soldiers  of  to-day,  who,  before  declaring  their  principles, 
wait  to  find  out  their  company,  trimming  themselves  to  the  breeze,  very  pious  with 
the  pious,  indifferent  with  the  indifferent,  and  openly  irreligious  with  the  irreligious. 
But  there  is  something  amiss  with  the  question,  for  it  is  rebuked.  Joshua  made 
the  mistake  of  thinking  of  the  warfare  in  which  he  was  engaged  as  having  the  two 
sides — "our  side"  and  "the  other  side."  Whoever  approached  the  host  must 
come  to  aid  "  us  "  or  oppose  "  us."  And  this  view  was  aU  wrong.  It  was  just  like 
the  Homeric  idea  of  the  gods  descending  to  earth  as  partisans  in  human  strifes, 
Apollo  patronising  the  diligent  offerer  of  hecatombs,  Venus  favouring  this  or  that 
one  of  her  mortal  kindred.  It  was  like  the  Komans  expecting  Castor  and  Pollux  in 
their  van  to  spread  dismay  in  the  opposing  hosts.  It  was  an  idea  of  God  which 
the  Jews  got  in  a  certain  stage  of  their  national  history,  an  idea  of  God  as  a 
patron  deity,  a  national  divinity,  just  as  Chemosh  was  the  national  divinity  of 
Moab.  In  due  time,  when  the  exclusive  national  spirit  had  done  its  work,  this 
idea  was  destined  to  be  swept  away.  The  vision  rebukes  it  now.  "  Nay,"  he  says, 
"not  for  you,  nor  yet  for  your  adversaries,  am  I  come,  but — as  Captain  of  the 
Lord's  host  am  I  now  come."  "Not  as  a  partisan," he  would  say,  "but  as  a  Prince 
am  I  come.  Not  such  as  you  deem  me  am  I,  a  welcome  ally  or  a  hated  foe,  come 
to  mingle  in  the  clash  and  din  of  earthly  warfare,  but  as  captain  of  an  army  in 
which  Israel  forms  but  one  tiny  battalion,  I  am  come  to  take  my  place  and  give 
my  intructions."  What  a  struggle  must  have  taken  place  in  the  mind  of  Joshua ! 
Was  not  he  the  captain,  divinely  chosen  by  God,  and  consecrated  by  the  laying  on 
of  the  hands  of  Moses  ?  Did  not  this  matter  touch  the  dignity  of  his  office  ?  At 
any  rate,  we  may  be  sure — for  Joshua  was  a  man — that  it  touched  his  pride.  Just 
as  he  was  so  full  of  plans,  perhaps  had  got  everything  ready  for  the  attack  on 
Jericho,  had  seen  exactly  how  this  wall  was  to  be  scaled,  how  that  apparently 
impregnable  tower  was  to  be  battered  down,  how  the  troops  were  to  be  disposed 
with  the  certainty  of  victory — an  unknown  One  comes  to  him,  levels  all  his  plans  to 
the  ground  with  a  word,  and  proclaims  Himself  the  Captain  of  the  host.  Long- 
fellow tells  the  story  of  the  same  conflict  in  "  King  Robert  of  Sicily,"  but  there  is  a 
difference.  King  Pvobert  requnes  years  of  humiliation  and  discipline  to  bring  him 
to  the  confession  all  must  make  before  the  Captain ;  Joshua  wins  his  battle  on  the 
spot — a  battle  which  showed  his  fitness  for  leadership  more  than  when  he  fought 
with  Amalek  at  Eephidim.  And  he  won  it,  as  many  of  the  great  battles  in  the 
world's  history — although  they  have  not  scarred  the  fair  fields  of  earth — have  been 
won — on  his  knees.  No  longer  looking  up,  he  falls  with  his  face  to  the  earth.  Oh, 
what  bitter  pain  and  self-abasement  were  there  in  that  moment  when  the  strong 
soldier  of  Israel  bowed  himself  to  the  dust  I  Who  can  say  how  hard  the  struggle 
was  ?  We  are  only  told  that  the  battle  was  won.  "  What  saith  my  Lord  unto  His 
servant  ?  "  Then  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host  gives  His  orders,  tells  of  His  plan 
— not  at  all  like  the  plans  of  Joshua — how  Jericho  is  to  be  taken,  not  by  might  or 
strength  of  armed  men,  but  by  the  blast  of  the  Spirit  of  God  toppling  down  the 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

stupendous  walls  in  which  the  heathen  Canaanites  put  their  trust.  1.  Oh,  that  we 
imitated  Joshua  in  his  vigilance  !  We,  too,  are  in  the  promised  land.  But  Canaan, 
for  us,  as  for  Israel,  is  a  battle-field.  Enemies  prowl  around,  mighty  fortresses  of 
evil  frown  before  us,  and  it  is  only  our  blindness  which  prevents  us  from  seeing  the 
momentous  issues  which  depend  upon  our  wakefulness.  Do  we  ponder  much  and 
often  upon  the  charge  laid  upon  us  ?  Do  we  often  rise  from  slumber,  leave  the  host 
of  sleepers,  and  go  out  alone  to  survey  the  field  of  the  approaching  battle  ?  Let  us 
not  shrink  from  challenging  the  unknown  influences  which  at  such  times  touch  our 
lives.  "  Try  the  spirits,"  says  St.  John  ;  good  or  evil,  they  must  be  challenged,  for 
God  has  made  us  creatures  of  choice,  and  He  has  willed  that  by  choice  (and  not  by 
instinct)  we  must  obey  Him.  This  is  the  mark  of  our  manhood,  the  mark  which 
distinguishes  us  from  the  beasts.  2.  But  let  us  avoid  Joshua's  error.  There  is  no 
"our  side"  in  the  matter.  There  is  God's  side,  and  the  side  against  God.  The 
Persian  poet,  Jellaladeen,  tells  us  that,  "  One  knocked  at  the  Beloved's  door,  and  a 
voice  asked  from  within,  '  Who  is  there  ?  '  and  he  answered,  '  It  is  I.'  Then  the 
voice  said,  '  This  house  wUl  not  hold  me  and  thee ' ;  and  the  door  was  not  opened. 
Then  went  the  lover  into  the  desert  and  fasted  and  prayed  in  solitude,  and  after  a 
year  he  returned  and  knocked  again  at  the  door ;  and  again  the  voice  asked,  '  Who 
is  there  ? '  and  he  said,  ♦  It  is  thyself ' ;  and  the  door  opened  to  him."  All  true 
Christian  warriors  have,  with  Joshua,  learned  this  utter  renunciation  of  self.  The 
Jehu  spirit,  "  Come  and  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord,"  is  banished,  and  the  spirit  of 
Paul  takes  its  place,  "  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  that  dw( -leth  in  me."  {R.  H.  Gowen.) 
The  heavenly  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host ;  or,  the  vision  at  Jericho : — I.  The  time  of 
THE  vision.  1.  It  was  immediately  after  God  had  been  publicly  honoured  and 
sought  in  His  ordinances.  Christian,  wouldst  thou  see  Jesus  ?  Then  consecrate 
thyself  anew  to  the  service  of  thy  God,  and  seek  Him  in  the  employment  of  the 
means  of  grace.  Especially  exercise  faith  in  the  Lamb  of  God,  and  feed  upon  the 
paschal  sacrifice  in  thy  heart  by  faith.  Honour  thy  God  by  thy  devotion,  and  He 
shall  honour  thee  by  revelations  of  His  glory  and  His  grace.  2.  It  was  immediately 
before  the  mighty  campaign  with  the  Canaanites.  This  is  often  the  method  of 
God's  procedure.  When  a  great  trial  is  at  hand,  great  revelations  of  His  glory ; 
transporting  experiences  of  His  presence  are  given  in  anticipation.  It  was  thus 
with  our  Divine  Master  Himself.  Before  His  temptation,  the  heavens  were  opened 
to  His  view ;  the  Spirit  descended  upon  Him  in  bodily  shape  ;  the  audible  voice  of 
the  Father  declared  that  Father's  love,  relationship,  and  approval  of  Him.  It  was 
thus,  again,  that  the  disciples  were  strengthened  to  bear  the  trial  to  their  faith  in 
the  betrayal,  suffering,  and  death  of  Jesus.  H.  The  aspect  of  the  vision. 
Joshua's  question  is  not  the  utterance  of  doubt  and  distrust,  but  rather  of  a  hope 
and  an  expectation  that  crave  a  fuller  confirmation.  It  is  like  the  prayer  of  David, 
"  Say  unto  my  soul,  '  I  am  thy  salvation.'  "  Oh,  it  is  a  solemn  thing  to  see  the 
naked  sword  in  the  hand  of  the  destroying  angel  standing  over  against  us :  a 
petition  for  a  reassuring  word  from  Him  who  wields  that  sword  is  no  disgrace  to  a 
believer.  A  humble  soul  that  is  taught  of  God  to  know  what  sin  is  must  ofttimes 
be  conscious  of  sin  and  guilt  enough  to  justify  a  prayer  for  a  renewal  of  assurance, 
and  to  prompt  the  anxious  question,  "  Art  Thou  for  us,  or  for  our  adversaries?" 
III.  The  communication  of  the  vision.  Lessons :  1.  Let  unsaved  sinners  read 
here  a  lesson  of  terror  and  alarm,  and  heed  the  call  to  repentance.  His  sword  is 
in  His  hand.  But  still,  still  His  long-suffering  mercy  defers  the  stroke  of  judg- 
ment. Wilt  thou  not  repent  and  beheve  the  gospel?  2.  To  those  who  have 
accepted  His  offer  of  grace,  and  who  plead  His  precious  blood  as  their  title  to 
pardon,  there  is  nothing  to  dread  in  the  person  of  their  Saviour.  Do  you  belong 
to  the  Lord's  host  ?  Then  bow  your  heads  and  worship,  for  as  Captain  of  the 
Lord's  host  is  He  now  come.  Say,  can  you  trust  this  heavenly  Guardian  ?  Will 
you  follow  this  heavenly  Guide  ?  He  claims  these  of  us  all — full  confidence, 
entire  obedience.  3.  Note  that  while  God's  people  are  reassured  and  delivered 
from  the  fear  that  hath  torment,  there  is  a  reverence  and  godly  fear,  from 
which  they  are  not  excused,  but  with  which  it  is  their  duty  to  approach  their 
Saviour.  This  is  the  symbolism  of  the  loosing  of  the  shoe.  {G.  W.  Butler,  M.A.) 
Captain  of  the  Lord's  host : — I.  The  relation  heke  indicated  between  Christ  and 
His  people.  Piuler,  Defender,  and  Leader  of  the  Church  on  earth.  1.  This  He  is 
by  virtue  of  the  sufferings  and  conquests  of  Calvary.  2.  By  the  free  choice  of  His 
people.  II.  The  character  and  oi'fice  in  which  Jesus  here  manifests  Himself. 
Warrior  with  drawn  sword  (Eev.  i.  16).  III.  The  position  and  duty  devolving 
UPON  Christians  in  consequence  of  this  relation  to  Christ.     The  true  ideal  of  the 


CHAP.  T.]  JOSHUA.  107 

Christian  is  not  that  of  the  shepherd  with  crook  and  pipe  on  sunny  hillside ;  or  even 
that  of  the  pilgrim  slowly  toiling  on,  and  leaning  on  his  staff ;  but  rather  that  of  the 
soldier,  with  shield  and  helmet,  fighting  his  way  against  doubts  that  agitate  his 
mind,  against  fears  that  even  disturb  the  serenity  of  hope,  against  fiery  passions 
that  threaten  to  overmaster  his  patience,  against  the  flesh  in  all  its  varied  forms  of 
opposition  to  the  Spirit,  against  the  world  and  its  allurements,  against  invisible 
enemies,  &c.  Over  and  above  these  single-handed  conflicts  with  our  foes,  we  are 
called  upon  as  soldiers  of  the  Cross  to  march  forward  with  the  host  against  envy, 
and  wickedness,  and  sin  ;  to  fight  for  the  overthrow  of  Satan's  stronghold,  at  home 
and  abroad.  IV.  Christ's  eelation  to  the  Church  involves  the  assurance  of  all 
NEEDED  GRACE  AND  POWER  FOR  THE  WARFARE.  We  have  His  woid  to  direct  us.  His 
Spirit  to  give  strength  and  guidance.  His  love  to  inspire  us  with  zeal.  His  promise 
to  assure  us  that  the  conflict  shall  end  in  victory.  {A  London  Clergyman.) 
Joshua's  vision : — I.  Eealise  the  fact  of  the  Divine  presence.  Jesus  Himself 
comes  to  this  holy  war.  Joshua  saw  a  man  clad  in  armour,  equipped  for  war. 
Cannot  the  eyes  of  your  faith  see  the  same  ?  There  He  stands,  Jesus,  God  over  all, 
blessed  for  ever,  yet  a  man.  Not  carnally,  but  still  in  real  truth,  Jesus  is  where 
His  peoiDle  meet  together.  Joshua  saw  Him  with  His  sword  in  His  hand.  Oh,  that 
Christ  might  come  in  our  midst  with  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  in  His  hand  ;  come  to 
effect  deeds  of  love  but  yet  deeds  of  power  ;  come  with  His  two-edged  sword  to  smite 
our  sins,  to  cut  to  the  heart  His  adversaries,  to  slay  their  unbelief,  to  lay  their 
iniquities  dead  before  Him.  The  sword  is  drawn,  not  scabbarded,  as  alas  I  it  has 
been  so  long  in  many  Churches,  but  made  bare  for  present  active  use.  It  is  in  His 
hand,  not  in  the  minister's  hand,  not  even  in  an  angel's  hand,  but  the  sword  drawn 
is  in  His  hand.  Oh,  what  power  there  is  in  the  gospel  when  Jesus  holds  the  hilt, 
and  what  gashes  it  makes  into  hearts  that  were  hard  as  adamant  when  Jesus  cuts 
right  and  left  at  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  men !  The  glorious  man  whom 
Joshua  saw  was  on  his  side.  In  the  midst  of  His  Church,  Christ  carries  a  sword 
only  for  the  purposes  of  love  to  His  people.  The  Divine  presence,  then,  is  what  we 
desire,  and  if  we  have  it  faith  at  once  is  encouraged.  It  was  enough  for  the  army 
of  Cromwell  to  know  that  He  was  there,  the  ever  victorious,  the  irresistible,  to  lead 
on  his  Ironsides  to  the  fray.  Many  a  time  the  presence  of  an  old  Eoman  general 
was  equal  to  another  legion ;  as  soon  as  the  cohorts  perceived  that  he  was  come 
whose  eagle  eye  watched  every  motion  of  the  enemy,  and  whose  practised  hand  led 
his  battalions  upon  the  most  salient  points  of  attack,  each  man's  blood  leaped  within 
him,  and  he  grasped  his  sword  and  rushed  forward  secure  of  success.  Our  King  is 
in  the  midst  of  us,  and  our  faith  should  be  in  active  exercise.  "  If  God  be  for  us, 
who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  When  the  King  is  with  His  people,  then  hope  is  greatly 
encouraged,  for  saith  she,  "Who  can  stand  against  the  Lord  of  hosts?  "  Where 
Jesus  is,  love  becomes  inflamed,  for  oh  1  of  all  the  things  in  the  world  that  can  set 
the  heart  burning,  there  is  nothing  like  the  presence  of  Jesus.  A  glimpse  of  Him 
wiU  overcome  us,  so  that  we  shall  be  almost  ready  to  say,  "  Turn  away  Thine 
eyes  from  me,  for  they  have  overcome  me."  Suppose  that  Christ  is  here. 
His  presence  will  be  most  clearly  ascertained  by  those  who  are  most  like  Him. 
Joshua  was  favoured  with  this  sight  because  he  alone  had  eyes  that  could  bear  it. 
I  would  that  all  of  you  were  Joshuas  ;  but  if  not,  if  but  some  shall  perceive  Him,  we 
shall  stUl  receive  a  blessing.  I  am  sure  this  presence  of  Christ  will  be  needed  by  us 
aU.  Go  not  to  warfare  at  your  own  charges,  but  wait  upon  your  Master,  tarrying  at 
Jerusalem  until  ye  be  endued  with  power  from  on  high.  But  Jesus  Christ's  presence 
may  be  had.  Do  not  despond  and  say  that  in  the  olden  times  the  Master  revealed 
Himself,  but  He  will  not  do  so  now.  He  will,  He  wiU.  His  promise  is  as 
good  as  ever.  II.  Understand  the  Lord's  position  in  the  midst  of  His  people. 
"As  Captain  of  the  host  of  the  Lord  am  I  now  come."  What  a  relief  this  must 
have  been  for  Joshua.  Perhaps  he  thought  himself  the  captain ;  but  now  the 
responsibility  was  taken  from  him  ;  he  was  to  be  the  lieutenant,  but  the  King  Him- 
self would  marshal  His  hosts.  Wherever  Christ  is,  we  must  recollect  that  He  is 
Commander-in-chief  to  us  all.  We  must  never  tolerate  in  the  Church  any  great 
man  to  domineer  over  us  :  we  must  have  no  one  to  be  Lord  and  Master  save  Jesus. 
Down  with  thee,  self,  down  with  thee  1  Carnal  judgment  and  foolish  reason,  lie 
stUl  I  Let  the  Word  of  God  be  paramount  withiu  the  soul,  all  opposition  being 
hushed.  If  we  do  not  act  with  the  Captain,  disappointment  will  be  sure  to  follow. 
One  action  brought  defeat  upon  Israel.  III.  Our  third  rule  is,  worship  Him  who  is 
present  with  us.  Joshua,  it  is  said,  fell  on  his  face  to  the  earth.  Worship  is  the 
highest  elevation  of  the  spirit,  and  yet  the  lowliest  prostration  of  the  soul.    Worship 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

he  Son  of  God  I  Then,  when  you  have  so  done,  give  up  yourself  to  His  command : 
say  to  Him,  "What  saith  my  Lord  unto  His  servant?"  When  you  have  done 
this,  I  want  you  to  imitate  Joshua  in  the  third  thing,  namely,  put  off  your 
shoes  from  off  your  feet.  Joshua,  perhaps,  had  not  felt  what  a  solemn 
thing  it  was  to  fight  for  God,  to  fight  as  God's  executioner  against  condemned 
men.  He  must  put  his  shoes  off,  therefore.  We  never  can  expect  a  blessing 
if  we  go  about  God's  work  flippantly.  IV.  To  conclude,  let  us  now  advance  to 
ACTION,  according  to  the  Master's  command.  Unconverted  men  and  women,  you 
are  our  Jericho,  we  wish  to  conquer  you  for  Christ.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
Captain  of  the  Lord's  host : — I.  A  transient  revelation  of  an  eternal  truth.  You 
wLU  observe  that  there  run  throughout  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament  notices  of 
the  occasional  manifestation  of  a  mysterious  person  who  is  named  ♦•  the  Angel," 
"  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,"  and  who,  in  a  remarkable  manner,  is  distinguished  from 
the  created  hosts  of  angel  beings,  and  also  is  distinguished  from,  and  yet  in  name, 
attributes,  and  worship  all  but  identified  with,  the  Lord  Himself.  If  we  turn  to 
the  New  Testament,  we  find  that  there  under  another  image  the  same  strain  of 
thought  is  presented.  The  Word  of  God,  who  from  everlasting  "  was  with  God,  and 
was  God,"  is  represented  as  being  the  Agent  of  Creation,  the  source  of  all  human 
illumination,  the  director  of  Providence,  the  Lord  of  the  Universe.  "  By  Him  were 
all  things,  and  in  Him  all  things  consist."  So,  surely,  these  two  halves  make  a 
whole;  and  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  separate  and  yet  so  strangely  identified  with 
Jehovah,  who  at  the  crises  of  the  nation's  history,  and  stages  of  the  development  of 
the  process  of  revelation,  is  manifested,  and  the  Eternal  Word  of  God,  whom  the 
New  Testament  reveals  to  us,  are  one  and  the  same.  The  eternal  order  of  the 
universe  is  before  us  here.  It  only  remains  to  say  a  word  in  reference  to  the  sweep 
of  the  command  which  our  vision  assigns  to  the  Angel  of  the  Lord.  '*  Captain  of  the 
Lord's  host "  means  a  great  deal  more  than  the  true  General  of  Israel's  little  army. 
It  does  mean  that,  or  the  words  and  the  vision  would  cease  to  have  relevance  and 
bearing  on  the  moment's  circumstances  and  need.  But  it  includes  also,  as  the 
usage  of  Scripture  would  sufficiently  show,  if  it  were  needful  to  adduce  instances  of 
it,  all  the  ordered  ranks  of  loftier  intelligent  beings,  and  all  the  powers  and  forces  of 
the  universe.  These  are  conceived  of  as  an  embattled  host,  comparable  to  an  army 
in  the  strictness  of  their  discipline  and  their  obedience  to  a  single  will.  It  is  the 
modern  thought  that  the  universe  is  a  Cosmos  and  not  a  Chaos,  an  ordered  unit,  with 
the  addition  of  the  truth  beyond  the  reach  and  range  of  science,  that  its  unity  is  the 
expression  of  a  personal  will.  That  is  the  truth  which  was  flashed  from  the  unknown 
like  a  vanishing  meteor  in  the  midnight  before  the  face  of  Joshua  and  which  stands 
like  the  noonday  sun,  unsetting  and  irradiating  for  us  who  live  under  the  gospel. 
n.  The  Leader  of  all  the  warfare  against  the  world's  evil.  "  The  Captain  of 
the  Lord's  host."  He  Himself  takes  part  in  the  fight.  He  is  not  like  a  general  who, 
on  some  safe  knoll  behind  the  army,  sends  his  soldiers  to  death,  and  keeps  his  own 
skin  whole.  But  He  has  fought,  and  He  is  fighting.  Do  you  remember  that 
wonderful  picture  in  two  halves,  at  the  end  of  one  of  the  Gospels,  "  The  Lord  went 
up  into  heaven,"  &c.  .  .  .  "they  went  forth  everywhere  preaching  the  Word"? 
Strange  contrast  between  the  repose  of  the  seated  Christ  and  the  toils  of  His 
peripatetic  servants  I  Yes.  Strange  contrast ;  but  the  next  words  harmonise  the 
two  halves  of  it  :  "  The  Lord  also  working,"  &c.  The  leader  does  not  so  rest  as 
that  he  does  not  fight ;  and  the  servants  do  not  need  so  to  fight  as  that  they  cannot 
rest.  Thus  the  old  legends  of  many  a  land  and  tongue  have  a  glorious  truth  in  them 
to  the  eye  of  faith,  and  at  the  head  of  all  the  armies  that  are  charging  against  any 
form  of  the  world's  misery  and  sin  there  moves  the  form  of  the  Son  of  Man,  whose 
aid  we  have  to  invoke,  even  from  His  crowned  repose  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  If 
this,  then,  be  for  us,  as  truly  as  for  Joshua  and  his  host,  a  revelation  of  who  is  our  true 
leader,  surely  all  of  us  in  our  various  degrees,  and  especially  any  of  us  who  have  any 
"  Quixotic  crusade"  for  the  world's  good  on  our  consciences  and  on  our  hands,  may 
take  the  lessons  and  the  encouragements  that  are  here.  Own  your  leader.  That  is 
one  plain  duty.  And  recognise  this  fact,  that  by  no  other  power  than  by  His,  and 
with  no  other  weapons  than  those  which  He  puts  into  our  hands,  in  His  Cross  and 
meekness,  can  a  world's  evils  be  overcome,  and  the  victory  be  won  for  the  right  and 
the  truth.  We  may  have,  we  shall  have,  in  all  enterprises  for  God  and  man  that 
are  worth  doing,  need  of  patience,  just  as  the  army  of  Israel  had  to  parade  for  six 
weary  days  round  Jericho  blowing  their  useless  trumpets,  whilst  the  impregnable 
walls  stood  firm,  and  the  defenders  flouted  and  jeered  their  aimless  procession.  But 
the  seventh  day  wLU  come,  and  at  the  trumpet  blast  down  will  go  the  loftiest  ramparts 


CHAP,  v.]  JOSHUA.  109 

of  the  cities  that  are  walled  up  to  heaven,  with  a  rush  and  a  crash,  and  through  the 
dust  and  over  the  ruined  rubbish  Christ's  soldiers  will  march  and  take  possession. 
Do  not  make  Joshua's  mistake.     "  Art  thou  |f or  us  ?  "    Nay  !     "  Thou  art  for  Me." 
That  is  a  very  different  thing.     There  is  a  great  deal  that  calls  itself,  after  Jehu's 
fashion,  "  my  zeal  for  the  Lord,"  which  is  nothing  better  than  zeal  for  my  own 
notions  and  their  preponderance.    Therefore  we  must  strip  ourselves  of  all  that,  and 
not  fancy  that  the  cause  is  ours,  and  then  graciously  admit  Christ  to  help  us,  but 
recognise  that  it  is  His,  and  lowly  submit  ourselves  to  His  direction,  and  what  we  do, 
do,  and  when  we  fight,  fight,  in  His  name,  and  for  His  sake.    IH.  The  ally  in  all 
OUB  WAEFAEE  WITH  ouESELVES.    That  Is  the  worst  fight.    Far  worse  than  all  external 
foes  are  the  foes  that  each  man  carries  about  in  his  own  heart.    In  that  slow  hand- 
to-hand  and  foot-to-foot  struggle  I  do  not  believe  that  there  is  any  conquering  power 
available  for  a  man  that  can  for  a  moment  be  compared  with  the  power  that  comes 
through  submission  to  Christ's  command  and  acceptance  of  Christ's  help.     He  has 
fought  every  foot  of  the  ground  before  us.    IV.  The  power  which  it  is  madness  to 
BEsisT.     Think  of  this  vision.     Think  of  the  deep  truths,  partially  shadowed  and 
symbolised  by  it.    Think  of  Christ,  what  He  is,  and  what  resources  He  has  at  His  back, 
of  what  are  His  claims  for  our  service,  and  loyal,  militant  obedience.    Think  of  the 
certain  victory  of  aU  who  follow  Him  amongst  the  armies  of  heaven,  clad  in  fine  linen, 
clean  and  white.     Think  of  the  crown  and  the  throne  for  him  that  overcomes. 
Eemember  the  destructive  powers  that  sleep  in  Him ;  the  drawn  sword  in  His  hand ;  the 
two-edged  sword  out  of  His  mouth ;  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb.     Think  of  the  ultimate 
certain  defeat  of  aU  antagonisms ;  of  that  last  campaign  when  He  goes  forth  with  the 
name  written  on  His  vesture  and  on  His  thigh,  "  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords." 
Think  of  how  He  strikes  through  kings  in  the  day  of  His  wrath,  and  fills  the  place 
with  the  bodies  of  the  dead  ;  and  how  His  enemies  become  His  footstool.     Ponder 
His  own  solemn  Word,  "  He  that  is  not  with  Me  is  against  Me."   There  is  no  neutrality 
in  this  warfare.  Either  we  are  for  Him  or  we  are  for  His  adversary.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
A  strengthening  vision  (a  Sermon  to  Soldiers)  : — The  vision  described  in  the  text  was 
God's  way  of  teaching  Joshua.     It  revealed  to  him  the  important  truth,  it  showed 
him  that  the  secret  source  of  all  splendid  achievements  was  in  the  strength  that 
comes  from  the  realised  union  between  God  and  man.    When  and  where  did  this 
vision  come  to  Joshua  ?    It  was  on  the  eve  of  an  expected  battle.     At  any  moment 
the  first  blood  might  be  shed.     Uncertainty  was  in  every  heart.     Men  recounted  to 
each  other  as  they  walked  silently  about  the  camp  the  wonderful  doings  of  Jehovah, 
their  God.     These  Israelitish  soldiers  gathered  hope  from  the  past  for  the  future, 
and  so  stood  erect  for  expected  duty.     But  it  was  a  moment  of  supreme  anxiety,  for 
an  untried  matter  lay  before  them.     It  was  a  moment  of  supreme  anxiety,  and 
heart-sickening  suspense  to  every  soldier  who  stood  before  that  first  stronghold  they 
had  to  attack.     What  must  it  be  to  Joshua  the  commander-in-chief?    Earnest 
thoughts  about  his  duty,  about  his  responsibility,  would  surely  rise  up  within  him 
at  such  a  moment,  and  his  heart  must  well-nigh  faint  at  the  difficulties  and  the 
dangers.     Did  ever  soldier  meet  greater  encouragement?    At  that  moment,  then, 
when  Joshua  for  the  first  time  was  face  to  face  with  the  difficulties  and  the  dangers 
of  that  unexpected  campaign,  at  this  place  with  the  grim  fortifications  frowning 
round  him,  this  vision  of  the  text  appeared.     It  was  an  answer  to  that  which  was 
going  on  within  him.     It  was  a  striking  vision  ;  the  appearance  of  a  soldier  ready 
for  battle  to  a  soldier.    But  what  did  this  man  with  the  drawn  sword  in  his  hand 
mean  ?    Joshua  knew  a  conflict  was  certain,  that  there  was  a  long  and  severe  cam- 
paign before  him,  but  what  was  it,  victory  or  defeat  ?    What  about  the  issue  ?   The 
vision  leaves  Joshua  still  in  uncertainty  and  doubt,  and  so  with  a  soldier-like 
promptness  and  courage  he  goes  up  to  the  man,  and  the  thought  that  is  in  his  heart 
appears   at  the  rr-vj  abruptness  of  the  question :   "  Art  thou  for  us,  or  for  our 
adversaries  ?  "     Tnat  was  what  Joshua  wanted  to  know.    But  no  direct  answer  was 
given  ;  instead  came  the  majestic  words  :  "  Na.y,  but  as  Captain  of  the  host  of  the 
Lord  am  I  now  come."     I  am  thy  fellow-soldier,  but  I  belong  to  another  army.     I 
was  with  Moses  as  a  guiding  angel ;  I  wiU  be  with  thee  as  a  soldier,  the  commander, 
the  orderer  of  the  battle.     Thou  needst  not  fear ;  to  thy  army  there  is  a  reserve  of 
which  thou  knowest  nothing.     The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  thee,  the  God  of  Abraham, 
of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob  is  on  thy  side.     He  arranges  all  this  battlefield :  thou  needst 
not  fear ;  thou  art  safe  under  His  protection.     So  God  spoke  to  Joshua,  and  the 
watchful  soldier  understood  the  message  that  was  given  to  him,  he  recognised  the 
reviving  vision  and  bowed  before  the  Divine  presence.    Faith  in  God  is  a  great 
inducement  to  a  good  heroic  life ;  the  enthusiasm  of  faith  is  strength :  "  All  things  are 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

possible  to  him  that  believeth."  But  what  does  this  vision  of  the  man  with  the 
drawn  sword  in  his  hand  reveal  to  us  ?  Surely,  first  of  all  we  are  able  to  recognise 
this  truth,  that  a  soldier's  life  ought  to  be,  must  be,  may  be,  looked  upon  as  a 
vocation  from  God.  The  essence  of  an  ideal  soldier's  life  is  self-sacrifice.  To  do 
your  work  because  you  must,  to  do  it  as  slavery,  to  do  as  little  of  it  as  possible,  to 
get  away  from  it  as  soon  as  you  can,  and  then  to  find  your  amusement  or  your 
pleasure  in  some  wild  form  of  self-indulgence,  that  is  unsoldierUke  and  wrong. 
The  Cross  of  Christ  is  the  true  symbol  of  a  soldier's  life.  Self-sacrifice  should  mark 
it ;  duty  to  God  and  duty  to  man  is  that  which  lies  hidden  in  its  uniform.  And 
again,  surely  the  vision  teaches  us  this,  that  in  like  emergencies  English  soldiers 
and  English  commanders  may  expect  the  same  Divine  revelation,  a  man  with  a 
drawn  sword  in  his  hand  to  appear  to  them.  "  I  never  knew,"  said  a  cultured 
Christian  officer  to  me,  "  I  never  knew  the  delight  of  God's  presence,  I  never 
realised  it  so  thoroughly,  as  when  in  the  darkness  of  the  night  we  were  crossing  the 
deserts  of  Egypt  to  the  unknown  dangers  of  Tel-el-Kebir."  And  surely  in  these 
days  of  newness,  when  not  only  is  a  new  England  rising  up  about  us,  but  a  new 
army  with  new  weapons,  and  with  new  modes  of  warfare  and  unexplored  campaigns 
in  the  distance,  it  behoves  us  to  believe  that  whenever  war  comes,  if  it  be  under- 
taken for  the  good  of  men  and  the  glory  of  God,  this  vision  of  the  man  with  the 
drawn  sword  in  his  hand  will  lead  our  army  and  inspire  our  officers  and  soldiers  to 
noble  deeds.  This  vision  came  to  Joshua,  but  Joshua  had  a  prepared  heart.  A 
man  can  only  see  that  which  he  is  prepared  to  see.  Such  a  vision  would  not  come 
to  unprepared  souls.  Joshua  had  learned  the  lessons  of  fighting  successful  battles 
long  ago.  Years  before  this  the  first  battle  that  Israel  had  ever  fought,  that  at 
Eephidim,  had  been  gained  when  Joshua  was  the  leader,  the  chosen  selected  leader. 
An  able,  young,  and  capable  leader  he  was  then,  and  the  army  was  made  up  of 
picked  men.  He  was  brave  and  enduring,  and  everything  seemed  to  be  on  the  side 
of  the  Israelites,  but  yet  the  final  force  was  not  with  the  fighting  men,  but  up  on 
the  mountain-side.  The  final  force  was  in  the  uplifting  of  hoary  men's  hands  to 
God.  Moses  and  Aaron  and  Hur,  old  men,  stood  on  the  mountain  side  and  suppli- 
cated God  while  the  young  men  fought.  How  goes  the  battle,  do  you  want  to 
know?  You  must  watch  the  hands  of  Moses.  When  the  hands  of  Moses  are 
uplifted  the  children  of  Israel  march  grandly  on,  and  when  they  drop  down  in  their 
weakness  the  Amalakites  spring  forward,  and  neither  good  generalship  nor  hard 
fighting  can  keep  them  back.  The  secret  of  all  true  power  is  with  God.  We,  men, 
cannot  wipe  off  evil  in  our  own  strength  or  might,  but  God  will  drive  it  out.  Not 
by  a  miracle,  but  He  will  work  through  willing  men,  and  do  His  work  thoroughly 
and  well.  We  know  there  are  difficulties  and  dangers  in  a  soldier's  life,  but  amid 
the  difficulties  and  dangers  we  see  deliverance ;  amid  sin  we  see  salvation ;  with 
the  Cross  of  Christ  before  us  we  will  never  despair  of  men.  We  will  never  despair, 
for  the  Word  tells  us  that  Christ  came  into  the  world,  not  to  condemn  it,  but  to  save 
it.  Then,  again,  there  are  surely  special  times  in  a  soldier's  life  when  he  needs 
special  encouragement.  There  is  war  with  its  many  horrors,  mangled  forms,  vast 
heaps  of  dying  and  wounded  ;  and  at  such  a  moment,  in  such  a  crisis,  the  memory 
of  the  Church  at  home,  the  hymns  sung,  the  prayers  offered,  the  teaching  received, 
comes  back  and  lightens  up  the  darkest  hour  of  a  soldier's  life.  It  tells  him  of  hope 
in  unexplored  dangers,  and  in  the  last  great  danger  of  all,  death.  I  have  listened 
with  tearful  eyes  from  all  sorts  of  men's  lips  of  such  strength  being  given  them  in 
hours  of  danger  from  hymns  they  have  sung.  Some  thought  comes,  some  stray 
thought,  as  it  seems,  which  the  Holy  Spirit  brings  into  their  minds,  that  in  the 
garrison  towns  of  England  prayers  are  being  offered  up  for  them.  This  thought 
comes  in  and  gives  the  man  a  new  gleam  of  hope,  new  thoughts  of  God,  new  hopes 
of  heaven.  There  is  a  touching  incident  in  one  of  the  books  which  Mrs.  Ewing 
wrote  about  soldiers.  She  could  enter  into  their  tenderest  feelings  better  than 
most  people.  She  knew,  too,  by  constant  experience  with  soldiers,  what  religious 
associations  could  do  for  them,  and  what  a  power  the  Church  of  Christ,  with  its 
hymns,  prayers,  sacraments,  and  ministrations,  could  be  to  them.  Jackanapes  lay 
dying  on  the  battlefield.  He  had  given  his  life  for  another,  as  many  a  soldier  has 
done.  There  stood  by  him  his  old  major.  Jackanapes  said,  "  Say  a  prayer  for 
me,  a  Church  prayer.  A  Church  prayer  on  parade  service,  you  know."  But  the  old 
major  was  not  used  to  prayer  and  praise,  and  he  could  only  say,  "  Jaconite,  God 
forgive  me,  I  am  afraid  I  am  very  different  to  what  some  of  you  young  fellows  are." 
And  there  was  a  moment  of  silence,  deep  silence  and  terrible  pain,  and  then  the  old 
major  said  with  that  cliarming  simplicity  which  we  so  often  find,  "lean  only 


CHAP,  v.]  JOSHUA.  Ill 

repeat  the  little  one  at  the  end."  Impressed  with  the  conviction  that  what  he  could 
do,  it  was  his  duty  to  do,  the  old  major  knelt  down  and  unbared  his  head  and  said 
by  the  dying  boy  reverently,  loudly,  and  clearly,  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  love  of  God" — and  then  Jackanapes  died,  and  how  could  he 
die  better !  God's  love  came  before  him  at  the  last  supreme  moment.  Oh, 
there  is  many  a  word  heard  in  the  church,  heard  again  and  again,  falling 
upon  unheeding  ears,  but  which  God  hears,  and  which  comes  up  again  at  God's 
appointed  time.  When  an  English  soldier  like  Joshua  has  to  face  unexplored 
dangers,  such  words  as  the  soldier  hears  in  the  church  speaking  of  the  love  of  God 
are  so  valuable.  When  the  soul  needs  them  most,  when  the  man  is  about  to  fall 
into  the  hands  of  God,  whose  character  he  longs  to  know,  then  to  recall  thoughts 
of  the  love  of  God,  it  is  to  such  gracious  memories  as  we  trust  the  seivices  in  the 
church  will  have  that  he  looks.  (J.  C.  Edgehill,  D.D.)  Jesus  our  Captain : — 
I.  OuB  LEADER  iNSPiEEs  CONFIDENCE.  He  has  uBver  becu  defeated.  In  one  of  the 
Napoleonic  battles  on  the  Peninsula  a  corps  of  British  troops  were  sorely  pressed 
and  began  to  waver.  Just  then  the  Duke  of  Wellington  rode  in  among  them.  A 
veteran  soldier  cried  out,  "  Here  comes  the  Duke,  God  bless  him  1  the  sight  of  him 
is  worth  a  whole  brigade."  So  to  the  equipped  warrior,  under  the  ensign  of  the 
Cross,  a  sight  of  Jesus,  our  Leader,  is  a  new  inspiration,    H.  Jesus  is  able  to 

ASSUEE  THE  VICTORY  TO  EVERY  REDEEMED  SOUL  WHO  IS  LOYAL  TO    HiM.       What  a  buglC- 

blast  that  is  which  sounded  from  the  lips  of  the  heroic  apostle  (Eom.  viii.  37).  To 
be  a  conqueror  is  to  vanquish  our  enemies.  But  to  "more  than  conquer  "  is  to 
reap  a  positive,  spiritual  good  from  the  battle  itself.  If  life  had  no  encounters  we 
would  acquire  no  spiritual  sinews.  HI.  Each  one  of  us  has  a  personal  conflict 
TO  WAGE.  No  other  human  being  can  fight  it  for  us.  Some  have  to  contend  with 
a  powerful  passion,  some  with  a  besetting  sin,  some  with  a  temptation  from  with- 
out; others  with  internal  doubts  and  abominable  suggestions  by  the  adversary. 
IV.  Jesus  met  and  overcame  the  devil.  He  is  able  to  "  destroy  his  works." 
1.  Jesus  gives  us  the  only  armour  which  can  protect  us,  and  with  it  He  gives  the 
strength  to  wield  the  weapons.  2.  Jesus  makes  intercession  for  us  when  the  battle 
waxes  hot.  3.  These  conflicts  bring  us  into  closer,  sweeter  sympathy  with  Jesus. 
4.  He  flies  to  the  relief  of  every  redeemed  follower  who  is  ready  to  perish.  (T.  L. 
Cuyler,  D.D.)  Christ  the  Captain  of  salvation  : — I.  It  is  important  to  contem- 
plate the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the  source  of  His  authority.  1.  The  authority  of 
the  Saviour  is  founded  upon  His  essential  Divinity.  2.  While  the  authority  of  the 
Saviour,  as  the  Captain  of  all  the  hosts  of  the  Lord,  is  founded  upon  His  essential 
Divinity,  it  is  also  to  be  taken  as  founded  upon  His  mediatorial  office.  The  special 
charge  which  He  had  of  the  hosts  of  the  Lord,  or  the  tribes  of  Israel,  in  another 
form  of  manifestation,  must  be  regarded  evidently  and  distinctly  as  the  symbol  of 
that  covenant  relationship  which  He  holds,  throughout  aU  ages  of  time,  to  those 
who  constitute  the  spiritual  Israel  and  God's  covenant  people,  out  of  every  nation, 
tribe,  and  tongue.  11.  The  glory  of  His  objects.  1.  These  objects  are  glorious 
on  account  of  their  intrinsic  importance.  The  literal  object  had  in  view  by  the 
Saviour,  in  the  manifestation  of  Himself  to  Joshua,  was  one  of  much  magnitude — 
the  leading  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  conquest  and  to  the  promised  laud,  so  that  the 
promise  might  be  fulfilled  to  these  people,  upon  which  they  had  been  looking  now 
for  a  long  succession  of  ages.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  been  revealed  as  the 
great  Leader  of  "  the  sacramental  hosts  of  God's  elect  "  ;  and  it  should  be  observed 
that  this  possesses  an  importance  far  beyond  what,  by  any  human  being,  hath  been 
conceived,  and  demands  all  that  can  be  rendered  of  the  adoration  and  praise  of  the 
universe.  2.  These  objects  are  glorious  by  their  extended  influence.  We  are  all 
aware  of  the  influence  of  extent,  either  in  increasing  the  evil  of  what  is  pernicious 
or  in  increasing  the  value  of  what  is  beneficial.  According  to  the  number  of  persons 
affected  by  a  curse,  we  assign  the  magnitude  of  that  curse ;  and  according  to  the 
number  of  persons  affected  by  a  blessing,  we  assign  the  magnitude  of  that  blessing. 
Let  this  principle  be  applied  to  the  theme  on  which  we  now  are  meditating,  and 
new  honour  wiU  be  found  to  be  given  to  those  objects  which  are  proposed  by  the 
great  Captain  and  Leader  of  the  hosts  of  the  Lord.  in.  The  certainty  of  Hib 
triumph.  1.  The  grounds  of  this.  (1)  His  Divinity.  (2)  His  promises.  2.  We  must 
also  recollect  that  the  certainty  of  this  triumph  must  also  be  connected  with  the 
exercise  of  certain  influences  over  those  minds  who  are  interested  in  it.  And  if  the 
triumph  we  anticipate  in  connection  with  our  own  salvation  be  secure,  one  influence 
to  be  inspired  is  that  of — (1)  Obedience;  (2)  fortitude;  (3)  gratitude.  (J.  Parsons.) 
The  Cajptain  of  the  Lord's  host: — I.  Thai   before   undertaking  any  difficult 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

ENTERPBISE,  INDEED  IN  ALL  OUB  TEIALS  AND  DISTRESSES,  IN  ALL   OUR  WATS,  WE   SHOULD 

DIRECT  OUB  THOUGHTS  TO  Heaven.  Joshua  "  lifted  up  his  eyes  "  to  heaven,  from 
whence  he  knew  that  his  help  would  in  due  time  come.  So  should  our  eyes  not  be 
lowered  to  the  "  earthly,  sensual,  devilish,"  but  be  lifted  up  to  the  noble,  holy,  pure. 
II.  That  the  help  of  God  is  not  merely  to  be  passively  beceived,  but  is  to  be 
ACTIVELY  SOUGHT  FOB.  Joshua  not  Only  lifted  up  his  eyes:  he  also  "  looked."  God 
helps  those  that  help  themselves.  Men  should  all  be,  not  merely  idle  waiters  on 
God's  bounty,  but  really  "  workers  together  with  Him."  III.  That  Chbist  is  ever 
BEADY  TO  help  THOSE  THAT  LOOK  TO  HiM  FOB  SUCCOUR.  The  Captain  of  the  Lord's 
host  "  stood  over  against  Joshua  with  His  sword  drawn  in  His  hand  " — typical  of 
Christ,  prepared  to  afford  His  omnipotent  aid  to  aU  who  are  fighting  manfully  under 
His  banner,  and  striving  by  His  grace  to  continue  faithful.     IV.  That  when  faith 

HAS  MADE   KNOWN  TO    US  HEAVENLY    TRUTHS,  REASON   MUST   DISCLOSE   TO   US  THE  EXACT 

BEARING  OF  THOSE  TRUTHS.  "  Art  thou  for  US  or  for  our  adversaries  ?  "  Bringest 
thou  with  thee  airs  from  heaven  or  blasts  from  hell  ?  Be  thy  intents  wicked  or 
charitable?  Many  a  noble  human  soul,  like  stately  galley,  has  been  lured  to 
destruction  by  "phantom  ships"  in  "the  spirit  land."    V.  That  in  the  light  op 

ETERNITY    EARTHLY    CONFLICTS    ARE    PALTRY    AND    UNIMPORTANT.        Sectarianism    mUSt 

cease  when  Christianity  reigns.  VI.  That  honour  should  be  given  where  hoxoub 
IS  due.  Joshua  "  fell  on  his  knees,"  &c.  VII.  That  obedience  is  not  the  least 
op  the  Christian  virtues.  When  commanded  by  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host 
to  "loose  his  shoes,"  &c.,  he  at  once  "  did  so."  Obedience  is  a  sign,  not  of  servi- 
tude, but  of  intelligence.     {R.  Young,  M.A.)        The  true  camjiairin : — I.  That  in 

THE  true  campaign  GoD  HAS  COMMITTED  TO  MAN  A  GREAT  WORK.      1.    An  OUerOUS  WOrk. 

We  live  in  a  world  of  evU.  Corrupt  principles,  the  mighty  "  powers  of  darkness," 
possess  the  world.  They  crowd  our  sphere  of  action ;  and,  alas  !  they  are  encamped 
within  us.  The  work  to  which  we  are  called  is  their  entire  extermination,  both 
from  within  and  without.  2.  A  righteous  work.  The  man  who  consecrates  his 
energies  to  the  downfall  of  evil,  whose  life  is  one  earnest  struggle  against  the 
principalities  and  powers  of  darkness,  is  acting  evermore  in  accordance  with  the 
eternal  law  of  rectitude.  He  is  "  figliting  the  good  fight  of  faith,"  and  if  he  is 
faithful  he  shall  receive  "  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away."  3.  An  indis- 
pensable work.  Never  will  you  possess  the  Canaan  of  spiritual  harmony,  moral 
approbation,  self-control,  uplifting  thoughts,  heavenly  affections,  ever-brightening 
hopes,  and  free  and  blessed  intercourse  with  the  Infinite  Father  of  spirits,  without 
the  expulsion  of  all  evil  from  your  soul.  II.  That  in  the  true  campaign  God 
blesses  man  with  a  great  leader.  "  The  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host " — Jesus 
Christ,  "  the  Captain  of  our  salvation."  1.  As  a  moral  commander  He  is  ever 
present  when  needed.  2.  As  a  moral  commander  He  is  always  ready.  3.  As  a 
moral  commander  He  is  all-sufiicient.  III.  That  in  the  true  campaign  God 
REQUIRES  A  great  SPIRIT.  Joshua  here  displays — 1.  A  spirit  of  indomitable  valour. 
2.  A  spirit  of  reverent  inquiry.  3.  A  spirit  of  solemn  obedience.  (Hu)uili:it.)  The 
Captain  of  the  Lord's  host : — Joshua's  question,  "  Art  thou  for  us,  or  for  our 
adversaries  ?  "  was  a  perfectly  natural  one  for  him  to  ask,  at  the  sight  of  an  armed 
man  in  an  enemy's  country  ;  we  can  scarcely  say  he  did  wrong  to  ask  it ;  but  it 
seems  as  though  the  Lord  met  the  question  with  something  like  a  reuuke.  "He 
said.  Nay."  It  scorned  to  Joshua  that  there  were  two  sides,  his  own  and  the 
enemy's,  between  which  the  battle  was  to  be  fought  out :  he  had  to  leai-n  that  it  was 
not  for  him  nor  for  Israel  to  gain  the  victory,  but  for  the  Lord  their  God.  To  teach 
him  and  all  Israel  this  more  plainly,  the  Lord  gave  him  special  commands  as  to  the 
way  the  first  victory  was  to  be  gained,  in  the  taking  of  Jericho  ;  this  v.as  to  be  done, 
entirely  and  plainly,  by  God  and  not  by  man  ;  and  for  all  the  war  that  followed, 
though  more  was  to  depend  upon  human  prudence  and  conrr.ge,  they  were  still  to 
know  that  they  were  fighting,  not  for  themselves,  but  for  their  Lord  ;  that  they  were 
not  at  liberty  to  act  as  they  pleased,  but  wei-e  to  act  in  entire  obedience  to  Him.  Is 
not  this  a  lesson  which  we  require  to  learn  in  the  war  we  have  to  fight  against  the 
power  of  sin  within  and  about  us  ?  The  recognition  of  this  would  do  something  to 
calm  and  soothe  the  bitterness  of  men's  minds  about  the  questions  of  party  that  are 
so  fiercely  and  frequently  argued  in  our  days.  And  as  in  puMic  and  party  questions, 
80  the  same  fault  of  self  will  comes  into  men's  efforts  pJter  goodness  in  other  matters 
also.  Most  people  sometimes  feel  it  would  be  easier  for  them  to  be  good  if  they 
were  in  a  different  state  of  life  from  what  they  are,  if  they  lived  in  a  different 
Bociety  or  neighbourhood,  if  their  family  circumstances  were  different ;  if  tbcy  had 
a  different  business  or  employn^.ent  in  life,  and  the  like ;  and  they  often  set  down 


CHAP,  v.]  JOSHUA.  113 

their  own  faults,  as  far  as  they  are  aware  of  them,  to  the  blame  of  their  neighbours 
or  of  the  circumstances  that  they  think  are  the  great  hindrances  to  their  curing 
them.  This  is  nothing  but  claiming  to  ourselves  the  right  to  command  the  Lord's 
host,  instead  of  fighting  in  it  as  simple  soldiers,  whose  duty  only  is  to  obey  orders. 
Are  we  to  expect  the  Lord  to  be  "  for  us,"  not  only  so  that  He  means  and  wishes  us 
to  get  the  victory,  but  so  that  He  shall  take  every  means  that  we  choose  to  seciure  it, 
shall  serve  under  our  command,  and  make  bridges  over  all  the  steep  valleys  and 
roads  through  all  the  different  passes,  and  give  us  the  chance  of  fighting  the  enemy 
just  on  our  own  ground,  when  we  choose  and  where  we  choose  ?  There  is  one 
source  of  difficulty  in  the  way  of  duty  of  which  it  is  especially  wrong  to  complain  or 
to  want  to  have  it  altered  so  as  to  suit  us,  though  it  is  perhaps  the  commonest  of  all 
— I  mean  the  difficulties  we  find  to  our  own  right  conduct  from  the  conduct  of  other 
people.  Here,  if  we  ask  whether  the  Lord  is  "for  us  or  for  our  adversaries,"  the 
only  possible  answer  is,  "For  both."  He  loves  both  equally.  God  gave  Joshua 
and  the  Israelites  the  victory  over  the  Canaanites  only  "  by  little  and  little,"  for  this 
reason  among  others — that  He  desh-ed  to  spare  the  Canaanites  themselves  as  much 
as  possible,  and  to  give  them  time  to  repent  if  they  would.  Much  more  is  it  wrong 
and  selfish  for  us  to  want  any  of  our  fellow-Christians  swept  out  of  our  way — to 
think  of  them  as  mere  spiritual  enemies,  or  expect  God  to  deal  with  them  as  mere 
temptations  to  ourselves,  and  hindrances  to  our  own  goodness.  Patience  and  sub- 
mission to  God's  will  are  the  foundation  of  all  excellence  in  the  Christian  character; 
just  as  discipline,  and  ready  and  unquestioning  obedience  are  the  most  important 
of  all  qualities  in  an  army  of  this  world.  It  is  when  things  are  against  you  that 
your  mind  is  tried  and  trained ;  you  have  to  make  the  best  of  them,  but  you  are  not 
tempted  to  "  seek  great  things  for  yourself  "  ;  if  you  escape  disaster  you  will  be 
satisfied,  and  that  is  hard  enough.  Now  it  cannot  be  useless  for  us  to  remember 
in  our  spiritual  war,  if  we  find  things  are  against  us,  and  that  the  operations  in 
which  we  are  engaged  are  unsuccessful,  that  it  was  under  these  conditions  that  the 
Captain  of  the  Lord's  host  Himself  fought  out  His  great  battle  on  earth.  Judging 
it  in  a  natural  way.  His  hfe  was  a  failure.  His  ministry  a  failure.  He  had  fought 
the  world  for  God,  and  had  lost  the  battle.  But  His  faith  and  obedience  did  not 
fail — rather  it  was  perfected  by  His  defeat.  He  still  went  on  fearlessly  until  He  had 
fijiished  the  work  God  gave  Him  to  do :  then  He  said,  "  It  is  finished ! "  and 
bowed  His  head  and  gave  up  the  ghost.  And  then  He  had  conquered.  Let  us,  then, 
not  be  discouraged  if  we  find  that  He  gives  us  work  to  do  that  we  do  not  Hke,  or  in 
which  we  do  not  see  our  way  to  success.  It  may  be  only  that  He  means  us  so  to 
win  glory  like  His  own — such  as  is  won  by  the  highest  faith  in  Him,  the  faith  that 
removes  mountains.  But  whether  that  be  so  or  not,  we  have  to  accept  His  orders 
and  obey  them.  Do  your  duty  patiently,  and  trust  God  for  its  having  a  good  event. 
(IF.  H.  Simcox,  M.A.)  The  vision  for  the  great  campaign  : — See  the  British 
fleet  lying  anchored  at  Spithead.  It  is  in  commission  for  an  important  expedition. 
Every  ship  has  orders  to  be  ready  to  sail  at  a  moment's  notice.  Accordingly  all  are 
ready.  Every  officer,  every  man,  every  boy  is  aboard.  The  captains  are  assured 
that  every  preparation  is  completed  ;  that  all  stores  of  every  description  are  laid  in ; 
that  steam  is  up,  and  that  in  a  moment  their  ships  can  be  under  weigh.  Why,  then, 
do  they  not  hurry  seaward  ?  Is  not  this  delay  a  waste  of  precious  time?  No,  for 
the  admiral  is  not  yet  on  board  the  flagship.  The  supreme,  responsible,  directing 
mind,  on  whose  energy  and  ability  the  whole  nation  is  depending,  is  not  yet  at  his 
post.  See,  here  he  comes.  Every  ship  acknowledges  the  little  craft  that  bears  his 
flag  ;  he  steps  on  the  quarter-deck  of  the  vessel  he  commands,  the  signal  for  depar- 
ture is  hoisted  ;  all  are  off.  Such  an  event  as  that  will  give  some  idea  of  the  mean- 
ing of  this  part  of  the  sacred  narrative.  Israel  has  received  orders  to  enter  on 
this  momentous  campaign.  All  things  are  ready  for  a  beginning.  They  have 
crossed  the  river ;  they  have  been  cu-cumcised ;  they  have  kept  the  feast ;  they 
have  partaken  of  the  corn  of  the  land ;  why,  then,  this  pause  ?  Because  they  wait 
for  Him  who  is  their  Captain.  Here  on  the  plains  of  Jericho  the  typical  Saviour 
and  the  true  Joshua  and  Jesus,  stand  face  to  face.  Yea,  Joshua's  work  at  that 
time  was  the  work  of  Jesus ;  was  the  work  of  Jesus  so  peculiarly  and  definitely 
that  Joshua  must  wait  on  Him  for  instructions.  He  who  came  the  lowly  Lamb 
comes  here  the  mighty  warrior,  with  a  sword  of  judgment  drawn  and  gleaming 
in  His  awful  hand.  He  who  came  to  save  comes  to  destroy.  This  vision  makes 
very  emphatic  what  was  clearly  revealed  before,  viz.,  that  this  campaign  is  under  the 
Divine  sanction  and  direction.  Divine  skill  plans  the  work.  Divine  power  carries 
it  forward.    L  Behold  oxjb  Captain.    We  have  a  Leader  in  this  great  war.    We 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

are  not  left  to  fight  alone ;  herein  lies  our  comfort.  "  He  goeth  before."  We  go 
not  a  warfare  at  our  own  charges.  If  Joshua  was  unfit  for  that  conquest  of  Canaan 
by  himself,  how  much  more  are  we  unfit  for  the  fight  against  principalities  and 
powers  and  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places.  For  Joshua,  Jesus  came, 
"  The  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host."  For  us  Jesus  comes  "  the  Captain  of  salva- 
tion." And  it  is  a  comfort  to  think  that  this  Leader  of  the  people  is  one  of  the 
people  Himself.  Li  any  war,  which  is  the  captain  whom  the  soldiers  love  to  follow  ? 
He  who  shares  their  lot  most  closely — he  who,  Uke  Skobeleff  in  the  Turkish  war, 
knows  all  their  hardships  and  privations.  He  who  sleeps  with  them  in  the  trenches, 
eats  the  same  coarse  and  scanty  rations,  and  leads  them  into  the  thickest  of  the 
fight.  Now,  this  great  Captain  of  whom  we  speak  acts  in  this  very  fashion.  He 
has  shared  our  lot  in  every  particular,  however  hard,  sin  excepted.  Also,  like  the 
warrior  that  appeared  to  Joshua,  our  Leader  is  thoroughly  equipped  for  His  work. 
His  hand  is  drawn  ready  to  smite.  The  word  of  truth  is  the  royal  weapon  He 
wields  in  this  war  of  grace  and  salvation ;  quick,  powerful,  sharp,  effectual.  He 
puts  it  in  the  hands  of  every  faithful  foUower  and  bids  him  use  it  well.  Again, 
Jesus  is  our  Leader  in  virtue  of  Divine  appointment :  "  The  government  shaU  be 
upon  His  shoulders."  "  To  Him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be."  Moreover, 
He  is  Captain  in  virtue  of  His  own  purchase.  Jesus  has  the  right  to  lead  God's 
people,  because  He  has  died  for  them.  He  is  made  perfect,  as  the  Captain  of  salva- 
tion, through  suffering.  Also  He  is  our  leader  because  of  His  own  resources.  These 
are  infinite.  Lastly,  we  would  say,  He  is  Leader  because  of  His  qualities.  He  is 
an  able  Leader,  thoroughly  fit  to  command  God's  army,  a  true  King  of  men,  always 
present,  always  ready.  He  is  faithful  to  His  word ;  wise  in  His  plans  ;  glorious  in 
His  achievements ;  ravishing  in  His  perfections.  H.  See  here  also  the  faithful 
FOLLOWER.  We  know  that  Joshua  stands  prepared  to  follow  this  great  Captain, 
because  we  remember  his  past  obedience.  By  doing  whatever  duty  comes  to  hand, 
under  the  eye  of  the  great  Leader,  we  prepare  for  higher  achievements.  Joshua's 
heart  is  also  in  his  work.  He  is  not  slothful  and  indifferent.  He  is  not  careless 
and  unconcerned.  He  is  not  fearful  and  oppressed,  with  no  stomach  for  the  fight. 
Thus  the  follower  of  Jesus  should  be  a  willing  worker,  full  of  energy  and  watchful- 
ness, ever  on  the  alert  to  do  whatever  in  him  lies  to  extend  the  Saviour's  kingdom. 
Joshua  is  also  brave.  When  this  warrior  started  up  before  him,  though  he  was 
startled  he  was  not  unmanned.  Without  moral  courage  there  can  be  no  nobility  of 
character,  no  strength  of  soul,  no  effective  work.  And  this  brave  man  is  also  humble. 
He  fell  on  his  face  before  this  majestic  Presence.  He  was  deeply  conscious  of  the 
superiority  of  his  Leader  and  of  his  own  nothingness.  Therefore  his  heart  is  also 
filled  with  reverence.  He  worshipped  before  Him.  He  took  the  shoes  off  his  feet, 
for  the  place  was  holy.  Men  who  have  done  anything  great  for  God,  men  who 
have  followed  the  Lord  fully,  have  been  always  marked  by  a  spirit  of  deepest  reve- 
rence. The  gravity,  the  solemnity  of  the  work  in  which  they  are  engaged,  the  con- 
sciousness of  the  Divine  presence  before  which  they  walk,  fills  them  with  awe. 
Joshua  was  also  docile  and  obedient.  He  put  the  question,  "  What  wilt  Thou  have 
me  to  do  ?  "  And  when  he  got  the  answer  he  did  as  he  was  commanded.  Un- 
questioning, prompt  obedience  is  due  to  Him  who  commands  us  with  such  unerring 
wisdom,  who  leads  us  with   such  invincible  might.      {A.  B.  Mackay.)  An 

inspiring  vision: — Constantine,  with  his  young,  enthusiastic  heart,  was  setting 
out  on  his  war  campaigns,  when,  they  tell  us,  the  appearance  of  the  sky  arrested 
his  attention.  As  the  eyes  of  the  conqueror  looked  up  into  the  heavens,  behold, 
there  seemed  shaped  to  his  vision  a  cross  of  fire,  and  beneath  it,  in  letters  of 
flame,  were  inscribed  the  Latin  words,  "In  hoe  signo  vinces  "  ("  Li  this  sign  thou 
wilt  conquer").  It  may  have  been  a  dream — it  very  likely  was;  but  oh,  there  is 
truth  in  it  1  If  you  can  see  the  Cross,  you  have  got  the  vision  that  ennobles  and 
enlivens,  and  brings  conquering  power  to  you  in  this  life.  "  Where  there  is  no 
vision,  the  people  perish  "  ;  but  when  there  is  a  vision — the  vision  of  Calvary,  the 
vision  of  the  Lord  Jesus — there  is  life,  there  is  joy,  there  is  peace,  there  is  blessing. 
(J.  Robertson.)  Joshua's  vision : — There  are  moments  when  we  see  without  seeking, 
what  at  other  times  does  not  appear  to  us,  and  will  not  appear.  An  inward  eye 
that  had  been  closed  seems  to  open,  and  we  stand  suddenly  in  the  presence  of 
hitherto  invisible  things.  Midnight,  solitude,  sorrow,  a  felt  crisis  in  our  lives — 
what  revealings  they  have  brought  with  them ;  and  it  was  as  though  a  veil  had 
been  rent  in  twain,  as  though  a  flash  of  lightning  had  illumined  the  darkness. 
We  all  have  our  occasional  transient  visions  of  something  higher,  grander,  or  more 
solemn  than  we  are  ordinarily  sensible  of.    Joshua  has  now  to  begin  afresh,  Id  fresh 


CHAP,  v.]  JOSHUA.  115 

scenes  ;  another  period  of  toil  and  endurance  is  opening  before  him.  So  we  stand 
to-day  upon  the  threshold  of  another  year,  waiting,  after  we  have  finished,  to 
commence  again.  And,  as  he  waited,  gravely  meditative,  with  earnest  thoughts 
stirring  in  him  concerning  his  duties  and  responsibilities,  there  came  upon  him  the 
vision  of  the  text ;  for,  unless  he  had  been  meditative  and  earnest,  he  would  not 
have  beheld  what  he  beheld,  we  may  be  sure.  It  was  the  shining  answer  to  what 
was  taking  place  within  him.  One  sees  only  that  which  one  is  tuned  and  prepared 
to  see ;  and,  to  catch  inspiring  glimpses,  one  must  be  aspiring.  All  things  must  be 
met  by  us  half-way.  For  none  but  those  whose  hearts  are  kindling,  does  the  bush 
burn  with  fire.  May  ours  be  the  inner  temper  of  mind  to-day,  to  which  angels  of 
God  shall  be  able  to  show  themselves.  But  notice  first  the  agitation  of  uncertainty 
in  the  breast  of  the  son  of  Nun.  ''Art  thou  for  us,  or  for  our  adversaries?" 
wondering  anxiously  what  the  apparition  meant.  You  see,  this  was  the  form  in 
which  the  future  in  the  strange  country  appeared — a  mighty  man  with  a  drawn 
sword  in  his  hand.  Yes,  of  course  the  future  would  be  filled  with  the  clash  of  war. 
Nothing  but  conflict  could  be  expected;  conflict  perhaps,  severe  and  prolonged; 
but  what  olE  the  issue  ?  with  whom  would  the  victory  lie  ?  with  Israel  or  the  enemy  ? 
Ah,  if  he  could  but  tell.  Mystic  form  of  the  Future,  wilt  thou  reveal  it  to  me  ?  Aid 
it  is  with  like  uncertainty  that  we  front  now  the  new  year.  We  have  most  of  us  Uved 
long  enough — we  most  of  us  know  enough  of  life  to  discern,  as  we  lift  our  eyes,  a 
man  with  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand.  That  there  will  be  more  or  less  of  disagree- 
able and  trying  encounter,  is  sure.  We  shall  have  difficulties  to  grapple  with,  in 
the  sweat  of  our  face.  Temptations  will  assail  us  ;  vexations  and  annoyances  will 
have  to  be  borne.  But  will  it  be,  upon  the  whole,  one  of  our  happy  and  prosperous 
years  ?  Shall  we  get  through  it,  however  threatened  or  assaulted,  unrifled  and  un- 
harmed, without  being  sore  wounded  or  overthrown  in  the  way.  The  character  of 
past  years  has  varied.  Some,  notwithstanding  many  little  rufflings  and  unpleasant- 
nesses experienced  in  them,  we  have  looked  back  upon  with  satisfaction  and  thank- 
fulness, and  have  called  them  good  years.  Ah,  we  did  well  in  them.  They  were 
marked  by  much  sunshine.  Our  enterprises  prospered ;  our  friendships  yielded 
only  sweetness.  Other  years,  perhaps,  we  were  glad  to  have  done  with.  They  are 
remembered  as  black  years,  in  which  the  sun  shone  only  at  rare  intervals,  and  for 
a  brief  space,  between  ever-returning  clouds.  The  years  have  varied  with  us.  In 
some,  if  we  have  had  to  fight,  we  have  conquered.  In  others,  the  tide  of  battle  has 
rolled  against  us,  leaving  us  broken  and  mauled.  "  New  year  coming  on  apace, 
what  hast  thou  to  give  me  ?  Comest  thou  promising  peace  and  brightness,  or  big 
with  thunder  and  gloom  ?  "  We  ask  in  vain,  as  Joshua  did  when  he  cried,  "  Art 
thou  for  us,  or  for  our  adversaries  ?  "  For  observe,  that  question  of  his  was  not 
replied  to.  "Nay,"  said  the  armed  angel,  "lam  no  token,  no  prophecy  of  that, 
one  way  or  the  other."  But  what  does  he  say  to  the  wistfully  inquiring  man?  "As 
the  captain  of  the  host  of  the  Lord  I  am  now  come. "  Here,  then,  was  what  Joshua 
saw,  presently,  in  looking  forward  to  the  future.  Not  what  was  going  to  happen — 
not  the  victory  or  the  defeat  to  which  he  was  destined  in  marching  against  the 
Canaanites ;  but,  that  it  would  not  be  himself  alone  at  the  head  of  the  Hebrew 
army ;  that  One  would  be  there,  superintending  and  disposing,  ordering  and  com- 
manding, whom  the  people  beheld  not,  even  the  very  same  angel  of  Jehovah's 
presence.  He  saw  himself  divinely  overlooked  and  attended  ;  planning, 
manoeuvring,  fighting  to  the  best  of  his  ability,  as  the  chosen  general,  under  the 
constant  eye  and  control  of  an  unseen  Generalissimo,  who  had  His  purposes,  whose 
purposes  were  good  and  right,  and  would  be  always  fulfilling  themselves  in  and 
through  all.  It  was  thus  that  the  Future  answered  his  appeal,  "  What  hast  thou 
hidden  for  us  in  thy  thick  darkness  ?  "  It  answered,  "  God  is  here — caring, 
managing,  ruling  to  the  end ;  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob."  An 
inspiring  vision,  to  have  been  borne  in  upon  him  as  he  stood  alone  in  the  plain,  with 
the  grim  fortifications  of  Jericho  frowning  down  on  him,  and  thought  of  the  work 
to  be  done,  with  its  difficulties  and  dangers.  Better,  surely,  than  any  glimpse  or 
foreshadowing  of  coming  events  would  have  been.  And  if  we  be  able  to  receive  it, 
what  can  be  more  inspiring  for  us  in  our  entrance  upon  the  unknown  land  of  a  new 
year  than  the  vision,  not  merely  of  an  existence  in  the  universe  over  and  above  all 
phenomena,  and  producing  and  sustaining  them ;  but  of  a  living  Being,  transcendent 
in  wisdom  and  goodness,  whose  purpose  is  our  education  and  the  education  of  the 
world,  and  who  is  working  evermore,  in  whatever  happens,  in  whatever  chances 
and  changes  may  bef aU,  to  forward  it ;  of  One  who  is  not  only  with  us  in  cor  doings 
and  Bufferings,  our  aspirations  and  struggles,  our  mistakes  and  stumblings,  but  in 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

them  with  continuous  tuitional  intent ;  under  whom  we  are  pursuing  our  ends,  by 
whom,  in  all  paths,  we  are  led,  in  whose  kingdom  we  are  from  morn  to  eve,  let  it 
be  with  us  as  it  may.  Many  earnest  souls  around  us  are  starting  afresh  to-day,  aa 
they  have  come  through  the  year  that  is  gone,  with  no  such  vision.  Joshua's  angel 
does  not  manifest  itself  to  them.  Lifting  their  eyes,  they  behold  nothing  but  the 
walls  of  Jericho  and  the  encampment  of  Israel,  and  over  all,  an  empty  sky.  Nor 
are  they  the  less  ready  for  the  battle,  or  the  less  patient  and  strong,  hopeful  and 
brave,  in  essaying  to  conquer.  And  we  may  be  sure  too,  that  guidance  and  help 
from  above,  is  theirs  ;  for  the  presence  and  energy  of  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host 
does  not  depend  upon  men's  seeing  Him.  He  is  not  absent  or  inoperative  because 
they  are  unable  to  discern  Him.  Nevertheless,  happy  are  they  to  whom  He  is 
visible.  Let  us  be  thankful  then,  if  to-day,  as  we  are  girding  our  loins  anew  for  the 
work  of  life,  and  for  whatever  life  may  bring — let  us  be  thankful  if  we  can  behold 
with  Joshua  the  angel  of  Jehovah's  presence,  and,  in  setting  out,  pause  a  little  to 
entertain  and  foster  the  strengthening  vision.  "  But  what  saith  my  Lord  to  His 
servant?"  cried  the  son  of  Nun  when  he  felt  the  august  Presence  about  him,  and 
bowed  himself  to  the  ground  before  it.  "What  saith  my  Lord  to  His  servant? 
Ah !  now  that  I  have  Thee  here ;  now  that  Thou  art  revealed  to  me  in  the  way, 
speak  to  me ;  tell  me  something.  Surely,  I  shall  hear  some  great  thing  from  Thy 
lips — surely,  some  great  secret  will  be  whispered  to  me.  With  the  Invisible  Power 
thus  consciously  nigh  me,  I  may  expect  wondrous  words,  important  disclosures." 
We  can  understand  and  sympathise  with  the  expectation,  can  we  not  ?  What 
might  not  God  Almighty  tell,  we  are  apt  to  think,  if  He  were  once  found  speaking. 
So  thought  Joshua,  waiting  in  awed  anticipation  with  his  face  to  the  earth.  And 
from  the  mystic  Presence  overshadowing  him,  what  syllables  fell  ?  What  was  it 
that  he  heard  to  whom  it  grew  vocal?  "  Loose  thy  shoe  from  off  thy  foot,  for  the 
place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy."  Was  that  all  ?  That  was  all.  No  declaring 
of  things  that  had  been  kept  hidden,  no  weighty  revealings.  Only  a  plain  and 
familiar  admonition,  to  cherish  and  preserve  within  him  a  right  temper  of  mind,  a 
right  spirit — to  see  to  it  that  he  walked  reverently,  and  cultivated  purity,  as  one 
who  dwelt  in  a  temple.  That  was  all  the  heavens  told  him,  when  they  leaned 
toward  him  with  a  word.  "Take  heed  to  yourself,  to  your  character  and  conduct; 
be  dutiful,  be  loyal  to  the  vision  that  is  yours.  Piecognise  and  answer  the  claim  on 
you  to  be  holy."  And  should  we  be  disappointed,  were  the  silent  sky,  in  sending 
on  a  sound,  to  drop  upon  our  ear  no  more  than  such  an  admonition  as  Joshua 
heard  ?  What,  however,  do  we  need  so  much,  for  all  present  and  future  benedic- 
tion, as  to  be  taught  a  truer,  finer  ordering  of  ourselves  ?  and  what  better,  richer, 
more  brightly  fruitful  new  year's  gift  could  we  have  from  above  than  a  deepened 
sense  of  duty  and  a  fresh  impulse  toward  reverent  and  noble  living  ?  Yes,  oh  yes, 
"  Blessed  are  the  lowly  in  spirit ;  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart ;  they  shall  see  God."     {S.  A.  Tipple.) 


CHAPTEB  VL 

Vers.  1-5.  Now  Jericho  was  straitly  shut  up. — Shut  up : — An  old  writer  says  that 
every  carnal  heart  is  a  Jericho  shut  up  ;  God  sits  down  before  it  and  displays  mercy 
and  judgment :  it  hardens  itself  in  a  wiltul  security  and  saith,  "  I  shall  never  be 
moved."  What  numbers  of  men  there  are  who  close  their  hearts  and  keep  them 
barred  against  God  I  God  might  have  thrown  down  the  walls  of  Jericho  at  once, 
but  you  must  remember  that  He  uses  means  to  accomplish  ends.  God  required 
Israel  to  walk  round  Jericho.  That  was  their  part.  God  ia  not  usually  in  a 
hurry.  He  can  afford  to  wait  until  the  seventh  day  before  bringing  down  the  walls. 
I  don't  read  that  the  Israelites  grew  tired  of  waiting  on  this  occasion.  They  went 
at  it  day  after  day  quietly  inarching  ahead.  Here  is  a  lesson  of  perseverance  I'or  us. 
We  sometimes  grow  impatient.  We  see  no  good  resulting  from  our  own  labours, 
and  are  disposed  to  murmur.  (Charles  Leach.)  Seven  trumpets  of  rams'  horiU. 
—  The  blast  of  the  trumpet  was,  in  the  Jewish  feasts,  the  solemn  proclamation  oi  ihe 
presence  of  God.  And  hence  the  purpose  of  that  singular  march  circumambulating 
the  city  was  to  declare  "Here  is  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth,  weaving  His  invisible 
cordon  and  network  around  the  doomed  city."     1.  Here  ia  a  confidence  in  the  Divine 


CHAP.  VI.]  JOSBUA.  117 

presence,  manifested  by  unquestioning  obedience  to  a  Divine  command.  Joshua 
had  spoken ;  God  had  spoken  through  him.  And  so  here  goes ;  up  with  the  ark 
and  the  trumpets,  and  out  on  to  the  hot  sand  for  the  march.  It  would  have  been 
a  great  deal  easier  to  have  stopped  in  the  tents.  It  was  disheartening  work 
marching  round  thus.  The  sceptical  spirit  in  the  host — the  folk  of  whom  there 
are  many  great-grandchildren  living  to-day,  who  always  have  objections  to  urge 
when  disagreeable  duties  are  crammed  up  against  their  faces — would  have  enough 
to  say  on  that  occasion,  but  the  bulk  of  the  people  were  true,  and  obeyed.  Now, 
we  do  not  need  to  put  out  the  eyes  of  our  understanding  in  order  to  practise  the 
obedience  of  faith.  And  we  have  to  exercise  common  sense  about  the  things  that 
seem  to  us  to  be  duties.  But  this  is  plain,  that  if  once  we  see  a  thing  to  be,  in 
Christianlanguage,  the  will  of  our  Father  inheaven,  then  that  is  everything,  and  there 
is  only  one  course  for  us,  and  that  is,  unquestioning  submission,  active  submission, 
and,  what  is  as  hard,  passive  submission.  2.  Then  here  again  is  faith  manifesting 
itself  by  an  obedience  which  was  altogether  ignorant  of  what  was  coming.  "We,  too, 
have  to  do  our  day's  march,  knowing  very  little  about  to-morrow ;  and  we  have  to  carry 
on  all  through  liie  "  doing  the  duty  that  lies  nearest  us,"  entirely  ignorant  of  the 
strange  issues  to  which  it  may  conduct.  So,  seeing  that  we  know  nothing  about 
the  issues,  let  us  make  sure  of  the  motives ;  and  seeing  that  we  do  not  know  what 
to-morrow  may  bring  forth,  nor  even  what  the  next  moment  may  bring,  let  us  see 
that  we  fill  the  present  instant  as  full  as  it  will  hold  with  active  obedience  to  God, 
based  upon  simple  faith  in  Him.  3.  Then,  here,  again,  is  faith  manifesting  itself  by 
persistency.  A  week  was  not  long,  but  it  was  a  long  while  during  which  to  do  that 
one  apparently  useless  thing  and  nothing  else.  Familiarity  would  breed  monotony, 
but  notwithstanding  the  deadly  influences  of  habit,  the  obedient  host  turned  out 
for  their  daUy  round.  "  Let  us  not  be  weary  in  well-doing."  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Religious  work  often  seems  impracticable  : — When  we  are  in  great  religious  moods, 
in  sublime  spiritual  ecstasies,  in  immediate  and  vital  touch  with  God,  we  are  not 
afraid  to  adopt  apparently  impracticable  measures  in  carrying  out  the  purposes  of 
righteousness  and  wisdom.  What  could  be  more  ridiculous,  from  a  purely  military 
point  of  view,  than  the  directions  given  for  the  capture  and  overthrow  of  Jericho  ? 
They  had  no  relation  to  the  event.  The  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  the 
wisdom  of  men.  We  cannot  always  judge  things  by  appearances.  We  ourselves 
are  often  startled  by  the  want — apparent,  at  least — of  adaptation  of  means  to  ends. 
The  religious  method  may  always  be  called  impracticable.  It  is  very  slow ;  it  does 
not  seem  to  work  with  any  immediate  effect.  What  can  be  duller,  slower,  than 
what  is  generally  understood  as  teaching  ?  Yet  it  is  by  teaching  that  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  to  be  prepared  for.  It  is  a  very  slow  method.  One  gleam  from 
heaven's  own  midday  would  startle  the  world  more  surely  I  Why  not  this  sudden 
outburst  of  intolerable  glory?  Because  there  is  no  lasting  in  it,  no  power  of 
duration  and  sustenance.  Men  cannot  live  upon  such  visions.  Things  that  are  not 
are  employed  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are.  Foolish  things,  little  things, 
contemptible  things,  are  used  by  the  hand  almighty  to  shake  down  towers  and  walls 
and  temples  and  capitals,  and  bring  them  to  nought  before  the  throne  of  righteous- 
ness. Thus  religion  is  not  afraid  of  the  impracticable — at  least,  of  what  may  appear 
to  be  impracticable  to  those  who  look  only  upon  the  surface.  Eeligion  has  never 
been  afraid  to  claim  prayer  as  one  of  its  very  pillars — the  signature  of  its  very 
power.  What  can,  from  the  outside,  be  more  futile  and  ridiculous  than  to  be 
speaking  into  the  vacant  air — to  exclude  all  living  things  upon  the  earth,  and  to 
speak  to  One  we  have  never  seen,  and  pour  our  heart's  penitence,  woe,  hope,  into  an 
ear  we  cannot  detect  amid  all  the  clouds  which  float  through  the  heavens  ?  _  Yet 
religion  says,  "  Continue  instant  in  prayer  " ;  you  have  no  other  hope.  Besides, 
processes  may  be  long,  and  results  may  be  brought  about  in  startling  suddenness. 
(J.    Parker,   D.D.)  The    seventh  day  ye   shall   compass   the    city   seven 

times. — The  compassing  of  Jericho  : — 1.  The  posture  was  a  walking  posture,  as  it 
had  no  direct  or  probable  tendency  for  subduing  the  city,  so  it  likewise  seemed 
ridiculous  to  the  rude  citizens,  who  might  well  scoffingly  say,  "  What  are  these 
foolish  people  doing  ?  Have  they  not  had  a  walk  long  enough  for  forty  years  in 
the  wilderness  that  now  they  have  a  new  walk  round  about  our  walls,  and  that 
once  every  day  for  six  days  together  ?  They  desire  indeed  to  possess  our  pity,  but 
they  may  compass  it  long  enough  before  that  posture  can  conquer  it,"  &c.  Besides,  this 
posture  seemed  perilous  as  well  as  ridiculous.  Yet  God  will  make  Jericho  as  well 
as  His  Israel  know  that  He  can  give  victory  to  their  feet  as  well  as  to  their  hands. 
God  oftentimes  delighteth  to  go  some  way  of  His  own  (which  is  not  man's  way) 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

and  worketh  His  own  will  by  such  means,  and  in  such  a  manner,  as  the  world 
judges  both  perilous  and  ridiculous.  As  the  greater  was  God's  glory  in  effecting 
this  great  work,  wherein  Israel  contributed  nothing  to  it,  so  the  stronger  was  Israel's 
faith  in  believing  it  should  be  effected,  notwithstanding  both  the  difficulty,  danger, 
and  improbability  of  means  and  manner.  (1)  The  term  of  place  or  space  of  ground 
they  walked  was,  negatively,  not  an  acre,  or  furlong,  or  any  such  measures  of  miles, 
nor  was  it  a  half -turn,  but  positively,  it  must  be  a  whole  turn,  a  compassing  the  city 
round  about.  Had  they  not  gone  round  about,  all  had  not  been  their  ovm.  They 
had  conquered  no  more  than  they  had  compassed,  so  had  done  their  work  but  to 
half  part.  It  looks  more  like  children's  play,  in  treading  a  maze,  than  any 
stratagem  of  warriors.  All  this  was  to  teach  Israel  not  to  expect  success  from 
their  own  prowess  or  policy,  but  merely  from  the  prescription  and  favourable 
presence  of  that  God  who  can  work  what  He  pleaseth,  even  by  the  most  con- 
temptible ways.  (2)  The  term  of  time  unto  which  this  action  was  extended,  this 
compassing  the  city,  must  be  done  once  every  day  for  six  days  together,  but  on  the 
seventh  day  theymust  surroundit  seven  times  successively  (vers.  3, 11, 13-16).  Israel 
walks  their  circuit  six  times  over  for  six  days,  and  on  each  day  return  into  their 
camp.  Nothing  was  effected  in  order  to  Jericho's  overthrow,  so  long  a  time  they 
are  held  in  suspense,  for  the  exercise  of  their  faith  and  patience.  (C.  Ness.) 
Work  which  seems  aimless : — God  taught  His  people  to  work  six  days,  apparently 
doing  nothing.  It  is  easy  enough  to  work  for  Christ  when  ground  is  manifestly 
being  gained.  Fighting  is  not  hard  work  when  souls  are  won  to  Christ ;  when  an 
enemy  goes  down  at  well-nigh  every  blow,  and  many  captives  are  delivered.  It  is 
far  harder  work  to  toil  and  do  nothing.  Thus  Carey  laboured  for  a  lifetime 
marching  round  letters  and  languages  and  dialects,  and  probably  some  wondered 
how  he  could  call  that  work  for  Christ.  So  David  Livingstone  spent  his  life  in 
walking  up  and  down  Africa,  and  some  well-meaning  and  good  men  asked,  "  How 
can  he  call  himself  a  missionary  ?  He  is  merely  a  geographer,"  they  said ;  "  he 
has  been  discovering  the  water-shed  of  a  continent  instead  of  carrying  to  its 
thirsty  inhabitants  the  Water  of  Life."  So  little  did  they  know  of  what  was  being 
done ;  so  little,  perhaps,  did  Livingstone  himself  sometimes  know.  "We  can  see 
now  that  in  all  that,  to  some,  aimless  marching,  England's  sympathy,  America's 
sympathy,  the  sympathy  of  all  Christendom,  was  being  won  for  Africa  ;  and  that 
the  heart  of  the  whole  Church  of  Christ  was  being  brought  to  feel,  "  Those  negroes 
must  no  longer  be  made  slaves  ;  those  men  and  women  must  hear  the  gospel ;  the 
work  of  the  great  man  who  died  upon  his  knees  for  Africa,  and  whose  heart  lies 
buried  in  Africa,  must  not  be  suffered — under  God,  shall  not  be  suffered — to  fall 
to  the  ground."  It  is  very  hard,  however,  to  learn  to  do  what  seems  to  be  nothing. 
It  is  hard  for  parents  to  teach  their  children,  when  all  their  labour  seems  so  useless ; 
fruitless  work  is  hard  for  other  teachers,  and  hard  for  preachers.  God  shows  us 
here  that  it  is  enough  for  us  to  say,  "  Am  I  doing  faithfully  and  prayerfully  and 
zealously  what  my  Lord  has  bidden  me  to  do  ?  "  A  justifiable  Sabbath  work  : — Was 
it  not  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  law  to  make  no  difference  on  the  Sabbath  ?  As 
the  narrative  reads  we  are  led  to  think  that  the  Sabbath  was  the  last  of  the  seven 
days,  in  which  case,  instead  of  a  cessation  of  labour,  there  was  an  increase  of  it 
sevenfold.  Possibly  this  may  be  a  mistake  ;  but  at  the  least  it  seems  as  if,  all  days 
being  treated  alike,  there  was  a  neglect  of  the  precept,  "  In  it  thou  shalt  not  do  any 
work."  To  this  it  has  usually  been  replied  that  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  being  only 
a  matter  of  arrangement,  and  not  founded  on  any  unchangeable  obligation,  it  was 
quite  competent  for  God  to  suspend  it  or  for  a  time  repeal  it,  if  occasion  required. 
The  present  instance  has  been  viewed  as  one  of  those  exceptional  occasions  when 
the  obligation  to  do  no  work  was  suspended  for  a  time.  But  this  is  hardly  a 
satisfactory  explanation.  Was  it  likely  that  immediately  after  God  had  so  solemnly 
charged  Joshua  respecting  the  book  of  the  law,  that  it  was  "  not  to  depart  out  of 
his  mouth,  but  he  was  to  meditate  therein  day  and  night,  to  observe  to  do  according 
to  all  that  was  written  therein,"  that  almost  on  the  first  occurrence  of  a  public 
national  interest  He  would  direct  him  to  disregard  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  ?  What 
seems  the  just  explanation  is,  that  this  solemn  procession  of  the  ark  was  really  an 
act  of  worship,  a  very  public  and  solemn  act  of  worship,  and  that  therefore  the 
labour  which  it  involved  was  altogether  justifiable,  just  as  the  Sabbath  labour 
involved  in  the  offering  of  the  daily  sacrifices  could  not  be  objected  to.  It  was  a 
very  solemn  and  open  demonstration  of  honour  to  that  great  Being  in  whom  Israel 
trusted — of  obedience  to  His  word,  and  unfaltering  confidence  that  He  would  show 
Himself  the  God  of  His  chosen  people.    At  every  step  of  their  march  they  might 


CHAP.  VI.]  JOSHUA.  119 

well  have  sung — "  I  will  lift  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  hills,  from  whence  cometh  my 
help."  The  absurdity  of  their  proceeding,  to  the  eye  of  flesh,  invested  it  with  a 
high  sanctity,  because  it  testified  to  a  conviction  that  the  presence  of  that  God  who 
dwelt  symbolically  in  the  ark  would  more  than  compensate  for  all  the  feebleness 
and  even  apparent  silliness  of  the  plan.  It  was  indeed  an  exception  to  the  usual 
way  of  keeping  the  Sabbath,  but  an  exception  that  maintained  and  exalted  the 
honour  of  God.  And,  in  a  sense,  it  might  be  called  resting,  inasmuch  as  no 
aggressive  operations  of  any  kind  were  carried  on  ;  it  was  simply  a  waiting  on 
God,  waiting  till  He  should  arise  out  of  His  place,  and  cause  it  to  be  seen  that 
(Psa.  xUv.  3).     {W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.B.) 

Vers.  6-11.  Ye  shall  not  shout .  . .  until  the  day  I  bid  you  shout. — Joshua  taking 
Jericho : — I.  One  of  the  essential  attkebutes  of  a  gkeat  leader — the  power 
TO  repress  the  passions  of  a  nation  of  warriors  :  •'  Ye  shall  not  shout,"  &c.  This 
was  the  command  of  a  young  ruler.  The  temptation  of  the  young  and  inexperienced 
is  impatience.  We  but  gradually  learn  the  lesson,  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not 
make  haste."  Joshua,  however,  had  learnt  this.  It  is  easy  to  arouse  a  nation 
when  new  scenes  suggest  new  possibiUties,  but  it  is  difficult  to  suppress  emotions  at 
such  a  time,  and  to  insist  upon  silence  "  until."  This  is  one  of  the  tests  of  ruler- 
ship.  Every  general  should  be  equal  to  this  task.  Joshua  was.  H.  One  of  the 
characteristics  of  a  great  people — willinq  obedience  to  the  command  to  repress 
their  emotions  at  such  a  time  as  this.  Joshua  does  not  seem  to  have  told  them 
all  that  the  Lord  had  told  him.  Their  ignorance  of  the  final  issue  made  obedience 
to  the  command  to  go  round  Jericho  for  six  days  without  giving  vent  to  their  feelings 
in  one  single  shout  the  more  difficult,  and  on  that  account  imparted  to  it  a  grander 
meaning.  At  the  outset  the  nation  of  conquerors  had  to  conquer  their  own  spirit. 
There  must  be  a  reserve  of  force.  Only  those  who  can  be  silent  can  shout  to  good 
purpose.  So  has  it  ever  been  with  God's  servants.  They  have  had  their  seasons  of 
delay.  Moses  in  Midian;  Christ's  disciples  tarrying  in  Jerusalem  "until,"  Ac; 
Paul  in  Arabia  ;  so  here  the  people  who  could  persist  in  their  apparently  meaning- 
less rounds  "  until "  they  were  bidden  to  shout,  had  the  making  of  conquerors  in 
them.  The  shout  would  have  all  the  momentum  of  the  delay  in  it.  III.  The 
Divine  method  op  accomplishing  triumphs  :  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by 
My  Spirit."  The  triumph  thus  gained  is  often  the  consummation  of  patient 
waiting  and  implicit  obedience  on  our  part.  The  world  misunderstands  the 
meaning  of  the  apparent  monotonous  routine  of  Providence,  and  asks  sneeringly, 
♦'  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming?"  All  the  while  we  know  that  the  Lord  is 
not  slack  concerning  His  promise,  and  that  every  apparent  delay  hastens  the  final 
consummation.  And  "  this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  bur 
faith."    {D.  Davies.) 

Vers.  12-27.  The  wall  fell  down  flat. — The  fight  of  faith  : — Of  uninspired  poems, 
perhaps  the  most  widely  read  are  those  which  celebrate  a  siege — the  siege  of  Troy. 
Homer  and  Virgil  have  sung  in  noble  numbers  the  praises  of  the  heroes  in  that 
world-renowned  fight.  Their  qualities,  deeds,  reverses,  successes,  as  thus  recorded, 
will  live  as  long  as  such  poetry  has  a  charm  for  the  human  mind.  But,  after  all, 
the  principles  which  animated  Agamemnon,  Ajax,  Achilles,  Nestor,  Ulysses,  and 
others  of  these  old-world  heroes,  were  very  commonplace.  The  play  of  human 
passion,  headstrong,  self-willed,  fierce,  implacable,  impure,  treacherous,  constitutes 
the  base,  shaft,  and  capital  of  these  poetic  columns.  The  whole  thing  is  of  the 
earth  earthy.  It  is  the  fight  of  the  flesh  that  we  witness,  not  the  fight  of  faith. 
In  this  chapter  we  have  the  record  of  a  siege  of  another  sort,  the  description  of 
heroes  of  a  different  spirit.  There  an  innocent  city  must  be  besieged  for  ten  years 
because  Paris  ran  off  with  a  beautiful  woman.  Here,  after  a  seven  days'  pause  for 
possible  penitence,  the  Lord's  host  executed  judgment  on  a  city  of  exceptional 
wickedness  because  God's  patience  was  exhausted.  There  in  long  works  elaborated 
by  the  genius  of  the  world's  great  poets  we  have  many  pictures  that  command  our 
admiration.  Here  in  one  little  line  the  Holy  Ghost  presents  a  picture  far  more 
marvellous  and  sublime,  when  He  simply  says,  "  By  faith  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell 
down."  I.  Consider,  then,  this  fight  of  faith  ;  and  first  of  all  mark  the  foundation 
op  the  faith  whereby  Jericho  was  overthrown.  It  was  a  well-founded  faith,  for  it 
rested  altogether  on  the  Word  of  God.  "  What  are  the  marching  orders  ?  "  This 
is  the  only  question  faith  asks ;  if  it  is  convinced  in  regard  to  this,  it  can  command 
mountains  to  be  plucked  up  by  the  roots  and  cast  into  the  sea.    As  it  was  in  the 


120  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

siege  of  Jericho  so  is  it  in  the  siege  of  Mansoul.  All  must  be  done  in  faith,  or 
nothing  is  done  to  good  purpose.  Faith  asks,  What  has  God  commanded  ?  And 
the  answer  is  clear  as  day :  "  Preach  the  Word."  "  Testify  of  Me."  We  have 
something  more  to  do  than  to  defend  the  faith,  or  to  apologise  for  the  gospel ;  we 
have  to  prophesy  over  the  dry  bones,  knowing  that  in  the  power  of  that  Word  they 
will  rise  up  an  exceeding  great  army.  11.  Think  also  of  the  tkial  of  his  faith. 
The  whole  thing  looked  like  child's  play.  The  means  seem  to  human  wisdom 
utterly,  ridiculously  inadequate  to  the  end  in  view.  Even  so  in  our  days  faith  is 
tried.  What,  it  may  be  asked,  are  you  to  preach,  preach  for  ever,  to  do  nothing  but 
preach  ?  Again,  it  must  have  been  a  trial  to  Israel  to  wait  so  long.  If  going  round 
Jericho  is  to  accomplish  the  work,  surely  once  round  is  as  good  as  a  thousand 
times.  If  one  shout  wUl  lay  the  walls  flat,  why  not  shout  the  first  day,  and  make 
short  work  of  it  ?  To  try  every  mode  of  presenting  the  gospel,  so  as  to  reach  the 
conscience  and  influence  the  life  of  those  who  hear,  but  never  to  see  any  good  result 
therefrom ;  to  labour  in  some  degraded  district  to  elevate  the  masses  by  the  leverage 
of  the  gospel,  and  to  see  them  sink  back  like  dry  sand  into  their  congenial  degrada- 
tion ;  to  teach  in  the  Sabbath-school  with  earnestness  and  diligence,  and  never  have 
the  assurance  that  one  soul  is  savingly  touched ;  to  train  up  the  children  in  the 
family  with  careful  pains  and  earnest  prayers,  and  yet  to  find  their  hearts  wayward 
and  prone  to  evil — all  these  are  sad  and  trying  experiences  under  which  the  heart 
is  apt  to  sink  discouraged  and  to  ask.  Is  this  gospel  the  true  power  after  all  ?  For 
a  cure  to  such  f aintness  let  us  remember  Israel,  Perfect  victory  comes  soon  or  late 
to  every  soul  who  works  in  the  energy  of  God's  Spirit  as  God  directs.  Not  only  the 
•walls  of  Jericho  but  mighty  mountains  are  beaten  small  by  the  worm  Jacob.  Still 
another  part  of  the  trial  of  Israel's  faith  must  have  been  the  thought  of  what  their 
enemies  had  been  saying  and  thinking.  Say  what  we  wUl,  the  opinions  and  thoughts 
of  our  fellows  have  an  influence  over  us,  and  cause  either  gratification  or  discomfort. 
One  of  the  severest  trials  to  the  faithful  witness  of  Christ  is  his  critics.  Some  of 
them  are  unfriendly,  and  their  aim  is  to  destroy  his  influence.  Some  of  them  are 
friendly ;  and  their  purpose  is  to  extend  his  influence.  If  he  is  a  foolish  man, 
weak  in  faith,  he  will  be  spoiled  by  either  of  them.  He  should  try  to  get  all  the 
good  out  of  them  that  is  in  them ;  and  if  there  is  no  good  in  them  pay  no  more 
attention  to  them  than  the  Israelites  did  to  the  men  of  Jericho.  III.  As  we  look  at 
Israel  in  its  march  round  Jericho  we  also  see  a  good  example  of  the  obedience  of 
FAITH.  We  have  need  to  imitate  these  warriors,  and  to  remember  that  faith 
without  works  is  dead.  Faith  develops  itself  in  and  by  docility.  We  can  attain 
to  victory,  the  Divine  blessing  can  rest  on  our  labours,  only  as  we  work  according 
to  the  Divine  plans,  only  as  we  obey  His  revealed  will,  IV.  We  have  still  further 
in  the  conduct  of  Israel  before  Jericho  a  display  of  the  coueaoe  of  faith. 
Faith  is  brave  as  well  as  obedient.  Displaying  its  banners  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  it  can  run  through  a  troop,  and  overleap  a  wall.  Faith  never  underrates 
difiiculties ;  faith  never  despises  danger ;  but  obeying  God,  it  never  quaUs  before 
them,  even  when  it  is  most  exposed.  Walking  in  the  path  of  obedience,  it  knows 
that  the  Lord  will  preserve  it  from  all  evil,  and  therefore  its  heart  never  fails. 
V.  The  patience  of  Isr-vel's  faith  is  also  plainly  shown.  The  faith  of  these 
warriors  was  enduring  as  well  as  courageous.  This  was  like  the  finishing  of 
their  education  so  far  as  patience  went.  Much  mischief  is  often  wrought  by 
that  natural  impetuosity  which  rushes  forward  before  God  has  prepared  the 
way,  even  as  much  ground  is  often  lost  by  that  lack  of  patience  which  faints 
in  the  day  of  adversity,  and  gives  in  before  the  work  is  done.  Only  by  patient 
continuance  in  well-doing  are  great  things  accomplished.  VI.  Though  the  faith 
of  Israel  was  strongly  tried  before  Jericho,  still  it  was  not  without  true  encookage 
MENT.  Faith  can  always  derive  strength  from  some  quarter:  it  can  live  where 
all  else  would  die.  The  command  of  God  would  encourage  Israel.  No  word 
that  He  speaks  is  vain.  Also  the  very  way  in  which  they  marched  would  strengthen 
their  hearts.  They  marched  as  God's  people,  with  Jehovah's  priests  in  their 
company,  bearing  the  sacred  ark  of  God's  strength,  before  which  all  the  might  of 
man  is  weakness.  The  sacred  number  seven,  moreover,  interwoven  with  their 
v/ork,  showed  that  there  was  order  and  completeness  in  the  task  set  before  them, 
even  though  they  might  not  be  able  to  discover  them.  VII.  Think,  lastly,  of  the 
triumph  of  this  faith.  Nothing  in  Jericho  was  left  alive.  Thus  perished  the 
enemies  of  Jehovah.  Israel's  victory  was  complete.  Behold  in  Jericho  two  things — 
the  might  of  man,  as  revealed  in  these  walls  and  towers  and  stalwart  soldiers  ;  the 
wisdom  of  man,  as  shown  in  their  watchfulness,  their  care  and  precautions. 


CHAP.  VI.]  JOSHUA.  121 

Behold  also  two  other  things — the  foolishness  of  God  in  that  aimless  marching 
round  the  city;  the  weakness  of  God  in  the  sound  of  these  rams'  horns,  in  the 
shout  of  these  soldiers.  See  the  effect ;  the  walls  are  a  ruin,  Jericho  is  burned  with 
fire,  the  place  is  desolate.  Learn  therefore  that  the  weakness  of  God  is 
stronger  than  men,  and  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men.  {A.  B.  Machay.) 
The  walls  of  Jericho  : — In  various  directions  we  may  find  a  counterpart  of  these 
remarkable  experiences.  I.  In  Christian  experience.  If  Egypt  represents  our 
conflict  with  the  world,  and  Amalek  our  conflict  with  the  flesh,  the  seven  nations 
of  Canaan  represent  our  conflict  with  the  principalities  and  powers  of  wicked  spirits, 
who  resist  our  entrance  into  the  heavenlies,  and  our  practical  realisation  of  what 
Christ  has  wrought  for  us.  Who  is  there  amongst  us  that  does  not  know,  or  has 
not  known,  of  something — a  cherished  indulgence,  a  friendship,  a  pernicious 
entanglement — reared  as  an  impassable  barrier  to  the  enjoyment  of  those  blessed 
possibilities  of  Christian  experience  which  are  ours  in  Christ,  but  which  for  that 
reason  seem  beyond  our  reach  ?  That  thing  is  a  Jericho.  Now  it  cannot  be  the 
purpose  of  God  that  anything,  however  deeply  rooted,  should  shut  His  redeemed 
ones  out  of  the  heavenly  places,  which  are  theirs  in  Christ — even  though  it  should 
be  the  result  of  their  own  sin,  or  mistake,  the  heirloom  of  early  indiscretions,  the 
entail  of  trespass  ofE  the  narrow  path.  1.  Be  still.  The  hardest  of  all  command- 
ments this.  That  our  voice  should  not  Be'lieard  I  That  we  should  utter  our 
complaints  to  God  alone  1  All  this  is  foreign  to  our  habits  and  taste.  As  death  is 
the  last  enemy  to  be  destroyed  in  the  universe  of  God,  so  is  the  restraint  of  the 
tongue  the  last  lesson  learnt  by  His  children.  "Be  still,"  saith  God,  "  and  know 
that  I  am  God.  I  will  be  exalted,"  &c.  And  that  soul  may  well  be  still  and  wait 
which  has  learnt  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  beside  it,  and  the  God  of  Jacob  is  its  refuge. 
To  that  Friend  it  hies  to  pour  out  its  secret  agony.  In  that  home  it  nestles  as  in  the 
covert  of  a  great  rock,  sheltered  from  the  blast.  2.  Obey.  As  in  this  story  so  in 
grace,  there  must  be  co-operation  between  God  and  man".  Only  God  can  remove 
the  difiiculties  that  stand  in  the  way  of  an  entirely  consecrated  and  blessed  hie,  but 
there  are  commands  and  duties  which  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  fulfil.  In  some 
cases  we  are  withholding  obedience  that  we  should  give  at  once.  There  are  things 
which  we  ought  to  do  which  we  are  not  doing.  And  there  is  equal  danger  in  doing 
more  than  we  should — endeavouring  to  scale  walls  which  we  are  told  to  encompass ; 
shooting  before  the  word  of  command  has  been  uttered;  making  the  circuit  of 
the  city  oftener  than  the  once  each  day  prescribed  by  the  Divine  ordering.  It  is  so 
hard  to  feel  that  we  do  more  by  doing  less  ;  that  we  save  time  by  resting  quietly  in 
our  tents  ;  that  it  is  vain  to  rise  early  and  late  take  rest,  because  He  giveth  to  His 
beloved  while  they  sleep.  3.  Have  faith.  Look  away  from  all  your  preparations, 
and  even  from  your  God-commanded  acts,  to  God  Himself ;  and  as  you  do  so  your 
difficulties  will  melt  away,  that  stone  will  be  rolled  from  the  mouth  of  the  sepulchre, 
that  iron  gate  will  open  of  its  own  accord,  those  mighty  walls  will  fall  down  flat. 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  the  obstacle  which  threatened  to  make  the  best  life 
impossible  shall  minister  to  such  an  unfolding  of  God's  very  present  help  as  shall 
furnish  fuel  for  praise  in  all  coming  years.  II.  In  Christian  work.  The  apostle 
speaks  of  strongholds  that  had  to  be  cast  down,  and  of  high  things  that  exalted 
themselves  against  the  knowledge  of  God  ;  and  asserts  that  he  did  not  war  against 
such  things  according  to  the  flesh,  and  that  the  weapons  of  his  warfare  were  not  of 
the  flesh,  but  mighty  before  God  for  the  casting  down  of  strongholds,  and  for  the 
bringing  of  every  high  and  proud  thought  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ. 
Our  only  hope  is  to  act  on  strictly  spiritual  lines,  because  we  wrestle  not  with 
flesh  and  blood,  but  with  the  wicked  spirits  that  lie  behind  all  that  is  seen  in  this 
world  of  men  and  things.  If  we  can  overthrow  the  dark  spirits  that  abet  and 
maintain,  we  shall  see  the  system  which  they  support  crumble  as  a  palace  of  clouds 
before  the  wind.  Let  us  be  pure  and  holy,  giving  time  to  heart-searching  in  the 
presence  of  the  Captain ;  let  us  lift  up  the  sacrifice  and  work  of  Jesus ;  let  us  blow 
the  gospel  trumpet  of  alarm  and  summons  to  surrender  ;  let  us  be  much  in  silent 
prayer  before  God ;  let  us  cherish  a  spirit  of  unity  and  love,  as  the  tribes  of  Israel 
forgot  their  differences  in  one  common  expedition  against  their  foes  ;  above  all,  let 
us  believe  in  the  presence  and  co-operation  of  God,  and  we  shall  see  the  old  miracle 
repeated,  and  the  walls  of  Jericho  fall  down  flat.  IH.  In  the  stoet  of  the  Church. 
This  capture  of  Jericho  is  surely  capable  of  being  read  as  a  parable  of  things  that 
are  yet  to  be.  We  know  that  the  world  lieth  in  the  power  of  the  wicked  one.  It  has 
long  boasted  itself  against  God,  with  its  mighty  walls  and  gates,  and  it  would  seem 
as  if  the  time  wiU  never  come  of  which  psalmists  and  kings  have  sung  and  spoken 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

in  rapturous  phrase.  In  the  meanwhile  the  various  tribes  of  the  Church  of  Clirist 
have  been  perambulating  about  the  walls,  subjected  to  much  derision  and  mockery, 
though  sometimes  a  sickening  premonition  of  approaching  judgment  must 
steal  upon  the  hearts  of  the  votaries  of  worldliness.  For  nearly  nineteen 
centuries  the  circuit  has  been  made,  the  trumpet-blast  uttered,  the  testimony 
maintained.  And  surely  the  seven  days  have  nearly  expired.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
The  lofty  city,  He  layeth  it  low  : — This  incident  teaches  solemn  truths  as  to  God's 
character  and  working,  and  animating  thoughts  as  to  our  duty  as  His  soldiers. 
The  true  revelation  of  God  is  by  His  deeds,  and  the  Scripture  words  of  prophet 
or  psalmist,  which  we  caU  revelation,  are  aU  based  upon  and  draw  out  the  signifi- 
cance of  the  history.  The  page  of  which  this  siege  is  the  first  paragraph  is  written 
in  blood,  and  is  crowded  with  terrible  entries  ;  but  it  is  a  page  in  the  revelation  of 
God,  and  its  message,  once  delivered,  is  not  set  aside,  though  completed,  by  the 
later  pages,  which  tell  of  love  as  His  very  being.  If  God  makes  Himself  known  by 
His  doings  as  men  do,  the  dream  of  a  God  whose  love  is  so  flaccid  that  He  cannot 
punish  is  baseless.  But  this  same  story  reveals  His  long-suffering  patience  as  well ; 
for,  not  only  had  generations  passed,  during  which  His  thunder  was  silent,  but 
even  at  this  supreme  moment  the  cloud  gathered  slowly,  and  ample  time  was  given 
to  escape.  The  slow  minute-hand  creeps  round  the  dial  for  a  long  silent  hour ;  but 
when  it  reaches  the  sixtieth  of  the  seconds,  in  each  of  which  it  might  have  been 
stopped,  the  bell  rings  out,  and  aU  is  over.  God  waits,  that  men  may  turn ;  but  if 
they  do  not  turn  God  strikes,  and  the  stroke  is  mortal.  Now,  aU  this  is  as  true 
under  the  gospel  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Joshua.  The  message  of  love  does  not 
contradict  the  message  of  law,  nor  the  revelation  of  the  Father  set  aside  the 
revelation  of  the  Judge.  The  lessons  of  stimulus  for  us  are  equally  plain.  The 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  points  to  the  fall  of  Jericho  as  a  triumph  of  faith,  and 
emphasises  the  obedience  to  the  strange  command  to  compass  the  walls,  and  the 
patience  wliich  did  it  seven  days,  as  the  tokens  of  the  Israelites'  faith.  So  we  may 
draw  the  lessons  of  the  conquering  power  of  faith  over  all  strongest  opposition,  of 
the  way  by  which  faith  becomes  victorious,  and  of  the  tokens  which  wiU  attest  its 
presence.  Jericho  is  a  symbol  of  the  evils  against  which  the  individual  Christian  has 
in  his  own  life  to  fight,  but  still  more  of  the  banded  and  organised  enemies  arrayed 
against  the  Church.  The  great  Babylon  shines  through  the  little  Jericho,  and  its 
fall  comes  about  in  the  same  fashion.  The  faith  which  these  fierce  sons  of  the 
desert  exercised  was  in  form  rude  enough ;  but,  however  Uttle  of  a  spiritual  or 
refining  aspect  it  had,  it  was  stUl  real  confidence  in  God's  help,  and  that,  in  its 
poorest  form,  makes  the  weakest  strong,  and  turns  cowards  into  heroes.  In  its 
lowest  operations,  it  will  send  men  to  dash  themselves  against  stone  walls  with 
desperate  bravery,  and  to  meet  death  as  joyfully  as  a  bride.  Christians,  who  should 
have  it  in  its  highest  and  purest  energy,  ought  not  to  be  less  brave  in  the  harder 
conflict  which  is  laid  upon  them — against  evU  in  their  ov/n  hearts  and  the  organised 
iniquities  of  society.  The  one  victorious  power  is  that  of  absolute  confidence  in 
God's  help.  Eloquence,  learning,  strategy,  organising  power,  machinery,  and  wise 
methods,  are  all  very  good  ;  but  an  ounce  of  faith  is  worth  a  ton  of  them  when  the 
question  is  how  the  walls  of  Jericho  are  to  be  got  down.  It  will  beget  these 
qualities,  they  wiU  never  produce  it.  Mark  how  faith  conquers.  It  does  so  by 
bringing  the  might  of  God  into  the  field.  Faith  is  not  the  battering-ram  which 
beats  down  the  walls,  but  only  the  hand  which  swings  the  ram.  God's  power  is,  if 
we  may  say  so,  set  loose  to  work  through  our  faith ;  and  that  faith  is  mighty, 
because  it  opens  the  door  for  the  entrance  of  His  omnipotence.  The  slow  marches 
round  and  round  the  doomed  ciLy,  and  the  war-cry,  at  last  did  not  effect  the 
capture ;  but  they  were  the  tokens  of  the  faith  which  brought  into  play  the  power 
which  did.  We  may  learn,  too,  the  tokens  of  faith.  They  are  docile  obedience  and 
perseverance  therein.  It  is  a  slow  task  to  leaven  society  with  the  principles  of  the 
gospel,  which  will  destroy  deeply  rooted  and  long-continued  abuses.  But  we  have 
to  "  keep  pegging  away,"  to  use  Abraham  Lincoln's  homespun  heroic  phrase.  If 
we  can  do  no  more,  we  can  at  least  blow  the  trumpet  which  proclaims  that  God  is 
here  and  summons  Jericho  to  surrender.  If  we  have  to  die  before  the  seven  Ih  day 
comes,  no  matter.  We  shall  have  our  share  in  the  triumph  all  the  same,  and, 
wherever  we  are,  shall  hear  the  great  shout  which  tells  the  fall  of  the  bloody  city, 
"  to  be  found  no  more  at  all."  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Jericho  captured : — I.  God 
WOULD  HAVE  His  PKOPLE  WORK.  We  daily  insist  upon  it  that  works  do  not  make  a 
man  to  hve,  but  we  equally  insist  upon  it  that  spiritual  life  continually  manifests 
itself  by  holy  deeds.    The  soldiers  of  God's  army,  after  they  had  crossed   the 


CHAP.  VI.]  JOSHUA.  123 

Jordan,  were  not  to  lie  still  in  luxurious  ease  till  Jericho's  walls  should  crumble 
down  by  slow  degrees ;  and  though  God  determined  to  send  Jericho  to  destruction 
on  a  sudden,  yet  His  people  are  not  to  sit  stiU  upon  some  neighbouring  knoll  and 
expect  the  catastrophe :  they  are  to  labour,  and  Jericho  is  to  fall  as  the  result  of 
their  toil.  Let  us  look  at  this  work  a  Uttle  in  connection  with  this  narrative. 
1.  You  wiU  observe  that  the  work  to  be  done  by  Israel  was  universal.  There  was  a 
place  for  each  one  to  occupy.  The  men  of  arms  were  to  go  round  the  city,  and 
with  them  the  priests  were  to  march  also.  Both  the  ecclesiastical  and  the  military 
castes  should  be  represented  here.  They  must  neither  of  them  sit  still.  God 
would  have  His  people  work  universally.  2,  But,  next,  He  would  have  them  work 
in  His  own  appointed  way.  They  are  not  to  go  in  a  scramble — in  a  boyish  race  ; 
there  must  be  the  soldiers  in  their  troops,  the  priests  in  their  array,  and  then  again, 
the  men  of  war  to  bring  up  the  rear.  God  would  have  His  people  work  according 
to  His  own  revealed  wiU.  If  I  go  upon  a  tour  I  do  not  expect  to  see  certain  sights 
which  have  been  guaranteed  to  me  by  my  friend,  unless  I  agree  to  follow  the  little 
chart  which  he  has  mapped  out  for  me.  I  cannot  expect  to  have  that  sublime  view 
of  the  Alps  if  I  refuse  to  climb  a  certain  spot  and  stand  there  and  view  the  glacier 
and  the  snow  peak  glittering  in  the  sun.  And  I  carmot  expect  to  have  God's 
blessing  in  my  ministry  and  in  the  Sunday-school  class  unless  I  keep  to  "It  is 
written,"  and  in  all  things  have  a  tender  conscience,  and  am  jealous  of  myself  lest 
I  err.  3.  Then,  again,  remember,  they  encompassed  the  city  daily.  So  does  God 
call  His  Church  to  work  daily.  The  wheel  must  revolve  again,  and  again,  and 
again  :  it  is  that  perpetual  motion  of  industry  which  produces  wealth,  and  it  must 
be  the  ceaseless  energy  of  our  zeal  which  shall  produce  spiritual  conquest.  4.  Nor 
have  we  exhausted  the  metaphors  with  which  our  text  supphes  us,  for  surely  we 
may  add  that  God  would  have  His  people  work  in  faith.  We  are  told  that,  "by 
faith  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down."  Is  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  a  power  ?  If 
you  think  it  is  not,  never  try  it  again.  Is  the  gospel  mighty  to  save?  Will  the 
gospel  come  out  victorious?  If  you  have  any  doubt  slink  back  to  your  cowardly 
repose,  but  let  the  man  whom  God  sends  never  doubt.  If  you  have  achieved  no 
successes,  if  after  fifty  years  your  trumpet  of  jubilee  was  exceeding  small,  if  after 
fifty  years  it  was  something  like  a  ram's  horn  that  had  not  been  bored,  and  could  not 
make  any  noise  at  all,  yet  stiU  go  on ;  your  time  for  shouting  has  not  come  yet,  but 
your  time  for  compassing  the  city  is  always  present.  Go  on  with  it,  go  on  with  it, 
and  God  wiU  not  permit  you  to  end  till  you  have  won  the  victory.  So  let  us  notice 
once  more  under  this  head  of  work,  they  worked  with  patience  and  courage,  God 
kept  this  people  labouring  in  the  presence  of  difficulty.  Sometimes  we  get  into  the 
habit  of  shutting  our  eyes  to  difficulty ;  that  wUl  not  do :  faith  is  not  a  fool,  faith 
does  not  shut  her  eyes  to  difficulty,  and  then  run  head  foremost  against  a  brick 
wall — never.  Faith  sees  the  difficulty,  surveys  it  aU,  and  then  she  says,  "  By  my 
God  will  I  leap  over  a  wall " ;  and  over  the  wall  she  goes.  II.  God  would  have 
His  people  wait.  The  delay  must  have  sorely  tried  the  faith  and  patience  of  the 
Israelites.  There  are  a  great  many  brethren  who  seem  to  be  perfectly  satisfied  to 
rest  at  ease,  but  men  of  war  do  not  generally  seem  to  be  of  that  temperament. 
When  I  was  in  the  military  prison  at  Dublin  I  observed  a  form  of  punishment 
there.  Men  were  carrying  large  shot.  A  man  took  up  a  large  shot  and  carried 
it  to  the  end  of  the  yard,  and  he  afterwards  had  to  pick  that  shot  up  and  bring  it 
back  again.  I  said,  "  How  is  it  you  do  not  let  them  take  all  the  shot  to  that  end 
and  pile  them  up  there  ?  "  The  officer  said,  "  We  used  to  do  so  but  it  was  no  use, 
for  when  the  fellows  had  piled  them  up  they  felt  they  were  doing  something,  but 
now  we  make  them  carry  the  shot  from  one  end  of  the  yard  to  the  other,  and  then 
back  again,  and  back  again,  and  they  feel  they  have  to  work  hard  and  do  nothing. 
That  is  always  miserable  work  to  the  soldiers."  Many  of  our  soldiers  at  Sebastopol 
made  bitter  complaints  at  not  being  led  to  battle.  And  you  will  often  have  heard 
young  military  men  say,  that  they  hate  the  inactivity  of  peace,  they  want  to  be 
doing  something.  Now  these  men  of  war  were  kept  for  six  days  marching 
round  and  round  the  city,  and  they  must  have  felt  themselves  to  have  been 
doing  very  httle  aU  that  week.  Though  as  men  of  war  we  would  rather  come 
to  close  quarters  and  see  more  done,  yet  as  men  of  God  we  must  keep  to  our  posts 
of  duty,  and  learn  how  to  wait.  Besides  this,  what  rendered  the  waiting  so  very 
galling  was  (what  must  have  struck  their  reason  if  it  did  not  assail  their  faith) 
the  utter  desperateness  of  the  case.  How  could  they  hope  to  win  that  city  by 
simply  going  round  and  round?  "Give  me  a  good  ladder,"  says  one,  "a  rope- 
ladder  and  a  couple  of  good  irons  at  the  end  of  it ;  just  let  me  hear  the  clank  upon 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Ti. 

the  top-stone,  and  I  am  your  man  to  lead  the  •  forlorn  hope,'  and  there  are  fifty 
thousand  of  us  to  follow,  and  we  will  soon  have  Judah's  standard  waving  on  the 
top,  and  make  the  sons  of  Jericho  know  what  the  sons  of  Abraham  can  do."  But 
no;  they  must  just  march  round  the  place  till  they  have  compassed  the  city  twelve 
times.  And  so  there  are  certain  spirits  apt  to  say,  "  Could  not  we  do  more  by 
adopting  these  methods  and  such  other  expedients?"  Now  we  know  that  God  has 
His  reasons  for  making  us  wait.  It  is  for  His  own  glory  we  doubt  not.  We  know 
that  all  things  work  together  for  good,  and,  we  believe,  it  will  be  ultimately  for  our 
profit.  When  I  have  read  some  masterly  tragic  poem,  and  verse  after  verse  has 
dwelt  upon  the  horrible  portion  of  the  tale,  did  I  wish  it  shortened  ?  Would  I  have 
the  author  leave  out  one  of  those  dark  verses  ?  Not  I.  God  is  writing  a  great 
poem  of  human  history,  the  subject  is  the  victory  of  truth,  the  destruction  of  Anti- 
christ. Let  the  history  be  long.  Who  wants  it  shortened  ?  who  wants  a  brief  story 
on  so  exceedingly  interesting  a  subject  as  this,  from  so  great  an  Author  ?  HI.  God 
WOULD  HAVE  His  people  win.  The  victory  is  very  sure,  and,  when  it  comes  forth, 
very  complete.  Nothing  could  be  more  so.  It  may  be  very  sudden  also,  and  it 
wiU  be  very  glorious.  But  we  shall  get  nothing  by  it,  for  when  Jericho  feU,  nobody 
gained  anything  except  to  offer  it  unto  the  Lord ;  so  that  we  have  to  persevere  in 
disinterested  service,  just  toUing  on  for  the  Master,  remembering  that  when  success 
comes  it  will  all  be  His — every  single  atom  of  it — the  glory  will  be  to  Him  and  not 
to  us.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Lessons  from  the  fall  of  Jericho  : — I.  The  lesson  of 
SEU-CONTEOL.  "  Yc  shall  not  shout  "  was  perhaps  a  hard  order  to  the  enthusiastic 
young  soldiers  of  Joshua.  Yet  by  putting  the  seal  on  their  lips  and  withholding 
arrow  and  missle  they  became  victors.  How  grandly  do  the  annals  of  biography 
illustrate  this  duty  of  controlling  one's  spirit!  Under  the  clouds  of  aspersion, 
maligning  of  motive,  slanders,  and  jeers  that  darken  the  sun  of  truth,  a  good  man 
is  often  called  to  fight  in  the  shade,  to  walk  wearily  and  monotonously  the  round 
of  duty  in  silence  and  in  patience.  He  who  endures  the  contradictions  against 
himself  is  like  the  disciplined  soldier  who  stands  in  the  ranks,  seeing  the  cowardly 
rufiian  approach,  pistol  in  hand ;  he  receives  death  calmly  rather  than  break  ranks, 
fire  without  orders,  or  disobey  commands.  There  are  trying  positions  in  life  when 
we  must  wait  silently  tiU  we  see  the  whites  of  the  enemy's  eyes,  or  hold  the  linstock 
from  the  touch-hole  even  while  the  hostile  broadsides  crash  through  our  ship's 
timbers.  This  hard  and  severe  discipline  makes  noble  characters  and  turns  the 
common  man  into  a  hero.  It  infuses  in  the  soul  the  right  kind  of  fear — fear  for 
the  noblest,  fear  lest  we  fail  in  obedience  to  what  ought  to  be  obeyed.  H.  The 
LESSON  OF  PERSEVEEANCE.  Jcricho,  the  walled  and  apparently  impregnable  fortress, 
is  but  a  symbol  of  foes  in  the  heart  and  evils  in  the  world.  The  conflict  is  lifelong. 
God  calls  us  to  what  seems  slow,  tedious,  patient  methods.  Sometimes  He  seems 
to  shock  all  worldly  sense  and  maxims  by  His  providences,  which  make  even  His 
children,  for  a  time,  a  by- word,  a  shaking  of  the  head  and  wagging  of  the  tongue  to 
the  ungodly.  The  intrenched  evil  spirits  laugh.  Sometimes  there  is  a  kind  of 
enemy  that  cometh  not  forth  but  by  prayer  and  by  fasting.  Abstinence  and  silence 
are  laid  upon  us.  Behold  the  Jericho  in  us — habitual  faults,  hereditary  vices, 
bosom  sins.  Behold  in  the  Christian's  warfare — opposition  of  science,  falsely  so 
called,  in  philosophy,  in  criticism,  in  infidelity,  in  war,  in  intemperance,  in  vice, 
these  are  Jerichos  that  appear  impregnable.  The  difficulties  seem  walled  up  to 
heaven.  Nevertheless,  we  are  well  able,  with  God's  help,  to  possess  the  land  and  to 
take  every  city.  HI.  The  power  of  faith  and  its  gain  by  exercise.  This  tax  on 
Israel's  courage — compelling  men  of  war,  whose  yell  in  charging  is  part  of  their 
offensive  power,  to  make  silence  a  weapon — was  laid  on  them  for  the  strengthening 
of  their  faith.  The  whole  affair  appeared  irrational.  But  to  those  loyally  obedient 
to  the  command  of  a  leader  inspired  of  God,  their  act  was  in  the  finest  strain 
of  reason.  The  method  selected,  the  means  employed,  were  those  of  the  wisest  and 
bravest ;  for  Joshua,  their  leader,  was  a  tried  man.  Nor,  without  neglecting  means, 
are  we  to  think  that  the  same  means  employed  by  others,  even  mighty  men  of  old, 
will  serve  us  without  faith.  {W.  E.  Griffis.)  The  fall  of  Jericho  :—l.  The 
SITUATION  OF  THE  ISRAELITES  AT  THIS  TIME.  The  wildcrness  is  behind  them.  They 
are  standing  on  this  side  Jordan  within  the  borders  of  the  long  wished  for 
Canaan.  But  though  in  Canaan,  the  land  is  not  yet  theirs.  A  powerful  nation  is 
in  possession  of  it,  from  whom  they  have  still  to  take  it  if  they  would  occupy  it. 
And  how  are  they  to  take  it  ?  They  are  without  military  resources  of  any  kind. 
And  have  we  not  shtidowed  forth  here  the  condition  of  many  of  God's  servants  in 
our  world  ?  your  own  spiritual  condition  perhaps  at  this  moment  7    As  you  look 


CHAP,  vi.]  JOSHUA.  125 

back-ward  you  can  see  that  much  indeed  has  been  done  for  you.  But  now  -what  is 
your  situation  ?  You  are  ready  to  say,  "  Ahnost  as  bad  as  it  was  at  first.  We 
thought  we  were  saved  for  ever,  but  we  see  now  that  our  salvation  is  but  begun. 
Not  only  is  heaven  itself  far  oS,  but  aU  that  is  heavenly  and  spu-itual :  it  is  yet  to 
be  won.  And  how  is  it  to  be  won  ?  "We  know  not.  We  have  as  many  difficulties 
before  us  as  we  have  escaped,  or  more :  and  we  are  helpless  as  children."  II.  The 
TOWN  THESE  Israelites  have  now  to  take.  1.  It  is  a  strong  place.  Oh,  what  a 
picture  of  Jericho  within  your  hearts !  Men  of  the  world  look  on  their  souls  as 
what  we  may  call  an  open  country.  Talk  to  them  of  the  holiness  of  the  gospel  and 
the  happiness  of  the  gospel,  they  never  feel  that  there  is  anything  within  them 
which  shuts  these  things  out  of  them.  But  what  do  some  of  you  think  ?  or  rather 
what  do  you  know?  If  you  are  taught  of  God  you  wUl  answer,  "  We  know  this — 
our  whole  soul  is  entrenched  against  Christ  and  His  salvation.  It  is  covered 
aU  over  with  fortresses  which  shut  Him  out."  2.  It  was  a  frontier  town 
also.  God  gave  them,  you  observe,  a  most  formidable  difficulty  to  overcome  the 
instant  they  set  foot  in  Canaan.  And  so  it  is  in  the  spiritual  life.  Severe 
conflicts,  we  say,  are  for  the  aged  Christian ;  heavy  trials  for  the  man  who  has 
first  borne  light  ones :  the  Lord  deals  gently  with  those  who  are  inexperienced  in 
His  ways.  And  this  is  quite  true.  But  yet  it  frequently  happens  that  the  servant 
of  God  has  some  one  great  difficulty  to  get  over  in  the  very  outset  of  his  course. 
III.  The  means  by  which  these  Iseaelites  took  this  strong  city.  1.  They  were 
means  which  God  had  appointed.  We  no  more  know  how  to  master  Satan  or  our 
own  evil  hearts  than  we  know  how  to  control  the  sea  or  direct  the  clouds.  The 
Lord  therefore  gives  us  instruction  in  all  things.  Our  real  wisdom  is  to  be  mindful 
of  our  ignorance.  2.  These  means  seemed  most  unlikely  to  succeed.  So,  too,  in 
the  spiritual  warfare.  If  we  would  have  the  strongholds  of  Satan  pulled  down  in 
our  hearts  we  must  expect  God  to  give  us  many  strange  commands,  and  deal  with 
us  often  in  a  very  strange  manner.  When  we  look  to  Him  for  strength  He  may 
answer  us  by  making  us  feel  our  weakness ;  and  when  we  are  determined  to  be 
zealous  and  active,  and  take  our  enemies  by  storm,  He  may  say,  "  Your  strength 
is  to  sit  stUl.  In  returning  and  rest  shaU  ye  be  saved."  IV.  The  peobable  reasons 
WHY  God  appointed  these  strange  means  to  overthrow  this  city.  1.  A  simplicity 
of  obedience  was  certainly  one  thing  this  event  was  intended  to  teach  these  Israehtes. 
God's  commands,  be  they  what  they  may,  must  not  be  trifled  with.  We  are  not  to 
sit  in  judgment  on  them  ;  we  must  obey  them.  2.  A  simplicity  of  faith  was  also 
inculcated  here.  God  loves  to  be  trusted  as  well  as  obeyed.  He  deUghts  in  the 
confidence  of  His  people.  3.  The  people  were  taught,  too,  by  this  transaction  the 
importance  of  a  patient  waiting  on  God.  He  consults  our  good,  not  only  in  the 
things  He  gives  us,  but  in  the  day  and  hour  in  which  He  gives  them.  They  are 
not  always  ready  for  us  the  moment  we  wish  for  them.  We  must  generally  wait 
for  as  well  as  seek  them.  4.  And  one  thing  more  Israel  must  surely  have  learnt 
here — to  give  glory  to  God.  And  now  let  me  speak  to  three  classes  of  persons. 
(1)  To  those  who  are  in  a  situation  Uke  that  of  these  Israehtes  while  besieging 
Jericho  —  such  as  are  warring  with  some  powerful  evil  which  keeps  them 
from  the  enjoyment  of  some  spiritual  good.  You  want  that  sin  vanquished,  and 
60  does  God ;  but  He  wants  more.  He  wants  all  sin  vanquished  in  you,  and  you 
made  meet  for  His  heavenly  kingdom.  (2)  Others,  it  may  be,  have  just  gained 
such  a  victory  as  this.  You  are  even  now  rejoicing  over  some  bosom-sin  which  the 
Lord  has  enabled  you  to  overcome.  Happy  are  you  I  Never  buUd  that  vile  Jericho 
again.  Never  suiler  it  to  be  built.  Watch  over  its  ruins  lest  they  should  unawares 
be  raised  up.  And  this  also  I  would  say  to  you — rejoice  still  in  the  ruins  of 
those  guilty  walls.  Look  forward  to  other  victories.  If  bought  with  a  Saviour's 
blood,  you  are  destined  to  be  conquerors  still,  and  "  more  than  conquerors," 
triumphant  conquerors,  "  through  Him  that  loved  you."  (3)  But  there  may  be 
some  to  whom  all  this  is  a  riddle.  "  Seek  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate."  (C 
Bradley,  M.A.)  Jericho  taken : — I.  The  city  which  was  to  be  taken.  How 
vainly  they  reckon  who  leave  God  out  of  their  calculations !  When  He  is  with  us 
no  opposing  host  can  harm  us ;  but  when  He  is  against  us  no  earthly  walls  can 
protect  us.  H.  The  means  by  which  it  was  taken.  These  were  very  peculiar. 
1.  There  was  no  natural  fitness  in  the  means  to  produce  the  end  designed,  2.  The 
means  employed  were  such  as  would  provoke  the  ridicule  of  the  besieged.  3.  The 
means  employed  produced  no  effect  whatever  for  six  days,  nor  even  on  the  seventh, 
until  the  shout  was  raised  at  the  last.  HI.  The  disposition  that  was  to  be  made 
or  THE  CITY.    It  was  to  be  accursed  or  devoted  to  God.    The  Israehtes  in  destroying 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

the  inhabitants  of  Jericho  and  the  Canaanites  generally  were  hut  the  instruments 
in  God's  hand  of  carrying  out  His  sentence.  Lessons  :  1.  Eetribution,  though  long 
delayed,  comes  at  last.  God's  judgments  have  leaden  feet,  and  so  they  come  slowly; 
but  they  have  iron  hands,  and  so  they  strike  deadly  when  they  come.  2.  Faith 
does  what  God  says,  and  asks  no  questions.  3.  At  the  sound  of  the  trumpets  of  the 
priests  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down.  By  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  the  strong- 
holds of  sin  and  Satan  are  to  be  overthrown.  4.  Let  us  not  be  impatient  of  results 
when  we  are  doing  God's  commands.  5.  Success  in  our  working  for  God  is  His 
doing,  not  ours,  and  so  the  whole  glory  of  it  should  be  given  to  Him.  {W.  M.  Taylor, 
D.D.)  The  siege  of  Jericho  : — Consider  the  circumstances  of  this  event  as  calcu- 
lated— I.    To  TEY  THE  FAITH  OF  IsEAEL.     U.    To  GIVE  A  PLEDGE  THAT  GOD  WOULD  FIGHT 

FOB  His  people.    III.  To  secure  all  the  glokt  to  God.    IV.  To  show  that 

JUDGMENT  WOULD  BE  SUEE  TO  FALL  ON  THE  DEVOTED  CaNAANITES.     (C.  D.  MarstOll,  M.A.) 

The  overthrow  of  Jericho  : — Forty  years  before  this  God  brought  this  people's  fathers 
to  this  same  point,  and  to  this  very  opportunity,  but  faith  in  Him  was  at  such  a 
very  low  ebb  that  this  deed  could  not  be  done.  He  got  them  comfortably  packed 
away  under  the  clod,  and  at  last  raised  up  out  of  their  sons  a  more  faithful  genera- 
tion to  serve  Him  and  to  do  His  work.  I  can  imagine  that  when  the  sough  of  that 
strange,  mysterious  band  of  people  who  had  been  creeping  along  the  edge  of  the 
desert,  so  wonderfully  guided,  and  so  wonderfully  fed,  reached  the  people  of  Jericho, 
and  when  at  last  they  themselves  began  to  heave  in  sight,  old  men  in  Jericho  would 
be  saying  to  younger  braves,  "  Be  not  afraid  of  them.  These  men's  fathers  came 
up  against  us,  but  when  they  saw  the  height  of  our  walls,  and  the  height  of 
ourselves,  their  hearts  melted  within  them  like  water,  and  wo  have  seen  nothing  of 
them  for  almost  a  lifetime.  Be  not  afraid  of  them."  But  they  were  wrong.  I 
can  imagine  other  men,  who  had  been  out  doing  the  work  of  scouts  and  spies, 
saying  as  they  gathered  round  their  fires  in  Jericho  and  talked  about  the  host  that 
was  on  the  way,  "Ah,  say  not  so.  Whatever  these  men's  fathers  were,  we  have 
been  out  and  seen  the  sons."  The  spies,  no  doubt,  went  back  to  Jericho  and  said, 
"  Shut  your  gates !  Man  the  walls !  It  is  death  or  victory  this  time."  There  was 
something  uncanny  about  the  men  and  women  who  could  so  sing  praise  to  an 
invisible  God.  And  the  advice  was  taken.  Jericho  was  straitly  shut  up.  They 
considered  it  no  laughing  matter  this  time.  Only  let  God's  truth,  in  power,  come 
into  the  Church's  heart,  and  this  immediate  triumph  will  be  secured.  Jericho  will 
be  straitly  shut  up.  There  will  be  a  splendid  division  and  separation,  with  a 
clear  field  and  issue  of  conflict  definitely  presented — all  Jericho  there,  and  all  Israel 
here,  and  the  ground  cleared  in  front  for  the  contending  hosts.  But  to-day,  where 
are  we  ?  We  do  not  know  what  is  Jericho,  and  what  is  Israel.  We  are  all  here 
and  there;  all  mixed,  hopelessly,  helplessly.  But  let  us  come  near  to  God,  as  these 
IsraeUtes  after  forty  shameful  years  did.  Let  us  gather  round  Him.  Let  us  lift 
up  our  hearts  in  faith  and  prayer  to  Him.  Then  He  wiU  revive  us,  and  this 
immediate  sign  wiU  follow :  the  world  will  stop  scoffing,  the  world  will  stop 
insulting.  But  then  notice  stUl  further,  that  this  was  a  victory  won,  by  faith 
•working  through  organisation.  The  cry  on  every  hand  is,  "  Organise,  organise, 
organise  1 "  I  think  that  there  is  a  little  too  much  said  about  organisation.  Still, 
we  must  not  despise  it,  and  we  must  not  forget  that  God  is  not  the  God  of  confusion, 
but  of  order.  God  does  His  work  by  plan  and  system.  I  can  imagine  a  small 
breed  of  Israelites — men  far  too  like  ourselves — who  on  the  first  day's  round  would 
have  given  vent  to  what  we  call  "  the  rationalising  spirit,"  and  they  would  have 
said  to  their  fellows,  "  Now,  really,  being  Israelites  has  led  us  along  some  strange 
paths,  but  I  will  draw  the  line  at  this.  As  intelligent,  sensible  men,  what  mortal 
connection  can  there  be  between  our  walking  round  the  walls  with  all  this  horn- 
blowing  and  tooting  and  the  down-coming  of  these  walls  ?  "  And  do  not  the 
rationalists  seem  to  have  a  deal  to  say  for  themselves  ?  But  when  I  put  it  that 
way,  you  see  how  stupid  it  would  have  been,  judged  by  the  after  results.  Always 
let  us  believe  that  faith  in  God  is  splendidly  inteUigent.  And  let  me  say,  further, 
if  any  of  us  have  doubts — and  just  because  we  are  human  we  have  them — let  us 
adopt  Joshua's  plan.  If  you  have  doubts  keep  them  to  yourself.  Do  not  give  them 
to  me.  I  have  plenty  of  my  own,  and  I  will  try  and  keep  mine  back  from  you. 
That  is  a  grand  plan  for  doubts.  Shut  the  mouth  upon  them.  Let  them  be 
hermetically  sealed.  Do  not  let  them  get  the  fresh  air,  and  they  will  very  likely 
wither  and  die.  Less  talking,  and  more  walking.  Less  conferring  with  men,  and 
vaore  simple,  sublime,  stupendous  faith  in  the  Word  of  God.  God  has  spoken,  and 
God  has  sworn,  "  I  wiU  give  Jericho  into  your  hands,  and  its  mighty  men  of  valour. 


CHAP.  VI.]  JOSHUA,  127 

Believe  in  Me."    And  it  turned  out  that  that  was  the  highest  wisdom.    And,  last 
of  all,  we  see  an  organisation  that  was  gloriously  successful.    On  the  seventh  day 
they  compassed  the  city  seven  times ;  and,  as  surely  as  God  had  spoken  the  word, 
the  deed  was  done.     He  kept  them  from  ventilating  their  doubts.    He  compelled 
them  to  look  to  Him,  and  to  trust  in  Him.    He  poured  contempt  on  aU  their 
wisdom  and  aU  their  strength,  so  that  their  unbelief  just  withered  away  at  the 
root,  and  died  out  in  their  hearts  because  it  had  nothing  to  feed  upon.    To-day, 
where  are  we  ?    Just  where  the  Israelites  were ;  still,  after  all  that  has  come  and 
gone,  only  on  the  borders.    The  world  still  needs  to  be  taken  captive  for  Jesus 
Christ.    The  first  thing  is  to  get  our  own  hearts,  our  own  selves  united — united 
round  the  Lord,  and  then  knit  together  to  each  other  as  one  man.    You  will  always 
find  in  Scripture  that,  when  God's  people  get  united  round  about  Him,  nothing  can 
stand  before  them.     Here  they  were  united,  and  Jericho  fell  without  a  stroke. 
(John  McNeill.)        The  fall  of  Jericho  (A  Sermon  to  Children) : — What  do  we  mean 
when  we  pray  for  the  Church  "militant  here  on  earth  "?    We  mean  the  fighting 
Church — the  Church  on  the  battlefield  of  the  world.    Christians  are  God's  army, 
and  every  one — men,  women,  and  children — must  try  to  show  that  they  are  good 
soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ.    What  do  you  think  is  required  of  a  good  soldier  ?    I.  First 
of  aU  he  must  be  beave.    It  has  been  said  that  an  English  soldier  or  sailor  never 
knows  when  he  is  beaten.    The  word  coward  does  not  seem  to  go  well  with  the 
name  Briton.    But  there's  a  better  sort  of  courage  than  that  of  a  fighting  soldier ; 
that  is,  the  courage  of  a  Christian,  which  enables  him  to  do  right  at  any  cost ; 
which  enables  him  to  bear  sorrow  and  insult  and  loss  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake.    We 
all  like  to  hear  about  acts  of  bravery  like  that  of  the  boy  ensign,  Anstruther,  who 
at  the  battle  of  Alma  planted  the  colours  of  the  23rd  Eegiment  on  the  wall  of  the 
great  redoubt,  and  then  feU,  shot  dead,  with  the  colours  drooping  over  him  like  a 
pall.    But  the  courage  which  is  thought  most  of  in  heaven  is  the  courage  to  do 
right.    The  child  who  is  brave  enough  to  say  "  No  "  when  he  is  asked  to  do  wrong ; 
the  boy  or  girl  who  can't  teU  a  lie  to  escape  punishment ;  the  schoolboy  who  is 
brave  enough  to  say  his  prayers  with  a  whole  bedroom  of  companions  laughing  and 
jeering  at  him — these  are  the  heroes  whose  names  are  written  in  God's  Book. 
n.  What  else  must  a  good  soldier  be  ?     Obedient.     Can  you  remember  any  one 
mentioned  in  the  Bible  who  was  a  very  tall,  powerful,  brave  soldier,  and  yet  not  a 
good  soldier,  because  he  was  disobedient?    King  Saul.    If  you  reaUy  love  the 
Lord,  you  will  keep  His  conunandments.    A  soldier  must  not  do  what  he  likes,  but 
what  he  is  ordered  to  do.    Between  you  and  the  Paradise  of  God  there  lies  a  long 
journey,  the  enemy's  country,  where  the  devil  and  his  angels  will  fight  against 
you;  but  don't  be  afraid,  only  be  brave  and  go  forward,  and  follow  Jesus  your 
Captain,  and  you  will  be  able  to  say,  as  Paul  said,  "  Thanks  be  unto  God,  who 
giveth  us  the  victory,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."     (British  Weekly  Fulpit.) 
The  fall  of  Jericho : — In  the  campaign  against  Jericho  the  children  of  Israel  appear 
at  their  best.    Never  before  or  afterwards  did  they  act  with  greater  unanimity  or 
singleness  of  heart.    There  were  noble  individual  souls  such  as  Gideon,  Barak, 
Samson,  Jephthah,  Samuel,  David,  and  the  prophets,  whom  the  writer  of  the  book 
of  the  Hebrews  could  single  out  as  worthy  of  mention ;  but  there  were  only  two 
events  in  which  the  nation  as  a  whole  participated  which  were  specified  in  that 
splendid  summary ;  namely,  the  crossing  of  the  Bed  Sea  as  on  dry  land  and  the 
marching  around  Jericho  seven  days.    Had  Israel  gone  forward  as  they  began,  their 
course  in  history  would  have  been  like  that  of  some  mighty  river,  rising  in  the 
mountains  and  carrying  a  crystalline  current  far  onward  towards  the  sea,  its  waters 
unsullied  by  continuous  flowing  but  sweet  and  clear  to  the  very  end.    What  makes 
the  fall  of  Jericho  for  ever  interesting  is  the  fact  that  it  resulted  from  the  faith  and 
obedience  of  the  many.    In  this  contest  Joshua  was  hardly  more  conspicuous  than 
the  humblest  soldier  in  his  army.     The  striking  thing  about  the  campaign  is  the 
sharp  contrast  between  the  protracted  preparation  and  the   suddenness  of  the 
catastrophe.    This  is  often  the  case.    The  end  comes  quickly  and  easily  because  of 
the  long  and  careful  preparation  for  it,  the  means  being  adjusted  to  the  end.     Only 
one  thing  then  is  needed,  namely,  to  trust  in  God  and  go  forward.     That  is  what 
Israel  did  and  kept  on  doing  until  the  time  came  to  shout.     Then,  because  the 
people  had  done  their  partj  God  did  His  part.    The  faith  they  showed  was  simple 
and  implicit.    It  did  not  confuse  the  two  spheres  of  action,  theirs  and  His.    They 
did  the  walking  and  shouting.  He  overturned  the  walls.    He  was  the  effective  agent, 
they  the  instrumental  agent.    (S.  JS.  Bushnell.)        The  Christian  conflict : — I.  God 

CAM  US£   IH£  FEEBLESI   INBXBUUENTALIIIES  XO   ACCOUPLtSH   HiS   PURPOSES.      If  ever 


123  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

feeble  instrumentalities  were  used,  surely  it  was  now.  Feeble  instrumentalities ! 
God  has  often  worked  that  way,  and  does  so  still.  You  remember  proud  Naaman  I 
Many  a  time  He  has  used  the  little  girl,  the  little  child,  to  bring  men  to  acknow- 
ledge Him.  What  happened  when  the  little  child  was  born  into  your  home  ?  In 
the  first  place,  it  became  the  anchor  which  held  the  mother  to  her  home  as  never 
before.  But  it  did  more  than  this.  It  was  the  connecting-link  which  bound 
together  father  and  mother,  husband  and  wife,  in  a  closer  bond  of  affection  and 
oneness  than  the  marriage  ring.  The  ring  was  the  beginning  of  the  union,  the 
coming  of  that  little  child  was  the  completion  of  the  union.  Nay,  it  did  more  than 
this  even.  Impressed  by  the  fact  that  the  little  one  would  look  to  you  for  guidance 
in  matters  of  the  soul  and  the  better  life,  were  you  not  forced  to  think  how  you  had 
neglected  such  matters  yourself,  and  for  the  child's  sake,  as  well  as  your  own,  you 
were  driven  to  the  Cross  to  seek  salvation  ?  Such  things  have  often  happened,  and 
we  trust  they  may  again.  The  Cross  of  Calvary  was  a  feeble  instrumentality.  The 
preaching  of  a  crucified  and  risen  and  glorified  Saviour  has  often  been  regarded  as 
a  feeble  thing.  And  yet,  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching,  God  has  won  for  Himself 
many  thousands  of  the  bravest  and  noblest  champions  of  His  cause.     II.  God 

WANTS  ALL  INSTRUMENTALITIES  TO  FIGHT  AGAINST  THE  FORCES  OF  SIN.       Look   at   Ver.  9. 

It  shows  us  that  all  the  hosts  of  God  were  in  that  procession.  God  wants  all,  and 
the  battle  needs  all.  Armed  strong  men — men  of  courage,  confidence,  faith — let 
these  pass  on  in  front.  Let  them  lead  us  in  the  battle.  Priests,  ministers,  teachers 
— let  them  fall  into  line.  And  then  the  rereward — the  people.  God  wants  all !  He 
wants  you,  and  the  cause  needs  you.  Do  you  say  you  can't  carry  arms?  You  are 
timid,  and  possess  but  little  or  no  strength  ?  What  of  that  ?  There  is  a  place  for 
you  ;  see  that  you  fill  it.  You  can  sustain  and  encourage  those  who  are  in  front, 
and  you  wUl  best  do  this  by  filling  your  place  in  the  ranks.  Do  you  say  you  can't 
preach  ?  Do  you  teU  us  that  it  is  impossible  for  you  to  take  the  pulpit  or  mount 
the  platform,  and  address  your  fellows  in  eloquent  words  ?  You  can  support  and 
pray  for  those  whom  God  has  called  to  blow  the  ram's  horn  and  bear  the  solemn 
and  sacred  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  gospel.  You  can  march,  you  can  share  the 
conflict;  God  has  a  place  for  you.  (CJias.  Leach,  D.D.)  The  potency  of  in- 
adequate instrumentalities  : — When  we  have  clear  indications  of  the  Divine  mind  as 
to  any  course  of  action  we  are  to  advance  to  it  promptly  and  without  fear,  even 
though  the  means  at  our  disposal  appear  utterly  madequate  to  the  object  sought  to 
be  gained.  No  man  goeth  a  warfare  at  his  own  charges  in  the  service  of  God.  The 
resources  of  infinite  power  avail  for  that  service,  and  they  are  sure  to  be  brought 
into  play  if  it  be  undertaken  for  God's  glory  and  in  accordance  with  His  will.  Who 
could  have  supposed  that  the  fishermen  of  Galilee  would  in  the  end  triumph  over 
all  the  might  of  kings  and  rulers  ;  over  all  the  influence  of  priesthoods  and  systems 
of  worship  enshrined  in  the  traditions  of  centuries ;  over  all  the  learning  and  intellect 
of  the  philosopher,  and  over  all  the  prejudices  and  passions  of  the  multitude  ?  Who 
could  have  thought  that  the  efforts  of  a  poor  German  student  in  Berlin,  on  behalf  of 
some  neglected  children,  would  expand  into  the  widespread  and  weU-rooted  "  Inner 
Mission"  of  Wichern?  Or  that  the  concern  of  a  prison  chaplain  for  the  welfare  of 
some  of  the  prisoners  after  their  release  would  develop  into  the  worldwide  work  of 
Pliedner  ?  Or  that  the  distress  of  a  kind-hearted  medical  student  in  London  for  a 
batch  of  poor  boys  who  "  didn't  live  nowhere,"  and  whose  pale  faces,  as  they  lay  on 
a  cold  night  on  the  roof  of  a  shed,  stirred  in  him  an  irrepressible  compassion,  would 
give  birth  to  one  of  the  marvels  of  London  philanthropy — Dr.  Barnardo's  twenty 
institutions,  caring  for  three  to  four  thousand  childi-en,  in  connection  with  which 
the  announcement  could  be  made  that  no  reaUy  destitute  child  was  ever  turned 
from  its  doors?  When  Carey  on  his  shoemaker's  stool  contemplated  the  evan- 
gelisation of  India,  there  was  as  great  a  gulf  between  the  end  and  the  apparent 
means  as  when  the  priests  blew  with  their  rams'  horns  round  the  walls  of 
Jericho.  But  Carey  felt  it  to  be  a  Divine  command,  and  Joshua-like  set  himself 
to  obey  it,  leaving  to  God  from  whom  it  came  to  furnish  the  power  by  which 
the  work  was  to  be  done.  And  wherever  there  have  been  found  men  and 
women  of  strong  faith  in  God,  who  have  looked  on  His  will  as  recorded  in 
the  Scriptures  with  as  much  reverence  as  if  it  had  been  announced  personally 
to  themselves,  and  who  have  set  themselves  to  obey  that  will  with  a  sense 
of  its  reality  and  a  faith  in  God's  promised  help  like  that  of  Joshua  as  the 
priests  marched  round  Jericho,  the  same  result  has  been  realised :  "  The  Lord 
hath  done  great  things  for  us,  whereof  we  are  glad."  {W.  0.  Blaikie,  D.D.) 
Discipline : — 1.  Was  it  not  of  the  nature  of  discipline  that  the  men  were  to  have 


CHAP.  VI.]  JOSHUA.  129 

arms,  and  yet  were  not  to  use  them  ?    It  is  hard  to  have  the  weapon,  to  see  the 
thing  that  is  to  be  done,  and  to  know  that  the  proposed  thing  could  be  done  by 
the  use  of  the  weapon,  and  yet  to  allow  it  to  remain  in  disuse.     This  is  part  of  the 
continual  discipline  of  life ;  this  is  what  we  are  all  called  upon  to  do  to-day.     We 
do  not  use  all  our  faculties ;  sometimes  we  have  almost  to  strip  ourselves  of  our 
distinctive  faculties,  or  to  let  them  lie  in  disuse,  and  to  be  doing  everything  by 
doing  nothing.     This  is  part  of  a  deeply-planned  scheme  of  education.     This  is 
how  Jesus  Christ  Himself  conducted  His  own  life  in  the  sight  of  men.    He  did  not 
use  all  His  faculties ;  He  did  not  call  into  requisition  all  His  resources ;  He  was 
quiet  when  He  might  have  been  restless,  calm  when  He  might  have  excited  a 
tumult  which  would  have  had  all  the  effect  of  an  unexpected  and  irresistible  storm. 
When  one  offered  to  defend  Him,  He  said,  "  Nay,  not  thus  ;  thou  dost  not  under- 
stand the  spirit  of  the  kingdom ;  thinkest  thou  that  I  could  not  now  pray  unto  My 
Father,  and  He  would  send  twelve  legions  of  angels,  which  would  look  all  these 
petty  enemies  into  dismay  ?     We  must  not  use  all  our  resources.     We  have  the 
strength,  but  do  not  resort  to  the  tyranny  of  using  it.     Some  things  are  to  be 
accomplished  by  submission,  patience,  meekness ;  knowing  the  righteousness  of  the 
cause,  we  await  the  issue  with  imperturbable  calm.    But  what  a  lesson  this  is  to 
those  who  are  impatient  1    Life  without  discipline  is  life  without  dignity.     2.  Was 
it  not,  further,  of  the  nature  of  discipline  for  the  men  to  be  in  the  midst  of  plenty 
and  yet  not  touch  it  ?  (vers.  18,  19).     To  keep  men  back  from  things  which  they 
could  so  easily  use  and  and  so  naturally  appropriate,  and  to  remain  in  comparative 
poverty  in  the  very  midst  of  abundance,  is  not  easy.     When  we  do  not  want  the 
things,  it  is  no  trouble  to  let  them  alone;  but  when  they  are  round  about  us, 
urging  themselves  upon  us,  and  are  almost  clamorous  in  their  appeal  that  we 
should  appropriate  them,  to  stand  in  their  presence  as  with  folded  arms,  and  look 
upon  them,  not  with  contempt,  but  with  a  judgment  that  values  them,  yet  with  a 
conscience  that  will  not  appropriate  them,  is  an  attainment  in  religious  manhood 
which  we  must  not  expect  to  secure  without  long  training.     This  is  part  of  the 
mystery  of  providence.  Here  it  is  that  character  discovers  its  quality.  We  are  in  reality 
what  we  are  in  critical  circumstances.     It  is  the  exceptional  hour  that  is  the  key 
to  the  lifetime.     "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."     3.  Is 
it  not  in  the  nature  of  discipline  to  be  in  great  excitement,  and  yet  not  to  express 
it?     "And  Joshua  had  conamanded  the  people,  saying.  Ye  shall  not  shout,  nor 
make  any  noise  with   your  voice,  neither  shall  any  word  proceed  out  of   your 
mouth,  until  the  day  I  bid  you  shout ;    then  shall  ye  shout "   (ver.  10).    The 
instruction   seems  easy.     Obedience  under   such  ckcumstances  would   be   most 
difficult.     Who  can  keep  down  excitement — honest  and  honourable  excitement? 
To  shout  under  such  circumstances  as  are  described  in  the  teyt  is  natural.    Inborn 
instincts  may  be  profaned,  and  the  very  voice  of  God  within  the  soul  may  be 
mistaken.     The  whole  kingdom  of  heaven  is  hindered  in  some  instances  because 
people  will  not  hold  their  tongues.     God  knows  when  His  people  should  shout, 
speak,  pray,  work ;  the  distribution  of  parts,  functions,  duties,  is  with  God.     Here 
we  clearly  see  that  much  detail  must  go  before  great  results.    It  is  not  for  us  to 
take  this  work  out  of  the  Lord's  hand.    Be  patient  in  the  detail.    It  seems  a  long 
time   since  we  began  going  round  this  awful  hell.    It  seems  to  be  encroaching 
upon   us,  rather  than  we  seem  to  be   encroaching   upon  its  heat.     Travel  on ! 
It  is  the  fifth  day ;    to-morrow  is   the  sixth   day ;    and   the    day   after   is    the 
seventh   day.      "The    Lord  shall  suddenly  come  to   His  temple."      "I  beheld 
Satan    as  lightning   fall  from  heaven."      How  quickly  he  falls  1      (J.   Parker, 
D.I).)        They  burnt  the   city  .  .  .  and   aU  that  was   therein. — Too  polluted 
to   be   spared : — Great  were  their   offences  whose  possessions  were  too  polluted 
to  retain  any  value  or  become  of  any  service  to  the  people  of  God,  and  who 
not   only  themselves  became  a  curse,  but  aU   that  they   had.     This  not  unfre- 
quently  discovers  itself  in  the  transfer  of  Ul-gotten  wealth — a  curse  comes  with  it, 
which  a  new  possession  does  not  wipe  off,  but  consumes  and  withers  as  though 
carJiered   and   moth-eaten.      It  was  not  to  enrich  His  people  with  the  spoils  of 
conquest  that  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  led  the  march  of  triumph,  but  to  inspire 
them  with  a  holy  detestation  of  sin,  and  especially  the  corruptions  and  impurities 
of  idolatry,  as  the  just  cause  of  His  vengeance.     Nothing  so  entirely  unfits  men  to 
live  in  this  world,  and  so  soon  hastens  them  to  another,  even  to  depriving  them  of 
the  common  pity  and  forbearance   of   God,  as  the  corruptions  of  idolatry,  the 
sanctified  impurities  of  a  false  religion.     This  proves  infinitely  worse  in  its  nature, 
and  vmspeakably  more  dangerous  in  its  influence,  than  would  the  positive  absence 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

or  total  obliteration  of  all  that  bears  the  name  of  sanctity.  In  this  view  the  admoni- 
tion receives  peculiar  force  as  addressed  by  the  apostle  (1  Cor.  x.  20,  21).  (W. 
Seaton.)  The  silver  and  the  gold  .  .  .  they  put  into  the  treasury.— Uoofy  given 
to  God  : — Other  cities  would  be  conquered  and  their  booty  be  divided  among  the 
people,  but  in  this  case  all  was  to  be  given  to  God.  No  one  was  to  be  richer  for 
those  marches  and  that  tremendous  slaughter  except  as  every  one  was  richer  when 
the  treasure  was  dedicated  to  God.  It  was  enough  to  be  delivered  by  His  help  from 
so  formidable  a  foe,  who  held  the  two  main  passes  to  the  hill  country  above,  an 
enemy  too  powerful  to  be  left  unconquered  in  their  rear.  Besides,  all  that  was 
God's  was  theirs.  As  well  might  a  son  begrudge  the  increasing  wealth  of  his  father 
in  whose  prosperity  his  own  interests  were  enhanced.  But  the  fact  that  one  man, 
Achan,  did  covet  and  then  conceal  a  goodly  Babylonish  mantle,  with  some  silver 
and  gold  that  he  found,  shows  how  real  was  the  temptation,  yet  how  magnificently 
it  was  resisted.  Only  one  man  among  aU  those  thousands  played  the  thief.  How 
splendid,  then,  was  the  fidelity  of  the  many  !  (C,  S.  Bushnell.)  Seems  not  this 
too  severe  to  forbid  the  soldiers  the  spoils  of  the  city? — 1.  It  was  wonderful  con- 
tinency  in  the  soldiery,  now  wanting  aU  things  of  country  provisions,  by  their  so 
long  wandering  in  the  wilderness.  2.  Jericho  was  the  firstfruits  of  that  cursed 
country,  so  must  wholly  be  devoted  to  God,  and  offered  up  a  whole  burnt-offering. 
3.  The  hungry  soldiers  might  have  been  so  glutted  with  the  spoils  of  this  rich  city 
that  it  would  in  all  likelihood  have  made  them  fitter  for  idleness  and  luxury  than 
for  marching  forward  in  a  martial  conquest  of  Canaan.  4.  The  whole  army  being 
thus  admonished  by  the  prohibition  of  their  expected  prey,  might  understand  that 
the  conquest  of  Jericho  was  accomplished  solely  by  the  almighty  power  of  God,  and 
not  by  any  of  their  prowess  and  valour,  as  was  afterwards  done  in_  subduing  all  the 
other  cities.  5.  This  severity  was  exercised  upon  this  city  at  their  first  landing  ia 
Canaan,  to  strike  the  greater  terror  upon  the  other  Canaanitish  cities,  which  they  had 
to  conquer,  and,  if  possible,  to  bring  them  to  repentance  and  submission.  (C.  Ness.) 
Joshua  saved  Rahab  the  harlot  silive.—Rahab  saved  : — It  has  not  been  the  lot  of 
Eahab  to  share  the  devout  interest  which  has  been  lavished  on  Mary  Magdalene. 
Our  Correggios,  Titians,  and  Carlo  Dolcis  have  not  attempted  to  represent  the 
spirit  of  contrition  and  devotion  transfiguring  the  face  of  the  Canaanite  girl.  And 
this  is  not  surprismg.  Eahab  had  never  seen  the  human  face  of  Jesus,  nor  heard 
the  words  that  dropped  Hke  honey  from  His  lips.  But  though  she  was  not  one  of 
those  whose  contrite  and  holy  love  painters  delight  to  represent,  she  belonged  to 
the  same  order,  and  in  some  respects  is  more  remarkable  than  any  of  the  New 
Testament  penitents.  For  her  light  was  much  dimmer  than  theirs  who  lived  in 
the  days  of  the  Son  of  Man.  She  was  utterly  without  support  or  sympathy  from 
those  among  whom  she  lived,  for  with  the  exception  of  her  own  relations,  who 
seem  to  have  been  influenced  by  herself,  not  a  creature  in  Jericho  shared  her  faith, 
or  showed  the  slightest  regard  for  the  God  of  Israel.  But  the  time  has  now  come 
for  her  to  reap  the  reward  of  her  faith  and  its  works.  In  her  case  there  was  but  a 
short  interval  between  the  sowing  and  the  reaping.  And  God  showed  Himself  able 
to  do  in  her  exceeding  abundantly  above  what  she  could  ask  or  think.  For  she 
was  not  only  protected  when  Jericho  and  aU  its  people  were  destroyed,  but 
incorporated  with  the  children  of  Israel.  No  doubt  the  scarlet  cord  was  hung  from 
her  window,  aa  had  been  arranged  with  the  spies.  And  a  happy  woman  she  no 
doubt  was  when  she  saw  the  faces  of  her  old  guests,  and  under  their  protection  was 
brought  out  with  aU  her  kindred  and  all  that  she  had  and  led  to  a  place  of  safety. 
It  ia  a  blessed  time,  after  you  have  stood  fast  to  duty  while  many  have  failed,  when 
the  hour  comes  that  brings  you  peace  and  blessing,  while  it  carries  confusion  and 
misery  to  the  faithless.  How  thankful  one  ia  at  such  a  moment  for  the  grace  that 
enabled  one  to  choose  the  right  1  What  do  we  not  gain  by  patience  when  we  do 
the  right  and  wait  for  the  reward  ?  One  of  the  pictures  in  the  Interpreter's  House 
is  that  of  "  a  little  room  where  sat  two  little  children,  each  in  his  chair.  The  name 
of  the  eldest  was  Passion,  and  of  the  other  Patience.  Passion  seemed  much  dis- 
content, but  Patience  was  very  quiet.  Then  asked  Christian,  '  What  is  ue  reason 
of  the  discontent  of  Passion  ? '  The  Interpreter  answered,  '  The  Governor  of  them 
would  have  them  stay  for  his  best  things  till  the  beginning  of  the  next  year ;  but 
he  will  have  them  all  now ;  but  Patience  ia  willing  to  wait.'  "  The  case  of  Eahab 
was  one  of  those  where  whole  families  were  saved  on  account  of  the  faith  of  one 
member.  The  head  of  a  Hebrew  house  was  eminently  a  representative  man,  and 
by  a  well-understood  and  recognised  law  his  family  were  implicated  in  his  acts, 
whether  for  good  or  for  evil.    But  in  this  case  the  protector  of  the  family,  the 


CHAP.  VT.]  JOSHUA.  131 

member  of  it  that  determines  the  fate  of  the  whole,  is  not  the  one  whom  the  law 
recognises,  but  his  chUd,  his  daughter.  A  woman  occupies  here  a  higher  and  more 
influential  place,  in  relation  to  the  rest  of  the  family,  than  she  has  ever  held  at  any 
previous  time.  The  incident  comes  in  as  a  kind  of  foreshadow  of  what  was  to  be 
abundantly  verified  in  after-times.  This  narrative  shows  it  to  be  in  the  line  of 
God's  providence  that  sisters  and  daughters  shall  prove  instruments  of  deliverance 
to  their  relations.  It  is  blessed  when  they  are  so  even  in  earthly  things,  but  far 
more  glorious  when,  through  faith  and  prayer  and  unwearied  interest,  they  are 
enabled  to  win  them  to  Christ,  and  turn  them  into  living  epistles  for  Htm.  But 
let  us  now  advert  to  the  reception  of  Eahab  and  her  household  into  the  nation  and 
Church  of  the  Israelites.  At  first  they  could  be  treated  only  as  unclean  until  the 
rites  of  purification  should  be  performed.  In  the  case  of  Eahab  this  was  doubly 
necessary — owing  to  her  race,  and  owing  to  her  life.  Thereafter  they  were  admitted 
to  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  had  an  interest  in  the  covenants  of  promise. 
The  ceremonial  purification  and  the  formal  admission  signified  little,  except  in  so 
far  as  they  represented  the  washing  of  regeneration  and  the  renewal  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  •'  Where  sin  abounded  grace  did  much  more  abound."  When  the  enemy 
ensnares  a  woman,  wiles  her  into  the  filthiest  chambers  of  sin,  and  so  enchains 
her  there  that  she  cannot  escape,  but  must  sink  deeper  and  deeper  in  the  mke,  the 
case  is  truly  hopeless.  More  rapidly  and  more  thoroughly  than  in  the  case  of  a 
man,  the  leprosy  spreads  till  every  virtuous  principle  is  rooted  out,  and  every 
womanly  feeling  is  displaced  by  the  passions  of  a  sensual  reprobate.  "  Son  of 
man,  can  these  bones  live  ?  "  Is  there  any  art  to  breathe  the  breath  of  purity  and 
pure  love  into  that  defiled  soul  ?  Can  such  a  woman  ever  find  her  home  on  the 
mountains  of  spices,  and  hear  a  loving  bridegroom  say,  "  My  love,  my  undefiled  is 
but  one"?  It  is  just  here  that  the  religion  of  the  Bible  achieves  its  highest 
triumphs.  We  say  the  religion  of  the  Bible,  but  we  should  rather  say,  that  gracious 
Being  whose  grace  the  Bible  unfolds.  "  The  things  that  are  impossible  with  men 
are  possible  with  God."  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Prince  of  Life.  Living  faith  in  a  living 
and  loving  Saviour  can  do  all  things.  We  wonder  whether  Eahab  obtained  much 
help  in  her  new  life  from  the  fellowship  of  those  among  whom  she  came  when  she 
joined  the  Church.  If  the  Church  then  was  what  the  Church  ever  ought  to  be,  i£ 
its  outstanding  members  were  like  the  three  fair  damsels.  Prudence,  Piety,  and 
Charity,  in  the  Palace  Beautiful,  no  doubt  she  would  ha  helped  greatly.  But  it  is 
not  very  often  that  that  emblem  is  realised.  And  strange  to  say,  among  the 
members  of  our  Churches  now  we  usually  find  a  very  imperfect  sense  of  the  duty 
which  they  owe  to  those  who  come  among  them  from  without,  and  especially  out 
of  great  wickedness.  It  is  quite  possible  that  Eahab  was  chnied  by  the  coldness  of 
some  of  her  Hebrew  sisters,  lookiiig  on  her  as  an  intruder,  a  reprobate,  and  grieved 
because  their  select  society  was  broken  in  upon  by  this  outlandish  woman.  And  it 
is  quite  possible  that  she  was  disappointed  t^j  find  that,  though  they  were  nominally 
the  people  of  God,  there  was  very  little  ol  what  was  Divine  or  heavenly  about  them. 
So  it  often  happens  that  what  ought  to  be  the  greatest  attraction  in  a  Church,  the 
character  of  its  members,  is  the  greatest  repellant.  Will  the  day  ever  be  when 
every  one  that  names  the  name  of  Christ  shall  be  a  living  epistle,  known  and  read 
of  all  men?  But  however  she  may  have  been  affected  by  the  spirit  of  those 
among  whom  she  came,  Eahab  undoubtedly  attained  to  a  good  degree  before  God, 
and  a  place  of  high  honour  in  the  Hebrew  community.  It  was  well  for  her  that 
what  at  first  arrested  and  impressed  her  was  not  anything  in  the  people  of  Israel ; 
it  was  the  glorious  attributes  of  their  God.  For  this  would  preserve  her  substantially 
from  disappointment.  Men  might  change,  or  they  might  pass  away,  but  God 
remained  the  same  yesterday  and  to-day  and  for  ever.  (TF.  G.  Blaikie,  B.D.) 
Cursed  be  the  man  .  .  .  that  riseth  up  and  buildeth  this  city  Jericho. — The  un- 
prosperous  builder : — Here  is  a  terrible  denunciation,  under  a  curse,  of  the  destruction 
of  the  family  of  that  person  that  should  labour  to  build  up  Jericho  again.  As  in 
blessing  there  are  three  things  considerable,  that  come  near  one  another — a  blessing, 
a  prayer,  and  a  prophecy — so  is  it  likewise  in  cursing :  there  is  a  prayer  that  God 
would  pour  forth  His  vengeance  upon  the  enemies  of  the  Church,  and  a  prophetical 
prediction  that  God  wiU  do  it.  "  Cursed  be  the  man  before  the  Lord."  That  is, 
let  htm  be  cursed  indeed.  That  that  is  done  before  the  Lord  is  truly  and 
solemnly  done.  This  was  a  solemn  cm-se,  a  heavy  curse,  and  it  did  truly  light 
upon  him.  And  let  him  be  cursed  before  the  Lord,  however  the  world  bless 
him.  "  That  riseth  and  builds  this  city  Jericho."  Why  would  not  God  have 
Jericho  built  again?     1.  Partly  because  He  would  have  it  a  perpetual  remem- 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

brance  of  His  goodness  and   merciful  dealing  with  His  people,  passing  over 
Jordan  and  coming   freshly  into  Canaan;    for  we  are  all  subject  to   forget.     If 
this  city  had  been  built  again,  the  memory  of  it  would  have  been  forgotten ;  but 
lying  all    waste  and   desolate,   the   passers    by  would    ask  the   cause — as   God 
speaks  of  His  own  people — "  What  is  the  reason  that  this  city  lies  thus  ?  "   And  then 
it  would  give  them  occasion  of  speaking  of  the  mercy  of  God  to  His  people.    And 
likewise  it  would  give  occasion  to  speak  of  the  justice  of  God  against  the  idolatrous 
inhabitants,  whose  sins  were  grown  ripe.     2.  Arid  likewise  it  was  dedicated  to  God 
as  the  firstfruits.    Being  one  of  the  chief  mother  cities  of  the  land,  it  was  dedicated 
and  consecrated  to  God  as  a  thing  severed ;  it  was  to  be  for  ever  severed  from 
common  use.     There  are  two  ways  of  severing  things  from  common  use :  one  by 
way  of  destruction,  as  here  the  city  of  Jericho ;  another  by  way  of  dedication,  as 
the  gold  of  Jericho.     God  would  have  this  city  severed  from  common  use,  as  a 
perpetual  monument  and  remembrance  of  His  mercy  and  justice.     3.  And  likewise 
for  terror  to  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants ;  for  usually  great  conquerors  set  up  some 
terrible  example  of  justice  to  terrify  others.    Now,  this  being  one  of  the  first  cities 
after  their  passing  over  Jordan,  God  would  have  the  destruction  of  it  to  strike 
terror,  together  with  this  sentence  of  a  curse,  upon  aU  that  should  build  it  again  for 
ever.     4.  And  then  that  this  terrible  sentence  might  be  a  means  to  draw  others  to 
come  in  to  God's  people  to  join  with  them,  and  submit,  and  prevent  their  destruction, 
seeing  how  terribly  God  had  dealt  with  Jericho.     {R.  Sibbes,  D.D.)        The  curse  of 
Jericho : — I.  Let  us  listen  to  the  cuese  pronounced.     Such  an  act  of  destruction 
was  clearly  directed  in  that  law  which  Joshua  was  to  ponder  day  and  night.     It 
was  the  first  city  that  Joshua  had  taken,  and  he  was  bound  to  act  according  to  the 
directions  laid  down  by  Moses  (Deut.  xiii.  15-18).    Joshua  therefore  had  no  choice 
as  regards  Jericho.     Other  conquerors,  for  their  own  pride  and  self-glorification, 
have  ordained  that  fair  cities  should  be  levelled  with  the  dust  and  their  sites  sown 
with  salt.     Thus  was  it  with  Troy,  Carthage,  Sidon.     Joshua  did  this  as  he  did  aU 
things,  in  obedience  to  the  Divine  command.     Jericho  was  "  cursed  before  the 
Lord,"  i.e.,  from   God's  presence  and  by  His  sentence.     But  did  this  dreadful 
destruction  serve  any  good  purpose  ?    Yes,  truly.    Here  we  have  sermons  in  stones, 
far  more  intelligible  and  emphatic  even  than  those  with  which  the  book  of  nature 
is  filled.     To  begin  with,  inasmuch  as  they  are  tokens  of  a  just  and  long-deferred 
judgment  on  wickedness,  they  sound  a  loud  note  of  warning  to  the  impenitent. 
Especially  do  they  display  the  terrible  nature  of  the  sin  of  idolatry  and  its  conse- 
quent evils.     Would  they  not  be  impressive  witnesses  against  Israel  in  every  evil 
day  of  apostasy  ?    And  would  they  not  also  give  encouragement  to  every  faithful 
heart  that  strove  to  follow  the  Lord  fully  ?     Pious  souls  could  read  these  words 
writ  in  large  characters  on  every  one  of  them,  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  nor 
by  wisdom,  but  by  faith,  is  the  victory  won  "  ;  and  the  practical  conclusion  was 
plain:  "Faithful  to  God,  you  can  never  know  defeat."     Thus  these  stones  would 
also  emphasise  the  truth,  that  in  the  greatest  triumphs  and  the  most  brilUant 
successes  there  is  no  room  for  pride  or  boastfulness  or  self-sufficiency  on  the  part 
of  man.    Always  these  stones  would  say,  "  His  right  hand  and  His  holy  arm  hath 
gotten  Him  the  victory."    What  a  stimulus  therefore  to  truthful  and  healthful 
effort  would  these  stones  become  1    JI.  But  the  time  came  when  the  cukse  was 
DESPISED.    It  may  seem  incredible  that  a  curse  so  plain,  so  terrible,  so  memorable, 
should  be  thought  so  httle  of,  but  when  we  read  the  Divine  record  we  can  clearly 
trace  the  causes  of  this  sinful  audacity.     To  begin  with,  there  was  a  popular  cause 
for  this  despisal.    It  was  done  in  a  day  when  Israel's  God  was  forgotten,  when 
spiritual  life  was  very  low,  when  public  sentiment  was  degraded,  when  open  impiety 
reigned  in  high  places,   and  only  one   solitary  man  stood  out  an  open  witness 
against  the  evils  of  the  day.     The  very  sins  for  which  Jericho  was  destroyed  were 
rampant  and  popular  in  Israel  (1  Kings  xvi.  30-33).     How  significant  are  the 
words,  "  In  his  days."     There  were  many  bad,  but  none  worse  than  they.     It  is 
also  instructive  to  notice  that  the  builder  was  a  Bethelite.     Hiel  had  come  under 
the  fuU  influence  of  all  the  evil  principles  that  were  rampant.     He  was  born  and 
bred,  he  hved  and  died,  at  Bethel,  the  metropolis  of  idolatry,  the  place  in  which 
Jeroboam  had  set  up  his  calf.     There  was  also  a  sceptical  cause  which  led  to  the 
despising  of  the  curse.     Unbelief  was  at  the  bottom  of  Hiel's  impious  act,  as  it  is 
the  root  of  every  evil  work.    Perhaps  he  had  reasoned  thus.     The  curse,  if  there 
ever  was  any  force  in  it,  must  have  spent  itself  by  this  time.     Unbelief  forgot  whose 
curse  this  was.    It  could  not  get  beyond  the  lip  of  Joshua  to  the  will  of  the 
changeless  and  almighty  Jehovah.    Or  perhaps  Hiel  had  said :  "  It  is  nothing  bat 


CHAP.  Ti.]  JOSHUA.  133 

an  old  wives'  fable,  nnworthy  of  credence ;  an  old-fashioned  jingle,  without  a 
particle  of  meaning  ;  an  apocryphal  curse,  to  explain  an  apocryphal  miracle  :  or  at 
the  very  utmost,  granting  that  it  has  some  historical  basis,  it  can  be  nothing  more 
than  the  expression  of  Joshua's  ill-nature  and  ill-feeling,  and  therefore  is  a  fossilised 
manifestation  of  the  narrow,  bitter,  bigoted  age  in  which  he  lived.  The  supposition 
that  it  is  a  Divine  proclamation  is  utterly  absurd,  utterly  inconsistent  with  the 
nature  of  things.  It  would  be  neither  just  nor  wise  nor  loving  in  God  to  do  so. 
Such  a  curse  as  that  does  not  commend  itself  to  my  conscience,  reason,  or  heart, 
and  therefore  it  is  unworthy  of  credence."  Hiel,  having  stood  in  the  way  of  sinners, 
would  not  be  long  in  sitting  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful.  And  perhaps  the  governing 
and  most  potent  of  these  concurrent  causes  was  a  purely  materialistic  one.  Hiel 
may  have  said  to  himself  and  others,  "  You  see  I  am  a  practical  man  of  business.  I 
am  neither  a  prophet  nor  a  prophet's  son.  Profit,  not  prophecy,  is  my  forte.  Now 
look,  did  you  ever  see  such  a  splendid  site  ?  "  (Had  Hiel  lived  in  our  days  he  could 
have  drawn  up  a  splendid  prospectus  for  a  limited  liability  building  company. ) 
"  And  what  a  delicious  climate  this  vaUey  enjoys;  even  in  mid-winter  the  air  is 
bright  and  balmy.  And  see,  the  building  material  is  lying  around,  ready  to  be 
used.  The  site  can  be  got  for  an  old  song,  on  account  of  that  ridiculous  supersti- 
tion about  Joshua,  which  has  scared  so  many  chicken-hearted  noodles.  Do  you 
shake  your  head  and  say  there  may  be  some  truth  in  it  ?  What  care  I  ?  I  see 
plainly  how  I  can  make  money  out  of  this.  You  to  your  books  and  me  to  my 
buildings,  and  every  man  to  his  own  trade."  It  was  not  so  very  difficult  then  for 
Hiel  to  despise  the  curse  of  Joshua ;  even  so  it  is  not  difficult  for  any  one  to 
despise  the  curse  of  the  gospel.  The  spirit  of  the  age,  whether  as  expressed  by 
common  talk,  or  the  newspaper  press,  or  current  literature,  is  in  favour  of  such  a 
despisal.  There  are  also  sceptical  reasons  which  conduce  to  the  same  end.  The 
record  which  contains  this  curse  is  old  and  not  trustworthy,  say  some.  The  curse 
is  decrepit  and  antiquated.  The  edge  of  the  sword  of  judgment  is  blunt  and  its 
blade  is  rusty.  The  Lord  is  slack  concerning  His  threatenings.  We  are  too 
enlightened  and  liberal  nowadays  to  believe  in  these  things.  But  perhaps  the  great 
reason  why  men  will  not  take  heed  to  this  curse  is  because  they  are  so  absorbed  in 
the  things  of  time  and  sense  that  they  can  think  of  nothing  else.  III.  Now  notice 
THE  FULFILMENT  OF  THE  CUBSE.  Hiel  was  full  of  his  great  life-work.  The  plana 
have  been  drawn,  the  trenches  have  been  dug,  the  stones  arranged  and  prepared, 
multitudes  of  labourers  engaged.  There  is  to  be  a  grand  opening  ceremony  at  the 
laying  of  the  foundation  stone ;  therefore  the  members  of  his  family  and  his 
numerous  relations  and  friends  flock  from  all  quarters.  It  is  a  most  auspicious 
occasion.  But  in  the  midst  of  the  ceremony  his  firstborn  is  seized  with  a  sudden 
sickness ;  he  falls  in  a  swoon,  and  is  carried  away  from  the  crowd.  But  by  and 
by  a  messenger  with  a  sorrowful  countenance  returns  and  whispers  into  Hiel'a 
ear,  "  Abiram  is  dead."  It  was  a  terrible  blow,  in  this  hour  of  his  father's  triumph 
to  be  cut  down.  But  perhaps,  his  friends  would  say,  the  excitement  of  the  ceremony 
was  too  much  for  him.  He  had  never  been  very  strong,  and  was  complaining  for 
some  time,  and  this  must  have  been  heat  apoplexy,  a  sunstroke.  But  though 
Abu-am's  death  was  a  great  interruption,  the  work  must  be  carried  on  all  the  same. 
At  last  it  is  all  but  finished.  There  is  nothing  left  but  the  putting  up  of  the  gates. 
Absorbed  in  his  great  undertaking,  he  has  been  able  to  drive  away  ominous  thoughts 
and  what  he  calls  superstitious  fears  !  But  there  is  growing  on  him,  as  he  near 3 
the  completion  of  the  work,  a  nervous  anxiety  that  he  cannot  drive  away.  On  one 
thing  he  is  resolved — there  shall  be  no  public  ceremonial  at  the  closing  of  the  work, 
as  there  was  at  the  commencement.  He  will  superintend  the  putting  up  of  the 
gates  himself,  and  not  permit  any  of  his  children  to  be  present.  As  he  was  thus 
busily  occupied  at  the  finishing  touch  of  his  great  work,  a  messenger  arrived  in  hot 
haste  from  Bethel,  fourteen  mUes  distant,  with  the  doleful  news,  "  Segub  is  dead." 
Thus  was  the  curse  of  Joshua  concerning  Jericho  fulfilled.  Learn  from  this  how 
faithful  are  God's  words,  the  terrible  as  well  as  the  gracious.  No  jot  or  tittle  of 
His  truth  ever  fails.  His  word  may  remain  in  abeyance  for  many  years,  but  the 
lapse  of  time  can  never  destroy  its  vitality,  "  The  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for 
ever."  See  also  how  infatuated  is  unbelief.  Every  blow  hardens  rather  than 
softens.  Behold  also  the  bitter  fruits  of  unbelief.  Pleasant  and  profitable  Hiel 
thought  his  work  would  be ;  perhaps  this  very  speculation  was  more  for  his 
children's  benefit  than  for  his  own ;  but  the  solemn  narrative  teaches  that  there 
can  be  no  lasting  profit  for  us  or  ours  if  we  run  contrary  to  God's  Word,  if  we  deny 
His  will.    lY.  But  we  can  turn  to  a  more  grateful  scene,  and  consider  the  kemovaIi 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

OF  THE  cuBSE,  Jericho  was  rebuilt  in  disobedience  to  a  command,  in  defiance  of  a 
thi-eatening,  and  at  the  awful  cost  of  the  builder's  children  ;  yet  it  was  not  de- 
molished. God  had  better  things  in  store  for  it.  His  prophets  and  His  people  were 
permitted  to  dwell  there,  and  though  there  was  much  that  was  pleasant  and  attractive 
in  it,  it  was  an  uncomfortable  residence.  The  curse  seemed  to  hover  over  it  and 
linger  within  its  walls  (2  Kings  iii.  19-22).  Thus  the  curse  of  Joshua  is  removed. 
Strange  cure  this  ;  the  old  curse  met  by  the  new  cruse  ;  the  old  word  of  judgment 
removed  by  the  new  word  of  healing.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  healed  these 
waters."  How  strange  that  the  salt  of  the  new  cruse  should  aboUsh  the  bitterness 
of  the  old  spring — passing  strange.  Yet  can  we  not  here  see  the  symbol  of  higher 
truth?  Can  we  not  see  Jesus  and  His  salvation  in  this  strange  action  of  that 
prophet  so  like  Himself  ?  Each  human  being  is  like  Jericho.  "  The  city  of  Mansoul," 
"  the  house  we  live  in,"  is  it  not  like  Jericho,  pleasant  for  situation,  fair  in  its 
outlook?  Our  powers  and  faculties  of  mind  and  body,  the  possibilities  of  our 
nature,  are  all  that  could  be  desired ;  yet  the  water  of  spiritual  health  is  naught 
and  the  ground  barren.  We  are  lying  under  a  curse.  But  see,  the  Saviour  comes. 
The  wonder-working  wood  for  the  bitterness  of  Marah  and  the  wonder-working  salt 
for  the  spring  of  Jericho,  both  picture  that  cross  and  passion  by  which  Jesus  has 
removed  the  curse.  Yes,  and  the  world  itself  is  also  like  Jericho.  Is  it  not  fair  and 
beautiful ;  most  pleasant  for  situation  ?  Every  prospect  pleases.  But  there  is  a 
deadly  drawback,  "The  water  is  naught  and  the  land  barren."  Death  reigns. 
"The  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain,  waiting."  Yes,  waiting; 
waiting  the  coming  of  Him  who  brings  healing  and  life  and  fruitf ulness  with  Him ; 
to  welcome  whose  arrival  all  creatures  will  shout  for  joy,  for  there  shall  be  no  more 
curse.    His  presence  will  bless  us  with  Eden  again,    (k.  B.  Mackay.) 


CHAPTER  vn. 

Veb.  1.  But  the  children  of  Israel  committed  a  trespass. — Corporate  responsi- 
bility : — This  is  here  attributed  to  the  whole  people,  which  was  really  the  act  of  but 
one  man  or  one  family.  This  is  not  because  of  any  guilty  participation  in  this 
trespass  by  others ;  there  is  no  intimation  that  any  others  of  the  people  were 
involved  in  a  like  crime.  Nor  is  there  any  implication  that  others  were  privy  to  the 
crime  of  Achan,  and  by  concealment  of  the  fact  became  its  abettors  and  sharers  in 
its  guilt.  In  ail  probability  his  act  was  not  known  or  suspected  beyond  the  Hmits 
of  his  own  famUy.  Nevertheless,  Israel  was  one  people,  and  it  is  here  dealt  with 
as  one  corporate  body.  There  was  criminality  in  the  midst  of  them.  And  it  was 
necessary  that  it  should  be  disavowed  and  punished,  in  order  that  the  people  might 
be  freed  from  all  complicity  and  connection  with  it.  (W.  H.  Green,  D.D.) 
Destruction  a  duty : — Many  a  thing  which  is  attractive  in  itself  ought  to  be 
destroyed ;  and  if  it  ought  to  be  destroyed,  it  ought  not  to  be  preserved.  The 
contents  of  a  saloon,  or  of  a  gambling-house,  books  and  pictures  which  are  harmful 
in  themselves,  v,  }iich  are,  by  their  owners  or  by  the  public  authorities,  devoted  to 
destruction,  ought  to  be  destroyed.  To  preserve  any  portion  of  them,  under  such 
circumstances,  would  be  a  wrong  on  the  part  of  him  whose  duty  it  was  to  destroy 
them.  To  preserve  a  private  letter  which  is  entrusted  to  one  to  destroy  is  not  in 
itself  an  act  of  theft,  but  it  is  an  inexcusable  breach  of  trust ;  and  if  no  one  else  in 
the  world  is  ever  harmed  by  it,  the  one  who  preserves  the  letter  is  the  worse  for 
60  doing.  The  destroying  of  that  which  ought  to  be  destroyed  is  as  clearly  one's 
duty  in  its  place,  as  the  preserving  of  that  which  ought  to  be  preserved.  (H.  C. 
Trumbull.) 

Vers.  2-5.  They  fled  hefore  the  men  of  Al. — The  tnie  measure  of  strength : — 
In  every  estimate  of  work  to  be  done  by  men,  or  by  money,  the  moral  element  ought 
to  be  taken  into  account  as  an  important  factor.  Napoleon's  thought  was  that 
"  God  is  on  the  side  of  the  heaviest  battalions."  But  Napoleon  did  not  consider 
the  relative  weight  of  battalions  by  God's  method  of  weighing  them.  One  man's 
strength  may  be  as  "the  strength  of  ten,  because  his  heart  is  pure  "  ;  and  where 
two  thousand  righteous  men  would  be  more  than  sufficient  for  a  work  of  God, 
twenty  thousand  wrong-hearted  men  may  fail.     The  true  measure  of  the  strength 


CHAP.vn.]  JOSHUA.  135 

of  any  local  Church  is  in  the  number  and  power  of  its  godly  men  and  women,  not  in 
the  show  of  its  men  and  women  of  wealth  and  intellect  and  social  standing.  One 
good  teacher  in  a  Sunday-school  has  more  real  power  there  than  a  score  of  unworthy 
ones.  And  it  is  with  money  as  with  men.  The  need  of  the  Church  in  both  the 
home  and  the  foreign  field  to-day  is  not  so  much  mere  money,  but  better  gifts.  Ten 
dollars  with  a  blessing  will  count  for  more  in  God's  work  than  ten  thousand  doUars 
without  a  blessing.  It  is  not  true  that  one  man's  money  is  as  good  as  another's, 
nor  that  money  gained  by  one  means  is  as  good  as  money  gained  by  another.  (Ibid.) 
JoshvM's  lesson  after  the  defeat  at  Ai : — Jericho,  according  to  the  Divine  promise, 
had  fallen  before  Israel.  It  was  evident  that  this  remarkable  event  had  happened 
through  the  direct  interposition  of  the  power  of  God.  It  is  scarcely  to  be  wondered 
at  that  such  a  triumph  bred  self-confidence.  And,  flushed  with  their  recent  and 
easily-gained  success,  the  victors  were  in  haste  to  add  to  their  laurels  by  the  conquest 
of  Ai.  Here  was  an  unlooked-for  catastrophe.  The  Lord's  chosen  people  discomfited 
and  dispersed  in  their  second  battle,  a  ground  of  insulting  and  contemptuous  rejoicing 
given  to  the  idolatrous  Canaanites.  And  thus  the  Divine  purpose  stood,  apparently, 
in  danger  of  disgraceful  frustration.  Such  thoughts  were  evidently  jostling  each 
other,  like  a  medley  crowd,  in  the  mind  of  Joshua.  And,  confused  beyond  the 
possibility  of  cahn  reflection  by  their  influence,  he  casts  himself  in  despair  before 
the  ark  of  the  Lord.  With  what  wonderful  illuminating  power  must  the  answer 
have  come  to  him,  "  Get  thee  up ;  wherefore  liest  thou  upon  thy  face  "  !  What  a 
call  to  common-sense  action  on  the  lines  of  faith  is  here  I  A  little  reflection  might 
have  shown  to  Joshua  that  the  fault,  whatever  it  was,  could  not  lie  at  Jehovah's 
door.  In  place  of  useless  whimpering  over  the  past,  vigorous  examination  was 
needed  to  remove  the  lurking  evil.  Sanctification,  as  before  Jericho,  was  urgently 
required.  And  as  for  the  honour  of  the  name  of  the  Lord,  it  was  never  in  danger. 
This  first  defeat  would  give  caution  to  the  warriors  of  Israel,  while,  under  the 
improved  conditions  about  to  be  set  up,  it  would  act  as  an  unfailing  lure  to  the 
victors  of  Ai.  Now  this  leaf  out  of  the  life  of  a  good  servant  of  God  is  well  fitted  to 
teach  us  many  useful  lessons.  I.  A  lesson  as  to  the  right  treatment  of  a  Divinb 
MYSTERY.  It  is  easy  to  conceive  of  Joshua  as  emulating  the  example  of  a  rationaUst, 
had  the  prototype  of  that  much-belauded  school  existed  in  his  time.  In  that  case 
he  would  have  called  the  leaders  of  his  army  together,  and  subjected  them  to  a 
severe  cross-examination.  He  would  have  proposed  a  long  list  of  questions  as  to 
the  condition  of  the  arms  of  the  people,  the  manner  of  their  leadership  and  its 
blunders,  the  time  and  apparent  causes  of  the  panic.  And  having  exhausted  his 
criiical  powers  in  the  vain  endeavour  to  discover  some  adequate  cause  for  iha 
catastrophe,  he  would  have  proceeded  to  distribute  blame  aU  round.  At  the  same 
time,  sapiently  shaking  his  head  over  the  problem,  he  would  decide  to  "  rest  and  be 
thankful"  without  further  efforts  at  the  conquest  of  the  country.  Or  he  would  set 
hunself  to  prove  conclusively  that  after  all  the  success  at  Jericho  was  due  to  acci- 
dent, or  purely  natural  causes,  and  that  the  whole  scheme  of  Canaan  conquest  was 
based  on  a  mistake.  In  this  he  might,  not  improbably,  easily  find  scientific  heads 
to  help  him.  There  would  be  sages  who  would  invoke  the  aid  of  the  discoveries  of 
their  time  to  show  that  the  Jordan  was  divided,  and  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  from 
the  operation  of  ordinary  physical  laws.  The  phenomena  were  special,  but  not 
Bupernaturally  so.  Or  Joshua  might  have  chosen  a  third  course,  and  abandoned 
himself  to  surly  grumbling  or  useless  repining  at  the  hard  lot  of  a  popular  leader 
under  a  so-called  "  theocracy."  Joshua's  primitive  faith — or,  as  some  would  say, 
simphcity — was  far  wiser  and  more  useful.  And  just  as,  turn  the  compass  as  you 
may,  the  needle  wiU  point  to  the  pole,  so,  let  circumstances  be  what  they  might, 
Joshua's  trust  always  drew  him  towards  God's  oracle.  The  man  of  the  world  might 
call  it  chUdish,  fatalistic  credulity.  At  all  events  the  issue  proved  it  to  be  the  right, 
the  wisest  thing  to  do.  In  like  manner  our  true  wisdom  hes  in  taking  our  diffi- 
culties to  God.  Second  causes,  in  the  shape  of  natural  law,  human  ignorance  or 
frailty,  have  their  sphere  in  the  economy  of  the  Divine  government,  but  God  is 
supreme  over  all.  II.  It  is  not  always  safe  to  trust  our  zeal  for  the  Divine 
HONOUR.  Doubtless  Joshua  thought  with  Elijah  in  later  times,  "I  have  been  very 
zealous  for  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  while  he  was  really  only  fathering  Israel's  sin  upon 
Jehovah.  And  similar  mistakes  are  not  unfrequently  made  by  godly  men,  and 
often  with  the  best  intentions.  There  are  some  facts  which  exist,  and  some  which 
are  threatened,  which  seem  to  reflect  upon  the  nature  and  government  of  God. 
And  in  order,  as  it  is  supposed,  to  conserve  Jehovah's  honour,  infinite  effort 
is  expended  to  cast  doubt  upon  the  facts  or  to  qualify  the  declarations.    Could 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vu. 

we  but  touch  the  bottom  of   such  "  zeal  for  God "  we  might  be  surprised  to 
discover  that  after  all  there  is  more  in  it  which — unconsciously,   it  is  true — 
tends  to  conserve  human  weakness  and  sin  rather  than  the  glory  of  our  Divine 
Buler.      A  similar  remark  applies  to  very  much   in  our  own   estimate  of  the 
success  of  the  gospel.    Often  we  hear,  and  perhaps  oftener  are  tempted  to  indulge 
in  our  hearts,  doubts  as  to  the  power  of  the  glorious  gospel.    Progress  is  so  slow 
that  men  are  quick  to  discover  that  the  machinery  of  evangehcal  ministry  has 
become  obsolete,  and  its  teachings  effete.     But  the  lesson  ought  rather  to  be  earnest 
inquiry  as  to  our  fitness  or  otherwise  for  the  success  we  crave.    Is  the  cause  in  our- 
selves, or  our  easily  improvable  methods  ?     Or  does  the  hidden  mischief  lie  in  those 
with  whom  we  work  ?     There  needs  but  the  removal  of  "  the  accursed  thing  "  for 
success  to  return  to  us,  and  our  despondent  dirge  shall  then  speedily  become  a  song 
of  victory.     III.  The  narrative,  moreover,  suggests  to   us  the  eight  method  of 
EEGAEDiNG  ATFLicTioNB.    It  is  wise  here  to  have  a  fixed  belief  in  an  overruling 
Providence,  but  we  must  not  allow  this  to  hinder  our  full  cognisance  of  second 
causes.     And  it  will  be  well  for  us  if  in  any  special  trial,  while  we  are  ready,  with 
aU  submission,  to  bow  to  the  Divine  decree,  we  carefully  ask  what  there  is  in  us  of 
indiscretion  or  sin  which  has  procured,  or  been  accessory  to,  our  sufferings ;  and 
then,  in  earnest  rehance  upon  Divine  grace,  let  us  seek  altogether  to  remove  it.    IV. 
Sanctification  for  God's  service  often  involves  the  searchino  out  and  removal 
OF  hidden  and  unsuspected  sins.     There  was  only  one  Achan  in  the  camp,  and  his 
offence  was  known  only  to  himself  and  God.     Nevertheless,  no  success  can  rest  on 
the  arms  of  Israel  until  he  is  found  out  and  destroyed.     Let  us  not  forget  the 
important  lesson  which  this  is  so  weU  fitted  to  teach.     Sin  comes  to  us  in  such 
insidious  ways,  and  uses  agents  so  dear  to  us,  that  it  succeeds  in  taking  up  its  abode 
in  our  hearts  before  we  are  aware  of  its  presence.     Have  we  an  Achan  in  the  camp  ? 
If  so,  let  us  seek  to  extnpate  the  evil.    (J.  Dann.)      Israel  defeated  at  Ai : — I.  The 
Divine  displeasure  at  human  sin.     This  was  not  a  new  lesson  to  the  Israelites.   At 
Sinai,  at  Kadesh,  at  Peor,  it  had  been  taught  them ;  but,  under  new  temptations, 
they  needed  renewed  instruction.     Sin  unrepented  and  unforsaken  provokes  God's 
changeless  displeasure.     Such  displeasure  is  a  part  of  eternal  justice.    We  magnify 
the  grace  of  God,  but  grace  is  only  a  fragment  of  His  character ;  it  co-exists  with 
justice.     II.  The  many  mat  be  punished  for  the  sins  of  one.     God  does  not  deal 
with  men  as  individuals  only.     There  is  a  corporate  unity  of  the  family,  the  Church, 
the  State,  which  He  regards ;  and,  as  the  good  deeds  of  one  benefit  all,  the  sins  of 
one  bring  evil  upon  all.     In  this  matter,  God's  thought  is  often  not  as  ours.     No 
modern  leader,  after  the  sack  of  a  city,  would  be  surprised  to  fijid  an  Achan  in  every 
tent.     Might  not,  then,  the  one  have  been  pardoned  for  the  sake  of  the  self-restraint 
of  the  many  ?    At  least,  might  not  the  guilty  one  have  suiJered  all  the  consequences 
of  his  crime,  without  involving  his  innocent  fellows  ?     Such  questions  we  are  not 
competent  to  decide.     Only  a  far-seeing  Wisdom,  which  can  f uUy  fathom  motives 
and  forecast  aU  the  results  of  individual  sins,  can  tell  when  to  be  gracious  and  for- 
giving, and  when  to  punish.     The  war  against  the  idolatrous  races  of  Palestine  was 
not  to  degenerate  into  pillage,  a  school  for  covetousness  and  selfishness  for  the 
victors ;  and  so,  at  the  beginning,  such  a  lesson  was  needed  as  would  make  each 
afraid  of  private  transgression,  and  also  watchful  of  others.    III.  The  defeat  at 
Ai  illustrates  the  difference  between  human  sagacity  and  Divine  guidance. 
The  Israelites  were  so  strangely  unteachable  that  they  did  not  clearly  distinguish 
between  the  two.     The  victory  at  Jericho  was  clearly  not  theirs,  but  God's.     But,  in 
the  flush  of  victory,  this  was  forgotten.     Israel  rejoiced  in  her  own  success.     Pros- 
perity brought  presumption,  out  of  which  grew  the  ill-advised  expedition  against  Ai. 
It  is  easy  for  the  Church  to  repose  confidence  in  the  stability  and  strength  of  her 
own  organisation,  and  in  smoothly-running  ecclesiastical  machinery,  to  find  the 
sure  augury  of  her  success.     Then  some  spiritual  Ai  must  needs  recall  us  to  the 
truth  that  the  victories  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  are  "not  by  might  nor  by  power," 
but  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.     IV.  There  is  great  danger  in  under- 
estimating THE  power  of  an  ADVERSARY.     The  casy  success  at  Jericho  made  Israel 
over-confident.    A  Southern  historian  of  the  rebellion  has  recorded  his  opinion  that 
the  first  battle  at  Bull  Run  was  a  serious  misfortune  to  the  Southern  cause.     It  led 
to  mistaken  confidence.     Great  numbers  of  volunteers  left  the  Southern  army  and 
returned  home,  believing  the  war  ended.     Thoughtful  writers  at  the  North  agree 
that  it  helped  the  Northern  cause,  for  it  taught  us  not  to  despise  the  enemy,  and  set 
clearly  before  us  the  magnitude  of  the  conflict.    And  this  has  its  parallel  in  the 
conflicts  of  the  spiritual  life.    After  Jericho,  Ai.     There  is  no  commoner  mistake 


CHAP.  VII.]  JOSHUA.  137 

than  the  belief  that  following  some  great  victory  will  be  peaceful  conquest,  the  rest 
of  Canaan.  There  is  no  earthly  Canaan.  V.  It  is  folly  to  trust  in  past 
EXPERIENCES.  The  three  thousand  men  who  went  up  against  Ai  were  full  of  confi- 
dence which  grew  out  of  the  successes  at  the  Jordan  and  at  Jericho.  They  assumed 
the  presence  and  guidance  of  God  because  of  His  past  deliverances.  They  knew 
what  had  happened ;  from  this  they  formed  a  doctrine  of  probabilities  of  what  would 
happen.  They  learned  the  truth  of  the  maxim,  "  It  is  a  part  of  probability  that 
many  improbable  things  will  happen."  We  cannot  measure  our  present  relation  to 
God  by  the  past.  The  past  may  give  us  ground  for  hope,  but  there  is  no  science  of 
spiritual  probabiKties.  "  There  are  factors  in  the  spiritual  life  which  can  change 
the  face  of  things  to  any  extent,  and  which  hide  from  all  calculations  of  the  probable." 
Christian  progress  is  by  "  forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind."  Have  we  a  living 
faith  to-day  ?  [Sermons  hy  the  Monday  Club.)  The  diseases  that  stop  England^s 
mercies : — In  this  chapter  you  have  a  treatise  concerning  Achan's  sin,  branching 
itself  into  three  parts ;  one  concerning  the  commission  of  the  sin,  the  second  con- 
cerning the  discovery  of  it,  and  the  third  concerning  the  punishment  thereof.  Oh, 
what  unexpected  ways  and  means  hath  God  to  bring  out  men's  sin  to  light. 
Three  thousand  men  flee  before  the  men  of  Ai,  and  thirty-six  men  are  slain,  and 
this  was  made  the  means  of  discovery  of  Achan's  sin  ;  who  would  have  thought  that 
there  should  have  been  such  a  discovery  as  this  ?  The  work  was  hindered  by  this 
defeat,  and  that  sets  them  on  work  to  search  out  the  cause,  and  shows — 1.  That 
afflictions  should  set  us  on  work,  to  search  out  our  sins,  and  the  cause  of  them. 
2.  That  sins  shall  not  always  be  pocketed  up,  but  shall  be  discovered,  though  never 
so  secret.  3.  That  God  hath  strange  ways  to  discover  men's  sins.  First,  where  God 
is  in  a  way  of  mercy  towards  His  people,  there  sin  does  make  a  stoppage  in  His 
proceedings ;  so  here  God  was  in  a  way  of  mercy  towards  His  people,  carrying  of 
them  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  but  in  the  way  they  sin,  Achan  plays  the  thief ;  mark 
what  a  stoppage  this  made  in  the  way  of  mercy ;  so  you  have  it  in  chap.  xxiv.  20, 
Jer.  xxviii.  9.  Sins  committed  when  God  is  in  a  way  of  mercy  are  a  slighting  of 
mercy.  Again,  those  mercies  that  come  unto  God's  people  come  unto  them  in  the 
way  of  a  promise,  and  therefore  if  men  do  not  keep  the  condition,  God  takes  Him- 
self free,  and  will  turn  Himself  out  of  the  way  of  His  mercy.  You  have  an  expres- 
sion to  this  purpose  (Num.  xiv.  34).  God  never  gives  His  people  any  mercy,  but 
He  gives  it  them  in  a  way  of  mercy.  He  does  not  think  it  enough  to  give 
them  that  which  is  mercy,  but  He  will  give  it  them  in  a  way  of  mercy.  But  now 
if  God  should  be  in  a  way  of  mercy  towards  His  people,  and  they  sin  against  Him» 
and  He  should  go  on  to  give  them  the  mercy,  they  would  be  hardened  in  their  sin, 
and  so  it  would  not  come  unto  them  in  the  way  of  mercy.  Therefore,  if  God  be  in 
a  way  of  mercy  towards  His  people,  and  they  sin  against  Him,  He  will  break  off  the 
course  of  His  mercy,  and  go  another  way,  and  there  shall  be  a  stoppage  made  in. 
these  proceedings.  "Why  should  this  be,  that  so  small  a  sin  should  turn  the  great 
God  of  heaven  out  of  the  way  of  His  mercy?  Achan  commits  but  a  small  sin,  and 
what  a  mighty  stop  is  made  in  the  way  of  mercy  !  For  answer  three  things — 
1.  There  is  nothing  between  God  and  us.  I  may  boldly  say  thus  much,  that  men  sin 
a  great  sin  in  saying  their  sin  is  small.  2.  Sometimes  what  falls  short  in  the  great- 
ness of  the  sin  is  made  up  in  the  number  of  sins.  It  may  be  that  the  number  of 
your  little  sins  amount  to  the  greatest  sin.  8.  God  will  make  good  His  name  to  the 
utmost,  and  His  name  is,  "  A  jealous  God."  But  what  evil  and  hurt  is  in  this,  if  a 
final  stoppage  be  not  made  ?  Is  it  nothing  in  your  ears,  and  in  your  hearts,  that  the 
Lord  should  turn  out  of  a  way  of  mercy  ?  If  there  be  a  stoppage  made  in  England's 
mercy,  though  but  present,  there  is  an  obstruction  in  all  your  comforts :  you  are 
sensible  of  the  obstructions  of  your  body,  will  you  not  be  sensible  of  State  obstruc- 
tions, of  Church  obstructions  ?  Again,  when  a  man  does  not  rely  and  live  upon 
God's  aU-sufl&ciency,  when  God  hath  appeared  in  that  way.  Abusing  of  God's 
instruments  which  He  raiseth  up  for  to  do  His  work  by,  doth  exceedingly  provoke 
and  make  a  stoppage  in  the  mercy  of  God.  Carrying  on  the  work  of  reformation, 
and  the  great  affairs  of  the  Church,  upon  the  shoulders  of  human  prudence,  will 
make  a  stoppage  in  the  way  of  mercy.  As  prayer  and  humiliation  do  exceedingly 
further  the  work  of  God  in  the  hands  of  His  people,  so  the  falling  and  slacking  of 
the  hands  in  these  two  works  doth  make  a  stop  in  mercy,  and  hath  done  in  our 
mercy.  An  unthankful  receiving  of  the  mercies  that  God  hath  given  us,  and  a 
slight  beholding  of  the  great  works  He  hath  done  before  us  lately,  is  another  sin 
that  hath  made  a  stoppage  in  our  mercy.  The  last  sin  that  makes  a  stop  in 
England's  mercy  is  a  worldly  dispoEition,  whereby  a  man  hangs  back  onto  the 


138  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tu. 

great  work  of  God,  and  the  glorious  reformation  that  is  now  a-doing.  I  shall  show 
you  it  is  a  hard  thing  to  appease  God's  anger  when  it  is  gone  out.  It  must  be 
done,  and  that  quickly.  I  shall  show  you  what  you  shall  do,  that  you  may  do  it. 
Therefore  it  is  an  exceeding  hard  thing  and  very  difficult  to  appease  God's  anger. 
If  the  sea  break  over  the  banks,  and  there  are  but  few  to  stop  it,  it  is  hard  to  do ; 
if  fire  hath  taken  two  or  three  houses  in  a  street,  and  but  few  to  quench  it,  it  is 
hard  to  do  :  the  fire  of  God's  anger  is  broken  out,  and  there  are  but  few  to  quench 
it :  it  is  a  hard  thing,  therefore.  Again,  God  seems  to  be  engaged  in  the  way  of 
His  wrath.  Oh,  it  is  a  hard  thing  to  turn  God  from  His  anr>er  1  But  it  must  be 
done,  and  done  quickly.  There  are  six  things  that  Joshua  did  here,  when  they  fled 
before  the  men  of  Ai.  1.  He  was  very  sensible  of  God's  stroke  that  was  given  to 
them,  for  he  says.  Lord,  would  we  had  been  contented  in  the  wilderness.  2.  He 
was  humbled  under  God's  hand,  for  it  is  said,  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  fell  down 
upon  the  earth.  3.  And  he  prayed,  and  cried  mightily  unto  God,  as  you  read  in  the 
chapter.  4.  And  he  put  away  the  evil  of  their  doings.  5.  And  he  punished  Achan, 
the  offender.  6.  He  made  a  holy  resignation.  And  there  must  be  a  concurrence  of 
all  these  six  things  if  we  would  bring  God  back  into  the  way  of  His  mercy  towards 
England.  HV.  Bridge,  M.A.)  Sources  of  weakness  : — 1.  Here  is  a  Church  with  all 
the  outward  elements  of  strength,  prosperity,  and  efficiency.  The  mass  of  members 
are  orderly  and  in  good  standing.  But  it  has  a  "name  to  live  while  it  is  dead." 
God  frowns  upon  it.  And  why  ?  There  are  notoriously  unworthy  members  in  it 
— perhaps  rich  and  influential — and  they  are  tolerated  year  after  year.  And  there 
is  not  spiritual  life  and  conscience  enough  in  the  body  to  cast  them  out  1  And  so 
the  whole  Church  is  cursed  for  their  sake  1  2.  Here  is  a  city  numbering  800,000 
strong,  with  hundreds  of  Churches  and  able  pastors,  and  scores  of  thousands  of 
respectable  members,  and  education  and  schools  and  wealth,  and  all  the  elements 
that  should  insure  social  vhtue  and  general  thrift,  and  God's  abundant  and  abiding 
blessing.  But  there  is  a  moral  blot  upon  it.  There  is  an  "  accursed  thing  "  winked 
at.  A  handful  of  corrupt  officials  are  suffered  to  rule  it  and  curse  it.  GambUng, 
drinking,  crime,  are  suffered  to  run  riot.  There  is  power  in  the  mass,  in  the 
Christian  element,  to  put  it  down,  stamp  it  out.  But  it  is  not  invoked.  And 
so  the  whole  city  has  to  suffer  the  shame  and  ignominy  and  loss.  The  pulpit,  the 
Church,  virtue,  law,  are  all  shorn  of  their  strength.  For  God  will  not  wiiik  at  such 
things,  if  His  people  do ;  and  so  "  Ichabod  "  is  written  on  that  city.  3.  Here  is  a 
community  in  which  a  horrible  crime  has  been  committed — a  man  shot  down  in 
cold  blood  for  his  fidehty  to  truth  or  virtue  or  the  public  welfare.  The  blood  of  that 
man  God  will  require  of  that  entire  community,  unless  they  exhaust  every  resource 
of  law  and  society  to  bring  the  guilty  to  punishment  1  We  may  narrow  the  circle  to 
the  individual,  and  the  principle  will  still  apply.  One  sin  in  the  heart  will  neutralise 
a  thousand  virtues  in  the  life.  One  secret  offence  will  make  a  man  a  coward  in  the 
face  of  the  world.  One  moral  weakness  will  spoil  a  whole  character.  (J.  M. 
Sherwood,  D.D.)  Defeat  through  miscalculation : — This  old  story  of  the  battle  at 
Ai  is  paralleled  in  all  its  essential  features  in  every  age  and  country.  Some 
unrecognised  weakness,  some  unforeseen  turn  of  events,  confuses  the  most  careful 
calculations  and  neutralises  the  most  elaborate  preparations.  Probably  the  splendid 
military  strategy  of  Napoleon  was  never  more  clearly  illustrated  than  in  his  plan  of 
the  battle  of  Waterloo  ;  and  yet  a  little  strip  of  sunken  road,  which  was  overlooked 
in  the  preliminary  survey  of  the  engineers,  threw  all  his  calculations  into  disarray 
and  lost  him  the  battle  and  the  empire  of  Europe.  Some  unnoticed  defect  in  the 
machinery  negatives  the  skill  of  the  captain  and  the  seamanship  of  the  crew  of  the 
Atlantic  steamer.  It  was  only  an  insignificant  bubble  of  air,  overlooked  in  the  foundry 
when  the  steel  was  wrought,  but  it  resulted  in  weakness  in  the  core  of  the  main 
shaft,  and  in  the  supreme  hour  of  trial  there  is  failure  and  disaster.  Some  lack  of 
fibre  in  character,  and  the  time  comes  when  the  man  who  supposed  himself  sufficient 
for  anything  finds  himself  unequal  to  the  emergency.  And  these  unforeseen 
interferences  and  checks  are  nowhere  so  common  and  so  potential  as  in  the  depart- 
ment of  religious  life.  A  low  type  of  piety  is  not  necessarily  or  probably  the  result 
of  a  resolution  to  be  satisfied  with  a  certain  level  of  spiritual  attainment.  I  believe 
that  at  heart  the  majority  of  Christian  men  and  women  desire  and  attempt  to  be 
and  do  the  best  and  most  possible,  but  there  is  some  defect  of  will,  some  infirmity  of 
temper,  some  unwillingness  to  sunender  to  God  what  may  be  considered  an  unim- 
portant particular,  and  so  long  as  that  hindrance  is  in  the  way,  our  prayers  and 
struggles  for  better  and  larger  growth  are  unavailing,  and  the  influence  of  that 
obstacle  continually  makes  ilself  more  and  more  felt  for  evil.    And  what  is  true  of 


CHAP,  vii.]  JOSHUA.  139 

the  individual  Christian  life  is  true  also  of  the  life  and  progress  of  the  Christian 
Church  as  a  whole.  That  Church  has  made  great  advances  and  won  not  a  few 
triumphs  at  various  periods  and  in  certain  directions.  At  the  same  time  it  is  true 
that  the  Church  ought  to  have  accomplished  greater  things,  ought  to  he  doing  far 
more  than  it  is  to-day.  It  is  God's  Church,  and  He  abides  in  it,  and  that  of  itself 
is  a  warrant  for  imperial  greatness.  What  conquest  is  too  vast  to  be  expected  when 
the  Lord  of  hosts  marshals  the  forces  that  are  enlisted  to  win  it  ?  With  such 
portents  and  prophecies  of  triumph,  why  should  there  be  any  discouragement,  or 
half-heartedness,  or  laggard  marches,  or  unwilling  hands,  or  partial  successes? 
Why  was  not  the  promise  fulfilled  long  ago,  that  "  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  are 
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of  His  Christ  "  ?  A  great  deal  is  said  in  our 
time  about  the  need  of  a  working  Church.  There  is  another  need  quite  as  great — 
the  need  of  a  Church  through  which  God  can  work.  It  is  not  the  method  and  spirit 
of  the  working  of  the  Church,  so  much  as  the  way  and  the  extent  in  which  and  to 
which  it  is  wrought  upon  of  the  Divine  Spirit  that  determines  its  efficiency.  It  is  the 
folly  of  the  Church  of  this  age  that  it  spends  so  much  ingenuity  in  devising 
machinery  and  too  little  time  in  preparing  the  way  of  the  Lord  and  making  His 
paths  straight.  No  wisdom,  nor  eloquence,  nor  marvel  of  contrivance  can  make 
good  the  lack  of  a  devoted  and  submissive  spirit  that  waits  and  waits  and 
still  waits  with  the  inquiry:  "Lord,  what  wUt  Thou  have  me  to  do?"  Let 
us  have  that  in  the  Church,  a  singleness  of  union  with  God,  and  then, 
through  the  membership,  the  converting  energy  from  on  high  will  flow  un- 
hindered, and  men  be  reached  and  transformed,  {E.  S.  Atwood.)  Hindered 
by  $171 : — 1.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  are  unexplained  checks  in  human 
progress.  We  wonder  why  we  do  not  advance  more  surely  and  quickly.  2.  Such 
checks  bring  Divine  providence  under  criticism  and  suspicion  (vers.  6-9).  This  is 
an  easy  refuge  for  men.  Providence  has  had  to  sustain  many  a  slander.  It  seems 
the  handiest  of  all  things  to  blame  the  mysteriousness  of  the  Divine  way.  Who 
ever  says,  "  The  fault  must  be  within  the  house  itself ;  let  every  man  in  the  house 
be  examined ;  somebody  is  to  blame  for  this  mystery — who  is  it  ?  "  But  it  is 
easier  to  sit  down  under  the  supposed  comforting  doctrine  that  all  this  is  meant 
for  our  good ;  it  is  chastisement ;  it  is  part  of  the  mysterious  process  of  human 
education  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  sufferer  himself 
may  not  be  personally  guilty.  Certainly  Joshua  was  no  criminal  in  this  case; 
yet  Joshua  suffered  more  than  any  other  man.  Here  we  may  find  the  mysterious- 
ness of  the  Divine  action.  This  is  not  an  action  of  mere  virtue,  as  it  is  socially 
understood  and  limited ;  it  is  the  very  necessity  of  God :  He  cannot  touch  "  the 
accursed  thing  " ;  He  cannot  smile  upon  fraud.  A  new  light  is  thus  thrown  upon 
sovereignty  and  God's  elective  laws.  God  elects  righteousness,  pureness,  simplicity, 
nobleness.  He  will  forsake  Israel  if  Israel  forsake  Him.  The  Lord  gives  the 
reason  why  we  are  stopped.  We  must  go  to  Heaven  to  find  out  why  we  are  not 
making  more  money,  more  progress,  more  solidity  of  position.    (J,  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-9.  Joshua  .  .  .  fell  .  .  .  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord. — Jos'him''s  plea  before 
the  ark : — The  ark  was  the  centre  of  mercy  to  Israel,  and  the  glory  of  the  tabernacle, 
their  refuge  in  trouble,  their  security  in  danger,  and  their  deliverance  in  distress. 
Here  they  mourned,  and  made  supplication,  where  the  cause  only  could  be  kno^vn, 
where  relief  only  could  come.  From  hence  had  proceeded  all  their  pardons,  their 
conquests,  and  possessions.  But  for  the  ark  and  the  mercy-seat  above,  its  pro- 
pitiatory covering,  Israel  had  been  a  lost  people,  and  long  had  perished  in  want  or 
conflict.  No  such  seat  of  grace  and  habitation  of  mercy  in  Ai.  The  God  of  glory 
was  stiU  in  the  sanctuary  of  His  people,  though  an  accursed  thing  was  in  the  camp. 
And  where  but  to  God  in  Christ,  the  true  ark  of  the  covenant  and  token  of  His 
gracious  presence,  can  the  afflicted,  the  oppressed,  or  the  convicted  go  ?  This  is 
their  peculiar  privilege,  their  constant  need,  and  their  never-failing  resource.  The 
pleadings  of  Joshua  are  a  fine  specimen  and  example  of  a  true  supplicatory  spirit. 
It  was  before  the  ark,  that  grand  and  expressive  type  of  Christ.  Nothing  in  the 
worship  of  the  spiritual  sanctuary,  no  act  of  prayer  or  praise,  no  penitential 
pleadings  or  humiliations,  can  be  acceptable,  but  as  offered  in  the  name,  and 
through  the  mediation,  of  our  Divine  and  glorious  peace-maker,  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Though  the  fears  and  apprehensions  of  unbelief  mingle  some  infirmity  with  the 
pleadings  of  this  great  intercessor  for  Israel,  yet  there  is  impressive  beauty  and 
strength  in  his  expressions,  but  in  none  so  much  as  those  which  discover  a  mind 
tenderly  affected  for  the  glory  of  God,  the  honour  of  His  name,  and  the  prevalence 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

of  His  truth.  "What  wilt  Thou  do  unto  Thy  great  name  ?  "  Oh !  this  was  the  grand 
point,  the  highest  consideration,  and  beyond  which  pleading  could  not  go.  This 
failing,  no  other  could  avail.  And  still  here  is  all  the  force  of  pleading,  as  from  it 
all  the  cause  of  prevailing.  This  name,  with  all  its  glory  and  honour,  is  in  Christ 
known  to  the  Church  and  published  to  the  world,  a  name  ever  dear  to  God,  and 
dearer  than  a  thousand  worlds.  This  will  prevail  above  all  the  distresses  of  the 
Church,  all  the  triumphs  of  her  enemies.  Peace  and  pardon,  and  every  blessing  of 
providence,  grace  and  glory,  are  insured  to  the  believer,  so  that  he  who  rests  here 
can  never  perish  or  be  conquered.  {W.  Seaton.)  Deep  affliction : — When  Achilles 
heard  of  the  death  of  Patroclus  his  grief  was  so  great  that  he  cast  himself  on  the 
ground  as  one  that  could  not  be  comforted. 

"  With  both  his  hands  black  dust  he  gathers  now, 
Casts  on  his  head  and  soils  his  comely  brow, 
Foul  ashes  cling  his  perfumed  tunic  round. 
His  noble  form  lies  stretched  upon  the  ground." 

Here  we  have  a  grief  similarly  expressed,  but  more  pathetic  and  noble.  Joshua 
shows  here  again  that  he  was  a  perfect  leader.  In  all  the  affliction  of  the  people  he 
is  afflicted.  All  the  feeling  of  dismay  in  the  camp  is  concentrated,  as  it  were,  in 
him.  His  great  capacity  for  leadership  gives  him  greater  capacity  for  suffering. 
Thus  is  it  always.  He  who  is  most  interested  in  the  cause  of  Christ,  he  whose 
heart  is  most  enthusiastic,  will  be  most  cast  down  by  defeat.  The  man  whose  soul 
is  most  sensitive  to  sin,  most  fully  alive  to  the  commandments  of  God  and  the 
demands  of  truth,  has  the  keenest  sensibility,  and  therefore  suffers  most  in  a  region 
of  rebellion.  That  is  to  say,  the  more  real  spiritual  life  there  is  in  the  soul,  the 
more  suffering  must  there  be.  The  sorrow  of  Jesus  is  the  deepest  because  the  love 
of  Jesus  is  the  highest.  Joshua's  sorrow,  it  is  very  plain,  was  sincere  and  unfeigned. 
There  was  no  acting  here.  And  his  grief  was  as  unselfish  as  it  was  sincere.  His 
chief  sorrow  is  for  the  people.  Their  fate,  their  prospects,  are  his  chief  concern. 
Joshua's  perplexity  is  very  great.  This  indeed  is  the  biggest  element  in  his  trouble, 
and  two  parallel  questions  manifest  it — "  What  shall  I  say,  when  Israel  turneth 
their  backs  before  their  enemies  ?  "  (ver.  8),  and  "  What  wilt  Thou  do  unto  Thy  great 
name  ?  "  (ver.  9).  If  things  continue  as  they  are,  and  lead  to  their  natural  issues, 
"  What  shall  I  say?  What  wilt  Thou  do?"  I  have  a  difficulty  in  regard  to  my 
words.  I  have  a  difficulty  in  regard  to  Thy  ways.  What  shall  I  say  ?  What  con- 
clusion am  I  to  come  to  ?  What  construction  am  I  to  put  on  this  event  ?  Joshua 
makes  no  allowance  for  defeat.  The  chances  of  the  glorious  game  of  war  have  no 
place  in  his  reckoning.  Joshua  cannot  reconcile  this  defeat,  unimportant  though 
it  may  seem  to  some,  with  three  grand  facts  wherein  lay  his  chief  confidence.  The 
fact  of  the  Divine  presence — "  Is  God  with  us  after  all?  "  he  might  ask.  The  fact 
of  the  Divine  promise — "  Has  God  indeed  spoken  ?  "  The  fact  of  the  Divine  power 
— "Is  God  able  to  give  unbroken  victory?  "  The  sad  fact  of  defeat  seemed  to  go 
in  the  face  of  these  other  facts.  But  to  Joshua  these  other  facts  were  as  patent  as 
that  over  which  he  mourned ;  hence  his  consternation.  He  is  dumbfounded.  And 
surely  this  noble  sorrow,  this  believing  consternation  of  Joshua,  should  be  a  reproof 
to  many.  We  believe  that  there  are  individuals  and  congregations  who  would  be 
more  perplexed  and  confounded  by  a  spiritual  victory  than  by  a  spiritual  disaster. 
But  Joshua  had  a  second  question,  which  is  the  expression  of  a  still  deeper  cause 
of  perplexity.  His  first  question,  "  What  shall  I  say  ?  "  rose  from  his  faith  in 
God.  His  second  question,  "  What  wilt  Thou  do  unto  Thy  great  name?"  arose 
from  his  fidelity  to  God.  Thus  Joshua's  second  question  becomes  a  powerful  plea 
before  God,  commanding  His  attention  and  drawing  forth  a  reply.  And  it  is  well  to 
notice  here  for  our  encouragement  in  any  spiritual  emergency  that  in  the  very 
trouble  of  Joshua's  soul  there  exists  the  germ  of  good  hope.  Joshua,  just  because  he 
knows,  feels,  and  owns  his  trouble  before  God,  is  every  moment  helping  forward 
the  solution  of  the  difficulty.  To  know  that  we  are  beaten  may  be  a  bad  thing  in 
ordinary  warfare ;  hence  Napoleon's  complaint  against  the  British  troops  ;  but  it  is 
not  so  in  the  spiritual  fight ;  rather  is  it  essential  to  continued  success.  Let  us 
imitate  Joshua  in  his  godly  sorrow.  But  trouble  came  upon  Israel  as  well  as  upon 
their  leader.  As  a  single  grain  of  colouring  matter  will  tinge  gallons  of  water,  so 
one  sin  will  affect  a  whole  people.  Achan's  transgression  influenced  for  evil  the 
whole  of  that  nation.  His  little  leaven  leavened  the  whole  lump.  No  man  can 
confine  the  effects  of  any  sin  within  the  small  compass  of  his  own  personal  experi- 


CHAP,  vn.]  JOSHUA.  141 

ence.  Just  as  in  the  heart  of  a  rich  city  a  collection  of  sqnalid  and  filthy  dens  may 
spread  disease  and  death  in  its  finest  mansions,  so  the  wicked,  wherever  found, 
become  centres  of  spiritual  infection,  and  no  soul  near  them  is  safe  ;  hence,  just  as 
men  wisely  seek  in  self-defence  to  improve  the  physical  conditions  of  the  poorest 
dwellings,  so  should  we,  if  for  no  other  motive  than  the  preservation  of  our  own 
spiritual  health,  labour  in  all  directions,  and  in  every  possible  way,  to  improve  and 
elevate  the  masses.  And  If  this  principle  holds  in  the  body  politic,  much  more 
powerfully  does  it  manifest  itself  in  the  body  mystic,  i.e.,  the  Church  of  the  living 
God.  Here  the  influence  of  sin  is  most  acutely  and  quickly  felt.  Hence  the  con- 
stant care  that  should  be  manifested  in  casting  out  every  particle  of  the  leaven  of 
sin.  He  who  takes  heed  to  his  own  heart  and  life,  keeping  them  clean  and  pure  in 
the  sight  of  God,  edifies  the  brethren,  and  is  health  and  strength  and  joy  to  all 
the  body  of  Christ.  He  who  is  careless  and  sinful,  must,  like  Achan,  be  a  troubler 
of  the  house  of  God.  Yes,  and  he  himself  must  be  miserable.  What  joy  had 
Achan  in  all  his  ill-gotten  gains  ?  The  rust  of  gold,  like  some  strong  Satanic  acid, 
ate  into  his  soul,  to  his  unspeakable  torture.  Every  transgressor  sooner  or  later 
■will  find,  hke  Achan,  that  in  every  sin  lies  its  own  punishment,  and  therefore 
escape  is  impossible.  And  Achan's  act  had  an  evil  influence  upon  the  Canaanites 
as  well  as  on  himself  and  Israel.  The  effect  of  this  defeat  at  Ai  would  be  to  harden 
their  hearts,  to  make  them  persist  in  their  rebellion.  How  often  does  the  success 
of  the  wicked  turn  out  their  destruction.  Applying  these  things  to  the  work  of  the 
Lord  in  our  days,  we  are  reminded  by  the  effect  of  Achan's  sin  on  these  Canaanites 
of  the  evil  that  is  brought  on  the  world  through  the  unfaithfulness  of  professing 
Christians.  We  must  remember  that  not  only  the  honour  of  the  Master  and  the 
prosperity  of  the  Church  are  connected  with  our  faithfulness,  but  also,  to  no  incon- 
siderable extent,  the  spiritual  state  of  the  world  around.  Therefore  let  us  take  heed 
as  we  name  the  name  of  Christ  to  depart  from  all  iniquity,  and  perfect  holiness  in 
the  fear  of  the  Lord.     {A.  B.  Mackay.) 

Vers.  10-15.  Get  thee  up ;  wherefore  liest  thou  thus  upon  thy  face  7 — Get  thee 
up : — To  trust  God  is  manifestly  our  duty.  We  are  commanded  to  put  our  trust  in 
Him.  Trust  in  God  is  also  a  crowning  means  of  safety  and  prosperity.  Exceed- 
ingly great  and  precious  promises  are  made  to  confidence  in  God.  Watch  over  and 
cherish  your  trust  in  God.  Cherish  it  by  the  study  of  the  promises  of  your  God. 
Cherish  it  by  intercourse  with  God  ;  and  make  this  trust  in  God 'strong  by  giving  it 
plenty  of  work  to  do.  The  more  you  exercise  this  principle,  the  stronger  will  it 
become.  Trust  in  God  is  a  manifest  duty.  But  there  are  other  obligations.  We 
are  under  obligations  to  personal  exertion.  To  trust  is  one  duty ;  to  exert  ourselves 
is  another :  and  although  some  persons  would  think  that  these  two  things  caimot 
work  together,  they  not  only  can,  but  they  do  work  together  in  the  experience  and 
in  the  Ufe  of  every  man  who  is  really  walking  with  his  God.  Joshua,  as  you  know, 
was  leading  the  people  forward  to  the  entire  conquest  of  Canaan.  God  has  shown 
Israel's  captain  marvellous  deliverances,  and,  as  is  common  in  our  own  life,  after 
these  wonderful  deliverances  there  comes  a  check.  And  so  entirely  does  this  prostrate 
him,  that  God  his  helper  has  to  rebuke  him,  and  say  to  him  in  the  language  of 
rebuke,  "  Get  thee  up  :  wherefore  liest  thou  upon  thy  face  ?  "  Now,  it  strikes  me 
that  there  are  not  a  few  who  are  in  the  position  of  Joshua.  1.  In  the  first 
place,  there  is  the  doubter,  depressed  and  paralysed  by  his  doubts.  I  say  to 
that  man,  "  Get  up— get  thee  up,  and  inquire — get  thee  up,  and  caU  upon  God — 
get  thee  up  and  search  the  book  of  God — get  thee  up  and  think,  and  meditate — get 
thee  up  and  converse  with  sober,  intelligent,  wise,  kind-hearted,  Christhke  disciples." 
Follow  out  your  beliefs,  and  speak  of  that  which  you  know.  Then  deal  with  your 
doubts.  Do  not  let  these  doubts  tarry.  Do  not  let  them  become  normal  and 
constitutional.  Eegard  them  as  a  something  to  be  taken  away  from  your  heart  if 
possible.  2.  We  might,  also,  address  these  words  to  those  who  have  fainted  under 
the  struggles  of  life.  The  words  of  those  who  have  fainted  in  the  day  of  adversity 
are  such  words  as  these,  "  AH  things  are  against  me."  "  I  shall  one  day  fall  by  the 
hand  of  mine  enemy."  "  VerUy,  I  have  cleansed  my  heart  in  vain,  and  washed  my 
hands  in  innocency."  Well,  under  depressing  thoughts  like  these,  those  who  have 
become  weary  in  the  struggle  of  lite  sink  into  prostration  ;  and  we  say  to  such, 
"  Get  thee  up."  Out  of  most  troubles  there  is  a  present  way  of  escape,  and  a  future 
way  out  of  them  aU.  Your  trouble  may  he  poverty.  Why  conclude  that  God 
means  you  to  be  poor  all  your  days?  Get  up,  and  look  if  there  be  a  way  out  o' 
that  poverty.     Your  trouble  maybe  bodily  weakness  and  sickness.    Why  conclnd  • 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

that  you  are  to  be  an  invalid  all  your  days  ?    Get  thee  up,  and  look.    See  if  there  be 
a  way  of  escape  from  this  bodily  infirmity.     Out  of  many  of  our  troubles  there  is,  I 
say,  a  way  of  escape  ;  but  we  require  to  get  up,  and  to  look  for  the  way  of  escape.   All 
that  we  require  in  such  circumstances  is  strength  to  wait.     The  working  together  of 
the  various  events  of  life  is  of  course  a  process.     That  very  idea  of  working  together 
involves  a  succession  of  effects  and  of  results.    The  good  must  come.     3.  Perhaps, 
too,  there  is  that  class  of  person  known  by  the  common  name  of  backsUder.    It  is  a 
serious  thing  to  go  back.    But  the  man  who  has  gone  back  is  not  in  a  hopeless 
state.    He  ought  not  to  despair.    Thanks  be  to  God,  I  can  appeal  to  your  hope.    I 
can  in  the  name  of  God  say,  "Eeturn  unto  the  Lord,  and  He  will  return  to  you." 
He  will  heal  your  backsliding ;  He  will  love  you  freely  ;  He  will  be  as  the  dew  to 
you,  and  you  shall  revive  as  the  corn  and  grow  as  the  vine.     Only,  only,  return  to 
the  Lord,     4.  Those  who  are  hindered  and  disheartened  in  their  godly  enterprises, 
as  were  many  of  the  companions  of  Nehemiah,  in  connection  with  the  work  of 
rebuilding  the  city  and  rebuilding  the  temple.    Now  God  sent  Haggai  to  say  to 
the  people,  in  substance,  just  what  He  said  to  Joshua,  "  Get  thee  up ;  wherefore 
liest  thou  thus  upon  thy  face  ?  " — for  by  His  prophet  God  spake  thus  :  "  Is  it  time 
for  you  to  dwell  in  ceiled  houses  while  God's  house  lies  waste?  "     "Get  thee  up  : 
wherefore  liest  thou  upon  thy  face?"    Now,  just  see  that  self -prostration  and 
inertness  are  wrong.    For,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  God  who  speaks  to  us  thus :  "  Get 
thee  up"  ;  God,  whose  power  is  almighty;  God,  whose  resources  are  unsearchable 
riches ;  God,  who  is  ever  working  to  keep  us  up,  and  to  lift  us  up,  and  who,  when 
He  has  helped  us  ten  thousand  times,  has  His  hands  stretched  out  to  help  us  still ; 
God,  who  proffers  His  interposition  to  the  weak  and  to  the  needy.    And  He  speaks, 
observe,  to  our  will,  and  to  our  hearts.    By  the  use  of  these  words  He  is  seeking  to 
work  confidence,  resolution,  and  determination.     "  Get  thee  up."    He  is  appealing 
to  our  hopes,  that  He  may  comfort  us  by  hope.    There  is  no  evil  for  which  there  is 
no  remedy.    The  position,  therefore,  of  a  man  of  God  is  not  that  of  prostration. 
Even  when  he  is  confessing  his  sins,  his  position  is  not  that  of  prostration.    Pros- 
tration is  not  his  posture.    His  right  position  is  to  stand  up  like  a  man  before  God. 
Oh !  do  not  thus  lie  prostrate  on  your  faces.    Do  not  yield  to  your  despondency  and 
despair.    I  speak  to  you  men  of  God,  and  I  may  say  to  you,  "All  is  right.    All  is 
right  in  Heaven  concerning  you :  and  if  there  be  things  wrong  down  here.  Heaven 
can  set  them  right."    It  may  be,  too,  that  there  is  some  accursed  thing  that  is 
producing  your  present  perplexities  and  your  present  difficulties.    I  know  not  what 
that  accursed  thing  may  be.     Perhaps  it  is  sinful  trust  in  yourselves ;  perhaps  it  is 
undue   reliance   on   your   fellow-creatures;  perhaps   you   have   done   wrong   in 
endeavouring  to  obtain  an  instrumentaUty  to  assist  you  that  is  not  holy,  and  that  is 
not  heaven-approved.    What  the  accursed  thing  may  be  a  little  honest  inquiry  will 
soon  discover.    By  the  power  of  God,  I  say,  get  rid  of  it ;  but,  even  before  you  get 
rid  of  it,  get  up.    You  cannot  see  the  accursed  thing  while  you  are  thus  spiritually 
prostrate.     You  cannot  see  what  you  ought  to  do  while  you  are  thus  spiritually 
prostrate.    Whatever  may  be  the  cause  of  your  present  difficulty  and  depression,  it 
is  your  duty  to  get  up,  and  stand  before  God  upright  as  a  man.     (S.  Martin.) 
God's  voice  to  the  desponding : — I.  Despondency  sometimes  overtakes  the  greatest 
MEN.    1.  Examples :  Jacob,  Elijah,  David,  <fec.    2.  The  causes  of  despondency  are 
numerous:  remorse,  disappointment,  forebodings,  failure,  &c.    U.  Despondency 
MUST  BE  STRUGGLED  AGAINST:  "  Get  thco  up."    1.  Ecgrcts  for  the  past  are  useless. 
What  is  done  cannot  be  undone.    2.  There  is  urgent  work  to  do.    Eesolute,  earnest 
activity  is   required.    3.  Despondency  exhausts   strength  and  unfits    for    work. 
Despair  unstrings  nerves,  relaxes  muscles,  prostrates  energies.    4.  Effort  will  shake 
off  the  oppressive  load,  and  give  fresh  energy  to  your  soul.    (Homilist.)        Israel 
hath  Binned,  .  .  .  stolen  and  dissembled. — The  sinfulness  of  sin: — I.  The  suc- 
cessive STAGES  OF  BIN.    "  When  Achan  longed,  he  ought  to  have  resisted ;  when  he 
planned,  he  ought  to  have  stopped  before  taking ;  when  he  had  taken,  he  should 
have  cast  it  away  instead  of  stealing  ;  when  he  had  stolen,  he  should  have  freely 
confessed  it ;  and  when  it  was  buried  he  ought  to  have  dug  it  up  again."    II.  The 
AGGRAVATED  GUILT  OF  BIN.     1.  It  was  a  trausgressiou  of  righteousness:    "Israel 
hath  sinned."    2.  It  was  a  transgression  of  the  law  of  gratitude.    Achan  ignored 
the  covenant  altogether.    8.  It  was  a  transgression  of  God's  word :    "  Which  I 
commanded  them."     4.  It  was  the  transgression  of  good  faith.    Under  the  specific 
condition  of  not  touching  the  spoil,  the  victory  had  been  granted,  and  Achan  had 
"even  taken  of  the  cherem."     5.  It  was  a  transgression  of  honesty  and  truth: 
"  They  have  stolen  and  dissembled  also."    6.  It  was  a  transgression  of  Achan's  own 


CHAP,  vn.]  JOSHUA.  I45 

conscience.  Had  he  not  felt  it  wrong  to  put  the  devoted  things  "  among  his  own 
stuff,"  he  would  not  have  hidden  them.  III.  The  wide-keaching  evil  of  snj. 
IV.  The  connection  between  sin  and  unbelief.  Achan  had  no  real  faith— 1.  In 
Divine  omniscience.  Had  he  really  believed  that  God  saw  him,  he  could  not  have 
taken  of  the  spoil.  2.  In  Divine  punishment.  Had  he  been  convinced  that  he 
would  have  been  "  devoted,"  he  would  have  resisted  the  temptation.  3.  In  the 
Divine  Word.  To  disbelieve  in  the  punishment  was  to  disbelieve  Him  who  had 
threatened  to  destroy.  {F.  G.  Marchant.)  Secret  sin : — "We  have  a  mournful 
interest  in  sin.  Three  characteristics  of  sin  are  seen  in  Achan — 1.  Sin  is  secret* 
that  is,  from  men,  not  from  God.  2.  Sin  is  gradual.  Captivates  the  senses:  "I 
saw."  Captivates  the  desires :" I  coveted."  Captivates  the  soul:  "I  took."  3.  Sin 
is  the  herald  of  a  curse :  "  The  curse  of  the  Lord  is  in  the  house  of  the  wicked." 
Note  its  eiiects.  I.  On  Joshua— the  leadee.  1.  Changed  the  hero  into  a  coward. 
His  heart  became  as  water.  2.  Changed  the  man  of  faith  to  a  doubter  (ver.  7). 
3.  This  in  spite  of  his  Divine  call  and  his  great  ability.  So  secret  sin  affects  the 
leaders  of  the  Church  to-day.  II.  On  Iskabl — the  Church.  1.  Changed  victors 
into  victims.  They  fled  from  before  Ai.  Sin  is  weakness  as  well  as  wicked- 
ness. Sin  deters  the  progress  of  the  Church.  2.  This  in  spite  of  the  Divine 
covenant.  That  covenant  was  to  give  the  land  to  the  true  sons  of  Abraham — 
the  faithful :  "If  ye  be  willing  and  obedient,"  &c.  3.  This,  too,  in  spite  of 
previous  victory  at  Jericho.  They  won  at  Jericho,  for  they  were  all  sanctified. 
They  failed  at  Ai,  for  there  was  sin  in  the  camp.  One  secret  sinner  may  ruin 
a  Church's  worth.  HI.  On  Achan — the  sinner.  Did  not  sin  gain  for  him  much 
spoU?  Yes  —  and  more.  He  got  gold  and  brave  apparel,  but  he  also  got  for 
his  secret  sin — 1.  Public  shame.  2.  Public  punishment.  Sad  as  are  the  effects 
on  others,  the  secret  sinner  feels  them  most  of  aU.  The  remedy  is — 1.  Not  inactive 
grief:  "Wherefore  liest  thou  thus  upon  thy  face?"  (ver.  10).  2.  Active  search 
for  hidden  sin  (ver.  13).  3.  Entire  sanctification  of  all  (ver.  13).  {James  Dunk.) 
Secret  sin  discovered : — Sin  as  a  rule  is  committed  under  a  false  and  pernicious 
impression,  namely — (1)  That  it  will  never  be  known,  or  (2)  if  found  out,  in  some 
way  punishment  will  be  avoided.  If  sinners  did  not  deceive  themselves  on  these 
points  there  would  not  be  half  the  sin  in  the  world  there  is.  I.  There  is  and  cax 
be  no  secret  thing  in  God's  universe.  Every  sin,  though  no  human  eye  or  ear 
takes  cognisance  of  it,  is  seen  as  soon  as  conceived  by  the  all-seeing  eye.  That  sin 
a  secret  when  high  Heaven  knows  it  aU !  11.  There  is  in  sin  itself  the  element 
OF  EXPOSURE  AND  RETRIBUTION.  Sin,  Ukc  evcry  other  natural  and  moral  force,  works 
out  certain  results,  physical,  spiritual,  and  moral,  and  those  results  are  not  under 
man's  control ;  they  are  the  developments  of  law.  The  transgressor  is  impotent. 
He  cannot  stay  the  Almighty  Hand,  which,  by  means  of  the  law  of  cause  and  effect, 
has  its  firm  grip  upon  him.  He  is  no  longer  master  of  himself,  much  less  of  his 
secret.  And  a  thousand  influences  are  working  upon  him  and  closing  in  upon  him, 
all  tending  to  disclosure  and  final  retribution.  HI.  At.t.  the  laws  of  God's  universb 
are  put  in  requisition  to  expose  sin  and  bring  it  in  due  TIME  TO  punishment. 
1.  His  physical  laws.  They  even  cry  out  against  sin,  as  in  the  case  of  the  inebriate, 
the  glutton,  the  adulterer,  &c.  The  heavens  and  the  earth  conspire  to  track  and 
fasten  guilt  upon  the  murderer.  2.  His  moral  law.  Under  its  flashes  and  thunder 
peals  many  a  guilty  soul  has  quaked  and  been  driven  to  confession  or  suicide. 
Conscience,  echoing  God's  law,  makes  cowards  of  sinners ;  makes  life  an  insupport- 
able burden,  drives  them  from  home  and  makes  them  wanderers  on  the  earth,  as 
Cain  was.  3.  His  providential  law.  A  thousand  agencies  and  forces  are  set  to  work 
to  expose  and  punish  transgression  as  soon  as  it  is  committed.  Earth,  air  and 
water,  science,  art,  and  human  law,  all  furnish  evidence  to  point  out  and  convict 
the  criminal  and  bring  him  to  judgment.  (J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  The  ^punishment 
of  sin : — 1.  How  necessary  to  Christian  success  is  the  presence  of  God.  2.  When 
that  presence  is  withheld,  there  is  generally  a  cause.  3.  When  the  presence  of 
God  is  withheld,  the  Christian  should  be  humbled  and  make  inquiry  before 
God.  4.  Sin  is  the  cause  of  the  Divine  displeasure,  and  must  be  searched  out. 
5.  Mark  the  progress  of  sin.  He  who  parleys  with  sin  is  half-way  towards 
embracing  it.  6.  Behold  the  fatal  termination  of  sin.  (J.  G.  Breay,  B.A.) 
Sin  a  reproach  and  hindrance : — Sin,  that  accursed  thing  which  God  hates  is  a 
hindrance  and  a  reproach  to  any  people,  viewed  either  as  a  nation  or  as  individuals. 
I.  Let  us  look  at  the  sin  of  the  Jews,  as  a  nation,  in  persisting  to  despise  and 
BEjECT  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Now,  what  a  shame  and  reproach  are  the  Jews  exposed 
to  for  their  sin  in  rejecting  Christ,  the  anointed  of  God !    From  what  rich  blessings 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

also  are  they  excluded  in  consequence  of  their  not  admitting  Jesus  Christ  to  be  the 
Son  of  God  and  the  Saviour  of  the  world  1  What  an  accursed  thing,  too,  is  the  sin 
of  idolatry  to  any  nation  !  Those  people  who  are  ignorant  of  the  one  living  and 
true  God,  through  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  hath  sent,  and  who  are  bowing  down  to 
stocks  and  to  stones,  are  in  the  lowest  state  of  misery  and  degradation.  But  further. 
Those  nations  which  are  professedly  Christian  nations  aref  requently  seen  to  encourage 
some  great  evil,  which  operates  against  their  prosperity,  and  which  is  a  reproach  to 
them.  In  no  country  which  is  called  a  Chxistian  country  should  any  laws  be 
enacted  which  are  likely  to  be  detrimental  to  the  religion  of  Christ.  Now,  whenever 
this  is  the  case,  it  is  a  reproach  to  any  people,  and  a  great  hindrance  to  their 
prosperity  and  comfort.  II.  We  come  now  to  a  closer  application  of  oue  subject, 
AND  to  consider  IT  IN  REFERENCE  TO  INDIVIDUALS.  You  are  all  Christians  by 
profession.  But  remember,  "He  is  not  a  Jew  which  is  one  outwardly."  Are  ye 
living  in  the  commission  of  gross  sins  and  scandalous  vices,  while  ye  claim,  in  virtue 
of  your  baptism,  to  be  the  children  of  God,  and  heirs  according  to  the  promise?  Ye 
are  a  reproach  to  the  Lord's  people,  and  a  cause  to  them  of  much  sorrow  and 
anguish  of  heart.  Eemember  that  a  day  is  coming  when  He,  who  is  at  present 
waiting,  on  thy  true  repentance,  to  be  gracious  unto  thee  and  to  save  thee,  will 
appear  as  thy  terrible  adversary  to  destroy  thee.  But  further.  May  not  sin,  the 
accursed  thing,  in  some  degree  be  found  among  the  real  servants  of  God  as  well  as 
among  His  enemies  ?  How  important,  then,  and  necessary  is  it  that  believers 
should  be  continually  aiming  to  mortify  the  remains  of  inbred  corruption,  and  to  be 
fortifying  themselves  against  the  inroads  of  sin  by  following  after  righteousness  and 
holiness  of  life.  {W.Battershy,  M.A.)  Neither  will  I  be  with  you  any  more,  except 
ye  destroy  the  accursed  from  among  you. — God's  part  in  the  war: — I.  Success 
IN  WAR  IS  A  BLESSING  WHICH  IS  GIVEN  BY  GoD.  By  this  I  mean  that  it  does  not  depend 
only  on  the  armaments  which  are  fitted  out,  or  the  perfection  of  our  war  machinery, 
or  the  number  of  our  troops,  or  the  sagacity  of  our  leaders,  or  the  power  of  our 
enemy,  whether  we  shall  be  successful  in  the  end.  It  is  clearly  told  us  in  Scripture 
— so  clearly  that  there  is  no  excuse  for  the  man  who  disbelieves  it — that  God  keeps 
the  ultimate  results  of  war  entirely  in  His  own  hand.  Perhaps  there  is  no  other 
department  of  human  affairs  in  which  Jehovah  has  so  frequently  in  Scripture 
asserted  His  prerogative  as  that  of  war.  "  The  race  is  not  to  the  swift,  nor  the 
battle  to  the  strong."  And  once  more  we  find  that  Jehovah  retains  for  Himself  the 
name  of  Commander  over  all  the  armies  of  the  earth.  H.  So  long  as  we  cherish 
BIN,  WE  CANNOT  EXPECT  GoD  TO  GRANT  US  SUCCESS  IN  WAR.  I  do  not  mean  to  Say 
that  success  is  always  given  to  the  holiest — that  victory  is  the  guarantee  of  rectitude 
and  defeat  the  sign  of  sin ;  for  God  ofttimes  tries  His  people  by  afflictions,  and 
pei-mits  the  wicked  for  a  time  to  prosper.  We  are  not  sufficient  judges  of  these 
things.  But  the  only  ground  on  which  we  can  well  expect  the  blessing  of  success 
from  God  is,  surely,  that  of  walking  uprightly  before  Him ;  and  when  we  cherish 
Bin  wilfully  and  consciously  within  our  breasts,  neither  this  nor  any  other  blessing 
can  we  expect  Jehovah  to  bestow  upon  us.  It  was  the  sin  of  one  man  in  the  camp. 
It  is  the  same  with  us.  For  public  and  national  sins  we  are  indeed  called  to  mourn 
this  day.  They  form  a  long  black  roU.  They  are  too  many  for  enumeration.  But 
we  have  also  our  private,  our  individual  sins  to  mourn.  They  are  concerned  in  our 
disasters.  There  has  been  a  vainglorious  boasting — a  self-sufficient  confidence  in 
the  prowess  of  our  soldiers,  and  the  irresistible  force  of  our  arms,  as  if  we  could  not 
fail.  We  thought  we  were  presenting  to  the  world  an  unequalled  spectacle.  We 
have  not  been  relying,  as  a  nation,  upon  the  help  and  sufficiency  of  Jehovah.  Until 
we  come  to  a  more  fitting  state  of  heart — tUl  our  self-confidence  be  less — till  our 
recognition  of  Jehovah  be  more — tiU  we  feel  that  we  are  less  than  nothing  and 
vanity — till  we  feel  that  all  our  sufficiency  is  of  God — we  can  by  no  means  look  that 
the  Omnipotent  should  scatter  our  foes  before  us  and  humble  them  in  the  dust. 
{J.  E.  Gumming,  D.D.)  Covetousness  in  the  Church : — I.  A  heinous  transgression 
WAS  COMMITTED.  Some  pursue  the  acquisition  of  wealth  with  quiet  plodding  industry, 
not  appearing  to  be  the  subjects  of  much  excitement,  but  associating  greediness  with 
vrariness  and  caution,  never  permitting  themselves  to  swerve  from  the  contemplation 
of  the  end,  or  the  employment  of  the  means  for  attaining  to  it.  Others,  again,  in 
the  emphatic  language  of  Scripture,  have  "  hasted  to  be  rich."  The  appetite  has 
been  suddenly  and  uncontrollably  kindled,  either  by  a  combination  of  internal 
suggestions  or  by  the  fatal  facilities  and  opportunities  which  of  late  have  been  so 
signally  multiplied.  It  must,  however,  here  be  remembered  that  there  are  other 
forms  of  covetousness  besides  that  which  consists  in  the  craving  and  the  pursuit  of 


CHAP,  vn.]  JOSHUA.  145 

wealth.  The  love  of  fame,  the  love  of  power,  and  the  love  of  sensual  pleasure — all 
these  constitute  covetousness ;  and  such  covetousness  also  we  conceive  to  have 
intruded  itself  much  into  the  hearts  of  the  professing  people  of  God.  II.  A  mournful 
CONSEQUENCE  WAS  iNCUEBED.  1.  Obseivc  the  conscqucnce,  as  relating  to  the 
individual  himself.  God,  by  virtue  of  His  essential  omniscience,  was  aware  of  the 
perpetration  of  the  sin ;  notwithstanding  its  concealment  He  saw  it  done,  and  He 
instantly  arranged  a  series  of  events,  by  which,  in  the  most  impressive  manner, 
there  might  be  immediate  detection,  and  then  condign  and  adequate  punishment. 
There  is  nothing  but  what  is  naked  and  manifest  before  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom 
we  have  to  do  ;  and  as  God  knows  the  sin,  so  also  God  punishes  the  sin.  Sometimes 
He  punishes  covetousness,  when  it  is  remarkably  revolting  in  its  operations,  by 
judgments  similar  to  the  one  which  is  recorded  here — the  abrupt  termination  of 
life,  either  by  the  hands  of  men  or  by  judgments  from  His  own  power,  which 
cannot  be  misapprehended  or  mistaken.  Or,  frequently,  God  punishes  covetousness 
by  mental  anxiety  and  dissatisfaction ;  by  the  loss  of  that  for  which  they  have  craved, 
so  that  it  becomes  to  them  as  though  it  had  never  been ;  by  social  disgrace,  contempt 
and  dishonour ;  by  the  ruin  of  bodily  and  intellectual  health,  and  by  an  abandon- 
ment to  remorse  and  despair.  Always  God  punishes  covetousness,  when  it  constitutes 
and  is  cherished  to  the  last  as  a  master  passion,  by  an  exclusion  from  His  favour, 
and  from  the  abodes  of  His  celestial  glory.  Ye  professing  Christians  see  to  it  that, 
under  the  cloak  of  your  religion,  you  hide  nothing  and  cherish  nothing  of  a  spirit 
which  is  deadly  wherever  it  is  indulged.  And  let  us  all  endeavour,  with  constant 
anxiety,  to  remember  that  "  God  will  not  be  mocked  "  ;  and  that  "  it  is  a  fearful 
thing  "  to  fall  into  His  hands.  2.  Again,  we  are  also  to  trace  the  consequences,  as 
relating  to  the  community  to  which  the  individual  belonged.  For  important  reasons, 
the  welfare  of  the  whole  people  of  Israel  was  affected  by  the  individual  transgression. 
You  will  now  be  prepared  for  the  statement  we  have  simply  to  advance — that  the 
prosperity  of  the  Christian  Church  has  been  much  checked,  and  that  its  progress 
has  been  grievously  retarded,  by  the  covetousness  and  by  the  worldly  conformity  of 
those  who  have  professed  to  be  connected  with  it.  III.  A  momentous  duty  was 
EEQUiEED.  It  was  that  the  people  should  "  put  away  the  accursed  thing  "  from 
them.  1.  There  is  comprehended  here  uncompromising  separation  from  all  that  is 
polluted  and  pernicious.  2.  There  must  also  be  devoted  engagement  in  direct  effort 
for  the  advancement  of  the  Divine  glory.  There  ought  to  be,  throughout  the  whole 
of  the  Christian  Church,  one  spirit  of  devoted,  unwearied,  and  incessant  activity  in 
the  proclamation  of  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.  And,  in  connection  with 
personal  labour,  there  must  be  pecuniary  contribution.  The  property  which  has 
been  vouchsafed  to  man  as  a  stewardship  is  to  be  taken  away  from  the  service  of 
mammon,  and  devoted  to  the  service  of  the  Saviour,  is  to  be  taken  away  from  the 
service  of  Satan  and  devoted  to  the  service  of  God,  and  of  souls,  and  of  salvation. 
There  must  also  be  prayerfulness — incessant  and  persevering  prayerf ulness — prayer 
involving  matters  as  wide  as  the  universe  can  supply ;  that  our  own  souls  may  be 
spiritually  established,  and  may  prosper  ;  that  the  souls  of  our  fellow-saints  may  be 
aroused,  revived,  and  preserved.     (James  Parsons.) 

Vers.  16-19.  Achan  .  .  .  was  taken. — Achan'ssin: — 1.  Look  at  it  in  itself .  It  was 
sacrilege — a  robbing  God  of  what  He  had  directed  to  be  devoted  to  His  glory  and 
appropriated  to  the  use  of  His  sanctuary.  2.  View  it  in  its  circumstances.  It  was 
committed  immediately  after  the  offender,  together  with  the  rest  of  the  people  of 
Israel,  had  solemnly  renewed  their  dedication  to  God  in  the  ordinances  of  circum- 
cision and  the  Passover,  and  after  the  most  signal  display  of  almighty  power;  and 
it  was  committed  when  God  had  declared  that  the  person  who  should  be  found 
guilty  of  such  a  sin  should  be  accursed.  3.  Look,  too,  at  Achan's  sin  in  its  effects. 
In  consequence  of  it,  God  had  withdrawn  His  favour  and  His  help  from  His  people ; 
they  had  sustained  a  humiliating  defeat,  in  which  six-and-thirty  of  their  number 
had  been  slain ;  and  had  the  sin  not  been  punished,  it  would  have  procured  the 
destruction  of  the  whole  nation.  {W.  Gardall,  B.A.)  Achan's  tresjjass  : — A 
vessel  in  full  sail  scuds  merrily  over  the  waves.  Everything  betokens  a  successful 
and  delightful  voyage.  The  log  has  just  been  taken,  marking  an  extraordinary 
run.  The  passengers  are  in  the  highest  spirits,  anticipating  an  early  close  of  the 
voyage.  Suddenly  a  shock  is  felt,  and  terror  is  seen  on  every  face.  The  ship  has 
struck  on  a  rock.  Not  only  is  progress  arrested,  but  it  will  be  a  mercy  for  crew  and 
passengers  if  they  can  escape  with  their  lives.  Not  often  so  violently,  but  often  as 
really,  progress  is  arrested  in  many  a  good  enterprise  that  seemed  to  be  prospering 

10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

to  a  wish.  There  may  be  no  shock,  but  there  is  a  stoppage  of  movement.  The 
vital  force  that  seemed  to  be  carrying  it  on  towards  the  desired  consummation 
decUnes,  and  the  work  hangs  fire.  In  all  such  cases  we  naturally  wonder  what  can  be 
the  cause.  And  very  often  our  explanation  is  wide  of  the  mark.  In  religious  enter- 
prises we  are  apt  to  fall  back  on  the  sovereignty  and  inscrutability  of  God.  "  He 
moves  in  a  mysterious  way,  His  wonders  to  perform."  It  seems  good  to  Him,  for 
unknown  purposes  of  His  own,  to  subject  us  to  disappointment  and  trial.  We  do 
not  impugn  either  His  wisdom  or  His  goodness  ;  all  is  for  the  best.  But,  for  the 
most  part,  we  fail  to  detect  the  real  reason.  That  the  fault  should  he  with  ourselves 
is  the  last  thing  we  think  of.  We  search  for  it  in  every  direction  rather  than  at 
home.  It  was  an  unexpected  obstacle  of  this  kind  that  Joshua  now  en-  entered  in 
his  next  step  towards  possessing  the  land.  Hitherto  Joshua  had  been  eminently 
successful,  and  his  people  too.  Not  a  hitch  had  occurred  in  all  the  arrangements. 
The  capture  of  Jericho  had  been  an  unqualified  triumph.  It  seemed  as  if  the 
people  of  Ai  could  hardly  fail  to  be  paralysed  by  its  fate.  The  men  of  Israel  were 
not  prepared  for  a  vigorous  onslaught,  and  when  it  came  thus  unexpectedly  they 
were  taken  aback  and  fled  in  confusion.  As  the  men  of  Ai  pursued  them  down  the 
pass,  they  had  no  power  to  rally  or  retrieve  the  battle  ;  the  rout  was  complete,  some 
of  the  men  were  killed,  while  consternation  was  carried  into  the  host,  and  their 
whole  enterprise  seemed  doomed  to  failure.  And  now  for  the  first  time  Joshua 
appears  in  a  somewhat  humihating  light.  He  is  not  one  of  the  men  that  never 
make  a  blunder.  He  rends  his  clothes,  falls  on  his  face  with  the  elders  before  the 
ark  of  the  Lord  till  even,  and  puts  dust  upon  his  head.  There  is  something  too 
abject  in  this  prostration.  And  when  he  speaks  to  God,  it  is  in  the  tone  of  com- 
plaint and  in  the  language  of  unbelief.  Like  Peter  on  the  waters,  and  like  so  many 
of  ourselves,  he  begins  to  sink  when  the  wind  is  contrary,  and  his  cry  is  the 
querulous  wail  of  a  frightened  child !  After  all  he  is  but  flesh  and  blood.  Now  it 
is  God's  turn  to  speak.  "  Get  thee  up  ;  wherefore  liest  thou  thus  upon  thy  face  ?  " 
Why  do  you  turn  on  Me  as  if  I  had  suddenly  changed,  and  become  forgetful  of  My 
promise?  Then  comes  the  true  explanation — "Israel  hath  sinned."  Might  you 
not  have  divined  that  this  was  the  real  cause  of  your  trouble?  Is  not  sin  directly 
or  indirectly  the  cause  of  all  trouble  ?  What  a  curse  that  sin  is,  in  ways  and  forms, 
too,  which  we  do  not  suspect !  And  yet  we  are  usually  so  very  careless  about  it. 
How  little  pains  we  take  to  ascertain  its  presence,  or  to  drive  it  away  from  among 
us  1  How  little  tenderness  of  conscience  we  show,  how  little  burning  desire  to  be 
kept  from  the  accursed  thing !  And  when  we  turn  to  our  opponents  and  see  sin  in 
them,  instead  of  being  grieved,  we  fall  on  them  savagely  to  upbraid  them,  and  we 
hold  them  up  to  open  scorn.  How  little  we  think,  if  they  are  guilty,  that  their  sin 
has  intercepted  the  favour  of  God,  and  involved  not  them  only,  but  probably  the 
whole  community  in  trouble  I  How  unsatisfactory  to  God  must  seem  the  bearing 
even  of  the  best  of  us  in  reference  to  sin !  The  peculiar  covenant  relation  in  which 
Israel  stood  to  God  caused  a  method  to  be  fallen  on  for  detecting  their  sin  that  is 
not  available  for  us.  The  whole  people  were  to  be  assembled  next  morning,  and 
inquiry  was  to  be  made  for  the  dehnquent  in  God's  way,  and  when  the  individual 
was  found  condign  punishment  was  to  be  inflicted.  The  tribe  is  taken,  the  family 
is  taken,  but  that  is  not  all ;  the  household  that  God  shall  take  shall  come  "  man  by 
man."  It  is  that  individuaUsing  of  us  that  we  dread ;  it  is  when  it  comes  to  that, 
that  "  conscience  makes  cowards  of  us  all."  But  before  passing  on  to  the  result  of 
the  scrutiny,  we  find  ourselves  face  to  face  with  a  difficult  question.  If,  as  is  here 
intimated,  it  was  one  man  that  sinned,  why  should  the  whole  nation  have  been 
dealt  with  as  guilty  ?  We  are  to  remember  that  practically  the  principle  of  solidarity 
was  fully  admitted  in  Joshua's  time  among  his  people.  The  sense  of  injustice  and 
hardship  to  which  it  might  give  rise  among  us  did  not  exist.  Men  recognised  it  as 
a  law  of  wide  influence  in  human  affairs,  to  which  they  were  bound  to  defer.  Let 
us  think  of  Achan's  temptation.  A  large  amount  of  valuable  property  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  Israelites  at  Jericho.  By  a  rigorous  law,  all  was  devoted  to  the  service 
of  God.  Now  a  covetous  man  like  Achan  might  find  many  plausible  reasons  for 
evading  this  law.  "  What  I  take  to  myself  (he  might  say)  will  never  be  missed. 
Nobody  will  suffer  a  whit  by  what  I  do— it  cannot  be  very  wrong."  Now  the  great 
lesson  taught  very  solemnly  and  impressively  to  the  whole  nation  was,  that  this  was  just 
awfully  wrong.  The  moral  benefit  which  the  nation  ultimately  got  from  the  trans- 
action was,  that  this  kind  of  sophistry,  this  flattering  unction  which  leads  so  many 
persons  ultimately  to  destruction,  was  exploded  and  blown  to  shivers.  That  sin  is 
to  be  held  sinful  only  when  it  hurts  your  fellow-creatures,  and  especially  the  poor 


CHAP.  TO.]  JOSHUA.  147 

among  your  fellow-creatures,  is  a  very  common  impression,  but  surely  it  is  a 
delusion  of  the  devil.  That  it  has  such  effects  may  be  a  gross  aggravation  of  the 
wickedness,  but  it  is  not  the  heart  and  core  of  it.  And  how  can  you  know  that  it 
will  not  hurt  others  ?  Not  hm-t  your  fellow-countrymen,  Achan  ?  Why,  that  secret 
sin  of  yours  has  caused  the  death  of  thirty-six  men  and  a  humiliating  defeat  of  the 
troops  before  Ai.  More  than  that,  it  has  separated  between  the  nation  and  God. 
Many  say,  when  they  tell  a  lie,  it  was  not  a  malignant  he  ;  it  was  a  lie  told  to  screen 
some  one,  not  to  expose  him,  therefore  it  was  harmless.  But  you  cannot  trace  the 
consequences  of  that  lie,  any  more  than  Achan  could  trace  the  consequences  of  his 
theft,  otherwise  you  would  not  dare  to  make  that  excuse.  Is  there  safety  for  man 
or  woman  except  in  the  most  rigid  regard  to  right  and  truth,  even  in  the  smallest 
portions  of  them  with  which  they  have  to  do  ?  Is  there  not  something  utterly  fear- 
ful in  the  propagating  power  of  sin,  and  in  its  way  of  involving  others,  who  are 
perfectly  innocent,  in  its  awful  doom  ?  Happy  they  who  from  their  earliest  years 
have  had  a  salutary  dread  of  it,  and  of  its  infinite  ramifications  of  misery  and  woe  1 
(W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.)  r  A  great  crime  : — I.  The  crime  of  Achan  was  marked  by 
DISOBEDIENCE.  And  the  remembrance  of  the  solemn  covenant  between  God  and  His 
people  rendered  the  disobedience  very  aggravated.  The  act  of  Achan  was  a  glaring 
breach  of  its  conditions.  U.  It  was  also  an  act  of  theft,  a  breach  of  the  eighth 
commandment.  There  was,  on  the  part  of  Achan,  a  definite  and  deliberate  breach 
of  trust ;  as  much  so  as  if  the  crime  had  been  embezzlement  or  forgery.  And  it  is 
very  plain  that  this  act  was  deliberately  planned  and  carried  out.  Achan's  action 
was  not  that  of  a  man  suddenly  overcome  by  temptation.  His  act  was  most 
deliberate.  It  was  also  inexcusable.  There  was  no  pressing  want  or  demand  upon 
him  to  coerce  right  principle.  HI.  Deceit  also  characterised  Achan's  conduct.  So 
is  it  always.  Lying  and  stealing  are  twin  brothers,  inseparable.  The  words 
"committed  a  trespass"  might  be  more  literally  translated,  "deceived  a  deceit." 
The  whole  transaction  occurred  under  cover  of  a  cloud  of  guile.  He  not  only  stole, 
but  also  tried  hard  to  cover  his  offence  with  craft.  IV.  Achan's  conduct  also 
revealed  unbkotheeliness.  He  wished  in  an  underhand  way  to  get  the  better  of 
his  brethren,  and  that  was  bad  enough  ;  it  showed  how  utterly  selfish  he  was.  But 
he  had  also  been  warned  that  such  conduct  would  be  visited  not  only  on  the  per- 
petrator himself,  but  on  all  the  people  (chap.  vi.  18).  Accordingly  his  act  was  un- 
brotherly  and  unpatriotic.  The  real  enemy  of  God's  people  is  not  opposing  strength 
but  inner  corruption ;  not  the  quibbles  of  the  infidel  but  the  carelessness  of  the 
Christian.  Achan's  wedge  of  gold  was  a  more  formidable  weapon  against  Israel 
than  all  the  swords  of  the  ahens.  The  grand  lessons  here  taught  are,  that  while  the 
holy  are  invincible,  the  defiled  must  be  defeated ;  and  "  He  that  is  greedy  of  gain 
troubleth  his  own  house."  Y.  Still  further,  Achan's  conduct  revealed  ingkatitude. 
And  this  was  all  the  more  sad,  because  Jehovah  was  no  hard  master,  eager  to 
gather  all  to  Himself  and  leave  His  servants  as  little  as  possible.  Each  of  them 
will  have  plenty  in  good  time.  There  is  sufficient  for  each  and  all,  and  for  their 
children  after  them.  Surely  He  may  well  demand  the  firstfruits  as  His  due. 
VI.  Achan's  deed  betokened  uipiety.  It  was  the  act  of  a  godless  heart.  Could 
Achan  have  believed  that  God  spoke  true,  when  He  warned  the  army  of  the 
evil  that  would  come  upon  them  if  they  disobeyed  His  command  ?  Nay,  he  did 
not  believe  the  Divine  word.  Neither  did  he  believe  in  the  Divine  knowledge. 
Whom  did  Achan  conceive  the  God  of  Israel  to  be  ?  One  hke  the  blind  and  deaf 
deities  of  Canaan — a  god  who  could  not  see  and  understand.  His  act  was  an 
invasion  of  God's  rights  before  His  very  face  ;  the  alienation  of  His  property  under 
His  very  eyes ;  the  devoting  to  private  use  that  which  He  had  devoted  to  His  glory, 
and  therefore  it  amounted  to  daring  and  impudent  sacrilege.  Is  such  a  sin  aa 
Achan's  extinct  ?  Is  there  no  unjust  getting  in  these  days  ?  no  "  getting  of 
treasures  by  a  lying  tongue  "  ?  Is  there  no  undue  grasping  in  these  days  ?  Has  God 
no  claim  on  any  portion  of  what  we  possess?  {A.  B.  Mackay.)  Found  out: — 
One  man  spoiled  the  unity,  spoiled  the  success.  It  is  put  in  plain  English  :  for  the 
sin  of  one  man  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Israel,  and  they  all 
suffered.  For  that  unity,  that  solidarity,  is  a  reality  far  more  than  we  think.  God 
counts  a  great  deal  upon  it.  If  one  member  suffer,  the  whole  body  suffers.  If 
there  is  health,  there  is  general  health.  If  there  is  sickness,  we  are  all  enfeebled 
and  hurt  by  that  sickness.  It  is  somewhat  like  what  takes  place  in  connection  with 
our  electric  telegraph  system.  Messages  and  communications  are  flying  to  and 
fro,  say,  between  the  different  parts  of  an  army  in  a  foreign  country  engaged  in  a 
foreign    campaign,   one    being    in    complete    accord   and    close    communication 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

with  the  other,  when  suddenly  there  is  a  breakdown.  Suddenly  the 
generals  in  each  host  cease  to  be  able  to  communicate  with  each  other. 
United  movement  is  impossible :  united  counsel  is  impossible.  Why  ?  Because, 
at  some  one  place  the  enemy,  by  means  of  a  spy,  has  tapped  the  wire  ;  and  aU  this 
communication  of  theirs  is  being  turned  not  for  them,  but  against  them.  At  some 
place  the  wire  is  tapped  and  the  communication  is  taken  off  and  is  used  by  the 
enemy.  So  with  Israel.  At  one  point  the  tide  of  the  Spirit's  power  that  was 
circulating  through  them  all  was  deflected.  By  one  unfaithful  man  the  whole  tide 
of  God's  energy  was  shed  helplessly  down  to  the  earth.  The  problem  on  that  day 
was  this.  There  was  one  man  who  had  broken  the  chain.  A  leakage  was  taking 
place  at  one  point,  at  one  particular  man,  an  ordinary  man,  a  man  who  but  for  his 
sin  would  never  have  been  heard  of  in  the  world.  Oh,  see  how  staring,  glaring, 
conspicuous  a  man  becomes  by  sin  ;  not  by  cleverness,  not  by  intellectuality,  not 
by  wealth,  not  by  culture,  not  by  rank,  not  by  wearing  clothes,  and  taking  positions, 
but  by  this  dirty  thing — sin.  Sin  makes  a  man  conspicuous  who  otherwise,  as  I 
have  said,  would  not  have  been  heard  of — an  ordinary  man  in  the  ranks  of  men. 
There  is  that  missing  link ;  there  is  that  break ;  there  is  that  leakage ;  there  is 
that  sinner.  The  problem  is,  how  to  find  him  out — how  to  have  the  damage 
repaired,  how  to  have  that  man  detected,  and  either  put  right  or  put  out.  And 
the  problem  is  intensified  thus.  The  man  knows  what  he  has  done,  and  the  man 
will  not  tell.  We  have  the  same  thing  still.  This  accursed  thing  is  in  us,  namely, 
that  our  heart  shall  depart  from  the  living  God  ;  our  heart  shall  forget  its 
purpose ;  our  heart  shall  turn  aside  to  sin,  and  outwardly  we  shall  brazen  it  out 
with  our  very  Leader  and  defy  Him,  and  deny  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  that  we 
are  responsible— that  the  blame  Hes  at  our  door.  There  was  no  confession.  The 
Lord  was  not  helped  in  the  least.  He  had  to  take  judgment  in  hand.  Joshua  was 
nonplussed;  and  if  God  Himself  had  not  come,  Israel's  history  as  a  successful 
people  would  have  come  to  a  close  at  this  very  point.  We  talk  in  our  homely 
proverb  of  the  difficulty,  the  impossibility,  of  finding  a  needle  in  a  haystack.  That 
familiar  phrase  receives  a  moral  illustration  here.  What  God  has  to  do  is  to  find 
out  the  one  sinner  among  these  assembled  thousands,  when  he  is  keeping  as  dark 
as  the  grave.  God  could  have  come  and  simply  taken  that  unclean  thing,  Achan. 
He  could  have  taken  him  "  neck  and  crop  "  without  all  this  process.  God  could 
have  gone  straight  to  him,  and  put  His  hand  upon  his  shoulder,  and  hurled  him 
out  into  the  outer  darkness  at  once.  Why  take  all  this  time — tribe  by  tribe,  family 
by  family,  man  by  man  ?  Surely  that  was  mercy.  That  was  in  Achan's  interest. 
He  gave  the  poor,  infatuated  fool  time,  space,  place,  room  to  repent ;  and  as  he 
saw  Nemesis  evidently  on  his  track  he  had  time  to  cast  himself  down  before  Joshua, 
and  to  exclaim,  "  Stop !  I  confess !  I  am  the  man."  Had  he  done  so,  this  story,  I 
am  convinced,  would  have  been  one  of  the  brightest  stories  of  mercy  in  God's  book, 
instead  of  one  of  its  darkest,  almost  without  a  ray  of  light.  Achan  was  taken. 
That  same  God  is  the  God  of  the  New  Testament  Church.  I  do  not  know  how  it 
may  be  with  you  :  but  this  is  the  kind  of  preaching  I  was  brought  up  under,  and  I 
have  seen  no  reason  to  turn  from  it — a  God  of  inflexible  righteousness  and  holiness, 
who  wiU  not  allow  sin  to  go  unpunished.  Now  do  not  stand  up  blatantly  and  ask 
whether  I  have  ever  heard  of  the  Gross  and  the  New  Testament.  I  have  been  to 
the  Cross.  This  story  is  intensified  by  the  Cross.  At  the  Cross  we  behold  at  once 
the  goodness  and  the  severity  of  God.  At  the  Cross  we  learn  the  exceeding  sinful- 
ness of  sin,  the  dazzling,  blinding  holiness  of  God,  as  well  as  the  mercy  that  is 
intershot  through  all.  Sin  is  no  metaphysical  abstraction.  It  is  not  a  mere 
arrangement  of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet.  It  is  not  a  mere  thing  of  theology  or  of 
philosophy.  It  is  a  deep,  dark,  abominable  thing  found  in  the  hearts  of  men ;  and 
if  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sinned,  how  shall  He  spare  us  ?  No,  it  was  no 
exaggeration.  It  was  no  "trouble  for  nothing."  It  was  no  mere  cry.  God  was 
justified.  There  was  a  stone  in  the  machine,  and  God  found  out  the  stone  and 
took  it  away ;  and  then  the  wheels  ceased  to  grate  and  jar  and  move  heavily. 
There  is  a  stone  in  the  machine  yet,  in  the  moral  machinery  of  God's  Church  and 
of  God's  world.  I  may  be  that  stone,  and  I  may  be  concealing  what  I  am — con- 
cealing it  behind  the  profession  of  the  ministry,  concealing  it  behind  preaching  to 
you  on  this  very  subject.  You  may  be  concealing  it  behind  the  office  of  the  elder. 
You  may  be  concealing  it  behind  a  great  anxiety  to  keep  the  table  of  the  Lord  and 
the  communion  roll  pure  ;  and  I  say  that  this  is  needful,  and  it  is  a  good  sign  and 
a  good  thing  that  the  Church  should  conserve  and  be  anxious  about  her  purity 
before  God  and  man ;  and  yet  it  may  be  part  of  the  dress  that  we  put  on,  to  look  as 


CHAP.  VII.]  JOSHUA.  149 

Achan  looked.  For  while  the  judgment  processes  were  going  on  Achan,  very  likely, 
held  up  his  head  and  looked  round.  "  It  is  not  I,  at  any  rate  "  ;  and  the  nearer  it 
came  the  more  brazen  he  looked  ;  "  It  is  not  I."  So  our  very  scrupulosity  and  care 
in  connection  with  God's  house  and  book  and  day  may  belong  to  the  Pharisee 
within  us,  the  Achan,  the  hypocrite.  God  Almighty  alone  could  have  detected  this 
man,  and  God  Almighty  Himself  had  to  take  the  judgment  work  in  hand.  I  am 
speaking  to  Achan  here,  and  I  want  to  let  you  know  that  you  will  get  aU  you  are 
working  for.  The  day  comes  when  the  sweet  gales  of  mercy  no  longer  shall  blow — 
when  you  will  hear  no  more  about  cleansing  blood — when  there  will  be  nothing  but 
"  a  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  of  fiery  indignation  that  shall  devour  the 
adversaries  " — when  your  sin  shall  be  proved  on  you,  and  in  you,  and  to  you,  and 
before  an  assembled  world,  with  no  chance  for  ever  of  getting  its  curse  and  its 
power  lifted  away.  It  is  coming.  God  will  here  lead  us  now  to  confession, 
or  there  to  too  late  confession  and  doom  beyond  remedy.  (John  McNeill.) 
Achan  a  representative  man: — There  is  nothing  old  in  these  words.  Achan  is 
"taken"  every  day.  Achan  is  sure  to  be  "taken."  If  we  are  practising  the 
policy  of  Achan,  the  fate  of  Achan  we  can  never  avert.  What  a  representative 
man  is  Achan  I  Does  he  not  represent  those,  for  example,  who  are  con- 
tinually taking  great  risks  ?  What  a  life  some  men  lead  1  But  the  mystery 
of  it  is  that  Achan  represents  also  men  who  have  no  need  to  take  risks. 
They  have  plenty;  they  have  sweet  homes.  They  need  not  go  out  of  their 
own  doors  for  a  single  pleasure.  Yet  they  covet  just  a  little  more  :  it  is  only  one 
acre  to  complete  the  estate.  Achan  committed  a  sin  which  is  common  to  us  all,  in 
so  far  that  he  felt  it  extremely  difficult  to  subordinate  the  personal  to  the  communal. 
He  might  have  said — and  in  so  saying  he  would  have  talked  good,  round  English — 
"  What  can  a  wedge  of  gold  matter  in  all  this  great  heap  of  wealth  ?  What  is  the 
difference  one  Babylonish  garment  more  or  less  ?  Who  will  be  the  worse  for  my 
taking  it  ?  Nobody  need  know.  I  want  a  relic  of  this  event,  I  want  a  keepsake  ; 
this  has  been  a  very  wonderful  miracle,  and  I  want  to  keep  in  my  house  some 
memorial  of  it ;  I  could  turn  these  things  into  good,  moral  uses :  I  could  preach 
sermons  upon  them,  I  could  derive  lessons  from  them.  It  cannot  make  any  differ- 
ence where  thousands  of  men  are  concerned  if  I  take  one  wedge  of  gold,  two 
hundred  shekels  of  silver,  and  a  goodly  Babylonish  garment— they  are  all  but  a 
handful,  and  who  will  miss  them  ?  In  fact,  there  will  be  no  reckoning  ;  things  in 
connection  with  a  battle  are  done  so  tumultuously  and  so  irregularly  that  none  wiU 
ever  think  of  looking  up  such  a  handful  of  spoil  as  I  may  seize."  That  is  the 
exaggeration  of  individualism ;  that  is  the  lie  which  man  is  always  teUing  to  him- 
self. It  is  the  falsehood  which  enables  him  to  cheat  the  body  politic  :  "  What  can 
it  matter  if  I  do  not  vote  ?  There  are  thousands  of  people  who  want  to  vote,  let 
them  enjoy  themselves,  and  I  will  take  mine  ease.  What  can  it  matter  if  I  do  not 
keep  the  laws  of  the  company — the  municipal  or  other  company?  The  great 
majority  of  the  neighbours  will  keep  them,  and  as  for  any  little  infraction  of  them 
of  which  I  may  be  guilty,  it  is  mere  pedantry  to  remark  upon  it.  Who  cares  for  the 
body  politic — the  body  corporate  ?"  We  are  being  taught  to  respect  that  so-called 
abstraction ;  but  the  lesson  is  a  very  difficult  one  to  learn.  When  shall  we  come  to 
understand  fully  that  there  is  a  corporate  humanity,  a  public  virtue,  a  body  politic, 
with  its  responsibilities,  laws,  duties— a  great  training-school  in  which  individualism 
is  subordinated  to  the  commonwealth  ?  Does  not  Achan  represent  those  who  create 
unnecessary  mysteries  in  the  course  of  Divine  providence  ?  It  is  the  concealed  man 
who  could  explain  everything.  It  is  the  thief  behind  the  screen  who  could  relieve 
all  our  wonder,  perplexity,  and  distress.  We  have  to  search  him  out  by  circum- 
stantial evidence.  If  he  would  stand  up  and  say,  "  Guilty  ! "  he  would  relieve  our 
minds  of  many  a  distressing  thought  even  about  the  Divine  government.  We 
wonder  why  the  people  are  delayed,  why  the  battle  goes  the  wrong  way,  why  the 
heathen  pursues  the  chosen  man,  and  beats  him  down,  and  scorns  his  assaults.  We 
speak  of  God's  mysterious  way.  It  is  a  mistake  on  our  part.  The  silent  man, 
skulking  behind  the  arras,  could  explain  the  whole  affair,  and  relieve  Divine  provi- 
dence of  many  a  wonder  which  grows  quickly  into  suspicion  or  distrust.  Look  at  the 
case  in  one  or  two  remarkable  aspects.  1.  Consider  Achan,  for  example,  as  a  sohtary 
sinner.  He  was  the  only  man  in  the  host  who  had  disobeyed  the  orders  that  were 
given.  "  Why  arrest  a  whole  army  on  account  of  one  traitor  ?  Let  the  host  go  on." 
So  man  would  say.  God  wUl  not  have  it  so.  He  does  not  measure  by  our  scale. 
One  sin  is  a  thousand.  2.  Think  of  Achan  as  a  detected  sinner.  For  a  time  there 
was  no  prospect  of  the  man  being  found  out.    But  God  has  methods  of  sifting  which 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

we  do  not  know  of.  3.  Then  look  at  Achan  as  a  confessing  sinner.  He  did  confess 
Ms  sin,  but  not  until  he  was  discovered.  And  the  confession  was  as  selfish  as  the 
sin.  4.  The  picture  of  Achan  as  a  punished  sinner  is  appalling.  Who  punished 
the  sinful  man?  The  answer  to  that  inquiry  is  given  in  ver,  25,  and  is 
full  of  saddest  yet  noblest  meaning.  Who  punished  the  thief?  "  All  Israel  stoned 
him  with  stones " — not  one  infuriated  man,  not  one  particularly  interested 
individual,  but  "  all  Israel. "  The  punishment  is  social.  It  is  the  universe  that 
digs  hell— the  all  rising  against  the  one.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  My  son,  give, 
I  pray  thee,  glory  to  the  Lord. — Kindness  to  the  sinner: — There  was  infinite 
kindness  in  that  word  "  my  son."  It  reminds  us  of  that  other  Joshua,  the  Jesus  of 
the  New  Testament,  so  tender  to  sinners,  so  full  of  love  even  for  those  who  had  been 
steeped  in  guilt.  It  brings  before  us  the  great  High  Priest,  who  is  touched  with 
the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  seeing  He  was  in  all  things  tempted  like  as  we  are, 
yet  without  sin.  A  harsh  word  from  Joshua  might  have  set  Achan  in  a  defiant 
attitude,  and  drawn  from  him  a  denial  that  he  had  done  anything  amiss.  How 
often  do  we  see  this  !  A  child  or  a  servant  has  done  wrong  ;  you  are  angry,  you 
speak  harshly,  you  get  a  flat  denial.  Or  if  the  thing  cannot  be  denied,  you  get 
only  a  sullen  acknowledgment,  which  takes  away  all  possibility  of  good  arising  out 
of  the  occurrence,  and  embitters  the  relation  of  the  parties  to  each  other.  But  not 
only  did  Joshua  speak  kindly  to  Achan,  he  confronted  him  with  God,  and  called  on 
him  to  think  how  He  was  concerned  in  this  matter.  "  Give  glory  to  the  Lord  God 
of  Israel."  Vindicate  Him  from  the  charge  which  I  and  others  have  virtually  been 
bringing  against  Him,  of  proving  forgetful  of  His  covenant.  Clear  Him  of  all 
blame,  declare  His  glory,  declare  that  He  is  unsullied  in  His  perfections,  and  show 
that  He  has  had  good  cause  to  leave  us  to  the  mercy  of  our  enemies.  No  man  as 
yet  knew  what  Achan  had  done.  He  might  have  been  guilty  of  some  act  of  idolatry, 
or  of  some  unhallowed  sensuality  like  that  which  had  lately  taken  place  at  Baal- 
peor ;  in  order  that  the  transaction  might  carry  its  lesson  it  was  necessary  that  the 
precise  offence  should  be  known.  Joshua's  kindly  address  and  his  solemn  appeal 
to  Achan  to  clear  the  character  of  God  had  the  desired  effect.  {W.  G.  Blaikie, 
D.D.)  Confession  of  sin  to  God  : — God's  omniscience  should  indeed  make  us 
ashamed  to  commit  sin,  but  it  should  embolden  us  to  confess  it.  We  can  tell  our 
secrets  to  a  friend  that  does  not  know  them  ;  how  much  more  should  we  do  it  to 
Him  that  knows  them  already?  God's  knowledge  outruns  our  confessions  and 
anticipates  what  we  have  to  say.  As  our  Saviour  speaks  concerning  prayer,  '•  Tour 
heavenly  Father  knows  what  you  have  need  of  before  you  ask,"  so  I  may  say  of 
confession,  your  heavenly  Father  knows  what  secret  sins  you  have  committed 
before  you  confess.  But  still  He  commands  this  duty  of  us ;  and  that  not  to  know 
our  sins  but  to  see  our  ingenuity.  Adam,  when  he  hid  himself,  to  the  impiety  of  his 
sin  added  the  absurdity  of  a  concealment.  Our  declaring  of  our  sins  to  God  who 
knows  them  without  being  beholden  to  our  relation ;  it  is  like  opening  a  window  to 
receive  the  light  which  would  shine  in  through  it  howsoever.  Now  there  is  no 
duty  by  which  we  give  God  the  glory  of  His  omniscience  so  much  as  by  a  free  con- 
fession of  our  secret  iniquities.  Joshua  says  to  Achan,  "  My  son,  give,  I  pray  thee, 
glory  to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  and  make  confession  unto  Him."    (R.  South.) 

Vers.  20,  21.  Achan  answered  ...  I  coveted  and  took. — The  eye,  the  heart,  and 
the  hand  : — ^I.  The  eye  an  occasion  of  sin.  We  will  suppose  that  Achan  came  into 
contact  with  this  Babylonish  garment  in  the  course  of  his  duty.  He  could  not  help 
seeing  it,  and  therefore  there  was  no  harm  in  seeing  it ;  in  the  simple  contact  of  this 
garment  with  his  eye,  and  of  this  silver  and  gold  with  his  eye,  there  could  be  no 
wrong  ;  this  was  a  permission  of  Divine  Providence.  The  sin  was  in  the  looking  at 
it.  He  saw  ;  and  instead  of  turning  his  eye  away  from  the  temptation,  he  continued 
to  look,  and  he  looked  until  he  coveted,  and  he  coveted  until  he  took.  And  we  will 
suppose  that  you  cannot  help  seeing  things  which  suggest  the  thought  of  doing 
wrong,  and  which  excite  the  desire  to  do  wrong ;  but  you  can  help  fixing  your  eyes 
upon  them,  and  keeping  your  eyes  intent  upon  them.  II.  Maek  the  progress  of 
SIN.  It  was  an  evil  thing  to  continue  looking  ;  it  was  a  greater  evil  to  desire  to  take. 
The  desire  springing  up,  what  did  Achan  with  respect  to  it  ?  Instead  of  trying  to 
quench  it,  he  fed  it.  He  let  imagination  fly  and  work,  and,  under  the  influence  of 
that  imagination,  and  the  thinking  connected  with  that  imagination,  the  desire  to 
possess  this  garment,  and  to  lay  hold  of  this  silver  and  gold,  became  in  his  heart 
exceedingly  strong,  and  mastered  him.  Under  the  power  of  that  desire  he  stretched 
forth  his  hand  and  took.    Just  see  here  the  progress  of  the  sin — I  saw,  I  coveted,  I 


CHAP,  vn.]  JOSHUA.  151 

took ;  I  first  took  that  which  was  cloomed  to  be  destroyed,  and  then  I  took  that 
which  was  devoted  to  the  service  of  my  God.  III.  Look  at  the  deceitfulness  of 
SIN.  When  Achan  saw,  and  coveted,  and  took,  the  taking  promised  him  great 
things.  There  is  nothing  in  the  universe  so  deceitful  and  so  treacherous  as  doi^g 
wrong.  Doing  wrong  always  promises  some  good  result,  and  doing  wrong  has  never 
yet  realised  it,  nor  ever  can.  IV.  Look  at  the  cowardice  of  the  tbansgressob. 
He  hid  these  things.  He  first  put  them  among  his  furniture.  I  dare  say  he  thought 
that  there  would  be  no  notice  taken  of  it.  Then,  when  a  stir  is  made  about  the 
matter,  and  the  lot  begins  to  be  used,  what  did  he  ?  Instead  of  having  the  courage  and 
manliness  to  remove  suspicion  from  his  fellows,  and  to  say,  "  I  am  the  sinner,"  he 
hides  in  the  earth,  in  the  midst  of  his  tent,  the  treasures  and  the  garment  which  he 
has  taken.  This  seems  to  be  a  general  fact  in  connection  with  sin :  "  The  wicked 
fleeth  when  no  man  pursueth,  but  the  righteous  are  bold  as  a  Hon."    V.  Look  at 

THE  FOLLY  AND  THE    MADNESS    OF    PERSISTING   IN    TRANSGRESSION.       The    WagCS    of    siu, 

what  are  they?  You  see  this  illustrated  here.  "The  wages  of  sin  is  death." 
Achan,  instead  of  gaining  anything  by  this  transgression,  lost  all.  He  lost  not  only 
the  spoil  he  had  taken,  but  he  lost  even  life  itself.  Now  this  is  God's  arrangement, 
that  he  whose  transgressions  are  not  pardoned  shall  die,  and  shall  die  a  second 
death.  Tell  me,  then,  what  is  a  man  profited  if  he  gain  the  world,  and  die  that 
second  death?  (S.  Martin.)  Achanism ;  or,  self-seeking  a  hindrance  to  the  victories 
of  Christianity  : — I.  This  principle  applies  to  the  efforts  of  men  to  promote  their 
OWN  INDIVIDUAL  CHRISTIANITY.  It  is  common  to  hear  Christians  mourning  their 
spiritual  barrenness ;  regretting  their  little  progress  in  the  great  work  of  self- 
discipline  and  personal  sanctification.  They  refer  the  cause  sometimes  to  the 
circumstances  in  which  they  are  placed,  and  sometimes  to  the  profitless  ministry 
which  they  attend,  whereas  there  is  some  Achan  within — some  unholy  principle  or 
passion  that  is  neutralising  every  effort,  and  rendering  the  spirit  powerless  to  strike 
one  conquering  blow.  11.  This  principle  applies  to  the  efforts  which  individuaij 
Churches  make  to  promote  Christianity  in  their  own  neighbourhood.  Some 
sweeping  system  of  discipline  must  come  before  your  efforts  to  evangelise  will  be  of 
much  avail.  The  tares  must  be  plucked  from  the  wheat.  HI.  This  principle 
applies  to  the  efforts  which  the  general  Church  is  employing  to  promote  Chris- 
tianity throughout  the  world.  The  self-seeking  spirit  hinders  the  spread  of  the 
Gospel.  1.  By  preventing  that  agency  which  is  indispensable  for  the  purpose. 
Self-sacrifice.  2.  By  prompting  that  agency  which  must  necessarily  neutralise  its 
aim.     Priestcraft.     Slavery.     War.     {Homilist.)       Achan : — I.  The  gradual  peo- 

GEESS  OF  sin.  U.  ThE  DECEITFUL  NATUEE  OF  SIN  (Job  XX.  12-15;  Hab.  U.  11).  III. 
The  CERTAIN  DETECTION  OP  SIN.  IV.  ThE  AWFUL  PENALTY  OF  SIN.  V.  ThE  ONLY  WAY 
OF    FORGIVENESS    OP    SIN.        VI.    ThE    UNCERTAINTY    OF    A    LATER    REPENTANCE.         (T. 

Webster,  B.D.)  Sin's  progress  : — I.  The  glance:  "I  saw."  U.  The  greed  :  "I 
coveted."  in.  The  guilt  :  "  I  took."  (Thomas  Kelly.)  Achan's  sin : — I.  The 
fascination:  "  Babylonish  garment."  11.  The  feeling  :  "I  coveted."  IH.  The 
felony:  "I  took."  IV.  The  fear:  "I  hid  them."  V.  The  fate:  "Israel 
stoned  him."  {Ibid.)  Achan  and  his  sin  : — I.  The  tempting  sight  :  "  A  goodly 
Babylonish  garment," &c.  11.  The  covetous  heart  :  "I  coveted  them."  HI.  The 
grasping  hand  :  "  Took  them."  IV.  The  crafty  action  :  "  Hid."  V.  The 
JUDICIAL  SEARCH :  "  Joshua  sent,"  &c.  VI.  The  lawful  seizure  :  "  They  took 
them."  vn.  The  religious  ceremony  :  "  Laid  them  out  before  the  Lord."  VIH. 
The  merited  retribution  :  "  Stoned  him."  IX.  The  admonitory  memorial  : 
"  Eaised  over  him  a  great  heap  of  stones."  X.  The  appeased  Avenger  :  "  So  the 
Lord  turned,"  &c.  {J.  Henry  Bum,  B.D.)  Achan's  sin : — God,  who  looks  deeply 
into  the  hidden  springs  of  human  conduct,  is  careful  to  lay  a  special  emphasis  upon 
the  more  subtle  evil  of  covetousness.  It  deserves  attention  that,  along  with  murder, 
theft  and  lying,  it  has  one  entire  commandment  to  itself.  Drunkenness,  violence, 
sensuality,  luxurious  living,  corruption  and  bribery  are  doubtless  making  havoc 
with  reputations,  with  human  life  and  with  immortal  souls.  But  who  shall  say 
how  often  these  open  vices  draw  their  inspiration  or  the  means  of  gratification  from 
"  the  love  of  money,  which  is,"  in  very  deed,  "  a  root  of  aU  evil  "?  Many  of  the 
more  violent  sins  are  like  fire  in  dry  stubble — they  burn  out  rapidly.  But  avarice 
is  like  those  fish  which  can  best  thrive  in  Arctic  seas — it  flourishes  in  the  chilly 
blood  of  old  age.  I.  In  turning  our  attention  to  the  dealings  of  God  with  Israel 
concerning  Achan's  transgression  let  us  briefly  beveew  the  facts.  H.  These  deal- 
ings of  God  with  Achan's  family  and  with  Israel  because  of  one  man's  sin  bring 
before  as  in  a  startling  shape  tiiat  great  mystery — ^fellowship  in  guilt  and  in 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  th. 

ST3FFEKIN0.  Bishop  Butler  states  a  fact  of  daily  experience  when,  in  his  irrefutable 
reply  to  objections  against  the  mediation  of  Christ  ("Analogy"  pt.  ii.  ch.  v.),  he 
reminds  us  that  nearly  the  whole  of  what  we  enjoy  or  suffer  comes  to  us  through 
our  relation  to  other  men.  Every  thinking  man  can  see  for  himself  that  the  con- 
duct of  parents  shapes  the  destiny  of  their  children.  Drunkenness,  sensuality  and 
gluttony  stamp  themselves  upon  the  offspring  that  is  yet  unborn.  The  more 
obvious  operations  of  the  law  are  visible  to  our  feeble  eyes.  How  much  farther  it 
extends  is  known  only  to  God  or  as  He  reveals  it  to  us.  When  the  attempt  is  made 
to  break  the  force  of  this  analogy  by  saying,  "  It  is  all  natural,"  that  same  sagacious 
thinker  reminds  us  that  "  natural "  means  are  appointed  by  Him  who  is  the  Author 
of  nature.  So  it  appears  that,  explain  the  facts  as  we  may,  deny  them  if  we  dare, 
we  cannot  get  rid  of  the  principle  so  long  as  we  hold  to  a  belief  in  an  almighty 
Creator.  III.  From  this  discussion,  notwithstanding  our  imperfect  apprehension  of 
its  great  theme,  certain  conclusions  seem  to  follow  which  abe  of  imrENSE 
PRACTICAL  importance.  1.  How  vain  to  hope  for  escape  from  punishment  so  long 
as  sin  remains  unrepented  of  !  2.  A  wise  regard  to  our  own  happiness  will  make 
us  deeply  interested  in  the  welfare  of  our  neighbour.  God  holds  us  accountable  in 
this  regard  to  an  extent  that  many  seem  not  to  dream  of.  3.  It  especially  becomes 
parents  to  consider  the  influence  which,  in  the  nature  of  things,  they  must  exert 
over  the  destiny  of  their  children.  Not  miserable  Achan  only,  but  far  better  men, 
as  Noah,  Lot,  Eli,  and  David,  are  sad  examples  of  this.  "  The  curse  of  the  Lord  is 
in  the  house  of  the  wicked,  but  He  blesseth  the  habitation  of  the  just."  4.  Among 
other  duties  it  is  incumbent  upon  such  parents  to  consider  well  what  place  shall  be 
made  in  their  plans  for  "  goodly  "  garments  and  for  shekels  of  gold  and  silver. 
There  may  be,  there  often  is,  a  place  for  such  things,  but  it  becomes  us  to  consider 
the  text  upon  which  our  Lord  preached  that  wonderful  sermon,  the  parable  of  the 
rich  fool:  "Take  heed  and  beware  of  covetousness,"  &c.  {W.  E.  Boggs,  D.D.) 
Achan's  crime,  concession,  and  punishment: — In  the  progress  of  the  evil,  temptation 
entered  by  the  eye,  that  chief  inlet  of  corruption  to  the  heart.  He  might  be 
characterised  by  all  that  was  evil :  an  evil  eye,  an  evil  heart,  and  an  evil  hand. 
Correct  imitator  of  the  first  transgressor  I  David's  distress  and  dishonour  originated 
in  the  same  course ;  and  so  did  the  covetousness  of  Ahab,  who  could  not  see 
Naboth's  vineyard  without  conceiving  the  purpose  of  making  it  his  own.  Thus  the 
eye,  exquisitely  nice  in  construction,  beautiful  in  form,  and  precious  in  use,  formed 
too  for  purposes  of  purity  and  pleasure,  is  pressed  into  the  service  of  sin,  and  has 
opened  to  the  heart,  that  deep  and  rising  fountain  of  evil,  that  spring  of  moral 
corruption,  endless  forms  of  sin  and  allurement.  In  the  advance  of  sin  the  tempta- 
tion laid  hold  of  his  affections,  those  strong  ties  of  inward  life,  and  too  frequent 
controllers  of  outward  action.  The  first  conceptions  of  evil,  and  its  last  impres- 
sions, are  in  the  heart :  the  eye  is  but  as  a  servant  in  its  employ.  When  I  saw,  &c., 
then  I  coveted  them.  The  only  thing  that  remained  was  to  make  them  his  o\vn, 
for  which  we  may  conceive  many  palliating  considerations  were  admitted,  matured 
by  unbelief.  Oh !  to  what  cruelties  and  outrage  have  forbidden  desires,  the  lust  of 
the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  hfe,  impelled  on  many  who,  in  love  of  power,  wealth,  and 
pleasure,  have  not  only  laid  hands  on  what  God  has  prohibited,  but,  with  property, 
taken  away  the  very  lives  of  its  owners!  "I  took  them."  The  hand,  as  the  eye, 
now  became  the  servant  of  the  heart  to  perfect  its  evil  wishes.  Ah !  little  did  he 
consider  that  the  whole  progress  of  this  action  was  marked  with  a  curse — the  sight, 
the  desire,  and  the  act  of  sin,  and  that  therein  he  had  even  appropriated  a  curse 
from  which  he  would  never  be  able  to  free  himself.  "  And,  behold,  they  are  hid 
in  the  earth  in  the  midst  of  my  tent."  What  perplexities  did  these  riches  bring  ! 
a  thousand  embarrassments  felt,  before  a  place  could  be  found  for  their  deposit ! — 
at  last,  his  tent ;  not  among  the  things  seen,  nor  were  they  deemed  safe  in  the 
privacy  of  his  most  concealed  possessions,  but,  as  though  dead  to  his  heart,  and 
never  again  to  see  the  light,  he  gave  them  burial  beneath  his  tent !  Neither  friend, 
nor  wife,  nor  children,  could  be  entrusted  with  the  secret.  Oh  I  that  any  should 
transact  what  fear  or  shame  induces  them  to  conceal  from  the  observation  of 
others,  and  even  sometimes  what  they  could  not  endure  their  nearest  friends  should 
know  I  But  what  can  all  avail  when  men  cannot  hide  themselves,  or  any  of  their 
actions,  from  the  eye  of  infinite  purity,  which  sees  into  every  dark  recess  of  infi- 
delity and  corruption.  In  this  instance  of  confession  one  melancholy  reflection 
arises — it  was  out  of  the  order  of  mercy  as  to  this  life,  and  therefore  unavailing. 
Instead  of  preceding  detection,  it  was  after  conviction,  and  but  the  desperate  neces- 
sity of  his  case,  wanting  the  ingenuousness  which  ever  characterises  the  sincere 


CHAP,  vn.]  JOSHUA.  IM 

penitent  as  the  hater  of  his  own  offence.  Whatever  his  situation  in  the  next  world, 
it  may  be  viewed  as  a  faint  picture  of  their  ineffectual  confessions  and  unavailing 
miseries  who  shall  appear  convicted  and  condemned  at  the  bar  of  God.  The 
awfulness  of  the  sentence  naturally  throws  our  reflections  upon  the  aggravations  of 
the  offence.  "  He  that  is  taken  with  the  accursed  thing  shall  be  burnt  with  fire,  he 
and  aU  that  he  hath."  The  reason  assigned  vindicates  the  severity  of  justice. 
"  Because  he  hath  transgressed  the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  and  because  he  hath 
wrought  foUy  in  Israel."  Achan  acted  against  the  mightiest  displays  of  vengeance 
and  love,  the  obligations  of  favours  received,  and  the  awful  severities  of  justice 
executed  upon  idolaters.  To  aU  the  wonders  of  providence  and  grace  displayed 
through  many  years,  the  interposition  of  power  so  recently  experienced  in  the 
destruction  of  Jericho,  added  new  claims  of  obedience.  The  covenant  relation  in 
which  he  stood  to  God  as  one  of  His  professing  people,  and  the  instructions  of 
revelation  with  which  he  was  favoured,  gave  an  aggravation  to  his  offence,  beyond 
whatever  could  characterise  the  sin  of  idolaters.  The  ruinous  consequences  that 
followed.  Many  the  evils  which  had  resulted  to  others,  but  the  most  awful  feU 
upon  himself  and  family.  To  the  loss  of  men,  the  distress  of  the  camp,  the 
triumphs  of  the  enemy,  and  the  dishonour  cast  upon  the  Divine  name,  ensued  the 
execution  of  a  sentence  the  most  exemplary.  How  terrible  this  scene  of  judgment, 
more  awful  than  the  burning  of  Jericho.  For  how  small  a  portion  of  ill-gotten  gain, 
and  how  short  a  time,  did  he  lose  life,  and  all  the  good  to  be  enjoyed  in  the  land  of 
Canaan.  All  Israel  concurred  in  the  execution  of  the  sentence :  it  is  so  spoken  of 
as  though  every  man  had  cast  a  stone,  and  every  one  thrown  fuel  to  the  fire.  How 
awful  their  case,  and  how  aggravated  their  crimes,  when  even  those  they  have  lived 
among  are  employed  by  God,  as  the  executioners  of  His  justice.  {W.  Seaton.) 
The  Bahtjlonish  garment : — I.  We  find,  in  the  case  of  Achan,  that  the  wANDEEpo 
AND  WANTON  EYE  WAS  THE  FiKST  AVENUE  OF  MiscHrEF.  Yct  thls  is  the  Very  function 
to  which  the  great  Teacher  appeals  as  the  first  guardian  against  sin :  '•  Watch  and 
pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation."  There  is  an  eye  in  the  heart  as  well  as 
in  the  head,  and  Christ,  knowing  how  easily  the  one  is  decoyed,  enjoins  wakefulness 
upon  the  other.  Keep  both  open,  and  let  the  eye  of  the  conscience  supervise  and 
test  all  that  the  eye  of  sense  may  contemplate.  I  once  went  into  a  garden  where  a. 
lady  and  her  little  child  were  engaged  in  putting  in  some  spring  roots  and  seeds. 
By  some  mischance,  the  little  plants  had  got  mixed  up  with  some  which  were  only 
worthless  weeds.  The  child,  anxious  to  be  busy,  was  thrusting  aU  alike  indiscrimi- 
nately into  the  soil,  till  the  mother  checked  the  little  eager  hand,  and  said,  "  Bring 
them  to  me,  and  let  me  see  them  before  you  put  them  in,  that  I  may  tell  you  which 
to  plant  and  which  to  throw  away."  And  there  was  an  added  pleasure  in  this  work 
of  testing  and  submitting  which  made  the  child  not  only  more  useful  but  more 
happy.  And  thus,  when  the  child-eye  of  the  sense  beholds  something  which  seems 
goodly  and  fair,  let  it  be  brought  to  the  inspection  of  the  mother-eye  of  the  con- 
science before  it  is  taken  and  sown  and  assimilated  into  the  soil  of  character.  "I 
saw."  The  spirit  of  these  times,  and  of  modern  habits,  addresses  itself  to  this 
avenue  of  the  heart.  The  eye  of  the  voluptuary  is  opened  to  let  in  the  comely  pro- 
cession which  turns  the  world  into  a  huge  Babylonish  seragho,  _His  life  is  a 
closing  dalliance  among  houri,  till  the  fever  of  ignited  lust  attains  its  climax  of 
delirium,  and  then,  having  conceived  its  progeny  of  illusions,  brings  forth  its  only 
permanent  offspring — death  (Jas.  i.  15).  The  eye  of  the  man  of  luxury  is  opened 
to  turn  the  world  into  one  vast  Babylonish  kitchen,  and  the  great  problem  of  living 
is,  "  What  shall  I  eat  ?  What  shall  I  drink  ?  "  We  know  the  guerdon  and  the 
result  of  all  such  entrail-worship.  The  meat  turns  to  worms  within  the  pampered 
lips,  and  the  consequential  sequence  is — "  whose  god  is  their  belly,  whose  end  is 
destruction."  The  eye  of  the  slave  of  commerce  looks  at  the  world  as  one  great 
Babylonish  mart.  There  is  the  wedge  of  gold,  appearing  and  re-appearing  in  a 
thousand  shapes.  Now  it  is  a  lump  of  solid  bullion,  now  it  is  melted,  minted, 
stamped  into  coin  ;  now  it  is  bartered  for  scrip,  now  cropping  up  in  consols,  now  in 
coupons,  now  in  debentures  (a  coffin  and  a  grave  being  the  simple  end  of  all  the 
race  and  turmoil) ;  but  through  aU  the  changes  the  wedge  is  at  its  wedge-like  work, 
splitting  asunder,  as  it  is  driven  home  into  the  fibres  of  the  life-character,  aU  that 
gives  life  its  buoyancy,  or  character  its  weight,  until  the  whole  fabric  of  the  man- 
hood is  shivered  and  destroyed,  and  the  mart  becomes  a  mausoleum,  as  sin,  per- 
fected, brings  forth  death.  And  the  eye  of  the  proud  or  the  votary  of  fashion  turns 
the  world  into  a  vast  Babylonish  shop.  Life  is  one  interminable  Eegent  Street. 
There  is  the  goodly  Babylonish  garment  folding  and  unfolding,  and  as  it  rustles 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

while  the  smiling  courtiers  hold  it  up,  first  in  this  light,  then  in  that,  it  seems  to 
whisper  a  silken  accompaniment  to  the  anxious  duet  of  prudery  and  foppery  which 
the  doUs  of  fashion  are  for  ever  singing,  "  Wherewithal  shall  I  be  clothed  ?  "    Lust  1 
Luxury  I     Commerce !    Fashion  !     They  all  come  like  besiegers  to  this  gateway  of 
the  eye,  and  try  to  storm  it.    It  is  the  first  and  the  last  of  these,  perhaps,  which 
most  hotly  assaU  young  men — lust  and  fashion,  both  kindred  evils,  both  sore  enemies 
of  the  soul.     The  lust  of  the  eye  and  the  pride  of  life.     Beware  of  them  1     11.  See- 
ing is  WAKTiNG.     There  is  a  covetousness  of  the  sense  which  looks  and  craves ; 
there  is  a  covetousness  of  the  soul  which  looks  and  learns.     The  first  is  the  lust 
which  consumes  itself  to  death  ;  the  second  is  the  patience  which  watches  unto  life 
eternal.     Be  yours  the  wiser  choice.     Don't  shut  your  eyes  upon  the  beauty  of  the 
garment  or  the  richness  of  the  gold,  but  look,  that  you  may  adorn  the  spirit  with 
the  beauty,  and  enrich  the  soul  upon  the  wealth.     III.  Fatal  gradation — the  eye, 
the  appetite,  the  act.     The  glance,  the  greed,  the  gathering.     The  look,  the  lust,  the 
larceny.    I  see  a  man  before  me  in  this  place  who  has  looked  upon  the  office  and 
position  of  another,  and  who  has  longed  for  it,  and  has  begun  to  take  it,  by  false- 
hood and  innuendo  against  his  character.     I  see  another  who  has  grudged  a  neigh- 
bour his  good  fortune,  and  has  tried  to  steal  his  wedge  of  gold  by  driving  in  the 
wedge  of  scandal  and  detraction  to  destroy  his  credit.     IV.  The  same  path  must 
EVEE  LEAD  TO  THE  SAME  END.     The  lust  is  sooH  Satiated,  and  then  begins  to  crave 
and  rage  again.     The  Delilahs  who  charmed  can  charm  no  more  ;  all  they  can  do 
is  to  point  the  white  and  taper  fingers  with  which  they  beckoned  in  derision  at  your 
shame,  and  part  the  coral  lips  that  smiled  you  into  sin  to  hiss  the  taunt,  "  The 
Philistines  be  upon  thee."     The  tresses  that    you  played  with  are  stiffened  to 
Cassandra's  snakes,  to  sting  you  into  fiercer  pain.     The  luxury  is  soon  gone.     The 
Babylonish  kitchen  is  soon  empty,  and  all  that  is  left  is  but  the  reek  of  the  past 
banquet,  which  sickens  and  repels.    The  gold  is  soon  spent,  and  only  emptiness 
remains.    The  Babylonish  garment  is  soon  threadbare  and  worn  out,  and  shabbi- 
ness,  nakedness,  and  chill  are  all  that  linger  now.     The  path  along  which  you  look 
with  wanton  eye  leads  to  lust,  and  the  lust  to  sin,  and  at  the  end  of  all  is  nothing 
but  a  grave.     The  last  garment  is  the  shroud — the  last  shekel  is  the  funeral  fee — 
the  last  beckoner  is  death.     {Arthur  3Iursell.)         Covetousness : — The  man  in  the 
text,  in  one  view,  it  should  seem  at  first  sight,  was  an  object  of  pity;  for  gold  and 
silver  and  fine  clothes,  to  be  had  for  carriage,  formed  a  great  temptation.     Hence 
arises  a  question,  why  doth  providence  put  in  our  way  such  agreeable  objects,  and 
yet  forbid  us  to  touch  them  ?    Let  us  give  glory  to  God  by  acknowledging  that  by 
such  means  we  are  exercised,  first  as  creatures  to  discover  the  natural  grandeur  of 
our  own  passions,  the  incompetence  of  the  world  to  make  us  happy,  and  if  reason 
be  not  asleep  the  all-sufficiency  of  God.    Next,  these  exercises  try  us  as  servants, 
and  by  the  emotions  of  depraved  passions  we  become  acquainted  with  the  natural 
rebellion  of  an  evU  heart,  that  disputes  dominion  with  God.  By  an  habitual  deadness 
to  these,  because  God  commands  it,  we  discover  the  true  religion  of  a  renewed 
mind,  and  enter  on  the  enjoyment  of  conscious  rectitude,  a  preference  of  virtue,  the 
felicity  of  heaven.     Why,  then,  do  we  blame  Achan  ?    Because  he  was  not  a  boy, 
for  none  but  men  above  twenty  bore  arms,  and  he  was  old  enough  to  know  that  he 
ought  not  to  have  disobeyed  his  general,  or  his  God.    Because  he  was  a  Jew,  and 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  had  been  brought  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of 
the  Lord.    Because  he  must  have  heard  what  mischief,  the  golden  calf,  the  iniquity 
of  Peor,  and  the  murmuring  at  Kadesh  had  brought  upon  his  countrymen.    Because 
he  knew  God  had  expressly  forbidden  plunder.     Had  he  exercised  his  understand- 
ing, some  or  all  these  reasons  would  have  cooled  his  passion  for  perquisites.    In 
like  manner  we  say  of  ourselves.    We  have  temptations  and  passions ;  but  we  have 
reason,  too,  to  resist  them.    We  have  passions  ;  but  we  have  had  a  Christian  educa- 
tion, and  have  been  apprised  of  the  danger  of  gratifying  them.     We  have  passions  ; 
but  we  have  eyes  and  ears,  and  live  among  people  who  daily  die  for  gratifying  the 
same  passions  which  we  feel.    We  covet ;  but  God  says,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  any 
thing  that  is  thy  neighbour's."    To  covet  is  to  desire  beyond  due  bounds.     God  hath 
set  these  due  bounds.     He  hath  bounded  passion  by  reason,  and  reason  by  religion 
and  the  nature  of  things.     1.  Covetousness  is  unjust.    Let  the  prince  enjoy  the 
privilege  of  his  birth ;  let  the  man  who  hath  hazarded  his  life  for  wealth  possess 
it  in  peace ;  let  the  industrious  enjoy  the  fruit  of  his  labour ;  to  transfer  their 
property  to  myself  without  his  consent,  and  without  putting  something  as  good  la 
the  place,  would  bean  act  of  injustice.      Only  to  covet  is  to  wish  to  be  unjust. 
2.  Covetousness  is  cruel.    A,  man  of  this  disposition  is  obliged  to  harden  his  heart 


CHAP,  vn.]  JOSHUA.  155 

against  a  thousand  plaintive  voices,  voices  of  poor,  fatherless,  sick,  aged,  and 
bereaved  people  in  distress ;  voices  that  set  many  an  eye  a-trickling,  but  which 
make  no  impression  on  a  covetous  man.  3.  Covetousness  is  ungrateful.  Shall  the 
whole  world  labour  for  this  old  miser,  one  to  feed  him,  another  to  guard  him,  and 
aU  to  make  him  happy,  and  shall  he  resemble  the  barren  earth  that  returns  nothing 
to  him  that  dresseth  it  ?  This  is  a  black  ingratitude.  4.  Covetousness  is  a  foolish 
vice  ;  it  destroys  a  man's  reputation,  makes  everybody  suspect  him  for  a  thief,  and 
watch  him  ;  it  breaks  his  rest,  fills  him  with  care  and  anxiety,  excites  the  avarice 
of  a  robber,  and  the  indignation  of  a  housebreaker ;  it  endangers  his  Uf  e,  and,  depart 
how  he  will,  he  dies  unblest  and  unpitied.  5.  Covetousness  is  unprecedented  in  all 
our  examples  of  virtue.  It  is  Judas,  who  hanged  himself,  and  not  such  as  Peter, 
whom  covetous  men  imitate.  6.  Covetousness  is  idolatry.  It  is  the  idolatry  of  the 
heart,  where,  as  in  a  temple,  a  miserable  wretch  excludes  God,  sets  up  gold  instead 
of  Him,  and  places  that  confidence  in  it  which  belongs  to  the  great  Supreme  alone. 
Achan,  and  all  such  as  he,  cause  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  and  to  pass  everything  else 
let  us  only  observe  what  covetous  men  do  with  their  wealth.  "  Behold,  it  is  hid  in 
the  earth  in  the  midst  of  my  tent."  Observe  a  miser  with  his  bag.  With  what  an 
arch  and  jealous  leer  the  wily  fox  creeps  stealthily  about  to  earth  his  prey  I  He 
hath  not  a  friend  in  the  world,  and  judging  of  others  by  himself,  he  thinks  there  is 
not  an  honest  man  upon  earth,  no,  not  one  that  can  be  trusted.  1.  Eemark  his 
caution.  He  turns  his  back  on  his  idol,  trudges  far  away,  looks  lean,  and  hangs  all 
about  his  own  skeleton  ensigns  of  poverty,  never  avoiding  people  in  real  distress, 
but  always  comforting  himself  with  the  hope  that  nobody  knows  of  his  treasure, 
and  that  therefore  nobody  expects  any  assistance  from  him.  2.  Take  notice  of  the 
just  contempt  in  which  mankind  hold  this  hoary  mass  of  meanness.  He  thinks  his 
wealth  is  had;  but  it  is  not  hid,  his  own  anxious  side-looks  betray  the  secret. 
People  reckon  for  him,  talk  over  all  his  profits,  omit  his  expenses  and  losses,  declare 
his  wealth  to  be  double  what  it  is,  and  judge  of  his  duty  according  to  their  own 
notions  of  his  fortune.  One  lays  out  his  good  work  for  him,  another  rates  him  at 
so  much  towards  such  a  charity,  and  aU  execrate  him  for  not  doing  what  is  not  in 
his  power.  3.  Mark  his  hypocrisy.  He  weeps  over  the  profligacy  of  the  poor,  and 
says  it  is  a  sad  thing  that  they  are  brought  up  without  being  educated  in  the  fear  of 
God.  He  laments  every  time  the  beU  tolls  the  miserable  condition  of  widows  and 
orphans.  He  celebrates  the  praise  of  learning,  and  wishes  public  speakers  had  all 
the  powers  of  a  learned  criticism,  and  all  the  graces  of  elocution.  He  prays  for  the 
downpouring  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  outgoings  of  God  in  His  sanctuary,  and  then, 
how  his  soul  would  be  refreshed !  What  a  comfortable  Christian  would  he  be  then  ! 
Tell  him  that  the  gratitude  of  widows,  the  hymns  of  orphans,  and  the  blessings  of 
numbers  ready  to  perish,  are  the  presence  of  God  in  His  Church.  Tell  him  aU  these 
wait  to  pour  themselves  like  a  tide  into  his  congregation,  and  wait  only  for  a  Uttle 
of  his  money  to  pay  for  cutting  a  canal.  See  how  thunderstruck  he  is  1  His 
solemn  face  becomes  lank  and  black ;  he  suspects  he  has  been  too  liberal  already, 
his  generosity  has  been  often  abused.  Why  should  he  be  taxed  and  others  spared  ? 
The  Lord  will  save  His  own  elect ;  God  is  never  at  a  loss  for  means,  no  exertions  wiU 
do  without  the  Divine  presence  and  blessing ;  and  besides,  his  property  is  all  locked 
up,  "  Behold,  it  is  hid  in  the  earth  in  the  midst  of  my  tent !  "  Let  us  respect  truth 
even  in  the  mouth  of  a  miser.  This  ignoble  soul  tells  you  that  he  would  not  give  a 
wedge  of  gold  to  save  you  all  from  eternal  ruin ;  but  he  says  God  is  not  hke  him, 
God  loves  you,  and  will  save  you  freely.  This  is  strictly  and  Uterally  true.  There 
have  been  thousands  of  poor  people  besides  you  who  have  been  instructed  and 
animated,  converted  and  saved,  without  having  paid  one  peimy  for  the  whole  ;  but 
this,  instead  of  freezing,  should  melt  the  hearts  of  all  who  are  able,  and  set  them 
a-running  into  acts  of  generosity.  I  conclude  with  the  words  of  Ambrose. 
"  Joshua,"  said  he,  "  could  stop  the  course  of  the  sun  ;  but  all  his  power  could  not 
stop  the  course  of  avarice.  The  sun  stood  still,  but  avarice  went  on.  Joshua 
obtained  a  victory  when  the  sun  stood  still ;  but  when  avarice  was  at  work,  Joshua 
was  defeated."  (R.Robinson.)  Achan's  sin  : — "I  coveted."  What  multitudes  of 
sinners  of  that  class  are  to  be  found — revenge,  theft,  adultery,  murder,  carried  on 
in  the  feelings.  This  is  the  secret  of  the  sudden  falls  and  failures  in  society. 
Achan  must  have  had  a  weakness  for  at  least  looking  at  questionable  and  un- 
lawful things  before  this  trouble.  Woe  to  the  man  who  cannot  confront  a  bad 
impulse  with  the  solid  masonry  of  a  good  character  1  Unless  we  thus  fence  our- 
selves off  from  evil,  our  downfall  wiU  be  only  a  matter  of  time.  Only  character, 
evolved  from  the  principles  of  truth  and  righteousness,  can  withstand  the  seductive 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

influences  of  the  world  and  the  attacks  of  the  powers  of  darkness.  The  influence 
of  home  and  friends  is  all  that  keeps  many  people  straight  and  respectable.  Like 
coopers'  casks,  they  are  held  upright  and  in  shape  by  the  hoops  of  external  influ- 
ences that  surround  them.  Woe  to  the  man  whose  restraints  are  all  on  the  outside  I 
The  internal,  more  than  the  external,  should  suggest  our  conduct,  and  shape  our 
activities.  It  is  the  Japanese,  I  think,  who  say  that  a  snake  is  quite  orderly  and 
straight  so  long  as  you  keep  it  in  a  bamboo  stick,  but  the  moment  it  gets  out  it 
begins  to  wriggle  and  act  snaky.  So  there  are  many  who  are  quite  decorous  and 
respectable  while  in  the  bamboo  of  home  influences  who  show  the  old  serpent  and 
act  snaky  enough  when  such  restraints  are  taken  away.  [T.  Kelly.)  Achan  : — 
Jericho  was  one  of  the  largest  and  richest  cities  in  all  ancient  Canaan.  At  one 
time,  indeed,  and  but  for  the  terrible  ban  pronounced  by  Joshua,  Jericho  might 
have  taken  the  place  of  Jerusalem  itself  as  the  chief  city  of  ancient  Israel. 
Jericho  was  an  excellently  situated  and  a  strongly  fenced  city.  There  were  great 
foundries  of  iron  and  brass  in  Jericho,  with  workshops  also  in  sUver  and  in  gold. 
The  looms  of  Babylonia  were  already  famous  over  all  the  eastern  world,  and  their 
rich  and  beautiful  textures  went  far  and  near,  and  were  warmly  welcomed  wherever 
the  commercial  caravans  of  that  day  carried  them.  "  A  goodly  Babylonish 
garment "  plays  a  prominent  part  in  the  tragical  history  that  now  opens  before  us. 
The  rich  and  licentious  city  of  Jericho  was  doomed  of  God  to  swift  overthrow  and 
absolute  extermination,  but  no  part  of  the  spoil,  neither  thread  nor  shoe-lachet,  was 
to  be  so  much  as  touched  by  Joshua  or  any  of  his  armed  men.  Nothing  demoraUses 
an  army  like  sacking  a  fallen  city.  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth  temptation ; 
for  when  he  is  tried  he  shall  receive  the  crown  of  life."  And  Joshua  and  all  his  men 
received  a  crown  of  life  that  night — all  his  men  but  one.  Who  is  that  stealing  about 
among  the  smoking  ruins?  Is  that  some  soldier  of  Jericho  who  has  saved  himself 
from  the  devouring  sword  ?  1.  Everybody  who  reads  the  best  books  will  have  long 
had  by  heart  Thomas  a  Kempis's  famous  description  of  the  successive  steps  of  a 
successful  temptation.  There  is  first  the  bare  thought  of  the  sin.  Then,  upon 
that,  there  is  a  picture  of  the  sin  formed  and  hung  up  on  the  secret  screen  of  the 
imagination.  A  strange  sweetness  from  that  picture  is  then  let  down  drop  by  drop 
into  the  heart ;  and  then  that  secret  sweetness  soon  secures  the  consent  of  the  whole 
soul,  and  the  thing  is  done.  That  is  true,  and  it  is  powerful  enough.  But  Achan's 
confession  to  Joshua  is  much  simpler,  and  still  closer  to  the  truth :  "  I  saw  the  goodly 
Babylonish  garment,  I  coveted  it,  I  took  it,  and  I  hid  it  in  my  tent."  Had  Joshua 
happened  to  post  the  ensign  of  Judah  opposite  the  poor  part  of  the  city  this  sad 
story  would  never  have  been  told.  But  even  as  it  was,  had  Achan  only  happened 
to  stand  a  little  to  the  one  side,  or  a  little  to  the  other  side  of  where  he  did  stand, 
in  that  case  he  would  not  have  seen  that  beautiful  piece,  and  not  seeing  it  he  would 
not  have  coveted  it,  and  would  have  gone  home  to  his  tent  that  night  a  good  soldier 
and  an  honest  man.  But  when  once  Achan's  eyes  lighted  on  that  rich  garment  he 
never  could  get  his  eyes  off  it  again.  As  a  Kempis  says,  the  seductive  thing  got 
into  /chan's  imagination,  and  the  devil's  work  was  done.  Achan  was  in  a  fever 
now  lest  he  should  lose  that  goodly  garment.  He  was  terrified  lest  any  of  his  com- 
panions should  have  seen  that  glittering  piece.  He  was  sure  some  of  them  had 
seen  it,  and  was  making  off  with  it.  He  stood  in  between  it  and  the  searchers.  He 
turned  their  attention  to  something  else.  And  then  when  their  backs  were  about  he 
rolled  it  up  in  a  hurry,  and  the  gold  and  the  silver  inside  of  it,  and  thrust  it 
down  into  a  hiding-place.  His  eyes  were  Achan's  fatal  snare.  It  was  his  eyes  that 
stoned  Achan  and  burned  him  and  his  household  to  dust  in  the  valley  of  Achor. 
Had  God  seen  it  to  be  good  to  make  men  and  women  in  some  way  without  eyes  the 
i'ail  iiibeK  would  have  been  escaped.  In  his  despair  to  get  the  devil  out  of  his  heart 
Job  swore  a  solenm  oath  and  made  a  holy  covenant  with  his  eyes.  But  our  Saviour, 
as  He  always  does,  goes  far  deeper  than  Job.  He  knows  quite  well  that  no  oath 
that  Job  ever  swore,  and  no  covenant  that  Job  ever  sealed,  will  hold  any  man's  eyes 
in ;  and  therefore  He  demands  of  all  His  disciples  that  their  eyes  shall  be  plucked 
out.  He  pulls  down  His  own  best  handiwork  at  its  finest  part  so  that  He  may 
get  the  devil's  handiwork  destroyed  and  rooted  out  of  it ;  and  then  He  will  let  us 
have  all  our  eyes  back  again  when  and  where  we  are  fit  to  be  trusted  with  eyes. 
Miss  Rossetti  is  writing  to  young  ladies,  but  what  she  says  to  them  it  will  do  us  all 
good  to  hear.  "  True,"  says  that  fine  writer,  "  all  our  lives  long  we  shall  be  bound 
to  refrain  our  soul,  and  to  keep  it  low ;  but  what  then  ?  For  the  books  we  now 
forbear  to  read,  we  shall  one  day  be  endued  with  wisdom  and  knowledge.  For  the 
music  we  will  not  listen  to,  we  shall  join  in  the  song  of  the  redeemed.    For  the 


CHAP,  vn.]  JOSHUA.  157 

pictures  from  which  we  turn,  we  shall  gaze  unabashed  on  the  Beatific  Vision.  For 
the  companionships  we  shun,  we  shall  be  welcomed  into  angelic  society  and  the 
communion  of  triumphant  saints.  For  all  the  amusements  we  avoid,  we  shall  keep 
the  supreme  jubilee."  Yes,  it  is  as  certain  as  God's  truth  and  righteousness  are 
certain,  that  the  crucified  man  who  goes  about  with  his  eyes  out ;  the  man  who 
steals  along  the  street  seeing  neither  smile  nor  frown ;  he  who  keeps  his  eyes  down 
wherever  men  and  women  congregate,  in  the  Church,  in  the  market-place,  at  a 
station,  on  a  ship's  deck,  at  an  inn  table,  where  you  will ;  that  man  escapes  multi- 
tudes of  temptations  that  more  open  and  more  fuU-eyed  men  and  women  continually 
fall  before.  You  huff  and  toss  your  head  at  that.  But  these  things  are  not  spoken 
for  you  yet,  but  for  those  who  have  sold  and  cut  off  both  eye  and  ear,  and  hand  and 
foot,  and  life  itself,  if  all  that  wiU  only  carry  them  one  single  step  nearer  their 
salvation.  2.  Look  at  the  camp  of  Israel  that  awful  morning !  It  is  the  day  of 
judgment,  and  the  great  white  throne  is  set  in  the  valley  of  Achor  before  its  proper 
time.  Look  how  the  hearts  of  those  fathers  and  mothers  who  have  sons  in  the  army 
beat  tUl  they  cannot  hear  the  last  trump.  Did  you  ever  spend  a  night  like  that 
night  in  Achan's  tent  ?  A  friend  of  mine  once  slept  in  a  room  in  a  hotel  in  Glasgow 
through  the  wall  from  a  man  who  made  him  think  sometimes  that  a  madman  had 
got  into  the  house.  Sometimes  he  thought  it  must  be  a  suicide,  and  sometimes  a 
damned  soul  come  back  for  a  visit  to  the  city  of  its  sins.  But  he  understood  the 
mysterious  noises  of  the  night  next  morning  when  the  officers  came  in  and  beckoned 
to  a  gentleman  who  sat  at  the  breakfast-table,  and  drove  him  off  to  a  penal  settle- 
ment, where  he  died.  Groantngs  that  cannot  be  imitated  to  you  were  heard  by  all 
Achan's  neighbours  all  that  night.  Till  one  bold  man  rose  and  lifted  a  loop  of 
Achan's  tent  in  the  darkness,  and  saw  Achan  still  burying  deeper  and  deeper  his 
sin.  0  sons  and  daughters  of  discovered  Achan !  0  guilty  and  dissembling 
sinners  !  It  is  all  in  vain.  It  is  all  utterly  and  absolutely  in  vain.  Be  sure  as  God 
is  in  heaven,  and  as  He  has  His  eyes  upon  you,  that  your  sin  will  find  you  out. 
You  think  that  the  darkness  will  cover  you.  Wait  till  you  see  !  3.  The  eagle  that 
stole  a  piece  of  sacred  flesh  from  the  altar  brought  home  a  smouldering  coal  with  it 
that  kindled  up  afterwards  and  burned  up  both  her  whole  nest  and  all  her  young 
ones.  And  so  did  Achan.  It  was  very  sore  upon  Achan's  sons,  and  his  daughters, 
and  his  oxen,  and  his  asses,  and  his  sheep,  and  his  tent,  and  all  that  he  had.  But 
things  are  as  they  are.  God  gathers  the  solitary  into  families  for  good,  and  the 
good  family  tie  stiU  continues  to  hold  even  when  all  the  members  of  the  family 
have  done  evil.  Once  a  father,  always  a  father :  the  relationship  stands.  Once  a 
son,  always  a  son,  even  when  a  prodigal  son.  Every  son  has  his  father's  grey  hairs 
and  his  mother's  anxious  heart  in  his  hands,  and  no  possible  power  can  alter  that. 
Drop  that  stolen  flesh !  A  coal  is  in  it  that  shall  never  be  quenched.  4.  Make  a 
clean  breast  of  it,  then.  Go  home  to  your  tent  to-night,  go  home  to  your  lodgings, 
take  up  the  accursed  thing  out  of  its  hiding-place,  and  lay  it  out  before  Joshua,  if 
not  before  all  Israel.  Lay  it  out  and  say,  "  Indeed  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord 
God  of  Israel,  and  thus  and  thus  have  I  done."  And  if  you  do  not  know  what  more 
to  say,  if  you  are  speechless  beside  that  accursed  thing,  try  this ;  say  this.  Ask  and 
say,  "  Is  Thy  name  indeed  Jesus?  Dost  Thou  indeed  save  found-out  men  from  their 
Bins  ?  Art  Thou  still  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  ?  Art  Thou  truly  able  to  save 
to  the  uttermost  ?  For  I  am  the  chief  of  sinners,"  say.  Lie  down  on  the  floor  of 
your  room — you  need  not  think  it  too  much  for  you  to  do  that,  or  that  it  is  an  act 
unworthy  of  your  manhood  to  do  it :  the  Son  of  God  did  it  for  you  on  the  floor  of 
Gethsemane.  Yes,  lie  down  on  the  floor  of  your  sinful  room,  and  lay  your  tongue 
in  the  dust  of  it,  and  say  this  about  yourself  :  say  that  you,  naming  yourself,  are 
the  offscouring  of  all  men.  For  "  thus  and  thus,"  naming  it,  "  have  I  done."  And 
then  say  this — 

•'  The  dying  thief  rejoiced  to  see 
That  Fountain  in  his  day  " — 

and  see  what  the  true  Joshua  will  stand  over  you  and  say  to  you.  5.  Therefore  the 
name  of  that  place  is  called  the  valley  of  Achor  to  this  day.  Achor ;  that  is,  as 
interpreted  on  the  margin,  "Trouble" — the  valley  of  trouble.  "Why  hast  thou 
troubled  us  ?  "  demanded  Joshua  of  Achan.  "  The  Lord  shall  trouble  thee  this  day." 
The  Lord  troubled  Achan  in  judgment  that  day,  but  He  is  troubling  you  in  mercy  in 
your  day.  Yes  ;  already  your  trouble  is  a  door  of  hope.  You  will  sing  yet  as  you 
never  sang  in  the  days  of  your  youth.  You  never  sang  songs  like  these  in  the  daya 
of  your  youth,  or  before  your  trouble  came — songs  like  these  :  The  Lord  will  be  a 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

refuge  for  the  overwhelmed :  a  refuge  in  the  time  of  trouble.  Thou  art  my  hiding- 
place  ;  Thou  shalt  preserve  me  from  trouble  ;  Thou  shalt  compass  me  about  with 
songs  of  deliverance.      A.  Whyte,  D.D.) 

Vers.  25,  26.  And  Joshua  said,  Why  hast  thou  troubled  U8  ?  the  Lord  shall  trouble 
thee  this  day. — The  troubles  of  sin  : — I.  That  sin  is  a  veey  trodblesosie  thing. 
1.  The  load  of  guilt  by  which  it  oppresses  us.  2.  The  shifts,  subterfuges,  and 
tricks  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  concealing  our  sins,  or  transferring  the  blame 
to  others,  are  convincing  proofs  that  sin  troubles  us.  3.  Sin  troubles  us  by  its 
corrupt  and  restless  influence  on  the  tempers  and  dispositions.  4.  But  it  is  chiefly 
into  futurity  that  we  are  to  look  for  the  troubles  of  sin  (Prov.  xi.  21 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  4 ; 
Romans  vi.  23).  II.  However  artfully  concealed,  sin  must  be  exposed.  1.  The 
most  secret  sins  are  often  revealed  in  this  world.  2.  Those  sins  that  escape  detection 
here,  wiU  be  manifested  in  the  last  day  (Eccles.  xii.  14).     IIL  When  the  sinnee 

IS  EXPOSED,  HE  IS  LEFT  WITHOUT    ANT   REASONABLE  EXCUSE.       Joshua  Said,  "  Why  hast 

thou  troubled  us ?  "  What  could  he  say  ?  Could  he  plead  ignorance  of  the  law? 
No ;  it  was  published  in  the  camp  of  Israel.  The  weakness  of  human  nature  ?  No ; 
he  had  strength  to  do  his  duty.  The  prevalence  of  temptation  ?  No  ;  others  had 
similar  temptations,  and  yet  conquered.  And  what  shall  we  have  to  say  when  God 
shall  summon  us  to  His  bar  ?  IV.  That  punishment  treads  upon  the  heels  of 
SIN.  "  The  Lord  shall  trouble  thee  this  day."  1.  God  has  power  to  trouble  sinners. 
The  whole  creation  is  a  "  capacious  reservoir  of  means,"  which  He  can  employ  at  His 
pleasure.  2.  God  will  trouble  sinners.  He  will  either  bring  them  to  repentance, 
when  they  shall  "  look  upon  Him  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  mourn,"  or  He 
will  vex  them  in  His  wrath,  and  dash  them  in  pieces  as  a  potter's  vessel.  Infer — 
1.  What  a  powerful  preventive  this  should  be  to  deter  us  from  committing  sin.  2.  See 
the  madness  of  sinners,  who,  for  the  sake  of  a  few  sordid  despicable  pleasures,  which 
always  leave  a  sting  behind,  will  desperately  plunge  themselves  into  an  abyss  of 
troubles  which  know  no  bound  nor  termination.  3.  Since  sin  is  so  troublesome, 
let  us  all  seek  a  deliverance  from  its  dominion  and  influence.  4.  Learn  what  ideas 
you  should  entertain  of  those  who  seek  to  entice  you  to  sin.  They  are  agents  of 
the  devil,  and  you  should  shun  them  as  you  would  shun  perdition.  (Sketches  of 
Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  Israel  stoned  him  with  stones,  and  burned  them  with 
fire. — Achan's  punishment : — The  punishment  of  Achan  himself  offers  no  difficulty. 
He  knew  the  decree,  and  chose  to  stake  his  life  against  a'few  valuable  articles  which 
excited  his  rapacity.  The  maintenance  of  discipline  in  an  army  is  at  aU  times  of 
first  importance.  In  the  Peninsula  War  two  men  were  shot  for  stealing  apples, 
pilfering  having  been  proclaimed  a  capital  crime.  The  Duke  of  Wellington  was  a 
humane  man,  but  he  knew  the  need  of  obedience  to  law  and  the  value  of  a  striking 
example.  The  Israelites  were  a  nation  and  army  in  one.  Regard  for  the  general 
welfare,  above  all  private  aggrandisement,  had  to  be  encouraged.  The  sense  of  a 
common  interest  would  soon  be  undermined,  if  a  pilfering  spirit  set  in  and  a  greedy 
selfishness  received  any  countenance.  Moreover,  at  aU  costs,  reverence  for  their 
Deity  had  to  be  upheld.  His  majesty  must  be  vindicated.  Disastrous  results  could 
only  follow  upon  a  diminution  of  the  religious  sentiment  among  the  people.  But 
the  association  of  Achan's  famUy  in  his  terrible  penalty,  as  a  calm  judicial 
proceeding,  sends  a  thriU  of  horror  through  our  hearts.  But  then,  we  are  "  the 
heirs  of  all  the  ages,  in  the  foremost  files  of  time."  We  enjoy  the  inheritance  of 
millenniums  of  Divine  education.  We  could  not  expect  Joshua  to  act  in  advance 
of  the  spirit  of  his  time.  The  ancient  world  was  deficient  in  its  conception  of  what 
a  man  was.  It  was  long  before  it  came  to  regard  him  as  an  individual,  a  being 
complete  in  himself.  So  long  as  one  man  continued  to  be  considered  as  part  of  another, 
or  in  any  sense  the  property  of  another,  so  long  fathers  might  pledge  the  lives  of 
their  children,  and  whole  families  expiate  the  crimes  of  a  single  member  without 
shocking  the  public  sense  of  justice.  But  is  it  not  said  that  the  destruction  of 
Achan's  family  was  by  the  express  command  of  Jehovah  ?  Is  not  this  the 
explanation?  The  command,  shaping  itself  within  the  mind  of  Joshua  in  the 
form  of  an  overmastering  conviction,  would  be  that  justice  should  be  executed. 
Joshua  could  only  understand  justice  in  the  sense  in  which  his  contemporaries 
understood  it.  His  moral  sense  would  give  the  character  and  colour  to  the  justice 
to  be  dealt  out.  His  inmost  conviction,  which  was,  in  truth,  the  inspired  message 
of  his  God,  forced  upon  him  the  necessity  for  a  signal  vindication  of  the  majesty  of 
loyalty  and  uprightness,  and  he  acted  up  to  the  light  which  he  possessed.  (T.  W.  M. 
Lund,    M.A.)        The  troubling  of  Achan: — ^Two  questions  present  themselves. 


CHAP.  Til.]  JOSHUA,  159 

Why  should  all  Israel  have  been  put  to  shame  and  defeat  for  the  sin  of  one  man  ? 
And  why  should  God  have  required  the  whole  congregation  in  this  dramatic  way  to 
take  part  in  the  execution  of  the  offender  ?  To  our  minds  at  first  thought  it  would 
seem  likely  to  brutalise  the  hearts  of  the  people,  that  all  should  be  required  to  take 
part  in  that  bloody  vengeance.  For  the  sake  of  example,  God  might  wish  the 
whole  congregation  to  be  present  at  the  taking  of  the  lot.  He  could  have  pointed 
out  the  criminal  to  Joshua  in  some  simple  and  direct  way,  but  He  chose  to  give  all 
Israel  a  most  salutary  warning.  That  the  unerring  finger  of  Jehovah  should  thus 
single  out  the  guilty  man  was  a  striking  object-lesson  concerning  the  truth  that  no 
sin  is  so  secret  as  to  be  hidden  from  the  all-searching  God.  But  this  does  not 
explain  why  all  the  people  should  have  been  made  to  suffer  shame  and  defeat 
because  of  Achan's  sin,  for  the  great  investigation  might  have  been  made  just  as 
thoroughly  before  the  defeat  at  Ai.  We  might  say,  perhaps,  that  Israel  needed  the 
lesson  of  this  defeat  to  teach  them  their  dependence  upon  God  for  the  smallest  as 
well  as  the  greatest  victory.  We  fancy  we  can  detect  a  little  vein  of  boastfulness 
in  the  words  of  the  scouts  (ver.  3).  And  if  we  ask  concerning  the  thirty  and  six  men 
who  perished  while  Israel  was  receiving  this  lesson  in  humility,  we  may  reply  that 
such  matters  must  be  left,  and  can  without  disquietude  be  left  in  the  hands  of  God. 
We  cannot  know  about  individual  lives.  God  certainly  in  all  cases  deals  wisely  and 
mercifully.  Yet  we  have  not  progressed  very  far  in  our  solution  of  this  difficulty, 
that  God  permitted  all  Israel  to  suffer  for  the  sin  of  one  man.  And  it  is  a  difficulty 
worth  trying  to  solve,  because  it  is  of  the  same  sort  as  that  which  meets  us  every 
day  of  our  lives,  and  makes  heedless  men  question  the  justice  and  fairness  of 
Almighty  God.  Who  is  there  that  has  not  suffered  hurt,  or  trouble,  or  unhappiness, 
from  the  misdoings  of  his  neighbours  ?  The  embezzler  gets  the  money  of  hundreds 
of  poor  and  unsuspecting  people  invested  in  his  dazzling  schemes,  and  then  goes  off 
with  his  booty,  leaving  desolation  and  misery  behind.  How  many  people  suffer  from 
the  malignity  or  hatred  of  their  fellows,  because  they  have  innocently  offended 
them.  Aye,  how  many  suffer,  often  most  cruelly,  from  the  heedlessness  and 
thoughtlessness  of  others,  who  never  meant  to  do  harm,  but  talked  fooUshly  and 
excessively  about  things  they  did  not  understand.  We  think  of  the  mischief  we  have 
endured  at  the  hands  of  others,  knowing  that  we  deserved  nothing  of  it ;  and  we 
say,  "Why  does  God  allow  the  innocent  thus  to  suffer  for  other  men's  sins?" 
Perhaps,  indeed,  it  is  to  remind  us  that  we  are  not  so  guiltless  as  we  fancy.  We 
dwell  upon  the  harm  done  us  by  others,  and  we  seldom  think  of  the  many  ways  in 
which  we  do  others  harm,  it  may  be  quite  thoughtlessly,  but  still  very  mischievously. 
Our  hasty  and  ill-considered  words,  our  luilovely  examples,  how  much  mischief 
these  may  do  our  fellow-men,  whUe  we  are  quite  oblivious  of  it.  A  young  man  is 
dishonest,  and  makes  off  with  large  sums  of  his  employer's  money ;  we  condemn 
him  heartily,  and  yet  it  may  be  in  the  sight  of  God  that  the  very  atmosphere  in 
which  he  was  brought  up  in  our  midst  was  so  filled  with  the  praise  of  wealth  and 
the  excellence  of  shrewdness  and  business  ability,  the  power  of  capital,  and  the 
good  things  which  money  can  bring  into  one's  life,  that  our  words  and  views  have 
been  the  teachers  which  fostered  in  the  transgressor's  heart  the  very  sin  we  now  so 
unsparingly  condemn.  May  it  not  be  that  the  very  wrongs  we  so  often  have  to 
suffer  undeservedly  at  the  hands  of  others  are  the  merciful  agencies  of  God,  to  let 
us  endure  a  little  of  the  penalty  our  own  careless  words  and  evil  examples  deserve, 
which  constantly,  all  unsuspected  by  ourselves,  are  doing  mischief  toour  neighbours  ? 
We  have  no  right,  then,  even  to  complain  of  injustice  in  the  fact  that  we  have  to 
suffer  for  other  men's  sins,  unless  we  can  be  sure  that  our  sins  do  not  cause  as  great 
injury  to  the  souls,  if  not  to  the  bodies,  of  many  of  our  fellow-men.  There  is  a 
deeper  sense  yet  in  which  we  may  take  this  lesson  of  all  Israel  suffering  f or'Achan's 
transgression.  God  thus  taught  His  people  the  solidarity  of  their  national  life  as 
His  people.  In  other  words,  that  men  have  responsibility  for  their  neighbours. 
No  one  in  Israel  might  say,  "  This  is  none  of  my  affair,"  for  God  showed  them  that 
the  sin  of  one  man  affected  the  whole  community ;  therefore  the  whole  community 
had  a  certain  responsibility  towards  individual  transgression.  Civilised  nations  all 
admit  this  responsibility  of  humanity,  at  least  to  a  certain  degree.  Men  hear  of 
flood  or  famine  or  pestilence  in  some  far-off  part  of  the  world,  devastating  populous 
districts  in  India,  or  China,  or  some  distant  island  of  the  Pacific.  Immediately 
the  sentiment  of  humanity  opens  their  purses,  and  relief  goes  forth  generously  to 
the  sufferers.  Why  should  we  concern  ourselves  to  help  those  savages,  who  would 
as  likely  as  not  murder  us  if  we  went  among  them  as  travellers  ?  Because  they  ars 
men ;  they  share  in  our  common  humanity,  and  we  may  not  forget  our  brotherhood 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vu. 

of  race.  Why  should  European  nations  send  war-ships  to  the  Red  Sea  and  the 
East  African  coast  to  stop  the  Arabian  slave  trade  ?  What  right  have  they  to 
interfere  ?  You  reply  that  the  slave-trade  is  brutal  and  inhuman,  and  the 
sentiment  of  humanity  compels  those  who  have  the  power  to  interfere,  to  save  the 
poor  blacks  from  their  fiendish  persecutors.  Carry  the  same  thought  a  little 
further,  and  you  get  the  higher  Christian  conception  of  man's  duty  to  all  his  fellow- 
men.  What  is  the  greatest  evil  in  the  world  ?  You  reply  sin,  because  sin  is  the  root 
of  all  other  evils.  Well,  then,  we  Christians  owe  it  to  humanity  to  do  all  that  lies 
in  our  power  to  take  sin  away  from  the  world.  That  is  the  great  principle  of 
Christian  missions.  No  matter  if  the  missions  do  not  seem  to  be  very  successful, 
we  shall  not  have  missed  this  lesson  of  the  sufferings  we  have  to  endure  for  other 
men's  sins  if  we  have  bravely  done  what  was  in  our  power  to  make  known  to  our 
fellow-men  the  efficacy  of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  Our  other  question  was, 
Why  did  God  require  the  whole  congregation  to  take  part  in  the  stoning  of  Achan  ? 
There  are  evils  of  ignorance,  there  are  also  evils  of  wanton  defiance  of  the  known 
law  of  right.  So  long  as  men  sin  in  ignorance  and  superstition  we  may  be  moved 
only  by  compassion  to  help  them.  The  missionary  spirit  must  always  be  that  of 
Christlike  pity  for  them  that  are  ignorant  and  out  of  the  way.  England  sends  her 
heroic  missionaries  into  the  heart  of  Africa  and  of  China  while  at  the  same  time 
she  patrols  the  Red  Sea  with  warships  to  stop  at  the  cannon's  mouth  the  slave  trade, 
and  sends  an  army  up  the  Irrawaddy  to  conquer  the  monster  King  Theebaw  of 
Burmah,  and  so  to  put  a  stop  to  his  terrible  cruelties.  Is  there  inconsistency  in 
this  ?  No.  It  was  quite  as  much  the  duty  of  Israel  to  stone  Achan  as  it  was  to 
teach  their  children  with  loving  assiduity  the  enormity  of  disobeying  Jehovah.  We 
owe  it  to  God  to  do  what  lies  in  our  power  to  put  down  flagrant  iniquity.  We  are 
much  too  careless  about  this  in  our  Christian  lives.  We  may  not  punish  individuals, 
for  God  commits  that  authority  to  the  State  ;  but  we  are  bound  to  confront  and 
denounce  all  iniquitous  principle,  to  stand  up  and  fight  against  God-defying  sin. 
No  matter  if  we  do  not  succeed  in  slaying  Achan.  No  matter  if  men  tell  us  to  mind  our 
own  business,  and  not  to  interfere  with  them.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  have  thrown  a  stone 
for  the  Lord,  even  if  it  has  seemed  in  no  wise  to  hurt  the  enemy.  {Arthur  Ritchie.) 
They  raised  over  him  a  great  heap  of  stones. — Nemesis  .• — Again  we  stand  beside 
a  heap  of  stones.  Again  it  wiU  be  profitable  to  put  and  to  answer  the  question, 
*'  What  mean  ye  by  these  stones  ?  "  This  is  the  third  occasion  on  which  such  a 
question  might  arise.  The  first  heap  of  stones  was  raised  on  the  brink  of  Jordan  ; 
the  second  lay  some  miles  distant ;  the  third  is  still  further  in  the  land.  The  first 
heap  was  a  token  of  Jehovah's  might ;  for  taken  from  the  river-bed  by  twelve 
stalwart  warriors,  they  told  to  all  succeeding  generations  that  by  a  strong  hand 
and  a  stretched-out  arm  Israel  was  brought  into  Canaan.  The  second  heap, 
stretched  far  and  wide,  the  ruins  of  a  famous  city,  was  the  token  of  Jehovah's 
judgment.  This  third  heap  in  the  valley  of  Achor,  the  cairn  erected  over  the 
dead  body  of  Achan,  was  the  token  of  Jehovah's  discipline.  The  twelve  stones 
speak  of  Jehovah's  relation  to  the  sin  of  those  who  trust  Him  and  accept  His 
leadership.  He  buries  all  their  iniquities,  He  brings  them  into  His  promised 
inheritance,  and  gives  them  a  permanent  place  therein.  The  ruined  city  speaks  of 
Jehovah's  relation  to  the  sin  of  these  who  stubbornly  resist  Him.  He  smites  them 
with  a  rod  of  iron.  This  rugged  pUe  speaks  of  Jehovah's  relation  to  the  sin  of 
those  who  profess  to  obey  Him,  but  who  in  their  deeds  deny  Him.  If  He  judges 
the  world,  much  more  must  He  judge  His  own  house.  The  twelve  stones  on 
Jordan's  bank  were  a  monument  of  Israel's  hope.  He  who  had  led  them  over, 
and  brought  them  in,  would  assuredly  bless  them  with  aU  earthly  blessings  in  His 
fair  heritage.  The  ruins  of  Jericho  were  a  monument  of  Israel's  faith.  For 
nothing  but  faith  could  have  been  so  patient,  so  docile,  so  mighty,  so  victorious — 
"  By  faith  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down."  The  heap  in  the  valley  of  Achor  was  a 
monument  of  Israel's  love.  They  heaped  up  this  cairn  of  condemnation  to  show 
their  detestation  of  the  crime  of  which  Achan  was  guilty.  Thus  this  act  revealed 
their  love  to  God  in  the  strongest  light.  By  this  third  heap  we  stand,  and  as  we 
do  so,  let  UB  ponder  the  discovery  of  Achan's  crime,  its  confession,  and  its 
punishment.  Joshua  gave  himself  no  rest  till  he  got  to  the  root  of  this  matter. 
Though  appalled  by  such  severe  tokens  of  the  Divine  displeasure,  he  did  not 
murmur  against  God,  but  persistently  made  inquiry  of  God.  He  did  not  complain 
of  God,  he  complained  to  God ;  and  his  faithful  persistency  was  rewarded 
(vers.  10-12).  "  Get  thee  up.  My  mind  has  not  changed.  My  arm  is  not 
shortened.     My  word  is  not  broken.     Get  thee  up,  for  the  discovery  and  punish- 


CHAP,  vn.]  JOSHUA.  161 

ment  of  this  sin."  The  discovery  of  Achan's  sin  was,  therefore,  the  result  of 
Divine  directions.  It  was  God  who  set  everything  in  motion  for  the  detection  of 
the  hidden  criminal.  The  discovery  was  undertaken  most  solemnly,  as  a  deeply 
spiritual  and  religious  act  (ver.  13).  Three  times  in  the  course  of  their  history 
had  the  children  of  Israel  been  thus  called  solemnly  to  sanctify  themselves.  On 
the  first  occasion,  it  was  at  the  foot  of  Sinai,  in  prospect  of  the  giving  of  the  law. 
On  the  second  occasion  it  was  at  Jordan,  in  prospect  of  entering  into  the  land.  On  the 
third  occasion,  it  was  here,  in  prospect  of  the  discovery  and  punishment  of  the 
transgressor.  To  receive  God's  will,  to  enter  into  God's  inheritance,  to  purge 
away  transgression,  such  things  demand  the  most  thorough  consecration.  It  is 
plain  from  the  Divine  record  that  Israel  went  about  this  solemn  work  in  the  right 
way.  There  was  no  burst  of  ungovernable  excitement  and  blind  popular  fury. 
With  judicial  calmness  and  religious  reverence,  the  terrible  drama  was  begun, 
continued,  and  ended.  It  was  also  prosecuted  deliberately.  There  was  no 
unseemly  haste  or  confusion.  A  proclamation  was  made  in  the  evening  previous 
as  to  the  manner  of  procedure  on  the  following  day ;  and  then  the  carrying  out  of 
the  process  of  casting  lots  must  have  been  slow  and  deliberate.  What  a  night 
must  that  have  been  for  Joshua  !  How  thankfully  must  he  have  laid  himself  to 
rest  in  the  blessed  consciousness  that  as  surely  as  the  darkness  of  night  would  fly 
before  the  dawning  day,  so  all  his  difficulties  would  vanish,  and  all  the  disgrace  of 
Israel  would  be  blotted  out.  And  what  a  night  must  that  have  been  for  Achan  I 
He  would  feel  as  did  another  whose  mental  torture  a  great  poet  has  described — 

"  Macbeth  hath  murdered  sleep,  the  innocent  sleep, 
Sleep  that  knits  up  the  ravelled  sleave  of  care, 
Bahn  of  hurt  minds." 

Oh !  what  a  long,  black,  miserable  night  was  that.  The  voice  cried,  "  Sleep  no 
more,"  and  on  the  morrow,  as  with  bloodshot  eyes  he  took  his  place  in  the  ranks  of 
his  tribe,  what  must  have  been  his  terror  I  And  then  to  mark  the  circle  of  con- 
demnation closing  upon  him,  growing  less  and  less  at  each  casting  of  the  lot,  he 
rooted  meanwhile  to  the  dark  spot,  its  centre,  till  at  last,  pointed  out  by  the  finger 
of  God,  he  stood  alone,  the  incarnation  of  disaster  and  disgrace,  the  hateful 
object  for  every  eye  in  Israel,  the  awful  focus  of  their  fiery  indignation,  burning 
into  his  soul  one  thought,  one  agony,  "We  have  found  thee,  0  our  enemy."  The 
method  of  discovery  was  most  impressive  for  the  people,  revealing  so  marvellously 
the  finger  of  God.  Whatever  the  precise  process  of  the  lot  may  have  been,  and 
that  is  hard  to  discover,  there  was  no  difliculty,  hesitation,  timidity,  uncertainty, 
or  partiality  in  its  carrying  out.  The  method  of  discovering  the  crime  was  also 
the  most  merciful  that  could  have  been  adopted  for  the  offender.  It  gave  him  time 
to  think  ;  a  blessed  space  for  repentance ;  an  opportunity,  if  there  was  any  spark 
of  spiritual  life  within,  to  cast  off  the  incubus  of  iniquity.  Every  step  would 
serve  to  convince  him  how  utterly  foolish  it  was  to  promise  himself  secrecy  in  sin, 
and  how  certainly  at  the  last  God  would  discriminate  between  the  innocent  and 
the  guilty,  however  for  a  little  while  they  were  involved  in  the  same  condemnation. 
Thus  Achan  stands  exposed  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel.  Joshua,  fiUed  with  un- 
utterable compassion  for  the  trembling  sinner,  though  absolutely  certain  of  his 
guilt,  has  no  harsh  word  to  utter,  but  only  seeks  to  win  him  to  a  right  frame  of 
mind.  Nothing  could  be  more  touching  than  this  venerable  leader's  words.  He 
deals  with  him  as  a  grey-haired  father  with  a  wayward  son,  urging  him  to  the 
only  course  that  in  the  circumstances  could  yield  one  spark  of  consolation  (ver.  19). 
Achan  breaks  down  under  this  unexpected  kindness.  He  had  looked  for  nothing 
but  harsh  reproof  and  unmitigated  severity ;  therefore  in  broken  accents  he 
replies,  "  Indeed  I  have  siimed,"  &c.  This  confession  is  worthy  of  notice,  and  has 
some  features  which  relieve  the  darkness  of  the  scene.  To  begin  with,  it  was 
voluntary.  There  was  here  no  extortion  of  a  confession  from  unwilling  lips. 
Joshua  spoke  in  love,  calling  him  "  my  son."  It  is  evident  that  he  has  no 
personal  ill-will,  no  hard  spirit  of  revenge.  He  appealed  to  the  glory  of  God. 
Thus  Joshua  brought  forth  this  free  confession  of  Achan's  guilt.  His  confession 
was  as  full  as  it  was  free.  The  miserable  man  kept  nothing  back.  He  made  a 
clean  breast  of  it.  His  full  confession  shows  that  penitents  cannot  be  too  par- 
ticular. His  confession  was  also  personal.  He  felt  that  it  was  first  of  all,  and 
above  all,  a  matter  between  himself  and  God,  and  therefore,  though  others,  in  all 
likelihood,  were  i^arers  in  his  guilt  (for  he  could  not  well  have  hid  these  things  in 

11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

his  tent  without  the  cognisance  of  his  family),  still  he  made  no  mention  of  them, 
he  condemned  none  but  hiir  -If,  for  he  felt  himself  the  greatest  sirmer.  Also 
Achan's  confession  was  sincere.  He  did  not  attempt  in  the  faintest  degree  to 
excuse  himself.  He  pleaded  no  palliation  of  his  offence.  Surely,  therefore,  in  this 
confession  we  have  a  gleam  of  light  thrown  across  the  gloom  of  this  narrative. 
Just  as  in  a  picture  of  this  dark  valley  and  its  black  pile  of  stones,  we  have  seen 
one  white  bird  hovering  amid  the  gloom,  so  this  confession  is  the  white  bird  of 
hope  hovering  over  Achan's  grave,  and  relieving  somewhat  the  blackness  of  its 
darkness.  BQs  punishment  trod  swiftly  on  the  heels  of  his  confession.  This 
punishment  was  at  once  a  solemn  expression  of  the  evil  of  sin,  a  vindication  of 
God's  truth  and  justice,  a  prelude  to  future  victory,  and  a  monument  to  all 
succeeding  ages,  declaring,  "  be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  We  are  also  told 
that  all  Achan's  substance  was  destroyed,  that  which  he  possessed,  as  well  as  that 
which  he  stole.  What  a  poor  prize  had  Achan  then  in  the  things  he  so  much 
admired.  No  good  ever  comes  of  ill-gotten  gains.  In  regard  to  this  punish- 
ment of  Achan,  the  fate  of  his  family  deserves  to  be  noticed.  What  happened 
to  them  ?  Two  explanations  have  been  offered.  The  first  is  that  they  shared 
Achan's  sin  and  therefore  shared  his  punishment.  Another  explanation  is 
that  Achan's  family  were  spared.  This  rests  on  the  fact  that  there  is  a  change 
from  the  plural  in  ver.  24  to  the  singular  in  ver.  25.  Joshua  took  Achan 
and  all  his  possessions  and  all  his  family  to  the  scene  of  execution,  but 
the  punishment  fell  only  on  Achan,  for  Joshua  said  (ver.  25):  "Why  hast  thou 
troubled  us  ?  the  Lord  will  trouble  thee  this  day.  And  all  Israel  stoned  him  with 
stones,  and  burned  them  (his  cattle  and  goods)  with  fire  after  they  had  stoned 
them  with  stones."  Whichever  is  the  true  explanation  we  may  rest  assured 
that  the  demands  of  justice  were  not  ignored.  Thus  we  leave  Achan,  and  surely 
as  we  stand  by  this  heap  of  stones  and  consider  his  sad  end,  these  words 
come  to  mind — "the  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil,  which  while  some 
coveted  after,  they  have  erred  from  the  faith  and  pierced  themselves  through  with 
many  sorrows."  Looking  again  at  this  event,  we  are  struck  with  the  paraUehsm 
between  the  early  history  of  Israel  as  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Joshua  and  the  early 
history  of  the  Church  as  recorded  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  The  taking  of 
Jericho  corresponds  in  its  mighty  triumph  to  the  Day  of  Pentecost  and  the  casting 
down  of  the  walls  of  rebellion  and  prejudice  through  the  proclamation  of  the 
gospel.  Then  the  sin  of  Achan  is  strikingly  paralleled  by  that  of  Ananias  and 
Sapphira.  The  cause  of  transgression  was  the  same  in  both,  and  the  punishments 
present  a  striking  resemblance.  It  was  a  salutary  lesson  taught  both  to  Israel  and 
to  the  Church.  It  showed  that  the  God  who  dwelt  among  men  was  a  consuming 
fire,  that  His  judgment  must  follow  shortly  and  surely  on  the  heels  of  sin,  and 
that  holiness  is  the  only  source  and  secret  of  success  in  the  work  of  the  Lord. 
(A.  B.  Mackay.)  The  valley  of  Achor. — The  valley  of  Achor .- — I.  We  should 
GBiEVE  MORE  FOB  SIN  THAN  FOR  ITS  RESULTS.  As  soon  as  we  havo  Committed  sin, 
we  look  furtively  round  to  see  whether  we  have  been  watched,  and  then  we  take 
measures  to  tie  up  the  consequences  which  would  naturally  accrue.  Failing  this, 
we  are  deeply  huiniliated.  We  dread  the  consequences  of  sin  more  than  sin ;  dis- 
covery more  than  misdoing ;  what  others  may  say  and  do  more  than  the  look  of 
pain  and  sorrow  on  the  face  that  looks  out  on  us  from  the  encircling  throng  of 
glorified  spirits.  But  with  God  it  is  not  so.  It  is  our  sin,  one  of  the  most 
grievous  features  in  which  is  our  failure  to  recognise  its  intrinsic  evil,  that 
presses  Him  down,  as  a  cart  groans  beneath  its  load.  The  true  way  to  a  proper 
reaUsation  of  sin  is  to  cultivate  the  friendship  of  the  holy  God.  The  more 
we  know  Him,  the  more  utterly  we  shall  enter  into  His  thought  about  the 
subtle  evil  of  our  heart.  We  shall  find  sin  lurking  where  we  least  anticipated, 
in  our  motives,  in  our  religious  acts,  in  our  hasty  judgment  of  others,  in  our 
want  of  tender,  sensitive,  pitying  love,  in  our  censorious  condemnation  of  those 
who  may  be  restrained  by  the  action  of  a  more  sensitive  conscience  than  our 
own  from  claiming  all  that  we  claim  to  possess.  We  shall  learn  lint  every 
look,  tone,  gesture,  word,  thought,  which  is  not  consistent  with  perfect  love 
indicates  that  the  virus  of  sin  has  not  yet  been  expelled  from  our  nature, 
and  we  shall  come  to  mourn  not  so  much  for  the  result  of  sin  as  for  the  sin 
itself,  n.  We  should  submit  oubsblvbs  to  the  judgment  of  God.  "  And 
the  Lord  said  unto  Joshua,  Get  thee  up ;  wherefore  liest  thou  thus  upon  thy 
face?"  It  was  as  if  He  said,  "Thou  grievest  for  the  effect,  grieve  rather  for  the 
cause.    I  am  well  able  to  preserve  My  people  from  the  assaults  of  their  foes, 


CHAP.  VII.]  JOSHUA.  163 

though  all  Canaan  beset  them,  and  I  am  equally  able  to  maintain  the  honour  of 
My  name.  These  are  not  the  main  matters  for  concern,  but  that  a  worm  is 
already  gnawing  at  the  root  of  the  gourd,  and  a  plague  is  already  eating  out  the 
vitals  of  the  people  whom  I  have  redeemed.  With  My  right  arm  I  will  screen  you 
from  attack,  whilst  you  give  yourselves  to  the  investigation  and  destruction  of  the 
accursed  thing."  Whenever  there  is  perpetual  failure  in  our  life,  we  may  be 
sure  that  there  is  some  secret  evil  lurking  in  heart  and  life,  just  as  diphtheria 
breaking  out  repeatedly  in  a  household  is  an  almost  certain  indication  that  there  is 
an  escape  of  sewer  gas  from  the  drains.  1.  In  searching  out  the  causes  of  failure 
we  must  be  willing  to  know  the  worst,  and  this  is  almost  the  hardest  condition. 
Ostrich-like,  we  all  hide  our  heads  in  the  sand  from  unwelcome  tidings.  It  is 
the  voice  of  an  iron  resolution,  or  of  mature  Christian  experience,  that  can  say 
without  faltering,  "  Let  me  know  the  worst."  But  as  we  bare  ourselves  to  the  good 
Physician  let  us  remember  that  He  is  our  husband,  that  His  eyes  film  with  love 
and  pity,  that  He  desires  to  indicate  the  source  of  our  sorrow  only  to  remove  it,  so 
that  for  Him  and  for  us  there  may  be  the  vigour  of  perfect  soul-health  and  conse- 
quent bliss.  2.  When  God  deals  with  sin  He  traces  back  its  genealogy.  Notice 
the  particularity  with  which  twice  over  the  sacred  historian  gives  the  list  of  Achan's 
progenitors.  It  is  always,  "  Achan,  the  son  of  Carmi,  the  son  of  Zabdi,  the  son  of 
Zerah,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  "  (vers.  1,  16-18).  Sin  is  sporadic.  To  deal  with  it 
thoroughly  we  need  to  go  back  to  its  parentage.  A  long  period  will  often  intervene 
between  the  first  germ  of  sin,  in  a  permitted  thought  or  glance  of  evU,  and  its 
flower  or  fruit  in  act.  We  generally  deal  with  the  wrong  that  flames  out  before 
the  sight  of  our  fellows ;  we  should  go  behind  to  the  spark  as  it  lay  smouldering 
for  hours  before,  and  to  the  carelessness  which  left  it  there.  We  only  awake  when 
the  rock  disintegrates  and  begins  to  fall  on  our  cottage  roof ;  God  would  lead  us 
back  to  the  moment  when  a  tiny  seed,  borne  on  the  breeze,  floating  through  the 
air,  found  a  lodgment  in  some  crevice  of  our  heart,  and,  although  the  soil  was 
scanty,  succeeded  in  keeping  its  foothold,  tiU  it  had  struck  down  its  tiny  anchor 
into  a  crack,  and  gathered  strength  enough  to  split  the  rock  which  had  given  it 
welcome.  And  by  this  insight  into  small  beginnings  our  God  would  forearm  us 
against  great  catastrophes.  3.  It  is  a  good  thing  at  times  to  muster  the  clans  of 
heart  and  life.  We  must  make  the  principal  tribes  of  our  being  pass  before  God. 
The  public,  and  private,  our  behaviour  in  the  business,  the  family,  the  church, 
until  one  of  them  is  taken.  Then  to  take  that  department  and  go  through  its 
various  aspects  and  engagements,  analysing  it  in  days,  or  duties ;  resolving  it  into 
its  various  elements,  and  scrutinising  each.  This  duty  of  self-examination  should 
be  pursued  by  those  who  have  least  relish  for  it,  as  probably  they  really  need  it ; 
whilst  they  who  are  naturally  of  an  introspective  or  morbid  disposition  should  not 
engage  themselves  in  it  to  any  large  extent.  And  whoever  undertakes  it  should  do 
80  in  reliance  on  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  give  ten  glances  to  the  blessed  Lord  for 
every  one  that  is  taken  at  the  corruptions  of  the  natural  heart.  It  is  looking  off 
unto  Jesus  which  is  the  real  secret  of  soul-growth,  in.  We  should  hold  no 
PARLEY  with  discoveked  SIN.  God  ncvcr  reveals  an  evil  which  He  does  not  require 
us  to  remove.  And  if  heart  and  flesh  fail,  if  our  hand  refuses  to  obey  our  faltering 
will,  if  the  paralysis  of  evil  has  so  far  enfeebled  us  that  we  cannot  lift  the  stone,  or 
wield  the  knife,  or  strike  the  flint  stones  for  the  fire,  then  He  wiU  do  for  us  what 
must  be  done,  but  which  we  cannot  do.  Some  are  cast  in  a  mould  so  strong  that 
they  can  dare  to  raise  the  hatchet,  and  cut  off  the  arm  just  madly  bitten,  and 
before  poison  has  passed  from  it  into  the  system ;  others  must  await  the  surgeon's 
knife.  But  the  one  lesson  for  all  the  inner  life  is  to  be  willing  for  God  to  do  His 
work  in  us,  through  us,  or  for  us.  So  the  valley  of  Achor  becomes  the  door  of 
hope.  From  that  sterile,  moimtain-guarded  valley,  Israel  marched  to  victory ;  or, 
to  use  the  highly-coloured  imagery  of  Hosea,  it  was  as  though  the  massive  slabs 
opened  in  the  cliffs,  and  the  people  passed  into  cornfields,  vineyards,  and  olive- 
yards,  singing  amid  their  rich  luxuriance  as  they  sang  in  their  youth  in  the  day 
when  they  came  up  out  of  Egypt.  Ah !  metaphor  as  true  as  fair  1  For  all  our  inner 
life  there  is  no  valley  of  Achor  where  the  work  of  execution  is  faithfully  performed 
in  which  there  is  not  a  door  of  hope,  entrance  into  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  and  a 
Bong  so  sweet,  so  joyous,  so  triumphant,  as  though  the  buoyancy  of  youth  were  wed 
with  the  experience  and  mellowness  of  age.     (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vra. 


CHAPTER  Vm. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Fear  not  ...  I  have  given  into  thy  hand  the  king  of  Ai. — The 

use  of  failure  : — "Fearnot."  How  much  of  our  misery  arises  from  fear  I  How 
many  a  beating  heart,  how  many  a  shaking  nerve,  how  many  a  sleepless  night 
have  come,  not  from  evil  experienced,  but  from  evil  apprehended  1  To  save  one 
from  the  apprehension  of  evil  is  sometimes  more  important,  as  it  is  usually 
far  more  difficult,  than  to  save  one  from  evil  itself.  An  affectionate  father  finds 
that  one  of  his  most  needed  services  to  his  children  is  to  allay  their  fears.  Never 
is  he  doing  them  a  greater  kindness  than  when  he  uses  his  larger  experience  of  life 
to  assure  them,  in  some  anxiety,  that  there  is  no  cause  for  fear.  Our  heavenly 
Father  finds  much  occasion  for  a  similar  course.  Virtually  the  command  to 
Joshua  is  to  "  try  again."  Success,  though  denied  to  the  first  effort,  often  comea 
to  the  next,  or  at  least  to  a  subsequent  one.  Even  apart  from  spiritual  con- 
siderations, it  is  those  who  try  oftenest  who  succeed  best.  There  is  httle  good 
in  a  man  who  abandons  an  undertaking  simply  because  he  has  tried  once  and 
failed.  Who  does  not  recall  in  this  connection  the  story  of  Alfred  the  Great  ?  Or 
of  Eobert  the  Bruce  watching  the  spider  in  the  barn  that  at  last  reached  the  roof 
after  sixteen  failures  ?  Or,  looking  to  what  has  a  more  immediate  bearing  on  the 
kingdom  of  God,  who  has  not  admired  the  perseverance  of  Livingstone,  undaunted 
by  fever  and  famine  and  the  ferocity  of  savage  chiefs ;  unmoved  by  his  longings 
for  home  and  dreams  of  plenty  and  comfort  that  mocked  him  when  he  awoke  to 
physical  wretchedness  and  want  ?  Such  perseverance  gives  a  man  the  stamp 
of  true  nobility.  To  Christian  men  especially  failure  brings  very  valuable  lessons. 
There  is  always  something  to  be  learned  from  it.  In  our  first  attempt  we  were  too 
self-confident.  We  went  too  carelessly  about  the  matter,  and  did  not  sufficiently 
realise  the  need  of  Divine  support.  In  the  case  of  Joshua  and  his  people,  one  of 
the  chief  lessons  derived  from  their  failure  before  Ai  was  the  evil  of  covering  sin. 
Alas,  this  policy  is  the  cause  of  failures  innumerable  in  the  spiritual  life!  In 
numberless  ways  it  interrupts  Divine  fellowship,  withdraws  the  Divine  blessing,  and 
grieves  the  Holy  Spirit.  Joshua  is  instructed  to  go  up  again  against  Ai,  but  in 
order  to  interest  and  encourage  the  people  he  resorts  to  a  new  plan  of  attack.  A 
stratagem  is  to  be  put  in  operation.  (W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.)  The  right  policy  : — 
I.  These  words  were  spoken  to  give  encoubagement.  God  began  His  address  with 
the  exhortation,  "  Fear  not."  This  indeed  constitutes  the  burden  of  comfort  which 
it  contains.  God  would  renew  Joshua's  confidence  ;  for  this  is  always  essential  to 
success  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Without  holy  confidence  there  can  be  no  good 
hopes,  no  wise  plans,  no  buoyant  energy,  no  patient  endurance,  no  successful 
campaign.  The  fact  that  this  was  an  old  exhortation  made  it  doubly  dear. 
Israel's  sins  had  been  confessed,  acknowledged,  judged,  therefore  God  is  faithful 
and  just  to  forgive  it,  thoroughly,  absolutely.  These  words  of  God  also  contain  a 
promise.  "  Ai  is  thine  "  ;  this  is  the  pledge  given.  It  was  sure,  for  God's  Word 
is  never  broken.  And  it  was  as  sweet  as  it  was  sure.  It  was  the  encouragement  of 
a  perfect  love  that  had  long  been  experienced  and  enjoyed ;  a  new  outpouring  of 
its  glory  most  grateful  and  precious.  II.  But  God  thus  addressed  Joshua  in  order 
TO  REPBOVE  AN  EBBOB.  The  spics  had  said,  "Let  not  all  the  people  go  up,"  &c. 
Here  God  says,  "  Take  all  the  people  with  thee,  and  arise,  go  up  to  Ai."  Here 
God  points  out  the  error  of  division  in  His  work,  the  error  of  thinking  that  part 
can  do  the  work  designed  for  the  whole.  The  policy  of  the  spies  was  a  policy  of 
pride.  They  were  elated  with  their  marvellous  success  at  Jericho,  with  that 
brilliant  victory  so  easily  won  ;  and  therefore  when  they  came  to  look  at  Ai  their 
hearts  were  filled  with  contempt.  And  the  feelings  which  influenced  them  still 
possess  the  human  heart.  How  dangerous  is  success  to  the  individual,  to  the 
congregation,  to  the  Church  1  The  policy  of  the  spies  was  also  one  of  ignorance  and 
disobedience.  It  was  opposed  to  the  Divine  design  and  command.  So  is  it  now. 
trod  has  never  said  to  any  of  His  children,  "  Son,  go  to  church,  enjoy  the  services, 
ciiticise  the  sermons,  bury  yourself  in  business  and  pleasure  from  Monday  till 
Saturday."  No,  but  He  does  say,  "  Son,  go  work."  And  He  says  that  to  every 
son  whom  He  acknowledges.  No  Christian  can  shake  off  his  responsibility  for 
personal  service.  And  no  one  can  buy  himself  off,  for  the  conscription  is  universal. 
We  must  each  put  our  hand  to  this  work  as  we  have  opportunity,  and  if  we  do  not, 
we  show  ourselves  ignorant  or  prove  ourselves  disobedient.  Moreover,  this  policy 
of  the  spies  was  a  policy  of  inconsistency.     In  adopting  it  Joshua  fell  from  his  own 


CHAP,  vm.]  JOSHUA.  165 

model.  He  had  begun  in  the  spirit  and  was  continuing  in  the  flesh.  The  taking 
of  Jericho  was  the  pattern  for  faith  to  follow.  What  is  the  model  set  by  God 
before  His  Church  in  the  prosecution  of  the  campaign  of  salvation?  Without 
dispute,  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  And  what  were  the  characteristics  of  that  day  ? 
Unity  of  spirit,  unity  of  labour.  Likewise,  this  poUcy  sprang  from  presumption. 
Joshua  in  Ustening  to  the  advice  of  the  spies  acted  according  to  the  dictates  of 
carnal  wisdom.  If  all  the  people  go  against  Ai  they  will  tread  on  each  other  and 
be  a  hindrance  rather  than  a  help.  K  all  the  people  quit  the  camp  there  wUl  be  a 
useless  expenditure  of  energy.  It  is  absurd  to  use  50,000  men  when  5,000  are  quite 
capable  of  doing  the  work.  So  they  argued;  and  so  the  modern  descendants 
of  these  wise  spies  say,  "  Not  all  the  people."  If  all  are  engaged  in  this  work, 
many  mistakes  wUl  be  made,  much  energy  will  be  wasted,  much  folly  will  be 
■wrought,  much  injury  to  the  good  cause  will  be  done.  What !  Has  not  God 
ordained  that  all  are  to  take  part  in  this  campaign  ?  Let  us  take  heed,  then,  lest  in 
our  wisdom  we  perchance  become  guilty  of  presumptuously  opposing  God,  who  has 
ordained  by  the  fooUshness  of  preaching  to  save  them  that  believe.  Certainly 
it  is  delightful  to  see  zeal  well  directed,  but  any  zeal  for  the  good  of  souls  is  better 
than  lethargy,  indifference,  death.  Still  further,  this  policy  of  the  spies  was  a 
policy  of  infatuation.  That  Joshua  entertained  this  proposal  and  acted  on  it  was 
a  sign  that  for  the  while  he  was  left  to  himself  on  account  of  that  sin  which  had 
defiled  all  Israel.  Its  unanimous  adoption  by  the  people  (for  both  those  who  went 
to  Ai  and  those  who  stayed  in  the  camp  signified  their  approval  of  it)  was  a  clear 
token  of  the  Divine  displeasure,  and  brought  its  own  punishment  in  the  universal 
disgrace  which  followed.  Thus  does  God  often  deal  with  men  when  they  will  not 
hearken  to  His  voice.  He  makes  them  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own  ways.  May  we 
ever  be  saved  from  such  infatuation.  Let  us  fall  every  one  into  the  ranks  of  this 
great  army  of  salvation.  Let  us  buckle  on  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  Let  us  march 
to  the  attack  on  Satan's  citadels  with  united  front;  and  we  also,  like  Israel,  wiU 
divide  the  spoil  and  share  the  glory  of  the  victory.  IH.  God  gave  this  command 
to  Joshua  in  order  to  teach  a  lesson.  Jericho  was  taken  in  one  way,  Ai  in 
another :  therefore  methods  may  vary ;  they  are  not  stereotyped,  cast-iron  rules, 
which  cannot  be  altered.  There  are  essential  and  there  are  non-essential  elements 
in  the  mode  of  conducting  the  Divine  work.  It  is  essential  that  aU  God's  people 
should  take  part  in  the  work.  All  were  employed  at  Jericho ;  all  were  to  be 
employed  at  Ai.  It  is  essential  that  there  be  organisation  and  arrangement.  It 
was  an  army,  not  a  rabble,  which  did  the  work  at  Jericho ;  so  was  it  at  Ai.  But 
there  are  non-essentials  also.  There  are  great  diversities  of  operation  in  this  army 
of  the  Cross.  God  does  not  always  act  exactly  in  the  same  way.  He  has  different 
modes  of  reaching  the  human  heart  and  conscience  in  different  ages,  in  different 
countries,  and  among  different  classes.  What  is  suitable  in  one  set  of  circum- 
stances may  be  very  unsuitable  in  another.  {A.  B.  Mackay.)  The  taking 
of  Ai  sjnritualised : — 1.  It  appears,  in  the  first  place,  that  in  going  out  to  battle 
with  anything  that  is  doomed  we  must  have  a  right  character  and  a  right  cause. 
The  Lord  would  not  allow  a  blow  to  be  struck  at  the  city  by  a  wicked  hand ;  He 
will  have  judgment  executed  by  righteousness ;  He  will  have  the  law  proclaimed 
by  lips  that  have  been  circumcised  and  anointed.  The  first  great  inquiry  of  man  is 
a  moral  inquiry,  not  an  inquest  about  numbers,  places,  and  possible  issues — but,  "  Is 
this  thing  right?  and  am  I  right  who  attempt  to  do  the  work?  "  That  being  the 
case,  go  forward.  2.  The  next  great  lesson  of  this  incident  is  that  we  must  all 
advance  upon  the  doomed  institution.  When  the  idea  of  taking  Ai  was  first 
broached,  there  were  clever  men  in  Israel  who  said,  "  Let  two  or  three  thousand  of 
us  go  up  and  take  the  city."  "I,  and  aU  the  people  that  are  with  me,  will  approach 
unto  the  city"  (ver.  5).  That  must  be  the  rule  of  the  Church  in  all  its  great  moral 
wars.  The  battle  is  not  to  be  handed  over  to  a  few  persons,  however  skilful  and 
zealous.  The  work  of  teaching  the  world  and  saving  the  world  is  a  work  committed 
to  the  whole  Christian  body.  The  Uving  Church  of  the  living  God  is  one.  When 
the  Church  realises  its  totality,  when  every  man  is  part  of  an  army  and  not  an 
isolated  warrior,  then  every  Ai  doomed  of  Heaven  shall  reel  under  the  battering-ram 
which  the  Church  will  employ.  There  are  to  be  no  mere  critics  ;  there  are  to  be 
thousands  of  active  soldiers.  3.  This  being  so,  the  incident  brings  before  us  in  a 
very  suggestive  and  picturesque  manner  the  fact  that  we  must  excel  the  enemy  in 
shrewdness.  The  Church  is  to  be  shrewder  than  the  world,  believers  are  to  be 
keener  of  mind  and  more  active  in  every  energy  than  unbelievers.  It  is  evident, 
moreover,  that  il  we  are  to  do  any  real  work  in  the  world  in  the  name  of  God  and 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vra. 

in  the  cause  of  Christ  we  must  be  about  our  business  night  and  day.  In  ver.  10 
we  read,  "  And  Joshua  rose  up  early  in  the  morning  " ;  in  ver.  13  we  read,  "  Joshua 
went  that  night  into  the  midst  of  the  valley."  How  useful  some  men  might  be  if 
they  had  the  spirit  of  consecration  :  what  time  they  have  on  hand !  4.  We  should 
miss  one  great  lesson  of  this  story  if  we  did  not  note  that  we  are  bound  to  set  fire  to 
every  devoted  abomination.  Ai  was  burned.  We  are  not  caUed  to  compromise,  to 
paltering,  to  arranging,  to  expediency  where  ignorance  is  concerned,  or  slavery,  or 
vice,  or  wrong.  Things  must  be  so  burned  down  that  they  can  never  grow  again. 
And  after  destruction,  what  then?  Positive  religion  comes  next:  "Then  Joshua 
buUt  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  in  Mount  Ebal  "  (ver.  30).  It  is  no  use 
building  your  altar  until  you  have  burned  the  abomination.  A  great  destructive 
work  is  to  be  done  first,  and  in  the  doing  of  it,  there  will  be  great  outcry  about 
change,  and  novelty,  and  reprisal,  and  revolution.  If  you  have  not  been  faithful  in 
the  work  of  destruction,  you  cannot  be  faithful  in  the  work  of  construction.  It  is 
lying  unto  the  Holy  Ghost  to  buUd  an  altar  upon  the  basis  of  a  rotten  life.  So  we 
are  called  to  thoroughness  of  work.  There  is  to  be  no  superficial  action  here.  And 
after  the  altar,  what?  The  law — the  law  of  righteousness,  the  law  of  God.  Ver.  32 
reads,  "And  Joshua  wrote  there  upon  the  stones  a  copy  of  the  law  of  Moses, 
which  he  wrote  in  the  presence  of  the  children  of  Israel."  This  is  complete  work — 
destruction,  the  erected  altar,  the  inscribed  law.  This  is  healthy  work.  (J. 
Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3-29.  So  Joshua  arose,  and  aU  the  people  of  war. — All  the  people  at 
work  for  Jesus : — I.  Consider  the  advice  of  the  spies  which  led  to  such  a  shameful 
defeat  (chap.  vii.  8).  1.  Here  we  shall  have  to  deal  with  the  error  of  supposing 
that  a  part  only  of  the  Church  will  be  sufficient  to  perform  the  work  of  the  whole. 
2.  In  Joshua's  day  this  error  sprang  up  among  the  Israelites  because,  on  account 
of  their  sins,  God  was  displeased  with  them.  When  God  is  in  the  midst  of 
a  Church  He  guides  its  counsels  and  directs  the  hearts  of  men  to  go  about  His 
work  in  the  wisest  manner.  Even  upon  the  Lord's  own  people  a  measure  of 
judicial  bhndness  may  come.  You  may  depend  upon  it  that  when  it  becomes 
a  doctrine  that  only  special  classes  of  men  are  to  be  expected  to  work  in  the  Church 
there  is  some  great  wi'ong  in  the  background.  3.  Furthermore,  this  evil  policy 
arose  out  of  presumption  engendered  by  success.  The  full  sail  needs  much 
ballast,  lest  the  boat  be  overset.  We  must  be  more  sensible  of  weakness,  more 
mindful  that  the  conversion  of  souls  is  the  work  of  Omnipotence,  or  we  shall  see 
but  little  done.  We  must  ourselves  believe  more  fully  in  the  need  of  earnest  work 
for  God,  and  put  forth  all  our  strength,  and  strain  every  sinew  for  Him,  knowing 
that  it  is  His  power  that  worketh  in  us  mightily  when  we  strive  with  all  our  hearts. 
4.  Let  us  not  forget  that  these  children  of  Israel  were  forgetting  their  commission 
and  violating  the  command  of  God.  As  they  all  expected  to  have  a  dweUing-place 
in  Canaan,  so  they  were  all  expected  to  conquer  the  territory  by  their  own  exertions. 
They  were  all  an  enlisted  host  for  God,  and  He  never  ordained  that  a  part  only 
should  go  forth  in  His  great  controversy  with  the  condemned  Cauaanites.  If  we 
ever  neglect  to  render  universal  service  as  a  Church  in  the  cause  of  Christ  we  shall 
depart  from  our  trust  and  call,  for  the  Lord  has  sent  aU  His  disciples  to  testify  of 
Him  and  contend  against  sin.  5.  These  Israelites,  in  the  new  fashion  which  they 
were  trying  to  set  up,  were  departing  from  their  own  model.  That  model  was, 
doubtless,  the  siege  of  Jericho.  In  that  siege  there  was  much  dependence  upon 
God,  but  there  was  no  neglect  of  instrumentaUty ;  and,  though  all  they  did  was  to 
go  round  the  city  and  shout,  yet  in  so  doing  they  were  literally  fulfilling  orders,  and 
doing  all  that  was  commanded.  What,  then,  is  our  model  as  a  Church  ?  Is  it  not 
Pentecost  ?  In  that  day  did  they  not  break  bread  from  house  to  house,  all  of  them  ? 
Did  they  not  sell  their  lands  and  lay  the  price  of  them  at  the  apostles'  feet  ?  Was 
there  not  a  burning  enthusiasm  throughout  the  entire  company  of  disciples?  I 
suppose  there  is  not  one  person  present  who  heard  that  famous  sermon  by  Matthew 
Wilks  upon  the  universal  service  rendered  by  idolaters  to  their  false  gods,  from  the 
text,  "  The  children  gathered  wood,  and  the  fathers  kindled  the  fire,  and  the  women 
kneaded  their  dough  to  make  cakes  to  the  queen  of  heaven."  The  preacher's 
argument  on  that  occasion  was  that  which  I  would  now  press  upon  you,  that  all 
should  take  part  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Distinct  offices  but  united  aims  ;  diverse 
operations  but  the  same  spirit ;  many  and  yet  one— so  let  it  be.  6.  Again,  this  error 
which  we  are  carefully  to  avoid  was  no  doubt  the  dictate  of  carnal  wisdom.  Spies 
were  never  of  much  use  to  Israel — two  only  of  the  first  twelve  were  faithful — what 


CHAP.  Tin.]  JOSHUA.  167 

did  Israel  want  with  spies?    Better  far  had  it  been  to  walk  by  faith.     To  Ai  they 
must  needs  send  spies  instead  of  going  up  at  once  in  the  confidence  of  faith :  evil 
came  of  it,  for  these  spies  counselled  that  only  part  of  the  people  need  labour  up 
the  hni.    And  the  best  ministers  of  Christ,  worthy  of  all  honour,  would  be  the 
cause  of  great  mischief  if  once  their  carnal  wisdom  should  make  them  think  that 
they  can  supersede  primitive  plans  with  wiser  inventions.     7.  These  children  of 
Israel,  in  sending  to  the  war  only  part  of  the  men  were  breaking  in  upon  the  Divine 
design.     The  Lord  never  intended  to  have  two  peoples,  but  one ;  and  so  we  read 
that  the  Eeubenites  and  the  Gadites  came  over  Jordan  to  the  war,  although  their 
portion  was  already  conquered.     It  was  the  Divine  intent  that  they  should  be  one 
army  of  the  living  God,  each  separate  son  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  belonging  to  that 
army  and  fighting  in  it ;   He  meant  that  not  some  only,  but  aU  should  see  the 
mighty  works  of  His  hand,  working  with  them  to  overthrow  their  adversaries.     I  am 
sure  it  is  so  with  the  Church  of  God  to-day.     Our  Lord  means  to  keep  all  His 
chosen  ones  as  one  army,  and  to  instruct  them  all  as  one  band.    And  when  are  we 
most  manifestly  one  ?     When  we  get  to  work.     II.  The  command  that  all  Iseael 
SHOULD  GO  FORTH  TO  THE  FIGHT  :  "  Take  all  the  men  of  war  with  thee."    We  must 
have  aU  our  Church  members  go  to  the  war.    We  want  to  turn  out  the  drones,  and 
we  need  an  increase  of  true  working  bees.     How  is  it  to  be  done?     1.  We  must  be 
ourselves  deeply  impressed  with  the  evil  brought  upon  idle   Christians  by  their 
idleness,  and  the  evil  which  they  bring  upon  the  rest  of  the  Church.     Indolence  is 
temptation.     Certain  of  our  Churches  are  suffering  from  unsound  teaching,  but 
they  are  suffering  as  much  from  want  of  work.     The  moss  is  growing  upon  them, 
the  rust  is  eating  them  up ;  the  gold  becomes  dim,  the  silver  is  losing  its  brightness, 
and  all  for  want  of  use.     2.  We  need  to  be  impressed  with  the  mischief  which 
idlers   cause  to  others.     One   sickly  sheep   infects  the  flock;  one  member  who 
does  nothing  lowers  the  tone  of  the  whole  body.     The  indolence  of  prominent 
professors  is  not  merely  the  waste  of  their  own  labour,  but  of  that  of   scores  of 
others.    Every  man  in  an  army  who  is  not  efficient  and  really  serviceable  is  on 
the  enemy's   side.     3.  Moreover,  we  must  hunt  out  the  sin  which  leads  to  the 
evil  against  which  we  contend,  and  I  believe  it  is  want  of  vital  godliness  in  many 
cases.     It  is  often  the  sin  which  grows  out  of  too  much  ease,  self-indulgence,  and 
luxurious  hvtng.     It  seems  as  if  the  more  God  gives  a  man  the  less  return  he 
is  inclined  to  offer.     Whatever  the  secret  sin  of  the  Church  may  be,  let  us  try 
to  discover  it,  and  then  by  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit  endeavour  to  educate  aU  our 
members  to  work  for  the  Lord.     4.  There  must  be  a  continual  insisting  upon  the 
personal  obligations   of   Christians.     "  What   art  thou   doing  for   Christ  ? "  is   a 
question  to  be  asked  of  aU.     No  one  must  appear  before  the  Lord  empty,  but  either 
by  active  or  passive  service  must  prove  his  gratitude  to  God.     And  then,  while  each 
is  responsible,  neglect  by  one  is  injurious  to  the  common  service  of  the  whole.     I 
saw  a  cart  standing  this  morning  on  the  roadside  with  one  wheel  chained ;  there 
was  no  fear  of  its  moving  with  that  one  wheel  fast.     Sometimes  one  chained  wheel 
in  a  Church  wUl  hinder  aU.     5.  Dwell  upon  the   importance  of  the  enterprise 
in  which  we  are  engaged ;  and  so  act  as  to  make  others  feel  its  importance.     We 
must  make  men  feel  that  to  save  a  soul  is  better  than  to  possess  all  knowledge,  or 
even  to  gain  the  whole  world  1     While  others  are  making  a  new  gospel  let  us  labour 
to  save  souls  by  the  old  one.     6.  Above  all,  let  us  pray  for  more  grace.     Napoleon 
nsed  to  say,  "Conquest  has  made  me  what  I  am,  and  conquest  must  maintain 
me " ;    and  it  is   so  with   Christians.     You  must  advance ;   you  must  outdo  the 
exploits  of  the  past,  and  eclipse  the  deeds  of  your  sires,  or  you  will  show  yourselves 
unworthy  of  them.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         United  effort  needed  : — In  the  days  of 
chivalry  a  certain  band  of  knights  had  never  known  defeat.     In  all  battles  their 
name  was  terrible  to  the  foe.     On  their  banners  was  emblazoned  a  long  list  of 
victories ;  but  in  an  evil  hour  the  leaders  of  the  knights  summoned  them  in  chapter, 
and  he  said  :  "  My  brethren,  we  cause  ourselves  too  much  toil.     Let  the  champions 
go  alone.     Yonder  knight  with  his  sword  can  cleave  a  man  in  twain  at  a  single 
stroke,  and  his  comrade  can  break   a  bar  of  ii'on  with  his  axe ;  others  among 
us  are  equally  powerful,  each  one  being  a  host  in  himself.     With  the  terror  of  our 
name  behind  them,  the  chosen  champions  can  carry  on  the  war  while  the  rest 
divide  the  spoil."     The  saying  pleased  the  warriors  weU,  but  from  that  hour  the 
kneU  of  their  fame  was  rung,  and  defeat  defiled  their  standard.     When  they  came 
together  they  complained  of  the  champions  because  they  had  not  sustained  the 
honour  of  the  order,  and  they  bade  them  exert  themselves  more  heroically.    They 
did  so,  but  with  small  success.    Louder  and  louder  were  the  notes  of  discontent  and 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

the  demands  for  new  champions.  Then  one  of  the  oldest  of  the  knights  said: 
" Brethren,  why  do  you  blame  us?  The  mistake  lies  here.  In  the  old  time,  when 
the  enemy  assailed  us,  a  thousand  men  were  up  in  arms,  and  we  who  led  the  van 
knew  that  a  gallant  army  followed  at  our  heels.  But  now  you  have  made  us  solitary 
champions,  and  the  adversary  takes  heart  to  defy  us,  finding  us  unsustained. 
Come  you  all  with  us  to  the  fray  as  aforetime,  and  none  shall  stand  against  us." 
(Ibid.)  Work  for  God  among  the  heathen : — Let  us  each  question  his  own 
heart  as  to  the  claims  of  the  heathen :  for  my  own  part,  I  dare  not  sleep  till  I 
have  honestly  considered  whether  I  ought  to  go  or  not.  We  teU  our  young  men  in 
the  college  that  they  must  prove  that  they  have  not  to  go,  or  else  their  duty  is  clear. 
If  some  of  the  men  of  Israel  had  said  to  Joshua,  "  We  cannot  go  to  Ai,"  Joshua 
would  have  replied,  "  You  must  prove  that  you  cannot  go  or  you  may  not  be 
excused."  All  other  things  being  equal,  ministers  should  take  it  for  granted  that 
it  is  their  duty  to  invade  new  territory  unless  they  can  prove  to  the  contrary. 
France  is  wanting  the  gospel.  See  what  one  beloved  brother  in  Paris  has  been 
able  to  do — are  there  none  who  can  do  the  like  for  other  cities  in  that  neigh- 
bour-country ?  Here  and  there  a  good  man  can  say,  "  I  have  made  a  competency  " 
— why  not  live  and  employ  it  where  you  can  lay  it  out  personally  for  the  spread  of 
the  Redeemer's  kingdom  ?  Such  a  thing  is  being  done  by  a  few,  it  is  not  therefore 
impossible,  and  you  who  follow  the  grand  example  shall  have  your  reward. 
See  what  Pastor  Harms  did  in  the  village  of  Hermansburg,  how  he  stirred 
up  all  the  people  until  they  gave  themselves  and  their  property  to  the 
Lord,  and  built  a  ship  for  the  mission  and  went  forth  in  it  to  Africa, 
company  after  company,  to  evangelise.  Should  it  not  be  the  ambition  of  a 
minister  to  feel  that  if  he  stays  at  home  he  will  at  least,  by  the  Holy  Spirit's 
help,  produce  missionaries  by  scores  in  the  village  where  he  labours?  (Ibid.) 
Ye  shall  lie  in  wait  against  the  city. — Joshua's  address  to  the  soldiers  of  the 
expedition: — I.  Joshua's  obedience.  U.  Joshua's  prudence.  III.  Joshua's 
COURAGE.  rV.  Joshua's  faith.  V.  Joshua's  authority.  1.  The  authority  of  all 
God-given  words.  2.  The  authority  of  obedience.  (F.  G.  Marchant.)  The 
victorious  retreat : — I.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  victorious  retreat.  There  are 
times  in  your  life  when  the  best  thing  you  can  do  is  to  run.  You  were  once  the 
victim  of  strong  drink.  The  glass  and  the  decanter  were  your  fierce  foes.  Your 
only  safety  is  to  get  away  from  them.  Your  dissipating  companions  will  come 
around  you  for  your  overthrow.  Eun  for  your  life !  Your  retreat  is  your  victory. 
Here  is  a  converted  infidel.  He  is  so  strong  now  in  his  faith  in  the  gospel,  he  saya 
he  can  read  anything.  What  are  you  reading  ?  Bolingbroke  ?  Theodore  Parker  ? 
Drop  them  and  run.  You  will  be  an  infidel  before  you  die  unless  you  quit  that. 
Fly  before  they  cut  you  with  their  swords  and  transfix  you  with  their  javelins. 
There  are  people  who  have  been  weU-nigh  ruined  because  they  risked  a  foolhardy 
expedition  in  the  presence  of  mighty  and  overwhelming  temptations,  and  the  men 
of  Ai  made  a  morning  meal  of  them.  So  also  there  is  such  a  thing  as  victorious 
defeat  for  the  Church.  Thousands  of  times  the  kingdom  of  Christ  has  seemed  to 
fall  back.  When  the  Vaudois  of  France  chose  extermination  rather  than  make  an 
unchristian  surrender,  when  on  St.  Bartholomew's  day  mounted  assassins  rode 
through  the  streets  of  Paris,  crying,  "  Kill  1  Blood-letting  is  good  in  August ! 
Kill !  Death  to  the  Huguenots  1  Kill ! "  When  John  Bunyan  lay  rotting  in 
Bedford  Jail,  saying,  "If  God  wiU  help  me,  and  my  physical  life  continues,  I  will 
stay  here  until  the  moss  grows  on  my  eyebrows  rather  than  give  up  my  faith,"  the 
days  of  retreat  for  the  Church  were  days  of  victory.  But  there  is  a  more  marked 
illustration  of  victorious  retreat  in  the  life  of  our  Joshua,  the  Jesus  of  the  ages. 
First  falling  back  from  an  appalling  height  to  an  appalling  depth,  falling  from 
celestial  hills  to  terrestrial  valleys,  from  throne  to  manger  ;  yet  that  did  not  seem 
to  suffice  Him  as  a  retreat.  Falling  back  still  further  from  Bethlehem  to  Nazareth, 
from  Nazareth  to  Jerusalem,  back  from  Jerusalem  to  Golgotha,  back  from  Golgotha 
to  the  mausoleum  in  the  rock,  back  down  over  the  precipices  of  perdition,  until  He 
walked  amid  the  caverns  of  the  eternal  captives  and  drank  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath 
of  almighty  God  amid  the  Ahabs  and  the  Jezebels  and  the  Belshazzars.  Oh,  men 
of  the  pulpit  and  men  of  the  pew,  Christ's  descent  from  heaven  to  earth  does  not 
measure  half  the  distance  !  It  was  from  glory  to  perdition.  He  descended  into 
hell.  All  the  records  of  earthly  retreat  are  as  nothing  compared  with  this  falling 
back.  Santa  Anna  with  the  fragments  of  his  army  flying  over  the  plateau  of 
Mexico,  and  Napoleon  and  his  army  retreating  from  Moscow  into  the  awful  snows 
of  Bussia,  are  not  worthy  to  be  mentioned  with  this  retreat  when  all  the  powers  of 


CHAP,  vin.]  JOSHUA.  169 

darkness  seem  to  be  pursuing  Christ  as  He  fell  back,  until  the  body  of  Him  who 
came  to  do  such  wonderful  things  lay  pulseless  and  stripped.  But  let  not  the 
powers  of  darkness  rejoice  quite  so  soon.  Do  you  hear  that  disturbance  in  the 
tomb  of  Arimathea  ?  I  hear  the  sheet  rending  1  What  means  that  stone  hurled 
down  the  side  of  the  hill  ?  Who  is  this  coming  out  ?  Push  Him  back  !  The  dead 
must  not  stalk  in  this  open  daylight.  Oh,  it  is  our  Joshua  1  Let  Him  come  out. 
He  comes  forth  and  starts  for  the  city.  He  takes  the  spear  of  the  Boman  guard 
and  points  that  way.  Church  militant  marches  up  on  one  side  and  the  Church 
triumphant  marches  down  on  the  other  side.  And  the  powers  of  darkness  being 
caught  between  these  ranks  of  celestial  and  terrestrial  valour,  nothing  is  left  of 
them  save  just  enough  to  illustrate  the  direful  overthrow  of  hell  and  our  Joshua's 
eternal  victory.  H.  The  tritjmph  of  the  wicked  is  short.  Did  you  ever  see  an 
army  in  a  panic  ?  There  is  nothing  so  uncontrollable.  If  you  had  stood  at  Long 
Bridge,  Washington,  during  the  opening  of  our  unfortunate  war,  you  would  know 
what  it  is  to  see  an  army  run.  And  when  those  men  of  Ai  looked  out  and  saw 
those  men  of  Joshua  in  a  stampede,  they  expected  easy  work.  They  would  scatter 
them  as  the  equinox  the  leaves.  Oh,  the  gleeful  and  jubilant  descent  of  the  men 
of  Ai  upon  the  men  of  Joshua  !  But  their  exhilaration  was  brief,  for  the  tide  of 
battle  turned,  and  these  quondam  conquerors  left  their  miserable  bodies  in  the 
wilderness  of  Bethaven.  So  it  always  is.  The  triumph  of  the  wicked  is  short. 
Call  over  the  roll  of  bad  men  who  prospered,  and  see  how  short  was  their  prosperity. 
m.  How  much  may  be  accomplished  by  lying  in  ambush  for  opportunities.  Are 
you  hypercritical  of  Joshua's  manoeuvre  ?  Do  you  say  that  it  was  cheating  for  him 
to  take  that  city  by  ambuscade?  Was  it  wrong  for  Washington  to  kindle  camp-fires 
on  New  Jersey  Heights,  giving  the  impression  to  the  opposing  force  that  a  great 
army  was  encamped  there  when  there  was  none  at  all  ?  I  answer,  if  the  war  was 
right  then  Joshua  was  right  in  his  stratagem.  He  violated  no  flag  of  truce.  He 
broke  no  treaty,  but  by  a  lawful  ambuscade  captured  the  city  of  Ai.  Oh,  that 
we  all  knew  how  to  He  in  ambush  for  opportunities  to  serve  God!  The  best 
opportunities  do  not  lie  on  the  surface,  but  are  secreted  ;  by  fact,  by  stratagem,  by 
Christian  ambuscade,  you  may  take  almost  any  castle  of  sin  for  Chiist.  Come  up 
towards  men  with  a  regular  besiegement  of  argument,  and  you  will  be  defeated ;  but 
just  wait  until  the  door  of  their  hearts  is  set  ajar,  or  they  are  off  their  guard,  or 
their  severe  caution  is  away  from  home,  and  then  drop  in  on  them  from  a  Christian 
ambuscade.  There  has  been  many  a  man  up  to  his  chin  in  scientific  portfolios 
which  proved  there  was  no  Christ  and  no  Divine  revelation,  his  pen  a  scimetar 
flung  into  the  heart  of  the  theological  opponents,  who,  nevertheless,  has  been 
discomfited  and  captured  for  God  by  some  little  three-year-old  child  who  has  got 
up  and  put  her  snowy  arms  around  his  sinewy  neck  and  said,  "  Papa,  why  don't 
you  love  Jesus  ? "  Oh,  make  a  flank  movement ;  steal  a  march  on  the  devil ; 
cheat  that  man  into  heaven  !  Do  not  rub  a  man's  disposition  the  wrong  way.  Do 
not  take  the  imperative  mood  when  the  subjunctive  mood  will  do  just  as  well.  You 
can  take  any  man  for  Christ  if  you  know  how  to  get  at  him.  Do  not  send  word  to 
him  that  to-morrow  at  ten  o'clock  you  propose  to  open  your  batteries  upon  him, 
but  come  on  him  by  a  skUful,  persevering,  God-directed  ambuscade.  IV.  The 
IMPORTANCE  OF  TAKING  GOOD  AIM.  There  must  be  some  signal — a  signal  to  stop  the 
one  division  and  to  start  the  other.  Joshua,  with  a  spear  on  which  were  ordinarily 
hung  the  colours  of  battle,  points  towards  the  city.  He  stands  in  such  a  conspicuous 
position,  and  there  is  so  much  of  the  morning  light  dripping  from  that  spear-tip, 
that  all  around  the  horizon  they  see  it.  It  was  as  much  as  to  say  :  "  There  is  the 
city.  Take  it.  Take  it  now.  Eoll  down  from  the  west  side.  Surge  up  from  the 
north  side.  It  is  ours,  the  city  of  Ai."  God  knows  and  we  know  that  a  great 
deal  of  Christian  attack  amounts  to  nothing  simply  because  we  do  not  take  good 
aim.  Nobody  knows,  and  we  do  not  know  ourselves,  which  point  we  want  to  take, 
when  we  ought  to  make  up  our  minds  what  God  will  have  us  to  do,  and  point  our 
spear  in  that  direction,  and  then  hurl  our  body,  mind,  soul,  time,  eternity,  at  that 
one  target.  {T.  Be  Witt  Talmage.)  Variety  of  Divine  means  : — Jericho  was  taken 
by  the  power  of  God ;  this  was  to  be  by  the  stratagem  of  His  people.  "  Lay  thee  an 
ambush  for  the  city  behind  it."  The  designs  of  Jehovah  engage  a  diversity  of 
means  and  operation  as  may  best  promote  the  ends  of  His  infinite  wisdom.  It  had 
been  equally  as  easy  to  have  taken  this  city  without  hands,  and  to  have  caused  its 
fenced  walls  to  have  yielded  to  invisible  operation,  as  those  of  Jericho ;  but  then 
the  courage  of  faith  had  not  been  exercised  in  His  people,  nor  had  the  conquest  of 
their  enemies,  now  exulting,  been  so  striking  and  instructive.    The  aohievementg 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vra. 

of  the  Lord's  people  are  all  of  Him,  whether  effected  by  the  measures  of  force  or 
of  artifice.  (IF.  Seaton.)  Joshua  drew  not  his  hand  back,  wherewith  he 
stretched  out  the  spear,  until  he  had  utterly  destroyed  all  the  inhabitants  of 
Ai. — The  outstretched  spear : — A  spear  outstretched,  outstretched  by  Divine  com- 
mand, outstretched  tiU  the  doom  of  Ai  was  sealed — what  means  it  ?  I.  It  was  the 
siGXAL  OF  PRUDENCE.  Plaus  had  been  carefully  prepared  for  the  capture  of  Ai,  and 
that  spear,  probably  with  a  pennon  hanging  from  its  head  like  the  weapon  of  the 
Lancers,  was  a  pre-arranged  signal  for  the  carrying  out  of  these  plans.  The  out- 
stretched spear  would  have  been  useless,  meaningless,  apart  from  the  plans  to 
which  it  referred.  But  it  was  most  important  when  these  are  taken  into  considera- 
tion. In  the  great  war  we  wage  against  evil  within  and  without,  God  desires  us  to 
use  all  the  appliances  of  wisdom  and  prudence.  How  wary  is  the  fisher  as  he  angles 
on  the  stream,  taking  advantage  of  every  bush  and  tuft  of  grass,  of  every  passing 
cloud  and  gentle  ripple ;  and  the  more  the  waters  are  fished  the  more  wary  and 
ingenious  is  he.  Oh,  for  a  holy  ingenuity,  a  sanctified  sagacity  in  winning  souls  ! 
Oh,  that  the  dictates  of  prudence  were  more  faithfully  carried  out  in  the  sanctification 
of  the  soul !  n.  It  was  the  sign  of  obedience.  While  much  was  left  to  human 
prudence,  certain  Divine  principles  clearly  laid  down  must  not  be  traversed. 
Joshua  must  not  in  every  respect  do  as  he  pleased.  There  was  a  circle  within 
which  wisdom  might  have  free  and  full  play,  but  beyond  that  circle  he  dared  not 
go  at  his  perU.  But  not  only  was  there  a  general  obedience  to  this  Divine 
command,  there  was  also  a  very  special  and  definite  act  of  obedience  in  connection 
with  the  outstretched  spear.  Joshua  did  not  do  this  when  he  pleased,  but  waited 
patiently  till  he  got  a  clear  intimation  of  the  Divine  will  that  the  time  had  come 
for  striking  the  decisive  blew.  Thus  Joshua's  act  in  stretching  out  the  spear  was 
well-timed.  We  need  the  same  patient  and  punctual  obedience  which  Joshua 
manifested.  We  must  not  be  like  the  horse,  going  before,  or  the  mule  lagging 
behind,  and  therefore  requiring  the  bit  and  the  bridle  of  God's  providences.  We 
must  not  be  like  Moses,  who  when  he  was  forty  was  too  fast,  and  when  he  was 
eighty  was  too  slow,  to  obey  the  Divine  command.  Let  us  be  like  Joshua  here,  led 
by  the  eye  of  God  to  a  well-timed  obedience.  HI.  It  was  axso  a  signal  of  attack. 
Its  waving  pennon  cried  to  those  in  ambush,  "  Up  and  at  them ! "  It  called  to 
those  who  were  retreating,  "  Turn  and  smite ! "  And  it  shouted  to  all  of  them, 
"Retrieve  your  lost  honour,  win  back  your  laurels."  How  many  deeds  of  daring 
were  the  answer  to  that  signal.  Every  common  soldier  in  Israel  was  a  hero  that 
day,  a  noble  brother  of  the  man  who  waved  that  spear  aloft.  Oh,  for  like  courage 
and  energy  in  the  wars  of  the  Lord,  for  noble  deeds  done  against  deadly  sins ! 

IV.  It  was  Also  the  mark  of  confidence.  He  did  not  think  because  he  had  once 
failed  that  he  would  fail  again.  He  had  no  foreboding  of  defeat.  Not  with 
nervous,  trembling,  fearful  hand  did  he  hold  it  aloft,  but  with  the  firm,  sure  grasp 
of  perfect  confidence.  From  the  vantage-ground  on  which  he  stood,  he  ordered 
the  fight,  as  again  an  assured  victor.  Thus  should  we  engage  in  the  war  to  which 
we  are  called — with  sublime  confidence,  sure  of  victory,  aye,  even  after  we  have 
experienced  defeat.  So  should  it  be  in  the  inner  fight,  for  He  who  has  begun  the 
good  work  will  perfect  that  which  concerns  us  to  the  praise  of  His  glorious  grace. 
And  so  should  it  be  in  the  outer.  Never  let  us  dishearten  ourselves  or  our  neigh- 
bours with  the  thought  that  we  are  fighting  a  losing  battle.  The  very  idea  is 
blasphemous ;  as  if  man  or  the  devil,  or  both,  were  stronger  than  the  Almighty. 

V.  It  mat  be  also  looked  upon  as  a  memorial  of  mercy.  As  certainly  as  Amalek 
fled  before  the  Lord's  hosts,  so  certainly  wiU  the  men  of  Ai.  Victory  is  sure.  In 
the  spiritual  warfare  how  stimulating  is  it  to  bring  to  mind  past  victories ;  to 
remember  how  David  and  Paul,  Luther,  Calvin,  and  Knox,  Wesley,  Whitefield,  and 
McCheyne,  wrestled  with  evil  and  prevailed.  But  above  all,  the  remembrance  of 
hard-won  victories  in  our  own  experience  is  pre-eminently  fitted  to  encourage. 

VI.  It  was  the  symbol  of  perseverance.  No  doubt  Joshua  remembered  how  the 
battle  with  Amalek  swayed  forward  and  backward  as  the  rod  of  Moses  was  elevated 
or  depressed ;  and  this  perhaps  explains  the  fact  that  he  never  drew  back  the  spear 
till  the  work  was  finished.  As  if  his  hand  had  been  glued  to  that  spear  he  held  it 
aloft,  and  thus  he  urged  his  soldiers  to  look  like  himself  to  the  God  of  Sabaoth, 
who  alone  giveth  victory.  We  have  seen  the  battle  well  begun,  with  prudence  and 
obedience,  courage  and  confidence.  See  it  nobly  continued  and  ended  with  stubborn 
perseverance.  Oh,  for  such  a  spirit  in  the  fight  of  faith  1  Alas !  how  few  endure 
to  the  end.  YII.  It  was  also  the  omen  of  doom.  It  hung  over  Ai  Uke  the  great 
sword  of  the  angel  over  Jerusalem.    And  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that  these  men  were 


CHAP,  vni.]  JOSHUA.  171 

not  without  resources.  They  showed  great  zeal  and  enthusiasm  in  defending  their 
city,  rising  early  to  go  out  to  fight.  They  also  displayed  far  greater  courage  than 
the  men  of  Jericho,  for  they  marched  against  overwhelming  odds.  They  also 
showed  considerable  wisdom  in  acting  on  the  offensive,  and  not  waiting  to  be 
attacked  like  their  neighbours.  It  was  also  plain  that  they  believed  that  union  was 
strength,  for  they  got  the  men  of  Bethel  to  unite  their  forces  with  theirs  in  the 
attack  on  Joshua.  They  also  had  great  confidence  in  their  success,  emboldened  as 
they  were  by  their  previous  victory.  They  had  aU  these  qualities,  good  in  them- 
selves, but  all  useless  because  on  the  wrong  side.  The  all-important  question  is. 
On  which  side  are  you?  Are  you  on  the  wrong  side?  Then  cast  down  your 
weapons  of  rebellion.  "  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  He  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the 
way,  when  His  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little."  Are  you  on  the  right  side  ?  Then 
"  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  lay  hold  on  eternal  life."     {A.  B.  Mackay.) 

Vers.  30,  31.  Then  Joshua  built  ...  an  altar  of  whole  stones. — The  plastered 

altar  : — Let  us  behold  in  the  story  of  Joshua's  altar  in  Mount  Ebal  the  mirror  of 
an  honest  Christian  life.  1.  It  is  weU  to  recognise  the  fact  that  this  world  is  under 
the  curse,  a  true  Mount  Ebal.  Is  human  existence  hard  ?  There  is  sunshine  in 
life,  it  is  true,  but  think  of  the  shadows.  Go  into  the  houses  of  the  rich,  where 
luxury  meets  you  on  every  hand.  In  this  mansion  the  servants  go  about  with 
noiseless  tread ;  the  street  in  front  is  thickly  strewn  with  tan  bark ;  often  at  the 
door  is  seen  the  physician's  carriage.  Is  it  a  happy  household  ?  Enter  the  next 
mansion.  Here,  too,  wealth  is  supreme,  everything  of  the  costliest,  but  the  face  of 
the  father  of  the  family  is  clouded  with  anger,  and  the  mother's  eyes  are  red  with 
weeping.  What  is  the  trouble  ?  Shame,  dishonour ;  a  child  has  fouled  a  parent's 
noble  name,  disgraceful  deeds  have  made  the  son  and  heir  of  a  great  house  a 
byword  and  a  hissing.  But  thank  God  there  is  Mount  Gerizim  as  weU  as  Ebal ; 
the  blessings  are  as  rich  as  the  curses  are  deplorable,  and  the  curses  come  first,  only 
to  give  place  to  the  blessings.  We  may  not  forget,  however,  that  the  great  heart 
altar  for  God  is  to  be  set  up  in  Ebal,  in  the  consciousness  of  the  power  of  the  curse. 
The  first  thought  we  ought  to  have  in  our  Christian  life  is  that  Christ  hath 
redeemed  us  from  the  curse.  2.  Well,  then,  Christian,  saved  by  Christ's  blood  from 
wrath  to  come,  rear  up  to  thy  Lord  and  Master  thiue  altar.  Of  what  sort  shall  we 
make  it  ?  The  altar  in  the  heart  must  be  of  whole  stones  upon  which  no  man  hath 
lift  up  any  iron.  I  suppose  that  no  metal  enters  into  our  life  to  the  extent  that 
iron  does  in  its  myi-iad  forms  of  using.  Is  its  cold  hardn<^ss  not  an  appropriate 
symbol  of  human  selfishness,  the  occasion  of  all  strife  and  quarrelling,  hatred,  and 
crime  ?  Is  there  any  one  who  lives  his  life  on  earth  unselfishly,  who  is  not  con- 
cerned more  with  his  own  interests  than  with  those  of  his  neighbours  ?  If  the  secret 
of  the  worthy  heart  altar  as  towards  God  be  humble  acquiescence  in  the  Divine 
ordering  of  things,  the  secret  of  it  as  towards  men  is  genuine  unselfishness. 
Towards  God  the  "  whole  "  stones,  unfashioned  by  our  wilfulness,  towards  man 
stones  piled  up  with  no  help  of  iron,  but  erected  in  brotherly  love,  self -forgetting 
generosity.  3.  When  Joshua  had  set  up  the  great  cairn,  he  plastered  it  all  ^er 
with  plaster,  that  he  might  engrave  thereon  the  words  of  the  law.  In  this  way  the 
separate  stones,  without  having  been  fashioned  or  fitted  together  by  human  hand  and 
tool,  were  in  a  certain  sort  made  one  through  human  agency.  There  is  a  strange 
factor  in  our  life  which  is  indeed  given  more  than  its  rightful  share  of  importance  in 
most  earthly  things,  while  in  the  Divine  service  it  seems  to  be  hardly  enlisted  at  all. 
I  mean  the  purpose  or  the  wiU.  As  the  plaster  covered  all  those  rough  stones  and 
gave  them  a  smooth,  well-compacted  surface,  so  does  a  finn  and  well-set  will,  a 
steadfast  heart-purpose,  make  the  unhewn  circumstances  of  our  lives  homogeneous, 
a  shapely  altar  for  the  Lord's  use.  God's  law  has  been  revealed  in  order  that  we 
may  obey  it,  and  we  have  no  other  guide  to  duty.  The  end  of  the  Christian  life, 
in  the  world  at  least,  is  obedience.  To  beheve  not  what  we  think  reasonable,  but 
what  God  has  said ;  to  do  not  what  seems  edifying,  but  what  He  has  enjoined. 
4.  Thus  are  we,  everj'  one  of  us,  if  we  be  in  earnest,  raising  up  altars  in  our  hearts, 
as  we  go  on  through  this  world ;  gathering  up  one  by  one  the  circumstances  and 
opportunities  of  our  lives.  Great,  rough,  ill-shaped  stones  they  seem,  yet  we  may 
not  think  to  trim^nd  fashion  them  to  our  own  notion,  nor  to  hew  them  out  with 
iron  tools  of  selfisnness  and  pride.  Lay  them  up,  0  soul,  in  a  cairn,  as  they  come, 
plaster  them  all  over  with  devout  purpose  and  zealous  will,  then  write  on  them  the 
law  of  God,  that  it  may  be  the  guiding  priociple  of  all  thy  thoughts  and  words  and 
deeds,  His  will  not  thine  own.    [Arthur  Ritchie.) 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

Vers.  32-35.  Gezizlm  .  .  .  Ebal. — Ebal  and  Gerizim : — The  valley  between 
these  two  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  in  Palestine,  Jacob's  well  lies  at  its  mouth, 
and  all  its  luxuriant  extent  is  covered  with  its  verdant  beauty  of  gardens,  and 
orchards,  and  olive  groves,  rolling  in  waves  of  billowy  beauty  up  to  the  walls  of 
Shechem,  whilst  the  murmur  of  brooks  flowing  in  all  directions  fills  the  air.  The 
width  of  the  valley  is  about  a  third  of  a  mile,  though  the  summits  of  the  two 
mountains,  in  the  lap  of  which  it  lies,  are  two  miles  apart.  It  is  remarkable  that 
where  the  two  mountains  face  each  other  and  touch  most  closely,  with  a  green 
valley  of  five  hundred  yards  between,  each  is  hollowed  out,  and  the  limestone 
stratum  of  each  is  broken  into  a  succession  of  ledges,  "  so  as  to  present  the  appear- 
ance of  a  series  of  regular  benches."  Thus  a  natural  amphitheatre  is  formed, 
capable  of  containing  a  vast  audience  of  people ;  and  the  acoustic  properties  are  so 
perfect  in  that  dry  and  rainless  air  that  Canon  Tristram  speaks  of  two  of  his  party 
taking  up  positions  on  the  opposite  mountains,  reciting  the  ten  commandments 
antiphonally,  and  hearing  each  other  perfectly.  I.  The  altar  on  Ebal.  Ebal  was 
stem  and  barren  in  its  aspect.  There  was  a  congruity,  therefore,  between  its 
appearance  and  the  part  it  played  in  the  solemn  proceedings  of  the  day.  For  far 
up  its  slopes  gathered  the  dense  masses  of  the  six  tribes,  who,  with  thunderous 
amens,  twelve  times  repeated,  answered  the  voices  of  the  band  of  white-robed 
Levites,  as  standing  with  Joshua,  and  the  elders,  and  officers,  and  judges,  in  the 
green  valley,  they  solemnly  repeated  the  curses  of  the  law.  But  that  was  not  the 
first  proceeding  in  that  holy  ceremonial.  Before  the  people  took  up  their  assigned 
places  on  the  mountain  sides  an  altar  was  reared  on  the  lower  slopes  of  Ebal.  As  we 
pass  into  the  land  of  promise  we  must  be  watchful  that  we  do  not  leave  behind 
the  devout  and  loving  consideration  of  that  precious  blood  by  which  we  have  been 
redeemed  and  which  is  our  life.  Our  highest  and  most  rapturous  experiences  can 
never  take  the  place  of  this.  Constantly  we  must  remind  ourselves  and  others  that 
we  are  redeemed  sinners,  and  that  all  our  hopes  of  salvation,  our  fellowship  with 
God,  our  motives  for  service,  are  derived  from  what  our  Saviour  did  when  He  bore 
our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  But  because  He  died  there,  we  need 
never  stand  there.  Because  He  counted  not  His  life  dear  to  Himself,  those  gaimt 
and  forbidding  slopes  have  become  the  scene  of  blessed  communion  with  God. 
"We  sit  and  feast  with  Him,  and  from  peak  to  peak  the  joy  chases  the  terrors  of  the 
curse,  and  smiles  look  out  on  us  from  the  old  rocks,  whilst  the  torrents  tinged  with 
the  light  of  the  sun  flash  and  sing.  H.  The  law  in  Canaan.  Around  the  altar 
strong  men  reared  great  stones,  and  plastered  them  with  a  facing  of  cement,  com- 
posed of  lime  and  gypsum,  on  which  it  was  easy  to  write  all  the  words  of  the  law 
very  plainly  (Deut.  xxvii.  8).  In  that  dry  air,  where  there  is  no  frost  to  split  and 
disintegrate,  such  inscriptions,  written  on  the  soft  cement  with  a  stencil,  or  on  its 
polished  surface,  when  dry,  with  ink  or  paint,  as  in  the  case  of  the  monumental 
stones  of  Egypt,  would  remain  for  centuries.  As  the  time  could  not  have  admitted 
of  the  inscription  of  the  whole  law,  it  is  probable  that  the  more  salient  points  were 
alone  committed  to  the  custody  of  those  great  cromlechs  to  perpetuate  to  after 
generations  the  conditions  of  the  tenure  on  which  Israel  held  the  lease  of  Palestine. 
They  were  a  standing  protest  against  the  sins  which  had  blighted  those  fertile 
valleys,  and  an  incentive  to  the  obedience  on  which  so  much  of  the  future  hinged. 
The  case  is  this :  when  we  yield  ourselves  entirely  to  the  Spirit  of  life  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus,  and  which  passes  freely  through  us,  as  the  blood  through  artery  and 
vein,  He  makes  us  very  sensitive  to  the  least  commandment  or  desire  of  Him  whom 
He  has  taught  us  to  love ;  we  dread  to  see  the  shadow  of  suffering  pass  over  His 
face  more  than  to  feel  the  pang  of  remorse  rend  our  hearts  ;  we  find  our  heaven  in 
His  smile  of  approval,  and  the  "  Well  done  1  "  that  glistens  in  His  eyes  when  we 
have  done  aught  to  the  least  of  His  ;  we  are  conscious  of  the  pulse  of  a  love  which 
He  has  instilled,  and  which  supplies  us  with  the  highest  code  for  life — and  so 
insensibly,  whilst  we  yield  ourselves  to  Him,  we  find  ourselves  keeping  the  law  after 
a  fashion  which  was  foreign  to  us  when  it  was  a  mere  outward  observance,  and  we 
cry  with  David,  "  Oh,  how  I  love  Thy  law,  it  is  my  meditation  aU  the  day." 
ni.  The  convocation.  It  is  well  worth  our  while  to  ponder  the  list  of  blessings 
appended  to  obedience  in  that  memorable  twenty-eighth  chapter  of  Deuteronomy, 
that  we  may  discover  their  spiritual  counterparts,  and,  having  found  them,  to  claim 
them.  Let  us,  first,  be  quite  sure  that  we  are  right  with  God  ;  next,  that  we  are  on 
His  plan  and  doing  His  will ;  also,  thirdly,  that  we  are  set  upon  His  glory,  alto- 
gether irrespective  of  our  own  interests  ;  and  we  shall  find  ourselves  able  to  claim 
blessings  of  which  we  little  dreamt.     The  Lord  will  open  His  good  treasury  in 


CHAP.  Tin.]  JOSHUA.  173 

heaven  and  make  ns  plenteous  for  good,  and  establish  us  for  an  holy  people  unto 
Himself.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  M.A.)  Ebal  and  Gerizim  : — I.  Where  we  go.  We  go 
to  a  distant  place ;  about  a  week's  journey  from  Gilgal.  Why  do  we  go  there  ? 
To  take  some  strong  fortress  ?  To  fight  some  great  battle  ?  No,  but  to  worship 
Jehovah,  and  to  take  formal  possession  of  the  land  in  His  name.  But  it  is  a  for- 
midable thing  to  move  all  the  host  of  Israel  so  far  as  that.  It  is  ;  but  no  trouble  is 
too  great  that  serves  to  show  our  loyalty  to  Jehovah.  What  a  reproof  is  this  to 
those  whose  religion  costs  them  nothing  !  who  seek  to  serve  God  with  the  miserable 
fag-ends  of  time — the  odd  intervals  of  a  busy  life,  or  the  poor  dregs  of  the  evil  days 
of  nature's  decay.  There  is  no  fear  of  any  man's  temporal  interests  suffering  by 
due  attention  to  the  spiritual.  Turning  again  to  Israel,  we  notice  that  they  went  to 
a  dangerous  place.  Why  march  a  company  of  religious  worshippers  to  that 
distant  valley,  instead  of  a  mighty  army  to  destroy  every  foe?  Surely  prompt 
action,  preventing  their  enemies  from  amalgamating  their  forces,  is  their  only 
policy.  Nay,  to  wait  on  God  is  better.  Man  is  only  weak  when  he  disobeys.  And 
they  go  to  an  appointed  place.  This  makes  the  march  wise  and  profitable.  This 
journey  had  a  special  bearing  on  the  formal  possession  of  the  land  in  Jehovah's 
name.  From  being  defiled  Canaan,  resting  under  God's  curse,  it  is  to  become  the 
inheritance  of  Jehovah,  the  holy  land  which  He  delights  to  bless.  As  Noah's  first 
act  was  to  take  possession  of  the  new  world  in  the  name  of  God,  so  at  the  first 
opportunity  Joshua  took  possession  of  Canaan  in  Jehovah's  name.  Still  further, 
this  was  an  appropriate  place  to  which  Israel  marched.  It  was  appropriate, 
whether  we  consider  its  past  associations  or  look  at  its  position  in  the  land.  It  was 
here  that  Abraham,  the  father  of  Israel,  built  his  first  altar  in  the  land  that  God 
had  promised.  What  more  appropriate,  then,  than  that  his  children  should  first 
come  here,  and  as  inheritors  of  his  faith  and  piety,  as  well  as  of  his  promise,  rear 
their  altar  and  worship  the  unchanging  Jehovah  ?  It  was  here  that  Jacob  bought 
ground  and  dug  a  well  which  remains  to  this  day,  leaving  it  in  faith  a  heritage  to 
his  children's  children.  And  here  they  come,  the  possessors  of  all  that  was  pro- 
mised ;  their  feet  shall  stand  on  this  earnest  of  the  inheritance ;  they  and  their 
little  ones  and  their  flocks  shall  drink  of  their  father's  well.  This  rendezvous  was 
also  appropriate  because  it  was  so  central  and  so  beautiful.  Mahomed  called  it  the 
fairest  spot  on  earth ;  and  many  have  named  it  the  paradise  of  the  Holy  Land.  No 
greater  contrast  could  be  conceived  than  that  presented  by  the  scenery  of  Mount 
Sinai,  where  the  law  was  first  given,  and  that  of  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  where  it  was 
repeated.  The  former  is  stern,  still,  and  forbidding,  without  speck  of  green  or  sign 
of  life.  This  is  smiling  and  verdant,  vocal  with  the  songs  of  innumerable  birds, 
laden  with  the  fatness  of  the  olive,  the  sweetness  of  the  fig,  the  luscious  richness  of 
the  vine — the  most  inviting  spot  the  heart  of  man  can  conceive.  Here  the  traveller, 
enchanted  by  the  indescribable  air  of  tranquillity  and  repose  which  hang  over  the 
scene,  pitches  his  tent  beside  the  purling  and  pellucid  rills,  and  however  anxious 
to  renew  his  journey,  feels  he  would  gladly  linger  days  and  weeks  in  such  a  para- 
dise. Such  is  it  even  now,  as  described  by  those  whose  eyes  have  rested  on  it — 
what  must  it  have  been  in  those  days  of  Joshua  ?  11.  What  we  see.  First  of  all 
we  behold  the  ark,  as  conspicuously  prominent  as  on  the  day  that  Israel  crossed  the 
Jordan.  The  Holy  Presence  of  which  the  ark  speaks  has  never  failed  them,  has 
never  forsaken  them.  We  also  behold  an  altar  here.  The  altar  is  for  the  ark. 
The  blood  of  the  one  sprinkles  the  mercy-seat  of  the  other,  and  thus  sin  is  purged ; 
God  can  dwell  among  the  people,  and  say  to  the  sinful,  "  There  will  I  meet  with 
thee."  This  altar  was  constructed  of  rough  stones,  untouched  by  any  instrument 
of  iron,  and  therefore  spoke  of  the  work  of  Christ  as  divinely  finished,  requiring 
not  any  addition  or  improvement  that  man's  wisdom  could  suggest  or  man's  skill 
accomplish.  This  altar  was  pitched  on  Ebal,  the  loftier  height,  from  which  the 
curses  came.  There  it  was  set  to  remove  the  curse ;  for  apart  from  the  sacrifice 
of  the  altar  which  God  has  provided  all  flesh  are  under  the  curse  of  the  law.  On 
this  altar  were  offered  up  burnt-offerings  and  peace-offerings.  The  burnt-offerings 
spoke  of  Christ  offered  to  God,  a  sacrifice  of  a  sweet-smelling  savour ;  yielding  a 
perfect  and  glorious  obedience  to  all  that  law  which  He  thus  magnified  and  made 
honourable.  The  peace-offering  spoke  of  Christ  as  the  centre  and  substance  of  rest, 
delight,  and  refreshment  to  God  and  man ;  the  glorious  means  whereby  communion 
is  restored  and  maintained.  God  and  man  delight  in  the  same  sacrifice,  are 
sharers  in  the  same  feast.  Thus  the  ark  and  the  altar,  the  Holy  Presence  and  the 
Perfect  Sacrifice,  guarantee  to  Israel  all  the  glory  of  God's  inheritance.  Behold  the 
imposing  scene.    The  elders  of  the  tribes  stand  with  Joshua  and  Eleazar  and  the 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.u>.  vni. 

priests  in  the  centre  of  the  valley  beside  the  ark.  The  tribes  stretch  outward,  like 
two  dark  wings,  on  either  side  in  compact  masses.  Then,  when  all  were  in  their 
places  and  solemn  silence  reigned,  the  Levites  read  aloud  the  curses  of  the  law,  and 
the  men  on  Ebal  responded  with  a  deep  amen,  like  the  sound  of  many  waters. 
Again  the  clear  notes  of  the  Levites  rise  as  they  recite  the  blessings,  and  like  the 
sound  of  harpers  harping  with  their  harps  comes  the  joyous  amen  from  the  slopes 
of  Gerizim.  But  there  is  still  another  object  for  our  eyes  to  rest  upon.  As  a 
lasting  monument  of  that  great  event,  Joshua  put  up  great  stones  on  Mount  Ebal, 
plastered  with  plaster,  and  having  written  upon  them  "  a  copy  of  the  law  of  Moses." 
The  altar  spoke  of  what  the  Holy  Presence  in  Israel  bestowed.  These  stones  spoke 
of  what  this  Holy  Presence  demanded.  The  stones  on  Jordan's  bank  spoke  of 
Jehovah's  gracious  power.  The  stones  of  Jericho  declare  His  judgment.  The 
stones  of  Achor  speak  of  His  discipline.  The  stones  of  Ai  tell  His  faithfulness. 
The  stones  of  Ebal  are  witnesses  of  His  holiness.  They  tell  what  is  becoming  in 
the  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord.  They  hold  up  the  standard  whereby  His  people 
are  to  walk.  Has  this  standard  changed  ?  Are  its  precepts  binding  still,  or  have 
they  become  antiquated  ?  Are  these  ten  words  the  Christian's  standard  and  rule  of 
life?  It  is  a  vain  morality,  it  is  a  false  spirituality,  which  dreams  that  it  can  rise 
above  obedience  to  the  law.  {A.  B.  Mackay.)  He  read  all  the  -words  of  the 
law. — The  reading  of  the  law : — I.  The  fitness  of  maeking  life's  changes  by  a 

SPECIAL  KECOGNITION  OF  DEPENDENCE  UPON  GOD  AND  OBLIGATION  TO  HiM.     With  Isiacl  it 

was  a  time  of  transition,  involving  triumph,  gain,  a  new  and  long-desired  possession. 
At  such  times,  men  of  the  world  are  apt  to  think  only  of  themselves  and  their  good 
fortune.  It  was  not  so  with  Israel.  This  is  their  first  pause  on  entering  the 
promised  land.  And  they  trust  God  to  protect  them,  while  they  use  it  to  own  Him 
as  having  brought  them  thither.  With  solemn  ceremony  they  put  themselves  afresh 
into  covenant  relations  with  Him.  Supposing  ourselves  to  be  changing  our  resi- 
dence or  occupation,  to  be  entering  a  new  place  or  state  of  responsibiUty,  to  be 
keeping  a  birthday  or  other  anniversary — ^how  becoming  it  would  be  to  make  it  a 
time  of  re-dedication  to  God !  So  of  a  youth  passing  from  school  to  business, 
entering  the  marriage  state,  going  out  from  the  old  home,  and  taking  up  for  himself 
a  life's  work.     Our  religious  faith  should  make  it  natural  to  do  this.     11.  The 

VALUE   OF   SPECIAL  MEANS   TO   DEEPEN   THE   SENSE   OF   OBLIGATION  TO  GoD.      There  are 

such  ordinary  means  as  the  daily  reading  of  the  Bible,  attendance  on  the  public 
ordinances  of  God's  house.  Christian  conversation,  giving  heed  to  the  voices  of 
conscience  and  the  Divine  Spirit.  Many  things  remind  us  of  duty  and  dependence. 
And  yet  it  is  easy  to  forget.  Ordinary  means  lose  a  measure  of  their  power,  save 
as  they  are  reinforced  now  and  then  by  those  that  are  special  and  extraordinary. 
It  was  once  more  common  than  we  fear  it  now  is  for  persons  entering  the  Christian 
life  to  do  it  with  a  solemnly-written  covenant,  to  be  recalled  and  renewed  in  after 
months  and  years.  Other  occasions  were  signalised  in  a  similar  way.  On  the  day 
of  the  birth  of  the  late  Dr.  Bethune,  his  father  solemnly  dedicated  him  to  God  in 
writing — an  act  more  than  once  repeated.  Churches  have  had  their  times  of 
renewing  covenant  vows  by  rising  in  a  mutual  pledge  to  each  other,  and  a  common 
re-dedication  to  God.  I  have  seen  the  record  of  "  an  holy  covenant  entered  into, 
and  renewed  with  God,  by  ye  Church  of  Christ  in  concord,  upon  a  day  of  fasting 
and  prayer,  set  apart  for  that  purpose,  July  11, 1776,"  bearing  the  signature  of  Rev. 
William  Emerson  (then  pastor)  and  sixty-one  others.  Eehgious  revivals  have  been 
begun  and  prolonged  by  such  means.  Piety  that  is  from  the  heart  readily  approves 
them.  It  makes  glad  use,  not  only  of  common,  but  of  special,  helps  to  fidelity  and 
growth  in  godly  living.    IH.  The  wisdom  of  heeding  all  God  has  told  us  of  our 

OBLIGATION   TO   HiM,  AND  OF   THE   PERIL   OF   CA8TINQ   IT   OFF.      Joshua    "  read   all  the 

words  of  the  law,  the  blessings  and  cursings."  Just  what  things  were  included  in 
the  inscription  on  the  stones  and  in  the  reading  we  are  not  told.  Doubtless,  at 
least,  the  substance  and  sanctions  of  the  law.  It  is  clear  that  there  was  no  self- 
pleasing  discrimination  in  favour  of  the  easy  and  agreeable  commands,  nor  yet  in 
the  singUng-out  of  the  blessings  and  the  rejection  of  the  cursings.    IV.  The  mis- 

TAEE  OF  WITHHOLDINO  ANT  PART   OF   God'S  LAW  FROM  ANT  AGE  OB  CLASS.      "  All  Israel, 

and  their  elders  and  ofiQcers,  and  their  judges,  stood  en  this  side  the  ark,  and  on 
that  side."  None  were  bo  great  and  wise  that  they  had  no  need  to  be  present. 
And  "  there  was  not  a  word  of  all  that  Moses  commanded  which  Joshua  read  not," 
&c.  It  is  sometimes  thought  that  the  great  and  sober  things  of  God's  law  are  not 
to  be  taught  to  children.  "  Set  before  them  only  the  bright  things,"  it  is  said. 
How  strange  that  it  is  so  much  easier  to  be  wise  in  earthly  things  than  in  the 


CHAP.  IX.]  JOSHUA.  175 

heavenly  I  In  this  world's  affairs,  we  teach  the  child  to  foresee  that  which  is  evil, 
that  he  may  hide  himself.  We  remember,  too,  that  great  souls  are  never  nurtured 
on  the  ostrich  plan.  The  ostrich  thrusts  his  head  into  the  sand,  shuts  his  eyes, 
and,  seeing  no  peril,  says,  "Now  I  am  safe  I  "  This  is  not  God's  way.  The  "Uttle 
ones  "  were  to  hear  "  aU  that  Moses  commanded."  They  might  comprehend  little. 
They  would  feel  much.  Through  the  imagination,  their  souls  would  be  fiUed  with 
abiding,  restraining,  and  uplifting  awe.  V.  The  possibilitt  of  a  seeene  contem- 
plation OF  God's  law  and  kemembeance  of  oue  past  unfaithfulness  to  it.  First 
of  all,  before  he  ventured  to  read  the  law,  "  Joshua  buUt  an  altar,"  &c.  On  this 
altar,  burnt-offerings  and  peace-offerings  were  to  be  presented.  The  burnt-offering 
signified  self -surrender,  entire  devotement  to  God;  the  peace-offering,  joyful  com- 
munion with  Him.  Thus  the  people  came  face  to  face  with  law  and  penalty,  not 
as  aliens,  but  as  friends ;  their  sins  expiated  and  pardoned  ;  their  persons,  powers, 
and  possessions  made  over  to  Him  to  be  wholly  His ;  their  hearts  at  rest  in  the 
gladdening  sense  of  His  favour.  To  such  the  law  could  be  nothing  other  than  a 
blessed.  Divine  rule.    So  it  may  be  with  us.     (Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Yebs.  1,  2.  The  klii^  ...  on  this  side  Jordan  .  .  .  slathered  themselTes  to- 

gether. — J.  Canaanitish  league  : — I.  The  chakacteeistics  of  this  league.  1.  It 
was  very  wide,  embracing  every  tribe  in  Canaan,  those  of  the  hills  as  well  as  those 
of  the  plain,  and  those  of  the  sea  coast  as  well  as  those  inland.  Even  so  has  it 
been  in  all  ages.  Men  of  all  ranks  and  occupations  can  be  found  to  sneer  at,  con- 
demn, and  crush  if  they  could,  the  pure  gospel.  2.  It  was  very  singular.  Strange 
elements  were  brought  together  on  this  occasion.  A  common  danger,  a  common 
enemy,  a  common  hate,  makes  them  forget  old  feuds,  bury  the  war-hatchet,  and 
unite  on  common  ground  for  a  common  object.  Who  ever  hated  each  other  more 
cordially  than  Pharisee  and  Sadducee?  yet  they  united  in  crying,  "  Crucify  Him," 
and  in  compassing  His  death.  Pilate  and  Herod  cemented  their  broken  friendship 
with  His  blood.  3.  It  was  spontaneous.  No  pressure  was  employed  to  gather  the 
clans  together ;  none  was  needed.  On  every  side  there  sprang  up  a  desire  to  take 
united  action.  It  is  a  sad  and  a  terrible  fact  that  the  deepest  thing  in  the  natural 
heart  is  enmity  against  God.  Every  sinner  is  potentially  a  Deicide.  4.  It  was 
crafty.  The  wisest  heads  in  Canaan  were  here  drawn  together,  and  engaged  in 
strengthening  this  league.  Their  most  skiKul  diplomatists,  their  most  wily  warriors, 
would  give  their  advice,  and  seek  to  help  the  league  in  every  way.  The  rich  would 
give  of  their  substance,  the  poor  would  give  their  strength,  the  wise  would  use  their' 
wits  in  discussing  and  arranging  plans  ;  and  thus  by  their  united  energy  all  might 
yet  be  well.  Thus  again  and  again  has  aU  man's  wisdom  been  brought  to  bear 
against  the  purposes  of  God.  5.  And  who  could  deny  that  such  a  league  was 
powerful  ?  It  was  powerful  because  of  all  the  accumulated  experience  and  wisdom 
that  could  he  brought  to  bear  upon  the  work ;  because  of  the  minute  knowledge  of 
the  country  which  the  common  people  as  well  as  the  leaders  possessed ;  and  because 
of  the  immense  resources  they  could  fall  back  upon.  6.  And  it  is  also  very  plain 
that  this  league  was  heartily,  yea,  even  enthusiastically,  entered  into.  Like  the 
great  sea  biUows  they  rage  against  this  bark,  and  with  implacable  wrath  would 
smite  and  overwhelm  it.  Alas,  frail  bark !  Alas,  poor  Israel  1  what  canst  thou  do 
against  such  a  league,  so  wild,  so  strange,  so  spontaneous,  so  crafty,  so  powerful, 
so  zealous?  IL  The  occasion  of  this  league.  No  doubt  many  things  contri- 
buted to  bring  it  about,  but  one  thing  is  specially  singled  out  and  mentioned  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  this  connection.  When  they  heard  of  that  strange  march  and  the 
solemn  ceremony  in  the  vale  of  Shechem,  then  they  gathered  themselves  together 
to  fight  with  Joshua  and  with  Israel  with  one  accord.  This  shows  that  these 
Canaanites  understood  something  pt  the  significance  of  this  action.  They  inter- 
preted it  rightly  as  an  act  of  dispossession,  so  far  as  they  were  concerned.  How 
often  does  the  pious  devotion  of  God's  people  provoke  and  exasperate  the  un- 
righteous above  everything  else  I  The  sinner  hates  above  all  things  the  holiness  of 
the  saint,  because  it  is  his  most  emphatic  condemnation.  Perfect  surrender  to 
Gkid's  will  always  brings  the  enmity  of  the  world  to  a  head.    Would  you  learn  the 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  re 

true  spirit  of  the  world  ?  March  to  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  and  pitch  your  tent  in  that 
sacred  and  fruitful  vale  of  utter  consecration.  But  if  such  a  life  as  this  stirs  up  of 
necessity  the  evil  which  reigns  in  the  heart  of  man,  it  is  also  to  be  remembered 
that  such  a  life  alone  is  powerful  to  do  good  to  man  or  bring  glory  to  God.  Who 
can  measure  the  strength  of  such  consecrated  souls  ?  John  Wesley  knew  some- 
thing of  this  when  he  said,  "  Give  me  ten  men  who  hate  sin  only  and  love  God 
oniy,  and  I  will  shake  the  gates  of  heU."  Its  enmity  wiU  be  roused,  even  as  that 
of  the  Canaanites  by  the  consecration  of  Israel ;  but  it  will  be  roused,  only  like 
theirs,  to  be  utterly  broken.  III.  The  purpose  of  this  league.  They  banded 
themselves  together  "  to  fight  against  Joshua  and  against  Israel."  Though  great 
wonders  have  been  wrought  before  their  very  eyes,  they  will  oppose  this  people. 
Therefore  their  action  cannot  for  a  moment  be  classed  with  the  resistance  which, 
e.g.,  the  Britons  offered  to  the  invading  Eomans  under  Caesar.  The  position  of 
these  Canaanites  was  altogether  different.  In  fighting  against  Israel  they 
deliberately  set  themselves  against  Israel's  God,  Jehovah.  They  knowingly  pit 
the  strength  of  their  idols  against  that  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  At  Him  they  aim 
their  shafts  through  His  people.  Earth  loves  not  its  rightful  Monarch.  It  rebels 
against  His  edicts,  it  cleaves  to  the  great  usurper's  sway.  What  daring  rebellion 
have  we  here  1  men  plotting  under  God's  very  eyes.  Conspirators  usually  meet  in 
secret,  in  the  darkness  of  night,  screened  from  the  eye  and  sheltered  from  the  hand 
of  the  power  outraged ;  but  here  these  sinners  gather  together  openly,  to  take 
counsel  against  Him  who  is  marching  through  their  land  in  awful  majesty.  Oh, 
hardened  soul,  remember  the  only  alternatives.  Bend  or  break ;  turn  or  burn. 
What  utter  futility  have  we  here?  Could  we  conceive  anything  more  useless,  more 
inefiBcient,  more  foolish,  more  powerless,  than  this  league  ?  The  only  consequence 
to  these  leaguers  will  be  their  own  ruin.  For  this  they  plot,  and  not  in  vain.  It 
comes  upon  them  as  a  whirlwind,  certain,  irresistible,  terrible,  complete,  irretriev- 
able. IV.  The  lessons  of  this  league.  Surely,  to  begin  with,  we  are  very  plainly 
taught  that  the  people  of  God  in  carrying  out  the  purposes  of  God  may  count  upon 
opposition.  It  always  has  been  so ;  and  it  will  be  so  to  the  very  end,  for  we  read 
that  even  the  glorious  millennium  is  ushered  in  with  a  terrible  struggle.  We  are 
apt  to  get  downhearted  when  we  see  the  hosts  of  evil  mustering  on  every  side.  We 
exclaim,  »'  What  can  the  poor  Church  of  God  do  ?  "  If  she  can  do  nothing  more, 
she  can  look  up.  She  can  see  a  sight  which  can  calm  all  her  fears,  and  make  her 
laugh  to  scorn  her  loudest  foes.  Look  up,  then  1  look  up  !  See  Him  who  sitteth 
on  the  circle  of  the  heavens,  and  before  whom  the  nations  are  as  grasshoppers. 
God  is  keeping  silence.  God  is  having  them  in  derision.  The  attacks  which  to  us 
may  seem  formidable  are  to  Him  despicable.  Let  us  therefore  have  good  hope. 
The  systems  of  corruption  and  error  and  oppression,  however  well  compacted  and 
widely  organised,  must  in  the  long  run  be  destroyed,  and  he  who  expects  and  prays 
and  works  for  their  downfall  wiU  not  be  disappointed.  Let  us  look  back  when  we 
are  despondent  and  faint-hearted,  and  remember  how  often  God  has  restrained  the 
wrath  of  the  enemy ;  how  often,  when  iniquity  was  coming  in  as  a  flood,  He  has 
raised  up  a  standard  against  it.  Yea,  look  around,  and  see  what  God  has  wrought. 
Think  of  the  diffusion  of  Christianity,  and  of  its  mighty  influence,  whether  direct 
or  indirect.  But  we  may  learn  another  lesson  from  this  league.  We  may  learn  as 
the  host  of  God  to  unite  our  forces  more  and  more  in  prosecuting  the  work  set 
before  us.     (A.  B.  Mackay.) 

Vers.  3-27.  The  Inhabitants  of  Gibeon  ...  did  work  wilily. — A  Canaanitish 
ttratagem : — I.  How  this  device  okiginated.  1.  Their  wisdom  suggested  it.  The 
selfsame  facts  suggest  different  courses  of  action  to  the  Canaanites  and  to  the 
Gibeonites.  These  events  led  the  great  majority  to  unite  their  forces  against 
Joshua ;  they  led  this  Gibeonitish  minority  to  see  if  they  could  not  come  to  terms 
with  this  irresistible  foe.  There  was  no  sense  whatever  in  the  counsels  of  the  kings. 
They  ought  to  have  assembled  in  a  lunatic  asylum,  for  their  wisest  counsels  were 
but  the  ravings  of  a  maniac.  There  is  a  spark  of  wisdom  in  the  craft  of  the 
republican  Gibeonites.  They  do  come  to  a  wise  decision  when  they  resolve  to  bear 
anything  rather  than  provoke  God  against  them  by  vain  resistance.  Let  us,  like 
them,  humble  ourselves  before  God's  irresistible  might.  It  is  our  only  wisdom. 
There  is  no  use  waiting  till  judgment  is  at  the  door ;  no  use  staying  tiU  our  souls 
are  besieged  by  sickness  and  death :  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of 
salvation."  2.  The  fears  of  these  Gibeonites  also  stimulated  them,  were  a  spur  to 
their  wisdom.    Was  the  conduct  of  the  Gibeonites  ignoble?    Our  hearts  always 


CHAP.  IX.]  JOSHUA.  177 

side  with  the  man  -who  against  overwhelming  odds  fights  with  grim  consistency  a 
losing  battle,  who  resolves  to  "  Perish  if  it  must  be  so  ;  at  bay,  destroying  many  a 
foe."  But  here  again  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  religious  element  which  was 
uppermost  in  the  mind  of  all.  It  can  never  be  right  for  the  subject  to  rise  against 
lawful  authority.  It  can  never  be  ignoble  to  throw  down  our  weapons  of  rebellion 
and  fall  at  the  feet  of  the  All-wise,  the  All-gracious,  and  the  Almighty.  3.  Also, 
there  was  faith  at  the  bottom  of  this  movement.  It  may  readily  be  allowed  that  it 
was  very  small ;  microscopical,  infinitesimal,  if  you  choose.  It  may  also  be  granted 
that  it  was  also  overlaid  with  error,  guile,  and  selfishness.  Yet  notwithstanding  all 
these  things  faith  was  there.  These  Gibeonites  did  believe  that  the  purpose  of  God 
would  come  to  pass.  They  did  believe  that  God  desired  to  give  Israel  the  land,  and 
that  He  was  able  to  do  so.  With  what  mixed  motives  do  we  give  up  our  rebellion 
and  fall  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  I  Can  they  bear  full  scrutiny  ?  Are  we  pleased  with 
them  ?  I  trow  not.  When  we  look  back  and  analyse  our  thoughts  and  feelings, 
can  we  not  discover  a  large  leaven  of  mixed  motives  ?  Accordingly,  there  is  here 
much  encouragement  to  all.  You  ask,  "  Is  my  faith  of  the  right  kind?  "  See.  If 
faith  of  this  miserable  description  finds  grace,  who  need  despair  ?  Perhaps  our 
motives  will  not  bear  close  examination  ;  perhaps  it  is  true  that  it  is  a  selfish  thing 
to  fear  hell ;  that  it  is  nothing  more  than  a  hangman's  whip.  But  if  that  whip 
lashes  us  to  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  works  for  us  salvation,  we  shall  bless  God  for  it 
for  ever.  II.  How  this  plan  was  peosecuted.  Anything  is  fair  in  war,  so  men  say ; 
and  anything  is  fair  in  diplomacy,  so  men  have  believed  in  past  ages.  It  need  not 
surprise  us,  then,  that  these  Gibeonites  followed  the  universal  rule.  They  show 
their  craft  both  by  what  they  did  and  by  what  they  hid.  They  were  no  novices  in 
the  art  of  deceit.  They  also  prosecuted  their  commission  very  courageously.  The 
coolness  and  audacity  of  these  men  are  marvellous.  They  must  have  had  strong 
nerves,  a  great  command  over  themselves,  and  a  deep  knowledge  of  human  nature. 
These  men  were  neither  fools  nor  cowards  after  all.  HI.  How  theik  steatagem 
SUCCEEDED.  It  succccded  to  perfection.  Their  audacity,  cunning,  and  knowledge 
of  human  nature  were  all  conspicuous  in  this  transaction,  and  served  them  well. 
The  weakness  of  the  Israelites  helped  to  bring  about  the  same  result.  It  is  one 
thing  to  be  rudely  suspicious,  it  is  another  thing  to  be  over-credulous.  But  practi- 
cally how  often  are  men  at  a  loss  how  to  decide  when  placed  in  similar  circum- 
stances !  Therefore  we  should  not  blame  Israel  too  severely,  but  rather  remember 
that  the  best  cure  either  for  over-credulity  or  over-caution  is  communion  with  God 
and  distrust  in  self.  The  men  of  Israel  are  also  very  self-conscious.  Pride  had 
something  to  do  with  their  decision  to  take  these  strangers  under  their  protection. 
They  felt  honoured  and  flattered  by  the  supposed  circumstances  which  made  them 
a  centre  of  universal  attraction.  Would  you  be  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of 
another,  a  pipe  producing  just  such  notes  as  the  player  pleases,  think  much  of 
yourself  ;  give  yourself  out  to  be  some  great  one ;  open  your  ears  and  give  up  your 
heart  to  the  sweet  blandishments  of  flattering  lips.  Contrariwise  remember  that 
the  humblest  soul  is  the  most  independent.  The  Israelites  were  also  very  self- 
confident,  and  this  exposed  them  to  the  wiles  of  these  schemers.  No  step  that  we 
take  in  life  is  too  trivial  to  be  made  a  matter  of  prayer.  Only  as  we  do  so,  con- 
sulting with  God  about  everything,  are  we  guided  by  His  eye.  Here  the  Israelites 
put  right  questions — "  Who  are  you  ?  "  "  Whence  come  you  ?  "  But  sufiicient  care 
was  not  taken  to  sift  the  answer  and  see  if  it  was  true.  "  All  is  not  gold  that 
glitters."  Much  ancient  armour  is  manufactured  all  the  year  round  at  Birming- 
ham. Not  a  few  ancient  statues  are  made  to  order  in  Italy  in  these  days,  and  sold 
to  innocent  connoisseurs.  Even  so  is  it  in  things  spiritual.  The  wolves  are  very 
clever  at  fitting  themselves  with  sheep's  clothing  ;  the  make-up  is  often  particularly 
ingenious.  Let  the  Israel  of  God  take  heed  "  to  the  law  and  to  the  teslim':'nT  ;  if 
they  speak  not  according  to  this  Word  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them."  And 
we  should  apply  this  also  to  the  affairs  of  every-day  life.  How  often  do  we  involve 
ourselves  in  difficulties,  hedge  up  our  way  with  troubles,  lead  ourselves  into  danger, 
because  we  "  ask  not  counsel  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord."  We  give  a  listening  ear 
to  plausible  representations ;  we  hurry  headlong  into  inviting  schemes ;  we  enter 
heedlessly  into  doubtful  connections  without  weighing  the  consequences  or  looking 
for  Divine  direction.  But  sooner  or  later  we  discover  that  no  business,  or  engage- 
ment, or  union  can  prosper  without  the  counsel  and  approbation  of  the  Lord  ;  and 
often  with  shame  and  sorrow  we  have  to  seek  His  face  to  undo  the  evils  which  our 
own  rashness  and  unfaithfulness  have  brought  upon  us.  But  in  considering  this 
matter  our  view  would  be  very  superficial  did  we  not  look  higher  than  man  and 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

his  motives.     The  purpose  of  Jehovah  had  also  to  do  with  the  result.     Why  did  He 
allow  Joshua  to  be  thus  deceived  ?    To  teach  him  and  Israel  a  valuable  lesson  ? 
No  doubt ;  but  it  was  also  for  the  purpose  of  manifesting  to  all  that  He  was  not 
unwilling  to  show  mercy  to  the  very  chief  of  sinners.    If  with  all  their  guile  and 
crooked  policy  He  spared  these  Gibeonites,  much  more  would  He  have  spared  them 
if  they  had  honestly  cast  themselves  on  His  mercy.     Yea,  He  spared  them  because 
they  came;  He  reproved  them  because  they   came  thus.     In  this  manner  God 
separated  the  precious  from  the  vile  ;  He  commended  their  faith  in  coming,  and 
condemned  their  mode  of  approach.     Accordingly,  while  it  was  well  for  them  that 
they  came  at  all,  nothing  was  gained,  but  much  was  lost,  by  their  crooked  policy. 
Thus  is  it  always,  and  therefore  what  encouragement  is  there  here  to  the  open  and 
ingenuous.    IV.  The  kesdlt  of  this  stratagem.     They  received  a  place  in  Israel. 
This  was  no  small  matter  ;  far  more  than  they  had  expected.     This  was  no  small 
favour  where  all  would  have  perished.     This  place  in  Israel  was  obtained  with 
difficulty.      When  it  was  discovered  who  these  strangers  were,  the  people  were 
roused  against  the  princes  who  had  conducted  the  treaty  with  them,  and  murmured 
loudly  at  the  result.    How  true  to  human  nature  is  this  murmuring.     It  is  always 
easy  to  criticise  those  who  are  in  authority,  and  find  fault  with  the  conclusions  to 
which  they  come.     Every  toper  in  a  village  inn,  were  you  to  credit  him,  could 
conduct  the  affairs  of  the  British  Empire  with  greater  success  than  the  wisest  prime 
minister  that  ever  lived.     The  most  ignorant  and  irresponsible  individual  in  a  con- 
gregation is  confident  he  would  never  have  fallen  into  the  mistakes  of  his  betters. 
These  Israelites  perhaps  thought  that  they  were  very  zealous  for  God  in  thus 
murmuring,  but  I  am  afraid  that  self-interest  had  a  little  to  do  with  it.     Was  it 
not  somewhat  of  a  disappointment  that  they  would  not  be  able  to  finger  the  spoil 
of  these  Gibeonitish  cities  ?     How  often  does  selfishness  sharpen  zeal  1     The  proper 
time  for  murmuring  or  objecting  would  have  been  when  the  treaty  was  so  hastily 
concluded.     But  these  critics  forgot  that  then  also  their  heads  were  turned,  and 
that  in  all  likelihood  they  would  have  murmured  if  the  princes  had  proposed  any 
other  course  than  the  one  they  are  now  condemning.    But  though  equally  deceived 
with  their  leaders,  they  were  not  hke  them  bound  by  a  solemn  oath,  and  therefore 
they  felt  free  to  murmur.    Yet  it  was  a  good  sign  that  they  went  no  further. 
Though  they  grumbled  they  submitted,  and  the  Gibeonites  were  allowed  to  live. 
They  owed  their  safety  to  the  abihty  of  Joshua  and  the  princes  of  Israel.    In  this 
emergency  the  leaders  displayed  great  firmness.     They  felt  that  it  would  be  better 
far  to  fulfil  their  agreement  at  any  cost  rather  than  by  any  shift  or  quibble  to  retire 
from  it.     Surely  in  this  steadfast  adherence  of  Joshua  to  this  covenant  the  seeker 
may  find  great  encouragement.    There  have  been  murmurers  in  the  house  of  God 
who  have  called  in  question  the  grace  of   that  Saviour  who   forgives  sinners. 
Bemember  the  taunt  of  the  Pharisees,  "  This  Man  receiveth  sinners  and  eateth 
with  them."    The  race  of  the  self-righteous  is  not  yet  extinct ;  but  Jesus  is  not  less 
firm  than  Joshua,  and  justifies  the  ways  of  God  to  men  in  that  glorious  constella- 
tion of  grace  which  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  Luke  contains.    Again,  these  Gibeonites 
received  a  definite  place  among  the  people  of  God.     They  became  an  integral  part 
of  the  nation,  with  duties  as  clearly  defined  as  those  of  the  tribe  of  Levi.     Hence- 
forth they  were  an  essential  part  of  the  people ;  Israel's  God  was  theirs ;  Israel's 
friends  were  their  friends,  Israel's  foes  their  foes ;  and  they  were  sharers  in  all 
Israel's  fortunes.    The  place  which  these  Gibeonites  received  in  Israel  was,  how- 
ever, very  humble.     The  lowest  kind  of  drudgery  was  expected  of  them.     But  if 
their  place  and  occupation  are  very  lowly,  their  Master  is  very  high  and  honourable, 
and  He  so  arranged  that  they  should  not  be  private  slaves,  scattered  through  the 
nation,  but  that  they  should  be  attached  to  the  tabernacle  as  servants  to  the  priests 
and  Levites.    Now  the  humblest  office  under  a  great  and  good  man  may  be  better  than 
the  highest  place  a  mean  and  bad  master  could  offer.    It  would  be  better  to  black 
the  boots  of  some  men  than  to  roll  in  the  carriage  of  others.    And  if  the  place  of 
these  Gibeonites  was  humble,  it  was  at  the  same  time  useful.     This  would  be  a  great 
consolation  to  them,  and  would  reconcile  them  to  their  lot.     The  place  of  these 
Gibeonites  was  also  a  hallowed  one  ;  their  service  was  sacred.    God  brought  them 
near  Himself,  attached  them  to  His  tabernacle,  sheltered  them  under  His  wing. 
The  altar  of  Jehovah  was  the  centre  of  their  service.    They  were  nearer  God  than 
many  in  Israel.    To  be  near  God  is  the  highest  privilege  and  the  chief  joy  of  the 
renewed  heart.    And  we  come  near  to  God  just  as  we  make  the  Cross  of  Christ  the 
centre  of  all  our  service.     The  doorstep  of  God's  house  is  a  happier  resting-place 
than  the  downy  couch  in  the  gilded  pavilion  of  royal  sinners.     Still  further,  these 


CHAP.  IX.]  JOSHUA.  179 

Gibeonites  had  a  hopeful  place  in  Israel,  and  that  was  a  great  advantage.  In  the 
service  of  such  a  Master  they  might  well  expect  to  rise,  and  they  did.  Ismaiah, 
one  of  David's  mighty  men,  was  a  Gibeonite.  Melatiah,  a  builder  of  the  wall  of 
Jerusalem  under  Nehemiah,  was  another.  These  are  instances  recorded  to  show 
how  they  prospered  and  rose  in  Jehovah's  service.  In  England  it  is  thought  a 
great  matter  to  be  recognised  in  any  way  as  connected  with  the  royal  house.  The 
official  appointment  to  such  a  position  may  frequently  be  seen  framed  and  glazed 
and  placed  conspicuously  in  the  window.  The  fact  is  noted  in  the  gold  letters  on 
the  sign,  on  every  bill,  and  notice,  and  advertisement  that  is  sent  from  the  establish- 
ment. They  strive  to  let  no  one  forget  or  be  oblivious  of  the  fact.  They  find  that 
it  is  profitable  to  do  so.  Much  more  laboriously  should  we  in  all  things  make  it 
plain  whose  we  are  and  whom  we  serve.  {Ibid.)  League  made  with  the 
Gibeonites  : — The  customs  and  manners  of  modern  times,  in  which  is  less  of 
simplicity  and  more  of  parade,  and  when  facilities  for  intercourse  with  far  distant 
dwellers  would  render  such  a  deception  quite  impossible,  cannot  be  a  criterion  by 
which  to  judge  of  the  poUcy  of  this  expedient.  Strange  as  it  would  be  viewed  by  us, 
neither  their  appearance  nor  speech  excited  suspicion.  Their  falsehood  stands  no 
example  for  Christians,  yet  no  one  but  must  adnure  their  ingenuity.  Necessity  is 
the  mother  of  invention.  The  resources  which  have  opened  in  invention  have  been 
such  as  were  never  thought  of  in  ease  and  safety.  They  believed  the  report,  and, 
being  sore  afraid,  had  no  expectation  of  Hfe  but  from  alliance  with  the  Lord's 
people ;  therefore  were  saved  in  yielding,  when  others  were  destroyed  in  resisting. 
There  is  no  hope  for  any  but  those  who,  in  faith  and  love,  are  in  league  with  the 
true  Israel  of  God — those  who  seek  by  prayer,  and  obtain  through  grace,  a  share  in 
their  spiritual  and  eternal  interests.  And  oh !  when  those  tremendous  evils  which, 
in  the  Divine  threatenings,  impend  over  the  guilty,  are  so  apprehended  as  to  fill 
transgressors  with  fears  of  dying,  when  the  great  concerns  of  another  world  lie  in 
their  fuU  weight  on  the  heart,  and  they  see  that  all  to  be  hoped  for  in  the  best  state 
of  future  being  is  endangered  and  hes  at  awful  stake,  what  expedients  are  ready  to 
be  adopted  !  though  none  ever  succeed  but  the  one  which  the  gospel  points  out  as 
the  never-failing  provision  of  mercy.  No  decree  is  gone  forth  against  such  as  cease 
hostilities,  and  who  voluntarily  yield  themselves  up  to  the  reign  of  grace,  but 
against  those  only  who  persist  till  they  perish  in  their  rebellion.  The  more  deter- 
mined and  inveterate  any  have  been  in  their  opposition  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  the 
more  heartily  welcome  they  become  when,  in  the  fervent  entreaties  of  deep-felt 
need,  they  apply  for  life  and  pardon  through  the  merit  of  Christ.  No  sight  on 
earth  more  interesting  than  to  witness  a  spiritual  subjection  to  our  Divine  and 
glorious  Kedeemer ;  to  see  a  forsaking  of  the  world  for  the  Church,  and,  instead  of 
fighting  against  God  to  destruction,  sinners  obtaining  the  assurance  of  life  and 
pardon  through  faith.  These  suppliant  strangers,  with  worn-out  apparel  and  musty 
provision,  and  bearing  every  mark  of  having  come  a  long  journey,  remind  one  of 
the  true  condition  of  those  who  apply  to  Christ,  and  who  desire  to  obtain  a  portion 
in  the  inheritance  of  His  people.  They  are  really  what  these  only  feigned  to  be ; 
and  should  they  appear  in  the  best  robes  of  nature,  whatever  their  own  opinion, 
they  would  be  esteemed  but  as  filthy  rags  by  the  infinitely  holy  God,  which,  in  self- 
loathing,  must  be  thrown  aside  for  change  of  raiment,  for  garments  of  salvation 
and  robes  of  righteousness.  Their  address  is  not  less  striking  than  their  appear- 
ance, and  may  remind  us  of  a  suppliant  for  mercy,  "  We  are  thy  servants :  make 
ye  a  league  with  us."  The  secmrity  of  life  they  were  willing  should  be  held  upon 
servitude  of  life.  What  is  so  dear  as  life  ?  As  Satan  said  of  Job,  "  Skin  for  skin ; 
yea,  all  that  a  man  hath,  will  he  give  for  his  life."  And  nothing  is  so  much  the 
concern  of  an  awakened  mind,  as  to  live  in  a  state  of  favour  with  God,  and  union 
with  His  people.  It  is  accounted  no  slavery,  but  perfect  freedom,  as  well  as  secure 
protection,  and  to  be  desired  beyond  all  earthly  advantages,  to  retain  life  in  the 
service  of  God.  The  expedient  adopted  in  their  necessity  availed.  It  was  a 
precipitate  act,  and  though  highly  reprehensible,  in  not  asking  counsel  of  the  Lord, 
to  whom  all  the  affairs  of  His  Church  and  people  should  be  referred  in  humble  and 
obedient  faith,  yet  it  was  not  to  be  rescinded.  In  the  aU-wise  dominion  of  God  it 
was  overruled  for  mercy  to  many.  Though  the  command  was  peremptory,  and  so 
utterly  to  destroy  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  as  "  to  make  no  covenant  with  them, 
nor  shew  mercy  unto  them,"  yet  the  20th  chapter  of  Deuteronomy,  v.  10  and  11, 
would  induce  a  hope  that  tiiey  who,  whether  near  or  afar  off,  yielded  to  the 
triumphant  Church  and  renounced  idolatry  would  have  obtained  mercy  and  been 
incorporated  with  the  Lord's  people.    Is  not  this  the  very  constitution  and  proce- 


ISO  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

dure  of  the  gospel,  a  most  affecting  and  honourable  covenant  of  peace,  requiring 
only  to  be  closed  with  and  signed  by  the  sinner  in  submission  and  faith  ?  As  the 
men  of  Gibeon  came  to  Israel,  have  you  applied  to  Jesus  for  peace  ?  If  so,  the 
testimony  of  conscience  will  accord  with  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  in  that  happy 
hope  and  assurance  which  will  attend  the  sealing  of  the  covenant  on  the  heart. 
Unspeakably  blessed  their  state  with  whom  the  promise  of  life  is  confirmed :  they 
cannot  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  the  hands  of  their  covenant  God. 
The  sword  that  spares  in  mercy  will  protect  in  justice.  Not  long  before  discovery 
was  made  of  their  artifice.  The  surprise  which  this  excited  was  not  little,  nor  the 
apprehension  of  consequences  to  be  feared  from  the  precipitate  and  incautious 
engagements  entered  into  ;  for  the  people  aU  murmured  against  the  princes.  But  the 
providence  of  God  was  in  it,  and  His  honour  so  involved  in  His  people's  regard  to  their 
oath  that  the  treaty  made  could  not  be  broken.  If  in  a  case  of  fraud,  and  in  a  certain 
view  the  stealing  of  His  mercy,  God  will  not  suffer  an  impeachment  of  His  char- 
acter by  a  forfeiture  of  truth  in  His  people,  what  shall  be  said  of  the  inviolability  of 
those  engagements  of  His  love  for  the  accomplishment  of  which  He  has  voluntarily, 
in  the  view  of  all  our  unworthiness,  pledged  in  solemn  oath  and  promise  His  own 
infinite  perfections  ?  One  cannot  but  conceive  it  designed  to  present  us  with  an 
idea  of  the  conversion  of  enemies  to  God,  and  afford  a  prelude  of  the  accession  of 
Gentiles  to  His  Church.  Such  as  God  designs  to  save  He  inclines  to  sue  for  mercy. 
Servitude  became  their  condition  whose  lives  mercy  spared ;  but  that  was  honour- 
able, as  it  was  holy,  and  to  be  preferred  to  all  the  degrading  liberties  and  supersti- 
tions of  idolatry.  Life  was  the  constant  reward  of  their  service,  and  in  many 
instances,  it  may  be  hoped,  grace  was  connected  with  their  labour.  By  spiritual 
instructions  imparted  in  that  temple  where  they  served,  though  in  the  meanest 
office,  the  gracious  among  them  would  become  sharers  in  more  valuable  blessings 
than  any  that  could  be  connected  with  the  highest  earthly  honours.  None  can  be 
truly  in  the  service  of  God  but  they  will  find  better  pay  and  purer  satisfaction  than 
any  who  are  serving  themselves  or  the  world.  (W.  Seaton.)  Pious  frauds  : — In 
the  Gibeonites  there  was  faith — a  belief  that  Israel  was  under  the  protection  of  a 
remarkable  Divine  power,  under  a  Divine  promise  the  truth  of  which  even  Balaam 
had  very  recently  acknowledged — "  I  will  bless  them  that  bless  thee,  and  curse 
him  that  curseth  thee."  Undoubtedly  a  religious  feeling  lay  at  the  bottom  of  the 
proceeding.  A  great  Divine  Being  was  seen  to  be  involved,  who  was  on  Israel's 
side  and  against  his  enemies,  and  it  would  not  do  to  trifle  with  Him.  But  in  their 
way  of  securing  exemption  from  the  effects  of  His  displeasure  the  grossest  super- 
stition appeared.  They  were  to  gain  their  object  by  deceit.  \\'hat  a  strange  con- 
ception of  God  1  What  blindness  to  His  highest  attributes.  His  hohness  and  His 
truth !  "What  a  miserable  God  men  fashion  to  themselves  when  they  simply  invest 
Him  with  almighty  power,  or  perhaps  suppose  Him  to  be  moved  by  whims  and 
prejudices  and  favouritisms  like  frail  man,  but  omit  to  clothe  Him  with  His  highest 

glory forget  that  "  justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  His  throne,  mercy 

and  truth  go  before  His  face."  The  conduct  of  the  men  was  the  more  strange  that 
it  was  impossible  that  they  should  not  be  speedily  found  out.  And  it  was  quite 
possible  that,  when  found  out,  they  would  be  dealt  with  more  severely  than  ever. 
True,  indeed,  Joshua,  when  he  did  detect  their  plot,  did  not  so  act ;  he  acted  on  a 
hifh,  perhaps  a  mistaken,  sense  of  honour ;  but  they  had  no  right  to  count  on  that. 
We  cannot  but  respect  the  way  in  which  Joshua  and  the  princes  acted  when  they 
discovered  the  fraud.  It  might  have  been  competent  to  repudiate  the  league  on  the 
ground  that  it  was  agreed  to  by  them  under  false  pretences.  It  was  made  on  the 
representation  that  the  Gibeonites  had  come  from  a  far  country,  and  when  that  was 
seen  to  be  utterly  untrue  there  would  have  been  an  honourable  ground  for  repudia- 
ting the  transaction.  But  Joshua  and  the  princes  did  not  avail  themselves  of  this 
loophole.  The  fact  that  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  had  been  invoked  in 
the  oath  sworn  to  the  Gibeonites  constrained  them  to  abide  by  the  transaction. 
They  carried  out  that  great  canon  of  true  reUgion— first  and  foremost  giving  "  glory 
to  God  in  the  highest."  But  though  the  lives  of  the  Gibeonites  were  spared,  that 
was  aU.  They  were  to  be  reduced  to  a  kind  of  slavery— to  be  "  hewers  of  wood  and 
drawers  of  water  for  the  congregation  and  the  altar  of  God."  Does  anything 
resembling  this  fraud  of  the  Gibeonites  ever  take  place  among  ourselves?  In 
answer,  let  us  ask  first  of  all  what  is  the  meaning  of  pious  frauds  ?  Are  they  not 
transactions  where  fraud  is  resorted  to  in  order  to  accomplish  what  are  supposed  to 
be  religious  ends  ?  How  can  anything  be  a  reai  religious  gain  to  a  man,  how  can 
it  be  otherwise  than  disastrous  in  the  last  degree,  if  it  develops  a  fraudulent  spirit, 


CHAP.  IX.]  JOSHUA.  181 

if  it  perverts  his  moral  nature,  if  it  deepens  and  intensifies  the  moral  disorder  of 
his  heart  ?  If  men  saw  "  the  beauty  of  holiness,"  "  the  beauty  of  the  Lord,"  they 
could  never  bring  their  minds  to  such  miserable  distortions.  It  is  pure  blasphemy 
to  suppose  that  God  could  thus  demean  Himself.  It  is  self -degradation  to  imagine 
that  anything  that  can  be  gained  by  oneself  through  such  means  could  make  up 
for  what  is  lost  or  for  the  guilt  incurred  by  such  wickedness.  And  this  suggests  a 
wider  thought — the  fearful  miscalculation  men  make  whensoever  they  resort  to 
fraud  in  the  hope  of  reaping  benefit  by  means  of  it.  Yet  what  practice  is  more 
common  ?  The  question  is.  Does  it  really  pay  ?  Does  it  pay,  for  instance,  to  cheat 
at  cards  ?  Does  it  pay  the  merchant  to  cheat  as  to  the  quality  of  his  goods  ?  Doea 
it  not  leak  out  that  he  is  not  to  be  trusted,  and  does  not  that  suspicion  lose  more  to 
him  in  the  long  run  than  it  gains  ?  Or,  to  vary  the  illustration.  "When  one  has 
entrapped  a  maiden  under  false  promises,  and  then  forsakes  her ;  or  when  he 
conceals  the  fact  that  he  is  already  married  to  another ;  or  when  he  controls  him- 
self for  a  time,  to  conceal  from  her  his  ill-temper,  or  his  profligate  habits,  or  his 
thirst  for  strong  drink,  does  it  pay  in  the  end  ?  The  question  is  not,  Does  he 
succeed  in  his  immediate  object  ?  but.  How  does  the  matter  end?  Is  it  a  comfort- 
able thought  to  any  man  that  he  has  broken  a  trustful  heart,  that  he  has  brought 
misery  to  a  happy  home,  that  he  has  filled  some  one's  life  with  lamentation  and 
mourning  and  woe  ?  We  are  not  thinking  only  of  the  future  life,  when  so  many 
wrongs  will  be  brought  to  light,  and  so  many  men  and  women  will  have  to  curse 
the  infatuation  that  made  fraud  their  friend  and  evil  their  good.  We  think  of  the 
present  happiness  of  those  who  live  in  an  atmosphere  of  fraud,  and  worship  daily 
at  its  shrine.  Can  such  disordered  souls  know  ought  of  real  peace  and  solid  joy? 
All  Eastern  nations  get  the  character  of  being  deceitful ;  but  indeed  the  weed  may 
be  said  to  flourish  in  every  soil  where  it  has  not  been  rooted  out  by  living 
Christianity.  But  if  it  be  peculiarly  characteristic  of  Eastern  nations,  is  it  not 
remarkable  how  constantly  it  is  rebuked  in  the  Bible,  even  though  that  book  sprang 
from  an  Eastern  soU  ?  No  doubt  the  record  of  the  Bible  abounds  with  instances 
of  deceit,  but  its  voice  is  always  against  them.  And  its  instances  are  always 
instructive.  Satan  gained  nothing  by  deceiving  om*  first  parents.  Jacob  was  well 
punished  for  deceiving  Isaac.  David's  misleading  of  the  high  priest  when  he  fled 
from  Saul  involved  ultimately  the  slaughter  of  the  whole  priestly  household. 
Ananias  and  Sapphira  had  an  awful  experience  when  they  lied  unto  the  Holy 
Ghost.  AH  through  the  Bible  it  is  seen  that  lying  lips  are  an  abomination  to  the 
Lord,  but  they  that  deal  truly  are  His  delight.  And  when  our  blessed  Lord  comes 
to  show  us  the  perfect  life,  how  free  He  is  from  the  slightest  taint  or  vestige  of 
deceit  I  Is  it  possible  for  us  ever  to  be  worthy  of  such  a  Lord  ?  First,  surely,  we 
must  go  to  His  Cross,  and,  bewailing  aU  our  unworthiness,  seek  acceptance  through 
His  finished  work.  And  then  draw  from  His  fulness,  even  grace  for  grace ;  obtain 
tlu:ough  the  indwelling  of  His  Spirit  that  elixir  of  life  which  will  send  a  purer 
life-blood  through  our  souls,  and  assimilate  us  to  Him  of  whom  His  faithful  apostle 
wrote :  "  He  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guUe  found  in  His  mouth."  {W.  G.  Blaikie,  DD.) 
The  Gibeonites : — Do  we  not  see  here,  first  and  foremost,  the  pitiable  shifts  to 
which  all  spiritual  fear  is  driven  ?  The  fear  of  Israel  came  upon  the  Gibeonites, 
and  the  result  was  an  invention,  a  false  arrangement,  an  attempt  to  escape  the 
inevitable.  This  is  the  story  of  to-day.  Volumes  might  be  written  upon  this  one 
thought,  namely,  that  spiritual  fear  is  always  and  of  necessity  driven  to  the  most 
pitiable  shifts.  Spiritual  fear  says,  "  What  can  I  do  ?  I  wiU  undertake  long 
pilgrimages ;  I  will  discharge  severe  and  exhausting  penances ;  I  will  build  churches, 
and  seem  to  worship ;  I  wiU  commingle  with  the  people  of  God  as  if  I  were  one  of 
them  when  my  heart  is  a  thousand  leagues  away  from  the  very  poorest  soul  in  all 
the  sacred  number."  The  trick  of  the  Gibeonites  is  the  game  of  to-day.  Spiritual 
fear  knows  not  the  spirit  of  truth,  and  cannot,  of  course,  know  the  spirit  of  joy.  Are 
we  not  always  cursed  by  this  spirit  of  fear  ?  It  leads  us  to  misconstructions  of  God. 
He  ceases  to  'be  God  when  He  is  looked  at  through  the  medium  and  under  the  base 
inspiration  of  servile  fear.  The  man  in  whom  the  spirit  of  fear  is  cannot  read  the 
Bible.  It  is  a  mere  idol  to  him.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Saints  may  be  outwitted  by 
the  world : — Saints  are  outwitted  by  the  world  in  the  things  of  the  world,  and  no 
marvel ;  neither  does  it  impeach  their  wisdom,  any  more  than  it  does  a  scholar's  to 
be  excelled  by  a  cobbler  in  his  mean  trade.  Nature,  where  it  intends  higher 
excellencies,  is  more  careless  in  those  things  which  are  inferior ;  as  we  see  in  man, 
who,  being  made  to  excel  the  beasts  in  a  rational  soul,  is  himself  excelled  by  some 
beast  or  other  in  all  his  senses.     Thus  the  Christian  may  well  be  surpassed  in 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

matters  of  worldly  commerce,  because  he  has  a  nobler  object  in  his  eye  that  makes 
him  converse  with  the  things  of  the  world  in  a  kind  of  non-attendance ;  he  is  not 
much  careful  in  these  matters ;  if  he  can  die  well  at  last,  and  be  justified  for  a  wise 
man  at  the  day  of  resurrection,  all  is  well.  (H.  G.  Salter.)  Reprehensible  self- 
distortion : — Self-abasement  is  proper  ;  but  self-distortion  is  wrong,  false,  wicked, 
hateful  to  Omniscience.  It  is  the  voice  of  Jacob,  though  the  hands  be  the  hands  of 
Esau  :  the  Pharisee  in  another  face.  Was  the  artifice  any  the  less  real  on  the  part 
of  Jeroboam's  wife  when  she  appeared  in  the  presence  of  Ahijah  the  prophet,  though 
a  queen  in  disguise  ?  Was  not  the  conduct  of  the  Gibeonites  crafty  and  reprehensible  ? 
The  attempt  to  make  ourselves  worse  is  as  bad  as  trying  to  make  ourselves  better. 
It  is  hypocrisy  either  way,  and  God  hates  it  in  every  form,  in  every  disguise,  for 
every  purpose.  Do  no  violence  to  self-hood.  Be  natural,  simple,  straightforward. 
Go  to  the  Father  in  penitence  and  trustfulness,  and  then  may  you  say,  "  For  the 
Lord  God  will  help  me  ;  therefore  shall  I  not  be  confounded  :  therefore  have  I  set 
my  face  like  a  flint,  and  I  know  that  I  shall  not  be  ashamed."  (Thomas  Parsons.) 
Beguiled  by  the  crafty  enemy  : — How  often  is  the  believer  who,  with  Joshua,  would 
have  withstood  some  fierce  assault,  because  driven  by  it  to  dependence  upon  the 
almighty  arm,  the  all-sufificient  grace,  of  his  Divine  Captain  and  Defender,  with  Joshua 
beguiled  by  the  tempter's  wiles  and  "  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  "  !  The  Gibeonites 
presented  themselves  to  Joshua  and  to  Israel  as  not  falling  within  the  number  of 
those  nations  whom  they  had  been  enjoined  to  destroy  utterly,  with  whom  they 
must  make  no  truce  nor  covenant,  whom  their  eyes  must  not  pity  nor  spare.  Does 
your  experience  prove  that  sin  is  always  presented  to  you  as  sin — in  its  native 
hideousness,  its  essential  heinousness,  its  inseparable  danger  ?  Does  the  tempter 
always  show  the  hook  with  the  bait  ?  Are  you  never  tempted  to  make  a  league 
•with — to  tolerate — to  conform  to — that  which  ought  to  be  proscribed  and  opposed 
without  reserve  ?  Never  in  danger  of  calUng  evil  good  and  good  evil ;  of  putting 
darkness  for  light  and  light  for  darkness  ;  of  putting  bitter  for  sweet  and  sweet  for 
bitter  ?  In  a  word,  are  there  no  Gibeonites  among  your  soul's  enemies  ?  (J.  C. 
Miller,  D.D.)  Old  shoes  and  clouted  upon  their  feet. — "Old  shoes  and  clouted," 
patched  clothing  : — There  are  two  sorts  of  hypocrites — those  who  profess  to  be  better 
than  they  are  :  they  form  a  large  class  ;  and  those  who  profess  to  be  worse  than 
they  are.  There  is  great  scope  for  hypocrisy  even  in  wearing  clothes.  There  are  a 
great  many  people  who  wear  very  expensive  garments  at  the  cost  of  other  people ; 
because  they  have  never  paid  for  them,  and  never  hope  to  do  so.  They  represent 
one  class  of  hypocrites.  But  occasionally  you  meet  with  a  man  who  looks  dread- 
fully shabby.  His  coat  has  a  goodly  number  of  patches,  and  every  garment  he 
wears  gives  proof  of  having  been  well  worn.  He  dies,  and  leaves  many  thousands 
of  pounds,  sewn  in  some  bag  or  other,  and  concealed  in  the  chimney  or  under  the 
mattress.  Now,  he  is  a  hypocrite  of  the  other  type ;  he  professes  to  be  much  poorer 
than  he  is.  The  Gibeonites  were  hypocrites  of  this  order  on  this  occasion.  They 
acted  as  they  did  of  a  set  purpose,  not  in  order  to  show  that  they  were  poor,  and 
thus  to  gain  sympathy,  but  for  quite  another  purpose.  They  sought  to  impress  upon 
Joshua  that  they  had  come  from  a  far  country :  that  they  had  walked  a  weary 
journey,  and  that  they  had  worn  out  their  sandals,  their  clothes,  and  wine  bags  on 
the  journey.  They  sought  to  make  Joshua  believe  that  they  were  led  to  him  by 
kind,  unselfish  motives :  that  they  had  been  prompted  by  such  high  regard  for 
Joshua  and  the  people  whom  he  led  as  to  earnestly  wish  to  be  on  good  terms  with 
them.  One  cannot  help  trying  to  picture  to  one's  self  what  happened  at  Gibeon 
just  before  they  started.  A  goodly  company  of  men  went  forth  as  ambassadors,  and 
all  wanted  the  oldest  clothes  they  could  get.  I  wonder  whether  there  were  second- 
hand dealers  at  Gibeon  ?  The  articles  must  have  gone  up  suddenly  in  price  if  there 
were ;  and  what  an  opportunity  for  clearing  old  and  bad  stock  out — all  the  old 
Bandals,  and  the  old  clothes  1  However  that  may  have  been,  they  got  what  they 
required,  and  at  length  appeared  before  Joshua,  and  represented  to  him  that  they 
had  come  a  long  journey,  during  which  they  had  worn  out  their  clothes,  and  that 
they  had  not  had  the  opportunity  of  reclothing  themselves  ;  but  that  meanwhile 
they  had  been  very  careful  of  their  garments  in  patching  them  diligently  and  well. 
It  would  not  have  done  for  them  to  have  come  in  rags,  and  therefore  they  were 
careful  to  show  to  Joshua  that,  worn  out  as  their  garments  were,  yet  they  had  made 
the  best  use  of  them,  and  had  in  each  case  put  in  a  stitch  in  time  to  save  nine.  I 
wish  that,  while  abstaining  from  all  the  deceit  of  these  men,  we  could  learn  one 
lesson  from  them.  Would  that  poor  people  always  acted  as  economically  as  these 
people  pretended  to  have  acted  on  this  occasion.    If  there  are  any  of  you  who  are 


CHAT.  K.]  JOSHUA.  183 

placed  in  circumstances  where  it  is  necessary  to  have  many  patches  on  your  gar- 
ments, and  other  boys  who  are  placed  in  better  circumstances  than  you  feel  inclined 
to  laugh  and  sneer  at  you,  never  be  ashamed  of  your  patches ;  always  consider  that 
every  patch  on  your  coat  teUs  everybody  what  an  industrious  mother  you  have  at 
home.  On  the  other  hand,  a  hole  that  is  allowed  to  remain  long  and  to  expand 
day  by  day  is  a  reflection  on  all  concerned.  Now  look  at  this  from  another  stand- 
point. You  see  these  people  wanted  to  impress  Joshua  with  the  fact  that  on  this 
one  journey  they  had  worn  out  all  the  clothing  they  had  provided  for  themselves. 
Have  you  ever  thought  what  a  great  deal  we  all  wear  out  in  life  ?  Have  you  ever 
thought  how  many  garments,  how  many  shoes,  and  how  many  hats  every  boy  of 
twelve  has  worn  out  since  the  day  he  was  bom  ?  I  suppose  the  oldest  man  here 
would  stand  perfectly  aghast  if  all  the  garments  he  had  worn  and  cast  aside  were 
only  made  to  pass  before  him.  Now  that  is  something  worth  our  consideration.  It 
at  least  teaches  us  this — that  there  must  be  a  marvellous  Providence  which  takes 
care  of  us  in  a  very  extraordinary  way.  Then,  think  again  of  the  food  consumed. 
If  we  only  thought  of  this  we  should  begin  to  ask,  "  Where  have  aU  these  garments 
come  from?  and  how  has  all  this  food  been  provided?  Thus,  we  should  thank 
God  more  for  His  providence,  and  be  less  ready  to  cast  away  garments  when  they 
were  half  worn,  and  to  think  ourselves  too  good  to  wear  a  garment  that  is  compara- 
tively threadbare,  though  we  may  be  too  poor  to  buy  a  new  one.  Now  just  one  word 
more — it  is  this.  We  not  only  wear  out  clothes  and  consume  food,  but  also  these 
bodies  of  ours,  on  the  journey  of  life.  We  have  only  one  body  for  the  journey  of 
life  :  in  other  words,  we  have  only  one  suit  for  the  soul.  It  is  a  marvellous  suit,  it 
expands  as  the  soul  expands.  But  it  is  not  lil:e  the  spirit  itself  ;  it  is  not  immortal : 
it  is  subject  to  a  great  deal  of  wear  and  tear.  Now  God  mends  this  for  us  day  by 
day.  But  by  and  by,  even  with  all  His  care,  it  begins  to  wear  out.  There  are 
some  here  who  are  getting  on  in  life.  Their  soul's  garment  is  not  what  it 
was.  They  cannot  run  as  fast  as  they  could  when  they  were  boys :  they 
cannot  do  as  much  work  as  they  did  when  they  were  young  men  in  the  prime  of 
life.  What  is  the  matter  ?  Oh,  the  old  garment  is  beginning  to  wear,  and  the 
good  God  has  to  patch  it  up  a  little.  The  doctor  says  sometimes,  "  Well,  I  can 
patch  him  up  a  little  bit."  But  what  a  grand  thing  it  will  be  when  we  shall  never 
wear  out !  When  this  garment  is  put  aside,  God  wUl  provide  for  us  another  that 
wUl  never  grow  old,  and  we  shall  engage  in  a  service  of  which  we  shall  never  tire. 
(D.  Davies.)  Causes  of  raggedness  : — Many  a  clouted  shoe,  many  a  ragged  gar- 
ment has  been  paraded  before  the  eyes  of  men  during  the  three  thousand  years 
that  have  passed  since  the  jaded  asses  of  Gibeon  entered  the  camp  at  Gilgal.  Let 
me  name  some  shams  to  be  avoided.  1.  Beware  first  of  the  shams  of  social  life. 
Let  us  rather  put  up  with  the  blame  of  being  blunt  and  uncivil  than  feel  that  we 
are  constantly  begirt  and  bedizened  with  shams  as  deceitful  as  were  the  clouted 
shoes  and  the  ragged  raiment  of  these  men  of  Gibeon.  2.  Let  me  urge  you  also  to 
beware  of  the  shams  of  trade  and  commerce.  And  I  do  not  limit  these  to  what 
may  be  found  in  the  shop  and  the  market-place.  I  extend  the  warning  to  every 
professional  pursuit.  There  are  shams  in  them  all.  It  has  grown  into  a  proverb, 
that  "  there  are  tricks  in  all  trades  "  ;  and  the  proverb  is  more  pointed  because  it  is 
so  true.  Be  poor  men  all  your  lives  rather  than  richer  ones,  if  riches  can  only  be 
won  by  practices  as  disreputable  as  were  the  clouted  shoes  and  the  ragged  raiment 
of  the  deputies  of  Gibeon.  3.  And  let  us  beware,  above  all,  of  the  shams  of  religion. 
The  most  loathsome  of  all  hypocrisy  is  that  which  assumes  the  garb  of  rehgion. 
The  man  who  dares  to  assume  this  that  he  may  further  his  own  selfish  ends  joins 
himself  to  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  and  is  not  afraid  to  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Oh !  in  whatever  else  we  are  hypocrites,  let  it  not  be  in  assuming  the  language  and 
demeanour  of  followers  of  Christ  while  our  hearts  are  far  from  Hun  and  rebelling 
against  Him  !  for  this  is  worse  an  hundredfold  than  the  clouted  shoes  and  the  ragged 
raiment  of  the  Gibeonites.  And  of  these  representative  shams  that  I  have  named, 
and  of  all  others,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  one  day  wiU  declare  them.  But  though 
I  have  drawn  these  lessons  from  the  words  of  the  text,  as  spoken  of  those  who  wore 
the  clouted  shoes  and  the  ragged  raiment,  to  effect  a  dishonest  treaty,  and  to  give 
colour  to  a  lying  tale,  yet  the  words  occurred  to  my  mind  as  descriptive  of 
those  by  whom  the  clouted  shoes  and  ragged  raiment  are  not  assumed  from  choice, 
but  worn  from  the  grim  necessity  that  they  have  no  other.  And  it  is  concerning 
this  class  of  our  communities,  and  our  duty  towards  them,  that  I  wish  now  to  speak. 
It  is  a  humbling  fact  that  amid  the  civilisation  and  wealth  of  our  land,  of  which  we 
are  so  proud,  there  are  hundreds  and  thousands  of  poor,  neglected  waifs — men, 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

women,  and  children — who  are  homeless  and  unsheltered.  Of  the  children,  at  any 
rate,  we  must  say  that  by  some  cruel  misfortune  they  are  degraded  to  a  sphere 
immeasurably  below  their  birthright  as  children  of  immortality.  They  are  more 
sinned  against  than  sinning.  If  they  are  called  by  the  opprobrious  name  of  '•  human 
vermin,"  whose  fault  is  it  that  they  are  such  ?  If  they  have  been  declared  to  be 
"  attired  in  the  unalterable  livery  of  scoundreldom,"  whose  fault  is  it  that  this  new 
and  terrible  representative  class  has  been  suffered  to  grow  up  in  our  midst  in  monster 
proportions  ?  If  they  have  been  called  by  a  more  truthful  title,  the  "Arabs  of  the 
streets,"  "  their  hand  against  every  man,"  must  it  not  be  confessed  that  it  is  because 
every  man's  hand  has  so  long  been  against  them?  It  is  our  bounden  duty  to 
inquire  something  into  the  producing  causes  of  this  great  mass  of  human  sorrow, 
and  misery,  and  want,  and  sin ;  let  us  try  to  do  so.  Of  course  there  is  a  certain 
amount  of  this  utter  poverty  for  which  the  idleness  and  laziness  of  the  people  them- 
selves must  be  blamed.  It  is  true  now  as  when  Solomon  said  it,  that  "  drowsiness 
shall  clothe  a  man  with  rags."  But  what  can  we  say  for  those  homeless  children 
who  are  striving  to  earn  an  honest  penny  by  gathering  holly,  by  holding  horses,  and 
so  on  ?  Their  homelessness  and  raggedness  has  come  down  to  them  ;  they  are  bom 
with  it ;  their  only  heritage  one  of  woe !  I  trace  it  to  two  causes :  first,  improvi- 
dence ;  and  second,  extravagance,  especially  in  the  two  articles  of  dress  and  drink. 
But  since  rags  and  tatters  are  already  the  heritage  of  many  thousands  of  children, 
from  the  improvidence  and  drunkenness  of  their  parents,  we  must  do  something 
more  than  aim  at  removing  the  producing  causes ;  we  must  help  those  hapless  ones 
who  are  already  in  rags.  I  know  that  we  shrink  from  doing  so.  This  is  one  of  the 
penalties  of  abject  misery.  But  this  feeling  of  aversion,  though  common,  is  un- 
christian I  Our  Lord  never  shrank  from  contact  with  the  poorest,  and  filthiest,  and 
most  ragged  and  loathsome  leper.  And  so  it  becomes  us,  who  profess  to  follow  in 
TTJH  steps,  to  seek  to  gather  in  even  the  most  ragged  outcast  on  our  streets  and  lanes. 
{J.  E.  Clarke,  M.A.)  The  men  .  .  .  asked  not  counsel  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord. 
— Seek  direction  from  God : — Let  the  fault  and  neglect  of  the  leaders  of  Israel 
instruct  you.  They  were  deceived  because  they  asked  not  counsel  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Lord.  The  Urim  and  Thummim  and  the  High  Priest  were  in  the  camp,  and 
from  them  an  infalUble  answer  might  have  been  obtained.  Go  ye  then,  in  the  hour 
of  temptation,  to  God  by  prayer.  Implore  His  counsel  and  direction  ;  and  the  Holy 
Spirit,  in  answer  to  your  fervent  petition,  shall  give  you  a  right  judgment  in  all 
things.  Cry  each  of  you  to  God,  "  What  I  know  not,  that  teach  Thou  me."  "  Trust 
in  the  Lord  with  all  thine  heart,"  &c.  Study  the  Bible ;  be  instant  in  prayer :  so  shall 
the  eyes  of  your  understanding  be  opened  to  discern  the  causes  of  danger ;  and  so 
shall  you  be  enabled  to  live  with  that  holy  caution  which,  through  Divine  grace, 
wUlmake  a  way  for  you  to  escape.  "  Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation." 
(E.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.)  Going  astray  : — There  is  an  old  but  wholesome  proverb 
which  speaks  of  "  making  more  haste  than  good  speed."  We  find  the  same  truth, 
otherwise  expressed,  in  Scripture ;  expressed  as  a  part  of  the  wiU  of  God,  from 
whose  right  of  control  over  man  flow  all  those  duties  of  caution,  deliberation,  and 
foresight  which  are  inculcated  nowhere  so  forcibly  as  in  the  Bible.  We  have  in  this 
passage  a  very  remarkable  illustration  of  our  homely  English  proverb ;  and  at  the 
same  time  a  very  remarkable  illustration  of  forgetfulness  of  the  Divine  saying, 
«'  Acknowledge  God  in  aU  thy  ways,  and  He  shall  direct  thy  paths."  "  The  men 
took  of  their  victuals,  and  asked  not  counsel  of  the  Lord."  I.  This  was  unjustifi- 
ABLB.  1.  They  had  the  teaching  of  direct  precepts  that  forbid  it.  They  were  told  that 
the  land  which  was  given  them  to  possess  was  filled  with  a  wicked  people,  whose 
cup  was  full,  and  that  their  »'  strange  work "  was  their  extermination.  Thus 
instructed,  they  were  to  make  no  covenant  with  any  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  land, 
but  to  smite  "utterly  both  man  and  beast."  This  precept,  or  rather  reiterated 
command,  they  forgot ;  acting  under  impulse  they  forgot  what  was  written,  and 
governed  by  feeling  they  overlooked  the  law.  2.  They  had  the  teachings  of  their 
own  experience  that  should  have  suggested  caution.  Let  us  not  so  conduct  our- 
selves :  let  us  remember  the  past  only  to  be  wiser  for  the  future ;  let  obedience  to 
law  be  the  rule  of  our  life,  lest  some  stem  and  inexorable  calamity  should  come  and 
crush  us  into  inevitable  submission.  3.  All  this  was  perfectly  unjustifiable.  What- 
ever consequences  might  have  resulted,  they  could  only  blame  themselves.  Precept 
and  precedent  were  against  them,  yet  blindly  and  wilfully  they  defied  both.  11.  Thb 
KEsuLTs  OF  THIS  FOBOETFULNESS.  1.  To  the  Israelites.  The  moment  the  mistake 
was  found  out  the  multitude,  who  had  said  nothing  before,  began  of  course  to 
murmur.    So  frequently,  when  men  coimive  at  each  other's  iniquities  and  mistakes, 


CHAP.  IX.]  JOSHUA.  185 

as  soon  as  one  of  their  number  is  reduced  to  trouble  his  partners  in  folly  will  be  the 
first  to  upbraid  him.  God  may  forgive  us  our  sins  and  our  follies ;  but  He  will  not 
by  miracle  interpose  to  save  us  from  the  natural  consequences  of  our  violation  of 
the  laws  by  which  He  manifests  the  everlasting  unchangeableness  of  His  moral 
government.  2.  To  the  Gibeonites.  Lying  and  cheating  always  defeat  themselves 
in  the  long  run.  {W.  G.  Barrett.)  Hasty  judgments : — The  children  of  Israel 
made  two  mistakes  here.  I.  They  received  these  men  by  reason  of  their  victuals. 
They  judged  in  a  hasty  and  superficial  way.  By  hasty  judgments  we  are  led  into 
wrong  in  several  directions.  1.  Hasty  judgments  lead  us  to  wrong  others.  2.  Hasty 
judgments  lead  us  to  wrong  God.  You  take  a  superficial  view  of  your  troubles,  and 
you  think  God  is  a  tyrant  and  is  cruel.  3.  How  many  reject  the  truth  by  such 
hasty  judgment.  Some  trifle  suffices — a  silly  criticism  they  heard  years  ago — to 
lead  them  to  give  up  Christianity  and  lose  their  souls.  This,  then,  is  the  first  lesson 
of  the  text :  To  form  no  judgment  concerning  any  man  or  any  thing  on  insufficient 
or  defective  data.  11.  They  "  asked  not  counsel  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord."  They 
acted  upon  theib  own  wit  and  discernment.  If  you  have  any  wit,  you  are  to  use  it. 
You  may  think  you  know  all  about  the  harbour  of  success,  every  shallow,  every 
sunken  rock,  yet  it  would  be  better  to  take  a  pilot  on  board.  I  prefer  to  employ  a 
praying  doctor,  a  praying  lawyer.  {H.  M.  Scudder,  D.D.)  A  judgment  over  self- 
reliance  : — What  an  ominous  sound  there  is  in  those  words !  They  portend  disaster, 
and  it  befell.  Up  to  this  moment  the  initiative  had  always  been  taken  by  the  Lord. 
Now  for  the  fijst  time  it  is  taken  by  Joshua  and  the  people.  In  all  the  previous 
chapters  the  words  run  thus  :  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Joshua  " ;  but  there  is  no  such 
phrase  in  this.  Israel  through  her  chosen  leaders  acted  for  herself,  and  easily  fell 
into  the  trap.  If  only  they  had  inquired  of  the  Lord  the  dimming  Ught  in  the 
sacred  stone  would  have  betrayed  the  fatal  secret  and  arrested  the  formation  of  the 
league.  Let  us  lay  the  moral  to  our  heart.  Earth's  sombre  tints  and  cross-Ughts 
are  very  perplexing ;  and  it  is  often  extremely  hard  to  detect  the  truth.  The  foolish 
virgins  are  so  much  like  the  wise ;  the  tares  so  resemble  the  wheat ;  the  hireling  imitates 
so  precisely  the  Shepherd's  voice  ;  the  devil's  mimicry  of  an  angel  of  light  is  so  exact ; 
bye-path  meadow  is  parted  from  the  King's  highway  by  so  narrow  a  boundary.  We 
urgently  need,  as  the  apostle  prayed  for  his  Philippian  converts,  that  we  may  have, 
not  only  all  knowledge,  but  all  discernment,  so  that  we  may  prove  the  things  that 
differ  (Phil.  i.  10,  R.V.  margin).  In  one  place  this  power  to  discriminate  is  said  to 
result  from  use  (Heb.  v.  14) ;  whilst  in  the  passage  already  quoted  it  is  attributed  to 
an  abounding  love.  But  following  the  suggestion  of  the  narrative  before  us,  we  may 
say  that  it  wUl  follow  naturally  on  the  careful  cultivation  of  the  blessed  habit  of 
asking  counsel  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.  Never  trust  your  own  judgment.  When 
voices  within  or  without  would  hasten  you  to  decide  on  the  strength  of  your  own 
conclusions,  then  be  careful  to  refer  the  whole  matter  from  the  lower  court  of  your 
own  judgment  to  the  supreme  tribunal  of  God's.  If  there  is  any  doubt  or  hesitation 
left  after  such  reference,  be  sure  that  as  yet  the  time  has  not  come  for  you  to  under- 
stand all  God's  will.  Under  such  circumstances  wait.  Throw  the  responsibility  of 
the  pause  and  all  it  may  involve  on  God,  and  dare  still  to  wait.  As  a  traveller  over 
the  hills,  when  the  mist  has  come  down,  elects  to  stand  or  lie  where  it  overtakes 
him,  rather  than  wander  on,  perhaps  to  the  brink  of  a  precipice,  so  wait.  If  you 
trust  God  absolutely  it  is  for  Him  to  give  you  clear  directions  as  to  what  you  should 
do.  And  when  the  time  for  action  arrives  He  will  have  given  you  such  unmis- 
takable indications  of  His  will  that,  though  a  fool,  you  will  not  be  able  to  mistake 
them  or  err  therein.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Joshua  made  peace  with  them. — Th© 
grand  inquiry  here  is  whether  this  league  was  lawful  or  not  ?  Answer  the  first : 
Some  have  these  sentiments,  that  it  was  unlawful  upon  those  grounds,  because  (1) 
God  forbade  Israel  to  make  any  league  with  the  Canaanites,  and  bade  to  destroy 
them  all  (Exod.  xxiii.  32,  xxxiv.  15  ;  Deut.  vii.  2)  without  making  any  exceptions, 
&o.  (2)  Secondly,  the  people  murmured  at  this  league  (ver.  18),  which  they  ought  not 
to  have  done,  had  it  been  lawful.  (3)  Joshua  denounces  those  Gibeonites  accursed 
for  deceiving  him  (ver.  23),  which  he  would  not  have  done  had  nothing  been  done 
but  what  was  just  and  equal.  (4)  He  charged  them  with  circumventing  him  by 
dissimulation  (ver.  21).  Answer  the  second :  but  others  affirm  it  was  a  lawful 
league,  as  Augustine  and  all  the  rabbis,  ,<&c.,  upon  those  grounds.  First,  it  was 
lawful  for  Israel  to  offer  peace  to  other  nations  before  they  besieged  any  of  their 
cities  (Deut.  xx.  10),  which  shows  this  league  was  lawful  as  to  the  substantial  part 
of  it.  Secondly,  this  sanguinary  law  of  kiUing  all  the  Canaanites  was  not  absolute 
and  aniversal,  bat  admitted  of  an  exception  of  penitents  and  true  converts,  as 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

appeareth  from  Jer.  xviii.  7,  8,  and  John  iii.  4.     Thirdly,  that  this  law  was  thus 
limited  (being  only  a  positive  law,  and  so  might  be  qualified  with  a  natural  and 
moral  equity)  appears  in  Israel's  sparing  Eahab  and  her  relations.     Fourthly,  the 
reason  of  that  sanguinary  law  was  lest  those  Canaanites  that  were  not  killed  might 
entice  the  Israelites  to  their  idolatry.     Now  that  reason  ceased  at  their  turning 
from  idolatry  and  becoming  proselytes  to  Israel,  &c.    Tifthly,  that  the  Gibeonites 
were  converts  appears,  for  their  hearts  were  not  hardened  as  the  other  Canaanites 
were  (chap.  xi.  19,  20).   They  came  to  Joshua  here  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  (ver.  9), 
and  they  had  this  blessing,  to  have  a  near  approach  unto  God  in  their  service  of  the 
sanctuary  (ver.  27),  where  David  could  have  been  content  to  be  a  poor  door-keeper 
(Psa.  Ixxxiv.  10).     Sixthly,    Had    this   league  been  unlawful  it  had  been  better 
broken  than  kept ;  if  it  had  been  a  sin  to  make  it,  the  sin  would  have  been  double  to 
keep  it ;  but  Joshua  and  all  the  princes  upon  the  review  of  it  did  conscientiously 
keep  it  (vers.  19,  20,  22,  23).   Seventhly,  God  severely  punished  the  violaters  of  this 
league,  long,  even  400  years,  after,  as  2  Sam.  xxi.  3.     Saul's  rash  zeal  cost  the 
seven  of  his  sons'  lives,  and  so  almost  rooted  out  his  whole  posterity.   Eighthly,  The 
utter  destruction    of   all  the  other  cursed   Canaanites  came  not  so  much  or  so 
necessarily  upon  them  by  vktue  of  any  absolute  or  peremptory  precept  for  destroy- 
ing them  as  it  did  from  their  own  obstinacy  and  obduration  of  their  hearts,  whereby 
they   did    not   only  neglect  but   also  scorned  to  make  peace  (chap,  xi,  19,  20). 
(C.  Ness.)         Hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water. — Mistakes  divinely  over- 
ruled : — This  is  a  beautiful  and  comforting  example  of  the  way  in  which  God 
overrules  our  mistakes,  and  brings  blessing  out  of  our  sins,  as  the  chemist  obtains 
his  loveliest  dyes  from  the  refuse  of  gas  retorts.     Inadvertently,  and  without  due 
consideration,  some  of  my  readers  may  have  entered  into  alliance  with  a  Gibeouite, 
whether  in  marriage,  in  business,  or  in  some  other  sphere.    Are  they  therefore  to 
abandon  their  high  privilege,  and  forsake  their  lofty  ministry  to  the  world  ?     Must 
they  cease  to  be  God's  portion,  and  the  priests  of  men  ?    Not  necessarily.    Let  them 
turn  to  God  in  repentance  and  confession,  and  He  will  teach  them  how  these  very 
hindrances  may  become  great  means  of  help,  so  that  they  shall  hew  the  wood  for 
the  burnt-offering,  draw  the  water  for  the  libations,  and  promote  the  prosperity  and 
well-being  of  the  soul.    Out  of  the  eater  shall  come  forth  meat,  and  out  of  the 
strong  sweetness.    (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 


CHAPTER  X. 

Vers.  1-5.  Come  up  unto  me,  and  help  me,  that  we  may  smite  Gibeon :  for  it 
hath  made  peace  with  Joshua. — To  arms !  To  arms  ! — The  greatest  poet  of  Greece 
has  sung  in  stately  numbers  the  deeds  of  heroes  whom  his  race  adored.  We  listen 
to  their  counsels,  we  hear  their  battle  shouts,  we  see  their  awful  blows.  Yet  after 
all  this  plain,  unvarnished  tale  depicts  with  more  fidelity  and  power  the  progress 
and  results  of  a  conflict,  the  most  sublime  ia  its  accompaniments  that  this  earth 
has  ever  seen.  In  this  chapter  we  have  recorded  not  only  one  of  Joshua's  most 
brilliant  victories,  but  one  of  the  world's  greatest  battles  :  a  struggle  surpassing  in 
importance  and  interest  Issus  or  Arbela,  Marathon  or  Cannae,  and  affecting  to  an 
incalculable  extent  the  religious  and  political,  the  moral  and  the  material,  welfare 
of  mankind.  First  of  all  we  listen  to  the  summons — "  Come  up  unto  me,  and  help 
me,  that  we  may  smite  Gibeon,"  &c.  Notice  from  whom  the  summons  comes. 
From  Adoni-zedek,  king  of  Jerusalem.  This  is  a  strange  thing.  From  this  man's 
name,  Lord  of  Righteousness,  and  from  his  heritage,  Jerusalem,  we  would  have 
expected  something  very  different.  He  is  certainly  the  successor,  probably  the 
descendant,  of  Melchizedek.  Here  is  a  man  who  bears  the  best  of  titles,  but  is, 
alas !  unworthy  of  it.  Nothing  could  be  better  than  his  name ;  few  things  are  worse 
than  his  fame.  Learn  from  this  sad  lesson  that  piety  is  not  hereditary.  The 
descendants  of  the  righteous  may  be  a  wicked  seed.  This  is  a  sad  thing.  A  noble 
ancestry  is  not  a  thing  to  be  despised.  It  is  unwise  and  ungrateful  to  ignore  the 
records  and  the  glories  of  the  past.  This  is  also  a  dangerous  thing.  The  opposi- 
tion of  those  who  have  thus  fallen  is  always  most  dangerous.  None  are  so  bitter 
and  remorseless,  so  vehement  and  virulent,  so  venomous  and  subtle,  as  renegades. 
Notice  to  whom  Adoni-zedek's  message  was  sent.  It  was  not  sent  to  all  the  members 


CHAP.  X.]  JOSHUA.  187 

of  the  great  national  league.  That  was  impossible,  because  the  submission  of  the 
Gibeonites  had  split  the  confederacy  into  two  unequal  parts.  Instead  of  one  vast 
army  marching  to  crush  the  invader  there  must  now  be  two  :  one  in  the  south,  the 
other  in  the  north.  That  of  the  south  is  smaller,  therefore  more  easily  set  in 
motion ;  and  it  is  also  placed  nearer  the  centre  of  attack.  Thus  we  see  how  God 
has  restrained  the  wrath  of  the  enemy  and  deprived  him  of  half  his  might.  Even 
so  all  coalition  against  Him  must  fall  to  pieces.  Transgressors  are  always  lacking 
in  cohesion.  It  was  to  Gibeon  that  Adoni-zedek  summoned  his  confederates.  Thus 
his  enmity  was  manifested  against  their  defection.  StiU  this  summons  of  Adoni- 
zedek  betokens  fear.  It  is  to  some  extent  the  blustering  of  a  bully  who  is  at  heart  a 
craven.  We  know  this,  for  we  are  told  that  "  When  Adoni-zedek  king  of  Jerusalem 
had  heard  how  Joshua  had  taken  Ai,  and  had  utterly  destroyed  it  .  .  .  that  they 
feared  greatly."  Therefore  because  they  fear  they  do  not  come  alone.  They  keep 
their  courage  up  by  company.  How  many  are  like  them.  They  do  fear  when 
spiritual  truths  are  brought  before  them,  when  God's  judgment  stares  them  in  the 
face  ;  yet  they  try  to  find  comfort  in  the  thought,  "  Well,  if  I  am  lost  a  great  many 
will  be  badly  off."  Nay  !  nay  I  It  is  a  vain  thing  to  banish  fear  by  such  thoughts. 
Such  a  fear  as  that  works  destruction ;  because  being  accompanied  by  a  rebellious 
heart  and  a  darkened  mind  it  led  to  union  against  God.  Hatred  against  the 
Gibeonites  is  a  very  distinct  characteristic  of  Adoni-zedek's  message.  Yet,  after  all, 
what  right  had  they  to  be  thus  angry  with  their  old  friends?  Had  not  the 
Gibeonites  a  right  to  have  a  mind  of  their  own,  especially  in  a  matter  that  con- 
cerned their  very  existence  ?  But  the  human  heart  remains  the  same.  When  the 
sinner  turns  from  his  rebellion  and  humbles  himself  before  God,  then  is  the  time 
for  the  wrath  of  man  to  be  revealed.  This  hatred  is  most  unreasonable,  for,  like 
these  Gibeonites,  the  penitents  in  throwing  down  the  weapons  of  their  rebellion  set 
an  example  which  it  is  the  highest  wisdom  to  foUow.  The  cunning  and  the  impiety 
of  these  Canaanites  are  also  revealed  by  this  confederation.  They  will  prevent 
further  defection ;  they  will  gain  one  of  the  most  important  strongholds  in 
the  land;  they  wiU  make  the  old  league  possible.  Thus  they  displayed  their 
craft.  And  in  doing  so  they  proved  their  impiety.  [A.  B.  Mackay.)  Eage 
of  the  world  against  deserters  from  its  ranks  : — It  is  thus  in  the  spiritual  life. 
Upon  no  outer  enemy  does  the  world  turn  with  such  rage  and  resentment  as 
upon  those  who  desert  their  ranks  to  join  the  Lord's  host.  All  the  legions  of 
hell  are  marshalled  forth  against  the  young  believer  who  has  newly  signed  the 
terms  of  treaty  with  the  Joshua  of  the  better  covenant.  As  Bishop  Hall  says,  "  If 
a  convert  come  home,  the  angels  welcome  him  with  song,  the  devils  follow  him  with 
uproar  and  fury,  his  old  partners  with  scorn  and  obloquy."  In  spite  of  all  this, 
let  not  those  who  have  become  allied  to  the  Israel  of  God  quail ;  but  let  the  sequel 
here  before  us  reassure  them.  [G.  W.  Butler,  M.A.)  Combinations  against  the 
Church : — What  combinations  have  been  formed,  what  artifices  practised  against  the 
Church ! — one  wile  to  allure,  another  to  frighten,  and  sometimes  to  destroy.  As 
against  the  Lord  Himself,  so  against  His  people,  the  great  and  the  mighty  of  the 
earth  have  consulted  their  ruin,  and  for  a  season  availed  to  harass  and  distress  the 
saints  ;  nor  can  this  be  matter  of  surprise  to  those  who  know  their  own  character, 
and  remember  what  themselves  were  till  converted  by  the  grace  of  God.  The 
Church's  gain  is  the  world's  grief,  as  it  is  the  world's  loss.  Oh,  what  oppositions  in 
families,  what  combinations  out  of  old  connections  and  associates,  have  been  raised 
against  those  who,  no  longer  of  the  world,  have  been  chosen  out  of  it,  and  through 
grace  enabled  to  turn  their  backs  upon  its  vanities  and  pursuits  !  No  sooner  is  it 
known  that  any  have  made  peace  with  our  spiritual  Joshua  than  the  world  is  up 
in  arms,  and  war  declared,  lasting  as  the  irreconcilable  enmity  of  fallen  nature. 
Not  one  who  openly  declares  himself  on  the  Lord's  side,  and  is  inwardly  devoted  to 
His  glory,  but,  according  to  the  station  he  occupies,  and  the  influence  of  those  around 
him,  will  experience  a  full  measure.     {W.  Seaton.) 

Vers.  6-11.  Come  up  .  .  .  quickly,  and  save  us,  and  help  us. — Help  I  help ! — The 
chapter  opens  with  a  cry  from  Jerusalem,  the  summons  of  Adoni-zedek — "  To  arms  ! 
To  arms  !  "  Here  we  have  another  and  a  very  different  cry,  a  cry  from  Gibeon  ;  a  cry 
to  Joshua  for  help.  I.  The  trouble  of  the  Gibeonites.  They  are  in  sore  straits. 
What  a  vivid  picture  of  sphitual  truth  have  we  here  I  "He  that  departeth  from 
evil  maketh  himself  a  prey."  Do  you  make  your  peace  with  God?  that  instant, 
and  by  that  act,  you  are  at  war  with  Satan.  No  sooner  is  the  treaty  of  salvation 
signed  than  the  infernal  hosts  are  rallied.     The  ink  is  scarcely  dry  before  he  begins 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

his  attack.  Old  friends  become  new  enemies.  A  man's  foes  are  often  those  of  his 
own  household.  When  we  come  into  such  trouble  let  us  not  think  that  a  strange 
thing  has  befallen  us.  It  is  the  common  fate  of  God's  children,  from  the  highest  to 
the  meanest,  and  to  the  end  of  time.  Though  the  Captain  of  salvation  is  the 
Prince  of  Peace,  He  has  come  not  to  send  peace  on  the  earth  but  a  sword ;  and 
so  will  it  be  till  every  enemy  is  cast  out  and  all  flesh  shall  own  Him  Lord. 
These  Gibeonites  felt  this  attack  all  the  more  dangerous  because  it  was  the  onset  of 
men  with  whom  in  the  past  they  had  been  on  such  intimate  terms.  AU  their  condi- 
tions and  resources  were  as  well  known  to  these  five  kings  as  to  themselves.  And 
the  remembrance  of  these  things  made  this  attack  all  the  more  formidable.  But 
what  was  all  the  knowledge  which  the  five  kings  had  of  the  Gibeonites  compared 
with  the  knowledge  Satan  has  of  us  ?  Therefore,  how  terrible  must  be  his  attack  1 
If  we  are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices,  he  is  not  ignorant  of  our  weakness.  H.  But 
if  this  cry  suggests  the  trouble  of  the  Gibeonites,  it  also  points  out  their 
EESOXJECES.  If  they  are  in  great  trouble  they  are  not  without  resource,  and  at  once 
they  avail  themselves  of  it.  They  dwelt  in  a  fortified  city,  but  they  did  not  depend 
on  its  walls  and  bulwarks.  They  had  no  confidence  in  themselves.  Their  own 
resources  were  insufficient.  All  their  confidence  was  placed  in  Joshua.  "Would  that 
we  always  showed  like  wisdom  I  Sin  and  Satan  are  more  than  a  match  for  the 
strongest  saint.  As  they  looked  to  Joshua,  so  must  we  look  to  Jesus.  As  they 
depended  on  that  covenant  of  peace  which  had  been  ratified,  so  must  we.  As  they 
dispatched  runners  post  haste  to  Gilgal,  so  must  we  send  out  swift-footed  mes- 
sengers of  prayer.  Our  very  existence  as  saints  depends  on  their  success.  IH. 
The  earnestness  or  the  Gibeonites.  How  keen  and  piercing  is  their  cry  I  How 
urgent  is  their  request !  The  message  was  no  doubt  short,  they  did  not  waste  their 
words ;  but  it  was  f  uU  of  earnestness.  It  was  the  message  of  men  thoroughly  roused 
and  anxious.  Though  short  it  was  very  full.  They  sought  to  stir  up  Joshua's 
energy.  It  is  as  if  they  said,  "  We  have  no  hope  apart  from  you.  We  are  all  dead 
men  ii  you  fail  us.  We  know  you  can  save  us  and  trust  you  will."  They  also 
manifested  faithfulness  to  Joshua,  by  the  last  two  words  of  their  message — "  Help 
us."  Why  were  these  words  added  ?  »'  Save  "  is  the  word  of  dependence — "  Help  " 
suggests  the  determination  to  do  what  they  can.  It  is  as  if  they  said,  "  WhUe  wo 
feel  that  in  our  own  strength  we  must  be  worsted,  yet  we  are  determined  to  make  a 
stand  against  them.  On  no  account  will  we  come  to  terms.  We  will  never  open 
our  gates  to  the  enemy.  We  will  not  even  hold  parley  with  him.  Till  you  come, 
and  even  if  you  do  not  come,  we  will  do  the  best  we  can."  Accordingly  this  shows 
that  they  were  faithful  to  their  new  leader.  Surely  their  conduct  in  this  emergency 
may  well  be  imitated.  Oh,  for  like  earnestness  in  crying,  "  Awake,  awake,  O  arm 
of  the  Lord  1 "  How  languid  are  our  prayers !  How  unconscious  are  we  of  danger  ! 
It  is  good  for  God  to  open  our  eyes  by  trouble,  if  it  leads  us  to  cry  like  these 
Gibeonites.  IV.  The  succour  of  the  Gibeonites.  Help  was  sure.  Joshua  would 
have  behed  his  name,  would  have  been  unfaithful  to  his  covenant,  would  have  been 
untrue  to  his  nature,  if  he  had  not  hastened  to  their  relief.  And  help  came  speedily. 
Joshua  lost  not  a  moment.  Help  also  came  in  time.  Joshua  was  not  too  late. 
The  Gibeonites  did  not  become  a  prey ;  they  had  cause  to  rejoice  over  a  great 
deliverance.  Do  we  in  every  extremity  cry  to  God  ?  Help  must  come.  God  never 
said  to  any,  "  Seek  ye  My  face,"  in  vain.  Jesus,  like  Joshua,  is  never  too  late.  If 
He  tarries  there  is  good  reason  for  it.  It  is  always  for  our  good.  He  may  come 
when  Lazarus  is  laid  in  the  grave,  but  He  never  comes  too  late.  He  is  never  too 
late  in  history.  The  world  had  a  long  time  run  its  course  before  He  came.  Why  ? 
Because  that  time  was  set.  "  In  the  fulness  of  time  God  set  forth  His  Son."  He 
has  promised  to  come  back  again,  and  depend  upon  it  He  will  not  come  back  too 
late.  What  though  1,800  years  have  passed  away  ?  nothing  will  divert  Him  from 
His  purpose ;  nothing  will  prevent  His  appearing.  "  Amen,"  therefore  we  say, 
"  Ampin,  even  so,  in  Thy  good  time,  for  that  is  quickly,  come,  Lord  Jesus."  And 
notice,  in  conclusion,  that  it  may  be  said  of  these  Gibeonites  that  they  were  twice 
saved.  First  they  were  saved  from  the  wrath  of  God ;  then  they  were  saved  from 
the  wrath  of  their  enemies.  So  we  are  saved  from  the  wrath  of  God  and  from  the 
wrath  of  Satan.  The  Gibeonites  were  saved  by  faith,  for  they  trusted  in  Joshua 
and  in  the  God  of  Israel.  They  were  saved  by  works,  for  they  determined  to  oppose 
Adoni-zedek  or  die.  They  were  saved  by  hope,  for  they  looked  to  Joshua  for  succour 
and  were  not  disappointed.  So  we  are  saved  by  faith  when  we  fall  at  the  feet  of 
Jesus  and  put  our  trust  in  Him.  We  are  saved  by  works,  when  in  the  strength  of 
God  we  wrestle  against  principalities  and  powers  and  spiritual  wickednesses  in 


CHAP.  X.]  JOSHUA.  189 

high  places.  We  are  saved  by  hope  when  we  look  for  the  glorious  appearing  of 
the  great  God  and  our  Saviour.  The  Gibeonites  were  saved  by  coming  to  Joshua 
in  their  fear  of  judgment.  They  were  saved  by  Joshua  coming  to  them  and  extri- 
cating them  out  of  all  their  trouble.  So  we  are  saved  by  coming  to  Jesus.  The 
instant  we  fall  at  His  feet  we  receive  the  salvation  of  our  souls.  And  we  are  saved 
by  Jesus  coming  to  us  (Heb.  ix.  28).  (A.  B.  Machay.)  The  newly-converted 
assailed  : — 1.  No  sooner  is  the  soul  brought  into  the  bonds  of  the  covenant  with  our 
Joshua  or  Jesus,  but  presently  the  spiritual  enemies  of  the  soul  muster  up  all  their 
forces  against  it,  as  the  five  cursed  kings  did  against  Gibeon  as  soon  as  they  had 
entered  into  a  league  with  Joshua  here  (2  Tim.  iii.  12 ;  Acts  xiv.  22).  2.  The 
soul  when  thus  assaulted  must  immediately  send  the  messenger  of  prayer  to  its 
Joshua  or  Jesus.  3.  As  those  new  converts  the  Gibeonites  showed  their  confidence 
in  that  God,  whose  religion  they  had  newly  embraced,  therefore  sent  they  for  Joshua, 
not  at  all  doubting  of  salvation  by  him.  So  the  like  confidence  should  be  found  in  all 
new  converted  souls,  that  their  Joshua  will  relieve  them,  and  turn  their  spirit  of 
bondage  into  the  spirit  of  adoption.  (C.  Ness.)  Ready  help  : — The  help  required 
was  great :  "  Slack  not  thy  hand  from  thy  servants."  It  is  not  httle  the  Christian 
needs.  How  often,  in  seeking  Divine  aid  and  security,  has  the  believer  to  say, 
"  Lord,  how  are  they  increased  that  trouble  me  "  !  &c.  Eeady  help  was  intreated. 
"  Come  up  to  us  quickly,  and  save  us."  It  was  well  they  were  not  what  they  once 
represented  themselves  to  be — the  inhabitants  of  a  far  remote  country ;  for  then 
help  had  come  too  late,  had  it  come  with  bottles  rent  and  bound  up,  shoes  clouted 
and  worn  out,  garments  old  and  threadbare.  Great  is  the  mercy  to  be  near  our 
mercies,  that  when  life,  and  all  that  is  dear  to  us,  lies  at  stake,  salvation  may  be 
found  at  hand.  (TV.  Seaton.)  Vahie  of  promptitude  in  action : — Let  us  note 
not  only  the  nobility  of  this  acknowledgment  of  the  claims  of  the  new  allies,  but  also 
the  promptitude  and  energy  with  which  their  rescue  is  undertaken.  How  many 
good  resolves  are  marred  and  made  of  none  effect  by  lack  of  decision  in  their 
execution.  We  rest  in  the  thought  of  our  noble  plans,  and  meanwhile  we  hesitate 
and  defer  to  carry  them  out  in  the  performance :  thus  the  evils  we  might  have 
stayed  grow  beyond  control :  the  opportunity  has  sped  away  ;  the  hearts  of  those 
who  looked  for  our  help  are  sick  with  hopes  long  deferred.  Too  late !  too  late  I  is  the 
disappointed  cry  with  which  they  greet  our  tardy  steps.  (G.  W.  Butler,  M.A.) 
Fear  them  not :  for  I  have  delivered  them  into  thine  hand. — Courage  ! — On  the 
eve  of  a  great  engagement  a  wise  leader  often  rouses  the  enthusiasm  of  his  followers 
by  a  few  well-chosen  words.  V/e  know  how  the  message  of  Nelson,  before  the  battle 
of  Trafalgar,  stimulated  every  man  in  his  fleet  to  do  his  utmost ;  and  not  only  so, 
but  it  has  also  come  ringing  down  the  years  that  intervene  with  telling  effect  on 
every  noble  heart  in  great  emergencies.  God  deals  with  His  servants  after  the 
same  fashion ;  therefore,  here,  before  Joshua  passes  forth  to  the  rescue  of  the 
Gibeonites,  he  gives  them  words  of  cheer.  Notice  when  God  gave  this  encourage- 
ment. It  was  when  Joshua  had  resolved  to  set  out  to  the  help  of  the  Gibeonites. 
There  is  no  evidence  that  Joshua  asked  for  or  even  expected  such  encouragement. 
He  felt  bound  to  do  his  duty,  to  keep  faith  with  the  Gibeonites,  and  while  in  the  act 
of  responding  to  their  cry,  this  encouragement  came.  The  very  fact  that  this 
cheering  word  was  unsolicited  made  it  doubly  sweet.  We  may  have  similar  expe- 
riences. When  we  walk  in  the  path  of  duty  we  may  always  reckon  on  the  Divine 
encouragement.  If  we  go  to  God's  work  with  good  will,  however  hard  it  may  be, 
and  whoever  may  oppose,  we  may  always  count  on  the  good  wiU  and  the  good  word 
of  God,  and  surely  that  ought  to  suffice.  How  encouraging,  how  comforting,  how 
strengthening,  is  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  towards  God !  Notice,  also,  the 
terms  of  this  encouragement  now  given.  They  were  very  clear.  They  had  no  par- 
ticle of  ambiguity.  How  the  healthy  soul  rejoices  in  certainty !  How  freely  does 
God  delight  to  give  it !  And  the  fact  that  the  words  Joshua  now  heard  were  familiar 
to  his  ear,  phrases  repeated  again  and  again,  made  this  assurance  doubly  sweet. 
God  is  dealing  with  him  now  as  He  has  graciously  done  in  all  the  past ;  and  every 
repetition  and  new  fulfilment  of  a  promise  adds  to  its  value.  For  the  old  promise 
has  been  tried  and  tested  again  and  again,  and  proved  to  be  sufficient.  It  is  good 
when  we  have  such  experience  as  Joshua ;  when  we  have  not  only  a  true  word,  but 
one  which  in  our  own  experience  we  have  tried  and  proved  to  be  sufiicient  for  every 
emergency.  Therefore  notice  next  the  effect  that  this  encouragement  has  upon 
Joshua.  It  fills  him  with  new  energy.  The  clearest  assurance  of  success  does  not 
do  away  with  the  use  of  means,  rather  is  it  a  sharp  spur  to  make  the  most  of  them. 
Joshua,  though  thus  assured,  yea,  because  thus    assured,  acts  as  if  everything 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chajp.  x. 

depended  on  his  energy  and  the  swiftness  and  strength  of  his  attack.  And  so  in  a 
very  important  sense  it  did.  But  we  may  not  only  trace  the  effect  of  this  promise 
in  the  energy  with  which  it  filled  Joshua  and  his  soldiers,  but  also  in  that  marvellous 
prayer  which  rose  to  his  lips  in  the  great  crisis  of  the  fight  that  ensued.  It  is  this 
great  promise  of  God  which  justifies  and  explains  that  great  prayer  of  Joshua. 
Joshua  "  spoke  to  the  Lord  "  on  that  day,  and  his  words  were  wonderful.  His 
prayer  was  very  short,  but  we  are  startled  by  its  boldness.  The  prayer  was  public, 
therefore  Joshua  risked  all  his  reputation  on  its  answer.  The  prayer  was  humble. 
He  had  no  desire  to  parade  his  power ;  he  had  no  need  to  win  the  allegiance  of 
Israel.  His  one  thought  was  the  perfect  fulfilment  of  that  work  which  by  this  pro- 
mise God  had  said  would  be  accomplished.  God  had  spoken.  His  power  and  glory 
are  pledged  to  the  fulfilment  of  that  word.  Can  He  not  perform  ?  God  gave  Joshua 
a  large  promise,  and  Joshua  laid  before  God  a  large  prayer.  Thus  both  God's 
power  and  Joshua's  faith  were  magnified  and  made  honourable.  In  like  manner 
may  we  make  use  of  all  God's  promises ;  and  we  only  prove  our  unbelief  by  leaving 
them  a  dead  letter.  Who  can  over-estimate  the  value  of  prayer,  who  can  put  a 
limit  to  its  power  ?  Did  we  believe  in  the  promises  of  God  as  firmly  as  Joshua,  we 
would  be  able  more  closely  to  imitate  his  prayers.  Men  make  difficulties  here 
where  the  simple  soul  can  find  none.  As  a  living  father  can  answer  the  request  of 
his  children,  so  the  Lord  can  hear  and  answer  the  prayer  of  His  people.  And  He 
answers  every  prayer  addressed  to  Him ;  not  always  in  the  same  way,  but  always  in 
the  best  way.  Now  notice,  lastly,  the  fulfilment  of  this  promise.  No  doubt  the 
good  generalship  of  Joshua  and  the  valour  of  his  soldiers  had  much  to  do  with  it. 
They  marched  with  swiftness,  they  laid  on  with  might  and  main,  they  never  paused 
in  the  pursuit,  yet  all  that  they  did  was  obscured  by  the  wonderful  interposition  of 
God.  Joshua  and  Israel  did  what  they  could,  and  yet  God  did  all.  It  is  well  to 
remember  that  nature  may  become  one  great  arsenal  for  the  defence  of  those  that 
fear  God,  for  the  destruction  of  all  His  enemies.  It  was  no  superstition,  but  true 
godliness,  which  enabled  our  forefathers  to  see  the  finger  of  God  in  those  storms 
which  swept  the  great  Armada  to  its  doom.  How  often  does  God  in  His  adorable 
Providence  render  the  very  objects  in  which  men  trust  the  means  of  fiUing  them 
with  shame  and  confusion  of  face !  How  manifestly  was  God  with  Israel !  How 
evident  is  it  that "  The  Lord  reigneth  1  "  Israel  needed  that  assurance,  and  we  need 
it  too.  Whatever  may  come  to  pass  from  year  to  year,  from  century  to  century, 
He  and  He  alone  is  guiding  the  world  and  the  Church  to  that  goal  which  He  has 
foreknown  and  appointed.  This  is  the  sheet-anchor  of  all  our  hopes  for  humanity. 
(A.  B.  Mackay.)  They  were  more  wliich  died  with  hailstones  than  they  whom 
the  children  of  Israel  slew  with  the  sword. — The  Lord's  artillery : — We  have  seen 
how  Gibeon  made  peace  with  Joshua.  Adoni-zedec,  king  of  Jerusalem,  was 
exceedingly  displeased  with  the  men  of  Gibeon  for  making  peace  with  the  enemy. 
1.  The  Divine  cause  has  enemies.  2.  But  the  enemies  of  the  Divine  cause  have 
both  earth  and  heaven  against  them — the  sword  of  Israel  and  the  hail  of  God. 
The  Uving  God  has  two  great  forces ;  if  you  escape  one,  you  fall  under  the  power 
of  the  other.  All  things  fight  for  God.  The  hailstones  are  His  friends  and  allies ; 
the  stars  in  their  courses  beat  and  throb  according  to  His  purpose  and  express  His 
intent.  The  bad  cause  has  no  friends ;  it  comes  to  an  ignominious  end ;  it  is 
overwhelmed  by  hailstones.  It  is  so  humbling.  The  bad  cause  perishes  in 
contempt.  The  five  kings  ran  away  and  hid  themselves  in  a  cave,  and  Joshua  said, 
•«  Bring  them  out  I "    {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  The  sun  stood  still,  and  the  moon  stayed. — The  battle  of  Bethhoron : 
— ^In  some  respects  this  victory  had  a  special  significance.  In  the  first  place,  it  had 
a  most  important  bearing  on  the  success  of  the  whole  enterprise ;  its  suddenness, 
its  completeness,  its  manifold  grandeur  being  adnairably  fitted  to  paralyse  the 
enemy  in  other  parts  of  the  country,  and  open  the  whole  region  to  Joshua.  By 
some  it  has  been  compared  to  the  battle  of  Marathon,  not  only  on  account  of  the 
Boddenness  with  which  the  decisive  blow  was  struck,  but  also  on  account  of  the 
importance  of  the  interests  involved.  It  was  a  battle  for  freedom,  for  purity,  for 
true  religion,  in  opposition  to  tyranny,  idolatry,  and  abominable  sensuality ;  for  all 
that  is  wholesome  in  human  life,  in  opposition  to  all  that  is  corrupt ;  for  all  that 
makes  for  peaceful  progress,  in  opposition  to  all  that  entails  degradation  and 
misery.  The  prospects  of  the  whole  world  were  brighter  after  that  victory  of 
Bethhoron.  The  relation  of  heaven  to  earth  was  more  auspicious,  and  more  full  of 
promise  for  the  days  to  come.     In  the  next  place  the  tokens  of  Divine  aid  were 


CHAP.  X.]  JOSHUA.  191 

very  impressive.  After  the  experience  which  Joshua  had  had  of  the  consequences 
of  failing  to  ask  God  for  direction  when  first  the  Gibeonites  came  to  him,  we  may 
be  very  sure  that  on  the  present  occasion  he  would  be  peculiarly  careful  to  seek 
Divine  counsel.  And  he  was  weU  rewarded.  Then  as  to  the  miracle  of  the  sun 
and  the  moon  standing  still.  It  is  well  known  that  this  was  one  of  the  passages 
brought  forward  by  the  Church  of  Eome  to  condemn  Galileo,  when  he  affirmed  that 
the  earth  and  the  moon  revolved  round  the  sun,  and  that  it  was  not  the  motion  of 
the  sun  round  the  earth,  but  the  rotation  of  the  earth  on  her  own  axis  that  produced 
the  change  of  day  and  night.  No  one  would  dream  now  of  making  use  of  this 
passage  for  any  such  purpose.  Whatever  theory  of  inspiration  men  may  hold,  it  is 
admitted  universally  that  the  inspired  writers  used  the  popular  language  of  the  day 
in  matters  of  science,  and  did  not  anticipate  discoveries  which  were  not  made  till 
many  centuries  later.  A  far  more  serious  question  has  been  raised  as  to  whether 
this  miracle  ever  occurred,  or  could  have  occurred.  To  those  who  believe  in  the 
possibility  of  miracles,  it  can  be  no  conclusive  argument  that  it  could  not  have 
occurred  without  producing  injurious  consequences  the  end  of  which  can  hardly  be 
conceived.  For  if  the  rotation  of  the  earth  on  its  axis  was  suddenly  arrested,  all 
human  beings  on  its  surface,  and  all  loose  objects  whatever  must  have  been  flung 
forward  with  prodigious  violence ;  just  as,  on  a  small  scale,  on  the  sudden  stoppage 
of  a  carriage,  we  find  ourselves  thrown  forward,  the  motion  of  the  carriage  having 
been  communicated  to  our  bodies.  But  really  this  is  a  paltry  objection ;  for  surely 
the  Divine  power  that  can  control  the  rotation  of  the  earth  is  abundantly  able  to 
obviate  such  effects  as  these.  We  can  understand  the  objection  that  God,  having 
adjusted  all  the  forces  of  nature,  leaves  them  to  operate  by  themselves  in  a  uniform 
way  without  disturbance  or  interference  ;  but  we  can  hardly  comprehend  the  reason- 
ableness of  the  position  that  if  it  is  His  pleasure  miraculously  to  modify  one 
arrangement.  He  is  unable  to  adjust  all  relative  arrangements,  and  make  all  con- 
spire harmoniously  to  the  end  desired.  But  was  it  a  miracle  ?  The  narrative,  as 
we  have  it,  implies  not  only  that  it  was,  but  that  there  was  something  in  it 
stupendous  and  unprecedented.  It  comes  in  as  a  part  of  that  supernatural 
process  in  which  God  has  been  engaged  ever  since  the  deliverance  of  His  people 
from  Egypt,  and  which  was  to  go  on  tiU  they  should  be  finally  settled  in  the  land. 
It  naturally  joins  on  to  the  miraculous  division  of  the  Jordan,  and  the  miraculous 
faU  of  the  walls  of  Jericho.  We  must  remember  that  the  work  in  which  God  was 
now  engaged  was  one  of  peculiar  spiritual  importance  and  significance.  He  was 
not  merely  finding  a  home  for  His  covenant  people ;  He  was  making  arrangements 
for  advancing  the  highest  interests  of  humanity;  He  was  guarding  against  the 
extinction  on  earth  of  the  Divine  light  which  alone  can  guide  man  in  safety  through 
the  life  that  now  is,  and  in  preparation  for  that  which  is  to  come.  Who  will  take 
upon  him  to  say  that  at  an  important  crisis  in  the  progress  of  the  events  which  were 
to  prepare  the  way  for  this  grand  consummation,  it  was  not  fitting  for  the  Almighty 
to  suspend  for  a  time  even  the  ordinances  of  heaven,  in  order  that  a  day's  work, 
carrying  such  vast  consequences,  might  not  be  interrupted  before  its  triumphant 
close  ?  One  other  notable  feature  in  the  transaction  of  this  day  was  the  complete- 
ness of  the  defeat  inflicted  by  Joshua  on  the  enemy.  This  defeat  went  on  in 
successive  stages  from  early  morning  tni  late  at  night.  First,  there  was  the 
slaughter  in  the  plain  of  Gibeon.  Then  the  havoc  produced  by  the  hail  and  by 
Joshua  on  the  retreating  army.  Then  the  destruction  caused  as  Joshua  followed 
the  enemy  to  their  cities.  And  the  work  of  the  day  was  wound  up  by  the  execution 
of  the  five  kings.  Moreover,  there  followed  a  succession  of  similar  scenes  at  the 
taking  and  sacking  of  their  cities.  When  we  try  to  realise  all  this  in  detail,  we  are 
confronted  with  a  terrible  scene  in  blood  and  death,  and  possibly  we  may  fiiid  our- 
selves asking,  "  Was  there  a  particle  of  humanity  in  Joshua,  that  he  was  capable  of 
such  a  series  of  transactions?  "  But  it  must  be  said,  and  said  firmly  for  Joshua, 
that  there  is  no  evidence  of  his  acting  on  this  or  on  other  such  occasions  in  order 
to  gratify  personal  feelings ;  it  was  not  done  either  to  gratify  a  thirst  for  blood,  or 
to  gratify  the  pride  of  a  conqueror.  Joshua  all  through  gives  us  the  impression  of 
a  man  carrying  out  the  will  of  another  ;  inflicting  a  judicial  sentence,  and  inflicting 
it  thoroughly  at  the  first  so  that  there  might  be  no  need  for  a  constant  series  of 
petty  executions  afterwards.  This  certainly  was  his  aim  ;  but  the  enemy  showed 
themselves  more  vital  than  he  had  supposed.  And  when  we  turn  to  ourselves  and 
think  what  we  may  learn  from  this  transaction,  we  see  a  valuable  appUcation  of  hia 
method  to  the  spiritual  warfare.  God  has  enemies  still,  within  and  without,  with 
whom  we  are  called  to  contend.    "  For  we  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood,  but 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

against  principalities  and  powers,  against  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world, 
against  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places."  When  we  are  fighting  with  the 
enemy  within  our  own  hearts  leniency  is  our  great  temptation,  but  at  the  same 
time  our  greatest  snare.  What  we  need  here  is  courage  to  slay.  And  in  reference 
to  the  outside  world,  want  of  thoroughness  in  warfare  is  stiU  our  besetting  sin.  If 
only  the  Church  had  more  faith,  and,  as  the  fruit  of  faith,  more  courage  and  more 
enterprise,  what  help  from  heaven  might  not  come  to  her  1  True,  she  would  not 
see  the  enemy  crushed  by  hailstones,  nor  the  sun  standing  in  Gibeon,  nor  the  moon 
in  the  valley  of  Ajalon  ;  but  she  would  see  grander  sights ;  she  would  see  men  of 
spiritual  might  raised  up  in  her  ranks ;  she  would  see  tides  of  strong  spiritual 
influence  overwhelming  her  enemies.  Jerichos  dismantled,  Ais  captured,  and  the 
champions  of  evil  falling  like  Lucifer  from  heaven  to  make  way  for  the  King  of 
kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  Let  us  go  to  the  Cross  of  Jesus  to  revive  our  faith  and 
recruit  our  energies.  {W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.I).)  Fixing  of  sun  and  moon  in  the 
heavens  : — I.  Consider  the  aeguments,  usually  advanced  against  the  rossiEiLiTT 
or  the  sun  and  moon  standing  still  in  the  heavens.  Not  merely  is  it  objected 
that  such  an  occurrence  would  be  an  unwarrantable  interference  with  the  laws  of 
nature ;  but  the  historian's  veracity  has  also  been  called  in  question.  It  is  argued 
that  in  recording  the  circumstance  he  does  not  express  himself  scientifically  ;  but 
that,  on  the  contrary,  he  evinces  ignorance  of  the  true  principles  of  astronomy :  that 
therefore  he  should  not  be  regarded  as  an  inspired  writer,  this  circumstance  being 
sufficient  in  itself  to  shake  credit  in  his  testimony.  To  this  objection  we  reply — 
Joshua  did  not  mean  to  furnish  us  with  a  treatise  on  astronomy.  He  expressed 
himself  according  to  the  opinion  formed  on  scientific  topics  during  the  times  in 
which  he  lived.  Do  not  we,  ourselves,  who  know  that  it  is  the  earth  which  moves, 
and  not  the  sun,  commonly  speak  of  his  rising  and  setting ;  while  perfectly  aware 
that  in  reality  he  neither  rises  nor  sets.  Certainly  the  lengthening  out  of  the  day 
(on  the  occasion  of  Joshua  defeating  the  five  kings)  must  have  been  caused  by  the 
earth  not  revolving  so  rapidly  on  its  axis  as  it  usually  does.  It  is  well  known  that 
in  the  equatorial  regions  the  earth  moves  from  west  to  east  at  the  rate  of  one 
thousand  miles  in  the  hour ;  and  that  the  rapidity  of  motion  gradually  diminishes 
as  we  go  from  the  equator  to  the  poles ;  so  that,  at  the  poles,  there  is  no  motion 
whatever.  Supposing  that,  instead  of  moving  at  its  usual  speed,  our  earth  were  to 
revolve,  on  its  axis,  only  five  hundred  miles  in  the  hour  :  the  result  would  be  that 
the  day  would  be  protracted  to  double  the  ordinary  length,  because  the  apparent 
passage  of  the  sun  first,  and  of  the  moon  next,  over  the  concave  surface  would  be 
proportionally  retarded.  But  it  is  further  objected  that  such  an  interference  with 
the  course  of  nature  would  have  occasioned  irreparable  mischief.  What !  Is  any- 
thing too  hard  for  God  ?  Cannot  He,  who  called  nature  into  existence,  suspend  its 
laws  and  operations  when  He  pleases  ?  Is  any  man  so  well  acquainted  with  the 
complex  machinery  of  nature  as  to  be  prepared  to  say  that  the  conception  and 
development  of  animal  life  are  possible  things ;  but  that  the  slackening  of  the 
earth's  rotary  motion  is  an  impossibility  ?  And  now,  before  dismissing  this  head  of 
our  subject,  we  shall  adduce  from  pagan  mythology  a  proof  that  the  miracle 
referred  to  in  our  text  did  really  occur.  The  superstitious  Greeks,  in  olden 
times,  worshipped  the  sun,  under  the  name  of  Apollo,  who  (according  to  them)  had 
a  son  who  was  called  Phaeton.  Apollo  was  supposed  to  drive  the  chariot  of  the 
sun  daily  through  the  skies.  Phaeton  requested  his  father  to  permit  him  to  drive 
the  chariot  for  a  single  day.  Apollo  granted  the  request.  Phaeton  proved  an 
unskilful  charioteer,  in  being  unable  to  curb  the  horses,  which  therefore  went  out 
of  the  proper  track.  Jupiter  (whom  the  ancient  pagans  regarded  as  the  supreme 
god)  irritated  at  Phaeton's  rashness,  and  fearing  that  a  conflagration  of  heaven 
and  earth  might  ensue,  struck  the  youth  with  the  thunderbolt  and  hurled  him  into 
the  river  Po  in  Italy.  This  heathen  anecdote  cannot  be  altogether  an  invention. 
There  lies  a  truth  at  the  bottom  of  it.  Some  irregularity  in  the  sun's  apparent 
diurnal  course  must  have  occurred  at  an  early  period  of  history  ;  otherwise  ancient 
heathens  would  have  no  foundation  whereon  to  build  their  superstitious  legend. 
And  let  us  observe  that  where  heathen  testimony  can  be  brought  to  corroborate 
revelation  the  testimony  is  invaluable ;  because  it  is  the  testimony  of  enemies. 
II.  We  proceed  to  show  that  thebe  existed  an  absolute  necessity  fob  the  mibacle 
IN  question  being  performed.  Yes  ;  there  is  an  intimate  connection  between  thid 
miracle  and  the  redemption  which  is  in  Jesus  Christ.  If  sun  and  moon  had  not 
stood  still  at  Joshua's  command  there  would  (on  human  calculation)  have  been  no 
chance  of  salvation  for  a  single  member  of  our  fallen  race.     If  Israel  had  not  had 


CHAP.  X.]  JOSHUA.  193 

sufficient  light  to  guide  them  in  pursuing  their  Canaanite  enemies  these  enemies 
would  have  escaped  during  the  darkness  of  the  night.  Had  they  escaped  the  five 
kings  might  have  ralHed ;  and,  instead  of  Israel  exterminating  them,  they  might 
have  exterminated  Israel.  Thus  the  advent  of  the  promised  Eedeemer  would  have 
been  prevented :  for  God  had  decreed  that  of  Jacob's  seed  (in  the  hue  of  Judah) 
Messiah  should  descend.  No  doubt  the  Divine  plans  have  long  been  settled  in  the 
councils  of  eternity ;  and  the  Most  High  wiU  take  good  care  that  Satan  shall  not 
defeat  them.  But  then  God  employs  second  means  to  work  His  ends.  He  ordains 
every  single  step  and  event  which  wiU  be  conducive  thereto  in  order  that  a  single 
link  may  not  be  broken  in  the  chain  of  His  providential  dealing.  HI.  The  conflict 
which  Israel,  under  Joshua,  had  to  maintaua  with  the  wicked  nations  of  Canaan 
prefigured  that  deadlier  conflict  which  we  ourselves,  under  a  greater  than  Joshua, 
have  to  keep  up  with  the  world,  the  devil,  and  the  flesh.  To  enable  us  to  make 
head  against  these  spiritual  foes,  who  have  in  view  nothing  less  than  our  destruc- 
tion, God  in  mercy  lengthens  out  the  day.  There  is  a  spiritual  sun,  and  there  is 
a  spiritual  moon :  even  as  there  exist  a  literal  sun  and  moon.  God  has  set  these 
moral  luminaries  in  the  spiritual  firmament,  to  give  such  persons  as  have  hitherto 
turned  a  deaf  ear  to  the  gospel  space  to  believe  it  and  be  saved,  ere  it  be  too  late  ; 
and  also  to  afford  light  to  those  who  already  believe  that  they  may  continue  firm 
to  the  end.  (John  Caldwell,  B.A.)  How  Joshua  stopped  the  sun : — For  ages 
multitudes  of  Bible  readers  have  seen  in  this  narrative  a  stupendous  miracle. 
Seeing  the  statement  some  have  rebelled  against  it,  and  refused  to  beUeve  it. 
Others  have  conscientiously  striven  to  believe  the  statement,  and  defend  it.  Now, 
if  a  miracle  is  really  declared  to  have  taken  place  upon  that  day,  its  stupendous 
nature  forms  no  objection  whatever  to  my  faith.  Every  mu-acle  is  tome  stupendous, 
or  else  it  is  no  miracle  at  all.  Where  God  is  concerned  nothing  is  impossible. 
What  objection  then  is  there  ?  The  first,  that  such  an  act  would  seem,  at  any  rate 
to  be  out  of  keeping  with  God's  economy  of  power ;  it  serves  no  direct  purpose 
here.  Mere  flourishes  of  almightinesses  are  never  found  in  the  Bible.  Every 
miracle  in  the  Bible  is  a  means  to  an  end,  and  there  is  a  proportion  between  the 
means  and  the  end  in  view.  There  is  no  waste.  I  search  the  Bible  in  vain  for  any 
reference  to  the  fact  that  the  earth  was  stopped,  or  the  sun  stayed.  I  find  no  such 
reference  at  all.  No  use  whatever  is  made  of  this  in  any  other  age,  or  in  any  other 
book.  God  led  His  people  out  of  Egypt  with  a  high  hand,  and  the  nation  was 
cradled  among  miracles,  and  those  miracles  are  appealed  to  time  after  time,  age 
after  age,  to  the  end  of  the  Bible.  But  there  is  a  remarkable  silence  with  regard  to 
this.  But  my  chief  objection  to  the  ordinary  view  is  that  I  do  not  believe  that  the 
Bible  says  there  was  a  miracle  at  all.  I  hold  that,  given  a  fair  translation  of  this 
chapter,  and  an  average  amount  of  intelligence  in  the  reader,  and  a  reasonable 
freedom  for  traditional  bias,  the  alleged  stupendous  miracle  disappears  entirely, 
and  gives  way  to  something  far  more  valuable.  And  I  claim  that  it  is  one  of  the 
inestimable  and  innumerable  benefits  conferred  upon  us  by  the  Bevised  Translation 
of  the  Bible,  that  by  its  means  the  average  reader  can,  without  the  help  of  any 
commentary,  see  at  a  glance  how  the  case  stood,  and  what  really  took  place  on  that 
great  day.  Now,  you  will  ask,  What  is  the  difference,  then,  between  the  Eevised 
and  the  Old  Version  ?  Why,  simply  this.  If  you  read  this  chapter  in  the  Old 
Version  the  verses  follow  one  another  in  unbroken  continuity,  and  no  hint  what- 
ever is  given  to  the  reader  that  when  he  arrives  at  the  twelfth  verse  he  is  no  longer 
reading  what  the  author  of  the  Book  of  Joshua  himself  wrote ;  he  is  not  warned 
that  the  author,  at  the  twelfth  verse,  breaks  off  from  telling  his  own  story,  and 
introduces  a  quotation  as  a  climax  to  the  description  of  the  battle,  and  that  that 
quotation  is  a  poetical  one,  taken  from  a  book  once  popular,  but  now  entirely  lost, 
the  Book  of  Jasher.  If  you  read  the  Old  Version  it  would  seem  to  you  that  from 
the  twelfth  to  the  fifteenth  verses  is  as  much  prose  as  the  rest  of  the  chapter, 
whereas  in  the  Hebrew  Bible,  from  the  first,  these  verses  were  marked  as  a  piece  of 
quoted  poetry  ;  and  in  the  Eevised  Version  the  thing  is  done  almost  in  the  same 
way.  So  that  the  reader  who  just  looks  at  this  chapter  as  it  stands  in  the  Eevised 
Version  will  see  that  in  the  first  part  of  the  chapter  he  has  to  deal  with  history,  and 
in  this  part  he  has  to  deal  with  poetry — a  poetical  quotation  introduced  by  the 
historian  as  the  climax  of  his  description  of  the  great  battle  of  Bethhoron.  Now  it 
appears  to  me  that  this  simple  fact  solves  the  difficulty  entirely — relieves  the  faith 
of  multitudes  from  a  great  burden ;  and,  best  of  aU,  deprives  a  certain  class  of 
unbelievers  of  a  very  coarse  but  at  the  same  time  a  very  effective  weapon.  What 
have  we  here,  then  ?    Precisely  what  we  have  in  many  other  parts  of  the  Bible — 

13 


194  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

namely,  two  accounts  of  the  same  thing :  one  the  sober  account  of  the  historian, 
and  the  other  the  more  glowing  account  of  the  poet.  For  instance,  you  have  the 
same  thing  in  the  Book  of  Judges.  You  will  remember — for  you  are  Bible  readers 
—you  remember  the  great  battle  of  Mount  Tabor.  The  Jews  were  groaning  under 
the  tyranny  of  Jabin,  the  king  of  Jerusalem,  and  at  last  there  arose  Deborah.  She 
aroused  Barak,  Barak  routed  the  army  of  Sisera ;  Jael  completed  Barak's  work, 
and  with  a  tent-pin  and  a  hammer  killed  Sisera  in  her  tent.  This  is  the  story  of 
the  battle  of  Mount  Tabor,  as  told  by  the  historian.  But  in  the  chapter  next  to  it 
you  will  find  the  song  of  Deborah,  and  in  that  song  an  inspired  poetess  gives  her 
account  of  the  battle  from  the  standpoint  of  the  poet.  She  says :  "  They  fought 
from  heaven ;  the  stars  in  their  courses  fought  against  Sisera."  It  was  Barak  who 
did  it,  and  Jael,  and  the  tent-pin  and  the  hammer.  No,  no ;  they  fought  out  of 
heaven.  "  The  stars  in  their  courses,"  says  Deborah,  "fought  against  Sisera."  Is 
there  any  man  on  the  face  of  the  earth  that  has  ever  stood  up  to  say  that  because 
Deborah  said  that  the  battle  of  Mount  Tabor  was  actually  won  by  planetary 
impulses,  therefore  the  stars  really  entered  the  Jewish  army  and  fought  against 
the  oppressor  ?  Who  is  there  that  does  not  see  at  once  that  in  that  case  we  have 
to  deal  with  poetry  ?  We  have  something  like  that  even  in  the  New  Testament. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  said  on  the  very  first  day  when  discipleship  was  born — He 
said  to  one  of  His  first  disciples — "  Te  shall  see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  angels 
ascending  and  descending  upon  the  Son  of  Man."  Did  they  ever?  Never,  never. 
They  never  saw  the  blue  rent ;  they  never  saw  angels  walking  up  and  down  the 
body  of  Christ.  Never  ;  it  was  a  poetical  form — a  great  mystical  spiritual  promise 
thrown  into  the  larger  language  of  poetry.  And  so  the  Gospel  closes — "  They  shall 
take  up  serpents,  and  if  they  drink  any  deadly  thing  it  shall  do  them  no  manner  of 
harm."  Is  that  being  carried  out  in  everybody  or  in  anybody  that  beUeves  the 
name  of  Christ  ?  No,  not  literally.  The  serpent  will  kill  a  Christian  as  well  as  an 
infidel.  Poison  is  as  effective  on  a  saint  as  on  a  sinner.  What  does  it  mean  then  ? 
It  is  a  grand  spiritual  fact,  put  in  the  large  language  of  poetry.  And  that  is  what 
we  have  in  this  chapter.  But  you  will  say,  Is  not  the  Bible  a  serious  book  ?  Of 
what  value  is  the  introduction  of  a  bit  of  poetry  like  this  when  it  misleads  so  many  ? 
I  reply — I,  Yes,  the  Bible  is  intensely  seeious.  This  is  not  quoted  as  an  orna- 
ment ;  it  is  for  use.  And  if  you  ask.  What  is  the  value  of  it  ?  I  reply  it  is  immensely 
valuable.  Apart  from  this  poetical  quotation  the  whole  chapter  is  comparatively 
worthless.  Why?  Because  a  body  without  a  soul  is  worthless.  The  Bible  is 
valuable  to  us  in  so  far  as  it  touches  my  life  and  yours.  To  tell  me  that 
Joshua  routed  those  people  does  not  help  me  very  much.  That  is  the  body  of  it. 
I  want  to  get  at  the  soul  of  it.  I  want  to  understand  Joshua  himself,  to  modernise 
him,  to  make  him  a  brother  and  to  get  some  good  out  of  him.  Well,  this  bit  of 
poetry  helps  me :  this  is  the  key  to  it.  If  I  read  this  I  see  how  the  thing  is  done, 
and  I  see  how  I  can  do  the  same  thing,  in  a  measure,  when  I  am  called  upon  to  do 
it.  This  piece  of  poetry  is  a  window  through  which  we  can  look  into  Joshua's 
heart.  The  great  battle  of  Bethhoron  was  a  battle  that  threatened  to  be  a  drawn 
battle.  There  stands  the  man  on  the  ridge.  The  men  have  been  running  away 
faster  than  he  has  been  able  to  pursue  them,  and  at  this  moment  it  seemed  as  if 
nature  were  conspiring  against  him  ;  as  if  he  were  not  to  have  the  usual  hours  of 
the  day.  A  black,  mysterious  cloud  was  coming  to  help  the  people  who  were  run- 
ning away  from  him.  Don't  you  understand  the  agony  that  would  come  into  a 
man's  soul  at  that  moment  ? — the  impassioned  prayer  that  would  go  up  to  God 
from  his  heart— not  to  stretch  the  laws  of  nature  till  they  crack — but  to  give  him 
the  usual  day,  to  keep  the  sun  from  going  down  at  noon.  No  child  was  Joshua, 
crying  for  the  moon.  No  man  with  such  sick  fancies  could  have  done  the  work  he 
did.  What  this  man  prayed  for  was  a  fair  day's  light  to  do  a  fair  day's  work  in  the 
strength  of  and  for  the  glory  of  God.  And  do  not  you  know  something  of  the  fear 
that  came  over  him  ?  If  you  are  trying  to  do  any  work  you  too  will  come  to  this 
point.  It  will  seem  to  you  as  if  God  were  going  to  make  your  day  too  short.  You 
will  see  the  night  falling  all  too  soon.  The  night  cometh,  and  you  will  s:\v,  "  Oh, 
for  more  light.  Life  is  not  long  enough  ;  I  am  being  taken  away  in  the  veiy  middle 
of  my  days."  And  you  will  then  know  what  it  is  to  cry,  "  Sun,  stand  thou  in  the 
heaven  ;  and  thou,  moon,  in  the  valley  of  Ajalon."    II.  "  And  the  sun  stood  still, 

AND  the  moon  stayed,  UNTIL   THE    NATION    HAD    AVENGED   THEMSELVES."      That   is   the 

key — "  until  the  nation  had  avenged  themselves."  What  was  coming  up  from  the 
Mediterranean  was  not  some  awful  preternatural  piece  of  night,  as  Joshua  feared. 
It  was  only  a  shower :  a  hailstorm.    It  was  not  going  to  help  his  enemies,  but  to 


CHAP.  X.]  JOSHUA.  195 

slay  them.  The  sun  was  not  hasting  from  the  heavens  ;  the  heavenly  orbs  would 
do  their  work  as  usual.  The  sun  and  moon  were  to  be  depended  on  ;  but  if  Joshua 
really  wanted  to  have  a  longer  day  than  usual,  that  did  not  depend  on  the  sun  and 
moon,  he  had  to  make  it  himself.  How  ?  Just  as  he  lengthened  the  preceding 
night.  From  Gilgal  to  Gibeon,  how  long  ?  Three  days'  journey.  What  did  Joshua 
do  ?  Why,  he  took  the  twelve  hours  and  stretched  them  till  they  became  thirty-six. 
He  did  three  days'  march  in  one  night.  So  if  Joshua  wants  a  longer  day  on  Beth- 
horon,  it  is  not  the  sun  that  can  make  it  for  him,  nor  the  moon  either.  He  must 
go  back  on  his  recipe  of  the  night  before,  and  take  the  twelve  hours  of  the  day  and 
stretch  them.  It  is  for  Joshua  himself  to  make  the  day  longer,  for  it  is  not  up  in 
the  skies  that  days  are  lengthened,  but  here  on  earth.  The  secret  of  a  long  day  lies 
with  Joshua,  and  not  with  the  sun.  No,  the  sun  will  not  wait  for  you  ;  but  you 
can  quicken  your  pace,  and  so  lengthen  your  days.  The  longest  day  in  your  life  is 
the  day  in  which  you  work  hardest,  think  the  closest,  live  noblest.  HI.  Is  that 
all?  No.  Was  nothing  done  by  God?  Yes,  everything,  "And  there  was  no 
day  like  that,"  says  the  old  poet,  "  before  it,  or  after,  that  the  Lord  hearkened  unto 
the  voice  of  a  man."  By  stopping  the  sun  ?  No ;  "  The  Lord  fought  for  Israel." 
That  cloud  coming  up  from  the  Mediterranean,  that  Joshua  mistook  for  the  night, 
was  one  of  his  own  soldiers  marching  to  meet  him ;  it  was  one  of  his  own  allies. 
Nature  herself  was  in  league  with  him.  It  was  the  hailstorm,  one  of  God's  rein- 
forcements coming  to  do  the  work  of  God.  It  is  one  of  the  deepest  truths  of 
experience  that  "  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them^that  love  God."  The 
hailstorms  are  still  in  league  with  the  Joshuas.  Are  you  false  and  mean  in  your 
aims  ?  Are  your  ways  corrupt  on  the  earth  ?  Then  I  tell  you,  whoever  you  are,  you 
may  succeed  for  a  while,  or  you  may  seem  to  succeed,  as  the  tares  that  ripen  in  the 
autumn  sun  that  the  fire  may  burn  them  all  the  easier  by  and  by.  You  may  seem 
to  succeed  for  a  while,  but  the  very  framework  of  the  universe  must  be  shattered  ; 
God's  throne  must  crumble  in  decay  ;  heaven  itself  must  be  carried  at  the  assault 
of  hell's  dark  troops  before  you  can  ultimately  and  really  succeed.  You  too  will  be 
caught  some  day  between  Joshua  and  the  hailstorm  of  the  Lord.  But  are  you 
seelung  to  be  true,  trying  to  be  right,  yet  often  finding  things  arrayed  against  you  ? 
Then,  in  God's  name,  go  on.  You  misread  the  signals.  The  blackness  that 
threatens  you  is  only  an  ally  in  disguise.  You  are  bound  to  succeed  in  the  battle  of 
the  Lord.  The  nature  of  things  is  in  league  with  righteousness.  IV.  "  And  Joshua 
RETUKNED  INTO  THE  CAMP  AT  GiLGAi."  Did  he  know  what  he  had  done  ?  No.  Ha 
knew  he  had  done  something ;  that  it  had  been  a  great  day,  but  he  had  no  idea 
how  great  it  was.  It  was  one  of  the  thousand-year  days  of  God.  It  is  still  with 
us.  That  sun  that  Joshua  cried  to  is  still  shining,  and  the  moon  has  never  left  the 
vale  of  Ajalon.  Serve  the  Lord  with  aU  your  might,  and  you  will  do  a  work  greater 
than  you  imagine,  or  dream,  or  desire.  Our  time-tables  are  altogether  wrong — 
sixty  seconds  to  the  minute,  sixty  minutes  to  the  hour  ;  that  will  do  very  well  for 
the  rough  and  tumble  work  in  the  city,  but  apply  a  time-table  like  that  to  Geth- 
semane.  Bead  the  Gospels,  watch  in  hand,  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  Cross— 
•'From  the  sixth  to  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  hung  on  the  Cross,  dying."  Sixty 
minutes  to  the  hour,  sixty  seconds  to  the  minute  1  It  will  not  do.  These  are 
eternal  things,  and  they  upset  aU  our  calculations.  We  do  not  know  what  we  do 
when  we  serve  God.  Life  is  greater,  grander  than  we  dream.  Do  not  think  life  is 
smaU.  We  sow  time,  and,  lo,  we  reap  eternity.  We  may  so  live  as  to  leave  behind 
us  a  Ught  shining  till  the  world  itself  shall  end.  "  Eetumed  to  the  camp."  Ah, 
men  and  women,  the  pathos  of  that  old  phrase !  You  and  I  will  return  to  the  camp 
very  soon.  The  day  over.  Well,  you  may  arrest  the  sun  before  night  ;  but  the  sun, 
once  it  has  dipped  beneath  the  western  wave,  cannot  be  brought  back.  Yesterday  I 
Where  is  it  ?  It  is  beyond,  in  the  great  eternity.  Can  you  run  after  the  lightning 
and  catch  it  and  bring  it  back  ?  Sooner  shall  you  do  that  than  at  the  end  of  the 
day  recover  the  sun  that  has  set.  We  shall  be  returning  to  camp  soon.  What 
histories  are  we  bringing  back — you  and  I  ?  The  number  of  our  days  is  with  God ; 
but  the  length,  fulness,  quaUty,  and  eternalness  are  with  us.  {J.  M.  Gibbon.) 
Providential  help: — 1.  We  may  learn  whither  to  have  recourse  for  help  when- 
ever the  state  of  the  weather  has  proved  unfavourable  to  our  respective  under- 
takings. Is  our  land  drenched  with  floods,  that  threaten  to  wash  away  or  decay 
the  seed  lately  sown  ?  or  chilled  by  cold  and  blighting  winds  ?  or  parched  up  with 
a  scorching  heat,  unmitigated  by  a  passing  cloud  or  a  soUtary  shower  ?  To  com- 
plain and  murmur  under  such  visitations  is  as  vain  as  it  is  impious ;  whereas 
prayer  for  their  alleviation  or  removal  will  probably  procure  us  God's  favourable 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cms.  x. 

consideration,  and  certainly  work  for  our  spiritual  profit.  2.  Again,  we  learn  by 
what  unlikely  means  the  Almighty  brings  about  the  deliverance  of  His  people  and 
the  discomfiture  of  His  enemies.  To  promote  this  great  end,  all  hearts  are  in  His 
hand,  all  events  are  at  His  disposal ;  yea.  He  directs  and  controls  the  elements 
themselves,  so  as  to  extort  from  the  sons  of  men  the  confession,  "  This  is  God's 
doing  ;  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes."  What  befell  the  Spanish  Armada,  fitted  out 
for  the  invasion  and  conquest  of  Great  Britain  ?  "The  Lord  sent  a  great  wind 
into  the  sea,"  to  destroy  the  remnant  of  those  ships  which  had  hitherto  escaped 
defeat ;  so  that  the  final  discomfiture  of  the  fleet  was  as  much  owing  to  the 
tempestuous  violence  of  the  ocean  as  to  the  desperate  valour  of  the  English. 
However  inextricable  your  difficulties,  however  insuperable  your  dangers  may 
appear,  the  time  for  surmounting  or  escaping  them  may  be  at  hand:  your 
last  extremity  is  God's  gracious  opportunity:  the  valley  of  Achor  He  is  chang- 
ing into  the  door  of  hope,  and  making  the  vast  magazine  of  ordinary  and 
extraordinary  dispensations  instrumental  to  your  eventual  happiness  and  eternal 
glory.  But  tremble,  ye  wicked,  though  peace  and  prosperity  at  present  attend  your 
path.  The  resources  in  the  hand  of  a  retributive  Providence  are  leagued  against 
you,  which,  if  delayed  now,  will  fall  on  your  devoted  heads  with  tripled  weight 
hereafter.  3.  But  I  may  instance  some  stiU  clearer  points  of  resemblance 
between  this  special  interference  of  the  Almighty  in  the  case  of  Joshua  and  His 
providential  arrangements  at  the  present  day.  Every  year  presents  to  us  an 
appearance  in  the  heavens  as  deserving  our  surprise  and  admiration  as  that  which 
attracted  the  notice  of  the  camp  of  Israel.  From  the  depth  of  winter  to  the  height 
of  summer  the  sun  gradually  travels  over  a  wider  space  in  its  daily  course.  Morning 
after  morning  it  rises  earUer ;  evening  after  evening  later  sets.  At  length  it  escapes 
nur  sight  for  a  few  hours  only ;  and  during  that  short  interval  the  twilight  in  a 
great  degree  compensates  for  its  absence.  Lest,  moreover,  during  winter  nearly 
utter  darkness  should  veil  the  skies,  on  account  of  the  sun's  few  and  contracted 
visits,  the  stars  on  frosty  nights  shine  with  a  brilliancy  unknown  in  summer,  while 
the  unclouded  moon  supplies  its  place,  a  welcome  substitute,  guided  by  whose 
friendly  rays  at  any  time  the  wanderer  may  confidently  rely  on  reaching  his  place 
of  destination.  I  scarcely  need  remind  you  what  assistance  this  lesser  light  lends 
the  labourer  in  late  harvests  by  rising  about  the  full  at  the  same  hour  for  some 
evenings  in  succession  ;  or  how,  when  the  sun  does  not  rise  above  their  horizon  for 
months  together,  and  they  would  otherwise  be  enveloped  in  continual  darkness. 
Divine  Providence  lights  up  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  polar  regions  the  brilliant 
aurora  borealis,  or  northern  lights,  to  illumine  and  cheer  their  "  noonday  nights." 
Is  not  as  effectual  a  provision  made  for  light  by  these  contrivances  as  though  the 
sun  and  moon  in  set  terms  stood  still,  and  hasted  not  to  go  down  about  a 
whole  day?  Are  they  not  as  hard  to  be  accounted  for?  4.  By  comparing  this 
miracle  wrought  by  the  hand  of  Joshua  with  those  performed  by  Jesus  Christ,  we 
may  learn  to  ascribe  all  proper  honour  to  His  person,  all  due  reverence  to  the 
religion  He  came  hither  to  establish.  (H.  A.  Herbert,  B.A.)  The  sun  stand- 
ing still : — A  new  suggestion  in  regard  to  the  standing  still  of  the  sun  and  the 
moon  at  the  apostrophe  of  Joshua  is  given  by  the  Eev.  J.  Sutherland  Black  in 
his  edition  of  "  Joshua,"  issued  as  one  part  of  the  Smaller  Cambridge  Bible  series. 
His  new  postulate  is  to  the  effect  that  no  physical  miracle  occurred,  or  was  desired ; 
he  thinks  the  cosmical  features  of  the  event  do  not  touch  upon  the  supernatural  at 
all.  His  explanation  runs  thus :  "  To  understand  the  quotation  from  the  Book  of 
Jasher,  we  must  figure  to  ourselves  the  speaker  at  two  successive  periods  of  the 
summer  day — first  on  the  plateau  to  the  north  of  the  hill  of  Gibeon,  with  Gibeon 
lying  under  the  sun  to  the  south-east  or  south,  at  the  moment  when  the  resistance 
of  the  enemy  has  at  last  broken  down,  and  again,  hours  later,  when  the  sun  has  set, 
and  the  moon  is  sinking  westward  over  the  valley  of  Ajalon,  threatening  by  its 
disappearance  to  put  an  end  to  the  victorious  pursuit.  The  appeal  to  the  moon  is, 
of  course,  for  light — i.e.,  after  sunset.  The  moon  appears  over  Ajalon;  that  is 
somewhat  south  of  west,  as  seen  by  one  approaching  from  Beth-horon.  There  was, 
therefore,  evening  moonlight.  Joshua  prayed  first  that  the  sunlight,  and  then  that 
the  moonlight  following  it,  might  suffice  for  the  complete  defeat  of  the  enemy." 
The  desire  and  the  improvement  of  life  : — It  is  the  language  of  the  passions,  in  the 
midst  of  a  fervid  and  impetuous  career.  "  Sun,  stand  thou  still,"  equally  exclaim 
the  sons  of  pleasure  and  of  ambition :  every  rank,  pursuit,  and  age  joins  in  the 
same  prayer.  In  the  morning  of  our  existence,  when  all  things  display  their  fairest 
aspect,  and   in  the  midst  of  a  succession  of  pleasurable  scenes  time  rolls  rapidly 


CHAP.  X.]  JOSHUA.  197 

along  :  should  a  moment  of  reflection  intervene,  who  does  not  exclaim,  with  a 
sigh,  "  How  brief,  how  vain  is  life !  how  silently  and  swiftly  do  the  hours  advance 
and  vanish  !  "  "0  sun,  stand  thou  still"  ;  give  us  a  few  more  of  thy  bright  morn- 
ing beams,  that  we  may  a  httle  longer  taste  the  sweetness  of  unsullied  pleasure. 
When  we  advance  to  the  noon  of  the  human  course  ;  amidst  all  the  weighty  cares, 
the  thronging  projects  and  objects  of  strenuous  pursuit,  that  by  turns  awaken  our 
ardour  and  elude  our  expectation — if,  amidst  this  busy  scene,  we  throw  a  glance 
upon  the  enlarged  and  enlarging  space  we  have  already  passed,  and  the  short  and 
shortening  Umits  of  that  which  remains — how  naturally  does  the  heart  send  forth 
the  involuntary,  fruitless  wish,  "  '  Sun,  stand  thou  still.'  Hasten  not  so  precipitately 
to  crush  our  aspiring  hopes,  and  extinguish  in  untimely  darkness  our  unripened 
purposes:  shine  a  httle  longer  in  thy  meridian  brightness,  that  we  may  not  only 
exert  our  strength,  but  reap  some  recompense  of  our  toil."  Arrived  at  this  period  ©f 
imaginary  tranquility — though  many  ties  may  be  loosened  which  once  bound  us  to 
the  world,  yet  new  objects  of  attachment  rise,  and  new  motives  for  wishing  that 
our  stay  might  be  prolonged — or  if  expectation  saddens,  and  aU  around  the  prospect 
grows  more  dim  and  desolate,  still  do  we  hnger  fondly  on  the  verge  of  life,  though 
bereft  of  its  most  valued  comforts,  from  that  unconquerable  dread  with  which  the 
untried  and  unknown  future  strikes  the  imagination,  "0  sun,  stop,  stop  thy 
course.  Stand  thou  still  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  yet  another  year,  another  day, 
to  soften  our  removal  from  the  cheerful  light,  from  the  society  of  our  fellow-beings, 
that,  with  more  composed  and  collected  thoughts,  we  may  stand  before  the  tribunal 
of  our  Creator."  Thus  various  and  inexhaustible  are  the  excuses  of  each  successive 
stage  for  wishing  to  lengthen  out  the  brief  span  of  life ;  and  the  same  sentiment 
pervades  all  the  different  conditions  and  circumstances  of  mankind.  If  prosperity 
smile  upon  us,  we  think  the  sun,  which  hghts  us  every  day  to  a  succession  of 
pleasures,  moves  too  quickly  to  his  setting :  "  0  sun,  stand  thou  still  "  in  the  midst 
of  this  fair  horizon — hasten  not  to  draw  the  veil  of  night  over  these  delightful 
prospects.  And  if  adversity  oppress  our  spirits,  we  complain  that  the  days  which 
are  clouded  with  grief,  like  those  which  are  illumined  with  joy,  equally  pass  away 
never  to  return.  "  0  Sun,  stand  thou  still,"  let  the  dark  and  lowering  tempest  pass 
from  before  thy  refulgent  orb :  let  thy  sweet  and  pleasant  Ught  again  gladden  our 
hearts,  that  our  few  remaining  hours  may  glide  peacefully  to  the  close.  But  if  he, 
who,  without  his  own  fault,  and  by  inevitable  circumstances,  has  been  deprived  of 
happiness,  may  complain  of  the  swiftness  of  time  and  the  brevity  of  life,  how  much 
deeper  regret  must  that  man  feel  who  is  conscious  of  having  wasted  its  most 
valuable  seasons,  in  thoughtless  inactivity  I  Well  may  he  cry  out  to  time,  to 
suspend  its  course,  "  Sun,  stand  thou  still,"  or  rather  reverse  thy  flaming  and 
impetuous  career.  On  the  other  hand,  the  virtuous  man.  But  who  is  so  virtuous 
as  to  have  no  faults  to  repair,  no  defects  to  supply — the  man,  however,  com- 
paratively virtuous,  whose  youthful  days  have  been  introductory  to  a  scene  of 
honourable  and  useful  exertion ;  who  may  justly  look  upon  himself  as  a  blessing  to 
his  fellow-creatures ;  and  who  is  pursuing,  with  steady  vigour,  his  well-chosen 
course  ;  gradually  extending  his  usefulness  and  his  good  affections  ;  and  is  a  pro- 
gressive pattern  of  every  social  and  every  religious  duty ;  though  he  may  sub- 
missively await  the  Divine  disposal,  yet  will  he  view,  not  without  awe,  the  narrow 
space  which  even  virtue  itself  can  boast  of  here  below ;  and  will  be  almost  tempted 
to  wish  that  it  might  be  the  wUl  of  Divine  Providence  to  protract  the  duration  of  a 
span  so  brief,  so  inadequate  to  his  views  and  his  desires  :  "  '  Sun,  stand  thou  still ' ; 
withdraw  not  thy  precious  and  useful  light  so  soon  ;  let  me  still  pursue  the  happy 
course  on  which  I  have  entered."  Unavailing  are  all  such  wishes;  the  tide  of  time 
wiU  be  neither  accelerated  nor  retarded  by  our  entreaties;  the  sun  will  neither 
suspend  nor  deviate  from  his  course.  Since,  therefore,  we  cannot  rule  the  course  of 
nature,  let  us  endeavour  to  rule  ourselves.  If  we  are  so  unhappy  as  to  have  wasted 
our  past  hours  in  folly  or  to  have  abused  them  by  misconduct  it  is  in  vain  to  sit 
down  and  fold  our  arms  in  melancholy  inaction ;  wishing  that  the  past  noight  be 
recalled,  and  grieving  that  the  future  cannot  be  hindered  from  advancing.  We 
should  rather  call  upon  our  souls  and  all  that  is  within  us  to  amend  our  faults, 
and  repair  the  ills  we  have  thereby  incurred,  before  it  be  too  late  ;  hke  travellers 
who  having  wandered  from  the  right  path  hasten  to  regaia  it  before  the  svm  goes 
down.  If,  on  the  contrary,  we  have  happily  chosen  the  path  of  virtue,  let  ua 
cheerfully  and  thankfully  pursue  our  way.  Pleasant  but  fleeting  is  the  season  of 
youth,  life's  cheerful  morning.  You  cannot  prolong  its  absolute  duration ;  but  you 
can  add  inestimably  to  its  valae.    You  can  extend  its  happy  influence  over  every 


198  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.x. 

remaining  period,  and  draw  from  it  a  rich  harvest  of  knowledge,  virtue,  and  true 
felicity.  Youth  is  the  blossom,  the  promise  of  mature  years — these  are  equally 
transitory  with  the  former.  In  vain  you  implore  the  sun  to  stay,  but  you  may  call 
him  to  witness  a  train  of  pious  and  charitable  actions  as  he  passes  ;  you  may  crowd 
into  a  small  extent  a  multitude  of  valuable  labours  ;  it  is  not  for  us  to  fix  the 
limits,  but  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  life — well  pleased  to  act  in  concert  with  the  great 
first  mover  of  aU  things,  among  the  innumerable  instruments  of  His  benevolent 
designs,  and  not  unwilling  to  cease  from  action,  whenever  He  shall  see  fit  to 
transfer  the  pleasing  though  arduous  toil  from  ourselves  to  others.  No  sooner  has 
the  sun  passed  his  meridian  than  the  shadows  lengthen  and  night  approaches. 
The  dawn,  the  noon,  the  evening,  all  glide  with  uninterrupted  speed ;  and  the  hour 
when  we  must  bid  farewell  to  all  their  successive  scenes  nature  cannot  now  long 
delay.  All  that  remains  is,  by  reason  and  reflection,  by  prayer  and  repentance,  to 
calm  the  perturbation  of  our  minds — by  holy  resignation  to  the  will  of  God,  and  a 
cheerful  performance  of  our  remaining  duties,  to  seek  His  aid  and  protection — then, 
though  we  cannot  escape  the  stroke  of  death,  we  shall  render  it  less  painful  and 
alarming ;  thus  disarmed  of  its  sting,  it  will  lose  its  greatest  terrors ;  and  will 
appear  somewhat  like  a  sound  and  refreshing  slumber,  falling  on  the  over-wearied 
mariner,  who  is  within  sight  of  his  desired  haven,  and  who  expects,  with  the  dawn 
of  the  succeeding  day,  to  meet  the  glad  congratulations  of  all  whom  he  loves.  (P. 
Houghton.)  Sun,  stand  thou  still : — "Oh,"  you  say,  "the  sun  and  moon  didn't 
stand  stiU."  One  man  comes  to  me  and  says,  "According  to  the  Copernican 
system  the  sun  stood  still  anyhow,  and  it  was  no  miracle  for  it  to  stand  still." 
Another  man  says,  "  If  you  stop  the  sun,  you  upset  the  whole  universe,  and  throw 
everything  out  of  order,"  Another  man  tells  me  it  was  only  the  refraction  of  the 
sun's  rays  which  made  the  sun  seem  to  stand  still.  Another  man  tells  me  that  all 
that  was  necessary  to  have  this  miracle  right,  was  to  stop  the  world  on  its  own 
axis,  and  it  was  not  necessary  to  stop  it  in  its  revolution  through  its  orbit. 
The  universe  is  only  God's  watch.  I  suppose  He  could  make  it.  Then  I 
suppose  He  could  stop  it.  Then  I  suppose  He  could  start  it  again,  and  stop  it 
again.  Oh  !  not  the  sun  standing  stiU !  Yes.  A  bad  man  does  not  live 
out  half  his  days.  His  sun  may  set  at  noon.  But  a  good  man  may  prolong 
his  days  of  usefulness.  If  a  man,  in  the  strength  of  Joshua,  will  go  forth  to 
fight  against  sin  and  in  behalf  of  the  truth,  he  shall  live ;  a  thousand  years  will 
be  as  one  day.  John  Summerfield  was  a  consumptive  Methodist.  He  stood  look- 
ing fearfuUy  white  in  Old  Sand  Street  Methodist  Church,  preaching  the  glorious 
gospel,  and  on  the  anniversary  platform  in  New  York  pleading  for  the  Bible  until 
the  old  book  unrolled  new  glories  the  world  had  never  seen.  And  on  his 
death-bed  he  talked  of  heaven  until  the  wing  of  the  angelic  messenger  brushed  the 
pillow  on  which  he  lay.  Has  John  Summerfield's  sun  set  ?  Has  John  Summer- 
field's  day  ended  ?  No !  He  lives  in  the  burning  words  he  uttered  in  behalf  of  the 
Christian  Church.  He  lives  in  the  fame  of  that  Chi'ist  whom  he  recommended  to 
the  dying  people.  He  lives  in  the  eternal  raptures  of  that  heaven  into  which  he 
has  already  introduced  so  many  immortal  souls.  Faint,  and  sick,  and  dying,  and 
holding  with  one  hand  to  the  rail  of  the  altar  of  the  Methodist  Church,  with  the 
other  hand  he  arrested  the  sun  in  the  heavens,  seeming  to  say,  "  I  can't  die  now  ; 
I  want  to  live  on,  and  live  on  ;  I  want  to  speak  a  word  for  Christ  that  will  never 
die ;  I  am  only  twenty-seven  years  of  age.  Sun  of  my  Christian  ministry,  stand 
still  over  America."  And  it  stood  still.  Robert  M'Cheyne,  of  Scotland,  was  a  con- 
sumptive Presbyterian.  He  used  to  cough  in  his  sermon  so  hard  that  the  people 
thought  that  he  would  never  preach  again ;  but  thousands  in  Aberdeen,  and 
Edinburgh,  and  Dundee,  heard  the  voice  of  mercy  from  his  lips.  The  people 
rejoiced  under  his  ministry.  His  name  to-day  is  fragrant  in  all  Christendom, 
and  that  name  is  mightier  than  ever  was  his  living  presence.  The  delirium 
of  his  last  sickness  was  filled  with  prayer,  and  when  in  his  dying  moment 
he  lifted  his  hand  for  a  benediction  upon  his  friends,  and  upon  his  country, 
he  was  only  practically  saying,  "  I  can't  die  now  ;  I  want  to  live  on  for 
Christ ;  I  am  only  thirty  years  of  age.  Sun  of  my  Christian  ministry,  stand 
still    over    Scotland."      And    it    stood    still.       {T.   De    Witt    Talmage.)  No 

day  like  thSit.— High  days; — I.  There   had  been  noke  like  it  in  the  number 

AND     strength    OF    THE     CONrEDEBACY   WHICH    WAS    GATHERED    AGAINST   ISRAEL.       The 

highlanders,  and  lowlanders,  and  the  maritime  tribes  combined  their  forces  to 
oppose  and  crush  the  invaders,  who  now,  by  the  defection  of  Gibeon,  possessed  a 
pathway  into  the  heart  of  the  country.    Israel  had  previously  dealt  with  separate 


CHAP.  X.]  JOSHUA.  199 

cities,  Jericho,  Ai,  Gibeon ;  but  now  six  of  the  seven  nations  of  Canaan  j  oined 
together  at  the  summons  of  the  king  of  Jerusalem,  who  was  allied  with  the  kings 
of  Hebron,  Jarmuth,  Lachish,  and  Eglon.  11.  There  was  kone  like  it  in  Joshua's 
LIFE  FOB  HEEOic  FAITH.  1.  It  was  a  day  of  vigour.  As  soon  as  he  received  the 
message  he  saw  the  importance  of  at  once  vindicating  the  trust  reposed  in  him. 
Inertness  and  indolence  ill  become  those  who  are  entrusted  with  great  concerns. 
The  stirring  of  God's  Spirit  in  man  makes  the  pulse  throb  quickly,  purposes  form 
themselves  in  the  will ;  and  all  the  nature  is  braced,  and  knit,  to  subserve  the  heroic 
soul.  2.  It  was  a  day  of  fellowship.  Soon  after  the  first  message  had  come,  with 
surely  a  certain  amount  of  startling  surprise,  God  had  spoken  to  him  and  said, 
"Fear  them  not,"  &c.  And  so  we  may  expect  it  to  be  always.  Sometimes  the 
assurance  comes  first  to  prepare  us  for  what  is  at  hand.  But  if  not  then  it  will 
reach  us  simultaneously  with  the  alarm,  reassuring  us,  and  giving  us  quiet  con- 
fidence in  the  midst  of  evil  tidings,  as  the  bird  rocks  in  its  nest  over  the  rush  of  the 
waterfall,  serene,  though  the  branch  beneath  it  sways  in  the  stonn.  There  are 
high  days  in  human  lives  when  thought  and  purpose,  which  had  been  quietly 
gathering  strength,  like  waters  swelling  against  a  barrier,  suddenly  leap  from  their 
leash,  and  vent  themselves  in  acts,  or  words,  or  prayers,  such  as  stand  out  from 
the  ordinary  routine  of  existence,  hke  the  cathedral  of  Cologne  from  the  mean 
houses  that  gather  around  its  base.  We  are  not,  then,  drunk  with  wine,  but  we  are 
flushed,  as  to  our  spirits,  with  the  exhilaration  and  sense  of  power  which  the  Spirit 
of  God  alone  can  give,  or,  to  put  it  in  another  form,  we  catch  fire.  There  is  too 
little  experience  of  this  capacity  of  rising  into  the  loftiest  experience  of  that  Spirit 
life  which  is  within  the  reach  of  us  all,  through  living  fellowship  with  God ;  but 
whenever  we  realise  and  use  it,  it  is  as  when  the  feeble,  smouldering  wick  is 
plunged  into  oxygen  gas,  or  as  when  a  flower,  that  had  struggled  against  the  frost, 
is  placed  in  the  tropical  atmosphere  of  the  hot-house.  In  such  hours  we  realise 
what  Jesus  meant  when  He  said,  "  "Whosoever  shall  say  unto  this  mountain,"  &c. 
3.  It  was  a  day  of  triumphant  onlook.  The  kings  were  summoned  from  their 
hiding-place,  and  as  they  crouched  abjectly  at  the  feet  of  their  conquerors,  Joshua 
called  for  aU  the  men  of  Israel,  and  said  unto  the  chiefs  of  the  men  of  war,  '*  Come 
near,  put  your  feet  upon  the  necks  of  these  kings."  And  whUst  they  stood  in  that 
attitude  of  unquestioned  victory,  there  broke  on  the  exalted  spirit-kindled  imagi- 
nation of  the  warrior-chieftain  the  sure  prevision  of  the  ultimate  issue  of  the 
conflict  in  which  they  were  engaged.  He  aheady  saw  the  day  when  every  knee 
should  bow  before  Jehovah's  might,  when  every  king  should  be  prostrate  before 
Israel's  arm,  and  when  the  whole  land  should  be  subdued.  HI.  Theke  had  been 
NONE  liXKE  IT  IN  THE  EXTRAORDINARY  CO-OPERATION  OF  Jehovah.  The  Israelites  were 
the  executioners  of  Divine  justice,  commissioned  to  give  effect  to  the  sentence  which 
the  foul  impurities  of  Canaan  called  for.  There  is  a  judgment-seat  for  nations  as 
well  as  for  individuals.  "Within  the  limits  of  the  ages  as  they  pass,  and  on  the 
surface  of  this  earth,  that  throne  is  erected  and  that  judgment  is  proceeding.  We 
get  some  glimpse  of  this  in  the  hand  that  wrote  the  doom  of  Belshazzar's  kingdom 
on  the  walls  of  the  palace  which  beheld  a  scene  of  wanton  revelry  lit  by  the  hght  of 
the  temple's  sacred  lamps.  And  the  almighty  Judge  sees  to  it  that  His  sentences 
are  carried  out.  He  has  many  agents — the  Persian  legions  to  execute  his  sentence 
on  Babylon,  the  Vandals  on  Eome,  the  Eussian  Cossacks  on  Napoleon,  as  the 
Israehtes  on  the  Amorites,  whose  iniquity  was  now  fuU,  and  threatened  to  infect 
the  world.  IV.  Such  days  come  still  to  men.  There  are  days  in  our  hves  so 
extraordinary  for  the  combination  of  difficult  circumstances,  human  opposition,  and 
Satanic  combination,  that  they  stand  out  in  unique  terror  from  the  rest  of  our  lives. 
Looking  back  on  them,  we  may  almost  adopt  the  language  of  the  sacred  historian, 
"there  was  no  day  like  that  before  it  or  after  it."  But  these  days  do  not  come  if 
we  are  living  in  friendship  with  God,  intent  on  doing  His  wiU,  without  there  coming 
also  His  sweet  "  Fear  them  not,  for  I  have  delivered  them  into  thine  hands."  Our 
only  anxiety  should  be  that  nothing  should  divert  us  from  His  path,  or  intercept 
the  communication  of  BUs  grace.  Like  a  wise  commander  we  must  keep  open  the 
passage  back  to  our  base  of  operations,  which  is  God.  Careful  about  that,  we  need 
have  no  anxious  care  beside.  The  greatness  of  our  difficulties  is  permitted  to  ehcit 
the  greatness  of  His  grace.  He  covers  our  heads  in  the  day  of  battle.  He  is  our 
shield  and  exceeding  great  reward.  Though  an  host  should  encamp  against  us,  we 
will  not  fear ;  though  war  should  rise  against  us,  in  this  we  wUl  be  confident. 
Moreover,  these  days  may  always  be  full  of  the  reahsed  presence  of  God.  All 
through  tile  conflict  Joshua's  heart  was  in  perpetual  fellowship  with  the  mighty 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

Captain  of  the  Lord's  host,  who  rode  beside  him  all  the  day.  The  blessed  colloquy 
between  the  two  was  unbroken,  as  between  a  Wellington  and  a  Blucher,  a  Napoleon 
and  a  Marshal  Ney.  So  amid  all  our  conflicts,  our  hearts  and  minds  should  thither 
ascend  and  there  dwell  where  Christ  is  seated,  drawing  from  Him  grace  upon  grace, 
as  we  need,  like  the  diver  on  the  ocean  floor  who  inhales  the  fresh  breeze  of  the 
upper  air.  At  these  times  it  is  very  necessary  not  merely  to  ask  God  to  help  us, 
because  the  word  "help  "  may  mean  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  reliance  on  self,  and 
whatever  there  is  of  ourselves  is  almost  certain  to  give  way  in  the  strain  of  battle. 
Achilles  was  mortally  wounded  in  the  heel,  the  one  place  which  did  not  share  in  the 
plunge  given  him  by  his  goddess  mother  into  the  immortal  stream.  The  Divine 
part  of  our  deliverance  will  be  nullified  by  the  alloy  of  our  own  energy,  strength,  or 
resolution.  Let  us  substitute  for  the  word  "  help  "  the  word  "  keep."  Let  us  put  the 
whole  matter  into  the  hands  of  God,  asking  Him  to  go  before  us,  to  fight  for  us,  to 
deliver  us,  as  He  did  for  His  people  on  this  eventful  day.  "  The  Lord  discomfited 
them  before  Israel."    {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Vers.  15-27.  Bring  out  those  live  kings. — The  prostrate  kings : — The  kings  of 
the  Canaanites  fled  and  hid  themselves,  but  the  Divine  vengeance  followed  them  ; 
and  after  the  rout  of  their  hosts  was  completed  they  themselves  were  taken  and 
put  to  death.  Before  this,  however,  they  were  humbled  in  the  sight  of  Israel ;  and 
the  captains  were  bidden  by  Joshua  to  put  their  feet  on  the  necks  of  their  foes. 
Thus  their  thorough  subjection  was  pointed  out;  and  the  people  of  God  were 
distinguished  as  triumphing  over  all  opposition,  even  the  most  formidable.     I.  No 

OPPOSITION    IS    so   GREAT,   NO    ENEMIES  SO    MIGHTY,    BUT   THE    TOLIiOWERS   OF  THE    LORD 

Jesus  can  OVERCOME  THEM.  In  outward  and  bodily  things,  and  at  the  hands  of 
men,  the  people  of  God  are  ofttimes  sorely  tried.  Over  and  over  again  they  have 
been  slain  aU  the  day,  and  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter.  The  deep  and 
mysterious  providence  of  an  all-wise  God  has  suffered  and  ordered  this.  But 
inwardly,  and  as  regards  spiritual  experience,  is  it  not  true  that  "  We  are  more 
than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us  "  ?  As  believers  in  Jesus  we  are 
exposed  to  constant  opposition  of  a  spiritual  kind.  As  soon  as  ever  the  Christian 
life  really  begins,  so  soon  does  conflict  commence.  But  is  it  not  a  good  thing  to 
change  slavery  for  freedom ;  and  to  feel  the  opposition  and  rage  of  Satan  rather 
than  to  be  bound  in  his  destructive  chains  ?  Then  again,  the  rebel  flesh  puts  forth 
its  power,  resisting  the  wUl  of  God,  and  proving  that  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity 
against  God.  But  have  we  not  found  deliverance  ?  We  have  heard  the  precious 
assurance,  "  No  weapon  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper  " ;  we  have  taken  up  the 
Christian's  war-cry,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  who  strengtheneth  me  "  ; 
we  have  doubtless  sung  the  believer's  song  of  triumph,  "  Thanks  be  to  God  who 
giveth  us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Do  I  now  speak  to  any  soul 
in  strong  conflicts,  and  exposed  to  some  sore  temptation  ?  Oh  !  poor  tried  and 
harassed  one,  look  up,  look  up.  Do  not  let  the  enemy  engage  aU  your  attention  : 
think  of  the  mighty  Friend  who  is  standing  by.  Do  not  let  the  temptation  quite 
swallow  up  your  spirit;  remember  (1  Cor.  x.  13).     II.  It  is  the  Lord  Jesus  who 

ACCOMPLISHES     THIS    GLORIOUS    WORK     FOR    AND    IN    BEHALF    OF     HiS   BELIEVING    ONES. 

Mark  the  circumstances  in  detail  which  are  narrated  in  the  text,  and  see  how 
conspicuous  Joshua  was  throughout  the  whole  transaction  (vers.  22-2G).  Joshua 
called  for  all  the  men,  summoned  the  host,  then  called  out  the  captains,  and  bade 
them  put  their  feet  on  the  necks  of  the  kings  ;  then  he  encouraged  his  captains  ; 
then  he  executed  the  kings.  The  crowning  speech,  and  ci-owning  act,  on  that 
eventful  day  were  his.  Just  so,  it  is  only  our  heavenly  Joshua  who  can  make  us 
conquerors,  who  can  effect  deliverance  for  us,  who  can  enable  us  to  set  our  feet 
upon  the  necks  of  those  hosts,  those  temptations,  those  foes  of  whatsoever  sort, 
which  surround  and  assault  us,  and  which,  without  His  aid,  are  sure  to  be  too 
many  and  too  mighty  for  us  to  cope  with  and  subdue.  1.  In  the  help  which  we 
have  received,  or  may  now  be  enjoying,  let  us  see  the  pledge  of  future  victory. 
2.  It  may  be  that  some  are  in  sore  conflict  and  trial  at  this  very  time.  Forget  not 
who  is  able  to  save,  even  to  the  uttermost.  The  same  Jesus  who  has  strengthened 
thousands  of  conflicting  souls  and  made  them  victorious  is  ready  to  help  you. 
(C.  D.  Manton,  M.A.)  Foes  under  foot : — 1.  This  solemn  scene  reminds  us  of 
the  mad  resistance  of  these  kings.  Here  is  the  end  of  it.  And  what  a  contrast  is 
this  to  that  which  they  had  conceived.  As  we  look  on  these  wretched  kings  we 
hear  a  voice  asking  in  earnest,  solemn  tones,  "  Who  hath  hardened  himself  against 
God  and  hath  prospered  ?  "    "  Who  can  resist  the  arm  of  the  Almighty  ?  "    And 


CHAP.  X.]  JOSHUA.  201 

again  it  says,  "  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks."  Can  the  clay  rebel 
against  the  potter  ?  Will  the  tool  lift  up  itself  against  the  workman  ?  Will  worms 
defy  the  Almighty?  Why,  then,  oh!  why  are  there  found,  not  a  few,  but  many, 
who  still  resist  Him  ?  2.  This  scene  also  reminds  us  of  the  despairing  flight  of 
these  kings.  Finding  that  resistance  was  useless,  they  sought  to  escape  by  flight, 
but  this  proved  also  vain.  The  sinner  cannot  flee  from  the  judgment  of  God. 
Many  a  man  has  been  able  to  escape  the  just  judgment  of  his  fellows.  It  can  never 
be  so  with  the  Divine  justice.  It  rolls  forth  no  empty  thunders.  Seeing  all  flight 
is  vain,  our  only  hope  is  instant  and  complete  submission,  if  haply  the  Lord  will 
have  mercy  on  us  and  spare  us  for  His  name's  sake.  3.  The  scene  also  speaks  of 
their  useless  refuge.  Their  resistance  was  found  to  be  utterly  vain,  therefore  they 
had  recourse  to  flight.  But  flight  they  found  also  unavailing,  therefore  they  sought 
to  hide,  but  this  was  also  vain.  By  this  new  device  they  not  only  deceive  them- 
selves, they  actually  destroy  themselves.  Know  that  it  is  as  vain  to  hide  from  God 
as  to  fly  from  Him.  Yet  the  truth, "  Thou  God  seest  me,"  is  one  not  easily  learned. 
Often,  as  in  the  case  of  Hagar,  it  is  only  in  the  hour  of  dire  extremity  that  the  soul 
becomes  truly  conscious  of  the  fact.  Nothing  is  more  common  or  more  natural  for 
fallen  man  than  to  hide  from  God.  Even  in  chUdhood,  if  unwelcome  thoughts  of 
God  obtruded  themselves,  how  quickly  did  we  learn  to  bury  ourselves  in  the  cave 
of  other  and  more  congenial  thoughts  and  hopes.  And  as  we  grow  older,  and  the 
heart  gets  more  unsusceptible  to  spiritual  realities,  how  easUy  can  we  hide  in 
indifference.  How  natural  it  is  to  let  slip  everything  that  has  been  taught  us  of 
spiritual  truth,  to  forget  all  warnings  and  admonitions,  to  become  engrossed  with 
the  pleasures  that  lie  around,  and  to  forsake  the  good  habits  in  which  we  had  been 
trained.  And  not  a  few  seek  to  shelter  themselves  in  hypocrisy.  The  Church  is 
the  garden  of  God ;  and  not  a  few  are  hiding  from  Him  among  the  trees  of  His 
own  garden.  They  come  to  the  solemn  assembly.  They  give  of  their  substance  to 
His  work.  They  maintain  propriety  of  conduct,  and  yet  they  know  not  God  ;  yea, 
they  are  hiding  from  Him  all  the  time,  and  by  these  very  means.  Others  are  hiding 
from  God  in  business.  From  Monday  morning  till  Saturday  night  they  are  en- 
grossed in  earthly  cares,  and  even  on  the  Lord's  day  their  heads  and  hearts  are  more 
in  their  bank-books  and  ledgers  than  in  their  Bibles.  But  though  men  may  for  a 
few  moments  bury  themselves  in  oblivion  of  God,  they  can  never  hide  from  Him. 
Soon  the  souls  who  thus  hide  will  be  dragged  out  to  the  bewildering  light,  to  their 
shame  and  ruin.  Have  we,  then,  no  hope?  Is  there  no  refuge  for  us?  There  is. 
We  can  never  hide  from  God,  but  we  can  hide  in  God.  "  The  name  of  the  Lord  is 
a  strong  tower ;  the  righteous  runneth  into  it  and  is  safe."  4.  Here  also  we  behold 
the  utter  degradation  of  these  kings.  It  was  far  deeper  than  that  of  their  subjects. 
As  they  were  ringleaders  in  this  revolt,  their  end  was  more  terrible.  They  had  to 
bow  their  necks  under  the  feet  of  the  children  of  Israel.  This  was  a  most  significant 
act.  It  was  a  picture  of  the  absolute  subjection  of  all  to  the  yoke  of  Israel.  It  was 
a  pledge  of  the  perfect  conquest  of  the  land,  of  the  glorious  ending  of  that  work 
which  had  been  so  well  begun.  This  also  was  written  for  our  encouragement  and 
instruction.  All  things  must  be  brought  into  subjection  to  the  true  Joshua,  They 
who  follow  Him  are  not  overcome  of  evil,  they  are  conquerors  in  the  struggle  against 
sin.  However  weak  we  may  feel  in  ourselves,  yet  in  His  name  we  dare  deal  with 
the  proudest  and  strongest  sin  that  lurks  in  our  hearts,  as  Joshua's  captains  did 
with  these  kings.  That  man  caimot  be  following  Christ  who  is  not  putting  all 
spiritual  foes  under  his  feet  from  day  to  day.  And  we  have  here  not  only  a  picture  of 
this  daily  and  oft-repeated  triumph  over  sin  which  Jesus  gives  His  followers,  but 
also  a  picture  of  that  ultimate  and  complete  victory  over  sin  and  Satan  that  shall 
be  granted.  There  were  other  kings  in  Canaan  besides  these  five  kings,  and  they 
gave  Joshua  and  his  captains  much  trouble.  Though  the  victory  so  far  was  real 
and  glorious,  it  was  by  no  means  complete.  They  have  faced  and  overcome  these 
particular  foes ;  but  many  more  remain.  Even  so  the  Christian,  though  he  should 
and  must  obtain  the  victory  over  all  known  sin,  and  keep  it  ever  under  foot,  learns 
the  longer  that  he  lives  that  there  are  other  sins  which  he  had  not  dreamt  of  lurking 
in  the  recesses  of  his  heart.  Therefore  he  lays  count  for  a  protracted  war.  Yet  he 
does  not  go  forward  with  a  faint  heart  to  face  these  new  foes.  Eather,  encouraged 
by  the  victories  already  granted,  he  goes  on  with  assurance  of  like  triumph.  6.  We 
must  also  draw  attention  to  the  miserable  end  of  these  kings.  Here,  as  we  stand 
over  the  dead  bodies  of  these  kings,  we  hear  a  voice  proclaiming,  "  So  perish  the 
king's  enemies."  There  are  judgments  of  God  agaiast  sin  in  the  past  history  of 
the  world.    In  the  future  history  of  the  world  these  judgments  will  again  be  on  tha 


209  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

earth.  Between  the  past  and  the  future  He  has  erected  the  Cross.  That  also  is  a 
centre  of  judgment.  Yea,  the  judgment  against  sin  on  the  Cross  is  far  more  perfect 
than  either  that  judgment  which  goes  before  or  follows  after  ;  for  it  is  a  judgment 
finished,  a  cup  of  condemnation  drunk  to  the  last  drop,  and  that  can  be  said  of  no 
other,  past  or  future.  Identified  with  that  Victim,  nailed  with  Him  to  that  Cross, 
cursed  in  Him  with  all  the  curse  due  to  sin,  banished  with  that  forsaken  Victim  in 
the  great  darkness,  there  is  no  condemnation,  no  judgment,  to  them  that  are  in 
Christ  Jesus.  6.  In  these  conquests  of  Joshua  we  have  a  faint  picture  of  the 
victories  of  Jesus.  However  numerous  His  enemies  may  be,  they  will  be  all 
scattered  as  chaff  before  the  wind,  as  smoke  before  the  hurricane.  However 
mighty  they  may  be,  they  will  bite  the  dust  in  terror  and  dismay.  However 
wise  and  noble,  they  will  be  crushed  under  His  heel.  (A.  B.  Mackay.)  Five 
Tiings : — Tou  all  know  something  of  a  strugji'le  that  is  continually  going  on 
in  your  own  hearts  between  good  and  evil.  You  have  all  heard  of  the  battle 
against  sin.  Well,  the  five  kings  are  for  us  five  sins,  which  day  by  day  are 
warring  against  us.  And  let  us  be  quite  sure  of  this,  if  we  do  not  conquer  them 
they  will  conquer  us.  I.  Here  is  the  first — King  Anger.  What  boy  or  girl  is  there 
who  has  not  felt  this  king  rising  in  his  heart,  and  leading  him  on  to  unkind  words 
and  bad  deeds.  Kill  the  very  first  angry  thought,  and  then  it  won't  have  time  to 
grow  into  a  great  king  to  trouble  you  and  all  near  you.  II.  "But,"  says  some 
child,  "  I'm  not  given  to  being  angry.  I  have  a  very  good  temper.  I'm  not  afraid 
of  that  king."  Don't  be  too  sure.  He  may  turn  up  some  time  when  you  are  not 
ready  for  him.  And  in  any  case  I  fear,  from  the  way  you  speak,  that  there  is 
another  king  you  will  have  to  keep  a  very  good  look-out  against — Krao  Pride.  Do 
you  know  what  he  is  ?  Some  one  gave  a  very  good  description  of  pride  when  he 
said  that  pride  was  a  great  big  "I "  and  a  very  little  "  you."  Some  of  you,  I  am  sure, 
have  read  "  Alice  in  Wonderland  " ;  and  you  remember  what  happened  to  Alice 
when  she  ate  the  piece  of  cake  marked,  "Eat  me."  She  found  herself  growing 
taller,  and  taller,  and  taller,  until  at  length  everything  looked  quite  small  beneath 
her.  Now  King  Pride  does  for  us  all  what  the  wonderful  cake  did  for  Alice.  He 
puffs  us  up.  He  makes  us  very  high  and  very  great  in  our  own  sight.  And  the 
only  way  to  deal  with  him  is  to  do  like  Joshua's  soldiers,  and  to  take  this  king  and 
put  our  foot  upon  his  neck,  and  crush  him  to  the  ground.  III.  But  we  must  pass  on 
to  our  third  king ;  and  dangerous  as  were  the  first  two,  he  is  more  dangerous  still, 
for  his  name  is  King  Falsehood.  Have  you  ever  told  a  lie,  ever  said  what  was  not 
quite  true  to  get  your  own  way,  or  to  save  yourself  from  punishment  ?  If  you  have, 
then  you  are  letting  King  Falsehood  reign  over  you,  and  a  cruel,  hard  master  you 
win  soon  find  him  to  be.  Determine  at  all  costs  to  say  nothing  but  what  is  strictly 
true.  Once  a  great  and  good  man  was  thrown  into  prison  because  he  had  written 
a  paper  which  displeased  King  Charles  I.  He  was  tried  and  condemned  to  death 
for  what  he  had  written ;  but  the  king  sent  messengers  to  him  in  prison  to  say  that 
if  he  would  only  deny  having  written  the  paper  and  signed  it,  he  would  be  set  free. 
And  how  do  you  think  he  answered  ?  "I  did  sign  that  paper.  I  could  save  my 
life  by  telling  a  lie,  but  I  would  rather  a  thousand  times  tell  the  truth,  even  though 
my  life  must  be  the  cost."  That  was  noble.  Be  like  that  hero,  Algernon  Sydney. 
IV.  Our  fourth  king  need  not  detain  us  long — King  Disobedience.  He  needs  no 
explanation,  but  perhaps  you  will  remember  best  about  him  if  I  tell  you  how  he 
was  once  conquered  by  a  brave  English  boy.  Henry  Havelock  was  his  name,  and 
at  twelve  o'clock  one  day  his  father  left  him  on  London  Bridge,  and  told  him  to 
wait  till  he  came  back.  One  hour,  two  hours,  three  hours  passed,  and  still  the 
father  did  not  come  ;  but  King  Disobedience  did.  "  Why  wait  any  longer  ?  "  he 
whispered  to  Henry.  "  Your  father  has  forgotten  you,  and  will  not  expect  you  to 
remain.  It  is  quite  excusable  to  disobey  him  now  after  aU  these  hours.  You  had 
better  run  home."  But  the  boy  would  not  consent.  He  had  been  told  to  wait  till 
his  father  came,  and  like  a  soldier's  son  he  drove  the  enemy  back  at  every  point. 
At  seven  o'clock  that  evening  his  wife  asked  General  Havelock,  "Where  is  Henry? 
I  have  not  seen  him  all  the  afternoon."  The  General  started  up.  "  Oh,"  he  said, 
"  he's  on  London  Bridge  1  I  left  him  there  at  twelve  o'clock,  and  told  him  to  wait 
for  me.  In  the  hurry  of  business  I  quite  forgot  about  him.  But  he's  there  still, 
I'm  sure."  And  there  indeed  he  was  when  his  father  went  to  fetch  him.  Seven 
long,  weary  hours  he  had  waited,  and  fought  King  Disobedience.  And  hard  though 
the  battle  had  been  he  had  won.  V.  And  now  there  remains  only  one  king ;  but  ha 
is  so  big  and  so  strong  that  I  shall  ask  the  printer  to  print  his  name  in  extra  large 
letters — KING  SELF.    Have  yon  ever  heard  two  voices  inside  you ;  one  saying, 


CHAP.  X.]  JOSHUA.  203 

"Please  yourself.  Take  your  own  way.  Why  should  you  think  about  other 
people  ?  "  And  the  other  saying,  "  No,  be  generous  ;  be  kind.  Give  up  what 
pleases  yourself,  and  help  others."  I  think  you  have,  and  I  think  you  know  which 
is  the  voice  of  King  Self,  and  what  a  poor  sort  of  a  king  he  is  to  follow.  He  can 
make  no  one  happy.  Somehow  the  boy  who  is  always  trying  to  please  himself  is 
the  boy  who  is  never  pleased  at  all.  And  then  how  uncomfortable  he  makes  all 
round  him.  It  was  only  because  God  had  helped  him  that  Joshua  was  able  to 
defeat  the  five  kings.  And  so  shall  we  conquer  if  we  fight  in  God's  strength,  not 
in  our  own.  Kneel  down  to  Him  then,  and  ask  Him  to  be  with  you,  and  to 
make  you  "  more  than  conquerors  "  for  Jesus'  sake.  (Morning  Rays.)  Five 
modern  kiiigs : — The  names  of  the  places  may  help  us  to  consider  the  nature 
of  their  respective  kings.  1.  "  The  king  of  Jerusalem."  That  such  a  king  should 
have  been  slain  works  violently  in  our  memory  and  whole  thought,  for  "  Jerusalem" 
means  peace — the  city  of  peace,  the  restful  city,  the  sabbatic  metropolis,  the  home 
of  rest.  But  is  there  not  a  false  peace  ?  The  king  of  false  peace  must  be  slain. 
He  has  ruled  over  some  of  us  too  long.  2.  •'  Hebron  "  means  conjunction,  joining, 
alliance.  Is  hot  the  king  of  false  fellowship  to  be  killed  ?  What  concord  hath 
Christ  with  Belial  ?  God  has  always  been  against  unholy  alliances.  Many  a  man 
He  has,  so  to  say,  arrested  with  the  words.  Why  this  conjunction  ?  What  right 
have  you  to  be  here,  pledging  your  character  to  sustain  a  known  dishonesty  ? 

3.  And  the  king  of  Jarmuth.  The  word  means  high,  that  which  is  lifted  up.  And 
is  not  the  king  of  false  ambition  to  be  slain  and  then  hanged — to  have  contempt 
added  to  murder  ?     Contempt  is  never  so  well  expended  as  upon  false  ambition. 

4.  Then  the  king  of  Lachish.  The  word  means  hard  to  be  captured,  almost  out  of 
reach,  or  so  defended  that  it  will  be  almost  impossible  to  get  at  the  king.  Is  not 
the  king  of  fancied  security  to  be  slain  and  hanged  ?  5.  King  of  Eglon.  The  word 
"  Eglon"  means  pertaining  to  a  calf,  and  may  be  taken  as  representing  the  whole 
system  of  false  worship.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  28-43.  All  these  kings  and  their  land  did  Joshua  take  at  one  time,  because 
the  Lord  .  .  .  fought  for  Israel — Divine  sovereignty  : — I.  God  has  an  indisputable 

BIGHT  TO  DISPENSE  HiS  FAVOURS  TO  WHAT  PEESONS  AND  IN  WHAT  PEOPORTIONS  He  PLEASES. 

As  the  sole  proprietor,  it  is  His  to  dispose  of.  1.  Worldly  goods.  One  is  accordingly 
born  to  affluence,  while  another  is  cradled  in  poverty.  Before  they  existed  they 
could,  of  course,  have  no  claims  or  demerits  ;  and  therefore  the  difference  in  their 
lot  must  be  owing  to  His  sovereign  disposal  of  events.  2.  Bodily  constitution  and 
health.  As  variety  marks  all  other  of  God's  works,  so  here  it  happens  that  one  is 
naturally  robust,  another  sickly,  a  third  deformed,  &c.  Who  is  it  that  maketh  the 
strong,  the  beautiful,  &c.,  to  differ  ?  The  answer  may  be  found  in  2  Sam.  xxii.  30, 
35.  3.  Mental  qualifications.  "  The  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  giveth  understand- 
ing." Much,  it  is  true,  depends  on  personal  application.  But  much  depends  on 
natural  capacity ;  given  "  to  one  five  talents,  to  another  two,  and  to  another  one"  ; 
and  much  on  the  opportunities,  instructors,  &c.,  which  God  either  gives  or  withholds. 
4.  Spiritual  privileges.  Mankind  soon  began  to  have  greater  or  smaller  advantages 
in  this  respect,  as  they  descended  from  families  more  or  less  holy ;  and  the  case  is  the 
same  to  the  present  day.  Instance  the  Israelites  and  heathens  formerly ;  Christians 
and  pagans  now.  H.  God  has  an  equal  eight  to  resume  or  to  transfer  His  favours. 
1.  We  have  seen  that  whatever  we  possess  is  of  free  favour  at  first,  from  the  original 
proprietor  of  all.  Such  the  acknowledgment  of  the  psalmist,  "  Of  Thine  own  have 
I  given  Thee."  2.  No  person  becomes  a  proprietor  of  his  possessions  merely  because 
he  has  long  enjoyed  them.  Every  blessing  is  a  loan  resumable  at  pleasure ;  and 
instead  of  gaining  a  right  by  holding  it,  the  holder  is  becoming  more  and  more 
indebted.  The  property  is  still  God's  (Psa.  xxiv.  1,  1.  10,  12).  3.  On  this  ground 
He  took  His  own  land  of  promise  from  the  Canaanites  and  transferred  it  to  Israel. 
And  He  still  puts  down  one  and  raises  up  another  as  it  pleases  Him.    III.  God  may 

JUSTLY   PUNISH   EVERY   VOLUNTARY   TRANSGRESSION   OF   HiS  RIGHTEOUS   AND    EQUITABLE 

LAWS.  Here  we  remark — 1.  That  His  intelligent  and  moral  creatures  are  what  they 
are  is  owing  to  His  sovereign  pleasure.  Thus  Elihu  (Job  xxxv.  10,  11).  2.  Since 
they  are  such,  and  capable  of  moral  government,  their  nature  requires  a  law,  as  a 
test  of  their  obedience  and  for  the  exercise  of  their  capabilities ;  and  it  is  His 
prerogative,  who  is  not  only  the  sovereign  Lord,  but  infinitely  wise,  to  say  what  is 
right,  to  enact  such  law.  3.  In  order  to  make  the  law  efiicient  it  was  necessary  it 
should  be  guarded  and  enforced  by  penal  sanctions.  Whence  it  follows — 4.  That 
truth  requires,  while  sovereignty  authorises,  the  just  punishment  of  disobedience  to 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  x. 

His  righteous  and  equitable  commands.  IV.  In  executinq  His  righteous  purposes 
God  may  employ  what  aobkoy  ob  instkumentality  He  pleases.  He  doubtless  can 
and  may  work  immediately  on  any  and  every  part  of  His  creation.  Yet  He  seldom 
does  so.  Oftentimes  He  employs  angels,  as  in  the  case  of  Sennacherib  or  Herod. 
And  oftentimes  storm,  pestilence,  earthquake,  &c.  Deists  do  not  object  to  these. 
Yet  they  cavil  at  God's  employing  the  sword  of  Israel ;  a  difference  merely  in  the 
circumstance  of  instrumentality.  Let  the  subject  teach  us — 1.  Eeverence.  "  For- 
asmuch as  there  is  none  like  unto  Thee,  0  Lord,"  &c.  (Jer.  x.  6,  7).  The  opposite 
disposition  is  reproved  (Eom.  ix.  20),  and  threatened  (Isa.  xlv.  9,  10).  2.  Depen- 
dence. We  enjoy  no  more  or  longer  than  He  blesses  us,  and  live  no  longer  than 
He  sustains  (Psa.  xc.  3,  14,  civ.  27-29).  3.  Humility.  "  Let  not  the  wise  man 
glory  in  his  wisdom,"  &c.  (Jer.  ix.  23,  24 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  7).  4.  Gratitude.  Who 
maketh  thee  to  differ  ?  (Sketches  of  Sermons.)  Joshua  returned,  and  all  Israel 
with  him,  unto  the  camp  to  Gilgal. — The  old  camp  and  the  new  foe : — It  must  have 
been  a  great  rest  and  refreshment  for  the  weary  warriors  to  come  to  such  a  camp 
from  time  to  time.  It  would  be  to  them  a  Sabbath  amid  their  arduous  labours. 
Prom  this  place  they  would  after  each  visit  go  more  boldly  out  to  deal  harder  blows 
against  the  uncircumcised  Canaanites.  And  it  is  the  same  with  us  in  the  war  which 
we  wage  against  the  inner  and  the  outer  foe.  We  have  our  headquarters  too,  a  visit 
to  which  should  stimulate  us  even  more  than  a  visit  to  Gilgal  did  the  Israelites. 
What  is  our  Gilgal  ?  The  Cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  That  remains  always  our 
centre.  We  should  come  back  to  it  at  all  times ;  not  only  when  driven  there  by 
defeat,  in  order  to  have  shelter,  but  also  after  every  victory,  in  order  to  give  thanks. 
Thus  shall  we  maintain  faith  and  a  good  conscience.  Then  issuing  from  such 
headquarters,  so  safe,  so  restful,  so  hallowed,  so  purifying,  we  shall  be  filled  with  a 
holy  enthusiasm  and  unconquerable  strength,  and  march  like  Israel  from  victory  to 
victory.  When  Joshua  had  come  back  to  the  old  headquarters  word  was  brought 
to  him  of  the  gathering  of  a  new  foe.  This  was  the  most  numerous  army  that  had 
as  yet  been  gathered  against  him.  And  it  was  the  most  powerful,  as  well  as  the 
most  numerous  army  which  Joshua  had  encountered.  For  the  first  time  in  this 
campaign  we  hear  of  war-horses  being  used,  and  the  war-chariots  of  iron  which  were 
such  a  terror  to  the  ancient  infantry.  This  army  is  also  better  led  than  any  other 
that  had  taken  the  field.  Jabin  was  the  commander-in-chief.  One  of  his  successors 
is  called  king  of  Canaan  (Judges  iv.  2-24),  and  therefore  he  would  in  aU  likelihood 
have  been  the  head  of  the  great  confederacy.  The  word  "  Jabin  "  is  not  a  name, 
but  a  title  borne  by  the  kings  of  Hazor,  and  signifies  "  The  Wise,"  just  as  Adoni- 
zedek  means  "  Lord  of  Eighteousness."  Therefore,  as  we  have  seen  the  religious 
head  of  the  Canaanites  marshalling  the  southern  army,  so  here  we  see  the  wise  head 
of  the  Canaanites  marshalling  the  northern  army.  The  southern  might  be  caUed 
the  coalition  of  the  priest ;  the  northern  the  coalition  of  the  sage.  How  graphically 
is  the  spiritual  experience  of  the  Christian  depicted  by  these  conflicts  I  No  sooner 
is  one  set  of  foes  subdued  than  another  arises.  There  is  no  rest  here.  There  is  also 
a  similarity  in  the  kind  of  opposition  which  we  have  to  encounter.  As  the  advance 
of  Israel  was  opposed  now  by  Adoni-zedek  and  now  by  Jabin,  so  the  advance  of 
truth  is  opposed  now  by  apostate  Christianity  and  now  by  pompous  philosophy. 
As  it  is  with  the  Church  collectively  so  is  it  with  the  individual.  He  may  lay  his 
account  sooner  or  later  to  face  these  two,  often  in  the  same  order.  First  comes 
superstition,  with  its  high-sounding  titles,  its  endless  genealogies,  its  imperious 
claims,  its  elaborate  ritual,  its  sensuous  will-worship,  its  irrational  bondage.  It  is 
resisted,  it  is  overcome.  Then  comes  rationalism,  and  it  cries,  "  Well  done.  You 
have  routed  these  infernal  hosts.  Now  come  with  us.  Finish  the  work  you  have 
so  well  begun.  Cast  from  you  the  remaining  rags  of  superstition.  FoUow  the  light 
of  Eeason.  Shake  off  the  remaining  fetters  and  be  free."  Then  the  sage  who  argues 
thus  wUl,  like  Jabin,  muster  whole  hosts  of  imposing  arguments.  How  quickly 
they  come  at  his  bidding :  from  north,  south,  east,  and  west,  like  the  sand  that  is 
on  the  seashore  for  multitude.  And  when  he  reviews  them,  how  imposing  is  their 
array  1  It  is  a  critical  time  for  the  soul  when  he  stands  gazing  on  that  imposing 
array,  if  he  is  not  assured  that  the  Lord  is  on  his  side ;  if  he  hears  not,  as  did 
Joshua,  the  words,  "  Be  not  afraid  because  of  them,  to-morrow  will  I  deliver  them 
up  all  slain  before  Israel."  But  for  faith  in  the  Divine  presence  and  this  sure  word 
the  soul  is  in  a  sad  case,  and  with  quaking  heart  and  tottering  knees  wiU  quit  the 
high  places  of  the  field.  Alas !  alas !  how  many  in  our  day  are  dazed  by  the  hosts 
of  unsanctified  science  I  The  Christian  soldier  is  not  worthy  of  his  name  who  is  not 
ready  with  unfeigned  faith  in  the  truth  of  God  to  proclaim  it  boldly,  whether  men 


CHAP.  XI.]  JOSHUA.  205 

hear  or  forbear,  to  oppose  all  the  glittering  phalanxes  of  false  philosophy  with  the 
sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God.  As  we  look  at  this  new  army 
mustered  to  oppose  Joshua,  we  cannot  but  renew  our  wonder  at  the  infatuation  of 
the  Canaanites.  What  a  solemn  thought  it  is  that  the  greatest  miracles  will  not  in 
themselves  lead  the  heart  of  man  to  subjection!  Yet,  after  all,  why  should  we 
wonder  at  these  Canaanites,  when  we  have  greater  cause  for  wonder  in  the  unbelief 
of  many  around  us  ?  What  were  all  the  miracles  of  which  these  Canaanites  were 
cognisant  compared  with  those  with  which  we  have  been  familiar  since  our  child- 
hood ?    {a.  B.  Mackay.) 


CHAPTEE  XI. 

Vers.  1-23.  When  Jabln  king  of  Hazor  had  heard. — Talee  heed  how  ye  hear : — 
I,  Hearing  and  not  heabing.     The  tidings  of  the  overthrow  of  Sihon  and  Og,  and 
the  fall  of  Jericho,  seem  to  have  made  almost  no  impression  on  the  sleepy  King 
of  Hazor.     H.  Hearing,  but  hearing  in  vain.     When  Ai  fell  there  seems  to  have 
been  a  general  movement  all  through  Canaan  west  of  Jordan  (chap.  ix.  1).     Before 
Jabin  had  gathered  the  northern  legions  southern  Canaan  had   been  destroyed. 
in.  Hearing,  and  hearing  to  ruin.     When  Jabin  did  exert  himself,  it  was  but  to 
proceed   straight  to  destruction.     Thus  do  the  wicked  delay  heedlessly,  awaken 
slowly,  and  finally  bestir  themselves  to  anticipate  judgment.     (F.  G.  Marchant.) 
Be  not  afraid  because  of  them. — Divine  directions  for  the  fight : — I.  The  directions 
which  God  gave  Joshua  on  this  occasion  were  prefaced  by  words  of  encourage- 
ment according  to  the  Divine  custom.     Though  Jehovah  is  not  to  interpose  with 
mighty  power  as  on  former  occasions,  yet  He  supports  and  strengthens  His  servant 
with  timely  encouragement.     Nothing  could  be  better  timed  than  these  words  as 
a  preparation  for  the  work  that  had  to  be  done.     Joshua  had  been  made  fully 
acquainted  with  the  foe.     His  scouts  have  returned  covered  with  dust,  and  reported 
the  position  and  numbers  and  equipment  of  this  new  enemy.     As  these  particulars 
were  all  told  we  can  imagine  that  the  boldest  held  his  breath  for  a  time.     Joshua's 
generals  would  look  at  each  other  as  if  to  say,  "  What  shall  we  do  now  ?  "     God 
knows  human  nature,  therefore  at  this  emergency  He  steps  in  with  the  words,  "  Be 
not  afraid  because  of  them,  for  to-morrow  about  this  time  will  I  deliver  them  up  all 
slain  before  Israel."     God  is  always  well  timed  in  His  announcements.     When  we 
seek  with  all  our  hearts  to  do  His  will  we  shall  never  lack  encouragement,  and  the 
greater  the  enemy,  the  harder  the  task,  the  more  emphatic  will  that  encouragement 
be.      And  the  encouragement  God   gave  was  very  definite.      He  did  not  speak 
in  a  general  way.     He  fixed  the  day,  the  hour,  and  the  extent  of  the  victory.    What- 
ever our  difficulties  may  be,  if  we  only  search  God's  Word  we  will  find  definite 
encouragement,  that  which  exactly  meets  our  chcumstances.     The  encouragement 
was  also  emphatic.     We  lose  somewhat,  in  our  translation,  the  emphasis  of  the 
original.     The  "I"  is  most  emphatic.     The  army  before  Joshua  maybe  as  the 
sand  of  the  sea  for  multitude,  but  what  are  the  hosts  of  Jabin  to  the  hosts  of 
Jehovah  ?    And  the  man  who  has  on  his  side  Jehovah  of  hosts  can  also  count  on 
the  hosts  of  Jehovah.     Therefore  Joshua,  even  in  the  sight  of  such  a  foe,  has  no 
cause  for  fear.     Does  not  God  deal  in  the  very  same  way  with  us  ?    With  what 
emphasis  does  He  point  to  Himself  as  the  glorious  source  of  light  and  love  and  life, 
so  that  our  hearts  may  be  encouraged  to  put  all  their  trust  in  Him,  to  the  casting 
out  of  every  fear.     And  the  encouragement  was  also   suggestive.     God's  words 
bring  to  remembrance  other  scenes  and  other  victories.     Joshua  was  not  the  only 
one  whom  God  had  helped  in  similar  emergencies.     All  the  difficulties  that  may 
come  upon  us  may  be  new  to  us,  but  not  one  of  them  is  new  to  God.     He  has 
brought  His  people  triumphantly  through  the  same  or  worse  before,  and  He  can  do 
so  again.   II.  This  Divine  encouragement  was  coupled  with  a  Divine  command.    The 
chief  object  of  Israel's  fear  would  naturally  be  the  horses  and  chariots  which  were 
Jabin's  pride  and  confidence ;  and  it  is  to  them  that  the  command  has  special 
reference.     God  ordered  His  servants  not  to  seize  them  and  turn  them  against  the 
enemy,  but  to  destroy  them  utterly.      This  command  is  given  for  the   express 
purpose  of   removing  a  temptation   to  carnal  confidence.      Jehovah  wishes  His 
people  to  look  to  Him  alone  for  victory.    This  is  to  be  their  constant  attitude,  the 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

holy  habit  of  their  souls.  The  bearing  of  this  command  on  us  is  plain,  and  the 
lesson  is  much  needed  in  our  day.  We  are  to  carry  on  God's  work  in  God's  way. 
There  are  many  of  the  weapons  and  devices  of  the  world  which  ought  not  to  be 
pressed  into  the  service  of  the  Church.  To  handle  the  iron  chariots  and  the 
prancing  horses  of  human  philosophy  against  the  hosts  of  unbehef ,  at  the  same 
time  retaining  our  confidence  in  God  as  the  Giver  of  every  victory,  and  the  con- 
sciousness that  not  a  single  soul  can  be  savingly  convinced  except  by  His  might — 
this  is  an  attainment  which  the  history  of  the  Church  from  the  beginning  has 
proved  a  practical  impossibihty.  Our  one  work  in  the  prosecution  of  the  campaign 
of  salvation  is  to  preach  "  Christ  and  Him  crucified,"  though  fully  conscious  of  the 
fact  that  to  some  it  is  fooUshness,  not  worth  a  row  of  pins ;  and  to  others  a 
stumbling-block,  utterly  repugnant.  There  is,  and  has  always  been,  a  fatal 
tendency  to  use  the  world's  weapons  in  the  Church's  work ;  to  worship  intellect, 
learning,  genius,  scholarship,  eloquence ;  to  look  on  these  things  as  the  treasury 
and  aiTaoury  of  the  Church  ;  to  depend  on  what  is  outward  and  human,  instead  of 
what  is  spiritual ;  to  depend  on  that  which  appeals  to  the  eye,  the  ear,  the  intellect, 
the  emotions,  rather  than  on  the  Uving  God  and  His  glorious  gospel.  They  are 
the  mightiest  champions  who,  like  the  Master,  do  all  the  fighting  "  not  with 
enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom,  but  in  demonstration  of  the  Sphit,  and  with 
power."  Thus  encouraged  and  commanded,  Joshua  brought  his  army  into  close 
proximity  to  the  foe.  He  rested  during  that  night,  and  when  the  grey  dawn  was 
lighting  up  the  rushy  marshes  round  the  waters  of  Merom,  he  burst  like  a  thunder- 
bolt upon  Jabin's  camp.  The  victory  could  not  have  been  more  complete  ;  and  it 
was  speedily  followed  up,  as  in  the  south,  by  the  subjugation  of  all  the  leading 
cities  in  the  northern  portion  of  Canaan;  the  city  of  Hazor,  Jabin's  capital, 
being  destroyed  with  fire.  As  we  think  on  this  crowning  victory  we  remember 
the  words,  "  An  horse  is  a  vain  thing  for  safety,  neither  shall  he  deliver 
any  by  his  great  strength."  Jabin  found  this  out  in  that  dire  encounter. 
So  will  it  be  with  all  who  harden  themselves  against  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
The  more  stout  in  heart  they  are  to  resist,  the  more  terrible  will  be  their 
overthrow.  And  if  Jabin's  overthrow  reminds  us  of  these  things,  this  last  great 
victory  of  Joshua  also  places  very  emphatically  before  us  the  conditions  of  success 
in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  They  are  few  and  simple,  and  easy  to  be  understood. 
They  comprise  wise  purpose,  believing  courage,  sleepless  energy,  scrupulous 
obedience,  hard  blows.  As  a  young  student  said  to  a  friend  when  they  were 
speaking  of  the  work  to  which  they  had  devoted  themselves,  '•  Our  great  work 
in  preaching  to  people  is  not  to  dish  up  dainty  ideas,  but  to  pound  them  with  the 
truth."  Let  us  only  listen  to  God's  encouragement,  obey  God's  command,  march  with 
unfeigned  faith,  and  strike  with  all  our  might,  and  victory  is  sure.  {A.  B.  Mackay.) 
Types  of  Christian  warfare : — 1.  The  enemies  of  Christ  are  very  many  in  number. 
2.  Not  only  are  the  enemies  of  Christ  very  numerous,  but  they  are  perfectly  united. 
There  is  a  common  consent  amongst  them.  They  hate  the  good.  They  are 
unanimous,  and  their  unanimity  is  power.  3.  The  forces  of  evil  are  many,  united, 
and  desperate.  They  have  made  up  their  minds  to  work  rack  and  ruin.  (J. 
Parker,  D.D.)  All  the  spoil  of  these  cities,  and  the  cattle,  the  children  of  Israel 
took  for  a  prey  unto  themselves. — Sharing  the  spoil : — These  at  the  end  would 
amply  make  up  for  the  toils  and  sufferings  of  conflict,  and  for  all  the  privations 
and  prohibitions  they  had  been  laid  under.  This  is  that  which  should  engage  the 
Christian's  hopes,  and  on  which  his  whole  heart  should  be  set,  the  end  of  warfare, 
when  He  who  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death,  and  was  numbered  with  trans- 
gressors, will,  in  assigning  the  fruits  of  His  eternal  conquests,  divide  the  spoil  with 
the  strong,  and  His  portion  with  the  great.  Unsearchable  the  riches,  and  invaluable 
the  spoils,  to  be  shared  in  the  heavenly  world :  treasures  of  everlasting  bliss  and 
glory  that  await  every  holy  warrior.  These  are  appropriate  only  to  the  elevation 
of  perfect  being  and  blessedness ;  and  then  to  be  enjoyed,  when  the  conflicts  o£ 
time  end  in  the  triumphs  of  eternity.  Nothing  will  be  found  marked  with  a 
prohibition,  nor  anything  less  be  obtained,  than  an  unwithering  crown  of  life.  This 
will  compensate  for  all  the  sufferings  that  can  now  be  endured,  and  for  aU  the 
sacrifices  that  may  ever  be  made,  the  hope  of  which,  as  realised  in  the  mind, 
yields  no  small  support.    (IF.  Seaton.) 

Ver.  15.  He  left  nothing:  undone  of  all  that  the  Lord  commanded  Moses. — Thingi 

undone : — "  This  year  omissions  have  distressed  me  more  than  anything."  So 
speaks  Andrew  A.  Bonar,  concluding  one  of  the  years  of  his  life.    How  many  of  u§ 


CHAP.  XI.]  JOSHUA.  207 

are  similarly  distressed!  I.  The  things  undone  aee  many.  We  have  not  left 
undone  a  duty  here  or  there  merely,  but  we  have  the  painful  consciousness  of 
having  missed  so  much  that  more  seems  undone  than  done.  Darwin's  biographer 
relates  that  the  great  scientist  "  never  wasted  a  few  spare  minutes  from  thinking 
that  it  was  not  worth  while  to  set  to  work."  His  golden  rule  was  "  taking  care  of 
the  minutes."  And  so  he  became  rich  and  accurate  in  knowledge.  How  much 
more  might  we  have  done  in  the  home  !  We  deal  neghgently  with  those  about  us 
until  change  or  death  takes  them  away  I  How  much  more  might  we  have  done  in 
the  world  !  We  have  loitered  in  the  sheepfold  to  hear  the  bleating  of  the  sheep, 
when  we  ought  to  have  been  in  the  high  places  of  the  field.  How  much  more  might 
we  have  given  and  taught  and  toiled  in  the  Church  of  Godl  We  are  always 
evading  manifest  obligations,  which  are  also  precious  privileges.  With  what  fiery 
energy  the  bird,  the  bee,  the  butterfly,  carry  out  the  special  commission  with  which 
they  are  entrusted  !  In  nature  everything  seems  to  be  done  that  can  be  done  with 
the  granted  measure  of  time,  space,  material,  and  energy.  But  we  are  conscious 
of  a  very  different  and  far  less  satisfactory  state  of  things  in  the  hmnan  sphere. 
Here  inertia,  laziness,  sUpperiness,  procrastination,  prevail.  There  are  great  gaps 
in  our  work.  H.  The  things  undone  are  often  the  things  of  the  greatest 
CONSEQUENCE.  Emersou  speaks  of  "  the  science  of  omitting."  A  very  necessary 
and  much-neglected  science.  "  The  artist,"  says  Schiller,  "  may  be  known  rather 
by  what  he  omits."  The  master  of  hterary  style  is  best  recognised  by  his  tact  of 
omission.  The  orator  declares  his  genius  as  much  by  what  he  leaves  out  as  by 
what  he  puts  into  his  discourses.  And  in  life  the  science  of  omission  must  have 
a  large  place.  Life  on  its  moral  side,  in  its  highest  sense,  becomes  complete  and 
successful  by  exclusion :  if  we  are  to  make  anything  of  it,  we  must  reject  much. 
When,  however,  an  artist  understands  the  science  of  omission,  he  leaves  out  the 
trivial,  the  vulgar,  the  irrelevant.  Pater,  speaking  of  Watteau,  the  French  artist> 
says,  "  Sketching  the  scene  to  the  life,  but  with  a  kind  of  grace,  a  marvellous  tact 
of  omission  in  deaUng  with  the  vulgar  reality  seen  from  one's  own  window."  Yes, 
leaving  out  the  vulgar  features  and  commonplace  detail.  But  the  defect  in  our 
moral  life  is  that  in  our  science  of  omission  we  too  often  leave  out  the  primary,  the 
highest,  the  essential.  The  trivial,  the  fugitive,  the  inferior,  the  accidental,  are 
given  a  place  in  our  life,  whilst  the  large,  the  noble,  the  precious,  and  the  supreme 
are  excluded.  It  is  thus  with  us  in  questions  of  character.  The  weightier  matters 
are  more  difficult,  and  we  evade  them.  It  is  thus  with  matters  of  duty.  We  shirk 
the  calls  demanding  courage,  diligence,  sacrifice,  and  content  ourselves  by  doing 
abundantly  the  things  which  are  more  immediately  connected  with  our  pride,  our 
interest,  or  our  pleasure.  Here  we  are  often  condemned.  Great  principles  are  left 
out  of  our  character,  because  they  are  difficult  to  acquire  and  maintain ;  great 
duties  are  ignored,  because  they  mean  heroism  and  suffering ;  great  opportunities 
are  forfeited,  because  they  demand  promptitude  and  resolution ;  great  works  are 
declined,  because  they  involve  consecration  and  sacrifice.  HI.  The  things  undone 
AEE  things  for  WHICH  WE  MUST  BE  HELD  RESPONSIBLE.  We  are  oftcH  deeply  con- 
cerned, as,  indeed,  we  ought  to  be,  with  the  things  we  have  done  amiss ;  but  we 
are  less  troubled  by  the  things  left  undone.  Yet  the  negative  side  is  as  really  sin 
as  is  the  positive  side.  In  these  modern  days  it  is  rather  fashionable  for  men  of 
a  certain  type  to  stand  quite  aside  from  an  active  career.  They  are  deeply  impressed 
by  the  seriousness  of  life,  by  its  difficulties,  its  mysteries  ;  they  decline,  as  far  as 
may  be,  its  relationships,  its  obligations,  its  trials,  its  honours,  its  sorrows.  They 
will  teU  you  that  they  have  no  gifts,  no  calling,  no  opportunity.  But,  however 
disguised,  these  lives  are  slothful  and  guilty.  But  most  of  us  have  somewhat  of 
this  slothful  temper.  True,  we  gloss  with  mild  names  this  skirking  of  duty.  We 
call  it  expediency,  standing  over,  modesty,  deliberation,  forgetfulness,  oversight ; 
but  it  ought  to  be  called  sloth,  hypocrisy,  cowardice,  sin.  How  much  undone  for 
God,  for  man,  for  our  own  perfecting !  And  as  for  the  future,  let  us  put  into  life 
more  purpose,  passion,  and  will.  Let  us  be  more  definite,  prompt,  unflinching. 
Let  us  be  at  once  more  enthusiastic  and  more  methodical.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.) 
It  was  of  the  Lord  to  harden  their  hearts. — Resisted  conviction : — We  must  not 
suppose,  of  course,  that  God  stepped  in  to  produce,  in  the  case  of  these  Canaanites, 
a  result  which  would  not  have  accrued  to  them  by  the  working  out  of  the  natural 
laws  which  He  had  instituted.  God  loved  them  as  He  loves  the  world.  They  were 
included  in  the  propitiation  of  Christ.  They  might  have  been  saved,  as  Kahab 
was.  And  when  it  is  said  that  God  hardened  their  hearts,  we  must  understand 
that  their  hearts  became  hardened  by  sinning  against  their  light,  in  accordance 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rc 

with  that  great  principle  which  God  has  established,  that  if  a  man  resists  his  con- 
victions of  right  he  becomes  more  inveterate  in  his  sinful  ways.  God  is  thus  said 
to  do  what  is  done  by  the  working  out  of  the  laws  of  that  moral  universe  which  He 
has  constituted.  It  is  clear  that  the  Canaanites  knew  that  God  was  with  Israel. 
Bahab  said  (chap.  ii.  10,  11).  And  the  Gibeonites  (chap.  ix.  10).  There  is  no 
doubt,  then,  that  throughout  the  land  there  had  gone  forth  the  fame  of  God ;  and 
when  the  kings  flung  their  hosts  in  battle  against  Israel  it  was  as  it  has  always 
been  (Psa.  ii.  2).  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Hardening  the  heart : — I  remember  one 
day,  in  our  natural  history  class,  the  professor  explained  to  us  how  sponges  became 
flints.  He  had  aU  his  specimens  arranged  along  his  table.  He  took  the  soft 
sponge,  elastic  and  flaccid,  that  could  bend  any  way — beautifully  soft  and  fine. 
Then  he  took  the  next  one ;  it  was  not  so  flexible :  and  he  went  on,  each  one  only 
a  little  more  flinty  than  the  former,  tiU  he  had  the  flint.  That  had  been  a  sponge  ; 
though  now  its  heart  was  so  hard  that  you  could  strike  fire  from  it  with  a  steel. 
The  sponge  will  become  fiint.  There  are  little  silicious  particles  that  gather  in  the 
soft  sponge ;  and  by  and  by  the  silex  is  deposited  in  the  interstices  of  the  sponge ; 
and  on  it  goes  till  the  silica  has  the  victory,  and  the  sponge  becomes  fimt.  A 
wonderful  sermon  from  science.  I  have  had  companions  like  that — ^young  men 
with  hearts,  oh,  so  soft !  at  their  first  revival.  Impressions  went  home  to  them ; 
they  had  tears  and  anxiety ;  yet,  as  years  have  passed,  the  hardness  of  heart  has 
increased,  as  with  one  whom  I  met  recently,  who,  since  then,  has  bolted  to 
America  with  a  heart  of  flint  instead  of  a  soft  heart.  As  the  days  went  by,  hardness 
increased ;  the  silicious  particles  of  rejection  of  Christ  multiplied  in  number,  till  the 
man  became  a  reprobate.  Perhaps  you  are  in  that  position.  As  I  am  preaching 
from  the  presence  of  God  it  has  no  effect.  You  are  hearing  it,  but  it  is  going  in  at 
the  one  ear  and  out  at  the  other.  See  to  it  that  the  judicial  hardening  of  your 
heart  does  not  overtake  you,  and  you  learn  by  experience  the  despair  of  a  lost 
Boul.  {J.  Robertson.)  So  Joshua  took  the  whole  land. — The  people  for  whom 
the  Lord  fights : — I.  The  magnitude  of  theie  dlfficulties  should  be  eegaeded 
AS  ONLY  the  sieasuke  OF  THEER  viCTOEiES.  "  Joshua  took  the  whole  land."  TL 
Theie  most  signai  victoeies  aee  evee  incomplete.  The  whole  land,  yet  not 
the  whole  (chap.  viii.  1).  III.  The  teiumphs  which  thet  do  win  aee  evee  thk 
FEUiT  OF  God's  promises.  "  According  to  aU  that  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses."  This 
clause  serves  also  to  limit  and  explain  the  former.  God  had  specially  told  Moses 
that  the  whole  land  should  not  be  conquered  too  suddenly  (Exod.  xxiii.  29,  30). 
IV.  The  inheeitance  thus  given  by  God  should  be  the  inheeitance  of  at.t, 
God's  people.  "  Joshua  gave  it  for  an  inheritance  unto  Israel  according  to  their 
divisions  by  their  tribes."  V,  The  best  which  they  obtain  heee  faintly  foee- 
bhadowsthe  perfect  best  heeeaftee.  "  And  the  land  rested  from  war."  1.  Best 
after  severe  strife.  2.  Best  only  through  faith  and  obedience.  3.  Best,  but  rest 
which  still  requires  that  they  watch  and  pray.  4.  Best,  which  though  but  an 
imperfect  pattern,  should  stand  for  a  sure  prophecy  of  the  rest  which  is  perfect. 
If  we  really  enter  into  the  rest  of  faith,  it  will  be  by  that  holy  Spirit  of  promise, 
"  which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance  until  the  redemption  of  the  purchased 
possession."    {F.  G.  Marchant.) 

Ver.  23.  The  land  rested  from  war. — The  fight  from  which  they  rested  : — Though 
the  records  of  this  war  are  short,  we  know  that  "  Joshua  made  war  a  long  time 
with  aU  these  kings."  Only  the  most  striking  and  salient  features  are  recorded, 
and  these  are  such  as  are  well  fitted  for  correction  and  instruction.  The  campaign 
in  all  probability  lasted  for  six  years.  God,  had  He  so  chosen,  could  have  brought 
all  the  Canaanites  together  and  crushed  them  at  one  blow.  He  did  not  do  so,  and 
He  gives  us  the  reason  why  He  did  not.  So  far  as  His  people  were  concerned  it 
was  for  their  spiritual  training.  Had  He  wrought  such  a  wonder,  they  might 
have  magnificently  celebrated  His  praises  as  at  the  Bed  Sea,  but  as  easily  forgotten 
His  mercies  as  at  Marah.  Jehovah  sought  to  teach  them  and  us  by  the  con- 
tinuance of  this  conflict,  that  His  heritage  is  our  portion  only  through  faith  in  Him 
and  faithfulness  to  His  word.  Yet  there  is  an  opposite  error  that  must  be  guarded 
against.  If  we  are  not  to  expect  one  great  and  decisive  victory,  much  less  are  we 
to  expect  a  series  of  disastrous  defeats.  If  too  great  a  triumph  might  have  led  to 
presumption  on  the  part  of  Israel,  too  great  a  trial  might  have  induced  despair. 
Accordingly,  God  neither  gave  the  one  nor  did  He  permit  the  other,  but  always 
tempered  both  to  the  necessities  of  His  people.  Is  not  this  a  true  picture  o£ 
spiritual  experience,  full  of  instruction  and  encouragement  ?    How  often  does  the 


CHAP.  XI.]  JOSHUA.  209 

young  convert  feel  himself  walking  in  a  land  of  miracle  ?  "  Old  things  have 
passed  away,  all  things  have  become  new."  The  chains  of  iron  and  the  fetters  of 
steel  fall  from  his  limbs.  The  bars  of  brass  are  broken,  and  he  quits  the  prison- 
house  of  Satan  and  walks  abroad  in  abounding  Uberty  and  glorious  triumph. 
Sometimes,  indeed,  in  the  buoyancy  of  his  soul,  he  indulges  in  strange  talk,  shakes 
his  head  with  precocious  wisdom,  and  assumes  unconscious  airs  of  superiority  in 
the  presence  of  such  as  do  not  share  his  happy  experience.  But  by  and  by  he 
encounters  some  gross  and  humiliating  defeat  like  that  which  befel  Israel  at  Ai. 
He  is  humbled  in  the  dust.  With  chastened  spirit  he  begins  to  join  trembling 
with  his  mirth,  and  he  finds  out,  more  and  more  every  day,  the  need  of  constant 
trust  and  unquestioning  obedience.  He  wakes  up  to  the  fact  that  in  this  fight  of 
faith,  as  in  that,  the  conditions  of  success  are  trustful  courage,  wise  purpose, 
sleepless  energy,  scrupulous  obedience,  and  hard  blows.  It  wiU  be  interesting  to 
notice  the  last  foes  encountered  in  this  fight.  We  read  in  the  immediately  pre- 
ceding verses:  "At  that  time  came  Joshua,  and  cut  off  the  Anakims."  These 
Anakim  were  the  first  to  fill  the  hearts  of  the  Israelites  with  fear,  and  they  were 
the  last  to  be  faced.  Compared  with  them  the  Israelites  felt  themselves  grass- 
hoppers, and  it  was  well  that  their  giant  strength  was  not  braved  at  the  beginning 
of  the  campaign,  but  reserved  to  its  close.  Israel  did  not  face  these  giants  tiU  it 
had  been  trained  in  the  war  of  the  Lord  ;  till  it  knew  how  invincible  was  the  man 
who  puts  his  trust  in  Jehovah  ;  till  it  knew  from  its  own  experience  how  one  could 
chase  a  thousand — till,  in  short,  it  was  able  to  measure  the  strength  of  the  Anakim 
not  against  its  own,  but  against  the  omnipotence  of  Jehovah.  The  opposition, 
which  was  once  deemed  invincible,  now  shrinks  into  insignificance.  How  often  is 
it  thus  in  the  experience  of  God's  people.  I  have  sometimes  asked  young  converts 
why  they  had  been  so  long  in  coming  forward  to  confess  Christ.  And  their  reply 
has  often  been,  "  I  saw  what  was  required  and  expected  of  a  Christian.  I  felt  the 
many  and  great  difficulties  that  lay  in  the  way  of  confessing  Christ.  I  knew  some- 
thing of  the  temptations  and  troubles  that  would  come  upon  me  if  I  became  a 
Christian,  and  as  I  looked  at  these  things  I  felt  afraid,  and  shrank  back  conscious 
of  my  own  weakness."  Exactly!  Before  these  difficulties,  that  would  come  upon 
you  by  confessing  Christ,  you  feel  as  grasshoppers.  Does  that  express  your  present 
position  ?  You  are  like  Israel  at  Eadesh-Barnea.  You  are  standing  on  the  very 
borders  of  the  land,  with  all  its  beauty  spread  before  you.  Yea,  you  also  are 
spying  it  out.  You  are  considering  the  promises  and  blessings  of  Christ  for  time 
and  eternity.  You  cannot  but  conless  that  it  is  a  goodly  heritage,  a  pleasant  land 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey.  Even  though  you  have  not  entered  the  good  land, 
you  know  that  you  are  refreshed  by  its  blessed  fruits.  Then  why  not  enter  in  ?  It 
is  free  for  you.  No  walls  rise  up  between  you  and  it  to  shut  you  out.  No  deep 
river  roUs  to  prevent  your  entrance.  Ah  1  you  are  afraid.  There  are  giants  there, 
and  strong  cities  walled  to  the  sky.  If  I  confess  Christ  I  shall  have  mighty 
temptations  and  troubles  to  face  and  overcome.  Are  such  your  difficulties  ?  Well, 
I  do  not  say  you  are  strong.  I  do  not  say  that  there  are  no  Anakim  in  the  land. 
But  I  do  say  that  you  utterly  misunderstand  the  meaning  of  the  situation.  The 
instant  you  go  forward  you  enlist  on  your  side  the  strength  of  Jehovah,  and  there 
is  no  sin,  no  temptation,  no  trouble,  however  gigantic,  over  which  He  cannot  cause 
you  to  triumph.  But  there  are  lessons  here  for  the  Christian  veteran  as  well  as  for 
the  Christian  recruit.  He  has  left  Moses  behind,  as  a  leader  who  can  give  no  rest, 
he  has  put  himself  under  the  flag  of  Joshua,  he  has  entered  into  the  inheritance 
and  fought  the  good  fight  of  faith,  with  encouraging  measure  of  success.  Yet  still 
there  remain  some  temptations,  some  sins,  some  sorrows,  some  bereavements, 
which  look  very  dreadful.  They  are  like  gigantic  Anakim,  before  which  you  quail. 
Do  not  measure  your  might  with  theirs.  Pit  them  against  the  omnipotence  of 
your  Father  God.  Any  temptation,  any  sin,  any  trial,  is  too  much  for  us  in  our 
own  strength ;  but  strengthened  with  His  might  the  meanest  can  face  and  over- 
come the  greatest  of  them  aU.  Notice,  again,  that  the  fighting  does  not  grow  less 
severe  as  we  go  onwards.  The  Anakim  were  left  to  the  last.  So  often  the  greatest 
burdens,  sharpest  trials,  severest  afflictions,  fiercest  temptations,  come  at  the  end. 
No  man  can  ever  rest  here  in  fancied  security.  (A.  B.  Mackay.)  The  rest  for 
which  they  fought : — The  rest  for  which  Israel  fought  had  been  promised  more 
than  four  hundred  years  before  (Gen.  xii.  1-3,  6,  7,  &c.).  This  promise,  so  old,  so 
solemn,  so  wide,  so  definite,  so  clear,  and  so  often  repeated,  was  the  formative  and 
governing  principle  in  the  lives  of  all  the  patriarchs.  This  it  was  that  made  them 
Faith's  Pilgrim  Fathers.    They  heUeved  these  promises,  their  hearts  embraced 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

them,  and  they  confessed  that  they  were  pilgrims  and  strangers  in  the  earth.    But 
the  promise  was  sure,  though  held  long  in  abeyance  for  wise  and  loving  purposes. 
The  vision  may  tarry,  but  come  it  must ;  because  God's  gifts  and  calling  are 
without  repentance,  unconditioned  by  aught  in  the  creature ;  and  because  God's 
power  and  wisdom  are  without  limit.     He  is  the  God  of  truth  and  of  infinite 
resources.     Through  strange  scenes,  hard  discipline,  and  varying  experiences  the 
seed  of  Abraham  may  pass,  but  all  the  time  God  is  leading  them  to  His  promised 
rest.     What  a  lesson  in  patience  have  we  here  !    What  encouragement  to  wait  for 
the  end  of  the  Lord !     Surely,  as  we  consider  them  thus  at  the  end  of  their  toils 
and  in  the  enjoyment  of  that  great  promise,  we  may  exclaim,  "  Happy  is  the  people 
whose  God  is  the  Lord."    Is  there  anything  as  good  in  store  for  us  ?     There  is 
better.     God's  basket  of  bounty  is  not  empty.     God's  act  gave  this  promise  first  of 
all.    After  He  created  all  things  He  rested  from  His  works.     He  had  gone  out  of 
Himself  to  work ;  He  returned  to  Himself  to  rest.     As  certainly  as  the  old  creation, 
through  ages  of  convulsion  and   astounding  changes,   attained  its  crown   and 
climax  in  God's  rest,  so    surely  the  new  creation,  by  whatever  mysteries   and 
conflicts  its  development  is  characterised,  shall  usher  in  the  glorious  Sabbath  of 
redemption.    As  surely  as  Joshua  gave  rest  to  those  who  followed  him,  so  surely 
does  Jesus  give  rest  to  all  who  put  their  trust  in  Him.     The  innumerable  company 
of  the  redeemed  have  found  in  this  promise  a  power  sufficient  to  govern  all  their 
lives,  a  solace  for  every  woe.    But  if  the  rest  for  which  Israel  fought  was  a  rest 
long  promised,  it  was  also  a  rest  which  for  a  time  was  forfeited.     "  They  could  not 
enter  in  because  of  unbeUef.    Thou  standest  by  faith.     Therefore  be  not  high- 
minded,  but  fear."    Let  us  fear  with  that  fear  which  has  strong  confidence,  with 
which  we  work  out  our  salvation,  which  mingles  with  holy  mirth,  which  lasts 
through  all  the  time  of  our  sojourn  here,  and  which  is  our  safety.     "  Blessed  is  the 
man  that  feareth  alway."    Further,  the  rest  for  which  Israel  fought  was  imperfect. 
It  was  only  a  comparative  rest.     The  land  as  a  whole  was  taken.    It  was  so  far  in 
their  hands  that  they  could  with  safety  partition  it  among  the  several  tribes, 
allowing  each  to  perfect  the  work  of  conquest  within  his  allotted  territory.     The 
Canaanites  were  unable  to  put  an  army  in  the  field.     Their  united  power  was  for 
the  time  utterly  broken.    Yet  still  they  had  cities  here  and  there  in  their  possession. 
They  were  to  remain  for  a  time,   to  prevent  the    land   from   lapsing   into   an 
irreclaimable  waste,  to  exercise  the  people  in  war,  and  to  be  a  test  of  Israel's  faith- 
fulness.    We  have  therefore  here  a  master-sketch  of  Christian  experience.     The 
believer  enters  into  life  by  a  miracle  of  grace  and  power.     He  is  buried  with  Christ 
by  baptism  into  His  death.     He  is  raised  with  Him  and  seated  with   Him   in 
heavenly  places.     He  finds  his  Gilgal  at  Golgotha,  where  the  reproach  of  sin  is 
rolled  away,  and  he  receives  nourishment  for  his  soul.    Here,  also,  he  learns  the 
mystery  of  the  Divine  leadership  of   Him  who  has  said,  "  Lo,   I  am  with  you 
alway."    He  takes  Him  as  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.     Then  he  learns  the  might 
of  faith  in  casting  down  the  walls  which  human  pride  and  strength  and  skill  have 
reared.     He  is  also  taught,  it  may  be  by  humiliating  defeat,  the   weakness  of 
unbelief  and  disobedience,  as  was  Israel  at  Ai.     He  is  convinced  that  if  he  is  not 
to  make  shipwreck  he  must  hold  fast  "  faith  and  a  good  conscience."    Then  with 
bitter  sorrow  he  learns  the  value  of  self-judgment  and  confession  of  sin.     The  dark 
and  dreadful  valley  of  Achor  becomes  the  only  door  of  hope.     Then  with  deeper 
inteUigence  he  repeats  with  restored  soul  the  Amen  of  allegiance,  deliberately  takes 
the  law  of  God  for  his  guide,  and  depends  on  the  Cross  for  power  of  communion. 
He  camps  at  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  in  the  very  centre  of  the  blessed  inheritance,  sur- 
rounded by  its  fairest  scenes,  when  his  heart  knows  the  meaning  of  these  words, 
"  If  we  walk  in  the  light  as  He  is  in  the  hght,  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another, 
and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."     Then,  from 
new  consecration,  rejoicing  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  having  no  confidence  in  the  flesh, 
he  passes  on  to  higher  acts  of  faith  and  to  nobler  victories.     Things  in  heaven  as 
well  as  things  on  earth  reveal  faith's  power.     He  can  put  his  foot  on  the  neck  of 
tyrant  sins,  and  laugh  to  scorn  the  horses  and  chariots  of  human  might.     Some- 
times there  are  periods  of  desperate  fighting,  in  which  every  fibre  is  strained  to  its 
utmost  tension.     Sometimes  there  are  periods  of  comparative  repose,  a  welcome 
lull,  when  the  land  rests  from  war.     And  in  these  happy  days  all  the  work  may 
seem  done,  and  perfect  victory  gained.     Old  and  tough  sins  are  conquered.     Those 
that  remain  hide  their  diminished  heads.     Still  they  lurk  in  the  dark  recesses  of 
the  heart,  ready  to  spring  out  and  pounce  upon  us  if  for  a  moment  we  are  off  our 
guard.     Therefore  there  is  constant  need  of  watchfulness.     Lastly,  the  rest  for 


CHAP.  XII.]  JOSHUA.  211 

which  Israel  fought  was  prospective.  From  the  very  fact  of  its  imperfections  it 
pointed  forward  to  a  better.  (Ibid.)  Rest  from  war: — Interesting  period  I 
What  so  much  the  anticipation  of  the  heart  in  conflict  ?  As  long  as  the  land 
remained  unsubdued  rest  could  not  be  enjoyed.  Besides,  had  there  been  nothing 
else  to  annoy  peace  and  disturb  the  inheritance  of  the  Church,  whose  heart  could 
have  rested  in  his  lot,  and  been  free  from  distress,  amidst  the  judgments  of  heaven 
upon  guilty  idolaters,  and  upon  whom  Divine  authority  made  it  an  imperious 
necessity  in  Israel  to  execute  a  sentence  of  extermination  ?  Sweet  to  the  expecta- 
tion and  welcome  of  hope,  a  period  when,  in  the  perfect  and  undisturbed  rest  of 
heaven,  war  will  cease  for  ever,  and  sighs  of  woe  be  eternally  removed.  The  peace 
of  heaven  wiU  be  lasting  as  sweet.  There  no  Canaanites  will  be  left  to  dispute 
their  right,  or  remnants  of  broken  powers  ever  rise  to  assert,  and  attempt  to 
restore  their  long  forfeited  claim.  That  land  shall  have  rest  from  war,  as  long  as 
the  destroyer  of  sin  and  conqueror  of  death  shall  live.  Joyous  prospect !  Soon 
the  armour  of  light  will  be  exchanged  for  robes  of  incorruptible  glory,  and  the 
helmet  of  salvation  for  the  conqueror's  crown.  As  under  the  dominion  of  the 
Prince  of  peace,  and  themselves  the  subjects  of  its  reigning  influence.  Christians 
will  rest  from  war ;  as  commanded,  they  will  cease  from  anger  and  forsake  strife. 
Nor  wiU  they  ever  embroil  themselves  in  the  contentions  of  others,  unless  as  peace- 
speakers  and  peace-makers.     (IF.  Seaton.) 


CHAPTER  XD. 

Vebs.  1-24.  These  are  the  kings  of  the  land,  which  the  children  of  Israel 
smote. — The  goodness  and  severity  of  God  : — This  chapter  is  a  short  summary  of 
the  work  that  has  been  done.  In  this  resume  of  the  conquest  Moses  is  not  for- 
gotten. He  is  named  as  well  as  Joshua.  The  Holy  Ghost  delights  to  point  out 
how  God  causes  many  instruments  to  work  out  His  designs,  and  thus  takes  all 
praise  from  man.  Thus  the  chapter  is  a  miniature,  suggesting  aU  the  victories 
that  Israel  won,  and  aU  the  defeats  which  overwhelmed  the  Canaanites.  Accord- 
ingly it  is  valuable  as  a  demonstration  that  both  the  promises  and  the  threatenings 
of  God  will  be  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  Here  as  in  a  glass  we  see  on  the  one  hand 
the  course  and  the  end  of  those  who  follow  God,  and  on  the  other  the  course  and 
the  end  of  those  who  resist.  Or,  we  have  pointed  out  to  us  the  narrow  way  that 
leads  to  life,  and  the  broad  road  that  leads  to  destruction.  May  we  ponder  these 
things  and  learn  the  way  wherein  we  should  walk.  I.  The  different  roads. 
That  of  Israel  was  the  path  of  obedience.  Everything  was  done  by  Divine  com- 
mand. But  it  was  not  always  easy  work  for  Israel  to  obey.  The  commands  of 
God  not  only  led  along  a  narrow  way,  but  often  brought  them  up  to  a  strait  gate. 
They  had  just  to  go  right  on,  according  to  the  command  of  God.  Obedience  was 
their  watchword.  To  stop  and  parley  was  to  be  lost.  Patient  endurance 
characterised  them  all  through.  When  an  old  general  was  asked  why  he  picked 
out  the  old  veterans  for  a  forced  march  he  replied,  "  Because  they  have  the  most 
staying  power."  For  hard  work  of  any  kind  this  is  what  tells  in  the  long  run ; 
and  from  the  first  encounter  with  Sihon  and  Og  to  the  last  wrestle  with  the 
Anakim  Israel  exhibited  this  quality  both  in  things  physical  and  things  spiritual. 
Obedience  was  the  path :  patient  endurance  was  the  characteristic  of  those  who 
walked  therein.  On  the  part  of  the  Canaanites  their  course  was  marked  by 
rebellion.  They  said,  "  Who  is  Lord  over  us?  "  Thus  they  hardened  themselves 
against  God's  wiU,  and  fought  it  out  to  the  bitter  end,  learning  no  lesson  and 
yielding  no  submission.  These  two  paths  of  obedience  and  rebellion  have  not 
ceased  to  be  trodden.  Neither  of  them  is  grass-grown.  Thank  God  there  are 
many  who  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  seek  for  glory  and  honour  and 
immortality.  If  there  must  be  patient  continuance  on  the  part  of  those  who  walk 
the  narrow  way,  there  must  be  constant  contention  on  the  part  of  those  who  hurry 
down  the  broad  road.  There  must  be  the  resistance  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  the 
warnings  of  conscience,  of  the  light  of  truth.  There  must  be  at  times  the  fear  of 
death  and  judgment  and  eternity.  U.  The  diffeeent  objects  placed  before  each. 
That  placed  before  Israel  was  something  very  definite  and  tangible,  viz.,  the  sure 
promise  of  Jehovah.    To  them  that  promise  was  the  title-deed  of  the  Holy  Land ; 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ini. 


therefore  all  through  this  war  they  had  in  their  eye  a  Divine  inheritance,  and  all 
the  glory  and  honour  which  this  implied.  Can  we  find  any  similar  incitement  on 
the  part  of  the  Canaanites  ?  Nay.  Theirs  was  a  hopeless  struggle.  They  were 
without  God  and  therefore  without  hope.  They  obeyed  unrighteousness,  and  were 
therefore  filled  with  unrest.  So  is  it  now.  They  who  walk  in  the  obedience  of 
faith  have  a  glorious  object  before  their  eyes  to  stimulate  and  encourage  them. 
They  seek  for  glory  and  honour  and  immortality.  And  they  have  good  hope 
through  grace  of  obtaining  it.  Yea,  they  have  God's  faithful  promise,  and  there- 
fore glorious  assurance  of  the  result.  But  where  is  the  hope  of  the  rebellious  ?  It 
is  but  a  vague,  unsatisfying  dream.  At  the  very  best  they  have  no  certainty  of  a 
happy  issue.  When  they  pass  hence  it  is  "A  leap  in  the  dark."  What  a 
miserable  plight  is  thisl  Notwithstanding  their  vast  coalitions,  their  imposing 
armies,  their  formidable  weapons,  their  notable  leaders,  they  go  forward  with  fear. 
The  Sihon  and  Og  of  materialism,  the  Adoni-zedek  of  sacerdotalism,  the  Jabin  of 
false  philosophy,  can  inspire  no  true  and  blessed  hope  in  the  hearts  of  their 
faltering  followers.  HI.  The  DirrEBENT  ends.  We  see  the  Israelites  marching 
on  from  victory  to  victory  ;  entering  into  Canaan,  enjoying  the  smUe  of  God,  and 
reaping  the  fruit  of  their  labours.  We  see  the  Canaanites  swept  with  the  besom  of 
destruction,  and  all  that  is  left  of  their  mightiest  kings  is  the  chronicle  of  their 
tombstones  as  given  here.  The  ends  are  different  because  the  beginnings  are 
different.  Of  Israel  it  might  be  said,  "  These  aU  fought  in  faith."  Of  the 
Canaanites  it  might  be  said,  "  These  all  died  in  unbelief."  Paul  has  laid  plainly 
before  us  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  these  two  ends,  as  we  must  know  them. 
On  the  one  hand  he  places  eternal  life,  glory,  honour,  peace.  On  the  other  he 
places  indignation,  wrath,  tribulation,  anguish.  One  or  other  of  these  is  the 
terminus  to  which  every  life  is  hastening.  And  he  also  plainly  teUs  us  that 
without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  walk  in  the  good  way  or  to  attain  the  glorious  end. 
Eemember  then  God's  solemn  record  of  the  dead.  He  marks  His  own  as  precious 
jewels,  to  be  worn  in  His  crown  in  the  day  of  glory,  but  He  counts  His  enemies 
but  worthless  ashes  to  be  trodden  under  foot.  In  the  Divine  record  of  the  dead 
there  are  no  omissions,  no  oversights,  and  no  lies.  He  counts  His  enemies  and 
He  counts  His  friends.    How  will  He  count  you  ?    (A.  B.  Mackay.) 


CHAPTER  Xm. 


Vees.  1-33. — ^Thou  art  old  and  stricken  In  years. — Joihua't  old  age: — "The 
Lord  said  unto  Joshua,  Thou  art  old  and  stricken  in  years."  To  many  men  and 
women  this  would  not  be  a  welcome  announcement.  They  do  not  like  to  think 
that  they  are  old.  They  do  not  like  to  think  that  the  bright,  joyous,  playful  part 
of  life  is  over,  and  that  they  are  arrived  at  the  sombre  years  when  they  must  say, 
«'  There  is  no  pleasure  in  them."  Then,  again,  there  are  some  who  really  find  it 
hard  to  believe  that  they  are  old.  Life  has  flown  past  so  swiftly  that  before  they 
thought  it  was  well  begun  it  has  gone.  But  however  much  men  may  like  to  be 
young,  and  however  much  some  may  retain  in  old  age  of  the  feeling  of  youth,  it 
is  certain  that  the  period  of  strength  has  its  limit,  and  the  period  of  life  also. 
To  Joshua  the  announcement  that  he  was  old  and  stricken  in  years  does  not 
appear  to  have  brought  any  painful  or  regretful  feeUng.  Perhaps  he  had  aged 
somewhat  suddenly ;  his  energies  may  have  failed  consciously  and  rapidly,  after 
his  long  course  of  active  and  anxious  military  service.  He  may  have  been  glad 
to  hear  God  utter  the  word  ;  he  may  have  been  feeling  it  himself,  and  wondering 
how  he  should  be  able  to  go  through  the  campaigns  yet  necessary  to  put  the 
children  of  Israel  in  full  possession  of  the  land.  So  Joshua  finds  that  he  is  now 
to  be  relieved  by  his  considerate  Master  of  laborious  and  anxious  service.  Not 
of  all  service,  but  of  exhausting  service,  unsuited  to  his  advancing  years.  Joshua 
had  been  a  right  faithful  servant ;  few  men  have  ever  done  their  work  so  well. 
He  has  led  a  most  useful  and  loyal  life,  which  there  is  some  satisfaction  in  looking 
back  on.  No  doubt  he  is  well  aware  of  unnumbered  faihngs :  "  Who  can  under- 
stand his  errors  ?  "  But  he  has  the  rare  satisfaction — oh  1  who  would  not  wish  to 
share  it? — of  looking  back  on  a  well-spent  life,  habitually  and  earnestly  regulated 


CHAP,  xm.]  JOSHUA.  213 

amid  many  infirmities  by  regard  to  the  will  of  God.  Yet  Joshua  was  not  to 
complete  that  work  to  which  he  had  contributed  so  much :  "  there  remaineth  yet 
very  much  land  to  be  possessed."  At  one  time,  no  doubt,  he  thought  otherwise, 
and  he  desired  otherwise.  When  the  tide  of  victory  was  setting  in  for  him  so 
steadily,  and  region  after  region  of  the  land  was  falling  into  his  hands,  it  was 
natural  to  expect  that  before  he  ended  he  would  sweep  all  the  enemies  of  Israel 
before  him,  and  open  every  door  for  them  throughout  the  land,  even  to  its  utmost 
borders.  Why  not  make  hay  when  the  sun  shone  ?  When  God  had  found  so  apt 
an  instrument  for  His  great  design,  why  did  He  not  employ  him  to  the  end  ?  If 
the  natural  term  of  Joshua's  strength  had  come,  why  did  not  that  God  who  had 
Bupernaturally  lengthened  out  the  day  for  completing  the  victory  of  Bethhoron 
lengthen  out  Joshua's  day,  that  the  whole  land  of  Canaan  might  be  secured  ? 
Here  comes  in  a  great  mystery  of  Providence.  Instead  of  lengthening  out  the 
period  of  Joshua's  strength,  God  seems  to  have  cut  it  short.  We  can  easily 
understand  the  lesson  for  Joshua  himself.  Joshua  must  be  made  to  feel — perhaps 
he  needs  this — that  this  enterprise  is  not  his,  but  God's.  And  God  is  not  limited 
to  one  instrument,  or  to  one  age,  or  to  one  plan.  Never  does  Providence  appear  to 
ns  so  strange  as  when  a  noble  worker  is  cut  down  in  the  very  midst  of  lus  work. 
A  young  missionary  has  just  shown  his  splendid  capacity  for  service,  when  fever 
strikes  him  low,  and  in  a  few  days  all  that  remains  of  him  is  rotting  in  the  ground. 
•'  What  can  God  mean  ?  "  we  sometimes  ask  impatiently.  "Does  He  not  know  the  rare 
value  and  the  extreme  scarcity  of  such  men,  that  He  sets  them  up  apparently  just 
to  throw  them  down  ? "  But  "  God  reigneth,  let  the  people  tremble."  AH  that 
bears  on  the  Christian  good  of  the  world  is  in  God's  plan,  and  it  is  very  dear  to 
God,  and  "precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  His  saints."  But  He 
is  not  limited  to  single  agents.  (TF.  G.  Blaikie,  D.JD.)  God  takes  note  of  our 
failing  strength  : — He  says,  concerning  this  man  and  that.  Grey  hairs  are  here  and 
there  upon  him,  and  he  knoweth  it  not.  About  some  supposedly  strong  men,  He 
says.  They  are  wearing  out ;  they  are  old  at  forty ;  at  fifty  they  will  be  patriarchal, 
BO  far  as  the  exhaustion  of  strength  is  concerned ;  they  will  die  young  in  years,  but 
old  in  service.  God's  work  does  take  much  out  of  a  man,  if  the  man  is  faithful. 
A  man  may  pray  himself  into  a  withered  old  age  in  one  night :  in  one  little  day  a 
man  may  add  years  to  his  labour.  We  can  work  off-handedly :  the  work  need  not 
take  much  out  of  us  ;  but  if  we  think  about  it,  ponder  it,  execute  it  with  both  hands 
— if  it  is  the  one  thought  of  the  soul,  who  can  tell  how  soon  the  strongest  man  may 
be  run  out,  and  the  youngest  become  a  white-haired  patriarch?  But  blessed  is  it 
to  be  worked  out  in  this  service.  A  quaint  minister  of  the  last  century  said,  "  It 
is  better  to  rub  out  than  to  rust  out."  How  many  are  content  to  "  rust 
out " !  They  know  nothing  about  friction,  sacrifice,  self-slaughter,  martyrdom. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  There  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  be  possessed. — 
Unconquered  territory  : — I.  Eevealed  truth  yet  to  be  leaened.  We  have 
not  yet  secured  all  the  sacred  knowledge  which  God  has  made  possible,  and 
which  it  would  be  profitable  for  us  to  acquire.  Here  is  this  book  set  out  before 
us,  the  great  region  of  revealed  religion.  May  we  not  say  that  "  there  remaineth 
yet  very  much  land  to  be  possessed"?  Who  among  us  is  familiar  with  all 
its  histories,  is  acquainted  with  all  its  facts,  knows  all  its  truths,  has  seen  all 
its  beauties,  or  learned  aU  its  lessons?  Some  of  you  have  been  through  the 
pass  of  Llanberis — perhaps  twenty  times.  Did  you  ever  see  it  twice  alike? 
Always  the  same  thing  ;  and  yet  a  different  appearance,  because  seen  under 
different  circumstances.  If  you  were  to  go  through  it  twenty  times  twenty 
times,  it  would  never  appear  twice  alike.  The  light  would  be  falling  on  it  at 
different  angles,  and  thus  make  a  difference.  On  a  cloudy  day  you  would  see 
something  you  did  not  see  on  a  bright  day,  and  on  a  rainy  day  you  would  see 
something  you  did  not  see  on  a  fine  day.  It  is  thus  with  this  book.  You  say  that 
you  read  the  Bible  through  last  year,  and  you  ask,  "  T\Tiat  is  to  be  gained  by 
reading  it  through  again  this  year  ?  "  Have  you  the  same  hopes?  the  same  joys? 
the  same  sorrows  ?  the  same  aspirations  ?  the  same  motives  ?  and  the  same 
experiences  ?  I  care  not  how  often  you  have  read  it,  you  have  never  read  it  as  you 
feel  now,  with  your  present  experience  and  in  your  present  circumstances.  H.  A 
HOLY  CHARACTEB  TO  BE  ACQUiBED.  There  remaineth  much  of  that  to  be  possessed. 
Men  in  ancient  times  had  not  a  Divine  standard  to  measure  themselves  by,  or  a 
Divine  pattern  to  contrast  themselves  with,  and  learn  how  deficient  they  were  and 
full  of  blemishes.  We  have  had  a  perfect  pattern  set  before  us.  In  the  life  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  we  have  the  map  of  the  good  land ;  see  it  in  its  length  and 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm; 

breadth,  and  realise  how  true  it  is  that  there  are  glorious  portions  of  it  over  which 
our  flag  has  not  floated,  provinces  which  we  have  not  made  our  own.  III.  Christian 
USEFULNESS.  I  am  not  going  to  slander  the  Christian  Church,  and  tell  you  that 
former  times  were  better  than  these.  There  is  nothing  gained  by  telling  lies  for 
God.  If  you  want  to  quicken  God's  people  you  must  not  talk  as  if  the  Church 
were  more  sleepy  now  than  it  ever  was  before.  I  do  not  believe  it.  As  I  read 
ecclesiastical  history,  I  cannot  find  many  periods  when  the  Church,  as  a  whole, 
was  more  vigorous  and  devoted  than  now.  Let  us  not  ignore  what  God  has  done 
for  us,  and  enabled  us  to  do.  "  Not  unto  us,  but  unto  Him  be  the  praise  and  glory." 
But  when  we  take  into  account  all  that  has  been  done  and  all  that  has  been 
attempted  against  the  world's  ignorance,  vice,  and  ungodliness,  may  we  not  still 
say,  "  There  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  be  possessed  "  ?  It  is  not  the  season 
for  slothfulness,  selfishness,  or  prayerlessness ;  the  call  is  urgent  and  great. 
"There  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  be  possessed."  Why  did  God  keep  His 
people  to  that  struggle  ?  He  gave  the  people  the  land,  and  then  they  had  to  fight 
for  it.  They  crossed  the  Jordan  with  the  best  title-deeds  man  ever  possessed ; 
they  came  from  heaven,  they  were  given  by  Him  to  whom  aU  the  earth  belongs. 
The  title-deed  of  the  people  said,  "  The  land  is  yours  "  ;  and  after  God  had  given 
it  to  them  they  had  to  buckle  on  the  sword,  sharpen  the  spear,  and  go  and  win 
every  acre  of  it.  This  is  God's  way — He  gives  it  to  you,  and  yet  He  says,  •'  Get  it ; 
work  it  out  with  fear  and  trembling."  Why  does  He  treat  us  so  ?  I  cannot  tell ; 
but  this  I  know,  that  if  we  cease  to  work  the  powers  of  evil  never  will.  {Charles 
Vince.)  The  Christian's  work : — Canaan,  though  commonly  used  as  a  type  of 
heaven,  is,  in  some  of  its  aspects,  a  type  rather  of  a  state  of  grace  than  of  a  state 
of  glory.    And  taking  this  view  of  it,  I  remark  that — I.  Canaan,  as  the  Israelites 

rOUND  IT,  REPRESENTS  THE  STATE  OF  MAN'S  HEART  WHEN  THE  GRACE  OF  GOD  ENTERS  IT. 

Think  of  a  soul  like  thine,  made  at  first  in  the  image  of  God ;  a  being  such  as  thou 
art,  once  occupying  a  rank  in  creation  next  to  and  but  a  little  lower  than  that  of 
angels  ;  a  heart  like  thine  which,  though  blighted  by  sin,  stUl  retains  some  traces 
of  departed  glory,  alienated  from  the  true  God,  held  captive  of  the  devil,  ruled  by 
unholy  passions,  full  of  corruptions  as  difficult  to  root  out  as  were  these  sons  of 
Anak  who,  in  Goliath  and  his  giant  race,  disturbed  the  peace  of  Israel  and  defied 
the  armies  of  the  living  God  many  long  years  after  the  land  was,  in  a  sense,  both 
conquered  and  possessed.  The  Hebrews  did  not  enter  Canaan  to  find  an  empty 
land,  which  they  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  occupy ;  nor  does  Jesus,  when  He  enters 
our  heart  by  His  Spirit  and  saving  grace.  It  is  in  possession  of  His  enemies.  They 
are  there  to  dispute  His  rights,  and  resist  His  entrance — sons  of  Anak,  indeed ;  more 
formidable  stiU  ;  for  giant  sins  are  less  easily  conquered  than  giant  men.     II.  The 

BLESSINGS    OF    THE    KINGDOM   OF    GRACE,    LIKE    THOSE    OF    CaNAAN,    HAVE    TO    BE  FOUGHT 

FOR.  Bring  out  every  sin  before  the  Lord,  and  let  it  be  condemned  to  death  ;  pass 
the  sword  of  the  Spirit  through  and  through  it,  till  it  has  breathed  out  its  cursed 
life,  and  has  no  more  dominion  over  you.  As  the  apostle  says,  "  Let  him  that 
nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  all  iniquity."  Beware  how  you  leave  innate 
corruption  and  old  sinful  habits  to  draw  down  on  you  the  anger  of  a  holy  God 
and  the   afflictions  threatened    on  Israel   (Num.    xxxiii.   55).      III.    The    most 

ADVANCED    CHRISTIAN    HAS    MUCH   TO   DO    IN    THE    WAY    OF    SANCTIFICATION.       HoW  tiuly 

may  it  be  said  to  the  most  experienced,  aged,  honoured  Christian,  as  the  Lord 
said  to  Joshua,  "  Thou  art  old  and  well  stricken  in  years,  and  yet  there  is  much  land 
to  be  possessed.  Sin  stiU  has  more  or  less  power  over  you,  and  it  should  have 
none;  your  corruptions  are  wounded,  dying  of  mortal  wounds,  but  they  are  not  yet 
dead ;  your  affections  are  set  on  heaven,  yet  how  much  are  they  still  entangled 
with  earthly  things ;  your  heart,  like  the  needle  of  a  sailor's  compass  to  its  pole, 
points  to  Christ,  but  how  easily  is  it  disturbed,  how  tremblingly  and  unsteadily  does 
it  often  point  to  Him  ;  your  spirit  has  wings,  but  how  short  are  its  flights,  and  how 
often,  like  a  half-flodged  eaglet,  has  it  to  seek  the  nest,  and  come  back  to  rest  on 
the  Rock  of  Ages ;  your  soul  is  a  garden  in  which,  when  north  and  south  winds 
blow  to  call  out  its  spices,  Christ  delights  to  walk,  but  with  many  a  beautiful 
flower,  how  many  vile  weeds  are  there — ready  to  spring  up,  and  ill  to  keep  down  ; 
requiring  constant  care  and  watching."  Indeed,  so  many  impurities  and  imper- 
fections cleave  to  the  best  of  us,  that  it  seems  to  me  a  change  must  take  place  at 
death  only  second  to  what  took  place  at  conversion.  How  that  is  done  is  a  mystery 
which  we  cannot  fathom  ;  but  it  would  seem  as  if  grace,  like  that  species  of  cereus 
which  opens  its  gorgeous  flower  only  at  midnight  burst  out  into  fullest  beauty  amid 
the  darkness  of  a  dying  hour.     (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)         The  uncompleted  rcork : — 


CHAP,  xin.]  JOSHUA.  215 

There  is  much  land  to  be  possessed  in — I.  The  knowledge  of  God.  Columbus 
was  not  content  to  pick  up  a  few  shells  on  the  beach  of  the  new  world — he 
explored  the  continent ;  alas !  we  are  too  soon  satisfied  with  coasting  for  a  little  on 
that  great  continent  of  the  Divine  nature.  II.  The  study  or  the  Bible. 
Christians  are  too  prone  to  keep  to  the  beaten  tracks  ;  they  do  not  make  excursions 
into  less  familiar  paths ;  some  pages  well  thumbed,  others  clean  and  uncut. 
III.  CHBisTLiN  CHARACTEB.  Cauaau  was  occupied  by  seven  nations  of  ugly  names ; 
but  our  hearts  and  lives  are  cursed  by  still  uglier  things.  We  must  not  be  content 
until  all  these  are  brought  under  obedience  to  Christ.  lY.  The  heathen  world. 
{F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  On  progress  in  religion  : — Christians,  God  has  assigned 
you  a  glorious  portion.  Opening  before  you  the  discoveries  of  revelation.  He  said, 
"  Make  all  this  your  own  ;  advance  ;  leave  nothing  unpossessed."  At  first  you  were 
filled  with  spiritual  ardour,  "  laying  aside  every  weight,"  cfec.  But,  alas  !  your  love 
has  waxen  cold.  I.  Yes,  Christians,  there  eemaineth  tet  very  much  land  to 
BE  possessed — many  cities  and  strongholds,  many  fine  plains,  and  "  springs  of 
water,"  many  beautiful  valleys,  and  very  "fruitful  hills" — or,  to  speak  less  in 
figure,  much  of  your  religion  is  unattained,  unoccupied,  unenjoyed ;  you  are  far 
from  its  boundaries.  Very  little  of  it  indeed  do  some  of  you  possess ;  you  command 
only  a  small,  inconsiderable  corner,  scarcely  affording  you  a  subsistence. 
1.  Consider  your  knowledge.  After  so  many  years  of  hearing,  what  additions 
have  you  made  to  your  stores  ?  Are  you  filled  with  holy  prudence  to  ponder  "  the 
path  of  your  feet,"  to  "look  well  to  your  goings,"  and  to  discern  snares  where  there 
is  no  appearance  of  danger ?  Do  you  "walk  circumspectly;  not  as  fools,  but  as 
wise"?  2.  Observe  your  holiness.  For  the  knowledge  of  persons  may  surpass 
their  experience;  and  a  growth  in  gifts  is  very  distinguishable  from  a  growth 
in  grace.  Review,  then,  your  sanctification ;  and  suffer  me  to  ask.  Have  you  no 
remaining  corruptions  to  subdue?  Is  your  obedience  universal,  unvarying, 
cheerful?  Have  you  fuUy  imbibed  the  tempers  of  your  religion?  Are  there 
no  deficiencies  perceivable  in  every  grace,  in  every  duty?  3.  Think  of 
your  privileges.  It  is  the  privilege  of  Christians  to  be  "  careful  for  nothing." 
It  is  the  privilege  of  Christians  to  "  enter  into  rest."  It  is  the  privilege 
of  Christians  to  "have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
It  is  the  privilege  of  Christians  to  "count  it  all  joy  when  they  fall  into  divers 
temptations ;  and  to  glory  in  tribulation  also."  And  all  this  has  been  exemplified. 
Men  have  "received  the  gospel  in  much  affliction,  with  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  they 
have  taken  pleasure  in  infirmities,  in  reproaches,  in  necessities,  in  persecutions,  in 
distresses,  for  Christ's  sake  " ;  they  have  "  taken  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  their 
goods " ;  they  have  approached  the  flames  with  rapture ;  they  have  loved  and 
longed  for  "  His  appearing  " — but  where  are  you  ?  Always  in  darkness  and  alarms, 
&c.  Do  you  belong  to  the  same  company  ?  II.  Whence  is  this  ?  Why  will  you 
suffer  all  this  remaining  religion  to  be  unpossessed  ?  How  shall  I  awaken  you  from 
your  negligence,  and  convince  you  of  the  propriety  and  necessity  of  making  fresh 
AND  continual  ADVANCES  ?  1.  I  place  before  you  the  commands  of  God.  You  are 
forbidden  to  draw  back ;  you  are  forbidden  to  be  stationary.  Something  more  is 
necessary  than  languid,  partial,  occasional,  temporary  progression.  You  are 
required  to  be  "  steadfast,  unmovable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  " ; 
to  "  add  to  your  faith,  virtue,"  <Sc.  2.  I  surround  you  with  all  the  images  employed 
by  the  sacred  writers  when  they  would  describe  the  nature  of  a  religious  life.  For 
which  of  them  does  not  imply  progress,  and  remind  us  of  the  importance  of 
undiminished  ardour  and  increasing  exertion  ?  Light.  Growing  grain.  Mustard 
Beed.  Leaven.  3.  I  caU  forth  examples  in  your  presence;  they  teach  you  the 
same  truth.  Who  said,  "  I  beseech  thee,  show  me  Thy  glory  "  ?  A  man  who  had 
"seen  God  face  to  face."  Who  prayed,  "Teach  me  Thy  statutes:  open  Thou 
mine  eyes,  that  I  may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  Thy  law  "  ?  A  man  who 
had  "  more  understanding  than  all  his  teachers,"  a  man  who  "  understood  more 
than  the  ancients."  4.  I  hold  up  to  view  the  advantages  of  progressive  religion. 
(1)  A  Christian  should  be  concerned  for  the  honour  of  God.  He  is  under  infinite 
obligations  to  "  show  forth  the  praises  of  Him,  who  hath  called  us,"  &c. ;  but 
"herein  is"  our  "Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit."  (2)  A  Christian 
should  be  concerned  for  the  welfare  of  his  fellow-creatures.  He  should  be  a  blessing 
to  his  family,  to  his  country.  (8)  A  Christian  should  be  concerned  for  his  own 
prosperity.  And  has  he  to  learn  wnerein  it  consists  ?  Need  he  be  told  that  adding 
grace  to  grace  is  adding  "  strength  to  strength,"  dignity  to  dignity,  beauty  to  beauty, 
joy  to  joy  ?    It  is  an  awful  proof  that  you  have  no  real  religion  if  you  are  satisfied 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cHAP.xm. 

with  what  you  have.  A  degree  of  experience,  however  small,  would  stimulate ;  the 
relish  would  provoke  the  appetite ;  and  having  "  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious," 
your  language  would  be,  "evermore  give  as  this  bread."  m.  Some  admonitions 
WITH  BEGAED  TO  TOUB  FUTURE  EFFORTS.  1.  Shake  off  indolcnce.  Nothing  is  more 
injurious  to  our  progress ;  and,  alas !  nothing  is  more  common.  Man  loves  indul- 
gence ;  he  needs  a  stimulus,  to  make  him  arise  from  the  bed  of  sloth,  to  exert  hia 
faculties,  and  to  employ  the  means  of  which  he  is  possessed.  And  one  would 
naturally  conclude  that  in  religion  he  would  find  it.  As  he  sits  at  ease  revelation 
draws  back  the  veil,  and  shows  him  the  most  astonishing  realities — an  eternal 
world ;  whatever  can  sting  with  motive ;  whatever  can  alarm  with  fear ;  whatever 
can  animate  with  hope.  What  a  Being  to  please,  on  whom  it  depends  to  save  or 
to  destroy  1  "What  a  state  of  misery  is  there  to  escape !  What  an  infinite  happiness 
to  secure  1  2.  Beware  of  diversion.  Discharge  yourself  as  much  as  possible  from 
superfluous  cares.  Distinguish  between  diligence  in  lawful  business  and  "  entang- 
ling yourselves  in  the  affairs  of  this  life."  There  are  not  only  diversions  from 
religion,  but  diversions  in  it ;  and  of  these  also  you  are  to  beware.  Here,  finding 
you  are  unsuspicious  of  danger,  the  enemy  often  succeeds ;  for  his  end  is  frequently 
answered  by  things  good  in  themselves.  He  is  satisfied  if  he  can  draw  off  your 
attention  from  great  things,  and  engross  it  with  little  ones ;  if  he  can  make  you 
prefer  opinions  to  practice,  and  controversy  to  devotion.  3.  Guard  against  des- 
pondency. There  are  indeed  many  things  which,  when  viewed  alone,  have  a 
tendency  to  discourage  the  mind.  We  know  your  weakness,  and  we  know  the 
difficulties  and  dangers  to  which  you  are  exposed.  But  you  have  the  promise  of  a 
faithful  God.  4.  Be  afraid  of  presumption.  Our  dependence  upon  God  is 
absolute  and  universal.  "In  Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being."  His 
agency  is  more  indispensable  in  spiritual  things  than  in  natural ;  sin  has  rendered 
us  peculiarly  weak,  helpless,  and  disaffected.  5.  It  would  be  profitable  for  you  to 
*'  caU  to  remembrance  the  former  days,"  and  especially  to  review  the  beginning  of 
your  religious  course.  6.  It  wiU  not  be  less  profitable  for  you  to  look  forward, 
and  survey  the  close  of  all.  Christians !  "  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep ;  for 
now  is  your  salvation  nearer."  Would  you  slumber  on  the  verge  of  heaven  ?  The 
stream  increases  as  it  approximates  the  sea ;  motion  accelerates  as  it  approaches 
the  centre.  {W.  Jay.)  Territory  yet  to  be  taken  by  the  Church : — Who  in  the 
sketch  of  the  inheritance  given  by  God,  the  outline  of  the  borders  assigned  to  them 
in  the  grant  of  heaven,  and  sealed  by  covenant  oath,  could,  in  this  seat  of  plenty 
and  portion  of  the  Church,  behold  with  satisfaction  and  content  so  much  of  what 
mercy  had  made  their  own,  still  retained  under  the  dominion  of  darkness,  and 
occupied  to  the  keeping  out  of  their  f uU  right  the  true  heirs  of  promise  ?  Who, 
whatever  his  achievements  in  conquest  and  attainments  in  grace,  but  in  this  view 
feels  the  confined  results  of  all  his  operations,  and  sees  on  every  hand  very  much 
land  yet  to  be  possessed?  Notwithstanding  aU  that  has  been  achieved  by  the 
Church  of  God,  the  sphitual  inclosures  of  grace,  and  those  precious  plants  of 
righteousness,  where  once  grew  the  thorn  and  the  briar,  none  whose  contemplations 
seldom  reach  beyond  such  beauteous  spots  of  mercy,  such  flourishing  vineyards  of 
grace,  can  possibly  conceive  of  the  melancholy  darkness  which  still  broods  over  by 
far  the  greater  part  of  the  land,  those  moral  wastes  of  ignorance  and  corruption 
which  everywhere  meet  the  eye  and  distress  the  heart  of  the  Christian  traveller. 
Ah  1  what  extensive  wastes  of  sin  everywhere  meet  the  eye,  for  the  cultivation  of 
which  but  few  hands  are  found  !  Vast  multitudes  in  the  possession  of  intelligence, 
and  bearing  the  stamp  of  immortality,  are  living  without  the  fear  of  God,  or  any 
hope  of  futurity,  as  indifferent  to  all  the  momentous  concerns  of  eternity  as  they 
are  ignorant  of  aU  the  affecting  realities  of  the  gospel.  The  worldly-mindedness, 
profligacy,  and  pride  of  the  rich,  and  their  prevailing  disregard  of  all  that  is  serious 
and  devout,  demonstrate  that  they  are  equally  without  God  and  without  hope  in  the 
world,  and,  till  renewed  by  grace,  or  removed  by  death,  are  the  pollution  and  burden 
of  the  place  where  they  live.  These  are  the  Anakims,  a  people  tall  and  strong,  and 
as  the  sons  of  Anak,  a  gigantic  race,  who  in  their  power  and  influence  contract  the 
inheritance  of  the  saints,  and  hold  them  from  a  more  enlarged  possession,  till  the 
powers  of  heaven  subdue  or  destroy.  But  with  the  promise  of  an  inheritance  wide 
as  the  world,  and  stretched  in  its  extent  to  the  remotest  boundaries  of  the  earth, 
how  much,  very  much  land  yet  remaineth  to  be  possessed  !  (W.  Seaton.)  More 
beyond : — Spain  inscribed  on  her  coins  the  picture  of  the  pillars  of  Hercules,  which 
stood  on  either  side  of  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  the  extreme  boundary  of  her  empire, 
with  only  an  unexplored  ocean  beyond ;  and  on  the  scroll  over  them  was  written, 


CHAP.  XIV.]  JOSHUA.  217 

"  Ne  plus  ultra  " — nothing  beyond.  But  afterwards,  when  Columbus  had  discovered 
America,  Spain  struck  out  the  negative  and  left  the  inscription,  "  Plut  vltra  "•— 
more  beyond. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Vebs.  1-5.  By  lot  was  their  inheritance. — The  tribet  apportioned: — As  the 
whole  inheritance  was  the  gift  of  God,  so  each  one's  share  was  assigned  to  him  by 
His  appointment.  Not  even  Joshua  himself  in  a  display  of  the  greatest  wisdom  and 
impartiality  could  have  yielded  satisfaction  in  a  matter  where  so  many,  and  all  of 
one  family,  were  concerned.  Only  the  authority  of  the  Father,  who  had  entailed 
upon  them  as  His  redeemed  children  this  common  patrimony,  could  decide  the 
portion  of  each  tribe  and  of  each  family.  This  may  yield  great  satisfaction  to  the 
heirs  of  promise,  who  are  looking  for  a  share  in  the  heavenly  inheritance.  There, 
■whatever  degree  of  station,  difference  of  capacity,  or  diversity  of  possession  may 
exist,  no  one  but  will  find  his  inheritance  all  he  could  desire  and  enjoy,  and  for  ever 
beyond  the  possibility  of  becoming  a  cause  of  dissatisfaction  to  himself  or  of  envy  to 
others.  To  animate  the  hopes  of  the  believer,  and  quicken  his  desires  after  it,  an 
outline  is  presented  in  the  descriptions  of  heavenly  promise.  Oh,  for  a  realising  faith, 
that  elevation  and  meekness  which  characterise  the  high-born  sons  of  God,  and 
which  by  present  hopes  wean  the  heart  from  earthly  bliss  and  sublimate  its  affections 
to  highest  joys.  The  portion  of  inheritance  that  fell  to  the  members  of  this  great 
family  was,  agreeably  to  previous  instructions  in  the  wilderness,  determined  by  lot ; 
and  was  to  be  viewed  not  as  the  result  of  chance,  but  as  the  wise  and  gracious 
appointment  of  their  heavenly  Father.  No  one  but  had  reason  to  be  satisfied  with 
his  portion,  and  to  consider  it  assigned  him  with  the  indisputable  exactness  of  a 
last  will  and  testament.  What  a  sweet  thought  to  the  true  spiritual  Church  of  God, 
the  heirs  of  grace  and  glory,  both  with  respect  to  their  present  condition  and  their 
future  inheritance  !  He  who  did  not  overlook  one  tribe  or  family  in  the  earthly 
Canaan,  but  provided  for  them  as  few  or  many,  now,  though  the  lot  is  differently 
determined,  as  minutely  fixes  the  bounds  of  His  people's  habitations,  and  manages 
all  their  affairs.  Nor  less  exact  will  appear  the  eternal  consummation  of  His  good- 
ness, in  the  final  results  of  providence,  and  completion  of  His  covenant  purpose. 
(W.  Seaton.) 

Vers.  6-15.  Caleb  .  .  .  said  .  .  .  the  Lord  hath  kept  me  alive,  as  He  said. — 

CaleVs  reflection  on  the  goodness  and  faithfulness  of  God  to  him : — I.  It  is  God  that 
KEEPETH  us  ALIVE.  The  Scripturss  often  remind  us  of  this,  and  urge  it  as  a  motive 
to  religious  fear,  gratitude,  and  obedience.  They  teach  us  "  that  in  Him  we  live 
and  move  and  have  our  being :  that  in  Him  is  the  breath  of  every  living  thing  and 
the  spirit  of  all  mankind"  ;  that  He  gave  it  at  first  and  that  He  taketh  it  away. 
More  particularly,  God  preserveth  us  from  many  accidents  that  would  be  fatal  to 
us.  "  He  giveth  His  angels  charge  over  us,  to  keep  us  in  all  our  ways."  H.  The 
AGED  HAVE  PECULIAR  REASON  TO  MAKE  THIS  ACKNOWLEDGMENT.  When  any  arrive  at 
old  age,  it  is  proper  to  do  this,  with  peculiar  seriousness  and  gratitude ;  considering 
that,  like  Caleb,  they  have  been  wandering  all  their  days  in  a  wilderness.  Dangers 
surround  us  on  every  side.  The  aged  cannot  but  often  reflect  upon  this ;  what 
numbers  they  have  survived !  Their  own  infirmities  render  the  acknowledgment  of 
God's  preservation  of  them  almost  natural  and  peculiarly  proper.     IH.     It  is  a 

GKEAT  SATISFACTION  TO  AGED  CHRISTIANS  TO  REFLECT  ON  THEIR  OBEDIENCE  TO  GOD,  AND 

THE  ACCOMPLISHMENT  OF  His  PROMISES  TO  THEM.  They  rccollect  with  gratitude  and 
delight,  that  grace,  which  began,  maintained  and  improved  the  Divine  life  in  their 
souls,  amidst  innumerable  temptations,  from  without  and  within  ;  and  though  they 
have  fallen  into  trouble,  they  have  been  prevented  from  making  shipwreck  of  faith 
and  a  good  conscience.  It  is  pleasant  to  them  to  trace  up  all  these  streams  to  the 
fountain ;  to  consider  them  as  the  displays  of  rich  and  free  grace ;  as  the  accom- 
plishment of  the  promises  of  God,  and  proofs  of  His  fidelity.  Their  mercies  were 
sweet  in  the  enjoyment,  and  are  sweet  in  the  reflection,  when  they  consider  them  as 
founded  on  the  covenant  of  grace,  made  with  all  true  believers  through  Christ  Jesus. 

IV.  The  EXPERIENCE  WHICH  AGED  SAINTS  HAVE  HAD  OF  God'S  GOODNESS  AND  FAITHFUL- 
NESS IS  A  STRONG  ENCOURAGEMENT  TO  THEM  TO  HOPE  AND  TRUST  IN  HiM.      Application : 

1.  Let  us  all  remember  our  constant  dependence  upon  God,  and  learn  those  useful 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

instructions  wliich  that  is  adapted  to  teach  us.    2.  What  hath  been  said  should  bo 
an  inducement  to  young  persona  to  follow  the  Lord  fuUy.     Instead  of  "  possessing 
the  iniquities  of  your  youth,"  you  will  have  unspeakable  pleasure  in  being  able  to 
appeal  to  God,  with  Hezekiah,  •'  that  you  have  walked  before  Him  in  truth,  and 
■with  an  upright  heart,  and  have  done  that  which  was  good  in  His  sight."     3.  The 
example  of  Caleb  is  worthy  the  imitation  of  aged  Christians.    When,  like  Caleb,  you 
are  mentioning  your  age,  your  contemporaries,  or  what  happened  in  the  former  part 
•of  your  lives,  let  it  be  done  with  seriousness,  with  an  humble  and  thankful  acknow- 
ledgment of  Grod.    Further,  let  the  remainder  of  your  Uves  be  faithfully  devoted  to 
God's  service.     One  important  branch  of  this  is  humbly  to  relate  your    own 
experience  for  the  instruction  and  consolation  of  others.     (J.  Orton.)        Caleb't 
confession : — We  meet  with  old  men  who   are   continually  asking   us,  with  a 
slight  twinkle  in  their  eye,  "  How  old  do  you  think  I  am?  "  and  the  answer,  of 
course,  is  meant  to  bring  out  that  you  never  would  dream  that  they  were  such 
veterans  in  years,  they  are  so  fresh,  and  sprightly,  and  springy.     That  is  an  evil 
thing,  and  would  have  been  evil  in  Caleb  but  for  this  saving  clause,  "Behold,  the 
Lord  hath  kept  me  alive."     That  is  the  saving  clause,  my  green  and  vigorous  aged 
friend,  with  whom  all  things  have  prospered.     See  to  it  that  boastf ulness  be  not 
found  in  your  heart.    Let  not  that  "  dead  fly  "  spoil  your  ointment.    Do  not  give  to 
yourself  the  credit  and  glory  of  your  strength  and  prowess  of  body,  and  brain,  and 
mind.     Give  all  the  glory  where  all  is  due.     "  The  Lord  hath  kept  me  alive."     I 
want  you  to  notice  this  also  about  Caleb.     He  says,  "  I  have  wholly  followed  the 
Lord  my  God  " ;  and  in  the  Hebrew  that  is  quite  a  striking  word — more  striking 
than  in  the  English.    It  is  a  pictorial  word  in  the  Hebrew,  and  describes  a  ship 
going  out  at  full  sail.    Why,  that  is  the  very  keynote  of  Caleb  from  beginning  to 
end.    He  was  the  man  he  was,  from  the  begiiming  to  the  end,  because  he  was  out 
and  out — because  there  were  no  hmitations  and  provisions   with  him.    He  was 
not  a  man  who,  as  Paul  would  say,  "  made  provision  for  the  flesh  for  the  lust 
thereof  "  ;  but  having  been  called  by  God  to  His  service,  he  made  it  his  meat  and 
his  drink.    He  "  went  in"  for  God  and  His  cause,  like  a  ship  in  full  sail.    He  flung 
every  power  of  body,  and  soul,  and  spirit  like  a  free  sheet  to  the  winds  of  God's 
grace,  and  God's  Spirit,  and  God's  Providence.    He  "  let  go."    Young  f eUow,  it  is 
the  ruin  of  you  that  you  are  holding  back.    You  will  never  be  a  Caleb ;  you  will 
never  be  a  Joshua ;  you  wiU  never  be  a  David — never,  never — at  this  rate  of  it ; 
hanging  back  and  saving  your  life,  and  therefore  losing  it ;  taking  so  much  of  the 
programme  because  it  fits  you,  and  scoring  out  certain  other  items  that  you  do  not 
like.     Go  in  for  a  full  programme,  if  you  would  enjoy  Christian  Ufe.    {John  McNeill.) 
Joshua's  grateful  retrospect : — A  great  Alpine  climber  was  asked  about  the  ascent  of 
a  high  mountain,  and  said,  "  I  was  very  weary  before  I  got  to  the  top,  and  found 
the  best  plan  was  just  to  follow  the  guide  in  front  of  me.    At  the  summit  I  turned 
round,  and  when  I  saw  the  grand  view,  and  the  dangers  through  which  the  guide 
had  brought  me,  I  felt  I  could  have  fallen  down  on  my  knees  to  thank  him 
for  having  led  me  to  such  a  wonderful  place."    {Our  Own  Magazine.)        I  am 
as  strong  this  day  as  I  was. — Caleb — youth  in  old  age : — I.  A  life  built  on 
God's  peomise.    Five  times  in  his  short  speech  does  he  refer  to  the  word  which  "the 
Lord  spake."    The  word  of  promise  to  Caleb  dealt  with  two  things — his  prolonged 
life  and  his  possession  of  the  land  "  whereinto  he  went"  (Num.  xiv.  24).    For  five 
and  forty  years  he  had  kept  this  word  "  hid  in  his  heart,"  and  now  he  puts  out  a 
hand,  unweakened  by  age  and  long-delayed  fulfilment,  to  grasp  the  realisation — a 
grand  example  of  steady,  persistent  faith,  which  waits  for  the  vision,  though  it 
tarry,  and  buoyantly  welcomes  it  when  it  comes  at  last  1    A  life  thus  filled  with 
trust  in  God's  faithful  word  has  ever  present  instalments  of  accompUsbment,  as 
brooks  by  the  way,  to  keep  its  hope  fresh.    The  prolongation  of  Caleb's  lite  was  the 
pledge  to  him  of  the  fulfihnent  of  the  remoter  promise.     Such  a  life  is  consciously 
surrounded  with  Divine  operations,  too  plain  to  be  ignored,  and  when  looked  at  in 
retrospect,  presents  one  solid  and  homogeneous  mass  of  preserving  providences, 
which  are  all  summed  up  in  saying,  "  Behold,  the  Lord  hath  kept  me  alive,  as  He 
spake,  .  .  .  while  Israel  walked  in  the  wilderness."     Such  a  life  has  hope  burning 
as  a  guiding  star  to  the  very  end.    The  hopes  of  age  are  few  and  tremulous,  if  they 
be  hmited  to  earth.    When  the  feast  is  near  an  end,  appetite  is  dulled,  and  there  is 
little  to  do  but  to  get  up  and  go  away.    But  if  we  set  our  hope  on  God,  our  hope  ia 
immortal.    He  keeps  the  good  wine  till  the  last.    H.  A  life  which  bears  BEiNa 
BEMEMDEKED.    We  may  freely  admit  that  the  tone  of  this  retrospect  savours  of  an 
earlier  stage  in  the  process  of  revelation  than  ours,  and  that,  if  this  were  a  complete 


CHAP.  XIV.]  JOSHUA.  219 

account  given  by  a  man  of  his  life,  we  should  miss  in  it  the  voice  of  humble  peni- 
tence, which  must  always  sound  through  a  Christian  autobiography.  But  still,  a 
life  of  trust  and  following  Christ,  however  imperfectly,  does  yield  calm  remem- 
brances, which  nothing  else  does,  and  for  the  lack  of  which  nothing  can  compensate. 
If  we  would  lay  up  for  ourselves  against  old  age  the  treasure  of  such  calm  and 
humble  memories,  we  must  in  youth  and  manhood  choose  God  for  our  God,  and 
take  heed  to  foUow  Him,  though  we  may  be  singular ;  and  to  do  it  wholly. 

"  I  backward  cast  mine  e'e 
On  prospects  di-ear," 

said  poor,  brilliant  Eobert  Burns,  whose  youth  of  riotous  pleasure  burnt  itself  out 
before  he  was  forty,  and  had  been  fuU  of  self-reproach  and  bitterness  long  before 
the  end.  Many  a  life  which  grasps  at  delight  and  spurns  the  slow-going  puritanical 
ways  of  God-fearing,  sense-coercing  Christians,  comes  at  last  to  be  gnawed  by 
memories  sharp  and  poisonous  like  a  serpent's  tooth.  The  only  way  to  secure  that 
at  the  end  we  may  be  able  to  say,  "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,"  is  to  become 
Christ's  soldier.  Recruits  for  His  army  are  most  surely  enlisted  in  youth.  HI.  A 
LiFE-PEESERViNG  YouTHEUii  VIGOUR  TO  OLD  AGE.  This  "  old  youug  man,"  as  Thomas 
Fuller  calls  him,  followed  the  Lord  wholly;  therefore  he  "brought  forth  fruit  in 
old  age,"  and  the  aged  tree  was  "  full  of  sap  and  green  "  in  all  its  gnarled  branches. 
In  a  very  true  sense  a  man  may  keep  himself  young  all  his  days.  A  youth  and 
manhood  of  Christian  sobriety  and  self-restraint,  temperate,  chaste,  and  free  from 
the  "sins  of  youth,"  which  rot  "the  bones"  and  "lie  down  with"  their  victims 
"in  the  dust,"  is  likely  to  conserve  physical  vigour.  A  life  of  Christian  devotion 
and  faith  will  keep  its  spring  flowers  blowing  till  late  autumn,  and  blossom  and 
fruit  will  hang  together.  The  buoyancy,  carelessness,  hopefulness,  cheeriness  of 
youth  are  not  far  away  from  the  aged  heart,  which  lives  by  faith,  and  therefore 
dwells  at  ease,  and  is  glad  and  secure,  though  the  shadows  of  evening  be  falling. 

IV.    A  LIFE    STILL  EAGER  AT  LAST  FOR  FURTHER  ENTERPRISE.       That  is  the  tlUC  temper 

of  the  Christian  soldier,  seeking  the  hardest,  not  the  easiest,  work,  and  finding  in 
danger  an  attraction.  How  nobly  it  has  been  exemplified  in  many  a  mission  field, 
to  which,  whenever  disease  has  smitten  down  one,  two  have  been  ready  to  go  I  An 
old  Highland  legend  tells  how  his  foster-brothers  made  a  ring  round  the  chief  in  a 
battle,  and  how,  as  each  that  shielded  him  with  his  own  body  fell,  the  foster-father 
cried,  "Another  for  Hector,"  and  another  strode  into  the  fatal  empty  place.  The 
annals  of  the  Church  are  full  of  like  incidents.  The  oaU  for  another  to  stand  in 
some  deadly  breach  for  the  sake  of  the  elder  brother  has  never  been  sounded  in 
vain  ;  and  to-day  American  and  English  Christianity  is  showing  that  the  old  heroic 
fire  burns  yet,  in  the  men  who,  on  the  Congo  and  elsewhere,  have  hazarded  their 
lives  for  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  been  drawn  to  the  field  by  its  very  dangers. 
(A.  Maclaren.  D.D.)  Caleb's  vigour  of  mind  in  old  age  was  equal  to  his  vigour 

of  body  ia  youth.  As  his  strength  was  in  the  day  that  Moses  sent  him,  so  was  his 
strength  then  for  war,  both  to  go  out  and  to  come  in :  yea,  he  had  waxed  stronger 
and  stronger,  and,  as  is  said  of  the  righteous,  "  brought  forth  fruit  in  old  age."  As 
aU  other  graces,  true  faith  increases  in  its  exercise,  and  becomes  mightier  by  con- 
flict. They  who  are  strong  in  faith  when  young,  and  have  the  word  of  God  abiding 
in  them,  are  not  likely  to  become  weak  in  faith  when  old.  Interesting  sight,  to 
behold  one  grown  old  in  the  service  of  God,  still  a  veteran  in  the  ranks,  with  a 
resolution  never  to  yield  or  return  his  sword,  while  an  enemy  remains  unsubdued. 
One  had  thought  it  now  time  for  this  old  warrior  to  leave  the  field,  and  quietly  to 
enjoy  his  earthly  portion  ;  and  had  his  mind  been  affected  less  with  things  future 
than  things  present,  had  he  sought  rest  only  in  Canaan,  and  not  rest  in  heaven,  he 
would  have  so  thought  himseK.  It  is  a  lovely  sight,  and  what  must  command 
admu'ation  from  all,  to  see  an  old  believer  to  the  very  last  ready  to  testify  his  faith 
in  God  and  hope  of  the  promise  by  a  sacrifice  of  ease,  and  even  at  the  hazard  of  life. 
But  they  may  well  be  inspired  with  the  fortitude  of  unyielding  valour,  and  fight  even 
tiU  they  die,  who  are  under  the  command  of  Jehovah  and  the  banner  of  the  Cross ; 
for  a  crown  of  life  and  eternal  triumphs  await  the  slain — they  shall  rise  and  reign 
for  ever  in  the  kingdom  of  glory.  The  Christian,  whose  brightest  portion  lies 
beyond  this  world,  must  not  wonder  if,  as  age  creeps  on,  new  conflicts  arise,  and  if 
at  last,  before  he  take  possession  of  his  eternal  settlement,  the  Anakims,  a  people 
tall  and  great,  should  still  be  to  be  conquered.  They  are  all  an  easy  conquest 
through  Hun  that  hath  loved  us,  so  that  he  may  say  as  Caleb  (ver.  12).    (1^.  Seaton.) 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

Give  me  this  mountain. — Caleb's  choice  : — 1.  In  this  choice  we  find  a  revelation  of  a 
sturdy  character.  There  is  a  powerful  individuality  about  the  man  who  chooses  a 
mountain  as  his  ideal  possession.  It  means  climbing  and  hard  work.  I  knew  a 
veteran  who,  late  in  Ufe,  bought  a  rugged  mountain,  built  his  house  in  one  of  its 
hollows,  cultivated  a  portion  of  its  slope,  and  let  his  sheep  wander  for  a  living  over 
the  remaining  portion.  He  was  as  happy  in  breathing  the  clear  mountain  air,  and 
in  climbing  the  mountain  steeps,  as  Adam  was  in  Paradise.  There  was  wonderful 
congeniahty  between  him  and  his  surroundings.  There  was  a  great  deal  of  rugged 
grandeur  about  him.  To  come  into  contact  with  that  man  was  as  bracing  as  to 
climb  his  mountain,  and  to  breathe  the  pure  inspiring  air  upon  its  summit.  In 
Caleb  we  have  a  man  of  similar  robust  make — a  man  who  not  only  chose  the 
mountainous  district  of  Hebron  while  others  sought  the  plains,  but  also  chose  that 
mountain  while  as  yet  every  crevice  in  its  fastnesses  bristled  with  foes  of  giant 
stature.  Caleb  was  charmed  with  the  thought  of  a  possession  which  involved  most 
of  faith  and  heroism  in  making  his  own.  2.  This  choice  further  reveals  to  us  the 
continuity  of  his  character.  It  is  the  brave  man  who  stood  before  Israel  and  the 
ten  spies  who  brought  depressing  news  of  the  land,  and  exclaimed,  "  Let  us  go  up 
at  once  and  possess  it,"  that  now,  forty  years  later,  claims  it  as  his  privilege  to 
drive  the  sons  of  Anak  out  of  their  last  fastness.  He  had  done  enough  to  wear  out 
half  a  dozen  ordinary  men.  There  seemed  to  be  endless  wear  in  him.  This  is  the 
speech  of  an  old  soldier.  You  trace  the  same  man,  and  he  affirms — and  gives  proof 
of  his  affirmation  subsequently — that  he  has  the  same  vigour  as  of  old.  Throughout 
his  life  we  trace  one  master-feeling,  one  supreme  purpose,  one  distinctive  personality. 
This  unity  running  through  life  is  one  of  the  glories  of  a  great  character.  3.  Caleb's 
choice  shows  his  hopefulness  and  faith.  We  are  not  so  surprised  that  when  forty- 
five  years  of  age  he  should  have  taken  such  a  bright  view  of  things,  as  that  now  in 
prospect  of  such  a  difficult  task  he  should  say,  "  If  so  be  that  the  Lord  be  with  me, 

then "    This  is  not  the  "  if  "  of  doubt,  but  the  "  if  "  of  great  possibilities,  of  a 

large  hope,  and  of  a  mighty  faith  (E.V.).  "  It  may  be  that  the  Lord  will  be  with 
me,  and  I  shall  drive,"  &g.  He  is  willing  to  risk  all  upon  that  "  may  be."  He 
bases  all  upon  what  the  Lord  had  promised.  4.  This  choice  shows  Caleb's  wisdom. 
The  mountain  fastnesses  of  the  land  were  the  most  difficult  to  win,  but  having  been 
once  won  could  best  be  held,  and  would  finally  become  the  greatest  centres  of 
strength.  It  is  a  general  rule  of  life  that  what  is  hardest  won  is  worth  the  winning 
most,  and  is  the  most  lasting  good  when  won.  The  strength  of  a  life  as  well  as  of 
a  country  is  in  its  mountain  fastnesses  and  passes,  and  not  in  its  broad  and 
luxuriant  plains.  5.  The  whole  incident  reveals  the  sacredness  which  Caleb  and 
Joshua  attached  to  a  promise  given  by  Moses  forty  years  previously.  Moses  was 
dead,  but  the  promise  lived.  Caleb  repeated  it,  and  Joshua  honoured  it.  6.  Observe 
how  the  name  of  a  comparatively  unknown  father  is  connected  with  the  choice  now 
made  by  a  noble  son.  Caleb  is  usually  designated  as  the  "  son  of  Jephunneh." 
Jephunneh  seems  to  have  belonged  to  an  Edomite  tribe,  the  Kenezites,  but  all  that 
we  know  of  him  besides  is  that  he  was  the  father  of  Caleb.  All  that  we  know,  too, 
of  Nun  is  that  he  was  the  father  of  Joshua.  These  were  two  noble  sons  who  made 
their  fathers  famous.  Young  men,  take  note  of  that !  How  largely  the  father's  repu- 
tation is  in  the  hands  of  his  son !  "  A  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father."  (D.  Davies.) 
Hebron  therefore  became  the  inheritance  of  Caleb  .  .  .  because  that  he  wholly 
followed  the  Lord. — God  rewards  His  faithful  folloicers  : — I.  What  is  implied  in 
Caleb's  following  the  Lord  wholly.  Though  this  may  imply  a  great  deal,  yet  it 
cannot  imply  absolute  perfection.  1.  It  implies  that  his  heart  was  renewed.  He 
had  a  filial,  dutiful,  submissive  spirit,  which  the  Scripture  calls  a  perfect  heart. 
2,  It  implies  that  he  paid  an  external  respect  to  all  the  intimations  of  His  will. 
If  he  had  allowed  himself  in  one  sin,  or  habitually  offended  in  one  point,  he  would 
have  been  guilty  of  all.  It  is  essential  to  the  character  of  a  good  man  to  follow  the 
Lord  in  all  His  precepts  and  appointments.  "  This  is  the  love  of  God  that  we  keep 
His  commandments  ;  and  His  commandments  are  not  grievous."  3.  This  amiable 
character  implies  that  he  persevered  in  obedience  under  every  trial  and  temptation. 
Such  a  sincere,  uniform,  and  constant  course  of  obedience,  for  forty  or  fifty  years, 
fully  verified  the  Divine  declaration  that  "he  wholly  followed  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel."  But  this  is  not  all.  God  not  only  approved,  but  rewarded  his  obedience. 
II.  Why  the  Loed  rewarded  him  foe  following  Him  wholly.  1.  Because  his 
wholly  following  the  Lord  was  a  strong  expression  of  his  supreme  love  to  Him. 
Obedience  is  the  natural  expression  of  love.  "Ye  are  My  friends,"  says  Christ,  "  if 
vc  do  whatsoever  I  command  vou."    Neither  the  hosts  of  Pharaoh,  nor  the  absence 


CHAP.  XIV.]  JOSHUA.  221 

of  Moses,  nor  the  defection  of  Aaron,  nor  the  giants  of  Canaan,  could  cool  his  zeal 
or  warp  his  resolution.  He  determined  to  endure  unto  the  end  ;  and  unto  the  end 
he  endured.  He  loved  God  sincerely  and  supremely,  and  he  meant  to  express  his 
love  to  Him,  hy  uniform  obedience,  under  the  most  trying  circumstances.  This  God 
saw,  approved,  and  rewarded,  agreeably  to  His  own  declaration,  "  I  love  them  that 
love  Me;  and  those  that  seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me."  2.  Caleb  greatly  promoted  the 
glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  His  people,  by  his  uniform  and  persevering  obedience. 
This  rendered  him  one  of  the  principal  instruments  in  the  hand  of  God  of  conducting 
His  people  to  Canaan,  and  of  executing  His  wise  and  gracious  purposes  respecting 
them.  By  walking  with  God,  and  observing  His  wise  and  holy  providence,  he 
became  a  man  of  great  experimental  and  practical  knowledge,  which  enabled  him 
to  be  very  useful  in  guiding  and  instructing  an  ignorant  and  refractory  people.  It 
is  natural  to  suppose  that  he  had  a  principal  hand  in  forming  the  lives  and  manners 
of  that  generation,  which  was  educated  in  the  wilderness,  and  eventually  prepared 
for  the  promised  inheritance.  And  his  great  and  extensive  usefulness  was  a  good 
reason  why  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  should  reward  his  signal  services,  agreeably  to 
His  own  maxim,  "  Them  that  honour  Me,  I  will  honour."  3.  There  was  something 
very  distinguishing  in  Caleb's  conduct.  None  but  he  and  Joshua  persevered  in 
their  allegiance  to  God.  This  singularity  of  his  obedience  not  only  displayed,  but 
really  enhanced,  the  worth  of  his  virtue  and  piety,  and  laid  a  proper  foundation  for 
God  to  reward  him  with  peculiar  marks  of  His  favour.  Eeflections :  1.  What  great 
encouragement  have  all  true  saints  to  persevere  in  the  ways  of  well-doing !  2.  What 
great  benefit  may  those,  who  follow  the  Lord  whoUy,  derive  from  the  evils  and 
burdens  of  their  wearisome  pilgrimage !  Caleb  acquired  a  beautiful  character,  and 
a  distinguished  reward,  by  properly  improving  a  series  of  great  and  complicated 
trials.  He  learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  he  suffered.  3.  How  wiU  saints 
hereafter  admire  the  distinguishing  grace  of  God  by  which  they  were  conducted 
to  heaven  1  4.  Does  God  speak  respectfully  of  those  who  follow  Him  wholly, 
and  graciously  reward  their  faithful  labours  ?  Then  we  must  justly  conclude  that 
we  ought  to  honour  those  whom  He  delights  to  honour.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.) 
Following  the  Lord : — I.  What  is  included  in  the  expkession,  "  wholly  follow- 
ing THE  Lord  "  ?  It  is  impossible  to  take  the  words  in  their  strictly  literal  sense. 
There  are  so  many  slips,  so  many  wanderings,  so  many  shortcomings,  that  the 
strict  perfection  of  obedience  is  unattainable  by  any  of  the  children  of  Adam.  But 
the  expression  is  one  which,  nevertheless,  can  be  applied  to  those  who  honestly  and 
simply  give  themselves  up  through  Divine  grace  to  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
1.  A  realisation  that  the  will  of  God  is  paramount.  2.  A  resting  upon  the  Word  of 
God  as  clear  and  authoritative.  3.  A  laying  hold  of  the  promises  of  God  as  sure. 
n.  The  cibcumstances  under  which  it  is  said  of  Caleb  that  he  wholly  followed 
God.  1.  Caleb  wholly  followed  God,  though  others  who  were  in  the  same  position 
of  influence  with  himself  deserted  the  side  of  God  and  of  His  truth.  2.  Caleb 
wholly  followed  God,  though  the  whole  congregation  feared  to  walk  in  the  right  way. 
3.  Caleb  wholly  followed  the  Lord  in  spite  of  opposition.  The  current  of  excited 
feeling  set  dead  against  him,  and  threatened  to  bear  him  down.  And  you  will 
observe  that  it  was  not  the  mere  opposition  of  abuse,  insult,  and  prejudice;  it 
assumed  a  far  more  dangerous  form  (Num.  xiv.  10).  His  life  was  perilled.  Yet 
no  degree  of  violence,  however  determined,  could  drive  him  from  the  position 
which  he  had  been  enabled  to  take  up.  Oh,  what  encouragement  there  is  here  for 
those  who  find  themselves  in  the  midst  of  difficulties  and  trial  for  the  sake  of  the 
Gospel !  Caleb  was  a  man  of  like  passions  with  ourselves.  Naturally  he  had  the  same 
aversion  to  the  will  of  God  that  others  have ;  but  in  his  case  grace  was  strong,  faith 
triumphed.  And  what  a  glorious  sight  it  is  to  see,  when  you  behold  one  thus 
meeting  any  storm  of  indignation,  coldness,  or  scorn  from  man,  rather  than  forsake 
the  way  and  truth  of  the  Lord  Jesus !  {CD.  Marston,  M.A. )  Caleb  the  soldier  :— 
I.  Caleb's  fidelity.  FideUty  is  one  of  the  first  properties  of  a  soldier ;  and  it 
were  well  that  every  good  cause,  and  especially  that  of  Christ,  could  boast  of  such 
fidelity  as  gallant  men  have  often  shown  in  the  ranks  of  war.  Mere  boys  have 
bravely  carried  the  colours  of  their  regiment  into  battle ;  and  to  save  them  from 
falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  they  have  been  known,  when  they  themselves 
fell,  to  wrap  them  around  their  bodies  and  die  within  their  encrimsoned  folds.  An 
incident  more  heroic  still  occurred  on  one  of  those  fields  where  Austria  lately 
Buffered  disastrous  defeat.  When  the  bloody  fight  was  over,  and  the  victors  were 
removing  the  wounded,  they  came  on  a  young  Austrian  stretched  on  the  ground, 
whose  l3e  was  pooring  out  in  the  red  streams  of  a  ghastly  wound.    To  their 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiT. 

astonishment  he  declined  their  kind  services.  Recommending  others  to  be 
removed,  he  implored  them,  though  he  might  still  have  been  saved,  to  let  him 
alone.  On  returning  sometime  afterwards  they  found  him  dead — all  his  battles  o'er. 
But  the  mystery  was  exi^lained.  They  raised  the  body  to  give  it  burial ;  and  there, 
below  him,  lay  the  colours  of  his  regiment.  He  had  sworn  not  to  part  with  them ; 
and  though  he  clung  to  life,  and  tenderly  thought  of  a  mother  and  sisters  in  their 
distant  home,  he  would  not  purchase  recovery  at  the  price  of  his  oath  and  the 
expense  of  a  soldier's  honour — "  he  was  faithful  unto  death."  The  property  of  a 
good  soldier  was  eminently  illustrated  by  Caleb.  11.  Caleb's  courage.  Courage, 
which  has  in  all  ages  won  the  praise  of  poets  and  admiration  of  mankind,  is  a 
property  for  which  our  seamen  and  soldiers  have  been  long  and  eminently  dis- 
tinguished. Descended  from  ancestors  who  met  the  Eomans  on  the  sea-beach,  and 
those  brave  Norsemen  who  ploughed  the  stormiest  oceans  with  their  warlike  prows, 
our  countrymen  have  proved  themselves  worthy  of  their  sires  ;  and  the  repute  of  a 
courage  which  has  been  tested  in  many  a  hard-fought  field  has  proved,  under  God, 
the  strongest  bulwark  of  our  island-home.  It  is  remarkable,  and  highly  creditable  to 
the  resolution  and  bravery  of  our  soldiers,  that,  notwithstanding  all  the  wars  in 
which  they  have  engaged,  no  foreign  nation  flaunts  a  flag  of  ours  as  the  trophy  of 
its  victory,  and  of  our  defeat.  No  British  banner,  so  far  as  I  know,  hangs  drooping 
in  dusty  folds  from  the  walls  of  foreign  castle  or  cathedral  to  make  us  blush  ;  nor 
in  that  proud  pillar  the  great  Napoleon  raised,  whose  bronze,  formed  of  the  cannon 
taken  by  him  in  battle,  commemorates  his  victories,  is  there  an  ounce  of  metal  that 
belonged  to  a  British  gun.  I  have  heard  indeed  how  cowards,  probably  drawn  from 
the  scum  of  the  people,  hung  back  when  the  bugler  in  the  trenches  sounded  a  new 
assault,  and  refused  to  cross  ground  so  strewed  with  their  fallen  comrades  as  to 
resemble  a  field  carpeted  with  scarlet  cloth.  Yet,  whatever  may  be  their  defects, 
our  soldiers  have  been  commonly  as  much  distinguished  for  their  courage  when  the 
battle  raged  as  for  their  clemency  when  the  victory  was  won.  For  that  courage, 
true,  calm  courage,  which  does  not  He  in  insensibility  to  danger,  nor  in  the  violent 
animal  passion  which  may  bear  a  coward  forward  as  a  whklwind  does  the  dust,  or 
a  wave  the  seaweed  on  its  foaming  crest,  Caleb  presents  the  very  model  of  a  soldier. 
How  bravely  he  bears  himself  when  the  other  spies  prove  traitors !  The  source  of 
Caleb's  courage,  of  a  bravery  so  admirable  and  dauntless,  is  not  far  to  seek.  In  him, 
as  in  those  noble  Christian  soldiers  whom  I  have  mentioned,  and  in  others  also  who 
have  maintained  their  religion  in  the  camp,  courage,  if  it  did  not  spring  from,  was 
sustained  by  piety.  He  had  faith  in  God.  Therefore  he  did  not  fear  the  face  of 
man,  though  that  man  were  a  giant,  nor  of  death  itself.  From  the  same  lofty 
source,  and  none  other,  the  soldier  of  the  Cross,  he  who  fights  with  foes  more 
formidable  than  giants — the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  that  trinity  of  evil — is 
to  draw  his  courage.  More  of  it  may  be  needed  to  face  the  jeers  of  an  ungodly 
world  than  a  blazing  battery  of  cannon.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Caleb's  history — 
piety  portrayed  and  piety  promoted : — I.  Piety  pobtkayed  :  Caleb  "  wholly 
followed  the  Lord  God  of  Israel."  1.  Genuine  piety  is  the  sublimest  of  all  pur- 
suits. 2.  Genuine  piety  accords  with  the  constitutional  cravings  and  powers  of  the 
human  soul.  11.  Piety  promoted  :  "  Hebron  became  the  inheritance  of  Caleb." 
(Homilist.)  The  inheritance  of  Caleb  : — Caleb  is  one  of  those  men  whom  we  meet 
with  seldom  in  Bible  history,  but  whenever  we  do  meet  them  we  are  the  better  for 
the  meeting.  Bright  and  brave,  strong,  modest,  and  cheerful,  there  is  honesty  in 
his  face,  courage  and  decision  in  the  very  pose  of  his  body,  and  the  calm  confidence 
of  faith  in  his  very  look  and  attitude.  It  is  singular  that  there  should  be  cause  to 
doubt  whether  his  family  were  originally  of  the  promised  seed.  On  the  whole,  the 
preponderance  of  evidence  is  in  favour  of  the  opinion  that  Caleb's  family  were 
originally  outside  the  covenant,  but  had  become  proselytes  Uke  Hobab,  Eahab, 
Euth,  and  Heber.  Their  faith  was  pre-eminently  the  fruit  of  conviction,  and  not 
the  accident  of  heredity.  It  had  a  firmer  basis  than  that  of  most  Israelites.  It 
was  woven  more  closely  into  the  texture  of  their  being,  and  swayed  their  lives  more 
powerfully.  It  is  pleasing  to  think  that  there  may  have  been  many  such  prose- 
lytes ;  that  the  promise  to  Abraham  may  have  attracted  souls  from  the  east,  and 
the  west,  and  the  north,  and  the  south ;  that  even  beyond  the  limits  of  the  twelve 
tribes  many  hearts  may  have  been  cheered,  and  many  lives  elevated  and  purified  by 
the  promise  to  him,  ••  In  thee  and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be 
blessed."  Caleb  and  Joshua  had  believed  and  acted  alike,  in  opposition  to  the 
other  ten  spies  ;  but  Caleb  occupies  the  more  prominent  place  in  the  story  of  their 
heroism  and  faith.     Caleb  was  evidently  the  man  who  led  the  opposition  to  the  ten. 


CHAP,  xrv.]  JOSHUA,  223 

not  only  asserting  the  course  of  duty,  but  manifesting  the  spirit  of  contempt  and 
defiance  toward  the  faithless  cowards  that  forgot  that  God  was  with  them.  In  his 
inward  heart  Joshua  was  quite  of  his  mind,  but  probably  he  wanted  the  energetic 
manner,  the  ringing  voice,  the  fearless  attitude  of  his  more  demonstrative  com- 
panion. Certain  it  is  that  Caleb  reaped  the  chief  honour  of  that  day.  It  is 
beautiful  to  see  that  there  was  no  rivalry  between  them.  Not  only  did  Caleb  inter- 
pose no  remonstrance  when  Joshua  was  called  to  succeed  Moses,  but  he  seems  all 
through  the  wars  to  have  yielded  to  him  the  most  loyal  and  hearty  submission.  His 
affectionate  and  cordial  bearing  on  the  present  occasion  seems  to  show  that  not 
even  in  the  corner  of  his  heart  did  there  linger  a  trace  of  jealousy  toward  the  old 
friend  and  companion  whom  on  that  occasion  he  had  surpassed,  but  who  had  been 
set  so  much  higher  than  himself.  He  came  to  him  as  the  recognised  leader  of  the 
people — as  the  man  whose  voice  was  to  decide  the  question  he  now  submitted,  as 
the  judge  and  arbiter  in  a  matter  which  very  closely  concerned  him  and  his  house. 
And  yet  there  are  indications  of  tact  on  the  part  of  Caleb,  of  a  thorough  under- 
standing of  the  character  of  Joshua,  and  of  the  sort  of  considerations  by  which  he 
might  be  expected  to  be  swayed.  "Thou  knowest  the  thing  that  the  Lord  said 
unto  Moses  the  man  of  God  concerning  me  and  thee  in  Kadesh-barnea."  *•  Moses 
the  man  of  God."  Why  does  Caleb  select  that  remarkable  epithet?  Why  add  any- 
thing to  the  usual  name,  Moses  ?  The  use  of  the  epithet  was  honouring  to  all 
three.  That  which  constituted  the  highest  glory  of  Moses  was  that  he  was  so  much  at 
one  with  God.  God's  will  was  ever  his  law,  and  he  was  in  such  close  sympathy  with 
God  that  whatever  instructions  he  gave  on  any  subject  might  be  assumed  to  be  in 
accordance  with  God's  will.  Moreover,  in  calhng  him  "  the  man  of  God  "  when 
addressing  Joshua,  Caleb  assumed  that  Joshua  would  be  impressed  by  this  con- 
sideration, and  would  be  disposed  to  agree  to  a  request  which  was  not  only 
sanctioned  by  the  will  of  Moses,  but  by  that  higher  wiU  which  Moses  constantly 
recognised.  Having  fortified  his  plea  with  this  strong  reference  at  once  to  Moses 
and  to  God,  Caleb  proceeds  to  rehearse  the  service  which  had  led  to  the  promise  of 
Moses.  "  Forty  years  old  was  I  when  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  sent  me,"  &c. 
Why  does  Caleb  put  the  matter  in  this  way  ?  Why  does  he  not  couple  Joshua 
with  himself  as  having  been  faithful  on  that  never-to-be-forgotten  occasion  ?  The 
only  explanation  that  seems  feasible  is,  that  from  the  pre-eminent  position  of 
Joshua  this  was  unnecessary,  perhaps  it  might  have  appeared  even  unbecoming. 
A  soldier  making  a  request  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  and  recalling  some  service 
he  had  done  at  the  battle  of  Waterloo,  would  hardly  think  it  necessary,  or  even 
becoming,  to  say  how  the  Duke,  too,  had  been  there,  and  what  surpassing  service 
he  had  rendered  on  that  day.  "  I  brought  him  word  again,  as  it  was  in  my  heart." 
The  statement  is  made  in  no  boasting  spirit,  and  yet  what  a  rare  virtue  it  denotes ! 
Caleb,  as  we  now  say,  had  the  courage  of  his  convictions.  To  break  away  from 
your  own  set,  from  the  comrades  of  your  campaign,  to  upset  their  plans,  and 
counsel  those  in  power  to  a  course  diametrically  opposed  to  theirs,  is  one  of  the 
most  difficult  of  social  duties.  The  men  that  have  the  courage  of  their  convictions 
are  often  social  martyrs,  shut  out  from  the  fellowship  of  their  brethren,  shut  out 
from  every  berth  of  honour  or  emolument,  and  yet,  for  their  courage  and  honesty, 
worthy  of  infinitely  higher  regard  than  whole  hundreds  of  the  time-servers  that 
"  get  on  "  in  the  world  by  humouring  its  errors  and  its  follies.  Nevertheless,  though 
most  of  us  show  ourselves  miserably  weak  by  not  speaking  out  all  that  is  "in  our 
hearts,"  especially  when  the  honour  of  our  Lord  and  Master  is  concerned,  we  are 
able  to  appreciate  and  cannot  fail  to  admire  the  noble  exhibitions  of  courage  that 
we  sometimes  meet  with.  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  Caleb 
believed,  and  therefore  he  was  patient.  Five-and-forty  long  years  had  elapsed  since 
Moses,  the  man  of  God,  speaking  in  the  Spirit  of  God,  had  promised  him  a 
particular  inheritance  in  the  land.  It  was  a  long  time  for  faith  to  live  on  a 
promise,  but,  like  a  tree  in  the  face  of  a  cUff  that  seems  to  grow  out  of  the  solid 
rock,  it  derived  nourishment  from  unseen  sources.  It  was  a  long  time  to  be  looking 
forward ;  but  Caleb,  though  he  did  not  receive  the  promise  during  all  that  time, 
was  persuaded  of  it  and  embraced  it,  and  believed  that  at  last  it  would  come  true. 
It  seems  that  when  acting  as  one  of  the  twelve  spies,  Caleb  had  in  some  emphatic 
way  taken  his  stand  on  Hebron.  "  The  land  on  which  thy  foot  hath  trodden  will 
be  an  inheritance  to  thee."  Perhaps  the  spies  were  too  terrified  to  approach 
Hebron,  for  the  sons  of  the  Anakim  were  there,  and,  in  the  confidence  of  faith, 
Caleb,  or  Caleb  and  Joshua,  had  gone  into  it  alone.  Moses  had  promised  him 
Hebron,  and  now  he  came  to  claim  it  under  circumstances  that  would  have  induced 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

most  men  to  let  it  alone.  The  driving  out  of  the  Anakim  was  a  formidable  duty, 
and  the  task  might  have  seemed  more  suitable  for  one  who  had  the  strength  and 
enthusiasm  of  youth  on  his  side.  But  Caleb,  though  eighty -five,  was  yet  yoang. 
Age  is  not  best  measured  by  years.  He  was  a  remarkable  instance  of  prolonged 
vigour  and  youthful  energy.  "  As  yet  I  am  as  strong,"  &c.  As  one  reads  these 
words  of  Caleb,  one  recalls  the  saying  of  a  well-known  physician,  Dr.  Eichardson, 
that  the  human  frame  might  last  for  a  hundred  years  if  it  were  only  treated  aright. 
There  is  something  singularly  touching  in  Caleb's  asking  as  a  favour  what  was 
really  a  most  hazardous  but  important  service  to  the  nation.  Rough  though  these 
Hebrew  soldiers  were,  they  were  capable  of  the  most  gentlemanly  and  chivalrous 
acts.  There  can  be  no  higher  act  of  courtesy  than  to  treat  as  a  favour  to  yourself 
what  is  reaUy  a  great  service  to  another.  WeU  done,  Caleb !  In  the  spiritual  war- 
fare, too,  we  do  not  want  instances  of  the  same  spirit.  We  recall  Captain  Allan 
Gardiner  choosing  Tierra  del  Fuego  as  his  mission  sphere  just  because  the  people 
were  so  ferocious,  the  climate  so  repulsive,  and  the  work  so  difficult  that  no  one 
else  was  likely  to  take  it  up.  We  think  of  the  second  band  who  went  out  after 
Gardiner  and  his  companions  had  been  starved  to  death ;  and  still  more,  after  these 
were  massacred  by  the  natives,  of  the  third  detachment  who  were  moved  simply  by 
the  consideration  that  the  case  was  seemingly  so  desperate.  Or  we  think  of  Living- 
stone begging  the  directors  of  the  London  Missionary  Society,  wherever  they  sent 
him,  to  be  sure  that  it  was  "  Forward  "  ;  turning  aside  from  aU  previous  missionary 
stations,  and  the  comparative  ease  they  afforded,  to  grapple  with  the  barbarian 
where  he  had  never  begun  to  be  tamed  ;  his  eyes  thirsting  for  unknown  scenes  and 
untried  dangers,  because  he  scorned  to  build  on  the  foundation  of  others,  and 
thirsted  for  "fresh  vfoods  and  pastures  new."  We  think  of  him  persevering  in  his 
task  from  year  to  year  in  the  same  lofty  spirit ;  disregarding  the  misery  of  pro- 
tracted pain,  the  intense  longings  of  his  weary  heart  for  home.  A  crowd  of  noble 
names  comes  to  our  recollection — WUliams,  and  Judson,  and  Morrison,  and  Burns, 
and  Patteson,  and  Keith-Falconer,  and  Hannington,  and  Mackay — men  for  whom 
even  the  Anakim  had  no  terrors,  but  rather  an  attraction  ;  but  who,  serving  under 
another  Joshua,  differed  from  Caleb  in  this,  that  what  they  desired  was  not  to 
destroy  these  ferocious  Anakim,  but  to  conquer  them  by  love,  and  to  demonstrate 
the  power  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  to  change  the  vilest  reprobates  iato  sons  of 
God.  (W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.)  Caleb  the  Kenezite  : — I.  In  am.  probability  Caleb 
WAS  A  PEOSELYTE.  In  GcH.  xxxvi.  42,  Kenaz  is  named  as  one  of  the  Edomlte 
"  dukes."  In  1  Chron.  ii.  50,  Caleb  is  called  "  son  of  Hur."  Many  critics  assume 
that  this  indicates  that  he  was  adopted  into  the  family  of  Hur.  This  foreigner  had 
the  true  faith  of  an  Israelite.  Sometimes  those  whose  early  years  have  been  spent 
in  heathenism,  home  or  foreign,  become  noted  in  Christian  circles  for  their  moral 
virtues  and  foremost  in  every  good  work.  II.  Caleb  had  the  coueage  to  be  in  a, 
MiNOEiTY  OP  TWO  (Num.  xiv.  1-10).  The  secret  of  this  courage  was — 1.  His  faith 
in  God's  promise.  2.  That  the  Lord  put  His  fear  upon  their  enemies  (Num.  xiv. 
9).  3.  His  sense  of  the  Divine  presence.  HI.  Caleb's  whole  conduct  was  con- 
sistent. "I  wholly  foUowed"  may  mean — 1.  The  full  measure  of  his  days. 
2.  The  whole-heartedness  of  his  life.  IV.  At  the  end  of  his  careeb  he  receives 
HIS  REWARD.  1.  A  happy  old  age.  2.  An  unfailing  faith  in  God.  3.  The  people 
acknowledge  his  faithful  service.  4.  The  seed  of  Caleb  received  the  benefit 
resulting  from  the  father's  fidelity.  {Henry  Smith.)  Caleb's  inheritance: — 
I.  An  OLD  man's  inheritance.  Old  age  has  its  benedictions,  its  redeemed  pledges, 
its  inheritance.  The  faithful,  tireless  servant  of  God  has  his  portion,  though  he  has 
not  gathered,  sold,  and  joined  field  to  field.  Caleb  had  been  seeking  for  a  country, 
not  scattering  an  estate.  U.  An  old  man's  request.  "  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord  is  the  death  of  His  saints  "  ;  but  the  life  approaching  the  grave  with  a  weight 
of  honourable  service  is  alike  cherished  by  the  Lord.  It  must  have  been  so  with 
Caleb.  His  strength  was  as  great  for  war  as  when  he  received  his  commission.  The 
old  man  does  not  ask  for  land  he  may  cultivate,  on  which  to  raise  choice  varieties 
of  those  grapes  whose  single  clusters  weary  two  men  to  bear  them  on  a  staff.  He 
has  led  the  life  of  a  soldier  His  service  for  the  Lord  he  thinks  still  lies  in  that 
direction.  Those  giants  who  frightened  his  comrades  forty  years  ago  have  been  on 
his  mind  ever  since.  The  Israelites  are  not  likely  to  become  more  warlike  in  this 
rich  country  where  they  can  tUl  the  soil.  He  therefore  proposes  to  take  care  of 
those  enemies  of  God  himself.  When  Herod  the  Great  wished  to  rid  the  cliffs  of 
Arbela  of  robbers,  he  caused  Roman  soldiers  to  be  let  down  in  cages  to  fight  the 
outlaws  in  the  mouths  of  their  caves.    Caleb  did  not  ask  for  a  Hebrew  regiment  to 


CHAP.  XIV.]  JOSHUA.  225 

help  him  manage  those  sons  of  Anak.  Hebron,  that  ancient  city  built  seven  years 
before  Zoan  in  Egypt,  ought  not  to  remain  longer  in  the  hand  of  the  infidel.  AUen 
born  or  Hebrew,  he  cannot  bear  that  God's  people  should  be  defied  in  their  inherit- 
ance. In  after-years,  when  crusading  knights  took  this  city,  it  was  not  with  more 
righteous  purpose  than  that  which  stirred  the  heart  of  this  ancient  servant  of 
Jehovah.  III.  An  old  man's  bequest.  Caleb's  first  work  was  to  purify  his  inherit- 
ance. He  got  the  iniquity  out  of  it.  He  did  not  levy  tribute  on  the  brigands  and 
hve  luxuriously  on  the  income  of  robbery.  This  veteran  was  not  a  man  of  com- 
promises. The  enemies  of  God  and  righteousness  could  get  no  terms  with  him. 
His  hands  were  not  soiled  with  the  revenue  or  the  rents  of  a  nefarious  business. 
They  did  not  close  around  the  rewards  of  iniquity.  Something  of  the  spirit  which 
in  after-years  stirred  the  heart  of  the  Master  as  He  drove  the  money-changers  from 
the  temple  now  rested  on  this  old  man.  The  spirit  of  reform  was  strong  in  him, 
and  it  had  fuel  to  keep  it  burning,  for  it  was  fed  by  the  Spirit  of  God  and  of 
righteousness.  That  mountain  was  not  first  cleared  of  timber,  and  lawns,  parks, 
and  terraces  laid  out  and  built  on  its  slopes.  There  was  perhaps  no  summer-house 
commanding  a  view  of  the  distant  Mediterranean,  but  there  was  some  honourable 
estate  to  pass  onward.  There  was  a  remainder  which,  according  to  Divine  promise, 
would  go  to  his  descendants.  It  was  cleared  of  the  enemies  of  God.  Whoever 
received  it  would  get  an  inheritance  without  any  bill  of  attainder  against  it  for 
treason.  Such  a  man  as  Caleb  does  not  impoverish  his  estate,  though  he  lessen  it 
in  behalf  of  righteousness.  The  bare  mountain  was  to  him  a  better  property  than 
a  large  rent-roll  of  criminal  tenants.  (W.  E.  Cami^hell.)  Caleb's  reward  : — 
Caleb's  reward  illustrates  the  immense  difference  between  a  full  and  a  partial 
following  of  God.  It  is  the  difference  between  the  river  and  the  sea.  Both  are 
water,  and  the  river  is  all  well  in  its  way  and  is  useful  to  man  and  beast  in  small 
services.  The  sea  is  something  more  than  mere  water,  for  it  is  infinite ;  and  as  we  gaze 
upon  it  a  sense  of  its  immeasurableness  comes  over  us  as  never  is  the  case  when  we 
behold  the  largest  lake  or  the  Mississippi  river.  You  cannot  measure  a  whoUy- 
following  servant  of  the  living  God,  and  you  can  too  easily  take  the  dimensions  of 
a  half-and-half  Christian.  You  come  to  form  an  idea  of  about  how  much  money 
he  will  give  to  a  needy  enterprise,  about  how  much  time  to  a  pressing  work,  how 
long  he  will  stay  to  push  a  fresh  project  in  the  kingdom,  and  what  pleasures  and 
business  engagements  he  wiU  surrender  to  help  revival  efforts.  We  get  tired  of 
these  easy  measurements.  But  take  a  Caleb,  and  you  cannot  tell  what  Divine  energies 
are  locked  up  within  him  to  come  forth  when  needed.  I.  One  with  Caleb's  spieit 
SEES  cleablt  the  GOOD  THINGS  WHICH  GoD  HAS  PROMISED.  He  has  sight  and  insight. 
Twelve  good  men  go  over  the  same  country,  but  on  the  whole  they  see  differently, 
and  so  report  what  they  see.  Ten,  with  a  common-sense  vision  of  the  greatness  of 
the  foes,  and  making  no  allowance  for  hidden  and  supernatural  factors,  did  not  see 
things  as  they  were.  On  the  other  hand,  Caleb  saw  aU  that  they  did,  but  he  had  a 
power  of  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible,  and  so  of  seeing  truly.  The  man  who  followed 
fully  had  a  clear  eye,  a  single  eye,  and  his  whole  body  was  full  of  light.  In  this 
way  he  perceived  the  essential  weakness  and  rottenness  of  confederated  evil.  All 
achieving  men  have  the  same  vision,  and  so  they  persist  and  wait  and  return  to 
the  same  attack  untU  they  win  the  day,  and  the  people  that  once  bade  stone  them 
bring  out  garlands  for  their  graves.  II.  Men  of  Caleb's  spieit,  wholly  following 
THE  LoED,  have  THE  POWER  OF  STANDING  ALONE.  The  mass  move  with  the  stream. 
The  few  stand  like  a  rock.  No  one  knows  who  has  not  tried  it  what  it  costs  the 
soul  of  self-searching,  fear,  doubt,  sorrowful  parting  with  loved  friends,  and  the 
crushing  weight  of  popular  disapproval.  In  one  of  his  noblest  odes  Horace  speaks 
in  admiration  of  him  who  can  resist  the  heated  demands  of  citizens  who  call  for 
evil  things.  IH.  Those  who  are  like  Caleb  have  the  patience  of  faith.  It  was 
a  long  and  wearisome  time  before  the  word  of  God  to  His  trusty  servant  was 
fulfilled— more  than  a  whole  generation.  No  doubt  sometimes,  for  he  was  human, 
he  wondered  when  God  would  arise  and  His  enemies  be  scattered.  Have  you  seen 
some  new  possession  in  the  things  of  the  Spirit  ?  Eepeat  the  promise.  Though  it 
tarry,  wait  for  it ;  it  wiU  surely  come ;  it  will  not  tarry.  We  get  tir  ed  and  run 
away  from  our  own  prayers,  so  that  when  the  answer  comes  some  one  else  lives 
where  we  did  when  we  prayed.  Oh,  let  us  seek  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus 
Christ !  IV.  Men  of  Caleb's  spirit  have  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith. 
Hebron  was  beautifully  situated  upon  the  hills  to  the  south  of  Jerusalem,  where 
even  to-day  there  is  a  luxuriant  vegetation  and  the  grapes  as  of  Eschol  are 
gathered.     From  it  one  looks  over  a  wide  expanse  of  country,  eastward,  westward, 

15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

northward,  southward,  towards  Edom.  There  David  was  crowned  and  reigned 
seven  years.  It  was  a  splendid  reward  after  forty-three  years'  delay.  Perhaps  on 
the  great  expedition  with  the  spies  Caleb  marked  the  place  and  made  a  vow  that,  if 
the  people  entered  in,  he  would  have  that  abode,  and  the  picture  may  have  dwelt 
in  his  memory  to  cheer  him  in  long  years,  just  as  the  heavenly  hills  glow  before  the 
eye  of  Christian  faith.  But  even  at  last  the  prize  did  not  drop  into  his  hands  like 
a  ripe  apple.  No ;  he  must  draw  his  sword  and  expel  the  sons  of  Anak  who  were 
in  possession,  for  they  also  loved  the  high  places.  It  costs  to  get  the  best,  but  it  is 
wise  economy  to  be  satisfied  with  nothing  less.  Faith,  the  patience  of  faith,  the 
fight  of  faith,  the  reward  of  faith — these  come  before  us  in  this  ancient  story  with 
the  freshness  of  the  Word  of  God.  And  now  it  remains  to  be  said  that  there  is  a 
peculiar  need  of  Calebs  to-day,  when  great  things  are  offered  us  in  the  providences 
of  God  and  we  have  not  far  to  go  to  enter  into  them.  Make  it  personal.  Some- 
times the  Spirit  shows  you  while  you  are  praying  or  reading  or  listening  to  others 
an  attainment  beyond  all  you  have  ever  reached.  It  is  your  Hebron.  No  matter 
what  the  precise  form  of  the  blessing,  if  you  have  had  it  clearly  set  before  you,  it  is 
a  call  to  possess  it  by  faith,  just  as  Caleb  went  up  to  his  reward  among  the  hiUs  of 
Palestine.  All  that  your  feet  press  is  yours.  Saints  are  more  to  blame  for  not 
walking  upon  the  high  places  as  children  of  the  heavenly  King  than  sinners  are 
for  not  turning  to  God  in  penitence.  Saints  have  great  promises  made  to  them  and 
great  helps  offered  them.  Make  it  more  general.  Before  the  whole  Church  to-day 
there  is  a  promised  world  to  be  won  for  Christ  by  prayer  and  toU.  Our  charter 
gives  it  to  us  for  a  possession,  and  the  doors  are  wide  for  our  entrance  therein. 
Another  field  for  faith  is  the  deeper  Christianising  of  the  already  Christian  nations 
of  the  earth.  Dr.  Herron  says  in  his  little  book,  "The  Larger  Christ":  "The 
realisation  of  heaven  upon  earth  is  more  than  a  mystic  ideal.  It  is  the  crowning 
fact  of  history.  It  is  the  solid  reality  with  which  God  is  displacing  the  insubstantial 
materialism  underlying  the  rude  social  structures  of  human  selfishness.  It  is  the 
Divine  errand  upon  which  white-souled  prophets  have  walked  serene  through  a 
world  ablaze  with  scorn.  The  pledge  of  God  is  behind  it,  and  the  victorious  forces 
of  the  universe  are  allied  in  its  behalf.  The  Bible  is  its  written  warrant  and  the 
Cross  its  seal  which  none  can  break.  It  may  take  us  with  violence,  but  it  advances 
to  conquer.    And  the  saints  shall  judge  the  world  1 "    {Edward  N.  Fackard.) 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Intboduotion  to  Chaps,  xv.-xnt. — The  law  of  distrihution : — ^We  come  now 
in  earnest  to  the  distribution  of  the  land.  The  narrative  looks  very  bare,  but 
important  principles  and  lessons  underlie  it.  These  lists  of  unfamiliar  names 
look  like  the  dSbris  of  a  quarry — hard,  meaningless,  and  to  us  useless.  But 
nothing  is  inserted  in  the  Bible  without  a  purpose — a  purpose  that  in  some 
sense  bears  on  the  edification  of  the  successive  generations  and  the  various 
races  of  men.  1.  There  is  something  to  be  learned  from  the  maintenance  of 
the  distinction  of  the  twelve  tribes  and  the  distribution  of  the  country  into 
portions  corresponding  to  each.  In  some  degree  this  was  in  accordance  with 
Oriental  usage  ;  for  the  country  had  already  been  occupied  by  various  races, 
dwelling  in  a  kind  of  unity — the  Canaanites,  Amorites,  Hittites,  Hivites, 
Jebusites,  Perizzites,  and  Girgashites.  What  was  peculiar  to  Israel  was  that 
each  of  the  tribes  was  descended  from  one  of  Jacob's  sons,  and  that  their  re- 
lation to  each  other  was  conspicuously  maintained,  though  their  dwelling-places 
were  apart.  As  in  the  case  of  the  separate  states  of  North  America,  or  the  separate 
cantons  of  Switzerland,  it  provided  for  variety  in  unity ;  it  gave  a  measure  of  local 
freedom  and  independence,  while  it  maintained  united  action;  it  contriliu  <  d  to  the 
life  and  vigour  of  the  commonwealth  without  destroying  its  oneness  of  character 
or  imprJring  its  common  purpose  and  aim.  It  promoted  that  picturesque  variety 
often  found  in  little  countries,  where  each  district  has  a  dialect,  or  a  pronunciation, 
or  traditions,  or  a  character  of  its  own  ;  as  Yorkshire  differs  from  Devon,  or 
Lancashire  from  Cornwall ;  Aberdeenshire  from  Berwick,  or  Fife  from  Ayr.  As  in 
a  gpjden  variety  of  species  enlivens  and  enriches  the  effect,  so  in  a  commnnity 
variety  of  type  enriches  and  enlivens  the  common  life.    In  the  case  of  the  Hebrew 


CHAP.  XV.]  JOSHUA.  227 

commonwealth  the  distinction  of  tribes  became  smaller  as  time  went  on,  and  in 
New  Testament  times  the  three  great  districts  Judsea,  Samaria,  and  Galilee  showed 
only  the  survival  of  the  fittest.  A  larger  individuality  and  a  wider  variety  would 
undoubtedly  have  prevailed  if  a  good  spirit  had  continued  to  exist  among  the  tribes, 
and  if  all  of  them  had  shown  the  energy  and  the  enterprise  of  some.  But  the 
■wrong  spirit  came  in,  and  came  in  with  a  witness,  and  mischief  ensued.  For 
distinctions  in  race  and  family  are  apt  to  breed  rivalry  and  enmity,  and  not  only  to 
destroy  aU  the  good  which  may  come  of  variety,  but  to  introduce  interminable 
mischief.  For  many  a  long  day  the  Scottish  clans  were  like  Ishmael,  their  hand 
against  every  man  and  every  man's,  hand  against  them ;  or  at  least  one  clan  was 
at  interminable  feud  with  another,  and  the  country  was  wretched  and  desolate. 
Among  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  the  spirit  of  rivahy  soon  showed  itself,  leading  to 
disastrous  consequences.  Many  arrangements  of  our  modern  civilisation  that 
conduce  to  our  comfort  when  in  good  order  become  sources  of  unexampled  evil 
when  they  go  wrong.  The  drainage  of  houses  conduces  much  to  comfort  while  it 
works  smoothly ;  but  let  the  drains  become  choked,  and  send  back  into  our  houses 
the  poisonous  gases  bred  of  decomposition,  the  consequences  are  appalhng.  The 
sanitary  inspector  must  be  on  the  alert  to  detect  mischief  in  its  very  beginnings,  and 
apply  the  remedy  before  we  have  well  become  conscious  of  the  evil.  And  so  a 
vigilant  eye  needs  ever  to  be  kept  on  those  arrangements  of  Providence  that  are  so 
beneficial  when  duly  carried  out,  and  so  pernicious  when  thoughtlessly  perverted. 
"What  a  wonderful  thing  is  a  little  forbearance  at  the  beginning  of  a  threatened 
strife  !  What  a  priceless  blessing  is  the  soft  answer  that  turneth  away  wrath  ! 
2.  Again,  in  the  allocation  of  the  tribes  in  their  various  territories  we  have  an 
instance  of  a  great  natural  law,  the  law  of  distribution,  a  law  that,  on  the  whole, 
operates  very  beneficially  throughout  the  world.  In  society  there  is  both  a  centri- 
petal and  a  centrifugal  force ;  the  centripetal  chiefly  human,  the  centrifugal  chiefly 
Divine.  Men  are  prone  to  cluster  together;  God  promotes  dispersion.  In  the 
early  ages  they  clustered  about  the  plain  of  Shinar  ;  the  confusion  of  tongues 
scattered  them  abroad.  And  generally,  in  any  fertile  and  desirable  spot,  men  have 
been  prone  to  multiply  till  food  has  failed  them,  and  either  starvation  at  home  or 
emigration  abroad  becomes  inevitable.  And  so  it  is  that,  in  spite  of  their  cohesive 
tendency,  men  are  now  pretty  well  scattered  over  the  globe.  And  when  once  they 
are  settled  in  new  homes,  they  require  adaptation  to  their  locality,  and  begin  to  love 
it.  It  is  a  proof  of  Divine  wisdom  that  a  world  that  presents  such  a  variety  of 
climates  and  conditions  has,  in  all  parts  of  it,  inhabitants  that  enjoy  their  life.  The 
same  law  operates  in  the  vegetable  world.  Everywhere  plants  seem  to  discover  the 
localities  where  they  thrive  best.  There  is  always  a  place  for  the  plant,  and  a  plant 
for  the  place.  And  it  is  so  with  animals,  too.  The  elephant  in  the  spreading  forest, 
the  rabbit  in  the  sandy  down,  the  beaver  beside  the  stream,  the  caterpillar  in  the 
leafy  garden.  Some  of  the  great  deserts  that  our  imagination  used  to  create  in 
Africa  or  elsewhere  do  not  exist.  Barren  spots  there  are,  and  "  miry  places  and 
marshes  given  to  salt,"  but  they  are  not  many.  The  earth  has  been  replenished, 
and  the  purpose  of  God  so  far  fulfilled.  And  then  there  is  a  distribution  of  talents. 
"We  are  not  all  created  alike,  with  equal  dividends  of  the  gifts  and  faculties  that 
minister  in  some  way  to  the  purposes  of  our  life.  We  depend  more  or  less  on  one 
another ;  women  on  men,  and  men  on  women  ;  the  young  on  the  old,  and  some- 
times the  old  on  the  young ;  persons  of  one  talent  on  those  of  another  talent,  those 
with  strong  sinews  on  those  with  clear  heads,  and  those  with  clear  heads  on  those 
Y.'ith  strong  sinews ;  in  short,  society  is  so  constituted  that  what  each  has  he  has 
for  all,  and  what  all  have  they  have  for  each.  The  principle  of  the  division  of 
labour  is  brought  in ;  and  in  a  well-ordered  community  the  general  wealth  and 
well-being  of  the  whole  are  better  promoted  by  the  interchange  of  offices  than  if 
each  person  within  himself  had  a  little  stock  of  all  that  he  required.  The  same 
law  of  distribution  prevails  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  It  was  exemplified  in  an 
interesting  way  in  the  case  of  our  Lord's  apostles.  No  one  of  these  was  a  duplicate 
of  another.  And  throughout  the  history  of  the  Church  the  distribution  of  gifts 
has  been  equally  marked.  Chrysostom  and  Augustine,  Jerome  and  Ambrose, 
Bernard  and  Anselm,  were  all  of  the  same  stock,  but  not  of  the  same  type.  At  the  ■ 
Reformation  men  of  marked  individuality  were  provided  for  every  country.  The 
missionary  field  has  in  like  manner  been  provided  for.  India  has  had  her  Schwartz, 
her  Carey,  her  Duff,  and  a  host  of  others;  China  her  Morrison,  Burmah  her 
Judson,  Polynesia  her  Williams,  Africa  her  Livingstone.  The  most  unattractive 
and  inhospitable  spots  have  been  supplied.     Greenland  was  not  too  cold  for  the 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRAT OR.  [chap.  xt. 

Moravians,  nor  the  leper-stricken  communities  of  India  or  Africa  too  repulsive.   And 
never  were  Christian  men  more  disposed  than  to-day  to  honour  that  great  Christian 
law  of  distribution — "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every 
creature."     It  was  a  great  providential  law,  therefore,  that  was  recognised  in  the 
partition  of  the  land  of  Canaan  among  the  tribes.     Provision  was  thus  made  for  so 
scattering  the  people  that   they  should  occupy  the   whole  country,  and  become 
adapted   to  the  places  where  they  settled  and  to   the   pursuits  proper  to  them. 
3.  StiU  further,  in  the  allocation  of  the  tribes  in  their  various  territories  we  have 
an  instance  of  the  way  in  which  God  designed  the  earth  to  minister  most  effectually 
to  the  wants  of  man.     We  do  not  say  that  the  method  now  adopted  in  Canaan  was 
the  only  plan  of  distributing  land  that  God  ever  sanctioned ;  very  probably  it  was 
the  same  method  as  had  prevailed  among  the  Canaanites  ;  but  it  is  beyond  doubt 
that,  such  as  it  was,  it  was  sanctioned  by  God  for  His  chosen  people.      It  was  a 
system  of  peasant  proprietorship.     The  whole  landed  property  of  the  country  was 
divided   among  the  citizens.      The  extremes  of  wealth  and  poverty  were  alike 
checked     and     discouraged,     and     the    lot     eulogised     by    Agur — a    moderate 
competency,    neither    poverty    nor    riches — became    the     general    condition     of 
the  citizens.    It  is  difficult  to  tell  what  extent  of  land  fell  to  each  family.     The 
portion  of  the  land  divided  by  Joshua  has  been  computed  at  twenty-five  million 
acres.     Dividing  this  by  600,000,  the  probable  number  of  families  at  the  time  of  the 
settlement,  we  get  forty-two  acres  as  the  average  size  of  each  property.    For  a 
Eoman  citizen,  seven  acres  was  counted  enough  to  yield  a  moderate  maintenance, 
so  that  even  in  a  country  of  ordinary  productiveness  the  extent  of  the  Hebrew 
farms  would,  before  further   subdivision   became   necessary,    have  been  ample. 
When  the  population  increased  the  inheritance  would  of  course  have  to  be  sub- 
divided.    But  for  several  generations  this,  so  far  from  an  inconvenience,  would  be 
a  positive  benefit.      It  would  bring  about  a  more  complete  development   of   the 
resources  of  the  soil.     The  great  rule  of  the  Divine  economy  was  thus  honoured — 
nothing  was  lost.     We  in  this  country,  after  reaching  the  extreme  on  the  opposite 
side,  are  now  trying  to  get  back  in  the  direction  of  this  ancient  system.     All  parties 
seem  now  agreed  that  something  of  the  nature  of  peasant  proprietorship  is  necessary 
to  solve  the  agrarian  problem  in  Ireland  and  in  Great  Britain  too.     It  is  only  the 
fact  that  in  Britain  commercial  enterprise  and  emigration  afford  so  many  outlets 
for  the  energies  of  our  landless  countrymen  that  has  tolerated  the  abuses  of  property 
so  long  among  us — the  laws  of  entail  and  primogeniture,  the  accumulation  of  pro- 
perty far  beyond  the  power  of  the  proprietor  to  oversee  or  to  manage,  the  employ- 
ment of  land  agents  acting  solely  for  the  proprietor,  and  without  that  sense  of 
responsibihty  or  that  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  people  which  is  natural  to  the 
proprietor  himself.     It  is  little  wonder  that  theories  of  land-possession  have  risen 
up  which  are  as  impracticable  in  fact  as  they  are  wild  and  lawless  in  principle. 
Such  desperate  imaginations  are  the  fruit  of  despair — absolute   hopelessness  of 
getting  back  in  any  other  way  to  a  true  land  law — to  a  state  of  things  in  which  the 
land  would  yield  the  greatest  benefit  to  the  whole  nation.     4.  In   the  arrange- 
ments for  the  distribution  of  the  land  among  the  twelve  tribes  we  may  note  a  proof 
of  God's  interest  in  the  temporal  comfort  and  prosperity  of  men.    It  is  not  God 
that  has  created  the  antithesis  of  secular  and  spiritual,  as  if  the  two  interests  were 
like  a  see-saw,  so  that  whenever  the  one  went  up  the  other  must  go  down.     Things 
in  this  world  are  made  to  be  enjoyed,  and  the  enjoyment  of  them  is  agreeable  to  the 
will  of  God,  provided  we  use  them  as  not  abusing  them.     In  ordinary  circumstances 
God  intends  men  to  be  fairly  comfortable ;  He  does  not  desire  life  to  be  a  perpetual 
struggle,  or  a  dismal  march  to  the  grave.     The  very  words  in  which  Christ  counsels 
us  to  consider  the  lilies  and  the  ravens,  instead  of  worrying  ourselves  about  food 
and  clothing,  show  this ;  for,  under  the  Divine  plan,  the  ravens  are  comfortably 
fed  and  the  lilies  are  handsomely  clothed.      The  characteristic  of   a  good  man, 
when  he  enjoys  a  share  of  worldly  prosperity,  is,  that  he  does  not  let  the  world 
become  his  idol — it  is  his  servant,  it  is  under  his  feet ;  he  jealously  guards  against 
its  becoming  his  master.      His  effort  is  to  make   a  friend  of  the  mammon  of 
unrighteousness,  and  to  turn  every  portion  of  it  with  which  he  may  be  entrusted  to 
such  a  use  for  the  good  of  others  that  when  at  last  he  gives  in  his  account,  as 
steward  to  his  Divine  Master,  he  may  do  so  with  joy,  and  not  with  grief.     (W.  O. 
Blaikie,  D.D.) 

Vers.    1-12.   This    then    was   the  lot   of .  .  .  Judah.  —  The   inheritance    of 
Judah  : — Judah  was  the  imperial  tribe,  and  it  was  fitting  that  he  should  be  planted 


CHAP.  XV.]  JOSHUA.  22& 

in  a  conspicuous  territory.  Judah  and  the  sons  of  Joseph  seem  to  have  obtained 
their  settlements  not  only  before  the  other  tribes,  but  in  a  different  manner.  They 
did  not  obtain  them  by  lot,  but  apparently  by  their  own  choice  and  by  early 
possession.  Judah  was  not  planted  in  the  heart  of  the  country.  That  position 
was  gained  by  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  the  children  of  Joseph,  while  Judah 
obtained  the  southern  section.  The  territory  of  Judah  was  not  pre-eminently 
fruitful ;  it  was  not  equal  in  this  respect  to  that  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh.  It 
had  some  fertile  tracts,  but  a  considerable  part  of  it  was  mountainous  and  barren. 
It  was  of  four  descriptions — the  hill  country,  the  valley  or  low  country,  the  south, 
and  the  wilderness.  "  The  hill  country,"  says  Dean  Stanley,  "  is  the  part  of 
Palestine  which  best  exemplifies  its  characteristic  scenery ;  the  rounded  hills,  the 
broad  valleys,  the  scanty  vegetation,  the  villages  and  fortresses,  sometimes  standing, 
more  frequently  in  ruins,  on  the  hill  tops ;  the  wells  in  every  valley,  the  vestiges 
of  terraces  whether  for  corn  or  wine."     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  13-19.  To  him  will  I  give  Achsah  my  daughter  to  wife. — Othniel's 
conquest  of  Debir  : — I.  The  spieit  which  influenced  Caleb  in  the  disposal  oe 
AcHSAH.  He  sought  to  unite  her  to  a  man — (1)  Honourable  for  his  zeal  and  energy ; 
(2)  conspicuous  for  his  bravery ;  (3)  and  willing  to  use  his  strength  in  the  way  of  the 
Lord's  commandments.  (4)  It  seems  likely  also  that  Caleb  sought  to  unite  his 
daughter  to  one  who  was  in  a  social  station  akin  to  her  own.  The  promise  was  not 
to  the  man  who  should  first  enter  Kirjath-sepher.  This  may  have  been  the  nature  of 
the  similar  promise  at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  under  David,  although  it  seems  by  no 
means  certain  that,  even  in  this  instance,  David  did  not  refer  to  the  captain  who 
should  first  bring  his  company  into  Jebus  and  smite  the  garrison.  He  should 
be  chief  captain  (2  Sam.  v.  8 ;  1  Chron.  xi.  6).  However  this  may  have  been, 
Caleb's  promise  ran,  "  He  that  smiteth  Kirjath-sepher,  and  taketh  it,  to  him,"  &c. 
No  man  single-handed  could  "  smite  and  take "  a  fortified  city ;  and  thus  the 
promise  probably  refers  to  the  leaders  of  the  army  who  were  under  Caleb.  This 
view  has  also  the  advantage  that  it  does  not  exhibit  to  us  an  honourable  man  like 
Caleb  putting  up  his  daughter  as  the  object  of  a  wretched  scramble,  where  a  mere 
accident  of  a  stumble  or  a  wound  might  decide  whose  she  should  be.  Possibly 
there  were  but  few  of  the  commanders  under  Caleb  officially  qualified  to  lead  one  or 
more  divisions  of  the  army  against  Debir ;  and  of  these  Othniel  might  first  have 
volunteered,  or  he  only  might  have  volunteered  to  lead  the  attack.  Any  way,  out 
of  regard  for  Achsah,  Othniel  was  one  who  offered  to  conduct  the  assault,  and  he 
succeeded.  II.  The  harmony  between  the  fathek  and  the  daughteb.  1.  Achsah 
accorded  with  her  father's  will  and  with  the  custom  of  the  age.  There  can  be  no 
doHbt  but  that,  at  this  period,  a  father  was  held  to  have  an  absolute  right  to  the 
disposal  of  his  daughter's  hand  (Gen.  xxix.  18-28 ;  Exod.  xxi.  7-11 ;  1  Sam.  xvii. 
25,  &c.).  It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  a  father  would  not  consult  his  daughter's 
wishes.  2.  She  had  confidence  in  her  father's  love,  notwithstanding  her  recogni- 
tion of  his  authority.  She  asked  for  a  larger  dowry  (ver.  19).  On  leaving  her 
father,  to  cleave  to  her  husband,  we  thus  find  her  seeking  her  husband's  interest. 
3.  Her  father  cheerfully  responded  to  her  request.  The  confidence  which  was  bold 
to  ask  was  met  by  an  affection  which  was  pleased  to  bestow.     III.  The  honourable 

CH.4.RACTER  IN  WHICH  THIS  BRIEF  HISTORY  INTRODUCES  OtHNIEL.       He  COmeS   bcforC    US 

as  a  man  of  courage,  willing  to  risk  his  life  for  the  woman  he  loved.  He  is  seen  to 
perhaps  even  more  advantage  in  not  preferring  the  request  which  Achsah  prompted 
him  to  make.  He  may  have  refused  to  comply  with  his  wife's  wishes.  The  history 
does  not  actually  say  this ;  it  merely  shows  that  Achsah  made  her  request  herself. 
Othniel  was  bold  enough  to  fight  ;  he  seems  to  have  been  too  manly  to  have 
allowed  himself  to  ask  for  this  addition  to  what  was  probably  already  a  just  and 
good  inheritance.  He  was  brave  enough  to  do  battle  against  Debir ;  he  was  not 
mean  enough  to  beg.  If  Achsah  needed  a  larger  do^vry,  such  a  request  would  come 
better  from  herself.  (F.  G.  Marchant.)  A  chance  for  ability  : — There  begins 
the  test  of  talent  and  force  and  quality  in  men.  The  speech  is,  Come,  now !  the 
palm  be  to  the  brave,  the  crown  to  him  who  wins  it.  Up  to  a  certain  point  all 
things  seem  to  be  appointed,  settled,  almost  arbitrarily  distributed  ;  but  then  there 
are  chances  in  life  that  seem  to  come  afterwards,  as  it  were,  amongst  ourselves, 
competitions  of  a  personal  and  social  kind.  How  early  this  competitive  spirit  was 
developed,  and  how  wonderfully  it  has  been  preserved  through  all  history  I  The 
spirit  of  Providence  seems  to  say,  in  homeliest  language,  now  and  again.  Here  is  a 
chance  for  you ;  you  had  something  to  begin  with,  to  that  you  can  add  more,  by 


230  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

pluck,  bravery,  force — to  the  war  I    We  need  such  voices ;  otherwise  we  would 
soon  slumber  off,  and  doze  away  our  handful  of  years,  and  awake  to  find  that  the 
day  had  gone.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)        Thou  hast  given  me  a  south  land;  give 
me  also  springs  of  water. — Noble  discontent  : — 1.  Such  noble  discontent,  such 
aspiration  for  higher  and  better  things,  should  urge  us  on  in  the  realm  of  the  daily 
duty.     Simply  the  south  land  of  a  measurable  and  merely  respectable  discharge  of 
the  daily  duty  should  never  satisfy  us.      We  should  be  stirred  with  a  noble  dis- 
content for  the  water  springs  of  the  best  possible  doing  it.     Thus  we  transform  our- 
selves from  drudges   into  artists.      Thus,  too,  we  compact  ourselves  in  noble 
character.    2.  In  the  realm  of  intellectual  advance  we  should  be  stirred  with  this 
noble  discontent ;  we  should  turn  from  a  merely  general  and  surface  and  news- 
paper information  toward  the  springs  of  water  of  a  thorough  and  accurate  know- 
ledge.   3.  In  the  realm  of  the  best  good  of  the  community  in  which  we  dwell  we 
should  be  stirred  with  a  noble  discontent.      The  south  land  of   a  merely  usual 
municipal  security  and  order  ought  not  to  satisfy  us ;  we  should  be  restless  with 
discontent  until  the  springs  of  water  of  a  high  moral  atmosphere  and  action  are 
predominant.     4.  In  the  realm  of  Christian  experience  we  ought  to  be  stirred  with 
such  noble  discontent ;  we  ought  to  leave  behind  us  the  south  land  of  a  merely 
usual  and  routine  experience,  and  seek  the  springs  of  water  of  the  peace  and  joy 
and  strength  of  a  transfiguring  likeness  to  our  Lord  (1  Cor.  iii.  10,  16).     {W.  Hoyt, 
D.D.)        The  upper  springs,  and  the   nether  springs. — The  upper  and  nether 
springs : — ^I.  The  upper  speings,  as  they  pictuee  forth  the  joi-soueces  of  xhb 
HIGHER  NATURE.    "  My  soul  thirsteth  for  God — the  living  God ! "    Nor  need  we  be 
disappointed.    It  is  pensive  to  think  that  some  thirsts,  and  honest  thirsts  too,  must 
be  disappointed.    Not  to  aU  are  given  possibilities  equal  to  their  desires.     Their 
ideals  are  above  their  realisation  1     But  none  need  be  disappointed  in  God  1    Christ 
has  opened  up  a  free  and  full  channel  of  communication.     "  It  pleased  the  Father 
that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell."    We  have  read  of  waters  in  the  East  which, 
copious  at  some  times,  are  scarce  at  others.    To-day  the  waters  pour  forth  their 
freshening  streams,  irrigate  the  land,  and  satisfy  the  thirst  of  man  and  beast; 
to-morrow  the  faithless  well  is  dry.    Not  so  with  Christ.    In  Him  the  waters  dwell. 
But  more  than  this,  Christ  is  not  only  the  fulness  of  God,  He  is  the  available 
fulness  for  us.     1.  Take  fellowship  with  God.    Inspired  words  used  about  this  are 
not  the  language  of  poetic  fiction  or  overwrought  religious  feeling.    They  are  the 
actual  experiences  of  meditative,  devout,  earnest,  inspired  men.      •'  God  is  the 
strength  of  my  heart  and  my  portion  for  ever."    2.  Take  likeness  to  God.    Who 
can  conceive  of  a  more  magnificent  ideal  than  God-life  in  the  soul  ?    Be  ye  holy  as 
your  Father,  &c.     Be    ye   followers  of    God,  &c.      Herein   consists  our  true 
life.     Not    in    the    mere    culture  of    art-faculty,  but  in    the    growth    of    the 
moral  likeness  to  God  I     We  become  happier  as  we  become  more  like  Him. 
Less  vexed  with  trifles,   less  anxious  about  losses  provided  they  bring  gains 
to  the  soul,  less  conformed  to  the  world,  more  restful  in  the  love  of  Godl    3.  Take 
the  service  of  God.      Christ  does  not  call  us  to  His  work  merely  that  we  may 
work,  that  our  moral  nature  may  have  something  to  do ;  the  Lord  hath  need  of  us. 
I  say  this  not  only  dignifies  life,  it  makes  it  delightful  (John  iv.  34).     These  are 
upper  springs !     Co-workers  together  with  God  I     4.  Take  the  friends  of  God. 
These  are  yours  I    We  are  made  for  each  other  !    Church  life  is  designed  to  draw 
forth  common  sympathies  "and  common  purposes.    We  are  pilgrims  to  the  same 
shrine ;   soldiers  in  the  same  battlefield  ;   fruit-gatherers  in  the  same  vineyard ; 
children  of  the  same  Father.    Thoughtful  Christian  friendship  is  one  of  the  choicest 
blessings  we  can  enjoy.    5.  Take  the  future  of  God's  children.    I  love  to  think  of 
them  at  home  there.      Upper  springs  coming  from  the  throne  of  God  and   the 
Lamb:  "  They  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more."    Shall  we  drink  of 
those  upper  springs?    I  hope  sol    Do  we  love  Christ  now?     Do  we  enjoy  HiB 
service  now  ?    If  so,  when  the  morning  of  eternity  comes  to  us,  we  shall  know  in  a 
higher  sense  than  we  have  ever  known  on  earth  the  meaning  of   "  the  upper 
springs."    n.  The  nether  springs,  as  they  illustrate  the  mere  satisfactions  of 
THE  LOWER  NATURE.    Take  caro  lest  all  life  plays  upon  the  surface !    Take  care  lest 
all  life's  drinking  be  at  the  nether  springs.    I  am  not  now  speaking  of  the  gross- 
ness  of  sensualism,  but  of  mere  sensationalism.     It  is  possible  to  live  a  merely 
surface  life.    Let  us  remember  that  there  are  eyes  and  ears  within  us,  that  the 
invisible  world,  the  world  which  embraces  God  and  judgment   and  eternity,  is 
always  speaking  through  many  voices  to  our  conscience  and  heart.    Mere  earthly 
aims  are  nether  springs.     Some  people  are  always  drinking  at  the     springs  of 
position  and  success.    They  attempt  to  please  men. 


CHAP,  xn.]  JOSHUA.  231 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

Veks.  1-10.  The  lot  of  .  .  ,  Joseph. — The  inheritance  of  Joseph : — Next  to  Jadah, 
the  most  important  tribe  was  Joseph ;  that  is,  the  double  tribe  to  which  his  two  sons 
gave  names,  Ephrahn  and  Manasseh.  In  perpetual  acknowledgment  of  the  service 
rendered  by  Joseph  to  the  family,  by  keeping  them  alive  in  the  famine,  it  was 
ordained  by  Jacob  that  his  two  sons  should  rank  with  their  uncles  as  founders  of 
tribes  (Gen.  xlviii.  5).  It  was  also  prophetically  ordained  by  Jacob  that  Ephraim, 
the  younger  son,  should  take  rank  before  Manasseh  (Gen.  xlviii.  19).  The  privilege 
of  the  double  portion,  however,  remained  to  Manasseh  as  the  elder  son.  Hence,  in 
addition  to  his  lot  in  Gilead  and  Bashan,  he  had  also  a  portion  in  Western  Palestine. 
But  Ephraim  was  otherwise  the  more  important  tribe ;  and  when  the  separation  of  the 
two  kingdoms  took  place,  Ephraim.  often  gave  his  name  to  the  larger  division.  And 
in  the  beautiful  prophetic  vision  of  Ezekiel,  when  the  coming  reunion  of  the  nation 
is  symbolised,  it  is  on  this  wise  (Bzek.  xxxvii.  16,  17).  The  superiority  allotted 
to  Ephraim  was  not  followed  by  very  happy  results ;  it  raised  an  arrogant  spirit  in 
that  tribe.  The  delimitation  of  the  tribes  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  is  not  easy  to 
follow,  particularly  in  the  A.V.,  which  not  only  does  not  translate  very  accurately,  but 
uses  some  English  expressions  of  uncertain  meaning.  The  R.V.  is  much  more  helpful, 
correcting  both  classes  of  defects  in  its  predecessor.  Yet  even  the  R.V.  sometimes 
leaves  us  at  a  loss.  It  has  been  supposed,  indeed,  that  some  words  have  dropped 
out  of  the  text.  Moreover,  it  has  not  been  found  possible  to  ascertain  the  position 
of  all  the  places  mentioned.  The  portion  of  the  land  occupied  by  Ephraim  and 
Manasseh  is,  however,  on  the  whole,  very  clearly  known,  just  as  their  influence  on 
the  history  of  the  country  is  very  distinctly  marked.  In  point  of  fact,  the  lot  of 
Joseph  in  Western  Palestine  was,  in  many  respects,  the  most  desirable  of  any.  It 
was  a  fertile  and  beautiful  district.  It  embraced  the  valley  of  Sliecliem,  the  first 
place  of  Abraham's  sojourn,  and  reckoned  by  travellers  to  be  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  spots,  some  say  the  most  beautiful  spot,  in  Palestine.  Samaria,  at  the 
head  of  another  valley  celebrated  for  its  "  glorious  beauty,"  and  for  its  '*  fatness  "  or 
fertility  (Isa.  xxviii.  1),  was  at  no  great  distance.  Tirzah,  a  symbol  of  beauty,  in 
the  Song  of  Solomon  (vi.  4)  was  another  of  its  cities,  as  was  also  Jezreel,  "  a  lovely 
position  for  a  capital  city."  On  the  other  hand,  this  portion  of  the  country  laboured 
under  the  disadvantage  of  not  having  been  well  cleared  of  its  original  inhabitants. 
The  men  of  Ephraim  did  not  exert  themselves  as  much  as  the  men  of  Judah.  This 
is  apparent  from  what  is  said  in  ver.  10,  and  also  from  Joshua's  answer  to  the  request 
of  Ephraim  for  more  land  (chap.  xvii.  15-18).  In  the  definition  of  boundaries  we 
have  first  a  notice  applicable  to  Joshua  as  a  whole,  then  specifications  applicable  to 
Ephraim  and  Manasseh  respectively.  The  southern  border  is  delineated  twice  with 
considerable  minuteness,  and  its  general  course,  extending  from  near  the  Jordan  at 
Jericho,  past  Bethel  and  Luz,  and  down  the  pass  of  Bethhoron  to  the  Mediterranean, 
is  clear  enough.  The  border  between  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  is  not  so  clear,  nor 
the  northern  border  of  Manasseh.  It  is  further  to  be  remarked  that,  while  we  have 
an  elaborate  statement  of  boundaries,  we  have  no  list  of  towns  in  Ephraim  and 
Manasseh  such  as  we  have  for  the  tribe  of  Judah.  This  gives  countenance  to  the 
supposition  that  part  of  the  ancient  record  has  somehow  dropped  out.  We  find, 
however,  another  statement  about  towns  which  is  of  no  small  significance.  At 
ver.  9  we  find  that  several  cities  were  appropriated  to  Ephraim  that  were 
situated  in  the  territory  of  Manasseh.  And  in  like  manner  several  cities  were  given 
to  Manasseh  which  were  situated  in  the  tribes  of  Issachar  and  Asher.  Of  these  last 
the  names  are  given  (chap.  xvii.  11).  They  were  Bethshean,  Ibleam,  Dor,  Endor, 
Taanach,  and  Megiddo.  Some  of  them  were  famous  in  after-history.  Bethshean  was 
the  city  to  whose  wall  the  body  of  Saul  and  his  sons  were  fixed  after  the  fatal  battle 
of  Gilboa ;  Ibleam  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Naboth's  vineyard  (2  Kings  ix.  25, 27) ; 
Endor  was  the  place  of  abode  of  the  woman  with  a  famihar  spirit  whom  Saul  went 
to  consult ;  Taanach  was  the  battlefield  of  the  kings  of  Canaan  whom  Barak  defeated, 
and  of  whom  Deborah  sang  (Judg.  v.  19).  As  for  Megiddo,  many  a  battle  was 
fought  in  its  plain.  We  can  only  conjecture  why  these  cities,  most  of  which  were 
in  Issachar,  were  given  to  Manasseh.  They  were  strongholds  in  the  great  plain  of 
Esdraelon,  where  most  of  the  great  battles  of  Canaan  were  fought.  For  the  defence 
of  the  plain  it  seemed  important  that  these  places  should  be  held  by  a  stronger  tribe 
than  Issachar.  Hence  they  appear  to  have  been  given  to  Manasseh.  But,  hke 
Ephraim,  Manasseh  was  not  able  to  hold  them  at  first.    Undoubtedly  these  sons  of 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rra. 

Joseph  occupied  a  position  which  gave  them  unrivalled  opportunities  of  benefiting 
their  country.  But  with  the  exception  of  the  splendid  exploit  of  Gideon,  a  man  of 
Manasseh,  and  his  little  band,  we  hear  of  little  in  the  history  that  redounded  to  the 
credit  of  Joseph's  descendants.  Nobility  of  character  is  not  hereditary.  Sometimes 
nature  appears  to  spend  all  her  intellectual  and  moral  wealth  on  the  father  and 
almost  to  impoverish  the  sons.  And  sometimes  the  sons  live  on  the  virtues  of  their 
fathers,  and  cannot  be  roused  to  the  exertion  or  the  sacrifice  needed  to  continue 
their  work  and  maintain  their  reputation.    (W.  O.  Blaikie,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XVn. 


Vers.  1-18.  Zelophehad  .  .  .  hadno  sons,  but  daughters. — The  right*  of  women:-- 
The  question  decided  by  their  case  was  the  right  of  females  to  inherit  property  in 
land  when  there  were  no  heirs  male  in  the  family.  We  find  that  the  young  women 
themselves  had  to  be  champions  of  their  own  cause.  The  decision  was,  that  in  such 
cases  the  women  should  inherit,  but  under  the  condition  that  they  should  not  marry 
out  of  their  own  tribe,  so  that  the  property  should  not  be  transferred  to  another 
tribe.  In  point  of  fact,  the  five  sisters  married  their  cousins,  and  thus  kept  the 
property  in  the  tribe  of  Manasseh.  The  incident  is  interesting,  because  it  shows  a 
larger  regard  to  the  rights  of  women  than  was  usually  conceded  at  the  time.  Some 
have,  indeed,  found  fault  with  the  decision  as  not  going  far  enough.  Why,  they 
have  asked,  was  the  right  of  women  to  inherit  land  limited  to  cases  in  which  there 
were  no  men  in  the  family?  The  decision  implied  that  if  there  had  been  one 
brother  he  would  have  got  all  the  land ;  the  sisters  would  have  been  entitled  to 
nothing.  The  answer  to  this  objection  is,  that  had  the  rights  of  women  been 
recognised  to  this  extent  it  would  have  been  too  great  an  advance  on  the  pubUo 
opinion  of  the  time.  The  benefit  of  the  enactment  was  that,  when  propounded,  it 
met  with  general  approval.  Certainly  it  was  a  considerable  advance  on  the  ordinary 
practice  of  the  nations.  It  established  the  principle  that  woman  was  not  a  mere 
chattel,  an  inferior  creature,  subject  to  the  control  of  the  man,  with  no  rights  of  her 
own.  But  it  was  far  from  being  the  first  time  when  this  principle  obtained 
recognition.  The  wives  of  the  patriarchs — Sarah,  Rebekah,  Rachel — were  neither 
chattels,  nor  drudges,  nor  concubines.  They  were  ladies,  exerting  the  influence  and 
enjoying  the  respect  due  to  cultivated,  companionable  women.  And  though  the  law 
of  succession  did  not  give  the  females  of  the  family  equal  rights  with  the  males,  it 
recognised  them  in  another  way.  While  the  eldest  son  succeeded  to  the  family  home 
and  a  double  portion  of  the  land,  he  was  expected  to  make  some  provision  for  his 
widowed  mother  and  unmarried  sisters.  {Ibid.)  Manasseh  could  not  drive 
out  the  Inhabitants  of  those  cities. — What  with  "could  not"  in  the  one,  and 
»'  would  not "  in  the  other,  the  enemies  of  peace  and  purity  were  allowed  to  remain. 
But  why  was  it,  but  because  of  the  cowardice  and  unbelief  of  "  could  not "  ?  for  no 
rebellion  and  opposition  of  "  would  not "  could  hold  out  against  the  strength  of 
Israel's  sword.  It  is  not  so  correctly  our  "  cannot "  as  our  "  will  not "  that  so  many  hold 
a  share  in  our  hearts  to  their  annoyance  and  pollution ;  for  what  enemies  might  not 
a  Christian  conquer,  what  achievements  not  make,  in  the  spiritual  warfare,  who 
goes  forth  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His  might? 
(W.  Seaton.)  What  hinders  : — No,  as  they  were  then,  and  as  just  then  they  were 
going  on,  they  "  could  not"  drive  out  the  Canaanites — that  was  true  enough.  1.  Their 
mood  was  wrong.  They  preferred  ease  to  energy.  Josephus  tells  us :  *'  After  this 
the  Israelites  grew  effeminate  as  to  fighting  any  more  against  their  enemies,  but 
applied  themselves  to  the  cultivation  of  the  land,  which  producing  them  great  plenty 
and  riches,  they  neglected  the  regular  disposition  of  their  settlement,  and  indulged 
themselves  in  luxury  and  pleasures.  The  Benjamites,  to  whom  belonged  Jerusalem, 
permitted  its  inhabitants  to  pay  tribute ;  the  rest  of  the  tribes,  imitating  Benjamin, 
did  the  same ;  and,  contenting  themselves  with  the  tributes  which  were  paid  them, 
permitted  the  Canaanites  to  live  in  peace."  In  such  a  mood  of  course  they  "  could 
not."  2.  Lapped  thus  in  luxury,  and  thinking  more  of  their  own  pleasant  ease 
than  of  their  nobler  duty,  these  Israelites  had  lost  practical  and  prevailing  faith  in 
God.  And  so,  of  course,  letting  the  weapon  of  their  faith  rust  in  a  bad  non-use 
they  "  could  not  "  drive  these  Canaanites  from  their  8troQ£;holdB.    8.  Lying  thus  in 


CHAP,  xvn.]  JOSHUA.  233 

this  enervating  ease,  and  losing  thus  their  practical  faith  in  God,  the  dangers  and 
difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  extirpating  these  Canaanites  were,  to  their  thought, 
correspondingly  increased.  The  strongholds,  to  their  fearful  ease-loving  feeling, 
grew  very  strong;  the  fortresses  perched  upon  the  rocky  hill-tops  seemed  very 
unassailable  ;  the  chariots  of  iron — which,  drawn  by  maddened  horses  and  horrible 
•with  long,  sharp  knives,  would  come  dashing  upon  their  ranks — grew  awfully 
terrible.  And  thus  again,  of  course,  "  they  could  not."  4.  But  think  now  of  these 
Israehtes  marshalled  and  armed  for  their  duty;  as  ready  to  obey  their  God's 
command ;  as  determined  to  put  Jehovah  to  the  proof,  and  to  go  forth  relying  on 
His  promise.  How  plain  it  is  that  the  "could  not"  would  have  belonged  to  the 
Canaanites,  and  the  *'  would  "  would  have  been  the  word  for  these  Israehtes.  Then  we 
had  had  Scripture  of  another  sort,  viz..  And  the  children  of  Manasseh  "  would"  drive 
out  the  inhabitants  of  those  cities,  and  the  Canaanites  "  could  not "  dwell  in  that  land. 
(W.  Hoyt,  D.D.)  Little  will,  and  thus  no  way  : — I.  Inabilitt  in  its  relation  to 
UNBELIEF.  The  promises  of  God  had  been  many,  and  the  warnings  urgent  (Exod. 
xxxiv.  10-17 ;  Num.  xxxiii.  50-56,  <fec.).  They  who  begin  by  disbelieving  God  may 
weU  fear  to  encounter  powerful  enemies.  II.  Inabilitt  in  its  relation  to  indis- 
position. The  indisposition  that  comes — 1.  Through  fear  of  men.  2.  Through 
love  of  ease.    3.  Through  undervaluing  the  importance  of  God's  command.  HI.  Thb 

INABILITY   OF   GoD-AIDED   MEN   PRESENTLY  SHOWN  TO  BE  A  MERE   PRETENCE  AND  A  POOB 

EXCUSE.  1.  The  revelation  which  comes  through  transgressors  themselves.  "  When 
the  children  of  Israel  were  waxen  strong,  they  put  the  Canaanites  to  tribute." 
*'  Could  not "  is  here  seen  to  be  '•  would  not."  That  "  tribute  "  told  the  entire  story 
in  its  true  colours.  Tribute  goes  on  telling  secrets  stUl.  The  tribute  of  Judas 
burned  into  his  very  soul,  till  he  threw  the  thirty  pieces  on  the  temple  floor,  and 
cried  over  them  in  agony.  The  tribute  of  the  craft  by  which  Demetrius  had  his 
■wealth  let  out  the  secret  reason  of  his  great  love  for  the  despised  Diana  (Acts  xix. 
24-27).  The  dishonest  merchant  cannot  keep  his  gains  from  preaching.  Trans- 
gressors win  their  way  to  success  unobserved,  and  then  betray  themselves  with  the 
very  gains  they  have  won.  2.  The  revelation  which  comes  through  those  who  succeed 
transgressors.  Out  of  this  very  section  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh  arose  Gideon,  of 
the  family  of  the  Abi-ezrites  (ver.  2).  On  this  very  ground  of  the  half-tribe  of 
Manasseh  was  fought  the  great  battle  which  delivered  Israel  from  the  Midianites. 
And  how  was  it  fought  ?  By  an  army  from  which  more  than  thirty  thousand  had 
been  sent  to  their  homes ;  by  a  small  force  of  three  hundred  men,  who  merely  brake 
their  pitchers,  and  held  their  torches  on  high,  shedding  light  on  a  truth  afterwards 
embodied  in  one  of  the  famous  sayings  of  Israel,  "  The  battle  is  the  Lord's."  It 
was  as  though  God  were  purposely  reproving  the  faint-heartedness  and  idleness  of 
these  men  who  had  lived  in  the  days  of  Joshua.  {F.  G.  Marchant.)  Why  hast 
thou  given  me  but  one  lot  7 — The  complaining  of  Ephraim  : — A  grumbling  reference 
seems  to  be  made  here  by  Ephraim  to  his  brother  Manasseh,  who  had  received  two 
lots,  one  on  each  side  of  the  Jordan.  Alas,  how  apt  is  the  spirit  of  discontent  still 
to  crop  up  when  we  compare  our  lot  with  that  of  others !  Were  we  quite  alone,  or 
were  there  no  case  for  comparison,  we  might  be  content  enough ;  it  is  when  we 
think  how  much  more  our  brother  has  than  we  that  we  are  most  liable  to  murmur. 
And,  bad  though  murmuring  and  grieving  at  the  good  of  our  brother  may  be,  it  ia 
by  no  means  certain  that  the  evil  spirit  will  stop  there.  At  the  very  dawn  of  history 
•we  find  Cain  the  murderer  of  his  brother  because  the  one  had  the  favour  of  God  and 
not  the  other.  What  an  evil  feeUng  it  is  that  grudges  to  our  brother  a  larger  share 
of  God's  blessing ;  if  at  the  beginning  it  be  not  kept  under  it  may  carry  us  on  to 
deeds  that  may  weU  make  us  shudder.  Joshua  dealt  very  wisely  and  fearlessly  ■with 
the  complaint  of  Ephraim,  though  it  was  his  o-wn  tribe.  "  You  say  you  are  a  great 
people — be  it  so  ;  but  if  you  are  a  great  people,  you  must  be  capable  of  great  deeds. 
Two  great  undertakings  are  before  you  now.  There  are  great  woodlands  in  your 
lot  that  have  not  been  cleared^-direct  your  energies  to  them,  and  they  •will  afford 
you  more  room  for  settlements.  Moreover,  the  Canaanites  are  stiU  in  possession  of 
a  large  portion  of  your  lot ;  up  and  attack  them  and  drive  them  out,  and  you  will 
be  furnished  •with  another  area  for  possession."  Joshua  accepted  their  estimate  of 
their  importance,  but  gave  it  a  very  different  practical  turn.  We  have  all  heard  of 
the  dying  father  who  informed  has  sons  that  there  was  a  valuable  treasure  in  a 
certain  field,  and  counselled  them  to  set  to  work  to  find  it.  With  great  care  they 
turned  up  every  morsel  of  the  soil,  but  no  treasure  appeared,  till,  observing  ia 
autumn,  what  a  rich  crop  covered  the  field,  they  came  to  understand  that  the  fruit 
of  persevering  labour  was  the  treasure  which  their  father  meant.    We  have  heard» 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rvn. 

too,  of  a  physician  who  was  consulted  by  a  rich  man  suffering  cruelly  from  gout,  and 
asked  if  he  had  any  cure  for  it.  "  Yes,"  said  the  doctor,  "  live  on  sixpence  a  day, 
and  work  for  it. "  The  same  principle  underlay  the  counsel  of  Joshua.  Of  course 
it  gratifies  a  certain  part  of  our  nature  to  get  a  mass  of  wealth  without  working  for 
it.  But  this  is  not  the  best  part  of  our  nature.  Probably  in  no  class  has  the  great 
object  of  life  been  so  much  lost  and  the  habit  of  indolence  and  self-indulgence 
become  so  predominant  as  in  that  of  young  men  born  to  the  possession  of  a  great 
fortune  and  never  requiring  to  tarn  a  hand  for  anything  they  desired.  After  all, 
the  necessity  of  work  is  a  great  blessing.  It  guards  from  numberless  temptations  ; 
it  promotes  a  healthy  body  and  a  healthy  mind ;  it  increases  the  zest  of  life ;  it 
promotes  cheerfulness  and  flowing  spirits  ;  it  makes  rest  and  healthy  recreation  far 
sweeter  when  they  come,  and  it  gives  us  affinity  to  the  great  Heavenly  Worker,  by 
whom,  and  through  whom,  and  for  whom  are  all  things.  This  great  principle  of 
ordinary  life  has  its  place,  too,  in  the  spiritual  economy.  It  is  not  the  spiritual 
invalid,  who  is  for  ever  feeling  his  pulse  and  whom  every  whiff  of  wind  throws 
into  a  fever  of  alarm,  that  grows  up  to  the  full  stature  of  the  Christian ;  but  the 
man  who,  like  Paul,  has  his  hands  and  his  heart  for  ever  full,  and  whose  every 
spiritual  fibre  gains  strength  and  vitality  from  his  desires  and  labours  for  the 
good  of  others.  And  it  is  with  Churches  as  with  individuals.  An  idle  Church 
is  a  stagnant  Church,  prone  to  strife,  and  to  all  morbid  experiences.  A 
Church  that  throws  itself  into  the  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love  is  far  more 
in  the  way  to  be  spiritually  healthy  and  strong.  {W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.) 
Discontentment: — I.  The  easy  way  to  discontentment.  Anybody  can  complain. 
Everybody  is  tempted  to  complain.  Most  of  those  who  murmur  think  that  they 
can  show  good  cause  for  their  complaints.  No  man  is  rich  enough  to  be  out  of  the 
reach  of  discontent.  No  man  is  poor  enough  to  be  below  the  possibility  of 
happiness.  II.  The  ttnf ailing  testimony  of  discontentment.  1.  Complaintsfurnish 
no  trustworthy  evidence  about  a  man's  lot.  How  can  they,  when  so  many  murmur 
in  every  kind  of  lot  which  the  world  knows  ?  2.  Complaints  bear  unfailing  witness 
against  the  murmurer  himself.  Scripture  often  condemns  the  man  who  complains, 
apart  from  considering  the  cause  of  complaining.  III.  The  true  answer  to 
discontentment.  1.  Joshua  was  too  wise  to  dispute  the  assumption  of  greatness 
(vers.  15-17).  He  who  tries  to  argue  a  discontented  man  out  of  his  favourite 
assumptions  does  but  waste  breath.  2.  Joshua  turned  the  plea  of  greatness  back 
on  those  who  used  it :  "  If  thou  be  a  great  people,  then  " — work,  fight.  3.  Joshua 
sought  to  cure  the  murmuring  of  the  heart  through  the  diligence  of  the  hand.  The 
energy  which  is  absorbed  in  gloomy  thoughts,  and  poured  out  in  bitter  complaints, 
would  generally  double  the  small  inheritance,  if  it  were  rightly  directed.  Apart 
from  this  industry  and  courage  ever  tend  to  happiness.  4.  Joshua  encouraged 
these  murmurers  to  think  that  to  the  people  of  God  no  difficulties  were  insuperable. 
He  would  have  them  think  of  the  invincible  might  which  had  promised  to  support 
their  faithful  efforts  (Deut.  xx.  1-4),  and  make  them  victorious.  The  after  history 
shows  us  that  a  discontented  spirit  is  not  easily  cured.  These  people  showed  the  same 
haughty  dissatisfaction  again  and  again  after  the  death  of  Joshua  (Judges  viii. 
1-3,  xii.  1-G).  He  who  has  cultivated  contentment  through  faith  in  God  is  not 
readily  disturbed  ;  while  the  man  who  has  learned,  in  whatsoever  state  he  is,  to  find 
some  fault  with  his  fellows,  has  given  room  in  his  heart  for  a  demon  that  is  not 
easily  expelled.  (F.  G.  Marchant.)  The  self -aggrandising  sjnrit : — They  did 
not  use  the  power  which  God  gave  them  for  the  execution  of  His  commands  and 
for  driving  out  the  Canaanites,  but  they  misapplied  it  to  their  own  self-aggrandise- 
ment, and  to  the  indulgence  of  their  own  covetousness ;  and  they  were  not  content 
with  the  lot  they  had  received,  although  it  was  the  most  fruitful  part  of  Palestine  ; 
but  in  a  boastful  spirit  of  self-adulation  they  said,  "I  am  a  great  people  ";  they 
claimed  a  larger  portion  for  themselves,  in  order  that  they  might  be  enriched 
thereby.  Here  is  an  example  of  that  self-idolising  and  self-aggrandising  spirit  in 
nations  and  in  Churches  which  seek  to  extend  themselves  by  colonisation  and 
conquest,  and  even  by  missionary  enterprise,  not  so  much  that  they  may  gain 
kingdoms  for  Christ,  and  win  subjects  to  Him,  but  in  order  that  they  may  have 
vassals  and  tributaries  to  themselves.  Is  there  not  here  a  solemn  warning  to  such 
nations  as  England,  which  publicly  and  privately  derives  an  immense  revenue 
from  her  two  hundred  millions  of  subjects  in  India,  and  yet  has  done  little  hitherto 
to  bring  them  into  subjection  to  Christ  ?  {Bp.  Chris.  Wordsworth.)  Discontented 
with  our  lot: — When  the  last  national  census  was  taken  it  would  have  been  an 
interesting  question  to  have  asked  just  how  many  people  were  icliere  they  wanted 


CHAP,  xvn.]  JOSHUA.  235 

to  be.  I  fear  that  tlie  really  contented  souls  would  have  been  a  very  small  minority. 
Contentment  with  one's  spiritual  condition  is  quite  too  common ;  and  of  such  low- 
grade  Christians  there  is  not  much  hope  of  improvement.  But  those  who  are  really 
contented  with  their  present  lot,  present  place  of  residence,  present  circumstances 
or  fields  of  labour,  are  not  in  the  majority.  Take,  for  example,  the  ministers  of  the 
Gospel  and  see  how  many  will  say :  "  Well,  my  place  of  labour  has  pecrdiar 
difiQculties  ;  it  is  a  hard  field,  and  I  have  a  great  deal  to  encounter,  and  if  I  could 
get  a  first-rate  call  to  some  better  place  I  would  be  off  in  a  minute."  Very  probably 
you  would.  But,  my  good  brother,  if  you  will  discover  any  parish  on  this  round 
globe  that  has  not  some  "  peculiar  difficulties  "  to  encounter,  then  you  will  have 
found  a  people  so  perfect  that  they  will  not  need  any  preaching.  Mary  Lyon's 
noble  advice  to  her  pupils  at  Mount  Holyoke  Seminary  was :  "  When  you  choose 
your  field  of  labour  for  Christ,  go  where  nobody  else  is  willing  to  go."  Heaven  is 
the  only  place  I  have  ever  heard  of  where  there  is  no  hard  work  or  no  difficulties. 
(T.  L.  Cuyler.)  Restless  discontent  to  be  avoided  : — My  first  parish  was  a  very 
discouraging  one,  and  I  was  just  threatening  to  play  Jonah  and  leave  it  when  the 
Lord  poured  out  Eis  Spirit  on  the  little  flock  and  we  had  a  revival  that  taught  me 
more  than  six  months  did  in  a  theological  seminary.  Many  years  afterwards  I  was 
sorely  harassed  with  doubt  whether  I  should  remain  in  a  certain  pulpit  or  go  to  a 
very  inviting  one  nearly  a  thousand  miles  away.  I  opened  Eichard  Cecil's  "  Ke- 
mains  " — a  volume  of  most  valuable  thought — and  my  eyes  fell  on  these  pithy 
words :  "  Taking  new  steps  in  life  are  very  serious  dangers,  especially  if  there  be  in 
our  motives  any  mixture  of  selfish  ambition.  '  Wherefore  gaddest  thou  about  to 
change  thy  way  ?  '  "  I  turned  up  that  text  in  the  book  of  Jeremiah  ;  it  decided  me 
not  to  gad  about  or  change  my  field  of  labour,  and  I  have  thanked  God  for  a  decision 
that  resulted  in  my  happy  thirty  years'  pastorate  in  Brooklyn.  There  are  rm- 
questionably  times  and  circumstances  in  which  a  minister  or  any  Christian  worker 
should  change  his  place  of  labour,  but  never  under  the  promptings  of  a  restless, 
discontented,  or  self-seeking  spirit.  (Ibid.)  The  Lord  hath  blessedme  hitherto . — 
Retrospect: — L  Aconfession:  "  The  Lord  hath  blessed  me  hitherto."  I  will  not  at 
present  speak  to  those  of  you  upon  whom  the  blessing  of  God  has  never  rested.  Ee- 
member,  that  every  man  is  either  under  the  curse  or  under  the  blessing.  They  that 
are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse.  Faith  in  Him  who  was  made  a 
curse  for  us  is  the  only  way  to  the  blessing.  But  I  speak  to  as  many  as  have  believed 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  of  whom  the  Lord  saith,  "  Surely,  blessing  I  will  bless  thee," 
You  can  say  at  this  time,  "  God  hath  blessed  me  hitherto."  1.  He  has  blessed  you 
with  those  blessings  which  are  common  to  all  the  house  of  Israel.  You  and  I,  who 
are  in  Christ,  are  partakers  of  all  covenant  blessings  in  Christ  Jesus.  "  If  children, 
then  heirs  " ;  and  if  we  are  children  of  God,  then  we  are  heirs  of  all  things.  "  Ye  are 
Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's,"  and  therefore  "  aU  things  are  yours."  Can  you  not 
say — "  The  Lord  hath  blessed  me  hitherto  "  ?  Has  He  ever  denied  you  one  of 
the  blessings  common  to  the  covenanted  family  ?  Has  He  ever  told  you  that  you 
may  not  pray,  or  that  you  may  not  trust  ?  Has  He  forbidden  you  to  cast  your 
burden  on  the  Lord  ?  Has  He  denied  to  you  fellowship  with  Himseli  and  communion 
with  His  dear  Son?  Has  He  laid  an  embargo  on  any  one  of  the  promises  ?  Has 
He  shut  you  out  from  any  one  of  the  provisions  of  His  love?  2.  But  then, 
besides  this,  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  had  special  blessings,  the  peculiar  blessing  of 
Joseph,  which  did  not  belong  to  Judah,  or  Eeuben,  or  Issachar,  Each  saint  may 
tell  his  fellow  something  that  he  does  not  know;  and  in  heaven  it  will  be  a 
part  of  the  riches  of  glory  to  hold  commerce  in  those  specialities  which  each  one  has 
for  himself  alone.  I  shall  not  be  you,  neither  wUl  you  be  me ;  neither  shall  we 
twain  be  like  another  two,  or  the  four  of  us  like  any  other  four,  though  all  of  us 
shall  be  like  our  Lord  when  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.  I  want  you  each  to  feel  at 
this  hour — "  The  Lord  hath  blessed  me  hitherto."  Personally,  I  often  sit  me  down 
alone,  and  say,  "  Whence  is  this  to  me  ?  "  I  cannot  but  admire  the  special  goodness 
of  my  Lord  to  me.  3.  I  think,  besides  this,  that  these  two  tribes  which  made  up 
the  house  of  Joseph,  also  meant  to  say  that,  not  only  had  God  blessed  them  with, 
the  common  blessings  of  Israel,  and  the  special  blessing  of  their  tribe,  but  also  with 
actual  blessings.  As  far  as  they  had  gone  they  had  driven  out  the  Canaanites, 
and  taken  possession  of  the  country.  They  had  not  received  all  that  was  promised ; 
but  God  had  blessed  them  hitherto.  Come,  we  have  not  driven  out  all  the  Canaanites 
yet,  but  we  have  driven  out  many  of  them.  We  are  not  what  we  hope  to  be,  but  we 
are  not  what  we  used  to  be.  We  cannot  yet  see  everything  clearly,  but  we  are  not 
blind,  as  once  we  were.    We  have  not  seen  our  Lord  as  He  is,  but  we  have  seen 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

Him ;  and  the  joy  of  that  sight  will  never  be  taken  from  na.  Therefore,  before  the 
Lord  and  His  assembled  people,  we  joyfully  declare  that  "  The  Lord  hath  blessed  us 
hitherto."  Let  us  expand  this  confession  a  little,  and  speak  thus :  1.  All  the 
blessings  that  we  have  received  have  come  from  God.  Do  not  let  us  trace  any 
blessing  to  ourselves,  or  to  our  fellow-men ;  for  though  the  minister  of  God  may  be 
as  a  conduit-pipe  to  bring  us  refreshing  streams,  yet  all  our  fresh  springs  are  in 
God,  and  not  in  men.  Say,  "The  Lord  hath  blessed  me  hitherto."  2.  And,  mark 
you,  there  has  been  a  continuity  of  this  blessing.  God  has  not  blessed  us,  and  then 
paused;  but  He  has  blessed  us  "hitherto."  One  silver  thread  of  blessing  extends 
from  the  cradle  to  the  grave.  There  is  an  unconquerable  pertinacity  in  the  love  of 
God  :  His  grace  cannot  be  baffled  or  turned  aside  ;  but  His  goodness  and  His  mercy 
follow  us  all  the  days  of  our  lives.  3.  In  addition  to  that  continuity  there  is  a 
delightful  consistency  about  the  Lord's  dealings.  "  The  Lord  hath  blessed  us 
hitherto."  No  curse  has  intervened.  He  has  blessed  us,  and  only  blessed  us. 
There  has  been  no  "  yea  "  and  "  nay  "  with  Him ;  no  enriching  us  with  spiritual 
blessings,  and  then  casting  us  away.  He  has  frowned  upon  us,  truly ;  but  His  love 
has  been  the  same  in  the  frown  as  in  the  smile.  He  has  chastened  us  sorely ;  but 
He  has  never  given  us  over  unto  death.  4.  And,  what  is  more,  when  my  text  says, 
"  The  Lord  hath  blessed  me  hitherto,"  there  is  a  kind  of  prophecy  in  it,  for 
' '  hitherto  "  has  a  window  forward  as  well  as  backward.  You  sometimes  see  a  railway 
carriage  or  truck,  fastened  on  to  what  goes  before,  but  there  is  also  a  great  hook 
behind.  What  is  that  for?  Why,  to  fasten  something  else  behind,  and  so  to 
lengthen  the  train.  Any  one  mercy  from  God  is  linked  on  to  all  the  mercy  that 
went  before  it ;  but  provision  is  also  made  for  adding  future  blessing.  All  the  years 
to  come  are  guaranteed  by  the  ages  past.  H.  The  argument  :  "  Forasmuch  as  the 
Lord  hath  blessed  me  hitherto."  1.  This  is  cause  for  holy  wonder  and  amazement. 
Why  should  the  Lord  have  blessed  me  ?  2.  Be  full  of  holy  gratitude.  Get  into 
the  state  of  that  poor  man  who  was  so  greatly  blessed  to  pious  Tauler.  He  wished 
the  man  a  good-day.  The  man  replied,  "  Sir,  I  never  had  a  bad  day."  "  Oh,  but 
I  wish  you  good  weather."  Said  he,  "  Sir,  it  is  always  good  weather.  If  it  rains 
or  if  it  shines,  it  is  such  weather  as  God  pleases,  and  what  pleases  God  pleases  me." 
Our  sorrows  lie  mainly  at  the  roots  of  our  selfishness,  and  when  our  self -hood  is 
dug  up,  our  sorrow  to  a  great  extent  is  gone.  Let  us,  then,  utter  this  text, 
"  Forasmuch  as  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me  hitherto,"  with  hearty  gratitude  for  His 
holy  will.  Summing  up  gains  and  losses,  joys  and  griefs,  let  us  say  with  Job, 
"  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,  and  blessed  be  the  name  of  the 
Lord."  3.  Say  also,  with  holy  confidence,  "  The  Lord  hath  blessed  me  hitherto." 
Speak  as  you  find.  If  any  inquire,  "  What  has  God  been  to  you?  "  answer,  "  He 
hath  blessed  me  hitherto."  The  devil  whispers,  "  If  thou  be  the  son  of  God  "  ;  and 
he  then  insinuates,  "  God  deals  very  hardly  with  you.  See  what  you  suffer.  See 
how  you  are  left  in  the  dark !  "  Answer  him,  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan, 
for  surely  goodness  and  mercy  have  followed  me  all  the  days  of  my  life  ;  and  if  God 
takes  from  me  any  earthly  good,  shall  I  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and 
shall  I  not  receive  evil  ?  "  He  who  can  stand  to  this  stands  on  good  ground.  "  In 
all  this  Job  sinned  not,  nor  charged  God  foolishly."  But  he  that  gets  away  from 
this  drifts  I  know  not  where.  4.  Furthermore,  if  this  be  true,  let  us  resolve  to 
engage  in  enlarged  enterprises.  If  the  Lord  has  blessed  us  hitherto,  why  should 
He  not  bless  us  in  something  fresh  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  If  thou  be  a  great 
people,  then  get  thee  up. — Encroachments  not  permissible: — Encroachments  were 
not  to  be  made  upon  their  brethren,  but  new  inroads  upon  their  enemies,  whom  it 
had  become  their  duty  utterly  to  exterminate.  This  was  the  work  which  Providence 
had  assigned  to  them,  both  for  the  enlargement  of  the  portion,  and  for  the  exercise  of 
their  piety ;  and  therefore  the  straitness  in  which  they  were  placed,  intended  as  it 
was  for  an  excitement  to  diligence,  fortitude,  and  faith,  was  no  real  crook  in  the  lot. 
What  employs  men's  hearts  and  hands  for  God  must  be  a  work  with  a  blessing 
annexed  to  it,  and  always  attended  with  its  own  reward.  In  the  cultivation  of 
Messiah's  kingdom,  the  assigned  inheritance  of  the  Church,  and  extension  of  its 
borders  in  the  world  there  are  many  wastes  of  sin  to  be  taken  in,  many  long- 
standing thickets  of  corruption  to  be  hewn  and  cleared  away.  The  straitened 
boundaries  of  Immanuel's  land  require  many  spiritual,  never-weary  labourers  in 
well-doing.  How  much  ought  it  to  be  the  grief  of  every  pious  mind,  and  the  matter 
of  his  most  anxious  concern,  in  seeing  those  vast  territories  yet  the  possessions  of 
enemies  worse  than  the  Perizzites  and  giants  on  the  borders  of  Ephraim.  Whatever 
presses  on  the  view  to  desist  from  undertakings  to  which  we  have  the  Lord's  special 


CHAP,  xvn.]  JOSHUA.  237 

call,  or  the  toten  of  His  marked  approbation,  the  considerations  of  His  power  and 
promise  are  quite  sufficient  to  encourage  exertions.  In  a  spiritual  view  all  the 
Lord's  people  are  a  great  people,  and  having  great  power  are  destined  to  mighty 
enterprises  and  achievements.  In  themselves  and  outward  condition,  none  are 
more  weak  and  contemptible  ;  yet  in  their  infinitely  glorious  Lord  and  Captain  they 
are  both  great  and  powerful,  so  that  through  grace  strengthening  them  they  can  do  aU 
things,  even  cut  through  the  greatest  obstructions,  and  conquer  the  most  formidable 
enemies.  Success  was  to  crown  action.  Neither  the  axe  nor  the  sword  would  be  em- 
ployed in  vain ;  the  woodland  instrument  nor  the  warlike  weapon.  Reward,  though  but 
in  promise,  sweetens  labour,  and  the  hope  of  triumph  emboldens  to  conflict ;  but  how 
much  more  the  assurance  of  both  1  The  Christian  has  no  less  encouragement  in 
all  the  enterprises  assigned  him  ;  for  whether  in  works  of  faith,  in  labours  of  love, 
or  in  the  toils  of  conflict,  this  is  the  invigorating  address  :  "  Be  not  weary  in  well- 
doing, for  in  due  season  ye  shall  reap  if  ye  faint  not."  They  had  only  to  work  and 
the  way  would  open ;  to  fight,  and  the  enemy  would  yield  to  the  sword,  as  the 
thicket  to  the  axe.  The  possession  was  theirs,  and  needed  only  to  be  claimed. 
Who  would  not  thus  have  his  coast  enlarged  ?  for  the  inheritance  that  improves, 
and  widens  beneath  its  owner's  own  hand  and  eye  has  far  more  charms,  and  yields 
higher  satisfaction  than  the  seat  of  ease  obtained  by  others.  Heaven  wiU  be  but 
the  sweeter,  the  more  welcome  and  valued,  after  the  labours  of  this  mortal  life,  and 
its  conquests  close  in  eternal  triumphs.  {W.  Seaton.)  Labour  the  price  of  excel- 
lence : — This  is  the  voice  of  God's  providence  to  every  soul  that  has  dreamed  of 
greatness,  or  of  the  possession  of  unfolded  powers  and  abilities.  By  labour  show 
your  talent.  Express  what  you  are  by  what  you  do.  Michael  Angelo  once  exhibited 
a  rare  specimen  of  his  art,  and  it  was  pronounced  beautiful  and  wonderful.  Months 
passed,  and  visitors  saw  nothing  more  in  his  studio,  and  when  he  was  asked  what 
he  had  been  doing  Angelo  answered  that  he  had  been  at  work  on  the  same  statue, 
reducing  this  feature  and  developing  that ;  and  his  visitors  said  those  were  but 
trifles,  and  he  should  be  engaged  on  something  great.  To  this  he  replied,  "  Trifles 
make  perfection,  and  perfection  itself  is  no  trifle."  That  was  a  noble  answer. 
Indeed,  genius  may  be  defined  as  that  power  which  best  magnifies  trifles.  It  sees 
the  worth  of  everything.  It  glorifies  the  small  because  of  their  relation  to  the 
great.  The  most  finished  actor  of  our  age,  on  retiring  from  his  profession,  and  on 
receiving  a  public  testimonial  as  having  made  the  best  impression  on  his  age  in 
reference  to  his  art,  made  the  memorable  remark,  "  Whatever  is  excellent  in  art 
must  spring  from  labour  and  endurance."  That  sentiment  may  weU  be  written  on 
the  shield  of  every  aspiring  young  man.  Greatness  is  from  culture,  rather  than 
from  genius ;  and  if  it  had  a  voice  for  the  world,  it  would  sing  of  "  The  high 
endeavours  and  the  glad  success."  There  are  unquestionably  some  instances  of 
that  original  intensity  of  a  mental  faculty  by  which  the  mind  springs,  as  it  were,  at 
a  leap,  to  the  results  it  desires ;  but  it  is  certain  that  many  of  fhe  most  remarkable 
men  have  attributed  to  patient  labour  what  the  world  have  attributed,  in  them,  to 
endowment.  That  Newton  attributed  his  success  to  greater  patience  with  the 
minute  is  well  known,  and  Sir  Joshua  Eeynolds  held  that  superiority  resulted  from 
intense  and  constant  application  of  the  strength  of  intellect  to  a  specific  purpose. 
•'  Genius,"  he  said,  "  is  the  art  of  making  repeated  efforts."  The  first  effort  he 
made  with  his  pencil  was  the  perspective  of  a  book-case  from  sheer  idleness ;  but 
his  father  saw  it,  encouraged  him,  and  he  went  on  by  labour  to  success.  Benjamin 
West,  when  he  drew  the  babe's  face  as  he  watched  it  in  the  cradle,  was  kissed  by 
his  mother  for  the  effort,  and  was  wont  to  say,  "  That  kiss  made  me  a  painter." 
And  to  every  department  of  artistic,  mechanical,  and  professional  life  the  advice 
of  Sir  Joshua  Eeynolds  to  his  scholars  is  adapted,  where  he  said,  "  Make  no 
dependence  on  your  own  genius.  If  you  have  great  talents,  labour  will  improve 
them ;  if  you  have  poor  talents,  labour  will  increase  them.  Nothing  is  denied  to 
well-directed  labour.  Nothing  is  to  be  obtained  without  it."  Napoleon  well  said, 
when  once  asked  to  create  a  marshal  out  of  a  man  who  belonged  to  a  noble  family, 
but  who  had  no  other  claim,  '*  It  is  not  I  that  make  marshals,  but  victory."  What 
we  attribute  to  some  gift  may  be  traced  to  the  kindling  and  concentrating  power  of 
feeling  or  passion,  as  is  illustrated  in  the  many  instances  where  the  greatest  mental 
effort  has  sprung  from  passion.  Scorched  and  stung  by  a  Scottish  reviewer,  Byron 
wrote  a  poem,  and  he  who  was  deemed  but  a  simple  rhymester  became  a  poet,  as 
he  himself  once  said, "  I  went  to  bed  one  night,  and  woke  up  to  find  myself  famous." 
So  in  sharp  debates,  in  violent  controversy,  the  most  remarkable  things  have  been 
uttered;  men  have  gone  beyond  themselves  and  have  astonished   the  world.    A 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvii. 

mighty  intensity  of  thought  has  burned  within  them,  and  they  have  brought  tha 
whole  stock  of  intellectual  attainment  to  bear  upon  the  matter  before  them.  The 
best  things  of  many  men  in  all  departments  of  effort  have  been  unpremeditated ; 
but  this  gives  no  argument  against  labour,  study,  and  forecast,  because  these  men 
have  been  made  capable  of  these  great  or  uncommon  efforts  by  the  wealth  of  mind 
stored  up.  The  ripe  things  of  nature  fall  into  hands  prepared  to  receive  them ; 
and  in  a  profound  sense  may  the  wise  man's  words  be  applied  beyond  religion, 
where  he  says,  "The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him."  Genius, 
therefore,  is  really  intensity  of  thought,  feeling,  emotion,  activity.  All  the  faculties 
of  the  man  are  in  earnest.  The  whole  man  is  glorified  by  the  intensity  of  the 
determined  spirit,  and  what  is  done  is  done  with  every  energy — with  a  resoluteness 
that  means  with  persistence  of  effort  to  conquer  if  such  a  thing  can  be.  Take  up 
any  man's  life  who  has  risen  to  real,  permanent  eminence,  and  you  see  there  the 
marks  of  labour ;  so  that  it  may  be  said  of  many,  as  was  said  of  Piso,  "  What  he 
withdrew  of  application  he  deducted  from  glory."  Goethe  said  truly,  "  What  is 
genius  but  the  faculty  of  seeing  and  turning  to  advantage  everything  that  strikes 
us  ?  "  And  so  thought  the  celebrated  French  landscape  painter,  Poussin,  who, 
when  asked  how  he  was  able  to  give  such  an  effect  to  his  paintings,  simply 
answered,  "  I  have  neglected  nothing."  The  price  of  excellence,  then,  is  labour. 
"What  most  we  need  is  to  intensify  our  love  of  God  and  His  gospel — to  make  faith 
more  a  fire — a  fire  that  rouses  up  to  action  every  inmate  of  the  house,  and 
shows  what  wonders  can  be  wrought.  A  fire  that  demands  more  and  more 
fuel,  when  it  is  rightly  confined  to  its  place,  and  that  bids  us  go  out  of  our 
Mount  Ephraim,  into  the  land  of  the  giants,  and  cut  wood.  {Henry  Bacon.) 
The  responsibility  of  greatness  : — 1.  It  is  not  a  brave  and  wholesome  thing  to  be 
too  eager  for  favours  and  for  help  from  others.  There  are  men  of  this  class  in 
every  community.  They  want  to  rise  in  the  world,  but  they  would  rise  on  the 
exertions  and  sacrifices  of  others — not  their  own.  "We  find  the  same  in  spiritual 
life.  There  are  those  who  sigh  for  holiness  and  beauty  of  character,  but  they  are 
not  willing  to  pay  the  price.  They  would  make  prayer  a  substitute  for  effort,  for 
struggle,  for  the  crucifying  of  self.  They  want  a  larger  spiritual  inheritance,  but 
they  have  no  thought  of  taking  it  in  primeval  forests  which  their  own  hands  must 
cut  down.  The  truth  is,  however,  that  God  gives  us  our  inheritance  just  as  He  gave 
Joseph's  lot  to  him.  Our  promised  land  has  to  be  won,  every  inch  of  it.  You 
must  train  your  own  faith.  You  must  cultivate  your  own  heart-life.  You  must 
learn  patience,  gentleness,  and  all  the  lessons  of  love  yourself.  No  one  can  give 
you  any  Christian  grace.  2.  True  friendship  ofttimes  declines  to  do  for  men 
what  they  can  do  for  themselves.  If  you  can  wake  up  a  young  man,  arouse  his 
sleeping  or  undiscovered  powers,  so  that  he  will  win  a  fortune  with  his  own  hands 
and  brain,  that  is  an  infinitely  better  thing  to  do  for  him  than  if  you  were  to  give  him 
a  fortune  as  a  present.  In  the  former  case,  in  getting  his  fortune,  he  has  gotten 
also  trained  powers,  energy,  strength,  self-reliance,  disciplined  character  and  all  tha 
elements  that  belong  to  strong  manhood.  In  the  other  case  he  gets  nothing  but  the 
money.  A  little  poem  tells  the  story  of  two  friends.  One  brought  a  crystal  goblet 
full  of  water  which  he  had  dipped  from  flowing  streams  on  far-off  mountain 
heights.  The  hUls  were  his,  and  his  the  bright,  sweet  water.  But  the  water  did 
not  refresh  his  friend.  The  other  looked  upon  him  kindly,  saw  his  need,  and  gave 
him — nothing.  With  a  face  severe  he  bade  him  seek  his  own  hard  quarry,  hew  out 
the  way  for  the  imprisoned  waters,  and  find  drink  for  himself.  He  obeyed,  and  the 
water  gave  him  satisfaction.  That  is  God's  way  with  us.  He  does  not  make  life 
easy  for  us.  Surely  it  is  a  wiser  love  that  puts  new  strength  into  your  heart  and 
arm,  so  that  you  can  go  on  with  your  hard  duty,  your  heavy  responsibility,  your 
weight  of  care,  without  fainting,  than  would  be  the  love  which  should  take  all  the 
load  away  and  leave  you  free  from  any  burden.  3.  True  greatness  should  show 
itself,  not  in  demanding  favours  or  pi'ivileges,  but  in  achieving  great  things.  The 
way  a  commander  honours  the  best  regiment  on  the  field  of  battle  is,  not  by 
assigning  it  to  some  easy  post,  to  some  duty  away  from  danger.  He  honours  it 
by  giving  it  the  most  perilous  post,  the  duty  requiring  the  most  splendid  courage. 
So  it  is  in  all  life — the  place  of  honour  is  always  the  hardest  place,  where  tha 
most  delicate  and  difficult  duty  must  be  done,  where  the  heaviest  burden  of 
responsibility  must  be  borne.  It  is  never  a  real  honour  to  be  given  an  easy  place. 
Instead  of  demanding  a  place  of  honour  as  a  favour  of  friendship,  which  sets  no 
seal  of  real  greatness  upon  our  brow,  we  should  win  our  place  of  honour  by  worthy 
deeds  and  services.     The  truth  is  far-reaching  in  its  applications.     It  should  sweep 


CHAP,  xvn.]  JOSHUA.  289 

out  of  our  thought  for  ever  all  feeling  that  others  owe  us  favours ;  all  that  spirit 
which  shows  itself  in  self-seeking,  in  claims  for  place  or  precedence  over  others. 
The  law  of  love  is  that  with  whatsoever  we  have  we  must  serve  our  fellow-men. 
The  most  highly  dowered  Ufe  that  this  world  ever  saw  was  that  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Yet  He  demanded  no  recognition  of  men.  He  claimed  no  rank.  He  never  said 
His  lowly  place  was  too  small,  too  narrow,  for  the  exercise  of  His  great  abiUties. 
He  used  His  greatness  in  doing  good,  in  blessing  the  world.  He  was  the  greatest 
among  men,  and  He  was  the  servant  of  all.  This  is  the  true  mission  of  greatness. 
There  is  no  other  true  and  worthy  way  of  using  whatever  gifts  God  has  bestowed 
upon  us.  Instead  of  claiming  place,  distinction,  rank,  position,  and  attention, 
because  of  our  gifts,  abilities,  wisdom,  or  name,  we  must  use  all  we  have  to  bless 
the  world  and  honour  God.  (J.  R.  Millar,  D.D.)  The  proof  of  greatness  : — 
Petty  jealousies  are  harder  to  deal  with  than  anything  else.  Joshua  had  not  only 
to  conquer  but  also  to  divide  the  country.  It  was  divided  into  several  parts. 
Jealousy  was  aroused.  Some  said,  You  have  not  considered  my  greatness  as  you 
did  that  of  Ephraim.  In  the  present  day  a  worker  for  God  has  need  to  pray  for 
tact  to  deal  with  others.  Our  text  is  very  suggestive,  and  may  be  applied  in 
many  ways.  Prove  thy  greatness  by  clearing  the  forest.  Pretension  proved  by 
achievement  ;  thus  prove  thy  strength  by  thy  actions.  1.  If  great,  why  not  clear 
the  forest  ?  Great  power  demands  corresponding  enterprise  1  Some  financially 
are  great;  if  so,  let  your  contributions  be  beyond  others  who  are  not  in  such  a 
position.  If  possessed  of  a  superior  education,  prove  it  by  your  exertions  to  benefit 
others.  Some  are  great  in  position  as  standard-bearers  in  God's  army ;  prove  it 
by  your  faith ;  show  what  faith  will  do ;  go  up  and  clear  the  forest  by  your  zeal  and 
consecration — the  more  advantages  we  claim  the  more  obligations  we  contract. 
2.  If  cramped  for  room,  why  not  clear  the  ground  you  have  ?  Some  are  always 
asking  for  more  scope,  from  the  village  to  the  town,  from  the  town  to  the  city, 
forgetting  that  in  their  own  sphere  they  have  not  done  all  they  could  do.  When 
this  is  done  God  will  open  up  a  larger  sphere.  Do  thoroughly  all  that  in  which  you 
are  engaged.  The  man  who  looks  after  the  ones  and  twos  God  will  bless  with  other 
larger  spheres  for  usefulness.  Greatness  does  not  lie  in  pretensions  but  in  actions. 
(A.  G.  Brown.)  Cure  for  complaining  : — This,  then,  is  the  cure  for  our  com- 
plainings— the  memory  of  the  Lord's  promises  of  help  ;  and  then  the  brave  going 
forth  against  the  causes  of  the  complainings,  and  thus  the  curing  of  them.  1.  Apply 
this  cure  for  complainings  to  the  winning  of  culture.  How  often  we  complain,  "  in 
our  circumstances,  with  our  limitations,  with  our  business,  cfec,  no  chance  for 
culture."  And  we  settle  to  the  newspaper  or  fill  up  the  chance  moments  with  a 
hurried  reading  of  the  last  novel — not  the  last  best ;  too  often  the  last  worst.  But 
the  cure  for  such  complainings  is,  with  God's  help,  to  go  forth  and  seize  culture. 
Take  up  the  Chautauqua  scheme  for  reading,  for  example.  Take  it  up,  go  through 
with  it,  put  the  energy  into  doing  your  work  and  not  into  complaining,  and  you  will 
grow  in  culture  surprisingly.  2.  Apply  this  cure  for  complainings  to  the  maintain- 
ing a  consistent  Christian  profession.  Think  of  the  saints  in  Caesar's  household. 
By  God's  help  determine  to  be  a  saint,  whatever  your  circumstances.  3.  Apply 
this  cure  for  complainings  to  the  duty  of  becoming  Christian.  What  Canaanites  and 
Perrizzites  of  objections  men  are  apt  to  make — e.g.,  do  not  understand  whole 
Bible ;  it  is  a  hard  thing  to  serve  God ;  it  is  gloomy  to  be  Christian ;  I  am  afraid 
God  will  not  receive  me ;  so  many  hypocrites  among  professing  Christians ;  I  don't 
know  that  I  am  one  of  the  elect ;  I  have  not  time ;  I  am  not  fit ;  I  will  meet  a  good 
deal  of  opposition ;  I  don't  feel ;  I  am  afraid  if  I  do  become  a  Christian  I  will  not 
hold  out ;  I  cannot  believe;  I  am  willing  to  be  a  secret  Christian,  &c.,  illimitably. 
But  stop  complainingly  conjuring  such  objections.  Go  forth  in  the  promised  help 
of  Christ  to  Christ,  any  way.  So  at  once  get  cure  for  your  complainings  and 
surely  find  the  forgiveness  and  peace  of  Christ.  {W.  Hoyt,  D.D.)  Thou  shalt 
drive  out  the  Canaanites. — Driving  out  the  Canaanites  and  their  iron  chariots  : — 
I.  We  must  drive  them  out.  Every  sin  has  to  be  slaughtered.  Not  a  single  sin  is 
to  be  tolerated.  1.  They  must  all  be  driven  out,  for  every  sin  is  our  enemy. 
Any  pretence  of  friendship  with  iniquity  is  mischievous.  2.  Sin  is  our  Lord's  most 
cruel  enemy.  Saved  by  Jesus,  will  you  not  hate  sin  as  He  did?  Would  any 
person  here  lay  up  in  his  drawer  as  a  treasure  the  knife  with  which  his  father  was 
murdered?  Our  sins  were  the  daggers  that  slew  the  Saviour.  Can  we  bear  to 
think  of  them  ?  3.  Eemember,  also,  that  a  man  cannot  be  free  from  sin  if  he  is 
the  servant  of  even  one  sin.  Here  is  a  man  who  has  a  long  chain  on  his  leg — a 
chain  of  fifty  links.    Now,  suppose  that  I  come  in  as  a  liberator,  and  take  away 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvn. 

forty-nine  links,  but  still  leave  the  iron  fastened  to  the  pillar,  and  his  leg  in  the  one 
link  which  is  within  the  iron  ring,  what  benefit  have  I  brought  him  ?  How  much 
good  have  I  done  ?  The  man  is  stiU  a  captive.  11.  Thet  can  be  oBrrEN  out.  I  do 
not  say  that  we  can  drive  them  out,  but  I  say  that  they  can  be  driven  out.  It  will 
be  a  great  miracle,  but  let  us  believe  in  it ;  for  other  great  wonders  have  been 
wrought.  1.  Note  first  that  you  and  I  have  been  raised  from  the  dead.  Is  it  not 
80  ?  "  You  hath  He  quickened,  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  If  a  dead  man 
has  been  raised,  then  anything  can  be  done  with  the  man  who  is  now  made  alive. 
2.  You  have  also  by  Divine  power  been  led  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  If 
you  have  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  result  of  Divine  grace  within  your 
heart,  what  is  there  that  you  cannot  do  ?  If  you  have  been  enabled  to  believe,  you 
can  be  enabled  to  be  holy.  He  that  led  you  to  exert  faith,  can  lead  you,  by  faith,  to 
overcome  any  and  every  iniquity.  3.  You  have  already  conquered  many  sins.  He 
that  has  helped  you  so  far  can  surely  help  you  even  to  the  conclusion  of  the  fight. 
Do  not  doubt  that  the  almighty  power  of  Divine  grace,  which  has  achieved  so  much, 
can  achieve  yet  more.  Be  strong  and  very  courageous,  for  the  Lord  of  hosts  Himself 
is  at  your  side.  4.  Have  you  not  seen  other  Christians  conquer  ?  Oh,  let  your 
memory  charge  you  now  with  brethren  and  sisters  in  whom  you  saw  great  infirmities 
and  sins  at  the  commencement  of  their  spiritual  career ;  but  how  they  have  grown  ! 
How  they  have  vanquished  inbred  sin  !  What  God  has  done  for  them  He  can  do 
for  you.  HI.  Thet  shail  be  driven  out.  1.  This  is  what  Christ  died  for,  to  save 
His  people,  not  from  some  of  their  sins,  but  from  all  their  sins.  2.  This  is  what 
Christ  lives  for.  Christ  in  heaven  is  the  pattern  of  what  we  shall  be,  and  He  will 
not  fail  to  mould  us  after  His  own  model.  We  shall  one  day  be  perfectly  conformed 
to  His  image,  and  then  we  shall  be  with  Him  in  glory.  Our  Lord's  honour  is 
bound  up  with  the  presentation  of  all  His  saints  in  spotless  purity  to  Himself  in  the 
day  of  His  glorious  marriage.  3.  This  is  what  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given  for.  He  is 
not  given  to  come  into  our  hearts,  and  comfort  us  in  our  sins,  but  to  deliver  us 
from  all  evil,  and  to  comfort  us  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  quickens,  He  directs.  He  helps, 
He  illuminates  ;  He  does  a  thousand  things  ;  but,  chiefly,  He  sanctifies  us.  He 
comes  into  the  heart  to  drive  out  every  other  power  that  seeks  to  have  dominion 
there.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  All  sins  to  be  conquered : — They  must  all  be  conquered, 
every  one.  Not  one  single  sin  must  be  allowed  to  occupy  the  love  of  our  heart  and 
the  throne  of  our  nature.  There  are  certain  sins  that,  when  we  begin  to  war  with 
them,  we  very  soon  overcome.  These  Israelites,  when  they  were  up  in  the 
mountains,  and  in  the  woods,  soon  got  at  the  hill-country  Canaanites  and  destroyed 
them ;  but  down  in  the  plain,  where  was  plenty  of  room  for  horses  and  chariots, 
the  Israelites  were  puzzled  what  to  do ;  for  some  of  these  Canaanites  had  chariots 
of  iron,  which  had  scythes  fixed  to  the  axles,  and  when  they  drove  into  the  ranks  of 
an  army,  they  mowed  down  the  people  as  a  reaping  machine  cuts  down  the  standing 
com.  For  a  while  this  seems  to  have  staggeied  the  Israelites  altogether ;  it  was  a 
terrible  business  to  think  about,  and  fear  exaggerated  the  power  of  the  dreadful 
chariots.  Dread  made  them  powerless,  till  they  plucked  up  courage,  and 
when  they  once  plucked  up  courage,  they  found  that  these  chariots  were 
not  nearly  so  terrible  as  they  were  supposed  to  be.  There  were  ways  of 
managing  and  mastering  them,  if  Israel  would  but  trust  in  God,  and 
play  the  man.  'When  a  man  is  converted  by  Divine  grace,  certain  sins  are  readily 
overcome :  they  fly  away  home  at  once,  never  to  return.  Swearing  is  a  kind  of 
Canaanite  that  is  soon  settled  off — driven  out  and  slain.  So  it  is  with  many  other 
forms  of  evil.  We  get  our  swoid  at  their  throats  quickly,  and  by  God's  grace  we 
are  clean  rid  of  all  temptation  to  return  to  them.  Such  sins,  though  once  powerful, 
are  left  dead  on  the  field  of  battle.  I  know  that  some  of  you  could  bear  testimony 
that  your  favoured  sins  became  so  disgusting  to  you  that  you  have  never  had  a 
temptation  to  wander  in  that  direction ;  and  if  a  desire  towards  them  has  crossed 
your  mind,  you  have  revolted  against  it,  and  cast  it  away  from  you  with  indignation. 
But  certain  other  sins  are  much  tougher  to  deal  with.  They  mean  fight,  and  some 
of  them  seem  to  have  as  many  lives  as  a  cat.  There  is  no  killing  them.  When  you 
think  that  you  have  slain  them,  they  are  up  and  at  you  again.  They  may  be  said 
to  have  chariots  of  iron.  1.  These  sins  are  sometimes  those  which  have  gained 
their  power — their  chariots  of  iron — through  long  habit.  "  Can  the  Ethiopian 
change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots?"  No,  he  never  shall,  but  the  grace  of 
God  can  work  the  change.  2.  Some  sins  get  their  chariots  of  iron  from  being 
congenial  to  our  constitution.  Certain  brethren  and  sisters  are  sadly  quick- 
tempered ;  and  as  long  as  ever  they  live,  they  will  have  to  be  on  their  guard  against 


CHAP,  rvm.]  JOSHUA.  241 

growing  Buddenly  angry,  and  speaking  unadvisedly  with  their  lips.  They  are 
quick  and  sensitive,  and  this  might  not  in  itself  be  a  serious  evil ;  but  when  sin 
wields  that  quickness  and  sensitiveness,  evil  comes  of  it.  How  many  a  sincere 
child  of  God  has  had  to  go  for  years  groaning,  as  with  broken  bones,  because  of 
the  quickness  of  his  temper  1  As  for  these  constitutional  sins,  you  must  not  excuse 
them.  Everything  that  is  of  nature — ay,  and  of  your  fallen  n.iture  when  it  is  at 
its  best — has  to  be  put  under  the  feet  of  Christ,  that  grace  may  reign  over  every 
form  of  evil.  3.  Frequently  the  chariot  of  iron  derives  its  force  from  the  fact  that 
a  certain  sin  comes  rushing  upon  you  on  a  sudden,  and  so  takes  you  at  a  disadvan- 
tage. Yet  we  must  not  say,  because  of  this,  "  I  cannot  help  it,"  for  we  ought  to  be 
all  the  more  watchful,  and  live  all  the  nearer  to  God  in  prayer.  4.  Sometimes  these 
sins  get  power  from  the  fact  that,  if  we  do  not  yield  to  them,  we  may  incur  ridicule  on 
account  of  them.  I  would  not,  if  I  could,  prevent  any  of  you  from  being  persecuted 
in  your  measure.  Should  not  soldiers  fight  ?  I  would  stay  the  persecution  for  the 
sake  of  the  persecutor ;  but  for  the  sake  of  you  who  have  to  bear  it,  I  would  hardly  lift 
a  finger  to  screen  you,  because  the  trial  is  an  education  of  the  utmost  value.  5.  Per- 
haps one  of  the  things  that  is  worst  of  all  to  a  Christian  is,  that  certain  sins  are 
supposed  to  be  irresistible.    It  is  a  popular  error,  and  a  very  pernicious  one.    {ibid.) 


CHAPTEB  XVm. 


Vers.  1-28.  The  whole  congregation  .  .  .  assembled  together  at  Shiloh,  and  set 
up  the  tabernacle. — Religion  in  the  new  land  : — ^An  event  of  great  importance  now 
occurs ;  the  civil  arrangements  of  the  countiy  are  in  a  measure  provided  for,  and 
it  is  time  to  set  in  order  the  ecclesiastical  establishment.  First,  a  place  has  to  be 
found  as  the  centre  of  the  religious  life ;  next,  the  tabernacle  has  to  be  erected  at 
that  place — and  this  is  to  be  done  in  the  presence  of  all  the  congregation.  It  is 
well  that  a  godly  man  like  Joshua  is  at  the  head  of  the  nation :  a  less  earnest 
servant  of  God  might  have  left  this  great  work  unheeded.  How  often,  in  the 
emigrations  of  men,  drawn  far  from  their  native  land  in  search  of  a  new  home, 
have  arrangements  for  Divine  service  been  forgotten !  In  such  cases  the 
degeneracy  into  rough  manners,  uncouth  ways  of  life,  perhaps  into  profanity, 
debauchery,  and  lawlessness,  has  usually  been  awfully  rapid.  On  the  other  hand, 
when  the  rule  of  the  old  puritan  has  been  followed,  •'  Wherever  I  have  a  house, 
there  God  shall  have  an  altar  " ;  when  the  modest  spire  of  the  wooden  church  in 
the  prairie  indicates  that  regard  has  been  had  to  the  gospel  precept — "  Seek  ye  first 
the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto 
you  " — a  touch  of  heaven  is  imparted  to  the  rude  and  primitive  settlement ;  we  may 
beheve  that  the  spirit  of  Christ  is  not  unknown  ;  the  angels  of  virtue  and  piety  are 
surely  hovering  round  it.  The  narrative  is  very  brief,  and  no  reason  is  given  why 
Shiloh  was  selected  as  the  religious  centre  of  the  nation.  We  should  have  thought 
that  the  preference  would  have  been  given  to  Shechem,  a  few  miles  north,  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  which  had  already  been  consecrated  in  a 
sense  to  God.  That  Shiloh  had  been  chosen  by  Divine  direction  we  can  hardly 
doubt,  although  there  may  have  been  reasons  of  various  kinds  that  commended  it 
to  Joshua.  Situated  about  half-way  between  Bethel  and  Shechem,  in  the  tribe  of 
Ephraim,  it  was  close  to  the  centre  of  the  country,  and,  moreover,  not  difficult  of 
access  for  the  eastern  tribes.  Here,  then,  assembled  the  whole  congregation  of  the 
children  of  Israel,  to  set  up  the  tabernacle,  probably  with  some  such  rites  as  David 
performed  when  it  was  transferred  from  the  house  of  Obed-Edom  to  Mount  Zion. 
Hitherto  it  had  remained  at  Gilgal,  the  headquarters  and  depot  of  the  nation. 
The  "  whole  congregation "  that  now  assembled  does  not  necessarily  mean  the 
whole  community,  but  only  selected  representatives,  not  only  of  the  part  that  had 
been  engaged  in  warfare,  but  also  of  the  rest  of  the  nation.  (W.  G.  Blaihie,  D.D.) 
How  long  are  ye  slack  to  go  to  possess  the  land  ? — Joshua's  remonstrance  : — I.  Is 

NOT   THE   GOODLY  PORTION   FREELY  PROVIDED,  AND  WAITING  TOUR  ACCEPTANCE  ?      Hath 

not  the  Lord  God  of  your  fathers  freely  given  you  a  title  to  the  country  of  peace 
and  rest  in  heaven  ?  May  not  "  an  entrance  be  ministered  unto  you  abundantly  "  ? 
<fcc.  His  hand  broke  asunder  your  chains,  when  ye  lay  helpless  in  the  land  of  your 
spiritual  bondage — when  Satan  was  your  taskmaster,  sin  your  service,  and  d'eatii 

16 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

your  wages.  He  paid  the  full  ransom  of  your  deliverance.  The  same  hand  ^s-hich 
took  you  forth  from  the  captivity  and  death  of  sin  has  still  led  you  onward, 
cheered  with  increasing  hope  of  reposing  in  the  kingdom  and  glory  of  Jesus  Christ. 
As  your  day,  so  has  your  strength  been.  Is  there  then,  in  the  little  circle  of  perish- 
ing enjoyments  around  you,  is  there,  even  among  the  present  spiritual  privileges 
with  which  Divine  love  has  invested  you,  anything  sufficiently  great  to  satisfy  the 
aspirations  of  one  who  looks  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal 

life  ?       II.    Is    NOT   THE   ATTAINMENT    OF    SALVATION    THE    GEEAT    BUSINESS    OF    LIFE,  TO 

WHICH  YE  sHOTTLD  BE  DEVOTED  ?  TouT  life,  in  its  best  and  only  worthy  acceptation, 
consists  not  in  seeking  "  what  ye  shall  eat,  and  what  ye  shall  drini,  and  where- 
withal ye  shall  be  clothed,"  and  how  ye  shall  enjoy  the  present,  and  be  aggrandised 
for  the  future ;  but  in  holy  resolve  and  aim  to  seek  the  salvation  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  with  eternal  glory.  Be  your  portion  of  present  advantages,  whether 
temporal  or  spiritual,  what  it  may,  let  it  not  absorb  your  minds,  that  ye  may  rest 
upon  it,  and  seek  nothing  beyond.  Do  not  live  so  much  beneath  your  privileges 
as  to  be  satisfied  with  the  mere  shadow  of  good ;  while  the  pure,  perfect,  unsatia- 
ting,  and  everlasting  reality  solicits  you  in  vain.  III.  Have  te  not  lost  timb 
ENOUGH  alkeadt  ?  If  we  look  inward  to  the  experience  of  our  own  hearts — if  we 
recollect  the  testimony  of  years  past  and  gone,  they  will  surely  speak  of  long  and 
guilty  inattention  to  the  duty  of  serving  God  who  hath  called  us  to  His  kingdom 
and  glory.  How  many  opportunities  have  ye  possessed  of  walking  with  God,  like 
Enoch,  and  of  illustrating  the  holy  character  of  His  religion  so  unequivocally,  that 
men  must  have  taken  knowledge  of  you  that  you  had  been  with  Jesus  1  What 
then  remains  ?  Eedeem  the  time  by  an  increasing  zeal  and  diligence  to  do  the 
work  of  God,  and  to  attain  by  His  grace  a  meetness  for  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  Ught.  {R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.)  Slack  to  possess  : — The  weakness  of 
our  nature  discovers  itself,  even  under  the  most  prosperous  and  encouraging 
circumstances.  This  degrades  our  conquests  and  diminishes  the  glory  of  our 
triumphs.  Either  self-indulgence,  indolence,  or  indifference  was  the  cause  why 
they  were  slack  to  go  to  possess  the  land.  The  luxury  of  new  and  undisturbed 
possessions  succeeding  to  the  incessant  toils  and  privations  of  warfare  too  long, 
and  it  may  be  too  immoderately,  entwined  about  their  earthly  affections,  and 
retained  them  in  the  lap  of  indulgence.  A  condition  Uke  this,  so  congenial  with 
the  fleshly  desires  of  the  heart,  induced  a  frame  of  indolence  which  was  not  only 
indisposed  bat  might  render  them  indifferent  to  new  achievements.  How 
unfavourable  to  those  energies  and  exertions  which  require  the  mortification  of 
self-indulgence  as  a  condition  of  uninterrupted  prosperity  1  This  has  often  been 
found  attended  with  more  dangerous  results  than  even  the  most  pressing  adversity. 
Who  has  not  needed  this  reproof  again  and  again  ?  "  Why  are  ye  slack  to  go  to 
possess  the  land  ?  "  Present  gratifications  have  made  us  indifferent  to  future 
interests ;  and  private  satisfactions  to  public  duties.  Let  the  Christian  remember 
that  he  owes  much  to  the  interests  of  others,  not  only  to  the  present,  but  even  to 
future  generations,  as  far  as  concerns  the  Church  of  God ;  and  therefore,  to  live  to 
himself,  inclosed  within  the  narrow  limits  of  his  own  person  and  concerns,  is 
unworthy  the  greatness  of  his  character,  and  far  beneath  the  dignity  of  his  being. 
Though  nothing  were  wanting  to  render  complete  our  personal  estate  or  family 
patrimony,  yet  let  us  remember  that  we  have  much  to  achieve  for  others,  for  our 
brethren,  and  the  cause  of  truth,  that  require  self-denying  and  Bell-sacrificing 
exertiona.    {W.  Seaton.) 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


Vers.  1-51.  The  part  of  the  children  of  Judali  was  too  mnch  for  them :  there- 
fore the  children  of  Simeon  had  their  inheritance  within  the  inheritance  of  them. 
— A  too  extensive  earthly  portion  : — A  fine  lesson  for  such  who,  in  the  amplitude  of 
their  earthly  portion,  have  more  than  themselves  or  their  famihes  in  conscience 
require,  when  numbers  of  their  brethren,  high-born  as  themselves  and  heirs  to  the 
noblest  hopes,  have  many  of  them  not  only  a  scanty  lot,  but  scarcely  the  common 
necessaries  of  life.  If  the  one  has  too  little,  surely  it  may  be  said,  though  few  are 
likely  to  allow  it,  the  other  has  too  much.  And  why  this  disparity  in  the  condition 
of  the  brethren  but  for  the  trial  of  faith  in  the  one  and  the  display  of  charity  in 


CHAP.  XIX.3  JOSHUA,  243 

the  other  ?  What  an  admonition  in  so  impoverished  a  world  as  this,  where  so 
many,  comparatively  speaking,  yea,  and  in  cases  not  a  few,  literally  are  houseless 
and  helpless,  without  means  of  daily  sustenance,  to  contract  their  own  borders  that 
room  may  be  given  to  these  destitute  Simeonites.  The  first  Christians  did  this  to 
an  extent  not  now  required  :  so  powerfully  did  the  love  of  Christ  operate  in  their 
hearts,  and  so  little  hold  had  earthly  things  of  their  affections  when  placed  in 
competition  with  spiritual  and  heaveidy  interests,  that  the  multitude  of  them  that 
believed  were  of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul — and  in  this  too,  in  practice  as  well  as 
in  sentiment  (Acts  iv.  34,  35).  Without  reducing  to  one  common  stock,  that 
distribution  which  should  be  alike  to  all,  a  state  of  things  evidently  adapted 
only  to  times  of  persecution,  and  that  under  no  other  circumstances  could  answer 
the  designs  of  Providence  in  a  condition  of  trial  common  to  this  life,  who  is 
there  that  thinks  he  has  too  much,  and  is  so  affected  with  the  little  which 
others  have  of  the  same  household  of  faith,  that  he  is  cheerfully  ready  to 
allow  a  p^i't  in  his  portion?  therein  discovering  that  amiable  feature  of  the 
Christian  character  which  the  apostle  has  marked  as  strikingly  beautiful, 
"  willing  to  distribute."  (W.  Seaton.)  An  inheritance  to  Joshua. — The  leader 
disinterested : — As  in  a  shipwreck  the  captain  is  the  last  to  leave  the  doomed 
vessel,  so  here  the  leader  of  the  nation  was  the  last  to  receive  a  portion.  With 
lare  self-denial  he  waited  till  every  one  else  was  provided  for.  Here  we  have 
a  glimpse  of  his  noble  spirit.  That  there  would  be  much  grumbling  over  the 
division  of  the  country  he  no  doubt  counted  inevitable,  and  that  the  people  would 
be  disposed  to  come  with  their  complaints  to  him  followed  as  a  matter  of  course. 
See  how  he  circumvents  them  1  Whoever  might  be  disposed  to  go  to  him  com- 
plaining of  his  lot  knew  the  ready  answer  he  would  get — "  You  are  not  worse  off 
than  I  am,  for  as  yet  I  have  got  none  !  "  Joshua  was  content  to  see  the  fairest 
inheritance  disposed  of  to  others,  while  as  yet  none  had  been  allotted  to  him.  He 
might  have  asked  for  an  inheritance  in  the  fertile  and  beautiful  vale  of  Shechem, 
consecrated  by  one  of  the  earliest  promises  to  Abraham,  near  to  Jacob's  well  and 
his  ancestor  Joseph's  tomb,  or  under  shadow  of  the  two  mountains,  Ebal  and 
Gerizim,  where  so  solemn  a  transaction  had  taken  place  after  his  people  entered 
the  land.  He  asks  for  nothing  of  the  kind,  but  for  a  spot  on  one  of  the  highland 
hills  of  Ephraim,  a  place  so  obscure  that  no  trace  of  it  remains.  It  is  described  iu 
Judges  ii.  9  as  "  Timnath-heres,  in  the  hiU  country  of  Ephraim,  on  the  north  of  the 
mountain  of  Gaash."  The  north  side  of  the  mountain  does  not  indicate  a  spot 
remarkable  either  for  amenity  or  fertility.  In  the  days  of  Jerome  his  friend  Paula 
is  said  to  have  expressed  surprise  that  the  distributer  of  the  whole  country  reserved 
so  wild  and  mountainous  a  district  for  himself.  His  choice  of  it  was  a  splendid 
rebuke  to  the  grumbling  of  his  tribe,  to  the  pride  and  selfishness  of  the  "  great 
people  "  who  would  not  be  content  with  a  single  lot,  and  wished  an  additional  one 
to  be  assigned  to  them.  "  Up  with  you  to  the  mountain,"  was  Joshua's  spirited 
reply;  "  cut  down  the  wood,  and  drive  out  the  Canaanites  !  "  In  any  case,  he  set 
a  splendid  example  of  disinterested  humility.  How  nobly  contrasted  with  men 
like  Napoleon,  who  used  his  influence  so  greedily  for  the  enrichment  and  aggran- 
disement of  every  member  of  his  family !  Joshua  came  very  near  to  the  spirit  of 
our  blessed  Lord.  (W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.)  Self  the  last  to  be  considered  : — The 
servant,  though  honourable  above  all,  and  worthy  a  double  portion,  was  as  the 
last  and  least  among  them,  and  gave  rest  to  others  before  he  took  rest  himself.  In 
this  he  was  a  striking  type  of  that  adorable  Eedeemer,  the  captain  of  the  host  of 
the  Lord,  who,  till  He  had  obtained  full  conquest  and  possession  for  His  people,  sat 
not  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  in  the  presence  of  His  triumphant  Church. 
Though  Lord  of  all,  yet  He  became  the  servant  of  all,  and  as  an  example  ever  to  be 
studied  and  copied  by  His  followers,  said  in  expressive  condescension  and  abase- 
ment, "Am  not  I  among  you  as  one  that  serveth?"  Oh  I  that  this  mind  were 
more  evidently  in  us  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus,  who,  in  all  He  sacrificed, 
suffered,  and  forewent,  ever  looked  on  the  things  of  others,  and  in  His  self- 
emptyings  placed  His  own  felicity  and  glory  in  the  salvation  of  His  people.  The 
lot  assigned  Joshua  was  his  choice,  and  within  the  portion  of  his  own  tribe.  There 
was  nothing  of  pre-eminence  to  distinguish  it  from  the  possession  of  others,  except 
as  himself  gave  note  to  it,  and  being  the  residence  of  one  so  exalted  in  character,  so 
great  in  achievements.  It  does  not  appear  the  best  of  the  land,  yet  it  possessed 
one  advantage,  beyond  what  it  could  have  had  in  fertility  and  extent,  being  near  to 
ShUoh,  the  habitation  of  holiness  and  seat  of  mercy.  Lot  chose  Sodom  for  the 
pleasantness  and  fertility  of  its  plain,  bat  Joshua  chose  Timnath-serah  for  the 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

holiness  of  its  vicinity.  How  few  in  the  settlements  of  life,  whose  means  afford  the 
advantage  of  choice,  are  determined  by  considerations  of  piety  and  the  hope  of 
rendering  service  to  God  and  His  people  !  Generally  a  residence  is  sought  which 
promises  gratifications  most  congenial  with  their  earthly  wishes,  or  where  they  may 
receive  the  greatest  good  to  themselves,  and  not  where  they  may  do  the  greatest 
good  to  others.    {W.  SeaUm,  M.A.) 


CHAPTEB  XX. 

Vebs.  1-9.  Cities  of  refuge. — The  cities  of  refuge : — 1.  The  first  thought  that 
naturally  occurs  to  us  when  we  read  of  these  cities  concerns  the  sanctity  of  human 
life ;  or,  if  we  take  the  material  symbol,  the  preciousness  of  human  blood.  God 
wished  to  impress  on  His  people  that  to  put  an  end  to  a  man's  life  under  any 
circumstances  was  a  serious  thing.  Man  was  something  higher  than  the  beasts 
that  perish.  It  is  not  a  very  pleasing  feature  of  the  Hebrew  economy  that  this 
regard  to  the  sanctity  of  human  Ufe  was  limited  to  members  of  the  Hebrew  nation. 
All  outside  the  Hebrew  circle  were  treated  as  little  better  than  the  beasts  that  perish. 
For  Canaanites  there  was  nothing  but  indiscriminate  slaughter.  Even  in  the  times 
of  King  David  we  find  a  barbarity  in  the  treatment  of  enemies  that  seems  to  shut 
out  all  the  sense  of  brotherhood,  and  to  smother  all  claim  to  compassion.  We 
have  here  a  point  in  which  even  the  Hebrew  race  were  still  far  behind.  They  had 
not  come  under  the  influence  of  that  blessed  Teacher  who  taught  us  to  love  our 
enemies.  2.  Even  as  apportioned  to  the  Hebrew  people,  there  was  still  an  uncivilised 
element  in  the  arrangements  connected  with  these  cities  of  refuge.  This  lay  in  the 
practice  of  making  the  go-el,  or  nearest  of  kin,  the  avenger  of  blood.  Had  the  law 
been  perfect,  it  would  have  simply  handed  over  the  killer  to  the  magistrate,  whose 
duty  would  have  been  calmly  to  investigate  the  case,  and  either  punish  or  acquit, 
according  as  he  should  find  that  the  man  had  committed  a  crime  or  had  caused  a 
misfortune.  It  was  characteristic  of  the  Hebrew  legislation  that  it  adapted  itself  to 
the  condition  of  things  which  it  found,  and  not  to  an  ideal  perfection  which  the 
people  were  not  capable  of  at  once  realising.  In  the  office  of  the  go-el  there  was 
much  that  was  of  wholesome  tendency.  The  feehng  was  deeply  rooted  in  the 
Hebrew  mind  that  the  nearest  of  kin  was  the  guardian  of  his  brother's  life,  and  for 
this  reason  he  was  bound  to  avenge  his  death ;  and  instead  of  crossing  this  feeling, 
or  seeking  wholly  to  uproot  it,  the  object  of  Moses  was  to  place  it  under  salutary 
checks,  which  should  prevent  it  from  inflicting  gross  injustice  where  no  crime  had 
really  Ijeen  committed.  3.  The  course  to  be  followed  by  the  involuntary  manslayer 
was  very  minutely  prescribed.  He  was  to  hurry  with  aU  speed  to  the  nearest  city 
of  refuge,  and  stand  at  the  entering  of  the  gate  till  the  elders  assembled,  and  then 
to  declare  his  cause  in  their  ears.  If  he  failed  to  estabUsh  his  innocence,  he  got  no 
protection  ;  but  if  he  made  out  his  case  he  was  free  from  the  avenger  of  blood,  so 
long  as  he  remained  within  the  city  or  its  precincts.  If,  however,  he  wandered  out, 
he  was  at  the  mercy  of  the  avenger.  Further,  he  was  to  remain  in  the  city  till  the 
death  of  the  high  priest,  it  being  probable  that  by  that  time  all  keen  feeling  in 
reference  to  this  deed  would  have  subsided,  and  no  one  would  then  think  that 
justice  had  been  defrauded  when  a  man  with  blood  on  his  hands  was  allowed  to  go 
at  large.  4.  As  it  was,  the  involuntary  manslayer  had  thus  to  undergo  a 
considerable  penalty.  Having  to  reside  in  the  city  of  refuge,  he  could  no  longer 
cultivate  his  farm  or  follow  his  ordinary  avocations ;  he  must  have  found  the 
means  of  living  in  some  new  employment  as  best  he  could.  His  friendships,  his 
whole  associations  in  life,  were  changed ;  perhaps  he  was  even  separated  from  hia 
family.  To  us  all  this  appears  a  harder  line  than  justice  would  have  prescribed. 
But,  on  the  one  hand,  it  was  a  necessary  testimony  to  the  strong,  though  somewhat 
unreasonable,  feeling  respecting  the  awf ulness,  through  whatever  cause,  of  shedding 
innocent  blood.  Then,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fact  that  the  involuntary  destruction 
of  life  was  sure,  even  at  the  best,  to  be  followed  by  such  consequences,  was  fitted  to 
make  men  very  careful.  In  turning  an  incident  like  this  to  account,  as  bearing  on 
our  modern  life,  we  are  led  to  think  how  much  harm  we  are  liable  to  do  to  others 
without  intending  harm,  and  how  deeply  we  ought  to  be  affected  by  this  considera- 
tion when  we  discover  what  we  have  really  done.    And  where  is  the  man — ^parent, 


CHAP.  XX.]  JOSHUA.  245 

teacher,  pastor,  or  friend — that  does  not  become  conscious,  at  some  time  or  other, 
of  having  influenced  for  harm  those  committed  to  his  care  ?  We  taught  them, 
perhaps,  to  despise  some  good  man  whose  true  worth  we  have  afterwards  been  led 
to  see.  We  repressed  their  zeal  when  we  thought  it  misdirected,  with  a  force 
which  chilled  their  enthusiasm  and  carnalised  their  hearts.  We  failed  to  stimulate 
them  to  decision  for  Christ,  and  allowed  the  golden  opportunity  to  pass  which 
might  have  settled  their  relation  to  God  all  the  rest  of  their  life.  The  great 
realities  of  the  spiritual  life  were  not  brought  home  to  them  with  the  earnestness, 
the  fideUty,  the  affection  that  was  fitting.  "Who  can  understand  his  errors?" 
Who  among  us  but,  as  he  turns  some  new  corner  in  the  path  of  life,  as  he  reaches 
some  new  view-point,  as  he  sees  a  new  flash  from  heaven  reflected  on  the  past — 
who  among  us  but  feels  profoundly  that  all  his  life  has  been  marred  by  unsuspected 
flaws,  and  almost  wishes  that  he  had  never  been  born  ?  Is  there  no  city  of  refuge 
for  us  to  fly  to,  and  to  escape  the  condemnation  of  our  hearts  ?  It  is  here  that  the 
blessed  Lord  presents  Himself  to  us  in  a  most  blessed  light.  "  Come  unto  Me,  aU 
ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  And  let  us  learn  a 
lesson  of  charity.  Let  us  learn  to  be  very  considerate  of  mischief  done  by  others 
either  unintentionally  or  in  ignorance.  What  more  inexcusable  than  the  excite- 
ment of  parents  over  their  children  or  of  masters  over  their  servants  when,  most 
undesignedly  and  not  through  sheer  carelessness,  an  article  of  some  value  is  broken 
or  damaged?  Let  them  have  their  city  of  refuge  for  undesigned  offences,  and 
never  again  pursue  them  or  fall  on  them  in  the  excited  spirit  of  the  avenger  of 
blood  1  So  also  with  regard  to  opinions.  Many  who  differ  from  us  in  religious 
opinion  differ  through  ignorance.  They  have  inherited  their  opinions  from  their 
parents  or  their  other  ancestors.  If  you  are  not  called  to  provide  for  them  a  city 
of  refuge,  cover  them  at  least  with  the  mantle  of  charity.  Believe  that  their 
intentions  are  better  than  their  acts.  {W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.)  The  cities  of 
refuge: — ^L  The  right  to  life.  Alone  among  the  nations  stood  Israel  in  the 
value  set  upon  human  life.  Its  sacred  book  enjoined  its  worth.  Philosophically, 
such  a  sacred  value  upon  life  would  be  expected  of  the  people  of  God.  The  value 
of  life  increases  in  ratio  with  the  belief  in  God  and  immortaUty.  Deny  immortality 
and  you  have  prepared  the  ground  for  suicide.  They  who  say,  "  Let  us  eat  and 
drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die,"  may  voluntarily  end  the  life  before  to-morrow  comes. 
Greece  with  all  her  learning  was  far  behind.  Aristotle  and  Plato  both  advised 
putting  to  death  the  young  and  sickly  among  children.  Plutarch  records  having 
seen  many  youths  whipped  to  death  at  the  foot  of  the  altar  of  Diana.  Seneca 
advised  the  drowning  of  disabled  children — a  course  that  Cicero  commended. 
Heathenism  gives  but  a  dark  history.  It  is  one  of  the  last  lessons  learned  that 
each  human  life  is  its  own  master.  No  one  can  take  it  away  except  for  a  trans- 
cendent reason,  n.  The  surbendeb  of  life  to  what  is  geeateb.  It  is  a  larger 
condition  to  be  good  than  to  hve  wrongly.  Better  surrender  life  than  do  wrong. 
On  the  other  hand,  better  be  murdered  than  be  a  murderer.  Better  suffer  wrong 
than  do  wrong.  Whether  in  this  late  century  the  removal  of  capital  punishment 
would  increase  crime  we  cannot  verify ;  but  the  old  law  of  the  avenger  is  not  yet 
stricken  from  the  statutes  of  civilisation.  No  refuge  in  God's  sight  for  the  hating 
heart.  No  palliation  of  deliberate  human  deeds  of  wickedness.  No  city  of  refuge 
for  a  murderer.  HI.  The  motive  marks  the  character.  It  is  not  the  mere  deed 
that  reveals  the  man.  Nor  is  it  the  catastrophe  that  marks  the  deed.  Every  one's 
motive  is  greater  than  aU  he  does.  The  man  who  hates  his  brother  is  a  murderer 
as  truly  as  he  who  kills.  Not  always  what  one  does,  but  what  he  would  do,  is  the 
standard  of  his  character.  Take  away  every  outside  restraint ;  leave  one  alone 
with  himself ;  and  his  unhindered  wish  and  motive  mark  just  what  he  is.  The 
intentional  taking  away  of  life  makes  murder ;  the  unintentional  relieves  from 
all  crime.  Crime,  therefore,  does  not  find  its  way  from  the  hand,  but  from  the 
heart.  Thus  does  God  look  on  the  heart.  IV.  The  Divine  forbearance 
WITH  HUMAN  BLUNDERiNGS.  This  is  what  the  city  of  refuge  expressly  declares. 
The  stain  of  the  deed  of  shedding  blood  rests  in  the  fact  that  the  life  was 
made  in  the  Divine  likeness.  The  greatness  of  the  life  was  evident  in  its 
kinship  with  God.  Death  by  accident  does  not  take  away  the  terrible  sorrow 
that  settles  like  a  pall.  The  careless  taker  away  of  life  may  go  insane  in  his 
despair ;  but  the  awful  agony  of  the  blunderer  does  not  make  the  loss  any  the  less 
heavy.  It  will  call  out  pity  even  for  the  careless  one ;  but  it  will  not  counter- 
balance the  loss.  V.  The  conditions  of  refuge.  Each  unfortunate  held  the 
keeping  of  his  life  in  his  own  hands.    The  provided  city  did  not  alone  save  the 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

delinquent  from  the  avenger.  Mansions  in  it  were  provided  for  all  who  should 
enter  by  right.  Handicraft  was  taught  those  who  found  shelter  within  its  walls. 
Pood  and  raiment  were  furnished  by  kind  hands  outside  the  gates  in  addition  to 
what  they  themselves  should  gather  or  earn  for  themselves.  They  had  much 
provided ;  but  the  conditions  they  must  themselves  fulfil.  It  was  not  enough  to 
rest  within  sight  of  the  city ;  they  must  enter  in.  They  must  not  venture  forth  ; 
only  as  they  remained  could  they  be  safe.  We  have  no  cities  of  refuge  now ;  but 
God  is  our  refuge.  He  is  the  hope  of  the  careless  who  turn  to  Him.  The  conditions 
we  cannot  disregard.  He  gives  the  opportunities,  of  which  we  must  take  advantage 
for  ourselves.  We  cannot  set  aside  His  condition.  VI.  The  responsibiiitt  fok 
LIFE  IN  THE  CHOICES  WE  MAKE.  In  a  Certain  sense  the  safety  of  each  unfortunate 
rested  solely  upon  himself.  It  was  no  time  for  theories ;  it  was  the  time  for  action ; 
and  on  that  action  depended  his  own  life.  He  held  his  temporal  safety  in  his  own 
care  and  keeping.  In  thousands  of  ways  we  are  thus  making  choices  that  wiU 
shape  our  life  and  conduct  in  all  future  time.  We  have  the  power  to  save  ourselves 
or  to  destroy.  Peter  had  the  opportunity  to  save  his  Lord  even  when  he  denied 
Him.  Judas  could  have  shielded  his  Master  instead  of  betraying  Him.  Each  one 
of  us  can  choose  whom  to  serve.  The  choice  of  evil  made  Peter  weep,  and  made 
Judas  become  a  suicide.  We  cannot  choose  evil  and  live.  If  we  choose  God  for 
our  refuge,  we  shall  not  die.  He  is  our  city.  It  rests  with  us  to  choose  what  we 
shall  be.  (David  0.  Mears.)  Blood-guiltiness  removed  from  the  Lord's  host;  or, 
the  cities  of  refuge : — I.  A  beneficent  political  institution.  In  ancient  Greece 
and  Eome  there  were  asylums  and  shrines  where  the  supposed  sanctity  of  the 
place  sheltered  the  blood-stained  fugitive  from  righteous  retribution ;  and  it  is 
probable  that  here,  as  in  innumerable  other  instances,  the  pagan  institution  was 
but  an  imitation  of  the  Divine.  In  our  own  country,  too,  there  were,  in  former 
times,  similar  sanctuaries.  But  how  different  the  copy  from  the  pattern — the  one 
institution  how  pernicious,  the  other  how  salutary !  By  the  so-called  sanctuaries 
all  that  was  unsanctified  was  promoted,  for  here  wilful  murderers  were  received, 
who,  after  a  short  period,  were  permitted  to  go  forth  to  repeat  a  like  violence  with 
a  like  impunity.  Not  thus  was  it  with  him  who  fled  to  the  city  of  refuge.  We 
have  heard  of  Indian  savages  who,  when  one  of  their  people  is  killed  by  a  hostile 
tribe,  wiU  go  out  and  kill  the  first  member  of  that  tribe  whom  they  may  meet.  We 
have  heard,  too,  of  those  who  for  years  would  cherish  vindictiveness  and  deadly 
hate  against  some  enemy.  Quite  opposite  to  any  such  spirit  of  retaliation  is  that 
which  was  to  stimulate  the  Goel  in  his  pursuit.  The  express  command  of  God 
placed  a  sword  in  his  hand  which  he  dared  not  sheathe.  As  one  entrusted  with  a 
prisoner  of  war,  so  was  it,  as  it  were,  said  to  him,  "  Thy  life  for  his  if  thou  let  him 
go."  n.  A  TYPE  OF  Chbist.  Each  person  concerned,  each  regulation  for  the 
direction  of  the  various  parties,  each  circumstance  of  the  case  finds  its  counterpart 
in  the  gospel  antitype.  1.  To  begin  with  the  unfortunate  homicide  himself — he 
represents  the  sinner  in  his  guilt  and  danger,  under  the  wrath  of  God.  2.  Does 
any  one  doubt  the  efficacy  of  God's  way  of  saving  sinners  ?  Would  any  one  fain 
flee  to  other  refuges  ?  Ah,  they  are  but  refuges  of  lies.  3.  Money  could  procure 
no  remission;  nor  will  riches  avail  "in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  wrath."  4.  Mercy 
could  not  be  shown  unless  the  prescribed  conditions  were  observed.  5.  Up,  then, 
and  flee,  thou  yet  unsaved  one!  Wait  not  vainly  tiU  others  bear  thee  thither 
perforce.  Complain  not  of  thy  God  as  an  austere  judge  because  He  saith,  "The 
soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die  "  ;  but  bless  Him  for  His  clemency  in  preparing  thee 
a  place  of  safety.  6.  This  terrible  Goel — the  avenger  of  blood — whose  fatal  purpose 
no  reward,  no  argument,  no  entreaty  can  turn  aside,  is  but  an  impersonation  of  the 
righteous  anger  of  the  Lord  against  the  sinner.  7.  That  we  may  more  fully 
perceive  the  appositeness  of  the  illustration  which  the  cities  of  refuge  furnish  of  the 
person  and  work  of  the  Redeemer,  let  us  notice  their  position  in  the  country — "  in 
the  midst,"  not  in  the  borders,  or  in  the  corners  of  the  land  (Deut.  xix.  2).  8.  The 
very  names  of  the  six  cities  are,  to  say  the  least,  in  keeping  with  the  symboHsm  of 
the  subject.  9.  The  cities  of  refuge  were  not  open  to  native  Israelites  only,  but 
"the  stranger"  and  "the  sojourner" — in  fact,  "every  one"  among  them  was 
accepted  (Num.  xxxv.  15).  Thus  none  is  accounted  an  alien  who,  owning  himself 
a  sinner,  flies  to  Christ.  10.  There  is  a  beautiful  lesson  in  the  fact  that  not  only 
the  city  itself,  but  the  very  suburbs,  afforded  safety.  11.  The  isolation,  the  restric- 
tions, and  the  privations  experienced  by  him  who  was  confined  within  the  city  of 
refuge  may  be  compared  to  the  separation  of  the  Christian  from  the  world  and  the 
things  of  the  world ;  but  what,  after  all,  are  temporary  trials,  if  the  precious  life  be 


CHAP.  XX.]  JOSHUA.  247 

spared  ?  12.  We  have  spoken  of  the  danger  of  delay  in  seeking  the  refuge.  Let 
us  earnestly  bear  in  mind  the  danger  of  the  opposite  kind,  namely,  of  afterwards 
quitting  the  safe  retreat.  13.  At  the  death  of  the  high  priest  the  manslayer  was 
set  free.  14.  Before  the  homicide  could  be  received  as  a  permanent  inmate  of  the 
city  of  refuge,  a  trial  was  appointed.  If  he  was  acquitted,  he  was  admitted  there  ; 
but  if  condemned  as  a  designing  murderer,  he  was  given  up  to  the  avenger  for 
summary  execution.  This  condemnation  may  be  read  in  two  ways.  It  suggests — 
1.  A  blessed  contrast.  We  have  been  tried,  and  found  guilty.  Our  sins  are  of 
crimson  dye.  Yet  the  door  of  mercy  stands  still  open ;  nay,  more,  it  is  the  full 
admission  of  our  guilt,  and  not  the  profession  of  our  innocence,  that  is  the  condition 
of  our  entrance  thereat.  2.  A  solemn  comparison.  Though  it  be  so,  that  for  all 
sin  there  is  a  pardon,  yet  the  Scripture  speaks  of  "  a  sin  that  is  unto  death."  The 
case  of  a  deliberate  murderer,  in  contradistinction  to  an  unwitting  manslayer, 
illustrates  that  of  one  whose  sins  are  not  the  sins  of  ignorance,  but  presumptuous 
sins,  namely,  who  has  deliberately  and  persistently  sinned  against  light  and  know- 
ledge. From  this  depth  of  wickedness,  for  which  no  city  of  refuge  is  provided,  and 
for  which  there  is  no  forgiveness,  either  in  this  world  or  the  next,  the  Lord 
graciously  preserve  us !  (G.  W.  Butler,  MA.)  The  cities  of  refuge  : — I.  The 
APPOINTMENT  AND  USE  OF  THESE  CITIES.  It  is  veiy  ofteu  Said  by  thoughtless  and 
ignorant  persons  that  the  laws  of  the  Old  Testament  were  barbarous  and  cruel. 
To  this  two  answers  might  be  made  :  First,  that  they  were  a  great  advance  upon 
any  other  legislation  at  the  period  when  they  were  given,  and  were  full  of  wise 
sanitary  provisions,  and  of  tender  care  for  human  life  and  welfare  ;  secondly,  that 
the  objection  urged  does  not  he  against  Moses,  but  against  the  human  race  at  that 
stage  of  its  history.  We  are  apt  to  forget  that  the  laws  of  Moses  were  adaptations 
to  an  existing  and  very  low  order  of  society,  and  were  designed  to  be  a  great 
training-school,  leading  children  up  into  manhood.  The  cities  of  refuge  were  _  a 
merciful  provision  in  times  of  lawless  vengeance,  and  the  entire  legislation  in 
regard  to  them  was  founded  on  an  existing  and  very  imperfect  condition  of  society, 
while  it  looked  towards  a  perfect  state,  towards  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  II.  The 
BEASONS  roB  THE  APPOINTMENT  OF  THESE  CITIES.  1.  All  men  at  that  early  day 
recognised  the  right  to  kill  an  assassin ;  all  exercised  the  right,  or  refrained  from 
doing  so,  at  their  will ;  but  Jehovah  gave  a  positive  command  to  Israel,  without 
alternative.  It  should  be  blood  for  blood  ;  and  it  certainly  rests  with  the  opposers 
of  capital  punishment  to-day  to  show  when  and  how  this  original  law  was  abrogated. 
How  it  should  be  carried  out  was  a  matter  of  secondary  consequence;  that  it  should 
be  observed  was  the  first  thing.  When  the  law  was  given,  the  blood-avenger  did 
what  we  to-day  remand  to  courts  of  law.  It  was  a  step,  surely,  beyond  an  utterly 
lawless  vengeance  to  appoint  one  person  to  carry  out  the  Divine  will  that  hf  e  should 
be  forfeited  for  life.  2.  But  while  this  was  the  general  rule,  it  was  not  a  merciless 
and  blind  one ;  for  the  law  distinguished  between  voluntary  and  unintentional 
homicide.  It  judged  an  act  by  its  motives,  and  thus  lifted  the  whole  question  of 
punishment  out  of  the  sphere  of  personal  revenge  and  family  spite.  Here  at  the 
very  threshold  of  civilisation  how  clearly  man  is  treated  as  a  free  moral  agent, 
responsible  for  his  acts,  and  yet  judged  by  his  motives  !  The  materialism  of  to-day, 
which  endeavours  to  sweep  away  this  primitive  morahty,  has  human  nature 
against  it.  3.  Then,  in  a  system  intended  to  train  a  nation  into  habits  of  self- 
restraint  and  righteousness,  it  was  necessary  very  early  to  bring  in  the  lessons  of 
mercy.  God  had  always  declared  Himself  the  real  avenger  of  blood.  "  I  will 
require  man's  blood,"  He  said,  when  He  gave  the  law  for  the  death  of  a  murderer  ; 
»'  vengeance  is  Mine :  I  will  repay."  The  unintentional  act  was  not  to  be  treated 
like  that  of  malice  aforethought.  The  accidental  homicide  had  certain  rights; 
and  yet  the  mercy  offered  him  was  conditional.  It  was  only  a  chance.  It  was  not 
left  as  a  small  thing  for  a  human  life  to  be  taken,  even  unintentionally  :  hence  the 
limitations  placed  about  the  right  of  asylum  in  the  cities  of  refuge.  4.  But  this 
was  not  all :  the  law  demanded  an  expiation  for  the  wrong,  even  when  it  was  done 
without  intent.  Still  it  was  a  wrong  ;  blood  had  been  shed,  and  the  Divine  govern- 
ment never  grants  forgiveness  without  atonement.  God  cannot  be  tender  and 
forgiving  without  at  the  same  time  showing  His  holiness  and  just  claims  upon  the 
guilty.  This  principle  found  expression  in  a  singular  way  in  the  cities  of  refuge, 
in  the  provision  that,  whenever  the  high  priest  died,  the  prisoners  of  hope  should 
go  freely  back  to  their  homes.  The  priest  was  in  some  sort  a  sacrifice  for 
the  sins  of  the  people,  even  in  his  natural  death.  Here  we  find  what  we 
might   call   a   constructive    expiation.      Thus    from    age    to    age    death    was 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  xx. 

associated  in  the  public  mind  with  deliverance  from  punishment,  the  death 
of  successive  high  priests  setting  forth  the  death  of  Christ  on  the  Cross. 
III.  The  cities  of  befuge  ake  a  type  of  Christ.  Their  very  names  have  a  typical 
meaning — Kedesh,  "  holy  "  ;  Shechem,  "  shoulder  "  ;  Hebron,  "  fellowship  " ;  Bezer, 
"refuge";  Kamoth,  "high";  and  Golan,  "joy."  {Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.) 
Christ  our  city  of  refuge : — I.  There  is  an  analogy  between  oub  situation  and 

THE    situation    OF    THOSE   FOR    WHOM    THE   CITY   OF  REFUGE    WAS  DESIGNED.      It   WaS 

not  intended  for  the  murderer.  The  law  respecting  him  was  that  he  should  imme- 
diately be  put  to  death,  however  palliating  might  be  the  circumstances  connected 
with  his  crime,  and  however  sacred  the  place  to  which  he  might  flee  for  protection. 
Even  the  law  respecting  the  manslayer  bore  in  some  points  a  resemblance  to  that 
which  referred  to  the  murderer.  While  provision  was  made  for  his  safety  if  he 
chose  to  avail  himself  of  it,  it  was  also  enjoined  that  should  he  be  overtaken  by  the 
avenger  of  blood  his  life  was  to  be  the  forfeit  of  his  negligence.  He  had  shed  the 
blood  of  a  fellow-man ;  and  should  he  disregard  the  means  of  safety  which  were 
furnished  to  him,  no  guilt  would  be  incurred,  although  by  him  whom  he  had 
injured  his  blood  also  should  be  shed.  Now,  all  of  us  are  chargeable  with  having 
transgressed  the  law  of  God.  In  one  important  respect,  indeed,  the  comparison 
between  us  and  the  manslayer  does  not  hold.  He  deprived  his  fellow  of  life  without 
having  meditated  the  deed,  and  therefore  he  did  not  contract  moral  guilt;  for 
although  the  motive  does  not  in  every  case  sanctify  the  deed,  it  is  to  the  motive  that 
we  must  look  in  determining  the  virtuous  or  vicious  nature  of  an  action.  We,  how- 
ever, have  sinned  against  the  Divine  law  voluntarily.  We  have  done  it  in  spite  of 
knowledge,  conviction,  and  obligation.  Involved,  then,  as  we  are,  in  this  universal 
charge  of  guilt,  the  justice  of  God  is  in  pursuit  of  us,  and  is  crying  aloud  for  ven- 
geance. And  the  condition  of  those  whom  it  overtakes  is  utterly  hopeless :  death 
is  the  forfeit  which  they  must  pay.  Let  us  guard  against  the  callousness  of  those 
who,  though  they  readily  enough  admit  that  they  are  sinners,  seem  to  imagine  that 
no  danger  is  to  be  apprehended,  and  soothe  themselves  with  the  vague  expectation 
that,  since  God  is  good,  they  shall  somehow  or  other  drop  into  heaven  at  last, 
and  be  taken  beyond  the  reach  of  all  that  is  painful.  Oh  1  is  it  not  infatuation  thus 
to  remain  listless  and  secure,  when  God's  anger  is  provoked,  and  equity  demands 
the  execution  of  the  threatening  ?  Would  it  have  been  folly  in  the  manslayer  to 
have  deluded  himself  into  the  notion  of  his  safety,  at  the  very  time  that  his  infu- 
riated enemy  was  in  hot  pursuit  ?  and  is  it  wise  in  the  sinner,  when  Divine  justice 
is  about  to  seize  him,  to  remain  insensible  to  the  hazard  of  his  situation  ?  But  let 
us  not  despair.  Our  sin,  it  is  true,  has  veiled  Jehovah's  face  in  darkness ;  but 
through  that  darkness  a  bright  beam  has  broken  forth,  revealing  to  us  peace  and 
reconciliation.  11.  There  is  an  analogy  between  our  prospects  and  the  prospects  of 
THE  manslayer  UNDER  THE  LAW.  By  Joshua  six  citles  of  refuge  were  appointed,  three 
on  either  side  of  Jordan,  that  the  distance  might  not  be  too  great  which  the  man- 
slayer required  to  travel.  Now,  in  Christ  Jesus  we  have  a  city  of  refuge  to  which 
we  are  encouraged  to  repair  for  protection  from  the  justice  which  is  in  pursuit  of  us. 
This  refuge  God  Himself  has  provided  ;  so  that  He  whom  we  have  injured  has  also 
devised  and  revealed  to  us  the  method  by  which  our  salvation  may  be  effected. 
"  Deliver,"  He  said,  "  from  going  down  to  the  pit ;  I  have  found  a  ransom."  Nor 
is  this  divinely-provided  deliverance  difficult  of  being  reached.  Christ  is  ever  near 
to  the  sinner,  and  no  tiresome  pilgrimage  requnes  to  be  performed  before  He  can  be 
found.  All  obstructions  have  been  removed  out  of  the  way  which  leads  to  His 
Cross,  and  everything  has  been  done  to  facilitate  our  flight  to  its  blessed  shelter. 
The  cities  of  refuge : — I.  The  persons  for  whom  the  cities  of  refuge  were  provided 
were  in  circumstanceb  of  imminent  danger.  1.  The  danger  of  man  arises  from  sin 
and  transgression  against  the  authority  of  that  law  which  God  revealed  for  the  per- 
sonal rule  and  obedience  of  man,  it  being  an  essential  arrangement  in  the  Divine 
government  that  the  infraction  of  the  law  should  expose  to  the  infliction  of  punish- 
ment. 2.  The  peril  of  man  which  thus  arises  from  sin  affects  and  involves  his 
soul,  which  is  pursued  by  justice  as  the  avenger,  and  is  exposed  to  the  infliction  of 
a  future  state  of  torment,  the  nature  and  intensity  of  which  it  is  beyond  the  possibility 
of  any  finite  mind  to  conceive,  and  the  duration  of  which  is  restricted  by  no  hmits, 
but  is  coeval  with  eternity  itself.  3.  The  peril  of  man  thus  arising  from  trans- 
gression and  affecting  and  involving  his  soul  applies  not  to  a  small  portion,  but 
extends  to  every  individual  of  the  species.  II.  The  persons  for  whom  these  cities 
of  refuge  were  provided  were  furnished  with  ample  directions  and  facilities  to 
reach  thbu.    1.  The  clearness  with  which  the  oiBces  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  io 


CHAP.  XX.]  JOSHUA.  249 

their  adaptation  to  the  condition  of  man,  are  revealed.  2.  The  nature  of  the  method 
by  which  in  their  saving  application  and  benefit  the  Saviour's  ofiSces  are  to  be 
applied.  HI.  The  persons  for  whom  cities  of  refuge  were  provided  became  on 
reaching  them  assured  of  inviolable  security.  1.  The  grounds  of  this  security ; 
it  arises  from  sources  which  render  it  unassailable  and  perfect.  There  is  the  faith- 
fulness of  the  promise  of  the  Father,  which  God  has  repeatedly  addressed  to  His 
people ;  there  is  the  efficacy  of  the  mediation  of  the  Son ;  and  there  is  the  pledge  of 
the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  The  blessings  involved  in  this  security.  And 
here  we  have  not  so  much  a  comparison  as  a  contrast.  He  who  fled  for  refuge, 
after  he  had  become  a  homicide,  to  the  appointed  asylum  in  the  cities  of  Israel, 
became  by  necessity  the  subject  of  much  privation.  He  was  secure,  but  that  was 
all,  inasmuch,  it  is  evident,  that  he  was  deprived  of  home,  of  kindred,  of  freedom, 
and  of  all  those  tender  and  endearing  associations  which  are  entwined  around  the 
heart  of  the  exile,  and  the  memory  of  which  causes  him  to  pine  away,  and 
oftentimes  to  die.  But  in  obtaining,  by  the  mediation  and  work  of  Christ,  security 
from  the  perils  of  the  wrath  to  come,  we  find  that  the  scene  of  our  security  is  the  scene 
of  privilege,  of  liberty,  and  of  joy.  IV.  If  the  persons  for  whom  the  cities  of  refuge 
were  provided  removed  or  were  found  away  from  them  they  were  justly  left  to 
PERISH.  There  is  a  Saviour,  but  only  one ;  an  atonement,  but  only  one ;  a  way  to 
heaven,  but  only  one ;  and  when  once  we  have  admitted  the  great  fact  with  regard 
to  the  reason  of  the  Saviour's  incarnation  and  sacrifice  on  the  Cross  and  His  ascen- 
sion into  heaven,  we  are  by  necessity  brought  to  the  conclusion  and  shut  up  to  the 
confirmed  behef  of  this  truth,  that  "  neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other,  for 
there  is  none  other  name,"  &c.    {James  Parsons.)    Cities  of  refuge  : — I.  Notice  a 

FEW  points  in  which  THERE  IS  NO  CORRESPONDENCE  BETWEEN  THESE  CITIES  PROVIDED 
TOR    THE    MANSLAYEB    AND    THE     PROTECTION   WHICH    THE     GOSPEL    PROVIDES  FOR  THB 

SINNER.  1.  The  cities  of  refuge  afforded  only  a  temporary  protection  for  the  body. 
The  gospel,  on  the  contrary,  is  a  protection  for  the  whole  man,  and  for  the  whole  man 
for  ever.  2.  The  cities  afforded  protection  only  to  the  unfortunate,  whereas  the  refuge 
of  the  gospel  is  for  the  guilty.  3.  The  protection  which  the  cities  afforded  involved  the 
sacrificing  of  certain  privileges ;  that  of  the  gospel  ensures  every  privilege.  4.  Those 
who  enjoyed  the  protection  of  the  cities  would  desire  to  return  to  their  former 
scenes  ;  not  so  with  those  who  enjoy  the  protection  of  the  gospel.  11.  Notice  some 
OP  the  more  illustrative  features  OP  RESEMBLANCE.  1.  The  cltics  of  refuge  were 
of  Divine  appointment ;  so  is  the  protection  offered  in  the  gospel.  2.  The  cities  of 
refuge  were  provisions  against  imminent  danger ;  so  is  the  gospel.  3.  The  cities  of 
refuge  were  arranged  so  as  to  be  available  for  all  the  manslayers  in  the  country  ;  so  i» 
the  gospel  provided  for  all  sinners.  (1)  Capacity  enough  to  secure  all.  (2)  Within 
reach  of  aU.  (3)  Pointed  out  to  all.  4.  The  cities  of  refuge  were  the  exclusive  asylums 
for  such  cases ;  so  is  the  gospel  the  only  way  of  salvation.  5.  The  cities  of  refuge 
were  only  serviceable  to  those  who  by  suitable  effort  reached  them.  (1)  Individual 
effort.  (2)  Immediate  effort.  (3)  Strenuous  effort.  (4)  Persevering  effort.  (Homilist.) 
The  cities  of  refuge : — I.  Let  us,  then,  look  at  the  people  who  dwelt  in  them. 
Who  were  they  ?  They  were  not  exclusively  rich  people,  nor  were  they  exclusively 
poor.  Poverty  or  wealth  was  no  title  to  a  residence  there.  Nor  were  they  even 
educated  people,  or  illiterate  people.  Some  other  plea  than  these  must  be  urged  in 
order  to  get  an  entrance  there.  They  were  guilty  people.  Upon  their  hands  must 
be  the  mark  of  their  foul  sin.  They  must  be  avowed  man-slayers,  or  else  the  gates 
were  closed  against  them,  and  admission  refused.  I  think  I  hear  the  Pharisee  reply 
something  Uke  this:  "I  am  a  religious  man — a  respectable  man.  This  is  a 
religious  city  established  by  God,  kept  by  His  priests — the  peculiar  care  of  Jehovah. 
There  is  a  certain  fitness  between  that  city  and  myself,  I  mean  to  enter  there, 
because  I  think  it  is  a  good  thing  to  dwell  in  such  a  place."  But  they  speak  to  him 
and  say,  "  Sir,  you  have  made  a  mistake.  Let  us  ask  you  one  question — Have 
you  ever  done  any  harm?"  He  looks  at  them,  amazed  at  the  question.  "Done 
any  harm  ?  No,  sirs,  mine  has  been  a  blameless  life.  Taken  the  life  of  another  ? 
Why,  I  would  not  hurt  a  fly."  "Then,  sir,"  they  say  to  him,  "  this  city  cannot  be 
your  dwelling-place.  It,  with  all  its  privileges,  is  for  the  man-slayer."  Ah,  sinner, 
now  I  know  why  you  are  not  saved.  You  are  not  guilty  :  you  do  not  believe  it. 
But  let  me  point  out  to  you  another  mark  of  these  people  who  dwelt  in  the  cities. 
They  were  something  more  than  guilty :  they  were  conscious  of  their  danger. 
They  had  found  oat  that  they  had  slain  a  man.  They  knew  the  penalty  of  the 
law :  they  believed  it.  They  did  not  dare  to  doubt  it,  and  they  fled  for  their  very 
lives.    Sinner,  would  to  God  that  we  could  get  you  to  flee  lor  your  life !    Oh, 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

sinner,  to-night  you  see  it  not,  but  there  behind  you  is  the  keen,  two-edged  sword  of 
that  law  that  you  have  broken — that  law  that  you  have  defied.  It  is  very  near  to 
you.  God  says,  "  Ply,  fly  for  thy  life  to  the  city  of  refuge."  And  you — what  are 
you  doing  ?  Why,  you  do  not  even  hear  the  voice  of  God.  You  have  no  con- 
sciousness of  your  danger.  One  other  word  about  these  people:  they  were 
responsible,  absolutely  responsible,  for  their  own  safety.  I  think  I  see  that  man 
again.  We  have  watched  him,  and  we  have  spoken  to  him ;  he  left  us  and  ran ; 
but  we  say  to  each  other  now,  "What  is  the  matter?  Our  friend  has  stopped 
running.  Look  1  He  is  sitting  down  by  the  road-side,  and  from  that  wallet  behind 
his  back,  which  we  did  not  see  before,  he  has  taken  out  some  bread.  He  is  eating 
it  leisurely,  quietly.  He  must  have  made  a  mistake.  Surely,  the  avenger  of  blood 
cannot  be  after  him.  Surely  he  cannot  be  guilty."  We  go  up  to  him  and  we  say, 
"  Friend,  you  told  us  just  now  that  you  were  flying  from  the  avenger  of  blood. 
How  is  it  that  you  are  taking  your  ease?  "  *'  Well,"  he  says,  "  the  fact  is  I  have 
been  thinking  over  the  matter,  and  I  have  changed  my  mind.  Quite  true,  I  have 
done  wrong  ;  quite  true,  I  have  taken  a  life ;  quite  true,  the  avenger  of  blood  is 
after  me.  But  look  here,  sir.  The  logic  of  the  matter  is  this :  if  I  am  to  be  saved 
I  shall  be  saved."  "What  folly  1  You  may  be  saved  if  you  flee;  but,  as  God 
liveth,  unless  you  get  within  its  walls  you  never  wUl  be  saved."    II.   Look   to 

SOME  EEMAEKABLE  POINTS  ABOUT  THE  CITIES  OF  REFUGE   THEMSELVES.      WcU,  the  poLut 

that  strikes  us,  and  which  shows  forth  Jesus  Christ  and  His  willingness  and  power 
to  save,  is  this :  these  cities  were  all  easy  of  access.  God  took  all  the  difficulties 
out  of  the  way.  1.  They  were  aU  upon  the  level  plain.  If  you  read  chapter  xx., 
and  take  the  map,  as  I  have  done,  and  look  at  the  land,  you  will  be  struck 
with  this,  that  not  one  of  them  was  built  upon  a  mountain.  What  does  it  mean  ? 
Why,  it  means  that  an  anxious  and  fleeing  man — fleeing  for  his  life — must  have  no 
weary  mountain  to  travel  up.  There,  upon  the  level  plain,  is  the  city  whose 
welcome  walls  invite  him  for  refuge.  You  have  no  hill  of  experience  or  of  works 
or  deeds  to  climb  up.  And  then  observe  another  fact  about  them,  proving  the  ease 
of  access  which  God  had  arranged  for  them.  2.  If  you  were  to  look  at  the  land  of 
Palestine  you  would  observe  that  it  is  divided  nearly  longitudinally — that  is,  from 
north  to  south — by  a  river  at  times  broad  and  wide  and  deep,  and  with  a  mighty 
current — the  river  Jordan,  Now,  we  will  suppose  that  God  had  put  the  cities  of 
refuge,  we  will  say,  on  the  other  side.  Here  comes  a  poor  man-slayer ;  he  is  flying 
for  his  life,  and  he  reaches  Jordan.  There  is  no  bridge ;  he  has  no  boat ;  he 
cannot  swim  ;  and  yet  there  within  sight  of  him  is  the  welcome  city.  "  Oh,"  he 
says  in  his  bitter  despair,  "  God's  promise  has  brought  me  so  far  only  to  mock 
me."  But  no,  God  arranges  otherwise.  God  said,  "  Let  there  be  six  cities,  three 
on  each  side  of  the  river ;  one  north,  one  in  the  middle,  one  in  the  south,  on  one 
side ;  one  in  the  south,  one  in  the  middle,  one  on  the  north  on  the  other  side." 
What  does  it  mean  ?  Why,  it  means  this,  that  wherever  there  could  be  a  poor, 
guilty  man-slayer  there  was  a  city  of  refuge.     Oh,  "  The  Word  is  nigh  thee,"  &c. 

3.  May  I  add,  too,  that  the  gates  were  always  open.  Eighteen  hundred  years  have 
the  gates  been  open.     Man's  infideUty  and  opposition  have  never  closed  the  gates. 

4.  Observe,  too,  about  these  cities,  that  they  were  all  well  known.  That  was  of  the 
very  greatest  importance.  God  ordained  that  there  should  be  six.  Their  names 
were  given.  I  think  the  mothers  of  Israel  must  have  taught  their  httle  children 
those  six  names  by  heart.  It  would  never  do  that  by  and  by  their  child  should  be 
in  danger,  and  know  not  where  to  escape.  We  are  told  by  Josephus  that  where 
cross-roads  met  there  were  always  finger-posts  established,  having  these  words, 
"  To  the  city  of  refuge."  And  I  often  think  that  persons  like  myself,  or  even  the 
most  distinguished  ministers  of  Chiist,  cannot  save  a  soul,  but  they  may  be  finger- 
posts pointing  clearly  to  Jesus,  and  saying  in  life  and  ministry  and  deed,  "  To  the 
city  of  refuge."  Let  me  point  out  to  you  another  fact  of  great  importance  about 
these  cities — the  most  important  fact  of  all,  without  which  all  other  facts  would  be 
useless.  Within  these  walls  was  perfect  safety.  God  had  said  it :  Jehovah's  word 
was  staked  to  it.  Perfect  safety.  God's  honour  was  at  stake.  Every  man  who  fled 
inside  that  city  should  be  saved.  {J.  T,  Barnardo.)  Refuge: — Life  is  full  of 
alleviations,  shelters,  ways  of  dehverance.  So  that  however  gloomy  things  look  at 
times,  the  worst  never  comes  to  the  worst.  At  the  moment  when  all  seems  lost  the 
gate  of  the  city  of  refuge  opens  before  us,  and  friendly  hands  are  held  out  to  draw 
us  within  its  sanctuary.    I.  I  want  to  give  some  illustrations  of  this,  and,  first  of 

all,  FBOM  WHAT  WE  MAY  CALL  THE  OKDINAllY  AKHANQKMENTS  OF  THE  PROVIDENCE  OF  GOD 

— the  means  of  refuge  which  this  God-made  world  provides  within  itself  against  the 


CHAP.  XX.]  JOSHUA.  251 

commoner  ills.  The  daily  round  seems  so  trivial,  our  cares  are  so  petty,  the  things 
that  we  are  working  for  so  utterly  unworthy  of  beings  laying  any  claim  to  greatness, 
that  we  should  be  tempted  to  forego  our  claim  and  settle  down  in  mechanical 
acceptance  of  the  humdrum  and  the  commonplace  if  we  did  not  avail  ourselves  of 
means  of  escape  into  a  higher  realm  of  thought  and  feeling.  To  some  of  us  the 
culture  of  music  affords  a  city  of  refuge  from  the  drearier  side  of  life.  The 
transformation  of  Scott's  "  wandering  harper,  scorned  and  poor,"  under  the  potent 
Bpell  of  his  own  music  is  repeated  a  Qiousand  times  a  day. 

"  In  varying  cadence,  soft  or  strong, 
He  swept  the  sounding  chords  along : 
The  present  scene,  the  future  lot, 
'   .  His  toils,  his  wants  were  all  forgot. 

Cold  diffidence  and  age's  frost. 
In  the  full  tide  of  song  were  lost." 

Others  find  their  city  in  the  contemplation  of  great  pictures.  A  man,  crusted  over 
with  the  sordidness  of  his  daily  task,  will  get  away  into  a  picture  gallery.  He  will 
Bit  down  tired  and  uninterested  before  some  great  masterpiece,  and  after  a  while  it 
will  begin  to  take  hold  of  him.  As  he  sits  there,  passively  yielding  to  its  influence, 
just  letting  it  lay  itself  against  his  spirit,  there  will  gradually  steal  over  him  a  great 
restf ulness  and  calm.  Presently  a  deeper  life  will  wake  up.  He  will  pass  from  the 
passive  to  the  active  state.  Imagination  will  become  aUve ;  thought  wiU  stir ;  a 
new  world  will  grow  into  realness  around  him — a  larger,  higher,  finer  world,  not 
less  real,  but  more  real ;  not  foreign  to  him,  but  more  truly  native  to  him  than  the 
world  whose  dust  he  has  just  shaken  from  his  feet.  And  a  greater  number,  perhaps, 
find  their  way  of  escape  by  the  door  of  good  books  than  by  either  music  or  pictures, 
or  both  together.  And  it  is  more  than  a  merely  temporary  refuge.  If  books  are 
really  great,  if  the  art  is  really  elevating,  we  get  something  more  than  a  short 
respite  from  an  unfriendly  world.  When  we  go  back  to  it  the  world  is  changed. 
The  avenger  of  blood  is  no  longer  there.  But  there  are  tenser  forms  of  evil  to  be 
saved  from  than  the  dull  pain  of  a  prosaic  and  uninspiring  existence.  There  are 
sharp  strokes  of  misfortune,  the  sudden  loss  of  health,  an  overwhelming  catastrophe 
in  business,  or  bereavement.  It  is  marvellous  how  at  such  a  time  people  find 
themselves  ringed  round  with  friends.  The  story  of  Naomi  is  the  story  of  the 
destitute  in  every  age.  What  could  have  been  more  hopeless  than  the  outlook  for 
her  ?  Yet  she  got  through.  She  found  friends  among  the  foreigners ;  and  when 
after  the  long  years  of  exile  she  returned  to  Bethlehem,  she  found  herself  taken  to 
people's  hearts.  And  Euth  the  Moabitess  was  befriended  also.  There  are  many 
who  could  say  with  old  John  Brown  of  Haddington,  "  There  might  be  put  upon  my 
coffin,  '  Here  lies  one  of  the  cares  of  Providence,  who  early  wanted  both  father  and 
mother,  and  yet  never  missed  them  ! '  "  So  true  is  this  that  of  late  years  we  have 
begun  to  hear  in  tones  of  complaint  and  foreboding  of  "  the  survival  of  the  unfit." 
The  world,  it  seems,  is  too  kind.  There  is  too  much  providence.  That  complaint 
need  not  distress  us.  But  it  is  a  confirmation  of  the  Christian  view  of  the  world 
under  God's  fatherly  administration  from  a  somewhat  unexpected  quarter  ;  and  it 
is  none  the  less  valuable  for  the  source  from  which  it  comes.  God  is  love,  and  He 
will  be  yet  more  fully  known  in  the  world's  palaces  of  science  as  a  refuge.  But  we 
cannot  think  long  on  the  subject  without  being  sorrowfully  conscious  that  there  are 
other  foes  of  the  soul  against  which  the  ordinary  providence  of  God  offers  no 
defence ;  and  our  sorrow  is  only  turned  into  joy  when  we  recognise  that  in  these 
cases  a  still  better  refuge  is  provided.  "  God  Himself  is  our  refuge,  a  very  present 
help  in  time  of  trouble."  1.  For  example,  there  is  sin.  It  is  possible  for  men  to 
go  through  life  without  any  distinct  perception  of  sin  as  an  enemy  of  their 
happiness.  But  whenever  the  conscience  is  truly  awakened,  from  that  moment  sin 
stands  forth  as  the  saddest  fact  in  life.  It  is  the  one  foe  that  peace  cannot  dwell 
with.  Other  evils  we  may  escape,  leaving  them  still  in  possession  of  the  outer 
suburbs,  while  we  retreat  into  the  iimer  citadel  of  the  soul.  But  not  with  sin.  For 
the  awfulness  of  that  is  that  its  very  seat  is  in  our  inmost  soul,  so  that  the  more 
deeply  we  hve  the  more  vivid  is  the  fatal  consciousness  of  its  presence.  And 
whether  you  count  the  burning  shame  of  it,  the  self-contempt  it  breeds,  the  vague 
but  awful  terrors  which  of  necessity  dwell  with  it,  or  the  feeling  of  helplessness 
which  grows  upon  us  as  we  realise  how  impossible  it  is  to  escape  unaided  from  its 
f  ower,  as  soon  as  its  burden  presses  upon  a  man  it  is  felt  as  the  heaviest  burden  of 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xx. 

life,  different,  not  only  in  degree  but  in  kind,  from  every  other,  intolerable,  and  yet 
never  to  be  shaken  off  by  any  human  strength.  Here  is  an  avenger  for  which  earth 
provides  no  city  of  refuge.  Great  books,  great  pictures  give  no  relief  now ;  they 
aggravate.  Mother  Nature  with  her  healing  ministries  has  no  balm  for  this  wound. 
Thank  God  there  is  deUverance.  The  trouljled  conscience  comes  to  peace  in  Jesus 
Christ.  2.  Another  case  in  which  God  alone  in  His  own  person  can  be  a  refuge  for 
us,  is  when  we  are  oppressed  by  the  sense  of  finiteness  that  comes  to  us  some  time 
or  other  in  our  experience  of  all  things  earthly.  There  are  times  when  we  seem  to 
see  round  everything.  We  have  reached  the  limit  of  our  friends'  capacity  to  satisfy 
us  ;  music  is  nothing  more  to  us  than  a  combination,  more  or  less  faulty,  of  sounds 
that  jar  upon  the  nerves.  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit." 
And  all  human  goodness  is  as  the  morning  cloud.  "  All  men  are  Uars,"  you  say  in 
your  haste.  And  if  not  that,  then  at  least,  "  I  have  seen  an  end  of  all  perfection." 
Blessed  is  the  man  who  in  that  hour  knows  the  way  to  God.  The  secret  of  the  Lord 
is  with  him,  and  the  water  that  he  drinks  of  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water 
springing  up  unto  everlasting  life.  3.  Death  and  deliverance.  And  then  there  is 
death.  There  are  those  who  through  fear  of  death  are  all  their  life-time  subject  to 
bondage.  Well,  God  delivers  us  from  that  spectre.  When  we  walk  through  the 
valley  of  that  shadow,  we  fear  no  evil  for  He  is  with  us.  We  who  have  fled  for 
refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  us  find  ourselves  holding  by  an  anchor  that  enters 
into  that  within  the  veil.    11.  Now,  it  will  be  a  great  help  to  us  if  we  recognise 

IN  EVERT  LIGHTENING  OE    THE  BURDENS  OF   LIFE   THE    SIGN   THAT   GoD  HAS  BEEN  GOING 

BEFORE  US  PREPAEiNQ  DELIVERANCE.  Do  uot  let  US  shut  God  out  of  the  alleviations 
that  spring  up  out  of  the  earth  as  we  pass  along.  There  were  six  cities  of  refuge 
appointed  for  the  Hebrews,  and  now  one  and  now  another  of  these  cities  would  offer 
a  practicable  way  of  escape  from  the  avenger.  And  God  fulfils  Himself  in  many 
ways.  The  doors  of  hope  that  seem  entirely  earth-fashioned  and  of  human  provision 
are  equally  of  God's  appointment  with  that  heavenly  door  by  which  alone  we  can  find 
deliverance  from  the  deeper  sorrows.  Tour  God-given  way  of  escape  is  not  always 
along  the  path  of  extreme  religious  fervour.  A  week  of  rest  at  the  seaside  will  do 
you  more  spiritual  good  sometimes  than  a  week  of  revival  services.  A  hearty 
shake  of  the  hand  from  a  genial  unbeliever  will  give  you  a  mightier  lift  than  a 
lecture  from  a  saint.  And  you  are  to  use  the  means  of  escape  that  lies  nearest  you, 
and  is  most  suitable — and  see  God's  gracious  provision  in  it  whatever  it  is  that  gives 
you  effectual  relief.  I  don't  mean  that  all  ministries  are  of  the  same  order,  or 
intrinsically  of  equal  worth.  But  then  all  troubles  are  not  of  the  same  order  either. 
Paul  is  equally  the  minister  of  God  when  to  the  gaoler  crying,  "  What  must  I  do  to 
be  saved?  "  he  says,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved"; 
and  to  the  sailors  worn  out  with  long  battling  with  the  storm,  he  recommends,  not 
prayer,  but  to  take  food.  IH.  Let  me  direct  tour  minds  to  a  dutt  which  God 
LAID  upon  the  Israelites  in  relation  to  their  cities  of  refuge.  "  Thou  shalt  pre- 
pare thee  a  way  and  divide  the  coasts  of  thy  land,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 
thee  to  inherit,  into  three  parts,  that  every  slayer  may  flee  thither."  That  is,  there 
shall  not  only  be  a  city  of  refuge,  but  there  shall  be  a  road  to  it.  And  these  roads 
were  to  be  kept  in  order.  And  it  came  afterwards  to  be  a  law  that  finger-posts 
should  be  placed  wherever  other  roads  crossed  the  road  to  the  city  of  refuge,  so  that 
a  man  in  search  of  it  might  the  more  easily  find  his  way.  Now  the  meaning  of  this 
in  the  larger  bearing  which  we  are  giving  it  all,  is  that  we  should  make  ourselves 
familiar  beforehand  with  the  means  of  access  to  the  doors  of  deliverance  which  God 
has  provided.  We  are  bidden  to  have  resources.  We  must  know  the  use  of  pictures 
and  of  great  books ;  we  must  know  the  way  to  Nature's  treasure-house,  or  be  able, 
like  Boethius,  to  solace  ourselves  amid  the  disorders  of  the  world  by  contemplating 
the  Divine  order  of  the  stars.  In  the  day  of  comparative  prosperity  we  are  to 
prepare  for  adversity.  And  this  is  a  counsel  of  tremendous  significance  when  we 
think  of  the  supreme  needs  of  the  soul,  those  needs  which  nothing  short  of  God  can 
meet.  "  Thou  shalt  prepare  thee  a  way."  One  of  the  most  pathetic  stories  in  the 
Old  Testament  is  that  which  relates  how  King  Saul,  who  had  gone  his  own  time- 
serving, politician-like  way  all  his  life,  came  at  last  in  his  extremity  to  feel  his  need 
of  God,  and  did  not  know  how  to  come  to  Him.  "  Acquaint  thyself  with  Him." 
"Remember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth  " — in  the  springtime  of  life, 
when  all  is  bright  and  hope-inspiring.  Now  is  the  time  to  make  a  path  for  yourself  to 
Him.  (C.  S.  Pedley,  M.A.)  The  Christian's  cities  of  refuge  .-—I.  Oub  first  citt  of 
REFuas  18  POATBB.  Whatever  trouble  comes  to  as,  we  can  run  to  prayer  for  help,  as  the 
man  of  old  ran  to  the  city  of  refuge,    n.  Oub  second  city  of  BsruaE  is  the  Biblz. 


CHAP.  XX.]  JOSHUA.  253 

When  Jesus  was  tempted  three  tunes  by  the  devil  in  the  wilderness  to  do  wrong, 
every  time  His  heart  ran  to  the  Bible  as  a  city  of  refuge  and  quoted  some  precious 
promise.  III.  A  thied  city  of  eefuge  is  sacred  song.  If  our  hearts  and  voices 
are  full  of  sweet  and  pure  songs  ftbout  God,  and  heaven,  and  doing  good,  they  will 
keep  away  a  great  many  wicked  thoughts  and  evil  words.  IV.  The  fourth  city  of 
REFUGE  IS  TRUST  IN  GoD  AS  OUR  FATHER.  A  chUd  was  asked  the  question,  "  What  is 
faith  ?  "  She  answered,  "  God  has  spoken,  and  I  beheve  it."  That  is  a  part  of  what 
it  means  to  trust  in  God.  V.  Our  fifth  city  of  refuge  is  the  Holy  Spirit  as  our 
Guide.  VI.  The  sixth  city  of  refuge,  the  last  one  and  the  most  precious,  is 
Jesus  as  our  Saviour.  (Christian  Age.)  The  number  of  the  cities  of  refuge  : — These 
were  doubtless  sufficient  to  answer  the  exigencies  that  might  arise ;  but  why  six 
were  appointed,  and  not  seven,  the  perfect  number,  we  may  conceive  was  the 
reference  they  aU  had  to  one  other,  the  only  perfection  of  types,  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
in  whom  alone  security  can  be  found.  The  perfection  of  the  covenant  and  of  every 
covenant  blessing  is  found  in  Him.  In  whatever  trouble,  whether  in  first  convictions 
or  after-trials,  the  Christian,  as  the  prophet,  with  thoughts  raised  to  Christ,  may 
exclaim,  "  0  Lord,  my  strength  and  my  fortress,  and  my  refuge  in  the  day  of 
affliction."  (W.  Seaton.)  The  situation  of  the  cities  of  refuge: — In  the  division  of 
land  east  and  west  of  Jordan  which  was  nearly  equal  the  Lord  made  equal  provision 
for  both,  that  it  might  be  no  disadvantage  on  which  side  soever  any  dwelt  who  were 
within  the  extent  of  the  inheritance.  Christ  is  for  general  benefit,  wherever  men 
live,  within  the  sound  of  His  gospel ;  so  that  it  matters  not  where  that  is,  in  what 
part  or  quarter  of  the  world.  How  great  a  mercy  to  be  stationed  near  this  refuge  I 
and  how  great  a  sin  to  neglect  or  despise  its  security  I  (Ibid.)  The  cities  of  refuge 
illustrative  of  Christ's  redeeming  work : — How  illustrative  of  the  way  of  life,  the 
facilities  grace  has  given  to  sensible  and  alarmed  sinners  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come !  I.  In  the^  gospel  of  Christ  is  found  nothing  to  impede  or  discourage  an 
immediate  application  for  salvation,  but  the  way  is  set  before  men  under  directions 

so  PLAIN  AND  OBVIOUS  THAT  HARDLY  ANY  ONE  CAN  ERR,  EXCEPT  THROUGH  WILFUL  IGNORANCE 

AND  DETERMINED  REBELLION.  Faithful  ministers  are  designed  to  answer  the  end  of 
directing-posts  ;  they  are  to  stand  in  byways  and  corners,  to  distinguish  the  right 
way  from  the  wrong,  and  thereby,  if  possible,  to  prevent  any  from  proceeding  to  their 
own  destruction.  Mercy  has  placed  them  on  the  road  to  life  purposely  to  remind 
sinners  of  their  danger,  to  direct  the  perplexed,  and  to  admonish  the  careless.  How 
important  is  simplicity  in  a  matter  that  involves  in  it  the  concerns  of  life  and 
death  1  What  if  the  line  of  inscription,  "  To  the  City  of  Eefuge,"  had  been  in  any 
other  language  than  the  one  generally  understood  ?  and  what  if  gospel  ministers 
express  themselves  in  a  way  that  few  only  can  reap  the  benefit  of  their  instruc- 
tions ?  They  ruin  more  than  they  save,  and  cannot  avoid  a  fearful  charge  in  the  day 
when  every  work  will  be  brought  into  judgment.  H.  Next,  consider  the  requirements 

MADE  OF  THE  MAN  WHO    HAD  OCCASION  TO  AVAIL  HIMSELF  OF    THE   PROVISION  APPOINTED  ; 

and  as  if  having  witnessed  the  act  of  slaughter,  follow  him  to  the  gates  of  the  city. 
His  first  and  obvious  duty,  and  that  to  which  necessity  compelled,  was  to  leave  the 
dead  and  run  for  his  life,  to  rise  from  his  bleeding  neighbour  and  betake  himself, 
with  all  possible  haste,  to  the  nearest  refuge.  This  was  to  be  voluntary,  for  no  one 
could  compel  him.  Another  requirement  was  that  he  who  had  set  out  should  make 
all  possible  haste  till  he  had  got  within  the  walls  of  the  city ;  for  security  was  not  in 
the  way,  but  at  the  end ;  not  while  escaping,  but  when  refuged.  And  what  shall  be 
said  of  them  who,  professing  to  flee  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  them 
in  Christ,  think  neither  of  danger  nor  security,  but  are  taken  up,  as  their  chief  con- 
cern, with  the  pleasure  and  pursuits  of  the  world  ?  IH.  The  internal  constitution 
OF  THESE  CITIES,  like  the  way  to  them,  and  the  requisitions  made  of  those  for  whose 
benefit  they  were  instituted,  instructs  us  in  the  knowledge  of  many  evangelical 
TRUTHS.  Let  us  enter  for  examination,  or  rather  consider  ourselves  as  needing  the 
security  they  give.  Eefuge  was  not  allowed  till  after  judicial  investigation.  They 
were  no  asylum  for  murderers,  but  for  those  guilty  of  manslaughter  only.  In  this 
the  legal  refuge  came  short  of  that  the  gospel  sets  before  us :  it  was  wisely  and 
necessarily  so ;  for  no  typical  institutions  could  be  ordained  contrary  to  public 
justice  and  security,  or  that  would  have  perpetually  endangered  the  life  and  peace 
of  society.  Herein  the  pre-eminence  of  the  gospel  appears,  and  the  infinite  merit  of 
Christ's  blood,  which  has  efficacy  to  atone  for  the  worst  of  crimes.  The  government 
under  which  these  cities  were  placed  must  not  be  forgotten ;  they  were  given  to  the 
Levitea,  and  though  distinct  from  those  they  were  to  inhabit,  yet  they  were  numbered 
among  them.    This  denoted  au  appointment  of  mercy,  namely,  that  aU  the  privi- 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

leges  peculiar  to  them,  the  security,  residence,  and  provision  there  afforded,  were  all 
the  fruit  of  priestly  merits,  and  under  the  regulation  of  sacerdotal  dominion.  The 
streams  of  mercy  from  Christ  flow  to  sinners  through  the  prevalence  of  His  atoning 
sacrifice  and  the  exercise  of  His  availing  intercessron.  Again,  safety  was  nowhere 
but  within  the  city — not  only  was  the  manslayer  required  to  flee  to  it,  but  to  remain 
there  the  life  of  the  high  priest.  Expressive  appointment !  Who  out  of  Chi-ist  can 
be  safe  ?  One  cannot  but  remark  the  deficiency  of  the  type,  as  to  the  liberty  as  well 
as  security  which  every  believer  obtains  through  Christ.  As  long  as  the  high  priest 
lived  the  slayer  of  blood  was  deprived  of  liberty  beyond  the  bounds  of  the  city.  With 
all  the  mercy  there  provided,  it  must  have  been  no  little  inconvenience  to  have  been 
compelled  so  suddenly  to  give  up  connections,  occupations,  inheritance,  and  family 
for  so  uncertain  a  period.  Nevertheless  we  are  left  to  admire  the  wisdom  of  the  Divine 
procedure,  in  that  regard  to  the  ends  of  public  justice  and  social  right,  ever  observed 
in  even  those  institutions  which  were  principally  designed  to  set  forth  the  unbounded 
grace  of  Christ.  While  the  life  of  the  high  priest  typified  the  secui-ity  of  Christ,  the 
death  of  the  high  priest  was  to  express  the  redemption  of  the  forfeited  possession. 
"  After  the  death  of  the  high  priest,  the  slayer  shall  return  to  the  land  of  his  posses- 
sion." His  life  was  a  blessing  that  protected  the  slayer  from  the  avenger,  but  his 
death  uimaistakably  greater,  for  that  secured  liberty  with  life.  The  death  of 
Christ  has  not  only  availed  to  deliver  us  from  all  the  penalties  of  a  broken  covenant, 
but  to  interest  us  in  all  the  positive  blessings  of  the  new  ;  not  only  to  save  from  all 
the  sorrows  of  guilt,  but  to  restore  to  us  all  the  joys  of  innocence.    {Ibid.) 


CHAPTEE   XXI. 


Vees.  1-45.  Unto  the  Levites  •  .  .  these  cities. — Ministers  liberally  treated : — The 
liberality  both  of  God  and  of  His  people  to  the  ministers  of  God  is  here  very 
marvellous,  in  giving  forty-eight  cities  to  this  one  tribe  of  Levi,  which  was  the 
least  of  aU  the  tribes,  yet  have  they  the  most  cities  given  to  them  (vers.  4,  10,  41), 
because  it  was  the  Lord's  pleasure  to  have  this  tribe  provided  for  in  an  honourable 
manner,  seeing  He  Himself  took  upon  Him  to  be  their  portion  and  made  choice  of 
them  for  His  peculiar  service ;  therefore  did  He  deal  thus  bountifully  with  His 
ministers,  partly  to  put  honour  upon  those  whom  He  foresaw  many  would  be  prone 
to  despise,  and  partly  that  by  this  liberality  they,  being  freed  from  worldly  distrac- 
tions, might  more  entirely  devote  themselves  to  God's  service  and  to  the  instruction 
of  souls.  (C.  Ness.)  Ministers  wisely  located  : — God  provided  for  the  residence 
of  His  ministers  in  most  ample  extent  and  number,  and  in  a  way  suited  to  the 
spiritual  instruction  and  benefit  of  the  nation.  Li  temple  service  they  were  round 
about  the  habitation  of  His  holiness ;  and  yet,  in  their  ministerial  instructions, 
dispersed  over  the  whole  land.  How  exact  a  fulfilment  of  dying  Jacob's  prediction, 
and  that  even  though  mercy  changed  the  curse  into  a  blessing :  "  I  will  divide 
them  in  Jacob  and  scatter  them  in  Israel."  What  an  important  appointment !  and 
how  adapted  to  the  communication  and  diffusion  of  Divine  truth  for  their  lips,  as 
the  messengers  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  were  to  keep  knowledge,  and  at  their  mouth 
the  people  were  to  seek  the  law  I  It  is  no  common  privilege,  under  the  more  exalted 
and  distinguished  dispensation  of  the  gospel,  that  the  ministers  of  salvation  are  not 
removed  into  a  corner,  but  that  as  servants  of  the  most  high  God  they  have  their 
stations  assigned  them,  as  may  best  promote  the  increase  and  instruction  of  the 
Church.  These  are  the  stars  which  He  holds  in  His  right  hand,  and  which,  great 
in  wisdom  and  power.  He  numbers  and  calls  by  their  names.  What  holy  and 
heavenly  light  and  influence  are  they  ordained  to  impart  in  their  several  spheres  I 
Without  them  the  Christian  Church  would  soon  be  involved  in  the  most  degrading 
and  destructive  ignorance,  and  overwhelmed  with  the  miseries  of  corruption  and 
error.  Who  that  admits  the  importance  of  their  services  would  not  yield  room  to 
them  as  being  equally  a  privilege  as  a  duty.  Their  residence  is  to  be  esteemed  a 
mercy,  and  no  intrusion.  Thus  it  has  appeared  that  the  Lord  has  ever  paid  special 
regard  to  His  ministers,  and  as  here  enjoined  upon  His  people,  in  obligation  the 
most  reasonable,  to  provide  them  habitations  as  well  as  support.  {W.  Seaton.) 
There  failed  not  ought  of  any  good  thing  which  the  Lord  had  spoken. — Divine 
faithfulnest: — L   Thb  rAiTHTULNESs  or  God  in  accomplishino  ELis  enoaoements 


CHAP.  XD.]  JOSHUA.  255 

TOWARD   THE   TRIBES    OB"    ISBAEL.       11.     ThB    FAITHFULNESS   OP   GoD   TO   HiS   CHtTBCH 

COLLECTIVELY  in  subsequent  engagements.  III.  The  faithfulness  of  God  in  His 
ENGAGEMENTS  TO  INDIVIDUAL  BELiEVEES.  I  believe  there  is  no  person  experiencing 
the  power  of  religion  who  has  not  had  an  increasing  evidence  of  the  faithfulness 
of  God  in  verifying  His  promises  on  which  He  has  caused  him  to  hope.  He  has 
found — notwithstanding  the  dark  appearances  of  Divine  providence — he  has  found 
that  sort  of  satisfaction  which  he  was  taught  to  expect  from  the  exercise  of  faith 
and  confidence  in  Jesus  Christ  and  obedience  to  Him.  He  has  found,  in  seasons 
of  pain  and  difficulty,  that  kind  of  assistance  on  which  he  was  taught  to  rely.  The 
faithfulness  of  God  in  performing  His  promises  at  present  must,  however,  be  in  a 
great  degree  obscured  by  the  darkness  of  our  present  state ;  for  everything  is  in 
perpetual  motion.  No  one  can  understand  the  nature  of  a  beautiful  building  in  the 
rubbish,  or,  while  it  is  actually  rising,  in  the  midst  of  the  complicated  instrumenti 
used  in  its  erection,  but  we  must  wait  till  it  is  finished  before  wc  s&a  form  a  just 
estimate  of  its  beauty.  And  with  respect  to  that  great  hope  of  which  the  possession 
of  Canaan  was  but  a  shadow  and  figure — the  possession  of  the  heavenly  inheritance — 
in  a  very  short  time  every  real  believer  will  be  able  to  put  his  seal  to  the  truth  of 
the  Divine  promise.  Let  us  rejoice  that  we  have  a  covenant  of  God,  and  a  covenant 
ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,  which  is  all  our  salvation  and  all  our  desire.  And 
first,  by  way  of  improvement,  let  us  observe  the  propriety  of  remembering  the  way 
in  which  the  Lord  God  hath  led  us.  If  we  consider  the  trials  and  sorrows  of  the 
present  life  as  a  part  of  that  holy  dispensation,  in  that  proportion  shall  we  be  disposed 
to  glorify  God.  If  we  trace  the  hand  of  man  in  these  events,  this  may  produce 
disquietude ;  but  if  we  could  extend  our  view  to  the  furthest  limit,  all  this  would 
frequently  be  matter  of  gratitude,  and  we  should  be  enabled  to  give  thanks  to  God 
in  everything.  Let  us  look  forward  to  that  state  in  which  we  shall  have  His 
kindness  fully  displayed.  (2?.  Hall,  M.A.)  The  triumphant  record  oj  God's  faith- 
fulnest : — Verses  43-45  are  the  trophy  reared  on  the  battlefield,  like  the  lion  of 
Marathon,  which  the  Greeks  set  on  its  sacred  soil.  But  the  only  name  inscribed 
on  this  monument  is  Jehovah's.  Other  memorials  of  victories  have  borne  the 
pompous  titles  of  commanders  who  arrogated  the  glory  to  themselves ;  but  the 
Bible  knows  of  only  one  conqueror,  and  that  is  God.  "  The  help  that  is  done  on 
earth,  He  doeth  it  all  Himself."  The  military  genius  and  heroic  constancy  of 
Joshua,  the  eagerness  for  perilous  honour  that  flamed,  undimmed  by  age,  in  Caleb, 
the  daring  and  strong  arms  of  many  a  humbler  private  in  the  ranks,  have  their  due 
recognition  and  reward ;  but  when  the  history  that  tells  of  these  comes  to  sum  up 
the  whole,  and  to  put  the  "  philosophy "  of  the  conquest  into  a  sentence,  it  has 
only  one  name  to  speak  as  cause  of  Israel's  victory.  That  is  the  true  point  of  view 
from  which  to  look  at  the  history  of  the  world  and  of  the  Church  in  the  world. 
The  difference  between  the  "  miraculous  "  conquest  of  Canaan  and  the  "  ordinary  " 
facts  of  history  is  not  that  God  did  the  one  and  men  do  the  other ;  both  are  equally, 
though  in  different  methods,  His  acts.  In  the  field  of  human  affairs,  as  in  the 
realm  of  nature,  God  is  immanent,  though  in  the  former  His  working  is  compUcated 
by  the  mysterious  power  of  man's  wiU  to  set  itself  in  antagonism  to  His ;  while  yet, 
in  manner  insoluble  to  us.  His  will  is  supreme.  The  very  powers  which  are  arrayed 
against  Him  are  His  gift,  and  the  issue  which  they  finally  subserve  is  His  appoint- 
ment. It  does  not  need  that  we  should  be  able  to  pierce  to  the  bottom  of  the 
bottomless  in  order  to  attain  and  hold  fast  by  the  great  conviction  that  there  is 
no  power  but  of  God,  and  that  from  Him  are  aU  things  and  to  Him  are  all  things. 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  Divine  fidelity  acknowledged  : — We  may  note,  too,  in 
these  verses,  the  threefold  repetition  of  the  one  thought,  of  God's  punctual  and 
perfect  fulfilment  of  His  word.  He  "  gave  unto  Israel  all  the  land  which  He  sware 
to  give  " ;  "  He  gave  them  rest  .  .  .  according  to  aU  that  He  sware  " ;  "  there 
failed  not  ought  of  any  good  thing  which  the  Lord  had  spoken."  It  is  the  joy  of 
thankful  hearts  to  compare  the  promise  with  the  reality,  to  lay  the  one  upon  the 
other,  as  it  were,  and  to  declare  how  precisely  their  outlines  correspond.  The 
finished  building  is  exactly  according  to  the  plans  drawn  long  before.  God  gives 
us  the  power  of  checking  His  work,  and  we  are  unworthy  to  receive  His  gifts  if  we 
do  not  take  delight  in  marking  and  proclaiming  how  completely  He  has  fulfilled 
His  contract.  It  is  no  small  part  of  Christian  duty,  and  a  still  greater  part  of 
Christian  blessedness,  to  do  this.  Many  a  fulfilment  passes  unnoticed,  and  many 
a  joy,  which  might  be  sacred  and  sweet  as  a  token  of  love  from  His  own  hand, 
remains  common  and  unhallowed,  because  we  fail  to  see  that  it  is  a  fulfilled 
promise.    The  eye  that  is  trained  to  watch  for  God's  being  as  good  as  His  word 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rra. 

will  never  have  long  to  wait  for  proofs  that  He  is.  "  Whoso  is  wise,  and  will 
observe  these  things,  even  he  shall  understand  the  lovingkindness  of  the  Lord." 
And  to  such  an  one  faith  will  become  easier,  being  sustained  by  experience  ;  and  a 
present  thus  manifestly  studded  with  indications  of  God's  faithfulness  will  merge 
into  a  future  still  fuller  of  these.  For  it  does  not  need  that  we  should  wait  for 
the  end  of  the  war  to  have  many  a  token  that  His  every  word  is  true.  The 
Btruggling  soldier  can  say,  "No  good  thing  has  failed  of  all  that  the  Lord  has 
spoken."  "We  look,  indeed,  for  completer  fulfilment  when  the  fighting  is  done ;  but 
there  are  brooks  by  the  way  for  the  warriors  in  the  thick  of  the  fight,  of  which  they 
drink,  and,  refreshed,  lift  up  the  head.  We  need  not  postpone  this  glad  acknow- 
ledgment till  we  can  look  back  and  down  from  the  land  of  peace  on  the  completed 
campaign,  but  may  rear  this  trophy  on  many  a  field,  whilst  stiU  we  look  for  another 
conflict  to-morrow.  {Ibid.)  The  Sripreme  Worker : — We  read  that  on  a  pyramid 
in  Egypt  the  name  and  sounding  titles  of  the  king  in  whose  reign  it  was  erected 
were  blazoned  on  the  plaster  facing,  but  beneath  that  transitory  inscription  the 
name  of  the  architect  was  hewn,  imperishable,  in  the  granite,  and  stood  out  when 
the  plaster  dropped  away.  So,  when  all  the  short-lived  records  which  ascribe  the 
events  of  the  Church's  progress  to  her  great  men  have  perished,  the  one  name  of 
the  true  Builder  will  shine  out,  and  to  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  shall  bow. 
Let  us  not  rely  on  our  own  skill,  courage,  talents,  orthodoxy,  or  methods,  nor  try 
to  build  tabernacles  for  the  witnessing  servants  beside  the  central  one  for  the 
supreme  Lord,  but  ever  seek  to  deepen  our  conviction  that  Christ,  and  Christ  only, 
gives  all  their  powers  to  all,  and  that  to  Him,  and  Him  only,  is  all  victory  to  be 
ascribed.  It  is  an  elementary  and  simple  truth ;  but  if  we  really  Uved  in  its  power 
we  should  go  into  the  battle  with  more  confidence,  and  come  out  of  it  with  less 
self-gratulation.     (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XXn. 


Vers.  1-34.  Ye  have  not  left  your  TotethTen.— Helping  one  another: — I.  Thesb 

TTKrBES  HELPED  THEIE  BREXHEEN  TO  THEIB  OWN  INCONVENIENCE  AND  POSITIVE  DETRI- 
MENT. A  narrow-minded,  selfish  race  would  have  recognised  no  claim  for  any 
service  which  could  not  be  repaid  dollar  for  doUar.  What  fine  excuses  could  have 
been  made  for  the  non-performance  of  this  duty  if  they  had  been  in  the  excuse- 
making  mood  1  How  prominently  that  threadbare  proverb,  "  Charity  begins  at 
home" — a  proverb  often  outrageously  perverted— might  have  figured  in  their 
conversation  1  We  have  our  own  children  and  our  own  houses  to  look  after ;  our 
crops  must  be  planted  and  harvested ;  our  homes  must  be  established  in  this  new 
land ;  the  wandering  tribes  of  our  enemies  may  at  any  time  swoop  down  upon  our 
vineyards  and  gardens.  Small  and  selfish  souls  always  reason  in  this  way,  whether 
they  Uve  in  Palestine  or  America,  in  the  fifteenth  century  before  Christ  or  the 
nineteenth  after  Christ.  Such  reasoning  and  such  living  inevitably  lead  to  national 
and  individual  bankruptcy  in  all  the  generous  and  noble  qualities  which  make  a 
nation  great.  Let  us  remember  also  that  it  is  not  what  we  can  spare  as  well  as  not 
which  helps  our  brother.  It  is  not  the  cast-off  coat  which  we  should  never  wear, 
the  superfluous  dollar  whose  gift  we  should  never  feel,  that  blesses  the  world ;  it  is 
the  gift  that  carries  part  of  ourselves  with  it  that  helps  to  regenerate  mankind. 
The  Eeubenites  and  Gadites  gave  themselves,  their  sturdiest  men,  their  bravest 
warriors,  not  merely  a  quota  of  drafted  hirelings.  There  is  no  other  brotherly 
kindness  worth  the  name  ;  a  dollar  bill  given  without  the  personal  interest  of  the 
one  who  sends  it  is  but  a  piece  of  printed  paper ;  a  dollar  bill  sent  with  love  and 
prayer,  a  bill  that  represents  the  yearning  of  some  heart  to  do  good,  may  be— yea, 
it  always  is — the  winged  messenger  of  God,  carrying  a  blessing  to  him  to  whom  it 
goes  and  leaving  a  larger  one  with  him  who  sends  it.    H.  These  heroic  Israelites 

HELPED   THEIB  BRETHREN   PERSISTENTLT   AND   PATIENTLY.       SoveU    loUg   yearS   paSSed 

before  all  their  battles  were  fought  and  they  were  at  liberty  to  return  to  their  wives 
and  their  children.  In  our  deeds  of  benevolence  and  charity  the  tendency  is  to 
leave  the  work  half-done  because  of  discouragement  at  the  slowness  of  results. 
•'  Ye  did  run  well,  who  did  hinder  you  ?  "  might  be  the  epitaph  on  the  tombstone 
of  many  abandoned  schemes  of  philanthropy.    12  the  world  could  be  converted  in  • 


CHAP,  xxn.]  JOSHUA.  257 

year,  there  would  be  many  enthusiastic  missionaries  among  those  who  now  chiefly 
find  fault  with  the  slowness  of  missionary  operations,  because  the  Lord  cliooses  to 
make  use  of  centuries  in  bringing  about  the  triumph  of  His  cause.  The  reason  for 
this  seeming  slowness  of  God's  hosts  is  not  far  to  seek.  There  is  more  virtue  in  the 
fight  than  in  the  victory.  There  are  souls  to  be  enlarged,  there  are  sympathies  to 
be  quickened,  there  are  lives  to  be  inspired  with  zeal  for  God  and  truth  and  fellow- 
men.  All  this  is  accomplished  by  the  struggle  and  not  by  the  ease  and  the 
possession  of  the  goodly  land  that  follows  the  struggle.  III.  Their  home-comino 
AFTER  THE  SEVEN  TEARS  OF  CONFLICT.  There  is  another  home-coming  to  which 
every  true  heart  aspires,  and  the  conditions  of  honourable  discharge  and  of  welcome 
to  that  home  are  typified  in  our  lesson.  What  is  heaven  except  the  final  gathering- 
place  for  those  who  have  helped  their  brethren  for  Christ's  sake  ?  {F.  E.  Clark.) 
Helping  others  : — The  law  for  us  is  the  same  as  for  these  warriors.  In  the  family, 
the  city,  the  nation,  the  Church,  and  the  world,  union  with  others  binds  us  to  help 
them  in  their  conflicts,  and  that  especially  if  we  are  blessed  with  secure  possessions, 
while  they  have  to  struggle  for  theirs.  We  are  tempted  to  selfish  Uves  of  indulgence 
in  our  quiet  peace,  and  sometimes  think  it  hard  that  we  should  be  expected  to  buckle 
on  our  armour  and  leave  our  leisurely  repose  because  our  brethren  ask  the  help  of 
our  arms.  If  we  did  as  Eeuben  and  Gad  did,  would  there  be  so  many  rich  men 
who  never  stir  a  finger  to  relieve  poverty,  so  many  Christians  whose  religion  is  much 
more  selfish  than  beneficent  ?  Would  so  many  souls  be  left  to  toil  without  help,  to 
struggle  without  allies,  to  weep  without  comforters,  to  wander  in  the  dark  without 
a  guide  ?  All  God's  gifts  in  providence  and  in  the  gospel  are  given  that  we  may 
have  somewhat  wherewith  to  bless  our  less  happy  brethren.  "  The  service  of  man  " 
is  not  the  substitute  for,  but  the  expression  of,  Christianity.  Are  we  not  kept  here, 
on  this  side  Jordan,  away  for  a  time  from  our  inheritance,  for  the  very  same  reason 
that  these  men  were  separated  from  theirs — that  we  may  strike  some  strokes  for 
God  and  our  fellows  in  the  great  war  ?  Dives,  who  loUs  on  his  soft  cushions,  and 
has  less  pity  for  Lazarus  than  the  dogs  have,  is  Cain  come  to  life  again ;  and 
every  Christian  is  either  his  brother's  keeper  or  his  murderer.  Would  that  the 
Church  of  to-day,  with  infinitely  deeper  and  sacreder  ties  knitting  it  to  suffering, 
struggling  humanity,  had  a  tithe  of  the  willing  relinquishment  of  legitimate 
possessions  and  patient  participation  in  the  long  campaign  for  God  which 
kept  these  rude  soldiers  faithful  to  their  flag  and  forgetful  of  home  and  ease 
till  their  general  gave  them  their  discharge.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Standing  by 
our  brethren: — A  ship  arrived  at  San  Francisco  recently  which  had  been  two 
hundred  and  ninety-six  days  from  New  Castle,  Australia.  She  had  been  in  great 
peril  in  a  storm  at  sea  and  had  had  long  delays.  One  night  when  she  was  in  great 
danger  the  captain  asked  the  captain  of  another  ship  to  stand  by  through  the  night, 
and  he  did  so  at  great  risk  to  his  own  vessel  and  his  own  life,  but  finally  was  the 
cause  of  the  salvation  of  the  imperilled  vessel.  As  soon  as  he  was  safe  in  harbour 
the  captain  of  the  ship  that  had  been  threatened  with  wreck  gave  his  first  attention 
to  showing  appreciation  of  the  other  captain's  assistance,  and  sent  him  a  gold  watch, 
and  went  before  the  council  of  the  city  of  Sydney  and  told  the  story  of  his  heroism. 
On  learning  of  it  the  Sydney  authorities  presented  to  the  noble  captain  a  medal 
bearing  his  name  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other  the  simple  inscription,  "  The  man 
that  did  stand  by."  In  the  midst  of  the  campaign  for  righteousness  that  is  going 
on  in  our  modern  life  the  noblest  ambition  for  a  Christian  man  is  to  share  the  fate 
of  righteousness  ;  to  be  no  more  popular  than  Jesus  Christ  would  be,  if  He  stood  in 
his  place,  and  sought  as  of  old  to  make  it  easy  for  men  to  do  right  and  hard  for 
them  to  do  wrong.  Eather  than  anything  else  the  Christian  man  should  prize 
having  Christ  look  down  upon  him  and  say:  "The  man  that  did  stand  by." 
{Louis  A.  Banks,  D.D.)  Take  diligent  lieed  to  do  the  commandment  and  the 
law. — The  commander's  parting  charge: — They  were  about  to  depart  for  a  hfe 
of  comparative  separation  from  the  mass  of  the  nation.  Their  remoteness  and 
their  occupations  drew  them  away  from  the  current  of  the  national  life,  and  gave 
them  a  kind  of  quasi-independence.  They  would  necessarily  be  less  directly 
under  Joshua's  control  than  the  other  tribes  were.  He  sends  them  away  with 
one  commandment,  the  imperative  stringency  of  which  is  expressed  by  the 
accumulation  of  expressions  in  ver.  5.  They  are  to  give  diligent  heed  to  the 
law  of  Moses.  Their  obedience  is  to  be  based  on  love  to  God,  who  is  their  God 
no  less  than  the  God  of  the  other  tribes.  It  is  to  be  comprehensive — walking 
in  all  His  ways ;  it  is  to  be  resolute — cleaving  to  Him ;  it  is  to  be  whole- 
hearted and  whole-souled  service,  that  will  be  the  true  bond  between  the  separated 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

parts  of  the  whole.  Independence  so  limited  will  be  harmless ;  and,  however  wide 
apart  the  paths  may  lie,  Israel  will  be  one.  In  like  manner  the  bond  that  knits  all 
divisions  of  God's  people  together,  however  different  their  modes  of  life  and  thought, 
however  unlike  their  homes  and  their  work,  is  the  similarity  of  relation  to  God. 
They  are  one  in  a  common  faith,  a  common  love,  a  common  obedience.  Wider 
waters  than  Jordan  part  them.  Graver  differences  of  tasks  and  outlooks  than  sepa- 
rated these  two  sections  of  Israel  part  them.  But  all  are  one  who  love  and  obey  the 
one  Lord.  The  closer  we  cleave  to  Him,  the  nearer  we  shall  be  to  all  His  tribes. 
{American  Sunday  School  Times.)  Universal  obligation: — All  the  great  duties  of 
a  Christian  life  are  no  more  incumbent  upon  Christians  than  upon  other  men  ;  for 
men  are  bound  to  be  and  to  do  right  on  the  religious  scale  of  rectitude  not  because 
they  are  Christians,  but  because  they  are  men.  Religious  obligations  took  hold  of 
us  when  we  were  born.  They  waited  for  us  as  the  air  did.  They  have  their  sources 
back  of  volition,  back  of  consciousness,  just  as  attraction  has.  Though  a  man 
declares  himself  an  atheist  it  in  no  way  alters  his  obligations.  Right  and  wrong  do 
not  spring  from  the  nature  of  the  Church.  Obligation  lies  deeper  than  that.  It  is 
as  much  the  worldling's  duty  to  love  God  and  obey  His  laws  as  the  Christian's. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.)  Obedience  unmeasured: — When  the  truth  of  our  sincerity 
requires  to  be  weighed  out  in  drachms  and  scruples,  and  runs  so  sparingly  as  from 
an  exhausted  vessel — when  the  state  of  the  conscience  must  be  ascertained  by  a 
theological  barometer,  the  health  of  the  soul  must  be  in  a  very  feeble  and  crazy 
condition.  (H.  G.  Salter.)  Sincere  obedience: — If  conscience  be  enlightened, 
and  faithful  in  the  trial,  a  man  cannot  deliberately  deceive  himself :  he  must 
know  whether  his  resolutions  and  endeavours  be  to  obey  aU  the  will  of  God  ;  or, 
whether,  like  an  intermitting  pulse,  that  sometimes  beats  regularly,  and  then 
falters,  he  is  zealous  in  some  duties,  and  cold,  or  careless  in  others?  Saul  would 
offer  sacrifice,  but  not  obey  the  Divine  command  to  destroy  all  the  Amalekites :  for 
his  partiahty  and  hypocrisy  he  was  rejected  of  God.  'Tis  not  the  authority  of  the 
lawgiver,  but  other  motives  that  sway  those  who  observe  some  commands,  and  are 
regardless  of  others.  A  servant  that  readily  goes  to  a  fair  or  a  feast,  when  sent  by 
his  master,  and  neglects  other  duties,  does  not  his  master's  command  from  obedience, 
but  his  own  choice.  Sincere  obedience  is  to  the  royalty  of  the  Divine  law,  and 
is  commensurate  to  its  purity  and  extent.  {Ibid.)  What  trespass  is  this  that 
ye  have  committed? — The  memorial  altar: — 1.  Notice  the  proper  jealousy  of 
the  elders.  When  the  chiefs  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  heard  of  this  altar  they 
arose  in  great  alarm  and  went  down  to  their  brethren,  the  two  and  a  half 
tribes,  to  demand  an  explanation.  Their  jealousy  was  hasty,  it  was  ignorant 
and  uncharitable,  but  it  was  not  unnatural.  It  arose,  indeed,  from  a  mis- 
understanding. They  imagined  that  the  eastern  men  were  wishful  to  do  the 
exact  opposite  of  that  which  was  in  their  hearts ;  they  took  the  altar  to  be  a  sign 
and  a  means  of  division,  whereas  it  was  intended  to  be  a  symbol  and  an  influence 
for  unity.  Such  misunderstandings  often  and  naturally  arise.  Men  look  at  what 
others  are  doing  ;  they  do  not  stay  to  inquire,  they  assume  they  know  aU  about  it; 
they  read  in  what  they  see  their  own  notions,  and  hence  they  come  to  unwise  and 
uncharitable  opinions.  It  is  surely  necessary  that  Christian  men,  in  judging  each 
other's  work,  should  cultivate  a  spirit  of  candour,  should  be  anxious  to  be  clear  in 
judgment,  should  assume  the  better  motive  until  the  worse  is  proved  ;  and  should 
remember  that,  within  the  limits  of  what  is  right,  there  is  room  for  wide  difference 
of  taste,  even  where  there  is  equal  loyalty  for  the  truth  and  equal  anxiety  for  its 
maintenance.  2.  Now  notice  the  anxiety  of  the  fathers.  They  were  very  anxious 
to  have  a  symbol  of  unity.  They  themselves,  who  had  borne  a  part  in  every  con- 
flict, could  never  forget  the  battle  or  the  victory ;  but  to  their  children  those 
memories  might  become  dim,  and  might  even  become  to  be  thought  mere  myths, 
and  so  they  desired  a  symbol,  the  existence  of  which  could  only  be  accounted  for  by 
the  fact  symbolised,  and  the  sight  of  which,  exciting  curiosity  and  comment,  should 
keep  the  glorious  facts  alive  amongst  them.  And  they  were  surely  right.  Symbols 
and  monuments  are  useful,  the  human  mind  requires  them,  and  me.n  in  all 
ages  and  lands  have  provided  them :  erected  on  the  sites  of  great  battles, 
as  Waterloo  and  Quebec;  to  commemorate  great  discoveries,  such  as  chloro- 
form ;  or  great  inventions,  such  as  the  steam  engine ;  they  have  been  executed 
to  keep  green  the  memory  of  great  men.  The  busy  world  is  only  too  apt  to  forget 
its  benefactors  and  to  lose  trace  of  the  events  which  have  been  mightiest  in  mould- 
ing its  fortunes,  so  the  instinct  of  men  has  led  them  to  keep  alive  precious  memories 
by  monumental  symbols.    And  the  principle  has  been  recognised  by  God  Himsell, 


CHAP.  XXII.]  JOSHUA.  259 

and  has  been  embodied  in  the  institutions  of  the  Church.  The  Sacrament  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  a  symbol,  a  memorial  observance  in  which  we  do  show  forth  the 
Lord's  death  till  He  comes.  By  its  frequent  observance  the  Church  recalls  to  the 
mind  of  its  members  and  the  attention  of  the  thoughtless  world  the  supreme  fact  of 
human  history.  And  surely  never  were  becoming  memorials  of  great  and  noble 
events  more  necessary  than  in  our  own  time  !  These  are  days  of  rush  and  hurry 
unexampled.  Events  succeed  each  other  so  rapidly  that  one  impression  overlays, 
and  perhaps  effaces,  its  predecessors.  Anything  that  will  help  us  to  keep  in  mind 
great  deeds  done  for  God  and  man,  and  their  influence  on  subsequent  events,  will 
preserve  the  rich  treasure  of  our  spiritual  heritage.  3.  But,  again,  those  fathers 
were  anxious  for  a  link  with  the  past.  They  were  unwilling  that  the  continuity  of 
their  history  should  be  broken.  They,  and  their  children  after  them,  would  be 
impoverished  if  the  memories  of  the  past  should  be  lost.  Some  of  them  might  be 
memories  of  shame,  but  even  therein  were  precious  lessons  of  warning ;  and  many 
of  them  were  memories  of  triumph  invaluable  for  the  inspirations  to  duty  and  to 
enterprise  which  they  conveyed.  Those  old  heroes  were  unwUling  that  the  past 
■with  its  lessons  should  fade  away  and  disappear,  and  they  were  right.  How  much 
we  owe  to  the  past,  though  we  are  often  unconscious  of  the  debt !  Ourposition, 
our  mental  quality,  the  balance  of  our  faculties,  our  peculiar  character,  have  come 
to  us  through  the  mingling  of  many  strains  and  the  influence  of  a  thousand  varying 
circumstances.  Our  mental  conceptions  arise  out  of  the  heritage  of  ideas  which  we 
find  before  us  when  we  come  into  the  world,  possessed  by  all  minds  as  a  common  endow- 
ment and  embodied  in  a  multitude  of  forms,  hterary,  mechanical,  social,  rehgious. 
What  magnificent  possessions  the  past  hands  on  to  us !  4.  And,  especially,  these  people 
were  anxious  for  their  children  ;  they  were  anxious  that  their  share  in  the  toils  and 
risks  of  the  campaigns  of  Israel  should  not  be  forgotten.  They  were  fearful  lest 
their  children  should  lose  their  part  in  the  original  heritage  of  the  covenant.  Many 
causes  would  favour  this  :  distance,  which  made  it  impossible  for  them  to  attend 
the  great  national  festivals ;  difference  of  habits  occasioned  by  the  different  sur- 
roundings of  their  life ;  the  influence  of  neighbouring  idolatry ;  intermarriage  with 
the  tribes  hard  by — all  these  things  would  make  it  only  too  likely  that,  after  one  or 
two  generations,  their  children  would  fall  away  from  the  faith  of  Israel.  If  by  the 
sight  of  this  great  altar  overlooking  the  Jordan  they  could  be  reminded  of  God's 
claim  upon  them  and  God's  covenant  with  them  and  God's  dealing  with  their 
fathers,  perhaps  they  might  be  preserved  from  the  apostasy  which  would  otherwise 
ruin  them.  Who  does  not  sympathise  with  this  anxiety  of  the  fathers  of  the  ancient 
days  which  has  always  been  a  marked  characteristic  of  truly  godly  men,  that  they 
have  been  anxious  for  their  children's  salvation?  "Oh,  that  Ishmael  might  hve 
before  Thee  1 "  is  a  prayer  which  has  often  found  echo  in  the  hearts  of  men.  Love 
itself  becomes  more  true  and  tender  when,  with  all  the  other  passions,  it  is  sanctified 
by  the  LudweUing  Spirit.  Then,  too,  the  successes  or  failures  of  life  become  properly 
discriminated.  Men  who  see  the  invisible  estimate  the  more  correctly  the  things 
temporal  and  the  things  eternal.  And  the  chief  solicitude  for  their  children  comes 
to  be,  not  that  they  should  be  rich  or  fashionable,  but  that  they  should  be  good. 
(T.  R.  Stephenson,  I).D.)  The  altar  of  testimony  : — Suppose  we  call  the  Israehtes 
who  built  the  altar  the  Eastern  Church,  and  those  who  found  fault  with  them  the 
Western  Church.  We  shall  hope  to  get  instruction  from  both.  From  the  builders 
of  the  altar  of  testimony  we  shall  ask  you  to  learn  a  lesson  in  Christian  doctrine ; 
from  their  brethren  of  the  west,  who  found  fault  with  them,  a  lesson  in  Christian 
practice.    I.  Now  the  story  of  the  altar  on  the  banks  of  the  Jordan  appears  to  me 

REMARKABLE  AS  A  PERFECT  ILLUSTRATION  OF  WHAT  MAY  BE  CALLED  A  GREAT  SPIRITUAL 
AMBIGUITY,  COMMON  (iN  FACT,  UNIVERSAL)  THROUGHOUT  THE   ChURCH  OF  THE  MODERNS. 

It  certainly  is  something  above  and  beyond  a  mere  theological  refinement  when  we 
discuss  one  with  another  the  right  province  of  duty  and  work  in  the  system  of  Chris- 
tianity. It  eaters  into  every  judgment  we  form  of  other  men's  Christianity  or  our 
own.  The  hard-toiling  Christian,  is  he  a  Pharisee  or  not  ?  The  idle  and  the  use- 
less Christian,  is  he  a  humble  believer  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  ?  Here,  then,  it  is 
that  the  Eeubenites  will  come  in  and  render  us  a  valuable  service  as  teachers  of 
sound  doctrine.  "  We  dwell,"  said  they,  "  in  the  near  neighbourhood  of  idolatrous 
tribes.  There  is  nothing  now — there  will  be  less  when  we  are  dead  and  gone^to 
mark  us  out  from  the  heathen  and  to  rank  us  with  the  chosen  of  the  Lord."  And 
therefore  up  went  the  altar — a  memorial,  a  lasting  memorial,  in  the  style  of  it,  or 
the  inscription  it  bore,  that  the  builders  were  they  who  had  come  up  out  of  Egypt,  and 
belonged  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  according  to  the  promise.    And  is  it  not  for  this 


260  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

very  same  purpose  that  we  Christians  are  commanded  to  "  let  your  light  so  shine 
before  men  "  ?  The  offerings  of  the  silver  and  the  gold,  the  building  of  churches, 
the  visiting  of  the  widow  and  the  fatherless,  the  carrying  of  the  gospel  to  foreign 
climes,  the  reclaiming  of  untaught  and  neglected  childhood  from  misery  and  guilt — 
there  are  lesser  motives  for  doing  these  things,  but  the  chief  motive  is  that  we  may 
adorn  the  doctrines  we  profess,  that  men  may  take  knowledge  of  us  that  we  have 
been  with  Jesus,  and  that  all  the  world  may  discover  that  ours  is  no  barren  or 
unprofitable  faith.  Or  perhaps,  like  the  Eeubenites,  our  motives  may  stretch  out 
into  other  generations.  We  may  build,  with  our  money,  and  our  toils,  and  our 
example,  and  our  lives,  that  our  children  and  our  children's  children  may  say  of 
our  memory, "  Behold  the  pattern  of  the  altar  of  the  Lord,  which  our  fathers  made." 
But  now,  mark  you.  It  was  an  altar  that  the  Church  east  of  the  Jordan  built  up 
for  their  memorial.  Were  the  Eeubenites  wrong  in  rearing  their  memorial  in  the 
form  of  an  altar  ?  It  came  out,  "  Not  at  aU."  It  was  not  designed  for  a  victim : 
no  sacrifice,  in  the  proper  Shiloh  sense  of  sacrifice,  was  ever  to  be  offered  up 
from  it.  "Behold  the  pattern  of  the  altar  of  the  Lord."  That  was  all  they 
intended  by  the  erection.  They  would  tell  the  heathen,  and  their  children  would 
tell  the  children  of  the  heathen,  that  the  Jordan  made  no  difference  between 
them  and  the  seed  of  Abraham  on  the  other  side.  They  must  build  something. 
What  shall  it  be  ?  Why,  let  it  be  a  model,  a  copy,  of  the  altar  that  is  at  Shiloh. 
What  more  fitting  ?  What  more  pregnant  with  meaning  ?  It  reminds  them  whilst 
they  live  of  the  one  solitary  spot  where  the  blood  must  be  shed  for  the  remission  of 
sin  ;  it  will  prove  to  friends  and  enemies,  when  they  themselves  are  no  more,  that 
they  too  were  blessed  in  faithful  Abraham.  The  altar  was  a  tribute,  not  a  rival, 
to  the  tabernacle  that  dwelt  in  Shiloh.  Oh,  beautiful  picture  this  of  what  a  Chris- 
tian's good  works  are,  and  what  a  Christian's  good  works  are  not.  They  are  a 
memorial,  a  demonstration.  They  must  take  some  form.  What  form  shall  they 
have  ?  What  ?  Why  the  form  of  patterns,  copies,  models  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ. 
To  be  trusted  in  ?  To  be  looked  to  for  salvation  ?  To  supplant  the  offering  on  the 
Cross  ?  Nay,  indeed,  not  so.  But  to  do  homage  to  that  Cross  by  imitation,  to 
remind  us  of  it  while  we  live,  and  to  point  our  descendants  to  it  when  we  are  gone. 
II.  Learn,  then,  from  the  warm-hearted  Israelites  on  the  east  of  the  Jordan  that  a 

GOOD  man's  toils  ABE  NOT  THE  GOOD  MAM'S  ATONEMENT,  BUT  THAT  THEY  MAT  BE  EEABED, 
AND  MUST  BE  BEARED,  IN  THE  SHAPE  AND  ON  THE  MODEL  OF  ChBIST'S  ATONEMENT — an 

altar,  but  an  altar  of  witness  or  testimony,  reminding  both  yourselves  and  your  neigh- 
bours of  the  one  sacrifice  for  sin  which,  though  none  can  ever  repeat,  aU  are  com- 
manded to  copy.  But  now  it  seems  hardly  possible  to  make  the  Eeubenites  and 
the  Gadites  our  onJy  teachers  in  this  story.  They  may  render  a  lesson  upon  Chris- 
tian doctrine,  but  certainly  their  brethren  across  the  water  match  them  with  a 
lesson  on  Christian  practice.  Just  think  for  a  moment  of  the  spirit  and  manner 
wherein,  from  the  days  of  the  apostles,  the  Church  has  carried  on  the  innumerable 
controversies  that  split  up  the  Catholic  Church  into  parties.  Grace  and  good  works. 
What  a  happy  thing  it  would  have  been  for  every  one  but  the  booksellers  if  the 
champions  on  both  sides  had  only  had  the  charity  and  good  sense  to  do  what  the 
men  of  Western  Israel  did  towards  the  men  of  Eastern  Israel  three  thousand  years 
ago.  They  condescended  first  to  find  out  whether,  in  point  of  fact,  there  was  any 
heresy  to  fight  against.  "  Strike,"  then,  in  your  controversies,  but  "  hear  "  first; 
and  when  you  "  strike,"  let  it  be  only  with  the  strong  argument,  and  never  with  the 
frenzy  of  the  persecutor.  Eemember  the  words  of  Bishop  Taylor  :  "Either  the 
disagreeing  person  is  in  error,  or  he  is  not.  In  both  cases  to  persecute  is  extremely 
imprudent.  If  he  be  right,  then  we  do  open  violence  to  God  and  to  God's  truth ;  if 
he  be  wrong,  what  stupidity  it  is  to  give  to  error  the  glory  of  martyrdom.  Besides 
which,  there  is  always  a  jealousy  and  a  suspicion  that  persecutors  have  no  argu- 
ments, and  that  the  hangman  is  their  best  reasoner."  No,  no,  we  will  not  hastily 
♦'  bear  false  witness  against  our  neighbour,"  but  we  will  speak  one  to  another,  and 
judge  other  men's  servants  no  longer ;  and  may  the  very  God  of  peace  and  love  give 
to  all  of  us  to  build  up  everywhere  humble  models  and  copies  of  His  great  work  for 
our  salvation,  and  help  us  to  do  aU  that  we  do  in  the  spirit  of  charity.  {H. 
Christophenon.)  The  purity  and  unity  of  the  Church  : — I.  Thb  state  of  mind 
which  the  erection  of  this  altab  excited  in  the  otheb  tribes.  1.  Zeal  for 
the  honour  of  God.  2.  Fear  lest  they  should  incur  the  Divine  displeasure.  11. 
The  real  design  fob  which  the  altab  was  erected.  1.  It  was  a  memorial  that 
they  were  one  people.  2.  It  was  a  memorial  that  they  had  one  God  and  one  religion. 
Lessons  ;  1.  These  Israelites,  by  setting  up  this  altar,  show  their  love  to  the  service 


CHAP.  XXII.]  JOSHUA.  261 

and  worship  of  God.  Had  they  not  valued  their  privileges,  it  would  not  have 
occurred  to  them  to  provide  against  the  possibility  of  losing  them  :  that  which  we 
value  we  endeavour  to  keep.  2.  They  show  their  love  to  their  brethren.  Had  they 
not  felt  a  regard  for  them,  they  would  not  have  sought  means  to  preserve  the  know- 
ledge of  their  common  relation  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  They  who  sincerely 
love  God  wiU  love  their  brethren,  and  love  will  secure  unity ;  but  not  at  the  expense 
of  purity.     (Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)       A  supposed  wrong  explained : — 

1.  How  little  reliance  can  be  placed  upon  hearsay  !  It  is  always  so  difficult  to  give 
a  true  report  of  what  has  happened,  that  to  draw  inferences  from,  and  institute 
action  upon  mere  rumour,  is  a  dangerous  course.  A  fact  is  not  necessarily  the 
truth,  because  it  may  be  but  part  of  the  truth.  Part  of  the  truth  is  often  the  most 
dangerous,  subtle,  and  wicked  lie.  A  fact  is  after  all  but  the  expression  of  a  motive ; 
so  that  to  grasp  the  bearing  of  a  fact  the  motive  must  be  first  of  all  understood. 
Consequently,  hearsay  must  always  be  an  unsafe,  and  often  a  mischievous  guide. 

2.  Notice  how  a  religious  symbol,  employed  with  the  most  innocent  design  and  for 
a  praiseworthy  end,  was  interpreted  as  a  signal  of  idolatry  and  rebellion.  At  the 
present  day,  what  excites  the  worst  passions  so  powerfully,  and  that,  too,  in  the  name 
of  reUgion,  as  some  devout  act  or  pious  sign,  of  which  the  meaning  is  not  quite  clear 
to  the  uninitiated,  or  which  prejudice  associates  with  heresy  or  superstition.  3.  If 
all  would  follow  the  example  of  the  Israelites,  and,  before  going  to  war,  as  it  were, 
to  right  a  supposed  wrong,  would  first  seek  an  explanation,  how  often  the  wrong 
would  be  found  to  have  no  existence,  and  how  clear  of  discord  the  atmosphere  of 
the  world  would  become  1  4.  Never  assume  the  guilt  of  those  whom  you  suspect. 
It  creates  a  prejudice  in  one's  own  mind,  which  it  is  hard  to  overcome.  It  makes 
one's  own  manner  severe  and  condemnatory,  instead  of  being  conciliatory  and 
impartial.  The  effect  upon  the  opposite  party  is  to  create  an  attitude  of  resentment, 
to  excite  irritation,  to  give  a  sense  of  injury,  to  predispose  to  a  perpetuation  of  the 
quarrel,  instead  of  seeking  to  remove  it.  5.  The  eastern  tribes  behaved  with  ex- 
emplary self-control.  They  were  the  grossly  injured  party.  Yet,  smarting  as  they 
were  under  the  sense  of  injustice,  they  did  not  resent  the  indignity.  You  hear  no 
reproaches  or  recriminations.  They  simply  state  their  innocence  and  disclose  their 
real  motives.  6.  Phinehas  and  the  people  blessed  God  that  war  was  averted.  Are 
we  not  sometimes  disappointed  when  we  find  there  is  no  cause  for  quarrel? 
(T.  W.  M.  Lund,  M. A.)  Misxmderstanding : — 1.  Prepossessions  and  misunder- 
standings are  too  often  the  occasion  of  great  divisions  in  the  world,  and  of  such  as, 
if  not  prevented,  draw  after  them  very  pernicious  and  fatal  consequences.  2.  There 
ought  to  be  the  speediest  and  most  effectual  care  taken  for  preventing  the  ill-conse- 
quences of  such  misunderstandings,  and  to  take  up  the  case  before  it  comes  to  the 
utmost  extremity.  3.  The  most  proper  method  for  preventing  such  misunderstand- 
ings, and  for  composing  differences  arising  from  such  misunderstandings,  is  exami- 
nation and  inquiry  into  the  cause  with  deliberation  and  meekness,  that  they  may 
see  where  the  difference  hes,  and  take  the  best  course  for  the  composing  of  it.  4.  It 
is  a  comfortable  evidence  of  God's  presence  with  a  people  to  bless,  defend,  and 
prosper  them  when  mistakes  are  removed,  differences  happily  composed,  and  they 
are  at  union  and  peace  among  themselves.  (John  Williams,  D.D.)  Misconstruc- 
tion : — Thus  quarrels  among  brethren  oft  arise  from  mere  mistakes,  as  betwixt  Cyril 
and  Theodoret,  who  excommunicated  one  another  for  heresy,  &c.,  yet  afterwards 
coming  to  a  better  understanding  of  each  other's  meaning,  and  finding  they  both 
held  the  same  truth,  they  were  cordially  reconciled.  We  must  justly  wonder  at  the 
over-hasty  jealousy  of  the  ten  tribes  against  their  brethren,  whose  faithfulness  and 
valour  for  God  and  His  people  they  had  so  long  experience  of  in  the  Seven  Years' 
War  ;  yet  now  to  find  fault,  when  themselves  were  foully  faulty  of  a  rash  censure, 
having  only  AUegata's,  or  matters  alleged,  but  no  Probata's,  or  things  proved ;  but  alas ! 
how  oft  doth  inconsiderate  zeal  transport  even  religious  men  to  uncharitable  censures. 
Would  to  God  all  such  differences  upon  mistakes  in  our  day  may  be  as  happily 
ended  as  this  was  here,  then  God  is  among  us  (ver.  31),  perceivingly  ;  but  dissension 
drives  God  from  us,  and  will  let  in  dissolution  among  us  if  we  avoid  not  all  giving 
offence  carelessly  and  all  taking  offence  causelessly.  Oh,  that  the  Lord  would  take 
away  that  morosity  and  malignity  of  a  censorious  spirit  from  us,  and  give  to  us 
more  meekness  of  wisdom  (Jas.  iii.  13).  The  Reubenites,  &c.,  here  were  really  to 
be  commended  not  only  for  their  care  in  building  this  altar  for  the  spiritual  good  of 
their  posterity  (lest  they  should  forsake  the  sincere  service  of  the  true  God  in  their 
following  generations),  but  also  for  their  meekness  when  thus  foully  calumniated. 
They  did  not  bristle  and  set  up  the  crest  in  a  way  of  scornful  defiance,  bat  they 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxu» 

calmly  sought  to  give  due  satisfaction  to  their  offended  brethren  ;  and  the  ten  tribes 
were  verily  more  blameworthy  for  misconstruing  their  religious  meanings  and 
doings  upon  such  slender  grounds  as  a  bare  report  (without  any  solid  proof),  mis- 
representing the  matter  to  them.  Yet  herein  were  they  truly  praiseworthy,  not 
oidy  that  they  were  so  blessedly  blown  up  with  a  zeal  for  God's  glory,  in  preparing 
war  against  idolatry,  yea,  even  in  one  half  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh  against  the 
other  half  beyond  Jordan,  when  the  purity  of  their  religion  came  in  competition 
with  brotherly  affection,  like  Levi  in  that  heroic  act  of  Divine  justice  (Exod.  xxxii. 
26-29),  would  not  spare  their  own  brethren  (Deut.  xxxiii.  9),  but  also,  and  more 
especially,  that  the  ten  tribes  first  sent  Phinehas,  so  famous  for  his  heroic  act  against 
Zimri  and  Cozbi,  whereby  God's  wrath  was  appeased  (Num.  xxv.  8-11 ;  Psa.  cvi. 
SO),  to  compromise  the  controversy,  which  he  happUy  effected  without  any  imbruing 
their  hands  in  one  another's  blood.  Sure  I  am  we  want  such  a  Phinehas  in  our 
day  to  put  an  happy  end  to  our  unhappy  differences.    (C.  Ness.) 

Ver.  20.  Achan  .  .  .  perished  not  alone  In  his  Iniquity. — Achan  and  his  punish- 
ment : — Where  could  I  allege  Scripture  so  wonderful  to  show  the  mystery  of  God'a 
justice,  lest  we  speak  unadvisedly  with  our  lips:  "Why  art  Thou  so  wrath  with  the 
sheep  of  Thy  pasture  ?  "  Strike  once  upon  this  rock  of  justice,  and  I  dare  promise  a 
fountain  will  issue  out  from  thence  of  fear  and  reverence  not  to  provoke  the  Lord 
by  sins  and  trespasses ;  for  if  He  threaten,  shall  He  seem  as  one  that  mocks  ?  First, 
We  must  put  the  cause  foremost,  the  cause  of  all  the  wrath  that  follows,  and  that 
both  general:  it  is  iniquity,  and  with  an  instance  his  iniquity.  The  subject,  Achan, 
but  not  alone ;  the  affliction,  that  he  perished.  Now  let  not  any  man  make  it  a 
fallacy  to  deceive  his  own  soul.  Doth  not  the  cause  deserve  severe  arraignment  ? 
Then  blaspheme  not  as  the  wicked  do  :  "  He  seeketh  an  occasion  to  punish."  Sin  in 
its  essence  is  confederate  with  death  and  punishment.  Thus  much  for  the  cause 
in  general.  But  what  offence  his  iniquity  did  give,  the  sin  of  Achan  will  ask  a 
peculiar  and  a  larger  trial.  You  are  deceived  if  you  think  it  was  but  larceny  or 
greedy  pilfering.  But  heinous  was  the  fact  of  Achan,  first  in  scandal,  that  an 
Israelite,  preserved  so  long  in  the  wilderness,  one  that  fought  the  Lord's  battles,  and 
came  always  home  with  victory,  that  he  should  be  the  first  that  trespassed  among 
the  Canaanites,  the  heathen  that  would  blasj)heme  the  living  God.  Secondly,  In. 
disobedience :  that  Joshua,  his  noble  general,  made  the  head  of  aU  the  tribes  by  God's 
appointment,  and  Moses'  good  liking,  and  Eleazar's  unction,  could  not  command  to 
be  obeyed.  Thirdly,  In  faithless  covetousness.  That  since  manna  did  fall  no  more 
from  heaven  about  their  tents,  the  Lord  did  heed  His  people  no  longer,  every  man 
must  catch  what  come  to  his  hands,  so  Achan  took  the  accursed,  &c.  Here  is 
scandal  to  them  that  were  without ;  within  themselves  contempt  of  the  Lord  and 
His  servant  Joshua,  in  his  own  heart  an  inordinate  desire  to  grow  rich  and 
sumptuous.  Now  turn  to  the  punishment  of  this  man.  Behold  Achan,  the  son  of 
Zerah,  that  man  perished  not  alone  in  his  iniquity.  Achan  that  had  outUved  the 
corruption  of  his  young  years,  and  was  grown  in  age  able  to  go  to  warfare,  to  have 
many  children,  to  know  how  to  steal  from  God,  and  dissemble  with  Joshua,  doth 
his  hoary  head  go  down  with  peace  into  the  grave  ?  Like  the  web  of  Penelope,  all 
that  hath  been  wrought  in  the  year  may  be  ravelled  out  in  a  night.  Secondly,  He 
that  was  spared  among  all  the  dangers  of  the  wilderness  is  consumed  in  the  city ; 
he  that  could  escape  the  pilgrimage  of  forty  years  is  doomed  to  die  in  Canaan ;  he 
that  was  not  devoured  in  the  fire  of  Taberah  is  burnt  in  the  valley  of  Achor.  As 
Aristotle  speaks  of  Homer's  poetry,  when  he  set  up  waUs  for  Troy  in  one  book,  and 
plucked  them  down  in  another.  They  that  walk  in  the  night  preserve  the  flame  of 
their  torch  or  candle  from  winds  and  casualties  abroad,  which  notwithstanding  they 
put  out  when  they  return  to  their  home.  So  Achan  that  walked  over  the  sea,  when 
the  bridge  was  under  water,  and  lived  among  scorpions,  and  was  not  consumed  in 
the  sedition  of  Dathan,  nor  slain  in  the  battles  of  Moab,  yet  the  vessel  is  not  cast 
away  in  the  ocean  sea,  but  in  the  haven,  and  his  light  is  put  out  at  home  in  the 
long-expected  Canaan.  Note  this,  thirdly,  in  Achan's  person,  mischief  did  light 
upon  him,  not  in  the  hunger  and  thirst  of  the  wilderness,  not  in  his  poverty,  but 
having  compUed  much  riches  together,  enough  to  purchase  a  good  fee-simple  in 
Canaan  if  the  Lord  had  not  given  him  his  portion.  Men  think  themselves  nowadays 
past  the  law  and  penalties  of  death,  when  they  have  sinned  so  much  that  they  are 
grown  wealthy  in  iniquity ;  because,  if  need  be,  they  can  buy  the  favour  of  the 
judge.  But  this  man,  when  he  was  furnished  to  live  simaptuously,  then  he  is  cut 
off,  that,  as  Solomon  says,  the  remembrance  of  death  may  be  bitter  to  that  man, 


CHAP.xxn.]  JOSHUA.  263 

who  thought  it  pleasant  to  live.  This  was  St.  Austin's  rule  when  he  was  old  and 
had  learnt  the  world:  "  I  fear  no  hurt  from  the  world  when  it  goes  against  me,  and 
casts  a  froward  look  upon  my  fortunes,  but  my  danger  is  near  at  hand,  when  it 
smiles  and  flatters  me,  as  if  all  were  happy."  The  sponges  that  swell  with  liquors 
are  most  likely  to  be  pressed  and  emptied.  Now  recoUect  these  three  qualities  of 
Achan,  who  was  more  likely  to  prosper  than  a  soldier  in  the  flower  of  his  age, 
a  joyful  man  at  his  journey's  end  in  the  land  of  his  peace,  a  wealthy  man  in  the 
plenty  of  his  riches.  Take  it  to  thought,  all  you  that  have  the  world  tied  unto  you 
with  a  threefold  cord  of  health  and  peace  and  prosperity,  which  men  dream  as  if 
it  could  not  be  broken  ;  for  it  broke  like  tow  among  the  sparks.  I  have  many 
theorems  to  propound  unto  you,  but  all  shall  end  in  this  doctrine,  that  excepting 
the  first  Adam,  the  root  of  our  corrupt  nature,  and  excepting  the  second  Adam, 
who,  being  without  spot  or  sin,  gave  Himself  to  the  death  of  the  Cross  for  the  sins  of 
all  the  world,  these  two  excepted,  every  man  dies  for  his  own  iniquity.  First,  I  do 
presume  that  you  will  consent  unto  me  that  the  heart  of  man  is  only  evil  continually, 
and  that  we  may  call  it,  as  Theodorus  did  revile  Tiberius,  mud  tempered  with 
pollution.  Then,  it  is  confessed,  that  the  wages  of  sin  is  death.  Give  me  your 
credit  but  to  one  thing  more.  You  are  bound  to  answer  to  as  painful  and  severe  a 
death  as  God's  vengeance  shall  inflict  upon  you.  Observe  these  points,  then.  First, 
If  the  disobedience  of  one  siimer  is  enough  to  consume  many  persons.  Lord  whither 
will  a  multitude  of  iniquity  send  one  man  headlong  ?  Sufficient  are  our  evil  days 
wherein  we  have  walked  too  much  before  after  the  vanity  of  our  mind.  Secondly, 
As  the  greatest  unity  of  the  triumphant  Church  above  doth  consist  in  the  glory 
which  they  enjoy  together  in  the  sight  of  God,  so  our  unity  of  the  militant  Church 
below  is  to  suffer  and  die  together.  It  is  that  which  must  combine  the  souls  of 
Christians.  Thirdly,  Shall  not  this  make  me  as  careful  to  prevent  every  man's  sins 
as  mine  own  ?  Shall  I  not  offer  myself  to  be  my  brother's  keeper  ?  Like  watch- 
men that  compass  the  city  in  the  night,  not  only  for  the  safety  of  their  own  house, 
but  lest  any  mansion  take  fire  about  them.  Thus  is  the  brief  sum  of  the  second 
part  of  my  text,  man  perished  in  iniquity.  Secondly,  That  man  Achan,  a  branch  of 
the  olive  tree,  even  Israel  which  God  had  planted.  But  an  evil  branch  is  evil 
though  the  stock  were  a  cedar  of  Libanus.  Is  it  any  glory  for  the  dead  branches 
to  boast  they  were  vine  branches,  and  not  heythorn,  since  they  are  cut  off  and  cast 
away?  Lastly,  He  fell  down  like  the  tower  of  Siloam,  and  brained  all  that  were 
about  him.  I  have  but  one  short  part  to  dispatch,  his  execution,  that  man 
perished,  &c.  To  search  much  into  Achan's  punishment  were  not  the  way  to  be 
more  learned,  but  more  tormented.  Briefly  thus.  Every  man  in  the  rank  of  a 
subject  lives  under  the  authority  of  three  commanders — 1.  Under  the  conscience  of 
his  own  heart.  2.  Under  the  laws  of  his  king.  3.  Under  the  commandments  of 
God.  And  if  we  displease  either  God  or  the  king,  or  our  own  conscience,  vengeance 
meets  us  on  every  side.  Conscience  hath  a  worm  in  store,  nay,  a  cockatrice  to 
sting  us ;  the  magistrate  bears  a  sword  to  divide  us ;  but  especially  it  is  a  fearful 
thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God.  In  an  evil  conscience  we  die  unto  all 
joy  and  comfort ;  in  our  trespass  against  the  laws  of  man  we  die  unto  men ;  in 
breaking  the  statutes  of  God  we  die  unto  heaven :  surely  he  deserved  not  to  die  but 
one  death  that  offended  three.  Some,  perchance,  will  go  a  thought  further,  and 
pronounce  a  fearful  sentence  that  this  man  was  wiped  for  ever  out  of  the  book  of 
the  hving.  Nothing  should  make  me  mistrustful  and  doubt  of  his  salvation  but  his 
too  late  repentance.  Is  this  a  time  to  leave  off  sin  when  we  must  leave  off  life  and 
can  sin  no  more  ?  Do  you  then  come  to  play  the  huxters  for  mercy,  as  if  the 
market  were  cheapest  at  the  latter  end  of  the  day  ?  {Bp.  Hacket.)  Achan's  sin, 
and  Achan's  end  : — I.  The  perpetration  of  sin.  Iniquity  is  the  common  character- 
istic of  all  mankind :  "  The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately 
wicked."  But  there  is  before  us  a  reference  to  one  particular  act  of  sin,  which, 
while  proceeding  from  the  depraved  heart  possessed  by  the  perpetrator  in  common 
with  others,  appears  to  us  in  prominent  and  isolated  distinction  of  enormity.  1.  The 
iniquity  of  Achan  was  heinous,  on  account  of  its  intrinsic  nature.  It  was  an  act 
of  covetousness.  He  was  beguiled  by  a  greedy  and  unprincipled  desire  after  the 
attainment  and  preservation  of  wealth.  2.  The  iniquity  of  Achan  was  perpetrated 
against  the  Divine  command,  distinctly  expressed  and  amply  known.  3.  The 
iniquity  of  Achan  was  heinous  on  account  of  its  attendant  dissimulation  and 
attempted  concealment.  H.  The  infliction  of  punishment.  The  punishment  of 
the  transgressor  himself :  "  That  man  perished  in  his  iniquity."  The  terms  of  our 
text  appear  to  justify  the  implication,  that  his  iniciaity  was  not  repented  of,  and 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

that  therefore  it  was  not  cleansed  or  forgiven ;  he  confessed,  but  he  was  not  con- 
trite ;  and  the  whole  spirit  of  the  narrative  must  be  regarded  as  justifying  the  view 
which  now  is  expressed.  So  that  you  perceive  the  death  of  his  body  was  the  sign 
of  the  ruin  of  his  soul.  And  it  is  true  with  regard  to  every  impenitent  sinner,  in 
every  age  of  the  world,  who  dies  in  iniquity,  that  thus  he  must  "  perish."  "  They 
Bhall  utterly  perish  in  their  own  corruption."    They  die  "  the  second  death." 

2.  Observe  the  punishment  of  the  transgressor,  in  relation  to  the  interests  of  others. 
"  That  man  perished  not  alone  in  his  iniquity."  Men  by  their  iniquity  often 
associate  themselves  with  the  ruin  of  the  souls  of  their  feUow-men.  It  is  probable 
that  no  person  can  long  continue  in  a  state  of  alienation  from  God  without  exerting 
(although  he  attempts  it  not)  some  baneful  influence  on  the  character  and  the 
interests  of  others ;  and  there  are,  we  have  reason  to  fear,  numerous  instances  in 
which  men  by  bad  example,  or  even  by  direct  efforts  for  that  purpose,  make  others 
"  partakers  of  their  evil  deeds"  and  lead  them  down  to  hell.  How  horrible,  how 
thrice  horrible,  to  lead  others  into  the  prison  1  to  lash  around  others  the  fetters  1  to 
administer  to  others  the  poison  !  to  enwrap  others  in  the  flame  1  Deeds  at  which 
hell  itself  may  wonder  and  fiend  may  point  with  amazement  to  his  fellow- flend — 
"  That  man  '  perished  not  alone  in  his  iniquity ' ;  there  is  the  seducer,  and  there 
are  his  victims — all  victims  now  I  "  Lessons — 1.  There  ought  to  be  anxious  appli- 
cation for  the  pardon  of  our  transgressions  perpetrated  in  past  times.  2.  There 
ought  to  be  the  determined  repudiation  and  avoidance  of  sin  for  the  time  to  come. 

3.  There  ought  to  be  diligent  endeavour  to  bring  our  feUow-men  to  salvation. 
Some  are  "  not  alone  in  their  iniquity  "  ;  it  must  be  our  ambition  not  to  be  alone  in 
our  salvation.  {James  Parsons.)  The  history  ofAchan  improved  : — I.  The  natubb 
OF  THE  rNiQDiTT  WHICH  HE  COMMITTED.  He  transgrcsscd  the  plain  command  of  God, 
and  thus  sinned  against  Him.  He  no  doubt  sinned  also  against  his  own  soul, 
against  his  family,  and  against  his  people.  But  no  notice  is  taken  of  this.  What  ia 
dwelt  upon  is,  that  he  sinned  against  the  Lord.  His  iniquity  was  a  transgression 
of  the  command  and  law  and  covenant  of  his  God.  It  implied  the  basest  ingrati- 
tude for  the  mercies  he  had  received,  as  weU  as  a  secret  disbelief  of  the  Divine 
omniscience,  power,  holiness,  righteousness,  and  truth.  Was  this  sin  peculiar  to 
Achan  ?  Are  there  not  many  others  who  are  virtually  guilty  of  the  same  thing  ? 
Are  there  not  many  who  apply  to  their  own  use  what  has  been  dedicated  to  God  ? 
Are  there  not  many  who  retain  in  their  own  possession  gold  and  silver  which  they 
ought  to  consecrate  to  Him  ?  Are  there  not  many  who  rob  Him  of  the  time  which 
He  has  set  apart  for  His  immediate  worship  and  service  ?  Are  there  not  many  who 
by  no  entreaty  can  be  prevailed  upon  to  glorify  Him  in  their  body,  and  in  their 
spirit,  which  are  His  ?  What  incited  Achan  to  commit  sacrilege,  and  thus  to  sin 
against  God,  was  avarice — an  inordinate  desire  of  money,  an  eagerness  of  gain. 
And  are  there  not  many  who,  under  the  influence  of  the  same  sordid  spirit,  act  like 
him,  and  thus  sin  against  God  and  their  own  souls?  "Take  heed,  and  beware  of 
covetousness :  for  a  man's  Ufe  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  things  which  he 
possesseth."  II.  The  way  in  which  the  iniquity  of  Achan  was  bkought  to  light. 
1.  The  Lord  hates  and  abhors  sin.  It  is  an  enemy  within  the  camp  which  is  sure 
to  betray  us  into  the  hands  of  those  that  are  without,  and  ultimately  make  us  their 
prey.  2.  The  Lord  sees  our  sins,  however  secretly  they  may  be  committed.  3.  God 
is  able  to  bring  our  sins  to  light  even  now,  and  that  He  frequently  does  bring  them, 
to  our  utter  confusion.  By  such  visitations  in  time  the  Lord  warns  us  of  what  we  are 
to  expect  in  eternity.  III.  The  confession  which  Achan  made  of  his  iniquity. 
Had  Achan  made  this  confession  sooner,  there  would  have  been  room  to  hope  that 
he  truly  repented  of  his  iniquity  ;  but  as  he  deferred  his  acknowledgment  of  his 
guilt  till  the  lot  actually  pointed  him  out,  there  is  reason  to  fear  that  it  proceeded 
at  last  from  no  real  change  of  heart ;  that,  in  fact,  it  was  constrained  and  not 
voluntary.  1.  How  he  was  led  to  commit  his  iniquity.  Mark  here  the  way  in 
which  men  are  frequently  led  to  sin  against  God.  The  temptation  makes  its 
insidious  approach  by  means  of  the  eyes,  or  one  of  the  other  senses ;  then  there 
arises  in  the  heart  an  evil  desire  for  the  thing  seen  ;  and  desire,  when  it  hath 
conceived,  bringeth  forth  sin.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  we  should  make 
a  covenant  with  our  eyes,  that  we  should  watch  against  temptation,  that  we  should 
guard  against  the  first  approaches  of  iniquity,  that  we  should  stop  every  avenue  by 
which  sin  can  enter.  2.  How  fuU  of  fear  and  disquietude  is  the  life  of  a  sinner, 
Achan,  having  taken  the  accursed  thing,  hid  it  in  the  earth  in  the  midst  of  his  tent. 
Why  ?  Because  he  was  afraid  some  one  would  see  it ;  and  in  this  fear  he  must  have 
lived  day  after  day,  until  his  iniquity  was  brought  to  light.    Saoh  always  is  sin,  every 


CHAP,  xxn.]  JOSHUA.  265 

sin,  and  especially  the  sin  of  theft  or  sacrilege.  It  deludes  those  who  are  under  its 
dominion.  It  promises  them  much,  but  pays  them  little  but  wretchedness  and 
misery.  It  fills  them  with  fears  and  anxieties,  and  often  causes  them  to  flee  when 
no  man  pursueth.  IV.  The  punishment  which  followed  thk  iniquity  of  Achan. 
1.  As  to  Achan  himself,  condign  punishment  speedily  overtook  him:  "He  perished 
in  his  iniquity."  He  suffered  death  as  the  due  reward  of  his  crime.  And  such  is 
the  wages  which  every  sinner  is  sure  to  receive  unless  he  obtains  deliverance 
through  the  death  of  Christ,  who  died  that  we  might  live.  2.  Others  also  suffered 
for  the  iniquity  of  Achan:  "  That  man  perished  not  alone  in  his  iniquity."  Who, 
then,  perished  besides  him  ?  Many  had  perished  before  him,  and  perished  too  for 
his  iniquity,  namely,  the  thirty-and-six.  men  who  were  smitten  by  the  men  of  Ai. 
It  is  also  probable  that  aU  his  family  were  put  to  death  with  him  for  the  same  sin. 
Such  were  the  dreadful  consequences  occasioned  by  the  iniquity  of  this  man.  And 
is  not  sin,  even  in  our  own  day,  frequently  followed  by  similar  consequences  ? 
How  often  do  we  see  children  suffering  for  the  sins  of  their  parents  and  parents  for 
the  sins  of  their  children  ?  How  often  do  we  see  thieves  and  murderers,  adulterers, 
drunkards,  and  such  like,  involving  their  wives  and  families,  and  perhaps  other 
relations  also,  in  poverty  and  disgrace,  in  troubles  and  anxieties,  in  wretchedness 
and  misery,  if  not  in  still  more  awful  calamities  ?  How  often,  also,  has  one  order 
of  society  to  bear  the  ill  consequences  arising  from  the  misconduct  of  another  ? 
Lessons  :  1.  How  wonderful  is  the  patience  of  God  towards  the  world  we  live  in.  In 
the  conduct  of  Achan  we  may  see,  as  in  a  glass,  what  is  the  conduct  of  hundreds 
and  thousands  who  are  now  living  on  the  earth.  How  astonishing,  then,  is  the 
patience  of  God !  How  wonderful  that  He  should  still  bear  with  us,  that  He  should 
still  give  us  space  for  repentance,  that  He  should  stiU  be  unwilling  that  we  should 
perish  1  Oh,  let  us  not  despise  the  riches  of  His  goodness  and  forbearance  and 
long-suffering  I  2.  The  patience  of  God,  however  great  and  wonderful,  will  not  last 
for  ever.  (D.  Rees.)  Fellowship  in  Achan's  fall : — If  indeed,  says  Dr.  South,  a 
man  could  be  wicked  and  a  villain  to  himself  alone,  the  mischief  would  be  so  much 
the  more  tolerable.  But  the  case,  as  he  goes  on  to  show,  is  much  otherwise  ;  the 
guilt  of  the  crime  lights  upon  one,  but  the  example  of  it  sways  a  multitude ; 
especially  if  the  criminal  be  of  any  note  or  eminence  in  the  world.  "  For  the  fall 
of  such  an  one  by  any  temptation  (be  it  never  so  plausible)  is  like  that  of  a  principal 
stone  or  stately  pillar,  tumbling  from  a  lofty  edifice  into  the  deep  mire  of  the  street ; 
it  does  not  only  plunge  and  sink  into  the  black  dirt  itself,  but  also  dashes  or 
bespatters  all  that  are  about  it  or  near  it  when  it  falls."  Well  may  the  note  of 
exclamation  follow :  how  strange,  yet  how  inevitable,  the  tie  which  may  link  our 
uneventful  life  with  the  stormy  passions  of  numbers  far  away  1  More  wonderful 
than  even  the  Atlantic  cable  is  declared  to  be  that  unknown  fibre,  along  which, 
from  other  men's  sins,  responsibility  may  thrill  even  to  our  departed  souls :  "  a 
chain  whose  links  are  formed  perhaps  of  idle  words,  of  forgotten  looks,  of  phrases 
of  double  meaning,  of  bad  advice,  of  cynical  sentiment  hardly  seriously  meant ;  yet 
carried  on  through  life  after  life,  through  soul  after  soul,  till  the  Uttle  seed  of  evil 
sown  by  you  has  developed  into  some  deed  of  guilt  at  which  you  shudder,  but  from 
participation  in  responsibility  for  which  you  cannot  clear  yourself."  Every  sin,  we 
are  in  fine  reminded,  may  waken  its  echo  ;  every  sin  is  redupUcated  and  reiterated 
in  other  souls  and  lives.  A  distinguished  Prench  preacher  has  a  striking  discourse 
on  what  he  entitles  the  soUdarity  of  evil ;  and  he,  too,  dilates  upon  the  mysterious 
links  which  connect  together  persons  and  acts  that  appear  to  have  nothing  in 
common — suggesting  melancholy  examples  of  the  contagion  of  guilt  and  its  conse- 
quences, of  the  expansive  power  of  corruption  and  its  almost  boundless  results. 
Very  forcibly  Mr.  Isaac  Taylor  warns  us  that  in  almost  every  event  of  life  the 
remote  consequences  vastly  outweigh  the  proximate  in  actual  amount  of  importance ; 
and  he  undertakes  to  show,  on  principles  even  of  mathematical  calculation,  thai 
each  individual  of  the  human  family  holds  in  his  hand  the  centre  lines  of  on 
interminable  webwork,  on  which  are  sustained  the  fortunes  of  multitudes  of  hia 
successors ;  the  rmpUcated  consequences,  if  summed  together,  making  up  therefore 
a  weight  of  human  weal  or  woe  that  is  reflected  back  with  an  incalculable 
momentum  upon  the  lot  of  each.  The  practical  conclusion  is  that  every  one  is 
bound  to  remember  that  the  personal  sufferings  or  pecuhar  vicissitudes  or  toils 
through  which  he  is  called  to  pass  are  to  be  estimated  and  explained  only  in  an 
immeasurably  small  proportion  if  his  single  weUare  is  regarded,  while  their  "  full 
price  and  value  are  not  to  be  computed  unless  the  drops  of  the  morning  dew  oould 
be  numbered."    {F,  Jacox,  B.A.) 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

Ver.  22.  Tlie  lord  God  of  gods,  He  knoweth. — God  knows  : — It  is  a  great  satis- 
faction when  we  feel  that  there  is  one  Being  who  knows  everything.  After  some 
great  perplexity,  some  dark  hour,  or  some  mysterious  visitation,  when  there 
seemed  to  be  no  clue  to  an  event,  no  interpretation  arching  it,  and  not  a  spark  of 
illumination  about  it,  it  is  a  blessed  relief,  both  to  mind  and  soul,  when  we  feel 
that  somebody  can  understand  it,  can  thoroughly  sift  it,  and  will  in  good  time  bring 
out  its  illuminated  side,  and  reveal  the  spiritual  diamonds  so  long  concealed  in 
darkness,  sorrow,  and  grief.  God  knows — what  ?  The  uses  of  things — why  the 
world  was  made,  why  we  were  made,  the  meaning  of  the  events  that  greet  us,  what 
lessons  they  convey,  what  benedictions  they  unfold,  what  promises  they  hold  out, 
and  how  much  culture  we  shall  gain  by  them.  Can  anything  be  more  cheer- 
ing than  this  fact,  and  is  there  anything  strange  about  it?  Strange  that  the 
Maker  should  be  familiar  with  what  He  has  made,  wonderful  that  the 
Architect  should  understand  all  about  His  building,  peculiar  that  the  Creator 
of  the  world  should  comprehend  what  He  has  produced?  How  is  it  in  every- 
day affairs?  Would  it  not  be  wonderful  if  Mozart  and  Beethoven  did  not 
understand  their  own  music,  stood  apart  from  it  as  strangers,  and  were  unable 
to  comprehend  the  science  of  its  melody?  or  if  Powers  stood  before  one  of  his 
statues  dumb  as  an  idiot,  and  unable  to  give  an  account  of  how  it  was  shaped  into 
its  wondrous  beauty?  or  if  Eubens  stared  at  one  of  his  own  pictures  with  a  vacant 
gaze,  and  with  a  total  inability  to  trace  out  the  preparatory  steps  that  led  to  its 
execution?  Then  is  it  not  very  natural  that  the  Great  Musician  of  earth  and 
heaven  should  be  able  to  explain  all  the  grand  chorus  of  the  ages,  that  the  Holy 
Sculptor  of  aU  time  should  be  able  to  describe  every  particular  of  His  work,  or  that 
the  Great  Painter  of  both  worlds  should,  with  a  keen  wisdom,  delight  in  His  own 
magnificent  paintings  ?  I  come  now  to  my  second  proposition,  that  grows  out  of 
the  first — we  do  not  know.  Here  we  find  two  parties  in  the  Church.  One  says, "  We 
do  not  know  anything,  and  never  can  know  anything,"  and  the  other  says,  "  We 
do  know  something,  but  that  something  wiU  not  amount  to  much  until  God  reveals 
more  knowledge."  I  confess,  I  do  not  think  that,  in  order  to  exalt  God,  we  must 
utterly  extinguish  ourselves.  If  I  say  that  a  human  being  is  utterly  incapable  of 
ever  being  enlightened,  has  no  power,  and  is  bound  irrevocably  to  sin,  with  no 
chance  to  escape,  you  may  very  properly  ask  me,  "  Who  could  have  made  such  a 
being  as  that  ?  "  But,  because  we  can  do  something — aye,  many  things — and 
because  we  are  something — aye,  much — it  does  not  follow  that  we  can  do  everything 
or  that  we  are  self-sufficient.  No,  never.  God  made  us,  and  therefore  we  are  not 
failures  ;  and  let  us  not  for  a  moment  suppose  that  God  has  made  a  mistake  in 
our  creation,  but,  because  we  are  made,  we  are  dependent,  frail,  and  we  must 
often  and  always  look  to  our  Creator  for  aid  and  blessing.  We  are  engirdled 
by  mysteries.  Yet  is  it  not  something  that  we  can,  by  the  grace  of  God, 
think,  talk,  write,  walk,  live?  and  can  we  speak  meanly  of  one  who  can  do  all 
these  things  ?  Forbid  it.  Father  I  Make  us  humble,  but  do  not  let  us  be  ungrate- 
ful. As  we  look  at  history  and  at  historical  results,  it  becomes  very  evident  that  all 
through  the  past  ages  there  has  been  a  providential  plan.  If  we  made  ourselves 
Eomans,  Grecians,  or  Hebrews,  and  if  we  threw  ourselves  back  thousands  of  years, 
we  should  hardly  understand  that  some  of  our  greatest  trials  were  to  prove  such  a 
vast  benediction  to  after-ages.  We  could  hardly  believe  that  our  decay  would 
prove  to  others  life,  and  that  every  pang  we  suffered,  both  as  nations  and  as 
individuals,  was  in  accordance  with  the  great,  glorious,  and  holy  scheme  of 
Providence.  What  would  be  called  in  ancient  days  subjugation,  invasion,  and  a 
despotism,  has  since  proved  emancipation,  while  the  baptism  of  blood  then  offered 
has  resulted  in  the  salvation  of  the  future.  Time  explains  a  great  many  things 
that  we  do  not  understand  to-day ;  and  events  always  prove  that  He  who  rules  the 
heavens  and  the  earth  is  never  bewildered,  nor  mistaken,  nor  vanquished.  Let 
each  one  of  us  take  our  own  personal  experience  and  trace  it  back,  and  see  what 
we  wanted  to  do  and  where  we  wanted  to  go  when  God  would  not  let  us  do  it,  and 
when  God  held  us  back,  and  when  God  seemed  to  be  working  against  us,  and  how 
does  the  retrospect  look  with  our  present  experience  ?  Did  not  God  know  best  ? 
and  has  not  everything  come  out  right,  and  was  it  not  well  for  us  that  years  ago  a. 
restraining  hand  was  placed  upon  our  pleasures,  appetites,  and  desires  ?  And  is  it 
not  better  that  we  were  turned  aside  from  the  road  that  we  desired  to  travel  ?  I 
think  one  of  the  bewitching  attractions  of  biography  rests  in  the  fact  that  we  often 
detect  what  appear  to  be  very  slight  and  trivial  matters,  changing  the  whole  course 
of  a  person's  Me,    Washington  gave  up  going  into  the  navy  in  order  to  please  his 


CHAP,  xxm.]  JOSHUA.  267 

mother  ;  and  thns  a  hero  was  secured  for  America  and  a  splendid  monument  of 
goodness  and  greatness  for  all  the  world.  Franklin  started  on  a  journey  to 
Philadelphia  as  a  mere  pauper,  and  went  under  false  promises  to  London ;  and 
thus  a  philosopher  was  educated  for  all  time.  The  eyesight  of  a  Prescott  was 
suddenly  eclipsed,  but  out  of  that  darkness  an  historian  was  bom,  whose  sweet 
rhetoric  will  always  prove  a  fascination  and  a  culture.  Yes,  the  slightest  incidents 
that  we  call  disappointments  are  often  the  turning-points  in  our  experience,  and 
prove  the  very  moment  when  Heaven  interposes,  and  shapes  us  for  ends  more  con- 
sistent with  the  will  of  God.    (Caleb  D.  Bradlee.) 


CHAPTEE  XXm. 


Yebs.  1-16.  I  am  old  and  stricken  in  age  :  and  ye  have  seen  all  tbat  the  Lord 
your  God  hath  done. — Old  age : — As  in  the  snowy  realms  of  the  Alps  lovely  flowers 
open  their  cheerful  petals  to  the  sky,  so,  notwithstanding  the  weight  of  years 
and  cares,  many  a  sweet  flower  of  hope,  and  trust,  and  love,  and  disinterested 
friendship,  and  faith  may  continue  to  blossom  in  the  aged  heart,  and  to  send  out  an 
attractive  fragrance  for  the  happiness  of  others.  Jehovah  the  champion  of  Israel : — 
The  last  two  chapters  of  Joshua  are  very  like  each  other.  Each  professes  to  be  a 
report  of  the  aged  leader's  farewell  meeting  with  the  heads  of  the  people.  In  our 
judgment,  both  reports  bear  on  the  same  occasion ;  and  if  so,  all  that  needs  to  be 
said  as  to  their  origin  is,  that  the  author  of  the  book,  having  obtained  two  reports 
from  trustworthy  sources,  did  not  adopt  the  plan  of  weaving  them  into  one,  but  gave 
them  separately,  just  as  he  had  received  them.  The  circumstance  is  a  proof  of  the 
trustworthiness  of  the  narrative ;  had  the  writer  put  on  record  merely  what  Joshua 
might  be  supposed  to  have  said,  he  would  not  have  adopted  this  twofold  form  of  narra- 
tive. What  was  the  burden  of  Joshua's  address  ?  You  have  it  in  the  words — "  The 
Lord  your  God  is  He  that  fighteth  for  you  " ;  therefore  "  cleave  unto  the  Lord  your 
God."  You  owe  everything  to  the  Lord;  therefore  render  to  Him  all  His  due.  God 
is  expressly  set  forth  as  the  champion  of  Israel,  fighting  for  him  against  the  Canaan- 
ites,  and  driving  them  out.  He  is  here  the  God  of  battles ;  and  the  terrible  desolation 
that  followed  the  track  of  Israel  is  here  ascribed  to  the  championship  of  the  Most  High. 
There  are  some  expositors  who  explain  these  sayings  in  a  general  sense.  There 
are  great  laws  of  conquest,  they  say,  roughly  sanctioned  by  Providence,  whereby 
one  race  advances  upon  another.  Nations  enervated  through  luxury  and  idleness 
are  usually  supplanted  by  more  vigorous  races.  We  cannot  vindicate  aU  the  rule  of 
the  British  in  India ;  greed,  insolence,  and  lust  have  left  behind  them  many  a  stain. 
Still,  the  result  on  the  whole  has  been  for  good.  The  English  have  a  higher  con- 
ception of  human  life  than  the  Hindus.  They  have  a  higher  sense  of  order,  of 
justice,  of  family  life,  of  national  well-being.  There  is  a  vigour  about  them  that 
wiU  not  tolerate  the  policy  of  drifting ;  that  cannot  stand  stiU  or  He  still  and  see 
everything  going  vnrong ;  that  strives  to  remedy  injustice,  to  reform  abuse,  to 
correct  what  is  vicious  and  disorderly,  and  foster  organisation  and  progress.  In 
these  respects  British  rule  has  been  a  benefit  to  India.  There  may  have  been  deeds 
of  oppression  and  wrong  that  curdle  the  blood,  or  habits  of  self-indulgence  may 
have  been  practised  at  the  expense  of  the  natives  that  shock  our  sense  of  humanity, 
as  if  the  inferior  race  could  have  no  rights  against  the  superior  ;  but  these  are  but 
the  eddies  or  by-play  of  a  great  beneficent  current,  and  in  the  summing  up  of 
the  long  account  they  hold  but  an  insignificant  place.  When  you  survey  the  grand 
result ;  when  you  see  a  great  continent  like  India  peaceable  and  orderly  that  used 
to  be  distracted  on  every  side  by  domestic  warfare  ;  when  you  see  justice  carefully 
administered,  life  and  property  protected,  education  and  civilisation  advanced,  to 
say  nothing  of  the  spirit  of  Christianity  introduced,  you  are  unable  to  resist  the  con- 
clusion that  the  influence  of  its  new  masters  has  been  a  gain  to  India,  and  therefore 
that  the  British  rule  has  had  the  sanction  of  Heaven.  Now,  in  this  case,  as  in  the 
conquest  of  India  by  Britain,  a  process  went  on  which  was  a  great  benefit  on  a  large 
scale.  It  was  not  designed  to  be  of  benefit  to  the  original  inhabitants,  as  was  the 
British  occupation  of  India,  for  they  were  a  doomed  race,  as  we  shall  immediately 
see.  But  the  settlement  of  the  people  of  Israel  in  Canaan  was  designed  and  was 
fitted  to  be  a  great  benefit  to  the  world.    Explain  it  as  we  may,  Israel  had  higher 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xsm. 

ideas  of  life  than  the  other  nations,  richer  gifts  of  head  and  heart,  more  capacity  of 
governing,  and  a  far  purer  religious  sentiment.  On  the  principle  that  a  race  like 
this  must  necessarily  prevail  over  such  tribes  as  had  occupied  Palestine  before,  the 
conquest  of  Joshua  might  well  be  said  to  have  Divine  approval.  God  might  truly 
be  said  to  go  forth  with  the  armies  of  Israel,  and  to  scatter  their  enemies  as  smoke 
is  scattered  by  the  wind.  But  this  was  not  all.  There  was  already  a  judicial 
sentence  against  the  seven  nations  of  which  Israel  was  appointed  to  be  the 
executioner.  Loathsome  vice  consecrated  by  the  seal  of  religion  ;  unnatural  lust, 
turning  human  beings  into  worse  than  beasts ;  natural  affection  converted  into  an 
instrument  of  the  most  horrid  cruelty — could  any  practices  show  more  powerfully 
the  hopeless  degradation  of  these  nations  in  a  moral  and  religious  sense,  or  their 
ripeness  for  judgment?  Israel  was  the  appointed  executioner  of  God's  justice 
against  them,  and  in  order  that  Israel  might  fulfil  that  function,  God  went  before 
him  in  his  battles  and  delivered  his  enemies  into  his  hands.  And  what  Israel  did 
in  this  way  was  done  under  a  solemn  sense  that  he  was  inflicting  Divine  retribution. 
We  cannot  suppose  that  the  people  uniformly  acted  with  the  moderation  and  self- 
restraint  becoming  God's  executioners.  No  doubt  there  were  many  instances  of 
unwarrantable  and  inhuman  violence.  To  charge  these  on  God  is  not  fair.  They 
were  the  spots  and  stains  that  ever  indicate  the  hand  of  man,  even  when  doing  the 
work  of  God.  If  it  be  said  that  the  language  of  the  historian  seems  sometimes  to 
ascribe  to  God  what  really  arose  from  the  passions  of  the  people,  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  we  are  not  told  in  what  form  the  Lord  communicated  His  commands.  No 
doubt  the  Hebrews  were  disposed  to  claim  Divine  authority  for  what  they  did  to 
the  very  fullest  extent.  There  may  have  been  times  when  they  imagined  that  they 
were  fulfilling  the  requirements  of  God,  when  they  were  only  giving  effect  to  feelings 
of  their  own.  And  generally  they  may  have  been  prone  to  suppose  that  modes  of 
slaughter  that  seemed  to  them  quite  proper  were  weU  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God. 
For  God  often  accomplishes  His  holy  purposes  by  leaving  His  instruments  to  act  in 
their  own  way.  But  we  have  wandered  from  Joshua,  and  the  assembly  of  Israel. 
What  we  have  been  trying  is  to  show  the  soundness  of  Joshua's  fundamental  posi- 
tion— that  God  fought  for  Israel.  The  same  thing  might  be  shown  by  a  negative 
process.  If  God  had  not  been  actively  and  supernaturally  with  Israel,  Israel  could 
never  have  become  what  he  was.  Moses  and  his  bevy  of  slaves,  Joshua  and  his 
army  of  shepherds — what  could  have  made  such  soldiers  of  these  men  if  the  Lord 
had  not  fought  on  their  side?  The  getting  possession  of  Canaan,  as  Joshua 
reminded  the  people,  was  a  threefold  process  :  God  fighting  for  them  had  subdued 
their  enemies  ;  Joshua  had  divided  the  land  ;  and  now  God  was  prepared  to  expel 
the  remaining  people,  but  only  through  their  instrumentality.  Emphasis  is  laid  on 
"  expelling  "  and  "  driving  out "  (ver.  5),  from  which  we  gather  that  further  massacre 
was  not  to  take  place,  but  that  the  remainder  of  the  Canaanites  must  seek  settle- 
ments elsewhere.  A  sufficient  retribution  had  fallen  on  them  for  their  sins,  in  the 
virtual  destruction  of  their  people  and  the  loss  of  their  country :  the  miserable 
remnant  might  have  a  chance  of  escape,  in  some  ill-filled  country  where  they  would 
never  rise  to  influence  and  where  terror  would  restrain  them  from  their  former 
wickedness.  Joshua  was  very  emphatic  in  forbidding  intermarriage  and  friendly 
social  intercourse  with  Canaanites.  He  knew  that  between  the  realm  of  holiness 
and  the  realm  of  sin  there  is  a  kind  of  neutral  territory,  which  belongs  strictly  to 
neither,  but  which  slopes  towards  the  realm  of  sin,  and  in  point  of  fact  most  com- 
monly furnishes  recruits  not  a  few  to  the  army  of  evil.  Alas,  how  true  is  this  still ! 
Marriages  between  believers  and  unbelievers;  friendly  social  fellowship,  on  equal 
terms,  between  the  Church  and  the  world  ;  partnership  in  business  between  the 
godly  and  the  ungodly — who  does  not  know  the  usual  result  ?  In  a  few  solitary 
cases,  it  may  be,  the  child  of  the  world  is  brought  into  the  kingdom  ;  but  in  how 
many  instances  do  we  find  the  buds  of  Christian  promise  nipped,  and  lukewarmnesa 
and  backsliding,  if  not  apostasy,  coming  in  their  room  1     (IF.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  I  have  divided  unto  you  by  lot  these  nations. — Joshua  the  colonht : — 
Great  colonists  as  we  are,  and  greater  as,  with  the  growth  of  our  wealth  and  there- 
fore of  our  population,  we  are  likely  to  be,  it  may  prove  instructive  and  also 
interesting  to  look  at  Joshua  in  the  character  of  a  colonist — the  leader  of  the  largest 
band  that  ever  left  their  old  in  search  of  a  new  home.  I  remark,  then,  that  the 
colonisation  of  Canaan  under  Joshua  was  conducted  in  an  orderly  manner,  on  a 
large  scale,  and  in  a  way  eminently  favourable  to  the  happiness  of  the  emigrants 
and  the  interests  of  virtue  and  reUgion.    It  presents  us  with  a  model  we  would  do 


CHAP,  xxin.]  JOSHUA.  269 

well  to  copy.  The  children  of  Israel  entered  Canaan  to  be  settled  within  allotted 
borders  ;  by  families  and  by  tribes.  In  their  case  emigration  was  thus  less  a  change 
of  persons  than  a  change,  and  a  happy  change,  of  place.  No  broad  seas  roUed 
between  the  severed  members  of  the  same  family ;  there  were  no  bitter  partings 
of  parents  and  the  children  they  feared  never  more  to  see  :  nor  did  the  emigrants, 
with  sad  faces  and  swimming  eyes,  stand  crowded  on  the  ship's  stern  to  watch  the 
blue  mountains  of  their  dear  native  land  as  they  sank  beneath  the  wave.  A  still 
more  important  lesson  than  that  taught  by  the  orderly,  just,  humane,  and  happy 
arrangements  of  this  Hebrew  colony  is  taught  us  by  the  care  Joshua  took  of  its 
religious  interests.  These,  the  greatest,  yet  considered  apparently  the  least,  of  all 
interests,  are  sadly  neglected  in  many  of  our  foreign  stations ;  and  I  have  often 
wondered  to  see  with  what  little  reluctance  Christian  parents  could  send  their 
children  away  to  lands  where  more  lost  their  religion  than  made  their  fortune. 
Whatever  we  do  with  our  religion,  the  Hebrews  did  not  leave  the  ark  of  God  behind 
them.  Eegarding  it  as  at  once  their  glory  and  defence,  they  followed  it  into  the  bed 
of  Jordan,  and,  passing  the  flood  on  foot,  bore  it  with  them  into  the  adopted  land. 
Wherever  they  pitched  their  tents,  they  set  up  the  altar  and  tabernacle  of  their  God. 
Priests  and  teachers  formed  part  of  their  train ;  and  making  ample  provision  for  the 
regular  ministration  of  word  and  ordinance,  they  laid  in  holy  and  pious  institutions 
the  foundations  of  their  future  commonwealth.  Such  are  some  of  the  points  in 
which  Joshua  is  to  be  admired,  and  imitated,  as  a  model  colonist.  Alas !  while 
neglecting  his  example  in  things  worthy  of  imitation,  we  have  followed  it  but  too 
closely  in  the  one  thing  where  it  affords  us  no  precedent  to  follow.  I  refer  to  the 
fire  and  sword  he  carried  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  his  extermination  of  its 
original  inhabitants.  We  have  too  faithfully  followed  him  in  this — with  no  warrant, 
human  or  Divine,  to  do  so.  In  his  bloodiest  work  Joshua  was  acting  under  com- 
mission. His  orders  were  clear,  however  terrible  they  read.  God  undertakes  the 
whole  responsibiUty.  And  be  it  observed  that  the  children  of  Israel  were  blamed 
not  because  they  did,  but  because  they  did  not,  exterminate  the  Canaanites — slaying 
them  with  the  sword  or  driving  them  out  of  the  land.  The  duty  was  painful  and 
stern  ;  but  they  lived  to  find,  as  God  had  warned  them  would  happen  to  them,  and 
as  happens  to  us  when  we  spare  the  sins  of  which  these  heathen  were  the  type,  that 
mercy  to  the  Canaanites  was  cruelty  to  themselves.  But,  admitting  that  the 
responsibility  is  shifted  from  Joshua  to  God,  how,  it  may  be  asked,  are  the  suffer- 
ings of  the  Canaanites,  their  expulsion  and  bloody  extermination  from  the  land,  to 
be  reconciled  with  the  character  of  God,  as  just  and  good  and  righteous  ?  This  is 
like  many  other  of  His  acts.  On  attempting  to  scrutinise  them,  mystery  meets  us 
on  the  threshold.  No  wonder  ! — when  we  feel  constrained  to  exclaim  over  a  flake 
of  snow,  the  spore  of  a  fern,  the  leaf  of  a  tree,  the  change  of  a  base  grub  into  a 
winged  and  painted  butterfly,  "  Who  can  by  searching  find  out  God  ?  who  can  find 
out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection  ?  It  is  higher  than  heaven,  what  can  we  do  ? 
deeper  than  hell,  what  can  we  know  ?  the  measure  thereof  is  longer  than  the  earth 
and  broader  than  the  sea."  Dark  as, the  judgment  on  Canaan  seems,  a  little  con- 
sideration will  show  that  it  is  no  greater,  nor  so  great,  a  mystery  as  many  others  in 
the  providence  of  God.  The  land  of  Canaan  was  His — "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and 
the  fulness  thereof."  And  I  ask  in  turn,  is  the  Sovereign  Proprietor  of  all  to  be 
denied  the  right  that  ordinary  proprietors  claim — the  right  to  remove  one  set  of 
tenants  and  replace  them  by  another  ?  Besides,  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  were 
not  only,  so  to  speak,  "  tenants  at  will,"  but  tenants  of  the  worst  description.  Let 
it  be  remarked  also,  that  the  Canaanites  not  only  deserved,  but  chose  their  fate. 
The  fame  of  what  God  had  done  for  the  tribes  of  Israel  had  preceded  their  arrival 
in  the  land  of  Canaan.  Thus  its  guilty  tenants  were  early  warned  ;  got  "  notice  to 
quit " ;  might  be  considered  as  summoned  out.  They  refused  to  go.  They  chose 
the  chances  of  resistance  rather  than  quiet  removal ;  and  so — for  be  it  observed  that 
the  Israelites  in  the  first  instance  were  only  ordered  to  cast  them  out — they  brought 
destruction  on  themselves  :  with  their  own  hands  pulling  down  the  house  that  buried 
them  and  their  children  in  its  ruins.  But  the  children  ?  the  unoffending  infants  ? 
There  is  a  mystery,  I  admit,  an  awful  mystery  in  their  destruction ;  but  no  new  or 
greater  mystery  here  than  meets  us  everywhere  else.  The  mystery  of  offspring  who 
suffer  through  their  parent's  sins  is  repeated  daily  in  our  own  streets.  It  does  not 
alter  the  case  one  whit  to  say  that  children  who  die  of  disease,  for  instance,  die  by 
the  laws  of  nature,  whUe  those  in  Canaan  were  put  to  death  by  the  command  of 
God.  This  is  a  distinction  without  a  difference ;  for  what  are  the  laws  of  nature 
but  the  ordinances  and  will  of  God  ?    Nor  is  the  cloud  which  here  surrounds  God'a 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

throne,  dark  as  it  seems,  without  a  silver  lining.  The  sword  of  the  Hebrew  opens  to 
the  babes  of  Canaan  a  happy  escape  from  misery  and  sin — a  sharp  but  short  passage 
to  a  better  and  purer  world.  Thus,  and  otherwise,  we  can  justify  the  sternest 
deeds  of  which  Joshua  has  been  accused.  He  held  a  commission  from  God  to  enter 
Canaan  and  cast  out  its  guilty  inhabitants,  and,  like  a  woodman  who  enters  the 
forest  axe  in  hand,  to  cut  them  down  if  they  clung  like  trees  to  its  soil.  His  conduct 
admits  of  the  fullest  vindication ;  and  though  it  did  not,  we  should  be  the  last  to 
accuse  him.  Ours  are  not  the  hands  to  cast  a  stone  at  Joshua.  A  more  painful 
and  shameful  history  than  the  history  of  some  at  least  of  our  colonies  was  never 
written.  Talk  of  the  extermination  of  the  CanaanitesI  Where  are  the  Indian 
tribes  our  settlers  found  roaming,  in  plumed  and  painted  freedom,  the  forests  of  the 
new  world  ?  Not  more  fatal  to  the  Canaanites  the  irruption  of  the  Hebrews  than 
our  arrival  in  almost  every  oolony  to  its  native  population  !  We  have  seized  their 
lands  ;  and  in  a  way  less  honourable,  and  even  merciful,  than  the  swords  of  Israel, 
have  given  them  in  return  nothing  but  a  grave.  Professed  followers  of  Him  who 
came  not  to  destroy  but  to  save  the  world,  we  have  entered  the  territories  of  the 
heathen  with  fire  and  sword,  and  adding  murder  to  robbery,  have  spoiled  the 
unoffending  natives  of  their  lives  as  well  as  of  their  lands.  Had  we  any  commission 
to  exterminate  ?  Divine  as  Joshua's,  our  commission  was  as  opposite  to  his  aa 
opposing  poles  to  each  other.  These  are  its  blessed  terms,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the 
world  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Can  our  country  and  its  Churches 
read  that  without  a  blush  of  shame  and  a  sense  of  guUt  ?  Let  us  repent  the  errors 
of  the  past.  Not  so  much  to  aggrandise  our  island,  as  to  Christianise  the  world  by 
our  colonies,  is  the  noble  enterprise  to  which  Providence  calls  us.  "  Go  ye  in  to 
possess  the  land  " — these,  if  I  may  say  so,  were  the  marching  orders  under  which 
Joshua  and  Israel  entered  Canaan  ;  and  however  unable  they  appeared,  in  point  of 
numbers  and  ordinary  resources,  to  cope  with  those  who  held  the  soil,  and  were 
prepared  to  fight  like  men  that  had  their  homes  and  hearths,  their  wives  and 
children,  to  defend,  yet  then,  as  stiU,  the  measure  of  man's  ability  is  God's  command. 
Since  it  is  so,  what  a  noble  career  and  rapid  conquest  were  before  the  children  of 
Israel  I  Sweeping  over  Canaan  like  a  resistless  flood,  they  might  have  carried  all 
before  them.  What  difficulties  could  prove  too  great  for  those  who  had  God  to  aid 
them  ?  What  need  had  they  of  bridge  or  boats,  before  whose  feet  the  waters  of 
Jordan  fled  ?  of  engines  of  war  whose  shout,  borne  on  the  air,  smote  the  ramparta 
of  Jericho  to  the  ground  with  an  earthquake's  reeling  shock  ?  of  allies,  who  had 
Heaven  on  their  side,  to  hurl  down  death  from  the  skies  on  their  panic-stricken 
enemies  ?  How  could  they  lose  the  fruits  of  victory  over  the  retreat  of  whose  foea 
night  refused  to  throw  her  mantle,  while  the  sun  held  the  sky,  nor  sunk  in  darkness 
tiU  their  bloody  work  was  done  ?    (2*.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Be  ye  therefore  very  courageous. — On  Christian  courage  : — In  the  first 
place,  in  your  relation  with  your  feUow-creatures,  in  your  intercourse  with  the  world, 
it  requires  much  courage  and  resolution  to  be  sturdily  upright  and  just.  When 
your  interest,  your  feelings,  your  wants,  nay,  even  your  future  independence,  are  on 
one  side,  and  the  plain  dictates  of  duty  and  rehgion  on  the  other,  then  it  is  that 
you  must  "  be  very  courageous  "  ;  and  not  turn  aside  therefrom  to  the  right  hand  or 
to  the  left.  Here  is  the  trial :  to  prefer  the  praise  of  God  and  the  approval  of  the 
conscience,  with  loss,  with  disgrace  or  derision,  and  even  poverty  for  Life,  to  the  mean 
and  dishonest  acquirement  of  every  worldly  good.  Courage  is  requisite  even  in 
doing  good.  Our  good  actions  may  cost  us  much  trouble  and  even  expense,  much 
opposition,  much  vexation,  and  much  misrepresentation  ;  for  our  good  may  not  only 
be  evil  spoken  of,  but  it  may  be  to  ourselves  a  positive  evil  in  a  worldly  and 
temporal  point  of  view.  On  some  occasions  we  may  have  to  encounter  the  resist- 
ance of  the  indolent  and  the  selfish ;  the  thwarting  malignity  of  envy,  that  will 
never  either  co-operate  or  commend ;  the  sneers  of  the  niggardly,  who  revenge  an 
extorted  charity  by  slandering  the  man  that  shamed  them  to  it ;  and  the  unkind 
constructions  of  the  worldly,  who  never  attribute  disinterested  motives  to  a 
prominence  in  well-doing.  On  other  occasions,  we  may  be  induced  to  benefit  others, 
even  against  their  will ;  to  succour  the  worthless  and  ungrateful ;  to  weary  our- 
selves in  long,  and  perhaps  for  the  time  fruitless,  attempts  to  soften  the  obstinate, 
persuade  the  wilful,  reform  the  profligate.  In  all  these  cases  we  want  also  a  bold 
and  patient  decision  of  character.  Again,  it  requires  courage  to  forgive  injuries  and 
endure  wrongs,  as  well  as,  on  the  other  hand,  to  ask  for  forgiveness  and  to  make 


CHAP,  xmi.]  JOSHUA.  271 

reparation.  Yet  the  Christian  must  do  both  when  necessary.  Courage  is  required, 
again,  in  maintaining  truth  and  sincerity.  I  do  not  mean  by  this  merely  avoiding 
flagrant  falsehood  and  equivocation  ;  but  acquiring  habits  of  open  and  frarik  avowal 
of  our  minds,  except  where  we  may  give  needless  pain  or  offence.  No  deference  to 
rank  or  circumstances,  no  indolent  aversion  to  differ  from  others,  no  ill-timed 
timidity,  or  desire  to  ingratiate,  must  prevent  our  bold  and  determined  reprobation 
of  what  is  decidedly  wrong,  however  glossed  by  fine  language  or  supported  by 
sophistry  and  curming.  Courage  is  very  necessary  also  in  setting  a  good  example. 
"We  are  "  neither  to  love  the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  God,"  nor  to 
"  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil."  The  real  Christian  may  want  resolution  to  maintain 
a  Christian  example ;  he  may  shrink  from  singularity ;  he  may  fear  a  laugh,  an 
obnoxious  name,  or  misrepresentation ;  he  may  think  it  too  precise  and  severe  to 
protest  and  strive  against  received  customs  and  opinions,  though  plainly  at  variance 
with  the  Word  of  God ;  or,  lastly,  he  may  distrust  his  own  steadfastness  and  perse- 
verance. Yet  all  he  wants  is  courage — courage,  not  to  go  about  setting  the  whole 
world  right,  not  to  put  on  a  garb  of  austerity  and  intolerance  that  does  not  belong 
to  him  or  his  religion  ;  not  to  declare  war  against  practices  and  amusements  which 
sweeten  the  busy  occupations  of  life  and  are  decidedly  innocent ;  but  to  be  "  stead- 
fast and  immovable "  in  the  plain,  straightforward  course  of  Christian  duties  of 
every  kind.  Again,  courage  is  most  requisite  in  striving  against  all  the  inward 
corruption  of  our  fallen  nature.  In  the  first  place,  the  Christian  has  to  contend  with 
wicked  thoughts  and  tendencies,  or  inchnations.  When  allowed  to  grow  to  maturity 
they  become  headstrong  passions,  lusts,  and  appetites,  whose  power  is  generally  in 
proportion  to  the  time  they  have  been  indulged.  At  that  fearful  period,  the  courage 
required  is,  as  it  were,  that  of  plucking  out  an  eye,  or  cutting  off  a  limb  !  for  habit 
has  by  that  time  made  the  indulgence  quite  necessary  to  the  sinner's  happiness,  and 
even  comfortable  existence.  Courage  is  again  necessary,  under  this  head,  in  getting 
the  better  of  our  natural  selfishness.  Pride  and  vanity  and  pretension  are  also 
vices  that  need  no  common  courage  and  resolution  to  master  them.  They  are, 
however,  most  unchristian  tempers,  and  must  be  subdued.  But,  lastly,  it  is 
in  perfecting  holiness  in  the  heart— by  purity,  vigilance,  discipline,  and  perse- 
verance—  that  the  Christian  warrior  has  most  need  of  courage  and  resolution. 
His  enemies  are  so  strong  and  numerous,  and  the  fort  he  holds  so  easily  sur- 
prised and  taken,  that  he  has  need  of  "  the  whole  armour  of  God,"  that  he  may 
"  have  victory,  and  triumph  against  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh."  {A.  B. 
Evans,  D.D.)  To  keep  and  to  do  all  that  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  of 
Moses. — The  supreme  excellence  of  Holy  Scripture: — I.  The  book  commended  :  "  All 
that  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  Moses."  1.  Observe  it  was  to  the  written 
law  alone  that  Joshua  directed  them.  2.  From  that  day  to  this  the  will  of  God  has 
been  made  known  to  us  in  writing.  3.  The  evidence  of  the  Divine  authority  of  the 
New  Testament  is  of  the  same  description.  4.  Oh,  let  the  written  Word  of  God, 
infaUible  truth,  be  elevated  far,  far  above  the  writings  of  men,  however  excellent. 
n.  The  exhobtation  eespecting  it  :  "  Be  ye  therefore  very  courageous,"  &c. 
1.  *'  Keep  it " — treasure  it  up  in  your  hearts ;  lodge  it  in  your  memories ;  inscribe  it 
on  the  tablet  of  your  mind.  2.  "  Do  it."  We  are  not  to  keep  the  Holy  Scripture  as 
a  curiosity  in  a  cabinet ;  not  to  hide  or  bury  it,  but  to  practise  it.  If  the  Scriptures 
do  not  exercise  a  practical  influence  over  us,  they  wiU  only  increase  our  condemna- 
tion. 3.  Observe  the  universality  of  the  injunction,  "  AH  that  is  written  in  the 
book."  There  is  to  be  no  reservation  nor  exception — no  selection  of  favourite 
doctrines  or  of  agreeable  duties,  but  "  all  that  is  written  "  is  to  be  read,  believed, 
obeyed  !  4.  There  must  be  no  deviation  from  the  narrow  way — "  that  ye  turn  not 
aside  therefrom,  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left."  This  is  the  chart — be  careful  to 
steer  by  it  1  This  is  your  map,  your  guide,  your  lamp  ;  beware  of  the  smallest 
deviation  1  (Isa.  xxx.  21).  5.  "  Be  ye  very  courageous  to  keep  and  to  do  all 
this  I  "  He  had  said  in  the  previous  verse  that  God  would  drive  out  their  enemies 
before  them;  and  now  he  says,  "Be  ye  very  courageous" — but  not  to  fight  with 
sword  and  spear,  but  with  spiritual  weapons — moral  courage :  be  bold  for  God — 
much  courage  is  needed :  for  want  of  it  Peter  denied  his  Lord.  "  Be  not  ashamed 
of  Christ " — "  confess  Him  before  men."    HI.  The  consequences  of  oBEcrKNCE  ob 

DISOBEDIENCE  TO  THIS  EXHOBTATION  MAT  BE  LEABNED  FBOM  SCBIPTUBE  AND  BXPEBIENOE. 

Wherever  God's  written  Word  was  known  and  read  and  honoured,  religion  has 
flourished ;  and  where  that  Word  has  been  neglected,  rehgion  has  decayed.  (Dean 
Close.)  Turn  .  .  .  not  aside  therefrom  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left^ 
Obedience  : — 1.  What  motive  has  the  Christian  to  obedience  ?   Looking  to  be  saved 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

only  through  the  righteousness  of  another,  what  is  there  to  induce  him  to  walk 
righteously  before  God  Himself  ?  (1)  Gratitude,  or  responsive  love.  The  Christian  ia 
plied  with  reminders  of  what  the  Lord  hath  done  for  him  by  Christ  to  open  to  him  the 
heavenly  Canaan  and  to  give  him  an  inheritance,  and  his  grateful  heart  responds  to 
the  heavenly  logic,  "  Take  heed  that  ye  love  the  Lord,"  "  Serve  the  Lord  in  truth  with 
all  your  heart,  for  consider  how  great  things  He  hath  done  for  you."  "  If  ye  love  Me, 
keep  My  commandments."  (2)  Hope.  "  Ye  shall  possess  their  land  as  the  Lord 
your  God  hath  promised  you."  Christ  is  made  the  author  of  eternal  salvation  to 
them  that  obey  Him ;  and  he  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  must  depart  from 
iniquity.  (3)  Fear.  •'  When  ye  have  transgressed  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your 
God  ye  shall  perish  quickly  from  off  the  good  land."  And  similar  are  the  rules 
with  regard  to  entering  heaven,  of  which  land  Canaan  was  a  figure.  Disobedience 
entails  exclusion.  2.  But  what  kind  of  obedience  is  necessary,  or  rather  what  do 
we  learn  from  our  text,  wiU  obedience  require  or  call  for  ?  (1)  Courage.  "Be  ye 
therefore  very  courageous  to  keep  and  to  do."  Many  look  down  upon  a  Christian 
as  a  poor,  mean-spirited  creature,  and  only  half  a  man.  But  he  is  the  highest  kind 
of  man.  Li  proportion  as  he  acts  up  to  his  principles  he  is  a  bold,  courageous  hero, 
and  may  stand  up  among  the  bravest  and  noblest,  and  suffer  not  by  the  comparison. 
Is  it  a  mark  of  courage  to  submit  to  the  operator's  knife,  and  a  still  higher  mark  to 
operate  upon  oneself  ?  This  the  obedient  servant  of  God  does.  He  plucks  out  the 
right  eye,  he  cuts  off  the  right  hand  of  forbidden  indulgence  ;  that  is,  in  obedience 
to  God's  wUl  he  will  give  up  inclinations  which  cost  him  as  much  as  plucking  or 
cutting.  Is  it  a  mark  of  courage  to  face  the  cannon's  mouth  ?  Aye  ;  but  it  is  a 
higher  mark  for  beings  constituted  as  we  are,  naturally  proud  and  sensitive,  to  brave 
the  mouth  which  sneers  and  jeers  at  piety,  so  that  we  are  often  a  scorn  and  derision 
to  them  that  are  round  about  us.  (2)  Completeness.  "Be  ye  very  courageous  to 
keep  and  do  all,"  &c.  The  moral  law  of  Moses,  though  no  longer  it  can  be  so  kept 
as  to  give  us  a  right  to  eternal  life,  is  to  be  our  guide  and  rule  in  our  present  life. 
For  the  ten  commandments  expanded  contain  aU  the  precepts,  duties,  and  disposi- 
tions of  a  servant  of  God,  just  as  buds  contain  all  the  leaves  of  that  flower  which 
opens  out  into  such  fulness  of  detail.  And  the  Christian  is  to  keep  and  do  all. 
(3)  Carefulness.  "  That  ye  turn  not  aside,"  &c.  The  path  of  obedience  is  generally 
a  middle  path,  and  we  must  seek  to  have  such  views  of  God's  "Word,  under  the 
teaching  of  God's  Spirit,  that  our  love  may  abound  yet  more  and  more  in  knowledge 
and  in  all  judgment,  that  we  may  approve  things  that  are  excellent ;  or,  as  it  might 
be  rendered,  "discriminate  things  that  differ,"  and  ever  hear  a  voice  behind  us  saying, 
"  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it."  The  extreme  opposite  of  wrong  is  not  right.  We  go 
safest  between  extremes.  The  pendulum  swings  as  far  to  the  right  hand  as  it  does 
to  the  left,  and  because  some  persons  go  to  extremes  one  way,  we  are  apt  to  go  to 
extremes  the  opposite  way.  Some  are  all  for  privilege,  others  aU  for  duty ;  but  we 
must  turn  not  aside  to  the  right  or  left.  Thankful  for  privileges,  we  must  do  our 
duty.     (H.  C.  Mitchinson,  M.A.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  Cleave  unto  the  Lord  your  God,  as  ye  have  done  unto  this  day. — The 
necessity  of  every  one's  cleaving  to  God  who  wishes  well  to  the  support  of  hit 
country : — I.  Sin  has  natubally  in  itself  a  tendency  to  the  bdin  of  any 
NATION.  We  may  easily  see  that  when  a  people  grow  regardless  of  the  laws  of 
God  they  want  the  greatest  obligations  of  obedience  to  the  laws  of  men.  II.  Sin 
MAKES  God  an  enemy.  God  presides  with  a  peculiar  providence  over  societies  and 
communities  of  men.  We  may  learn  from  the  history  of  all  past  ages  and  the 
frequent  smart  of  our  own  that  the  government  of  God  is  ever  administered 
according  to  the  nature  of  men's  actions ;  that  He  dispenses  His  favour  to  a  people, 
or  withdraws  it  from  them,  as  virtue  or  vice,  religion  or  impiety,  respectively 
prevail  among  them.  But  perhaps  it  may  be  said  by  some  who  are  ready  to 
impute  all  successes  to  themselves,  "  What  need  we  to  call  in  Providence  in  all 
difficulties?  "  Now  this,  give  me  leave  to  prove  more  particularly,  by  considering 
those  three  main  props  on  which  the  weight  of  states  and  empires  may  seem  to 
them,  who  look  not  far  into  things  and  their  causes,  wholly  to  rely;  that  is, 
worldly  providence,  or  policy  in  contriving ;  courage  and  force  in  executing  great 
designs ;  and  a  wise  improvement  of  both  these,  by  firm  and  well-grounded 
confederacies.  But  alas  I  in  these,  barely  considered,  there  can  be  no  safety, 
because  no  human  foresight  can  reach  those  many  accidents,  the  least  of  which 
may  alter  the  best-laid  counsels ;  nor  any  human  courage,  though  never  so  well 
seconded,  be  sore  to  execute  them,  since  the  very  execution  of  them  is  attended 


CHAP,  xxra.]  JOSHUA.  273 

with  so  many  circumstances  as  may  produce  effects  quite  different  from  what  they 
proposed.      III.    The    oblioation,  which    lies    on    everybody   who    loves    hi3 

COTJNTRY  TO  DO  HIS  DUTY  TO  GOD,  FROM  WHICH  SUCH  UNIVERSAL  VIRTUE  AND  PIETY 
WILL   RESULT,    AS   WILL     MOST     CERTAINLY     ENGAGE     GOD    ON    OUB    SIDE.      1.    That   all 

national  favours  flow  purely  from  God,  I  will  presume  has  been  sufficiently  proved, 
as  being  beyond  the  single  or  united  force  of  human  policy,  courage,  or  the  firmest 
alliances :  if  so,  what  is  it  more  than  our  bounden  duty,  and  justice,  to 
acknowledge  unfeignedly  the  gift  to  God,  who  desires  no  more  for  the  giving  it  ? 
He  is  not  bettered  by  our  thanksgivings,  yet  is  pleased  with  the  gratitude.  2.  We 
ought  to  break  off  the  course  of  those  sins  which  will  estrange  God  from  us, 
and  deprive  us  hereafter  of  aU  such  extraordinary  successes.  (Bp.  Trelawney.) 
Religious  stability  enforced  : — I.  The  duty  the  text  recommends.  Cleaving 
unto  the  Lord  evidently  implies — 1.  Previous  union  with  Him.  2.  Faithful 
adherence  to  Him.  Our  religion  must  be  uniform  and  constant;  we  must  not 
only  come  to  the  Lord  as  humble  penitents,  but  also  adhere  to  Him  as  Hia 
indefatigable  servants.  (1)  We  should  cleave  to  His  name  ;  as  the  fountain 
of  all  goodness,  from  whom  we  receive  every  blessing;  and  therefore  should 
continue  to  love,  obey,  hope,  and  trust  in  Him,  as  the  God  of  our  salvation  (Isa. 
xii.  2  ;  Hab.  iii.  18).  (2)  We  should  cleave  to  His  Word  ;  by  faithfully  reading  its 
contents,  imbibing  its  doctrines,  obeying  its  precepts,  and  by  making  it  the  per- 
petual subject  of  our  meditation  and  prayers,  and  the  infallible  rule  of  our  faith 
and  conduct  (Psa.  cxix.  18,  148 ;  John  v.  39  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  16,  17).  (3)  We  should 
cleave  to  His  ways ;  by  dihgently  discharging  all  personal  and  relative  duties, 
constantly  attending  all  the  means  of  grace,  working  out  our  salvation  with  fear 
and  trembling,  and  by  "walking  in  all  the  commandments  and  ordinances  blame- 
less." (4)  We  should  cleave  to  Him  at  all  times  :  in  prosperity  and  adversity,  in 
tribulation  and  distress,  in  health  and  affliction,  in  life  and  death;  impUcitly 
trusting  "  in  the  Lord  for  ever ;  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength." 
n.  The  importance  the  text  involves.  This  evidently  appears,  both  from  the 
solemnity  of  the  occasion  on  which  it  was  delivered,  and  the  fervency  of  the 
manner  in  which  it  was  urged  on  the  tribes  of  Israel.  1.  This  duty  is  reasonable 
(John  vi.  67-69;  Kom.  xii,  1,  2).  2.  This  duty  is  honourable.  Instability  in 
religion  is  peculiarly  disgraceful  (2  Pet.  ii.  20-22).  It  is  extremely  weak  and 
childish,  and  should  be  carefully  avoided,  as  displeasing  to  God,  and  dishonourable 
to  our  holy  profession  (Eph.  iv.  14).  3.  This  duty  is  profitable.  It  is  only  by 
cleaving  unto  the  Lord  that  we  can  maintain  personal  piety,  overcome  our  enemies, 
encounter  difficulties,  rejoice  evermore,  triumph  over  death,  and  "lay  hold  on 
eternal  life  "  (Deut.  iv.  3,  4 ;  Psa.  Ivii.  7  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8).  4.  This  duty  is  indis- 
pensable. Final  perseverance  is  necessary  to  final  salvation.  He  only  that 
"  endures  to  the  end  shall  be  saved"  (1  Cor.  xv.  2;  Eom.  ii.  7;  2  Pet.  i.  10,  11). 
in.  The  motives  to  this  duty.     (Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.) 

Ver.  11.  Take  good  heed  therefore  unto  yourselves. — The  Christian  warfare  : — 
The  Christian  life  is  a  warfare,  and  there  are  several  common  mistakes  made 
thereupon.  For  example — 1.  When  it  is  supposed  that  the  enemies  to  bb 
FOUGHT  AGAINST  ARE  ALL  EXTERNAL  FOES.  This  is  a  vcTy  prevalent  error.  Where 
conversion  is  believed  to  be  always  a  sudden  change,  and  not  a  matter  of  growth, 
there  converts  are  cautioned  against  dangers  that  lie  without,  while  left  in 
ignorance  of  the  greater  dangers  that  are  still  within.  There  are  external  foes,  but 
these  are  not  all.  There  are  inward  foes,  such  as — (1)  EvU  tempers ;  (2)  passionate 
and  ungovernable  wills;    (3)  covetousness ;  (4)  selfishness;  (5)  pride;  (6)  anger, 

&C.      n.    It   is   also   a   mistake  to  suppose  that  the  enemies  to  be   fought  AGAINST 

ARE  CHIEFLY  EXTERNAL  ONES.  With  all  his  Warnings  against  surrounding  foes, 
Joshua  was  most  emphatic  in  his  exhortation  to  watchfulness  over  one's  own  heart, 
"  Take  good  heed  therefore  unto  yourselves."  In  this  sense  a  man's  enemies  are 
they  of  his  own  house.  The  greatest  temptations  arise  from  that  inner  tendency 
to  corruption,  but  for  which  the  outward  influences  would  be  well-nigh  powerless. 
Many  a  man  has  been  his  own  tempter  (Jas.  i.  14).    HI.  It  is  a  great  Cheistiah 

DUTY,    THEREFORE,    FOB    EVERY     MAN     TO     BEING     HIS     OWN     HEART     INTO    SUBJECTION. 

1.  This  cannot  be  done  except  by  the  exercise  of  constant  watchfulness.  2.  Self- 
cultivation  also  is  necessary.  When  will  men  learn  that  religion  is  no  dreamy 
Bentimentalism,  but  a  stem  and  living  reality  ?  "  The  grace  of  God  in  the  heart 
of  man  is  a  tender  plant  in  a  strange,  unkindly  soil,  and,  therefore,  cannot  well 
prosper  and  grow  without  much  care  and  pains,  and  that  of  a  skilful  hand." 

18 


274  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  run. 

Let  us,  then,  "  take  heed  to  ourselves."  Let  us  keep  the  fortress  of  our  own 
heart.  Let  us  do  battle  with  the  foes  of  our  own  household.  Thus  shall  we 
be  "  more  than  conquerors " ;  for  "  he  that  ruleth  his  own  spirit  is  better 
than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  {Frederic  Wagstaff.)  Self-consideration : — We 
can  have  no  aspirations  unless  we  know  what  we  lack,  and  we  cannot 
properly  cultivate  our  spiritual  life  unless  we  recognise  the  symptoms  of  its 
vitality  or  decay.  A  gardener  would  be  failing  in  his  duty  if  he  did  not  notice 
the  withering  of  a  flower,  which  was  only  wanting  more  room  in  which  to  spread 
its  roots.  A  mother  would  be  justly  blamed  if  she  was  too  absorbed  in  making  her 
child's  dress  for  a  coming  party  to  notice  the  pale  face  and  heavy  eyes  which  fore- 
told an  illness  demanding  instant  attention.  Far  heavier  is  the  responsibility 
resting  on  us  to  consider  our  own  condition.  {A.  Rowland,  B.A.)  Self-judg- 
ment : — No  sane  man  fails  to  form  some  opinion  of  himself.  We  cannot  help 
knowing,  for  example,  whether  our  temper  is  quick  or  dull,  whether  our  imagination 
is  vivid  or  torpid,  any  more  than  we  can  be  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  we  are  tall  or 
short.  But  we  ought  not  to  leave  this  self-judgment  to  transient  feeUngs,  or  to 
spasmodic  revelations — but  should  try  to  shape  it  by  sober  thought.  Some  people 
teU  us  that  it  is  best  not  to  think  of  ourselves  at  aU,  but  to  absorb  ourselves  in  daily 
duty,  leaving  ourselves  simply  in  God's  hands,  so  far  as  religious  life  is  concerned. 
No  doubt  this  is  partly  true :  and  we  must  not  forget  that  self -introspection  has  its 
dangers  as  well  as  its  uses.  It  would,  for  example,  be  quite  possible  to  subject  our 
motives  to  such  close  and  constant  scrutiny  as  to  take  away  all  momentum  from  life : 
but  no  sensible  man  would  be  so  particular  about  dust  on  the  engine,  as  to  neglect 
keeping  up  steam.  (Ibid.)  That  ye  love  the  Lord. — Take  heed  to  love  God: — 
1.  Because  if  you  do  not  love  God,  your  obedience  will  be  worthless.  2.  Because 
if  you  do  love  Him,  obedience  wUl  be  easy.  3.  Because  there  are  so  many  things 
that  compete  for  your  love.  4.  Because  if  you  love  God,  you  wOl  love  only  good 
things,  and  those  in  a  proper  measure.  5.  Because  if  you  love  God,  you  will  love 
what  God  loves,  and  especially  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  (The  Hive.)  God 
demands  our  love : — I.  It  is   fok   this  veet  end  that   national  meecies  abb 

BESTOWED.      n.   Wb     ABE     IN     DANGEE    OF     PEEVEETING     HiS     GOODNESS   TO    A    VEST 

DiEFEEENT  puEPosE.  The  cautioD  givcu  in  the  text  plainly  implies  this,  and  the 
subsequent  history  of  the  Jewish  nation  as  plainly  proves  that  the  caution  was 
necessary.  HI.  To  love  the  Lord  our  God  is  not  only  the  return  He  expects  for 
His  benefits,  but  the  retuen  He  demands.  It  is  not  only  just  and  reasonable  in 
its  own  nature,  but  it  is  likewise  absolutely  necessary  on  our  part — nay,  it  is  the 
one  thing  needful,  the  withholding  of  wluch  shall  unavoidably  be  attended  with 
the  most  fatal  consequences.     {R.  Walker.) 

Yer.  14.  And  behold  this  day  I  am  going  the  way  of  all  the  earth. — Death 
common  to  all : — Death  is  so  dim-sighted  and  so  blundering-footed  that  he  staggers 
across  Axminster  tapestry  as  though  it  were  a  bare  floor,  and  sees  no  difference 
between  the  fluttering  rags  of  a  tatterdemalion  and  a  conqueror's  gonfalon.  Side 
by  side  we  must  all  come  down.  No  first  class,  second  class,  or  thu-d  class  in 
death  or  the  grave.  Death  goes  into  the  house  at  Gad's  HiU,  and  he  says,  "I  want 
that  novelist."  Death  goes  into  Windsor  Castle,  and  he  says,  "  I  want  Victoria's 
consort."  Death  goes  into  Ford's  Theatre,  at  Washington,  and  says,  "  I  want  that 
President."  Death  goes  on  the  Zulu  battlefield,  and  says,  "  I  want  that  French 
Prince  Imperial."  Death  goes  into  the  marble  palace  at  Madrid,  and  says  "  Give 
me  Queen  Mercedes."  Death  goes  into  the  almshouse,  and  says,  "  Give  me  that 
pauper."  Death  comes  to  the  Tay  Bridge,  and  says,  "Discharge  into  my  cold 
bosom  all  those  passengers."  {T,  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Premonitions  of  death : — 
The  first  symptom  of  approaching  death  with  some,  is  the  strong  presentiment 
that  they  are  about  to  die.  Oganan,  the  mathematician,  while  in  apparent  health, 
rejected  pupils  from  the  feeling  that  he  was  on  the  eve  of  resting  from  his  labours ; 
and  he  expired  soon  after  of  an  apoplectic  stroke.  Fletcher,  the  divine,  had  a  dream 
which  shadowed  out  his  impending  dissolution,  and  believing  it  to  be  the  merciful 
warning  of  Heaven,  he  sent  for  a  sculptor  and  ordered  his  tomb.  "  Begin  your 
work  forthwith,"  he  said  at  parting ;  "  there  is  no  time  to  lose."  And  unless 
the  artist  had  obeyed  the  admonition,  death  would  have  proved  the  quicker 
workman  of  the  two.  Mozart  wrote  his  Bequiem  under  the  conviction  that 
the  monument  he  was  raising  to  his  genius  would,  by  the  power  of  associa- 
tion, prove  a  universal  monument  to  his  remains.  When  Ufe  was  fleeting 
very  fast,  he    called    for    the  score,  and    musing    over    it,  said,   "Did  I   not 


CHAP,  xxin.]  JOSHUA.  275 

tell  you  truly  that  it  was  for  myself  that  I  composed  this  death  chant?" 
Not  one  thing  hath  failed  of  all  the  good  things  which  the  Lord  .  .  .  spake. — 
Joshua's  dying  testimony  to  the  faithfulness  of  God : — I.  Death  is  a  way. 
It  leads  the  heliever  from  the  means  and  streams  of  religious  ordinances  to  the 
fountain-head  of  living  waters  ;  from  the  society  of  earthly,  and  at  best  imperfect 
connections,  to  the  company  of  triumphant  saints,  &c.  11.  Death  is  a  way  that 
ALL  MUST  GO.  Some  journeys  may  be  deferred  and  postponed  a  week,  a  month,  a 
year,  and  perhaps  be  wholly  declined.  But  this  caimot  be  put  off  or  avoided. 
III.  Death  is  a  way  which  we  may  soon  be  eequieed  to  take.  (Isaac  Bachus,  D.D.) 
Joshua's  last  confession : — With  Joshua  as  with  Simeon,  at  eventide  it  was  light,  the 
hues  of  a  golden  sunset  coloured  with  the  tints  of  the  rainbow,  which  St.  John 
beheld  before  the  throne.  The  words  that  I  have  read  to  you  contain  a  retrospect 
and  a  prospect.  He  looks  behind  for  them ;  he  looks  forward  for  himself.  1.  We, 
too,  have  a  retrospect  like  his,  and  we  too  have  a  prospect.  Let  us  look  back  at 
life,  each  from  our  own  standing-point,  each  colouring  with  the  hues  of  his  own 
experience  the  common  outline.  Begin  at  the  beginning,  and  look  back  at  child- 
hood. I  do  not  think  childhood  the  happiest  time  of  life,  and  therefore  I  will  not 
say  it  is.  And  yet  in  the  spring  of  our  life,  though  it  had  its  biting  winds  and  its 
cold  nights,  lest  our  characters  should  bud  too  fast  and  in  an  atmosphere  too  genial 
we  should  grow  unequally  and  develop  too  rapidly,  there  were  gleams  of  bright 
Bunshine,  showers  dropping  with  fruitfulness,  in  which  our  minds  expanded  and  our 
souls  grew.  Some  of  us  it  may  be  were  brought  to  the  feet  of  Jesus,  to  hear  His 
Word.  As  children  we  knew  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  our  infant  lips  were  tutored 
in  prayer.  But  manhood  is  the  time  of  man's  glory,  when  we  partake  of  the  full 
joys  of  home  life,  when  opinions  mature  and  cultivation  grows,  and  experience 
meUows,  and  noble  duties  open  out  before  us,  and  grow  into  the  full  liberty  of  the 
sons  of  God,  and  by  faith  we  overcome  the  wicked  one.  Oh,  how  full  manhood 
may  be  of  pure  and  generous  happiness,  if  lived  unto  God,  if  we  will  but  look  up  to 
Him  as  a  reconciled  Father,  and  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost  follow  the  Lamb 
whithersoever  He  went  on  earth !  Sorrow  there  must  be,  but  there  is  strength  to 
bear  it ;  losses,  but  there  is  time  to  redeem  them ;  sin,  but  the  blood  of  Christ 
cleanses  us  from  all  sin;  imperfectness,  but  then  we  are  complete  in  Him. 
And  then,  as  to  old  age,  in  one  view  of  it  that  is  the  best  of  all.  The  aged 
man,  if  he  is  a  Christian,  is  nearly  at  home.  His  activities  may  be  diminished, 
but  his  wisdom  is  augmented.  If  not^ strong  in  action,  he  is  great  in  counsel.  He 
looks  back  over  a  past  of  unbroken,  unvarying  love,  and  his  song  is,  "  Surely,  good- 
ness and  mercy  have  followed  me  all  the  days  of  my  life ;  I  will  dwell  in  the  house 
of  the  Lord  for  ever."  Oh,  I  pray  you,  wherever  in  life  you  be,  whatever  in  life  you 
have,  gather  up  your  mercies  and  count  them ;  see  how  the  Lord's  faithfulness  has 
given  you  every  one  of  the  good  things  that  He  has  promised  to  His  people.  Where 
you  wandered,  it  was  through  your  own  wilfulness,  and  He  brought  you  back. 
When  you  fell  He  lifted  you  up.  When  you  wept  your  tears  came  to  you  with  a 
message  from  God.  You  may  indeed  be  forgetting  Him ;  that  I  know  not,  but  this 
I  do  know,  that  He  has  been  love  to  you,  trying  to  embrace  you  with  the  arms  of 
His  mercy,  willing  to  draw  you  with  the  cords  of  love.  2.  There  is  also  a  prospect. 
"  Behold,  this  day  I  am  going  the  way  of  aU  the  earth."  "  It  is  appointed  imto 
men  once  to  die,  and  after  that  the  judgment."  My  brethren,  this  way  is  a  universal 
way,  and  a  sorrowful  way,  and  a  cloudy  way.  (Bp.  Thorold.)  Joshua  intimating 
his  own  departure,  and  the  favour  of  God  toward  Israel : — I.  The  circumstances  in 
WHICH  Joshua  hebe  bepbesents  himself  as  placed.  Time  has  gathered  death's 
memorials  on  that  form ;  and  warned,  perhaps,  by  some  communication  from  the 
world  invisible,  or  feeling,  it  may  be,  in  the  pain,  the  weakness,  or  the  gathering 
wrinkles,  that  his  closing  hour  is  near,  he  thus  addresses  the  multitude  around : 
"Behold,  this  day  I  am  going  the  way  of  all  the  earth."  What  was  dying  Joshua 
but  just  the  representative  of  dying  man  ?  and  what  is  Joshua  dead  but  an  instance, 
from  the  midst  of  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  of  the  human  form,  erect  and 
strong,  and  animated  once,  consigned  to  mournful  silence,  and  the  human  spirit 
vanished  from  the  scenes  of  enterprise  and  life,  where  it  thought  so  loftily  or  toiled 
so  zealously  of  old  ?  And  if  we  commit  ourselves  to  the  pages  of  recorded  history, 
and  find  them  full  throughout  with  the  alternations  of  life  and  death,  or  mark  the 
common  course  of  society  and  providence  around  us,  how  many  an  illustration  may 
be  found  of  what  to  us  is  specially  momentous  in  the  idea  afforded  by  the  words, 
"  the  way  of  all  the  earth  "  I  II.  Thb  appeal  which  Joshua  makes  to  the  people 
HE  acdbesses.    1.  Joshua's  appeal  may  suggest  the  idea  of  a  pious  and  active  old 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxra. 

age.  To  earlier  years  and  robuster  vigour  may  belong  the  more  stirring  and 
laborious  forms  of  Christian  enterprise  and  zeal ;  but  age  has  the  same  principles 
of  duty  to  regard,  and  the  same  animating  motives  to  cherish  in  the  heart.  In  the 
apparent  proximity  of  death  it  has  a  consideration  in  some  degree  peculiar,  to  urge 
it  on  to  zealous  and  devoted  services  for  God  ;  and,  oh  1  how  powerfully  ought  that 
consideration  and  many  a  motive  else  to  animate  the  minds  of  those  who,  "  old  and 
stricken  in  age,"  are  ready,  like  Joshua,  to  say,  "  I  am  going  the  way  of  all  the 
earth  "  I  If  you  have  given  your  more  vigorous  years  to  sin,  why  should  you  delay 
with  contrite  and  devout  heart  to  give  the  close  of  your  continuance  here  to  Christ, 
and  piety,  and  God  ?  And  if  you  have,  in  some  degree,  like  Joshua,  given  your 
earlier  life  to  the  cause  of  righteousness,  oh  1  have  you  not  found,  in  your  experience 
of  its  dignity,  and  blessedness,  and  worth,  a  motive  strong  to  keep  you  steadfast  to 
the  end  ?  2.  Not  only  is  the  appeal  of  Joshua  in  the  text  representative  of  a  pioua 
and  zealous  old  age,  but  it  expresses  an  important  fact  presented  by  the  providence 
of  God  :  '•  Ye  know,"  says  he,  "  in  all  your  hearts,  and  in  all  your  souls,  that  not 
one  thing  hath  failed,"  &c.  Of  aU  men  Christian  believers  perhaps  will  be  the 
readiest  to  perceive,  and  the  most  willing  to  acknowledge,  the  absolute  faithf ulnesa 
and  the  gracious  liberality  of  God ;  and  how  can  they  but  know  that,  sad  as  the 
outward  condition  of  God's  chosen  may  sometimes  be,  and  sadder  still  as  may  be 
the  general  aspect  of  the  earth,  to  neither  can  the  Almighty's  pledge  be  broken,  to 
neither  can  His  promise  fail  ?  {Alex.  S.  Patterson.)  A  man  dying  : — ^I.  A  man 
dying  in  philosophic  calmness  :  "I  am  going  the  way  of  aU  the  earth."  1.  It  is 
not  a  strange  road.  All  that  have  ever  been,  have  gone  through  it ;  and  all  that 
ever  will  be,  must.  2.  It  is  not  an  avoidable  road.  To  complain  is  useless. 
II.  A  man  dying  fully  satisfied  with  God  :  •'  Not  one  thing  hath  failed," 
&c.  1.  That  God  had  promised  "good  things."  2.  That  aU  the  "good  things" 
promised  had  come.  Ill,  A  man  dying  with  spiritual  interest  in  survivors: 
"  Ye  know,"  &c.  He  wished  his  contemporaries  and  survivors  to  cherish  con- 
fidence in  God  when  he  was  gone.  [Ilouiilist.)  The  solicitude  and  testimony 
of  a  dying  man : — I.  The  solicitude  of  a  noble  veteran.  Joshua  was  soUcitoua 
that  the  Israelites  (1)  should  continue  in  love  to  God  (ver.  11)  ;  (2)  should  be 
separated  from  the  world  (vers.  7,  12,  13) ;  (3)  should  be  courageous  in  the  ways 
of  righteousness  (ver.  6).  11.  The  testimony  of  an  aged  pilgrim:  "And  behold 
this,"  &c.  We  learn  here  (1)  That  the  faithfulness  of  God  may  be  relied  on. 
(2)  That  the  faithfulness  of  God  extends  to  all  His  children.  (3)  That  the  faithful- 
ness of  God  is  to  His  believing  ones  a  conscious  realisation.  HI.  The  calmness  of 
A  DYING  SAINT.  What  a  peaceful,  glowing  suHsct!  (W.Fry.)  Joshua^ s  retrospect: 
— There  are  certain  occasions  in  life  when  it  is  irresistibly  natural  to  look  back. 
After  cUmbing  a  difiScult  ascent,  or  concluding  a  tedious  negotiation,  or  even 
winding  up  a  long  and  troublesome  letter,  we  like  to  take  a  final  view  of  the  whole. 
Joshua  had  now  arrived  at  the  culminating  point  of  his  mission.  I.  The  largeness 
of  God's  promises.  To  bring  Israel  out  of  the  prison-land  of  Egypt,  through  the 
death-land  of  the  wilderness,  into  triumphant  possession  of  the  fortress-land  of 
Canaan,  was  what  God  undertook.  If  some  great  leader  had  undertaken,  some 
years  back,  to  emancipate  the  negroes  of  the  Southern  States  of  America,  to  conduct 
them  over  the  broad  Atlantic,  and  make  them  owners  and  masters  of  military  and 
imperial  France,  he  would  scarcely  have  promised  any  more,  allowing  for  the 
difference  of  the  times.  All  God's  promises  are  "exceeding  great  and  precious." 
II.  The  steadiness  of  god's  purposes.  Just  when  the  promise  appeared  utterly 
forgotten,  its  final  fulfilment  was  being  planned.  Just  when  the  good  seed  appeared 
altogether  perished,  the  labourers  who  were  to  gather  in  the  harvest  were  being 
engaged.  The  rest  of  the  history  to  which  Joshua  looked  back  furnished  other 
instances  of  Uke  kind.  HI.  The  completeness  of  God's  work.  God  had  wrought 
all  that  He  had  promised.  I  apply  the  subject  to  the  earnest  expectations  of 
the  humble  believer  in  Christ.  You  too  are  looking  forward  to  the  end  of  your 
wanderings,  to  the  enjoyment  of  absolute  rest,  to  perfection  of  spiritual  condition, 
to  the  subjugation  of  every  enemy,  in  a  word,  to  complete  conformity  to  yom*  Lord. 
Be  assured  that  the  time  is  approaching  when  you  shall  look  back  in  triumph  upon 
all.  {HoTJiilist.)  The  last  words  of  Joshua: — You  can  hardly  overdraw  the 
character  of  the  patriarch  warrior  who  is  about  to  surrender  his  command.  He  is 
one  of  the  rare  men  of  either  economy  of  whom  inspiration,  always  faiihful,  has 
preserved  no  record  of  blemish.  And  if  you  ask  wherein  lay  the  main  charm  of  his 
character,  we  find  it  in  the  fact  that  he  himself  is  so  much  concealed  behind  the 
grandeur  of  his  own  exploits.    That  is  the  highest  order  of  excellence — to  be  self- 


CHAP,  xxra.]  JOSHUA.  277 

concealed  by  the  glory  of  events  whereof  we  are  the  authors.  "I  have  sent  for 
you,"  said  a  great  man  of  modern  days,  from  his  death-bed  to  a  youth  who  stood 
beside  him,  "that  you  may  see  how  a  Christian  can  die."  Let  us  see  how  a 
"  servant  of  the  Lord  "  can  die  who  only  saw  the  day  of  Christ  from  a  distance. 
We  might  dwell,  for  a  warrant  in  favour  of  repetition,  on  the  fact  that  Joshua 
spends  his  last  breath  in  teUing  something  to  the  children  of  Israel  which  he  himself 
admits  they  know  already  "  in  all  their  hearts  and  in  aU  their  souls."  Old-fashioned 
doctrines  never  look  so  new,  never  so  precious,  as  when  seen  from  the  edge  of  the 
grave.  But  what  absorbs  the  interest  of  this  spectacle  is  not  so  much  the  triteness 
of  the  discussion  as  the  motive  that  moved  to  its  delivery.  If  Joshua  does  not  say, 
he  implies,  that  because  the  chills  of  death  are  at  the  very  moment  creeping  round 
his  heart  and  the  tongue  will  not  serve  him  much  longer,  on  that  very  account  he 
stirs  them  up  to  remembrance  that  "  the  Lord  has  not  been  slack  concerning  His 
promise."  Oh,  surely,  this  is  something  new  in  the  treatment  of  an  old  doctrine! 
The  last  faculties  of  the  mind  before  it  ceases  to  act  and  move  amongst  the  hving, 
turned  upon  the  character  and  the  honour  of  the  great  God,  and  that  not  so  much 
towards  the  man  himself,  but  towards  the  other  men  addressed.  That  a  human 
being  should  be  so  able  to  forget  himself,  if  not  in  the  very  struggles,  in  the  nearest 
prospect,  of  mortality,  as  to  busy  himself  entirely  with  the  credit  and  the  character 
of  his  Creator,  that  he  should  gather  around  him  the  thousands  who  wiU  survive  him, 
for  nothing  but  to  wring  from  them  the  acknowledgment  that  God  is  true — oh  1  you 
may  fairly  enough  conclude  that  the  speaker  is  not  far  off  the  world  where  God  will 
be  all  in  all.  There  is  no  test  of  a  man's  chief  good  hke  death.  The  miser  will  ask 
for  his  old  strong-box  to  be  placed  beside  him  on  the  bed  that  he  may  see  the  last 
of  the  deity  he  has  worshipped  whilst  he  Uved.  The  husband  will  turn  his  latest, 
fondest  look,  amongst  all  bystanders,  towards  the  one  sad  face  that  belongs  to  her 
who  has  weathered  with  him  so  many  a  storm,  and  proved  her  love  through  evil 
and  through  good  report.  The  statesman  wanders  in  his  last  delirium  on  the 
future  of  the  country,  the  hehn  of  whose  affairs  he  is  quitting  for  ever.  The 
scholar,  too,  seems  reluctant  to  die  till  that  one  great  work,  the  study  of  years,  has 
received  its  finishing  touch ;  and  the  mechanician,  or  the  chemist,  or  the  astronomer, 
is  startled  by  the  grim  summons  from  the  busy  calculation,  or  the  tiresome  experi- 
ment, or  the  sweeping  survey  of  the  stars.  And  if  each  of  these  were  to  leave  a 
witness  from  the  death-bed,  that  witness  would  turn  for  a  topic  to  the  favourite  and 
the  darling  of  the  life  that  is  leaving  him.  Joshua  does  the  same.  "  What  will 
they  think  of  my  God  when  I  am  gathered  to  the  grave  ?  I  know  Him,  but  do 
they  ?  They  do ;  but  will  they  remember  what  they  know  ?  Will  they  serve  my 
God  as  if  they  recollected  that  He  has  never  failed  them  ?  It  is  not  certain  hearts 
that  know  forget :  souls  that  have  learned  love  their  own  lessons.  Therefore  will  I 
make  this  work,  the  honour  of  Jehovah,  at  least  as  perfect  as  I  can  make  it  by 
hallowing  in  its  behalf  the  faltering  of  the  dying  lip  and  the  clouding  of  the  dying 
brain."  "I  must,"  says  the  dying  hero,  "spend  the  last  sands  in  the  glass  in 
putting  the  glory  of  the  Divine  administration  beyond  all  reach  of  reproach.  Are 
my  warriors  and  myself  at  one  upon  the  doctrine  that  the  whole  of  an  inheritance 
promised  is  as  good,  to  faith,  as  the  whole  of  it  conferred  ?  Are  we  going  to  part 
agreed  that  Palestine  is  already  as  truly  the  property  of  the  sons  of  Abraham  as 
Timnath-Serah,  in  Mount  Ephraim,  belongs  to  me  ?  "  And  so  the  good  man  could 
not  rest  in  his  grave  till  he  had  exchanged  with  his  brethren  in  arms  a  new  vow  of 
allegiance  to  Him  who  has  not,  even  in  our  day,  with  absolutely  Hteral  truth, 
accomplished  the  fulness  of  what  is  here  taken  as  done.  Here  is  faith  for  you ! 
The  captain  of  the  army  will  not  die  till  he  has  overleapt  centuries  by  a  faith  of 
his  own,  and  carried  all  his  squadrons  with  him  in  the  leap.  One  of  our  great 
warriors  ordered  his  ships  into  action  with  the  shout  of  "  Victory,  or  Westminster 
Abbey  I "  But  what  should  we  have  thought  had  the  cry  been  "  Victory  and 
Westminster  Abbey !  "  Joshua  foresaw  that  his  own  death,  and  the  death  of  whole 
generations  of  soldiers,  would  make  no  difference  to  the  conquest  of  Canaan. 
Millenniimis  are  shorter  than  moments  to  "  him  that  believeth."  This  then  was 
Joshua's  judgment  of  the  right  business  for  a  dying  day.  Beautiful  ministry  for 
last  moments,  to  strengthen  bystanders  in  their  trust  upon  God's  word.  It  was  to 
Israel  almost  as  if  a  spectre  spoke.  You  contract  heavy  responsibilities — you  who 
stand,  from  time  to  time,  in  the  chambers  of  dying  believers.  Next  to  hearing 
voices  from  heaven  comes  the  hearing  of  voices  from  those  who  are  just  stepping 
from  earth.  Books  are  nothing  to  the  last  whispers  —even  the  last  smiles — of 
warriors  laying  down  their  swords,  and  of  pilgrims  sinking  into  rest.  I  pray  that  we 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rxm. 

may  all  die  leaving  some  witness  to  the  faithfulness  of  Christ.  {H.  Christopherton.) 
Joshua'g  farewell  charge  : — Notice,  first,  that  in  parting  he  says  nothing  of  himself. 
He  recalls  to  their  minds  only  the  source  of  all  the  power  that  was  theirs  in  the  past, 
and  all  the  power  that  could  be  theirs  in  the  future.  His  one  thought  in  leaving 
them  is  to  remind  them  of  the  character  of  God.  That  should  ever  be  the  thought 
of  the  pastor  who  is  parting  with  his  people — that  he  should  say  nothing  of  himseK, 
or  what  he  has  done,  or  what,  known  only  to  himself  and  God  perhaps,  he  has  utterly 
failed  to  do,  but  that  he  should  be  exceeding  anxious  and  exceeding  jealous  as  to 
the  character  of  God.  The  question  which  he  seems  to  ask  himself  as  he  is  about 
to  leave  them  is  not,  "  What  will  the  people  think  about  me  when  I  am  gone  from 
them  ?  "  but,  '*  What  wUl  this  people  think  about  God  ?  Will  they  serve  Him  as 
if  they  really  believed  in  their  heart  and  in  their  soul  that  God  can  never  fail  them  ? 
Will  they  feel  that  they  may,  and  that  they  must,  because  of  all  that  they  know 
of  God  in  the  past,  trust  Him  absolutely  and  utterly  for  the  future  ?  "  It  is  just 
possible  he  imagined  that  they  might  not,  and  so  his  endeavour  is  in  parting  to 
make  this  great  truth  of  the  absolute  fidelity  of  God,  which  must  be  the  foundation 
of  all  true  rehgion,  as  strong  in  them  as  it  could  be.  It  is  easy  to  say,  of  course, 
that  God  is  true  and  faithful ;  but  is  there  a  man  or  woman  here  to-day  who 
believes  that  every  promise  that  God,  in  His  written  Word,  or  in  revelation  to  their 
inmost  and  deepest  spiritual  nature,  has  made  is  actually  fulfilled  ?  What  a  changed 
world  it  would  be  if  every  baptized  man  and  woman  believed  in  their  heart  and  soul, 
as  a  child  believes  the  assurance  of  his  father,  that  not  one  promise  of  God  has 
ever  faUed  1  Joshua  called  them  to  witness  that  day  that  not  one  single  promise 
that  God  had  made  them  had  failed ;  and  yet  there  were  the  tribes  that  He  had 
promised  to  drive  out  stiU  occupying  many  places  in  the  land ;  there  was  the  Star 
unrisen  yet  that  had  been  promised  to  come  out  of  Jacob ;  there  was  the  sceptre  as 
yet  unwielded  by  Israel ;  there  were  many  things,  if  you  read  the  history  literally, 
that  God  had  promised,  and  that,  as  far  as  mere  human  eye  could  see,  were  not 
accomplished ;  nay,  the  approach  of  their  fulfilment  was  not  discernible.  And, 
nevertheless,  he  called  on  these  men,  who  longed  for  these  things,  to  whom  these 
things  had  been  promised  and  had  not  yet  come,  he  calls  them  to  bear  witness  that 
day  that  not  one  promise  of  the  Lord  their  God  had  failed  them.  To  his  heart 
of  faith  and  to  his  eye  of  faith,  because  God  hath  promised  them,  they  were  come 
to  pass  already ;  and  he  could  not  part  from  his  people  without  endeavouring  to 
make  them  as  deeply  persuaded  of  that  truth  as  he  was  himself.  And  that,  amid 
all  the  flux  of  time,  that,  amid  all  the  great  social,  political,  and  economic  changes 
that  have  swept  over  the  world,  that  is  the  one  foundation-truth  still  for  nations 
and  for  men.  In  our  national  life  it  is  the  truth  we  mostly  need.  In  our  national 
life  forces  are  being  developed  to-day  into  activity,  of  which  none  can  at  present 
forecast  the  issue.  Beneath  the  smooth  surface  of  our  modern  life  fii'es  are 
seething  which  reveal  themselves  now  and  again,  as  it  were,  in  tongues  of  lurid 
flame  that  leap  through  the  thin  film  of  our  civilisation.  Now  amid  all  this  how 
can  we  look  with  anything  like  manly  confidence  to  the  remote,  or  even  to  the 
immediate,  future  ?  We  must  sink,  as  it  seems  to  me,  into  despair,  if  we  can  only 
think  of  the  schemes  of  rival  politicians,  or  the  impotence  of  social  nostrums,  or  il 
we  can  only  hear,  as  words  of  hope,  the  flabby  platitudes  of  the  feeble  philan- 
thropist. Our  confidence  and  our  hope  must  be  based  upon  faith  in  the  faithfulness 
of  God,  in  Him  as  the  eternal  I  Am,  who  sitteth  above  the  water-floods,  be  the 
earth  never  so  unquiet.  Our  cardinal  faith  must  be  that  the  Lord,  who  was  God 
in  all  history,  is  God  in  history  still,  that  He  holds  in  His  hands  to-day  all  the 
strength  and  all  the  weakness  of  the  nation  and  of  man.  He  is  not  the  God  of  the 
dead  but  of  the  living ;  and,  if  we  will  learn  the  lesson  which  He  will  be  teaching 
us  somehow,  by  prosperity  or  by  disaster,  even  now,  as  we  look  around  us  on  all 
the  portents  of  the  time,  we  may  do  so  in  the  absolute  confidence  and  in  the  faith 
and  hope  which  we  ought  to  possess  as  we  say :  "  No  one  good  thing  which  the  Lord 
our  God  hath  promised  has  ever  failed  us."  {Canon  T.  T.  Shore.)  What  made 
Joshua  the  man  he  was  ? — Joshua,  when  he  spoke  these  words,  was  one  of  God's 
grand  old  friends.  He  and  Caleb  were  the  oldest  men  in  that  company.  He  tells 
them  his  experience  of  life.  It  is  worth  while  to  ask  what  made  old  Joshua  the 
man  he  was.  It  was  his  character.  If  I  met  a  man  on  the  Manchester  Exchange, 
and  he  told  me  he  was  building  a  new  mill,  fitting  it  up  with  the  newest  machinery, 
and  that  he  would  shortly  turn  out  the  finest  yarn  in  the  country,  well,  I  would 
Bay  to  him  :  "  You've  got  your  work  cut  out,  but  we  shall  see."  So  I  walk  round 
that  way,  and  look  at  the  new  mill,  with  its  fine  machinery ;  see  the  manager — one 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  JOSHUA.  279 

who  knows  his  business — and  I  say,  "  That's  all  right."  Then  I  walk  down  to  the 
mill  gate  to  see  what  kind  of  raw  material  comes  in.  If  the  raw  material  is 
inferior,  then  the  fine  miU,  with  its  machines,  all  goes  for  nothing — it  won't  do. 
The  yarn  won't  wear.  Now,  make  a  man  up  of  poor  material,  and  he'll  not  wear. 
What  character  has  a  man  ;  what  is  he  made  of  ?  That  is  a  great  question.  There 
are  two  things  about  Joshua's  character  to  be  noticed.    I.  Joshua  became  the  man 

HE  WAS  BECAUSE  HE  KEPT  COMPANY  WITH  ONE    OLDER   AND    BETTER   THAN   HIMSELF.       He 

was  Moses'  servant.  Watching  Moses  and  hearing  his  words  moulded  Joshua's 
character.  My  advice  to  young  people  is  to  keep  company  with  folks  older  and 
better  than  yourselves.  Why  does  God  let  people  live  to  a  long  age,  if  not  to  give 
the  younger  generation  their  experience  ?  Don't  leave  home  in  a  hurry.  K  father 
and  mother  are  people  that  pray,  don't  hurry  to  leave  them.  It  is  the  same  with 
old  books :  those  used  to  be  bound  in  sheepskin ;  nothing  to  look  at  outside,  but  all 
inside.  Nowadays  they  put  it  all  outside,  and  the  bookbinder  does  what  the  author 
should  have  done.  It  is  a  responsibility  which  older  people  should  consider,  that 
they  ought  to  live  so  as  to  attract  the  young.  This  is  one  of  the  wants  of  the  age. 
Live  so  that  your  young  people  may  say  when  they  go  out  into  life,  "I  leave  my 
best  friends  behind."  I  never  had  such  a  fine  compliment  paid  me  before  as  I  had 
from  my  boy  the  other  day.  It  was  in  class,  and  when  I  came  to  my  son  Charlie, 
he  said :  "  Well,  father,  I  am  only  getting  my  eyes  opened  to  see  what  a  privilege 
mine  has  been  to  live  with  such  people  as  you  and  mother  are."  I  wouldn't  give 
that  away  for  £20,000.  II.  Joshua  became  the  man  he  was  because  he  ttat>  the 
COURAGE  OF  HIS  CONVICTIONS.  There  were  twelve  of  them  sent  to  spy  Canaan,  ten 
of  them  said,  "  It's  no  use.  The  country  is  good  enough,  but  it  is  full  of  giants." 
"Yes,  we  shall  go  up,"  said  Joshua  and  Caleb.  Joshua  was  wiUing  to  be  out-voted. 
It  was  ten  to  two,  but  the  ten  had  their  coffins  made  before  the  two.  Have  the 
courage  to  vote  for  the  right.  One  man  and  God  makes  a  strong  party.  Joshua's 
experience  was  that  God  had  been  as  good  as  His  word.  There  are  no  crises  but 
what  God  can  surmount  them.  Go  and  ask  George  Miiller.  A  man  thought 
that  he  would  give  a  thankoffering  for  his  life  being  spared  to  fifty  years.  He 
intended  to  give  £50,  and  he  thought  he  would  send  the  Bristol  Orphanage  £10. 
He  was  so  haunted  by  this  thought  that  he  could  not  wait  for  his  birthday,  but  got 
an  envelope  and  despatched  a  cheque  for  £10.  He  got  the  usual  receipt,  and  there 
was  no  more  of  it  until  the  yearly  report  of  the  Orphanage  appeared.  He  thought 
he  would  just  turn  up  the  date  and  see  if  his  money  were  there.  There  at  the  very 
date  he  saw  George  Miiller's  words,  "  No  money  and  no  bread  to-day,  but  cheque 
has  arrived  for  £10."  Friends,  believe  in  a  prayer-hearing  God.  Don't  be  afraid 
to  leave  your  case  in  His  hands  if  you  are  doing  right.  Some  of  these  days  you 
will  have  to  say  with  Joshua,  "  I  go  the  way  of  aU  the  earth."  Tou  wiU  have  to 
give  up  going  to  business  and  to  lie  in  bed.  Everything  is  growing  dim,  and  the 
loved  voices  seem  miles  away.  Will  some  of  those  loved  ones,  writing  to  the  son 
in  Australia,  have  to  say,  "  Father's  last  words  were  these  :  '  Not  one  thing  hath 
failed  of  all  the  good  things  which  the  Lord  spake  '  "  ?  (T.  Champness.)  An 
elevation  that  explains  the  whole  of  life : — The  traveller  who  has  reached  the  highest 
attainable  summit  of  the  Andes,  and  stands  in  the  pure  and  cloudless  atmosphere 
around  them,  can  expatiate  over  a  wide  and  almost  boundless  horizon ;  while 
another  who  remains  in  the  valley  below,  amidst  the  haze  of  mist  and  vapour, 
must  be  satisfied  with  a  comparatively  poor  and  trifling  view  of  the  magnificence 
and  beauty  that  surround  him.  It  is  thus  with  the  Christian  militant,  in  the  war- 
fare of  his  earthly  state,  and  after  his  release  to  join  the  armies  of  the  blessed  in  the 
rest  of  God.  Here  dimness  and  obscurity  may  in  part  intercept  or  much  distort 
the  prospect  of  Divine  mercy,  and  all  the  rich  consolations  of  a  Saviour's  love.  But 
When  his  liberated  soul  shall  attain  the  felicities  of  heaven,  he  will  stand  upon  an 
elevation  commanding  the  boundless  extent  of  Divine  operation  in  the  walk  and 
world  of  providence  and  grace.  His  eye  will  be  strengthened  to  behold,  and  his 
comprehension  will  be  enlarged  to  understand  them  with  knowledge,  love,  and 
wonder,  increasing  throughout  eternity.  No  cloud  will  be  seen  throughout  the 
universe  of  blessedness  to  intercept  his  vision.  Every  dispensation  by  which  the 
Saviour  visited  and  helped  him,  however  misunderstood  in  the  days  of  earthly 
darkness  and  ignorance,  will  then  be  fully  explained,  every  difficulty  solved,  and 
every  apparent  contradiction  harmonised  for  ever.  (R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.) 
The  promise  of  God  has  its  season : — As  the  herbs  and  flowers  which  sleep  all 
winter  in  their  roots  underground,  when  the  time  of  spring  approacheth  presently 
start  forth  of  their  beds,  where  they  had  lain  so  long  unperceived,  thus  will  the 


280  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xht. 

promise  in  its  season  do.  He  delays  who  passeth  the  time  appointed ;  but  he  only 
stays  that  waits  for  the  appointed  time,  and  then  comes.  Every  promise  is  dated, 
but  with  a  mysterious  character  ;  and  for  want  of  skill  in  God's  chronology  we  are 
prone  to  think  that  God  forgets  us,  when  indeed  we  forget  ourselves  in  being  so  bold 
to  set  God  a  time  of  our  own,  and  in  being  angry  that  He  comes  not  just  then  to  us. 
Confidence  in  God's  faithfulness  : — Your  boy  comes  to  you  and  asks  you  to  buy  him 
a  fishing-rod,  and  he  says,  "I  saw  one  to-day  in  a  window,  which  was  just  what  I 
want.  Can't  I  go  down  now  and  buy  it  ?  "  And  you  say,  "  No,  not  to-day,  wait  a 
little."  A  week  passes,  and  the  lad  begins  to  say  to  himself,  ••  I  wonder  if  father 
has  forgotten  all  about  it  ?  "  Then  you  put  into  his  hands  a  better  rod  than  he 
has  ever  seen  before,  and  the  boy  is  overwhelmed  with  surprise  and  pleasure.  And 
yet  the  main  thing  in  all  this  is  not  that  your  son  received  what  he  wanted,  but  the 
gift  won,  through  delay,  has  given  him  a  new  view  of  his  father's  wisdom,  and  a 
new  confidence  in  his  affection,  which  makes  him  say,  "  Hereafter,  when  I 
want  anything  of  this  kind,  I  will  leave  it  all  to  father."  And  so  the  main  thing 
that  a  man  gains,  when  God  at  last  answers  his  prayer,  is  not  the  gift,  but  the 
clearer  consciousness  that  God  is  better  than  His  gifts,  that  he  has  all  in  God. 
{R.  Vincent.) 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Yebs.  1-33.  Joshua  gathered  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  Shechem. — Jothua'i  last 
farewell: — I.  God's  thbeefold  meecies.  1.  Israel's  enlargement  (vers.  2-4J. 
2.  Israel's  exodus  (vers.  5-7).  3.  Israel's  entrance  into  Canaan  (vers.  ,8-12). 
IL  Joshua's  thbeefold  appbai.  1.  He  exhorts  them  to  fear  and  serve  this  great 
and  this  good  God.  2.  To  manifest  in  yet  clearer  light  that  the  service  of  God  is 
a  reasonable  service,  and  to  show  the  utter  foUy  of  idolatry,  Joshua,  in  the  gravest 
irony,  upholds  the  alternative  for  the  adoption  of  the  people,  and  mocks  the  apostasy, 
the  latent  germs  of  which  he  knew  too  well  were  in  the  hearts  of  the  great  assembly 
before  him.  3.  Then,  having,  both  with  tender  love  and  with  withering  scorn,  set 
forth  the  two  alternatives,  he  declares  his  own  resolute  decision  in  words  which 
should  be  the  motto  for  every  ruler,  and  for  every  householder.  This  is  the  true 
order  of  the  growth  of  piety.  First,  individual  consecration ;  then  follows  family 
control ;  and  then  the  third  stage  in  the  gradation — namely,  public  influence — will 
not  be  lacking.  HI.  Israel's  threefold  covenant.  IV.  A  threefold  affidavit 
TO  Israel's  covenant.  1.  The  first  is  the  memory  of  the  transaction  in  the  minds 
of  the  people  themselves.  2.  Joshua  himseU,  moreover,  puts  the  whole  matter  into 
writing,  even  as  we  have  it  here  before  us  in  this  last  chapter.  3.  But  there  is 
another  testimony  that  shaU  witness  against  Israel  if  they  apostatise — "  a  great 
Btone,"  which  he  places  beneath  the  oak  in  Shechem,  "  that  was  by  the  sanctuary 
of  the  Lord."  V.  A  threefold  seal  to  God's  promises.  The  Book  closes  with  the 
mention  of  three  burials.  In  the  peaceful  graves  of  three  of  God's  saints  we  seem 
to  see  three  seals  to  the  truth  of  God's  Word.  These  holy  men  once  served  Him 
among  strange  nations,  but  now  their  bones  are  laid  within  the  borders  of  the 
promised  land.  (G.  W.  Butler,  M.A.)  Joshua's  last  appeal : — It  was  at  Shechem 
that  Joshua's  last  meeting  with  the  people  took  place.  There  was  much  to 
recommend  that  place.  It  lay  a  few  miles  to  the  north-west  of  Shiloh,  and  was 
not  only  distinguished  as  Abraham's  first  resting-place  in  the  country,  and  the 
scene  of  the  earliest  of  the  promises  given  in  it  to  him  ;  but  likewise  as  the  place 
where,  between  Mount  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  the  blessings  and  curses  of  the  law  had 
been  read  out  soon  after  Joshua  entered  the  land,  and  the  solemn  assent  of  the 
people  given  to  them.  And  whereas  it  is  said  (ver.  26)  that  the  great  stone  set  up 
as  a  witness  was  "  by  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord,"  this  stone  may  have  been  placed 
at  Shiloh  after  the  meeting,  because  there  it  would  be  more  f uUy  in  the  observation 
of  the  people  as  they  came  up  to  the  annual  festivals  (1  Sam.  i.  7,  9).  1.  In  the 
record  of  Joshua's  speech  contained  in  the  twenty-fourth  chapter,  he  begins  by 
rehearsing  the  history  of  the  nation.  He  has  an  excellent  reason  for  beginning 
with  the  revered  name  of  Abraham,  because  Abraham  had  been  conspicuous  for 
that  very  grace,  loyalty  to  Jehovah,  which  he  is  bent  on  impressing  on  them.  We 
mark  in  this  rehearsal  the  well-known  features  of  the  national  history,  as  they  were 
always  represented ;  the  frank  recognition  of  the  supernatural,  with  no  indication 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  281 

of  myth  or  legend,  with  nothing  of  the  mist  or  glamour  in  which  the  legend  is 
commonly  enveloped.  And,  seeing  that  God  hath  done  all  this  for  them,  the 
inference  was  that  He  was  entitled  to  their  heartiest  loyalty  and  obedience.  Never 
was  a  good  man  more  in  earnest,  or  more  thoroughly  persuaded  that  all  that  mada 
for  a  nation's  weKare  was  involved  in  the  course  which  he  pressed  upon  them. 
2.  But  Joshua  did  not  urge  this  merely  on  the  strength  of  his  own  conviction.  He- 
must  enlist  their  reason  on  his  side ;  and  for  this  cause  he  now  called  on  them 
deliberately  to  weigh  the  claims  of  other  gods  and  the  advantages  of  other  modes 
of  worship,  and  choose  that  which  must  be  pronounced  the  best.  There  were  four 
claimants  to  be  considered — (1)  Jehovah ;  (2)  the  Chaldaean  gods  worshipped  by 
their  ancestors ;  (3)  the  gods  of  the  Egyptians  ;  and  (4)  the  gods  of  the  Amorites 
among  whom  they  dwelt.  Make  your  choice  between  these,  said  Joshua,  if  you 
are  dissatisfied  with  Jehovah.  But  could  there  be  any  reasonable  choice  between 
these  gods  and  Jehovah  ?  It  is  often  useful,  when  we  hesitate  as  to  a  course,  to 
set  down  the  various  reasons  for  and  against — it  may  be  the  reasons  of  our  judg- 
ment against  the  reasons  of  our  feelings ;  for  often  this  course  enables  us  to  see 
how  utterly  the  one  outweighs  the  other.  May  it  not  be  useful  for  us  to  do  as 
Joshua  urged  Israel  to  do  ?  3.  But  Joshua  is  fully  prepared  to  add  example  to 
precept.  Whatever  you  do  in  this  matter,  my  mind  is  made  up,  my  course  is 
clear — "  as  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  Jehovah."  He  was  happy  in  being 
able  to  associate  his  house  with  himself  as  sharing  his  convictions  and  his  purpose. 
He  owed  this,  in  all  likelihood,  to  his  own  firm  and  intrepid  attitude  throughout 
his  life.  His  house  saw  how  consistently  and  constantly  he  recognised  the  supreme 
claims  of  Jehovah.  Not  less  clearly  did  they  see  how  constantly  he  experienced 
the  blessedness  of  his  choice.  4.  Convinced  by  his  arguments,  moved  by  his 
eloquence,  and  carried  along  by  the  magnetism  of  his  example,  the  people  respond 
with  enthusiasm.  But  Joshua  knew  something  of  their  fickle  temper.  He  may 
have  called  to  mind  the  extraordinary  enthusiasm  of  their  fathers  when  the  taber- 
nacle was  in  preparation  ;  the  singular  readiness  with  which  they  had  contributed 
their  most  valued  treasures,  and  the  grievous  change  they  underwent  after  the 
return  of  the  spies.  Even  an  enthusiastic  burst  like  this  is  not  to  be  trusted.  He 
must  go  deeper  ;  he  must  try  to  induce  them  to  think  more  earnestly  of  the  matter, 
and  not  trust  to  the  feeling  of  the  moment.  5.  Hence  he  draws  a  somewhat  dark 
picture  of  Jehovah's  character.  He  dwells  on  those  attributes  which  are  least 
agreeable  to  the  natural  man — His  holiness,  His  jealousy,  and  His  inexorable 
opposition  to  sin.  "Te  cannot  serve  the  Lord,"  said  Joshua ;  "  take  care  how  you 
undertake  what  is  beyond  your  strength."  Perhaps  he  wished  to  impress  on  them 
the  need  of  Divine  strength  for  so  difficult  a  duty.  Certainly  he  did  not  change 
their  purpose,  but  only  drew  from  them  a  more  resolute  expression.  6.  And  now 
Joshua  comes  to  a  point  which  had  doubtless  been  in  his  mind  all  the  time,  but 
which  he  had  been  waiting  for  a  favourable  opportunity  to  bring  forward.  He  had 
pledged  the  people  to  an  absolute  and  unreserved  service  of  God,  and  now  he 
demands  a  practical  proof  of  their  sincerity.  He  knows  quite  well  that  they  have 
"  strange  gods  "  among  them.  Minor  forms  of  idolatry,  minor  recognitions  of  the 
gods  of  the  Chaldseans  and  the  Egyptians  and  the  Amorites,  were  prevalent  even  yet. 
What  a  weed  sin  is,  and  how  it  is  for  ever  reappearing  1  And  reappearing  among 
ourselves  too,  in  a  different  variety,  but  essentially  the  same.  For  what  honest  and 
earnest  heart  does  not  feel  that  there  are  idols  and  images  among  ourselves  that 
interfere  with  God's  claims  and  God's  glory  as  much  as  the  teraphim  and  the 
earrings  of  the  Israelites  did  ?  7.  And  now  comes  the  closing  and  the  clinching 
transaction  of  this  meeting  at  Shechem.  Joshua  enters  into  a  formal  covenant 
with  the  people.  When  Joshua  got  the  people  bound  by  a  transaction  of  this  sort, 
he  seemed  to  obtain  a  new  guarantee  for  their  fideUty ;  a  new  barrier  was  erected 
against  their  lapsing  into  idolatry.  And  yet  it  was  but  a  temporary  barrier  against 
a  flood  which  seemed  ever  to  be  gathering  strength  unseen,  and  preparing  for 
another  fierce  discharge  of  its  disastrous  waters.  8.  At  the  least,  this  meeting 
secured  for  Joshua  a  peaceful  sunset,  and  enabled  him  to  sing  his  "  Nunc  dimittis." 
The  evil  which  he  dreaded  most  was  not  at  work  as  the  current  of  life  ebbed  away 
from  him ;  it  was  his  great  privilege  to  look  round  him  and  see  his  people  faithful 
to  their  God.  It  does  not  appear  that  Joshua  had  any  very  comprehensive  or  far- 
reaching  aims  with  reference  to  the  moral  training  and  development  of  the  people. 
His  idea  of  religion  seems  to  have  been  a  very  simple  loyalty  to  Jehovah,  in  opposition 
to  the  perversions  of  idolatry.  For  his  absolute  and  supreme  loyalty  to  his  Lord  he 
is  entiUed  to  our  highest  reTerence.    This  loyalty  is  a  rare  virtue,  in  the  sublima 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxnr. 

proportions  in  whicli  it  appeared  in  him.  The  very  rareness,  the  eccentricity  of 
the  character,  secures  a  respectful  homage.  And  yet  who  can  deny  that  it  is 
the  true  representation  of  what  every  man  should  be  who  says,  "  I  believe  in  God 
the  Father  almighty,  maker  of  heaven  and  earth"?  [W.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.) 
Dying  charges : — The  world  long  remembers  Jonathan  Edwards's  dying  charge  to 
his  family  :  "  Trust  in  God,  and  you  have  nothing  to  fear  " ;  or  the  English  Samuel 
Johnson's  exhortation  to  his  physician,  "  Doctor,  believe  a  dying  man :  nothing  but 
salvation  by  Christ  can  comfort  you  when  you  come  to  lie  here  "  ;  or  a  departing 
President,  like  Jackson,  saying,  "  Eeligion  is  a  great  reality :  the  Bible  is  true." 
These  and  a  thousand  other  instances  testify  that  a  thoughtful  man  going  the  way 
of  all  the  earth  is  pretty  certain  to  have  his  thoughts  fixed  on  the  place  to  which  he 
is  going  and  the  preparation  he  and  those  around  him  may  need  for  that  journey. 
(W.  E.  Knox,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  I  gave  unto  Isaac  Jacob  and  Esau :  and  I  gave  unto  Esau  mount  Selr. — 
Certain  singular  subjects  : — I.  History  and  the   hand  of   God   in   it.     See :  "  I 
gave";  and  then  again,  "I  gave."    It  is  not  merely  that  Esau  and  Jacob  were 
born  of  Isaac  and  Eebekah,  but  the  Lord  says,  "I  gave  unto  Isaac  Jacob  and 
Esau."     How  plainly  doth  this  declare  that  the  hand  of  God  is  in  human  history  1 
At  first  sight  history  seems  a  great  tangle,  a  confusion ;  but  on  looking  at  it  more 
closely  we  perceive  that  it  is  only  in  appearance  a  maze,  but  in  fact  a  marvellous 
piece  of   arrangement,   exhibiting  perfect  precision  and  never-failing  accuracy. 
1.  We  see  the  hand  of  God  in  history  very  strikingly  in  the  raising  up  of  remark- 
able men  at  certain  special  periods.      "  I  gave  unto  Isaac  Jacob  and  Esau  " : 
children  are  the  gift  of  God.     This  is  true  not  only  of  Isaac  but  of  all  mortal  men. 
God  gave  to  a  worthy  couple,  George  Washington ;  to  another  pair,  John  Howard ; 
and  to  a  third,  George  Whitefield.    Each  of  these,  in  his  own  special  way,  was  a 
Divine  gift  to  men.     Children  are  born  with  different  talents  and  varied  capacities, 
but  all  about  them  which  wiU  make  them  blessings  is  the  gift  of  God.     2.  So  also 
is  the  hand  of  God  distinctly  to  be  seen  in  aU  great  events.     If  Esau  captures 
Mount  Seir,  then  the  setting  up  of  the  Edomite  dominion,  bad  as  it  may  have  been, 
is  from  another  point  of  view  a  matter  in  which  God's  purpose  and  design  are  to 
be  noted,  for  He  says :  "  I  gave  Esau  mount  Seir."    In  everything  that  happens,  be 
it  small  or  great,  the  Lord  is  present,  and  His  will  is  done.    It  is  so  in  all  the 
plottings  and  manceuvrings  of  kings  and  princes  and  senates,  in  the  stirs  of  pubUc 
opinion,  in  the  marchings  of  armies,  and  in  aU  that  transpires  among  mortal  men. 
Though  the  iniquity  of  man  is  seen  abundantly,  yet  the  overruling  power  of  God  is 
never  absent.     3.  To  us  the  hand  of  God  is  very  visible  in  our  own  case.    Look  at 
the  hand  of  God  that  gave  to  you  and  to  me  such  parents  as  we  have :  I  mean 
those  of  us  who  have  the  great  delight  of  having  descended  from  Christian  men 
and  women.     Had  we  anything  to  do  with  that  ?    And  yet  the  greatest  part  of  a 
man's  future  depends  upon  the  parents  of  whom  he  is  born.     Is  not  the  hand  of 
God  in  it  ?     4.  And  do  we  not  see  the  hand  of  God,  again,  in  our  children  ?    Bring 
these  gifts  of  God  to  God,  and  say,  "  Here,  Lord,  are  the  children  which  Thou  hast 
given  me.   0  Lord,  let  Thy  name  be  named  on  them,  and  let  Thy  grace  be  glorified 
in  them."    5.  Observe,  further,  that  the  Lord's  hand  is  in  all  the  prosperity  which 
He  gives  to  any.    He  says,  "  I  gave  unto  Esau  mount  Seir,  to  possess  it."     It  is  by 
God's  allotment  that  temporal  things  fall  as  they  do :  even  the  ungodly  have  their 
portion  in  this  life  by  Divine  grant.     6.  And,  once  more,  God's  hand  is  to  be  seen 
in  the  place  in  which  we  live.    If  Esau  Uves  in  Mount  Seir,  it  is  because  God 
appoints  him  to  be  there ;  and  if  Israel  goes  down  to  Egypt,  it  is  for  the  selfsame 
reason.    If  you  and  I  remove  from  one  place  to  another,  it  is  sweet  to  see  the 
cloud  moving  before  us,  and  to  know  that  the  Lord  directs  our  way.     H.  BmxH 
AND  ITS  DISAPPOINTMENTS.     "I  gavc  uuto  Isaac  Jacob  and  Esau,"  twin  children 
born  of  godly  parents.     In  that  birth  there  was  joy,  but  sorrow  came  by  it  as  well 
as  joy.     Children  are  certain  cares  and  doubtful  comforts.   They  may  bring  to  their 
parents  such  sorrow  that  they  may  be  inclined  to  think  the  barren  happier  than 
the  fruitful.    Hence  it  is  well  for  us  to  leave  our  hopes  of  posterity  with  God ;  and 
if  we  reckon  that  in  a  childless  house  we  have  missed  a  great  joy,  we  ought  also  to 
reckon  that  we  have  missed  a  mint  of  trouble  by  the  same  fact.     III.  Wouldlinos 
AND  THEIR  POSSESSIONS.    Why  does  God  so  often  give  possessions  to  ungodly  men  ? 
Why  do  they  flourish  ?    Why  do  they  have  their  portion  in  this  Ufe  ?     Is  it  not, 
first,  because  God  thinks  little  of  these  things,  and  therefore  gives  them  to  those 
of  whom  He  thinks  little?    "Why,"  said  Luther  in  his  day,  "  the  whole  Turkish 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  283 

empire  is  but  a  basket  of  husks  that  God  gives  to  the  hogs,  and  therefore  He  hands 
it  over  to  the  unbelievers."  Something  infinitely  better  is  reserved  for  the  Lord's 
own  family.  The  rich  blessing  of  true  grace  He  reserves  for  His  children  and  heirs. 
Do  you  wish  that  ungodly  men  should  have  less  ?  For  my  part,  I  am  reconciled  to 
their  present  prosperity,  for  it  is  all  they  ever  will  have.  Poor  souls,  let  them  have 
as  much  of  it  as  they  may  here ;  they  have  nothing  hereafter.  Let  those  have  the 
treasures  of  this  present  evil  world  who  have  nothing  else.  Never  quarrel  with  the 
Lord  for  saying,  "I  gave  unto  Esau  mount  Seir,  to  possess  it."  Besides,  these 
comforts  may  lead  them  to  reflect  upon  God's  bounty  to  them ;  and  at  any  rate 
they  ought  to  move  them  to  repentance.  IV.  The  chosen  of  God  and  their 
XBiAiiS.  Esau  reigns,  but  Israel  serves ;  Esau  set  his  nest  on  high,  but  Israel 
crouched  by  the  reeds  of  the  river.  The  worldling  would  read  the  Scripture  as  if  it 
said,  "  As  many  as  I  love,  I  caress  and  pamper  "  ;  but  the  Lord  speaketh  not  so  ; 
His  word  is,  "  As  many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten  "  ;  "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth 
He  chasteneth."  To  carnal  reason  this  seems  strange  ;  faith  alone  can  explain  it. 
1.  Israel  and  his  children  went  down  into  Egypt,  first,  for  their  preservation. 
Sanctified  aiHictions  are  spiritual  promotions.  The  salt  and  bitterness  of  sorrow 
often  preserves  men  from  the  gall  and  bitterness  of  sin.  2.  They  went  down  into 
Egypt,  next,  for  their  improvement.  God  often  thrusts  His  people  into  adversity 
that  He  may  improve  them,  arouse  them,  instruct  them,  and  ennoble  them.  See 
to  it,  that  the  Lord's  design  be  fulfilled  in  you  to  the  full.  May  the  fire  and  the  file, 
the  crucible  and  the  flame,  work  in  you  a  clearance  of  dross  and  rust,  and  make 
you  pure  and  bright.  3.  They  also  went  down  into  Egypt  for  their  education.  The 
chosen  seed  needed  teaching  ;  they  were  getting  to  be  rustic,  not  to  say  barbarous, 
in  their  manners ;  acquirements  and  knowledge  were  scant  among  them.  They 
must  go  down  into  the  seat  of  ancient  learning  to  acquire  arts  and  sciences  and 
civilisation.  For  future  usefulness  it  is  well  that  we  bear  present  sorrow,  and  like 
Jacob  go  down  into  Egypt.  4.  And  they  went  down  to  Egypt,  again,  that  God 
might  display  His  great  power  in  them.  It  is  worth  while  to  go  down  into  Egypt 
to  come  out  of  it  with  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm.  Oh,  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  in  His  redeemed  !  Oh,  the  lofty  destiny  of  the  tried  people  of  God  1  Oh,  the 
subhmity  of  their  hves  even  now !  There  is  God  in  them ;  there  is  God  about 
them.  "Jacob  and  his  children  went  down  into  Egypt."  That  is  where  the  story 
ends,  according  to  my  text ;  but  you  know  the  story  does  not  end  there  after  all ; 
for  out  of  Jacob  and  his  children  came  the  Star,  the  Sceptre,  and  the  Throne. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  12.  Not  with  thy  sword,  nor  with  thy  bow. — Not  with  sword  or  bow : — 
A  very  necessary  reminder,  applicable  to  both  the  hour  of  conflict  and  victory. 
Both  seasons  have  their  own  dangers.  There  is  no  final  conflict  or  victory  in  this 
life ;  only  when  death  has  finished  our  course  should  we  be  hopeless  or  exultant. 
Each  contest  is  but  a  single  event  of  a  series,  and  the  one,  though  leading  to  others, 
does  not  of  necessity  determine  the  character  of  them  all.  Defeat  to-day  does  not 
mean  defeat  to-morrow,  any  more  than  success  to-day  means  the  same  in  the  next 
encounter  with  the  hidden  powers  of  darkness.  No  man  is  safe  on  this  side  the 
grave.  So  for  each,  for  all,  these  words  may  be  for  encouragement  and  direction. 
The  cause  of  failure  may  be  discovered,  and  the  remedy  be  pointed  out,  or  the  way 
which  shall  lead  to  entire  possession  of  the  fulness  of  God's  blessedness  may  be 
known,  as  each  and  all  shall  remember  that  "it  is  not  by  thy  sword  or  thy  bow." 
I.  Life's  conflict  must  be  met  by  human  effof.t  and  energy.  The  promise  of 
the  land  as  an  inheritance  to  the  people  of  Israel  is  most  distinct.  Everywhere 
God  said  He  would  give  it.  Was  there  not  some  reason,  then,  in  the  expectation 
that  they  should  have  the  land  without  any  very  special  trouble  ?  Is  there  so  much 
to  be  wondered  at  in  the  disappointment  of  the  spies  when  they  saw  they  had  to 
fight  ?  One  would  have  thought  that  the  people  would  have  walked  in  at  one  side 
while  the  inhabitants  walked  out  at  the  other.  God  could  have  done  it  without 
the  intervention  of  human  effort  at  aU.  But  this  is  not  the  point.  What  God  did, 
as  we  learn  from  the  history  of  this  period,  was,  He  used  the  sword  and  the  bow 
of  the  people  to  secure  to  them  the  promise  He  had  given  to  their  fathers.  And 
though  no  such  stipulation  is  anywhere  directly  stated,  yet  universally  we  find 
that  the  human  effort  and  skill  are  needful  to  the  attainment  of  the  gift  of  God. 
And  it  is  just  so  with  all  that  has  to  do  with  God.  He  has  endowed  us  with 
certain  powers  which  He  calls  upon  as  to  exercise.  When,  then,  on  the  one  hand 
w«  Bit  down  quietly  and  say,  "  God  has  promised  and  wUl  perform — there  is 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xht. 

nothing  for  me  to  do,"  or  when  we  refuse  to  do  anything  because  of  our  great 
weakness,  or  when  we  fail  to  call  upon  our  powers  of  mind  and  heart  to  rise 
against  the  inroads  of  our  spiritual  enemies,  or  quietly  submit  when  we  are  taken 
captive  in  the  snares  of  the  devil,  we  are  just  putting  ourselves  outside  the  pale  of 
the  directions  which  God  has  given  us.  So,  too,  when  we  ask  God  to  work  for  us, 
and  make  supplication  to  Him  to  remove  trouble  or  give  us  light  and  peace,  if  we 
say,  "  God  can  and  will  work,"  and  we  do  nothing  ourselves,  then  we  are  forgetting 
this  part  of  God's  ways.  It  is  not  by  longing,  wishing,  desiring,  however  ardent, 
that  God  fulfils  His  loving  purposes  towards  us ;  but  by  prayer,  girding  up  our 
minds,  and  resolute,  undaunted  courage,  that  we  must  meet  our  foe — "with  thy 
sword  and  with  thy  bow."  But  what  is  the  energy  and  activity  here  indicated  ? 
You  will  observe  that  God  has  not  endowed  man  with  any  natural  modes  of  offence 
or  defence.  The  smallest  insect  is  apparently  better  equipped  for  the  dangers  of 
its  life  than  we  are.  But  God  has  given  man  a  stronger  force  than  all.  Will — 
moral  force — the  power  of  doing — are  his ;  so  that  though  unarmed  he  is  more  fully 
equipped  against  the  multifarious  dangers  of  his  way.  Nothing  can  assault  him, 
but  he  can  adopt  such  means  as  shall  protect — such  measures  as  shall  totally 
defeat  the  foe.  He  has  the  sword  and  the  bow.  Moral  dangers  must  be  met  by 
moral  means,  e.g.,  conscience  must  be  kept  clear,  its  voice  must  be  listened  to, 
and  when  heard  the  will  must  without  hesitation  obey.  Spiritual  blessings  must 
be  obtained  by  spiritual  effort.  God  has  promised  them,  He  will  give ;  but  you 
must  ovetcome  the  obstacles.  Will  you  have  the  promise  ?  then  adopt  the  means 
needful.  If  you  would  scale  the  mountains,  you  look  for  a  guide,  and  take 
provisions,  and  put  on  suitable  dress.  "  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God."  Just  as 
the  poor  shipwrecked  one  lays  hold  of  the  floating  spar  for  very  life,  so  you  must 
lay  hold  of  God,  and  laying  hold  of  Him,  do  what  He  tells  you.  Cannot!  No 
such  word  ought  to  be  used.  "I  can,  I  wiU  I "  these  are  your  sword  and  bow,  and  if 
you  would  extract  blessing  out  of  everything  it  must  be  by  their  use,  and  only  thus 
will  you  gain  the  end  you  desire.  But  then  it  must  be  "  thy  "  sword  and  "  thy  "  bow. 
There  is  a  speciality  here.  It  is  the  act  of  the  individual,  the  perseverance  of  the 
man.  U.  Life's  conflict  is  not  won  by  the  human  effobt  and  energy.  The 
greatest  effort  cannot  obtain  the  victory ;  the  most  stupendous  energy  cannot  save 
from  defeat.  It  is  one  thing  to  meet  the  foe,  it  is  another  thing  to  win  the  day. 
And  so  our  text  tells  us  that  it  is  not  by  thy  sword  nor  by  thy  bow.  You  must 
fight,  but  God  gives  the  victoiy.  It  is  not  won  by  your  fighting,  but  by  God's  aid. 
It  is  not  secured  by  your  prowess,  but  by  God's  strength.  It  is  all  God,  not  you. 
{H.  W.  Butcher.) 

Ver.  13.  And  I  have  given  you  a  land  for  which  ye  did  not  labour. — The 

inheritance  of  the  past : — The  substance  of  these  closing  words  of  the  old  Hebrew 
chief  amounted  to  this :  they  had  had  vastly  more  done  for  them  than  they  had 
done  or  could  have  done  for  themselves.  They  were  not  the  sole  nor  the  chief 
architects  of  their  own  fortunes.  At  this  stage  in  the  fortunes  of  their  national  life 
the  prescient  eye  of  Joshua  saw  the  resulting  perils  from  the  disposition  among 
them  to  forget  their  past  history  and  to  magnify  the  personal  element  in  their 
present  gains  and  security.  There  is  but  one  step  between  the  temper  of  boastful- 
ness  and  the  decadence  and  demoralisation  of  a  nation's  life.  Modesty,  simplicity, 
self-knowledge,  and  a  devout  recognition  of  its  profound  indebtedness  to  the  past— 
these  are  among  the  prime  elements  of  national  wealth  and  prosperity.  And 
Joshua's  was  that  warning  voice  whose  authority  and  experience  and  disinterested 
patriotism,  as  with  all  similar  men  in  all  countries  and  times,  served  as  the  organ 
of  the  national  conscience.  It  served  to  remind  them  that  a  nation  is  not  the 
growth  of  a  day,  that  the  highest  blessings  of  life  are  unattainable  by  our  own 
unaided  efforts,  that  manifold  are  the  forces  which  are  working  in  the  world  to 
produce  the  life  of  each  one  of  us,  and  that  it  is  as  inaccurate  as  it  is  ungrateful 
and  boastful  to  impute  to  ourselves  the  chief  or  the  largest  share  in  the  production 
of  aU  the  good  of  Ufe  that  we  enjoy.  "  I  have  given  you  a  land  for  which  ye  did 
not  labour."  To  every  age  and  period,  as  it  reviews  its  successes  and  takes  stock 
of  its  gains  and  advances,  may  be  addressed  these  words  of  Joshua,  with  deep 
truth  and  significance.  The  conditions  of  life  amid  which  we  live  to-day 
constitute  veritablv  the  promised  land  of  the  many  generations  of  English  and 
Scottish  life  that  have  preceded  us.  In  whatever  way  we  turn  we  have  much  to 
make  us  grateful  for  our  progress,  and  to  inspire  as  with  a  deep  sense  of  that 
providence  whose  guiding  spirit  ig  a  fact  as  real  and  sacred  of  British  history  a* 


CHAP.  xnT.]  JOSHUA.  285 

ever  it  was  of  Hebrew  history.  In  regard  to  the  political  and  social  troubles  of  the 
present — and  they  are  both  many  and  serious — and  in  regard  to  the  conditions  of 
our  human  lite  to-day,  whose  frequent  difi&culty  and  harshness  sometimes  makes 
us  fretful  and  discontented,  I  do  not  know  anything  which  better  tends  to  smooth 
out  these  wrinkles  of  impatient  discontent,  and  to  inspire  us  with  a  feeling  of  our 
large  and  soUd  improvement  in  life,  than  to  take  up,  for  example,  the  history  of 
our  own  country,  say  some  three  or  four  centuries  ago,  and  fixing  your  reading 
and  your  attention  mainly  upon  the  social  condition  of  the  people  ;  upon  the  state 
of  our  commerce  and  all  the  peaceful  arts  ;  upon  the  measure  of  personal  freedom 
in  matters  of  State  or  of  religion  which  was  then  possessed ;  upon  the  character 
of  the  pubUc  health  and  the  amount  of  disease  and  the  averages  of  mortaUty  in 
aU  ranks  ;  upon  the  degree  of  comfort  which  people  had  in  their  dwelling-houses  ; 
upon  the  general  level  of  morality  and  decency  which  the  habits  of  society 
evinced — to  contrast  all  this  with  what  requires  no  special  course  of  reading,  the 
public  and  private  life  of  society  to-day  in  our  land,  its  means  of  intelligence,  its 
measure  of  hberty,  and  all  the  other  distinguishing  quahties  of  our  civilisation 
to-day.  Civilisation,  in  which  word  is  comprehended  art  and  science  and  religion, 
and  refinement  of  manner  and  speech,  and  the  increase  of  material  comfort,  and 
the  spread  of  intelligence,  and  all  things  which  beautify  or  sanctify  our  human  hfe 
and  character,  is  no  mere  production  of  some  one  age  or  country  to  which  now  and 
then  some  Uttle  measure  of  improvement  is  added  at  irregular  and  incalculable 
intervals,  but  is  the  long,  unbroken  movement  of  ascensional  life  going  right  back 
in  its  origins,  into  the  dim,  impenetrable  beginnings  of  human  life  and  society. 
What  is  the  utmost  that  we  to-day  have  done  or  can  do  set  against  the  mighty  sum 
of  the  world's  historical  and  prehistorical  lifel  We  find  the  sense  of  enormous 
indebtedness  in  regard,  for  example,  to  our  religious  possessions.  The  text  reminds 
us  of  how  that  thousands  of  years  ago  an  Eastern  people  were  feeling  their  way  to 
religious  truths  and  ideas  which,  passing  subsequently  through  the  higher  medium 
and  expression  of  Christianity,  absolutely  rule  a  vast  part  of  the  world's  life  to-day. 
We  are  debtors  both  to  the  barbarian  and  the  Greek,  to  the  Gentile  and  to  the  Jew. 
In  regard  to  the  more  restricted  life  of  our  own  country  and  nation,  we  are  the 
sum  and  product  of  a  large  variety  and  infusion  of  forces.  And  in  the  social  order 
of  our  life  there  are  few  of  us  who  need  to  be  reminded  of  how  much  that 
controls  our  hves  to-day  dates  back  to  the  far  and  ahnost-forgotten  past.  Our 
constitutional  hberties  have  been  things  of  slow  accretion.  And  again,  in  the  shape 
and  character  of  our  strictly  personal  life  it  is  no  less  true  that  we  have  entered 
upon  possessions  for  which  we  did  not  labour.  There  is  one  inheritance  at  least 
which  is  every  man's  birthright,  the  accumulated  experience  of  his  race  and 
ancestry.  The  life,  the  conduct,  the  temper,  the  traditions  of  our  ancestry  Uve  in 
us.  When  we  speak  of  a  man  as  coming  from  a  good  stock  or  a  bad  stock  the 
phrase  is  significant  of  how  considerable  is  that  element  of  character  and  tendency 
for  which  we  did  not  labour.  We  are  not  altogether  the  children  of  a  day.  We 
have  taken  a  good  many  centuries  in  making.  Let  me  urge  upon  you  the  duty 
which  these  considerations  bring  before  us  of  maintaining  an  intelligent  sympathy 
with  the  past,  as  an  essential  condition  of  rightly  understanding  and  controlling 
the  present.  It  is  by  Uberally  using  the  vast  stores  of  accumulated  experience  that 
we  have  inherited ;  it  is  by  tracking  our  social  troubles  to  their  roots  in  antecedent 
conditions ;  it  is  by  following  the  hue  of  dogmatic  and  Church  history  to  the 
periods  of  germination  and  bkth,  that  we  shall  be  the  most  effectively  armed  to 
meet  the  difficulties  and  to  discharge  the  duties  which  every  generation  has,  in 
God's  name,  to  manfully  overcome  or  fulfil.  Let  us  not  shrink  from  them.  Again, 
these  considerations  suggest  to  us  the  virtue  and  grace  of  humihty.  "  I  have  given 
you  a  land  for  which  ye  did  not  labour."  "We  are  not  our  own,"  wrote  the 
apostle  ;  "  we  have  been  bought  with  a  price."  We  are  ourselves  but  the  last  link 
in  the  interminable  procession  of  the  human  race.  The  true  lesson  of  history  and 
of  religion  is  to  make  us  feel  how  slight  and  insignificant  is  our  best  work  in 
comparison  with  the  mighty  whole.  It  is  to  inspire  us  with  the  salutary  and 
humbling  feeling  that  our  life  is  being  guided  by  an  infinite  power  and  wisdom, 
who  can  dispense  with  any  one  of  us,  but  who  is  indispensable  to  us.  And  once 
more  :  these  considerations  should  guide  us  in  our  duties  as  regards  that  unknown 
future  which  is  ever  lying  in  front  of  us.  What  we  shall  be  is  being  determined 
by  what  we  are  to-day.  What  the  national  life  will  be  a  century  hence  is,  in  no 
small  measure,  dependent  upon  the  quality  and  pohcy  of  the  national  life  to-day. 
Labour,  then,  in  modest,  self-forgetting  devotion  to  the  will  of  God  and  His 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

abiding  truths,  so  that  the  future  of  the  world's  life  may  be  happier  and  wiser 
and  purer  for  our  lives.  Labour  as  men  who,  by  the  most  absolute  of  necessities, 
will  have  to  give  an  account  of  their  stewardship  of  life.  Finally,  take  stock  of 
your  own  lives,  of  all  that  you  have  passed  through,  of  all  the  blessings  that  have 
crowned  your  days,  of  the  perils  from  which  you  have  escaped,  of  the  temptations 
you  have  resisted,  of  the  vast  stores  of  life  in  which  you  have  found  your  noblest 
nutriment ;  and  say  how  much  of  it  originated  in  your  own  independent  resources 
and  volitions,  and  how  much  of  it  came  from  sources  far  above  and  beyond  any 
power  of  yours.     {J.  Vickery.) 

Vers.  14-29.  Now  therefore  fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  Him. — The  last  days  of 
Joshua : — I.  The  keasonableness  of  serving  God  (vers.  14,  15).  To  serve  God, 
to  obey  Him,  to  love  Him,  to  submit  heart  and  life  to  His  control,  is  only  a  seemly 
and  adequate  acknowledgment  of  claims  felt  to  be  just.  God's  character.  His  mercy. 
His  grace  in  the  gospel,  His  promises  of  pardon,  the  gift  of  eternal  life  through  His 
Son,  create  an  obligation  which,  if  it  be  disregarded,  makes  our  attitude  towards 
God  not  only  sinful,  but  unreasonable.  It  is  inconsistent  with  aU  in  us  that  is  true 
and  noble  and  manly.  This  is  the  paradox  of  sin :  it  makes  one  conscious  of 
placing  an  inferior  good  above  the  superior,  of  seeking  for  dross  and  refusing  the 
gold,  of  plucking  a  bauble  and  rejecting  the  crown.  H.  The  state  of  mind 
KEQUiEED  for  THE  SERVICE  OF  GoD  (veis.  19,  20.)  The  service  of  God  must  be 
born  of  something  more  than  impulse.  It  must  be  the  result  of  choice ;  it 
must  be  the  determined  purpose  of  the  whole  being  to  enter  and  continue  in  a  hfe 
of  obedience.  To  every  one  God  is  saying,  "  Choose  ye  this  day  whom  ye  wiU 
serve."  Many  desire  to  be  Christians,  they  wish  they  were  the  servants  of  God, 
but  they  are  unwilling  to  "  choose  "  to  become  such.  If  for  a  time  they  set  their 
faces  heavenward,  they  soon  turn  back.  When  they  sink  in  the  Slough  of  Despond, 
they  struggle  to  be  free  on  the  side  nearest  the  City  of  Destruction.  Such  need  to 
remember  that,  when  the  service  of  God  is  entered,  the  will  is  to  be  unalterably  set 
towards  Him.  III.  The  right  attitude  for  those  who  propose  to  serve  God. 
"  Joshua  wrote  these  words  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  God,"  &o.  Joshua  well 
understood  the  benefit  arising  from  such  a  formal  enactment.  1.  It  would  be  a 
test  of  the  strength  of  their  purpose.  Often  the  way  to  disclose  the  feebleness  of 
one's  Christian  aims  is  to  bring  them  to  the  test  of  an  open  declaration — to  ask, 
*'  Are  you  willing  that  others  should  know,  that  aU  should  know,  that  you  commit 
yourself  unqualifiedly  to  be  the  Lord's  ?  "  2.  It  would  be  helpful  by  bringing  to 
their  aid  the  motive  of  consistency.  Most  men  desire  to  act  in  harmony  with  their 
past  record.  IV.  The  value  of  a  single  life  devoted  to  the  service  of  God. 
Joshua's  days  are  now  ended.  His  work  is  done,  and  he  is  ready  for  his  reward. 
Few  men  have  lived  so  worthily.  Men  are  needed  everywhere  of  like  decision,  and 
who  are  ready  to  thus  openly  declare  for  God.  Will  you  be  one  ?  (Sermons  by 
the  Monday  Club.)  Joshua,  and  his  zeal  for  the  service  of  the  Lord  : — This 
was  a  great  event,  and  we  ought  to  know  the  secret  of  its  causes.  It  was,  we  see, 
this  old  man  Joshua's  burning,  quenchless  zeal  for  the  service  of  the  Lord,  kindled 
full  five  and  sixty  years  before.  It  led  to  results  worthy  to  rank  with  the  revival 
under  Ezra,  with  the  Pentecost  at  Jerusalem  and  at  Cffisarea,  with  the  conversion 
of  Roman  emperors  and  British  islanders  to  Christianity,  with  the  Eeformation 
and  the  triumphs  of  Wesley  and  Whitfield.  I.  Zeal  for  the  service  of  God  is 
BORN  or  views  which  are  taken  of  God.  This  plainly  was  the  case  with  Joshua ; 
this  was  the  case  with  the  people  also,  and  universally  this  must  be  true.  We  are 
asked  to  view  God  as  creation  presents  Him  (Psa.  xix.).  This  has,  at  least,  the 
merit  of  being  poetry  of  the  highest  school;  it  is  a  thousand  pities  if  it  is  not 
true.  Oh,  does  not  this  vast  fabric  suggest  a  God  ?  Perhaps  not ;  but  we  have 
got  the  suggestion  somehow,  and  to  our  anxious  inquiries  of  her  all  nature  seems 
to  give  back  a  ready  affirmative  response.  We  are  asked  to  view  God  as  He  is 
presented  to  us  in  the  phenomena  of  mind.  One  observes  that  these  mental 
phenomena  taper  away  downwards  to  the  tiniest  forms  of  sentient  life.  One  feels 
that  somehow  it  must  and  does,  in  a  corresponding  manner,  expand  in  its  upward 
way,  and  when  we  have  reached  the  loftiest  heights  of  the  finite  we  seem  to  come 
in  sight  of  the  lowest  rays  of  light  from  the  throne  of  the  Infinite  mind.  Then  if 
the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord,  there  will  be  a  concentration  of  thought  on  Him ; 
our  love  will  be  undivided,  rising  to  suitable  proportions  to  its  Infinite  object.  We 
are  asked  to  see  God  in  His  providence.  This  is  a  name  we  give  to  a  constantly- 
observed  work  resulting  from  an  unseen  Presence.    We  notice  the   perpetual 


CHAP,  xrrv.]  JOSHUA,  287 

operation  of  certain  great  forces  in  nature,  whicli  say  nothing  so  distinctly  as  they 
say  that  they  are  only  the  expressions  of  an  all-comprehending  and  sufficient 
Power  behind  them.  Can  we  connect  this  governing  power  with  that  aU-pervading 
mind,  and  with  the  creating  power  of  which  we  have  spoken  ?  Yes,  I  am  sure  of  it. 
There  are  unattached  threads  in  all.  They  evidently  find  their  complements  in  one 
another.  Then  if  this  is  the  "  God  of  my  life,  throughout  my  days  my  grateful 
powers  shall  sound  His  praise,  my  song  shall  wake  with  opening  light,  and  cheer 
the  dark  and  silent  night. "  But  all  these  are  summed  up  and  expressed  by  the 
Incarnation.  You  are  asked  to  view  God  in  Christ.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at 
any  time  ;  the  only-begotten  Son  hath  declared  Him."  It  is  when  we  view  God  thus 
that  our  zeal  for  His  service  will  rise  and  abound ;  will  flow  forth  and  overflow. 
"  Were  the  whole  realm  of  nature  mine,  that  were  an  offering  far  too  small,  love 
so  amazing,  so  Divine,"  demands  a  house  of  prayer,  a  noble  service.  Christian  toil, 
more  than  we  can  give,  or  think  to  give.     11.  Zeal    for    God's    service    is 

NOURISHED   BY  THE   VIEWS   WHICH   WB   CHERISH   CONCERNING   THE    CHARACTER   OF   THAT 

SERVICE.  Our  experience  and  our  observation  are  faithful  witnesses  hereto. 
Joshua  presents  a  severe  but  accurate  view  of  God's  holiness,  and  then  urges  a 
service  that  shall  perfectly  accord  with  it — a  service  that  was  pure,  and  sincere,  and 
true,  and  grateful.  "Serve  the  Lord,"  said  he,  "in  sincerity  and  truth."  "It  must," 
he  meant  to  say,  "be  service  of  the  heart  rather  than  of  the  hands."  A  service  which 
demands  the  heart  nourishes  the  zeal  born  of  right  conceptions  of  Jehovah.  This 
is  living  bread,  this  is  water  of  life.  Our  God  searcheth  the  heart,  but  we  are  not 
afraid,  we  are  the  more  confident.  The  sacrifices  He  desires  are  the  broken  heart, 
the  contrite  spirit  (Isa.  Ixvi.  1-5).  But  outwardly  and  visibly  it  must  be  pure,  as 
inwardly  it  was  sincere  and  true.  The  oldest  forms  of  God's  service  were  wealthy 
in  sacrifice,  and  prayers,  and  Divine  blessing.  David,  the  Homer,  the  Virgil,  the 
Milton  of  the  Hebrews,  enriched  that  service  by  adding  psalmody  and  music. 
Later  times  added  the  stated  reading  of  the  Scriptures,  and  later  still  we  have  the 
sacraments  and  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel.  Of  our  Christian  ritual,  then,  we 
boldly  say  that  it  supphes  us  with  the  green  pastures  and  still  waters  of  God's 
"Word.  It  has  the  spread  table  of  heaven's  bounties,  if  not  dainties.  It  anoints 
the  devout  worshipper  with  a  holy  oil,  and  gives  him  an  overflowing  cup.  It  is  the 
expression  of  the  goodness  and  mercy  which  foUow  every  step  of  the  pilgrim, 
making  him  glad  to  dwell  in  the  house  of   the  Lord  for  ever.    III.  Joshua's 

ENTHUSIASM     WAS     PERFECTED    BY    HIS     CONVICTION    OF    THE    INFLUENCE     WHICH    THB 

worship  of  God  exerts  on  men.  To  tell  the  history  of  its  influence  on  individuals 
is  to  tell  the  story  of  every  worthy  instance  of  personal  piety.  You  may  seek  for 
them  and  you  will  find  them  among  all  ranks  and  kindreds.  You  may  scan  the 
calendar  of  your  own  history,  and  its  red-letter  days  are  those  you  have  spent  in 
the  service  of  God.  To  teU  its  influence  on  families  would  be  to  write  the  history 
of  the  best  of  earth's  households  and  homes  from  tent  to  palace.  To  these  God 
has  kept  covenant  and  showed  mercy  to  the  fourth  generation.  What  a  heritage 
of  mercy  !  Let  us  in  our  families  see  to  it  that  the  legacy  never  runs  out.  Let 
the  men  of  the  fourth  generation  in  this  descent  remember  what  they  ought  to  do. 
But  how  shall  we  tell  its  historic  influence  on  the  nation  ?  It  has  supphed  the 
place  of  navies ;  invincible  armadas  have  been  scattered  as  forest  leaves  before  it. 
It  has  been  better  than  armies,  than  revenue,  than  police.  (G.  Woolnough.)  In 
sincerity  and  in  truth. — Maria  of  being  sincerely  religious: — Sincerity  is  the 
disposition  of  soul  which  alone  can  recommend  us  to  God,  and  incline  Him  to  look 
with  an  eye  of  mercy  upon  the  errors  and  frailties  of  our  conduct.  I.  If  we 
would  know  whether  we  serve  God  in  sincerity,  let  us  look  with  an  attentive 
EYE  into  our  hearts,  in  order  to  trace  the  true  springs  or  principles  of  our  actions. 
n.  Another  evidence  of  our  serving  God  in  sincerity  is,  when  we  are  as  careful 
TO  PRESERVE  A  GOOD  CONSCIENCE  A3  TO  SAVE  APPEARANCES,  and  act  with  the  samo 
integrity  in  secret,  where  God  is  the  sole  spectator  of  our  actions,  as  when  they  ho 
open  to  the  view  and  observation  of  the  world.  HI.  Another  evidence  of  our 
serving  God  in  sincerity  and  in  truth  is,  when  we  pay  an  equal  regard  to  the 
WHOLE  LAW,  and  mean  not,  by  selecting  some  favourite  duties,  to  compensate  for 
the  habitual  violation  or  neglect  of  others  that  happen  not  to  fall  in  with  our  taste 
and  inclination.  IV.  Another  evidence  of  our  serving  God  in  sincerity  is,  when  we 
BESisT  AND  OVERCOME  TEMPTATIONS ;  f or  to  scrve  God  in  those  instances  only  where 
we  are  not  tempted  to  disobey  is  a  very  defective  test  of  our  integrity.  The 
decisive  proof  is,  when  we  are  faithful  to  our  duty  in  opposition  to  seducements, 
and  reject  every  solicitation  that  offers  to  corrupt  us.    V.  The  last  evidence  I  shall 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  tOHAJ.  xxiT. 

mention  of  our  serving  God  in  sincerity  is,  if,  in  cases  wheke  we  are  doubtful 

OF   THE   OBLIGATION   OR  LAWFULNESS   OF  AN   ACTION,   WE   ALWAYS  INCLINE   TO   DO   WHAT 

APPEARS  MOST  CONFORMABLE  TO  DUTY,  what  will  bcst  answcr  the  ends  of  piety,  and 
be  most  conducive  to  the  honour  of  religion.  (G.  Carr,  B.A.)  Put  away  the 
gods  "Which  your  fathers  served. — An  address  to  image-worshippers : — Here  is  a 
forcible  address  to  every  image-worshipper,  and,  indeed,  every  image-possessor: 
•'  Put  away  these  gods  from  you."  What  have  any  who  own  the  Bible  for  their 
guide  to  do  with  these  vain  and  worthless  toys  of  sin,  these  devices  of  Satan,  and 
degrading  productions  of  ignorance,  the  very  perversions  of  reason,  as  well  as  the 
corruptions  of  revelation?  They  are  everywhere  the  contempt  and  derision  of 
inspired  truth.  To  make  them  is  directly  prohibited,  and  to  destroy  them 
explicitly  commanded,  so  that  it  may  be  matter  of  wonder  how  any  can  plead  for 
their  use,  under  any  plausibility  or  pretence,  as  remembrancers  only  of  spiritual 
and  hidden  realities.  If  in  the  Church  of  the  Old  Testament  the  very  mention  of 
idols,  or  the  keeping  any  representations  of  them,  became  so  offensive  in  the  Divine 
eye,  what  shall  be  said  of  any  rivalship  in  the  heart  in  services  and  worship  offered 
to  saints  or  angels  ?  Supplications  and  sacrifices,  offered  even  to  holy  intelligences, 
must  be  idolatry  in  its  spirit,  equally  offensive  to  God  and  opposed  to  His  Word  as 
the  most  degrading  rites  of  the  heathen.  Oh,  what  false  gods,  what  spiritual 
imagery  is  formed  within  the  chambers  of  the  heart !  Who  does  not  need  to  put 
them  away,  and  to  cleanse  himself  from  the  filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit  1  How 
easily  does  carnal  affection  change  the  best  of  things  into  the  worst !  There  is 
nothing  but,  through  the  corruption  of  imagination  or  sinfulness  of  affection,  may 
become  an  idol  of  the  heart.  Whatever  denies  to  God  supremacy  of  love,  and 
occupies  the  regards  to  be  paid  to  spiritual  and  eternal  realities,  that  is  an  idol  to 
be  put  away  ;  and  happy  are  such  who  can  say,  "  What  have  I  to  do  any  more 
with  idols  ?  "  Choice  enters  into  the  very  nature  of  true  and  sincere  religion,  so 
that  none  serve  the  Lord  cheerfully,  acceptably,  and  with  profit,  whose  heart  ia 
not  itself  a  willing  offering.     (W.  Seaton.) 

Ver.  16.  Choose  you  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve. — The  Christian's  choice : — 
"  Seem  evil  unto  you  to  serve  the  Lord !  "  How  can  the  service  of  the  Lord  seem 
evil  to  any  one  who  is  not  either  wholly  void  of  understanding  or  altogether 
hardened  against  religious  impressions  ?  The  service  of  God  is  exclusive.  It  does 
not  admit  of  interference,  or  of  competition,  or  of  divided  homage.  It  must  have 
the  whole  man.  He  requires  your  whole  heart — with  all  its  principles,  and 
dispositions,  and  sensibilities.  And  if  your  heart  be  thus  surrendered  to  Him,  the 
conduct,  which  is  but  a  demonstration  of  its  influence  and  actings,  will  exhibit,  in 
all  its  departments  and  in  aU  its  bearings  a  single  regard  to  His  will  and  glory. 
Now,  apply  this  test  to  yourselves.  It  is  no  doubt  a  strict  and  searching  one.  But 
it  is  scriptural  and  true.  I.  Choose  you  whom  you  will  serve — the  Lord,  or  those 
idols  which  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief  has  substituted  in  His  place.  You  may  allege 
that  it  does  not  seem  evil  to  you  to  serve  the  Lord.  And,  speculatively,  this  may  be 
true ;  but,  practically,  it  is  false.  You  think,  you  feel,  you  act,  as  if  it  did  seem 
evil  unto  you  to  serve  the  Lord.  There  is  a  latent  repugnance  in  your  minds  to 
His  service.  There  is  a  real  devotedness  to  those  whom  you  ought  not  to  serve  which 
is  essentially  and  irreconcilably  inconsistent  with  a  real  devotedness  to  Him  whom 
you  ought  to  serve.  And  the  idea  that  you  are  submitting  to  His  sway,  when  you 
are,  in  fact,  their  slaves,  merely  because  you  reject  the  atrocious  saying,  that  it  is 
"  evil  to  serve  the  Lord,"  and  are  not  disinclined  to  do  many  things  included  in 
that  service,  is  all  a  delusion,  which,  however  long  it  may  last  in  this  land  of  self- 
deception  and  shadows,  must  inevitably  be  broken.  Now,  it  is  our  wish  that  tliis 
delusion,  so  sad  and  so  fatal,  under  which  you  labour,  should  be  broken  before  the 
day  of  retribution  comes.  You  have  been  "  halting  between  two  opinions " ; 
embrace  one  of  them  and  abide  by  it.  You  have  been  trying  to  amalgamate  two 
systems :  abandon  the  one,  and  cleave  to  the  other.  U.  "  Choose  you  this  day 
whom  ye  wUl  serve."  Having  acknowledged  that  you  have  been  in  error — 
grievous,  perilous  error — why  should  you  delay  forsaking  it  ?  Is  not  this  to  belie 
your  own  professed  convictions?  "Choose  you  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve"; 
and  instead  of  hesitating,  as  if  you  might  still  snatch  another  pleasure  before  you 
renounce  your  connection  with  the  world,  account  t^ie  time  past  as  far  more 
than  sufficient  to  have  wrought  the  wiU  of  the  flesh.  Wonder  at  the  forbearance 
of  God  in  not  making  you  long  since  a  monument  of  His  righteous  anger  against 
the  unholy  and  impenitent.      "Choose  you  this  day  whom  ye   will    serve"; 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  289 

because  the  sooner  that  you  enter  on  God's  service,  in  its  full  import,  the  sooner 
will  you  consult  the  dignity  of  that  rational  nature  which  He  has  given  you,  and 
which  you  have  been  hitherto  degrading.     "  Choose  you  this  day  whom  ye  will 
serve  "  ;    because  to  delay  the  change  which  a  right  choice  implies  wUl  be  the 
means  of  rendering  it  more  difficult  in  the  end.     "  Choose  you  this  day  whom  ye 
wUl  serve  " ;  for  it  you  do  not  embrace  the  existing  opportunity  of  devoting  your- 
selves wholly  and  heartily  to  God,  which  is  your  reasonable  and  bounden  service, 
another  opportunity  may  never  be  afforded.     {A.  Tlwmson,  D.D.)        Promptitude  of 
choice  recommended : — I.  The  act  of  choice.     1.  Our  choice  should  be  Divine  in 
its  object.     We  should  choose  the  Lord  for  our  God.     2.  Our  choice  should  be 
rational   in  its  character.     Let  us  wisely  consider  what  we  are  doing.     3.  Our 
choice  should  be  decisive  in  its  nature.     4.  Our  choice  should  be  practical  in  its 
operations.      Having    chosen    God,    serve    Him — (1)    Totally ;     (2)    uniformly  ; 
(3)  evidently.     U.  The  pekiod  of  choice.     1.  We  should  make  our  choice  this 
day,  because  of  the  criminal  neglect  of  which  we  have  been  guilty.     2.  From  a 
view  of  the  shortness  and  uncertainty  of  our  time.     3.  Because  the  present  is  the 
only  time  when  God  has  promised  the  aid  of  His  Spirit.     4.  Because  the  difficulty 
of  choosing  will  increase  in  proportion  to  our  neglect  of  it.     HI.  The  motives  fob 
CHOICE.      1.  The  capacity  which  we  have  for  choice  is  a  reason  for  its  exercise. 
God  gives  nothing  in  vain.     2.  The  perilous  state  in  which  we  are  without  this 
choice  is  another  motive.     3.  The  happiness  that  results  from  our  choosing  God 
should  prompt  us  to  comply  with  the  requisition  in  the  text.    He  who  has  chosen 
God  is  in  a  state  of  safety  and  tranquillity.     (Sketches  of  Sermons.)        Religion 
voluntary,  personal,  powerful: — I.  Eeligion  is  voluisTAKt.      1.  The  choice,  how- 
ever, is  not  between  religion  and  no  religion.     Man  is  a  religious  being.    EeUgion 
is  as  necessary  to  his  soul  as  breathing  is  to  his   body.     To  be*~reUgious  is  a 
necessity,  but  the  kind  of  religion  adopted  is  a  matter  of  choice.     In  selecting 
religion,   care   should  be  taken   to   understand  fully  the   merits   of   each.     The 
antiquity  and  popularity  of  a  system,  though  they  show  that  such  a  system  ought 
to  be, examined,  are  in  themselves  no  arguments  in  favour  of  its  truth.     Truth  is 
beautiful  though  hated  and  hooted  by  the  majority  of  men.     The  diamond  glitters 
however  mean  the  setting.     Like  the  diamond  and  the  star,  truth  is  beautiful 
everywhere  and  always.     2.  The  choice  of  religion  is  limited  as  to  time :  "  Choose 
you  this  day."     The  present  time  is  God's  time  and  ours  :   "  Now  is  the  acceptable 
time."     We  know  that ;  but  as  for  to-morrow,  as  for  the  future,  we  know  nothing. 
"^    II.  Eeligion  is  peesonai.     He  says,  "Choose  you."    It  cannot  be  done  by  proxy. 
Every  man  must  come  to  God  himself.    III.  Eeligion  is  powerful.    Eehgion  is  life ; 
life  is  example  ;   and  example  is  almost  omnipotent.     The  smallest  pebble  cast 
into  the  quiet  pool  causes  a  series  of  undulations,  and  the  smallest  of  these  leaves 
its  impression,  for  millions  of  ages,  on  the  shore ;  so  does  the  feeblest  soul  of  man, 
renewed  by  grace,  make  a  series  of  moral  impressions  on  the  world — impressions 
whose  record  will  be  legible  throughout  aU  eternity.     (Evan  Lewis,  B.A.)         On 
choosing  the  service  of  God : — It  is  an  act  of  choice,  of  preference,  to  which  you  are 
called ;  one  of  the  most  familiar,  every-day  acts  of  the  mind.     You  are  called  to 
change  masters  ;  to  renounce  the  world  as  your  portion  and  to  choose  God  as  your 
portion  ;  to  submit  to  His  authority  and  control,  and  henceforth  live,  not  to  your- 
self, but  to  Him  who  died  for  you  and  rose  again.    And  this  act  of  choice  or  prefer- 
ence is  of  the  nature  of  a  supreme,  governing  purpose  of  the  mind — such  a  pui-pose 
as  gives  direction  to  the  current  of  feeling  and  desire  in  the  soul.     1.  Is  it  not  right 
.  that  you  should  choose  God  as  your  portion  and  His  service  as  that  which  should 
engage  your  supreme  regards  ?     He  is  in  Himself  a  being  of  boundless  excellence 
and  glory ;  your  creator,  preserver,  benefactor,  and  ruler.     2.  The  duty  in  question  is 
enjoined  by  express  command  of  God.     3.  This  is  a  duty  which  perfectly  accords 
with  the  nature  and  destiny  of  the  intelligent,  immortal  mind  with  which  the  Creator 
has  endued  you.    4.  The  choice  of  God,  as  the  being  whom  you  will  serve,  is  the 
sum  and  substance  of  reUgion ;  and  you  ought  all  to  be  religious ;  friends  of  God 
and  followers  of  the  Saviour.    5.  Every  man  must  choose  either  God  or  the  world 
as  his  portion ;  and  according  as  he  chooses  the  one  or  the  other,  so  is  his  character 
in  the  sight  of  God,  and  his  condition  in  eternity.     6.  There  is  nothing  either 
within  or  without  you  which  need  prevent  your  choosing  the  service  of  God.    He 
who  knows  perfectly  your  frame,  your  intellectual  and  moral  faculties,  and  aU  the 
circumstances  of  your  condition — He,  the  God  who  made  and  upholds  you  in  bein.<^, 
calls  you  to  enter  into  His  service,  to  choose  Him   as  your  Lord   and  portion. 
7.  The  service  of  God  is  the  highest  glory  of  your  nature,  the  most  peiiecc  ircc^x^xu 

19 


>i 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxir. 

ot  rational  moral  beings ;  the  surest  and  most  abundant  source  of  inward  comfort 
and  outward  prosperity.  It  exalts  those  who  are  devoted  to  it  to  an  alliance  with 
the  purest  and  noblest  beings  in  the  universe,  with  prophets  and  apostles,  and 
glorified  spirits  in  heaven ;  with  ministering  angels  on  high,  and  with  God  Himself, 
the  supreme  good.  It  sets  the  soul  upon  an  endless  career  of  improvement  in  all 
that  is  worthy  and  good,  opens  before  it  bright  visions  of  heavenly  glory,  secures 
God's  presence  and  favour  for  its  support  and  guidance  while  passing  through 
this  world  ;  brings  Divine  comforts  into  the  bosom  in  the  hour  of  death,  and 
finally  exalts  to  everlasting  rewards  in  heaven.     {J.  Hawes,  D.D.)         Our  choice  : — 

1.  Serve  the  Lord  because  of  his  goodness.  II.  Serve  the  Lord  because  of  His 
WONDROUS  MEF.cy.  HI.  Servc  the  Lord  because  of  His  love.  Let  His  love  in 
dying  for  us  cause  us  to  serve  the  Lord.  IV.  Serve  Him  because  of  His  providence. 
V.  Serve  the  Lord  also  because  of  His  saxvation.  (IF.  Birch.)  Serving  the 
Lord  : — I.  True  religion  is  a  service  to  the  Lord.  How  well  this  was  under- 
stood under  the  old  dispensation  by  truly  good  men  !  The  Lord  was  set  foremost 
as  the  aim  of  all  piety,  not  man.  If  you  are  in  another's  service  you  do  not  follow 
your  own  wishes,  but  his  ;  you  do  not  aim  to  please  yourself,  but  him ;  your 
business  is  to  help  him  and  promote  his  interests.  U.  The  beginning  of  religion 
IN  THE  HEART  IS  WITH  THE  CHOICE  OF  THAT  SERVICE.  Shall  Christ  havc  dominioH 
over  you  or  the  world  ?  Who  has  the  first  right  ?  What  says  reason  ?  what  says 
conscience  ?  what  says  the  voice  of  your  immortal  interests  ?  Thus  deliberates  the 
soul  in  the  crises  of  its  history.  All  j)ersons  are  to  be  addressed  in  this  matter  as 
free  moral  agents.  III.  To  some  persons  it  seems  an  evil  thing  to  choose  thb 
Lord's  service.  1.  One  reason  is  that  which  Joshua  gives  in  the  lesson :  "  Ye 
cannot  serve  the  Lord,  for  He  is  a  holy  God."  To  choose  His  service  is  to  renounce 
Bin.  This  is  the  secret  of  many  irreligious  lives.  2.  It  seems  evil  to  give  up  idol- 
worship.  3.  There  is  a  mortification  of  pride  in  the  choice  of  God's  service  which 
often  seems  evil.  IV.  Whether  it  seems  good  or  evil  to  choose  the  Lord's  ser- 
vice, THERE  is  a  necessiti  OF  CHOOSING,  AND  OF  CHOOSING  NOW.  1.  Thosc  Israelites 
were  to  weigh  the  fact  that  they  did  that  day  make  some  choice.  That  is  the  serious 
dilemma  of  every  awakened  soul.  You  are  under  the  necessity  of  preferring  the 
Bervice  of  God  or  some  other.  2.  The  more  important,  then,  to  note  that  the 
choice  of  to-day  is  likely  to  be  that  of  to-morrow  and  all  time  to  come.  3.  Last, 
but  not  least  of  all,  your  choice  wiU  have  a  controlling  effect  on  others.  "  As  for 
me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord."  What  a  lesson  to  all  who  are  in 
high  places !  What  an  example  for  men  of  prominence  in  every  community ! 
What  an  admonition  to  every  father  of  a  family!  How  wide-reaching  is  the 
influence  of  such  persons  over  the  decision  of  others  I  {TV.  E.  Knox,  D.D.) 
The  only  alternative  : — There  are  few  delusions  more  fatal,  and  yet  more  common, 
than  that  of  persons  labouring  to  negotiate  a  treaty  betwixt  the  service  of  sin  and 
the  service  of  holiness,  striving  to  reconcile  the  claims  of  Christianity  with  the 
claims  of  the  world.  In  many  cases  of  every-day  life,  neutrality  is  not  only  lawful, 
but  commendable.  But  it  is  far  otherwise  in  matters  of  religion  and  in  the  high 
interests  of  immortality.  Here  no  reserve  can  be  admitted — no  demur  or  debate 
Banctioned — no  discreet  caution  allowed.  I.  The  two  sides  of  the  alternative 
proposed.  1.  The  first  particularised  is  the  tragical  or  fatal  side.  If  you  choose 
this  day  to  give  yourselves  up  to  the  thrall  of  your  turbulent  passions,  and  to 
become  the  slaves  of  all  ungodliness,  then  drown  every  rising  conviction,  strangle 
in  the  birth  all  boding  apprehensions  and  all  gloomy  forecastings  of  the  future. 

2.  But  if  you  choose  an  opposite  course,  if  you  prefer  the  service  of  Jehovah  to  the 
service  of  Satan,  the  pleasures  of  holiness  to  the  pleasures  of  unrighteousness,  then 
stand  not  for  a  moment  in  fatal  hesitation,  but  range  yourselves  at  once  under  the 
standard  of  the  Cross  and  resign  yourselves,  without  reserve  and  without  condition, 
to  the  faith  and  obedience  of  the  gospel,  to  the  love  and  service  of  Christ.  Let 
everything  bear  attestation  to  the  fact  that  you  consider  you  have  a  work  to  execute 
of  great  diinculty  and  of  infinite  importance,  on  the  issue  of  which  the  wliole  burden 
of  the  destinies  of  endless  ages  is  staked,  and  therefore  you  cannot  p-imit  your 
attention  to  be  for  a  moment  diverted  away  from  this  one  grand  and  all-absorbing 
business  of  your  existence,  or  your  faculties  to  be  engrossed  by  an  inferior  object, 
II.  The  special  time  when  this  option  is  to  be  made  and  this  decision  come 
to:  "  Choose  ye  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve."  In  every  relation  and  condition  of 
human  life  much  depends  on  the  cultivation  of  favourable  junctures  and  the 
improvement  of  propitious  moments.  The  greatest  revolutions  that  have  taken 
place,  the  most  splendid  victories  that  have  been  won,  and  the  most  permanent 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  291 

conquests  that  have  been  achieved,  have  all  depended  upon  a  judicious  estimate 
and  critical  application  of  time.  If  it  be  true  what  a  writer  has  observed,  "  that  it 
is  possible  to  live  a  thousand  years  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,"  it  holds  stUl  truer, 
that  a  few  minutes  lost  or  unproved  may  decide  the  complexion  of  our  whole 
destiny  for  eternity.  Seeing,  then,  that  there  is  equal  hazard  and  criminality  in 
every  moment's  delay,  in  a  business  so  critical  and  so  momentous  as  the  restoration 
of  the  soul  to  God's  favour  and  image,  and  the  insurance  of  its  eternal  well-being,  we 
would  with  all  earnestness  press  it  upon  you  as  your  first,  your  predominant,  and 
your  ultimate  interest,  to  give  yourselves  to  God  now,  to  give  yourselves  to  God  wholly, 
and  to  give  yourselves  to  God  for  ever.  {Joseph  Sommerville.)  God's  service  as  a 
choice: — "Choose."  God  speaks  this  word  to  every  man  amid  the  thunders  of 
Sinai  and  the  pleadings  of  Calvary.  1.  Christianity  is  a  religion  of  reason, 
hitelligence,  not  of  authority  and  force ;  it  appeals  to  motives ;  it  sets  right  and 
wrong,  life  and  death,  before  every  man's  mind  and  calls  upon  him  to  choose 
between  them.  2.  The  choice  is  voluntary.  No  deception  is  used,  and  no 
compulsion  of  any  kind.  God  never  coerced  a  creature's  will,  and  He  never  wUl, 
even  to  save  him  !  3.  The  choice  in  all  cases  is  a  personal  one,  in  view  of 
motives  :  "  Choose  you,"  &c.  Each  soul  will  decide  his  course  and  destiny,  and 
will  be  required  to  give  account  of  himself  at  the  judgment.  4.  Every  one  is  at 
liberty  to  decline  God's  service  just  the  same  as  he  is  to  enter  it;  but  to  refuse  is 
to  choose.  Not  to  serve  Christ  is  to  serve  the  devil.  5.  Hence  the  entire  responsi- 
,bility  of  choosing  rests  on  each  individual's  mind.  {J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.) 
i. Rei^snns  for  choosing  God's  service: — 1.  Justice  and  equity  imperiously  demand 
this  of  us.  2.  The  claims  of  gratitude  join  in  enforcing  it.  3.  The  mysteries  of 
redemption.  4.  Our  best  interests  are  necessarily  involved  in  it.  (The  Fulpit.) 
Joshua's  permission  and  determination  : — I.  First  as  to  the  permission.  There  is  no 
leave  given — and  this  we  wish  to  be  well  observed — for  the  renouncing  religion 
altogether,  but  only  of  choosing  between  the  true  and  the  false.  Joshua  does  not 
say,  "  Choose  whether  ye  will  have  the  Lord  or  no  God  " ;  but,  "  "Whether  ye  will  have 
the  Lord  or  the  gods  of  the  idolaters."  But  we  may  not  suppose  that  Joshua  here 
distinguishes  atheism  from  idolatry,  as  though  the  people  might  choose  idolatry 
with  a  less  degree  of  guiltiness  than  atheism.  He  only  assumes  a  broad  principle, 
which  the  experience  of  mankind  has  all  along  verified,  namely,  that  a  nation 
must  have  some  religion,  and  that  they  will  worship  false  gods  if  they  do  not 
v/orship  the  true.  And  then  observe,  in  respect  of  this  permission,  that  it  does  not 
argue  indifference  on  the  part  of  Joshua  as  to  the  religion  which  the  people  might 
adopt.  He  leaves  them  indeed  free  to  make  their  election ;  but  still  he  takes  the 
most  effectual  mode  of  recommending  truth  to  their  acceptance.  His  declaration 
as  to  the  religion  which  he  himself  would  uphold  was  the  giving  all  his  influence 
to  the  side  of  righteousness ;  and  it  were  not  easy  to  imagine  a  more  dexterous, 
and  at  the  same  time  a  more  powerful,  method  of  bringing  the  Israelites  to  vow 
allegiance  to  God  than  thus  leaving  them  their  choice,  whilst  he  gave  the  weight 
of  his  own  example  to  the  cause  which  he  desired  to  support.  And  yet  there  is 
more  than  this  to  be  advanced  with  regard  to  the  apparent  refusal  of  Joshua  to 
interfere  otherwise  than  by  example  with  the  national  religion.  It  would  be  easy 
to  misrepresent  the  permission  in  question — to  construe  it  into  an  intimation  that 
in  matters  of  religion  rulers  should  leave  a  people  altogether  to  themselves  ;  but  if 
you  consider  the  circumstances  of  the  Jewish  nation  when  Joshua  delivered  the 
address  you  will  perceive  that  toleration  is  the  only  thing  enjoined,  and  not  the 
non-interference  of  rulers  with  religion.  The  Jews  were  not  without  an  established 
religion  when  Joshua  bade  them  choose  between  truth  and  error.  Their  rulers, 
acting  under  the  immediate  direction  of  God,  had  woven  a  system  of  worship  into 
all  the  national  institutions,  and  provided,  by  every  possible  means,  for  the  instruc- 
tion of  the  people  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  Rulers  cannot  interfere  with  conscience, 
and  having  established  what  they  know  to  be  the  true  religion,  and  determining  to 
uphold  it  by  their  example,  toleration,  and  not  persecution,  is  their  business. 
Therefore  "  choose  you  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve"  ;  decide  whether  ye  will  be 
worshippers  of  Jehovah  or  idolators  with  the  Amorites.  The  mtrepid  leader  of 
Israel's  thousands  resolved,  even  if  deserted  or  opposed  by  his  countrymen,  that  he 
would  remain  staunch  in  his  loyalty  to  Jehovah.  He  had  satisfied  himself  as  to 
the  nature  and  demands  of  true  religion  ;  and  if  none  had  espoused  the  same  side, 
his  purpose  was  fixed — to  stand  alone  in  the  championship  of  truth.  This  was 
sublime,  because  moral  heroism ;  and  Joshua  was  not  a  thousandth  part  as  glorious 
when  crossing  the  Jordan  as  the  captain  of  the  Lord's  host,  or  bidding  the  sun 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rsir. 

stand  arrested  in  the  firmament  as  when,  contemplating  the  possibility  of  national 
apostasy,  with  the  image  before  him  of  the  tribes  whom  he  had  led  on  to  victory 
abandoning  the  God  who  had  fought  all  their  battles,  he  uttered  the  permission 
and  the  resolve — "  Choose  you  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve ;  but  as  for  me  and  my 
house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord."  II.  Now,  we  had  intended  to  speak  at  length  on 
Joshua's  determination,  as  we  have  done  on  his  peraiission  ;  but,  in  handling  the 
one,  we  have  touched  on  most  of  the  points  suggested  by  the  other.  The  wisdom, 
for  example,  of  Joshua's  choice  is  demonstrated  by  the  insufficiency  of  the  reasons 
which  were  likely  to  produce  a  different  choice  in  the  Israelites.  Neither  the 
antiquity  nor  the  extent  of  idolatry  could  justify  its  adoption  ;  and  if,  therefore,  the 
ranks  of  idolaters  were  swelled  by  accessions  from  God's  professed  people,  there 
would  be  nothing  to  warrant  a  change  of  purpose  in  Joshua  ;  and  it  would  still  be 
his  wisdom,  though  it  would  ask  great  courage  to  act  on  the  principle  that  the  Lord 
alone  should  be  worshipped.  Hence  the  wisdom  of  the  determination  requires  no 
proof,  whilst  its  boldness  may  well  put  us  to  the  blush,  when  deterred,  as  we  often 
are,  by  a  frown  or  a  sneer,  from  avouching  ourselves  the  resolved  servants  of  God. 
(H.  Melvill,  B.D.)       The  evil  and  danger  of  fiddeness  in  religion : — I.  An  intimation 

OF  THE  DANGER  THERE  IS  THAT  A  GREAT  PART  OF  THE  WORLD  MAT  GROW  WEART  OP 
RELIGION,  EVEN  WHILST  IT  IS  TAUGHT  IN  SIMPLICITY  ANT)  TRUTH.  11.  An  ADMONITION 
THAT  SUCH  AS  ABE  DISPOSED  TO  THROW  OFF  THE  BONDS  OF  DUTY  TO  THEIR  MaKER 
WOULD  THINK  SERIOUSLY  WHAT  SORT  OT  CHANGE  THEY  ARE  ABOUT  TO  VENTURE  UPON, 
AND  HOW  THEY  HOPE  TO  BE  GAINERS  BY  IT.  III.  ThE  RESOLUTION  WHICH  PRUDENT 
MEN  WILL  MAKE,  WHATEVER  OTHERS  DO,  TO  CONTINUE  IN  THE  PRACTICE  OF  IT  THEM- 
SELVES, AND  PRESERVE   A    CONSCIENTIOUS    REGARD    TO    IT  AMONGST  ALL  THAT  ARE  PLACED 

UNDER  THEIR  INSPECTION.  [ArcJibp.  Secker.)  National  religion  : — 1.  It  is  here 
supposed  that  a  nation  must  be  of  some  religion  or  other.  Joshua  does  not  put 
this  to  their  choice,  but  takes  it  for  granted.  2.  That  though  religion  be  a  matter 
of  choice,  yet  it  is  neither  a  thing  indifferent  in  itself  nor  to  a  good  governor,  what 
religion  his  people  are  of.  3.  That  true  religion  may  have  several  prejudices  and 
objections  against  it :  "  If  it  seem  evil  unto  you  to  serve  the  Lord  "  ;  intimating 
that,  upon  some  accounts,  and  to  some  persons,  it  may  appear  so.  4.  That  the  true 
religion  hath  those  real  advantages  on  its  side,  that  it  may  safely  be  referred  to 
any  considerate  man's  choice.  5.  The  example  of  princes  and  governors  hath  a 
very  great  influence  upon  the  people  in  matters  of  religion.  {Archbp.  Tillotson.) 
Choose  God  now — a  sermon  to  children: — I.  Choose.  The  melancholy  majority  of 
men  never  did  choose  their  course  of  life,  but  have  been  content  to  take  it  from 
circumstances,  from  accident,  from  teachers,  from  outward  influences  in  which 
they  happened  to  find  themselves.  And  although  they  may,  step  by  step,  have 
chosen  immediate  action  for  immediate  results,  what  a  host  of  people  there  are 
that  never  set  clearly  before  them  the  definite  aim  for  which  they  were  living. 
Choose.  Standing  as  you  do  at  the  parting  of  the  ways,  get  a  clear  notion  of  what 
you  are  aiming  at,  and  do  not  let  yourselves  be  moulded  by  mere  accident ;  do  not 
let  yourselves  be  mere  children  of  impulse ;  do  not  owe  the  shape  of  your  lives  to 
the  pressure  of  circumstances ;  do  not  let  yourselves  be  ruled  by  the  moment's 
inclination  ;  do  not  be  like  the  weeds  in  the  stream,  that  move  only  as  it  flows. 
Do  not  be  like  the  jelly-fishes  in  the  sea,  that  have  no  locomotion,  or  next  to  none, 
who  are  borne  along  helplessly  in  the  current.  "  Be  a  hammer,  and  not  an  anvil," 
Choose  !  Do  not  let  the  world  shape  you.  Exercise  your  will,  your  reason,  your 
conscience.  Formulate  your  purposes,  say  to  yourselves  what  you  mean  to  be  and 
to  do  ;  and  say  it  strongly,  for  this  world  is  no  place  for  weaklings ;  and  wishes  and 
inclinations  and  good  intentions  are  all  very  well,  but  they  are  not  enough.  Will 
and  choose,  and  in  the  name  of  God  choose  the  right.  II.  Choose  God.  I  mean 
choose  the  God  that  has  come  near  to  you  in  the  Saviour  that  has  loved  you  and 
lived  for  you  and  died  for  you  ;  and  give  your  hearts  up  to  Him  to  be  cared  for,  to 
be  blessed,  and  your  spirits  to  Him  to  be  cleansed,  and  to  be  saved  ;  and  then, 
yielding  yourselves  to  Christ,  you  will  have  taken  God  for  your  portion.  Contrast 
for  one  moment  the  objects  that  are  set  before  you  for  your  love,  trust,  and  service. 
And  opposite  :  what  a  rabble  of  bestial  divinities  !  Surely  there  need  be  no  question 
where  a  man's  heart  may  fold  its  wings,  like  a  weary  dove,  and  rest  for  evermore. 
For  not  only  is  there  a  contrast  between  the  objects,  but  there  is  also  a  contrast 
between  the  results.  III.  Choose  God  now.  It  can  never  be  too  soon  to  do  what 
is  right  and  noble  ;  it  can  never  be  too  soon  to  do  what  is  duty  and  safety.  And 
let  me  tell  you  four  reasons  why  I  pray  you  this.  First,  the  peril  of  delay.  It  is 
not  likely  that  many  of  you  will  be  laid  in  your  graves  before  this  day  next  year  ; 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  293 

it  is  certain  that  some  of  you  will.  And  because  no  hand  can  point  to  the  one  that 
will,  let  us  all  listen  to  the  beseeching,  "  Choose  you  this  day  whom  ye  will  serve." 
Second,  because  of  the  rapidly  increasing  difficulty  of  making  a  choice,  which  is  a 
c'&ange.  When  the  clay  is  on  the  potter's  wJtieel  the  lightest  touch  of  the  finger 
can  impress  it  with  any  form  that  he  desires  ;  when  it  is  taken  off  and  hardened, 
nothing  will  change  the  shape  of  the  vase  but  smashing  it  to  fragments.  Thirdly, 
because  of  the  loss  that  you  sustain  by  delay.  Why  should  you  be  another  day 
without  the  best  blessing  that  a  man  can  have  ?  Why  should  you  be  another  day 
poorer  than  you  need  to  be  ?  Fourthly,  because  of  the  bitter  fruits  which  you  are 
laying  up  for  yourselves  by  delay.  If  "ever  you  come  to  Christ.  I  would  have  you 
"  innocent  of  much  transgression."  I  would  have  you  to  "  grow  up  in  the  nurture 
and  admonition  of  the  Lord,"  that  you  may  never  have  to  look  back,  in  the  event 
of  a  late  return  to  Him,  on  a  life  all  given  to  idols,  consumed  for  self  and  wasted 
by  sin.  (A .  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Moral  masterhoods  : — I.  All  men  have  some  moral 
MASTER.  The  moral  monarch  of  the  soul  is  the  object  of  its  supreme  regard ;  the  pre- 
dominant love  evermore  sways  the  soul.  11.  The  moral  master  is  always  the  object 
OF  CHOICE.  No  soul  is  coerced  into  the  service  of  any  object.  III.  The  sooner  men 
choose  their  moral  master  the  better.  1.  Because  a  wrong  moral  master  will  ruin 
you.  2.  Because  there  is  only  one  right  moral  Master — the  Supreme  One.  (Homilist.) 
Religion  founded  on  reason  and  the  right  of  private  judgment : — I.  I  observe  that 
RELIGION  IS  A  VOLUNTARY  THING  AND  A  MATTER  OF  CHOICE.  FoT  mankind  are  beiugs 
endued  with  reason  and  liberty,  and  this  alone  makes  them  capable  of  religion  and 
virtue.  Without  these  powers  they  would  be  upon  a  level  with  brute  creatures,  and 
it  is  the  right  or  wrong  exercise  of  them  that  constitutes  the  moral  good  or  evil  of 
actions.  II.  We  may  infer  from  the  text  that  no  man  can  be  obliged  to  embrace 
A  RELIGION  that  IS  EVIL,  i.e.,  Contrary  to  reason  and  the  moral  fitness  of  things  ;  but, 
on  the  contrary,  is  bound  to  reject  it.  If  any  scheme  of  religion  undermines  the 
perfections  of  God,  which  the  reason  of  our  minds  can  demonstrate  from  certain 
principles,  it  cannot  be  true.  Again,  that  scheme  of  religion  must  necessarily  be 
false,  and  ought  to  be  rejected  with  detestation,  which  dissolves  or  weakens  the 
obligations  to  universal  purity,  and  tends  to  licentiousness  and  vice.  And  though 
religion  must  be  a  voluntary  thing  and  a  matter  of  choice,  it  is,  however,  our  duty,  in 
order  to  the  making  this  choice,  to  be  diligent  and  impartial  in  our  inquiries. 
For  the  great  Author  of  our  nature  hath  endued  it  with  such  faculties,  as  are 
proper  to  distinguish  betwixt  truth  and  error,  and  appear  to  have  been  given  us  for 
this  very  purpose.  There  is  also  a  fixed  and  certain  standard  of  truth  in  the 
reason  of  things  which,  in  all  cases  of  importance  and  necessary  influence  upon 
our  happiness,  is  sufficiently  clear  and  explicit  to  well-disposed  minds.  And  again, 
though  we  may  with  safety  reject  a  religion  that  is  unreasonable,  that  patronises 
vice,  and  is  dishonourable  to  Almighty  God,  yet  it  must  be  allowed  that,  in  order 
to  our  being  able  to  judge  whether  it  deserves  that  character  or  no,  we  must  care- 
fully and  calmly  examine  it.  III.  We  should  learn,  from  Joshua's  example,  to  be 
faithful  to  the  cause  of  God  and  the  interest  of  religion  and  virtue  even  in 
times  of  most  general  corruption  and  depravity.  Singularity  in  things 
indifferent  may  generally  perhaps  be  an  argument  of  weakness  and  folly,  or  of 
unbecoming  stiffness  and  obstinacy  ;  but  men  have  carried  the  argument  much  too 
far  when  they  have  paid  so  great  a  compliment  to  custom  as  to  urge  it  against  the 
practice  of  virtue  itself.  For  the  obligations  of  virtue  are  upon  no  considerations 
whatsoever  to  be  dispensed  with,  much  less  for  a  piece  of  foolish  fawning  com- 
plaisance, and  a  man  of  reason  would  never  consent  to  do  a  thing  that  was  really 
dishonourable  for  the  sake  of  avoiding  undeserved  reproach.  Again,  to  dare  to  be 
singularly  good  is  an  argument  of  great  resolution  and  strength  of  mind,  and  of  a 
confirmed  and  established  virtue :  for  such  must  that  virtue  be  which  repels  the 
contagion  of  Ul-examples,  and  flags  not  at  reproaches  and  ill-treatment.  IV.  I 
shall  conclude  all  with  observing  that  the  design  of  Joshua,  to  use  his 
utmost  credit  and  influence  with  his  more   immediate  dependents  for  the 

SUPPORT  AND  maintenance  OF  RELIGION,  WAS  TRULY  NOBLE  AND  GENEROUS,  AND 
WHAT    IT    WILL    BE    HIGHLY    FOB    THE    HONOUR    OF    EVERY    ONE    OF    US     TO     IMITATE. 

(Jamef  Foster.)  Joshua's  proposition  and  resolution : — First,  Joshua  took  it 
for  granted  that  a  nation  must  have  a  religion  of  one  sort  or  other.  His 
whole  address  is  built  upon  this  principle;  and  if  there  had  been  a  middle 
way  between  serving  the  God  of  Israel  and  serving  other  gods,  his  discourse  would 
have  been  inconclusive.  Some  have  pretended  that  a  society  of  atheists  might  be 
tolerably  good,  and  regulated  by  humane  motives,  by  present  rewards  and  punish- 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  ixiv. 

ments,  by  shame,  disgrace,  fear,  honour,  good-nature,  reputation,  and  self-interest. 
But  this  cannot  be.  Take  away  religion,  and  you  take  away  with  it  the  influence 
of  conscience  and  the  strongest  motives  to  social  duties.  Nothing  remains  on 
which  mutual  reliance  can  be  firmly  grounded.  All  will  be  done  in  compUance 
with  external  power,  and  every  law  will  be  disregarded,  when  it  may  be  done  with 
secrecy  or  impunity  and  with  any  present  pleasure  or  profit.  Religion,  then,  is  a 
matter  of  deliberation  and  choice.  Amidst  the  diversity  of  opinions  and  of 
worship  which  divide  the  world,  to  walk  at  hazard  in  the  first  path  that  Ues  before 
us,  and  to  which  birth  and  education  direct  us,  and  to  continue  boldly  in  it  without 
any  sort  of  conviction  that  it  is  the  right  way,  this  is  not  the  behaviour  of  a 
rational  agent.  God  will  be  loved  freely  and  unconstrainedly,  and  served  by 
choice  and  preference.  He  requires  a  reasonable  service,  and  man  being  a  rational,  a 
free  agent,  ought  to  be  able  to  give  some  account  and  some  reason  for  his  belief 
and  his  actions,  and  to  be  afraid  to  compare  truth  and  falsehood,  God  and  an  idol, 
and  to  examine  which  deserves  the  preference,  is  doing  wrong  to  God  and  to  His 
truth.  A  third  remark  is  upon  the  time  when  this  is  to  be  done.  There  is  an  age 
of  life,  and  there  are  occasions,  when  every  one  should  resolve  and  make  his 
choice.  "Choose  you  this  day,"  says  Joshua.  To-day,  with  every  person,  is  the  time 
when  his  understanding  is  mature  and  opportunities  offer.  In  a  Christian  nation 
everything  invites  us  to  remember  our  Creator— the  voice  of  conscience,  the  example 
of  the  wise  and  good,  and  the  public  religion.  Here  is  another  thing  observable  in 
the  text.  Joshua  supposeth  that  the  Israelites  might  be  weary  of  serving  God,  and 
think  His  laws  to  be  an  unsupportable  burden.  If  it  seem  evil  to  you  to  serve  the 
Lord,  how  can  it  seem  evil  to  any  rational  creature  to  serve  the  true  and  the  hving 
Lord  ?  But  consult  experience  and  matter  of  fact,  and  you  will  find  that  men  have 
often  been  disgusted  at  truth,  and  weary  of  a  reasonable  service.  Thence  the 
inconstancies,  rebellions,  idolatries,  and  apostasies  of  the  Jewish  nation.  True 
rehgion  hath  its  dilficulties  and  its  dark  side,  and  in  some  respects  may  be  dis- 
agreeable. False  religions  have  in  some  respects  more  allurements,  are  more  easy, 
and  more  accommodated  to  indolent  inattention,  to  carnal  and  corrupted  minds. 
And  yet,  notwithstanding  these  advantages  of  error,  no  reasonable  person  can  make 
it  a  doubt  which  ought  to  be  preferred.  Religion  hath  its  difficulties  relating  both 
to  faith  and  to  practice,  both  to  the  understanding  and  to  the  heart.  As  to  faith, 
it  contains  things  hard  to  be  received  by  worldly-minded  persons.  I  observed  before 
that  false  religions  may  in  many  respects  be  more  agreeable  than  the  true  one  to 
persons  of  a  carnal  and  sensual  temper.  Joshua  supposed  that  the  religion  of  the 
Chaldeans  or  of  the  Canaanites  might  appear  such  to  the  people  of  Israel,  when 
he  said  to  them,  "  If  you  will  not  serve  the  Lord,  choose  whether  you  will  serve  the 
gods  of  your  forefathers  or  the  gods  of  the  nations  where  you  now  dwell."  Here, 
then,  were  two  false  religions  to  choose  out  of.  Both  might  please  them  by  their 
antiquity  ;  and  as  to  that  of  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine,  the  Israelites  by  adopting 
it  might  make  themselves  acceptable  to  their  neighbours.  And  both  these  religions, 
though  they  might  have  different  objects  of  worship  or  different  names  for  their 
gods,  agreed  in  this,  that  they  taught  the  worship  of  many  deities  and  the  use  of 
images,  and  such  ceremonies  as  amused  the  senses,  and  required  no  integrity  and 
purity  of  heart.  If  you  consider  all  the  more  remarkable  false  religions  that  have 
been  or  are  in  the  world,  and  all  the  corrupted  systems  of  true  religion,  you  shall 
find  that  they  recommend  themselves  by  one  or  other  of  these  four  privileges  and 
characters — either  antiquity  or  extent  or  ceremonious  pomp,  or  an  accommodation 
to  the  follies  and  vices  of  men.  "  But  as  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the 
Lord."  If  the  doctrines  of  revealed  religion  concerning  the  perfections  and  the 
providence  of  God  and  the  doctrines  of  revealed  religion  taught  us  in  the  gospel 
have  in  them  some  obscurity  and  difiiculty,  it  is  no  more  than  might  justly  be 
expected  from  the  sublime  subject.  All  atheistical  and  idolatrous  systems  are, 
beyond  comparison,  harder  to  be  admitted  by  a  reasonable  man.  The  moral  part 
of  reUgion  is  conformable  to  our  nature;  and  if  it  be  contrary  to  our  dopraved 
incUnations,  that  is  our  own  fault.  Eeligion  hath  motives  to  induce  ns,  examples 
to  direct  us,  assistances  for  our  infirmities,  and  helps  in  time  of  distress ;  and  if 
God  be  a  holy  and  a  jealous  God,  He  is  also  a  God  of  mercy,  who  forgives  and  receives 
the  penitent.  The  boasted  advantages  and  prerogatives  of  false  religions  are  false 
and  unsound  at  the  bottom.  Having  considered  the  wisdom  of  Joshua's  choice,  let 
us  consider  his  person.  He  was  the  prince  of  God's  people,  and,  like  Moses,  had 
the  authority  though  not  the  title  of  king.  Princes  and  rulers  of  nations  are  as 
much  obliged  as  the  meanest  of  their  subjects  to  serve  God.    Their  example  is  of 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  295 

great  consequence,  and  whether  they  walk  in  the  paths  of  virtue  or  of  vice  they 
induce  others  to  walk  after  them.  Observe  also  that  the  prince  of  Israel  answers 
for  himself  and  for  his  family  :  "  I  and  my  house  will  serve  the  Lord."  He  was  a 
wise  and  a  happy  man  ;  happy  to  be  so  fuUy  assured  of  the  good  disposition  of  his 
household.  (J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  An  honourable  servitude  : — There  are  words  which 
will  never  be  popular — as  service,  servant,  master.  They  carry  the  idea  of 
humiliation.  Every  man  seeks  independence  ;  all  aim  for  position  to  be  at  least 
equal  to  the  highest,  the  best.  Yet  service  is  honourable,  if  the  master  is  sufficiently 
honourable.  All  men  are  servants  of  some  master.  "We  are  all  under  authority. 
I.  The  service  of  God  is  the  most  honoueable  in  the  would.    II.  The  hoxoub  is 

TO  BE  SEEN  IN  THE  WOEK  THE  ChEISTIAN   IS    CALLED    UPON    TO    DO.       III.    ObSEEVE    THE 

TREATMENT  RECEIVED  BY  THOSE  WHO  SERVE  GoD.  A  Servant  wishcs  kind,  generous, 
just  treatment.  The  service  of  Satan  is  at  first  pleasant,  then  ends  in  shame  and 
remorse.  Where  is  the  liberty  of  him  who  serves  appetite,  passion  ?  Ask  Lord 
Byron.  Said  he,  "  I  have  not  had  ten  happy  days."  Lord  Chesterfield  declared, 
"I  have  been  the  whole  round  of  pleasure,  and  I  am  disgusted  ;  and  for  myself,  I 
mean  to  sleep  in  my  carriage  for  the  rest  of  my  journey."  Sinners,  you  think  you 
are  free  ;  loaded  with  shackles,  yet  know  it  not.  IV.  The  time  will  come  when  the 
-  FINAL  SETTLEMENT  WILL  BE  MADE.  (G.  E.  Reed.)  Betweeuites  : — I  can  see  where 
I  you  are,  you  betweenites.  The  saints  will  be  ashamed  of  you,  because  you  did  not  join 
'  with  Christ  in  the  day  of  battle,  and  the  adversary  himself  will  despise  you  because 
you  shrank  away  even  from  him.  Be  one  thing  or  the  other.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
A  fatal  decision  : — ^A  young  soldier  from  Glasgow  was  talking  to  a  comrade.  In 
3a'  their  ears  was  the  mufiled  sound,  the  "  Dead  March  in  Saul,"  as  a  comrade  was 
carried  to  his  last  resting-place  ;  and  this  Glasgow  soldier,  converted  up  there  at 
Maryhill,  was  talking  to  his  friend,  and  pleading  with  him  to  come  to  Christ. 
The  young  Highlander  there  in  the  funeral  march  was  terribly  impressed,  and  he 
said,  "  Jack,  I  will  be  a  Christian  when  I  leave  the  service."  He  had  just  nine 
months  to  put  in.  He  said,  "  I  am  determined  to  be  a  Christian  when  I  leave  the 
service."  Ah !  that  was  his  decision.  Next  week  there  came  orders  for  the  79th 
to  embark  for  Egypt.  The  two  friends  were  in  the  march  across  the  sands  to  the 
Arab  encampment  of  Tel-el-Kebir,  marching  side  by  side — the  one  with  the 
acceptance  of  salvation  in  his  heart,  and  the  other  putting  it  off  till  he  should 
leave  the  service.  Softly  did  they  walk  across  these  sands,  silently  did  they  steal 
through  the  darkness  of  midnight  to  the  camp  of  the  slumbering  Arabs  ;  but  the 
sentinels  were  on  the  alert,  and  they  saw  a  flash  of  light,  and  five  hundred  rifles 
from  the  Arab  encampment  poured  their  bullets  on  the  advancing  Highlanders ; 
and  there,  dead  and  cold,  was  the  body  of  the  man  who  put  off  the  acceptance 
till  he  should  leave  the  service.  Oh,  comrade,  what  a  fatal  decision  1  {J.  Robertson.) 
As  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord. — Joshua's  choice  : — I.  If  we  attend 
to  the  writings  of  some,  and  the  manners  of  more,  in  the  present  age,  we  shall 

BE  LED  TO  THINK  THAT  WE  ARE  NOT  TO  SEEVE  EITHER  GoD  OR  MAN  ;    in  a  WOrd,  that  We 

are  born  free  and  independent.  Why,  we  should  not  Uve  six  hours  after  our  birth 
in  such  a  state.  From  the  first  moment  in  which  we  see  hght,  we  depend,  for 
preservation  and  support  on  the  good  offices  of  those  around  us  ;  they  depend  on 
others,  and  all  on  God.  Man  being  thus  dependent,  it  is  but  reasonable  that  he 
should  acknowledge  such  dependence,  and  that  he  should  serve.  U.  Whom  he 
should  serve.  For,  as  the  apostle  has  remarked,  "  there  are  gods  many  and  lords 
many,"  who,  in  different  ages,  have  obtained  the  homage  of  mankind.  The  oldest 
and  first  idolators  worshipped  the  powers  of  nature  instead  of  the  God  of  nature.  The 
world,  with  its  fashions  and  its  follies,  its  principles  and  its  practices,  has  been 
proposed  in  form  to  Unghshmen  as  the  proper  object  of  their  attention  and  devo- 
tion. A  late  celebrated  nobleman  has  avowed  as  much  with  respect  to  himself,  and 
by  his  writings  said  in  effect  to  it,  "  Save  me,  for  thou  art  my  god !  "  At  the  close 
of  life,  however,  his  god,  he  found,  was  about  to  forsake  him,  and  therefore  wag 
forsaken  by  him.  "  I  have  run,"  says  this  man  of  the  world,  "  the  siUy  rounds  of 
;  business  and  pleasure,  and  have  done  with  them  all.  I  have  enjoyed  all  the 
pleasures  of  the  world,  and,  consequently,  know  their  futility,  and  do  not  regret 
their  loss.  I  think  of  nothing  but  killing  time  the  best  I  can  now  he  has  become 
mine  enemy.  It  is  my  resolution  to  sleep  in  the  carriage  during  the  remainder  of 
the  journey."  When  a  Christian  priest  speaks  slightingly  of  the  world  he  is  sup- 
posed to  do  it  in  the  way  of  his  profession,  and  to  decry,  through  envy,  the  pleasures 
he  is  forbidden  to  taste.  But  here,  I  think,  you  have  the  testimony  of  a  witness 
every  way  competeat.    HI.  How  we  are  to  serve  God.    A  concise  way  of  coming 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rur. 

at  this  will  be,  to  reflect  upon  the  qualifications  you  require  in  a  good  servant,  and 
to  see  that  they  be  found  in  yourselves,  considered  as  the  servants  of  God.  These 
qualifications  may  all  be  reduced  to  two — that  he  be  careful  to  know  the  will  of  his 
master  and  diligent  to  do  it.  In  our  inquiries  after  the  will  of  God  we  are  often 
apt  to  be  partial.  We  inquire  after  only  such  parts  of  it  as  may  happen  to  coincide 
with  our  circumstances,  our  situation,  our  tempers,  our  constitutions,  our  interests. 
But  there  are  no  reserves  in  St.  Paul's  question :  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have 
me  to  do  ?  "  Whatever  it  may  be,  whatever  the  difidculties,  whatever  the  conse- 
quences, I  am  ready.  There  is  yet  a  different  error  in  the  conduct  of  mnn.  It  is 
when  they  employ  themselves  to  discover  the  obligations  and  the  failings  of 
others,  entirely  forgetful  of  their  own.  The  last  mistake  that  shall  be  mentioned, 
relative  to  our  inquiries  after  the  will  of  God,  is,  when  we  make  those  inquiries 
as  matter  of  speculation  only,  as  an  amusement  of  the  mind.  {Bp.  Home. ) 
Decision  for  the  Lord  : — I.  First,  let  me  describe  it.  It  means  many  things,  all 
of  which  must  be  wrought  in  us  by  Divine  grace,  or  we  shall  never  possess  them, 
though  we  may  have  their  counterfeits.  1.  Decision  implies,  first,  that  all  hesitation 
is  gone.  You  will  make  no  journey,  0  traveller,  if,  now  that  the  sun  is  in  its  zenith, 
you  do  not  decide  which  way  to  walk  !  Mariner,  your  voyages  will  be  scant  if  you 
much  longer  lie  at  anchor !  The  season  of  favourable  winds  is  passing  away,  and 
yet  your  sail  remains  unfilled  ;  will  you  never  have  solved  the  problem,  "  To  what 
port  shall  I  steer  ?  With  what  cargo  shall  I  load  my  ship  ?  "  Is  our  life  to  end  in 
a  constant  repetition  of  the  question,  "  What  shall  I  be  ?  "  2.  This  state  of  heart 
indicates  superiority  to  the  evil  influence  of  others.  Our  own  understandings  should 
now  be  exercised,  or  else  why  are  they  given  to  us  ?  God  waits  to  guide  us,  but  He 
would  have  us  cry  to  Him,  and  not  follow  the  trail  of  our  fellows.  3.  Eight  decision 
for  God  is  deep,  calm,  clear,  fixed,  well  grounded,  and  solemnly  made.  Joshua  does 
not  speak  his  determination  lightly.  He  speaks  with  immovable  resolve  :  his 
soul  is  anchored  and  defies  all  storms-.-"  As  for  me  and  my  house  we  will,  despite 
crowds  and  customs,  we  will,  despite  temptations  and  trials,  we  will,  despite  idols  or 
devils,  to  the  end  of  the  chapter  serve  Jehovah."  4.  That  resolve  on  the  part  of 
Joshua  was  openly  avowed.  That  is  sorry  courage  which  skulks  behind  the  bushes : 
that  is  poor  loyalty  which  never  utters  the  king's  name  ;  that  is  questionable 
decision  which  dares  not  own  itself  to  be  on  the  Lord's  side.  Are  you  not  ashamed 
of  being  ashamed,  and  afraid  to  be  any  longer  afraid  ?  5.  In  Joshua's  case  his 
resolve  was  not  only  openly  avowed,  but  earnestly  carried  out.  He  was  a  soldier, 
and  if  any  one  had  asked  him,  "  Whose  soldier  are  you,  Joshua  ?  "  he  would  have 
answered,  "I  am  God's  soldier."  "  Whose  battles  do  you  fight?"  "I  fight  the 
battles  of  Jehovah."  "  And  what  is  your  object  in  fighting  ? "  "  To  glorify 
Jehovah."  6.  Joshua's  decision  was  adhered  to  throughout  the  whole  of  his  life. 
He  had  begun  early  in  the  service  of  God,  and  he  never  repented  of  it.  Blessed  are 
they  who  have  this  abiding  thoroughness  in  the  cause  of  the  Lord  their  God. 
II.  Let  me  now  praise  decision.  In  religion  nothing  is  more  desirable  than  to  be 
out-and-out  in  it.  1.  To  enjoy  religion  you  must  plunge  into  it.  To  wade  into  it 
up  to  the  ankles  may  make  you  shiver  with  anxieties,  doubts,  and  questionings,  till 
you  resemble  a  trembling  boy  unwillingly  entering  a  bath  on  a  cold  morning  ;  but 
to  plunge  into  its  depths  is  to  secure  a  glow  of  holy  joy.  The  central  position  in 
religion  is  the  sweetest.  The  nearer  to  God  the  sweeter  the  joy.  2.  Decision  for 
God  enables  a  man  to  direct  his  way.  David  prayed,  "  Lead  me  in  a  plain  path 
because  of  mine  enemies,"  and  the  man  who  has  made  up  his  mind  by  Divine  grace 
that  he  will  serve  the  Lord  has  that  prayer  fulfilled.  3.  This  saves  many  men  from 
temptation.  As  a  giant  walks  along  unconscious  of  the  cobwebs  across  his  path,  so 
does  a  thoroughly  consecrated  man  break  through  a  thousand  temptations,  which 
indeed  to  him  are  no  longer  temptations  at  all.  4.  Thorough-going  men  wield  a 
mighty  influence.  Joshua  was  able  to  speak  for  his  house  as  well  as  for  himself. 
Many  fathers  cannot  speak  for  themselves,  and  therefore  you  may  guess  the  reason 
why  they  cannot  speak  for  their  families.  III.  I  close  by  demanding  this  decision 
FOR  Christ  which  I  have  described  and  praised.  Decision  is  required  because  the 
Lord  deserves  to  have  it.  He  who  made  us  ought  not  to  be  served  hesitatingly ;  He 
who  gave  His  Son  to  die  for  us  ought  not  to  be  trifled  with.  By  the  splendour  of 
Deity,  and  the  glory  of  the  Cross,  I  claim  your  whole  hearts  for  my  Lord.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Joshua's  resolution  to  serve  the  Lord  : — I.  The  occasion  of  these 
WORDS,  n.  What  is  included  in  the  resolution?  1.  A  solemn  and  exclusive 
worship  of  God  from  the  heart.  2.  In  all  the  actions  of  our  life  to  have  respect  to 
the  will  of  God,  to  seek  to  please  Him,  to  seek  to  glorify  Him.    8.  There  are  three 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  297 

ingredients  in  the  service  of  God  that  may  be  considered  as  giving  vitality  to  it. 
(1)  The  first  is  sincerity.  The  servant  of  God  makes  an  entire  surrender  of 
himself  to  the  service  of  God,  and  keeps  back  nothing  from  Him.  (2)  Next,  this 
obedience  must  be  minute — His  service  must  be  universally  adhered  to.  There  is  a 
harmony  and  consistency  between  all  the  parts  of  real  practical  religion,  so  that 
they  cannot  be  separated  one  from  another,  and  if  we  separate  them  we  deceive 
ourselves  and  lose  sight  of  God.  (3)  Another  ingredient  in  the  service  of  God,  if 
it  be  true  and  genuine,  is  that,  like  the  principle  from  which  it  proceeds,  it  is 
permanent  and  abiding.  III.  Some  of  the  reasons  why  we  should  close  with  the 
KEsoLUTioN  OF  JosHUA.  1.  It  is  our  duty  to  serve  the  Lord  from  the  relation 
in  which  we  stand  to  Him  and  the  unspeakable  benefits  we  derive  from  His  good- 
ness. 2.  The  grand  distinction  of  man  above  the  other  creatures  consists  in  such 
a  constitution  of  our  nature  as  appears  to  have  no  other  end  or  object  but  that 
of  qualifying  us  for  the  end  of  worshipping  God.  3.  Consider,  next,  the  great  rewards 
which  hereafter  necessarily  accompany  the  service  of  God.  4.  KecoUect,  again,  the 
impossibility  of  neutraUty  and  the  danger  of  delay.  5.  Eecollect,  in  a  very  short 
time,  if  you  are  not  employed  in  the  service  of  God,  you  will  have  no  portion,  no 
employment  beneficial  or  dignified  or  delightful  to  aU  eternity.  (R.  Hall,  M.A.) 
Concerning  resolution  and  steadfastness  in  religion : — L  Of  the  bbavb  resolution  of 

A  GOOD  MAN,  THAT  IF  THEBE  WEKE  OCCASION,  AND  THINGS  WERE  BROUGHT  TO  THAT 
EXTREMITY,  HE  WOULD   STAND  ALONE   IN   THE  PROFESSION  AND  PRACTICE   OF   God's   TRUE 

EELiQiON.  1.  The  matter  of  this  resolution.  Joshua  here  resolves  that,  if  need  were, 
he  would  stand  alone  in  the  profession  and  practice  of  the  true  religion.  And  this  is 
not  a  mere  supposition  of  an  impossible  case,  which  can  never  happen ;  for  it  may, 
and  hath  really  and  in  fact  happened  in  several  ages  and  places  of  the  world. 
2.  The  due  limits  and  bounds  of  this  peremptory  resolution.  In  all  matters  of  faith 
and  practice  which  are  plain  and  evident,  either  from  natural  reason  or  from 
Divine  revelation,  this  resolution  seems  to  be  very  reasonable ;  but  in  things 
doubtful,  a  modest  man — and  every  man  hath  reason  to  be  so — would  be  very  apt  to 
be  staggered  by  the  judgment  of  a  very  wise  man  ;  and  much  more  of  many  such, 
and  especially  by  the  unanimous  judgment  of  the  generality  of  men,  the  general 
voice  and  opinion  of  mankind  being  next  to  the  voice  of  God  Himself.    II.  To 

VINDICATE  THE  REASONABLENESS  OF  THIS  RESOLUTION  FROM  THE  OBJECTIONS  TO  WHICH 
THIS    SINGULAR    AND    PEREMPTORY    KIND    OF   RESOLUTION  MAY  SEEM  LIABLE.       1.    It  may 

very  speciously  be  said  that  this  does  not  seem  modest  for  a  man  to  set  up  his  own 
private  judgment  against  the  general  suffrage  and  vote.  And  it  is  very  true  that 
about  things  indifferent  a  man  should  not  be  stiff  and  singular,  and  in  things 
doubtful  and  obscure  a  man  should  not  be  over-confident  of  his  own  judgment;  but 
in  things  that  are  plain,  either  from  Scripture  or  reason,  it  is  neither  immodesty 
nor  a  culpable  singularity  for  a  man  to  stand  alone  in  defence  of  the  truth, 
because  in  such  a  case  a  man  does  not  oppose  his  own  single  and  private  judgment 
to  the  judgment  of  many,  but  the  common  reason  of  mankind  and  the  judgment  of 
God  plainly  declared  in  His  "Word.  2.  It  is  pretended  that  it  is  more  prudent  for 
private  persons  to  err  with  the  Church  than  to  be  so  pertinacious  in  their  own 
opinions.  To  which  I  answer,  that  it  may  indeed  be  pardonable  in  some  cases  to  be 
led  into  mistake  by  the  authority  of  those  to  whose  judgment  and  instruction  we 
ought  to  pay  a  great  deference  and  submission,  provided  always  it  be  in  things 
■which  are  not  plain  and  necessary  ;  but  surely  it  can  never  be  prudent  to  err  with 
any  number,  how  great  soever,  in  matters  of  religion  which  are  of  moment,  merely 
for  numbers'  sake ;  but  to  comply  with  the  known  errors  and  corruptions  of  any 
Church  whatsoever  is  certainly  damnable.  3.  It  is  pretended  yet  further,  that  men 
BhaU  sooner  be  excused  in  following  the  Church  than  any  particular  man  or  sect. 
To  this  I  answer,  that  it  is  very  true,  if  the  matter  be  doubtful,  and  especially  if  the 
probabilities  be  equal,  or  near  equal,  on  both  sides  ;  but  if  the  error  be  gross  and 
palpable,  it  wiU  be  no  excuse  to  have  followed  any  number  of  men,  or  any  Church 
whatsoever.  4.  It  is  objected,  that  as,  on  the  one  hand,  there  may  be  danger  of 
error  in  following  blindly  the  belief  of  the  Church,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is 
as  great  a  danger  of  schism  in  forsaking  the  communion  of  the  Church,  upon 
pretence  of  errors  and  corruptions.  Very  true ;  but  where  great  errors  and 
corruptions  are  not  only  pretended,  but  are  real  and  evident,  and  where  our  com- 
pliance with  those  errors  and  corruptions  is  made  a  necessary  condition  of  our 
communion  with  that  Church,  in  that  case  the  guilt  of  schism,  how  great  a  crime 
soever  it  be,  doth  not  fall  upon  those  who  forsake  the  communion  of  that  Church,, 
but  upon  those  who  drive  them  out  of  it  by  the  sinful  conditions  which  they  impose 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

upon  them.  [Ahp.  Tillotson.)  Concerning  family  religion:—!.  I  shall  show 
WHEREIN  THE  PBACTicE  OF  THIS  DUTY  DOTH  CONSIST.  The  pimcipal  parts  of  it  are 
these  following : — 1.  Setting  up  the  constant  worship  of  God  in  our  families. 
2.  Instructing  those  committed  to  our  charge  in  the  fundamental  principles  and  in 
the  careful  practice  of  the  necessary  duties  of  religion.  3.  I  add  further,  as  a  con- 
siderable part  of  the  duty  of  parents  and  masters  of  families,  if  they  be  desirous  to 
have  their  children  and  servants  religious  in  good  earnest,  that  they  do  not  only  allow 
time  and  opportunity,  but  that  they  do  also  earnestly  charge  them  to  retire  every 
•day,  but  more  especially  on  the  Lord's  day,  to  pray  to  God  for  the  forgiveness  of 
their  sins,  and  for  His  mercy  and  blessings  upon  them,  and  Hkewise  to  praise  Him 
for  all  His  favours  conferred  upon  them  from  day  to  day.  4.  One  of  the  most 
effectual  ways  to  make  those  who  are  under  our  authority  good  is  to  be  good  our- 
selves, and  by  our  good  example  to  show  them  the  way  to  be  so.  Without  this  our 
best  instructions  will  signify  but  very  httle,  and  the  main  efficacy  of  them  will  be 
lost.  n.  OuB  OBLIGATION  TO  IT.  1.  In  point  of  duty.  All  authority  over  others  is 
a  talent  entrusted  with  us  by  God  for  the  benefit  and  good  of  others,  and  for  which 
we  are  accountable,  if  we  do  not  improve  it  and  make  use  of  it  to  that  end.  2.  We 
are  hereto  likewise  obliged  in  point  of  interest ;  because  it  is  really  for  our  advantage 
that  those  that  belong  to  us  should  serve  and  fear  God,  religion  being  the  surest 
foundation  of  the  duties  of  aU  relations  and  the  best  security  for  the  true  per- 
formance of  them.  Would  we  have  dutiful  and  obedient  children,  diligent  and 
faithful  servants  ?  Nothing  will  so  effectually  oblige  them  to  be  so  as  the  fear  of 
God  and  the  principles  of  religion  firmly  settled  in  them.     III.  The  causes  of  the 

60  COMMON  AND  SHAMEFUL   NEGLECT  OF   THIS  DUTY,  TO    THE  EXCEEDING    GBEAT  DECAY  OF 

PIETY  AMONG  US.  1.  This  may  in  good  part  be  ascribed  to  our  civil  confusions  and 
distractions.  2.  This  great  neglect  and  decay  of  religious  order  in  families  is 
chiefly  owing  to  our  dissensions  and  differences  in  religion,  upon  occasion  whereof 
many,  under  the  pretence  of  conscience,  have  broke  loose  into  a  boundless  liberty. 
IV.  The  veey  mischievous  and  fatal  consequences  of  the  neglect  of  this  duty. 
1.  To  the  pubhc.  Families  are  the  first  seminaries  of  religion,  and  if  care  be  not 
there  taken  to  prepare  persons,  especially  in  their  tender  years,  for  public  teaching 
and  instruction,  it  is  hke  to  have  but  very  little  effect.  2.  To  ourselves.  We  can 
have  no  manner  of  security  of  the  duty  and  fidelity  of  those  of  our  family  to  us  if 
they  have  no  sense  of  religion,  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes.  If  children  were 
carefully  educated,  and  famUies  regularly  and  religiously  ordered,  what  a  happy 
and  delightful  place,  what  a  paradise,  would  this  world'  be  in  comparison  of  what 
now  it  is  ?  [Ibid.)  Joshua's  resolution : — I.  Tbue  religion  consists  in  the 
service  of  God.  II.  They  who  truly  serve  God  make  His  service  a  matter  of 
choice,     ni.  If  the  service  of  god  is  the  object  of  oue  choice,  it  is  our  duty  to 

ENGAGE  ourselves  TO  IT  BY  OPEN  PROFESSION  AND  SOLEMN  COVENANT.  IV.  If  WE  HAVE 
DEVOTED    OURSELVES     TO     THE    SERVICE    OF     GoD    IT     IS     OUE    DUTY     TO     USE     EVERY 

MEANS  TO  ENGAGE  OTHERS  IN  IT.  (Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.) 
Historical  and  family  religion  : — The  valedictory  charge  of  Joshua  clearly  shows 
that  the  Jewish  religion  was  built  upon  a  definite  historical  experience  ;  was 
founded  on  the  rocks  of  impregnable  fact.  Never  in  the  whole  course  of  their 
history  had  the  Israelites  found  God  unfaithful  to  His  promises  or  forgetful  of  His 
threatenings  ;  and  as  God  had  been  from  the  beginning,  so  (said  Joshua)  will  He 
continue  to  the  end.  What  God  has  been  He  will  ever  be,  what  He  has  done  He 
ever  will  do — therefore  "  choose  ye,"  said  Joshua,  "  this  day  whom  you  will  serve." 
If  history  proves  that  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  God,  then  follow  Him  and  faithfully 
obey  His  voice.  This,  then,  is  what  we  mean  by  an  historical  religion.  An 
historical  religion  is  an  appeal  to  the  witness  of  the  past  as  a  groundwork  and 
reason  for  present  allegiance  to  God.  And  as  the  Jewish  religion  was  an  historical 
religion,  so  also  is  the  Christian  religion.  The  Christian  religion  is  not  a  doctrine 
of  ideas,  an  untested  philosophical  theory  :  it  is  founded  on  the  life  of  an  historical 
Person,  for  Christ  is  no  less  historic  than  Divine.  And  as  Jewish  leaders  and 
prophets  appealed  to  the  witness  of  history,  so  likewise  have  Christian  guides  and 
teachers,  from  the  earliest  times,  made  history  a  principal  reason  for  faith.  All 
true  religion,  however,  and  most  notably  the  religion  of  the  Bible,  is  much  more 
than  an  historic  faith.  Its  foundations  lie  deep  and  strong  in  history ;  but  its 
superstructure  is  continuously  and  essentially  practical.  Historic  religion,  like 
historic  knowledge,  Is  useless  unless  it  serves  as  the  guide  and  inspiration  of  daily 
conduct.  The  use  of  history  chiefly  consists  in  its  application  of  the  experiences  of 
the  past  to  the  circumstances  and  resolutions  of  the  present.    It  was  this  use  to 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  299 

which  Joshua  applied  the  striking  historical  survey  of  his  great  valedictory  charge. 
Upon  the  ground  of  their  historical  experiences  he  based  his  fervid  appeal  to  the 
Jewish  people  to  make  choice  of  Jehovah  as  their  national  Deity,  and  to  remain 
consistently  faithful  in  their  allegiance  to  Him.  Whatever  became  of  the  national 
religion,  his  own  family  religion  at  least  should  be  settled  and  unwavering  in  its 
loyalty  to  Jehovah.  Family  religion  is  the  best  beginning  for  all  religious  life. 
The  Church  in  the  house  is  the  best  temple  for  the  education  of  righteousness  and 
true  holiness.  As  the  sun  is  the  centre  of  the  earth's  light  and  heat,  so  from  the 
family  radiates  throughout  the  world  the  heat  and  light  of  religion.  When  families 
are  religious,  nations  are  rehgious  ;  when  families  are  religious,  individuals  also  are 
religious.  Even  the  very  structure  of  the  Bible  seems  to  lend  authority  to  the  con- 
viction of  the  primary  importance  of  family  religion.  The  three  great  divisions  of 
the  Old  Testament — the  law,  the  prophets,  the  psalms  or  hagiographa — broadly 
represent  the  three  great  spheres  in  which  religion  ought  to  work.  The  book  of  the 
law,  the  foundation  of  all  revelation,  was  written  during  the  patriarchal  period. 
It  describes  the  origin,  the  management,  the  sacred  functions,  of  the  family.  In 
the  New  Testament,  also,  great  stress  is  laid  upon  family  religion.  As  nature 
makes  families  into  little  kingdoms,  so  Christianity  makes  families  into  little 
Churches.  It  was  in  the  devotion  of  family  life  that  Jesus  nursed  His  faculty  for 
worship  and  His  character  for  holiness.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  any  institution 
hedged  round  with  more  firm  and  higher  walls  than  the  institution  of  the  family. 
The  New  Testament  regards  the  family  as  a  Divine  institution,  and  its  relation- 
ships as  sacred,  heavenly,  relationships.  It  cannot  but  be  that  an  institution  with 
an  origin  and  sanctions  so  Divine,  should  be  intended  to  work  out  great  blessings 
for  humanity.  And  aU  experience  proves  that  family  love  and  family  religion  are 
more  fruitful  of  happiness  and  holiness  than  any  other  single  source ;  and  that 
family  discords  and  family  irreligion  are  the  cause  of  endless  miseries  and  countless 
iniquities.  {Canon  Diggle.)  The  cluster  of  grapes;  or,  family  prayer  : — Man,  we 
aU  know,  is  not  made  to  live  alone.  None  of  us  could  do  so,  even  if  we  wished  it. 
As  no  man  can  come  into  the  world  without  a  father  or  mother  to  bring  him  into 
it — as  no  child,  when  it  has  received  the  gift  of  life,  could  keep  that  gift  for  much 
more  than  a  single  round  of  the  clock  without  some  one  to  tend  and  feed  it — in  like 
manner,  after  we  are  grown  up,  and  have  gained  strength  to  stand  alone,  we  still 
need  the  help  of  our  brethren  in  a  thousand  ways.  Every  worthy  and  reasonable 
and  honourable  work  which  man  is  permitted  to  perform  can  only  be  performed  by 
him  so  far  as  he  lives  in  union  and  communion  with  his  brethren.  Thus  too  is  it 
with  the  highest  and  most  precious  of  all  the  gifts  which  God  has  bestowed  on  man- 
kind, the  religion  of  Christ.  This  also  is  a  gift  which  cannot  be  received  alone, 
which  cannot  be  enjoyed  alone,  which  cannot  be  turned  to  any  use  alone.  In  giving 
it  to  man  God  did  not  give  it  to  him  as  standing  alone,  but  as  hving  in  communion 
with  his  brethren.  -  He  purposes  that  in  spiritual  things,  as  well  as  in  temporal 
things,  we  should  help  and  feed  each  other,  that  we  should  nourish  each  other  with 
the  bread  of  life,  as  well  as  with  the  bread  that  perishes.  You  remember  our  Lord's 
beautiful  parable  in  which  He  compares  Himself  to  the  vine  and  His  disciples  to 
the  branches.  All  the  members  of  the  same  family,  aU  the  members  of  the  same 
parish,  should  draw  their  spiritual  life  from  the  heavenly  Vine,  not  singly,  but 
together,  joining  heart  and  soul  in  the  exercises  and  offices  of  devotion,  and  keeping 
in  mind  that  it  is  when  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  that  our  Lord  has  pro- 
mised to  be  in  the  midst  of  them.  "  As  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord." 
This  should  be  the  plain,  the  avowed,  the  steadfast  resolution  of  every  one  who  bears 
rule  in  a  house,  of  every  master  of  a  household,  of  every  father,  of  every  mother  of 
a  family.  When  God  ordains  that  every  one  should  be  the  master  or  the  mistress 
of  a  household.  He  hkewise  ordains  that  they  should  take  care  of  those  who  are 
under  their  authority,  and  should  look  upon  them  as  committed  to  their  special 
charge.  In  hke  manner  when  He  is  pleased  to  grant  any  one  the  blessing  of  being 
a  father  or  a  mother  He  links  this  blessing  with  the  duty  of  taking  care  of  the 
children,  of  bringing  them  up,  of  providing  for  them.  We  shall  have  to  give 
account,  not  only  for  our  own  souls,  but  also,  more  or  less,  for  the  souls  of  those 
whom  God  has  committed  to  our  charge.  Let  this  then  be  your  watchword,  "  As  for 
me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord."  It  is  not  enough  for  you  to  say,  "  As  for 
me,  I  wiU  serve  the  Lord."  A  grape  never  stands  alone  :  it  is  always  part  of  a 
cluster.  In  truth  no  one  can  feel  any  hearty  desire  to  serve  the  Lord  himself,  with- 
out being  at  the  same  time  anxious  that  others  also,  that  his  friends  and  neighbours, 
above  all,  that  the  members  of  his  own  household,  should  bear  their  part  in  this 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

godly  service.  And  one  of  the  ways  in  which  it  behoves  you  to  provide  that  your 
house  shall  serve  the  Lord  is  by  setting  up  His  worship  in  your  house,  by  taking 
care  that  you  and  your  whole  house  join  day  by  day  in  serving  Him  with  prayer 
and  thanksgiving  and  praise.  Most  important,  too,  is  it  that  every  family  should  be 
perpetually  reminded  that,  as  a  family,  it  is  a  Christian  family — that  the  Church 
is  not  God's  only  house  in  the  parish,  but  that  every  house  in  the  parish  ought  to 
be  a  house  of  God.  We  have  been  led  by  our  Lord's  parable  to  liken  a  Christian 
family  and  a  Christian  congregation  to  a  cluster  of  grapes.  Such  are  they,  if  they 
hang  from  the  true  Vine,  if  the  life  which  springs  from  the  true  Vine  be  ever 
flowing  into  them  through  prayer — through  prayer  offered  up  in  brotherly  com- 
munion one  beside  the  other.  And  what  can  give  a  more  beautiful  image  of  the 
love,  the  neighbourly  kindness,  the  peace,  which  ought  to  prevail  in  a  brotherhood 
of  Christians,  than  a  cluster  of  grapes  ?  None  of  them  seems  to  have  any  desire  of 
thrusting  itself  forward  before  the  others,  or  of  pushing  them  into  the  background, 
or  of  showing  itself  off  at  their  cost.  On  the  contrary  each  seems  contented  to 
stand  just  peeping  out  of  its  cell,  half  hidden  by  its  neighbours,  retiring  behind 
them,  and  almost,  as  it  were,  in  honour  preferring  them.  Such  are  the  grapes  of 
the  true  Vine.  Such  are  the  families  in  the  living  Church  of  Christ.  They  hang 
from  Him.  Their  love  flows  into  them  from  Him ;  and  therefore  they  love  each 
other.  {J.  C.  Hare,  M.A.)  The  Christian  household  : — The  household  is  not  an 
accident  of  nature,  but  an  ordinance  of  God.  The  household  is  a  representation,  on 
a  small  scale  as  regards  numbers,  but  not  as  regards  the  interests  concerned,  of  the 
great  family  in  heaven  and  earth.  The  father  of  a  household  stands  most 
immediately  in  God's  place.  Of  all  the  influences  which  can  be  brought  to  bear  on 
man,  paternal  influence  may  be  made  the  strongest  and  most  salutary,  and  whether 
so  made  or  not  is  ever  of  immense  weight  one  way  or  the  other.  For  remember 
that  paternal  influence  is  not  that  which  the  father  strives  to  exert  merely,  but  that 
which  in  matter  of  fact  he  does  exert.  None  so  keen  to  see  into  a  man's  religion 
as  his  own  household.  He  may  deceive  others  without,  he  may  deceive  himself, 
he  can  hardly  long  succeed  in  deceiving  them.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  his 
religion  is  really  a  thing  in  his  heart ;  if  he  moves  about  day  by  day  as  seeing  One 
invisible  ;  if  the  love  of  Christ  is  really  warming  the  springs  of  his  inner  life,  then, 
however  inadequately  this  is  shown  in  matter  or  in  manner,  it  will  be  sure  to  be 
known  and  thoroughly  appreciated  by  those  who  are  ever  living  their  Uves  around 
him.  But  in  treating  of  a  household  ruled  in  the  fear  of  God  another  most 
important  influence  comes  to  be  considered — one  which,  without  holding  so  para- 
mount a  place  as  the  first,  yet  ever  Ues  closer  to  the  hearts  of  children,  and  is  more 
wound  about  all  their  schemes  and  plans.  From  the  very  necessities  of  life  the 
father  is  kept  ordinarily  at  a  distance  from  his  family  during  a  great  portion  of  his 
time.  He  is  that  one  of  the  household  who  goes  forth  into  the  external  world  and 
savours  of  it ;  and  thus  not  only  in  continuity,  but  in  character  also,  his  influence 
is  in  some  measure  broken ;  lying  at  some  little  distance,  not  employed  on  the 
thoughts  and  schemes  of  his  children  till  they  have  acquired  some  degree  of  con- 
sistency ;  not  called  in  to  mould  and  cherish  their  first  openings  of  intention  and 
desire.  This  necessary  deficiency  is,  however,  amply  and  most  graciously  supphed 
by  the  mother  of  a  household.  She  is  ever  the  ministering  angel  to  her  children  ; 
with  the  same  hand  guiding  their  infant  steps,  and  smoothing  the  fevered  pillow  of 
after-life  ;  with  the  same  voice  teaching  them  their  infant  prayers,  and  with  quiet 
and  loving  admonition  tempering  the  waywardness  of  the  rising  spirits  of  youth. 
And  thus  while  she  shares  in  many  of  the  feelings  of  reverence  and  affection  due  to 
the  father,  she  yet  has  a  narrower  circle  of  her  own.  To  her  is  committed  by  God 
the  training  and  forming  of  each  individual  character  among  her  children  ;  in  her 
bosom  will  take  root  those  finer  fibres  of  personal  feeling  from  which,  after  all,  our 
strongest  emotions  are  fed.  Oh  that  every  Christian  mother  were  living  and  moving 
in  her  household  in  the  full  consciousness  of  this  power  and  this  responsibiUty  1 
Much  might  be  said  on  a  mother's  share  in  the  after-training  of  her  children,  even 
when  other  help  is  requisite  and  necessary ;  but  it  is  only  one  very  short  and  simple 
thing  which  need  be  said  on  their  earliest  training — it  is  a  matter  to  which  a  mother 
alone  is  competent,  a  sacred  duty  which  she  can  never  neglect,  and  ought  never  to 
delegate.  (Dean  Alford.)  The  charities  of  the  Christian  household  : — I  wish  now 
to  speak  of  the  good  worts  of  the  Christian  household,  its  religious  standing  and 
progress  within,  and  its  beneficent  employments  without,  for  the  good  of  man  and 
the  glory  of  God.  Now  we  must  lay  the  foundation  of  all  such  external  duties  in 
the  religion  of  the  household.    Let  the  well-spring  of  the  religion  of  the  family  be  in 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  301 

the  closet  and  by  the  bedside  of  the  father  and  mother.  And  not  only  this,  but  let 
\  the  children,  let  the  servants  see  that  it  is  so,  and  learn  to  take  not  precept  only,  but 
I  pattern  from  them.  And  if  the  foundation  be  thus  laid,  let  us  go  on  to  inquire 
what,  and  how  raised,  must  be  the  building.  First  of  all,  it  must  be  real,  consistent 
■with  itself  ;  raised  for  a  dwelling,  and  not  for  a  show.  In  a  man's  own  religion 
reality  is  the  first  and  most  constant  requisite  ;  but  where  influence  is  to  be  exerted 
over  others  it  is  even  doubly  necessary.  Hearts  are  not  won  by  words,  nor  will 
knees  ever  so  often  bended  prompt  one  syllable  of  prayer.  And  here  is  often  a  fault 
in  Christian  heads  of  families.  Their  own  religion  is  real — felt  in  their  hearts,  and 
shown  in  their  lives.  But  their  way  of  putting  it  forth  is  unreal.  They  are  perhaps 
the  bondsmen  of  a  rigid  system,  or  they  fall  into  the  opposite  extreme,  and  leave 
that  on  which  they  themselves  feel  so  deeply  to  take  its  chance  among  those  whom 
God  has  given  them  to  train  for  Him.  In  the  one  case,  that  of  rigid  adherence  to 
system,  the  force  of  their  own  example  is  marred,  the  attraction  of  their  own  faith 
and  love  disturbed ;  in  the  other  they  are  bearing  indeed  good  seed,  but  sow  it  not, 
letting  human  nature,  which  ever  wants  help  from  above  and  from  around,  get  its 
good  as  it  best  may.  How  often  do  we  see  heads  of  families,  whom  we  know  to  be 
earnest  and  genuine  Christian  men  and  women,  yet  attempting  to  guide  their  house- 
holds by  the  merest  and  emptiest  commonplaces,  which  never  had,  and  never  can 
have,  life  or  power  in  them.  Oh  that  we  knew  and  remembered  this — that  nought 
unreal  will  ever  stand  God's  test  of  time  and  trial.  You  may  teach  the  child  his 
theological  lesson  ever  so  well;  he  may  be  apt  to  distinguish,  apt  to  retain,  ready 
to  profess  ;  yet  meantime,  if  you  have  not  preoccupied  it,  the  heart,  which  really 
guides  the  life,  will  have  been  learning  from  things  themselves  another  and  a  surer 
lesson,  and  you  wUl  find,  when  the  voyage  of  life  begins,  that  voyage  which  you  had 
expected  would  be  so  straight  and  so  sure,  that  another  hand  than  yours  is  on  the 
helm.  In  promoting  family  religion  let  parents  study  the  hearts  of  their  children. 
Let  them  see  what  those  cords  really  are  which,  according  as  they  are  drawn  one 
way  or  the  other,  turn  the  course  of  life  itself.  Let  them  remember  what  it  was  in 
their  own  case  which  really  influenced  them  for  good,  and  reflect  that  their  children 
are  like  themselves.  Win  the  heart,  and  the  victory  is  yours.  Lose  that,  and  you 
have  lost  all.  Before  I  pass  to  the  outward  acts  and  fruits  of  family  religion  let 
me  exemplify  these  remarks  in  two  departments  of  the  inner  life  of  the  household : 
in  their  use  of  the  Bible  and  in  family  prayer.  The  Bibles  of  a  household,  if  they 
could  testify,  would  be  no  bad  witnesses  respecting  its  religion.  And  I  fear  their 
testimony  would  be  often  of  a  sad  and  a  startling  kind.  The  Bible  in  the  chamber, 
how  often  is  it  taken  down  for  genuine  use  ?  The  contents  of  that  Bible,  how 
much  is  known  of  them  ?  I  do  not  believe  there  ever  was  an  age  when  the  Bible 
has  been  so  much  printed  and  so  httle  read  as  in  our  own.  And  this  is  the  book 
which  is  to  be  a  light  to  our  feet  and  a  lamp  to  our  paths.  And  therefore  one  of 
the  very  fii-st  cares  in  a  Christian  and  Protestant  household  ought  to  be  that  the 
Bible  may  be  known  by  all  its  members  :  known,  I  mean,  by  familiarity  with  its 
contents,  and  a  habit  of  thinking  and  speaking  intelligently  on  them,  and  a  habit 
also — for  this  should  never  be  forgotten — of  their  devotional  use.  It  is  plain  that 
this  subject  might  be  pursued  much  further,  but  we  must  drop  it  now,  to  mention 
another  nearly  connected  with  it — I  mean  that  of  family  prayer.  Family  prayer 
is  an  absolute  necessity  of  the  Christian  household.  It  is  indeed  an  affecting  and 
solemn  sight  ;  and  it  might  be  a  vast  opportunity  for  good.  Here  is  a  priest  of 
whose  power  we  can  never  speak  too  highly,  a  teacher  standing  in  the  place  of 
God  Himself.  But  what  are,  for  the  most  part,  his  ministrations — what  his  instruc- 
tions ?  To  judge  from  the  books  which  have  been  printed  for  use  at  such  times, 
for  the  most  part,  I  fear,  formal,  disconnected,  lifeless  ;  or  if  earnest  and  fervent, 
then  passing  perhaps  into  another  fault  equally  fatal  to  usefulness—  lengthy  and 
tedious.  The  effect  of  this  must  be  mischievous.  You  cannot  expect  children,  you 
cannot  expect  servants,  to  love  and  consult  and  study  a  work  which  you  have 
accustomed  them  to  loathe  and  to  be  weary  over.  Nor,  to  recur  back  to  the  other 
fault  again,  can  you  expect  them  really  to  feel  wants  which  have  been  so  long  life- 
lessly and  formally  expressed  ;  uttered  perhaps  in  words  far  above  their  comprehen- 
sion, and  in  a  strain  to  which  their  simple  minds  never  attained.  Of  all  united 
acts  of  the  family  this  one  should  most  bear  the  impress  of  life  and  reality.  Bead 
no  more  than  the  ear,  no  more  than  the  mind  can  retain — and  that  little  with 
earnestness  and  solemnity.  If  explanation  is  given  let  it  be  short  and  to  the  point 
— neither  dilating  nor  diluting.  And  with  regard  to  prayer,  the  rule  should  be  of 
the  same  kind.     The  simpler  the  better.    And  I  may  also  say,  without  fear  of 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxr7. 

being  misunderstood,  the  shorter  the  better.  But  from  these  counsels  respecting 
the  inner  Ufe  of  the  family  we  must  pass  now  to  its  outward  fruits  of  its  religion. 
And  here  at  once  let  me  say  that  such  fruits  ought  always  to  be  found.  There 
never  ought  to  be  such  a  thing  as  a  hidden  family  religion  in  any  sense,  and  least 
of  all  in  the  sense  of  being  without  visible  and  sensible  fruit  for  good.  And  in 
family  charity,  as  in  all  other  family  duties,  the  spring  must  ever  be  found  in  the 
heads  of  the  household.  Let  them  be  known  by  their  children  and  dependents  to 
be  engaged  in  works  of  charity  and  mercy.  And  in  their  places  and  proportions 
let  each,  even  the  humblest  member,  be  encouraged,  as  soon  as  self-control  and 
responsibility  begin,  to  bear  a  part  in  such  works.  And  I  cannot  impress  it  too 
strongly  on  young  persons  that  this  duty  is  binding  on  them  from  the  moment 
that  they  can  call  money  or  time  their  own.  Whatever  is  allowed  you  by  your 
parents  for  ordinary  purposes,  all  of  it  belongs  to  God,  and  you  are  but  His  steward. 
On  the  beneficence  due  from  every  Christian  household  to  the  poor  and  needy 
around  it  I  vrill  not  at  present  enlarge ;  it  is  a  wide  subject,  and  comes  before  us  in 
the  course  of  our  teaching  in  various  ways.  I  will  only  say  no  household  can 
escape  its  claims  or  venture,  from  any  excuse,  to  set  them  aside.  But  I  would 
especially  now  speak  of  that  other  department  of  a  Christian  family's  benevolence 
which  should  be  spent  in  their  work  as  disciples  of  Him  who  commanded  us  to 
enlighten  all  nations  with  the  word  of  His  truth.  Every  Christian  is  described  in 
Scripture  as  holding  forth  the  word  of  truth,  shining  as  a  light  in  the  world. 
Every  Christian  is  a  missionary,  and  ought  to  be  employed  in  the  work  of 
one— either  in  personal  labour  and  influence,  or  by  contribution  to  institu- 
tions established  for  the  purpose.  And  as  a  family  duty  this  possesses 
peculiar  interest.  In  Christ  are  all  families  of  the  earth  blessed.  {Ibid.) 
The  mutual  duties  of  the  family  : — From  the  tone  of  these  words  we  see  that  they 
are  not  the  voice  of  one  man  only.  There  is  about  them  a  concerted  determination, 
they  bear  evidence  of  deliberation  having  been  had,  and  a  combined  resolution 
come  to.  There  is  something  even  of  triumphant  union  about  them,  something  of 
a  challenge  to  Israel  to  look  and  see  whether  they  of  whom  they  are  said  did  not 
fulfil  them  by  serving  the  Lord.  Every  member  of  a  household,  whether  among 
children  or  domestics,  has  a  place  assigned  by  God  and  a  solemn  account  to 
render  to  Him.  I  will  touch  on  this  portion  of  our  subject — the  duties  of  the 
members  of  a  household,  and  their  reflection  on  those  who  are  set  at  the  head  of  it. 
If  I  were  to  ask  what  is  the  first  duty  of  a  child  to  a  parent  the  answer  would  be 
one  and  uniform.  All  would  say,  obedience.  Yet  is  this  quite  understood  ?  At  all 
events,  is  it  generally  acted  on  ?  What  I  understand  by  obedience  being  the  first 
duty  of  young  persons  to  their  parents  is  this — that,  irrespective  of  all  concurrence 
of  their  own  individual  approval  with  what  is  ordered,  there  is  a  sacredness  about  a 
parent's  word,  because  it  is  so,  which  ensures  prompt  and  ready  compliance.  I 
would  say,  then,  to  my  young  friends,  guard  carefully  and  with  all  diligence  this  your 
chief  jewel  and  treasure — constant  and  scrupulous  obedience.  It  is  the  bloom  of 
your  whole  character.  Nothing  becomes  you  so  well — nothing  contains  so  great 
promise  for  your  future  days.  It  is  a  link  which,  between  a  loving  and  wise  parent 
and  a  Christian  child,  is  never  dissolved  ;  and  I  know  of  no  sight  so  pleasing  as  to 
see  men  and  women,  moving  in  life  and  filling  important  posts  which  God  has 
assigned  them,  and  yet  with  reverence  and  affection  retaining  the  pious  habits  of 
childhood  and  youth — observing  the  wishes  and  ruling  themselves  by  the  guidance 
of  an  aged  parent.  I  am  sure  I  need  not  remind  ourselves  who  are  parents  how 
very  solemn  is  the  position  of  one  who  is  thus  to  be  obeyed — how  necessary  the 
wisdom  which  is  from  above  to  guide  us  in  guiding  them.  I  need  not  say  how 
much  love,  how  much  consistency,  how  much  temper  is  required  to  lead  up  and 
train  this  sacred  principle  of  obedience,  so  that  it  be  not  relaxed  on  the  one  hand 
nor  overstrained  on  the  other.  Before  I  pass  on  to  the  other  great  division  of  the 
members  of  a  family,  let  me  say  a  word  to  young  persons  as  to  the  direct  subject  of 
the  resolution  in  our  text — the  service  of  the  Lord.  Tou  will  some  day  know  and 
feel,  on  looking  back  over  these  first  years  of  life,  that  it  is  the  memory  of  the 
service  of  God  which  constitutes  the  real  charm  of  your  recollections  of  home.  And 
if  it  is  but  fitting  to  say  something  of  those  others  who  dwell  under  the  roof  of  a 
household  to  minister  to  their  wants,  I  would  say  to  the  servants  in  our  households, 
Your  gracious  Father  in  heaven  has  called  you  out  of  your  own  country  and 
from  your  own  father's  house,  and  He  has  caused  you  to  be  adopted  into  other 
families,  of  a  rank  and  situation  in  life  different  from  your  own.  If  you  are  His 
servants  your  position  is  one  full  of  interest,  and  full  of  honour.     He  has  put  you 


CHAP,  xsiv.]  JOSHUA.  305 

in  reach  of  many  blessings,  both  temporal  and  spiritual,  to  which  others  of  your 
family  have  not  access.  And  more  especially  is  this  so  if  your  lot  is  cast  in  a  house- 
hold where  God  is  feared  and  served.  But  as  the  servant's  life  is  one  of  much  and 
undoubted  privilege  for  good,  so  is  it  one  of  enormous  temptation  to  evU.  There  is 
no  class  of  persons  in  our  days  the  contemplation  of  whom  more  fills  the  Christian 
mind  with  sadness,  or  suggests  more  forcibly  the  frightful  account  which  the 
votaries  of  fashion  and  pleasure  wUl  one  day  have  to  give.  How  many  souls  have 
the  ungodly  heads  of  a  household  helped  to  ruin,  or  been  the  means  of  ruining 
altogether  ?  God  sent  to  them,  to  be  kept  and  influenced  for  Him,  dependents 
whose  souls  were  as  valuable  as  their  own ;  whose  account  before  Him  will  be  as 
Bolemn,  their  condemnation  or  justification  as  final,  as  theirs.  They  came  to  them 
from  the  Sunday  school  and  the  village  pastor's  instructions  ;  they  came  with  the 
Bible  which  was  to  be  the  guide  of  their  lives,  with  the  prayer  which  had  been  the 
practice  of  their  childhood,  with  the  resolution  which  the  last  communion  prompted 
and  the  mother's  parting  words  urged  forward.  Where  are  those  Bibles  now? 
What  is  become  of  that  daUy  prayer  ?  Where,  but  under  your  roof,  and  with  your 
sanction,  was  that  resolution  laughed  to  scorn  ?  Who  made  it  impossible  for  them 
to  keep  up  those  monthly  communions  ?  If  you  have  in  your  family  and  before 
your  dependents  denied  Christ,  He  also  wUl  deny  you.  And  let  servants  themselves 
remember  that  no  circumstances  can  excuse  them  in  unfaithfulness  to  Him  whom 
they  have  once  learned  to  know  and  to  serve ;  that  on  themselves  the  ultimate 
burden  must  rest,  and  the  final  condemnation  come,  if  they  allow  themselves  to  be 
laughed  or  tempted  out  of  Christian  habits  of  life.  I  would  willingly  think,  too, 
that  I  am  speaking  to  some  of  this  class  whose  lot  God  has  mercifully  cast  in 
families  such  as  that  in  our  text,  where  their  souls  are  cared  for,  and  their  moral 
and  spiritual  welfare  attended  to.  Then  I  say  to  you.  Blessed  indeed  is  your  lot, 
and  great  in  proportion  wiU  be  your  accountableness.  (Ibid.)  Hindrances 
to  home  religion : — I.  The  want  of  a  vivid  sense  of  God,  as  personal  and  present. 
II.  The  loose  manner  in  which  the  present  home  Kfe  is  conducted.  III.  The 
diminished  regard  for  the  Sabbath.  IV.  The  overlaying  of  the  Bible  and  the  family 
altar  by  the  newspapers,  and  especially  the  Sunday  papers.  V.  The  dispersion  of 
families  among  Churches  having  different  views  of  Divine  things.  VI.  The  division 
of  families  on  the  line  of  Christian  discipleship.  VH.  The  lack  in  some  homes  of  an 
expressive  and  impressive  piety  in  such  as  do  profess  to  be  believers,  such  as  will 
quietly  control  and  at  last  convert  the  household.  (J".  L.  Withrow,  D.D.) 
We  should  think  about  the  religious  welfare  of  others  : — A  poor  woman  came  into  a 
village  one  dark  night  and  asked  her  way  to  the  house  of  a  friend.  It  was  three 
mUes  off  yet,  and  the  road  was  strange  to  her,  and  it  was  so  dark.  "  If  you  make 
haste,"  some  one  said  to  her,  "  you  will  overtake  the  doctor.  He  has  just  gone 
down  the  road  to  go  to  the  same  place,  and  he  carries  a  lantern."  This  was  glad 
news  to  the  timid  woman,  and  off  she  started  looking  eagerly  ahead  in  the  hope  of 
catching  some  glimmer  of  the  lantern's  light,  but  never  a  flash  of  it  could  she  see. 
At  length,  after  a  weary  trudge,  she  reached  the  house  of  her  friend,  and  there  she 
found  the  doctor  newly  arrived.  "  Oh,  sir  !  "  she  said,  "  I  have  had  such  a  weary 
run  after  you.  They  told  me  you  had  a  lantern,  but  I  saw  nothing  of  its  light." 
"  Very  true,"  said  the  doctor,  showing  a  dark  lantern  fastened  to  his  belt ;  "  I  had 
a  lantern,  but  I  did  not  think  of  drawing  the  slide  so  as  to  let  the  light  shine,  for 
I  know  the  road  very  well  myself."  Now  there  are  people  in  the  world  very  hke 
this  doctor.  They  know  the  right  way  themselves,  and  don't  trouble  about  others, 
who  may  not  know  it.  Make  it  very  clear  to  others  that  you  not  only  know  the 
right  road  yourself,  but  that  you  have  also  a  heart  to  think  of  them  and  influence 
them  for  good.      (W.    Francis.)        Decision  for    God: — "I  was    the    guest   of 

Colonel  ,   a  leading  man  in   his   county,   Master   of  the   Hounds  for  two 

counties,  keeping  the  hounds  at  a  cost  of  $20,000  a  year.  He  was  a  man 
of  passionate  character,  and,  when  excited,  very  profane.  He  attended  the 
meetings  every  evening.  But  he  complained  that  he  had  a  headache  the  next 
morning.  One  morning  at  breakfast  he  said,  '  I  don't  think  I  shall  go  to  the 
meetings  any  longer.  My  head  aches  with  the  bad  air,  and  then  I  do  not  think 
you  are  quite  fair.  You  make  everybody  out  as  no  better  than  heathen.  That  may 
be  true  of  the  common  people ;  but  you  will  drive  all  the  gentry  away.'  I  said, 
'  Colonel,  I  am  your  guest,  and  I  did  not  introduce  this  subject.  But  let  me  ask 
you.  Are  you  a  Christian  ?  '  '  What  do  you  mean  ?  I  support  a  Church  and  two  or 
three  ministers.'  I  said,  '  Unless  you  will  take  a  stand  as  a  Christian  as  plainly  as 
you  do  as  Master  of  the  Hounds,  I  do  not  think  you  have  any  claim  to  be  called  ii. 


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

Christian.'  To  my  surprise,  he  was  in  church  that  night,  with  his  wife,  who  was  a 
Christian.  I  preached  on  the  Pharisee  and  the  Pubhcan.  At  the  close  I  said,  » If 
there  is  any  man  or  woman  who  is  ready,  with  the  publican,  to  say,  "  God  be 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  I  invite  him  to  rise.'  To  my  surprise,  up  rose  the  Colonel, 
and  folded  his  arms,  and  his  wife  by  his  side.  I  thought,  '  Will  it  do  to  call  the 
Colonel  up  here  and  ask  him  to  go  on  his  knees  ? '  I  did  so.  The  Colonel  moved 
right  forward  with  his  wife.  And  the  next  that  came  was  the  Irish  servant,  and  he 
kneeled  down  by  his  master.  Next  morning,  as  I  opened  the  Bible  for  prayers,  the 
Colonel  rose  and  said,  '  Before  the  Doctor  reads,  I  want  to  say  that  last  night  I  went 
forward  and  took  God  as  my  Saviour.  I  ask  you,  my  friends,  to  pray  for  me.'  This 
in  the  presence  of  all  the  servants."  {Dr.  Pentecost.)  Who  will  volunteer  ? — One 
night,  in  the  army  on  the  banks  of  the  Potomac,  the  colonel  came  for  volunteers  to 
cross  over  the  river  in  flat  boats.  "Who'll  volunteer?  I  want  so  many  men." 
"  rU  go  !  "  "  I'U  go!  "  Their  decision  made  up  the  number  ;  the  colonel's  heart 
was  rejoiced.  They  went,  and  returned  with  150  or  200  contrabands  and  other 
trophies  of  war.  That  was  the  result  of  decision.  They  took  their  lives  in  their 
hands  and  went  on  reckless  of  consequences.  In  order  to  spiritual  success  we  need 
decision.  How  long  would  it  take  the  Lord  Jesus  to  do  His  part  if  you  make  the 
decision  ?  There  are  a  hundred  strings  whereby  you  are  holding  on  to  the  interests 
of  the  world.  You  cut  a  string  here  and  a  knot  there,  but  there  are  more  left  than 
you  have  cut  off ;  come  right  to  the  central  point  where  they  all  come  to  a  focus, 
then  you  can  cut  them  all  at  once.  The  work  is  aU  in  a  nutshell.  Some  are  con- 
verted by  piecemeal.  The  better  way  is  to  take  it  in  a  lump.  How  long  does  it  take 
to  give  away  a  house  and  land  ?  Only  while  you  sign  your  name,  that  is  all.  When 
we  go  forth,  a  troop  of  'decided  souls,  we  can  take  the  world  for  Christ.  Take  Christ 
fuUy,  completely,  that  wiU  give  us  inward  power. 

Vers.  19-28.  Ye  cannot  serve  the  Lord :  for  He  is  an  holy  God. — The  covenant 
renewed  : — I.  The  DnricuLTT  of  seeving  God.  "  Ye  cannot  serve  the  Lord."  It 
was  a  staggering  admonition.  It  embodied  what  theologians  have  called  the 
doctrine  of  "  moral  inability."  The  seat  of  the  disorder  is  in  the  will.  There  is  the 
conflict.  Till  that  is  established  in  the  choice  of  holiness  it  will  still  be  true,  as  in 
the  case  before  us,  that  one  can  not  serve  God.  "  Ye  cannot "  should  stiU  read  for 
many,  loath  to  abandon  practices  and  ideas  and  hopes  which  He  condemns,  "  Ye 
wiU  not."  n.  The  conscious  ability  to  seeve  God.  With  much  vehemence  the 
people  asserted  that  they  would,  and  therefore  could,  be  true  to  their  promise.  They 
realised  that  no  more  was  demanded  of  them  than  was  within  the  range  of  their 
powers  to  do.  Their  tribute  to  the  righteousness  of  their  Maker  is  the  universal 
testimony  as  well.  From  the  shrine  of  the  most  besotted  savage  to  the  latest 
Christian  altar  we  see  the  multiplying  tokens  that  each  and  aU  might  have  heeded 
and  wrought  that  full  measure  of  righteousness  which  their  God  prescribed.  Every- 
where, on  all  the  recognised  possibilities  of  a  human  soul,  is  plainly  imprinted,  and 
none  can  honestly  exclaim  against  it,  "  This  is  your  reasonable  service."  III.  The 
SOLEMN  PEOMisE  TO  SEEVE  GoD.  The  transfer  of  estates,  the  giving  in  marriage,  the 
parting  with  a  child — these  chief  acts  of  our  lives  are  trivial  and  ordinary  compared 
with  that  in  which  a  heart  yields  itself  for  ever  unto  Him  who  has  sought  it  from  its 
first  conscious  moment.  It  is  serious  business  we  transact  with  Him.  He  hears, 
too,  each  voice  among  the  myriads  as  though  it  were  the  only  one,  and  receives  each 
uplifted  spirit  as  though  no  other  had  come.  IV.  The  abiding  witnesses  of  the 
PLEDGE  TO  SERVE  GoD.  As  our  memorials  and  statues  are  eloquent  of  former  scenes 
and  persons,  to  those  who  will  pause  a  little  to  listen,  so  this  column  in  the  spot  of 
sanctuary  told  to  children's  children  that  their  fathers  were  given  here  and  for  ever 
to  the  Lord.  Every  individual,  too,  that  stood  near  any  who  there  uttered  his 
"  credo  "  had  stamped  upon  his  memory  his  neighbour's  act,  to  be  made  to  glow  as 
secret  tracings  when  heat  is  applied.  But  are  men  aware  of  the  numerous  objects 
which  have  heard  and  may  testify  to  their  former  promises  to  do  the  wiU  of  God  ? 
It  was  in  some  severe  sickness,  when  the  spectre  of  death  seemed  to  draw  nigh, 
when,  begging  for  reprieve,  you  said :  "  If  I  am  spared  I  will  dedicate  myself  to 
Him."  And  the  walls  of  your  chamber  listened,  and  now  and  then  repeat  it  in  the 
stillness  of  the  night.  They  who  watched  heard  it,  and  are  wondering  yet  if  you 
have  forgotten.  Or  it  was  when  some  sudden  horror  of  doom  flashed  on  you,  and 
you  proffered  all  you  had  for  your  life,  while  billows  or  tempest  or  hurrying  car  or 
roadside  fences  heard  your  cry  and  occasionally  remind  you  of  the  pledge  1  Or,  as 
you  sat  under  the  moving  influences  of  the  Spirit,  and  you  were  sure  the  acceptable 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  305 

time  for  turning  to  God  had  come,  did  you  not  say :  "  When  I  have  made  my 
fortune,  or  gained  this  office,  or  reached  that  age,  I  will  "  ?  And  now  the  fortune  is 
yours,  the  office  has  been  held,  the  age  has  been  passed,  but  your  heart  is  not  yet  in 
the  Lord's  keeping.  It  is  easy  to  mortgage  the  future,  so  unknown,  so  full  of 
plausible  chances  and  opportunities.  Be  as  fair,  friend,  with  the  Lord  as  with  your 
neighbour,  whom  you  are  proud  always  to  have  satisfied,  for  He  has  waited  longer, 
till  you  shall  pay  your  vows  to  the  full.  (De  Witt  S.  Clark.)  The  difficulty  of 
serving  God  : — I.  Some  of  their  DiFFictiLTY  would  be  found  on  the  side  of  God. 
"  He  is  an  holy  God ;  He  is  a  jealous  God  ;  He  will  not  forgive  your  transgressions 
nor  your  sins  "  so  as  to  fail  to  punish  them.  "  He  will  turn,  and  do  you  hurt,  and 
consume  you,  after  that  He  hath  done  you  good."  1.  If  Jehovah  is  to  be  served  at 
aU,  He  must  be  served  alone.  There  can  be  no  possible  rivalry  between  Him  and 
any  other  claimants  to  be  gods.  We  may  think  of  three  things  that  are  ever 
pressing  in  our  day  to  be  gods  with  God — the  luxury  of  wealth ;  self-seeking 
pleasure  ;  mere  mind  knowledge.  2.  If  God  is  served  at  all  He  must  be  served  in 
righteousness.  God  wiU  search  through  and  through  every  form  of  service  offered 
to  Him,  and  it  must  be  sincere,  it  must  be  "  clean  every  whit,"  or  it  cannot  be 
acceptable  to  Him.  The  service  of  a  holy  God  must  be  the  service  of  intention  and 
resolve,  not  of  mere  accident.  It  should  be  thought  about,  resolved  upon,  prayed 
about,  made  the  most  earnest  thing  in  the  whole  life.  II.  Some  of  the  difficulties 
WEKE  found  on  THE  SIDE  OF  IsEAEL.  "  Ye  canuot."  "  Yc  are  too  frail.  Ye  are  too 
much  exposed  to  the  power  of  temptation.  Ye  have  too  serious  inchnations  to  evil. 
You  do  not  know  yourselves,  or  you  would  not  promise  too  readily.  You  do  not 
fully  estimate  the  influences  of  the  past,  or  you  would  fear  for  your  future."  They 
who  know  themselves  learn  to  pray,  "Hold  Thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be 
safe,  and  I  shall  have  respect  unto  Thy  commandments."  (The  Weekly  Pulpit.) 
The  holy  character  of  God  : — I.  Although  the  Lord  is  full  op  compassion  and 
MERCY,  He  is  yet  a  holy  and  a  jealous  God.  We  must  beware  of  attributing  to 
our  God  any  qualities  which  are  inconsistent  with  those  by  which  He  is  known 
to  be  guided.  H.  As  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  holy  jealousy  of  God  towards 
wilful  sinners  there  are  certain  conditions  of  mind  in  which  He  will  not 
FORGIVE  your  transgressions  nor  your  sins,  and  in  which,  therefore,  ye  cannot  serve 
the  Lord.  The  impenitent,  the  unbelieving,  the  careless,  the  presumptuous  will  be 
excluded  from  the  blessing.  The  fact  is,  that  one  thing  is  indispensable  to  your 
acceptable  service  of  God ;  and  that  is,  that  you  should  be  in  earnest.  III.  Ask 
yourselves  the  question.  Are  you  desirous  to  serve  the  Lord  youb  God  ?  (E.  G. 
Marshall,  M.A.)  God  declining  first  offers  of  service  : — If  there  be  any  one  thing 
true  in  the  Bible,  it  is  that  God  welcomes  the  fii'st  approach  which  man  makes  to 
Him.  Yet  here  Joshua  offers  a  repulse  to  men  who  wish  to  avow  themselves  on  the 
side  of  God.  Are  we  to  conclude,  then,  that  the  people  were  insincere  ?  We  have 
no  evidence  of  this,  but  the  reverse,  in  their  subsequent  conduct.  There  must  be 
some  reason  for  the  manner  in  which  they  are  met,  and  we  shall  try  to  discover  it. 
1.  First,  however,  we  shall  seek  to  show  that  this  procedure  on  the  part  of  God  i3 
not  so  unusual.  You  may  recollect  how  the  band  of  Gideon  was  chosen.  When 
the  wise  men  from  the  East  came  seeking  Christ  the  star  seemed  to  desert  them, 
and  they  met  with  disappointment  and  perplexity  from  all  their  inquiries  in 
Jerusalem.  When  the  Jews,  stirred  up  to  expect  the  coming  Messiah,  sent 
messengers  to  John,  in  the  hope  that  they  had  found  their  desire,  "  he  confessed 
and  denied  not,  but  confessed,  I  am  not  the  Christ."  We  cannot  forget  the  strange 
treatment  of  the  woman  of  Canaan  by  the  Lord  Himself ;  how  she  cried  after  Him, 
and  was  not  answered,  and  met  at  length  what  appeared  a  contemptuous  rejection. 
In  the  same  way  He  acted  to  the  scribe  who  came  to  Him  with  such  an  uncondi- 
tional offer  of  discipleship,  "  Master,  I  will  foUow  Thee  whithersoever  Thou  goest." 
"  This  is  no  common  pleasure-walk,"  was  the  reply ;  "  the  foxes  have  holes,  and 
the  birds  of  the  air  have  nests,  but  the  Son  of  Man  hath  not  where  to  lay  His  head." 
There  is  another  way  of  finding  the  same  result  in  the  Bible.  Consider,  for 
example,  the  view  that  is  given  of  the  character  of  God.  He  is  presented  to  us  not 
only  as  good,  and  ready  to  forgive,  but  as  just  and  righteous — a  God  who  cannot 
look  on  sin  without  displeasure.  There  are  many  terrible  threatenings,  many 
dreadful  judgments  against  sin  and  sinners,  which  have  all  this  language  in  them : 
"Ye  cannot  serve  the  Lord,  for  He  is  an  holy  God."  When  we  leave  Bible  repre- 
sentations, and  come  to  the  experience  of  individuals,  we  meet  with  many  similar 
illustrations.  In  regard  to  the  general  evidence  of  the  divinity  of  the  Bible,  we  caTi 
see  that  God  has  not  constructed  it  on  the  plan  of  overpowering  the  conviction  of 

20 


306  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixiv. 

any  man  at  first  sight.  And  even  when  a  man  has  come  to  the  entire  conviction 
that  the  gospel  is  Divine,  that  there  is  "  none  other  name  given  under  heaven 
whereby  we  must  be  saved  but  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,"  he  is  not  assured  thereby 
of  perfect  peace.  2.  Having  sought  to  show  that  this  procedure,  on  the  part  of 
God,  is  not  so  unusual,  we  may  now  attempt  to  find  some  reasons  for  it.  (1)  As  a 
first  reason  we  may  assign  this,  that  it  sifts  the  true  from  the  false  seeker.  The 
gospel  comes  into  the  world  to  be  a  touchstone  of  human  nature — to  be  Ithuriel's 
spear  among  men.  There  is  enough  in  it  to  attract  and  convince  at  last  every  man 
who  has  a  sense  of  spiritual  need  and  a  desire  of  spiritual  deliverance,  but  it  is 
presented  in  such  a  form  as  to  try  whether  the  soul  really  possess  this,  and  therefore 
we  may  have  obstacles  of  various  kinds  at  the  very  entrance.  It  may  seem  a 
strange  and  unworthy  thing  that  such  an  obstacle  should  meet  a  man  in  the  very 
conxtnencement  of  such  a  journey ;  but,  after  all,  let  it  be  remembered  that  what 
makes  it  an  obstacle  is  the  state  of  heart  of  the  man  himself.  This  further  may  be 
said,  that  no  one  will  be  able  to  complain  of  any  real  wrong  from  such  obstacles. 
The  false  seeker  is  not  injured,  because  he  never  sincerely  sought  at  all.  There 
was  no  sense  of  sin's  evil,  no  wish  to  be  saved  from  it,  and  till  this  exists  nothing 
can  be  sought,  and  nothing  found.  The  true  seeker  is  not  injured,  for  never  was 
such  an  one  disappointed.  (2)  Next,  it  leads  the  true  seeker  to  examine  himself 
more  thoroughly.  If  a  man  is  accepted,  or  thinks  he  is  accepted,  at  once,  he  takes 
many  things  for  granted  which  it  would  be  well  for  him  to  inquire  into.  Very 
specially  is  this  the  case  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  sin  and  the  Ught  in  which  God 
regards  it.  The  easy  complacency  with  which  some  talk  of  pardon  and  their 
assurance  of  it,  often  springs  more  from  dulness  of  conscience  than  strength  of 
faith.  The  natural  result  of  such  a  defective  view  is,  that  when  a  man  enhsts  with 
it  in  God's  service,  he  does  so  without  any  distinct  idea  of  what  he  is  to  aim  at.  He 
does  not  see  that  the  gospel  binds  us  to  the  service  of  a  God  of  truth  and  purity, 
and  that  only  in  this  way  can  its  blessings  be  enjoyed.  (3)  Further,  it  binds  a  man 
to  his  profession  by  a  stronger  sense  of  consistency.  There  is  a  paper  of  obligations 
put  into  our  hands  to  sign,  and,  when  we  take  the  pen,  we  are  bidden  read  it  over 
again  and  ponder  it,  that  we  may  subscribe  with  clear  consciousness  of  the  contents. 
God  will  beguile  no  man  into  His  service  by  false  pretences.  (4)  Lastly,  it  educates 
us  to  a  higher  growth  and  greater  capacity  of  happiness.  Wnen  we  see  the  wind 
shaking  a  young  tree,  and  bending  it  to  the  very  earth,  it  may  seem  to  be  retarding 
its  rise,  but  it  is  furthering  it.  In  the  intellectual  world  a  strong  man  thrives  on 
difficulties.  There  is  no  falser  method  of  education  than  to  make  all  smooth  and 
easy,  and  remove  every  stone  before  the  foot  touches  it.  God  Himself  has  hidden 
the  knowledge  of  His  creation  in  the  depths  of  the  sky  and  the  bosom  of  the  earth. 
He  has  demanded  toil  and  travail,  keen  and  patient  thought,  tiU  study  has  become 
a  weariness  to  the  flesh,  in  order  that  man's  intellect  may  rise  to  its  proper  stature. 
It  would  have  been  a  strange  thing  if  the  spiritual  world  had  been  an  exception. 
Kead  the  manner  in  which  such  men  as  Paul  and  Luther  and  Pascal  passed  through 
the  gate  of  life,  not  easily  and  complacently,  but  with  fears  within  and  fightings 
without,  and  you  will  see  how  God  made  them  grow  such  men  as  they  became. 
And,  though  we  are  far  distant  from  that  mark,  very  humble  plants  in  the  garden 
of  God  beside  those  great  trees  of  righteousness,  yet,  if  we  are  to  rise  to  anything,  it 
must  be  in  the  same  way,  not  by  soft  indulgent  nurture,  but  by  endurance  of  hard- 
ship, and  pressing  on  against  repulse.  If  there  be  some  who  have  been  seeking 
God,  as  they  think,  in  vain,  and  have  given  up  the  search  as  fruitless,  what  can  we 
do  but  urge  them  to  renew  the  application?  Come,  as  these  Israelites  did,  with  the 
words,  "  Nay ;  but  we  will  serve  the  Lord."  I  can  suppose  a  twofold  class  who 
have  ceased  to  seek.  There  are  some,  perhaps,  with  a  feeling  of  wounded  pride  or 
petulance.  They  say  they  have  done  their  best,  and  it  is  useless.  They  have  gone 
through  a  course  of  inquiry  and  search  and  prayer,  and  they  have  found  neither 
comfort  nor  hope.  Would  it  not  be  worth  the  while  of  such  to  reconsider  this  part 
of  it,  and  to  see  whether  some  of  the  blame  may  not  lie  with  themselves  ?  There 
may,  however,  be  another  class  who  have  left  off  seeking  God,  from  very  different 
motives,  not  in  petulance,  but  in  despondency,  who  have  not  so  much  turned  their 
back  on  search,  as  sat  down,  wearied  and  hopeless,  in  the  midst  of  it.  Let  theijx 
consider  that  they  have  to  do  with  One  who  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed  nor 
quench  the  smoking  flax ;  that  the  heart  of  God  is  with  them  ;  that  the  darkness 
and  death  of  Christ,  now  changed  to  the  strength  of  intercession,  are  on  their  side, 
and  all  those  heavenly  promises  which  are  yea  and  amen  in  Him,  and  which,  as 
bright  and  as  many  as  Uie  stars  in  theii  courses,  all  fight  for  them.    Let  them 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  307 

think  of  Jacob's  wrestling,  of  David's  tears,  of  Paul's  threefold  prayer,  of  the  woman 
of  Canaan,  &c.  (John  Ker,  D.D.)  Moral  inability  : — I.  The  certainty  of  the 
TRUTH  THAT  uxREJTEWED  MEN  CANNOT  SERVE  GoD.  1.  The  nature  of  God  renders 
perfect  service  impossible  to  depraved  men.  2.  The  best  they  could  render  as 
unrenewed  men  would  lack  heart  and  intent,  and  therefore  must  be  unacceptable. 
3.  The  law  of  God  is  perfect,  comprehensive,  spiritual,  far-reaching :  who  can  hope 
to  fulfil  it  ?  4.  The  carnal  mind  is  inclined  to  self-will,  self-seeking,  lust,  enmity, 
pride,  and  aU  other  evils.  5.  Let  men  try  to  be  perfectly  obedient.  They  wiH  not 
try  it.  They  argue  for  their  ability,  but  they  are  loth  enough  to  exert  it.  11.  The 
DiscouBAGEMENT  WHICH  ARISES  FROM  THIS  TRUTH.  1.  It  discourages  men  from  an 
impossible  task.  2.  It  discourages  from  a  ruinous  course.  3.  It  discourages 
rehance  upon  ceremonies  or  any  other  outward  religiousness,  by  assuring  men  that 
these  cannot  suffice.  4.  It  discourages  from  every  other  way  of  self-salvation,  and 
thus  shuts  men  up  to  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  Nothing  better  can  befaU  them 
(GalJii.  22,  23).  in.  The  necessities  of  which  we  are  reminded  by  this  truth. 
1.  Unregenerate  men,  before  you  can  serve  God  you  need — (1)  A  new  nature. 
(2)  Eeconciliation.  (3)  Acceptance.  (4)  Continual  aid,  to  keep  you  in  the  way 
when  once  you  are  in  it  (1  Sam.  ii.  9  ;  Jude  24,  25).  2.  If  you  cannot  serve  God  as 
you  are,  yet  trust  Him  as  He  manifests  Himself  in  Christ  Jesus ;  and  do  this  just 
as  you  are.  3.  This  will  enable  you  to  serve  Him  on  better  principles.  4.  This 
change  of  your  nature  will  be  effected  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  will  come  and  dwell 
in  you.  5.  This  will  fit  you  for  heaven,  where  "His  servants  shall  serve  Him" 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Moral  inability  : — Their  inability  was  wholly  of  the  moral 
kind.  They  could  not  do  it  because  they  were  not  disposed  to  do  it,  just  as  it  is  said 
of  Joseph's  brethren  (Gen.  xxxvii.  4)  that  they  "could  not  speak  peaceably  unto 
him,"  so  strong  was  their  personal  dislike  to  him.  But  an  inability  arising 
from  this  source  was  obviously  inexcusable,  on  the  same  grounds  that  a  drunkard's 
inability  to  master  his  propensity  for  strong  drink  is  inexcusable.  In  like  manner 
the  "  cannot"  of  the  impenitent  sinner,  in  regard  to  the  performance  of  his  duty, 
is  equally  inexcusable.  {George  Bush.)  Entire  change  needed  : — A  man  deeply 
exercised  about  his  soul  was  conversing  with  a  friend  on  the  subject,  when  the 
friend  said,  "  Come  at  once  to  Jesus,  for  He  will  take  away  all  your  sins  from  your 
back."  "  Yes,  I  am  aware  of  that "  ;  said  the  other ;  "  but  what  about  my  back ?  " 
I  find  I  have  not  only  sins  to  take  away,  but  there  is  myself  ;  what  is  to  be  done 
with  that  ?  And  there  is  not  only  my  back,  but  hands  and  feet,  and  head  and  heart 
are  such  a  mass  of  iniquity  that  it's  myself  I  want  to  get  rid  of  before  I  can  get 
peace.  (British  Evangelist.)  Discouragement  useful : — Discouragements,  rightly 
put,  encourage.  The  best  way  to  deepen  and  confirm  good  resolutions  which  have 
been  too  swiftly  and  inconsiderately  formed  is  to  state  very  plainly  all  the  difficulty 
of  keeping  them.  The  hand  that  seems  to  repel  often  most  powerfully  attracts. 
There  is  no  better  way  of  turning  a  somewhat  careless  "  we  will"  into  a  persistent 
"nay,  but  we  will,"  than  to  interpose  a  "ye  cannot."  Many  a  boy  has  been  made 
a  sailor  by  the  stories  of  hardships  which  his  parents  have  meant  as  dissuasives. 
Joshua  here  is  doing  exactly  what  Jesus  Christ  did  often.  He  refused  glib  vows 
because  He  desired  whole  hearts.  "  Master,  I  will  follow  Thee  whithersoever  Thou 
goest ! "  was  answered  by  no  recognition  of  the  speaker's  enthusiasm,  and  by  no 
word  of  pleasure  or  invitation,  but  by  the  apparently  cold  repulse:  "Foxes  have 
holes,  birds  of  the  air  roosting-places  ;  but  the  Son  of  Man  has  not  where  to  lay  His 
head.  That  is  what  you  are  offering  to  share.  Do  you  stand  to  your  words  ?  "  He 
will  have  no  soldiers  enlisted  under  false  pretences.  They  shaU  know  the  fuU 
difficulties  and  trials  which  they  must  meet ;  and  if,  knowing  these,  they  still  are 
wilhng  to  take  His  yoke  upon  them,  then  how  exuberant  and  warm  the  welcome 
which  He  gives  !  There  is  a  real  danger  that  this  side  of  the  evangelist's  work 
should  be  overlooked  in  the  earnestness  with  which  the  other  side  is  done.  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Reasons  why  man  will  not  serve  God  .-—Dr.  Tucker,  Bishop  of 
Eastern  Equatorial  Africa,  said :  "  In  our  journey  we  came  to  the  country  of  Taita. 
The  people  of  Taita  are  not  a  very  interesting  people,  and  are  adverse  to  Christianity. 
I  visited  a  chief  there,  and  asked  him  why  they  were  so  unwilling  for  Christian 
people  to  settle  in  their  midst,  and  I  said,  '  If  I  sent  you  a  couple  of  missionaries 
would  you  not  be  glad  to  have  them  ?  '  '  No.'  '  Why  ? '  I  asked.  The  chief 
replied,  '  If  they  come  and  settle  among  us  they  tell  us  that  stealing  cattle  and 
fighting  are  not  right.'  '  Yes ! '  I  replied.  '  Well,  that  would  never  do ;  for  we  are 
very  fond  of  stealing  cattle,  and  also  of  fighting.'  It  was  a  most  straightforward 
reason,  and  I  think  if  many  of  the  heathen  at  home  would  be  as  honest  in  giving 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiy. 

the  reasons  why  they  will  not  come  to  Christ  they  would  say  much  the  same.  '  If 
I  came  to  Christ  I  should  require  to  quit  getting  drunk,  and  I  am  very  fond 
of  getting  drunk,' "  &c. 

Ver.  20.  If  ye  forsake  the  Lord  .  .  .  He  will  turn. — Mercies  abused,  the  precursors 
of  wrath  : — I.  The  eeasonableness  of  expecting  that  abused  mercies  must  lead 
TO  more  aggravated  punishment.  We  see  this  clearly  in  the  history  of  Israel. 
Their  career  as  a  nation  was  marked  by  perfidy  and  ingratitude ;  at  almost  every 
step  of  their  progress  we  find  them  in  rebellion  against  the  Most  High — "  forsaking 
the  Lord,  and  serving  strange  gods."  And  how  did  God  deal  with  them  when  they 
thus  acted  ?  Is  it  not  the  case  that  He  scourged  them,  and  caused  them  to  suffer 
punishment  ?  Look  at  the  plagues  that  bef  el  them  in  the  desert ;  look  at  the 
slaughters  which  God  permitted  them  to  experience  in  warfare  with  their  enemies. 
And  who  can  survey  the  subsequent  history  of  the  Jews,  and  not  read  a  fulfilment 
of  the  threatening  contained  in  our  text  ?  And  what  we  are  desirous  you  should 
gather  from  the  foregoing  observations  is  mainly  this,  that  no  experience  of  good 
at  the  hands  of  the  Almighty  affords  warrant  to  expect  that  future  disobedience 
will  not  be  visited  with  righteous  severity.  "  If  ye  forsake  the  Lord  and  serve 
strange  gods,  then  He  will  turn  and  do  you  hurt  and  consume  you,  after  that  He 
hath  done  you  good."  II.  The  justice  of  the  dealing  which  is  referred  to 
IN  THE  threatening  BEFORE  US.  Now  it  wiU  be  admitted  that  every  reason  was 
given  Israel  to  expect  the  continuance  of  the  Divine  favour  and  protection.  We 
think  it  easily  to  be  perceived  that  one  main  purpose  of  the  Almighty  in  the 
calling  of  Israel  as  a  nation  was  to  maintain  upon  earth,  through  means  of  that 
race,  the  pure  knowledge  of  Himself ;  to  afford  a  witness  to  the  unity  of  Jehovah, 
and  against  idolatry  ;  to  secure  glory  to  Himself  by  the  exhibition,  on  the  part  of 
this  people,  of  a  consistent  obedience.  Surely,  then,  if  this  purpose  was,  through 
the  nation's  profligacy  and  disobedience,  altogether  thwarted,  if  all  the  resources 
which  God  gave  them  of  national  strength  were  abused  and  corrupted,  indeed  it 
were  strange  not  to  perceive  that  their  conduct  in  this  respect  released  every 
presumed  obligation  "  to  do  them  good,"  and  in  short  vindicates  to  the  letter  the 
justice  of  the  warning,  "If  ye  forsake  the  Lord,  and  serve  strange  gods,  then  He 
will  turn  and  do  you  hurt,  and  consume  you,  after  that  He  hath  done  you  good." 
And  now,  to  take  a  more  comprehensive  range,  from  looking  at  the  case  of  the 
Jewish  people  let  us  turn  to  that  of  mankind  in  general.  Does  it  appear  that  God 
can  be  just  in  the  apportionment  of  unmitigated  wrath  to  mankind,  notwithstand- 
ing all  the  manifestations  of  His  determination  to  do  them  good  ?  There  are  two 
grand  exhibitions  to  be  met  with  of  God's  merciful  intention  towards  mankind  at 
large,  to  do  them  good.  The  first  of  these  is  furnished  by  creation,  and  the  second 
by  redemption.  Our  object  of  inquiry  is  simply  this :  whether  the  display  of  God's 
love  in  creating  or  redeeming  mankind  offers  any  reason  to  conclude,  that,  in 
harmony  with  His  justice,  He  cannot  "turn  and  do  them  hurt,  and  consume  them." 
To  begin  with  creation :  no  man  can  doubt  that  his  creation  is  the  proof  of  a  pur- 
pose on  God's  part  to  "  do  him  good."  Beyond  all  question  this  purpose  was  man's 
happiness,  but  then  his  happiness  was  to  consist  in  assimilation  to  the  Godhead ; 
and  if  upon  man  devolve  the  guilt  of  having  voluntarily  destroyed  and  renounced 
that  similitude,  where  is  the  inconsistency  of  the  dealing,  should  God  "turn  and 
do  him  hurt,  and  consume  him  "  ?  The  nobler  the  faculties  wherewith  he  was 
endowed  the  brighter  the  evidence  of  God's  purpose  to  "  do  him  good,"  the  stronger 
then  seem  to  me  the  reasons  wherefore  wrath  should  be  executed  upon  those  by 
whom  the  faculties  are  abused  and  the  evidence  slighted.  We  turn,  lastly,  to  the 
manifestation  of  God's  goodness  as  displayed  in  redemption.  There  have  been 
those  who  have  argued — redemption  is  the  evidence  of  a  love  so  surpassing,  they 
can  never  believe  God  will  sentence  to  destruction  those  whom  He  has  redeemed  at 
such  cost.  "  The  method  of  our  atonement  involves  an  expenditure  of  such 
wisdom  and  mercy,  that  how  can  we  conceive  of  the  Almighty  as  permitting  its 
objects  finally  to  perish  ? "  Alas !  to  reason  thus  is  equally,  as  in  the  former 
instances  we  have  adduced,  to  overlook  one  main  purpose  of  God  in  the  scheme  of 
human  redemption.  Is  it  not  strange  that  men  who  have  been  made  the  objects  of 
a  sacrifice  so  costly  should  regard  it  so  lightly  and  requite  it  so  coldly  ?  We  may 
wonder  that  redeemed  sinners  should  perish,  but  is  it  not  more  wonderful  that 
redeemed  sinners  should  refuse  to  be  saved?  Again,  let  us  revert  to  the  purpose  of 
God  in  redemption.  Indeed  it  was  to  bless  the  whole  earth ;  it  was  to  ransom 
humanity  from  the  bondage  of  evil,  and  to  exalt  it  to  transcendent  felicity.     But 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  309 

after  all,  throughout  every  dealing  of  God  with  His  intelligent  creatures,  we  may 
discover  the  purpose  to  treat  them  as  responsible  beings,  free  to  reject  the  overtures 
of  His  mercy.  Now,  redemption  is  offered  upon  certain  terms  ;  man  is  required  to 
repent  and  to  believe  in  order  to  be  saved.  It  is  no  part  of  redemption  to  offer  him 
an  entrance  into  heaven  irrespective  of  a  moral  fitness,  to  render  him  meet  for 
heaven's  enjoyments  ;  and  in  the  acquisition  of  this  moral  fitness  man  is  required 
to  co-operate  with  the  Divine  Spirit.  He  can  refuse  to  profit  by  what  God  hath 
done  for  him,  and  thus  prove  himself  a  despiser  of  the  love  which  is  so  unsearch- 
ably great.  He  can  resolutely  withstand  the  design  of  the  Almighty  in  redemption, 
namely,  that  he  should  glorify  God,  both  in  his  body  and  soul ;  and,  I  ask,  if  it  be 
possible  for  Him  to  act  thus,  is  there  not  justice  in  the  sentence  which  awards  him 
to  suffer  in  spite  of  all  the  declared  willingness  of  God  to  do  him  good  ?  (Bp.  R. 
Bickenteth.)         Christians  solemnly  reminded  of  their  obligations  : — I.  That  we 

ARE    UNDER    OBLIGATIONS   TO    SERVE    THE   LoRD    FROM    OUR    OWN    CHOICE,    OR   VOLUNTARY 

ENGAGEMENTS.  Here  I  would  premise  that  though  voluntary  obligations,  taken 
upon  ourselves  by  our  own  act,  have  something  of  a  pecuUar  force  in  them,  yet 
they  are  not  the  only  obligations  we  are  under  to  serve  the  Lord.  We  are  bound  to 
be  His  servants  whether  we  wiU  or  not.  His  character  as  our  creator,  our 
preserver,  and  benefactor,  and  as  a  being  of  supreme  excellency,  give  Him  the  most 
firm  and  indisputable  right  to  our  obedience.  But  though  we  are  all  under 
obhgations  to  God,  independent  upon,  and  prior  to,  our  own  consent,  yet  there  are 
a  class  of  obligations  which  we  have  personally,  and  by  our  own  act,  taken  upon 
ourselves ;  and  in  the  breach  of  these  we  are  guilty  of  more  direct  and  aggravated 
perjury.    U.  To  inquire  how  and  when,  or  in  what  respects,   and   at  what 

PERIODS    OF    time,  WE    ARE   WITNESSES   AGAINST    OURSELVES    THAT  WE  HAVE  CHOSEN  THE 

Lord  to  serve  Him.  1.  You  yourselves  are  witnesses  against  yourselves  that  you 
have  chosen  the  Lord  to  be  your  God.  You  know  and  confess  that  you  have  been 
dedicated  to  God  in  baptism ;  and  some  of  you  know  it  was  your  own  act  and  deed 
when  capable  of  choosing  for  yourselves.  You  also  know  in  your  own  consciences 
that  you  are  often  present  at  the  table  of  the  Lord,  and  there  you  renew 
your  covenant  with  God  afresh.  2.  You  are  witnesses  against  one  another 
that  you  have  chosen  the  Lord  to  serve  Him.  You  have  seen  the  transactions 
that  have  passed  between  God  and  you  in  His  house ;  you  have  seen  some 
baptized  themselves,  some  presenting  their  children  to  baptism,  and  so  renewing 
their  own  covenant  with  God ;  some  sealing  their  religious  engagements  at  the 
Lord's  table.     {President  Davies.) 

Ver.  25.  Joshua  made  a  covenant. — The  covenant  of  Joshua  : — »'  That  day  "  was 
a  very  notable  day  in  the  annals  of  the  children  of  Israel ;  its  transactions  might 
well  be  recorded  in  the  volume  of  the  book  and  engraven  on  the  monumental 
stone.  All  the  favours  which  God  had  promised  to  their  fathers  while  yet  they 
languished  in  bondage  in  Egypt  had  been  now  fulfilled ;  the  promised  land  was 
theirs.  God  had  given  them  rest  in  all  their  borders.  In  the  meantime  their 
captain,  who  had  so  often  led  them  to  victory,  waxed  helpless  and  old  ;  he  felt  that 
there  gathered  around  him  the  mists  and  crept  over  him  the  shadow  of  the  coming 
change.  He  summoned  the  tribes  of  Israel,  therefore,  to  meet  him  in  Shechem ; 
and  they  muster  largely,  for  they  feel  it  to  be  a  great  day,  and  suspect  they  are 
about  to  listen  to  their  leader's  parting  charge.  He  recounts  God's  providential 
dealings  with  them,  and  seeks  by  the  memory  of  the  past  to  inspire  their  vows  of 
fidelity  and  allegiance.  The  warrior  heart  is  still  in  the  old  man  eloquent,  but  he 
wars  not  now  against  advancing  hosts,  but  against  rebellious  minds.  There  is  yet 
fire  in  his  battle-cry,  but  it  summons  to  selt-conquest.  There  is  glory  yet  upon  his 
brow,  but  it  is  not  the  lustre  of  his  former  achievements,  but  the  radiance  of  the 
nearing  heaven  already  gathering  to  crown  its  hero.  He  has  often  led  the  people 
to  victory ;  he  will  confirm  them  in  piety  now,  that  he  may  but  briefly  precede  them 
into  the  recompense  of  the  reward.  He  knew  full  weU  that  their  only  danger  sprang 
from  themselves,  that  there  was  no  danger  to  them,  if  they  were  but  obedient 
and  faithful,  from  the  shock  even  of  an  embattled  world  ;  and  with  earnest  love  to 
God,  and  with  deep  knowledge  of  the  human  heart,  he  delivers  his  final  and  his 
impressive  appeal.  He  warns  them  to  count  the  cost,  in  order  that  there  may  be  a 
more  solemn  and  decided  consecration  of  themselves  to  God.  Then,  receiving 
their  reiterated  vows,  he  makes  a  covenant  with  them,  and  stamps  it  with  a  sacra- 
mental and  with  an  authoritative  value,  and  sets  it  up  for  a  statute  and  for  an 
ordinance  in  Shechem.    This  seems  to  have  been  the  last  public  act  of  his  Ufe,  and 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

then,  weary  for  the  rest  of  which  Canaan  was  but  the  significant  shadow,  he  went 
serenely  into  heaven.  Fkst,  as  to  the  nature  of  this  covenant.  I  need  not  remind 
you  that  the  Israelites  were  the  chosen  people  of  God — chosen  to  be  the  recipients 
of  His  bounty — chosen  to  be  the  witnesses  of  His  unity — chosen  to  enter  solemn 
protests  against  the  abominable  idolatries  of  the  nations  around.  For  the  fulfil- 
ment of  these  ends  Jehovah  had  interposed  for  His  Israel  in  many  signal  deliver- 
ances and  blessings.  They  were  not  a  people,  and  He  had  given  them  a  great 
name ;  He  had  broken  for  them  the  yoke  of  the  oppressor ;  He  had  made  them 
heir  to  an  inheritance  which  they  knew  not,  neither  did  their  fathers  know ;  He 
made  the  ocean  a  pavement  for  them,  the  heavens  a  storehouse,  and  the  rock  a 
fountain  of  waters ;  He  had  successively  overthrown  all  their  enemies  in  their 
sight,  and  by  many  a  convincing  illustration  had  stamped  the  seal  of  faithfulness 
upon  every  promise  He  had  made.  And  yet  they  had  very  frequently  rebelled. 
When  trials  came  they  turned  recreant  from  faith  and  hope ;  when  they  were 
summoned  to  hazardous  duty  they  shrank,  like  cowards,  from  its  discharge ;  and 
they  even  formed  unholy  leagues  with  the  people  whom  they  were  sent  to  over- 
throw, and  adopted  their  idolatries  with  an  enthusiasm  the  more  reckless  because 
of  its  perversion  from  a  purer  faith  and  worship.  There  was  need,  therefore,  that 
they  should  be  reminded  of  their  duty,  and  that  they  should  be  urged,  by  all  the 
solemnity  of  statute  and  of  ordinance,  to  give  themselves  afresh  unto  God.  Are 
not  their  circumstances  yours  ?  The  burden  of  the  summons  which  Joshua  made 
unto  the  people  was  that  they  should  serve  the  Lord.  This  was  also  the  essence 
of  the  covenant,  that  they  should  serve  the  Lord.  And,  allowing  for  the  differences 
of  mission  and  local  ch-cumstances,  there  is  an  identity  in  the  covenant  which  I 
want  to  make  with  you  to-day.  I  just  mention  two  points.  In  the  first  place, 
then,  Joshua  could  not  have  served  the  Lord  if  he  had  neglected  the  Divinely- 
appointed  institution  of  sacrifice.  Although  the  Mosaic  and  the  Christian  economy 
differ  in  many  things,  they  are  alike  in  this,  that  the  foundation  of  each  of  them  is 
a  recognition  of  sin.  The  only  other  part  of  the  covenant  which  it  is  necessary 
for  me  to  bring  before  you  is  that  Joshua  could  not  have  served  the  Lord,  nor 
any  Israelite  in  the  camp,  if  he  had  not  strictly  obeyed  the  ten  commandments  of 
the  law.  The  great  principles  of  morality  are  the  same  in  every  age,  and  these 
precepts  of  the  former  time,  with  a  new  spirit  put  into  them  by  the  exposition  of 
Jesus  on  the  mount,  are  binding  on  our  consciences  to-day.  In  entire  union  with 
Christ  I  have  obtained  power  to  obey — that  is  the  first  thing.  We  cannot  obey 
untU  we  have  got  a  new  heart  put  into  us ;  we  have  no  strength  in  human  nature's 
old  heart  to  obey  the  commandments  of  God;  but  having  by  our  union  with 
Christ  obtained  power  to  obey,  that  obedience  should  be  sincerely  and  heartily 
rendered.  A  sincere  seeker  after  the  will  of  God  will  not  choose  among  the  com- 
mandments, wUl  not  obey  them  just  so  far  as  they  chime  in  with  corrupt  desire 
and  contravene  no  darling  and  yet  vicious  inclination  of  the  soul ;  he  will  seek  to 
obey  them  in  the  universality  of  their  behests,  in  the  breadth  and  grandeur  of  their 
deep  de.sign.  I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  go  further.  If  these  points  of  the 
covenant  are  granted  me,  that  is  all  I  ask.  Come  to  Christ,  and  keep  His  law,  and 
you  will  be  Christians  fit  for  earth,  and  Christians  fit  for  heaven.  I  cannot  at 
large  mention  the  arguments  by  which  this  covenant  was  commended.  I  rather, 
therefore,  prefer  to  confine  my  thoughts  to  the  faculty  to  which  the  minister 
makes  his  appeal.  Joshua  evidently  regarded  every  man  among  the  Israelites 
around  him  as  invested  with  the  royal  attribute  of  personal  freedom.  Beneath 
each  kindling  eye  and  swarthy  brow  he  sees  an  active  reason  and  a  manly 
Boul.  He  speaks  not  to  those  who  are  of  necessity  impelled — who  are  circum- 
scribed by  a  despotism  of  surroundings — from  whose  shackles  there  is  no  liberation; 
he  speaks  to  men,  to  freemen,  to  freemen  with  power  to  choose  the  right — with 
power  to  prefer  the  wrong :  "  Choose  you  this  day."  You  can  choose  your  service. 
Oh  1  I  would  remind  you  of  the  many  blessings  which  God  has  heaped  upon  you 
from  the  beginning — how  your  life  has  sparkled  in  the  light  of  His  loving-kindness. 
It  was  He  who  kindled  for  you  all  the  endearments  of  affection  and  lit  up  all  the 
joyfulness  of  home ;  it  was  He  that  warded  off  peril  and  environed  you  with  the 
restraints  that  have  preserved  you  from  the  grosser  vices  and  inspired  you  with  the 
impulse  of  every  good  desire.  His  Son  died  to  redeem  you,  and  hves  to  intercede 
that  the  benefits  of  His  redemption  may  be  yours.  His  Spirit  fans  the  faint 
impression  and  kindles  the  holy  desire,  and  takes  of  the  precious  things  of  Christ — 
those  precious,  those  holy  motives,  and  inspiring  hopes — and  shows  them  unto 
you.    There  is  not  a  temporal  mercy,  there  is  not  an  intellectual  enjoyment, 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  JOSHUA.  311 

there  is  not  a  spiritual  mercy,  for  which  you  are  not  indebted  to  Him.  And  even 
now  He  comes,  not  forcing  you  to  love  Him,  but  inviting,  entreating,  imploring, 
adjuring,  "  My  son.  My  daughter,  give  Me  thy  heart."     [W.  M.  Punshon,  D.D.) 

Vers.  26,  27.  Joshua  .  .  .  took  a  great  stone,  and  set  it  up  there  under  an  oak, 
that  was  by  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord. — The  devout  soul  and  nature : — Solemnity 
of  occasion.    Joshua,  dying,  calls  upon  the  nation  to  "  choose  whom  you  wiU  serve." 
Here  we  have — 1.  A  wise  effort  to  impress  and  perpetuate  religious  resolutions. 
2.  A  fine  impersonation  of  material  nature.    I.  The   impoktance   or  religious 
EESOLUTioNS.     They  are  worthy  of  perpetual  remembrance.     The  world  has  monu- 
ments of  earthquakes,  wars,  deaths ;  but  how  few  of  devout  resolutions !     H.  The 
HIGHEST  USE  01"  MATERIAL  OBJECTS.     Without  actually  Setting  up  material  objects, 
nature  might  be  appropriated  in  her  diiTerent  manifestations  as  types  of  God's 
character,  and  as  mementos  of  events  in  the  religious  history  of  an  individual  or 
a  family.     HI.  The  most  solemn  aspects  of  nature.      Who  dares  to   say  that 
nature  cannot  hear  or  speak  ?    Who  shall  say,  at  the  last,  what  nature,  after  her 
long  silence,  shall  reveal?     Take  heed  what  you  do  and  say:  stones  may  hear 
without  a  Joshua's  invocation.     {Homilist.)         The  Christian  use  of  churches  : — 
We  can  easily  conceive  the  association  of  thought  with  which  Joshua  and  Israel 
contemplated  the  stone  which  they  set  up  in  Shechem.    However  rough  it  might  be 
and  shapeless,  it  had  for  them  a  solemn  character  ;  it  had  something  approaching 
to  personality  and  the  power  of  testimony.     "  It,"  said  Joshua,  "  hath  heard  all  the 
words  of  the  Lord  which  He  spake  unto  us  "  ;  not,  of  course,  literally,  but  in  the 
minds  and  recollections  of  those  who  regarded  it  as  a  pledge  and  token  of  the  vow 
and  covenant  made  betwixt  them  and  God.     And  we  may  well  conceive  that  such 
a  silent,  unchangeable  witness  retained  for  years,  and  perhaps  for  generations,  its 
effect  on  the  people  of  Israel,  even  in  their  downward  course  which,  we  too  well 
know,  shortly  followed.     To  it  the  servants  of  God,  struggling  against  the  idolatry 
and  pollution  of  their  age,  would  bring  their  little  ones,  and  teach  them  the  words 
which  it  heard,  and  of  which  it  was  a  testimony,  and  repeat  each  for  himself  their 
dying  captain's  confession,  "As  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord." 
Many  a  tender  hand,  laid  on  its  cool  surface,  may  have  throbbed  with  generous 
emotion  and  holy  zeal ;  many  a  thoughtful  youth  and  maiden  of  Israel  may  have 
heard  from  it  a  sermon,  which  issued  in  holy  endurance  and  heroic  resolve.     And 
we,  have  not  we  too  setup  our  stone  of  testimony?  have  not  these  walls,  dead 
materials  gathered  from  the  slime  of  the  earth  and  the  bosom  of  the  rock,  within 
these  few  days  assumed  for  us  a  solemnity  of  which,  in  the  laws  of  our  thought, 
they  can  never  be  divested?    Have  they  not  heard  all  the  words  which  the  Lord 
our  God  hath  spoken  to  us,  and  aU  that  we  have  spoken  to  Him  ?     Have  we  not 
begun  a  new  course,  entered  on  a  fresh  iteration  of  our  covenant  with  God,  of  which 
these  stones  are  a  witness,  a  silent  but  ineffaceable  witness — a  witness  through  the 
ages  of  time — a  witness  at  the  solemn  day  of  j  udgment  ?    If  this  pillar  of  testimony, 
set  up  in  the  midst  of  our  homes,  raised  with  so  much  self-denying  effort,  inaugu- 
rated with  so  many  tears  of  joy,  is  to  witness  only  cold  hearts  and  feeble  hands,  and 
formal  Sundays,  and  ungodly  weeks,  oh  shame  unto  us  henceforward — nay,  woe 
unto  us,  for  God  will  look  upon  it  and  judge ;  and  as  we  have  received,  so  will  He 
at  last  require  of  us.     These  latter  words — as  a  note  of  passage — lead  me  on  to 
speak  of  not  only  the  similarity,  but  the  difference  also,  between  Joshua's  stone 
of  witness  and  ours.    I  deeply  feel  that  this  your  church  is,  as  the  stone  in  Shechem 
was,  a  witness  between  you  and  God.     But  it  is  so  in  a  far  more  solemn  sense,  in  a 
far  wider  and  deeper  meaning,  than  that  could  ever  be.     That  stone  was  a  merel 
passive  witness ;  by  standing  where  it  did,  it  gave  a  permanence  to  the  fact  of  the ' 
covenant  there  made.    It  was  merely,  as  our  Nelson's  pillar  or  our  Wellington 
statues,  a  memorial.     A^,  this  our  chocch  is  lijjfiwise ;  a  memorial  of  His  great  "^ 
mercies  and  of  our  feeble  graitrfude ;  a  memorial  that  a  Christian  congregation  has 
in  it  anew  entered  into  covenant  with  Him.     But  it  is  also  far  more  than  this.     It 
is  an  active  witness  between  you  and  God.     The  sermons  which  it  preaches  ai'e  not 
merely  those  which  associations  of  thought  might  suggest ;  they  are  active,  positive, 
spoken  declarations  of  God's  will,  ever  renewed  and  energising.     Its  testimony  is 
not  only  that  of  a  memorial  of  the  past ;  it  is  an  ever-welling  fountain  of  Divine 
knowledge,  telling  of  Christ  and  His  salvation.     Thus  considered,  then,  what  is  the 
use,  what  is  the  office,  of  this  our  Church  ?    Briefly  (but  how  much  is  contained  in 
Ifliese  words)  to  provide  those  who  dwell  in  this  thickly-peopled  neighbourhood  with 
the  public  means  of  grace.    Undoubtedly,  the  first  means  of  grace  are,  prayer  and 


/' 


812  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

praise.  But  there  are  others,  standing  in  the  very  first  rank  of  importance,  viz., 
the  Word  and  the  Sacraments.  Nor  should  I  omit,  in  speaking  of  our  new  church 
as  a  witness  for  God,  the  important  testimony  which  is  borne  by  every  church  in 
the  succession  of  her  services  throughout  the  Christian  year.  Here  you  will  each 
year  accompany  our  blessed  Lord  "  from  His  poor  cradle  to  His  bitter  cross  "  ;  here 
you  will  witness  His  burial,  and  His  glorious  resurrection  and  ascension,  and  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  the  Father  in  the  descent  of  the  Spirit,  and  will  adore 
■with  holy  joy  on  that  crowning  festival  of  Trinity  the  whole  Three  Persons  in  the 
One  Godhead,  covenanted  in  the  work  of  our  salvation.  Such  are  some  few  of  the 
blessings  which  you  may  expect  from  your  church  ;  such  some  few  of  the  testimonies 
which  it  will  lift  up  among  you  for  God  and  His  work.  Can  I  pass  on  without  a 
word  of  exhortation  to  you  that  you  thwart  not  such  blessings — that  you  let  not 
Buch  testimonies  be  given  against  yourselves  ?  Oh,  love  your  church  1  Throng  its 
aisles  from  week  to  week,  as  to-day.     {Dean  Alford.) 

Vers.  29-33.  Joshua  .  .  .  died. — The  burials  of  distinguished  saints : — Within 
the  compass  of  the  five  last  verses  of  this  book  three  deaths  are  recorded  and  three 
burial-places  signalised  by  the  deposited  remains  of  the  most  distinguished  saints. 
After  all  we  have  seen  in  Canaan,  let  us  visit  the  sepulchre  of  Joshua.  The  short 
record  given  may  be  viewed  as  a  simple,  unvarnished  memento,  or  monumental 
inscription  (vers.  29,  80).  The  place  of  his  interment  was  in  the  lot  of  his  inherit- 
ance, and  may  remind  us  how  soon  the  seat  of  life  becomes  the  repository  of  death. 
Short  had  been  the  date  of  his  settlement :  an  hundred  years  before  he  obtained 
rest,  and  then  but  ten  before  he  must  lie  down  in  his  grave,  not  again  to  rise  till 
the  heavens  be  no  more.  "WTiat  can  be  a  greater  or  more  convincing  proof  of  still 
higher  and  nobler  ends  of  Providence  than  any  contained  within  the  limits  of  this 
life,  when  even  the  most  distinguished  of  God's  famQy,  the  most  exemplary  and 
useful  of  His  children,  are  not  suffered  to  continue  by  reason  of  death,  but  are  early 
removed  from  the  happiest  scenes  on  earth  !  It  bespeaks  the  greatness  of  man,  and 
the  more  exalted  provisions  of  glory  the  infinite  goodness  of  God  has  secured  in  another 
world.  The  designs  of  His  grace  are  too  exalted,  and  the  displays  of  His  power  too 
wondrous,  to  centre  in  any  earthly  lot,  though  equal  in  beauty  and  richness  to 
Eden,  when  as  yet  the  seat  of  innocence,  perfection,  and  love.  Timnath-serah  was 
stiU  the  portion  of  his  lot,  even  in  death.  Where  he  lived  in  possession,  there  he 
lay  in  possession,  nor  left  any  commandment,  as  Jacob  and  Joseph,  for  removal. 
It  is  remarkable  how  much  this  was  the  desire  of  the  faithful,  and  of  what  moment, 
though  not  in  itself,  yet  in  its  typical  regards,  they  viewed  a  burying-place  in  the 
promised  land.  It  was  as  if  they  thought  upon  the  interests  of  their  sleeping  dust 
as  well  as  the  felicity  of  their  undying  spirits,  and  in  still  retaining  their  inherit- 
ance, even  in  a  state  of  death,  would  claim  for  their  bodies  a  share  in  the  life  to 
come  ;  for  He  who  had  so  richly  provided  for  the  one  as  well  as  for  the  other,  in  an 
inheritance  entirely  typical,  would  not  have  so  essential  a  part  of  our  redeemed 
nature  for  ever  the  prey  of  worms.  Where  the  believer  now  rests,  in  what  bed 
matters  little,  for  Jesus  is  the  resurrection  and  the  life  of  all  His  people.  A  short 
inscription,  which,  as  a  plain  monumental  record  of  his  character  and  age,  claims 
in  the  solemn  reflections  here  excited  a  moment's  pause :  "  Servant  of  the  Lord 
died,  being  an  hundred  and  ten  years  old."  What  an  important  connection  of  age 
and  dignity  !  What  an  honour  to  lie  down  at  last  under  this  character  !  This  is 
the  highest  style  of  man.  What  he  had  done,  and  all  which  this  book  recorded  of 
the  mighty  conquests  achieved,  was  not  here  to  be  named ;  for  in  everything  he  had 
been  but  a  servant,  and  only  the  willing  instrument  of  Omnipotence.  The  title 
was  all  that  need  appear,  or  that  any  who  know  their  own  insignificance  would 
desire.  It  is  enough  that  *'  they  rest  from  their  labours,  and  their  works  do  follow." 
Joshua  and  all  the  saints,  from  infancy  to  age,  through  the  long  lapse  of  time, 
shall  retain  the  record  of  truth,  and  in  the  character  in  which  they  died  rise  the 
servants  of  God.  As  now  in  the  end  of  life  it  is  said,  "  The  servant  of  the  Lord 
died,  being  an  hundred  and  ten  years  old,"  so  then  shall  commence  the  history  of 
eternity.  The  servant  of  the  Lord  arose  the  beginning,  the  first  day,  of  immor- 
tality. From  the  tomb  of  Joshua  let  us  go  to  the  burying-place  of  Joseph  :  it  is  in 
the  same  inheritance,  and  not  far  distant.  It  is  remarkable  in  the  connected  record 
of  these  burials  that  Joshua  should  have  lived  just  the  same  number  of  years  as 
this  his  distinguished  ancestor,  and  that  though  not  buried  in  the  same  spot,  yet  in 
the  same  inheritance,  and  not  far  distant  from  the  same  period.  Never  was  there 
BO  singular  a  funeral :  two  hundred  years  dead  before  interment.     Many,  we  may 


CHAP.  XXIV,]  JOSHUA.  813 

think,  crowded  to  see  it,  and  if  the  Church  in  heaven  could  have  been  witnesses, 
the  sight  must  have  yielded  pleasure  ;  for  it  was  the  burial  of  faith.  And  did  it 
reach  the  glorified  saint,  the  spirit  long  made  perfect,  or  could  he  have  looked  down 
upon  the  purchased  spot  of  his  father,  the  desired  resting-place  of  his  bones,  he 
would  have  known  the  fidelity  of  his  brethren,  and  have  rejoiced  in  the  end  of  his 
faith.  It  became  the  inheritance  of  the  children  of  Joseph,  though  he  had  stood  a 
stranger  in  the  land,  when,  in  obedience  to  the  dying  request  of  his  father,  he 
buried  him  in  the  grave  which  himself  was  said  to  have  digged  (Gen.  1.  5).  How 
remarkable  that  the  place  where  Joseph  obtained  interment,  and  where  at  length  he 
•was  gathered  to  his  fathers,  should  turn  out  the  inheritance  of  his  sons  ;  and  that, 
though  separated  many  -years  from  his  father  in  life,  he  should,  as  he,  rest  in 
Canaan,  and  find  a  grave  even  in  his  own  inheritance.  Oh !  it  was  a  sweet  privi- 
lege to  be  entombed  in  his  own  inheritance,  and  to  hold  a  place  with  both  his  sons 
and  his  fathers  in  what  bespoke  the  common  hope  and  claim  of  all  the  faithful. 
It  was  a  choice  spot,  and  where  any  saint  would  have  wished  to  have  been  laid,  and 
there  to  have  rested  in  the  hope  of  all  that  was,  in  the  perfection  of  the  Church  and 
close  of  time,  to  open  in  the  grandeur  of  the  resurrection,  when,  as  the  heirs  of 
promise,  and  the  sons  of  immortality,  they  would  rise  to  claim  a  fairer,  brighter, 
and  more  lasting  inheritance  above  the  skies.  The  ground  was  a  purchase 
(Gen.  xxiii.  16,  17).  And  now  the  purchase  of  Jacob  became  the  burying-place  of 
Joseph.  The  heavenly  land  is  spoken  of  as  a  purchased  possession,  and  that  in  no 
part  ever  to  become  a  burying-place,  but  the  seat  of  endless  life  and  feUcity  to  the 
whole  Church  of  God.  But,  oh  !  what  has  been  the  purchase,  what  paid  for  it,  by 
the  eternal  Son  of  God !  One  more  burying-place  within  this  inheritance  is  pointed 
out :  "  And  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  died,"  &c.  As  situated  near  Shiloh,  this  was, 
probably  for  its  convenience,  assigned  as  the  residence  of  the  high  priest.  We  see  the 
inheritances  of  Israel  fast  changing  into  the  burying-places  of  the  dead.  It  was  not 
the  land  of  immortality,  not  that  state  of  being  of  which  it  is  said,  "  There  shall 
be  no  more  death,"  &c.  In  Canaan  all  must  die,  as  weU  princes,  priests,  and 
rulers,  as  others ;  but  in  heaven  none  die  :  there  natural  evils  and  moral  pollutions 
are  for  ever  removed.  (W.  Seaton.)  Israel  served  the  Lord.  —  Faithful 
adherence  to  engagements : — The  men  of  that  generation  remained  faithful  to  their 
engagements.  These  men,  who  had  themselves  "  known  all  the  works  of  the  Lord 
that  He  had  done  for  Israel,"  in  bringing  them  into  Canaan  and  in  subduing  the 
hostile  nations,  never  forsook  His  worship  for  the  worship  of  the  idols  of  the  land, 
of  whose  boasted  power  they  had  witnessed  so  signal  a  discomfiture.  The  character 
and  admonitions  of  Joshua  were  not  forgotten.  His  disinterestedness,  his  energy, 
his  singleness  of  purpose,  his  faith,  had  left  a  track  of  glory  behind,  as  the  sun, 
after  he  has  sunk  below  the  horizon,  flings  glorious  hues  and  golden  light  over  all 
the  western  sky.  The  men  who  had  themselves  seen  the  conquests  of  Joshua 
would  have  been  doubly  inexcusable  if  they  had  forsaken  the  worship  of  Jehovah, 
Like  the  disciple  Thomas,  because  they  had  seen  they  had  believed.  How,  indeed, 
could  it  have  been  otherwise  ?  How  could  they,  standing  there  in  Shechem, 
— the  site  of  Abraham's  altar,  of  Jacob's  well,  of  Joseph's  tomb,  of  Joshua's 
victories — refuse  to  believe  in  the  Divine  calling  of  the  people  Israel?  {L.  H. 
Wiseman,  M.A.) 


INTBODVGTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES, 

TiTLK  AND  PLACE  or  THE  BooK  IN  THB  Ganon. — The  title,  "  Judges,"  or  "  The  Book 
of  Judges,"  which  the  book  bears  in  the  Jewish  and  Christian  Bibles,  is  given  to  it 
because  it  relates  the  exploits  of  a  succession  of  Israelite  leaders  and  champions 
who,  in  the  book  itself  as  well  as  in  other  parts  of  the  Old  Testament,  are  called 
Judges.  The  significance  of  the  Hebrew  word  is,  however,  much  wider  than  that  of 
the  Greek  Kpirfjg,  the  hsdin  judex,  or  the  English  "  judge."  The  verb  shaphat  is  not 
onlj  judicare,  but  vindicare,  both  in  the  sense  of  '» defend,  deliver,"  and  in  that  of 
"  avenge,  punish."  The  participle  sJiophet  is  not  only^'wdear,  but  vindex,  and  is  not 
infrequently  synonymous  with  "  deliverer."  Again,  as  the  administration  of  justice 
was,  in  times  of  peace,  the  most  important  function  of  the  chieftain  or  king,  the 
noun  is  sometimes  equivalent  to  "ruler,"  and  the  verb  signifies  "rule,  govern."  In 
this  sense  it  is  most  natural  to  take  it  in  the  lists  of  minor  Judges  {e.g.,  Judg.  x.  2,  3, 
cf.  xii.  7,  8,  11,  14 ;  xv.  20 ;  1  Sam.  iv.  18,  vii.  15,  ef.  viii.  20).  The  title,  "  Book  of 
Judges,"  was  in  all  probability  meant  by  those  who  prefixed  it  to  the  book  to 
correspond  to  that  of  the  Book  of  Kings ;  the  judges  were  the  succession  of  rulers 
and  defenders  of  Israel  before  the  hereditary  monarchy,  as  the  kings  were 
afterwards.  In  the  Hebrew  Bible  the  Book  of  Judges  stands  in  the  first  division  of 
the  Prophets,  the  Prophetic  Histories  (Joshua,  Judges,  Samuel,  Kings)  which  narrate 
continuously  the  history  of  Israel  from  the  invasion  of  Canaan  to  the  fall  of 
Jerusalem  (b.o.  586).  In  the  Greek  Bible  Euth  is  appended  to  it,  sometimes  under 
one  title  ((cpirai),  sometimes  under  its  own  name ;  and  in  manuscripts,  the  Pentateuch, 
together  with  Joshua,  Judges,  and  Euth,  frequently  forms  a  codex  (Octateuch).  In 
the  history  of  Israel  before  the  exile,  Judges  covers  the  time  from  the  close  of  the 
period  of  conquest  and  occupation  with  the  death  of  Joshua  to  the  beginning  of  the 
struggle  with  the  Philistines  in  the  days  of  Eli.  A  better  division,  from  our  point 
of  view,  would  have  been  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  Saul.  There  is  some 
evidence  that,  in  one  at  least  of  the  older  histories  which  our  author  had  before  him, 
Eli  and  Samuel  were  reckoned  among  the  judges  (1  Sam.  iv.  18,  vii.  15) ;  but  as 
Samuel  is  the  central  figure  in  the  story  of  the  founding  of  the  kingdom,  it  was  not 
unnatural  to  begin  a  new  book  with  his  birth.  The  character  of  the  two  works 
shows  conclusively  that  Judges  was  not  composed  by  the  author  of  Samuel ;  the 
peculiar  religious  interpretation  of  the  history  which  is  impressed  so  strongly  on 
Judges  is  almost  entirely  lacking  in  Samuel.    {Prof.  G.  F.  Moore.) 

Date  op  Compilation  op  the  Book. — Its  authorship — or  rather,  the  authorship  of 
any  part  of  it,  for  it  is  drawn  from  more  than  one  source — is  unknown,  and  its  final 
redaction,  as  is  shown  by  the  presence  of  Deuteronomic  and  other  elements,  cannot 
have  taken  place  until  after  the  exile.  Its  composite  character  is  shown  by  the  fact 
that  it  has  two  beginnings  (see  L  1  and  ii.  6).  The  main  section  of  the  book, 
extending  from  11.  6  to  zvi.  31,  consists  of  an  apparently  consecutive  narrative, 
grouped  round  six  principal  judges — Othniel,  Ehud,  Deborah,  Gideon,  Jephthah, 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES. 


and  Samson — the  intervals  being  filled  with  the  history  of  Gideon's  son,  AbLmelech, 
and  references,  more  or  less  brief,  to  six  minor  heroes — Shamgar,  Tola,  Jair,  Ibzan, 
Elon,  and  Abdon.  The  religious  pragmatism  of  this  narrative  is  obvious;  the 
history  falls  into  running  cycles,  all  corresponding  to  the  scheme  indicated  at  the 
outset  (chap.  ii.  11-23).  The  apparently  consecutive  character  of  the  narrative 
disappears  when  its  chronological  data  are  carefully  analysed  ;  from  these  we  find 
that  the  chronology  of  the  section  is  based  on  two  artificial  alternative  schemes, 
either  of  which,  but  not  both  together,  can  be  reconciled  with  the  datum  in  1  Kings 
vi.  1.  Thus  the  narrative  of  the  greater  judges  was  originally  separate  from  that 
of  the  minor  ones.  The  religious  standpoint  of  this  main  section,  taken  along  with 
other  points  of  internal  evidence,  shows  that  in  the  main  it  must  have  been 
composed  about  the  eighth  century  B.C.  There  are  signs  of  Deuteronomic  redaction, 
however ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  section  contains  elements  that  carry  us  much 
further  back  than  the  century  named — such  elements,  e.g.,  as  the  Song  of  Deborah, 
and  the  history  of  Abimelech.  Of  the  remaining  portions  of  the  book,  i.  1  to  ii.  5 
is  relatively  old — older  than  the  Book  of  Joshua,  which  relates  to  the  same  subject, 
the  conquest  of  Canaan,  but  treats  it  in  a  much  later  manner.  The  closing  section 
of  the  book  is  made  up  of  two  unconnected  and  independent  narratives  of  very 
different  dates.  The  history  of  Micah  and  the  Danites  (xvii.  1  to  xviii.  31)  is  a 
piece  of  very  old  history  :  that  of  the  Levite  and  the  Benjamites  is  considered  by 
Wellhausen  to  be  post-exUic,  and  in  any  case  must  be  regarded  as  comparatively 
very  late.     {Chambers^s  Encyclopaedia.) 

The  CnRONOLOOi  of  the  Book. — The  only  guide  to  the  chronology  is  to  be  found  in 
the  genealogies  which  span  the  period,  for  there  are  no  materials  in  the  book  itself 
from  which  to  construct  an  accurate  rendering  of  the  number  of  years  between  the 
death  of  Joshua  and  the  commencement  of  Eli's  judgeship.  There  are  ten 
genealogies  in  Scripture  given  with  more  or  less  completeness,  which  include  the 
interval  of  time  between  the  exodus  and  David.  (1)  That  of  David  himself 
(Ruth  iv.  18-22  ;  1  Chron.  ii.  10-15  ;  Matt.  i.  4-6 ;  Luke  ui.  31,  32).  (2)  That  of 
Zadok  the  High  Priest  (1  Chron.  vi.;4-8,  50-53 ;  Ezra  vii.  2-5).  (3)  That  of  Abiathar 
(made  up  of  different  notices  of  his  ancestors  in  1  Sam.  up  to  Eli,  and  by  assuming 
the  same  number  of  generations  between  Eli  and  Ithamar  as  there  are  between 
Jehoram,  the  grandfather  of  Samuel,  and  Assir,  son  of  Korah).  (4)  That  of  Saul 
(by  putting  together  1  Sam.  ix.  1,  1  Chron.  vii.  6-8,  ix.  35-39).  (5)  That  of  Heman 
(1  Chron.  vi.  33).  (6)  ThatofAhimoth(l  Chron.  vi.  25).  (7)  Thatof  Asaph  (1  Chron. 
vi.  39.)  (8)  That  of  Ethan  (1  Chron.  vi.  44).  (9)  That  of  Zabad  (1  Chron.  ii.  25-36, 
xi.  41.)  (10)  The  succession  of  the  kings  of  Edom  (Gen.  xxxvi.  31-38,  1  Chron.  i. 
43-50).  Of  these  ten  genealogies,  of  which  those  of  David  and  Zadok  especially 
have  the  appearance  of  being  drawn  up  in  their  respective  Ufetimes,  and  carry  every 
conviction  of  their  completeness,  and  those  of  Saul  and  the  Edomitish  kings  have 
also  all  likelihood  of  being  complete,  only  one,  that  of  Heman,  differs,  in  appearance 
even,  from  the  others  in  length ;  but  this  apparent  difference  is  removed,  and  the 
line  of  Heman  brought  to  the  same  length  as  the  other  nine,  when  we  observe  that 
seven,  or  rather  nine  names  from  another  genealogy  (that  of  Ahimoth,  vers.  22-25) 
have  apparently  been  interpolated  bodily  between  Elkanah  in  ver.  35  and  Korah  in 
ver.  37.  The  evidence,  then,  of  these  ten  genealogies  concurs  in  assigning  an  average 
of  between  seven  and  eight  generations  to  the  time  from  the  entrance  into  Canaan 
to  the  commencement  of  David's  reign,  which  would  make  up  from  240  to 
260  years.  Deducting  thirty  years  for  Joshua,  thirty  for  Samuel,  and  forty  for  the 
reign  of  Saul  (Acts  xiii.  21),  in  all  100  years,  we  have  from  140  to  160  years  left  for 
the  events  related  in  the  Book  of  Judges.  This  is  a  short  time,  no  doubt,  but  quite 
sufficient,  when  it  is  remembered  that  many  of  the  retts  and  servitudes  there  related 
are  not  successive,  but  synchronise ;  and  that  no  great  dependence  can  be  placed  on 
the  recurring  eighty,  forty,  and  twenty  years,  whenever  they  are  not  in  harmony 
with  historical  probability.  .  .  .  The  narratives  which  have  the  strongest  appearance 
of  synchronising  are  those  of  the  Moabite,  Ammonite,  and  Amalekite  servitude 
(Judg.  iii.  12-80),  which  lasted  eighteen  years,  and  was  closely  connected  with  a 
PhiUstine  invasion  (iii.  31) ;  of  the  Ammonite  servitude  which  lasted  eighteen  years, 
and  was  also  closely  connected  with  a  Phihstine  invasion  (x.  7,  8);  and  of  the 
Midianite  and  Amalekite  servitude  which  lasted  seven  years  (vi.  1),  all  three  of 
which  terminated  in  a  complete  expulsion  and  destruction  of  their  enemies  by  the 
three  leaders,  Ehad,  Jephthah,  and  Gideon,  heading  respectively  the  Benjamites, 
the  Manassites,  and  the  northern  tribes,  and  the  tribes  beyond  Jordan :  the  conduct 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES. 


of  the  Ephraimites  as  related  in  chap.  viii.  1,  xii.  1,  being  an  additional  very  strong 
feature  of  resemblance  in  the  two  histories  of  Gideon  and  Jephthah.  The  forty 
years  of  Philistine  servitude  mentioned  in  Judg.  xiii.  1  seem  to  have  embraced 
the  last  twenty  years  of  Eli's  judgeship  and  the  first  twenty  of  Samuel's,  and 
terminated  with  Samuel's  victory  at  Ebenezer ;  and  if  so,  Samson's  judgeship  of 
twenty  years  also  coincided  in  part  with  Samuel's.  The  long  rests  of  forty  and 
eighty  years  spoken  of  as  following  the  victories  of  Othniel,  Bareik,  Ehud  may  very 
probably  have  synchronised  in  whole  or  in  part.  If  the  numerals  are  correct,  and 
the  rests  are  successive,  we  should  have  no  less  than  160  years  (40+80+40)  without 
a  single  recorded  incident  in  any  part  of  the  twelve  tribes,  which  must  be  deemed 
improbable.     {Lord  Arthur  Hervey.) 

The  Object  of  the  Book. — In  this  sacred  history  we  are  authoritatively  taught 
what  the  moral  causes  were,  in  the  instances  recorded  in  it,  which  led  to  the  fall 
and  rising  again  of  Israel.  The  book  is  a  record  of  the  righteousness,  the 
faithfulness,  and  the  mercy  of  God.  Again,  as  the  preservation  of  the  Israelitish 
people  through  this  troublesome  and  perilous  portion  of  their  existence  was  not  an 
accident,  but  a  part  of  God's  eternal  plan  for  the  salvation  of  mankind,  so  is  the 
record  of  it,  and  of  the  means  by  which  it  was  brought  about,  an  integral  portion  of"' 
those  Holy  Scriptures  which  were  given  by  inspiration  to  God.  This  book  exhibits 
the  wondrous  strength  which  man  acquires  from  good  and  glorious  works  when  his 
faith  lays  fast  hold  of  the  faithfulness  of  God.  It  exhibits,  too,  the  fearful  perils 
which  they  incur  who  seek  for  safety  in  weak  and  indolent  compliance  with  the 
demands  of  sin,  instead  of  in  a  bold  and  uncompromising  adherence  to  the  law  of 
Christ.  It  teaches  us  by  heart-stirring  examples  to  "  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith," 
and  "  lay  hold  on  eternal  life."  It  holds  out  to  us  in  figures  the  mighty  victory  of 
Christ  over  all  His  foes,  and  so  stimulates  our  own  hope  of  sharing  His  victory, 
and  being  partakers  of  His  kingdom,  when  aU  enemies  are  put  under  His  feet. 
{Ibid.) 

Contents  of  the  Book. — The  Book  consists  of  three  parts :  i.  1-ii.  5 ;  ii.  6-xvi.  31 ; 
xvii.-xxi. 

(1)  i.  1-ii.  5.  A  BRIEF  account  of  the  conquests  and  settlements  of  the 
Israelite  tribes  in  Canaan,  i.  1-21.  The  southern  tribes:  Judah,  Caleb,  the 
Kenites,  Simeon,  Benjamin,  i.  22-29.  The  central  tribes :  Joseph  (Manasseh, 
Ephraim).  i.  30-33.  The  northern  tribes :  Zebulun,  Asher,  Naphtali.  i.  34,  35. 
Dan's  settlement  in  the  west.  i.  36.  The  southern  border.  1.  1-5.  The  angel  of 
Yahweh  reproves  the  Israelites  for  sparing  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  and  fore- 
tells the  consequences. 

(2)  ii.  6-xvi.  31.  The  history  of  Israel  in  the  days  of  the  Judges,  ii.  6-iii.  6. 
Introduction :  The  religious  interpretation  and  judgment  of  the  whole  period  as  a 
recurring  cycle  of  defection  from  Yahweh,  subjugation,  and  deUverance — The 
nations  which  Yahweh  left  in  Palestine,  iii.  6-xvi.  31.  The  stories  of  the  Judges 
and  their  heroic  deeds,  iii.  7-11.  Othniel  delivers  Israel  from  Cushan-rishathaim, 
King  of  Aram-naharaim.  iii.  12-30.  Ehud  kills  Eglon,  King  of  Moab,  and  Uberates 
Israel,  iii.  31.  Shamgar  kills  six  hundred  Philistines,  iv.  Deborah  and  Barak 
deliver  Israel  from  the  Canaanites  ;  the  defeat  and  death  of  Sisera.  v.  Triumphal 
ode,  celebrating  this  victoi-y.  vi.-viii.  Gideon  rids  Israel  of  the  Midianites. 
ix.  Abimelech,  the  son  of  Gideon,  King  of  Shechem.  x.  1-5.  Tolah ;  Jair,  x.  6-18, 
The  moral  of  the  history  repeated  and  enforced;  preface  to  a  new  period  of 
oppression,  xi.  1-xii.  7.  Jephthah  delivered  Gilead  from  the  Ammonites;  he 
punishes  the  Ephraimites.  xii.  8-15.  Ibzan ;  Elon ;  Abdon.  xiii-xvi.  The 
adventures  of  Samson,  and  the  mischief  he  does  the  Philistines. 

(3)  xvii.-xxi.  Two  additional  stories  of  the  times  of  the  Judges,  xvii.,  xviii. 
Micah'B  idols ;  the  migration  of  the  Danites  and  foundation  of  the  sanctuary  of 
Dan.  xix.-xxi.  The  outrage  committed  by  the  inhabitants  of  Gibeah  upon  the 
Levite's  oonoubine.  The  vengeance  of  the  Israelites,  ending  in  the  almost  complete 
eztemilnation  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.     {Prof.  O.  F.  Moore.) 


f 


THE   BIBLICAL   ILLUSTEATOE. 

JUDGES. 

CHAFTEB   I. 

Yeb8.  1-10.  The  cliildrezi  of  Israel  asked  the  Lord. — Simplinty  in  prayer: — Jnst 
that  1  How  we  have  modernised  and  complicated  and  destroyed  prayer  I  "  The 
children  of  Israel  asked  the  Lord."  How  simple,  how  direct,  how  sensible,  how 
likely  to  succeed !  The  altar  may  have  lost  its  power :  no  atheist  has  pulled  down 
the  altar,  no  outsider  has  taken  away  one  stone  from  the  holy  pile ;  the  suppliants 
may  have  torn  down  their  own  altar.  We  will  modernise  and  invent  and  enlarge 
and  embroider  the  simplicity  that  would  have  saved  us.  "  The  children  of  Israel 
asked  the  Lord,"  whispered  to  Him,  hailed  Him,  arrested  His  condescending 
attention  by  some  sign  of  necessity.  They  whispered  to  the  Lord,  they  told  Him 
plainly  the  condition  in  which  they  were  placed,  and  brought  the  whole  need 
under  His  attention;  they  wanted  leadership  and  captaincy  and  guidance,  and 
they  said,  *'  Who  shall  do  this  ?  "  The  method  has  not  been  changed ;  Jesus  Christ 
added  nothing  to  this  old  method.  Said  He,  "  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you ; 
seek,  and  ye  shall  find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you."  "  If  any  man 
lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask."  We  have  changed  aU  that ;  we  now  are  in  danger  of 
approaching  the  Lord  as  if  He  were  an  infinite  Shah,  and  must  needs  be 
approached  with  long  words  and  logical  sequence.  Speaking  to  God  elevates  the 
mind ;  prayer,  however  brief  and  however  tremulous,  takes  the  suppliant  up  to  a 
higher  level  than  he  has  ever  scaled  before.  The  whole  idea  of  religion  is 
intellectually  elevating ;  no  man  can  be  truly  religious  and  meanly  little ;  to  touch 
the  Divine  garment  even  at  its  edge  is  to  rise  to  a  new  stature  and  to  breathe  a 
new  air.  I  repeat,  therefore,  that  asking  God,  talking  to  God,  communing  with 
God,  elevates  the  mind.  It  is  the  spiritual  exercise  that  elevates  the  soul ;  the 
words  themselves  may  be  poor,  they  may  be  ungrammatical,  they  may  be  uttered 
in  a  very  halting  and  stumbling  tone,  but  the  exercise,  spiritually  understood, 
rightly  interpreted,  lifts  the  soul  world  on  world  a  thousand  worlds  higher  than 
can  ever  be  occupied  by  a  mere  denizen  of  this  world  of  dust.  We  cannot  look 
God  in  the  face  without  catching  something  of  the  brightness  of  His  smile.  Do 
they  take  knowledge  of  us  that  we  have  been  with  the  literature  of  the  day,  with 
the  journals  of  the  morning,  with  the  gossip  of  the  time?  or  do  they  take  know- 
ledge of  us  that  we  have  just  come  from  the  altar,  that  we  have  just  seen  the  King, 
that  we  have  not  a  moment  ago  been  closeted  with  Christ,  having  shut  the  door, 
and  do  we  come  out  of  the  presence-chamber  new  bom,  newly  ordained,  just 
crowned  with  the  approbation  of  the  Divine  love  ?  Talking  to  God,  asking  God, 
laying  the  whole  case  before  God,  sometimes  laying  it  before  Him  without  words, 
sometimes  simply  looking  into  His  face,  sometimes  letting  our  throbbing,  aching 
misery  look  into  the  infinite  peace  of  the  Divine  tranquillity,  will  lift  a  man  to  a 
new  status  and  clothe  him  with  a  new  influence  and  enrich  him  with  an  abiding 
benediction.  Let  your  misery  seek  the  face  of  the  King.  Do  not  keep  anything 
from  God;  you  mow  perfectly  well  that  you  cannot  keep  anything  from  His 
omniscience ;  that  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  exhortation  ;  the  meaning  rather  is, 
tell  God  everything  as  if  He  had  never  heard  it ;  go  and  tell  Jesus.  Do  not  ask 
the  man  who  never  prayed  to  tell  you  what  he  thinks  of  prayer.     People  are 


10  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

tempted  to  make  a  great  mistake  in  that  matter.  They  are  going  to  hear  an  agnostic 
lecture  on  the  subject  of  prayer  1  A  prayerless  man  cannot  lecture  on  that  theme. 
Sooner  ask  a  dead  man  to  tell  you  his  candid  opinion  of  Beethoven  than  ask  a 
prayerless  man  to  tell  you  what  he  thinks  of  prayer.  Ask  the  man  who  never 
was  an  inch  from  his  own  fireside  what  he  thinks  of  the  climate  of  the  North 
Pole  or  the  South.  Consult  saintly  souls  about  the  value  of  prayer.  "  The 
children  of  Israel  asked  the  Lord."  They  did  not  dictate  to  Him.  Prayer  is  not 
dictation ;  prayer  is  not  always  even  suggestion,  and  when  prayer  is  suggestion  it 
is  offered  with  halting  breath  and  with  a  most  reverent  faith,  lest  a  suggestion 
should  be  not  only  a  sophism  but  an  expression  of  selfishness.  Ask  God  about 
everything ;  you  undervalue  life  if  you  think  there  is  anything  beneath  His 
attention  ;  the  very  smallest  thing  that  concerns  you  concerns  Him  ;  He  has  told 
us  so  in  many  a  beauteous  parable.  Saith  He,  "A  sparrow  cannot  fall  to  the 
ground  without  My  notice."  Observe,  the  people  in  question  were  "the  children 
of  Israel."  Character  is  implied;  character  is  not  only  implied,  it  is  recognised 
and  held  up  as  a  lesson.  They  belong  to  a  praying  host,  to  a  covenanted  ancestry, 
they  were  involved  in  the  baptism  of  an  oath.  Do  not  imagine  that  a  man  can 
leap  out  of  atheism  and  begin  to  pray  for  some  selfish  purpose,  and  have  his 
answer  on  the  spot.  Character  determines  prayer ;  the  simple  heart  suggests 
the  right  petition  ;  the  sincere  spirit,  praying  at  the  Cross  and  in  the  name  of 
Christ,  can  alone  pray  with  lasting  and  ennobling  effect.  In  this  respect  there  is 
something  in  heredity,  there  is  something  in  the  covenant,  something  in  the  eternal 
decree.  We  stand  the  last  members  up  to  this  moment  of  a  great  ancestry  of  prayer. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Wlio  shall  go  up  for  us  against  the  Canaanites  first,  to  fight 
against  them  ? — Dead  leaders  and  living  duties : — I.  A  great  leader  dead,  and 
life's  duties  as  pressing  as  ever.  1.  Let  who  wiU  and  what  will  pass  away,  our 
own  work  only  passes  with  our  own  life.  2.  The  advancement  of  God's  purpose 
is  dependent  on  no  life  in  particular.  3.  Great  lives  are  sometimes  removed  that 
other  lives  may  better  feel  their  responsibility  and  cultivate  their  strength. 
n.  Human  direction  suddenly  failing,  and  Divine  guidance  specially  sought, 
1.  Prayer  prompted  by  the  removal  of  long  familiar  light.  2.  Prayer  over  unfulfilled 
commandments.  3.  Prayer  provoked  by  gathering  dangers.  4.  Prayer  for  God's 
appointment  of  our  post  in  life.  5.  The  realism  of  prayer  to  every  true-hearted 
suppliant.  HI.  An  eminently  faithful  past  demanding  a  no  less  vigorous 
future.  Judah  had  already  done  well.  He  who  has  done  well  in  the  past 
is  under  perpetual  obligation  to  do  no  less  well  in  the  future.  God  also  chooses 
those  for  new   duties  who  have  best  served  in  the  past.     IV.  God    specially 

CHOOSING     SOME     OF     HiS     SERVANTS,    BUT    LEAVING   THEM   LIBERTY   TO    SEEK    THE    HELP 

OF  OTHERS.  1.  The  benefits  of  co-operation.  What  one  cannot  do,  two  can. 
What  one  can  only  do  with  difficulty,  two  can  do  easily.  2.  The  limits  of 
co-operation.  Judah  might  only  seek  aid  from  his  own  brethren,  not  from  idolaters. 
V.  The  Lord's  call  to  great  duties  followed  by  His  rich  blessing  on  those 
WHO  seek  faithfully  to  perform  them.  "  The  Lord  delivered  the  Canaanites  and 
the  Perizzites  into  their  hand."  1.  God  calls  and  sends  none  of  His  servants  in 
vain.  2.  God's  blessing  answers  to  His  own  promise  of  blessing.  3.  God's  blessing 
satisfies  His  people's  highest  hopes.  {F.  G.  Marchant.)  Dead  heroes  missed  : — 
1.  In  that  this  people  was  now  constrained  to  look  about  them,  and  (now  Joshua 
was  dead)  to  do  that  themselves  for  their  peace  and  quiet  which  he  was  wont  to 
do  for  them,  we  are  taught  that  when  special  persons  are  taken  away  then  they 
who  were  left  behind  must  put  forth  themselves  and  take  the  more  pain  than 
before.  The  which  being  so,  men  should  make  this  use  of  such  changes  to 
provide  and  learn  to  want  their  good  helps  and  friends  beforehand.  They 
should  also  acknowledge  daily  with  hearty  thanks  to  God  what  a  benefit  they  have 
of  them,  while  they  enjoy  them,  and  do  all  good  that  they  may  by  the  help  of  them. 
Which  they  cannot  do,  but  they  must  of  necessity  feel  the  loss  of  them  to  be  very 
great,  and  see  that  they  must  now  lay  their  shoulders  to  the  burden.  For  the 
which  purpose  this  I  add — oh,  how  sweetly  and  to  their  good  liking  have  many 
lived  when  they  had  others  to  bear  their  burdens  for  them — as  husbands,  wives, 
subjects,  children,  neighbours :  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  (which  is  the  chiefest  of  all) 
they  have  therewith,  that  God  is  their  friend  also.  But  seeing  many  depend  only 
on  them  in  a  carnal  manner,  and  on  their  living  stiU  with  them,  and  rest  not  on 
God,  therefore  their  props  fail  them,  and  their  desolation  cometh  upon  them  aa 
the  enemy  upon  an  unarmed  man.  2.  We  are  taught  here  by  their  example,  who 
sought  to  God  in  their  doubts  for  counsel  and  resolution,  that  in  all  our  doubtful 


CHAP.  I.]  JUDGES.  11 

cases,  partly  touching  our  estate  towards  God,  and  partly  particular  duties  and 
actions  of  our  special  callings  and  conditions  of  life,  while  we  remain  here  on 
earth  we  should  consult  with  and  ask  counsel  of  God  for  our  resolution,  in  such 
manner  as  He  hath  taught  us,  and  in  no  wise  to  conceal  and  bury  our  wants  and 
defects  that  trouble  us,  or  pass  by  the  sins  that  cleave  to  us,  or  other  difficulties  in 
our  dealings  and  business  that  oppress  us,  for  so  we  provide  ill  for  ourselves,  even 
to  live  in  ignorance  and  sorrow  (with  other  inconveniences  annexed  thereunto)  for 
ever  after.  {R.  Rogers.)  And  the  Lord  said,  Judah  shall  go  up. — God  sove- 
reign over  His  servants  : — May  we  not  pause  here  to  allow  this  oracular  response 
to  sink  into  the  heart  ?  How  full  it  is  in  its  manifold  meaning  1  It  asserts  the 
sovereignty  of  God  in  disposing  and  ordering  the  work  which  His  servants  have  to 
perform.  It  reminds  us  that  every  one  is  not  to  attempt  everything  ;  for  Judah  is 
to  fight  the  enemy  and  the  other  tribes  are  to  remain  at  home.  It  promises  victory, 
not  to  every  ardent  soldier  who  might  volunteer  to  take  the  field,  but  to  the  tribe 
whom  the  Lord  shall  order  to  the  battle.  It  disturbs  all  rule-of-three  calculations 
of  success  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  agents  men  may  induce  to  go  to  work  ; 
success  is  for  those  whom  the  Lord  shall  send.  It  allows  of  no  objection,  no  plea 
of  incompetency,  no  deceitful  humility,  on  the  part  of  the  called  soldier :  "  Judah 
shall  go  up  "  ;  it  is  the  word  of  a  King.  It  hides  pride  from  man,  by  declaring  that 
although  Judah  would  conquer,  it  would  be  only  through  Divine  ordination  and 
help.  (L.  H.  Wiseman,  M.A.)  Adoni-bezek. — The  punishment  of  Adoni-bezek  : 
— I.  The  instability  and  uncertainty  of  worldly  greatness.  Look  at  this 
man — and  behold  in  what  slippery  places  God  sets  the  mighty  and  noble.  From 
the  eagerness  with  which  mankind  pursue  the  distinctions  of  life,  we  should 
conclude,  not  only  that  they  were  very  valuable  in  themselves,  but  that  no  kind  of 
precariousness  attached  to  them.  But  let  not  the  strong  be  secure ;  let  not  the 
honourable  be  vain  ;  let  not  the  rich  be  high-minded.  What  is  all  history  but  a 
narrative  of  the  reverses  to  which  all  earthly  things  are  liable,  however  fii-mly 
established  they  once  appeared  to  be  ;  of  the  revolutions  of  empires  ;  the  destruction 
of  cities  ;  of  the  mighty  put  down  from  their  seats ;  of  counsellors  led  away  spoiled, 
or  politicians  disgraced,  generals  banished,  and  monarchs  put  to  death  I  11,  Judg- 
ment overtaking  the  sinner  in  this  life.  Nor  does  Adoni-bezek  stand  alone  as 
an  instance  of  the  present  punishment  of  sin.  Adam  and  Eve  driven  out  of 
paradise ;  flood ;  cities  of  the  plain ;  Lot's  wife ;  Gehazi ;  Ananias  and  Sapphira, 
&c.  This,  however,  is  not  always  the  case.  The  misery  of  the  sinner  is  principally 
reserved  for  a  future  world,  and  we  are  now  in  a  state  of  probation.  But  God 
would  confirm  our  faith  in  His  adorable  providence.  If  all  sin  was  punished  here, 
we  should  look  no  further ;  if  no  sin,  we  should  not  easily  believe  in  the  power,  the 
holiness,  the  truth  of  God.  We  may  add  that  the  punishment  of  sin  in  this  world 
is  sometimes  unavoidable.  If  nations  are  punished  at  all,  they  must  be  punished 
in  time — for  in  eternity  men  exist  only  as  individuals.  Nearly  the  same  may  be 
said  of  a  family.  Yea,  the  present  punishment  of  sin  is  in  some  measure  natural. 
For  how  frequently  do  men's  sufferings  arise  from  the  very  sins  they  commit ! 
Extravagance  breeds  ruin — indolence,  poverty — intemperance,  disease.  III.  Punish- 
ment INFLICTED  AFTER  LONG  DELAY.  Behold  the  Career  of  this  sinner  I  What  a 
lengthened  course  of  iniquity  was  here !  "  So  long  and  so  often  had  I  done  this, 
that  I  thought  God  had  not  seen,  or  did  not  remember.  But  He  has  found  me  out ; 
and  I  live  long  enough  to  be  a  miserable  instance  of  this  awful  truth — that  however 
long  punishment  may  be  delayed,  it  will  at  last  be  inflicted — as  I  have  done,  so  God 
hath  requited  me."  IV.  A  correspondence  between  sin  and  suffering  :  "  What  I 
have  inflicted  upon  others,  is  now  inflicted  upon  me  ;  and  in  my  very  punishment  I 
read  my  crime — as  I  have  done,  so  God  hath  requited  me."  1.  Between  sin  and 
punishment  there  is  sometimes  a  comparative  conformity.  This  is  the  case  when 
we  suffer  things  which  have  some  resemblance  to  our  crimes.  2.  Sometimes  there 
is  also  between  them  a  direct  conformity.  This  is  the  case  when  we  suffer  in  the 
same  way  and  in  the  same  things  in  which  we  sin.  3.  But  there  is  a  future 
conformity  still  more  dreadful  (Gal.  vi.  7).  V.  The  hand  of  God  acknowledged, 
while  men  are  only  employed  :  "  God  hath  requited  me."  But  who  saw  any- 
thing of  Him?  A  good  man  perceives  the  hand  of  God  in  all  events,  and  he 
wishes  to  see  it.  But  it  is  otherwise  with  the  sinner.  His  apprehension  of  God  is 
forced  upon  him ;  he  would'  gladly  get  rid  of  the  conviction  :  it  is  all  terror  and 
dismay  to  him — for  he  knows  that  God  is  his  adversary,  and  He  may  now  be 
coming  to  lay  hold  of  him ;  he  knows  that  he  has  a  long  account  to  give,  and  this 
may  be  the  time  of  reckoning.     Hence  the  bitterness  of  afliiction :  it  is  regarded 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  l 

not  only  as  a  trial,  but  as  a  punishment.  Lessons :  1.  Abhor  cruelty.  It  is 
equally  disgraceful  to  religion  and  humanity.  It  renders  you  unpitied  of  God  and 
man.  2.  Improve  the  case  of  examples.  If  they  were  not  particularly  adapted  to 
do  us  good,  the  Word  of  God  would  not  be  so  f  uU  of  them.  Lodge  them  in  your 
memory.  Often  reflect  upon  them.  And  make  use  of  the  dreadful  as  well  as  the 
pleasing.  It  is  necessary  that  we  should  be  awakened  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come.  (W.  Jay.)  The  story  of  requital : — I.  The  life  of  man  cannot  escape 
THE  jtrnoMENT  OF  GoD !  "Be  not  deceived,  God  is  not  mocked,"  &c.  Man  may 
deny  it,  may  theoretically  disregard  it,  but  cannot  escape  it !  At  the  heart  of 
things  is  the  spirit  of  judgment.  Human  life  appears  to  be  confused,  but  before 
Hie  Almighty  it  has  shape,  and  plan,  and  purpose.  11.  Let  no  man  take  the  law 
INTO  HIS  OWN  HANDS :  "  Vengeance  is  Mine,  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord."  Why 
have  we  suffered  loss  in  business  ?  May  it  not  be  that  we  have  oppressed  the  poor 
and  needy  ?  Why  are  our  schemes  delayed  and  thwarted  ?  Probably  because  we 
have  been  obstinate  and  unfriendly  towards  the  schemes  of  others.  Why  are  we 
held  in  disesteem  or  neglect?  Probably  because  of  the  contempt  in  which  we 
have  held  our  brethren.  So  we  are  to  look  at  the  moral  working  of  things, 
and  to  see  in  the  results  which  are  forced  upon  us,  not  the  petty  anger  of 
men,  but  the  holy  and  righteous  judgment  of  God.  III.  Eveet  good  deed 
WILL  be  honoured  WITH  APPROPRIATE  REWARD.  1.  Good  dccds  are  their  own 
reward.      2.  Deeds  done  merely  for  the  sake  of  reward  cannot  be  good.    IV.  Though 

JUSTICE  BE  long  DELATED,  YET  IT  WILL  BE  VINDICATED  EVENTUALLY.       {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Adoni-bezek ;  or,  righteous  retribution  : — In  the  accompaniments  of  war,  not  only 
have  the  most  terrible  injuries  been  inflicted  during  the  battles,  but  when  over  the 
persons  of  the  conquered  have  sometimes  been  subjected  to  worse  torments  than 
any  they  could  have  endured  on  the  field.  These  doings  have  often  been  defended 
on  the  ground  that  they  were  necessary  to  self-defence  and  self-preservation.  Alas  1 
they  are  sometimes  only  to  be  explained  by  the  depraved  desire  in  the  human  heart 
of  exercising  arbitrary  and  cruel  power.  The  practice  referred  to  in  this  chapter — 
that  of  excision  of  the  thumbs  of  captives — comes  under  this  class.  Probably  it 
was  to  brand  men  as  cowards  that  Adoni-bezek  carried  on  such  a  cruel  practice. 
He  had  evidently  delighted  in  practising  as  much  cruelty  as  possible.  If  he  had 
thus  treated  seventy-two  kings,  it  is  probable  that  he  had  maltreated,  or  caused  to 
be  tormented,  many  others  of  inferior  rank.  The  victorious  Israelites  advance, 
and  Adoni-bezek  has  to  fight  a  battle  in  which,  instead  of  being  the  victor,  he  is 
the  captive.  He  was  taken  and  led,  a  prisoner,  into  the  presence  of  another. 
Never  had  he  anticipated  this ;  much  less  that  he  would  have  to  suffer  as  others 
had  done  through  him.  With  hands  and  feet  writhing  from  the  recent  excision, 
he  makes  this  acknowledgment :  "  As  I  have  done,  so  God  hath  requited  me." 
1.  Adoni-bezek  notices  the  remarkable  correspondence  between  previous  barbarity 
and  present  suffering.  He  takes  it  in  the  sense  of  retribution.  2.  The  evil  which 
falls  upon  us  may  ofttimes  be  the  consequence  of  the  wrong-doing  of  others. 
Sometimes  various  circumstances  connected  with  bringing  the  offender  to  justice 
are  so  remarkable,  and  seemingly  so  responsive  to  crime,  that  there  arises  in  the 
minds  of  others  the  belief  that  it  is  a  special  and  divinely-imposed  retribution. 
3.  The  recognition  of  the  correspondence  between  past  acts  and  his  present  mis- 
fortune leads  Adoni-bezek  to  ascribe  it  to  a  Divine  hand  :  "  God  has  requited  me." 
He  was  not  an  Israelite,  had  probably  been  an  idolator,  and  may  have  trusted  in 
false  gods  for  a  long  time.  He  had  heard  of  God,  and  what  He  had  done  to  other 
nations ;  now  he  finds  himself  conquered,  and  is  led  to  attribute  his  personal 
sufferings  to  the  God  of  the  Israelites.  God  has  so  arranged  natural  law  that  it 
works  in  harmony  with  eternal  justice.  There  is  a  subtle  connection  between  our 
acts  and  our  sufferings.  We  may  see  illustrations  of  this  every  day.  A  man  may 
act  in  a  certain  loose  and  careless  way  and  prepare  for  himself  consequences  the 
most  terrible  and  unlooked-for.  Another  gives  way  to  fierce,  ungoverned  passions, 
and  makes  himself,  thereby,  wretched.  Another  chooses  to  spend  his  time  only 
in  the  pursuits  of  pleasure,  and  to  squander  his  money  on  every  foolish  tli;:ig  that 
pleases  his  eye ;  he  soon  finds  himself  without  the  power  to  enjoy,  and  without 
money  to  procure  such  enjoyment.  Another  gives  way  to  pilfering,  and  soon  finds 
himself  discharged,  characterless.  Even  if  he  is  not  punished  by  law,  he  is  dis- 
honoured. Or  a  youth  may  have  kind  parents,  and  every  opportunity  of  making 
his  way  in  the  world,  but  he  gives  way  to  dissipated  habits,  and  finally,  when 
character  is  gone  and  friends  are  dead,  is  glad  to  earn  the  most  trifling  sum  under 
men  whom  he  once  despised     A  just  retribution  in  all  such  cases  certainly  follows 


CHAP.  I.]  JUDGES.  13 

the  sin.  Liie  Adoni-bezek,  such  must  confess  that  God  "hath  requited"  the 
wrong-doing.  4.  This  acknowledgment  concerning  the  just  requital  of  sin  is  sure 
to  take  place  in  the  other  world,  if  not  in  this.  Pagan  mythology  taught  that  the 
mean  and  sly  will,  in  the  other  world,  take  the  lynx  form  ;  the  slanderers,  that  of 
the  vampire  fanning  ever  to  sleep,  and  sucking  the  life-blood  at  the  same  time ;  that 
the  hypocritical  will  be  as  crocodiles,  crawling  in  mud  and  shedding  false  t«ars  ; 
and  that  the  narrow  and  bigoted,  fearful  of  truth  and  loving  error,  may  be  as 
owls,  hooting  amid  darkness  and  ruin,  in  the  forsaken  and  desolate  regions 
of  the  other  world.  May  not  the  dishonest  man  there  have  to  cringe  and 
hide  himself  stUl  more?  May  not  the  drunken  man  have  a  constant  craving, 
a  burning  thirst,  a  racking  brain  ?  May  not  the  ambitious  man  have  a  con- 
stant anxiety  to  obtain  power,  and  the  torment  of  always  being  supplanted, 
or  effectually  checked,  by  others?  May  not  the  avaricious  man  be  in  a 
constant  fever  of  suspicion?  May  not  the  ill-tempered  man  be  in  a  constant 
whirl  of  passion,  and  make  himself  more  and  more  wretched  ?  May  not  the 
ruthless  and  cruel  fear  the  scorn  of  their  victims  and  clutches  of  their  enemies  ? 
May  not  the  voluptuary  have  to  bear  the  torment  of  an  inflamed  heart  and 
ungratified  lusts  ?  {Fred.  Hastings.)  A  thrilling  life  and  its  lessons  : — I.  Thb 
LIFE.  Brief  biography.  Throned.  Successful  in  war.  Cruel.  At  last  a  defeated 
tyrant.  Three  scenes.  1.  Celebrating  his  victories.  2.  Feeding  royal  captives. 
3.  The  defeated  tyrant's  unsuccessful  flight.  11.  The  lessons.  Note  three — 
1.  To  what  depths  of  cruelty  it  is  possible  for  some  to  sink  themselves.  How 
came  Adoni  to  be  such  a  tyrant  ?  (1)  Possibly,  in  part,  through  parental  neglect. 
(2)  Through  neglect  of  self-discipline.  2.  Honoured  men  sometimes  fall  from 
palace  to  prison.  3.  "  Be  not  deceived ;  God  is  not  mocked ;  for  whatsoever  a 
man   soweth,   that   shall    he    also   reap."      (Homiletic  Review.)  Punishment 

delayed  : — God  often  forbears  and  defers  His  punishments.  "  As  I  did  long  ago," 
saith  Adoni-bezek,  "  yea  again  and  again,  seventy  times  one  after  another — so  long 
and  so  often  that  I  thought  God  had  either  not  seen  or  quite  forgotten  me ;  yet 
now  I  see  He  requiteth  me."  How  true  this  observation  is,  is  sufficiently  witnessed 
by  their  experience  who  have  little  less  than  stumbled  hereat.  This  made  Cato, 
a  heathen  man,  to  cry  out :  "  The  disposals  of  Divine  providence  are  not  a  httle 
cloudy  and  dark."  This  made  David,  a  man  after  God's  own  heart,  to  confess  and 
say :  "  My  feet  were  almost  gone,  my  steps  had  well-nigh  slipped."  This  made 
Jeremiah  cry  out  from  the  bottom  of  an  amazed  soul :  "  Kighteous  art  Thou, 
0  Lord,  when  I  plead  with  Thee ;  yet  let  me  talk  with  Thee  of  Thy  judgments. 
Wherefore  doth  the  way  of  the  wicked  prosper  ?  Why  are  they  happy  that  deal 
very  treacherously  ?  "  Yea,  those  martyred  saints  (Rev.  vi.  10)  are  heard  to  cry 
from  under  the  altar,  "  How  long  ?  "  &c.  Now  as  these  forenamed  have  stumbled  at 
God's  delaying  His  judgments,  so  others  there  are  who  have  been  quite  deceived, 
verily  believing  that  with  God  what  was  forborne  was  also  forgotten.  Such  an  one 
was  Adoni-bezek  here,  who,  having  escaped  so  long,  thought  to  have  escaped  ever. 
And  such  were  those  whereof  David  spake  (Psa.  x.  6).  Such  an  one  is  the  great 
whore  of  Babylon,  that  sings :  "  I  sit  like  a  queen,  and  am  no  widow,  and  shall  see 
no  sorrow."  Such  an  one  was  Pherecydes  Syrius,  master  of  Pythagoras,  and  a 
famous  philosopher,  and  one  that  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  philosopher  that 
taught  among  the  Greeks  the  soul  to  be  immortal ;  and  yet  among  all  his  know- 
ledge had  not  learned  this  one  principle:  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning 
of  wisdom."  For,  as  .^lian  reports,  he  used  among  his  scholars  to  vaunt  of  his 
irreligion  after  this  manner,  saying  that  he  had  never  offered  sacrifice  to  any  god 
in  all  his  life,  and  yet  had  lived  as  long  and  as  merrily  as  those  who  had  offered 
several  hecatombs.  But  he  that  thus  impiously  abused  the  long-suffering  of  God 
came  at  length  to  an  end  as  strange  as  his  impiety  was  unusual ;  for  so  they  report 
of  him  that  he  was  stricken,  like  Herod  by  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  with  such  a 
disease  that  serpents  bred  of  the  corrupt  humours  of  his  body,  which  ate  and 
consumed  him  being  yet  alive.  But  that  we  may  neither  distrust  the  righteous 
ways  of  God,  nor  prevent  His  unsearchable  counsels  with  our  over-hasty  expecta- 
tion, let  us  a  little  consider  of  the  ends  why  God  oftentimes  defers  and  prolongs  His 
judgments.  1.  For  the  sake  of  godly  ones,  for  whom  God  useth  to  forbear  even 
multitudes  of  sinners.  So  had  there  been  but  ten  righteous  persons  in  Sodom, 
Sodom  had  never  been  destroyed  :  "  I  will  not  destroy  it  for  ten's  sake."  So  for 
good  Josiah's  sake  God  deferred  the  plagues  He  had  decreed  to  bring  upon  that 
people  (2  Kings  ixii.  20).  2.  To  give  time  of  repentance  and  amendment  (2  Pet. 
iii.  9).     This  is  shown  by  the  parable  of  the  fig-tree  (Luke  xiii.  7).    A  hundred 


14  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

and  twenty  years  the  old  world  had  given  them  before  the  flood  came.  3.  The 
opportunity  of  example  by  them  unto  others  and  of  manifesting  His  own  glory. 
God  is  Lord  of  times  ;  and  as  He  created  them,  so  He  alone  knows  a  fit  time  for  all 
things  under  the  sun.  He,  therefore,  who  knows  all  occasions,  when  He  seeth  a  fit 
time  for  His  judgments  to  profit  other  men  by  example,  and  most  of  all  to  set  forth 
His  own  glory,  then  He  sends  them  forth  and  till  then  He  wiU  defer  them. 
4.  When  God,  intending  some  extraordinary  judgment,  suffers  men's  sins  to  grow 
unto  a  full  ripeness  that  their  sin  may  be  as  conspicuous  unto  the  world  as  His 
purpose  in  their  punishment  shall  be.  Thus  God  punished  not  the  Canaanites  in 
Abraham's  time,  but  deferred  it  tiU  Israel's  coming  out  of  Egypt ;  and  that,  as 
Himself  witnesseth  (Gen.  xv.  16)  :  "Because  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  was  not 
yet  full."  And  therefore  is  not  this  last  end  to  be  looked  for  in  all  God's  delays; 
but  it  seemeth  proper  to  His  extraordinary  punishments — when  God  meaneth,  as  it 
were,  to  get  Himself  a  name  amongst  men,  then  God  stays  to  have  the  sin  full,  upon 
which  He  will  pour  a  full  vial  of  wrath  and  indignation.  [Joseph  Made,  B.D.) 
Adoni-hezek^s  confession  : — I.  The  suffering  of  punishment  extorts  the  confession 
OF  SIN.  The  reason  whereof  is  the  very  nature  of  punishment,  which  always 
implieth  some  offence,  and  therefore  is  a  good  remembrancer  of  the  same.  Thus 
Joseph's  brethren,  when  they  were  distressed  in  Egypt,  cried,  "We  are  verily  guilty 
concerning  our  brother."  Proud  Pharaoh,  when  he  saw  the  plague  of  hail  and 
thunder,  said  :  "  I  have  now  sinned  ;  the  Lord  is  righteous,  and  I  and  my  people 
are  wicked."  The  proud  stomachs  of  the  Israelites  came  down  when  once  the 
fiery  serpents  stung  them,  and  then  they  came  to  Moses  and  said:  "We  have 
sinned;  for  we  have  spoken  against  the  Lord  and  against  thee."  Manasseh,  whom 
all  the  threatenings  of  God's  prophets  in  fifty  years'  space  could  never  move,  yet 
when  he  was  bound  in  fetters  and  carried  prisoner  unto  Babylon,  "  then  he 
besought  the  Lord  his  God,  and  humbled  himself  greatly  before  the  God  of  his 
fathers."  Whosoever,  therefore,  he  be  that  feels  not  this  fruit  and  makes  not  this 
use  of  his  afflictions  is  worse  than  hard-hearted  Pharaoh,  worse  than  cruel  Adoni- 
bezek.  But  if  by  this  means  we  come  to  see  and  acknowledge  our  sin,  then  may  we 
say  with  David  :  "  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  was  afflicted,"  and  give  praise  unto  our 
God,  who  is  able  out  of  such  hard  rocks  as  these  to  make  flow  the  saving  waters 
of  repentance.  II.  God's  judgment  fob  sin  is  one  of  the  strongest  motives  to 
MAKE  AN  atheist  CONFESS  THERE  IS  A  GoD.  Those  who  Say,  "  There  is  no  God," 
David  accounteth  them  in  the  number  of  fools  (Psa.  liii.  1).  Solomon  styleth 
punishment  the  schoolmaster  of  fools.  If  for  all  fools,  then  also  for  atheistical  fools, 
that  they,  either  by  their  own  or  by  example  of  God's  plagues  upon  others,  may  be 
taught  to  put  away  their  folly.  Most  certain  it  is,  the  not  observing  of  God's 
judgments,  or  the  supposed  examples  of  some  who  seem  to  escape  the  hand  of  God 
in  the  greatest  sins,  is  a  main  occasion  of  atheism.  For  this  cause,  therefore, 
David,  as  jealous  of  God's  honour  and  knowing  what  force  God's  judgments  have 
to  keep  atheism  from  creeping  into  the  hearts  of  men,  desireth  God  fPsa.  lix.  13). 
Hence  it  is  also  that  God  often  in  Ezekiel  doth  plainly  affirm  this  to  oe  the  end  of 
His  judgments,  that  it  might  be  known  that  He  was  the  Lord.  As  in  Ezek.  vi.  6 
thus  He  threatens  Israel :  "Your  cities  shall  be  laid  waste,  and  your  high  places 
shall  be  desolate,"  &c.  Yer.  7 :  "  And  the  slain  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of  you ; 
and  you  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  And  again,  vers.  12,  13:  "He  that  is  far 
off  shall  die  by  the  pestilence ;  and  he  that  is  near  shall  fall  by  the  sword.  Then 
shall  ye  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  And  Ezek.  xxv.  17,  concerning  the  Philistines : 
"  I  will  execute  great  vengeance  upon  them,  saith  the  Lord,  with  furious  rebukes  ; 
and  they  shall  know  that  lam  the  Lord  when  I  shall  lay  My  vengeance  upon  them." 
If  this,  then,  be  so  as  ye  have  heard,  let  us  learn  hence  a  good  preservative  against 
atheism  and  all  the  ill  motions  of  the  devil  and  our  flesh  drawing  thereunto  ;  not 
lightly,  as  most  men  do,  to  pass  over  the  judgments  of  God  upon  sin,  but  duly  and 
diligently  to  observe  them ;  if  in  ourselves,  then  more  severely ;  if  in  our  neigh- 
bours, curiously  but  charitably.  III.  As  punishment  in  general  bringeth  sin  to 
mind  which  else  would  be  forgotten,  so  the  fashion  and  kind  thereof  well 
considered  mat  lead  us,  as  it  were  by  the  hand,  to  know  the  very  sin  we  are 
punished  for.  God's  visible  judgments  have  usually  in  them  a  stamp  of  con- 
formity with  the  sin  for  which  they  are  inflicted ;  for  either  we  sutler  the  same 
thing  ourselves  that  we  have  done  to  others  or  something  resembling  or  like  unto 
it,  or  else  are  punished  about  the  same  thing  wherein  our  sin  was,  or,  lastly,  in  the 
place  or  time  where  and  when  we  sinned.  I  am  persuaded  there  is  no  judgment 
which  God  sends  for  any  special  sin  but  it  hath  one  of  these  marks  in  it.     Come, 


CHAP.  I.]  JUDGES.  15 

therefore,  to  Adoni-bezek,  and  let  us  learn  of  him  by  God's  stamp  in  our  punish- 
ment to  find  out  what  sin  He  aims  at.  If  we  would  once  use  to  read  this 
handwriting  of  God  in  our  afflictions,  what  a  motive  would  it  be  to  make  us  leave 
many  a  sin  wherein  the  devil  nuzzles  us  the  greater  part  of  our  life  without  sense 
and  feeling  ?  For  if  anything  would  scare  us  from  sin,  sure  this  would,  to  hear 
word  from  God  Himself  what  the  sin  is  He  plagues  us  for  and  so  sharply  warns  us 
to  amend.  Whensoever,  therefore,  any  cross  or  calamity  befalls  us  or  any  of  ours, 
either  in  body,  goods,  or  name,  or  in  the  success  of  anything  we  take  in  hand,  let 
us  not  rebel  against  God  with  an  impatient  heart,  or  fret  at  the  occasion  or  author 
of  our  misery  ;  but  let  us  take  a  just  account  of  our  life  past,  and  thus  reason  with 
ourselves :  "  This  is  surely  none  other  but  the  very  finger  of  God  ;  I  am  punished, 
therefore  have  I  sinned.  I  am  punished  thus  and  thus,  in  this  or  that  sort,  in  this 
or  that  thing,  in  this  or  that  place  or  time ;  therefore  God  is  angry  with  me  for 
something  I  have  done,  the  same  with  that  I  suffer,  or  something  like  unto  it,  or 
because  I  sinned  in  this  thing,  or  at  this  time,  or  in  this  place,  when  and 
where  I  am  now  punished.  '  As  I  have  done,  so  surely  God  hath  requited  me.' 
Therefore  I  will  not  look  any  longer  upon  any  other  cause  or  occasion  of 
this  misery,  of  this  cross  or  calamity,  but  look  unto  my  sin  and  give  glory 
imto  God  who  sent  the  hand  which  hath  done  all  this  unto  me."  {Ibid.) 
The  law  of  retribution : — "  The  fox  finds  himself  at  last  at  the  furrier's,"  and  his 
fate  is  all  the  more  certain  because  of  the  foxy  conduct  in  which  he  has  been 
engaged.  They  say  "  A  bad  deed  never  dies  " ;  and  they  might  further  say  that 
its  life  is  quickened  and  its  sting  intensified  by  the  cumulative  influence  of  time. 
"  He  can't  reap  wheat  that  sows  hemlock  " ;  the  harvest  must  be  to  the  full  as 
poisonous  as  the  seed.  As  we  brew,  we  must  drink  ;  so  we  cannot  be  too  prudent 
as  to  the  purity  of  the  materials  or  too  careful  of  the  mixing.  "  Do  well,  and 
have  well ;  do  ill,  and  look  for  the  like."  "  Eemember  the  reckoning "  is  a 
pregnant  old  saw  that  might  well  be  suspended  in  home  and  office,  hearthstone  and 
wayside  ;  it  would  often  save  men  a  tremendous  balance  on  the  contra  side  of  the 
ledgers  both  of  money  and  morals.  Sin  and  punishment  are  Hke  the  body  and  the 
shadow,  never  very  far  apart.  Who  sin  for  their  profit  will  not  profit  by  their 
sin ;  you  may  see  nothing  but  well  in  its  commission,  you  will  see  nothing  but 
woe  in  its  conclusion.  The  law  of  retribution  is  as  fixed  as  the  law  of  gravitation. 
There  is  a  connecting  string  between  ourselves  and  our  misdeeds.  We  tie  our- 
selves by  an  invisible  and  enduring  thread  to  every  evil  deed  we  do.  There  is  an 
Australian  missile  called  the  boomerang,  which  is  thrown  so  as  to  describe 
singular  curves,  and  falls  again  at  the  feet  of  the  thrower.  Sin  is  that  boomerang, 
which  goes  off  into  space,  but  turns  again  upon  its  author,  and,  with  tenfold 
force,  strikes  him  who  launched  it.  (J.  Jackson  Wray.)  The  retribution  of  God 
acknowledged  : — In  saying,  "  God  hath  requited  me,"  it  is  to  be  noted  that  he,  an 
heathen  idolater,  could  see  so  far  as  to  ascribe  to  God  his  affliction.  Whereby 
we  may  see  that  very  bad  men  do  acknowledge  God  to  be  the  striker  and  punisher 
of  them.  But  where  should  he  learn  it?  for  though  it  did  him  no  good  to 
acknowledge  it,  yet  it  is  that  which  many  who  have  been  baptized  do  not  come  to, 
but  curse  and  ban,  rage  and  fret,  in  their  afflictions,  crying  out  of  their  ill-fortune, 
as  they  call  it,  so  far  are  they  from  resting  in  the  justice  of  God,  and  to  say,  "  He 
hath  done  righteously."  Also  as  they  ascribe  to  chance  and  fortune  their  calamities, 
so  do  they  run  for  help  to  witches  and  sorcerers  when  they  be  oppressed  with  them, 
which  is  greatly  to  the  convicting  of  them.  {R.  Rogers.)  Retribution  inevitable: — 
Gravitation  is  not  more  unerring  than  retribution.  Sin  and  punishment  have  been 
said  by  Emerson  to  "  grow  out  of  one  stem."  Sin  is  like  the  flower  that  appears 
first ;  but  punishment  is  the  fruit  lurking  and  swelling  within,  and  destined  to 
appear  when  the  flower  is  blown.     (G.  A.  Sowter,  M.A.) 

Ver.  11.  Kiijath-sepher. — The  Book-Town : — The  name  Kirjath-sepher,  that  is 
Book-Town,  has  been  supposed  to  point  to  the  existence  of  a  semi-popular 
literature  among  the  pre-Judaean  inhabitants  of  Canaan.  We  cannot  build  with 
any  certainty  upon  a  name,  but  there  are  other  facts  of  some  significance.  Already 
the  Phoenicians,  the  merchants  of  the  age,  some  of  whom  no  doubt  visited  Kirjath- 
sepher  on  their  way  to  Arabia  or  settled  in  it,  had  in  their  deaUngs  with  Eg3rpt 
begun  to  use  that  alphabet  to  which  most  languages,  from  Hebrew  and  Aramaic 
on  through  Greek  and  Latin  to  our  own,  are  indebted  for  the  idea  and  shapes  of 
letters.  And  it  is  not  improbable  that  an  old-world  Phoenician  library  of  skins, 
palm-leaves  or  inscribed  tablets  had  given  distinction  to  this  town  lying  sway 


16  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

towards  the  desert  from  Hebron.  "Written  words  were  held  in  half-superstitiou3 
veneration,  and  a  very  few  records  would  greatly  impress  a  district  peopled  chiefly 
by  wandering  tribes.  Nothing  is  insignificant  in  the  pages  of  the  Bible,  nothing  is 
to  be  disregarded  that  throws  the  least  light  upon  human  affairs  and  Divine 
providence ;  and  here  we  have  a  suggestion  of  no  slight  importance.  Doubt  has 
been  cast  on  the  existence  of  a  written  language  among  the  Hebrews  till  centuries 
after  the  Exodus.  It  has  been  denied  that  the  law  could  have  been  written  out  by 
Moses.  This  difficulty  is  now  seen  to  be  imaginary,  like  many  others  that  have 
been  raised.  It  is  certain  that  the  Phoenicians  trading  in  Egypt  in  the  time  of  the 
Hyksos  kings  had  settlements  quite  contiguous  to  Goshen.  What  more  likely  than 
that  the  Hebrews,  who  spoke  a  language  akin  to  the  Phoenicians,  should  have 
shared  the  discovery  of  letters  almost  from  the  first,  and  practised  the  art  of 
Nvriting  in  the  days  of  their  favour  with  the  monarchs  of  the  Nile  valley  ?  The 
oppression  of  the  foUowing  period  might  prevent  the  spread  of  letters  among  the 
people  ;  but  a  man  like  Moses  must  have  seen  their  value  and  made  himself 
familiar  with  their  use.  The  importance  of  this  indication  in  the  study  of  Hebrew 
law  and  faith  is  very  plain.  Nor  should  we  fail  to  notice  the  interesting  connection 
between  the  Divine  lawgiving  of  Moses  and  the  practical  invention  of  a  worldly 
race.  There  is  no  exclusiveness  in  the  providence  of  God.  The  art  of  a  people, 
acute  and  eager  indeed,  but  without  spirituality,  is  not  rejected  as  profane  by  the 
inspired  leader  of  Israel.  Egyptians  and  Phoenicians  have  their  share  in  originating 
that  culture  which  mingles  its  stream  with  sacred  revelation  and  religion.  Letters 
and  rehgion,  culture  and  faith,  must  needs  go  hand  in  hand.     {R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.) 

Vers.  12-15.  To  Mm  will  I  give  Achsah  my  daMghter.— Difficulties  and  hardships 
in  life : — There  was  more  difficulty  and  danger  in  the  winning  of  this  city  than 
others ;  which  teaches  us  that  we  must  not  think  it  strange  if  some  part  of  our 
life  be  more  encumbered  than  other  parts  and  times.  The  husbandman  is  hindered 
sometimes  by  the  rainy  weather :  but  yet  so,  as  he  hath  his  seasons  free  from  it,  to 
do  his  business  in.  The  artificer  is  troubled  about  putting  away  his  wares,  and  the 
falling  of  the  price,  so  that  he  cannot  always  make  his  advantage  of  them,  as 
ordinarily  he  doth,  for  the  maintaining  of  himself  and  his  charge.  But  God 
changeth  those  times  so  that  they  do  not  always  keep  at  one  stay.  In  more 
particular  manner  I  might  show  the  disappointments  that  all  sorts  of  people  meet 
with  and  have.  And  why  do  I  set  down  all  this  about  the  matter  in  hand  ?  but 
that  we  may  see  the  wisdom  and  mercy  of  God  herein,  who  mixeth  both  together, 
because  if  all  our  life  should  be  smoothly  carried,  and  easily  passed,  we  should  be 
made  thereby  unfit  for  our  change,  especially  for  great  trials,  when  they  come ;  and 
so  likewise,  if  it  should  be  for  the  most  part  tedious  and  troublesome,  there  should 
be  nothing  but  weariness  and  discomfort.  And  therefore  all  sorts  should  seek  to 
be  in  God's  favour,  that  so  they  may  also  be  under  His  government  in  both  estates. 
(R.  Rogers.)  Thou  hast  given  me  a  south  land ;  give  me  also  springs  of  water. 
— The  blessings  given  in  the  gospel ; — To  Achsah  Caleb  gave  a  south  land— a  plot  of 
land  with  a  southern  aspect.  It  did  not  face  the  dark  and  chilly  north ;  but  the 
midday  sun  beat  full  upon  it.  But  still  she  has  a  request  to  make  :  the  blessing 
given  her  is  not  enough.  The  text  reminds  us  of  the  blessing  God  has  given  us 
in  the  gospel.  "  A  south  land."  What  splendour  of  hght — what  a  clear  revelation 
of  His  mind  and  will !  Never  has  anything  been  seen  on  earth  to  rival  it  I  Think 
of  this  I  The  splendour  of  gospel  light — the  clear  discovery  of  the  way  of  our 
salvation — the  vision  of  a  perfect  harmony  between  all  God's  attributes,  no  less 
than  between  the  creature's  highest  good  and  the  Creator's  highest  glory  I  Ours  is 
a  "  south  land."  The  light  does  not  come  to  us  refracted  through  an  atmosphere 
of  types  and  shadows  ;  but  falls  full,  so  that  our  eyes  are  dazzled  and  filled  with 
tears  ;  for  it  is  "  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  "  seen  "  in  the  face 
of  Jesus  Christ."  What  fervour  of  love  !  There  is  light  in  the  wintry  meteor 
that  blazes  across  the  northern  sky,  but  there  is  no  warmth  in  it — nothing  to  stir 
the  dulness  of  sleeping  germs  or  folded  buds,  to  bring  the  blade  through  the  soil 
or  the  blossom  on  the  tree.  But  sun-rays  have  heat  as  well  as  light  in  them — they 
have  a  quickening  as  well  as  an  illuminating  power.  And  so  the  gospel  is  as 
fervent  as  it  is  splendid — it  brings  near  to  us  a  God  of  light  and  love.  Such  is  the 
blessing  already  given  to  aU  who  are  faithfully  taught  the  glorious  gospel.  The 
text  tells  us  of  another  blessing  yet  to  be  implored.  See  the  case  of  Achsah.  The 
mere  possession  of  south  land  was  not  enough  for  her  ;  the  light  and  heat  of  the 
noonday  sun  were  not  enough.     Her  heritage  needed  another  kind  of  influence  to 


CHAP.  1.]  JUDGES.  17 

make  it  fruitful — that  influence  that  comes  with  springs  of  water.  Without  this 
the  sun  might  shine  and  glow  in  vain — nay,  worse  than  in  vain :  it  might  soon 
become  a  curse  rather  than  a  blessing.  When  "  the  heavens  are  as  brass,  and  the 
earth  is  as  iron,"  that  land  fares  badly  that  faces  the  southern  sun,  and  is  without 
springs  of  water.  How  naturally,  then,  might  Achsah  put  up  the  prayer,  "Thou 
hast  given  me  a  south  land  ;  give  me  also  springs  of  water."  See  our  case.  Oh, 
it  is  very  terrible  to  think  of,  but  plainly  declared — that  the  great  blessing  of  the 
gospel  may  become  a  curse  !  If  it  is  not  "  a  savour  of  life  unto  lite,"  it  wUl  prove 
"  a  savour  of  death  unto  death."  If  it  does  not  make  us  fruitful  to  man's  good 
and  God's  glory,  it  will  only  harden  us,  wither  us,  consume  us.  0  dwellers  in  the 
south  land,  awake  I  Awake,  and  cry  aloud  for  "  springs  of  water."  See  the  work 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  That  work  is  very  frequently  referred  to  in  Holy  Scripture 
under  the  figure  of  rain  from  heaven :  rain,  sometimes  filling  the  wells  and  water- 
courses, and  sometimes  feeding  the  secret  springs.  Observe — there  is  no 
antagonism  between  the  work  of  Christ  and  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  any  more  than 
between  sun  and  rain.  The  one  is  the  supplement  to  the  other ;  both  co-operate 
harmoniously  together  to  one  blessed  end.  (F.  Tucker,  B.A.)  Achsah's  asking  a 
pattern  of  prayer : — I.  Hek  considekation  of  the  matteb  befobe  she  went  to  heb 
FATHER.  1.  She  naturally  wished  that  her  husband  should  find  in  that  estate  all 
that  was  convenient  and  aU  that  might  be  profitable ;  and  looking  it  all  over,  she 
saw  what  was  wanted.  Before  you  pray,  know  what  you  are  needing.  *'  Oh !  " 
says  somebody,  "  I  utter  some  good  words."  Does  God  want  your  words  ?  Think 
what  you  are  going  to  ask  before  you  begin  to  pray,  and  then  pray  like  business 
men.  2.  This  woman,  before  she  went  to  her  father  with  her  petition,  asked  her 
husband's  help.  When  she  came  to  her  husband  "  she  moved  him  to  ask  of  her 
father  a  field."  It  is  often  a  great  help  in  prayer  for  two  of  you  to  agree  touching 
the  thing  that  concerns  Christ's  kingdom.  A  cordon  of  praying  souls  around  the 
throne  of  grace  wUl  be  sure  to  prevail.  3.  Achsah  bethought  herself  of  this 
one  thing,  that  she  was  going  to  present  her  request  to  her  father.  I  suppose  that 
she  would  not  have  gone  to  ask  of  anybody  else  ;  but  she  said  to  herself,  "  Come, 
Achsah,  Caleb  is  your  father.  The  boon  I  am  going  to  ask  is  not  of  a  stranger, 
who  does  not  know  me,  but  of  a  father,  in  whose  care  I  have  been  ever  since  I 
was  born."  This  thought  ought  to  help  us  in  prayer,  and  it  wiU  help  us  when  we 
remember  that  we  do  not  go  to  ask  of  an  enemy,  nor  to  plead  with  a  stranger  ;  but 
we  say,  "  Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven."  4.  She  went  humbly,  yet  eagerly. 
If  others  will  not  pray  with  you,  go  alone ;  and  when  you  go,  go  very  reverently. 
Thou  art  on  earth,  and  God  is  in  heaven  ;  multiply  not  thy  words  as  though  thou 
wert  talking  to  thine  equal.  II.  Her  encouragement.  "  Caleb  said  unto  her,  what 
wilt  thou  ? "  1.  You  should  know  what  you  want.  Could  some  Christians,  if 
God  were  to  say  to  them,  "What  wilt  thou?"  answer  Him?  Do  you  not 
think  that  we  get  into  such  an  indistinct,  indiscriminate  kind  of  a  way  of  praying 
that  we  do  not  quite  know  what  we  do  really  want  ?  If  it  is  so  with  you,  do  not 
expect  to  be  heard  till  you  know  what  you  want.  2.  Ask  for  it.  God's  way  of 
giving  is  through  our  asking.  I  suppose  that  He  does  that  in  order  that  He  may 
give  twice  over,  for  a  prayer  is  itself  a  blessing  as  well  as  the  answer  to  prayer. 
Perhaps  it  sometimes  does  us  as  much  good  to  pray  for  a  blessing  as  to  get  the 
blessing.  HI.  The  prayer  itself.  1.  A  good  beginning:  "Give  me  a  blessing." 
Why,  if  the  Lord  shall  hear  that  prayer  from  everybody  in  this  place,  what  a 
blessed  company  we  shall  be  ;  and  we  shall  go  our  way  to  be  a  blessing  to  this  City 
of  London  beyond  what  we  have  ever  been  before  !  2.  Notice  next,  how  she 
mingled  gratitude  with  her  petition :  "  Give  me  a  blessing :  for  thou  hast  given  me 
a  south  land."  Go  back  in  grateful  praise  to  God  for  what  He  has  done  for  thee  in 
days  gone  by,  and  then  get  a  spring  for  thy  leap  for  a  future  blessing  or  a  present 
blessing.  Mingle  gratitude  with  all  thy  prayers.  3.  There  was  not  only  gratitude 
in  this  woman's  prayer,  but  she  used  former  gifts  as  a  plea  for  more  :  "  Thou  hast 
given  me  a  south  land  ;  give  me  also,"  &c.  Oh,  yes,  that  is  a  grand 
argument  with  God  :  "  Thou  hast  given  me  ;  therefore  give  me  some 
more."  Every  blessing  given  contains  the  eggs  of  other  blessing  within 
it.  Thou  must  take  the  blessing,  and  find  the  hidden  eggs,  and  let 
them  be  hatched  by  thine  earnestness,  and  there  shall  be  a  whole  brood 
of  blessings  springing  out  of  a  single  blessing.  See  thou  to  that.  4.  But 
this  woman  used  this  plea  in  a  particular  way  :  she  said,  "  Thou  hast  given  me  a 
south  land ;  give  me  also  springs  of  water."  When  you  ask  of  God,  ask  distinctly  : 
"  Give  me  springs  of  water."     You  may  say,  "  Give  me  my  daily  bread."     You 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

may  cry,  "  Give  me  a  sense  of  pardoned  sin."  You  may  distinctly  ask  for  anything 
which  God  has  promised  to  give.  IV.  Her  success.  1.  Her  father  gave  her  what 
she  asked.  And  God  gives  us  what  we  ask  for  when  it  is  wise  to  do  so.  But 
sometimes  we  make  mistakes.  2.  He  gave  her  in  large  measure.  The  Lord  "  is 
able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think."  Some  use  that 
passage  in  prayer,  and  misquote  it,  "  above  what  we  can  ask  or  even  think."  That 
is  not  in  the  Bible,  because  you  can  ask  or  even  think  anything  you  hke  ;  but  it  is 
"  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think."  Our  asking  or  our  thinking  falls  short ;  but 
God's  giving  never  does.  3.  He  gave  her  this  without  a  word  of  upbraiding. 
Now,  may  the  Lord  grant  unto  us  to  ask  of  Him  in  wisdom,  and  may  He  not 
have  to  upbraid  us,  but  give  us  all  manner  of  blessings  both  of  the  upper  and  the 
nether  springs,  both  of  heaven  and  earth,  both  of  eternity  and  time,  and  give  them 
freely,  and  not  say  even  a  single  word  by  way  of  upbraiding  us  I  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  upper  springs  and  the  nether  springs  : — What  is  told  us  about  Caleb's  daughter 
is  an  illustration  of  the  hfe  of  the  soul.  1.  Every  earnest  Christian,  realising  the 
seriousness  of  life,  the  meaning  of  his  profession,  the  destiny  which  is  before  him, 
ought  to  ask  of  God  a  field ;  that  is,  a  vocation.  God  individualises  His  servants. 
He  has  endowed  each  one  in  His  own  wise  way,  and  He  expects  each  one  to  exercise 
His  own  particular  endowment  for  the  glory  of  the  Master  and  Lord.  At  the  same 
time  it  is  also  true  that  He  allows  us  a  great  deal  of  liberty  in  adapting  our 
vocations  to  our  lives,  or  perhaps  one  should  rather  say,  adapting  our  lives  to  our 
vocations.  One  who  believes  himself  called  to  the  ministry  may  not  take  up  any 
other  profession,  yet  may  without  sin  choose  whether  he  will  devote  himself  to 
mission  work  or  minister  as  opportunity  may  present  itself  in  parish  life.  In  like 
manner  the  less  marked  commonplace  vocations  of  everyday  Christian  life  are 
largely  shaped  by  the  earnest  disciple  himself  following  the  bent  of  his  own 
enthusiasm,  though  it  must  be  always  in  deference  to  the  will  of  God,  when  that  is 
in  any  way  specially  manifested.  Even  in  cases  where  there  seems  to  be  no 
possibility  of  individual  choosing,  where  one's  way  seems  marked  out  by 
circumstances,  and  there  is  nothing  to  do  but  to  go  on  in  it,  there  should  still  be 
conscious  recognition  of  the  opportunity  of  a  willingly  accepted  vocation ;  there 
should  be  the  asking  for  a  field  on  the  part  of  the  loyal  soul ;  that  is,  the  asking  for 
grace  to  do  a  true  and  useful  work  for  God  in  the  circumstances  He  has  prepared 
for  us.  2.  It  does  not  take  us  long  to  discover  that  our  fields  are  in  the  land  of  the 
south — arid,  hard  to  cultivate,  lacking  moisture.  All  true  vocations  are  hard  and 
trying.  The  purpose  of  the  existence  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  upon  earth  is  the 
conquest  and  overthrow  of  the  kingdom  of  evil ;  that  means  that  all  who  will  serve 
in  the  Master's  service  have  to  fight.  It  often  happens  that,  because  vocations  are 
found  to  be  very  hard,  the  disciple  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  what  he  thought 
to  be  his  caUing  is  not  truly  so,  that  he  has  made  a  mistake.  3.  What  then  ?  The 
undaunted  soul  betakes  itself  to  prayer.  The  vocation  is  hard,  almost  unendurable ; 
never  mind,  light  down  from  off  the  ass  and  pray  for  a  blessing.  There  is  here  no 
thought  of  surrendering  one's  calling ;  of  saying,  "  This  is  too  hard  a  thing  for  me ; 
take  it  away,  and  give  me  an  easier  lot  in  Thy  service."  Caleb's  daughter  did  not 
ask  her  father  to  exchange  the  arid  field  for  a  fruitful  and  better  situated  one  ;  she 
asked  him  to  give  her  something  besides  it,  however.  God  loves  to  have  us 
develop  our  vocations  by  prayer.  We  must  have  especial  and  particular  times  of 
prayer  set  apart  for  that  purpose,  wherein  we  light  down,  as  it  were,  from  our  daily 
duties  and  make  our  petitions  to  the  Most  High.  4.  Did  Caleb  respond  to  his 
daughter's  petition  ?  Aye,  surely,  but  no  more  surely  than  God  responds  to  the 
prayers  of  His  children  who  are  striving  to  live  loyally  in  the  vocations  He  has 
assigned  them.  She  asked  for  springs  of  water,  for  with  springs  of  water  to 
irrigate  it  the  south  land  might  be  made  most  fertile  and  profitable  for  every  sort  of 
good  fruit.  It  is  said  significantly  that  he  gave  to  her  both  the  upper  springs 
and  the  nether  springs.  For  the  lower  springs,  that  is  the  weUs,  supplement  the 
waters  of  the  upper  springs.  These  last  coming  down  abundantly  in  torrents  from 
the  mountains,  guided  by  the  hand  of  man  through  the  fields,  make  them  exceed- 
ing fertile,  and  then  the  superabundance  of  their  waters  is  stored,  according  to 
nature's  wise  provision,  in  the  lower  wells,  which  do  not  dry  up  with  the  long- 
continued  heat  of  the  summer,  but  remain  an  ever  reliable  and  constant  supply.  If 
God  has  given  to  His  children  hard  and  arid  fields  of  labour,  in  which  they  are  to 
find  their  several  vocations,  we  are  not  to  forget  that  to  those  who  seek  His  help  in 
prayer  He  grants  abundantly  the  upper  and  the  nether  springs.  6.  What,  then,  are 
these  upper  springs,  the  fresh,  cooUng  waters  from   the  hills,  flowing   down   in 


CHAP.  I.]  JUDGES.  19 

copious  streams,  for  man's  use  and  profit,  that  the  dry  ground  may  be  refreshed  by 
them,  and  made  to  blossom  as  the  rose  and  to  be  fruitful  with  all  manner  of  good 
things?  Evidently  these  upper  springs  of  God's  gift  are  the  waters  of  supernatural, 
sacramental  grace  ;  the  waters  that  flow  down  from  the  delectable  mountains,  the 
heavenly  provision  in  overflowing  abundance  for  earthly  spiritual  drought.  We 
,  were  never  meant  to  fulfil  our  vocations  without  the  help  of  grace.  We  think  so 
much  of  our  own  energy,  gifts,  work,  money,  as  if  these  things  earnestly  and 
heartily  applied  were  to  make  the  arid  south  land  of  God's  calling  for  us  fertile. 
They  are  all  very  well,  but  do  not  anything  more  valuable  than  dig  the  irrigating 
trenches  which  shall  carry  the  sparkling  waters  of  the  upper  springs  down 
through  the  dry  land,  and  make  it  productive.  6.  And  the  nether  springs,  the 
lower  wells,  what  are  they  in  the  Christian  life  ?  They  are  those  blessed  reservoirs 
of  the  sacramental  grace  which  has  been  drawn  in  and  assimilated  by  the  corre- 
spondence of  earnest  disciples,  ready  for  use  in  the  times  when  the  upper  springs  do 
not  seem  to  flow  freely,  and  to  make  fertile  the  field  of  the  soul's  labour.  They  are 
living  fountains  of  God-given  water,  staying  us  when  the  special  help  from  on  high 
seems  for  the  time  withdrawn,  (1)  There  is  the  nether  spring  of  love.  As  the 
wells  in  the  lowlands  are  filled  from  the  upper  springs,  so  love  of  God,  fed  by 
sacramental  grace,  becomes  a  living  fountain  of  perennial  freshness  in  the  soul. 
(2)  The  sacramental  life  teaches  one  patience ;  the  graces  which  flow  from  Holy 
Communion  fill  up  this  deep  fountain,  so  that  it  never  runs  dry.  (3)  There  is  yet 
another  fine  nether  spring  of  precious  value  in  the  devout  Christian  life — the  spring 
of  confident  expectation,  the  spring  which  combines  faith  and  hope  in  one  great 
wealth  of  unshaken  trust.  This  too  is  filled  by  the  upper  springs  of  sacramental 
grace.  One  learns  by  his  experience  in  confessing  his  sins  how  true  and  real  is 
the  pardon  that  comes  through  the  precious  blood.  One  learns,  as  the  result  of 
his  communions,  how  mighty  is  the  transforming  power  of  the  Christ-life  so 
lovingly  imparted  to  us.  Thus  he  becomes  sublimely  sure,  magnificently  confident,, 
with  a  sureness  and  a  confidence  that  are  not  inconsistent  with  genuine  humility. 
{Arthur  Ritchie.) 

Vers.  17-19.  Zephath  .  .  .  Hormah. — Zephath  and  Hormah : — In  the  world  of 
thought  and  feeling  there  are  many  Zephaths,  whence  quick  onset  is  often  made 
upon  the  faith  and  hope  of  men.  We  are  pressing  towards  some  end,  mastering 
difficulties,  contending  with  open  and  known  enemies.  Only  a  little  way  remains 
before  us.  But  invisible  among  the  intricacies  of  experience  is  this  lurking  foe 
who  suddenly  falls  upon  us.  It  is  a  settlement  in  the  faith  of  God  we  seek.  The 
onset  is  of  doubts  we  had  not  imagined,  doubts  of  inspiration,  of  immortality,  of 
the  incarnation,  truths  the  most  vital.  We  are  repulsed,  broken,  disheartened. 
There  remains  a  new  wilderness  journey  till  we  reach  by  the  way  of  Moab  the 
fords  of  our  Jordan  and  the  land  of  our  inheritance.  Yet  there  is  a  way,  sure  and 
appointed.  The  baffled,  wounded  soul  is  never  to  despair.  And  when  at  length 
the  settlement  of  faith  is  won,  the  Zephath  of  doubt  may  be  assailed  from  the 
other  side,  assailed  successfully  and  taken.  The  experience  of  some  poor  victims 
of  what  is  oddly  called  philosophic  doubt  need  dismay  no  one.  For  the  resolute 
seeker  after  God  there  is  always  a  victory,  which  in  the  end  may  prove  so  easy,  so 
complete,  as  to  amaze  him.  The  captured  Zephath  is  not  destroyed  nor  aban- 
doned, but  is  held  as  a  fortress  of  faith.  It  becomes  Hormah — the  consecrated. 
{R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)  Judah  .  .  .  could  not  drive  out  the  inliabitants  of  the 
valley. — What  hinders  the  gospel  ? — Infinite  Intelligence  has  a  plan  by  which  He 
does  all  things.  He  never  works  by  impulse  or  caprice.  1.  God  frequently  makes 
human  agency  the  condition  of  His  own  action.  2.  So  entirely  does  the  Almighty 
abide  by  this  plan,  that  if  the  required  human  agency  is  not  put  forth,  He  will  not 
work.  These  "  chariots  of  iron  "  so  discouraged  and  terrified  the  Israelites  that  they 
would  not  do  the  part  which  God  designed  them  to  do ;  and  because  God  would  not 
violate  His  own  plan,  He  "could  not"  drive  them  out.  God's  plan  is  the  best, 
and  He  cannot  deviate  from  the  best.  Now,  the  plan  by  which  He  promotes  the 
circulation  of  the  gospel  amongst  men  is  most  clearly  revealed  in  the  Bible ;  and 
it  is  this — a  proper  human  representation  of  it.  The  Divine  idea  is  to  be  reflected 
on  man  through  man.  Why  the  great  Author  of  the  gospel  should  proceed  on 
anch  a  plan  is  a  question  which,  if  proper,  it  is  not  necessary  to  determine.  We 
may  as  well  ask  why  He  has  left  the  life  of  the  world,  vegetable  and  animal,  to 
depend  upon  the  solar  beams  and  the  fertile  showers.  It  is  enough  for  me  to 
know,  as  the  reasons  of  His  procedure  in  any  case,  that  as  His  nature  is  love,  the 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ultimate  reason  of  every  act  is  some  benevolent  idea.  Love  is  the  planning  genius 
of  the  universe :  it  frames  and  fashions  all.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  see  love  in  the 
plan  in  question.  What  an  honour  does  it  confer  on  human  nature  to  make  it  the 
reflector  and  exponent  of  Divine  ideas  !  What  benign  power,  too,  is  there  in  the 
arrangements  to  stimulate  the  devout  to  benevolent  effort,  and  to  unite  the  human 
family  in  the  bonds  of  gratitude  and  compassion !  Three  general  remarks  may 
suffice  to  show  that  there  has  been  sufficient  mal-representation  to  account  for  its 
present  limited  influence.  I.  That  the  gospel  kegabds  the  cekemoniai,  as  subob- 
DiNATE  TO  the  DOCTEiNAi.  Though  the  Old  Testament  had  many  rites,  the  New 
has  only  two — baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  But  the  rites  of  both  the  Old  and 
the  New  were  intended  to  answer  the  same  functions  in  the  economy  of  revelation, 
namely,  to  adumbrate  doctrines.  II.  That  the  gospel  regaeds  the  docteinal  as  sub- 
bEEviENT  TO  THE  ETHICAL.  And  if  this  is  SO,  a  mere  theological  manifestation  is  a 
mal-representation.  Christianity  consists  mainly  of  two  elements — doctrines  and 
precepts  :  subjects  for  faith  and  rules  for  life — theology  and  morality.  Doctrines 
and  precepts  are  rays  from  the  same  eternal  sun  of  truth ;  the  former,  however, 
throwing  their  radiance  upwards — revealing  the  vast  heavens  that  encircle  us,  and 
impressing  us  with  ideas  of  infinitude  ;  the  latter  flowing  down  upon  our  earthly 
path,  and  guiding  our  feet  in  the  way  of  life.  Of  what  use  would  the  sun  be  to  us 
if  all  its  rays  streamed  upwards,  unfolding  the  boundless  blue,  and  none  reached 
our  earthly  sphere,  to  show  us  how  to  act  ?  The  theology  of  the  Bible  is  useless  to 
a  man  unless  it  changes  his  heart  and  moulds  his  life  anew.  The  doctrines  of 
Christ  are  not  learnt  like  the  doctrines  of  Newton  or  Euchd,  by  mere  intellectual 
study  ;  they  are  learnt  by  the  heart  and  the  life.  Action  alone  translates  Christian 
doctrines  into  meaning.  III.  That  the  gospel  eegabds  the  TEtTE  ethical  as 
EMBODIED  IN  THE  LITE  OF  Cheist.  And  if  this  is  SO,  a  mere  dry  legal  manifestation 
of  it  is  a  mal-representation.  Where  are  the  ethical  elements  whose  illustration, 
enforcement,  and  promotion,  all  doctrines  are  to  subserve,  to  be  found  ?  Are  they 
to  be  found  in  the  statutes  of  goverimients,  the  rubrics  of  Churches,  or  the  practices 
of  religious  sects  ?  No !  Men  have  often  made  sound  doctrine  subservient  to  the 
corrupt  ethics  drawn  from  such  sources  ;  but  the  ethics  to  which  all  sound  theology 
should  ever  minister  are  embodied  in  the  life  of  one  Being — Christ.  Our  whole 
duty  is  summed  up  in  His  command,  "  Follow  Me."  Assimilation  to  Christ  is 
the  perfection  of  man.  Another  train  of  thought  may  further  serve  to  illustrate 
the  various  forms  of  the  mal-representation,  and  to  sum  up  our  observations  upon 
this  truly  momentous  theme.  1.  The  ceremonies  of  the  gospel  being  only  in- 
tended as  the  symbols  of  its  doctrines,  a  mere  ritualistic  ministry  of  it  is  a  mal- 
representation.  2.  The  doctrines  of  the  gospel  being  coincident  with  human 
reason,  any  irrational  manifestation  of  it  is  a  mal-representation.  3.  The 
meaning  of  the  gospel  being  only  truly  reached  by  experience,  a  mere  professional 
manifestation  of  it  is  a  mal-representation.-  Christianity  is  only  thoroughly 
understood  by  the  heart.  4.  The  genius  of  the  gospel  being  that  of  benevolence, 
any  unloving  manifestation  of  it  is  a  mal-representation.  Does  the  Church 
represent  love  ?  warm,  self-denying,  world-wide  love  ?  If  not,  it  does  not  represent 
the  gospel.  5.  The  provisions  of  the  gospel  being  for  universal  man,  any 
restricted  offer  of  them  is  a  mal-representation.  Let  the  narrow-minded  bigot 
preach  that  the  sun  was  lit  up  for  a  class ;  or  that  the  ocean  was  poured  forth  for 
a  class ;  or  that  the  sea  of  air,  whose  every  wave  is  life,  rolls  through  the  world 
for  a  class ;  and  his  sermons  wUl  be  as  true  to  nature  as  those  sermons  are  to  the 
gospel,  that  proclaim  that  God's  mercy  is  only  for  a  "  favourite  few."  My  con- 
clusion is,  that  the  first  thing  to  be  done  in  order  to  convert  the  world  is  to  reform 
the  Church.  You  may  have  your  missionary  societies,  you  may  send  forth  your 
emissaries,  you  may  stud  the  globe  with  your  missionary  stations  ;  but  unless  the 
Church  will  give  the  Christianity  of  Christ  in  His  own  spirit  of  love,  it  will  be 
labour  lost.  {Homilist.)  Chariots  of  iron. — Chariots  of  iron  : — I.  The  Lord's 
POWER  WAS  TRUSTED  AND  MAGNIFIED  c  "  The  Lord  was  with  Judah."  1.  Great 
victories.  2.  Numerous  victories.  3.  Brotherly,  action  (ver.  3).  4.  God  gave 
great  proofs  of  His  presence  and  power  by  raising  up,  here  and  there,  a  man  in 
their  midst  who  performed  heroic  deeds.  Caleb  shall  be  gathered  to  his  fathers, 
but  Othniel  shall  follow  him,  who  shall  be  as  brave  as  he.  5.  The  reason  why  the 
men  of  Judah  were  successful  was  because  they  had  full  confidence  in  God.  The 
Lord  will  not  fall  short  of  the  measure :  let  us  not  make  the  measure  short. 
II.  TuE  Loed's  powee  RESTRAINED  BECAUSE  DISTRUSTED.  The  men  of  Judah 
could  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  the  mountain^  but  they  could  not  drive  out  th« 


CHAP.  I.]  JUDGES.  21 

inhabitants  of  the  valley,  because  they  had  chariots  of  iron.  As  far  as  their  faith 
■went,  so  far  God  kept  touch  with  them,  and  they  could  do  anything  and  every- 
thing ;  but  -when  they  despondingly  thought  that  they  could  not  drive  out  the 
inhabitants  of  the  wide  valleys,  then  they  failed  utterly.  1.  They  retained  too 
much  confidence  in  themselves.  If  their  confidence  had  been  in  God  alone,  these 
chariots  of  iron  would  have  been  ciphers  in  the  calculation.  The  bare  arm  of  God 
is  the  source  of  aU  power.  2.  They  believed  one  promise  of  God  and  did  not 
believe  another.  Beware  of  being  pickers  and  choosers  of  God's  promises. 
3.  There  was  a  further  reason  for  failure  arising  out  of  this  imperfection  of  their 
faith :  they  could  not  conquer  the  chariots  of  iron,  because,  first,  they  did  not  try. 
The  Hebrew  does  not  say  that  they  could  not  drive  them  out.  What  the  Hebrew 
says  is  that  they  did  not  drive  them  out.  Some  things  we  cannot  do  because  we 
never  make  the  attempt.  I  wish  we  had  among  Christian  workers  the  spirit  of  the 
Suffolk  lad  who  was  brought  up  in  court  to  be  examined  by  an  overbearing  lawyer. 
The  lawyer  roughly  said  to  him,  "  Hodge,  can  you  read  Greek  ?  "  "I  don't  know, 
eir,"  said  he.  "  Well,  fetch  a  Greek  book,"  said  the  lawyer,  and  showing  the  lad 
a  passage  he  said  to  him,  "Can  you  read  that?"  "No."  "Then  why  did  you 
not  say  that  you  could  not  ?  "  "  Because  I  never  say  I  cannot  do  a  thing  till  I 
have  tried  it."  If  that  spirit  were  in  Christian  people  we  should  achieve  great 
thiogs ;  but  we  set  down  such  and  such  a  thing  as  manifestly  beyond  our  power, 
and,  silently,  we  whisper  to  ourselves,  "  therefore  beyond  God's  power,"  and  so  we 
let  it  alone.  No  chariots  of  iron  will  be  driven  out  if  we  dare  not  make  the 
attempt.  4.  Next,  I  suspect  that  they  did  not  drive  them  out  because  they  were 
idle.  If  cavalry  were  to  be  dealt  with,  Judah  must  bestir  himself.  If  chariots  of 
iron  were  to  be  defeated  they  must  enter  upon  an  arduous  campaign ;  and  so, 
taking  counsel  of  their  fears  and  their  idleness,  they  said,  "  Let  us  not  venture  on 
the  conflict."  There  are  many  things  that  Christ's  Church  is  unable  to  do  because 
it  is  too  lazy.  6.  Then,  again,  they  were  not  at  all  anxious  to  meet  the  men  who 
manned  those  chariots,  for  they  were  afraid.  These  men  of  Judah  were  cowards 
in  the  presence  of  chariots  of  iron,  and  what  can  a  coward  do  ?  He  is  great  at 
running  away.  They  say  that  he  "  may  Uve  to  fight  another  day."  Not  he  :  he 
wiU  live,  but  he  wUl  not  live  to  fight,  depend  upon  it,  any  more  another  day  than 
he  does  to-day.  6.  There  was  no  excuse  for  this  on  the  part  of  Judah,  as  there  is 
really  no  excuse  for  us  when  we  think  any  part  of  God's  work  to  be  too  difi&cult  for 
us — for,  recollect,  there  was  a  special  promise  made  about  this  very  case 
holy  (Deut.  xx.  1).  HI.  The  Lord's  power  viNmcATED,  I  could  tell  you  of 
women,  sick  and  infirm,  scarcely  able  to  leave  their  beds,  who  are  doing  work 
which,  to  some  strong  Christians,  seems  too  hard  to  attempt.  Have  I  not  seen  old 
men  doing  for  the  Lord  in  their  feebleness  that  which  young  men  have  declined  ? 
Could  I  not  tell  you  of  some  with  one  talent  who  are  bringing  in  a  splendid 
revenue  of  glory  to  their  Lord  and  Master,  while  you  fine  young  fellows  with  ten 
talents  have  wrapped  them  all  in  a  napkin  and  hid  them  in  the  earth  ?  I  wish 
that  I  could  shame  myseif,  and  shame  every  worker  here,  into  enterprises  that 
would  astonish  unbeUevers.  God  help  us  to  do  that  which  seems  impossible. 
(C.  H.  Sturgeon.) 

Vers.  22-26.  Tbe  liouse  of  Josepb  .  .  .  went  np  against  Eethel ;  and  the  Lord 
was  with  them. — Success  in  carrying  out  God^s  commands  : — This  work  of  the 
house  of  Joseph  which  they  went  about,  namely,  to  take  this  city  Bethel,  as  God 
had  injoiaed  them,  doth  hvely  set  before  our  eyes  the  duty  of  all  God's  people, 
that  is  to  say,  readily  to  go  about  and  set  upon  the  work  that  God  hath  appointed 
them,  yea,  and  this  is  to  be  done,  whatsoever  discouragements  may  stand  up  in  the 
way  to  hinder  them.  For  hath  not  He  commanded  them  ?  And  is  not  He  able  to 
remove  those  impediments,  rather  than  they  shall  hinder  His  work  in  the  hands  of 
His  servants  ?  For  otherwise,  if  we  look  not  to  God  by  faith,  but  what  let  is  in 
the  way,  and  be  hindered  thereby,  we  shall  cast  the  commandment  of  God  behind 
our  back,  and  do  as  they  who  observe  the  wind,  and  therefore  sow  not ;  and  look 
too  much  to  the  clouds,  and  therefore  reap  not ;  and  so  for  fear  of  inconveniences 
we  shall  let  pass  necessary  duties.  Again,  when  we  thrive  and  have  good  success, 
we  bless  God,  and  are  merry ;  but  if  we  be  crossed,  we  curse  ourselves  with  im- 
patience. Whereas  it  ought  to  be  enough  to  us,  that  God  hath  brought  it  to  pass 
either  thus,  or  otherwise.  And  beside  the  authority  He  hath  over  us.  His  bountiful 
rewarding  of  us  in  His  service,  ought  to  encourage  us  to  address  ourselves  to  all 
such  work  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  further,  seeing  He  commandeth  and  would  have 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

us  do  it,  as  it  may  be  most  for  our  own  ease,  that  is,  willingly,  readily,  cheerfully; 
for  the  Lord  loveth  that,  in  all  His  service,  as  He  loveth  a  cheerful  giver.  And  we 
know  (for  our  own  parts)  that  men  go  untowardly  about  that  work  which  they  take 
in  hand  unwillingly.  I3ut  I  would  that  even  they  who  are  so,  did  go  about  that 
which  they  do  by  God's  commandment  cheerfully,  and  with  delight  for  the  Lord's 
sake ;  then  should  there  many  excrements  be  cut  off  from  the  infinite  actions 
which  are  done  in  our  lives,  and  with  so  much  sin  removed ;  many  plagues  and 
annoyances  should  be  avoided  from  men's  lives  also.  (R.  Rogers.)  The  splea 
saw  a  man  come  forth. — The  spies  and  the  man  of  Bethel : — In  this  verse,  where 
it  is  said  that  the  spies  met  this  man  coming  out  of  the  city,  somewhat  is  to  be 
noted  by  occasion  of  the  man  and  somewhat  from  the  spies.  By  the  man  first, 
going  in  his  simplicity  out  of  .the  city  (whether  to  save  his  life  or  upon  some  other 
necessary  occasion),  meeting  with  these  spies,  and  falling  into  such  a  fright 
thereby,  that  either  he  must  lose  his  life  or  betray  the  city  (for  the  spies  said  to 
him,  "  Show  us  the  way  into  the  city  and  we  will  show  thee  mercy").  We  may 
see  what  straits  and  difficulties  we  meet  with  in  this  life  ;  for  that  peril  which  we 
neither  fear  nor  once  think  of,  may  befall  us,  even  to  the  hazarding  of  our  lives, 
much  more  of  our  undoing,  or  the  loss  of  the  best  of  God's  blessings  that  we  enjoy, 
as  wife,  children,  goods,  &c.  The  Shunammite's  child  went  into  the  field  in  the 
morning  well,  but  died  at  noon.  This  we  have  to  learn  by  occasion  of  the  man. 
Now  of  the  spies.  The  spies  offered  him  kindness,  if  he  would  show  them  the  way 
into  the  city  ;  in  that  they  dealt  kindly  with  him,  rather  than  roughly  and  cruelly, 
seeking  such  a  matter  at  his  hands,  they  did  as  became  them.  But  he  being  one 
of  the  cursed  nations,  how  could  they  promise  him  mercy  ?  For  though  they  did 
BO  to  Eahab  before,  yet  she  turned  to  their  religion ;  and  so  did  the  Gibeonites 
serve  them  as  bondmen,  and  embraced  their  religion  also.  But  no  such  thing  can 
be  said  of  this  man,  for  he  went  unto  the  Hittites,  out  of  the  seven  cursed  nations, 
and  dwelt  there.  I  answer,  we  must  interpret  the  laws  of  God  against  the 
Canaanites,  and  concerning  the  rooting  them  out,  by  mitigating  them  with  this 
equity,  that  if  they  made  peace  with  Israel,  they  should  not  root  them  out.  And 
this  appears  by  that  which  is  written  in  Joshua,  that  these  nations  were  rooted  out, 
seeing  none  of  them  save  the  Gibeonites,  made  peace  with  the  Hebrews.  And  this 
being  so,  teacheth  all  men  to  deal  even  with  the  bad  kindly,  and  to  be  harmless 
toward  them.  And  again,  oh  that  we  could  deal  pitifully,  kindly,  and  lovingly 
with  the  miserable  and  the  afflicted  ;  and  that  all  the  gentlest  means  were  used  to 
reclaim  offenders,  of  whom  there  is  hope,  such  as  are  as  this  man  of  Bethel  was, 
in  great  distress,  which  is  not  done  but  very  rarely,  and  therefore  is  there  much 
hardness  of  heart  in  those  to  whom  it  is  neglected,  and  wilfulness,  that  carrieth 
them  to  all  profaneness  and  impenitency.      {Ibid.) 

Vers.  27,  28.  Neither  did  Manasaeh  drive  out. — Forsaking  the  Lord's  work : — 
Manasseh  and  Ephraim,  and  the  rest  of  these  tribes,  did  not  fail  in  completing 
their  warfare  because  they  had  begun  imprudently,  but  because  they  did  not 
continue  believingly.  The  tower  of  conquest  was  unfinished,  not  because  they  had 
not  counted  the  cost  at  the  beginning,  but  because  they  forgot  their  infinite 
resources  in  the  help  of  Jehovah.  I.  Men  forsaking  a  work  which  had  been 
BEGUN  AFTER  LONG  PREPARATION.  The  plagues  of  Egypt,  the  miracles  of  the 
wilderness,  the  gifts  of  the  manna  and  other  supplies,  and  the  long  period  of 
discipline  in  the  desert,  were  all  designed  to  lead  up  to  the  full  inheritance  of  the 
land.  II.  Men  forsaking  a  work  which  had  already  been  prosecuted  with 
GBEAT  ENERGT  AND  AT  GREAT  COST.  The  Church  has  throwH  away  not  a  little 
energy  for  want  of  just  a  little  more.  HI.  Men  forsaking  a  work  about  which 
THEY  HAD  CHERISHED  ARDENT  HOPES.  The  wholo  Way  up  from  Egypt  had  been  a 
long  path  of  expectation.  We  see  here  briUiant  hopes  blasted  for  ever  for  want  of 
a  little  more  faith  and  a  little  more  service.  How  many  of  our  once  cherished 
visions  have  fled  for  the  same  reason  1  IV.  Men  fors.vking  a  work  in  which  they 
HAD  ALREADY  WON  SPLENDID  TRIUMPHS.  The  path  of  their  past  prowess  was  almost 
vocal  against  this  sinful  inaction  and  unbelief.  V.  Men  forsaking  a  work  to 
WHICH  God  wAn  commanded  them,  in  which  God  had  marvellously  helped  them, 
AND  IN  WHICH  Hk  NO  LESS  WAITED  TO  HELP  THEM  STILL.  They  did  not  "  remember 
the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the  Most  High."  "  They  forgat  His  works."  No 
less  did  they  forget  His  absolute  commands,  and  His  unbroken  promises.  {F.  O. 
Marchant.)  A  good  work  forsaken  : — We  here  learn  how  ready  men  are  to  leave 
and  forsake  a  good  course,  although  they  have  hardly,  and  with  much  ado,  beeo 


CHAP.  I.]  JUDGES.  23 

brought  to  embrace  and  fasten  upon  it ;  which  much  concerneth  us  to  mark.  For 
we  are  easily  deceived  about  this,  and  think  both  of  ourselves  and  others,  that  if 
we  begin  to  dislike  and  turn  away  from  some  gross  and  common  faults  that  we 
were  wont  to  commit,  then  the  worst  is  past  with  us,  and  that  we  ought  justly  to 
be  reckoned  among  the  godly ;  whereas  it  is  nothing  so,  but  we  be  yet,  for  all  that, 
far  off.  For  a  far  greater  matter  is  required  to  the  endeavour  effectual  calling  to 
repentance  may  be  approved  of  God,  and  be  sound  indeed,  how  we  ought  to  try 
and  search  into  ourselves,  and  cannot  now  stand  about  it.  But  although  we  were 
truly  turned  to  God,  and  had,  as  these,  obeyed  God  for  a  time  with  a  good  heart, 
yet  ought  we  to  fear  danger,  in  respect  of  our  own  frailtj^  and  according  to  the 
present  occasion,  when  we  see  to  what  point  these  tribes  came,  for  aU  they  had 
followed  the  Lord  commendably  for  a  time,  in  beginning  to  cast  out  the  nations  as 
they  were  commanded.  And  the  reason  of  this,  to  wit,  that  we  should  thus  care- 
fully look  to  ourselves,  is  this,  that  we  are  reformed  but  in  part,  and  that  in  small 
part ;  in  which  respect  yet,  because  we  have  received  some  grace,  we  are  able 
thereby  to  desire  and  go  about  to  do  God  some  service,  and  specially  at  some  time, 
namely,  while  we  be  watchful  to  hold  under  our  rebellious  passions,  assisted  by 
grace  ;  but  what  then  ?  For  we  having  a  sea  of  corruption  ever  flowing  in  us,  and 
our  own  concupiscence  beside  outward  objects  enticing  us  a  contrary  way;  it  must 
be  drained  and  purged  out  daily,  by  little  and  little,  and  not  be  let  alone  in  us, 
lest  it  should  choke  and  drown  the  grace  that  we  have  received ;  which  if  it  be,  we 
become  impotent  by  and  by,  so  that  we  do  not  only  cease  to  obey,  but  we  are 
carried  rather  as  with  a  stream  to  any  evil  that  we  be  tempted  to  ;  and  namely,  to 
this  one  here  mentioned  that  overtook  these  tribes ;  that  is,  to  be  weary  of  well 
doing ;  and  so  much  the  rather,  seeing  there  are  so  many  allurements  and 
occasions  in  every  place  to  provoke  us  and  set  us  forward.  And  although  we  are 
not  without  hope,  nor  naked  in  the  midst  of  all  these  storms,  yet  if  we  know  not 
these  things,  yea,  and  if  also  we  do  not  resist  carefully  such  evil  as  I  have  men- 
tioned, neither  strive  to  nourish  such  sparkles  of  grace  as  are  kindled  in  us,  our 
hearts  being  set  wholly  hereupon,  as  the  weightiest  thing  that  we  have  to  deal  in  ; 
what  marvel  is  it,  though  we  fall  from  the  goodness  that  was  wrought  and  begun 
in  us,  and  so  become  others  than  we  were  before?  {R.  Rogers.)  Attitude  of  the 
world  towards  the  Church  : — "  The  Canaanites  would  dwell  in  that  land,"  says  the 
historian,  repeating  the  words  used  in  reference  to  the  same  tribe  and  the  same 
places  elsewhere  (Josh.  xvii.  12).  The  Hebrew  word  rendered  "  would  dwell," 
intimates  that  the  Canaanites  wished  to  arrange  the  matter  agreeably ;  that  they 
made  friendly  overtures  to  the  men  of  Manasseh  to  be  permitted  to  remain — a 
permission  which  was  granted  them  on  condition  of  their  paying  tribute.  Such  is 
the  attitude  which,  in  these  letter  days,  the  world  frequently  assumes  towards  the 
Church  of  Christ  in  Christian  countries.  It  is  willing  enough  to  pay  tribute,  both 
in  gold  and  outward  forms  of  deference,  if  only  the  Church  will  allow  it  a  peaceable 
lodging  and  refrain  from  using  against  it  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  Too  often  has 
the  Church,  like  the  men  of  Manasseh,  consented  to  accept  tribute  money,  whether 
of  the  State  or  of  private  individuals,  as  the  price  of  permitting  the  world  to 
remain  unmolested  within  its  borders  ;  and  how  often  has  she  found,  in  her  bitter 
experience,  the  degrading  and  enslaving  effect  of  such  compromises — verifying  to 
the  letter  the  prediction  of  Joshua  in  regard  to  such  unhallowed  coimections 
(Josh,  xxiii.  13).     (L.  H.  Wiseman,  M.A.) 

Vers.  34-36.  The  Amoiites  forced  the  children  of  Dan  Into  the  mountain. — A 

neglect  of  duty  injurious  to  others  : — So  that  we  see  that  the  negligence  of  the  other 
tribes  in  suffering  the  forbidden  nations  to  remain  and  wax  strong  caused  these 
their  brethren  to  be  wronged,  and  to  go  without  their  due  which  God  had  allotted 
them.  For  if  they  had  kept  their  enemies  out  they  might  have  been  able  now  to 
help  this  tribe  of  Dan :  who,  if  the  house  of  Joseph  had  not  done  more  than  the 
rest,  they  had  been  left  almost  without  habitation.  And  by  this  way  we  may  sea 
that  men's  sins  do  not  only  redound  to  their  own  hurt,  but  also  to  the  hurt  of  others. 
Whereas  none  are  hurt,  neither  themselves,  by  those  that  fear  to  offend  God,  and 
be  careful  to  do  their  duties,  but  they  may  receive  great  benefit  thereby.  But  the 
other  hurt  many  as  well  as  themselves.  As  we  see  bad  parents,  what  woe  they 
hoard  up  for  their  unhappy  children,  as  Ahab  and  the  like.  As  also,  how  many 
souls  doth  on  ignorant,  idle,  or  scandalous  minister  destroy  and  cause  to  perish. 
(R.  Eogen.) 

22 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 


CHAPTER   IL 

Vers.  1-5.  An  angel  of  the  Lord  came  up  from  GUgal  to  BocMm. — The  Israelite* 
at  Bochim  : — I.  The  assembly  convened:  "All  the  children  of  Israel."  11.  The 
MESSENGER  employed.  This  "  angel  of  the  Lord  "  is  said  to  "  come  up  from  GUgal 
to  Bochim."  Gilgal  was  the  scene  of  interesting  transactions  between  the  Lord  and 
the  Israelites.  The  Lord,  therefore,  in  the  riches  of  His  mercy,  again  visits  this 
people  ;  and  at  Bochim  revives  the  impressions  which  had  been  felt  and  the  resolu- 
tions which  had  been  formed  at  Gilgal.  III.  The  address  delivered.  1.  A  state- 
ment of  what  the  Lord  had  done  for  this  people :  "  I  made  you  to  go  up  out  of  Egypt," 
that  land  of  slavery,  that  scene  of  degradation  and  toil,  "  and  have  brought  you 
unto  the  land  which  I  sware  unto  your  fathers."  This  was  the  completion  of  His 
work.  It  was  a  proof  of  the  exceeding  greatness  of  His  power,  and  also  of  His  faith- 
fulness ;  for  Canaan  was  the  inheritance  which  He  had  engaged  to  give.  2.  Next 
they  are  told  what  the  Lord  had  promised  to  them  :  "  I  said,  I  will  never  break  My 
covenant  with  you."  Here  was  additional  favour,  and  a  solemn  engagement  of 
fidelity.  It  had  been  weU  if  their  fidelity  had  resembled  His  ;  then  would  their 
peace  have  been  as  a  river  and  their  prosperity  permanent  as  a  rock  1  3.  They  are 
also  reminded  of  what  the  Lord  required  of  them :  "  Ye  shaU  make  no  league  with 
the  inhabitants  of  this  land."  Nothing  could  be  more  reasonable.  One  would 
naturally  have  expected  their  prompt  and  persevering  compliance.  4.  But  it  is 
affecting  to  learn  what  the  Lord  received  from  them — the  manner  in  which  He  waa 
requited  for  aU  His  favours :  "  Ye  have  not  obeyed  My  voice."  The  charge  is 
express  and  pointed.  They  had  leagued  with  the  Canaanites,  spared  their  altars, 
connived  at  their  idolatry ;  and  all  this  in  direct  opposition  to  the  command  of 
Jehovah  :  "  Why  have  ye  done  this  ?  "  Their  sin  may  be  accounted  for,  but  it  can 
never  be  justified.  Indolence  may  partly  account  for  it :  to  oppose  evil  required 
vigilance  and  exertion.  Covetousness,  perhaps,  had  its  influence ;  they  might  join 
with  the  Canaanites  in  hope  of  sordid  gain.  Love  of  idolatry,  a  secret  inclination 
to  the  practices  of  heathen  nations,  might  induce  them  to  spare  their  altars  and  to 
palliate  their  sin.  But  unbelief  was  the  grand  cause,  and  lay  at  the  root  of  aU  their 
disobedience.  5.  Lastly  is  recorded  what  the  Lord  threatened  against  them  : 
"Wherefore  I  also  said,  I  will  not  drive  them  out,"  &c.  Here  was  righteous  retribu- 
tion ;  they  were  punished  by  weapons  of  their  own  making  ;  nor  can  we  wonder  at 
this  mark  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  IV.  The  effect  produced  (vers.  4,  5).  From 
this  remarkable  fact  let  us  apply  a  question  to  ourselves  :  what  influence  has  the 
Word  preached  among  us  ?  In  other  words,  where  are  your  tears,  and  where  are 
your  prayers  ?  Thank  God,  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  are  altogether  restrained. 
But  why  are  they  not  more  frequent  ?  It  is  owing  to  the  hardness  of  the  human 
heart,  and  is  an  affecting  proof  of  the  deep  degeneracy  of  man.  Terrors  do  not 
move ;  mercies  do  not  melt ;  the  most  attractive  truths  are  often  heard  without 
emotion  or  concern;  and  when  some  appearance  of  penitence  does  exist,  how 
transient  its  continuance,  and  how  unfruitful  its  influence  I     {T.  Kidd.)  The 

weepers  : — The  voice  of  that  weeping  echoes  through  the  ages,  and  Bochim  becomes 
classic  ground  in  the  moral  history  of  the  world.     I.  There  is  a  terrible  physicai. 

AND    MORAL    CONFUSION    PALPABLE    ON    THE  VERY  SURFACE  OF  MAN's  LIFE,  which  appears 

darker  and  deadlier  the  more  you  penetrate  the  depths ;  while  the  profound  instinct 
of  his  being,  made  in  the  image  of  the  one  God,  demands  order  and  unity.  All  the 
heathen  hecatombs,  aU  the  theodicies  of  philosophy,  are  attempts  to  explain  the 
mystery.  They  are  at  least  man's  protests  against,  his  struggle  to  be  free  from,  the 
desperate  confusions  of  his  physical  and  moral  life.     II.  There  is  in  man  a  nativb 

TENDENCY  TO  MISTAKE  THE    KIND  OF    HELP  WHICH    HE    IS    TO    EXPECT    FROM  GOD.       FrOIU 

the  Old  and  from  the  New  Testament  we  hear  alike  the  cry  of  man's  natural  heart, 
"  The  rest  is  near."  There  is  the  undying  hope  in  the  heart  of  humanity  that  God 
will  give  rest.  Lamech  thought  that  Noah  would  give  it,  Abraham  that  Isaac  would 
give  it,  the  Jews  saw  it  in  Canaan,  David  in  Solomon,  Ezra  in  the  restoration,  the 
early  Christians  in  the  Church.  Suffering  is  to  be  destroyed,  so  runs  the  human 
dream,  by  the  destruction  of  sin.  The  devU  is  to  be  slain,  and  all  things  that  now 
tempt  man  to  transgression  shall  woo  him  sweetly  to  virtue  and  joy.    III.  God's 

REST,  THE  TRUE  CaNAAN  FOR  WHICH  WE  ALL  ARE  PINING,  MUST  SPRING  FROM  WITHIN, 
AND  BE  DEPENDENT  ON  THE  VIGOUR  OF  THE  INWARD  LIFE.  IV.  In  THIS  SCENE  OF 
DISCIPLINE,    WHERE     MAN     EXISTS     OF     NECESSITY     AS    AN    IMPERFECT    MORAL    BEING,    HB 

MUST  HAVE  THRONGS  OF  TEMPTERS  AROUND  HIM.     He  gives  them    Strength  by  hia 


CHAP,  n.]  JUDGES.  25 

want  of  firmness,  by  his  system  of  foolish  and  timid  compromise.  But  you  have 
God's  covenant  as  a  rock  to  stand  on,  God's  promise  as  a  star  to  cheer,  God's 
strength  to  nerve  the  spirit  and  to  harden  it  to  endurance,  and  God's  sword,  sharp 
and  gleaming,  to  cut  out  before  you  the  path  to  victory.     V.  The  bittee  truth, 

DISCOVERED     AT     BoCHIM,     IS    THE    DEEP,    SAD   UNDERTONE    OF    THE   MUSIC    OF    HISTORY. 

Perhaps  those  who  are  most  alive  to  its  higher  interests  and  aims  find  it  saddest. 
But  for  them  this  sadness  becomes  holy  ;  it  is  part  of  the  sorrow  of  Christ,  which  is 
the  germ  of  everlasting  joy.  It  is  not  in  anger,  in  its  deepest  purpose,  but  in  love, 
that  this  weeping  is  ordained  to  us.  Life  is  richer,  nobler,  ii  sadder,  under  such 
conditions,  as  we  shall  understand  at  last  when  we  stand  white-robed  before  the 
throne.  {J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  Thorough-going  Christianity  : — The  picture  here 
presented  to  us  is  that  of  the  people  of  God  stopping  short  in  their  career  of  triumph, 
not  following  up  and  following  out  the  great  salvation  which  the  Lord  has  wrought. 
They  thus  incur  His  stern  rebuke  and  questioning  :  "  Why  have  ye  done  this?" 
Many  reasons,  more  or  less  plausible,  might  be  given.  They  were  weary  of  the 
wilderness  and  of  war ;  they  had  had  enough  of  wandering  and  fighting ;  they 
longed  for  quiet  rest  and  peace.  Motives  also  of  seeming  pity  and  prudence  might 
sway  them  :  how  hard  to  cut  off  with  so  fell  a  swoop,  and  in  one  wholesale  sacrifice, 
so  many  hosts  and  households,  of  whom  some  at  least  might  yet  be  reclaimed  to 
Jehovah's  service,  or  made  useful  in  some  way  to  His  people.  Then,  as  these 
relentings  of  tenderness  or  considerations  of  expediency  occasioned  hesitation  and 
delay,  their  enemies  recovered  courage  and  became  formidable  again.  No  wonder 
if,  under  some  such  influences  as  these,  proposals  of  truce  and  compromise  began 
to  be  welcome  to  Israel ;  and  the  wisdom  of  God  gave  way  before  the  policy  of  man. 
It  was  a  policy,  however,  alike  unwarrantable  and  disastrous  ;  unwarrantable,  con- 
sidering all  that  God  had  done  for  them  and  the  assurance  they  had  that  He  would 
not  break  His  covenant  with  them  (ver.  1) ;  and  disastrous  in  the  issue,  for  the 
error  was  irretrievable.  I.  The  sin.  Let  me  speak  to  the  young  Christian,  the 
recent  convert.  What  now  have  you  more  urgent  on  hand  than  to  make  good  your 
position  and  reap  the  full  fruit  of  the  deliverance  wrought  out  for  you  ?  What 
better  opportunity  for  carrying  out  fuUy  the  sternest  injunctions  of  your  Lord 
regarding  them?  How  does  He  bid  you  treat  these  enemies?  "  Mortify  your 
members  that  are  on  the  earth."  "  They  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh 
with  the  affections  and  lusts. "  Or  take  another  instance.  Such  a  season  as  I  am 
speaking  of  is  the  very  season  for  remodelling  your  whole  plan  of  life — its  pursuits, 
its  habits,  its  companionship.  You  come  out,  0  behever,  from  the  secret  place  of 
your  God,  where  He  has  been  speaking  peace  to  you — you  come  out  into  the  world 
a  new  man ;  and  now,  when  all  is  fresh,  and  before  you  have  committed  yourself, 
now  is  the  very  time  for  arranging  methodically  your  general  course  of  conduct  and 
all  its  details.  How  are  you  to  meet  with  your  former  associates  ?  On  what  terms 
and  with  what  degree  of  intimacy  ?  When  and  how  are  you  to  join  yourselves  to 
the  company  commonly  called  godly,  cast  in  your  lot  with  them,  and  avow  your- 
self partakers  of  their  toils,  their  trials,  and  their  joys  ?  What,  moreover,  are  to  be 
your  rules  for  the  exercise  of  private  devotion  and  the  cultivation  of  personal  piety  ? 
What  the  system  of  your  studious  preparation  for  heaven  ?  You  may  take  your 
ground,  unfurl  your  standard,  and  announce  your  watchword  so  unequivocally  that 
few  ever  after  wiU  think  of  trying  to  shake  or  to  disconcert  you.  But  alas  1  too 
generally,  as  to  all  these  matters,  you  have  no  definite  plan  of  life  at  aU.  Hence 
vacillation,  fitfulness,  inconsistency,  excess,  and  deficiency  by  turns.  The  oppor- 
tunity of  setting  up  a  high  standard  and  a  high  aim  is  lost ;  and  soon,  amid  the 
snares  of  worldly  conformity  and  the  awkwardness  of  the  false  shame  that  will  not 
let  you  retrace  your  steps,  you  deeply  sigh  for  the  day  of  your  visitation,  when  you 
might  have  started  from  a  higher  platform  and  run  a  higher  race  than  you  can  now 
hope  ever  to  realise.  II.  The  inexcusableness  of  the  sin.  Hear  the  remon- 
strance which  God  addresses  to  Israel  (ver.  1),  and  consider  His  threefold  appeal. 
Look  back  to  the  past,  and  call  to  mind  from  what  a  state  the  Lord  has  rescued  you, 
at  what  a  price,  by  what  a  work  of  power.  Look  around  on  your  present  circum- 
stances ;  see  how  the  Lord  has  performed  all  that  He  sware  to  your  fathers ;  the 
land  is  yours ;  and  it  is  a  goodly  land.  And  if,  in  looking  forward  to  the  future,  you 
have  any  misgivings,  has  He  not  said,  "  I  will  never  break  My  covenant  with  you  "  ? 
What  can  you  ask  more  ?  Are  these  considerations  not  sufficient  to  bind  you  to  the 
whole  work  and  warfare  of  the  high  calling  of  God,  and  to  make  cowardice  and 
compromise  exceeding  sinful  ?  III.  The  dangerous  and  disastrous  consequences 
or  the  sin.    Hear  the  awful  sentence  of  God  (ver  3),  and  then  see  how  the  children 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

of  Israel  lift  up  their  voice  and  weep  (ver.  4).  "Well  is  the  place  named  Bochim  : 
it  is  indeed  a  melting  scene.  The  golden  opportunity  is  lost :  their  error  is  not  to 
be  retrieved  ;  its  bitter  fruits  are  to  be  reaped  from  henceforth  many  days.  A  sad 
sight  truly  ;  but  sadder,  if  possible,  is  the  spectacle  of  a  Christian  professor  suffering, 
in  after-years,  from  the  insufficiency  of  his  works  and  the  first  foundation  of  hia 
Christianity  ;  from  his  having  allowed  some  evil  thing  in  his  bosom,  some  Achan 
in  his  camp ;  from  his  having  stopped  short  when  he  should  have  gone  on  unto 
perfection.  (R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  From  Gilgal  to  Bochim  : — Gilgal  was  the 
first  camp  of  Israel  after  Jordan  was  actually  crossed  ;  it  was  at  once  a  goal  and  a 
starting-point.  To  Christians  it  represents  that  position  of  vantage,  that  excellence 
of  endowment  whence  they  go  forth  in  obedience  and  faith  to  subdue  their  spiritual 
foes.  Had  Israel  been  wise,  they  would  have  abode  in  Gilgal  until  their  work  of 
conquest  was  complete  and  the  land  all  their  own.  Doubtless  the  angel  first 
appeared  in  that  deserted  camp,  doubtless  he  followed  the  people  thence,  in  order  to 
remind  them  that  he  ought  to  have  found  them  there.  But  they  had  not  been  wise; 
they  had  not  extirpated  the  nations,  but  had  mingled  with  them  and  learnt  their 
works ;  they  had  abandoned  Gilgal,  from  whence,  under  the  strong  restraints  of 
religious  and  military  discipline,  they  might  have  carried  through  the  work  of 
conquest,  and  had  settled  themselves  in  some  place  of  their  own  choosing :  there- 
fore, the  angel  of  the  Lord  followed  and  found  and  reproached  them ;  then  they 
wept,  and  named  the  place  Bochim — "the  weepers."  "  From  Gilgal  to  Bochim."  la 
nature  it  is  an  ascent,  but  in  grace  it  is  a  tremendous  fall ;  the  one  named  from 
■what  God  did,  the  other  from  what  they  felt.  And  surely  it  is  very  expressive  of 
a  great  deal  amongst  ourselves ;  surely  many  of  us  are  settled  in  a  place  of  feelings 
without  acts,  emotions  without  results,  reproofs  which  only  produce  tears.  "  From 
Gilgal  to  Bochim."  How  often  is  the  story  repeated  in  our  spiritual  life  !  Canaan 
is  our  kingdom — that  kingdom  of  life  and  immortality,  of  light  and  holiness,  which 
is  already  ours  ;  not,  indeed,  for  quiet  and  absolute  possession,  but  for  steady  and 
victorious  occupation.  The  seven  nations  of  the  Canaanites,  alien  intruders  on  the 
sacred  soil,  are  the  seven  deadly  sins  which,  with  all  their  evil  kith  and  kin,  with- 
stand our  entry  and  dispute  our  enjoyment  of  that  holy  land  whereof  God  hath 
made  us  kings  and  priests  in  Christ.  It  is  our  duty  and  our  charge,  as  well  as  our 
interest,  to  extirpate  these  sins^to  make  a  clean  sweep  of  them,  great  and  small. 
But  we  do  not ;  we  gain  some  splendid  victories,  we  lay  some  threatening  strong- 
holds low,  we  deliver  some  large  territories  from  the  dominion  of  the  foe,  we  do 
enough  to  show  that  we  could  do  all ;  and  then  we  cease.  Because  we  would  not 
be  at  the  trouble,  relying  on  the  grace  of  God,  to  cast  out  all  the  sins  which  He 
detests ;  because  we  held  our  hand  and  allowed  some  of  them  to  remain  in  their 
old  places  in  our  life  and  character ;  therefore  hath  God  also  restrained  the  working 
of  His  grace,  and  hath  allowed  those  very  faults  to  become  our  constant  plagues, 
thorns  in  our  sides,  unfailing  causes  of  irritation,  self-reproach,  and  weakness. 
What  we  want  is  to  be  up  and  doing,  to  make  a  vigorous  move,  to  get  back  to  Gilgal, 
and  from  thence  to  go  forth  patient  and  resolved  to  complete  the  conquest  of  our 
own  spiritual  realm.  Let  ns  occupy  once  more  that  place  of  vantage  to 
which  God  hath  brought  us  by  election  and  by  grace ;  let  us  realise  the  invin- 
cible strength  which  is  assured  unto  those  Christians  who  wait  upon  their 
God  in  prayer  and  sacraments;  let  us  rely  upon  that  strength  not  to  be  the 
substitute  for  our  own  efforts,  but  to  inspire  them  with  supernatural  ardour, 
to  crown  them  with  supernatural  success.  {R.  Winterhotham,  M.A.)  Bochim; 
or,  the  weepers  : — I.  How  hopeful.  One  could  not  desire  anything  better 
apparently  than  this.  1.  They  were  all  attentive  hearers.  There  was  not  one  that 
looked  about  him,  or  that  forgot  the  pointed  words  that  were  spoken.  It  is  a  great 
thing  to  win  people's  attention.  2.  They  were  very  feeling  people.  3.  They  were 
aU  sorrowful  hearers.  Alas  1  that  such  drops  did  not  precede  a  shower  of  grace, 
but  passed  away  as  the  morning  cloud.  4.  Aye,  and  they  all  became  professing 
hearers;  for  as  soon  as  ever  that  service  was  over  they  held  another,  and  "they 
sacrificed  unto  Jehovah."  Now  let  me  turn  to  the  other  side  and  show  you  that 
there  was  nothing  permanently  good  in  Bochim's  sudden  water-floods.  II.  Their 
weeping  was  veby  disappointing.  1.  I  half  suspect  that  their  tears  and  lamenta- 
tions were  produced  as  much  by  the  preacher's  person  as  by  anything  else.  It  was 
the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  and  who  would  not  be  moved  at  His  presence?  It  may  be  a 
great  blessing  to  you  to  hear  a  very  useful  preacher,  but  if  you  depend  upon  him  in 
the  least  it  will  be  mischievous  to  you.  Seek  that  your  repentance  may  be  a 
repentance  which  is  wrought  by  the  Spirit  of  Qod  in  your  heart  and  conBoieuce. 


CHAP,  n.]  JUDGES.  27 

Sham  religion  is  an  injury  rather  than  a  benefit.  2.  Again,  I  am  afraid  that  the 
repentance  of  these  people  had  a  great  deal  to  do  with  their  natural  softness.  They 
were  tender  and  excitable  because  there  was  little  grit  in  their  nature ;  their  manli- 
ness was  of  a  degenerate  type.  They  feared  to  go  to  battle  for  God ;  they  dreaded 
the  noise  and  the  slaughter.  They  were,  moreover,  easily  moved  by  their  fellow- 
men,  and  took  shape  from  those  who  lived  near  them.  One  grain  of  faith  is  better 
than  a  gallon  of  tears.  A  drop  of  genuine  repentance  is  more  precious  than  a 
torrent  of  weeping.  3.  There  is  another  thing  about  the  weeping  of  these  people, 
and  that  is,  that  it  was  caused  a  great  deal  by  threatenings  of  punishment.  Every 
murderer  repents  at  the  gallows,  they  say ;  that  is,  he  repents  of  being  hanged,  but 
he  does  not  repent  of  having  killed  others.  "We  ought  clearly  to  discern  between 
the  natural  terrors  that  come  of  vivid  descriptions  of  the  wrath  to  come  and  that 
real  spiritual  touch  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost  which  breaks  and  melts  the  heart  and 
then  casts  it  into  another  mould.  These  people  were  deceived  as  to  the  depth  and 
sincerity  of  their  own  feelings.  Doubtless  they  reckoned  themselves  choice  penitents 
when  they  were  only  cowardly  tremblers,  labouring  under  impressions  which  were 
as  useless  as  they  were  transient.  Their  feeling  was  but  as  a  meteor's  blaze, 
shedding  strong  but  momentary  day.  4.  Next,  these  people  had  not  repented,  for 
they  did  not  bring  their  children  up  rightly.  The  next  generation,  it  is  said,  knew 
not  the  Lord,  neither  the  mighty  works  of  the  Lord.  If  parents  make  known  the 
things  of  God  to  their  children  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  children  do  not  know  the 
works  of  God.  If  parents  teach  with  affectionate  earnestness,  their  children  learn 
at  least  the  letter  of  the  truth.  Woe  unto  you,  with  all  your  tears,  if  you  have  no 
regard  for  your  household,  and  no  care  to  bring  up  your  children  in  the  fear  of 
God.  5.  I  know  that  these  people  did  not  repent  aright,  because  they  went  from 
bad  to  worse.  They  went  from  weeping  before  God  to  worshipping  Baal.  The 
more  tender  you  are,  if  afterwards  you  harden  yourselves,  so  much  the  greater  will 
be  your  guilt ;  and  if  you  humble  yourselves  before  God  in  mere  appearance,'  so 
much  the  more  terrible  will  be  your  doom  if  that  humbleness  departs  and  you  go 
back  to  the  sin  from  which  you  professed  to  turn.  6.  I  know  that  these  people  were 
not  penitents,  because  God  did  not  take  away  the  chastisement.  The  punishment 
which  He  threatened  He  brought  upon  them :  He  gave  them  over  to  the  spoilers 
and  sold  them  to  their  enemies.  But  where  there  is  a  hearty  repentance  of  sin, 
God  wiU  never  lay  punishment  on  a  man.  He  will  forgive  him  and  receive  him 
to  His  bosom  and  restore  him.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  failure  of  obedience  : — 
The  accusation  against  them  at  Bochim  was  negative  rather  than  positive.  They 
were  not  charged  with  any  specific  act  of  avowed  rebellion,  but  with  having  failed 
to  obey  the  voice  of  God.  But  when  the  Church  has  begun  to  habitually  neglect 
any  one  of  her  Lord's  known  commands — still  more  when  she  begins  to  "  break  one 
of  these  least  commandments,  and  teach  men  so  " — the  day  is  not  far  distant  when, 
unless  arrested  in  her  career  by  the  mercy  or  the  judgments  of  God,  she  will  be 
found  openly  consorting  with  the  mammon-worshippers  by  whom  she  is  surrounded. 
Even  so  it  was  in  the  history  before  us.  1.  The  Canaanites  in  this  history  repre- 
sent the  enemies  of  the  Church  of  God,  and  also  the  inward  besetting  sins  of  indi- 
vidual members  of  that  Church.  Need  we  name  pride,  and  lust,  and  covetousness, 
and  self-conceit,  and  envy,  and  worldliness,  and  impatience,  and  fretfulness,  and 
revengefulness — a  band  of  brothers,  tall  sons  of  Anak,  diverse  in  feature,  yet  all 
showing  the  ancestry  and  lineaments  of  the  serpent?  Need  we  mention  others  of 
the  same  kindred — jealousy,  and  sloth,  and  worldliness,  and  levity,  and  procrasti- 
nation, and  presumption,  and  unbelief  ?  2.  It  follows,  then,  that  the  believer's 
warfare  is  not  completed  when  he  has  been  made  a  partaker  of  peace  through 
believing  in  Christ ;  for  "  we  are  made  partakers  of  Christ "  only  "  if  we  hold  the 
beginning  of  our  confidence  steadfast  unto  the  end."  "Put  off,"  says  the  Scripture, 
"  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts."  Mighty  task  ! — • 
for  this  "  old  man  "  is  not  easily  ousted  from  his  ancient  habitation.  He  fights 
hard  for  possession;  and  we  must  "give  diligence,"  even  after  we  have  obtained 
our  "  calling  and  election,"  to  "  make  it  sure."  3.  "We  are  reminded  that  many  of 
the  spiritual  Israel  stop  short  of  a  full  salvation,  for  it  is  to  be  remembered  that 
these  men  had  partially  obeyed.  They  had  begun  well.  4.  The  history  illustrates 
the  causes  of  the  weakness  of  the  Church  and  people  of  God.  (1)  One  of  these 
causes  was  indolence.  "They  neglected  to  destroy  the  nations,  not  because  of 
want  of  inclination,  but  because  they  were  deficient  in  strength  in  consequence  of 
their  guilt ;  not  from  feelings  of  compassion,  but  from  want  of  holy  zeal  and  from 
slothfulness."    The  athlete  cannot  retain  his  strength  without  daily  exercise ;  the 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  jcuas.  n. 

vocalist  cannot  retain  his  power  and  command  of  voice  without  incessant  practise ; 
and  the  child  of  God  cannot  go  on  to  perfection  without  a  daily  spiritual  gymnastic, 
"  exercising  himself  with  a  view  to  godliness,"  as  an  athlete  with  a  view  to  the 
games.  Faith  and  love,  correcting  the  indolence  of  our  nature,  wiU  make  this  holy 
toil  delightful.  (2)  Another  cause  of  spiritual  weakness  is  a  secret  love  of  sin.  In 
our  own  day  there  are  degraded  Englishmen  who  have  settled  among  the  savages  of 
New  Hebrides  or  Fiji  on  purpose  to  be  free  from  all  moral  restraint,  and  who  outdo 
the  worst  of  the  heathen  in  every  kind  of  abomination.  In  religious  families  there 
are  sons  and  daughters  who,  although  outwardly  restrained  by  the  circumstances  of 
their  position,  cherish  a  bitter  hatred  of  religion  and  a  secret  love  for  a  dissipated 
life.  And  even  in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful  what  strange  occasional  lingerings 
towards  evil  I  "What  treacherous  trifling  with  things  fordidden!  (3)  Another 
cause  of  spiritual  weakness  is  unbelief,  if  indeed  this  one  cause  does  not  sum  up  and 
exhaust  the  whole  subject.  Unbelief  is  vitally  connected  with  that  alienation  of 
heart  and  affections  from  God  in  which  the  deepest  ruin  of  man  consists.  And 
is  it  for  this  cause,  0  ye  Israel  of  God,  that  ye  are  so  slow  to  believe  even  in 
the  possibility  of  being  sanctified  wholly,  and  of  being  preserved  blameless 
unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord?  Is  this  the  reason  why  ye  so  stoutly  contend 
that  although  the  inbred  foe,  the  spiritual  Canaanite,  may  be  humbled  and 
put  to  tribute,  it  is  impossible  he  should  be  utterly  destroyed  on  this  side  the 
grave  ?  When  the  heart  pants  after  the  living  God,  is  it  pleasant  to  think  that, 
in  this  life  at  least.  He  wUl  never  take  full  and  complete  possession,  but  that 
some  damnable  lust  wiU  always  be  there  to  dispute  with  Him  for  the  supremacy  ? 
(L.  H.  Wiseman,  M.A.)  The  evil  of  disobedience  to  God  : — Mark  and  note  right 
well  that  it  is  an  evil  thing  under  any  pretext  whatever  to  depart  in  any  degree 
f  r6m  the  commandment  of  the  Most  High  God.  Whatsoever  may  be  the  law  which 
God  gives,  either  to  the  whole  race  or  to  His  chosen,  they  wiU  find  their  safety  in 
keeping  close  to  it.  But  Israel  forgot  this.  Soldiering  was  hard  work — storming 
cities  and  warring  with  men  who  attacked  them  with  chariots  of  iron  was  heroio 
service.  AU  this  required  strong  faith  and  untiring  perseverance,  and  in  these 
virtues  the  Israelites  were  greatly  deficient ;  and  so,  in  certain  places,  they  said  to 
the  Canaanites,  "  Let  us  be  neighbours :  let  us  dwell  together."  At  any  rate,  it 
could  do  no  harm  to  study  their  archaeology,  and  go  to  their  temples,  and  see  the 
gods  they  worshipped,  and  get  a  general  acquaintance  with  the  advanced  thought 
of  the  period ;  for  the  Canaanites  were  a  greatly  advanced  people — they  were  the 
advanced  thinkers  of  the  period.  Tolerance  led  to  imitation,  and  Israel  became  as 
vile  as  the  heathen  whom  the  Lord  had  condemned,  and  the  Israelites  became  a 
mixed  race,  in  whose  veins  there  flowed  a  measure  of  Canaanite  blood.  Yes ;  if  you 
depart  from  God's  Word  by  a  hair's  breadth  you  know  not  where  you  will  end.  I 
would  to  God  that  in  these  degenerate  times  we  had  back  again  somewhat  of  the 
stern  spirit  of  the  Cameronians  and  the  Covenanters ;  for  now  men  play  fast  and 
loose  with  God,  and  think  that  anything  they  please  to  do  will  satisfy  the  Most  High. 
The  offal  and  the  refuse  will  suffice  for  sacrifice  for  Him  ;  but  as  to  strict  obedience 
to  His  Word,  they  can  by  no  means  abide  it.  Mischief  will  surely  come  of  this  lax 
state  of  things  to  the  Churches  of  this  day  as  surely  as  affliction  came  abundantly 
to  Israel  of  old.  Note,  next,  that  whenever  one  sin  is  allowed  we  may  say  of  it, 
"Gad,  a  troop  cometh."  It  seemed  a  pardonable  sort  of  sin  to  be  gentle  to  these 
people  and  not  to  obey  God's  severer  word  ;  but  then,  what  came  next  ?  Why,  soon 
they,  the  children  of  Jehovah,  were  found  worshipping  before  the  horrible  Baal. 
Soon  they  had  gone  farther,  and  the  unclean  goddess  Ashtaroth  became  their  delight ; 
and  anon  they  forgot  Jehovah  altogether  amid  their  deities  and  demons.  With 
these  errors  in  religion  there  had  come  in  all  sorts  of  errors  in  morals,  for  every 
fashion  of  immorality  and  lewdness  defiled  the  worshippers  of  Baal-Peor,  Baal- 
Berith,  and  Baal-Zebub  ;  and  the  chosen  people  of  God  could  scarcely  be  distin- 
guished from  the  heathen  nations  among  which  they  dwelt,  or  if  distinguished  at 
all,  it  was  by  their  greater  sin,  inasmuch  as  thoy  were  transgressing  agaiiT^I  superior 
light,  and  holding  down  their  consciences  which  God  had  rendered  by  liis  leaching 
much  more  tender  than  the  consciences  of  those  about  them.  Backslide  a  little, 
and  you  are  on  the  way  to  utter  apostasy.  The  mother  of  mischief  is  small  as  a 
midge's  egg ;  hatch  it,  and  you  shall  see  an  evil  bird  larger  than  an  ostrich.  The 
least  wrong  has  in  it  an  all  but  infinity  of  evil.  So  Israel  went  aside  farther  and 
farther  from  God  because  they  regarded  not  their  way,  and  did  not  in  all  things 
obey  the  Lord.  But  then  comes  in  a  truth  which,  though  it  may  seem  black  in  the 
telUng,  is  bright  in  the  essence  of  it.     God  did  not  leave  His  people  without  chastise- 


CHAP.  II.]  JUDGES.  29 

ment.  The  Lord  laid  His  blows  upon  them  thick  and  heavy.  But,  before  He  did 
this,  He  sent  a  messenger  to  rebuke  them.  It  is  ever  the  Lord's  way  to  give  space 
for  repentance  ere  He  executes  vengeance.  The  axes  which  were  carried  before  the 
Eoman  magistrates  by  the  lictors  were  bound  up  in  bundles  of  rods.  It  is  said  that 
when  a  prisoner  was  before  the  magistrate  the  lictor  began  to  untie  the  rods,  and 
with  these  the  culprit  was  beaten  ;  meanwhile  the  judge  looked  in  the  prisoner's 
face  and  heard  his  defence,  and  if  he  saw  reason  for  averting  the  capital  sentence, 
because  of  the  repentance  which  the  offender  expressed,  then  he  only  smote  him 
with  the  rod,  but  the  axe  remained  unused.  But  if,  when  every  rod  was 
taken  off,  the  culprit  was  still  hardened,  and  the  crime  was  a  capital  one 
and  clearly  proven,  then  the  axe  was  used,  and  used  all  the  more  sternly 
because  space  had  been  given  for  penitence,  and  the  rods  had  been  used 
in  vain.  When  the  rod  is  despised  the  axe  is  ready.  It  is  certainly  so  with 
God :  He  waiteth  to  be  gracious,  but  when  patience  cannot  hope  for  penitence 
then  justice  takes  her  turn,  and  her  stroke  is  terrible.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  rushing  of  tears  : — If  this  hour  we  could  realise  God's  goodness  toward  us, 
and  our  conduct  toward  Him,  a  great  grief  would  seize  upon  us,  and  repentance 
would  meet  remorse,  and  remorse  would  meet  ingratitude,  and  memories  of  the 
past  would  jostle  the  fears  of  the  future,  and  silence  would  be  broken  by  sobs  and 
shrieks.  1.  I  have  first  to  remark  that  many  Christian  people  have  reason  for  a 
good  deal  of  mourning.  What  have  you  been  doing  these  ten,  twenty,  thirty,  forty 
years  ?  Did  not  God  lead  you  out  of  Egypt  ?  Did  He  not  part  for  you  the  Bed 
Sea  of  trouble,  and  has  He  not  rained  manna  all  around  about  your  camp  ?  Did 
He  not  divide  the  Jordan  of  death  for  your  loved  ones,  until  they  went  through 
dry-shod,  not  wetting  even  the  soles  of  their  feet  ?  Has  He  not  put  clusters  of 
blessings  upon  your  table,  and  fed  you  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat  ?  And  yet,  we 
must  confess,  we  have,  like  the  Israelites,  made  a  league  with  the  world.  Three- 
fourths  of  our  Christian  life  has  been  wasted.  Oh,  weep  for  our  derelictions  I 
weep  for  our  wanderings  !  weep  for  our  lost  opportunities  that  will  never  return  ! 
There  is  great  reason  for  sadness  on  the  part  of  some  parents  when  they  look 
over  their  families.  You  know  that  there  must  be  a  mighty  change  in  your 
household  before  you  can  all  live  together  in  eternity,  Can  you  placidly  con- 
template an  eternal  separation  from  any  of  your  loved  ones  ?  Things  are  looking 
that  way.  Their  opportunities  of  salvation  less  and  less ;  your  opportunities  of 
plying  them  with  religious  motives  less  and  less.  The  prospect  that  God's  invitation 
will  continue  to  them,  less  and  less.  The  day  of  their  mercy  almost  gone,  yet  they 
have  not  put  up  one  earnest  prayer,  or  repented  of  one  sin,  and  not  given  one 
hopeful  sign,  and  death  coming  to  snap  the  conjugal  bond,  and  break  up  the 
fraternal  and  the  fihal  tie.  An  aged  woman  came  to  me.  I  said,  "Are  you 
seeking  the  salvation  of  your  soul  ?  "  She  said,  "  No,  I  have  sought  and  found. 
I  came  in  to  ask  your  prayers  for  my  sons.  They  are  on  the  wrong  road."  O 
Lord  Jesus,  are  we  to  be  parted  from  any  we  have  loved  ?  Will  some  of  us  be 
saved  and  some  of  us  be  lost  ?  Which  one  will  it  be  missing,  missing,  missing,  for 
eternity?  I  say  farther:  there  are  impenitent  souls  who  ought  to  be  sad  from 
the  fact  that  there  are  sins  they  have  committed  that  cannot  be  corrected  either 
in  this  world  or  the  world  to  come.  Suppose  a  man  at  fifty  years  of  age  becomes  a 
Christian,  but  he  has  been  all  his  life  on  the  other  side.  He  is  a  father.  He  comes 
to  Christ  now  ;  but  can  he  arrest  the  fact  that  for  twenty  or  thirty  years  over  his 
children  he  was  wielding  a  wrong  influence,  and  they  have  started  in  the  wrong 
direction  ?  And  if  you  come  to  God  in  the  latter  part  of  your  life,  when  you  have 
given  your  children  an  impulse  in  the  wrong  direction,  those  ten,  or  fifteen,  or 
twenty  years  of  example  in  the  wrong  direction  will  be  mightier  than  the  few  words 
you  can  utter  now  in  the  right  direction.  So  it  is  with  the  influence  you  have  had 
anywhere  in  community.  If  you  have  aU  these  years  given  countenance  to  those 
who  are  neglecting  religion,  can  you  correct  that  ?  Tour  common  sense  says  "No." 
Here  is  an  engineer  on  a  locomotive.  He  is  taking  a  long  train  of  cars  loaded  with 
passengers.  He  comes  on  and  sees  a  red  flag.  He  says,  "What  do  I  care  for  the 
red  flag  ?  "  He  pushes  on  the  train,  and  comes  to  another  red  flag.  He  says,  "  I 
don't  care  for  the  red  flag."  After  a  while  he  sees  that  the  bridge  is  down ;  but  he 
is  by  a  marsh,  and  he  leaps  and  is  not  damaged.  Does  that  stop  the  train  ?  No  ! 
It  goes  on  crash !  crash !  crash !  That  is  the  history  of  some  men  who  have 
been  converted.  I  congratulate  them,  but  I  cannot  hide  the  fact  that  they 
started  a  train  of  influences  in  the  wrong  direction ;  and  though,  in  the  afternoon 
of  their  life,  they  may  leap  off  the  train,  the  train  goes  on.     So,  also,  there  is 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

occasion  for  sadness  in  the  peril  that  surrounds  every  unforgiven  soul.  And  so  you 
may  go  on  placidly,  smoothly,  gaily  for  a  while  in  your  sin,  but  the  hurricane  will 
swoop  upon  your  souls.  Without  God,  without  hope !  Oh,  what  an  orphanage, 
what  an  exile,  what  a  desolation  !  Moan  I  moan  !  for  thy  lost  estate.  Have  you 
not  had  a  chance  for  heaven?  "Ah,"  you  say,  "  that  is  the  worst  of  it.  That  is 
what  makes  me  weep."  Was  your  father  bad  ?  Was  your  mother  wicked  ?  "  No," 
you  say.  "  Say  nothing  against  my  mother.  If  there  was  ever  a  good  woman,  she 
was  one  ;  and  I  remember  how,  in  her  old  days,  and  when  bent  with  years,  and  in 
her  plain  frock  she  knelt  down  and  prayed  for  my  soul,  and  with  her  apron  wiped 
away  the  tears.  Oh,  I  have  trampled  on  her  broken  heart.  I  am  a  wretch  undone. 
Who  will  pray  for  me  ?  I  am  so  sick  of  sin.  I  am  so  weary  of  the  world  !  "  No 
wonder  you  weep,  for  the  greatest  condemnation  of  the  last  day  will  be  for 
those  who  had  pious  parents  and  who  resisted  their  admonition.  But  what 
is  a  sadder  thought  is,  that  some  of  these  people  not  only  stay  out  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  themselves,  but  they  will  not  let  their  children  come  in.  "  You 
never  invited  me  to  Christ.  You  stood  in  my  way.  You  gave  a  wrong  example. 
Father,  mother,  you  ruined  my  soul !  "  2.  But  I  remember  that  there  are  tears 
of  joy  as  well  as  tears  of  sorrow,  and  how  the  foundations  of  the  deep  would 
break  up  if  one  hundred  or  one  thousand  souls  would  march  up  and  take  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  !  But  there  are  some  who  have  not  come.  They  will  not 
come.  They  will  not  repent.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Sorroio  not  repentance : — 
"  Bochim"  might  be  widely  inscribed  in  the  land  of  Palestine,  if  thereby  to  mark 
the  place  where  universal  lamentations  have  been  heard.  Crying  was  a  frequent 
sight  and  sound  there.  It  was  sometimes  uncontrollable.  It  was  often  mechanical 
and  artificial.  Trouble  usually  provokes  it,  and  fears  and  tears  are  closely  related. 
But  sobbings  and  penitence  are  not  so  nearly  allied  as  we  might  expect.  The  vain 
Xerxes,  as  he  sat  on  his  silver  throne,  overlooking  his  vast  fleet  and  outstretched 
army,  and  weeping  to  think  how  in  a  hundred  years  every  life  before  him  would 
have  perished,  yet  who  arrayed  his  thousands  for  needless  and  speedy  slaughter, 
might  have  better  spared  his  grief,  while  curbing  his  pride.  Sentiment  is  not 
sanctity.  Sorrow  is  not  sobriety.  In  the  abodes  of  shame  there  are  burning  tears 
and  pitiful  groans  without  a  wish  for  a  better  life.  The  trappings  of  woe  are 
common ;  the  resolve  to  remove  its  cause  is  not  as  common.  Eeformatories  are 
full  of  victims  of  their  own  evil  choices,  and  many  a  sigh  they  heave  over  a  wicked 
past,  but  it  is  only  because  of  the  ills  it  has  brought  upon  them.  They  like  the  sin 
as  well  as  ever.  Could  it  be  separated  from  its  penalty  they  would  be  only  too 
willing  to  commit  it.  There  are  three  classes  of  weepers  :  the  repentant,  mourning 
both  over  the  wrong  done  and  the  result  it  has  necessitated,  and  determined 
never  to  offend  again ;  the  regretful,  intending  to  keep  from  the  like  in  future, 
but  only  slightly  moved  because  of  its  evil  character;  the  suffering,  thinking 
only  of  the  disaster,  but  ready  to  repeat  the  deed  so  soon  as  it  is  safe.  To 
the  second  class,  for  the  most  part,  the  "Bochimites"  belong.  They  wish  for 
prosperity  and  ease,  and  are  more  sorry  for  the  "  thorning  "  and  "snaring"  in 
store  than  for  having  disobeyed  the  word  of  Jehovah.  {Be  Witt  S.  Clark.) 
Bochim  : — I.  Observe,  first,  that  the  kepeover  of  the  people  is  tehjied  "  AN 
ANGEL."  "  An  angel  of  the  Lord  came  up  from  Gilgal."  But  the  first  utterance 
carries  us  to  the  thought  of  One  higher  than  angel  or  archangel.  The  speaker 
describes  Himself  as  the  deliverer  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  and  He  finishes  with 
the  denunciation,  "  Ye  have  not  obeyed  My  voice."  The  burden  of  His  prophecy 
is  worthy  of  the  Divine  speaker,  for  it  is  the  simple  enunciation  of  the  fundamental 
truth  of  all  religion — man  in  covenant  with  God,  and  bound  to  comply  with  the 
terms  of  that  covenant.  II.  Consider  the  result  of  the  prophesying.  The 
general  result  was  but  transitory.  The  people  wept  and  sacrificed  unto  the  Lord. 
But  no  amendment  ensued.  The  whole  effect  was  a  momentary  outburst  of 
feeling  and  a  hasty  sacrifice.  Most  true  picture  of  the  reception  of  the  Word 
of  God  in  after-time.  It  is  sensational  or  emotional  religion  against  which 
Bochim  is  our  warning.  There  are  two  principal  elements  of  this  fruitless  sorrow. 
1.  The  first  is  want  of  depth  of  soul.  2.  The  second  is  the  "  after  revolt  of  the 
human  mind  against  the  supernatural."  Godly  sorrow  issues  in  a  repentance  not 
to  be  repented  of,  in  that  thorough  turning  of  the  life  to  God's  service  from 
which,  in  the  hottest  fire  of  temptation,  there  is  never  a  turning  back  to  the  way  of 
evil  again.  {Bp.  Woodford.)  Wasted  emotion: — In  California,  where  so 
much  of  the  land  requires  irrigation,  there  is  a  serious  effort  being  made  to 
(lovise  some  scheme  by  which  the  water  that  goes  to  waste  in  times  of  flood  can  ba 


CHAP,  n.]  JUDGES.  81 

stored  up  and  used  in  times  of  drought.  It  has  long  been  known  that  enough 
flood  water  flows  back  to  the  sea  in  the  rainy  season  to  more  than  multiply  the 
state's  resource  for  irrigation.  Therefore  it  is  felt  that  if  some  system  is  workable 
whereby  flood  waters  can  be  impounded  and  saved  from  waste,  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  acres  of  now  useless  lands  would  be  made  fruitful.  "What  a  won- 
derful thing  it  would  be  if  some  such  scheme  could  be  devised  ia  the  higher  realm 
of  human  emotion  I  There  is  enough  real  heart-benevolence  stirred  up  to  fill  the 
land  with  kindness  and  bring  about  human  brotherhood  everywhere.  But  it 
often  goes  to  waste  without  producing  any  practical  result.  Many  people  are 
moved  to  tears  by  a  novel  or  the  story  of  some  suffering  fellow-being,  and  for  a 
time  there  is  a  flood  of  charitable  feeling  that  surges  through  the  soul ;  but  it  runs 
to  waste,  and  when  opportunity  for  real  helpfulness  comes  the  emotion  has  passed 
away.     (L.  A.  Banks.) 

Vers.  6-10.   The   people  served  the   Lord  all  the  days  of  Joshua. — Joshua 

and   "  another  generation  "  ; — I.   The  power  of  a  great  man  to  adapt  himself 

TO  CHAKGING  CIRCUMSTANCES,  AND  TO  BE  EQUALLY  GREAT  UNDER  VARYING  CON- 
DITIONS. Many  a  man  great  in  conquest  is  a  nonentity  in  peaceful  times. 
The  great  warrior  does  not  always  make  a  great  statesman.  Joshua,  on  the 
contrary,  was  the  moral  ruler  of  the  nation  in  peace  as  well  as  the  military 
commander  of  the  army  in  war.  The  Eomans  are  said  to  have  conquered 
like  savages  and  ruled  like  philosophic  statesmen.  Joshua,  too,  excelled  in  war 
and  peace.  Perhaps  he  was  greatest  in  peace,  because  "  he  that  ruleth  his  spirit 
is  better  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  Contrast  Napoleon  in  St.  Helena  with 
Joshua  at  Timnath  Heres.  II.  The  formative  influence  of  one  great  life  in 
GIVING  character  TO  AN  AGE.  Such  men  as  Joshua  are  necessarily  exceptional. 
There  is  a  Divine  economy  in  the  sending  of  great  men.  Like  miracles,  they  must 
not  be  allowed  to  degenerate  into  commonplaces.  There  is  a  reserve  in  producing 
great  leaders:  they  come  one  in  a  century — in  some  instances,  one  in  a  millennium. 
Men  of  the  Joshua  type  are  sent  to  give  a  character  to  their  time.  The  history  of 
the  world  is  largely  the  history  of  single  champions.  III.  The  limitations  of  a 
personal  influence — even  one  of  the  most  powerful  kind  ;  for  we  see  here  the 
strange  capacity  of  one  age  to  prove  untrue  to  the  best  traditions  of  that  which 
preceded  it:  "There  arose  another  generation,"  &c.  1.  This  generation  suffered 
from  the  lack  of  direct  personal  testimony.  They  could  not  say,  "  We  speak  that 
which  we  do  know,  and  testify  that  which  we  have  seen."  All  they  knew  was  by 
hearsay,  and  spirituality  must  be  very  vigorous  and  intense  to  breathe  life  into 
hearsay.  2.  These  people  sadly  under-estimated,  and  therefore  ignored,  the  value 
of  historic  record — "  knew  not,"  &c.  They  severed  themselves  from  the  past. 
3.  This  was  an  age  of  ease,  and,  as  such,  the  least  productive  of  noble  manhood. 
These  were  poverty-stricken  times.  The  nation  was  no  longer  braced  by  one 
common  ambition,  or  bent  upon  one  object.  They  had  lapsed  into  a  state  of 
indolence  and  indifference.  Moreover,  there  was  no  central  supreme  power,  for 
they  had  leaders  only  in  times  of  war,  and  the  old  leader  and  his  subordinates  were 
dead.  This  was  a  time  when  a  great  character  was  most  needed  to  save  the  nation 
from  degeneracy.  Such  ages  often  succeed  the  iron  ages  of  history.  I  am  not  sure 
that  we,  as  Christians,  have  not  lost  much  of  the  robustness  of  the  past  age. 
IV.  What  a  responsibility  is  involved  in  this  succession  of  ages  to  maintain 
THE  continuity,  to  be  worthy  followers  of  those  who  through  faith  and  patience 
have  inherited  the  promises;  to  be,  of  a  truth,  successors  of  the  apostles  and  of 
other  holy  men !  V.  Thank  God,  the  record  in  our  text  is  only  fragmentaby. 
That  age  was  not  a  final  break  upon  the  progress  of  revelation.  History  is  pro- 
gressive after  all.  Span  the  centuries.  Don't  let  the  point  of  observation  be  too 
narrow  or  near.  Ascending  from  lowlands  to  highlands  there  are  undulations;  but 
take  a  span  large  enough,  and  you  will  find  that  it  is  an  ascent  all  the  way.  So  in 
the  history  of  our  race.  God  has  been  advancing  throughout  all  time  in  spite  of 
the  "  dark  ages  "  of  the  world,  and  in  spite  of  human  relapses  into  sin.  (D.  Davies.) 
Man : — I.  The  moral  obligation  of  every  member  of  our  race  (ver.  7).  1.  All 
creatures  are  the  servants  of  God,  but  they  serve  Him  in  different  ways.  (1)  Some 
without  a  wiU.  Inanimate  matter  and  insentient  life.  (2)  Some  with  their  will. 
Brutes — instinct.  (3)  Some  against  their  will.  Wicked  men  and  fallen  angels. 
(4)  Some  by  their  will.  Saints  and  angels.  2.  To  serve  Him  in  this  way  is  the 
obligation  of  the  race.  But  there  is  one  condition  indispensable  to  this — supreme 
love  for  Him  as  the  Sovereign.    This  will — (1)  Induce  man  to  attain  an  under- 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.  [chap.  n. 

standing  of  His  law ;  (2)  prompt  him  cheerfully  to  obey  it.  II.  The  service  op 
ONE  GOOD  MAN  TO  OUR  RACE.  1.  That  a  man  can  induce  his  race  to  serve  the  Lord. 
Joshua  did.  2.  That  a  man,  to  do  this,  must  himself  be  a  servant  of  the  Lord. 
Joshua  was.  3.  That,  however  useful  a  man  may  be  to  his  race  in  this  respect,  he 
must  die.  Joshua  died.  III.  The  melancholy  succession  of  our  race  (ver.  10). 
1.  The  succession  involves  no  extinction.  The  mighty  generations  that  are  gone 
live  on  some  other  shore.  2.  The  mode  of  the  succession  involves  a  moral  cause. 
We  say  the  "mode,"  not  the  "fact."  If  the  race  continue  to  multiply  as  now,  the  limi- 
tation of  the  world's  area  and  provisions  would  require  a  succession.  This  planet 
was  probably  intended  as  a  stepping-stone  to  another.  Had  there  been  no  sin, 
however,  instead  of  the  succession  taking  place  through  the  grave,  it  might 
have  been  through  a  "  chariot  of  fire,"  as  in  the  case  of  Elijah.  IV.  The 
DEGENERATING  TENDENCY  OF  OUR  RACE.  1.  This  degenerating  tendency  is  often 
found  stronger  than  the  most  elevating  influences  of  truth.  Peter  fell  in  the 
very  presence  of  Christ.  2.  This  degenerating  tendency  indicates  the  necessity  of 
a  conscious  reliance  upon  the  gracious  help  of  God.  {Homilist.)  Israel's 
apostasy : — I.  The  character  of  the  Jews  at  the  death  of  Joshua.  U.  The 
APOSTASY  OF  THE  SUCCEEDING  GENERATION.  1.  The  nature  of  their  apostasy.  God 
is  jealous  of  His  own  honour;  and  to  unite  His  name  with  idols,  and  to  His 
worship  to  join  the  revolting  orgies  of  Ashtoreth,  was  diabolism,  and  must  be 
judged  and  punished.  2.  Their  apostasy  was  intensified  by  all  the  distinguishing 
privileges  and  blessings  they  had  enjoyed.  As  virtue  is  proportioned  in  vigour 
to  the  temptations  resisted,  so  transgression  is  proportioned  to  the  forces  of  con- 
science, education,  example  and  blessing  which  have  been  fought  with  and  conquered. 
Nor  was  this  aU  their  sin.  To  the  list  must  be  added  disobedience.  They  refused 
to  execute  the  Divine  command  to  expel  the  Canaanites  from  the  land.  It  was 
terrible  surgery,  and  not  murder,  that  the  Israelites  were  commanded  to  perform  as 
touching  the  heathen  idolaters — a  true  and  just  surgery,  cutting  away  unflinchingly 
the  diseased  part,  that  themselves  might  remain  sound.  Stopping  short  in  the 
operation,  they  became  infected  with  the  moral  leprosy  which  made  the  Canaanites 
loathsome  to  heaven  and  earth  (Lev.  xviii.  21-30 ;  Deut.  xii.  30-32).  (1)  Mercies 
despised,  privileges  scorned,  pledges  made  to  God  in  covenant  and  oroken,  become 
the  foundation  for  towering  iniquity.  The  best  things  perverted  are  the  worst. 
(2)  Nothing  is  more  fatal  to  the  Christian  calling  than  alliances  with  the  ungodly. 
He  who  makes  the  experiment  of  such  entangling  alliances  will  speedily  discover 
that  his  power  is  lost ;  that  what  he  builds  with  one  hand  he  pulls  down  with  the 
other ;  that  he  does  not  win  the  world  to  God :  the  world  wins  him.  It  is  a 
notorious  fact  that  alliances  with  the  wicked  do  not  command  the  respect  of  the 
very  men  for  whose  favour  they  are  formed.  The  world  scorns  those  who  sacrifice 
their  religious  principles  to  worldly  policy  or  social  ambitions.  III.  The  punish- 
ment OF  their  apostasy.  1.  No  two  ideas  are  more  inseparably  linked  together 
than  these  two  of  sin  and  suffering.  The  one  follows  the  other  by  a  law  as  fixed 
and  imperative  as  the  agony  of  a  burning  hand.  They  are  the  •'  twin  serpents  "  of 
the  race,  inseparable  companions.  2.  But  all  suffering  is  not  penal.  With  respect  to 
God's  people  it  is  remedial  and  corrective.  Moses  Browne  truly  saith,  "  A  great  deal 
of  rust  requires  a  rough  file."  IV.  God's  merciful  provision  for  Israel's  deliver- 
ance. God  answered  the  cries  of  distress  by  sending  them  Judges — men  chosen  and 
qualified  to  act  as  His  vicegerents  in  the  emergencies  of  the  nation.  Let  no 
Christian  despair  or  be  discouraged  even  in  the  most  adverse  circumstances. 
Evermore  it  is  true  that  "  Man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity."  (IF.  G.  Moore- 
head,  D.D.)  There  arose  another  generation  after  them,  which  knew  not  the 
Lord. — Israel  forsaking  God  : — With  ages  of  schooling,  and  always  the  same  lessons, 
mankind  is  slow  to  learn  the  absolute  and  unalterable  conditions  of  prosperity; 
equally  slow  to  note  and  steer  clear  of  the  reefs  and  shoals  on  which  nationality 
after  nationality  has  gone  to  wreck.  I.  The  drift  of  human  nature.  It  is  towards 
Bin,  and  away  from  God.  The  Israelites  were  men  no  better  and  no  worse  than 
other  men.  Sentimental  philosophers  of  the  modem  type  may  write  out  in  soft 
phrase  their  exalted  estimates  of  human  nature  ;  they  may  enlarge  upon  its  beauties 
and  excellences ;  but,  in  spite  of  their  fancies  and  ecstacies,  here  the  fact  asserts  itself 
in  the  record,  as  it  does  on  every  page  of  history,  that  human  nature,  left  to  itself, 
gravitates  downward.  U.  The  infujence  of  men  in  high  station.  The  signifi- 
cant fact  is  recorded  that  "  the  people  served  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  Joshua,"  &c. 
A  great  responsibility  rests  upon  those  who  occupy  prominent  places  in  society  or  in 
the  State — a  responsibility  that  is  not  discharged  by  fidelity  to  the  specific  duties  of 


CHAP,  n.]  JUDGES.  83 

their  position.  There  is  that  undefined,  incalculable  something  of  influence  which 
is  inseparable  from  their  station,  which  they  are  to  guard  and  direct.  III.  The 
DANGER  OF  RELIGIOUS  INSEN8IBILITT.  It  is  twofold.  There  is  danger  that  men  will 
come  into  a  state  of  mind  and  heart  where  they  wUl  be  unmoved  by  Divine  truth, 
and  there  is  great  danger  in  that  state.  The  children  of  Israel  did  not  sweep  over 
at  once  and  in  a  body  into  idolatry.  They  drifted,  by  slow  and  imrecognised 
gradations,  from  the  service  of  God  to  the  worship  of  Baal  and  Ashtaroth.  Care- 
lessness about  single  duties,  indifference  to  single  truths — here  were  the  causes  of 
their  final  detection.  The  process  has  been  often  repeated,  is  still  in  progress. 
Men  and  women  walk  our  streets  to-day  utterly  indifferent  to  the  most  solemn 
truths  of  religion,  to  whom  aU  the  truths  of  God  were  once  intensely  real.  There 
was  a  time  when  conscience  was  quick,  and  the  least  wandering  from  duty  brought 
sorrow  and  repentance.  There  was  a  time  when  immortality,  with  its  heaven  of 
blessedness  and  its  land  of  infinite  sorrow,  loomed  colossal  on  the  horizon  of 
thought.  There  was  such  a  time,  but  it  has  passed,  perhaps  for  ever.  Neglect 
of  duty,  lack  of  watchfulness  against  sin,  disobedience  to  many  a  heavenly  calling — 
things  like  these,  slight  and  unnoticed  in  themselves,  have  swept  them  away  from 
the  moorings  of  faith  and  interest,  and  they  are  adrift  on  the  dark  sea  of  unbelief 
and  indifference.  IV.  The  secret  of  prosperity.  The  Israelites  had  aU  the 
human  factors  of  success — a  fruitful  country,  a  genial  climate,  experience  in  the 
arts  of  war  and  peace,  and  the  prestige  of  a  triumphant  march  from  Egypt  to 
Canaan.  These  were  seemingly  enough  to  make  them  a  power  among  the  nations. 
But  one  thing,  the  indispensable  thing,  was  missing — the  Divine  favour  which  they 
had  forfeited  by  their  sin.  Is  God  for  us  or  against  us  ?  is  the  decisive  question. 
If  He  frown,  empires  with  the  glow  of  centuries  of  art  and  culture  transfiguring 
them  may  crumble  to  dishonoured  dust,  and  the  shame  of  their  defeat  become 
greater  than  the  splendour  of  their  conquests.  From  the  tawny  sands  that  cover 
the  old-time  magnificence  of  Babylon  and  Nineveh,  and  the  scores  of  historic  centres 
that  have  faded  out  of  sight,  comes  one  and  the  same  declaration,  voiced  by  the 
desert  wind  that  moans  over  their  graves,  "Even  so  shall  it  be  with  the  nations 
that  forget  God."  And  what  is  true  of  men  in  the  mass  is  true  of  individuals. 
The  conditions  of  real  and  enduring  success  in  life  are  always  the  same.  "  If  God 
be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?  "  Many  things  are  rightly  estimated  as  elements 
in  what  is  called  a  successful  life.  Enterprise,  thrift,  patience,  energy— all  these 
are  helpful  and  desirable  forces ;  but  it  still  remains  unalterably  and  everlastingly 
true  that  the  sovereign  maxim  of  political  and  social  economy  is  that  given  long 
ago  by  Jesus  on  the  mount :  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  <fec.  {Ser7non8  by 
the  Monday  Club.) 

Vers.  11-15.  They  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers. — Israel's  obstinacy 
and  God's  patience : — This  passage  sums  up  the  Book  of  Judges,  and  also 
the  history  of  Israel  for  over  four  hundred  years.  Like  the  overture  of  an 
oratorio,  it  sounds  the  main  themes  of  the  story  which  follows.  That  story 
has  four  chapters,  repeated  with  dreary  monotony  over  and  over  again.  They 
are :  Eelapse  into  idolatry,  retribution,  respite  and  deliverance,  and  brief  return 
to  God.  The  last  of  these  phases  soon  passes  into  fresh  relapse,  and  then  the 
old  round  is  gone  all  over  again,  as  regularly  as  the  white  and  red  lights  and 
the  darkness  come  round  in  a  revolving  lighthouse  lantern,  or  the  figures  in  a 
circulating  decimal  fraction.  1.  The  first  is  the  continual  tendency  to  relapse 
into  idolatry.  The  fact  itself,  and  the  frank  prominence  given  to  it  in  the  Old 
Testament,  are  both  remarkable.  As  to  the  latter,  certainly,  if  the  Old  Testament 
histories  have  the  same  origin  as  the  chronicles  of  other  nations,  they  present  most 
anomalous  features.  Where  do  we  find  any  other  people  whose  annals  contain 
nothing  that  can  minister  to  national  vanity,  and  have  for  one  of  their  chief  themes 
the  sins  of  the  nation?  As  to  the  fact  of  the  continual  relapses  into  idolatry, 
nothing  could  be  more  natural  than  that  the  recently  received  and  but  imperfectly 
assimilated  revelation  of  the  one  God,  with  its  stringent  requirements  of  purity  and 
its  severe  prohibition  of  idols,  should  easily  slip  off  these  rude  and  merely  outward 
worshippers.  Instead  of  thinking  of  the  Israelites  as  monsters  of  ingratitude  and 
backshding,  we  come  near  the  truth,  and  make  a  better  use  of  the  history,  when  we 
see  in  it  a  mirror  which  shows  us  our  own  image.  The  strong  earthward  pull  is 
ever  acting  on  us,  and,  unless  God  hold  us  up,  we  too  shall  slide  downwards. 
Idolatry  and  worldUness  are  persistent ;  for  they  are  natural.  Firm  adherence  to 
God  is  less  common,  because  it  goes  against  the  strong  forces,  within  and  without, 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

■whicli  bind  us  to  earth.     Apparently  the  relapses  into  idolatry  did  not  imply  the 
entire  abandonment  of  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  but  the  worship  of  Baalim  and 
Ashtaroth  along  with  it.     Such  illegitimate  mixing  up  of  deities  was  accordant  with 
the  very  essence  of  polytheism,  and  repugnant  to  that  of  the  true  worship  of  God. 
These  continual  relapses  have  an  important  bearing  on  the  question  of  the  origin  of 
the  "  Jewish  conception  of  God."     They  are  intelligible  only  if  we  take  the  old- 
fashioned  explanation,  that  its  origin  was  a  Divine  revelation,  given  to  a  rude 
people.     They  are  unintelligible  if  we  take  the  new-fashioned  explanation  that  the 
monotheism  of  Israel  was  the  product  of  natural  evolution,  or  was  anything  but  a 
treasure  put  by  God  into  their  hands,  which  they  did  not  appreciate,  and  would 
willingly  have  thrown  away.     2.  Note  the  swift-following  retribution :  "  The  anger 
of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Israel."     That  phrase  is  no  sign  of  a  lower  concep- 
tion of  God  than  the  gospel  brings.    Wrath  is  an  integral  part  of  love,  when  the 
lover  is  perfect  righteousness  and  the  loved  are  sinful.     The  most  terrible  anger  is 
the  anger  of  perfect  gentleness,  as  expressed  in  that  solemn  paradox  of  the  apostle 
of  love,  when  he  speaks  of  "the  wrath  of  the  Lamb."     God  was  angry  with  Israel 
because  He  loved  them,  and  desired  their  love,  for  their  own  good.     The  rate  of 
Israel's  conquest  was  determined  by  Israel's  faithful  adherence  to  God.     That  is  a 
standing  law.    Victory  for  us  in  aU  the  good  fight  of  life  depends  on  our  cleaving 
to  Him,  and  forsaking  all  other.     The  Divine  motive,  if  we  may  so  say,  in  leaving 
the  unsubdued  nations  in  the  land,  was  to  provide  the  means  of  proving  Israel. 
Would  it  not  have  been  better,  since  Israel  was  so  weak,  to  secure  for  it  an  un- 
tempted  period  ?     Surely  it  is  a  strange  way  of  helping  a  man  who  has  stumbled,  to 
make  provisions  that  future  occasions  of  stumbling  shall  lie  on  his  path.    But  so 
the  perfect  wisdom  which  is  perfect  love  ever  ordains.     There  shall  be  no  unnatural 
greenhouse  shelter  provided  for  weak  plants.     The  hability  to  fall  imposes  the 
necessity  of  trial,  but  the  trial  does  not  impose  the  necessity  of  falling.     The  devil 
tempts,  because  he  hopes  that  we  shall  fall.     God  tries,  in  order  that  we  may  stand, 
and  that  our  feet  may  be  strengthened  by  the  trial.     3.  Respite  and  deliverance  are 
described  in  verses  16  and  18.     The  R.V.  has  wisely  substituted  a  simple  "and" 
for  "  nevertheless  "  at  the  beginning  of  verse  16.     The  latter  word  implies  that  the 
raising  up  of  the  judges  was  a  reversal  of  what  had  gone  before;  "  and"  implies 
that  it  was  a  continuation.    And  its  use  here  carries  the  lesson  that  God's  judg- 
ment and  deliverance  come  from  the  same  source,  and  are  harmonious  parts  of  one 
educational  process.    Nor  is  this  thought  negatived  by  the  statement  in  verse  18 
that  "it  repented  the  Lord."    That  strong  metaphorical  ascription  to  Him  of  human 
emotion  simply  implies  that  His  action,  which  of  necessity  is  the  expression  of  His 
wlU,  was  changed.     The  will  of  the  moment  before  had  been  to  punish  ;  the  will  of 
the   next  moment  was  to   deliver,  because  their  "  groaning "   showed   that  the 
punishment  had  done  its  work.     But  the  two  wills  were  one  in  ultimate  purpose, 
and  the  two  sets  of  acts  were  equally  and  harmoniously  parts  of  one  design.     The 
surgeon  is  carrying  out  one  plan  when  he  cuts  deep  into  quivering  flesh,  and  when  he 
sews  up  the  wounds  which  he  himself  has  made.     God's  deliverances  are  linked  to 
His  chastisements  by  "  and,"  not  by  "  nevertheless."    4.  A  word  only  can  be  given  to 
the  last  stage  in  the  dreary  round.    It  comes  back  to  the  first.     The  religion  of  the 
delivered  people  lasted  as  long  as  the  judge's  life.    When  he  died,  it  died.     There 
is  intense  bitterness  in  the  remark  to  that  effect  in  verse  19.    Did  God  then  die  with 
the  judge  ?    Was  it  Samson,  or  Jehovah,  that  had  delivered  ?     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  Israel — God's  methods  with  nations : — I.  Some 
CHAEACTEiusTics  OF  NATIONAL  SINS  (vcrs.  11-13).     There  is  an  amazing  tendency  in 
communities  to  commit  the  same  sins.     We  are  such  creatures  of  imitation  that 
every  community  develops  a  certain  individuality  ;  all  composing  it,  while  having 
personal  peculiarities,  do  yet  have  many  modes  of  speech  and  thought  and  habits 
of  life  in  common.     Every  nation,  every  city,  has  its  characteristic  virtues,  its 
characteristic  sins.     It  is  easy  to  "  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil."     So  the  Jewish 
people  developed  a  propensity  to  idolatry.    But  a  still  more  striking  fact  regarding 
national  sin  is  the  way  it  is  promoted  by  the  influence  of  other  nations.    Israel 
followed  the  gods  of  the  people  that  were  round  about  them.     II.  The  betribution 
or  NATIONS  (vers.  14,  15).     A  nation  must  be  punished  in  this  life  if  at  all,  for  it 
has  no  hereafter.     Consequently,  in  national  experience  the  connection  between  sin 
and  the  loss  of  prosperity  is  most  distinctly  seen.     III.  The  importance  of  good 
MEN  AS  leaders  (vers.  16-18).     It  is  God's  method  to  elevate  and  save  nations  by 
the  influence  of  men  whom  He  brings  forward  for  the  purpose.     They  may  hold 
very  different  positions  in  public  life,  they  may  be  men  of  very  different  character 


CHAP,  n.]  JUDGES.  85 

and  abilities,  but  we  are  to  recognise  the  work  tbey  do  as  made  possible  through  the 
goodness  of  God.  We  must  trust  God  more  in  national  emergencies,  and  pay  more 
heed  to  the  counsels  of  men  who  are  appointed  of  God  to  be  our  leaders.  It  i3 
worth  our  notice  here  that  the  judges  of  Israel  were  simply  the  vicegerents  of  God. 
God  was  the  Chief  Magistrate  of  the  nation.  He  claimed  absolute  authority.  The 
government  was  a  theocracy ;  that  is,  God  enacted  the  laws  of  the  nation,  inter- 
preted them,  and  enforced  them.  He  combined  in  Himself  the  three  departments 
of  government — the  legislative,  the  judicial,  and  the  executive.  Our  governments 
are  under  equal  obligation  with  the  judges  of  old  to  bring  God's  thought  before  the 
people  and  to  enforce  His  will.  Our  rulers  show  themselves  to  be  raised  up  of  God, 
and  are  delivering  us  from  the  misery  of  our  national  sins  only  as  they  act  for  God 
and  express  His  will  in  their  government  of  the  people.  IV.  The  amazing  tendency 
OF  NATIONS  TO  EELAPSE  INTO  SIN  (vcr.  19).  It  is  a  sad  record,  but  true  to  nature 
and  repeated  in  every  age  of  the  world.  Eeform  makes  progress,  as  the  tide 
advances,  by  refluent  waves,  only  each  succeeding  wave  rolls  a  little  higher  up  the 
beach.  The  wave  sweeps  in,  but  it  does  not  stay  there.  It  rolls  back  and  leaves 
the  shore  bare,  and  everything  seems  swept  out  to  sea.  That  is  a  very  discouraging 
feature  to  the  eager  reformer.  There  is  need  for  us  of  to-day,  in  view  of  this  law  of 
retrogression  in  progress,  of  two  things.  One  is  never  to  be  discouraged  by  any 
seeming  discomfiture.  There  are  undoubtedly  moral  lapses  in  communities.  In 
Cromwell's  day,  in  England,  there  was  a  great  advance  in  morals  and  high  purpose, 
but  with  the  death  of  Cromwell  and  the  accession  of  Charles  11.  the  wave  of 
progress  flowed  back  again  and  left  the  unhappy  kingdom  demoralised  and  given 
over  to  folly.  But  this  was  only  a  temporary  reverse.  In  time  the  right  re-asserted 
itself,  morality  triumphed,  and  the  nation  rose  to  a  higher  level  than  ever  before. 
We  may  be  sure  this  is  God's  design  for  us.  V.  The  probation  and  discipline  of 
NATIONS  BY  TKiAL  (vcrs.  20-23).  Just  as  David  was  fitted  for  kingship  by  the  rude 
discipline  of  his  life  as  an  outlaw,  so  was  Israel  fitted  to  introduce  Christ  to  the 
world  by  its  bitter  experiences  in  the  time  of  the  judges,  in  the  days  of  the  captivity, 
and  under  the  hated  Eoman  yoke.  God  is  doing  the  same  thing  for  this  nation, 
training  it  for  great  usefulness,  or  at  least  giving  it  opportunity  to  be  so  trained,  by 
its  successive  trials.    (A.  P.  Foster.) 

Vers.  16-23.  The  Lord  raised  up  Judges. — The  judges,  their  choice,  function,  and 
administration : — I.  These  men,  in  some  of  whom  the  miraculous  operations  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  were  singularly  manifested,  were  not  chosen,  like  the  suffetes  of 
Carthage,  with  regal  powers  for  a  year ;  nor  like  the  archons  of  Athens,  with 
divided  and  carefully  defined  responsibilities;  nor  like  the  dictators  of  Eome, 
chosen  to  exercise  uncontrolled  power  during  extraordinary  emergencies.  They 
were  not  chosen  by  the  people  at  all.  They  were  sent  forth  by  the  Divine  King  of 
Israel — impelled  by  an  inward  inspiration,  which  was  in  several  instances  con- 
firmed by  outward  miraculous  signs  to  act  in  His  great  name.  They  were  raised 
up  as  the  exigencies  of  the  times  required ;  and  their  presence  and  their  absence 
were  alike  calculated  to  keep  alive  in  the  nation  a  sense  of  dependence  upon  its 
invisible  King.  11.  The  functions  which  the  judges  were  called  upon  to  discharge 
may  be  partly  understood  by  referring  to  the  position  in  which  Moses  and  Joshua 
stood  in  relation  to  the  twelve  tribes.  The  judges  were  God's  vicegerents.  The 
parallel  between  the  office  of  the  judges  and  that  of  Moses  or  Joshua  was  not, 
however,  complete.  In  so  far  as  they  were  specially  raised  up  to  be  God's  vice- 
gerents in  Israel,  it  holds  good  ;  yet  it  was  a  separate  and  distinct  form  of  govern- 
ment, and  is  recognised  as  such  by  St.  Paul.  Moses  and  Joshua  was  called,  each 
of  them,  to  introduce  a  new  order  of  things.  But  during  the  period  of  the  judges, 
nothing,  in  respect  of  God's  covenant,  was  put  upon  a  new  footing.  The  history  of  the 
people  is  a  succession  of  various  fortunes,  afflictions,  and  deliverances,  alternating 
according  to  their  public  sin  or  their  repentance  :  but  no  change  occurred,  perma- 
nently or  deeply  affecting  their  public  condition.  As  often  as  the  sins  of  the  people 
brought  down  God's  chastisements,  and  chastisement  produced  repentance,  judges 
were  raised  up  to  repel  the  invader,  and  to  restore  peace  and  tranquillity.  Hence 
they  are  frequently  called,  in  the  sacred  history,  "  deliverers  and  saviours."  The 
judges  were  the  chief  magistrates  of  the  Hebrew  commonwealth.  As  such,  they 
had  to  deal  with  religious,  no  less  than  with  civil,  affairs ;  for  the  sharp  line  of 
separation  between  these  which  modem  ingenuity  has  invented  did  not  then  exist.  It 
became  the  duty  of  the  judges  to  stir  up  the  people  to  return  to  the  Lord  ;  and  hence 
they  needed  to  be  themselves  men  of  faith,    m.  With  regard  to  the  effect  of  their 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

administration  upon  the  nation  of  the  Jews,  I  think  the  period  of  the  judges  was, 
upon  the  whole,  a  period  of  national  advancement.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the  rule 
of  the  judges  secured  long  periods  of  public  tranquillity.  Gloomy  and  fearful  as 
are  some  of  the  details  furnished  in  the  Book  of  Judges,  the  Hebrew  nation  was  never- 
theless in  a  better  state  during  that  period,  morally,  politically,  and  spiritually,  than 
it  became  afterwards  during  the  reigns  of  the  later  kings.  Not  only  the  intervals 
of  repose,  but  also  the  periods  of  warfare,  must  be  taken  into  account  in  estimating 
the  benefits  of  their  rule.  In  general,  they  exerted  themselves  to  prevent  idolatry, 
dissuading  the  people  from  their  besetting  sin ;  but  there  were  times  when  the 
people  "  would  not  hearken  unto  their  judges  "  ;  and  further,  "  when  the  judge  was 
dead,"  they  took  advantage  of  the  interregnum  which  sometimes  occurred,  and 
"  returned  and  corrupted  themselves  more  than  their  fathers."  These  apostasies 
were  followed  by  chastisements.  The  Lord  forsook  them ;  He  permitted  their 
enemies  to  oppress  and  torment  them ;  "  the  east  wind  from  the  wilderness  " 
dried  up  the  fountain  of  their  strength,  until,  at  the  point  to  die,  they  bethought 
themselves  of  His  holy  name.  Miserable  and  forsaken,  their  name  might  have  been 
blotted  out  for  ever  but  for  the  "  saviours  " — figures  of  a  greater  Saviour — whom 
their  God  raised  up  to  deliver  them.  Nor  was  success  denied  to  these  men  in  that 
which  they  undertook.  The  kings  of  Mesopotamia,  of  Moab,  and  of  Canaan,  the 
fierce  mountaineers  of  Ammon  :  the  innumerable  hordes  of  the  Bedouin ;  the  lordly 
and  persistent  Philistines,  were  in  turn  humbled  and  subdued  by  these  men  who, 
through  faith,  "  quenched  the  violence  of  fire,  escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword, 
waxed  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens."  (L.  H.  Wiseman, 
M.A.) 


CHAPTEE  m. 

Vers.  1-5.  The  nations  which  the  Lord  left,  to  prove  Israel  by  them. — The  trial 

and  chastisement  of  an  unfaithful  people  : — I.  It  was  God's  own  thought  to  put 
THEM  TO  THE  PROOF.  1.  Far  otherwlsc  were  the  thoughts  of  the  nations.  (1)  When 
Israel  was  strong  their  thoughts  were  of  alliances.  (2)  When  Israel  became  weak 
their  thoughts  were  of  conquest  and  revenge.  2.  The  nations  could  do  nothing 
without  God's  permission.  3.  This  proving  of  character  was  done  out  of  respect  to 
His  covenant.  (1)  God  acted  by  principle  and  not  by  temporary  impulse.  (2) 
He  acted  according  to  His  established  manner  of  dealing  with  His  people's  sins. 
(3)  Provision  made  for  this  through  the  intervention  of  the  coming  Messiah,  the 
real  Mediator  of  the  covenant.  4.  God  puts  His  people  under  discipUne  to  serve 
wise  and  holy  ends,  fl)  Nor  real  injury  is  ever  intended.  (2)  Never  is  the  rod 
without  some  gracious  mstruction  :  "  Hear  ye  the  rod,  and  Him  who  appointeth  it." 
5.  God  Himself  determines  the  time,  manner,  and  severity  of  the  trial'.  II.  It  was 
NECESSARY  TO  PUT  IsRAEL  TO  THE  PROOF.  1.  Their  allegiance  to  their  God  must  be 
ascertained.  (1)  God's  jealousy  required  it.  (2)  Without  allegiance  the  people 
were  not  in  a  fit  state  to  receive  Divine  blessings.  (3)  Ways  and  means  were  easy 
where  there  was  allegiance.  2.  Human  protestations  of  obedience  are  little  to  be 
trusted.  III.  This  testing  op  character  was  made  in  love,  not  in  anger.  1.  All 
God's  dealings  with  His  covenant  people  are  necessarily  in  love.  This  is  the  very 
spirit  of  His  covenant:  "Your  God" — "God  is  for  you" — always  on  your  side. 
2.  It  was  love  to  prevent  a  breach  of  the  covenant.  3.  It  was  love  to  teach  the 
heart  the  bitterness  of  sin.  4.  It  is  love  to  teach  self-knowledge  and  humility.  5. 
It  is  love  where  a  false  character  exists  to  have  the  discovery  of  it  made  known  in 
good  time.  IV.  Obedience  is  with  God  the  all-important  requirement.  1.  Obe- 
dience is  the  index  which  shows  that  the  heart  is  right  with  God.  2.  Obedience 
springs  naturally  from  the  fear  and  the  love  of  God.  3.  In  the  gospel  obedience 
must  spring  from  love.  4.  Obedience  in  the  gospel  is  the  obedience  of  children.  5. 
Obedience  must  be  shown  in  the  face  of  opposition.  (J.  P.  Millar.)  Tests  and 
chastisement: — I.  The  work  to  be  done.  1.  Chastisement  as  well  as  trial.  2.  A 
special  mark  is  put  on  the  reason  for  this  course  of  dealing  (chap.  ii.  20-23). 
n.  God's  choice  of  instruments.  1.  God  designates  His  own  agency  to  do  His 
work.  2.  God  selects  His  instruments  from  the  camp  of  His  enemies  equally  with 
His  friends.  3.  A  sinning  people  often  supply  the  means  of  their  own  correction. 
4.  God  can  turn  the  most  unlikely  persons  into  fit  instruments  for  doing  His  work. 


CHAP,  m.]  JUDGES.  87 

m.  The  tendency  of  the  covenant  people  to  apostatise  moM  theie  God.  1.  It 
is  what  might  have  been  least  expected.  2.  The  root-cause  lies  in  the  depravity  of 
the  human  heart.  3.  Eemissness  of  parental  training  one  of  the  immediate  causes. 
IV.  Each  new  generation  requiees  in  some  degree  to  be  taught  by  an  experience 
OF  its  own.  1.  The  strange  incapacity  of  the  human  heart  for  receiving  Divine 
lessons.  2.  Personal  experience  is  the  most  effective  method  of  teaching.  (1)  A 
more  vivid  impression  is  made.  (2)  Personal  interests  are  more  deeply  touched. 
3.  Each  generation  must  have  a  character  of  its  own,  and  answer  for  itself.  (Ibid.) 
To  teach  them  wax. — It  was  God's  will,  then — it  was  a  necessity  for  the  IsraeUtes 
— that  they  should  "  learn  war."  In  their  case  "  learning  war  "  meant  learning 
that  God  alone  could  fight  for  them.  Do  not  the  Canaanites  of  unbelief,  heresy, 
and  worldliness  still  remain  ?  And  is  not  the  evil  of  their  remaining  presence  over- 
ruled for  a  twofold  good — that  of  teaching  His  Church  how  to  make  war,  and  of 
proving  their  faithfulness  toward  Himself  ?     (L.  H.  Wiseman,  M.A.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  Served  their  Gods  .  .  .  forgat  the  Lord,  and  served  Baalim  and  tbe 
groves. — The  downward  course  of  sin: — I.  The  form  of  their  sin.  One  of 
omission  (chap.  ii.  2).  1.  No  sin  of  omission  is  ever  small.  (1)  It  slights  God's 
authority.  (2)  It  implies  alienation  of  heart  from  God.  (3)  There  is  no  fear  of 
God  before  the  eyes.  2.  Sins  of  omission  may  become  indefinitely  great.  II.  The 
TENDENCY  OF  SIN  TO  MULTIPLY  ITSELF.  1.  No  siu  stands  aloue.  2.  The  root-sin 
here  was  failure  to  exterminate  the  Canaanites.  3.  It  led  to  their  dwelling  among 
the  idolaters.  4.  Their  intermarrying  with  the  ungodly.  5.  Their  worship  of  false 
gods.  6.  The  faciUty  with  which  they  made  the  change.  III.  The  deplorable 
END  TO  WHICH  THEIR  EVIL  COURSE  LED.  1.  There  was  entire  abandonment  of  God 
as  their  God.  Sin  is  a  great — (1)  Spoiler ;  (2)  madness.  2.  There  was  sinking 
down  to  the  level  of  heathen  worship  and  heathen  practices.     {J.  P.  Millar.) 

Ver.  8.  Sold  them  into  the  hand  of  Chushan-rishathaim  king  of  Mesopo- 
tamia.— Israel  in  servitude  :—l.  This  was  the  first  servitude  of  the  Israelites 
ever  since  they  came  out  of  their  house  of  bondage  in  Egypt ;  for  now  such 
detestable  apostasy  was  found  in  Israel  as  heaven  and  earth  had  caused  to 
be  ashamed  of  (Jer.  ii.  12,  13)  ;  therefore  is  he  made  a  slave  and  servant 
(ver.  14).  They  that  would  not  serve  the  Lord  in  the  abundance  of  all  things 
with  gladness  shall  serve  their  enemies  in  the  want  of  all  things  with  sadness 
(Deut.  xxviii.  47,  48) ;  therefore  God  forsook  them,  that  they  might  know  the 
worth  of  His  service  by  the  want  of  it  under  woful  miseries  (2  Chron.  xii.  8). 
2.  As  this  was  the  first  oppression  that  Israel  met  with  after  their  coming  out 
of  Egypt,  so  this  king  of  Syria  was  their  oppressor.  This  king  had  God's 
commission  to  oppress  Israel,  for  God  sold  them  into  this  king's  hands,  and 
yet  was  he  but  a  lessee ;  his  possession  was  by  virtue  of  a  lease,  and  that  only  a 
lease  limited  to  eight  years.  It  surely  seemed  very  long  for  those  "  children  of 
light  "  to  walk  in  such  a  place  of  darkness  for  eight  years  together ;  if  so,  the  time 
of  their  suffering  bears  a  due  proportion  to  the  time  of  their  sinning.  3.  The 
marvellous  proportion  God  observed  in  proportioning  Israel's  suffering  to  the 
proportion  of  their  sinning.  As  Israel's  sinning  increased  in  magnitude  so  their 
suffering  increased  in  multitude,  every  term  of  their  slavery  rising  higher  and 
higher.  They  served  this  Chushan  eight  years,  and,  because  not  bettered  thereby, 
they  served  Eglon  eighteen  years  (ver.  14)  and  afterwards  Jabin  twenty  years 
(chap.  iv.  3,  &c.).  With  the  froward  God  will  deal  frowardly  (Psa.  xviii.  26). 
When  lesser  corrections  could  not  restrain  them  from  sin,  God  laid  heavier  punish- 
ments upon  them,  and  punishes  them  seven  times  more ;  yea,  and  seven  times 
more,  and  yet  seven  times  more  to  that,  as  He  had  threatened  (Lev.  xxvi.  18,  21, 
24,  28).  God  will  not  give  over  punishing  until  men  give  over  sinning.  4.  The 
redeemer  that  the  Lord  raised  up  to  redeem  Israel  out  of  their  first  slavery  was 
Othniel  (ver.  9),  which  God  would  not  yet  do  for  them  until  they  humbled  them- 
selves, when  God,  they  saw,  would  get  the  better  of  them.  And  this  deUverer, 
whom  God  sent  to  redeem  Israel,  when  sold  into  the  hands  of  this  terrible  tyrant, 
was  a  type  of  our  Eedeemer  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  was  sent  of  God  to  redeem  us,  and 
thus  all  the  other  judges  be  types  of  Christ,  though  some  more  eminently  than 
others.  Here  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  Othniel,  gave  him  prudence, 
prowess,  and  magnanimity  to  make  war  against  this  tyrannical  oppressor,  and 
having  vanquished  him  in  battle,  he  restored  rest  to  God's  Israel,  governing  his 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

people  in  peace  and  in  the  profession  and  practice  of  God's  true  religion  according 
to  His  law.     (C.  Nest.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Othniel  the  son  of  Kenaz  .  .  .  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon 
him. — The  controlling  man  : — It  is  the  personal  soul  that  is  the  basis  of  all  action. 
Your  machinery  is  soulless,  and  the  true  driver,  after  aU,  is  the  man  with  his  hand 
on  the  throttle.  You  invent,  and  you  multiply  motions,  and  actions,  and  skilled 
operations;  but  you  never  can  dispense  with  the  brain  and  mind  and  heart  of 
the  controlling  man.  In  the  same  way,  all  movements  on  this  earth  need  to  head 
up  into  personal  souls.  God  sets  a  man  in  charge  of  the  machinery,  and  as  the 
stars  and  suns  revolve  in  their  cycles,  as  the  events  of  the  human  race  happen 
and  are  run  off  the  reel,  they  get  their  explanation  only  from  the  personal  souls 
that  have  been  in  the  movements.  When  the  time  of  the  Eeformation  was  at 
hand,  Luther  shakes  himself  in  yonder  cell  and  comes  forth.  When  the  thick 
mists  of  Popish  darkness  were  to  be  rolled  away  from  Scotland,  John  Knox  appeared. 
It  is  the  same  all  down  the  ages :  men,  personal  souls,  are  called  forth  to  lead 
events  to  their  God-destination  and  God-purpose.  Events  need  men.  So  with  Godl 
When  the  time  came,  God  found  the  Person  who  would  undertake  this  great 
purpose  of  redeeming  love,  who  would  atone  for  man,  and  suffer  on  the  Cross.  (John 
Robertson. )  Othniel : — Othniel,  the  first  of  the  judges,  seems  one  of  the  best.  He  ia 
not  a  man  of  mere  rude  strength  and  dashing  enterprise ;  nor  is  he  one  who  runs  the 
risk  of  sudden  elevation  of  power,  which  few  can  stand.  A  person  of  acknowledged 
honour  and  sagacity,  he  sees  the  problem  of  the  time  and  does  his  best  to  solve  it. 
He  is  almost  unique  in  this,  that  he  appears  without  offence,  without  shame.  And 
his  judgeship  is  honourable  to  Israel.  It  points  to  a  higher  level  of  thought  and 
greater  seriousness  among  the  tribes  than  in  the  century  when  Jephthah  and 
Samson  were  the  acknowledged  heroes.  The  nation  had  not  lost  its  reverence  for 
the  great  names  and  hopes  of  the  Exodus  when  it  obeyed  Othniel  and  followed  him 
to  battle.  [R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)  Political  leadership  : — In  modern  times  there 
would  seem  to  be  scarcely  any  understanding  of  the  fact  that  no  man  can  do  real 
service  as  a  political  leader  unless  he  is  a  fearer  of  God,  one  who  loves  righteous- 
ness more  than  country,  and  serves  the  Eternal  before  any  constituency.  Sometimes 
a  nation  low  enough  in  morality  has  been  so  far  awake  to  its  need  and  danger  as  to 
give  the  helm,  at  least  for  a  time,  to  a  servant  of  truth  and  righteousness  and  to 
follow  where  he  leads.  But  more  commonly  is  it  the  case  that  political  leaders  are 
chosen  anywhere  rather  than  from  the  ranks  of  the  spiritually  earnest.  It  is 
oratorical  dash  now,  and  now  the  cleverness  of  the  intriguer,  or  the  power  of  rank 
and  wealth,  that  catches  popular  favour  and  exalts  a  man  in  the  State.  Members 
of  parliament,  cabinet  ministers,  high  officials  need  have  no  devoutness,  no  spiritual 
seriousness  or  insight.  A  nation  generally  seeks  no  such  character  ia  its  legislators, 
and  is  often  content  with  less  than  decent  morality.  Is  it  then  any  wonder  that 
politics  are  arid  and  governments  a  series  of  errors  ?  We  need  men  who  have  the 
true  idea  of  liberty  and  will  set  nations  nominally  Christian  on  the  way  of  fulfilling 
their  mission  to  the  world.  When  the  people  want  a  spiritual  leader  he  will 
appear ;  when  they  are  ready  to  follow  one  of  high  and  pure  temper  he  will  arise 
and  show  the  way.  But  the  plain  truth  is  that  our  chiefs  in  the  State,  in  society 
and  business  must  be  the  men  who  represent  the  general  opinion,  the  general  aim. 
WhUe  we  are  in  the  main  a  worldly  people,  the  best  guides,  those  of  spiritual  mind, 
will  never  be  allowed  to  carry  their  plans.  And  so  we  come  back  to  the  main 
lesson  of  the  whole  history,  that  only  as  each  citizen  is  thoughtful  of  God  and  of 
duty,  redeemed  from  selfishness  and  the  world,  can  there  be  a  true  cormnonwealth, 
honourable  government,   beneficent  civilisation.       (Ibid.)  Prayer   helpful  to 

leadership : — You  may  be  as  unlike  a  warrior,  as  unlike  one  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ's  Ironsides  as  unlike  can  be,  yet  you  have  a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  making 
and  shaping  and  sending  of  them.  Can  you  feel  the  woes  of  Israel  ?  Can  you 
shed  tears  over  her  ?  Have  you  a  large,  sympathetic  heart  ?  And,  summing  it  all 
up  in  one  word,  can  you  cry  ?  can  you  pray  ?  "  When  the  children  of  Israel  cried 
unto  the  Lord,"  the  Lord  sent  this  mighty  Othniel,  upon  whom  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  came,  Aht  I  think  we  are  weak  there.  We  would  have  more  great 
preachers,  we  would  have  more  revival  movements,  in  the  large  meaning  of 
the  word  revival— not  only  the  ingathering  of  sinners,  but  the  up-building  and 
brightening  of  saints — if  we  had  more  people  who  sigh  and  cry  for  the  sad  condition 
of  God's  inheritance.  "  Ye  that  make  mention  of  the  Lord,  keep  not  silence." 
Tossing  often  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  or  weakness,  or  pain,  do  you  aigh  and  cry  f 


CHAP,  m.]  JUDGES.  89 

Then  will  God  be  getting  ready  His  Othniels,  and  Ehuds,  and  Shamgars.  {John 
McNeill.)  The  gift  of  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  "  ; — This  clearly  teaches  us  that 
all  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  and  all  excellent  effects  thereof,  they  are  none  of  ours — they 
are  the  Lord's  ;  He  giveth  and  distributeth  them  at  His  pleasure,  as  we  see  here 
that  it  was  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  that  came  upon  Othniel,  whereby  he  brought  to 
pass  the  great  things  that  he  did.  And  whatsoever  is  of  any  note  in  man  for  price 
and  excellency  it  is  all  of  God,  and  cometh  from  His  mere  bounty.  Alas  !  there  is 
no  bird  stripped  of  her  feathers  more  bare  and  naked  than  man  in  himself  is  void 
of  goodness  ;  for  what  hath  he  that  he  hath  not  received  ?  Insomuch  as  all  that 
he  hath  to  glory  of  is  his  sin — a  most  holy  and  approved  truth,  which  giveth  God 
His  due,  and  layeth  out  man  in  his  colours,  that  he  is  nothing  else,  if  he  rob  not 
God  of  His  honour,  and  prank  not  up  himself  in  his  gifts,  he  is  nothing  else  but 
naked,  poor,  and  a  mirror  of  misery.  (JR.  Rogers.)  Judgment,  then  deliverance : — 
Judgment  and  then  deliverance ;  judgment  of  the  mistakes  and  sins  men  have 
committed,  thereby  bringing  themselves  into  trouble ;  conviction  of  sin  and 
righteousness ;  thereafter  guidance  and  help  that  their  feet  may  be  set  on  a  rock 
and  their  goings  established — this  is  the  right  sequence.  That  God  should  help 
the  proud,  the  self-sufficient  out  of  their  troubles  in  order  that  they  may  go  on  in 
pride  and  vain  glory,  or  that  He  should  save  the  vicious  from  the  consequences 
of  their  vice  and  leave  them  to  persist  in  their  iniquity,  would  be  no  Divine 
work.  The  new  mind  and  the  right  spirit  must  be  put  in  men,  they  must 
bear  their  condemnation,  lay  it  to  heart  and  repent,  there  must  be  a  revival 
of  holy  purpose  and  aspiration  first.  Then  the  oppressors  will  be  driven  from 
the  land,  the  weight  of  trouble  lifted  from  the  soul.  (R.  A.  Watson,  31. A.) 
The  making  of  a  hero  : — This  is  a  book  of  heroes,  of  strong  men,  and  strong  women 
too,  who,  in  a  time  of  storm  and  stress,  saved  their  own  souls  and  the  souls  of  those 
around  them  also.  It  will  brace  you  up,  invigorate,  and  inspire  you.  It  is  said  of 
Pitt  that  he  breathed  his  own  lofty  spirit  into  his  country.  "  No  man,"  said  a 
soldier  of  the  time,  "  ever  entered  Mr.  Pitt's  room  who  did  not  feel  himseK  a  braver 
man  when  he  came  out  than  when  he  went  in."  And  no  man  can  read  this  book 
sympathetically  without  being  moved  to  emulation  of  the  mighty  souls  that  move 
across  its  pages.  It  tells  us  very  briefly,  but  suggestively,  the  story  of  twelve  people 
who  helped  to  make  Israel,  and  of  these  the  first,  and  in  some  respects  the  best  also, 
is  Othniel,  the  son  of  Kenaz.  Many  of  these  "  saviours,"  as  they  are  called,  were 
far  from  being  perfect  characters.  But  in  Othniel's  life,  as  we  have  it,  there  is  no 
hint  of  anything  that  offends  either  the  taste  or  the  conscience.  His  name  means 
God's  Lion ;  and  throughout  he  seems  to  have  been  a  brave,  pure,  noble  man.  And 
yet  the  age  in  which  he  lived  was  a  very  corrupt  one.  His  surroundings  were  very 
unfavourable  to  the  growth  of  character.  There  was  no  king  or  leader  in  Israel — 
every  man  did  that  which  was  right  in  his  own  eyes.  Idolatry  and  licentiousness 
abounded.  And  the  task  set  before  you,  young  men  and  women,  is  not  so  very 
unlike  that  which  faced  Othniel.  You  must  first  save  yourselves — you  must,  by 
God's  help,  save  your  own  souls.  You  must  also  help  God  to  save  the  world.  This 
is  your  task  and  your  privilege — both  to  be  saved  and  to  be  saviours.  But  how  did 
Othniel  become  a  hero  and  a  saviour  of  his  people?  I.  "Caleb  said  '  He  that 
smiteth  Kiriath-sepher  and  taketh  it,  to  him  will  I  give  Achsah  my  daughter  to 
wife.'  And  Othniel  the  son  of  Kenaz  took  it."  That  is  the  fii-st  fact  given  us  from 
Othniel's  life,  and  that  is  all  that  is  said  about  it — Othniel  took  it — took  the  strong- 
hold of  the  mighty  sons  of  Anak — the  oracle  city  of  idolatry  before  which  even 
Caleb  quailed.  Othniel  took  it.  But  many  things  go  to  the  making  of  such  a  deed 
as  that.  1.  First,  of  course,  comes  courage.  It  was  an  undertaking  full  of  despe- 
rate difficulties.  What  was  needed  was  not  so  much  physical  as  moral  courage. 
The  courage  to  follow  is  common  enough ;  it  is  the  courage  to  lead  that  is  rare. 
Othniel  had  this  soul-quality.  He  led  the  way  and  took  the  city.  Well,  if  you 
young  people  are  bent  upon  saving  yourselves  from  the  evil  that  is  in  the  world, 
you  too  must  have  and  must  exercise  this  soul-courage.  It  often  needs  more 
courage  to  handle  the  yard-wand  than  the  sword — to  be  a  business-man  than  to  be 
a  soldier.  Daily  life,  all  hum-drum  as  it  looks,  has  its  Marathons,  its  Waterloos, 
and  its  Almas  ;  its  Six  Hundreds  that  ride  into  the  jaws  of  death.  2.  But  courage, 
what  is  it  ?  How  does  any  one  get  courage  ?  Well,  if  we  take  another  look  at 
Othniel  we  shall  see  that  the  lion  in  him  was  not  born  on  the  day  Debir  was  taken. 
It  was  akeady  strong,  matured,  full  grown.  Born  long  before  this  in  the  desert,  it 
had  been  nourished  by  daily  deeds  of  unrewarded  valour.  Acts  such  as  this  take 
years  to  grow.     All  his  life  he  had  been  unconsciously  preparing  for  this.     Yes, 

23 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

that  is  the  story  of  all  courage.  God  gives  it  to  us  as  He  gives  all  things  in  seed 
form.  Every  heart  is  full  of  germs — courage-germs  among  them.  If  we  cultivate 
any  germ  it  grows  and  bears  fruit ;  if  we  neglect  it  it  dies.  If  you  want  courage 
you  must  grow  it  from  a  seed — that  is  you  must  practise  the  little  you  have. 
3.  Once  more :  This  deed  of  Othniel's  lays  bare  to  us  the  central  secret  of  all  true 
power — faith.  You  are  familiar  with  great  facts  of  which  Othniel  never  even 
dreamt.  But  your  salvation  does  not  depend  on  how  many  beliefs  you  carry  about 
with  you,  but  on  how  much  do  you  believe  any  of  them.  Any  truth  becomes  a 
saving  truth  to  the  soul  that  trusts  it  and  through  it  trusts  God.  Thus  this  little 
sentence,  unpromising  as  it  looks,  gives  us  three  things  that  go  to  the  making  of  a 
hero :  courage,  habit,  faith,  and  the  greatest  of  these  is  faith.  II.  "  And  he  (Caleb) 
gave  him  Achsah  his  daughter  to  wife :  and  it  came  to  pass  when  she  came  unto 
him  that  she  moved  him  to  ask  of  her  father  a  field."  This,  the  second  of  the 
three  facts  of  Othniel's  history,  introduces  us  into  a  very  different  set  of  circum- 
stances, a  different  climate  of  life  in  fact.  1.  Debir',is  taken  ;  Caleb  has  kept  his  word; 
the  bride  is  coming  to  her  new  home.  Applause  is  not  much  for  a  young  pair  to 
live  on ;  so,  amid  the  excitement  and  the  joy,  this  fair  daughter  of  the  wilderness 
kept  her  eyes  open  and  her  wits  about  her.  She  noted  the  situation  in  which  her 
new  home  lay.  It  was  south  land.  It  had  no  water.  She  moved  her  husband  to 
ask  for  the  field  that  had  the  springs  of  water.  But  Othniel  is  better  at  fighting 
than  asking.  Her  humour,  her  sense,  and  her  exquisite  tact  carried  all  before  them. 
Caleb  gave  her  "  the  upper  springs  and  the  nether  springs."  2.  But  what  has  this 
to  do  with  the  making  of  a  hero  ?  Much  in  every  way.  Othniel  was  brave  enough 
but  he  had  a  great  deal  to  learn.  He  had  taken  Debir  with  his  sword,  but  here  at 
his  own  door  he  is  confronted  with  a  situation  in  which  his  sword  is  useless. 
Evidently  he  must  learn  the  use  of  other  weapons.  He  must  master  the  art  of 
gracious  speech.  He  must  acquire  tact.  There  are  knots  which  it  avails  not  to  cut,  they 
must  be  patiently  untied  by  skilful  fingers.  He  is  to  help  in  making  a  people  who 
shall  never  become  formidable  as  a  military  power — never  produce  an  Alexander  or 
a  Caesar — who  shall  ultimately  lose  all  their  swords,  lose  every  inch  of  their  terri- 
tory and  every  stone  of  their  citadels,  and  yet  shall  overcome  their  enemies  through 
sheer  force  of  character.  That  he  may  do  this  God  sent  him  to  the  home-school 
and  the  farm-school  to  learn  those  homely  virtues  of  common  sense,  patience,  and 
tact,  without  which  strength  and  courage  were  of  little  avail.  3.  Well,  you  too, 
young  people,  must  not  despise  these.  III.  "  The  children  of  Israel  did  that  which 
was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  .  .  .  the  children  of  Israel  served  Cushan- 
rishathaim  eight  years  .  .  .  the  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the  Lord."  Many 
years — forty,  perhaps,  or  even  more — have  passed  since  Othniel  and  Achsah  took 
possession  of  their  new  home,  and  we  are  confronted  with  a  new  and  painful  situa- 
tion. The  Lord's  people  "  forgat  the  Lord  and  served  the  Baalim  " — that  was  their 
sin  !  "  They  served  Cushan,  King  of  Mesopotamia" — that  was  their  punishment ! 
Egypt  and  Pharaoh  were  not  so  far  away  as  they  thought.  Egypt,  the  land  of 
bondage,  is  wherever  sin  is,  and  Pharaoh  follows  iniquity  as  the  night  the  day. 
"  And  the  Lord  raised  up  a  saviour  .  .  .  even  Othniel,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
came  upon  him."  He  raised  him  to  this  glorious  height  of  manhood  by  breathing 
into  him  His  own  breath  of  love  and  life.  There  were  many  reasons  why  Othniel 
should  do  nothing.  The  chief,  perhaps,  was  that  apparently  he  could  do  nothing. 
Perhaps  Achsah  was  another — and  the  farm  a  third.  Yes,  depend  upon  it  there 
were  many  voices  both  within  and  without  that  bade  Othniel  beware  of  meddling 
with  things  beyond  his  power.  But  the  still  small  voice  called.  He  put  himself, 
all  that  he  was,  all  that  he  had,  upon  the  altar,  "  and  he  judged  Israel."  He  called 
the  erring  people  back  to  truth  and  duty.  Led  by  God's  spirit  he  began  there,  with 
the  people's  own  sin  first.  Then  he  '*  went  out  to  war  .  .  .  and  his  hand  prevailed 
against  Cushan,  and  the  land  had  rest  forty  years."  Thus  Othniel,  even  Othniel, 
became  a  saviour  of  his  people,  and  the  lion-like  man  of  war,  under  the  influence  of 
God's  spirit,  was  changed  into  a  living  prophecy  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  the  Saviour 
of  the  world.  "  And  Othniel,  the  son  of  Kenaz,  died,"  having  in  a  rude,  hard  age, 
nobly  sustained  the  character  of  the  Happy  Warrior  The  phase  "  Othniel — a 
saviour,"  is  at  once  his  epitaph  and  his  eulogy.  Well,  even  so  are  noble  lives  still 
made.  Faith,  patience,  wisdom,  and  the  breath  of  God  are  the  great  life-building 
powers.  Saviouvhood  is  the  end  of  all  the  ways  of  God  in  a  soul.  He  makes  some 
men  strong  in  order  that  they  may  help  the  weak.  He  gives  wisdom  to  some  that 
they  may  thereby  guide  the  foolish.  He  makes  men  holy  in  order  that  they  may 
turn  the  unholy  from  the  error  of  their  way.     Now,  young  people,  will  you  be  made 


CHAP,  ra,]  JUDGES.  41 

strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  strength  of  His  might  ?  Around  you,  in  numbers 
that  Othniel  never  dreamed  of,  are  men  that  "  serve  the  Baalim  and  serve  Cushan," 
that  sin,  and  suffer  for  their  sin  in  mind,  body,  and  estate.  Will  you  help  to  save 
these  ?     (J".  M.  Gibbon.) 

Vers.  12-30.  The  Lord  strengthened  Eglon  the  king  of  Moab  against  Israel. — 

Sin — suffering  ;  penitence  and  deliverance  repeated : — I.  New  sin  added  :  "  Again." 

I.  A  painful  surprise.  2.  Deeper  guilt.  It  showed  more  deliberation  in  the  act  of 
rebellion,  more  stubborness  of  will,  and  greater  defiance  of  the  Divine  authority. 
It  also  imphed  the  heavy  guilt  of  despising  all  the  argument  involved  in  the  close 
and  faithful  dealing  God  had  with  them,  in  the  terrible  chastisements  He  had 
already  brought  down  on  their  heads.  3.  A  perplexing  problem  to  solve.  Why 
should  the  children  oi  such  holy  men  as  Abrp.ham,  Isaac,  and  Ji^cob  become  such 
incorrigible  rebels  ?  This  is  the  puzzle  that  meets  us  everywhere  in  the  history  of 
God's  Israel.  (1)  The  people  had  lost  their  leader.  (2)  Apostasy  was  due  in  part 
to  the  universal  bad  example.  (3)  Idolatry  was  their  easily  besetting  sin.  (4)  A 
new  generation  had  sprung  up.     (5)  The  inveterate  depravity  of  the  human  heart. 

II.  New  chastisement  inflicted.  1.  The  Lord  chastises  in  faithfulness.  2.  He 
makes  use  of  a  new  rod.  3.  He  sends  a  more  severe  token  of  His  displeasure.  We 
do  not  know,  indeed,  that  the  oppression  of  the  Moabites  was  heavier  than  that  of 
the  Mesopotamian  hordes.  Probably  there  was  not  much  to  choose  between  them. 
But  it  was  certainly  much  longer  continued.  Now  it  is  eighteen  years  of  servitude, 
whereas  formerly  it  was  but  eight  years.  In  this  respect,  the  scourge  was  much 
more  severe,  not  only  because  the  lash  was  longer  appHed,  but  also  because  God 
showed  that  His  ear  was  more  heavy  to  hear  their  prayer.  It  was  also  a  deeper 
humiliation  to  be  trodden  upon  by  a  people  whom  till  now  they  had  despised,  from 
their  birth  onwards,  and  who  had  been  accustomed  for  more  than  three  generations 
to  tremble  at  the  name,  and  the  mention  of  the  God  of  Israel.  4.  He  helps  His 
enemies  against  His  own  people.  III.  New  expressions  or  penitence.  1.  In 
distress  they  flee  to  the  universal  refuge.  2.  They  had  a  special  plea  with  God  as 
children  of  the  covenant.  3.  Their  temporary  apostasy  did  not  shut  them  out  from 
the  privilege  of  prayer.  (1)  They  had  a  mediator  to  plead  for  them  in  their  priest- 
hood, and  the  continual  sacrifices  were  laid  on  the  altar,  as  the  means  of  propitiating. 
(2)  Their  apostasy  was  not  allowed  by  their  covenant  God  to  become  permanent. 
rV.  New  delivekances  experienced.  1.  This  deliverance  came  in  answer  to 
prayer.  2.  It  was  brought  about  by  a  suitable  instrument.  (<7.  P.  Millar.)  Ehud 
the  son  of  Gera. — The  summer  parlour: — I.  A  man  under  great  PHTSiCAii  dis- 
advantages may  accomplish  wonders.  Ehud  was  left-handed ;  and  the  original 
implies  some  serious  defect  in  the  right  hand.  So  it  has  often  been.  Among 
poets,  the  three  greatest  of  all  times  were  totally  blind,  viz. :  Homer,  Ossian,  and 
Milton.  Among  sculptors:  Gambassio  could  not  see  the  marble  or  the  chisel. 
Among  authors :  Pope,  the  poet,  was  a  wretched  invalid.  Among  preachers : 
Bobert  Hall,  Eichard  Baxter,  Edward  Payson,  Samuel  Eutherford,  and  Dr.  McAJl 
were  all  invalids.  These  men  in  the  battle  of  life  fought  with  the  right  hand  tied 
behind  them ;  but  they  had  something  better,  viz.,  the  spirit  of  consecration  to  a 
righteous  and  noble  life.  n.  Ehud  teaches  us  to  make  thorough  work  of  what 
BELONGS  to  OUR  DELIVERANCE  FROM  BIN.  Somc  are  Content  to  cut  down  sins  which 
may  be  ranked  as  kings,  princes,  and  captains :  but  Ehud  slew  the  common  soldiers 
as  well.  It  is  to  work  as  thorough  that  each  of  us  is  called.  This  is  no  easy  work. 
But  heaven  is  not  to  be  reached  by  easy-going  people.    HI.  God  makes  ready  in 

SOME    sense   every   INSTRUMENT    OF    DEATH,    AND    IS    THE   SOVEREIGN    DISPOSER   OF   ALL 

EVENTS.  There  are  three  kingdoms — of  Nature,  of  Providence,  and  of  Grace.  Of 
each  and  aU  Jehovah  is  King.  In  the  kingdom  of  Providence,  some  of  the  instru- 
ments of  death  are  common  sickness,  epidemics,  accidents  in  erecting  houses, 
accidents  at  sea,  accidents  on  the  rail-train.  These  are  no  accidents !  God  has 
perfect  right  to  slay  a  man  either  by  malaria  or  by  the  instrumentality  of  man.  He 
alone  has  the  keys  of  the  grave.  IV.  Nobody  steps  out  of  life  as  he  expects.  It 
was  so  with  the  king  of  Moab.  Death  to  him  was  a  great  surprise.  There  was  but 
a  step  between  him  and  death ;  hut  he  knew  it  not.  "  The  unexpected  is  the 
probable  I "  The  manner  in  which  we  step  out  of  life  is  pre-eminently  unlocked 
for.  If  so,  we  press  an  inference :  Prepare !  Be  ready  1  The  accepted  time  is 
now  1  (W.  F.  Bishop.)  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee. — A  message  from 
Ood : — I.  Before  proceeding  to  the  delivery  of  this  message,  I  would  insist  upon 
THB  TACT  HEBB  BTATii>— namely,  that  I  come  to  you,  as  a  messenger  "  from  God." 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

One  chief  reason  why  mankind  hear  with  so  much  indifference  and  with  so  little 
effect  upon  themselves,  is  simply  that  they  fail  to  recognise  that  he  who  thus 
speaks  to  them  does  come  from  God.  Suppose,  however,  that  yonder  heaven  should 
open,  and  that  down  through  the  "  everlasting  gates  "  and  along  the  fields  of  air 
should  come  an  angel  burning  with  celestial  glory  and  should  stand  suddenly  in 
your  midst.  Would  not  your  minds  be  instantly  raised  to  a  fixed  and  reverent 
attention  ?  Would  you  not  almost  seem  to  hear  in  the  tones  and  words  of  the 
heavenly  messenger  the  very  voice  of  the  Mighty  One  by  whom  he  was  sent  ?  But 
I  claim  that  I  as  truly  come  "  from  God."  II.  We  pass  on  then,  to  the  delivert 
OF  THIS  MESSAGE.  It  is  a  mcssagc  from  God ;  there  is  no  place  for  argument.  It  is 
a  message  to  a  soul  in  imminent  danger  of  destruction ;  there  is  no  room  for  the 
play  of  imagination.  1.  Man  of  the  world,  absorbed  in  the  occupations  of  this 
present  life,  whatever  those  occupations  may  be,  "I  have  a  message  from  God  unto 
thee."  "  Biches  and  honours,"  He  declares,  "  come  of  Me  alone."  "  Riches,"  He 
aflSrms,  "  certainly  take  to  themselves  wings,  they  fly  away  as  an  eagle  toward 
heaven."  "  Riches,"  He  warns  you,  "  profit  not  in  the  day  of  wrath."  God 
declares  to  you,  that  if  you  allow  mammon  to  have  a  higher  place  in  your  hearts 
than  Himself  and  His  service,  you  must  expect  nothing  else  but  that  He  will  strip 
you  of  all  your  gains  when  perhaps  you  least  expect  it,  and  render  all  your  labour 
of  none  effect.  He  reminds  you  that  you  "  can  take  nothing  out "  of  this  world. 
And  He  bids  me  remind  you  that  after  death  there  is  a  judgment.  2.  Young  man 
and  young  woman  just  entering  life,  "  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee."  God 
bids  me  tell  you  that  you  have  in  your  possession  a  priceless  treasure  which  He  has 
committed  to  you  to  be  used  for  His  glory,  and  for  which  He  will  hold  you  hereafter 
to  a  strict  account.  You  are  in  the  possession  of  sensibilities  not  yet  dead  to  the 
influence  of  His  grace.  He  has  afforded  you  a  perfect  knowledge  of  His  wiU,  and 
He  has,  moreover,  brought  to  bear  upon  your  hearts  the  power  of  His  Spirit.  He 
tells  you  that  you  may  squander  and  lose  all  the  advantages  which  you  now  possess, 
but  He  warns  you  of  the  result.  3.  Lukewarm  Christian,  "  I  have  a  message  from 
God  unto  thee."  God  bids  me  tell  you,  in  few  words,  just  what  your  religion  means, 
and  what  it  is  worth.  You  profess  with  your  lips  to  serve  God,  while  you  plot  in 
your  heart  how  you  may  serve  God  and  the  world.  But  God  tells  you  that  while 
you  imagine  you  are  deceiving  Him,  He  sees  through  the  duplicity,  the  meanness 
of  your  conduct.  4.  Daring  and  impenitent  man,  you  who  can  violate  God's  law 
without  a  feeling  of  alarm  or  remorse,  "  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee." 
You  have  travelled  far.  If  ever  you  repent  now,  to  the  saving  of  your  soul,  it 
must  be  by  a  severe  and  terrible  struggle.  You  have  trifled  with  God's  mercy, 
but  His  justice  has  abated  not  one  tittle  of  severity.  God,  however,  sends  me 
once  more,  to  tell  you  that  if  you  will  even  now  put  forth  all  your  strength  to 
break  the  cords  wherewith  sin  has  bound  you,  He  will  still  vouchsafe  to  assist 
and  bless  you  in  your  endeavours.  But  if  you  are  deaf  to  this  message,  if  you  will 
still  go  on  in  impenitence  and  sin  if  you  refuse  to  be  reconciled  to  Him, 
He  informs  you  that  He  "  reserveth  wrath  to  His  enemies."  (TI'.  Rudder,  D.D.) 
The  goxpel  message  : — I.  The  tidings  I  bring  to-day  are  very  different  from  those 
which  Ehud  carried  to  the  King  of  Moab,  and  my  design  in  delivering  them  is  very 
opposite  to  his.  He  came,  evidently,  with  an  hostile  intention,  and  concealed, 
under  his  garment,  a  deadly  weapon.  The  message  he  brought  was  a  message 
of  vengeance,  and  though  artfully  disguised,  was  to  prove  fatal  to  the  King  of 
Moab.  But  the  message  I  bring  is  a  message  of  peace  and  goodwill  to  men, 
and  my  intention  in  delivering  it  is  the  most  kind  and  friendly.  1.  In  the 
first  place,  let  me  beseech  you  to  awake  from  that  slumber  and  insensibility 
in  which,  perhaps,  you  have  too  long  remained.  If  you  were  hanging  upon 
the  brink  of  a  precipice,  would  you  not  haste  away  to  some  place  of  safety  ? 
2.  A  second  message  which  I  have  from  God  to  you  is,  to  intreat  you  to  be 
reconciled  to  Him.  Will  you  persist  in  your  enmity  to  God  when  He  is  willing 
to  become  your  friend  ?  3.  A  third  message  I  have  got  from  God  to  you  is  to 
beseech  you  to  kiss  the  Son ;  that  is,  honour,  love,  and  obey  the  Son  lest  He  be 
angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way.  It  was  the  great  object  of  our  blessed  Lord's 
ministry  to  recommend  Himself  to  the  affections  of  men,  and  to  persuade  them  to 
come  to  Him.  4.  A  fourth  message  I  have  from  God  to  you  is,  that  you  be  prepared 
to  meet  Him.  5.  A  fifth  message  which  I  have  got  from  God  to  you  is,  that  you  set 
your  hearts  and  your  house  in  order,  for  you  must  die  and  not  live.  II.  I  go  on 
to  urge  you  to  comply  with  the  gospel  message,  by  a  few  motives  and  arguments. 
1.  Reflect  first  on  the  authority  of  the  Person  who  sends  the  message.     2.  A  second 


CHAP,  in.]  JUDGES.  43 

argument  to  persuade  you  to  comply  with  the  gospel  message,  is  the  vast  importance 
of  it.  It  is  not  of  a  trifling  nature,  like  a  piece  of  idle  news,  to  which  you  may 
listen  or  not  as  you  please.  It  is  the  most  interesting  which  was  ever  published  to 
mankind.  What  is  the  history  of  all  the  arts  and  sciences,  when  compared  with 
the  life  and  doctrine,  with  the  sufferings  and  death,  with  the  resurrection  and  glory 
of  the  Son  of  God  ?  Are  they  not  mere  childish  tales  ?  And  shall  we  prefer  what 
tends  to  amuse  and  entertain  us,  to  what  contributes  to  enlighten  and  to  save  us  ? 
3.  A  third  argument  to  engage  you  to  comply  with  the  gospel  message  is  the 
encouraging  and  precious  promises  contained  in  it.  It  is  suited  to  our  guilt  and 
depravity  as  sinners,  and  to  our  weakness  and  imperfection  as  creatures.  4.  One 
argument  more  to  engage  you  to  comply  with  the  gospel  message  is,  that  your  ruin 
is  certain  and  inevitable  if  you  do  it  not.  Perhaps  the  message  I  have  now  delivered 
you  may  be  the  last  you  ever  shall  receive ;  and  is  not  this  a  strong  argument  for 
complying  with  it  ?  (D.  Johnston,  D.D.)  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee : — 
And  perhaps  you  are  ready  to  say.  If  we  were  certain  you  had,  we  should  hang  upon 
your  lips  with  the  utmost  attention.  Have  you,  indeed,  had  any  immediate  commu- 
nication from  heaven  concerning  us  ?  No.  Have  you  any  new  revelation  to  deliver 
to  us?  No:  and  yet,  "I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  you":  that  message 
is  in  this  book — this  book  that  many  of  you  neglect  and  despise.  "  I  have  a  message 
from  God  unto  you."  You  are  aU  equally  interested  in  it.  I.  To  the  young.  It 
may  be  you  start  astonished  that  I  begin  with  you.  You  fancy  I  should  begin  with 
the  aged  who  are  just  stepping  into  the  grave.  But  how  do  you  know  they  are 
nearer  death  than  you  ?  II.  I  havk  a  message  fkoji  God  unto  tou  who  are  in  the 
MERIDIAN  OF  LITE.  You  who  are  engaged  in  its  active  business — ye  merchants,  ye 
tradesmen,  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  you:  "Be  careful  for  nothing,"  &c. 
"  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  &c.  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  should 
gain,"  &c.  HI.  I  have  a  message  to  the  old  and  geey-headed  :  •'  The  hoary 
head  is  a  crown  of  glory,  if  it  be  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness."  Is  that 
honour  yours  ?  "  Though  you  walk  through  the  valley,"  &c.  But  are  you  an 
aged  sinner,  a  hoary-headed  trifler,  scoffing  at  eternity,  with  one  foot  in  the  grave  ? 
Alas !  alas  1  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  you :  "  The  Judge  standeth  at  the 
door."  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly,"  <S:c.  lY.  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  the 
BiCH.  I  have  a  message  of  warning  :  "  Charge  those  that  are  rich  in  this  world," 
&c.  It  is  a  message  of  caution  :  "  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches," 
&c.  It  is  a  message  of  admonition.  What  says  the  wise  man,  "Wilt  thou  set 
thine  eyes  upon  that  which  is  not?"  "  Eiches  make  to  themselves  wings,"  &c. 
Are  riches  the  right  soil  for  piety  ?  No — but  the  most  formidable  obstruction  to  its 
growth.  V.  I  HAVE  A  message  to  THE  POOR.  Are  you  poor  and  pious  ?  Then  yours 
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  "  The  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them."  The 
promises  of  Scripture  are  principally  applicable  to  the  poor.  VI.  Are  any  of  you 
scepticaij  ?  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  you.  Are  you  sincere  ?  Do  you 
really  wish  to  ascertain  the  truth  ?  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  you  :  "  If 
any  man  will  do  His  will,"  &c,,  that  is  the  man  who  shall  ascertain  the  truth,  and 
be  emancipated  by  its  freedom.  But  it  is  not  the  man  who  comes  to  speculate — who 
comes  to  gratify  an  idle  curiosity — who  comes  cherishing  the  love  of  sin ;  that  is 
not  the  man  who  shall  know  the  truth.  VH.  Is  youe  mind  deistical  ?  You  want 
more  evidence  to  prove  that  this  holy  book  is  the  Word  of  God.  Do  you  want 
mathematical  demonstration?  It  were  madness  to  ask  it  upon  a  moral  subject. 
What  evidence  do  you  want?  Is  it  evidence  of  testimony?  You  have  it;  and,  I 
venture  to  say,  there  is  more  evidence  of  the  Scriptures  than  of  any  other  history  on 
the  face  of  the  earth.  What  evidence  do  you  want  ?  Is  it  the  evidence  of  prophecy  ? 
You  have  it.  The  Jews,  at  the  present  day,  are  a  living  and  a  mighty  argument  in 
proof  of  the  truth  of  the  Scriptures.  What  evidence  do  you  want  ?  Is  it  the  evidence 
of  miracles  ?  That  evidence  was  given  in  the  first  ages  of  Christianity,  in  order  to 
establish  the  Divine  authority  of  the  Christian  system,  and,  having  accomplished  it, 
it  is  done  away  ;  for  if  miracles  had  continued  to  the  present  hour,  they  would  have 
ceased  to  operate  in  the  way  of  miracles.  There  is  sufficient  evidence  to  justify 
the  ways  of  God  to  men  in  your  condemnation,  if,  after  all  this  evidence,  you  reject 
Him.  Vin.  Do  I  SPEAK  to  any  who  abe  desponding  and  penitential  ?  What  a 
sudden  change  1  what  a  dehghtful  contrast  1  "  I  have  a  message  from  God  unto 
you."  "  Come,  and  let  us  reason  together,"  &c.  (T.  Raffles,  D.D.)  The  gospel 
menage : — I.  The  ministers  or  the  gospel  abe  God's  messengers.    U.  The  min- 

ISTEBS  OP  THE  GOSPEL  MUST  BE  FAITHFUL  IN  DELIVERING  THEIR  JIESSAGE.  III.  If  MEN 
BEFU8B   TO  ATTEND    10   THE   MESSAGE.  THUS   DELIVERED   TO   THEM,  IT  IS   AT   THEIK  O'V.V 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

PEKEL.  IV.  A  MORE  DiEECT  APPLICATION  OF  THE  TEXT :  "  I  havc  a  message  from 
God  unto  thee."  1.  To  the  careless,  thoughtless  person.  2.  To  the  ungodly  and 
the  profane.  3.  To  the  humble  and  serious  inquirer  after  Divine  truth  (Heb.  x. 
38 ;  Eev.  ii.  5).  4.  To  those  who,  having  once  known  the  way  of  righteousness, 
are  turned  from  the  holy  commandment  delivered  unto  them.  5.  To  him  whose 
heart  now  labours  under  a  sense  of  sin ;  who,  being  brought  to  see  his  guilt  and 
danger,  is  full  of  fear,  and  trembles  for  the  consequences.  How  shall  he  escape  the 
sentence  of  His  righteous  law  ?  What  shall  he  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  Believe  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  &c.  6.  To  the  established  Christian ;  the  man  who,  having  fled 
to  Christ  for  refuge,  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin,  has  found  peace  and  joy  in 
believing ;  and  being  now  professedly  devoted  to  the  Lord's  service,  is  living  in 
hope  of  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed.  "  Be  faithful  unto  death,"  &c.  "Be  not 
weary  of  well-doing."  "  Grow  in  grace,"  and  "Let  thy  profiting  appear  unto  all 
men."  {E.  Cooper,  M.A.)  God's  messages: — I.  God's  messages  abe  of  diffekent 
KINDS.  1.  Eeconciliation.  2.  Eepentance.  3.  Faith.  4.  Life  and  salvation. 
5.  Gospel  privileges.  6.  Special  tokens  of  Divine  favour.  7.  Deliverances. 
8.  "Warning  and  threatening.  9.  Calls  to  duty.  10.  Commands.  11.  Encourage- 
ment. 12.  Doom.  n.  Evert  man  has  Divine  messages  sent  to  him  personally. 
In  the  gospel,  in  the  ordinary  providence  of  God,  and  in  the  workings  of  his  own 
conscience.  1.  God  individualises  every  man.  2.  The  wise  thing  for  every  man 
is  to  act  as  if  he  were  the  only  person  dealt  with.  3.  The  messages  are  framed  so 
as  to  have  always  an  individual  application.     III.  God's  messages  are  always  to 

BE    reverently    RECEIVED.       IV.    It    IS    DANGEROUS     TO    TURN  A    DEAF    EAR    TO    God's 

messages.     V.  Messages  of  good  to  the  righteous  and  of  evil  to  the  wicked 

OFTEN  COME  TOGETHER.  VI.  GoD  SENDS  MESSAGES  OF  MERCY  BEFORE  He  SENDS  MES- 
SAGES OF  JUDGMENT.       VII.    It  IS   OUR  DUTY  AND  OUR  WISDOM  TO  BE  ALWAYS  BEADY  TO 

RECEIVE  THE  Lord's  MESSAGES.  Most  men  are  not  ready  when  the  message  comes 
(Luke  xvii.  27-30,  xii.  20,  xvi.  19,  with  23 ;  Matt.  xxv.  5 ;  1  Thes.  v.  3  ;  1  Kings 
xxii.  26,  27,  with  34-37;  Prov.  xiv.  32;  Matt.  vii.  13 ;  2  Sam.  xviii.  9).  Some  are 
ready  (Luke  ii.  29,  30 ;  2  Tim,  iv.  6-8 ;  Acts  vii.  59,  60 ;  Heb.  xi,  13-16 ;  2  Cor. 
V.  2,  9  ;  2  Sam.  xv.  26  ;  Ch.  xxiii.  5  ;  1  Sam.  iii.  18).  {J.  P.  Millar.)  A  distinct 
message  : — Can  there  be  any  person  to  whom  God  has  never  sent  a  message  ?  Is 
He  your  Creator?  And  has  He  made  you  to  drift  on  the  tempestuous  sea  of  life  in 
solitude  without  compass  or  guide  ?  I.  Messages  from  God.  This  Bible  is  in  the 
house  of  every  Englishman.  It  is  "  a  message  from  God  unto  thee."  Other 
messengers  you  have  had.  Ought  not  the  kindness  and  compassion  extended  to 
you  in  providence  to  have  led  you  to  say,  "  How  can  I  grieve  such  a  God  ?  "  Other 
messages  have  come  to  you  draped  in  black.  Can  you  forget  the  season  when  life 
trembled  in  the  scale,  and  the  physician  knew  not  which  way  it  would  turn? 
Another  dark  messenger  has  come  to  you.  Death  has  bereaved  you  of  friends  and 
comrades.  Are  there  those  whom  thou  didst  ensnare  who  have  gone  their  way 
before  thee  to  feel  their  terrible  remorse  ?  Let  the  remembrance  of  them  make  you 
pause  and  think  and  turn  from  your  sins  to  the  living  and  true  God.     II.  The 

GOSPEL  or  THE  GRACE  OF  GoD  IS  IN  ITSELF   A   MESSAGE    FROM  GoD   TO   YOU.       Be  SUrC  of 

this,  let  our  case  be  what  it  may,  the  gospel  preached  is  a  message  from  God  to  our 
souls.  The  hypocrite  cannot  long  attend  upon  the  means  of  grace  without  finding 
that  its  doctrines  are  very  heart-searching.  They  pierce  his  thoughts ;  they  hold  a 
candle  up  to  him,  and  if  he  would  but  look  they  would  expose  his  desperate 
condition.  The  formalists,  the  men  who  delight  in  ceremonies,  cannot  long 
frequent  God's  hallowed  courts,  where  His  true  ministers  proclaim  His  name,  with- 
out perceiving  that  there  is  a  message  from  God  to  them.  The  most  careless 
spirit  will  find  in  the  Word  a  looking-glass  held  up  to  his  face  in  which  he  can  see  a 
reflection  of  himself.  III.  If  there  be  such  a  message  as  this  from  God  to  us,  how 
SHOULD  WE  TREAT  IT  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Christian  minister  hearing  a 
message  from  God  to  man : — I.  The  bearers  of  the  message.     H.  The  nature  of 

THE  MESSAGE.     Ehud.    III.  ThE  DANGER  OF  NEGLECTING  THISMESSAGE.     {H.  S.  Pllimptre, 

M.A.)  A  message  from  God: — I.  It  is  a  message  of  truth.  II.  It  is  .\  mess.\.ge 
OF  LOVE.  in.  It  is  a  message  of  peace.  IV.  It  is  a  message  of  reconciliation. 
V.  It  is  needed  by  thee.  This  alone  is  the  message  humanity  needs ;  it  alone 
meets  the  breadth  and  depth  and  multitude  of  its  necessities.  The  light  of 
nature  is  Cimmerian  darkness.  It  reveals  your  danger,  but  reveals  no  means  of 
rescue.  VI.  It  is  suited  to  thee.  1.  It  is  suited  to  your  ignorance,  "  making 
■wise  unto  salvation."  2.  It  is  suited  to  man's  sin,  expiating  its  guilt  by  the  blood 
of  the  Cross.     3.  It  is  suited  to  man's  misery.     VII.  It  is  sufficient  for  thee. 


CHAP,  ni.]  JUDGES.  45 

No  want  is  there  in  our  being  which  it  cannot  fill — no  multitude  it  cannot  minister 
to.  VIII.  It  is  sent  to  thee.  [J.  Cumming,  D.D.)  A  message  from  God: — 
Think,  first  of  all,  of  the  feelings  with  which  we  should  expect  such  a  message  to 
be  received.  For,  consider  the  scene  from  which  that  message  comes  :  from  God's 
throne  on  high.  And  consider  the  Presence  from  which  that  message  emanates— 
even  from  our  Creator,  our  Preserver,  in  whose  presence  we  may  at  any  moment 
be  called  to  stand.  And  think  next  of  the  effects  which  we  should  expect  the 
delivery  of  such  a  message  to  produce — profound  attention,  deep  gratitude,  perfect 
obedience.  "  A  message  from  God  !  "  Is  such  a  thing  possible  ?  Has  there  ever 
come  to  earth,  and  to  us  men,  a  message  from  God  ?  Surely.  The  whole  world  is 
full  of  voices  of  God.  The  night  wears  away — the  grey  light  comes  stealing  on. 
And  the  sweet  dawn  of  early  day  says,  "I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee." 
To  the  sick — "I  have  a  message  to  thee."  "There  shall  be  neither  sorrow, 
nor  crying  .  .  .  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain."  To  the  mourner — "  I 
have  a  message  to  thee."  "  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes." 
To  the  secret  sinner — "I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee."  "God  shall 
bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good,  or 
whether  it  be  evil."  The  day  goes  on — a  clock  strikes.  "  I  have  a  message 
from  God  unto  thee,"  it  says:  "to  thee,  0  careless  one.  The  sands  are  fast 
running  out — take  heed  how  you  waste  time."  Men  are  at  work  in  the  fields. 
Suddenly  there  comes  a  booming  sound,  borne  towards  them  on  the  breezes, 
"Hark!  that's  the  passing  beU."  "I  have  a  message  from  God" — "It  is 
appointed  unto  men  once  to  die ;  and  after  this,  the  judgment !  "  {J.  B.  C. 
Murphy,  B.A.)  Application  of  the  truth: — D.  L.  Moody  was  first  awakened  to 
an  interest  in  spiritual  things  whUe  sitting  drowsily  in  Dr.  Kirk's  church  in 
Boston,  by  some  one  suddenly  rousing  him  and  telling  him  that  the  sermon 
•'  meant  him."  Ehud  .  .  .  took  the  dagger  .  .  .  and  thrust  It  into  Ms  belly. — 
Ehud  :  left-handedness  : — According  to  the  Septuagint,  Ehud  was  an  ambidexter ; 
that  is,  a  man  who  could  use  both  hands  with  equal  facility.  Hector  boasted — 
"  Many  a  Greek  hath  bled  by  me,  and  I  can  shift  my  shield  from  right  to  left." 
Of  the  children  of  Benjamin  we  read  (chap.  xx.  16).  Plato  recommended  all 
soldiers  to  acquire  equal  facility  in  the  use  of  both  hands.  It  is  evident  from 
all  this,  as  well  as  from  what  is  known  amongst  ourselves,  that  left-handedness 
has  always  been  considered  peculiar,  otherwise  it  would  not  have  been  pointed  out 
as  a  feature  in  any  case.  We  never  say  of  a  man  that  he  is  right-handed,  but  we 
do  remark  upon  any  man  whom  we  see  using  his  left  hand  for  purposes  which  are 
usually  assigned  to  the  right.  I.  Manx  men  mat  be  dependent  upon  one  man. 
1.  The  one  man  may  be  in  a  better  position  than  the  many,  and  this  may  account 
for  his  influence.  Take  the  case  of  a  besieged  city  :  one  man  outside  the  walls  may 
work  out  the  deliverance  of  the  whole,  &c.  2.  The  one  man  may  be  able  to  move 
about  more  quickly  than  the  many.  Crowds  cannot  be  hurried  to  any  wise  action. 
They  soon  lose  themselves  in  confusion.  They  need  leadership  to  give  unity  and 
precision  to  their  movements.  3.  Specially  is  one  good  man  more  than  all  the 
hosts  of  evil.  For  the  sake  of  the  one  God  preserves  the  many.  H.  The  instruments 
CHOSEN  OF  God  mat  often  surpkise  and  disappoint  men.  God  sent  a  left-handed 
man  to  deliver  Israel !  It  seemed  like  a  mockery.  In  view  of  this  apparent 
eccentricity  of  the  Divine  method  we  should  remember — 1.  A  man  is  not  a  great 
man  merely  because  he  is  left-handed.  Bunyan  was  a  tinker,  but  it  does  not  follow 
that  every  tinker  is  a  Bunyan.  George  Whitefield  was  cross-eyed,  but  it  does  not 
follow  that  squinting  is  a  condition  of  good  preaching.  2.  No  man  should  be 
condemned  merely  because  he  does  not  take  hold  of  things  in  the  common  way. 
Give  every  man  an  opportunity  of  proving  himself.  III.  Some  good  use  mat  be 
made  of  the  most  unlikelt  QUAiiiFiCATioNS.  Many  are  secretly  lamenting  some 
peculiarity  of  temperament,  some  defect  of  body,  or  some  circumstance  which 
seems  to  shut  them  off  from  the  general  band  of  workers.  Let  such  persons  look 
at  the  text  and  take  heart  again  !  {J.  Parker,  D.DA  Lessons  from  the  death  of 
Eglon: — I.  The  power  of  left-handed  men.  There  are  some  men  who,  by 
physical  organisation,  have  as  much  strength  in  their  left  hand  as  in  their  right 
hand ;  but  there  is  something  in  this  text  which  implies  that  Ehud  had  some 
defect  in  his  right  hand  which  compelled  him  to  use  the  left.  Oh,  the  power  of 
left-handed  men !  Genius  is  often  self -observant,  careful  of  itself,  not  given  to 
mach  toil,  bringing  increase  to  its  own  aggrandisement,  while  many  a  man  with  no 
natural  endowments,  actually  defective  in  physical  and  mental  organisation,  has  an 
earnestness  for  the  right,  a  patient  industry,  an  all-consuming  perseverance,  which 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap. in. 

acliieves  marvels  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Though  left-handed,  as  Ehud,  they 
can  strike  down  a  sin  as  great  and  imperial  as  Eglon.  But  I  don't  suppose  that 
Ehud,  the  first  time  he  took  a  sling  in  his  left  hand,  could  throw  a  stone  a  hair's 
breadth  and  not  miss.  I  suppose  it  was  practice  that  gave  him  the  wonderful 
dexterity.  Go  forth  to  your  spheres  of  duty,  and  be  not  discouraged  if  in  your  first 
attempts  you  miss  the  mark.  There  was  an  oculist  performing  a  very  difficult 
operation  on  the  human  eye.  A  young  doctor  stood  by  and  said,  "  How  easily  you 
do  that — it  don't  seem  to  cause  you  any  trouble  at  all."  "  Ah,"  said  the  old  oculist, 
"it  is  very  easy  now,  but  I  spoiled  a  hat  full  of  eyes  to  learn  that."  Be  not 
surprised  if  it  takes  some  practice  before  we  can  help  men  to  moral  eyesight,  and 
bring  them  to  a  vision  of  the  Cross.  Left-handed  men,  to  the  work !  Take  the  gospel 
for  a  sling,  and  faith  and  repentance  for  the  smooth  stone  from  the  brook.  Take 
sure  aim,  God  directs  the  weapon,  and  great  Goliaths  will  tumble  before  you. 
n.  The  danger  of  worldly  elevations.  "This  Eglon  was  what  the  world  called  a 
great  man.  There  were  hundreds  of  people  who  would  have  considered  it  the 
greatest  honour  of  their  Ufe  just  to  have  him  speak  to  them ;  yet,  although  he  is  so 
high  up  ia  worldly  position,  he  is  not  beyond  the  reach  of  Ehud's  dagger.  I  see  a 
great  many  people  trying  to  climb  up  in  social  position,  having  an  idea  that  there 
is  a  safe  place  somewhere  far  above,  not  knowing  that  the  mountain  of  fame  has  a 
top  like  Mont  Blanc,  covered  with  perpetual  snow.  Oh,  be  content  with  just  such 
a  position  as  God  has  placed  you  in.  It  may  not  be  said  of  us,  "  He  was  a  great 
general,"  or  "  He  was  an  honoured  chieftain,"  or  "  He  was  mighty  in  worldly 
attaimnents  "  ;  but  this  thing  may  be  said  of  you  and  me,  "  He  was  a  good 
citizen,  a  faithful  Christian,  a  friend  of  Jesus."  And  that  in  the  last  day  will  be 
the  highest  of  aU  eulogiums.  HI.  Death  comes  to  the  summer-house.  Eglon 
did  not  expect  to  die  in  that  fine  place.  Amid  all  the  flower-leaves  that  drifted  like 
summer  snow  into  the  window ;  in  the  tinkle  and  dash  of  the  fountains ;  in  the 
sound  of  a  thousand  leaves  fluttering  on  one  tree-branch ;  in  the  cool  breeze  that 
came  up  to  shake  feverish  troubles  out  of  the  king's  looks — there  was  nothing  that 
spake  of  death,  but  there  he  died  I  In  the  winter,  when  the  snow  is  a  shroud,  and 
when  the  wind  is  a  dirge,  it  is  easy  to  think  of  our  mortality.  And  yet  my  text 
teaches  that  death  does  sometimes  come  to  the  summer-house.  He  is  blind,  and 
cannot  see  the  leaves.  He  is  deaf,  and  cannot  hear  the  fountains.  Gather  about 
us  what  we  will  of  comforttind  luxury,  when  the  pale  messenger  comes  he  does  not 
stop  to  look  at  the  architecture  of  the  house  before  he  comes  in ;  nor,  entering, 
does  he  wait  to  examine  the  pictures  we  have  gathered  on  the  wall.  (T.  De  Witt 
Talmage.)  Unexpected  perils  : — 1.  I  daresay  you  think  it  was  a  rash  thing  of  Eglon 
to  receive  Ehud  in  private,  when  he  knew  very  well  that  the  man  who  asked  to  see 
Viim  was  one  of  a  people  that  hated  him  and  longed  to  be  rid  of  his  oppression. 
And  what  is  more  extraordinary  in  his  rashness  is  that  he  suffers  Ehud  to  come  to 
him  with  that  great  dagger  a  cubit  long  on  his  thigh.  It  is  true  that  Ehud  had  a 
cloak,  but  I  do  not  think  it  could  altogether  have  concealed  the  weapon.  I  believe 
the  reason  why  Eglon  was  easy  in  mind  was  this,  Ehud  had  got  his  dagger  slung 
on  the  wrong  side.  He  left  the  fact  of  Ehud  being  left-handed  entirely  out  of  his 
calculation,  and  that  was  his  ruin.  2.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take 
heed  lest  he  fall."  We  have  enemies,  temptations  without  and  within,  to  watch 
against.  It  is  just  when,  and  where,  and  how  you  least  expect  danger,  that  a  fall 
may  come.  Take  care  1  be  sober  1  be  vigilant !  (S.  Baring-Gould,  M.A.) 
Effective  preachers  compared  to  Ehud : — When  you  see  a  man  with  a  gift  in  his 
right  hand,  and  his  dagger  concealed  where  only  his  left  hand  could  get  at  it,  that 
man  is  worth  the  watching.  There  is  no  preacher  in  the  world  worth  his  salt  who 
is  not  like  that.  Like  Ehud,  have  the  right  hand  filled  with  the  gift,  with  the 
gospel  offer  and  present,  if  you  like,  but  for  God's  sake,  and  for  the  sake  of 
everything,  hit  hard  with  the  left  1  Preaching  that  does  any  good  is  typified  in 
Ehud.  The  gift,  and  the  gift  in  the  best  hand,  and  the  gift  put  first ;  but  look  out 
for  the  left,  look  out  for  the  blow.  It  is  not  to  be  all  coddling,  and  wheedling,  and 
coaxing,  and  pleading,  "  Oh  1 "  and  "  Ah  1 "  and  "Won't  you  come?"  There 
must  be  the  law,  the  terror,  the  close-quarters,  the  words  that  are  daggers,  and  the 
daggers  driven  home,  and  that  unexpectedly.  For  that  is  another  element  in  Ehud. 
Ehud  is  what  we  may  call  a  man  who  does  his  work  in  his  own  way,  and  therefore 
he  abounds  in  what  I  may  call  "  surprise."  In  the  Church,  in  all  our  pulpits,  in  all 
our  active  operations  for  God  at  home  and  abroad,  would  that  we  had  more  of  the 
surprise ;  more  unexpected  things  happening.  More  men  who  can  work  the  left 
hand  when  the  right  hand  gets  tired.     And  when  God  sends  a  surprise-man  to  as, 


CHAP,  in.]  JUDGES.  47 

don't  you  turn  round  and  find  fault  witli  that  man.  Encourage  him  ;  cheer  him 
on.  He  doesn't  do  as  you  do — he  does,  it  may  be,  the  other  way  ;  don't  find  fault 
with  his  methods.  The  test  of  all  preaching  styles  is,  do  they  hit  ?  Do  they  go 
home  ?  Do  they  minimise  man  and  magnify  God  ?  Then  they  are  all  right. 
{John  McNeill.)  They  took  a  key. — A  sermon  upon  keys  : — There  are  many 
different  kinds  of  keys  in  the  world,  but  I  think  we  might  select  one  or  two  of  them, 
and  try  if  we  can  make  them  keys  of  wisdom,  to  open  our  understandings.  We 
shall,  then,  begin  with  a  small  but  a  very  important  key,  namely — I .  The  Watch-Ket. 
The  heart  of  the  watch  is  the  mainspring.  The  watch  will  not  go  unless  the  main- 
spring is  right.  II.  The  "  Safe"  Key.  Two  burglars  have  been  trying  hard  for 
hours  to  break  into  a  merchant's  safe.  At  last  they  give  it  up  as  hopeless  and  make 
their  escape.  In  due  time  the  merchant  opens  his  shop,  and  takes  a  small  key  out 
of  his  pocket,  and  in  less  than  a  minute,  and  as  if  by  magic,  the  heavy  iron  doors 
swing  open.  Then  he  takes  out  the  gold,  silver,  and  other  valuables  that  he  only 
can  reach.  The  Bible  is  the  "  safe  "  of  the  Christian.  Many  people  look  at  it,  but 
only  a  few  possess  the  key  and  are  able  to  get  at  the  treasures.  Some  people  are 
so  foolish  as  to  deny  that  there  are  treasures  in  the  Word  of  God  because  they 
cannot  find  them.  IH.  The  House  Key.  To  be  presented  with  the  key  of  a  house 
signifies  to  have  liberty  to  go  in  and  out  of  that  house.  Christ  speaks  of  a  house 
of  which  He  is  the  door  (John  x.  9).  Faith  is  the  key  to  open  it,  for  He  again 
tells  us  that  (John  iii.  19).  All  who  are  in  Christ  are  safe  from  the  many  dangers 
that  ruin  the  souls  of  men.  Within  the  fold  there  is  pasture  for  the  sheep.  So  in 
Christ  there  is  refreshing  and  satisfying  pasture.  Nothing  else  can  satisfy  us. 
{John  Mitchell.) 

Ver.  31.  Shamgar  the  son  of  Anath.  —  Shamgar : — This  is  one  of  the  most 
singular  and  astonishing  battles  in  the  history  of  the  world.  If  Shamgar  had  been 
stationed  in  some  Thermopylse,  whene  the  foe  could  only  come  one  or  two  at  a  time 
it  would  not  have  been  so  wonderful ;  but  he  was  in  the  open  field,  literally  sur- 
rounded by  six  hundred  desperadoes,  bent  on  plunder  and  death.  It  gives  us  some 
idea  of  what  pluck  can  do  for  a  man  when  fired  with  the  love  of  home  and  country. 
To  my  mind,  there  is  something  wonderful,  almost  miraculous,  in  this  strange  battle 
and  unparalleled  victory.  I  wonder,  first  of  all,  how  he  could  muster  courage  to 
face  so  many,  and  how  he  escaped  when  surrounded  by  such  a  multitude.  I  wonder 
also,  that  when  the  Philistines  saw  that  they  were  being  slaughtered  at  every  blow, 
and  that  they  had  no  power  to  injure  their  mysterious  antagonist,  that  they  fought 
on  and  stood  their  ground  until  the  last  man  was  slain.  It  only  shows  that  men 
may  have  courage  in  fighting  on  the  side  of  evil  without  a  particle  of  truth  or 
righteousness  to  inspire  them  ;  that  they  will  sacrifie  their  lives  on  the  altar  of  a 
bad  cause  as  well  as  a  good  one.    I.  Men  determine  theer  future  by  the  manner 

IN   WHICH    THEY   MEET    THE    DUTIES    AND   PROVOCATIONS   OF    THE    PRESENT.       God    neVCt 

selects  a  lazy,  idle  man,  when  He  is  going  to  choose  a  person  to  do  some  noble  work. 
He  promotes  none  but  busy  men.  Shamgar  was  ploughing  when  the  PhiUstines 
came  upon  him.  It  speaks  well  for  him  that  he  had  heart  to  plough  at  such  a 
time,  for  the  whole  country  was  thrown  into  great  fear  and  discouragement.  Few 
men,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  had  courage  enough  just  then  to  plough.  Such  men 
are  an  inspiration  and  a  blessing  to  any  community.  So  far  as  we  can  ascertain, 
Shamgar  was  an  humble  labouring  man.  Yet  his  heroic  conduct  on  this  occasion 
brought  him  into  notice,  and  raised  him  to  be  one  of  the  judges  of  Israel.  The 
world  is  looking  for  men  who  can  bring  things  to  pass.  Noble  deeds  are  the  stair- 
way leading  to  greatness  and  honour.  If  you  would  be  trusted,  first  learn  to  be 
honest ;  if  you  would  rule,  first  learn  how  to  obey ;  if  you  would  rise  to  a  more  impor- 
tant position,  fill  the  place  where  you  are  to  overflowing  with  yourself,  and  God  will 
soon  beckon  you  to  a  wider  sphere.  H.  In  the  absence  of  success,  it  is  poor  logic 
TO  THROW  THE  BLAME  ON  OUR  INSTRUMENTS  OR  SURROUNDINGS.  The  Workman  is  moro 
than  his  tools.  The  spirit  and  skill  of  the  worker  tower  above  his  surroundings, 
and  give  valae  and  significance  to  the  instruments  he  wields.  Shamgar  fought  this 
battle  with  an  ox  goad.  However  discouraging  your  circumstances,  if  you  give 
yourself  fully  to  God,  and  walk  in  the  full  honours  of  uprightness  before  Him, 
the  great  Captain  of  our  salvation  will  not  only  give  you  blessed  foretastes  of  the 
"  rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God,"  but  He  will  also  enable  you  to  cut 
your  way  to  victory  through  all  the  spiritual  Philistines  that  may  confront  you, 
even  though  your  instruments  may  be  as  insignificant  as  those  of  Shamgar. 
m.  In  oxtb  lifk  wobk  we  should  bb  natxtkal,  and  use  the  instruments  we  enow 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

BEST  HOW  TO  HANDLE.  Shamgar  fought  with  the  ox-goad.  He  knew  bo  well  how  to 
handle  it  that,  at  close  range,  it  was  a  terrible  weapon  to  come  in  contact  with. 
He  could  kill  more  men  with  it  in  a  crowd  than  with  sword  or  musket.  He  knew 
the  spring  and  feel  of  it  so  perfectly  that  every  stroke  brought  two  or  three 
Philistines  to  the  ground.  What  we  want  in  order  to  our  greatest  possible  efficiency 
is,  not  somebody  else's  way  of  doing  things,  but  our  own,  trained  and  sanctified  by 
the  grace  of  God.  No  two  persons  are  exactly  alike ;  and  so  there  are  phases  of 
work  which  each  individual  is  constitutionally  fitted  to  do  which  no  other  person 
can  ever  do  quite  as  well.    IV.  New  iNSTKUMENTALrriES  should  not  be  condemned 

SIMPLY  because  THET  ARE  NEW  AND  OUT  OF  THE  REGULAR  ORDER,  BUT  SHOULD  BE  JUDGED 

AND  VALUED  ACCORDING  TO  THEIR  RESULTS.  As  a  wcapou  of  destructiou  the  OX  goad 
was  unknown  up  to  this  time  ;  but,  judged  of  by  its  results,  it  was  worthy  of  high 
appreciation.  It  may  be  that,  in  the  past,  the  Church  has  been  a  little  too  conser- 
vative in  the  matter  of  new  agency ;  that  she  has  been  too  much  inclined  to  condemn 
any  agency  that  was  not  officially  sanctioned  or  technically  approved.  There  ia 
nothing  that  carries  conviction  like  the  logic  of  facts,  and  nothing  succeeds  like 
success.  Think  of  one  man  against  six  hundred,  with  nothing  in  his  hands  but  an 
ox  goad.  You  may  not  be  as  well  qualified  for  the  work  as  some  others  ;  but  still 
God  has  a  work  for  you  to  do,  and  He  will  help  you  to  do  it  if  you  do  your  best  and 
trust  Him.  It  may  be  that  your  sphere  is  humble  and  obscure,  but  you  can  live  a 
noble  Ufe  and  do  grand  work  in  obscurity.  Some  of  the  greatest  evangelists  of  our 
own  day  teach  us  two  lessons — 1.  That  sanctified  individuality  is  the  condition  of 
usefulness  and  the  great  want  of  the  times.  2.  That  the  vast  majority  of  Chi-istians 
have  talent  enough  to  become  each  a  mighty  power,  in  the  hands  of  God,  to  hasten 
the  millennial  glory  of  the  future.  (T.  Kelly.)  A  man  for  the  time  : — From  this 
let  all  true  patriots  take  heart — with  the  hour  and  the  peril  comes  the  man  required. 

I.  The  APPARENT  INCOMPATIBILITY  AND  INSUFFICIENCY  OF  THE  DELIVERER  AND  HIS  WEAPON. 

A  herdman  carrying  a  goad,  an  ugly  implement  some  eight  or  ten  feet  long,  and  shod 
with  iron.  Uncouth,  without  such  military  training  as  the  science  of  the  times 
could  give,  destitute  of  such  arms  as  the  Philistines  would  be  likely  to  fear.  He 
could  only  be  looked  upon  as  an  improvised  leader  with  an  extemporised  armament. 
Opposed  to  him  was  a  host  led  by  hereditary  chieftains.  Now,  as  ever,  the  Philistine 
opponents  of  Christ  and  the  truth  grin  inanely  at  the  rabble  rout,  as  they  deem  the 
Lord's  host  to  be.  They  sneer  at  the  Word,  albeit  they  bear  many  scars  inflicted 
by  that  old  Damascene  blade.  They  laugh  at  the  praying,  the  preaching,  and  the 
labour  of  the  "  unlearned  and  ignorant  men  "  whom  the  Lord  has  called  to  do  His 
work.  n.  The  triumphant  efficacy  of  both.  Shamgar's  generalship,  strong 
arm,  awful  ox-goad,  proved  to  be  no  laughing  matters.  The  soul  of  a  patriot,  the 
genius  of  a  leader,  the  skill  of  a  strategist,  were  all  in  him.  Neither  devil,  lords, 
nor  army  had  much  time  to  sneer  when  Shamgar  reached  them.  They  had  mis- 
taken the  man,  the  instrument,  and  the  God  behind  all.  History  repeats  and 
spiritualises  itself.  For,  we  ask,  in  what  is  the  augury,  whence  is  the  success  of 
our  Christian  warfare,  waged  against  the  enemies  of  God  and  man  ?  In  numbers, 
literary  efficiency,  dialectical  skill,  scientific  theology  ?  Not  so ;  Satan  can  beat  us 
out  of  the  field  in  every  one  of  these.  He  is  constantly  doing  it.  Not  all  the  drum- 
beating,  banner-waving,  and  shouting  of  our  conferences  and  demonstrations  ever 
frighten  him.  But  his  doom  is  sealed  when  a  Christ-filled  Shamgar  leads.  That 
man  who  on  his  knees  pleads  and  waits  to  know,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me 
to  do  ?  " — such  are  the  men  we  want,  the  men  we  should  pray  for,  the  men  we 
ought  to  be.  The  fact  that  we  are  Christians  should  be  a  certificate  that  we  are 
surrendiered,  Christ-filled  men,  or  our  profession  is  a  lie.  Would  that  all  were  so. 
Oh,  that  all  may  become  so  I  Whatever  the  sacrifice  involved,  there  is  no  more 
happy  life,  and,  at  its  close,  can  be  no  more  glorious  epitaph  than  "  he  saved 
Israel !  "  (James  Dann.)  Shamgar :  mean  instruments : — 1.  How  absurd  it  is 
for  any  man  to  blame  his  tools  for  bad  work.  Shamgar  used  an  ox-goad ; 
Samson  wielded  the  jawbone  of  an  ass ;  David  had  but  a  sling  and  stone.  Some- 
times we  think  what  wonders  we  could  do  if  we  had  better  instruments.  2.  How 
important  it  is  that  men  should  use  those  instruments  which  they  can  handle  most 
skilfully.  Shamgar  knew  how  to  use  the  ox-goad,  and  David  knew  how  to  use  the 
sling  and  stone.  3.  How  foolish  it  would  be  to  ridicule  the  instruments  when  the 
results  are  so  obviously  good.  Look  at  the  six  hundred  dead  men  !  Look  at  the 
slain  giant  1  Look  at  the  prostrate  walls  of  Jericho  I  The  rule  applies  to  every 
department  of  life.  It  applies  to  preaching.  It  applies  to  foreign  missions.  It 
applies  to  every  Christian  effort.    4.  How  victories  are  sometimes  won  in  the 


CHAP,  in.]  JUDGES.  49 

face  of  the  greatest  improbabilities.  One  man  against  six  hundred !  Some  men 
would  have  succumbed  under  the  mere  pressure  of  numbers,  but  Shamgar  fought 
the  crowd.  Do  not  let  us  blame  men  for  working  with  instruments  that  have  not 
been  of3Bicially  or  technically  approved.  The  one  great  object  is  to  do  good.  What 
meaner  instrument  can  there  be  than  the  Cross  ?  (J.  Parker,  D.I).)  Shamgar'i 
ox-goad : — Shamgar  considered  not  whether  he  was  equipped  for  attacking 
Philistines,  but  turned  on  them  from  the  plough,  his  blood  leaping  in  him  with 
swift  indignation.  The  instrument  of  his  assault  was  not  made  for  the  use  to  which 
it  was  put :  the  power  lay  in  the  arm  that  wielded  the  goad  and  the  fearless 
will  of  the  man  who  struck  for  his  own  bh'thright,  freedom — for  Israel's  bu-th- 
right,  to  be  the  servant  of  no  other  race.  Undoubtedly  it  is  well  that  in  any 
efforts  made  for  the  Church  or  for  society  men  should  consider  how  they  are 
to  act,  and  should  furnish  themselves  in  the  best  maimer  for  the  work  that 
is  to  be  done.  No  outfit  of  knowledge,  skill,  experience,  is  to  be  despised.  A 
man  does  not  serve  the  world  better  in  ignorance  than  in  learning,  in  bluntness 
than  in  refinement.  But  the  serious  danger  for  such  an  age  as  our  own  is  that 
strength  may  be  frittered  away  and  zeal  expended  in  the  mere  preparation  of 
weapons,  in  the  mere  exercise  before  the  war  begins.  The  important  points  at 
issue  are  apt  to  be  lost  sight  of,  and  the  vital  distinctions  on  which  the  whole 
battle  turns  to  fade  away  in  an  atmosphere  of  compromise.  {R.  A.  Watso7i,  3I.A.) 
Shamgar^s  ox-goad  : — The  ox-goad  was  not  much ;  but  Shamgar  with  the  ox-goad, 
that  was  the  sight  to  see.  Perhaps  you  cannot  work  the  ox-goad.  It  fitted 
Shamgar,  and  he  fitted  it ;  but,  after  all,  it  was  the  man.  It  is  the  man.  I  read 
Wesley's  sermons — those  sermons  that  routed  the  Phihstines  of  a  hundred  years 
ago,  and  delivered  Israel  over  all  this  England ;  I  read  those  sermons  of 
Wesley  and  Whitefield,  and,  I  say,  what  is  in  them?  You  would  be  tired 
of  them  from  me.  "UTiy?  You  see  the  obvious  answer.  You  look  at  that  ox- 
goad  and  say,  "  There  is  not  much  in  that "  ;  neither  is  there.  It  was  the  man, 
and  God  in  the  man.  One  was  taken  to  see  a  famous  sword  that  had  belonged  to  a 
famous  swordsman,  and  when  he  saw  it  he  said,  "  I  do  not  see  much  in  that 
sword,"  and  there  came  the  obvious  answer,  "  No,  but  you  should  have  seen  the 
arm  that  wielded  it."  Shamgar's  hand  grew  into  the  hilt  of  that  ox-goad,  and  it 
became  part  of  him.  The  ox-goad  and  Shamgar,  again,  became  part  of  the  arm  of 
the  Lord  God  Almighty.  That  was  all  in  it,  and  that  may  be  in  you  and  me,  God 
taking  our  individuality  and  consecrating  it  and  using  it  for  His  eternal  glory. 
Now,  be  yourself,  whether  you  be  at  the  plough  or  at  the  desk  ;  God  can  do  His 
work  with  the  ox-goad ;  He  can  do  it  with  the  pen ;  He  can  do  it  with  anything  if  it 
lies  near  His  hand.  And,  last  of  all,  what  honourable  mention  this  ploughman 
gets  :  "  He  also  delivered  Israel."  Why,  the  mighty  Joshua  did  no  more  !  {John 
McNeill.)  Great  results  with  imperfect  tools : — Many  of  the  discoveries  in 
astronomy,  chemistry,  mathematics,  navigation,  and  science  generally,  were  made 
with  very  imperfect  instruments.  Dr.  Valentine  Mott's  remarkable  surgical  skUl  is 
the  more  honourable  because  of  his  comparatively  poor  instruments.  True  genius 
shows  itself  in  accomplishing  grand  results  with  imperfect  tools.  Eittenhouse, 
whose  name  is  a  synonym  for  marvellous  scientific  attainments,  worked  in  boyhood 
on  his  father's  farm,  and  calculated  eclipses  on  plough-handles  and  fences  ;  and, 
although  studying  alone,  made  himself  master  of  Newton's  "  Principia,"  and  dis- 
covered for  himself  the  method  of  fluxions  when  in  his  nineteenth  year.  It  is  little 
wonder  that  when  he  observed  the  transit  of  Venus  (June  3,  1769),  while  in  his 
private  observatory  at  Norriton,  he  fainted  from  excitement  at  the  moment  of 
apparent  contact.  Benjamin  West,  the  Anglo-American  painter,  made  his  first 
colours  from  leaves  and  berries,  and  his  first  brushes  were  taken  from  a  cat's  tail. 
Thus  self-taught,  at  the  age  of  sixteen  he  practised  portrait-painting  in  the  villages 
near  Philadelphia,  his  first  historical  picture  being  "  The  Death  of  Socrates." 
Humphry  Davy  had  but  little  opportunity  to  acquire  scientific  knowledge,  but  he 
made  old  pans,  kettles,  and  bottles  contribute  to  his  success  as  he  experimented  in 
the  attic  of  the  apothecary  shop  in  which  he  was  employed.  Over  a  stable  in 
London  lived  Michael  Faraday,  a  poor  boy  who  made  a  living  by  carrying  news- 
papers to  customers.  While  apprenticed  to  a  bookbinder  and  engaged  in  binding 
the  '•  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,"  his  eyes  fell  on  the  article  on  electricity.  He  had 
only  a  glass  vial,  an  old  pan,  and  a  few  other  articles  with  which  to  make  experi- 
ments. A  friend  took  him  to  hear  Sir  Humphry  DaAry  lecture  on  chemistry.  Later 
the  great  Davy  called  on  the  humble  Michael.  The  years  pass,  and  Tyndall  said 
of  Paraday,  "  He  is  the  greatest  experimental  philosopher  the  world  has  ever  seen." 


go  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 


CHAPTEE  IV. 

Yebs.  1-3.  Israel  again  did  evil  .  .  .   the  Lord  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  Jabin. 

— Reappearance  of  vanquished  foes  : — Their  ancient  foe,  whom  they  had  conquered, 
rose  gradually  from  his  prostration.  He  rebuilt  his  castle ;  he  repossessed  the 
lands  ;  he  multiplied  his  armies.  At  length  he  defied  and  "  mightily  oppressed  " 
the  chosen  people.  How  has  this  history  been  re-enacted  a  thousand  times  in  the 
experience  botli  of  individual  believers  and  of  Christian  Churches  1  How  many 
there  are  who  answer  to  the  description  (1  Pet.  ii.  20).  The  Canaanite  was  slain, 
but  he  reappears  and  resumes  his  ancient  tyranny.  Exploded  errors  revive.  Slain 
heresies  live  again,  and  triumph  on  the  very  spot  where  they  received  what  was 
deemed  their  death-blow.  The  subjugation  and  prostration  of  the  Church  may  not 
be  as  complete  as  was  the  twenty  years'  slavery  of  Israel  under  the  second  Jabin,  yet 
is  not  the  fortress  of  Hazor  being  rebuilt  in  this  land  ?  Are  not  the  furnaces  of 
Harosheth  being  rekindled?  Ajad  are  not  the  Papal  workmen  busy  fabricating 
chariots  of  iron  wherewith  anew  to  scour  the  plains  which  valiant  Protestants  of  old 
■won  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  and  of  His  truth  ?     (L.  R.  Wiseman,  M.A.) 

Vers.  4-11.  Deborah,  a    prophetess,  .  .  .  judged    Israel. — Behorah :    woman'i 
attribute : — 1.  Amongst  the  women   of   the   Bible   Deborah   stands   out  in  great 
prominence,  though  we  know  but  little  of  her  character.     She  is  one  of  those  who 
show  forth  a  distinctive  characteristic  of  women — the  power  of  contrivance  and 
design  carried  out  to  such  an  extent  as  to  make  some  doubt  whether  her  acts  were 
within  the  limits  of  religion  and  morality.    2.  Deborah  seems  to  have  been  a  kind 
of  oracle  in  the  unsettled  state  of  things  that  existed  among  the  Jewish  tribes  ;  her 
advice  was  attended  to  and  her  voice  followed  by  leaders  and  by  armies  with  the 
most  implicit  devotion.     Her  parallels  are  many,  both  in  Scripture  and  history. 
We  are  irresistibly  reminded  of  one  whose  spirit  once  bore  up  the  flagging  energies 
of  France  in  the  annals  of  the  latter,  of  Judith  in  those  of  the  former.    One  circum- 
stance strikes  us  as  highly  significant.     Starting   up    close   beside   her  was  the 
kindred  spirit  of  Jael,  the  wife  of  Heber  the  Kenite.     Though  not  strictly  answer- 
j  able  for  the  act  of  Jael,  she  nevertheless  celebrated  that  act  as  one  of  her  objects  of 
/  gratulation  in  her  magnificent  hymn.    3.  We  must  view  her  in  two  lights.    She  was 
/  of  course  under  a  heavenly  inspiration,  as  well  as  under  the  guidance  of  a  strong 
(  natural  character.    In  the  former  capacity  she  is  simply  to  be  viewed  as  one  of 
those  instances  in  which  God  chooses  to  show  forth  His  power  through  the  weak 
1   things  of  this  world,  and  to  bring  about  great  national  crises  through  the  instru- 
\  mentality  of  the  weaker  sex.     But  placing  this  view  of  the  subject  aside,  I  will 
"cionsider  her  in  reference  to  her  natural  character  and  ordinary  position,  as  a  woman 
in  the  midst  of  vast  and  depressing  circumstances  rousing  by  the  vigour,  boldness, 
'  and  freshness  of  her  character,  the  flagging  energies  of  men.    We  see  this  in  many 
\  instances  of  life,  public  as  well  as  private.     How  repiarkable  and  almost  miraculous 
\it  is  that  the  wife,  who  shares  the  anxious  cares  of  the  Husband,  be  he  labourer  or 
mechanic,  is  able  to  keep  up  her  spirit  and  to  hope  to  the  endl     How  often  would 
the  man,  who  has  had  to  contend  with  the  waves  of  constant  trouble,  succumb  to 
increasing  difiiculties ;   and  how  many  a  crisis  of  difficulty,  in  connection  with 
illness,  accidents,  or  the  like,  in  the  domestic  circle,  calls  forth  the  presence  of 
mind  of  the  mother,  when  the  father  would  shrink  from  the  difficulty,  and  lend  no 
hand  to  help.    Nor  is  it  only  this  power  that  is  felt  so  beneficially  in  the  cottage  as 
well  as  in  richer  homes.     The  eye  that  sees  a  brighter  day  and  that  pierces  the  fast 
rolling  clouds  of  present  adversity,  perceiving  the  glow  of  a  brighter  morning  when 
"  the  tyranny  wUl  be  overpast,"  is  especially  the  eye  of  woman.    One  other  attribute, 
of  woman  which  comes  out  in  Deborah's  story  is  the  de_ep  impression  that  Ber 
^Jl.  mission  was  Divine,  and  that  the  instincts  of  nature  were  the  gifts  of  inspiration. 

*Zx         ii  There  is  that  sjpiril  in  the  weaker  sex  which,  in  the  moment  of  high  crisis  and 
.  v^       M  difficulty,  would  often  justify  the  impression  ;  but  this  spirit  is  the  gift  of  God  for  a 
*^i\'^     special  purpose,  and  is  a  substitute  for  those  bolder  and  more  persevering  qualities 
I  which  belong  to  the  stronger  sex.     There  are  many  periods,  both  in  private  and  in 
pu^Fic  life,  which  need  rather  light  shed  by  a  ready  and  present  mind  than  the 
steady  beam  of  the  more  enduring  fire.    From  the  lack  of  it  we  may  miss  the  object 
of  our  life's  search.     It  is  the  want  felt  in  such  conjunctures  as  these  that  woman 
supplies;  she  bears  the  lamp  of  the  midnight ;  and  sometimes  when  with  weary 
watching  other  lamps  have  gone  out,  hers  is  trimmed.      4.  Such  is  woman's  prero- 


CHAP,  IV.] 


JUDGES. 


51 


gative,  such  her  peculiar  characteristic.  For  though  Deborah  may  be  an  exaggera- 
tion in  a  remarkable  crisis  of  the  characteristics  of  her  sex,  they  nevertheless  exist 
in  more  or  less  force  in  every  representative  of  it.  It  is  seemingly  paradoxical,  but ' 
no  less  true,  that  women  should  have  the  power  of  meeting  imminent  danger  with  a  ] 
calmness  and  perseverance  often  denied  to  man.  Let  them  view  these  gifts  as  the 
direct  ordering  of  Heaven,  and,  while  they  glory  in  them  as  their  heritage,  let  them  1 
cultivate  and  improve  them  as  the  talents  committed  to  their  trust.  {E.  Monro,  3I.A.y,j 
Lessons  from  an  old  story: — 1.  In  an  age  and  a  season  of  perpetual  unrest,  how 
refreshing  is  it  to  the  spirit  to  have  before  us  the  example,  albeit  in  a  remote  past,, 
of  one  judge  who  could  dwell  under  the  palm-tree  between  Eama  and  Bethel,  and  to- 
whom  the  children  of  Israel  could  go  up  for  judgment.  If  the  right  kind  of  men,  a 
few  of  them,  could  be  set  free  to  think,  to  advise,  to  originate,  to  counsel,  what  a 
gain  would  this  be  to  a  people  laden  with  care,  full  of  intellectual  and  spiritual 
perplexities,  and  feeling  themselves  terribly  alone  in  their  difficult  and  embarrassing 
way.  For  lack  of  this  many  lives  go  utterly  astray,  and  many  minds  are  wrecked 
on  shoals  and  sandbanks  of  doubting.  It  might  be  said  that  the  two  offices  of 
action  and  thought  are  only  kept  distinct  in  the  present  state  of  things,  and  that 
those  who  want  counsel  have  no  lack  of  help  from  an  innumerable  crowd  of  writers. 
Unhappily  the  thinkers  are  too  often  too  much  isolated  from  action,  so  that  they 
run  into  vain  and  profitless  speculation,  having  neither  help  for  this  life  nor  hope 
in  that  which  is  to  come.  It  is  the  combination  which  helps :  the  judge  sitting 
under  the  palm-tree,  but  Israel  coming  up  to  him  for  judgment.  The  moral  of  it 
all  is,  busy  men,  snatch  moments  for  reflection !  let  no  day  be  quite  without  it ! 
2.  We  see  the  true  place  and  dignity  of  woman  here  in  the  positive  and  in  the 

negative.     Deborah  was  a  pro^hetjgss. God.  spoke  _to  her.     She  sawjwithin  and 

-beneath  the'appearraTlceorinings.  She  did  not  allow  the  visible  to  crush^ouFTKe  ' 
invisible.  She  was  not  appalled  by  the  nine  hundred  chariots  of  iron.  §he  knew\ 
that there  was.still  a  God  in  Israel  who  rules  m  the  kingdom  of  men,  and  though V^ 
He  bears  long  with  evil,  and  sometimes  sets  up  over  nations  the  basest  of  men.  He 
can  yet  be  called  on  hy  prayer,  and  in  the  long  run  will  make  it  to  be  well  with  the 
righteous.  Ih_a  great  emergency  she  became  aninfluence ;  she  called  Barak  to  her,  ; 
sgrlrtiBrhis  task,  assured  him  of  his  commission,  and  even  consented  at  his  request  / 
to  accompany  him  on  his  march.  This  waS-Jberoic,  but  it  was  also  feminine.  / 
Deborah  did  not  assume  the  command  of  the  army ;  she  was  the  influence,  she  was 
the  iaspiratiqii7l&ut  she  left  the  leadership  and  the  generalship  to  another.  NotTdr 
nothing  have  we  tlie  record  of  another  woman  on  the  sanie  page  with  that  o£ 
Deborah.  We  shrink  instinctively  from  the  bloodstained  hand  of  Jael.  She  has 
overstepped  the  line  between  the  feminine  and  the  masculine — nay,  between  the 
enthusiast  and  the  fanatic.  The  excitement  of  victory  might  draw  forth  the 
impassioned  cry  even  from  one  of  the  male  sex,  even  from  one  of  God's  utterers, 
"  Blessed  above  women  "  ;  but  that  cry  has  never  found  even  an  echo  in  evangelical 
hearts  ;  that  cry  has  given  trouble  and  pain  to  champions  of  revelation.  We  cannot 
receive  it  as  the  voice  of  God's  Spirit,  except  in  some  modified  and  softened-down 
form,  in  which  it  hails,  and  justly  hails,  the  victory  as  a  victory  of  the  cause  of  the 
monotheistic  idea  as  against  the  polytheistic ;  as  a  victory  of  the  cause  of  progress, 
of  the  cause  of  development,  and  therefore  in  some  sense  the  cause  of  mankind  and 
of  the  world.  3.  One  last  thought  occurs,  and  it  might  seem  at  first  hearing  to 
conflict  with  the  foregoing  ;~bunrisliof  so.  Deborah  says_to  Barak,  "  Hath  not 
tEeXor3~God  of  Israel  commanded?  "  And  he'replieslbner— a  wolnan— ^'*"If  thou 
wilF^o  with  me,  then  I  will  go :  but  if  thou  wilt  not  go  with  me,  then  I  will  not  go." 
She  rejoined  yet  again,  "I  will  surely  go  with  thee:  notwithstanding  the  journey 
that  thou  takest  shall  not  be~for  thine  honour ;  for  the  Lord  shall  sell  Sisera  into 
th5"iran4-^a  woman."  We  are  not  concerned  with  the  last  phrase — "  God  shall 
sell  Sisefalnto  the  hand  of  a  woman."  Scripture  readers  see  the  hand  of  God  every- 
where— go  so  far  as  to  say,  "  Shall  there  be  evil  in  the  city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not 
done  it  ?  "  We  ask  what  was  the  point,  what  was  the  characteristic,  the  differentia 
in  the  faith  of  Barak,  that  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  should  single  him  out  for 
merition?  And  we  find  it  here  in  the  self-forgetfulness  of  Barak  in  doing  God's 
work.  What  if  one  woman  set  him  on  it,  and  another  woman  is  to  finish  it  ?  What 
if  the  journey  he  took  was  not  fo  be  for  his  own  honour  ?  Shall  that  stop  him  ? 
What  will  the  troops  say  if  they  see  a  woman  marching  by  his  side  ;  see  htm  consult 
her  about  his  tactics ;  hear  him  confess  that  she  is  his  monitress  and  his  inspirer  ? 
Shall  that  thought  deter  him  ?  No.  He  has  God's  cause  in  hand ;  God's  honour, 
not  hisVTs  the  thing  to  aiin  at.    Here  is  faith  forgetting  itself  in  the  cause.    It  la 


OOc 


X 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

a  grand  heroism ;  for  lack  of  it  much  good  work  is  spoilt  and  much  forborne. 
There  is  a  phrase  which  more  often  disguises  than  precludes  the  self-glorifying. 
Humble  instruments  all  call  themselves ;  yet  the  same  modest  disclaimer  asserts 
the   instrumentality.       Propose   to    omit    the    name    from   the   subscription  list 
or  the  list   of  patrons,   where    will  the   humble   instrument  be   then?       "The 
iourn§j„\Elu£h  _thou    takest    shall    not    be    for    thine    honour."    No,   for    one 
w'oman    suggested  Tt   and*  another    woman    shall    complete    it.       What   then? 
Faith    is    willing    to    have    it    so ;     for    faith    is    the    sight    of    the    invisible, 
and   .this—arratngement  will    show    the    Invisible,   the  Doer.     (Dean   Vaughan.) 
CTCKe  duty  of  woman  to  women: — It  is  a  suggestive  and  on  the  whole  perhaps  a 
creditable  Tact  thatheroic  women  are  not  so  interesting  to  women  as  to  men.     We 
read  about  that  German  prophetess  who  roused  her  people  against  the  invaders 
from  Borne,  or  about  Joan  of  Arc,  who,  simple  peasant  girl  that  she  was,  commun- 
ing with  mysterious  angels'  voices  (as  the  legend  runs),  kindled  the  French  nation 
against  the  English  dominion  when  princes  and  statesmen  had  well-nigh  given  up 
the  cause  ;  or  we  read  about  Deborah,.like.St._  Louis  under  the  oak  at  Vincennes, 
/''feitting  under  a  Judsean  palm,  not   with   downcast  eyes   and  folded  hands   and 
I  extinguished  hopes,   but   aU  on   fire   with   faith   and   energy,   with   the   soul  of 
\  courage  and  the  voice  of  command,  and  we  are  constrained  to  pay  homage  to 
I  her  daring  and  her  fearlessness,  to  her   strong  will  and  her  unslu-inking  pur- 
)  pose.     But  if  I   were  to   ask  any  young   girl  whether  she  were   ambitious  of 
such   a   career,   there   is   not   one   in   a   score  who  would   say  so.     A  woman's 
idea  of  happiness  and  usefulness  ordinarily  centres  in  a  home.     We  have  been 
accustomed  to  hear  the  constantly  reiterated  assertion  that  "  woman's  sphere  is 
the  home."    I  confess  for  one  that  in  view  of  the  actual  facts  of  society,  as  they 
exist  around  us,  there  is  often  in  such  words  a  sound  of  cruel  irony.     Do  not  you 
and  I  know,  that  there  are  thousands  of  women  to  whom  a  home  is  as  impossible  a 
thing  as  a  castle  in  Spain  ?     Do  we  not  know  that  there  are  thousands  of  young 
girls  who  have  no  human  being  but  themselves  to  depend  upon,  and  who  must 
somehow  make  their  way  and  earn  their  own  bread  in  life  ?     Will  you  teU  me  how 
a  home  or  anything  else  than  a  room  and  a  hard,  stern  struggle  for  life  is  possible 
to  these  ?    We  have  now  reached  a  point  in  the  social  progress  of  this  age  when  it 
is  necessary  that  we  should  every  one  of  us-recognisa-the.. crisis  that  is  upon  us,    A 
'much" larger  number  of  women  must  hereafter  support  themselves  than  have  ever 
done  so  before.     There  are  some  callings  from  which,  as  it  seems  to  me,  women 
must  for  ever  remain  shut  out.    Any  calling  which  requires  conspicuous  publicity, 
masculine  activities,  and  out-door  leadership  is  not,  I  venture  to  submit,  for  a 
woman.    For  one,  I  should  not  care  to  see  her  hanging  from  a  yard-arm,  driving 
a  steam-engine,  digging  in  a  coal-mine,  or  vociferating  in  congress.    But  when  we 
have  ehminated  from  the  question  those  occupations  from  which  healthy  self-respect 
would  restrain  any  really  womanly  woman,  there  remain  a  vast  range  of  employ- 
ments on  which  women  have  not  yet  entered,  but  for  which,  nevertheless,  they  have 
singular  and  supreme  qualifications.    Already  women  have  acquired  the  science  of 
telegraphy,  and  they  are,  of  course,  more  expert  in  it  than  men  can  possibly  be. 
Women  are  already  training  themselves  to  be  phonographic  reporters.    And  here 
again  their  peculiar  aptitudes  are  a  pre-eminent  qualification.     Why  should  they 
not  oftener  provide  for  them  an  honourable  maintenance  ?    It  is  a  curious  and 
scarcely  known  fact  that  in  the  middle  ages,  the  daughters  as  well  as  the  sons  in  a 
family  often  inherited  and  carried  on  the  family  art  or  handicraft.     When  one  goes 
to  Nuremberg,  or  Prague,  or  Heidelberg,  he  will  find  bits  of  wood  carving,  artistic 
work  in  metal  or  stone,  which  no  modern  hand  can  pretend  to  rival.    How  are  we 
to  explain  this  earlier  perfection  ?     Simply  on  this  wise :  the  calling  of  the  father 
was  the  calling  of  the  children.    Exquisite  workmanship  was  a  hereditary  trait. 
"  Among  goldsmiths  the   daughters    executed    chasing,   among  furniture-makers 
carving,  among  stone-masons  sculpture,  among  engravers  drawing  and  graving." 
Could  there  be  more  pleasing  or  wholesome  employment  of  one's  best  aptitudes  ? 
It  is  time  that  every  woman  among  us,  and  especially  every  young  girl  with  culture 
and  influence  and  social  power,  should  awaken  to  the  needs  of  her  own  sex.     What 
/''Deborah  was  under  the  palm-tree  at  Mount  Ephraim  every  brave  and  true-hearted 
woman  is  called  to  be  in  the  service  of  as  holy  a  cause  and  as  precious  interests. 
We  call  Deborah  a  prophetess,  and  so  she  was.     We  regard   her  as  somehow 
separated  by  her  rare  natural  endowments  and  her  exceptional  inspiration  from  the 
other  women  of  her  time,  and  so  she  was.    But  in  a. very  real  and  a  very  living  and 
__l9fty  sense  every  woman  is  a  prophetess,  with  a  propnef  s  gifts  and  a  prophet's 


CHAP.  IV.]  JUDGES.  53 

calling.  For  what  are  prophets'  gifts  but  that  Divine  insight,  that  swift  and 
Keaverinjorn  intuition,  whicn  is  your  rarest  gift,  your  loftiest  endowment?  Shall  I 
bel)pemn'g  an  old  wound  if  I  say  that  it  was  a  woman's  voice  and  pen  that,  more 
than  any  other,  roused  this  land  to  the  evils  and  the  cruelties  of  slavery  ?  and  as 
truly  I  believe  they  must  be  women's  voices  that  must  waken  us  men  to  the 
cruelties  of  that  other  servitude  in  which  too  often  and  too  widely  the  weak  of  your 
sex  are  to-day  oppressed.  Do  not.jthen,  be  afraid  to  lift  your  voice  in  any  good 
cause  that  aims  to  elevate  women  to  iqual  chance  and  equal  respect  and  equal 
emolument  with  men  in  the  great  struggle  of  life.  Be,  each  one  of  you,  a  Deborah 
to  cry  to  some  slumberous  and  sluggish  Barak,  "  Uj  and  do_the  Master's  work,  in 
the_s£irit_qf_the  Master's.^sample  !."  {Bp.  H.  C.Potter.)  If  thou  wilt  go  with 
me,  then  I  will  go.— ^elf-reliaiic'e  :^-lt  was  very  natural  that  Barak  should  desu-e 
the  presence  of  Deborah,  ^he  was  a  woman  of  natural  influence,  possessed  of 
sagacity,  able  to  read  the  signs  of  the  times.  As  it  has  been  said  the  best  definition 
of  a  fool  is  a  man  who  is  wise  too  late,  so  the  best  definition  of  wisdom  is  wisdom 
at  the  right  moment ;  and  she  possessed  that  wisdom,  and  understood  what  was  the 
proper  occasion  when  it  was  desirable  to  strike  the  blow  for  freedom.  Her  intel- 
lectual powers  had  made  her  influence  great  among  the  people  ;  diflficult  cases  were 
brought  to  her ;  her  knowledge  and  her  sagacity  had  won  its  way  and  established 
its  influence  in  Israel.  But  it  was  not  only  natural ;  there  was  a  certain  appear- 
ance of  piety  in  the  profession.  Deborah  was  not  merely  one  of  those  persons 
whose  gifts  give  them  a  high  dominating  influence  over  their  feUow-beings,  but  she 
was  believed  by  the  people  to  be  inspired  by  the  breath  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  And, 
therefore,  there  was  in  their  view  a  certain  sanction  of  the  Divine  power  which 
came,  as  it  were,  from  her  lips.  Was  it  not,  then,  because  he  regarded  her  as  the 
Divine  representative  that  he  said,  "  If  thou  wilt  go  with  me  I  will  go  "  ?  May  we 
not  argue  further,  and  say  precisely,  because  she  was  the  one  person  in  Israel  at 
that  time  in  whose  words  you  could  trace  the  meanings  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  there- 
fore was  it  not  an  attitude  of  the  spirit  of  piety  which  would  say,  ' '  I  cannot  under- 
take this  expedition  alone ;  I  must  be  assured  of  the  presence  of  the  prophetess  of 
the  Lord  "  ?  Is  there  not  piety  in  the  resolution,  "  If  thou  wilt  go  with  me,  then  I 
will  go  "  ?  And  yet,  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  try  and  understand  the  motive  before 
we  declare  whether  it  is  good  or  bad.  "  If  thou  wilt  come  with  me,  then  I  will  go." 
In  what  strain  ought  a  man  to  face  the  obvious  duties  of  life  ?  Is  it  true  that  we 
are  always  to  wait  for  the  assistance  of  others,  or  are  we  bound  to  do  what  lies 
before  us,  regardless  of  the  sympathy  we  may  receive?  The  message  sent  by 
Deborah  was  an  emphatic  message,  "  Go  there  with  ten  thousand  men,  and  I," 
says  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  "  wiU  draw  thy  adversaries  to  the  river  Kishon."  There 
is  not  the  slightest  hint  or  any  suggestion  of  condition ;  it  is  a  plain,  simple,  and 
absolute  order.  The  hour  is  come  ;  the  blow  is  to  be  struck ;  it  is  your  duty  to  do 
it ;  here  are  your  instructions.  You  know  the  class  of  persons  who  are  never  able 
to  do  any  duty  without  the  assistance  of  others  ;  you  know  the  schoolboy  who 
always  does  his  work  when  he  can  get  his  sister  to  stand  beside  him ;  you  know  the 
class  of  man  who  is  always  reluctant  to  quit  with  company  and  undertake  any  irk- 
some duty  by  himself.  He  is  not  the  character  which  impresses  us  as  possessing 
strong,  marked ,  or  admirable  lines.  You  want  some  one  more  determined  and  self- 
relying.  If  a  duty  has  to  be  done,  in  the  name  of  that  duty,  and  in  the  name  of 
your  God  who  gives  you  that  duty,  do  it  like  a  man,  and  do  not  stop  to  make  con- 
ditions which  betray  your  weakness,  and  say,  "  If  this  condition  be  fulfilled,  if  I  am 
assisted  by  the  presence  of  another,  then  I  think  I  can  do  my  duty,  but  I  do  not 
think  I  can  face  the  frowning  face  of  duty  alone."  I  say  this  is  a  character  which 
does  not  possess  the  highest  order  of  self-reliance.  It  is  also  an  answer  which 
betrays  slackness  and  feebleness  of  life.  By  the  very  law  by  which  Israel  was  then 
governed,  by  the  law  of  that  very  religious  sentiment  which  had  been  operating  in 
the  minds  of  the  chosen  people,  one  thought  was  predominant  in  all  their  minds, 
"  The  Lord  is  the  God  of  Israel."  It  is  the  realisation  of  the  Divine  presence,  and 
that  alone,  which  marks  the  higher  range  of  faith  ;  the  power  to  say,  "  I  will  go  in 
His  strength  because  He  sends  me,  and  I  ask  not  Deborah  to  go  with  me  to 
jeopardise  her  life ;  she  has  her  work  to  do  and  I  have  mine  to  do,  and  the  God 
who  inspired  her  can  make  my  hand  strong."  But  what  was  the  result  ?  As  a 
fact  the  victory  was  won  ;  but  you  know  how  truly  the  scorn  of  Deborah  burst  forth 
when  she  received  the  conditions  of  Barak,  "  If  thou  wilt  go  with  me."  "  Then  let 
it  be  known  that  the  laurels  of  this  victory  are  not  for  thy  brow.  If  thou  hast 
thought  that  only  with  a  woman  at  thy  side  thou  canst  face  the  crowning  hour  of 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

battle,  those  honours  which  you  would  boast  are  reserved  for  a  woman.  The  Lord 
shall  sell  Sisera  into  the  hand  of  a  woman."  Barak  sinks  down  into  the  second  place 
in  the  story,  and  the  opportunity  which  might  have  been  his  was  snatched  from  his 
hand,  as  in  the  hour  when  he  was  tested  he  betrayed  weakness.  What,  then,  should 
we  gather  from  this  ?  The  enormous  and  measureless  importance  of  self-reliance 
in  every  affair  of  Hfe.  Life  is  a  constant  movement  from  companionship  into 
isolation.  As  I  pass  through  the  road  of  life  I  have  to  determine  certain  questions, 
and  I  must  determine  them  by  the  law  of  my  own  existence  and  my  own 
conscience  as  in  the  sight  of  God.  Over  and  over  again  we  are  bound  to 
have  that  experience.  We  think  we  have  others  to  help  us  in  certain  matters, 
but  the  final  decision  rests  with  us.  Does  it  not  mean  that  in  the  purposes  of  God 
we  are  to  be  taught  self-reliance  ?  Sometimes  we  are  told  that  Christianity  is 
deficient  in  the  virile  virtues.  That  is  only  because  we  have  misunderstood  the 
story.  What  is  the  story  of  the  Redeemer?  Is  it  the  story  of  one  who  relied  so 
completely  upon  others  that  by  a  dexterous  adjustment  of  His  teaching  to  the  wants 
of  the  day  He  was  able  so  to  establish  His  ascendancy  over  others  as  to  be  able  to 
bring  forward  a  community  willing  to  be  called  by  His  name  ?  That  is  the  very 
reverse  of  the  genesis  of  Christianity.  [Bp.  Boyd  Carpenter.)  Influence  : — 
Every  human  being  has  influence,  which  is  a  part  of  himself,  and  helps  to  make 
up  his  personal  being.  And  as  long  as  he  lives  it  goes  out  from  him  to  others,  for 
weal  or  for  woe.  Nay,  more ;  it  is  not  limited  to  time.  Once  having  lived,  it  never 
dies.  For  the  individual  may  go  down  to  the  tomb  and  perish  ;  but  his  influence 
shall  go  on  evermore.  I.  We  ake  accountable  for  our  influence.  This  is  evident 
from  the  very  nature  of  influence.  What  is  it  ?  It  is  power  ;  the  power  of  one  will 
over  another.  This  power  and  authority  go  forth  from  us  to  others  in  various  ways 
— in  speech,  by  action,  by  the  glance  of  the  eye,  by  the  expression  of  feeling,  by  the 
show  of  passion,  by  the  play  of  the  countenance,  by  the  motion  of  the  hand,  by  our 
dress,  our  habits,  our  style  of  living,  and  our  conduct.  And  now  I  ask^f  I  cause 
a  man  to  do  an  act,  am  I  not  responsible,  i.e.,  so  far  forth  as  I  lead  him  to  do  it  ? 
Of  course  I  am  not  to  bear  the  entire  burden  of  his  conduct,  for  he  is  a  man  as  well 
as  I,  and  he  is  bound  to  think  and  judge  for  himself.  But  if  I  am  the  stronger, 
more  controlling  character,  and  use  my  influence  to  guide  him  astray,  and  start 
him  on  his  way  to  ruin,  surely  I  am  responsible  for  what  I  do.  But  it  is  manifest 
that  this  principle  is  not  one  that  is  local,  partial,  or  limited.  It  is  a  broad,  general, 
universal  principle ;  pertaining  to  souls  under  all  circumstances.  And  see  how  it 
reaches  our  fellow-creatures  on  every  side,  with  awful  significance  and  tremendous 
power.  I  am  responsible  for  my  influence  ;  I  am  held  accountable  by  the  Almighty 
for  the  way  in  which  I  affect  and  prompt  the  souls  of  my  fellow-men.  Then  I  am 
responsible  for  my  influence  upon  you.  Then  you  are  responsible  for  your  influence 
upon  me ;  and  each  and  every  one  of  us  is  responsible  for  the  influence  we  exert 
upon  our  neighbours.  Then  we  are  responsible  for  the  channels  by  which  our 
influence  goes  forth  from  us  to  others.  And  we  are  responsible  for  their  outflow- 
ings  ;  and  though  the  influence  of  a  man  differs  somewhat,  in  kind,  from  his  specific 
acts,  yet  the  law  of  Divine  justice  comes  in  here,  with  the  same  force  and  authority 
as  in  any  outward  deed.  II.  The  measure  of  our  responsibility  is  proportioned 
TO  OUR  INFLUENCE.  Herein  lies  our  stewardship.  We  are  stewards  of  God  in  the 
particular  item  of  influence.  A  little  girl  is  beloved  by  her  schoolmate ;  and  so 
great  power  has  she  over  her,  that  that  schoolmate  will  do  anything  she  wants  her 
to  do,  good  or  bad.  She  is  responsible  for  her  control  over  that  child's  soul,  and  to 
God.  They  are  both  responsible  for  the  power  they  possess,  the  one  over  the  other. 
Here  is  a  man  in  a  community,  of  such  commanding  power,  whether  through 
wealth,  talent,  or  character,  that  everybody  quotes  him  as  authority,  and  aims  to 
follow  in  his  track.  As  sure  as  God  liveth.  He  will  hold  him  responsible  for  his 
popularity  and  his  power.     IH.  Influence  is  an  awful,  a  perilous  thing  when  it 

ASSUMES  THE  FORM  AND  PROPORTIONS  OF  MASTERY  AND   CONTROL.       And  this  is  oftCH  the 

case.  The  mass  of  men,  the  world  over,  are  governed  by  opinion  and  example. 
Imitation,  too,  is  a  most  powerful  agent  in  deciding  the  convictions  and  habits  of 
men.  No  doubt  it  is  God's  will  that  certain  prominent  men  should  have  authorita- 
tive influence  ;  that  is  their  calling ;  to  that  they  are  elected  by  the  Almighty 
Himself,  to  the  end  that  they  may  help  to  quicken  inferior  wills,  and  to  decide 
human  destinies.  Thus  in  the  family  relation  the  words  of  a  father  or  mother  go 
with  children  to  mature  manhood,  and  may  descend  to  children's  children.  How 
in  our  school-days  our  hearts  have  become  knit  "as  with  hooks  of  steel"  to  com- 
panions whom  we  have  loved  as  Jonathan  loved  David,  with  a  "  love  passing  the 


CHAP.  IT.]  JUDGES.  55 

love  of  women."  I  have  myself  seen  men  moving  about  through  a  nation,  after 
whom  millions  of  men  flowed  as  with  the  mighty  current  of  a  torrent ;  and  when 
they  spoke,  momentous  questions  were  settled,  as  though  decisive  utterances  had 
come  forth  from  an  oracle  or  a  god.  But  the  illustrations  of  this  controlling 
influence  of  men  is  as  common  in  the  lowher  spheres  of  life  as  in  the  highex-. 
Sometimes  a  grand,  noble  parent  serves  his  generation  and  blesses  it,  and  then 
sends  down  the  crystal  purity  of  his  honour  and  the  odour  of  his  sanctity  to 
children's  children.  Sometimes  it  is  the  reverse,  and  the  alcoholic  blood  and  the 
alcohohc  breath  of  a  drunkard  triumphs  over  the  dominion  of  the  grave,  and  reaches 
over  a  whole  generation  of  men  to  his  descendants,  poisoning  the  atmosphere  and 
polluting  society  by  the  sottishness  of  sons  and  grandsons.  {A.  Crummell.)  la 
not  the  Lord  gone  out  before  thee  ? — A  sermon  for  the  new  year  : — Wherever  we 
may  be  called  upon  to  go,  our  Lord  has  gone  before  us.  L  We  ake  enteking  into 
DAKKNESS.  God  is  light.  What  does  it  matter  what  we  see,  or  whether  we  see  at 
all,  if  He  has  seen  and  known  that  the  way  is  safe  ?  II.  We  aee  entering  upon 
UNCEKTAiNTY.  But  all  things  are  fixed  and  ordered  by  God's  power,  and  from 
knowledge.  III.  We  are  entering  upon  DimcuLTT.  God  is  almighty  in  power. 
IV,  We  are  to  meet  with  pain  and  death.  God  cannot  die.  Learn  :  1.  To  distrust 
all  human  help  and  consolation.  2.  To  trust  in  Him  who  is  so  well  able  to  do  for 
us,  and  to  be  to  us  aU  we  need.  3.  To  implicitly  foUow  and  confidently  resign  our- 
selves to  His  leadership.    (Homilist.) 

Vers.  18-24.  Jael  went  out  to  meet  Sisera. — Life's  crises: — Emphatically  are 
we  reminded  that  life  continually  brings  us  to  sudden  moments  in  which  we  must 
act  without  time  for  careful  reflection,  the  spirit  of  our  past  flashing  out  in  some 
quick  deed  or  word  of  fate.  Sisera's  past  drove  him  in  panic  over  the  hills  to 
Zaanaim.  Jael's  past  came  with  her  to  the  door  of  the  tent ;  and  the  two  as 
they  looked  at  each  other  in  that  tragic  moment  were  at  one,  without  warning,  in  a 
crisis  for  which  every  thought  and  passion  of  years  had  made  a  way.  Here  the 
self -pampering  of  a  vain  man  had  its  issue.  Here  the  woman,  undisciphned, 
impetuous,  catching  sight  of  the  means  to  do  a  deed,  moves  to  the  fatal  stroke  like 
one  possessed.  It  is  the  sort  of  thing  we  often  call  madness,  and  yet  such  insanity 
is  but  the  expression  of  what  men  and  women  choose  to  be  capable  of.  The  casual 
allowance  of  an  impulse  here,  a  craving  there,  seems  to  mean  little  until  the 
occasion  comes  when  their  accumulated  force  is  sharply  or  terribly  revealed.  The 
laxity  of  the  past  thus  declares  itself ;  and  on  the  other  hand  there  is  often  a 
gathering  of  good  to  a  moment  of  revelation.  The  soul  that  has  for  long  years 
fortified  itself  in  pious  courage,  in  patient  well-doing,  in  high  and  noble  thought, 
leaps  one  day,  to  its  own  surprise,  to  the  height  of  generous  daring  or  heroic  truth. 
We  determine  the  issue  of  crises  which  we  cannot  foresee.  (R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.) 
Jael  and  Sisera  : — "  What  then  1  "  might  we,  upon  the  first  cursory  perusal  of  this 
narrative,  be  inclined  to  exclaim.  "  Has  the  all  pure  and  all  holy  Jehovah  belied 
His  unspeakable  attributes,  has  He  laid  aside  His  thunder,  and  renounced  those 
direful  visitations  which,  by  the  mouth  of  His  servant  Moses,  He  had  threatened 
against  the  wilful  shedder  of  man's  blood  ?  Why  are  the  rights  of  hospitality,  so 
jealously  hedged  in,  in  the  Mosaic  law,  and  so  sacredly  observed  in  many  previous 
instances  (as  in  the  preservation  of  his  guest  by  the  besieged  Lot  and  the  sparing 
of  the  Gibeonites  by  the  deceived  yet  forbearing  Joshua),  why  are  these  rights, 
here  first,  with  impunity  violated  ?  "  I.  The  whole  of  the  Canaanitish  nations  had 
long  since  by  their  idolatrous  iniquities  and  abounding  profligacy  and  wickedness, 
merited  the  condemnation  and  fiery  wrath  of  Jehovah,  which  had  indeed  been 
denounced  against  them  unambiguously  by  the  mouth  of  Moses  on  the  other  side 
of  Jordan  in  the  wilderness.  No  one  who  has  read  the  intimations  of  their  guilt 
in  the  Book  of  Leviticus  can  question  for  one  moment  the  justice  of  the  Almighty 
in  blotting  them  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  Jabin,  king  of  Canaan,  trusted  in  the 
number  and  weight  of  his  iron  chariots,  and  in  the  almost  countless  host  of  his 
armed  men.  The  God  of  Israel  designed,  therefore,  to  humble  him  to  the  dust  by 
scattering  his  forces  before  the  resolute  assault  of  but  a  few  ill-equipped  Israehtes, 
while  He  would  sell  the  mighty  leader  of  aU  this  armament  into  the  hands  of  a 
weak  and  unarmed  woman.  Thus  would  He  teach  the  rebellious  nations  to  '*  put 
not  their  strength  in  horses,  nor  in  the  sons  of  men,"  but  to  fear  and  reverence  the 
one  true  and  only  God,  the  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of  kings— the  fearful  God  of 
Sabaoth.  II.  The  Scripture  narrative  simply  details  the  progress  of  these 
wonderful  events  for  our  warning  and  exhortation,  bat  not  necessarily  for  our 

24 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

example.  It  would  be  as  reasonable  to  assert  that,  because  in  the  book  of  God's 
revealed  truth  we  read  of  the  cruelty  of  Saul  and  the  transgression  of  David,  that 
therefore  we  are  to  imitate  them  in  their  wickedness,  as  to  infer  from  this  history 
of  the  slaughter  of  Sisera  that  hence  treachery  is  allowable.  Jael's  conduct, 
like  that  of  the  unjust  steward  in  the  parable,  is  commended  to  our  notice — not  for 
imitation,  but  for  warning.  (jF.  F.  Statham,  B.A.)  The  defence  and  example  of 
Jael: — If  Jael  received  Sisera  into  her  tent  with  the  intention  of  murdering  him, 
she  must  be  left  to  the  execrations  of  posterity.  But  there  are,  we  think,  plain  and 
straightforward  reasons  from  which  to  infer  that  Jael  had  no  design  of  killing 
Sisera — that  she  acted,  therefore,  with  perfect  honesty,  and  not  with  atrocious 
duplicity,  when  she  offered  him  shelter.  What  likelihood  is  there  that  Jael 
proposed  to  murder  Sisera  ?  He  was  not  her  enemy,  for  there  was  peace  between 
her  husband's  family  and  the  Canaanites.  She  had  nothing  to  gain  by  his  death ; 
and  if  she  had,  she  needed  only  to  refuse  him  a  shelter.  The  enemy  was  in 
pursuit,  and  would  quickly  have  overtaken  the  fugitive.  Had  she  wished  his  death 
ever  so  much,  she  had  nothing  more  to  do  than  to  leave  him  to  his  fate.  He  was 
a  doomed  man,  and  there  was  no  necessity  that  she  should  endanger  herself  to 
ensure  his  destruction ;  for  let  it  be  well  observed  that  the  killing  of  Sisera  was  a 
most  dangerous  undertaking  for  a  lonely  woman.  Whatever  account  may  be  given 
of  her  subsequent  conduct,  the  only  candid  construction  to  be  put  on  this  part  of 
the  narrative  is  that  Jael  was  thoroughly  sincere  in  offering  an  asylum  to  Sisera — 
that  it  was  not  with  the  language  of  deceit,  nor  in  order  to  cloak  a  bloody  purpose, 
but  simply  in  truthfulness  of  heart,  and  with  the  earnest  desire  of  succouring  a 
distressed  man,  that  she  invited  the  fugitive  into  her  tent,  covered  him  with  a 
mantle,  and  refreshed  him  with  milk.  " Nevertheless,"  you  will  say,  "she  killed 
Sisera ;  whether  premeditated  or  not,  the  murder  was  committed.  What  is  to  be 
urged  in  extenuation  of  so  barbarous  a  deed?"  This  brings  us  to  examine  by 
what  motives  Jael  was  instigated,  or  on  what  principles  she  acted  in  putting  to 
death  her  slumbering  guest.  We  reckon  it  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  her 
conduct,  and  one  which  removes  every  difficulty,  that  she  was  led  by  a  Divine 
impulse,  or  in  obedience  to  a  Divine  command,  to  take  away  Sisera's  life.  She 
had  probably  acted  from  her  natural  feeUng  when  offering  shelter  to  the  fugitive 
and  giving  most  hospitable  entertainment.  We  only  think  it  a  kindly  part  that 
she  should  go  out  to  meet  Sisera  in  his  distress,  and  endeavour  to  shield  him  from 
further  injury ;  but  when  the  deep  slumber  was  on  him  there  came  an  intimation 
to  Jael,  I  cannot  tell  you  how  conveyed — but  certainly  in  such  a  manner  as  that 
there  could  be  no  doubt  of  its  origin — an  intimation  from  God  that  her  guest  must 
die,  and  that,  too,  by  her  hand.  And  if  such  were  the  case,  again  we  remind  you 
that  nothing  but  a  Divine  command  will  explain  a  Divine  approval.  If  such  were 
the  case,  we  challenge  you  to  find  in  all  the  annals  of  Scripture  a  mightier  display 
of  the  power  of  faith  than  was  exhibited  by  Jael.  What  if  Sisera  should  awake 
just  in  time  to  discover  and  defeat  the  murderous  design  1  It  was  Ukely.  He 
seemed  indeed  in  deep  sleep,  but  fresh  as  he  was  from  battle,  his  brain  must  have 
been  full  of  confused  imagery,  and  the  least  noise  must  startle  him  as  though  his 
foes  were  at  the  door ;  and  she  having  but  a  woman's  hand  and  a  woman's 
strength — shall  she  dare  to  attempt  the  naUing  the  sleeping  warrior  to  the  earth  ? 
Will  not  her  courage  fail  her  at  the  most  critical  moment,  when  there  is  enough 
done  to  arouse  Sisera,  but  not  to  overcome?  Besides,  why  must  she  be  the 
executioner  ?  There  was  little  probability  that  Sisera  could  escape ;  in  a  short 
time  the  pursuers  would  arrive,  and  then  the  fate  of  Sisera  could  be  sealed  without 
her  interference.  We  will  believe  that  thoughts  such  as  these  crowded  into  Jael's 
mind ;  we  can  believe  that  it  was  a  moment  of  terrible  perplexity  when  she  felt 
that  she  had  received  a  commission  from  God,  and  considered  the  fearfulness  and 
the  peril  of  its  execution.  There  must  have  been  the  natural  shrinking  from  the 
shedding  of  blood ;  there  must  have  come  the  cutting  reflection  that  Sisera  was  her 
guest,  and  that  she  was  pledged  to  his  defence ;  there  must  have  been  dread  of  his 
revenge  if  she  should  betray  her  cause  in  its  execution ;  but  the  faith  of  this 
woman  triumphed  over  aU  that  is  most  calculated  to  confound  and  dismay  her. 
There  is  yet  another  question,  which  will,  perhaps,  suggest  itself  to  your  minds  as 
full  of  great  importance  as  those  already  considered.  You  may,  perhaps,  now  be 
disposed  to  allow  the  great  probability,  if  not  the  certainty,  that  Jael  acted  on  a 
Divine  command,  conveyed  to  her  after  Sisera  had  been  admitted  into  the  tent, 
and  you  may  on  this  account  acquit  her  of  any  charge  of  treachery  or  cruelty. 
Then  you  will  ask,  how  it  could  be  consistent  with  the  character  of  God  to  issue 


CHAP.  IV.]  JUDGES.  67 

8uch  a  command  ?  Since  murder  is  a  crime  •which  is  expressly  forbidden,  with 
■what  propriety  could  He  enjoin  its  perpetration  ?  Now,  just  think  !  No  one  would 
have  felt  any  surprise  had  Sisera  perished  in  the  battle.  He  was  the  oppressor  of 
the  Lord's  people :  what  marvel,  then,  that  he  should  be  overtaken  by  vengeance  ? 
Thus  also  with  the  Canaanites ;  their  wickedness  marked  them  out  for  exter- 
mination, just  as  did  that  of  the  unbelief  of  the  world  before  the  flood  came ;  so 
that  if  in  place  of  employing  the  sword  of  the  Israelites,  God  had  employed  a 
deluge,  or  a  pestilence,  we  should  not  have  had  a  word  to  say,  but  must  have 
admitted  the  justice  of  His  ridding  the  land  of  those  by  whom  it  was  profaned. 
And  could  either  Jael  or  the  Israelites  be  charged  with  murder  in  performing  by 
Divine  command  a  just  though  severe  action  ?  They  were  only  the  executioners  of 
a  righteous  sentence  :  could  they  on  that  account  contract  guiltiness  ?  Why,  when 
the  law  of  the  land  has  condemned  a  man  to  death,  who  thinks  of  charging  the 
executioner  with  murder,  because  he  is  instrumental  in  executing  the  penalties  of 
that  law  ?  Indeed,  he  has  not  actually  invaded  and  rifled  the  sanctuary  of  life,  as 
a  midnight  assassin  who  steals  on  his  victim,  and  leaves  him  weltering  in  his 
blood  ;  but  because  a  competent  authority  has  directed  him  to  inflict  death,  he  is 
no  murderer,  but  only  an  obedient  servant  of  the  State  when  he  takes  the  life  of  a 
feUow-man.  And  now  having  vindicated  Jael,  we  shall  not  hesitate  to  go  further, 
and  hold  her  forth  as  an  example  which  it  should  be  your  endeavour  to  imitate. 
We  do  not  merely  mean  that  having  displayed  strong  faith,  and  obeyed  the  law, 
when  obedience  was  beyond  measure  difficult,  she  has  left  a  pattern  to  be  followed 
by  all  who  are  summoned  to  special  difficulties  and  sacrifices  in  the  service  of  God ; 
over  and  above  this,  the  case  of  Jael  and  Sisera  has  a  peculiar  similarity  to  many 
— ^yea,  even  aU — amongst  yourselves,  who  are  required  by  God  to  inflict  death  where 
they  have  offered  hospitality.  Tea,  if  it  be  the  Scriptural  demand  that  we 
"  crucify  " — "  crucify  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts  " — oh,  then,  there  is  a 
vast  similarity  between  our  own  case  and  that  of  Jael.  We  too  must  put  to  death 
the  enemy  whom  we  have  cherished  and  received.  We  too  must  determine  that 
we  wiU  act  the  executioner  where  we  have  been  the  patron  and  the  host.  We  too 
must  be  ready  to  strike  down  that  which  we  have  embraced,  and  pierce  that  which 
we  have  admitted  not  only  into  the  tent,  but  into  the  heart.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
Jael,  a  type  of  the  unscrupulous  helpers  of  a  good  cause : — Long  has  the  error 
prevailed  that  religion  can  be  helped  by  using  the  world's  weapons,  by  acting  in  the 
temper  and  spirit  of  the  world.  Of  that  mischievous  falsehood  have  been  born  all 
the  pride  and  vainglory,  the  rivakies  and  persecutions  that  darken  the  past  of 
Christendom,  surviving  in  strange  and  pitiful  forms  to  the  present  day.  If  we 
shudder  at  the  treachery  in  the  deed  of  Jael,  what  shall  we  say  of  that  which 
through  many  a  year  sent  victims  to  inquisition,  dungeons,  and  to  the  stake  in  the 
name  of  Christ  ?  And  what  shall  we  say  now  of  that  moral  assassination  which  in 
one  tent  and  another  is  thought  no  sin  against  humanity,  but  a  service  of  God  ? 
Among  us  are  too  many  who  suffer  wounds  keen  and  festering  that  have  been  given 
in  the  house  of  their  friends,  yea,  in  the  name  of  the  one  Lord  and  Master.  The 
battle  of  truth  is  a  frank  and  honourable  fight,  served  at  no  point  by  what  is  false 
or  proud  or  low.  To  an  enemy  a  Christian  should  be  chivalrous,  and  surely  no 
less  to  a  brother.  Granting  that  a  man  is  in  error,  he  needs  a  physician,  not  an 
executioner ;  he  needs  an  example,  not  a  dagger.  How  much  farther  do  we  get  by 
the  methods  of  opprobrium  and  cruelty,  the  innuendo  and  the  whisper  of 
suspicion?  Besides,  it  is  not  the  Siseras  to-day  who  are  dealt  with  after  this 
manner.  It  is  the  "  schismatic  "  within  the  camp  on  whom  some  Jael  falls  with 
a  hammer  and  a  nail.  If  a  Church  cannot  stand  by  itself,  approved  to  the 
consciences  of  men,  it  certainly  wiU  not  be  helped  by  a  return  to  the  temper  of 
barbarism  and  the  craft  of  the  world  (2  Cor.  x.  4).  (R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)  Sin 
tlain : — If  the  story  of  the  world's  sufferings  under  different  tyrants  could  all  be 
written,  there  would  be  no  man  found  who  would  be  capable  of  reading  it.  I 
believe  that  even  the  despots  themselves,  who  have  committed  the  atrocities  to 
which  I  refer,  would  not  be  sufficiently  cold-blooded  to  sit  down  and  read  the 
account  of  the  agonies  which  their  ovra  victims  have  endured.  I  have  been  struck 
in  passing  through  many  lands  with  the  horrible  sufferings  which  in  the  olden 
times  were  endured  by  the  poor  at  the  hands  of  the  rich  kings  and  lords  who  were 
their  oppressors.  In  almost  every  town  in  which  you  enter,  you  either  have  shown 
to  you  the  rack,  the  dark  dungeon,  the  thumb-screw,  or  the  infernal  machine,  or 
instruments  too  horrible  to  describe — that  make  one's  blood  run  chill  at  the  very 
thought  and  sight  of  them.    Sin  has  brought  more  plagues  upon  this  earth  than  aU 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

the  eartt's  tyrants.     I.  First  let  us  try  to  picture  the  sutoeb  growing  rrNEASY 

UNDER  THE   YOKE   OF    HIS    SINS,   AND     PLANNING  A   REVOLT     AGAINST    HIS    OPPRESSORS. 

It  is  said  that  when  a  man  is  born  a  slave,  slavery  is  not  near  so  irksome  as  when 
he  has  once  been  free.  You  will  have  found  it,  perhaps,  in  birds  and  such 
animals  that  we  keep  under  our  control.  If  they  have  never  known  what  it  is  to 
fly  to  and  fro  in  the  air  from  tree  to  tree,  they  are  happy  in  the  cage ;  but  if,  after 
having  once  seen  the  world,  and  floated  in  the  clear  air,  they  are  condemned  to  live 
in  slavery,  they  are  far  less  content.  This  is  the  case  with  man — he  is  born  a 
slave.  Until  the  Spirit  of  God  comes  into  the  heart — so  strange  is  the  use  of 
nature — we  live  contented  in  our  chains  ;  we  walk  up  and  down  our  dungeon,  and 
think  we  are  at  large.  It  is  one  of  the  first  marks  of  Divine  life  when  we  grow 
discontented  and  begin  to  fight  against  sin.  11.  And  now  we  have  the  second 
picture — the  sinner  having  gone  to  war  with  his  own  sins  has,  to  a  great 
EXTENT,  BY  God's  GRACE,  OVERCOME  THEM  j  but  he  fcels  whcu  this  is  doue,  that  it 
is  not  enough,  that  external  morality  will  not  save  the  souL  Like  Barak,  he  has 
conquered  Sisera ;  but,  not  content  with  seeing  him  flee  away  on  his  feet,  he  wants 
to  have  his  dead  body  before  him.  Rest  not  content  till  the  blood  of  thine  enemy 
stain  the  ground,  until  he  be  crushed,  and  dead,  and  slain.  Oh,  sinner,  I  beseech 
thee  never  be  content  until  grace  reign  in  thy  heart,  and  sin  be  altogether  subdued. 
Indeed,  this  is  what  every  renewed  soul  longs  for,  and  must  long  for,  nor  will  it 
rest  satisfied  until  all  this  shall  be  accomplished.  III.  I  stand  at  the  door  to-day, 
not  of  a  tent,  but  of  a  tomb,  and  as  I  stand  her^  I  say  to  the  sinner  who  is  anxious 
to  know  how  his  sins  may  be  killed,  how  his  corruption  may  be  slain,  "  Come,  and 
I  will  show  thee  the  man  whom  thou  seekest,  and  when  you  shall  come  in,  you 

SHALL   SEE   YOUR   SINS   LYING   DEAD,    AND   THE  NAILS  IN  THEIR   TEMPLES."      Sinner,  tho 

sin  thou  dreadest  is  forgiven,  thou  hast  wept  sore  before  God,  and  thou  hast  cast 
thyself  on  Christ  and  on  Christ  alone.  In  the  name  of  Him  who  is  the  Eternal 
God  I  assure  thee  that  thy  sins  are  all  forgiven.  Further— dost  thou  ask  where 
thy  sin  is  ?  I  teU  thee  thy  sin  is  gone,  so  that  it  never  can  be  recalled.  Thou  art 
so  forgiven  that  thy  sins  can  never  have  a  resurrection.  The  nail  is  not  driven 
through  the  hands  of  thy  sins,  but  through  their  temples.  The  spear  that  pierced 
the  Saviour's  heart  pierced  the  heart  of  thine  iniquity ;  the  grave  in  which  He  was 
buried  was  the  tomb  of  all  thy  sins ;  and  His  resurrection  was  the  resurrection  of 
thy  spirit  to  light  and  joy  unspeakable.  God  forbid  we  should  ever  glory  in  sin, 
but  it  is  a  theme  for  joy  to  a  Christian  when  he  can  look  upon  his  sins  drowned 
in  the  blood  of  Jesus.  (C.  H.  Spur g eon.)  Jael's  deed: — When  Jael  received 
him,  she  did  so  no  doubt  in  good  faith,  nor  had  she  heard  of  his  overwhelming 
disaster.  She  would  be  only  too  ready  to  afford  shelter  to  the  proudest  warrior  of 
those  regions.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  while  he  was  sleeping  she  began  to  reflect 
upon  the  strangeness  of  his  being  in  a  condition  to  need  such  succour,  and  that 
from  fugitives  and  others  passing  by  she  learned  the  story  of  that  eventful  day. 
She  found  that  it  was  no  longer  a  victor,  but  a  baffled  and  helpless  fugitive,  who 
lay  in  her  tent.  She  probably  had  a  dim  idea  also  of  his  character,  as  an  enemy 
of  the  God  of  heaven  whom  the  Israelites  worshipped.  A  sudden  impulse  seized 
her ;  she  would  despatch  him  as  he  lay.  Was  he  not  the  worst  of  oppressors  ? 
Did  he  deserve  to  live  ?  Besides,  the  cries  of  the  pursuers  already  echo  through 
the  mountains,  and  their  weapons  flash  amid  the  foliage.  The  wretched  Sisera  is 
too  exhausted  to  offer  a  dangerous  resistance.  She  enters  the  apartment  and 
strikes  him.  He  staggers  up ;  then  in  a  swoon  he  falls  at  her  feet.  An  iron  tent- 
pin,  to  which  the  cords  of  the  tent  were  fastened,  is  in  her  hand,  and  a  maUet. 
She  drives  the  iron  pin  through  his  temples  into  the  earth,  with  a  blow  given  in  the 
superhuman  strength  of  frenzied  excitement.  Then  voices  are  heard  in  the  forest. 
The  pursuers  have  come  up ;  it  is  Barak  himself  (ver.  22).  The  whole  story 
appears  perfectly  natural ;  nor  is  there  any  need  for  the  supposition  of  Jael  acting 
under  a  Divine  impulse  or  a  special  Divine  commission.  Her  act  was  dictated  as 
much  by  self-interest  as  by  any  other  motive.  It  was  a  moment  of  wild  excite- 
ment, and  cannot  be  judged  by  the  rules  of  our  peaceable  and  decorous  time.  If  in 
the  great  Indian  mutiny  we  had  heard  of  Nana  Sahib  having  been  entrapped  and 
killed  by  some  wild  woman  of  a  wandering  tribe,  the  public  opinion  of  England 
would  not  have  scrutinised  too  closely  the  morality  of  the  action,  in  its  joy  at  being 
rid  of  the  most  infamous  of  murderers.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  eulogy  pronounced  by 
Deborah  which  has  constituted  the  difficulty.  And  a  difficulty  it  must  always 
remain  to  those  who  believe  that  every  word  uttered  by  those  who  of  old  had  the 
name  and  rank  of  prophets  is  a  direct  utterance  of  the  Divine  will,     The  difficulty, 


CHAP.  IT.]  JUDGES.  69 

however,  disappears  if  we  view  the  splendid  ode  of  Deborah  as  being  included  by 
the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God  among  the  records  of  His  ancient  Church,  and 
as  expressing  the  feelings  of  an  Israelite  patriot  of  that  day.  The  holiest  and  most 
devout  of  the  Church  of  that  age  would  respond  to  Deborah's  language.  Whether 
Buch  sentiments  would  be  appropriate  in  our  own  day  is  not  in  question :  we 
believe  in  the  doctrine  and  in  the  fact  of  progressive  light.     (L.  H.  Wiseman,  M.A.) 

Ver.  20.  Thou  slialt  say,  No. — Thou  shalt  say,  No : — ^A  human  being  has  his 
destiny,  in  some  measure,  in  his  own  hands,  depending  on  his  own  voluntary 
determinations.  We  cannot  define  exactly  the  limits  of  the  province  of  free-will, 
but  that  it  has  a  province,  and  an  important  one,  all  consciousness  attests.  It 
is  true  that  man,  like  the  animals  and  the  vegetables,  is  subject  to  those  laws 
of  his  being  which  he  had  no  choice  in  enacting,  and  to  the  outside 
influences  which  he  does  not  invite,  and  they  must  needs  go  far  towards  deciding 
his  character.  But  not  exclusively.  He  can  enact  laws  for  himself,  impose  actions 
upon  himself,  and,  what  it  is  our  business  to  consider  now,  he  possesses  a  certain 
qualified,  but  real  veto-power.  He  can,  to  a  large  extent,  not  suppress,  but  repress 
and  hold  in  check,  some  of  the  laws  and  tendencies  and  demands  of  his  own  nature. 
And  he  can,  in  a  degree,  reject  outside  influences  and  solicitations,  push  them 
aside,  defy  them,  avert  them.  He  can  veto  them,  can  say  "  No  "  to  them.  And 
according  as  he  says  it,  and  says  it  on  right  occasions,  says  it  promptly,  decisively, 
he  maintains  the  splendid  self-sovereiguty  of  manhood.  A  brave,  frequent,  and 
absolute  exercise  of  the  veto-power  with  which  he  is  endowed,  is  one  of  the  fixed 
conditions  of  success  and  honour  in  the  world,  of  self-respect  and  dignity  of 
character,  of  harmony  with  God  and  the  happiness  of  life.     I.  The  exercise  of  this 

BtJPREME    POWEB   IN   REFERENCE    TO    THE    TENDENCIES    AND   INCLINATIONS    WITHIN    ONE'S 

BELF.  There  are  tendencies  and  appetites  in  every  man  which,  if  allowed  a  free 
course  and  full  swing,  would  drag  him  in  the  mire  and  hurry  him  to  his  ruin. 
The  meanest  of  them  has  slain  its  thousands.  So  mean  and  paltry  an  appetite  aa 
that  for  stimulating  drink  counts  its  victims  by  millions,  and  our  nature  is  largely 
made  up  of  such  dangerous  proclivities,  some  inborn  and  some  acquired.  There 
is  in  man,  also,  a  certain  inscrutable,  central  authority,  the  mysterious  Ego,  the 
indefinable  "  I  myself,"  whose  office  is  to  watch  over  these  necessary  but  dangerous 
members  of  the  internal  commonwealth,  and  keep  them  to  their  limits,  and  say, 
"  No  "  to  each  and  all  their  demands  for  undue  power  and  over-indulgence.  No 
man  can  live  at  all  without  exerting  this  power  at  some  points  ;  and  no  man  can 
live  nobly,  and  to  the  highest  purposes  of  his  being,  without  exerting  it  constantly, 
at  all  points,  and  with  absolute  supremacy.  In  the  biographies  of  all  persons 
eminent  for  character  and  achievement,  you  will  notice  how  they  have  striven  to 
acquire  perfectly  this  form  of  self-mastery.  What  ingenious  devices  and  shrewd 
practices  they  have  resorted  to,  to  this  end.  In  some  ages,  what  fasts  and  penances 
and  seclusions  and  all  forms  of  asceticisms,  and  in  all  ages  what  vigorous  efforts, 
what  watchfulness,  and  what  contrivances  and  habits  of  self-discipline,  whereby 
they  might  be  able  with  promptitude  and  effect  to  say  "  No  "  to  any  tendency  that 
is  getting  too  strong,  and  any  desire  that  is  too  clamorous !  And  success  in  that 
is  their  salvation,  the  open  secret  of  their  success  in  their  high  aims,  and  the  glory 
of  their  lives.  II.  The  circumstances  and  events  arotjnd  us.  These  are  veiy 
powerful,  seemingly  irresistible  often.  They  claim  to  take  full  possession  of  a  man, 
to  carry  him  whither  they  will,  and  make  of  him  what  they  will.  They  seem  to 
say  to  him,  "  We  are  a  part  of  the  irresistible  order  of  nature ;  we  move  according  to 
the  eternal  laws  ;  we  represent  the  forces  of  the  universe ;  we  come  backed  by  the 
omnipotence  of  the  Creator.  What  can  you,  poor,  puny  mortal,  do  in  resistance 
to  our  overwhelming  might  ?  A  pitiful  speck  of  being  as  you  are,  an  evanescent 
bubble  on  this  vast  sea  of  matter  and  force,  what  is  there  for  you  but  to  drift 
whithersoever  we  may  carry  you,  and  sink  whei'e  we  drop  you  ?"  But  not  so,  thou 
majestic  universe,  bearing  upon  man  as  you  do  with  all  your  infinite  might  in 
the  events  and  circumstances  around  us — not  so  !  The  soul  in  man,  that  mysterious 
essence,  whose  very  existence  you  bring  into  question,  is  in  its  rightful  province  a 
match  for  you,  can  resist  you,  set  you  aside,  say  "No"  to  you,  and  in  the  ethereal, 
Godlike  power  it  is  endowed  with,  and  with  the  humility  of  a  little  child,  make 
good  its  audacious  defiance.  The  brave  but  wary  seaman  knows  the  tremendous 
power  of  an  adverse  wind,  a  power  that  nothing  can  withstand,  knows  it  and 
respects  it,  yet  he  is  master  of  the  situation.  He  can  anchor  in  the  roadstead,  and 
look  the  very  hurricane  in  the  face,  and  let  it  blow.    He  will  not  budge.    He  can 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

wait.  That  force  -will  be  spent  before  his  will  be.  He  will  yet  lay  his  course 
right  along  the  pathway  of  the  storm,  and  he  does,  and  makes  his  voyage  trium- 
phantly. Or  in  another  case  he  refuses  to  drift  with  it.  He  will  move  right  on 
against  the  opposing  force,  and  never  stop  a  moment,  nor  furl  his  sails  ;  he  must 
beat,  go  zigzag,  tediously,  but  he  gets  on  against  it,  and  if  need  be,  he  will  make 
the  entire  Atlantic  voyage  without  one  favourable  breeze,  with  hard  struggles  but 
no  yielding,  delayed  but  not  defeated.  So  in  aU  human  life.  The  power  of 
circumstances  must  be  respected,  and  dealt  with  vaUantly  but  warily.  The  true 
man  will  accommodate  himself  to  them,  and  yet  refuse  to  drift  with  them ;  nay, 
will  circumvent  them,  outwatch  them,  and  make  them  serve  his  purpose.  They 
may  delay  him,  but  not  turn  him  back ;  discourage  him,  but  not  pluck  heart  of  hope 
out  of  him.  They  may  change  his  direction,  but  not  stop  his  progress.  They  may 
change  the  form  of  his  duty,  but  cannot  hinder  doing.  They  may  combine  to 
tempt  and  assail  his  integrity  or  purity,  but  if  he  say  in  God's  name,  "  No !  "  they 
cannot  touch  it.  HI.  It  is  most  practical  to  consider  the  exekcise  of  this 
VETO-POWER  in  REFUSING  THE  REQUESTS  OF  OTHER  PERSONS.  There  are  always 
about  us  those  who  ask  us  or  propose  to  us  to  do  things  that  we  ought  not  or  had 
better  not  do.  And  such  is  the  strength  of  the  social  tie,  and  so  potent  the 
influence  of  another's  desire,  that  there  is  always  a  disposition  to  comply,  and  an 
amiable  disposition  it  is  in  itself.  But  it  is  often  very  misleading,  and  sometimes 
fatal  to  honour  and  integrity,  to  purity  and  peace  and  every  sacred  interest  of  life. 
Many  a  youth  and  many  a  man,  not  depraved,  but  simply  weak  and  unestablished, 
has  thus  been  led  to  his  ruin,  out  of  mere  good-natured  compliance  and  the 
difficulty  of  refusing  a  solicitation.  Balancing  between  good  and  evil,  with 
the  promise  and  possibility  of  the  best,  he  has  gone  to  the  bad,  because 
he  could  not,  or  felt  that  he  could  not,  say,  "Nol"  The  dangerous 
tendencies  that  are  in  him,  and  that  are  in  everybody,  acquire  tenfold  power 
when  reinforced  by  the  importunity  of  a  friendly  companion  to  join  him  in 
giving  way  to  them.  That  little  off-hand  suit,  "  Come  along,"  coupled  with  the 
suggestion,  "  What's  the  harm?  "  or  "  Who  will  know  it  ?  "  or  "  Just  this  once,"  or 
"  Don't  be  a  coward,"  we  cannot  tell  how  many  it  leads  astray  every  day,  initiates 
in  the  downward  path,  and  that  too  when  every  instinct  of  the  conscience,  every 
sentiment  of  honour,  every  affection  of  their  heart,  and  every  hope  of  their  lives,  is 
breathing  its  protest,  and  would  hold  them  back.  If  all  those  hesitating  consents 
could  now  be  recalled,  that  fatal  compliance  reversed,  and  it  should  be  as  if  the 
rightful  refusals  had  been  spoken  in  place  of  them,  what  blessed  results  should  we 
see.  Oh,  learn  betimes  to  say,  "No  1  "  when  you  know  you  ought  to  say  it  Fear 
not  the  sneers  of  the  evil-disposed,  the  corrupt,  or  the  merely  thoughtless,  but  fear 
rather  the  anguish  and  tears  of  those  who  love  you,  the  strings  of  your  conscience, 
and  the  displeasure  of  your  God.  Be  prompt  and  strong  to  say,  "  No  I  "  when  you 
ought,  and  your  better  nature  bids  you,  and  so  march  on  through  your  career  in 
safety,  honour,  and  peace.  And  it  is  not  only  to  the  solicitations  or  the  suggestions 
that  would  lead  us  in  fatal  directions,  into  enslaving  vices,  or  the  outright  sacrifice 
of  truth,  honour,  and  purity  that  we  need  to  exercise  this  great  prerogative  of 
downright  refusal  in  the  thick  of  this  our  social  city  life,  we  have  need  to  exercise 
it  daily,  and  almost  hourly,  in  respect  to  requests  and  invitations  that  have  no 
bad  intent,  but  are  meant  in  courtesy  and  kindness,  and  that  in  other  circumstances, 
and  at  other  times,  might  be  complied  with  in  all  propriety.  We  need,  on  moral 
grounds,  to  guard  with  some  jealousy  our  personal  independence,  and  let  nobody 
unduly  or  unreasonably  invade  it.  We  cannot  afford  to  hold  ourselves,  our 
time,  faculties,  thoughts,  or  even  sympathies,  entirely  at  the  beck  and  call 
even  of  the  best  people  or  of  the  kindest-meaning  friends.  That  high 
independence  which  never  hesitates  to  say,  "  No  I  "  whenever  and  to  whom- 
soever it  should  be  said  commands  respect.  It  is  a  chief  element  of  all 
nobleness  and  strength  of  character.  It  is  essential  to  feminine  dignity,  and  to  the 
highest  manhood.  It  makes  you  worth  seeking,  and  causes  your  refusals  to  be 
better  taken  than  the  loose  assents  of  those  facile  persons  who  from  sheer  weakness 
in  the  fibre  and  the  making  up  of  their  character  can  never  say,  "  No  1 "  or  say  it 
as  if  guilty  of  an  offence  and  fearful  of  your  displeasure.  {George  Futnam.) 
Thou  Shalt  say,  No  : — Here  is  one  of  the  shortest  words  in  our  language ;  yet  there 
is  none  which  persons  of  an  easy  and  yielding  disposition  find  it  so  difficult  to 
pronounce.  To  say  it,  however,  is  one  of  the  first  lessons  which  we  have  occasion 
to  learn,  and  one  of  the  most  frequent  we  are  caUed  upon  to  practise.  You  can 
hardly  mention  a  cause  which  has  done  more  to  lead  men  into  embarrassment, 


CHAP.  IT.]  JUDGES.  61 

distress,  and  crime,  than  disregard  of  this  caution.  A  young  man  just  entering 
into  life  is  solicited  by  his  gay  companions  to  take  part  in  their  dissipations.  He 
feels  that  it  would  be  wrong ;  that  it  can  lead  to  nothing  but  evU.  And  yet  he 
cannot  muster  resolution  enough  to  say,  "  No."  He  consents,  goes  on  from  step  to 
step,  and  in  the  end  is  ruined.  An  affectionate  mother  is  besought  by  her  children 
to  grant  them  some  improper  indulgence.  She  feels  that  it  would  be  an  improper 
indulgence ;  that  it  can  only  do  them  harm.  And  yet  she  cannot  find  it  in  her  heart 
to  say, "  No."  I.  In  the  first  place,  then,  let  us  leabn  to  bespect  our  own  judgment 
IN  WHAT  WE  DO.  If,  ou  a  vicw  of  all  the  circumstances,  we  think  we  ought  to  say, 
"No,"  let  us  have  the  courage  and  firmness  and  independence  to  say  it.  A  man  who 
dares  not  act  according  to  his  own  convictions  of  what  is  right,  for  fear  that  after 
all  he  may  be  mistaken — I  will  not  say  that  he  has  no  regard  for  conscience, 
but  this  I  will  say :  he  has  no  confidence  in  conscience,  which  in  practice  amounts 
to  nearly  the  same  thing.  Besides,  with  respect  to  the  construction  which  other 
people  may  put  on  our  motives,  if  we  only  take  care  that  our  motives  are  what  they 
should  be,  and  that  our  whole  conduct  is  in  keeping,  we  need  not  entertain  any 
apprehensions  but  that  in  the  long  run  ample  justice  will  be  done  them  byaU  whose 
approbation  is  worth  having,  I  have  shown  that  it  is  but  the  part  of  a  manly 
independence  to  have  the  courage  and  firmness  to  say, "  No,"  when  we  are  convinced 
that  this  is  the  proper  word.  11,  I  proceed  to  show  that  it  is  no  less  a  dictate  of 
prudence,  and  practical  wisdom.  You  can  hardly  step  your  foot  on  the  threshold 
of  life  without  encountering  seduction  in  every  possible  shape  ;  and  unless  you  are 
prepared  to  resist  it  firmly,  you  are  a  doomed  man.  What  makes  it  still  more 
dangerous  is,  that  the  first  solicitations  of  vice  often  come  under  such  disguised 
forms,  and  relate  to  things  seemingly  so  trivial,  as  to  give  hardly  any  warning  of 
the  fatal  consequences,  to  which  by  slow  and  insensible  gradations  they  are  almost 
sure  to  lead.  As  you  value,  then,  your  health  and  reputation,  your  peace  of  mind 
and  personal  independence,  learn  to  say,  "  No."  Inquire  into  the  sources  of  human 
misery,  study  the  first  beginnings  of  crime,  and,  meet  with  it  where  you  may,  by  tracing 
it  back  to  its  first  cause  you  wiU  find  it  to  have  been,  in  almost  every  instance, 
merely  because  they  could  not  say,  "No,"  to  the  tempter.  Put  the  question  to  one 
who  has  wasted  his  substance  in  riotous  living.  The  burden  of  their  confession 
will  be,  that  they  owe  every  calamity  which  has  befallen  them  to  their  not  having 
had  firmness  enough,  at  some  turning-point  of  their  destiny,  to  say,  "  No."  As  you 
would  avoid  their  fate,  let  me  then  conjm-e  you  to  avoid  its  cause.  III.  The  same 
conduct  which  I  have  shown  to  be  necessary  to  a  manly  independence  and  to  a 
prudent  regard  to  our  own  interest  I  shall  next  prove  to  be  in  no  sense  inconsistent 
with  a  benevolent  and  truly  generous  disposition.  One  of  the  most  common 
mistakes  on  this  subject  is  to  confound  an  easy  disposition  with  a  benevolent 
disposition :  two  things  which  in  fact  are  as  wide  asunder  as  the  east  from  the 
west.  A  man  of  an  easy  disposition  is  so  commonly  merely  because  he  will  not 
make  the  effort  a  more  firm  and  steady  conduct  requires.  And  why  will  he 
not  make  this  effort  ?  Because  he  will  not  take  the  trouble  of  making 
it.  But  is  this  benevolence?  Is  it  so  much  as  an  abuse  of  benevolence? 
Is  it  not  sheer  selfishness?  TV.  Having  shown  that  independence,  prudence, 
and  benevolence  alike  require  the  conduct  I  have  been  recommending,  it  only 
remains  for  me  to  urge  it  upon  you  as  a  matter  of  moral  and  religious 
DUTY.  It  is  a  great  error,  though  a  common  one,  not  to  suppose  that  the  prin- 
ciple of  duty  extends  to  almost  all  our  actions;  requiring  them  or  forbidding 
them,  as  being  either  right  or  wrong.  We  talk  of  actions  as  being  honourable  or 
dishonourable,  as  being  prudent  or  imprudent,  as  being  benevolent  or  otherwise,  but 
what  is  honourable  or  prudent  or  benevolent  is  also  right.  Everything,  therefore, 
which  has  already  been  said  to  prove  the  conduct  in  question  a  dictate  of  benevo- 
lence, prudence,  and  manly  independence,  goes  also  to  the  same  extent  to  prove  it  to  be 
our  duty,  our  imperative  duty.  Besides,  take  the  words  as  they  stand.  If,  con- 
sidering all  the  circumstances,  we  ought  to  say,  "  No,"  then  it  is  our  duty  to  say  it, 
let  the  consequences  be  what  they  may.  Some  men  can  never  say,  "  No,"  unless  they 
are  in  a  passion,  and  are  therefore  driven  to  the  mortifying  necessity  of  working 
themselves  up  into  a  passion  before  they  can  find  the  courage  to  do  it.  Again, 
there  are  others,  who  will  trust  themselves  to  say,  "  No,"  only  as  a  matter  of  policy  ; 
and  with  whom,  therefore,  the  question  is  not, "  What  ought  I  to  say  ?  "  but, "  What 
will  it  be  for  my  interest  to  say  ?  "  There  is  also  a  third  class  that  will  say,  "No  "— 
and  say  it  often  enough  too,  if  that  were  all — from  mere  churlishness  and 
ill-humoar ;  bat  I  need  not  observe  that  this  is  very  far  from  being  the  conduct 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

I  am  here  recommending.  Putting  aside  all  such  considerations,  let  us  learn  to 
resist  improper  solicitations  from  a  sense  of  duty.  It  should  be  enough  to  know 
that  it  is  our  duty.  Let  us  act  on  this  principle,  and  we  shall  never  refuse 
except  when  duty  requires  it ;  but  at  such  times  our  refusal  will  be  much  more 
decided  and  effectual,  while  it  will  be  made  under  circumstances  of  much  greater 
dignity  on  our  part,  and  of  much  less  irritation  on  the  part  of  those  whom  it  may 
disappoint.  Moreover,  while  we  act  from  a  sense  of  duty,  we  should  connect  with 
this  feeling  a  conviction  that  it  is  one  of  religious  obligation.  God  has  required  ua 
to  pursue  a  course  of  undeviating  rectitude.  Whoever,  therefore,  would  seduce  us 
from  this  sets  himself  against  God,  and  we  must  deny  one  or  the  other.  Whether 
in  such  a  case  we  should  deny  God  rather  than  man  let  conscience  judge.  {Jas, 
Walker.) 

Ver.  23.  So  God  subdued  on  that  day  Jabin. — A  great  victory — hut  God's : — 
I.  What  He  did  :  '*  God  subdued  .  .  .  Jabin  the  king."  1.  This  is  the  normal 
issue  of  God's  activity.  For  God  to  act  is  for  Him  to  conquer.  Where  the  victory 
tarries,  it  is  only  God  waiting.  2.  He  subdued  Jabin  the  king  of  Canaan.  Who  is 
able  to  stand  against  Him  ?  3.  Every  oppressor  of  God's  people  becomes  His  foe. 
He  who  molests  them  virtually  challenges  God.  H.  How  He  did  it  :  "  So." 
1.  By  inspiring  Deborah  with  a  holy  courage.  2.  By  arrangement.  The  plan  of 
salvation  is  only  one  grand  instance  of  the  Divine  order.  HI.  When  He  did  it  : 
♦•  On  that  day."  God  never  miscalculates.  The  Eternal  is  never  late.  1.  It  was 
as  soon  as  they  wanted  it.  2.  It  was  when  they  were  most  ready  to  receive  it. 
IV.  Where  He  did  it  :  "  Before  the  children  of  Israel."  1.  There  are  many  things 
which  God  must  do  out  of  our  sight.  2.  There  are  instances  wlien  He  works  by 
signs  which  are  visible—  Ked  Sea ;  Carmel.  This  victory  was  not  only  decided, 
but  manifest.     (E.  M.  Mouchin.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Vers.  1-11.  Then  sang  Deborah  and  Barak. — Leaders  who  lead : — This 
is  far  better  given  in  the  Bevised  Version:  "For  that  the  leaders  took  the 
lead  in  Israel,  for  that  the  people  offered  themselves  willingly,  bless  ye  the 
Lord."  The  poetess  gives  two  reasons  why  her  enterprise  was  successful. 
I.  The  riEST  "filASoN  of  success  was  that  the  leaders  took  the  lead. 
They  were  not  engaged  elsewhere ;  they  did  not  linger ;  they  were  not  too 
excessively  modest.  They  were  in  the  forefront  of  the  enterprise  in  resource  and 
enthusiasm  and  execution.  The  leaders  in  those  days  in  Israel  were  the  heads 
of  the  tribes.  In  ancient  society  there  was  always  an  arrangement  which  pro- 
Tided  natural  leaders  to  whom  the  people  could  look.  In  spite  of  what  some 
people  may  say  to  the  contrary,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  loyalty  still  in  the  people 
to  what  might  be  called  their  natural  leaders,  and  I  may  say  this,  that  our 
aristocracy  have  immense  advantages  on  their  side  it  only  they  have  the  heart  to 
give  themselves  to  pubUc  work.  It  is  the  man  with  the  biggest  and  clearest  and 
keenest  brain  that  is  the  leader  in  modern  times.  The  thinker,  the  orator,  the 
author,  the  journalist,  the  inventor,  the  scientist — these  are  the  men  to  whom  we 
now  look  to  give  the  watchword  and  lead  us  in  public  work.  I  think  it  is  vain  to 
deny  that  money  is  a  great  power  in  modern  times,  and  the  making  of  it  is  a 
rough  test  of  ability,  although  it  is  a  very  humble  illustration  of  my  text.  In 
pohtics  and  in  reforms  in  the  Church  and  the  municipality  we  should  get  quit 
of  those  awful  wrongs  and  abuses  which  disfigure  our  life,  and  we  could  raise  our 
people  to  higher  and  nobler  life  if  only  the  leaders  would  take  the  lead.  Unfor- 
tunately they  do  not  do  it.  Very  often  the  best  causes  have  to  do  without  those 
that  should  be  the  leaders.  They  do  not  get  the  people  with  ten  talents,  and  have 
to  struggle  along  as  best  they  can  with  the  people  who  have  one  talent,  and  who 
use  it  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  men.  This  may  be  due  to  the  fact 
that  those  who  should  be  leaders  are  occupied  with  their  own  affairs,  and  have  no 
heart  for  the  public  interest.  Those  who  have  most  of  this  world's  means  and 
influence  are  often  living  a  life  of  frivoUty  and  selfishness.    Those  ^^ho    are 


CHAP,  v.]  JUDGES.  63 

engaged  in  the  struggle  of  life  are  often  thinking  of  nothing  but  enriching  them- 
selves. Those  who  have  the  finest  culture  often  keep  aloof  from  the  profane 
multitude.  Or  the  fact  that  the  leaders  do  not  take  the  lead  may  be  due  to 
timidity  and  over-caution.  Any  change  that  alters  the  status  quo  must  give 
annoyance  and  cause  loss  to  somebody.  When  once  a  reform  is  matter  of  history, 
and  is  put  down  in  books  of  history,  all  men  praise  it,  but  whUe  it  is  being 
accomplished  few  men  praise  and  many  oppose.  I  remember  a  few  years  ago 
there  was  hardly  a  newspaper  in  the  country  in  which  there  was  not  a  leader  in 
praise  of  WUberforce  and  the  noble  men  who  co-operated  with  him  in  that  great 
reform.  But  in  his  own  day  Wilberforce  and  his  coadjutors  were  not  praised  at 
aU.  They  were  even  exposed  to  personal  violence.  Every  evil  name  was  flung 
at  them.  Drunkenness  is  inflicting  on  our  country  evils  so  vast  and  potent  that 
any  considerable  diminution  of  it,  say  the  reduction  of  it  by  half,  would  be  a 
reform  infinitely  greater  than  those  reforms  by  which  our  statesmen  are  at 
present  winning  their  laurels.  But  if  a  statesman  of  the  first  mark,  a  man  of  the 
calibre  of  Mr.  Balfour  or  Mr.  Chamberlain  or  Mr.  Morley,  were  to  take  the  lead  on 
this  subject,  he  would  simply  be  shrieked  at  by  all  who  are  engaged  in  that  traffic. 
II.  The  other  reason  given  by  this  ancient  heroine  for  her  success  was  that  the 
PEOPLE  WILLINGLY  FOLLOWED.  Leaders  cannot  win  a  cause ;  it  is  won  by  the 
followers.  Now  sometimes  the  people  do  not  follow  even  when  the  leaders  take 
the  lead.  1.  Instead  of  that,  they  wish  themselves  to  take  the  lead.  Many  a  cause 
has  been  wrecked  by  the  jealousies  and  suspicions  of  those  who  have  thought  they 
were  fit  for  positions  greater  than  were  assigned  to  them.  We  often  hear  of  the 
need  of  first-class  leaders,  but  I  sometimes  think  what  the  world  needs  most  is 
great  numbers  of  men  who  are  willing  to  take  the  second  place,  or  the  third  place, 
or  the  fourth  place,  and  to  work  as  heartily  there  as  if  they  were  in  the  first  place. 
That  requires  even  more  heroism.  The  man  who  is  in  the  first  place  attracts  the 
eyes  of  all,  and  may  receive  his  reward  in  fame,  but  the  man  who  works  weU  in 
an  obscure  place  only  receives  the  reward  of  the  cause  itself.  2.  Another  reason 
why  the  people  do  not  always  foUow  is  that  they  are  criticising  instead  of 
following.  Now  I  should  not  like  to  conclude  without  referring  to  the  last 
words  of  my  text,  "  Bless  ye  the  Lord."  Deborah  attributed  the  success  to  the 
leaders  taking  the  lead  and  the  people  following  willingly,  but  she  went  beyond 
these  means,  and  traced  aU  to  the  Lord.  (J.  Stalker,  D.D.)  Leaders : — Now  in 
this  text  we  are  called  upon  to  celebrate  our  leaders,  "  for  that  the  leaders  took  the 
lead  in  Israel."  Deborah,  with  a  fine  instinct,  perceived  the  singular  value  of 
great  and  heroic  leaders.  In  some  directions  to-day  there  is  a  disposition  to  obscure 
greatness,  to  deny,  I  was  going  to  say,  the  supreme  value  of  splendid  talents.  Oh, 
let  us  recognise  the  rights  of  the  people.  We  must  never  forget  in  this  world  the 
wonderful  importance  of  the  man  as  against  the  multitude.  The  Eoman  soldier 
was  a  master  in  his  art  and  profession,  but  what  would  all  the  Eoman  soldiers  have 
been  but  a  rabble  without  Csesar?  I  dare  say  those  sailors  four  centuries  ago  were 
brave  and  skilful  Italians  and  Spaniards,  but  they  would  have  done  very  little  with 
that  barque  on  the  Atlantic  without  Columbus.  You  may  have  fine  masons  and 
painters,  but  if  St.  Peter's  is  to  be  built  in  Eome  or  St.  Paul's  in  London  you  must 
have  Michael  Angelo  in  one  place  and  Sir  Christopher  Wren  in  the  other.  Oh,  no, 
let  us  acknowledge  the  multitude,  and  all  the  rights  that  pertain  to  them,  but  that 
need  not  for  a  moment  obscure  our  mind  as  to  the  appreciation  of  men  of  supreme 
genius.  "  For  the  leaders  that  took  the  lead  bless  ye  the  Lord."  The  great  archi- 
tects, the  great  navigators,  the  great  captains ;  they  are  all  great  gifts  of  God  to 
humanity.  Outside  a  great  leader  is  the  architect  of  civilisation,  and  in  the  Church 
a  great  leader  is  the  organiser  of  victory.  {W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Deborah :  a\ 
mother  in  Israel : — Deborah  was  an  extraordinary  woman.  In  strength  of  under- 
Btanding,  in  strength  of  wiU,  in  soundness  of  judgment,  in  splendid  courage,  in 
warmth  of  heart,  and,  withal,  in  what  we  would  nowadays  call  literary  genius, 
Deborah  was  an  absolute  miracle  of  many  sides.  There  was  neither  king,  nor 
captain,  nor  judge,  nor  prophet,  nor  psalmist,  nor  a  man  to  be  called  a  man  in  all 
Israel  in  those  evil  days  till  Deborah  arose  with  aU  those  things  in  herself.  To 
begin  with,  Deborah's  name  came  to  be  known  outside  of  her  own  house  by  her 
strong  sense  and  her  open,  fair,  mascuUne  mind.  Her  neighbours  were  constantly 
faUing  into  disputes  and  quarrels,  and  the  way  Deborah  dealt  with  aU  those  disputes 
and  quarrels  soon  made  her  name  famous.  Tj[fr  ]l9Vlf^fi  '"  Mo"Jll.Sll]ir»''in. jy»"  * 
rftf^iprfltn  n,1]  j^h,^  npnrqpP"!  TjTer  j,^]m  t,];qp.  waa-fl^jitrftT^g^  tower  ,tn  wbif.h  rH  iha~ 
ftffllctea  people  gontinnally  cajne  up.    At  the  same  time,  with  aU  that,  JDeborahj 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

[T)  Dfihiyq,h  wfLH  nnly  wa.lking  flILt.hp.  clof.npwil,Ti  hp.r  fi-nf]  at  Bp.tViel.     T^^hor^^  '^"«"?  not 

"^  put-it  intaJber  song— ste_cannot  wt^ssryihing^Tito  iane  song=5-but  ho\y^hft^  would 

(^/  ,,  gp^ut  tojQi^clitate  aWjopraj  un^£j[acob!&-lad(ier  afterJher  day's  work  was  done  1 
^  Ro^^e  Wijijld  afiekwisdom  and  direclioiuat.that  House  QfjGod.  "  What  was  it  that 
made  Deborah  arise  at  last  and  come  forth  from  her  own  house  to  be  the  mother  in 
all  Israel  she  was  and  is?  Waa-itJJie.4fiath  of  Lapidpth,  her  husbands  that  mada^ 
hfir  fi,  wi'dnwind^^ed,  and  set  her  free  to  follow  ont  her  mighty  hopes  for  the  house 
of-Israd-?~Had  her  sons  been  carried  into  captivity  of  the  King  of  Canaan ;  and 
had  it  been  better  for  her  daughters  that  they  had  never  been  born  ?  IJLsaa-aQiae 
gUJiEseJihings,  it  was  all  these  things  taken  together  that  at  last  rquged  up  the 
"j^i^  Rljtnbp.ring  lioness  in  D_eborah's  bosom^and-made  her  swear  beside  the  sacred  stone, 
in  Bethel  that  Israel  should  be  setfreCf  But,  after  all,  Deborah  was  only  a  woman. 
And  to  discomfit  Sisera-aad  hisjoine  hundred  chariots  of  iron  demnnded  a. man  at 
thp.  bp.n.d  of  tp.n  thousand  men ;  while  in  all  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  there  was  nothing 
but  women.  And  Deborah  sent,  says  her  history,  and  called  Barak  the  son  of 
Abinoam  out  of  Kadesh-Naphtali,  and  said  unto  him.  Hath  not  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel  commanded,  saying,  go,  and  draw  toward  Mount  Tabor,  and  I  wiU  draw  out 
Sisera  the  captain  of  Jabin's  army,  and  I  will  deliver  him  into  thine  hand.  Arise, 
Barak,  and  lead  captivity  captive,  thou  son  of  Abinoam.  /  In  what  is  perhaps  the 
most  beautiful  volume  of  sermons  that  has  been  published  in  England  since  Dr. 
Newman  came  down  from  the  English  pulpit,  though  a  very  different  volume  in  many 
ways,  the  late  Master  of  Balliol  says  that  the  first  of  Christian  duties  in  our  day  is 
the  removal  of  the  evils  of  our  great  towns.  "Moy  fif*^  "^  4^^yP  worst-evila-ol  all 
our_gceat_towns^will  neyer  be  removed  tiE  iT  motherHEeSeborah  arises  in  our 
I§ra£l.^  There  is  one  evU  in  aU  our  great  towns  that  our  Barak-like  men  may  and 
must  remove.  And  my  heart  is  toward  the  governors  of  Israel  that  offered  them- 
selves willingly  among  the  people.  But  the  other  great  evil  is  one  that  the  women, 
and  more  especially  the  mothers,  of  our  great  towns  must  take  into  their  own  hands. 
y.  jEill  peed  Pehnrah  and^  gaj-ak  too.  j|t-will  need  all  Deborah's  strength  of  under- 
standing, and  all  her  strength  of  will,  and  all  her  soundness  'of  judgment,  and 
all  her  warmth  of  heart,  and  all  her  splendour  of  courage,  and  all  her  wholeness  of 
devotion,  as  well  as  all  her  genius,  to  speak  it  home  and  to  write  it  home  to  our 
slow  and  selfish  hearts.  But  you  are  not  a  queen,  or  a  princess,  or  a  peeress,  and 
because  you  cannot  do  everything  you  sit  still  and  do  nothing.  No.  But  have  you 
not  a  fire-side,  and  a  lady  friend  or  two,  and  a  spare  hour  on  a  Saturday  or  a 
Sabbath  night  ?  Have  you  no  imagination  ?  Have  you  no  heart  ?  Have  you  no 
apprehension?  Have  you  no  son  or  nephew?  {A.  Whyte,  D.D.)  National 
mercies  and  national  sins: — I.  The  grounds  of  thankfulness  which  Deborah 
thought  she  and  the  whole  nation  had.  1.  She  insists,  first,  upon  the  cheerful 
willingness  of  the  people,  their  ready  alacrity  in  obeying  the  call  of  the  Lord  their 
God,  when  by  her  voice  He  summoned  them  to  arms.  Oh  I  that  there  were  such  a 
heart  in  each  one  of  us  1  Spiritual  readiness  is  the  attitude  and  the  grace  of  angels. 
God  desires,  and  will  have,  from  us  all,  hearty  service.  Whether  as  regards  our 
substance  or  our  time,  our  talents  or  our  affections,  the  Word  declares,  "  GLnd  Invgth 
y.  <?hfp.rf^i1  givfirr"  2.  Deborah  notices  gratefully  the  interference  of  God  Himself 
in  behalf  of  the  nation.  What  could  Israel,  in  their  enslaved  and  enfeebled  state, 
have  done  against  Jabin's  nine  hundred  chariots?  Of  what  avail  would  have  been 
the  willingness  of  the  people  or  the  valour  of  the  chiefs  if  the  Lord  had  provided 
no  succours  ?  But  the  Lord  had  provided  them.  And  like  mercies  have  been 
vouchsafed  to  us  with  regard  to  our  personal  and  individual  conflicts  with  sin  and 
Satan.  Satan  is  especially  called  the  "  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  " ;  what 
would  the  rude  implements  of  earthly  warfare  avail  against  such  an  antagonist  ? 
No  ;  God  puts  the  spiritual  against  the  spiritual ;  He  brings  the  arms  of  an  invisible 
providence  to  bear  upon  the  spiritual  fortunes  of  a  child  of  God,  and  to  keep  him 
from  falling.  Angels  are  ministering  to  us  whilst  we  sleep  ;  the  elements  are  com- 
bining for  our  good,  even  when  we  know  not  the  very  existence  of  evil ;  and  never 
till  we  are  beyond  the  reach  of  evil  and  sin  shall  we  know  how  the  Lord  "  fought " 
for  our  souls  "  from  heaven,"  or  how  "  the  stars  in  their  courses  fought  against 
Sisera."  3.  Deborah  finds  matter  of  thankfulness  in  the  peaceful  and  happy 
state  of  the  country  contrasted  with  its  condition  under  the  oppressions  of  Jabin  ; 
and  to  this  part  of  Deborah's  song  I  entreat  your  special  attention.  Her  picture  of 
two  eountries,  or  at  least  of  the  same  country  under  two  different  governments,  will 


CHAP,  v.]  JUDGES.  65 

be  found  to  have  such  an  astonishing  parallel  that  I  hope  every  heart  amongst  us 
will  he  lifted  up  to  God  with  silent  thankfulness.  Observe,  then,  first,  Deborah 
Bpeaks  of  a  country  where  all  trade  was  stopped  :  "  In  the  days  of  Shamgar  the 
son  of  Anath,  in  the  days  of  Jael,  the  highways  were  unoccupied."  The  great 
public  thoroughfares  were  all  closed  ;  the  caravans  could  no  longer  convey  their 
merchandise  from  city  to  city  ;  the  merchants  found  their  occupation  gone.  Then, 
secondly,  she  says  that  in  this  cotmtry  travelling  had  become  unsafe :  "  The 
travellers  walked  through  byways."  The  complete  lawlessness  of  the  people  and 
the  bold  effrontery  of  the  robber  made  those  who  had  occasion  to  travel  seek  the 
most  lonely  and  unfrequented  byways.  Every  step  they  took  was  taken  with  fear ; 
they  saw  death  or  danger  at  every  turn.  Then,  thirdly,  she  says  that  there  was 
no  tilling  of  the  ground  :  "  The  inhabitants  of  the  villages  ceased."  The  constant 
incursions  of  lawless  hordes  had  driven  the  villagers  from  their  peaceful  employ- 
ments ;  the  cessation  of  commerce  throughout  the  land  had  closed  the  market  for 
their  grain  ;  whilst  for  the  sake  of  personal  safety  the  poor  villagers  were  obliged 
to  leave  their  humble  abodes  and  take  refuge  in  walled  and  fenced  cities.  Fourthly, 
she  says  that  there  was  no  administration  of  justice.  The  "  people  of  the  Lord  " 
could  not  "  go  down  to  the  gates  " — "  the  gates  "  signifying,  as  you  are  aware,  in  the 
Jewish  language,  the  courts  of  justice.  In  the  eighth  verse  she  gives  the  reason 
why  all  judicial  proceedings  were  suspended :  "Then  was  war  in  the  gates."  The 
courts  of  justice  resounded  with  the  noise  of  arms;  the  gravity  of  the  judge  was 
merged  in  the  zeal  of  the  soldier ;  the  magistrates  had  lost  aU  dignity  and  the 
people  all  respect  for  law.  Lastly,  she  says  that  no  dependence  could  be  placed  on 
the  military  strength  of  the  country :  "  Was  there  a  shield  or  spear  seen  among 
forty  thousand  in  Israel?"  All  energy  was  now  gone;  all  public  spirit  had 
decayed ;  anarchy  and  misrule  held  sovereign  sway,  and  order  and  good  govern- 
ment were  banished  from  the  land.  I  need  not  stay  to  tell  you  where  this  awful 
picture  of  national  misery  and  misrule  has  but  a  too  faithful  counterpart.  I  pass 
on  to  another  picture,  which,  God  be  praised,  hath  its  counterpart  also.  "  What 
is  the  state  of  our  country  now  ?  "  asks  Deborah.  "Why,  our  nobles  ride  secure  on 
white  asses ;  our  judges,  without  fear,  sit  in  judgment  at  the  gates,  undisturbed  by 
the  noise  of  archers  in  the  places  of  drawing  water ;  and  the  people,  as  they  walk 
by  the  way,  rehearse  the  righteous  acts  of  the  Lord.  Now  all  is  peaceful  among 
us  ;  our  ships  ride  upon  the  sea ;  our  caravans  throng  the  highways ;  our  villages 
revive  amid  the  busy  industry  of  pruning-hook  and  ploughshare ;  and  now  all  that 
remains  for  us  is  to  testify,  by  a  song  of  thankfulness,  our  gratitude  to  God." 
Neither  should  there  be  lost  upon  us  Deborah's  invitation  to  different  classes  of 
society  to  join  in  this  song  of  gratitude.  First,  you  will  perceive,  she  calls  upon  the 
noble  and  the  wealthy :  " « Speak,  ye  that  ride  on  white  asses.'  Who  gave  you 
your  wealth  ?  Who  has  preserved  to  you  your  wealth  ?  To  whom  alone  is  the 
praise  due  that  your  substance  has  not  been  wrested  from  you  by  bands  of 
marauders  ;  that  you  have  not  been  driven  from  your  country  by  the  insecurity  of 
property  ;  that,  under  the  protecting  shadow  of  equal  laws,  you  can  now  lie  down 
with  safety,  none  making  you  afraid  ?  "  Then,  secondly,  she  speaks  to  magistrates 
and  judges.  " '  Speak,  ye  that  sit  in  judgment.'  Who  has  preserved  your  office 
in  all  its  reverence  ?  Who  has  continued  your  lives  in  all  their  sacredness  ?  Who 
has  kept  your  authority  in  all  the  respect  in  which  the  people  hold  it  ? "  Then, 
thirdly,  she  addresses  herself  to  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  ordinary  occupations 
of  Ufe.  "  '  Speak,  ye  that  walk  by  the  way ' ;  following  your  peaceful  employments 
without  fear  of  the  public  robber,  without  dread  of  lawless  assemblages,  reposing 
under  your  own  vine  and  your  own  fig-tree ;  rehearse  the  wonderful  works  of  God. 
Yes,  '  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,'  rehearse  the  righteous  acts  of  the  Lord,  even 
His  righteous  acts  towards  the  inhabitants  of  the  villages  of  Israel."  And  have 
we  no  part  to  bear  in  Deborah's  song  ?  Oh !  shall  there  be  a  British  heart  cold  or  a 
British  tongue  dumb  while  we  think  of  our  signal,  eminent — I  might  almost  say 
solitarily  enjoyed  blessings?  "  Awake,  awake,"  England ;  "  awake,  awake,  utter  a 
song."  Let  us,  while  we  bewail  her  sins  and  confess  her  pride,  mourn  over  her 
luxurious  living  when  thousands  are  starving  for  the  bread  of  life — let  us  also  bless 
God  for  His  mercies  to  this  our  land.  Let  us  bless  Him  that  blood  hath  not  yet 
stained  our  streets ;  that  our  ears  tingle  not  with  the  sound  of  artillery ;  that  the 
file  and  the  hammer  are  yet  heard  in  our  shops ;  and  that  our  churches  are  still 
open,  where  we  may  praise  and  worship  God.  II.  Some  causes  of  sokkow  and 
STERN  REBUKE.  The  Lord's  cause  had  triumphed,  as  triumph  it  ever  will,  whether 
we  "  come  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  "  or  not.     Still  the  names  of  those  shall  be  told 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

up  who  come  to  the  Lord's  help,  in  order  that  it  may  be  seen  who  are  to  be  shut  oat 
from  the  triumph,  who  are  to  have  no  part  in  the  joy,  who  are  to  have  no  mention 
in  God's  book  of  remembrance,  save  to  their  dishonour  and  their  shame.  1.  First, 
some  are  noticed  reprehensibly  by  Deborah  because  of  the  contentions  and  strifes 
among  them  :  "  For  the  divisions  of  Keuben  there  were  great  searchings  of  heart." 
Oh !  take  ye  good  heed  ;  for  if  at  this  moment  you  are  cherishing  an  urJiind  feel- 
ing towards  any  human  being,  you  are  cherishing  that  which  is  an  eternal  foe  to 
godliness ;  you  are  cherishing  that  which  may  drive  the  Spirit  of  God  from  your 
souls ;  you  are  cherishing  that  which  in  your  dying  hour  will  cause  you  bitter 
searchings  of  heart.  2.  But  another  sin  which  Deborah  notices,  as  excluding  the 
parties  who  had  committed  it  from  all  part  in  Israel's  triumph,  is  the  sin  of  sloth- 
fulness— the  love  of  ease,  an  imwillingness  to  endure  the  hardships  and  encounter 
the  difficulties  of  the  Christian  life  :  "  Why  abodest  thou  among  the  sheepfolds,  to 
hear  the  bleatings  of  the  flocks  ?  "  Ai'e  there  not  many  who  never  make  a  sacrifice, 
never  impose  on  themselves  any  form  of  restraint,  who  are  conscious  of  nothing 
worthy  of  the  name  of  effort,  whose  life  is  one  of  gilded,  cushioned,  luxurious 
ease,  without  one  struggle  or  one  act  of  self-denial  ?  3.  But  another  occasion  o£ 
tinf  aithf  ulness  to  the  Lord's  cause  is  an  absorbing  interest  in  worldly  engagements : 
"Dan  remained  in  ships,"  and  '•  Asher  continued  on  the  sea-shore."  Oh  !  be  not 
deceived  by  that  refined  artifice  of  Satan  which  tempts  you  to  persist  in  the  pursuit 
of  that  which  he  persuades  you  is  lawful.  Heaven  has  fixed  its  own  law  of  prefer- 
ences, has  determined  which  of  two  interests  shall  be  sacrificed  if  an  occasion  arise 
in  which  we  must  sacrifice  one.  What  amount  of  "  com  and  wine  and  oil"  will 
compensate  us  for  the  loss  of  the  "  light  of  God's  countenance  "  ?  What  emergency 
or  extremity  in  our  domestic  affairs  could  ever  supersede  that  imperative  law, 
•'  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all  other  things  shall 
be  added  unto  you  "  ?  4.  There  is  one  more  excluding  sin  mentioned  by  Deborah, 
the  sin  of  religious  indifference — the  sin  of  a  Gallio-like,  uncaring,  unthinking 
spirit — the  sin  of  a  Loadicean  lukewarmness  about  the  things  of  God.  "  Curse  ye 
Meroz,  said  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  curse  ye  bitterly  the  inhabitants  thereof." 
Why  ?  For  any  positive  sin  which  they  had  committed  ?  For  any  great  scandal 
which  they  had  brought  on  the  Lord's  name  and  cause  ?  No,  but  "  because  they 
came  not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord,  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty."  It 
seems  as  if  God  were  speaking  from  the  thick  cloud  to  each  one  amongst  us,  and 
asking,  not  "  What  have  you  left  undone?  "  but  "  What  have  you  done?  " — done 
for  God,  done  for  eternity,  done  for  "the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty"? 
And  think  not  to  escape  with  the  plea  that  opportunity  is  wanting  for  thus  serving 
God.  I  tell  you  that  every  relation  in  life  affords  scope  for  this  pious  activity.  As 
masters,  you  may  counsel ;  as  parents,  you  may  teach  ;  as  friends,  you  may  speak 
♦'  a  word  in  season  "  ;  as  rich,  you  may  give  of  your  substance  to  promote  good 
works;  as  poor,  you  may  promote  benevolent  objects  by  daily  and  earnest  prayer. 
But  if  in  none  of  these  ways  you  are  conscious  of  helping  the  Lord,  if  neither  by 
your  counsel,  nor  by  your  encouragement,  nor  by  your  example,  nor  by  your  prayers, 
you  come  to  the  Lord's  help,  then  are  you  included  among  "  the  inhabitants  of 
Meroz,"  and  the  curse  of  Meroz  abides  upon  your  souls.  (D.  Moore,  31. A.)  I, 
even  I. — The  big  "  I"  .• — Archdeacon  Hare  tells  us  that  of  all  peoples,  so  far  as  he 
knows,  the  English  people  are  the  only  people  who  write  the  first  personal  pronoun 
in  one  capital  letter,  "  I."  He  further  tells  us  that  this  fact  lets  in  a  good  deal  of 
light  upon  the  English  character,  much  that  is  favourable  to  the  Englishman,  and 
perhaps  a  good  deal  that  is  unfavourable.  Now  I  will  dwell — I.  Upon  two  of  the 
FAVOURABLE  THINGS  he  mcntions.  1.  He  says  that  the  letter  "  I,"  that  stands  up  by 
itself,  expresses  the  freedom  and  independency  of  the  Englishman.  It  is  a  good 
thing  to  be  free  and  independent.  But  I  don't  want  you  children  to  be  independent 
in  the  wrong  sense.  You  are  very  dependent  little  creatures,  and  have  all  been  very 
dependent  ever  since  you  were  born — so  dependent  upon  your  mother's  care  and  your 
father's  love.  I  want  you  to  feel  that  you  are  very  dependent  indeed,  and  above  all 
that  you  are  very  dependent  upon  God.  But  yet  there  is  a  sense  in  which  we  ought 
to  be  independent  and  free.  The  boy  who  does  not  insist  upon  exercising  his  own 
freedom  and  independency  is  very  soon  despised,  and  he  very  soon  goes  to  the 
bad.  2.  The  letter  "I"  also  denotes  the  Englishman's  firmness.  It  is  wonderful 
how  firm  we  can  be  if  we  have  planted  our  foot  in  the  right  place.  No  one  is  so 
firm  as  the  man  who  has  planted  his  foot  upon  the  Rock  of  Ages,  or  the  Truth  as 
it  is  in  Jesus.  When  a  man  has  learnt  what  the  Saviour  expects  of  him,  and  says, 
•'  God  helping  me,  I  will  do  it,"  he  puts  down  his  foot  upon  a  foundation  which  can 


CHAP,  v.]  JUDGES,  67 

never  give  way.  II.  I  will  mention  now  two  of  the  unfavoueable  things  referred 
to  by  Archdeacon  Hare.  1.  He  tells  us  that  the  letter  "  I "  shows  a  certain  amount 
of  arrogance.  He  says  that  the  proudest  word  in  English,  to  judge  by  its  way  of 
carrying  itself,  is  this  "I."  There  it  is,  lifting  its  head  up  above  everybody  else, 
and  looking  down  with  contempt  upon  its  little  neighbours.  Now  that  is  not  a 
good  thing.  That  is  utterly  unlike  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  was  meek  and  gentle  in 
spirit:  He  never  looked  down  upon  any  one,  but  welcomed  poor  broken-down 
sinners  to  His  presence,  and  ever  spoke  a  kind  word  to  the  world's  outcasts.  2.  The 
capital  "  I "  represents  the  Englislunan's  reserve  and  isolation.  It  loves  to  stand 
alone,  and  does  not  believe  in  mixing  up  with  others.  Let  us  no  longer  hold  our- 
selves aloof,  but  be  kind  and  gentle  to  aU.  Whenever  you  meet  another,  do  not 
gather  yourself  up  in  your  little  coat,  and  conclude  that  you  must  be  better  than 
he ;  but  be  ready  to  draw  near  and  shake  hands  with  another  little  boy ;  and,  if  he 
is  poorer  than  you,  there  is  a  special  chance  for  you  to  do  him  a  little  kindness. 
Bemember  that  it  is  the  will  of  Jesus  that  we  should  be  very  kind  to  each  other, 
and  in  His  name,  yea,  and  for  His  sake,  bless  all.  (D.  Davies.)  They  chose 
new  gods ;  then  was  war  in  the  gates. — The  soldier's  honour : — Here  is — 1.  The 
apostasy  of  the  people:  "They  chose  new  gods."  This  I  call  the  alarm;  for 
ungodliness  calls  to  war.  If  we  fight  against  God,  we  provoke  God  to  fight  against 
us.  Then — 2.  A  laying  on  of  punishment.  God  meets  their  abomination  with 
desolation ;  the  hand  of  justice  against  the  hand  of  unrighteousness :  •'  Then  was 
war  in  the  gates."  This  I  call  the  battle.  Then — 3.  A  destitution  of  remedy : 
"  Was  there  a  shield  or  spear  seen  among  forty  thousand  in  Israel  ?  "  Sin  had 
not  only  brought  war,  but  taken  away  defence — sent  them  unarmed  to  fight.  And 
this  I  call  the  forlorn  hope.  I.  The  alaem  :  "  They  chose  new  gods."  Their 
idolatry  may  be  aggravated  by  three  circumstances  or  degrees.  They  are  all 
declining  and  downwards :  there  is  evil,  worse,  and  worst  of  all.  1.  "  They  chose." 
Here  is  a  frank  choice,  no  compelling.  They  voluntarily  took  to  themselves,  and 
betook  themselves  to,  other  gods.  There  is  evil,  the  first  degree.  2.  "  Gods." 
What !  a  people  trained  up  in  the  knowledge  of  one  God :  "  Jehovah,  I  am ;  and 
there  is  none  besides  Me."  The  bees  have  but  one  king,  flocks  and  herds  but  one 
leader,  the  sky  but  one  sun,  the  world  but  one  God.  3.  "New  gods."  Will  any 
nation  change  their  gods  ?  No ;  the  Ekronites  will  keep  their  god,  though  it  be 
Beelzebub ;  the  Ammonites  will  keep  their  god,  though  it  be  Melchom ;  the  Syrians 
will  stick  to  their  god,  though  it  be  Eimmon ;  the  Philistines  will  not  part  with 
their  god,  though  it  be  Dagon.  And  shall  Israel  change  Jehovah,  the  living  God  ? 
This  is  worst  of  all.  II.  We  come  now  to  the  battle:  "Then  was  war  in  the 
gates."  If  Israel  give  God  an  alarm  of  wickedness,  God  will  give  them  a  battle  of 
desolation.  Idolatry  is  an  extreme  impiety ;  therefore  against  it  the  gate  of  heaven 
is  barred  ^1  Cor.  vi.  9).  Let  us  view  the  punishment  as  it  is  described :  "  Then 
was  war  m  the  gates."  1.  The  nature  of  it :  "  War."  War  is  that  miserable 
desolation  that  finds  a  land  before  it  like  Eden,  and  leaves  it  behind  it  like  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah,  a  desolate  and  forsaken  wilderness.  Let  it  be  sowed  with  the  seed 
of  man  and  beast,  as  a  field  with  wheat,  war  wiU  eat  it  up.  In  itself  it  is  a  miser- 
able punishment.  2.  The  time:  "Then."  When  was  this  war  ?  In  the  time  of 
idolatry.  "  They  chose  new  gods ;  then."  When  we  fight  against  God,  we  incense 
Him  to  fight  against  us.  Yet  if  timely  repentance  step  in,  we  escape  His  blows, 
though  He  hath  not  escaped  ours.  But  if  Israel's  sins  strike  up  alarm,  Israel's  God 
wUl  give  battle.  If  they  choose  new  gods,  the  true  God  will  punish.  "  Then  was 
war."  It  is  a  fearful  thing  when  God  fights.  3.  The  place :  "  In  the  gates." 
This  is  an  extreme  progress  of  war,  to  come  so  near  as  the  gates.  If  it  had  been  in 
the  land  of  their  enemies,  a  preparation  of  war  a  great  way  off,  the  noise  of  war — 
yea,  if  it  had  come  but  to  the  coasts  and  invaded  the  borders,  as  the  Phihstinea 
did  often  forage  the  skirts  of  Israel,  yet  it  had  been  somewhat  tolerable,  for  then  they 
had  but  seen  it  only.  "  Thou  hast  shewed  Thy  people  grievous  things  "  (Psa.  Ix.  3) — 
shewed,  but  not  inflicted ;  shaken  the  rod,  but  not  scourged  us.  But  here  war  is 
come  to  their  thresholds,  yea,  to  the  heart  of  the  land,  to  defy  them  in  the  very 
gates.  And  now  they  more  than  hear  or  see  it ;  they  feel  it.  You  now  see  the 
punishment.  Happy  are  we  that  cannot  judge  the  terrors  of  war  but  by  report, 
that  never  saw  our  towns  and  cities  burning,  our  houses  rifled,  our  temples  spoiled. 
We  have  been  strangers  to  this  misery  in  passion,  let  us  not  be  so  in  compassion. 
Let  us  think  we  have  seen  these  calamities  with  our  neighbours'  eyes,  and  felt  them 
through  their  sides.  IH.  We  now  come  to  the  forlorn  hope  :  "  Was  there  a  shield 
or  spear  seen  among  forty  thousand  in  Israel  ?  "    Was  there  ?     There  was  noi 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T. 

This  question  is  a  plain  negative.  Here  is  the  want  of  help  ;  great  misery,  but  no 
remedy ;  not  a  spear  to  offend,  no,  not  a  shield  to  defend.  War,  and  war  in  the 
gates,  and  yet  neither  offensive  nor  defensive  weapon  1  It  takes  away  all,  both 
present  possession  and  future  possibility;  help  and  hope.  You  see  now  aU  the 
parts  of  the  affliction :  the  alarm  in  sin,  the  battle  in  war,  and  the  forlorn  hope  in 
the  want  of  remedy.  Two  useful  observations  may  hence  be  deduced — 1.  That 
war  at  some  times  is  just  and  necessary ;  indeed,  just  when  it  is  necessary :  as  here. 
For  shall  it  come  to  the  gates,  and  shall  we  not  meet  it?  Yea,  shall  we  not  meet 
it  before  it  come  near  the  gates?  There  is,  then,  a  season  when  war  is  good  and 
lawful.  Now  there  are  two  cautions  observable  in  the  justness  of  wars — (1)  That 
they  be  undertaken  upon  just  and  warrantable  cause.  That  they  be  prosecuted 
with  an  honest  mind.  The  cause  must  be  just,  (a)  The  peace  of  the  people; 
for  we  must  aim  by  war  to  make  way  for  peace.  We  must  not  desire  truce  to  this 
end,  that  we  may  gather  force  for  an  unjust  war ;  but  we  desire  a  just  war  that  we 
may  settle  a  true  peace,  (b)  The  health  and  safety  of  our  country :  some  must  be 
endangered  that  all  may  not  be  destroyed,  (c)  The  glory  of  the  kingdom ;  and 
that  is,  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  Wars  for  God  are  called  God's  battles.  The 
destruction  of  their  cities  that  revolt  from  God  to  idols,  and  the  whole  spoil,  is  for 
the  Lord ;  it  is  the  Lord's  battle  and  the  Lord's  spoil  (Deut.  xiii.  16).  (2)  The 
next  caution,  after  a  good  ingression,  is  to  be  sure  of  a  good  prosecution.  We  say 
of  the  surgeon  that  he  should  have  a  lady's  hand  and  a  lion's  heart;  but  the 
Christian  soldier  should  have  a  lady's  heart  and  a  lion's  hand.  I  mean,  though  he 
deal  valiant  blows,  yet  not  destroy  without  compassion.  2.  The  other  inference 
that  may  hence  be  deduced  is  this,  that  munition  and  arms  should  at  all  times  be 
in  readiness.  Wise  men  in  fair  weather  repair  their  houses  against  winter  storms ; 
the  ant  labours  in  harvest  that  she  may  feast  at  Christmas.  Be  long  in  preparing 
for  war,  that  thou  mayest  overcome  with  more  speed.  A  long  preparation  makes  a 
short  and  quick  victory.  I  have  held  you  long  in  the  battle ;  it  is  now  high  time 
to  sound  a  retreat.  But  as  I  have  spoken  much  of  Israel's  affliction,  so  give  me 
leave  to  speak  one  word  of  the  prophetess's  affection,  and  of  this  only  by  way  of 
exhortation:  "  My  heart  is  set  on  the  governors  of  Israel,  that  offered  themselves 
willingly  among  the  people.  Bless  ye  the  Lord."  Here  is  the  subject  in 
which  this  affection  resides  and  the  object  on  which  this  affection  reflects. 
The  subject  wherein  it  abides  is  the  heart — a  great  zeal  of  love.  Not  only 
the  affection  of  the  heart,  but  the  heart  of  affection :  "  My  heart  is  set."  The 
object  on  which  it  reflects  is  double,  man  and  God ;  the  excellent  creature,  and  the 
most  excellent  Creator ;  the  men  of  God,  and  the  God  of  men.  Upon  men :  "  My 
heart  is  towards  the  governors  of  Israel,  that  offered  themselves  willingly  among 
the  people."  Upon  God :  "  Bless  ye  the  Lord."  Among  men  two  sorts  are  objected 
to  this  love :  superiors  in  the  first  place,  inferiors  in  the  latter.  To  the  commanders 
primarily,  but  not  only ;  for  if  they  offered  themselves  willingly  among  the  people, 
as  we  read  it,  then  certainly  the  people  also  willingly  offered  themselves,  as  the 
other  translations  read  it,  "  Those  that  were  willing  amongst  the  people."  1.  To 
the  governors  of  our  Israel ;  that  they  offer  for  themselves  willingly  to  these 
military  designs,  not  on  compulsion.  His  brows  deserve  no  wreathed  coronet 
that  is  enforced.  Come  with  a  willing  mind.  In  every  good  work  there  must 
be  cheerfulness  in  the  affection  and  carefulness  in  the  action.  God  loves  a 
cheerful  giver ;  so  thou  gainest  no  small  thing  by  it,  but  even  the  love  of  God. 
"  Whatsoever  good  thing  thou  doest,"  saith  Augustine,  "  do  it  cheerfully  and 
willingly,  and  thou  doest  it  well."  You  that  have  the  places  of  government,  offer 
willingly  your  hands,  your  purses,  yourselves,  to  this  noble  exercise.  Your  good 
example  shall  hearten  others.  2.  Now  for  you  that  are  the  materials  of  all  this, 
let  me  say  to  you  without  flattery.  Go  forth  with  courage  in  the  fear  of  God,  and 
the  Lord  be  with  you.  Preserve  unity  among  yourselves,  lest  as  in  a  town  on  fire, 
whilst  all  good  hands  are  helping  to  quench  it,  thieves  are  most  busy  to  steal 
booties ;  so  whilst  you  contend,  murmur,  or  repine  one  at  the  honour  of  another, 
that  subtle  thief,  Satan,  through  the  crack  of  your  divisions,  step  in,  and  steal  away 
your  peace.  Offer  yourselves  willingly;  and  being  offered,  step  not  back.  Ee- 
member  that  it  is  base  for  a  soldier  to  fly.  And  remember  always  the  burden  of  this 
eong,  which  everything  that  hath  breath  must  sing, "  Bless  ye  the  Lord."  (T.  Adams.) 
Delivered  from  the  noise  of  archers  In  the  places  of  drawing  water. — Song$ 
of  deliverance  : — I.  Our  text  tells  us  of  wells  cleared  from  the  foe,  and  speaks  of 
those  who  "  are  delivered  from  the  noise  of  archers  in  the  places  of  drawing  water." 
I.  We  thank  God  that  we  who  are  children  of  the  Most  High  have  wells  to  go  to. 


CHAP,  v.]  JUDGES.  69 

The  world  is  a  wilderness,  say  what  we  will  of  it.  "  This  is  not  our  rest ;  it  is 
polluted."  Our  great  inexhaustible  well  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  is,  indeed, 
the  great  "  deep  that  lieth  under,"  the  "  deep  that  coucheth  beneath,"  the  secret 
spring  and  source  from  which  the  crystal  streams  of  life  flow,  through  the  wells  of 
instrumentality  and  ordinance.  "All  my  fresh  springs  are  in  Thee."  Whenever 
we  come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  drink  and  are  refreshed.  No  thirst  can  abide 
where  He  is.  Arising  out  of  this  greatest  fountain,  we  have  wells  from  which  we 
draw  the  waters  of  comfort.  First  there  is  this  book,  this  golden  book,  this  book  of 
God,  the  Word  of  God,  with  its  thousands  of  promises,  suitable  to  every  case, 
applicable  to  all  seasons.  So  it  is  also  with  the  weU  of  ordinances — baptism  and 
the  Lord's  Supper.  I  must  not  forget  the  mercy-seat.  What  a  well  that  is  to  the 
Christian  when  he  can  draw  nigh  unto  God  with  true  heart  1  It  is  a  glorious  thing 
to  have  such  a  well  as  that  in  the  family,  where,  in  prayer  with  the  children,  you 
can  bring  all  the  necessities  of  the  household  before  God.  Let  us  never  give  up  that 
weU.  But,  as  for  private  prayer,  this  world  were  drear  indeed  if  we  could  not  pour 
out  our  sorrows  into  our  Father's  ear.  Over  and  above  this,  every  form  of  fellow- 
ship with  Jesus,  wrought  in  us  by  the  Spirit,  is  a  weU  of  salvation.  He  is  our  dear 
companion,  our  ever  present  help  in  time  of  trouble.  2.  Thus  have  I  mentioned 
some  of  the  wells.  Now,  concerning  them  all,  it  may  be  said,  that  they  can  never 
be  stopped  up  by  our  foes.  If  outward  ordinances  be  stopped,  yet  the  great  deep 
that  lieth  under  wiU  find  a  vent  somewhere.  3.  Moreover,  as  they  cannot  be 
stopped,  so  neither  can  they  be  taken  away  from  us.  They  are  ours  by  covenant 
engagements;  they  are  guaranteed  to  us  by  the  solemn  league  of  the  Eternal  Three; 
and  none  of  these  covenant  blessings  shall  be  wrested  from  the  heirs  of  life,  who  are 
heirs  of  all  things  in  Christ  Jesus.  4.  Though  these  fountains  cannot  be  stopped 
up  or  taken  away,  yet  we  can  be  molested  in  coming  near  to  them.  It  seems  that 
archers  and  wells  frequently  go  together.  It  was  the  blessing  of  Joseph — "  Joseph 
is  a  fruitful  bough,  even  a  fruitful  bough  by  a  well ;  whose  branches  run  over  the 
wall."  But  what  next?  «*  The  archers  have  sorely  grieved  him,  and  shot  at  him, 
and  hated  him."  And  so  in  the  text :  here  are  weUs,  but  there  is  the  noise  of  archers, 
which  greatly  disturbs  those  who  go  to  draw  water.  I  think  you  know  what  the 
noise  of  archers  has  been  to  you  when  you  have  tried  to  draw  water.  Years  ago, 
with  some  of  us,  our  sins  were  the  archers  that  shot  at  us  when  we  would  fain  come 
to  Christ  and  drink  of  His  salvation.  When  we  bowed  the  knee  in  prayer  a  fiery 
arrow  would  dart  into  our  hearts — "  How  dare  you  pray?  God  heareth  not  sinners  1 " 
When  we  read  the  Word  of  God  another  barbed  shaft  would  be  shot  against  us^ 
"  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  God's  Word  ?  There  can  be  no  promise  there  for  such 
as  thou  art."  I  thank  God,  when  our  faith  is  in  exercise,  and  our  hope  is  clear,  we 
can  see  our  interest  in  Christ ;  we  come  to  Him  just  as  we  came  at  first,  and  cast 
ourselves  wholly  upon  him.  Then  we  no  longer  fear  the  archers,  but  are  rid  of 
every  fear.  I  should  not  wonder  if  another  band  of  archers  has  sometimes  attacked 
you  when  you  have  been  at  the  wells,  namely,  your  cares.  Dear  mother,  the  thought 
of  the  children  at  home  has  frequently  disturbed  your  devotions  in  the  assembly  of 
the  saints.  Good  friend,  engaged  in  business,  you  do  not  always  find  it  easy  to  put 
a  hedge  between  Saturday  and  Sunday.  The  cares  of  the  week  wUl  stray  into  the 
sacred  enclosure  of  the  day  of  rest,  and  thus  the  cruel  archers  worry  you.  It  is  well 
to  be  able  to  cast  aU  our  cares  on  Him  who  careth  for  us,  and  thus,  by  an  act  of  faith 
in  our  heavenly  Father,  to  be  delivered  from  the  noise  of  these  archers.  II.  The 
BONGS  BY  THE  WELL.  As  when  the  people  came  to  the  wells  of  old  they  were  wont  to 
talk  with  one  another  if  all  was  peaceful,  so  when  we  come  up  to  the  ordinances  of 
God's  house,  and  enjoy  fellowship  with  Jesus,  we  should  not  spend  our  time  in  idle 
chat,  but  we  should  rehearse  the  works  of  the  Lord.  Around  all  the  wells,  which- 
ever they  may  be,  of  which  we  drink,  let  our  conversation  be  concerning  Chiist  and 
His  dying  love ;  concerning  the  Holy  Spirit  and  His  conquering  power ;  concerning 
the  providence  of  God  and  its  goodness  and  its  faithfulness ;  and  then,  as  we  wend 
our  way  to  our  different  homes,  let  us  go  with  music  in  our  hearts,  and  music  on 
our  lips,  to  take  music  to  our  household,  each  man  and  woman  magnifying  the 
name  of  the  Lord.  Did  you  observe  carefuUy  what  it  was  they  sang  of? — "  The 
acts  of  the  Lord."  But  there  is  an  adjective  appended,  "  The  righteous  acts  of  the 
Lord."  Eighteousness  is  that  attribute  which  the  carnal  man  fears,  but  he  who  sees 
the  righteousness  of  God  satisfied  by  the  atonement  of  Christ  is  charmed  even  by 
the  severe  aspect  of  God  dressed  as  a  judge.  Then,  if  you  observe,  it  was  "  the 
righteous  acts  of  the  Lord  toward  His  people."  Yes,  the  very  marrow  of  the  gospel 
lies  in  special,  discriminating,  distinguishing  grace.    Note  with  care  that  the  works 


70  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

•which  are  to  be  rehearsed  are  done  towards  the  inhabitants  of  the  villages  of  Israel. 
Does  not  this  suggest  that  we  ought  frequently  to  magnify  the  Lord's  choice  favour 
and  tender  indulgence  towards  the  least  and  feeblest  of  His  family?  HI.  The 
text  says,  "  Then  shall  the  people  of  the  Lord  go  down  to  the  gates,"  by  which 
several  things  may  be  intended.  1.  When  the  people  of  God  are  altogether 
delivered  from  their  sins,  and  their  cares,  and  their  troubles,  by  the  great  redemption 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  the  power  of  His  Spirit,  then  they  enjoy  great  liberty.  The 
liberty  of  the  man  of  the  world  is  liberty  to  commit  evil  without  restraint;  the 
liberty  of  a  child  of  God  is  to  walk  in  holiness  without  hindrance.  When  the 
believer's  ways  are  enlarged,  he  delights  to  run  in  the  statutes  of  the  Lord ;  obedience 
is  freedom  to  the  Lord's  servant.  It  is  a  most  glorious  liberty  which  a  man  possesses 
when  he  is  no  longer  in  bondage  to  men,  to  smart  under  their  threats  or  to  fatten  in 
their  smiles.  Glorious  was  that  ancient  father  who  threw  back  the  threatenings  of 
his  enemies,  and  laughed  them  to  scorn.  2.  To  go  down  to  the  gates,  however, 
means  something  else,  for  citizens  went  down  to  the  gates  to  exercise  authority  and 
judgment.  He  that  is  in  Christ  discerneth  spirits,  and  separateth  between  the 
excellent  and  the  reprobate.  "  The  spiritual  judgeth  all  things,  yet  he  himself  ia 
judged  of  no  man."  Instead  of  being  judged  and  following  others,  they  who  love 
God  become  the  leaders  in  right,  and  are  as  God's  mouth  rebuking  iniquity.  3.  To 
go  down  to  the  gates  signified  also  to  go  forth  to  war.  When  a  Christian  man  is 
saved,  he  is  not  content  with  his  own  safety,  he  longs  to  see  others  blessed.  He  can 
now  go  out  of  the  gates  to  attack  the  foe  who  once  held  him  in  bondage,  and  there- 
fore he  girds  on  his  weapon.  When  will  the  Church  of  God  be  inflamed  by  the 
sacred  desire  of  carrying  the  war  for  Christ  into  the  enemy's  territory  ?  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon. )        The  noise  of  archers  in  the  places  of  drawing  water : — I.  These  words 

MAKE  INTELLIGIBLE  WHAT  HAS  BEEN  CALLED  THE  SAVAGE  ACT  OF  JaEL  IN  KILLINO 
SiSERA,  AND   THE   FIERCE  WORDS  WITH  WHICH   DeBOBAH   PRAISES  THE  ACT.      We  See  the 

place  of  drawing  water — the  well  belonging  to  some  little  town  or  village.  Thither 
in  the  stUl  summer  evening  come  the  women  and  children.  The  men  are  absent 
at  the  wars.  The  women  come  to  draw  water  for  household  and  flock.  As  they 
wait  their  turn,  the  elder  women  talk  together  of  their  common  cares  and  interests. 
The  fair  young  maidens  group  together  apart  for  the  merry  jest  or  confidential 
intercourse.  Amongst  them,  moving  in  and  out,  are  the  laughing,  bright-eyed 
children.  What  a  pretty  picture  it  makes — pretty,  peaceful,  glad  I  And  then 
suddenly  the  whole  is  changed.  The  cruel,  hated  Canaanite  is  at  hand.  "  The 
noise  of  archers"  is  heard.  The  mothers  fly  to  guard  the  little  ones,  some  of 
whom  are  laid  low  by  the  arrows.  In  the  confusion  the  band  sweeps  down  upon 
the  group  of  fair  maidens.  The  brightest  and  youngest  and  most  beautiful  are 
taken  to  be  the  slaves  of  the  tyrant  conquerors.  Oh,  who  wonders  now  at  Jael's 
cruelty  and  Deborah's  vindictive  triumph  ?  It  was  not  because  the  fair  gardens 
were  laid  waste,  the  homes  burned,  the  cattle  and  household  treasures  carried  off, 
that  these  women  so  hated  the  oppressors ;  but  because  in  the  division  of  the  spoil 
there  would  always  fall  "  to  every  man  a  damsel  or  two,"  each  the  bright,  sweet 
flower  of  some  home,  to  be  degraded,  spoiled,  trampled  down,  and  brought  to  shame. 
We  from  our  lofty  standpoint,  in  the  very  midst  of  the  full  light  of  Christ's  gospel — 
we  who  have  learned  to  be  patient,  long-suffering,  forgiving,  tender-hearted — may 
be  able  to  condemn  them.  They  hved  in  a  darker  age ;  they  had  not  our  advantages. 
And  yet  I  sometimes  think  that  if  we  fully  realised  what  that  twenty  years  of 
mighty  oppression  must  have  been,  how  the  hearts  of  the  people  will  have  burned 
with  indignation  at  the  cruelties  and  abominations  they  had  to  witness,  we  should 
be  forced  to  acknowledge  that  Jael  and  Deborah  would  have  been  either  more  or 
less  than  women  if  they  had  acted  otherwise.  Deborah's  song  is  a  thanksgiving  to 
God  for  deliverance.  "The  one  point  she  wishes  to  be  ever  remembered  is  that  the 
victory  was  of  God  alone.    U.  There  is  ever  going  on  around  us  the  great  battlb 

OF  GOOD  against  EVIL,  IN  WHICH   EACH   OP   US   IS   CALLED   TO   TAKE  OUR  PART.      He  who 

does  not  hate  the  evil  with  earnest  hatred,  who  rests  in  selfish  indolence  like  Asher, 
who  lets  his  searchingsof  heart  and  all  his  religious  purpose  end  in  talk  like  Eeuben, 
who  is  indifferent  and  lukewarm  like  Meroz,  he  must  needs  fall  under  the  scathing 
curse  of  those  who  come  not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty.  We  are 
all  bound  to  range  ourselves  on  the  side  of  the  good ;  to  fight  bravely  for  it ;  if  need 
be,  to  suffer  or  to  die  for  it.  Again,  as  Sisera  fell  at  last,  so  will  all  God's  enemies 
fall  for  ever  one  day.  m.  "The  noise  of  archers  in  the  places  of  drawing 
water  " — that  is  to  say,  the  attack  of  the  enemy  upon  those  who  only  seek  fob 

FBAO,  AS  THST  00  ABOUT  THX  INNOCENT  EUPLOYUBNT  OF  DAILY  LIFE.      HOW  this  make! 


CHAP,  v.]  JUDGES.  71 

us  think  of  one  great  mystery  of  temptation.  How  depressing  and  terrifying  to 
many  a  poor  soul !  "  I  began  the  day  with  prayer  not  to  be  led  into  temptation  ;  I 
resolved  to  be  so  careful.  I  was  careful,  and  then  all  at  once  in  my  work  it  came. 
I  was  not  thinking  of  it,  till  I  found  myself  wounded  with  the  poisoned  arrows  of 
temper,  lust,  selfishness,  sloth,  avarice,  or  pride."  More  mysterious  still,  even  amid 
our  religious  duties,  the  enemy  can  make  his  deadly  onslaught — the  distraction,  the 
vain  thought,  the  cruel  doubt,  even  the  blasphemous  suggestion,  come  whisthng  like 
the  deadly  arrow,  striking  us  back  and  wounding  us,  and  marking  us,  as  we  think, 
for  death.  Well,  aU  this  is  at  least  no  difiSculty  to  us  who  beheve.  The  arrows  do 
not  come  by  chance.  An  enemy  has  done  this.  Whilst  the  war  lasts,  he  is  to  be 
hated,  avoided  with  watchful  care.  But  there  is  deliverance.  Even  now  the  victory 
has  been  won,  and  protection  assured,  and  none  need  fear  the  arrows  who  are  willing 
to  dwell  under  the  defence  of  the  Most  High.  And  there  shall  be  a  hereafter,  when 
the  noise  of  archers  shall  be  no  longer  heard ;  when  we  shall  have  our  noble  work 
assigned  to  us,  such  work  as  God  has  for  His  saints  to  do  ;  when  we  shall  go  about 
the  work  in  perfect  security ;  when  we  shall  rehearse  one  to  another  the  righteous 
acts  of  the  Lord  who  has  wrought  mightily  for  the  deliverance  of  His  people.  (R. 
H.  Parr,  M.A.) 

Ver.  12-22.  Awake,  awake,  Deborah:  awake,  awake,  utter  a  song:  arise, 
Barak,  and  lead  thy  captivity  captive. — Magnificat : — I.  First,  then,  a  stirring 
UP  OF  ALL  OUR  POWERS  TO  PRAISE  GoD,  according  to  the  words  of  the  holy 
woman  in  the  text,  "Awake,  awake" — repeated  yet  again — "Awake,  awake." 
1.  What  is  there  that  we  need  to  awaken  if  we  would  praise  God  ?  I  reply,  we 
ought  to  arouse  all  the  bodily  powers.  Our  flesh  is  sluggish ;  we  have  been  busy 
with  the  world,  our  limbs  have  grown  fatigued,  but  there  is  power  in  Divine  joy  to 
arouse  even  the  body  itself,  to  make  the  heavy  eyelids  light,  to  reanimate  the  drowsy 
eye,  and  quicken  the  weary  brain.  We  should  call  upon  our  bodies  to  awake, 
especially  our  tongue,  "the  glory  of  our  frame."  Let  it  put  itself  in  tune  hke 
David's  harp  of  old.  Surely  we  should  call  on  aU  our  mental  powers  to  awake. 
Wake  up,  my  memory,  and  find  matter  for  the  song.  Tell  what  God  has  done  for 
me  in  days  gone  by.  Awake,  my  judgment,  and  give  measure  to  the  music. 
Come  forth,  my  understanding,  and  weigh  His  loving-kindness  in  scales,  and  His 
goodness  in  the  balances.  See  if  thou  canst  count  the  small  dust  of  His  mercies. 
See  if  thou  canst  understand  the  riches  unsearchable  which  He  hath  given  to  thee 
in  that  unspeakable  gift  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord.  Awake,  my  imagination,  and 
dance  to  the  holy  melody.  Gather  pictures  from  all  worlds.  Bid  sun  and  moon 
stay  in  their  courses,  and  join  in  thy  new  song.  But  especially  let  us  cry  to  aU  the 
graces  of  our  spirit — "  Awake."  Wake  up,  my  love,  for  thou  must  strike  the  key- 
note and  lead  the  strain.  Wake  up,  my  hope,  and  join  hands  with  thy  sister — love; 
and  sing  of  blessings  yet  to  come.  Sing  of  my  dying  hour,  when  He  shall  be  with 
me  on  my  couch.  Sing  of  the  rising  morning,  when  my  body  shall  leap  from  its 
tomb  into  her  Saviour's  arms !  Sing  of  the  expected  advent,  for  which  thou  lookest 
with  delight !  And  oh,  my  soul,  sing  of  that  heaven  which  He  has  gone  before  to 
prepare  for  thee.  And  thou,  my  faith,  awake  also.  Sing  of  the  promise  sure  and 
certain.  Then  let  us  wake  up  the  energy  of  all  those  powers — the  energy  of  the 
body,  the  energy  of  the  mind,  the  energy  of  the  spirit.  You  know  what  it  is  to  do 
a  thing  coldly,  weakly.  As  well  might  we  not  praise  at  all.  You  know  also  what 
it  is  to  praise  God  passionately — to  throw  energy  into  aU  the  song,  and  so  to  exult  in 
His  name.  So  do  ye,  each  one  of  you,  this  day.  2.  But  you  say  unto  me  :  "  Why 
and  wherefore  should  we  this  day  awake  and  sing  unto  our  God  ? "  There  be 
many  reasons;  and  if  your  hearts  be  right,  one  may  well  satisfy.  Come,  ye 
chUdxen  of  God,  and  bless  His  dear  name ;  for  doth  not  all  nature  around  you 
sing  ?  If  you  were  silent,  you  would  be  an  exception  to  the  universe.  But, 
believer,  shall  not  thy  God  be  praised  ?  I  ask  thee.  Shall  not  thy  God  be  praised  ? 
When  men  behold  a  hero,  they  fall  at  his  feet  and  worship  him.  Garibaldi 
emancipates  a  nation,  and  lo,  they  bow  before  him  and  do  him  homage.  And  Thou, 
Jesus,  the  Eedeemer  of  the  multitudes  of  Thine  elect,  shalt  Thou  have  no  song  ? 
Shalt  Thou  have  no  triumphal  entry  into  our  hearts  ?  Shall  Thy  name  have  no 
glory  ?  Thou  sayest,  believer,  "  Why  should  I  praise  Him  ?  "  Let  me  ask  thee 
a  question  too.  Is  it  not  heaven's  employment  to  praise  Him  ?  And  what  can 
make  earth  more  like  heaven  than  to  bring  down  from  heaven  the  employment  of 
glory,  and  to  be  occupied  with  it  here  I  Besides,  Christian,  dost  thou  not  know 
that  it  is  a  good  thinp^  for  thee  to  praise  thy  God  ?    Mourning  weakens  thee,  doubts 

25 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAJ.  v. 

destroy  thy  strength ;  thy  groping  among  the  ashes  makes  thee  of  the  earth,  earthy, 
Aiise,  for  praise  is  pleasant  and  profitable  to  thee.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our 
strength."  But  I  ask  you  one  other  question,  believer.  Thou  sayest,  "  Why  should 
I  awake  this  morning  to  sing  unto  my  God  ?  "  I  reply  to  thee,  '•  Hast  thou  not  a 
cause?  Hath  He  not  done  great  things  for  thee,  and  art  thou  not  glad  thereof?  " 
3.  "  But,"  saith  one,  "  when  shall  I  do  this  ?  When  shall  I  praise  my  God  ?  "  I 
answer,  "  Praise  ye  the  Lord,  all  His  people,  at  all  times,  and  give  thanks  at  every 
remembrance  of  Him."  4.  Yet  once  more,  you  reply  to  me,  "  But  how  can  I  praise 
my  God  ?  "  I  will  be  teacher  of  music  to  thee,  and  may  the  Comforter  be  with 
me.  Wilt  thou  think  this  morning  how  great  are  thy  mercies.  Thou  art  not 
blind,  nor  deaf,  nor  dumb ;  thou  art  not  a  lunatic ;  thou  art  not  decrepit ;  thou  art 
not  vexed  with  piercing  pains ;  thou  art  not  going  down  to  the  grave  ;  thou  art  not 
in  torments,  not  in  hell.  And  is  not  this  a  theme  for  praise  ?  Oh,  must  not  you 
praise  him,  ye  chief  of  sinners,  whose  natures  have  been  changed,  whose  hearts 
have  been  renewed  1  H.  "  Aeise,  Bakak,  and  lead  thy  captivity  captive,  thou  son 
OF  Abinoam."  You  understand  the  exact  picture  here.  Barak  had  routed  Sisera, 
Jabin's  captain,  and  all  his  hosts.  She  now  exhorts  Barak  to  celebrate  his  triumph. 
This  is  a  picture  which  is  often  used  in  Scripture.  Christ  is  said  to  have  led 
captivity  captive  when  He  ascended  on  high.  He  led  principalities  and  powers 
captive  at  His  chariot-wheels.  But  here  is  a  picture  for  us — not  concerning  Christ, 
but  concerning  ourselves.  We  are  exhorted  to-day  to  lead  captivity  captive.  Come 
up,  come  up,  ye  grim  hosts  of  sins  once  my  terror  and  dismay.  Come  up,  ye  sins, 
come  up,  for  ye  are  prisoners  now ;  ye  are  bound  in  fetters  of  iron,  nay,  more  than 
this,  ye  are  utterly  slain,  consumed,  destroyed  ;  you  have  been  covered  with  Jesu's 
blood ;  ye  have  been  blotted  out  by  His  mercy.  Arise,  celebrate  your  triumph,  oh 
ye  people  of  God !  Arise,  my  trials ;  ye  have  been  very  great  and  very  numerous ; 
ye  came  against  me  as  a  great  host,  and  ye  were  tall  and  strong  hke  the  sons  of 
Anak.  Oh,  my  soul,  thou  hast  trodden  down  strength ;  by  the  help  of  our  God 
have  we  leaped  over  a  wall ;  by  His  power  have  we  broken  through  the  troops  of 
our  troubles,  our  diiUculties,  and  our  fears  I  Arise,  and  let  us  lead  captive  all  our 
temptations.  You  have  been  foully  tempted  to  the  vilest  sins.  Satan  has  shot  a 
thousand  darts  at  you,  and  hurled  his  javelin  multitudes  of  times ;  bring  out  the  darts 
and  snap  them  before  his  eyes,  for  he  has  never  been  able  to  reach  your  heart.  Come, 
break  the  bow  and  cut  the  spear  in  sunder ;  burn  the  chariot  in  the  fire.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)         God^s  cause  carried  on  hy  human  agency  : — I.  The  cause  of  true 

BELIGION  IS  eminently  AND  EMPHATICALLY  THE   CAUSE  OF  GoD.      1.   It  WaS  His  CaUSe ; 

for — (1)  It  had  the  sanction  of  His  express  command.  (2)  God's  hand  was  in  it. 
2.  We  have  in  view,  under  the  blessing  of  God,  the  evangelisation  of  all  mankind ; 
and  this  is  unquestionably  the  cause  of  God.  (1)  For  God  has  commanded  that 
the  evangelisation  of  the  world  should  be  attempted  by  His  people.  (2)  For  God's 
honour  is  greatly  involved  in  the  success  of  it.  Idolatry,  in  all  its  various  forms, 
is  a  direct  attack  on  God's  supremacy  and  sovereignty.  (3)  In  this  cause  we  have 
the  promise  of  God's  presence  and  blessing.  II.  In  cakryino  on  this  great  work 
God  has  been  pleased  to  demand  and  to  bless  human  efforts.  In  the  case  before 
ns  the  power  of  God  was  supernaturally  exerted.  The  stars  in  their  courses,  the 
swelling  of  the  river,  the  thunder  and  the  tempest,  were  all  effects  of  supernatural 
interposition.  But,  even  in  that  age  of  miracles,  these  supernatural  means  were 
not  intended  to  supersede  those  means  which  were  ordinary.  Deborah  and  Barak 
exerted  themselves  to  the  utmost ;  and,  with  many  others,  were  required  to  come 
up  to  the  help  of  the  Lord,  to  the  help  of  the  God  of  miracles.  And  similar  is  the 
case  as  to  the  conversion  of  the  world  to  Christianity.  God  "gave  some,  apostles; 
and  some,  evangelists;  and  some,  pastors  and  teachers;  for  the  work  of  the 
ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ."  It  was  by  the  instrumentaUty  of 
holy,  enlightened,  zealous  missionaries  that  our  own  country  first  received  the  glad 
tidings  of  salvation ;  it  was  through  their  agency  that  our  rude  ancestors  were 
induced  to  change  Thor  and  Woden,  and  all  their  bloody  rites  and  awful  abomina- 
tions, for  the  simple  and  holy  truths  of  the  gospel.  And  the  work  we  have  to  do 
must  be  done  by  the  same  agency.  Ambassadors  must  be  sent  to  the  heathen,  and 
they  must  declare  God's  message,  trusting  in  His  power  and  help.  This  is  the 
established  order  of  God,  that  they  who  love  His  cause  should  help  it  by  their 
various  instrumentaUty.    HI.  Thb  calls  or  God  to  enoaok  in  this  cause  kxperiencb 

A   VERY  VARIOUS  RECEPTION  FBOM  THOSE  TO  WHOM  THEY  ARE   ADDRESSED.       1.    SomC  ate 

hearty  in  the  cause  of  God.  2.  Others  cherish  a  spirit  of  indolence  and  careless- 
ness.    IV.  God  takes  bbpbciai.  notice  or  thb  conduct  of  His  people  in  refkrencb 


CHAP.  T.]  JUDGES.  73 

TO  THE  DEMAND  MADE  UPON  THEM  FOR  THIS  CAUSE ;  AND  Hb  MAKES  AN  IMPORTANT 
DISTINCTION   IN   HiS  CONDUCT  TOWARDS   THOSE  WHO  COME  FORWARD,  OR  REFUSE  TO  COME 

FORWARD,  IN  His  CAUSE.  Those  who  refused  to  come  forward  are  recorded  as 
infamous,  and  are  covered  with  everlasting  disgrace ;  those  who  came  forward  are 
mentioned  with  distinguished  honour,  and  were  no  doubt  blessed  ever  afterwards. 
For  God  will  be  no  man's  debtor ;  He  may  make  us  wait  for  payment,  but,  such 
is  His  condescension  and  grace.  He  will  be  in  no  man's  debt.  Come  up  to  the  help 
of  the  Lord,  and  you  shall  have  the  approbation  of  Almighty  God.  Come  np  to 
the  help  of  the  Lord,  and  you  will  gain  the  esteem  and  good  wishes  of  your  fellow- 
Christians  and  ministers,  who,  when  they  see  their  humble  efforts  are  not 
unfruitful,  but  that  you  are  becoming  complete  in  every  good  word  and  work,  wUl 
gladly  spend  and  be  spent  in  your  service.  Come  up  to  the  help  of  the  Lord 
against  His  enemies,  and  you  shall  have  the  increasing  influence  of  God  to  render 
beneficial  all  the  means  you  enjoy.  Come  up  to  the  help  of  the  Lord,  and  your 
happiness  shall  increase,  your  consolations  shall  abound — you  shall  be  blessed  in 
the  Lord.  Come  up  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty,  and  you  shall  have 
the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain.  For  the  Word  of  the 
Lord  shall  not  return  unto  Him  void.  You  shall  reap  in  due  season,  if  you  faint 
not.  (J.  Bunting,  M.A.)  By  the  •watercourses  of  Reuhen  there  were  great 
resolves  of  heart. — The  apology  of  the  non-fighters: — On  account  of  their 
unfaithfulness  the  children  of  Israel  were  oppressed  by  Jabin  for  twenty  years; 
then  the  oppressed  people  cried  unto  God,  and  Deborah  and  Barak  were  called  to 
lead  them  to  freedom.  In  this  great  song  Deborah  brings  out  the  characteristics 
of  the  several  tribes  at  the  national  crisis.  She  sets  forth  how  some  of  them 
promptly  entered  upon  the  struggle  for  liberty;  how  others  were  miserably 
indifferent  and  unpatriotic;  and  in  the  text  a  vivid  stroke  or  two  shows  that 
whUst  Eeuben  was  deeply  interested  and  agitated  by  what  was  transpiring,  he 
refrained  from  taking  any  part  in  the  actual  fight.  "  By  the  watercourses  of 
Eeuben  there  were  great  searchings  of  heart,"  and  that  was  all.  "  Great  were 
the  debates,"  "  great  were  the  resolves " ;  but  they  never  proceeded  to  action. 
I.  The  text  is  a  rebuke  to  the  theorist.  The  Keubenites  were  the  thinkers  of 
their  age.  They  were  not  indifferent  to  public  questions;  they  recognised  the 
problems  of  their  day,  and  mentally  wrestled  with  them ;  but  they  drew  the  line 
at  action.  All  action  seemed  so  unsatisfactory  that  they  could  not  persuade 
themselves  to  reduce  their  splendid  patriotic  theories  to  experiment.  So  to-day 
there  is  a  tribe  of  idealists.  They  are  full  of  thought,  rich  in  ideas,  masterly  in 
systems ;  but  they  find  it  impossible  to  pass  from  reflection  to  effort.  Thought  is 
large,  action  is  insignificant;  thought  is  swift,  action  is  tardy;  thought  is 
triumphant,  action  is  f uU  of  interruption,  shortcoming,  and  failure ;  and  so  the 
theorist  abides  in  his  arm-chair  watching  pictures  in  the  fire.  To  follow  the 
facts  and  movements  of  the  world  as  a  supreme  game  of  chess  delights  the 
philosophic  mind,  but  to  interest  ourselves  in  any  commonplace  practical 
endeavour  to  aid  the  needy  is  voted  a  belittUng  vulgarism.  Amiel  says,  "  Eeverie 
is  the  Sunday  of  the  mind  " ;  and  the  whole  Ufe  of  some  men  is  a  Sunday,  they 
know  no  working-days.  They  deplore  personal  defects,  yet  they  do  not  bravely 
take  themselves  to  task  and  struggle  into  a  better  life ;  they  ponder  social  evils, 
but  nothing  comes  of  the  intellectual  agitation ;  they  have  their  ideas  and  aspira- 
tions concerning  the  heathen  world,  yet  they  take  no  part  in  missionary  enterprise. 
Their  whole  life  is  spent  in  observation,  reasoning,  and  soliloquy.  This  will  not 
do.  Deborah  scorns  the  idle  theorists,  and  their  position  is  always  ignoble.  We 
account  men  meritorious  as  they  master  the  difficult  conditions  of  human  life; 
society  has  no  prizes  for  mere  dreamers.  He  who  gives  a  cup  of  cold  water  to  a 
thirsty  soul  is  infinitely  better  than  the  idealist  whose  sparkling  fountains  and 
flowing  rivers  are  mere  mirages  of  the  brain.  We  must  have  thought,  theory, 
programme ;  we  must  have  the  dreamer,  the  philosopher,  the  debater,  only  the 
pondering  of  the  mind  must  be  succeeded  by  the  labour  of  the  hands.  When 
Cavour  died,  Elizabeth  B.  Browning  wrote :  "  That  noble  soul  who  meditated  and 
made  Italy  has  gone  to  the  diviner  country."  "  Meditated  and  made."  It  is  all 
there.  We  must  meditate  and  make.  Not  that  we  can  by  any  means  realise  all 
our  dream,  but  we  must  strive  thereunto.  Some  bit  of  reality  must  testify  to  the 
genuineness  of  our  great  thought  and  purpose.  H.  The  text  is  a  rebuke  to  the 
csmcAL.  The  Keubenites  were  the  critics  of  the  age.  "  Great  were  the  debates." 
They  read  the  minutes  of  the  last  meeting;  they  submitted  a  resolution  as  to  what 
might  be  done ;  tiien  tiiey  ably  discussed  the  whole  situation ;  the  ornaments  of 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

debate  shone  out ;  an  amendment  was  proposed  that  nothing  be  done,  the  vote  was 
taken,  the  amendment  was  declared  to  be  carried  by  a  large  majority,  and  the 
assembly  retired  to  lunch.  And  one  can  easily  imagine  the  course  of  the  debate. 
Some  would  object  to  a  movement  led  by  a  woman ;  others  would  question  the 
qualifications  of  Barak;  many  would  think  that  it  was  not  the  psychological 
moment  ;  and  those  with  a  flavour  of  military  genius  would  doubt  the  plan  of 
campaign.  The  critical  tribe  is  with  us  still.  We  have  a  host  of  people  who  are 
interested  in  the  great  struggle  of  Ught  and  darkness,  but  whose  interest  ends  with 
information,  discussion,  and  opinion.  We  have  such  critics  outside  the  Church. 
They  are  prepared,  at  five  minutes'  notice,  to  discuss  any  religious,  moral,  social, 
or  political  question ;  yet  they  make  no  practical  effort  whatever  to  grapple  with 
the  evils  they  dissect.  Especially  do  these  critics  love  to  scourge  the  Church. 
How  well  they  can  describe  the  evil !  How  clearly  they  can  see  what  ought  to  be 
done  I  How  rough  they  are  upon  the  blunders  of  philanthropists  and  evangelists ! 
But  all  ends  there ;  they  spend  no  time,  or  gold,  or  blood  in  any  form  of  practical 
amelioration.  How  false  is  the  position  of  the  critic,  and  how  ignoble  the  whole 
spirit  of  barren  criticism !  How  contemptible  the  carpet  knight  lecturing  the 
scarred  heroes  of  the  battlefield  1  How  ridiculous  the  musical  amateur  exposing 
the  faults  of  Handel  and  Mozart  I  How  despicable  the  scribbler  of  a  day  making 
merry  over  the  shortcoming  of  literary  masterpieces !  "  Why  abodest  thou  among 
the  sheepfolds  ?  "  is  the  d  jrisive  question  of  Deborah.  The  Eeubenites  thought 
themselves  superior  persons,  but  the  singer  suggests  a  cutting  contrary.  A  love  of 
ease  partly  explained  their  conduct.  They  liked  the  shepherd's  lute  better  than 
the  war-trumpet  with  its  toils  and  sufferings.  The  love  of  gain  also  explained  the 
absence  of  the  Eeubenites  from  battle.  And  they  were  cowards.  There  was  not  a 
spear  in  Israel,  and  Jabin  had  thousands  of  chariots  of  iron.  Deborah  pours 
scorn  on  the  windy  orators.  The  day  is  coming,  too,  when  God  will  pour  scorn 
upon  the  phrase-makers.  He  will  laugh  at  the  laughers,  criticise  the  critics,  scorn 
the  scorners.  Let  us  act.  "  God's  words  are  things,"  says  Luther ;  and  unless 
we  strive  to  make  our  words  things  they  become  falsities,  vanities,  mockeries.  One 
of  the  great  heroes  of  to-day  is  the  hero  of  the  paper-knife,  the  critic  who  flourishes 
his  wooden  weapon  as  if  it  were  some  famous  blade  of  victory.  The  poorest 
plough  that  will  scratch  the  ground,  the  most  ramshackle  basket  that  will  carry 
a  little  seed,  the  rustiest  hook  that  vdll  serve  for  a  sickle,  is  better  than  the  paper- 
knife.  A  drop  of  blood  is  more  than  a  vat  of  ink  or  a  world  of  talk.  The  poorest 
methods  of  service,  the  homeliest  instruments  of  practical  endeavour,  count  for 
far  more  in  the  sight  of  God  than  a  magazine  of  polished  and  attenuated  shafts 
which  neither  smite  nor  bite.  Let  us  not  waste  Ufe  in  opinion,  discussion,  or 
criticism,  but  deny  ourselves  in  daily  efforts  seeking  some  real  good.  Our  Master 
did  not  redeem  us  by  words,  but  by  tears  and  blood  ;  and  the  best  thing  for  us  is 
with  fewest  words  to  take  up  our  cross  and  follow  Him.  IH.  The  text  is  a  rebuke 
to  the  SENTIMENTALIST.  There  were  "  great  searchings  of  heart."  The  Eeubenites 
were  men  of  fine  feeling,  of  intense  emotion ;  only  the  emotion  evaporated  when 
the  resolution  was  duly  entered  upon  the  minutes.  A  large  circle  of  these  senti- 
mentalists survive.  They  pride  themselves  on  the  depth  and  tenderness  of  their 
feehng,  yet  their  feehng  never  compels  action  and  sacrifice.  They  feel  for  the 
poor,  the  ignorant,  the  suffering,  the  fallen,  and  most  for  themselves.  Li  prayers, 
sermons,  hymns,  and  sacraments  the  fountains  of  the  deep  are  broken  up  without 
leaving  any  fertiUsing  stream.  It  is  really  a  fearful  thing  that  sentiment  should 
be  BO  constantly  wasted  that  the  very  word  itself  comes  at  last  to  be  regarded  as 
expressing  something  unreal.  Sympathy  is  the  richest  element  in  the  human 
heart,  and  it  is  an  awful  loss  to  society  that  so  much  of  it  should  be  vainly  lavished 
on  unsubstantial  scenes  and  images,  on  airy  nothings.  We  talk  of  the  loss  of 
force  in  Niagara,  but  there  is  a  far  more  terrible  loss  of  precious  energy  in  the 
unavailing  stream  of  feeUng  which  passes  away  in  imaginative  moods.  If  we 
could  harness  the  Niagara  of  human  sympathy,  and  set  it  to  work  in  educating 
the  ignorant,  in  helping  the  helpless,  in  nursing  the  sick,  in  reclaiming  the  fallen, 
what  gracious  revolutions  would  be  worked  in  a  day  I  Feeling  is  worth  nothing 
if  it  bear  no  tangible  fruit.  Our  Master  wept,  but  He  also  bled.  {W.  L. 
Watkinson.)  Why  abodest  thou  among  the  sheepfolds 7— On  thirking  duty: 
— There  is  a  touch  of  scorn,  as  well  as  of  reproach,  in  the  question  of  the 
prophetess.  And  the  question  is  one  which,  in  the  spirit  of  it,  may  be  addressed 
to  thousands  to-day.  There  is  a  great  battle  now  going  on  in  the  world — the  battle 
between  truth  and  error,  right  and  wrong,  love  and  misery.    The  conflict  involvea 


CHAP.  ▼.]  JUDGES.  75 

self-denial ;  and  we  have  simply  no  right  to  "  abide  in  the  sheepfolds."  I.  We 
HAVE  NO  RIGHT  TO  SACEiriOE  DUTY  TO  coMTOET.  We  are  all  tempted  thus  to  prefer 
our  own  ease  to  the  doing  of  our  duty.  There  are  multitudes,  indeed,  who  will 
sacrifice  comfort  for  the  sake  of  some  selfish  end  :  their  love  of  money,  or  of  fame, 
or  of  pleasure,  will  lead  them  to  take  upon  themselves  a  large  amount  of  toil  and 
trouble.  But  when  it  is  a  question  of  simple  duty  there  are  many  who  will  shirk 
such  duties  rather  than  sacrifice  their  own  personal  ease.  They  would  like  to  do 
good  in  the  world ;  but  it  is  too  much  trouble  !  Many  a  man  shirks  the  duties  of 
citizenship  on  the  plea  that  he  has  no  ambition  to  distinguish  himself  in  public 
life.  He  finds  his  fireside  very  comfortable ;  the  bosom  of  his  family  is  his 
•'  sheepfold."  Others  shirk  their  duty  to  the  Church  and  the  cause  of  Christ 
simply  through  their  love  of  selfish  ease;  they  will  not  take  the  trouble  to  "do 
good  as  they  have  opportunity."  II.  We  have  no  eight  to  saceifice  duty  to 
PEACE.  It  is  right  that  you  should  shrink  from  the  din  of  controversy  and  strife, 
and  that  you  should  prefer  to  live  in  concord  with  your  neighbours  ;  but  it  is  wi'ong 
that,  on  this  account,  you  should  withhold  your  testimony  and  your  infiuence  from 
the  cause  of  truth  and  justice.  III.  We  have  no  eight  to  sacrifice  duty  to  gain. 
When  Christ  calls  you  into  the  conflict  against  the  world's  evil,  when  He  calls  you 
to  protest  by  your  own  example  against  all  dishonesty  .^nd  falsehood,  then  you  must 
be  prepared  to  sacrifice  some  of  the  profits  which  fall  to  the  lot  of  less  scrupulous  men, 
and  you  must  be  content,  if  necessary,  with  a  smaller,sheepfold.  (T.  C.Finlayson.) 
The  divisions  of  Eeuben. — The  attitude  of  Reuben: — Could  such  a  thing  as  actual 
neutrality  have  been  possible  under  the  circumstances,  the  men  of  Eeuben  would 
have  represented  such  an  attitude.  But  under  the  circumstances  it  was  impossible. 
No  member  of  the  favoured  race  could  be  actually  neutral  when  his  brethren  were 
struggling  for  liberty  and  life.  Not  to  assist  was  to  oppose.  To  look  on  coldly 
was  to  help  the  foe.  They  saw  their  brethren  gathering  on  the  opposite  bank. 
They  heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  and  the  noise  of  war.  Would  they  not  arise 
and  join  them  ?  Could  they  be  indifferent  when  the  very  existence  of  their  nation 
was  at  stake?  But  against  this  higher  impulse  had  to  be  set  considerations  of 
worldly  profit  and  loss.  "  Why  abodest  thou  among  the  sheepfolds,  to  hear  the 
bleatings  of  the  flocks  ?  "  It  was  this  fatal  sound  that  decided  them.  It  was  with 
them  as  it  so  often  is  with  us — the  nearer  the  temptation,  the  more  powerful 
it  becomes.  Had  they  marshalled  themselves  for  war,  and  left  their  homes,  the 
bleatings  of  the  sheepfold  would  never  have  reached  their  ears,  and  the  higher 
impulse  would  have  prevailed ;  but  as  they  Ungered  vacillating  by  the  sheepfolds, 
the  nearer  attractions  of  home  and  prosperity  proved  too  strong.  The  great 
opportunity  passed  away,  leaving  an  indelible  stain  on  the  history  of  the  tribe. 
"Unstable  as  water,  thou  shalt  not  excel."  Were  they  happy?  A  double-minded 
man  is  never  happy.  Unstable  in  all  his  ways,  he  can  neither  enjoy  the  world 
nor  God.  They  might  escape  danger,  but  they  could  not  escape  the  "  great 
searchings  of  heart."  Their  conscience  smote  them,  even  whUe  their  worldly 
prosperity  continued.  They  lost  the  power  to  enjoy  what  they  had  sacrificed 
their  character  to  retain.  Ah,  how  many  Eeubens  have  we  still  in  the  Church 
of  Christ ! — men  who  make  fair  promises  under  the  influence  of  a  momentary 
excitement  or  a  higher  emotion,  but  whose  hearts  are  not  fuUy  surrendered  to 
God.  They  grasp  after  the  good  things  of  the  world,  and  love  them.  They 
seek  the  good  opinion  of  their  fellow-men,  and  love  it.  If  a  Christianity  can  be 
discovered  which  shall  cost  them  nothing,  which  shall  not  even  lower  them  in 
the  estimation  in  which  men  of  the  world  hold  them,  such  a  Christianity  they 
are  ready  to  accept;  but  the  Christianity  of  the  manger  and  of  the  Cross,  of 
Gethsemane  and  Calvary,  they  shirk  from  with  ill-concealed  aversion.  (W.  Hay 
Aitken,  M.A.)  Divisions  should  be  avoided: — How  strong  it  makes  a  family 
when  all  the  sisters  and  brothers  stand  together,  and  what  an  awful  wreck  when 
they  disintegrate,  quarrelling  about  a  father's  will  and  making  the  surrogate's  office 
horrible  with  their  wrangle !  If  you  only  knew  it,  your  interests  are  identical. 
Of  all  the  families  of  the  earth  that  ever  stood  together,  perhaps  the  most  conspicuous 
is  the  family  of  the  Kothschilds.  As  Meyer  Anselm  Eothschild  was  about  to  die  in 
1812  he  gathered  his  children  about  him,  Anselm,  Nathan,  Charles,  and  James, 
and  made  them  promise  that  they  would  always  be  united  on  "  'Change."  Obeyinpr 
that  injunction,  they  have  been  the  mightiest  commercial  power  on  earth,  and  at 
the  raising  or  lowering  of  their  sceptre  nations  have  risen  or  fallen.  That  illr^ 
trates  how  much  on  a  large  scale,  and  for  selfish  purposes,  a  united  family  v< ■ 
achieve.    But  suppose  that,  instead  of  a  magnitude  of  dollars  as  the  object. 


76  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

be  doing  good  and  making  salutary  impression  and  raising  this  sunken  world,  how 
much  more  ennobling  1  Sister,  you  do  your  part,  and  brother  will  do  his  part.  (T, 
Be  Witt  Talmage.)  Why  did  Dan  remain  in  ships  ? — Why  did  Dan  remain  in 
ships  ? — I  dare  say  Dan  could  have  given  what  might  have  seemed  to  himself  a  very 
sensible  answer.  Surely  it  would  never  have  done  for  Dan  to  lose  his  commerce. 
Surely  it  was  most  important  that  he  should  retain  his  mercantile  position.  To 
leave  his  ships  and  go  to  fight  the  Lord's  battle  in  the  field  would  have  been  to 
tnrn  his  back  upon  his  most  obvious  interests.  He  had  no  men  to  spare ;  no  time 
to  spare ;  no  money  to  spare.  Far  too  busy  were  the  Danites  to  think  of  their 
brethren  in  the  field.  It  mattered  not  that  national  hberty  and  religion  might  be 
lost  so  long  as  Dan  retained  his  ships.  Go  to  the  streets  of  one  of  our  great 
towns,  and  you  will  see  the  same  thing  re-enacted.  Men  running  to  and  fro  as 
though  life  were  at  stake  in  every  effort,  toiling  at  their  business  all  day  long,  and 
when  night  comes  too  wearied  to  think  of  spiritual  things.  They  have  too  much 
to  do — are  far  too  busy  to  think  of  the  business  of  life  !  .  .  .  Why  I  does  he  not 
know  that  his  ships  are  doomed  sooner  or  later  to  fearful  shipwreck  ?  Dost  thou 
not  know,  O  lover  of  the  world,  that  the  day  must  come  when  thou  and  thy 
darling  idols  will  have  to  part  ?  What  profit  on  thy  dying  bed  to  remember  that 
thou  hast  laboured  here  for  that  which  thou  canst  not  carry  with  thee  ?  Thou 
hast  enlarged  thy  barns,  increased  thy  merchandise,  raised  thy  family  in  the 
world,  and  left  thy  children  in  prosperity ;  and  now  the  sentence  falls  upon  thy 
trembling  soul,  •'  Give  an  account  of  thy  stewardship,  for  thou  mayest  be  no 
longer  steward."  Poor  consolation  under  the  sentence  of  doom  to  remember  that 
thy  coiJers  are  full  while  thy  soul  was  starved.  (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  Why 
did  Dan  remain  in  ships  ? — Early  in  this  century  a  minister  in  England,  who  has 
since  spent  many  years  in  the  foreign  missionary  field,  was  requested  to  preach, 
at  a  meeting  of  some  of  his  brethren,  on  the  too  prevalent  disposition  among 
professing  Christians  to  inactivity  in  religion.  Somewhat  to  their  surprise,  he 
read  as  his  text,  "  Why  did  Dan  remain  in  ships  ?  "  After  explaining  the  text  in 
its  connection,  and  that  the  Danites  resembled  many  Christians  at  present,  he 
showed  their  inactivity  to  be — 1.  Unreasonable.  They  knew  the  state  of  the 
country,  its  dangers,  and  the  assurance  of  victory; — how  unreasonable  that  a 
whole  tribe  should  under  such  circumstances  remain  inactive.  2.  It  was  injurious. 
By  their  inactivity  the  hands  of  their  brethren  were  weakened,  an  opportunity  was 
given  to  the  enemy  to  triumph,  and  personal  injury  was  sustained.  3.  It  was 
sinful.  The  command  of  God  was  disregarded ;  they  availed  not  themselves  of 
opportunities  to  be  useful,  and  forbore  to  destroy  their  enemies.  That  jeoparded 
their  lives  unto  the  death  in  the  high  places  of  the  field.— Li/e  jeoparded  in 
heroic  service : — The  late  Wilmot  Brooke,  the  pioneer  missionary  to  the  Soudan, 
who  died  on  March  19th,  anticipated  his  swiftly-approaching  end.  At  the  Church 
Missionary  House  just  before  starting  on  his  last  expedition  in  May,  1891,  he 
remarked :  •'  I  have  five  times  had  African  fever  of  the  most  deadly  kind.  No 
one  is  ever  known  to  have  recovered  seven  times  from  this  fever.  You  must 
expect  that  some  of  us  will  fall ;  I  shall  not  be  surprised  if  my  call  comes  in  six 
months.  Still  I  am  determined  to  go.  Friends  tell  me  what  madness  it  is  to 
run  such  risks.  But  when  men  were  called  to  storm  Delhi  and  Lucknow,  they 
cheerfully  came  forward,  knowing  that  death  was  certain.  The  strongholds  of 
heathenism  and  Mohammedanism  can  only  be  stormed  by  acting  for  God  in  the 
same  spirit.  My  action  is  not  the  outcome  of  rashness  on  my  part.  I  am 
going  after  the  calmest  and  fullest  consideration."  The  stars  in  their  courses 
fought  against  Sisera. — Sisera  no  match  for  the  stars : — All  things,  even  the 
stars  in  their  courses,  fight  against  every  one  who,  like  Sisera,  puts  himself 
in  opposition  to  the  plans  of  the  Euler  of  the  universe.  If  you  co-operate 
with,  and  act  according  to  the  laws  of  God,  then  you  wiU  in  the  long  run  prove 
victorious ;  if  you  do  not,  why  then  these  laws  will  crush  you.  They  are  stronger 
than  you.  A  man  is  powerful  or  powerless  just  in  proportion  as  he  Ruliinits  to 
God's  laws.  And,  first,  to  speak  of  physical  laws,  or  those  relating  to  matter.  It 
is  by  obeying  nature  that  we  learn  her  secrets.  A  medical  man  in  the  kingdom  of 
nature  cures  or  kills,  just  in  proportion  as  he  has  carefully  or  carelessly  studied 
the  laws  of  health  and  obeys  them.  By  studying  and  making  use  of  the  physical 
laws  of  God's  universe  we  can  improve  health  and  prolong  life.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  is  no  favourite  of  nature  who  can  be  intemperate  and  not  suffer  from 
ill-health,  or  live  near  bad  drainage  and  escape  fever.  No  matter  how  intellectual 
or  even  religions  you  may  be,  if  yon  hold  your  hand  in  the  fire  it  will  certainly  be 


•' V. 


CHAP,  v.]  JUDGES.  77 

burned.  A  Christian  is  as  liable  to  losses  in  his  business  if  he  does  not  conform  to 
the  laws  of  commerce,  on  which  wealth  depends,  as  an  atheist  is.  Transgress 
God's  physical  laws,  and  even  the  stars  in  their  courses  fight  against  you.  Just  so 
there  are  spiritual  and  moral  laws,  by  compliance  with  which  we  receive  blessings, 
and  which,  if  not  obeyed,  are  as  ready  as  the  stars  to  fight  against  us.  Such  laws 
are  these  :  "  If  we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth  in  us."  "  If  any  man  will  do 
His  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  Without  God  we  can  do  nothing.  Let 
us  conduct  ourselves  in  every  relation  and  occupation  of  life  as  if  we  believed  we 
were  what  we  are — "  workers  together  with  God  " — and  all  things  must  work 
together  for  good.  Let  us  put  ourselves  in  opposition  to  Him,  and  all  things,  even 
the  stars  in  their  courses,  shaU  fight  against  us.  {E.  J.  Hardy,  M.A.)  The 
ttars  fought  against  Sisera  : — I.  The  literal  sense.  1.  This  lesson  is  a  song  of 
thanksgiving.  It  reminds  us  at  once  of  the  duty  of  gratitude  to  God  at  all  times, 
but  especially  after  any  great  deliverance.  The  miracle  of  the  cleansing  of  the 
lepers  puts  in  a  picture  the  rarity  of  thanksgiving — when  ten  pray,  but  one  gives 
thanks.  2.  Then,  this  song  was  a  spontaneous  outburst  of  praise  immediately 
after  the  reception  of  the  blessing.  Thanksgiving  was,  as  it  should  be,  prompt. 
3.  The  victory  was  ascribed  to  God :  "  Praise  ye  the  Lord  for  the  avenging  of 
Israel."  Thanksgiving  is  only  possible  when  there  is  faith,  when  the  eye  of  the 
Boul  penetrates  beyond  what  are  called  "  second  causes,"  and  traces  the  events  of 
this  life  to  the  providence  of  God.  4.  But  a  particular  instrument  which  God 
employed  for  carrying  out  His  purposes  is  recognised  in  the  text :  "  the  stars,"  &c. 
Viewed  literally,  what  is  meant  by  this  ?  It  is  the  description  of  some  wonder 
wrought  by  God  in  the  battle,  which  aided  the  overthrow  of  Jabin's  host  and 
Jabin's  general.  U.  The  fiqurativb  sense.  1.  «•  The  stars  in  their  courses " 
have  been  supposed  to  represent  the  angels  of  God.  2.  Warfare  against  evil  is  one 
part  of  the  angels'  functions.  Holy  Scripture  recounts  their  military  operations 
(Eev.  xii.  7).  St.  Jude  describes  another  altercation  (ver.  9).  Daniel  relates  a  third 
(Dan.  X.  13).  And  again,  at  the  end  of  the  world  (1  Thess.  iv.  16 ;  2  Thess.  il.  8), 
the  angels  "  shall  sever  the  wicked  from  among  the  just,"  and  consign  them  to 
punishment  (Matt.  xiii.  49,  50).  3.  We  may  not  know  how  these  spiritual  beings 
"  fought  against  Sisera,"  any  more  than  we  can  tell  how  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
caused  the  pestilence  in  the  days  of  David  (1  Chron.  xxi.  15) ;  but  we  do  know 
that  angels  are  the  ministers  of  God  (Psa.  civ.  4),  and  carry  out  His  behests.  4,  If 
the  stars  represent  the  angels  of  God,  then,  on  the  other  hand,  the  victory  over 
Sisera,  and  the  instrument  by  which  it  was  achieved,  form  an  apt  image  of  the 
overthrow  of  Satan's  power  by  the  Cross.  HI.  Lkssons.  1.  When  this  lesson  is 
said  to  contain  "praise  of  Jael's  perfidy,"  and  that  from  the  lips  of  an  inspired 
prophetess,  it  may  be  urged  in  reply,  that  it  is  a  commendation  of  the  brave  deed 
of  Jael  and  her  disinterested  zeal  for  the  welfare  of  God's  people,  whilst  the 
treachery  which  accompanied  it  was  in  keeping  with  the  low  moral  condition  of 
the  age  and  person — with  "  the  light  of  the  times."  2.  We  may  learn  from  the 
general  subject  the  duty  of  thanksgiving,  and  that  its  fulfilment  involves  a  belief 
in  the  doctrine  of  Divine  providence.  3.  According  to  the  literal  interpretation  of 
the  text,  we  are  led  to  the  conviction  that  even  such  matters  as  the  weather  may 
be  guided  by  God  to  fulfil  His  purposes,  and  that  His  directing  touch  is  effective  in 
a  region  far  beyond  the  ken  of  human  science,  which  can  only  extend  to  the 
proximate  causes  of  things.  4.  The  spiritual  meaning  should  remind  us  that  the 
angels  of  God  assist  us  in  our  conflict  with  the  evil  one,  and  by  Divine  appointment 
*'  succour  and  defend  us  on  earth " ;  so  that,  in  our  struggles  with  the  power  of 
darkness,  we  may  take  the  words  of  the  pi'ophet  as  a  ground  of  confidence,  "  Fear 
not :  for  they  that  be  with  us  are  more  than  they  that  be  with  them  "  (2  Kings  vi.  16). 
(Canon  Hutchings^  0  my  soul,  thou  hast  trodden  down  stren^h. — Interposition 
and  victory : — I.  The  interposition  by  which  the  soul  treads  down  all  opposition 
AND  gains  the  VICTORY.  It  matters  not  how  weak  the  creature  may  be  if  the  Lord 
interpose.  They  had  nothing  to  do  but  follow  on  :  it  was  the  Lord  that  took  spirit 
out  of  the  enemy,  and  that  caused  the  enemy  to  err.  These  things  remind  us  of 
what  an  awful  thing  it  is  to  be  an  enemy  to  God — under  sin,  under  the  wrath 
of  God,  under  the  curse  of  the  law,  and  under  the  powers  of  darkness ;  and  aU 
the  time  we  are  there,  we  are  reckoned  enemies,  and  we  are  under  judgment. 
What  a  fearful  position  I  and  yet  we  are  by  nature  unconscious  of  it,  and  uncon- 
cerned about  it.  Let  us,  then,  look  at  these  interposing  stars,  by  which  we  tread 
down  strength.  But  in  bo  doing  we  must  be  careful  not  to  forget  one  thing,  and 
that  is  the  chief  thing ;  and  that  is  Jesus  Christ,  the  Morning  Star.    He  is  that 


z^^^^^ 


78  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

interposing  light,  by  whom  we  have  the  victory.  But  it  says,  "  the  stars  in  their 
courses."  The  people  of  God  at  large  are  called  stars,  but  ministers  especially. 
Hence  you  read  of  His  holding  the  seven  stars  in  His  right  hand ;  the  seven  stars 
are  the  angels  or  messengers  of  the  Churches.  And  so  I  take  the  stars,  then,  il 
I  spiritualise  it,  fighting  against  Sisera,  to  mean  the  prophets  testimonially  standing 
against  the  powers  of  darkness,  n.  The  vain  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  escape. 
The  river  Kishon  swept  the  enemy  away.  Many  people  say,  "Well,  I  am  no 
enemy."    You  are,  unless  you  are  a  friend.     {James  Wells.) 

Yer.  23.  Curse  ye  Meroz . . .  because  they  came  not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord. — 

The  doom  of  Meroz  : — I.  The  sin  or  the  men  of  Meboz  is  described  in  very  remark- 
able terms,  although  we  have  grown  so  famUiar  with  them  as  scarce  perhaps  to 
notice  their  strange  character :  "  They  came  not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord."  Every- 
where we  read  of  the  Lord's  coming  to  the  help  of  man ;  but  man  coming  to  the 
help  of  the  Lord  seems  strange.  The  Lord  employs  instruments  for  the  executing 
of  His  purposes,  though  He  needs  them  not.  The  tribes  of  Israel  were  summoned 
to  this  war,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Meroz  declined  the  summons.  Well ;  but  God 
had  entered  into  marriage  covenant  with  Israel.  The  kingdom  of  Israel  was  His 
kingdom.  The  interests  of  Israel  were  His  interests ;  and  He  had  bound  up  with 
them  the  glory  of  His  own  name.  Accordingly  it  is  not  now  said  of  the  men  of 
Meroz  that  they  came  not  to  Deborah's  help,  nor  to  Barak's  help,  nor  even  to  the 
help  of  Israel,  but  that  "  they  came  not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord."  1.  A  little  more 
Bpecifically,  the  sin  of  the  men  of  Meroz  had  in  it  unbelief — criminal  distrust  of  the 
word  and  promise  and  power  of  the  living  God.  No  doubt  it  was  largely  cowardice 
that  led  them  to  refuse  their  aid.  But  whence  the  cowardice?  They  did  not  believe 
that  the  Canaanites  could  be  subdued.  They  would  keep  on  good  terms  with  the 
oppressors  to  save  their  own  heads.  2.  But  besides  criminal  unbelief — that  root 
and  strength  of  all  other  iniquities — the  sin  of  the  men  of  Meroz  had  in  it  a  vile 
preference  of  their  own  ease,  and  fancied  present  interest  before  the  authority  and 
honour  and  interest  of  the  God  of  Israel.  3.  And  thus,  further,  their  sin  was 
nothing  less  than  enmity,  war,  against  the  living  God.  Doubtless  they  would  be 
fain  to  say,  "What  have  we  done  so  much  against  Him?  we  have  but  sat  still  in  our 
quiet  homes."  Aye,  and  therein  fought  against  Him.  Oh,  there  is  no  possible 
medium  between  the  love  of  the  adorable  God  and  the  hatred  of  Him — between 
willing,  active  service  rendered  to  God  and  hostility,  war,  against  Him — "  He  that 
is  not  with  Me  is  against  Me ;  and  he  that  gathereth  not  with  Me  scattereth  abroad." 
4.  It  was  to  "  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty  "  they  refused  to  come — 
against  the  mighty.  Had  the  enemy,  that  is  to  say,  been  a  feeble,  contemptible  one 
in  numbers  and  strength,  they  might  have  had  some  plausible  pretext  for  leaving 
the  struggle  to  others.  But  all  was  in  reality  at  stake.  II.  Notice  the  judgment 
OF  the  Lord  against  the  men  of  Meeoz  for  this  sin.  I  think  there  can  be  very 
little  doubt  that  there  must  have  been  some  special  aggravation  in  the  case  of  Meroz 
which  has  not  been  placed  on  record — perhaps  its  having  been  in  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  of  the  field  of  action,  together  with  some  more  emphatic  treachery 
of  dealing  in  its  refusal  of  aid.  Lessons :  1.  First,  a  lesson  of  duty — very  urgent 
duty.  It  will  help  to  bring  both  the  duty  and  the  urgency  of  it  better  out  if  it  is 
borne  in  mind  that,  from  the  fall  of  our  race  downwards,  the  Lord  has  had  a  con- 
troversy, so  to  speak — a  quarrel  in  this  fallen  world — a  war  with  mighty  adversaries, 
Satan,  sin,  the  world  that  lieth  in  the  wicked  one — His  gracious  purpose  having  all 
along  been  in  that  war  to  call  a  people  out  of  the  world  for  the  glory  of  His  own 
name — an  innumerable  multitude  of  all  kindreds  and  peoples  and  tongues,  to  be 
"  washed,  and  sanctified,  and  justified,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the 
Spirit  of  our  God."  2.  Observe  a  second  lesson  of  a  different  character,  one  of  pre- 
cious and  varied  encouragement  to  all  such  as  are  disposed  humbly,  yet  resolutely 
and  prayerfully,  to  offer  themselves  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty. 
See,  for  example,  how  He  wiU  condescend  to  receive  and  welcome  your  aid  (ver.  9). 
And  see  the  grateful  mention,  if  I  might  so  speak  with  reverence,  which  God  makes 
of  particular  services  (ver.  14).  3.  Once  more,  we  have  a  lesson  here  of  solemn 
warning — duty,  encouragement,  warning.  For  observe  that  it  is  by  no  means  any 
and  every  kind  of  help  and  service  that  will  suffice  to  separate  us  from  the  class, 
and  save  us  from  the  curse,  of  the  inhabitants  of  Meroz.  A  man  may  come,  for 
example,  with  a  help  so  stinted  and  grudging  as  to  make  it  quite  manifest  that  it  is 
but  the  covering  up  of  a  desire  to  be  let  alone  altogether.  Or  he  may  come  with  a 
help  not  80  stinted  in  the  simple  amount  of  it,  yet  not  offered  to  the  Lord  Himself, 


CHAP,  v.]  JUDGES.  79 

wliich  is  the  hinge,  you  will  carefully  observe,  of  this  whole  matter,  "they  came  not 
to  the  help  of  the  Lord  " — '•  Ye  did  it,"  or,  "  ye  did  it  not,  to  Me."  Assuredly,  by 
how  much  the  Lord  has  revealed  His  condescension  and  grace,  in  making  offer  to 
us  of  so  marvellous  a  oneness  of  cause  and  interest  and  blessedness  with  Himself, 
by  so  much  the  more  aggravated  a  judgment  and  doom  must  the  contempt  and 
rejection  of  that  grace  bring  with  it.  {G.  J.  Brown,  D.D.)  Co-operation  in  God's 
cause  required  of  all: — I.  Fbom  the  earliest  pebiods  of  time  God  has  been 

OBACIOTJSLT  PLEASED  TO  PEOVTDE  FOB  THE  DELIVERANCE  OF  HiS  PEOPLE  FROM  THE 
THBALDOM  AND  BONDAGE  INTO  WHICH  THET  HAVE  BEEN  BBOUGHT  BT  SIN.  11.  In  THE 
PROSECUTION    OP    THIS    WOBK    JeHOVAH    MEETS    WITH    MUCH    AND    MIGHTY    OPPOSITION. 

m.  The  people  of  God  abe  bequibed  to  co-opebate  with  Jehovah  in  befebence 
TO  His  DESIGNS  AS  to  the  children  op  men.    IV.   Among  those  who  abe  thus 

SUMMONED  TO  THE  HELP  OF  THE  LOBD,  THEBE  ABE  SOME  WHO  DISREGABD  THE  CALL. 
V.  To  WITHHOLD  OUB  CO-OPEBATIVE  AID  IN  REFERENCE  TO  THE  DESIGNS  OP  GoD  TO 
BBING   THE  WOULD   FBOM   THE   BONDAGE  OF   SIN   TO  HiS  OWN   BLESSED   SEBVICE   IS   MOST 

CRIMINAL  AND  DESTRUCTIVE.  {W.  Roiy.)  Why  was  Meroz  cursed? — What  had 
Meroz  done  to  deserve  the  punishment  of  God?  In  the  first  place,  Meroz  had 
omitted  to  do  a  positive  and  plain  duty.  They  did  not  join  with  the  enemy,  but 
they  refused  to  help  the  people  of  God.  Then  again,  the  sin  of  Meroz  was  a  sin  of 
lukewarmness,  carelessness.  Supposing  England  to  have  been  overrun  by  an 
hostile  army.  Supposing  that  at  last,  gathering  all  her  strength  to  repel  her  enemies 
from  her  fair  country,  one  town  in  an  important  position  refused  to  join  in  the 
battle  at  a  critical  moment,  so  that  the  enemies  of  England  were  not  crushed  as 
we  desired  to  see  them.  Surely  aU  England  would  ring  with  words  of  hatred  for 
the  people  that  could  so  act,  Meroz  was  guilty  of  lack  of  patriotism,  but  a  lack  of 
patriotism  in  the  case  of  the  children  of  Israel  was  also  a  lack  of  proper  religious 
zeal.  Well,  then,  in  the  third  place,  Meroz  let  slip  an  opportunity ;  it  neglected  a 
crisis  in  its  life.  The  war  led  up  to  the  gates  of  Meroz,  the  opportunity  was  given 
to  them  of  striking  a  blow  for  God  against  sinners.  The  opportunity  was  refused. 
1.  From  the  conduct  of  the  people  of  Meroz,  then,  we  may  take  three  great  warnings ; 
and  in  the  first  place  a  warning  against  sins  of  omission.  People  are  apt  to  think 
a  very  great  deal  too  little  about  sins  of  omission.  We  are  all  of  us  apt  to  slur  over 
the  good  things  which  we  have  left  undone,  and  to  think  that  the  only  thing  hateful 
in  the  sight  of  God  or  offensive  to  Him  whom  we  call  our  heavenly  Father  are  the 
gross  sins  which  attract  perhaps  the  observation  and  hatred  of  others,  and  from 
which  our  own  consciences  do  naturally  recoil.  How  very  often  do  you  hear  a 
person  say  in  a  satisfied  way  that  they  have  never  done  harm  to  anybody.  Such 
persons  who  say  that  are  in  great  danger.  They  seem  to  see  no  sins  though  there 
may  be  many  in  their  lives ;  but  they  have  forgotten  altogether  that  the  object  of 
their  own  crisis,  the  very  object  of  their  coming  into  the  world,  was  not  to  do  no  sin, 
but  to  glorify  God  by  their  lives.  Neglecting  prayers.  When  we  lift  up  our  hands 
to  God  on  high  and  call  Him  our  Father,  when  we  have  that  mighty  privilege  and 
that  great  duty  accorded  to  us  and  yet  neglect  it,  is  it  no  sin,  I  say,  to  go  day  by 
day  with  careless  prayers,  or  neglected  prayers,  to  God  ?  Surely  there  is  some  sin 
in  neglecting  our  Church  and  our  duties  of  public  worship.  And  then  again,  while 
we  think  of  habits  of  evU  and  so  forth,  we  are  inclined  not  to  think  half  enough 
about  encouraging  habits  of  good,  doing  what  is  right  as  well  as  avoiding  what  is 
wrong.  Then  again,  faith — a  great  duty  to  us.  Yet  how  many  go  on  through  life 
without  ever  troubling  themselves  to  look  into  the  matters  of  their  faith,  or  how 
many  dare  to  live  on  through  life  with  a  sort  of  lurking  or  lingering  doubt  at  their 
hearts,  which  chills  all  their  acts  of  devotion  and  makes  their  lives  unlovely  in  the 
sight  of  God.  The  curse  of  God  came  down  on  Meroz  ;  doomed  to  judgment  was 
the  city,  not  because  it  did  that  which  was  wrong  in  opposing  the  people  of  God, 
but  because  she  neglected  a  plain  duty  that  God  had  put  before  her  plainly.  2.  Then 
we  see,  in  the  second  place,  that  the  sin  of  Meroz  was  a  sin  of  lukewarmness.  We 
are  warned  very  frequently  and  very  earnestly  in  Holy  Scripture  about  the  sin  of 
lukewarmness,  not  being  eager  to  take  the  part  of  God,  not  being  eager  to  proclaim 
ourselves  His  children  and  to  show  ourselves  worthy  of  the  membership  of  His 
Church.  There  are  many  warnings  to  this  effect,  notably,  the  character  of  Esau  in 
the  Old  Testament.  And  then  you  remember,  surely,  those  awful  denunciations  in 
the  Book  of  the  Revelation  against  the  lukewarm  Laodicea.  We  are  inclined  to  be 
very  hot  and  earnest  and  keen  about  matters  of  business,  or  about  matters  of 
pleasure,  or  about  matters  of  politics,  or  perhaps  we  may  even  add  about  matters  of 
Church  partisanship.    Bat  how  about  true  religion?    Oh,  we  aaj,  "Let  OB  take 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

that  easy.  Our  fathers  did,  perhaps,  before  us,  why  should  not  we?  Do  not  let  us 
take  any  trouble  about  that.  That  will  come  all  right  in  the  end."  3.  And  again, 
in  the  last  place,  we  notice  that  the  sin  of  Meroz  was  neglecting  to  seize  an 
opportunity,  letting  a  crisis  in  its  history  pass  by  without  making  use  of  it. 
The  opportunity  was  given  for  striking  a  blow  for  God,  and  it  was  let  slip  by. 
We  are  in  danger  in  this  way.  There  are  crises  in  every  man  and  woman's 
life,  crises  in  the  lives  of  all  of  us,  which  God  gives  to  us;  some  of  very 
vital  importance — opportunities,  which  may  perhaps  never  come  again,  of  strik- 
ing some  blow  for  God,  or  of  gaining  some  great  spiritual  victory  over  the 
sins  which  beset  us.  It  is  very  important  to  remember  this.  (Cecil  Hook, 
M.A.)  Coming  to  the  help  of  the  Lord: — 1.  Meroz  is  never  again  mentioned  in 
Scripture,  and  its  exact  site  is  unknown.  Its  sin  resulted  in  its  extinction.  What 
was  that  sin?  (1)  It  was,  first,  an  act  of  selfishness.  The  inhabitants  of  Meroz 
cared  only  for  their  own  interests.  The  yoke  of  Jabin  did  not  apparently  lie  so 
heavily  upon  them  as  upon  the  northern  tribes.  They  could  see  no  advantage  to 
be  gained  for  themselves  by  a  military  revolt,  and  they  would  run  no  risks  in  con- 
nection with  it.  (2)  It  was,  therefore,  a  neglect  of  duty.  They  did  not  fight  against 
their  brethren,  but  they  would  not  fight  for  them.  It  was  a  purely  negative  sin,  a 
sin  of  omission,  but  it  was  none  the  less  a  distinct  and  positive  "  No  "  to  the  caU  of 
duty.  (3)  This  refusal  was  an  act  of  impiety.  It  betrayed  a  sad  lack  of  patriotism 
and  a  coutemplible  indifference  towards  national  freedom  and  honour.  These 
miserable  lovers  of  ease  had  the  souls  of  slaves,  and  were  unworthy  of  their 
ancestral  traditions.  Their  indifference  was,  moreover,  impious.  It  implied  a 
disregard  of  God,  whose  worship  they  were  bound  to  uphold.  2.  Meroz  haa 
perished  ;  but  did  none  of  its  inhabitants  escape  ?  Have  they  not  had  a  numerous 
progeny  and  become  a  great  people  spread  over  the  face  of  the  earth?  Their 
descendants  are  not  unknown  among  ourselves.  Is  there  nothing  in  our  hfe  that 
corresponds  to  the  sin  of  Meroz  ?  Consider  our  position  in  relation  to  the  gospel  of 
Christ,  and  we  shall  see.  Our  Lord  has  summoned  us  to  the  conquest  of  the  world. 
All  souls  are  His — His  by  right  of  creation  and  redemption,  as  they  should  also  be 
by  willing  submission.  That  submission  is  hindered  by  men's  ignorance  and  error, 
by  reckless  indifference  and  dehberate  sin,  by  calculating  worldliness  not  less  than 
by  unbridled  self-indulgence.  Against  these  foes  the  whole  force  of  the  gospel  is 
directed.  Every  man,  be  he  learned  or  ignorant,  an  Englishman  or  a  Hindoo,  is 
interested  in  that  fact,  and  needs  the  help  of  which  it  is  at  once  the  pledge  and  the 
source.  Christ,  and  Christ  only,  is  the  Saviour  of  the  world ;  even  as,  on  the  other 
hand,  every  man  belongs  unto  Christ,  and  is  bound  by  the  most  stringent  and 
absolute  obligation  to  Him  who  is  Lord  of  all.  Christ  comes  not  to  this  conquest 
alone,  but  as  "  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host."  He  summons  His  people  to  His  side, 
gives  them  spear  and  shield,  and  equips  them  for  the  fight.  We  have,  of  course, 
the  power  of  refusal.  Our  Lord  asks  for  wiUing  service,  and  will  have  no  pressed 
men  in  the  ranks.  You  can  escape  this  service  if  you  are  so  minded,  meeting 
Christ's  call  and  your  brother's  need  with  a  flat  denial.  Multitudes  do  so  fail,  and 
why  ?  1.  Some  are  influenced  by  a  false  intellectualism.  Let  us,  as  far  as  it  is  in 
our  power,  know  the  best  that  has  been  thought  and  said,  come  in  contact  with 
master  minds,  understand  their  working,  see  things  as  with  their  eyes,  and  catch 
the  glow  of  their  enthusiasm.  To  gaze  on  the  fair  forms  of  truth  and  beauty,  to 
listen  to  the  harmonies  of  perfect  music,  is  a  pure  delight,  and  imparts  an  added 
charm  to  life.  But  such  an  aim  touches  only  a  small  part  of  our  duty.  The  know- 
ledge of  Christ — the  crown  of  all  science— can  only  be  acquired  by  the  obedience  of 
faith  and  love  ;  while  no  amount  of  self-culture  or  of  aesthetic  worship  will  justify 
us  in  ignoring  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  mankind,  or  in  neglecting  the  opportunities 
we  possess  of  meeting  the  terrible  pressure  of  human  need.  2.  Other  men  are 
absorbed  in  business.  Their  main  aim  is  to  get  on  in  the  world,  to  become  rich  and 
prosperous,  to  make  good  bargains,  and  to  ensure  at  any  rate  a  steady  increase  of 
their  capital  or  their  savings.  Coal,  steam,  and  iron  have  their  devout,  if  not  their 
disinterested,  worshippers.  Money,  which  is  designed  to  be  a  means,  becomesan  end 
in  itself — committed  to  men  in  trust,  it  is  hoarded  or  used  as  if  it  were  their  own, 
and  they  do  nothing  to  rescue  the  heathen,  because  they  are  themselves  the  slaves 
of  "  covetousness,  which  is  idolatry."  3.  A  third  class  make  no  response  to  the  call 
of  Christ  because  of  their  love  of  pleasure.  They  care  only  for  amusement,  for 
sensuous  excitement,  or  something  to  relieve  the  weariness  and  ennui  of  life,  and  to 
make  it  bright,  eager,  and  thrilling.  Enslaved  and  befooled  by  passion,  "  all  that 
is  within  them  doth  condemn  itself  for  being  there."    4.  Yet  others  are  prevented 


CHAJ.T.]  JUDGES.  81 

from  joining  us  in  our  campaign  because  of  their  theological  laxity.  One  religion, 
they  urge,  is  as  good  as  another,  and  to  convert  the  heathen  is  a  superfluous,  if  it  be 
not  an  impossible,  task.  And  similarly  when  men  excuse  their  indifference  to  this 
great  work  on  the  ground  of  the  coldness,  the  worldliness,  and  the  strife  of  the 
Churches  at  home.  The  best  of  Christians  are  no  doubt  imperfect,  the  ideal  of  their 
life  is  but  inadequately  realised,  and  many  who  profess  to  be  Christ's  are  sadly 
inconsistent.  We  deplore  the  fact,  but  it  does  not  exempt  us  from  a  plain  duty. 
Still  the  Saviour  asks,  "  What  is  that  to  thee  ?  follow  thou  Me."  (Jas.  Stuart.) 
Eeligious  indifference : — I.  The  Loed's  people  identified  with  their  Lord. 
Observe  the  bearing  of  this  principle  on— 1.  Sympathy  (Acts  ix.  4).  2.  Power 
(Eph.  i.  22).  3.  Life  and  grace  (John  xv.).  4.  Keproach  (Luke  x.  16).  II.  The 
sin  of  Mekoz.  This  disregard  of  God's  people  implies — 1.  Ignorance  of  God's  love 
to  His  children.  2.  An  imperfect  sense  of  the  scheme  of  Divine  government.  By 
human  means,  &c.  3.  An  imperfect  sense  of  personal  responsibility — Cain 
(Gen.  iv.  9).  4.  Indifference  to  God's  truth  and  honour — Pilate.  5.  Selfishness 
— Balaam.  6.  Indecision — Peter  in  the  judgment  haU.  III.  The  sin  eebiains. 
It  is  ever  displaying  itself  in  new  forms.  1.  The  Church  at  home  indifferent  to  the 
evangelisation  of  the  heathen.  2.  Wealthy  congregations  indifferent  to  poorer 
localities.  3.  Women  of  ease  and  leisure  to  their  burdened  and  weary  sisters. 
4.  Parents  unwilling  to  give  their  sons  for  the  ministry.  5.  Indifference  to  the 
conversion  of  souls.  IV.  The  result  is  that  punishivient  cojies  upon  the 
DEFAULTERS.  1.  Of  old  it  was,  "  If  the  Lord  be  God,"  c&c.  (1  Kings  xviii.  21).  Not 
less  solemn  and  critical  is  the  question  now,  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  "  Not  to 
confess  Him  is  to  deny  Him  (Matt.  x.  33).  2.  So  with  our  employment  of  gifts  and 
opportunities.  The  buried  talent  and  the  hidden  pound,  or  their  iU-using,  involve 
the  "darkness  that  is  without."  3.  So  of  the  •*  brotherhood."  We  are  to  love  it, 
to  promote  and  defend  it.  There  may  be  flaws,  but  this  does  not  justify  separation. 
It  calls  for  prayer  and  the  active  operation  of  faith,  sincerity,  and  truth.  "  They 
shall  prosper  that  love  thee."  V.  Shun  indifference  and  indecision.  They  bring 
men  to  perish,  like  Balaam,  with  the  ungodly.  Be  decided  as  Paul,  though  it  bring 
the  loss  of  all  things.  What  is  there  so  noble  as  to  "  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of 
the  sufferings  of  Christ  for  His  body's  sake,  which  is  the  Church  "  ?  (Col.  i.  24).  (H. 
W.  Dearden,  3I.A.)  The  moral  of  the  curse  of  Meroz : — In  a  way  that  in  some  respects 
reminds  us  of  the  German  prophetess  Velleda,  of  the  British  queen  Boadicea,  and  of 
the  French  peasant  girl  Joan  of  Ai-c,  does  Deborah  revive  the  national  spirit,  and 
summon  the  people  to  repel  the  national  foes.  In  this  verse  she  utters  true  scorn 
for  those  who  were  inactive  and  self-contained  in  a  time  when  the  nation  was  in  ita 
thi-oes  for  liberty  and  independence.  I.  Our  work  for  Christ  is  vert  analogous 
TO  WAR.  1,  In  its  fierce  opposition.  2.  In  its  reverses  of  victory  and  defeat.  3.  In 
its  call  for  a  sacrifice.  H.  Neglect  of  such  work  involves  us  in  a  cur.sE.  1.  The 
reproachful  cry  of  the  world's  sin  and  sorrow.  2.  Conscious  separation  from  God. 
Common  aim  and  common  work  are  indispensable  for  true  fellowship.  3.  Loss  of 
the  rewards  of  true  service.  4.  Piebuke  of  Christ :  "  Ye  did  it  not."  (U.  R.  Thomas.) 
Inaction : — Notice,  first  of  all,  that  the  sin  for  which  Meroz  is  cursed  is  pure 
inaction.  There  are  in  all  our  cities  a  great  multitude  of  useless  men  and  of  men 
perfectly  contented  with  their  uselessness.  Consider  some  of  the  various  points 
which  uselessness  assumes.  I.  The  first  source  of  the  uselessness  of  good  men  is 
MORAL  COWARDICE.  The  vice  is  wonderfully  common.  The  fear  is  concentrated 
on  no  individual,  but  is  there  not  a  sense  of  hostile  or  contemptuous  surroundings 
that  hes  like  a  chilling  hand  upon  what  ought  to  be  the  most  exuberant  and 
spontaneous  utterance  of  life  ?  Men  do  not  escape  from  their  cowardice  by  having 
it  proved  to  them  that  it  is  a  foolish  thing  to  be  afraid.  Nothing  but  the  knowledge 
of  God's  love,  taking  such  possession  of  a  man  that  his  one  wish  and  thought  in 
life  is  to  glorify  and  serve  God,  can  hberate  him  from,  because  it  makes  him  totally 
forget,  the  fear  of  man.  II.  The  second  cause  of  uselessness  is  false  humility. 
Humility  is  good  when  it  stimulates,  it  is  bad  when  it  paralyses,  the  active  powers 
of  a  man.  If  conscious  weakness  causes  a  man  to  believe  that  it  makes  no 
difference  whether  he  works  or  not,  then  his  humility  is  his  curse.  Eemember — 
1.  That  man  judges  by  the  size  of  things  ;  God  judges  by  their  fitness.  2.  That 
small  as  you  think  you  are,  you  are  the  average  size  of  moral  and  intellectual 
humanity.  3.  That  such  a  humility  as  yours  comes,  if  you  get  at  its  root,  from  an 
over-thought  about  yourself,  an  over-sense  of  your  own  personality,  and  so  is 
closely  akin  to  pride.  III.  The  third  cause  of  uselessness  is  indolence.  There  is 
only  one  permanent  escape  from  indolence  and  self-indulgence — the  grateful  and 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

obedient  dedication  to  God  through  Christ,  which  makes  all  good  work,  all  self- 
sacrifice,  a  privilege  and  joy  instead  of  a  hardship,  since  it  is  done  for  Him. 
(Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.)  Zeal  lacking  : — Take  a  heretic,  a  rebel,  a  person  that  hath 
an  ill  cause  to  manage ;  what  he  is  deficient  in  the  strength  of  his  cause  he  makes 
up  with  diligence ;  while  he  that  hath  right  on  his  side  is  cold,  indiligent,  lazy, 
inactive,  trusting  that  the  goodness  of  his  cause  will  not  fail  to  prevail  without 
assistance.  So  wrong  prevails,  while  evil  persons  are  zealous  and  the  good 
remiss.     (Bp.  Jeremy  Taylor.) 

Vers.  24-27.  Blessed  above  ■women  shall  Jael  .  .  .  be. — TJie  blessing  ofJael: — 
And  whose  lips  are  they  which  pronounce  this  blessing  ?  Indeed,  it  is  Deborah  the 
prophetess  who  sings  this  song ;  it  is  Deborah,  by  whom  God  spake,  who  gives 
utterance  to  this  strain.  It  is  clear  that,  revolting  as  her  action  appears  at  first 
view,  there  must  be  a  way  of  looking  at  it  in  which  it  deserves  all  our  sympathy 
and  applause.  I.  First,  we  would  observe  that  hdmak  actions  abe,  in  God's 
HOLT  Word,  spoken  of  as  good  and  righteous,  although  at  the  same  time  it  is 

CERTAIN     THAT     THE     BEST     DEEDS     OP     THE     BEST     MEN    ARE    ALLOYED   WITH    EVIL.       It 

would  not,  therefore,  be  out  of  harmony  with  the  tenor  of  the  inspired  volume, 
that  Jael  should  be  called  blessed  for  her  deed,  that  her  deed  should  meet  with 
commendation  from  the  prophetess,  without  it  being  thereby  implied  that  she  was 
quite  undeserving  blame.  If  her  act  contained  some  elements  of  good,  amidst  much 
of  evil,  it  might,  if  the  good  preponderated,  be  esteemed  and  proclaimed  as  blessed. 
To  this  general  observation  we  would  add  another,  namely,  that  under  the  Jewish 
dispensation  there  was  a  lower  standard  of  religious  perfection  than  under  the 
Christian.  Hence  it  is  that  you  find  the  most  renowned  characters  of  the  Old 
Testament  polluted  with  sins  from  which  men  of  ordinary  morality  among  our- 
selves would  recoil.  So  that  Jael's  deed  is  to  be  judged,  not  by  itself  in  the 
abstract,  stiU  less  by  the  light  of  the  gospel,  but  in  reference  to  the  code  under 
which  she  lived,  in  reference  to  the  laiowledge  of  the  Divine  will  then  published 
among  men;  and  so  judged,  it  is  not  requisite  that  it  should  have  been  free  from  all 
blame  in  order  to  obtain  praise.  H.  But  what  were  the  elements  of  good  in 
THIS  FAMOUS  ACT  OF  THE  Kenite  WOMAN  ?  Now  wc  must  here  remind  you  of  the 
real  character  of  the  Israelitish  warfare.  It  is  of  course  true  that  always  the  sword 
is  God's  weapon,  as  much  as  the  famine  or  the  pestilence.  War  is  the  scourge 
wherewith  the  Eternal  lashes  the  nations  when  they  wax  proud  against  Him.  But 
the  difference  between  the  case  of  the  Israelites  and  every  other  conquering  race 
is  this,  that  the  Israelites  knew  their  mission,  and  went  forth  to  execute  it  at 
God's  bidding.  And  now,  again,  let  us  apply  these  principles  to  the  case  of 
Jael.  The  people  of  the  Lord  were  in  arms  against  the  enemies  of  the  Lord. 
We  do  not  know  whether  Jael  was  a  daughter  of  Israel;  if  not,  her  faith,  as 
we  shall  see,  is  more  remarkable.  She  had  heard  of  the  violence  of  the  Canaanite 
for  twenty  years;  she  had  heard  that  Deborah,  in  whom  dwelt  the  spirit  of  pro- 
phecy, had  aroused  the  men  of  Israel  against  Sisera.  To  her  mind  it  was  not  a 
mere  struggle  of  hostile  nations  for  liberty  and  power.  To  her  it  was  the  battle 
of  the  Lord  of  hosts  against  the  heathen  who  refused  to  worship  Him ;  it  was 
as  the  mustering  of  the  armies  of  heaven  against  the  armies  of  hell.  We  are 
aware  that  it  is  still  open  to  you  to  object,  that  even  if  the  killing  Sisera  can  be 
justified,  the  craft  which  beguiled  him  must  be  reprehensible.  In  answer  to  this, 
we  remind  you  of  the  observations  wherewith  we  started,  namely,  that  we  need  not 
prove  Jael's  act  to  be  free  from  all  defect,  we  are  only  concerned  to  show  that 
it  had  in  it  many  elements  of  good ;  and  now  we  set  it  forth  as  an  act  evidencing 
strong  faith  in  the  God  of  Israel  (faith  still  more  marvellous  if  the  Kenite's 
wife  was  not  a  daughter  of  Israel),  as  prompted  by  love  for  Him,  and  zeal  for 
His  cause.  Such  love  and  such  zeal,  even  when  evinced  by  an  action  not  perfectly 
faultless,  might  well  earn  praise.  But  we  go  further.  It  may  be  doubted  how  far 
the  treachery  of  the  act,  as  it  appears,  was  sinful.  Is  it  wrong  to  use  craft  against 
Satan  ?  May  we  resist  the  devU  only  by  open  force  ?  May  we  not  use  prudence 
and  tact  and  wiliness  in  avoiding  temptation  or  in  abating  its  force  ?    III.  The 

WHOLE   HISTORY  OF   THE   ISRAELITES  18   TYPICAL   OP   THE   HISTORY  OF   THE  REDEMPTION 

OF  MANKIND  BY  Jesus  Chbist.  The  delivery  of  the  Jews  from  their  enemies, 
often  as  it  occurs,  is  symbolical  of  the  greater  deliverance  of  all  people 
from  the  thraldom  of  Satan.  And  whilst  the  general  history  is  thus  broadly 
significant,  the  distinct  parts  of  that  history  lead  tre  almost  irresistibly  to  the  re- 
i  nembrance  of  particular  features  in  the  history  of  Christ's  salvation.    {Bp.  Woodford.) 


CHAP,  v.]  JUDGES,  83 

The  blessing  of  Jael  by  Deborah : — I.  The  defficdltt  is  not  to  be  suBMoiraTED  by 
DEN1INQ  THE  INSPIRATION  OF  Deborah's  UTTERANCE.  If  this  weto  SO — if  it  might  be 
maintained  that  Deborah  is  wrong  when  she  pronounces  Jael  blessed — how  are  we 
to  know  that  she  is  right  in  her  other  statements  ?  Upon  what  principle  are  we  to 
draw  the  exact  line  of  demarcation  ?  11.  In  what  sense  are  we  to  understand 
Deborah's  language,  and  how  are  we  to  reconcile  it  with  what  would  seem,  at 
first  sight,  to  be  the  true  character  of  Jael's  action?  1.  Sisera's  life  was,  in 
Deborah's  judgment,  rightly  forfeited.  He  was  the  Lord's  enemy.  He  repre- 
sented, in  Deborah's  eye — (1)  An  impure  and  cruel  system  of  idolatry,  which  had 
been  sentenced  to  extermination  by  God  ;  (2)  a  long  career  of  plunder  and  murder, 
which  had  brought  untold  miseries  upon  the  poor  peasants  of  Naphtali  and 
Zebulun.  2.  Deborah's  language  about  Jael  is  relative  language.  (1)  Relative  to 
the  conduct  of  other  persons  than  Jael.  The  contrast  is  really  between  the  motive 
and  the  absence  of  motive ;  between  the  wUl  to  do  what  is  right  and  the  absence  of 
wiU.  (2)  Eelative  to  the  time  and  circumstances  in  which  Jael  lived,  and  to  the 
opportunities  at  her  command ;  or,  rather,  to  the  absence  of  such  oppor- 
tunities. Jael's  loyalty  to  Israel,  and  to  the  one  ray  of  truth  she  knew,  is 
admirable  ;  the  method  she  chose  for  expressing  her  loyalty,  though  for  her  quite  a 
matter  of  course  and  custom,  is  deplorable.  For  acting  fuUy  up  to  all  the  Ught  she 
possessed  she  deserved  the  meed  of  praise  awarded  her  by  Deborah.  HI.  Con- 
cluding lessons.  1.  Note  the  equitableness  of  Deborah's  estimate  of  Jael.  How 
often  do  we,  in  our  judgment  of  others,  measure  their  failures  by  some  standard  of 
which  they  have  never  heard,  and  refuse  them  credit  for  excellences  which  in 
them  are  even  consummate  I  Their  standard  is  a  very  poor  and  low  one,  it  may 
be,  but  if  they  have  had  no  chance  of  learning  something  better,  it  is  the  standard 
by  which  they  will  be  judged.  We  do  not  risk  loyalty  to  higher  truth  than  any  of 
which  they  know  if  in  judging  them  we  are  strong  enough  to  be  equitable.  2.  This 
history  would  be  sorely  misapplied  if  we  were  to  gather  from  it  that  a  good  motive 
justifies  any  action  that  is  known  to  be  bad.  Jael  could  not  have  been  pronounced 
"  blessed  "  had  she  been  a  Jewess,  much  less  had  she  been  a  Christian.  The 
blessings  which  the  ignorant  may  inherit  are  forfeited  when  those  who  know,  or 
might  know,  more  act  as  do  the  ignorant.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Deborah^ s  praise  of 
Jael: — "We  need  not  weight  ourselves  with  the  suspicion  that  the  prophetess 
reckoned  Jael's  deed  the  outcome  of  a  Divine  thought.  No ;  but  we  may  believe 
this  of  Jael,  that  she  is  on  the  side  of  Israel,  her  sympathy  so  far  repressed  by  the 
league  of  her  people  with  Jabin,  yet  prompting  her  to  use  every  opportunity  of 
serving  the  Hebrew  cause.  It  is  clear  that  if  the  Kenite  treaty  had  meant  very 
much,  and  Jael  had  felt  herself  bound  by  it,  her  tent  would  have  been  an  asylum  for 
the  fugitive.  But  she  is  against  the  enemies  of  Israel ;  her  heart  is  with  the  people 
of  Jehovah  in  the  battle,  and  she  is  watching  eagerly  for  signs  of  the  victory  she 
desires  them  to  win.  Unexpected,  startling,  the  sign  appears  in  the  fleeing  captain 
of  Jabin's  host,  alone,  looking  wUdly  for  shelter.  "  Turn  in,  my  lord  ;  turn  in." 
Will  he  enter  ?  WiU  he  hide  himself  in  a  woman's  tent  ?  Then  to  her  will  be 
committed  vengeance.  It  will  be  an  omen  that  the  hour  of  Sisera's  fate  has  come. 
Hospitality  itself  must  yield  ;  she  wUl  break  even  that  sacred  law  to  do  stem 
justice  on  a  coward,  a  tyrant,  and  an  enemy  of  God.  A  line  of  thought  like  this  is 
entirely  in  harmony  with  the  Arab  character.  The  moral  ideas  of  the  desert  are 
rigorous,  and  contempt  rapidly  becomes  cruel.  A  tent  woman  has  few  elements  of 
judgment,  and,  the  balance  turning,  her  conclusion  was  be  quick,  remorseless. 
Jael  is  no  blameless  heroine ;  neither  is  she  a  demon,  Deborah,  who  understands 
her,  reads  clearly  the  rapid  thoughts,  the  swift  decision,  the  unscrupulous  act,  and 
sees,  behind  all,  the  purpose  of  serving  Israel,  Her  praise  of  Jael  is  therefore  with 
knowledge;  but  she  herself  would  not  have  done  the  thing  she  praises.  AH 
possible  explanations  made,  it  remains  a  murder,  a  wild,  savage  thing  for  a  woman 
to  do ;  and  we  may  ask  whether  among  the  tents  of  Zaanaim  Jael  was  not  looked 
on  from  that  day  as  a  woman  stained  and  shadowed,  one  who  had  been  treacherous 
to  a  guest.  Not  here  can  the  moral  be  found  that  the  end  justifies  the  means,  or 
that  we  may  do  evil  with  good  intent ;  which  never  was  a  Bible  doctrine,  and 
never  can  be.  On  the  contrary,  we  find  it  written  clear  that  the  end 
does  not  justify  the  means.  Sisera  must  live  on  and  do  the  worst  he  may 
rather  than  any  soul  should  be  soUed  with  treachery  or  any  hand  defiled  by 
marder.  There  are  human  vermin,  human  scorpions  and  vipers.  Is  Christian 
society  to  regard  them,  to  care  for  them  ?  The  answer  is  that  Providence  regards 
them  and  oares  for  them.    They  are  htunan  after  all — men  whom  God  has  made, 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

for  -whom  there  are  yet  hopes,  who  are  no  worse  than  others  would  be  if  Divine 
grace  did  not  guard  and  deliver.  Eightly  does  Christian  society  affirm  that  a 
human  being  in  ijerU,  in  suffering,  in  any  extremity  common  to  men,  is  to  be 
succoured  as  a  man,  without  inquiry  whether  he  is  good  or  vUe.  What,  then,  of 
justice,  and  man's  administration  of  justice  ?  This,  that  they  demand  a  sacred 
calm,  elevation  above  the  levels  of  personal  feeling,  mortal  passion  and  ignorance. 
Law  is  to  be  of  no  private,  sudden,  unconsidered  administration.  Only  in  the  most 
solemn  and  orderly  way  is  the  trial  of  the  worst  malefactor  to  be  gone  about, 
sentence  passed,  justice  executed.    {iJ.  A.  Watson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  28-30.  Why  is  his  chariot  so  long  in  coming  ?  why  tarry  the  wheels  of  his 
chariots? — The  delayed  chariot: — The  language  of  this  hoping,  yet  half-despairing 
and  disconsolate  mother,  has  been,  I  presume,  the  language  of  multitudes  some 
time  or  other  in  the  stern  fight  of  existence  and  the  moral  campaign  of  consecrated 
life.  When  God  has  tarried  in  His  pavilion  of  cloud,  withholding  both  Himself 
and  His  blessings,  our  hearts  have  struggled  and  our  lips  quivered  with  wondei'ing 
desire  to  know  the  reason  "  why,"  until  impatience  has  bubbled  over  in  anxious 
inquiry,  "  Why  is  His  chariot  so  long  in  coming  ?  why  tarry  the  wheels  of  His 
chariots  ? "  God  stays  not  from  us  because,  hke  Sisera,  He  is  a  dismounted 
general  and  a  slain  warrior :  men  fall,  but  He  never.  He  always  has  a  sublime 
design  in  His  tarrying,  a  good  and  satisfactory  reason  for  His  delay,  which  He  does 
not  always  make  known,  but  leaves  us  to  spell  out  as  best  we  can  for  ourselves.  He 
tan'ies  to  do  us  good,  and  not  to  taunt ;  to  check  our  Impatience  and  correct  our 
hurrying  spirit,  and  not  to  discourage  or  distress.  He  will  come  to  us  if  we 
only  wait  long  enough  :  and  His  coming  shall  be  as  the  morning — fresh,  fragrant, 
and  radiant.  I.  Let  us  look  at  this  text  as  the  language  of  the  universaii 
Chttech.  The  Church  in  the  wilderness,  the  Church  militant,  for  nearly  nineteen 
centuries  has  been  breathing  fervently  the  prayer  commanded  by  her  Founder — 
"  Thy  kingdom  come."  And  in  her  anticipation  of  the  answer  and  the  advent,  in 
her  longings  after  complete  victoiy,  universal  regeneration,  when  truth  and  peace 
shall  sway  her  sceptre  in  every  land,  and  the  Christ-King  shall  be  enthroned  in 
every  heart — I  say,  in  her  longings  after  this  gloriou.5  era,  she  plaintively  ejaculates, 
"  Why  is  His  chariot  so  long  in  coming  ?  "  "  Why  does  my  Lord  delay  His 
coming  ?  "  The  progress  of  Christianity,  the  achievements  and  triumphs  of  truth, 
we  are  told,  have  been  so  slow,  so  few,  so  limited,  for  the  time  in  which  it  has  been 
at  work,  that  our  learned  doubters  and  avowed  foes  have  written  upon  it  in  big 
letters,  "Failure  1 "  Well,  we  are  not  surprised  at  that.  Had  there  not  been  some- 
thing about  it  which  largely  savoured  of  success,  they  would  not  have  been  so  hasty 
to  label  it  with  failure  1  Moreover,  slowness  of  progress,  of  growth,  is  no  proof  of 
failure.  Are  not  the  greatest  works  of  God  and  man  the  result  of  slow  processes  ? 
I  would  ask,  must  the  corn  be  pronounced  a  failure  because  it  does  not  wave  in 
golden  harvests  after  a  night  and  a  day's  growth  ?  Must  the  old  sun  be  pronounced 
a  failure  because  it  does  not  march  instantaneously,  but  by  degrees,  to  the  meridian  ? 
What  if  Christianity  has  been  slow  in  its  march  ? — it  has  been  sure.  It  has  been 
moving  in  no  circle  of  uncertainty,  no  region  of  doubt  and  ill-based  probabilities  ! 
It  has  been  making  solid  headway.  And  if  other  systems  of  religion — false  and 
flashy — have  sprung  up  with  the  rapidity  of  the  mushroom,  they  have  been  as 
fragile  and  unenduring.    II.  Look  at  this  text  as  the  language  of  the  individuaIi 

ChUECH  DESrRrNO  AND  EXPECTING  A  SPECIAL  VISIT  FROM  HEAVEN.       The   chilUug   wiudS 

of  worldhness  have  swept  over  the  Church,  or  the  mildew  of  indifference  has  fallen 
on  some,  and  the  cankerous  rust  of  idleness  on  others,  while  some  have  become 
intoxicated  with  pride,  and  others  poisoned  with  heresy,  numbed  with  doubt,  and 
wild  with  the  delirium  of  controversy.  So  that  the  Church  is  bordering  on  life- 
lessness,  its  strength  low,  its  energies  exhausted,  its  influence  and  glory  almost 
gone.  The  few  in  her  that  have  not  defiled  their  garments  nor  indulged  in  worldly 
ease,  who  are  true  and  loyal,  and  steadfast  and  earnest,  tremble  for  the  "  ark  of 
God,"  and  grieve  to  see  it  drifting  to  the  fatal  rocks;  and  in  agony  of  soul  cry, 
"Why  is  His  chariot  so  long  in  coming  to  our  help?"  Hold  on  faith,  hold  on 
patience,  hold  on  pleading — loosen  not  your  grasp  of  Omnipotence,  your  Jacob-like 
grip  on  God — cease  not  to  ask,  to  seek,  to  knock,  to  wait :  in  Jehovah's  own  time 
the  golden  gates  will  open,  the  flaming  steed  will  rush  out.  He  who  speeds  His 
way  through  a  wilderness  of  worlds,  through  untra versed  solitudes  of  space,  will  steer 
His  glad  "  chariot "  to  your  sanctuary  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Church,  and  scatter 
the  gifts  of  His  grace  and  the  benedictions  of  His  love.    III.  Look  at  this  text  as 


CHAP,  v.]  JUDGES.  85 

the  language  of  the  penitent  sinner  seeking  and  desieing  Christ.  A  penitent 
soul  is  one  of  earth's  grandest  pictures.  When  the  obdurate  heart  melts  and 
weeps,  and  the  unwilling  knees  bend  in  lowly  submission,  and  the  prayer  uprises  to 
heaven,  '•  "What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  and  the  poor  sinner  is  passing  through 
the  sharp  ordeal  of  repentance,  then  it  is  we  read  in  the  mystic  language  of  tears 
and  sighs  the  plaintive  words  of  my  text,  "  Why  is  His  chariot  so  long  in  coming  ? 
why  tarry  the  wheels  of  His  chariot  ? "  Should  there  be  one  such  penitent  soul 
waiting  for  the  coming  of  Jesus,  listening  for  the  rumbling  of  His  chariot  wheels  to 
give  him  '•  beauty  for  ashes,  the  oU  of  joy  for  mourning,  and  the  garment  of  praise 
for  the  spirit  of  heaviness,"  tarry  on  your  knees,  tighten  your  grip  of  faith,  wait ! 
and  He  that  wiU  come  shall  come  ;  and  His  arrival  shall  be  all  the  more  welcome 
and  blissful  for  the  delay  and  the  waiting.    IV.  Again,  we  may  regard  the  text  as 

THE  LANGUAGE  OF  THE  COXSECEATED  BUT  CLOUDED  CHILD  OF  GoD,  MOriiNING  PKOTEACXED 

DELAY  OF  CONSCIOUS  COMMUNION.  For  a  time  God  has  seemed  to  depart :  He  has 
withdrawn  His  light.  His  conscious  presence.  No  voice  speaks,  no  face  beams,  no 
hands  leads,  no  presence  remains ;  the  soul  presses,  as  it  thinks,  near  to  Him,  but 
He  is  not  there  ;  it  speaks,  but  there  is  no  response ;  it  gropes  in  the  distressing 
darkness,  but  finds  Him  not.  We  should,  however,  never  forget  that  the  halting 
of  Jehovah  is  not  to  tantalise,  but  to  test  ;  not  to  inflict  unneeded  pain,  but  to 
produce  great  spiritual  profit.  The  hiding  of  His  face  is  simply  for  the  multiplying 
of  His  grace.  Suspended  communion  is  intended  to  do  for  us  what  the  storm  does 
for  the  tree,  what  the  fire  does  for  the  sUver  and  gold,  what  the  lapidary's  wheel 
does  for  the  jewel.  Such  absence  only  makes  the  heart  grow  fonder.  The  longing 
desire  for  repossession  and  renewed  fellowship  is  a  pledge  of  a  consecrated  heart, 
and  a  prophecy  that  sooner  or  later  He  will  return.  V.  Again,  look  at  this  text  as 
the  language  of  God's  afflicted  child  daily  expecting  His  chariot  to  take  him 
HOME.  Home,  sweet  home !  what  a  precious  monosyllable !  God  sometimes  keeps 
His  chosen  ones  a  long  time  in  the  final  fires,  in  the  finishing  process — a  long 
time  Ungering  between  the  two  worlds — suffering,  dying.  With  what  a  "  spirit  of 
expectant  hope  "  and  holy  calm  did  Francis  Bidley  Havergal  contemplate  and 
wait  for  death.  There  was  acute  and  continued  suffering — at  times  most  severe  ; 
but  the  presence  of  "the  King  "  was  fully  reaUsed,  and  His  grace  was  suflficient  for 
her.  She  startled  her  medical  adviser  on  one  of  his  early  visits  by  the  emphatic 
inquiry,  "  Now  tell  me,  doctor,  candidly,  is  there  any  chance  of  my  seeing  Him  ?  " 
Later  on  she  said,  "  Not  one  thing  hath  failed,  tell  them  all  round :  trust  Jesus :  it 
is  simply  trusting  Jesus."  "  Spite  of  the  breakers,  not  a  fear."  "  I  am  just  waiting 
for  Jesus  to  take  me  in."  "  I  thought  He  would  have  left  me  here  awhile,  but  He 
is  so  good  to  take  me  so  soon."  "  I  have  such  an  intense  craving  for  the  music  of 
heaven."  Then,  as  if  "  longing  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better," 
she  said,  "  Why  tanieth  His  chariot  ?  "     (J.  0.  Keen,  D.D.) 

Ver.  31.  So  let  all  Thine  enemies  perish,  0  Lord. — TJie  imprecations  of  the 
Old  Testament: — I  have  chosen  this  verse  rather  than  any  detailed  utterances 
from  the  imprecations  that  are  found  in  the  imprecatory  Psalms,  because  I 
beheve  it  contains  the  key  that  wUl  enable  us  to  solve  the  inner  meaning 
and  the  spiritual  relations  of  these  imprecations.  It  is  always,  I  think,  a  wise 
thing  to  get  a  principle,  if  possible,  where  it  is  clearly  stated,  rather  than  where  it 
is  hidden  by  a  mass  of  obscure  material.  Once  we  get  the  principle — the  key  of 
the  question — we  can  then  use  it  to  bring  order  into  what  may  appear  at  first  sight 
to  be  disorder.  I.  Examine  the  modern  theory  that  asserts  that  these  impre- 
catory PASSAGES  were  INSPIRED  BY  UNHOLY  PERSONAL  VINDICTIVENESS.      The  reCOil 

from  rigid  theories  of  inspiration  has  caused  some  to  run  riot.  They  make  swift 
work  of  anything  that  offends  their  taste  or  that  they  cannot  immediately  com- 
prehend— they  cut  it  out  with  the  ready  pen-knife.  This  seems  an  easy  way  of 
getting  over  difficulties.  Yet,  theory  or  no  theory,  there  is  a  living  unity  and 
congruity  in  the  Scriptures  which  demands  recognition,  and  wiU  revenge  itself  upon 
indiscriminate  mutUation,  But,  someone  may  ask,  is  it  not  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  even  some  of  the  Old  Testament  saints,  under  a  fit  of  provocation,  may  have 
indulged  in  fierce  imprecations,  in  such  curses  as  these.  I  hesitate  even  to  answer 
that  in  the  affirmative.  But  that  is  not  all  you  have  to  suppose.  You  have  not 
only  to  suppose  that  one  of  these  saints  could  lose  his  self-control  and  his  spiritual 
sense  so  far  as  to  indulge  in  terrible  curses,  inspired  by  personal  malignity,  but 
vou  have  also  to  suppose  that  he  deliberately  threw  that  vindictive  outburst  into  a 
high  form  of  literary  composition,  bestowing  upon  it  great  hterary  care  and  skill ; 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

that  he  put  it  into  the  form  of  a  sacred  psahn,  and  deliberately  designed  that  that 
furious  outburst  of  evil  and  vindictive  passion  should  be  preserved  and  perpetuated. 
You  have  yet  further  to  suppose  that  that  man,  inspired  by  the  Satanic  passion 
within  him,  having  composed  his  psalm,  was  able  to  induce  the  elect  nation,  the 
people  whose  religious  and  spiritual  intuitions  were  so  marvellous,  whom  God  was 
training  in  such  a  special  manner,  you  have  to  suppose  that  that  people  adopted 
into  their  sacred  book  some  of  the  most  Satanic  utterances  ever  given  expression  to 
by  a  member  of  their  own  or  any  other  race.  I  would  have  you  also  note  this.  The 
most  terrible  imprecations  occur  in  the  Book  of  Psalms,  and  the  Book  of  Psalms 
reaches  the  high  water  mark  of  spiritual  thought  and  conception  among  the  Jews. 
Such  a  supposition  reduces  the  spiritual  history  of  Israel  to  complete  chaotic 
confusion.  There  is  another  consideration  that  is  worthy  of  notice.  These 
imprecatory  Psalms,  especially  the  69th,  are  quoted  in  the  New  Testament  more 
frequently  perhaps  than  any  other  passage  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  quoted 
as  forming  a  true  and  legitimate  part  of  the  sacred  Scriptures  of  the  Jews,  quoted, 
mark  you,  not  by  fossilised  and  prejudiced  Jews,  but  by  the  apostles  of  Jesus 
Christ.  II.  Place  these  utterances  in  their  true  setting  in  the  writings  of  the 
Old  Scriptures.  You  will  now  understand  why  I  have  chosen  these  words  as  my 
text.  "  So  let  all  Thine  enemies  perish,  0  Lord."  "  Thine  enemies."  This  is  the 
key  that  unlocks  the  whole  matter.  The  ancient  inspired  writers  never  asked  for 
the  descent  of  judgment  on  their  own  personal  account  simply,  but  always  as  a 
vindication  and  assertion  of  eternal  righteousness.  There  are  two  things  we  must 
remember,  however,  in  considering  these  prayers  for  the  extermination  of  the 
nngodly.  The  first  is  that  these  prayers  refer  primarily,  almost,  if  not  altogether, 
exclusively  to  the  government  of  God  upon  this  earth.  When  the  psalmist  prays 
that  the  wicked  may  be  "blotted  out  of  the  book  of  life,"  he  is  not  speaking  in  the 
language  of  the  New  Testament,  but  in  that  of  the  Old,  and  from  the  standpoint  of 
the  earth.  He  is  not  praying  for  spiritual  and  eternal  condemnation  ;  he  is  pray- 
ing that  the  race  of  the  ungodly  may  be  exterminated  from  this  world.  We  must 
remember,  further,  that  it  is  the  wicked,  as  such,  upon  whom  these  judgments  are 
denounced.  The  imprecation  has  force  only  in  so  far  as  the  wicked  continues  in 
his  wickedness.  III.  Compare  these  utterances  with  the  New  Testament  stand- 
point. It  is  easy  to  see,  first,  that  the  New  Testament  has  a  clearer  view  of  the 
eternal  scope  of  God's  government.  It  does  not  trouble  us  as  it  did  the  Jew  when 
we  see  the  ungodly  flourish  here,  because  we  know  that  this  Ufe  is  but  a  short  time 
in  the  annals  of  human  life.  We  know  that  this  earth's  history  is  only  a  speck  in 
the  history  of  the  human  race.  Then  there  is  another  advance.  We  have  larger 
conceptions  of  the  love  and  forbearance  of  God.  The  ancient  Jew  could  not  under- 
stand the  possibility  of  salvation  for  all.  The  world  was  divided  into  two  parts  for 
him — the  righteous  and  the  wicked  ;  and  they  stood  on  each  side  of  the  moral  linej 
and  there  was  scarcely  any  crossing  over.  And  especially  did  the  Jewish  nation  in 
its  entirety  stand  out  in  opposition  to  the  other  nations  of  the  earth.  The  Jew  had 
very  little  hope  of  God's  loving  them,  and  bringing  them  into  the  joy  of  His  grace. 
The  ancient  Jew  desired  righteousness  to  be  vindicated  by  the  victory  of  the 
righteous  over  the  wicked ;  we  rather  desire  that  righteousness  may  be  glorified  by 
the  victories  of  love,  and  that  all  men  may  be  brought  out  of  the  sphere  of 
destruction  into  the  life  and  glory  of  God.  But  do  not  forget  that  that  old  principle  of 
judgment  was  true.  It  is  still  in  force,  although  it  is  now  subordinate  to  the  principle  of 
life  and  hope ;  but  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  it.  Do  not  spurn  these  old  solemn,  terrible 
denunciations  because  Christ  has  set  them  in  a  blaze  of  love.  {John  Thomas,  M.A.) 
Jewish  zeal,  a  pattern  to  Christians: — What  a  contrast  do  these  words  present 
to  the  history  which  goes  before  them  1  Here  is  the  picture  of  indolence  and 
unfaithfulness  leading  to  cowardice,  to  apostasy,  and  to  national  ruin.  On  the 
other  hand  consider,  by  way  of  contrast,  the  narrative  contained  in  the  chapter 
which  ends  with  the  text.  Here  is  a  picture  of  manly  obedience  to  God's  will — a 
short  trial  of  trouble  and  suffering — and  then  the  reward,  peace.  What  the  Old 
Testament  especially  teaches  us  is  this :  that  zeal  is  as  essentially  a  duty  of  all 
God's  rational  creatures  as  prayer  and  praise,  faith  and  submission ;  and,  surely, 
if  so,  especially  of  sinners  whom  He  hath  redeemed ;  that  zeal  consists  in  a  strict 
attention  to  His  commands — a  scrupulousness,  vigilance,  heartiness,  and  punctuality 
which  bears  with  no  reasoning  or  questioning  about  them — an  intense  thirst  for  the 
advancement  of  His  glory ;  a  shrinking  from  the  pollution  of  sin  and  sinners ;  an 
indignation,  nay,  impatience,  at  witnessing  His  honour  insulted;  a  quickness  of 
feeling  when  His  name  is  mentioned,  and  a  jealousy  how  it  is  mentioned; 


CHAP.  T.]  JUDGES.  87 

a  fulness  of  purpose,  an  heroic  determination  to  yield  Him  service  at  whatever 
eacrifice  of  personal  feeling ;  an  energetic  resolve  to  push  through  all  difficulties, 
were  they  as  mountains,  when  His  eye  or  hand  but  gives  the  sign  :  a  carelessness  of 
obloquy,  or  reproach,  or  persecution,  a  forgetfuLness  of  friend  and  relative,  nay,  a 
hatred  (so  to  say)  of  all  that  is  naturally  dear  to  us,  when  He  says,  "  Follow  Me." 
These  are  some  of  the  characteristics  of  zeal.  Now,  it  has  sometimes  been  said 
that  the  commands  of  strenuous  and  stern  service  given  to  the  Israelites,  for  instance, 
those  relative  to  their  taking  and  keeping  possession  of  the  promised  land,  do  not 
apply  to  us  Christians.  There  can  be  no  doubt  it  is  not  our  duty  to  take  the  sword 
and  kill  the  enemies  of  God  as  the  Jews  were  told  to  do.  But  it  does  not  hence 
follow  that  the  temper  of  mind  which  they  presuppose  and  foster  is  not  required 
of  us ;  else,  surely,  the  Jewish  history  is  no  longer  profitable  for  doctrine,  for 
reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction  in  righteousness.  Man's  duty,  perfection, 
happiness,  have  always  been  one  and  the  same.  What  was  the  holiness  of  an 
Israelite  is  still  the  holiness  of  a  Christian,  though  the  Christian  has  far  higher 
privileges  and  aids  for  perfection.  It  is  impossible,  then,  that  all  these  duties 
imposed  on  the  Israelites  of  driving  out  their  enemies,  and  taking  and  keeping 
possession  of  the  promised  land,  should  not  in  some  sense  or  other  apply  to  us ;  for 
it  is  clear  they  were  not  in  their  case  mere  accidents  of  obedience,  but  went  to  form 
a  certain  inward  character,  and  as  clear  is  it  that  our  heart  must  be  as  the  heart  of 
Moses  or  David  if  we  should  be  saved  through  Christ.  This  is  quite  evident  if  we 
attentively  examine  the  Jewish  history  and  the  Divine  commands  which  are  the 
principles  of  it.  For  these  commands,  which  some  persons  have  said  do  not  apply 
to  us,  are  so  many  and  varied,  and  repeated  at  so  many  and  divers  times,  that 
they  certainly  must  have  formed  a  peculiar  character  in  the  heart  of  the  obedient 
Israelite,  and  were  much  more  than  an  outward  form  and  a  sort  of  ceremonial 
service.  Let  us  consider  some  of  the  commands  I  have  referred  to,  and  the  terms 
in  which  they  are  conveyed.  For  instance,  that  for  the  extirpation  of  the  devoted 
nations  from  the  land  of  Canaan  (Deut.  vii.  1-5,  16).  Next  observe  this  merciless 
temper,  as  profane  people  would  call  it,  but  as  well-instructed  Christians  say,  this 
godly  zeal,  was  enjoined  upon  them  under  far  more  distressing  circumstances,  viz., 
the  transgressions  of  their  own  relations  and  friends  (Deut.  xiii.  6-9).  Now, 
doubtless,  we  at  this  day  are  not  to  put  men  to  death  for  idolatiy ;  but,  doubtless 
also,  whatever  temper  of  mind  the  fulfilment  of  this  command  implied  in  the  Jew, 
such,  essentially,  must  be  our  temper  of  mind,  whatever  else  it  may  be  also ;  for 
God  cannot  speak  two  laws,  He  cannot  love  two  characters — good  is  good,  and  evil 
is  evil  (Psa.  xix.  7,  8,  10,  11).  A  self-mastering,  fearless  obedience  was  another  part 
of  this  same  religious  temper  enjoined  on  the  Jews,  and  still  incumbent,  as  I  dare 
affirm,  on  us  Christians  (Josh,  xxiii.  6).  It  required  an  exceeding  moral  courage 
in  the  Jews  to  enable  them  to  go  straight  forward,  seduced  neither  by  their  feelings 
nor  their  reason.  Nor  was  the  severe  temper  under  review  a  duty  in  the  early  ages 
of  Judaism  only.  The  Book  of  Psalms  was  written  at  different  times,  between 
David's  age  and  the  captivity,  yet  it  plainly  breathes  the  same  hatred  of  sin  and 
opposition  to  sinners  (Psa.  cxxxix.  21-24).  Further  still,  after  the  return  from 
the  captivity,  after  the  prophets  had  enlarged  the  compass  of  Divine  revelation, 
and  purified  and  heightened  the  religious  knowledge  of  the  nation,  still  this  rigid 
and  austere  zeal  was  enjoined  and  enforced  in  all  its  ancient  vigour  by  Ezra.  The 
Jews  set  about  a  reformation ;  and  what  was  its  most  remarkable  act  ?  Let  us 
attend  to  the  words  of  Ezra  (ix.  3,  4).  Now,  I  do  not  say  that  every  one  ought  to 
have  done  what  Ezra  did,  for  he  was  supernaturally  directed ;  but  would  the  course 
he  adopted  have  ever  entered  into  the  mind  of  men  of  this  day,  or  can  they  even 
understand  or  acquiesce  in  it,  now  that  they  know  it  ?  for  what  did  he  ?  He  offered 
a  confession  and  intercession  in  behalf  of  the  people ;  then  at  length  he  and  the 
people  came  to  a  decision,  which  was  no  other  than  this — to  command  all  persons 
who  had  mamed  foreign  wives  to  put  them  away.  He  undid  the  evil  as  well  as 
hindered  it  in  future.  What  an  act  of  self-denying  zeal  was  this  in  a  multitude  of 
people !  These  are  some  out  of  many  instances  which  might  be  brought  from  the 
Jewish  history  in  proof  of  the  duty  of  strict  and  severe  loyalty  to  God  and  His 
revealed  will.  There  was  an  occasion  when  our  Lord  is  expressly  said  to  have 
taken  upon  Him  the  zeal  which  consumed  David  (Matt.  xxi.  12, 13).  Surely,  unless 
we  had  this  account  given  us  by  an  inspired  writer,  we  should  not  have  believed  it  I 
To  put  aside  form,  to  dispense  with  the  ministry  of  His  attendant  angels,  to  act 
before  He  had  spoken  His  displeasure,  to  use  His  own  hand,  to  hurry  to  and  fro,  to 
be  a  servant  in  the  work  of  purification,  surely  this  must  have  arisen  from  a  fire  of 

26 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHiP.  v. 

indignation  at  witnessing  His  Father's  house  insulted  which  we  sinners  cannot 
understand.  But  anyhow  it  is  but  the  perfection  of  that  temper  which,  as  we 
have  seen,  was  encouraged  and  exemplified  in  the  Jewish  Church.  Such  is  the 
pattern  afforded  us  by  our  Lord ;  to  which  add  the  example  of  the  angels  which 
surround  Him.  Surely  in  Him  is  mingled  "  goodness  and  severity  "  ;  such,  there- 
fore, are  all  holy  creatures,  loving  and  severe.  We  read  of  their  thoughts  and 
desires  in  the  Apocalypse  (xiv.  7,  xvi.  5-7,  xviii.  5,  6),  all  which  passages 
imply  a  deep  and  solemn  acquiescence  in  God's  judgments.  Thus  a  certain  fire  of 
zeal,  showing  itself,  not  by  force  and  blood,  but  as  really  and  certainly  as  if  it  did 
— cutting  through  natural  feelings,  neglecting  self,  preferring  God's  glory  to  all 
things,  firmly  resisting  sin,  protesting  against  sinners,  and  stccadily  contemplating 
their  punishment — is  a  duty  belonging  to  all  creatures  of  God,  a  duty  of  Christians, 
in  the  midst  of  all  that  excellent  overflowing  charity  which  is  the  highest  gospel 
grace  and  the  fulfilling  of  the  second  table  of  the  law.  And  such,  in  fact,  has  ever 
been  the  temper  of  the  Christian  Church,  in  evidence  of  which  I  need  but  appeal 
to  the  impressive  fact  that  the  Jewish  Psalter  has  been  the  standard  book  of  Chris- 
tian devotion  from  the  first  down  to  this  day.  Now  I  shall  make  a  few  observations 
in  conclusion,  with  a  view  of  showing  how  meekness  and  charity  are  compatible 
with  this  austere  and  valiant  temper  of  the  Christian  soldier.  1.  Of  course  it  is 
absolutely  sinful  to  have  any  private  enmities.  Not  the  bitterest  personal  assaults 
upon  us  should  induce  us  to  retaliate.  We  must  do  good  for  evil,  love  those  who 
hate,  bless  those  who  curse  us,  and  pray  for  those  who  despitefully  use  us.  It  is 
only  when  it  is  impossible  at  once  to  be  kind  to  them  and  give  glory  to  God  that 
we  may  cease  to  act  kindly  towards  them.  We  hate  sinners  by  putting  them  out  of 
our  sight,  as  if  they  were  not,  by  annihilating  them,  in  our  affections.  And  this 
we  must  do,  even  in  the  case  of  our  friends  and  relations,  if  God  requires  it.  But 
in  no  case  are  we  to  allow  ourselves  in  resentment  or  malice.  2.  Next,  it  is  quite 
compatible  with  the  most  earnest  zeal  to  offer  kind  offices  to  God's  enemies  when 
in  distress.  I  do  not  say  that  a  denial  of  these  offices  may  not  be  a  duty  ordinarily, 
for  it  is  our  duty,  as  St.  John  tells  us  in  his  second  Epistle,  not  even  to  receive 
them  into  our  houses.  But  the  case  is  very  different  where  men  are  brought  into 
extremity.  3.  And,  further,  the  Christian  keeps  aloof  from  sinners  in  order  to  do 
them  good.  A  true  friend  is  he  who  speaks  out,  and,  when  a  man  sins,  shows 
him  that  he  is  displeased  at  the  sin.  (J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.)  The  enemies 
and  friends  of  Jehovah : — I.  The  teue  character  and  certain  doom  of  the 
UNGODLY.  1.  The  term  "enemies"  will  apply  to  all  the  unrenewed  portions  of 
mankind.  The  heart  is  positively  hostile,  &c.  "  Carnal  mind  is  enmity  against 
God,"  &c.  (1)  There  are  the  daring  enemies  of  God,  who  sceptically  treat  His 
revelation,  yea,  deny  His  being.  They  attack  His  rule  ;  despise  His  word ;  rail  at 
His  servants ;  try  to  subvert  His  cause.  (2)  There  are  the  profane  and  reckless 
enemies  of  God,  who  defy,  contemn  the  Most  High — Pharaoh,  Belshazzar,  Herod. 
(3)  There  are  those  who  are  wickedly  neutral,  and  who  temporise  in  religion.  2.  Now 
as  to  the  doom  of  the  enemies  of  God  they  will  all  perish  except  they  repent ;  all  have 
one  condemnation,  sentence,  woeful  abode.  It  will  include — (1)  Utter  shame  and 
confusion;  (2)  total  wretchedness  and  misery;  (3)  eternal  ruin  and  despair. 
n.  The  ilujstrious  representation  given  of  the  friends  of  Jesus  :  "  Them  that 
love  Him."  In  the  enemy  we  look  for  hate ;  in  the  friend,  love.  Now  love  to  Jesus 
is— 1.  A  Divine  principle  of  God  and  from  God.  The  result  of  regeneration.  2.  A 
pre-eminent  principle.  Above  aU,  it  has  the  centre,  it  reigns,  it  subordinates.  3.  It 
is  manifest.  Lives,  breathes,  speaks,  acts.  Moves  all  the  springs  of  the  heart. 
Affects  aU  the  machinery  of  life.  Loosens  the  tongue,  employs  the  hands  and 
feet.  Mark  the  representation — "  Let  them  that  love  Him  be  as  the  sun,"  &o.  Now, 
the  metaphor  will  apply — (1)  To  the  exalted  station  which  they  occupy.  Sin 
debases,  sinks,  &c.  Religion  exalts.  (2)  To  the  spiritual  rays  they  diffuse  abroad. 
"Ye  were  once  darkness,"  &o.  Now  lights,  &c.  "Arise,  shine,"  &c.  (3)  As 
fertilising  and  beautifying  all  around.  Now,  believers  shed  moral  beauty  all  around. 
Holy  virtues,  heavenly  graces,  Christ-like  feelings,  all  tend  to  expel  the  winter  of 
moral  evil  and  misery,  like  the  sun.  (4)  Irresistibly  advancing  in  their  glorious 
career.  (5)  Like  the  sun  setting  in  celestial  radiance  and  moral  splendour.  How- 
ever bright  the  career,  it  must  cease  on  earth.  See  the  aged  Christian  declining,  &c. ; 
at  last  it  sets— but  watch  the  scene.  No  stormy  sky,  no  threatening  tempest,  no 
cloud;  all  still  and  tranquil  and  clear;  the  whole  horizon  mellowed  with  the 
golden  glory.  (6)  As  the  sun  rising  In  another  hemisphere  and  shining  in  fairer 
worlds.    Is  that  setting  sun  annihilated?    He  rises  in  another  land  as  he  sets  in 


CHAP,  v.]  JUDGES.  89 

this.  So  with  those  who  once  shone  here,  (fee.  They  are  lost  to  us  but  they  still 
live,  and  are  more  radiant,  shine  brighter,  <fec.  Application  :  1.  Let  the  subject  be  the 
test  of  character.  Are  we  enemies  ?  <fec.  2.  Learn  the  supreme  excellence  of  true 
religion.  Godliness  leads  to  honour,  usefulness,  blessedness,  and  glory.  3.  Let  the 
enemies  of  God  consider.  "  Kiss  the  Son  lest  He  be  angry,"  &o.  4.  Let  the  professed 
friends  of  Jesus  exemplify  their  principles.  {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  The  rival  armies  : — 
I.  The  enemies  of  the  Lokd.  L  Their  character.  (1)  The  idolater.  The  giving  up 
the  throne  of  our  being  to  any  king  but  God.  (2)  The  forgetful.  (3)  The  indifferent. 
As  God  adds  to  His  mercies  we  subtract  from  our  thanks.  (4)  The  undecided.  An 
insult  to  God,  for  He  has  granted  evidence  sufficient.  (5)  The  reckless.  Those  who 
defile,  despise,  and  disgrace  the  unutterable  goodness  of  the  Lord.  2.  Their  doom. 
They  perish.  (1)  As  without  God,  and  so  cut  off  from  the  only  source  of  true  life. 
(2)  As  wilhont  God  and  so  without  hope.  (3)  As  fighting  against  God  and  so 
doomed  to  certain  defeat.  II.  The  feiends  of  the  Lokd.  "  As  the  sun  when  ha 
goeth  forth  in  his  might."  The  figure  refers  not  to  the  period  from  sunrise  to  sun- 
set but  from  sunrise  to  the  meridian  of  his  splendour.  It  is  a  striking  metaphor 
as  setting  forth  the  glorious  ongoing  and  enlivening  influence  of  the  Christian 
character.  1.  Very  quiet.  2.  Gladdening.  3.  Eegular  and  sure.  4.  Increasing 
in  brightness.  {H.  G.  Parrish,  B.A.)  Rejoicing  at  the  death  of  an  oppressor: — 
Hearing  a  whole  choir  of  birds  chirping  merrily  together,  my  curiosity  was  excited 
to  inquire  into  the  occasion  of  their  convocation  and  merriment,  when  I  quickly 
perceived  a  dead  hawk  in  the  bush,  about  which  they  made  such  a  noise,  seeming 
to  triumph  at  the  death  of  an  enemy.  I  could  not  blame  them  for  singing  the 
kneU  of  one  who,  like  a  cannibal,  was  wont  to  feed  upon  their  living  bodies,  tearing 
them  limb  from  limb,  and  scaring  them  with  his  frightful  appearance.  Over  this 
bird,  which  was  so  formidable  when  ahve,  the  most  timid  wren  or  titmouse  did  not 
now  fear  to  chirp  or  hop.  This  occurrence  brought  to  my  mind  the  case  of 
tyrants  and  oppressors.  When  living,  they  are  the  terror  of  mankind  ;  but  when 
dead,  they  are  the  objects  of  general  contempt  and  scorn.  "When  the  wicked 
perish,  there  is  shouting"  (Prov.  xi.  10).  The  death  of  Nero  was  celebrated  by 
the  Eomans  with  bonfires  and  plays;  birds  ate  the  naked  flesh  of  Pompey; 
Alexander  lay  unburied  thirty  days ;  but  a  useful  and  holy  life  is  generally  closed 
by  an  honourable  and  lamented  death.  The  victorious  course  of  the  Divine 
kingdom : — The  song  closes  with  an  apostrophe  or  prediction  of  a  similar  and  sure 
disappointment  and  fatal  issue  for  every  evil  cause ;  while  brighter  and  brighter  must 
wax  the  course  of  God's  kingdom  on  the  earth,  like  the  sun  shining  forth  in  its 
strength  towards  the  effulgence  of  perfect  day.  It  is  at  once  a  principle,  a  predic- 
tion, and  a  prayer.  1.  A  principle :  for  there  is  a  Divine  cause  and  interest  of  God  in 
the  world,  often  obscured  by  human  passion,  often  clouded  with  sad  disaster,  like 
the  sun  wading  through  mist  and  storm,  but  destined  ever  to  re-assert  itself  and 
establish  its  bright  ascendancy.  2.  A  prediction.  Every  inimical  interest  must  and 
shall  give  way  and  succumb  to  His  undying  kingdom,  with  the  seed  Divine  of 
immortal  youth  within  its  bosom — 

"  And  the  power  of  each  foe,  as  if  smote  with  the  sword, 
Shall  melt  like  the  snow  in  the  glance  of  the  Lord." 

8.  A  prayer.  So  is  it,  so  it  shall  be :  and  so  says  the  singer,  let  it  be.  (A.  H, 
Drysdale,  M.A.)  Let  them  that  love  Him,  be  as  the  sun. — Christians  like  the 
tun: — L  The  CHARACTER  OF  God's  people:  "They  love  Him."  1.  This  love  has 
been  implanted  in  their  hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Formerly  they  hated  Him  and 
His  service.  2.  Their  love  is  sincere.  It  must  be  so  if  the  Spirit  has  created  it 
in  the  heart  (Eph.  vi.  24).  The  love  of  many,  however,  is  merely  professional. 
3.  This  love  is  supreme  :  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee?  "  &o.  4.  This  love 
is  practical.  It  dwells  in  the  heart  and  shows  itself  in  the  life.  6.  It  is  self- 
denying,  n.  The  similitude  by  which  the  chap.acter  of  God's  people  is 
ILLUSTRATED.  1.  The  suu  reccivcs  its  light  from  the  creative  energy  of  God 
rPsa.  cxxxvi.  8).  So  Christians  have  derived  their  hght  from  God  Himself 
(2  Cor.  iv.  6).  2.  Christians  resemble  the  sun  in  beauty:  "Truly  light  is  sweet, 
and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  for  the  eyes  to  behold  the  sun."  So  Christians  are 
beautiful  in  their  individual  spiritual  character — in  their  associated  character. 
3.  The  sun  is  a  visible  object ;  it  excites  attention  and  inspires  admiration.  The 
course  of  Christians  is  not  hidden ;  they  are  lights  of  the  world,  cities  set  on  d 
hill,  living  epistles  (Matt.  v.  16).    4.  The  Christian  resembles  the  sun  in  nsefulness. 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v. 

What  a  dark  world  this  would  be  if  the  natural  sun  were  to  cease  its  shining? 
What  would  the  world  be  without  Christianity?  (1)  As  the  rising  sun  dispels 
clouds  and  darkness,  so  the  believer  rises  above  the  changes  and  calamities  of  life — 
he  dispels  the  mists  and  darkness  of  prejudice ;  proves  that  religion  does  not  tend 
to  licentiousness,  that  it  is  not  a  system  of  melancholy.  (2)  Like  the  sun,  the 
Christian  spreads  the  most  salutary  and  delightful  effects  around.  The  sun  is  the 
great  spirit  of  the  world,  in  the  light  of  which  all  things  are  made  to  rejoice.  So 
the  life  of  the  Christian  and  the  benevolent  efforts  of  the  Church,  in  conjunction 
with  Divine  power,  are  calculated  to  make  the  desert  blossom  as  the  rose,  c&c. 
(Isa.  XXXV.  1,  2).  (3)  The  influence  of  the  sun  is  very  extensive,  reaching  to  every 
creature.  The  charity  of  Christians  would  save  the  whole  world.  5.  The  light  of 
the  sun  is  irresistible.  Who  can  say  to  it,  "  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come  "  ?  &c.  No 
one  can  stop  the  work  of  the  Church,  for  it  is  God's  work  (Isa.  Iv.  11).  0  Christians, 
like  the  sun,  shine  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day.  They  grow  in  grace,  in 
knowledge,  purity,  peace,  joy,  till  their  course  terminates  in  the  meridian  noontide 
splendour  of  heaven.  {Helps  for  the  Puljnt.)  Love  makes  suns : — If  we  think  of 
the  singer,  of  the  age,  and  the  occasion  of  the  song,  such  purely  spiritual,  lofty 
words  must  seem  very  remarkable.  I.  Note,  first,  how  here  we  have  a  penetratino 
INSIGHT  INTO  THE  ESSENCE  OF  EELiGiON.  This  womau  had  been  nourished  upon  a 
more  or  less  perfect  edition  of  what  we  know  as  the  "  Mosaic  law."  Her  faith  had 
been  fed  by  forms.  She  moved  amidst  a  world  full  of  the  cruelties  and  dark  con- 
ceptions of  a  mysterious  Divine  power  which  torture  heathenism  apart  from  Chris- 
tianity. She  had  forced  her  way  through  all  that,  and  laid  hold  of  the  vital  centre. 
And  there,  away  out  amidst  cruelty  and  murder,  amidst  the  unutterable  abomina- 
tions and  terrors  of  heathenism,  in  the  centre  of  a  rigid  system  of  ceremonial  and 
retaliation,  the  woman's  heart  spoke  out  and  taught  her  what  was  the  great  com- 
mandment. Deborah  had  got  as  far,  in  a  moment  of  exaltation  and  insight,  as 
the  teaching  of  the  apostle  John,  although  her  thought  was  strangely  blended  with 
the  fierceness  of  the  times  in  which  she  lived.  Her  approval  of  Jael's  deed  by  no 
means  warrants  our  approving  it,  but  we  may  thankfully  see  that  though  she  felt 
the  fierce  throbbing  of  desire  for  vengeance,  she  also  felt  this — "Them  that  love 
Him  ;  that  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  all."  Our  love  must  depend  on  our  know- 
ledge. Deborah's  knowledge  was  a  mere  skeleton  outline  as  compared  with  ours. 
Contrast  the  fervour  of  emotional  affection  that  manifestly  throbbed  in  her  heart 
with  the  poor,  cold  pulsations  which  we  dignify  by  the  name  of  love,  and  the  con- 
trast may  put  us  to  shame.  II.  Further,  note  the  grand  conception  of  the 
CHARACTER  WHICH  SUCH  A  LOVE  PRODUCES  :  "Let  them  be  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth 
forth  in  his  might."  Think  of  the  fierce  eastern  sun,  with  "sunbeams  like 
swords,"  that  springs  up  from  the  east  and  rushes  to  the  zenith,  and  "  nothing  is 
hid  from  the  heat  thereof" — a  sun  the  like  of  which  we,  in  our  cloudy  skies, 
know  little  about,  but  which,  to  the  Oriental,  is  the  very  emblem  of  splendour 
and  of  continuous  victorious  power.  There  are  two  things  here — radiance  and 
energy,  light  and  might.  "As  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his  strength." 
Deborah  was  a  "prophetess,"  and  people  say,  "  What  did  she  prophesy?  "  Well, 
she  prophesied  the  heart  of  religion  in  reference  to  its  essence,  and,  as  one  sees  by 
this  phrase,  in  reference  to  its  effects.  What  is  her  word  but  a  partial  anticipation 
of  Christ's  saying,  "Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world";  and  of  His  disciple's  utter- 
ance, "  Ye  were  sometimes  darkness,  and  now  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord :  walk  as 
children  of  the  light "  ?  "  Is  Deborah's  aspiration  fulfilled  about  me  ?  "  Let  each  of 
us  ask  that.  "As  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his  strength" — would  anybody 
say  that  about  my  Christian  character  ?  Why  not  ?  Only  because  the  springs  have 
run  low  within  is  the  stream  low  through  the  meadows.  Only  because  the  love  is 
cold  is  the  light  feeble.  There  is  another  thing  here.  There  is  power  in  sunlight 
as  well  as  radiance.  On  that  the  prophetess  especially  lays  a  finger.  "  As  the  sun 
when  he  goeth  forth  in  his  strength."  She  did  not  know  what  we  know,  that  solar 
energy  is  the  source  of  all  energy  on  this  earth,  and  that,  just  as  in  the  deepest 
analysis  "  there  is  no  power  but  of  God,"  so  in  the  material  region  we  may  say  that 
the  only  force  is  the  force  of  the  sun,  which  not  only  stimulates  vegetation  and 
brings  light  and  warmth — as  the  pre-scientific  prophetess  knew — but  in  a  hundred 
other  ways,  unknown  to  her  and  known  to  modern  science,  is  the  author  of  all  change, 
the  parent  of  all  life,  and  the  reservoir  of  all  energy.  And  so  we  come  to  this  thought : 
the  true  love  of  God  is  no  weak,  sentimental  thing,  such  as  narrow  and  sectional  piety 
has  often  represented  it  to  be,  but  it  is  a  power  which  will  invigorate  the  whole  of  a 
man  and  make  him  strong  and  manly  as  weU  as  gentle  and  gracious ;  being,  indeed, 


CHAP.  Ti.]  JUDGES.  91 

the  parent  of  all  the  so-called  heroic  and  of  all  the  so-called  saintly  virtues.  If  you 
love  God  you  -will  surely  be  a  strong  man  as  well  as  an  emotional  and  affectionate 
Christian.  That  energy  is  to  be  continuous  and  progressive.  The  sun  that 
Deborah  saw  day  by  day  spring  from  his  station  in  the  east  and  climb  to  his  height 
in  the  heavens  and  ray  down  his  beams,  has  been  doing  that  for  millions  of  years, 
and  it  will  probably  keep  doing  it  for  uncounted  periods  still.  And  so  the  Christian 
man,  with  continuity  unbroken  and  progressive  brilliance  and  power,  should  shine 
more  and  more  till  the  unsetting  noontide  of  the  day.  III.  Here  is  a  pkophect  of 
WHICH  THE  UTTEREK  WAS  UNAWARE.  There  IS  a  coutrast  drawn  in  the  words  of  our  text 
and  in  those  immediately  preceding.  "  So,"  says  Deborah,  after  the  fierce  description 
of  the  slaughter — "  so  let  all  Thine  enemies  perish,  0  Lord  !  but  let  them  that  love 
Thee  be  as  the  sun  when  he  shineth  in  his  strength."  She  contrasts  the  transiency 
of  the  lives  that  pit  themselves  against  God  with  the  perpetuity  that  belongs  to  those 
which  are  in  harmony  with  Him,  because  the  livers  are  lovers  of  Him.  The  truth 
goes  further  than  she  probably  knew ;  certainly  further  than  she  was  thinking 
when  she  chanted  these  words.  Let  us  widen  them  by  other  words  which  use  the 
same  metaphor  and  say,  "They  that  be  wise" — that  is  a  shallower  word  than 
"  them  that  love  Thee  " — "  they  that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the 
firmament ;  and  they  that  turn  many  to  righteousness  as  the  stars  for  ever  and 
ever."  Let  us  widen  and  deepen  them  by  sacreder  words  still,  for  Jesus  Christ 
laid  hold  of  this  old  metaphor  and  said,  describing  the  time  when  all  the 
enemies  shall  have  perished  and  the  weeds  have  been  flung  out  of  the  vine- 
yard, "  Then  shall  the  righteous  blaze  forth  like  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  My 
Father."  A  brilliancy  that  will  fill  heaven  with  new  galaxies,  bright  beyond  all 
that  we  see  here,  amidst  the  thick  atmosphere  and  mists  and  clouds  of  the 
present    lifel      (A.    Maclaren,    D.D.)  Interposing   poicer: — I.    The    object: 

"Them  that  love  Him."  11.  The  request:  "Let  them  be  as  the  sun."  I 
think  the  chief  doctrine  here  intended  is  that  of  infallibility.  First,  the  sun  is  a 
faithful  witness  in  heaven.  The  sun  has  never  failed  yet,  and  never  can  fail. 
"When  He  goeth  forth  in  His  might."  The  Scriptures  are  clear  that  the  people 
are  all  predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  Christ ;  that  what  He  is  they 
are  to  be.  Did  not  Jesus  Christ  go  forth  in  His  might  in  His  humiliation ;  and 
doth  He  not  also  go  forth  in  His  might  in  His  exaltation  ?  III.  The  repose  here 
mentioned  :  "  The  land  had  rest  forty  years."  How  is  it  that  they  had  rest  forty 
years?  Well,  they  had  rest,  liberty,  and  quiet,  enjoying  all  the  privileges  of  the 
promised  land  during  these  forty  years,  by  one  of  the  most  simple  things.  It  was 
by  simply  rejecting  all  false  gods,  and  abiding  by  the  God  of  Israel,  and  just  bring- 
ing up  a  little  of  past  history,  and  learning  that  this  God,  who  had  delivered  them 
from  Egypt,  this  God,  who  had  sustained  them  through  the  wilderness,  this  God 
that  brought  them  into  the  promised  land  and  planted  them  there.  He,  and  He 
alone,  was  God ;  and  the  consequence  was  that  their  liberty  remained,  their  harvests 
were  good,  their  vintage  was  good,  their  flocks  and  their  herds  increased,  and  they 
were  every  way  happy.  Just  so  now ;  if  we  would  have  spiritual  rest,  spiritual 
settlement,  and  real  prosperity,  it  must  be  by  simply  abiding  by  that  truth  that 
represents  the  great  God  to  ua  as  a  Saviour,  that  represents  Him  in  a  covenant 
ordered  in  all  things  and  sure — simply  abiding  by  that.  Now  how  was  it  they  had 
rest  no  longer  than  forty  years  ?  I  can  hardly  tell ;  but  you  do  not  get  through  the 
next  chapter  before  you  stumble  upon  an  altar,  and  say,  "What  altar  is  this  ?  "  This 
is  not  the  Lord's ;  no,  it  is  Baal's.  And  here  is  a  beautiful  grove  and  gardens — 
everything  made  pleasant  to  the  flesh,  a  great  display.  Well,  how  in  the  world 
Baal  got  in  again  I  do  not  know,  but  I  should  not  wonder  if  it  was  either  by  trade 
affairs,  or  else  bj  matrimonial  affairs,  or  else  by  both.    {James  Wells.) 


CHAPTER  VL 

Ybbs.  1-10.  Because  of  tbe  Midlanltes  the  cliildren  of  Israel  made  them  the 
dens  .  .  .  and  caves  and  strongholds.  —  Divine  punishment  through  natural 
means  ^ — Thus  God  gets  at  men  through  various  means.  The  Midianites  came 
oat  and  spoiled  the  fields  of  the  Israelites.  The  camels  of  the  Midianites  were 
without  number;  they  entered  the  land  to  destroy  it.    Wheresoever  they  laid 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

their  hand  they  crushed  the  hope  of  Israel.  Has  God  a  way  into  our  life,  then, 
through  corn  and  grass  ?  Has  He  a  way  to  chastise  us  through  the  medium  of  our 
business  ?  Can  He  turn  a  client  away  and  send  a  customer  in  another  direction, 
and  blind  a  man  whilst  he  is  counting  his  money  ?  and  can  He  so  arrange  things 
that  prosperity  shall  crumble  into  adversity  and  a  dense  darkness  shall  settle  upon 
the  brightness  of  prosperity  ?  This  is  God's  way  of  doing.  He  gets  at  men  through 
their  skin ;  He  smites  them  with  leprosy  that  they  may  learn  to  pray ;  He  curses 
their  bread  that  they  may  cry  out  about  the  better  life ;  He  drops  poison  into  their 
water  that  they  may  learn  that  they  have  committed  two  evils— they  have  forsaken 
Him,  the  fountain  of  living  water,  and  have  hewn  out  unto  themselves  cisterns, 
broken  cisterns,  that  can  hold  no  water.  These  things  should  bring  us  to  study, 
to  reflection,  to  inquiry.  "  Why  has  this  adversity  come  upon  me  ?  why  do  men 
actually  pine  and  die?  Is  there  not  a  cause?"  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Divine 
retribution : — The  famished,  terror-stricken  fugitives,  are  they  indeed  the  sons  of 
the  men  of  old  before  whom  the  elders  of  Moab  and  of  Midian  trembled,  and 
against  whom  the  prince  of  sorcerers  confessed  that  no  enchantments  could 
prevail  ?  These  crouching  slaves  that  timidly  peep  from  behind  projecting  rocks, 
or  shiver  in  the  damp  darkness  of  caverns,  are  they  indeed  the  sons  of  the  men 
who  vanquished  Sihon  king  of  the  Amorites,  and  Og  king  of  Bashan  ?  Where 
are  the  old  traditions  of  victory  ?  Where  is  the  national  character — the  energy  of 
the  race  ?  National  character,  ancestral  traditions,  energy  of  race !  Yes ;  such 
things  exist ;  they  have  potency  and  value.  But  there  is  one  law  higher,  wider, 
deeper  than  all  these,  and  which  modifies  and  controls  them  all.  It  is  the  ever- 
lasting law  of  right  and  wrong ;  the  law  of  conscience ;  the  law  of  retribution. 
Israel  had  forsaken  Jehovah  and  had  fallen  into  the  licentious  practices  of  the 
heathen,  therefore  they  became  an  easy  prey  to  the  spoiler,  whose  audacity  increased, 
while  Israel's  strength  diminished  year  by  year  of  that  calamitous  seven.  The 
same  laws  are  still  in  force,  for  the  whole  world  is  a  theocracy.  If  we  act  as  the 
Israelites  acted,  we  shall  suffer  as  they  suffered.  Spoilers  will  come  upon  us — 
spoilers  in  the  form  of  tumultuous  passions ;  spoilers  in  the  form  of  mighty  lusts ; 
spoilers  in  the  form  of  wretched,  remorseful  thoughts,  which  will  devour  our 
happiness,  and  make  us  ready  to  skulk  away  into  the  farthest  comer  of  the  darkest 
cave,  to  avoid  the  light  of  the  sun.  This  irruption  of  the  Midianites  into  the 
fruitful  vales  of  Palestine  was  no  accident.  The  world  is  not  governed  by 
chance.  Israel  had  bowed  to  the  gods  of  the  heathen,  therefore  they  must  bow 
to   the  tyranny  of   the  heathen.      (L.   H.    Wiseman,  M.A.)  The   Midianite 

spoilers : — The  narrative  of  the  sacred  historian,  though  orief,  gives  a  vivid 
picture  of  the  ravages  of  the  Midianites,  and  of  the  pitiable  distress  to  which 
Israel  was  reduced.  They  chose  the  spring  when  the  seed  had  been  sown,  and 
came  up  with  all  the  accompaniments  of  Bedouin  life,  '•  with  their  cattle,  their 
tents,  and  their  camels."  They  ranged  over  the  entire  plain,  beginning  at  the  bank 
of  the  Jordan,  and  proceeding  farther  and  farther  westward  "  until  thou  come  to 
Gaza,"  on  the  low-lying  sandy  shore  of  the  Mediterranean.  They  carried  their 
plundering  incursions  far  up  into  the  hills  of  Manasseh,  of  Zebulun,  and  of 
Naphtali.  They  arranged  no  regular  campaign,  but  pitched  their  tents  wherever  they 
pleased ;  roaming  in  armed  parties  over  the  whole  country,  and  spreading  terror  in 
every  direction.  The  farmers,  instead  of  combining  in  self-defence,  fled  to  the  hills 
or  sheltered  themselves  in  caves;  leaving  their  produce  to  the  robbers,  who 
"  destroyed  the  increase  of  the  earth,"  carried  off  the  cattle,  and  "  left  neither  sheep, 
nor  ox,  nor  ass,"  nor  any  kind  of  sustenance  for  Israel.  After  they  had  plundered 
aU,  they  withdrew  till  the  following  season,  when  they  again  came  up  from  the 
desert,  after  the  seed  had  been  sown,  to  renew  their  depredations.  For  seven  suc- 
cessive years  were  these  ravages  committed — ravages  more  terrible  than  those  of 
war — until  the  Israelitish  people  had  become  not  only  "  greatly  impoverished," 
but     utterly    disheartened.       {Ibid.)  The    Lord    sent    a    prophet. — Divine 

reproof: — "Thus  saith  the  Lord  ...  ye  have  not  obeyed  My  voice."  Awful 
words,  but  not  unmixed  with  mercy.  If  the  wounds  of  a  friend  are  faitii.'al — if  it 
be  a  kindness  when  the  righteous  smite  us — how  much  more  when  our  heavenly 
Father  is  pleased  to  reprove  I  Severe  and  unsympathising  as  the  utterances  of  this 
prophet  might  sound  in  the  ears  of  a  crushed  and  dejected  people,  they  were  a 
necessary  preparation  for  the  coming  deliverance.  Before  the  Lord  sent  them  a 
deUverer,  He  sent  to  them  a  prophet  to  preach  repentance  ;  to  remind  them  that  their 
own  disobedience  had  been  the  real  cause  of  all  their  miseries ;  to  prepare  them  for 
salvatioc  by  piercing  them  with  a  sense  of  sin.    It  is  a  mercy  if  the  silence  of  the 


CHAP,  VI.]  JUDGES.  93 

skies  is  broken,  even  though  it  be  by  the  voice  of  correction.  If  that  word  which  is 
like  a  two-edged  sword  be  humbly  and  dutifuUy  received,  the  word  which  heals  and 
restores  wiU  presently  foUow.  Thus  it  was  in  Gideon's  time;  a  messenger  of 
reproof  prepared  the  way  for  a  messenger  of  victory.  {Ibid.)  The  result  of 
disobedience  to  God's  voice  : — God  reads  the  book  of  history,  and  says,  "  See  what  I 
did  for  you,  where  I  found  you,  how  I  delivered  you,  how  I  interposed  for  you  in 
the  hour  of  extremity ;  see  how,  by  a  mighty  hand  and  outstretched  arm,  I  wrought 
out  this  whole  salvation  for  you,  and  no  sooner  did  I  recover  you  to  life  and  to  hope, 
than  you  turned  your  backs  upon  Me  and  stopped  your  ears  with  your  fingers,  and 
your  hearts  went  astray  from  My  throne."  There  is,  then,  a  moral  explanation  of 
this  whole  thing  that  we  call  difficulty,  or  pain,  or  discipline,  disappointment, 
sorrow,  and  death:  "  Ye  obeyed  not  My  voice."  That  is  the  explanation  of  it  all. 
The  explanation  of  death,  pain,  poverty,  homelessness,  frieudlessness,  sorrow  of 
every  degree,  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  "  that  we  have  disobeyed  the  voice  of  God." 
There  has  been  the  moral  lapse,  the  great  spiritual  slip,  the  heart  has  not  retained 
its  integrity,  and  we  have  got  wrong  at  the  centre,  and  having  become  disorganised 
there,  all  the  outwardness  of  life  has  gone  off  into  confusion  and  riot  and  darkness, 
and  God  has  justly  vindicated  Himself  by  a  multitude  of  pains  and  penalties,  keen 
distresses  and  intolerable  agonies,  all  of  which  are  the  servants  of  His  righteous  and 
gracious  will.  How  long  can  God  set  Himself  against  the  cries  of  the  heart  of  His 
people  ?  Not  long.  Israel  cried  unto  the  Lord  1  Did  the  Lord  remove  Himself  ten 
thousand  miles  further  into  the  depth  of  the  great  solitude  that  is  above?  No.  He 
is  full  of  compassion,  He  is  tender  in  mercy.  He  is  gentle  in  spirit.  When  Israel 
cried, God  came.  Though  He  might  have  said,  "No,"  yet  He  came — for  God  is 
love.  "  He  knoweth  our  frame,  He  remembereth  that  we  are  dust."  (J.Parker, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  11-24.  "mere  came  an  Angel  of  tJie  Lord  .  .  .  Gideon  threshed  wheat. — 

Gideon's  angelic  visitor: — I.  That  a  man,  when  activelt  and  unostentatiously 

DOING     HIS     DUTY,    IS     BEST    FITTED     FOB     THE    KECEPTION    OF    HEAVENLY    VISITANTS. 

n.   That,  however  unconscious  op  the  fact  a  man  may  be,   God  is  beally 

QUICKENING  HIM  WHEN  HE  IS  ON  THE  PATH  OF  DUTY.  III.  ThAT  AFFLICTIONS  ABB 
NOT  ALWAYS  PEOOFS  OF  THE  DiVINE  DISPLEASUBE,  BUT  ARE  FBEQUENTLY  SENT  AS 
INCENTIVES  TO  INCREASED  EXERTION  ON  OUR  PART.  IV.  ThAT  God'S  THOUGHTS  ARE 
NOT    AS    OUR    THOUGHTS.       V.    ThAT    WE    SHOULD    NOT    FOOLISHLY   AND    PROFANELY  CALL 

ON  God  to  show  us  fresh  individual  signs.  VI.  That  we  should  offeb  of  oub 
BEST  TO  God.  VII.  That  oub  earthly  offerings  are  cleansed  by  their 
consecration  to  God's  service.  VHI.  That  the  first  step  in  righteousness  is 
to  purify  the  heart  from  its  false  idols,  and  that  the  second  step  is  to  set  up 
IN  it  an  altar  to  the  true  God.  IX.  That  our  earliest  efforts  towards 
goodness  will  pbobably  meet  with  opposition  fbom  our  companions.    X.  That 

WHEN  WE  ARE  ATTACKED  BY  THE  SCORNERS,  HELP  RISES  OFTEN  FBOM  THE  MOST  UNEXPECTED 
QUARTERS.  XI.  ThAT  RELIGION  SHOULD  NOT  BE  A  HINDRANCE  TO  THE  PERFORMANCE  OP 
OUR  DUTY,  OR  TO  THE  ENJOYMENT  OF  ANY  INNOCENT  PLEASURE,  BUT  AN  INCENTIVE  TO 
BOTH  DUTY  AND  PLEASURE.  XII.  ThAT  THE  FIRST  RESULT  OP  AN  ANGELIC  VISITANT  TO 
THE  SOUL  OF  MAN,  IN  WHATEVER  WAY  THROUGH  THE  HOLY  SpIRIT'S  ACTION  THAT  VISITANT 
MAY  COME,  IS    FEAR  ;    THE    SECOND  RESULT    IS  PEACE  ;    AND    THE    THIRD    IS    IMMORTALITY. 

(R.  Young,  M.A.)  Gideon's  interview  with  the  angel: — Amongst  the  various 
important  lessons  which  the  history  of  Israel  sets  before  us,  none  are  more  plainly 
marked  than  this,  viz. — I.  Sin  carries  its  own  punishment.  Seven  years  did  this 
bondage  and  misery  continue.  In  all  that  time  we  do  not  hear  one  cry  of 
repentance,  nor  see  one  act  of  faith  in  the  true  God,  on  the  part  of  Israel.  They 
hardened  their  heart  under  the  sore  affliction,  and  stiffened  their  neck  under  the 
galling  yoke.  Their  sustenance  was  gone,  their  enemies  held  them  in  cruel 
subjection,  and  yet  the  cause  of  all  the  calamity  was  fostered  and  maintained ; 
Israel  worshipped  Baal  instead  of  Jehovah.  Oh,  how  hard  the  heart  becomes  when 
it  is  in  Satan's  keeping  !  But  at  last,  being  convinced  that  no  other  means  would 
bring  relief,  "  they  cried  unto  the  Lord."  II.  As  the  first  verse  of  this  chapter 
connects  the  sin  with  the  punishment,  so  the  seventh  verse  connects  the  prayer 
WITH  the  answer  :  "  It  came  to  pass,  when  Israel  cried  unto  the  Lord  because  of 
the  Midianites,  the  Lord  sent  a  prophet."  He  might  have  said  by  the  voice  of  that 
prophet,  •*  It  is  now  too  late  to  cry  for  deliverance.  The  door  of  mercy  has  been 
standing  open  during  the  seven  years  of  your  captivity,  and  ye  would  not  enter  ; 
now  it  is  shut,  and  ye  cannot."    But  Israel's  God  was  a  God  "  merciful  and 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

gracious,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  goodness."  And  now  whose  history  is  this? 
Is  it  the  history  of  the  perverse  and  rebellious  Israelites  only?  No,  it  is  your 
history  and  mine.  It  is  the  history  of  that  sin-distressed  soul  who  is  now  perhaps 
weeping  to  hear  it  told.  "  Yes,"  says  the  penitent  man,  "  it  is  the  account  of  my 
past  life  :  I  served  other  gods,  I  went  astray,  I  did  very  wickedly  year  after  year  ;  I 
hardened  myself  even  against  His  chastening  hand ;  and  it  was  of  His  mercy  that  I 
was  not  then  consumed.  But  He  let  me  alone,  one  year  after  another ;  tiU  at 
length  I  began  to  think  that  for  all  these  things  God  would  bring  me  into  judgment; 
I  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  He  heard  me.  He  might  have  frowned  me  from  His 
presence ;  He  might  have  upbraided  me  for  my  long  rebellion ;  but  like  the  tender 
father  of  the  prodigal  son,  He  welcomed  me  back."  But  when  God  had  heard  the  cry 
of  penitent  Israel,  and  had  determined  to  come  down  to  deliver  them,  what  were  the 
means  taken  for  this  purpose  ?  It  is  a  national  concern  :  shaR  not  the  chief  men 
of  the  nation  receive  the  first  intimation  of  it  ?  It  is  a  matter  of  general  importance : 
shall  not  immediate  publicity  be  given  to  it  ?  No,  the  Lord's  way  is  not  as  ours ;  He 
is  pleased  to  do  it  in  a  manner  which  shall  show  that  He  can  raise  up  any  instrument, 
and  work  by  any  means,  in  order  that  the  pride  of  man  may  be  abased,  that 
the  glory  of  the  deliverance  may  be  aU  His  own,  and  that  He  alone  may  be  exalted. 
He  comes  to  a  poor  humble  individual ;  and  the  beginning  of  the  mighty  work 
which  He  was  about  to  perform  is  told  us  in  these  simple  words  :  "  There  came  an 
angel  of  the  Lord,  and  sat  under  an  oak  that  was  in  Ophrah."  We  mark  next  some 
points  in  Gideon's  character.  1.  His  consistency  and  decision.  Notwithstanding 
his  retired  situation,  he  had  testified,  it  seems,  against  the  prevailing  idolatry ;  and 
even  in  his  father's  house  had  kept  himself  from  his  father's  sins.  Let  it  comfort 
those  who  are  serving  God  alone  in  their  families  to  think  of  Gideon  and  God's 
favour  towards  him.  You  are  not  alone ;  and  "  greater  is  He  that  is  with  you  than 
they  that  are  against  you."  2.  Mark^next,  Gideon's  ardent  patriotism.  He  does 
not  distinguish  himself  from  the  rest  of  Israel,  though  God  does.  He  identifies 
himself  with  his  country.  His  thoughts  were  bent  upon  the  welfare  of  Israel,  as 
his  prayers  were  offered  up  for  it.  It  would  be  well  if  we  were  to  endeavour,  in  our 
individual  capacity,  while  walking  humbly  with  our  God,  to  serve  the  land  in  which 
we  live.  We  may  not  be  called  to  fight  her  battles,  but  we  can  pray  for  the  peace 
of  our  Jerusalem.  We  may  not  be  called  to  high  public  situations  in  life,  but  we 
may  do  private  good,  both  temporal  and  spiritual.  We  have  all  a  talent  to  exercise 
and  to  account  for.  Oh,  see  to  it,  that  by  your  means  your  country  is  in  some 
measure  benefited.  3.  Lastly,  we  are  told  from  whence  Gideon's  might  and  valour 
■were  derived  :  "  The  Lord  looked  on  him,"  and  said,  "  Go  in  this  thy  might,  and  I 
will  be  with  thee  ;  and  thou  shalt  smite  the  Midianites  as  one  man."  "  The  Lord 
looked  on  him."  Oh  1  what  a  look  was  that  1  what  a  smile  of  encouragement  cast 
on  Gideon  by  his  God !  what  a  token  of  love  1  what  a  communication  of  strength 
and  faith  1  "  Go  in  this  thy  might,"  says  the  angel,  "  I  will  be  with  thee."  Gideon 
need  not  any  longer  doubt  or  hesitate,  after  such  encouragement  as  this.  It  is  the 
word  of  the  Lord ;  and  Gideon  has  only  to  cast  himself  upon  it  in  simple  faith,  and 
to  act  according  to  its  precepts.  May  we  be  as  sensible  of  our  own  insufficiency  as 
Gideon  was  of  his  :  and,  at  the  same  time,  as  "  strong  "as  he  was  "  in  the  Lord, 
and  in  the  power  of  His  might,"  and  may  the  Lord  look  upon  you  as  He  did  upon 
Gideon,  in  mercy  1  (F.  Elwin.)  Gideon's  triumph : — I.  The  disteess  of  God's 
PEOPLE  is  caused  BY  THEIR  OWN  BIN.  God  tums  His  f orces  against  those  who  forget 
Him,  and  makes  use  of  those  who  are  His  own  foes  to  punish  His  own  people. 
-IL  God  can  always  raise  up  instruments  to  accomplish  His  purposes  when  Hh 
NEEDS,  in.  The  utility  anb  the  strength  depend  on  the  call  op  God. 
IV.  Humility  is  the  distinguishing  mark  of  the  brave.  How  seldom  do  men 
deprecate  their  own  importance  1  To  form  a  low  estimate  of  our  own  abilities  not 
only  keeps  us  from  the  danger  of  pride  with  its  attendant  snares,  but  is  a  test  of 
character.  It  is  not  the  learned  who  are  proud,  nor  the  skilful,  nor  the  wise.  The 
empty  head,  like  the  empty  drum,  makes  the  most  noise.    V.  The  service  of  God 

DEMANDS  unrestricted  DEVOTION  TO  HiS  CAUSE.  VI.  HoWEVER  VALUABLE  THB 
SERVICES  OF  THE  AGENT  MAY  BE,  GoD  CLAIMS,  AS  HiS  JUST  DUE,  THE  GLORY  OF  THB 
TRANSACTION.      VII.   We    CANNOT    DOUBT   OF   SUCCESS   WHEN   GoD   TAKES   A  MATTER   IN 

HAND,  AND  GIVES  His  PROMISE  OF  AID.  (IlomiUst.)  Gideon's  call  to  service  :— 
This  ancient  history  carries  us  back  to  a  period  when  God's  Israel  was  in 
poverty  and  want.  It  was  not  the  action  of  laws  passed  in  the  interests  of 
landowners  which  led  to  their  misery ;  it  came  through  the  oppression  of  a 
foreign  foe,  whose  merciless  treatment  of  the  people  scarcely  left  them  the  meana 


CHAP.  VI.]  JUDGES.  95 

of  life.  *' They  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord"  may  be  written  across  the 
history  of  naost  suffering  and  sadness.  This  is  the  tap-root  of  much  of  our  suffering 
and  inconvenience.    This  is  the  poison  which  destroys  our  life.    I.  The  text  says 

IT  WAS  AN  ANGEL  WHICH   CAME   TO    CALL   GlDEON.      11.    NOTICE   HOW   THE   ANGEL  FOUND 

Gideon  engaged  when  he  came  to  call  him.  The  angel  found  Gideon  at  work. 
Work  is  honourable.  God  has  often  put  honour  upon  the  lowly  worker.  Let  no 
man  say  that  work  is  degrading,  that  work  is  low  ;  to  be  an  idler,  to  be  a  drone,  is  to 
be  dishonoured.  III.  See  the  angel's  estimate  of  Gideon.  The  angel  addressed 
Gideon  as  "  thou  mighty  man  of  valour."  What !  A  man  in  apparent  poverty ;  a 
man  threshing  a  bit  of  wheat  with  his  own  strength ;  a  man  having  to  prepare  his 
very  food  in  secret,  lest  it  should  be  stolen  ;  that  man  called  by  the  angel  a  mighty 
man  of  valour  !  Poor,  yet  valiant !  "Ah,"  but  you  say,  "  that  belongs  to  an  old 
world  time.  We  have  altered  aU  this  now."  Yes,  indeed,  we  have  made  some 
changes,  and  changes  which  have  not  always  been  for  the  better.  We  caU  men 
noble  now  who  are  often  ignoble.  It  is  about  time  that  we  recognised  to  the  full 
that  poor  men  may  be  valiant  men,  and  that  lowly  men  may  be  noble  men.  'Tis 
only  noble  to  be  good.  Thousands  of  people,  like  Gideon,  toU  in  secret,  and  are  not 
known  to  fame,  but  are  among  the  valiant  and  the  mighty.  Earth's  scroll  has  no 
page  for  their  names  in  golden  writing,  but  the  angels  of  God  have  written  them 
down  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  Ufe  in  heaven.  IV.  Gideon's  complaint  to  the  angel. 
I  suppose  we  aU  find  it  easy  to  thank  God  and  see  God  with  us  when  aU  goes  well. 
But  wait  until  the  lark  sinks  songless  to  his  nest,  and  the  path  of  life  becomes  a 
wearisome  journey,  fiUed  with  stones  and  thorns ;  wait  until  sickness,  sorrow,  and 
bereavement  enter  the  dwelling ;  wait  until  the  man  stands  in  the  darkness  of  a 
foggy  night  of  paia,  loss,  and  despair ;  how  does  he  act  then  ?  How  did  you  act 
when  you  were  in  this  condition  ?  Were  you  any  better  than  Gideon  ?  Could  you 
see  the  Lord  in  it  ?  And  yet  few  things  are  more  true  in  the  experience  of  good  men 
than  the  presence  of  God  and  the  love  of  God  in  the  loss  and  pain.  (C.  Leach,  D.D.) 
The  Lord  is  with  thee,  thou  mighty  man  of  valour. — The  man  of  valour : — 1.  That 
valour  does  not  despise  lowly  but  necessary  occupations.  2.  That  valour  is  not  incom- 
patible with  caution.  3.  That  valour  may  have  its  misgivings.  4.  That  valour 
may  walk  in  the  darkness  of  the  Divine  hidings.  I.  Yaloxjb  is  a  Divine  gift. 
n.  Valour  is  developed  by  the  Divine  presence.  III.  Valour  is  more  enlarged 
BY  the  Divine  vision.  IV.  Valour  feels  a  sublime  awe.  Fear  God  in  order  to  be 
delivered  from  all  false  human  fear.  V.  Valour  is  prompt  to  obey.  Moral 
hindrances  must  be  removed  before  material  success  can  be  secured.  VI.  Valour 
braves  the  consequences.  Duty  is  ours,  results  are  God's.  (W.  Burrows,  B.A.) 
Invisible  might : — I.  Valour  unknown.  Gideon  was  pronounced  by  the  angel  who 
appeared  unto  him  as  "  a  mighty  man  of  valour."  But  did  Gideon  know  his  own 
might  ?  It  would  seem  that,  as  a  valorous  man,  he  was  as  much  unknown  to 
himself  as  he  was  unknown  to  Israel  or  to  his  enemies.  His  valour  was  real,  but 
untried.  His  valour  was  Uving,  but  dormant.  His  valour  was  mighty,  but  un- 
exercised. Oft,  too,  is  valorous  faith  unknown  until  it  is  tried.  Great  occasions 
make  great  men.  Great  trials  make  great  believers.  Faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard- 
seed  is  as  strong  in  its  principle  as  is  the  faith  which  moves  a  mountain.  But  it 
needs  growth  and  development.  Unconscious  strength  is  often  the  most  potent. 
You  cannot  cast  him  down  who  is  already  low.  You  cannot  rend  him  from  the 
Eock  of  Ages  who  is  resting  on  Christ  as  "  the  chief  of  sinners."  There  is 
unspeakable  comfort  in  the  fact  that  this  "  man  of  valour"  was  unconscious  of  his 
might  until  the  angel  revealed  to  him  his  secret  power.  Many  a  faint-hearted 
believer  is  "  overcoming  the  world  "  (1  John  v.  4,  5)  unconsciously  to  himself.  His 
might  is  hidden,  but  it  is  no  less  real.  Et.  Valour's  weakness.  The  sun  is  often 
under  a  cloud.  So  is  faith.  The  cloud,  however,  does  not  change  the  nature  of 
the  sun.  Nor  do  beclouding  dispensations,  which  chiU  the  soul,  affect  the  true 
nature  of  its  faith.  The  Christian  is  often  a  paradox  to  himself.  He  is  weak  and 
strong  at  the  same  moment.  *'  When  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong,"  said  one  of 
the  greatest  believers.  "  It  is  the  nature  of  faith,  not  the  quantity,  which  determines 
the  character,"  said  an  eminent  divine ;  and  he  added,  "  Samson  wa?  a  riddle  to 
me  till  I  unriddled  myself.  He  was  an  inconsistent  believer."  Gideon  is  named 
with  Samson  among  the  mighty  believers  in  the  eleventh  chapter  of  Hebrews.  We 
shall  now  see  his  inconsistent  weakness.  The  causes  of  it  are  laid  open  before  ua. 
1.  He  was  now  walking  ]?y  sight,  and  not  by  faith.  He  could  see  no  tokens  of  the 
Lord's  presence ;  and  therefore,  in  reply  to  the  salutation,  "  The  Lord  is  with  thee, 
thou  mighty  man  of  valour,"  he  said,  in  the  weakness  of  unbelief,  "  Oh  I  my  Lord^ 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

if  the  Lord  be  with  us,  why  then  is  all  this  befallen  us  ?  "  Once  suffer  doubt  to 
hint  at  the  bare  possibility  that  it  may  not  be  exactly  true  in  all  cases,  at  all  times, 
that  "  God  is  not  a  man,  that  He  should  lie,"  and  faith  will  lose  its  foothold,  and 
stumble.  2.  Gideon  overlooked  God's  justice  and  man's  sin.  '•  Why  then  is  all 
this  befallen  us?  "  The  reason  was  patent.  ,  Surely  Gideon  could  not  have  closed 
his  eyes  to  all  the  idolatry  in  the  land  1  The  chastisement  of  the  Lord's  people  may 
often  be  traced  up  to  the  same  cause.  Does  the  afflicted  child  of  God  ask,  "Why 
is  all  this  befallen  me?  "  He  need  not  question  the  cause.  It  is  not  because  the 
Lord  is  not  with  him.  Far  from  it.  It  is  the  true  vine  that  is  purged.  The  barren 
fig-tree  is  plucked  up  by  the  roots  and  cast  away.  But  there  is  some  evil  permitted, 
some  idol  worshipped,  some  idolatrous  altar  erected.  3.  Hard  thoughts  of  God 
were  mixed  with  Gideon's  faith.  "  Now  the  Lord  hath  forsaken  us,"  he  murmured. 
Was  this  true  ?  The  Lord  had  just  sent  a  prophet*  to  them,  in  answer  to  their 
prayer  (vers.  7,  8).  Israel  had  forsaken  the  Lord,  but  the  Lord  had  not  forsaken 
Israel.  His  rod  over  them  proved  that  He  had  not  given  them  over  to  their  sins. 
4.  False  humility  was  another  ingredient  in  the  weak  faith  of  Gideon.  "  Thou 
shalt  save  Israel,"  said  the  Lord :  "  have  not  I  sent  thee  ?  "  This  twofold  promise 
should  have  been  enough  for  any  emergency.  What  could  a  creature  need  more  ? 
But  Gideon,  instead  of  fixing  his  eye  of  faith  upon  the  Lord  alone,  began  to  think 
of  himself.  And  he  said,  in  reply,  "0  Lord,  wherewith  shall  I  save  Israel?  Behold, 
my  family  is  poor  in  Manasseh,  and  I  am  the  least  in  my  father's  house  V  (ver.  15). 
WTierein  would  his  confidence  have  been  placed  had  his  family  been  the  richest  in 
Manasseh  and  he  the  greatest  in  his  father's  house  ?  There  was  a  leaning  to  the 
arm  of  flesh  in  all  this.  "  Proud  humihty  "  is  a  fearful  bane  of  the  soul.  It  apes 
the  most  retiring  and  modest  graces  of  the  Spirit ;  but  it  usurps  the  throne  and 
sovereignty  of  Jehovah.  Under  its  mask  Satan  robs  beUevers  of  their  comfort  and 
the  Church  of  their  zeal.  Were  the  creature  made  nothing,  and  Jehovah  every- 
thing, what  Goliath  could  resist  the  sling  and  the  stone  of  the  veriest  stripling  ? 
m.  But  now  we  turn  and  behold  valour's  might.  Gideon  was  "  a  mighty  man  of 
valour  "  notwithstanding  all  the  weakness  of  his  faith.  We  naturally  ask,  wherein 
was  his  might  ?  What  was  its  source  ?  In  himself  he  was  as  weak  as  a  babe. 
1.  The  Lord'spjresence  was  one  great  source  of  valour's  might.  "  The  Lord  is  with 
thee."  "  Surely  I  will  be  with  thee."  Here  was  might  irresistible.  No  enemy 
can  withstand  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  2.  The  Lord's  look  was  another  source 
of  valour's  might.  "  The  Lord  looked  upon  Gideon,  and  said.  Go  in  this  thy 
might."  The  Lord's  look  of  grace  and  love  imparts  strength  to  the  soul.  3.  The 
Lord's  promise  was  one  chief  source  of  valour's  might.  Faith  hves  upon  promise. 
It  is  its  food  and  daily  sustenance.  It  is  the  very  sinew  of  its  might.  "  Surely  I 
will  be  with  thee,  and  thou  shalt  smite  the  Midianites  as  one  man."  "  Thou  shalt 
save  Israel."  These  were  the  promises  with  which  Gideon  was  to  wage  war  and 
overcome.  Promise  is  to  faith  what  the  rope  is  to  the  drowning  man.  Faith 
begins  to  rise  from  despair  to  hope  by  promise.  Promise,  descending  into  the  heart 
of  faith,  rises  like  water  to  its  own  level,  and  upbears  the  reposing  soul  to  the  very 
throne  and  bosom  of  God.  Promise,  like  light  issuing  from  the  sun,  cannot  be 
polluted  by  earth's  contamination.  It  is  pure  in  whatever  degree  it  shineth.  It 
Cometh  from  one  source,  and  tendeth  to  one  end.  4.  The  command  of  the  Lord, 
no  less  than  promise,  was  the  warrant  of  faith,  and  a  chief  source  of  valour's 
might.  "  Go,"  saith  the  Lord.  "  Have  not  I  sent  thee  ?  "  The  Captain  of  our  salva- 
tion speaks  as  one  having  authority.  Who  can  resist  His  will  ?  Does  He  say, 
•'  Go  "  ?  Who,  then,  shall  be  able  to  let,  or  hinder,  the  servant  in  doing  his  Master's 
behest?  Does  he  say,  "Go,"  without  providing  "  grace  and  strength"  equal  to 
the  need  of  going  ?  True  faith  is  an  obedient  grace.  Let  but  the  Lord  issue  His 
command,  and  faith  will  answer,  "  Speak,  Lord,  for  Thy  servant  heareth."  {O. 
A.  Rogers,  M.A.)  If  the  Lord  be  with  us,  why  then  is  all  this  befallen  U8  7 — 
Gideon's  attitude  partly  right  and  partly  wrong  : — He  was  right  in  refusing  to 
believe  God  was  present  if  things  went  on  just  as  if  He  were  not  present,  but 
he  was  wrong  in  not  seeing  what  it  was  that  prevented  God  from  being  present. 
He  was  right  in  arguing,  "  What  God  was,  He  is ;  why  then  does  He  not  do  for  us 
what  He  did  for  our  fathers  ?  "  He  was  right  in  debating  with  himself,  and  asking 
"Is  this  what  it  means  to  be  God's  people?  What  is  the  use  of  living  at  this 
price  ?  "  But  he  was  wrong  in  thinking  that  the  fault  lay  with  God,  and  not 
with  himself ;  wrong  in  not  seeing  his  very  obvious  duty,  which,  until  he  performed, 
God  could  not  be  expected  to  work  for  Israel.  Just  so  we  are  right  in  refusing  to 
accept  a  religion  which  makes  no  practical  difference  upon  us;  right  in  impatiently 


CHAP,  VI.]  JUDGES.  97 

throwing  aside  the  mere  traditional  assurances  whereby  men  soothe  sinners  and 
promise  them  deUverance ;  right  in  looking  straight  at  the  facts  of  our  own  experi- 
ence, and  testing  religion  by  its  power  on  ourselves ;  but  we  often  add  to  this  the 
mistake  of  Gideon,  and  faU  out  with  God  for  not  interfering  more  powerfully  in 
our  behalf,  when  it  is  we  ourselves  who  are  preventing  Him  from  so  interfering. 
You  wait  for  God  to  do  something,  while  He  is  waiting  for  you.  If  you  are  not 
able  to  use  God's  strength,  if  you  might  as  well  be  heathen  for  all  the  moral  help 
you  get  from  God,  then  depend  upon  it  there  is  something  wrong  in  your  conduct 
towards  God,  some  plain  duty  you  are  neglecting.  [Marcus  Dods,  D.D.)  Gideon's 
lament : — Can  we  not  catch  some  echoes  of  Gideon's  complaint  in  the  thoughts  that 
are  cherished  among  ourselves  ?  That  God  wi'ought  wonders  once,  that  He  raised 
up  men  to  open  new  views  of  His  truth  and  of  His  will  and  thus  renewed  the 
Church's  strength,  and  sent  her  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer — all  this  we  hold, 
of  course.  We  call  the  man  who  doubts  it  an  infidel  or  a  heretic.  But  the  man 
who  believes  that  similar  things  may  take  place  in  our  day,  who  believes,  for 
instance,  that  God  makes  His  will  as  plain  in  ways  suited  to  our  time  as  He  did  in 
other  ways  at  former  times — does  not  such  a  man  run  great  risk  of  being  called  an 
enthusiast  or  a  fool  ?  That  any  man  now  may  be  guided  in  actual  fact,  and  guided 
unerringly,  by  God  in  common  life,  or  that  things  going  on  among  us  may  be  as 
important  and  as  Divine  as  what  was  done  in  any  former  age,  is  an  assertion  that 
few  would  dare  to  make.  If  we  are  sensible  of  the  strange  contradiction  implied 
in  our  thus  demanding  credence  for  such  things  in  the  past  as  we  deny  the  very 
possibility  of  in  |the  present,  we  shall  the  better  understand  Gideon's  state  of  mind 
when  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  him.  {W.  Miller,  M.A.)  How  to  treat 
doubters: — "God  be  with  you  !"  said  the  stranger.  Gideon  flung  down  his  flail. 
'*  God  be  with  us  ?  Don't  talk  nonsense,  man !  Would  I  be  skulking  in  this  wine- 
press, would  we  Hebrews  be  cowering  before  those  pagan  Midianites,  if  God  were 
with  us?  They  say  God  was  with  us  when  we  came  out  of  Egypt,  and  that  He  did 
great  miracles  when  Joshua  conquered  this  land.  Ah  !  if  that  is  true,  then  He  has 
gone  away  and  left  us  now.  Don't  talk  to  me  about  God,  when  facts  prove  that 
there  is  no  God  with  us."  How  do  you  think  a  modem  minister  of  the  orthodox 
type  would  have  treated  a  man  who  had  spoken  in  that  fashion  about  God  ?  Not 
as  the  angel  treated  Gideon.  I  fear  the  modern  minister  would  have  said,  "  Here 
is  a  most  dangerous,  blasphemous  sceptic,  all  wrong  in  his  views,  full  of  heretical, 
unsettling,  dangerous  feelings  and  ideas  "  ;  and  he  would  have  sought  to  argue  with 
him  and  to  put  him  right.  What  did  the  angel  ?  He  looked  at  him,  knew  he  was 
wrong  in  blaming  God  in  that  fashion,  but  also  that  he  was  right  to  refuse  to  accept 
a  religion  that  had  lost  all  its  nobility  and  bravery,  that  had  no  backbone  in  it. 
The  angel  said :  "  Go  in  this  thy  might,  thy  spirit  that  cannot  tolerate  this  degra- 
dation of  God's  people,  that  rises  against  this  wrong ;  go  thou,  and  be  the  leader  in 
Jehovah's  name,  and  set  things  right."  The  Church  would  be  a  good  deal  wiser  if 
it  always  took  care  to  distinguish  between  the  doubt  of  corruption  and  worldliness, 
the  cold,  caUous,  sneering  doubt,  and  the  doubt  of  a  brave  young  heart  that 
doubts  because  religion  is  so  poor  an  affair,  that  doubts  because  of  the  great  wrongs 
in  the  world,  because  of  the  deeds  of  evil  that  sin  works,  that  doubts  precisely 
because  it  is  crying  for  the  reality.  We  should  go  to  every  such  man  and  say : 
«'My  brother,  you  are  not  an  infidel;  you  are  called  to  be  a  religious  man  beyond 
the  common.  You  are  not  an  atheist.  God  has  hold  of  you,  and  wants  you 
for  Himself.  Go  and  do  something  heroic,  and  show  that  God's  religion  is 
the  mightiest  force.  Go  and  demand  the  reality,  and  win  a  victory  for  God  and 
His  kingdom  such  as  the  world  has  never  seen  yet."  {Prof.  G.  A  Smith.) 
Brotherhood  illustrated  by  Gideon's  reply  : — There  is  here  an  example  of  largeness 
in  heart  and  mind  which  we  ougbt  not  to  miss,  especially  because  it  sets  before  us 
a  principle  often  unrecognised.  It  is  clear  enough  that  Gideon  could  not  enjoy 
freedom  unless  his  country  was  free,  for  no  man  can  be  safe  in  an  enslaved  land  ; 
but  many  fail  to  see  that  spiritual  redemption  in  like  manner  cannot  be  enjoyed  by 
one  unless  others  are  moving  towards  the  light.  Truly  salvation  is  personal  at  first 
and  personal  at  last ;  but  it  is  never  an  individual  affair  only.  Each  for  himself 
must  hear  and  answer  the  Divine  call  to  repentance ;  each  as  a  moral  unit  must 
enter  the  strait  gate,  press  along  the  narrow  way  of  life,  agonise  and  overcome. 
But  the  redemption  of  one  soul  is  part  of  a  vast  redeeming  purpose,  and  the  fibres 
of  each  life  are  interwoven  with  those  of  other  Uves  far  and  wide.  Spiritual 
brotherhood  is  a  fact  but  faintly  typified  by  the  brotherhood  of  the  Hebrews,  and 
the  struggling  soul  to-day,  like  Gideon's  long  ago,  must  know  God  as  the  Saviour 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

of  all  men  before  a  personal  hope  can  be  enjoyed  worth  the  having.    As  Gideon 
showed  himself  to  have  the  Lord  with  him  by  a  question  charged  not  with  indi- 
vidual anxiety  but  with  keen  interest  in  the  nation,  so  a  man  now  is  seen  to  have 
the   Spirit  of   God  as  he  exhibits  a  passion  for  the  regeneration  of  the  world. 
Salvation  is  enlargement  of  soul,  devotion  to  God,  and  to  man  for  the  sake  of  God. 
If  any  one  thinks  he  is  saved  while  he  bears  no  burdens  for  others,  makes  no  steady 
effort  to'liberate  souls  from  the  tyranny  of  the  false  and  the  vile,  he  is  in  fatal 
error.     The  salvation  of  Christ  plants  always  in  men  and  women  His  mind,  His  law 
of  life,  who  is  the  Brother  and  Friend  of  all.     (R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)        Providence 
not  to  he  judged  from  a  narrow  point  of  view  : — Crossing  the  great  deep  at  night, 
lying  sleeplessly  and  perhaps  painfully  in  your  berth,  longing  for  the  light  without 
much  hope  that  it  wiU  bring  you  comfort,  what  hear  you  ?     The   surge  of  the 
water,  the  moan  of  the  wind,  and  the  tinkle  of  a  bell.    That  bell  has  no  sooner 
told  its  tale  of  time  than  a  voice  in  a  sing-song  tone  says,  "  All's  well,  all's  well !  " 
It  is  the  man  on  the  look-out.     Tou  say:  "How  can  all  be  well  when  I  am  not 
sleeping  ?    How  can  all  be  well  when  I  am  sick  and  in  pain  ?    How  can  all  be  well 
when  I  am  not  at  home,  and  the  children   are  longing  for  me  ?  "     There  is  a 
higher  law  than  your  sleeplessness,  your  pain,  and  your  child's  desire  for  your 
presence.    Within  those  limits  you  are  right — all  is  not  well — but  in  the  higher 
sphere,  that  takes  in  a  larger  area  and  commands  a  wider  outlook,  all's  well,  all's 
well.     So  it  is  with  this  marvellous  mystery,  this  strange  providence.     "  I  am 
sick,  and  tired,  and  heart-broken,  misunderstood,  and  belied,  and  slandered,  and 
ill-fed,  and  battered  down,"  saith  the  Christian  man,  but  the  angel  on  the  look-out 
says,  "  All's  well,  all's  well ! "    The  vessel  has  her  face  straight  home,  and  the  sea  is 
yielding  to  give  her  passageway.     "  All's  well,  all's  well."     (j.  Parker,  D.D.)        The 
Lord  looked  upon  him. — The  look  of  God : — I.  The  chief  features  of  such  looks. 
1.  An  implied  promise  (Jer.  xxiv.  6).     2.  An  implied  encouragement.     3.  An 
implied  help.     II.  The  chief  conditions  fob  theib  bestowai.     1.  Cultivation  of 
various  graces — love  and  obedience,  contrition  and  reverence,  godliness,  hope,  and 
nprightness.    2.  Attitude  of  expectancy.     If  God  is  looking  down  to  bless  us,  we 
must  look  up  to  meet  His  gaze.    Our  attitude  must  be,  "  As  the  eyes,"  &c.     Our 
determination  must  be,  "  In  the  morning  wiU  I,"  &c.    Then  our  history  will  be, 
"They  looked  unto  Him,"  &c.    HI.  The  chief  purpose  of  these  looks — accom- 
panied by  a  command:  "  Go."    Do  you  ask,  where?     Go  anew  and  daily,  in  faith 
and  penitence,  to  a  Father's  footstool,  and  as  by  faith  you  know  He  is  looking 
graciously  on  you  in  Christ,  go  to  the  discharge  of  your  daily  duties  in  the  might 
of  His  strengthening  grace,  and  the  Lord  will  go  before  you.     Go  through  the 
obstacles  which  have  hitherto  impeded  you.     [Homilist.)        A  look,  a  word,  and  a 
question : — I.  What  a  look  was  that  which  the  Lord  gave  to  Gideon  1     He  looked 
him  out  of  his  discouragements  into  a  holy  bravery.    If  our  look  to  the  Lord  saves 
us,  what  wiU  not  His  look  at  us  do  ?    Lord,  look  on  me  this  day,  and  nerve  me  for 
its  duties  and  conflicts,    n.  What  a  word  was  this   which  Jehovah   spake  to 
Gideon  I     "  Go."    He  must  not  hesitate.    He  might  have  answered,  "  What,  go  in 
all  this  weakness  ?  "    But  the  Lord  put  that  word  out  of  court  by  saying,  "  Go  in 
this  thy  might."    The  Lord  had  looked  might  into  him,  and  he  had  now  nothing  to 
do  but  to  use  it,  and  save  Israel  by  smiting  the  Midianites.    It  may  be  that  the  Lord 
has  more  to  do  by  me  than  I  ever  dreamed  of.    If  He  has  looked  upon  me  He  has 
made  me  strong.     Let  me  by  faith  exercise  the  power  with  which  He  has  entrusted 
me.    He  never  bids  me  "  idle  away  my  time  in  this  my  might."    Far  from  it.    I 
must  "  go,"  because  He  strengthens  me.    III.  What  a  question  is  that  which  the 
Lord  puts  to  me,  even  as  He  put  it  to  Gideon  1    "  Have  not  I  sent  thee?  "    Yes, 
Lord,  Thou  hast  sent  me,  and  I  will  go  in  Thy  strength.    At  Thy  command  I  go, 
and,  going,  I  am  assured  that  Thou  wilt  conquer  by  me.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Qo 
in  this  thy  might  .  .  .  have  not  I  sent  thee? — Gideon^s  commission: — I.  Thb 
sanction  given  :  "  The  Lord  looked  upon  him."    Oh,  what  a  mercy  1    His  father 
might  have  looked  upon  him  long  enough,  and  surnamed  him  Jerubbaal  or  what 
he  pleased,  but  it  would  have  been  no  use  unless  the  Lord  had  looked  upon  him. 
But  there  are  many  senses  in  which  the  Lord  looks  upon  His  people,  and  upon  His 
enemies  too.     He  looked  upon  the  affliction  of  His  people  in  Egypt :  "  I  have 
looked  upon  them,  and  have  come  down  to  deliver  them."    He  looked  upon  David 
in  all  his  affliction.     Then,  again,  you  will  remember  how  the  Lord  looked  upon 
Peter.     What  a  significant  and  expressive  look  I     But,  to  put  these  matters  a  little 
more  into  form,  mark,  first  of  all,  that  Gideon  seemed  as  if  he  would  avoid  all 
lookers-on.    He  was  withdrawn  from  observation.    Some  of  the  sweetest  seasons  in 


CHAP.  71.]  JUDGES.  99 

which  God  looks  upon  His  people  are  when  they  are  retired.  And  hence  the  direc- 
tion given  by  our  blessed  Lord,  "  But  thou,  when  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy 
closet,"  &o.  Now  just  look  again  at  this  great  sanction  from  above.  "While 
Jehovah  looks  from  His  high  throne  upon  the  objects  of  His  love  to  inspire  them 
for  His  special  work  and  for  the  great  objects  to  which  He  has  appointed  them,  He 
withdraws  their  affections  from  other  objects  and  leads  them  forth  with  an  ardent 
desire  to  glorify  God  in  His  work.  II.  The  commakd  :  "  Go  in  this  thy  might." 
Why,  I  do  not  know  that  Gideon  had  confessed  to  possess  any  might ;  on  the  con- 
trary, he  had  concealed  himself  from  time  to  time  from  all  those  very  enemies  he 
was  about  to  vanquish.  He  said  unto  the  Lord,  "  Wherewith  shall  I  save  Israel  ? 
Behold,  my  family  is  poor  in  Manasseh,  and  I  am  the  least  in  my  father's  house." 
Well,  now,  if  I  first  of  aU  view  this  as  typical  of  Christ,  did  not  He  spring  from  a 
poor  family  ?  Yet  He  was  the  "  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host."  But — mark  this — 
aU  glory  to  His  name,  it  was  His  own  essential  might.  I  beseech  you,  lose  not 
sight  of  this  all-important  fact,  to  which,  I  think,  Gideon's  history  points  typically 
— that  Christ  had  the  whole  matter  with  regard  to  the  salvation  of  His  Church 
entrusted  to  His  care;  therefore  is  it  written,  that  He  hath  "laid  help  upon  one 
that  is  mighty  and  exalted — one  chosen  out  of  the  people."  I  come  to  the 
secondary  view — I  mean  the  sending  of  God's  own  servants ;  because,  while  I  allow 
no  efficiency  whatever  to  be  ascribed  to  them,  yet  are  they  instrumentally  employed 
for  the  express  purpose  of  saving  Israel  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Midianites.  Now, 
have  you  not  Omnipotence  pledged  in  your  personal  experience  ?  If  you  have  not 
you  have  got  no  experience  at  all.  It  was  Omnipotence  that  broke  your  hearts,  and 
subdued  you  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  God  humbles  the  sinner  thus ;  He  lays  us  low, 
strips  us  of  all  confidence,  makes  us  deeply  conscious  of  creature-weakness  and 
insufficiency,  so  as  not  to  be  sufficient  of  ourselves  to  think  anything  as  of  ourselves  ; 
and  then  we  get  the  pledge  of  Omnipotence  on  our  side.  We  may  well  go  forth 
thus  to  the  war  armed  with  strength — "  Go  in  this  thy  might."  Well,  but  how 
could  it  be  said  to  be  his  ?  Why,  what  is  freer  than  a  gift  ?  It  was  given  him — it 
was  his  might — •'  in  this  thy  might."  No  man  is  strong  but  he  who  is  strong  in 
Jehovah's  might.  III.  The  pkomise  of  success  :  "  And  thou  shalt  save  Israel 
from  the  hands  of  the  Midianites  " — cruel  and  vexatious,  always  to  be  wanting  the 
territories  of  Israel.  I  must  here  refer  you  back  again  to  the  commandment  of 
God  at  an  earlier  period  than  this  with  regard  to  these  Midianites.  After  Balaam 
had  instructed  Balak  how  to  seduce  God's  Israel,  the  commandment  came  from  the 
Lord,  '•  Vex  the  Midianites  and  smite  them,  for  they  vex  you  with  their  wiles." 
Here  we  might  include  in  this  vast  multitude,  "like  grasshoppers  for  number,"  all 
the  opposers  of  God's  gospel,  all  the  enemies  of  His  Cross.  But  to  bring  this  matter 
nearer  home.  The  Midianites  that  every  Christian  has  to  contend  with  he  finds  in 
his  own  camp,  in  his  own  tent,  within  his  own  heart.  Now  mark  the  simple 
process  of  the  war.  I  do  not  read  that  there  was  a  weapon  of  war  in  any  of  their 
hands,  but  they  were  to  go  forth  under  the  simple  direction  of  Gideon.  Now  look 
at  their  weapons.  Each  man  was  to  have  a  trumpet,  a  pitcher  and  a  lamp  inside. 
Pretty  things  to  go  to  war  with,  truly !  WeU,  then,  but  while  we  glance  at  the 
simplicity  of  the  means  thus  employed,  and  the  cry  that  went  forth,  "  The  sword 
of  the  Lord  and  of  Gideon!"  mark  that  the  Midianites  all  fled.  {J.  Irons.) 
Gidconh  might : — In  Gideon's  attitude  of  mind  a  human  observer  would  have  seen 
nothing  but  weakness,  and  yet  God  saw  "might."  The  Divine  eye  penetrated  to 
the  very  depths  of  Gideon's  spirit  and  character,  and  saw  in  his  seeming  weakness 
the  very  qualities  out  of  which  spiritual  heroes  are  made.  For  in  spiritual  achieve- 
ments a  man  is  mighty  in  proportion  to  his  capacity  to  receive  Divine  help,  just  as 
a  steam-engine  is  mighty  in  proportion  to  its  capacity  to  receive  and  utilise  the 
largest  possible  amount  of  steam.  Gideon's  might,  then,  consisted — 1.  In  his 
whole-hearted  loyalty  to  God.  He  was  evidently  among  the  few  who  remained 
true  to  Jehovah.  And  his  first  act  was  to  strike  a  blow  at  the  idolatry  of  the  land. 
The  first  condition  of  spiritual  strength  and  success  is  to  give  our  hearts  to  God  in 
profound  loyalty.  There  is  an  idolatry  of  the  spirit  which  must  be  put  away 
before  we  can  do  any  work  for  God.  2.  In  his  humble  dependence  upon  God. 
Gideon's  touching  confession  of  his  own  insufficiency  reminds  us  that  this 
spirit  is  characteristic  of  the  great  men  of  the  Bible — Moses  (Exod.  iii.  11),  Jeremiah 
(i.  6,  7),  Paul  (Eph.  iii.  8).  Out  of  conscious  weakness  these  men  were  made 
strong  for  the  work  to  which  they  had  been  called.  God  has  often  chosen  "  the 
weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty."  3.  In  his 
profound  faith  in  God.    Gideon  is  mentioned  in  Heb.  xi.  as  one  of  those  who 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

"  through  faith  .  .  .  out  of  weakness  were  made  strong,  waxed  valiant  in  fight, 
turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens."  God  tenderly  nourished  it  by  giving 
signs  of  encouragement — sacrifice  consumed,  wet  and  dry  fleece,  visit  to  the 
Midianites'  camp — until  it  was  strong  enough  to  venture  on  the  perilous  enterprise 
with  the  little  band  of  three  hundred  men.  4.  In  his  consciousness  of  a  Divine 
mission.  "Have  not  I  sent  thee?"  (ver.  14).  This  is  God's  answer  to  human 
weakness  shrinking  from  a  difficult  and  dangerous  task.  When  a  man  realises 
this  he  possesses  a  might  not  his  own  (John  xvii.  18).  There  was  not  only  a 
Divine  commission,  but  also  a  promise  of  the  Divine  presence  :  "  Surely  I  will  be 
with  thee"  (ver.  16).  But  still  something  more  was  needed,  and  that  was  the 
touch  of  the  Spirit.  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  Gideon."  {J.  T.  Hamly.) 
God's  call,  and  the  resjionse  to  it: — It  is  the  call  of  God  that  ripens  a  life  into 
power,  resolve,  fruitfulness— the  call  and  the  response  to  it.  Continually  the 
Bible  urges  upon  us  this  great  truth,  that  through  the  keen  sense  of  a  close  personal 
relation  to  God  and  of  duty  owing  to  Him  the  soul  grows  and  comes  to  its  own. 
Our  human  personality  is  created  in  that  way,  and  in  no  other.  There  are,  indeed, 
lives  which  are  not  so  inspired  and  yet  appear  strong ;  an  ingenious,  resolute 
selfishness  gives  them  momentum.  But  this  individuality  is  akin  to  that  of  ape  or 
tiger ;  it  is  a  part  of  the  earth  force,  in  yielding  to  which  a  man  forfeits  his  proper 
being  and  dignity.  Look  at  Napoleon,  the  supreme  example  in  history  of  this 
failure.  A  great  genius,  a  striking  character !  Only  in  the  carnal  region,  for 
human  personality  is  moral,  spiritual,  and  the  most  triumphant  cunnmg  does  not 
make  a  man ;  while  on  the  other  hand  from  a  very  moderate  endowment  put 
to  the  glorious  usury  of  God's  service  will  grow  a  soul  clear,  brave,  and  firm, 
precious  in  the  ranks  of  life.  Let  a  human  being,  however  ignorant  and  low,  hear 
and  answer  the  Divine  summons,  and  in  that  place  a  man  appears,  one  who 
stands  related  to  the  source  of  strength  and  light.  And  when  a  man,  roused 
by  such  a  call,  feels  responsibility  for  his  country,  for  religion,  the  hero  is 
astir.  Something  will  be  done  for  which  mankind  waits.  {R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.) 
Gideon's  obedience  to  God's  call : — Gideon,  observe,  was  not  unwilling  to  go  forward 
in  the  cause  of  God  and  God's  people ;  on  the  contrary,  he  was  most  ready  to  do  so ; 
but  without  an  outward  call  he  never  would  have  taken  the  lead.  Nevertheless, 
when  the  call  was  repeated  and  so  made  plain,  no  account  was  made  of  difficulties. 
In  full  view  of  them  Gideon  determined  to  obey.  Now  he  evidently  had  no  suspicion 
yet  of  the  supernatural  character  of  his  visitor.  It  was  not,  therefore,  any  sign 
from  heaven  that  compelled  him  to  crush  down  his  hesitation.  It  was  the  inward 
voice  of  conscience,  awakened  by  what  he  beUeved  to  be  an  ordinary  communication 
from  God,  that  led  him  on.  He  asked,  indeed,  for  a  sign  from  heaven,  but  it  was 
to  strengthen  him  to  keep  his  resolution,  not  to  enable  him  to  form  it.  Here  was 
the  true  spirit  of  faith.  Here  was  the  root  of  the  success  that  came  so  gloriously 
afterwards.  Submission,  consent  when  once  God's  will  is  known ;  resolution  to  do 
that  will  in  spite  of  difficulties — that  is  the  spirit  to  which  signs  are  given  ;  that  is 
the  spirit  by  which  success  is  won.  The  man  or  the  Church  that  makes  visible 
success,  or  signs  of  any  kind,  a  condition  of  bending  all  their  energy  to  the  doing 
of  God's  will,  is  not  among  those  by  whom  deliverance  is  wrought  or  the  famiUes 
of  the  earth  blessed.  To  those  who  yield,  like  Gideon,  to  the  will  of  God  so  soon  as 
it  is  made  clear,  signs  of  acceptance  and  encouragement  come  thereafter,  and  often 
come  with  but  small  delay.  {W.  Miller,  M.A.)  Surely  I  will  be  with  thee. — The 
Divine  afflatus  : — Whatever  ground  there  was  for  taking  exception  to  Gideon's  faith 
in  God,  this,  at  all  events,  there  seems  to  be  every  reason  to  believe,  that  he  had 
learned  to  refer  all  success  to  the  presence  and  blessing  of  the  Lord.  The  language 
he  employs  (ver.  13)  necessarily  implies  this.  But  still  much  required  to  be  done 
before  he  should  be  qualified  to  act  the  distinguished  part  for  which  he  was  destined ; 
and  accordingly  we  are  informed  (ver.  14)  that  by  some  method  here  unexplained- 
some  secret  and  mysterious  afflatus  of  the  Spirit  imparted  on  that  occasion — it 
pleased  the  Lord  to  make  up  what  was  wanting  in  his  faith,  and  in  whatever  else 
■was  still  manifestly  defective.  The  Lord  looked  upon  him  !  Ah  I  who  knows  what 
was  in  that  look  1  It  was  not  a  look  of  anger  or  displeasure.  It  was  not  a  mere 
look  of  compassion,  nor  of  benevolence  and  favour.  There  seems  to  have  been 
something  above  nature  in  it,  not  unlike  that  memorable  glance  with  which  Jesus 
smote  Peter  to  the  heart,  so  that  he  rushed  out  of  the  house  and  wept  bitterly ;  the 
influence  which  accompanied  the  "  look  "  which  the  Lord  cast  on  Gideon  was  of_  a 
tlifferent  character,  indeed,  but  it  was  not  less  potential.  It  was  Gideon's  commis- 
sion.   Along  with  it  seems  to  have  come  all  the  wisdom,  all  the  might,  all  the 


CHAP.  Ti.]  JUDGES.  101 

valour,  all  the  strategic  skill  -which  he  needed  in  order  to  fit  hun  for  the  grand 
expedition  in  which  he  was  soon  to  act  so  prominent  a  part.  Let  us  learn  the 
following  important  practical  lessons : — 1.  The  Lord  often  anticipates  the  desires 
of  His  people,  and  grants  them  what  they  need  even  before  they  ask  it.  Indeed,  in 
every  case  He  may  be  said,  in  one  sense,  to  give  before  we  ask,  because  if  He  did 
not  by  His  Holy  Spirit  vouchsafe  unto  us  grace  to  pray,  which  of  us  would  ever 
pray  for  grace  ?  But  if  He  is  so  ready  to  grant  before  we  ask,  how  much  more  is 
He  ready  to  grant  when  we  do  ask  in  faith  aU  things  whatsoever  we  require.  2.  A 
lowly  sense  of  our  own  deserts  is  at  once  a  sign  that  exaltation  is  at  hand,  the  way 
to  it,  and  the  occasion  of  it.  Diffidence,  humility,  modesty,  unobtrusiveness,  are 
among  the  highest  recommendations  in  the  sight  of  God.  He  "  resisteth  the  proud, 
but  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble."  "Before  honour  is  humility,  and  pride  goeth 
before  a  fall."  3.  If  we  be  indeed  of  the  true  Israel  of  God,  we  may  rest  assured 
that  the  Lord  will  be  with  us,  and  cause  us  to  triumph  over  all  our  foes.  4.  It  is 
unbecoming  the  Christian  to  be  too  anxious  or  too  careful  about  the  designs  of  God 
concerning  him.  To  Gideon's  question,  "  Wherewith  shall  I  save  Israel  ?  "  no 
explicit  answer,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  vouchsafed.  His  curiosity  was  rebuked 
as  a  sign  of  remaining  unbelief.  Let  us  repose  Uke  Uttle  children  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father's  promise.  (IF.  W.  Duncan,  M.A.)  Thou  shalt  smite  the  Midianites 
as  one  man. — War  : — What  shall  we  say  as  to  the  moral  character  of  this  trans- 
action ?  We  must  not  let  our  affection  or  veneration  for  old  traditions  blind  us  to 
the  difficulty  of  the  question.  But  common  sense  has  suggested  to  me  one  or  two 
considerations.  First  of  all,  our  judgment  is  apt  to  be  prejudiced  here,  because 
men  in  our  time,  we  English  people  in  particular,  have  come  to  think  rather  falsely 
about  war.  A  profounder  ai^prehension  of  the  lovely  Ghristlike  spirit  of  our  religion, 
coupled  with  a  good  many  less  worthy  influences,  such  as  the  peaceableness  and 
security  of  our  sea-girt  life  in  these  isles,  have  aU  combined  to  give  us  a  great 
horror  of  war ;  not  because  of  the  sin  and  iniquity  of  it,  but  because  it  means 
wounds  and  bloodshed,  and  robbery  of  our  property  and  death.  Now  indubitably 
every  rational  man  will  say  that,  were  our  world  free  from  selfishness  and  sin,  war 
could  not  exist  in  it.  Therefore  it  has  its  roots  in  iniquity.  Nevertheless,  like 
many  other  things  that  are  evils  in  themselves,  war  may  be  used,  under  God's 
providential  government  of  the  world,  to  cure  worse  evils,  acting  remedially  like  the 
surgeon's  knife,  and  bringing  renewed  life  to  the  nation  and  the  individual.  In  the 
second  place,  I  wish  to  add  another  consideration.  I  venture  to  say  that  all  of  us, 
in  our  historical  judgment  and  in  our  ethical  and  religious  teaching,  probably  have 
fallen  into  error,  in  that  we  overvalue  mere  physical  human  life.  If  anything  is 
manifest  in  this  world,  it  is  that  the  material  life  counts  for  very  httle  in  God's 
sight ;  that  the  material  life  is  mere  scaffolding,  the  machinery  by  which  or  the 
platform  on  which  the  mental,  moral,  and  ethical  life  is  to  be  built  up.  Over  and 
over  again,  in  the  pathological  history  of  our  human  race,  we  find  that  God  has 
sacrificed  millions  of  lives  to  compel  men  to  be  pure  and  dignified  in  their  bodily 
and  moral  habits.  Apply  this  to  war.  Though  it  be  a  scourge  and  an  exterminator, 
it  has  nevertheless  a  wonderful  potential  force  in  it  to  produce  bravery,  courage, 
abUity  of  every  description.  War  may  thus  be  used  to  elevate  the  moral  and 
mental  worth  of  our  race.  I  fear  it  is  our  tendency  in  the  present  day  to  make  too 
much  of  physical  comfort  and  physical  hfe.  On  that  account  we  recoil  unduly 
when  God  has  wrought  out  benefit  for  our  race  as  a  whole  through  terrible  trial, 
affliction,  discipUne,  suffering,  and  self-sacrifice  ;  as,  for  example,  by  wars  in  which 
cruel  despotisms,  tyrannous,  inferior,  and  sanguinary  races  have  succumbed  before 
superior  moral  or  mental  worth.  I  am  afraid,  too,  we  do  not  deal  out  fair  measure 
to  our  predecessors.  We  are  ready  to  censure  these  Hebrews  for  the  cruel  treatment 
they  often  meted  out  to  prisoners  of  war.  We  are  apt  to  say  that  the  men  who  did 
Buch  things  could  not,  along  with  such  a  low  moral  character,  have  possessed  a 
lofty,  pure  revelation  of  God  or  a  knowledge  of  His  character.  But  that  is  too 
hasty  a  judgment.  Similarly  we  take  a  socialist  book,  describing  life  in  the  last 
generation,  or  in  the  present  generation,  in  our  England ;  we  read  the  history  of 
the  horrors  that  produced  the  Factory  Acts — how  the  wealthy  capitalist  hved  in 
luxury,  and  grudged  a  diminution  of  his  income  that  would  have  made  the  condition 
of  workshops  and  the  hours  of  labour  such  as  would  have  averted  the  premature 
death  of  their  operatives,  of  men,  women,  and  children,  untU  Parliament  stepped 
in.  We  say  those  men  who  occupied  the  position  of  capitalists  were  fiends.  But 
they  were  nothing  of  the  kind ;  some  of  them  were  even  eminent  Christians.  But 
Christianity  had  got  into  cursed  bUndness  and  ignorance  on  these  points,  and  they 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

belonged  to  their  day  and  generation.  At  present,  are  we  so  very  far  above  them  ? 
Is  it  not  the  fact  that  constantly  you  have  great  outbreaks  of  small-pox  or  scarlet 
fever  spreading  death  in  a  hundred  households  which  are  due  solely  to  carelessly 
scamped  work?  Have  we  not  the  horrors  of  the  East  End,  and  the  City,  and  so 
on  ?  But  are  we  therefore  all  bad  men  ?  Not  so.  We  are  Christians  in  process  of 
growing.  These  are  evils  we  are  only  waking  up  to  discover,  the  sins  we  have 
inherited,  the  Canaanites  we  have  to  destroy.  If  we  apply  the  same  measure  to  the 
Hebrews,  we  see  that  there  was  a  real  progress,  a  real  working  for  good  in  a  society 
that,  in  certain  moral  aspects,  was  low  and  degraded.  Then  again,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  God  that  made  our  world  has  made  this  law,  that  wherever  sin  of  a  certain 
type  and  degree  has  come  in,  the  retribution  of  moral  obliquity  and  degradation  has 
come  in  also,  in  the  shape  of  annihilation  at  the  hands  of  a  superior  race.  That 
seems  a  cruel,  hard  thing ;  but  nevertheless  so  it  is.  Moreover,  to  make  it  more 
mysterious,  the  conquering  race  is  not  always  a  superior  race  in  the  perfect  sense. 
But  we  have  not  that  complication  here,  for  all  old  history  testifies  that  the  most 
blighting  curse  of  false  religion  and  the  vilest  sensuality  of  our  world  in  these  days 
lay  in  the  religion  of  those  Canaanites.  Even  classic,  pagan  writers  say  that  blank 
atheism  would  have  been  better  than  that.  Wherever  Phoenicians  established  their 
colonies  and  their  places  of  worship  they  introduced  nameless  vices  and  unclean- 
nesses,  and  dignified  them  with  the  name  of  religion.  And  where  these  things  were 
introduced  they  spread,  so  much  so  that  the  end  of  the  great  Eoman  empire  was 
hastened,  its  old  martial  strength  was  rooted  out,  by  the  corruption  that  came  in  a 
direct  line  from  that  old  Canaanitish  religion.  To  justify  what  was  done,  therefore, 
we  do  not  need  to  say  that  the  conquerors  were  perfect  and  immaculate.  AH  we 
need  to  be  able  to  say  is,  that  it  was  a  deserved  retribution,  and  that  it  was  better 
for  our  world  that  Canaan  should  pass  into  the  hands  of  the  Hebrew  nation,  which 
has  done  the  grandest  moral  and  religious  work  for  the  world.  (Prof.  G.  A.  Smith.) 
Shew  me  a  sign  that  Thou  talkest  with  me. — The  sign : — When  the  Lord  Jesus 
had  risen  from  the  dead,  and  first  appeared  to  His  disciples,  "  they  believed  not  for 
joy,  and  wondered."  Their  doubts,  however,  were  soon  removed  by  the  sign  which 
the  Lord  afforded  them  (Luke  xxiv.  41-43).  We  may  well  imagine  that  the  feelings 
of  Gideon  were  not  altogether  dissimilar  to  those  of  the  disciples  of  our  Lord,  when 
the  angel  •'  looked  upon  him  and  said,  Go  in  this  thy  might,  and  thou  shalt  save 
Israel  from  the  hand  of  the  Midianites :  have  not  I  sent  thee  ?  "  These  tidings 
were  so  welcome,  and  yet  so  marvellous,  that  Gideon's  faith  staggered.  He 
"  believed  not  for  joy,  and  wondered."  And  then  he  sought  "a  sign,"  to  satisfy 
himself  that  he  was  in  a  waking  state,  that  his  senses  were  not  deceiving  him,  and 
that  the  angel  was  not  a  mere  phantom  called  up  by  a  heated  imagination.  "  Shew 
me  a  sign  that  Thou  talkest  with  me."  Now,  the  sign  which  was  given  to  Gideon 
was  not  altogether  unlike  in  character  to  the  sign  which  our  blessed  Lord  gave  to 
His  disciples  on  His  resurrection-morn.  In  both  cases  the  emblems  of  peace  and 
friendship  were  presented.  In  both  cases  the  offering  was  accepted.  In  both  cases 
it  was  consumed.  Now,  do  not  we  need  some  sign  that  the  Lord  talketh  with  us, 
and  hath  come  down  to  "  save  us  from  the  hand  of  our  enemies  "?  Our  enemies 
are  many  and  powerful.  We  need  not  now  some  audible  voice,  nor  midnight 
dream,  nor  open  vision,  to  assure  us  of  pardon  and  salvation,  Jesus  Himself  has 
given  us  a  sign.  We  see  it  on  Calvary's  hill.  Let  us  draw  near  and  see  this  great 
sight.  I.  Mark  that  this  sign  which  Gideon  received,  was  an  appeal  to  the  senses. 
Man  is  a  compound  being.  God  deals  with  him  as  such.  There  is  not  a  faculty 
nor  a  gift  with  which  man  is  endowed  to  which  God  does  not  appeal  in  the  great 
matter  of  salvation.  This  is  an  important  consideration.  We  are  too  apt  to  regard 
the  atonement  as  a  mere  matter  of  faith.  We  believe  it  is  something  more  ;  some- 
thing greater,  and  something  less.  Gideon  wished  for  a  sign  which  his  own  hands 
could  handle  and  his  own  eyes  could  see.  God  granted  him  this  sign — a  sign,  be 
it  remembered,  of  greater  things  promised.  Now  it  is  just  this  sign,  or  this  appeal 
to  the  senses,  which  appears  in  the  atonement  of  our  Lord.  One  voice  throughout 
the  whole  life  and  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  seems  to  say,  "  Behold  My 
hands  and  My  feet,  that  it  is  I  Myself  "  (Luke  xxiv.  39).  It  is  true  that  our  own 
individual  eyes  have  not  seen  Him,  nor  have  our  own  ears  heard  Him  speak,  nor 
have  our  own  hands  handled  His  pierced  side,  but  our  fathers  have  had  all  these 
their  senses  satisfied — they  saw,  they  heard,  they  handled,  they  believed,  and  they 
were  saved.  And  is  not  this  enough?  "  Blessed  are  they  who  have  not  seen,  and 
yet  have  beheved."  Do  we  not  receive  the  testimony  of  credible  witnesses  upon 
other  matters  of  bygone  fact  ?    Through  the  senses  of  others,  who  lived  ages  ago, 


CHAP.  VI.]  JUDGES.  103 

vre  embrace  the  facts  recorded  of  ancient  sages,  of  conquerors,  of  emperors.  Tte 
great  and  the  noble  dead  live  over  again  in  our  minds.  We  should  be  held  ir-^edu- 
lous  and  inexcusable  were  we  to  throw  aside  all  credible  history  because  our  own 
eyes  could  not  test  its  accuracy.  And  what  excuse  shall  we  fi^^  J  in  heaven  If  we 
reject  or  slight  the  testimony  of  others  on  the  matter  of  sal',  i-cion  ?  But  if,  on  the 
contrary,  we  embrace  the  sign  which  God  has  given  us,  p. J  rely  upon  the  wondrous 
facts  of  which  they  are  signs,  we  then  set  to  our  spr.l  that  God  is  true.  This  is 
behaving.  This  is  acting  faith  in  God.  We  truit  God.  We  honour  God.  Our 
senses  harmonise  with  the  faculties  of  our  soul.    II.  We  notice  that  this  sign 

WHICH  THE  LOKD  GAVE  UNTO  GlDEON  WAR  A  CONFIBMATION  OF  PKOMISES.      The  piOmiseS 

made  to  this  mighty  man  of  val'-  r  were  of  a  twofold  nature,  as  emphatically 
expressed  in  the  fourteenth  v^'  se,  "  The  Lord  said  unto  him.  Surely  I  will  be  with 
thee,  and  thou  shalt  smito  the  Midianites  as  one  man."  The  Lord's  presence  and 
the  Lord's  deliverprce  were  united.  They  always  are  so.  They  are  inseparable. 
If  the  Lord  be  not  with  us,  in  vain  shall  we  go  forth  against  the  Midianites.  But 
"  if  the  Lord  be  "  with  us,  "  none  can  prevail  against  us."  Salvation,  both  present 
and  eternal,  is  included  in  the  promise,  "I  will  be  with  thee."  It  is  just  this 
promise  and  blessing  which  are  embodied  in  the  name  Jesus  which  bears  the  same 
interpretation  as  "  Immanuel,"  "  God  with  us."  III.  The  sign  vouchsafed  to 
Gideon  was  also  an  evidence  of  things  not  seen.  It  was  an  appeal  to  sense  to 
strengthen  faith.  It  proved  to  him  that  He  who  appeared  as  a  man  "  under  the 
oak  which  was  in  Ophrah  "  was  none  other  than  the  Angel  of  the  Lord — even  the 
Angel  of  the  everlasting  covenant !  It  proved,  moreover,  that  Gideon  was  called  of 
God  to  deliver  Israel.  Oh,  that  he  might  succeed  in  the  attempt  1  He  had  no 
riches,  no  name,  no  influence,  no  soldiers ;  but  no  matter,  the  Lord  was  indeed 
"  with  him,"  and  that  was  enough.  He  would  now  act  up  to  the  title  which  the 
Lord  had  given  him,  as  a  "  mighty  man  of  valour,"  and  Israel  shall  be  delivered 
by  "  the  sword  of  the  Lord  and  of  Gideon."  Now  it  is  just  this  faith  in  an  unseen 
presence  and  in  an  unfelt  power  which  saves  the  soul  from  spiritual  Midianites. 
Divine  power  alone  is  equal  to  cope  with  Satanic  might.  The  sinner  who  wars 
against  his  sins,  his  lusts,  his  evil  passions,  his  corrupt  nature,  in  his  own  strength, 
soon  proves  his  folly  and  his  weakness.  As  regards  all  spiritual  conquests,  one 
word  should  at  once  check  the  vain  conceit  of  the  sinner,  and  strengthen  the  faith 
of  the  child  of  God  :  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts."  Look  you,  then,  for  any  sign  that  the  Lord  is  with  you — that  He  will 
dehver  you,  and  make  you  victorious  over  all  your  enemies  ?  Behold  that  sign 
upon  the  hard  rock  of  Calvary  t  Behold  it  in  that  mysterious  fire  which  arose 
therefrom  !  Behold  it  in  the  utter  consumption  of  the  sacrifice !  Behold  it  in  the 
ascent  of  the  Lord  Himself  from  off  the  altar  to  His  throne  of  glory !  What 
further  sign  can  you  need  ?  {G.  A.  Rogers,  M.A.)  Gideon's  sacrijlce  accepted : — 
"  Give  me  a  sign  that  Thou  talkest  with  me."  It  may  be  said  that  this  hesitation 
was  Gideon's  infirmity.  Connecting  it,  however,  with  the  circumstance  of  its  being 
himself  that  was  called  forth  to  the  mighty  work  of  Israel's  deliverance,  I  cannot 
but  consider  it  as  an  evidence  of  his  humility.  Would  to  God  that  all  our  scruples 
with  regard  to  engaging  in  the  service  of  God  arose  from  the  same  cause  1  What 
is  the  reason  that,  when  we  ask  the  co-operation  of  many  in  some  labours  of  the 
Lord's  vineyard,  they  all,  with  one  accord,  begin  to  make  excuse  ?  Is  it  a  humbling 
sense  of  their  own  unfitness  for  the  work  ?  If  it  were,  we  have  an  encouraging  text 
in  the  Word  of  God,  with  which  we  might  do  away  the  difficulty:  "I  can  do  aU 
things  through  Christ  who  strengtheneth  me."  But  when  one  goes  to  his  farm,  and 
another  to  his  merchandise — in  short,  when  "men  seek  their  own,  and  not  the 
things  which  are  Jesus  Christ's" — how  opposed  are  their  characters  to  Gideon's, 
whose  only  scruple  about  the  work  of  God  was,  "  What  am  I,  that  I  should  deliver 
Israel?  "  And  would  to  God  that  when  humility  does  appear  to  be  the  source  of 
objections  to  the  engaging  in  the  promotion  of  the  cause  of  religion,  that  humility 
were,  like  Gideon's,  real  genuine  humility,  and  not  the  cloak  of  hypocrisy,  not  a 
covering  to  conceal  idleness  and  indifference.  I.  On  the  ciecumstance  which  forms 
the  text  we  may  make  two  observations,  viz.,  the  manner  in  which  the  angel  tried 
Gideon's  faith,  and  the  manner  in  which  he  displayed  his  own  power  and  Godhead. 
1.  We  notice  the  manner  in  which  the  angel  tried  Gideon's  faith.  "  He  said,  Take 
the  flesh  and  the  unleavened  cakes  and  lay  them  upon  this  rock ;  and  pour  out  the 
broth."  This  was  intended  to  make  way  for  a  miracle  ;  that  Gideon's  faith  in  the 
God  who  wrought  it  might,  after  this  trial,  become  strong,  according  to  the  work 
which  he  was  shortly  to  undertake.    It  will  be  remembered  that  EUjah  made  wav 

27 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

for  the  miracle  which  God  was  about  to  work  for  the  confusion  of  Baal's  prophets, 
by  placing  the  sacrifice  in  the  most  unlikely  state  for  consumption  by  fire.  It  seems 
to  have  been  for  the  same  purpose  that  the  angel  commanded  Gideon  to  lay  the 
flesh  upon  the  cold  rock,  and  to  pour  out  the  broth.  All  suspicion  and  all  possibihty 
of  the  communication  of  fire  were  to  be  done  away.  Gideon  obeys,  looking  for  the 
"  sign,"  and  wondering  how  it  shall  be  given.  2.  The  manner  in  which  the  angel 
displays  his  great  power  and  Godhead.  He  does  not  offer  up  prayer  for  fire  from 
heaven  on  the  sacrifice,  as  Elijah  did.  He  himself  communicates  the  fire,  and 
makes  the  sacrifice.  How  sweet  the  thought,  that  when  the  Christian  presents  his 
sacrifice  of  praise,  and  prayer,  and  thanksgiving,  there  is  one  who,  as  his  Mediator, 
can  make  it  acceptable  ;  one  who  "  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession,"  even  "  Jesus 
Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever !  "  11.  Having  made  these  remarks 
on  the  circumstance,  let  us  observe  the  effect  which  it  had  upon  Gideon's  mind 
AND  conduct.  The  effect  which  it  had  upon  his  mind  was  this  :  he  said,  "Alas,  O 
Lord  God  !  for  because  I  have  seen  an  angel  of  the  Lord  face  to  face."  There  was  so 
much  of  the  majesty  of  the  Godhead  in  the  miracle  which  the  angel  had  wrought, 
that  the  Divinity  beamed,  as  it  were,  through  the  appearance  of  His  manhood. 
Gideon  was  afraid.  It  was  a  received  opinion  among  the  Jews  that  any  vision  of 
the  Divine  glory  would  be  fatal,  in  consequence  of  what  God  had  declared  to  Moses. 
When  Moses  said  unto  the  Lord,  "  I  beseech  Thee  shew  me  Thy  glory,"  the  Lord 
said  unto  him,  "  Thou  canst  not  see  My  face ;  for  there  shall  no  man  see  Me  and 
live."  But  it  may  be  asked,  "  How  was  it  that  Gideon  survived  the  sight?  "  If  it 
had  been  said  to  Moses,  "  No  man  shall  see  My  face  and  live,"  how  did  Gideon  Uve  ? 
The  answer  will  open  to  us  some  precious  gospel  truths.  Gideon  saw  the  glory  of 
God,  indeed,  but  it  was  "in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  "No  man,"  says  St.  John, 
"  hath  seen  God  at  any  time.  The  only  begotten  Son,  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,  He  hath  declared  Him."  In  other  words,  whenever  there  has  been  a  mani- 
festation of  Jehovah  to  His  creatures,  it  has  been  by  Jesus  Christ,  the  second  person 
in  the  ever-blessed  Trinity ;  and  it  is  by  His  having  tabernacled  in  our  flesh  that 
the  awful  majesty  of  Jehovah  has  been  softened  into  mildness  and  peace  and  love. 
The  believer's  rejoicing  is  that  Jesus  is  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory  "  ; 
and  therefore  he  can  look  upon  it  and  live;  yea,  live  by  looking  upon  it,  and 
because  he  looks  upon  it.  "  Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  0  all  ye  ends  of  the 
earth."  Mark  here  the  answer  of  God  to  Gideon.  The  Lord  said  unto  him, 
"  Peace  be  unto  thee ;  fear  not ;  thou  shalt  not  die."  We  do  not  now  wonder  at 
this  gracious  answer,  after  taking  into  consideration  the  character  of  the  angel 
from  whom  it  came.  Was  it  not  from  Him  who  "  made  peace  by  the  blood  of  His 
Cross,"  who  is  called  *'  our  peace  "  and  "  the  Prince  of  Peace  "  ?  Yes,  it  was  an 
answer  that  fitted  His  priestly  and  His  mediatorial  character.  But  does  the 
impenitent  sinner  see  nothing  in  this  passage  which  is  calculated  to  affect  his  mind  ? 
Let  him  think  of  this — that  he  shall  one  day  see  the  "  Angel  "  before  whom  Gideon 
trembled  ;  shall  see  Him  as  Gideon  saw  Him,  "  face  to  face  "  ;  but  mark,  not  veiled, 
as  He  was  then,  in  the  appearance  of  a  man ;  not  disguised  in  the  garb  of  lowly 
human  nature,  but  in  the  glory  which  He  had  before  the  world  was.  And  mark  His 
character  then.  He  shall  come,  not  to  touch  a  sacrifice,  not  to  work  a  miracle,  not 
to  confirm  the  faith  of  an  individual,  as  in  the  case  of  Gideon;  but  "to  be  glorified 
in  His  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all  them  that  believe."  He  shall  come  to  be  our 
Judge.  We  come  now  to  show,  in  the  last  place,  the  effect  which  this  circumstance 
had  upon  Gideon's  conduct.  "  Then  Gideon  built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord,  and 
called  it  Jehovah-shalom."  This  he  did  to  commemorate  the  event.  It  was  a  day 
much  to  be  remembered  by  Gideon,  both  on  his  own  account  and  Israel's ;  and 
therefore  he  built  this  altar.  The  name  which  he  gave  it  is  beautifully  descriptive 
of  the  circumstance :  "  The  Lord  is  my  peace  "  ;  taking  that  comfortable  assurance 
which  God  gave  him  for  the  motto  to  inscribe  on  it,  "  Peace  be  unto  thee  1  "  It  is 
remarkable  that  holy  men  in  former  times  seem  to  have  been  uniformly  careful  to 
record  their  mercies.  We  may  take  shame  to  ourselves  for  want  of  a  closer  imitation. 
Does  the  God  of  battles  bless  our  arms  and  give  us  victory  ?  We  build  a  monument 
to  the  glory  of  the  conqueror,  whom  God  has  honoured  as  the  instrument ;  but 
where  are  the  hearts  in  which  an  altar  of  praise  is  built  unto  the  Lord,  and  on  which 
is  written,  "  The  Lord  is  my  banner  "  ?  Does  God  restore  a  dear  child  from  the 
brink  of  the  grave  and  give  him,  like  Isaac,  to  his  parent's  arms  again  ?  The 
parent  clasps  him  to  his  breast,  and  says,  "  This  my  son  was  dead,  and  is  alive 
again;  he  was  lost,  and  is  found"  ;  but  how  seldom  does  he  remember  the  mercy 
by  a  commemoration  of  it,  like  Abraham's  "  Jehovah -jireh."    Does  God  "  give  and 


CHAP.  VI.]  JUDGES.  105 

preserve  to  our  use  the  kindly  fruits  of  the  earth,  so  as  in  due  time  we  may  enjoy 
them  "  ?  "We  begin  to  pull  down  our  barns  and  build  greater  ;  and  to  say  to  our 
Bouls,  "  We  have  much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years ;  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry ! 
But  how  few,  from  Dan  to  Eeersheba,  from  one  end  of  the  country  to  the  other, 
how  few  look  upon  "  fields  white  unto  the  harvest,"  and  count  the  sheaves  which 
God  has  ripened  for  them,  with  thankful  hearts,  and  say,  "  We  will  raise  an 
Ebenezer,  for  hitherto  the  Lord  hath  helped  us  1 "  But  there  is  one  character  who 
does  record  His  mercies,  and  that  is  the  man  whose  mercies  have  been  of  a  nature 
which  have  effected  a  change  in  his  heart ;  melting  and  subduing  what  was  before 
hardness,  and  impenitency,  and  unbelief,  into  contrition  and  gratitude  and  love. 
To  such  a  soul  this  commemorative  word  of  Gideon  is  a  cordial :  "  Jehovah- 
Bhalom :  the  Lord  is  my  peace."  {F.  Elwin.)  The  Christian's  peculiar  state : — 
L  The  Cketstian's  privu.kge.     It  is  to  "find  grace  in  the  sigbt  of   the  Lord." 

1.  A  partaking  of  the  Divine  nature.  Those  who  have  found  grace  in  God's  sight 
have  received  His  grace  in  their  heart.  If  we  are  accepted  of  God  we  are  united 
to  Him  by  faith  in  His  Son.  We  become  one  with  Him — are  created  anew — 
conformed  to  the  Divine  image  and  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.  2.  A  recep- 
tion of  the  Divine  fulness.  He  is  emphatically  called  the  God  of  all  grace.  He 
has  all  the  treasm*es  of  grace  we  stand  in  need  of ;  so  that  if  we  find  favour  with 
Him — if  we  are  interested  in  His  love — He  will  communicate  to  us  every  blessing 
we  require.  What  are  all  the  treasures  of  the  world  compared  with  the  durable 
riches  and  righteousness  which  He  has  to  bestow?  3.  The  enjoyment  of  the 
Divine  presence :  "  In  Thy  sight."  There  is  no  grace  to  be  found  but  here. 
We  may  find  favour  with  men,  but  only  grace — free  favour — with  God.  We 
have  free  access  into  His  presence.  We  approach  His  very  throne,  and  He 
bids  us  come  near.  U.  The  Christian's  doubts  :  "  If  now  I  have  found  grace 
in  Thy  sight."  There  are  seasons  when  the  most  eminent  saints  have  been  led 
to  doubt  of  their  interest  in  God.  "  Happy  is  the  man  that  feareth  alway." 
Let  us  refer  to  some  of  those  things  that  occasion  the  believer's  doubts.  1.  The 
greatness  of  the  privilege.  When  we  take  a  review  of  the  vast  privileges  enjoyed 
by  our  finding  grace  in  His  sight,  and  think  of  our  depravity  and  vileness  under  a 
sense  of  our  unworthiness,  we  exclaim,  "  Surely  such  mercy  cannot  be  for  me ! " 

2.  The  imperfection  of  our  graces.  If  I  have  found  grace  in  Thy  sight,  why  do  I 
not  more  closely  follow  them  who  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the  promises  ? 
Why  am  I  not  more  fervent  in  prayer  ?  Why  not  more  delighted  in  God's  house  ? 
Why  do  I  so  little  prize  the  privilege  of  communion  with  Him  ?  3.  The  withdraw- 
ings  of  God's  countenance.  There  are  seasons  when  the  believer  is  called  to  walk 
in  darkness,  and  God  hides  His  face.  Without  God's  presence,  the  Word  is  a  dead 
letter,  ordinances  are  a  blank,  all  the  means  we  may  use  are  insipid.  4.  The 
apostasy  of  false  professors.  Then  the  thought  occurs  in  the  mind — perhaps  after 
aU  I  am  deceiving  myself  with  the  profession  of  godliness,  while  I  have  never  felt 
its  power,  and  I  mistake  the  excitement  of  natural  feelings  for  the  operation  of  a 
Divine  principle — perhaps,  after  in  outward  appearance  reaching  the  very  gate  of 
heaven,  I  shall  be  thrust  down  to  hell.  But  is  there  no  way  of  ascertaining  the 
fact  ?  in.  The  Christian's  desire.  Gideon  asked  a  sign.  "  Show  me  a  sign  that 
Thou  talkest  with  me."  And  God  gave  it  him.  Christians  have  a  sign  beyond  all 
visions,  tokens,  voices,  or  any  outward  manifestation.  There  are  three  ways  in  which 
God  shows  His  people  a  sign — 1.  By  the  workings  of  His  providence.  2.  By  the 
communications  of  His  grace.  Thus  He  speaks  peace  to  the  soul — calms  the  spirit — ■ 
gives  us  a  sense  of  pardoning  mercy.  3.  By  the  witness  of  His  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  16). 
There  are  many  ways  in  which  this  sign  is  given  by  the  Spirit.  It  is  done  by  sealing 
home  pardon  to  the  soul — by  more  deeply  impressing  on  our  souls  the  Divine 
hkeness — by  pouring  out  a  spirit  of  prayer — by  implanting  divine  principles — 
by  giving  filial  dispositions  and  tempers— inspiring  heavenly  desires  and  affec- 
tions— conferring  the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  and  making  us  bring  forth  the  fruits 
of  the  Spirit — causing  the  Spirit  to  dwell  in  us  as  in  a  temple,  and  assuring 
us  of  God's  favour.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  those  who  have  not  found  grace 
seek  the  possession  of  it.  Seek  to  be  good  rather  than  great— the  grace  of 
God  more  than  the  favour  of  man.  2.  Let  those  who  have  found  grace  seek  the 
assm-ance  of  it.  It  is  attainable — the  way  is  open.  And  remember,  though  you 
may  be  as  safe,  you  cannot  be  as  happy  without  it.  (E.  Temple.)  Bring 
forth  my  present,  and  set  it  before  thee. — Gideon's  sacrifice: — He  did  not 
want  to  be  rash  and  hasty,  and  do  what  he  might  be  very  sorry  for  after- 
wards.   He  thought  strongly  that  this  was  an  angel,  but  he  was  not  sure  yet.    His 


106  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

thoughts  had  been  so  set  upon  the  thing,  that  he  even  thought  he  might  be 
dreaming.    "  If  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,"  he  said,  "  give  me  a  sign 
that  thou  talkest  with  me."     Or  again,  this  might  be  somebody  tempting  him  and 
leading  him  into  a  trap.   So  he  asked  the  stranger  to  stay  while  he  got  ready  a  present 
for  him,  as  Abraham  had  done  for  the  three  angels  who  came  to  him.     If  this  is  an 
ordinary  man  he  wiU  give  him  food  in  a  hospitable  fashion  as  Easterns  do,  and 
then  send  him  on  his  way — if  it  is  God,  he  will  offer  Him  a  sacrifice.     That  is  why 
he  put  the  broth  in  a  pot,  he  kept  it  for  the  libation  or  drink  offering,  if  it  should 
really  prove  that  this  was  the  angel  of  the  Lord.   So  when  the  angel  said,  "  Lay  the 
flesh  and  the  cakes  on  the  rock,  and  pour  out  the  broth,"  it  was  as  much  as  saying, 
•'  Offer  me  a  sacrifice."   Gideon  was  satisfied  directly.   Here  was  the  test  he  had  been 
looking  for  and  wanting  to  know  about.     So  he  obeyed :  he  poured  out  the  broth  as 
a  drink-offering,  and  the  angel  touched  it,  and  fire  came  out  of  the  rock  and  burnt 
it  up.     Then  he  knew  that  God  was  on  his  side.     Now  you  will  see  from  this,  I 
think,  wherein  the  excellence  of  his  character  lay.     On  the  one  hand  he  was  not 
rash,  ready  to  throw  his  life  away  for  nothing  ;  on  the  other  he  was  not  a  laggard, 
throwing  away  opportunities  when  he  got  them.     Now  I  think  you  will  see  the 
power  of  this  text.    He  put  his  broth  in  a  pot  for  two  reasons — (1)  He  did  not  want 
to  be  deceived ;  but — (2)  He  wanted  to  be  ready.   Eash  men  do  things  in  a  hurry  which 
they  are  sorry  for  afterwards,  but  rashness  is  better  than  indifference,  carelessness, 
indolence.     Sad  indeed  it  would  have  been  for  him  if  he  had  turned  a  cold  ear  to 
■what  the  angel  had  told  him,  if  he  had  prepared  no  sacrifice,  had  gone  on  threshing 
his  wheat  and  taken  no  heed  to  God's  message.    He  would  have  lived  and  died  with 
God's  will  towards  him  unfulfilled.    Tou  and  I  have  all  of  us  God's  work  to  do ;  you 
have  yours,  I  mine.     The  world  does  not  know  what  it  is,  we  do  not  know  our- 
selves, except  in  part.    We  know  present  duties,  but  life  is  not  mapped  out  in  full 
before  any  of  us.    But  happy  is  that  servant  who  knows  Christ's  present  will,  who 
has  taken  pains  to  learn  it,  and  not  only  so,  but  who  is  ready  to  fulfil  it.   Duties  which 
conscience  teUs  us  are  duties,  how  ready  we  are  to  find  excuses  to  avoid  them,  and 
to  foUow  our  own  pleasure.     Gideon  had  his  wheat  to  thresh ;  let  greater  men  than 
he  go  forth  and  fight  the  Midianites.     If  he  had  said  so,  would  that  have  been  a 
strange,  unusual  case?    Would  it  not  have  been  very  like  what  we  have  done 
before  now?    For  the  will  of  God — we  must  surely  have  learned  that  by  this  time 
— is  very  often  quite  contrary  to  our  own  inchnations.    Duty  says  one  thing,  self- 
indulgence  says  another.    By  aU  means  let  us  have  caution  and  steadiness,  but  let 
not  caution  be  an  excuse  for  doing  nothing.     Gideon  putting  his  broth  in  a  pot  is 
an  everlasting  example  to  us  to  be  ready  for  God's  living  sacrifice.     (The  Weekly 
Pulpit.)        There  rose  up  fire  .  .  .  and  consumed  the  flesh. — The  witness  of  Divine 
fire  and  the  altar  of  Divine  peace  : — I.  The  Divinely-oedebed  offering.     1.  What, 
then,  are  the  offerings  that  are  required  ?     Gideon  here  offered  "  the  flesh,  the 
unleavened  cakes,  and  the  broth."     These  are  simply  the  sustenance  of  the  natural 
human  life.     Taken  and  assimilated  by  man,  they  become  portions  of  his  earthly 
frame.    Nowadays,  God  expects  us  to  make  a  spiritual  offering  unto  Him  of  all  the 
energies  of  our  life.     2.  The  man  was  ordered  to  make  the  offering  in  an  especial 
manner:  "Lay  them  upon  this  rock."     There  is  nothing  trivial  in  the  record  of 
God's  manifestations  to  man.    The  offerings  of  man  to  God,  before  they  can  lead 
him  on  to  peace,  must  be  based  upon  the  At-one-ment  between  man  and  God. 
II.  The  Divine  acceptance  of  man's  offering.     1.  That  fire  which  came  forth  out 
of  the  cleft  of  the  rock  in  Ophrah  is  still  burning  in  the  deep  recesses  of  the  Eock 
of  Ages,  ready  to  come  forth  in  response  to  the  obedient  devotion  of  man.    On 
Calvary,  in  the  self-sacrifice  of  the  God-man,  we  behold  the  eternal  law  of  Divine 
love  fulfilling  itself.    The  Church  has  again  and  again  passed  through  its  hours  of 
coldness  and  darkness.    But  in  God's  good  time  the  fire  of  revival  has  kindled,  and 
she  has  spoken  to  the  hearts  of  men  with  power.    This  sign  of  "  fire  "  is  given  to 
the  individual  soul  no  less  than  to  the  Church.    He  who  gives  himself  to  God, 
laying  the  devotion  of  his  whole  soul  upon  Christ,  offering  daily  in  His  name  the 
prayers,  the  praises,  the  alms,  the  pure  feelings,  the  chastened  thoughts,  and  all  the 
energies  of  charity,  wiU  find  assurance  that  God  talketh  with  him.    He  will  find  hia 
mind  brightened  by  the  light  of  heavenly  thoughts  and  eternal  hopes,  and  his  heart 
fired  by  the  impulses  of  a  Divine  love.    2.  In  this  passage  we  may  see  the  purpose 
and  ultimate  destiny  of  religious  forms.     The  forms  of  the  offering  which  Gideon 
made  were  not  unimportant.    The  Divine  voice  recognised  their  value,  and  directed 
the  manner  in  which  they  were  to  be  presented.    It  was  not  until  they  had  been 
duly  presented  that  the  fire  came  forth.    When  forms  of  worship,  beautiful  music, 


CHAP.  VI.]  JOSHUA.  107 

and  august  ceremonial  express  faith  and  reverence  for  the  majesty  of  Christ  they 
are  offerings  laid  upon  the  rock,  and  are  means  of  quickening  spiritual  life.  But 
in  using  them  let  us  look  beyond  the  means  to  the  end,  until  the  forms  are  in  our 
sight  lost  to  view  in  the  realities  of  spirit.  III.  The  impeessions  left  by  the 
MANIFESTATION  UPON  THE  man's  SOUL.  1.  This  vivid  manifestation  of  the  Divine 
presence  to  the  soul  was  but  for  a  short  time.  On  earth  man  cannot  bear  the 
brightness  of  the  supernatural  visions  of  truth,  save  during  brief  moments.  The 
overpowering  splendours  of  the  theophanies  have  in  mercy  been  traiisient.  2.  The 
angel  departs,  but  he  leaves  his  footprints  on  the  soul.  This  spiritual  intuition  of 
the  Divine  presence  given  to  Gideon  soon  passed  away,  but  its  influence  on  his 
heart  and  mind  never  died.  IV.  Its  objective  results  in  his  outwabd  action. 
The  vision  soon  passed  away.  But  it  wrought  a  mighty  change  in  Gideon's  life  and 
career.  That  change  is  briefly  but  fully  recorded  in  the  announcement  that  he  now 
built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord.  The  altar  implies  the  sacrifice.  In  building  an  altar 
imto  the  Lord  he  pledged  himself  to  sacrifice  henceforth  unto  the  Lord.  On  what 
principle  did  he  take  this  momentous  step?  In  the  name  of  what  truth  did 
he  buUd  this  altar  ?  He  called  it  "  Jehovah-shalom  " ;  that  is,  "  Jehovah  the 
author  of  peace."  So  in  our  own  day,  the  object  of  the  messenger  of  God  is  to 
constrain  men  to  build  this  altar  of  peace.  (Henry  T.  Edwards,  M.A.)  Peace 
be  unto  thee. — The  assurance  of  peace  vouchsafed  to  Gideon  : — Already  Gideon  had 
received  what  ought  to  have  been  a  sufficient  assurance  of  the  Divine  favour,  for 
his  offering  had  been  accepted,  and  of  this  he  had  received  the  clearest  evidence  in 
the  issue  of  fire  from  the  rock.  But  the  sense  of  acceptance  which  this  sign  was 
well  fitted  to  inspire  was  overborne  by  the  indefinite  sense  of  fear,  which  prostrated 
him  in  the  dust.  But  mark  how  tenderly  and  sympathisingly  the  Lord,  if  not  now 
in  a  bodily  form,  at  least  with  audible  voice,  replies  to  his  cry,  and  reassures  the 
trembling  man.  And  may  we  not  here  recognise  the  voice  of  that  very  Saviour — 
the  Angel  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  who  said  to  the  winds  and 
waves  of  the  sea  of  Galilee,  as  they  threatened  to  swallow  up  His  disciples,  "  Peace 
be  stiU,"  and  who  after  His  resurrection  appeared  to  them  again  and  again  saying, 
•'  Peace  be  unto  you  "  ?  We  may  indeed  !  Never  does  He  allow  any  one  who  reaUy 
fears  the  Lord  to  remain  long  in  so  deplorable  a  state  as  that  in  which  Gideon  is 
described  to  have  been.  Never  does  He  "  break  the  bruised  reed,  or  quench  the 
smoking  flax."  It  gives  Him  no  satisfaction  to  see  any  of  His  creatures  overcome 
by  slavish  terror  and  alarm  from  whatsoever  cause.  And  when,  in  any  case,  the  soul 
and  the  affections  are  found  to  yield  to  constitutional  weakness  of  that  kind,  who 
so  ready  as  He  with  encouraging  assurances  such  as  that  which  He  addressed  to 
Gideon,  "  Peace  be  unto  thee ;  fear  not."  He  would  have  us  to  reflect  that  the  grand 
end  for  which  He  came  into  this  world  was  to  banish  all  terrors  from  the  guUty 
breast,  to  restore  tranquillity  to  the  most  tempest-tossed  bosom.  "Fear  not,"  says 
He ;  "  thou  shalt  not  die  !  "  Death  temporal,  indeed,  still  holds  its  stern  dominion 
over  all  the  families  of  men.  But  death  eternal  has  been  abolished,  and  "  life  and 
immortality  have  been  brought  to  light."  "  Thou  shalt  surely  die,"  was  the  doom 
pronounced  on  all,  in  consequence  of  the  entrance  of  sin  into  our  world.  But  listen 
to  the  gospel  bells  as  their  sweet,  harmonious  sounds  come  softened  by  distance  over 
the  waters  of  time.  What  do  they  say?  "  Thou  shalt  not  die;  surely  thou  shalt 
not  die."  The  Angel  of  the  everlasting  covenant  whispers  it  amid  the  silence  of 
the  night,  adding,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shalt  live  also."  And  in  His  hands  are  the 
keys  of  life  and  of  death,  of  death  and  of  hell.  (W.  W.  Duncan,  M.A.)  Fear  not : 
thou  Shalt  not  die. — Death  impossible : — There  is  no  such  thing  as  death.  Change, 
transition,  promotion — anything,  everything,  except  an  end.  This  is  the  great  law 
of  Christianity ;  and  the  word  "  eternity  "  is  the  logical  condensation  of  the  mighty 
truth.  Nature  changes  all  the  time.  Nations  alter  and  seemingly  disappear.  We 
om'selves  pass  on,  and  up ;  but  nobody,  nothing  whatever,  inevitably  disappears. 
But,  oh,  how  hard  it  is  for  us  all  to  learn  this  comfortable  and  sublime  lesson !  1.  The 
little  boy  or  girl  grows  up  to  a  man  or  a  woman,  and  we  say  complainingly,  "  We  have 
lost  our  child !  "  No  !  We  have  not  lost  our  child.  The  child  is  there,  with  a  fresh 
body  and  a  matured  soul.  And  the  man  or  woman  grows  into  old  age,  and  all 
previous  life  seems  to  be  wiped  out  and  lost.  Oh,  no  1  not  wiped  out,  not  lost,  but 
prolonged,  ripened,  illustrated.  We  have  simply  the  boy  or  girl,  or  man  or  woman, 
further  advanced,  and  acting  on  the  stage  of  Ufe  with  a  new  costume  ;  but  the  same 
actors,  after  all,  are  behind  the  dress.  Then  again,  these  dear  ones  vanish  from  oui- 
sight,  and  we  say,  "  They  are  gone,  they  are  dead,  they  are  no  mpre :  it  is  an 
irreparable  loss."    But  they  are  not  gone — no  more  in  the  flesh,  but  alive  with  God ; 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

and  they  are  not  lost,  but  transplanted,  glorified,  crowned,  and  it  may  be  right  at 
our  side  after  aU,  although  unseen  by  mortal  eyes.  No  more  lost  than  was  the  boy 
or  girl  who  became  a  man  or  woman,  than  was  the  man  or  woman  in  fuU  vigour  of 
life  who  became  worn  out  by  old  age.  They  have  only  taken  one  step  more. 
"  Mortals  cry,  A  man  is  dead :  Angels  cry,  A  child  is  born."  One  way  of  looking  at 
it,  it  was  death  ;  but  another  way  of  looking  at  the  matter,  the  Christian  way,  it 
was  birth.  And  so,  ever  and  for  ever,  not  destruction,  but  creation.  2.  Nations 
alter  and  seemingly  disappear ;  but  are  they  really  gone,  or  with  us  in  a  newer, 
better,  and  holier  shape  ?  I  believe  that  there  has  been  a  telephonic,  telegraphic, 
and  electric  influence,  ever  since  the  days  of  Adam  to  the  present  hour,  by  which 
all  past  history  is  present  life,  and  every  nation  seemingly  dead  is  living  again  in 
Asia,  Africa,  Europe,  and  America,  so  that  the  races  of  to-day  are  but  the  great- 
grandchildren of  the  races  of  the  past,  and  you  and  I  have  something  in  our  bones 
and  blood  of  Egypt,  Assyria,  Babylonia,  Judcca,  Phoenicia,  India,  and  Persia,  so  that 
nations  never  really  die,  but  are  changed,  transmitted,  reorganised,  improved,  by 
marriage,  by  birth,  by  intermingling  of  races,  by  time,  by  the  grace  of  God ;  so  that, 
in  a  certain  philosophical  sense,  I  am  not  only  an  American,  but  a  Pioman,  a 
Grecian,  a  Persian,  a  part  of  everybody  and  everything  that  ever  has  been,  and 
a  part,  by  transmission,  century  after  century,  of  everybody  and  everything  that 
ever  wiU  be  ;  and  thus  there  is  an  everlasting  unity  of  flesh,  and  the  unity  of  God 
and  the  unity  of  humanity  are  great  and  mighty  and  twin  realities.  Do  not  forget 
the  prayer  of  Jesus — that  those  who  were  His  might  be  one  with  Him,  as  He  was 
one  with  God.  3.  Once  more,  nature  changes  all  the  tinae.  Yes;  but  nature 
never  dies.  Do  those  leaves  that  you  tread  on  an  October  or  November  day  perish? 
Are  they  annihilated?  Is  their  work  done,  and  is  our  farewell  to  them  a  fijiality? 
Oh,  no !  They  will  go  into  the  hungry  earth,  and,  through  many  changes,  at  last 
will  fall  into  your  hands  in  the  shape  of  a  luscious  peach,  or  rosy  apple,  or 
juicy  pear,  or  else  as  a  violet  or  rosebud  or  japonica  will  bless  your  eyes,  cheer 
your  heart,  and  somehow  spiritually  say,  "  We  do  not  die,  we  have  never 
perished :  we  are  blessing  the  world  for  ever  and  ever ;  and  like  you,  0  mortals, 
we  are  immortal."  4.  What  do  our  great  writers  and  thinkers  say  about 
death?  Beecher :  "Dying  is  life."  Bryant:  "Death  is  a  deliverer."  Walter 
Scott :  "  Is  death  the  last  sleep  ?  No,  it  is  the  last  final  awakening."  Dr.  Adam 
Clarke :  "  Death  to  a  good  man  is  but  passing  through  a  dark  entry,  out  of  one 
little  dusky  room  of  his  Father's  house  into  another  that  is  fair  and  large,  light- 
some and  glorious,  and  divinely  entertaining."  Goethe:  "In  the  death  of  a  good 
man  eternity  is  seen  looking  through  time."  But  hear  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ: 
Matt.  ix.  24;  John  xi.  25,  xiv.  2  ;  Matt.  xxii.  32  ;  Luke  xxiii.  43.  (C.  D.  Bradlee.) 
Jehovah-Shalom. — Jehovah-shalom :  the  Lord  our  peace  : — The  theme  presented 
by  this  text  is,  the  peace  which  the  gospel  brings.  "It  is  a  great  mercy  to 
have  the  gospel  of  peace,  but  it  is  a  far  greater  mercy  to  have  the  peace 
of  the  gospel."  I,  The  nature  of  this  peace.  We  call  it  in  our  form  of 
benediction  "  The  peace  of  God."  It  is  so  called  with  great  propriety,  because 
it  is  the  peace  which  God  has  designed  and  provided.  It  was  arranged  for 
in  the  far-back  ages  of  eternity,  when  the  stupendous  plan  of  our  redemption 
in  Christ  Jesus  was  determined  upon.  The  peace  which  Jehovah-Jesus  gives  is  not 
the  peace  of  exhaustion,  nor  the  peace  of  satisfied  sensuaUsm,  nor  the  peace  of 
mental  torpor  and  inaction,  nor  the  peace  of  apathy,  nor  the  peace  of  death — no ; 
but  it  is  the  peace  which  attends  pardon,  and  renewal,  and  consecration,  and 
activity,  and  life,  in  its  fullest  and  most  perfect  plan.  An  incident  in  Grecian 
history  illustrates  the  nature  of  this  peace.  Thrasybulus  was  one  of  the  chief  men 
of  Athens  about  the  year  400  B.C.  He  came  to  the  head  of  affairs  after  many 
political  changes,  which  had  left  behind  them  great  bitterness  of  feehng.  To 
prevent  the  existence  of  heartburnings,  and  to  secure  peace  among  the  Athenians, 
Thrasybulus  exerted  his  influence  to  secure  the  passage  of  a  law,  which  they  called 
Amnestia,  from  the  Greek  word  signifying  no  recollection,  or  no  memory,  and  from 
which  our  word  amnesty  comes.  This  law  provided  that  all  former  wronys  should 
be  forgotten,  and  the  people  pledged  themselves  henceforward  to  live  lovingly  and 
peaceably  towards  each  other,  and  as  if  all  the  wrongs  and  offefices  of  the  past  had 
never  taken  place.  Among  men,  with  such  infirmities  as  cling  to  us,  it  may  be 
▼ery  easy  to  make  a  law  liie  this,  but  it  must  be  very  hard  to  carry  it  out.  Yet 
this  is  a  fair  illustration  of  the  peace  which  the  gospel  brings  to  us.  It  is  a 
peace  founded  on  an  act  ot  amnesty.  But  this  act  is  fairly  and  fully  carried  out. 
II.  The  i^oundaxion  or  this  saxes.    This  peace  rests  on  the  atoning  work  of  ChrlBt. 


CHAP.  VI.]  JUDGES.  109 

"  He  made  peace,"  says  the  apostle,  "  through  the  blood  of  His  Cross  "  (Col.  xi.  20). 
And  in  another  place  the  same  apostle  teaches  us  to  connect  the  thought  of  this 
peace  with  "  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant "  (Heb.  xiii.  20).  "  There  are 
depths  in  the  ocean,"  we  are  told,  "  which  no  tempest  ever  stirs;  they  are  beyond 
the  reach  of  all  the  storms  which  sweep  and  agitate  the  surface  of  the  sea.  And 
there  are  heights  in  the  blue  sky  above  to  which  no  cloud  ever  ascends,  where 
no  tempest  ever  rages,  where  aU  is  perpetual  sunshine,  and  nothing  exists  to  disturb 
the  deep  serene.  Each  of  these  is  an  emblem  of  that  peace  which  Jesus  imparts  to 
His  people."  "  The  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure,"  says  the  apostle.  But  we 
must  have  a  clear  knowledge  of  what  this  foundation  is,  and  that  we  are  certainly 
built  upon  it,  if  we  would  have  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  Christian's  peace.  A 
young  minister  in  Wales,  having  to  spend  a  night  in  a  very  exposed  locality,  slept 
at  a  farm-house,  situated  on  the  highest  point  of  land  in  that  part  of  the  country. 
After  he  had  retired  to  rest,  the  wind  rose  suddenly,  and  blew  a  tempest.  He 
thought  he  felt  the  house  rock,  as  the  tempest  beat  upon  it  in  its  fury,  and  he 
feared  it  would  faU.  He  could  not  sleep ;  so  he  rose  and  sat  by  the  fire  to  be 
ready  for  the  worst.  But  the  morning  dawned  at  last,  and  the  house  stood 
unharmed.  When  the  family  assembled  the  minister  told  of  his  fears,  and  expressed 
his  wonder  that  they  could  sleep  securely  amidst  the  peltings  of  such  a  storm. 
"Why,"  said  he,  "  I  was  afraid  every  moment  the  house  would  faU."  *'0h," 
said  the  farmer,  "  I  never  have  a  fear  of  the  house  falUng — for  I  know  that  it  ia 
founded  upon  the  rock."  HI.  The  influence  exerted  by  this  peace.  1.  It 
is  an  extensive  influence.  It  sweeps  through  the  whole  circle  of  our  relationships. 
It  is  the  peace  of  God,  and  peace  with  God.  It  is  peace  with  the  angels  and  all 
holy  beings.  It  is  peace  with  the  providence  of  God,  and  aU  the  complicated 
mechanism  of  its  far-reaching  agency.  If  I  possess  this  peace,  then,  go  where 
I  will,  I  need  not  fear.  A  traveller  met  an  aged  Christian  once,  who  lived  alone  in 
a  cottage,  on  the  top  of  a  mountain,  far  away  from  any  human  habitation.  "  Are 
you  not  afraid,"  said  he,  "to  live  in  this  lonely  place?"  "What  have  I  to 
be  afraid  of,"  was  the  reply,  "when  Providence  is  my  next-door  neighbour?" 
And  then  the  circle  of  this  peace  contracts  itself  to  the  bosom  of  every  behever. 
Its  centre  is  here ;  its  circumference  widens  out  to  the  farthest  boundaries  of 
the  universe.  If  I  am  at  peace  with  God,  then  I  may  go  forth  in  the  path  of  duty, 
anywhere,  without  a  fear,  for  all  the  universe  is  at  peace  with  me.  But  are  there 
not  evil  men  and  evil  spirits  who  are  at  peace  with  no  one  ?  True,  there  are. 
May  they  not  work  me  ill,  through  the  wrath  that  is  in  their  hearts?  They 
would,  indeed,  if  they  could.  But  they  are  never,  for  one  moment,  beyond 
the  clear  knowledge  and  efficient  control  of  that  Providence  "  whose  everlasting 
purposes  control  aU  agencies  and  accidents,  converting  them  to  good."  2.  It 
is  a  protecting  influence.  The  apostle  Paul  brings  out  this  view  of  the  matter 
very  clearly  when  he  says,  "  The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding, 
shaU  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through  Jesus  Cturist"  (Phil.  iv.  7).  The 
word  rendered  "keep,"  has  a  military  aspect,  and  denotes  to  guard  or  garrison 
the  souL  A  garrison  is  put  into  a  fortress  or  citadel  for  its  defence  and 
protection.  And  this  is  what  the  peace  of  God  is  designed  to  do  for  our  souls. 
God  intends  that  we  shall  find  protection  in  it.  Somewhere  in  the  East  there 
is  said  to  be  a  tree  which  is  a  non-conductor  of  electricity.  The  people  in  that 
region  are  aware  of  the  fact,  and  when  the  terrible  thunderstorms  come,  which 
prevail  in  those  parts,  they  flee  for  safety  to  this  tree,  and  always  find  it 
there.  What  a  beautiful  emblem  of  that  protection  vouchsafed  to  all  who 
seek  peace  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  Cross  I  3.  And  then  it  is  a  comforting 
influence  which  this  peace  exerts.  It  is  the  key-note  which  must  be  struck  in  our 
bosoms  before  we  can  know  anything  of  the  joy  and  comfort  of  the  heavenly  world. 
That  quaint  old  writer,  Quarles,  imagines  the  possibihty  of  our  gaining  the 
possession  of  earth,  and  air,  and  sea,  and  sky,  yea  of  all  things,  apart  from 
the  presence  or  the  peace  of  God,  using  the  two  terms  as  interchangeable,  and  then 
winds  up  his  comparison  in  this  impressive  way — 

*•  Without  Thy  presence  earth  gives  no  refection ; 

Without  Thy  presence  sea  affords  no  treasure ; 
Without  Thy  presence  air's  a  rank  infection ; 

Without  Thy  presence  heaven's  itself  no  pleasure; 
If  not  possessed,  if  not  enjoyed  in  Thee, 
What's  earth,  or  sea,  or  air,  or  heaven  to  met" 


110  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

To  have  this  peace  is  to  have  our  wills  moving  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  will ;  it 
is  to  have  our  affections  subordinated  and  controlled  by  the  holy  law  of  God ;  it  is 
to  have  our  desires  elevated — our  fears  of  trouble  and  death  subdued — and  our 
hopes  of  immortality  strong,  and  bright,  and  abiding.  4.  And  then  it  is  a  peace 
that  is  useful  in  its  influence.  Jesus  called  attention  to  this  feature  of  its  influence 
when  He  said,  "Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,  for  they  shall  be  called  the  children 
of  God."  Those  who  really  possess  this  peace  wUl  go  on  their  way  cultivating  the 
things  that  make  for  peace.  The  spirit  of  peace,  when  properly  exercised  in  the 
paths  of  daily  life,  has  a  power  to  turn  evil  into  good,  in  a  thousand  ways  more 
mighty  than  any  magician  with  his  fabled  wand  has  ever  claimed  to  exercise.  If 
this  peace  is  ours,  let  us  try  to  show,  in  our  lives,  its  elevating  and  satisfying 
power.  Let  all  our  aims  and  influences  be  in  the  interests  of  peace.  But,  if  we 
are  not  Christians,  there  is  no  peace  for  us.  No  peace  with  our  own  consciences — 
no  peace  with  God^no  peace  with  the  universe.  How  can  we  remain  another 
hour  in  such  a  state  ?  It  is  possible  to  make  peace  now  :  to-morrow  it  may  be  too 
late  for  ever.  (E,  Newton,  D.D.)  One  war  over  and  another  begun: — 
I.  Gideon's  sigh  fob  peace  ;  for  he  loved  not  war,  but  pined  for  quiet.  He  called 
the  name  of  the  altar  "  Jehovah-shalom,"  which  the  margin  reads,  "  The  Lord 
Bend  peace."  You  see,  therefore,  that  deeper  down  in  his  spirit  than  any  desire  for 
warlike  honour  there  was  a  yearning  after  peace.  He  wanted  not  the  spoils  of 
princes ;  he  only  desired  to  plough,  and  sow,  and  reap  in  peace.  1.  And  do  you 
wonder  at  it,  when  the  ills  of  war  were  all  around  ?  The  Bedouin  styled  the  valley 
of  Jezreel  "the  meadows  of  God  "  ;  how  grievous  to  see  those  fat  pastures  trodden 
down  by  the  feet  of  the  invaders  I  Ah,  little  can  you  and  I  imagine  of  the  horrors 
of  war.  If  we  saw  battle  with  our  own  eyes  we  should  with  burning  fervour  cry, 
•'  Send  us  peace  in  our  days,  good  Lord."  2.  Moreover,  he  had  not  only  seen  war, 
but  he  sighed  for  peace  because  he  was  himself  feeling  the  mischief  of  it.  The 
dread  of  the  conflict  had  come  to  his  own  mountain  farm  at  Abi-ezer.  Let  us  bow 
cur  heads  and  thank  God  that  He  has  long  blessed  this  favoured  isle  with  unbroken 
peace ;  and  as  an  act  of  thankfulness  to  God  let  us  set  our  faces  against  the 
war-spirit  which  so  readily  inflames  our  fellow-countrymen.  3.  The  way  of  peace 
was  sufficiently  well  known  to  Gideon;  the  prophet  of  the  Lord  had  indicated 
to  the  people  that  the  only  way  of  peace  was  for  Israel  to  return  unto  Jehovah,  her 
God.  Much  is  gained  when  we  know  this,  if  our  knowledge  leads  to  practical  action. 
4.  While  Gideon  was  meditating  and  working,  an  angel  appears  to  him  and  gives 
Mm  the  assurance  that  with  him  at  least  God  was  at  peace.  We  know  how  sweet 
is  the  assurance  that  being  justified  by  faith  we  have  peace  with  God.  It  is  well 
with  us  when  we  are  assured  that  the  Lord  is  with  us,  our  helper,  our  shield,  our 
portion  for  ever  and  ever.  5.  But  there  arose  in  his  mind  a  grave  anxiety.  His 
was  a  very  careful,  thoughtful  soul,  for  he  was  a  man  of  prudence,  large-hearted, 
far-seeing,  and  given  to  look  at  things  coolly  and  steadily ;  and  there  arose  in  hia 
heart  a  question  serious  and  vital,  "  Is  this  the  voice  of  God  to  me,  or  am  I 
deluded  ?  Is  God  at  peace  with  me,  or  am  I  like  the  rest,  plunged  in  a  horrible 
warfare  against  the  Uving  God?"  Therefore  he  puts  a  question,  and  he  asks 
a  sign  that  he  might  make  sure  of  what  he  was  about.  In  spiritual  matters  you 
and  I  had  need  be  sure.  If  we  have  peace  within  our  spirit  let  us  make  certain  that  it 
is  the  peace  of  God ;  for  still  are  there  voices  that  cry,  "  Peace,  peace,"  where  there 
is  no  peace.  Still  do  siren  songs  charm  men  to  ruin  with  their  dulcet  notes  ;  still 
does  the  fatal  river  flow  most  smoothly  as  it  approaches  the  dreadful  cataract. 
II.  From  Gideon's  longing  desire  to  obtain  peace  with  God  and  then  peace  for  his 
country  we  turn  to  look  a  little  further  into  Gideon's  feab  which  he  met  with 
IN  THE  WAT  OF  PEACE.  "An  angel"  appeared  to  him — so  saith  the  text  in  the 
Authorised  Version ;  but  in  truth  it  was  the  angel  of  Jehovah,  and  this  should 
have  comforted  him,  even  as  it  has  comforted  us.  Why  was  Gideon  afraid? 
1.  Not  because  he  was  a  coward — you  will  scarcely  meet  with  a  braver  man 
in  aU  Scripture  than  this  son  of  Joash — ^but  because  even  brave  men  are  alarmed 
at  the  supernatural.  He  saw  something  which  he  had  never  seen  before — an 
appearance  celestial,  mysterious,  above  what  is  usually  seen  of  mortal  men  ;  there- 
fore, as  he  feared  God,  Gideon  was  afraid.  When  the  living  God  draws  very  near 
to  a  soul,  even  though  it  be  in  the  person  of  Christ  Jesus,  that  soul  is  struck  with 
awe,  and  trembles  before  the  Lord.  It  cannot  well  be  otherwise.  2.  Gideon  had 
been  ill-taught  by  tradition.  There  was  a  rumour  abroad,  which  was  derived  from 
truth  and  yet  was  false,  namely,  that  no  man  could  see  a  heavenly  being  and  Hve. 
The  tradition  was  an  accretion  to  the  truth  and  a  corruption  of  it.    We  may  not 


CHAP.  VI.]  JUDGES.  Ill 

see  the  face  of  God,  but  we  may  see  Jesus ;  in  fact,  we  live  because  we  see  Him. 
Beware  of  the  moss  which  grows  upon  a  truth.  3.  Gideon  was  in  a  state  of  mind 
in  which  he  could  be  easily  cast  down.  He  was  a  brave  man,  but  long  aflSiction 
had  cast  a  tinge  of  sadness  over  him.  And  you,  dear  heart,  if  you  are  seeking 
after  peace  with  God,  I  should  not  wonder  if  fear  foUows  fear,  and  yet  no  fear 
drives  you  from  looking  unto  the  Lord.  It  is  but  natural  that  you  should  be 
overawed,  but  oh,  be  not  despairing,  for  there  is  the  surest  reason  for  hope.  Still 
look  to  Jesus,  and  He  will  surely  in  His  due  time  send  you  a  blessed  deliverance. 
4,  Gideon's  greatest  fear  arose  out  of  a  sign  which  he  had  himself  asked  for.  He 
said,  '•  Show  me  a  sign,"  and  when  he  had  that  sign,  namely,  God's  coming  to 
him,  then  it  was  that  he  was  afraid.  Be  very  chary  how  you  ask  for  signs,  for 
they  may  work  your  discouragement  rather  than  your  comfort.  We  cry  aloud, 
"  Show  me  a  token  for  good,"  and  when  the  token  is  given  we  are  amazed  at  being 
heard,  and  fall  to  fearing  more  sadly  than  before.  Therefore  pray  for  such  boons 
with  bated  breath,  and  say  twice  over  concerning  such  things,  "Nevertheless, 
not  as  I  wiU,  but  as  Thou  wilt."  5.  Gideon  had  one  truth  before  him  which 
ought  to  have  prevented  aU  his  fears,  for  the  Lord  had  spoken  to  him  and 
said,  "Go  in  this  thy  might."  How  could  he  die  if  he  was  to  deliver  Israel? — 
he  must  be  a  live  man  to  do  that ;  and  yet,  you  see,  he  forgets  to  reason  for  his  own 
comfort,  but  takes  care  to  argue  for  his  fears.  Have  I  never  seen  you  doing  this  ? 
I  have  often  caught  myself  at  it — refusing  to  use  my  logic  for  the  strengthening  of 
my  faith,  but  perverting  reason  in  order  to  assist  my  unbelief.  Is  not  this  foolish 
and  wicked  ?  IH.  God's  comfoet  of  His  sebvant.  1.  "  The  Lord  said  unto  him, 
Shalom — peace  be  unto  thee ;  fear  not,  thou  shalt  not  die."  The  Lord  would  not 
have  His  Gideons  disturbed  in  mind.  If  we  are  to  trouble  the  enemy  we  must  not 
be  troubled  ourselves.  He  wants  His  workers  to  be  full  of  comfort  while  they 
labour.  1.  Notice  the  great  power  of  God  in  speaking  home  the  truth.  Suppose  I 
salute  you  with  "  Brethren,  peace  be  to  you."  That  would  be  a  sweet  word  ;  but 
when  the  Lord  says  it  you  feel  the  peace  itself.  2.  The  Lord  also  cheered  him 
with  "Fear  not."  Oh,  that  charming  word;  as  full  as  it  is  short — "Fear  not." 
It  is  the  death-kneU  of  fear,  the  life  of  hope.  If  we  once  hear  it  as  God's  fiat 
in  our  soul  it  makes  us  leap  over  a  wall  or  break  through  a  troop.  Doubts  and 
fears  flee  away  like  spectres  of  the  night  when  the  sun  arises.  Gideon  feared 
himself,  feared  his  own  unfitness  and  unworthiness,  feared  in  the  awful  presence  of 
God  ;  but  the  Lord  said,  "  Fear  not,"  and  Gideon's  heart  grew  calm.  3.  Then  the 
Lord  added,  "  Thou  shalt  not  die,"  thus  meeting  the  special  form  of  his  dread. 
This  is  what  the  Lord  says  to  every  poor  trembler  who  is  holding  to  Him  by 
the  desperate  grip  of  faith,  "  Thou  shalt  not  die.  Thou  shalt  not  die  the  second 
death:  thou  hast  no  sin  to  die  for,  for  I  have  laid  thy  transgressions  on  My 
only  begotten  Son ;  thou  shalt  not  die,  for  Jesus  died.  Thy  spiritual  life  cannot 
expire,  for  thy  '  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,'  and  because  Jesus  lives  thou  shalt 
live  also."  IV.  Gideon's  memorial.  His  fears  being  banished,  and  being  at  perfect 
peace,  Gideon  now  goes  to  work.  Are  any  of  you  questioning  whether  you  are 
saved  or  not  ?  Do  not  go  out  preaching  yet,  for  you  may,  perhaps,  put  others  into 
bondage.  Are  any  of  you  half  afraid  that  you  are  not  at  peace  with  God  ?  Be 
careful  what  you  do  1  Strive  after  peace,  lest  you  weaken  your  testimony.  God 
would  have  His  people  be  at  peace  with  Him,  and  know  that  they  are  so,  for 
if  they  are  fretted  within  and  worried  in  reference  to  their  God,  how  can  they  fight 
the  battles  of  life?  When  Gideon  is  fully  at  peace  what  does  he  begin  to  do 
for  God  ?  If  God  loves  you  He  will  use  you  either  for  suffering  or  service ;  and  if 
He  has  given  you  peace  you  must  now  prepare  for  war.  Will  you  think  me  odd  if 
I  say  that  our  Lord  came  to  give  us  peace  that  He  might  send  us  out  to  war  ? 
Gideon's  first  work  was  to  go  and  cut  down  his  father's  sacred  grove,  which  stood 
on  the  top  of  the  hill,  and  enclosed  an  altar  to  Baal.  A  splendid  clearance  was 
made  that  night.  "Now,"  cries  he,  "over  with  that  detestable  altar  to  Baal." 
Some  people  would  have  said,  "  Spare  it  as  a  fine  piece  of  antiquity."  Yes,  and 
leave  it  to  be  used  again !  I  say,  down  with  it,  for  the  older  it  is  the  more  sin 
it  has  caused,  and  the  more  likely  is  it  that  it  will  be  venerated  again.  Gideon  cast 
down  every  stone,  and  it  was  bravely  done.  But  see,  by  the  Lord's  bidding  he 
piles  a  new  altar  of  earth,  or  unhewn  stone ;  and  when  that  is  done  he  fetches  his 
father's  bullock  and  slays  it  for  a  sacrifice.  How  steadily  they  went  about  this 
re-estabUshment  of  the  pure  faith !  If  God  has  given  you  peace,  go  home  and 
begin  your  reform.  I  would  preach  up  the  overthrow  of  every  sin.  Down  with 
every  idol.    Have  you  one  left?    Over  with  it  and  present  a  sacrifice  to  God. 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

Every  true  Christian  should  pass  a  reform  bill  at  home  and  carry  it  out.  But 
to  pull  down  is  not  enough.  Plenty  of  people  can  do  that.  Gideon,  as  we  have 
seen,  builds  an  altar  to  Jehovah.  When  you  are  at  perfect  peace  with  God,  think 
what  you  can  do  for  Hun  ;  think  of  a  new  plan  of  work,  or  consider  how  to  do  the 
old  work  better ;  advance  any  part  of  Divine  truth  that  has  been  forgotten,  any 
ordinance  that  has  been  neglected,  any  virtue  that  has  been  despised.  Especially 
make  prominent  Christ  Jesus,  the  Altar  and  Sacrifice  so  dear  to  God.  When 
he  had  built  his  altar  he  called  it  " Jehovah-shalom,"  which  was  done  byway 
of  thanksgiving  for  peace  received.  It  was  a  psalm  in  two  words  ;  it  was  a  song  of 
one  verse  infinitely  sweet.  "  Jehovah-shalom  "  :  the  Lord  our  peace.  Moreover, 
it  was  a  prayer,  as  the  margin  puts  it,  "  Jehovah,  send  peace."  If  you  have  peace 
with  God,  let  your  next  prayer  be,  "  Lord,  give  peace  to  all  Thy  people."  "Pray 
for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Gideon^s  altar: — I.  The  first 
thing  is  THE  GREAT  DISCOVERY  which  this  man  has  made,  and  in  the  rapture  of 
which  he  named  his  altar — that  the  sight  of  God  is  not  death,  but  life  and 
PEACE.  Can  you  write  upon  the  memorial  of  your  experiences — "  The  Lord  is  my 
peace  "  ?  Have  you  passed  from  hearsay  into  personal  contact  ?  Can  you  say,  "  I 
have  heard  of  Thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  Thee  "  ? 
Do  you  know  the  further  experience  expressed  in  the  subsequent  words  of  the  same 
quotation — "  Wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes  "  ?  And 
have  you  passed  out  of  that  stormy  ocean  of  terror  and  self-condemnation  into  the 
quiet  haven  of  trust  in  Him  in  whom  we  have  peace  with  God,  where  your  little 
boat  lies  quiet,  moored  for  ever  to  the  Eock  of  Ages,  to  Jehovah,  who  is  Peace  ? 
II.  We  may  look  upon  this  inscription  as  suggesting  the  thought  that  God's  peace 
13  the  best  peepabation  fob,  and  may  be  experienced  in  the  midst  of,  thb 
INTENSEST  CONFLICT.  In  the  inmost  keep  of  the  castle,  though  the  storm  of  war 
may  be  breaking  against  the  walls,  there  will  be  a  quiet  chamber  where  no  noise  of 
the  archers  can  penetrate,  and  the  shouts  of  the  fight  are  never  heard.  Let 
us  seek  to  live  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High;  and  in  still  communion 
with  Him  keep  our  inmost  souls  in  quiet,  while  we  bravely  front  difficulties  and 
enemies.  You  are  to  be  God's  warriors ;  see  to  it  that  on  every  battlefield  there 
stands  the  altar  "  Jehovah-shalom."  HI.  We  may  say  that  that  altar,  with  its 
significant  inscription,  expressed  the  aim  op  the  conflict  and  the  hope  which 
SUSTAINS  IN  the  FIGHT.  The  truc  tranquillity  of  the  blessed  life  is  the  prize  of 
conflict.  David,  "  the  man  of  war  from  his  youth,"  prepares  the  throne  for 
Solomon,  in  whose  reign  no  alarms  of  war  are  heard.  If  you  would  enter  into 
peace  you  must  fight  your  way  to  it,  and  every  step  of  the  road  must  be  a  battle. 
The  land  of  peace  is  won  by  the  good  fight  of  faith.  But  Gideon's  altar  not  only 
expressed  his  purpose  in  his  taking  up  arms,  but  his  confidence  of  accomplishing  it, 
based  upon  the  assurance  that  the  Lord  would  give  peace.  It  was  a  trophy  erected 
before  the  fight,  and  built,  not  by  arrogant  presumption  or  frivolous  under-estimate 
of  the  enemy's  strength,  but  by  humble  reliance  on  the  power  of  that  Lord  who 
had  promised  His  presence  and  assured  triumph.  So  the  hope  that  named  this 
altar  was  the  hope  that  war  meant  victory,  and  that  victory  would  bring  peace. 
That  hope  should  animate  every  Christian  soldier.  Across  the  dust  of  the  conflict 
the  fair  vision  of  unbroken  and  eternal  peace  should  gleam  before  each  of  us,  and 
we  should  renew  fainting  strength  and  revive  drooping  courage  by  many  a  wistful 
gaze.  We  may  realise  that  hope  in  large  measure  here.  But  its  fulfilment  is 
reserved  for  the  land  of  peace  which  we  enter  by  the  last  conflict  with  the  last 
enemy.  Every  Christian  man's  gravestone  is  an  altar  on  which  is  written  '•  Our 
God  is  peace,"  in  token  that  the  warrior  has  passed  into  the  land  where  violence 
shall  no  more  be  heard,  wasting  nor  destruction  within  its  borders,  but  all  shall  be 
deep  repose,  and  the  unarmed,  because  unattacked,  peace  of  tranquil  communion 
with,  and  likeness  to,  Jehovah  our  peace.  (.4.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Jehovah- 
shalom  : — I.  Gideon's  feab.  Gideon's  fear  was  traditional.  It  was  a  commonly 
received  opinion  that  no  man  could  receive  a  direct  manifestation  from  heaven  ana 
live.  Ever  since  the  fall  of  Adam  in  paradise  man  has  ever  shunned  and  dreaded 
the  immediate  presence  of  Jehovah.  If  the  righteous  thus  fear  and  thus  tremble 
when  the  Lord  revealeth  Himself  unto  them  in  love  and  peace,  "  where  shall  the 
ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear,"  when  He  cometh  forth  from  His  place  and 
sweareth  that  He  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty  ?  II,  Gideon's  feab  eemoved. 
There  was  more  than  a  mere  salutation  in  those  words,  "  Peace  be  unto  thee." 
Gideon  would  never  have  found  heart  to  have  built  up  his  memorial  altar  and 
called  it  "  Jehovah-shalom  "  if  peace  itself  had  not  entered  his  heart  when  those 


CHAP.  VI.]  JUDGES.  113 

words  entered  his  ears.  And  what  is  that  which  now  quells  the  fears  of  the 
trembling  sinner?  What  is  that  which  assures  him  of  peace,  takes  away  his 
alarms,  and  imparts  to  his  soul  holy  confidence  that  he  shall  not  die  ?  This  altar, 
Jehovah-shalom,  is  an  altar  which  many  a  grateful,  loving  heart  has  built  up  high 
above  all  the  storms  and  tempests  of  life,  and  all  the  dread  fears  of  death.  And 
what  has  done  aU  this?  Whence  the  joy  of  saints?  Whence  the  peace  which 
passeth  all  understanding?  What  is  that  which  opens  the  heart  to  peace  and 
assures  the  soul  of  endless  life?  There  is  but  one  grand  means — there  is  but 
one  grand  channel.  It  is  not  far  off.  You  need  take  no  long  and  perilous  journey 
to  obtain  it.  "  Say  not  in  thine  heart.  Who  shall  bring  Christ  down?  "  &c.  But  if 
men  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  this  word  of  the  gospel ;  if  they  stand  trembling  or  hardened 
in  the  presence  of  God,  alike  unfit  to  live  or  to  die — if  they  listen  to  the  voice 
of  gain  or  pleasure ;  if  they  turn  a  more  ready  ear  to  the  sounds  of  sin  or 
temptation  than  they  do  to  the  words  of  the  Most  High — is  it  any  wonder  that  they 
are  strangers  to  peace  ?  What  have  they  to  do  with  peace  as  long  as  they  reject  or 
neglect  the  word  of  the  Prince  of  Peace  ?  III.  The  altak  which  Gideon  built. 
1.  What  a  memorial  of  Gideon's  faith  was  it  1  As  soon  as  the  Lord  had  spoken 
words  of  promise  Gideon  raised  his  altar,  not  only  in  remembrance  of  the  promise, 
but  as  an  evidence  that  he  trusted  in  it.  The  greatest  act  of  man  towards  God  is 
faith — a  reception  of  His  Word,  and  a  reliance  upon  it.  All  things  are  possible  to 
him  that  believeth.  2.  This  altar  was,  moreover,  a  memorial  of  Gideon's  hope. 
"  Hope  maketh  not  ashamed  1 "  How  sweet,  how  precious,  is  the  Christian's  hope. 
It  is  no  vain  wish  or  mere  fervent  desire  of  the  mind.  It  is  a  grace  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  which  He  alone  enkindles  in  the  heart.  It  is  the  crowning  grace  of  all. 
Ah  I  this  would  be  a  dreary  world  without  hope  I  When  earthly  hope  vanishes 
and  despair  enters  the  heart,  no  mere  human,  no  extraneous  help,  wUl  raise  a  man 
above  himself.  And  what  is  the  soul  without  hope — this  faith-imparted,  faith- 
nourished  hope?  And  if  true  behevers — real  Christians — God's  own  children — 
need  more  of  this  "  hope  which  maketh  not  ashamed  " — if  their  faith  at  times  fail 
to  bring  joy  and  peace  in  believing — what  are  we  to  say,  what  are  we  to  think 
of  some  who  are  living  "  without  God  and  without  hope  in  the  world "  ?  I  say 
to  them,  in  all  heartfelt  sincerity,  "  Blind  credulity  you  have  much,  but  true  faith  you 
have  none."  3.  Gideon's  altar  was,  lastly,  a  memorial  of  his  gratitude.  He  could 
never  look  upon  that  altar  without  recalling  to  his  mind  the  wonders  of  the  past. 
Thus  many  a  memorial  of  gratitude  has  been  raised  by  pious  and  loving  hearts. 
"  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits  towards  me?  "  was  David's 
grateful  inquiry.  Gratitude  weUed  up  in  Jacob's  full  heart  at  Bethel  when  he 
"  vowed  a  vow,  saying.  If  God  be  with  me,  and  will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I 
go,  and  v?ill  give  me  bread  to  eat  and  raiment  to  put  on,  so  that  I  come  again 
in  peace,  then  shall  the  Lord  be  my  God,  and  this  stone  which  I  have  set 
for  a  pillar  shall  be  God's  house ;  and  of  aU  that  Thou  shalt  give  me  I  will  surely 
give  the  tenth  unto  Thee."  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,"  saith  the  apostle  Paul,  "  for 
ye  are  bought  with  a  price."  Ahl  let  this  purchase  be  valued — let  this  price 
be  estimated — let  imagination  attempt  to  conceive  its  infinite  magnitude  and  endless 
consequences,  and  then  ask,  what  memorial  can  be  commensurate  with  that  deep 
sense  of  fervent  love  and  gratitude  which  should  overflow  the  heart.  (G.  A. 
Rogers,  M.A.)  Jehovah-shalom: — ^I.  We  have  a  far-sighted  man  looking  to 
THE  BESOLT  BATHER  THAN  TO  THE  MEANS.  GideoH  Called  his  altar  '•  Jehovah- 
shalom" — the  Lord  send  "peace."  As  he  was  going  to  war  we  would  have 
supposed  him  to  inscribe,  "  The  Lord  send  victory,  the  Lord  send  success."  But  the 
Holy  Spirit  prompted  him  to  write  "peace."  There  is  wonderful  power  in  this. 
What  are  all  our  battles,  all  our  struggles,  but  a  means  to  an  end  ?  That  end 
is  peace.  How  much  wiser  and  how  much  better  would  it  be  if  we  were  to  look  at 
the  issue !  H.  We  have  a  brave  man  EBNOUNciNa  his  own  prowess.  "  The  Lord 
send  peace."  The  very  message  of  the  angel  was  calculated  to  make  Gideon  self- 
opinionated.  He  was  favoured  with  a  vision  of  God.  He  was  appointed  to  be 
the  Divine  vicegerent.  But  instead  of  doing  what  we  should  expect,  he  renounced 
aU  pretensions  to  any  superiority,  and  was  only  overwhelmed  by  a  consciousness  of 
the  honour  reposed  in  him.  True  greatness  and  true  humihty  always  go  together. 
The  great  man  is  humble  and  the  humble  man  is  great.  It  is  a  mark  of  superior 
minds  to  realise  how  small  they  are.  IH.  We  have  a  pious  man  engaging  in  wab. 
War  is  a  terrible  scourge ;  one  of  the  most  fearful  developments  of  the  passions 
of  men.  But  it  has  been  permitted  by  God,  and  even  ordered  under  His  arrange- 
ments.   What  the  Almighty  directs  man  need  not  fear  to  undertake.    God  works 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

HiB  purposes  by  the  scourges  of  earth,  and  He  employs  man's  passions  as  Hia 
instruments  of  purification.  The  few  who  are  sacrificed  in  war  are  only  as  a  grain 
of  sand  in  comparison  to  those  who  are  sacrificed  in  sin.  IV.  We  have  a  lesson 
AS  to  our  own  conduct  ;  that  is,  ever  to  invoke  the  blessing  of  God  on  that  which 
we  undertake.  When  we  go  forth  to  duty,  or  pleasure,  or  any  engagement  what- 
soever, we  should  rear  our  altar  to  the  Lord,  and  pray  that  He  will  send  peace  and 
prosperity.  And  the  necessity  for  this  is  not  taken  away  because  we  are  doing  the 
Lord's  work,  at  the  Lord's  bidding,  and  under  the  Lord's  direction.  To  teachers, 
preachers,  and  evangelists  this  trutii  is  a  very  serious  one.    {J.  J.  S.  Bird.) 

Vers.  25-32.  Throw  down  the  altar  of  Baal. — Baal's  altar  destroyed : — 1.  Observe 
God's  command  to  Gideon.     He  had  been  hitherto  protesting  against  the  idolatry  ol 
his  family  and  country  by  a  life  of  opposition,  inasmuch  as  it  was  a  life  of  humble, 
pious  fear,  and  love  of  Jehovah,  and  of  the  worship  of  Him  as  the  true  God.   But 
now  he  is  commanded  to  perform  an  act  of  opposition.   Gideon  is  to  destroy  Baal's 
altar  before  he  builds  God's ;  the  same  altar  wUl  not  do  :  God  will  have  no  polluted 
sacrifice ;  if  there  is  any  connection  at  all  between  the  two,  it  shall  be  only  this, 
that  the  wood  of  Baal's  grove  shall  be  made  fuel  to  burn  the  sacrifice  on  Jehovah's 
altar.     Now  may  not  this  act  of  Gideon's,  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation, 
be  made  to  speak  the  language  of  the  New  ?    "No  man  can  serve  two  masters  ;  ye 
cannot  serve  God  and  Mammon,"  any  more  than  God  and  Baal.     But  it  is  a  noble 
act,  worthy  of  the  imitator  of  Gideon,  to  make  the  things  which  were  before  "  an 
occasion  of  falling  "  the  instruments  of  doing  good,  by  putting  them  to  a  sanctified 
use ;  making  them  subservient  to  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel,  instead  of  fostering 
"  the  lust  of  the  eye  and  the  pride  of  life,"  as  they  did  before.    Whatever  has  been 
the  accompaniment  of  your  idol-worship,  cut  it  down,  and  apply  it  to   a  holy 
purpose ;  make  it  fuel  for  the  altar  of  God.    But  where  shall  Gideon  buUd  the 
altar  of  God?    Is  it  to  stand  in  the  place  of  Baal's?    No;  as  if  this  were  a 
contamination,  the  thing  is  forbidden:  "Build  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  upon  the 
top  of  this  rock."    The  reason  was  obvious.     That  rock  was  the  place  where  the 
angel  of  the  covenant  had  met  him.     That  rock  was  the  place  on  which  the  miracle 
had  been  wrought,  to  show  the  Godhead  of  Him  that  wrought  it  and  to  confirm  the 
faith  of  him  who  witnessed  it.     That  rock  was  the  place  from  whence  ascended 
the  sacrifice  which  the  angel  had  made  acceptable  by  ascending  with  it.     That  rock 
had  already  witnessed  the  manifestations  of  God  to  Gideon ;  and  there  was  written, 
as  it  were,  upon  it,  "  Jehovah-shalom."     2.  Observe  Gideon's  prompt  obedience  to 
God's  command.    He  seems  to  have  begun  the  destruction  of  idolatry  that  very 
night  in  which  God  had  given  the  command.    Oh,  the  sad  effects  of  procrastination 
in  matters  which  respect  the  overthrow  of  the  idols  of  the  heart  and  the  dedication 
of  the  heart  to  God  I     How  is  it  that  when  the  command  of  God  is  proclaimed  to 
do  this  there  is  such  hesitation  and  delay  ?     It  is  not  so  much  from  a  determination 
not  to  obey  it  at  all  as  from  a  fallacious  hope  of  being  better  able  to  comply  with 
it  at  some  other  time,  which  time  is  constantly  keeping  its  distance  in  proportion 
as  life  itself  advances.     3.  We  notice  the  influence  of   Gideon's  character  and 
conduct  over  those  who  were  in  his  service  :  "  Gideon  took  ten  men  of  his  servants, 
and  did  as  the  Lord  said  unto  him."    It  seems  that  Gideon  had  not  only  kept 
himself  from  the  defilement  of  his  country's  idolatry,  but  that  he  had  used  his 
influence  and  authority  in  endeavouring  to  preserve  his  servants  from  it  also  ;  and 
now,  when  he  has  to  perform  a  work  beyond  his  own  strength — a  work  in  which  not 
one  man  in  his  father's  house,  nor  in  all  Israel,  can  be  found  to  help  him — the 
hearts  of  his  own  ten  servants  are  made  willing  to  unite  with  him,  and  they  give 
him  a  proof  on  which  he  can  depend  that  his  counsel  and  example  have  had  a  proper 
effect  by  assisting  him  at  the  risk  of  their  lives.    Here,  then,  is  a  point  of  Gideon's 
character  which  deserves  the  imitation  of  every  master  of  a  family.     Gideon  keeps 
his  own  servants  from  bowing  the  knee  to  Baal.     He  instructs  them  in  the  know- 
ledge of  the  true   God.     His  authority  is  exercised  for  the  best  of  purposes. 
4.  Observe  how  professing  Christians  may  often  be  put  to  confusion  and  shame  by 
a  comparison  with  those  very  idolaters  whose  ignorance  appears  so  pitiable  in  their 
sight.     Here  is  a  god  made  of  a  log  of  wood  or  a  block  of  stone ;  it  is  a  lifeless  and 
senseless  image:  and  yet  his   worshippers  "rise  up  early  in  the  morning"  to 
worship  him.    See  how  diligent  they  are  in  his  service,  how  zealous  for  his 
honour,  how  fervent  in  their  devotions  1     Compare  that  god  with  our  God,  and 
then  compare  those  worshippers  with  ourselves.     5.  Observe  how  the  enmity  of 
the  carnal  heart  shows  itself  when  any  effort  is  made  for  prompting  the  worship 


CHAP.  VI.]  JUDGES.  115 

and  glory  of  God.  "  The  men  of  the  city  said  unto  Joash,  Bring  out  thy  son, 
that  he  may  die :  because  he  hath  cast  down  the  altar  of  Baal."  As  long  as  religion 
remains  a  dead  letter,  a  mere  matter  of  profession  devoid  of  practice,  the  world 
will  not  cry  out  against  it.  But  when  the  decisive  part  which  the  Christian  takes 
shows  the  difference  which  exists  between  him  and  others  as  to  motive  and 
principle ;  when  his  life  is  seen  to  be  a  constant  reproach  to  theirs,  and  his  love 
for  God  a  contrast  to  their  love  for  mammon ;  when  Baal's  altar  is  cast  down,  and 
God's  altar  built ;  then  the  carnal  mind  becomes  a  spirit  of  persecution ;  then  a 
man's  foes  become  those  of  his  own  household ;  and  because  he  is  not  content  to 
think  or  speak  about  religion  merely,  but  is  active  enough  to  do  something  for  the 
cause,  he  is  made  to  suffer  for  it.  Hence  the  calumny  which  a  zealous  Christian 
undergoes  ;  hence  all  the  misconstruction  put  upon  his  good  works ;  hence  all  the 
evil  motives  charged  upon  him,  and  all  the  hard  speeches  which  are  spoken  against 
him.  Lastly,  observe  that  God  can  "  make  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him,  and 
the  remainder  of  wrath  He  can  restrain."  It  might  have  been  supposed  that  Joash, 
whose  bullock  had  been  slain  and  whose  altar  had  been  thrown  down,  would  have 
been  more  enraged  than  the  rest.  But,  lo  1  he  takes  the  part  of  the  accused.  It 
seems  as  if  he  had  been  secretly  influenced  by  his  son's  pious  example;  and 
perhaps  he  was  struggling  with  the  convictions  of  his  own  mind  upon  the  folly  and 
wickedness  of  his  idolatry  when  the  conduct  of  these  men  brought  him  at  once  to 
the  point.  Gideon  commits  his  cause  to  God ;  and  God  not  only  takes  care  of  the 
cause,  but  of  Gideon.  And  so  it  is,  and  always  shall  be,  with  the  Christian  who 
is  called  forth  to  fight  the  battles  of  the  Lord.  He  shall  be  able,  in  the  strength  of 
his  Master,  to  put  to  flight  all  who  oppose  his  progress.  {F.  Elwin.)  The  way  to 
deal  with  -public  abuses : — May  not  we  all  learn  from  what  is  here  recorded  not  to 
shrink  from  boldly  and  promptly  assailing  and  seeking  to  uproot  all  moral  evils, 
which  have  already  become  chronic,  or  threaten  ere  long  to  become  so.  Half- 
measures,  in  regard  to  such  matters  as  those  to  which  we  refer,  never  succeed.  The 
more  thoroughly  the  iron  will  of  a  Cromwell  combines  with  the  sterling  spirituality 
of  a  John  the  better  fitted  is  the  reformer  for  his  difficult  and  delicate  task.  It 
will  never  do  for  one  in  his  circumstances  to  act  in  a  spirit  of  compromise,  where 
truth  and  principle  demand  the  prompt,  vigorous,  and  unsparing  application  of  the 
sledge-hammer  and  the  axe.  But  if  firmness  and  decision  are  indispensable  ia 
dealing  with  public  abuses,  whether  in  Church  or  State,  they  are  no  less  indispens- 
able in  dealing  with  the  corruption  of  our  own  hearts  and  any  evil  habits  which 
we  may  have  contracted.  It  is  peculiarly  necessary  that  we  set  ourselves  resolutely 
and  vigorously  to  the  work  of  seK-ref ormation — a  work  which,  while  it  must  always 
take  the  precedence  of  every  other  kind  of  rectification,  can  never  succeed  if 
attempted  in  our  own  strength.  Cheered  and  sustained  by  the  Divine  promise,  so 
freely  and  largely  given  to  those  who  are  sincere  in  their  desire  to  reform  their  own 
hearts  and  lives,  let  every  one  apply  the  pruning-knif  e  with  nerve  and  determination 
to  the  overgrowth  of  what  is  false  in  principle  or  vicious  in  practice,  and  lop  it  off 
without  remorse  (Mark  ix.  43-48).  Another  lesson  to  be  derived  from  Gideon's 
conduct  on  this  occasion  is  the  duty  of  obeying  the  commands  of  God  with 
unquestioning  promptitude.  Too  rash  and  impetuous  we  may  be,  but  we  can  never 
be  too  prompt.  Instructive  as  the  example  of  Gideon  is,  stiU  more  so  is  that  of 
his  Master  and  our  Exemplar  who,  when  the  bitter  cup  of  retribution  due  to  us 
■was  put  into  His  hand  and  He  was  satisfied  that  it  was  indeed  the  will  of  His  Father 
that  He  should  drink  it,  drank  it  to  the  very  dregs.  (IF.  W.  Duncan,  M.A.)  The 
valorous  assault: — I.  Observe  God's  command  to  Gideon.  1.  Gideon  is  com- 
manded to  destroy  the  altar  of  Baal.  "  God  or  Baal " — not  "  God  and  Baal " — 
was  the  point  to  be  settled  before  any  deliverance  could  be  expected.  Now,  throw 
New  Testament  Hght  upon  this,  and  what  do  we  learn  ?  The  lesson  is  trumpet- 
tongued.  No  compromise — no  halting  between  two  opinions — is  the  language  of 
the  command.  God  hates  a  divided  heart.  He  will  not  endure  two  altars.  He 
will  give  no  deliverance  as  long  as  Baal's  altar  stands.  No  sacrifice,  however 
costly,  is,  or  can  be,  accepted,  which  is  offered  upon  the  polluted  altar  of  man's 
corrupt  heart.  A  new  altar  must  be  built  up — an  altar  of  God's  workmanship — of 
God,  and  for  God,  that  is  the  only  altar  which  will  sanctify  an  acceptable  gift. 
Any  attempt  to  worship  at  Jehovah's  altar  on  one  day  in  seven,  and  to  worship  at 
the  altar  of  Baal  or  Mammon  on  the  other  six  days  of  the  week,  is  not  only  vain, 
but  suicidal.  God  will  have  a  new  heart,  and  a  whole  heart,  or  none.  2.  The  next 
thing  Gideon  was  commanded  to  do  was  to  cut  down  Baal's  grove  and  make  it  fuel 
for  tiie  altar  ol  God.    Groves  were  not  idolatrous — there  was  no  harm  in  them — 


116  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  -n. 

but  they  were  occasions  of  sin.  How  many  had  been  ruined,  and  ruined  for  ever, 
under  the  foliage  of  those  groves  !  Perversion  of  nature's  growth  to  the  dishonour 
of  nature's  God !  Many  would  plead  for  the  harmless  trees  who  would  condemn 
both  Baal  and  his  idolatrous  worship.  But  God  knows  the  heart  of  the  sinner 
better  than  he  knows  it  himself  ;  and  therefore  He  says,  "  Cut  down  the  grove." 
Cut  down  the  occasion  of  sin.  Touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not  that  which  causes 
men  to  perish  with  the  using.  Avoid  the  spot,  shun  the  places,  where  Satan's  seat 
is.  Do  more  than  this  !  God  commanded  Gideon  to  "  offer  a  burnt  sacrifice  with 
the  wood  of  the  grove."  This  was  turning  the  idolatrous  grove  to  a  good  purpose. 
Let  there  be  no  waste — no  useless  destruction.  Money,  health,  time,  influence, 
example,  all,  once  expended  for  Baal,  now  let  them  all  be  as  fuel  for  the  altar  of 
God.  3.  The  third  thing  God  commanded  Gideon  to  do  was  to  build  an  altar  unto 
the  Lord  his  God.  But  where  was  this  altar  to  be  reared  ?  Was  it  to  stand  on  the 
spot  whereon  Baal's  altar  stood  ?  No  !  the  place  is  polluted.  On  no  unhallowed 
spot  must  this  altar  be  raised.  Build  it,  said  the  Lord,  "  upon  the  top  of  this  rock, 
in  the  ordered  place."  Gideon  must  build  it  upon  the  rock  already  consecrated  by 
the  wondrous  doings  thereon  of  the  angel  of  the  covenant.  May  we  not  say  of  this 
rock  what  Paul  said  of  the  smitten  rock  in  the  wilderness,  "  That  rock  was 
Christ."  He  is  indeed  both  altar  and  rock — yea,  He  is  Himself  the  sacrifice. 
Standing  on  Him  alone  as  our  Rock,  we  ever  hear  the  words,  "  Peace  be  unto  thee ; 
fear  not :  thou  shalt  not  die."  He  only  is  the  true  Rock — higher  than  we — far 
above  the  flood  which  sweeps  the  impenitent  into  the  depths  of  woe.  He,  too,  only 
is  the  Rock  on  which  we  can  with  safety  place  the  altar  of  our  hearts.  The  old 
foundation  will  not  do — it  is  polluted — it  is  defiling.  No  altar,  no  sacrifice  will 
God  accept  if  it  be  offered  upon  the  site  of  Baal's  altar.  "  Behold,  I  make  all  things 
Qg-^v  " — this  is  our  hope  to  come.  This  must  be  the  rule  of  our  faith  and  practice 
now.  II.  And  now  we  come  to  Gideon's  obedience.  1.  His  obedience  was  prompt. 
He  did  not  give  himself  time  to  take  counsel  of  his  fears.  He  did  it  by  night,  lest 
he  should  be  opposed  and  hindered.  He  had  no  fear  on  account  of  detection.  He 
must  have  known  that  his  deed  would  be  proclaimed  over  the  whole  nation.  His 
aim  was  to  do  the  work  out  of  hand,  and  leave  the  consequences  with  God.  Duty 
was  his,  events  were  God's.  Noble  example.  Half  the  shipwrecks  of  faith  would 
be  escaped  were  it  followed.  Procrastination  is  the  bane  of  true  godliness.  2.  We 
observe,  however,  that  Gideon's  obedience  was  attended  with  personal  danger.  He 
needed  courage  and  strong  faith.  Doubtless  he  sought  for  grace  equal  to  that  night 
of  danger  whence  alone  all  strength  cometh.  The  followers  of  Baal — the  men  of 
the  city — were  zealous  for  the  worship  of  Baal.  If  idolaters  be  zealous  for  the 
honour  of  Baal,  he  will  be  no  less  zealous  for  the  honour  and  glory  of  God.  Now, 
it  is  just  this  zeal  and  this  courage,  in  the  face  of  danger  and  difficulties,  which 
prove  the  character  of  the  true  Christian.  If  a  man  will  venture  nothing  for  Christ 
he  is  not  worthy  of  Him.  Ah,  we  need  a  Gideon  to  rise  up  in  Israel !  Rather  we 
need  that  all  the  people  of  God  should  be  as  zealous  for  the  true  God,  for  His 
Word,  for  His  day,  for  His  worship,  as  idolaters  are  for  the  worship  of  Baal. 
3.  Mark,  also,  that  Gideon's  obedience  was  eminently  successful  and  strikingly 
rewarded.  He  was  for  God,  and  God  was  for  him.  The  Lord  made  his  way 
prosperous.  Gideon's  ten  servants  did  their  work  well.  He  was  not  left  to  do  all 
the  work  himself.  Doubtless  they  caught  their  master's  spirit  and  zeal.  It  is 
astonishing  how  much  influence  for  good  or  evil  every  master  exercises  over  his 
own  household.  Eyes  are  upon  him  when  he  leasts  suspects  it.  But  Gideon  was 
defended  by  one  who  of  all  others  seemed  pledged  to  oppose  him.  His  father 
ceased  to  be  an  idolater  that  very  night.  Perhaps  the  bravery  of  his  son,  or  his 
steady  and  consistent  piety  and  zeal,  convinced  him  of  his  sin,  or  perhaps  tbe 
impotency  of  Baal  to  save  himself  was  conclusive  logic  to  his  mind.  Who  can  tell 
how  many  fathers  and  mothers  in  Israel,  how  many  sons  and  daughters,  relatives 
and  friends,  would  be  converted  and  saved,  were  Christian  men  and  women  as 
faithful  to  their  God  as  was  Gideon?  You  think  to  conciliate  the  world  by 
concession,  by  connivance  at  their  sinful  principles  and  customs.  Alas!  your 
inconsistency  only  leads  them  to  despise  you.  Be  consistent,  be  uncompromising 
in  serving  the  Lord ;  be  courageous — obey  God  rather  than  man,  and  God  will 
honour  you,  as  he  Has  honoured  many,  and  made  them  instruments  in  winning 
father  and  mother,  brothers  and  sisters,  to  Christ.  (G.  A.  Rogers,  M.A.)  On  the 
destruction  of  idols  .-—The  idolatrous  altar  and  false  worship  of  one's  own  clan,  of 
one's  own  family — these  need  courage  to  overturn,  and  more  than  courajie— a 
ripeness  of  time  and  a  Divine  call.  A  man  must  be  sure  of  himself  and  his  motives, 


CHAP,  vi.]  JUDGES.  117 

for  one  thing,  before  he  takes  upon  him  to  be  the  corrector  of  errors  that  have 
secured  truth  to  his  fathers  and  are  maintained  by  his  friends.  Suppose  people 
are  actually  worshipping  a  false  god — a  world-power  which  has  long  held  rule 
among  them.  If  one  would  act  the  part  of  iconoclast  the  question  is,  by  what 
right  ?  Is  he  himself  clear  of  illusion  and  idolatry  ?  Has  he  a  better  system  to 
put  in  place  of  the  old?  He  may  be  acting  in  mere  bravado  and  self -display, 
flourishing  opinions  which  have  less  sincerity  than  those  which  he  assails.  There 
were  men  in  Israel  who  had  no  commission  and  could  have  claimed  no  right  to 
throw  down  Baal's  altar,  and  taking  upon  them  such  a  deed  would  have  had  short 
shrift  at  the  hands  of  the  people  of  Ophrah.  And  so  there  are  plenty  among  us 
who,  if  they  set  up  to  be  judges  of  their  fellow-men  and  of  beliefs  which  they  call 
false,  even  when  these  are  false,  deserve  simply  to  be  put  down  with  a  strong  hand. 
There  are  voices,  professing  to  be  those  of  zealous  reformers,  whose  every  word  and 
tone  are  insults.  The  men  need  to  go  and  learn  the  first  lessons  of  truth,  modesty, 
and  earnestness.  And  this  principle  applies  all  round — to  many  who  assail  modern 
errors  as  well  as  to  many  who  assaU  established  beliefs.  On  the  one  hand  are  men 
anxious  to  uphold  the  true  faith.  It  is  well.  But  anxiety  and  the  best  of  motives 
do  not  qualify  them  to  attack  science,  to  denounce  aU  rationalism  as  godless.  We 
want  defenders  of  the  faith  who  have  a  Divine  calling  to  the  task  in  the  way  of 
long  study  and  a  heavenly  fairness  of  mind,  so  that  they  shall  not  offend  and  hurt 
rehgion  more  by  their  ignorant  vehemence  than  they  help  it  by  their  zeal.  On  the 
other  hand,  by  what  authority  do  they  speak  who  sneer  at  the  ignorance  of  faith 
and  would  fain  demohsh  the  altars  of  the  world  ?  It  is  no  shght  equipment  that 
is  needed.  Fluent  sarcasm,  confident  worldliness,  even  a  large  acquaintance  with 
the  dogmas  of  science,  wUl  not  suffice.  A  man  needs  to  prove  himself  a  wise  and 
humane  thinker ;  he  needs  to  know  by  experience  and  deep  sympathy  those  per- 
petual wants  of  our  race  which  Christ  knew  and  met  to  the  uttermost  (R.  A. 
Watson,  M.A.)  Reform  at  home  : — In  Jerusalem  every  man  sweeps  before  his 
own  door — at  least  it  is  said  that  he  does.  If  he  doesn't,  I  doubt  if  any  one  else 
does  it  for  him.  Here  in  London  the  same  thing  was  required  of  us  until  a  very 
recent  date.  If  a  fall  of  snow  came,  say  before  January,  1892,  every  man  was 
required  by  law  to  sweep  in  front  of  his  own  door,  and  in  the  sweeping  he  was  to 
go  as  far  as  the  outer  edge  of  the  footpath  ;  so  that  what  we  know  as  a  proverb  in 
relation  to  Jerusalem  we  have  practised  as  a  fact  in  relation  to  London.  But 
I  suppose  that  most  of  you  will  at  once  understand  that  the  Jerusalem  door-front 
sweeping  is  only  another  way  of  saying  that  all  reform  should  begin  at  home ;  and 
used  in  that  sense  the  saying  is  expressive  and  suggestive.  It  is  in  this  sense  that 
I  use  the  text.  I.  EEroKii  at  home  should  be  peeached  to  nations.  These  are 
days  of  rapid  travel  and  national  interchange.  We  visit  all  the  world,  and  aU 
the  world  visits  us.  This  enables  us  to  see  the  excellences  and  the  defects  of  our 
neighbours ;  and  I  do  not  think  that  Englishmen  have  been  slow  to  speak  of  the 
faults  of  others.  But  it  may  be  well  for  us  as  a  people  to  look  a  little  more  at  home. 
If  the  angel  of  God  came  to  us  as  he  came  to  Gideon,  I  have  a  suspicion  that  he 
would  say,  "  Break  down  the  altar,  turn  out  the  idols,  heal  your  own  diseases, 
sweep  before  your  own  door,  and  reform  your  own  abuses  and  inconsistencies." 
We  send  our  missionaries  to  convert  the  heathen  from  their  darkness  and  super- 
stitions, and  it  is  good  that  we  should.  We  send  our  missionaries  to  convert  the 
heathen,  but  what  else  do  we  send  them  ?  We  send  them  our  ardent  spu'its,  our 
rum  fiend,  which  undoes  the  good  work  the  men  of  God  succeed  in  doing.  I  feel 
like  saying,  "  Before  you  send  any  more  missionaries,  sweep  your  own  door-step,  clean 
your  own  house."  We  have  sent  our  ships  into  many  waters,  and  our  soldiers  into 
many  lands,  to  put  down  slavery ;  we  have  spent  much  in  blood  and  treasure  in 
this  direction ;  but  if  the  angel  came  to  us  as  he  did  to  Gideon,  wouldn't  he  rebuke 
us  for  the  slavery  in  our  midst?  If  a  tenth  part  of  what  we  hear  about  the 
sweater  be  true,  of  poor  women  making  clothes  for  the  army,  and  I  know  not  what 
beside,  at  a  price  on  which  they  cannot  Uve,  isn't  it  time  we  swept  in  front  of  our 
own  door?  H.  Kefoeh  at  home  should  be  pkeached  to  Churches.  We  want 
revivals  among  the  people  which  shall  save  them.  Then  the  Church  must  be 
revived.  We  desire  to  lead  the  masses  to  Christ,  that  they  may  feel  the  warm 
glow  of  His  love,  and  know  the  joy  of  His  service.  Then  the  Church  must  get 
nearer  Christ.  We  must  put  out  of  the  Church  everything  contrary  to  the  spirit 
of  Him  whose  name  it  bears.  The  Churches  must  be  warm,  generous,  and  large- 
hearted,  and  this  should  apply  both  to  pulpit  and  pew.  The  pulpit  is  not  always 
as  broad  and  sympathetic  as  might  be.    And  there  is  a  good  deal  of  room  for 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

reform  in  the  pew.  Cold  men  in  the  pews  create  cold  men  in  the  pulpit.  Let  there 
be  warmth  and  love  in  the  pews,  and  the  pulpit  will  warm  up.  But  if  icebergs  be 
in  the  pews  you  will  get  marble  in  the  pulpit,  and  seeking  sou5*  will  be  warned  oS 
by  the  chills  which  will  be  as  cutting  as  the  east  wind.  III.  Eefoem  at  home  ehould 
BE  PREACHED  TO  iNDiYiDUALs.  All  reform  should  begin  at  self.  We  can  only  mend 
the  universe  as  we  mend  its  units.  We  want  the  nation  better,  then  we  must  mend 
its  men.  We  desire  to  see  the  Church  of  God  pure  and  holy,  then  its  members 
must  be  holy.  Let  us  break  down  every  altar,  and  eject  every  idol,  and  let  the  Lord 
of  life,  who  has  a  right  to  rule  ours,  enter  into  possession  of  us.  (C.  Leach,  D.D.) 
Gideon's  reformation  not  destructive  only  : — Gideon  does  not  leave  Ophrah  without 
an  altar  and  a  sacrifice.  Destroy  one  system  without  laying  the  foundation  of 
another  that  shall  more  than  equal  it  in  essential  truth  and  practical  power,  and 
what  sort  of  deliverance  have  you  effected  ?  Men  will  rightly  execrate  you.  It  is  no 
reformation  that  leaves  the  heart  colder,  the  life  barer  and  darker  than  before ,  and 
those  who  move  in  the  night  against  superstition  must  be  able  to  speak  in  the  day 
of  a  living  God  who  will  vindicate  His  servants.  It  has  been  said  over  and  over 
again,  and  must  yet  be  repeated,  to  overturn  merely  is  no  service.  They  that  break 
down  need  some  vision  at  least  of  a  building  up,  and  it  is  the  new  edifice  that  is  the 
chief  thing.  The  world  of  thought  to-day  is  infested  with  critics  and  destroyers,  and 
may  weU  be  tired  of  them.  It  is  too  much  in  need  of  constructors  to  have  any 
thanks  to  spare  for  Voltaires  and  Humes.  Let  us  admit  that  demolition  is  the 
necessity  of  some  hours.  We  look  back  on  the  ruins  of  Bastilles  and  temples  that 
served  the  uses  of  tyranny,  and  even  in  the  domain  of  faith  there  have  been  fortresses 
to  throw  down,  and  ramparts  that  made  evil  separations  among  men.  But 
destruction  is  not  progress ;  and  if  the  end  of  modern  thought  is  to  be  agnosticism, 
the  denial  of  all  faith  and  all  ideals,  then  we  are  simply  on  the  way  to  something 
not  a  whit  better  than  primeval  ignorance.  (JR.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)  Daring  to  oppose 
wrong  : — I  have  seen  many  a  time  on  the  sea-shore  bits  of  driftwood  tossed  hither 
and  thither,  the  helpless  sport  of  the  waves.  I  have  seen  on  the  same  shore  the 
black  rock  standing  there  unmoved,  unshaken — opposing  itself  to  all  the  might  and 
force  of  the  waves  which  fumed  and  seethed  around  it  and  dashed  themselves  in 
wild  and  savage  fury  against  it.  To  be  real  men  we  must  be  not  like  the  driftwood 
— driven  about  by  every  passing  wave  of  opinion ;  we  must  be  like  the  rock — able  to 
resist  and  oppose  the  full  force  of  the  world's  fashion  and  custom.  This  wUl  not  be 
easy.  The  world  has  never  loved  singularity.  Loyalty  to  conviction,  courage  to 
say  "  No  "  to  the  demands  made  by  fashion  and  custom,  will  entail  upon  you  scorn, 
hardship,  hate.  The  way  of  hfe  is  still  the  narrow  path.  But  I  have  yet  to  learn 
that  difficulties  can  daunt  the  young  and  ardent  soul.  Garibaldi  could  only  promise 
his  ragged  soldiers  suffering,  wounds,  and  perhaps  death  if  they  followed  him  into 
Italy,  and  yet  they  responded  to  his  call,  and  said,  "General,  we  are  the  men." 
And  I  am  not  afraid  now  that  those  who  have  any  love  or  enthusiasm  for  tiuth  and 
right  will  be  daunted  or  terrified  because  of  the  suffering  wherewith  the  path  of 
duty  abounds.  (J.  D.  Jones.)  If  he  be  a  god,  let  Mm  plead  for  himself. — 
Religion  judged  by  results  : — When  we  hear  a  speech  like  that,  we  are  inclined  to 
shout,  "  Hear,  hear."  Surely  it  seems  reasonable.  Surely  no  one  could  object  to 
that.  Let  religion  be  judged  by  its  results.  Do  not  attempt  to  argue  to  defend  it ; 
it  surely  does  not  need  that.  Christianity  has  had  eighteen  hundred  years  of  trial 
now,  and  it  is  too  late  to  attempt  to  defend  it  by  mere  words.  Look  at  what  it  has 
done.  If  you  know  your  Bibles,  you  will  recollect  that  both  Old  and  New 
Testaments  claim  this  test.  When  Elijah  stood  alone  for  God  at  Carmel,  in  the 
presence  of  the  king  and  the  court  and  the  false  prophets,  he  challenged  them  all 
to  a  judgment  by  results.  "  The  God  that  answereth  by  fire,  let  him  be  the  God." 
And  when  the  people  refused  to  believe  in  our  Saviour,  rejected  His  teaching,  and 
would  not  acknowledge  Him  as  their  Saviour,  He  appealed  to  them  on  the  ground 
of  results :  "  Though  ye  believe  not  Me,  believe  the  works,"  said  Christ  (John  x.  38) ; 
"Believe  Me  for  the  Very  works'  sake,"  said  He  again  (John  xiv.  11).  If,  then,  we 
say,  "Judge  our  religion  by  its  works,  the  tree  by  its  fruits,"  you  ask,  "  Well,  what 
has  it  done  ?"  And  when  this  question  is  put,  whole  continents  stand  up  to  bear  witness 
to  the  power  and  saving  might  of  Jesus  Christ.  Whole  peoples,  who  have  come  out 
of  paganism  and  heathen  darkness,  say,  "  Look  at  us.  We  are  what  we  are  by  Christ 
Jesus  the  Lord."  What  has  Christianity  done?  It  has  filled  dark  places  of  the 
earth  with  light.  It  has  sent  help  to  the  poor,  hope  to  the  despairing,  comfort  to 
the  sad,  salvation  to  the  sinful,  and  restored  fallen  man  to  his  reconciled  God.  But 
let  OS  suppose  fox  a  moment  that  we  listen  to  those  who  would  take  Christ  and  His 


CHAP.  VI.]  JUDGES,  119 

religion  out  of  the  world.  We  ask  them,  ' '  What  will  you  put  in  place  of  these  ?  What 
have  you  to  offer  us  ?  Before  I  give  up  the  old  I  want  to  see  the  new.  Bring  out 
your  god,  let  us  have  a  look  at  him.  It  will  be  interesting  to  see  what  he  is^'like. 
We  should  like  to  know  what  he  has  done.  We  want  to  apply  our  test  of  results  to 
him.  We  challenge  you  on  this  ground."  A  meeting  was  once  held  at  which  a 
number  of  very  clever  people  set  themselves  the  task  of  opposing  Christianity  and 
slighting  God.  When  the  speaking  was  over,  criticism  and  questions  were  asked 
for.  After  a  short  pause  an  old  woman  rose  up  on  the  floor  of  the  meeting-place 
and  said,  "  These  men  have  been  opposing  religion  and  almost  laughing  at  God.  I 
want  to  ask  what  they  can  give  me  instead  of  what  I  have  ?  I  was  left  a  widow 
with  six  children,  not  one  of  whom  could  work.  I  rested  upon  the  promise  of  God, 
who  says  He  is  a  husband  to  the  widow  and  a  father  to  the  fatherless,  and  I  have 
found  His  word  to  be  true.  For,  though  I  have  had  a  hard  struggle,  not  one  of  my 
six  children  or  myself  ever  wanted  a  bit  of  bread.  I  have  brought  them  all  up,  and 
now  I  am  just  waiting  till  God  thinks  fit  to  take  me  home  to  rest.  WiU  these  men 
up  there  tell  me  what  could  have  done  better  for  me  than  my  loving  God  has  done?  " 
It  was  an  old  woman's  argument,  but  as  it  was  one  of  experience  it  was  powerful. 
I  put  her  question,  "  What  has  infidelity  done  ?  "  Until  we  can  see  something  of  its 
results  we  shall  not  be  disposed  to  part  with  the  religion  which  has  lifted  us  into 
the  higher  regions  of  life  and  hope.  We  know  too  much  of  the  blessings  which 
result  from  Christianity  ever  to  be  persuaded  to  give  it  up.  We  have  seen  it 
reconstruct,  remake  men.  It  is  said  that  now  science  has  invented  a  way  of 
dealing  with  the  waste  slag  which  comes  from  the  iron  furnaces  which  used  to  be 
thrown  away  in  heaps  as  worthless.  I  have  seen  somewhere  various  useful  articles, 
vases  and  others,  made  from  the  slag — waste,  worthless  materials  worked  up  into 
articles  of  use  and  beauty.  That  is  just  what  Christ  does.  He  takes  men  who  are 
cast  off  by  the  world  as  worthless  and  waste,  and  remakes  them.     (C.  Leach,  D.D.) 

Ver.  33.  The  Midianites  and  the  Amalekites  and  the  children  of  the  east. — TTie 

victory  over  the  Midianites  : — The  mind  of  man  is  by  nature  like  two  hostile  camps. 
In  the  higher  region  are  principles  of  innocence,  hope,  love,  justice,  trust,  kindness, 
purity,  and  tenderness — those  angels  of  the  soul — "For  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  In  the  lower  regions  of  the  soul  are  selfishness,  pride,  vanity,  contempt 
for  others,  injustice,  faithlessness,  harshness,  impurity,  and  violence,  and  of  such  is 
the  kingdom  of  hell.  There  can  be  no  peace  between  these  two  (Isa.  Ivii.  20,  21). 
Life  is  a  state  of  conflict,  both  for  the  virtuous  and  the  evil.  The  virtuous,  however, 
strive  on  the  side  of  heaven,  and  they  are  assisted  by  heavenly  powers,  and  by  the 
Saviour  Himself.  They  have  often  cessations  of  warfare,  seasons  of  blessing,  and 
their  end  is  peace.  The  wicked  struggle  against  their  better  part ;  they  oppose  their 
inner  convictions  ;  they  stifle  the  voice  of  conscience ;  they  smother  their  nobler 
impulses ;  they  harden  themselves  against  God  and  goodness.  It  is  in  reflecting 
light  upon  these  mental  struggles,  and  affording  guidance  to  the  earnest  Christian, 
that  the  history  of  the  wars  of  the  Israelites  is  of  inestimable  value.  Let  us  trace 
and  apply  the  lesson  in  the  narrative  before  us.  The  Israelites  had  been  much 
infested  by  three  nations  in  their  immediate  neighbourhood,  the  Amalekites,  the 
Midianites,  and  a  people  called  the  children  of  the  east.  They  oppressed  them 
with  a  cruel  hand  :  they  destroyed  even  the  means  of  subsistence.  These  people — 
at  least  the  Amalekites  and  the  Midianites — were  descendants  from  Abraham 
indirectly,  and  inhabited  the  borders  of  Canaan  on  the  south,  south-east,  and  east. 
They  were  at  the  land,  but  not  in  the  land.  Hence  they  correspond  to  the 
principles  of  those  who  border  on  the  Church,  but  are  not  in  it.  They  know  and 
believe  what  the  gospel  teaches  in  a  certain  fashion,  but  do  not  love  and  do  it. 
They  are  opposed  to,  and  hasten  to  destroy,  a  growing  and  progressive  religion. 
They  assailed  Israel  most  cruelly  on  their  march,  and  came,  as  recorded  in  the 
narrative  before  us,  to  destroy  the  rising  corn.  They  were  all  at  this  time  deadly 
enemies  of  Israel.  The  Amalekites  were  the  most  malignant.  It  is  recorded  of 
them  that  they  insidiously  hung  around  the  Israelites  on  their  march,  and  when 
any  remained  behind  from  weakness  or  weariness  they  were  put  to  death  by  these 
lurking  and  harassing  foes  (Deut.  xxv.  17,  18).  Amalek  was  the  most  powerful  foe 
of  Israel  during  the  pilgrimage  in  the  wilderness,  as  well  as  the  most  malignant 
(Num.  xxiv.  20).  Amalek  has  an  awful  peculiarity  of  notice  from  Jehovah 
(Exod.  xvii.  14-16).  From  all  this  it  is  not  difficult  to  draw  the  inference  that 
Amalek  must  be  the  representative  of  some  peculiarly  deadly  principle,  some 
malignant  strong  delusion,  to  which  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  incessantly  opposed. 

28 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

There  are  times  in  our  journey  of  life  when  we  feel  weary  and  toil  worn  ;  when  we 
are  tired  of  our  struggles  against  our  evils  and  our  difficulties,  and  become  almost 
hopeless.  Life  seems  hollow  and  a  blank.  We  are  weary  with  the  world  and  with 
ourselves.  Perhaps  high  hopes  have  been  blighted.  At  such  times  the  deadly 
fallacy  will  break  in  upon  us,  "  Give  up ;  throw  all  good  aside  ;  strive  no  longer.  Do 
as  other  people  do ;  get  as  much  sinful  pleasure  and  sinful  gain  as  you  can,  and 
take  your  chance  with  the  millions  who  are  reckless."  This  is  Amalek.  Many  a 
poor  weak  soul,  battered  and  downcast  in  the  struggle  of  life,  has  sunk  under  this 
direful  despairing  suggestion.  Oh !  that  men  would  learn  to  remember  that  this 
principle  of  despairing  delusion  is  abhorrent  to  the  Divine  love.  "  Jehovah  has 
war  with  Amalek,  from  generation  to  generation."  "  Never  despair,"  should  be  the 
motto  of  life.  The  Midianites  were  not  always  enemies  of  Israel.  They  were 
traders  and  intermediate  between  Egypt  and  Canaan.  Midianites  drew  Joseph  out 
of  the  pit,  and  sold  him  to  the  IshmaeUtes,  thus  saving  his  life.  That  they  were 
representatives  is  evident  from  their  being  mentioned  in  the  prophetical  part  of  the 
Scriptures  as  taking  part  in  operations  of  the  future  Church,  in  times  when  Midian, 
as  a  distinct  nation  or  tribe,  would  long  have  ceased  to  be  (Isa.  Ix.  6).  On  the 
other  hand,  in  that  sublime  and  mysterious  vision  of  the  prophet  Habakkuk  the 
prophet  says  (Hab.  iii.  7,  8).  Midian,  then,  sometimes  the  friend  and  sometimes 
the  foe  of  the  Church  ;  sometimes  assisting  the  praises  of  the  Lord,  and  sometimes 
covering  the  soul  with  curtains  which  tremble  before  the  judgment  and  presence  of 
the  Lord,  is  the  type  of  that  kind  of  general  belief  in  the  doctrines  of  religion 
which  may  lead  to  something  better,  but  in  which  great  numbers  often  rest,  so  as  to 
make  a  profession  of  a  kind  of  faith  which  is  not  saving,  because  neither  grounded 
in  love,  nor  flowing  into  practice.  The  children  of  the  east,  the  coadjutors  of  the  two 
former,  represent  all  such  portions  of  the  Scriptures  as  can  be  pressed  into  the 
service  of  an  inward  aversion  to  God  and  goodness,  but  combined  with  an  outward 
profession  of  piety  and  regard  for  holiness.     {J.  Bailey,  Ph.D.) 

Vers.  34,  35.  He  blew  a  trumpet,  and  Abi-ezer  was  gathered  after  him. — The 
muster : — And  what  did  he  do  ?  He  seized  a  trumpet  and  blew  a  blast  so  loud  that 
it  startled  the  slumbering  echoes  of  the  hills,  and  stirred  to  the  lowest  depths  the 
latent  patriotism  of  the  inhabitants  of  Abi-ezer.  The  martial  notes  of  that  shrill 
clarion  as  they  pierced  their  ears  operated  like  a  charm  on  their  minds,  suffering  as 
they  were  under  the  intolerable  burden  of  suspense,  not  knowing  how  soon  the 
enemy  might  be  upon  them,  and  might  find  them  unprepared.  Now  their  hearts 
beat  strong  with  a  new  hope.  Behold  how  suddenly  and  effectually  the  popular 
mind  may  undergo  a  thorough  revolution  1  Where  now  were  all  their  prejudices 
and  fury  and  spite  against  Gideon?  Before  the  startling  peals  of  that  trumpet 
blast  they  had  vanished  like  a  dream.  Striking  illustration  of  the  expulsive  power 
of  a  new  affection  or  emotion  of  the  mind  I  Yet  a  more  striking  illustration  still  of 
the  truth  to  which  we  have  already  referred,  namely,  that  God  can  make  the  very 
enemies  of  a  godly  man  to  be  at  peace  with  him,  and  even  only  too  glad  to  come 
under  his  wing.  See  how  they  crowd  around  the  man  whom  but  yesterday  they 
would  have  torn  to  pieces  in  expiation  of  his  offence.  Behold  how  readily  they 
obey  his  summons,  and  how  confidingly  they  look  to  him  as  the  hero  of  the  hour  ! 
So  sure  is  real  worth  to  rise  to  a  premium  in  general  esteem,  when  circumstances 
occur  which  call  for  more  than  ordinary  wisdom,  integrity,  decision,  fortitude,  and 
nerve  in  the  conduct  of  affairs.  At  such  a  time  those  who  have  contrived  to  suit 
themselves  to  the  popular  fancy  during  a  season  of  ease  and  luxury  are  sure  to  be 
cast  off,  and  men  of  sterner  mould,  men  of  high  moral  principle  and  integrity,  men 
whose  hearts  are  animated  by  the  spirit  of  a  hero,  how  ungainly  soever  the 
exterior  beneath  which  they  beat — men  such  as  Havelock  and  Lawrence — are  as 
sure  to  be  in  great  demand,  neglected  though  till  then  they  may  have  been,  and 
perhaps  sneered  at  and  despised  by  inferior  souls.  And  in  how  many  cases  in  the 
history  of  nations  have  such  men  as  these — the  Ezras,  the  Nehemiahs,  the 
Jeroboams,  the  Gideons  of  our  race — proved  the  right  men  in  the  right  place,  when 
elevated  by  a  discerning  country  to  that  rank  and  authority  and  influence  for  which 
they  were  fitted  above  all  others  in  virtue  of  their  sterling  worth.  This  is  a  lesson 
of  too  great  importance  to  be  lightly  urged.  How  strikingly  does  the  experience  of 
Gideon,  at  this  stage  of  his  story,  prove  that  no  man  who  is  conscious  of  being 
endowed  with  superior  natural  talents  in  combination  with  high  moral  principle 
should  allow  himself  to  be  discouraged  even  though  for  a  season  he  may  fail  to  be 
duly  appreciated  by  his  fellow-men.   Let  him  "  bide  his  time."    Even  in  the  piping 


CHAP.  VI.]  JUDGES.  121 

times  of  peace,  when  there  are  no  symptoms  of  coming  convulsion,  it  is  deemed  the 
part  of  prudence  to  keep  our  arsenals  well  stored  with  the  munitions  of  war,  and  a 
standing  army  is  maintained  in  continual  readiness  for  whatever  may  occur.  For 
who  can  tell  how  soon  or  how  suddenly  wild  war's  deadly  blast  may  be  blown,  and 
its  blood-hounds  be  let  loose.  And  so  it  ought  ever  to  be  with  body,  soul,  and  spirit 
— the  whole  man.  Eeason,  religion,  experience,  and  common-sense,  all  combine  to 
indicate  that  it  is  at  once  the  duty  and  the  interest  of  every  one  (leaving  the  future 
in  the  hands  of  God)  to  go  straight  forward  in  the  improvement  of  all  his  talents 
and  opportunities,  and  in  the  pursuit  and  practice  of  what  is  right,  heedless  of  what 
men  may  say  or  do,  satisfied  that  in  due  time  God  will  secure  for  him  the  very 
place  which  it  is  fittest  and  best  that  he  should  occupy,  in  spite  of  all  the  opposition 
of   earth   or  hell.     [W.    W.   Duncan,  M.A.)  The  muster: — What  a  strange, 

unwonted  appearance  must  the  market-place  of  Ophrah  have  presented  at  this 
juncture.  The  inhabitants  had  found  something  else  to  occupy  them  now  than  the 
martyrdom  of  Gideon.  Eather  than  have  injured  a  hair  of  his  head,  there  was  not 
one  perhaps  who  would  not  have  "  plucked  out  his  eyes,  and  given  them  unto  him," 
had  the  sacrifice  been  demanded,  such  and  so  general  was  the  enthusiasm  for  him 
which  now  prevailed.  As  for  ordinary  business,  it  was  in  a  great  measure 
suspended,  the  grand  business  now  in  hand  being  to  prepare  for  war.  The  sounds 
with  which  the  ear  must  have  been  most  familiar  at  that  time  were  the  ring  of  the  anvil, 
the  hiss  of  the  grindstone,  the  shrill  notes  of  the  bugle  and  the  clash  of  arms.  And 
ever  as  a  new  arrival  from  distant  parts  took  place,  and  ever  as  the  colours  of  the 
different  tribes  that  had  received  a  summons  were  recognised,  how  would  the  air  be 
rent  with  joyful  acclamations.  Here  might  be  seen  a  band  of  stalwart  shepherds 
and  woodcutters  from  Lebanon,  there  a  crew  of  sailors  from  the  coasts  of  Asher. 
Yonder,  streaming  over  the  hUls,  eager  to  join  their  brethren,  are  a  long  line  of 
fishermen  from  Zebulon  and  Naphtali,  who  have  left  their  nets  and  boats  on  the 
shores  of  the  sea  of  Galilee,  accompanied  by  many  of  their  own  tribes  of  various 
grades  and  of  various  professions.  All  seem  to  be  animated  by  one  spirit — a  spirit 
of  patriotism,  a  desire  to  rid  their  beloved  country  at  once  and  for  ever  of  that 
hateful  yoke  under  which  for  seven  long  years  they  had  groaned,  and  thus  to  be 
restored  once  more  to  their  ancestral  liberties  and  rights,     {ibid.) 

Vers.  36-40.  I  will  put  a  fleece  of  •wool  in  the  floor. — Gideon's  request : — 
1.  Impossible  though  it  may  be  to  acquit  Gideon  of  unreasonableness,  in  demanding 
farther  proofs  of  the  certainty  wherewith  he  might  rely  on  the  presence  and  blessing 
of  the  Lord  on  his  perilous  undertaking,  we  cannot  deny  that  he  displayed  at  the 
same  time  a  becoming  and  praiseworthy  concern  lest  he  should  be  deserted  of 
Him.  2.  Again,  in  the  kind  and  condescending  manner  in  which  it  pleased  the 
Lord  to  accommodate  Himself  to  Gideon's  infirmity,  and  to  allow  him  to  put  Him  to 
the  proof,  may  we  not  recognise  a  pleasing  evidence  that  such  concern  as  that  to 
which  we  have  referred — such  solicitude  and  nervous  apprehension  lest  there  be 
some  mistake  on  his  part — is  far  from  being  displeasing  to  Him.  Oh,  what  a  tender, 
sympathising,  long-suffering,  easy-to-be-entreated  High  Priest  is  He  with  whom  we 
have  to  do  1  Listead  of  upbraiding  Gideon  with  his  unbelief  in  spite  of  all  that  had 
passed.  He  bears  with  him  (oh,  with  what  marvellous  condescension,  and  slowness  of 
wrath  I)  and  at  once  yields  His  assent  to  the  proposal.  Well  says  good  Bishop 
HaU,  in  his  meditations  on  this  passage :  "  What  tasks  is  God  content  to  be  set  by  our 
infirmity ! "  3.  From  this  incident  in  the  life  of  Gideon  we  may  also  learn  this 
lesson :  that  every  behever  needs  fresh  supplies  of  grace  and  strength  for  every  new 
turn  in  the  affairs  of  his  soul,  and  for  every  new  phase  in  the  spiritual  conflict. 
Whoever  thinks  of  finding  fault  with  a  man,  on  the  ground  of  a  defect  in  faith, 
because  he  goes  so  often  to  the  throne  of  grace,  or  because  he  comes  '*  boldly  to 
obtain  mercy  to  pardon,  and  grace  to  help  "  ?  Nay,  rather  would  he  not  justly 
expose  himself  to  the  charge  of  ignorance  and  presumption,  if,  on  the  pretext  or 
plea  that  he  has  already  received  the  promise,  "  as  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength 
be,"  he  should  go  forth  to  do  battle  with  his  spiritual  adversaries  without  repairing 
afresh  to  the  fountain  of  all  spiritual  blessing,  and  asking  as  Gideon  asked? 
{Ibid.)  The  miracle  of  the  dew  and  the  fleece: — The  state  of  Gideon's  mind, 
if  we  may  judge  from  these  words,  seems  to  have  been  that  of  the  man  who 
cried,  "Lord  I  believe;  help  Thou  mine  unbelief."  He  had  already  experienced 
the  power  of  God  to  be  on  his  side,  by  the  touching  of  the  rock  and  the  consuming 
of  the  sacrifice.  He  had  been  already  assured  of  the  favour  of  God  towards 
him,  by    the   declaration   of  the   angel — "The  Lord  is   with  thee."     Yet    he 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

seeks  further  assurance.  We  must,  not,  however,  too  hastily  condemn  Gideon  in 
this  matter.  The  assurances  which  he  had  before  received  had  given  him  strength 
equal  to  his  day.  In  that  strength  he  had  already  thrown  down  the  altar  of  Baal, 
and  cut  down  the  grove  that  was  by  it,  and  this  at  the  risk  of  his  Ufe.  But  here  he 
is  called  to  new  duties ;  we  cannot,  therefore,  wonder  at  his  seeking  new  assurances. 
So  fights  the  soldier  of  the  Cross  "  the  good  fight  of  faith,"  against  the  world,  the 
flesh,  and  the  devil,  under  the  banner  of  the  Captain  of  his  salvation.  The  world 
wonders  to  see  him  so  continually  going  to  his  God  in  prayer,  for  fresh  tokens  of  His 
favour  ;  but  they  do  not  know  as  he  does  the  necessity  for  such  renewed  applications. 
Many  a  shameful  defeat  would  be  spared  Israel  if  they  were  more  careful  to  assure 
themselves  of  God's  presence  and  blessmg  in  what  they  undertake,  even  if  they 
sought  again  and  again  for  the  tokens.  It  would  prevent  many  mistakes,  for 
instance,  with  regard  to  what  are  termed  providences.  How  apt  are  we  to  interpret 
.  them  in  such  a  manner  as  to  suit  the  secret  inclinations  of  our  own  minds !  The 
Christian  finds,  frequently,  that  "  a  deceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside  "  in  this 
matter.  "  Such  a  circumstance,"  he  says,  "  is  certainly  an  opening  in  providence  " ; 
when,  if  the  truth  were  known,  it  is  an  opening  which  he  has  himself  made  to  gratify 
his  wishes,  and  not  an  opening  made  by  God  in  the  course  of  His  providence. 
"Let  me  prove,  I  pray  thee,  yet  once  more  with  the  fleece."  In  pursuing  our 
subject  we  may  notice — 1.  The  condescension  of  God  in  the  performance  of  this 
twofold  miracle.  Gideon's  doubts  and  fears  prevail,  and  he  goes  to  God  for  courage 
and  confirmation,  and  he  obtains  them.  He  asks  still  further,  and  he  still  obtains. 
What  doctrine  does  it  teach?  It  tells  us  that  "  The  Lord  is  merciful  and  gracious, 
Blow  to  anger  and  of  great  goodness."  "  The  bruised  reed  He  will  not  break,  and  the 
smoking  flax  He  will  not  quench."  2.  Some  spiritual  uses  to  which  this  miracle 
maybe  applied.  (1)  We  may  learn  from  this  emblem  that  God  is  a  sovereign  God,  and 
giveth  none  account  of  His  matters.  We  behold  some  nations  scourged  with  famine, 
pestilence,  and  the  sword,  while  others  are  enjoying  plenty,  health,  and  peace.  We 
see  vast  parts  of  the  globe  in  an  unenlightened  state,  as  it  respects  the  knowledge  of 
salvation  ;  while  others,  like  our  own  favoured  land,  are  living  in  the  full  blaze  of  gospel 
day.  What  sh  all  we  say  to  these  things  ?  Why  is  there  dew  on  one  nation  and  drought 
on  another  ?  Are  we  better  than  they  ?  No,  in  no  wise.  God  is  showing  that  He 
will  do  whatsoever  it  pleaseth  Him.  Just  and  true  are  all  Thy  ways,  0  God,  Thou 
King  of  saints  I  (2)  We  may  view  the  miracle,  in  the  next  place,  as  an  emblem  of 
the  state  of  the  Jewish  nation.  The  contrast  between  the  wet  fleece  and  the  dry 
was  not  more  striking  than  the  contrast  between  Israel  in  her  state  of  national 
prosperity  under  the  favour  of  God  and  in  her  after-state  of  degradation  when  that 
favour  was  withdrawn.  And  how  awfully  striking  when  the  same  contrast  is 
marked  in  her  spiritual  state  I  The  miracle  sets  before  our  minds  the  time  when 
the  nations  were  lying  in  the  darkness  of  idolatry,  and  "  dry,"  as  it  respected  any 
knowledge  of  God,  like  the  earth  round  Gideon's  fleece.  (3)  But,  in  order  to  make 
some  practical  use  of  the  subject,  we  will  consider  it  as  an  emblem  of  a  congregation 
under  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  It  need  hardly  be  observed  that  the  Divine 
blessing  upon  the  ordinances  is  often  compared  to  the  dew  of  heaven.  Thus, 
speaking  of  the  quickening  and  enlivening  effect  of  His  Word  upon  the  heart 
when  blessed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Lord  says,  in  Deuteronomy  xxxii.,  "  My 
doctrine  shall  drop  as  the  rain  ;  My  speech  shall  distil  as  the  dew."  The  metaphor 
is  simple  and  sublime.  As  the  dew  distils  silently,  and  almost  imperceptibly,  into 
the  plants  on  which  it  falls,  so  shall  God's  Word  and  doctrine,  under  the  Spirit's 
influence,  descend  upon  the  soul.  As  the  dew  insinuates  itself  into  the  plant, 
giving  it  fresh  life  and  vigour,  so  shall  God's  Word  accomplish  the  thing  whereunto 
He  sends  it,  giving  renewed  life  to  the  soul.  This  figure  will  appear  still  more  apt, 
and  strong,  and  beautiful,  if  you  consider  that  in  eastern  countries,  where  the  rain 
is  scarce,  the  dew,  as  the  only  substitute,  is  invaluable.  With  these  ideas  attached  to  the 
Word,  take  our  text  as  setting  forth  an  emblem  of  the  state  of  a  congregation,  sitting 
under  the  sound  of  the  gospel.  Is  this  the  house  of  God  ?  Are  we  at  this  moment 
preaching  to  you  "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  "  ?  Then  the  dew  is  now  falling,  and  it  is 
indeed  "  a  time  of  refreshing."  Will  it  fall  upon  that  careless  soul  that  is  as  un- 
concerned about  salvation  as  if  none  were  necessary  ?  Will  it  fall  upon  che  soul  of  him 
who  actually  disregards  the  offer  of  salvation  through  a  righteousness  not  his  own  ? 
Will  it  fall  on  the  soul  of  the  poor  thoughtless  trifler  ?  Miracle  of  grace !  but  not 
too  great  to  expect  from  almighty  power,  nor  from  almighty  love.  And  therefore 
we  will  pause,  and  secretly  pray  the  God  of  power  and  mercy  to  do  this  now  ;  that 
while  the  dew  is  descending  some  drops  may  fall  on  these  sinners,  carrying  conviction 


CHAP.  Ti.]  JUDGES.  123 

to  their  consciences  and  conversion  to  their  hearts.  But  we  ask,  also,  where  is  the 
dry  and  empty  fleece ?  Oh,  how  quickly  may  we  find  it  in  any  congregation!  We  may 
find  it  in  those  seats  where  there  has  been  no  prayer,  but  only  the  form  of  prayer ; 
we  may  find  it  in  those  pews  where  there  is  no  attention  to  the  preached  Werd  nor 
any  desire  after  the  salvation  which  it  holds  forth.  In  short,  wherever  carelessness 
and  indifference  prevail,  there  we  shall  find  the  dry  and  empty  fleece.  Oh,  let  not 
this  opportunity  pass  without  a  prayer  for  grace.  It  is  said  respecting  the  answer 
to  Gideon's  prayer,  "  The  Lord  did  it  that  night."  "  Ask,"  then,  "  and  it  shall  be 
given  you ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you." 
{F.  Elwin.)  Dewy  and  dry  fleeces  : — I.  The  circumstance  recorded  is  highly 
HONOURABLE  TO  THE  CHARACTER  OF  GiDEON.  It  shows  that  there  was  in  him  that  caution 
and  waiting,  for  the  want  of  which  how  many  a  man  has  mistaken  his  mission,  and 
instead  of  doing  the  work  of  the  Lord,  has  made  a  wreck  both  of  himself  and  his 
own  work!  "If  Thou  wilt  save  Israel  by  my  hand."  A  full  consciousness  that 
Israel  needs  saving ;  but  an  indisposition  to  feel  that  such  an  honour  could  be 
conferred  on  him  ;  such  is  a  good  index  to  the  character  of  a  man — a  disposition  to 
test  ourselves.  Am  I  fit  ?  Am  I  capable  ?  Can  God  use  me  ?  Am  I  he  whom 
God  will  choose  to  do  this  work  ?  Yes,  I  think  we  do  well  to  apply  tests  to  ourselves 
and  to  our  position  ;  to  our  religious  life,  and  to  our  relation  to  God  by  our  religious 
life.  Do  you  not  believe  that  there  is  an  influence  that  covers  a  man  with  blessings? 
Do  you  not  believe  that  there  is  a  conduct  which  attracts  to  itself  blessing  ?  Hence 
the  image  is  constantly  occurring  in  Scripture  between  moisture  and  drought 
(Jer.  xvii.  5-8  ;  Psa.  i.  3).  "  He  shall  be  like  a  tree."  There  is  the  test — a  tree, 
moistened  by  unseen  springs,  whose  leaves  are  green  even  in  the  parched  land  and 
not  inhabited.  See  David  in  the  court  of  Saul.  A  dewy  fleece  in  the  midst  of  a 
land  of  drought.  See  Daniel  at  the  courts  of  Nebuchadnezzar  and  Belshazzar. 
"While  aU  the  uproar  goes  on,  there  the  blasphemy,  and  the  tokens  of  a  coming 
doom ;  Daniel  and  his  companions  are  in  waiting  on  the  Lord ;  without  wiue  they 
are  brave  ;  their  spirits  are  fresh,  and  they  are  ready  for  the  service  of  God — a  dewy 
fleece  in  a  dry  place.  Who  are  the  happy  ?  I  do  not  ask  who  are  the  successful, 
because  I  find  often  the  happy  are  the  unsuccessful.  Setting  all  the  world's 
calculations  on  one  side,  "Behold,"  says  James,  "we  call  them  happy  which 
endure."  Whence,  then,  is  the  spring  supplied  which  will  never  dry?  The  calm, 
the  contented,  and  the  hallowed  blessedness  of  the  holy  heart.  How  often  we  find 
wealth  is  a  dry  fleece,  while  poverty  is  a  dewy  one  1  True,  there  is  nothing  in 
wealth  to  curse  especially,  but  then  there  is  nothing  in  wealth  to  bless  especially ; 
because  of  wealth,  it  is  not  that  the  dew  refuses  to  fall,  but  the  dew  will  not  fall 
because  wealth  is  there — only  proving  that  wealth  needs  something  more  before  it 
can  be  regarded  as  really  a  blessing ;  and  poverty  must  be  forgotten  of  God,  and 
cut  off  from  the  dew  before  that  state  can  be  regarded  as  a  curse.  11.  Thus,  then, 
WE  JUSTIFY  THE  GiDEON  TEST.  Upou  the  heart  and  the  home  the  dew  wUl  fall  and 
remain.  Thou  askest,  "  Am  I  a  child  of  God  ?  "  You  shall  know  by  the  dew.  "Have 
I  rehgion  ?  "  You  shall  know  by  the  dew.  Walk  forth  in  the  morning — the  sweet 
morning,  when  the  bright  drops  sparkle  on  the  hedgerows,  and  behold  the  twinkling 
thorn,  the  rose,  the  tree,  the  floor  of  grass,  such  shall  be  your  words,  and  such  your 
mind,  your  action — the  dew  shall  be  on  your  fleece !  in.  I  shall  attempt  to 
illustrate  this  a  little  further.  For  I  say  the  world  wiU  insist  on  applying  its  test  to 
ns ;  THE  WORLD  WILL  WATCH  FOB  THE  DEW  ON  OUR  FLEECE.  When  I  was  a  boy  it  was 
my  privilege  to  know  a  very  holy  man.  He  had  been  in  the  beginning  of  things  a 
poor  man ;  but  how  sacredly,  how  steadily,  he  served  God  I  He  worked  in  a  shop 
•where  proverbially  all  were  Sabbath-breakers.  He  would  not  break  the  Sabbath. 
The  master  could  do  as  he  liked  with  aU  his  men — it  was  a  kind  of  old-world 
tyranny.  He  would  not  break  the  Sabbath.  He  led  a  sweet,  sacred,  holy  life. 
His  master  was  a  swearer  in  the  midst  of  a  gang  of  unholy  men.  His  conversation 
became  the  gospel  of  Christ.  By  a  steady  course  he  was  able  to  provide  for  his 
widowed  mother ;  he  was  able  to  provide  for  his  sister.  And  he  died,  but  his  work 
lasted ;  the  dew  has  not  aU  evaporated  yet ;  the  shop  is  in  ruins ;  his  master  was 
long  since  a  bankrupt,  and  his  whole  family  is  in  ruins  too.  The  name  of  the  one 
man  is  fragrant,  all  else  is  gone — it  was  a  dewy  fleece  in  a  land  of  drought.  Thus 
gratitude  in  the  heart,  thus  hohness  in  the  life,  are  dew.  You  shall  know  them 
by  the  dew  upon  the  fleece.  (E.  Paxton  Hood.)  Nature's  laws  : — Gideon  owned 
the  sovereignty  and  the  power  of  God.  So  must  we.  In  the  matter  of  salvation 
we  deal  with  Omnipotence.  The  God  of  grace  is  the  Sovereign  Euler  of  the 
universe.     Gideon  believed  in  the  omnipotence  of  God.     He  rested  upon  Hia 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  lChap.  VL 

promises.  But  he  wanted  a  confirmation  of  his  faith  in  these  promises.  He 
seemed  to  cast  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  say  in  language  which  has  often  found  a 
response  in  the  hearts  of  tried  believers,  "  Shew  me  a  token  for  good  ;  that  they 
which  hate  me  may  see  it,  and  be  ashamed  ;  because  Thou,  Lord,  hast  holpen  me, 
and  comforted  me."  Or,  like  one  struggling  to  master  his  doubts  and  fears,  on 
finding  that  he  could  not  overcome  the  natural  infidelity  of  his  depraved  heart, 
he  turned  to  the  stronghold  whence  alone  help  could  come,  and  prayed,  "  Lord,  I 
believe,  help  Thou  mine  unbelief."  The  Lord  did  help  his  imbelief,  by  granting  him 
the  twofold  miracle  for  which  he  prayed.  It  was  a  fine  instance  of  childlike 
confidence  in  this  "  mighty  man  of  valour  "  that  as  soon  as  his  faith  began  to  waver 
he  at  once  told  the  Lord.  Half  of  our  difficulties  in  the  Christian  course  would  be 
got  over,  and  got  over  quickly  too,  if  we  would  but  unbosom  our  souls  to  the  Lord, 
and  teU  Him  our  difiQculties  as  soon  as  they  arise.  Now,  the  token  vouchsafed  to 
Gideon  was  peculiar  in  its  nature.  He  was  led,  doubtless  acting  under  the  influence 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  ask  of  God  a  sign,  and  to  choose  a  sign  himself.  In  infinite 
condescension,  God  was  pleased  to  accede  to  his  petition.  He  suspended  the 
ordinary  laws  of  nature,  and  whether  the  fleece  of  wool  was  to  be  wet  or  dry, 
according  to  the  prayer  of  this  man  of  God,  we  are  told,  "  God  did  so  that  night." 
The  grand  doctrine  to  be  deduced  from  this  narrative  is,  that  in  confirmation  of 
His  promises,  and  in  appearing  on  behalf  of  His  people,  the  Lord  suspended  the 
ordinary  laws  of  nature.  I.  Observe,  first,  that  it  was  none  other  than  ihe  Lokd 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  who  thus  answeeed  Gideon's  prater.  God,  to  whom 
Gideon  prayed  in  ver.  36,  is  the  same  who  "  looked  upon  him,"  and  spake 
to  him  in  ver.  14,  He  was  the  angel  of  the  covenant,  who  said,  "  Go  in  this 
thy  might,  and  thou  shalt  save  Israel  from  the  hand  of  the  Midianites  :  have 
not  I  sent  thee?  "  Gideon  prayed  to  this  same  Lord,  that  He  would  grant  him  a 
sign  that  He  would  save  Israel  by  his  hand,  "As  He  had  said."  The  answer  to 
Gideon's  prayer — the  twofold  miracle  which  was  wrought — proved  the  proper  Deity 
of  Christ,  It  proved  that  the  government  of  all  things  was  indeed  upon  His 
shoulder.  H.  Now,  it  is  over  the  laws  of  nature  that  Christ  reigneth,  roit  the 
GOOD  OF  His  Church  in  all  ages.  We  know  not  how  little,  nor  how  much,  other 
worlds  are  affected  by  the  redemption  of  Christ's  people  in  this  world.  It  may  be 
that  inhabitants  of  other  spheres  and  of  other  systems  are  learning  the  wisdom 
and  the  goodness  and  the  love  of  God  in  the  book  of  man's  salvation.  Angels 
study  it,  the  highest  orders  of  intelligence  make  it  their  theme  of  praise,  and  why 
not  beings  in  untold  worlds  which  fill  up  the  immensity  of  space  ?  But  be  this  as 
it  may,  all  the  laws  of  the  universe  are  under  the  rule  of  the  Lord  Jesus  for  the 
good  of  His  people.  There  is  no  law  but  the  will  of  God.  To  deify  law  is  to 
undeify  God.  So  to  enthrone  nature  as  to  make  her  reign  is  to  dethrone  Jehovah, 
who  alone  does  reign  "  God  over  all,  blessed  for  evermore."  Time  would  fail  us  to 
dwell  upon  the  many  instances  of  the  suspension  of  the  laws  of  nature  recorded  in 
the  Word  of  God.  We  will  adduce  but  a  few  remarkable  examples.  1.  Observe 
the  suspension  of  the  laws  of  physical  nature  for  the  good  of  the  people  of  God. 
Although  heaven  and  earth  should  seem  to  oppose  the  fulfilment  of  His  Word, 
although  physical  impossibilities  may  raise  up  a  barrier  the  top  of  which  no  eye  of 
sense  can  scale,  yet  the  eye  of  faith  soars  above  aU  nature,  up  to  nature's  God,  and 
rests  calmly  and  peaceably  upon  His  enthroned  promise  (Isa.  xliii.  2).  2.  We 
might  go  on  and  educe  instances  of  the  like  suspension  of  the  laws  of  animal 
nature,  in  carrying  out  the  purposes  of  Jehovah  on  behalf  of  His  people.  Birds  of 
the  air,  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  have  all  obeyed  other 
influences  than  the  laws  of  their  nature,  in  doing  the  will  of  their  Creator,  The 
instinct  which  they  possess,  is  just  that  law  which  God  sustains  in  them.  Unclean 
and  carnivorous  birds  forget  their  own  natures,  and  spread  their  wings,  and,  as 
angels  of  mercy,  visit  the  prophet  in  the  wilderness,  and  daily  spread  his  table. 
The  fish  devours  not  Jonah,  but,  at  the  word  of  the  Lord,  safely  lands  him  on 
dry  ground.  The  lions,  too,  become  the  harmless  and  the  friendly  companions 
of  Daniel,  and  not  a  hair  of  his  head  is  injured  in  their  den.  1.  Gideon's  need  of 
a  confirmation  of  his  faith.  The  only  question  with  this  mighty  man  of  valour 
was,  "Is  the  Lord  indeed  with  me?  Is  He  on  my  side?  Can  I  possibly  have 
made  any  mistake  ?  I  do  not  doubt  the  Lord's  power.  If  He  will,  He  can  save 
Israel  by  my  hand.  But  am  I  certain  that  I  have  not  put  too  favourable  an 
interpretation  upon  His  promises?  I  will  ask  a  sign  of  the  Lord."  He  did  so, 
and  you  know  with  what  result.  Are  you  as  anxious  as  was  Gideon  to  learn 
the  Lord's  will,  and  to  insure  His  blessing  in  your  undertakings  ?    Do  you  make 


CHAP.  VI.]  JUDGES.  125 

your  daily  callings  a  matter  of  prayer  ?  Do  you  pause  in  your  worldly  business, 
and  inquire  with  deep  anxiety,  "  Is  the  Lord  with  me  ?  "  2.  You  see  the  nature  of 
that  proof  which  the  Lord  gave  to  Gideon  that  His  promises  were  sure :  the  dew 
was  given  and  withheld  according  to  the  sign  proposed.  We  may  regard  the  dew 
as  a  striking  and  beautiful  emblem  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (G.  A.  Rogers,  M.A.) 
Gideon's  signs  : — Like  other  Israelites,  he  is  strongly  persuaded  that  God  appears 
and  speaks  to  men  through  nature ;  and  he  craves  a  sign  in  the  natural  world 
which  is  of  God's  making  and  upholding.  Now,  to  us  the  sign  Gideon  asked  may 
appear  rude,  uncouth,  and  without  any  moral  significance.  A  fleece  which  is  to  be 
wet  one  morning  while  the  threshing-floor  is  dry,  and  dry  next  morning  while  the 
threshing-floor  is  wet,  supplies  the  means  of  testing  the  Divine  presence  and 
approval.  Further,  it  may  be  alleged  that  the  phenonema  admit  of  natural 
explanation.  But  this  is  the  meaning:  Gideon  providing  the  fleece,  indentifles 
himself  with  it.  It  is  his  fleece,  and  if  God's  dew  drenches  it,  that  will  imply  that 
God's  power  shall  enter  Gideon's  soul  and  abide  in  it,  even  though  Israel  be  dry 
as  the  dusty  floor.  The  thought  is  at  once  simple  and  profound,  childlike  and 
Hebrew-like,  and  carefully  we  must  observe  that  it  is  a  nature-sign,  not  a  mere 
portent,  Gideon  looks  for.  It  is  not  whether  God  can  do  a  certain  seemingly 
impossible  thing.  That  would  not  help  Gideon.  But  the  dew  represents  to  his 
mind  the  vigour  he  needs,  the  vigour  Israel  needs  if  he  should  fail ;  and  in  reversing 
the  sign,  "Let  the  dew  be  on  the  ground  and  the  fleece  be  dry,"  he  seems  to  provide 
a  hope  even  in  prospect  of  his  own  failure  or  death.  Gideon's  appeal  is  for  a 
revelation  of  the  Divine  in  the  same  sphere  as  the  lightning,  storm  and  rain,  in 
which  Deborah  found  a  triumphant  proof  of  Jehovah's  presence ;  yet  there  is  a 
notable  contrast.  We  are  reminded  of  the  "  still  small  voice"  Elijah  heard  as  ha 
stood  in  the  cave-mouth  after  the  rending  wind  and  the  earthquake  and  the 
lightning.  We  remember  also  the  image  of  Hosea,  "I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto 
Israel."  There  is  a  question  in  the  Book  of  Job — "  Hath  the  rain  a  father,  or  who 
hath  begotten  the  drops  of  dew?  "  The  faith  of  Gideon  makes  answer,  "  Thou,  O 
Most  High,  dost  give  the  dews  of  heaven."  The  silent  distillation  of  the  dew  ia 
profoundly  symbolic  of  the  spiritual  economy  and  those  energies  that  are  "  not  of 
this  noisy  world,  but  silent  and  Divine."  {R.  A.  Watson,  M.A)  The  dew 
and  the  fleece  : — 1.  Just  before  the  occurrence  of  the  facts  narrated  in  this 
passage  Gideon  had  received  his  call  from  God.  Former  judges,  Othniel,  Ehud, 
and  Barak,  had  been  moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  their  work  of  delivering  Israel 
from  the  oppressor.  But  to  Gideon  alone  a  theophany  was  vouchsafed  in  order  to 
intimate  that  the  God,  who  had  visibly  manifested  HimseK  to  the  patriarchs,  was 
the  same  Jehovah  ready  to  save  their  descendants  if  only  they  would  penitently 
return  to  the  covenant.  2.  God  permitted  His  people  to  be  brought  so  low  in  order 
that  affliction  might  drive  them  to  prayer,  and  that  thus  their  extremity  might 
become  His  opportunity.  Such  was  the  result  in  the  gracious  ways  of  His  pro- 
vidence. 3.  Next,  God  called  Gideon  by  two  revelations.  The  first,  by  a  visible 
manifestation  of  the  angel  of  Jehovah.  Next,  in  a  dream  of  the  night,  Jehovah 
commanded  him  to  throw  down  his  father's  altar  to  Baal.  4.  As  in  the  first 
manifestation  Jehovah  acknowledged  Gideon,  so  in  this  second  one  He  required 
Gideon  to  acknowledge  Jehovah.  Gideon  accordingly,  with  ten  men  of  his  servants, 
overthrew  Baal's  altar,  and  cut  down  the  Asherah  pillar  by  it  in  the  night ;  for  he 
durst  not  do  it  by  day  through  fear  of  his  father's  household  and  the  men  of  the 
city.  But  God  does  not  reject  the  first  sincere  efforts  of  His  children  to  do  His 
win,  though  attended  with  timidity  (John  iii.  2,  xix.  38).  Gideon  did  not  by  secrecy 
effect  his  purpose  of  escaping  detection.  5.  Then  followed  the  gathering  together 
of  the  enemy  to  the  plain  of  Jezreel :  And  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  clothed  Gideon  as 
with  a  coat  of  mail.  At  his  trumpet-call  his  own  clan,  recognising  the  champion 
and  deUverer  of  Israel  in  him  who,  as  an  iconoclast,  braved  Baal's  revenge  with 
impunity,  was  the  first  to  rally  around  him.  The  neighbouring  tribes,  Manasseh, 
Zebulun,  and  Naphtali,  next  obeyed  his  summons  by  heralds.  But  still  there  were 
remnants  of  doubt  and  fear  in  Gideon,  though  he  was  very  different  in  respect  to 
faith  from  what  he  was  when  the  Angel  of  Jehovah  first  appeared  to  him.  6.  But 
before  setting  out  on  his  perilous  enterprise  with  the  assembled  army,  Gideon 
desired  a  further  sign  from  God  to  assure  biTn  of  success.  His  prayer  for  a  sign 
did  not  betoken  want  of  faith,  but  weakness  of  faith.  The  flesh  strove  against  the 
willing  spirit,  and  so  created  misgivings  and  fears.  The  sign  which  Gideon  asked, 
and  which  the  Lord  vouchsafed,  was  one  especially  significant.  The  dew  was  in 
the  Holy  Land  a  leadmg  source  of  fertility  (Gen.  xxvii.  28  ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  13).   Thus 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

dew  naturally  became  the  image  of  spiritual  influences.  The  type  may  be  viewed 
in  a  threefold  relation,  I.  The  dew  in  belation  to  Gideon's  enterprise.  To 
Gideon  in  his  fears  the  filling  of  the  fleece  with  dew  from  heaven  whilst  the  earth 
around  was  dry,  intimated  that,  whereas  Israel  was  heretofore,  through  apostasy,  as 
dry  spiritually  as  the  heathen  around  (comp.  the  "  dry  places,"  Matt.  xii.  4B), 
Jehovah  was  now  about  to  fill  Gideon  and  His  nation  with  His  reviving  grace.  The 
reversing  of  the  sign  at  Gideon's  request,  and  the  dryness  of  the  fleece  whilst  the 
dew  rested  on  the  earth  around,  assured  him  that  Jehovah  could,  and  would, 
manifest  His  power  even  amidst  the  weakness  and  helplessness  of  His  people  in  the 
face  of  the  nations  which  were  flourishing  all  around.  The  army  was  reduced  to  three 
hundred.  The  poor  and  weak  one  should  overturn  the  rich  and  mighty.  H.  The 
DEW  IN  RELATION  TO  ISRAEL  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.  The  type  has  a  deeply 
interesting  relation  to  Israel,  the  elect  nation.  1.  First,  in  the  past,  the  fleece 
filled  with  dew  whilst  the  ground  around  was  utterly  dry,  answers  to  Israel  filled 
with  heavenly  blessings  from  the  Lord,  whilst  the  Gentile  world  was  a  moral  wilder- 
ness, dry  and  unwatered  by  the  dews  of  His  grace.  It  was  not  because  of  Israel's 
merits,  but  because  of  God's  gratuitous  choice,  that  the  nation  was  singled  out  to 
be  the  Paradise  of  Jehovah  cut  off  from  the  spiritual  waste :  just  as  the  dew  is  not 
of  man's  procuring,  but  of  God's  bestowing.  Had  Abraham,  the  forefather  of  the 
nation,  been  left  to  himself  he  would  have  continued  an  idolater  like  all  his  neigh- 
bours in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  a  city  dedicated  to  moon-worship  (Josh.  xxiv.  2,  3). 
There  was  much  imperfection  in  him,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  Jacob's  sons,  except- 
ing Joseph  and  perhaps  Benjamin,  were  far  worse.  Yet  God  remembered  His  own 
covenant  of  grace,  and  preserved  Israel  in  Egypt  as  a  separate  people  unto  Himself  in 
the  land  of  Goshen,  like  a  fleece  full  of  heavenly  dew  in  the  midst  of  a  dry  and  parched 
land.  2.  The  dew  representing  the  present  state  of  Israel.  The  fleece  remaining 
dry,  whilst  all  the  ground  around  was  saturated  with  the  refreshing  dew,  represents 
Israel  in  a  state  forming  a  sad  contrast  to  the  former  image  and  what  it  represents. 
Israel  has  now  for  ages  been  spiritually  dry,  without  any  of  the  dews  of  heavenly 
blessing  which  descends  from  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  covenant.  And  what  makes 
her  case  the  sadder  is,  she  is  singular  in  her  state.  For  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus  is  making  many  a  spiritual  desert  throughout  the  Gentile  world 
to  become  a  garden  of  the  Lord,  blooming  with  the  life-giving  dews  of  the  Spirit 
poured  down  from  on  high.  3.  The  dew  representing  the  future  of  Israel.  The 
relation  of  the  type  to  the  future  of  Israel.  As  the  fleece  was  full  of  dew  at  first,  and 
all  the  earth  dry:  and  next,  the  fleece  was  dry,  and  all  the  earth  wet;  so  the 
blessed  time  is  coming  when  the  fleece  shall  be  again  full  of  dew,  and  all  the  earth, 
through  its  instrumentality,  shall  be  filled  with  the  dew  of  the  Lord  (Micah  v.  7 ; 
Jer.  iii.  17  ;  Psa.  Ixxii.  6,  8).  HI.  The  dew  in  relation  to  the  Church  of  Christ 
AND  ITS  PROFESSING  MEMBERS.  Lastly,  the  type  has  a  profitable  lesson  to  teach  us 
in  its  relation  to  the  Christian  Church  and  its  professing  members.  1.  The  fleece 
represents  not  only  Israel,  but  Israel's  Antitype,  Jesus  ;  and  secondarily.  His  people 
who  are  one  with  Him.  Originally  He  had  from  everlasting  the  fulness  of  the  God- 
head (Col.  i.  19).  The  fleece  was  full,  but  the  ground  around  had  no  dew  from 
heaven.  Then  at  His  crucifixion  the  Church  might  say,  "  Our  bones  are  dried,  and 
our  hope  is  lost"  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  11) ;  just  as  the  fleece  was  dried  whilst  the  earth 
around  was  saturated  with  dew.  But  at  His  resurrection  not  only  did  He  live 
again,  but  becomes  the  Lord  of  life  to  us.  Meantime  the  effect  of  Christ's  presence 
as  a  dew  in  the  soul  is  "  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily,  and  cast  forth  His  roots  as 
Lebanon  "  (Hosea  xiv.  5).  Prayer  will  fiU  the  fleece  with  the  heavenly  dew.  Moreover, 
there  is  great  danger  of  losing  the  dew.  2.  The  dry  place  amidst  the  dew-covered 
ground  is  a  symbol  of  the  sad  state  of  many  a  one  who  remains  spiritually  dead 
and  lifeless,  whilst  dews  of  heavenly  blessing  are  descending  on  every  side.  (A.  i2. 
Favuset,  Mid.) 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

Vers.  1-8.  Gideon  .  .  .  pitched  beside  the  wall  of  Harod. — Gideon*$  army  :— 
I.  The  Lord  callbd  him  to  fioht.  The  world  must  see,  now  and  then,  the 
gigantic  crimes  of  a  mere  man  turned  back  by  rival  arms  upon  both  idol  and 
idolater,  and  that  by  the  voice  of  the  Almighty.  Well  said  Victor  Hugo, 
"  Napoleon  had  been  impeached  before  the  Infinite."    The  groaning  of  the  bond- 


CHAP,  vn.]  JUDGES.  127 

man  in  our  own  land  entered  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth.  Arrogance, 
lust,  and  greed  combined  to  challenge  the  eternal  laws,  and  thousands  went  down 
together  into  silence,  till  we  could  learn  the  unwelcome  fact  that  God  is  no  respecter 
of  persons.  But  out  of  the  awful  strife  came  praying  souls,  and  a  regeneration  in 
the  sources  of  influence  and  power.  God  is  known  to  speak  in  the  crisis,  in  the 
hero — yes,  even  in  the  rebel.  II.  The  Lord  called  Gideon  to  success.  We  may 
notice  the  conditions.  1.  Careful  preparation.  There  must  be  selection  when 
daring  deeds  are  to  be  performed.  This  is  a  principle  in  the  Divine  government  as 
in  the  human.  God  husbands  and  adapts  His  resources,  though  seeming  to  scatter 
His  treasures  lavishly.  Have  you  sifted  out  the  real  from  the  visionary  and  found 
the  abiding  truths  which  wiU  not  fail  you  in  that  hour  of  trial  which  must  come  to 
aU  living  ?  They  may  be  ominously  reduced  from  all  that  promised  well,  as  was 
Gideon's  army,  but,  like  it,  be  enough.  2.  Obedience.  The  open  heart  learns  soon 
and  plainly  the  Divine  will.  As,  amid  all  the  roar  of  Niagara,  the  practised  ear 
catches  the  sweet  notes  of  birds  singing  in  the  grove  above,  so,  in  the  confusion  of 
tongues,  the  willing  soul  may  hear  the  clear  voice  of  its  Maker,  instructing,  guiding, 
cheering.  3.  Humility.  Nothing  develops  a  nation's  pride  like  military  success. 
Parade  of  troops,  battalion  after  battalion  in  all  the  splendour  of  equipment  and 
might  of  bearing,  satisfies  the  popular  ideals  of  greatness  and  strength.  War  is 
BtiU  an  honourable  trade,  and,  while  it  is,  meekness  will  be  despised.  But,  none 
the  less,  the  King  of  kings  "  pours  contempt  upon  princes,  and  weakeneth  the 
strength  of  the  mighty."  4.  Faith.  Belief  in  the  need,  the  call,  the  power,  the 
method,  the  victory  of  Jehovah,  was  all-important  with  Gideon.  {Sermons  by  the 
Monday  Club. )  Gideon's  army  : — I.  The  Lord  fighting  foe  and  with  His  people. 
God  is  the  author  of  war,  and  He  causes  men  to  fight,  in  the  same  way  that  law  is 
the  author  of  sin  and  causes  men  to  become  transgressors.  Were  there  no  law 
there  would  be  no  transgression,  and  were  there  no  God  there  would  be  no  conflict 
of  righteousness  with  unrighteousness.  War  is  God's  whip  for  sinful  nations  ;  it  is 
His  rod  of  iron  with  which  He  wUl  dash  them  in  pieces  as  a  potter's  vessel.  There 
is  a  Divine  retribution  following  nations,  and  sure  to  overtake  them  if  they  are 
workers  of  iniquity.  And  there  is  a  Divine  deliverance  waiting  for  nations  and  for 
individuals,  sure  to  come  when  they  repent  of  their  evil  ways  and  cry  unto  God  for 
His  salvation.  H.  The  army  made  ready.  When  God  has  some  great  work  to  be 
done,  or  some  hard  battle  to  be  fought,  He  chooses  the  men  who  are  best  able  to 
fight  or  work.  1.  The  fearful  were  suffered  to  go  back.  Moral  courage  is  a 
Christian  virtue.  Men  are  commanded  to  have  it.  Only  "  be  strong  and  of  a  good 
courage."  "  Be  not  afraid,  neither  be  thou  dismayed :  for  the  Lord  thy  God  is 
with  thee."  When  God  is  with  a  man  he  has  nothing  to  fear.  Even  Grecian  and 
Eoman  heroes,  when  they  showed  great  courage  and  wrought  brilliant  exploits, 
believed  themselves  to  be  acting  under  the  influence  of  a  Divine  inspiration.  It 
was  the  power  of  some  god  in  their  arms,  they  thought,  that  enabled  them  to  smite 
great  blows  ;  and  it  was  the  courage  of  some  god  in  their  hearts  that  enabled  them 
to  face  undaunted  the  most  terrible  foes.  2.  The  next  process  was  to  rid  the  army 
of  the  rash  and  unreliable.  Audacity,  no  less  than  want  of  courage,  unfits  men  for 
the  highest  service.  Among  aU  the  qualities  needed  in  a  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ, 
among  all  traits  of  character  essential  to  true  manliness,  none  perhaps  is  more 
important  than  a  certain  command  of  one's  self,  a  certain  keeping  of  the  body 
under  and  holding  back  of  adventurous  impulse.  Those  whom  God  will  lead  to 
victory  must  be  "  steadfast,  unmovable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord."  m.  The  three  hundred  called  to  great  exploits  (ver.  7).  Here  is 
the  key  to  human  history.  Common,  ease-loving  men  are,  by  their  own  wish, 
excused  from  glory,  from  heroic  deeds,  lasting  renown,  and  high  fellowship  with 
God  in  fighting  the  great  battles  of  humanity  and  righteousness.  They  are 
permitted  to  return  to  their  own  places.  They  sink  down  into  obscurity  and 
oblivion.  Three  hundred  heroes  are  chosen  to  be  their  deliverers  and  to  smite  for 
them  the  host  of  Midianites.  Side  by  side  with  Leonidas  and  his  three  hundred 
Spartans,  the  immortal  heroes  of  Thermopylffl,  will  we  place  Gideon  and  his 
three  hundred  Hebrews,  the  immortal  heroes  of  Mount  Gilboa,  asking  for  them  no 
greater  glory  than  belongs  to  the  Grecian  company,  and  beheving  that  they  are 
worthy  to  stand  together  as  the  immortal  six  hundred.  {Edward  B.  Mason.) 
The  best  work  of  the  world  done  by  the  few : — When  did  God  ever  complain  of 
having  too  few  people  to  work  with  ?  I  have  heard  Him  say,  "  Where  two  or  three 
are  gathered  together  in  My  name  there  am  I."  I  have  heard  Him  say,  "  One  shedl 
chase  a  thousand,  and  two  shaU  pat  ten  thousand  to  flight."    But  I  never  heard 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

Him  say,  "  Tou  must  get  more  men,  or  I  cannot  do  this  work ;  yon  must  increase 
the  human  forces,  or  the  Divine  energy  will  not  be  equal  to  the  occasion."  I  hear 
Him  say  in  the  case  before  us,  "  Gideon,  the  people  are  too  many  by  some 
thousands.  If  I  were  to  fight  the  Midianites  with  so  great  a  host,  the  people 
would  say,  after  the  victory  had  been  won,  '  My  own  hand  hath  saved  me. ' " 
The  work  of  the  world  has  always  been  done  by  the  few  ;  inspiration  was  held  by 
the  few  ;  wealth  is  held  by  the  few ;  poetry  is  put  into  the  custody  of  but  a  few ; 
Wisdom  is  guarded  in  her  great  temple  but  by  a  few ;  the  few  saved  the  world  ; 
ten  men  would  have  saved  the  cities  of  the  plain;  Potiphar's  house  is  blessed 
because  of  Joseph;  and  that  ship  tossed  and  torn  upon  the  billows  of  the  Adriatic 
shall  be  saved  because  there  is  an  apostle  of  God  on  board.  Little  child,  you  may 
be  saving  all  your  house — your  father,  your  mother,  your  brothers,  and  your  sisters. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  sifting : — And  was  this  the  upshot  of  all  the  talk,  and 
preparations,  and  professions  they  had  made?  Who  more  eager  apparently  to 
rush  to  battle,  who  more  loud  in  their  bravados,  than  the  very  cravens  who  now 
slunk,  with  so  cowardly  a  heart,  from  the  shock  of  actual  collision  with  the  foe  ? 
We  may  readily  suppose  that  Gideon,  while  making  his  proclamation  in 
accordance  with  the  Divine  command,  would  not  fail  at  the  same  time  to  remind 
them  of  the  positive  promise  which  he  had  received  of  the  Lord,  that  He  would  be 
with  them,  and  of  the  remarkable  signs  whereby  that  promise  had  been  sealed. 
Nor  in  all  probability  would  he  neglect  to  point  out  to  them  the  deplorable 
consequences  which  would  certainly  ensue  to  themselves  and  their  families  in  the 
event  of  a  defeat.  And,  if  so,  it  might  have  been  expected  that  all  of  them  with 
one  accord,  would,  in  the  chivalric  spirit  of  high-toned  patriotism,  have  scorned  the 
base  idea  of  deserting  their  colours,  especially  at  such  a  crisis.  What  a  mortification 
must  this  defection  have  been  to  Gideon  !  Yet,  mindful  of  our  own  weakness  and 
love  of  carnal  ease,  let  us  not  too  rashly  or  censoriously  judge  these  men.  It  were 
only  fair  to  take  into  consideration  how  surely  bondage  and  subjection  to  a  foreign 
yoke  tend  to  crush  the  spirit  of  a  people,  to  degrade  and  lower  their  mortal  tone 
down  to  utter  eileminacy.  Nor  ought  it  to  be  forgotten  that  a  large  proportion  of 
these  men  had  for  some  time  past  cast  off  their  allegiance  to  the  one  living  and  true 
God,  and  that  it  is  not  improbable  that  conscience,  which  makes  cowards  of  the 
bravest,  might  have  had  something  to  do  with  the  retrograde  movement  which  they 
so  rapidly  adopted.  At  the  same  time,  however  it  may  be  palliated  or  accounted 
for,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  conduct  of  which  they  were  guilty  was  extremely 
reprehensible,  and  that  it  affords  fitting  occasion  for  just  animadversion  on  the 
conduct  of  too  many  professed  followers  of  Christ,  who  are  ready  enough  to  cast  in 
their  lot  with  Him  so  long  as  there  is  no  immediate  appearance  of  suffering  or  of 
sacrifice  for  His  name's  sake,  but  who,  the  moment  that  real  danger  stares  them  in 
the  face,  take  the  earliest  opportunity  of  slinking  away  and  renouncing  the 
principles  to  which  they  formerly  in  words  adhered.  Such  disciples  are  totally 
unworthy  of  the  name.  They  are  not  good  soldiers  of  the  Cross.  They  are  devoid 
of  the  sterling  principle  which  is  essential  to  constancy  and  success  in  the  Christian 
warfare — mere  "  carpet  knights,"  who  "  make  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh,"  flourishing 
their  trumpets  and  brandishing  their  weapons  when  there  is  no  foe  with  whom  to 
contend,  but  bating  their  breath  and  altering  their  whole  tone  and  demeanour 
whenever  circumstances  occur  which  put  their  sincerity  to  the  proof.  (W.  W. 
Duncan,  M.A.)  The  people  .  .  .  are  too  many  for  Me  to  give  the  Midianites  Into 
their  hands. — Pride  excluded: — Pride  hurled  Satan  from  heaven,  and  turned 
angels  into  devils.  Pride  drove  Adam  out  of  paradise,  and  barred  its  gates  against 
his  posterity.  Pride  of  intellect,  pride  of  family,  pride  of  wealth,  pride  of  power, 
are  adamantine  chains,  which  bind  men  in  fetters  of  sin.  Boasting  and  vainglory 
are  inherent  to  fallen  nature.  Angels,  archangels,  and  cherubim,  who  stand  in  the 
unveiled  presence  of  Jehovah,  are  the  most  humble  of  God's  creatures  the  most 
conscious  of  their  own  unworthiness.  But  fallen  man  ever  boasts  of  his  sufficiency, 
his  goodness,  his  wisdom,  his  power.  He  will  not  believe  that  he  can  do  nothing, 
and  that  God  must  do  everything  for  his  deliverance.  Now,  pride  is  a  blind  sin. 
It  is  an  illogical  sin.  It  has  lost  all  sound  logic  in  theology.  Let  man  help  grace 
to  save  him,  and  what  would  be  the  result?  Why,  just  in  proportion  that  man 
helped  God  he  would  "  vaunt  himself  "  against  God.  He  would  claim  a  share  of 
God's  glory.  Now,  God  will  not  give  His  glory  to  another.  He  is  jealous  of  Hia 
own  honour,  majesty,  glory.  I.  We  have  a  remabkable  ikstanoe  op  the  Lobd's 
JEA'W)TTST  OP  His  own  honotjb  and  olobt.  Salvation  is  essentially  for  the  happiness 
of  God's  people.    But  it  is  supremely  for  the  glory  of  God.    The  Lord  gives  the 


CHAP,  vn.]  JUDGES.  129 

victory  to  Israel  as  a  free  gift.  Now,  the  salvation  of  the  sinner  is  just  as  much  a 
free  gift  as  was  Gideon's  victory.  There  is  no  more  fitness  in  the  creature  to  win 
heaven  than  there  was  power  in  these  three  hundred  to  win  the  victory.  We  are 
as  powerless  to  help  ourselves,  as  were  they.  Our  calling,  repentance,  adoption, 
sanctification,  are  a  free  gift.  II.  Now  mark  man's  TE^^DENCY  to  vatjnt  himself 
AGAINST  THE  LoED.  We  may  truly  say  of  every  man  what  Joash  said  to  Amaziah, 
"  Thine  heart  lifteth  thee  up  to  boast."  Vainglory  is  natural  to  the  human  heart. 
In  the  fable  of  the  ancients  the  fly  that  sat  on  the  axletree  of  the  chariot- wheel  gave  out 
that  she  made  the  glorious  dust  of  the  chariot.  Sin  is  proud.  It  exalts  itself  at  the 
expense  of  God's  glory.  When,  therefore,  the  Lord  visits  the  shiner  with  grace, 
grace  is  at  once  opposed  by  pride.  "  I  will  save  thee,"  saiththe  Lord.  "  Be  it  so," 
saith  the  sinner.  But  "  I  will  save  thee  freely,"  saith  the  Lord.  "  Freely  ?"  saith 
the  sinner.  "  But  what  am  I  to  do?  Am  I  to  do  nothing?  Are  my  good  works 
to  go  for  nothing  ?  God  !  I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  so  bad  as  some  other  men 
are  1  "  Thus  pride  speaks,  and  would  vaunt  itself  against  the  Lord,  and  say, 
'•  Mine  own  hand  hath  saved  me,  or  at  least  helped  to  save  me."  Do  any  doubt  this  ? 
Think  you  that  we  are  drawing  colours  too  deep  ?  Look  for  a  moment — 1.  At  man's 
notion  respecting  some  good  thing  stUl  remaining  in  his  heart,  notwithstanding  his 
fall.  How  few  really  believe  in  the  total  depravity  of  the  natural  heart  I  2.  Look 
at  man's  notion  respecting  the  only  ground  of  the  sinner's  acceptance  before  God. 
The  vaunting  of  the  first-named  evil  is  against  God  the  Holy  Ghost ;  boasting  that 
He  need  not  do  everything  in  the  soul.  This  vaunting  is  against  God  the  Son, 
boasting  that  He  need  not  do  everything  for  the  soul.  IH.  The  means  by  which 
THE  Lord  humbled  man  and  exalted  Himself.  1.  The  reduction  of  external  means 
may  be  God's  way  of  giving  success.  Man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity.  Be 
not  discouraged,  then,  if  God  cut  down  numerical  strength.  What  if  32,000 
be  reduced  to  300 ?  "If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us ? "  "  What  are  all 
the  hosts  of  Midian  to  the  Lord  ?  "  2.  The  Lord  thus  manifests  His  tender  care 
for  His  own  people.  The  ungodly,  like  the  Midianites,  count  the  people  of  God 
♦'as  sheep  for  the  slaughter."  They  think  they  can  swallow  them  up  as  in  a 
moment.  But  they  forget  that  the  Lord  regards  the  cause  of  His  people  as  His  own. 
They  forget  that  He  hath  said,  "  He  that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  Mine 
eye."  Oh  I  how  sensitive  is  God  to  all  injuries  done  wrongfully  to  the  least  of  His 
saints !  {G.  A.  Rogers,  M.A.)  "Wliosoever  is  fearful  and  afraid,  let  him  return. 
— The  trial  of  Gideon's  army  by  the  proclamation : — Gideon  has  now  obtained  the 
necessary  assurance  of  God's  favour ;  he  takes  courage  to  blow  the  trumpet,  and  to 
collect  the  forces  of  the  various  tribes,  if  haply,  after  all  the  strength  he  can  procure, 
Israel  may  be  able  to  stand  before  those  fearful  enemies,  the  Midianites.  We  may 
conceive  Gideon  in  such  a  season  of  anxiety,  hoping  that  more  hearts  will  be  stirred 
up  for  the  arduous  contest,  when  lo,  the  Lord  says  unto  Gideon,  '•  The  people  are 
too  many  for  Me  to  give  the  Midianites  into  their  hands."  What  a  majesty  there 
is  in  these  words !  In  consequence  of  this  intimation,  Gideon's  faith  is  to  be  tried 
by  the  lessening  of  his  army  upon  the  very  eve  of  battle ;  and  the  courage  of  the 
army  is  to  be  tried,  that  it  may  be  seen  that  "  with  God  it  is  a  little  thing  to  save 
by  many  or  by  few."  As  this  trial  respected  Gideon,  it  was  no  slight  one.  To  see, 
on  the  one  hand,  the  Midianites  "  as  grasshoppers  for  multitude,"  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  twenty-two  thousand  turning  their  backs  on  their  enemies  at  the  very  first 
sound  of  the  trumpet,  must  have  been  a  fearful  sight  indeed.  It  must  have  driven 
him  for  consolation  to  God's  own  promise.  We  may  see  in  it  a  picture  of  the 
outward  and  visible  Church  of  Christ  militant  here  on  earth.  Nay,  to  make  the 
picture  more  striking  still,  it  may  be  called  a  representation  of  the  various 
congregations  of  which  that  outward  and  visible  Church  is  composed.  What  is  a 
congregation  of  professing  Christians  but  an  army  enlisted  under  the  banner  of  the 
Cross ;  soldiers  engaged  to  contend  with  one  common  army,  which  would  hold  them 
in  a  bondage  worse  than  Midian's?  And  what  is  every  faithful  minister  of  the 
gospel  but  the  leader  of  this  host,  the  Gideon  of  the  army?  And  what  is  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  but  the  "proclamation"  which  calls  our  people  to  the 
battle  against  the  Lord's  enemies  and  theirs  ?  We  can  tell  them  of  a  better  sacrifice 
than  Gideon's  having  been  accepted  on  their  behalf  ;  we  can  point  to  "  the  Angel  of 
the  covenant"  Himself,  and  say,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world."  We  can  testify  that  the  enemy  against  whom  we  are  called 
to  fight  has  been  already  vanquished  ;  that  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  has  "  led 
captivity  captive,"  that  He  has  "  overcome  death,  and  him  that  had  the  power  of 
death,  that  is,  the  devil."    Did  Gideon  represent  the  "  dew  "  upon  the  fleece  and  on 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

the  earth,  as  an  encouragement  to  his  followers  ?  We  can  testify  that  the  very 
"  dew  "  of  the  heavenly  favour  and  blessing  is  even  now  poured  out  abundantly  on 
the  means  of  grace,  moistening  many  a  dry  fleece  and  fructifying  many  a  barren 
spot ;  and  that  the  word  of  prophecy  and  promise  is  as  sure  as  ever,  that  "  God  will 
be  as  the  dew  to  His  Israel."  And  if  we  have  greater  encouragements  than  Gideon 
to  offer,  we  have  also  more  fearful  warnings  to  hold  out.  We  call  to  remembrance 
the  baptismal  vow  by  which  each  is  bound  to  "  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith."  We 
tell  our  hearers  of  the  awful  consequences  of  being  taken  captive  by  the  enemy. 
It  may  be  asked,  "  Is  it  possible  that,  with  such  tremendous  consequences  hanging 
on  the  battle,  men  should  not  answer  to  the  call  ?  Alas !  so  it  is.  The  spirit  that 
is  in  them  is  one.  of  cowardly  inactivity,  and  it  "  cleaveth  unto  the  dust."  They 
need  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit  to  be  put  into  them  before  they  will  enter  upon 
the  warfare  against  sin  and  Satan,  a  heart  actuated  by  the  principle  (the  only 
constraining  principle)  of  love.  In  ver.  34.  of  the  former  chapter  we  read, 
•»  But  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  Gideon,"  and  then  "  he  blew  the  trumpet." 
So  the  same  Spirit  must  come  upon  him  that  leads,  and  upon  them  that  follow, 
before  the  gospel  trumpet  will  be  blown  effectually.  This  trumpet  we  would  blow 
to-day.  We  blow  it  in  the  ears  of  those  who,  like  Gideon's  army,  appear  to  be  all 
equaUy  "  on  the  Lord's  side "  ;  but  "  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His." 
Gideon's  proclamation,  too,  shall  be  ours  :  "  Whosoever  is  fearful  and  afraid,  let 
"him  return,  and  depart  from  Mount  Gilead."  It  is  right  to  sound  this  proclamation, 
that  men  may  "  count  the  cost."  If  we  speak  of  religion  as  a  life  of  enjoyment, 
we  testify  of  it  also  that  it  is  a  life  of  self-denial.  But  if  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  " 
come  upon  those  who  hear  this  "  proclamation,"  then  these  apparent  contradictions 
■will  be  reconciled,  the  seeming  mysteries  will  be  all  made  plain ;  and  it  will  be 
understood  that  Christ  has  a  yoke  to  be  borne  by  His  people,  but  it  is  easy ;  that 
He  has  a  burden  to  be  carried  by  them,  but  it  is  light ;  that  He  has  a  service  for 
them  to  engage  in,  but  it  is  perfect  freedom.  Depending  upon  "the  Spirit  of  God" 
to  make  known  these  "things  of  God,"' we  are  to  set  before  you  good  and  evil, 
bitter  and  sweet,  life  and  death,  and  then  to  say,  "  Choose  you  this  day."  Now, 
if  the  whisperings  of  men's  consciences  could  be  heard  in  the  pulpit,  as  they  are 
heard  in  heaven,  what  reply,  I  ask  you,  would  yours  be  found  to  make  to  this 
appeal  ?  If  the  motion  of  the  body  correspond  with  that  of  the  mind,  would  there 
be  none  discovered  among  us  "  departing  from  Mount  Gilead  "  ?  Would  there  be 
no  man  found  to  steal  away  from  the  spiritual  battle  through  fear  ?  Let  conscience 
judge.  Or  if  the  reasons  which  urged  the  "  fearful "  to  depart  were  to  be  given  in  as 
each  left  the  field,  what  would  they  present?  One  is  "  afraid"  that  the  service  of 
Christ  is  too  austere  ;  it  requires  too  many  privations.  He  is  unwilling  to  renounce 
a  sin  he  loves.  Another  is  "  afraid  "  of  being  ridiculed  or  despised  for  entering 
decidedly  on  a  religious  course  of  Ufe.  He  is  ashamed  of  Jesus.  A  third  is  "  afraid  " 
of  being  "  righteous  overmuch."  Tell  me,  is  the  soldier  "  afraid  "  of  being  thought 
too  zealous  when  fighting  in  his  country's  cause?  Is  the  patriot  "afraid"  of 
being  thought  to  love  his  native  land  too  much  when  called  upon  to  act  in 
defence  of  its  laws  or  its  Uberty  ?  Time  would  fail  to  enumerate  aU  the  fears  of 
the  faint-hearted.  Some  are  "afraid"  of  sacrificing  their  worldly  subsistence. 
•'  What  is  a  man  profited,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  " 
Others  "depart  from  Mount  Gilead"  for  fear  of  persecution.  When  we  exhort 
them  as  soldiers  of  the  Cross,  they  listen  perhaps  to  our  exhortation  ;  when  we  tell 
them  of  a  warfare  to  be  accomplished,  they  hearken  possibly  to  the  discourse  ;  when 
we  point  out  the  enemy,  aU  appear  outwardly  to  be  ready  to  engage  ;  but  when  we 
say,  "  Come  now,  and  testify  by  your  Uves  that  you  are  in  earnest  in  your 
profession,  that  you  mean  what  you  say  when  you  declare  without  reserve, 
"  Here  we  offer  and  present  unto  Thee,  0  Lord,  ourselves,  our  souls,  and  bodies  1 " 
how  many  depart  1  how  few  remain !  We  close  with  a  word  of  encouragement  to 
those  who  still  keep  their  post  in  the  field  of  battle.  To  such  we  say,  "  Be  strong 
in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His  might.  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,"  &o. 
(F.  Elwin.)  A  sifting  among  the  defenders  of  the  faith  : — The  men  who  had 
nastily  snatched  their  fathers'  swords  and  pikes  of  which  they  were  half-afraid 
represent  to  us  certain  modern  defenders  of  Cbristianity — those  who  carry  edged 
weapons  of  inherited  doctrine  with  which  they  dare  not  strike  home.  The  great 
battle-axes  of  reprobation,  of  eternal  judgment,  of  Divine  severity  against  sin  once 
wielded  by  strong  hands,  how  they  tremble  and  swerve  in  the  grasp  of  many  a 
modern  dialectician  I  The  sword  of  the  old  creed,  that  once,  like  Excalibar,  cleft 
helmets  and  breastplates  through,  how  often  it  maims  the  hands  that  trj^  to  use  it* 


CHAP,  vn.]  JUDGES.  131 

but  want  alike  the  strength  and  the  cunning.  Too  often  we  see  a  wavering  blow 
struck  that  draws  not  a  drop  of  blood  nor  even  dents  a  shield,  and  the  next  thing  is 
that  the  knight  has  run  to  cover  behind  some  old  bulwark,  long  riddled  and 
dilapidated.  In  the  hands  of  these  unskilled  fighters,  too  well  armed  for  their 
strength,  the  battle  is  worse  than  lost.  They  become  a  laughing-stock  to  the  enemy, 
an  irritation  to  their  own  side.  It  is  time  there  was  a  sifting  among  the  defenders 
of  the  faith,  and  twenty  and  two  thousand  went  back  from  Gilead.  Is  the  truth  of 
God  become  mere  tin  or  lead  that  no  new  sword  can  be  fashioned  from  it,  no  blade 
of  Damascus  prim  and  keen  ?  Are  there  no  gospel  armourers  fit  for  the  task  ? 
Where  the  doctrinal  contest  is  maintained  by  men  who  are  not  to  the  depth  of 
their  souls,  sure  of  the  creeds  they  found  on,  by  men  who  have  no  vision  of  the 
severity  of  God  and  the  meaning  of  redemption,  it  ends  only  in  confusion  to 
themselves  and  those  who  are  with  them.  {R.  A.  ff^atson,  M.A.)  Backing  out  of 
God's  service  : — We  have  here  a  striking  evidence  of  the  different  estimate  men 
make  of  danger  and  hard  work  at  a  distance  and  at  hand.  The  large  numbers  of 
the  Christian  army  are  singularly  made  up — are  made  up  by  those  who  are  bold  in 
intention,  brave  at  home,  but  cowards  in  the  field ;  they  answer,  or  seem  to  answer, 
God's  summons  at  first,  but  take  the  earliest  opportunity  of  backing  out  of  their 
engagements.  Many  persons,  when  you  speak  to  them  of  this  and  that  useful 
undertaking,  seem  quite  to  enjoy  the  prospect  of  engaging  in  it,  promise  their 
services,  and  actually  appear  at  the  rendezvous ;  but  the  actual  sight  of  the 
destitution,  the  disease,  the  ignorance,  the  incivility,  the  lying  and  fraudulent 
selfishness  with  which  they  must  cope,  quite  frightens  them,  and  they  avail 
themselves  of  the  first  plausible  opening  to  escape.  And  it  is  better  they  should  do 
so,  for  by  remaining,  their  f aint-heartedness  would  be  contagious,  and  unnerve  their 
comrades.  Every  one  knows  how  easy  it  is  to  work  alongside  of  a  cheery,  bright, 
hopeful  spirit ;  how  difficult  to  bear  up  against  the  continual  complaint  and  fear 
and  wretchedness  of  the  cowardly.  Such,  therefore,  God  rejects  from  His  army. 
{Marcus  Bods,  D.D.)  Why  were  the  fearful  dismissed  ? — Because  fear  ia 
contagious ;  and,  in  undiciplined  armies  like  Gideon's,  panic,  once  started,  spreads 
swiftly,  and  becomes  frenzied  confusion.  The  same  thing  is  true  in  the  work  of 
the  Church  to-day.  Who  that  has  had  much  to  do  with  guiding  its  operations  has 
not  groaned  over  the  dead  weight  of  the  timid  and  sluggish  souls,  who  always  see- 
difficulties  and  never  the  way  to  get  over  them  ?  And  who  that  has  had  to  lead  a  company 
of  Christian  men  has  not  often  been  ready  to  wish  that  he  could  sound  out  Gideon's 
proclamation,  and  bid  the  fearful  and  afraid  take  away  the  chilhng  encumbrance  of 
their  presence,  and  leave  him  with  thinned  ranks  of  trusty  men?  Cowardice, 
dressed  up  as  cautious  prudence,  weakens  the  efficiency  of  every  regiment  in 
Christ's  army.  Another  reason  for  getting  rid  of  the  fearful  is  that  fear  is  the 
opposite  of  faith,  and  that  therefore,  where  it  is  uppermost  the  door  by  which 
God's  power  can  enter  to  strengthen  is  closed.  Not  that  faith  must  be  free  of  all 
admixture  of  fear,  but  that  it  must  subdue  fear,  if  a  man  is  to  be  God's  warrior, 
fighting  in  His  strength.  Many  a  tremor  would  rock  the  hearts  of  the  ten 
thousand  who  remained,  but  they  so  controlled  their  terror  that  it  did  not  over- 
come their  faith.  We  do  not  need,  for  our  efficiency  in  Christ's  service,  complete 
exemption  from  fear,  but  we  do  need  to  make  the  psalmist's  resolve  ours: 
"I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid."  Terror  shuts  the  door  against  the  entrance 
of  the  grace  which  makes  us  conquerors,  and  so  fulfils  its  own  forebodings ; 
faith  opens  the  door,  and  so  fulfils  its  own  confidences.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  people  are  yet  too  many ;  bring  them  down  unto  the  water. — The  trial  of 
Gideon's  army  by  the  water : — As  Gideon  took  his  men  to  the  water  and  tried  them 
there,  so  we  would  bring  your  heart  and  conscience  to  the  spiritual  test  which  the 
subject  may  be  understood  to  signify.  Are  you  a  self-indulgent  Christian  ?  The 
two  terms  have  no  connection  with  each  other.  If  God  discard  the  "  fearful," 
will  He  retain  the  "  carnal  "  ?  If  He  dismiss  those  who  are  so  cowardly  that  they 
dare  not  enter  upon  a  profession  of  His  religion,  wUl  He  bear  with  those  who  have 
the  audacity  to  live  in  the  disgrace  of  it  ?  To  affect  to  serve  God  one  day  and 
really  to  serve  divers  lusts  and  passions  another  ;  to  pretend  to  be  one  of  "  Christ's 
Church  militant  here  upon  earth,"  and  yet  actually  to  make  no  resistance  to  the  enemy; 
this  is  only  showing  that  instead  of  being,  as  you  profess,  a  soldier  of  Christ,  you 
are  in  reahty  a  servant  of  Mammon.  TeU  us  not,  ye  that  are  thus  carnally-minded, 
of  any  warfare  that  you  are  waging  with  the  great  adversary  of  souls.  The  fact  is, 
that  you  are  already  taken  prisoners  by  the  enemy,  you  are  already  led  captive  by 
him  at  his  will.  Bat  the  active  soldiers  of  Christ  need  refreshment,  as  Gideon's  chosen 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

band  did ;  and  they  have  it.  "What  are  the  ordinances  of  Divine  grace  when  blessed 
to  the  soul,  but  "  times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord"?  And  now 
God  says  to  Gideon,  "  By  the  three  hundred  men  that  lapped  will  I  save  Israel ;  and 
let  all  the  other  people  go  every  man  to  his  place."  We  hear  no  complaint  from 
Gideon.  When  he  is  commanded  to  send  the  men  away,  he  sends  them  one  after 
another  by  the  hundred  and  by  the  thousand  ;  not  knowing  when  God  would  stay 
His  hand  or  say,  "  It  is  enough."  This  is  faith,  vital  and  practical  faith.  It  is 
•exactly  that  faith  which  the  Christian  is  required  to  carry  into  the  common  trans- 
actions of  life,  and  to  act  upon  in  the  occurrences  of  every  day  :  "  The  just  shall 
live  by  faith."  In  the  evil  day  he  is  to  live  upon  it  when  God  takes  away 
the  desire  of  his  eyes,  or  the  means  of  his  present  subsistence,  or  the  out- 
ward helps  which  he  has  been  accustomed  to,  and  on  which,  perhaps,  he 
has  been  leaning  too  confidently.  When  these  are  struck  from  under  him, 
then  the  proof  of  his  faith  is  that  he  can  "  trust  in  the  Lord,  and  stay  himself 
on  his  God."  We  are  apt  to  tremble  for  the  cause  of  the  gospel  around  us  when  we 
see  many  depart  and  walk  no  more  with  Christ.  But  let  those  who  remain  think  of 
the  concern  which  their  own  souls  have  in  the  matter.  Have  some  drawn  back  ?  The 
Captain  of  salvation  says,  "  What  is  that  to  thee?  follow  thou  Me."  Is  the  number 
of  the  fearful  or  disaffected  great,  and  is  it  increasing  ?  No  matter  if  it  be  twenty- 
two  thousand.  "  What  is  that  to  thee?  follow  thou  Me."  Certainly  it  is  our  duty 
to  use  all  the  means  which  God  puts  in  our  power  to  strengthen  our  missionary 
ranks ;  but,  nevertheless,  when  He  is  pleased  from  time  to  time  thus  to  draft  off,  if 
I  may  so  speak,  the  great  men,  and  the  strong  men,  and  the  chief  captains,  and  the 
mighty  men  from  our  missionary  host,  it  becomes  us  to  look  on  with  Gideon's 
patient  faith  and  meek  submission ;  to  regard  the  mysterious  dispensation  as 
intended  to  make  known  that  "  the  excellency  of  the  power  is  of  God,  and  not  of 
us."  Thus  every  death  of  a  missionary  will  have  a  voice  in  it  of  encouragement  as 
well  as  of  warning  from  our  God ;  and  if  we  listen  to  it  with  the  ear  of  Gideon's 
faith,  it  will  tell  us  "  The  people  are  yet  too  many."  And  our  answer  should  be, 
"  Be  Thou  exalted.  Lord,  in  Thine  own  strength  :  so  will  we  sing,  and  praise  Thy 
power."      (F.    Elicin.)  Testing -points  in  life  : — Many  are   the  commonplace 

incidents,  the  seemingly  small  points  in  life,  that  test  the  quality  of  men.  Every 
day  we  are  led  to  the  stream-side  to  show  what  we  are,  whether  eager  in  the  Divine 
enterprise  of  faith  or  slack  and  self-considering.  Take  any  company  of  men  and 
women  who  claim  to  be  on  the  side  of  Christ,  engaged  and  bound  in  all  seriousness 
to  His  service.  But  how  many  have  it  clearly  before  them  that  they  must  not 
entangle  themselves  more  than  is  absolutely  needful  with  bodily  and  sensuous 
cravings,  that  they  must  not  lie  down  to  drink  from  the  stream  of  pleasure  and 
amusement  ?  We  show  our  spiritual  state  by  the  way  in  which  we  spend  our 
leisure,  our  Saturday  afternoons,  our  Sabbaths.  We  show  whether  we  are  fit  for 
God's  business  by  our  use  of  the  flowing  stream  of  literature,  which  to  some  is  an 
opiate,  to  others  a  pure  and  strengthening  draught.  The  question  simply  is  whether 
we  are  so  engaged  with  God's  plan  for  our  life,  in  comprehending  it,  fulfilling 
it,  that  we  have  no  time  to  dawdle  and  no  disposition  for  the  merely  casual 
and  trifling.  Are  we  in  the  responsible  use  of  our  powers  occupied  as  that 
Athenian  was  in  the  service  of  his  country  of  whom  it  is  recorded :  "  There  was 
in  the  whole  city  but  one  street  in  which  Pericles  was  ever  seen,  the  street 
which  led  to  the  market-place  and  the  council-house.  During  the  whole  period  of 
his  administration  he  never  dined  at  the  table  of  a  friend  "  ?  Let  no  one  say  there 
is  not  time  in  a  world  like  this  for  social  intercourse,  for  literary  and  scientific 
pursuits  or  the  practice  of  the  arts.  The  plan  of  God  for  men  means  life  in  all 
possible  fulness  and  entrance  into  every  field  in  which  power  can  be  gained.  His 
will  for  us  is  that  we  should  give  to  the  world  as  Christ  gave  in  free  and  uplifting 
ministry,  and  as  a  man  can  only  give  what  he  has  first  made  his  own,  the  Christian 
is  called  to  self-culture  as  full  as  the  other  duties  of  life  will  permit.  He  cannot 
explore  too  much,  he  cannot  be  too  well  versed  in  the  thoughts  and  doings  of  men 
and  the  revelations  of  nature,  for  all  he  learns  is  to  find  high  use.  But  the  aim  of 
personal  enlargement  and  efficiency  must  never  be  forgotten,  that  aim  which  alone 
makes  the  self  of  value  and  gives  it  real  life— the  service  and  glory  of  God.  Only 
in  view  of  this  aim  is  culture  worth  anything.  And  when  in  the  Providence  of  God 
there  comes  a  call  which  requires  us  to  pass  with  resolute  step  beyond  every  stream 
at  which  the  mind  and  taste  are  stimulated  that  we  may  throw  ourselves  into  the 
hard  fight  against  evil  there  is  to  be  no  hesitation.  Everything  must  yield  now. 
The  comparatively  small  handful  who  press  on  with  concentrated  purpose,  making 


CHAP,  vn.]  JUDGES.  133 

God's  call  and  His  work  first  and  all  else,  even  their  own  needs  a  secondary 
affair — to  these  will  be  the  honour  and  the  joy  of  victory.  {R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.) 
The  revelation  of  character : — A  man  is  known  only  when  he  is  tried.  And  yet 
it  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  this  test  is  administered  to  us  in  some  great 
matter,  or  on  some  grand  occasion.  The  two  most  suggestive  words  to  us  in  the 
parable  of  the  good  Samaritan  are  these,  "  By  chance  there  came  down  a  certain 
priest."  The  Saviour  does  not  mean  by  using  this  expression  to  give  counten- 
ance to  the  idea  that  anything  reaUy  occurs  by  chance,  but  rather  to  fix  our 
minds  on  the  ordinary  and  incidental  nature  of  the  occurrence.  It  happened 
that  there  came  a  priest.  He  was  going  on  his  journey.  He  had,  most  likely, 
a  definite  object  before  him.  He  was  not  thinking,  probably,  of  his  own 
character.  Least  of  all  was  he  dreaming  that  he  was  at  the  moment  being 
tested.  He  only  made  it  evident  that  he  could  not  be  troubled  to  do  any- 
thing for  the  half-dead  traveller,  and  so  he  unconsciously  revealed  his  true 
character.  But  so  it  is  always.  We  let  out  our  truest  selves  when  we  do  not 
know  that  we  are  doing  it.  When  Gideon  led  his  army  to  the  brook  and  bade  them 
drink,  the  men  thought  only  of  slaking  their  thirst.  Some,  more  luxurious  in  their 
nature,  went  down  upon  their  hands  and  feet  and  put  their  lips  to  the  stream  to 
take  in  a  full  supply.  Others,  more  dashing  and  impetuous  in  their  disposition, 
could  not  take  so  much  trouble,  but  lifted  the  water  by  their  hands,  lapping  it  up 
thus  with  them,  as  a  dog  lappeth  it  with  his  tongue.  Not  one  of  them,  perhaps, 
was  conscious  of  doing  anything  special.  Yet,  through  that  tiny  drink,  each  one 
revealed  the  sort  of  man  he  was ;  and  Gideon,  by  Divine  direction,  selected  the 
latter  to  be  the  deliverers  of  Israel.  Now  it  is  by  the  casual  engagements  of  every 
day  that  God  is  testing  us  yet.  By  the  little  opportunities  that  are  furnished 
to  us,  so  to  say,  by  chance.  He  is  causing  us  to  unveil  our  inmost  selves.  For 
the  test  is  all  the  more  searching  because  we  are  unconscious  of  its  application. 
We  prepare  for  great  occasions,  thus  putting  such  an  unnatural  strain  upon  ourselves 
that  we  are  not  really  ourselves.  It  is  only  in  the  abandon  of  unconsciousness  that 
we  make  manifest  genuinely  what  we  are.  We  all  know  how  true  that  is  in  the 
art  of  portrait-taking.  The  best  likeness  of  a  man  is  taken  when  he  is  unaware  of 
it ;  but  it  you  set  him  down  before  a  camera  and  tell  him  to  look  pleasant,  the 
result  will  be  a  prim,  precise  expression,  meant  to  be  the  best,  but,  just  because  of 
that,  exceedingly  unnatural.  But  it  is  quite  similar  with  character.  To  know 
what  a  man  is  you  must  take  him  when  he  is  not  aware  that  you  are  judging  him. 
God  gauges  us  in  little  things.  He  watches  us  not  so  much  when  a  great  occasion 
is  making  its  demand  upon  us,  and  we  are  trying  to  do  our  best,  as  when  some 
ordinary  opportunity  is  at  our  hand.  Thus  regarded,  life  even  in  its  minutest  and 
apparently  most  trivial  aspects  becomes  a  very  solemn  thing.  We  are  being  weighed 
in  God's  balance  every  day.  Men  think  with  dread  of  the  Day  of  Judgment,  and 
we  do  not  desire  to  take  a  single  element  from  its  importance.  There  will  be  such 
a  day,  and  it  will  be  more  awful  than  we  think  of.  But  in  the  light  of  the 
principles  which  we  have  now  tried  to  enforce,  every  day  is,  in  its  measure,  also 
a  Day  of  Judgment.  God  is  testing  us  every  hour,  and  according  as  we  stand 
His  scrutiny  He  sends  us  forward  with  His  Gideons  to  emancipate  the  enslaved, 
or  dismisses  us  ignominiously  from  His  service.  {Christian  Age.)  By  the 
three  hundred  men  that  lapped  will  I  save  you. — Gideon's  three  hundred : — 
I.  Then,  little  things  make  great  differences  in  life.  It  was  a  little  thing  that 
made  the  difference  between  "  the  three  hundred  "  and  the  rest  of  the  army — 
"lapped."  But  little  things  represent  great  equivalents.  Little  things  test  and 
reveal  character.  II.  Then,  quality  in  human  instrumentality  is  of  more 
importance  than  quantity.  We  are  taught  here  that  success  in  God's  cause  does 
not  depend  upon  numbers.  The  victory  is  already  potentially  ours  when  we  use 
the  right  means  in  the  right  spirit.  The  great  want  of  the  Church  is  not  more 
members  but  more  of  the  right  stamp.  The  only  soldiers  that  amount  to  anything 
in  God's  service  are  volunteers ;  men  who  enlist,  put  on  the  armour,  obey  orders, 
and  delight  in  the  service.  IH.  Then,  the  few  may  stand  firm,  and  do  noble 
service  in  spite  of  the  bad  ex  a  triple  of  the  many.  IV.  Then,  God  is  worthy 
of  our  trust  and  hearty  co-operation  in  selecting  His  agents  and  carrying 
on  His  work.  Divine  wisdom  was  afterwards  seen  in  the  selection  of  these 
men.  So  it  must  be  in  God's  spiritual  army,  in  our  conflict  with  self  and 
sin.  Evil  habits,  unholy  practices,  false  principles,  must  all  be  pursued,  tracked  to 
their  hiding  places,  and  remorselessly  slain  with  the  edge  of  the  sword.  It  is 
harder   t*  live  Christianity  than  to   be  converted   to  it.    Y,  Then,  is  it  God's 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vu. 

FIXED   PLAN   TO   WOBK   THBOUGH   THE   FEW,  BATHER  THAN   THE    MANY  ?       No  ;  it  is  God'S 

plan,  all  things  being  equal,  to  work,  not  through  a  part,  but  through  all  His 
people  whether  few  or  many.  Why,  then,  did  He  reduce  Gideon's  army  from 
thirty-two  thousand  to  three  hundred  men  ?  Happily  we  are  not  in  the  dark  as 
to  the  cause ;  God  Himself  tells  us  why  He  did  it.  He  had  to  do  so  in  order 
that  His  power  might  be  recognised  in  the  victory.  (T.  Kelly.)  Gideon  and 
the  three  hundred : — 1.  It  is  the  small  matters  which  reveal  us,  the  slight  occasions. 
Think  not  that  the  Lord  is  cheated  by  the  world's  bravos.  He  leaves  the  world, 
religious  or  profane,  to  judge  you  when  you  are  got  up  for  its  inspection.  He 
follows  you  home  in  your  most  familiar  moods,  your  most  simple  and  necessary 
actions,  your  frank  and  free  communications,  and  He  sees  there  the  man,  as  all 
beings,  angels,  men,  devils,  will  see  him  one  day,  when  the  veils  are  lifted  and  the 
inner  realities  of  life  and  character  appear.  2.  There  is  One  watching  us  when 
■we  are  most  unconscious,  drawing  silently  auguries  of  character,  and  forecasting 
destiny.  The  Lord  proves  faculty  in  His  test-house  the  daily  occasions  of  life,  and 
hangs  it  up  it  found  true  in  His  armoury  for  higher  use.  Hence  the  leisure 
hour  is  so  precious ;  it  tells  so  mightily  on  the  life  and  destiny  of  the  man. 
The  soul  ungirds  itself  then,  and  lets  its  bent  appear.  Teach  it  to  love  in  the 
quiet  hours  the  things  that  make  for  its  health,  its  growth,  its  life,  and  leave  the 
work  hours  to  their  care.  As  the  man  is  in  silent,  secluded  moments,  God  finds  him 
in  all  the  great  crises  of  his  history.  3.  Keep  your  knee  for  God  alone.  The  men 
bent  the  knee  to  sensual  good.  That  was  their  fatal  weakness  in  God's  sight. 
Kneel  to  God,  and  it  will  cure  you  of  all  other  kneeling.  See  His  face  each  day 
before  you  look  on  the  world's,  and  its  frowns  will  not  scare  you  nor  its  smiles 
allure.     {J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  The  reduced  army: — What  an  extraordinary 

difference  between  Gideon's  army  as  it  was  at  first  and  Gideon's  army  as  it  was  at 
last — between  the  thirty-two  thousand  who  set  out  with  him  in  the  morning 
and  the  three  hundred  who  stayed  with  him  at  night !  But  I  can  tell  you  of  a 
difference  which  is  far  more  wonderful  than  that — the  difference  I  mean  between 
the  visible  Church  of  Christ  and  His  real  Church.  Just  think  of  the  number  of 
our  outwardly  baptized  persons.  But  how  many  out  of  all  this  vast  company  are 
really  chosen  by  the  Lord  to  be  His  soldiers  ?  But  how  shall  this  remnant  be 
distinguished  from  the  rest?  Is  there  not  something  which,  like  the  waters  in 
the  case  of  Gideon's  army,  may  make  the  difference  apparent  between  the  true 
and  the  false?  The  world,  for  example,  forms  a  very  good  test  by  which  you 
may  discern  a  true  Christian  from  a  false  one.  Look  at  the  conduct  of  the 
generality.  See  how  they  bow  down  to  drink  at  the  waters  of  the  world  !  See  how 
they  give  themselves  up  wholly  to  its  pleasures  and  pursuits  !  Unmindful  altogether 
of  eternal  things  they  set  their  affections  upon  things  beneath,  and  make  them  the 
one  great  end  for  which  they  live.  Earth — earth — earth  is  all  in  all  with  them. 
But  mark  the  conduct  of  a  little  remnant  who  are  here  and  there  to  be  discerned 
amidst  them.  These  men  come  unto  the  waters  with  the  rest.  They  have  their 
business  in  the  world  as  others  have.  But  oh  1  in  how  dilTerent  a  spirit  from  the 
rest !  They  may  be  compared  to  those  three  hundred  men  that  lapped.  A  little  of 
earth's  comforts  is  enough  for  them.  They  covet  not  great  things  in  this  life  ;  but 
if  the  Lord  shall  give  them  only  "  food  and  raiment,"  they  are  well  "  content." 
Their  moderation  is  known  unto  all  men.  Even  whilst  they  are  enjoying  earthly 
comforts  there  is  still  no  "  bowing  down  "  towards  them.  Their  eyes  are  rather 
towards  Him  who  gave  these  mercies,  and  their  desire  is  to  make  so  good  an 
improvement  of  them  as  to  glorify  the  Giver.  But  is  this  the  only  test  by  which  you 
may  discern  the  true  Christian  from  the  false  one — the  use  which  they  severally 
make  of  the  world  in  which  they  live  ?  Let  me  point  you  out  another  water,  as  it 
■were,  where  the  distinction  may  be  seen.  Only  here  they  that  sip  are  the  pro- 
fessors, and  they  are  the  believers  who  "  bow  down  to  drink."  The  water  that 
I  mean  is  the  water  of  the  gospel — that  water  of  the  well  of  life  to  which  every 
thirsty  soul  is  so  graciously  invited  in  those  well-known  words,  "  Ho !  every  one 
that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters  I  "  I  have  said  that  of  these  waters  professors 
only  sip.  Even  that,  perhaps,  is  a  stronger  term  than  should  be  used.  Oh,  what 
thousands  are  there  of  men  who  call  themselves  believers  who  just  come,  as  it  were, 
to  these  waters  of  salvation  and  look  at  them,  and  go  away  again  without  a  taste. 
They  just  come,  I  mean,  to  the  preaching  of  the  Word,  listen  to  it  with  a  dull  and 
idle  ear,  and  then  go  off  again  with  no  more  knowledge  of  it  than  they  brought  to 
church  with  them.  Others  will  go  a  little  further.  They  hear— they  listen—  they 
admire.    There  are  professors,  I  know,  who  will  go  further  than  this.    Yet  it  la 


OHAP.  vn.]  JUDGES.  135 

^th  the  best  of  them  but  a  sipping  at  the  stream.  A  little  measure  of  the  mere 
Bemblance  of  religion  is  sure  to  satisfy  the  man  who  is  but  half  a  Christian.  But 
not  the  man  to  whom  that  name  in  truth  belongs.  The  real  Christian  will  be 
satisfied  with  nothing  short  of  a  full  and  an  abundant  draught.  Moderate  as  he 
is  in  his  desires  of  earthly  things,  he  has  a  spkitual  appetite  which  it  takes  no  little 
to  content.  Nor  is  he  satisfied  with  attending  any  ordinance  unless  he  leaves  it 
with  a  blessing — refreshed  and  strengthened  for  his  Master's  work.  It  was  only 
the  true-hearted  part  of  Gideon's  army  which  remained  with  him.  These  only 
shared  his  victory  and  reaped  the  fruits  of  it.  And  think  you  that  Jesus  will  not 
make  the  like  distinction  ?  {A.  Eoberts,  M.A.)  Gideon's  three  hundred  : — A 
striking  story.  Especially  might  it  be  a  useful  story  for  all  preachers  to-day  who 
find  themselves  in  some  little  tide  of  popularity.  It  is  a  sore  story  this  on  Church 
statistics,  especially  when  the  numbers  swell,  and  we  are  apt  to  indulge  in  a  great 
chorus  of  praise  because  of  numerical  success.  How  the  Lord  Almighty  had  to 
reduce  thirty-two  thousand  stalwart  men  to  three  hundred  in  order  to  bring  the 
band  up  to  its  effective  strength  1  The  Captain  of  our  salvation  has  strange  ways 
with  Him,  has  He  not?  Sometimes  past  finding  out.  Now,  these  men  utterly 
deceived  Gideon,  and  we  have  to  learn  tha,t  lesson — that  we  may  utterly  deceive 
each  other.  Are  our  hearts  right  ?  "When  we  count  you  upon  our  totals,  does  the 
Lord  also  count  one,  or  are  you  to  Him  a  mere  fraction— a  nothing  ?  The  Lord 
said,  virtually,  "  Gideon,  give  these  pSOple  a  chance  to  go  home,  and  see  what  you 
shall  see.  Say  to  those  that  are  timid  and  of  a  fearful  heart.  Go  back."  And 
twenty-two  thousand  showed  the  breadth  of  their  backs,  executing  strategical  move- 
ments upon  home  1  Are  we  going  to  be  blown  away  like  chaff,  or  can  we  stand  it  ? 
Are  we  wheat  after  all  ?  And  even  when  there  were  not  so  many  by  twenty-two 
thousand  with  Gideon  as  at  first,  still  they  were  not  dense  and  compact  enough  for 
God's  purposes.  For  God  wants  His  army  to  be  not  like  a  great,  big,  overgi-own 
cabbage  that  has  run  to  blades  and  has  no  heart  in  it,  but  He  wants  His  army  to 
be  dense — not  extensive,  but  intensive — sound  at  the  heart,  solid  as  a  cannon-ball. 
Notice,  then,  when  we  come  to  this  second  action  of  God's  testing  of  these  people 
how  difficult  it  is  to  detect  hypocrisy.  Mark  you,  these  other  thousands  ought  to 
have  gone  off  with  the  first  batch ;  they  ought  to  have  gone  at  the  first  telling. 
But  such  an  ingrained  thing  is  formalism  and  hypocrisy  that  these  people  stood  firm 
when  they  ought  to  have  gone.  There  ought  to  have  been  no  second  sifting  pi'ocess 
needed.  One  was  enough  to  lay  bare  the  hearts  of  men  to  themselves  if  they  had 
been  simple  and  honest  and  sincere.  You  have  the  same  thing  to-day,  precisely — 
people  who  come  with  you  up  to  the  point  of  real  work,  and  then  "  Presto  !  Pass  !  " 
they  are  gone.  In  God's  great  name  let  me  ask  what  are  you  doing  but  coming 
to  church  once  a  week  ?  Now,  I  wish  to  say  that  your  seat  could  be  better 
occupied  if  that  is  all  that  is  to  come  out  of  you.  What  was  the  test  which  God 
applied  to  them  in  this  sore  business  ?  Well,  I  think  it  was  just  this.  I  am  not 
going  to  say  that  these  three  hundred  men  were  braver,  bolder,  grander  men  than 
those  who  had  gone  away.  I  am  not  going  to  say  that  these  men  were  men  of 
blood  and  iron — that  they  had  no  fear,  no  doubts,  and  no  misgivings.  No,  I  do 
not  think  that.  I  think  that  they  were  men  who  felt  their  hearts  beat  beneath  their 
jerkins  like  any  others.  They  had  very  likely  the  same  doubts  and  the  same 
misgivings  as  to  the  success  of  this  revolt  against  Midian  as  the  thousands  had  who 
had  gone  home ;  only  they  did  not  yield  to  them.  They  encouraged  themselves  in 
God  ;  they  encouraged  themselves  in  Gideon.  In  all  their  weakness  and  helpless- 
ness they  leaned  all  the  harder  upon  Him  who  had  called  them  to  this  fight,  in 
which  were  involved  death  or  victory.  And  that  is  all  that  God  wants  yet.  God 
never  asked  any  mortal  man  to  do  more  than  trust  in  Him.  These  three  hundred 
men  were  only  flesh  and  blood,  and  this  was  a  desperate  business.  Twenty-two 
thousand  of  their  countrymen  had  gone  away  from  fear ;  but  when  these  three 
hundred  came  to  the  ford  it  seemed  that  what  was  in  their  heart  was  not  retreat, 
but  fighting.  Because  when  they  came  to  that  ford,  a  key  position,  an  important 
place,  they  cannot  lie  down  and  give  themselves  up  to  the  business  of  taking  drink 
like  the  others.  It  was  not  drinking,  but  fighting  that  was  in  their  heads  and  in 
their  hearts ;  and  they  lapped  as  a  dog  lapped,  so  that  they  were  free  to  see  the 
oncoming  of  the  host,  and  to  spring  to  their  places  in  an  instant.  Thus  they  drank, 
and  God  said,  "  These  are  the  men."  This  thing  called  faith  in  God  is  a  thing  that 
tells.  It  tinges,  it  tinctures,  it  colours  every  word  you  speak,  and  everything  you  do. 
(eT".  McNeill.)  The  three  hundred  men  that  lapped : — Here  is  one  of  those  battles 
of  God  which  are  being  waged  in  century  after  century,  crisis  after  crisis,  by  the  armies 

29 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

of  Truth  against  the  hordes  of  unrighteousness.  Gideon,  trusting  manfully  in  his 
Divine  commission,  sets  himself  to  deliver  Israel  from  the  Midianites.  Cheered 
himself  by  God's  manifest  goodness,  he  succeeds,  as  men  count  success,  in  gathering 
together  a  strong  army.  Thirty-two  thousand  men  was  a  serviceable  army  to  put 
into  the  field  to  risk  the  chances  of  battle  with  a  successful,  arrogant,  and  over- 
whelming enemy.  "The  people  that  are  with  thee  are  too  many."  What?  la 
not  Providence  on  the  side  of  big  battalions  ?  Is  it  not  the  defiant  cry  which  is  ever 
rising  up  in  hoarse  murmurs  from  the  army  of  the  world  ?  "  Every  one  thinks  as 
we  do.  You  are  alone.  Every  one  does  as  we  do.  You  are  the  victim  of  a  foolish 
prejudice.  You  must  yield  in  the  end.  The  house  of  Baal  is  full  from  one  end 
thereof  to  the  other,  while  you,  you  prophet  of  the  Lord,  shivering  in  your  isolation, 
try  to  perpetuate  a  failure."  Midian  comes  on  with  its  overwhelming  cry,  "  Every 
one  thinks  so,  every  one  says  it,  every  one  does  it ;  numbers  are  on  our  side,  there- 
fore we  are  right."  Ah !  my  brethren,  do  I  touch  on  a  subtle  danger  which  is  incident 
to  societies — to  count  heads,  and  to  boast  of  numbers  on  the  books  ?  Remember, 
the  very  charter  of  existence  in  a  guild  is  quaUty,  not  quantity.  It  is  the  con- 
centration of  the  earnest  few  against  the  careless  and  undisciplined  many.  So 
Gideon  has  to  submit — there  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy,  with  a  tradition  of  dis- 
grace behind  him,  he,  a  leader  of  reputed  cowards,  has  to  submit  to  the  departure 
of  twenty-two  thousand  men,  leaving  his  splendid  band  reduced  to  a  pitiable  ten 
thousand.  The  fearful  and  the  half-hearted  go  away,  and  more  than  half  his  host 
has  vanished.  Ah,  is  it  some  annual  meeting  we  are  thinking  of  there  in  our  guild 
room,  where  the  leader  says,  "  I  do  not  care  for  a  guild  of  non-communicants,  who 
do  not  keep  to  the  rules.  Let  every  one  resign  who  does  not  intend  to  Uve  up  to 
his  profession,"  and  with  a  heavy  heart  he  sees  the  diminution  of  his  flourishing 
band.  Poor  Gideon,  with  his  wretched  ten  thousand  1  But  what  is  this?  "The 
people  are  yet  too  many  "  is  the  inexorable  decree  of  God.  They  must  yet  be 
submitted  to  the  test.  They  are  brought  down  to  the  water  of  the  weU  Harod  near 
where  they  were  encamped,  to  be  tried  with  the  test  of  thirst,  which  has  so  often 
proved  the  value  of  disciplined  troops.  "  By  the  three  hundred  men  that  lapped,  I 
will  save  you."  There  are  many  weUs  of  water  to  try  the  guild  members  in  this 
city.  He  will  never  fight  a  battle  of  the  Lord  who,  with  his  badge  round  his  neck, 
goes  down  on  his  knees  to  drink  his  fiU  of  pleasure,  unrestrained,  unmindful,  self- 
indulgent.  The  servant  of  ,the  Lord  who  is  to  win  in  the  battle  of  Midian,  just 
tastes  lightly  of  the  pleasures  of  life,  which  are  free  from  sin,  as  they  that  use  this 
world  as  not  abusing  it,  for  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away.  "  The  three 
hundred  men  that  lapped."  1.  These  are  the  sort  of  members  that  we  want  for  a 
Church  guild,  for  they  represent  in  the  first  place  a  band  of  men  who  have  learnt 
the  great  lesson  of  self-control.  They  were  men  not  to  be  moved  by  a  draught  of 
water  on  a  hot  day.  The  cause  of  God  had  stilled  the  cry  of  appetite.  Ah,  it  is  not 
a  bit  of  use  joining  in  a  splendid  service,  waving  banners,  singing  hymns,  talking 
about^he  CathoUc  Faith,  wearing  a  badge,  and  attending  sometimes  a  guild  meeting, 
if  we  have  not  learnt  the  splendid  lesson  of  self-control.  "  The  three  hundred  men 
that  lapped."  2.  They  represented  to  Gideon  also  a  band  of  enthusiasts.  Their 
heart  was  elsewhere,  when  they  stood  by  the  water.  They  barely  had  time  to 
remember  the  keenness  of  their  thirst,  as  they  strained  at  the  leash,  and  pulled  at 
the  bridle,  the  restraint  of  delay,  between  them  and  victory.  Only  second  in 
importance  to  the  moral  basis  is  the  enthusiasm  of  right  in  the  member  of  a  guild. 
There  are  few  things  more  depressing,  and  few  things  more  wrong  than  the  listless 
apathy,  which  men  either  affect  or  feel  in  this  glad  world  of  God's  creating.  Aa 
you  step  into  rank  you  feel  what  a  splendid  thing  it  is  to  exist,  to  live  at  aU.  You 
feel  what  wondrous  powers  God  has  given  you  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  With  your 
senses  you  reach  out  to  all  around  you.  With  your  mind  you  live  in  the  past, 
enjoy  the  present,  or  imagine  the  future  in  all  the  freedom  of  intellect,  with  your 
spirit  you  are  in  touch  with  God.  You  feel  at  least  you  never  can  cumber  the 
ground  as  one  of  those  painted  grubs  who  crawl  about  the  earth,  or  flit  about  as  a 
creature  of  the  day  in  bright  clothes  and  meaningless  flight,  now  expanding  in  the 
sunshine,  now  dying  at  the  first  frost  of  adversity.  The  guild  member  is  serious, 
he  is  active,  he  is  useful,  because  he  has  the  enthusiasm  of  life,  and  even  more,  he 
has  the  enthusiasm  of  Christianity.  He  knows  what  the  Church  has  been  to  him. 
He  is  enthusiastic — how  can  he  help  it  ? — none  of  these  things  move  me,  he  says, 
as  he  passes  the  well,  as  he  gazes  at  the  hosts  of  Midian,  and  his  own  attenuated 
ranks.  He  longs  to  help  others,  himself  to  be  a  centre  of  good  and  a  rallying  point 
for  the  forces  of  the  Lord.    We  want  a  band  of  enthusiasts,  alive  with  the  enthusiasm 


CHAP.  Til.]  JUDGES.  137 

of  God.    We  are  suffering  at  the  present  moment  from  silliness,  men  who  play  at 
religion,  men  who  are  not  in  earnest,  men  who  talk  and  do  not  act.     "  The  three 
hundred  men  that  lapped."     3.  Gideon  might  count  on  these  as  determined  men. 
They  were  men  who  had  counted  the  cost ;  when  others  refused  to  come  forward 
they  had  presented  themselves ;  when  others  went  back  they  had  stood  firm ;  when 
others  had  failed  in  a  simple  trial,  they  had  shown  what  manner  of  men  they  were. 
A  battle  of  three  hundred  against  a  host  would  mean  determined  men,  and  the  battle 
of  the  Lord  needs  determined  men  now.     The  conflict  for  each  of  us  needs  strength 
and  determination  of  character.     Do  not  believe  for  one  moment  that  it  will  ever 
be  easy  to  be  good.     Our  fathers  found  it  hard  to  resist  evU,  so  shall  we ;  our  fathers 
found  it  hard  to  pray,  so  shall  we.    You  will  want  all  the  firmness  of  your  will 
in  the  combat  of  life  which  lies  before  you.     Moab  lies  in  ambush  with  all  his 
countless  hosts,  the  battle  will  be  hard  and  long.     If  you  be  but  an  insignificant 
fraction  out  of  the  number  of  professing  Christians,  keep  on;   if  you  be  but  & 
small  and  attenuated  remainder,  out  of  those  who  have  fallen  away  since  you 
first  became  enrolled,  still  keep  on.     The  freshness,  it  may  be,  has  worn  off ; 
the  monotony  of  hfe  is  beginning  to  teU  upon  yoa;   it  may  be,  the  hard  faUs 
and  rough  blows  of   life  have  disheartened  you — keep  on.    Bodies  of  pledged 
men  like  you  are,   after   all,  the  strength  of  the   Church.      {Canon  Newbolt.) 
Gideon's  hand : — 1.  Nearly  everything  great  in  this  world  has  been  effected  by  a 
few  men,  or,  perhaps,  a  single  man,  who  beheved  in  it  when  everybody  else  saw 
only  difficulties  and  objections.     The  struggle  between  the  right  and  the  expedient, 
or  the  practical  and  the  ideal,  is  always  going  on.     The  exploit  of  Gideon's  band 
was  as  nothing  compared  with  the  daring  of  the  few  Galilean  fishermen  who  went 
forth  to  preach  to  a  hostile  world  the  story  of  Christ  and  Htm  crucified.     "  All 
things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth."     2.  In  the  next  place  we  may  observe 
that  God  chose  for  this  great  work  the  man  who  was  to  be  His  instrument,  and 
Gideon  obeyed  the  call.    It  then  became  his  duty  to  set  to  work  and  collect  an 
army.     The  result  was  just  what  might  have  been  expected.    A  large  number  of 
Gideon's  compeers  thought  it  highly  desirable  that  the  yoke  of  the  invader  should 
be  cast  off  their  necks,  but  they  were  afraid  to  try  and  do  it.     They  saw  the  diffi- 
culties more  plainly  than  they  saw  the  good  to  be  attained.     Even  some  of  those 
who  volunteered  at  first  went  back  after  they  had  counted  the  cost.    Just  so. 
Every  man  who  honestly  assumes  a  responsibility  and  attempts  a  good  work  may  be 
perfectly  sure  that  ten  people  will  say,  "  Well  done  1     Go  on ! "  for  every  one  who 
will  say,  "  I  wiU  help  you,  though  I  stand  to  lose  by  it ! "    In  such  cases  the  man 
who  sees  what  ought  to  be  done  must  just  obey  his  call  and  go  forward.    It  is  not 
upon  men,  but  upon  God  that  he  must  depend.     3.  Further,  let  us  bear  in  mind 
that  the  issues  of  all  things  are  in  the  hands  of  God.    We  need  not  be  afraid  of 
compromising  the  doctrine  of  moral  freedom  by  any  such  assertion  as  this.    Man 
has  power  of  choice  when  he  has  not  power  of  action.    Power  of  action  may  be 
indefinitely  extended.     God  may  complete  our  purposes  when  they  are  beyond  our 
ken,  and  may  supplement  our  deficiencies  if  we  honour  Him  by  obedience  and  faith. 
The  shortest  road  to  the  attainment  of  an  ideal  or  the  fulfilment  of  a  duty  is  to 
fearlessly  perform  what  one  knows  to  be  right,  and  trust  in  God  for  the  issue.     We 
need  but  lamps  and  pitchers  and  trumpets.     We  must  take  trouble  and  be  wise, 
while  remembering  that  the  race  is  not  to  the  swift  nor  the  battle  to  the  strong. 
(R.  J.  Campbell,  B.A.)         Fit  men  for  the  fight: — God  required  but  few  men,  but 
He  required  that  these  should  be  fit.     The  first  test  had  sifted  out  the  brave  and 
willing.     The  liquor  was  none  the  less,  though  so  much  froth  had  been  blown  off. 
As  Thomas  Fuller  says,  there  were  "fewer  persons,  but  not  fewer  men,"  after  the 
poltroons  had  disappeared.     The  second  test,  "  a  purgatory  of  water,"  as  the  same 
wise  and  witty  author  calls  it,  was  still  more  stringent.     The  dwindled  ranks  were 
led  down  from  their  camp  on  the  slopes  to  the  fountain  and  brook  which  lay  in  the 
valley  near  the  Midianites'  camp.     Gideon  alone  seems  to  have  known  that  a  test 
was  to  be  applied  there ;  but  he  did  not  know  what  it  was  to  be  till  they  reached  the 
spring,  and  the  soldiers  did  not  know  that  they  were  determining  their  fate  when 
they  drank.     The  two  ways  of  drinking  clearly  indicated  a  difference  in  the  men. 
Those  who  glued  their  lips  to  the  stream  and  swilled  till  they  were  fuU  were  plainly 
more  self-indulgent,  less  engrossed  with  their  work,  less  patient  of  fatigue  and  thirst 
than  those  who  caught  up  enough  in  their  curved  palms  to  moisten  their  lips  with- 
out stopping  in  their  stride  or  breaking  rank.     The  former  test  was  self -applied,  and 
consciously  so.    This  is  no  less  self-appUed,  though  unconsciously.     God  shuts  out 
no  man  from  His  army,  but  men  shut  themselve^^  out ;  sometimes  knowingly,  by 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

avowed  disinclination  for  the  -warfare,  sometimes  unknowingly  by  self-indulgent 
habits  which  proclaim  their  unfitness.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9-14.  A  cake  of  barley  bread  tumbled  into  the  host  of  Midian. — Encourage- 
ment for  Gideon ; — Gideon  felt  that  he  was  but  the  thin,  weak,  limp  cake ;  that 
there  was  a  ludicrous  disproportion  between  the  means  at  his  command  and  the 
work  he  was  to  accomplish.  But  then,  behind  him  was  the  unseen  but  mighty 
wind  of  God's  Spirit,  that  swept  him  on  irresistibly  and  made  him  invincible. 
This  was  Gideon's  encouragement,  and  this  must  be  the  encouragement  of  each  of 
us  in  aU.  duty.  That  man  must  have  low  aims  indeed  who  never  finds  himself 
confronted  by  duty  that  he  feels  to  be  impossible ;  who  does  not  feel  again  and 
again  that  the  conquest  of  sin  in  himself  is  impossible  ;  who  is  not  again  and  again 
perplexed  by  the  difficult  circumstances  he  is  silently  swept  into  ;  who  does  not  feel 
helpless  before  the  profound,  rooted  misery,  the  masses  of  distress  and  crime  in  the 
world.  "What  can  one  do  ?  We  can  do  nothing  of  ourselves ;  God  does  not  expect 
that  we  should.  But  there  is  nothing  we  may  not  do,  if  the  almighty  inspiration 
of  God  takes  us  and  carries  us  forward  as  its  instrument.  But  how,  you  will  say, 
are  we  to  secure  that  inspiration  ?  how  are  we  to  get  into  the  current  of  God's 
Spirit,  so  as  to  be  carried  along  by  it  ?  How,  we  may  ask  in  reply,  do  sailors  get 
to  their  destination  ?  They  cannot  themselves  drag  their  ship  along — they  are 
helpless  in  this  respect ;  neither  can  they  raise  winds  for  themselves.  They  cannot 
supply  their  own  motive  power,  and  yet  they  can  do  all  that  is  necessary.  They 
know  where  and  when  certain  winds  blow,  and  getting  into  the  current  of  these, 
they  guide  their  vessel  to  its  port.  You  also  know  the  directions  in  which  God's 
Spirit  blows  ;  you  know  the  objects  towards  which  God  is  willing  to  help  you  ;  you 
know  what  God  Himself  aims  at  and  wishes  done ;  and  though  you  cannot  reach 
those  objects  by  your  own  strength,  yet  if  you  set  your  face  towards  them,  if  you 
keep  your  soul  in  their  direction,  if  you  make  them  your  real  aim,  God's  Spirit 
cannot  miss  you — you  wiU  be  caught  and  carried  along  in  His  powerful  inspiration. 
{3Iarcus  Dods,  D.D.)  The  3Iidianite  soldier :  the  power  of  the  little : — 1.  A  great  end 
reached  by  most  insignificant  instrumentality.  2.  The  influence  it  had  upon  the 
mind  of  Gideon.  I.  An  argument  for  special  pkovidexce.  The  little  and  the 
great  are  not  only  inseparable  parts  of  a  whole,  but  what  is  called  the  little  some- 
times creates  and  sometimes  destroys  the  great.  11.  A  lesson  fob  our  everyday 
LIFE.  1.  Despise  not  things  of  humble  aspect.  To  do  so  is — (1)  Unmanly  ;  (2) 
unrighteous ;  (3)  unwise.  Give  the  acorn  time,  and  it  shall  become  a  forest,  and 
cover  oceans  with  the  fleets  of  nations;  give  the  little  rUl,  starting  from  the 
fiohtude  of  the  hills,  time,  and  it  shall  become  a  river  bearing  on  its  bosom  the 
wealth  of  kingdoms.  2.  Cultivate  an  appreciation  of  the  little.  The  observation 
of  little  events  has  done  wonders  before  now.  The  fall  of  an  apple  unfolded  the 
true  theory  of  the  material  universe.  The  rushing  of  a  little  steam  from  a  kettle 
led  to  the  introduction  of  that  steam  power  which  has  already  almost  changed  the 
face  of  the  world.  A  feather  shows  how  the  wind  blows,  and  an  insignificant  event 
may  indicate  the  direction  of  an  eternal  law.  Mark  little  tendencies  of  character ; 
smaU  wishes  and  preferences  may  often  throw  a  flood  of  light  upon  your  spiritual 
history.  Respect  little  virtues.  Shun  little  sins.  3.  Eecognise  God's  presence  in 
the  minute  as  well  as  the  vast.  (Eo}nilist.)  The  dream  of  the  barley  cake : — 
I.  The  strikinq  providence  which  must  have  greatly  refreshed  Gideon.  It  may 
appear  to  be  a  little  thing  ;  but  an  occurrence  is  none  the  less  wonderful  because  it 
appears  to  be  insignificant.  God  is  as  Divine  in  the  small  as  in  the  stupendous,  as 
glorious  in  the  dream  of  a  soldier  as  in  the  flight  of  a  seraph.  ^  1.  Now  observe, 
first,  the  providence  of  God  that  this  man  should  have  dreamed  just  then,  and  that 
he  should  have  dreamed  that  particular  dream.  Dreamland  is  chaos,  but  the  hand 
of  the  God  of  order  is  here.  God  is  not  asleep  when  we  are  asleep  ;  God  is  not 
dreaming  when  we  are.  2.  Further,  I  cannot  but  admire  that  this  man  should  be 
moved  to  tell  his  dream  to  his  fellow.  It  is  not  everybody  that  teUs  his  dream  at 
night;  he  usually  waits  till  the  morning.  God  ruleth  men's  idle  tongues  as  well 
as  their  dreaming  brains,  and  He  can  make  a  talkative  soldier  in  the  camp  say 
just  as  much  and  just  as  little  as  will  subserve  the  purposes  of  wisdom.  8.  It  is 
remarkable  that  the  man  should  tell  his  dream  just  when  Gideon  and  Phurah 
had  come  near.  God  has  so  arranged  the  whole  history  of  men,  and  angels,  and 
the  regions  of  the  dead,  that  each  event  occurs  at  the  right  moment  so  as  to  effect 
another  event,  and  that  other  event  brings  forth  a  third,  and  all  things  work 
together  for  good.     0  child  of  God,  when  yoa  are  troubled  it  is  because  you  fancy 


CHAP.  TH.]  JUDGES.  139 

that  you  are  alone ;  but  you  are  not  alone ;  the  Eternal  Worker  is  with  you.  Oh, 
for  a  little  heavenly  eyesalve  to  touch  our  eyes  that  we  may  perceive  the  presence 
of  the  Lord  in  all  things.  The  stars  in  their  courses  are  fighting  for  the  cause  of 
God.  Our  allies  are  everywhere.  God  will  summon  them  at  the  right  moment. 
n.  The  comfortable  trifle  which  Gideon  had  thus  met  with.  It  was  a  dream,  and 
therefore  a  trifle,  and  yet  he  took  comfort  from  it.  We  are  all  the  creatures  of  senti- 
ment as  well  as  of  reason,  and  hence  we  are  often  strongly  affected  by  little  things. 
Gideon  is  cheered  by  a  dream  Of  a  barley  cake.  When  Eobert  Bruce  had  been 
frequently  beaten  in  battle,  he  despaired  of  winning  the  crown  of  Scotland ;  but 
when  he  lay  hidden  in  the  loft  among  the  hay  and  straw,  he  saw  a  spider  trying  to 
complete  her  web  after  he  had  broken  the  thread  many  times.  As  he  saw  the  insect 
begin  again,  and  yet  again,  until  she  had  completed  her  net  for  the  taking  of  her 
prey,  he  said  to  himself,  "If  this  spider  perseveres  and  conquers,  so  wiU  I  persevere 
and  succeed."  There  might  not  be  any  real  connection  between  a  spider  and  an 
aspirant  to  a  throne,  but  the  brave  heart  made  a  connection,  and  thereby  the 
man  was  cheered.  If  you  and  I  will  but  look  about  us,  although  the  adversaries 
of  God  are  as  many  as  grasshoppers,  yet  we  shall  find  consolation.  I  hear  the  birds 
sing,  "  Be  of  good  cheer,"  and  the  leafless  trees  bid  us  trust  in  God  and  live  on, 
though  all  visible  signs  of  life  be  withered.  But  what  a  pity  it  is  that  we  should 
need  such  little  bits  of  things  to  cheer  us  up,  when  we  have  matters  of  far  surer 
import  to  make  us  glad  !  Gideon  had  already  received,  by  God's  own  angel,  the 
word,  "  Surely  I  will  be  with  thee,  and  thou  shalt  smite  the  Midianites  as  one 
man."  '^Was  not  this  enough  for  him  ?  III.  The  cheering  discovert.  Gideon  had 
noticed  a  striking  providence,  he  had  received  a  comfortable  trifle,  but  he  also 
made  a  very  cheering  discovery ;  which  discovery  was,  that  the  enemy  dreamed  of 
disaster.  You  and  I  sometimes  think  about  the  hosts  of  evil,  and  we  fear  we  shall 
never  overcome  them,  because  they  are  so  strong  and  so  secure.  Hearken : 
we  over-estimate  them.  The  powers  of  darkness  are  not  so  strong  as  they  seem 
to  be.  The  subtlest  infidels  and  heretics  are  only  men.  What  is  more,  they  are 
bad  men  ;  and  bad  men  at  bottom  are  weak  men.  It  is  natural  to  men  to  fear,  and 
doubly  natural  to  bad  men.  IV.  The  dream  itself  and  its  interpretation.  The 
Midianite  in  his  dream  saw  a  barley  cake.  Barley  cakes  were  not  much  valued  as 
food  in  those  days,  any  more  than  now.  People  ate  barley  when  they  could  not  get , 
wheat,  but  they  would  need  to  be  driven  to  such  food  by  poverty  or  famine: 
Barley-meal  was  rather  food  for  dogs  or  cattle  than  for  men  ;  and  therefore  the 
barley  cake  would  be  the  emblem  of  a  thing  despised.  A  barley  cake  was 
generally  made  upon  the  hearth.  A  hole  was  made  in  the  ground,  and  paved  with 
stones  ;  in  this  a  fire  was  made,  and  when  the  stones  were  hot  a  thin  layer  of 
barley-meal  was  laid  upon  them,  covered  over  with  the  ashes,  and  thus  quickly  and 
roughly  baked.  The  cake  itself  was  a  mere  biscuit.  It  may  have  been  a  long 
piece  of  thin  crust,  and  it  was  seen  in  the  dream  moving  onward  and  waving  in  the 
air  something  like  a  sword.  It  came  rolling  and  waving  down  the  hiU  till  it  came 
crash  against  the  pavilion  of  the  prince  of  Midian,  and  turned  the  tent  completely 
over,  so  that  it  lay  in  ruins.  1.  Now,  what  we  have  to  learn  from  it  is  just  this, 
God  can  work  by  any  means.  He  can  never  be  short  of  instruments.  Gideon, 
who  threshes  corn  to-day,  will  thresh  the  Lord's  enemies  to-morrow.  Preachers  of 
the  Word  are  being  trained  everywhere.  2.  God  can  work  by  the  feeblest  means. 
He  can  use  a  cake  which  a  child  can  crumble  to  smite  Midian,  and  subdue  its 
terrible  power.  I  have  heard  that  a  taUow  candle  fired  from  a  rifle  will  go  through 
a  door :  the  penetrating  power  is  not  in  the  candle,  but  in  the  force  impelling  it.  So 
in  this  case  it  was  not  the  barley  biscuit,  but  the  almighty  impulse  which  urged  it 
forward,  and  made  it  upset  the  pavilion.  We  are  nothing ;  but  God  with  us  is 
everything.  "  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  He 
increaseth  strength."  3.  Note,  next,  God  uses  unexpected  means.  If  I  wanted  to 
upset  a  tent  I  certainly  should  not  try  to  overturn  it  by  a  barley  cake.  If  I  had  to 
cannonade  an  encampment  I  should  not  bombard  it  with  biscuits.  Yet  how 
wonderfully  God  hath  wrought  by  the  very  persons  whom  we  should  have  passed 
over  without  a  thought  I  0  Paganism,  thy  gigantic  force  and  energy,  with  Caesar 
at  their  head,  shall  be  vanquished  by  fishermen  from  the  sea  of  Galilee !  God  willed 
it  so,  and  so  it  was  done.  4.  But  the  dream  hath  more  in  it  than  this.  God  useth 
despised  means.  This  man  Gideon  is  likened  unto  a  cake,  and  then  only  to  a 
barley  cake  ;  but  the  Lord  styles  him  "  a  mighty  man  of  valour."  God  loves  to  take 
men  whom  others  despise,  and  use  them  for  His  glorious  ends.  5.  But,  then,  God 
ever  uses  effectual  means.     Even  if  He  works  by  barley-cakes,  He  makes  a  clean 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

overthrow  of  His  enemy.  A  cannon-ball  could  not  have  done  its  work  better  than 
did  this  barley  cake.  Wherefore,  be  not  afraid,  ye  servants  of  God,  but  commit 
yourselves  into  the  hands  of  Him  who,  out  of  weakness,  can  bring  forth  strength. 
Do  you  not  think  that  this  smiting  of  the  tent  of  Midian  by  the  barley  cake,  and 
afterwards  the  actual  overthrow  of  the  Midianite  hordes  by  the  breaking  of  the 
pitchers,  the  blazing  of  the  torches,  and  the  blowing  of  the  trumpets,  all  tends  to 
comfort  us  as  to  those  powers  of  evil  which  now  cover  the  world  ?  When  we  are 
thinned  out,  and  made  to  see  how  few  we  are,  we  shall  be  hurled  upon  the  foe  with 
a  power  not  our  own.  Were  things  worse  than  they  are,  we  should  still  cry,  "  The 
Bword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon !  "  and  stand  each  man  in  his  place  till  the  Lord 
appeared  in  strength.  Another  lesson  would  I  draw  from  the  text  as  to  our  inward 
conflicts.  You  are  feeling  in  your  heart  the  great  power  of  sin.  The  Midianites 
are  encamped  in  your  soil ;  in  the  httle  valley  of  Esdrelon  which  lies  within  your 
bosom  there  are  countless  evils,  and  these,  like  the  locusts,  eat  up  every  growing 
thing,  and  cause  comfort,  strength,  and  joy  to  cease  from  your  experience.  You 
Bigh  because  of  these  invaders.  I  counsel  you  to  try  what  faith  can  do.  This 
Beems  a  very  poor  means  of  getting  the  victory,  as  poor  as  the  barley  cake  baked  on 
the  coals ;  but  God  has  chosen  it,  and  He  will  bless  it,  and  it  wUl  overthrow  the 
throne  of  Satan  within  your  heart,  and  work  in  you  hohness  and  peace.  Once 
again,  still  in  the  same  vein,  let  us  try  continually  the  power  of  prayer  for  the  suc- 
cess of  the  gospel,  and  the  winning  of  men's  souls.  Prayer  wiU  do  anything — will 
do  everything.  It  fills  the  valleys  and  levels  the  mountains.  By  its  power  men 
are  raised  from  the  door  of  hell  to  the  gate  of  heaven.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  soldier^s  dream : — There  is  a  httle  incident  in  connection  with  Christ's  resurrec- 
tion which  merits  careful  notice.  We  allude  to  the  following  words  :  •'  Then  went 
in  that  other  disciple."  Unconsciously  men  influence  each  other  mightily  for  good 
or  evil.  The  incident  before  us  illustrates  this.  A  soldier  wakes  and  tells  "  his 
fellow  "  of  a  curious  dream  which  he  has  had ;  the  latter  volunteers  an  interpre- 
tation of  it.  How  little  they  thought  that  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  enemy 
was  eagerly  listening  outside !  Still  less  did  they  imagine  that  their  conversation 
was  the  means  of  nerving  bim  to  new  courage.  More  than  that :  the  brief  talk  of 
these  heathen  soldiers  was  a  liiik  in  the  chain  of  events  by  which  the  destiny,  not 
only  of  Israel,  but  of  mankind,  was  effected.  Truly,  "  no  man  liveth  unto  himself." 
I.  God  condescends  to  human  rNrmsnTiES.  Gideon  had  a  direct,  distinct  assur- 
ance that  in  the  coming  battle  he  should  be  triumphant.  "  I  have  delivered  it  into 
thine  hand."  What  more  could  he  want  ?  But  see  how  graciously  the  Most  High 
came  down  to  the  tent  of  His  servant.  If  a  sign  or  "  token  "  wUl  do  what  a  promise 
cannot,  then,  although  it  ought  not  to  be  necessary,  it  shall  be  granted.  In  His 
dealings  with  us  God  "  knoweth  our  frame."  Brightly  does  this  fact  shine  out  in  the 
life  of  the  Incarnate  One.  After  His  resurrection  Thomas  was  sceptical.  He  must 
Bee  and  feel  or  he  "  will  not  beheve."  In  this  he  was  quite  wrong.  All  the  world  over, 
testimony  is  accepted  as  a  sufficient  ground  for  faith.  The  evidence  sought  was  granted. 
n.  God  adapts  His  revelations  to  ouk  special  needs.  Think  of  Gideon's  position. 
It  is  the  nigh  •;  before  the  battle :  the  forces  of  the  foe  are  "  like  grasshoppers  for  multi- 
tude," the  Hebrew  army  is  stringently  limited  to  three  hundred  men.  Under  such 
circumstances,  the  temptation  of  the  Jewish  generalissimo  would  be  to  think  that 
an  attack  by  such  an  unequal,  fearfully  disproportionate  host  would  result  in  defeat. 
What,  then,  does  he  require  ?  A  conviction  to  the  following  efifect :  that  in  the 
impending  conflict  numbers  will  count  for  nothing.  And  that  is  exactly  what,  in  a 
singular  and  indeed  grotesque  style,  the  dream  teaches  him.  The  barley-cake 
flung  against  the  tent  upsets  it,  stakes,  pole,  canvas,  and  all.  Well  may  we  pause 
to  admire  this  exquisite  adaptation  of  Divine  revelation  to  human  requirements. 
The  ascended  Redeemer  has  "  gifts  for  men,"  not  one  gift  but  many,  and  none  shall 
Bcek  a  suitable  gift  in  vain.  In  a  certain  Austrian  city  there  is  a  bridge  in  the 
parapets  of  which  stand  twelve  statues  of  the  Saviour.  He  is  represented  in  various 
relationships — Prophet,  King,  Priest,  Pilot,  Physician,  Shepherd,  Sower,  Carpenter, 
and  so  forth.  The  country  people  coming  into  the  city  in  the  early  morning  with 
produce  from  the  market,  pause  before  the  Sower,  or  Shepherd  Christ,  and  offer 
their  worship  to  Him.  Two  hours  later,  the  artisan,  coming  to  his  workshop,  bends 
before  the  Carpenter.  Later  still,  the  sailor  prays  to  the  heavenly  Pilot.  And  in 
the  warm  sunlight  of  the  forenoon,  the  invalids,  creeping  out  to  enjoy  the  fresh  air, 
rest  and  adore  under  the  image  of  the  Great  Physician.  Christ  has  a  manifestation 
of  Himself  to  fit  aU  human  needs.  Indeed,  what  is  true  of  Him  holds  good  also  of 
the  whole  Bible :  it  is  adapted  to  all :  whatever  our  peculiar  circumstances,  we  may 


CHAP,  vn.]  JUDGES.  141 

find  in  it  something  to  meet  them.  III.  God  teaches  us  to  get  help  from  the 
ENEMY.  Who  were  the  instruments  of  Gideon's  encouragement?  Not  allies  but 
adversaries :  the  reassuring  voices  came  not  from  an  Israelitish  home  but  from  a 
Midianite  tent.  Unwittingly,  the  heathen  arrayed  against  him  proved  his  timely 
stimulus.  Here  is  another  valuable  lesson  for  us  :  make  your  very  foes  your  aid. 
Satan  is  an  enemy.  Learn  from  him  and  his  artifices  where  much  of  your  moral 
strength  is  to  be  found,  namely,  in  the  Bible.  "  The  devil  can  quote  Scripture  for 
his  purpose."  A  careful,  painstaking,  sympathetic  knowledge  of  Scripture  is  the 
grand  panacea  for  heresy  and  the  true  palladium  of  our  faith.  Temptation  is  a  foe, 
otherwise  we  should  never  have  been  taught  to  pray,  "  Lead  us  not  into  tempta- 
tion." Albeit,  it  is  often  one  of  our  best  friends.  "Blessed  is  the  man  that 
endureth  temptation."  Vanquish  it  and  you  are  mightier  than  you  were  before. 
The  ancient  Scandinavians  believed  that  the  power  and  the  prowess  of  each  foe  they 
felled  to  the  dust  entered  into  them,  and,  unquestionably,  new  courage  and  fresh 
zeal  are  the  portion  of  him  who  overcomes  sin.  Again :  St.  Paul  speaks  of  those 
as  "  enemies  of  the  Cross  of  Christ  "  "  who  mind  earthly  things."  The  worldly 
are  foes  of  the  gospel ;  whether  they  mean  it  or  not,  they  retard  its  glorious 
progress.  Yes:  but  what  a  lesson  those  "  enemies  of  the  Cross"  read  us  who  are 
believers  in  it!  Their  intelligence  and  earnestness  about  business,  education, 
pleasure,  may  well  put  to  shame  the  slow  advances  that  we  make,  with  heaven 
itself  in  view.  (T.  R.  Stevenson.)  The  insecurity  of  the  godless  : — In  every 
combination  of  godless  men  there  is  a  hke  feeling  of  insecurity,  a  like  presage 
of  disaster.  Those  who  are  in  revolt  against  justice,  truth,  and  the  religion 
of  God  have  nothing  on  which  to  rest,  no  enduring  bond  of  union.  What  do 
they  conceive  as  the  issue  of  their  attempts  and  schemes?  Have  they  any- 
thing in  view  that  can  give  heart  and  courage,  an  end  worth  toil  and  hazard? 
It  is  impossible,  for  their  efforts  are  all  in  the  region  of  the  false  where  the 
seeming  realities  are  but  shadows  that  perpetually  change.  Let  it  be  allowed 
that  to  a  certain  extent  common  interests  draw  together  men  of  no  principle  so  that 
they  can  co-operate  for  a  time.  Yet  each  individual  is  secretly  bent  on  his  own 
pleasure  or  profit,  and  there  is  nothing  that  can  unite  them  constantly.  One 
selfish  and  unjust  person  may  be  depended  upon  to  conceive  a  lively  antipathy  to 
every  other  selfish  and  unjust  person.  Midian  and  Amalek  have  their  differences 
with  one  another,  and  each  has  its  own  rival  chiefs,  rival  families,  full  of  the 
bitterest  jealousy  which  at  any  moment  may  burst  into  flame.  The  whole  com- 
bination is  weak  from  the  beginning,  a  mere  horde  of  clashing  desires  incapable  of 
harmony,  incapable  of  a  sustaining  hope.  .  .  .  Look  at  those  ignorant  and  unhappy 
persons  who  combine  against  the  laws  of  society.  Their  suspicions  of  each  other 
are  proverbial,  and  even  with  them  is  the  feeling  that  sooner  or  later  they  will  be 
overtaken  by  the  law.  They  dream  of  that  and  tell  each  other  their  dreams.  The 
game  of  crime  is  played  against  well-known  odds.  Those  who  carry  it  on  are 
aware  that  their  haunts  will  be  discovered,  their  gang  broken  up.  A  bribe  will 
tempt  one  of  their  number  and  the  rest  will  have  to  go  their  way  to  the  cell  or  the 
gallows.  Yet  with  the  presage  of  defeat  wrought  into  the  very  constitution  of  the 
mind,  and  with  innumerable  proofs  that  it  is  no  delusion,  there  are  always  those 
amongst  us  who  attempt  what  even  in  this  world  is  so  hazardous,  and  in  the  larger 
sweep  of  moral  economy  is  impossible.  In  selfishness,  in  oppression  and  injustice, 
in  every  kind  of  sensuality  men  adventure  as  if  they  could  ensure  their  safety  and 
defy  the  day  of  reckoning.     {R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.) 

Vers.  15-25.  Arise,  for  the  Lord  hath  delivered  into  your  hand  the  host  of 

MidiajL — Divine  Providence  overruling  the  result ; — The  hand  of  the  Lord  visible 
IN  THIS  deliverance.  1.  In  the  general  effect  produced.  2.  In  the  use  of  the 
particular  means  employed.  II.  A  pictttre  of  the  Church's  experience  in  evert 
age.  1.  She  is  still  surrounded  by  enemies  numerous  as  the  sand  on  the  sea  shore. 
2.  The  enemies  are  a  heterogeneous  confederation.  Science,  philosophy,  criticism, 
atheism,  agnosticism,  <fec.  3.  The  attacks  are  persistently  made.  4.  Every  possible 
advantage  is  on  the  side  of  the  enemy.  Truth  is  in  the  minority,  and  has  always  been 
exposed  to  the  grossest  misrepresentation.  5.  The  inherent  power  of  Bible  truth 
makes  victory  certain  in  the  end.  (J.P.Millar.)  A  trumpet  .  .  .  empty  pitchers, 
and  lamps. — Our  life  : — I.  Consider  the  mortal  and  material  part  of  man  under 

THE    emblem    op   A   PITCHER   CONTAINING   WItAiN   IT   A   LAMP   OR   FIREBRAND.        1.    The 

pitcher  is  made  of  potter's  clay,  even  as  man  was  formed  of  the  dust  of  the  ground. 
2.  Again,  the  pitcher's  manufacture  is  brittle,  and  easily  shattered  into  a  thousand 


142  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

fragments.  3.  Notice,  as  a  final  point  of  comparison,  the  intransparent  character 
of  the  earthen  vessel.  If  we  desire  to  see  the  beauty  and  brilliancy  of  a  light,  and 
at  the  same  time  to  preserve  it  from  extinction  by  the  rude  breath  of  the  atmos- 
phere, we  must  perforce  find  for  it  a  transparent  medium  of  glass  or  crystal ;  hardly 
a  ray  will  struggle  out  of  the  mouth  of  a  pitcher.  The  human  body  is  an  inapt 
vehicle  for  certain  strong  and  passionate  emotions  of  the  natural  soul.  We  speak, 
for  example,  of  a  grief  that  is  too  deep  for  tears,  and  much  more  for  the  spii-itual 
emotions  of  a  holy  and  devout  soul.  Those  emotions  are  rather  hindered  than 
furthered  by  the  material  body.  The  mortal  frame  is  not  a  fitting  tabernacle  for 
the  display  of  the  exhibition  of  grace.  11.  Consider  the  light  within  the  pitcher  ; 
the  soul,  or  immaterial  part  of  man,  enclosed  for  the  present  within  a  material 
framework,  the  breath  of  lives  breathed  into  the  vessel  of  clay.  1.  First,  there  is  the 
animal  life.  And  even  this  lowest  species  of  life  is  very  beautiful  and  glorious,  and 
worthy  of  Him  from  whom  it  emanates.  Like  a  flame  it  is  most  subtle,  and,  as  it 
were,  eludes  the  grasp  and  ken  of  man.  How  does  it  intei-penetrate  the  whole 
realm  of  nature  I  And  yet  you  cannot  tell  where  it  resides.  It  is  transfused 
through  matter  without  taking  up  its  abode  in  any  particular  locality.  Like  a  flame 
it  glows  in  the  ruddy  cheek  of  health ;  like  a  flame  it  glances  and  sparkles  in  the 
sunlit  stream ;  like  a  newly-kindled  lamp  it  gradually  dawns  in  the  opening  bosom 
of  the  flower.  Learn  to  bless  God  for  natural  as  well  as  for  spiritual  life.  2.  But 
to  turn  to  the  second  kind  of  life — rational — the  life  of  the  intellect.  This,  too,  is  a 
very  subtle  and  very  beautiful  emanation  from  the  Father  of  life.  I  spoke  of 
animal  life  just  now  as  diffused  through  the  whole  realm  of  matter.  How  does  the 
keen  and  active  intellect  of  man  seek  to  explore  and  penetrate  through  all  subjects 
and  substances.  How  beautiful  does  the  tide  of  words  gush  forth  from  the  pen  or 
from  the  lip  !  How  is  the  reader  or  the  audience  carried  along  against  his  will,  and 
captivated  by  the  happiness  and  beauty  of  such  discourse !  And  whence  this 
happiness  and  beauty  ?  It  is  the  lamp  of  life-rational  struggling  forth,  the  spuit 
within  the  earthen  pitcher  ;  it  is  the  fire-brand  of  the  human  mind  shaking  ofi  on 
every  side  its  lustrous  sparkles.  3.  But  there  was  yet  a  higher  life  breathed  into 
man  at  his  first  creation — spiritual  life.  And  if  the  two  former  lives  admit  of  a 
comparison  with  a  lamp  or  a  fire-brand,  how  much  more  apt  is  such  a  similitude 
to  set  forth  the  life  of  the  immortal  spirit.  By  the  life  of  the  spirit  I  mean  that  life 
which  evinces  itself  in  holy  affections  of  joy,  love,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness, 
goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance.  It  resembles  a  flame  principally  in  the 
circumstance  that  it  aspires  towards  heaven.  Like  a  flame,  moreover,  it  has  a 
wonderful  property  of  self-propagation.  Spiritual  life  kindled  in  one  little  dark 
corner  of  the  earth  will  soon,  by  throwing  out  sparks  as  of  a  fire-brand,  light  up  other 
beacons  near  and  around  it.  And,  finally,  amongst  those  so  brought,  there  subsists 
the  warmth  of  spiritual  intercourse,  which  is  called,  in  the  technical  language  of 
theology,  the  "  communion  of  saints."  (Dean  Goulburn.)  The  battle  of  the 
pitchers  : — 1. 1  learn,  in  the  first  place,  from  this  subject,  the  lawfulness  of  Christian 
stratagem.  You  all  know  what  strategy  is  in  military  affairs.  Now  I  think  it  is 
high  time  we  had  this  art  sanctified  and  spiritualised.  In  the  Church,  when  we  are 
about  to  make  a  Christian  assault,  we  send  word  to  the  opposing  force  when  we 
expect  to  come,  how  many  troops  we  have,  and  of  course  we  are  defeated.  There 
are  thousands  of  men  who  might  be  surprised  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  We  have 
not  sufficient  tact  and  ingenuity  in  Christian  work.  We  have  in  the  kingdom  of 
God  to-day  enough  troops  to  conquer  the  whole  earth  for  Christ  if  we  only  had 
skilful  manoeuvring.  2.  I  learn  from  this  subject  also  that  a  small  part  of  the 
army  of  God  will  have  to  do  all  the  hard  fighting.  3.  Again,  I  learn  from  this 
subject  that  God's  way  is  different  from  man's,  but  is  always  the  best  way.  If  we 
had  had  the  planning  of  that  battle,  we  would  have  taken  those  thirty-two  thousand 
men  that  originally  belonged  to  the  army,  and  we  would  have  drilled  them,  and 
marched  them  up  and  down  by  the  day,  week,  and  month.  But  that  is  not  the 
way.  God  depletes  the  army,  and  takes  away  all  their  weapons,  and  gives  them  a 
lamp,  and  a  pitcher,  and  a  trumpet,  and  tells  them  to  go  down  and  drive  out  the 
Midianites.  I  suppose  some  wiseacres  were  there  who  said,  "  That  is  not  military 
tactics.  The  idea  of  three  hundred  men,  unarmed,  conquering  such  a  great  host  of 
Midianites  1 "  It  was  the  best  way.  What  sword,  spear,  or  cannon  ever  accom- 
plished such  a  victory  as  lamp,  pitcher,  and  trumpet  ?  God's  way  is  different 
from  man's  way,  but  it  is  always  best.  Take,  for  instance,  the  composition  of  the 
Bible.  If  we  had  had  the  writing  of  the  Bible,  we  would  have  said,  "  Let  one  man 
write  it.    If  you  have  twenty  or  thirty  men  to  write  a  poem,  or  make  a  statute,  or 


CHAP,  vn.]  JUDGES.  143 

■write  a  history,  or  make  an  argument,  there  will  be  flaws  and  contradictions."  But 
God  says,  "  Let  not  one  man  do  it,  but  forty  men  shall  do  it."  And  they  did, 
differing  enough  to  show  there  had  been  no  collusion  between  them,  but  not  con- 
tradicting each  other  on  any  important  point.  Instead  of  this  Bible,  which  now  I 
can  Uft  in  my  hand — instead  of  the  Bible  that  the  child  can  carry  to  school — instead 
of  the  little  Bible  the  sailor  can  put  in  his  pocket  when  he  goes  to  sea — if  it  had 
been  left  to  men  to  write,  it  would  have  been  a  thousand  volumes,  judging  from  the 
amount  of  ecclesiastical  controversy  which  has  arisen.  God's  way  is  diilerent 
from  man's,  but  it  is  best,  infinitely  best.  So  it  is  in  regard  to  the  Christian  life. 
If  we  had  had  the  planning  of  a  Christian  life  we  would  have  said :  "  Let  him  have 
eighty  years  of  sunshine,  a  fine  house  to  live  in ;  let  his  surroundings  all  be  agree- 
able ;  let  him  have  sound  health  ;  no  trouble  shadow  his  soul."  I  enjoy  the  pros- 
perity of  others  so  much  I  would  let  every  man  have  as  much  money  as  he  wants, 
and  roses  for  his  children's  cheeks,  and  the  fountains  of  gladness  glancing  in  their 
large  round  eyes.  But  that  is  not  God's  way.  It  seems  as  if  a  man  must  be  cut, 
and  hit,  and  pounded,  just  in  proportion  as  he  is  useful.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
A  good  general : — It  was  said  by  Napoleon  that  God  was  on  the  side  of  the  strongest 
battalions.  Notwithstanding  our  present  advances,  materialism  is  still  deified. 
Gideon's  first  battle  teaches  another  lesson.  We  may  go  back  to  rude  ages  in  order 
to  learn  the  might  of  moral  forces.  I.  A  good  genebal  is  led,  not  by  caprice, 
not  by  the  promptings  of  ambition,  not  by  the  desire  of  spoil,  not  by  the  voice  of  an 
unthinking  host,  but  by  patriotism,  by  the  love  of  humanity  broadly  considered,  and 
by  the  leading  of  the  Eternal.  11.  A  good  generaij  leads.  Gideon  himself  gave 
the  example  of  brave  deeds:  took  his  part  in  the  fray,  ready  to  do,  dare,  die. 
Consider  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  He  goes  before  in  every  conflict.  III.  A 
GOOD  general  inspires.  The  men  catch  the  burning  enthusiasm  of  their  leader. 
rv.  A  good  general  wisely  disposes.  Three  companies.  Christ  places  each  where 
best  for  him.  V.  A  good  general  skilfully  uses  unlikely  weapons.  The  ram's 
horn  of  gospel  preaching  more  affectual  than  the  silver  trumpet  of  philosophy. 
Fishermen  have  beaten  the  savants.  A  tinker's  the  greatest  name  in  modern 
literature.  A  cobbler  a  great  missionary.  A  weaver  mightiest  of  explorers.  VI.  A 
good  general  raises  a  good  battle-cry:  "  The  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon." 
Better  than  Napoleon's — "  Gentlemen,  remember  that  forty  centuries  are  looking 
down  upon  you."  VII.  A  good  general  makes  good  soldiers.  VIII.  A  good 
general  secures  a  good  issue.  (IF.  Burrows,  B.A.)  Lamps : — Valuable  as  the 
light  of  the  sun  and  moon  is  to  us,  yet  there  are  times  when  we  cannot  enjoy  either, 
and  therefore  require  artificial  lights.  And  of  these  we  have  a  fair  variety.  We  might 
notice  a  few  of  the  lamps  that  are  in  daily  use  amongst  us.  I.  The  street  lamp. 
This  light  is  for  the  benefit  of  the  public  generally.  But  we  have  living  street 
lamps  as  well.  They  give  us  moral  and  spu'itual  light.  Every  true  Christian  is  a 
lamp,  lit  by  God  with  the  light  of  Christ,  and  is  to  be  like  the  street  lamp,  giving 
light  to  the  multitudes  who  pass  by.  And  we  ought  to  be  unselfish,  and  whether  in 
storm  or  sunshine  we  should  show  our  light.  And  although  one  lamp  does  not 
seem  to  be  of  great  importance,  yet  a  number  of  them  give  us  a  light  almost  as  good 
as  the  sun.  II.  The  house  lamp.  The  first  place  where  Christians  ought  to  shine 
is  at  home.  There  we  must  stand  up  for  Christ  and  show  whose  side  we  are  on. 
Sometimes  we  find  people  ready  to  make  a  great  profession  in  the  street  or  at 
the  meeting,  but  very  different  at  home.  They  may  thus  deceive  men,  but  they 
cannot  deceive  God.  HI.  The  private  lamp  or  lantern.  This  is  a  faithful  com- 
panion to  us  when  in  the  country  on  dark  evenings.  We  are  aU  travellers  on  life's 
journey,  the  way  is  strange,  and  the  end  hid  from  our  view,  and  unless  we  can  find 
a  lamp  we  must  be  eternally  lost.  We  discover  in  Scripture  the  assurance  that, 
"  Thy  Word  is  a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and  a  light  unto  my  path."  IV.  The  stable 
LAMP.  This  lamp  would  scarcely  be  suitable  for  the  mansion,  but  it  is  well  adapted 
for  the  stable.  And  among  Christian  lights  we  have  some  suited  for  one  sphere  and 
some  for  another.  V.  The  lighthouse  lamp.  This  is  a  stationary  light,  and  as  such 
is  of  great  service.  Let  us  as  Christians  seek  to  be  as  steady  lights,  contented  with 
our  lot  and  shining  there.  The  lighthouse  is  a  saving  light.  Multitudes  have  been 
saved  by  them.  We  as  Christians  ought  to  be  saving  lights.  If  we  have  been  saved 
ourselves  we  must  seek  to  save  others.  {John  Mitchell.)  Blowing  the  trumpets : — 
Each  man  had  one,  and  each  blew  it  as  he  joined  in  the  assault.  They  did  not 
leave  this  business  to  their  leader  alone.  Just  so  should  every  Christian  soldier 
make  it  his  duty  to  proclaim  the  glad  tidings  of  the  kingdom  of  grace  and  redemp- 
tion.   Not  that  every  private  in  the  ranks  is  to  aspire  to  be  a  Gideon — a  captain 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  to. 

of  the  army.  A  battalion  cannot  be  all  ofiBcers,  whether  the  corps  be  CiBsar'a 
or  Christ's.  While  all  cannot  guide  and  control  the  movement  of  the  host, 
all  can  assert,  with  consenting  voice  and  stroke,  the  merits  of  the  cause  for 
which  it  has  taken  the  field.  Every  Christian  is  not  called  to  the  pulpit. 
But  this  is  by  no  means  the  only  method  of  publishing  salvation.  "  Let  him  that 
heareth  say,  Come."  They  therefore  mistake  who  think  they  have  no  word  to 
utter  for  God.  Every  man  blew  his  trumpet.  They  blew  together — commander 
and  followers.  So  do  not  always  the  men  of  Christ's  army.  While  zeal  for  their 
Master  may  move  the  energies  of  part,  others  have  lost  sight  of  the  point  of  success- 
ful assault,  have  loitered  or  laboured  elsewhere  very  much  to  no  purpose.  Or  their 
note  is  a  dispiriting  one,  sounding  a  retreat  rather  than  an  onward,  resolute  move- 
ment. Their  tones  of  brooding  discontent  spread  discouragement  through  the 
whole  encampment.  Gideon  and  the  three  hundred  blew  their  trumpets  together. 
It  not  unfrequently  happens  that  the  minister  blows  one  note,  but  many  of  his  band 
a  very  different  one.  How  many  sermons  preached  in  the  fear  of  God,  on  the  Sabbath, 
are  utterly  negatived  by  professed  believers  of  the  gospel  in  the  family,  the  workshop, 
the  counting-house.  Look  at  this  common  and  mischievous  habit  among  Church 
members.  Men  and  women  of  Israel,  remember  that  if  the  Church  is  to  speak  effec- 
tually for  God  in  the  ear  of  a  disobedient  world,  it  must  speak  in  unison,  in 
harmony.  {N.  Y.  Evangelist.)  A  meagre  equipment : — It  is  always  pathetic  to  read 
of  that  experience  of  Agassiz  when  as  a  young  man  he  was  summoned  to  Paris  to  be 
associated  with  a  great  naturalist.  He  was  too  poor  to  provide  himself  with  the 
appropriate  instruments  for  the  conduct  of  his  work ;  so  poor  he  could  not  procure 
a  decent  coat  in  which  he  might  present  certain  letters  of  introduction.  He  was  no 
mean  man  in  the  esteem  and  knowledge  of  the  world  even  then,  but  he  was  poor. 
He  had  a  meagre  equipment,  but  the  very  meagreness  of  his  equipment  had  in  it  a 
suificiency  for  the  thing  he  had  in  hand,  and  in  spite  of  the  want  of  equipment  he 
rose  to  be  our  greatest  naturalist.  The  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon. — The 
finite-infinite — the  work  of  God  and  the  work  of  man  : — There  is  a  strange  power  in 
a  battle-cry.  In  certain  circumstances  a  single  word,  or  a  simple  motion,  may  rouse 
men  to  a  frenzy  of  heroism.  One  electric  sentence,  such  as  that  addressed  by 
Nelson  to  his  men,  "  England  expects  that  every  man  this  day  wiU  do  his  duty," 
may  be  the  making  of  a  victory.  It  brings  before  the  imagination  in  a  moment 
such  a  picture  of  country,  of  home,  of  duty,  of  fame,  as  suffices  to  awaken  some  of 
the  grander  elements  of  the  mind.  A  battle-cry  is  fitted  to  inspire  confidence  in 
friends  and  fear  in  foes.  It  is  not  strange,  therefore,  that  the  followers  of  Gideon, 
so  few  in  number,  should  seek,  as  they  were  about  to  meet  the  countless  hosts  of 
Midian  and  Amalek,  to  fortify  their  hearts  with  a  stirring  watchword — "  They 
cried,  The  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon  !  "  What  strikes  us  at  first  as  some- 
what strange  is  that  they  should  add  the  name  of  Gideon  to  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
It  is  not  without  good  reason  that  this  addition  is  made.  Just  as  great  and  abstract 
ideas  have  not  their  full  influence  over  the  mind  until  they  are  associated  with  soma 
illustration — embodied  in  some  concrete  form  ;  so  the  thought  of  God,  in  the 
height  and  infinitude  of  His  being,  has  not  that  practical  influence  on  the  mind  as  a 
mere  abstraction,  which  it  has  when  associated  with  some  human  agency — when 
brought  down  to  the  earth  and  brought  near  to  us  in  the  form  of  a  man.  Hence, 
indeed,  the  incarnation  of  God  in  man.  And  so  the  battle-cry  of  Christianity  is, 
not  merely  the  sword  of  the  Lord,  but  the  sword  of  the  Lord  and  His  Christ. 
Besides,  it  was  literally  the  arm  of  Gideon,  as  well  as  the  arm  of  the  Lord,  that 
gained  the  victory ;  and  therefore  we  have  suggested  to  us  by  these  words  the  union 
of  the  Divine  and  the  human  in  the  work  of  the  world,  or  the  co-existence  and 
co-operation  of  the  Infinite  and  the  finite.  I.  The  fact  of  this  union.  As  the 
planet  flies  swiftly  in  its  orbit,  impelled  by  the  opposing  centripetal  and  centrifugal 
powers ;  as  the  path  of  the  ship  is  the  result  of  the  combined  action  of  wind  and 
helm ;  as  the  body  of  man  moves  freely  over  the  solid  ground,  finely  balanced 
between  earth,  air,  and  sun ;  so  the  path  of  the  soul  is  the  result  of  the  combined 
action  of  heaven  and  earth.  The  breath  of  the  Divine  Spirit  fills  the  sails,  and  the 
little  helm  of  the  human  will  is  allowed  to  modify  the  course.  1.  The  union  of  the 
Divine  and  the  human  in  the  operations  of  nature.  God  created  paradise  and  led 
man  into  it ;  but  He  did  not  leave  His  creature  to  a  life  of  idleness.  He  put  him 
into  the  garden  of  Eden  to  dress  it  and  to  keep  it.  The  fruits  of  the  earth  were 
to  be  matured  by  the  touch  of  man  as  well  as  by  the  power  of  God.  As  the  seasons 
revolve  in  their  beauty  and  variety,  the  creature  has  always  to  unite  his  energies 
with  those  of  the  Creator  to  bring  the  harvest  forth.    And  what  is  aU  art  and  science 


CHAP.  VII.]  JUDGES.  145 

but  man  following  God,  imitating  God,  working  with  God  ?  Man  looks  upon  the 
works  of  God ;  and  from  the  union  of  his  beholding  mind  with  these  fair  forms 
there  come  forth  the  creations  of  art — the  inspired  poem,  the  pale  statue,  and  the 
coloured  canvas.  These  productions  are  the  combined  result  of  that  inspiration 
which  the  Almighty  has  given,  and  the  artist's  own  earnest  labour.  The  result  is 
cut  out  by  "  the  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon."  2.  The  union  of  the  Divine 
and  the  human  in  the  administration  of  secular  affairs.  What  is  the  true  idea  of 
government  ?  Is  it  not  that  of  a  theocracy,  or  a  world  in  which  God  is  king — a 
world  in  which  every  king  is  clothed  with  power  as  Gideon  was,  and  in  which  every 
magistrate's  sword  is  the  sword  of  the  Lord  as  well  ?  3.  More  directly  is  it  seen  in 
the  individual  Christian  life  that  the  power  of  God  is  working  with  the  power  of 
man.  Conversion  is  pre-eminently  a  work  of  God.  It  is  a  new  creation,  and  God 
is  the  Creator.  The  wounds  of  conviction  are  made  by  the  sword  of  the  Lord.  We 
are  born  again  of  God.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  no  less  clear  in  Scripture  that  con- 
version is  a  work  in  which  man  himself  must  play  a  part.  There  is  an  act  of  the 
Divine  will,  but  there  is  also  an  act  of  the  human  wilL  We  are  "justified  by 
faith,"  and  faith  is  an  act  of  the  mind.  Every  righteous  action  performed  is 
a  fruit  both  of  the  Divine  Spirit  and  the  human  spirit.  Every  true  and  believing 
prayer  is  at  once  an  inspiration  of  man  and  an  inspiration  of  God.  In  the 
warfare  of  the  soul  the  Divine  arm  and  the  human  arm  must  both  be  lifted 
against  the  foe;  and  it  is  still  "the  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon,"  that 
gains  the  victory.  To  the  same  effect  are  those  wonderful  words,  "  Work  out 
your  own  salvation  .  .  .  for  it  is  God  who  worketh  in  you,"  &c.  4.  The 
union  of  the  human  and  the  Divine  in  the  work  of  spreading  the  gospel. 
11.  The  invisible  kelation  of  the  two  powers.  We  cannot  draw  a  line  between 
the  two,  and  say,  "  There  the  Divine  ends,  and  here  the  human  begins :  up  to  this 
point  God  has  been  the  worker ;  after  that  man  is  the  worker."  As  the  battle  goes 
on,  we  cannot  say,  •'  On  yonder  part  of  the  field  are  the  heavenly  forces,  and  on  this 
part  the  earthly  forces."  We  cannot  say,  "  Now  God  has  laid  down  the  sword,  and 
now  man  has  taken  it  up."  The  two  energies  are  blended  in  such  invisible  relation 
and  mysterious  co-operation  that  we  cannot  thus  distinguish  them.  There  is  but 
one  sword  between  the  Lord  and  Gideon ;  and  both  grasp  the  hilt  at  the  same  time. 
m.  The  wisdom  and  advantage  or  this  arkangement.  1.  It  reveals  to  us  the 
dignity  and  solemnity  of  life.  We  are  fellow-labourers  with  God.  We  are  grasping 
and  wielding  the  same  sword.  This  truth  invests  life  with  the  highest  sacredness 
and  solemnity.  If  it  does  not  derogate  from  God's  dignity  to  work,  it  cannot 
derogate  from  man's.  The  dignity  that  comports  with  or  consists  in  idleness  is 
altogether  foreign  to  true  elevation  of  life.  2.  While  this  co-operation  is  fitted  to 
lift  us  up,  it  is  also  fitted  to  cast  us  down.  True  humiUty  is  wrought  in  us  by  the 
increasing  realisation  of  God's  existence  and  presence.  His  majesty  looks  down 
upon  us  and  His  holiness  looks  in  upon  us  evermore.  Earthly  honours  inflate 
and  pamper  the  vanity  of  the  human  heart,  but  heavenly  honours  humble  still 
more  the  heavenly.  3.  The  combination  of  entire  dependence  upon  God  with 
the  greatest  individual  activity.  What  a  blessed  thing  it  is  to  have  the  arm  of 
the  Almighty  to  lean  upon  in  our  daily  Ufe  I  Dependence  upon  others  is  not 
always  desirable ;  but  dependence  upon  God  is  our  very  life  and  strength. 
The  former  has  a  tendency  to  produce  servility  and  inactivity,  the  latter  leads 
to  the  greatest  activity.  Those  who  believe  most  entirely  that  everything 
depends  upon  God  at  the  same  time  work  as  energetically  as  it  everything  depended 
on  themselves.  Those  who  have  done  most  good  in  the  world  are  those  who  have 
ascribed  all  goodness  to  God.  4.  Since  God  is  a  worker,  the  success  of  His  work  is 
certain ;  but  since  we  also  are  workers,  we  should  be  filled  with  fear  lest  we  be 
found  unfaithful  and  fall  short  at  last.  The  fact  that  an  army  has  a  great  general 
— one  who  is  a  host  in  himself,  one  sure  to  lead  to  victory,  does  not  make  the  men 
who  fight  under  him  indifferent  as  to  how  they  fight.  It  makes  them  fight  all  the 
better.  It  inspires  them  with  an  almost  superhuman  power.  Under  the  leader- 
ship of  God,  then,  what  great  deeds  might  we  not  accomplish,  if  we  had  faith  to 
follow  Him  more  closely  1  With  what  joy  might  we  even  fall  in  the  fight,  when  we 
know  that  the  day  is  already  ours  I  But  the  practical  point  for  every  believer 
is,  that  a  certain  portion  of  the  work  is  entrusted  to  him.  What  an  awful 
responsibility  1  What  a  value  does  this  give  to  time  1  {F.  Ferguson,  D.D.) 
Gideon's  watchword: — Few  things  are  more  remarkable  than  the  inspiring  power, 
whether  for  good  or  evil,  which  a  short,  pithy,  pregnant  saying  possesses  for  the 
mind.    Froverbs,  watchwords,  party  cries,  have  always  played  an  important  part  ir 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  yn, 

human  affairs,  and  leaders  of  men  have  ever  recognised  their  value  as  powerful 
instruments  for  swaying  and  controlling  masses  of  people.  No  Spartan  of  old  fought 
tamely  who  had  received  from  wife  or  mother  that  parting  mandate,  "  Eeturn  either 
with  your  shield  or  upon  it  1 "  No  Crusader  in  the  ranks  of  Eichard  the  Lion- 
hearted,  as  they  charged  against  the  hosts  of  Saladin,  could  have  heard  unthrilled 
that  glorious  watchword,  "  Eememher  the  Holy  City !  "  "  God  defend  the  right  1 " 
was  the  suppUant  cry  of  youthful  enthusiasm  that  rang  out  from  the  Ups  of  the 
Black  Prince  at  Cressy.  *'  St.  George  for  England  I  "  was  the  cheer  with  which  the 
whole  fleet  saluted  the  flagship  of  Howard  of  Effingham,  in  an  hour  when  the  heart 
of  England  stood  still.  "  Victory  or  Westminster  Abbey  I  "  shouted  Nelson  as  he 
boarded  the  great  "  San  Josef"  in  Sir  John  Jervis's  engagement  with  the  Spanish 
fleet  off  Cape  St.  Vincent ;  and  in  less  than  eight  years  afterwards  he  had  signalled- 
along  the  line  at  Trafalgar  that  never-to-be-forgotten  message,  "England  expects 
that  every  man  wUl  do  his  duty  1 "  All  these  watchwords  had  their  meaning,  their  deep 
and  inspiring  meaning,  at  the  time  they  were  uttered,  but  none  ever  meant  more, 
ever  suggested  a  mightier  truth,  than  that  oldest  battle-cry  we  know  of,  "  The  sword 
of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon  1 "  Trust  in  God  and  implicit  faith  in  and  dependence 
upon  His  wisdom,  power,  and  love,  was  the  central  truth,  the  central  duty,  inculcated 
throughout  the  Divine  education  of  the  chosen  race.  Trust  in  God  lies  at  the 
foundation  of  all  true  character ;  for  it  is  that  which  "  can  alone  "  (to  use  Martineau's 
fine  words)  "  render  absolute  the  rules  of  righteousness,"  and  "  save  them  from  the 
gnawing  corrosion  of  exceptions,  and  raise  them  from  flexible  convictions  of  men 
into  a  law  secured  on  the  eternal  hohness."  "  Intellectual  integrity,"  adds  the  same 
•writer,  "  moral  tenacity,  spiritual  elevation,  all  alike  involve,  in  their  higher  degrees, 
an  unconditional  trust  in  the  everlasting  sway  of  Divine  justice,  wisdom,  and  love." 
God  saw  fit  to  educate  one  particular  people  in  this  all-important  truth,  that  they 
might  become  witnesses  to  the  world,  for  all  time,  of  that  saving  spirit  of  loving  and 
faithful  submission  to  the  will  of  God  which  found  its  most  perfect  exponent  in 
Christ  our  Saviour.  To  this  end  aU  God's  dealings  with  Israel  were  invariably 
directed.  Those  three  hundred  men  in  Gideon's  little  band  did  not  complain  that 
they  had  neither  sword,  nor  spear,  nor  shield.  They  made  the  best  of  what  they 
had,  and  committed  themselves  to  the  guidance  of  a  wise  and  protecting  God.  He 
knew  that  they  must  conquer  that  mighty  host  (if  they  were  to  conquer  it  at  all)  not 
by  their  own  unaided  strength,  but  by  His  wisegeneralship.  It  was  for  them  a  bloodless 
victory.  The  battle  was  won,  not  by  their  own  skill  in  fighting,  but  by  their  obedience 
to  Jehovah  and  their  implicit  trust  in  Him.  "  By  faith  "  they  conquered,  "  as 
seeing  Him  who  is  invisible,"  and  their  victory  wiU  remain  for  aU  time  a  parable  to 
successive  generations  of  men.  For  a  parable  it  is  of  the  battle  of  life.  The 
divinest  success  in  life  is  achieved,  not  through  the  possession  of  great  power,  but 
by  the  faithful  use  of  such  powers  as  we  have.  If  God  be  not  for  us  how  shall  we 
prevail  ?  Bound  your  life  and  round  mine  there  lie  foes — hidden,  spiritual  foes — 
which  we  are  powerless  to  conquer  in  our  own  unaided  strength  and  wisdom.  The 
evil  lusts  and  passions  of  our  own  hearts,  and  the  trials  and  difficulties  and 
temptations  of  the  world,  these  are  the  foes  that  lie  "  like  grasshoppers  for 
multitude"  encamped  around  our  daily  life,  and  if  we  would  conquer  them  we  must 
fight  with  the  weapons  that  God  has  given  us,  and  not  be  faint-hearted;  for  we  shall 
overcome,  not  of  ourselves,  but  by  the  help  and  the  guidance  of  Him  "  who  giveth 
us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Nay  more,  if  we  would  conquer  we 
must  surely  do  so  with  those  same  three  weapons  which  Gideon  put  into  the  hands 
of  his  three  hundred  warriors — the  lamp,  and  the  pitcher,  and  the  trumpet.  1.  God 
commits  to  each  of  us  a  lamp  or  torch,  which  is  to  be  trimmed  and  kept  bright 
through  life.  Every  man  has  his  own  torch ;  his  own  peculiar  powers  of  mind  and 
body  ;  his  own  individual  character ;  his  own  special  post  in  life,  and  opportunities 
of  influencing  others  for  good  or  for  evil.    The  work  we  do  and  the  example  we  show 

this,  in  short,  is  the  torch  we  hold  as  trust  from  God,  who  says  to  each  of  us,  as. 

He  said  to  the  Jews  of  old,  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men  that  they  may  see 
your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  2.  But  then,  in  the 
second  place,  we  learn  that  our  lamps,  like  those  of  Gideon's  band,  must  not  be- 
displayed  until  the  proper  moment  arrives  for  them  to  be  seen.  For  awhile  they 
must  be  concealed,  as  it  were,  within  empty  pitchers.  Our  characters  are  not  formed, 
we  are  not  fitted  for  the  work  of  Ufe,  in  a  moment.  Hence  those  years  of  school 
discipline  through  which  we  have  all  passed.  This  season  of  preparatory  culture 
and  seclusion  is  as  necessary  for  us  men  as  it  was  for  "  the  Son  of  Man,"  who,  for 
thirty  years,  during  which  He  prepared  Himself  for  His  short  ministry,  lived  a  life- 


CHAP,  vn.]  JUDGES.  147 

of  retirement  and  subjection  at  Nazareth.  In  His  career  on  earth  there  was  no 
precocious  self-assertion,  no  premature  display.  But  the  time  comes  when  we  are  each 
summoned  to  leave  the  life  of  preparation  and  enter  upon  our  life  of  work  in  the 
world,  and  then,  if  we  be  true  servants  of  God,  and  neither  cowards  nor  slaves  to 
self,  we  shall  be  ready  to  cast  aside  the  empty  pitcher,  and  hold  up  before  men's  eyes 
a  weU-trimmed  lamp.  3.  And  then,  lastly,  there  are  the  trumpets.  Just  as  the  torch 
means  man's  work  and  knowledge  and  character,  and  the  pitcher  represents  the 
method  by  which  he  receives  and  matures  his  light  until  the  hour  comes  for  revealing 
it,  so  the  trumpet  typifies  the  sound  of  the  human  voice,  the  power  with  which,  by 
precept  and  exhortation,  by  uttered  principle  and  uncompromising  assertion  of  truth, 
we  carry  the  gospel  of  Christ  into  the  world.  There  are  so  many  time-servers 
amongst  men,  who  will  not  dare  to  confess  what  they  believe  to  be  true  and  know  to 
be  right,  if  it  happens  to  conflict  with  the  popular  notions  of  society.  They  reserve 
their  principles  for  congenial  company,  where  they  will  be  safe  from  contradiction, 
and  they  go  about  the  world  agreeing,  like  sycophants,  with  anything  and  everybody. 
But  let  such  men  remember  that  the  world  owes  its  highest  good  to  those  who  have 
had  the  courage  of  their  convictions.  They  are  the  messengers  of  truth  and  of  God. 
"  Their  sound  is  gone  out  into  aU  lands,  and  their  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth." 
We  have  thus  arrived  at  the  full  meaning  of  that  battle-cry,  "  The  sword  of  the  Lord, 
and  of  Gideon."  It  is  the  motto  of  our  Christian  profession.  It  expresses  in  a 
eymbol  the  bloodless  victory  of  the  Christian  life,  through  Christ  our  Lord:  the 
victory  which  is  won  with  no  earthly  weapon,  but  with  the  "  sword  of  the  Spirit." 
(H.  E.  J.  Bevan,  M.A.)  The  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon : — A  company  of 
English  soldiers  were  in  disgrace.  Through  some  bad  conduct  they  had  for  a  while 
lost  their  colours,  and  were  in  trouble  about  it.  It  so  happened  that  these  men  had 
to  take  part  in  some  battle  where  a  piece  of  hard  fightmg  had  to  be  done.  One 
morning  the  men  were  in  line.  Some  distance  away  was  a  hill  held  by  the  enemy 
which  it  was  extremely  important  that  the  English  should  secure.  The  commander 
addressed  his  men  and  urged  them  on  to  the  conflict  which  was  soon  to  take  place. 
He  finished  his  brief  address  to  them  by  saying,  "  Men,  your  colours  are  on  the  top 
of  yonder  hiU."  It  was  enough.  Their  souls  were  fired,  and  long  before  the  day 
was  out  they  had  dislodged  the  enemy,  secured  the  hill,  vriped  out  the  disgrace  in 
which  they  had  been,  and  won  back  their  lost  regimental  colours  by  their  bravery 
that  day.  The  Church  of  God  is  engaged  in  war  against  the  hosts  of  the  world,  and 
every  member  of  God's  Church  has  to  take  his  share  in  the  conflict,  and  must  seek 
to  remove  the  enemies  of  God.  If  we  notice  how  Gideon  and  his  men  carried  on 
their  work  for  God,  we  may  perhaps  learn  a  few  things  which  we  may  also  practise 
with  some  profit.  I.  We  will  fiest  notice  their  unity.  There  were  no  divisions, 
no  quarrels,  no  mutinies  among  them.  They  stood  as  they  were  ordered  to  stand. 
Does  not  this  speak  to  us  and  with  a  loud  voice  ?  Have  the  hundreds  of  God's  hosts 
to-day  that  spirit  of  unity  which  should  mark  all  the  soldiers  of  the  Cross  ?  Have 
we  always  obeyed  orders  from  headquarters  ?  If  the  soldiers  in  the  ranks  of  the 
armies  of  the  living  God  could  only  forget  all  party  difference,  and  cease  to  contend 
about  minute  distinctions,  and  present  a  united  front,  the  kingdom  of  darkness  would 
Boon  receive  such  blows  as  would  make  it  totter  and  reel.  We  have  many 
illustrations  in  the  history  of  Christianity,  of  what  can  be  done  by  a  united  Church 
of  God.  II.  Let  us  now  notice  their  coubage.  Had  they  been  Englishmen  they  could 
not  have  displayed  more  fibre  and  courage  than  was  shown.  In  its  conflict  with  the 
world  the  Church  needs  men  of  courage.  There  never  was  a  time  it  more  needed 
them  than  now.  There  are  many  great  and  pressing  social  and  rehgious  problems 
which  need  attention  and  require  men  of  courage  and  faith  to  deal  with  them; 
and  in  aU  her  work  she  needs  men  of  brave  hearts  and  true,  who  are  not  easily 
daunted.  She  wants  brave  officers  to  serve  in  her  ranks — men  of  skill,  piety,  and 
courage.  She  wants  the  best  sons  and  daughters  in  her  ranks.  She  is  charged  with 
the  responsibility  of  the  salvation  of  the  world.  She  has  to  make  greater  inroads 
into  the  ranks  of  the  enemy.  God  is  with  us,  and  God  can  make  us  brave  and  bold. 
ni.  But  we  must  now  notice  the  faith  op  these  men.  It  was  a  victory  of  faith. 
Oh,  what  a  theme  for  contemplation  the  victories  of  faith  furnish  I  The  Church 
needs  men  of  faith  to-day.  This  is  an  age  of  scepticism,  of  doubt,  and  criticism. 
It  has  become  almost  fashionable  to  talk  about  doubting  as  if  it  were  a  mark  of 
strength  and  special  attainment  to  do  so.  The  Church  wants  men  who  live  in  the 
sunshine  of  strong  heroic  faith  and  power.  She  wants  men  who  can,  in  mighty 
faith,  march  round  the  strongholds  of  sin,  just  as  the  Israelites  marched  around 
ancient  Jericho.    She  needs  men  who  can  go  with  Bible  in  hand  and  win  victories 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOB.  [chap.  vil. 

for  God.  IV.  In  conclusion,  we  will  briefly  notice  the  success  they  experienced. 
It  was  complete.  They  stood  in  order  round  the  camp  as  they  were  commanded. 
At  the  given  signal  they  raised  their  shouts,  broke  their  pitchers,  and  flashed  their 
torches.  They  stood  and  watched  the  consternation  of  the  enemy.  It  was  a  victory 
which  was  God-given  and  full.  The  history  of  the  Church  of  Christ  abounds  with 
God-given  victories.  The  victories  of  the  past  are  to  be  far  surpassed  in  the  future. 
(C.  Leach,  D.D.)  The  natural  and  supernatural : — I.  Some  of  the  events  in 

WHICH    WE    BEHOLD    THE    CO-OPERATION    OF    THE    NATURAL    AND    SUPERNATURAL.        1,    In 

providence.  2.  In  conversion.  3.  In  the  sustenance  of  a  religious  life.  4.  In  the 
propagation  of  the  gospel.  II.  That  the  co-operation  of  the  natural  and 
SUPERNATURAL  IS  NECESSARY  TO  ENSURE  SUCCESS.  ,  1.  This  is  the  Only  way  success  is 
to  be  expected.  2.  This  is  the  only  way  in  which  success  is  possible.  3.  The 
co-operation  of  the  natural  and  supernatural  makes  success  certain.  III.  Practical 
LESSONS.  1 .  We  should  endeavour  to  form  a  true  estimate  of  ourselves.  We  can  do 
a  httle,  but  cannot  do  all.  2.  Learn  to  acknowledge  the  Lord  in  every  success. 
{D.  Leivis.)        Gideori's  gallant  three  hundred  : — I.  The  brave  company  with  which 

HE  ATTACKED  THE  FOE.     II.  ThE  BATTLE-CRY  OF  GiDEON  AND  HIS  GALLANT  THREE  HUNDRED. 

1.  The  first  secret  of  their  strength  was  that  they  all  reaUsed  that  the  battle  they  had 
to  fight  was  not  their  own,  but  God's.  A  man  may  fight  very  hard  for  himself,  yet 
there  is  a  point  at  which  heroism  inspired  by  self-interest  fails ;  but  let  it  be  inspired 
by  the  love  of  another,  and  let  that  love  be  centred  in  an  object  worthy  of  the 
greatest  daring,  and  there  you  will  find  a  courage  which  is  simply  transcendent  and 
irresistible.  Look  at  the  men  who  have  wrought  the  greatest  deeds  on  earth,  and 
you  will  find  that  the  first  thing  they  emphasised  was  just  this,  "  We  are  not  come 
out  in  our  own  cause  and  our  own  strength,  but  God's."  There  would  not  be 
sufficient  inspiration  in  any  other  cause  to  enable  them  to  meet  such  overwhelming 
odds  as  those  which  they  met  with  unfaltering  step,  and  at  length  overcame.  2.  As 
the  battle  was  the  Lord's,  so  the  weapons  were  His  :  "  The  sword  of  the  Lord." 
You  notice  how  Paul  emphasises  the  same  truth — "  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of 
God  "  ;  and  again,  "  Who  goeth  a  warfare  any  time  at  his  own  charges  ?  "  If  we 
are  to  be  God's  soldiers  we  must  be  armed  with  His  weapons.  A  young  man  enlists 
in  the  army  ;  there  is  a  sword  given  to  him ;  it  is  not  a  sword  he  has  had  made  for 
himself,  but  one  that  has  been  submitted  to  certain  tests,  though,  alas !  they  have 
been  more  imaginary  than  real  occasionally.  It  is  the  Queen's  sword,  and  as  such 
it  is  her  will  that  it  shall  be  so  made  as  to  be  worthy  of  the  mettle  of  every  soldier 
who  wiU  wield  it  and  of  the  empire  that  supplies  it.  The  soldier  is  not  allowed  to 
risk  his  life  by  getting  his  village  blacksmith  to  make  one  for  him.  There  must  be 
the  stamp  of  the  Government  upon  it.  The  battle  is  the  Queen's  and  the  sword  is 
the  Queen's ;  and  when  the  soldier  gets  that  sword  he  feels  that  the  whole  British 
Empire  has  staked  its  credit  largely  upon  the  quality  of  that  sword,  as  well  as  the 
courage  of  the  man  who  has  accepted  it.  The  fact  that  the  Queen  supplies  the 
sword,  and  that  it  represents  the  power  and  the  righteousness  of  the  country  whom  he 
serves,  adds  vigour  to  his  arm  and  determination  to  his  assault.  So  is  it  with  us. 
We,  as  the  soldiers  of  Christ,  have  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God, 
and,  thank  God,  this  has  never  snapped  yet  in  our  hands.  3.  In  a  glorious  sense 
Gideon  was  joint  possessor  with  the  Lord  of  the  sword  he  wielded  :  "  The  sword  of 
the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon."  There  was  no  blasphemy  in  this  cry ;  it  was  a  humble 
recognition  of  the  fact  that  God  had  taken  Gideon  into  His  service,  and  into  joint 
possession  of  the  sword  with  which  Gideon  fought.  Once  again,  referring  to  the 
ordinary  soldier,  you  ask  him,  "  Whose  sword  is  that  ?  "  He  replies,  "  It  is  mine." 
Yet  he  never  made  it,  and  never  purchased  it.  You  say  to  him,  "  Nay,  but  it  is  the 
Queen's  sword."  He  replies,  "  The  Queen  gave  it  me."  You  add,  "  Then  it  is 
yours."  "Yes,  the  Queen's — and  mine";  and  it  is  in  that  conjunction,  "and," 
which  joins  the  Queen  to  the  poor  soldier,  that  we  find  the  secret  of  his  prowess  on 
the  battlefield.  Just  so  here,  "  The  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon,"  was  the  cry 
which  imparted  more  than  human  strength  to  Gideon  and  his  soldiers.  God's 
warriors  have  to  fight  with  the  world  and  its  evil.  The  sword  is  the  Lord's,  but  it  is 
also  ours.  It  is  given  us  so  that  we  may  make  the  best  use  of  it,  and  that  every  man 
who  has  enlisted  in  Christ's  army  can  say  in  the  same  breath,  "  It  is  God's  battle 
and  mine."      (D.   Davies.)  Gideon's    victortj  : — I.  The   companies   engaged. 

Happy  is  he  who  is  numbered  among  the  three  hundred.  Be  it  so  that  he  is  in  the 
minority.  Many  have  forsaken  him,  more  are  against  him.  But  he  is  invincible 
for  all  that,  as  long  as  he  does  battle  with  but  one  weapon,  "  The  sword  of  the  Lord, 
and  of  Gideon."     II.  The  trumpet's  blast.      Never  did  means  appear  more 


CHAP,  vin.]  JUDGES.  149 

contemptible  than  those  employed  by  Gideon.  Thus  the  Lord  teaches  us  that  means 
are  weak  or  strong  just  according  to  His  appointment.  Weak  means  are  strong, 
powerful,  and  all-prevailing,  when  He  ordains  the  end  to  be  fulfilled  by  them. 
When  God  blesses,  the  worm  Jacob  can  lift  up  his  head,  and  thresh  the  mountains. 
But  the  mightiest  instruments  are  naught  without  His  blessing.  Now,  we  have 
here,  in  the  trumpet's  blast,  the  pitchers  broken,  and  the  lamps  held  forth,  striking 
and  appropriate  emblems  of  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  They  are  fit  emblems  of 
the  weakness  of  the  instrument  and  of  the  power  of  its  effects.  The  preaching  of 
the  everlasting  gospel  is  as  the  blowing  of  Gideon's  trumpets.  How  apparently 
inadequate  the  means  to  the  end  !  How  weak,  how  foolish  !  "  Men  must  be  fanatics 
to  suppose  that  men's  evil  passions  will  be  subdued,  that  the  love  of  sin  will  be 
uprooted,  that  their  affections  will  ever  be  turned  heavenward,  by  preaching  nothing 
but  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified.  Human  nature,"  says  the  world,  "needs 
something  different.  If  you  wish  to  convert  the  heathen,  civilise  them  first,  and 
then  preach  the  gospel  to  them."  But  let  us  turn  from  man  to  God.  He  who  made 
the  trumpet,  knew  full  well  its  power.  He  would  not  put  the  trumpet  into  our 
hands  and  bid  us  blow  if  the  breath  of  His  power  were  not  ready  to  go  forth  with 
the  blast.  The  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and 
they  that  hear  do  live,  and  live  for  ever.  Whilst  uncertain  sounds,  a  gospel  which 
is  not  the  gospel,  settle  men  in  their  sins,  and  cause  sport  to  devils,  the  clear  blast 
of  this  trumpet  shakes  the  infernal  kingdom  to  its  centre,  spreads  jubilee  among  the 
slaves  of  earth,  and  awakens  joy  in  the  presence  of  angels.  We  pause  to  ask,  have 
these  gladsome  notes  sounded  in  your  ears  in  the  dead  night  of  your  soul  ?  Have 
you  been  awakened  by  the  loud  blasts  of  the  gospel  trumpet  ?  HI.  The  pitchers 
BROKEN.  Earthen  pitchers  seemed  to  be  of  aU  things  the  most  absurd  to  fight  with. 
The  three  companies  might  do  some  execution  were  they  fully  equipped.  Trumpets 
might  alarm  and  terrify,  but  what  could  pitchers  do  ?  How  astonished  must  have 
been  these  three  hundred  men  when  Gideon  said,  "  Aim  yourselves  with  pitchers  "  ! 
The  result  proved  the  efiiciency  of  these  contemptible  instruments.  They  did  what 
no  sword,  no  battle-axe,  no  spear  could  do.  They  held  the  lights,  they  contained 
the  lamps.  They  were  nothing  in  themselves,  but  they  were  everything  to  the 
enterprise.  Now,  we  have  in  these  pitchers  a  striking  emblem  of  the  ministers  of 
the  gospel.  They  are  earthen  vessels,  carrying  the  lamp  of  life.  We  ask,  then — 
and  does  not  the  value  of  your  never-dying  interests  compel  us  to  ask  you  ? — have 
you  seen  this  light  ?  have  you  been  guided  by  that  lamp  ?  Has  it  shone  into  your 
mind,  and  given  you  the  saving  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ  ?    Has  it  been  the  power  of  God  unto  your  salvation  ?    (G.  A,  Eogers,  M.A.) 


CHAPTEB  Vm. 


Vees.  1-3.  Is  not  tlie  gleaning  of  tHe  grapes  of  Ephralm  better. — The 
conduct  of  the  Ephraimites : — 1.  Their  unthankfulness  was  great,  and  the 
injury  which  he  sustained  thereby,  who  ought  to  have  been  much  honoured 
of  them  for  his  industry  and  labour.  We  ought  not  to  look  for  our  reward 
md  commendation  for  well-doing  from  men,  but  to  rest  in  this,  that  God 
moweth  our  works,  and  it  is  enough  that  we  are  sure  that  from  Him  we  shall 
receive  our  reward.  2.  Another  of  the  faults  of  these  Ephraimites  against  Gideon 
is  that  they  envied  him  for  the  honour  he  got  by  the  victory.  Whereby,  though 
they  sustained  no  hurt,  neither  were  the  worse,  but  the  better,  yet  they  could 
not  bear  it,  that  Gideon  should  have  the  glory  of  it :  where  we  may  see  a  foul 
property  of  envy,  and  what  it  is.  It  is  a  grief  and  sadness  for  the  prosperity  of 
others,  and  namely,  of  such  as  be  our  equals.  And  when  I  say  envy  is  a  grief  at 
our  equals  for  any  eminency  or  prosperity  that  they  have  above  us,  I  mean  such  as 
are  in  kindred  estate,  years,  dignity,  or  in  gifts  like  us.  And  the  cause  of  this  envy 
is  not  for  that  we  are  troubled  as  though  any  hurt  or  danger  were  coming  towards 
us  from  them  whom  we  envy  (for  that  is  another  affection,  to  wit,  fear),  but  for 
that  through  a  cankered  stomach  we  cannot  bear  it,  that  such  an  one  as  is  no  better 
than  ourselves  should  be  lifted  up  so  high  and  commended  so  far  above  us.  And 
is  not  this  a  cursed  mind  in  us,  that  we  caimot  be  willing  that  another  should  fare 
well,  we  being  never  the  worse,  and  that  we  should  have  an  evil  eye  at  that  for  the 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

•which  we  should  rejoice?  And  because  I  now  speak  of  the  Ephraimites,  I  think  it 
not  amiss  to  add  this  of  them,  that  their  father  Ephraim,  the  younger  being  preferred 
by  Jacob  before  the  elder  brother  Manasseh,  the  stock  and  offspring  of  them  exalted 
themselves  since  from  age  to  age,  and  are  noted  for  it  oft  times  in  the  history  of  the 
Old  Testament.  As  in  Joshua  we  read  they  among  others  were  discontented  with  their 
portion,  so  in  the  twelfth  of  this  book  the  posterity  of  them  contended  with  Jephtha 
for  not  calling  them  with  him  to  battle  against  the  Ammonites  after  he  had 
overcome  them ;  even  as  these  Ephraimites  did  here  with  Gideon.  So  Esau, 
himself  deadly  hating  his  brother,  derived  this  sin  to  his  posterity,  the  Edomites; 
so  Ahab  did  idolatry  to  the  generations  that  came  after  him.  And  hereby  we  may 
learn  what  force  some  blemishes  and  corruptions  in  a  flock  or  kindred  have  to 
infect  almost  the  whole  posterity,  God  justly  thus  punishing  the  sins  of  the 
fathers  upon  the  children  to  many  generations,  punishing  sin  with  sin.  3.  And 
yet  one  thing  more  note  in  these  Ephraimites,  namely,  the  flights,  subtleties, 
doubleness,  and  hoUowness  that  lie  hidden  in  men's  hearts,  till  they  have 
occasion  to  show  them,  or  grace  to  repent  of  them.  These  would  now  seem  to 
have  had  great  injury  that  they  were  not  called  to  the  battle,  whereas  it  was  their 
own  sin  that  they  went  not,  for  they  did  forbear  for  fear  of  danger,  and  were 
willing  to  stand  by,  as  it  were,  lying  in  the  wind  to  wait  for  the  issue.  So  that  if 
Gideon  and  their  brethren  the  Israelites  that  joined  with  him  had  lost  the  day, 
then  all  the  blame  would  have  been  laid  upon  them  by  these  Ephraimites  ;  but  now 
they  had  got  the  victory  by  God's  direction  and  blessing,  they  complain  on  the  other 
side  that  they  had  injury  themselves,  for  that  they  were  not,  as  they  said,  bidden 
to  help  in  the  battle.  Wherein  we  may  behold  deep  subtlety  and  hypocrisy,  and 
how  far  all  such  are  from  simplicity  and  plain  dealing,  that  according  to  the 
proverb,  howsoever  the  world  go  they  will  save  one,  and  however  it  fall  out,  they 
wiU  provide  for  themselves.  {R.  Rogers.)  Gideon  and  the  men  of  Ephraim : — 
The  scanty  information  that  we  have  leaves  the  impression  that  in  speaking  as  they 
did  the  men  of  Ephraim  were  entirely  in  the  wrong.  If  they  were  the  foremost  of 
the  tribes,  why  had  they  not  organised  resistance  themselves  ?  If  they  had  neglected 
duty,  what  right  had  they  to  complain  that  others  had  discharged  it  ?  If  Gideon 
had  invited  them,  would  they  not  have  equally  resented  such  an  unwarrantable 
piece  of  presumption  in  a  mere  Manassite?  But  how  few  men  in  Gideon's  place 
would  have  made  allowance  for  them  as  he  did  !  It  shows  how  grace  had  got  the 
better  of  nature  in  him.  It  shows  how  little  he  cared  for  his  own  interest  or  honour ; 
how  much  for  the  welfare  of  Israel  and  the  ruin  of  its  foes.  That  in  the  very  moment 
of  victory  he  who  had  been  the  instrument  of  it  all  should  be  reproached  instead  of 
honoured  by  his  countrymen,  and  even  by  the  very  men  who  had  been  thinking 
only  of  themselves  when  he  was  planning  and  enduring  and  risking  everything  to 
save  them  all — this  was  trying  in  the  extreme  to  flesh  and  blood.  But  Gideon  knew 
that  an  angry  reply  might  kindle  mere  discontent  into  a  flame,  and  that  even  a 
continuance  of  jealousy  would  defeat  his  purpose  of  following  up  the  pursuit  and 
effectually  terminating  the  war.  His  answer,  therefore,  was  one  calculated  not 
only  to  soothe  Ephraim,  but  even  to  restore  their  self-respect.  The  answer  was  in 
an  important  sense  a  true  one.  God  had  overruled  for  good  the  very  slowness  of 
Ephraim  to  come  forward.  It  was  their  seizing  the  line  of  the  Jordan  that  had 
turned  defeat  into  irretrievable  overthrow ;  and,  as  plain  matter  of  fact,  those  slain 
by  Ephraim  must  have  been  far  more  numerous  than  all  that  Gideon  and  his  men 
had  beaten  down.  The  answer  was  true,  no  doubt,  but  not  on  that  account  the 
easier  to  give.  To  acquiesce  in  a  statement  of  the  case,  nay,  even  to  suggest  it,  in 
which  no  credit  was  given  for  those  preparatory  trials  and  schemes,  and  risks  and 
conflicts,  without  which  all  the  direct  hard  fighting  of  Ephraim  would  have  been 
perfectly  useless — this  showed  a  moderation  that  nothing  can  have  inspired  except 
the  deep  sense  that  the  real  glory  belonged  to  another  altogether,  and  that  Ephraim 
on  the  one  hand,  and  he  and  his  men  upon  the  other,  were  only  instruments  that 
God  employed,  each  in  the  way  that  He  deemed  best,  for  working  out  His  own 
designs.  When  he  thus  effaced  himself,  and  gave  up  the  glory  without  a  murmur 
that  by  all  fair  human  standards  was  righteously  his  own,  Gideon  stood  at  a  pitch 
of  moral  grandeur  that  few  of  the  choicest  saints  in  Scripture  have  exemplified. 
When  we  remember  that  he  was  no  quiet,  meditative  spirit,  but  a  mighty  man  of 
war,  rejoicing  in  his  prowess,  keenly  sensitive  to  dishonour,  and  animated  by  not  a 
little  of  the  fierce  vindictive  spirit  of  his  age,  the  triumph  of  faith  and  grace  within 
him  becomes  all  the  more  conspicuous.  (W.  Miller,  M.A.)  The  gleaning  of  the 
grapet  of  Ephraim  : — The  gleaning  of  the  grapes  of  Ephraim  I    This  is  the  portion 


CHAP,  vin.]  JUDGES.  151 

that  falls  to  us.  We  are  living  in  a  glorious  day.  Our  fathers  gathered  the  vintage 
with  strife  and  travail,  and  garments  rolled  in  blood.  It  is  for  us  to  stand  at  the 
waters  of  Beth-barah  and  gather  up  the  fruits  of  victory.  The  world  is  at  its  very 
best.  If  life  was  ever  worth  living,  it  is  worth  living  now.  Great  is  the  privilege, 
and  correspondingly  great  the  responsibility,  of  those  who  are  appointed  to  glean 
the  grapes  of  Ephraim.  I.  Ouks  is  the  golden  age  of  truth.  1.  The  body  of 
truth  is  larger  than  that  of  any  former  times.  Aristotle,  one  of  the  most  learned  of 
the  ancients,  if  he  were  to  return  to-day,  could  hardly  pass  a  preliminary 
examination  for  admission  to  one  of  our  grammar  schools.  The  results  of  past 
research  and  controversy  along  the  past  have  accumulated  into  a  great  treasury  of 
knowledge.  Each  generation  has  contributed  its  part.  History  is  not  a  treadmill, 
wherein  men  go  round  and  round,  getting  nowhere ;  but  a  thoroughfare,  the  King's 
highway,  whereon  we  journey  like  a  royal  troop,  league  by  league,  laden  with  the 
Bpoils  of  the  conquest,  until  we  come  to  the  palace  of  the  King.  2.  The  great  body 
of  truth  thus  accumulated  is  held  in  a  truer  spirit  of  toleration  than  the  past  ever 
knew.  3.  Along  with  this  goes  a  truer  orthodoxy  than  of  old.  The  denominations 
may  differ,  and  indeed  do  differ,  with  respect  to  minor  matters,  but  they  are  loyal 
to  old  landmarks.  II.  Ours  is  also  the  golden  age  of  morality,  particularly  in  its 
larger  sense  as  touching  all  the  relations  of  man  with  his  fellow-men.  1.  The 
industrial  reform  may  be  cited  in  evidence.  Capital  has  rights,  for  which  it 
tenaciously  strives ;  labour  has  rights,  for  which  it  vigorously  contends.  Out  of 
this  conflict  must  come  the  solution :  an  honest  day's  wage  for  an  honest  day's 
work ;  corporations  with  souls,  and  labourers  with  rights.  2.  The  temperance 
reform.  This  was  almost  unheard  of  a  century  ago.  For  this  we  have  to  thank 
the  fathers  who  gathered  the  vintage  of  Abi-ezer,  who  in  the  controversies  of  moral 
suasion  and  legislation  wrought  out  these  more  salutary  methods  and  passed  on 
their  achievements  to  us.  3.  Political  reform.  We  hear  much  of  "  civic 
corruption  "  in  these  days,  of  bribery,  blackmail,  &c.  In  the  time  of  William  III. 
bribery  was  so  commonly  practised  that  the  king  publicly  announced  his  inability  to 
dispense  with  it,  saying,  "  Under  the  existing  order  of  things,  to  refuse  the  common 
practice  would  endanger  the  crown."  The  municipal  corruption  which  is  so 
arousing  the  popular  indignation  at  this  moment  would  have  been  made  little  of  in 
former  days.  It  is  a  good  sign — this  stirring  about  the  Augean  stables. 
4.  Sociological  problems.  All  branches  of  the  Christian  Church  are  concerned 
in  the  discussion  of  questions  which  touch  the  welfare  of  the  community ;  the 
betterment  of  home  and  society ;  the  care  of  the  poor,  the  aged,  and  all  incapables. 
The  liberalitas  of  the  ancient  world  has  given  way  to  the  caritas  of  our  religion. 
We  are  beginning  to  understand  the  song  of  the  angels,  not  merely  in  its  ascrip- 
tion of  glory  to  God,  but  also  in  its  expression  of  goodwill  toward  men.  5.  As 
to  personal  character.  We  make  more  of  character  and  less  of  adventitious 
prominence  than  of  old.  III.  This  is  the  golden  age  of  moral  energy.  Truth 
and  ethics  are  changed  into  power  by  a  fire  burning  beneath  them.  The  Church 
works  with  a  purpose.  A  man,  aside  from  his  creed  and  personal  graces,  must  in 
these  times  have  something  to  do.  1.  There  was  a  time  when  good  people  were 
chiefly  concerned  about  their  personal  salvation.  Each  for  himself  was  the 
shibboleth  of  those  days.  2.  At  other  times  the  people  of  God  have  been  chiefly 
concerned  for  the  preservation  of  the  Church.  This  was  the  meaning  of  the  Crusades ; 
in  them  we  find  a  stem  endeavour  to  rescue  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  and  so  vindicate  the 
majesty  of  the  Church  and  avenge  her  wrongs.  The  effort  was  not  to  convert  the 
infidel,  but  to  destroy  him  root  and  branch.  3.  In  our  time  we  speak  of  the  kingdom. 
This  is  the  missionary  age.  All  are  summoned  to  work — men,  women,  and  children. 
AH  are  summoned  to  work  for  the  evangelisation  of  the  world — the  deliverance  of 
souls  from  sin.  We  seem  to  be  dwelling  in  the  early  twilight  of  the  last  days.  The 
victory  of  Christ  is  a  foregone  conclusion.  His  glory  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the 
waters  cover  the  sea.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  The  gleaning  of  the  grapes  of 
Ephraim  is  better  than  the  vintage  of  Abi-ezer: — In  other  words,  the  smallest 
experience  of  the  joys  of  God's  people — mere  vintage-gleanings — is  worth  far  more 
than  the  richest  world-clusters.    {J.  JJ.  Macduff,  D.D.) 

Yer.  4.  Faint,  yet  pursuing. — Gideon  and  his  three  hundred : — ^I.  Thb  abut. 

Merely  three  hundred  devoted  warriors,  under  command  of  a  trusted  leader.  But 
no  unreliable  material  in  their  midst.  Each  true  as  steel.  1.  The  leader  was  a 
man  thoroughly  equipped  for  his  work.  Many  good  causes  have  languished  or 
been  lost  for  want  of  an  efficient  chief.    Gideon  had  boldness  to  strike,  and 

80 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

enthusiasm  to  follow  up.  Also  a  heart  thoroughly  loyal  to  God.  2.  The  men 
composing  this  army  were  specially  chosen.  They  were  men  who  knew  no  fear  in 
the  hour  of  danger  nor  alarm  at  the  force  of  the  foe.  3.  The  men  composing  this 
army  were  devoted  to  their  work.  Not  to  be  caught  unawares :  ever  on  the  alert  for 
the  foe.  III.  The  victory.  1.  Divine  help.  The  history  of  battlefields  tells  us 
that  the  victorious  armies  have  not  always  been  the  best  equipped  ;  that  Providence 
is  not  always  on  the  side  of  the  strongest  artillery.  There  is  a  moral  influence  at 
work  in  all  struggles  for  the  right  which  will  make  itself  felt,  whatever  be  the 
opposing  odds.  The  greatest  exploits  are  sometimes  achieved  by  the  feeblest 
instrumentaUty.  It  is  not  so  much  mechanical  organisation  we  want — it  is  life. 
2.  Human  instrumentality.  To  those  who  go  out  at  God's  command  the  way  is 
wonderfully  opened  up,  the  insurmountable  barriers  vanish.  In  every  Christian 
enterprise  the  work  is  virtually  done  when  the  first  advance  is  made  in  God's  name. 
III.  The  pursuit:  "Faint,  yet  pursuing."  We  cannot  read  this  without  feeling 
rebuked  for  half-heartedness  in  our  Christian  work.  Many  a  time  we  seem  to  have 
made  inroads  on  Satan's  dominion,  souls  seem  to  have  been  rescued  from  the 
oppressor,  but  the  advantage  thus  gained  was  not  followed  up  ;  the  old  foe,  driven 
out  only  for  a  time,  returned,  and  the  last  state  became  worse  than  the  first.  And 
what  is  the  reason  ?  Why  do  we  stop  short  of  full  success  ?  Because  we  give  way 
to  weariness.  We  are  like  Gideon's  men  in  being  faint ;  but  we  fail  to  imitate  them 
in  pursuing.  (D.  Merson,  B.D.)  Gideon  and  his  men  : — I.  The  facts.  1.  Who 
and  what  were  they  who  were  "faint,  yet  pursuing"?  The  victorious  three 
hundred,  who  had  previously  cried  to  the  Lord.  Victorious  by  Divine  power, 
through  faith,  which  produced  works ;  they  went  forth,  trusting  in  the  Lord. 
Gideon's  plan,  like  Abraham's,  an  instance  of  inspired  judgment  and  energy,  of 
Divine  influence,  not  superseding,  but  exalting  and  invigorating,  the  natural 
faculties ;  not  excluding,  but  producing  consummate  generalship.  2.  The  victors — 
weak  in  themselves — felt  their  bodily  wants  and  infirmities.  II.  Principles  which 
the  facts  exemplify.  1.  The  preceding  events  in  the  context  show  the  connection 
of  sin  and  misery;  the  intention  of  Divine  chastisements;  the  necessity  and  benefit 
of  repentance ;  the  required  instrumentaUty  of  faith  and  obedience  ;  God's  care  to 
exclude  boasting.  2.  The  text,  as  a  comment  on  the  events,  suggests  that  all  God's 
people  indeed  are  called  to  be  conquerors  like  Gideon  and  his  men — on  the  same 
principles.  3.  Like  Gideon  and  his  men,  they  are  called,  and  able,  notwithstanding 
their  weakness,  to  be  still  pursuing.  4.  While  thus  pursuing,  they  are  Uable  to  be 
tried  like  Gideon  and  his  men,  with  foolish,  jealous,  testy  brethren,  like  the 
Ephraimites ;  to  be  disappointed  of  expected  help  by  selfish  or  churlish  brethren — 
as  at  Succoth  and  Penuel.  5.  In  the  case  of  the  Christian's  spiritual  warfare,  as  in 
Gideon's  case,  there  is  a  disproportion  of  forces.  Enemies — numerous,  insolent, 
oppressive.  Friends — some  faint-hearted,  some  foolish,  some  selfish  and  churlish. 
The  faithful  weak  and  faint  in  themselves.  But  God  is  among  His  people — their 
BufiBciency  is  of  Him.  6.  Not  only  converted  individuals,  but  all  true  Churches, 
exempUfy    the    same    principles.     (Isaac  Keeling.)         The  victor  in  pursuit: — 

I.  Account  fob  the  exhaustion.  1.  The  greatness  of  the  work.  2.  The  fewness 
of  the  hands.     3.  The  lack  of  material  supplies.     4.  The  want  of   sympathy. 

II.  Account  fob  the  pebseverance.  1.  Because  he  takes  the  past  as  a  pledge  for 
the  future.  2.  He  considers  that  things  half-done  are  not  well  done.  3.  He 
accounts  Him  faithful  who  had  promised.  4.  He  has  a  great  work  in  hand. 
5.  He  looks  onward.  Fainting  will  give  place  to  renewal  of  strength.  Pursuit 
leads  to  complete  victory.  {W.  Burrows,  B.A.)  Faint,  yet  pursuing : — I.  Faintness 
COMES  TO  THE  BODY  BY  LONG  TBAVEL.  Evcry  step  we  take  is  waste.  It  is  so  with  the 
Boul.  There  is  a  mysterious  spending  of  its  substance  and  vitality,  day  by  day,  in 
thought,  emotion,  will,  eiiort.  A  Christian  soul  spends  more  than  another  because 
it  has  more  to  spend.  It  has  higher  thoughts,  and  more  passionate  emotions,  and 
nobler  efforts,  and  more  fervent  wUling.  And  if,  through  long  travel,  the  waste  is 
more  than  the  recruiting,  then  comes  faintness.  H.  Faintness  comes  to  the  body 
BY  EAPiD  movement.  A  man  shall  walk  leisurely  over  some  miles  of  road  or  up  the 
slope  of  a  mountain  and  be  quite  cool  and  comparatively  fresh,  while  a  racer  shall 
bound  away  over  the  same  distance,  and  at  the  end  be  panting  with  exhaustion. 
It  is  so  in  this  respect  also  with  the  soul.  If  a  man  will  contend  with  all  his 
spiritual  energy — with  aspiring  affections,  and  in  the  full  fervours  of  a  living  will, 
against  God's  kingdom  of  heaven,  against  moral  perfection ;  if  he  will  match 
himself  for  that  attainment,  run  in  that  race,  climb  that  awful  steep,  he  need  not 
be  surprised  if  now  and  again  he  is  fain  to  pause  and  cry  with  one  who  ran  eagerly 


CHAP,  vin.]  JUDGES.  15S 

long  ago,  "I  have  seen  an  end  of  all  perfection,  but  Thy  commandment  is 
exceeding  broad."  All  earnest  natures  tend  to  go  by  rapid  movements,  and  are  in 
consequence  subject  to  sudden  exhaustion.  The  fainting  is  the  natural  fruit  of  the 
effort.  Intellectual  difficulties  wiU  not  melt  away.  Moral  mysteries  will  not 
disappear.  The  law  of  sin  in  the  members  wiU  not  die.  The  law  of  the  spirit  of 
life  will  not  grow  so  fast,  will  not  bloom  so  fair,  as  was  hoped ;  and  the  panting, 
eager  spii-it,  after  many  ineffectual  endeavours,  is  sometimes  almost  benighted 
with  the  gloom  of  such  disappointments,  and  sinks  down  fainting,  almost  ceasing  to 
pursue.  There  is  nothing  very  alarming  in  this  weariness.  It  will  soon  pass  away. 
You  have  not  lost  your  ideal,  nor  your  love  for  it,  nor  your  purpose  to  realise  it,  nor 
that  Divine  hope  which  kindles  itself  always  by  the  side  of  a  holy  purpose,  nor  that 
prophetic  faith  which  counts  the  thing  that  is  not  yet  as  though  it  were.  And  if  you 
have  lost  none  of  these  things,  you  have  lost  no  real  strength.  It  will  recover  and 
revive  ere  long,  and  bear  you  on  again  to  moral  victory.    III.  Faintness  comes  to  the 

BODY  BY  THE  DIFFICULTY  OF  THE  GKOUND  THAT  HAS  BEEN  TRODDEN,  OR  OF  THE  WOEK  THAT 

HAS  BEEN  DONE.  A  mile  thiough  tangled  thickets  or  thorny  brakes,  over  rough  rocks  or 
in  sinking  sand,  may  be  more  exhausting  than  seven  or  ten  over  the  smooth  green- 
sward or  along  the  level  way.  Some  Christians  go  to  heaven  by  the  way  of  the 
plain  and  some  by  the  mountain  roads.  Who  can  tell  why  one  is  sent  by  the 
mountain  and  another  by  the  plain  ?  why  one  smiles  and  sings  all  the  way  while 
another  smiles  and  weeps  ?  TV.  Faintness  comes  to  the  body  theouoh  lack  op 
SUSTENANCE.  The  soul,  like  the  body,  will  faint  if  it  is  famished.  V.  Faintness 
may  come  to  the  body  by  sickness,  by  DISEASE.  If  there  be  an  overtasking  of  the 
physical  energies,  or  an  exposure  to  malign  influences,  weakness  will  certainly 
creep  in.  If  a  man  works  in  an  unwholesome  place,  if  he  breathes  in  tainted, 
poisoned  air,  the  whole  head  will  soon  be  sick,  the  whole  heart  faint.  It  is  even  so 
with  the  soul.  It  sickens  and  grows  faint  when  in  any  way,  in  any  place,  it 
inhales  the  poison  of  sin.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Faint,  yet  pursuing  : — I.  The 
Christian  is  apt  to  faint  in  the  time  of  temptation,  when  sin  assails  and  troubles 
him.  n.  The  Christian  is  apt  to  faint  in  time  of  affliction.  Call  faith  to  your 
help ;  trust  God's  goodness,  power,  and  love.  III.  The  Christian  is  apt  to  faint  in 
his  endeavours  to  do  good.  rV.  The  Christian  is  apt  to  faint  in  prayer,  whether 
praying  for  himself  or  for  others.  {E.  Blencowe,  M.A..)  The  Christian's  twofold 
experience : — I.  The  difficitlties  and  hardships  op  the  Christian's  way  sometimes 
MAKE  HIM  paint.  1.  He  is  buffeted  by  the  world.  2.  He  meets  also  with  many  a 
source  of  trouble  in  himself.  3.  He  is  tempted  by  Satan.  He  is  often  disappointed 
of  his  hopes  and  expectations.    U.  Though  the  DiFricuLTiES  and  trials  of  his 

WAT    MAKE    THE    CHRISTIAN    FAINT,    YET    THE    PRINCIPLB    OP    FAITH   STILL  KEEPS   HIM 

PURSUING.  1.  A  strong  sense  of  duty  is  impressed  upon  his  thoughts,  and  impels 
him  stiU  to  hold  on  his  way.  2.  A  fear  of  consequences  also  operates.  Should 
the  Christian  give  up  his  pursuit,  what  will  ensue?  WiU  he  thereby  become 
happier  than  he  is  now?  Will  all  his  trials  cease?  He  feels  that  greater 
apprehensions  will    then    arise.      (R.  Maguire,  M.A.)  Strength  to  fainting 

hearts: — "Faint,  yet  pursuing."  Why  are  believers  faint  ?  They  are  so  because 
of  sin.  Even  the  Christian  is  still  considerably  under  its  power.  And  often, 
through  getting  a  clear  view  of  his  own  corruption,  he  becomes  desponding.  He 
fears  that  the  day  of  complete  deliverance  from  sinning  and  from  sin  wiU  never 
come.  Then,  springing  from  this  great  root  of  bitterness,  many  other  things  arise 
to  produce  faintness.  Suffering  is  one  of  them.  For  religion  does  not  free  from 
suffering.  "  Many  are  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous."  And  often,  under  his 
troubles,  the  beUever  gets  sorely  dispirited.  His  patience  gives  way ;  his  fortitude 
fails ;  he  loses  heart.  Another  saddening  thing  is  bereavement.  Gideon's  heart 
was  sore  because  of  the  death  of  his  brothers  at  Tabor,  and  many  of  his  feUow- 
Israehtes  were  similarly  distressed.  The  mourners  we  have  always  with  us. 
Another  cause  of  depression  is  worldly  loss.  The  IsraeUtes  suffered  much  in  this 
way.  Man  does  not  Uve  by  bread  alone,  but  man  lives  by  bread.  One  other  cause 
of  faintness  is  anxiety  about  the  future.  Bunyan's  Mr.  Fearing  has  left  behind 
him  a  very  numerous  family.  But  from  the  causes  of  faintness  turn  now  to  the 
things  by  the  help  of  which  the  faint  may  continue  pursuing.  One  of  these 
remedies  is  repentance.  Another  cure  for  faintness  is  faith — a  persistent  trustful 
clinging  to  Christ,  and  to  God  in  Him.  When  Gideon  grasped  the  truth  which  the 
angel  spake  to  him,  that  the  Lord  was  with  him  as  his  strength,  he  became  like 
another  man.  Another  remedy  is  gratitude.  God's  gracious  answer  to  his  request 
for  asaccession  of  signs  filled  Gideon's  heart  with  devout  gratitude,  which  in  turn 


15^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 

was  a  rich  solace  to  him  in  his  grief.  And  so,  still,  if  fainting  hearts  would  but 
meditate  more  on  God's  kindnesses  to  them,  they  would  be  mightily  strengthened 
to  bear  their  trials.  And  here  you  have  another  cure  for  faintness — hope.  Not 
Gideon's  faith  only,  but  also  his  hope  springing  from  it,  made  him  the  mighty  man 
of  valour  that  he  was.  And  still  God's  afflicted  ones  are  saved  by  hope.  Say, 
"  I  wiU  hope  continually,  and  will  yet  praise  Thee  more  and  more."  And  then, 
having  so  vowed,  act  accordingly.  "Praise  is  comely."  But  more,  this 
your  praising  of  God  wiU  give  you  a  still  fuller  mastery  over  your  faintness. 
(William  Miller.)  Faint,  yet  pursuing: — Neither  in  the  Bible,  nor  in  any 
other  book,  is  there  a  more  beautiful  motto  than  this.  There  could  not  be 
a  more  honourable  description,  and  it  is  one  that  is  deserved  by  many  warriors 
in  the  battle  of  life.  That  man  hates  the  profession  or  business  by  which  he 
earns  his  living.  He  has  drifted  into  it  or  been  forced  into  it  by  circumstances,  but 
now  he  finds  that  it  is  uncongenial  and  unsuited  to  him.  He  is  the  round  man  in 
the  square  hole,  and  is  therefore  faint  and  weary  with  his  life's  work,  but  ha 
deserves  the  "well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,"  because  he  does  his  best. 
A  business  is  sometimes  so  laborious  and  monotonous  that  it  is  almost  unbearable. 
That  haK  of  the  world  which  does  not  know  how  the  other  half  lives  can  scarcely 
realise  the  faintness  and  weariness  of  the  dim  millions  who  work  themselves  to 
death  in  order  to  live  honestly.  Why  does  that  woman,  who  might  earn  three 
pounds  a  week  by  a  life  of  sin,  make  shirts  for  six  shillings  ?  Because,  though 
faint,  she  has  determined  by  the  grace  of  God  to  pursue  the  good  and  the  right 
way.  Some  are  faint  and  weary  with  struggling  against  inherited  disease,  or 
tendencies  to  evil,  but  they  fight  their  enemy  to  the  last.  Others  find  that  their 
domestic  relations  are  incompatible  with  happiness  ;  but  they  continue  to  do  what 
is  right,  and  to  suffer  without  murmuring.  One  of  these  "  meek  souls"  said  to  a 
friend,  "You  know  not  the  joy  of  an  accepted  sorrow."  Of  life  itself  many  are 
faint  and  weary ;  but  they  will  not  leave  the  post  where  God  has  placed  them.  Of 
course,  when  applied  to  brave  men  and  women  like  these,  the  description  "  Faint, 
yet  pursuing,"  is  a  most  honourable  one  ;  but  there  are  many  cases  where  it  would 
be  anything  but  an  expression  of  praise.  Take  the  case  of  the  selfish  man.  Ha 
has  discovered  that  the  result  of  having  no  high  purpose  in  Ufe,  and  of  caring  for 
no  one  but  himself,  is  misery.  He  is  seized  with  ennui,  that  "  awful  yawn  which 
sleep  cannot  dispel,"  and  is  generally  sick  of  himself  through  very  selfishness. 
But  though  faint  and  weary,  he  pursues  his  course  still.  Is  there  on  earth  a  more 
pitiable  sight  than  that  of  a  man  who  has  grown  to  hate  some  sinful  indulgence 
which  he  continues  to  pursue  merely  from  force  of  habit  ?  But  we  desire  to  use 
the  motto  for  our  encouragement.  None  of  us  are  overcoming  sin  fast  enough,  but 
we  must  never  despair.  Let  us  take  for  our  motto,  "Faint,  yet  pursuing."  It  is 
only  pride  that  tells  us  that  we  are  not  making  the  progress  we  ought  to  make. 
And  if  we  do  not  see  results,  why  then  it  is  braver  to  continue  the  struggle  when 
the  tide  of  war  is  against  us  than  to  be  only  able  to  fight  when  shouts  of  triumph 
are  in  our  ears.  Oh,  that  it  might  be  said  of  us  in  our  warfare  against  evil  passions 
and  deshes,  what  was  said  by  a  historian  of  a  celebrated  Cameronian  regiment — 
"  They  prayed  as  they  fought,  and  fought  as  they  prayed ;  they  might  be  slain, 
never  conquered;  they  were  ready  whenever  their  duty  or  their  religion  called 
them,  with  undaunted  spirit  and  with  great  vivacity  of  mind,  to  encounter 
hardships,  attempt  great  enterprises,  despise  dangers,  and  bravely  rush  to  death 
or  victory."  Many  people  are  faint  who  would  not  be  if  they  would  only  accept 
the  invitation  of  their  heavenly  Father,  and  cast  all  their  anxiety  upon  Him.  The 
prophet  Joel  tells  the  weak  to  say,  "  I  am  strong  "  ;  and  it  was  St.  Paul's  experience 
that  when  he  was  weak  then  he  was  strong.  Our  faintness  and  weakness,  instead 
of  hindering  us  from  pursuing  the  right  way,  may  help  us  to  do  so.  There  is  an 
old  story  in  Greek  annals  of  a  soldier  under  Antigonus,  who  had  a  disease,  an 
extremely  painful  one,  likely  to  bring  him  soon  to  the  grave.  Always  first  in  the 
charge  was  this  soldier,  rushing  into  the  hottest  part  of  the  fray.  His  pain 
prompted  him  to  fight,  that  he  might  forget  it ;  and  he  feared  not  death,  because 
he  knew  that  in  any  case  he  had  not  long  to  Uve.  Antigonus,  who  greatly  admired 
the  valour  of  his  soldier,  discovering  his  malady,  had  him  cured  by  one  of  the 
most  eminent  physicians  of  the  day ;  but  from  that  moment  the  warrior  was 
absent  from  the  front  of  the  battle.  He  now  sought  his  ease ;  for,  as  he  remarked 
to  his  companions,  he  had  something  worth  living  for — health,  home,  and  other 
comforts.  Might  not  our  faintness,  weakness,  and  disappointments,  like  this 
soldier's  disease,  stimulate  to  distinguished  service?    We  most  remember  that  it 


CHAP,  vin.]  JUDGES.  155 

is  not  the  strong  and  the  successful,  but  the  weary  and  the  heavy  laden,  who  are 
especially  invited  by  Christ.     (E.  J.  Hardy,  M.A.) 

Vers.  6-17.  The  princes  of  Succoth  .  .  .  The  men  of  Penuel. — Patience  under 
provocation  : — Instead  of  being  supported,  as  they  had  good  right  to  expect 
they  would  have  been,  by  those  who  profess  to  be  the  Lord's  people,  instances 
are  by  no  means  rare  of  men  of  Gideon's  stamp  being  met  on  their  part  by  scoffs 
and  insinuations,  and  positive  refusals  along  with  cold  prudential  admonitions  to 
attend  to  their  own  business,  and  allow  matters  just  to  take  their  course.  Nor 
is  this  all.  There  are  some  who  go  even  farther  stiU — men  who,  while  professing 
to  be  the  friends  of  truth,  are  found  actually,  out  of  deliberate  malice,  envy, 
or  jealousy,  refusing  to  lend  a  lending  hand  and  casting  obstacles  in  the  way 
of  accomplishing  the  reformation  on  which  their  generous  hearts  are  set. 
Now  of  all  this  we  are  furnished  with  a  striking  illustration  in  what  is  here 
recorded  as  having  passed  between  Gideon  and  the  men  of  Succoth  and  Penuel. 
Yet  mark  how  nobly  he  continued  to  restrain  the  impulse  of  his  resentment 
— an  example  which  naturally  reminds  us  of  that  of  one  greater  far  than 
Gideon,  when  He  met  with  treatment  similar,  yet  worse  still,  at  the  hands  of 
those  whom  He  had  come  to  seek  and  to  save  from  a  servitude  more  deplorable  by 
far.  Oh,  how  amazing  was  His  long-suffering  forbearance !  How  analogous  also  to 
the  conduct  of  Gideon,  while  infinitely  more  worthy  of  our  admiration,  was  the 
patient  perseverance  with  which  He  went  on  His  way,  still  carrying  forward  the 
work  which  His  Father  had  given  Him  to  do,  and  for  the  sake  of  those  very  people 
who  thus  shamefully  requited  His  love  and  service  and  self-denial,  exposed 
Himself  to  still  greater  privations  and  stiU  severer  sufferings  than  any  He  had  yet 
borne !  Oh,  if  we  wonder  at  the  behaviour  of  the  Ephraimites  and  the  men  of 
Succoth  and  Penuel  toward  Gideon  son  of  Joash  under  provocation  so  aggravated, 
what  ought  we  to  think  of  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  in  bearing  with  us  as  He  does  ! 
Yet,  from  what  afterwards  took  place,  let  us  beware  how  we  presume  on  the  long- 
suffering  to  which  we  owe  so  much.  If  the  promises  of  Christ  are  yea  and  amen, 
so  also  are  His  threatenings ;  let  us  never  for  one  moment  lose  sight  of  that ! 
Gideon  contented  himself  meanwhile  with  simply  threatening  the  men  of  Succoth 
and  Penuel,  the  former  that  he  would  tear  their- flesh  with  thorns  (ver.  7.),  the  latter 
that  he  would  "  break  down  their  tower  "  (ver.  8).  But  afterwards,  when  he  returned 
from  taking  vengeance  on  his  country's  enemies  at  Karkor,  thereby  crowning  his 
enterprise  with  complete  success ,  then  he  fulfilled  these  threatenings  to  the  very  letter. 
And  even  so  it  shall  be  with  all  the  enemies  of  Jesus,  with  aU  who  decUne  to  come  to  the 
help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty,  at  that  day  when  He  shall  "come again,  to  be 
admired  of  all  them  that  love  Him, ' '  and  to  "  take  vengeance ' '  on  all  besides.  Sooner  or 
later  the  judgment  He  has  threatened  shall  descend  upon  them.  (TF.  W.  Duncan,  M.A.) 
Punishment  of  the  selfish  and  mean-spirited : — These  men  were  blind  to  the  glory  of 
the  common  cause — selfish,  poor-spirited  creatures,  that  shut  themselves  up  in 
their  fenced  cities,  and  were  satisfied  to  let  God's  soldiers  starve,  and  God's  work 
come  to  an  end  for  want  of  support,  so  long  only  as  they  had  bread  enough  to 
satisfy  their  own  hunger.  This  was  a  state  of  mind  not  to  be  corrected  by  a  mere 
civil  speech  or  explanation.  Gideon  taught  them,  not  by  expostulation,  but  by  the 
sword  and  with  the  briers  of  the  wilderness.  Can  we  say  that  there  are  none  now 
who  merit  the  same  punishment  ?  none  who  resist  every  appeal  to  assist  those  who 
are  faint  by  pursuing  God's  work?  There  are  still  men  who  have  no  eye  for 
spiritual  importance,  but  measure  all  things  by  their  outward  appearance  and  by 
their  relation  to  their  own  comfort ;  men  who  fortify  themselves  in  their  ungenerous 
selfishness  by  asking,  as  these  men  of  Succoth  did,  "  What  have  you  made  of  this 
pursuit  in  which  you  want  us  to  assist  you  ?  what  great  good  have  you  done,  that 
we  should  help  you  ?  Are  Zebah  and  Zalmunna  already  in  your  hands,  that  we 
should  acknowledge  you  as  useful  men,  and  give  you  what  you  ask  to  help  you  on 
in  your  pursuit  ?  "  For  such  persons,  who  despise  the  day  of  small  things,  who 
cannot  recognise  God  if  He  takes  on  Him  the  form  of  a  little  child,  nor  His  Church 
when  it  exists  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  there  remains  the  doom  of  seeing  the 
whole  work  of  God  in  the  worid  finished  without  then-  aid,  and  of  hearing  the 
voice  of  God  Himself  in  rebuke,  ■  Uehold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and  perish  !  " 
(Marcus  Dods,  D.D.) 

Vers.  18-21.  The  children,  of  a  king. — The  royal  house  of  Jesus : — There  are 
family  names  that  stand  for  wealth,  or  patriotism,  or  inteUigence.     The  name  of 


'-r,  -^HE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch-vp.  viii. 

^'\  cisiiington  means  patriotism,  although  some  of  the  blood  of  that  race  has  become 
very  thin  in  the  last  generation.  The  family  of  the  Medici  stood  as  the  representative 
of  letters.  The  family  of  the  Rothschilds  is  significant  of  wealth.  The  house  of 
Hapsburg  in  Austria,  the  house  of  Stuarts  in  England,  the  house  of  Bourbon  in 
France,  -were  families  of  imperial  authority.  But  I  come  to  preach  of  a  family 
more  potential,  more  rich,  and  more  extensive — the  royal  house  of  Jesus,  of  whom 
the  whole  family  in  heaven  and  on  earth  is  named.  1.  First,  I  speak  of  our  family 
name.  To  have  conquerors,  kings,  or  princes  in  the  ancestral  line  gives  lustre  to 
the  family  name.  In  our  line  was  a  King  and  a  Conqueror.  Our  family  name 
takes  lustre  from  the  star  that  heralded  Him,  and  the  spear  that  pierced  Him,  and 
the  crown  that  was  given  Him.  What  other  family  name  could  ever  boast  of  such 
an  illustrous  personage  ?  2.  Next,  I  speak  of  the  family  sorrows.  If  trouble  come 
to  one  member  of  the  family,  all  feel  it.  So,  in  the  great  Christian  family,  the 
sorrow  of  one  ought  to  be  the  sorrow  of  all.  3.  Next,  I  notice  the  family  property. 
After  a  man  of  large  estate  dies,  the  relations  assemble  to  hear  the  will  read.  Our 
Lord  Jesus  hath  died ;  and  we  are  assembled  to-day  to  hear  the  will  read.  He 
says :  "  My  peace  I  give  unto  you."  Through  the  apostle  He  says:  "  All  are  yours." 
4.  Next,  I  speak  of  the  family  mansion.  Almost  every  family  looks  back  to  a 
homestead — some  country  place  where  you  grew  up.  But  all  the  dwelling-places 
of  dukes  and  princes  and  queens  are  as  nothing  to  the  family  mansion  that  ia 
already  awaiting  our  arrival.  {T.  Be  Witt  Talmage.)  The  royal  appearance  oj 
God's  children : — The  people  of  God  resemble  the  children  of  a  king — I.  In  their 

SPmiTUAIi  CONFOEMITT  TO  THE  IMAGE  OF  KlXG  JeSUS.  11.  In  THEIR  ILLUSTRIOUS 
TITLES.       HI.     In    their    COURTLY    APPAKEL.      IV.     In    THEIR    KOTAL    IMMUNITIES    AND 

PKiviLEGES.  1.  They  dwell  in  the  royal  presence.  2.  They  have  constant  access 
to  God.  3.  They  have  royal  provision.  4.  They  have  special  instruction.  5.  They 
have  a  kingly  guard.  6.  They  have  royal  prospects.  Learn :  1.  The  dignity  and 
rights  of  the  saints  of  God.  2.  How  full  of  consolation  to  behevers  in  sorrow  and 
affliction  !  {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Jether. — Jether,  the  timid  son  of  a  brave  father  : — 
The  command  of  Gideon  was  in  harmony  with  the  savage  character  of  that  age. 
We  are  told  by  Tacitus  concerning  a  Roman  knight,  one  Civilis — who  headed  a 
revolt  of  the  Gauls  against  Eome — that  he  acted  in  a  similar  but  cruel  manner,  for 
he  gave  to  his  little  son  some  prisoners  whom  he  might  use  as  targets  for  his  little 
darts  and  arrows.  This  was  done  from  revenge  and  from  a  desire  to  initiate 
the  child  into  the  dreadful  art  of  war.  Gideon  may  have  desired  thus  to  stimulate 
his  eldest  son  to  hatred  of  the  enemies  of  his  country  and  boldness  in  slaying  them. 
Moreover,  it  was  to  add  dishonour  to  the  death  of  Zebah  and  Zalmunna.  Jether 
must  have  had  some  boldness  and  strength,  or  he  could  not  have  followed  his  father 
in  his  last  pursuit  of  the  Midianitish  kings  or  have  risked  the  dangers  attendant 
on  the  campaign  ;  but  he  shrinks  from  obeying  the  command.  He  was  paralysed 
by  fear,  not  kept  back  by  pity  ;  and  hence  he  stands  before  us  as  the  type  of  one 
who  in  higher  spheres  loses  advantages  which  might  be  gained  by  the  exercise  of 
strength  and  fearlessness.  Nothing  more  is  heard  of  him  in  Scripture.  He  drops  out 
of  notice.  Life  is  a  battle.  Severe  are  the  assaults  to  be  resisted,  wearying  ofttimes 
the  marches  to  be  undertaken.  Fearlessness  is,  however,  essential  if  we  would 
overcome  the  Zebahs  and  Zalmunnas  of  evil  and  wrong  around.  1.  In  order  to 
this,  then,  we  must  as  far  as  we  have  opportunity  cultivate  physical  power.  There 
is  truth  in  the  phrase  "  muscular  Christianity."  To  keep  a  healthy  body  for  the 
home  of  the  mind  should  be  a  persistent  aim.  We  have  no  right  to  neglect  it.  We 
should  be  as  unwise  as  would  a  cottager  who,  knowing  that  the  rainy  season  was 
setting  in,  should  neglect  to  stop  up  the  gaping  hole  in  the  rotting  thatch  roof. 
We  should  strive  to  develop  our  powers  to  the  full  extent,  and  when  we  can  go  no 
further,  we  should  conserve  the  force  we  have  gained.  2.  That  which  we  say  of 
the  body  applies  also  to  the  cultivation  of  mental  faculties.  The  opportunity  of 
strengthening  the  body  may  be  brief,  but  that  of  the  mind  lifelong.  We  have  but 
little  power  at  first,  but  reading,  thinking,  and  mingling  with  our  fellows  increases 
the  conscious  vigour  of  intellect.  3.  Further,  we  should  be  strong  in  convictions 
of  duty.  We  should  have  principles.  Our  arms  should  be  nerved  by  moral  earnest- 
ness. 4.  It  is  well  to  cultivate  a  confidence  in  our  powers  and  principles.  Jether 
was  fearful  as  to  his  powers,  and  so  he  drew  not  his  sword.  We  should  have 
no  hesitancy  in  doing  that  which  our  heavenly  Father  directs,  in  our  consciences 
or  in  His  Word,  to  be  undertaken.  Yea,  we  should  seek  to  go  beyond  others  in 
service.  We  should  arouse  ourselves  to  the  putting  forth  of  strength,  that  by  effort 
we  may  gain  greater  strength.    We  are  not  urged  to  put  forth  effort  to  attain 


CHAP.  VIII.]  JUDGES.  157 

knowledge  and  spiritual  power  in  our  own  strength.  We  must  "  be  strong  in  the 
Lord  and  in  the  power  of  His  might."  Needless  to  say,  there  must  be  humihty, 
penitence,  faith.  This  conscious  spiritual  strength  and  fearlessness  are  necessary 
in  various  circumstances.  (1)  In  the  effort  to  prosper  in  lawful  undertakings,  to 
provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  aU  men,  and  "  to  provide  for  our  own." 
The  strain  on  bone  and  brain  at  this  day  is  very  great.  (2)  They  are  necessary 
in  view  of  some  of  the  contingencies  of  life.  It  is  useless  to  be  thinking 
always  that  something  dreadful  is  about  to  happen.  Fearlessness  is  a  far  better 
spirit  in  which  to  meet  trial.  But  it  must  be  a  holy  fearlessness,  because  we  know 
that  our  God  cares  for  us.  We  need  to  put  aside  fear  when  we  stand  before  that 
which  may  cause  us  a  greater  anxiety  than  any  circumstances  of  trial,  personal 
suffering,  or  even  death,  the  prosperity  of  Christ's  Church  and  triumph  of  His 
truth.  We  may  be  concerned,  like  Eli,  for  the  ark  of  God.  We  may  hear  the  roar 
of  the  bulls  of  Bashan — the  attacks  of  infidelity.  We  may  shudder  as  we  see  the 
strongly  netted  leash  of  worldliness  thrown  over  the  Church.  Even  then  we  must 
not  be  paralysed  by  fear,  as  Jether  before  Zebah  and  Zalmunna,  for  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  can  lift  up  a  standard  against  all  evil.  He  can  defend  His  cause.  (Fredk. 
Hastings.)  As  the  man  is,  so  is  his  strength. — Strength  the  property  of  truth  : — 
Yes  :  as  a  man  is  in  character,  in  faith,  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God,  so  is  his 
strength ;  as  he  is  in  falseness,  injustice,  egotism,  and  ignorance,  so  is  his  weakness. 
And  there  is  but  one  real  perennial  kind  of  strength.  The  demonstration  made  by 
selfish  and  godless  persons,  though  it  shake  continents  and  devastate  nations,  is 
not  force.  It  has  no  nerve,  no  continuance,  but  is  mere  fury,  which  decays  and 
perishes.  Strength  is  the  property  of  truth,  and  truth  only ;  it  belongs  to  those 
who  are  in  union  with  eternal  reality,  and  to  no  others  in  the  universe.  Would 
you  be  invincible  ?  you  must  move  with  the  eternal  powers  of  righteousness  and 
love.  To  be  showy  in  appearance  or  terrible  in  sound  on  the  wrong  side  with  the 
futilities  of  the  world  is  but  incipient  death.  (R.  A,  Watson,  M.A.)  As  the  man 
is,  so  is  his  strength : — I.  As  a  man  is  physically,  so  is  his  strength.  If  we  are  to 
estimate  him  by  his  muscular  strength,  we  must  take  into  account  his  bodily  form, 
his  age,  his  health,  his  build,  his  stature.  Gideon  belonged,  as  we  may  say,  to  the 
order  of  nature's  nobility.  Now,  it  is  perfectly  true  that  we  cannot  give  to  ourselves 
a  handsome  mien,  nor  add  one  cubit  to  our  stature ;  nevertheless,  it  is  equally  true 
that  we  can  do  much  to  promote  our  health,  to  build  up  our  constitution,  and  even 
to  give  dignity  to  our  physical  presence.  By  a  regular  life,  by  scrupulous  temperance, 
by  due  bodily  exercise,  by  habits  of  order  and  cleanliness,  every  one  can  do  not 
a  little  in  this  direction,  n.  As  a  man  is  intellectually,  so  is  his  strength.  I 
use  the  word  "strength"  here  as  meaning  power  of  work,  capacity  for  accomplish- 
ing the  ends  of  life,  and  making  the  world  the  better  for  his  existence.  I  suppose 
that,  during  the  past  hundred  years,  no  proverb  has  been  more  often  quoted,  as 
none  has  been  more  largely  illustrated,  than  the  pithy  aphorism  of  Lord  Bacon, 
"  Knowledge  is  power."  In  order  to  succeed,  it  is  requisite  to  have  intelligence 
and  brains.  The  commerce  of  England  is  not  indeed  in  the  hands  of  learned 
scholars;  but  it  is,  for  the  most  part,  in  the  hands  of  shrewd,  clear-headed,  practical 
men,  who  understand  their  business,  and  know  how  to  push  it.  Thus  intellect 
becomes  an  equivalent  for  strength,  and  mind  means  money.  In  real  power  of 
work,  the  skilled  artisan  leaves  the  mere  labourer  far  behind,  and  the  thoughtful 
clerk  the  mere  mechanical  penman ;  so  that  as  a  man  is  in  intelligence  so  is  his 
strength.  HI.  As  a  man  is  morally  and  spiritually,  so  is  his  strength.  Character 
and  faith,  I  wiU  venture  to  say,  more  than  anything  else,  determine  your  power  of 
overcoming  difficulty  and  of  accomplishing  good.  This  is  the  sure  gauge  of  your 
personal  force  in  society  and  in  the  world.  A  man  with  a  resolute  conscience  wUl 
always  be  a  power.  IV.  As  the  man  is  in  faith,  so  is  his  strength.  Ah  1  that's 
the  main  point  of  all.  What  a  work  that  brave  soul  accomplished  all  through 
unshaken  confidence  in  his  God  I  Be  that  faith  yours,  young  men,  and  you  shall 
be  strong,  and  shall  overcome  the  wicked  one.  There  is  no  strength  in  the  world 
to  compare  with  that  which  faith  imparts,  especially  the  faith  which  lays  hold  of 
a  risen  and  all-sufficient  Eedeemer.  The  splendid  undertakings  of  an  Alexander, 
a  Hannibal,  a  Caesar,  are  nothing  to  the  achievements  which  it  has  accomphshed. 
It  has  mastered  legions  of  passions,  quelled  the  turbulence  of  lust,  overcome  the 
world,  driven  the  devil  to  flight,  and  thrown  open  an  entrance  to  the  palaces  of 
heaven  I    (/.  T.  Davidson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  23-86.  Bole  tbou  over  u .  ; .  ftr  thou  Iiast  delivered  xuL—Qideon'i  after- 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

life : — Maay  a  man  does  well  in  times  of  difficulty  and  danger  who  fails  entirely  in 
prosperity.  It  remains  for  us  to  see  whether  Gideon  yielded  to  this  greatest  of 
temptations.  Did  he  now  allow  selfishness  instead  of  faith  and  duty  to  become  the 
ruling  principle  of  his  hfe  ?  That  question  had  to  be  practically  answered  at  the 
great  assembly  that  was  held  on  his  return.  He  stood  there  on  the  pinnacle  of 
glory.  He  was  at  once  the  Wallace  and  the  Bruce  of  his  native  land.  And  his  very 
modesty  in  claiming  so  little  for  himself  made  his  glory  greater.  Vanquished  by 
his  generosity  as  much  as  Penuel  and  Succoth  had  been  vanquished  by  his  arms, 
Ephraim  probably  took  the  lead  in  the  offer  of  kingly  authority  that  was  made  to 
him.  That  offer  was  the  climax  of  his  natural  glory.  His  rejection  of  it  was  tho 
climax  of  his  moral  and  spiritual  glory.  Now,  were  not  the  proposal  and  tho 
reason  for  it  good  alike  ?  Gideon  had  undoubtedly  displayed  every  kingly  quality 
— skill  in  war,  wisdom  in  council,  prudent  reserve,  patient  determination,  and 
superiority  to  every  petty  motive  and  desire.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  had  it 
been  right  for  any  man  to  become  king  then,  he  was  the  very  man  to  fiU  the  place. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  proposal  was  in  many  respects  prompted  by  right 
feeling,  and  in  some  respects  a  wise  one.  But  the  leaders  of  Israel  did  not  fully 
understand  the  wants  of  their  age.  Looked  at  either  spiritually  or  politically,  kingly 
rule  would  then  have  been  premature.  It  was  needful  that  God  should  still  manifest 
His  presence  at  times  in  dkect  and  striking  ways.  The  nation  had  not  learnt  the 
truth  of  His  continual  presence.  They  had  not  learnt  this  truth  sufficiently  to 
warrant  its  being  even  partially  obscured  by  the  intervention  of  a  single  human 
ruler.  Neither,  considering  the  question  in  its  lower,  its  political,  aspect,  was  there 
yet  enough  cohesion  or  common  feeling  among  the  tribes  to  enable  them  to  work 
permanently  together  as  a  united  people.  Now,  I  do  not  say  that  such  reasons  for 
rejecting  the  offer  made  to  him  were  distinctly  present  to  the  mind  of  Gideon ;  but 
we  can  see  them  now,  and  he  was  guided  aright  by  the  instinctive  entering  into  tho 
mind  of  God,  the  instinctive  comprehension  of  the  Divine  plan,  which  is  one  of  the 
choicest  gifts  that  God  confers  on  those  who  live  in  close  communion  with  Him. 
The  very  fault  of  Israel  in  not  recognising  the  hand  of  God,  and  in  offering  tho 
crown  on  that  account  to  Gideon,  was  made  the  occasion  of  setting  emphatically 
before  them  the  very  truth  they  needed — the  occasion  of  gathering  up  for  them  tho 
spiritual  meaning  of  the  whole  of  this  portion  of  their  history.  Thus,  by  his  faith- 
fulness and  self-denial,  Gideon  became  the  means  of  bringing  spiritual  benefits  to 
his  people  as  real  and  more  enduring  than  the  political  and  social  ones  that  his 
sword  had  won.  And  so  the  time  came  at  last  when  God's  immediate  presence  got 
to  be  recognised  in  some  such  real  though  confused,  imperfect  way  as  truths  do  get 
recognised  among  men.  The  time  arrived  for  Jehovah  retiring,  so  to  speak, 
somewhat  into  the  background  when  He  appointed  David,  the  man  after  His 
own  heart,  to  take  His  place  visibly.  And  this  brings  us  to  the  point  at  which 
Gideon  is  no  longer  a  guiding  light,  but  a  beacon  to  warn  us  of  our  danger.  Very 
rightly  had  he  read  in  all  that  had  occurred  the  lesson  that  it  was  Jehovah,  and 
in  the  meantime  Jehovah  only  and  immediately,  that  must  govern  Israel.  Very 
nobly  had  he  refused  power  in  which  he  would  have  delighted,  in  order  that  he 
might  get  this  lesson  impressed  upon  his  people.  But  at  this  point  he  grew 
impatient  at  the  people's  dulness,  and  at  the  slowness  of  the  evolution  of  the 
scheme  of  Providence.  He  had  done  much  to  make  Israel  feel  the  nearness  of 
the  God  whom  he  trusted  in  and  loved  so  fervently.  Might  he  not  now  take  a 
further  and  more  influential  step?  Might  not  means  be  devised  by  which  this 
wonderful  dehverance  could  be  effectually  commemorated,  and  coming  generations 
be  made  really  to  feel  that  it  was  Jehovah  alone  that  had  delivered  or  that  could 
deliver?  Thus  he  would  help  on  God's  plan  by  his  own  shrewd  contrivance. 
With  this  object  he  took  advantage  of  the  enthusiasm  that  prevailed — an  enthusiasm 
of  admiration  for  himself  that  was  only  heightened  by  his  refusal  of  the  crown, 
vmwelcome  though  that  refusal  was.  He  asked  for  a  certain  portion  of  the  spoil, 
and  it  was  placed  at  once  at  his  disposal.  With  this  he  made  an  ephod  and  placed 
it  in  his  own  city,  Ophrah.  In  all  this  Gideon  greatly  erred.  His  natural  fondness 
for  devices  and  his  skill  in  shrewd  contrivance,  kept  in  check  till  now,  and  made 
useful  by  his  living  faith  and  strict  obedience,  had  led  him  at  last  astray.  Forming 
plans  of  his  own  without  being  in  direct  communion  with  the  God  who  had  guided 
him  tiU  now,  he  failed  to  meet  the  wants  of  his  time ;  nay,  he  pandered  to  its  most 
dangerous  vices.  That  happened  here  which  happens  so  continually  in  the  Church's 
tangled  story.  Excessive  reverence  for  the  past  was  made  a  substitute  for  walking 
with  the  personal  God  in  the  Uving  present.    It  is  sad  that  one  who  had  believed 


CHAP.  Tiu.]  JUDGES.  159 

so  steadfastly,  one  who  had  served  so  well  and  done  so  much,  should  thus,  through 
impatience  and  self-will,  have  stumbled  at  the  end.  Yet  even  this  bears  its  lesson 
with  it — the  lesson  that  even  in  the  noblest  of  God's  servants  we  cannot  find  a 
perfect  model;  that  in  communion  with  the  present  Spirit  we  must  learn  for 
ourselves  to  judge  concerning  what  is  to  be  admired  and  what  to  be  only  shunned 
in  the  very  best  and  greatest  of  mankind.  One  perfect  example  there  is,  but  only  one : 
He  who  is  man,  but  also  more  than  man,  and  who  is  our  pattern  most  of  all  in  this 
— that,  Son  of  God  and  head  of  humanity  as  He  was.  He  yet  did  in  each  particular, 
not  His  own  will,  but  the  will  of  the  Father  that  had  sent  Him.  {W.  Miller,  M.A.) 
Gideon,  the  deliverer : — I.  Gideon  teaches  us  the  impoktance  of  having  our  faith 
STEENGTHENED.  Any  means  Gideon  possessed  for  accomplishing  the  work  he  had 
undertaken  were,  humanly  speaking,  altogether  inadequate.  He  had  not  a  chance 
of  success,  if  it  could  be  said  with  truth,  "There  is  no  hope  for  him  in  God." 
Faith  being  then,  as  faith  is  stUl,  the  medium  of  connection  between  human  weak- 
ness and  Divine  power,  it  was  his  mainstay.  He  was  thrown  entirely  on  its 
strength.  The  ship  does  not  ride  the  storm  otherwise  than  by  the  hold  her  anchor 
takes  of  the  solid  ground.  By  that,  which  lies  in  the  calm  depths  below,  as  little 
moved  by  the  waters  that  swell  and  roll  and  foam  above,  as  by  the  winds  that  lash 
them  into  fury,  she  resists  the  gale,  and  rides  the  billows  of  the  stormiest  sea.  But 
her  safety  depends  on  something  else  also.  When  masts  are  struck  and  sails  are 
furled,  and,  anchored  off  reef  or  rocky  shore,  she  is  labouring  in  the  wild  tumult 
for  her  Ufe,  it  likewise  Ues  in  the  strength  of  her  cable  and  of  the  iron  arms  that 
grasp  the  solid  ground.  By  these  she  hangs  to  it;  and  thus  not  only  the  firm 
earth,  but  their  strength  also,  is  her  security.  Let  the  flukes  of  the  anchor  or 
strands  of  the  cable  snap,  and  her  fate  is  sealed.  Nothing  can  avert  it.  Powerless 
to  resist,  and  swept  forward  by  the  sea,  she  drives  on  ruin ;  and  hurled  against  an 
iron  shore,  her  timbers  are  crushed  to  pieces  like  a  shell.  And  what  anchor  and 
cable  are  to  her,  faith,  by  which  man  makes  God's  strength  his  own,  was  to 
Gideon,  and  is  stiU  to  believers  in  their  times  of  trial,    11.  Gideon  teaches  us  to 

MAKE   THOP.OUGH  WORK  OF  WHAT   BELONGS  TO  OUR   DELIVERANCE   FROM   SIN.      In  closing 

the  account  of  what  God  did  for  him,  and  through  him  for  his  people,  the  historian 
says,  "  Thus  was  Midian  subdued  before  the  children  of  Israel,  so  that  they  lifted 
up  their  heads  no  more."  And  how  was  this  accomplished?  The  remarkable 
victory  God  wrought  for  Gideon,  without  any  effort  on  his  part,  may  be  regarded 
as  a  type  of  that  greater,  better  victory  which,  without  any  effort  on  ours,  God's 
Son  wrought  for  us  when  He  took  our  nature  and  our  sins  upon  Him — dying,  the 
just  for  the  unjust,  that  we  might  be  saved.  Gideon  followed  up  this  victory  by 
calling  all  possible  resources  to  his  aid.  He  summoned  the  whole  country  to  arms, 
as,  accompanied  by  his  famous  three  hundred  men,  he  hung  on  the  skirts  of  the 
broken  host,  and  with  sword  bathed  in  their  blood  cut  down  the  fugitives — kings, 
princes,  captains,  and  common  soldiers — with  an  eye  that  knew  no  pity  and  a  hand 
that  did  not  spare.  Now,  it  is  to  work  as  thorough,  and  against  enemies  more  for- 
midable, that  He  who  trod  the  winepress  alone,  redeeming  us  to  God  by  His  blood, 
calls  all  His  followers.  By  resolute  self-denial,  by  constant  watchfulness,  by  earnest 
prayer,  by  the  diligent  use  of  every  means  of  grace,  and  above  all  by  the  help  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  we  are  to  labour  to  cast  sin  out  of  our  hearts.  This  is  no  easy  work. 
But  heaven  is  not  to  be  reached  by  easy-going  people.  Like  a  beleaguered  city, 
where  men  scale  the  walls  and  swarm  in  at  the  deadly  breach,  the  violent  take  it 
by  force.  The  rest  it  offers  is  for  the  weary.  The  crowns  it  confers  are  for 
warriors'  brows.  [T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Gideon  at  his  best : — ^A  man  is  at  his  best 
when  he  overcomes  a  great  temptation,  when  he  shows  the  might  of  a  regal  spirit, 
and  conquers  himself.  Gideon  now  reaches  the  climax  of  goodness,  which  is  true 
greatness.  I,  Kingship  offered  to  him.  Here  is — 1,  An  appeal  to  the  love  of 
power.  Men  love  power.  "What  disaster  ambition  has  produced!  The  evils  of 
war.  The  tricks  of  diplomatists.  Prostitution  of  talents.  Sacrifice  of  principle. 
2.  An  appeal  to  paternal  affection.  Positions  for  some,  if  not  all,  of  Gideon's  sons. 
The  first  of  a  kingly  race.  The  founder  of  a  royal  family.  An  opportunity  seldom 
presented.  A  rare  opening.  3.  An  appeal  to  the  desire  of  posthumous  fame.  To 
live  after  death  a  widespread  and  all  but  universal  desire.  One  indication  of  our 
immortality.  The  opportunity  now  presented  to  Gideon  to  satisfy  desire  in  a 
tangible  form.  His  name  inscribed  in  the  roU  of  Israel's  kings.  Who  is  the 
man  to  refuse  ?  Gideon.  H.  Kingship  rejected  by  him,  1,  Gideon's  self-denial. 
2.  Gideon's  patriotism.  Shown  as  much  sometimes  by  what  a  man  refuses  to  do  as 
by  what  he  undertakes.    3.  Gideon's  loyalty  to  conscience.    The  voice  of  the  people 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

not  always  the  voice  of  God.  But  the  voice  of  conscience  directed  by  the  Bible 
and  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  voice  of  God.  Listen  to  that  voice. 
III.  Kingship  acknowledged  by  him.  1.  Fidelity  to  God.  2.  Eeproof  of  the  people. 
You  have  the  theocratic  form  of  government.  The  best  form.  Why  seek  to 
subvert  the  Divine  arrangement  ?  3.  A  true  regard  for  the  people's  welfare.  The 
people  do  not  always  know  what  is  for  the  best.  Here  learn  that  a  man  may  do 
his  best  and  seemingly  fail.  Gideon  before  his  age.  (Wm.  Burrows,  B. A.)  King- 
ship offered  and  refused : — The  nation  needed  a  settled  government,  a  centre  of 
authority  which  would  bind  the  tribes  together,  and  the  Abi-ezrite  chief  was  now 
clearly  marked  as  a  man  fit  for  royalty.  He  was  able  to  persuade  as  well  as  to 
fight ;  he  was  bold,  firm,  and  prudent.  But  to  the  request  that  he  should  become 
king  and  found  a  dynasty  Gideon  gave  an  absolute  refusal.  We  always  admire  a 
man  who  refuses  one  of  the  great  posts  of  human  authority  or  distinction.  The 
throne  of  Israel  was  even  at  that  time  a  flattering  offer.  But  should  it  have  been 
made  ?  There  are  few  who  wiU  pause  in  a  moment  of  high  personal  success  to 
think  of  the  point  of  morality  involved ;  yet  we  may  credit  Gideon  with  the  belief 
that  it  was  not  for  him  or  any  man  to  be  called  king  in  Israel.  As  a  judge  he  had 
partly  proved  himself ;  as  a  judge  he  had  a  Divine  call  and  a  marvellous  indica- 
tion: that  name  he  would  accept,  not  the  other.  One  of  the  chief  elements  of 
Gideon's  character  was  a  strong  but  not  very  spiritual  religiousness.  He  attributed 
his  success  entirely  to  God,  and  God  alone  he  desired  the  nation  to  acknowledge  as 
its  Head.  He  would  not  even  in  appearance  stand  between  the  people  and  their 
Divine  Sovereign,  nor  with  his  will  should  any  son  of  his  take  a  place  so  unlawful 
and  dangerous.  Along  with  his  devotion  to  God  it  is  quite  likely  that  the  caution 
of  Gideon  had  much  to  do  with  his  resolve.  Before  Gideon  could  estabhsh  himself 
in  a  royal  seat  he  would  have  to  fight  a  great  coalition  in  the  centre  and  south  and 
also  beyond  Jordan.  To  the  pains  of  oppression  would  succeed  the  agony  of  civil 
war.  Unwilling  to  kindle  a  fire  which  might  burn  for  years  and  perhaps  consume 
himself,  he  refused  to  look  at  the  proposal,  flattering  and  honourable  as  it  was. 
But  there  was  another  reason  for  his  decision  which  may  have  had  even  more 
weight.  Like  many  men  who  have  distinguished  themselves  in  one  way,  his  real 
ambition  lay  in  a  different  direction.  We  think  of  him  as  a  military  genius.  He 
for  his  part  looked  to  the  priestly  office  and  the  transmission  of  Divine  oracles  as 
his  proper  calling.  He  desired  to  cultivate  that  intercourse  with  Heaven  which 
more  than  anything  else  gave  him  the  sense  of  dignity  and  strength.  From  the 
offer  of  a  crown  he  turned  as  if  eager  to  don  the  robe  of  a  priest  and  hsten  for  the 
holy  oracles  that  none  beside  himself  seemed  able  to  receive.  (R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.) 
Gideon's  unambitious  spirit : — 1  Gideon's  piety.  The  Israelites  offered  Gideon  the 
rule  over  them.  Few  men  would  have  refused  so  tempting  an  offer.  But  Gideon 
knew  that  he  could  not  accept  it  without  trenching  upon  God's  prerogative.  In 
the  spiritual  application,  our  wisdom  is  to  make  request  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  "Eule 
Thou  over  us,  for  Thou  hast  delivered  us."  He  hath  "saved  us"  at  the  cost  of 
His  own  life-blood,  "  from  our  enemies,  and  from  the  hand  of  all  that  hate  us." 
2.  Gideon's  modesty.  What  he  had  sought  in  his  service  against  Midian  was 
not  his  own  aggrandisement,  but  Israel's  welfare  (1  Cor.  ix.  18,  23  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  14, 
15).  Ambition  and  self-seeking  mar  the  service  of  God,  and  injure  the  minister's 
own  soul.  The  service  itself  is  its  own  highest  honour  and  best  reward. 
8.  Gideon's  wisdom,  too,  appears  in  his  choosing  to  remain  in  the  station  to  which 
the  providence  of  God  had  called  him.  Restlessness  can  never  bring  happiness. 
The  adage  is  true,  He  who  carves  for  himself  often  cuts  his  fingers ;  he  who  leaves 
God  to  carve  for  him  shall  never  have  an  empty  plate.  *'  Seekest  thou  great 
things  for  thyself,  seek  them  not "  (Jer.  zlv.  6).    {A.  R.  Faustet,  MA.) 

Vers.  24-27.  Gideon  made  an  ephod. — Gideon,  the  eeelesiastie : — ^A  strong  bat  not 
spiritual  religiousness  is  the  chief  note  of  Gideon's  character.  It  may  be  objected 
that  such  an  one,  if  he  seeks  ecclesiastical  office,  does  so  unworthily ;  but  to  say  so 
is  an  uncharitable  error.  It  is  not  thb  devout  temper  alone  that  finds  attraction  in 
the  ministry  of  sacred  things ;  nor  should  a  love  of  place  and  power  be  named  as 
the  only  other  leading  motive.  One  who  is  not  devout  may  in  aU  sincerity  covet 
the  honour  of  standing  for  God  before  the  congregation,  leading  the  people  in  wor- 
ship and  interpreting  the  sacred  oracles.  A  vulgar  explanation  of  human  desire  is 
often  a  false  one;  it  is  so  here.  The  ecclesiastic  may  show  few  tokens  of  the 
spiritual  temper,  the  other-worldliness,  the  glowing  and  simple  truth  we  rightly 
account  to  be  the  proper  marks  of  a  Christian  ministry ;  yet  he  may  by  his  own 


CHAP,  vra.]  JUDGES.  161 

reckoning  have  obeyed  a  clear  call.  His  function  in  this  case  is  to  maintain  order 
and  administer  outward  rites  with  dignity  and  care — a  limited  range  of  duty  indeed, 
but  not  without  utility,  especially  when  there  are  inferior  and  less  conscientious  men 
in  oflSce  not  far  away.  He  does  not  advance  faith,  but  according  to  his  power  he 
maintains  it.  But  the  ecclesiastic  must  have  the  ephod.  The  man  who  feels  the 
dignity  of  religion  more  than  its  humane  simplicity,  realising  it  as  a  great  move- 
ment of  absorbing  interest,  will  naturally  have  regard  to  the  means  of  increasing 
dignity  and  making  the  movement  impressive.  "When  it  is  supposed  that  Gideon 
fell  away  from  his  first  faith  in  making  this  image  the  error  lies  in  over-estimating 
his  spirituality  at  the  earlier  stage.  Vr :;  must  not  think  that  at  any  time  the  use 
of  a  symbolic  image  would  have  seemed  wrong  to  him.  He  acted  at  Ophrah  as 
priest  of  the  true  God.  And  yet,  pure,  and  for  the  time  even  elevated,  in  the 
motive,  Gideon's  attempt  at  priestcraft  led  to  his  fall.  "The  thing  became  a 
snare  to  Gideon  and  his  house,"  perhaps  in  the  way  of  bringing  in  riches  and 
creating  the  desire  for  more.  (E.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)  Ruler  or  priest : — Underlying 
Gideon's  desire  to  fill  the  office  of  priest  there  was  a  dull  perception  of  the  highest 
function  of  one  man  in  relation  to  others.  It  appears  to  the  common  mind 
a  great  thing  to  rule,  to  direct  secular  affairs,  to  have  the  command  of  armies 
and  the  power  of  filling  offices  and  conferring  dignities ;  and  no  doubt  to  one  who 
desires  to  serve  his  generation  well,  royalty,  political  power,  even  municipal  office, 
offer  many  excellent  opportunities.  But  set  kingship  on  this  side,  kingship  con- 
cerned with  the  temporal  and  earthly,  or  at  best  humane  aspects  of  life,  and  on  the 
other  side  priesthood  of  the  true  kind  which  has  to  do  with  the  spiritual,  by  which 
God  is  revealed  to  man  and  the  holy  ardour  and  Divine  aspirations  of  the  human 
will  are  sustained,  and  there  can  be  no  question  which  is  the  more  important.  A 
clever,  strong  man  may  be  a  ruler.  It  needs  a  good  man,  a  pious  man,  a  man  of 
heavenly  power  and  insight,  to  be  in  any  right  sense  a  priest — one  who  reaUy 
stands  between  God  and  men,  bearing  the  sorrows  of  his  kind,  their  trials, 
doubts,  cries  and  prayers,  on  his  heart,  and  presenting  them  to  God,  interpreting 
to  the  weary  and  sad  and  troubled  the  messages  of  heaven.  {Ibid.)  A  mock 
ephod : — In  Paul's  words,  Gideon  did  not  know  what  sin  was.  He  knew  suffering 
in  plenty;  but,  shallow  old  soldier  as  he  was,  he  did  not  know  the  secret  of 
all  suffering.  Gideon  was  as  ignorant  as  the  mass  of  men  are  what  God's  law 
really  is,  what  sin  really  is,  and  what  the  only  cure  of  sin  really  is.  At  bottom  that 
was  Gideon's  faU.  And  accordingly  Gideon  made  a  mock  ephod  at  Ophra,  while 
all  the  time  God  had  made  a  true  and  sure  ephod  both  for  Himself  and  for  Gideon 
and  for  all  Israel  at  Shiloh.  And  God's  ephod  had  an  altar  connected  with  it,  and 
a  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  and  the  pardon  of  sin,  and  a  clean 
heart,  and  a  new  life  ;  all  of  which  Israel  so  much  needed,  but  all  of  which  Gideon, 
with  all  his  high  services,  knew  nothing  about.  Sin  was  the  cause  of  all  the  evil 
that  Gideon  in  his  bravery  had  all  his  hfe  been  battling  with  ;  but,  instead  of  going 
himself,  and  taking  his  Ironsides  and  aU  his  people  up  with  him  to  God's  house 
against  sin,  Gideon  set  up  a  sham  house  of  God  of  his  own,  and  a  sham  service  of 
God  of  his  own,  with  the  result  to  himself  and  to  Israel  that  the  sacred  writer  puts 
in  such  plain  words.  Thiok  of  Gideon,  of  all  men  in  Israel,  leading  all  Israel 
a-whoring  away  from  God  1  The  pleasure-loving  people  came  up  to  Gideon's 
pleasure-giving  ephod,  when  both  he  and  they  should  have  gone  to  God's  penitential 
ephod.  They  forgot  all  about  the  Midianites  as  they  came  up  to  Ophra  to  eat  and 
to  drink  and  to  dance.  When,  had  they  been  well  and  wisely  led,  they  would  have 
gone  to  Shiloh  with  the  Midianites  "  ever  before  them,"  till  the  God  of  Israel  would 
have  kept  the  Midianites  and  all  their  other  enemies  for  ever  away  from  them. 
Gideon  was  a  splendid  soldier,  but  he  was  a  very  short-sighted  priest.  He  put  on 
a  costly  ephod  indeed,  but  it  takes  a  great  deal  more  than  a  costly  ephod  to  make  a 
prevailing  priest.  I  see,  and  you  must  see,  men  every  day  who  are  as  brave  and 
as  bold  as  Gideon,  and  as  full  of  anger  and  revenge  against  all  the  wi'ongs  and  all 
the  miseries  of  their  fellow-men ;  men  and  women  who  take  their  lives  in  their 
hands  to  do  battle  with  ignorance  and  vice  and  all  the  other  evils  that  the  land  lies 
under  ;  and,  aU  the  time,  they  go  on  repeating  Gideon's  fatal  mistake  ;  till,  at  the 
end  of  their  life  they  leave  aU  these  wrongs  and  miseries  very  much  as  they  found 
them  :  nothing  better,  but  rather  worse.  And  all  because  they  set  up  an  ephod  of 
their  own  devising  in  the  place  of  the  ephod  and  the  altar  and  the  sacrifice  and  the 
intercession  that  God  has  set  up  for  these  and  all  other  evils.  They  say,  and  in 
their  goodness  of  heart  they  do  far  more  than  merely  say — what  shall  the  poor  eat, 
and  what  shall  they  drink,  and  how  shall  they  be  housed  ?    At  great  cost  to  them- 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.vm. 

salYes  they  put  better  houses  for  the  working  classes,  and  places  of  refreshment  and 
amusement,  and  reading-rooms,  and  libraries,  and  baths,  and  open  spaces,  and 
secular  schools  and  "  moderate  "  churches  in  the  room  of  the  Cross  and  the  Church 
and  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ;  and  they  complain  that  the  Midianites  do  not 
remove  but  come  back  faster  than  they  can  chase  them  out.  Either  the  Cross  of 
Christ  was  an  excess  and  a  superfluity,  or  your  expensive  but  maladroit  nostrums 
for  sin  are  an  insult  to  Him  and  to  His  Cross.  (A.  Whyte,  D.B.)  Gideon^ t  great 
error : — 1.  Gideon's  sin  injurious  to  himself.  Scripture,  unlike  mere  human 
biographies,  tells  faithfully  the  failings  of  its  heroes.  The  record  of  the  believer's 
blemishes  is  as  edifying  as  that  of  his  graces.  Good  intentions  are  no  excuse  for 
self-willed  inventions.  An  oracle  of  Gideon's  own  contrivance,  and  made  out  of 
the  golden  amulets  of  idolaters,  could  never  be  pleasing  to  God,  and  was  a  bad 
return  to  make  for  the  Divine  favour  in  granting  him  victory.  It  "  became  a  snare 
unto  Gideon  "  himself,  by  lessening  his  zeal  for  the  house  of  God  in  ShUoh.  Still 
more  so  to  his  famUy.  2.  Gideon's  sin  had  a  deadly  effect  on  the  nation.  One 
false  step  of  a  good  man  leads  multitudes  astray.  If  Gideon  could  have  risen  from 
the  grave  and  seen  the  consequences  of  his  one  grand  error,  how  he  would  have 
grieved !     [A.  R.  Fausset,  M.A.) 

Vers.  29-35.  And  Jerubbaal  the  son  of  Joash  went  and  dwelt  In  his  own  house. — 

Gideon  at  his  worst : — Man  is  a  strange  mixture  of  greatness  and  of  httleness,  of 
goodness,  and  of  badness.  The  one  lies  very  close  to  the  other.  I.  Gideon  at  his 
worst  MORAXJLT.  Bibhcal  saints  are  not  made  more  than  human.  Their  virtues  are 
described  that  we  may  imitate  them,  their  vices  depicted  that  we  may  avoid  them. 
Gideon  not  without  his  failings :  many  wives,  and  even  concubines.  Remember  the 
degenerate  times  in  which  he  lived.  No  man  altogether  superior  to  the  influences 
of  his  age ;  Gideon  not.  His  guilt  not  so  great  as  if  he  had  Uved  in  our  days. 
Polygamy  now  almost  an  impossible  crime.  Be  thankful  for  what  the  gospel  has 
done  for  modern  society.  In  those  days,  too,  a  man  became  a  ruler,  and  was  per- 
mitted to  do  things  not  allowed  to  the  private  individual.  Great  positions  have 
always  great  moral  dangers.  In  lonely  walks  of  life  there  is  favourable  opportunity 
lor  the  growth  of  the  white  flower  of  a  blameless  character.  Zeal  for  the  Lord  of 
hosts  may  go  along  with  imperfection.  Zeal  will  not  condone  for  the  imperfection. 
11.  Gideon  at  his  worst  physically.  Gideon  lived  to  a  good  old  age ;  stiU  he  died, 
and  was  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  Joash.  He  who  overcame  vast  multitudes  is 
now  overcome  of  death.  Mighty  Gideon  lies  powerless  in  the  sepulchre  of  Joash. 
Thousands  passing  away  daily,  and  yet  the  living  regard  not  the  common  fate.  Oh, 
that  men  would  consider  their  latter  end !  To  live  in  view  of  death  is  not  to  die 
the  sooner,  is  not  to  Uve  less  nobly  or  usefuUy.  IH.  Gideon  at  his  worst  influen- 
TLiLLY.  Not  always  true  that  the  good  which  a  man  does  is  buried  along  with  his 
bones.  A  good  man's  influence  must  abide  more  or  less.  A  man's  greatness  shows 
that  he  can  project  an  influence  that  shall  outlast  his  earthly  life.  Yet  how  often 
we  appear  to  see  the  efforts  made  by  a  good  man  in  life  blighted  at  his  death.  As 
Boon  as  Gideon  was  dead,  the  children  of  Israel  turned  again,  and  went  a-whoring 
after  Baalim,  and  made  Baal-berith  their  god.  Pathetic  the  statement,  short-lived 
Gideon's  influence.  The  people  restrained  by  Gideon's  presence,  but  not  converted 
by  his  example.  Superficial  changes  not  lasting.  Rulers  may  do  much,  but  the 
gospel  only  can  work  a  permanent  reformation.  [Win.  Burrowt,  B.A.)  The 
children  of  Israel  remembered  not. — The  origin,  nature,  and  baseness  of  ingrati- 
tude : — I.  What  gratitude  is,  and  upon  what  the  obligation  to  it  is  grounded. 
This  virtue  includes — 1.  A  particular  observation,  or  taking  notice  of  a  kindness 
received,  and  consequently  of  the  goodwill  and  affection  of  the  person  who  did  that 
kindness.  For  still,  in  this  case,  the  mind  of  the  giver  is  more  to  be  attended  to 
than  the  matter  of  the  gift;  it  being  this  that  stamps  it  properly  a  favour  and  gives 
it  the  noble  and  endearing  denomination  of  a  kindness.  2.  That  which  brings  it 
from  the  heart  into  the  mouth,  and  makes  a  man  express  the  sense  he  has  of  the 
benefit  done  him  by  thanks,  acknowledgments,  and  gratulations ;  and  where  the 
heart  is  full  of  the  one,  it  will  certainly  overflow  and  run  over  in  the  other.  3.  An 
endeavour  to  recompense  our  benefactor,  and  to  do  something  that  may  redound  to 
his  advantage,  in  consideration  of  what  he  has  done  towards  ours.  II.  The  nature 
AND  baseness  OF  INGRATITUDE.  There  is  not  any  one  vice  or  ill  quality  incident  to 
the  mind  of  man,  against  which  the  world  has  raised  such  a  loud  and  universal 
outcry,  as  against  ingratitude.  It  is  properly  an  insensibility  of  kindnesses  received, 
v>ithout  any  endeavour  either  to  acknowledge  or  repay  them.     To  repay  them, 


CHAP,  rs.]  JUDGES.  163 

indeed,  by  a  return  equivalent,  is  not  in  every  one's  power,  and  consequently  cannot 
be  his  duty  ;  but  thanks  are  a  tribute  payable  by  the  poorest.  For  surely  nature 
gives  no  man  a  mouth  to  be  always  eating,  and  never  saying  grace ;  nor  a  hand 
only  to  grasp  and  to  receive :  but  as  it  is  furnished  with  teeth  for  the  one,  so  it 
should  have  a  tongue  also  for  the  other :  and  the  hands  that  are  so  often  reached 
out  to  take  and  to  accept,  should  be  sometimes  lifted  up  also  to  bless.  The  world 
is  maintained  by  intercourse ;  and  the  whole  course  of  nature  is  a  great  exchange, 
in  which  one  good  turn  is  and  ought  to  be  the  stated  price  of  another.  III.  The 
PBiNciPLE  PKOM  WHICH  IT  PROCEEDS.  In  One  word,  it  proceeds  from  that  which  we 
caU  Hi-nature.  1.  A  proneness  to  do  Ul  turns,  attended  with  a  complacency,  or 
secret  joy  of  mind,  upon  the  sight  of  any  mischief  that  befalls  another.  2.  An  utter 
insensibility  of  any  good  or  kindness  done  him  by  others.    IV.  Those  ill  qualities 

THAT  INSEPARABLY  ATTEND  INGRATITUDE,  AND  ARE  NEVER  DISJOINED  FROM  IT.      1.  Pride. 

The  original  ground  of  our  obligation  to  gratitude  is  that  each  man  has  but  a  limited 
right  to  the  good  things  of  the  world,  and  that  the  natural  and  allowed  way  by 
which  one  is  to  obtain  possession  of  these  things  is  by  his  own  industrious  acquisi- 
tion of  them.  Consequently,  when  any  good  is  dealt  to  him  any  other  way  than  by 
his  own  labour,  he  is  accountable  to  the  person  who  dealt  it  to  him,  as  for  a  thing 
to  which  he  had  no  right  or  claim  by  any  action  of  his  own.  But  pride  shuts  a 
man's  eyes  against  all  this,  and  so  fills  him  with  an  opinion  of  his  own  transcendent 
worth,  that  he  imagines  himself  to  have  a  right  to  all  things,  as  well  those  that 
are  the  effects  and  fruits  of  other  men's  labours  as  of  his  own.  So  that  if  any 
advantage  accrues  to  him  by  the  liberality  of  his  neighbour,  he  does  not  look  upon 
it  as  a  free  and  undeserved  gift,  but  rather  as  a  just  homage  to  that  worth  and 
merit  which  he  conceives  to  be  in  himself,  and  to  which  aU  the  world  ought  to 
become  tributary.  2.  Hard-heartedness,  or  want  of  compassion.  It  was  ingratitude 
that  put  the  poniard  into  the  hand  of  Brutus,  but  it  was  want  of  compassion  which 
thrust  it  into  Cassar's  heart.  V.  Some  useful  consequences,  by  way  of  application, 
raoM  the  premises.  1.  Never  enter  into  a  league  of  friendship  with  an  ungrateful 
person :  that  is,  plant  not  thy  friendship  upon  a  dunghill ;  it  is  too  noble  a  plant  for 
so  base  a  soil.  2.  As  a  man  tolerably  discreet  ought  by  no  means  to  attempt  the 
making  of  such  an  one  his  friend,  so  neither  is  he,  in  the  next  place,  to  presume  to 
think  that  he  shall  be  able  so  much  as  to  alter  or  ameUorate  the  humour  of  an 
ungrateful  person  by  any  acts  of  kindness,  though  never  so  frequent,  never  so 
obliging.  Flints  may  be  melted,  but  an  ungrateful  heart  cannot ;  no,  not  by  the 
strongest  and  the  noblest  flame.  I  limit  not  the  operation  of  God's  grace ;  but, 
humanly  speaking,  it  seldom  fails  but  that  an  iU  principle  has  its  course,  and  nature 
makes  good  its  blow.  3.  Wheresoever  you  see  a  man  notoriously  ungrateful,  you 
may  rest  assured  that  there  is  in  him  no  true  sense  of  religion.     {R.  South,  D.D.) 


CHAPTEE   IX. 


Vees.  1-22.  Abimelecli  the  son  of  JerutobaaL — The  election  of  the  tuurper  to  be 
iiafiU — ^I.  Contrasts  in  the  history  op  God's'  own  peoplb.  After  Gideon — 
Abimelechl    11.  The  best  op  fathers  may  have  the  worst  op  sons.    III.   XJse- 

rUIi    PURPOSES   ARE    SERVED    IN    RECORDING   A   WICKED    MAN's    LIFE    IN    THE    BOOK    OP 

God.  1.  The  record  is  given  as  a  curse,  and  not  as  a  blessing.  2.  Such  a  record 
illustrates  the  truth  of  God's  testimony  respecting  human  character.  3.  It  shows 
by  practical  example  the  frightfully  evU  nature  of  sin  when  allowed  to  develop 
itseli  unchecked.  4.  Wicked  deeds  recorded  are  beacons  set  up  to  warn  us  from 
the  rocks  and  whirlpools  of  sin.  IV.  God  can  bring  accusers  against  the 
wiciDED  when  they  FANCY  THEMSELVES  MOST  SECURE.  (J".  P.  Millar.)  AMmelech, 
the  adventurer : — Abimelech  is  the  Oriental  adventurer,  and  uses  the  methods  of 
aSother  age  than  ours ;  yet  we  have  our  examples,  and  if  they  are  less  scandalous 
in  some  ways,  if  they  are  apart  from  bloodshed  and  savagery,  they  are  stiU 
sufficiently  feeing  to  those  who  cherish  the  faith  of  Divine  justice  and  providence. 
How  many  have  to  see  ith  amazement  the  adventurer  triumph  by  means  of 
seventy  pieces  of  silver  from  the  house  of  Baal  or  even  from  a  holier  treasury.  He 
in  a  selfish  and  cruel  game  seems  to  have  speedy  and  complete  success  denied  to 
the  best  and  purest  cause.    Fighting  for  his  own  hand  in  wicked  or  contemptuous 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

hardness  and  arrogant  conceit,  he  finds  support,  applause,  an  open  way.  Being 
no  prophet,  he  has  honour  in  his  own  town.  He  knows  the  art  of  the  stealthy- 
insinuation,  the  lying  promise,  and  the  flattering  murmur ;  he  has  skill  to  make  the 
favour  of  one  leading  person  a  step  to  securing  another.  When  a  few  important 
people  have  been  hoodwinked,  he  too  becomes  important,  and  "success"  is  assured. 
The  Bible,  most  entirely  honest  of  books,  frankly  sets  before  us  this  adventurer, 
Abimelech,  in  the  midst  of  the  judges  of  Israel,  as  low  a  specimen  of  "  success  "  as 
need  be  looked  for ;  and  we  trace  the  well-known  means  by  which  such  a  person  is 
promoted.  "His  mother's  brethren  spake  of  him,"  &c.  That  there  was  little  to 
say,  that  he  was  a  man  of  no  character,  mattered  not  the  least.  The  thing  was  to 
create  an  impression,  so  that  Abimelech's  scheme  might  be  introduced  and  forced. 
So  far  he  could  intrigue  and  then,  the  first  steps  gained,  he  could  mount.  But 
there  was  in  him  none  of  the  mental  power  that  afterwards  marked  Jehu,  none  of 
the  charm  that  survives  with  the  name  of  Absalom.  It  was  a  jealousy,  pride, 
ambition,  he  played,  as  the  most  jealous,  proud,  and  ambitious;  yet  for  three  years 
the  Hebrews  of  the  league,  blinded  by  the  desire  to  have  their  nation  hke  others, 
suffered  him  to  bear  the  name  of  king.  And  by  this  sovereignty  the  Israelites  who 
acknowledged  it  were  doubly  and  trebly  compromised.  Not  only  did  they  accept  a 
man  without  a  record,  they  believed  in  one  who  was  an  enemy  to  his  country's 
religion — one,  therefore,  quite  ready  to  trample  upon  its  liberty.  This  is  really  the 
beginning  of  a  worse  oppression  than  that  of  Jabin  or  of  Midian.  It  shows  on  the 
part  of  Hebrews  generally,  as  well  as  those  who  tamely  submitted  to  Abimelech's 
lordship,  a  most  abject  state  of  mind.  (JR.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)  Ambition 
destroys  the.  finer  feelings  of  men : — The  love  of  power  and  supremacy  absorbed, 
consumed  Napoleon.  Before  this  duty,  honour,  love,  humanity,  fell  prostrate. 
Josephine,  we  are  told,  was  dear  to  him  ;  but  the  devoted  wife,  who  had  stood  firm 
and  faithful  in  the  day  of  his  doubtful  fortunes,  was  cast  off  in  his  prosperity  to 
make  room  for  a  stranger,  who  might  be  more  subservient  to  his  power.  He  was 
affectionate,  we  are  told,  to  his  brothers  and  mother ;  but  his  brothers,  the  moment 
they  ceased  to  be  his  tools,  were  disgraced ;  and  his  mother,  it  is  said,  was  not 
allowed  to  sit  in  the  presence  of  her  imperial  son.  He  sometimes  softened,  we 
are  told,  by  the  sight  of  the  field  of  battle  strewn  with  the  wounded  and  dead. 
But  if  the  Moloch  of  his  ambition  claimed  new  heaps  of  slain  to-morrow  it 
was  never  denied.  With  all  his  sensibility  he  gave  millions  to  the  sword  with 
as  Uttle  compunction  as  he  would  have  brushed  away  so  many  insects  which  had 
infested  his  march.  {H.  E.  Channing.)  The  trees  went  forth  ...  to  anoint 
a  king. — The  j^ardble  of  the  trees : — This  Divine  parable  is  full  of  interest. 
It  is  the  oldest  complete  example  of  a  parable  blending  with  literal  history. 
IV  was  spoken  by  Jotham,  the  youngest  son  of  Gideon,  to  expose  the  unworthy 
conduct  of  the  Israelites,  and  to  arrest  them  in  their  course.  The  olive,  the 
vine,  and  the  fig-tree,  in  the  metaphorical  application,  would  be  his  father, 
his  brethren,  and  himself,  none  of  whom  would  be  king.  The  bramble  would 
be  Abiinelech,  who  would  either  reign  or  destroy,  and  who  would  in  the  end, 
as  the  parable  teaches,  introduce  so  wretched  a  system  as  to  entail  upon  himself 
and  people  mutual  destruction.  And  so  it  happened.  And  such  is  the  eternal  law. 
He  whose  throne  is  reached  through  falsehood  and  blood,  who  has  no  foundation 
of  virtue  and  right  and  worth  to  rest  upon,  must  continue  to  cement  with  fresh 
crime  the  edifice  he  has  reared,  and  so  to  add  to  the  fire  of  vengeance  that  is 
secretly  gathering  around  him,  until  at  length  some  additional  blow  breaks  the 
cover  under  which  it  has  been  smouldering,  and  it  bursts  upon  the  wicked  tyrant 
and  destroys,  as  it  was  with  this  Abimelech,  both  reign  and  life.  Such  is  the 
lesson  yielded  by  this  parable  in  its  letter,  as  a  warning  against  that  destructive 
ambition  which  has  so  often  desolated  the  earth,  in  ancient  and  in  modern  times. 
Before  quitting  this  part  of  the  subject,  allow  me  to  call  your  attention  to  the 
difference  between  metaphor  and  correspondence.  Metaphor  is  a  certain  Ukeness 
which  is  perceived  by  the  mind,  between  two  natural  things,  which  have  in  other 
respects  no  connection  with  one  another.  Correspondence  is  the  analogy  which 
exists  between  two  things,  one  spiritual  and  the  other  natural,  and  which  answer  to 
one  another  in  all  their  uses  and  in  all  respects.  We  might  go  further,  and 
attempt  to  show  that  in  all  cases  of  true  and  complete  correspondences  the 
spiritual  is  to  the  natural  as  the  cause  to  the  effect,  the  soul  to  the  body ;  but  upon 
this  we  cannot  now  enlarge.  We  have  dwelt  upon  the  parable  as  a  metaphor. 
The  olive-tree  stands  in  this  respect  for  Gideon.  Like  him,  it  was  most  valuable 
and  honoured,  and  like  him  it  would  not  reign.    In  other  respects  there  was 


CHAP.  IX.]  JUDGES.  165 

no  connection  or  relation  between  them,  and  both  were  natural  visible  objects. 
We  come  now  to  the  spiritual  sense  of  the  parable,  and  to  bring  this  out  we 
must  employ,  not  metaphor,  but  correspondence.  Perceptions,  or  acknowledged 
principles  of  truth  or  error,  grow  up  in  the  mind  Uke  trees  in  the  soil,  and  answer 
to  trees  in  all  their  progress.  Instruction  is  like  seed.  Instruction  in  Divine 
things  is  the  seed  of  all  that  is  great  and  good  in  the  soul.  "  The  seed,"  the 
Divine  Saviour  said,  "  is  the  Word  of  God  "  (Luke  viii.  11).  If  we  watch  the 
reception  and  growth  of  knowledge  in  the  mind,  until  it  becomes  a  clear  and 
enlarged  view,  and  at  length  a  productive  principle,  we  shaU  discern  the  closest 
analogy  to  the  progression  of  a  tree  from  seed  to  fruit.  In  our  text,  however,  we 
have  not  only  the  subject  of  trees  in  general  placed  before  us,  but  three  trees 
especially  are  singled  out  as  valuable,  but  declining  to  reign — the  olive,  the  fig-tree, 
and  the  vine :  and  one  as  worthless  determined  to  rule  or  to  destroy — the  bramble. 
Let  us  examine  these  singly ;  and  first,  the  ohve.  It  is  the  tree  most  esteemed  in 
Eastern  countries,  and  especially  in  Palestine.  Its  wood  yields  a  precious  gum, 
its  fruits  are  deUghtful  and  nutritious,  and  its  oil,  which  is  as  it  were  the  essence  of 
the  fruit  pressed  out,  is  used  in  food,  also  to  give  light,  and  as  holy  oil  in  the 
offerings  of  worship.  As  trees  correspond  to  truths  perceived  as  principles  in  the 
mind,  the  most  worthy  tree  will  correspond  to  the  most  valuable  principle,  that  is, 
the  wisdom  which  teaches  love  to  the  Lord.  This  principle  when  it  has  grown  up 
in  the  soul,  and  given  us  to  know  the  true  character  of  our  heavenly  Father, 
shows  us  that  He  is  not  only  loving,  but  love  itself,  infinite  love  unutterably 
tender,  unchangeably  merciful,  good  to  all,  whose  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His 
works.  This  is  the  celestial  olive-tree  which  yields  the  oil,  honoured  both  by  God 
and  man.  It  is  of  the  olive-tree  corresponding  to  the  interior  wisdom  which 
conjoins  the  soul  and  its  God  together,  and  through  which  holy  love  descends,  that 
we  are  info'rined^in  our  text  it  refused  to  be  king  over  the  trees.  The  Divine  Word 
teaches  us  by  this  that  the  spirit  of  rule  is  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  love.  Love 
desires  to  aid,  to  serve,  to  bless,  but  not  to  rule.  If  placed  in  positions  of  govern- 
ment and  responsibility,  it  accepts  them  that  it  may  minister,  not  that  it  may 
reign.  If  it  were  to  enter  into  the  desire  of  ruling  it  would  lose  its  fatness ;  or,  in 
other  words,  its  richness  and  its  joy.  The  fig-tree  is  next  brought  under  notice. 
It  was  one  of  the  most  common  fruit  trees^in  Palestine,  growing  often  on  the 
wayside.  It  corresponds  therefore  to  that  natural  perception  which  teaches  the 
ordinary  virtues  of  daily  life.  But  even  the  common  virtues  of  life,  to  be  genuine, 
niusf  be  separated  from  the  love  of  dominion.  It  is  not  always  so.  But  unless 
this  is  really  the  case,  there  is  no  sweetness  in  doing  good.  Our  good  in  fact  is  not 
good,  but  self  in  a  disguise.  A  person  will  sometimes  be  Hberal  in  his  support  of 
charities.  He  will  profess  the  utmost  sympathy  for  the  poor.  He  will  be  generous 
in  his  support  of  public  institutions  for  education  and  general  improvement.  His 
fig-tree  seems  to  hear  fine  fruit,  and  yet  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  love  of 
applause,  the  desire  to  be  paid  by  the  suffrages  of  his  fellow-citizens,  being  given  to 
confer  upon  him  political  power,  may  be  his  aim.  And  if  so,  his  figs  have  no 
sweetness,  and  are  not  good  fruit.  And  oh,  what  is  the  applause  of  men  com- 
pared with  the  sweetness  of  heaven  ?  What  are  fruits  worth  if  they  are  only  gilded 
dust?  (Jer.  xxiv.  8).  Such,  then,  is  the  lesson  conveyed  in  the  reply  of  the  fig-tree 
spiritually  understood.  Should  we  leave  the  sweetness  of  heavenly  virtue,  and  the 
real  goodness  of  works  which  will  abide  the  scrutiny  of  eternity,  for  the  empty 
pageantry  of  place  and  power,  sought  only  from  the  love  of  rule,  and  entailing 
bitterness  here,  and  misery  hereafter?  "  Then  said  the  trees  unto  the  vine,  Come 
thou  and  reign  over  us."  Vines  correspond  to  the  truths  of  faith.  The  Church, 
especially  as  to  its  principles  of  faith,  is  commonly  called  in  the  Scriptures  a  vine- 
yard. The  reason  is,  no  doubt,  that  the  influence  of  principles  of  true  faith  is  to 
the  mind  what  wine  is  to  the  body — it  strengthens  the  exhausted  and  cheers  the 
weary.  There  are  more  that  be  with  us  than  all  that  be  against  us :  why  then 
should  we  faint  or  despan?  A  God  of  love  has  created  and  prepared  us  for 
our  work.  His  creation  consists  of  innumerable  channels,  through  which  His 
benevolence  descends.  Loving  friends  are  around,  and  a  heaven  of  love  before  us. 
All  things  cheer  us  on.  The  mountains  run  down  with  new  wine.  The  vine,  in 
our  text,  speaks  of  its  wine  as  cheering  God  and  man.  And  when  we  perceive  that 
wine  is  the  emblem  of  encouraging  truth,  we  appreciate  the  force  of  the  Divine 
words.  For  when  man  is  cheered  by  truth  and  saved,  God  rejoices  with  him.  But 
the  vine  intimates  that,  if  she  sought  to  be  ruler  over  the  trees,  she  would  leave 
her  wine.    "  Should  I  leave  my  wine,  which  cheereth  God  and  man,  and  go  to  be 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

promoted  over  the  trees  ?  "  And  so  it  is.  If  any  one,  by  means  of  heavenly  truth 
seeks  dominion,  his  truth  ceases  to  be  saving.  It  is  poison,  not  wine,  to  him.  We 
come  now,  however,  to  a  plant  of  very  different  character,  and  you  will  find  the 
reply  quite  different.  "  Then  said  aU  the  trees  to  the  bramble,  Come  thou,  and 
reign  over  us."  The  reply  takes  it  for  granted  that  he  is  willing,  and  expresses  his 
determination  either  to  rule  or  destroy.  This  bramble  is  a  low  bushy  tree  with 
strong  thorns,  and  whose  wood  is  of  a  fiery  nature  easily  set  in  flames.  It  is  the 
emblem  of  the  lust  of  dominion,  which  is  also  essentially  unbelieving.  The 
ambitious  man  believes  in  nothing  but  himself  and  his  cunning.  Everything 
which  will  contribute  to  his  earthly  aggrandisement  is  welcome ;  but  he  hates  what 
will  not  come  down  to  his  level.  Let  us  hear  him.  "If  in  truth  ye  anoint  me 
king  over  you,  then  come  and  put  your  trust  in  my  shadow :  and,  if  not,  let  fire 
come  out  of  the  bramble,  and  devour  the  cedars  of  Lebanon."  What  an  extra- 
ordinary invitation  was  that  1  The  olive,  the  vine,  the  fig-tree,  the  lofty  cedar,  and 
all  the  noble  trees  of  the  forest,  were  to  come  and  put  themselves  under  the 
shadow  of  this  contemptible  shrub  I  How  ridiculous  an  idea !  Yet  it  is  paralleled, 
in  all  respects,  by  the  demands  of  ambition.  It  will  deign  to  lend  its  protection  to 
Divine  things,  only  they  must  be  subservient,  and  it  must  be  chief.  This  principle 
in  politicians  makes  religion  an  instrument  of  state  policy;  the  ministers  of 
teligion  a  superior  kind  of  police.  But  woe  to  the  religion  which  stoops  to  it.  It 
loses  its  own  native  life  and  vigour :  it  leaves  its  oil,  and  its  figs,  and  its  wine. 
The  principle  in  an  ambitious  priest  uses  all  the  semblances  of  earnest  piety  to 
attain  his  selfish  ends.  He  cares,  however,  nothing  for  them  in  themselves.  That 
which  he  cannot  bend  to  his  selfish  rule  he  burns  to  destroy.  He  says,  like  this 
miserable  plant,  "  If  not,  let  fire  come  out  of  the  bramble,  and  devour  the  cedars  of 
Lebanon."  He  burns  with  the  mad  rage  of  frenzy  against  whatever  will  not  stoop 
to  gratify  his  insane  whim  to  rule  over  all  things.  From  the  whole  of  this  Divine 
lesson  we  may  gather  the  most  invaluable  impressions.  We  cannot  too  strongly 
imbue  ourselves  with  the  conviction  that  all  heaven  breathes  humility,  and  every- 
thing heavenly  is  humble.  The  moment  any  sacred  principle  is  turned  to  a  selfish 
purpose,  it  loses  its  richness,  its  sweetness,  its  holiness,  and  worth.  Love  becomes 
flattery,  virtue  hypocrisy,  faith  deception.  Oh  let  us  shun  this  awful,  desolating, 
soul- destroying  sin.  And,  on  the  contrary,  let  us  attend  to  Him  who  is  at  once  the 
humblest  and  the  highest.  Bring  often  to  mind  the  impressive  and  beautiful 
scene,  when,  surrounded  by  His  disciples.  He  took  a  httle  child,  and  placed  it  in 
the  midst  of  them.  It  was  the  day  following  that  of  the  grand  scene  of  the 
Transfiguration.  {J.  Bayley,  Ph.D.)  The  parable  of  Jotham : — I.  Its  intention 
AND  SUCCESS.  When  WiUiam  Penn  was  carrying  on  negotiations  with  the  Indians 
he  used  to  gain  their  respect  and  attention  by  exhibiting  to  them  his  skill  as  a 
swordsman.  This  was  an  acquirement  which  the  red  man  could  appreciate.  So 
Jotham  here  clothes  the  truths  he  wishes  to  utter  in  the  form  of  parable,  and  gains 
the  attention  of  the  men  of  Shechem  by  his  skilful  use  of  imagery.  II.  The 
CONTENTS  OF  THE  PAEABLE.  In  it  we  have  the  national  life  of  Israel  set  forth  under 
the  similitude  of  the  natural  life  of  the  tree.  In  the  kingdom  of  trees  we  notice — 
1.  The  individuality  of  each  tree.  2.  The  diversities  of  size,  and  form,  and  worth, 
found  among  them.  3.  The  manifest  dependence  of  some  trees  upon  others.  HI. 
The  teaching  which  underlies  it.  The  parable  implies  that  there  were  men 
in  Israel  at  this  time  who  possessed  the  qualifications  necessary  to  a  good  ruler  set 
forth  in  the  excellences  peculiar  to  the  trees  mentioned.  But  these  men,  the  most 
fitted  to  rule,  refused  to  do  so  because  there  is  no  honour  in  ruling  where 
excellence  is  held  in  dishonour.  They  were  in  the  soil  of  private  life,  which  was 
congenial  to  their  nature,  and  to  be  transplanted  to  a  soil  in  which  only  a  bramble 
could  flourish,  would  be  to  lose  their  power  of  imparting  light  and  sweetness.  The 
nation,  the  city,  or  the  congregation  in  which  a  bramble  is  held  in  estimation  is  not 
the  soil  in  which  to  plant  an  olive-tree,  a  vine,  or  a  fig-tree.  Lessons:  1.  The 
honour  of  a  leader  depends,  not  upon  the  fact  that  he  is  chosen  to  rule,  but  upon 
who  chooses  him.  2.  It  is  the  man  who  gives  honour  to  the  position,  and  not  the 
position  which  gives  honour  to  the  man.  8.  In  choosing  a  position  in  the  world, 
we  should  be  most  solicitous  to  obtain  that  which  will  be  favourable  to  the  develop- 
ment of  our  character,  and  that  in  which  character  will  be  appreciated.  4.  The 
ruler  of  a  nation  is  a  mirror  in  which  is  reflected  the  character  of  the  people. 
6.  The  true  leaders  of  men  have  resources  within  for  themselves,  and  therefore  for 
others.  Such  men  can  afford  to  remain  in  obscurity,  their  mind  is  to  them  a 
kingdom,  they  are  their  own  society.    {A  London  Minister.)        The  parable  of  the 


CHAP,  rs.]  JUDGES.  167 

trees  (to  Young  Men) : — This  parable  of  Jotham  is,  it  is  supposed,  the  very  oldest  in 
existence.  We  reach  here,  in  a  literary  sense,  almost  to  the  source  of  fictitious 
writing.  It  is  a  question  sometimes  put  to  religious  teachers,  "  Do  you  object  to 
works  of  fiction?"  For  myself  I  can  answer  at  once.  "I  do  not."  If  I  did  I 
should  condemn  perhaps  all  the  peoples  that  ever  lived,  simple  and  cultured  alike. 
In  the  snow  hut  of  the  Laplanders,  in  the  warm  wooden  house  of  the  Norse 
peasant,  in  the  sunny  islands  of  the  Southern  Sea,  and  all  through  the  burning 
East,  genius  has  in  this  way  expressed  itself,  and  men  have  been  pleased  and 
improved  by  its  ministries.  But  question  me  further.  Ask  me  if  I  object  to  much 
of  the  sensational  literature  of  the  day,  and  I  answer,  "  I  do  " ;  not  because  it  is 
fictitious,  but  because  of  the  evil  in  more  or  less  degree  which  it  contains,  and 
because  it  is  sorry  nourishment  for  human  minds  or  hearts.  To  return  to  Jotham's 
parable.  "  The  trees  went  forth  on  a  time  to  anoint  a  king  over  them."  There 
must  have  been  a  good  deal  of  talk  among  them  before  it  came  to  that,  much 
wagging  of  arboreous  tongues,  twittering  of  leaf,  and  groaning  of  branch.  They 
did  not  need  a  king.  But  the  procession  has  started.  We  must  follow  and  make 
part  of  it,  if  we  want  to  see  and  hear.  I.  Now  there  is  a  halt  before  an  olive-tree. 
And  they  said  to  the  oUve-tree,  "Keign  thou  over  us."  A  splendid  offer,  to  be  the 
anointed  king  over  the  whole  vegetable  world!  We  listen  to  hear  the  reply, 
couched  in  the  deprecating,  cautious  phraseology  usual  in  such  cases.  No  such 
answer  is  given;  but  a  clear,  distinct  refusal  of  the  proffered  honour.  "  Should  I 
leave  my  fatness?  "  &c.  Must  I  tear  up  my  roots  from  the  kindly  soil  where  I  have 
had  my  home  for  a  thousand  years,  and  cease  to  receive  the  secret  but  willing 
ministries  of  the  earth,  and  close  up  the  channels  along  which  they  have  come  ? 
Must  I  shake  the  hard  grain  of  my  body  by  locomotion,  and  have  my  leaves 
withered  in  a  triumphal  progress,  and  see  my  berries  grow  scant  and  shrivelled, 
and  produce  no  more  oil  for  God  or  man,  and  aU  this  that  I  may  be  a  king? 
Wise  olive-tree  !  Keep  thy  roots  where  they  have  struck  and  spread  I  Build  up  in 
concentric  rings,  as  the  years  come  and  go,  the  hard  pile  of  the  serviceable  wood ! 
Store  the  secret  fragrance  1  Distil  the  precious  oil  for  many  uses  !  Give  men  the 
annual  harvest  and  God  the  continual  glory  of  thy  growing  1  Can  we  miss  the 
lesson  ?  Usefulness  is  better  than  honour.  Usefulness,  if  it  be  of  the  higher  kind, 
is  attained  through  long  growing  and  long  striving.  But  when  it  is  attained,  when 
there  is  a  normal,  regulated  usefulness  flowing  steadily  out  of  a  man's  life,  when  he 
serves  God  and  man  where  he  is  and  by  what  he  is,  the  offer  of  promotion  ought  to 
carry  with  it  some  very  strong  and  clear  enforcements  to  induce  him  to  think  of 
acceptance.  II.  Here  is  a  fig-tkee  by  the  wayside.  It  belongs  to  an  old  and 
most  respectable  family.  It  traces  its  pedigree  up  to  Eden.  It  leads  a  useful  life, 
and  yet  it  has  much  less  to  give  up  and  leave  than  the  olive.  But  no!  The  fig- 
tree  has  not  much,  but  it  has  something  substantial  and  good.  It  has  beautiful 
leaves  of  deep  shining  green,  and  better  still  —for  the  fig-tree  makes  no  mention  of 
its  leaves — it  has  figs  which  caiTy  in  them  a  wonderful  sweetness  when  they  are 
fully  ripe.  Sweetness  is  the  one  quality  which  the  fig-tree  felt  that  it  possessed. 
There  is  in  some  human  souls  a  sweetness  which  imparts  a  fig-tree  flavour  to  the 
whole  life.  When  you  meet  one  who  possesses  this  gift  moving  about  among 
rough  ways  and  persons,  consider  that  you  see  something  far  more  than  merely 
pleasant,  something  of  exceeding  value  to  the  world.  III.  "  Then  said  the  trees 
unto  the  vine,  Gome  thou  and  reign  over  us."  Surely  there  wiU  be  no  refusal 
now !  The  vine  cannot  stand  alone,  it  needs  to  be  propped.  It  will  leap  at  the 
offer  of  a  throne,  up  which  to  climb  and  on  which  to  hang  its  nodding  clusters.  It 
can  only  do  one  thing :  it  can  bear  clusters  of  grapes.  Ah !  but  that  one  thing  is 
of  force  and  value  enough  to  keep  the  vine  steady  under  temptation.  "  Should  I 
leave  my  wine,"  &c.  As  there  are  some  human  lives  with  sweetness  in  them  as 
their  main  element,  so  there  are  some  with  this  brighter,  racier  quality,  which 
•'  cheers "  and  animates  the  spirits  of  others.  Be  a  vine  if  you  can  be  nothing 
more;  distil  and  distribute  the  wine  of  life.  IV.  Now,  at  length,  we  go  to  the 
coronation.  The  trees  have  found  a  king.  "  Then  said  all  the  trees  unto  the 
BRAMBLE,  Come  thou  and  reign  over  us."  Accepted  as  soon  as  offered !  The 
bramble  needs  no  time  for  deliberation.  It  accepts  the  crown  at  once.  Look  at 
the  bramble  or  spiky  thorn  of  Palestine  with  its  long  straggling  branches.  It  has 
no  "fatness"  to  leave,  like  the  olive-tree;  no  "sweetness,"  like  the  fig-tree;  no 
clusters,  like  the  vine.  It  casts  no  shadow,  like  the  oak.  It  has  nothing  but  sharp, 
piercing  spikes,  and  of  these  it  has  abundance ;  every  branch  is  full  of  them — and 
yet  hear  how  the  mean  creature  speaks!    "If  in  truth  ye  anoint  me  king  over 

81 


1G8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

you  "—as  if  it  were  the  most  natural  thing  in  the  world  that  they  should ;  as  if  it 
were  thinking  of  its  ripe  baskets  of  fruit,  and  of  the  weary  pilgrims  it  had  sheltered. 
"  If  in  truth  ye  anoint  me  king  1 "  Think  of  it,  in  presence  of  them  aU !  The 
cedar,  nodding  his  dark  plumes;  the  oak,  with  castled  strength  of  stem  and 
branch ;  the  beech,  in  its  sylvan  beauty ;  the  palm-tree,  with  its  cylindrical  stem 
and  feathery  leaves,  and  bounteous  burden  of  dates ;  '•  and  the  fir-tree  and  the 
pine-tree  and  the  box  together  "  ;  and  those  that  have  declined  the  honour — to  all 
these  it  says,  "Come  and  put  your  trust  in  my  shadow  1"  The  unbounded 
impudence  of  this  address  is  remarkable,  and  would  be  amusing  if  it  were  not 
connected  with  peril  to  the  whole  arboreous  kingdom.  This  peril  the  bramble 
knows,  and  has  the  art  to  hold  it  out  in  audacious  menace.  "  If  not,  think  of  it  well. 
You  have  gone  too  far  to  go  back,  you  are  now  in  my  power ;  and  that  the  noblest 
among  you  shall  feel  the  first,  in  case  of  the  least  show  of  opposition."  Society,  in 
all  its  sections,  is  full  of  bramble  men,  who  are  striving  for  every  sort  of  personal 
elevation  and  advantage.  By  the  picture  in  this  parable  I  want  you  to  scorn  the 
principles  they  act  upon ;  and  to  despise  the  honours  and  advantages  they  win ! 
{A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Jotham's  parable: — We  find  instruction  in  the  parable  by 
regarding  the  answers  put  into  the  mouth  of  this  tree  and  that  when  they  are 
invited  to  wave  to  and  fro  over  the  others.  There  are  honours  which  are  dearly 
purchased,  high  positions  which  cannot  be  assumed  without  renouncing  the  true 
end  and  fruition  of  life.  One  for  example,  who  is  quietly  and  with  increasing 
elficiency  doing  his  part  in  a  sphere  to  which  he  is  adapted,  must  set  aside  the 
gains  of  long  discipline  if  he  is  to  become  a  social  leader.  He  can  do  good  where 
he  is.  Not  so  certain  is  it  that  he  will  be  able  to  serve  his  fellows  well  in  public 
office.  It  is  one  thing  to  enjoy  the  deference  paid  to  a  leader  while  the  first 
enthusiasm  on  his  behalf  continues,  but  it  is  quite  another  thing  to  satisfy  all  the 
demands  made  as  years  go  on  and  new  needs  arise.  When  any  one  is  invited  to 
take  a  position  of  authority  he  is  bound  to  consider  carefully  his  own  aptitude. 
He  needs  also  to  consider  those  who  are  to  be  subjects  or  constituents,  and  make 
sure  that  they  are  of  the  kind  his  rule  will  fit.  The  olive  looks  at  the  cedar  and 
the  terebinth  and  the  palm.  WiU  they  admit  his  sovereignty  by  and  by  though 
now  they  vote  for  it?  Men  are  taken  with  the  candidate  jvho  makes  a  good 
impression  by  emphasising  what  will  please  and  suppressing  opinions  that  may 
provoke  dissent.  When  they  know  him,  how  will  it  be?  When  criticism  begins, 
will  the  olive  not  be  despised  for  its  gnarled  stem,  its  crooked  branches  and  dusky 
foliage  ?  The  fable  does  not  make  the  refusal  of  olive  and  fig-tree  and  vine  rest 
on  the  comfort  they  enjoy  in  the  humbler  place.  That  would  be  a  mean  and 
dishonourable  reason  for  refusing  to  serve.  Men  who  decline  public  office  because 
they  love  an  easy  life  find  here  no  countenance.  It  is  for  the  sake  of  its  fatness, 
the  oil  it  yields,  grateful  to  God  and  man  in  sacrifice  and  anointing,  that  the 
olive-tree  declines.  The  fig-tree  has  its  sweetness,  and  the  vine  its  grapes  to  yield. 
And  so  men  despising  self-indulgence  and  comfort  may  be  justified  in  putting  aside 
a  call  to  office.  The  fruit  of  a  personal  character  developed  in  humble,  unobtrusive 
natural  life  is  seen  to  be  better  than  the  more  showy  clusters  forced  by  public 
demands.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  if  one  wiU  not  leave  his  books,  another  his 
scientific  hobbies,  a  third  his  fireside,  a  fourth  his  manufactory,  in  order  to  take 
his  place  among  the  magistrates  of  a  city  or  the  legislators  of  a  land,  the  danger 
of  bramble  supremacy  is  near.  Next  a  wretched  Abimelech  will  appear ;  and  what 
can  be  done  but  set  him  on  high  and  put  the  reins  in  his  hand  ?  Unquestionably 
the  claims  of  Church  or  country  deserve  most  careful  weighing,  and  even  if  there 
is  a  risk  that  character  may  lose  its  tender  bloom,  the  sacrifice  must  be  made  in 
obedience  to  an  urgent  call.  For  a  time,  at  least,  the  need  of  society  at  large  must 
rale  the  loyal  life.  The  fable  of  Jotham,  in  so  far  as  it  flings  sarcasm  at  the 
persons  who  desire  eminence  for  the  sake  of  it  and  not  for  the  good  they  will  be 
able  to  do,  is  an  example  of  that  wisdom  which  is  as  unpopular  now  as  ever  it  has 
been  in  human  history,  and  the  moral  needs  every  day  to  be  kept  full  in  view. 
It  is  desire  for  distinction  and  power,  the  opportunity  of  waving  to  and  fro  over 
the  trees,  the  right  to  use  this  handle  and  that  to  their  names,  that  will  be  found 
to  make  many  eager,  not  the  distinct  wish  to  accomplish  something  which  the 
times  and  the  country  need.  Those  who  solicit  public  office  are  far  too  often 
selfish,  not  self-denying,  and  even  in  the  Church  there  is  much  vain  ambition. 
But  people  will  have  it  so.  The  crowd  follows  him  who  is  eager  for  the 
suffrages  of  the  crowd,  and  showers  flattery  and  promises  as  he  goes.  Men 
are  lifted  into  places  they  cannot  fiU,  and  after  keeping  their  seats  unsteadily 


CHAP.  IX.]  JUDGES,  169 

for  a  time  they  have  to  disappear  into  ignominy.  {B.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)  Forms 
of  usefulness  in  life : — What  special  advantages  of  life,  what  particular  forms 
of  usefulness  and  comfort,  Jotham  had  in  view,  if  he  had  any,  in  choosing  these 
particular  trees,  it  is  not  easy  to  say.  But  it  is  obvious  that  he  meant  in  a 
general  way  to  point  out  that  there  are  two  or  three  functions,  or  employments,  or 
ways  of  spending  life,  so  much  worth  a  man's  while  continuing,  that  he  is  wise  in 
refusing  to  abandon  them  for  the  sake  of  what  may  seem  a  better  position.  It  is 
very  desirable  that  men  should  see  the  advantages  of  their  own  position,  for 
nothing  is  more  enervating  than  a  craving  after  change,  and  nothing  more 
delusive  than  the  fancy  that  almost  any  other  position  would  be  better  than  our 
own.  The  "  fatness"  which  the  olive  was  not  disposed  to  forsake  in  exchange  for 
high  position  ."iriay  very  naturally  be  supposed  to  symbolise  the  usefulness  which 
belongs  to  many  obscure  positions  in  life.  If  we  are  fillirig  a  place  tliat  somebody 
must  fill,  if  we  are  doing  work  which  some  one  must  do,  then  we  should  be 
cautious  how  we  seek  change.  Moreover,  in  the  life  of  most  of  us,  the  usefulness 
of  our  daily  occupation  is  by  no  means  the  whole  measure  of  our  usefulness.  We 
are  mixed  up  in  life  with  persons  who  are  entangled  in  difficulties,  who  are  full  of 
faults,  who  are  needing  help :  wherever  we  go,  in  whatever  occupation  we  spend 
our  time,  we  find  this  to  be  the  case  ;  and  he  is  a  happy  man  who  can  disentangle 
the  sinner  from  the  meshes  of  his  sin  and  pluck  his  feet  out  of  the  net,  who  can  let 
some  tempted  person  have  the  strengthening  influence  of  his  society,  who  can  give 
advice  that  saves  from  misery  or  loss.  Again,  many  lives  are  soured  and  rendered 
wretched  to  all  connected  with  them,  because  it  is  not  recognised  that  ^jKfigjtcess  is 
that  to  which  they  are  specially  called.  The  fig-tree  did  not  think  it  was  a 
necessary  of  life ;  it  did  not  flatter  itself  men  could  not  live  without  figs ;  but  it 
was  modestly  and  reasonably  conscious  that  by  bearing  figs  year  after  year  it  did 
add  an  element  of  a  most  desirable  kind  to  the  life  of  man.  Taking  the  mere 
word  of  the  fable,  the  "  sweetness  "  of  the  fig,  every  one  knows  what  a  blessing  in  a 
household  is  even  one  sweet  temper,  one  disposition  that  is  not  rufiled,  that  does 
noOake' offence,  that  does  not  think  every  one  else  in  the  wrong,  that  does  not 
vaunt  itself,  but  is  quiet,  reasonable,  patient,  meek.  Peremptoriness  is  not  always 
equivalent  to  efficiency.  Any  one  who  has  tried  to  catch  an  unbridled  horse  in  a 
field  knows  how  little  persuasive  power  there  is  in  violent  language.  The  assump- 
tion of  a  tone  of  authority  or  infallibility  defeats  the  ends  of  persuasion  quite  as 
certainly  as  the  admission  of  a  tone  of  entreaty  destroys  the  authority  of  one  who 
should  rightfully  command.  But  a  thii;^  lesson  for  individuals  in  private  life, 
which  we  gather  from  this  fable,  is  how  contemptible  a  thing  is  display  and 
worldly  honour,  and  what  is  called  style.  People  will  not  be  content  to  live  com- 
fortably, to  be  moderate  in  their  expenses,  quiet  in  their  ways  ;  but  must  be  doing 
as  other  people  do,  must  commit  the  same  extravagancies,  even  though  they  have 
really  no  taste  for  them ;  must  deny  themselves  the  enjoyments  they  prefer, 
that  they  may  seem  to  enjoy  themselves  like  their  neighbours;  bind  themselves 
religiously  to  do  many  troublesome  things,  for  no  other  reason  whatever  than  that 
it  is  expected  of  them.  The  consequence  is  that  the  spirit  becomes  false,  and  the 
life  is  worn  out  by  useless  forms  and  meaningless  labour;  the  useful  services 
which  might  be  rendered  are  neglected,  and  time  cannot  be  found  for  them.  In 
conclusion,  Jotham  shall  not  have  spoken  this  parable  in  vain  for  us  if  we  carry 
away  from  its  perusal  the  settled  conviction  that  in  life  there  is  something  better 
than  mere  show  or  the  mere  attainment  of  the  rewards  accorded  by  the  world  to  its 
successful  men.  The  real  value  of  human  life  does  not  he  on  the  surface ;  lies, 
indeed,  so  deep  that  very  many  people  never  see  it  at  all.  There  are  circumstances 
so  afflicting  and  straitened,  so  very  tormenting  and  hampering,  that  we  are  apt  to 
think  we  do  well  if  only  we  do  not  cry  out  and  let  all  the  world  know  how  we 
suffer ;  but  there  is  a  better  thing  to  do  always,  and  that  is,  to  set  ourselves  with 
patience  and  humble  self-crucifixion  to  think  of  others  and  do  our  best  for  them. 
In  the  worst  circumstances,  in  circumstances  so  perplexing  we  know  not  how  to 
act,  there  always  remains  some  duty  we  are  aware  of,  some  kind  and  loving  thing 
we  can  do,  and  by  doing  which  other  duties  become  clearer.  {Marcus  Dods,  D.JD.) 
The  olive-tree  said  .  .  .  Should  I  leave  my  fatness  ? — The  refusing  of  leadership .- — 
I.  The   vabieties  which  God  has  made  among  men.    II.  The   temptations  to 

WHICH   WE    ABE    EXPOSED    TO    BE    UNTBUE    TO    OUB    DISTINCTIVE    NATUBE    AND    POSITION. 

in.  The  evil  which  would  aeise  fbom  oue  goino  out  of  oue  true  place 
TO  obtain  a  vulgar  power.  IV.  The  wise  conduct  of  some  in  besisting  the 
injurious  temptations  addeessbd  to  them.     v.  Those  who  befuse  formal  rule 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

MAT  BE   KINGS   IN   THEIE   SPHERES   NOTWITHSTANDING — NAT,  AIiL   THE   MORE.      VI.   ThB 

world's  king  is  often  the  brasible  after  all.  (W,  Morison,  D.D.)  The 
faithful  olive-tree : — The  fable  teaches  that  temptations  will  come  to  us  all,  how- 
ever sweet,  or  useful,  or  fruitful,  even  as  they  came  to  the  fig,  the  olive,  and  the 
vine.  These  temptations  may  take  the  shape  of  proffered  honours ;  if  not  a  crown, 
yet  some  form  of  preferment  or  power  may  be  the  bribe.  I.  Apparent  promotions 
are  not  to  be  snatched  at.  The  question  is  to  be  asked,  "  Should  I?  "  Let  us  never 
do  what  would  be  unbecoming,  unsuitable,  unwise  (Gen.  xxxix.  9).  Emphasis 
is  to  be  laid  on  the  "I."  "Should  'I'?"  If  God  has  given  me  peculiar  giftsor 
special  grace,  does  it  become  me  to  trifle  with  these  endowments  ?  Should  I  give 
them  up  to  gain  honour  for  myself  ?  (Neh.  vi.  11).  A  higher  position  may  seem 
desirable,  but  would  it  be  right  to  gain  it  by  such  cost?  (Jer.  xlv.  5).  It  will 
involve  duties  and  cares.  "  Go  up  and  down  among  the  trees  "  implies  that  there 
would  be  care,  oversight,  travelling,  &o.  These  duties  will  be  quite  new  to  me ; 
for,  like  an  olive,  I  have  been  hitherto  planted  in  one  place.  Should  I  run  into 
new  temptations,  new  difiSculties,  &c.,  of  my  own  wanton  will?  Can  I  expect 
God's  blessing  upon  such  strange  work  ?  Put  the  question  in  the  case  of  wealth, 
honour,  power,  which  are  set  before  us.  Should  we  grasp  at  them  at  the  risk  of 
being  less  at  peace,  less  holy,  less  prayerful,  less  useful  ?  II.  Actual  advantages 
ARE  NOT  TO  BE  TRIFLED  WITH.  "  Should  I  Icave  my  f  atucss  ?  "  I  have  this  great 
boon,  should  I  lightly  lose  it  ?  It  is  the  greatest  advantage  in  life  to  be  useful  both 
to  God  and  man:  "By  me  they  honour  God  and  man."  We  ought  heartUy  to 
prize  this  high  privilege.  To  leave  this  for  anything  which  the  world  can  offer 
would  be  great  loss  (Jer.  xviii.  14,  ii.  13).  Our  possession  of  fatness  meets  the 
temptation  to  become  a  king.  We  are  happy  enough  in  Christ,  in  His  service,  with 
His  people,  and  in  the  prospect  of  the  reward.  We  cannot  better  ourselves  by  the 
move ;  let  us  stay  as  we  are.  We  may  also  meet  it  by  the  reflection  that  the 
prospect  is  startling :  "  Should  I  leave  my  fatness  ?  "  For  an  olive  to  do  this  would 
be  unnatural :  for  a  believer  to  leave  holy  living  would  be  worse  (John  vi.  68). 
That  the  retrospect  would  be  terrible:  "leaverUiy  fatness."  What  must  it  be  to 
have  left  grace,  and  truth,  and  holiness,  and  Christ?  Eemember  Judas.  That 
even  an  hour  of  such  leaving  would  be  a  loss.  What  would  an  olive  do  even  for  a 
day  if  it  left  its  fatness  ?  That  it  would  all  end  in  disappointment ;  for  nothing 
could  compensate  for  leaving  the  Lord.  AH  else  is  death  (Jer.  xvii.  13).  That  to 
abide  firmly  and  reject  all  baits  is  like  the  saints,  the  martyrs,  and  their  Lord ;  but 
to  prefer  honour  to  grace  is  a  mere  bramble  folly.  III.  Temptation  should  bb 
TURNED  to  account.  Let  us  take  deeper  root.  The  mere  proposal  to  leave  our 
fatness  should  make  us  hold  the  faster  to  it.  Let  us  be  on  the  watch  that  we  lose 
not  our  joy,  which  is  our  fatness.  If  we  would  not  leave  it,  neither  can  we  bear 
that  it  should  leave  us.  Let  us  yield  more  fatness,  and  bear  more  fruit :  he  who 
gains  largely  is  all  the  further  removed  from  loss.  The  more  we  increase  in  grace 
the  less  are  we  likely  to  leave  it.  Let  us  feel  the  more  content,  and  speak  the  more 
lovingly  of  our  gracious  state,  that  none  may  dare  to  entice  us.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  fig-tree  said  .  .  .  Should  I  forsake  my  sweetness  ? — Self-fulfilment  .-—There 
was  to  the  fig-tree  no  excellency  like  that  of  meeting  adequately  its  own  ends  and  of 
fulfilling  its  own  inborn  purpose.  The  fig-tree  was  not  created  to  be  a  king  among 
the  trees.  That  was  not  its  selected  part  or  its  appointed  task.  The  oak  and  the 
cedar  might  be  great  in  strength,  the  ash  and  the  willow  might  be  exalted  for 
beauty,  but  in  its  own  way  of  being  great  the  fig-tree  had  a  dignity  all  its  own ; 
measured  by  what  it  was  meant  to  be  and  by  what  it  was  meant  to  do  it  might 
rest,  secure  for  all  time  of  usefulness  and  of  honour.  The  real  measure  of  the 
success  or  failure  of  each  life  is  thoroughly  and  exactly  the  measure  of  its  self- 
fulfilment.  Centuries  afterwards  a  Greek  philosopher  laid  hold  of  this  same  prin- 
ciple, and  he  gave  to  it  a  more  philosophical  interpretation,  a  profounder  applica- 
tion to  the  life  of  man  ;  but  Aristotle  did  not  teach  the  lesson  of  it  more  finely,  he 
Idid  not  Ulustrate  it  more  happily,  than  had  been  done  before  in  this  passage.  The 
pleasure  of  the  success  or  failure  of  each  life  is  thoroughly  and  exactly  the 
"measure  of  its  self -fulfilment.  As  with  the  fig-tree,  it  is  the  excellency  of  man  to 
live  and  to  be  fruitful  in  those  powers  which  are  distinctly  his  own ;  to  be  rational 
becawse  he  alone  is  +ruly  rational ;  to  be  moral  because  he  alone  is  moral ;  to  be 
spiritual  ba  ause  h  lone  within  the  earth  is  breathed  upon  from  a  higher  world, 
and  hears  with  a  per  hearing  a  music  and  a  song  which  hath  not  been  uttered, 
Nature  and  God  '  Ike  ask  of  man  not  the  life  of  the  tree  or  of  the  brute  or  of  the 
angel,  but  the  li'''.i  of  man  as  man.    For  man  to  turn  from  the  culture  of  that 


CHAP.  EC.]  JUDGES.  171 

rational  and  moral  life  which  is  distinctively  his  own,  for  man  to  yield  his  own 
peculiar  task,  for  him  to  forsake  the  high  inheritances  of  rational  freedom  and  of 
moral  purpose,  is  to  tear  from  his  own  experience,  to  cut  from  out  his  history,  the 
very  justification  of  his  existence  in  the  world.  Let  him  look  well  to  that.  It  is 
not  his  life  to  be  merely  strong.  When  we  look  for  strength  we  will  not  look  to 
him.  We  will  not  look  for  strength  to  man,  but  to  the  deep-settled  hills  laid  strong 
and  sure  among  the  rocks ;  to  the  wild  waters  of  the  flood  as  they  beat  and  scream 
in  their  ruin  of  the  land ;  to  the  winds  of  heaven  as  they  fall  sharply  upon  the  sea ; 
to  the  great  fish  within  the  deep ;  to  the  huge  beast  within  the  forest ;  to  a 
thousand  things  in  earth  and  sky  ;  but  we  will  not  look  for  strength  to  man.  Nor 
is  it  man's  life  or  woman's  to  be  merely  beautiful.  When  we  look  for  beauty  we 
will  not  look  to  man,  but  we  will  look  far  out  upon  some  deep  blue  quiet  of  the 
hills,  to  the  unfolding  glories  of  the  new  day,  to  the  sweet  radiance  of  those  tears 
which  the  dying  night  has  left  upon  the  flowers  ;  we  will  look  to  corals  of  the  sea, 
to  diamonds  from  the  under-world,  to  the  waving  shadows  of  the  forest  and  the 
fields.  To  these  we  wiU  look  for  beauty,  but  not  to  man.  Let  man  keep  and  wear 
the  graces  which  as  man  are  his ;  let  woman  be  dowered  in  those  beauties  which 
are  all  and  peculiarly  her  own ;  but  let  that  motive  die  within  us  which  has  no 
task  for  man  or  woman  but  those  sad  and  empty  services  of  flesh,  those  weak 
apparent  shows  of  lust  or  ease  or  wealth.  Oh,  for  men  whose  first  and  thorough 
task  win  be  that  of  being  men !  Oh,  for  women  whose  souls  and  hearts  are  set 
deeply  in  the  purpose  of  being  and  of  serving  under  woman's  name  in  those  causes 
which  are  all  her  own,  among  those  dignities  and  sanctities  which  make  with  men 
her  queenliness  and  saintliness  for  ever  !  If  there  is  need  to-day  for  a  humanity 
■which  is  human — for  manly  men,  for  womanly  women,  for  childlike  children- 
there  is  need  also  for  a  churchly  Church.  Institutions  as  well  as  individuals  have 
their  primaiy  uses  and  their  distinctive  life.  The  Church,  too,  if  she  is  to  con- 
tinue among  men,  must  act  truly  and  deeply  ffom  her  own  powers,  must  be  strong 
in  a  Church's  spirit,  instinct  and  eager  with  the  Church's  mission.  The  life  of  the 
Church  may  have  its  social  aspect,  it  may  have  in  a  sense  its  business  aspect,  it 
has  been  forced  to  have  in  certain  quarters  an  aspect  which  is  purely  political ;  but 
the  measure  of  her  exclusive  and  especial  triumphs  along  lines  like  these  is 
exactly  the  measure  of  man's  detestation  of  her  cause.  The  Church,  to  be  the 
Church,  must  be  primarily  and  essentially  religious.  There  are  individual  Churches 
which  are  not  successful  in  any  sense,  but  the  Church  which  is  successful  in  the 
life  God  sends  her  out  to  live,  that  Church  which  in  a  religious  sense  is  a  success 
must  be  a  success  in  all  senses  and  for  all  wise  and  honourable  work.  (E,  G. 
Murphy.)  The  bramble  said. — Bramble  rule ;  or,  the  people  and  their  leaders  : 
— I.  That  the  people  have  a  conscious  want  of  leadeks,  and  they  abe  not 
PAETicuLAB  IN  THEIR  CHOICE  OF  THEM.  1.  The  pcoplo  in  every  age  have  needed 
leaders  in  every  department  of  life — mercantile,  artistic,  political,  and  especially 
religious.  The  uncultured  masses  have  ever  been  ignorant,  credulous,  servile. 
2.  And  they  are  conscious  of  their  want.  This  arises  from — (1)  An  instinctive 
faith  that  there  is  somewhere  an  unpossessed  good  for  them.  (2)  A  consciousness 
that  they  are  incapable  of  reaching  it  themselves.  (3)  A  conviction  that  there  are 
members  of  the  race  superior  to  themselves.  3.  That  the  people  are  not  particular 
in  their  choice  of  leaders.  They  do  not  generally  follow  the  greatest  men.  Men 
of  inferior  capacity  and  uncultivated  nature  are  scarcely  qualified  to  appreciate 
the  highest  form  of  greatness.  Great  men  to  them  are  masters  whom  they  martyr. 
n.  That  inferior  men  are  often  more  ready  to  assume  the  responsibility  of 
LEADERSHIP  THAN  GREAT  ONES.  The  greater  a  man  is,  the  less  taste  he  has  for  a 
conventional  greatness,  the  greater  resources  he  has  in  himself,  and  more  disposed 
is  he  to  work  in  the  glorious  realms  of  principles  than  amidst  the  din  of  social 
parties.  Great  men  build  their  own  thrones,  and  establish  their  own  empires. 
III.  That  leadership  in  the  hands  of  inferior  men  is  ever  fraught  with 
MISCHIEF.  1.  Small  men  can  do  great  mischief.  2.  The  higher  the  office  they 
reach,  the-  greater  the  mischief  they  can  effect.  Learn — 1.  The  sad  condition  of 
the  world.  2.  The  transcendent  worth  of  the  gospel.  Christ  is  just  the  Leader 
needed.  (Homilist.)  Pulpit  brambles ;  or,  a  vacant  Church  making  a  choice  of 
a  minister : — 1.  Jotham's  parable  is  full  of  interest.  (1)  On  account  of*  its 
antiquity.  First  on  record.  (2)  The  spirit  of  its  delivery.  !  ^1  of  th(  humorous. 
(3)  The  sarcasm  it  contains.  The  satiric  is  a  most  useful  g  to  the  Christian 
teacher,  when  guided  by  the  hand  of  wisdom.  2.  The  princij  v  contained  in  the 
parable  is,  that  the  highest  places  ought  to  be  occupied  by  the    est  of  men,  and 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a, 

that  the  bramble  people  should  never  be  allowed  to  occupy  a  position  of  greatness. 
3.  From  Jotham's  parable  the  following  remarks  are  suggested — (1)  That  it  is  a 
time  of  great  responsibility  to  Churches  when  making  choice  of  a  minister.  Christ 
spent  a  night  in  prayer  before  He  ordained  His  apostles.  (2)  That  Churches  some- 
times show  a  great  want  of  shrewdness  in  their  choice  of  a  minister.  (3)  That 
Churches  ought  to  keep  a  view  to  the  practical  in  giving  a  call  to  a  minister. 
(4)  That  very  often  we  find  the  most  insignificant  ministers  are  the  most  ready  to 
accept  invitations  from  large  Churches.  (5)  That  a  stated  ministry  is  advantageous 
to  Churches.  (6)  That  great  evUs  follow  in  the  choice  of  unsuitable  ministers. 
(7)  That  Churches  will  never  reach  their  true  position  while  their  pulpits  are 
filled  with  brambles.  Conclusion — 1.  That  the  ministerial  life  is  one  of  great  sacri- 
fice. 2.  That  most  frequently  the  ministerial  brambles  are  blessed  with  unanimous 
calls.  3.  That  the  men  of  small  talent,  almost  without  exception,  are  full  of 
vanity.  4.  That  the  great  force  of  the  bramble  pulpit  is  in  destruction.  5.  Some 
of  our  large  Churches  have  frequently  been  deservedly  punished  when  they  have  lost 
their  old  minister.  (Ibid.)  King  Bramble  and  his  subjects : — Why  were  the 
trees  so  willing  to  enthrone  "Bramble"?  The  trees  argued:  "  n  we  make 
Bramble  king,  he  will  never  find  fault,  and  never  dare  chide  us  for  shortcomings — 
he  is  so  puny  and  worthless  compared  with  us."  So  men  reason,  all  over  the 
globe.  Do  you  know  why  men  possessing  just  as  much  good  common-sense  as 
you  have,  still  cling  to  idols  in  heathen  lands  ?  Many  of  them  know  as  well  as  we 
do  that  their  idols  are  worthless.  Why  keep  them  ?  Because  with  these  for  gods, 
they  make  reUgion  as  base  and  sensual  as  they  desire.  But  we  need  not  search 
heathen  lands.  In  our  own  midst  are  people  who  serve  King  Bramble  rather  than 
King  Jesus.  I.  The  bramble  of  intemperance.  Do  you  suppose  that  any  boy  ever 
starts  out  in  life  with  the  intention  of  being  a  drunkard  ?  He  who  yields  in  the 
least  degree  is  in  danger  of  being  overpowered  and  ruined  by  this  King  Bramble. 
II.  Bramble  of  mammon.  Just  enough  affords  more  happiness  than  too  much. 
ni.  Most  dangerous  bramble  of  all  is  self.  We  all  need  to  pray  for  deliverance 
from  the  evil  which  is  in  our  own  hearts.  One  of  the  most  cunning  devices  by 
which  Satan  entraps  men  is  that  of  making  them  worship  themselves  rather  than 
God.  (A.  F.  Vedder.)  The  bramble : — 1.  How  proud  the  bramble  was  1  "  Come 
and  put  your  trust  in  my  shadow."  Are  boys  and  girls  proud  ?  I  think  so.  And 
yet  they  have  no  more  reason  to  be  proud  than  the  foolish  bramble.  They  are 
entirely  dependent  on  the  bounty  of  a  gracious  Providence,  and  He  hates  pride. 
But  why  are  we  proud  ?  We  cannot  boast  of  our  clothes — these  are  given  to  us  by 
animals.  Why,  what  is  more  beautiful  than  the  butterfly,  that  flits  about  in  the 
sunshine,  or  the  tiny  flower  growing  by  the  roadside?  Both  insect  and  flower 
appear  in  better  coats  than  we.  2.  Another  thing  we  may  notice  about  the  bramble 
— its  insufficiency  for  shelter.  It  said  to  all  the  trees:  "  Come,  put  your  trust  in  my 
shadow."  The  lesson  to  be  learnt  from  this  parable  is  the  folly  of  false  trust. 
The  Bible  in  many  places  warns  us  against  false  trusts.  It  warns  us  against 
trusting  ourselves.  "  The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately 
wicked."  He  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool."  Some  trust  in  riches. 
This  is  not  safe.  For  riches  sometimes  take  to  themselves  wings  and  fly  away ; 
moreover,  they  profit  not  in  the  day  of  wrath.  Then  in  whom  shall  we  trust  ?  In 
the  Lord,  for  we  read  :  "  It  is  better  to  trust  in  the  Lord  than  to  put  confidence  in 
princes."  We  should  trust  in  Him  for  our  salvation.  There  is  none  other  name 
under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved.  3.  Then,  the  weak- 
ness of  the  bramble  reminds  us  of  its  insufficiency  for  defence.  Such  a  plant  could 
easily  be  trodden  down.  The  careless  ox  cannot  crush  the  cedar,  or  the  oUve,  or 
the  fig-tree  so  easUy  as  it  can  crush  the  bramble.  A  defence  indicates  the  exis- 
tence of  enemies.  You  and  I  have  enemies,  and  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  be 
guarded  against  them.  They  are  round  us — on  every  hand.  Jesus  Christ  is  not 
only  a  shelter,  but  a  defence.  4.  The  bramble  reminds  us  of  sin.  Sin  is  like  a 
thorn.  It  pierces,  it  irritates,  it  wounds.  (H.  Whittaker.)  Misleading  self- 
judgments  : — Many  are  misled,  because  they  judge  themselves  too  much  by  the 
impression  they  make  upon  those  around  them.  To  them,  in  that  sense,  vox 
populi  is  vox  Dei.  If  they  are  popular  in  their  own  circle,  they  think  propor- 
tionately well  of  themselves.  But  this  is  manifestly  an  empirical  judgment. 
It  depends  very  much  on  the  circle  to  which  we  belong ;  on  the  mental  and  moral 
attainments  of  those  in  it ;  on  the  natural  affection  they  cherish  towards  us,  which 
predisposes  them  in  our  favour ;  and  on  the  ideal  they  hold  generally  of  character 
and  worth.    A  solid  is  buoyant  in  a  liquid  in  proportion  as  it  is  light,  and  th« 


CHAP.  IS.]  JUDGES.  173 

liquid  heavy,  floating  or  sinking  according  as  it  is  heavier  or  lighter,  bulk  for  bulk, 
than  the  liquid  it  is  in.  And  similarly  we  may  judge  of  a  man's  moral  and 
intellectual  weight  by  the  kind  of  society  he  floats  in.  The  company  which  will 
buoy  up  one  man  will  not  sustain  another,  and  in  light,  frivolous  society,  a  silly, 
empty  fellow  may  successfully  keep  on  the  surface,  inflated  only  with  his  own 
self-conceit.  In  judging  ourselves  by  the  opinions  of  those  around  us,  therefore, 
let  us  ask  what  their  opinions  are  worth,  and  how  far  they  are  determined  by 
principles  which  will  decide  eternal  destiny.     (A.  Rowland,  B.A.) 

Ver.  23.  God  sent  an  evil  spirit  between  Abimelech  and  the  men  of  Shechem. — 
Disunion  .'—It  is  not  said  that  he  was  judge  over  Israel,  for  they  were  raised  up  by 
God,  but  he  ruled  and  usurped,  as  tyrants  use  to  do.  And  to  begin  first  with  his 
prosperity  in  that  God  gave  him  this  short  time  to  enjoy  his  desire,  and  to  domineer 
as  he  did,  it  is  to  teach  us  that  He  doth  for  some  little  time  give  wicked  men  their 
longed-for  desires ;  and  yet  not  for  that  He  applaudeth  them  therein,  but  that  they 
may  have  time  to  repent,  and  to  bethink  themselves  what  they  have  done,  and  how 
they  have  gone  to  work,  and  how  many  ways  they  have  provoked  God.  But  to  go 
forward :  this  evil  spirit  that  was  sent  betwixt  them,  being  the  first  occasion  of  their 
overthrow,  was  the  devil,  by  whose  malice  and  subtlety  iU-will  and  hatred  were 
kindled  betwixt  them,  and  this,  with  the  breaking  their  promise,  doth  show  us 
clearly  that  the  league  and  friendship  of  the  wicked  is  soon  broken  off.  For  why  ? 
It  hath  no  good  ground.  The  use  whereof  is  that  we  make  no  such  wicked  and 
cursed  leagues.  Secondly,  that  we  account  no  otherwise  of  them  where  they  be 
made,  but  as  of  the  spider's  web,  soon  swept  down  ;  and  thirdly,  praise  God  highly 
when  we  see  them  broken.  And  in  that  it  is  said  that  the  Lord  sent  an  evU  spirit 
betwixt  them,  we  may  note,  that  though  God  be  not  the  author  of  evil,  yet  that  sin 
which  is  in  the  wicked,  hidden  in  their  hearts,  and  never  so  secret.  He  bringeth 
forth  at  His  pleasure,  and  lets  it  break  out  at  His  commandment,  ruling  and  over- 
ruling the  same.  And  they  that  nourish  it  in  themselves,  and  do  not  give  it  a  vent 
by  repentance,  may  ever  justly  fear,  and  do  sometime  too  truly  find,  that  as  water 
pent  in  breaks  out  violently  in  some  place  or  other,  even  so  the  sin  that  is  enter- 
tained in  men's  hearts  shall  one  time  or  other  break  out  to  their  shame 
in  their  lives.  But  as  the  stink  of  the  dunghill  riseth  not  from  the  sun,  no 
more  doth  sin  proceed  from  God.  Also,  by  this  division  betwixt  them  we  may  note, 
that  when  God  suffers  division  among  the  wicked,  or  an  evil  spirit  any  way  to  lead 
them,  it  is  to  punish  their  lewd  fellowship,  and  to  revenge  the  sin  of  both  parts,  and 
to  make  each  the  other's  executioner.  And  yet,  oh  what  a  sweet  liberty  it  is 
thought  to  be,  to  enjoy  fellowship  with  such?  And  first,  grudges  secretly  being 
conceived,  they  are  nourished  by  jealousies  and  suspicions  exasperated  by  daily 
injuries,  till  they  break  out  into  hatred,  and  end  in  extremity.  These  things  are 
commonly  seen,  but  who  beholdeth  God's  justice  therein  ?  or  is  thereby  prevented 
from  having  anything  to  do  with  such  ?  or  made  wise  to  lay  a  better  foundation  of 
their  amity  and  friendship.  Furthermore,  by  this,  that  God  would  have  the  blood 
of  the  innocent  sons  of  Gideon  revenged  upon  Abimelech  and  the  men  of  Shechem, 
He  teacheth  us  that  He  will  revenge  the  innocents'  cause.  The  Lord  will  bless 
them  that  bless  His,  and  curse  them  that  curse  His.      [R.  Rogers.) 

Vers.  48,  49.  And  Abimelech  took  an  axe  in  his  hand. — The  storming  of  the 
temple  of  Berith : — 1.  I  learn  first  from  this  subject,  the  folly  of  depending  upon 
any  one  form  of  tactics  in  anything  we  have  to  do  for  this  world  or  for  God.  Look 
over  the  weaponry  of  olden  times— javelins,  battle-axes,  habergeons — and  show  me 
a  single  weapon  with  which  Abimelech  and  his  men  could  have  gained  such  com- 
plete triumph.  It  is  no  easy  thing  to  take  a  temple  thus  armed.  Yet  here 
Abimelech  and  his  army  come  up,  they  surround  this  temple,  and  they  capture  it 
without  the  loss  of  a  single  man  on  the  part  of  Abimelech,  although  I  suppose  some 
of  the  old  Israelitish  heroes  told  Abimelech :  "  You  are  only  going  up  there  to  be 
cut  to  pieces."  Yet  you  are  willing  to  testify  to-day  that  by  no  other  mode — cer- 
tainly not  by  ordinary  modes — could  that  temple  so  easily,  so  thoroughly,  have 
been  taken.  What  the  Church  most  wants  to  learn,  this  day,  is  that  any  plan  ia 
right,  is  lawful,  is  best,  which  helps  to  overthrow  the  temple  of  sin,  and  capture 
this  world  for  God.  We  are  very  apt  to  stick  to  the  old  modes  of  attack.  We 
come  up  with  the  sharp,  keen,  glittering  steel  spear  of  argument,  expecting  in  that 
way  to  take  the  castle ;  but  they  have  a  thousand  spears  where  we  have  ten.  And 
80  the  castle  of  sin  stands.     I  propose  a  different  style  of  tactics.    Let  each  one  go 


174  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

to  the  forest  of  God's  promise  and  invitation,  and  hew  down  a  branch,  and  put  it 
on  his  shoulder,  and  let  us  all  come  around  these  obstinate  iniquities,  and  then, 
with  this  pile,  kindled  by  the  fires  of  a  holy  zeal  and  the  flames  of  a  consecrated 
life,  we  will  burn  them  out.  What  steel  cannot  do,  fire  may.  We  want  more 
heart  in  our  song,  more  heart  in  our  almsgiving,  more  heart  in  our  prayers,  more 
heart  in  our  preaching.  Oh,  for  less  of  Abimelech's  sword  and  more  of  Abimelech's 
conflagration  1  The  gospel  is  not  a  syllogism ;  it  is  not  casuistry ;  it  is  not 
polemics,  or  the  science  of  squabble.  It  is  blood-red  fact ;  it  is  warm-hearted 
invitation ;  it  is  leaping,  bounding,  flying  good  news ;  it  is  efflorescent  with  all 
light ;  it  is  rubescent  with  all  summery  glow  ;  it  is  arborescent  with  all  sweet  shade. 
2.  Still  further,  I  learn  from  this  subject  the  power  of  example.  If  Abimelech  had 
Bat  down  on  the  grass,  and  told  his  men  to  go  and  get  the  boughs,  and  go  out  to 
the  battle,  they  would  never  have  gone  at  all,  or  if  they  had,  it  would  have  been 
without  any  spirit  or  effective  result ;  but  when  Abimelech  goes  with  his  own  axe 
and  hews  down  a  branch,  and  with  Abimelech's  arm  puts  it  on  Abimelech's 
shoulder,  and  marches  on,  then,  my  text  says,  all  the  people  did  the  same.  How 
natural  that  was !  What  made  Garibaldi  and  Stonewall  Jackson  the  most 
magnetic  commanders  of  this  century?  They  always  rode  ahead.  Oh,  the  over- 
whelming power  of  example  1  Oh,  start  out  for  heaven  to-day,  and  your  family 
will  come  after  you,  and  your  business  associates  will  come  after  you,  and  your 
social  friends  will  join  you.  With  one  branch  of  the  tree  of  life  for  a  baton, 
marshal  just  as  many  as  you  can  gather.  Oh,  the  infinite,  the  semi-omnipotent 
power  of  a  good  or  a  bad  example  I  3.  Still  further,  I  learn  from  this  subject  the 
advantage  of  concerted  action.  If  Abimelech  had  merely  gone  out  with  a  tree- 
branch,  the  work  would  not  have  been  accomplished,  or  if  ten,  twenty,  or  thirty 
men  had  gone  ;  but  when  all  the  axes  are  lifted,  and  all  the  sharp  edges  fall,  and 
aU  these  men  carry  each  his  tree-branch  down  and  throw  it  about  the  temple,  the 
victory  is  gained — the  temple  falls.  Where  there  is  one  man  in  the  Church  of  God 
at  this  day  shouldering  his  whole  duty,  there  are  a  great  many  who  never  lift  an 
axe  or  swing  a  bough.  It  seems  to  me  as  if  there  were  ten  drones  in  every  hive  to 
one  busy  bee.  What  broken  bone  of  sorrow  have  you  ever  set  ?  Are  you  doing 
nothing  ?  Is  it  possible  that  a  man  or  woman  sworn  to  be  a  follower  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  doing  nothing?  4.  Still  further,  I  learn  from  this  subject  the 
danger  of  false  refuges.  As  soon  as  these  Shechemites  got  into  the  temple,  they 
thought  they  were  safe.  They  said  :  "  Berith  will  take  care  of  us.  Abimelech  may 
batter  down  everything  else  ;  he  cannot  batter  down  this  temple  where  we  are  now 
hid."  But  very  soon  they  heard  the  timbers  crackling,  and  they  were  smothered 
with  smoke,  and  they  miserably  died.  And  you  and  I  are  just  as  much  tempted  to 
false  refuges.  The  mirror  this  morning  may  have  persuaded  you  that  you  have  a 
comely  cheek ;  Satan  may  have  told  you  that  you  are  all  right ;  but  bear  with  me  if 
I  tell  you  that,  if  unpardoned,  you  are  all  wrong.  I  suppose  every  man  is  steppiag 
into  some  kind  of  refuge.  Here  you  step  into  the  tower  of  good  works.  You  say,  "I 
shall  be  safe  here  in  this  refuge."  The  battlements  are  adorned  ;  the  steps  are  var- 
nished ;  on  the  wall  are  pictures  of  aU  the  suffering  you  have  alleviated,  and  all  the 
schools  you  have  established,  and  all  the  fine  things  you  have  ever  done.  Up  in 
that  tower  you  feel  you  are  safe.  But  hear  you  not  the  tramp  of  your  unpardoned 
Bins  all  around  the  tower?  They  each  have  a  match.  You  are  kindling  the  com- 
bustible material.  You  feel  the  heat  and  the  suffocation.  Oh  1  may  you  leap  in 
time,  the  gospel  declaring,  "  By  the  deeds  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  living  be 
justified."  "  Well,"  you  say,  "I have  been  driven  out  of  that  tower  ;  where  shall 
I  go  ?  "  Step  into  this  tower  of  indifference.  You  say,  "  If  this  tower  is  attacked, 
it  will  be  a  great  while  before  it  is  taken."  You  feel  at  ease.  But  there  is  an 
Abimelech,  with  ruthless  assault,  coming  on.  Death  and  his  forces  are  gathering 
around.  "  But,"  says  some  one,  "  you  are  engaged  in  a  very  mean  business, 
driving  us  from  tower  to  tower."  Oh  no  I  I  want  to  tell  you  of  a  Gibraltar  that 
never  has  been  and  never  will  be  taken ;  of  a  bulwark  that  the  judgment  earth- 
quakes cannot  budge.  The  Bible  refers  to  it  when  it  says :  "  In  God  is  thy  refuge, 
and  underneath  thee  are  the  everlasting  arms."  Ohl  fling  yoursell  into  it. 
(T.  D»  Witt  Talmage.) 


CHAP.  X.]  JUDGES.  175 


CHAPTER  X. 

Veb.  14.  Cry  tmto  the  gods  which  ye  have  chosen. — Man  in  trouble  crying  to  his 
god : — I.  Every  sinner  is  destined  to  meet  with  trouble.  Personal  afflictions ; 
social  bereavements ;  death.  11.  In  great  trouble  he  instinctivelt  cries  to  his 
GOD.  1.  Every  man  has  a  god.  2.  Every  man's  god  ought  to  be  able  to  help  him 
•when  help  is  needed.  III.  No  god  can  help  him  in  trouble  but  the  true  One. 
{HomiUst.)  No  help  in  trouble  save  from  God  : — Travellers  tell  us  that  they  who  are 
at  the  top  of  the  Alps  can  see  great  showers  of  rain  fall  under  them,  but  not  a  drop 
of  it  falls  on  them.  They  who  have  God  for  their  portion  are  in  a  high  tower,  and 
thereby  safe  from  all  troubles  and  showers.  A  drift  rain  of  evil  will  beat  in  at  the 
creature's  windows,  be  they  never  so  well  pointed  :  all  the  garments  this  world  can 
make  up  cannot  keep  them  that  travel  in  such  weather  from  being  wet  to  the  skin. 
No  creature  is  able  to  bear  the  weight  of  its  feUow-creature,  but  as  reeds  break 
under,  and  as  thorns  run  into  the  sides  that  lean  on  them.  The  bow  drawn 
beyond  its  compass  breaks  in  sunder,  and  the  string  wound  above  its  strength 
snaps  in  pieces.  Such  are  outward  helps  to  all  that  trust  to  them  in  hard- 
ships. {G,  Swinnock.)  Helpless  gods : — It  is  a  most  grievous  casting 
them  in  the  teeth,  by  an  ironical  mocking  of  them  with  their  idolatry,  as  if 
he  should  say,  "Now  ye  prove  and  see  what  your  gods  can  do."  As  Elias 
did  the  like  to  the  prophets  of  Baal.  Therefore  by  thus  speaking,  and  bidding 
them  go  seek  help  at  their  idols'  hands,  they  having  shaken  off  the  Lord,  he 
teacheth  us  that  they  whom  we  have  served,  and  committed  ourselves  to,  must  pay 
us  our  wages,  and  to  them  the  Lord  justly  doth  and  will  send  us  to  their  patronage 
in  our  greatest  need,  even  to  our  horror,  yea,  destruction,  if  He  take  us  not,  as  He 
did  these  here,  to  His  mercy.  They  therefore  that  have  trusted,  and  still  do  in 
man,  and  have  made  flesh  their  arm,  shall  know  by  experience  one  day  that  they 
have  trusted  to  a  bruised  reed.  Briefly  to  conclude  this  doctrine  with  some  other 
nses  thereof,  we  see  secondly  by  this  that  God  doth  import  no  less  than  that  (by  the 
law  of  like  equity,  and  by  virtue  of  a  far  stronger  covenant)  if  this  people  had  per- 
sisted faithful  in  His  service  He  could  not  have  denied  their  suit  for  help  and 
defence  against  their  enemies.  Thirdly,  these  words  note  out  this,  that  it  is 
wisdom  for  a  man  to  bestow  his  chief  cost  there  whence  he  looks  for  best  recom- 
pense and  acknowledgment  in  the  time  of  most  need.  A  man  is  not  ashamed  of 
that  labour  which  hath  brought  him  in  plentiful  gain,  but  of  that  which  answers 
not  his  cost  and  hope.  Men  that  have  run  themselves  out  of  breath  aU  their  life, 
groping  after  a  blind  happiness,  in  their  unprofitable,  superstitious,  profane  course, 
at  length,  seeing  themselves  deceived,  wish  they  had  served  a  Master  who  might 
have  saved  them  and  received  them  into  everlasting  habitations.  Thus  the  Lord 
is  fain  to  upbraid  men  (though  not  by  word,  saying,  "  Go  to  your  idols,"  yet  in  effect, 
in  that  He  leaveth  them  shiftless),  or  else  who  should  persuade  one  of  a  hundred 
that  he  soweth  among  thorns,  or  loseth  his  labour  and  cost,  when  he  casteth  it  and 
himself  away  upon  idols  ?  {R.  Rogers.)  The  misery  of  forsaking  God  : — I  know 
not  how  anything  can  be  imagined  more  sublime,  more  edifying,  or  more  truly 
affecting  than  the  delineations  of  the  moral  character  of  the  Almighty  Governor  of 
the  universe,  afforded  us  by  Scripture.  Immensity  of  power,  combined  with  the 
most  unrestricted  condescension  to  the  wants  of  the  meanest  of  His  creatures  ;  and 
purity,  which  charges  the  very  heavens  with  comparative  uncleanness,  united  with 
plenitude  of  compassion.  Perhaps,  however,  there  is  no  passage  in  the  book  of  the 
Old  Testament  more  completely  to  this  purpose  than  the  text.  Now,  be  it  remem- 
bered, that  a  correct  theory  of  the  Divine  Being,  and  sound  views  of  practical 
morality,  are  as  closely  connected  with  each  other  as  cause  and  effect.  All  real 
morality  being  the  adaptation  of  our  actions  to  some  authentic  first  rule,  and  that 
rule  being  the  presumed  wiU  of  the  great  Being  who  has  an  undisputed  claim  to  our 
obedience,  it  follows  as  a  matter  of  course  that,  in  order  that  our  standard  of  morals 
should  be  high,  our  notions  of  Him  to  whose  approbation  that  standard  is  referable 
should  be  high  in  a  like  proportion.  We  might  as  well  expect  the  subsequent 
course  of  a  stream  to  be  more  elevated  than  its  fountain  as  imagine  holy  and 
perfect  actions  to  proceed  from  belief  in  an  imperfect  or  impure  deity.  This  con- 
Bideration  will  at  once  show  us  that  spiritual  debasement  is  a  necessary  result  of 
false  worship ;  and  will  point  out  the  fallaciousness  of  that  favourite  assertion  of 
the  unbeliever,  that  accuracy  of  our  abstract  notions  respecting  the  Deity  is  of  no 
consequence  provided  oar  practical  theory  of  morality  be  correct    And  now,  then. 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

by  this  infallible  test  let  us  try  the  Christian  revelation,  comparing  it  with  all  that 
the  most  plausible  surmises  of  pagan  philosophy,  or  of  modern  infidelity,  have  at 
any  time  suggested  in  opposition  or  rivalry  to  it.  The  more  substantial  theories  of 
paganism  on  this  subject  lie  in  very  small  compass.  It  is  true  that  the  better  dis- 
posed heathens  in  all  ages  have,  from  an  instinctive  feeling  of  religion,  been  ready 
to  admit  the  occasional  intervention  of  Providence  with  the  affairs  of  mankind,  and 
something  like  a  general  system  of  rewards  and  punishments,  having  reference  to 
the  morality  of  human  actions.  These  opinions,  however,  so  far  as  they  went,  were, 
I  believe,  on  all  such  occasions,  rather  the  spontaneous  suggestion  of  the  moral  feel- 
ing within  them,  acting  against  theory,  than  the  result  of  any  deliberate  assent  of 
the  understanding,  founded  upon  rational  inquhy.  In  fact,  I  know  only  of  two 
views  of  the  great  question,  "  What  is  God  ?  "  or,  "  What  is  the  great  moral  sanction 
for  the  guidance  of  man's  actions  ?  "  as  taken  up  after  mature  dehberation  by  the 
philosophers  of  antiquity,  which  can  lay  claim  to  the  character  of  a  regular  system ; 
the  one  is  that  adopted  by  the  Stoics,  which  pronounces  virtue  to  be  so  intrinsically 
lovely  in  itself  as,  under  all  external  circumstances,  to  prove  its  own  reward ;  the 
other,  that  which,  though  not  formally  avowed,  would,  if  strictly  reasoned  out, 
necessarily  result  from  the  principles  of  the  Peripatetics,  which,  considering  the 
Creator  of  the  universe  as  the  summit  of  all  possible  perfection,  would  represent  Him 
as  eternally  wrapt  up  in  the  contemplation  of  His  own  transcendental  nature, 
and  consequently  indifferent  to  the  vicissitudes  which  may  befall  inferior  beings. 
Now  it  is  obvious  that  both  these  views,  either  if  entertained  as  physically  true,  as 
affording  a  substantial  first  principle  of  religious  morality,  are  quite  unsatisfactory 
and  inoperative.  Strange,  then,  as  the  proposition  may  sound  in  the  ears  of  those 
who  have  not  been  accustomed  to  consider  the  doctrines  of  paganism  in  all  their 
strictness  and  in  all  their  consequences,  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  the  belief  in  a 
Being  at  once  all  perfect  in  His  own  nature,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  watchfully 
attentive  to  all  that  passes  in  the  creation  beneath  Him,  is  the  result  of  revelation 
only.  Our  natural  reason  not  only  never  could  have  arrived  at  such  a  conclusion, 
but  in  fact,  at  the  first  blush  of  the  question,  it  absolutely  recoils  from  it.  Can  God 
really  regard,  not  merely  perishable  man,  but  even  the  very  worms  that  creep  at  our 
feet?  Our  first  impulse,  when  we  consider  the  presumed  impassiveness  of  His 
nature,  is  to  say,  "  Certainly  not."  How  can  He  be  at  once  complete  in  His  own 
perfection  and  happiness  and  accessible  to  prayer ;  or,  in  other  words,  hable  to  be 
influenced  by  causes  external  to  Himself  ?  Our  natural  reason  is  quite  unequal  to 
the  solution  of  this  difficulty.  It  is  only,  I  repeat,  when  we  reflect  how  entirely  the 
whole  sum  and  substance  of  reUgion,  the  elevation  of  our  souls,  the  establishment 
of  all  morality,  and  the  consequent  entire  welfare  of  society  turn  upon  this  very 
doctrine,  that  we  learn  how  much  more  complete  is  the  revealed  wisdom  which  is 
from  heaven  than  that  which  it  is  given  to  unassisted  man  to  find  out.  The 
question  is,  not  what  God  might  have  done,  but  what  He  actually  has  done.  The 
infidel  may  try  to  get  rid  of  the  difficulty  by  turning  the  whole  discussion  into 
ridicule,  and  attempting  to  show  that  human  life,  and  all  connected  with  it,  is 
merely  like  a  feverish  dream  or  an  ill-told  tale  without  object  or  connection.  The 
worldly  man  may  assert  that,  after  all  that  may  be  said  against  it,  life  is  still  a 
state  of  tolerable  ease  and  comfort,  and  contented  with  living  like  the  brutes,  may 
think  it  unnecessary  to  inquire  further ;  or  the  more  stern  philosopher,  arguing  upon 
the  principles  of  the  ancient  Stoics,  may  assert,  contrai"y  to  self-evident  fact,  that 
life  in  reality  possesses  no  evil  for  the  truly  wise,  and  that  the  theory  of  a  future 
state  is  not  necessary  for  the  vindication  of  the  ways  of  Providence.  But  meanwhile 
the  really  painful  circumstances  of  our  existence  will  make  themselves  felt,  whether 
we  will  or  not ;  and,  if  we  would  explain  them  in  a  manner  satisfactory  to  our 
highest  notions  of  God's  goodness,  we  must  have  recourse  to  our  Bible.  I  do  not, 
indeed,  say  that  even  in  our  Bibles  we  shall  find  all  our  difficulties  removed.  Very 
far  from  it ;  but  I  do  say,  that  the  Bible  presupposes  the  existence  of  all  these  very 
difficulties ;  that  the  theory  of  the  Bible  would  be  false  did  we  not  find  the  world 
precisely  what  we  do  find  it ;  and  that  the  great  object  of  the  Bible  is  to  show  how 
this  very  state  of  things  (the  great  stumbling-block  of  every  other  form  of  religious 
belief)  is  part  and  parcel  of  the  Divine  arrangements  for  the  accomplishment  of 
God's  wise  and  beneficent  purposes.  Let  us  pass  on  to  the  inferences  resulting  from 
these  momentous  facts.  Consider,  then,  in  what  a  new  position,  with  respect  to  every- 
thing around  us,  we  are  all  of  us  placed  by  this  circumstance  of  the  intimate,  and 
almost  social,  connection  which  revelation  thus  declares  to  exist  between  ourselves 
and  our  Maker.    What  a  vast  interest  is  communicated  to  the  whole  tenor  of  our 


CHAP.  XI.]  JUDGES.  177 

existence  when  we  recollect  that  we  are  not,  as  heathen  speculation  would  teach  us, 
placed  as  in  a  dreary  moral  solitude,  withdrawn  from  the  superintendence  of  the 
Divine  mind,  who  has  other  and  better  occupations  than  to  trouble  Himself  with  the 
details  of  our  son-ows  or  of  our  pleasures,  of  our  good  or  of  our  bad  actions  ;  but 
that  we  subsist  day  and  night  under  His  all-searching  eye ;  that  not  a  thought 
passes  through  our  breasts,  not  a  word  escapes  our  lips,  but  is  pregnant  with 
the  consequences  of  our  future  weal  or  woe ;  that  every  apparent  blessing,  every 
seeming  evil  with  which  we  are  visited,  has  its  peculiar  errand  and  object,  viz., 
the  disciplining  of  our  hearts,  and  the  preparing  us  for  immortality  1  {Bp. 
Shuttleworth.) 


CHAPTER  XL 


Vehs.  1-33.  Jephthah  the  Gileadite. — Jephthah : — It  is  common  to  regard 
Jephthah  as  one  of  the  wildest  characters  of  the  Bible — a  rough  and  heedless 
man ;  alike  rash  in  vowing  and  heartless  in  fulfilling ;  one  whom  it  is  strange 
to  find  in  the  eleventh  chapter  of  Hebrews.  Jephthah  was  neither  a  god- 
less nor  a  selfish  man.  Not  godless,  for  we  find  in  the  brief  annals  of  his 
life  more  copious  recognition  of  God  than  in  the  case  of  most  of  the  other 
judges ;  and  not  selfish,  because,  forgetting  his  private  wrongs,  he  devoted 
his  life  to  the  service  of  his  country,  and,  overcoming  his  strongest  feelings  of 
natural  affection,  he  did  with  his  daughter  according  to  his  vow.  We  shall  be 
nearer  the  truth  if  we  regard  Jephthah  as  a  good  man,  sadly  misguided ;  a  man 
roughly  trained,  poorly  educated,  and  very  deficient  in  enhghtened  views  ;  wishing 
to  serve  God,  but  in  great  error  as  to  what  would  prove  an  acceptable  service ;  a 
man  in  whose  religion  the  ideas  of  his  neighbours  of  Moab  and  Ammon  had  a 
strong  though  unknown  influence  ;  one  who,  with  the  deepest  loyalty  to  God,  had 
unconsciously  come  under  the  delusion  that  Jehovah  would  accept  of  such  an  oiler- 
ing  as  the  neighbouring  nations  offered  to  their  gods.  In  trying  to  estimate 
Jephthah  aright  it  is  necessaiy  that  we  bear  his  early  history  vividly  in  mind.  He 
had  the  grievous  misfortune  to  have  a  wicked  mother,  a  woman  of  abandoned 
character ;  and  as  in  these  circumstances  his  father  could  not  have  been  much 
better,  his  childhood  must  have  been  very  di-eary.  No  good  example,  no  holy 
home,  no  mother's  affection,  no  father's  wise  and  weighty  counsel.  If  Jephthah 
owed  little  to  his  parents,  he  owed  less  to  his  brothers.  If  he  knew  little  of  the 
sunbeams  of  parental  love,  he  knew  less  of  the  amenities  of  brotherly  affection. 
By  his  brothers  he  was,  as  we  may  say,  kicked  out  from  his  father's  house ;  he  waa 
driven  forth  into  the  wide,  wide  world,  to  shift  as  he  might ;  and  this  under  the 
influence  of  a  motive  all  too  common,  but  which  in  this  case  appears  in  all  its 
native  repulsiveness.  It  was  to  prevent  him  from  sharing  in  his  father's  inherit- 
ance ;  to  keep  to  themselves  the  largest  possible  share.  A  wretched  revelation  truly 
of  family  spirit !  None  of  the  dew  of  Hermon  here.  The  life  to  which,  in  these 
circumstances,  Jephthah  resorted  was  wild  and  rough,  but  was  not  considered 
immoral  in  those  wUd  times.  He  became  a  freebooter  on  the  borders  of  Moab  and 
Ammon,  like  many  a  borderer  two  or  three  centuries  ago  in  Cumberland  or 
Wigton ;  carrying  on  an  irregular  warfare  in  the  form  of  raids  for  plunder  ;  gather- 
ing to  himself  the  riff-raff  of  the  country-side.  The  occupation  was  very  unfavour- 
able to  a  religious  life,  and  yet  somehow  (such  is  the  sovereignty  of  grace)  Jephthah 
evidently  acquired  deep  religious  impressions.  He  was  strong  against  idolatry, 
and  that  not  merely  because  it  was  the  religion  of  his  enemies,  but  because  he  had 
a  deep  regard  for  the  God  of  Israel,  and  had  been  led  in  some  way  to  recognise  the 
obligation  to  serve  Him  only,  and  to  be  jealous  for  His  glory.  And,  partly  perhaps 
through  the  great  self-control  which  this  enabled  him  to  exercise,  and  the  courageous 
spirit  which  a  living  beUef  in  such  a  God  inspired,  he  had  risen  to  great  distinction 
as  a  warrior  in  the  mode  of  life  which  he  followed,  so  that  when  a  leader  was 
needed  to  contend  with  the  Ammonites,  Jephthah  was  beyond  aU  question  the  man 
most  fitted  for  the  post.  It  is  very  singular  how  things  come  round.  What  a 
strange  feeling  Jephthah  must  have  had  when  his  brothers  and  old  neighbours 
came  to  him,  inviting  and  imploring  him  to  become  their  head ;  trying  as  best  they 
could  to  undo  their  former  unkindness,  and  get  him,  for  their  safety,  to  assume  the 
post  for  which  not  one  of  them  was  fitted  1    It  is  amazing  what  an  iU-treated  man 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

may  gain  by  patiently  biding  his  time.    In  every  history  there  are  parallel  incidents 
to  that  which   now  occurred  in  the  case  of  Jephthah — that  of   Coriolanus,  for 
example ;  but  it  is  not  every  one  who  has  proved  so  prompt  and  patriotic.    He 
gave  way  to  no  reproach  over  the  past,  but  only  made  conditions  for  the  future 
which  were  alike  reasonable  and  moderate.    His  promptness  supplies  a  great  and 
oft-needed  lesson  for  Christians ;  showing  how  ready  we  should  be  to  forgive  and 
forget  ill-treatment ;  to  return  blessing  for  cursing,  and  good  for  evil.    But  let  us 
now  notice  what  was  peculiar  in  Jephthah's  mode  of  accepting  office.     In  contem- 
plating the  prospect  of  the  Ammonites  being  subdued,  it  is  not  he,  but  Jehovah, 
whom  he  regards  as  the  victor  (chap.  xi.  9) ;  and  after  he  has  been  made  head 
and  captain  he  utters  aU  his  words  before  the  Lord  at  Mizpeh  (ver.  11).     And  now 
it  was  that  he  made  his  fatal  vow.     He  made  it  as  a  new  pledge  of  his  dependence 
on  God,  and  desire  to  honour  Him.     The  strangest  thing  about  the  transaction  is, 
that  Jephthah  should  have  been  allowed  in  these  circumstances  to  make  such  a 
vow.     It  was  common  enough  in  times  of  great  anxiety  and  danger  to  devote  some 
much-valued  object  to  God.    But  Jephthah  left  it  to  God,  as  it  were,  to  select  the 
object.     He  would  not  specify  it,  but  would  simply  engage,  if  he  should  return  in 
peace  from  the  children  of  Ammon,  to  offer  to  the  Lord  whatever  should  come  forth 
from  the  doors  of  his  house  to  meet  him.     It  seemed  a  pious  act  to  leave  to  God 
the  selection  of  that  object.    Jephthah's  error  lay  in  supposing  that  God  would 
select,  that  God  would  accept  the  responsibility  which  he  laid  upon  Him.    What 
followed  we  hardly  need  to  rehearse.    But  what  became  of  Jephthah's  daughter  ? 
Undoubtedly  the  weight  of  evidence  is  in  favour  of  the  solution  that,  like  Iphigenia 
at  Aulis,  Jephthah's  daughter  was  offered  as  a  burnt-offering.    It  is  a  shocking 
thought,  and  yet  not  inconsistent  with  the  supposition  that  essentially  Jephthah 
was  a  sincere  and  loyal  servant  of  God.    We  must  remember  that  he  was  an 
unenlightened  man,  iU  brought  up,  not  possessing  the  cool,  well-balanced  judgment 
of  one  who  had  calmly  and  carefully  studied  things  human  and  Divine  with  the 
best  lights  of  the  age,  but  subject  to  many  an  impulse  and  prejudice  that  had  never 
been  corrected,  and  had  at  last  become  rooted  in  his  nature.     We  must  remember 
that  Gilead  was  the  most  remote  and  least  enlightened  part  of  the  land  of  Israel, 
and  that  all  around,  among  all  his  Moabite  and  Ammonite  neighbours,  the  im- 
pression prevailed  that  human  sacrifices  were  acceptable  to  the  gods.     This  remark- 
able narrative  carries  some  striking  lessons.     1.  In  the  first  place,  there  is  a  lesson 
from  the  strange,  unexpected,  and  most  unseasonable  combination  in  Jephthah's 
experience  of  triumph  and  desolation,  public  joy  and  private  anguish.    It  seems  so 
unsuitable,  when  all  hearts  are  wound  up  to  the  feeling  of  triumph,  that  horror  and 
desolation  should  come  upon  them  and  overwhelm  them.    But  what  seems  so 
unseasonable  is  what  often  happens.     It  often  seems  as  if  it  would  be  too  much  for 
men  to  enjoy  the  fulfilment  of  their  highest  aspirations  without  something  of  an 
opposite  kind.     General  Wolfe  and  Lord  Nelson  dying  in  the  moment  of  victory  are 
types  of  a  not  infrequent  experience.    At  the  moment  when  Ezekiel  attains  his 
highest  prophetical  elevation,  his  house  is  made   desolate,  his  wife  dies.     The 
millionaire  that  has  scraped  and  saved  and  struggled  to  leave  a  fortune  to  his  only 
son  is  often  called  to  lay  him  in  the  grave.     Providence  has  a  wonderful  store  of 
compensations.     Sometimes  those  who   are  highest  in  worldly  position  are  the 
dreariest  and  most  desolate  in  heart,     2.  Another  striking  lesson  of  Jephthah's  life 
concerns  the  errors  of  good  men.    It  dissipates  the  notion  that  good  men  cannot 
go  far  wrong.    But  let  us  learn  from  Jephthah  aU  the  good  we  can.     He  was 
remarkable  for  two  great  qualities.     He  depended  for  everything  on   God ;    he 
dedicated  everything  to  God,     It  is  the  very  spirit  which  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ 
is  designed  to  form  and  promote.    Jephthah  was  willing,  according  to  his  light,  to 
give  up  to  God  the  dearest  object  of  his  heart.     One  thing  is  very  certain.     Such 
sacrifices  can  be  looked  for  from  none  but  those  who  have  been  reconciled  to  God 
by  Jesus  Christ.     To  them,  but  only  to  them,  God  has  become  all  in  all.     They, 
and  they  only,  can  afford  to  sacrifice   all  that  is  seen   and  temporal.     (TF.   G. 
Blaikie,  D.D.)        Why  are  ye  come  unto  me  now  when  ye  are  in  distress  7 — 
The  elders  of  Gilead  got  into  trouble,  and  they  said,  "We  are  in  distress;  'we 
turn  again  to  thee,'  "  Ac.    Jephthah  mocked  them,  and  said,  *'  If  I  fight  for  you 
and  win  '  shall  I  be  your  head  ?  ' "    Who  can  tell  how  suggestively  he  uttered  the 
word  "  your  "  ? — head  of  a  mob  of  ingrates — "  your  "  :  and  his  heart  said,  "  Ha,  ha ! 
'  Why  are  ye  come  unto  me  now  when  ye  are  in  distress  ?  '    Why  did  you  not  come 
twelve  months  ago?    Why  did  you  not  come  when  the  feast  was  on  the  table 
smoking  hot  ?    Why  did  you  not  ask  me  to  the  dance  and  the  revel  and  the  high 


CHAP.  XI.]  JUDGES.  179 

glee  of  Gilead  ?  Here  you  are  like  a  number  of  whipped  hounds  coming  to  me  in 
your  poverty  and  weakness  and  humiliation  ;  you  have  come  to  the  bastard."  It  was 
not  a  resentful  speech :  it  was  the  eloquence  of  a  noble  man.  Some  people  can  only 
be  taught  when  they  are  whipped.  These  people  belonged  to  that  bad  quality. 
Have  we  not  here  a  revelation  of  human  nature  ?  Can  we  boast  ourselves  against 
the  elders  of  Gilead  and  say  we  are  of  a  higher  quaUty?  Are  we  not  aU  guilty 
before  one  another  in  this  very  respect  ?  There  are  some  men  we  never  write  to 
except  when  we  want  something.  They  never  received  a  friendly  letter  from  us  in 
their  Uves.  The  moment  we  come  into  distress  or  difficulty  then  we  write  to  those 
men  and  call  them  friends.  We  pay  our  friends  unconsciously  a  high  tribute  by 
going  to  them  again  and  again  in  our  distress.  Our  going,  being  translated  into 
language,  means,  "  We  have  come  again  ;  every  other  door  is  shut  agaiast  us  ;  this 
kind,  hospitable  home-door  was  never  thrust  in  our  faces,  it  was  always  opened  by 
some  kindly  hand :  the  last  time  we  came  it  was  for  help,  we  have  come  on  the 
same  errand  again."  This  may  be  mean  enough  on  our  part,  and  yet  there  is  an 
unconscious  tribute  to  the  very  friends  whom  we  neglected  in  the  time  of  our 
strength  and  prosperity.  See  how  this  same  question  penetrates  the  whole  warp 
and  woof,  the  whole  web  of  life  and  thought.  Sometimes  it  is  the  Church  that  asks 
the  question.  The  Church  says  to  some  applicants  for  admission,  "  '  Why  are  ye 
come  unto  me  now  when  ye  are  in  distress  ?  '  You  never  come  in  the  summer-time, 
you  never  come  in  the  fair  weather :  why  are  ye  come  to  me  now  when  ye  are  in 
distress  ?  What  has  brought  you  ?  Which  of  God's  constables  has  arrested  you 
and  planted  you  in  this  prison  ?  Trouble  is  your  gaoler,  and  he  has  turned  the  key 
of  the  prison  upon  you  in  Church."  There  are  people  we  use  thus  meanly,  and 
the  Church  may  be  used  often  on  this  low  ground.  We  go  when  we  are  sad. 
But  are  we  aware  that  here  also  we  are  paying  an  unconscious  tribute  to  the  Church 
and  to  everything  that  is  centralised  and  glorified  by  that  Divine  emblem  ?  The 
Church  wants  you  to  come  in  the  time  of  distress.  The  Church  is  not  an  upbraid- 
ing mother.  She  may  utter  a  sigh  over  you  as  she  sees  your  ragged  and  destitute 
condition,  but  she  admits  you  all  the  same  and  tells  you  to  go  up  higher.  If  our 
friends  can  ask  the  question  of  Jephthah,  if  the  Church  can  put  the  same  inquiry, 
BO  in  very  deed  and  in  the  fullest  significance  can  the  Bible.  Who  goes  to  the  Bible 
in  the  summer-time  ?  The  dear  old  Bible  says  to  many  of  us,  "  What,  you  back 
again?  What  has  happened  now?  Some  one  dead  ?  property  lost  ?  not  well  ?  What 
do  you  want  with  me  to-day  ?  Tell  me  your  case  ;  don't  profess  you  love  me  and 
want  me  for  my  own  sake ;  teU  me  what  it  is  you  want  before  you  begin,  and  I  will 
open  at  the  place."  It  is  God's  book,  because  it  is  so  lovely  and  so  sweet 
and  so  large  of  heart.  So  far  we  have  taken  an  advancing  line.  We  began 
with  our  friends,  we  passed  through  the  Church,  then  we  went  to  the  Bible, 
and  now  we  go  to  God.  This  is  the  Divine  inquiry:  "Why  are  ye  come  to 
Me  now  when  ye  are  in  distress  ? "  This  is  the  great  hold  which  God  has 
upon  us  aU.  His  family  would  be  very  small  but  for  the  distress  of  the  world. 
His  heaven  can  hardly  hold  His  household  because  of  this  wearying  trouble, 
this  eternal  want,  this  gnawing  worm  of  discontent.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Jephthah 
vowed  a  vow  unto  the  Lord. — JephthaKs  vow : — I.  How  the  Lord  suffereth 

GOOD  MEN  AND  WISE  MEN  TO  SNAEE  THEMSELVES,  AND  BEING  NEEDLESS  SORROWS  AND 
WOES   ON   THEMSELVES    BY   TEMERITY   AND  RASHNESS  (1  Sam.  XXV.  34  ;    Matt.  XXvi.  31). 

1.  The  foUy  of  man's  heart,  which  would  walk  at  large,  unconfined  within  the  rules 
of  wisdom ;  this  makes  men  rash  even  in  the  things  of  God,  as  here.  2.  God's 
just  desertion  of  good  men,  for  their  humiliation;  and  to  give  them  experi- 
ence of  themselves,  and  how  their  own  wisdom  wUl  make  them  befool  themselves,, 
as  David  did  after  his  rash  numbering  of  the  people,  and  cleave  more  close  to  God 
and  His  counsel,  when  they  see  their  own  counsels  prove  fit  for  nothing  but  to  cast 
them  down.  To  be  weU  advised  in  that  we  do  or  speak,  avoid  temerity  and  rash- 
ness, by  which,  making  more  haste  than  good  speed,  men  do  but  brew  their  own 
sorrow.  Consider — 1.  That  rashness  doeth  nothing  well  (Prov.  xv.  22).  "  Without 
counsel  thoughts  come  to  nought,"  and  the  hasty  man,  we  say,  never  wants  woe. 
Herod  himself,  as  wicked  as  he  was,  was  sorry  for  his  rash  oath ;  and  yet  how 
mischievous  was  it,  against  the  Ufe  of  John  Baptist !  A  man  going  in  haste  easily 
Blideth  (Prov.  xii.  2).  2.  A  note  of  a  man  fearing  God  is  to  carry  his  matters  with 
discretion  (Psa.  cxii.  5).  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  true  wisdom." 
S.  The  law  rejected  a  bhnd  sacrifice ;  the  gospel  requireth  a  reasonable  (Eom,  xii.  1) ; 
and  all  sacrifices  must  be  seasoned  with  the  salt  of  discretion.  4.  Bashness  and 
temerity  lays  as  bare  and  naked  to  the  lashes  of  God,  of  men,  and  of  our  own  con- 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

sciences.  Kules  of  direction  to  avoid  this  sin  of  rashness,  attended  with  so  much 
sorrow.  First,  watch  carefully  against  thine  own  rashness  in — 1.  Judgment.  2. 
Affections.  3.  Speeches.  4.  Actions.  5.  Passions.  Secondly,  arm  thyself  with 
the  rules  of  Christian  prudence  to  avoid  this  sin,  and  the  sorrow  of  it ;  as  knowing 
that  it  is  not  enough  to  be  a  faithful  servant,  but  he  must  be  wise  too.  II.  The 
Lord  commonly  exalting  His  servants  with  some  high  favour,  brings  some 
STINGING  CROSS  WITH  IT,  TO  HUMBLE  THEM.  1.  The  Loid  spics  in  US  a  lewd  nature 
and  disposition,  even  like  that  of  the  spider,  which  can  turn  everything  into  poison. 
There  is  in  the  best  a  root  of  pride  and  vanity  which  in  prosperit}'  and  warm  sun- 
shine sprouteth  and  grows  wonderfully  stiff.  Paul  himself  is  in  danger  to  be 
exalted  out  of  measure  by  abundance  of  revelation  ;  and  therefore  the  Lord,  as  a 
wise  physician,  adds  a  dose  of  affliction  to  be  an  antidote  to  expel  the  poison  of  pride, 
and  with  a  prick  lets  out  the  wind  of  vainglory.  2.  This  height  of  honours, 
success,  &c.,  easily  gaineth  our  affections  and  delights,  and  so  draws  and  steals 
away  our  delights  in  the  Lord.  We  are  prone  to  idolise  them,  and  to  give  them 
■our  hearts,  and  therefore  the  Lord  is  forced  to  pull  our  hearts  from  them,  and  by 
fiome  buffetings  and  cooling  cards,  tells  us  in  what  sliding  and  slippery  places  we 
stand,  and  therefore  had  need  still  keep  our  watch  about  us,  and  not  pour  out  our 
hearts  upon  such  momentary  pleasures.  3.  We  are  as  children  in  our  advance- 
ments who,  having  found  honey,  eat  too  much.  If  the  Lojd  did  not  thus  sauce 
our  dainties,  how  could  we  avoid  the  surfeit  of  them  ?  Alas  !  how  would  we  dote 
■upon  the  world  if  we  found  nothing  but  prosperity,  who  are  so  set  upon  it  for  all 
the  bitterness  of  it.  4.  The  Lord  spies  in  us  an  unthankful  disposition,  who,  when 
He  honours  us,  and  lifts  us  up  that  we  might  lift  up  His  name  and  glory,  we  let  the 
honour  fall  upon  ourselves.     III.  God  doth  often  turn  the  greatest  delights 

AND     earthly     pleasures     OF   HiS    SERVANTS    TO    THEIR    GREATEST    SORROW.       1.    FlOm 

the  transitoriness  of  all  outward  comforts ;  here  below  there  is  never  a  gourd  to 
cover  our  head,  but  a  worm  to  consume  it.  And  therefore  what  a  man  doth  chiefly 
delight  in  the  fruition,  he  must  needs  be  most  vexed  in  the  separation  and  want  of 
it.  2.  From  the  naughty  disposition  of  our  hearts.  (1)  Hardness  of  heart  which 
will  not  yield  without  such  hard  and  smart  strokes.  (2)  That  we  can  turn  all  kind 
of  comforts,  natural  and  supernatural,  to  bewitching  vanities,  and  yield  them  strength 
enough  to  allure  us  and  draw  us  from  the  sound  comfort  of  them ;  there  is  no 
ordinance,  no  creature,  no  gift,  no  comfort  that  can  escape  us.  3.  From  the 
jealousy  of  God  who  hath  made  all  His  creatui'es,  ordinances,  gifts.  His  servants  as 
well  as  ours,  and  cannot  abide  that  any  of  them  should  have  any  place  but  of 
servants  with  us  ;  His  zeal  cannot  abide  that  they  should  gain  our  hearts,  or  souls, 
or  any  power  of  them  from  Him,  and  therefore  when  men  go  a-whoring  after  the 
creatures,  and  lay  the  level  of  their  comfort  below  the  Lord  Himself,  then  He  shows 
the  fervency  of  His  zeal,  either  in  removing  the  gift  or  them  from  the  comfort  of 
it.     IV.   All   promises   to    God    or  man  lawful  and   in   our   power  must  be 

RELIGIOUSLY   AND   FAITHFULLY   PERFORMED  ;    OF  ALL  WHICH,  THOU   OPENETH   THY  MOUTH 

TO  THE  Lord,  or  before  the  Lord,  thou  mayest  not  go  back.  1.  I  say,  all  lawful 
promises,  for  no  promise  may  be  a  bond  of  iniquity,  and  the  performance  of  such 
is  but  tying  two  sins  together,  as  Herod  tied  to  a  wicked  oath,  murder  of  John 
Baptist.  2.  All  promises  in  our  power,  for  nothing  can  tie  us  to  impossibilities,  as 
when  the  bishop  makes  the  priest  vow  perpetual  continency — a  thing  out  of  his 
power  and  reach.  3.  To  God  or  men.  (1)  To  God  (Num.  xxx.  3).  (2)  To  man; 
fidehty  and  veracity  are  of  the  weighty  points  of  the  law  (Matt,  xxiii.  23).  And  of 
the  heathen  given  up  to  a  reprobate  sense  it  is  said,  they  were  truce-breakers 
(Rom.  i.  30).  4.  They  must  be  performed  religiously  and  faithfully.  To  a  conscion- 
able  performance  three  things  are  required.  (1)  Perform  them  willingly  and  cheer- 
fully ;  for  God  loves  as  a  cheerful  giver,  so  a  cheerful  performer.  (2)  Fully  and 
wholly,  not  by  halves  (Num.  xxx.  3).  He  shall  do  all  that  is  gone  out  of  His 
mouth,  not  taking  away  a  part,  as  Ananias  and  Sapphira  (Acts  v.).  (3)  Without 
delay;  every  seasonable  action  is  beautiful.  Besides  the  express  commandment 
(Eccles.  V.  4).  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Different  views  held  as  to  Jcphthali's  voio  : — 
Among  Jewish  paraphrasts  and  commentators,  the  more  ancient  are  mostly  of 
opinion  that  Jephthah  did  actually  sacrifice  his  daughter.  They  censure  the  rash- 
ness of  his  vow,  but  they  do  not  appear  to  doubt  that  the  sacrifice  of  the  maiden 
was  actually  made.  Some  later  Jewish  writers,  however,  of  great  authority,  have 
contended  that  Jephthah's  daughter  was  not  slain,  but  devoted  to  a  life  of  virginity; 
being  shut  up  in  a  house  which  her  father  built  for  the  purpose,  and  there  visited 
four  days  in  each  year  by  the  maidens  of  Israel  as  long  as  she  lived.     Among 


CHAP.  XI.]  JUDGES.  181 

Christian  writers,  perhaps  all  during  the  first  ten  centuries — certainly  the  exceptions, 
if  any,  were  few  and  far  between — believed  that  the  maiden  was  sacrificed.  Later 
Christian  writers  have  not  been  so  unanimous.  Many,  perhaps  the  majority,  of 
those  who  have  treated  upon  the  subject,  hold  the  opinion  which,  as  we  have  seen, 
was  universal  in  the  early  Church.  Many  others,  of  equal  learning  and  eminence, 
have  maintained  that  Jephthah's  daughter  was  not  offered  by  her  father  as  a  burnt- 
offering,  but  that  she  was  permitted  to  live ;  among  these,  there  are  some  who 
believe  with  the  modern  Jews  just  mentioned,  that  she  was  shut  up  by  her  father 
and  devoted  to  a  life  of  seclusion  ;  while  others  suppose  that  she  was  devoted  to  the 
Lord's  service  in  a  life  of  celibacy,  and  was  numbered  during  the  remainder  of  her 
life  with  the  "  women  who  assemble  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congrega- 
tion," performing  duties  of  sacred  service  in  connection  with  the  worship  at 
Shiloh.  .  .  .  That  Jephthah  was  "  hasty  in  opening  his  lips  before  God  "  is  gene- 
rally admitted  ;  although  this  rashness  is  singularly  in  contrast  with  his  cautious- 
ness and  skill  in  negotiating  and  arguing  with  the  Ammonite,  and  shows  how 
elements  the  most  opposite  may  exist  in  the  same  character.  That  he  deliberately 
contemplated  as  possible  the  sacrifice  of  a  human  being  is  a  supposition  scarcely  to 
be  entertained  of  one  who  is  spoken  of  in  the  New  Testament  as  a  man  of  faith. 
Yet  that  human  sacrifices  were  familiar  to  him  cannot  be  doubted ;  and  it  is 
possible  that  familiarity  with  the  rites  of  the  Ammonites,  on  whose  borders  he 
dwelt,  and  with  whom  human  sacrifices,  as  is  now  the  case  in  many  parts  of  Africa, 
were  religious  rites  of  daily  occurrence,  may  have  blunted  his  feelings,  and  have 
caused  him  to  forget  how  odious  such  offerings  were  in  the  sight  of  God.  The 
excitement  of  the  occasion,  however,  seems  to  have  bewildered  him,  so  that  he 
forgot  everything  not  immediately  connected  with  his  forthcoming  expedition. 
His  vow  was  utterly  rash.  He  did  not  take  time  to  consider,  for  example,  that  if 
an  ass  or  a  dog  had  first  met  him  coming  out  of  his  house  on  his  return,  to  offer  it 
to  the  Lord  would  have  been  an  abomination.  Had  Ije  bestowed  that  thought  upon 
the  matter  which  reason  itself  would  teach  us  to  be  necessary  when  we  open  our  lips 
to  our  Maker,  he  could  not  have  failed  to  reflect  that  it  was  possible,  nay,  likely, 
that  his  only  and  beloved  child  would  be  the  first  to  greet  him  on  his  return.  It 
was  natural  that  he  should  offer  a  vow  to  the  Lord  ;  strange  that  he  should  have 
done  it  with  such  impulsive  rashness.  .  .  .  The  peculiar  expression  of  the  sacred 
text,  that  "  her  father  did  with  her  according  to  his  vow  which  he  vowed,  and  she 
knew  no  man,"  may  lend  plausibility  to  the  opinion,  that  she  was  devoted  to  a 
virgin  life.  But  against  this  view  there  lie  three  objections,  which,  when  taken 
together,  compel  us  to  adopt  the  opposite  view.  The  first  is,  that  a  celibate  life 
formed  no  part  of  her  father's  vow.  The  second  is,  that  the  great  distance  at 
which  Jephthah  was  from  Shiloh,  where  the  tabernacle  was,  and  the  absence  of  any 
allusion  in  all  his  history  to  its  existence,  render  the  theory  of  his  daughter  being 
transferred  thither  improbable.  The  third  is,  that  the  misfortune  of  his  birth 
would  alone  have  prevented  such  an  arrangement.  If  the  sons  of  a  bastard, 
according  to  the  law  of  Moses,  could  not  enter  into  the  congregation  of  the  Lord  to 
the  tenth  generation,  it  is  scarcely  probable  that  Jephthah's  daughter  could  have 
secured  admission  among  the  privileged  women  who  rendered  service  about  the 
tabernacle.  We  therefore  look  upon  the  maiden  as  having  been  sacrificed.  Upon 
the  gloom  of  this  painful  history,  however,  an  ethereal  brightness  shines.  What 
can  be  more  beautiful,  more  wonderful,  than  this  pure  and  lovely  maid,  brought 
up  among  bandits,  and  far  from  the  tabernacle  of  God,  thus  freely  and  sweetly 
giving  up  herself  as  a  thank-offering  for  the  victories  of  Israel  ?  And  who  can  fail 
to  see,  in  the  story  of  the  meek  and  self-sacrificing  maid,  "  a  marvellous  and 
mysterious  adumbration  of  a  better  sacrifice  of  another  soul,  of  an  only  child , 
perfectly  free  and  voluntary,  and  of  virgin  holiness  and  heavenly  purity,  the  sacri- 
fice of  Christ,  who  gave  His  spotless  soul  to  death  for  our  eakes"?  {L.  H. 
Witeman,  M.A.) 

Vers.  34-40.  I  have  opened  my  mouth  unto  the  Lord,  and  I  cannot  go  back.— 
Retreat  impossible  : — I.  What  we  have  done.  "  I  have  opened  my  mouth  unto  the 
Lord."  1.  We  have  opened  our  mouths  before  the  Lord,  first,  "  by  confessing  our 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ."  2.  We  have  also  avowed  and  declared  before  the  living 
God  that  we  are  Christ's  disciples  and  followers.  3.  We  have  opened  our  mouth 
to  the  Lord,  next,  because  as  we  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  take  Him  to  be  our 
Master,  so  we  "  have  admitted  the  Kedeemer's  claims  to  our  persons  and  services, 
and  have  resolved  to  live  for  Him  alone  in  our  days."    We  have  made  a  dedication 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 


of  ourselves  to  His  service,  declaring  that  we  are  not  our  own,  but  bought  with  a 
price.  4.  We  have  cast  in  our  lot  with  His  people.  II.  What  we  cannot  do.  "  I 
cannot  go  back."  Having  once  become  Christians,  we  cannot  apostatise  from  the 
faith.  We  cannot  go  back,  even  by  temporary  turnings  aside.  1.  If  we  did  go 
back,  we  should  show  that  we  have  been  altogether  false  until  now.  2,  We  should 
incur  frightful  penalties.  To  go  back  is  death,  shame,  eternal  ruin.  3.  It  would 
be  so  unreasonable.  If  you  give  up  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ,  what  other 
religion  would  you  have  ?  If  you  were  to  give  up  the  pleasures  of  godliness,  what 
other  pleasures  would  you  have?  "  Oh,"  says  one,  "we  could  go  into  the  world." 
Could  you  ?  If  you  are  a  child  of  God  you  are  spoiled  for  the  world.  4.  I  have  no 
inclination  to  go  back.  The  man  who  is  married  to  a  good  wife  thinks  to  himself, 
"  If  I  had  to  marry  again  to-morrow  morning,  she  should  be  the  bride,  and  happy 
would  we  be."  And  so,  if  we  had  our  choice  to  make  again,  we  would  choose  our 
dear  Lord  over  again,  only  with  much  more  eagerness  and  earnestness  than 
we  did  at  first.  5.  We  have  opened  our  mouth  to  the  Lord,  and  we  cannot 
go  back  because  we  are  so  happy  as  we  now  are.  A  man  does  not  turn  his 
back  upon  that  which  has  become  his  life  and  his  joy ;  he  is  bound  to  it  by  the 
bUss  which  he  derives  from  it.  Can  the  Swiss  forget  his  country  when  he  listens  to 
the  home-music  which  he  heard  as  a  child  amidst  his  native  hiUs  ?  Does  not  the 
home-sickness  come  over  him  so  that  he  longs  to  be  among  the  Alps  again  ?  Does 
not  the  Englishman,  wherever  he  wanders,  whether  by  land  or  sea,  feel  his  heart 
instinctively  turn  to  the  white  cliffs  of  Albion,  and  does  he  not  say  that  with  all  her 
faults  he  loves  his  country  still  ?  Who  would  cease  to  be  that  which  he  loves  to  be  ? 
6.  And  then,  besides  that,  we  cannot  go  back  from  what  we  have  said,  for  Divine 
grace  impels  us  onward.  There  is  a  secret  power  more  mighty  than  all  other  forces 
called  the  force  of  grace,  and  this  has  captured  us.  III.  Sojiethino  which  we 
MUST  DO.  If  there  is  a  present  sacrifice  demanded  of  us,  we  must  make  it  directly. 
If  there  is  anything  in  your  business,  and  you  cannot  be  a  Christian  if  you  do  it, 
abjure  it  at  once  and  for  ever.  If  you  are  to  do  this,  however,  you  must  ask  for 
more  grace.  One  other  admonition  to  Christian  people  is  this — burn  the  boats 
behind  you.  When  the  Eoman  commander  meant  victory  he  landed  his  troops  on 
the  coast  where  he  knew  there  were  thousands  of  enemies,  and  he  burned  the  boats, 
so  as  to  cut  off  all  chance  of  retreat.  "  But  how  are  we  to  get  away  if  we  are 
beaten?  "  "That  is  just  it,"  said  he  ;  "we  will  not  be  beaten  ;  we  will  not  dream 
of  such  a  thing."  "Burn  the  boats" — that  is  what  you  Christian  people  must  do, 
"  Make  no  provision  for  the  flesh."  Let  the  separation  between  you  and  the  world 
be  final  and  irreversible.  Say,  "  Here  I  go  for  Christ  and  His  Cross,  for  the  ti-uth 
of  the  Bible,  for  the  laws  of  God,  for  holiness,  for  trust  in  Jesus  ;  and  never  will  I 
go  back,  come  what  may."  (C  H.  Sjmrgeon.)  No  trijling  with  God: — "We 
have  opened  our  mouth  unto  the  Lord."  It  is  not  what  we  promised  the  Church, 
though  in  becoming  members  of  it  we  have  promised  to  fulfil  the  mutual  duties  of 
Christians.  It  was  not  what  we  promised  to  the  minister,  though,  in  the  very  fact 
of  becoming  members  of  a  Church  of  which  he  is  the  pastor  we  have  a  Christian 
duty  towards  him.  It  was  not  what  we  promised  one  another,  though  we  all  owe 
something  to  each  other.  But  we  have  opened  our  mouth  to  the  Lord.  If  a  man 
must  trifle,  let  him  trifle  with  men,  but  not  with  God.  If  promises  to  men  may  be 
lightly  broken — and  they  should  not  be — yet  let  us  not  trifle  with  promises  made  to 
God.  And  if  solemn  declarations  ever  can  be  forgotten— which  they  should  not  be 
— yet  not  solemn  declarations  made  to  God.  Beware,  oh  !  beware  of  anything  like 
levity  in  entering  into  covenant  with  the  Most  High.  {Ibid.)  Do  to  me  accord- 
ing to  that  which  hath  proceeded  out  of  thy  mouth. — A  sacrifice  of  the  world  to 
high  principle : — Never  in  any  age,  or  among  any  people,  was  there  a  more  ready 
or  thorough  sacrifice  of  the  world  to  high  principle  and  duty  than  was  made  by  the 
daughter  of  Jephthah  the  Gileadite.  It  was  made,  too,  in  most  trying  circumstances. 
If  ever  the  world  seemed  bright  to  her,  it  must  have  been  when  she  went  forth  with 
timbrels  and  dances  to  meet  her  father.  The  land  of  Israel  they  had  so  longed  for 
was  to  be  their  home— they  were  to  dwell  there  in  peace  and  honour,  high  in  rank, 
great  in  power.  It  would  seem  to  the  daughter  of  Jephthah  as  if  life  were  but 
beginning  ;  the  night  seemed  past  and  the  morning  breaking— a  morning  without  a 
cloud.  She  could  not  but  anticipate  a  long  bright  day  for  her  father  and  herself  ; 
and  it  would  be  all  the  more  welcome  that  they  had  sighed  for  it  so  often,  and 
watched  for  it  through  a  night  so  dark  and  so  long.  It  was  in  these  most  trying 
circumstances  that  the  daughter  of  Jephthah  heard  from  her  father's  lips  that  he  had 
opened  his  mouth  unto  the  Lord  and  could  not  go  back.    Yet  without  one  word  of 


CHAP.  XI.]  JUDGES.  183 

reproacli  or  complaint,  and  without  hesitation,  she  said  unto  him  who  had  vowed 
that  rash  vow,  "  My  father,  if  thou  hast  opened  thy  mouth  unto  the  Lord,  do  to 
me,"  (fee.  Think  of  her,  that  child  of  an  outcast — brought  up  in  a  heathen  land 
and  in  a  camp — think  of  her,  how  pure,  how  unworldly,  how  unselfish,  how  noble 
in  spirit !  Think  of  her  patriotism,  think  of  her  self-sacrifice,  that  you  may  abhor 
all  that  is  mean  and  selfish,  and  worldly  and  untruthful;  and  that  you  may  cease 
to  grudge  the  sacrifices  your  Father  in  heaven  requires  in  love  and  wisdom,  and  for 
your  own  deliverance  and  safety.  (M.  Nicholson,  D.D.)  Let  me  alone  two 
months,  that  I  may  .  .  .  bewail  my  virginity. — The  wail  of  Jephthah's  daughter  : — 
It  is  this  wail  of  Jephthah's  daughter  that  rises  from  every  generation  of  this 
■world's  history.  What  we  are  all  of  us  called  upon  to  see  with  our  own  eyes,  and 
judge  with  our  own  hearts,  is  a  similar,  or  much  more  grievous  waste  of  all  that  is 
good  in  human  nature,  of  devotedness  to  country  and  family,  of  fine  feeling,  of  the 
best  intellect.  Again  and  again,  in  our  own  society,  we  see  the  most  splendid 
mental  abilities  squandered  in  the  quest  of  what  can  never  be  discovered,  the  truest 
eloquence  and  highest  moral  feeling  consecrated  to  a  cause  that  is  not  worth  lifting 
a  finger  to  defend.  Who  has  not  seen  the  most  precious  human  feelings  wasted, 
you  would  say,  on  worthless  people,  while  they  might  have  fertilised  and  enriched 
responsive  natures — the  noblest  devotedness  sacrificed  to  a  mere  lie,  or  deception, 
or  mockery  ?  Two  months  was  not  too  long  to  weep  over  the  dreadful  misguided- 
ness  of  human  actions,  and  the  consequent  waste  or  outward  unprofitableness  of 
what  is  best  in  human  nature.  Still,  there  is  a  compensating  element  even  here. 
These  companions  who  sympathised  with  their  friend,  and  at  last  decked  her  as  if 
for  her  bridal,  and  gave  her  into  her  father's  hands,  must  no  doubt  have  felt  to  the 
close  of  life  that  a  world  in  which  anything  so  tragic  could  happen  was  a  blighted, 
melancholy  world.  Still,  as  they  themselves  passed  through  the  various  womanly 
duties  that  fell  to  them,  and  felt  still  the  hold  that  event  had  taken  ;  as  they  told 
the  story  of  the  noble  maiden  to  their  own  children,  and  found  how  it  moved  and 
controlled  them,  and  how  many,  through  that  example,  were  urged  to  more  self- 
sacrificing  deeds,  and  to  higher  thoughts  about  what  is  beautiful  and  good  in  life  ; 
must  not  these  women  sometimes  have  thought  that  possibly  the  real  children  of 
Jephthah's  dau;,'hter,  those  who  had  truly  succeeded  to  her  nature,  were  more  and 
better  than  could  have  been  hers,  had  she  lived  ?  If  then  by  family  circumstances, 
or  in  any  other  way,  we  are  called  upon  to  sacrifice  our  own  will  to  what  seems  a 
very  needless,  provoking,  and  rash  plan,  what  we  have  to  do  is  to  seek  to  have 
something  of  the  spirit  of  Jephthah's  daughter,  and  accept  our  position  without  a 
murmur ;  knowing  that,  though  we  do  not  see  how,  any  more  than  she  did,  this 
may,  and  will,  by  God's  blessing,  result  in  such  development  of  our  own  character, 
and  such  enlargement  of  our  usefulness,  as  could  not  otherwise  be  attained.  {3Iarcus 
Dads,  D.D.)  Did  with  her  according  to  his  vow. — Modern  Jephthahs ;    or, 

parental  immolations  : — In  Jephthah's  vow  we  see  two  things — 1.  A  good  feeling 
overcoming  the  judgment.  2.  A  sense  of  right  leading  to  an  enormous  crime.  I. 
Jephthah  SACRiFifcED  HIS  DAUGHTER  TO  THE  TRUE  GoD.  But  what  are  many  modern 
parents  doing  ?  Why,  offering  up  their  children  to  false  gods !  1.  The  god  of 
idleness.  Indolence  is  ruin.  2.  The  god  of  worldliness.  3.  The  god  of  ambition. 
II.  Jephthah  sacrificed  only  the  body  of  his  daughter.  But  parents  in  these 
modern  times  are  found  immolating  the  souls  of  their  children  ;  they  are  made  to 
prostrate  their  powers,  and  to  yield  the  Divine  sentiments  of  their  nature  to  idleness, 
pelf,  vanity,  fashion.  1.  Soul  immolation  is  more  gradual.  2.  Soul  immolation 
is  more  mischievous.  It  is  the  ruin  of  the  whole  man.  in.  Jephthah  sacrificed 
HIS  DAUGHTER  FROM  A  NOBLE  IMPULSE.  No  such  high  feeling  prompts  parents  in 
these  days  to  sacrifice  the  souls  of  their  children  even  to  the  false  and  ignominious  \ 
divinities.  Thej'  do  it  either  from  the  spirit  of  custom,  vanity,  greed,  or  ambition.  / 
It  is  a  cold-blooded,  soulless  immolation.  If  there  is  any  feeling,  it  is  the  mere  lust 
of  the  eye  and  pride  of  life.  IV.  Jephthah  sacrificed  his  daughter  with  a 
TERRIBLE  REGRET.  But  modcm  parents  lay  the  souls  of  their  chUdren  on  the  altar 
of  worldliness,  vanity,  and  sin,  not  only  without  any  compunction,  but  with  an 
utter  indifference.  They  see  the  souls  of  their  daughters  running  into  grubs, 
butterflies,  swine,  and  heave  no  sigh  of  regret.  V.  Jephthah  sacrificed  his 
daughter  with  her  full  concurrence.  Were  worldly  parents  to  say  to  their 
daughters  at  the  dawn  of  their  intelligent  and  moral  life,  "  We  intend  to  take 
all  the  innocency  from  your  young  loves — all  the  sensibility  from  your  young 
consciences — all  the  religious  poetry  from  your  young  natures — and  to  make 
you  the  dolls  of  fashion,  the  devotees  of  a  sham  life,  the  victuus  of  a  pampered 

32 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xi. 

animalism,  and  thus  rifle  you  of  your  birthright  as  immortals" — this  would  be 
honest;  this  would  bring  the  question  so  thoroughly  home  to  the  young  heart 
as  would,  we  think,  rouse  opposition  to  the  fiendish  plan.  {Homilist.)  The 
vow  xierformed : —  To  Jephthah  and  his  daughter  the  vow  was  sacred,  irre- 
vocable. The  deliverance  of  Israel  by  so  signal  and  complete  a  victory  left  no 
alternative.  It  would  have  been  well  if  they  had  known  God  differently ;  yet 
better  this  darkly  impressive  issue  which  went  to  the  making  of  Hebrew  faith  and 
strength,  than  easy,  unfruitful  evasion  of  duty.  We  are  shocked  by  the  expenditure 
of  fine  feeling  and  heroism  in  upholding  a  false  idea  of  God  and  obligation  to  Him  ; 
but  are  we  outraged  and  distressed  by  the  constant  effort  to  escape  from  God  which 
characterises  our  age  ?  And  have  we  for  our  own  part  come  yet  to  the  right  idea 
of  self  and  its  relations  ?  Our  century,  beclouded  on  many  points,  is  nowhere  less 
informed  than  in  matters  of  self-sacrifice ;  Christ's  doctrine  is  still  uncomprehended. 
Jephthah  was  wrong,  for  God  did  not  need  to  be  bribed  to  support  a  man  who  was 
bent  on  doing  his  duty.  And  many  fail  now  to  perceive  that  personal  development 
and  service  of  God  are  in  the  same  line.  Life  is  made  for  generosity,  not  mortifi- 
cation ;  for  giving  in  glad  ministry,  not  for  giving  up  in  hideous  sacrifice.  It  is  to 
be  devoted  to  God  by  the  free  and  holy  use  of  body,  mind,  and  soul  in  the  daily 
tasks  which  Providence  appoints.  The  wailing  of  Jephthah's  daughter  rings  in  our 
ears,  bearing  with  it  the  anguish  of  many  a  soul  tormented  in  the  name  of  that 
which  is  most  sacred,  tormented  by  mistakes  concerning  God,  the  awful  theory  that 
He  is  pleased  with  human  suffering.  The  relics  of  that  hideous  Moloch  worship 
which  polluted  Jephthah's  faith,  not  even  yet  purged  away  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
continue  and  make  religion  an  anxiety  and  life  a  kind  of  torture.  I  do  not  speak 
of  that  devotion  of  thought  and  time,  eloquence  and  talent  to  some  worthless  cause 
which  here  and  there  amazes  the  student  of  history  and  human  life — the  passionate 
ardour,  for  example,  with  which  Flora  Macdonald  gave  herself  up  to  the  service  of 
a  Stuart.  But  religion  is  made  to  demand  sacrifices  compared  to  which  the  offering 
of  Jephthah's  daughter  was  easy.  The  imagination  of  women  especially,  fired  by 
false  representations  of  the  death  of  Christ,  in  which  there  was  a  clear  Divine 
assertion  of  self,  whUe  it  is  made  to  appear  as  complete  suppression  of  self,  bears 
many  on  in  a  hopeless  and  essentially  immoral  endeavour.  Has  God  given  us, 
minds,  feelings,  right  ambitions,  that  we  may  crush  them  ?  Does  He  purify  our 
desires  and  aspirations  by  the  fire  of  His  own  Spirit  and  still  require  us  to  crush 
them  ?  Are  we  to  find  our  end  in  being  nothing,  absolutely  nothing,  devoid  of  will, 
of  purpose,  of  personality  ?  Is  this  what  Christianity  demands  ?  Then  our  religion 
is  but  refined  suicide,  and  the  God  who  desires  us  to  annihilate  ourselves  is  but  the 
Supreme  Being  of  the  Buddhists,  if  those  may  be  said  to  have  a  god  who  regard  the 
suppression  of  individuality  as  salvation.  Christ  was  made  a  sacrifice  for  us. 
Yes ;  He  sacrificed  everything  except  His  own  eternal  life  and  power  ;  He  sacrificed 
ease  and  favour  and  immediate  success  for  the  manifestation  of  God.  So  He 
achieved  the  fulness  of  personal  might  and  royalty.  And  every  sacrifice  His 
religion  calls  us  to  make  is  designed  to  secure  that  enlargement  and  fulness  of 
spiritual  individuality  in  the  exercise  of  which  we  shall  truly  serve  God  and  our 
fellows.  Does  God  require  sacrifice  ?  Yes,  unquestionably — the  sacrifice  which 
every  reasonable  being  must  make  in  order  that  the  mind,  the  soul  may  be  strong 
and  free,  sacrifice  of  the  lower  for  the  higher,  sacrifice  of  pleasure  for  truth,  of 
comfort  for  duty,  of  the  life  that  is  earthly  and  temporal  for  the  life  that  is 
heavenly  and  eternal.  And  the  distinction  of  Christianity  is  that  it  makes  this 
sacrifice  supremely  reasonable  because  it  reveals  the  higher  life,  the  heavenly  hope, 
the  eternal  rewards  for  which  the  sacrifice  is  to  be  made,  that  it  enables  us  in 
making  it  to  feel  ourselves  united  to  Christ  in  a  Divine  work  which  is  to  issue  in 
the  redemption  of  mankind.  [R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)  JephthaWs  payment  of  his 
vow  : — Jephthah  paid  his  vow.  At  a  frightful  sacrifice  he  gave  up  what  he  had 
promised.  When  he  gave  up  his  daughter  he  gave  up  his  all.  Did  Jephthah  open 
his  mouth  unto  the  Lord  ?  and  have  not  you  who  are  parents — have  not  you 
dedicated  your  children  to  the  Lord,  and  vowed  that  they  shall  be  His?  Not 
rashly,  not  hastily,  but  with  due  deliberation  you  did  so,  and  that  in  a  holy 
ordinance  appointed  by  God  for  the  very  purpose.  Your  vow  is  registered  in 
heaven ;  is  it  to  be  forgotten  on  earth  ?  You  have  opened  your  mouth  unto  the 
Lord ;  will  you  go  back  ?  God  asks  your  children  to  be  presented  to  Him  not  as 
slain,  but  living  sacrifices.  You  have  vowed  ;  are  you  paying  your  vows  ?  Do  you 
pray  for  your  children  ?  Do  you  teach  them  to  pray  ?  Do  you  speak  to  them  of 
God  and  of  Jesus,  and  lead  them  in  the  way  of  holiness  ?    And  when  your  vowb 


CHAP,  xii.]  JUDGES.  185 

require  that  you  should  exercise  discipline,  and  when  faithfulness  to  God  requires 
that  you  should  lay  upon  your  children  what  for  the  present  is  not  joyous  but 
grievous,  do  you  shrink  from  it  ?  To  spare  your  feehngs,  do  you  shrink  from  it  ? 
Oh,  remember  Jephthah  when  you  are  thus  tempted ;  and  think,  if  you  were  under 
Buch  a  vow  as  he  was,  how  you  would  act.  And  you  children,  think  of  Jephthah's 
daughter.  Let  her  spirit  take  possession  of  you.  Think  how  she  lived  above  her 
own  personal  and  selfish  interests ;  think  how  she  honoured  her  father  and  honoured 
God.  (M.  Nicholson,  D.D.)  "  Did  with  her  according  to  his  vow  "  ; — If  he  did 
not  offer  her  as  a  burnt-offering,  then  he  did  not  do  with  her  according  to  the  vow. 
Moreover,  why  aU  this  waihng  and  anguish  if,  after  all,  all  that  was  going  to 
happen  to  her  is  what  happens  to  thousands  who  seem  to  stand  in  little  need  of 
compassion  ?  Then,  again,  why  did  she  ask  for  the  one  favour  of  a  respite  of  two 
months  to  bewail  her  virginity,  if  she  was  to  have  thirty  or  forty  years  with  leisure 
for  that  purpose?  And,  lastly,  if  the  mere  fact  of  her  remaining  unmarried 
fulfilled  even  that  part  of  the  vow  which  specified  that  she  was  to  be  the  Lord's, 
then  what  objection  can  we  make  to  other  young  women  giving  themselves  to  the 
Lord  in  the  same  way  ?  K  Jephthah's  daughter  became  a  nun,  and  if  this  was 
Judged  a  fulfilment  of  his  vow,  if  by  being  a  virgin  she  was  somehow  more  the 
Lord's  than  by  being  a  married  woman,  a  stronger  foundation  need  not  be  sought 
for  the  establishment  of  nunneries.  [Marcus  Dods,  D.D.)  Vows  which  should 
not  be  kept : — Two  men  are  very  foolish  or  stubborn  who  fulfil  an  agreement  which 
they  both  see  to  be  disadvantageous,  and  wish  to  fall  away  from.  No  duty  what- 
ever compels  them  to  fulfil  it,  and  if  they  do  so  they  are  justly  the  laughing-stock 
of  their  acquaintances.  Now,  this  is  precisely  the  case  in  which  a  man  finds 
himself  who  has  vowed  to  God  what  turns  out  to  be  sinful,  for  God  can  never  wish 
him  to  fulfil  a  contract  which,  he  now  sees,  involves  sin.  A  man  swears  to  do  a 
certain  thing  because  he  thinks  it  will  be  pleasing  to  God,  but  if  he  discovers  that, 
instead  of  being  pleasing,  it  will  be  hateful  to  God,  to  perform  his  vow,  and  do  that 
vowed  but  hateful  thing,  is  to  insult  God.  By  the  very  discovery  of  the  sinfulness 
of  a  vow,  the  maker  of  it  is  absolved  from  performing  it.  God  shrinks  much  more 
than  he  can  do  from  the  perpetration  of  sin.  Both  parties  fall  from  the  agreement. 
(Tbid.)  Typical  aspect  of  Jephthah's  vow  : — See  in  the  tragic  tale  a  foreshadowing 
of  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Christ.  He  took  upon  Himself  our  human  nature,  and 
having  vowed  it  as  the  ransom  of  the  guilty  world  He  never  hesitated,  despite  the 
awful  cost,  to  keep  His  vow.  Gladly  did  He  make  voluntary  oblation  of  His  own 
spotless  humanity,  a  vicarious  sacrifice  to  set  the  whole  race  free  from  the  spiritual 
children  of  Ammon,  the  followers  of  the  evil  one.  That  it  was  a  costly  sacrifice 
He  offered  we  know  fuU  well  from  the  story  of  Gethsemane  ;  nevertheless  He  did 
only  cry,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt,"  then  held  His  peace.  Do  we  think  it 
is  true  that  He  bewailed  His  virginity  with  His  fellows  on  the  mountains  before  Hia 
death?  Yet  we  know  that  from  the  human  standpoint  our  Lord's  ministry  of 
three  years  and  a  half  was  almost  fruitless.  Multitudes  followed  Him  to  see  His 
miracles  ;  they  crowded  about  Him  bringing  their  sick  folk  to  be  healed ;  but  they 
did  not  become  His  disciples,  and  accept  heartily  His  Word.  To  His  human 
nature  this  must  ever  have  been  a  grief  and  sore  trial.  Once  He  said  to  the  Twelve, 
"  Will  ye  also  go  away  ?  "  We  know  that  not  even  His  own  relations  believed  on 
Him.    {Arthur  Ritchie.) 


CHAPTER  Xn. 

Yebs.  1-3.  Wherefore  passedst  thou  over  to  fight  against  the  children  of  Ammon, 
and  didst  not  call  us  to  go  with  thee  7 — Shams  and  frauds : — Though  these 
Ephraimites  are  long  since  dead  and  gone,  there  are  many  Ephraimites  alive. 
They  are  men  who  wiU  not  share  the  conflict  themselves,  but  are  angry  when 
others  succeed.  I.  There  a»e  people  still  who  think  nothino  can  be  done 
WITHOUT  them.  We  find  these  people  everywhere — not  a  few  of  them  at  home. 
Ask  that  busy,  bustling  housewife  to  take  her  children  out  into  the  country  for  a 
day ;  or  ask  her  to  attend  church  on  a  Sunday  morning ;  or  ask  her  to  give  a  few 
hours  to  visiting  among  the  sick  and  the  poor  and  the  sorrowful,  what  wUl  she  say  ? 
"  Eow  can  I  leave  my  house  ?    Who  wiU  attend  to  my  affairs  ?    If  I  were  out  of 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

that  house  a  few  days  it  would  all  go  to  ruin."  That  woman  has  grcTn  daughters 
who  could  and  would  gladly  see  to  things  if  she  would  only  let  them.  But  she 
goes  on  in  her  foolish  whim  that  nothing  can  be  done  without  her.  And  I  veiily 
believe  that  not  a  few  would  rather  have  nothing  done  at  all  if  they  could  not  do  it. 
In  business,  too,  the  same  thing  occurs.  There  are  men  who  are  slaves  to  their 
business.  Neither  their  sons  nor  their  confidential  men,  who  would  suffer  any  loss 
rather  than  neglect  the  governor's  interest,  can  be  trusted.  They  must  see  to  it, 
or  it  won't  be  done.  Some  day  God  puts  such  a  man  on  his  back.  He  is  away 
six  months  with  a  serious  illness.  His  sons,  who  have  not  been  thought  capable 
hitherto,  have  responsibility  thrown  upon  them,  and  rise  to  the  position.  The  man 
is  humbled,  shamed,  or  it  may  be,  delighted  to  find  that  the  business  has  done 
better  with  the  infusion  of  the  new  blood  than  it  did  with  the  old.  The  Church  of 
Christ,  unfortunately,  is  afflicted  with  a  large  number  of  men  who  think  nothing 
can  be  done  without  them.  There  are  men  who  would  rather  the  battle  should  be 
lost  than  others  win  it — who  would  almost  wish  that  evil  should  remain  rather 
than  others  have  the  honour  of  removing  it.  But  what  does  it  matter  who  gains 
the  victory  if  it  be  gained  ?  God  can  accomplish  His  purposes  without  any  of  us. 
Look  over  the  pages  of  history,  and  you  will  find  that  workers  fall,  but  the  work 
goes  on.  II.  Theke  aee  some  who,  though  they  can't  stop  the  woek,  try  to 
PBEjUDicE  THE  woKKEEB.  The  men  of  the  text  said  in  effect,  "  And  who  are  you  ? 
Tou  are  fugitives,  mongrels,  not  of  pure  blood.  What  business  have  the  likes  of 
you  to  think  you  can  fight  the  foes  of  Israel  ?  It  is  monstrous,  and  we  won't  have 
it."  The  same  thing  goes  on  to-day.  There  are  men  who  seem  to  think  they  have 
said  something  clever  and  settling  when  they  say  that  the  popular  useful  man  was 
not  born  in  a  palace.  "  Who's  he  ?  "  is  their  cry.  "  Why,  don't  you  know  that  he 
was  a  collier,  and  worked  in  a  coal  pit  ?  His  father  died  in  a  cottage.  His  mother 
was  the  daughter  of  a  man  who  drove  a  horse  and  cart,  and  never  had  five  pounds 
in  his  life."  And  what  of  that  ?  Is  it  not  honest  to  get  coal  ?  Better  be  a  collier 
and  dig  coal  in  the  service  of  man,  and  thus  the  service  of  God,  than  be  a  loafer, 
an  idler,  a  consumer,  a  drone.  Some  of  the  noblest  of  God's  servants  have  come 
from  among  the  poor,  and  the  obscure,  and  the  unknown.  Our  Lord  Himself  was 
a  toiler,  and  the  Son  of  toilers,  and  has  for  ever  consecrated  and  blessed  all  honest 
necessary  human  labour.  So  I  say  to  you  all,  toil  on,  pray  on,  fight  on,  win 
victories  for  God.  Beat  back  the  enemies  of  Israel ;  and  if  the  Ephraimites, 
lacking  courage  and  genius  themselves,  despise  you,  let  them.     III.  There  are 

SOME   who   can't  or  WON't   DO   MUCH  THEMSELVES,   BUT  HATE,   AND  SCORN,    AND    TRY  TO 

PERSECUTE  THOSE  WHO  DO.  "  We  wiU  bum  thine  house  upon  thee."  Alas !  this 
has  often  found  expression  in  the  bitterness  of  party  strife  and  religious  bigotry. 
Unable  to  silence  men  whose  lips  God  had  touched  as  with  live  coals  from  His  own 
altar,  and  whose  hearts  had  felt  the  power  of  the  living  God,  they  have  erected 
their  stakes,  piled  their  faggots,  and  lit  their  fires,  in  which  the  saints  of  God,  the 
excellent  of  the  earth,  have  stood  tiU  their  flesh  was  shrivelled  and  their  bones 
cindered.  "  We  will  burn  thine  house  upon  thee  with  fire,"  said  these  men ;  but 
they  found  themselves  unable  to  do  it.  Some  men  are  hard  to  kill,  and  some 
houses  bad  to  burn.  Many  a  tyrant  has  found  this  out.  "  We  will  burn  thine 
house  upon  thee."  It  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  these  cowardly  Ephraimites 
that  men  who  burn  other  people's  houses  sometimes  burn  themselves.  It  is 
dangerous  to  play  with  edged  tools.  It  is  not  safe  to  toy  with  fire.  It  may  become 
the  instrument  of  your  own  torture,  the  weapon  of  your  own  destruction.  "  They 
that  take  the  sword  shall  perish  with  the  sword,"  said  Jesus  Christ ;  and  there  is 
for  us  no  higher  authority.  Some  men  who  are  fond  of  using  fire  do  no  harm 
except  to  themselves.  Whilst  it  is  in  some  sense  only  right  and  just  that  this 
should  be  so,  there  are  cases  in  which  we  are  sorry  for  the  opposers.  Well  had  it 
been  for  these  Ephraimites  had  they  shared  in  the  universal  rejoicing.  Well  had 
it  been  for  them  if  they  had  learned  wisdom,  and  ceased  from  oijposition.  Their 
wicked  and  senseless  opposition  brought  ruin  upon  themselves.  In  sheer  self- 
defence  the  victor  turned  the  sword  upon  them.  Alas  for  them !  Forty  and  two 
thousand  of  them  that  day  left  their  dead  bodies  upon  the  plains  as  victims  of  their 
folly,  and  in  illustration  of  our  saying  that  the  wicked  often  injure  themselves. 
And  this  is  true  with  the  Lord  Jesus  and  His  gospel.  Some  men  oppose  it,  reject 
it,  mutilate  it,  burn  it.  AU  such  injure  themselves.  They  can  never  hurt  the 
truth.  It  will  live.  They  cannot  stop  the  power  of  Jesus  Christ  to  save  men. 
The  waves  of  the  ocean  dash  against  the  granite  rock,  but  the  rock  does  not  move. 
But  what  of  the  waves  ?    Broken,  they  roU  back  in  spray  to  the  ocean  out  of 


CHAP.  XII.]  JUDGES.  187 

which  they  came.     "  Whosoever  shall  fall  on  this  stone  shall  be  broken  :  but  on 
whomsoever  it  shaU  fall,  it  will  grind  him  to  powder."     (C.  Leach,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Saj  now  Shibboleth  :  and  he  said  Sibboleth : — Trifles  indicate  character  : 
— It  is  often  just  such  a  slight  peculiarity  which  identifies  men  as  belonging  to  a 
certain  district  or  family.  You  know  whose  son  a  man  is  by  some  motion  of  his 
hands  or  by  his  walk,  by  the  fall  of  a  lock  of  hair  or  the  way  he  lifts  his  eye :  so 
also  some  very  slight  peculiarity  in  our  conduct  or  conversation  is  a  sufficient  index 
to  our  whole  state.  In  our  Lord's  account  of  the  last  judgment  He  describes  all 
men  as  expressing  astonishment  that  they  should  be  so  summarily  dealt  with, 
should  be  allotted  to  their  irrevocable  destinies  on  grounds  apparently  so  trivial. 
Is  it  really  reasonable  that  for  some  trifle  of  this  kind  a  man  should  be  everlastingly 
damned,  irretrievably  and  once  for  all  cast  in  judgment?  You  will  think  that  it 
is  quite  reasonable  if,  in  the  light  of  this  incident,  you  consider  that  the  little  things 
a  man  does  or  neglects  to  do  are  infallible  symptoms  of  his  character.  These 
Ephraimites  were  not  slain  because  the  Gileadites  thought  it  a  heinous  crime  to 
drop  the  "  h  "  ;  but  their  blood  dyed  the  Jordan  because  it  was  Ephraimite  blood, 
and  this  was  manifested  by  their  little  peculiarity.  And  so  in  a  thousand  ways 
that  God  observes,  and  that  even  men  of  any  spiritual  insight  or  keenness  of 
observation  notice,  we  are  in  little  things  revealing  our  character,  and  in  the  final 
judgment  one  of  these  little  things  will  be  sufficient  to  condemn  us.  Try  to  put 
away  these  little  faults  ;  if  you  succeed,  then  you  are  safe.  But  the  faults  of  your 
character,  the  little  actions  that  truly  express  what  is  in  you,  you  cannot  so  easily 
put  off.  There  often  arise  circumstances  even  in  this  life  in  which  a  more  holy 
and  decided  character  than  we  possess  were  most  desirable :  we  could  pass  through 
what  has  come  upon  us  in  a  vastly  more  satisfactory  way  if  only  we  were  other 
kind  of  men  than  we  are ;  but  this  is  impossible.  These  Ephraimites  could  not 
for  the  nonce  become  Gileadites  ;  nor  for  their  life  could  they  make  that  little 
change  in  their  mode  of  speech.  And  so  we  cannot,  on  the  sudden,  change  our- 
selves. If  certain  little  things  about  you  make  you  suspect  you  belong  to  the  wrong 
tribe  ;  If  there  are  little  flaws  in  your  conduct  which  you  firid  it  extremely  hard  to 
remove,  and  which  hint  to  you  that  perhaps  or  probably  the  very  roots  of  your 
character  are  wrong ;  then  go  quickly  to  God,  for  you  have  but  this  one  resource 
and  way  of  escape,  and  offer  to  forsake  your  old  tribe,  to  be  born  again,  and 
beseech  His  grace  to  effect  in  you  a  thorough  and  real  change  of  heart,  such  as  He 
has  effected  in  many.  {Marcus  Dods,  D.D.)  Shibboleth  : — That  the  language  of 
Palestine  was  diversely  spoken  in  its  different  provinces  in  the  days  of  Christ,  is 
evident  from  the  ready  recognition  of  Peter  by  the  high  priest's  servant  as  a 
Galilean,  his  "  speech  betraying  him."  In  the  present  day  the  Arabic  of  one  part 
of  Syria  is  so  different  from  that  of  another,  that  a  person  weU  able  to  understand 
the  people  of  Smyrna  finds  great  difficulty  in  understanding  those  of  Aleppo  ;  and 
even  in  the  small  island  of  Malta,  where  a  corrupt  Arabic  is  spoken,  the  peasants 
of  the  several  villages  are  said  to  be  nearly  unintelhgible  to  each  other.  Our  own 
country  affords  ample  illustration.  A  vanquished  army  of  Northumbrians,  retreat- 
ing across  the  Tees,  might  with  equal  facility  be  detected  by  being  required  to  say 
the  word  "  river,"  as  were  the  Ephraimites  on  the  banks  of  the  Jordan  by  being 
required  to  say  the  word  "  shibboleth,"  or  "  stream."  As  our  Northumbrians 
cannot  pronounce  the  "  r,"  but  utter  instead  of  it  a  guttural  sound  resembling  a 
*' w,"  the  Ephraimites,  unable  to  pronounce  the  "sh,"  discovered  themselves  at 
once  by  their  saying  sibboleth  for  shibboleth ;  and  so  fierce  was  the  revenge  of 
those  whom  they  had  taunted,  that  the  blood  of  forty-two  thousand  men  mingled 
with  the  stream  of  the  Jordan.  In  this  tragical  scene  the  vindictive  fuiy  of  the 
men  of  Gilead  cannot  escape  heavy  censure.  They  had  been  exasperated  by  bitter 
words ;  but  in  this,  as  in  many  other  instances  in  history,  we  see  the  terrific 
madness  of  popular  revenge.  No  contentions  are  so  bitter  as  those  which  arise 
among  brethren :  "  A  brother  offended  is  harder  to  be  won  than  a  strong  city." 
Civil  wars  are  usually  carried  on  under  greater  exasperation  of  feeling  than  wars 
between  nations  of  a  different  race  ;  nor  is  the  breach,  when  once  made,  so  readily 
healed.  As  the  sweetest  wine,  when  acetous  fermentation  has  set  in,  turns  to  the 
sourest  vinegar,  so  it  is  in  families  and  in  Churches.  How  dismally  protracted  are 
some  family  feuds  1  And  how  embittered  against  each  other  are  the  adherents  of 
the  two  opposed  parties  in  a  riven  Church !  Let  us  not  be  too  prodigal  of  our 
anathemas  upon  these  cruel  GUeadites  at  the  fords  of  the  Jordan,  at  least  until  we 
have  taken  leisure  to  compare  the  mutual  aspect  of  civilised  nations,  and  the  mutual 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

aspect  of  Christian  Churches,  in  the  later  centuries,  when  a  conduct  so  much  less 
violent  might  have  been  expected.  Are  there  not  Church  parties  in  our  own  day 
which  set  up  shibboleths  of  their  own,  and  refuse  the  interchanges  of  brotherhood 
to  all  who  do  not  pronounce  the  test-word  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  them- 
selves ?  (L.  H.  Wiseman,  M.A.)  Shibboleth: — The  word  on  which  this  tragical 
occurrence  hangs  has  passed  into  a  proverbial  word.  Were  any  casual  reader  of 
Scripture  asked  what  the  word  signifies,  he  would  hardly  reply,  a  stream  or  flood. 
The  incident  mentioned  in  the  text  has  given  a  new  meaning  to  it.  Shibboleth  is 
now  an  English  word,  with  an  English  meaning  distinct  from  its  root.  It  means 
any  word,  doctrine,  form,  or  fashion  which,  whether  we  will  or  no,  whether  rightly 
or  wrongly,  justly  or  unjustly,  we  are  required  to  pronounce  or  agree  to  as  a  test, 
in  short,  which  is  intended  to  try  on  whose  side  we  wage  war,  whose  leadership  we 
acknowledge,  whose  dominions  we  belong  to.  There  are  God's  shibboleths  and 
man's.  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  "Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  "Except  ye  repent, 
ye  shall  all  likewise  perish."  "  No  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  except  by 
the  Holy  Ghost."  There  are  also  man's  shibboleths.  "  You  must  believe  that  the 
world  stands  still  while  the  sun  revolves."  "  No,"  said  the  wise  old  man,  "I  cannot 
believe  that,  for  I  have  discovered  a  new  system."  "  Then  you  must  die,  and  your 
soul  be  lost."  So  the  poor  discoverer  was  tortured  into  pronouncing  the  shibboleth 
of  human  ignorance.  Notice,  as  a  leading  truth,  that  all  are  not  Israel  that  are  of 
Israel.  However  much  we  may  speak,  dress,  and  look  alike,  there  is  a  hidden 
difference  which  time  or  a  severe  test  will  show.  Also  that  difference  may  sound 
trifling,  and  yet  be  of  such  importance  as  to  embrace  the  Ufe  or  death  of  the  soul. 
Also  we  may  live  in  the  same  land,  the  same  street,  the  same  village,  the  same 
house ;  may  fight  in  the  same  camp,  and  wear  the  same  uniform ;  and  yet  be 
part  Ephraimites  and  part  Gileadites ;  part  God's  people  and  part  Satan's ;  part 
hastening  to  destruction  and  part  in  a  state  of  safety.  The  sight  of  any  great 
swaying  and  swelling  multitude,  any  waving  ocean  of  humanity,  causes  many  a 
quiet  thought,  and  sorrow,  and  prayer  to  ascend  from  Christian  souls,  respecting 
the  divided  future  of  the  ofttimes  unanimous-looking  crowd.  For  a  Christian  may 
lament  and  pray  for  his  brother,  without  lapsing  into  the  Pharisee's  censoriousness. 

1.  Look  we  now  for  the  vain  shibboleths  of  man,  those  heavy  burdens  which  are 
laid  on  men's  shoulders,  and  laid  too  often  by  those  who  will  not  themselves  touch 
them  with  the  tips  of  their  fingers.  1.  "  I  believe  that  I  am  forgiven."  This  is 
one  of  the  unfair  shibboleths  required  by  man.  Seldom  a  saint  departs  without  a 
sight  of  the  broad  seal  of  God's  forgiveness.  But  he  may  be  afraid  to  take  it. 
Still  he  is  forgiven.  To  be  forgiven  is  of  the  first  importance.  To  know  we  are 
forgiven  is  of  importance  too  ;  but  not  indispensable.  2.  "  I  am  a  member  of  this 
Church."  Here  is  another  human  shibboleth.  The  Lord  will  not  ask  what  earthly 
Church — so  it  be  but  a  branch  of  Christ's  vine — a  soul  belongs  to.  "  Come  with  us 
and  we  will  do  thee  good,"  is  the  utmost  length  to  which  our  invitation  may  go. 
3.  "  I  understand  Scripture  in  the  literal  sense.  I  agree  to  no  new  interpretation. 
I  admit  no  light  from  science."  These  requirements  form  another  human  shibbo- 
leth ;  this  shutting  up  of  the  Bible  from  that  free,  and  full,  and  fair  inquiry,  which, 
if  it  were  afraid  of  it,  it  would  be  well  nigh  worthless.  Having  first  prayed 
reverently,  "Lead  me  not,  0  Father,  into  temptation,"  a  man  may  wear  away  hia 
Bible  by  the  daily  attrition  of  diligent  study ;  for  it  contains  what  no  study  can 
wear  down — the  very  truth  of  God.  Such  a  reader  Christ  smiles  upon  as  his 
fingers  turn  over  the  sacred  page.  For  such  a  man,  after  God's  own  heart,  the 
Holy  Spirit  will  strike  forth  new  discoveries ;  will  lead  such  an  one  by  still  waters, 
and  feed  him  in  pleasant  pastures,  far  away  from  the  rivers  of  Babylon  ;  will  guide 
such  an  one  into  all  truth,  and  save  his  soul  in  peace.     H.  There  are  also  soms 

TRUE      shibboleths     OF      GOD,     WHICH     WE     MUST    PRONOUNCE    WITH    A    FULL,     ROUND 

UTTERANCE,  OR  WE  ABE  LOST.  1.  Eepentauce.  "  If  I  were  to  die  in  the  pulpit," 
said  Philip  Henry,  "I  would  desire  to  die  preaching  repentance;  and  if  I  were  to 
die  out  of  the  pulpit,  I  would  desire  to  die  practising  repentance."  "  Except  ye 
repent,"  says  the  Holy  Spirit,  "  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish."  Can  we  say,  "shibbo- 
leth "?     Have  we  repented?     Or  is  it  only  the  "  sibboleth"  of  a  worldly  sorrow? 

2.  Another  shibboleth  of  God  is  faith  in  Christ.  Not  the  form  of  words,  "  I 
beUeve  " ;  but  the  diUgent,  faithful  life ;  the  earnest,  converted  soul.  3.  We  must 
believe  the  Bible  to  be  inspired.  Keverently  and  freely  interpreting  it,  we  must 
take  it  from  God's  gracious  hand,  and  follow  out  its  leading  as  the  clue  to  salvation. 
Else  it  will  hang  like  a  millstone  about  our  necks,  and  sink  us  to  perdition.    4.  We 


CHAP.  XII.]  JUDGES.  189 

must  learn  the  true  language  of  heaven,  the  true  ways  of  holiness.  We  must 
leave  the  lispings,  formalities,  and  affectations  of  the  world,  and  say,  "  Shibboleth," 
as  the  angels  and  spirits  of  the  just,  and  the  just  who  yet  live  upon  earth  say  it, 
and  have  said  it  before.  {S.  B.  James,  M.A.)  Sectarianism — its  origin,  evils, 
cures: — The  Church  of  God  is  divided  into  a  great  number  of  denominations,  some 
of  them  founded  by  very  good  men,  some  of  them  founded  by  very  egotistic  men, 
and  some  of  them  founded  by  very  bad  men.  But  as  I  demand  liberty  of  conscience 
for  myself,  I  must  give  that  same  liberty  to  every  other  man,  remembering  that  he 
no  more  differs  from  me  than  I  differ  from  him.  I  advocate  the  largest  liberty  in 
all  religious  belief  and  form  of  worship.  The  air  and  the  water  keep  pure  by 
constant  ckculation,  and  I  think  there  is  a  tendency  in  religious  discussion  to 
purification  and  moral  health.  In  a  world  of  such  tremendous  vicissitude  and 
temptation,  and  with  a  soul  that  must  after  a  while  stand  before  a  throne  of 
insufferable  brightness,  to  give  account  for  every  thought,  word,  action,  preference, 
and  dislike — that  man  is  mad  who  has  no  religious  preference.  But  our  early 
education,  our  physical  temperament,  our  mental  constitution,  will  very  much 
decide  our  form  of  worship.  1.  In  tracing  out  the  religion  of  sectarianism,  or 
bigotry,  I  find  that  a  great  deal  of  it  comes  from  wrong  education  in  the  home 
circle.  There  are  parents  who  do  not  think  it  wrong  to  caricature  and  jeer  the 
peculiar  forms  of  religion  in  the  world,  and  denounce  other  denominations.  2.  I 
think  sectarianism  and  bigotry  also  rise  from  too  great  prominence  of  any  one 
denomination  in  a  community.  All  the  other  denominations  are  wrong,  and  his 
denomination  is  right,  because  his  denomination  is  the  most  wealthy,  or  the  most 
popular,  and  it  is  "our"  Church,  and  "our"  religious  organisation,  and  "our" 
choir,  and  "  our  "  minister,  and  the  man  tosses  his  head,  and  wants  other  denomi- 
nations to  know  their  places.  3.  Bigotry  is  often  the  child  of  ignorance.  You 
seldom  find  a  man  with  large  intellect  who  is  a  bigot.  It  is  the  man  who  thinks 
he  knows  a  great  deal,  but  does  not.  That  man  is  almost  always  a  bigot.  There 
is  nothiog  that  will  so  soon  kill  bigotry  as  sunshine — God's  sunshine.  So  I  have 
set  before  you  what  I  consider  to  be  the  causes  of  bigotry.  What  are  some  of  the 
baleful  effects  ?  1.  It  cripples  investigation.  You  are  wrong,  and  I  am  right,  and 
that  ends  it.  No  taste  for  exploration,  no  spirit  of  investigation.  2.  Another  great 
damage  done  by  the  sectarianism  and  bigotry  of  the  Church  is,  that  it  disgusts 
people  with  the  Christian  religion.  Now,  the  Church  of  God  was  never  intended 
for  a  war  barrack.  3.  Again,  bigotry  and  sectarianism  do  great  damage  in  the 
fact  that  they  hinder  the  triumph  of  the  gospel.  Oh !  how  much  wasted  ammuni- 
tion! how  many  men  of  splendid  intellect  have  given  their  whole  life  to  controversial 
disputes,  when,  if  they  had  given  their  Uf  e  to  something  practical,  they  might  have 
been  vastly  useful  1  A  quarrel  in  a  beehive  is  a  strange  sight.  I  go  out  sometimes 
in  the  summer  and  I  find  two  beehives,  and  these  two  beehives  are  in  a  quarrel.  I 
come  near  enough,  not  to  be  stung,  but  I  come  just  near  enough  to  hear  the 
controversy,  and  one  beehive  says,  "  That  field  of  clover  is  the  sweetest,"  and 
another  beehive  says,  "  That  field  of  clover  is  the  sweetest."  I  come  in  between 
them,  and  I  say,  "  Stop  this  quarrel ;  if  you  like  that  field  of  clover  best,  go  there  ; 
if  you  like  that  field  of  clover  best,  go  there ;  but  let  me  tell  you  that  that  hive 
which  gets  the  most  honey  is  the  best  hive !  "  So  I  come  out  between  the 
Churches  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  One  denomination  of  Christians  says,  "  That 
field  of  Christian  doctrine  is  best,"  and  another  says,  "  This  field  of  Christian 
doctrine  is  best."  Well,  I  say,  "  Go  where  you  get  the  most  honey."  That  is  the 
best  Church  which  gets  the  most  honey  of  Christian  grace  for  the  heart,  and  the 
most  honey  of  Christian  usefulness  for  the  life.  Besides  that,  if  you  want 
to  build  up  any  denomination,  you  wiU  never  build  it  up  by  trying  to  pull 
some  other  down.  In  England  a  law  was  made  against  the  Jew.  England 
thrust  back  the  Jew,  and  thrust  down  the  Jew,  and  declared  that  no  Jew 
should  hold  official  position.  What  came  of  it?  Were  the  Jews  destroyed? 
Was  their  religion  overthrown  ?  No.  Intolerance  never  yet  put  down  any- 
thing. Now,  what  is  the  remedy  for  sectarianism?  I  think  we  may  overthrow 
the  severe  sectarianism  and  bigotry  in  our  hearts,  and  in  the  Church  also,  by 
realising  that  all  the  denominations  of  Christians  have  yielded  noble  institutions 
and  noble  men.  There  is  nothing  that  so  stirs  my  soul  as  this  thought.  Moreover, 
we  may  also  overthrow  the  feelings  of  severe  sectarianism  by  joining  other  denomi- 
nations in  Christian  work.  Perhaps  I  might  more  forcibly  illustrate  this  truth  by 
calling  your  attention  to  an  incident  which  took  place  some  years  ago.  One 
Monday  morning,  at  about  two  o'clock,  while  her  nine  hundred  passengers  were 


190  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  xn. 

Bound  asleep  dreaming  of  home,  the  steamer  Atlantic  crashed  into  Mars  Head. 
Five   hundred  souls  in  ten  minutes  landed  in   eternity !     Oh,   what  a   scene ! 
Agonised  men  and  women  running  up  and  down  the  gangways,  and  clutching 
for  the  rigging,  and  the  plunge  of  the  helpless  steamer,  threw  two  continents  into 
terror.     But  see  this  brave  quartermaster  pushing  out  with  the  life-line  until  he 
gets  to  the  rock ;  and  see  these   fishermen  gathering  up   the  shipwrecked,   and 
taking  them  into  the  cabins  and  wrapping  them  in  the  flannels  snug  and  warm ; 
and  see  that  minister  of  the  gospel,  with  three  other  men,  getting  into  a  lifeboat, 
and  pushing  out  for  the  wreck,  pulling  away  across  the  surf,  and  pulling  away 
until  they  saved  one  more  man,  and  then  getting  back  with  him  to  the  shore.     Can 
these  men  ever  forget  that  night  ?    And  can  they  ever  forget  their  companionship 
in   peril,  companionship  in   struggle,  companionship   in   awful   catastrophe   and 
rescue  ?    Never !     Never !     Well,  our  world  has  gone  into   a  worse   shipwreck. 
Sin  drove  it  on  the  rocks.     The  old  ship  has  lurched  and  tossed  in  the  tempests  of 
six  thousand  years.     Out  with  the  life-line !     I  do  not  care  what  denomination 
carries  it.     Out  with  the  life-boat  I     I  do  not  care  what  denomination  rows  it. 
Side  by  side,  in  the  memory  of  common   hardships,  and  common  trials,   and 
common  prayers,  and  common  tears,  let  us  be  brothers  for  ever.     [T.  De  Witt 
Talmage.)        Social  and  religious   tests  : — I.   Social  life  has  its   shibboleths. 
Goodness  of  heart  and  purity  of  life  and  language  are  not  always  the  tests  of 
admission  to  what  is  termed  choice  society.    Anything  before  that.     With  some  it 
is  education.     How  much  do  you  know  ?     With  others  it  is  elegance  of  manners 
and  accomplishments.    We  do  not  admit  awkward  people  to  our  company.    And 
some  estimate  the  worth  of  their  neighbours  by  the  length  of  their  purses.    How 
much  are  you  worth  ?    With  multitudes  dress  is  the  countersign.     The  idol  of 
fashion  is  set  up,  and  we  are  expected  to  bow  down  daily  and  offer  devout  homage. 
In  many  assemblies  the  garment  decides  the  position.     One  of  our  great  generals, 
it  is  said,  went  modestly  to  one  of  our  fashionable  churches  on  a  great  funeral 
occasion.    Upon  his  applying  for  a  place,  it  transpired  that  the  plain  cloak  which 
wrapped  his  person  was  barely  sufficient  to  gain  him  a  seat  inside  the  door.    It 
was  almost  literally,  "  Stand  thou  there."    During  the  service  the  cloak  fell  back 
far  enough  to  reveal  the  mark  upon  the  shoulders.     Then  came  most  profuse 
apologies,  with  the  pressing  invitation,  "Come  up  higher,  and  sit  thou  in  a  good 
place."    n.  Eeligious  life  has  its  shibboleths,  and  there  is  no  place  where  the 
overbearing  requirements   are  more  unseemly  or  more  to  be  deprecated.     The 
spirit  of   Christianity,  as  taught  by  its  Divine  Author,  is  a  spirit  of  kindness, 
tenderness,  forbearance.    It  commends  and  enjoins  the  charity  that  beareth  all 
things,  believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things.    In  the  gospel  we  are  to  make  allowance 
for  each  other's  differences,  and  bear  with  each  other's  infirmities,  and  bid  God- 
speed to  each  other's  efforts.     There  are  shibboleths  which  are  legitimate,  and 
essential  to  the  maintenance  of  vital  truth  and  goodness  among  men.     There  are 
principles  which  constitute  the  very  foundation  stones  of  God's  temple.     These  are 
to  be  defended  and  guarded  without  compromise.     It  is  not  our  measuring  line 
which  is  thus  applied ;  it  is  not  our  standard  set  up ;  it  is  not  our  speech  to  which 
conformity  is  required.    It  is  the  pronunciation  which  God  demands.     And  yet 
it  becomes  us  to  be  extremely  cautious  in  the  pressing  of  the  pass-words,  lest  we 
should  substitute  our  own  pronunciation  for  God's  and  shut  out  any  of  the  children 
of  the  kingdom.     "  Take  heed  lest  ye  offend  one  of  these  little  ones."     There  are 
different  phases  of  the  same  doctrine ;  there  are  various  explanations  and  inter- 
pretations which  do  not  invalidate  the  truth.    {Goyn  Talmage.)        The  shibboleths 
of  the  Churches : — We  may  learn  here  the  worth  of  the  essence  of  a  thing  as  it 
stands  in  contrast  with  the  mere  accent — something  like  that  which  Paul  set  forth 
in  the  noble  words  I  read — and  the  need  there  is  now,  as  there  was  then,  that  we 
shall  stand  free  if  we  can  from  the  letter  and  cling  to  the  spirit.     The  letter  may 
be,  as  it  often  is,  the  mere  difference  between  the  two  sides,  while  the  spirit  is  the 
Divine  reaUty  that  hes  and  abides  within  them  both,  the  only  thing  God  ever  did 
care  for,  as  I  believe,  or  ever  will  care  for  while  the  world  stands.     Shibboleth  and 
sibboleth,  you  know,  still  make  mischief  when  they  can  get  a  chance,  as  surely  as 
they  did  on  the  banks  of  the  Jordan,  and  they  fall  out,  and  divide,  and  weaken  all 
the  chances  of  right  against  wrong.    Let  others  fall  out  as  they  will  about  the  way 
to  say  the  word,  but  be  sure  that  the  gates  of  life  never  did  open  and  never  can  to 
this  mere  turn  of  the  tongue,  this  sesame,  but  only  to  the  grand  old  password : 
"  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart  and  soul  and  mind  and 
strength,  and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."    I  notice,  again,  when  I  bring  shibboleth 


CHAP,  xni.]  JUDGES.  191 

and  sibboleth  home  to  my  heart  and  life,  that  there  is  no  other  way  open  to  me  if  I 
would  be  a  man,  let  alone  a  Christian,  but  just  to  say  what  he  says,  the  good  apostle 
(1  Cor.  xii.  13).  Our  belief  is  far  less  a  matter  of  free-will  than  we  imagine.  If  we 
are  sincere  in  regard  to  truth  we  must  believe  as  we  do,  and  there  is  no  ground  for 
reviling.  And  as  oaks  grow  best  alone,  and  as  vines  need  a  standard,  and  as  some 
flowers  like  a  day  with  three  quarters  shadow,  and  others  want  aU  the  sunshine 
that  heaven  can  pour  upon  them ;  as  aU  the  fruits  in  Covent  Garden  Market 
to-morrow  wOl  be  better  than  any  one  of  them ;  as  all  herbs  are  good  in  their 
place,  sweet  and  bitter,  meUow  and  sharp ;  and  as  some  love  Rembrandt's  pictures 
with  their  deep  shadows,  and  some  Eaphael's,  with  their  floods  of  glory  and  hosts 
of  angels,  and  no  great  gallery  could  be  complete  if  you  leave  out  any  of  these 
great  masters  :  so  I  think  we  must  make  up  our  minds  that  any  Church  which  can 
include  all  these  diversities  of  thinking  and  believing  is  better  than  those  which 
leave  any  out,  and  breed  "  in  and  in,"  like  the  chickens  in  Hawthorne's  story  that 
were  so  careful  of  the  separateness  of  their  breed  that  there  were  only  two  of  them 
left  in  the  end,  and  they  could  do  nothing  but  croak.  We  cannot  always  think 
alike  or  believe  alike  in  the  most  sacred  relations  that  men  and  women  can  sustain 
to  each  other  in  their  homes ;  and  we  ought  not  to  look  for  any  finer  harmony  than 
the  holy  spirit  of  well-mated  Christian  people,  least  of  all  in  the  Churches  where 
this  bond  of  fellowship  is  maintained,  against  aU  comers,  that  every  man  may 
make  something  good  enough  for  heaven  out  of  the  nature  that  God  has  given  him 
and  the  life  he  has  to  live,  and  that  the  best  form  in  the  Churches  and  in  the 
nation  is  that  in  which  men  can  manage  wisely  and  well  to  govern  themselves. 
{R.  Collyer,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13-15.  Abdon  .  .  .  liad  forty  sons  and  thirty  nephews. — The  time  of  peace : 
— For  our  instruction  this  we  may  learn,  that  in  the  time  of  peace,  when  there  is 
freedom  from  war  and  persecution  in  a  land,  there  is  great  prosperity  in  every  kind, 
as  multitudes  of  people,  building,  purchasing,  and  growing  in  wealth  and  pro- 
motion. For  though  the  plague  and  famine  sometimes  sweep  away  and  diminish 
the  number  of  people,  yet  they  through  God's  goodness  not  continuing  long,  nor 
Bore,  are  the  sooner  outgrown ;  but  the  other,  I  mean  war  and  persecution,  make 
strip  and  waste,  as  we  say,  even  as  the  violent  fire  bumeth  aU  where  it  cometh, 
and  the  raging  waters  drown.  But  when  they  cease,  there  is  plenty  for  the  most 
part  going  with  peace,  fi'^  ^  there  is  with  both  great  outward  prosperity.  Which  is 
to  be  acknowledged  a  sii.  lar  great  favour  of  God,  and  to  such  as  are  able  to  use  it 
aright  it  giveth  much  liberty  and  encouragement  to  live  well  and  happily.  And 
otherwise  what  is  all  joUity  and  abundance,  if  we  have  not  learned  and  be  not  fitted 
for  the  right  use  of  it?  Sbe  which  how  few  regard  or  look  after,  but  only  seek  to 
pass  their  precious  time  in  ease,  vanity,  play,  idleness,  drinking  and  such  like  ;  and 
the  civiller  sort  to  mind  little  else  than  to  increase  and  gather  wealth,  the  most  of 
them  not  knowing  why,  but  to  content  and  please  themselves  thereby  ;  to  see  how 
fondly,  nay  madly,  so  many  do  use  this  peace  and  liberty  of  quiet  living,  it  is  much 
more  to  be  bewaUed  than  the  benefit  itself  is  to  be  rejoiced  for.  And  to  think  how 
in  this  time  of  peace  good  preaching  should  be  in  use  throughout  all  parts  of  the 
land  to  hold  down  atheism,  prof  aneness,  and  other  sin,  and  that  which  should  be 
all  in  all  with  us  to  bring  many  people  to  God,  and  yet  how  little  is  done  this  way, 
it  cannot  without  much  bewailing  be  thought  on.  Now  if  in  this  earthly  mansion 
of  ours  He  can  allow  His  people  so  liberal  and  comfortable  a  supply  of  earthly 
refreshings  meet  for  them,  until  they  shall  no  longer  stand  in  need  of  them  ;  then 
what  is  like  to  be  their  entertainment  at  home  in  heaven,  and  what  provision  will 
the  Lord  make  for  them  there,  where  all  sound  rejoicing  is  without  end  or  measure  ? 
A  great  means  to  provoke  them  to  serve  out  their  time  with  cheerfulness  and  faith- 
fulness when  they  consider  that  all  things  are  theirs,  both  here  and  hereafter.  All 
good  things  serve  to  make  up  the  happiness  of  them  who  are  Christ's,  who  is  Lord 
of  all.    {B.  Bogers.) 


CHAPTEE  Xm. 


Ybbs.  1-25.  Blanoali ;  and  Us  wife. — The  angelic  appearancet  to  Manoah  and  hit 

wife : — I.  The  unknown  visixob.  Manoah's  wife  was  just  the  woman  to  be  visited 
by  an  angel — bold,  energetic,  large-hearted,  beheving.  God's  gifts  are  regulated  in 
their  extent  by  our  capacity  for  receiving  them.  We  should  have  diviner  visitationa 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

if  we  were  fitted  for  them,  or  could  appreciate  them.  II.  The  FE-inrxiL  rNTEBEXCE. 
We  never  get  into  the  presence  of  the  supernatural,  but  we  are  ready  to  say,  "  Let 
not  God  speak  with  us,  or  we  die."  Whence  comes  this  universal  dread  of  God?  I 
have  seen  a  cross  with  the  image  of  the  dead  Christ ;  the  cross  in  the  midst  of 
nature's  fairest  scenes,  telling  of  sin,  of  suffering,  of  death.  So  there  is  always 
with  us,  in  the  midst  of  life's  engagements  and  joys,  the  shadow  or  the  memory  of 
some  sin  or  sorrow.  When  God  comes  to  a  man,  and  separates  him  from  other 
men  the  man  feels,  and  confesses  the  sinfulness  of  his  sin,  and  at  first  thinks  he 
shall  surely  die.  When  God  comes  to  us  in  His  dispensations,  when  by  a  touch  He 
causes  our  flesh  to  wither,  when  He  removes  friends,  or  strips  us  of  property,  we  are 
filled  with  fear.  It  is  only  the  sight  of  God  in  Christ  "  reconciling  the  world  unto 
Himself,"  the  revelation  of  God  in  sacrifice,  that  can  calm  our  minds  and  quiet  our 
fears.  HI.  The  conclusive  aegdment.  It  is  the  woman's :  with  her  finer  percep- 
tions and  keener  senses,  she  sees  the  truth  as  by  intuition — she  does  not  arrive  at 
the  conclusion  by  the  processes  of  an  argument,  she  is  guided  by  her  emotional 
nature.  There  are  some  minds  that  possess  the  gift  of  seeing  into  the  meaning  of 
things,  and  instantly  arriving  at  definite  conclusions.  We  do  not  know  how  to 
construct  an  argument  in  reference  to  the  Divine  procedure  ;  we  are  not  sufficiently 
impressed  by  the  past  to  infer  the  future  ;  we  need  spiritual  perceptions  to  see  the 
real  truth  of  spiritual  things,  and  the  intuitions  of  the  heart  may  be  left  to  help  the 
judgment  in  its  interpretations.  If  God  has  been  at  such  pains  to  save  us,  then 
surely  we  shall  not  be  left  to  perish.  If  there  is  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  then,  sinners  as 
we  are,  we  may  be  saved  through  faith  in  Him  "  whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a 
propitiation."  We  are  not  left  without  Divine  manifestations.  Christ  has  come, 
and  has  gone  up  again  to  heaven.  Are  we  left  without  any  manifestations  of  God  ? 
There  are  spiritual  revelations  for  spiritual  men.  God  does  come  to  true  and  loving 
hearts.  Love  will  always  come  to  commune  with  love.  {H.  J.  Bevis.)  Manoah 
and  his  wife:  the  representatives  of  two  great  prevalent  moral  states  of  mind  in  relation 
to  God  : — I.  A  GLOOMY  deead.  This  dread  of  God,  which  is  all  but  universal — 1.  Is 
an  abnormal  state  of  the  soul.  Antecedently  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that  the  God 
of  infinite  goodness  would  create  beings  to  dread  Him,  and  the  revelations  of  His 
love  and  loveliness  in  nature  prove  that  they  are  made  to  admire  and  adore  Him. 
Whence  came  this  dread,  then  ?  It  springs  from  a  sense  of  guilt.  2.  Explains 
atheism.  A  desire  to  ignore  and  forget  and  destroy  if  possible  the  being  we  dread 
is  natural.  Because  men  dread  God  they  do  not  hke  to  retain  Him  in  their 
thoughts.  3.  Is  the  source  of  all  blasphemous  theologies.  The  being  we  dread,  by 
the  law  of  mind,  we  invest  with  the  attributes  of  a  monster.  Much  of  our  popular 
theology  presents  a  God  before  whom  the  human  heart  cowers  with  horror  and 
recoils  with  alarm.  4.  Keeps  the  soul  away  from  Him.  We  shrink  from  the  object 
we  dread,  we  turn  our  backs  from  such  an  one  and  hasten  from  his  very  shadow. 
5.  Eeveals  the  necessity  of  Christ's  mission.  With  this  dread  in  the  human  soul 
virtue  and  happiness  are  impossible.  But  how  can  it  be  removed  ?  Ordy  by  such 
an  appearance  of  God  to  the  soul  as  we  have  in  the  all-loving  tenderness  of  Christ. 
In  Him  God  comes  to  man  and  says,  "  It  is  I,  be  not  afraid."  II.'  A  cheering 
HOPE.  The  woman's»hope  was  based  upon  an  interpretation  of  God's  dealing  with 
them,  and  this  indeed  is  a  certain  ground  of  hope.  How  has  God  dealt  with  us  ? 
"  If  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  Mil  us  " — 1.  Would  He  have  in  our  natures  endowed 
us  with  such  powers  for  enjoyment,  and  placed  us  in  a  world  so  full  of  blessedness 
and  beauty  ?  2.  Would  He  have  continued  our  existence  so  long  in  such  a  world, 
notwithstanding  aU  our  transgressions  ?  3.  Would  He  have  sent  His  only  begotten 
Son  into  the  world  to  effect  our  salvation?  4.  Would  He  have  given  us  the 
gospel,  the  ministry,  and  all  the  morally  restorative  influences  at  work  within  us  ? 
{Homilist.)  God  and  His  people  : — I.  We  mat  leaen  the  loving  eoeethought  op 
God  fob  His  people.  He  never  wounds  them  without  at  the  same  time  making 
provision  for  their  heaUng.  Their  emancipation  may  be  only  partial  in  the  present; 
but  it  is  certain  in  the  future  to  be  gloriously  complete.  The  agents  for  bringing  it 
about  are  in  the  counsels  and  resources  of  the  Most  High.    U.  Paeents  mat  leaen 

THE  eight  method  OF  TEAINING   THEIR   CHlIiDREN  FOR  FOTUEE  8EEVICE  IN  THE  ChUBCH 

AND  THE  WORLD  (vcr.  8).  God's  teaching  is  necessary  for  the  great  and  diflScult 
work  ;  and  God's  teaching  should  be  asked  for  and  followed.     III.  We  may  leabn 

THAT  EMINENT  SERVICE  FOR    GoD    IS   ALLIED    TO    EMINENT    CONSECRATION   TO    GOD.       Ws 

must  become  Nazarites  in  the  spiritual  sense  ;  and  the  measure  of  our  usefulness 
will  depend  on  the  measure  of  our  consecration.    lY.  We  mat  learn  the  ddtt  of 

HOPBIULNESS  IN  the  MIDST  OF  AUi  DARKNESS  AND    PERPLEXITT    (vcr.    23).       The    bright 


CHAP.  XIII.]  JUDGES,  193 

hopefulness  of  Manoah's  wife  rested  on  a  solid  foundation.  But  as  believers  in 
Christ  we  have  even  better  grounds  for  looking  with  bright  hopefulness  in  reference 
to  every  threatening  visitation  of  Divine  Providence.  God  has  given  to  us  richer 
tokens  of  His  love  (Rom.  viii.  32).  {Thomas  Kirk.)  How  shall  we  order  the 
child. — Education  of  children  : — The  proper  idea  of  educating  children  is  to  fit  them 
for  the  duties  of  life,  and  the  realities  of  a  fast-coming  eternity.  To  do  this  they 
must  be  trained.  1.  Training  combines  both  instruction  and  government.  Its  field 
is  both  the  mind  and  the  body.  To  train  a  child  requires  patience,  faith,  courage, 
perseverance,  and  Divine  assistance.  2.  To  bring  up  a  child  in  "  the  nurture  and 
admonition  of  the  Lord,"  instruction  and  example  are  essential.  It  is  the  nature 
of  a  child  to  imitate  what  is  around  it.  Influences  educate  the  child  long  before  it 
is  large  enough  to  be  sent  from  home  to  school.  Let  the  home  be  for  amusement, 
pleasure,  knowledge,  and  reUgion  as  attractive  as  possible.  3.  In  the  bringing  up 
of  children  prayer,  deep,  earnest,  believing  prayer  is  essential.  After  all  our 
soHcitude  and  painstaking,  and  watching,  and  heart-bleeding,  we  have  to  trust 
them  to  God.  {W.  A.  Scott,  D.D.)  Money  bequeathed  by  parents  to  their 
children : — It  comes  out  incidentally,  but  not  the  less  certainly,  in  the  teaching  of 
the  Lord,  that  parents  are  in  some  matters  naturally  capable  of  making  the  best 
choice  for  their  offspring  (Luke  xi.  13).  Although  they  are  evil,  there  are  some 
things  in  which  they  can  act  aright.  If  the  question  relate  to  the  kind  of  food  that 
should  be  given  to  his  child — whether  a  piece  of  bread  or  a  stone,  whether  a  fish  or 
a  serpent — ^the  man  is  capable  of  judging.  When  a  parent  looks  forward  and 
attempts  to  provide  for  the  future  of  his  child,  he  is  more  at  a  loss  than  in  the 
matter  of  choosing  what  food  should  be  given  to  a  hungry  infant.  It  is  when  a 
man  is  called  to  do  for  his  offspring  what  the  lower  creatures  cannot  do,  that  he 
most  signally  fails.  He  is  insufficient  for  these  things.  Of  the  many  influences 
which  bear  on  the  child's  wellbeing,  and  which  the  parent  may  in  some  measure 
control,  I  select  only  one.  I  limit  the  question  to  one  object,  and  read  it,  How  shall 
we  order  the  child  in  regard  to  money?  The  estimate,  the  acquisition,  the 
possession,  the  use,  the  loss  of  money,  have  a  very  material  influence  on  the 
character,  and  station,  and  happiness  of  our  children,  in  youth  and  onward  to  age. 
In  these,  as  in  other  matters,  parents  have  much  in  their  power.  By  their  method 
of  ordering  the  child  in  these  things,  they  may  do  much  good  or  much  evil.  I.  In 
respect  of  money,  how  shall  we  order  the  child — the  little  child  ?  How  can  you 
lecture  an  infant  either  on  the  proper  value  of  money,  or  on  the  preposterous  value 
that  is  often  foohshly  attached  to  it?  Everything  in  its  own  place  and  time. 
Impress  thereon  a  bias  against  the  danger.  Begin  early  to  influence  the  infant 
mind.  Show  the  child  early  the  use  of  money — its  use  in  obtaining  necessaries, 
and  in  promoting  works  of  benevolence.  Train  the  child  in  the  right  direction  as  to 
the  estimate  of  money,  as  to  its  use,  and  as  to  the  objects  on  which  it  should  be 
expended.  In  after  life  he  will  have  much  to  do  with  it — teach  him  betimes  to 
handle  it  aright.  The  infant  is  the  germ  of  the  man.  The  infant's  hab  its,  and 
likings,  and  actings,  are  the  rivulet,  already  settling  its  direction,  which  will  soon 
swell  into  the  strong  stream  of  life.  H.  ia.  respect  of  money,  how  shall  we  order 
the  TOUTH  as  to  the  choice  and  opening  up  of  his  path  in  life  ?•  The  wary  seaman 
will  give  an  undefined  sunken  rock  a  good  offing.  He  wiU  take  care  to  err  on  the 
safe  side.  The  general  rule  is,  "  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteous- 
ness, and  all  these  things  shall  be  added."  If  this  law  were  faithfully  carried  into 
practice,  we  would  be  safe.  Deal  honestly  with  yourselves  when  the  prospect  of  an 
advantageous  settlement  appears.  Judge  righteous  judgment,  first  as  to  the  facts 
of  the  case,  whether  the  money  interest  and  the  soul's  interest  be  in  opposition. 
Then,  secondly,  if  so,  judge  which  of  the  two  should  be  allowed  to  go  to  the  wall. 
Does  the  soul's  safety  overrule  the  prospect  of  wealth  ?  or  does  the  prospect  of 
wealth  silence  your  anxieties  about  the  soul's  safety  ?  I  do  not  ask  any  parent  to 
bind  his  son  to  a  poor  trade,  if  a  more  profitable  one  is  within  his  reach  ;  but  I 
demand  of  every  parent,  as  he  owes  allegiance  to  the  King  of  kings,  that  he  have 
and  manifest  a  supreme  concern  for  the  spiritual  life  of  his  children,  and  that, 
under  the  guidance  of  this  ruling  passion,  he  frame  his  plans  and  make  his 
arrangements  for  their  outset  in  the  world.  Under  the  head  of  provision  made  for 
an  outset  in  life,  the  subject  of  matrimonial  alliance  deserves  special  notice.  To 
marry  for  the  sake  of  money  is  a  degradation  of  the  human  being,  and  a  prostitution 
of  the  good  ordinance  of  God.  It  is  fraught  with  danger  to  present  peace  and 
future  salvation.  III.  How  shaU  we  order  the  child  in  respect  to  the  acquisition 
and  accumulation  of  money  to  bb  bequeathed  as  his  pobtiom  ?    Beware  of  tacitly 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

acting  on  the  supposition  that  the  more  money  you  leave  to  them,  the  more  good 
you  will  do  to  them.     We  cannot  specify  a  sum,  and  say  it  is  lawful  for  a  Christian 
parent  to  bequeath  so  much  to  his  child,  but  unlawful  to  exceed  it.     But  it  does  not 
foUow  from  this  that  a  Christian  is  at  liberty  to  scrape  together  as  much  money 
as  he  can  during  his  life,  and  simply  bequeath  it  to  his  children  when  he  comes  to 
die.    Although  no  specific  rule  can  be  laid  down,  some  useful  suggestions  may  be 
given.    A  man  of  wealth  should  consider  well  before  he  leaves  a  large  fortune  to 
his  son.    It  may  in  some  cases  be  safely  done  ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  done  as  a  thing 
of  course.     You  would  not  spread  a  press  of  sail  on  a  ship  unless  you  had  previously 
satisfied  yourself  that  it  had  been  rendered  steady  by  a  sufficient  weight  of  ballast. 
So  should  parents  consider  the  character  and  capacity  of  their  children,  and  not  be 
instrumental  in  causing  their  shipwreck  by  giving  them  more  than  they  can  manage. 
And  as  to  the  cruelty  of  leaving  large  fortunes  to  unprotected  orphan  girls,  it  is 
difficult  to  speak  of  it  with  coolness.    It  is  hke  spreading  rank  carrion  round  the 
defenceless  lamb,  to  attract  the  vultures  to  their  prey.     The  example  of  a  judicious 
but  generous  expenditure  of  money  by  a  parent  is  a  more  precious  legacy  to  his 
child  than  all  the  accumulations  that  parsimony  and  pride  could  bequeath.   Finally, 
a  good  rule  for  Christian  parents  is  to  let  prayer  and  pains  always  go  together.     In 
BO  far  as  he  labours  to  provide  for  the  education  and  the  comfort  of  his  children, 
especially  those  who  are  not  likely  to  be  able  to  gain  their  own  livelihood,  a  father 
is  at  hberty  to  ask  God's  blessing  on  his  efforts.    But  when  one  has  already  amassed 
many  thousands,  and  is  striving  to  amass  more  and  more,  to  be  left  as  a  portion  to 
his  children,  he  would  do  well  to  add  prayer  to  his  pains.     Let  us  remember  that 
we  and  our  children  are  under  law  to  Christ,  and  on  our  way  to  the  judgment.     Let 
US  act  under  the  power  of  a  world  to  come.     Kegarding  money,  like  other  talents,  the 
command  of  the  Lord  is,  not  acquire  and  bequeath,  but  occupy.     To  use  his  money 
out  well  during  his  own  life,  is  at  once  the  best  service  to  God  which  a  parent  can  get 
of  money,  and  the  most  valuable  legacy  which  he  can  transmit  to  his  child.  {W.  Arnot.) 
Manoah  knew  not  that  he  was  an.  angel. — Unrecognised  angels  : — Ah  I  now  few  of 
us  think  that  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  the  beneficent  ministry  of  the  sun,  the 
glory  of  the  moon,  the  splendour  of  the  stars,  the  joy  of  the  summer,  the  stoiins  of 
the  winter,  are  all  angels  of  the  Lord,  bringing  to  us  some  revelation  of  Him,  some 
glad  tidings  of  His  love  for  us.    How  few  of  us  listen  when  He  speaks  to  us  through 
the  common  blessings  that  we  receive  every  day,  through  our  years  of  health, 
through  all  the  joys  and  sunny  hopes  of  youth,  through  the  strength  of  manhood, 
the  bliss  of  love  or  the  good  gifts  of  wife  or  children  !     How  few  of  us,  when  sorrow 
enters  our  dwelling,  or  when  sickness  comes,  realise  that  an  angel  of  the  Lord  has 
come  to  us — a  messenger  from  God  with  something  on  his  lips  which  God  wishes 
us  to  listen  to  and  profit  by  1    Ah,  no.     Most  of  us,  if  not  aU  of  us,  are  in  such 
circumstances  like  Manoah,  I  fear.     We  do  not  know  that  it  is  an  angel  of  the 
Lord.    Their  message  is  not  listened  to,  and  we  are  none  the  better,  none  the  wiser 
for  our  angel  visitants.    It  is,  perhaps,  however,  not  quite  the  same  with  us,  when 
the  messenger  comes  in  the  form  of  a  sorrow,  a  disappointment,  some  heavy  loss  or 
cross,  or  some  sad  bereavement.     We  may  say  that  they  readily  regard  it  as  an 
angel  of  the  Lord,  but  not  as  an  angel  of  love.     They  look  upon  it  rather  as  a 
messenger  of  anger  ,sent  to  avenge  or  punish.     They  ask  themselves,  "  Why,  what 
evil  have  I  done  that  this  should  have  been  laid  upon  me  ?  "     But  suffering  is  not 
sent  in  anger,  but  in  mercy.     It  is  often  at  least  sent,  not  to  destroy,  but  to  correct, 
to  awake,  perhaps,  some  Divine  energy  in  our  souls.     God  knows  all  our  short- 
comings and  all  the  dangers  that  threaten  us.     He  knows  where  our  faith  is  weak, 
where  our  love  is  languishing,  or  where  we  may  be  misplacing  it.     Is  He  unkind  to 
us  if,  in  these  circumstances,  He  employs  some  sufficient  means  of  showing  U3 
our  mistake — showing  us  that    we   have    been   over-estimating  the  strength  of 
our  faith,  the  quality  of  our  love,  or  the  measure  of  our  patience?     He  comes 
to  point  out  to  us  a  fault  that  we  might  correct  it — a  fault  that  if  we  remain 
unconscious    of  it  wiU  work  for  us  the  most  disastrous  consequences.      Could  a 
greater  service,  then,  be  done  us — a  greater  or  kinder  ?     (Wm.  Ewen,  B.  D.)        We 
shall  surely  die,  because  we  have  seen  God. — The  spirit  world  : — I.  The  earthly 
LIFE  OF  MAN  IS  IN  CLOSE  PROxiinTV  TO  THE  spiKiT  WORLD.     1.  Locally  proxlmate. 
2.  Relationally  proximate.     3.  Sympathetically  proximate.     H.  From  this  spirit 

WORLD  MEN  SOMETDIES  RECEIVE  PERSONAL    COMMXJNICATIONS.       HI.    ThE  S.VME  COMMUNI- 
CATIONS    AFFECT      DIFFERENT     PEOPLE     IN      DIFFERENT     WATS.        {HomiUst.)  FeaVS 

removed : — I.  What  peculiar  impressions  Divixe  manifestations  make  upon  thh 
MIND.     He  impresses  us  with  a  sense  of  our  danger,  that  we  may  flee  for  refuge ; 


CHAP,  xin.]  JUDGES.  195 

•with  a  sense  of  our  pollution,  that  we  may  wash  in  the  fountain  which  He  has  pro- 
vided,    n.  The  difference  thebe  is  in  the  knowledge  and  expekience  of  the 
Lord's  people.    What  opposite  conclusions  do  Manoah  and  his  wife  draw  from  the 
same  event  1     He  infers  wrath ;  she,  mercy.     The  former  looks  for  destruction ;  the 
latter  for  salvation.    Thus,  there  are  degrees  in  grace.     There  is  hope,  and  the  full 
assurance  of  hope.     Some  have  Uttle  faith  ;  others  are  "  strong  in  faith,"  "rich  in 
faith."    And  this  difference  is  not  always  to  be  judged  of  by  the  order  of  nature,  or 
external  advantages.    We  find  here  the  weaker  vessel  the  stronger  believer.    III. 
The  profit  that  is  to  be  derived  from  a  pious  companion.     Man  is  formed  for 
society,  and  religion  indulges  and  sanctifies  the  social  principle.    And  if  a  man  be 
concerned  for  his  spiritual  welfare,  he  will  be  glad  to  meet  with  those  who  are 
travelling  the  same  road,  and  are  partakers  of  the  same  hopes  and  fears :  he  will  be 
thankful  to  have  one  near  him  who  wiU  watch  over  him,  and  admonish  him  ;  who 
by  seasonable  counsel  will  fix  him  when  wavering,  embolden  him  when  timid,  and 
comfort  him  when  cast  down.    And  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  in  spiritual  distress 
we  are  often  suspicious  of  our  own  reasonings  and  conclusions :  we  know  the  deceit- 
fulness  of  our  own  hearts,  and  are  afraid  lest  while  they  encourage  they  should 
ensnare.    We  can  depend  with  more  confidence  upon  the  declarations  of  our  fellow 
Christians.    IV.  How  much  there  is  in  the  Lord's  dealings  with  His  people  to 
encourage  them  at  all  times,  if  they  have  skill  enough  to  discern  it.    How 
well  did  this  woman  reason !     How  naturally,  yet  how  forcibly  1     "  Nay — let  us  not 
turn  that  against  us,  which  is  really  for  us.     Surely  the  tokens  of  His  favour  are 
not  the  pledges  of  His  wrath."    Her  conclusion  is  drawn  from  two  things.    First, 
the  acceptance  of  their  sacrifice.    It  is  not  His  manner  to  accept  the  offering,  and 
reject  the  person.     Secondly,  the  secrets  with  which  He  had  favoured  them.     This 
regards  the  birth  of  their  son,  his  education,  his  deliverance  of  their  country — if 
the  accomplishment  of  this  be  certain,  our  destruction  is  impossible.     Let  us  leave 
Manoah  and  his  wife,  and  think  of  ourselves.    It  is  a  dreadful  thing  for  God  to 
kill  us.    What  is  the  loss  of  property,  of  health,  or  even  of  life,  to  the  loss  of  the 
soul  ?    Hence  it  becomes  unspeakably  important  to  know  how  He  means  to  deal 
with  us.    And  there  are  satisfactory  evidences  that  He  is  not  our  enemy,  but  our 
friend,  and  concerned  for  our  welfare.     Surely,  He  does  not  excite  expectations  to 
disappoint  us  ;  or  desires,  to  torment  us.     Surely,  He  does  not  produce  a  new  taste, 
a  new  appetite,  without  meaning  to  indulge,  to  relieve  it.    What  He  begins,  He  is 
able  to  finish  ;  and  when  He  begins.  He  designs  to  finish.     (W.  Jay.)        Manoah 
and  his  wife  : — I.  Observe  the  husband  as  representing  human  nature  troubled 
with  a  sense  of  guilt.     You  say  you  walk  about  among  God's  works,  and  wonder 
at  their  magnificence  and  beauty — why  should  you  be  afraid  of  Him  ?   Why  should 
a  child  be  afraid  of  his  father  ?    Ah !  why,  indeed  ?    Tet  I  believe  you  are  afraid 
of   God,  and  I  would  have  you  acknowledge  it.     God's  works  are  indeed  very 
beautiful.     He  did  paint  those  flowers  which  you  admire,  and  clothe  those  fruit 
trees  with  their  spring  blossoms.    But  it  is  God,  not  as  the  painter  of  flowers,  nor 
the  giver  of  fruits,  but  as  the  avenger  of  sin,  with  whom  you  have  to  do.     There  is 
one  place  where  you  do  expect  you  will  meet  with  God,  one  place  certainly.    How 
dreadful  is  that  place  1     You  turn  away  from  it.     At  all  costs  you  would  avoid  it : 
I  refer  to  the  place  of  death.    You  wiU  meet  God  there ;  and  you  feel  the  presenti- 
ment in  the  terrible  thoughts  of  your  heart.     11.  The  woman  representing  human 
NATURE  when  CHEERED  WITH  A  SIGN  OF  MERCY.     She  corrcctly  interpreted  the  signs  of 
God's  propitiation,  and  received  the  consolatory  assurance  of  deliverance  from 
death.     Comforted  herself,  she  could  comfort  her  husband  with  the  assurances  of 
mercy,  and  refer  him  for  satisfaction  and  a  good  hope  to  the  auspicious  sign  of 
reconciliation.    Yet  her  signs  of  peace  were  not  like  yours,  and  her  words  but  a  poor 
interpretation  of  the  gospel  of  your  reconciliation.    An  angel  in  the  flame  ascend- 
ing to  heaven  1 — You  see  Christ  in  your  own  nature  ascending  to  His  Father.    A 
kid  for  a  burnt-offering ! — You  have  a  brother  giving  himself  for  you,  a  sacrifice 
and  an  offering  of  a  sweet-smelUng  savour  to  God.     Manoah  chose  the  kid  from  his 
own  flock.     God  found,  not  a  lamb  of  His  own  fold,  but  the  Son  of  His  own  bosom, 
and  freely  gave  Him  up  for  us  all.     With  every  qualification  this  sacrifice  was 
endowed — "  a  Lamb  without  spot  or  blemish" — "the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world."     (B.  Halley,  D.D.)        ManoaK's  wife  and  her  excellent 
argument  : — 1.  Oftentimes  we  pray  for  blessings  which  will  make  us  tremble  when 
we  receive  them.    Often  the  blessing  which  we  used  so  eagerly  to  implore  is  the 
occasion  of  the  suffering  which  we  deplore.    2.  Very  frequently  deep  prostration  of 
spirit  is  the  forerunner  of  some  remarkable  blessing.    Take  it  as  a  general  rule  that 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xra. 

dull  skies  foretell  a  shower  of  mercy.  Expect  sweet  favour  when  you  experience 
sharp  aflfliction.  Blessed  be  God  for  rough  winds.  They  have  blown  home  many 
a  barque  which  else  had  sailed  to  destruction.  Blessed  be  our  Master  for  the  fire : 
it  has  burnt  away  the  dross.  Blessed  be  our  Master  for  the  file  :  it  has  taken  off 
the  rust.  3.  Great  faith  is  in  many  instances  subject  to  fits.  Do  not  judge  a  man 
by  any  solitary  word  or  act,  for  if  you  do  you  will  surely  mistake  him.  Trembling 
Manoah  was  so  outspoken,  honest,  and  sincere  that  he  expressed  his  feelings,  which 
a  more  politic  person  might  have  concealed.  4.  It  is  a  great  mercy  to  have  a 
Christian  companion  to  go  to  for  counsel  and  comfort  whenever  your  soul  i3 
depressed.  IManoah  had  married  a  capital  wife.  She  was  the  better  one  of  the 
two  in  sound  judgment.  She  had  three  strings  to  her  bow,  good  woman.  One  was 
— The  Lord  does  not  mean  to  kill  us,  because  He  has  accepted  our  sacrifices.  The 
second  was — He  does  not  mean  to  kill  us,  or  else  He  would  not  have  shown  us  all 
these  things.  And  the  third  was — He  will  not  kiU  us,  or  else  He  would  not,  as  at 
this  time,  have  told  us  such  things  as  these.  So  the  three  strings  to  her  bow  were 
accepted  sacrifices,  gracious  revelations,  and  precious  promises.  Let  us  dwell  upon 
each  of  them.  I.  Accepted  sacrifices.  This  being  interpreted  into  the  gospel  is 
just  this — Have  we  not  seen  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  fastened  to  the  Cross  ?  Because 
the  fire  of  Jehovah's  wrath  has  spent  itself  on  Him  we  shall  not  die.  He  has  died 
instead  of  us.  But,  if  you  notice,  in  the  case  of  Manoah,  they  had  offered  a  burnt- 
sacrifice  and  a  meat-offering  too.  Well,  now,  in  addition  to  the  great  sacrifice  of 
•Christ,  which  is  our  trust,  we  have  offered  other  sacrifices  to  God,  and  in  con- 
sequence of  His  acceptance  of  such  sacrifices  we  cannot  imagine  that  He  intends 
to  destroy  us.  First,  let  me  conduct  your  thoughts  back  to  the  offering  of  prayer 
which  you  have  presented.  I  wiU  speak  for  myself.  I  am  as  sure  that  my  requests 
have  been  heard  as  ever  Manoah  could  have  been  sure  that  his  sacrifice  was  con- 
sumed upon  the  rock.  May  I  not  infer  from  this  that  the  Lord  does  not  mean  to 
destroy  me  ?  Again,  you  brought  to  Him,  years  ago,  not  only  your  prayers  but 
yourself.  Tou  gave  yourself  over  to  Christ,  "  Lord,  I  am  not  my  own,  but  I  am 
bought  with  a  price."  Tou  have  at  this  very  moment  a  lively  recollection  of  the 
sweet  sense  of  acceptance  you  had  at  that  time.  Now,  would  the  Lord  have 
accepted  the  offering  of  yourself  to  Him  if  He  meant  to  destroy  you  ?  That 
cannot  be.  Some  of  us  can  recollect  how,  growing  out  of  this  last  sacrifice, 
there  have  been  others.  The  Lord  has  accepted  our  offerings  at  other  times,  too, 
for  our  works,  faith,  and  labours  of  love  have  been  owned  of  His  Spirit.  "  There- 
fore He  does  not  mean  to  kiU  us."  "Who  said  He  did?  "  says  somebody.  Well, 
the  devil  has  said  that  numbers  of  times.  He  is  a  liar  from  the  beginning,  and  he 
does  not  improve  a  bit.  Eeply  to  him,  if  he  is  worth  replying  to  at  all,  in  the 
language  of  our  text.  n.  Gracious  revelations.  1.  First,  the  Lord  has  shown 
you — your  sin.  A  deep  sense  of  sin  will  not  save  you,  but  it  is  a  pledge  that  there 
is  something  begun  in  your  soul  which  may  lead  to  salvation  ;  for  that  deep  sense 
of  sin  does  as  good  as  say,  "  The  Lord  is  laying  bare  the  disease  that  He  may  cure 
it.  He  is  letting  you  see  the  foulness  of  that  underground  cellar  of  your  corruption, 
because  He  means  to  cleanse  it  for  you."  2.  But  He  has  shown  us  more  than  this, 
for  He  has  made  us  see  the  hollowness  and  emptiness  of  the  world.  Do  you  think 
that,  if  the  Lord  had  meant  to  kill  us,  He  would  have  taught  us  this  ?  Why,  no  ; 
He  would  have  said,  "  Let  them  alone,  they  are  given  unto  idols.  They  are  only 
going  to  have  one  world  in  which  they  can  rejoice ;  let  them  enjoy  it."  3.  But  He 
has  taught  us  something  better  than  this — namely,  the  preciousness  of  Christ. 
Unless  we  are  awfully  deceived  we  have  known  what  it  is  to  lose  the  burden  of 
our  sin  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross.  We  have  known  what  it  is  to  see  the  suitability 
and  all- sufficiency  of  the  merit  of  our  dear  Redeemer,  and  we  have  rejoiced  in  Him 
with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  If  He  had  meant  to  destroy  us  He  would 
not  have  shown  us  Christ.  4.  Sometimes  also  we  have  strong  desires  after  God  I 
What  pinings  after  communion  with  Him  have  we  felt !  What  longings  to  be 
delivered  from  sin  1  Now  these  longings,  cravings,  do  you  think  the  Lord  would 
have  put  them  into  our  hearts  if  He  had  meant  to  destroy  us  ?  III.  M.vny  precious 
PROMISES.  "  Nor  would  He  have  told  us  such  things  as  these."  "  If  the  Lord  had 
meant  to  kill  us  He  would  not  have  made  us  such  a  promise  as  this."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  spectacle  of  life  and  the  opposite  conclusions  drawn  from  it : — We,  too,  draw 
just  such  opposite  conclusions  from  the  same  admitted  phenomena.  The  facts  of 
life  are  the  same.  We  admit  into  the  great  problem  of  existence  the  presence  of 
the  powers  of  this  life  and  of  the  Ufe  to  come.  There  is  the  world  of  regret  and 
sorrow,  and  the  world  of  cheerfulness  and  hope ;  there  is  the  secret  of  the  angel'g 


CHAP,  xra.]  JUDGES.  197 

name,  and  there  is  religion,  with  its  rocky  altar  of  sacrifice ;  there  is  the  fire  of 
man's  communion  with  God  ascending  to  heaven,  and  there  is  an  admitted  power 
in  our  hves  "  doing  wondrously."  And  yet,  as  in  this  grouping  of  the  forces  and 
interests  of  lite  around  Manoah's  altar,  men  draw  diametrically  opposite  conclusions. 
Let  us  look  at  three  of  the  common  facts  of  life  concerning  which  we  may  draw 
right  or  wrong  conclusions,  according  as  we  look  at  them  through  desperation  or 
through  hopefulness.  I.  Take,  first,  the  thought  of  chaeacter.  This  includes  the 
entire  world  of  conduct  and  action — the  question  of  law  and  authority,  the  right  or 
wrong  quality  of  a  man's  motives  and  his  deeds.  How  are  we  to  regard  all  this  ? 
Is  there  such  a  thing  as  absolute  right  and  truth  ?  Would  it  exist  anywhere  if  man 
did  not  exist  ?  Is  it  from  a  God,  a  Being  whose  lines  have  gone  out  into  all  the 
world  ?  Is  this  power  which  makes  for  righteousness,  as  Matthew  Arnold  calls  it, 
a  motion,  an  impulse  from  a  seat  and  source  of  law,  or  is  it  only  like  some  void, 
driving  gale  whose  conflicting  winds  have  no  definite  whence  and  are  seeking  no 
final  whither  ?  The  Manoah  type  of  mind  declares,  here  are  glimpses  of  some 
power  "  working  wondrously  "  in  the  midst  of  life ;  but  we  can  make  nothing  out 
of  them.  We  have  seen  strange  sights  in  the  history  of  humanity  and  in  the 
experience  of  our  own  souls ;  but  we  can  see  nothing  but  despair  and  death  before 
us.  The  other,  the  reUgious  type  of  mind,  pleads  with  the  wiser  wife  and  mother, 
would  we  have  all  these  visions  and  intimations  if  there  was  not  a  reason  for  them  ? 
Would  the  Lord  have  received  our  offerings,  and  have  told  us  all  these  things  if  He 
were  only  pleased  to  kill  us  ?  II.  Look  at  the  fact  of  life,  with  all  its  laws, 
physical,  mental,  and  social.  Look  at  this  wondrous  organism  of  ours,  with  its 
complex  and  far-reaching  functions.  We  move  through  the  world  as  the  planets 
whirl  on  through  space,  each  soul  being  a  world  of  its  own,  with  its  own  laws,  and 
tendencies,  and  orbit.  Is  it  any  wonder  that  philosophers  are  forever  investigating 
its  meaning  and  giving  us  new  views  of  the  relationship  between  the  working 
principle  in  life  and  the  working  principle  in  death  ?  One  side  declares  we  have 
seen  aU  these  wonders,  therefore  we,  too,  must  die  ;  life  is  only  the  bubbling  up  of 
a  few  moments'  consciousness,  like  the  evanescent  spray  in  the  leap  of  Niagara's 
plunge,  and  then  all  is  deep  and  quiet  again.  The  other  class  says,  No;  this 
existence  is  not  a  mere  guess ;  there  is  law,  and  Providence,  and  love  in  it ;  if  the 
Lord  were  pleased  to  kiU  us  He  would  not  have  told  us  such  things  as  these. 
ni.  There  is  the  question  of  the  future.  It  is  very  strange  to  think  how  theo- 
logical theories  and  opinions  go  in  sets  and  groups.  It  is  impossible  to  have  them 
separated  or  to  hold  them  singly.  One  view  leads  on  to  another  and  draws  it  after 
it  by  a  logical  necessity.  If  you  deny  a  personal  immortahty,  you  will  find  that 
locked  up  with  this  negation  is  your  disbelief  in  a  God  ;  or,  if  you  deny  a  God,  you 
will  find  that  immortality  goes  with  this  fundamental  denial.  Grant  the  premises 
of  hope  or  of  despair,  and  the  conclusions  wUl  haunt  you  just  as  your  shadow  plays 
round  your  hurrying  form  under  the  successive  street  Ughts  of  a  city  in  the  dark- 
ness of  night.  At  one  moment  it  follows,  at  another  it  precedes  your  step,  but  it  is 
always  about  you,  because  a  shadow,  after  all,  is  only  the  deprivation  of  light  due 
to  a  body.  And  so,  with  reference  to  the  future,  there  is  no  standing-ground 
between  the  creed  of  despair  and  the  creed  of  hope ;  between  a  blind  force  working 
in  the  smoke  of  our  best  sacrifices,  and  a  messenger  from  God  working  wondrously, 
as  the  flame  of  our  truest  love  ascends  and  is  accepted.  And  thus  we  should  value 
the  revelation  Christ  has  made,  when  once  we  feel  from  what  that  Saviour  rescues 
us!  (TT'.  W.  Newton.)  Cheer  for  the  faint-hearted : — Faith  is  not  only  the  door 
by  which  we  enter  into  the  way  of  salvation,  as  it  is  written  "  He  hath  opened  the 
door  of  faith  \into  the  gentiles  " ;  but  it  likewise  describes  the  entire  path  of 
Christian  pilgrimage,  "that  we  also  walk  in  the  steps  of  that  faith."  "  The  just 
shall  live  by  faith."  Happy  is  that  man  who,  steadfast,  upright,  cheerful, 
goes  from  strength  to  strength,  believing  his  God !  Trusting  in  his  God,  he 
knows  no  care  ;  resting  in  his  God,  he  knows  no  impossibihty.  1.  But,  it  seems 
from  our  text,  that  the  strongest  faith  has  its  seasons  of  wavering.  Most  of  those 
eminent  saints,  who  are  mentioned  in  Scripture  as  exhibiting  faith  in  its  greatness, 
appear  to  have  sometimes  showed  the  white  flag  of  unbelief.  Good  Lord !  of  what 
small  account  are  the  best  of  men  apart  from  Thee !  How  high  they  go  when 
Thou  lif test  them  up  I  How  low  they  faU  if  Thou  withdraw  Thine  hand !  2.  Some 
of  these  greatest  aberrations  of  faith  have  occurred  just  after  the  brightest  seasons 
of  enjoyment.  Some  of  us  have  learned  to  be  afraid  of  joy.  Sadness  is  often  the 
herald  of  satisfaction ;  but  bliss  is  ofttimes  the  harbinger  of  pain.  3.  It  is  a  very 
happy  thing  if,  when  one  behever's  down,  there  is  another  near  to  hft  him  up.    In 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

this  case  Manoah  found  in  his  wife  a  help-meet.  If  wife  and  husband  had  both 
been  down  at  one  time,  they  might  have  been  long  in  getting  up.  But  seeing  that 
when  he  fell  she  was  there  strong  in  faith  to  give  him  a  helping  hand,  it  was  but 
a  slight  fall,  and  they  went  on  their  way  rejoicing.  If  thou  art  strong,  help  thy 
weak  brother.  If  thou  seest  any  bowed  down,  take  them  on  thy  shoulders,  help  to 
carry  them.  4.  The  text  suggests  certain  consolations  which  ought  to  be  laid  hold 
of  by  believers  in  Christ  in  their  time  of  sore  trouble.  You  are  chastened  every 
morning,  and  you  are  troubled  all  day  long,  and  Satan  whispered  to  you  last 
Saturday  night,  when  you  were  putting  up  the  shutters  as  tired  as  you  could  be, 
"It  is  no  use  going  to  the  house  of  God  to-morrow.  There  is  nothing  there  for 
you.  God  has  forsaken  you,  and  your  enemies  are  persecuting  you  on  every  side." 
WeU,  now,  it  would  be  a  very  curious  thing  if  it  were  true ;  but  it  is  not  true,  for 
the  reasons  which  Manoah's  wife  gave.  Eecollect,  first,  the  Lord  has  in  your  case 
accepted  a  burnt-offering  and  a  meat-offering  at  your  hand.  Would  He  have 
accepted  your  faith  and  saved  you  in  Christ,  if  He  had  meant  to  destroy  you  ? 
What !  can  you  trust  Him  with  your  soul,  and  not  trust  Him  with  your  shop  ? 
Can  you  leave  eternity  with  Him,  and  not  leave  time  ?  What  I  trust  the  immortal 
spirit,  and  not  this  poor  decaying,  mouldering,  flesh  and  blood  ?  Man,  shame  on 
thee  I  But,  you  say,  He  will  forsake  you  in  this  trouble.  Remember  what  things 
He  has  shown  to  you.  Why,  what  has  your  past  life  been  ?  Has  not  it  been  a 
wonder  ?  You  have  been  in  as  bad  a  plight  as  you  are  in  to-night  scores  of  times, 
and  you  have  got  out  of  it.  Besides  this,  Manoah's  wife  gave  a  third  reason, 
"  Nor  would  He  at  this  time  have  told  us  such  things  as  these."  She  meant  that 
He  would  not  have  given  them  such  prophecies  of  the  future  as  He  had  done,  if 
He  meant  to  kill  them.  It  stood  to  reason,  she  seemed  to  say,  "  If  I  am  to  bear  a 
son,  we  are  not  going  to  die."  And  so,  remember,  God  has  made  one  or  two 
promises  which  are  true,  and  if  they  be  true,  it  stands  to  reason  He  won't  leave 
you.  Let  us  have  one  of  them.  "  No  good  thing  will  I  withhold  from  them  that 
walk  uprightly."  But  suppose,  next,  that  you  are  in  some  spiritual  trouble. 
"  Oh,"  say  you,  "  this  is  worse  than  temporal  trial,"  and  indeed  it  is.  Touch  a 
man  in  his  house,  and  he  can  bear  it :  but  touch  him  in  his  soul,  and  in  his  faith, 
and  then  it  is  hard  to  lay  hold  on  God,  and  trust  Him  still.  The  enemy  had  thrust 
sore  at  Manoah  to  vex  him  and  make  him  fret.  There  may  be  some  here  whose 
spiritual  enemy  has  set  upon  them  dreadfully  of  late,  and  he  has  been  howling  in 
your  ears,  "  It's  all  over  with  you  ;  you  are  cast  off,  God  has  rejected  you."  I  tell 
thee,  soul,  if  the  Lord  had  ever  meant  to  destroy  thee,  He  would  never  have 
permitted  thee  to  know  a  precious  Christ,  or  to  put  thy  trust  in  Him.  Besides, 
fallen  though  you  now  are,  through  sore  and  travail,  yet  was  there  not  a  time  when 
you  saw  the  beauty  of  God  in  His  temple  ?  To  conclude  the  argument  of  Manoah's 
wife,  what  promises  God  has  made  even  to  you  1  What  has  He  said  of  His  people  ? 
"  I  will  surely  bring  them  in."  "  I  give  unto  My  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they  shall 
never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  My  hand."  And  what  does 
Christ  say  again  ? — "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me  be 
with  Me  where  I  am."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Manoah^s  wife  : — Here  is  the  head 
of  the  house  in  gloom.  Is  he  not  always  more  or  less  in  gloom,  this  same  head  of 
the  house  all  the  world  over  ?  Who  ever  knew  a  head  of  the  house  that  was  not 
more  or  less  low-spirited,  worried  by  a  hundred  anxieties,  tormented  by  sudden 
fear  ?  Perhaps  naturally  so  :  after  aU  he  is  the  head  of  the  house ;  and  probably 
the  lightning  conductor,  being  higher  than  any  other  part  of  the  building,  may  have 
experience  of  thunder-storms  and  lightning  discharges  that  lower  parts  of  the 
structure  know  nothing  about.  Here  we  have  a  wife  comforting  her  husband. 
Like  a  true  woman,  she  let  Manoah  have  his  groan  out.  There  is  a  beautiful 
cunning  in  love.  It  lets  the  groan  get  right  out,  and  then  it  offers  its  gentle 
consolation.  If  we  had  heard  Manoah  alone,  we  should  have  said,  A  terrible 
thunder-storm  has  burst  upon  this  house,  and  God  has  come  down  upon  it  with 
awful  vengeance ;  and  not  until  we  heard  his  wife's  statement  of  the  case  should  we 
have  any  clear  idea  of  the  reality  of  the  circumstances.  The  husband  does  not 
know  all  the  case.  Perhaps  the  wife  would  read  the  case  a  little  too  hopefully. 
You  must  hear  both  the  statements,  put  them  both  together,  and  draw  your  con- 
clusions from  the  twofold  statement.  People  are  the  complement  of  each  other. 
Woe  to  that  man  who  thinks  ho  combines  all  populations  and  all  personalities  in 
himself.  Here  we  have  a  husband  and  wife  talking  over  a  dii&cult  ease.  Is  not 
that  a  rare  thing  in  these  days  of  rush  and  tumult  and  noise,  when  a  man  never 
Beeg  his  litUe  children,  his  very  little  ones,  except  in  bed  7    Se  leaves  home  so 


CHAP,  xiii.]  JUDGES.  199 

early  in  the  morning,  and  gets  back  so  late  at  night,  that  he  never  sees  his  little 
ones  but  in  slumber.  Is  it  not  now  a  rare  thing  for  a  husband  and  wife  to  sit 
down  and  talk  a  difficulty  over  in  all  its  bearings  ?  If  we  lived  in  more  domestic 
confidence  our  houses  would  be  homes,  our  homes  would  be  churches,  and  those 
churches  would  be  in  the  very  vicinity  of  heaven.  Let  us  now  look  at  the  incident 
as  showing  some  methods  of  reading  Divine  Providence.  There  we  have  the  timid 
and  distrustful  method.  Manoah  looks  at  the  case,  reads  it,  spells  where  he  cannot 
read  plainly,  and  then,  looking  up  from  his  book,  he  says  to  his  wife,  "  There  is 
bad  news  for  you ;  God  is  about  to  destroy  us."  It  is  possible  so  to  read  God's 
ways  among  men  as  to  bring  upon  ourselves  great  distress.  Is  a  man,  therefore,  to 
exclaim,  "  This  is  a  punishment  sent  from  heaven  for  some  inscrutable  reason,  and 
I  must  endure  it  as  well  as  I  can ;  I  shall  never  see  the  sky  when  not  a  cloud 
bedims  its  dome  "  ?  No,  you  are  to  struggle  against  this,  you  are  to  believe  other 
people ;  that  is  to  say,  you  are  to  live  in  other  people's  lives,  to  get  out  of  other 
people  the  piece  that  is  wanting  in  your  life.  This  is  the  inductive  and  hopeful 
method  of  reading  Divine  Providence.  I  think  that  Manoah's  wife  was  in  very 
deed  learned  in  what  we  called  the  inductive  method  of  reasoning,  for  she  stated 
her  case  with  wonderful  simplicity  and  clearness.  "If  the  Lord  were  pleased  to 
kill  us,  He  would  not  have  received  a  burnt-offering  and  a  meat-offering  at  our 
hands,"  &g.  That  is  logic  !  That  is  the  inductive  method  !— the  method,  namely, 
of  putting  things  together  and  drawing  a  conclusion  from  the  aggregate.  Thank 
God  if  you  have  a  wife  who  can  talk  like  that.  Manoah's  wife  was  of  a  hopeful 
turn  of  mind.  She  had  the  eye  which  sees  flecks  of  blue  in  the  darkest  skies.  She 
had  the  ear  which  hears  the  softest  goings  of  the  Eternal.  She  was  an  interpreter  of 
the  Divine  thought.  Oh,  to  have  such  an  interpreter  in  every  house,  to  have  such 
an  interpreter  in  every  pulpit  in  England,  to  have  such  a  companion  on  the  high- 
way of  venture  and  enterprise  !  This  is  the  eye  that  sees  further  than  the  dull  eye 
of  criticism  can  ever  see,  that  sees  God's  heart,  that  reads  meanings  that  seem  to 
be  written  afar.  Have  we  this  method  of  reading  Divine  Providence  ?  I  call  it 
the  appreciative  and  thankful  method.  Put  together  your  mercies,  look  at  them 
as  a  whole  and  say.  Can  this  mean  death,  or  does  it  mean  life  ?  and  I  know  what 
the  glad  answer  will  be.  There  are  some  sources  of  consolation  amid  the  distrac- 
tions and  mysteries  of  the  present  world.  Every  life  has  some  blessings.  Men 
eagerly  count  up  their  misfortunes  and  trials,  but  how  few  remember  their  mercies ! 
Every  life  has  some  blessing,  and  we  must  find  what  that  blessing  or  those  blessings 
are.  We  must  put  them  together,  and  reason  from  the  goodness  towards  the  glory 
of  God.  Amid  these  blessings  religious  privileges  are  sure  signs  of  the  Divine 
favour.  We  have  religious  privileges :  we  can  go  into  the  sanctuary  ;  we  can  take 
counsel  together  ;  we  can  kneel  side  by  side  in  prayer ;  we  can  go  to  the  very  best 
sources  for  religious  instruction  and  rehgious  comfort.  Does  God  mean  to  kill 
when  He  has  given  us  such  proofs  of  favour  as  these  ?  Let  us  learn  from  this 
family  scene  that  great  joys  often  succeed  great  fears.  Manoah  said.  The  Lord 
intends  to  kiU  us :  his  wife  said.  Not  so,  or  He  would  not  have  received  a  burnt- 
offering  at  our  hands.  And  behold  Samson  was  born,  a  judge  of  Israel,  an  avenger 
of  mighty  wrongs.  Is  it  ever  so  dark  as  just  before  the  dawn?  Are  you  not 
witnesses  that  a  great  darkness  always  precedes  a  great  hght — that  some  peculiar 
misery  comes  to  prepare  the  way  for  some  unusual  joy  ?  Let  us  read  the  goodness 
of  God  in  others.  Many  a  time  I  have  been  recovered  from  practical  atheism  by 
reading  other  people's  experience.  When  things  seem  to  have  been  going  wrong 
with  myself,  I  have  looked  over  into  my  neighbour's  garden  and  seen  his  flowers, 
and  my  heart  has  been  cheered  by  the  vision.  Oh,  woman,  talk  of  your  mission  ! 
Here  is  your  mission  described  and  exemplified  in  the  case  of  the  wife  of  Manoah. 
Here  is  your  field  of  operation.  Cheer  those  who  are  dispirited  ;  read  the  Word  of 
God  in  its  spirit  to  those  who  can  only  read  its  cold,  meagre  letter,  and  the  strongest 
of  us  will  bless  you  for  your  gentle  ministry.  Who  was  it  in  the  days  of  Scottish 
persecution  ?  Was  it  not  Helen  Stirk — a  braver  Helen  than  the  fiend  Maegregor — 
who  said  to  her  husband  as  they  were  carried  forth  both  to  be  executed,  "  Husband, 
rejoice,  for  we  have  lived  together  many  joyful  days  ;  but  this  day  wherein  we  die 
together  ought  to  be  most  joyful  to  us  both,  because  we  must  have  joy  forever; 
therefore  I  will  not  bid  you  good-night,  for  we  shall  suddenly  meet  within  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  "  ?  Who  was  it  when  Whitefield  was  mobbed  and  threatened, 
and  when  even  he  was  about  to  give  way — who  was  it  but  his  wife  who  took  hold 
of  his  robe  and  said,  "  George,  play  the  man  for  your  God  "  ?  Oh,  woman,  talk  of 
your  rights,  and  your  sphere,  and  your  having  nothing  to  do  I    Have  a  sphere  of 

33 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xra. 

labour  at  home,  go  into  sick  chambers  and  speak  as  only  a  woman  can  speak. 
Counsel  your  sons  as  if  you  were  not  dictating  to  them.  Bead  Providence  to  your 
husband  in  an  incidental  manner,  as  if  you  were  not  reproaching  him  for  his 
duluess,  but  simply  hinting  that  you  had  seen  unexpected  light.  Women  have 
always  said  the  finest  things  that  have  ever  been  said  in  the  Bible.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)        Past  tokens  of  Divine  favoitr  an  encouragement  against  fears : — I.  What 

ABE    THOSE    TOKENS    OF    FAVOUR    WHICH     HAVE     BEEN     SHOWN    EVEET    TKUE    BELrEVER  ? 

1.  Is  it  no  token  of  God's  favour  that  you  have  been  kept  aUve  to  your  calling? 
that  you  were  not  suffered  to  drop  into  hell  before  you  had  any  knowledge  of 
the  way  to  heaven  ?  2.  It  is  a  token  of  distinguishing  favour  that  thou  hast  not 
received  the  gospel  of  "the  grace  of  God  in  vain"  (2  Cor.  vi.  1).  The  gospel  has 
been  welcomed  not  only  to  thy  house,  but  to  thine  heart.  3.  It  is  a  token  of 
distinguishing  favour  that  thou  hast  at  any  time  seen  the  truth  of  thy  own  grace. 
As  thy  God  hath  His  hiding  times,  so  there  are  also  times  of  finding  (Psa.  zxxii.  6). 
Many  a  prayer  begun  in  distress  has  ended  in  delight.  Thy  God  has  raised  thee 
out  of  thy  depths,  and  set  thee  on  thy  high  places.  4.  It  is  a  token  of  distin- 
guishing favour  that  thou  hast  been  kept  from  falling  by  temptations,  or  that 
thou  hast  been  recovered  when  fallen.  Afflictions  have  purged  thy  dross,  and 
brightened  thy  gold.  Unruly  thoughts  have  been  often  quieted  by  Divine  conso- 
lations. 5.  It  is  a  token  of  distinguishing  favour  that  thou  hast  been  kept  close  to 
the  appointed  ways  and  means  of  comfort,  under  all  thy  complaints  for  want  of 
comfort.  To  be  out  of  the  way  of  duty  is  to  be  out  of  the  way  of  comfort.  It  is  a 
mark  of  distinguishing  mercy  to  be  kept  in  the  way  of  comfort.     11.  What  are 

THOSE    THINGS   WHICH    GOD    IS    EVEN    NOW    SHOWING   THE    CHRISTIAN    UNDER   ALL    HIS 

DARKNESS  AND  FEARS  ?  1.  Bclicvers  sec  a  loveliness  in  Christ's  person,  when  they 
cannot  discern  interest  in  His  love.  2.  Believers  have  strong  desires  after  the  truth 
of  grace  when  they  most  complain  under  the  want  of  it.  Sorrow  and  godly 
mourning  flow  from  love,  as  well  as  joy  and  praise.  3.  When  behevers  cannot  find 
Bin  mortified,  it  is  their  desire  and  prayer  that  it  may  be  rooted  out.  It  is  more 
on  account  of  indwelling  sin,  than  any  worldly  affliction  and  sorrow,  that  you  hear 
the  Christian  crying  with  David  (Psa.  Iv.  6) .  It  is  by  flight  doves  secure  them- 
selves, not  by  fright.  A  believer's  aim  is  levelled  at  the  root  of  sin.  4.  Weak  as 
his  hope  is,  a  believer  dare  not  cast  it  away  in  its  darkest  seasons.  It  is  the 
language  of  his  heart,  "  Yea,  though  He  slay  me,  yet  I  will  trust  in  Him."  If  he 
cannot  go  to  the  throne  as  sanctified  in  Christ  and  called,  he  will  fall  down  at 
the  footstool  as  a  perishing  sinner.    HI.  Why  such  who  have  been,  and  are, 

BLESSED  WITH   SUCH    TOKENS    OP    God'S   FAVOUR    SHALL   NEVER    DIE    UNDER  HiS  WRATH. 

1.  This  would  argue  God  to  be  wavering  and  imperfect  Uke  ourselves.  The  great 
God  may  alter  His  way,  but  He  never  changes  His  heart.  2.  Were  God  to  accept 
thy  offering,  and  destroy  thy  person,  what  becomes  of  His  faithfulness  to  Christ 
the  Mediator?  Christ  purchased,  and  He  intercedes  for  the  weakest  grace. 
3.  Should  God  kill  us,  after  such  grace  shown  us,  one  in  whom  the  Spirit  inhabits 
would  be  lost.  4.  God  would  lose  the  triumphs  of  His  own  grace :  "  Grace  reigna 
through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life."  Grace  in  us  is  a  creature,  but  it  is  kept 
alive  by  the  grace  in  God's  heart,  which  is  infinite  and  everlasting.  Use  1.  See 
what  use  you  are  to  make  of  past  experiences.  Carry  them  about  with  you  by 
faith,  that  you  may  turn  to  them  in  time  of  need.  Use  2.  Be  humbled  for  the 
weakness  of  faith,  in  so  great  a  multitude  of  experiences.  Use  3.  Labour  to  encourage 
sinners  by  your  taste  and  experiences  of  mercy.  You  were  not  rejected  in  your 
suit  for  mercy ;  why  then  should  they  doubt  in  their  desires  for  the  same  blessing  ? 
"  With  the  Lord  there  is  plenteous  redemption."  Use  4.  Bless  God  for  Christ,  all  your 
offerings  go  up  with  acceptance  on  this  altar  (Heb.  xiii.  15).  (JohnJamieson,3I.A.) 
Some  lessons  of  catastrophes  : — It  seems  inevitable  that  some  persons  will  continue 
to  regard  all  disastrous  occurrences  as  marks  of  God's  displeasure  with  His 
human  creatures.  The  pietist  reads  of  a  terrible  fire  in  some  city  particularly 
noted  for  the  irreligion  of  its  masses  of  people,  and  he  believes  it  to  be  the  judgment 
of  God  upon  the  sinful  ones.  Morbid  Christians  too  are  ever  disposed  to  regard 
the  mischances  of  their  own  temporal  experience  as  the  punishment  God  is  laying 
upon  them  for  their  sins ;  and  sometimes  they  are  fain  to  cry  out,  as  in  indignation, 
"  What  have  I  done  so  wickedly  as  to  deserve  such  retribution  as  this?  "  Our  Lord 
neither  suffers  us  thus  to  assign  His  judgments  to  particular  instances  of  offending, 
nor  yet  to  assume  that  we  ourselves  do  not  deserve  quite  as  much  as  we  ever  hear  of 
others  bearing  (Luke  xiii.  1-5).    I.  It  is  true  that  the  most  of  appalling  disasters 

■■AT.T.   niPARXIALLX  UPON  THB  GOD-FEARING  AND  IMPIOUS   ALIKE.       U.    MeN    WHO   DWELL 


CHAP,  xm.]  JUDGES.  201 

MUCH  UPON  THE  DISASTERS  WHICH  ASSAIL  IN  SO  MANY  DIRECTIONS  OUR  SOCIAL  LIFE  GROW 

SUPERSTITIOUS  ABOUT  THEM.  Evcrj  supematuial  manifestation,  or  what  seems  to 
be  supernatural,  inspires  fear.  No  doubt  this  is  because  of  the  consciousness  of 
Bin  in  our  lives.    III.  God  has  willed  to  re  a  fear-inspiring  God  to  His  sinful 

CREATURES  BECAUSE  THERE  IS  NO  BETTER  WAT  THAN  THIS  WHEREBY  TO  IMPRESS  UPON 
THEM  His  SUPREMACY,  THE  ABSOLUTE  AUTHORITY  AND  RIGHT  WHICH  He  HAS  OVER  THEM. 

"We  do  not  like  to  think  of  our  humanity  as  degraded,  yet  all  sound  philosophy 
insists  upon  this.  Then  God  interferes  with  His  awe-inspiring  visitations,  com- 
pelling us  to  remember  that  there  is  a  greater  existence  outside  the  realm  of 
familiar  nature,  and  a  Kuler  of  the  universe  whom  one  cannot  disobey  with 
impunity.    TV.  Notwithstanding  this  truth,   there  are   questions  which  arise, 

•W-HICH  must  arise,  IN    MEN's  MINDS    CONCERNING  THE  TREMENDOUS  DISASTERS  SO  OFTEN 

•EXPERIENCED  IN  LIFE.  Grrjitlng  that  no  one  is  free  from  sin,  that  no  one  deserves 
favour  or  blessing  at  God's  hands,  nevertheless  there  are  many  who  are  loyal  at 
heart  and  are  striving  to  be  good  disciples  of  the  gentle  Christ.  Why  does  He, 
■who  is  so  good,  allow  these  to  be  subjected  to  such  terrifying  possibihties  as 
Nature's  catastrophes  so  frequently  suggest  ?  1.  It  may  be  that  He  displays  His 
mighty  judgments,  menacing  to  the  faithful  as  well  as  to  the  irreligious,  in  order 
to  keep  us  ever  mindful  of  our  unpreparedness  for  His  coming  to  call  us  to 
account.  Who  is  there  that  is  ready  at  this  moment  to  die  ?  2.  There  is  nothing 
which  is  so  well  calculated  to  make  us  realise  the  evanescent  character  of  the 
circumstances  which  now  surround  us,  as  the  irresistible  breaking  in  upon  the 
harmony  of  these  circumstances  by  startling  catastrophes  and  terror-inspiring 
disasters.  Such  things  awe  wise-hearted  men,  and  set  them  to  thinking ;  and  when 
they  think  seriously  they  are  sure  the  invisible  and  eternal  things  are  more  worthy 
to  be  considered  than  the  visible  and  transitory  things.  V.  At  this  point  the 
question  suggests  itself.  Why  in  declaring  His  supernatural  rule  over  our  affairs 
BY  means  of  tremendous  disturbances  of  our  ordinary  course  of  life  does  God 
CAUSE  THE  innocent  TO  SUFFER  WITH  THE  GUILTY,  or  rather,  in  view  of  what  I  have 
just  said,  those  who  are  trying  to  do  His  will  and  to  use  profitably  the  lessons  He 
■would  teach  them,  as  well  as  the  hardened  and  the  despisers  of  His  judgments. 
1.  As  to  that  let  it  be  noted  that  while  we  naturally  look  upon  death  as  almost  the 
gravest  of  disasters  the  individual  can  experience,  from  the  Christian  point  of 
view  it  cannot  be  in  the  least  a  disaster  for  him  who  is  prepared  to  meet  his 
God.  The  blow  of  death  falls  upon  those  who  are  left  behind,  the  mourners,  the 
relations  and  friends  of  the  departed ;  but  for  him,  if  he  be  Christ's,  the  passing  of 
the  soul  is  its  entrance  into  the  land  of  life  where  no  further  temptation  can  try 
it,  nor  any  power  of  the  Evil  One  cause  it  to  fall  from  God.  "Blessed  are  the 
dead  who  die  in  the  Lord:  even  so  saith  the  Spirit;  for  they  rest  from  their 
labours."  2.  So  far  as  the  unrighteous  are  concerned,  the  sinful,  the  careless,  the 
impenitent,  who  have  never  feared  God  nor  troubled  themselves  to  do  His  will, 
we  may  be  sure  of  this,  the  bolt  of  the  Divine  wrath  does  not  strike  them  until  they 
have  made  it  abundantly  clear  to  the  heavenly  eyes  that  they  will  never  repent, 
never  choose  the  right.  VI.  After  all,  then,  in  spitb  of  the  appalling  catas- 
trophes  LIFE   is    so   abundantly   CHEQUERED  WITH,  IT   IS   CERTAIN   THAT   God'S   PITT 

EVER  SWAYS  His  WRATH,  80  LONG  AS  PITY  CAN  AVAIL.  From  Mauoah's  word  of  terror 
we  turn  to  the  wiser  saying  of  his  wife.  We  are  to  find  the  assurance  of  the 
mercifulness  of  our  Heavenly  Father  in  the  good  things  provided  for  us  in  our 
religion,  which  are  not  to  be  accounted  for  at  all  except  on  the  hypothesis  of  His 
kindness  towards  the  children  of  men.  1.  "  Would  He,  if  He  were  pleased  to 
kill  us,  have  received  a  burnt-offering  and  a  meat-offering  at  our  hands  ?  "  Aye, 
would  He,  for  this  is  plainly  the  meaning  of  that  long-ago  sacrifice  of  the  pious 
parents  of  Samson,  have  sent  His  only-begotten  Son  into  the  woi'ld  to  die  for  us 
the  shameful  death  of  the  Cross  ?  2.  "  Neither,"  continues  Manoah's  wife,  "  would 
He  have  showed  us  all  these  things."  Would  God,  indeed,  if  He  were  hard  and 
relentless  in  His  dealings  with  mankind  have  caused  to  be  written  for  our  learning 
and  unceasing  consolation  the  exquisite  story  of  the  gospel— all  the  pathetic  details 
of  the  human  life  of  the  Lord  Christ?  3.  Once  more  the  spiritually  minded 
■woman  cries :  "  Nor  would  He  at  this  time  have  told  us  such  things  as  these."  Ask 
yourself.  Christian  soul,  what  are  you  Uving  for — what  is  your  hope  ?  Is  it  merely 
that  you  may  escape  eternal  fire,  or  is  it  rather,  and  much  more  a  great  deal,  that 
you  may  come  to  the  unspeakable  joys  ?  Would  God,  if  He  did  not  love  us 
supremely,  have  revealed  to  us  all  those  glorious  things  of  which  St.  John  writes 
in  the  Apocalypse — the  story  of  the  land  full  of  beauty,  of  all-satisfying  delights  ? 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

[Arthur  Ritchie.)  Mysteries  of  providence : — Manoah  feared  that  he  and  his  wife 
were  going  to  be  destroyed,  because  they  had  been  visited  by  an  angel  of  God.  Our 
text  is  his  wife's  reply  to  him.  We  often  need  to  apply  a  similar  train  of  reasoning  to 
the  mysteries  of  Providence.  God's  angels  come  to  us  in  fearful  forms — the 
angels  of  disease,  desolation,  and  death.  At  such  times  the  murmuring  heart  will 
say  in  distrust,  »'  Why  hast  Thou  done  thus  ?  "  The  one  calamitous  event  often 
stands  out  by  itself.  Nothing  has  gone  before  it  to  interpret  it,  or  to  lighten  its 
severity  ;  nothing  has  accompanied  it  for  our  special  relief  or  solace ;  and  nothing 
has  as  yet  followed  it  in  the  world  without,  or  in  our  own  experience,  to  justify 
the  ways  of  God,  and  to  sustain  submission  by  reason.  Under  these  mysterious 
visitations  of  Providence  we  are  driven,  or  rather  we  gladly  have  recourse,  to 
reasoning  like  that  in  our  text.  We  appeal  to  other  and  more  frequent  experiences, 
in  which  the  Divine  mercy  has  been  manifest, — to  sorrows  which  have  been 
sanctified  to  our  growth  in  grace,  and  to  our  long  seasons  of  unmingled  and 
unclouded  happiness.  If  by  the  present  sorrow  God  meant  to  crush  us  to  the 
earth,  if  it  came  even  on  an  errand  of  doubtful  mercy,  the  past  could  not  have 
been  what  it  has  been.  Divine  love  could  not  thus  have  followed  us  step  by 
step,  and  hour  by  hour,  only  to  prepare  for  us  a  severer  fall  and  a  deeper  gloom. 
In  tracing  out  this  thought  let  us  follow  the  order  suggested  by  our  text.  1.  ♦'  If 
the  Lord  were  pleased  to  kill  us,  He  would  not  have  received  a  burnt-offering 
at  our  hands."  Have  not  burnt-offerings  from  our  households  gone  up  to  God, 
— lambs  without  fault  or  stain,  not  indeed  selected  by  ourselves,  but  chosen  by  the 
Most  High, — taken  wholly  from  us,  consumed,  lost  to  the  outward  sight, — their 
unseen  spirits  mounting  to  the  upper  heaven,  as  the  smoke  from  the  ancient  altars 
rose  to  the  sky  ?  These  bereavements  have  left  blessings  in  their  train.  When  met 
and  borne  in  faith  they  have  given  us  new  experience  of  spiritual  joy.  They  have 
opened  new  fountains  of  inward  life.  They  have  bound  us  by  new  and  stronger 
ties  to  the  unseen  world.  Our  sorrows  have  cut  short  our  sins,  nurtured  our  faith, 
given  vividness  to  our  hope,  and  made  our  love  more  and  more  like  that  of  the 
Universal  Father.  In  new  sorrows,  then,  from  which  we  have  not  had  time 
to  gather  in  and  count  the  happy  fruits,  we  will  hear  from  like  scenes  that  are  past 
the  call  to  trust  and  gratitude.  Did  it  please  God  to  destroy  us.  He  would  not  have 
accepted  our  burnt-offerings.  2.  Nor  yet  our  meat-offerings.  Have  those  alms 
gone  forth  which  may  sanctify  all  the  rest?  If  offered  God  has  accepted  and 
blessed  them.  And  whether  we  have  rendered  or  withholden  them,  how  many  are 
the  favours,  the  deliverances,  the  peculiar  mercies  of  our  homes,  to  which  we  should 
look  back,  when  in  any  hour  of  doubt  or  sorrow  a  murmuring  spirit  would  arraign 
the  Divine  goodness !  3.  To  pursue  the  order  of  the  text — "  If  the  Lord  were 
pleased  to  kiU  us,  neither  would  He  have  showed  us  all  these  things."  What  has 
He  showed  us  ?  What  is  He  daily  showing  us  ?  How  much  is  there  in  every 
scene  and  form  of  outward  nature  to  rebuke  distrust,  to  quell  fear,  and  to  make  us 
feel  that  the  world  we  live  in  is  indeed  our  Father's!  From  the  first  song  of 
the  birds  to  the  last  ray  of  mellow  twilight,  whether  in  sunshine,  beneath  sheltering 
clouds,  or  fresh  from  the  baptism  of  the  midday  shower,  the  whole  scene  is  full  of 
the  present  and  the  loving  God.  He  sustains  the  wayfaring  sparrow.  He  gives 
the  raven  his  food.  He  clothes  the  frail  field-flower  with  beauty.  In  our  seasons 
of  doubt,  darkness,  and  sorrow  have  not  these  miracles  of  Divine  care  and  love  a 
message  from  God  for  us  ?  4.  Manoah's  wife  added,  "  If  the  Lord  were  pleased 
to  kill  us,  He  would  not  have  told  us  such  things  as  these."  She  referred  to 
promised  temporal  mercies  in  her  own  household.  God  has  told  us  yet  more, 
infinitely  more.  In  the  revelation  by  Jesus  Christ  He  has  revealed  to  us  truths  and 
given  us  promises  which,  received  in  faith,  must  put  to  flight  all  hopeless  despon- 
dency and  gloom.  In  His  teachings  and  in  the  record  of  His  pilgrimage  we  learn 
all  that  we  can  need  to  know  of  the  mysterious  dealings  of  Providence.  To  interpret 
them  fully  we  cannot  expect  or  hope.  But  we  do  learn,  and  are  left  without  a 
remaining  doubt,  that,  when  the  most  severe,  they  are  sent  in  love — are  hidden 
mercies,  designed  to  discipline  our  faith,  to  spiritualise  our  affections,  and  to  draw 
us  into  closer  fellowship  with  our  Saviour's  sufferings,  that  we  may  afterwards 
become  partakers  of  His  glory.  {A.  P.  Peabody.)  God's  past  mercies  aground  of 
hope  for  the  future  : — It  is  a  safe  method  for  us  to  follow — to  plead  God's  past 
mercies  as  a  ground  of  hope  for  the  future.  His  rule  is  grace  upon  grace.  He 
that  has  receives  more.  It  is  not  irreverent  to  say  that  He  who  gave  His  Son  for 
us,  will  with  Him  give  us  all  things.  Is  it,  then,  reasonable  to  fear  that  He  who  has 
preserved  us  for  forty  years  will  fail  us  for  the  next  twenty,  if  our  pilgrimage 


CHAP,  xni.]  JUDGES.  203 

should  continue  so  long?  He  who  made  you,  aged  friend,  and  gave  His  Son 
to  redeem  you,  wUl  not  suffer  you  to  perish  for  the  want  of  meaner  things.  And 
the  feeling  of  your  need  of  His  grace  is  a  proof  that  He  is  waiting  to  be  gracious. 
Even  the  anxious  inquiry  after  salvation  proves  that  the  work  is  already  begun. 
Penitential  pangs  are  not  natural  but  gracious,  and  argue  that  God  has  laid  His 
hand  upon  us.  All  His  works  are  perfect.  He  wUl  not  leave  His  work  of  grace 
half  finished.  Nor  would  He  have  told  us  such  things  of  His  love  and  grace 
if  He  did  not  offer  pardon  and  eternal  hfe  to  us  in  perfect  good  faith  on  the 
terms  propounded  in  the  gospel.  And  surely  the  argument  from  past  experience 
should  be  a  satisfactory  one.  Experience  worketh  hope,  and  hope  maketh  not 
ashamed  (Eom.  v.  4,  5).  Is  it  not  an  impeachment  of  the  Divine  sincerity  to 
fear  that  if  God  begins  a  good  work.  He  will  not  complete  it  ?  It  cannot  be  that 
supreme  benevolence  tantalises  us.  If  so,  why  has  He  ever  opened  our  hearts  to 
our  need  of  salvation  ?  Why  do  we  feel  our  guilt,  and  desire  to  escape  from  the 
wrath  to  come  ?  Surely  He  would  not  have  announced  to  us  the  glad  tidings 
of  the  gospel — would  not  have  made  to  us  such  fuU  and  free  offers  of  mercy,  if  He 
were  not  pleased  to  accept  us.  Surely  there  is  honesty  in  the  declaration :  "  It  is  a 
faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners  " — even  the  chief  of  sinners.  God's  acceptance  of  the 
sacrifice  of  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  is  a  positive  proof  that  His  merits  and  mediation 
are  available  for  us.     (W.  A.  Scott,  D.D.) 

Vers.  24,  25.  Samson. — Samson : — The  history  of  Samson  is  surprising  even  in 
an  extraordinary  age.  In  several  particulars  he  was  the  most  distinguished  of  the 
Hebrew  judges.  And  though  never  at  the  head  of  an  army,  nor  on  a  throne,  nor 
prime  minister  to  any  earthly  potentate,  it  were  difficult,  perhaps  impossible,  to 
name  another  Hebrew  that  loved  his  country  with  more  fervid  devotion,  or  served 
it  with  a  more  hearty  good  will,  or  who  was  a  greater  terror  to  its  enemies.  I  know 
not  that  there  is  any  biography  so  completely  characteristic  or  more  tragical  than 
his.  It  is  full  of  stirring  incidents  and  most  marvellous  achievements.  He  seems 
to  us  like  a  volcano,  continually  struggling  for  an  eruption.  In  him  we  have  aU 
the  elements  of  an  epic  :  love,  adventure,  heroism,  tragedy.  Nor  am  I  aware  that 
any  Bible  character  has  lent  to  modern  literature  a  greater  amount  of  metaphor 
and  comparison  than  the  story  of  Samson.  The  "  Samson  Agonistes  "  of  Milton 
has  been  pronounced  by  the  highest  authority  to  be  "  one  of  the  noblest  dramas  in 
the  English  language."  It  reminds  us  of  the  mystic  touches  and  shadowy  grandeur 
of  Eembrandt,  while  Eembrandt  himself  and  Eubens,  Guido,  David,  and  Martin 
are  indebted  to  this  heroic  judge  for  several  of  their  immortal  pieces.  I  am  aware 
that  some  look  upon  Samson  merely  as  a  strong  man.  They  do  not  consider  that 
the  moving  of  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  gave  extraordinary  strength  to  Samson  for 
special  purposes.  His  peculiarities  are  not  remarkable,  because  of  anything  that 
we  perceive  foreign  to  fallen  humanity  in  the  kind  or  composition  of  his  passions 
and  besetting  sins,  but  in  the  fierceness  and  greatness  of  their  strength.  Ordinary 
men  now  have  the  same  besetting  sins — passions  of  the  same  character,  but  they 
are  diminutive  in  comparison  with  him,  and  are  without  his  supernatural  strength. 
It  must  be  confessed  in  the  outset  that  Samson's  spiritual  history  is  very  skeleton- 
like. We  have  only  a  few  time-worn  fragments  out  of  which  to  construct  his  inner 
man.  Now  and  then,  and  sometimes  after  long  and  dreary  intervals,  and  from  out 
of  heavy  clouds  and  thick  darkness,  we  catch  a  few  rays  of  hope,  and  rejoice  in 
some  signs  of  a  reviving  conscience  and  of  the  presence  of  God's  Spirit.  "  His 
character  is  indeed  dark  and  almost  inexplicable.  By  none  of  the  judges  of  Israel 
did  God  work  so  many  miracles,  and  yet  by  none  were  so  many  faults  committed." 
As  an  old  writer  has  said,  he  must  be  looked  upon  as  "  rather  a  rough  believer."  I 
like  not  to  dwell  on  Samson  as  a  type  of  Christ.  We  must  at  least  guard  against 
removing  him  so  far  from  us  by  reason  of  his  uniqueness  of  character  as  to  forget 
that  he  was  a  man  of  like  passions  with  ourselves.  We  must  carefully  discriminate 
in  his  life  between  what  God  moved  him  to  do  and  what  his  sinful  passions  moved 
him  to.  The  Lord  raised  up  this  heroic  Israelite  for  us.  He  threw  into  him  a 
miraculous  composition  of  strength  and  energy  of  passion,  and  called  them  forth  in 
Buch  a  way  as  to  make  him  our  teacher.  And  besides  being  a  hero,  he  was  a 
believer.  God  raised  him  up  for  our  learning,  and  made  him,  as  it  were,  "a 
mirror  or  molten  looking-glass,"  in  which  we  may  see  some  of  our  own  leading 
features  truthfully  portrayed,  only  on  an  enlarged  scale.  {W.A.  Scott,  D.D.)  The 
$lace  o/  Samson  in  Jewish  history: — 1.  Two  things  stand  out  in  the  narrative 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xra. 

of  Samson's  career,  as  compared  with  the  history  of  at  least  the  majority  of  the 
other  judges.  (1)  The  other  judges  fight  God's  battles  with  the  people  at  their 
backs.  They  simply  give  aid  and  point  to  a  sense  of  rising  strength,  of  im- 
patience of  subjection,  of  reviving  national  pride  and  religious  zeal  in  the  Hebrew 
people.  Samson,  on  the  contrary,  stands  uUerlj  alone,  fights  his  battle  single- 
handed,  is  supported  by  no  enthusiasm  for~iKe  national  cause,  and  not  even  by 
common  loyalty  on  the  part  of  his  own  comrades.  (2)  The  other  judges  are  chosen 
to  their  office  as  mature  men,  but  Samson  is  set  apart  to  his  career  as  an  unborn 
child.  From  his  very  infancy  the  sense  of  his  vocation  takes  possession  of  him  ; 
"as  child  and  boy  and  youth  it  is  making  and  moulding  him,  and  preparing  him 
for  what  he  is  to  be.  The  explanation  of  these  two  characteristic  features  of  hia 
history,  which  distinguish  it  from  that  of  the  other  judges,  lies  in  this,  that 
Samson's  lot  in  life  fell  upon  a  period  of  utter  national  demoralisation.  Israel 
had  elapsed  into  subjection  to  the  despised,  uncircumcised  Philistines.  All  national 
spirit  was  dying  out,  and  the  prestige  of  Jehovah  was  giving  way  before  the 
prestige  of  Dagon.  Now  the  only  hope  for  the  redemption  of  a  society  that  has 
fallen  into  a  condition  of  such  lassitude,  mental  and  moral,  lies  in  the  creation  of 
a  fresh  and  powerful  personality.  2.  How,  hu^anly_s£eaking,  was  Samson  pre- 
pared for  his  work  ?  (1)  To  begin  with,  God  made  acradle'  and  a  home  for  tiinl 
'^airison's  nxoiher  was  a  woman  with  a  great  soul  and  a  large  heart,  to  whom  God 
was  a  reality ;  a  woman  who  could  not  indeed  fight  God's  battles  and  deUver  God's 
people,  but  who  lived  with  the  upper  storeys  of  her  being  in  the  unseen,  and  was 
possessed  with  a  tremendous  longing  that  there  should  be  deliverance  for  Israel, 
that  something  heroic  should  appear  in  history,  and  that  God  should  vindicate 
His  might  and  grandeur  above  the  heathen  gods.  Samson  was  bom  to  a  mother 
that  longed  for  a  boy,  not  that  he  might  rise  to  comfort  and  ease,  but  that  he  might 
be  lofty  and  heroic,  and  fight  and,  if  need  be,  die  for  God  and  God's  kingdom.  To 
her  son  she  transmits  her  hope,  faith,  and  enthusiasm.  (2)  From  a  little  child 
Samson  felt  something;  jnysterious  stirring  in  his  soul,  ay,  and  in  his  physical 
nature.  Samson  needed  extraordinary  gifts  for  extraordinary  work.  He  had, 
single-handed,  by  his  own  solitary  prowess,  to  cow  the  Philistines  and  reanimate 
the  courage  of  the  Hebrews.  Two  things  were  needful  for  him :  (1)  extraordinary 
strength,  (2)  inextinguishable  jpyousness.  To  hold  his  own  ami3^  the  abject 
depression  of  the  people  round  about  him  it  was  essential  that  he  should  be 
possessed  of  exuberant  mirth  and  jollity.  It  is  the  men  that  do  the  most  serious 
and  earnest  work  that  can  play  and  romp  and  laugh  with  their  children.  That 
is  not  the  noisy  laughter  of  the  fool.  (3)  Once  again  ;  it  may  be  that  asceticism 
is  demanded  for  our  age,  just  as  Nazaritism  was  for  Samson's.  But  that, 
remember,  is  the  bad  remedy  of  a  still  worse  evil.  Jesus  Christ  was 
no  ascetic,  else  His  enemies  would  not  have  published,  as  the  likeliest 
scandal  about  Him,  that  He  was  a  wine-bibber.  {Professor  W.  G.  Elmslie.) 
Savison :  inferior  influences  over  large  minds : — 1.  The  Book  of  Judges  is  full  of 
expressions  of  singular  beauty.  The  springs  of  human  action  are  bared  and 
revealed  to  view  with  wonderful  power.  2.  Samson  was  inspired  and  sent 
forth  with  a  heavenly  mission.  Yet  second  motive  was  the  frequent  spring  of  his 
actions.  3.  There  is  a  vigour,  width,  and  absence  of  detail  or  accurate  plan 
about  his  proceedings  which  stamp  him  still  more  as  a  man  of  genius  and  bold 
conception.  4.  But  there  is  a  further  remarkable  feature  in  Samson's  case. 
He  became  the  slave  of  his  wife.  The  same  mind  around  which  a  mother 
wound  the  soft  coils  of  maternal  and  home  influences  a  wife  bound  round  with 
the  adamantine  chains  of  female  plot  and  management.  5.  But  we  have 
to  account  for  this  and  see  its  force.  (1)  In  ordinary  terms  Samson  was  a  man 
of  genius.  Genius  is  a  more  direct  gift  from  God  than  the  ordinary  power  of 
man.  It  is  a  species  of  inspiration.  It  sees  the  means  of  deliverance  from  an  evil 
without  having  to  wade  through  the  tortuous  windings  of  the  labyrinth  of  hard- 
worked  plans  and  schemes.  (2)  The  man  of  genius  is  left  with  the  simplicity  of  a 
child  from  never  having  commenced  his  hard  task  in  the  school  of  experience  and 
difficulty.  He  leans  with  the  trust  of  infancy  on  the  natural  stays  and  supports  of  life. 
Men  of  genius  will  be  subject  to  the  tyranny  as  well  as  consolations  of  inferior 
influences  ;  and  will  often  become  the  slaves  and  victims  of  female  narrowness  and 
punctilio.  Their  dependence  on  natural  affections  is  accounted  for  by  the  same 
cause  which  accounts  for  their  sometimes  unaccountably  sinking  under  the 
extravagant  exercise  of  that  influence.  Not  having  had  the  need  to  manage  others 
by  elaborate  plans,  they  are  duped  by  overmanagement,  and  not  having  been  called 


CHAP.  XIII.]  JUDGES.  205 

on  to  work  out  schemes,  they  fall  the  ready  and  easy  victims  to  those  devised  by 
others.     6.  We  are  often  startled  by  inconsistencies  in  Samson's  history.     They 
may  be  accounted  for  by  the  same  reason — genius.     The  man  of  genius  is  not 
therefore   of  necessity  a  man  of  personal  holiness.     The  glass  tube  may  be  the 
medium  of  streams  of  water,  yet  not  one  drop  will  imbue  the  substance  forming  the 
channel  that  conveys  the  fertilising  drops  from  one  spot  to  another.     The  eternal 
truth  which  a  man  speaks,  the  holiness  he  may  bear  witness  to,  the  warnings  he 
may  proclaim,  may  all  be  declared  with  the  utmost  eificiency,  and  yet  not  influence 
him  who  is  the  medium.    (E.  Monro,  M.A.)       The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  began  to  move 
Mm  at  times. — Man  under  the  influence  of  the  Divine  Sjiirit  .•—Our  knowledge  of  that 
mysterious  power  called  the  Spirit  has  been  assisted  by  the  well-known  comparison  of 
it  with  the  wind,  whose  effects  we  may  see,  but  whose  rise  and  courses  we  cannot 
trace.   "  The  wind  bloweth  where  itlisteth,"  &c.   There  wiU,  therefore,  be  in  human 
life  occurrences  that  we  can  only  refer  to  this  source,  which  will  defy  scientific 
rules    and    be    beyond    calculation.     But  though  we  may  not  search  out  the 
way  of   the   Spirit,  we  may  inquire  when  His  motions  are  most  generally  first 
felt.    Is  there  any  limit  of  age  at  which  His  visits  begin  or  end  ?    Are  we  to  wait 
till  riper  years,  when  knowledge  is  matured  and  the  passions  subdued  to  reason, 
before  we  can  entertain  them,  or  may  we  expect  this  power  of  God  to  approach  us 
early,  and  move  us  almost  as  soon  as  the  age  of  consciousness  begins  ?     So  much 
more  receptive  is  the  earlier  part  of  a  man's  life  that  I  have  heard  experienced 
preachers  allege  that  no  conversions  take  place  after  twenty-five ;  but  while  objecting 
to  such  a  limit,  or  indeed  any  limit,  I  would  maintain  that  in  the  young  rather  than 
in  the  old  there  is  the  best  hope  of  feeling  this  power  and  becoming  obedient  to  it. 
We  may  take  Samson's  life  as  evidence  of  what  a  man  can  dare  and  do  under  the 
influence  of  the  Spirit.     His  strength  was  not  his  own,  it  was  "  hung  in  his  hair," 
in  the  seven  mysterious  locks  in  his  head,  which  would  be  to  him  of  sacramental 
character,  outward  signs  of  an  invisible  gift.    The  Spirit  reaUy  in  him  accomplished 
his  feats.     When  the  lion  roared  against  him,  it  was  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  "  that 
came  mightily  upon  him;  when  he  finds  himself  among  his  enemies  bound  with 
two  new  cords,  at  their  shout  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  "  again  came  mightUy  upon 
him,  and  he  burst  the  cords  which  became  as  "  flax  which  was  burnt  in  the  fire," 
and  on  this  occasion  he  slew  a  thousand  men.     The  view  I  take,  then,  of  Samson's 
life  is,  that  it  was  a  witness  to  God's  Spirit  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.     We 
should  lose  much  of  the  teaching  of  it  if  we  believed  that  such  a  career  is  altogether 
out  of  date.    I  do  not  mean,  of  course,  that  the  same  feats  of  strength  will   be 
witnessed  again,  but  I  assert  that  heroic  feats  of  physical  courage  wiU  be  done, 
greater  feats,  too,  of  moral  courage ;  and  some  such  it  will  be  good  to  put  before  you 
for  imitation.    In  every  generation  they  are  to  be  found,  and  in  our  own  not  less 
than  others.    And  for  such  an  illustration  in  our  own  day  one  naturally  turns  to 
our  latest  modern  hero,  Gordon,  whose  life  is  almost  as  strange  and  eventful  as  that 
of  any  of  the  heroes  of  Hebrew  history,  and  none  the  less  inspired.     He  himself 
traced  his  superhuman  faith  and  energy  to  this  source,  to  God  working  in  him, 
enabUng  him  to  attempt  any  venture  in  His  service  and  cheerfully  to  die  for  Him. 
What  a  victory  is  scored  to  faith,  for  however  eccentric  his  conduct  maybe  thought, 
plainly  he  has  demonstrated  that  there  are  unseen  powers  that  sway  a  man's  heart 
much  more  forcibly  than  any  motives  of  the  world.  Such  men  almost  equal  Samson 
in  the  apparent  inadequacy  of  their  equipment  and  neglect  of  means.   But  no  doubt 
they  fortify  themselves  with  the  argument  that  God  loves  to  use  trivial  means  to 
effect  great  ends — a  small  pebble  in  David's  hand  to  bring  down  a  giant,  an  ox-goad 
in  Shamgar's  hand  to  work  a  national  deliverance,  a  stone,  rough  from  the  mountains, 
to  overthrow  Nebuchadnezzar's  Colossus  ;  and,  thus  encouraged,  without  scientific 
weapons,  such  as  our  theological  armouries  supply,  they  have  gone  forth  strong  in 
faith  alone.     I  am  led  on  to  commend  as  a  priceless  possession  the  gift  of  an  inde- 
pendent spirit  in  thinking  and  acting,  such  as  the  Judge  in  Israel  always  displayed 
among  his  fellow-men.    For  this  is  a  servile  age  in  which  we  live — albeit  declared 
to  be  one  of  liberty  and  progress.  Yet  tending,  as  everything  does,  to  democracy  and 
equality,  few  men  have  the  courage  of  their  opinions,  few  that  are  not  ready  to  make 
a  surrender  of  their  intelligence  and  conscience  at  the  bidding  of  others.     Where 
are  the  strong  men  who  wUl  act  independently  according  to  really  patriotic  or  godly 
motives,  and  not  put  up  their  principles  to  a  bidding?    Who  now  in  England 
is  "  valiant  for  the  truth  "  ?    Who  is  upholding  it  before  the  people  ?    Hitherto  the 
grander  part  of  Samson's  character  has  occupied  us,  but  there  was  a  weak  side 
when  the  strong  man  was  brought  low  through  a  temptation  that  has  cast  down 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xra. 

many  strong  men.  The  prison  house,  with  the  fallen  hero,  deprived  of  sight, 
shorn  of  his  noble  locks,  grinding  as  a  slave,  the  scoff  of  the  enemies  of  God,  is 
an  obvious  allegory  that  hardly  needs  an  interpretation,  for  it  is  alas !  a  picture 
of  every  day's  experience  when  a  spiritual  man  yields  to  those  lusts  which  war 
within  him,  and  enslave  him  if  they  prevail  against  him.  {C.  E.  Searle,  M.A.) 
Samson,  the  Judge  : — It  was  a  dark  time  with  Israel  when  the  boon  of  the 
future  Danite  judge  was  vouchsafed  to  the  prayers  of  the  long  barren  mother. 
It  seems  not  unlikely  that  this  may  have  been  a  part  of  that  evil  time 
when  the  ark  of  God  itself  feU  into  the  hands  of  the  hosts  of  Philistia. 
But  there  was  a  dawning  of  the  coming  day,  and  from  this  utter  subjection 
God  was  about  ere  long  to  deliver  His  people.  Samson  was  to  be  a  first  instrument 
in  this  work — he  was  to  "begin  to  deliver  Israel  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Philistines" 
(chap.  xiii.  5).  To  enable  him  to  fulfil  this  pecuHar  ministry,  the  possession  of 
extraordinary  physical  strength,  accompanied  by  an  unequalled  daring,  were  the 
special  gifts  bestowed  upon  him.  These  began  early  to  manifest  themselves. 
From  the  first  they  are  traced  back  in  the  sacred  record  to  the  working  of  that 
exceptional  influence  which  rested  upon  him  as  a  "  Nazarite  unto  God."  In  spite 
of  actions  which  seem  at  a  first  glance  to  us  Christians  irreconcilable  with  such  a 
spiritual  relation,  the  occurrence  of  his  name  under  the  dictation  of  the  Spirit  in 
the  catalogue  of  worthies  "  who  through  faith  subdued  kingdoms,  stopped  the 
mouths  of  lions,  escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword,  waxed  valiant  in  fight,  and  turned 
to  flight  the  armies  of  aliens  "  (Heb.  xi.  32-34),  establishes  beyond  a  doubt  the  fact 
that  he  was  essentially  a  faithful  man.  As  we  look  closer,  we  may  see  that  passing 
signs  of  such  an  inward  vitality  break  forth  from  time  to  time  along  the  ruder 
outlines  of  his  half -barbarous  course.  Surely  there  is  written  large  upon  the  grave 
of  the  Nazarite  judge,  "  Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God."  There  are  those  in 
whom,  in  spite  of  remaining  infirmities,  there  is  a  manifest  indwelling  and 
inworking  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost — men  whose  lives  are  rich  with  the  golden  fruit 
of  His  inward  life.  Their  life,  without  a  word  spoken,  has  an  untold  influence 
upon  others.  Be  they  young  or  old,  they  are  God's  witnesses,  God's  workmen. 
Far  outside  these  is  another  circle.  These  are  men  of  whom  it  is  not  possible  to 
doubt  that  the  Spirit  of  God  "has  begun  to  move  them  at  times."  There  are 
plain  marks  of  a  hard  struggle  going  on  within  them;  more  or  less  they  are 
conscious  of  it  themselves.  The  good  they  would  they  do  not,  the  evil  they 
would  not  that  they  too  often  do.  Perhaps  their  youth  is  stained  with  some- 
thing of  the  waywardness,  the  sensuahty,  and  disorder  which  marked  that  of  the 
Nazarite  Samson  ;  and  yet  there  is  another  Spirit  striving  within  them.  What 
a  strife  it  is  1  with  what  risks,  with  what  issues !  The  master  temptation  of  one 
may  be  to  yield  the  Nazarite  locks  of  the  purity  of  a  Christian  soul  to  the 
Philistine  razor  of  sensual  appetite ;  to  another  it  may  be  to  surrender  to  the  fair 
speeches,  or  perhaps  the  taunts,  of  some  intellectual  Delilah,  the  faith  which 
grew  up  early  in  his  heart ;  his  simple  trust  in  God's  Word,  in  creeds,  in  prayers, 
in  Christ  Incarnate.  "Trust  to  me,"  the  tempter  whispers,  "this  secret  of  thy 
strength,  and  I  will  let  thee  rest  at  peace  and  enjoy  thy  life  in  victorious  possession 
of  all  that  thy  mind  lusteth  after."  It  is  the  old  promise,  broken  as  of  old.  Beyond 
that  yielding  what  is  there  for  him  but  mockery  and  chains,  eyelessness  and  death? 
And  yet,  once  again,  another  class  is  visible.  There  are  those  who,  though 
the  Nazarite  life  is  theirs,  show  to  the  keenest  searching  of  the  longing  eye  no  token 
of  any  moving  by  the  blessed  Spirit.  In  some  it  is  as  if  there  had  never  been  so 
much  as  a  first  awakening  of  the  Spirit's  life.  In  others  there  is  that  which 
we  can  scarcely  doubt  is  indeed  present,  active,  conscious  resistance  to  the  Holy  One. 
This  is  the  darkest,  dreariest,  most  terrible  apparition  which  this  world  can  show. 
Here,  then,  are  our  conclusions.  1.  Let  us  use,  simply  and  earnestly,  our  present 
opportunities,  such  as  daily  prayer.  Let  us  regularly  practise  it,  in  spite  of  any 
difficulties.  Let  us  watch  over  ourselves  in  little  things  even  more  carefully  than  in 
those  which  seem  great.  2.  Let  us  guard  against  all  that  grieves  Him.  3.  Let 
us  each  one  seek  from  Him  a  thorough  conversion.  In  this  thoroughness  is  every- 
thing— is  the  giving  the  heart  up  to  God,  is  the  subduing  the  life  to  His  law,  is  all 
the  peace  of  regulated  passions,  all  the  brightness  of  a  purified  imagination. 
{Bp.  S.  Wilherforee.)  Samson : — Of  Samson  it  may  be  said  that  he  stands  alone 
in  the  whole  round  of  Scripture  characters.  The  gift  of  supernatural  bodily 
strength  was  bestowed  on  no  other  of  God's  servants.  In  this  respect  he  ia 
interesting,  as  furnishing  one  of  the  many  varieties  of  form  in  which  God,  who 
spoke  to  the  fathers  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners,  sought  to  impress 


CHAP,  xra.]  JUDGES*  207 

upon  them  the  great  lessons  of  His  will.  Likgjoijah,  Samson  was  a  sign  to  Israel. 
His  life  was  a  sort  of  parable,  exhibiting  in  a  strange  but  striking  form  what  would 
have  been  their  experience  if  they  had  been  faithful.  Like  the  nation  of  Israel, 
Samson  was  consecrated  .to.-  Gtad.  The  remarkable  thirig  in  his  experience  was, 
mat  Willie  Ee  continued  faithful  to  his  consecration  he  enjoyed  such  wonderful 
bodily  strength,  but  the  moment  that  the  Nazarite  law  was  broken,  he  became  weak 
as  other  men.  The  nation  was  taught,  symbolically,  what  wonderful  strength 
would  be  theirs  if  the;  should  be  faithful  to  their  covenant.  On  the  other  hand^ 
{EeTife  of  Samson  set  forth  with  equal  clearness,  what  would  be  the  consequences 
to  Israel  of  their  neglecting  their  consecration  or  treating  lightly  its  marks  and 
tokens.  There  was,  however,  a  third  point  in  which  Samson  was  a  type  for  Israel. 
Great  though  the  judgment  was  that  punished  his  neglect,  he  was  not  quite  aban- 
doned in  his  captivity.  The  hair  of  his  head  began  to  grow.  The  outward  tokens 
of  his  consecration  began  to  reappear.  It  was  thus  indicated  to  Israel  that  if,  in 
the  midst  of  judgment  and  tribulation,  they  should  bethink  them  of  the  covenant 
God  and  seek  to  return  to  Him,  He  would  in  mercy  return  to  them,  and  grant 
them  some  tokens  of  His  former  blessing.  In  these  respects  the  career  of  Samson 
was  peculiar.  In  addition  to  this,  we  are  perhaps  to  view  him,  in  common  with  the 
other  judges,  as  typically  setting  forth  the  great  Deliverer — the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah.  In  one  respect  Samson  was  quite  specially  a  type  of  Christ.  He  was  the 
first  of  the  Hebrew  worthies  who  deliberately  gave  his  llie  for  his  country.  Many 
nsked  their  lives,  but  he  actually,  and  on  purpose,  gave  his,  that  his  country  might 
reap  the  benefit.  Only  here,  too,  we  must  remark  an  obvious  difference.  Both 
achieved  salvation  by  dying,  but  in  very  different  ways.  Samson  saved  in  spite  of 
his  death,  Jesus  by  His  death.  Let  us  now  glance  at  the  salient  points  of  his 
career.  In  his  early  training  he  presented  a  great  contrast  to  Jephthah.  In  a  very 
special  sense  he  was  a  gift  of  God  to  his  family  and  his  nation ;  and  the  gift  was 
made  in  a  very  solemn  manner,  and  under  the  express  condition  that  he  was  to  be 
trained  to  live  not  for  himself  or  for  his  family,  but  for  God,  to  whom  he  was 
consecrated  from  his  mother's  womb.  And  no  doubt  he  was  brought  up  with  the 
strictest  regard  to  the  rules  of  the  Nazarites.  Yet  we  may  see,  what  was  probably 
very  common  in  these  cases,  that  while  he  was  rigidly  attentive  to  the  external 
rules,  he  failed  to  carry  out,  in  some  very  essential  respects,  the  spirit  of  the 
transaction.  In  heart  he  was  not  so  consecrated  as  in  outward  habit.  The  self- 
pleasing  spirit,  against  which  the  vow  of  the  Nazarite  was  designed  to  bear, 
appeared  very  conspicuously  in  his  choice  of  a  wife.  "  Get  her  for  me,"  he  said  to 
his  father,  "for  she  pleaseth  me."  The  thought  of  her  nation,  of  her  connections, 
of  her  religion,  was  overborne  by  the  one  consideration,  "  she  pleaseth  me."  This 
does  not  look  like  one  trained  in  aU  things  to  follow  the  will  of  God,  and  to  keep 
the  sensual  part  of  his  nature  in  strictest  subjection  to  the  spiritual.  True,  it  is 
said,  "  the  thing  was  of  the  Lord";  but  this  does  not  imply  that  it  carried  His 
epproval.  It  entered  as  an  element  into  God's  providential  plans,  and  was  "  of  the 
Lord  "  only  in  the  sense  in  which  God  makes  the  devices  of  men  to  work  out  the 
counsel  of  His  sovereign  will.  Yielding  at  the  outset  of  his  life,  and  in  a  most 
vital  manner,  to  an  impulse  which  should  have  met  with  firm  resistance,  Samson 
became  the  husband  of  this  Philistine  stranger.  But  it  was  not  long  ere  he  found 
out  his  lamentable  error.  The  shallow  qualities  that  had  taken  his  fancy  only 
covered  a  faithless  heart ;  she  abused  his  confidence  and  proved  a  traitor.  And 
after  he  had  had  experience  of  her  treachery  he  did  not  cast  her  off,  but  after  a 
time  sought  her  company,  and  it  was  only  when  he  learned  that  she  had  been 
given  to  another,  that  he  dashed  into  a  wild  scheme  of  revenge — catching  the  two 
hundred  foxes,  and  setting  fire  to  the  growing  com.  Whatever  we  may  say  of  this 
proceeding,  it  showed  unmistakably  a  very  fearless  spirit.  The  neighbouring  tribe 
of  Judah  was  horrified  at  the  thought  of  the  exasperation  the  Philistines  would 
feel  and  the  retribution  they  would  inflict,  and  meanly  sought  to  surrender  Samson 
into  their  hands.  Then  came  Samson's  greatest  achievement,  well  fitted  to  cow 
the  Philistines  if  they  should  be  thinking  of  reprisals — the  slaughter  of  the 
thousand  men  with  the  jaw-bone  of  an  ass.  Like  one  inspired,  Samson  moved 
alone  against  a  whole  nation,  strong  in  the  conviction  that  God  was  with  him,  and 
that  in  serving  Him  there  could  be  no  ground  for  fear.  But  the  old  weakness 
returned  again.  The  lust  of  the  flesh  was  the  unguarded  avenue  to  Samson's 
heart,  and  despite  previous  warnings,  the  foe  once  more  found  entrance  here.  It  is 
a  lust  that  when  it  has  gained  force  has  a  peculiar  tendency  to  blind  and  fascinate, 
and  urge  a  man  onwards,  though  rain  stares  him  in  the  face.    Other  lasts,  as 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.  xm. 

covetousness  or  ambition,  or  the  thirst  of  gold,  are  for  the  most  part  susceptible  of 
contrd;  but  let  a  sensual  lust  once  prevail,  control  by  human  means  becomes 
impos.  ible.  It  dashes  on  like  a  scared  horse,  and  neither  bridle,  nor  cries,  nor 
efforts  of  any  kind,  can  avail  to  arrest  its  course.  So  it  proved  in  the  case  of 
Samson.  He  seemed  to  rush  into  the  very  jaws  of  destruction.  How  sad  to  see 
a  grand  nature  drawn  to  destruction  by  so  coarse  a  bait! — to  see  a  wonderful 
Divine  gift  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  only  to  be  made  their  sport.  Sad 
and  lamentable  fall  it  was  I  Not  merely  a  great  hero  reduced  to  a  slave,  not 
merely  one  who  had  rejoiced  in  his  strength  afflicted  by  blindness,  the  very  symbol 
of  weakness,  but  the  champion  of  his  nation  prostrate,  the  champion  of  his 
nation's  faith  in  the  dust  I  It  would  seem  that  his  affliction  was  useful  to  Samson 
in  the  highest  sense.  With  the  growth  of  his  hair,  the  higher  principles  that 
came  from  above  grew  and  strengthened  in  him  too.  He  remembered  the  destiny 
for  which  he  had  been  designed,  but  which  appeared  to  have  been  defeated.  He 
was  humbled  at  the  thought  of  the  triumph  of  the  uncircumcised,  a  triumph  in 
which  the  honour  of  God  was  concerned,  for  the  Philistines  were  praising  their 
god  and  saying,  "  Our  god  hath  delivered  our  enemy  into  our  hands."  Oh,  if  he 
could  yet  but  fulfil  his  destiny !  It  was  to  vindicate  the  God  of  his  fathers,  to 
save  the  honour  of  his  people,  and  to  secure  to  coming  generations  the  freedom 
and  happiness  which  he  himself  could  never  know,  that  he  laid  himself  on  the 
altar  and  died  a  miserable  death.  Thus  it  appears  that  Samson  was  worthy  of  a 
place  among  those  who,  forgetful  of  self,  gave  themselves  for  the  deliverance  of 
their  country.  Let  the  young  be  induced  to  aim  at  steady,  uniform,  consistent 
service.  It  is  awful  work  when  the  servants  of  God  get  entangled  in  the  toils  of 
the  tempter.  It  is  humbling  to  have  but  a  blotted  and  mutilated  service  to  render 
to  God.  Happy  they  who  are  enabled  to  present  the  offering  of  a  pure  life,  a 
childhood  succeeded  by  a  noble  youth,  and  youth  by  a  consistent  manhood,  and 
manhood  by  a  mellow  and  fragrant  old  age.  These  are  they  which  follow  the 
Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth. 

*'  Boot,  and  stem,  and  blossom  undefiled." 

Samson  shows  ns  with  painful  clearness  what  havoo  and  misery  may  flow  from 
a  single  form  of  sinful  indulgence,  from  one  root  of  bitterness  left  in  the 
soil.      ( W.    G.  Blaikie,  D.D.)  Sa7nson's  gift : — I.  Hebe  was  a   man  of  sub- 

PA88INO  PHYSICAL  STRENGTH.  His  distinction  was,  that  in  splendour  of  muscle 
and  sinew  none  could  approach  him,  and  hence  his  popularity  and  the  high 
position  he  acquired.  In  a  later  age  and  a  more  advanced  state  of  society  it 
would  not  have  enthroned  him  thus.  But  these  are  the  earliest  masters,  these  are 
the  primitive  heroes,  the  men  who  can  do  great  things  with  their  limbs.  After- 
wards, the  dominion  is  taken  from  them  and  given  to  the  largest  brains.  Now, 
Samson  was  simply  mighty  in  muscle  and  sinew.  Unlike  most  of  the  other  judges 
he  does  not  appear  to  have  possessed  the  slightest  military  genius  or  enterprise, 
nor  any  power  of  combining  his  countrymen  in  opposition  to  their  enemies,  or 
inspiring  them  with  spirit  and  desire  to  fight  for  hberty.  There  was  no  general- 
ship in  him,  and  no  gift  for  leading.  He  had  but  massive,  magnificent  hmbs, 
and  went  in,  straightway,  for  applying  them  to  the  help  of  Israel  without  caring 
or  aiming  to  be  more  and  other  than  heaven  had  qualified  him  to  be.  Is  it  not 
a  grand  thing  always  to  perceive  the  line  along  which  we  can  minister,  and  to  be 
willing  to  pursue  it,  and  able  to  keep  to  it,  however  narrow  or  relatively  inferior 
it  may  be.  Not  a  few  would  be  more  successful  and  more  useful  than  they  are 
were  they  but  more  bravely  content  to  be  themselves — did  they  but  accept  more 
unreservedly  the  talent  committed  to  them,  and  study  more  simply  and  indepen- 
dently to  be  faithful  to  it.  Samson's  gift  was  not  much,  was  not  of  the  highest 
kind.  It  was  far  below  that  of  other  judges  in  Israel,  nor  did  it  produce  any 
great  results.  Is  it  not  possible  that  the  reported  mighty  deeds  of  the  redoubtable 
Nazarite  of  Dan  had  something  to  do  in  moving  Hannah  to  set  apart  her  boy,  the 
boy  for  whom  she  had  prayed,  to  be  a  Nazarite  from  his  birth  ?  Samson  may 
have  contributed  to  give  to  Israel  the  greater  Samuel.  "  I,  too,"  he  had  stirred 
the  woman  in  Mount  Ephraim  to  say  to  herself — "  I  too,  would  fain  have  a  son 
devoted  to  work  wonders  in  the  cause  of  God's  people ;  let  me  make  sacred  for 
the  purpose  this  new-born  babe  of  mine  1 "  and  out  of  that  came,  not  a  mere 
repetition  of  the  same  wonder-working  strength,  but  something  infinitely  superior 
— even  the  wisest,  noblest,  and  most  powerful  judge  the  land  had  ever  seen. 


CHAP,  xm.]  JUDGES.  209 

And  so,  often,  they  who  are  doing  faithfully,  in  quite  a  small  way,  on  quite  a 
small  scale,  may  be  secretly  conducive  to  the  awakening  and  inspiring  of 
grander  actors  than  themselves.  There  are  those  who,  with  their  rough  and 
crude  performances,  with  their  honest  yet  blundering  attempts,  with  their  dim 
guesses  and  half-discoveries,  do  prepare  the  way,  and  furnish  the  clue  for 
subsequent  splendid  successes  on  the  part  of  some  who  come  after  them.  IT. 
But  observe  what    Samson's    coxniTEYMEN    thought    of    his    amazlng   physical 

STRENGTH,    AND    HOW   IT    IMPRESSED     AND    AETECTED    THEM.       They    aSCribcd   it   tO    the 

Spirit  of  the  Lord:  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him."  That  was  how 
they  looked  at  it.  Their  mountains  were  to  them  more  than  mountains,  they 
were  the  mountains  of  the  Lord,  and  the  might  of  their  mighty  men  was  the 
might  of  the  Lord.  It  is  worth  cherishing,  this  old  Hebrew  sense  of  the  sacred- 
ness  of  things ;  it  helps  to  make  the  world  a  grander  place,  and  to  enhance  and 
elevate  one's  enjoyment  of  aU  skills  and  powers  displayed  by  men.  Samson's 
chief  value  lay,  perhaps,  after  all,  in  the  one  inspiring  thought  which  his  prowess 
awakened — the  thought  that  God  was  there  ;  for  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be  the 
means  of  starting  in  any  sluggish,  despondent,  or  earth-bound  human  breast  some 
inspiring  thought.  Good  work  it  is,  and  great,  to  be  the  instrument  of  putting 
another,  for  a  while,  into  a  better  and  holier  frame,  of  leading  him  to  be  more 
tender,  more  patient,  more  finely  sympathetic,  or  more  believing  in  the  Divine 
government  of  things,  and  in  the  reality  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  {S.  A.  Tipple.) 
Samson : — All  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable  for 
doctrine,  reproof,  correction,  and  instruction  in  righteousness.  Especially  God 
teaches  us  by  recording  lives  of  men  and  women  like  ourselves,  and  leaving  them 
there  with  their  lessons  staring  us  in  the  face.  L  Consider,  then,  how  low  God's 
PEOPLE  TTAT>  FALLEN  THBouGH  THEIR  UNFAITHFULNESS  TO  HiM,  and  their  many 
departures,  though  they  had  only  been  a  short  time  ago  brought  into  a  land 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey.  Ammon,  Midian,  and  Moab  had  aU  conquered 
them  in  turn.  Now  it  was  the  Philistines,  with  a  little  country  bordering  on  the 
sea  coast,  and  with  five  chief  cities,  and  yet  they  oppressed  God's  people  1  They 
would  not  let  them  have  any  weapons,  and  their  very  ploughs  had  to  be 
sharpened  at  a  Philistine  forge.  They  constantly  made  raids  upon  them.  It  was 
a  sore  humiliation  when  Germany  marched  right  up  to  Paris,  dictated  terms  to 
the  conquered  in  their  own  great  Palace  at  Versailles,  and  made  them  pay  heavily 
before  they  would  go  home.  But  suppose  it  had  been  Belgium  I  And  yet  Philistia 
answered  somewhat  to  that :  so  low  and  weak  do  men  become  when  they  depart 
from  the  hving  God.  But  then  it  was  that  the  Lord  in  wrath  remembered  mercy, 
and  sent  them  Samson,  a  mighty  dehverer.  Deborah  and  Barak  had  delivered 
them  before.  Gideon  and  Jephthah  had  kept  up  the  bright  succession,  and  now 
Samson  entered  into  it,  and  for  a  long  time  made  the  Philistines  tremble.  Never 
were  such  wonders  known  as  he  wrought,  and  the  oppressions  of  the  Philistines 
soon  came  to  an  end.  0  sunny,  strong,  stout-hearted  Samson,  how  much  good 
you  might  have  done  if  you  could  have  ruled  yourself  as  well  as  conquering  your 
foes  !  But  there  he  failed,  and  so  aU  was  a  failure.  He  was  a  Nazarite,  and  so 
never  took  any  wine,  according  to  the  Nazarite  vow,  and  yet  he  was  completely 
overcome  by  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  It  was  not  in  vain  that  the  net  had  been 
spread  in  the  sight  of  the  bird.  He  had  seen  the  wicked  Delilah  and  the  savage 
Phihstines  spreading  it  together,  and  had  been  taken  in  it  just  the  same.  The 
same  razor  that  cut  his  hair,  the  sign  of  his  strength,  could  have  cut  his  throat 
at  any  time.  But  for  a  few  months  he  lingered  on  in  penitence  and  prayer, 
whilst  his  hair  grew  once  more — the  sign,  though  not  the  source,  of  his  strength. 
And  then  came  a  great  day  in  Gaza,  when  they  gathered  to  glorify  their  god 
Dagon  in  thousands.  So  with  one  tremendous  effort  of  his  new-found  strength 
down  came  the  columns,  and  down  came  the  temple,  and  down  came  the  people, 
and  "the  dead  which  he  slew  at  his  death  were  more  than  they  which  he  slew  in 
his  life."  So  when  they  thought  themselves  most  secure  their  sport  was  turned  to 
woe,  and  in  an  hour  when  they  looked  not  for  it  their  destruction  came.  H.  But 
now  let  us  look  at  some  of  the  lessons  which  this  eem-uikable  story  is  designed 
TO  TEACH.  1.  And  the  obvious  one  on  the  face  of  the  whole  narrative  is  the  poor 
figure  that  mere  physical  strength  cuts.  There  are  three  sorts  of  strength — physical, 
intellectual,  and  spiritual — and  the  greatest  of  these  is  spiritual.  If  this  be 
lacking,  the  other  two  are  of  httle  use.  Later  on,  Solomon  was  an  example  of 
how  mental  power  is  of  little  worth  without  true  godliness.  Samson  is  an 
example  of  great  strength  of  body,  but  he  becomes  the  fool  and  the  plaything  of 


210  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  xiii. 

wicked  women.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  attention  paid  to  physical  strength  to-day, 
but  it  is  a  poor  thing  at  the  best.  "  Bodily  exercise  profiteth  little,  but  godliness 
is  profitable  unto  all  things."  We  may  have  very  strong  muscles  and  very  weak 
resolutions,  and  when  the  greatest  strength  is  secured  it  is  very  inferior  to  that  of 
the  gorilla.  God  only  "  began  "  to  deliver  Israel  in  Samson's  day,  it  is  significantly 
said.  The  real  and  effective  deUverance  came  later  on,  when  Samuel,  the  wise 
and  the  good,  judged  Israel  for  a  long  time,  and  David  carried  on  his  moral  and 
spiritual  reformation.  2.  But,  further,  let  us  never  rely  on  certain  moralities  if 
we  are  failing  in  obedience  to  God.  Samson  was  not  devoid  of  all  spiritual 
strength.  He  was  a  Nazarite  from  his  birth,  and  the  vow  of  the  Nazarite,  of 
which  he  is  the  first  example,  included  abstinence  from  wine  and  aU  similar 
drinks.  There  is  a  false  sympathy  as  well  as  a  true,  and  its  influence  is  to 
misinterpret  and  condone  evil.  So  we  are  perpetually  told  by  a  certain  class  of 
writers  that  Charles  I.  may  have  been  a  great  public  sinner,  but  he  had  excellent 
private  virtues.  He  may  have  been,  as  declared  in  his  sentence,  "  a  tyrant,  a 
traitor,  a  murderer,  and  a  public  enemy,"  but  he  was  a  good  husband  and  a  good 
father.  He  broke  his  coronation  oath  a  hundred  times,  but  then  he  always  kept 
his  marriage  vow.  He  was  an  awful  tyrant,  but  he  took  his  httle  son  on  his  knee 
and  kissed  him.  He  was  a  dreadful  liar,  but  he  went  to  the  prayers  in  his  chapel 
sometimes  at  six  in  the  morning.  So,  well  may  Lord  Macaulay  exclaim,  "  If  in  Sie 
most  important  things  we  find  him  to  have  been  selfish,  cruel,  and  deceitful,  we 
will  take  the  liberty  to  call  him  a  bad  man,  in  spite  of  all  his  temperance  at  table 
and  aU  his  regularity  at  chapel."  3.  Let  us  remember  that  the  badge  of  our 
consecration  is  largely  the  pledge  of  our  strength.  4.  Yea,  let  the  very  Dagon- 
worshippers  teach  us  some  such  lesson.  When  Samson  was  caught,  like  some 
wild  beast,  they  all  gathered  together  to  do  honour  to  their  fish-god  Dagon.  It  was 
nothing  to  do  with  Dagon,  but  instead  of  honouring  Delilah  and  the  lords  of  the 
Philistines  who  had  enticed  her,  they  had  a  great  assembly  to  do  honour  to  their 
god.  They  said,  when  they  saw  Samson,  "  Our  god  hath  delivered  into  our  hands 
our  enemy,  and  the  destroyer  of  our  country,  which  slew  many  of  us."  There 
was  not  quite  enough  of  this  in  Samson,  even  when  he  had  his  strength.  When 
he  slew  his  thousand  Philistines  it  was,  "I  have  done  it."  Yes,  we  may  often 
learn  from  those  that  have  not  our  light.  The  Mohammedans  believe  many  a  lie 
and  strong  delusion,  but  this  is  what  Mr.  Wilson  says  of  them  in  "  Uganda  and 
the  Egyptian  Soudan " :  "  These  Arabs  are  most  regular  in  performing  their 
devotions,  even  on  the  march.  I  noticed  frequently  sand  on  their  foreheads,  chins, 
and  noses,  from  their  prostrations  during  prayers.  The  sand  is  never  wiped  off, 
as  it  is  considered  a  mark  of  honour  on  a  believer's  face."  Oh,  let  us  keep  before 
us  the  true  mercies  and  blessings  of  the  true  God,  and  pay  our  vows  unto  the  Most 
High  1  (IF.  J.  Heaton.)  From  weakness  to  strength : — That  child  was  a  dedi- 
cated child.  Could  any  parent  have  a  child,  and  not  dedicate  it?  Could  that 
parent  be  a  Christian  ?  Deal  with  that  little  child  not  as  a  plaything,  but  as  a 
holy  thing  given  yoa  of  God,  and  which  you  have  given  back  to  Him.  Kemember 
it,  my  children  1  You  are  God's  child.  Your  body,  your  mind,  and  your  soul 
belong  to  God.  Remember  it  in  your  play,  in  your  studies,  when  you  get  up  in 
the  morning.  This  "  child  "  was  still  a  growing  child,  when  "  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  began  to  move  him  at  times."  God  takes  the  initiative  with  us  in  everything ; 
and  there  is  no  age  so  tender,  and  no  thought  or  feeling  so  simple,  but  the  Holy 
Spirit  may  be  there.  Is  there  a  boy  or  a  girl  who  could  not  say  that  they  have 
thoughts,  whispers,  little  inward  voices,  drawings  of  heart,  which  they  have  felt 
and  knew  to  be  of  God?  You  will  observe  that  "the  moving  of  the  Spirit"  is 
placed  immediately  after  "and  the  Lord  blessed  him."  The  "moving"  is  the 
"blessing."  We  should  do  well  if  we  always  looked  at  a  good  thought  when 
it  comes  and  say,  "  This  is  God  blessing  me.  This  thought  is  a  benediction." 
You  may  notice  that  "  the  moving  "  was  not  only  dated  as  to  time,  but  dated 
as  respects  the  exact  place.  So  important  a  "moving"  is,  in  God's  sight. 
"  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  began  to  move  him  at  times  in  the  camp  of  Dan  between 
Zorah  and  Eshtaol."  How  precise !  If  we  could  see  that  register  in  heaven,  we 
should  find  them  all  there  in  distinct  order — the  exact  when,  and  the  exact  where, 
the  Holy  Spirit  comes  to  us.  It  would  be  a  solemn  thing  to  confront  that  register. 
Have  you  kept  any  account  ?  We  often  try ;  but  the  number  will  outstretch 
all  our  arithmetic  1  Doubtless  it  was  "  strength  "  which  the  "  moving  of  the  Spirit " 
gave  to  the  young  Samson.  Strength  is  a  special  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  His 
operations  are  always  strengthening.    It  is  what  we  all,  in  our  great  weakness, 


CHAP.  XIV.]  JUDGES.  211 

particularly  want ;  and  therefore  He  particularly  supplies.  For  we  have  to  deal 
with  very  strong  things — a  strong  will ;  a  strong  besetting  sin ;  a  strong  tide  of  evil 
in  us  and  about  us ;  a  strong  invisible  foe !  We  have  to  be  very  thankful  that 
He  who  said,  "  Be  strong  I  "  has  placed  it  among  the  offices  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
"  stablish,  strengthen,  settle  "  us.    {J,  Vaughan,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Vebs.  1-20.  Samson  vent  down  to  Timnath.  —  Samson^s  first  love : — 
In  considering  Samson's  choice  of  a  wife,  we  are  conscious  of  a  feeling  of 
painful  disappointment.  In  choosing  a  Phihstine,  we  begin  to  see  his  lower 
nature  acting  the  tyrant.  But  it  were  well  if  domestic  history  in  modern 
times  did  not  present  many  instances  of  similar  stubbornness.  In  such  matters, 
the  fancy  of  young  people  is  often  the  supreme  law.  Samson's  falling  in  love 
was  in  the  ordinary  way:  "And  he  saw  a  woman  of  Tinmath,"  and  "  she  pleased 
him  well."  We  do  not  wonder  that  his  pious  parents  were  astonished  at  his  wish  to 
take  a  Philistine  woman  to  wife.  They  were  national  enemies.  And  the  angel  had 
said  he  should  deliver  Israel.  They  would  therefore  naturally  inquire,  "  How  is 
this?  Is  our  deliverance  to  begin  with  an  alliance?  We  are  not  to  touch  anything 
unclean  ;  our  child  is  a  Nazarite  ;  and  yet  he  wishes  to  marry  a  heathen  I  This  is 
the  beginning  of  the  riddle."  "Is  there  never  a  woman  among  thy  brethren  ?  "  is 
the  natural  inquiry  of  such  a  father  and  mother.  As  he  was  so  especially 
consecrated  to  God,  it  must  have  seemed  peculiarly  improper  for  him  to  make  such 
an  alliance.  In  seeking  a  Philistine  wife,  even  in  the  most  favourable  view  we  can 
take  of  the  affair  Samson  was  treading  on  doubtful  and  dangerous  ground.  Their 
law  expressly  forbade  the  Israelites  to  marry  among  those  nations  that  were  cursed 
and  devoted  to  destruction.  It  does  not  appear,  however,  that  the  Philistines  were 
numbered  among  the  doomed  Canaanites.  They  were  of  Egyptian  origin.  The 
spirit  of  the  Hebrew  law,  however,  was  plainly  against  such  alliances,  for  the 
Philistines  were  idolaters  and  foreigners.  It  is  true  the  law  that  forbade  an 
Israehte  to  marry  a  heathen  was  a  ceremonial  law,  or  a  police  law — one  that 
related  to  their  national  poUcy.  It  was  not  one  of  the  laws  of  the  decalogue.  It 
was  not  a  moral  law.  It  might  therefore  be  changed  or  suspended.  But  if  the 
Divine  prohibition  against  such  an  alliance  was  repealed  for  the  time,  making  for 
special  reasons  his  case  an  exception,  how  is  it  that  the  historian  does  not  inform 
us  of  this  fact  ?  Why  does  not  Samson  tell  his  parents  that  the  law  is  repealed  in 
this  case  ?  There  is  not  even  a  hint  of  any  such  thing.  The  match  was  of  his 
own  seeking.  But  God,  seeing  Samson's  choice,  determined  to  bring  good  out  of  it. 
— he  determined  that  his  attachment  to  a  Philistine  woman  should  be  overruled, 
so  as  to  be  the  occasion  of  his  beginning  to  deliver  Israel.  (W.  A.  Scott,  D.D.) 
Samson's  marriage ; — 1.  That  the  people  of  God  are  liable  to  imperfections.  They 
are  human,  though  partakers  of  grace.  2.  That  our  lusts  and  passions  are  to  be 
resisted.  Scenes  of  temptation  ought  to  be  avoided,  and  our  greatest  earthly 
joys  ought  to  be  regarded  by  us  as  pregnant  with  temptation,  and  be  carefully 
watched.  3.  That  care  should  be  taken  in  forming  friendships  or  alliances. 
4.  That  a  crooked  policy  does  not  eventually  profit.  Samson's  wife  burnt  by  those 
to  whom  she  betrayed  her  husband.  5.  That  God  frequently  works  good  out  of 
evil ;  and  that  God's  purposes  are  frequently  accompUshed  by  means  of  persons  audi 
events  apparently  least  adapted,  or  even  most  opposed.  6.  That  though  God  may- 
pardon  our  sins,  their  consequences  in  this  life  are  frequently  irremediable.  The 
Spirit  of  God  came  again  upon  Samson,  but  his  eyes  were  never  restored,  and  he 
perished  in  the  destruction  of  his  enemies.  (J.  Bigwood.)  The  choice  of 
a  wife : — Samson,  the  giant,  is  here  asking  consent  of  his  father  and  mother  to 
marriage  with  one  whom  they  thought  unfit  for  him.  He  was  wise  in  asking 
their  counsel,  but  not  wise  in  rejecting  it.  Excuseless  was  he  for  such  a  choice 
in  a  land  and  amid  a  race  celebrated  for  female  loveliness  and  moral  worth,  a 
land  and  a  race  of  which  self-denying  AbigaU,  and  heroic  Deborah,  and  dazzling 
Miriam,  and  pious  Esther,  and  glorious  Euth  were  only  magnificent  specimens. 
There  are  almost  in  every  farmhouse  in  the  country,  in  almost  every  home  of  the 
great  towns,  conscientious  women,  self -sacrificing  women,  holy  women ;  and  mora 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

inexcusable  than  the  Samson  is  that  man  who,  amid  all  this  unparalleled  muni- 
ficence of  womanhood,  marries  a  fool.  That  marriage  is  the  destination  of  the 
human  race  is  a  mistake  that  I  want  to  correct.  There  are  multitudes  who  never 
will  marry,  and  still  greater  multitudes  who  are  not  fit  to  marry.  But  the 
majority  will  marry,  and  have  a  right  to  marry;  and  I  wish  to  say  to  these 
men,  in  the  choice  of  a  wife  fiirst  of  all  seek  Divine  direction.  The  need  of  Divine 
direction  I  argue  from  the  fact  that  so  many  men,  and  some  of  them  strong  and 
wise,  have  wrecked  their  lives  at  this  juncture.  Witness  Samson  and  this  woman 
of  Timnath  !  Witness  John  Wesley,  one  of  the  best  men  that  ever  lived,  united 
to  one  of  the  most  outrageous  of  women,  who  sat  in  City  Eoad  Chapel  making 
mouths  at  him  while  he  preached  !  Especially  is  devout  supplication  needed,  because 
of  the  fact  that  society  is  so  full  of  artificialities  that  men  are  deceived  as  to  whom 
they  are  marrying,  and  no  one  but  the  Lord  knows.  By  the  bliss  of  Pliny,  whose  wife, 
•when  her  husband  was  pleading  in  court,  had  messengers  coming  and  going  to  inform 
her  what  impression  he  was  making;  by  the  joy  of  Grotius,  whose  wife  delivered 
him  from  prison  under  the  pretence  of  having  books  carried  out  lest  they  be  injurious 
to  his  health,  she  sending  out  her  husband  unobserved  in  one  of  the  bookcases ;  by 
the  good  fortune  of  Eoland,  in  Louis's  time,  whose  wife  translated  and  composed 
for  her  husband  while  Secretary  of  the  Interior — talented,  heroic,  wonderful 
Madame  Eoland ;  by  the  happiness  of  many  a  man  who  has  made  intelligent 
choice  of  one  capable  of  being  prime  counsellor  and  companion  in  brightness  and 
in  grief — pray  to  Almighty  God  that  at  the  right  time  and  in  the  right  place  He  will 
send  you  a  good,  honest,  loving,  sympathetic  wife ;  or,  if  she  is  not  sent  to  you, 
that  you  may  be  sent  to  her.  But  prayer  about  this  will  amount  to  nothing  unless 
you  pray  soon  enough.  Wait  until  you  are  fascinated  and  the  equilibrium  of  your 
soul  is  disturbed  by  a  magnetic  exquisite  presence,  and  then  you  will  answer  your 
own  prayers,  and  you  will  mistake  your  own  infatuation  for  the  voice  of  God.  If 
you  have  this  prayerful  spirit  you  will  surely  avoid  all  female  scoffers  at  the 
Christian  religion ;  and  there  are  quite  a  number  of  them  in  aU  communities. 
What  you  want,  0  man !  in  a  wife  is  not  a  butterfly  of  the  sunshine,  not  a 
giggling  nonentity,  not  a  painted  doll,  not  a  gossiping  gadabout,  not  a  mixture  of 
artificialities  which  leave  you  in  doubt  as  to  where  the  sham  ends  and  the  woman 
begins,  but  an  earnest  soul,  one  that  can  not  only  laugh  when  you  laugh,  but  weep 
when  you  weep.  As  far  as  I  can  analyse  it,  sincerity  and  earnestness  are  the 
foundation  of  all  worthy  wifehood.  Get  that,  and  you  get  all.  Fail  to  get  that,  and 
you  get  nothing  but  what  you  will  wish  you  never  had  got.  Don't  make  the  mistake 
that  the  man  of  the  text  made  in  letting  his  eye  settle  the  question  in  which 
coolest  judgment  directed  by  Divine  wisdom  are  all-important.  He  who  has  no 
reason  for  his  wifely  choice  except  a  pretty  face  is  like  a  man  who  should  buy  a 
farm  because  of  the  dahlias  in  the  front  door  yard.  There  are  two  or  three 
circumstances  in  which  the  plainest  wife  is  a  queen  of  beauty  to  her  husband, 
whatever  her  stature  or  profile.  By  financial  panic,  or  betrayal  of  business 
partner,  the  man  goes  down,  and  returning  to  his  home  that  evening  he  says: 
"  I  am  ruined !  I  am  in  disgrace  for  ever !  I  care  not  whether  I  live  or  die." 
After  he  ceases  talking,  and  the  wife  has  heard  all  in  silence,  she  says :  "  Is  that 
aU?  Why,  you  had  nothing  when  I  married  you,  and  you  have  only  come  back 
to  where  you  stai-ted.  If  you  think  that  my  happiness  and  that  of  the  children 
depend  on  these  trappings,  you  do  not  know  me,  though  we  have  lived  together  thirty 
years.  God  is  not  dead  and  if  you  don't  mind,  I  don't  care  a  bit.  What  little  we 
need  of  food  and  raiment  the  rest  of  our  lives  we  can  get,  and  don  t  propose  to  sit 
down  and  mope."  The  husband  looks  up  in  amazement,  and  says,  "  Well,  well, 
you  are  the  greatest  woman  I  ever  saw.  I  thought  you  would  faint  dead  away 
when  I  told  you."  And,  as  he  looks  at  her,  all  the  glories  of  physiognomy  in  the 
Court  of  Louis  XV.  on  the  modern  fashion-plates  are  tame  as  compared  with  the 
superhuman  splendours  of  that  woman's  face.  There  is  another  time  when  the 
plainest  wife  is  a  queen  of  beauty  to  her  husband.  She  has  done  the  work 
of  life.  She  has  reared  her  children  for  God  and  heaven,  and  though  some 
of  them  may  be  a  little  wild,  they  will  yet  come  back,  for  God  has  promised. 
She  is  dying,  and  her  husband  stands  by.  They  think  over  the  years  of  their 
companionship,  the  weddings  and  the  burials,  the  ups  and  the  downs,  the 
successes  and  the  failures.  They  talk  over  the  goodness  of  God,  and  His 
faithfulness  to  children's  children.  She  has  no  fear  about  going.  Gone  1  As  one 
of  the  neighbours  takes  the  old  man  by  the  arm  gently  and  says :  "  Come,  you  had 
better  go  into  the  next  room  and  rest,"  he  says,  "  Wait  a  moment ;  I  must  take  one 


CHAP.  xiT.]  JUDGES.  213 

more  look  at  that  face  and  at  those  hands  I  Beautiful !  Beautiful ! "  (T.  De 
Witt  Talmage.)  It  was  of  the  Lord. — God  overrules  evil  far  good: — 1.  This 
verse  has  been  very  strangely  and  very  unfortunately  misunderstood  by  many.  It 
has  been  thought  to  mean — (1)  That  Samson  was  moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to 
desire  this  marriage;  and — (2)  that  Samson  desired  to  enter  into  it  for  the  pui-pose  of 
finding  occasion  to  quarrel  with  the  Philistines.  2.  This  view  seems  open  to  three 
fatal  objections.  (1)  The  silence  of  Samson  about  any  such  movement  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  (2)  It  makes  God  inspire  Samson  to  go  contrary  to  the  spirit  of 
His  own  law.  (3)  It  is  opposed  to  the  whole  spirit  of  the  narrative,  which 
impresses  one  with  the  idea  that  Samson  was  sincere  in  his  passion.  3.  The 
marriage  was  of  God,  as  the  conquest  of  Nebuchadnezzar  or  the  treachery  of  Judas, 
inasmuch  as  He  permitted  it  and  overruled  it  for  bringing  Samson  into  collision 
with  the  Philistines,  and  introducing  him  to  the  grand  work  of  his  hf  e.  {Thomas  Kirk.) 
A  young  lion  .  .  .  and  he  rent  him. — Bodily  strength : — 1.  Physical  strength  is 
not  an  index  of  moral  power.  That  this  man  was  mighty  the  lion  and  the  Philis- 
tines found  out,  and  yet  he  was  the  subject  of  petty  revenges,  and  was  ungianted 
by  base  passion.  Oh !  it  is  a  shame  that  so  much  of  the  work  of  the  Church 
and  the  world  has  been  done  by  invalids,  while  the  stout  and  the  healthy 
men,  like  great  hulks,  were  rotting  in  the  sun.  Eichard  Baxter,  spending  his 
life  in  the  door  of  the  tomb,  and  yet  writing  a  hundred  volumes  and 
starting  uncounted  people  on  the  way  to  the  saints'  everlasting  rest.  Giants 
in  body,  be  giants  in  soul !  2.  Strength  may  do  a  great  deal  of  damage  if  it  is 
misdirected.  To  pay  one  miserable  bet  which  this  man  had  lost,  he  robs  and  slays 
thirty  people.  As  near  as  I  can  tell,  much  of  his  hfe  was  spent  in  animalism, 
and  he  is  a  type  of  a  large  class  of  people  in  all  ages  who,  either  giants  in  body, 
or  giants  in  mind,  or  giants  in  social  position,  or  giants  in  wealth,  use  that  strength 
for  making  the  world  worse  instead  of  making  it  better.  Who  can  estimate  the 
soul-havoc  wrought  by  Eousseau  going  forward  with  the  very  enthusiasm  of  iniquity 
and  his  fiery  imagination  affecting  all  the  impulsive  natures  of  his  time?  Or 
wrought  by  David  Hume,  who  spent  his  lifetime,  as  a  spider  spends  the  summer, 
in  weaving  silken  webs  to  catch  the  unwary  ?  Or  by  Yoltaire,  who  marshalled  a 
host  of  sceptics  in  his  time  and  led  them  on  down  into  a  deeper  darkness  ? 
3.  A  giant  may  be  overthrown  by  a  sorceress.  4.  The  greatest  physical  strength 
must  crumble  and  give  way.  He  may  have  had  a  longer  grave  and  a  wider 
grave  than  you  and  I  wiU  have,  but  the  tomb  was  his  terminus.  (T.  De  Witt 
Talmage.)  Brawn  and  muscle  consecrated : — We  are  often  told  that  people 
must  give  account  for  their  wealth,  and  so  they  must ;  and  they  must  give  account 
for  their  intelligence,  and  so  they  must ;  but  no  more  than  they  must  give  account 
for  the  employment  of  their  physical  organism.  Shoulder,  arm,  brain,  knee,  foot, 
all  the  forces  that  God  has  given  us — are  we  using  them  to  make  the  world  better 
or  make  it  worse?  Those  who  have  strong  arms,  those  who  have  elastic  step, 
those  who  have  clear  eye,  those  who  have  steady  brain,  those  are  the  men  who 
are  going  to  have  the  mightiest  accounts  to  render.  What  are  we  doing  with  the 
faculties  that  God  has  given  us  ?  (ibid.)  Resist  the  devil: — Sudden,  surprising 
danger  is  brought  before  us  here.  How  true  that  is  of  the  life  of  young  men  still. 
Are  there  not  temptations  that  leap  upon  us — spiritual  wickednesses  that  come 
upon  us  unawares?  This  Samson  was  going  down  to  Timnath  on  thoughts  of 
love  intent,  never  dreaming  of  such  danger.  A  young  Uon  roared  against  him.  I 
thank  God  for  the  roar — for  the  sins  that  are  unmistakable.  You  know  where  you 
are.  But  what  are  we  to  do  with  such  temptations  ?  First  of  aU,  do  not  run. 
Samson  had  great  strength;  he  could  stand  and  fight  tiU  his  weapon  clave 
to  his  fist ;  but  I  rather  think  running  was  not  in  his  line.  There  was  only  one 
thing — death  or  victory;  and  he  ran  aU  risks,  and  flung  himself  on  the  brute. 
So  with  certain  sins.  Do  not  dally  with  them ;  do  not  dodge — you  cannot.  Do 
not  try,  as  some  one  has  said,  to  think  them  down.  It  is  utterly  impossible ;  it  is 
neither  philosophical  nor  anything  else.  There  is  just  one  thing  to  do — accept 
them.  Take  them  as  they  are,  in  all  their  ugliness  and  aU  their  ferocity,  and  do 
not  be  afraid,  but  by  faith  and  prayer  imbrue  your  hand  in  their  blood.  Grip  them, 
bring  them  out,  face  them,  and  slay  them  before  the  Lord.  And  do  it  quickly ; 
make  sure  work  of  it — no  half -work  of  these  lusts,  like  springing  Hons,  that  war  against 
the  soul.  See  how  heaven  and  earth  are  mingled  in  that  conflict.  In  order  to  tell 
this  story  completely,  you  have  to  bring  in  the  supernatural — •'  The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  came  mightUy  upon  him."  Now,  that  control  by  the  Spirit  must  be  known  by 
us ;  His  power  must  be  experienced.    Without  Him  ye  can  do  nothing.    Without 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

Him,  the  lion-like  temptations,  or  the  snake-like  temptations,  will  lay  hold  of  you 
and  destroy  you.  But  with  the  Spirit  of  God  you  are  invincible ;  you  have  got  the 
secret  of  the  old  warrior  in  classic  story,  who  as  often  as  he  touched  mother-earth 
found  his  strength  return  to  him.  "Stand,"  says  Paul.  "How?"  you  ask. 
"  Praying  always,  with  all  prayer  and  supplication  in  the  Spirit,"  he  replies.  But 
notice  further,  "  there  was  nothing  in  his  hand."  No  sword,  no  staff. 
An  adumbration,  a  hint  of  the  New  Testament  again :  "  The  weapons  of 
our  warfare  are  not  carnal,  but  spiritual."  To  the  eye  of  sense,  the  most 
defenceless  babe  in  London  is  the  young  fellow,  full  of  flesh  and  blood,  who  wants 
to  hold  the  faith  and  fear  of  Jesus  Christ.  Wonder  of  wonders  1  He  is  not 
defenceless.  Marvel  of  marvels,  joy  of  heaven,  disappointment  of  hell,  ho  is  not 
overcome  1  There  are  men  and  women  to-day  living  a  kind  of  salamander 
life;  living  in  the  flame,  with  the  roar  of  the  lion,  and  the  hiss  of  the 
serpent,  and  the  rattle  of  the  snake,  for  ever  in  their  ears  ;  and  they  are  not  dead 
yet,  and  they  never  shall  be.  Yet  they  have  "nothing  in  then-  hands."  How, 
then,  do  they  live  when  others  are  pinned  to  the  earth  ?  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  ia 
with  them.  "  He  told  not  his  father  or  mother  what  he  had  done."  For  a  young 
Christian  that  is  very  helpful.  Samson  had  his  fine  points  about  him.  Like  a 
great  many  other  giants,  he  was  a  modest  fellow.  He  bore  his  honours  meekly. 
You  may  be  like  Samson.  You  may  be  a  deal  stronger  and  brighter  than  your 
fellows,  and  you  may  be  able  to  cope  with  difficulties  that  overwhelm  others.  Cope 
with  them,  and  hold  your  tongue.  Perhaps  you  have  escaped  a  lot  of  things  that 
others  have  not  escaped.  But  remember  Samson.  He  did  not  halloo  ;  and  it  well 
became  him,  for  he  was  not  out  of  the  wood.  Take  care ;  there  is  no  cause  for 
fear  ;  but  there  is  no  cause  for  boasting.  Then  another  word  from  the  eighth  verse : 
"After  a  time  he  returned,  and  he  turned  aside,"  &c.  The  picture  is  Samson 
going  on  eating  that  sweetmeat,  and  being  refreshed  by  it ;  and  you  see  at 
once  the  application  of  it.  Sin  faced,  mastered,  becomes  a  very  eating  and 
drinking  as  we  go  on  our  way.  See  how  the  believer's  path  is  a  path  going  on 
from  strength  to  strength.  Crucifying  the  flesh  is  honey-sweetness.  Do  this  to 
your  temptations :  get  at  the  honey  in  the  heart  of  their  carcase  when  you  have 
slain  them  ;  thereby  reading  Samson's  riddle,  "  Out  of  the  eater  comes  forth  meat, 
and  out  of   the  strong  comes  forth  sweetness."      {J.   McNeill.)  The  sweet 

memory  of  triumph: — 1.  The  victory  over  the  lion  of  unbelief.  2.  The  lion  of 
temptation.  3.  The  lion  of  a  rebellious  spirit.  4.  Death,  the  last  enemy,  shall 
also  be  vanquished.  [T.  Davies.)  He  told  not  his  father  or  his  mother. — 
Estrangement  from  home  influences: — AH  this  was  bad  and  dangerous.  For 
by  the  constitution  of  what  I  take  to  have  been  his  passionately  kind  and 
cordial,  as  well  as  most  murderously  resentful  nature,  he  must  have  company  and 
friends,  and  even  confidants ;  and  not  finding  them  at  home,  he  must  go  and  seek 
them  out  for  himself  abroad,  and  be  thus  ever  in  danger  of  casting  himself  into  the 
ai'ms  of  those  who  lure  him  only  to  destruction.  K  you  are  taking  up  with  other 
friends  more  readily,  and  are  begun  already  to  be  more  communicative  to  other 
counsellors  out  of  doors,  shutting  your  mouth,  because  you  are  more  than  willing 
now  to  shut  your  ears  to  such  godly  counsel  as,  both  by  their  natural  anxiety  and 
their  Christian  vows,  they  find  it  incumbent  on  them  to  give — if  you  feel  impatient 
of  such  restraint,  and  would  even  presume  to  treat  it  not  a  little  imperiously, 
having  chosen  for  yourselves  counsellors  of  another  spirit,  and  more  likely  to  concur 
with  the  desires  and  devices  of  your  own  heart,  which  are  many,  then  just  see  here 
how  like  sleepwalkers,  with  eyes  glistening  and  staring  wide,  yet  visionless  as  the 
blind,  are  you  treading  now  on  the  very  brink  of  that  hidden  gulf,  into  which  if  you 
fall  but  once,  it  may  be  never  to  rise  again.  {John  Brtice,  D.D.)  Honey  in  the 
carcase. — Honey  out  of  the  dead  lion: — I.  It  is  through  Divine  strength 
THAT  victories  ARE  WON.  1.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  mightily  on  Samson. 
God  trains  men  for  the  work  they  have  to  do  ;  if  they  are  to  be  deliverers,  saviours, 
then  their  training  shall  be  physical — as  in  the  case  of  Samson ;  his  conflict  with 
the  lion  would  prepare  him  for  repeated  encounters  with  the  Philistines.  2.  It  was 
when  Samson  was  about  to  enter  public  life  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon 
him.  It  is  in  the  freshness  of  youth,  before  the  mind  is  saturated  with  worldliness 
and  the  heart  incrustated  with  selfishness,  that  there  are  Divine  visitations. 
II.  Life  is  the  history  of  victory  and  defeat.  A  man  may  slay  a  lion,  but  have 
no  control  over  himself ;  he  may  be  physically  strong,  but  morally  weak.  Many  of 
our  defeats  are  to  be  traced  to  our  self-confidence  and  self-love,  to  our  forgetful- 
ness  of  God.    If  we  have  won  any  victories,  they  are  to  be  traced  to  Divine  grac« 


CHAP.  XIV.]  JUDGES.  215 

and  strength.  III.  Past  victories  ake  not  to  be  forgotten.  On  a  subsequent 
occasion  Samson  turned  aside  to  see  the  lion  he  had  slain.  God  will  not  have  us 
forget  the  past,  or  the  way  by  which  we  have  reached  our  present  position  (Deut. 
viii.  2-5).  All  our  Sabbaths,  and  sacraments,  and  sermons,  are  always  saying  to 
us,  "  Thou  shalt  remember."  They  remind  us  of  the  great  victory  gained  for  ua 
by  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  in  which  we  are  permitted  to  claim  our  part. 
IV.  We  get  strength  and  encouragement  from  the  remembrance  of  past  victories. 
If  ever  you  have  slain  a  lion,  be  sure  that  eventually  it  will  yield  you  honey. 
You  have  overcome  doubt — you  have  strengthened  faith.  You  have  vanquished 
sin — ^you  have  increased  holiness.  You  have  conquered  fear — you  have  gained 
strength.  We  learn,  too,  that  there  is  a  Divine  power  ever  at  work  in  this  world. 
From  the  secret  place  of  thunder  come  forth  the  streams  that  make  glad  the  world. 
The  light  is  born  in  darkness.  Good  comes  out  of  evil.  {H.  J.  Eevis.)  Hands 
full  of  honey  : — What  a  type  we  have  here  of  our  Divine  Lord  and  Master,  Jesus,  the 
conqueror  of  death  and  hell  I  He  has  destroyed  the  lion  that  roared  upon  us  and 
upon  Him.  He  has  shouted  "  Victory !  "  over  all  our  foes.  To  each  one  of  us  who 
believe  in  Him  He  gives  the  luscious  food  which  He  has  prepared  for  us  by  the 
overthrow  of  our  foes ;  He  bids  us  come  and  eat,  that  we  may  have  our  lives 
sweetened  and  our  hearts  filled  with  joy.  The  Samson  type  may  well  serve  as  the 
symbol  of  every  Christian  in  the  world.  I.  The  believer's  life  has  its  conflicts. 
Learn,  then,  that  if,  like  Samson,  you  are  to  be  a  hero  for  Israel,  you  must 
early  be  inured  to  suffering  and  daring  in  some  form  or  other.  1.  These 
conflicts  may  often  be  very  terrible.  By  a  young  lion  is  not  meant  a  whelp,  but  a 
lion  in  the  fulness  of  its  early  strength;  not  yet  slackened  in  its  pace,  or  curbed  in 
its  fury  by  growing  years.  Fresh  and  furious,  a  young  lion  is  the  worst  kind  of 
beast  that  a  man  can  meet  with.  Let  us  expect  as  followers  of  Christ  to  meet  with 
strong  temptations,  fierce  persecutions,  and  severe  trials,  which  will  lead  to  stern 
conflicts.  These  present  evils  are  for  our  future  good  :  their  terror  is  for  our 
teaching.  2.  These  conflicts  come  early,  and  they  are  very  terrible  ;  and,  moreover, 
they  happen  to  us  when  we  are  least  prepared  for  them.  Samson  was  not  hunting 
for  wild  beasts  ;  he  was  engaged  on  a  much  more  tender  business.  He  was  walking 
in  the  vineyards  of  Timnath,  thinking  of  anything  but  lions,  and  "  behold,"  says 
the  Scripture,  "  a  young  lion  roared  against  him."  It  was  a  remarkable  and 
startling  occurrence.  Samson  stood  an  unarmed,  unarmoured  man  in  the  presence 
of  a  raging  beast.  So  we  in  our  early  temptations  are  apt  to  think  that  we  have  no 
weapon  for  the  war,  and  we  do  not  know  what  to  do.  We  are  made  to  cry  out,  "  I  am 
unprepared  !  How  can  I  meet  this  trial  ?  "  Herein  will  the  splendour  of  faith  and 
glory  of  God  be  made  manifest,  when  you  shall  slay  the  lion,  and  yet  it  shall  be  said 
of  you  that  "  he  had  nothing  in  his  hand  " — nothing  but  that  which  the  world  sees 
not  and  values  not.  3.  I  invite  you  to  remember  that  it  was  by  the  Spirit  of  God  that 
the  victory  was  won.  We  read,  ••  And  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  mightily  upon  him, 
and  he  rent  him  as  he  would  have  rent  a  kid."  Let  the  Holy  Spirit  help  us  in  our 
trouble,  and  we  need  neither  company  nor  weapon  ;  but  without  Him  what  can  we 
do  ?  II.  The  believer's  life  has  its  sweets.  What  is  more  joyful  than  the  joy 
of  a  saint !  1.  Of  these  joys  there  is  plenty.  We  have  such  a  living  swarm  of  bees 
to  make  honey  for  us  in  the  precious  promises  of  God,  that  there  is  more  delight  in 
store  than  any  of  us  can  possibly  realise.  There  is  infinitely  more  of  Christ  beyond 
our  comprehension  than  we  have  as  yet  been  able  to  comprehend.  How  blessed  to 
receive  of  His  fulness,  to  be  sweetened  with  His  sweetness,  and  yet  to  know  that 
infinite  goodness  still  remains  1  2.  Our  joys  are  often  found  in  the  former  places 
of  our  conflicts.  We  gather  our  honey  out  of  the  hons  which  have  been  slain  for 
us  or  by  us.  There  is,  first,  our  sin.  A  horrible  lion  that  1  But  it  is  a  dead  lion, 
for  gi-ace  has  much  more  abounded  over  abounding  sin.  "  I  have  blotted  out  thy 
sins  like  a  cloud,  and  as  a  thick  cloud  thine  iniquities."  Here  is  choice  honey  for 
you !  The  next  dead  lion  is  conquered  desire.  When  a  wish  has  arisen  in  the 
heart  contrary  to  the  mind  of  God,  and  you  have  said,  "  Down  with  you  !  I  will 
pray  you  down.  You  used  to  master  me ;  I  feU  into  a  habit  and  I  was  soon  overcome 
by  you ;  but  I  will  not  again  yield  to  you.  By  God's  grace  I  will  conquer  you  " — 
I  say,  when  at  last  you  have  obtained  the  victory  such  a  sweet  contentment 
perfumes  your  heart  that  you  are  filled  with  joy  unspeakable,  and  you  aie  devoutly 
grateful  to  have  been  helped  of  the  Spirit  of  God  to  master  your  own  spirit.  Thus 
you  have  again  eaten  spiritual  honey.  IH.  The  BELrEVER's  life  leads  him  to 
communicate  of  these  sweets.  As  soon  as  we  have  tasted  the  honey  of  forgiven 
sin  and  perceived  the  bUss  that  God  has  laid  up  for  His  people  in  Christ  Jesus,  we 

34 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.ip.  xiv. 

feel  it  to  be  both  our  duty  and  our  privilege  to  communicate  the  good  news  to 
others.  Here  let  my  ideal  statue  stand  in  our  midst :  the  strong  man,  conqueror  of 
the  lion,  holding  forth  his  hands  fuU  of  honey  to  his  parents.  We  are  to  be 
modelled  according  to  this  fashion.  1.  We  do  this  immediately.  The  moment 
a  man  is  converted,  if  he  would  let  himself  alone,  his  instincts  would  lead  him  to 
tell  his  fellows.  2.  The  believer  will  do  this  first  to  those  who  are  nearest  to 
him.  Samson  took  the  honey  to  his  father  and  mother,  who  were  not  far  away. 
With  each  of  us  the  most  natural  action  would  be  to  tell  a  brother  or  a  sister  or  a 
fellow-workman,  or  a  bosom  friend.  It  will  be  a  great  joy  to  see  them  eating  the 
honey  which  is  so  pleasant  to  our  own  palate.  3.  The  believer  will  do  this  as  best 
he  can.  Samson,  you  see,  brought  the  honey  to  his  father  and  mother  in  a  rough- 
and-ready  style,  going  on  eating  it  as  he  brought  it.  Carry  the  honey  in  your 
hands,  though  it  drip  all  round  :  no  hurt  will  come  of  the  spilling ;  there  are  always 
little  ones  waiting  for  such  drops.  If  you  were  to  make  the  gospel  drip  about 
everywhere,  and  sweeten  all  things,  it  would  be  no  waste,  but  a  blessed  gain  to  all 
around.  Therefore,  I  say  to  you,  tell  of  Jesus  Christ  as  best  you  can,  and  never 
cease  to  do  so  while  Ufe  lasts.  4.  But  then  Samson  did  another  thing,  and  every  true 
believer  should  do  it  too  :  he  did  not  merely  tell  his  parents  about  the  honey,  but  he 
took  them  some  of  it.  If  your  hands  serve  God,  if  your  heart  serves  God,  if  your 
face  beams  with  joy  in  the  service  of  God,  you  will  carry  grace  wherever  you  go, 
and  those  who  see  you  wUl  perceive  it.  5.  Take  note,  also,  that  Samson  did 
this  with  great  modesty.  In  telling  your  own  experience  be  wisely  cautious.  Say 
much  of  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  you,  but  say  little  of  what  you  have  done 
for  the  Lord.     (C.    H.   Spurgeon.)  He  told  not  them  that  he  had  taken 

the  honey. — Samson's  silence  respecting  the  honey : — Two  reasons  may  be 
given  for  it.  1.  To  secure  that  his  parents  might  eat  the  honey.  According 
to  the  ceremonial  law,  the  honeycomb,  from  it^  having  been  in  contact 
with  a  dead  body,  was  unclean,  and  the  likelihood  is  that,  if  the  parents 
of  Samson  had  known  the  fact,  they  would  have  refused  to  eat  it.  Such 
a  motive  for  his  silence  would  be  indeed  discreditable ;  but  it  does  not  seem  likely 
that  such  minute  particulars  of  ceremonial  observance,  in  that  degenerate  period, 
would  be  present  to  the  mind  of  a  young  man  of  about  nineteen  years  of  age. 
2.  The  other  reason — and  probably  the  true  one — is,  that  he  might  ensure  the 
success  of  his  riddle  at  the  marriage  feast.  Samson  was  gifted  with  a  quick  wit 
and  ready  invention.  He  saw,  as  he  walked  along,  how  the  circumstance  of 
getting  the  honey  out  of  the  carcase  of  the  Hon  might  be  turned  into  a  riddle  for 
the  entertainment  of  his  guests,  and  so,  in  order  to  make  sure  that  no  inkling  of 
it  might  get  abroad,  he  resolved  to  keep  it  a  secret.  He  was  manifestly  a  young 
man  who  could  keep  his  own  counsel.  (Thomas  Kirk.)  I  will  now  put  forth  a 
riddle  unto  you. — Samson's  riddle : — By  the  goodness  of  God  those  things  which 
once  appeared  unpleasant  or  injurious  become  real  blessings.  1.  This  general 
observation  may  be  applied  to  those  painful  convictions  and  apprehensions  which 
sometimes  harass  the  minds  of  beginners  in  religion.  Many  who  have  felt  the 
deepest  sorrow  for  sin  have  afterwards  possessed  the  greatest  degree  of  religious 
joy,  and  have  "  loved  much,  because  they  knew  that  much  was  forgiven."  Thus, 
then,  "  Out  of  the  eater  came  forth  meat,  and  out  of  the  strong  came  forth  sweet- 
ness." 2,  The  same  may  be  said  of  divers  temptations  with  which  a  Christian  may 
be  exercised.  3.  It  is  the  lot  of  many,  of  very  many  good  people,  to  be  poor. 
Yet,  even  here,  they  gather  honey  from  the  carcase  of  the  lion ;  for  their  various 
troubles  give  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  humble  resignation  to  the  sovereign  will 
of  God.  Constant  dependence  upon  God  is  thereby  promoted.  Thankfulness  is 
another  fruit  of  sanctified  afiliction ;  for  such  is  the  ingratitude  of  our  hearts, 
that  we  are  scarcely  sensible  of  the  value  of  our  mercies  but  by  the  loss  or  suspension 
of  them.  Another  advantage  which  may  be  gained  from  poverty  is,  that  the 
Christian  is  led  to  seek  the  things  that  are  above.  4.  Apply  this  sentiment  to  the 
person  who  is  grievously  afflicted  with  severe  pains  and  bodily  afflictions.  "  We 
have  borne  chastisement ;  we  mil  not  offend  any  more,"  then  is  the  purpose  of 
Divine  goodness  in  the  visitation  accomplished  (Psa.  cxix.  67,  71).  6.  Domestic 
trials  may  produce  the  same  advantages  (1  Cor,  vii.  29-31).  6.  The  same  may  be 
said  with  regard  to  disappointments  in  our  worldly  affairs.  7.  Persecution  is 
another  of  those  evils  to  which  the  people  of  God  are  exposed.  As  long  as  there  are 
men  "  born  after  the  flesh,"  there  will  be  hatred  and  opposition  against  those  who 
are  "  born  after  the  Spirit."  But  out  of  this  unpromising  lion  sweet  honey  has 
been  procured.     8.  The  subject  may  even  be  extended  to  death  itself.     The  death 


CHAP.  XIV.]  JUDGES.  217 

of  Christ,  though  "  according  to  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of 
God,"  was  effected  by  the  cruel  hands  of  wicked  men.  But  bitter  as  seemed  this 
event  to  the  disciples,  what  ever  produced  so  much  sweetness  ?  Apply  this  also  to 
the  death  of  believers.  Nothing  to  nature  is  so  formidable  as  death  ;  it  is  the  king 
of  terrors;  and  through  the  fear  of  it,  many  are  aU  their  lifetime  subject  to 
bondage.  Such,  indeed,  is  the  carcase  of  the  lion ;  but  search  and  see :  is  there  no 
honey  within  ?  Is  there  nothing  to  lessen  the  terrors  of  the  tomb,  and  reconcile 
man  to  the  grave  ?  Yes ;  there  is  much  every  way.  The  sting  of  death  is 
extracted.  And  not  only  so,  but  death  is  gain.  The  Christian  leaves  a  trouble- 
some world,  a  diseased  body,  a  disordered  soul,  to  be  with  Christ,  to  behold  His 
glory,  to  be  perfectly  like  Him.  Conclusion  :  1.  Let  us  be  led  to  adore  the  wisdom 
and  goodness  of  God  in  bringing  good  out  of  evil.  2.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  painful 
to  reflect  on  the  state  of  worldly  and  wicked  men,  who  are  unhappily  so  entirely 
under  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan  that  they  continually  extract  evil  even  from 
good.  3.  What  an  argument  may  we  derive  from  this  subject  for  the  commitment 
of  ourselves  and  all  our  concerns  into  the  hands  of  an  all-wise  and  all-gracious  God  I 
(G.  Burder.)  Fruits  of  conflict : — I.  In  the  history  of  civilisation  we  see  how  honey 
comes  from  the  lion,  rich  fruitage  from  conflict.  Men  at  first  dwelt  in  caves.  Navies 
■were  then  only  in  forests,  and  railways  in  the  mountains.  Men's  necessities  goaded 
to  effort.  Even  in  Eden  sinless  man  toiled ;  much  more  must  sinful  man  toil. 
Think  of  the  poverty  and  pains  of  Elias  Howe,  through  long  years  of  weary  effort, 
before  he  perfected  the  sewing-machine  ;  of  the  obscurity  and  penury  out  of  which 
the  great  emancipator  came  who  rent  the  lion  of  American  slavery  and  rescued  the 
slave ;  and  of  Him  whom  we  worship  as  the  Saviour  of  the  race — if  you  would 
justly  estimate  the  value  and  significance  of  disciplinary  trial.  II.  The  conflicts 
OF  the  Chuech  illustrate  the  same.  In  the  glens  and  on  the  moors  of  Scotland 
thousands  have  fallen  martyrs  in  struggles  against  superstition,  &c.  III.  Indi- 
vidual HISTORY.  You  are  a  business  man.  The  prosperity  you  have  has  been 
gained  by  toil.  These  are  the  sweets  that  came  from  the  lion  of  poverty  and  toil. 
You  are  a  parent,  and  have  suffered  tribulation  in  the  loss  of  dear  ones.  Good 
comes  out  of  it  if  you  love  God,  somehow,  as  purity  comes  to  the  atmosphere  after 
the  thunderstorm.  I  saw  recently,  in  the  gallery  of  the  Eoyal  Academy  in  Edin- 
burgh, the  face  of  St.  Paul  painted  with  an  encircling  cloud  full  of  angels.  It 
held  me  as  no  other  picture,  and  I  thought  that  every  cloud  which  darkens  the 
believer's  way  is  fuU  of  angels,  if  he  did  but  know  it.  Conclusion :  There  are  three 
ways  of  conquering  a  foe — you  may  knock,  talk,  or  live  him  down.  Choose  the 
last.  Though  others  are  bad,  be  yourselves  good.  {C.  Easton.)  The  wedding 
riddle  and  tragedy  : — 1.  I  do  not  see  anything  wrong  in  Samson  making  a  feast, 
as  the  young  men  used  to  do.  It  belonged  to  the  bride  and  her  friends  to  say  what 
its  details  should  be.  In  so  far,  then,  as  he  could  comply  with  the  customs  of  her 
people  without  sinning  we  find  no  fault.  The  Bible  does  not  require  us  to  be 
proud,  mopish,  rude,  supercilious,  or  iU-behaved.  The  want  of  genuine  politeness 
is  no  proof  of  true  religion.  2.  At  weddings  it  was  common  to  have  games, 
riddles,  and  the  like  amusements.  An  old  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  is  quoted  by 
Dr.  Clark  as  saying  that  it  was  "  a  custom  among  the  ancient  Greeks  to  propose, 
at  their  festivals,  what  were  called  griplioi,  riddles,  enigmas,  or  very  obscure 
sayings,  both  curious  and  difficult,  and  to  give  a  recompense  to  those  who  found 
them  out,  which  generally  consisted  either  in  a  festive  crown  or  a  goblet  full  of 
wine.  Those  who  failed  to  solve  them  were  condemned  to  drink  a  large  portion  of 
fresh  water,  or  of  wine  mingled  with  sea  water,  which  they  were  compelled  to  take 
down  at  one  draught,  without  drawing  their  breath,  their  hands  being  tied  behind 
their  backs.  Sometimes  they  gave  the  crown  to  the  deity  in  honour  of  whom  the 
festival  was  made ;  and  if  none  could  solve  the  riddle,  the  reward  was  given  to  him 
who  proposed  it."  It  were  a  much  better  way  to  spend  our  time  at  seasons  of 
merry-making  in  expounding  enigmas  and  riddles  than  in  slandering  our 
neighbours  or  in  gluttony  or  excessive  drink.  At  our  weddings  let  there  be 
entertainment  for  the  mind,  as  well  as  employment  for  the  palate.  Our  social 
habits  and  opportunities  should  be  diligently  employed  in  doing  and  receiving 
good.  At  the  wedding  all  goes  on  merrily.  Sport  and  play  are  in  the  ascendant. 
The  cup-questions  were  as  sparkling  as  the  cups.  Many  were  the  passages  at 
wit.  At  last  Samson  is  aroused.  He  says,  "  I  will  propose  a  riddle."  If  they 
solve  his  riddle,  he  is  to  pay  thirty  changes  of  raiment.  If  they  fail,  they  are  to 
pay  him  one  change  of  raiment  apiece.  Samson  had  an  odd  humour  generally  of 
pitting  himself  against  great  odds.    No  doubt  he  thought  himself  sure  of  victory. 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nv, 

3.  The  solution  is  given  at  the  appointed  honr.  Josephns  paraphrases 
the  interview  thus :  "  They  said  to  Samson,  '  Nothing  is  more  disagreeable  than  a 
lion  to  those  that  light  on  it,  and  nothing  is  sweeter  than  honey  to  those  that  make 
use  of  it. '  To  which  he  replied :  '  Nothing  is  more  deceitful  than  a  woman ;  for 
such  was  the  perfidious  person  that  discovered  my  interpretation  to  you."  He 
meant,  doubtless,  that  without  the  assistance  of  his  wife  they  could  not  have  told 
the  riddle.  And  on  this  plea,  he  might  have  disputed  whether  they  were  entitled 
to  the  forfeit.  4.  Though  betrayed  and  badly  treated,  Samson  scorns  to  complain, 
but  goes  right  off  to  procure  the  means  to  pay  his  forfeit.  He  was  neither  a  cruel 
husband  nor  a  repudiator.  5.  Samson's  "  anger  was  kindled,  and  he  went  up  to 
his  father's  house."  Anger  is  as  natural  as  a  smile.  His  wife's  treachery  was  a 
just  cause  of  anger,  and  his  going  up  to  his  father's  house  at  this  time  showed 
unusual  prudence  and  forbearance.  When  he  returned  to  Timnath  to  pay  the 
forfeit,  he  seems  not  to  have  seen  his  wife.  But  lordly  as  Achilles,  and  quite 
as  angry  and  proud  in  his  self -consciousness  of  unmerited  wrong  and  impulsive 
ferocity,  he  strides  off  home  to  his  father  and  mother.  It  was  not  wise  for  him  to 
trust  himself  in  his  wife's  presence  when  the  sense  of  his  wrongs  was  so  warm 
within  him.  "  But  Samson's  wife  was  given  to  his  companion,  whom  he  had  used 
as  his  friend."  That  is,  she  was  given  by  her  father  and  the  chiefs  of  the  town 
in  marriage  to  his  first  groomsman.  Although  she  had  but  little  liberty  in  the 
matter,  still  no  doubt  she  was  glad  the  Hebrew  was  gone,  and  that  she  was  the 
wife  of  his  friend.  How  far  Samson  was  justified  in  leaving  his  wife  is  not  alto- 
gether clear  from  the  text.  Most  probably  he  did  not  intend  a  final  separation, 
although  this  was  the  result.  (W.  A.  Scott,  D.D.)  Samson's  riddle: — The 
pathway  of  life  has  many  a  lion  in  it,  and  our  success  and  happiness  depend  very 
much  on  the  way  we  deal  with  them.  Nearly  all  the  strongest  men  in  our  great 
cities  had  to  encounter  early  poverty  and  hardships ;  their  limited  education  was 
got  at  the  cost  of  self-denial,  but  learning  was  all  the  sweeter  when  they  found  it 
in  the  carcase  of  the  slain  lion.  Had  there  been  no  Samson  in  all  such  young  men 
they  would  have  been  frightened  by  discouragement  into  a  helpless  obscurity.  One 
of  the  Christian  leaders  in  New  York  tells  us  that  he  never  has  found  greater 
enjoyment  in  his  fine  library  than  he  found  in  the  second-hand  book  which  he 
purchased  with  his  first  shilling  and  read  in  his  father's  rustic  cabin.  Every  good 
enterprise  has  its  lions.  Things  that  cost  little  count  little.  When  a  handful 
of  Christians  undertake  to  build  up  a  mission  school  in  some  wi-etched  neighbour- 
hood, or  to  build  a  church  in  some  destitute  region,  they  find  difficulties  "  roaring 
against  them  "  like  the  wild  beast  in  the  vineyard  of  Timnath.  These  obstacles 
endear  their  work  to  them.  There  is  a  spiritual  enjoyment  in  the  after-results  of 
their  hard  toils  that  they  never  could  have  known  if  their  work  had  been  easier.  A 
sermon  heard  in  a  frontier  church,  whose  erection  cost  sharp  sacrifice,  after  a  ten- 
mile  ride  over  a  country  road,  has  some  honey  in  it  to  a  hungry  Christian.  Did 
you  ever  face  a  lion  in  undertaking  the  spiritual  reformation  of  some  hardened 
sinner  ?  And  had  you  ever  a  sweeter  banquet  of  soul  than  when  you  saw  him 
sitting  beside  you  at  Christ's  table  ?  Even  the  performance  of  a  duty  which  pre- 
sented a  disagreeable  front  has  a  peculiar  satisfaction  in  it.  Captain  Hedley 
Vicars  encountered  a  shower  of  scoffs  from  his  brother  officers  in  the  Crimean 
army  when  he  was  first  converted.  But  he  put  his  Bible  on  his  table  in  his  tent, 
wad  stood  by  his  colours.  Henceforth,  the  lion  was  not  only  slain,  but  there  was 
rich  honey  in  the  carcase  when  his  religious  influence  became  a  power  in  his 
regiment.  Life's  sweetest  enjoyments  are  gathered  from  the  victories  of  faith. 
Out  of  slain  lions  come  forth  meat ;  out  of  conquered  foes  to  the  soul  come 
its  sweetest  honeycombs.  One  of  the  joys  of  heaven  will  be  the  remembrance 
of  victories  won  during  our  earthly  conflicts.  (T.  L.  Cuyler.)  Out  of  strength, 
sweetness : — Strength  and  sweetness  may  be  taken  as  in  some  way  a  formula 
of  human  perfection.  They  are  qualities  which  may  have  a  certain  hidden 
connection  and  interdependence,  and  yet  which  men  usually  expect  to  find,  not 
together,  but  apart.  Sometimes  it  is  the  strength  that  makes  upon  us  the  first  and 
deepest  impression — as,  for  instance,  in  Luther,  a  man  of  gigantic  force  and  grasp ; 
before  whose  fixed  will  and  undaunted  perseverance  the  Papacy  itself  totters.  And 
yet  in  the  familiar  talk  which  happily  survives  to  tell  what  manner  of  man  he  was, 
how  kindly  he  shows  himself,  how  gentle,  how  full  of  domestic  cheerfulness  and 
mirth,  how  loving  to  little  children!  So  perhaps  in  Luther's  master,  Paul, 
it  is  the  strength  which  dared  and  endured  so  much  that  first  makes  its 
mark  upon  us:  we  marvel  at  the  inexhaustible  energy  which  founded  so  many 


CHIP.  XV.]  JUDGES.  219 

churches,  traversed  the  civilised  world  hither  and  thither,  survived  such  various 
hardships,  could  know  no  pleasure,  enjoy  no  rest,  so  long  as  an  opportunity 
remained  of  speaking  a  word  or  winning  a  soul  for  Christ.  And  yet,  as  we  look 
more  closely,  we  note  how  this  restlessly  energetic  apostle  is  stiU  the  prophet — I 
had  almost  said  the  poet — of  Christian  love ;  keeps  his  sway  over  men's  minds  by 
the  charm  of  sweetness.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  peculiar  to  that  type  of  character 
which  we  call  the  saintly  to  make  an  impression  of  sweetness,  which  diverts 
attention  from  the  hidden  strength  within  :  that  St.  Francis  should  draw  hearts  of 
like  pulse  to  his  own,  and  live  the  centre  of  a  brotherhood  of  love,  we  can  under- 
stand ;  while  that  he  should  be  a  power  in  the  Church  for  centuries,  begetting 
spiritual  sons  through  generation  after  generation,  is  a  fact  that  startles  us  into  the 
search  for  its  explanation.  But  the  consummate  instance  of  this  kind  of  character 
is  the  Master  Himself.  In  Him  men  see  and  feel  the  sweetness,  but  they  have  to  learn 
the  strength.  They  are  swayed,  but  so  gently  that  they  are  hardly  conscious  of  the 
force,  which  nevertheless  they  are  unable  to  resist.  These  examples  are  all  taken 
from  the  high  places  of  humanity :  let  us  look  a  little  nearer  home.  We  may 
admit  without  any  difficulty  that  there  is  a  strength  which  has  no  sweetness  in  it ; 
which  puts  itself  forth  and  strives  towards  its  own  ends,  without  caring  what  other 
forces  it  jostles  against,  or  even  what  hearts  it  tramples  on ;  which,  wholly  self- 
centred,  goes  on  its  way  with  all  the  hardness  which  comes  of  pure  and  unalloyed 
selfishness.  But  whether  such  strength  is  not  in  its  nature  partial  and  incomplete, 
whether  its  very  lack  of  sweetness  does  not  argue  a  certain  narrowness  of  scope 
and  meanness  of  aim,  I  will  rather  ask  than  pause  to  prove.  With  all  the  finest 
strength  we  associate  the  idea  of  magnanimity ;  and  what  we  call  "  greatness  of 
mind  "  has  in  it  precisely  the  quality  which  I  attributed  to  the  powers  of  nature,  of 
being  concerned  with  things  on  the  largest  scale,  and  yet  easily  and  unconsciously 
bending  to  things  on  the  least.  This,  however,  is  not  the  point  to  which  I  chiefly 
ask  your  attention ;  but  rather  that,  though  there  is  a  sweetness  of  disposition, 
undoubtedly  genuine  and  lovable  after  its  kind,  which  does  not  co-exist  with  force  of 
character,  the  truest  and  noblest  sweetness  is  that  which  "  cometh  out  of  the  strong." 
For  this  last  is  no  mere  yieldingness  and  flexibility  of  heart,  which  is  willing  to  take 
men  for  their  outward  seeming  and  at  their  own  valuation,  but  a  keen  and  large 
discernment  of  what  elements  of  nobleness  are  really  in  them  ;  not  a  desire  that 
the  Gomphcated  machine  of  society  should  run  smoothly,  and  unpleasant  things  be 
hidden  out  of  sight,  and  a  general  pretence  established  that  life  holds  no  sin  and  is 
stained  by  no  shame,  but  a  true  reaching  forth  towards  the  essential  harmony  ia 
which  all  God's  world  is  compact  together,  an  aspiration  after  the  peace  which 
comes  of  all  places  filled  and  all  rights  respected.     (C  Beard,  B.A.) 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Vbbs.  1-20.  1  verily  thought  that  thou  hadst  utterly  hated  her. — Wrong-doers 
naturally  seek  to  jiutify  themselves  : — This  spirit  of  seK- justification,  which  ia 
generally  associated  with  wrong-doing,  appeared  very  early  in  the  history  of  our 
race  (Gen.  iii.  12,  13).  And  the  same  spirit  is  commonly  found  still  amongst  all 
ranks  and  classes  of  wrong-doers.  Frank  and  fuU  acknowledgment  of  a  wrong  is 
exceedingly  rare.  In  most  cases  the  wrong-doer  through  seK-love  aims  at  making 
the  wrong  appear  right,  or  as  near  to  right  as  one  may  expect  from  fallible  men  ; 
and  in  this  endeavour  to  exonerate  himself  he  is  in  great  danger  of  blinding  the  eye 
of  his  conscience  and  tampering  with  the  sanctities  of  truth.  Hence  it  behoves  us, 
in  the  interests  of  our  moral  nature,  to  abhor  that  which  is  evil  and  cleave  to  that 
which  is  good  ;  and,  when  we  have  done  wrong  through  weakness  or  the  stress  of 
temptation,  frankly  and  at  once  to  confess  it.  The  person  who  does  wrong  and 
seeks  to  justify  it,  is  morally  on  the  down-grade.  (Thomas  Kirk.)  Now  shall  I 
be  more  blameless  than  the  Philistines. — Infliction  of  wrong  is  sometimes  overruled 
for  the  good  of  the  sufferer : — In  the  providence  of  God  this  great  wrong  freed 
Samson  from  the  meshes  of  an  unworthy  alliance,  and  awoke  him  to  the 
responsibilities  of  his  position  as  the  divinely-chosen  champion  of  his  people.  And 
•wrongs,  even  great  and  heartrending  wrongs,  are  often  permitted  by  God,  sometimes 
for  the  purpose  of  rescuing  Satan's  slaves  from  his  servitude,  and  sometimes  for 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnAP.  xT. 

the  purpose  of  rescuing  His  own  people  from  the  enslaving  power  of  some  unworthy 
passion.  The  injustice  which  abounds  in  the  world  is  not  an  unmixed  evil. 
Tjnrants,  extortioners,  dishonest  merchants,  and  all  sorts  of  wrong-doers  to  their 
fellow-men,  are  used  by  God  for  beneficent  ends.  They  often  constrain  those  who 
groan  under  the  wrongs  which  they  inflict  to  think  of  God  and  the  things  unseen 
and  eternal,  and  to  enter  on  a  new  and  a  divine  life.  Great  wrongs  from  men 
often  lead  the  sufferers  to  see  and  repent  of  the  great  wrongs  which  they  have  done 
against  God.  They  have  often  been  the  means  of  breaking  their  moral  and 
spiritual  slavery,  and  bringing  them  into  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  makes 
His  people  free.  And  great  wrongs  have  been  the  means  not  only  of  giving 
freedom  to  the  slaves  of  sin  and  Satan,  but  also  of  purifying  and  ennobling  the 
people  of  God.  The  great  wrongs  of  the  Babylonian  captivity  burnt  out  of  the 
Jewish  people  the  besetting  sin  of  idolatry.  The  great  wrongs  which  the  apostles 
and  the  early  Church  had  to  endure  at  the  hands  of  their  wicked  persecutors  were, 
like  the  furnace  to  silver  or  gold,  the  means  of  their  moral  or  spiritual  refinement 
(Rom.  v.  3,  4 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17).  We  may  deplore  and  abhor  the  wrongs  which  are 
perpetrated  in  the  world  and  on  the  Church ;  but  let  us  also  gratefully  behold  thia 
silver  lining  in  the  cloud,  which  comes  from  the  gracious  overruling  providence  of 
God.  (Ibid.)  Samson  went  and  caught  three  hundred  foxes. — Three  hundred 
foxes  in  the  corn  : — Surely  it  is  not  so  unheard  of  and  incredible  a  thing,  to  have 
collected  such  a  number  of  these  animals  in  ancient  times,  as  to  destroy  the 
credibility  and  literality  of  our  story,  because  it  contains  this  statement  about  the 
foxes.  Did  not  Sylla  show  at  one  time  to  the  Romans  one  hundred  lions?  And 
Csesar  four  hundred,  and  Pompey  six  hundred?  The  history  of  Roman  pleasures, 
according  to  the  books,  states  that  the  Emperor  Probus  let  loose  into  the  theatre  at 
one  time  one  thousand  wild  boars,  one  thousand  does,  one  thousand  ostriches,  one 
thousand  stags,  and  a  countless  raultitude  of  other  wild  animals.  At  another  time 
he  exhibited  one  hundred  leopards  from  Libya,  one  hundred  from  Syria,  and  three 
hundred  bears.  When  the  caviller  settles  his  hypercriticism  with  Vopiscus's  Life 
of  Probus,  and  with  Roman  history  generally,  we  shall  then  consider  whether  our 
story  should  be  rejected  as  incredible  because  of  its  three  hundred  foxes.  It  has 
also  been  proved  by  learned  men  that  the  Romans  had  the  custom,  which  they 
seem  to  have  borrowed  from  the  Phcenicians,  who  were  near  neighbours  of  the 
Philistines — if  they  were  not  Philistines  themselves — of  letting  loose,  in  the  middle 
of  April  (the  feast  of  Ceres) — the  very  time  of  wheat-harvest  in  Palestine,  but  not 
in  Italy — in  the  circus,  a  large  number  of  foxes  with  burning  torches  to  their  tails. 
Is  Samson's  the  original,  or  did  he  adopt  a  common  custom  of  the  country? 
The  story  of  the  celebrated  Roman  vulpinaria,  or  feast  of  the  foxes,  as  told  by  Ovid 
and  others,  bears  a  remarkable  similarity  to  the  history  before  us,  ascribing  the 
origin  of  this  Roman  custom  to  the  following  circumstance :  A  lad  caught  a  fox 
which  had  stolen  many  fowls,  and  having  enveloped  his  body  with  straw,  set  it  on 
fire  and  let  it  run  loose.  The  fox,  hoping  to  escape  from  the  fire,  took  to  the  thick 
standing  corn  which  was  then  ready  for  the  sickle ;  and  the  wind  blowing  hard  at 
the  time,  the  flames  soon  consumed  the  crop.  And  from  this  circumstance  ever 
afterwards  a  law  of  the  city  of  Rome  required  that  every  fox  caught  should  be 
burnt  alive.  This  is  the  substance  of  the  Roman  story,  which  Bochart  and  others 
insist  took  its  rise  from  the  burning  of  the  cornfields  of  the  Philistines  by  Samson's 
foxes.  The  Judeean  origin  of  the  custom  is  certainly  the  most  probable,  and  in 
every  way  the  most  satisfactory.  (W.  A.  Scott,  D.D.)  The  Philistines  .  .  .  burnt 
her  and  her  father. — The  fate  of  Satnson^s  wife  an  illustration  of  retributive 
justice : — Samson's  wife  in  trying  to  avoid  ScyUa  fell  into  Charybdis.  She  betrayed 
her  husband,  because  she  feared  her  brethren  would  burn  her  and  her  father's 
house  with  fire,  and  yet  by  their  hands  she  was  burned  with  fire  and  her  father  also. 
It  is  still  the  rule  of  Providence,  that  as  men  measure  to  others  so  it  shall  be 
measured  to  them  again.  It  should  be  eternally  before  our  minds  that  true 
ininciple  is  the  only  expediency.  All  history,  both  sacred  and  profane,  shows  that 
the  evil  that  men  do  in  trying  to  escape  by  continuing  to  sin — by  doing  s\  long  to 
correct  a  wrong—  always  meets  them  sooner  or  later  in  their  flight.  Sin  added  to 
sin  only  enhances  guilt.  Those  that  hasten  to  be  rich,  by  resorting  to  dishonest 
means,  and  have  accumulated  property  by  fraud,  do  not  generally  long  enjoy  it. 
They  seldom  retain  their  gains,  and  if  they  do,  how  can  they  enjoy  them  haunted 
with  a  guilty  conscience  ?  It  is  a  singular  and  significant  providence  that  so  many 
of  the  inventors  of  means  for  taking  the  life  of  their  fellow-men  should  have 
perished  by  their  own  inventions.     Gunpowder  was  the  death  of  its  inventor ; 


CHAP.  XV.]  JUDGES.  221 

Phalaris  was  destroyed  by  his  own  "  brazen  bull."     The  regent  Morton  who  first 
introduced  the  "  Maiden,"  a  Scottish  instrument  of  decapitation,  like  the  inventor 
of  the  guillotine,   perished  by  his  own  instrument.      Danton   and  Kobespierre 
conspired  the  death  of  Vergniaud   and  of  his   republican   confreres,  the   noble 
Ghondists,  and  then  Eobespierre  hved  only  long  enough  to  see  the  death  of  Danton 
before  perishing  himself  by  the  same  guillotine.     {Ibid.)        The  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
came  mightily  upon  him. — How  we  may  burst  the  bonds  of  sin : — The  descent  of 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  upon  us  is  the  grand  power  by  which  we  may  burst  asunder 
the  strongest  cords  of  sinful  habit  with  which  we  may  be  bound.     These  cords,  with 
which  men  freely  bind  themselves,  increase  in  strength  as  they  advance  in  years. 
By  an  inexorable  law  of  our  moral  nature,  sinful  habits  become  the  more  binding 
the  more  they  are  indulged.    The  drunkard  of  two  years'  standing  is  more  enslaved 
by  the  love  of  drink  than  the  drunkard  of  one  year's  standing,  and  less  than  the 
drunkard  of  five  or  ten.    And  the  same  is  true  of  every  evil  habit.    The  longer  men 
continue  in  sin,  they  strengthen  the  chains  of  their  own  enslavement.    Men  may  be 
able,  in  their  own  strength  of  will,  to  free  themselves  from  this  and  the  other  evU 
habit ;  the  drunkard  may  become  sober,  the  Ucentious  chaste,  the  dishonest  upright, 
and  so  on.     There  can  be  no  doubt  that  many,  by  their  unaided  exertions,  have 
reformed  themselves,  and  become  respectable  and  useful  members  of  society.    But 
even  with  regard  to  such  moral  reformation  it  is   sometimes — may  I  not   say 
frequently? — true,  that  men  of  themselves  are  unable  to  secure  it.    There  are  many 
drunkards,  e.g.,  who  seem  to  lack  the  power  of  bursting  the  fetters  with  which  the 
love  of  drink  has  bound  and  enslaved  them.    And  what  seems  to  be  true  of  some 
in    reference  to  particular  vices  is    true   of    all    in    reference  to  the  spirit  of 
insubordination  to  the  Divine  will.      All  men  are  naturally  rebellious;   and  this 
insubordination  grows  with  our  growth,  and  strengthens  with  our  strength.    But 
what  is  impossible  to  man  in  his  own  strength,  in  reference  both  to  this  spirit  of 
rebeUion  and  particular  vices,  is  possible  to  man  in  the  strength  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.     Any  man,  the  most  enslaved,  the  most  powerfully  bound  with  the  cords  and 
fetters  of  sin  and  vice,  may  obtain  his  spiritual  freedom.      What  he  needs  is  that 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  come  mightUy  upon  him,  as  He  did  upon  Samson,  and  any 
man  who  sincerely  prays  for  this  wondrous  endowment  shall  obtain  it.     This  is 
the  grand  hope  which  Jesus  Christ  has  brought  to  our  race.      {Thomas  Kirk.) 
The  jawbone  of  an  ass. — The  rudest  weapon  not  to  be  despised  in  God^s  service : — 
"When  God  has  work  for  you  to  do,  a  conquest  for  you  to  make,  a  deliverance  of 
others  for  you  to  effect.  He  wiU  not  leave  you  without  a  weapon ;  it  may  not  always 
be  a  very  promising  one,  but  stiU  a  weapon.     Samson  might,  no  doubt,  have  slaiu 
more  with  a  sword  if  he  had  had  one ;  and  so  it  is  weU  that  in  aU  you  do  for  God 
you  provide  yourself  with  as  likely  weapons  as  you  can  possibly  get.    But  sometimes 
you  find  yourself,  like  Samson,  in  circumstances  where  you  must  act  quickly,  and 
where  you  cannot  provide  yourself  with  what  you  might  think  the  best  weapon,  but 
must  take  the  first  that  comes  to  hand.     You  are,  e.g.,  suddenly  prompted  by  your 
conscience  to  say  a  word  of  rebuke  to  some  profane  or  wicked  person,  or  a  word  of 
warning  to  some  one  who  is,  as  you  know,  casting  off  even  ordinary  restraints,  and 
giving  way  to  evil  passions  ;  but  you  feel  your  want  of  wisdom  and  fluency ;  you 
know  you  can  never  say  a  thing  as  it  ought  to  be  said — you  wish  you  could,  you 
wish  you  were  well  enough  equipped  for  this,  which  you  feel  to  be  really  a  desirable 
duty.    Now  in  such  circumstances  it  is  more  than  half  the  battle  to  attempt  the 
duty  with  such  weapon  as  we  have,  in  the  faith  that  God  will  help  us.    A  rude 
weapon,  wielded  by  a  vigorous  arm,  and  by  one  confident  in  God,  did  more  than 
the  fine  swords  of  these  men  of  Judah,  who  had  no  spirit  in  them ;  and  in  very 
much  of  the  good  that  we  are  aU  called  upon  to  do  to  one  another  in  this  world  it 
is  the  sph-it  in  which  we  do  it  that  tells  far  more  than  the  outward  thing  we  do. 
And  it  is  a  good  thing  to  be  reduced  to  reliance,  not  on  the  weapon  you  use,  but  on 
the  Spirit  who  uses  you.     Samson  found  it  so,  and  gave  a  name  to  that  period  of 
his  history  where  he  learned  this ;  and  so  does  every  one  look  back  gratefully  to  the 
time  when  he  distinctly  became  aware  that  efficiency  in  duty  depends  on  God's 
taking  us  and  using  us   as  His   weapons.     {Marcus  Dads,   D.D.)  Samson's 

weapon: — I.  Samson  fought  the  battle  single-handed  against  three  thousand 
men.  It  is  a  feature  of  God's  heroes  in  all  ages  that  they  fight  whether  they  are  in 
the  minority  or  the  majority.  God  has  wrought  His  greatest  works  through  single 
champions.  II.  Samson  fought  without  the  usual  weapons  of  wakfabe.  The 
Philistines  were  armed,  but  he  had  no  sword.  Well,  now,  what  did  Samson  do  ? 
A  man  that  is  raised  by  God  lor  special  work  has  keen  eyes,  as  a  rule.    He  seea 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

what  there  is  about  him  and  to  what  use  everything  can  be  put.  This  moist  bone 
had  all  its  natural  strength  in  it.  Samson  laid  hold  of  that.  He  knew  what  ha 
was  about,  and  what  he  could  do  with  that  weapon,  and  he  turned  it  to  terrible 
uses.  in.  Samson  won  the  victoey  with  a  pook  weapon.  He  was  not  one  of  those 
who  excused  himself  for  bad  work  by  complaining  about  the  tool  he  used.  I  have 
known  some  little  boys  at  school,  over  whose  copy  books  I  have  looked.  When  I 
have  said,  "  Oh,  here  is  a  blot,"  they  have  replied,  "  Yes,  but  the  ink  bottle  was  too 
full."  And  so  in  many  other  instances  I  have  noticed  that  bad  writers  blame  the 
pens,  and  bad  workers  blame  the  instruments  they  have  had  to  work  with.  If  you 
see  a  bad  carpenter,  the  plane  is  always  wrong.  On  the  other  hand,  if  you  see  a 
good  workman,  he  never  blames  his  tools,  but  makes  the  best  of  them.  (D.  Davies.) 
Shall  I  die  for  thirst  ? — The  fainting  hero  : — My  drift  is  the  comforting  of  God's 
saints,  especially  in  coming  to  the  table  of  their  Lord.  I.  You  have  axreadt 
EXPEEiENCED  GREAT  DELIVERANCES.  Happy  is  it  for  you  that  you  have  not  had  the 
slaying  of  a  thousand  men,  but  there  are  "  heaps  upon  heaps  "  of  another  sort  upon 
which  you  may  look  with  quite  as  much  satisfaction  as  Samson,  and  perhaps  with 
less  mingled  emotions  than  his,  when  he  gazed  on  the  slaughtered  Philistines. 
1.  See  there  the  great  heaps  of  your  sins,  all  of  them  giants,  and  any  one  of  them 
sufficient  to  drag  you  down  to  the  lowest  hell.  But  they  are  all  slain  ;  there  is  not 
a  single  sin  that  speaks  a  word  against  you.  2.  Think,  too,  of  the  heaps  of  your 
doubts  and  fears.  Do  you  not  remember  when  yon  thought  God  would  never  have 
mercy  upon  you?  "  Heaps  upon  heaps  "  of  fears  have  we  had;  bigger  heaps  than 
our  sins,  but  there  they  lie— troops  of  doubters.  There  are  their  bones  and  their 
skulls,  as  Bunyan  pictured  them  outside  the  town  of  Mansoul ;  but  they  are  all 
dead,  God  having  wrought  for  us  a  deliverance  from  them.  3.  Another  set  of  foes 
that  God  has  slain  includes  our  temptations.  Some  of  us  have  been  tempted  from 
every  quarter  of  the  world,  from  every  corner  of  the  compass.  There  has  not  been 
a  bush  behind  which  an  enemy  has  not  lurked,  no  inch  of  the  road  to  Canaan 
which  has  not  been  overgrown  with  thorns.  But  look  back  upon  them.  Your 
temptations,  where  are  they  ?  Your  soul  has  escaped  like  a  bird  out  of  the  snare  of 
the  fowler.  4.  So,  let  me  say,  in  the  next  place,  has  it  been  with  most  of  your 
sorrows.  Like  Job's  messengers,  evil  tidings  have  followed  one  another,  and  you 
have  been  brought  very  low.  But,  in  Christ  Jesus,  you  have  been  delivered. 
"  Many  are  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous,  but  the  Lord  delivereth  him  out  of  them 
all."  n.  Yet  fresh  troubles  will  assail  you,  and  excite  your  alarm.  Thus 
Samson  was  thirsty.  This  was  a  new  kind  of  want  to  him.  He  was  so  thirsty  that 
he  was  near  to  die.  The  difficulty  was  totally  different  from  any  that  Samson  had 
met  before.  Now  I  think  there  may  be  some  of  you  who  have  been  forgiven,  saved, 
delivered,  and  yet  you  do  not  feel  happy.  God  has  done  great  things  for  you, 
whereof  you  are  glad,  yet  you  cannot  rejoice ;  the  song  of  your  thanksgiving  is 
hushed.  Let  me  say  two  or  three  words  to  you.  It  is  very  usual  for  God's  people, 
when  they  have  had  some  great  deliverance,  to  have  some  little  trouble  that  is  too 
much  for  them.  Look  at  Jacob ;  he  wrestles  with  God  at  Peniel,  and  overcomes 
Omnipotence  itself,  and  yet  he  goes  "  halting  on  his  thigh  1 "  Strange,  is  it  not, 
that  there  must  be  a  touching  of  the  sinew  whenever  you  and  I  win  the  day  ?  It 
seems  as  if  God  must  teach  us  our  littleness,  our  nothingness,  in  order  to  keep  U3 
within  bounds.  IH.  If  you  are  now  feeling  any  present  trouble  pressing  so  sorely 
that  it  takes  away  from  you  all  power  to  rejoice  in  your  deUverance,  remember  that 
YOU  ARE  still  SECURE.  God  will  as  certainly  bring  you  out  of  this  present  little 
trouble  as  He  has  brought  you  out  of  all  the  great  troubles  in  the  past.  1.  He  will 
do  this  because  if  He  does  not  do  it  your  enemy  will  rejoice  over  you.  If  you  perish, 
the  honour  of  Christ  will  be  tarnished,  and  the  laughter  of  hell  will  be  excited. 
"What !  a  child  of  God  forsaken  of  his  Father  I  God  will  never  permit  the  power  of 
darkness  to  triumph  over  the  power  of  light.  2.  That  is  one  reason  for  confidence, 
but  another  reason  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  God  has  already  delivered  you. 
I  asked  you  just  now  to  walk  over  the  battlefield  of  your  life,  and  observe  the 
heaps  of  slaughtered  sins,  and  fears,  and  cares,  and  troubles.  Do  you  think  He 
would  have  done  all  that  He  has  done  for  you  if  He  had  intended  to  leave  you?  The 
God  who  has  so  graciously  delivered  you  hitherto  has  not  changed ;  He  is  still  the 
same  as  He  ever  was.  Bethink  you  if  He  does  not  do  so  He  will  lose  all  that  He  has 
done.  When  I  see  a  potter  making  a  vessel,  if  he  is  using  some  delicate  clay  upon 
which  he  has  spent  much  preliminary  labour  to  bring  it  to  its  proper  fineness,  and  if 
I  see  him  again  and  again  moulding  the  vessel — if  I  see,  moreover,  that  the  pattern 
is  coming  out — if  I  know  that  he  has  put  it  in  the  oven,  and  that  the  ooloura  are 


CHAP.  XVI.]  JUDGES.  223 

beginning  to  display  themselves — I  bethink  me  were  it  common  delf  ware  I  could 
understand  his  breaking  up  what  he  had  done,  because  it  would  be  worth  but  little  ; 
but  since  it  is  a  piece  of  rich  and  rare  porcelain  upon  which  months  of  labour  had 
been  spared  ,1  could  not  understand  his  saying,  "  I  wiU  not  go  on  with  it,"  because 
he  would  lose  so  much  that  he  has  already  spent.  Look  at  some  of  those  rich 
vessels  by  Bernard  de  PaUssy,  which  are  worth  their  weight  in  gold,  and  you  can 
hardly  imagine  Bernard  stopping  when  he  had  almost  finished,  and  saying,  "I  have 
been  six  months  over  this,  but  I  shall  never  take  the  pains  to  complete  it."  Now, 
God  has  spent  the  blood  of  His  own  dear  Son  to  save  you ;  He  has  spent  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  you  what  He  would  have  you  be,  and  He  will  never  stay 
His  mighty  hand  till  His  work  is  done.  "  Hath  He  said,  and  shall  He  not  do  it  ? 
Hath  He  begun,  and  shall  He  not  complete  ? "  (C.  if.  Spurgeon.)  Samson's 
prayer : — There  are  two  facts  in  the  prayer  which  Samson  recognises  and  pleads 
with  God.  1.  One  is  that  he  is  the  Lord's  servant :  he  describes  himself  as  "  Thy 
servant."  Samson,  in  all  his  hostile  acts  against  the  Philistines,  evidently  regarded 
himself  as  doing  the  work  for  which  God  raised  him  up.  2.  The  other  is,  that  his 
rocent  glorious  victory,  which  was  a  wonderful  dehverance  not  only  to  Samson  but 
to  his  country,  was  due  to  God :  "  Thou  hast  given  this  great  dehverance."  And 
after  stating  these  two  facts,  he  uses  them  as  a  plea  for  the  relief  of  his  present 
distresses  :  "And  now  shall  I  die  for  thirst  .  .  .  ?  "  Surely  God  cannot  allow  such 
a  disgraceful  end  to  happen  to  His  own  servant,  for  whom  He  had  wrought  such  a 
wonderful  dehverance  1  (Thomas  Kirk.)  He  revived. — Spiritual  renewal  in 
answer  to  prayer : — In  this  incident  we  may  see  an  illustration  of  the  principle  on 
which  God  has  acted  towards  His  people  in  all  ages.  His  promise  is,  "As  thy  days, 
60  shall  thy  strength  be."  The  strength  for  to-day,  like  the  manna  of  old,  is  only 
sufficient  for  the  necessities  of  to-day  ;  and  if  we  would  be  equal  to  the  duties  of  the 
morrow,  or  to  any  emergency  that  may  arise,  we  must  get  fresh  strength  from  the 
Lord.  Without  spiritual  renewal,  after  exhausting  labour  or  conflict,  we  shall 
become  faint  and  ready  to  perish ;  so  it  is  always  with  the  mightiest  spiritual 
•warriors ;  but  if  we  cry  unto  the  Lord  in  our  times  of  faintness.  He  will  hear  us,  as 
He  did  Samson,  and  He  will  open  up  for  us,  not  in  the  hollow  of  some  desert  place 
outside,  but  in  the  depths  of  our  own  parched  souls,  a  spring  whose  pure  living 
waters  will  gladden  and  revive  our  languid  hearts.    {Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


Vebs.  1-31.  Then  went  Samson  to  Gaza. — Pleasure  and  peril  in  Gaza : — ^For  whai^ 
reason  did  Samson  go  down  to  Gaza  ?  We  imagine  that  in  default  of  any  excitement 
such  as  he  craved  in  the  towns  of  his  own  land,  he  turned  his  eyes  to  the  PhUistine 
cities  which  presented  a  marked  contrast.  There  life  was  energetic  and  gay,  there 
many  pleasures  were  to  be  had.  New  colonists  were  coming  in  their  swift  ships, 
and  the  streets  presented  a  scene  of  constant  animation.  The  strong,  eager  man, 
full  of  animal  passions,  found  the  life  he  craved  in  Gaza  where  he  mingled  with  the 
crowds  and  heard  tales  of  strange  existence.  Nor  was  there  wanting  the  opportunity 
for  enjoyment  which  at  home  he  could  not  indulge.  A  constant  peril  this  of  seeking 
excitement,  especially  in  an  age  of  high  civilisation.  The  means  of  variety  and 
stimulus  are  multiplied,  and  even  the  craving  outruns  them — a  craving  yielded  to, 
with  Uttle  or  no  resistance,  by  many  who  should  know  better.  The  moral  teacher^ 
must  recognise  the  desire  for  variety  and  excitement  as  perhaps  the  chief  of  all  the 
hindrances  he  has  now  to  overcome.  For  one  who  desires  duty  there  are  scores 
who  find  it  dull  and  tame  and  tm-n  from  it,  without  sense  of  fault,  to  the  gaieties  of 
civilised  society  in  which  there  is  so  Uttle  of  the  positively  wrong  that  conscience  is 
easily  appeased.  The  rehgious  teacher  finds  the  demand  for  "brightness"  and 
variety  before  him  at  every  turn ;  he  is  indeed  often  touched  by  it  himself,  and 
follows  with  more  or  less  of  doubt  a  path  that  leads  straight  from  his  professed 
goal.  "  Is  amusement  devilish?  "  asks  one.  Most  people  reply  with  a  smile  that 
life  must  be  Uvely  or  it  is  not  worth  having.  And  the  Philistinism  that  attracts 
them  with  its  dash  and  gaudiness  is  not  far  away  nor  hard  to  reach.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  go  across  to  the  Continent,  where  the  brilliance  of  Vienna  or  Paris 
offers  a  contrast  to  the  grey  dulness  of  a  country  village ;  nor  even  to  Londcu 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

where,  amid  the  lures  of  the  midnight  streets,  there  is  peril  of  the  gravest  kind. 
Those  who  are  restless  and  foolhardy  can  find  a  Gaza  and  a  valley  of  Sorek  nearer 
home,  in  the  next  market  town.  PhUistine  life,  lax  in  morals,  full  of  rattle  and 
glitter,  heat  and  change,  in  gambling,  in  debauchery,  in  sheer  audacity  of  movement 
and  talk,  presents  its  allurements  in  our  streets,  has  its  acknowledged  haunts  in 
our  midst.  Young  people  brought  up  to  fear  God  in  quiet  homes  whether  of  town 
or  country,  are  enticed  by  the  whispered  counsels  of  comrades  half-ashamed  of  the 
things  they  say,  yet  eager  for  more  companionship  in  what  they  secretly  know  to 
be  foUy  or  worse.  Young  women  are  the  prey  of  those  who  disgrace  manhood  and 
womanhood  by  the  offers  they  make,  the  insidious  lies  they  teU.     The  attraction 

/once  felt  is  apt  to  master.  As  the  current  that  rushes  swiftly  bears  them  with  it, 
they  exult  in  the  rapid  motion  even  while  life  is  nearing  the  fatal  cataract.    Subtle 

'  is  the  progress  of  infidelity.  From  the  persuasion  that  enjoyment  is  lawful  and  has 
no  perU  in  it,  the  mind  quickly  passes  to  a  doubt  of  the  old  laws  and  warnings.  Is  it 
so  certain  that  there  is  a  reward  for  purity  and  unworldliness  ?  Is  not  all  the  talk 
about  the  life  to  come  a  jangle  of  vain  words  ?  The  present  is  a  reality,  death  a 
certainty,  life  a  swiftly  passing  possession.  They  who  enjoy  know  what  they  are 
getting.  The  rest  is  dismissed  as  altogether  in  the  air.  {R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.) 
And  went  away  with  them,  bar  and  all — Our  Champion: — Poor  Samson  1  We 
cannot  say  much  about  him  by  way  of  an  example  to  believers.  He  is  a  beacon  to 
us  all,  for  he  shows  us  that  no  strength  of  body  can  suffice  to  deliver  from  weakness 
of  mind.  Samson  is  also  a  prodigy.  He  is  more  a  wonder  as  a  believer  than  he  is 
even  as  a  man.  It  is  marvellous  that  a  man  could  smite  thousands  of  Philistines 
with  no  better  weapon  than  the  jawbone  of  a  newly-killed  ass,  but  it  is  more 
marvellous  still  that  Samson  should  be  a  saint,  ranked  among  those  illustrious  ones 
saved  by  faith,  though  such  a  sinner.  St.  Paul  has  put  him  among  the  worthies 
in  the  eleventh  chapter  of  the  Hebrews.  I  look  upon  Samson's  case  as  a  great 
wonder,  put  in  Scripture  for  the  encouragement  of  great  sinners.  If  such  a  man  as 
Samson,  nevertheless,  prevails  by  faith  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  so  shall 
you  and  I.  Though  our  characters  may  have  been  disfigured  by  many  vices,  and 
hitherto  we  may  have  committed  a  multitude  of  sins,  if  we  can  trust  Christ  to  save 
us  He  win  purge  us  with  hyssop,  and  we  shall  be  clean ;  and  in  our  death  we  shall 
fall  asleep  in  the  arms  of  sovereign  mercy  to  wake  up  in  the  likeness  of  Christ. 
I.  Look  at  oub  mighty  Champion  at  His  work.  You  remember  when  our  Samson, 
our  Lord  Jesus,  came  down  to  the  Gaza  of  this  world,  'twas  love  that  brought  Him  ; 
love  to  a  most  unworthy  object,  for  He  loved  the  sinful  Church  which  had  gone 
astray  from  Him ;  yet  came  He  from  heaven,  and  left  the  ease  and  delights  of  His 
Father's  palace  to  put  Himself  among  the  Philistines,  the  sons  of  sin  and  Satan 
here  below.  There  He  lies  silently  in  the  tomb.  He  who  is  to  bruise  the  serpent's 
head  is  Himself  bruised.  0  Thou  who  art  the  world's  great  Dehverer,  there  Thou 
liest,  as  dead  as  any  stone !  Surely  Thy  foes  have  led  Thee  captive,  0  Thou  mighty 
Samson  1  He  sleeps ;  but  think  not  that  He  is  unconscious  of  what  is  going  on. 
He  knows  everything.  He  sleeps  till  the  proper  moment  comes,  and  then  our 
Samson  awakes ;  and  what  now  ?  He  has  defeated  death ;  He  has  pulled  up  hia 
posts  and  bar,  and  taken  away  his  gates.  As  for  sin,  He  treads  that  beneath  Hia 
feet :  He  has  utterly  overthrown  it,  and  Satan  lies  broken  beneath  the  heel  that 
once  was  bruised.  In  sacred  triumph  He  drags  our  enemies  behind  Him.  Sing  to 
Him !  Angels,  praise  Him  in  your  hymns  1  Exalt  Him,  cherubim  and  seraphim  1 
Our  mightier  Samson  hath  gotten  to  Himself  the  victory,  and  cleared  the  road  to 
heaven  and  eternal  life  for  all  His  people  1  H.  Consider  the  work  itself.  We 
will  stand  at  the  gates  of  this  Gaza  and  see  what  the  Champion  has  done.  He  had 
three  enemies.  These  three  beset  Him,  and  He  has  achieved  a  threefold  victory. 
There  was  death.  Christ,  in  being  first  overcome  by  death,  made  Himself  a 
conqueror  over  death,  and  hath  given  us  also  the  victory  ;  for  concerning  death  we 
may  truly  say,  Christ  has  not  only  opened  the  gates,  but  He  has  taken  them  away; 
and  not  the  gates  only,  but  the  very  posts,  and  the  bar,  and  all.  Christ  hath 
abolished  death,  and  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.  He  hath  abolished  it 
in  this  sense — that,  in  the  first  place,  the  cause  of  death  is  gone.  Believers  die, 
bat  they  do  not  die  for  their  sins.  The  curse  of  death,  then,  being  taken  away,  wo 
may  say  that  the  posts  are  pulled  up.  Christ  has  taken  away  the  after-results  of 
death,  the  soul's  exposure  to  the  second  death.  There  is  no  hell  for  you,  believer. 
Christ  has  taken  away  posts,  and  bar,  and  all.  Death  is  not  to  you  any  longer  the 
gate  of  torment,  but  the  gate  of  paradise.  Moreover,  Christ  has  not  only  taken 
away  the  curse,  and  the  after-results  of  death,  but  from  many  of  us  He  has  taken 


CHAP,  xn.]  JUDGES.  223 

away  the  fear  of  death.  He  came  on  pui-pose  to  deliver  "those  who  through  fear 
of  death  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage."  Besides,  there  is  a  sense  in 
which  it  may  be  said  that  Christians  never  die  at  all.  "  He  that  liveth  and  belie  veth 
in  Me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live."  "He  that  hveth  and  believeth  in 
Me  shall  never  die."  They  do  not  die  ;  they  do  but  "  sleep  in  Jesus,  and  are 
blessed."  But  the  main  sense  in  which  Christ  has  pulled  up  the  posts  of  the  gates 
of  death  is  that  He  has  brought  in  a  glorious  resurrection.  If  you  have  imagination, 
let  the  scene  now  present  itself  before  your  eyes.  Christ  the  Samson  sleeping  in 
the  dominions  of  death  ;  death  boasting  and  glorifying  itself  that  now  it  has 
conquered  the  Prince  of  Life ;  Christ  waking,  striding  to  that  gate,  dashing  it  aside, 
taking  it  upon  His  shoulders,  carrying  it  away,  and  saying  as  He  mounts  to  heaven, 
"0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory?"  Another  host 
which  Christ  had  to  defeat  was  the  army  of  sin.  Christ  had  come  among  sinners, 
and  sins  beset  Him  round.  Your  sins  and  my  sins  beleaguered  the  Saviour  till  He 
became  their  captive.  In  Him  was  no  sin,  and  yet  sins  compassed  Him  about  like 
bees.  Sin  was  imputed  to  Him ;  the  sins  of  all  His  people  stood  in  His  way  to 
keep  Him  out  of  heaven  as  well  as  them.  I  may  say,  therefore,  that  aU  our  sins 
stood  in  the  way  of  Christ's  resurrection  ;  they  were  the  great  iron  gate,  and  they 
were  the  bar  of  brass,  that  shut  Him  out  from  heaven.  Doubtless,  we  might  have 
thought  that  Christ  would  be  a  prisoner  for  ever  under  the  troops  of  sin,  but  oh, 
see  how  the  mighty  Conqueror,  as  He  bears  our  sins  "  in  His  own  body  on  the 
tree,"  stands  with  unbroken  bones  beneath  the  enormous  load.  See  how  He  takes 
those  sins  upon  His  shoulders,  and  carries  them  right  up  from  His  tomb,  and  hurls 
them  away  into  the  deep  abyss  of  forgetfuhiess,  where,  if  they  be  sought  for,  they 
shall  not  be  found  any  more  for  ever.  Then  there  was  a  third  enemy,  and  he  also 
has  been  destroyed — that  was  Satan.  Our  Saviour's  sufferings  were  not  only  an 
atonement  for  sin,  but  they  were  a  conflict  with  Satan,  and  a  conquest  over  him. 
Satan  is  a  defeated  foe.  The  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against  the  Church ;  but, 
what  is  more,  Chi'ist  has  prevailed  against  the  gates  of  heU.  As  for  Satan,  the 
posts,  and  bar,  and  all  have  been  plucked  up  from  his  citadel  in  this  sense — that 
Satan  has  now  no  reigning  power  over  believers.  He  may  bark  at  us  like  a  dog, 
and  he  may  go  about  like  a  roaring  lion,  but  to  rend  and  to  devour  are  not  in  his 
power,  in.  We  wiU  now  see  how  we  can  use  this  victory.  Surely  there  is  some 
comfort  here.  You  have  a  desire  to  be  saved  ;  God  has  impressed  you  with  a  deep 
sense  of  sin ;  the  very  strongest  wish  of  your  soul  is  that  you  might  have  peace 
with  God.  But  you  think  there  are  so  many  difficulties  in  the  way — Satan,  your 
sins,  and  I  know  not  what.  Let  me  teU  thee,  in  God's  name  there  is  no  difficulty 
whatever  in  the  way  except  in  thine  own  heart,  for  Christ  has  taken  away  the  gates 
of  Gaza — gates,  post,  bar,  and  all.  They  are  all  gone.  Is  not  this  an  incentive  for 
as  who  profess  to  be  servants  of  Christ  to  go  out  and  fight  with  the  world  and 
overcome  it  for  Christ?  Where  Jesus  leads  us  it  needs  not  much  courage  to 
foUow.  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof."  Let  us  go  and  take  , 
it  for  Him !  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  wherein  thy  great  strength 
lieth. — Man's  cannot  and  man's  can :  A  New  Year's  address : — Man  has  the  power  to 
turn  bad  things  to  a  good  account,  and  it  is  lawful  and  right  for  him  to  do  so.  On 
this  principle  we  shaU  use  these  words  of  a  bad  woman  to  a  not  very  good  man 
to  illustrate  the  ability  and  the  inabiUty  of  man.  I.  The  inability  of  man  ;  or 
WHAT  HB  has  NO  "  STRENGTH  "  FOR.     1.  He  Cannot  destroy  the  actions  of  his  life. 

2.  He  cannot  bring  back  the  neglected  opportunities  of  his  life.  3.  He  cannot  blot  ■ 
out  the  sins  of  his  life.  4.  He  cannot  arrest  the  course  of  his  life.  5.  He  cannoV 
destroy  the  influence  of  his  life.  II.  The  ability  of  man;  ob,  what  he  has^ 
"  strength  "  FOK  "I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  me."\ 
Through  the  moral  strength  of  Christ  man  can — 1.  Eeverse  the  ruling  impulse  of  \ 
his  past  sinful  life.     2.  Make  amends  for  the  pernicious  influence  of  his  past  life.  I 

3.  Remove  from  his  own  soul  the  pernicious  influence  of  his  past  life.  4.  Turn  the  ) 
very  scene  of  his  earthly  life  into  a  heaven.  (Homilist.)  The  secret  of  Sainson't 
strength : — Samson  was  not  transparent  to  the  vision  of  those  who  were  nearest 
him.  His  true  nature  was  a  riddle  they  could  not  solve.  His  phenomenal  prowess 
was  not  written  in  the  lines  of  a  vast  and  unwieldy  body,  or,  as  imagined  by  some, 
in  the  flowing  locks  of  his  hair.  It  was  no  mere  matter  of  exceptional  physique,  of 
massive  thews  and  sinews,  of  Titanic  proportions  visible  to  every  eye.  There  was 
more  in  him  than  met  the  eye,  or  the  question  would  not  have  been  repeated  with 
such  despairing  urgency,  "  TeU  me  wherein  thy  great  strength  lieth  ?  "  Did  it  spring 
from  the  dignity  and  exaltation  of  his  lot  ?    Samson  was  a  "  judge  "  in  Israel,  the 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XYi. 

"  saviour  "  of  his  tribe,  the  liberator  of  his  people,  an  "  uncrowned  ting  " ;  one  of 
those  elect  miUtary  and  moral  leaders  raised  up  in  an  era  of  gross  barbarity  and 
widespread  lawlessness  to  repress  irreligion  and  godlessness,  subdue  the  foes  of 
Israel,  caU  the  people  back  to  truth,  and  goodness,  and  God,  and  prepare  them  for 
the  acceptance  of  law  and  order  at  the  hands  of  His  earthly  representative,  a 
Divinely-given  king.  But  Samson's  strength  lay  no  more  in  his  position  than  in 
his  body.  He  had  to  make  his  opportunity  rather  than  to  take  it.  Therefore,  we 
repeat  Delilah's  inquiry  and  say — if  neither  in  the  limbs  he  used,  nor  in  the  place 
he  filled,  where  then  lay  his  great  strength  ?  I.  The  first  response,  with  all  the 
uniqueness  and  definiteness  of  inspiration,  brings  us  face  to  face  with  God.  The 
historian  of  the  judges,  with  characteristic  simplicity  and  directness,  brevity  and 
force,  traces  Samson's  power,  by  one  single  and  swift  step,  to  Jehovah,  and  credits 
his  marvellous  triumphs  to  the  mighty  and  immediate  movements  of  the  Divine 
Spirit.  His  birth  is  a  Divine  incident  and  his  nurture  the  Divine  care.  He  is 
reared  according  to  the  directions  of  God,  and  whilst  stiU  a  young  man  "  the 
Spirit  of  God  moves  him,"  "strikes"  him  repeatedly  and  with  increasing  force,  as 
the  smith  hits  and  welds  the  glowing  metal  on  the  anvU  with  his  hammer ;  "  pierces 
him  "  through  and  through  tiU  his  pain-bom  patriotism  is  unsupportable  and  he 
flings  himself  against  the  Philistines  with  the  crushing  weight  of  an  avalanche. 
From  first  to  last  the  hero's  life  is  invested  with  the  supernatural.  Samson's 
power  is  moral,  of  the  wiU  and  spirit,  and  not  merely  of  bone  and  sinew.  He  is 
not  a  giant  in  body  and  a  dwarf  in  soul.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  the  underlying  force 
of  his  character,  and  alone  secures  for  him  his  rank  in  the  long  line  of  mediators 
of  Divine  truth,  and  agents  of  Divine  revelation.  H.  Now  what  is  attributed  to 
God  directly  and  at  once  in  the  Old  Testament  is  set  down  to  the  credit  of  Samson's 
"  faith  "  in  the  New  ;  and  accordingly  this  Divine  hero  takes  his  place  in  the  long 
roll-caU  of  conquering  believers,  along  with  Abel  and  Abraham,  Jacob  and  Joseph, 
Deborah  and  David.  The  language  changes,  but  the  fact  is  the  same.  It  is  the 
view-point  that  differs.  The  historian  is  seated  on  high,  and  reads  Samson's  career 
from  beside  the  throne  of  the  Eternal.  The  key-note  is  the  same ;  both  are  struck 
in  the  high  spiritual  realm,  but  the  note  has  different  names  in  the  different 
notations  of  the  old  and  new  economies.  In  the  former  case  the  answer  to  the 
question  reads,  "  Samson  is  of  God,  and  has  overcome  them ;  because,  greater  is 
He  than  is  in  him,  than  he  that  is  in  the  world  "  ;  whilst  the  second  case  is  expressed 
in  the  language  of  the  same  writer  :  "  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world, 
even  our  faith."  But  this  is  not  all.  The  new  description  is  itself  a  positive  addition 
to  our  knowledge — another  ray  from  the  Sun  of  Bevelation.  The  same  people  do 
not  describe  the  same  facts  in  different  ways  without  a  motive.  Fresh  forces  of  the 
Spirit  are  at  work  meeting  the  fresh  needs  of  living  and  suffering  men,  in  a  fresh 
and  hving  speech,  addressed  to  the  heart  and  life.  "  True  eloquence,"  says  one  of 
our  most  recent  seers,  "  is  to  translate  a  truth  into  language  perfectly  intelligible  to 
the  person  to  whom  you  speak."  That  is  what  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  does.  In  a  sustained  stream  of  the  purest  and  most  exalted  eloquence  he 
translates  the  histories  of  Enoch  and  Noah,  Moses  and  Samson,  into  the  language 
of  the  Church  and  the  street,  brings  them  into  vital  touch  with  the  feelings  throbbing 
in  the  heart,  and  makes  the  Hebrew  Christians  to  realise  the  unity  of  their  lives, 
under  the  new  and  revolutionary  conditions  created  by  Christianity,  with  those  of 
the  fathers  of  the  human  race,  the  founders  of  the  Hebrew  nationality,  and  the 
prophets  and  leaders  of  the  revelation  of  God.  In  becoming  Christians  they  were 
not  destroying  the  law  and  the  prophets,  but  filling  out  their  programme,  advancing 
their  ideals,  and  accomplishing  their  projects.  We  can  only  discharge  our 
obligations  to  our  age  as  we  catch  the  spirit  of  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament, 
make  the  use  of  the  elder  Christianity  they  made  of  Mosaism  and  Judaism,  adopt 
a  language  that  beats  and  throbs  with  the  life  of  to-day,  and  so  reveal  the  unity  of 
human  life,  and  of  all  ages  in  the  living  and  loving  God.  HI.  Bringing  Samson, 
then,  out  of  the  ancient  Eastern  world,  and  looking  at  him  in  the  full  blaze  of  all 
the  lights  that  shine  on  human  character  in  its  making,  and  on  human  struggle  in 
its  success  and  failure,  what  is  the  answer  yielded  to  the  demand,  "  Tell  me  wherein 
thy  great  strength  lieth  ?  "  1.  No  despicable  advantaj^e,  surely,  was  that  with 
which  our  hero  started  life.  His  being  was  stored  with  force  at  his  birth.  He  had 
an  uncommon,  I  may  say,  for  that  day,  a  uniquely  opulent  inheritance.  He  was 
"  born  of  a  good  family,"  though  in  a  bad  time ;  a  family  that  dwelt  at  the  topmost 
heights  of  spiritual  consecration,  had  grandly  dared  in  the  midst  of  seething  vice 
and  irreligion  to  choose  the  most  self -suppressing  type  of  personal  and  domestic 


CHAP.  XVI.]  JUDGES.  227 

life,  and  dedicate  its  energies  to  obeying  the  most  strenuous  law  of  living  yet  made 
known,  even  that  of  the  Nazarite  vow.  No  aspiration  soared  higher.  No  range 
of  service  was  broader.  No  attitude  was  less  open  to  question.  No  position  made 
greater  demands  on  courage,  fidelity,  and  self-sacrifice.  Can  you  estimate  the 
spiritual  wealth  of  such  a  descent  ?  Have  you  any  measure  for  the  advantages  of 
such  a  home  ?  Would  not  every  day  be  an  acquisition  of  power,  and  may  we  not 
readily  believe  that  as  "  the  child  grew  the  Lord  blessed  him  "  ?  Parentage  and 
nurture  are  among  the  chief  agents  for  continuing  and  advancing  the  spiritual 
weKare  of  the  world  ;  and  so,  whilst  God  was  the  fountain-head  of  all  the  power  of 
Samson,  one  stream  of  the  spirit-force  assuredly  came  along  the  Kne  of  inherited 
sanctities  and  family  training,  constituting  him  the  typical  Nazarite,  the  chief 
example  of  that  special  phase  of  the  Hebrew  religion — at  once  of  its  splendid 
strength  and  of  its  possible  weakness.  2.  Again,  Samson's  Nazarism,  practised 
from  boyhood,  nourished  by  a  mother's  watchful  care,  and  intensified  by  his 
isolation  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  must  have  exercised  an  incalculable  power  upon 
his  mind,  and  fixed  in  the  "porcelain"  of  his  nature  the  faith  that  he  had  a 
supreme  work  to  do  for  God,  and  was  responsible  to  Him,  till  the  last  stroke  was 
given.  The  man  who  means  to  do  any  real  work  in  a  brief  life  must  know  what 
not  to  do.  Samson's  vow  was  of  signal  service  in  teaching  that.  The  root  of  his 
religion  was  separation,  and  his  vow  roused  and  stimulated  his  nature,  opened  hia 
being  to  the  access  of  God's  Spirit  with  unresisted  fulness  and  aU-subduing  might, 
developed  the  feeling  of  the  sacred  inviolability  of  his  life,  assured  him  he  could 
not  be  hurt  so  long  as  he  was  faithful  to  his  calling,  and  rendered  him  susceptible 
of  that  strength  of  will,  heroic  fearlessness,  and  resistless  dash,  which  made  him 
indomitable.  Samson  is  a  dedicated  will ;  and  once  dedicated  in  wiU  to  God  we 
are  strong  for  God  and  by  God.  3.  The  reputation  of  Samson  ha?  suffered  from 
the  grim  humour  marking  some  of  his  exploits  and  the  gigantic  and  boisterous 
mirth  that  runs  riot  through  some  of  his  achievements.  We  men  of  the  West  set  so 
high  an  estimate  on  strenuous  earnestness,  rigid  intensity,  and  serious  ardour,  that 
we  always  prefer  majesty  to  grace,  sober  sincerity  to  playful  humour.  The  massive 
dignity  and  royal  gravity  of  Milton  win  upon  us,  whilst  the  nimble  pliancy  and 
occasional  sportfulness  of  Shakespeare  are  ignored.  But  we  must  not  forget  that 
great  natures  are  rarely  wanting  in  humour.  Samson's  natural  cheerfulness ;  his 
light  and  cheerful  temperament,  sending  forth  a  full  buoyant  river  of  mirth,  was 
one  of  the  sources  of  his  strength,  saving  him  from  the  weakness  that,  in  a  time 
of  oppression  and  calamity,  nurses  care,  frets  away  power,  anticipates  disaster,  and 
wastes  existence.  Never  quailing  before  the  superiority  of  his  foes,  he  is  as  sunny 
as  he  is  strong,  as  bright  as  he  is  bold,  and  thus  is  able  to  husband  his  strength  for 
the  heaviest  demand  that  the  day  may  bring.  Joy  is  a  duty,  and  of  priceless  worth 
is  the  temperament  that  makes  obedience  easy,  opening  the  soul  to  every  genial  ray 
that  shines,  and  closing  it  to  the  access  of  brooding  care  and  darkening  anxiety. 

4.  It  was  one  of  the  darkest  hours  in  Israel's  history.  The  tribes  generally  had 
lost  heart  and  hope,  and  Judah  was  so  disorganised  that,  instead  of  co-operating 
with  Samson,  they  betrayed  him  into  the  hands  of  the  common  enemy.  Here  then 
was  urgent  need,  and  the  need  provoked  and  stimulated  Samson's  faith,  as  his  vow 
had  inspired  it.  Necessity  was  laid  upon  him.  The  Spirit  of  God  moved  him 
mightily  by  the  sight  of  the  work  to  be  done,  the  widespread  anarchy  and  confusion, 
and  the  vast  suffering  and  misery.  Consecrated  souls  are  goaded  to  battle  by  the 
sympathetic  pains  they  feel  with  the  wronged  and  the  oppressed.  Oh,  for  the  quick 
sympathy  that  sees  in  every  lost  soul  a  call  to  service,  and  in  every  national  and 
social  evil  a  Divine  summons  to  a  quenchless  zeal  in  service  for  God  and  men  1 

5.  But  the  function  of  Samson  in  revelation  would  be  most  imperfectly  discharged 
for  us  if  we  did  not  recognise  the  teaching  of  his  flagrant  and  ignominious  faU. 
Nothing  external,  though  it  be  the  purest  and  best,  can  enable  us  "  to  keep  the 
heights  the  soul  is  competent  to  gain."  God,  and  God  alone,  is  sufficient  for 
continuous  progress  and  final  victory.  {J.  Clifford,  D.D.)  Individualism  in 
religion: — The  lesson  of  Samson's  life  is  "Individualism  in  religion:  what  God 
can  accomplish  for  His  people  by  the  power  of  a  single  arm."  Wherein  lay  his 
strength?  I.  In  his  eaelt  consecration  to  God.  Aid  just  in  proportion  to  the 
degree  of  our  consecration  will  be  the  extent  of  our  influence  and  success  in  the 
Divine  service.  We  are  weak  in  the  ratio  of  what  we  reserve.  Give  up  little  for 
Christ,  and  we  will  accompUsh  little.  Give  up  all,  and  we  shall  be  more  than 
conquerors  through  Him  who  loves  us.   11.  In  doing  the  work  assigned  him.   III.  Im 

riGHTINO  WITH  IHB  WEAPON  GIVEN  HIM.    IV.  SaMSON  WAS  PREPABED  TO  DIE  TOB  HIS  CAUSB. 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

And  Samson  said,  *'  Let  me  die  with  the  Philistines."  This  was  the  Hebrew  warrior's 
greatest  and  most  heroic  exploit.  He  gave  his  hf  e  for  his  country.  (R.  Balgarnie,  D.D.) 
His  soul  was  vexed  unto  death. — The  gradual  and  subtle  advance  of  sin  : — That 
story  of  the  blandishments  of  Delilah  is  compassed  in  a  few  verses,  but  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  I  presume,  it  spreads  over  a  considerable  time.  Delilah  could  not  have 
overcome  a  man  of  native  wit  and  ready  perception  like  Samson  by  bringing  those 
snares  against  him  in  a  short  period ;  but  she  might  now,  with  soft,  silent  look, 
woo  the  secret  from  his  heart ;  then,  changing  her  humour,  she  would  try  the 
loving  petulance  of  the  toy  of  his  love  as  she  was  :  "  How  canst  thou  say  thou 
lovest  me,  seeing  thou  withholdest  this  secret  from  me  ?  "  Then  inch  by  inch  she 
wearied  out  the  strength  of  resistance,  and  then  came  that  terrible  catastrophe  ;  but 
it  was  slow,  very  slow.  He  felt  himself  strong  through  it  all,  perchance;  but 
because  he  felt  himself  strong,  the  snare  was  biting  through  the  very  joints  of  his 
harness ;  and  when  the  day  of  danger  and  necessity  came,  it  feU  from  off  him,  and 
left  him  a  victim  to  the  powers  of  the  enemy.  Now,  you  are  an  old  man ;  white 
hairs  are  upon  your  head.  Did  you  notice  their  growth  ?  Did  you  notice  how  one 
by  one  they  began  to  whiten  ?  Did  you  not  rather,  the  first  day  you  noticed  that 
symptom  of  coming  age,  pluck  out  the  recreant  hair  and  cast  it  aside  as  a  mere 
accidental  thing  ?  But  it  grew  notwithstanding,  till  it  frosted  your  head.  You  see 
it  is  bleak,  cold  winter,  and  there  is  not  a  leaf  to  be  seen,  and  the  earth  is  bound 
up  in  its  snowy  coat ;  you  never  noticed  how  it  stole  in,  and  how  bright,  warm 
summer  and  the  green  leaves  turned  to  the  crispness  of  the  sere  and  yellow  leaf,  and 
one  by  one  dropped  away,  till  at  length  winter  came  and  killed  the  last  leaf  that 
fluttered  in  the  cold  wind.  You  did  not  notice  this,  but  it  came  on.  Or  see  yon 
noble  berg  that  floats  in  the  northern  seas,  and  upon  its  pinnacled  crown  the  bright 
spring  sunshine  plays  till  it  lights  it  up  into  a  diadem  of  glory.  How  majestically 
it  floats  upon  the  blue  bosom  of  these  waters  I  Then  suddenly  as  in  an  instant  you 
see  that  mighty  diadem  of  crystal  pinnacles  plunge  into  the  depths.  Sudden  ?  no, 
not  sudden  at  all.  Sudden  in  its  collapse,  sudden  in  its  end  ;  but  the  warm  waters 
of  the  springtide  far  beneath  the  broad  base  which  weighted  it  so  well  were  lapping 
away  its  strength  and  melting  down  the  icy  surface,  and  then,  when  the  gravity 
was  just  pitched  over,  it  fell.  So  gradual  is  sin.  You  go  on  in  all  the  joyousness 
of  your  sinnership  ;  you  glory  that  you  at  least  have  been  free  from  all  the  grievous 
pestilences  which  hang  about  sin:  aye,  go  on,  and  float  down  towards  the  south, 
and  remember  that  the  warm  currents  which  you  do  not  notice  are  eating  out  the 
strength  of  your  life,  and  your  fall  wiU  be  sudden,  in  an  instant,  because  you  have 
not  noticed  its  gradual  approach.  You  do  not  notice  that  first  sin ;  you  feel  that  it 
has  not  produced  any  great  impression  upon  you ;  but  toils  are  being  prepared,  and 
/inch  by  inch  you  are  let  down  to  the  very  edge.  It  is  only  taken  to  put  back  again ; 
/it  is  only  keeping  a  little  longer;  it  is  only  preparing  the  way  for  disgrace  and 
■  exposure.  It  is  only  a  light  laugh  at  the  corner  of  the  street,  and  a  merry  innocent 
freak  with  a  strange  coy  face  that  meets  you.  It  is  only  tarrying  a  while  to  speak 
a  word  of  ready  and  easy  good-humoured  jest.  But  her  ways  lead  down  to  hell, 
and  her  end  is  in  the  grave.  (B}).  Boyd  Carpenter.)  If  I  be  shaven,  then  my 
strength  will  go  from  me. — The  gianVs  locks  : — I.  Learn  how  very  strong  people 
ARE  SOMETIMES  COAXED  INTO  GREAT  IMBECILITIES.  Thosc  who  have  the  kindest  and 
most  sympathetic  natures  are  the  most  in  danger.  The  warmth  and  susceptibility 
of  your  nature  will  encourage  the  siren.  Though  strong  as  a  giant,  look  out  for 
Delilah's  scissors.  H.  This  narrative  teaches  us  the  power  of  an  ill-disposed 
WOMAN.  While  the  most  excellent  and  triumphant  exhibitions  of  character  we  find 
among  the  women  of  history,  and  the  world  thrills  with  the  names  of  Marie 
Antoinette  and  Josephine  and  Joan  of  Arc  and  Maria  Theresa  and  hundreds  of 
others,  who  have  ruled  in  the  brightest  homes  and  sung  the  sweetest  cantos,  and 
enchanted  the  nations  with  their  art,  and  swayed  the  mightiest  of  sceptres,  on  the 
other  hand  the  names  of  Mary  the  First  of  England,  Margaret  of  France,  Julia  of 
Eome,  and  Elizabeth  Petrowna  of  Eussia  have  scorched  the  eye  of  history  with 
their  abominations,  and  their  names,  like  banished  spirits,  have  gone  shrieking  and 
cursing  through  the  world.  "Woman  stands  nearest  the  gate  of  heaven  or  nearest 
the  door  of  hell.  "When  adorned  by  grace  she  reaches  a  point  of  Christian  elevation 
which  man  cannot  attain,  and  when  blasted  by  crime  she  sinks  deeper  than  man 
can  plunge.  HI.  Consider  some  of  the  ways  in  which  strong  men  get  theib 
LOCKS  shorn.  The  strength  of  men  is  variously  distributed.  Sometimes  it  hes  in 
physical  development,  sometimes  in  intellectual  attainment,  sometimes  in  heart 
force,  sometimes  in  social  position,  sometimes  in  financial  accumulation ;  and  there 


CHAP.  XVI  ]  JUDGES.  229 

is  always  a  shears  ready  to  destroy  it.  Every  day  there  are  Samsons  nngianted.  I 
saw  a  young  man  start  in  life  under  the  most  cheering  advantages.  His  acute  mind 
was  at  home  in  all  scientific  dominions.  But  he  began  to  tamper  with  brilliant 
free-thinking.  Modern  theories  of  the  soul  threw  over  him  their  blandishments. 
Scepticism  was  the  Delilah  that  shore  his  locks  off,  and  all  the  Philistines  of  doubt 
alid"  cTafEfiess  and  despair  were  upon  him.  He  died  in  a  very  prison  of  unbelief,  his 
eyes  out.  Far  back  ia  the  country  districts  there  was  born  one  whose  fame  will 
last  as  long  as  American  institutions.  His  name  was  the  terror  of  all  enemies  of 
free  government.  He  stood  the  admired  of  millions  ;  the  nation  uncovered  in  his 
presence,  and  when  he  spoke  senates  sat  breathless  under  the  speU.  The  plotters 
against  good  government  attempted  to  bind  htm  with  green  withes  and  weave  his 
locks  in  a  web,  yet  he  walked  forth  from  the  enthralment,  not  knowing  he  had 
burst  a  bond.  But  from  the  wine-cup  there  arose  a  destroying  spirit  that  came 
forth  to  capture  his  soul.  He  drank  until  his  eyes  grew  dim,  and  his  knees  knocked 
together,  and  his  strength  failed.  Exhausted  with  lifelong  dissipations,  he  went 
home  to  die.  It  was  strong  drink  that  came  like  the  infamous  Delilah,  and  his 
locks  were  shorn.  Evil  associations,  sudden  successes,  spendthrift  habits,  miserly 
procUvities  and  dissipation,  are  the  names  of  some  of  the  shears  with  which  men 
are  every  day  made  powerless.  They  have  strewn  the  earth  with  the  carcases  of 
giants,  and  filled  the  great  prison  houses  with  destroyed  Samsons,  who  sit  grinding 
the  mills  of  despair,  their  locks  shorn  and  their  eyes  out.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage^ 
Made  him  sleep  upon  her  knees. — The  victim  and  the  victor : — I  remember  once 
walking  with  a  man  over  a  large  mortgaged  farm ;  the  poor  owner  had  fallen 
somehow  in  the  rear  of  life  ;  and  some  years  before  he  had  mortgaged  the  whole 
property.  He  began  life  badly,  and  when  I  knew  him  he  had  been  past  the  prime 
of  life,  for  some  time  ineffectually  trying  to  overtake  old  mistakes.  But  it  is  a 
difficult  matter  for  the  wisdom  of  to-day  to  overtake  the  folly  of  yesterday.  Thus 
a  mortgaged  life  is  far  more  affecting  and  hopeless  than  a  mortgaged  farm  ;  and 
there  are  those  who  mortgage  their  lives,  and  they  cannot  redeem  them.  Some 
mortgage  health  by  the  excesses  of  intemperance.  Oh,  it  is  a  sad  spectacle,  a  man 
trying  to  overtake  or  trying  to  repossess  a  mortgaged  life.  Of  course  a  nature  like 
Samson's  was  especially  in  danger  from  women  ;  and  there  were  women  in  Sorek  1 
His  is  the  old  story ;  so  all  these  heroes  fell.  Thus  it  was  with  Hercules  and 
Omphale ;  and  Hercules,  as  we  have  said,  was  the  strong  Samson  of  the  ancient 
classic  world ;  his  story  is  so  like  that  of  Samson  that  some  have  not  unnaturally 
supposed  it  derived  from  Hebrew  story.  Omphale  was  the  queen  of  Lydia,  and 
Hercules  fell  in  love  with  her,  and  became  her  slave  for  three  years,  and  led  an 
effeminate  life  in  winding  and  carding  wool,  while  Omphale  wore  the  skin  of  the 
tremendous  Nemean  lion  he  had  slain !  What  a  parable !  He  had  squeezed  the  lion 
to  death  ;  and  Omphale  pressed  out  his  manhood  in  her  embrace  I  Thus  it  was 
with  Antony  and  Cleopatra ;  thus  it  was  with  Henry  IV.  of  France.  Few,  hke 
Ulysses,  have  passed  in  safety  the  isle  of  Syrens  ;  few  escape  Calypso !  One  of  the 
great  masters  of  modern  poetry  has,  with  subtle  and  matchless  power,  in  the 
"  Idylls  of  the  King,"  drawn  in  Vivien  the  very  illustration  of  the  history  before 
US  ;  you  pity,  you  feel  contempt  for,  the  great  prince  lying  there,  his  head  in  the  lap 
of  the  Syren  of  Sorek ;  you  cannot  believe  it  I  You  say,  "  Did  he  not  know  ?  "  You 
say,  "  Could  there  be  such  matchless  folly  ?  Could  he  surrender  his  secret  ?  "  Yes, 
wise  men  fall,  great  men  fall !  Notice  the  manner  of  Samson's  fall ;  it  was  by  the 
extox-tion  of  his  secret ;  therefore  has  it  been  said,  '•  Keep  thine  heart  with  all 
dihgence,  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues,"  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  within  it  is  the 
secret  of  life.  There  are  around  us  constantly  those  who  seek  to  know  our  secret, 
the  secret  of  our  strength  and  of  our  weakness ;  for  there  is  a  dangerous  secret, 
there  is  in  all  of  us  a  charm ;  we  know  it.  Surrender  to  others  the  charm,  and 
they  nut  it  forth  against  us.  And  then  the  victim  lies  dead  ;  "  lost  to  life,  and  use, 
and  name,  and  fame. "  You  remember  the  wonderful  dream  of  John  Newton.  He 
was,  he  thought,  in  the  harbour  of  Venice,  on  the  deck  of  a  ship,  when  a  stranger 
brought  him  a  ring  of  inestimable  value,  giving  him  charge  to  keep  it,  because  its 
loss  would  entail  on  him  trouble  and  misery.  The  ring  was  accepted,  and  also  the 
responsibility  of  keeping  it ;  but  while  he  was  meditating  on  the  value  of  the  ring, 
a  second  person  appeared.  He  talked  to  him  about  the  supposed  value  and  virtues 
of  the  ring ;  he  laughed  at  the  idea  of  its  value,  and,  in  the  end,  advised  him  to 
throw  it  away.  He  plucked  it  from  his  finger,  and  threw  it  into  the  sea.  Imme- 
diately, from  the  Alps,  behind  Venice,  burst  forth  flames;  and  the  tempter, 
aughing,  told  bim  that  he  was  a  fool,  that  the  whole  mercy  of  God  was  in  that 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xyi. 

ring.  He  trembled  with  agony  and  fear,  when  a  third  person  came,  or  the  same 
who  had  first  given  him  the  ring ;  he  blamed  his  rashness,  but,  exactly  where  the 
ring  went  down,  he  plunged,  and  brought  it  up  again ;  instantly  the  Alps  ceased 
their  burning,  and  the  seducer  fled.  He  approached  his  friend,  expecting  to  receive 
again  the  ring.  "  No,"  said  his  friend,  "  if  you  kept  it,  you  would  soon  bring  your- 
self into  the  same  distress.  You  are  not  able  to  keep  it ;  I  will  keep  it  for  you,  and 
produce  it,  when  needful,  on  your  behalf."  A  wonderful  dream — do  not  doubt  it. 
We  all  have  something  to  keep — something  precious.  We  must  not  let  the  enemy 
of  our  spirits  steal  our  secret  from  us.  Do  you  remember  Samson  in  the  lap  of 
Delilah  ?  Samson  had  his  secret ;  "  Show  me,"  said  the  crafty  woman,  "  wherein  thy 
great  strength  lieth."  But  Samson  kept  his  secret.  "  How  canst  thou  say,"  said 
she,  "  I  love  thee,  when  thy  heart  is  not  with  me  ?  "  So  he  gave  up  his  secret ;  he 
parted  with  his  heart.  "  Then,  in  one  moment,  she  put  forth  the  charm  of  woven 
paces  and  waving  hands ;  and  he  lay  as  dead,  and  lost  to  life,  and  use,  and  name, 
and  fame."  Then  they  burst  forth  into  laughter.  "  Ha  1  ha  1  ha  1  Samson,  where 
is  thy  secret  now  ?  Ha !  ha  1  "  But  he  had  parted  with  his  heart ;  he  had  lost,  he 
had  mortgaged  his  secret.  "  And  was  lost  to  life,  and  use,  and  name,  and  fame." 
And  what  a  spectacle  is  that  of  Samson  asleep !  Behold  here  the  recklessness,  the 
carelessness,  of  the  tempted  soul.  There  is  but  one  thing  more  ;  the  price  of  hia 
ruin  is  paid,  now  awake  him !  "  The  Philistines  be  upon  thee,  Samson  I  And  he 
awoke  out  of  his  sleep,  and  said,  I  will  go  out  as  at  other  times  before,  and  shake 
myself.  And  he  wist  not  that  the  Lord  had  departed  from  him."  He  rouses,  but 
all  is  lost  1  How  strange  it  all  seemed ;  how  new  1  Where  am  I  ?  What  ?  "  No 
\  man  knows  well  the  value  of  what  he  has  had  until  he  has  lost  it.  A  character 
'  gone  I  Young  Weltly  sat  at  his  desk ;  a  clerk  came  to  him  and  said,  "  Weltly,  Mr. 
Drummond,  the  principal,  wants  to  speak  to  you."  He  went  into  the  ofHce ;  he 
knew  1  The  principal  looked  to  the  inspector  of  poUce  standing  by.  "  There's  your 
prisoner,  sir."  And  the  lost  young  man  held  out  his  hands  mechanically  for  the 
handcuffs.  Poor  boy  1  they  were  not  needed,  but  it  was  a  lost  life !  So  here 
strength  is  gone  !  character  is  gone  I  Israel  has  lost  her  hero  1  her  hero  has  lost 
himself  I  He  surrendered  "  the  secret  of  the  Lord,"  which  is  only  "  with  them  that 
fear  Him,"  and  awoke  to  find  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  departed  from  him  1  {E.  P. 
/■Hood.)  Samson  shorn  of  his  strength  : — Learn  how  it  was  that  Samson  waa 
/shorn  of  his  strength.  1.  Because  he  was  not  equally  strong  in  aU  directions. 
2.  Because  he  ventured  too  far  into  temptation.  Samson  allowed  Delilah  to  bind 
him  with  green  withes,  &c.  "  He  laid  his  head  in  her  lap,"  &c.  Beyond  a  certain 
point  retreat  was  impossible.  3.  Because  he  rehed  upon  his  own  strength.  He  did 
not  realise  that  his  strength  was  from  God.  It  is  a  sad  experience  that  teaches 
men  what  Philip  Melanchthon  learned  at  last,  "  that  Satan  was  stronger  than 
Philip."  (The Preacher^ s  Monthly.)  I  will  go  out  as  at  other  times. — The  evil  of 
knowing  evil: — These  were  the  words  of  a  man  once  strong,  who  found,  to  hia 
amazement,  that  he  had,  thi'ough  his  own  fault,  lost  that  in  which  his  strength  lay. 
What  do  you  try  to  keep  from  your  children  ?  Is  it  not  the  knowledge  of  evil  ? 
Their  innocence  you  feel  to  be  their  safety,  as  you  know  it  is  your  admiration. 
You  preserve  it  to  them  while  you  can.  Why  ?  Because  when  it  is  gone  they  are 
not  the  same.  At  best  they  go  out  as  at  other  times  before  and  shake  themselves : 
they  are  not  aware  that,  for  a  season  at  least,  the  Lord  has  departed  from  them. 
Their  history  is  the  universal  history.    I.  There  are,  no  doubt,  mani  subjects 

ABOUT  WHICH  WE  HAVE  LEARNED  SOMETHING,  AND  ABOUT  WHICH  NEVERTHELESS  WE  KNOW 
VERY  LITTLE  AFTERWARDS,  AND  FEEL  LITTLE  INCLINATION  TO  MAKE  EXPEKIMENTS.   This 

is,  probably,  the  case  with  all  sorts  of  studies  except  one ;  and  that  one  varies  in 
different  persons.  What  would  afford  me  extreme  gratification  might  be  to  some 
one  else  a  very  wearisome  pursuit ;  while  his  favourite  subject  would  have  no 
charms  for  me.  And  so  he  might  have  gained  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  my 
pursuit,  or  I  into  the  nature  of  his,  without  any  danger  of  either  of  us  injuring  our 
prospects  or  losing  our  time  by  following  the  pursuit  of  the  other  to  the  neglect  of 
his  own.  Now  this  safeguard,  you  will  see  at  once,  is  wanting  as  regards  the 
knowledge  of  evil.  We  have  naturally  a  decided  taste  for  wickedness.  Here,  then, 
is  an  answer  to  the  common  excuses  for  becoming  unnecessarily  acquainted  with 
the  evil  that  is  being  done  in  the  world.  It  is  admitted  that  the  practice  of  sin  is 
injurious.  Well,  the  taste  is  so  decided  in  your  heart,  that  the  likelihood  of  your 
stopping  short  and  being  satisfied  with  mere  knowledge  is  reduced  to  almost 
nothing.  In  your  own  sUength  you  surely  cannot  resist.  Strength  from  on  high 
how  oan  you  expect  when  you  are  tempting  Qod  ?    On  what,  Uien,  are  you  to 


CHAP.  XVI.]  JUDGES.  231 

depend  to  preserve  you  from  going  beyond  knowledge  if  you  once  get  it?  On 
nothing.     Then  you  had  better  not  have  the  knowledge.     11.  But,  besides  this, 

IT   IS   A    FACT    IN  OUB  NATURE  THAT  THE  DESIRE  OP  KNOWLEDGE  IS  CONNECTED  WITH  THE 

DESIRE  OF  SOCIETY.  Now  how  wUl  this  work  in  the  case  under  our  consideration  ? 
The  man  who  has  acquired  a  knowledge  of  evil  from  pursuing  it  as  a  study,  must 
seek  for  the  society  of  those  already  acquainted  with  it,  or  of  those  not  already 
acquainted  with  it.  Of  the  former  class — those  already  acquainted  with  it — how 
many  of  those  he  meets  are  likely  to  have  stopped  short  at  that  point?  and  how 
many  are  likely  to  be  satisfied  so  long  as  he  stops  short  of  it  ?  But  suppose,  on  the 
other  hand,  that  the  associates  chosen  be  those  to  whom  the  knowledge  of  evil  is 
new,  and  to  whom  it  may  be  imparted.  See  what  an  infinity  of  mischief  you  are 
bringing  about,  even  supposing — and  it  is  a  very  wild  supposition — that  you  avoid 
actually  committing  the  sins  about  which  you  are  so  anxious  to  acquire  and  to  impart 
knowledge  I  There  is,  literally,  no  end  to  the  mischief.  You  have  made  yom-self 
Satan's  missionary.  The  effects  of  your  first — perhaps  thoughtless — effort  you 
never  can  reverse.  III.  There  is  yet  another  important  practical  evil  resulting 
from  the  knowledge  of  sins,  even  though  we  neither  practise  them  nor  speak  of 
them ;  that  is,  the  tendency  of  such  knowledge  to  deaden  in  our  own  minds  the 

SENSE     OF    SIN    AS    SUCH,     TO    DIVERT    US    FROM    VIEWING    IT    AS     SOMETHING    UTTERLY 

antagonistic  AND  ABHORRENT  TO  A  PURE  AND  HOLY  GoD,  as  Something  SO  bad  that  to 
save  us  from  it  Christ,  who  was  very  God,  died  on  the  Cross.  There  are  very  many 
cases  where  repentance  seems  doubtful  not  so  much  from  an  unwillingness  to 
abandon  particular  acts  of  sin,  as  from,  apparently,  an  utter  incapability  to  com- 
prehend the  nature  of  sin  itself.  So  difficult  is  it  when  once  we  have  left  the  path 
of  safety,  which  we  trod  with  the  Divine  aid,  to  return  to  it  again — so  impossible  to 
come  back  to  it  as  we  left  it.  In  presumptuous  security  we  part  with  the  innocences 
■which  was  the  secret  of  our  success,  forgetting  that  our  strength  was  dependent ! 
upon  its  preservation.  In  an  unfounded  conviction  that  at  any  time  a  little  effort^ 
will  restore  us  to  the  position  which  we  wantonly  abandon,  we  do  wantonly  abandon 
it  and  slumber  unconscious  of  our  loss,  until  at  last,  like  Samson  in  the  text, 
awakened  from  our  sleep  we  say,  "I  will  go  out  as  at  other  times  before,  and  shake 
myself" — not  knowing  that  "the  Lord  is  departed  from  us."  No  words  of  mine 
could  at  all  convey  to  you  my  deep  sense  of  the  inestimable  benefit  of  following  all 
through  hfe  the  injunction  of  the  wise  man,  "Enter  not  into  the  path  of  the 
wicked,  and  go  not  in  the  way  of  evil  men.  Avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn  from  it, 
and  pass  away."  (J.  C.  Coghlan,  D.D.)  As  at  other  times  : — Now  the  story  of 
Samson  is  told  in  this  book,  just  in  the  characteristic  fashion  of  Bible  biography. 
There  is  nothing  extenuated,  and  there  is  nothing  concealed.  Here  you  have  the 
man  as  he  is — in  his  strength  and  his  weakness,  in  his  right-doing  and  his  wrong- 
doing. Now,  in  the  story  of  Samson  itself  there  is  nothing  very  puzzling.  The  one 
puzzling  thing  about  it  is  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  where  we  find  this  man 
canonised  as  one  of  the  heroes  of  faith.  Now,  as  we  candidly  read  the  story,  we 
must  confess  that  Samson  does  not  seem  to  have  very  much  religion  about  him. 
That  unshorn  hair  was  a  solemn  thing  to  him.  It  marked  out  a  certain  dedication 
of  him  to  God,  a  certain  separation  of  him  among  men.  But  so  far  as  we  can  see 
that  is  aU  the  religion  that  Samson  had  about  him.  Whence  that  verdict  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  ?  There  is  no  doubt  that  Samson  was  possessed  of  a  certain 
faith  in  the  God  of  Israel,  and  in  Israel's  future,  which  did  help  to  redeem  his  life 
from  utter  ignobleness,  which  did  inspire  him  to  make  a  part  of  that  history  that 
leads  up  to  Christ.  As  I  understand,  that  is  all  that  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  says.  Samsonij  an  illustration  of  how  far  a  hberal,  true,  and  noble  faith 
wiU  go  to  redeem  whatl  s  essentially  a  poor  life  from  utter  ignobleness.  Samson's 
life  is  far  from  that  of  inspiration  and  example.  He  is  here  rather  as  a  signal 
•warning.  I  daresay  some  of  you  are  familiar  with  Milton's  poem  of  Samson 
Agonistes.  If  so,  let  me  remind  you  that  the  Samson  of  the  Bible  is  not  at  all  the 
Samson  of  the  poem.  Milton's  tragedy  depicts  Samson  as  a  stately,  majestic,  fallen 
hero,  great  and  admirable  in  every  respect,  even  in  his  overthrow.  The  Samson  of 
the  Book  of  Judges  is  quite  another  man.  I  do  not  think  that  he  is,  on  the  whole, 
a  man  whom  you  can  possibly  respect,  though  I  think  he  is  a  man  that  you  cannot 
possibly  help  liking.  A  boyish,  sunny,  radiant  soul — keen  for  life  as  he  understands 
it.  Just  the  sort  of  man  to  be  exposed  to  extra  temptation  by  the  very  quaUties  that 
were  fitted  to  make  him  so  popular.  Aye,  we  too  need  that  natural  and  happy 
hopefulness  in  God's  campaigns — and  we  have  too  little  of  it.  We  are  too  sour  and 
grim,  we  who  fight  His  battles.  And  yet,  I  think,  there  is  a  false  ring  in  Samson's 

i6 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xti. 

laughter.  There  is  just  a  touch  of  the  crackling  of  the  thorns  under  the  pot,  of  the 
noisy  laughter  of  the  fool.  The  youth  of  him  was  the  best  of  him  ;  and  that  is  a 
hard  thing  to  say  of  any  man.  The  strongest  man  of  his  day,  he  was  about  essen- 
tially the  weakest  man  of  his  day.  No  doubt  he  did  much  to  save  his  country ;  he  began 
to  save  Israel  from  the  Philistines.  But  himself  he  could  not  save.  First  of  all, 
glance  at  his  childhood  and  youth  in  Zorah,  for  that  is  the  first  chapter  of  his  life. 
Kow  the  story  of  Samson's  birth  is  as  beautiful  and  tender  as  a  summer  morning. 
And  how  mother  and  father  resolve  together  that  the  life  God  would  have  then-  boy 
lead  they,  by  God's  grace,  will  help  him  towards.  They  will  not  take  God's  gift 
apart  from  God's  purpose.  They  will  not  plan  their  boy's  career  to  please  them- 
selves. And  so,  under  these  hajipy  auspices,  the  boy  is  born,  and  under  such  a 
training  he  grows  up  in  his  happy  youth  until  the  time  comes  that,  as  an  Israelite, 
he  must  take  his  responsible  part  in  the  burden  and  the  pain  of  his  people.  And 
now  I  think  we  may  entitle  the  second  chapter,  "  Samson  in  the  camp  of  Dan." 
There  he  has  betaken  himself,  with  his  consecrated  life,  where  the  manhood  of  his 
tribe  are  wont  to  gather  for  military  exercise,  or  perhaps  for  grave  counsel  concern- 
ing the  public  peril ;  for  they  seemed  to  be  ever  in  peril  in  those  days.  There  his 
forefathers,  long  ago,  had  established  their  camp.  There  was  the  ancestral  burying- 
place  of  his  people.  There  he  felt  himself  moved  nearer  to  all  that  was  great  and 
glorious  in  the  world  and  in  the  history  of  his  people.  There  we  read  "  The  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  moved  him  in  the  camp  of  Dan."  And  I  think  that  to  all  of  us  ere  we 
took  our  plunge  into  life  there  came  this  same  experience  in  some  sacred  spot  when 
a  vision  was  given  us  of  the  future  that  dawned  so  fair  for  us  when  we  were 
children,  but  now  shown  so  near,  a  vision  of  the  heaving  and  wresting  of  immortal 
powers,  of  the  battle  between  good  and  evil,  between  God  and  the  world ;  and  when 
we  felt,  oh,  a  great  scorn  of  the  world  and  the  trivial  and  the  selfish,  and  a  great 
purpose  to  strike  in  and  strike  out  on  the  right  side — to  be  for  God  and  for  God'a 
cause  in  this  world,  to  win  the  glory  that  is  of  God.  Well,  well,  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord,  I  venture  to  say,  hath  moved  us  all  in  the  camp  of  Dan.  And  now  we  pass 
on  to  the  third  chapter,  and  we  may  entitle  it  "  Samson  in  Gaza,"  or  "  Samson 
plunging  into  Life,"  or  if  you  prefer,  "  Peril  and  Pleasure  in  Gaza."  Gaza  was  the 
chief  seaport  of  the  Philistines,  a  great  commercial  city,  a  gay,  pleasure-loving 
place,  contrasting  strikingly  with  the  quiet  monotony  of  the  home-life  in  the  tribe 
of  Dan.  And,  although  Samson's  first  visit  to  Gaza  is  first  spoken  of  well  on  in  his 
life,  there  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  he  had  visited  Gaza  in  early  youth.  Gaza  lay 
very  near  to  the  camp  of  Dan,  and  there  all  that  he  had  purposed  and  felt  was  to 
be  put  to  the  test.  The  fact  is,  there  is  no  escaping  Gaza  for  you  and  me.  We 
have  to  mix  with  life.  One  ought,  in  one  sense,  to  trust  life  utterly.  You  cannot 
believe  too  strongly  in  the  good  of  life,  and  in  all  that  you  can  get  from  life  if  you 
live  it  rightly.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  one  is  bound  to  say  you  must  distrust  life. 
Ah,  it  is  life  that  undoes  folk,  and  undoes  them  smilingly  and  tenderly,  as  Delilah 
undid  Samson  in  Gaza.  It  is  life  that  lays  the  unholy  hand  on  the  holy  secret, 
that  asks  insinuatingly,  "  Tell  me,  tell  me,  wherein  the  secret  of  thy  strength  lies. 
Tell  me  what  makes  thee  different  from  other  folk.     Tell  me  what  prevents  thee 

now  from  coming  in  with  us.     Tell  me "  and  wins  the  secret  from  us,  laying 

the  unholy  hand  upon  the  holy  secret  for  the  unholy  purpose.  So  Samson  in  Gaza 
gives  himself  away.  Not  knowingly,  mark  you.  He  believed  that  even  if  he  got 
into  some  kind  of  mess,  he  was  strong  enough  to  get  out  of  it.  He  believed  that  he 
could  touch  the  fire  and  not  be  burnt.  Samson  one  day  woke  up  finding  he  had 
made  a  mistake,  but  saying  to  himself,  •'  Well,  I  must  retrieve  ;  I  will  go  out  as  at 
other  times,  and  resume  my  life."  But  he  was  never  more  to  go  out  as  at  other 
times.  He  had  gone  too  far ;  he  had  done  it  once  too  often  ;  he  had  given  way  too 
much.  Now,  it  seems  to  me  that  this  is  the  teaching  of  Samson's  life.  The  man 
had  no  principle,  no  definite  and  consecutive  purpose  in  life.  Even  an  inferior 
principle,  even  any  kind  of  purpose,  would  have  spared  him  much  that  he 
suffered.  Why,  one  would  rather  have  seen  that  man  set  himself  to  be  a 
millionaire  than  drift  as  he  did ;  one  would  rather  see  the  man's  heart  given  to 
gold  than  to  Delilah.  But  the  man  had  no  purpose  at  all,  he  had  no  rudder 
to  steer  by.  That  man  was  doomed  to  drift  upon  the  rocks,  to  make  shipwreck  of 
his  life.  Ah,  what  a  strange  and  awful  trust  this  life  of  ours  is  I  It  is  the  one  thing 
that  you  must  not  play  with.  You  must  take  it  very  seriously.  The  gift  that  God 
gives  you,  if  you  do  not  use  it  properly,  it  will  undo  you.  "I  will  go  out  as  at 
other  times."  That  is  the  history  of  every  temptation  and  of  every  failure.  That 
is  the  encouragement  every  one  applies  to  his  soul,  ere  he  goes  into  temptation. 


CHAP.  XVI.]  JUDGES.  233 

Tou  cannot  do  that.  It  cannot  be  with  you  as  it  was,  you  who  have 
yielded  to  the  temptress,  you  who  have  yielded  to  sin.  Oh,  then,  you  must 
come  straight  back  to  God,  and  get  His  forgiveness,  and  begin  life  again 
with  His  help.  But  be  very  sure  you  can  never  without  that  leave 
your  sin  behind  you;  you  cannot  go  out  as  at  other  times.  (J.  Durran.) 
He  wi3t  not  that  the  Lord  was  departed  from  him. — Moral  strength : — I.  The 
BOUBCE  OF  Samson's  strength.  Evidently  then  there  was  a  supernatural  element 
in  it.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Samson's  vow  as  a  Nazarite  bound  him  to  a  mode 
of  life  calculated  to  secure  a  healthy,  vigorous  physical  development ;  and  the 
rationalist  will  contend  that  that  of  itself  is  a  sufficient  explanation  of  the  matter. 
There  was  both  the  natural  and  the  supernatural.  And  is  not  Samson's  strength 
in  these  respects  typical  of  a  higher  strength,  that  which  is  moral  and  spiritual? 
Here  also  we  may  discern  two  elements,  the  Divine  and  himian.  The  hio^hest  form  , 
of  strength,  the  strength  of  goodness,  by  which  a  man  triumphs  over  evil,  and 
which  finds  its  highest  joy  in  holy  and  righteous  action,  is  not  to  be  gained  by  a 
life  of  dreamy  contemplation,  or  by  sitting  still  and  affecting  that  God  will  some 
day  transform  us  into  giants.  It  is  to  be  attained  by  self-denial,  self-sacrifice,  and 
true  work.  II.  The  loss  of  Samson's  stkength.  Now,  what  is  the  key  to  this 
Bad  affair  ?  In  one  word,  it  is  weakness  ;  and  that  is  the  key  to  half  the  wicked- 
ness committed  in  the  world.  When  temptation  presents  itself,  instead  of  saying 
with  a  soul  in  utter  revolt,  "  How  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness  and  sin  against 
God?  "  men  stop  to  think  and  dally,  and  once  that  is  done  there  is  fearful  danger. 
They  never  intend  doing  any  harm ;  they  have  good  feelings  and  desires,  and  yet 
through  moral  weakness  commit  all  kinds  of  wickedness,  and  involve  themselves 
and  others  in  misery.  If  we  would  be  safe  from  breakdown,  we  must  have  a  well- 
fortified  moral  character.  Guard  scrupulously  the  outworks ;  beware  of  everything 
that  is  morally  enervating.  If  we  fail  to  do  this,  ere  we  are  aware  we  may  find 
ourselves  shorn  of  our  strength.  HI.  The  restoration  op  Samson's  strength. 
Have  we  not  here  the  conditions  of  moral  restoration,  with  its  limitations  ?  The 
first  condition  is  a  painful  consciousness  of  weakness.  Without  this  a  man  will 
never  desire  any  change  in  his  condition,  and  therefore  he  will  never  seek  any. 
There  must  further  be  a  realisation  of  the  folly  and  wickedness  of  his  conduct, 
producing  sincere  regret  for  it  and  earnest  desires  and  resolution  of  amendment. 
Hence,  in  true  penitence  there  is  an  element  that  will  deter  a  man  from  committing 
the  sin  again.  And  then  there  must  also  be  the  prayer  of  faith.  Samson  prayed 
and  looked  for  an  immediate  answer.  But  there  is  something  lost  never  to  be 
regained.  Samson's  strength  was  restored,  but  not  his  eyesight ;  and  he  lost  his 
life  into  the  bargain.  And  that  typifies  a  solemn  truth.  The  man  who,  like 
Samson  or  David,  is  guilty  of  glaring  sin,  may,  by  the  mercy  and  grace  of  God, 
be  restored ;  but  he  can  never  regain  the  feeling  of  comparative  innocence  he  once 
enjoyed.  To  the  backslider  these  thoughts  should  bring  sadness  indeed,  but  not 
despair,  {Joseph  Bitson.)  The  man  who  has  trifled  once  too  often: — The  text 
speaks  of  one  who  has  trifled  once  too  often.  He  has  allowed  some  influence,  it 
scarcely  matters  what,  to  steal  from  him  the  secret  of  his  strength.  He  has  parted 
with  it  by  his  own  folly — in  a  certain  sense,  with  his  eyes  open — and  yet  he  treats 
it  as  still  recoverable  by  the  exercise  of  quite  a  common  kind  of  effort  and  of 
resolution.  "  I  wiU  go  out,"  he  says,  "  as  at  other  times  before,  and  shake 
myself."  In  vain.  The  strength  is  gone  from  him,  and  the  Lord  with  it.  Such 
is  the  parable ;  and  to  every  thoughtful  hearer  it  is  its  own  interpreter.  There  is 
in  many  men,  perhaps  in  most  men,  an  erroneous  idea,  in  two  respects,  of  the  free 
agency  and  the  free  will.  We  exaggerate  to  ourselves,  in  the  first  place,  what  is 
sometimes  called  the  bondage  of  the  will.  It  is  an  article  of  our  religion,  that  we 
cannot  of  ourselves  either  will  or  do  the  thing  that  we  ought.  This,  which  is  all 
true  in  its  place — true  as  a  reason  for  humility,  and  true  as  a  motive  for  prayer — 
becomes  a  terrible  falsehood  on  lips  which  utter  it  as  an  excuse  for  indolence,  or  as 
a  sufficient  explanation  of  any  neglect  or  any  sin  by  which  we  may  be  dishonouring 
God  or  giving  an  ill  example  to  our  generation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  same  man 
who  has  pleaded  the  bondage  of  the  will  in  excuse  for  his  own  negligences,  follies, 
and  sins  will  be  the  first  to  exaggerate  his  freedom  in  reference  to  the  reparative 
powers  of  the  future.  "  I  have  but  to  resolve,  any  day,  and  I  shall  shake  myself 
free — free  from  the  chain  of  habit,  free  from  the  binding  force  of  past  action, 
and  from  the  connection  of  yesterday  and  to-morrow  in  the  living  man 
of  to-day" — this  is  language  quite  familiar  to  us  all,  in  the  ear,  if  not  in 
the   heart.     In   this   state   of   mind   we   exaggerate   our   freedom,  as   in  the 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

other  we  unduly  disparaged  it.    The  real  bondage  of  the  will  lies  in  the  having 
sinned  away  the  freedom.     It  would  be  easy  to  apply  this  general  experience  to  the 
various  departments  of  the  life.     "  I  will  go  out,  as  at  other  times  before,  and  shake 
myself."     Thus  speaks  the  man  who  has  allowed  some  influence  of  evil  to  fasten 
itself  upon  his  conduct,  and  yet  refuses  to  regard  the  fetter  as  anything  more  than 
a  daily  separate  willing,  which  could  any  morning  be  reversed  and  willed  into  the 
opposite.     The  doctrine  which  that  man  wants  is  the  true  doctrine  of  the  bondage. 
Tell  him  that  to-morrow,  if  he  does  not  take  heed,  he  will  be  a  slave  ;  tell  him  that 
"  whosoever  committeth  sin  is  sin's  bondman  "  ;  tell  him  that,  for  anything  ha 
knows,  by  to-morrow  the  Lord  may  have  departed;  tell  him  that  this  one  night's 
sinning  may  be  to  him  like  that  fatal  sleep  upon  the  knees  of  the  traitoress,  which 
cost  Samson  eyesight  and  life — "  I  made  haste  and  prolonged  not  the  time"  is  his 
one  chance ;  the  dream  of  liberty  is  not  false  only,  for  him,  but  fatal ;  let  him 
awake  and  cry  mightily  unto  God,  if  so  be  He  may  yet  this  once  hear  him,  that  he 
perish  not.     We  cannot  doubt  that  the  same  delusion  has  place  in  the  faith  as  well 
as  in  the  life.     There  are  thousands  at  this  moment  dallying  with  scepticism,  who 
would  be  terrified  if  they  thought  that  they  could  not  at  any  moment  go  forth  from 
it  all  and  shake  themselves  free.    A  man  may  count  himself  free  to  believe  or  to 
disbelieve ;  he  may  even  set  himself  above  his  own  scruples,  and  say,  "  To-morrow, 
if  it  so  pleases  me,  I  will  go  out  and  shake  myself  free  of  them  " ;  but,  in  reaUty, 
he  is  fastening  them  upon  himself  to-day  by  the  very  postponement,  and  to-morrow, 
if  it  ever  dawn  upon  him,  may  find  him  one  from  whom  God  Himself  has  departed. 
There  is  in  us  all,  as  God  has  created  us,  a  marvellous  elasticity  of  mind,  body, 
and  estate.     The  recuperative  power  is  perhaps  the  greatest  of  His  gifts.     We  have 
seen  it  wonderfully  exemplified  on  the  bed  of  sickness.     We  have  seen  it  wonder- 
fully exemplified  in  the  fortunes  of  men  and  nations.     We  have  seen  it  wonderfully 
exemplified  in  the  moral  being.     Some  terrible  flaw  there  was,  in  early  days,  in  the 
character ;  some  vice  of  untruthfulness,  or  some  worse  vice  still,  brought  disgrace 
and  punishment  after  it  into  the  school-life  and  into  the  young  home.     But,  by  the 
blessing  of  God  upon  discipline  tempered  with  love,  a  new  growth  of  honesty  and 
of  purity  showed  itself  in  the  life,  and  a  noble  career  of  usefulness  and  honour 
obliterated,  long  before  death,  the  very  memory  of  the  sad  beginning.     We  have 
seen  it  wonderfully  exemplified  in  the  one  higher  region,  of  the  spiritual  life.     Once 
there  was  carelessness ;  once  there  was  unbehef ;  once  there  was  scoffing :  but  the 
blessed  promise  of  the  "  last  first  "  had  place,  by  the  grace  of  God,  in  the  history 
as  a  whole  ;  and  one  of  the  brightest  ornaments  of  the  faith  and  of  the  Church  has 
been  the  product  of  a  "  trying  in  the  fire  "  which  promised  only,  to  the  eye  of 
flesh,  scorching  and  scathing,  if  not  destruction.      This   is  one  side  of  human 
experience.     But  there  is  another.     The  recuperative  power  is  wonderful,  but  it 
has  its  limit.     "  Thus  far  and  no  further  "  is  written  upon  it,  or  it  would  bring 
evil  and  not  blessing  with  it.     There  is  a  point  beyond  which  recovery  is  not.     If 
we  could  foresee  the  exact  moment  at  which,  or  the  precise  act  by  which,  the 
limit  of  the  possible  recovery  would  be  overpassed,  it  would  be  contrary  to  God'a 
uniform  dealing  ;  it  would  but  tempt  to  presumption  on  the  way  to  it.     No  man 

I  knows  exactly  how  many  injuries  he  may  do  himself,  in  health  or  wealth,  in 
conduct  or  faith,  and  be  scatheless.  He  must  take  his  chance.  If  he  will  trifle 
in  any  of  these  ways,  there  is  no  Divine  Mentor  to  say  to  him,  The  next  time  but 
two,  or,  the  next  time  but  twenty,  will  be  fatal.  The  man  is  standing  aloof  from 
God  all  the  time,  and  by  the  nature  of  the  case  must  look  to  himself  alone  for 
monition.  Whatever  has  been  said,  and  said  truly,  of  the  restorative  powers  of 
this  being,  there  is  another  sense,  and  a  yet  more  grave  one,  in  which  we  must 
read  the  words,  "  I  am  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made."  We  speak  now  of  the 
identity  and  the  continuity  of  the  life,  which  makes  it  utter  childishness  for  a  man 
to  say  suddenly  to  himself,  "  I  will  go  out  and  shake  myself,  and  I  shall  be  another 
man."  There  is  a  mighty  power  in  the  will,  there  is  a  mightier  power  still  in 
Divine  grace ;  but  the  former  cannot,  and  the  latter  could  not  consistently,  isolate 
one  period  of  the  life  altogether  from  another,  or  make  that  in  the  past,  which  was 
most  of  all  to  be  regretted  and  mourned  over,  actually  unmade  or  undone  again,  so 
as  to  be  as  though  it  had  never  been.  All  this  is  no  reason  for  despondency. 
Although  we  are  warned  by  the  text  that  there  is  always  a  danger,  for  those  who 
are  living  without  God  in  the  world,  that  they  may,  even  without  knowing  it,  over- 
step the  limit  of  grace,  and  find  God  departed  from  them  when  they  would  shake 
themselves  from  their  bonds,  yet  we  must  remember  that  all  this  is  no  mitter 
of  chance,  caprice,  or  destiny ;  it  is  the  result  of  a  long  process  of  sinning  and 


CHAP.  XVI.]  JUDGES.  235 

neglecting,  which  need  not  be  any  man's ;  it  is  a  loud  call  to  awake  and  arise 
while  we  may ;  to  seek  God  now  while  He  certainly  may  be  found,  and,  instead  of 
trusting  in  our  independent  powers  of  recovery  and  self-amendment,  to  cast  our- 
selves earnestly  upon  the  help  of  His  grace  who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally  and 
upbraideth  not.  {Dean  Vmighan.)  Blessed  and  tragic  unconsciousness  (with 
Exod.  xxxiv.  29) : — The  recurrence  of  the  same  phrase  in  two  such  opposite 
connections  is  very  striking.  I.  Beauty  and  steength  come  from  communion 
WITH  God.  In  both  the  cases  with  which  we  are  dealing  these  were  of  a  merely 
material  sort.  The  light  on  Moses'  face  and  the  strength  in  Samson's  arm  were, 
at  the  highest,  but  types  of  something  far  higher  and  nobler  than  themselves. 
But  still,  the  presence  of  the  one  and  the  departure  of  the  other  alike  teach  us 
the  conditions  on  which  we  may  possess  both  in  nobler  form,  and  the  certainty  of 
losing  them  if  we  lose  hold  of  God.  There  have  been  in  the  past,  and  there  are 
to-day,  thousands  of  simple  souls  shut  out  by  lowUness  of  position,  and  other 
circumstances  from  all  the  refining  and  ennobling  influences  which  the  world 
makes  so  much  of,  who  yet  in  character  and  bearing,  aye,  and  sometimes  in  the 
very  look  of  their  meek  faces,  are  living  witnesses  bow  true  and  mighty  is  the 
power  of  loving  gazing  upon  Jesus  Christ  to  transform  a  nature.  All  of  us  who 
have  had  much  to  do  with  Christians  of  the  humbler  classes  know  that.  There  is 
no  influence  to  refine  and  beautify  men  like  that  of  living  near  Jesus  Christ  and 
walking  in  the  light  of  that  beauty  which  is  the  effulgence  of  the  Divine  glory  and 
express  image  of  His  person.  And  in  like  manner  as  beauty,  so  strength  comes 
from  communion  with  God,  and  laying  hold  on  Him.  Samson's  consecration, 
rude  and  external  as  that  consecration  was,  both  in  itself  and  in  its  consequences, 
had  passed  away  from  him.  11.  The  bearer  of  the  radiance  is  unconscious  of 
IT.  "  Moses  wist  not  that  the  skin  of  his  face  shone."  In  all  regions  of  life,  the 
consummate  apex  and  crowning  charm  of  excellence  is  unconsciousness  of  excel- 
lence. Whenever  a  man  begins  to  suspect  that  he  is  good,  he  begins  to  be  bad ; 
and  you  rob  every  virtue  and  beauty  of  character  of  some  portion  of  its  attractive 
fairness  when  the  man  who  bears  it  knows,  or  fancies  that  he  knows  it.  The 
charm  of  childhood  is  its  perfect  unconsciousness,  and  the  man  has  to  win  back 
the  child's  heritage,  and  become  as  a  httle  child,  if  he  would  enter  into  and  dwell 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  And  so  in  the  loftiest  region  of  all,  that  of  the 
religious  life,  depend  on  it,  the  more  a  man  is  like  Christ  the  less  he  knows  it,  and 
the  better  he  is  the  less  he  suspects  it.  III.  The  strong  man  made  weak  is 
UNCONSCIOUS  OF  HIS  WEAKNESS.  The  vcry  fact  that  you  do  not  suppose  the  state- 
ment to  have  the  least  application  to  yourself  is  perhaps  the  very  sign  that  it  has. 
When  the  hfe  blood  is  pouring  out  of  a  man  he  faints  before  he  dies.  The  swoon 
of  unconsciousness  is  the  condition  of  some  professing  Christians.  Frost-bitten 
limbs  are  quite  comfortable,  and  only  tingle  when  circulation  is  coming  back. 
I  remember  a  great  elm-tree,  the  pride  of  an  avenue  in  the  South,  that  had  spread 
its  branches  for  more  years  than  the  oldest  man  could  count,  and  stood,  leafy  and 
green.  Not  until  a  winter  storm  came  one  night  and  laid  it  low  with  a  crash  did 
anybody  suspect  what  everybody  saw  in  the  morning — that  the  heart  was  eaten  out 
of  it,  and  nothing  left  but  a  shell  of  bark.  Some  Christian  people  are  hke  that ; 
they  manage  leaves,  they  manage  fruit ;  when  the  storm  comes  they  will  go  down, 
because  the  heart  has  been  out  of  their  religion  for  years.  "  Samson  wist  not  that 
the  Lord  was  departed  from  him."  And  so,  because  there  are  so  many  things  that 
mask  the  ebbing  away  of  a  Christian  life,  and  because  our  own  self-love  and  habits 
come  in  to  hide  declension,  let  me  earnestly  exhort  you  and  myself  to  watch  our- 
selves very  narrowly.  Again  let  me  say,  let  us  ask  God  to  help  us.  "  Search  me, 
0  God,  and  try  me."  We  shaU  never  rightly  understand  what  we  are  unless  we 
spread  ourselves  out  before  Him,  and  crave  that  Divine  Spirit,  which  is  the  candle 
of  the  Lord,  to  be  carried  even  in  our  hands  into  the  secret  recesses  of  our  sinful 
hearts.  And,  last  of  all,  let  us  keep  near  to  Jesus  Christ,  near  enough  to  Him  to 
feel  His  touch,  to  hear  His  voice,  to  see  His  face,  and  to  carry  down  with  us  into 
the  valley  some  radiance  on  our  countenances  which  may  tell  even  the  world  that 
we  have  been  up  where  the  Light  lives  and  reigns.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The 
withdrawal  of  Divine  influences : — I.  Christians  in  a  state  of  grace  and  Divine 

FAVOUR   MAT,   IN    A    GREAT     MEASURE,    BE    FORSAKEN    OF    GoD,    AND    TET    BE    INSENSIBLE 

THEREOF.  1.  The  prevalence  of  some  darling  idol  in  the  heart  may  so  blind  the 
discerning  faculty  and  disorder  the  understanding  that  the  soul  may  not  perceive 
its  distance  from  the  ways  of  religion.  2.  There  can  be  no  doubt  concerning  this 
truth,  that  God  withdraws  sometimes  from  His  people,  if  we  observe  the  many 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

complaints  they  make  to  this  purpose  (Psa.  xxx.  7).  These  complaints  were  not 
without  cause,  nor  would  such  pious  characters  complain  without  reason.  The 
deadened  state  of  their  souls  made  them  feel  that  the  Divine  influences  and  power 
were  withdrawn  ;  they  found  the  stream  was  in  a  great  measure  stopped,  when  the 
waters  of  life  did  not  revive  their  souls.  3.  Christians  may  not  perceive  the  with- 
drawing of  the  Divine  influence,  because  there  may  be  a  counterfeit  resemblance 
between  their  idols  and  their  duty.  When  we  have  a  strong  affection  for  something 
connected  with  another  thing  that  is  good,  we  seldom  see  the  difference  between 
them,  but  fall  into  error  and  mistake  through  inattention.  We  view  under  one 
character  things  different  in  their  nature ;  and  perceive  not  the  unlawfulness  of 
what  we  covet,  when  we  find  it,  in  some  measure,  related  to  other  things  that  are 
innocent.  4.  The  subtlety  and  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  in  the  souls  of  the  best 
Christians  hinder  them  from  distinguishing  the  knowledge  of  Christianity  from  its 
life  and  practice.  5.  Believers  may  not  only  be  insensible  of  God's  withdrawing 
from  them,  but  also  embrace  false  for  true  grounds  of  comfort  and  enlargement. 
Sin  is  so  deceitful  that  it  will  creep  in  upon  the  believer  under  a  mask  :  some- 
times a  false  hope,  at  other  times  a  deceitful  joy  will  deceive  the  saints  themselves. 
II.  EvTDExcEs  OF  THIS  CONDITION.  1.  When  men  live  easy  and  indifferent  under  the 
means  of  salvation;  when  they  are  not  active  in  the  performance  of  the  duties 
belonging  to  their  several  stations  and  characters  in  life,  but  hke  Samson,  instead 
of  destroying  the  Philistines,  for  which  he  was  raised  up,  fall  asleep  in  carnal 
security,  and  begin  to  enter  into  league  with  the  enemies  of  God ;  when  they  begin 
to  remit  their  watchfulness,  and  live  secure  and  careless.  2.  When  men  not  only 
have  no  fears  of  their  present  evU  condition,  but  think  well  of  it;  when  they 
imagine  that  they  are  rich,  and  increased  in  goods,  and  stand  in  need  of 
nothing,  (fee.  3.  When  thoughts  of  death  and  a  future  judgment  are  removed 
from  men's  meditation  and  consideration  ;  when  the  evil  day  is  put  far  away,  and 
people,  like  those  of  whom  the  prophet  Ezekiel  speaks,  say,  "  The  Lord  hath  forsaken 
the  earth,  neither  doth  He  consider  it."  (J.  Williamson.)  Samson  conquered : — 
I.  The  stkength  of  the  consecrated  man.  Even  though  he  may  consecrate 
himself  to  a  wrong  object,  yet  it  it  be  a  thorough  consecration,  he  will  have 
strength.  In  the  old  Eoman  wars  with  Pyrrhus,  you  remember  an  ancient  story 
of  self-devotion.  There  was  an  oracle  which  said  that  victory  would  attend  that 
aiTiiy  whose  leader  should  give  himself  up  to  death.  Decius,  the  Eoman  Consul, 
knowing  this,  rushed  into  the  thickest  of  the  battle,  that  his  army  might  overcome 
by  his  dying.  The  prodigies  of  valour  which  he  performed  are  proofs  of  the  power 
of  consecration.  The  Eomans  at  that  time  seemed  to  be  every  man  a  hero,  because 
every  man  was  a  consecrated  man.  They  went  to  battle  with  this  thought — "  I  will 
conquer  or  die ;  the  name  of  Eome  is  written  on  my  heart ;  for  my  country  I  am 
prepared  to  live,  or  for  that  to  shed  my  blood."  And  no  enemies  could  ever  stand 
against  them.  If  a  Eoman  fell,  there  were  no  wounds  in  his  back,  but  all  in  hia 
breast.  His  face,  even  in  cold  death,  was  like  the  face  of  a  Hon,  and  when  looked 
upon  it  was  of  terrible  aspect.  They  were  men  consecrated  to  their  country.  How 
much  more  is  this  true  ii  I  limit  the  description  to  that  which  is  pecuhar  to  the 
Christian— consecration  to  God  I  11.  The  secret  of  his  strength.  I  have  heard 
some  men  talk  as  if  the  strength  of  free-will,  of  human  nature,  was  sulficient  to 
carry  men  to  heaven.  No  strength  of  nature  can  sufiSce  to  serve  the  Lord  aright. 
No  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  If,  then,  the  first 
act  of  Christian  life  is  beyond  all  human  strength,  how  much  more  are  those  higher 
steps  far  beyond  any  one  of  us  ?  III.  What  is  the  peculiar  danger  of  a  conse- 
crated MAN  ?  His  danger  is  that  his  locks  may  be  shorn ;  that  is  to  say,  that  hia 
consecration  may  be  broken.  Now  there  are  a  thousand  razors  with  which  the 
devU  can  shave  off  the  locks  of  a  consecrated  man  without  his  knowing  it.  Some- 
times he  takes  the  sharp  razor  of  pride,  and  when  the  Christian  falls  asleep,  and  is 
not  vigilant,  he  comes  with  it  and  begins  to  run  his  fingers  upon  the  Christian's 
locks,  and  says,  "What  a  fine  fellow  you  are!  What  wonders  you  hnve  done  I 
Didn't  you  rend  that  lion  finely?  Wasn't  it  a  great  feat  to  smite  those  i'iiilistinea 
hip  and  thigh  ?  Ah  1  you  will  be  talked  of  as  long  as  time  endures  for  carrying 
those  gates  of  Gaza  away !  You  need  not  be  afraid  of  anybody."  And  so  on  goes 
the  razor,  lock  after  lock  falling  off,  and  Samson  knows  it  not.  He  is  just  thinking 
within  himself,  "  How  brave  am  I !  How  great  am  1 1 "  Thus  works  the  razor  of 
pride — cut,  cut,  cut  away — and  he  wakes  up  to  find  himself  bald,  and  all  his 
strength  gone.  Another  razor  he  uses  is  self-sufficiency.  The  moment  we  begin 
to  think  that  it  is  our  own  arm  that  has  gotten  us  the  victory,  it  will  be  all  over 


CHAP.  XVI.]  JUDGES.  237 

•with  us — our  locks  of  strength  shall  be  taken  away,  and  the  glory  shall  depart  from 
us.  There  is  yet  another  and  a  more  palpable  danger  still.  When  a  consecrated 
man  begins  to  change  his  purpose  in  hfe  and  Uve  for  himself — that  razor  shaves 
clean  indeed.  Oh,  Christian,  above  all  things  take  care  of  thy  consecration.  Ever 
feel  that  thou  art  wholly  given  up  to  God,  and  to  God  alone.  IV.  The  Christian's 
DISGRACE.  His  locks  are  cut  off.  I  have  seen  him  in  the  ministry.  He  spake  like 
an  angel  of  God ;  many  there  were  that  regarded  him ;  he  seemed  to  be  sound  in 
doctrine  and  earnest  in  manner.  I  have  seen  him  turn  aside  ;  it  was  but  a  little 
thing — some  slight  deviation  from  the  ancient  orthodoxy  of  his  fathers,  some 
slight  violation  of  the  law  of  his  Church.  I  have  seen  him,  till  he  has  given  up 
doctrine  after  doctrine,  until  at  last  the  very  place  wherein  he  preached  has 
become  a  bye-word  and  a  proverb.  What  disgrace  was  there  1  What  a  fall !  The 
man  who  came  out  in  the  camps  of  Dan,  and  seemed  to  be  moved  by  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord,  has  become  the  slave  of  error.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Strength  lost : — I.  A 

MAN  MAT  LOSE  HIS    STRENGTH,  AND  YET   LIVE   IN  THE    EXPERIENCES  OF   THE    PAST.       YoU 

may  have  made  a  profession  of  faith  in  Christ ;  you  were  "  strong  in  the  Lord  and 
in  the  power  of  His  might " ;  but  you  have  departed  from  the  Lord,  and  yet  you  stiU 
retain  the  forms  and  habits  of  your  spiritual  life.  You  have  a  name  to  live — that 
is  all.     You  do  not  know  that  the  Lord  has  departed  from  you.    II.  When  a  man 

DEPARTS    FROM  THE    LOED,   IT    IS    CERTAIN    THE    LORD    WILL    DEPART    FROM    HIM.       The 

departure  is  at  first  scarcely  perceptible — it  is  in  thought  and  feeUng  and  then  in 
life.  I  have  seen  glaciers,  like  rivers  that,  flowing  down  the  sides  of  the  Alps,  have 
been  stopped  and  arrested  in  a  moment.  There  seems  no  movement,  for  aU 
appears  to  be  the  same  year  after  year.  Though  not  perceptible  to  the  eye,  it  can 
be  proved  by  experiment  that  the  frozen  river  is  always  moving  on  and  on.  So 
with  you — the  distance  from  God  may  be  increasing  and  widening,  but  it  is  so 
slowly  that  no  one  perceives  it.  At  length  some  circumstance  leads  to  the  mani- 
festation of  your  real  state,  and  the  fearful  consciousness  of  your  departure  from 
God.  The  Lord  does  not  all  at  once  depart — there  are  restraints,  remonstrances, 
difficulties  put  in  the  way  of  backsliding  ;  there  are  invitations  to  return.  At  last, 
when  all  is  vain,  and  the  man  will  have  his  own  way,  a  Divine  voice  says, 
"Let  him  alone."  III.  When  God  departs  from  a  man,  the  consequence  will 
BE,  that  the  man  LOSES  HIS  STRENGTH.  Havc  you  ever  seen  an  eagle  in  its  captivity, 
wearing  its  chains,  an  uncrowned  king?  How  sad  the  spectacle,  how  deep  the 
humiliation — what  a  seeming  consciousness  of  fallen  greatness !  The  eagle  was 
made  for  the  glorious  mountains,  its  home  is  on  the  summit  of  the  lofty  rocks,  ita 
wings  are  fitted  for  flight,  its  eye  to  look  on  the  sun.  How  much  sadder  is  it  to  see 
the  change  that  has  come  over  this  man.  How  are  the  mighty  fallen !  {H.  J.  Bevi$.) 
The  weakness  of  strength  : — We  still  need  to  learn  what  true  strength  is,  and  that 
both  physical  and  intellectual  power  may  be  the  means  of  moral  weakness. 
I.  Strength  from  ancestry.  Victor  Hugo  remarks  :  "  If  you  want  to  reform  a  man, 
you  must  begin  with  his  grandmother."  The  parents  of  Samson  were  sober  and 
pious  people.  The  weakening  effects  of  strong  drinks  upon  posterity  are  well 
known.  One  thing  that  makes  it  hard  to  be  born  again  is  being  born  wrong  the 
first  time.  II.  Strength  through  consecration.  III.  Strength  may  become 
weakness.  Great  powers  imply  great  passions.  With  every  increase  of  faculty 
come  more  subtle  temptations.  There  is  nothing  so  destructive  to  strength  and 
youth  as  sensual  sin.  IV,  Strength  forfeited  through  falsehood.  He  broke 
his  vow,  and  with  it  broke  faith  with  God.  No  one  can  really  betray  the  strong 
man  but  himself.  Break  trust  with  God,  and  sin  will  be  too  strong  for  you,  and 
the  Philistines  of  the  soul  will  enslave  you.  V.  Last  effort  of  strength.  The 
mercy  of  God  gave  him  still  a  chance.  He  was  not  wholly  lost.  So  do  you, 
already  weakened  by  falsehood  to  God  and  your  best  self,  use  the  strength  that 
remains.  Make  one  last  effort  to  break  the  chains  that  bind  you.  A  little  more, 
and  your  strength  will  be  entirely  gone.  (G.  Elliott.)  Loss  of  strength  : — I.  The 
strength  by  which  alone  we  can  overcome  evil  is  to  be  obtained  from  thb 
Spirit  of  God.  H.  This  spiritual  strength  is  lost  by  us  when  we  yield 
ourselves  to  sin.  III.  One  may  lose  this  spiritual  strength  without  at  the 
MOMENT  BEING  CONSCIOUS  OF  THE  PRIVATION,  Samsou  "  wist  HOt  that  the  Lord  was 
departed  from  him,"  That  was  melancholy  enough,  but  its  spiritual  antitype  is 
infinitely  more  so,  for  it  is  terribly  true  that  one  may  become  morally  feeble  through 
habitual  indulgence  in  sin,  and  yet  at  the  time  be  unaware  of  the  change  that  has 
passed  upon  him.  How  shall  we  account  for  this  ?  1.  We  may  explain  it  by  the 
fact  that  all  outward  things  may  be  with  him  as  they  were  before.    He  may  ba 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

outwardly  attentive  to  the  ordinances  of  religion,  but  his  heart  has  been  given 
to  some  earthly  object.  2.  Another  explanation  of  the  unconsciousness  of  many  to 
the  terrible  loss  of  which  we  speak  may  be  the  stealthiness  of  the  growth  of 
the  sin  which  has  caused  it.  No  man  becomes  helplessly  wicked  all  at  once. 
3.  Another  reason  why  a  man  may  be  unconscious  of  the  loss  of  his  spiritual  strength 
is  the  blinding  effect  of  sin  upon  the  conscience.  When  the  snow  is  untrodden 
you  may  easily  distinguish  the  first  footprints  that  are  made  upon  it,  but  after 
multitudes  have  hardened  it  by  their  tread,  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  mark  each 
separate  traveller's  tracks.  So  conscience  may  take  faithful  note  of  the  first  sins 
which  one  commits,  but  when  habits  have,  as  I  may  say,  formed  footmarks  over  it, 
the  soft  impressiveness  of  its  early  stage  has  gone,  and  it  becomes  impenetrable  as 
a  rock.  IV.  The  consciousness  of  this  loss  of  stbength  will  be  realised 
WHEN  THE  STRENGTH  ITSELF  IS  MOST  NEEDED.  Tou  know  the  drcadful  agouy  of 
nightmare,  when  in  your  dream,  being  pursued  by  some  assassin,  your  limbs  refuse 
to  perform  their  office,  and  you  seem  to  be  left  in  the  assailant's  power.  Such  is 
the  experience  of  the  man  who  discovers  in  some  time  of  urgency  that  his  strength 
has  departed  from  him.  Enumerate  a  few  of  the  times  of  crisis,  which  will 
infalhbly  test  whether  we  have  God  with  us  or  not :  temptation,  affliction,  death, 
judgment.  As  all  these  are  experiences  through  which  every  one  of  us  must  pass, 
we  ought  to  be  sure  that  we  have  strength  enough  to  sustain  us  in  them  all.  If  we 
have  not  strength  enough  for  these  occasions,  we  have  virtually  no  strength  at  all. 
It  is  for  such  times  we  must  prepare,  and  not  for  the  mere  review  days  of  showy 
profession.  Men  do  not  build  a  ship  to  lie  all  decked  with  bunting  in  the  harbour, 
but  to  weather  the  rough  storms  of  mid-ocean,  and  the  cable  that  will  not  bear  the 
toughest  strain  is  in  time  of  hurricane  as  bad  as  none  at  aU.  (IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Man's  power  for  God's  work : — I.  That  it  is  derived  from  a  specl\.l  connection 
WITH  God.  All  power  comes  from  God :  this  is  true  not  only  of  physical,  but  also 
of  intellectual  and  moral  power.  1.  God  is  in  a  good  man,  morally — dwells  in 
him  as  the  favourite  author  dwells  in  the  mind  of  the  devoted  reader.  God's 
thoughts  live  in  his  intellect,  God's  love  glows  in  his  heart :  he  is  filled  with  all  the 
fulness  of  God.  2.  That  God  is  with  a  good  man  operationally.  Without  Him  we 
can  do  nothing  in  His  cause.  II.  That  sm  dissolves  this  special  connectiojj 
BETWEEN  MAN  AND  GoD.  1.  By  destroying  our  sympathy  with  God.  2.  By 
awakening  a  dread  of  God.     3.  By  generating  an  opposition  to  God.     HI.  That 

THIS   dissolution    MAY   OCCUR   WHEN   THE  SUBJECT  IS  UNCONSCIOUS    OF    IT.       1.   BcCaUSe 

of  the  gradual  way  in  which  it  takes  place.  God  does  not  give  a  man  up  at  once. 
2.  Because  external  circumstances  continue  the  same.  Providence  pursues  its 
wonted  course ;  health  continues,  business  prospers,  the  sun  shines  as  usual,  and 
temporal  blessings  faU  free  and  fuU  as  ever  on  the  path.  3.  Because  the 
mechanical  habits  of  rehgion  are  maintained.  There  may  be  family  worship, 
regular  attendance  on  the  house  of  God,  but  no  soul  in  anything.     IV.  That  a. 

period    will   ARRIVE    WHEN    THE   DISSOLUTION    WILL   BE   PAINFULLY   REALISED.       In  the 

hour  of  severe  temptation — in  the  hour  of  suffering — in  the  dark  hour  of  death — in 
the  solemn  hour  of  judgment  the  want  of  Divine  moral  strength  will  be  deeply  felt. 
Its  lack  will  be  ruin.  {Homilist).  Samson,  the  Jewish  Hercules  : — I.  That  God 
HAS  RESPECT  TO  THE  EMERGENCIES  OF  His  PEOPLE.  The  lalsiug  of  OHC  man,  rather 
than  a  host,  to  break  the  power  of  the  Philistines,  served  to  manifest  the  Divine 
power.  II.  That  moral  feebleness  may  co-exist  with  the  highest  physical 
ENERGY.  Many  giants  in  body  are  dwarfs  in  soul.  Many  who  have  slain  an  army 
have  been  slain  by  their  own  lusts.  III.  Samson's  history  shows  that  great 
physical  strength  is  not  THE  HIGHEST  GOOD  OF  MAN.  Here  God  furnishes  the 
world  with  a  striking  example  that  great  muscular  energy,  apart  from  moral  good- 
ness, is  of  little  worth.  Look  at  the  misery  to  which  he  was  reduced — blinded, 
deluded,  destroyed.  IV.  Samson's  history  shows  that  one  man,  through  God,  can 
accomplish  great  things.  (Ibid.)  The  fall  and  rise  of  a  great  man  : — I.  Thb 
FALL  OF  A  great  MAN.  1.  The  whcHce  and  the  whither  of  the  fall.  (1)  From  special 
connection  with  God.  (2)  Into  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  (a)  "  They  put  out  hia 
eyes."  When  a  man  falls  from  God,  he  sinks  into  darkness ;  he  is  like  a  planet  cut 
off  from  its  centre,  rolling  in  a  starless,  moonless  midnight.  Hell  is  "outer  dark- 
ness." (b)  "  They  bound  him  in  fetters  of  brass."  Emblem  of  the  fettering  power 
of  sin.  Evil  prejudices  and  habits — how  they  manacle  the  limbs  of  the  soul  1  (c)  "He 
did  grind  in  the  prison  house."  The  little  liberty  of  limb  he  had  was  only 
allowed  that  he  might  feel  his  bondage  more.  Servants  of  sin  are  slaves  of  the 
devil.    The    corn  the  sinner  grinds  is  not  for  himself.    2.  The  wherefore  and 


OHAP.  XVI.]  JUDGES.  239 

the  how  of  this  man's  fall.  (1)  The  cause  was  in  himself.  He  did  it,  and  did  it 
freely.  The  devil  himself  cannot  push  a  man  down  against  his  will.  (2)  His  fall 
was  very  gradual,  and  even  imperceptible  to  himself.  He  had  been  pampering  his 
appetite,  and  gratifying  his  animal  desires  ;  and  thus  gradually  sliding  away  from 
the  virtuous  and  the  true,  he  lost  his  power  before  he  was  aware  of  it.  Eemember 
that  the  losing  of  Divine  power  is  a  gradual  and  an  imperceptible  process.  No  out- 
ward event  will  announce  its  loss  ;  no  great  convulsion  within  will  signify  it.  He 
will  only  know  it  when  the  time  comes  that  he  requires  it ;  when,  like  Samson,  he  is 
reduced  to  an  emergency,  requires  Divine  power,  makes  an  effort,  and  finds  it  is 
gone.  n.  The  rise  of  a  great  man.  1.  The  demonstrations  of  his  recovered 
strength.  (1)  Miraculous  achievement.  (2)  Self-sacrificing  heroism.  2.  The 
means  of  his  recovered  power.  (1)  Practical  obedience.  He  who  does  the  will, 
gets  the  power  of  God.  (2)  Earnest  prayer.  Lessons :  1.  A  solemn  warning  to 
men  of  signal  abiUty.  There  are  many  intellectual  giants  every  day  being  stripped 
of  their  power,  and  lying  eyeless  and  crippled  in  the  dungeon.  2.  A.  special 
encouragement  to  great  men  who  have  fallen.  (Ibid.)  Lost  grace  unrealised  : — 
He  knew  not  that  the  Lord  was  departed  from  him.  No  wonder ;  he  felt  not  the 
smarting  effect  of  it  as  yet :  he  fared  as  he  who  is  robbed  in  the  night  of  all  his 
treasure  or  wares  of  his  storehouse ;  but  till  the  light  of  the  day  he  misseth  nothing. 
But  then,  oh  what  an  inventory  makes  he  of  his  several  losses  !  And  so  did  this 
poor  self -robber  in  this  place.  When  the  Philistines  came  upon  him  there  was  no 
power  to  resist ;  then  it  appeared  indeed  that  he  was  robbed  to  purpose.  It  is  woe- 
ful to  lose  grace,  but  more  to  feel  no  such  loss.  {R.  Rogers.)  He  did  grind  in 
the  prison  house. — Ignominious  tasks : — Look  at  the  ignoble  task  to  which  Samson 
is  put  by  the  Philistines,  a  type  of  the  ignominious  uses  to  which  the  hero  may  be 
doomed  by  the  crowd.  The  multitude  cannot"  be  trusted  with  a  great  man.  In  the 
prison  at  Gaza  the  fallen  chief  was  set  to  grind  corn,  to  do  the  work  of  slaves.  To 
him,  indeed,  work  was  a  blessing.  From  the  bitter  thoughts  that  would  have  eaten 
out  his  heart  he  was  somewhat  delivered  by  the  irksome  labour.  In  reality,  as  we 
now  perceive,  no  work  degrades ;  but  a  man  of  Samson's  type  and  period  thought 
differently.  The  Philistine  purpose  was  to  degrade  him  ;  and  the  Hebrew  captive 
would  feel  in  the  depths  of  his  hot  brooding  nature  the  humiliating  doom.  Look, 
then,  at  the  parallels.  Think  of  a  great  statesman  placed  at  the  head  of  a  nation  to 
guide  its  poUcy  in  the  line  of  righteousness,  to  bring  its  laws  into  harmony  with  the 
principles  of  human  freedom  and  Divine  justice — think  of  such  an  one,  while  labour- 
ing at  his  sacred  task  with  all  the  ardour  of  a  noble  heart,  called  to  account  by 
those  whose  only  desire  is  for  better  trade,  the  means  of  beating  their  rivals  in  some 
market  or  bolstering  up  their  failing  speculations.  Or  see  him  at  another  time 
pursued  by  the  cry  of  a  class  that  feels  its  prescriptive  rights  invaded  or  its  position 
threatened.  Take  again  a  poet,  an  artist,  a  writer,  a  preacher  intent  on  great 
themes,  eagerly  following  after  the  ideal  to  which  he  has  devoted  himself,  but 
exposed  every  moment  to  the  criticism  of  men  who  have  no  soul — held  up  to 
ridicule  and  reprobation  because  he  does  not  accept  vulgar  models  and  repeat  the 
catchwords  of  this  or  that  party.  Philistinism  is  always  in  this  way  asserting  its 
claim,  and  ever  and  anon  it  succeeds  in  dragging  some  ardent  soul  into  the  dungeon 
to  grind  thenceforth  at  the  mUl.  With  the  very  highest,  too,  it  is  not  afraid  to 
intermeddle.  Christ  Himself  is  not  safe.  The  Philistines  of  to-day  are  doing  their 
utmost  to  make  His  name  inglorious.  For  what  else  is  the  modern  cry  that 
Christianity  should  be  chiefly  about  the  business  of  making  life  comfortable  in  this 
world  and  providing  not  only  bread  but  amusement  for  the  crowd  ?  The  ideas  of 
the  Church  are  not  practical  enough  for  this  generation.  To  get  rid  of  sin^that  is 
a  dream ;  to  make  men  fearers  of  God,  soldiers  of  truth,  doers  of  righteousness  at 
all  hazards — that  is  in  the  air.  Let  it  be  given  up ;  let  us  seek  what  we  can  reach ; 
bind  the  name  of  Christ  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  chains  to  the  work  of  a  practical 
secularism  and  let  us  turn  churches  into  pleasant  lounging-places  and  picture 
galleries.  Why  should  the  soul  have  the  benefit  of  so  great  a  name  as  that  of  the 
Son  of  God  ?  Is  not  the  body  more  ?  Is  not  the  main  business  to  have  houses  and 
railways,  news  and  enjoyment?  The  poUcy  of  undeifying  Christ  is  having  too 
much  success.  If  it  makes  way  there  will  soon  be  need  for  a  fresh  departure  into 
the  wilderness.  (R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)  A  grist  from  the  prison  mill  of  Gaza  ; — 
I.  In  Samson's  history  we  see  tbe  wonderfuii   forbearance  of   God,  notwith- 

BTANDINQ       HIS      MISUSE     OF      GREAT     MERCIES      AND      OP      SXJPERNATURAL       STRENGTH. 

n.  Samson  lost  his  great  strength  in  an  unconscious  manner.  His  frame  was 
not  convulsed  when  the  barber  removed  his  locks.    No  sobs  revealed  the  fact  that 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvu 

he  had  become  as  another  man.  He  slept  on  just  as  other  men  sleep,  m.  Samson's 
history  is  pictokial  of  the  progressive  downward  tendencies  of  binnino. 
Glorious  were  the  hopes  of  his  infancy.  IV.  Once  more,  the  downward  course  of 
the  Hebrew  judge  illustrates  our  reluctance  to  give  up  the  last  badge  op 
OUR  Nazarite  consecration.  We  find  him  disgustingly  in  dalliance  with  sin,  and 
yet  keeping,  as  it  were,  to  the  very  last  moment  the  outward  sign  of  his  covenant 
relation  to  God.  His  vows  were  for  hfe.  But  in  those  cases  where  the  Nazarite 
covenant  was  for  a  limited  period  of  life,  the  expiration  of  that  period  was  signalised 
by  shaving  the  head.  When  Samson,  therefore,  told  his  religious  secret,  he  took 
the  formal  step  to  separate  himself  wholly  from  his  God.  The  substance  of  his 
covenant  he  had  long  since  lost,  but  the  seal  of  it  he  now  throws  to  the  devil.  I  do 
not  wonder,  children  of  pious  parents,  that  you  are  uneasy  if  living  in  sin  under 
such  vows  as  rest  upon  you.  Nor  do  I  wonder  that  you  are  reluctant  to  part  with 
the  last  locks  that  bind  you  to  the  God  of  your  fathers.  (IF.  A.  Scott,  D.D.) 
The  hair  of  his  head  began  to  grow. — Strength  lost  and  restored : — I.  The  bight 
relation  of  man  to  God  is  the  condition  of  his  real  strength.  There  were 
many  remarkable  circumstances  connected  with  the  birth  of  Samson ;  and  the 
angel  who  appeared  to  his  mother  gave  her  most  minute  directions  about  the  train- 
ing of  the  child,  that  thus  he  might  be  fitted  for  the  great  work  to  which  he  was 
designated.  Where  there  is  a  right  relation  to  God  there  is  personal  dedication, 
and  as  the  result  there  will  be  separateness  and  sanctity.  The  consecrated  man 
was  to  be  temperate  and  chaste,  to  avoid  everything  that  would  defile  him.  You 
are  not  to  suffer  the  flesh  to  overshadow  the  spirit.  You  are  to  "abstain  from 
fleshly  lusts,  which  war  against  the  soul "  ;  to  mortify  your  members  which  are 
upon  the  earth;  and  to  keep  your  body  under  and  bring  it  into  subjection.  The 
Divine  presence  will  be  recognised  by  the  man  who  stands  in  a  right  relation  to 
God — the  true  strength  of  the  man  is  in  God.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon 
Samson — moving  him  at  times,  rousing  him  to  activity — stii-ring  up  his  whole 
nature  to  great  and  heroic  deeds,  and  giving  him  strength  to  do  them.  You  realise 
the  Divine  presence.  You  can  say,  "  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me ; 
because  He  is  at  my  right  hand  I  shall  not  be  moved."  God  is  with  you  in  all 
events  and  circumstances — in  all  conflicts  and  victories — in  life  and  in  death. 
n.  This  relation  to  God  mat  be  weakened  and  broken,  and  then  the  strength 
OF  THE  MAN  DEPARTS.  1.  TMs  may  be  the  result  of  an  unhallowed  alliance.  This 
was  the  first  wrong  step  on  the  part  of  Samson.  Marriage  is  the  oldest  human 
institute,  and  the  one  that  has  been  most  perverted  and  abused.  In  many  instances 
the  two  never  become  one — and  never  can  become  one — but  must  remain  in  awful 
separateness  and  loneliness.  Their  souls  never  touch  each  other  at  any  point.  In 
many  instances  there  are  no  true  afiinities — no  real,  abiding  love.  Marriage  is 
sometimes  created  by  mere  excitement  or  passion — it  is  based  on  prudential  or 
mercenary  motives.  Where  there  are  no  mental  or  moral  fitnesses,  these  ill- 
assorted  matches  become  the  pregnant  source  of  the  miseries  and  wretchedness 
that  abound  in  the  world.  2.  This  relation  may  be  broken  through  the  indulgence 
of  unrestrained  passions.  The  strong  man  is  a  child  when  governed  by  his 
passions ;  he  has  no  self-mastery  or  control — his  aiiections  are  misplaced ;  they 
have  degenerated  into  passions.  His  weakness  is  known — not  the  secret  of  his 
strength — but  men  take  advantage  of  his  weakness  to  find  out  where  his  strength 
lies,  that  they  may  thus  deprive  him  of  it.  Our  weaknesses  lead  to  the  loss  of 
strength.  3.  A  man  may  lose  his  strength  and  yet  live  in  the  experiences  of  the 
past.  The  man's  strength  was  gone,  but  "  he  wist  not  that  the  Lord  had  departed 
from  him."  4.  When  a  man  departs  from  the  Lord,  it  is  certain  the  Lord  will 
depart  from  him.  6.  When  God  departs  from  a  man,  the  consequence  will  be  that 
the  man  loses  his  strength.  He  cannot  retain  his  strength  and  lose  God.  When 
he  falls  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  then  comes  the  fearful  consciousness  of  his 
loss.  What  a  contrast  between  strength  and  weakness — light  and  darkness — liberty 
and  captivity  !  III.  This  relation  maybe  renewed,  and  the  strength  restored. 
"  Howbeit  the  hair  of  his  head  began  to  grow  after  he  was  shaven."  The  man  turns 
to  God.  This  is  true  repentance.  In  the  parable,  the  son  when  he  has  spent  all — 
when  he  has  nothing  left — when  a  mighty  famine  comes,  and  he  begins  to  be  in 
want — when  his  servitude  is  the  most  degrading — comes  to  himself,  and  says,  "  I 
will  arise,"  &c.  So  the  captivity  and  wretchedness  of  this  man  may  have  awakened 
reflection,  and  led  to  repentance.  IV.  Strength  mat  be  restored,  but  therb 
ARE  some  things  THAT  ARE  LOST  FOR  EVER.  There  is  the  return  of  strength,  but 
not  of  sight.     Sin  does  fearful  injury.    You  may  return  after  your  backslidings— 


CHAP.  XVI.]  JUDGES.  241 

God  may  forgive  you.  There  are  some  things  you  have  lost — freshness,  purity, 
peace,  wholeness,  light,  joy.  You  know  you  are  pardoned,  but  the  light  is  gone. 
You  walk  softly.  There  are  the  traces  and  scars  of  the  past.  The  lightning  has 
scathed  you — has  blinded  you.  Never  think  lightly  of  sin ;  it  is  an  evil  and  a  bitter 
thing — darkness  follows  it.  {H.  J.  Bevis.)  Shaven  aiid  shorn,  but  not  beyond 
hope : — I.  What  this  growing  or  the  hair  pictuees.  I  think  that  this  pictures 
the  gradual  restoration  of  certain  among  us  who  have  backslidden  from  God. 
n.  What  it  specifically  symbolises.  Samson's  strength  lay  in  his  consecration. 
His  hair  was  the  token  of  his  dedication  to  God.  I  know  Christian  people  who 
used  to  spend  an  hour  a  day  in  prayer.  The  hour  has  dwindled  into  five  minutes. 
They  used  to  be  constant  at  week-night  services.  They  very  seldom  gladden  us 
with  their  presence  now ;  and  they  are  not  as  happy  as  they  once  were.  I  can  read 
this  riddle.  If  a  man  were  to  reduce  his  meals  to  eating  once  a  week,  we  could  not 
warrant  his  health.  So  I  do  not  think  that  people  who  neglect  the  means  of  grace, 
and  give  up  their  consecration,  can  expect  to  be  Uvely,  happy,  or  vigorous. 
III.  What  it  prophesied  when  Samson's  hair  began  to  grow  again.  I  wonder  why 
these  Philistines  did  not  care  to  keep  his  hair  from  growing  to  any  length.  But 
wicked  men  are  not  in  all  matters  wise  men ;  indeed,  they  so  conspicuously  fail  in 
one  point  or  another  that  Scripture  calls  them  fools.  The  devil  himself  is  a  fool 
after  all.  He  thinks  that  he  is  wonderfully  cunning,  but  there  is  always  a  place 
where  he  breaks  down.  Satan  is  very  cunning  in  getting  hold  of  backsliders,  but 
he  generally  manages  to  let  them  slip  by  his  over-confidence  in  their  wilfulness. 
When  Samson's  hair  began  to  grow,  what  did  it  prophesy?  1.  Well,  it  prophesied 
hope  for  Samson.  Now,  if  any  of  you  have  signs  of  restoring  grace  in  your  hearts, 
and  you  are  coming  back  to  your  God  and  Saviour,  be  glad,  be  thankful.  Do  not 
hesitate  to  let  your  renewed  devotion  to  God  be  seen  by  those  round  about  you.  If 
the  grace  of  God  is  moving  you  at  aU,  be  hopeful  and  quicken  your  steps,  and 
come  to  Jesus.  2.  Joy  for  Samson,  but  also  hope  for  Israel.  Oh,  if  any  of  the 
Israelites  did  get  in  to  see  him  in  prison,  how  they  must  have  been  cheered  by  the 
sight  of  his  retm-ning  hair  1  Oh,  you  do  not  know  the  joy  that  you  back- 
sliders will  give  to  the  hearts  of  God's  people  if  you  do  but  return!  There 
is  joy  not  only  with  the  Great  Shepherd,  but  with  His  friends  and  His  neigh- 
bours when  the  lost  sheep  is  restored  to  the  fold.  3.  WeU,  it  prophesied  mischief 
for  the  Philistines.  They  did  not  know  it,  but  if  they  could  have  read  the 
writing  in  Samson's  heart,  they  would  have  understood  that  he  meant  to  shave 
their  nation  quite  as  closely  as  they  had  shaven  him.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Call  for  Samson,  that  he  may  make  us  sport. — The  influence  of  amusements  on 
character  and  destiny : — The  best  men  that  the  world  ever  knew  have  had  their 
sports.  William  WUberforce  trundled  hoop  with  his  children.  Martin  Luther 
helped  dress  the  Christmas-tree.  Show  me  a  man  who  never  hghts  up  with 
sportfulness  and  has  no  sympathy  with  the  recreations  of  others,  and  I  will  show 
you  a  man  who  is  a  stumbling-block  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  Such  men  are 
caricatures  of  religion.  I  have  no  confidence  in  a  man  who  makes  a  religion  of  his 
gloomy  looks.  God  means  you  to  be  happy.  But,  when  there  are  so  many 
sources  of  innocent  pleasure,  why  tamper  with  anything  that  is  dangerous  and 
polluting?  1.  You  may  judge  of  any  amusement  by  its  healthful  result  or  by 
its  baleful  reaction.  If  an  amusement  sends  you  home  at  night  nervous  so  you 
cannot  sleep,  you  have  been  where  you  ought  not  to  have  been.  There  are  amuse- 
ments that  send  a  man  next  day  to  his  work  bloodshot,  yawning,  stupid,  nauseated, 
and  they  are  wrong  kinds  of  amusements.  There  are  entertainments  that  give  a 
man  disgust  with  the  drudgery  of  life.  Our  recreations  are  intended  to  build  us 
up,  and  if  they  pull  us  down  as  to  our  moral  or  as  to  our  physical  strength,  you 
may  come  to  the  conclusion  that  they  are  obnoxious.  2.  Those  amusements  are 
wrong  which  lead  into  expenditure  beyond  your  means.  3.  You  may  judge  of 
amusements  by  their  effect  upon  physical  health.  4.  Again,  judge  of  the  places  of 
amusement  by  the  companionship  into  which  they  put  you.  5.  Again,  any 
amusement  that  gives  you  a  distaste  for  domestic  life  is  bad.  How  many  bright 
domestic  ckcles  have  been  broken  up  by  sinful  amusements  I  {T.  De  Witt 
Talmage.)  Only  this  once. — How  not  to  pray : — We  have  heard  these  words 
until  we  are  heartsick  of  them.  It  seems  as  if  such  words  could  not  be  done  with- 
out in  the  history  of  human  experience.  Samson  would  gather  himself  up  for  a 
grand  final  effort ;  he  said  in  effect,  •'  0  Lord,  the  Philistines  have  taken  away  mine 
eyes,  I  am  no  longer  what  I  was,  I  am  no  longer  a  prophet  and  servant  of  Thine, 
I  am  a  poor  fool ;  I  gave  up  my  secret ;  Lord,  this  once,  only  this  once ;  I  pray 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

Thee  let  the  old  strength  come  back,  and  I  will  be  avenged  for  my  two  eyes."    It 

was  very  natural,  it  was  most  human,  it  was  just  what  we  would  have  done  under 

similar  circumstances,  and  therefore  do  not  let  us  laugh  at  the  dismantled  giant. 

Let  us  accommodate  the  passage,  so  that  it  may  become  a  lamp  which  we  can  hold 

over  various  points  of  life.     " '  Only  this  once ' :  forgive  me,  I  wiU  never  ask  it 

again,  this  is  the  very  last  time  ;  I  have  no  excuse,  I  did  the  evil  deed,  I  spoke  the 

false  word,  but  I  am  getting  old,  and  I  shall  not  trouble  my  family  much  longer ; 

give  me  the  final  pardon  ;  I  seem  as  if  I  could  not  do  without  it ;  it  seems  as  if  I 

had  it  I  would  die  easily  and  triumphantly  ;  I  do  not  deserve  it,  but  add  one  more 

to  your  forbearances ;  I  will  never  ask  again,  but  pardon  me  this  one  time."     You 

know  that  speech ;    it  is  now  a  stale  speech  in  your  ears ;    you  have  pardoned 

seventy  times  seven,  and  another  pardon  is  requested  with  the  promise  that  it  shall 

be  the  last.     This  is  the  very  thing  we  have  done  in  the  case  of  the  Divine  Creator 

and  Eedeemer  of  the  worlds ;  we  have  told  Him  that  we  would  never  repeat  the 

Bin.     It  is  not  of  our  necessity  we  go  again,  but  for  the  very  selfsame  sin  we  did 

last  week,  and  we  will  do  to-morrow.     Life  is  critical.     I  am  sure  I  thought  I 

would  never  do  it  again ;  I  said  this  shall  not  occur  again ;  then  I  told  a  blacker 

lie  than  ever,  and  put  myself  more  thoroughly  into  the  devil's  service.    And  then 

we  have  it  again  in  the  daily  cry  from  familiar  voices :  "  Deliver  me  out  of  this 

perplexity  only  this  once,  no  more  ;  I  will  never  ask  for  deliverance  again,  I  will 

take  the  literal  consequences  ;  nay,  I  will  pray  to  go  to  hell  rather  than  come  back 

to  be  delivered."    And  the  fool  means  it ;  he  thinks  he  will  be  brave  next  time. 

You  know  this  in  your  own  family,  in  your  own  soul,  in  your  own  son,  daughter, 

fastest  friend.     "  Only  this  once,  this  other  ten  pounds ;    this  once   screen  me, 

and  I  will  never,  never  return."      You   know  the  cry.     "Which  of   us  has  not 

in  his  desk  a  hundred  promises  that  this  shall  be  the  last  solicitation  of  love  ? 

We    say  again  and  again,   "  Lord,   let  Thy  providence   help   me  in  this  case, 

only  this  once;    this  is  really  the  final  perplexity  of  my  life;   I  am  very  ill, 

and  I  am  afraid  of  the  other  world ;  I  have  suffered  much  on  account  of   it 

in  a  dream   but  yesternight;    I  heard   the  groanings  of  the  lost,  I  heard  the 

cry  for  water,  and  the  water  had  fled  away.     I  do  not  want  to  die  just  now ;  if 

Thou  wUt  give  the  doctor  great  success  and  turn  the  herbal  medicines  of  the  field 

into  sacramental  wine,  I  will  never  grieve  Thee  more;   only  this  oncel   and  I 

promised  God  many  things  ;  I  said  I  would  love  His  Church,  I  would  support  His 

altar,  I  would  vindicate  the  Cross  ;  I  would  take  up  a  new  line  and  become  a  new 

man."    He  did,  and  the  devil  has  never  had  a  sturdier  soldier.     Oh,  the  pity  of  it  1 

the  utter,  utter  sadness  of  it  1     Now  let  us  note  three  things  about  this  prayer. 

1.  First  of  all,  the  prayer  was  to  the  true  God.     It  was  not  offered  to  an  idol. 

Know,  then,  that  we  may  be  praying  to  the  right  God ;  that  is  no  guarantee  that  we 

BhaU  get  the  answer  which  we  desire.     You  may  read  the  right  book  and  get 

nothing  out  of  it.    Not  every  man  who  reads  the  Bible  receives  a  revelation,  or  has 

the  slightest  idea  that  there  is  a  revelation  of  a  spkitual  and  effective  kind  in  the 

whole  range  of  Holy  Scripture.     The  right  God  does  not  make  the  right  prayer ; 

the  prayer  is  in  the  spirit,  in  the  will ;  it  is  in  the  temper  or  disposition  of  the 

heart ;  it  is  in  the  self-crucifixion  of  the  soul :  not  a  cry,  but  a  sacrifice.     2.  What 

ailed  this  poor  prayer  ?  what  was  its  mortal  disease  ?     The  mortal  disease  of  this 

prayer  uttered  by  Samson  was  that  it  was  offered  in  the  wrong  spirit.    It  is  the 

spirit  that  determines  the  quahty.     "That  I  may  be   at  once  avenged  of   the 

Philistines  for  my  two  eyes."     It  was  a  prayer  for  vengeance.     That  prayer  comes 

easily  to  the  natural  spirit.     We  love  to  magnify  the  individual,  and  to  think  that 

individualism    is    personality.     What    grave    mistakes  we  make  in  our  verbal 

definitions  I    A  man  will  say  that  he  stands  up  for  personality,  when  he  knows 

nothing  about  it.     He  is  standing  up  for  individuality,  his  own  Uttle  miserable 

self.     Here  is  a  man  who  comes  forward  to  avenge  his  personal  or  individual  or 

physical  loss;  in  that  spirit  a  man  cannot  pray.     What  he  says  may  have  the 

form  of  prayer,  bo  to  say  the  likeness  of   prayer,  and  yet  the  man  may  not  be 

praying;  he  may  be  in  reality  simply  and  deeply  cursing.    A  curse  is  not  a  prayer  ; 

an  imprecation  is  not  part  of  the  great  liturgy  in  which  all  redeemed  souls  ought 

to  take  part.     Prayer  is  self-renunciation  ;  prayer  says,  "  Lord,  Thy  will  be  done, 

not  mine."     Thus  the  Divine  will  is  done  by  consent,  human  and  Divine,  and  is 

the  law,  in  its  own  degree,  of  the  universe ;  the  soul  then  falls  into  the  rhythmic 

movement  of  the  creation,  and  the  man  is  translated  out  of  individuality  into 

personality  in  its  broadest  definitions,  and  he  is  part  and  parcel  of  the  great  unity 

which  swings  like  a  censer  round  the  altar  Divine.     3.  In  the  third  place  thia 


CHAP.  XVI.]  JUDGES.  243 

prayer  was  answered,  but  answered  in  judgment.  Samson  had  his  way,  but  his 
way  killed  him.  God  has  many  ways  of  answering  prayer.  One  sad  case  is 
recorded  which  will  at  once  occur  to  your  memory :  "  He  gave  them  their  request ; 
but  sent  leaimess  into  their  soul."  They  had  their  way,  and  lost  it ;  they  got  what 
they  wanted,  and  it  poisoned  them.  How  marvellous  it  is  in  all  this  process  that 
Samson  stiU  had  within  him  what  I  may  caU  a  spark  of  vital  faith.  He  knew  he 
had  lost  his  opportunities,  and  forfeited  his  privileges,  and  betrayed  his  trust ;  yet 
he  knew  something  higher  than  all  this,  namely,  that  God  lives,  and  that  God  is  a 
God  of  judgment,  and  that  the  way  of  God  shall  yet  prevail  upon  the  earth,  be 
human  circumstances  and  conditions  what  they  may.  He  made  the  most  of  that 
vital  spark.  But  Samson  might  have  said,  "  Do  not  upbraid  me ;  I  have  played 
the  fool  before  God  ;  I  yielded  up  my  secret,  I  parted  with  my  strength,  I  ceased  at 
once  to  be  a  judge  in  Israel  and  to  be  a  child  of  God ;  but  there  is  one  last 
lingering  flash  of  faith,  and  I  want  to  turn  that  last  Ungering  flash  into  works,  into 
actions,  into  palpable  and  crushing  results."  Samson  was  then  at  the  very  height 
of  his  wiU ;  he  then  touched  the  sublimest  personaUty  of  his  own  consciousness, 
and  he  was  dealing  not  only  with  his  enemies,  but  with  the  enemies  of  the  Lord. 
This  we  may  say ;  for  the  eternal  comfort  of  the  race  it  is  written  according  to  the 
blessing  pronounced  by  father  Jacob,  "  Gad,  a  troop  shall  overcome  him :  but  he 
shall  overcome  at  the  last."  So  we  come  upon  the  famiUar  thought  of  intermediate 
and  final  victories.  Gad,  my  poor,  poor  son,  a  troop  shall  overcome  him,  but  he, 
my  son  Gad,  shall  overcome  at  the  last.  When  they  think  he  is  dead  he  wUl 
spring  to  his  feet ;  when  they  report  it  in  pagan,  uncircumcised  cities  that  Gad  is 
dead,  Gad  will  rise  and  whet  his  sword  and  challenge  the  enemy  to  a  deadlier 
combat.  Do  not  pronounce  upon  intermediate  failures ;  there  may  be  many  of 
them,  and  yet  there  may  be  conquest  at  the  last.  So  it  shall  be  with  our  poor 
hearts.  Yes,  we  were  caught  in  aU  the  sins,  the  devil  was  triumphing  over 
us,  but  we  overcame  at  the  last.  "All  these  sins  are  ours,  and  we  repent 
them,"  who  can  teU  whether  God  wiU  be  gracious  unto  us,  and  give  us  a  nail 
in  His  tabernacle,  and  one  small  place  in  His  great  providential  plan  ?  As  a 
nation  we  have  sinned ;  I  do  not  see  that  our  cup  of  iniquity  could  hold  one 
drop  more;  it  is  not  for  us  to  fall  back  upon  a  history  we  have  dishonoured, 
it  is  for  us  to  go  forward  to  a  throne  that  is  stiU  a  throne  of  mercy.  (J". 
Parker,  D.D.)  Let  me  die  with  the  Philistines. — The  death  of  Samson: — 
I.  Humiliation  and  weakness  are  suke  to  follow  the  falluke  to  keep  covenant 
WITH  God.  He  lacks  the  highest  motive  and  the  holiest  hope  who  has  not 
consciously  agreed  to  fulfil  the  conditions  on  which  the  exceeding  great  and 
precious  promises  of  God  are  given.  H.  The  discipline  of  humiliation  is  the 
ONLY  WAY  TO  A  RESTORATION  OF  STRENGTH.  All  great  eudowmcnts  bring  with  them 
also  especial  weaknesses.  This  big  burly  body  carried  great  passions  with  it.  This 
giant  strength  led  easily  to  over-confidence.  But  a  sudden  gleam  of  light  seems  to 
show  him  the  opportunity  to  complete  his  mission  as  the  champion  of  Israel. 
Blind  and  alone,  he  may  yet  gain  a  victory  for  God  and  for  His  people  over  their 
oppressors.  Now  he  confesses  that  his  strength  is  in  Jehovah.  To  Him  he  cries 
for  help.  His  hair  has  grown  again,  but  he  does  not  put  his  trust  in  that. 
Perhaps  he  feels  the  vigour  of  his  returning  power,  but  in  his  blindness  he  needs 
God,  however  strong  he  may  be.  And  as  soon  as  he  can  pray  again  he  is  the 
hero  again.    IH.  While  one  who  has  broken  covenant  with  God  can  never  come 

BACK  AND  BE  WHAT  HE  WAS  BEFORE,  GOD  MAT  SOMETIMES  ACCOMPLISH  MORE  THROUGH  A 
FALLEN  MAN  RESTORED  THAN  IF  HE   HAD  NOT   FALLEN.      PoOI  SamSOU  UeVCr  COUld  get 

back  his  eyes.  No  penitence  or  prayer  could  restore  the  lost  faculty.  Even 
though  his  strength  came  back,  his  eyesight  did  not.  He  must  beg  the  aid  of  a  boy 
to  find  his  way.  It  is  thus  with  aU  who  fall  from  God  and  fail  from  duty,  who 
turn  their  back  upon  the  Lord  and  neglect  the  conditions  of  His  blessing.  The 
Bears  remain  though  the  man  is  healed.  One  who  has  fallen  into  gross  sin  may  be 
restored,  but  he  is  weakened.  Do  not  let  us  think  too  lightly  of  the  peril  of  sin, 
and  especially  of  the  sin  of  one  who  is  pledged  to  God.  The  disability  which  comes 
from  the  violation  of  a  conscious  obligation  is  more  severe  and  more  lasting  than 
any  other.  (G.  M.  Boynton.)  Lessons  from  the  life  of  Samson  : — His  character 
is  unlike  that  of  the  other  heroes  of  Hebrew  story.  Alone  in  the  Old  Testament  he 
overflows  with  joyfulness.  His  very  name  is  probably  associated  vrith  the  sunshine 
— "  sunlike."  He  is  light  of  heart,  and  his  courage  rises  in  the  hour  of  danger.  He 
has  a  sportive  wit  which  sparkles  in  rhythmic  couplets,  flashes  in  epigrams,  plays 
upon  words.    It  will  not  be  forgotten  that  the  great  child  of  daring  and  genius  is 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

brought  up  a  Neziyr-Elohim  with  his  vow  of  abstinence.  Unquestionably,  he 
derived  an  inward  strength  of  a  certain  kind  from  the  conviction  that  he  was 
indeed  God's  own,  consecrated  to  Him  from  his  mother's  womb.  Certainly,  also, 
the  circumstances  which  called  him  to  be  a  judge  must  have  had  a  strengthening 
and  ennobling  influence.  We  must  remember  that  in  Israel  God's  Spirit  takes  the 
place  which  in  human  history  is  ascribed  to  natural  genius.  But  this  influence  of 
the  Spirit  was  a  gift  and  not  necessarily  a  sanctifying  grace.  Now,  such  measure 
of  spiritual  strength  as  may  have  been  given  to  Samson  by  his  being  a  Neziyr- 
Elohim  was,  so  to  speak,  artificial.  No  chain  is  stronger  than  its  weakest  link ;  no 
vow  is  stronger  than  the  will  behind  it.  Add  to  this,  that  the  vow  only  covers  an 
isolated  fragment  of  the  world  of  moral  duty.  Unnatural  strictness  in  one 
direction  sometimes  compensates  itself  by  unnatural  laxity  in  another.  Samson 
was  a  rigid  total  abstainer.  I  mean  no  unworthy  sneer  at  a  cause  to  which  I  wish 
well.  But  if  Samson  was  a  rigid  total  abstainer,  so  I  believe  is  the  Mormon,  and 
so  I  know  is  the  Moslem.  At  all  events,  Samson's  strictness  in  one  direction  was 
compensated  for  by  laxity  in  another.  A  fiercer  passion  than  that  for  wine 
coursed  through  the  hero's  veins,  and  set  his  blood  on  fire.  The  unrivalled 
bodily  strength  co-exists  with  abject  moral  weakness.  Why  will  so  many 
novelists  and  poets  speak  as  if  strength  and  passion  were  almost  convertible  terms  ? 
What  we  call  the  strength  of  passion  is  really  its  weakness.  It  is  not  passion,  but 
the  repression  of  passion,  which  is  really  strong.  And  the  strongest  character  is 
that  in  which  what  are  called  the  strongest  passions  are  held  in  leash  by  the 
sternest  will.  Lessons :  1.  Flee  from  every  sin  that  has  light  in  its  eye,  and 
honey  upon  its  tongue.  Flee  from  the  touch  that  wins,  but  blisters  as  it  touches, 
and  fills  the  vein  with  fire.  2.  A  second  lesson  derived  from  the  fallen  Nazarite 
is  the  weakness  of  our  will ;  the  helplessness  of  our  resolutions  ;  their  imperfect 
and  partial  action  upon  our  moral  nature.  How,  then,  is  the  will  to  be  eman- 
cipated and  strengthened?  I  am  not  now  speaking  of  prudential  rules,  and 
humble  efforts,  indispensable  though  they  are — I  am  not  just  yet  speaking  of  a 
sacramental  means  of  grace — but  of  ultimate  Divine  principles.  (1)  The  strength- 
ening of  our  will  comes  from  the  sympathy  cf  Christ.  In  this  we  have  a  law  of 
our  human  nature  perfected.  When  our  will  needs  an  accession  of  strength,  we 
find  such  accession  by  bringing  it  to  a  higher  will.  And  the  higher  and  purer 
that  other  wiU  may  be,  with  the  stronger  grasp  shall  it  lay  hold  upon  our  sinking 
resolutions.  (2)  The  strengthening  of  our  will  further  comes  from  the  inward 
gift  of  the  Spirit.  The  great  gift  of  the  new  covenant  is  (Jer.  xxxi.  33).  In 
those  whose  will  Christ  emancipates  there  is  a  supernatural  power,  conforming 
the  man  to  the  law,  not  dispensing  him  from  it.  3.  And  now  we  ate  led  to  see 
from  all  this  the  fitness  and  reasonableness  of  the  view  entertained  by  the  Church 
of  the  reality  of  grace  in  sacraments  and  ordinances.    {Abjp.  Wm.  Alexander.) 


CHAPTEB  XVn. 


Vbbs.  1-13.  Mlcali. — Micah's  mother : — In  the  second  verse  of  this  chapter  Micah 
makes  a  clean  confession  of  a  great  wrong  which  he  had  done  to  his  mother. 
"It  seems,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "that  this  old  woman,  with  long  scraping 
and  saving,  had  hoarded  a  considerable  sum  of  money — eleven  hundred  pieces 
of  silver.  It  is  likely  she  intended,  when  she  died,  to  leave  it  to  this 
son.  In  the  meantime,  it  did  her  good  to  count  it  over  and  call  it  her 
own."  On  discovering  that  she  had  been  relieved  of  her  treasure,  Micah's  mother 
became  justly  indignant.  She  scolded  and  called  down  curses  on  the  one 
who  had  robbed  her.  This  she  did  in  her  son's  presence,  and  though  she 
made  no  direct  charge  of  the  offence  upon  him,  her  conduct  gi'eatly  disturbed 
his  conscience.  Some  time  later  he  made  an  open  acknowledgment  to  his 
mother  of  the  whole  matter,  and  restored  the  stolen  treasure.  The  reappear- 
ance of  the  lost  shekels  had  a  remarkably  soothing  effect  on  her  disposition.  She 
forgot  all  about  the  wrong  done  to  her,  and  all  about  her  own  distemper.  "  Blessed 
be  thou  of  the  Lord,  my  son,"  said  this  forgiving  mother.  Is  it  not  wonderful  what 
a  difference  a  little  money  makes  in  one's  disposition  and  feelings  ?  She  who  could 
curse  at  its  loss  now  as  readily  blesses  with  its  return.    One  can  imagine  a  very 


CHAP,  xvn.]  JUDGES.  245 

different  state  of  things  had  Micah  come  to  her  with  his  confession,  but  without  the 
eleven  hundred  pieces  of  silver.  Note  now  another  incident  in  this  transaction. 
After  this  money  had  been  stolen  Micah's  mother  gave  as  one  reason  for  feeling  so 
badly  that  "  she  had  dedicated  it  whoUy  to  the  Lord."  When  she  had  it  in  her 
possession  she  had  not  the  heart  to  do  this,  but  as  soon  as  it  was  gone  she  made 
known  her  good  intentions.  For  some  reason  Micah  was  moved  to  restore  to  his 
mother  the  money  which  belonged  to  her.  What  did  she  do  with  it  ?  Did  she  give 
it  to  the  Lord,  according  to  her  reported  oath  of  dedication  ?  The  record  shows 
she  gave  to  Him  but  the  veriest  part  of  it.  Nine  hundred  shekels  she  kept  for 
herself.  The  remaining  two  hundred  she  devoted  to  religious  uses.  What  a 
picture  in  this  conduct  of  Micah  and  his  mother  of  poor,  weak,  vacillating,  human 
nature,  sinning  and  confessing,  cursing  and  blessing,  as  circumstances  determine  ! 
"  What  wonder,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "  that  such  a  mother  had  such  a  son !  She 
paved  the  way  for  his  theft,  by  her  probable  stinginess."  Li  her  poverty  she  pro- 
fessed generous  feeling  towards  the  Lord's  cause.  When  her  money  came  back, 
Bhe  gave  to  it  less  than  one-fifth  of  the  all  she  had  promised.  (TI'.  H.  Allbright.) 
There  was  no  king  In  Israel,  but  every  man  did  that  which  was  right  in  his 
own  eyes. — Anarchy  : — At  the  first,  one  would  think  that  it  were  a  merry  world  if 
every  man  might  do  what  he  listed.  But  yet  sure  those  days  were  evil.  This,  a 
complaint.  To  let  you  see,  then,  what  a  monster  lurketh  under  these  smooth  terms, 
*'  doing  that  which  is  right  in  our  eyes."  Two  parts  there  be,  the  eye,  and  the 
hand.  To  begin  with  the  eye,  and  that  which  is  right  in  the  eye.  There  began  all 
evil  in  the  first  temptation — even  from  this  persuasion,  they  should  need  no  direction 
from  God,  or  from  any ;  their  own  eye  should  be  their  director  to  what  was  right. 
Three  evils  are  in  it.  It  is  not  safe  to  commit  the  judgment  of  what  is  right  to  the 
eye ;  and  yet  it  is  our  surest  sense,  as  that  which  apprehendeth  greatest  variety  of 
differences.  But  I  know  withal,  the  optics  (the  masters  of  that  faculty)  reckon 
up  twenty  several  ways,  all  which  it  may  be  and  is  deceived.  The  object  fuU  of 
deceit ;  things  are  not  as  they  seem.  The  medium  is  not  evenly  disposed. 
Take  but  one  :  that  of  the  oar  in  the  water.  Though  the  oar  be  straight,  yet,  if  the 
eye  be  judge,  it  seemeth  bowed.  And  if  that  which  is  right  may  seem  crooked,  that 
which  is  crooked  may  seem  right.  So  the  eye  is  no  competent  judge.  But  admit 
we  will  make  the  eye  judge,  yet  not  every  man's  eye ;  that  were  too  much.  Many 
weak  and  dim  eyes  there  be,  many  goggle  and  mis-set ;  many  little  better  than 
blind ;  shall  all  and  every  of  these  be  allowed  to  define  what  is  right  ?  Some,  it 
may  be  (perhaps  the  eagle),  but  shall  the  owl  and  all?  I  trow  not.  Many  mis- 
shapen kinds  of  right  shall  we  have  if  that  may  be  suffered.  We  all  know  self-love, 
what  a  thing  it  is,  how  it  dazzleth  the  sight ;  how  everything  appeareth  right  and 
good  that  appeareth  through  those  spectacles.  Therefore,  not  right  by  the  eye. 
At  least,  not  every  man's  eye.  Nay,  not  any  man  is  right  by  his  own  eye.  I  now 
pass  to  the  next  point.  Here  is  a  hand,  too.  For  here  at  this  breaketh  in  the 
whole  sea  of  confusion,  when  the  hand  followeth  the  eye,  and  men  proceed  to  do  as 
lewdly  as  they  see  perversely.  And  sure  the  hand  wiU  follow  the  eye,  and  men  do 
as  seemeth  right  to  them,  be  it  never  so  absurd.  1.  Micah  liked  an  idol  well ;  Micah 
had  a  good  purse ;  he  told  out  two  hundred  shekels,  and  so  up  went  the  idol.  2.  The 
men  of  Dan  liked  well  of  spoiling ;  they  were  well  appointed,  their  swords  were 
sharp ;  they  did  it.  3.  They  of  Gibeah,  to  their  lust,  rape  seemed  a  small  matter ; 
they  were  a  multitude,  no  resisting  them ;  and  so  they  committed  that  abominable 
villainy.  But  what,  shall  this  be  suffered  and  no  remedy  sought?  God  forbid. 
First,  the  eye,  error  in  the  eye,  is  harm  enough ;  and  order  must  be  taken  even  for 
that.  For  men  do  not  err  in  judgment  but  with  hazard  of  their  souls;  very 
requisite,  therefore,  that  men  be  travailed  with,  that  they  may  see  their  own 
blindness.  But,  if  they  be  strongly  conceited  of  their  own  sight,  and  will  not 
endure  any  to  come  near  their  eyes :  it  we  cannot  cure  their  eyes,  what,  shall  we 
not  hold  their  hands  neither  ?  Yes,  in  any  wise.  We  see,  then,  the  malady;  more 
than  time  we  sought  out  a  remedy  for  it.  That  shall  we  best  do  if  we  know  the 
cause.  The  cause  is  here  set  down.  If  the  cause  be  there  is  no  king,  let  there  be 
one :  that  is  the  remedy.  A  good  king  will  help  all,  if  it  be  of  absolute  necessity 
that  neither  Micah,  for  all  his  wealth,  nor  Dan,  for  all  their  forces,  nor  Gibeah, 
for  aU  their  multitude,  do  what  they  list.  This  is  then  God's  means.  We  cannot 
say  His  only  means,  in  that  there  are  states  that  subsist  without  them,  but  this 
we  may  say.  His  best  means — the  best  for  order,  peace,  strength,  steadiness.  The 
next  point  is,  no  king  in  Israel.  That  this  is  not  noted  as  a  defect  in  gross,  or  at 
large,  but  even  in  Israel,  God's  own  chosen  people.    It  is  a  want,  not  in  Edom  or 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XTn. 

Canaan,  but  even  in  Israel.  Truly  Israel,  being  God's  own  peculiar  people,  might 
seem  to  claim  a  prerogative  above  other  nations,  in  this,  that  they  had  the  know- 
ledge of  His  laws,  whereby  their  eyes  were  lightened  and  their  hands  taught.  01 
which  there  needeth  no  reason  but  this :  that  a  king  is  a  good  means  to  keep  them 
God's  Israel.  Here,  for  want  of  a  king,  Israel  began,  and  was  fair  onward,  to  be 
no  longer  Israel,  but  even  Babel.  I  come  to  the  third  part :  and  to  what  end  a 
king  ?  What  will  a  king  do  unto  us  ?  He  will  in  his  general  care  look  to  both 
parts,  the  eye  and  the  hand — the  eye,  that  men  sin  not  blindly  for  want  of 
direction ;  the  hand,  that  men  sin  not  with  a  high  hand  for  want  of  correction. 
But  this  is  not  aU ;  the  text  carrieth  us  yet  further — that  it  is  not  only  the  charge 
of  the  king,  but  the  very  first  article  in  his  charge.  (Bp.  Andrewes.)  Anarchy  : 
— I.  The  tragical  antecedent  :  In  those  days  there  was  no  king  in  Israel. 
n.  The  terrible  consequent  :  Every  one  did  that  which  was  right  in  their  own 
eyes.  IH.  The  infallible  connection  between  that  cause  and  this  effect. 
(Thos.  Cartwright,  D.D.)  The  evil  of  unbridled  liberty  : — To  live  as  we  please 
would  be  the  ready  way  to  lose  our  liberty,  and  undo  ourselves.  Tyranny  itself 
were  infinitely  more  tolerable  than  such  an  unbridled  liberty.  For  that,  like  a 
tempest,  might  throw  down  here  and  there  a  fruitful  tree,  but  this,  like  a  deluge, 
would  sweep  away  all  before  it.  Many  men,  many  minds,  and  each  strongly 
addicted  to  his  own.  If,  therefore,  every  man  should  be  his  own  judge,  so  as  to 
take  upon  him  to  determine  his  own  right,  and  according  to  such  determination  to 
proceed  in  the  maintenance  of  it,  not  only  the  government,  but  the  kingdom  itself 
would  quickly  come  to  ruin ;  and  yet  admit  of  the  former,  and  you  cannot  exclude 
the  latter.  Diseases  in  the  eye,  errors  in  the  judgment,  are  dangerous ;  and  there 
being  not  one  reason  in  us,  there  is  the  more  need  of  one  power  over  us.  Yet  they 
who  see  amiss,  hurt  none,  they  say,  but  themselves  ;  but  how  if  their  unquiet 
opinions  will  not  be  kept  at  home  ?  but  prove  as  thorns  in  their  sides,  and  will  not 
suffer  them  to  take  any  rest,  tiU  from  liberty  of  thinking,  they  come  to  liberty  of 
acting  !  Nor  is  there  any  reason  we  should  be  lawless,  to  do  what  we  please,  for 
we  cannot  fathom  the  depth  and  deceitfulness  of  our  own  hearts,  much  less  of  the 
hearts  of  other  men.  Only  this  we  know,  we  are  all  the  worse  for  that  which  we 
mistake  for  Uberty  (mistake,  I  say),  for  to  live  as  we  please  is  indeed  to  lose  our 
liberty,  of  which  the  law  is  so  far  from  being  an  abridgement  that  it  is  the  only  firm 
foundation  upon  which  it  must  be  built.  {Ibid.)  The  Levite  was  content.— 
The  young  Levite ;  or,  rich  content : — His  morals  were  bad,  but  his  spu-it  of  general 
contentedness  was  good.  Can  it  be  said  of  men  now  that  they  are  content  ?  How 
much  unrest  is  there  all  around  us  1  The  discontented  spirit  is  easily  discovered. 
The  merchant,  in  his  office  or  on  the  market,  makes  certain  profits,  but  frets  him- 
self that  he  has  not  made  more.  The  tradesman  bitterly  complains  of  the  badness 
of  trade,  and  the  artisan  of  slackness  of  work.  When  he  has  succeeded  in  finding 
employment  he  wiU  be  found  quarrelling  with  the  rate  of  payment.  Nor  is  the 
discontented  spirit  confined  to  the  town ;  it  is  found  in  rural  districts  too.  Speak 
with  the  occupier,  and  what  a  string  of  complaints  he  has  about  home  or  weather ; 
speak  with  the  wife,  and  she  complains  of  her  wayward  family  ;  with  the  son,  and 
you  find  that  he  is  weary  of  country  life,  and  longs  for  the  excitement  of  a  city ; 
with  the  daughter,  and  she  is  annoyed  that  school  life  has  to  be  followed  by  what 
she  terms  "  home  drudgery."  You  may  go  away  from  such  a  place  of  beauty  in 
complete  disgust.  The  appearances  have  completely  belied  the  reality.  Even  the 
Indian,  for  whom  a  blanket  and  weapon  would  appear  to  suffice,  is  ofttimes  discon- 
tented because  game  is  scarce  or  his  maize  plot  unproductive.  It  is  difficult  to  find 
any  person  who  is  without  some  reason  for  discontent,  or  any  position  which  places 
a  man  beyond  its  reach.  The  joy  of  the  early  Church  (Acts  ii.  46)  grew  out  of  its 
contentedness.  Its  first  experience  of  the  results  of  religion  was  so  joyous  that  it 
was  a  foretaste  of  millennial  bliss.  It  lasted,  unfortunately,  too  short  a  time,  and 
yet  long  enough  to  show  what  should  be  the  ideal  of  life.  1.  This  "  simplicity  of 
heart,"  this  contentedness  of  mind,  is  not  always  inherited,  does  not  always  come 
by  nature,  but  may  be  obtained.  It  can  only  come  fully  when  the  heart  is  at  peace 
with  God  through  Christ.  The  man  is  "  alive  to  God."  He  gives  all  his  affection 
to  God,  because  he  lives  in  the  love  which  God  has  to  him.  His  greatest  desire  is 
to  have  his  whole  nature  subdued  to  Christ,  and  serve  Him  in  "  singleness  of  heart." 
2.  Again,  this  state  is  not  one  which  comes  to  all  suddenly.  Indeed,  it  comes  to 
most  gradually.  Paul,  the  apostle,  only  attained  it  by  degrees.  3.  There  is  a 
temporary  advantage  in  discontent.  But  for  dissatisfaction  with  our  spiritual 
state  and  progress,  we  should  not  strive  to  make  any  advance.    4.  Look  at  some  ol 


CHAP,  xvn.]  JUDGES.  247 

the  results  which  follow  the  attainment  of  the  contented  spirit.  (1)  There  will  be 
a  readiness  to  make  the  best  of  any  position  in  which  we  may  be  placed.  There 
was  a  schoolmaster  among  the  Cumberland  Hills,  of  whom  Eobertson  speaks  in 
one  of  his  lectures — a  man  who  rested  content  with  a  very  small  school,  small 
salary,  and  small  house ;  though  his  abilities  would  have  obtained  for  him  a 
position  much  higher  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  but  who  refused  every  inducement 
to  remove.  He  said,  "  I  reckon  that  the  privilege  of  living  amid  beautiful  scenery 
much  more  than  compensates  for  a  large  salary  with  work  in  the  stifling  atmos- 
phere of  some  town."  It  is  possible,  therefore,  to  gain  contentedness  in  respect  to 
position,  and  the  more  surely  if  we  can  have  the  assurance  that  Christ  has  taken 
up  His  abode  in  our  hearts.  (2)  Where  this  spirit  obtains,  there  will  be  a  more 
cheerful  view  of  life  cherished.  A  little  girl  once  inquired,  "Mamma,  did  the 
cheerful  God  make  all  the  beautiful  flowers  ?  "  The  child's  idea  of  God  was  far 
higher  than  of  many  Christians.  Her  expression,  which  was  apparently  bold,  was 
one  indicative  of  sweet  simplicity  and  "  singleness  of  heart."  Would  that  we  could 
be  in  spirit  as  that  little  child.  (3)  Where  this  spirit  of  content  obtains,  there  will 
be  a  more  earnest  performance  of  any  duty  that  may  fall  upon  us.  That  which  our 
hands  find  to  do  we  shall  do  with  our  might.  We  shall  ever  search  out  occasions 
of  usefulness.  If  we  see  any  wrong,  we  shall  not  be  content  to  let  it  rest.  If  we 
see  ignorance  and  sin  around,  we  shall  strive  to  remove  it.  (4)  Where  there  is 
this  rich  content  and  true  "  singleness  of  heart "  there  will  be  a  clearer  and  yet 
clearer  perception  of  God's  truth  and  will.  There  is  a  clearness  of  vision  following 
on  "  singleness"  of  desire.  (5)  Moreover,  there  wUl  be  perfect  willingness  to  leave 
everything  in  God's  hands.  Much  of  the  fret  and  worry  of  life  will  thus  be  saved. 
{F.  Hastings.)  Micah  consecrated  the  Levite. — An  unauthorised  ordination; 
or,  a  pastor-elecVs  recognition  services  : — I.  The  pastob.  1.  A  recognised  minister. 
2.  Without  a  charge.  3.  Very  poor.  4.  In  search  of  a  ministry.  5.  Of  a  good 
.  character.  6.  A  young  pastor.  II.  The  call.  1.  Its  nature.  (1)  To  a  small 
church.  (2)  Unanimous.  (3)  With  little  inquiries.  (4)  Upon  his  own  merit. 
(5)  By  a  very  rich  church.  2.  Its  condition.  (1)  Much  respected.  (2)  Poor 
stipend.  HI.  The  acceptance  of  the  call.  1.  Immediate.  2.  Without  a  scruple. 
IV.  The  eecognition  seevice.  1.  An  unauthorised  ordination.  2.  Without  any 
I  ceremony.  3.  With  a  good  purpose.  V.  The  gbeat  satisfaction  of  the  church 
I  IN  theib  choice.  (M.  Jones.)  Now  know  I  tliat  the  Lord  will  do  me  good. — 
The  great  religious  want  and  mistake  of  humanity  .- — I.  The  great  religious  want 
of  humanity.  1.  A  friendly  relation  with  the  Eternal.  2.  Some  mediator  to  pro- 
cure this  friendship.  H.  The  great  religious  mistake  of  humanity.  This  man 
concludes  that  he  shall  obtain  the  Divine  favour  simply  because  he  has  a  priest  in 
his  house.  He  may  have  drawn  this  false  and  dangerous  conclusion  from  one  of 
the  following  popular  assumptions:  1.  That  there  was  something  morally  meri- 
torious in  merely  supporting  a  minister  of  the  Lord.  2.  That  the  priest  would 
have  some  special  power  with  Heaven  to  obtain  "  good."  8.  That  by  his  formally 
attending  to  the  religious  ordinances  which  this  Levite  prescribed  "  the  Lord  would 
do  him  good."  (Homilist.)  Micah  and  the  Levite  : — I.  Selfishness  in  religion. 
This  lies  at  the  foundation  of  Micah's  trouble.  The  institution  of  Micah's  new 
^  form  of  worship  had  its  root  in  this  vice.  He  did  not  break  away  from  the  old 
\  form  of  things  because  he  was  dissatisfied  with  it,  but  because  it  caused  self-denial 
<  and  money  to  support  the  estabUshed  order  of  worship  at  Shilph.  It  took  time  to 
;  go  up  there,  and  means  to  convey  himself  and  family.  WEy'could  he  not  manage 
,'  the  matter  more  economically  and  just  as  satisfactorily  at  home,  and  thus  avoid  the 
1  annoyance  and  expense  ?  Many  a  man  has  made  this  mistake  of  Micah,  in  think- 
ing he  could  worship  God  as  acceptably  in  his  own  way  as  in  any  other — in  thinking 
there  is  no  difference  between  a  man-made  and  a  Divinely-appointed  religion.  In 
Micah's  case  selfishness  defeated  itself,  as  it  does  invariably.  In  departing  from 
the  true  religion  he  soon  came  to  have  no  religion  at  all.  And  is  not  this  the 
inevitable  course  of  religious  declension  ?  If  I  could  paint  a  picture  that  would 
preach  a  sermon,  it  would  be  Micah  running  after  his  gods  and  his  renegade  priest, 
and  crying :  •'  Ye  have  taken  away  my  gods  and  my  priest,  and  what  have  I 
more  ? "  II.  Iottation  in  religion.  Micah's  worship  was  a  cross  between 
Judaism  and  heathenism.  He  had  the  priest  and  the  ephod  on  one  side,  and  the 
molten  and  graven  images  on  the  other.  Either  he  did  not  perceive  the  incon- 
graity,  or  he  thought  it  would  make  no  difference.  Some  form  of  worship  he 
considered  a  necessity.  He  was  not  ready  to  throw  religion  overboard.  Hi3 
difficulty  was  in  thinMng  it  made  little  difference  after  all  what  kind  of  religion  a 

36 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xviu. 

man  has  so  long  as  he  has  some  form  of  worship.  Having  no  true  idea  as  to  the 
place  of  worship,  he  came  soon  to  have  no  true  idea  of  worship  itself.  This  is  a 
natural  order  of  declension.  Men  nowadays  break  away  from  the  sanctuary,  not 
meaning  to  give  up  all  religion.  Having  no  stated  place  of  worship,  they  go  here 
and  there  for  a  time,  and  then  cease  to  go  altogether.  Breaking  with  the  established 
order  of  worship,  Micah  manufactured  a  worship  of  his  own.  He  mistook  the  sign 
for  the  thing  signified.  His  religion  was  an  imitation — a  counterfeit — and  a 
counterfeit  is  more  or  less  a  copy  of  the  genuine.  Many  a  man  has  made  this 
mistake  of  Micah,  in  thinking  that  some  religion  was  better  than  none — that  a  poor 
thing  was  better  than  nothing  at  all.  Counterfeits  and  shams  abound  in  religion. 
Imitations  and  incongruities  are  seen  on  every  hand.  One  is  forced  to  inquire,  "  Is 
there  anything  real  and  genuine  ?  "  Is  every  man  the  maker  of  his  own  idols  ?  Is 
each  and  every  one  to  be  guided  by  his  own  ideas  of  worship  ?  God  forbid  1  If  it 
be  so,  then  unity  is  impossible,  and  confusion  and  bitterness  and  babble  are  the 
inevitable  sequence.  IH.  Self-complacencx.  With  his  young  priest  and  hia 
heathen  gods  Micah  was  satisfied.  Because  he  was,  he  thought  God  would  be. 
Hence  his  complacent  utterance  :  "  Now  know  I  that  the  Lord  wUl  do  me  good, 
seeing  I  have  a  Levite  to  my  priest."  We  have  seen,  even  in  our  day,  instances 
not  altogether  dissimilar.  Families  depending  on  the  orthodoxy  of  the  Church  for 
the  Divine  approbation ;  Churches  expecting  all  will  go  well  from  the  ecclesias- 
tical standing  or  ordination  vows  of  their  ministers.  How  often  families  and 
Churches  and  ministers  have  been  disappointed !  The  truth  is,  there  can  be  but 
one  way  of  securing  God's  blessing,  whether  for  the  individual,  the  family,  or  the 
Church,  That  one  way  is  the  way  of  loving  and  faithful  obedience  to  His  require- 
ments. Not  what  we  think,  but  what  He  thinks ;  not  what  we  consider  best,  but 
what  He  commands,  is  our  duty  and  happiness.  Eeligion  is  not  a  human  invention, 
but  a  Divine  obligation.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  mental  caprice,  but  oi  joyful 
BubmisBion  to  the  will  of  Heaven.    {W.  H.  AUbright.) 


CHAPTER  XVm. 


Vers.  1-31.  The  Danltes  sought  them  an  inheritance.  .  .  .  They  set  them  up 
Micah's  graven  image. — The  image-worship  expanding  into  tribal  idolatry : — I.  Thh 

STRAITS  TO  WHICH  UNBELIEF  REDUCES  THE  STRONG  (vcr.  1).  II.  DISCONTENT  WITH  A 
DiVINELT-MARKED  LOT  LEADS  TO  EVIL  (vcr.  2).  HI.  TrIFLING  CIRCUMSTANCES  OFTEN 
LEAD  TO  THE  DISCOVERY  OF  SINFUL  SCHEMES  (VCT.  3).  IV.  SiLENT  NEGLECT  AT  FIRST, 
LEADS  AFTERWARDS  TO  OPEN  REJECTION  OF  God's  ORDINANCES  (vCr.  5).  V.  ThE  MOST 
INOFFENSIVE  PEOPLE  ABE  NOT  SAFE  FROM  THE  ATTACKS  OF  EVIL  MEN  (verS.  7,  9,  10). 
VI.    BeLIGION  IB  SOMETIMES  INVOKED  TO  AID  THE  PLOTS  OF  THE  UNGODLY  (ver.  5).       VII. 

Indirectness  is  a  character  of  the  world's  counsel  (ver.  6).    VIH.  False  worship- 

PEBS  take  refuge  IN  IMITATING  THE  APPEARANCES  OF  THE  TRUE  (verS.  14, 17).  IX.  DiVINE 
providence  OFTEN  OFFERS  NO  INTERRUPTION  TO  THE  EXECUTION  OF  THE  DESIGNS  OF  THE 

WICKED,  X.  The  sudden  destruction  of  the  man-made  RELIGION  (vers,  15-20). 
XI.  Prayer  will  not  secure  the  Divine  blesseno  on  a  wrong  action  (vers.  5,  6, 
also  vers.  18,  19).  XH.  Worldly  minds  oabe  little  for  accuracy  in  spiritual 
things  (vers.  17-19).  XIII.  Neither  moral  principle  nor  sound  reason  can  be 
expected  of  those  who  deny  to  God  His  natural  rights.  XIV.  Success  in  evil 
is  no  proof  of  the  Divine  approval.     XV.  True  service  is  not  to  be  expected 

FROM  A  FALSE  PRIEST  (ver.  20).      XVI.    ThE  EXCESSIVE  IMPORTANCE  WHICH  AN  IDOLATER 

ATTACHES  TO  HIS  GODS  (vcT,  24).  {J.  P.  Millar.)  Ask  counsel,  we  pray  thee,  of 
God. — Counsel  of  God : — Seeking  counsel  of  God  is  the  first  duty  of  Christian 
men.  I.  Why  we  should  ask.  1.  On  account  of  our  ignorance  and  short-sighted- 
ness. The  way  before  us  dark,  uncertain.  So  reason  would  suggest  to  ask,  &c. 
It  is  the  course  God's  people  have  ever  adopted.  See  Jacob  at  Bethel  (Gen. 
xivii.  20) ;  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiii.  12) ;  David  (2  Sam.  vii.  29).  2.  On  account  of 
God's  ability  to  give.  He  knows  all  the  way  before  us.  3.  On  account  of  the  fact 
that  our  best  interests  are  involved  in  the  counsel  God  can  give.  It  is  like  the 
pillar  and  cloud,  the  compass  of  the  mariner,  light  of  day,  &c.  II.  What  we 
MAY  ASK.  1.  As  to  our  temporal  concerns.  Duties  in  the  world,  engagements,  plans, 
and  changes.    2.  As  to  our  relative  concerns.    Families,  children,  friends,  &c.     So 


CHAP,  xvm.]  JUDGES.  249 

Abraham  and  David ;  so  all  the  truly  pious.  3.  As  to  our  spiritual  concerns.  The 
way  of  experimental  piety,  usefulness,  &o.  Influence  for  good.  The  text  speaks  of 
the  "way  being  prosperous."  III.  How  we  must  ask.  1.  With  a  deep  conviction 
of  our  exigency.  Not  self-sufficient.  2.  With  believing  confidence.  The 
promises  are  abundant  for  every  scene.  To  lead,  direct,  keep,  deliver, 
strengthen,  protect,  sanctify,  save ;  hence  we  must  calmly  look  and  plead. 
3.  With  a  resolution  to  follow  the  counsel.  4.  Through  the  person  and  advocacy 
of  Christ.  (J.  Burns,  D.D.)  We  have  seen  the  land,  and  behold,  it  is 
very  good. — Report  from  the  promised  land  : — This  was  a  model  report,  because  it 
urged  the  brethren  to  take  advantage  of  an  opportunity  that  meant  benefit  to 
themselves.  The  believer  in  Jesus  Christ  is  an  explorer,  and  he  brings  back  a 
report  to  his  brethren  who  are  unbelievers.  Eeligion,  like  science,  to  be  exact, 
must  be  grounded  in  truth  and  fact.  We  Usten  to  Livingstone  and  believe  him,  as 
we  would  but  few  who  might  tell  us  of  the  wastes  of  Africa,  for  we  know  that  he 
has  seen.  Let  your  life  be  a  life  fragrant  with  peace,  a  life  unselfish,  devoted, 
Christ-like,  a  life  of  beauty,  and  it  wiU  bring  a  winning  report  of  the  land,  and  your 
hearers  will  say,  "  We  will  go  with  you.  It  will  be  a  good  land,  for  God  is  with 
you."  Suppose  a  man  from  the  cold  and  cheerless  Arctic  comes  here.  He  comes 
from  a  land  of  chill  and  blasts,  where  the  sun's  warmth  never  falls,  where  no  birds 
sing,  and  where  flowers  never  bloom.  Suppose  a  man  from  this  zone  of  the  Arctic 
were  to  come  to  our  city  and  open  an  office  upon  Broadway.  How  many  would 
listen  and  go  back  with  him  to  the  terrors  of  that  frozen  north  ?  But  suppose  a 
man  from  the  sunny  south  should  come.  He  would  tell  of  the  birds  that  sing  the 
whole  year  round,  of  the  flowers  that  bloomed  season  after  season,  and  the  bubbhng 
streams  that  flowed  on  for  ever.  Which  of  the  two  would  repel  and  which 
attract  ?  God's  people  are  weak.  Do  not  attribute  their  failures  to  the  land  from 
which  they  come.  Do  not  set  your  reproof  against  the  land.  It  is  a  glorious  land. 
Go  and  make  that  land  your  land,  your  hope  and  your  eternity.  (IF.  T.  Sabine.) 
And  are  ye  still  7 — Indifference  to  religion  : — It  may  be  that  we  wonder  at  the  slow- 
ness of  the  Danites — wonder  that  they  should  hesitate  to  press  forward  and  possess 
themselves  of  such  an  earthly  inheritance ;  of  such  an  inheritance  because  it  was  a  part 
of  the  land  promised  by  God  to  their  fathers.  May  we  not,  however,  be  the  more 
astonished  at  ourselves,  as  we  remember  our  own  indifference  towards  a  heavenly 
inheritance  ?  The  habitation  we  now  hold,  straitened  as  it  is,  and  but  for  time, 
must  be  resigned  at  the  call  of  death,  whether  we  have  made  any  advance  towards  the 
heavenly  inheritance  or  not.  And  why  are  we  still  ?  Is  it  because  we  are  required 
to  withdraw  our  affections  from  the  earth?  If  so,  we  are  to  be  gainers  by  it 
(1  Peter  i.  4).  And  we  ourselves  often  profess  a  desire  to  possess  such  a  home. 
And  often  do  we  picture  to  ourselves  a  home  where  all  that  renders  this  life 

gainful  will  be  found  no  more.  We  desire  a  land  which  is  "  very  good."  Such  a 
ome,  such  a  land,  God's  Word  speaks  of  to  us,  and  says  that  it  is  laid  up  for  those 
who  seek  it  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).  Yet  few  of  us  really  seek  this  home;  and  so,  in  the 
words  of  the  spies,  we  are  again  and  again  rebuked  for  our  indifference.  "  Behold 
the  land  is  very  good :  and  are  ye  still  ?  be  not  slothful  to  go,  and  to  enter  to 
possess  the  land."  Now  the  spies  declared,  concerning  the  people  of  Laish: 
••  When  ye  go,  ye  shall  come  unto  a  people  secure,  and  to  a  large  land."  1.  The 
security  here  alluded  to  was  a  false  security.  It  was  that  careless  indifference  to 
danger — that  want  of  thought  for  their  own  safety — which  the  people  of  Laish 
indulged.  There  was  peace  about  them.  They  did  not  think  of  the  possibility  of 
its  being  broken.  They,  in  fact,  prepared  the  way  for  their  own  destruction.  And 
Holy  Scripture  tells  us  who  seek  the  heavenly  iniieritanee :  "  When  ye  go  ye  shall 
come  unto  a  people  secure,  and  to  a  large  land."  But  this  security  is  a  true  one 
(2  Sam.  xxii.  2,  3).  2.  It  is  a  large  land.  In  it  we  shall  dwell  in  peace  with  those 
who  now  enjoy  its  blessedness.  Our  entrance  there  will  be  followed  by  the  gift  of 
our  God  to  us  of  fuller  measures  of  love.  Could  we  possibly  desire  a  life  more 
blessed  than  this? — a  life  passed  with  angels,  and  archangels,  and  all  God's 
faithful  ones.  "Behold,"  then,  "the  land  is  very  good,  and  the  people  dwell 
secure :  and  are  ye  still  ?  "  In  order  to  rouse  their  countrymen,  and  to  hasten  them 
forward  towards  Laish,  the  spies  declared,  "  God  hath  given  it  into  your  hands." 
Kow  these  words  either  set  forth  the  faith  of  the  spies,  and  mean,  "  God  will  give 
it  into  your  hands, "  or  they  refer  to  God's  promise  of  old  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  18), 
and  mean,  "  Know  ye  not  that  it  is  yours  already  by  promise  ?  God  hath  given  it 
into  your  hands,  since  He  sware  onto  Abraham  that  he  and  his  seed  should  possess 
it."    And  we  would  borrow  their  words,  and  say  of  heaven,  "  Gk>d  hath  given  it 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvin. 

into  your  hands."  For  ever  since  the  Saviour  shed  His  blood  for  you,  heaven  has 
been  purchased  thereby  for  your  everlasting  inheritance.  Heirs,  by  promise, 
thereof,  your  baptism  made  you.  Citizens  of  heaven  ye  are  now.  Take  heed  that 
ye  forfeit  not,  by  following  the  world  and  its  lusts,  your  citizenship.  Moreover,  it 
was  not  purchased  to  be  bestowed  arbitrarily,  and  after  the  manner  of  men,  upon  a 
few.  And  this  is  evident  from  the  whole  of  our  blessed  Lord's  teaching.  "  In  it 
there  are  many  mansions."  "  It  is  a  large  country."  And  though  many  have 
passed  from  the  earth,  and  are  sure  to  enter  it,  "yet  there  is  room."  But  for 
whom  is  their  room  ?  Oh,  not  for  the  proud  and  the  haughty.  Not  for  those  who 
cry  "  Lord,  Lord,"  yet  do  not  the  things  which  He  hath  commanded.  Not  for 
those  who  love  this  present  world,  yet  profess  to  seek  a  better,  but  are  still !  There 
is  room  in  heaven  for  the  poor  and  humble  in  spirit,  for  those  who  follow 
"  temperance,  soberness,  and  chastity."  The  spies  also  sought  to  urge  their 
countrymen  on  by  declaring,  concerning  Laish,  that  it  was  "  a  place  where  there  ia 
no  want  of  anything  that  is  in  the  earth."  So  tempting  a  prize  as  this  would,  we 
should  think,  put  away  all  hesitation,  all  fear  of  difficulties.  And  we  declare  the 
same  of  heaven.  The  blessings  offered  to  the  Danites  had  respect  unto  the  present 
life.  The  blessings  offered  to  us  are  those  of  the  eternal  life  with  God  in  heaven. 
Do  you  desire  peace  ?  It  is  there.  Heaven  is  the  abode  of  holiness ;  and  where 
holiness  is,  there  also  is  peace.  Do  you  desire  joy?  It  is  there.  In  heaven 
sorrows  and  tears  are  not.  Do  you  desire  security?  In  heaven  nothing  shall 
disturb  your  peace,  nothing  shall  diminish  your  joy.  Do  you  long  to  offer  unto 
God  a  worship  holy  and  undefiled  ?  In  heaven  you  shall  offer  it.  There  you  will 
join  the  sinless  angels,  and  "  the  just  made  perfect,"  and  with  them  worship  and 
adore  your  God.  (C.  P.  Longland.)  Be  not  slothful  to  go,  and  to  enter  to 
possess  the  land. — Practical  attention  to    religion: — I.  Some   considekationb  to 

rNDUCE    AN    EARNEST,    PKACTICAL  ATTENTION  TO    RELIGION.       1.    CoUSidcr  the  glory    and 

the  grandeur  of  the  inheritance  to  which  you  aspire.  Tou  see  much  of  the  wisdom 
of  God  in  furnishing  figurative  descriptions  of  the  blessedness  of  heaven.  2.  Con- 
sider the  encouraging  assurances  we  have  of  success  in  our  pursuit.  3.  Consider 
the  danger  of  remissness  and  indifference  where  interests  so  momentous  are 
at  stake.  II.  Bkief  suggestions  as  to  the  means  of  peomotinq  spiritualitt 
OF  MIND.  1.  Endeavour  to  form  a  high  standard  of  that  holiness  of  character 
in  which  fitness  for  heaven  consists.  2.  Serious  and  devout  meditation  upon  the 
Word  of  God  should  form  a  part  of  the  business  of  every  day.  3.  Cultivate  a  devo- 
tional spirit.  {Homiletic  Magazine.)  Fetched  the  carved  image,  the  ephod,  and 
the  teraphim. — The  stolen  gods : — Micah  and  his  household  worshipping  the  images 
of  silver,  the  Levite  officiating  at  the  altar,  seeking  counsel  of  Jehovah  by  ephod 
and  teraphim,  the  Danites  who  steal  the  gods,  carry  off  the  priest,  and  set  up  a  new 
worship  in  the  city  they  build — all  these  represent  to  us  types  and  stages  of  what  ia 
really  schism,  pitiful  and  disastrous — that  is,  separation  from  the  truth  of  things 
and  from  the  sacred  realities  of  Divine  faith.  Selfish  untruth  and  infidelity  are 
schism,  the  wilderness  and  outlawry  of  the  soul.  1.  Micah  and  his  household, 
with  their  chapel  of  images,  their  ephod  and  teraphini,  represent  those  who  fall 
into  the  superstition  that  religion  is  good  as  insuring  temporal  success  and 
prosperity,  that  God  will  see  to  the  worldly  comfort  of  those  who  pay  respect  to 
Him.  Even  among  Christians  this  is  a  very  common  and  a  very  debasing  super- 
stition. The  sacraments  are  often  observed  as  signs  of  a  covenant  which  secures 
for  men  Divine  favour  through  social  arrangements  and  human  law.  The  spiritual 
nature  and  power  of  religion  are  not  denied,  but  they  are  uncomprehended.  The 
national  custom  and  the  worldly  hope  have  to  do  with  the  observance  of  devout 
forms  rather  than  any  movement  of  the  soul  heavenward.  A  Church  may  in  this 
way  become  like  Micah's  household,  and  prayer  may  mean  seeking  good  terms  with 
Him  who  can  fill  the  land  with  plenty  or  send  famine  and  cleanness  of  teeth. 
2.  The  Levite  represents  an  unworthy,  worldly  ministry.  Very  few  of  those  in  the 
ranks  of  the  Christian  ministry  are  entirely  concerned  with  the  respect  paid  to  them 
in  society  and  the  number  of  shekels  to  be  got  in  a  year.  That  he  keeps  pace 
with  the  crowd  instead  of  going  before  it  is  perhaps  the  hardest  thing  that  can  be 
said  of  the  worldly  pastor.  He  is  humane,  active,  intelligent ;  but  it  is  for  the 
Church  as  a  great  institution,  or  the  Church  as  his  temporal  hope  and  stay.  So 
his  ministry  becomes  at  the  best  a  matter  of  serving  tables  and  providing  alms — 
we  shall  not  say  amusement.  Here,  indeed,  is  schism ;  for  what  is  farther  from 
the  truth  of  things,  from  Christ  ?  3.  Once  more,  we  have  with  us  to-day,  very 
much  with  us,  certain  Danites  of  science,  politics,  and  the  press,  who,  if  they  could, 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  JUDGES.  251 

would  take  away  our  God  and  our  Bible,  our  Eternal  Father  and  spiritual  hope,  not 
from  a  desire  to  possess,  but  because  they  hate  to  see  us  believing,  hate  to  see  any 
weight  of  silver  given  to  religious  uses.  Not  a  few  of  these  are  marching,  as  they 
think,  triumphantly  to  commanding  and  opulent  positions,  whence  they  wiU  rule 
the  thought  of  the  world.  And  on  the  way,  even  whUe  they  deride  and  detest  the 
supernatural,  they  will  have  the  priest  go  with  them.  They  care  nothing  for  what 
he  says  ;  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  a  spu-itual  teacher  is  an  absurdity  of  which  they 
would  not  be  guilty ;  for  to  their  own  vague  prophesying  all  mankind  is  to  give 
heed,  and  their  interpretations  of  human  Ufe  are  to  be  received  as  the  Bible  of  the 
age.  Of  the  same  order  is  the  socialist  who  would  make  use  of  a  faith  he  iatenda 
to  destroy,  and  a  priesthood  whose  claim  is  offensive  to  him,  on  his  way  to  what  he 
calls  the  organisation  of  society.  In  his  view  the  uses  of  Christianity  and  the 
Bible  are  temporal  and  earthly.  He  will  not  have  Christ  the  Eedeemer  of  the  soul, 
yet  he  attempts  to  conjure  with  Christ's  words,  and  appropriate  the  power 
of  His  name.  The  audacity  of  these  would-be  robbers  is  matched  only  by 
their  ignorance  of  the  needs  and  ends  of  human  life.  (R,  A.  Watson,  M.A.) 
Ye  have  taken  away  my  gods. — The   loss   of  gods .- — I.  All  men  have  a   god. 

I.  Whatever  a  man's  god  be,  he  deems  it  the  greatest  good.  2.  But  man's  ideas  of 
God  are  very  deficient  and  conflicting.  Some  make  a  god  of  the  means  of  gratify- 
ing their  passions  and  lusts  ;  others  make  money  and  riches  their  god ;  others 
the  praise  and  approbation  of  their  feUow-creatures,  and  others  the  outward  rites 
and  ceremonies  of  religion.  3.  It  is  one  thing  to  be  religious ;  another  and  a  very 
different  matter  to  be  godly,  worshipping  the  Father  "in  spirit  and  in  truth." 

II.  False  gods  can  be  taken  fkom  theik  devotees.  1.  Often  in  life.  Many,  long 
before  they  die,  lose  the  means  of  gratifying  sense ;  many,  early  in  life,  though 
lovers  of  money,  become  pitifully  poor ;  and  many,  by  some  means  or  other,  are 
deprived  of  the  means  to  pursue  their  accustomed  mode  of  attending  to  religious 
rites,  and  therefore  lose  their  gods.  2.  In  death.  Sense  cannot  be  gratified  in  the 
grave.  No  miser  has  ever  been  able  to  take  a  grain  of  his  adored  money  to 
another  world.  The  world's  praise  and  blame  are  equally  unimportant  when  a 
man  feels  he  is  to  be  ushered  before  the  judgment-seat ;  and  all  religious  rites  and 
formularies  are  left  behind  for  ever  when  we  enter  a  world  of  spirits.    HI.  Thb 

LOSS,  EVEN    OF    A    FALSE    GOD,  WILL    BE    FELT    TO    BE    A    GREAT    LOSS.       "  What    haVB  I 

more  ?  "  To  tear  the  thing  we  have  made  our  god  from  us  is  the  greatest  bereave- 
ment. Even  though  the  thing  is  bad,  it  has  been  loved  supremely,  and  the  loss  of 
it  wiU  create  a  vacuum  and  an  agony  intolerable.  But  the  conscious  loss  of  the 
true  God — this  is  the  climax  of  suffering.  Then  the  soul  is  a  chaos,  an  orphan  in 
the  universe.  {Homilist.)  Micah  the  Ephraimite  : — Consider  the  plan  of  life  he 
made,  and  the  reason  why  it  turned  out  so  badly.  1.  He  was  not  a  heathen,  though 
he  was  an  idolater.  He  thought  to  serve  God  through  the  medium  of  idols.  It 
was  more  comfortable  to  remain  at  home,  and  it  was  more  easy  to  worship  by 
means  of  what  could  be  seen.  He  was  like  people  who  say  that  it  is  not  necessary 
to  go  to  church,  because  they  can  read  the  Bible  and  say  their  prayers  at  home ;  as 
if  reading  the  Bible  and  saying  prayers  were  the  whole  duty  of  the  man  !  He  was 
also  like  those  who  think  that  worship  must  be  comfortable :  they  are  not  called 
upon  to  rise  early  or  to  adopt  more  than  a  sitting  posture.  You  can  see  what  the 
influence  of  idols  would  become  in  this  man's  life.  Micah  would  gradually  forget 
the  unseen  world  of  which  they  were  supposed  to  remind  him,  and  his  image-shop 
would  call  for  his  constant  care  and  attention.  What  soul  he  possessed  would  be 
centred  there,  and  the  presence  of  the  Levite  would  soothe  him  with  the  notion  that 
all  was  weU.  Nor  was  the  life  a  lonely  one,  for  others,  it  seems,  lived  near,  and 
took  an  interest  in  the  carved  image,  the  ephod,  the  teraphim,  and  molten  image  : 
in  fact,  there  was  quite  a  comfortable  Uttle  schism  formed  into  which  no  one  was 
likely  to  inquire.  Such  was  the  plan  of  Micah's  religious  life — a  cheap  one,  you 
will  observe,  in  spite  of  the  ten  shekels  of  silver  and  apparel  and  victuals,  for  no 
journeys  need  now  be  undertaken  to  other  seats  of  worship,  and  no  money  offered 
to  them.  2.  And  why  did  such  an  inexpensive  way  of  serving  God  fail  ?  Some 
rude  travellers  robbed  him  of  his  gods  and  his  priest,  and  what  had  he  more  ?  It 
might  have  been  possible  to  replace  them,  but  the  cost  would  have  been  much ; 
besides,  he  had  grown  fond  of  these  images,  and  this  priest,  and  his  heart  was  with 
them.  It  was  too  late  to  begin  life  again,  and  such  handsome  images  it  would  be 
difficult  to  make.  All  might  stiU  have  been  well  had  he  known  what  worship 
meant,  but  unfortunately  in  his  service  of  God  he  had  left  out  God.  "  God  is  a 
Spirit,  and  they  that  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."    Is 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP.xvm. 

there  anything  akin  to  us  in  the  character  of  this  poor  man,  who  began  by  cheating 
others  and  ended  by  being  cheated  himself  ?  1.  True  religion  cannot  be  easy,  at 
least  at  first.  It  never  can  be  cheap.  To  do  God's  wUl  entails  the  sacrifice  of 
ourselves,  soul  and  body,  to  the  Almighty.  And  so  easy-going  religion  is  popular. 
Men  will  not  go  far  to  a  service.  If  they  have  their  temple  at  their  door  they  can 
drag  their  wearied  limbs  so  far,  but,  unlike  their  forefathers,  they  do  not  care  to 
walk  a  few  miles  to  God's  house.  As  for  time  and  money,  what  a  little  suffices 
often  to  soothe  the  sleepy  conscience  1  2.  Micah's  religion  was  self-made.  Has  he 
not  followers  in  those  who  teach  that  we  can  please  ourselves  in  the  manner  and 
method  of  worship  ?  Is  it  perfectly  immaterial  whether  our  Saviour  made  a 
Church  or  not,  whether  we  continue  steadfastly  in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and 
fellowship,  and  in  breaking  of  bread  and  in  prayer,  or  not  ?  And  if  these  things 
do  matter,  surely  they  are  worth  a  little  hard  thought.  "  We  are  aU  going  the 
same  way,"  people  teU  you.  Yet  it  is  inconceivable  that  all  can  be  equally  right. 
Are  we  not  bound  to  give,  each  for  himself,  a  reason  for  the  form  of  the  faith  we 
hold  ?  3.  Micah's  rehgion  failed  him.  His  gods  were  taken  away,  and  his  priest, 
and  what  had  he  more  ?  God  was  left  out  of  sight.  We  can  take  the  warning  to 
ourselves.  Our  religion,  it  may  be,  has  been  largely  outward  :  we  have  said 
formal  prayers  morning  and  evening  ;  we  have  come  to  church  and  gone  through 
services  ;  we  have  read  a  few  verses  of  the  Bible  as  a  disagreeable  duty  ;  we  have 
hoped  all  was  well ;  and  suddsnly,  a  big  blow  falls — and  where  are  we  ?  Is  our 
religion  a  comfort  ?  does  it  help  to  support  us  ?  Not  a  bit.  Why  ?  Because  it 
was  only  skin-deep.  (W.  R.  Hutton,  M.A.)  The  stable  and  the  unstable  in 
religion  : — This  story  has  but  a  faint  analogy  with  what  I  wish  to  speak  of — but 
yet  it  illustrates  a  principle  applicable  in  aU  ages,  that  essential  rehgion  is  some- 
thing which  cannot  be  stolen.  Now  there  are  all  sorts  of  Danites — real  hostile 
Danites,  and  men  accounted  such  by  timid  souls  who  are  not  so  at  all.  There 
are  ruthless  Danites,  whose  honest,  or  dishonest,  aim  it  is  to  remove  what  they 
really  seem  to  think  rehgion  is  wrapped  up  in.  And  then  there  are  friendly 
Danites,  who  would  remove  idol  images  out  of  a  real  love  for  a  more  spiritual  and 
vital  faith.  But  whoever  the  Danites  be,  this  is  true — that  nobody  is  afraid  of  the 
Danites  unless  he  has  gotten  a  Micah  religion ;  and  nobody  encourages  the  raids 
and  raileries  of  the  Danites — "  What  aileth  thee  ?  " — hke  the  man  who  cries, 
"  What  have  I  more  ?  "  I.  Ant  eeligion  which  centres  in  a  fobm  or  organisation 
CAN  BE  stolen.  Tliis  is  only  to  say  that  external  aids  to  devotion,  and  diverse 
organisation  of  God's  host  may  be  changed,  and  yet  destroy  none  but  a  Micah 
faith  which  is  wrapped  up  in  them.  But  what  has  seemed  so  permanent  and  vital 
at  different  times,  and  to  different  souls,  is  just  this  very  thing  1  The  Micah  faith 
of  the  Jews  could  be,  must  be,  stolen  away.  But  what  was  permanent  ?  Eeverence 
and  worship  of  Almighty  God.  Again,  take  the  New  Testament.  It  was  a  zeal  in 
God's  name  by  which  Jesus  Himself  cleansed  the  temple  of  His  Father  1  And  who 
ever  stole  away  the  Micah  elements  of  religion  as  did  our  Lord  Himself,  in  mingled 
love  and  indignation  for  God's  eternal  law  ?  Again,  have  you  ever  realised  that 
the  great  argument  all  through  the  Epistles  of  Paul  is  just  this  carrying-off  process 
of  that  system,  glorious  in  its  purity  and  needed  for  its  day,  but  now  to  pass,  in  its 
essential  elements,  into  a  diiTerent  form  of  growth  ?  His  great  contention  every- 
where is  that  there  were  shadow  and  substance  both  in  the  old  Mosaic  economy ; 
that  form  was  vanishing,  its  truth  permanent ;  that  Christ  had  fulfilled,  or  filled 
full,  those  great  moral  and  spiritual  needs  of  men  which  once  were  best  fed  by 
other  means.  Did  He  take  away  a  single  element  that  was  permanent  ? 
n.  Standards  of  what  is  right  and  wrong  in  conduct  may  be  stolen,  and  yet  not 
carry  off  the  eternal  obligations  of  mortaUty.  How  often  people  have  been  trying 
to  say  that  this,  that,  and  the  other  thing  is  eternally  right  or  wrong  for  everybody 
and  all  nations  to  do  or  not  to  do  1  It  is  this  spirit  which  goes  to  the  Bible,  and  in 
Leviticus  and  Ecclesiastes,  as  well  as  in  John  and  Romans,  would  find,  on  one  level 
of  authority,  some  word  to  decide,  as  by  a  talisman,  whether  this  or  that  is  con- 
sistent for  everybody  everywhere  to  do  or  not  to  do.  How  this  confuses  and 
misrepresents  the  Bible  1  The  Bible  is  a  book  of  hfe,  and  so  it  has  progressively 
changed  and  raised  its  forms  of  moral  obligation  from  age  to  age.  Eight  in  the 
midst  of  the  Old  Testament,  Uke  a  lighthouse  in  a  storm,  stand  the  ten  com- 
mandments— true,  not  because  they  are  there,  but  there  because  universaUy  true  ; 
and  yet  even  they  are  not  true  because  that  is  the  best  or  highest  form  of  moral 
obligation  ;  for  Jesus  says  of  that  law,  "  It  says  so  and  so,  but '  I '  say  " — carrying 
those  same  principles  further  and  higher,  and  adding  entirely  new  and  deepei 


CHAP,  xvm.]  JUDGES.  253 

motives  and  sanctions.  Negative  "  Thou  shalt  not  "  accomplishes  for  one  man  or 
one  age  what  Jesus'  positive  "  Thou  shalt  love  "  does  for  another — two  forms  of 
the  same  thing.  See  the  progress  in  Bible  standards  !  1.  Thou  shalt  not  do 
wrong.  2.  Thou  shalt  love  God  and  man.  3.  Love  one  another,  "  as  I  have 
loved  you."  There  is  a  vast  difference  between  these  three  ways  of  looking  at  one 
thing,  in.  What  is  true  of  forms  of  worship  and  standards  of  morals  is  true  also 
of  FORMS  AND  PEOPOETioNS  OF  THEOLOGICAL  ISSUES.  Judged  by  the  Micah  creeds  of 
men  we  might  suppose  the  Christian  world  would  have  nothing  left  of  faith  after 
the  Danites  of  each  generation  had  carried  away  some  things  upon  which  every.  ■ 
thing  seemed  to  hang.  We  are  living  in  a  time  when  hosts  of  Christian  people 
think  the  ark  of  God  is  in  danger  as  it  never  was  before.  But  when  was  there  an 
age  in  which  people  did  not  say  the  same  thing  ?  This  is  said  to  be  an  era  of 
readjustment  and  revolution.  Yes  ;  but  so  has  nearly  every  age  been  accounted 
since  Jesus  came,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  fearful  auguries  of  every  century. 
There  are  always  some  people  perfectly  sure  if  this  or  that  doctrine  is  not  held  just 
as  their  fathers,  or  their  Church  or  themselves  hold  it,  that  men  are  cutting  loose 
from  all  sure  anchorage.  The  reassuring  thing  is  that  that  is  just  what  men  have 
always  been  saying,  and  yet  despite  dark  doubt  and  augury,  hostile  Danites,  and 
men  so  counted  Danites  in  one  age  to  be  canonised  in  the  next,  have  all  stolen 
only  what  was  either  false  or  only  one-sided  and  temporary.  There  is  not  a  great 
fact  or  essential  truth  of  Christian  revelation  which  is  not  held  as  firmly  this  very 
day  as  ever  before.  {A.  R.  Merriam.)  The  Indian  problem  : — Do  we  consider 
that  a  man  situated  as  this  man  was  a  fit  object  of  pity  and  sympathy  or  not? 
The  stern,  uncompromising  iconoclast  would  certainly  say,  "  No."  He  would  feel 
that  it  was  better  for  such  an  one  to  find  out  by  bitter  experience  how  vain  and 
useless  were  the  idols  in  which  he  trusted.  In  and  through  his  desolation  he  might 
be  brought  to  seek  for  help  where  alone  it  could  be  found.  The  mild,  tolerant 
student  of  comparative  religion  would  probably  say,  "  Yes."  He  would  urge  on  his 
behalf  that  at  that  particular  point  in  the  evolution  of  Jewish  religion  from  its 
primitive  worship  of  invisible  forces  it  was  inevitable  that  the  worshipper  should 
seek  to  give  concrete  form  and  embodiment  to  the  anthropomorphic  idea  of  God 
which  was  then  being  assimilated  from  the  nations  around.  For  such  an  one  to  be 
deprived  of  his  idols  was  to  be  put  out  of  rapport  and  correspondence  with  his 
religious  environment,  and  as  that  meant  spiritual  death,  he  clearly  deserves  our 
pity  in  his  destitution.  Turning,  however,  from  the  merely  speculative  interest 
which  the  ancient  Israelite's  case  presents,  I  wish  to  transfer  it,  "as  in  a  figure," 
to  the  very  real  and  practical  interest  presented  by  the  parallel  situation  of  a  large 
section  of  our  fellow-subjects  in  India,  and  to  endeavour  to  answer  the  question 
just  raised  by  considering  what  our  duty  to  them  is.  For  in  the  main  the  plea  of 
the  Jew  of  Mount  Ephraim  is  being  echoed  now  either  in  unexpressed  feeling  or  in 
outspoken  utterance  by  thousands  of  religious-minded  Hindus  in  India.  It  is  only 
with  one  portion  of  the  problem  that  I  would  attempt  to  deal ;  that,  namely,  which 
is  connected  with  the  sphere  of  Christian  education.  It  would  be  to  repeat  an  oft- 
told  tale  to  recount  at  any  length  what  has  been  and  will  be  increasingly  the 
necessary  result  of  such  contact  of  the  West  with  the  East  as  our  rule  in  India  has 
brought  about.  That  contact  is  unique  and  unprecedented  in  some  if  not  all  of  its 
conditions,  and  must  be  expected  to  produce  strange  and  unlooked-for,  even  con- 
tradictory, results.  But  it  is  of  the  moral  aspect  of  them  only  that  I  wish  to  speak. 
When  the  Government  of  India  decided  that  State  education  must  be  conducted  on 
the  principle  of  rehgious  neutrality  and  non-interference,  it  does  not  appear  whether 
the  disintegrating  effect  of  purely  secular  instruction  was  fully  realised.  What,  in 
short,  was  not  foreseen,  but  is  now  being  daily  found  to  be  the  inevitable  result  of 
the  State  system  of  education,  is  that  while  it  tends  to  destroy  much  that  was 
hurtful  and  fatal  to  progress,  it  fails  to  supply  the  place  of  what  it  destroys  by  any 
new  and  vital  principle  of  cohesion  and  solidarity.  The  son  goes  back  to  his  home 
and  announces  to  his  parents  that  he  has  learnt  to  rise  superior  to  caste  traditions 
and  prejudices,  and  it  is  found  that  what  this  amounts  to  practically  is,  that  while 
he  has  a  veneer  of  Western  learning  and  science,  he  has  lost  his  hold  of  what  is  the 
very  life  and  soul  of  any  society,  the  sense  of  obedience,  of  reverence,  of  duty  in  the 
famQy  and  in  the  State.  He  has  gained,  indeed,  ideas  of  freedom,  of  independence, 
of  equality,  of  self-assertion,  but  if  he  has  lost  or  is  in  danger  of  losing  these  other 
ideas,  which  surely  it  is  true  to  say  are  more  fundamental  and  indispensable  for 
the  well-being  of  the  family  and  the  nation,  is  not  the  loss  likely  to  be  greater  than 
the  gain,  at  any  rate  for  the  Indian  ?    If  there  is  any  virtue  which  the  caste  systei-i 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.xvm. 

can    claim  to  have  developed  and  preserved,  it   is   the   instinct  of    reverence 
and    obedience.       And    it    is     this     instinct    which    it     is     the     tendency    of 
our   education   to   weaken  if    not  to   destroy.      And  further,   it  is  precisely  in 
those  parts  of  India  which  are  most  advanced  in  Western  knowledge  where  this 
tendency  is  seen  in  its  fuUest  development.    What  wonder  is  it,  then,  that  the 
parent  who  hears  of  the  boasted  advantages  of  Western  science  and  education 
bewails  the  result  of  it  in  words  which  seem  an  echo  of  the  cry  of  the  Jew  of 
Mount  Ephraim  "  Ye  have  taken  away  my  gods  which  I  made,  and  what  have  I 
more  ?  and  how  then  say  ye  unto  me.  What  aileth  thee  ?  "    But  this  is  not  aU.    The 
student,  bereft  of  the  moral  sanctions  of  his  religion,  and  supplied  with  no  new 
motives  of  obedience  and  rectitude,  is  exposed  to  yet  other  dangers.    If  the  demon 
of  superstition  has  been  expelled,  there  are  the  seven  other  sph-its  more  wicked 
than  the  first,  ready  to  rush  in  and  occupy  the  vacant,  cheerless  room.    For  the 
mental  facilities  of  the  Indian  student  are  far  in  advance  of  his  moral  faculties. 
This  is  so  naturally  ;  and  when  the  course  of  education  tends  almost  exclusively  to 
develop  the  intellectual  part  of  him,  the  disparsity  becomes  all  the  more  marked. 
The  moral  element  in  him,  already  of  weakened  vitality,  is  gradually  starved  out, 
and  the  struggle  for  superiority  is  rather  between  the  animal  and  the  intellectual. 
There  are  many  noble  exceptions,  but  they  cannot  redeem  a  system  which  condemns 
the  majority  to  moral  sterility.     It  is  to  the  Christian  Church,  and  that  alone,  that 
we  must  turn  for  the  assertion  and  vindication  of  the  principles  of  true  reform,  as 
well  as  for   the  moral  dynamic  which  is  to  energise  and  embody  them  in  and 
through  an  actual  visible  living  society.     And  it  is  quite  wonderful  to  notice  how 
India's  need   of  the  gospel  is  being  recognised  on  aU  sides   and  in  the  most 
unexpected  quarters.    The  politician  looks  to  the  spread  of  Chi-istianity  as  one 
great  source  of  strength  and  stability  for  the  permanence  of  British  Empire.    The 
educationalist  looks  to  our  native  Christian  women  as  at  present  the  most  hopeful 
means  of  making  female  education  effective  among  the  upper  classes.     Sir  W.  W. 
Hunter  has  lately  said,  "  Christianity  holds  out  advantages  of  social  organisation 
not  offered  by  Hinduism  or  Islam.    It  provides  for  the  education  and  moral  super- 
vision of  its  people  with  a  pastoral  care  which  Islam,  destitute  of  a  regular  priest- 
hood, does  not  pretend  to.     It  receives  the  new  members  into  its  body  with  a 
cordiality  and  a  completeness  to  which  Hinduism  is  a  stranger.     I  believe,"  he 
says,  "  it  is  reserved  for  Christianity  to  develop  the  highest  uses  of  Indian  caste, 
'  as  a  system  of  conservative  socialism.'  .  .  .  But  it  will  be  Indian  caste  humanised 
by  a  new  spiritual  life."     Or  to  take  one  or  two  more  specific  cases.     Thetahsilddx 
or  head  native  officer  of  a  large  country  town  appeals  to  a  missionary  to  send  a 
Christian  teacher  for  a  Hindu  school,  because  he  finds  the  Hindu  teachers  have 
yielded  to  the  prevailing  immorality  of  the  town.     The  municipality  of  a  large  city 
in  the  Punjab  appoints  a  native  Christian  minister  its  chairman  because  they  can 
find  no  other  man  so  high-minded  and  honest  for  the  post.     The  only  great  modern 
religious  reformer  India  has  produced  bore  witness  on  his  death-bed  to  India's  need 
of  Christ.     When  the  man  of  Macedonia  stood  before  St.  Paul  that  night  in  the 
vision,  did  not  the  pathos  of  the  cry,  "  Come  over  and  help  us,"  arise  from  the  very 
fact  of  its  being  the  unconscious  appeal  of  the  heathen  world  for  help  ?    And  if  the 
response  to  that  cry  was  the  mission  to  Europe,  which  was  the  origin  and  cause  of 
all  that  is  highest  and  best  and  noblest  in  our  life  and  thought  here  to-day,  shall  the 
Church's  response  to  India's  cry  be  less  prompt,  less  devoted,  less  full  of  faith  and 
hope  and  love,  when  she  has  that  greatest  of  all  examples  to  inspire  and  stimulate 
her,  the  experience  of  the  power  of  the  message  he  bore  to  support  and  guide  her  in 
her  task,  the  certainty  of  final  victory,  not  in  our  time,  but  in  God's  time,  to  cheer 
and  encourage  her  till  Christ  comes  to  claim  the  kingdom  for  His  own?    (S.  S. 
Allnutt,  M.A.)        And  what  have  I  more  7 — The  beyond  in  religion : — It  was  natural 
that  Micah  snould  deplore  the  loss  of  his  images.     We  may  smile  at  his  grief,  and 
say  that  he  was  a  very  ignorant  and  a  very  superstitious  man.     Doubtless  he  might 
have  reflected  that  the  loss  was  not  irreparable  ;  doubtless  he  might  have  consoled 
himself  with  the  thought  of  what  remained.     And  yet  we,  with  our  purer  faith  and 
nobler  creed,  need  to  remind  ourselves  that  such  superstition  is  not  altogether 
unknown  amongst  us.     There  has  always  been  a  tendency  to  mistake  the  outward 
and  visible  for  the  inward  and  spiritual,  to  think  or  to  act  as  if  these  were  all,  and 
to  forget  the  beyond ;  even  to  imagine  that  if  these  are  withdrawn  and  taken  from 
us,  then  all  is  gone  and  nothing  more  is  left.     Idolatry  in  its  grosser  forms  has 
passed  away,  and  it  is  not  likely  to  return  ;  but  the  tendency  still  exists  to  pay 
undue  deference  to  and  to  depend  upon  what  is  visible  and  material  and  transitcrj; 


CHAP,  xvm.]  JUDGES.  255 

while  we  ignore  those  unseen  and  abiding  elements  in  which  alone  the  true  vitality 
of  religion  consists.  Let  us  trace  this  tendency  in  three  directions.  1.  Eeligion  is 
enshrined  in  ceremonies.  Forms  may  be  not  only  useful  in  religion,  they  are  to  a 
certain  extent  necessary.  In  Christian  worship  there  has  always  been  more  or 
less  of  form,  ceremonial,  ritual.  Men  have  tried  at  various  times  to  maintain  a 
rehgion  which  should  be  purely  spuitual,  but  the  effort  has  not  in  the  long  run  been 
successful.  In  early  days  Christian  worship  was  severely  simple.  It  was  so 
partly  by  design,  in  contrast  with  the  sensuous  materiaUsm  of  surrounding  idolatry ; 
partly  of  necessity,  because  of  the  poverty  of  the  worshippers.  In  later  times  came 
the  elaboration  of  ceremonial.  The  question  for  us  is.  What  have  we  more  ?  Do 
our  worship,  our  ceremonies  lead  us  to  what  is  beyond?  Are  we  relying  on  the 
accessories,  or  on  the  everlasting  truths  they  enshrine  ?  What  have  we  more  ?  I 
may,  for  instance,  be  accustomed  to  a  place  of  worship  where  the  services  are 
tendered  with  the  most  exquisite  musical  taste,  where  the  art  of  the  sculptor  or 
the  painter  ministers  to  my  sense  of  culture  and  refinement ;  but  what  have  I  more  ? 
If  altered  circumstances  should  force  me  to  worship  with  none  of  those  surround- 
ings, could  I  know  that  there  in  the  meanest  and  poorest  temple  is  no  less  the 
presence  of  God  ?  If  I  should  be  condemned  as  an  invalid  to  pass  weary  months 
and  even  years  within  the  four  walls  of  my  sick-room,  could  I  rest  in  the  assurance 
that  stiU  Christ  is  with  me,  and  that  possessing  Him  I  possess  all  things  ?  This  is 
to  penetrate  into  the  kernel  of  religion ;  this  is  to  have  the  power  as  well  as  the 
form  of  godliness,  and  it  is  to  this  that  all  form,  aU  ritual,  should  lead  up,  and 
without  this  they  profit  nothing.  2.  But  reUgion  is  not  only  enshrined  in  form ; 
it  is  embodied  in  phrases.  Churches  have  their  creeds  and  their  catechisms. 
Beligious  truth  must  find  its  expression  in  doctrine,  in  portable  forms  which  are 
easily  remembered,  though  the  doctrine  probably  expresses  very  inadequately  the 
truth  it  inculcates.  A  sound  creed  is  the  basis  of  a  strong  character.  Words  are 
the  necessary  embodiment  of  truth.  But  there  is  always  a  danger  lest  the  mere 
framework  of  words  be  taken  as  a  substitute  for  the  truth  it  indicates.  There  are 
those  who  worship,  instead  of  a  living  Christ,  their  own  wooden  and  stony  forms  of 
theology,  which  may  leave  them  just  as  hard  and  just  as  narrow  and  just  as  loveless 
as  any  other  form  of  superstition.  The  history  of  Christianity  is  fuU  of  examples. 
This  tendency  to  depend  on  words  is  especially  seen  in  the  decadence  of  any 
religious  movement.  Phrases  which  were  at  one  time  pregnant  with  meaning  are 
repeated  with  parrot-like  accuracy  by  those  who  are  very  far  from  being  animated 
by  their  spirit.  They  think  that  because  they  have  the  words  they  must  also  have 
the  truth.  "  What  have  I  more  ?  "  We  have  our  doctrines,  our  creeds,  our 
catechisms ;  but  do  they  lead  us  to  what  is  beyond  ?  Do  we  reach  forth  with  the 
Btrong  grasp  of  a  living  faith  to  the  unchanging  and  eternal  truths  which  the 
words  embody  ?  Do  you  remember  that  it  is  one  thing  to  say,  "  I  believe  in  God," 
another  to  believe  in  God  with  heart  and  soul  as  the  great  Factor  in  our  lives  ? 
Phrases  may  change ;  but  God  does  not  change.  Truth  cannot  change,  though  it 
may  be  conveyed  through  different  means.  Creed  is  important,  but  character  is 
greater  than  creed.  Life  is  more  than  orthodoxy,  and  goodness  than  correct 
opinions.  3.  Once  more,  religion  is  not  only  enshrined  in  ceremonies  and  creeds, 
but  also  in  persons.  When  St.  Paul  says  that  the  Church  is  the  "  body  of  Christ," 
he  implies  that  our  Lord  works  through  Christian  people,  and  that  they  are  His 
representatives  on  earth.  As  a  matter  of  fact  all  our  earlier  impressions,  and  many 
of  our  later  impressions,  in  religion,  have  come  to  us  through  persons.  The  mother 
who  taught  our  infant  lips  to  pray,  the  teacher  who  first  instructed  us  in  the  simple 
truths  of  the  gospel,  the  pastor  at  whose  feet  we  sat  as  children,  the  friend  so  noble 
and  so  brave  on  whom  we  leaned  for  counsel  and  guidance — these  and  others  were 
those  who  first  brought  religion  to  our  notice  as  the  great  power  in  the  world.  And 
no  one  can  overrate  the  power  and  the  value  of  religious  training  and  Christian 
friendship.  But  yet  even  the  best  and  purest  and  holiest  of  earthly  influences  may 
sometimes  be  almost  the  idol,  whose  removal  may  be  the  wreck  of  our  hopes.  I 
sometimes  tremble  for  the  religion  of  the  young  lad  who  goes  forth  from  a  holy  and 
happy  village  home  into  the  crowded  thoroughfares  of  the  great  city.  Will  he 
stand  fast  in  the  future  ?  Will  he  be  true  to  the  teaching  of  his  boyhood  in  the 
presence  of  increasing  temptations  ?  Will  he  keep  to  the  old  faith  in  the  land  that 
is  new  ?  He  will  not,  if  his  faith  is  merely  second-hand.  He  will  not  if  he  has 
never  really  made  his  parents'  beUef  to  be  his  own  belief.  The  great  question  is, 
"  What  have  I  more  ?  "  I  have  Christian  influence  around  me,  I  have  religions 
friends ;  but  what  have  I  more  ?    If  God  should  see  fit  to  take  away  these,  have  I 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

learnt  to  trust  in  the  one  Friend  from  whom  neither  distance  nor  death  can  part  ? 
Can  I  lean  on  Him  when  every  earthly  prop  is  removed  ?  Some  years  ago  I  waa 
called  to  visit  an  aged  lady  who  was  on  her  death-bed.  She  was  a  very  sincere 
Christian,  who  had  led  an  exceptionally  useful  life  of  active  benevolence.  But  she 
had  drunk  deep  of  the  cup  of  sorrow ;  she  had  been  reduced  through  monetary 
losses  to  comparative  poverty  ;  her  husband  had  deserted  her,  and  she  had  few,  if 
any,  relatives  who  could  help  her.  And  as  I  sat  by  her  bedside,  a  few  hours  before 
her  death,  she  talked  of  her  trials,  her  sorrows,  her  losses,  when,  suddenly  raising 
herself,  she  pointed  upward  to  a  text  above  her  bed,  and  said,  "But  I  have  found 
that  true  all  along."  I  looked  up  and  read  the  text.  It  was  the  familiar  promise, 
"I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee."  Yes,  earthly  friends  might  fail  and 
leave  her,  but  there  was  One  who  would  never  forsake  her,  the  unchanging  Friend 
who  had  strengthened  and  supported  her  in  life  as  in  death.  Certainly  the  day 
will  come  to  us  aU  when  aU  earthly  helps  wiU  leave  us,  and  we  shall  have  to  fall 
back  on  the  unseen  realities,  or  on — nothing.  At  such  a  time,  if  ever,  we  shall 
need  to  depend  on  the  reality  and  not  the  shadow.  No  forms,  no  phrases,  no  friends 
can  help  us  then.  Nothing  but  the  living  Christ  can  then  be  our  strength  and 
stay ;  He  and  He  only  can  say,  "  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters  I  will  be 
with  thee."  May  God  keep  us  from  trusting  in  the  shadow  rather  than  the 
substance.  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that 
I  desire  beside  Thee.  Thou  shalt  guide  me  with  Thy  counsel,  and  afterward 
receive  me  to  glory.  My  flesh  and  my  heart  faileth,  but  God  is  the  strength  of  my 
heart  and  my  portion  for  ever."    {Christian  World  Fulpit.) 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


Vees.  1-30.  Wlilther  g'oest  thou  ?  and  whence  comest  thou  7 — The  poit  and  the 

future: — These  two  questions  were  usually  proposed  of  old  to  the  traveller,  by 
the  inhabitants  of  any  district  through  which  he  might  be  passing ;  nor  were  they 
unnatural  in  a  state  of  society  wherein  the  infrequency  of  journeying  must  have 
rendered  the  appearance  of  a  stranger  a  matter  of  curiosity,  and  where,  owing  to 
the  want  of  houses  of  public  entertainment,  hospitality  was  an  important  and 
necessary  duty.  What  are  we  all,  in  truth,  but  wayfaring  men — journeying 
towards  a  city  of  habitation  ?  We  are,  like  this  Levite,  sojourners  passing  through 
the  streets — guests  that  tarry  but  a  night,  and  who  require  only  a  temporary 
shelter.  Whence  come  we ?  and  whither  are  we  going?  1.  The  former  of  these 
questions,  if  generally  considered,  might  be  answered  by  remembering  that  we  have 
no  reason  to  vaunt  of  our  origin,  since  that  is  but  of  yesterday,  and  of  the  earth. 
"  Why  is  dust  and  ashes  proud  ?  "  If  a  recollection  of  our  lowly  origin  might  thus 
subdue  the  imperious,  and  liberalise  the  selfish,  a  sense  of  our  sinful  extraction 
ought  in  no  less  measure  to  abase  the  self-dependent.  "Whence  come  we?" 
Some  among  us  have  come  from  the  suffering  of  affliction.  Have  we  been  purified 
in  that  furnace?  Has  the  storm,  pelting  on  the  wayfaring  man,  accelerated  his 
homeward  pace  ?  Others  have  come  from  experiencing  remarkable  instances  of  the 
Divine  mercy.  They  have  come  from  some  of  the  smooth  plots  of  greensward,  the 
isles  of  palm-trees  in  the  waste.  How  have  they  profited  by  the  blessing?  Have 
they  thanklessly  attributed  their  success  to  good  fortune,  or  boldly  to  their  own 
arm,  instead  of  acknowledging  the  hand  of  the  Father  of  lights?  Have  they 
tithed  the  bounty  to  poverty  and  distress  ?  2.  It  has  been  said  (though  the  remark 
is  a  quaint  conceit)  that  the  heathen  deity  Janus,  from  whom  the  first  month  in 
our  year  derives  its  name,  was  described  in  the  ancient  mythology  as  having  two 
faces,  the  one  looking  on  the  past,  and  the  other  on  the  future.  But  there  hardly 
needs  so  fanciful  an  allusion  as  this  to  advance  our  contemplations  from  the  irrevo- 
cable past  to  the  solemn  future.  On  that  future  let  us  next  direct  our  forethought, 
turning  our  attention  from  our  origin  to  our  destination,  "  Whither  goest  thou  ?  " 
We  are  travelling  in  a  circle.  We  are  hastening  back  to  the  earth,  from  whence 
we  proceeded.  Dust  we  are,  and  unto  dust  we  shall  return.  3.  Place  now  these 
two  questions  together  ;  view  the  line  of  life  from  its  commencement  to  its  termina- 
tion ;  consider  the  past  with  reference  to  the  future,  and  the  future  as  a  continua- 
tion of  the  past.    If  there  be  any  who  have  arrived  at  the  present  season  from  a 


CHAP.  XIX,]  JUDGES.  257 

year,  or  a  life,  which  they  can  review  only  with  shame  and  sorrow — who,  to  the 
question,  " Whence  comest  thou?"  can  only  reply,  like  Satan  to  Jehovah,  "We 
come  from  going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  and  from  wandering  up  and  down  in  it " 
— let  them  think  of  the  end  of  those  hitherto  squandered  days,  to  which  they  are 
ever  speeding,  and  know  not  how  near  they  are  come,  that  they  may,  if  possible, 
redeem  the  time  that  is  past,  and  improve  that  which  is  passing.  {J.  Grant,  M.A.) 
Let  all  thy  wants  be  upon  me.— Helping  others : — 1.  This  old  man's  practice 
commends  to  us  a  double  duty :  the  one  that  we  should  be  ready  to  remove  grief 
from  our  brethren,  and  to  quiet  their  troubled  minds  as  we  may.  For  grief  and 
heaviness  do  much  hinder  the  mind  from  doing  any  duty ;  especially  they  being 
deeply  seated  in  the  heart,  and  turbulent  passions  of  themselves,  and  therefore  the 
easing  it  of  them  is  a  setting  of  it  at  hberty.  2.  The  second  duty  we  learn  is  more 
particularly  the  duty  of  hospitality ;  which  as  far  as  need  required  he  did  unto  this 
Levite.  The  like  kindness  is  to  be  showed  by  us  to  strangers  sad  in  heart,  being 
known  to  be  brethren,  that  they  be  used  of  us  kindly  and  in  all  courtesy,  but  in  no 
wise  to  grieve  them,  being  already  heavy-hearted.  {R.  Rogers.)  Consider  of  it, 
take  advice,  and  speak  your  minds. — Deliberation : — I.  Thekb  are  some  actions  so 
SHOCKING  THAT  ALL  MEN  DO,  upou  the  fiist  hearing  of  them,  without  taking  time  to  con- 
sider, without  asking  the  opinion  of  others,  unanimously  agbee  to  condemn  them. 
Now,  amongst  those  truths  which  do  thus  gain  our  assent  upon  the  first  view  I  think 
we  may  justly  reckon  those  judgments  which  we  form  concerning  the  essential  differ- 
ences of  moral  good  and  evil.  For  our  sight  is  not  more  quick  in  discerning  the 
variety  of  figures  and  colours,  nor  more  taken  with  the  beauty  of  some,  or  displeased 
with  the  deformity  of  others ;  the  nicest  ear  hath  not  a  more  distinct  perception  of  the 
harmony  or  discord  of  sounds ;  nor  doth  the  most  delicate  ^palate  more  accurately 
distinguish  tastes  than  our  intellectual  faculties  do  apprehend  the  plain  distinction 
between  right  and  wrong,  honest  and  dishonest,  good  and  evil,  and  find  an  agree- 
ableness  and  satisfaction  in  the  one,  a  disagreeableness  and  dissatisfaction  in  the 
other.  And  it  is  for  very  wise  and  good  reasons  that  God  hath  so  formed  our 
faculties  that  concerning  such  actions  as  are  extraordinary  in  either  kind,  such  as 
are  extremely  good  or  extremely  wicked,  aU  men  should  be  able  to  judge  thus 
readily  and  thus  truly.  For,  in  human  life,  it  often  happens  that  an  occasion  is 
given  us  of  doing  some  great  good,  or  a  temptation  laid  before  us  to  commit  some 
great  evil,  when  there  is  no  leisure  allowed  us  of  entering  into  a  long  deliberation, 
in  which  cases  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  act  according  to  our  present  light ; 
and  therefore  by  Providence  wisely  ordered  that  we  should  enjoy  such  open  day- 
light that  there  should  be  no  danger  of  our  stumbling.  By  this  method  God  hath 
made  the  same  wholesome  provision  for  the  security  of  our  souls  as  He  hath  done 
for  preserving  the  health  of  our  bodies.  To  such  meats  as  might  prove  noxious  to 
us,  and  being  once  taken  down,  digested,  and  mingled  with  the  mass  of  our  blood 
might  quickly  destroy  our  lives,  we  have  often  so  strong  an  antipathy  that  we 
refrain  from  them  merely  on  account  of  this  natural  aversion,  without  considering 
the  mischievous  consequences  that  might  arise  from  our  indulging  ourselves  in 
them ;  and  in  the  like  manner,  those  sins  which  carry  with  them  the  greatest  malig- 
nity, and  which  are  most  perilous  to  the  souls  of  men,  do  create  in  our  minds 
an  utter  abhorrence.  11.  Although  such  actions  do  at  the  first  view  appear  very 
odious,  yet  in  order  to  confirm  or  rectify  our  first  judgments  it  is  proper  to  con- 
8IDEB  them  farther,  AND  TO  TAKE  IN  THE  ADVICE  OF  OTHERS.  When  a  thing  appears 
crooked  to  the  eye  upon  the  first  view,  we  cannot  but  pay  so  much  deference  to  the 
testimony  of  our  senses  as  to  presume  it  such  ;  but  because  this  appearance  may 
sometimes  proceed  from  a  defect  in  the  organ,  and  not  from  any  real  crookedness 
in  the  object,  for  our  better  satisfaction  we  measure  it  by  a  rule,  and  then  pronounce 
with  more  certainty  concerning  it.  And  the  same  method  we  ought  to  observe  in 
judging  of  moral  actions  ;  if  they,  at  the  first  sight,  appear  notoriously  wicked,  we 
cannot  but  entertain  a  violent  suspicion  of  their  being  such  ;  but  because  this 
appearance  may  arise  from  some  corruption  of  our  judgment,  when  there  is  no 
obliquity  in  the  actions  themselves,  the  best  way  to  prevent  all  possibility  of  error 
will  be  to  examine  them  by  the  only  infallible  test,  the  law  of  God.  But  this 
sentence  will  carry  still  more  weight  if  we  do  not  depend  too  much  upon  our  own 
judgments,  but  call  in  the  advice  of  others.  Men  are  so  apt  to  diiier  in  their 
opinions,  and  take  so  great  a  delight  in  contradicting  each  other,  that  those  truths 
must  carry  with  them  a  more  than  ordinary  degree  of  evidence  in  which  all  or 
most  men  do  agree.  He  who  considers  what  a  wide  difference  there  is  in  the  ways 
of  men's  thinking  and  judging,  from  the  difference  of  their  complexions,  tempers, 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xx. 

education,  character,  profession,  age,  religion,  and  other  innumerable  specialitiea 
by  which  they  are  distinguished  one  from  another,  and  disposed  to  form  very 
different  judgments  concerning  the  same  persons  or  things,  will  not  be  surprised  to 
find  that  several  men  do  seldom  concur  in  the  verdict  which  they  pass  upon  those 
actions  that  fall  within  their  observation.  Some  speculative  truths  there  are  in 
which  the  interests  of  men  being  not  at  aU  concerned  aU  may  unanimously  agree ; 
some  rules  of  life  there  may  be,  though  these  much  fewer  than  the  other,  which 
most  men  may  join  in  the  approbation  of ;  some  virtues  and  vices  which,  con- 
sidered abstractedly  and  without  regard  to  persons,  they  may  agree  to  praise  or  to 
condemn,  but  when  they  come  to  judge  of  actions,  not  as  they  are  in  idea  and 
theory,  but  as  they  are  in  reality  and  fact,  nor  as  they  are  in  books,  but  as  they  are 
performed  by  such  and  such  men,  here  several  things  wiU  offer  themselves  to 
influence  and  bias  their  judgments.  "When,  therefore,  notwithstanding  there  are  so 
many  and  strong  obstacles  to  hinder  men  from  concurring  in  their  opinions,  any  actions 
are  condemned  by  a  general  consent,  this  unanimity  of  judgment  is,  though  not  a 
demonstrative  proof,  yet  a  very  strong  presumption,  that  such  actions  are  notoriously 
wicked,  and  in  reahty  such  as  they  do  universally  appear.  III.  When  any  actions 
do,  both  at  the  first  view  and  also  upon  farther  inquiry,  appear  very  flagitious,  we 
should  then,  without  any  reserve,  openly  and  jbeelt  speak  oub  minds  concebnino 
THEM.  A  mark  of  infamy  hath,  by  the  universal  consent  of  all  civilised  nations, 
been  set  upon  some  actions,  tending  either  to  the  great  disparagement  of  human 
nature,  or  to  the  great  disturbance  of  civil  societies,  that  a  sense  of  shame  and  fear 
of  disgrace  might  be  powerful  curbs  to  restrain  men  from  doing  such  vile  things  as 
would  be  sure  to  stain  their  reputations,  and  to  fix  an  indelible  blot  of  ignominy  upon 
their  memories.  The  greatest  mischief  that  can  possibly  be  done  to  the  souls  of 
men  is  to  discourage  them  from  doing  their  duty  by  speaking  evil  of  what  God 
hath  conmianded,  and  to  encourage  them  in  the  commission  of  sin  by  speaking 
well  of  what  God  hath  condemned,  and  therefore  a  woe  is  justly  denounced  by  the 
prophet  Isaiah  against  those  who  call  good  evil  and  evil  good.  But  the  interests 
of  virtue  and  piety  are  also  very  much  endamaged  by  those  who,  though  they  do 
not  go  so  far  as  to  call  evil  good,  do  yet,  by  a  criminal  silence,  forbear  to  call  it 
evU;  and  therefore  those  priests  are  accused  by  God  of  violating  His  laws  and 
profaning  His  holy  things  who  put  no  difference  between  the  holy  and  profane, 
neither  show  the  d^erence  between  the  clean  and  the  unclean.    (£p.  Smalridge.) 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Vers.  1-48.  The  men  of  Israel  turned  again  upon  the  children  of  Benjamin. — 
From  justice  to  wild  revenge  : — It  may  be  asked  how,  while  polygamy  was  practised 
among  the  Israelites,  the  sin  of  Gibeah  could  rouse  such  indignation  and  awaken 
the  signal  vengeance  of  the  united  tribes.  The  answer  is  to  be  found  partly  in  the 
singular  and  dreadful  device  which  the  indignant  husband  used  in  making  the  deed 
known.  Womanhood  must  have  been  stirred  to  the  fiercest  indignation,  and  man- 
hood was  bound  to  follow.  Further,  there  is  the  fact  that  the  woman  so  foully 
murdered,  though  a  concubine,  was  the  concubine  of  a  Levite.  The  measure  of 
sacredness  with  which  the  Levites  were  invested  gave  to  this  crime,  frightful 
enough  in  any  view,  the  colour  of  sacrilege.  There  could  be  no  blessing  on  the 
tribes  if  they  allowed  the  doers  or  condoners  of  this  thing  to  go  unpunished.  It  is 
therefore  not  incredible,  but  appears  simply  in  accordance  with  the  instincts  and 
customs  proper  to  the  Hebrew  people,  that  the  sin  of  Gibeah  should  provoke  over- 
whelming indignation.  There  is  no  pretence  of  purity,  no  hypocritical  anger. 
The  feeling  is  sound  and  real.  Perhaps  in  no  other  matter  of  a  moral  kind  would 
there  have  been  such  intense  and  unanimous  exasperation.  A  point  of  justice  or 
of  belief  would  not  have  so  moved  the  tribes.  The  better  self  of  Israel  appears 
asserting  its  claim  and  power.  And  the  miscreants  of  Gibeah  representing  the 
lower  self,  verily  an  unclean  spirit,  are  detested  and  denounced  on  every  hand. 
Now  the  people  of  Gibeah  were  not  all  vUe.  The  wretches  whose  crime  called  for 
judgment  were  but  the  rabble  of  the  town.  And  we  can  see  that  the  tribes,  when 
they  gathered  in  indignation,  were  made  serious  by  the  thought  that  the  righteous 
might  be  punished  with  the  wicked.    Not  without  the  suffering  of  the  entire  com- 


CHAP,  xxi.]  JUDGES.  259 

munity  is  a  great  evil  to  be  purged  from  a  land.  It  is  easy  to  execute  a  murderer, 
to  imprison  a  felon.  But  the  spirit  of  the  murderer,  of  the  felon,  is  widely  diffused, 
and  that  has  to  be  cast  out.  In  the  great  moral  struggle  the  better  have  not  only 
the  openly  vile,  but  all  who  are  tainted,  aU  who  are  weak  in  soul,  loose  in  habit, 
secretly  sympathetic  with  the  vile,  arrayed  against  them.  When  an  assault  is 
made  on  some  vile  custom  the  sardonic  laugh  is  heard  of  those  who  find  their 
profit  and  their  pleasure  in  it.  They  feel  their  power.  They  know  the  wide 
sympathy  with  them  spread  secretly  through  the  land.  Once  and  again  the  feeble 
attempt  of  the  good  is  repelled.  The  tide  turned,  and  there  came  another  danger, 
that  which  waits  on  ebullitions  of  popular  feeling.  A  crowd  roused  to  anger  is 
hard  to  control,  and  the  tribes  having  once  tasted  vengeance,  did  not  cease  till 
Benjamin  was  almost  exterminated.  Justice  overshot  its  mark,  and  for  one  evil 
made  another.  Those  who  had  most  fiercely  used  the  sword  viewed  the  result  with 
horror  and  amazement,  for  a  tribe  was  lacking  in  Israel.  Nor  was  this  the  end  of 
slaughter.  Next,  for  the  sake  of  Benjamin  the  sword  was  drawn,  and  the  men  of 
Jabesh-gilead  were  butchered.  The  warning  conveyed  here  is  intensely  keen.  It 
is  that  men,  made  doubtful  by  the  issue  of  their  actions  whether  they  have  done 
wisely,  may  fly  to  the  resolution  to  justify  themselves,  and  may  do  so  even  at  the 
expense  of  justice ;  that  a  nation  may  pass  from  the  right  way  to  the  wrong,  and 
then,  having  sunk  to  extraordinary  baseness  and  malignity,  may  turn,  writhing 
and  self-condemned,  to  add  cruelty  to  cruelty  in  the  attempt  to  stUl  the  upbraidings 
of  conscience.  It  is  that  men  in  the  heat  of  passion  which  began  with  resentment 
against  evU  may  strike  at  those  who  have  not  joined  in  their  errors  as  well  as  those 
who  truly  deserve  reprobation.  We  stand,  nations  and  individuals,  in  constant 
danger  of  dreadful  extremes,  a  kind  of  insanity  hurrying  us  on  when  the  blood  is 
heated  by  strong  emotion.  Blindly  attempting  to  do  right,  we  do  evil ;  and  again, 
having  done  the  evil,  we  blindly  strive  to  remedy  it  by  doing  more.  In  times  of 
moral  darkness  and  chaotic  social  conditions,  when  men  are  guided  by  a  few  rude 
principles,  things  are  done  that  afterwards  appal  themselves,  and  yet  may  become 
an  example  for  future  outbreaks.  During  the  fury  of  their  Eevolution,  the  French 
people,  with  some  watchwords  of  the  true  ring,  as  hberty,  fraternity,  turned  hither 
and  thither,  now  in  terror,  now  panting  after  dimly-seen  justice  or  hope,  and  it  was 
always  from  blood  to  blood.  We  understand  the  juncture  in  ancient  Israel,  and 
realise  the  excitement  and  the  rage  of  a  self -jealous  people  when  we  read  the 
modern  tales  of  surging  ferocity  in  which  men  appear  now  hounding  the  shouting 
crowd  to  vengeance,  then  shuddering  on  the  scaffold.  In  private  life  the  story 
has  an  application  against  wUd  and  violent  methods  of  self -vindication.  Passing 
to  the  final  expedient  adopted  by  the  chiefs  of  Israel  to  rectify  their  error — the  rape 
of  the  women  at  Shiloh — we  see  only  to  how  pitiful  a  pass  moral  blundering  brings 
those  who  fall  into  it.    {B.  A.  Watson,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER   XXL 


Veb3.  1-25.  The  men  of  Israel  had  sworn. — An  unreasonable  oath : — 1.  It  was 

an  oath  that  flowed  from  rash  rage  rather  than  from  real  zeal.  Men  must  swear 
in  judgment  (Jer.  iv.  2),  not  when  transported  with  passion,  as  Israel  was  now 
against  Benjamin ;  their  fiery  spirits  stood  now  in  more  need  of  a  bridle  than  of  a 
spur.  2.  It  was  an  uncharitable  oath,  as  it  was  against  the  repairing  of  a  perishing 
tribe,  which  the  law  of  charity  bound  them  to  support,  and  not  to  see  it  perish  out 
of  the  land  through  the  want  of  their  helping  hand.  3.  It  appears  unlawful,  as  it 
crossed  the  revealed  will  of  God  in  Jacob's  prophetical  blessing  upon  this  tribe 
(Gen.  xlix.  27),  and  that  of  Moses  also  (Deut.  xxxiii.  12),  both  which  prophecies 
had  been  spoiled  had  this  one  of  the  twelve  tribes  been  extinguished.  4.  The 
performance  of  this  unreasonable  oath  was  likewise  bloody  and  barbarous,  for  by 
virtue  of  their  oath  their  blind  zeal  transported  them  to  destroy  many  persons  in  all 
those  cities  of  Benjamin  who  had  no  hand  in  that  foul  act  of  the  men  of  Gibeah. 
(C.  Ness.)  One  tribe  lacking. — One  lacking : — This  inquiry  represents  the  spirit  of 
the  whole  Bible ;  that  is  all  that  I  have  to  say.  It  is  indeed  not  so  much  an  inquiry 
as  a  wail,  a  burst  of  sorrow,  a  realised  disunion,  a  shattered  kinship.  Israel  was 
meant  to  be  foursquare — twelve,  without  flaw,  at  every  point  a  noble  integer. 
Benjamin  is  threatened  with  extinction,  Benjamin  is  not  in  the  honse  of  God, 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixi. 

Bethel,  a  city  literally,  but  a  sanctuary  spiritually,  and  Benjamin  is  outside.  Men 
should  not  take  these  facts  with  indifference.  I  have  no  faith  in  your  indifferent 
piety,  in  your  piety  that  can  allow  any  man  to  be  outside,  and  never  ask  a  question 
about  him  or  send  a  message  to  him.  That  is  not  Christianity.  From  the  first 
Benjamin  was  a  little  one,  having  only  some  thirty  or  forty  thousand  fighting  men, 
a  figure  that  went  for  nothing  in  the  numbering  of  old  Israel,  and  over  a  very 
delicate  and  difficult  question  he  came  into  collision  with  the  rest  of  Israel.  He 
was  alone,  and  after  an  almost  superhuman  resistance  he  was  overborne,  all  but 
extirpated,  and  he  went  away  and  hid  himself  some  four  months  in  the  rock 
Eimmon,  the  inviolable  rock  of  the  pomegranate,  and  there  he  took  account  of 
himself.  How  many  am  I  ?  Thousands  fell  and  thousands  more ;  eighteen 
thousand  fell,  all  men  of  valour,  over  against  Gibeah  towards  the  sun  rising,  and 
we  are  now  dwindled  into  some  six  hundred  men,  and  nobody  cares  for  us,  and 
nobody  seeks  us  out.  Wait  a  moment.  Perhaps  at  that  very  time  all  Israel  was 
saying,  "  Are  we  all  here  ?  All  but  Benjamin.  And  why  is  Benjamin  not  here  ? 
0  Lord  God  of  Israel,  why  is  this  come  to  pass  in  Israel,  that  there  should  be 
to-day  one  tribe  lacking  in  Israel  ?  "  But  you  are  eleven  1  Yes.  What  of  one  ? 
What  of  one?  "Whatman  of  you,  having  a  hundred  sheep,  and  one  of  them 
being  gone  astray,  doth  not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  wilderness,  and  go 
after  the  one  that  is  lost,  untU  he  find  it  ?  "  Thrice  repeated — that  is  the  way  of 
the  dear  old  Scriptures.  Whenever  the  proper  name  is  repeated,  the  repetition  is 
the  sign  of  concern,  solicitude,  anxiety.  "  Martha,  Martha  "  ;  "  Simon,  Simon  "  ; 
•'  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem  " — the  same  pathos.  "  0  Lord  God  of  Israel,  why  ia 
this  come  to  pass  in  Israel,  that  there  should  be  to-day  one  tribe  lacking  in  Israel  ?  " 
We  see  from  Bethel  what  we  never  saw  from  the  battlefield.  Until  you  have  seen 
the  world  from  the  house  of  God  you  have  never  seen  it.  You  have  never  seen 
man  till  you  have  seen  him  from  the  Cross.  Keep  up  the  Church.  That  is  the 
specular  tower  that  is  the  point  of  vision.  Until  you  have  seen  the  world  reli- 
giously you  have  not  seen  it,  you  twaddling,  tinkering,  niggling  reformer.  Now 
you  can  look  at  this  text  as  a  sentiment,  as  a  discipline,  as  an  encouragement.  I.  A 
SENTIMENT.  Why  ?  Is  not  this  the  human  aspect  of  the  solicitude  of  God's  heart  7 
In  this  respect  as  well  as  in  others  is  man  made  after  the  image  and  likeness  of 
God.  In  all  such  emotion  there  is  a  suggestion  infinite  in  scope  and  tenderness,  a 
suggestion  of  humility,  family  completeness,  absolute  unselfishness,  redemption, 
forgiveness,  reconstruction,  everlasting  joy,  the  gathered  fractions  consolidated  into 
an  everlasting  integer.  But  you  will  have  that  lost  man.  And  Paul,  that  marvel- 
lous compound  of  Moses  and  Christ,  honouring  the  majesty  of  the  law  as  he  always 
did,  yet  feeling  its  weakness  in  the  presence  of  sin,  did  he  not  tremble  under  the 
same  emotion?  He  says,  "lam  in  continual  sorrow."  Great  heavens!  what  is 
the  matter?  It  is  not  enough  for  him  that  the  forces  of  the  Gentiles  are  moving 
towards  the  Cross,  that  from  Midian,  Ephraim,  and  Sheba  men  are  rising  to  show 
forth  the  praises  of  the  Lord.  Not  enough;  what  more  do  you  want?  "I  could 
wish  myself  accursed;  anathema  from  Christ  and  my  brethren,  my  kinsmen 
according  to  the  flesh.  My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  is  that  Israel  might 
be  saved.  For  see  how  the  doves  are  flocking  to  the  windows !  I  know,  I  know : 
beautiful !  Thank  God  for  it,  but " — and  who  is  it  that  speaks  thus  ? — I  would  know 
this  man.  "  I  am  of  the  seed  of  Israel."  What  tribe?  Ah,  what  tribe  ?  Hush! 
You  want  music  now — not  the  blare  of  the  organ  but  the  whisper  of  the  harp. 
♦'  Of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin."  Why,  that  is  the  tribe  that  is  lacking  in  the  text. 
Yes.  Thus  history  rolls  round  in  ennobled  and  amplified  repetition  and  variety — 
evolution  unimaginable  in  vastness  and  variety.  He  is  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin. 
In  Judges  all  Israel  mourns  that  Benjamin  was  lacking.  In  the  Koraans  Benjamin 
mourns  that  all  Israel  is  away.  If  you  have  lost  your  tears,  you  have  lost  your 
Christianity.  The  Bible  varies  a  good  deal  in  historical  and  even  moral  colour,  but 
it  never  varies  in  pity,  love,  and  mercy.  From  the  first  God  loved  man  with 
atoning  and  redeeming  love.  We  want  all  the  genius,  all  the  poetry,  all  the  letters ; 
we  want  them  and  welcome  them  all  if  they  will  be  servants  in  the  house  of  God, 
and  help  us  in  the  expression  of  an  inexpressible  pity — a  contradiction  in  words,  a 
harmony  in  experience.  I  challenge  you — graciously  and  lovingly — and  I  think 
you  will  not  find  one  bare  place  in  all  the  area  of  the  Book.  Let  us  try  it.  In 
Eden  there  is  a  promise ;  in  the  wilderness  there  is  a  tabernacle — a  mercy-seat. 
In  Genesis  there  is  "  a  covenant."  In  Malachi  there  is  "  a  book  of  remembrance." 
In  Exodus  "  the  Lord  keeps  mercy  for  thousands,  and  forgives  iniquity,  trans- 
gression, and  sin."    In  Numbers  there  will  be  nothing!    Yes,  in  Numbers  "the 


CHAP,  rsj.]  JUDGES.  261 

Lord  is  long-suffering  and  of  great  mercy,  forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression." 
Why,  what  more  could  He  do  on  Calvary  ?  And  that  in  Numbers,  which  you 
thought  a  bare  place.  In  Judges,  "  the  Lord  is  grieved  for  the  memory  of  Israel." 
In  Samuel,  when  the  avenging  angel  had  gone  forth  He  recalled  the  angel,  and 
"  let  the  lifted  thunder  drop."  But  Chronicles — they  will  be  all  details,  annals,  and 
a  field  for  the  higher  critics  rather  to  pull  to  pieces.  There  will  be  nothing,  I  think, 
in  the  Chronicles.  Will  there  not?  In  the  Chronicles,  God  says,  "  If  His  people 
will  seek  His  face  and  turn  away  from  their  wicked  ways,  He  will  hear  them  from 
heaven.  He  will  forgive  their  sins.  He  will  heal  their  land."  And  as  for  the 
Psalms.  What  need  we  say  of  them,  or  of  Isaiah,  or  Jeremiah,  or  Ezekiel? 
They  are  golden  with  the  love  of  God.  In  Hosea  God  heals  the  backsliding  of  His 
people,  and  loves  them  freely.  Even  James,  a  man  without  poetry,  a  church  with- 
out a  spire,  wrote  his  letter  to  the  twelve  tribes — twelve.  They  were  scattered 
abroad — but  no  scattering  can  kill  the  household  of  faith.  Now  is  it  possible  for 
any  tribe  to  be  lacking,  to  become  extinct  ?  Where,  for  example,  is  the  tribe  of 
Dan  ?  It  disappeared  beyond  record  in  the  1st  Chronicles,  and  is  not  named  in  the 
Apocalypse,  but  its  few  thousand  members  amalgamated  with  some  other  tribe, 
say,  with  this  very  tribe  of  Benjamin.  Yet  even  in  the  Apocalypse  the  number  of 
the  tribes  is  twelve,  twelve  foundations,  and  twelve  gates  of  twelve  pearls.  And  we 
may  be  absentees,  but  God's  house  shall  be  fiUed.  Now  that  is  the  text  as  a 
sentiment.  A  great  moan,  a  most  tender,  passionate,  evangelistic  feeling. 
n.  This  high  feeling  has  also  a  disciplinabt  aspect,  and  therefore  there  is  a 
whole  field  of  complete  and  ardent  loyalty.  When  Deborah  sang  her  triumphant 
song  she  disclosed  the  sterner  aspect  of  this  case.  She  mentioned  the  absentees  by 
name,  and  consigned  them  to  the  withered  immortahty  of  obhvion.  '•  Why  should 
there  ?  "  said  that  mother  heart,  "  why  should  there  have  been  one  tribe  lacking  on 
that  day  of  the  battle  ?  Why  ?  "  "Eeuben  remained  among  the  sheepfolds  "  and 
listened  to  the  bleatings  of  his  flock  when  he  ought  to  have  answered  the  call  of 
the  trumpet,  and  helped  to  repulse  the  nine  hundred  chariots  of  Sisera.  "  The 
Lord  wlU.  have  hold  of  him  yet."  Why  was  he  lacking  on  that  day  ?  Oh,  he  was 
preoccupied ;  he  sent  promises,  but  he  remained  at  home  among  the  flocks  when 
he  ought  to  have  been  serving  with  the  army.  And  some  are  criticising  the  sermon 
who  ought  to  be  out  saving  sinners.  Oh,  these  prior  engagements,  these  domestic 
excuses,  these  parliament  and  council  and  other  engagements  that  prevent  our 
being  at  the  war.  And  GUead  abode  beyond  Jordan,  and  Dan  was  concealed  in 
ships,  and  Asher  peered  from  behind  the  creeks  and  wondered  how  the  war  was 
going  on.  Is  it  not  so  with  you  ?  Do  not  hinder  your  feUow-soldiers  if  you  cannot 
help  them.  Any  fool  can  do  mischief.  Stupidity  can  sneer  at  enthusiasm,  and  we 
may  remain  away  from  the  battle.  Do  you  think  that  is  going  to  interfere  with 
the  success  of  these  great  evangelistic  movements  and  missionary  movements  ? 
There  is  another  variety,  oh,  very  singular  indeed  1  There  is  a  lacking,  or  an 
absence,  which  affects  great  indignation  because  it  has  not  been  sent  for.  Do  you 
know  nothing  about  that  ?  You  do  I  They  stand  back  for  a  space,  that  they  may 
see  whether  they  will  be  missed.  You  have  heard  of  these  men  ?  They  say,  "  We 
are  just  waiting  to  see  whether  a  circular  will  be  sent  to  us.  One  has  been  sent 
next  door,  and  we  are  simply  waiting  to  see."  You  are  not  1  You  are  grieving  the 
Spirit  of  God.  Now,  there  was  a  band  ia  old  Israel  who  tried  this  trick  in  three 
instances,  but  I  think  the  third  was  the  last.  Once  Gideon  overthrew  the 
Midianites,  and  held  in  his  one  hand  the  head  of  Prince  Oreb  and  in  his  other 
hand  the  head  of  Prince  Zeeb.  The  Ephraimites  chided  him  severely  because  they 
were  not  sent  for — they  would  have  been  very  glad  to  have  held  somebody's  dead 
head  in  their  hands.  It  was  the  trick  of  Ephraim.  They  tried  it  once  upon  the 
son  of  the  harlot  of  GUead.  Ephraim  said  to  Jephthah,  "  When  thou  passedst  over 
to  fight  against  the  children  of  Ammon,  why  didst  thou  not  call  on  us  to  go  with 
thee?  "  One  can  be  fuUy  valorous  the  day  after  the  fight,  and  when  all  is  dead 
and  gone  they  say,  "  Why  were  not  we  sent  for  ?  "  And  Jephthah  was  a  bold  and 
plain-spoken  man — base-born,  but  he  could  not  help  that— but  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  was  in  him,  and  the  wrath  of  the  Divine  fire  burned  in  his  bones,  and  he  said 
I  will  tell  you.  "  Ephi-aim,  hear  me  ;  I  did  once  send  for  you,  and  you  did  not 
come.  You  did  not  come,  and  now  that  you  are  trying  this  stale  trick  upon  others 
I  will  put  an  end  to  you,  at  least  to  a  considerable  extent,"  and  that  day  he  choked 
the  passages  of  the  Jordan  with  the  carcases  of  forty-two  thousand  Ephraimites. 
So  there  are  two  kiads  of  lacking — a  lacking  that  excites  pity  and  emotion  and 
compassion,  and  a  lacking  that  excites  indignation.    Find  opportunities.    Be  on 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

the  alert  for  chances.  Watch  ;  thou  knowest  not  when  the  enemy  may  come,  or 
the  Lord.  Be  faithful.  Kemember  that  Christianity  is  a  battlefield  as  well  as  a 
contemplation  and  doctrine.  Is  the  whole  fighting  strength  of  the  Church  on  the 
field?  Are  any  enjoying  delights  of  civilisation  who  ought  to  be  taking  part  in  the 
war  ?  III.  Now,  we  are  looking  at  it  as  a  discipUne,  but  we  may  look  at  it  next 
AND  FINALLY  A3  AN  ENCOURAGEMENT.  Somc  are  no  longer  in  the  battle,  yet  they 
are  not  lacking  in  the  sense  of  the  text.  They  are  not  here — they  are  here.  Even 
the  mighty  David  waxed  faint.  He  was  but  seventy  when  he  died.  When  I  say 
"but  seventy"  do  I  not  speak  carelessly?  What  a  seventy  1  When  he  tottered 
under  his  weakness  in  one  of  his  closing  battles  he  nearly  fell.  In  one  of  hia 
closing  battles  there  was  a  Philistine  who  had  a  sword  and  was  pressing  the  king 
most  heavily,  and  it  was  going  badly  with  King  David.  The  Philistine  was  hard 
upon  him  ;  hard  upon  him  who  slew  the  lion  and  the  bear  and  the  giant  of  Gath ; 
hard  upon  him  who  made  Jerusalem  rich  with  the  golden  shields  of  Hadad ;  and 
the  royal  captains  rushed  to  falling  David  and  got  around  him  and  said,  "  Thou 
shalt  go  out  with  us  no  more  to  the  battle,  that  they  quench  not  the  light  of  Israel," 
and  they  stood  up  as  iron  might  stand,  and  to  the  foe  they  said,  "  God  save  the 
king,"  and  to  David  they  said — they  whispered — "  You  shall  not  go  with  us  any 
more  to  the  battle,  that  they  quench  not  the  light  of  Israel."  Henceforth  he  was 
to  be  lacking,  yet  not  lacking.  My  dear  old  septuagenarian  or  octogenarian,  or 
whatever  your  age  may  be,  no  more  to  the  battle.  We  would  not  say  that  to  the 
enemy ;  but  you  shall  go  out  to  no  more  wars ;  you  shall  still  be  with  us ;  you 
shall  pray  for  us  and  help  us  in  the  Council  Chamber,  and  give  us  the  benefit  of 
your  rich  experience ;  but  no  more  to  the  battle.  No,  my  old  friends,  we  stiU  have 
you,  you  are  with  us  as  reminiscences,  examples,  memories,  inspirations.  "  I  look 
round  my  table,"  says  one  and  says  another  ;  "  my  boys  are  not  with  me  as  they 
used  to  be.  I  miss  them.  They  used  to  go  with  me  to  the  village  chapel,  but  they 
are  lacking  now.  0  Lord  God  of  Israel,  why  is  my  son  lacking  ?  He  is  taken  up 
with  a  language  I  do  not  understand.  I  was  trained  very  simply,  believingly,  in 
the  great  redeeming  truths  of  the  gospel,  but  he  talks  to  me  now  in  a  language  I 
cannot  understand,  and  he  no  more  sings  the  old  hymns  and  goes  to  the  dear  old 
house  of  prayer."  Lacking !  Have  you  brought  no  word  for  me  this  morning  ? 
Yes,  I  have  a  word  for  you.  He  may  return.  He  is  going  through  a  very  difficult 
process  now  ;  you  know  your  son  is  a  very  prosperous  man,  and  prosperity  takes  a 
good  deal  of  chastening  in  order  to  remain  pious.  But  he  may  return.  I  will  tell 
you  how  he  may  return.  He  will  have  a  little  child,  and  she  will  be  the  delight  of 
his  heart,  and  when  she  is  about  five  or  six  she  will  sicken,  and  in  the  deep  dark 
night  she  will  say  to  him,  "  Father,  give  me  one  long,  long  kiss,"  and  she  will  pass 
away ;  and  he  will  look  round  for  some  of  his  books.  They  will  have  nothing  to 
say  to  him,  and  he  will  alight  upon  an  old,  old  book,  and  he  wiU  read,  "And 
Jesus  called  unto  Him  a  little  child  "  ;  and  he  will  read,  "  Suffer  little  children  to 
come  unto  Me  " ;  and  in  secret  and  in  darkness  he  will  drop  on  his  knees  at  the 
bedside,  and  angels  will  say,  "  Behold  he  prayeth."  Adversity  will  do  what 
prosperity  cannot  do.  Loss  will  be  gain.  So  he  may  return.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Every  man  did  that  which  was  right  in  his  own  eyes. — Confusion  and  misery 
through  want  of  orders : — A  visitor  was  once  standing  at  a  friend's  door.  He 
knocked,  and  knocked ;  but  there  was  nobody  to  open.  Perhaps  no  one  was  at 
home  ?  Oh,  yes  ;  there  was  a  noise  within,  which  plainly  showed  that  more  than 
one  or  two  or  three  were  there.  Again  he  knocked,  and  waited ;  then  at  last  a 
servant  came.  "  She  was  very  sorry,  but  she  had  been  with  the  children  who  were 
all  quarrelling."  TMs,  then,  explained  the  noise.  Sounds  of  crying  and  anger 
were  now  heard  from  a  room  upstairs,  while  a  little  fellow  ran  forward  to  welcome 
the  visitor.  "Why,  what's  the  matter?"  "  Oh,  sir,  father  and  mother  are  both 
out,  and  it  is  so  miserable  !  "  "  How  so  ?  "  "  Why,  we  are  all  left  to  do  as  we 
like  ;  there  is  nobody  to  manage  us  !  "  This  was  strange,  was  it  not  ?  Doing  "  aa 
they  liked "  seemed  to  bring  nothing  but  disorder  and  misery  until  father  came 
home  again !  Now,  I  do  not  know  whether  those  parents  were  wise  and  careful  or 
not,  or  whether  they  could  have  done  better  with  their  family  than  to  leave  it  so. 
But  I  know  that  at  one  time  the  people  of  God,  dwelling  in  the  promised  land, 
were  left  by  Him  very  much  as  those  children  were  left.  This  was  perhaps 
partly  a  punishment  for  their  wilfulness  and  sin.  They  had  thought  they  could 
manage  for  themselves  very  well,  and  now  God  let  them  try.  Then  there  was 
wisdom  and  kindness,  too,  in  thus  showing  them  that  they  needed  the  care  and 
power  of  a  wiser,  mightier  Que  than  they.     (S.  G.  Green,  D.D.) 


INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  BUTH. 

The  Date  of  the  Book. — The  story  is  placed  "in  the  days  when  the  judges 
ruled  "  (chap.  i.  1),  about  a  century  before  the  time  of  David ;  but  on  its  own  showing 
it  was  not  written  till  long  after  the  events  it  describes  (chap.  iv.  7).  How  long  after- 
wards is  a  question  on  which  critics  are  not  agreed  ;  most  of  them  consider  it  to 
be  exUic  (Ewald)  or  post-exilic  (Bertheau,  Wellhausen,  Kuenen),  mainly  on  the 
linguistic  and  genealogical  evidence ;  but  Driver  (Introduction  to  O.T.,  1891)  thinks 
that  the  general  beauty  and  purity  of  the  style,  which  stand  on  a  level  with  the 
best  parts  of  Samuel,  point  rather  to  a  date,  which  he  does  not  seek  to  fix  more 
definitely,  before  the  exile.  That  the  book  was  not  received  into  the  canon  tUl  a 
very  long  time  after  the  captivity  is  shown  by  its  place  in  the  original  Hebrew, 
where  it  occurs  as  one  of  the  Hagiographa  or  "  writings,"  standing  second  among 
the  five  MegUloth  or  Festal  KoUs,  between  Canticles  and  Lamentations,  a  position 
which  proves  that  it  did  not  become  canonical  tiU  after  the  series  of  "  former 
prophets,"  extending  from  Joshua  to  2  Kings,  had  been  finally  closed.  In  the 
LXX.,  however,  which  gives  it  the  place  it  claims  in  the  historical  order,  it  cornea 
between  Judges  and  Samuel,  and  the  same  order  is  observed  in  the  Vulgate  and  in 
the  English  A.V.  That  Josephus  also  must  have  reckoned  it  as  an  appendix  to 
Judges  is  shown  by  his  enumeration  of  the  books  of  the  O.T.  as  numbering  only  22. 
(Chamlers's  Encyclopcedia.)  More  than  one  reason  may  be  found  for  supposing 
the  book  to  have  been  written  in  Solomon's  time,  probably  the  latter  part  of  his 
reign,  when  law  and  ordinances  had  multiplied  and  were  being  enforced  in  endless 
detail  by  a  central  authority ;  when  the  manners  of  the  nations  around — Chaldea, 
Egypt,  Phoenicia — were  overbearing  the  primitive  ways  of  Israel ;  when  luxury  was 
growing,  societies  dividing  into  classes,  and  a  proud  imperialism  giving  its  colour 
to  habit  and  religion.  If  we  place  the  book  at  this  period,  we  can  understand  the 
moral  purpose  of  the  writer  and  the  importance  of  his  work.  He  would  teach 
people  to  maintain  the  spirit  of  Israel's  past,  the  brotherliness,  the  fidelity  in  every 
relation  that  were  to  have  been  all  along  a  distinction  of  Hebrew  life  because 
inseparably  connected  with  the  obedience  of  Jehovah.  The  splendid  temple  on 
Moriah  was  now  the  centre  of  a  great  priestly  system,  and  from  temple  and 
palace  the  national,  and  to  a  great  extent  the  personal,  life  of  aU  Israelites  was 
largely  influenced,  not  in  every  respect  for  good.  The  quiet  suggestion  is  here 
made  that  the  artificiality  and  the  pomp  of  the  kingdom  did  not  compare  well 
with  that  old  time  when  the  affairs  of  an  ancestress  of  the  splendid  monarch  were 
settled  by  a  gathering  at  a  village  gate.  {R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)  The  tone  of  the 
book  throughout  is  liberal  and  tolerant  to  the  Gentiles ;  and  part  of  its  design — 
unconsciously  to  its  author  perhaps,  but  not  the  less  intentional  with  God — seems 
to  be  to  prepare  for  the  time  when  through  the  promised  Messiah  the  middle  wall 
of  partition  between  the  Jews  and  other  nations  should  be  broken  down.  Now  the 
reign  of  David  appears  to  have  been  the  only  portion  of  Jewish  history  during 


INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  BOOK  OF  RUTH. 


which  such  a  spirit  towards  the  Gentiles  was  shown  without  any  breach  of  loyalty 
to  Jehovah.  This  fact,  taken  in  connection  with  the  personal  relation  of  David 
to  the  heroine  of  the  story,  seems  to  make  it  probable  that  the  book  was  written 
some  time  during  David's  reign,  and  we  know  that  the  royal  psalmist  had  con- 
temporaries who,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  might  have  produced 
such  a  work.  Indeed,  there  is  much  in  the  simple  pathos  of  the  parable  of  the 
ewe  lamb  to  remind  us  of  the  idyllic  beauty  of  the  Book  of  Euth,  and  both  might 
well  enough  have  come  from  the  prophet  Nathan.     {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

The  Place  of  the  Book  in  the  Bible. — The  walls  of  the  great  palace  at  Versaillea 
are  covered  with  paintings  of  battles.  The  Bastille,  Jena,  Austerlitz,  the  Pyramids  1 
Agony,  passion,  and  death !  Heroism  and  victory  !  One  grows  weary  with  the  endless 
profusion  of  art.  He  sits  down  at  last  on  the  casement  of  a  little  window.  He  looks 
out.  Here,  too,  is  a  picture.  Peaceful  France,  with  its  green  grass,  its  forests  and 
fields,  and  its  church  tower  beyond  the  placid  lake.  The  Book  of  Euth  is  such  a 
little  window  amidst  the  historical  pictures,  the  battle  pieces  of  Israei.  Through 
this  window  we  see  the  home  life  which  the  pictures  have  hidden — godliness, 
unselfishness,  love  and  peace.  Is  it  not  well  for  us  to  turn  from  the  historic,  the 
heroic,  and,  through  some  rift,  take  a  swift,  sweet  glimpse  of  the  pastoral  and 
domestic  scenes  of  life  ?  We  read  of  Sisera's  murder  and  Jephthah's  vow  and 
Samson's  revenge,  and  we  think  iU  of  Israel.  Euth  gives  us  another  view  and  a 
truer  view.  It  is  not  for  books  and  newspapers  to  publish  what  is  ordinary  and 
commonplace.  They  publish  the  remarkable,  the  wonderful.  The  very  fact  that 
a  matter  is  publishable  is  fair  evidence  that  it  is  exceptional.  Let  us  remember 
this.  Let  us  remember  that  little  Euth  is  the  rule,  and  not  the  exception.  Thus, 
we  wiU  think  better  of  Israel  and  of  all  the  world.     {R.  S.  Barrett.) 

Object  and  Contents  of  the  Book. — These  four  things  seem  the  object  of  the 
Book  of  Euth :  to  present  a  supplement  by  way  of  contrast  to  the  Book  of  Judges ; 
to  show  the  true  spirit  of  Israel ;  to  exhibit  once  more  the  mysterious  connection 
between  Israel  and  the  Gentiles,  whereby  the  latter,  at  the  most  critical  periods  of 
Israel's  history,  seem  most  unexpectedly  called  in  to  take  a  leading  part ;  and  to 
trace  the  genealogy  of  David.  Specially  perhaps  the  latter  two.  For,  as  one  has 
beautifully  remarked,  if,  as  regards  its  contents,  the  Book  of  Euth  stands  on  the 
threshold  of  the  history  of  David,  yet,  as  regards  its  spirit,  it  stands,  like  the  Psalms, 
at  the  threshold  of  the  gospel.  Not  merely  on  account  of  the  genealogy  of  Christ, 
which  leads  up  to  David  and  Boaz,  but  on  account  of  the  spirit  which  the  teaching 
of  David  breathes,  do  we  love  to  remember  that  Israel's  great  king  sprang  from  the 
union  of  Boaz  and  Euth,  which  is  symbolical  of  that  between  Israel  and  the  Gentile 
world.  (A.  Edersheim,  D.D.)  It  is  a  supplement  to  the  Book  of  Judges,  and  an 
introduction  to  that  of  Samuel.  Neither  of  these  give  an  account  of  David's 
ancestors ;  this  omission  our  story  supphes.  Euth  was  that  glorious  king's  great- 
grandmother.  Now,  unless  we  had  known  this,  and  also  that  Boaz  was  of  the 
house  of  Judah,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  verify  the  prophecy  that  Christ 
the  Messiah  should  descend  from  the  royal  tribe.  This  is  one  prominent  purpose — 
to  announce  David's  ancestry,  and  consequently  to  prove  that  the  Saviour  was  "  a 
lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah."  And  what  an  attractive  picture  of  those  ancestors  it 
is !  What  uprightness  and  singleness  of  heart,  what  piety  and  modesty  and  purity 
of  life  are  found  to  characterise  them !  Though  it  was  not  accounted  a  flattering 
distinction,  but  quite  the  reverse,  to  have  heathen  progenitors,  yet  if  any  character 
could  effectively  destroy  this  deeply-rooted  prejudice,  then  that  of  the  gentle  and 
loving  Euth  must  do  it.  (Win.  Braden.)  Does  it  not  tell  us  that  not  only  on 
the  city  and  the  palace,  and  on  the  cathedral  and  the  college,  on  the  assembUes  of 
statesmen,  and  on  the  studies  of  scholars,  but  upon  the  meadow  and  the  corn- 
field, the  farm-house  and  the  cottage,  is  written  by  the  everlasting  finger  of  God, 
"Holiness  unto  the  Lord"?  That  all  is  blessed  in  His  sight  ?  That  the  lowly 
dwellers  in  villages,  the  simple  tillers  of  the  ground,  can  be  as  godly  and  as  piov 
as  virtuous  and  as  high-minded,  as  those  who  have  nought  to  do  but  to  serve  G 
in  the  ofiices  of  religion  ?  Is  it  not  an  honour  and  a  comfort,  to  such  as  us,  i 
find  one  whole  book  of  the  Holy  Bible  occupied  by  the  simplest  story  of  tne 
fortunes  of  a  yeoman's  family  in  a  lonely  village  among  the  hill  of  Judah  ?  {Canon 
Kingiley.) 


THE   BIBLICAL   ILLUSTEATOE. 

RUTH. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Veb.  L  In  tho  daya  when  the  Judges  ruled. — The  transition  from  Judget  to 

Buth : — Leaving  the  Book  of  Judges  and  opening  the  story  of  Euth,  we  pass 
from  vehement  out-door  life,  from  tempest  and  trouble,  into  quiet  domestic  scenes. 
After  an  exhibition  of  the  greater  movements  of  a  people  we  are  brought,  as  it 
were,  to  a  cottage  interior  in  the  soft  light  of  an  autumn  evening,  to  obscure 
lives  passing  through  the  cycles  of  loss  and  comfort,  affection  and  sorrow.  We 
have  seen  the  ebb  and  flow  of  a  nation's  fidelity  and  fortune;  a  few  leaders 
appearing  clearly  on  the  stage,  and  behind  them  a  multitude  indefinite,  indis- 
criminate, the  thousands  who  form  the  ranks  of  battle  and  die  on  the  field,  who 
Bway  together  from  Jehovah  to  Baal,  and  back  to  Jehovah  again.  What  the 
Hebrews  were  at  home,  how  they  lived  in  the  villages  of  Judah  or  on  the  slopes  of 
Tabor,  the  narrative  has  not  paused  to  speak  of  with  detail.  Now  there  is  leisure 
after  the  strife,  and  the  historian  can  describe  old  customs  and  family  events,  can 
show  us  the  toiling  flockmaster,  the  busy  reapers,  the  women  with  their  cares  and 
uncertainties,  the  love  and  labour  of  simple  life.  Thunderclouds  of  sin  and 
judgment  have  rolled  over  the  scene;  but  they  have  cleared  away,  and  we  see 
himian  nature  in  examples  that  become  familiar  to  us,  no  longer  in  weird  shadow 
or  vivid  lightning  flash,  but  as  we  commonly  know  it,  homely,  erring,  enduring, 
imperfect,  not  unblest.  {R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)  There  was  a  famine  in  the  land. — 
Famine,  the  consequence  of  sin: — This  might  happen  many  ways  :  by  the  incursion 
of  foreign  enemies,  by  civil  wars  among  themselves,  or  by  restraint  of  seasonable 
showers  from  heaven.  Howsoever  it  came,  sin  was  the  cause  thereof :  a  toleration 
of  idolaters  and  public  monuments  of  idolatry  (Judg.  i.  21,  27,  29,  30,  and  iii.  5, 
and  ii.  2),  contrary  to  God's  express  commandment  by  the  hand  of  Moses.  They 
fell  themselves  unto  idolatry  (ii.   11,  12,  13,  17,   and  viii.   27).    I.  That  sms, 

ESPECIALLY   THOSE   AFORENAMED,    DESERVE    THE    JUDGMENTS    OF     GoD     (Deut.     XXviii,  ; 

1  Kings  viii.  35-37).  Therefore,  to  escape  plagues,  let  us  take  heed  of  sin 
(jSzek.  xviii.  31 ;  Rev.  xviii. ).  II.  That  famine  and  dearth  is  a  punishment  fob  sin, 
AND  THAT  A  GREAT  PLAGUE  (Ezck.  V.  16 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  23,  24 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  19,  29 ; 
Amos  iv.).  And  when  this  hand  of  God  cometh  upon  us,  let  us  search  our  ways 
aad  humble  ourselves  (2  Chron.  vii.  14),  that  the  Lord  may  heal  our  land,  for 
ill  is  a  terrible  judgment  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  14)  and  without  mercy  (2  Kings  vi.  10,  29 ; 
Ezek.  iv.  10) .  III.  We  may  hereby  see  how  God  made  His  Word  good  upon  them, 
and  that  He  daUieth  not  with  His  people,  in  denouncing  judgments  against  them  ; 
for  Moses  had  told  them  (Deut.  xxviii.)  that  God  would  thus  afflict  them  if 
rebellious  against  Him :  and  here  the  story  teUeth  us  that  in  the  days  of  the 
^gdges  this  famine  came.  {R.  Bernard.)  A  famine  in  the  land! — in  the  land 
fio-T^omise  and  in  Bethlehem,  the  House  of  Bread !  No  doubt  the  state  of  affairs 
^ja  Bethlehem  constituted  a  severe  trial  of  faith  to  Elimelech  and  his  family  and 
ueighbours.  It  is  very  hard  to  see  the  meal  growing  less  and  less  in  the  barrel ;  it 
is  even  harder  for  those  who  have  enjoyed  times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of 
the  Lord,  and  seasons  of  genuine  delight  in  His  service,  to  lose  the  experience 
of  the  Divine  love  and  care,  to  find  prayer  becoming  a  burden  and  the  Word  of  God 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP.t. 

lifeless  and  unhelpful ;  but  can  either  the  one  condition  of  things  or  the  other 
be  any  excuse  or  justification  for  forsaking  the  land  of  promise?  For,  to  begin 
with,  how  can  a  change  of  front  help  us  under  the  circumstances  ?  If  corn  be 
scarce  in  Canaan,  where  God  has  pledged  Himself  to  feed  us,  is  it  likely  that  better 
things  will  be  found  in  a  land  upon  which,  as  we  shall  see.  His  curse  is  resting  ? 
If  from  any  cause  our  sense  of  the  presence  and  approval  of  Jesus  seems  to  have 
lost  something  of  its  distinctness,  even  in  that  circle  of  Church  life  and  Christian 
society  with  which  we  have  been  associated,  is  it  probable  that  we  shall  obtain 
truer  solace  and  renewal  in  that  "  world  "  the  friendship  of  which  is  declared  to  be 
enmity  to  our  Lord  ?  And,  after  all,  what  is  the  province  of  faith  if  it  be  of  no 
service  to  us  under  such  circumstances  as  these  ?  Christ,  as  we  well  know,  changes 
not ;  if  there  be  a  change  in  our  experience  of  Him,  the  causes  he  with  us, 
and  not  with  our  Lord — the  clouds  are  earth-born  ;  what  we  need  is  more  sun,  not 
less,  and  this  we  shall  never  obtain  by  turning  our  back  upon  Him  from  whom 
every  blessing  of  spiritual  experience,  as  well  as  of  earthly  enjoyment,  flows.  It 
is  pretty  certain  that,  like  Elimelech,  those  whose  hearts  are  growing  colder  would 
protest  almost  with  indignation  that  they  have  no  intention  of  any  permanent 
abandonment  of  Christ.  They  are  suffering  from  famine — from  a  loss  of  spiritual 
enjoyment.  To  what  may  this  unhappy  state  of  things  be  due  ?  Some,  perhaps, 
would  frankly  aver  that  they  never  have  found  enjoyment  in  Christ  and  Hia 
service  from  the  very  commencement;  they  have  sought  to  serve  Him  purely 
as  a  matter  of  duty:  for  their  pleasure  they  have  looked  to  the  world.  Some, 
again,  would  admit  that  there  are  both  food  and  enjoyment  in  the  Divine  life 
for  those  who  desire  to  follow  Christ,  and  at  one  time  they  themselves  hoped  that 
it  would  prove  permanently  satisfying ;  but  they  confess  that  they  got  tired  of 
it  after  a  time,  and  it  seemed  rather  hard  to  them  that  they  should  be  required  to 
limit  themselves  to  that  which,  however  good  in  itself,  appeared  to  be  somewhat 
restricted  in  character.  Now,  our  Bread  is  Christ,  and  dissatisfaction  with  our 
Bread  is  dissati -faction  with  Him,  and  confessions  such  as  those  to  which  we  have 
been  listening  simply  mean  that  the  Lord  Jesus  has  ceased  to  be,  or  more  probably 
has  never  been  in  any  very  real  sense,  everything  to  us ;  such  persons  as  those 
whose  cases  we  have  imagined  have  not  actually  given  up  serving  and  loving  the 
Lord,  or  at  any  rate  do  not  think  they  have  done  so,  but  into  a  heart  which 
has  never  been  completely  surrendered  to  the  Master  they  have  admitted  other 
objects  of  regard,  and  these  later  affections,  competing  with  that  earlier  one,  have 
dimmed  its  lustre  and  loosened  its  hold  upon  us.  And  are  there  not  others  who, 
whilst  desiring  after  a  fashion  to  lead  a  Christian  life,  dehberately  place  themselves 
beyond  the  reach,  so  to  speak,  of  the  nourishing  and  fructifying  grace  of  God 
by  the  very  character  of  the  circumstances  by  which  they  elect  to  surround  them- 
selves? Their  friends,  their  amusements,  their  books  (not  to  mention  other 
matters)  seem  to  be  chosen  almost  with  a  view  to  hindering  instead  of  assisting 
their  growth  in  Christ.  But  the  Holy  Spirit  is  Sovereign ;  He  is  the  Lord  of  life 
as  well  as  the  giver  of  it,  and  He  feeds  the  souls  who  seek  Him  in  accordance  with 
His  own  will,  not  in  accordance  with  theirs.  And  the  famine  in  Bethlehem  took 
place  "  in  the  days  when  the  judges  ruled."  It  is  impossible  to  read  the  historian's 
account  of  those  days  (Judg.  ii.  11,  &c.)  without  realising  that  the  times  were  very 
bad  indeed,  and  just  such  as  we  should  expect  to  be  characterised  by  famine  and 
distress  of  all  kinds.  For,  to  begin  with,  they  were  days  of  religion  by  fits  and 
starts — days  in  which  the  Israelites  served  God  when  they  were  in  trouble  and 
forgot  Him  as  soon  as  their  circumstances  improved.  Is  it  likely  that  such  a 
condition  of  things  and  such  a  fashion  of  Uving  can  succeed  ?  Will  God  bless 
those  who,  blind  to  His  long-suffering,  set  every  law  of  gratitude  and  right 
behaviour  at  defiance  in  this  hopeless  kind  of  way  ?  But  is  not  this  precisely  what 
some  of  us  are  constantly  doing  ?  No,  religion  by  fits  and  starts  cannot  possibly 
be  a  happy  state  of  affairs :  it  must  involve  us  in  that  separation  from  God  which 
results  in  famine.  We  shall  not  improve  our  circumstances,  however,  by  turning 
our  backs  upon  God  ;  let  us  understand  that  our  want  is  due  to  our  own  conduct, 
not  to  God's  unfaithfulness,  and  let  us  seek  so  to  amend  our  Uves  that  He  may  yet 
be  able  to  make  our  land  flow  with  milk  and  honey.  Moreover,  the  days  when  the 
judges  ruled  were  obviously  days  of  intermittent  government:  the  arrangement  was 
but  a  makeshift  at  the  best.  In  our  own  case  it  is  the  absence  of  the  autocratic 
rule  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  or  rather  our  fretful  murmuring  against  the  rule,  which  hes 
at  the  root  of  most  of  our  spiritual  sorrow.  We  acknowledge  the  Lord  as  oar 
Saviour,  bat  do  we  safficiehtly  recognise  Him  to  be  Christ  our  King?    It  ia 


CHAP.  I.]  RUTH.  9 

impossible  for  us  to  fear  the  Lord  and  serve  our  own  gods,  and  be  happy — try 
as  we  may.  That  there  are  times  in  the  experience  of  all  Christian  people  when 
the  pasture  which  once  was  green  fails  somewhat  of  its  peaceful  restf ulness  no  one 
who  knows  anything  of  life  will  for  a  moment  deny.  But  this  is  neither  starvation 
nor  a  breaking  of  faith  on  the  part  of  our  covenant  God.  Elimelech  left  Beth- 
lehem in  a  moment  of  panic,  or  a  fit  of  despondency  or  of  world-hunger,  but  others 
remained  and  trusted  the  God  of  their  fathers ;  and  when  ten  years  later  Naomi, 
the  sohtary  survivor  of  the  little  band,  returned,  she  found  her  friends  alive  and 
well  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  barley  harvest.  They  had  been  tried,  indeed,  but 
never  forsaken.  It  was  sad  enough  that  Elimelech  should  have  left  the  land  of 
promise  and  the  House  of  Bread :  it  was  worse  that  he  should  have  selected  Moab 
as  his  new  home.  It  was  not  merely  that  the  people  of  the  country  were  heathen, 
and  that,  as  Ehmelech  must  have  known,  if  he  and  his  family  were  to  remain  true 
to  God  they  would  have  to  lead  lives  of  trial  and  to  face  unpopularity  and  perhaps 
persecution,  but  Moab  had  acted  with  extraordinary  bitterness  to  his  ancestors  in 
times  past,  and  in  consequence  was  under  a  very  terrible  curse.  Are  we  in  no 
danger?  Are  there  none  of  us  who  are  beginning  to  turn  our  heads,  and  our  hearts 
too,  in  the  direction  of  those  old  associations  and  those  old  surroundings  which  did 
us  so  much  injury  in  the  past — the  scars  of  whose  wounds,  the  fascination  of  whose 
attractions,  have  not  yet  passed  away  ?  Are  we  wise  in  venturing  where  stronger 
men  than  we  are  have  fallen,  where  we  ourselves  fell  not  so  long  ago  ?  God  help 
us,  and  keep  us  true  to  Him  and  to  ourselves  I  (if.  A.  Hall,  B.D.)  Bethlehem- 
jadah. — The  famine  in  Bethlehem : — The  home  of  Elimelech  was  in  Bethlehem — • 
"  Bethlehem-judah  "  as  the  historian  is  careful  to  remark,  in  order  to  distinguish 
it  from  another  Bethlehem  in  the  territory  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun.  Its  very  name 
— Bethlehem,  i.e.,  House  of  Bread — indicates  its  fertility.  And  therefore  the 
famine  which  drove  Elimelech  from  Bethlehem  must  have  been  extraordinarily 
protracted  and  severe ;  even  the  most  wealthy  and  fertile  parts  of  the  land  must 
have  been  consumed  by  drought:  there  was  no  bread  even  in  the  very  House 
of  Bread.  Elimelech  and  his  household  were  by  no  means  likely  to  be  the  first  to 
feel  the  pinch  of  want,  or  to  feel  it  most  keenly ;  for  he  came  of  a  good  stock,  of  a 
family  that  stood  high  in  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  was  a  man  of  consideration 
and  wealth.  The  probability  is  that  he  was  rich  in  flocks  and  herds,  a  sheep- 
master  such  as  Bethlehem  has  constantly  produced,  and  that  it  was  to  find  pastures 
for  his  famishing  flocks  that  he  went  to  sojourn  in  Moab.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  He, 
and  his  wife,  and  his  two  sons. — Family  names:— The  names  are  thoroughly 
Jewish,  and  are  rich  in  meaning.  Ehmelech  was  a  grand  name  for  a  pious  man  ; 
it  means,  "  My  God  is  King."  The  mother  is  called  Naomi,  "  the  gracious  "  or 
"sweetness."  Mahlon  means  "weakly,"  and  Chilion,  "pining"  or  "wasting," 
referring  probably  to  their  bodily  condition;  for  as  they  both  died  young  it  is 
possible  they  were  aihng  from  their  birth.  But  it  is  noteworthy  that  in  those 
olden  times  parents  were  accustomed  to  give  their  children  names  according  to 
some  pecuharity  in  their  circumstances,  or  in  the  fond  hope  that  the  special  virtue 
implied  in  the  name  might  be  developed  in  after-life.  Isaac's  firstborn  is  Esau, 
because  of  the  redness  of  his  skin.  Moses  in  exile  calls  his  son  Gershom,  "  For," 
he  said,  "  I  have  been  a  stranger  in  a  strange  land."  The  custom  is  dying  out  in 
these  modem  times.  Parents  give  children  names  without  inquiring  the  meaning ; 
the  sound  is  more  to  them  than  the  sense.  But  there  may  be  more  involved, 
for  good  or  evU,  in  the  old  custom  than  we  suppose.  Shakespeare  asks,  "  What's 
in  a  name  ?  A  rose  by  any  other  name  would  smell  as  sweet."  True,  but  as 
an  American  writer  points  out,  "  The  influence  of  names  in  the  formation  of 
character  is  probably  much  greater  than  is  usually  imagined,  and  deserves  the 
special  attention  of  parents  in  their  bestowment.  Children  should  be  taught  that 
the  circumstances  of  their  bearing  the  names  of  good  men  or  women  who  have 
lived  before  them  constitutes  an  obligation  upon  them  to  imitate  or  perpetuate 
their  virtues."  It  does  not  foUow  that  the  desired  result  will  be  obtained,  yet 
it  may  be  an  influence ;  and  at  least  the  name,  when  contrasted  with  the  life, 
will  be  a  constant  rebuke.    (Wm.  Braden.) 

Vet.  2.  They  came  into  the  country  of  Moab,  and  continued  there. — Let$on$ 
from  the  conduct  of  Elimelech  and  Naomi: — 1.  Learn  from  the  change  in  the 
circumstances  of  Naomi's  husband  not  to  trust  in  the  uncertain  possessions  of 
this  world.  You  may  now  be  wealthy  and  respectable  among  your  neighbours  an  1 
acqaaintanoea ;  a  few  years  or  months  may  reduce  yon  to  a  condition  of  discern !oi  . 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

if  not  of  poverty  and  indigence.  2.  Learn  from  the  consequences  of  the  step 
taken  by  Elimelech,  the  peril  of  discontentednesa  and  impatience  under  adverse 
circumstances.  Should  riches  make  themselves  wings,  and  poverty  threaten  to 
be  your  lot,  beware  of  rashly  changing  your  habits  and  connections.  3.  Te  that 
are  parents,  surrounded  with  a  family  of  children,  learn  from  this  history  to  reflect 
how  soon  those  children  may  be  taken  away.  And  oh !  strive  and  pray,  above  all 
things,  that  they  may  be  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Chi-ist.  4.  Learn 
from  Naomi's  trials  the  beneficial  effects  of  affliction;  and  from  her  resolution 
to  return  to  her  native  land — the  land  of  Jehovah's  worship — that  the  only  true 
refuge  in  affliction  is  pure  and  undefiled  religion.  {R,  Hughes,  B.D.)  The 
wanderers  : — Thus  the  history  of  Euth  begins  with  a  story  of  wanderers  from  God. 
It  is  a  sad,  but  not  a  strange  commencement.  I.  Why  did  they  wandeb,  and 
THUS  LEAVE  THE  HOME  OF  THEiB  FATHERS  ?  The  answer  given  is,  "  There  was  a 
famine  in  the  land."  God  had  sent  upon  them  a  temporary  trouble,  and  they  fled 
from  it.  But  when  God  chastens  us  in  His  wisdom,  our  duty  is  to  yield  with 
contentment  and  submission.  We  should  bear  the  rod  and  Him  who  hath 
appointed  it.  When  we  patiently  yield  to  His  merciful  chastisements,  they  become 
our  most  precious  blessings.  "  There  was  a  famine  in  the  land,"  and  they  fled 
from  it.  Temporary  sufferings  made  their  home  for  a  little  while  uncomfortable, 
and  they  could  not  patiently  endure  the  will  of  God.  It  was  their  own  land. 
It  was  their  father's  land.  It  was  the  Lord's  land.  Their  family  and  friends  were 
there.  Why  should  they  fly  ?  The  next  season  might  be  better,  and  more  than 
repay  them  for  the  losses  of  the  present.  The  famine  might  follow  them  to  the 
land  whither  they  went,  and  make  their  sufferings  greater  there  than  at  home. 
When  Socrates  was  urged  by  his  friends  to  escape  from  the  prison  where  he  was 
condemned  to  die,  he  answered  them,  "  Tell  me  of  a  land  where  men  do  not  die, 
and  I  wUl  escape  to  that."  How  much  better  might  this  family  have  found  a  quiet 
submission  to  the  will  of  God  !  What  an  illustration  this  is  of  sinful,  foolish  man  I 
Adam  had  all  the  garden  of  Eden.  One  single  restraint  made  him  a  voluntary 
wanderer  from  God.  How  easily  have  all  who  have  descended  from  him  rebelled 
and  wandered  since  !  But  can  we  ever  find  happiness  in  running  away  from  God  ? 
Is  there  any  happiness  but  in  a  cheerful,  filial  submission  to  God  ?  See  where  this 
wandering  from  God  begins — in  a  spirit  of  rebellion  and  discontent.  Oh,  be  ye 
watchful  there.  Be  ready  to  hear  and  to  do  the  will  of  God.  In  the  midst  of  your 
trials  remember  His  mercies.  II.  But  who  were  these  wanderers  whose  story  we 
HAVE  before  us  ?  They  were  a  family  of  Israelites,  of  professed  believers  in  the 
Word  of  God.  Never  does  sin  seem  to  be  more  dreadful  than  when  man's 
ingratitude  is  contrasted  with  God's  mercies.  You  are  never  straitened  in  God. 
You  have  all  things  and  abound  in  Him.  He  is  rich  in  His  mercy  to  you  alL 
Why  should  you  wander  ?  IH.  This  wandering  was  wholly  unnecessary.  These 
Israelites  were  not  poor  and  perishing.  They  "  went  out  full."  Their  wandering 
was  therefore  wilful,  and  this  made  it  the  more  rebellious  and  guilty.  But  is  not 
all  wandering  from  God  unnecessary  ?  Why  need  we  ever  go  astray  from  Him  ? 
It  wUl  be  always  a  solemn  charge  against  us,  "  they  went  out  full."  It  is  the 
wandering  which  makes  us  empty.  If  we  go  away  from  God  our  own  heedlessness 
or  choice  is  the  fountain  of  our  guilt  and  sorrow.  Why  need  we  wander? 
IV.  From  whence  did  these  Israelites  wander?  It  was  from  the  Lord's  own 
land,  Immanuel's  land.  It  was  from  the  whole  company  of  His  people. 
It  was  from  the  midst  of  the  privileges  of  Divine  revelation.  It  was  from 
Bethlehem,  the  House  of  Bread.  It  was  a  hasty,  foolish  wandering  from  a  happy 
home.  We  will  not  call  every  journey  a  wandering.  It  depends  upon  whence  we 
came  and  whither  we  go,  and  under  whose  direction  we  move.  Jonah  wandered. 
When  God  sent  him  to  Nineveh  he  fled  to  Tarshish.  And  God  arrested  him  in  the 
deep  and  brought  him  back.  Manasseh  wandered.  And  he  was  taken  in  the 
thorns  and  bound  with  fetters,  till,  in  the  day  of  his  affliction,  he  sought  the  Lord 
and  was  forgiven.  Demas  wandered.  From  a  love  of  this  present  world  he  forsook 
his  Master  and  returned  no  more.  Judas  wandered.  And  how  fearful  was  his  end 
when  he  went  to  his  own  place  1  This  is  the  wandering  of  which  we  have  to  speak. 
It  is  a  wandering  from  God,  from  His  Spirit,  from  His  Word,  from  His  Church. 
Whosoever  goes  astray  from  God  voluntarily  leaves  the  salvation  which  has  been 
provided  for  him,  and  makes  it  his  condemnation  that  he  has  loved  darkness 
rather  than  light,  because  his  ways  are  evil.  But  there  are  many  wanderers  from 
God  in  a  very  peculiar  sense.  They  go  from  the  very  midst  of  His  family,  from 
Bethlehem  itself,  where  Jesos  is.    They  were  bom  in  His  Choroh.    They  were 


CHAP.  I.]  RVTH.  11 

early  dedicated  to  Him  in  His  holy  sacrament.  They  were  taught  His  Word,  and 
named  and  registered  among  the  number  of  His  covenant  people.  They  might 
have  lived  always  at  His  feet  and  in  His  favour.  But  they  left  Bethlehem  in 
rebellious  discontent.  V.  Whither  did  these  Israelites  wander?  "To  the 
country  of  Moab  "  ;  to  a  land  of  idolatry ;  a  land  of  open  licentiousness  and  crime. 
What  a  change  of  condition  to  them !  What  though  bread  was  abundant  there  ! 
"  Fulness  of  bread  like  that  in  Sodom  !  "  Man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone.  And 
who  that  truly  loved  God  would  not  rather  live  with  a  famine  in  Bethlehem 
than  with  sinful  abundance  in  Moab?  They  went  to  Moab,  but  only  "to  sojourn 
there."  Just  as  Lot  went  to  sojourn  in  Sodom.  Just  as  every  wanderer  from  God 
goes  into  the  world.  It  is  but  for  recreation.  It  is  only  a  harmless  indulgence.  It 
is  but  for  a  season  of  enjoyment.  They  mean  some  time  to  return  and  never  to  go 
back  to  Moab  again.  To  die  in  Moab,  without  God  and  without  hope  !  Nothing  is 
further  from  their  thoughts  than  this.  They  will  only  dip  in  the  lake,  like 
the  swallow,  and  they  shaU  feel  refreshed  for  a  longer  flight.  Ah,  how  httle  they 
know  of  the  dangers  they  encounter  1  VI.  And  what  were  the  results  of  their 
WANDEErNG?  What  could  they  be  but  wasting  sorrow  and  death?  Ah,  how 
Bad  are  the  results  of  a  life  of  guilt !  How  mournful  are  the  consequences  of  a 
wandering  from  God !  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Spiritual  advantages  sacrificed 
to  worldly  gain: — Were  they  wise  in  taking  this  step?  For  some  reasons 
they  were  wise.  There  was  an  abundance  in  the  land  of  Moab,  and  a  scarcity 
in  the  land  of  Judah.  Worldly  prudence,  then,  seemed  to  point  out  some  other 
epot  as  their  dwelling-place.  But  one  thing  they  did  not  sufficiently  consider 
— they  were  leaving  behind  them  many  of  their  religious  advantages.  Yes, 
there  is  no  doubt  that  Elimelech  was  wrong,  very  wrong,  in  leaving  the  land  of 
Judah  with  his  family,  and  settling  in  the  godless  country  of  Moab.  It  is  a  fearful 
thing  to  set  little  store  by  our  religious  advantages  and  blessings,  when  God  has  given 
them  to  us.  When,  for  instance,  a  person  chooses  a  new  home,  how  apt  he  is  to 
reckon  how  far  he  will  be  a  gainer  in  a  worldly  point  of  view,  putting  aside  alto- 
gether his  gain  or  loss  in  spiritual  things  1  How  sad,  if  he  shoiid  grow  richer  for 
this  Ufe,  but  poorer  for  eternity  !  Again,  when  a  servant  chooses  a  fresh  situation, 
is  he  not  apt  to  measure  the  goodness  of  it  by  the  wages  he  is  to  receive,  instead  of 
thinking  seriously  how  far  his  soul  is  likely  to  prosper  in  his  new  home  ?  {Bp. 
Oxenden.)  Cowardly  emigration  : — Emigration  from  one's  own  land  can  only  be 
justified  when  it  becomes  an  inevitable  thing — where  the  population  abounds  more 
than  the  means  of  maintenance,  and  the  people  require  to  be  thinned  by  the  emigra- 
tion of  some  for  the  comfort  and  advantage  of  all.  But  when  people  leave  their 
country  in  the  day  of  its  difficulties,  and  thus  refuse  their  help,  they  play  the  part 
of  cowards  who  desert  the  army  when  the  tide  of  battle  rolls  against  its  standards — 
they  act  undutifuUy  before  God,  unworthily  as  patriots,  and  cruelly  as  human  beings. 
Our  best  exertions  at  such  a  crisis  are  always  due ;  and  instead  of  flinching  from  a 
sphere  in  which  any  good  is  possible  to  us,  we  ought  to  show  that  duty  calls  us 
wherever  we  can  be  of  service.  (J.  Gumming,  D.D^  The  godly  oppressed,  while 
the  wicked  have  abundance : — This  may  seem  a  strange  thing,  that  the  godly  should 
be  oppressed  with  famine,  when  worldlings  and  heathen  wallow  in  their  wealth.  Of 
these  David  speaketh  (Psa.  xvii.  14,  xxxvi.  15,  Ixxiii.  4,  12).  The  like  you  may 
hear  in  Job  (xxi.  7).  But  of  the  righteous  it  is  said  that  they  often  cry  out  of  their 
atflictions,  their  sorrows  and  nakedness,  their  hunger  and  misery ;  yea,  our  Saviour 
Christ  pronounces  Himself  in  His  members,  poor,  hungry,  naked.  Judge  now 
between  the  outward  estate  of  the  godly  and  the  wicked ;  are  they  not  contrary  ? 
That  which  of  the  world  is  condemned  is  of  the  Lord  commended.  Yet  be  not 
terrified  from  godliness,  but  rather  strengthened  in  your  profession.  Then  will  you  say, 
"  TeU  us  the  cause  of  this  inequality  ?  "  Our  Saviour  answers  (John  xv.  19,  xvi.  20). 
He  compares  us  to  the  fruitful  vine,  which  doth  not  only  abide  frost,  snow,  storm, 
and  heat,  but  also  at  the  gathering  time  is  broken  off,  that  the  grapes  may  be 
reached.  The  gold  must  be  tried  in  the  furnace,  the  silver  fined  in  the  fire,  the 
wheat  purged  in  the  floor,  and,  before  it  be  meat  for  man,  must  also  be  ground  in 
the  mill ;  so  must  we  be  proved  in  affliction,  fined  in  persecution,  and  crushed  in 
pieces,  under  the  burden  of  our  own  miseries,  that  we  may  be  made  prepared  bread 
for  the  Lord's  own  spending.  Why,  then,  doth  the  Lord  make  such  large  promises 
to  His  Church  of  plenty,  seeing  it  endures  continual  poverty  ?  I  answer,  the  Church 
of  God  must  be  considered  after  two  sorts  :  the  first,  as  it  is  cleansed  in  the  blood 
of  Christ,  and  washed  pure  from  all  outward  and  notorious  offences,  unto  which 
•state  pertain  all  these  outward  promises  of  liberaUty  in  the  Scriptures.    The  second 


12  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

is  the  declined  estate,  or  corrupted  condition  of  every  one  in  the  Church,  even  unto 
the  world's  end :  unto  this  pertain  all  the  punishments  and  tribulations  which  the 
godly  endure,  which  the  Lord  sends  upon  them  that  He  may  by  little  and  little  scour 
us  from  our  transgressions  and  weary  us  with  the  miseries  of  this  life,  that  we  may 
the  more  earnestly  desire  the  life  to  come,  for  the  Lord  doth  here  scourge  us  that  we 
should  not  be  condemned  with  the  world.  (E.  Topsell.)  Moab  doomed  : — Moab 
was  a  doomed  country.  More  than  a  hundred  years  before  Ruth's  birth  its  sentence 
had  been  pronounced  through  the  mouth  of  the  prophet  Balaam :  "  There  shall 
come  a  Star  out  of  Jacob ;  and  a  Sceptre  shaD  arise  out  of  Israel,  and  shall  smite 
the  corners  of  Moab."  "  The  earth  also,  and  the  works  that  are  therein,  shall  be 
burned  up."  (C.  F.  Hall.)  Elimelech  an  exile : — In  the  •'  Field  of  Moab,"  that  ia 
the  upland  canton  bounded  by  the  Amon  on  the  north,  the  mountains  on  the  east, 
and  the  Dead  Sea  precipices  on  the  west,  people  lived  very  much  as  they  did  about 
Bethlehem,  only  more  safely  and  in  greater  comfort.  But  the  worship  was  of 
Chemosh,  and  Elimelech  must  soon  have  discovered  how  great  a  difference  that 
made  in  thought  and  social  custom  and  in  the  feeling  of  men  toward  himself  and 
his  family.  The  rites  of  the  god  of  Moab  included  festivals  in  which  humanity  waa 
disgraced.  Standing  apart  from  these  he  must  have  found  his  prosperity  hindered, 
for  Chemosh  was  lord  in  everything.  An  alien  who  had  come  for  his  own  advantage, 
yet  refused  the  national  customs,  would  be  scorned  at  least,  if  not  persecuted.  Life 
in  Moab  became  an  exile,  the  Bethlehemites  saw  that  hardship  in  their  own  land 
would  have  been  as  easy  to  endure  as  the  disdain  of  the  heathen  and  constant 
temptation  to  vile  conformity.     (E.  A.  Watson,  3I.A.) 

Ver.  3.  Elimelech,  Naomi's  husband  died. — The  death  of  Elimelech : — He  went 
first  from  Israel,  the  land  of  the  living,  and  led  them  thence,  and  so  he  now  goeth 
out  of  the  world  before  them.  I.  Death  is  the  end  of  all,  and  it  spaeeth  nonb 
(Josh,  xxiii.  14;  Job  xxi.  33  ;  Eccles.  vi.  6,  vii.  2 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  51 ;  Heb.  ix.  27).  11.  A 
rtJLL  SUPPLY  OF  BODILY  WANTS  CANNOT  PEEVENT  DEATH.  The  man  must  die  in  Moab, 
where  was  food  enough ;  the  rich  glutton  must  die  also,  and  the  rich  man  with  his 
barn  full.  III.  Where  men  think  to  presebve  life,  there  they  may  lose  it,  as 
Elimelech  doth  here,  fleeing  from  the  famine  in  Israel,  yet  died  where  plenty  was, 
in  Moab  ;  for  no  place  is  free  from  death,  and  when  the  time  appointed  is  come,  man 
cannot  pass  it  (Job  xiv.  6).  {R.  Bernard.)  Eli7nelech's  departure  and  death  :^ 
I.  The  cause  of  his  departure.  •'  There  was  a  famine  in  the  land."  Famine 
cometh  from  God.  It  was  threatened  in  the  Mosaic  law,  as  a  punishment  from 
Heaven  for  disobedience  and  sin  (Lev.  xxvi.  18-20).  See  how  many  arrows  Jehovah 
hath  in  His  quiver  1  In  how  many  ways  He  can  wither  our  comforts — blast  our 
enjoyments.  See  how  dependent  we  are  upon  Him.  If  famine  and  its  calamitous 
consequences  be  occasioned  by  sin,  let  us  be  thankful  to  God  that  they  are  not  inflicted 
upon  US.  We  cannot  deny  that  our  sins  are  great  and  numerous,  considering  the 
precious  advantages  we  enjoy.  Still  God  loadeth  us  daily  with  His  benefits.  "  He 
hath  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins,  nor  rewarded  us  according  to  our  iniquities." 
Let  us  learn  to  be  thankful.  Let  us  flee  to  the  Redeemer's  Cross  for  pardon,  on 
account  of  our  past  forgetfulness  of  God.  If  famine  and  its  accompanying  horrora 
were  experienced  so  frequently  in  the  land  of  promise,  we  may  gather  that  we  cannot 
be  free  from  adversities  in  any  station  or  in  any  portion  of  the  earth.  When  we 
are  encompassed  by  difficulties — when  we  are  ready  to  wish  that  we  were  in  the 
situation  of  some  of  our  neighbours,  did  we  but  know  how  bitter  the  ingredients 
which  the  hand  of  Providence  not  unfrequently  puts  into  their  cups,  we  should 
murmur  less  at  our  own  crosses,  and  endure  with  a  more  satisfied  mind  our  own 
tribulations.  Let  us  learn,  then,  to  be  satisfied  with  the  station  which  Providence  hag 
assigned  us,  and  seek  for  relief  under  the  trials  which  are  inseparable  from  it.  in  the 
holy  Word  of  God.  Religion  is  the  only  effectual  soother  of  human  woe.  It  does 
not,  indeed,  remove  miseries  from  those  who  are  under  its  hallowing  dominion,  but 
it  mixes  the  sweet  with  the  bitter,  so  as  to  render  the  burden  supportable.  By 
directing  the  eye  of  the  troubled  Christian  to  that  heavenly  Benefactor  who  waa 
suspended  for  him  on  the  Crosa,  and  thereby  opened  for  him  a  way  to  the  realms  of 
unending  blessedness,  it  deprives  the  trials  of  this  temporary  scene  of  much  of  their 
bitterness,  and  imparts  new  energy  to  the  sinking  soul.  Again,  if  the  sore  effecta 
ol  famine  were  felt  in  Canaan,  while  there  was  abundance  in  Moab — if  Israelitea 
aufiered  want,  when  Egyptians,  and  Philistines,  and  Moabites  suffered  it  not — the 
possession  of  many  earthly  comforts  is  no  evidence  of  spiritual  safety,  no  sure  sign 
of  Divine  favoor  and  love.    The  only  heaven  which  the  despisers  of  the  Saviour 


CHAP.  I.]  RUTH.  13 

shall  enjoy  lies  on  this  side  the  tomb;  therefore  they  often  receive  more  of  the 
blessings  of  Providence  than  the  heirs  of  glory.  11.  Whither  Elimelech  directed 
HIS  COURSE  when  he  departed  from  Canaan.  By  this  conduct  this  man  evinced  too 
great  a  regard  for  terrestrial  bliss,  and  too  little  for  that  which  is  heavenly.  He 
slighted  Divine  ordinances  and  the  privileges  of  the  Lord's  sanctuary.  The  grace 
of  God  has,  indeed,  enabled  His  servants  to  keep  their  garments  clean  in  the  midst 
of  the  greatest  pollutions,  as  Joseph  in  Egypt  and  Obadiah  in  the  household  of 
wicked  Ahab  ;  still  it  is  oftener  the  case,  under  such  circumstances,  that  the  Christian 
Buffers  more  of  evil  than  he  imparts  of  good.  "The  companion  of  fools  shaU  be 
destroyed."  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation."  If  intercourse  with  the  ungodly  be  so 
replete  with  danger,  let  us  carefully  avoid  it.  HI.  What  became  of  Elimelech  in 
HIS  NEW  dwelling-place?  "And  Elimelech  Naomi's  husband  died,  and  she  was 
left,  and  her  two  sons. "  We  are  not  informed  how  soon  he  died  ;  but  that  he  finished 
his  life  shortly  after  his  settlement  there  is  clear  from  his  death  happening  before 
that  of  his  two  sons,  who  lived  only  ten  years  after  their  arrival  in  Moab.  How 
short  the  period  he  escaped  from  the  pressure  of  famine  in  the  land  of  his  nativity ! 
And  if  he  had  greater  abundance  of  earthly  comforts  in  his  new  habitation,  how 
quickly  were  they  all  taken  from  him  1  If  he  had  remained  in  the  land  of  religious 
advantages,  he  would  not  have  had  to  sustain  adversities  and  hardships  there  long. 
Eather  than  resort  to  unlawful,  or  even  questionable,  measures,  to  get  rid  of  our 
troubles,  we  ought  to  implore  aid  from  heaven,  that  we  may  "  endure  "  the  "  chasten- 
ing "  of  the  Lord — that  we  may  bear  the  afflictions  which  His  providence  allots  to 
us  with  patience  and  humility — being  f  uUy  persuaded  that  our  heavenly  Parent  doeth 
all  things  well — and  likewise  with  earnest  supplications  for  the  accompanying 
influences  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  by  which  they  become  greatly  instrumental  in 
meetening  our  souls  for  the  habitations  of  the  blessed.  Learn  :  1.  That  adversities 
and  troubles  should  not  be  allowed  to  weigh  too  heavily  on  our  minds.  2.  That  we 
should  be  very  moderate  in  our  estimation  of,  and  desire  for,  earthly  blessings. 
(John  Hughes.)  Out  of  one  sorrow  into  another : — The  end  of  one  sorrow  is  the 
beginning  of  another,  like  the  drops  of  rain  distilling  from  the  top  of  a  house,  when 
one  is  gone  another  foUows ;  Uke  a  ship  upon  the  sea,  being  on  the  top  of  one  wave, 
is  presently  cast  down  to  the  foot  of  another ;  like  the  seed  which  being  spread 
by  the  sower  is  haunted  by  the  fowls,  being  green  and  past  their  reach  is 
endangered  by  frost  and  snow,  being  past  the  winter's  hurt,  by  beasts  in  summer, 
being  ripe  is  cut  with  the  sickle,  threshed  with  the  flail,  purged  in  the  floor,  ground 
in  the  mill,  baked  in  the  oven,  chewed  in  the  teeth,  and  consumed  in  the  stomach. 
This  made  David  say  (Psa.  xxxiv.  13).  But  be  not  discouraged,  for  through  many 
afflictions  must  we  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  by  affliction  we  are  made 
like  the  Son  of  God.  (E.  Topsell.)  She  was  left,  and  her  two  sons. — Comfort  in 
bereavement : — I.  That  albeit  death  is  due  to  all,  yet  it  seizeth  not  upon  all  at 
ONCE  ;  but  one  dieth  now  and  another  hereafter.  But  God  will  have  mankind  upon 
earth  tUl  the  last  day ;  He  forbeareth  some,  andreprieveth  them  for  their  amendment ; 
for  the  lengthening  of  life  is  for  our  further  repentance.  11.  That  the  Lord,  in  afflict- 
ing His  children,  sweeteneth  the  same  with  some  comforts.  He  wholly  leaveth 
not  them  without  some  taste  of  His  mercy  and  goodness,  as  we  may  see  in  His  dealing 
with  Naomi.  He  took  away  her  husband,  and  left  her  two  sons,  and  after  took  them 
away,  but  gave  her  an  excellent  daughter-in-law.  If  we  look  upon  the  affliction,  let 
us  also  consider  what  cause  of  comfort  we  have ;  mark  when,  for  what,  how  long  or 
short,  what  it  is  allayed  with,  that  we  be  not  wholly  cast  down.    {R.  Bernard.) 

Vet.  4.  They  took  them  wives  of  the  •women  of  Moab. — Sinful  marriagei : — The 
sin  of  these  young  men  in  marrying  strange  women  is  not  expressly  denounced  as  a 
sin  in  the  story,  although  it  is  denounced  in  the  Targum,  which  commences  verse 
4  thus :  "  They  transgressed  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,  and  took  foreign  wives 
from  among  the  daughters  of  Moab."  But  no  one  can  read  the  Old  Testament 
without  feeling  that  they  sinned  against  the  law,  for  to  the  Hebrews  marriage  was 
a  religious  covenant ;  and  St.  Paul  does  but  utter  an  admitted  and  familiar  truth 
when  he  asks,  "What  fellowship  has  light  with  darkness,  or  Belial  with  God?" 
The  reason  of  the  law  is  given  in  the  passage  just  cited  from  Deuteronomy — "  they 
wUl  turn  away  thy  children  from  Me,  and  they  will  serve  false  gods."  The 
daughters  of  Moab  were  specially  obnoxious  to  the  faithful  Israelites.  They  appear 
to  have  been  among  the  most  fascinating,  and  the  most  wanton  and  profligate, 
women  of  antiquity.  Their  gods — Chemosh,  Moloch,  Baal-peor — were  incarnations 
of  last  and  cruelty.    They  demanded  human  sacrifices.    Children  were  oast  into 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  t. 

their  burning  arms.    In  their  ritual  sensuality  was  accounted  piety.    True,  Mahlon 
and  Chilion  were  exceptionally  fortunate  in  their  wives.     They  were  not  turned  to 
the  service  of  false  gods,  though  there  was  grave  reason  to  fear  that  they  might  be ; 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  neither  did  they  turn  their  wives  to  the  service  of  the  only 
true  God.    It  was  not  till  after  her  husband's  death  that  Euth  learned  to  take 
shelter  under  the  wings  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  (chap.  ii.  12) ;  and  Orpah,  as  we 
are  expressly  told  (chap.  i.  15),  "  went  back  to  her  people  and  her  gods."     {S.  Cox, 
D.D.)        In  the  country  of  Moah  : — It  is  wonderful  how  soon  and  how  easily  one 
gets  used  to  a  change  of  circumstances  when  the  change  itself  is  brought  about 
gradually.     The  country  of   Moab,   into  which  Elimelech   and  his  family  had 
journeyed,   had   of   course   its   own  language,   its   own  fashions,   and   its  own 
rehgion  too,  and  these  were  as  dissimilar  as  possible  from  those  of  the  country 
which  they  had  just  now  left.     Yet  the  new-comers  were  in  no  serious  sense 
shocked  by  what  they  saw  and  heard — had  they  so  been  they  would  have  retraced 
their  steps  without  delay ;  but  each  day  brought  its  own  novelty,  and  they  managed 
to  accustom  themselves  to  the  new  things  of  to-day  before  it  became  necessary  to 
face  those  of  the  morrow.    Looking  calmly  at  our  fashion  of  living  and  way  of 
acting  now,  some  of  us  are  compelled  to  admit  how  much  we  have  changed  in 
recent  years ;  we  never  guessed  that  the  alteration  was  so  great  or  so  complete ;  we 
never  meant  to  have  come  so  far.    "Worst  of  all,  we  never  thought  we  should  have 
felt  the  change  so  little.    We  remember  well  the  qualms  of  conscience  by  which  we 
were  troubled  when  first  we  commenced  to  wander:  we  recollect  now  how  the 
protests  of  our  heart  became  fainter  and  fainter  day  by  day  until  they  ceased 
to  be  anything  more  than  a  hardly  audible  whisper.    "We  went  to  sojourn  in  the 
country  of  Moab:  we  came  into  the  country  of  Moab,  and  continued  there.    To 
begin  with,  our  intentions  were  purely  selfish,  as  selfish  as  were  those  of  Lot  when 
he  elected  to  pitch  his  tent  toward  Sodom.    "We  were  going  to  get  what  we  could 
out  of  Moab ;  they  who  lived  there  had  something  that  we  coveted,  and  we  deter- 
mined to  make  them  share  it  with  us.    And,  moreover,  we  had  no  serious  intention 
of  giving  Moab  anything  in  return.    It  is,  indeed,  just  possible  that  at  one  time  we 
may  have  possessed  the  Quixotic  idea  of  remodelling  life  in  Moab  to  suit  our  own 
ideas,  but  If  so  we  soon  abandoned  the  idea ;  for  on  the  one  hand  we  found  that 
Moab  was  not  willing  to  be  remodelled — indeed,  when  we  faintly  suggested  some- 
thing of  the  kind,  they  said  to  us,  as  Sodom  had  said  to  Lot,  and  with  not  a  little 
point,  "  Stand  back ;  this  one  came  in  to  sojourn,  and  he  will  needs  be  a  judge  " ; 
and  on  the  other  hand,  our  own  opinions  were  neither  sufficiently  clear  in  our  own 
minds  nor  dear  to  our  own  hearts  to  enable  us  to  graft  them  upon  others.    We  were 
somewhat  surprised,  it  may  be,  and  a  Uttle  pained,  at  the  way  in  which  our  new 
neighbours  received  our  well-meant  attempts,  in  the  early  days  of  our  life  in  Moab, 
to  bring  before  them  the  advantages  of  a  Ufe  of  obedience  and  surrender  to  God. 
"  If  Bethlehem  was  such  a  charming  place,  and  the  Ufe  there  so  delightful,  why  did 
you  exchange  it  for  our  country  ?  "  they  not  unnaturally  inquired ;  "if  Bethlehem  did 
not  satisfy  you,  how  can  you  suppose  that  it  will  satisfy  us  ?  "    Nor  may  we  forget 
that  in  leaving  the  land  of  promise  the  wanderer  never  intends  to  be  absent  for 
other  than  a  short  period.    If,  on  parting  from  our  true  home,  any  one  had  sug- 
gested that  we  should  have  been  found  in  Moab  to-day,  we  should  have  denied  the 
imputation  with  indignation.    Yet  here  we  are  still ;  and  here  in  His  great  mercy 
the  Good  Shepherd  has  found  us,  and  hence  He  desires  to  carry  us  home  again — to 
our  home  and  His.    So  they  came  into  the  country  of  Moab,  and  appear  to  have 
been  received  there  with  courtesy  and  hospitality.     The  world  is  always  glad  when 
those  who  have  been  making  a  somewhat  definite  profession  of  devotion  to  God 
show  signs  of  a  desire  to  relax  the  strictness  of  their  behaviour ;  it  is  always  willing 
to  meet  such  persons  more  than  half-way,  and  to  do  its  best  to  enable  them  to  quiet 
the  still  struggling  conscience  with  as  little  delay  as  possible.    If  the  world  would 
only  persecute  us  when  it  finds  us  on  its  own  ground,  there  would  be  some  hope 
that  our  stay  in  Moab  would  prove  short  indeed.    Not  that  the  world  is  any  more 
prompted  by  unselfishness  in  its  reception  of  us  than  were  we  ourselves  in  our 
journey  to  Moab;  our  new  friends  rejoice  that,  by  our  change  of  front,  another 
protest  against  their  way  of  life  has  died  a  natural  death,  and  they  are  only  too  glad 
to  be  present  and  assist  at  its  obsequies ;  they  are,  moreover,  clear-sighted  enough 
to  see  without  being  told  that  our  surrender  is  a  tacit  victory  for  the  world  and 
indiUerentism,  and  pro  tanto  a  defeat  for  the  gospel  and  a  discredit  to  the  life  of 
faith  in  Christ.     {H.  A.  Hall,  B.D.)        Alternation  of  shadow  and  sunshine  in 
life: — ^And  thus  tne  world  moves  on — deaths    and    marriages,  marriages    and 


CHAP.  I.]  nVTH.  15 

deaths.  The  household  which  to-day  mourns  as  though  all  joy  had  taken 
flight  for  ever  to-morrow  resounds  with  the  laughter  of  many  voices  at  a  new- 
born happiness.  The  faces  all  tear-stained  yesterday  are  bright  with  smiles  to-day. 
The  bell  which  slowly  tolled  the  funeral  knell  an  hour  ago  now  rings  out  the 
joyous  wedding  chime.  So  it  must  be,  so  it  ought  to  be.  Probably  lite  would  lose 
half  its  beauty  but  for  this  alternation  of  shadow  and  sunshine ;  at  least,  this  we 
know,  that  human  hearts  need  both  the  darkness  and  the  light,  or  they  wlU  not 
grow  to  that  perfection  of  truth  and  purity  which  God  has  designed  they  shall 
attain.  Elimelech  died,  the  sons  married.  It  is  a  simple  statement,  yet  a  whole 
world  of  change  is  involved  in  it  for  that  small  household.     {W.  Braden.) 

Ver.  5.  MaMon  and  Chilion  died  also  both  of  them. — Bereavement  a  blessing : — 
What  a  melancholy  collapse  it  aU  had  been  1  For  those  so  dear  to  her,  death ;  for 
herself,  sohtude — the  woman  was  left  of  her  two  sons  and  her  husband.  And  yet 
what  a  marvellous  blessing  bereavement  not  only  may  be  but  often  is.  Surrounded 
by  those  who  make  up  to  us  our  world,  we  are  slow  to  raise  our  eyes  above  or 
beyond  them,  or  to  realise  that  we  have  any  need  which  they  are  incapable  of 
supplying ;  but  when  they  are  taken  from  us,  these  beloved  ones  upon  whom  alone 
■we  have  leaned  and  to  whom  alone  we  have  been  in  the  habit  of  looking  for 
strength  and  consolation  and  advice,  then  it  sometimes  is  that  the  soul  looka 
up  as  she  hears  the  Master  calling  her  by  name,  and  through  her  tears  recognises 
for  the  first  time  the  patient  Lord  who  has  ever  been  her  truest  friend.  God 
would  not  have  us  love  our  dear  ones  one  whit  the  less,  but  He  would  have  us  learn 
to  put  Him  first  and  to  trust  Him  implicitly  about  them  no  less  than  about  our- 
Belves.  (H.  A.  Hall,  B.D.)  Enormous  trials: — Observe — 1.  That  many  afflic- 
tions do  attend  the  most  gracious  souls  (Psa.  xxxiv.  19).  2.  Crosses  seldom  come 
single  upon  God's  servants.  3.  God  did  wonderfully  support  her  in  aU  these  her 
great  trials,  and  left  her  upon  Scripture  record  as  a  pattern  of  patience  unto  all  suc- 
ceeding generations.     (C.  Ness.) 

Ver.  6.  She  arose  .  .  .  that  she  migM  return. — Homeward  longings : — Observe 
— 1.  God's  house  of  worldly  correction  is  to  God's  people  a  school  of  heavenly 
instruction.  Naomi's  crosses  and  losses  she  met  with  in  Moab  made  her  soul 
to  sit  loose  from  that  cursed  country,  and  to  long  for  Canaan — that  blessed  land  of 
promise.  God's  rod  hath  a  voice  (Mic.  vi.  9),  and  now  Naomi's  ear  was  open  to 
hear  the  instruction  of  it  (Job  xxxvi.  8-10;  Mic.  ii.  10).  It  is  a  rich  mercy  when 
afiiiction  brings  us  from  worse  to  better,  from  Moab  to  Canaan,  further  off  from  sin  and 
nearer  to  God.  2.  Godly  souls  should  lead  convincing  lives.  Such  and  so  amiable 
was  the  conversation  of  godly  Naomi  in  the  eyes  of  those  two  daughters  of  Moab 
that  it  convinced  them  both — to  love  her  and  her  people,  and  to  go  along  with  her 
out  of  their  own  native  country  unto  her  land.  Plato  saith,  "If  moral  virtue  could 
be  beheld  with  mortal  eyes,  it  would  attract  aU  hearts  to  be  enamoured  with  it."  How 
much  more,  then,  would  theological  virtue  or  supernatural  grace  do  so?  3.  Every 
heart  should  hanker  heavenward,  as  Naomi  did  homeward  from  Moab  to  Canaan. 
(Ibid.)        A  woman  of  character: — I.  She  eetatned  heb  eeligion — hee  AiiLEoi- 

ANCE   TO   THE  ONE   TBUE   AND  LIVING    GoD— IN   THE   MIDST  OF   SURROUNDING   IDOLATET. 

II.  She  believed  in  God  even  in  the  midst  of  adveesitt.  III.  She  exeecised  an 
INFLUENCE  FOE  GOOD  ON  OTHEES.  1.  On  thosc  who  had  known  her  intimately — her 
own  household.  2.  On  those  who  had  known  her  long — long  enough  to  fiid  out 
her  true  character.  3.  On  those  who,  according  to  aU  experience,  are  least  easily 
influenced  by  one  in  her  position — on  her  daughters-in-law.  IV.  She  could  dent 
HEESELF  FOE  THE  GOOD  OF  OTHEES.  1.  It  would  havo  been  an  advantage  to  her  to 
have  these  two  strong,  active  young  women  with  her  to  work  for  her  in  her  old  age. 
But  a  settlement  would  be  easier  for  them  in  their  own  land  than  in  Judah.  So 
she  bade  them  return,  and  was  willing  to  go  home  alone.  2.  She  rose,  too,  above 
that  petty  jealousy  which  might  have  been  excused  in  one  so  circumstanced,  and 
wished  them  that  provision  which  was  the  best  security  for  rest  and  honour  for  a 
woman :  "  rest  each  of  them  in  the  house  of  her  husband."  Naomi's  religion  was 
no  mere  surface  thing.  It  had  become  a  part  of  herself.  It  had  informed  her 
character.  It  saved  her  from  the  corruptions  of  idolatry,  from  despair,  and  it  enabled 
her  to  exercise  a  beneficent  power  over  those  who  knew  her  best.  What  imperfect 
religion  could  do  for  her  the  sublime  faith  of  Christ  can  do  for  all.  (Joseph  Ogle.) 
The  awakening : — To  trace  the  course  of  the  wanderer  away  from  God  is  sad  and 
painful.    The  result  of  misery  and  regret  is  always  the  same ;  whether  he  ever  return 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

to  God  or  not  his  sorrow  over  the  remembrance  of  his  wandering  will  be  equally 
Bure.    We  must  never  hesitate,  therefore,  in  proclaiming  to  aU  the  wanderers  from 
God,  "  You  will  find  no  rest  in  Moab."    But  I  am  not  now  to  trace  this  course  of  sin 
to  its  dreadful  result.     There  is  for  some  a  day  of  awakening  in  the  present  life. 
And,  painful  as  this  day  may  be,  it  is  stUl  a  happy  day.    It  is  the  beginning  of  a 
new  life,  a  happy  life,  a  life  of  glory.   It  is  the  dawning  of  a  light  which  is  prepared 
as  the  morning.  It  is  the  blessed  visitation  of  the  grace  and  goodness  of  God  to  the 
lost  and  guilty.     We  must  never  forget  that  this  awakening  of  the  soul  is  the  work 
of  God.    Idolatry  and  enmity  to  God  reign  throughout  the  land  of  Moab.    There 
Naomi  dwells.    There,  if  God  permitted,  Naomi  would  die.    There,  if  God  did  not 
arrest  and  arouse  him,  the  sinner  would  perish.     To  leave  him  in  prosperity  in  this 
condition  is  to  leave  him  to  hopeless  destruction.     God  speaks  unto  him  in  his 
prosperity,  and  he  says,  "I  will  not  hear."  This  is  his  manner  from  his  youth.  Then 
God  sends  awakening  providences.    Afflictions  and  losses  are  multiplied.    The 
nest  is  broken  up.    The  soul  is  made  sorrowful.    Thus  it  was  with  Naomi.    Her 
husband  died.     Her  two  sons  are  taken  away.     How  many  of  His  children  have 
been  saved  by  the  bitter  remedy  of  affliction,  and  have  thus  been  taught  to  blesa 
the  chasteniugs  of  the  Lord  !    But  why  should  you  make  affliction  necessary  to 
your  soul's  salvation  ?    Let  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  lead  you  to  repentance.    Let 
His  love  awaken  your  gratitude.    But  whether  affliction  or  joy  be  made  the  instru- 
ment to  awaken  the  soul,  it  is  equally  a  Divine  instrument.    Welcome  it,  do  not 
resist  it,  but  cultivate  it  as  a  priceless  gift.    Now  God  means  to  bless  you  indeed. 
Listen  to  His  voice  with  gladness.     In  this  day  of  awakening,  Naomi  found  that 
she  had  gained  nothing  by  her  wandering  from  God.     There  had  been  a  famine  in 
Judah.    But  ah,  she  had  found  a  far  worse  famine  in  Moab.     There  every  comfort 
had  failed  and  every  hope  had  departed.    In  no  single  point  was  her  condition 
improved  by  her  flight  from  Israel.    But  was  this  peculiar  to  her  ?    Can  you  ever 
gain  in  such  a  course  ?    Are  you  ever  the  happier  for  transgression,  or  made  the 
more  contented  by  forgetting  your  Creator  ?  Far  enough  from  all  this  is  your  actual 
experience.    Your  awakened  mind  looks  back  upon  life,  to  say,  with  distress,  "  I 
have  sinned,  and  what  hath  it  profited  me  ?  "    There  is  not  a  single  real  pleasure, 
or  joy,  or  gain  in  life,  of  which  any  man  can  truly  say,  "This,  at  least,  is  the 
reward  of  my  sin."    Even  if  you  never  truly  repent,  your  retrospect  of  life  will  be 
just  as  unsatisfying  and  destitute  of  comfort  to  your  soul.    You  will  despise  all  that 
you  have  gained.    You  will  despise  yourself  for  pursuing  vanities  so  madly.    And 
nothing  will  remain  to  you  as  the  result  but  the  most  overwhelming  despair. 
How  much  you  have  lost !    You  have  thrown  away  the  favour  of  God.    You  have 
sacrificed  your  peace  of  conscience.    You  have  lost  your  early  readiness  to  receive 
religious  impressions.  But  good  news  from  the  Lord's  land  comes  to  this  awakened 
wanderer.     "  Naomi  heard  in  the  country  of  Moab  how  that  the  Lord  had  visited 
His  people  in  giving  them  bread."   What  precious  intelligence  does  the  gospel  bring 
to  the  guilty  I    It  declares  the  pardoning  love  of  God.    It  proclaims  complete  atone- 
ment in  the  blood  of  Jesus.    It  announces  fuU  salvation  in  His  merits  and  death. 
It  e^ibits  God  reconciled  to  those  who  have  rebelled  against  Him.     The  message 
comes  to  you.    Eeceive  it.    Eejoice  in  it.    It  is  a  message  from  God  to  each  of  you. 
Then  the  awakened  wanderer  sets  out  at  once  on  a  return.   Naomi  "  arose,  that  she 
might  return  from  the  country  of  Moab  ;  wherefore  she  went  forth  out  of  the  place 
where  she  was,  on  the  way  to  return  into  the  land  of  Judah."    Yes — the  very  first 
thing,  when  your  mind  is  awakened,  and  you  see  and  feel  your  guilt,  is  to  go  back. 
Many  think  they  must  first  feel  much,   and  mourn  much,   and  suffer  much, 
before  they  can  hope  to  go  back  in  peace  to  God.    But  why  ?    Will  your  suffering 
save  you?    Will  your  multiplied  tears  add  anything  to  a  Saviour's  worth?    Is 
your  dwelling  on  fire  ?    And  must  you  wait  until  you  are  scorched  with  the  flames 
before  you  can  escape  in  safety  ?    Have  you  mistaken  your  road  in  journeying  ? 
And  can  you  recover  your  lost  steps  the  better  by  delay  or  hesitation  or  fruitless 
grief  ?    Nay.    You  want  all  the  time  for  actual  pursuit.    You  have  none  to  waste. 
Turn  I  turn  I  fly  1  fly  1    'Tis  madness  to  defer.    Naomi  goes  to  no  other  part  of 
Moab,  to  no  other  land  of  idolatry.     She  goes  directly  back  to  the  land  of  Judah. 
This  is  a  blessed  example.    How  many  go  from  one  broken  cistern  to  another  1 
But  all  these  efforts  are  vain.    Edom  or  Babylon  are  no  better  than  Moab.    No. 
You  must  fly  to  Bethlehem  at  once.    Now  is  the  accepted  time.     This  is  the  day  of 
your  salvation.    (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)        How  that  the  Lord  had  visited  His  people 
In  giving  them  bread. — God^s  dealings  with  His  people : — I.  God  seeth  His  peoplb  ni 
ADvaasin  amd  w/lst,  and  combxh  ih  His  dub  time  io  hblp  theu  (Exod.  iiL  7,  8), 


CHAP,  I.]  RUTH.  17 

which  is  from  His  mere  mercy  and  the  stability  of  His  love  and  promise  to  His 
people.  II.  God  hath  ever  had  moee  specially  a  people  of  His  own  called  "  His 
PEOPLE."  This  should  make  us  to  examine  ourselves  how  we  be  God's  people, 
whether  according  to  creation  or  after  the  work  of  regeneration.   IH.  Corporal  food 

AND  THE  NECESSARIES  OF  THIS  LIFE  ARE  God'S   GIFT  (LeV.  XXvl.  4,  5  ;  Deut.  xi.  14,  15  ; 

Hos.  ii.  8,  9  ;  Joel  ii.  19).     {R.  Bernard.)        Good  news  from  the  far  country  : — 

1.  God  will  certainlt  revive  His  people  with  some  good  news  from  heaven  when 

THEIR   hearts   are    ALMOST   DEAD    WITHIN   THEM    UPON   EARTH    (PrOV.  XXV.  25).      This 

cheered  up  her  drooping  spirit,  that  was  almost  dead  within  her  by  her  manifold 
afflictions.  This  is  one  of  God's  methods,  first  to  kill  and  then  to  make  alive 
(1  Sam.  ii.  6 ;  Psa.  xvi.  10,  xviii.  16,  xc.  3) ;  the  good  news  God  sent  concerning  the 
weal  of  Zion  to  His  people  as  they  sat  weeping  by  the  waters  of  Babylon 
(Paa.  cxxxvii.  1,  2)  was  a  little  reviving  to  them  in  their  bondage  (Ezra  ix.  8) ;  and 
when  His  people  were  humbled  He  then  granted  them  some  deliverance  (2  Chron. 
xii.  7).  Heaven  is  caUed  a  far  country  (Matt.  xxv.  14) ;  good  news  from  thence  brought 
in  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Oh,  how  welcome  should  that  be  to  us  and  how  unspeakably 
comfortable !  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  U.  God  hath  His  visiting  times  and  seasons  in  relation 
TO  His  own  people.  1.  Sometimes  God  visits  their  sins  (Jet.  xiv.  10),  and  then  He 
fulfils  His  word  of  threatening  evil  against  them.  This  is  called  God's  visiting  in 
His  anger  (Job  xxxv.  15),  but  He  retains  not  His  anger  for  ever  (Psa.  Ivii.  11). 

2.  He  sometimes  also  visits  in  mercy  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  16).  This  is  that  visit  which 
David  begs,  "  Oh  visit  me  with  Thy  salvation  "  (Psa.  cvi.  4).  HI.  Grace  and  Boxrarr 
follow  want  and  penury  through  Divine  goodness  to  His  people.  After  a  long 
scarcity  (of  ten  years)  God  visits  them  with  plenty.  This  holds  true  both  in  the 
temporal  and  spiritual  famine  (Amos  viii.  11).  (C  Ness.)  NaomVs  undying 
faith  and  loyalty  to  IsraeVs  God : — During  all  those  ten  years  of  absence,  Naomi 
had  maintained  in  undiminished  strength  her  attachment  to  the  service  and  worship 
of  the  true  God.  "  Among  innumerable  incorrupt  she  stood,"  like  Abdiel  in  the 
midst  of  fallen  angels,  or  like  Noah  in  the  midst  of  a  revolted  world.  There  must 
have  been  root  and  reality  about  her  religion  to  make  it  thus  evergreen  and 
perennial.  So  have  we  sometimes  seen  in  the  Arabian  desert  a  solitary  palm  fed 
by  a  fountain,  and  glassing  its  beauty  and  abundance  in  that  from  which  it  derived 
all  its  verdure  and  life.  How  many  persons  are  there  whose  religion  could  not 
endure  the  test  of  an  ordeal  a  hundred  times  less  severe  than  this  1  It  is  a  thing  of 
mere  outward  imitation  and  reflection.  Withdraw  them  from  the  midst  of  favouring 
external  influences,  and  their  superficial  piety  will  speedily  vanish  away  like  the 
jnorning  dew.  Like  the  vase  that  has  been  electrotyped  so  as  to  resemble  sUver,  a 
little  tear  and  wear  brings  into  view  the  inferior  metal  which  forms  its  real  material. 
Carey  used  to  complain  bitterly,  in  his  days,  that  the  Christianity  of  many  who 
came  out  of  England  to  India  did  not  survive  a  sea  voyage.  It  was  aU  gone  before 
they  had  "  doubled  the  Cape."  In  like  manner,  the  Sabbath-keeping  and  the 
church-attendance  of  multitudes  have  undergone  sad  decadence  during  a  few 
months  of  residence  in  Berlin  or  Paris.  And  yet  the  degree  in  which  our  secret 
devotion  and  our  Christian  habits  can  live  and  flourish  in  the  midst  of  unfriendly 
influences  and  when  dependent  on  inward  support  alone,  is  the  true  test  of  the 
reality  and  strength  of  our  religion.  Naomi  had  nobly  stood  this  test,  and  had 
thus  proved  herself  to  be  "  an  Israehte  indeed."    {A.  Thomson,  B.D.) 

Ver.  7.  Her  two  daughters-in-law  with  her. — The  promising  commencement : — 
Here  we  have  the  most  happy  and  promising  commencement  of  a  new  work. 
We  see  them  all  set  out  together  upon  the  same  road  and  apparently  for  the  same 
result.  No  one  who  saw  them  set  out  upon  their  journey  could  anticipate  that  they 
would  voluntarily  separate,  or  imagine  that  one  was  more  likely  than  the  other  to 
reach  the  end  proposed.  We  are  obliged  to  wait  until  succeeding  trials  shall  bring 
their  real  characters  individually  to  light  before  we  can  discriminate  between  them. 
By  a  great  variety  of  means  God  stirs  up  sinful  men  to  seek  after  Himself. 
Anxious,  excited,  apparently  earnest  and  sincere,  they  set  out  upon  their  journey 
back  to  the  gracious  Being  whom  they  have  so  long  neglected.  Yes ;  they  reaUy 
set  out,  and  appear  to  set  out  sincerely.  I  do  not  mean  that  such  persons  feel  their 
need  and  danger  :  that  they  meditate  sincerely  upon  their  return  to  God  ;  that  they 
resolve  they  will  go  back.  No.  I  mean  that  they  actually  begin  their  journey. 
The  prodigal  not  only  says,  '•  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father  " ;  he  does  arise  and  go. 
The  wise  and  fooUsh  virgins  both  take  their  lamps  and  go  forth  to  meet  the  bride- 
groom.   Thus  all  go  together  "  on  the  way  to  return  into  the  land  of  Judah."    Aa 

88 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

far  as  this  journey  lies  still  within  the  limits  of  Moab,  so  far  they  may  unite  to  go. 
Up  to  a  certain  point  they  must  take  the  same  path  and  travel  in  the  same  direc- 
tion. Ah,  how  many  of  these  young  travellers  have  I  seen !  The  Church  delighted 
over  them.  Christian  friends  were  encouraged  by  them.  The  brightest  and  most 
blessed  hopes  clustered  around  them.  The  Lord  only,  who  knoweth  the  hearts  of 
the  children  of  men,  could  have  told  us  which  were  the  Orpahs  and  which  were  the 
Euths  of  this  hopeful  company.  His  judgment  at  the  last  separates  the  precious 
from  the  vile,  divides  the  gold  from  the  dross,  and  assigns  to  each  his  own  place. 
But  we  must  follow  our  travellers  in  their  journey,  and  see  why  and  where  they 
separate.  As  we  thus  follow  them  we  see  them  meet  with  many  trials  of  faith  and 
patience  on  the  road.  Your  former  habits  of  sin  are  to  be  renounced.  But,  in 
addition  to  these,  new  habits  of  conduct  and  feeling  are  to  be  acquired.  The  habit 
of  secret  prayer  in  your  closet  and  chamber ;  the  habit  of  constant,  earnest  study  of 
the  Word  of  God;  the  habit  of  watchfulness  over  your  easily-besetting  sins;  the 
habit  of  caution  in  your  allowed  indulgences ;  the  habit  of  consideration  and  dis- 
cernment in  your  relations  and  company ;  the  habit  of  resistance  to  your  inward 
propensities  to  evil ;  and,  above  all,  the  habit  of  constant  remembrance  of  God 
your  Saviour,  and  of  simple,  earnest  faith  in  His  presence,  protection,  and  help ;  all 
these,  if  I  should  mention  no  more,  are  to  be  acquired,  cultivated,  and  maintained. 
If  all  this  could  be  done  by  single  effort,  it  would  be  easy  work.  But  that  la 
impossible.  It  is  a  journey  of  successive  steps,  of  continued  progress ;  and  you 
have  to  press  forward  in  it  with  the  utmost  determination  and  the  most  sincei'e 
desire.  But  above  all  these  habits  of  outward  life,  you  have  to  come  with  the  deep 
sense  of  sin,  with  a  consciousnesi  that  you  are  condemned  and  destitute,  with  an 
entire  refusal  to  trust  in  any  virtue  or  excellence  of  your  own,  and  to  cast  yourself 
in  an  affectionate  and  simple  trust  at  your  Saviour's  feet.  When  you  come  to  serve 
the  Lord,  you  must  prepare  your  soul  for  temptation.  From  the  day  you  set  out  on 
your  heavenly  journey  discouragements  and  difficulties  will  seem  to  multiply  around 
you.  The  world  wiU  be  arrayed  against  you.  The  habits,  opinions,  and  plans  of 
worldly  people  are  constant  obstacles  in  your  way.  The  professed  Christians  around 
you  are  often  fearful  obstacles  in  the  way.  You  see  those  who  profess  to  follow 
Christ  in  many  instances  living  just  as  gaily,  as  extravagantly,  as  indulgently,  often 
as  sinfully,  as  if  they  had  made  no  such  profession.  Your  own  inward  heart  and 
feelings  will  often  be  very  discouraging  to  you.  There  is  such  backwardness  in 
prayer ;  such  want  of  deep  interest  in  the  Word  and  service  of  God ;  so  little 
sensible  enjoyment  often  in  your  new  path  ;  such  a  necessity  for  constant  warfare 
and  constant  watchfulness  within  yourself.  If  you  relax  a  moment,  you  fall.  Ah, 
these  are  great  discouragements,  great  trials  to  your  faith  and  patience.  Nothing 
can  endure  through  them  but  a  heart  that  really  loves  Jesus  more  than  all  the 
world,  and  a  spirit  that  willingly  sacrifices  itself  for  His  service  and  glory.  If  this 
is  your  heart  and  spirit,  then  all  these  discouragements  are  instruments  of  new 
strength.  Orpah  may  feel  dispirited  and  weary.  Buth  only  loves  the  more,  the 
more  she  is  tried.  To  Orpah  the  way  grows  more  unattractive  and  tedious  as  she 
goes  on.  To  Euth  every  step  brings  new  determination  and  new  desire  to  press  on 
even  to  the  end.     (S.  E.  Tyng,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  The  Lord  deal  kindly  with  you. — NaomVs  prayer  for  her  daughtere-in-law: 

j_  That  it  is  a  duty  to  peai  for  those  which  do  either  us  or  ours  good. 

n.  That  at  parting  friends  are  to  pray  one  for  another,  as  we  may  see  the 
practice  of  it  in  Isaac  (Gen.  xxviii.  1,  3) ;  Laban  (Gen.  xxxi.  55) ;  Jacob  (Gen. 
xliii.  14) ;  and  in  Paul  (Acts  xx,  36).  III.  Th.^.t  the  godly  are  persuaded  that 
the  Lord  is  a  merciful  eewarder  of  the  duties  of  love  which  one  doth 
towards  another  (Col.  iii.  24).  IV.  That  children  should  so  well  deserve 
OF  parents,  yea,  though  but  parents-in-law,  as  they  may  be  moved  heartily 
to  pray  for  them,  as  Naomi  doth  in  this  place.  A  good  carriage^  is  a  duty 
towards  all,  then  much  more  to  parents ;  and  the  prayers  of  parents  is  a  means 
to  put  a  blessing  npon  their  children.    V.  That  God  will  not  only  barely 

REWARD,    BUT     SO     DEAL     WITH    US     AS     WB     DEAL     WITH     OTHERS.    _     (R.      Bernard.) 

The  benedictions  of  life : — The  key-note  of  all  I  have  to  say  is  in  that  word 
"  kindly."  The  argument  is  this.  We  can  understand  kindness  in  the  sphere  of 
the  human,  and  rise  from  that  to  a  prayer  for  the  Divine  kindness.  No  society  in 
any  age  can  be  cemented  together  by  force  alone.  Feudalism,  for  instance,  in 
olden  times,  was  not  all  terror.  The  baron  could  command  his  dependents  in  time 
of  war,  as  he  fed  and  housed  and  clothed  them  in  times  of  peace ;  but,  as  the  old 


CHAP.  I.]  BUTE.  19 

chroniclers  tell  us,  there  was  often  a  rare  hospitality,  a  hearty  cheerfulness,  a 
chivalrous  affection  in  the  somewhat  stern  relationship.  I.  The  Loed  knows  best 
WHAT  KINDNESS  IS.  The  Loid  deal  kindly  with  you.  Has  He  been  kind  ?  At  times 
we  should  have  been  tempted  to  answer,  No !  The  vine  is  blighted,  the  fig-tree 
withered,  the  locusts  have  spoiled  the  green  of  spring.  Kindly  ?  Yes,  we  shall 
answer  one  time  when  we  stand  in  our  lot  at  the  end  of  days.  For  kindness  is 
not  indulgence.  God's  kindness  to  us  may  take  forms  which  surprise  us.  At  the 
heart  of  His  severest  judgments  there  is  mercy,  in  the  bitter  spring  there  is  healing 
water.  The  kindest  things  God  has  ever  done  for  us  have  been,  perhaps,  the 
strangest  and  severest.  So  it  was  with  Daniel  and  Jacob  and  Joseph  and  Abraham, 
our  father.  All  God's  ways  are  done  in  truth,  and  truth  is  always  kindness. 
II.  The  Lobd  knows  best  what  othebs  have  been  to  us.  "  As  you  have  dealt  with 
the  dead  and  me."  It  is  a  touching  little  sentence.  The  dead.  So  silent  now. 
Never  to  come  back,  for  us  to  touch  imperfectness  into  riper  good.  Gone  !  What 
a  word  of  vacancy,  and  silence,  and  subtle  mystery  1  Is  it  strange  we  should  wish 
well  to  those  who  were  kind  to  the  dead  ?  And  Naomi  hnks  her  own  being  with 
them  still:  "The  dead  and  me."  And  with  true  hearts  they  never  can  be  dis- 
sociated. Anniversaries  of  remembrance  make  our  separations  no  more  distant. 
They  soften  them.  They  give  place  for  comforting  remembrances :  but  the  dead 
are  near  as  ever.  "The  dead  and  me!"  Who  shaU  separate?  None.  Christ 
died,  yea,  rather  is  risen  again,  and  He  wiU  raise  us  up  together  to  the  heavenly 
places,  ni.  The  Lord  alone  will  be  with  us  all  theough  oue  future  pilgrim- 
age. Apart  from  Divine  power,  which  we  have  not  to  bless  with,  there  is  Divine 
presence  which  we  aU  need.  Christ  will  be  with  us  to  the  end.  Never  wiU  come  a 
battle,  a  temi)tation,  a  solitude,  a  sorrow,  a  needful  sacrifice,  but  the  LordwiU  be  at 
hand.  IV.  The  Lord  has  given  us  guarantees  of  His  kindness.  We  are  not  left 
to  meditate  on  rain  and  fruitful  seasons  only.  Not  the  green  of  spring,  nor  the 
south  wind  of  summer,  nor  the  gold  of  autumn  alone  proclaim  His  goodness. 
(TF.  M.  Statham.)  As  ye  have  dealt  with  the  dead,  and  with  me. — Kindness  to 
the  departed : — Let  us  inquire  how  many  things  a  dying  godly  man  leaves  behind 
him  in  this  world.  His  soul  is  sent  before  him  (Eev.  xiv.  13).  He  leaveth  behind 
him — I.  His  body,  to  which  we  must  be  kind,  by  burial  and  lamentation.  II.  His 
estate,  to  which  we  must  be  kind,  by  careful  and  faithful  administration.  III.  His 
children,  friends,  or  kindred,  to  whom  we  must  be  kind,  by  love  and  affection. 
rV.  His  faults  and  failings,  to  which  we  must  be  kind,  by  silence  and  suppression. 
V.  His  MEMORY  and  virtues,  to  which  we  must  be  kind,  by  congratulation,  com- 
memoration, and  imitation.  (T.  Fuller,  B.D.)  Behaviour  in  the  light  of  death  : 
— You  know  not,  husbands  and  wives,  how  long  you  may  dwell  together.  Death 
may  soon  come,  and  will  doubtless,  sooner  or  later,  come  and  tear  away  the  one  of 
you  from  the  other.  When  that  event  shall  take  place,  how  wiU  you  wish  to  have 
behaved  ?  Behave  at  present  as  you  would  then  wish  to  have  behaved,  for  then 
you  wiU  not  be  able  to  bring  back  the  present  time.  Many  great  miracles  have 
been  wrought  by  the  power  of  God,  but  it  never  did,  nor  ever  will,  recall  the  time 
that  is  past.  How  comfortable  was  it  to  Orpah  and  Euth  to  hear  Naomi  say,  "  Ye 
have  dealt  kindly  with  the  dead  !  "  And  how  comfortable  was  the  reflection  to  them 
through  life  that  she  had  reason  to  give  them  this  commendation  I  {G.  Lawson.) 
Showing  kindness  to  the  dead  : — It  was  much  to  be  able  to  say  this,  when  we  con- 
sider how  difficult  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  law-relationship  often  is,  and  how 
apt  it  is  to  be  judged  with  suspicion  and  severity  even  when  it  is  well  done.  The 
fact  has  been  noticed  long  ago  in  the  pages  of  many  a  Greek  and  Koman  satirist. 
But  Naomi  was  not  aware,  when  she  spoke  this  generous  tribute,  how  very  much 
their  conduct  had  been  the  result  of  her  own.  She  had  won  the  confidence  and 
veneration  of  their  young  hearts  by  her  unselfishness,  her  forbearance,  her  charitable 
judgments,  her  holy  consistency,  and  her  discretion.  We  often  make  for  ourselves 
the  beds  we  are  to  he  upon,  and  we  may  be  certain  that  there  would  be  more  Ruths 
in  the  world  if  there  were  more  Naomis.  But  how  blessed  when  it  can  thus  be  said 
of  us,  that  "we  have  dealt  kindly  with  the  dead"!  We  should  make  it  our 
habitual  and  earnest  aim  so  to  behave  ourselves  towards  our  kindred  that,  should 
we  be  called  to  stand  beside  their  open  graves,  this  would  be  the  testimony  of  others 
and  of  our  own  consciences.  But  we  must  not  forget  that  there  is  an  important 
sense  in  which  we  may  prove  our  undying  love  for  the  dead  by  our  kindness  to  the 
living.  Those  two  young  widows  expressed  their  affection  for  their  departed 
husbands  by  their  thoughtful  attentions  to  Naomi.  They  loved  her  for  her  own 
Bake,  but  they  loved  her  doubly  for  their  sakes.    Eeligion,  indeed,  warrants  us  to 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

think  of  our  friends  beyond  the  grave  as  still  living,  though  absent.  David's  nobly 
generous  spirit  rejoiced  that  he  could  still  reach  his  departed  Jonathan  in  lavishing 
respect  and  kindness  upon  Jonathan's  only  surviving  son,  Mephibosheth.  And  this 
sentiment  reaches  its  highest  possible  point  of  subUmity,  and  becomes,  as  it  were, 
transfigured,  when  we  show  kindness  to  another  because  he  belongs  to  Christ.  In 
this  way  we  can  still  reach  Him  in  His  members,  and  anoint  His  blessed  feet  with 
our  precious  ointment  and  wash  them  with  our  tears.  That  poor  sufferer  whom 
you  relieved  by  your  benefactions  and  soothed  by  your  sympathy  was  a  disguised 
Christ.  Even  the  cup  of  cold  water  given  to  a  disciple  in  the  name  of  a  disciple  is 
to  be  remembered  by  Him  on  another  day.    {A.  Thomson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  The  Lord  grant  you  that  ye  may  find  reat,  each  of  you  in  the  house  of 
her  husband- — The  rest  of  marriage  : — 1.  Man's  Maker  is  the  chief  maker  of  all 
men  and  women's  marriages  in  the  world.  It  is  the  work  of  God  to  provide  an 
helpmeet  for  man,  hence  it  is  called  the  covenant  of  God  (Prov.  ii.  17),  and  there- 
fore honourable  to  all  (Heb.  liii.  4).  Eeligious  Naomi  looks  up  here  unto  God, 
saying  in  effect,  "The  Lord  grant  you  good  husbands."  Grace  should  be  sought  for,  in 
the  first  place,  in  those  seven  qualifications  of  good  matches  and  marriages :  grace, 
race,  face,  arts,  parts,  portion,  proportion.  2.  A  married  state  is  a  state  of  rest. 
So  it  is  called  here  and  chap.  iii.  1.  Hence  marriage  is  called  the  port  or  haven  of 
young  people,  whose  affections  while  unmarried  are  continually  floating  and  tossed 
to  and  fro  like  a  ship  upon  the  waters,  till  they  come  into  this  happy  harbour. 
There  is  a  natural  propension  in  most  persons  towards  nuptial  communion,  as  all 
created  beings  have  a  natural  tendency  to  their  proper  centre,  and  are  restless  out  of 
it.  (C.  Ness.)  Rest  in  marriage : — If  it  is  to  be  wished  that  wives  may  find  rest 
in  the  houses  of  their  husbands,  it  must  be  the  duty  of  husbands  to  do  what  they 
can  to  procure  them  rest,  not  only  by  endeavouring  to  provide  for  them  what  ia 
necessary  for  their  subsistence  and  comfortable  accommodation,  but  by  such  a  kind 
behaviour  as  will  promote  their  satisfaction  and  comfort.  Men  and  women  may 
have  affluence  without  rest,  and  rest  without  affluence.  But  let  women  also  con- 
tribute to  procure  rest  for  themselves  by  frugality,  by  industry,  by  such  behaviour 
to  their  husbands  as  will  merit  constant  returns  of  kindness.    (G.  Lawson.) 

Ver.  10.  Surely  we  will  return  with  thee. — Promises  and  purposes  : — I.  Pboshses 

OF  SPEECH  AND  PURPOSES  OF  HEAET,  WHETHER  TO  GoD,  TO  HiS  ChURCH,  OR  TO  INDIVIDUALS, 

OUGHT  TO  ao  HAND  IN  HAND.  If  a  man's  word  does  not  express  his  meaning  and  bind 
him,  nothing  can.  H.  Promises  and  purposes  often  proceed  from  passion  instead 
OF  PRINCIPLE,  ni.  Promises  and  purposes  proceeding  merely  from  passion  soon 
FAiJi  to  THE  GROUND.  "  I  go,  sir,"  One  Said  in  the  Gospels,  and  "  Went  Dot."  Soma 
persons  melting  under  the  ministry  of  the  Word  as  a  summer  brook  (Job  vi.  15-20). 
A  changed  heart  necessary  to  perseverance.  Saul  may  have  religious  fits,  and  Jehu 
much  zeal;  for  want  of  a  regenerated  nature  both  come  to  nothing.  [John 
Macgowan.)  Promise  and  purpose  to  be  allied: — 1.  Promises  of  speech  and 
purposes  of  spirit  should  walk  hand  in  hand  together.  None  ought  to  promise  with 
their  mouths  what  they  do  not  purpose  with  their  hearts  ;  this  is  to  be  fraudulent 
and  deceitful,  which  is  destructive  to  human  society.  God's  children  are  all  such 
as  wiU  not  lie  (Isa.  Ixiii.  8),  to  say  and  unsay,  or  to  say  one  thing  and  think  another, 
to  blow  hot  and  cold  with  one  blast.  Ye  that  have  promised  to  give  up  yourselvea 
to  Christ,  and  to  go  with  Him  in  ways  of  holiness,  it  must  be  your  purpose  to 
depart  from  iniquity  (2  Tim.  ii.  19  ;  Eev.  xiv.  4 ;  Hos.  ii.  7).  2.  Promises  of  the 
mouth,  yea,  and  purposes  of  the  mind,  do  oft  proceed  from  passion,  and  not  from 
principle.  So  did  Orpah's  here ;  it  was  only  a  pang  of  passion  which  the  discreet 
matron  prudently  distrusts,  and  therefore  tries  them  both  with  powerful  dissuasives. 
Thus  Saul  in  a  passion  promised  fairly  to  David  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  16,  17,  and  xxvi.  21), 
and  David  discovered  all  those  fair  promises  to  proceed  more  from  sudden  passion 
than  from  fixed  principles ;  therefore  did  he  distrust  both  his  talk  and  his  tears. 
Hereupon  David  gets  him  up  into  the  hold,  well  knowing  there  was  little  hold  to  be 
taken  at  such  passionate  promises  and  protestations  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  22).  Tea,  and 
out  of  the  land  too,  as  not  daring  to  trust  his  reconciliation  in  passion  and  strong 
conviction  without  any  true  conversion  (1  Sam.  xxvi.  25,  and  ixvii.  1,  2,  4), 
otherwise  his  malice  had  been  restless  and  he  faithless.  3.  Purposes  and  promises 
that  proceed  from  passion,  and  not  from  principle,  do  soon  dwindle  away  into 
nothing.  Thus  did  Orpah's  (ver.  14),  who  said  with  that  son  in  the  parable  (Matt, 
xxi.  30) , "  I  go,  sir  " ;  yea,  but  when,  sir  ?  So  here,  it  is  certain  we  will  return  with  thee, 


CHAP.  I.]  RUTH.  21 

was  enough  uncertain.  It  is  a  maxim,  second  thoughts  are  better  than  first,  but 
Orpah's  first  wero  better  than  her  second  ;  her  purposes  and  promises  do  dwindle 
away  and  vanish  into  smoke.  {C.  Ness.)  The  failure  of  good  impulses  : — The 
bright  morning  does  not  always  shine  into  the  perfect  day  ;  the  sweetest  spring-bud 
of  promise  does  not  always  ripen  into  precious  fruit.  The  seed  that  was  cast  on 
Btony  ground  grew  rapidly  up,  but  withered  in  a  moment.  Orpah's  decision  was 
the  decision  of  impulsive  feeling,  of  filial  affection ;  it  was  strong  suddenly,  it  grew 
up  in  an  instant,  and  in  an  instant  it  perished  ;  and  she  resolved  to  forsake  Euth 
and  Naomi,  and  return  to  her  gods,  her  people,  and  her  country.     (J.  Gumming.) 

Vers.  11-13.  It  grfeveth  me  mucli  for  your  Bakes  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is 
gone  out  against  me. — NaomVs  parting  address : — This  is  a  great  aggravation  of 
the  afflictions  of  many  parents,  that  their  children  are  involved  with  themselves. 
They  could  bear  poverty,  they  could  bear  reproach,  they  could  bear  death  itself,  had 
they  none  who  depended  on  them  for  bread  and  for  respectability  in  the  world. 
God  has  the  same  right  to  rule  over  the  fruit  of  our  bodies  as  over  ourselves,  and  to 
allot  to  them  their  share  of  the  good  or  the  bad  things  of  this  world.  It  is  bitterest 
of  all,  when  we  have  reason  to  think  that  our  sins  have  provoked  God  to  punish  us 
in  the  persons  of  our  friends,  or  to  inflict  those  strokes  which  our  friends  must  feel 
as  heavily  as  ourselves.  Let  us  beware  of  ever  exposing  ourselves  to  such  heart- 
piercing  reflections  by  conduct  that  may  bring  down  God's  displeasure  upon  our 
families.  God's  people  may  sometimes,  without  good  reason,  think  that  the  hand 
of  the  Lord  is  gone  forth  against  them,  in  the  calamities  which  befall  their  families 
or  friends.  Our  afflictions  are  hard  enough  to  be  borne  by  us,  without  the  addition 
of  groundless  reflections  against  ourselves.  At  the  same  time,  the  error  is  much 
more  common  of  insensibility  to  the  Divine  displeasure,  when  it  has  been  really 
kindled  by  our  sins,  than  of  vexing  ourselves  with  unjust  suspicions  of  God's  anger. 
There  is  one  thing  that  still  remains  to  be  considered  concerning  this  parting  speech 
of  Naomi  to  her  daughters-in-law.  Why  did  she  dissuade  them  from  going  with 
her  to  the  land  of  Judah,  where  the  true  God  was  well  known,  and  persuade  them 
to  return  to  a  country  of  abominable  idolaters  ?  We  are  not  bound  to  justify  all  that 
Naomi  spake  or  did.  But,  in  charity  to  that  good  woman,  we  ought  to  beheve  that, 
for  years  past,  she  had  been  endeavouring,  by  her  practice  and  her  converse,  to 
recommend  to  her  young  friends  the  worship  of  the  God  of  Israel.  If  they  were 
truly  turned  from  the  error  of  their  ways,  nothing  that  is  here  said  was  likely  to 
drive  them  back  to  their  own  country.  They  might  have  been  disgusted  even  with 
Naomi's  own  conduct,  if  she  had  not  fairly  told  them  what  inconveniences  they 
were  to  encounter  in  going  to  her  land,  and  to  her  people.  Our  Lord  very  plainly 
told  His  followers  what  they  were  to  expect  in  His  service.  •'  The  foxes  have 
holes,"  &c.  We  may,  however,  observe,  that  Christ  usually  administered  proper 
antidotes  against  the  fears  which  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross  might  excite  in  the  minds 
of  His  hearers.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  Naomi,  in  the  dejection  of  her  spirits, 
did  not  overlook  the  powerful  consolations  which  might  have  encouraged  her  young 
friends  to  follow  her  into  the  land  of  Israel,  and  would  have  more  than  compensated 
all  the  inconveniences  to  which  they  would  have  been  exposed  in  a  strange  land. 
Doubtless  she  had  often  spoken  of  those  privileges  to  them  in  former  times  ;  but  as 
yet  they  had  not  learned  their  nature,  and  perhaps  Naomi  now  despaired  of  ever 
being  able  to  give  them  a  perfect  idea  of  it.     (G.  Lawson.) 

Ver.  14.  Orpah  kissed  her  mother-in-law ;  but  Ruth  clave  unto  her. — Orpah's 
defection : — I.  Worldly  respects  are  great  htndrances  in  the  course  of  godli- 
KESS.  The  world  keepeth  from  the  entertaining  of  the  truth  (Matt.  xxii.  5) ;  it 
hindereth  in  the  receiving  of  it.     11.  An  unsound  heart  mat  for  a  time  make  a  fair 

SHOW  TS  THE  WAT  TO  CaNAAN,  BUT   YET   TURN   BACK    AT    THE    LAST,  aS  Orpah  doth  hcrC. 

And  this  is  by  reason,  first,  of  certain  motions  of  religion,  which  maketh  them  in 
general  to  approve  of  the  same  ;  holding  this,  that  it  is  a  good  thing  to  be  religious, 
and  that  none  can  find  fault  with  a  man  for  that.  Further,  the  working  of  the 
Word,  moving  the  heart  in  some  sort  to  entertain  it.  And,  lastly,  the  desire  of  praise 
and  good  esteem  with  men :  these  will  make  hollow  hearts  to  set  on  a  while  to 
heavenward,  but  shall  not  be  able  to  enter.  IH.  Such  as  want  soundness  towards 
God  fob  religion  mat  tet  have  otherwise  commendable  parts  in  them.  For 
Orpah  is  commended  for  a  kind  wife,  as  well  as  Euth  by  Naomi,  and  for  a  kind 
daughter-in-law  (ver.  8) ;  and  she  showed  good  humanity  in  going  on  the  way  with 
her  mother-in-law,  yea,   a  good    natural    affection    in    weeping  so  at    parting. 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t 

{R.  Bernard.)  Orpah  ;  or,  the  mere  professor  : — An  onlooker  not  able  to  discover 
the  difference  between  Orpah  and  Euth  so  far.  The  crisis  has  come.  Both  had 
made  professions  (ver.  10).     Here  the  difference  is  made  apparent.    I.  We  leabn 

THAT   IT  IS  POSSIBLE  TO    GO  A  LONG  WAY   TOWAEDS    ChEISTIANITY  AND   TET    NOT    TO   BE   A 

Cheistian.  To  be  born,  educated,  and  dwell  in  Christian  households,  these  are 
great  blessings,  but  do  not  constitute  or  make  a  Christian.  It  will  not  do  to  be 
almost,  we  must  be  altogether,  decided  for  Christ.  The  cup  that  is  almost  sound 
will  not  hold  water.  The  ship  that  is  almost  whole  will  not  weather  the  storm. 
Feelings,  sentiment,  profession  are  all  good  if  they  spring  from  a  living  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ ;  without  this  they  are  worse  than  worthless.  II.  We  leaen  that  it 
IS  possible  to  deceive  oueselves,  and  to  think  that  all  is  eight  when  in  teuth 
ALL  IS  WEONG  WITH  OUE  SOULS.  Hardly  possible  that  Orpah  played  the  conscious 
hypocrite.  She  meant  what  she  did  when  she  became  a  proselyte — did  not  deliber- 
ately act  a  part.  Feeling  and  sentiment  (love  for  her  husband)  blinded  her  eyes. 
Love  to  God,  which  she  had  thought  supreme  in  her  heart,  subordinate  to  the  love 
of  Moab.  This  often  so  with  men  ;  they  are  not  hypocrites,  they  are  self-deceivers. 
Education,  circumstances,  the  force  of  influences  around  them,  produce  an 
emotional  religion  which  they  mistake  for  vital  godliness.  They  hear  with  joy  like 
the  "  stony-ground  hearers."    IH.  We  leaen  that  oue  beligion  will  not  peofit 

us  AT  ALL  UNLESS  IT  BE  CHAEACTEBISED  BY  PEESEVEEANCE  TO  THE  END.  Improve- 
ment :  Is  our  profession  a  mere  profession  or  the  fruit  of  a  living  faith  ?  Brought 
by  circumstances  to  the  boundary-line  between  life  and  death,  have  we  stopped 
there  ?  The  Bible  full  of  such  instances.  Felix  trembled ;  Balaam  prophesied ; 
Herod  heard  gladly  ;  Judas  sat  at  the  sacramental  table  with  our  Lord  !  Whatever 
we  do,  we  must  not  stop  short  of  conversion ;  if  we  do,  we  perish.  {Aubrey  C.  Price, 
B.A.)  A  good  word  for  Orpah: — The  others  did  not  greatly  blame  her,  and  we, 
for  our  part,  may  not  reproach  her.  It  is  unnecessary  to  suppose  that  in  returning 
to  her  kinsfolk  and  settling  down  to  the  tasks  that  offered  in  her  mother's  house 
she  was  guilty  of  despising  truth  and  love  and  renouncing  the  best.  We  may 
reasonably  imagine  her  henceforth  bearing  witness  for  a  higher  morality,  and 
affirming  the  goodness  of  the  Hebrew  religion  among  her  friends  and  acquaintances, 
Ruth  goes  where  affection  and  duty  lead  her  ;  but  for  Orpah  too  it  may  be  claimed 
that  in  love  and  duty  she  goes  back.  She  is  not  one  who  says,  "  Moab  has  done 
nothing  for  me ;  Moab  has  no  claim  upon  me ;  I  am  free  to  leave  my  country ;  I 
am  under  no  debt  to  my  people."  We  shall  not  take  her  as  a  type  of  selfishness, 
worldliness,  or  backsliding,  this  Moabite  woman.  Let  us  rather  believe  that  she 
knew  of  those  at  home  who  needed  the  help  she  could  give,  and  that  with  the 
thought  of  least  hazard  to  herself  mingled  one  of  the  duty  she  owed  to  others. 
{R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  15.  Thy  aister-ta-law  is  gone  back  unto  her  people,  and  unto  her  gods. — 

Backsliding : — 1.  The  backslidings  of  such  as  set  out  fair,  and  do  begin  well,  is  a 
sore  temptation  to  young  converts  and  proselytes.  It  was  no  less  to  the  very  disciples 
themselves  (John  vi.  66,  67).  Thus  it  was  also  an  occasion  of  stumbling  unto  the 
primitive  Christians  to  behold  the  backslidings  of  two  such  forward  professors  as 
Hymenseus  and  Philetus  had  been;  insomuch  that  the  apostle  saith  to  them, 
"  Nevertheless  the  foundation  "  (of  God's  election)  "  standeth  sure ;  the  Lord  knoweth 
them  that  are  His,"  &c.  As  the  multitude  of  sinners  cannot  give  any  patronage  to 
the  evil  ways  of  sin,  so  neither  can  the  paucity  of  saints  put  any  disgrace  or  dis- 
paragement upon  the  good  ways  of  God.  2.  Some  forward  followers  of  the  only 
true  and  living  God  may  apostatise  from  thence  to  embrace  the  vanities  of  the 
Gentiles.  3.  That  love  to  the  ways  and  worship  of  God  is  a  sincere  love  which  doth 
undergo  trials  and  temptations,  yet  bears  up  against  all :  godly  Ruth  rides  out  the 
storm  against  wind  and  tide  of  both  the  sister's  pattern  and  the  mother's  precept. 
(C.  Ness.)  The  painful  separation: — Nothing  can  be  more  encouraging  to  the 
Christian  heart  than  to  see  the  young  setting  out  to  seek  the  Lord.  It  is  a  beautiful 
exercise  and  exhibition  of  youth.  Never  do  the  morning  hours  appear  so  bright  or 
so  promising.  We  cannot  suspect  the  sincerity  of  any,  and  therefore  we  encourage 
them  to  press  forward.  We  have  seen  these  youthful  travellers  going  with  Naomi 
out  of  the  place  where  they  dwelt,  on  the  way  to  return  unto  the  land  of  Judah.  For 
a  time  they  travel  together  happily  and  affectionately.  There  is  a  line  which 
divides  Moab  from  Judah.  This  is  a  painful  but  an  inevitable  crisis.  The  two 
sisters  must  separate.  There  is  just  such  a  line  in  our  soul's  history  where  a 
similar  entire  separation  must  take  place.    The  awakened  mind  sees  its  own  sinful 


CHAP.  I.]  RUTE.  23 

ness  and  need,  acknowledges  the  darkness  and  emptiness  of  the  Moab  in  whicli  it 
has  dwelt,  and  truly  feels  the  importance  of  those  blessed  offers  which  the  gospel 
proclaims.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  taught  the  shiner  the  guiltiness  and  wretchedness 
of  his  past  life.  He  knows,  he  sees,  he  feels  the  truth.  But  he  does  not  love  the 
truth.  He  does  not  embrace  and  choose  it  for  his  own,  his  portion  for  ever.  If  he 
would  really  do  this,  all  would  be  well.  His  heart  he  cannot,  will  not,  give  to  Christ. 
Anything  else  he  will  do.  But  nothing  else  will  avail  him  anything.  Poor  Orpah ! 
How  often  have  I  seen  young  travellers  to  eternity  stopping  just  where  you  stop ; 
hesitating  just  where  you  hesitate.  Nothing  more  can  be  done  for  you  where  you 
are.  There  is  Moab.  You  have  tried  that,  and  found  it  empty  and  unhappy. 
There  is  Judah.  All  its  provisions  and  offers  are  before  you,  and  brought  for  your 
acceptance.  Never  will  you  be  sorry  if  you  take  your  portion  there.  Here  are 
Naomi  and  Rnth.  They  are  journeying  to  the  land  which  the  Lord  hath  promised 
them.  Soon  they  will  be  far  from  you,  out  of  your  sight.  Then  you  will  mourn 
over  the  separation  which  you  foolishly  made.  You  may  go  back  to  Moab,  and  bury 
yourself  in  its  sins  and  follies.  But  you  will  find  no  peace  or  happiness  there. 
Your  conscience  will  never  again  allow  you  to  rest.  Orpah  goes  "  back  to  her 
people  and  her  gods."  This  is  a  most  important  fact  in  her  history.  She  does  not, 
cannot  remain  where  they  part.  That  is  a  place  most  unnatural  and  unattractive. 
No;  she  goes  back,  while  Euth  and  Naomi  go  forward.  The  separation  grows 
wider  every  hour.  This  is  a  most  affecting  illustration.  The  awakened  and  con- 
vinced mind  can  never  abide  at  the  line  where  a  Saviour  is  refused.  There  is  no 
permanency  in  such  a  state  of  mind.  There  is  no  home  for  the  soul  there.  You  go 
back.  It  may  be  to  self-indulgence,  dissipation,  and  sensual  delights.  It 
may  be  to  giddiness,  frivolity,  and  empty,  cheerless  mirth.  It  may  be  to 
business,  covetousness,  and  unceasing  occupation.  It  may  be  to  infidelity  and 
assumed  unbelief  and  argument.  It  may  be  to  open  hostility  and  persecution  of 
the  gospel,  and  those  who  love  it.  It  may  be  to  absolute  and  dreadful  hardness  of 
heart.  But  to  whatever  it  shall  be,  you  stiU  go  back.  The  worst  opposers  of  the 
gospel  we  ever  meet  are  those  who  once  were  almost  Christians.  But  you  say  you 
will  hereafter  return  to  Christ.  You  cannot  do  this  but  by  His  ovm  Spirit.  And 
that  Spirit  you  have  driven  far  from  you.  There  is  a  spring  that  returneth  in 
creation  when  the  winter  has  gone.  But  you  have  buried  the  sacred  seed  of  your 
Boul's  welfare  beneath  a  winter  which  knows  no  coming  spring.  You  will  mourn  at 
the  last,  when  your  flesh  and  your  body  are  consumed.  But  it  wiU  be  with  a  worldly 
Borrow  which  worketh  death,  and  not  with  a  godly  sorrow  which  worketh  repentance 
unto  salvation.  This  is  the  fearful  prospect  in  your  return  with  Orpah.  [S.  H. 
Tyng,  D.D.)  Orpah : — I.  Okpah  was  a  Moabitish  woman — had  been  married  to 
one  of  the  sons  of  Elimelech — and  was  now  a  widow.  She  had  been  brought  up 
amid  the  absurdities  and  impurities  and  superstitions  of  idolatry.  But  her  con- 
nection with  an  Israelitish  family  was  a  great  advantage  to  her,  and  ought  to  have 
been  improved  by  her,  to  the  benefit  of  her  soul,  and  deemed  a  peculiar  privilege 
and  blessing.  Oh,  then,  let  us  associate  with  those  who  live  for  another  world — 
whose  spirit  and  words  and  conduct  diffuse  the  savour  of  heaven,  and  are  calculated 
to  keep  God  and  eternity  in  our  minds.  11.  Oepah  possessed  mant  natukai, 
EXCELLENCES,  which  made  her  lovely  and  amiable,  though  still  lacking  that  new 
heart  and  that  devotedness  to  God  without  which  no  man  can  be  saved.  1.  Orpah 
acted  well  in  the  character  of  a  wife.  2.  Orpah  conducted  herself  with  kindness 
and  tenderness  and  affection  towards  her  mother-in-law,  Naomi,  also.  3.  Another 
valuable  feature,  which  we  cannot  view  but  with  great  interest,  in  the  character  of 
Orpah,  was  her  intention  to  accompany  Naomi  to  the  land  of  Judah.  It  is  well  to 
see  hopeful  beginnings — to  see  the  careless  aroused,  the  indifferent  in  some  degree 
alarmed  about  their  sins,  and  paying  more  attention  than  before  to  the  welfare  of 
their  souls.  It  is  well  to  see  the  profane  putting  on  the  decencies  of  morality,  and 
renouncing  their  vile  habits  and  pursuits.  It  is  well,  we  say,  to  see  these  hopeful 
signs.  But,  alasl  they  often  disappoint  our  fondest  hopes.  HI.  Orpah's  fataii 
DEFiciENCT.  She  only  began  her  march  to  Canaan— her  resolution  failed — she  per- 
severed not,  but  returned  to  her  own  land !  Naomi  wished  not  to  prevent  either 
Kuth  or  Orpah  from  accompanying  her  to  Canaan,  but  from  doing  so  for  her  sake. 
She  had  no  earthly  inducement  to  hold  out  to  them.  If  they  came,  she  wished 
them  to  come  from  religious  considerations  alone.  If  we  take  up  the  cause  of  God 
from  any  but  spiritual  motives — if  we  attach  ourselves  to  the  cause  and  people  of 
God  from  earthly  views,  our  religion  is  hateful  in  heaven.  The  "loaves  and 
fishes  "  are  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  our  pursuit  of  Christ,  but  the  attractions  of 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

His  grace — the  privilege  of  serving  Him,  and  a  supreme  desire  to  be  His — His  aloha 
— His  for  ever.  1.  Orpah  forsook  the  cause  of  God — she  returned  to  her  people. 
Their  maxims  and  their  habits,  after  all,  were  more  congenial  with  her  mind.  Woe 
awaits  those  who  are  kept  from  "  following  the  Lord  fully  "  from  regard  to  earthly 
connections  and  associates.  2.  Orpah  forsook  the  cause  of  God  with  great  reluc- 
tance. Agrippa-like,  she  was  almost  persuaded  to  go  with  her  to  the  land  of  Judah, 
yet,  though  with  many  misgivings,  she  retraced  her  steps  to  her  own  country,  and 
saw  her  no  more.  Now,  with  the  view  of  inducing  these  wavering  characters,  who 
are  thus  daily  withstanding  the  convictions  of  their  own  minds — who  return  to 
Moab,  but  with  many  tears — to  hasten  out  of  their  present  condition,  we  beg  to  say 
a  few  words  concerning  their  danger.  It  is  a  great  mercy  to  have  our  minds  in  the 
smallest  degree  impressed  with  Divine  things,  and  awakened  to  the  importance  of 
the  things  which  accompany  salvation.  It  is  a  mercy  to  be  made  to  feel  some 
measure  of  anxiety  about  our  never-dying  souls  and  their  everlasting  welfare.  It  is 
the  Holy  Ghost  striving  with  us,  and  bidding  us  to  consider  our  peril  while  yet  it 
may  be  avoided.  With  the  view  of  urging  these  characters  to  a  speedy  determina- 
tion to  be  altogether  on  the  Lord's  side,  we  beg  to  add  a  few  remarks  likewise  con- 
cerning their  present  folly.  When  man  neglects  to  follow  the  admonitions  of  his 
conscience,  he  deprives  himself  of  aU  comfort.  He  cannot  enjoy  inward  tranquillity 
in  this  state.  There  is  something  within  him  constantly  telling  him  that  his  end 
cannot  be  desirable  if  a  radical  spiritual  change  does  not  take  place  in  him.  He 
cannot  have  real  joy  in  this  condition.  If  your  religion  resembles  that  of  Orpah, 
give  God  no  rest  till  the  weight  of  your  transgression  drives  you  to  the  Saviour,  and 
a  believing  view  of  His  matchless  love  constrains  you  to  devote  your  persons  and 
your  talents  to  His  service  and  glory.  [John  Hughes.)  Orpah  and  Ruth : — 
I.  Family  sobkows.  1.  Want.  2.  Separation.  3.  Death.  II.  Family  eeeors. 
1.  Preference  of  worldly  comfort  before  religious  privileges.  2.  Formation  of  worldly 
connections.  HI.  Family  attachments.  1.  Their  power.  The  amiableness  of 
Naomi  has  so  attached  these  idolaters  to  her  that  they  are  willing  to  forsake  evea 
their  own  mother.  2.  Their  weakness.  The  case  of  Orpah  may  teach  us  that  aa 
attachment  to  religious  people  is  not  religion  ;  nor  can  it,  of  itself,  produce  religion 
in  the  heart.  IV.  Family  meecies.  1.  The  return  of  moderate  prosperity.  2.  Con- 
verting grace  bestowed  upon  an  idolater.  [Homilist.)  The  danger  of  religious 
indifference: — ^A  family  perished,  not  long  ago,  by  a  fire  in  their  own  house. 
They  were  not  consumed  by  the  flames,  but  suffocated  by  the  smoke.  No 
blaze  was  visible  at  all,  nor  could  any  alarming  sign  of  fire  be  discovered 
from  the  street,  and  yet  death  came  as  effectually  upon  them  as  if  they  had 
been  burned  to  ashes.  Thus  is  sin  fatal  in  its  consequences,  few  being  destroyed 
by  outrageous  forms  of  it,  flaming  up  with  lurid  glare,  but  multitudes  perish- 
ing by  the  stifling  smoke  of  indifference  and  spiritual  slumber.  {J.  H.  Norton.) 
Unto  her  people,  and  unto  her  gods  : — When  Christian  set  out  from  the  City  oi 
Destruction,  he  too,  for  a  short  part  of  his  journey,  was  attended  by  two  com- 
panions :  the  first  indeed,  Obstinate,  only  went  with  him  in  order  to  try  and  bring 
him  back  to  what  he  considered  wiser  courses,  but  the  other,  Pliable,  was  absolutely 
sincere  in  his  desire  to  reach  the  Celestial  City.  "  I  intend  to  go  along  with  this 
good  man,"  he  said,  "and  to  cast  in  my  lot  with  him";  he  might  have  availed 
himself  of  the  words  of  sincerely -meant  devotion  in  which  Orpah  joined  with  Ruth, 
and  have  declared,  "  Surely  I  will  return  with  thee  unto  thy  people."  Tet,  as  we 
know,  when  the  pilgrims,  "  being  heedless,"  fell  into  the  Slough  of  Despondency, 
poor  Pliable,  his  virtuous  intentions  notwithstanding,  "  gave  a  desperate  struggle 
or  two,  and  got  out  of  the  mire,  on  that  side  of  the  Slough  which  was  next  to  hia 
own  house.  So  away  he  went,  and  Christian  saw  him  no  more."  There  are  one 
or  two  particulars  in  which  the  behaviour  of  Orpah  was  not  unlike  that  of  well- 
meaning  Pliable.  To  begin  with,  there  can  be  no  question  but  that  she  had  a 
sincere  affection  and  regard  for  Naomi,  and  would  genuinely  have  liked  to  spend 
the  remainder  of  her  days  in  her  society;  but  the  attachment  was  purely  personal, 
and  in  all  such  friendships  there  is  a  breaking  point,  a  limit  to  the  extent  to  which 
others  are  prepared  to  follow  us.  For  it  is  only  us  whom  they  are  following,  and 
our  path  may  lead  us  into  circumstances  more  trying  than  they  are  prepared 
to  undergo  whose  hearts  are  not  buoyed  up  by  the  hope  which  animates  our  own. 
Another  somewhat  sad  reflection  respecting  the  history  of  Orpah  springs  from  the 
fact  that  she  actually  started  for  the  better  land,  and  indeed  went  some  considerable 
way  on  the  journey.  The  thought  of  those  fellow-travellers  of  ours  who  set  out  so 
cheerily  with  us  and  yet  failed  after  all  to  persevere  is  one  of  the  saddest  that  comei 


CHAP.  I.]  RUTH.  25 

into  our  memory  when  we  review  our  pilgrimage.  We  call  to  mind  their  fervour, 
their  enthusiasm,  their  kindly  interest ;  we  shall  never  forget  how  our  heart  sank 
within  us  when  they  announced  their  intention  of  turning  back.  And  in  the  case 
of  Orpah  our  feelings  are  the  more  regretful  because  we  bear  in  mind  that  she  was 
full  of  the  best  possible  resolutions  of  going  further  still.  "  Surely,"  she  said,  no 
less  earnestly  than  did  Euth  herself,  "  Surely  we  will  return  with  thee  unto  thy 
people."  But,  as  we  have  already  noticed,  the  desire  in  her  mind  was  to  be,  as  she 
put  it,  "  with  thee  "  ;  it  was  the  personal  element  in  her  relation  to  Naomi  which, 
however  charming  in  itself,  constituted  the  weakness  of  her  position — it  was  on  this 
rock  that  her  frail  vessel  was  wrecked  at  last.  Further,  if  Orpah's  decision  pains 
us,  can  we  remain  unmoved  at  Orpah's  tears  ?  She  is  quite  clear  in  her  own  mind 
that  she  can  go  no  further;  she  will  leave  no  inconsiderable  portion  of  her  heart 
behind  her  when  she  says  farewell  to  Naomi ;  she  lifted  up  her  voice  and  wept ; 
she  lifted  up  her  voice  and  wept  again.  Alas  for  the  impotence  of  tears ! 
The  question  for  each  to  ask  himself  is  not,  What  have  I  felt?  but. 
What  have  I  done?  Orpah  loved  Naomi  dearly,  and  wept  bitterly  at  the 
prospect  of  parting  from  her,  but  returned  to  her  people  and  her  gods 
nevertheless.  And  here  we  must  pause  to  inquire  how  far  Naomi  was  to  blame 
for  the  failure  of  Orpah.  We  recognise  the  honesty  with  which  the  older  woman 
points  out  to  her  companions  the  sacrifice  which  they  wiU  be  called  upon  to 
make  if  they  elect  to  go  further  with  her.  She  must  have  known,  she  evidently  did 
know,  that  by  turning  back  Orpah  was  losing  her  reversionary  interest  in  the 
property  of  her  deceased  husband,  yet  we  do  not  find  Naomi  telling  her  of  this. 
Warn  people  by  all  means  that  life  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  the  life  of  a  servant 
and  a  soldier,  but  teU  them  too  that  their  entry  into  the  kingdom  has  made  them  in- 
heritors of  a  possession  greater  and  more  real  than  anything  than  the  world  can  offer, 
and  which  it  would  be  the  most  fearful  madness  to  throw  away.  Love  had  brought 
Orpah  a  long  way  towards  the  land  of  Judah :  might  not  a  little  affectionate  entreaty 
have  brought  her  further  still  ?  It  is  important  that  before  passing  away  from  the 
story  of  Orpah  we  should  try  to  realise  what  it  was  that  she  lost  by  turning  back. 
And  with  the  inheritance,  redeemed  as  it  was  by  Boaz,  Oi-pah  had  also  lost  the 
honour — Kuth's  chiefest  glory  in  the  ages  yet  to  come — of  being  the  ancestress  of 
David  and  of  the  Messiah.  Of  all  the  promises  to  Abraham,  that  upon  which  in 
all  probability  the  patriarch  set  the  greatest  store  was  God's  pledge  that  in  him  all 
the  nations  of  the  world  should  be  blessed.  To  be  an  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  in  itself  a  marvel  of  grace,  the  true  meaning  of  which  we  shall  never 
f  uUy  know  here,  but  to  have  it  in  one's  power  to  bring  redemption  within  the  reach 
of  others,  surely  this  is  an  infinitely  greater  marvel  still.  God  offers  us  salvation  as 
the  satisfaction  of  the  needs  of  our  own  heart ;  but  He  also  offers  it  to  us  in  order 
that  we  may  be  qualified  as  the  possessors  of  it  to  work  with  Him  in  plucking  from 
the  burning  those  who  are  the  bondsmen  of  Satan  and  of  sin.  What  answer  shall 
we  give  to  Him  that  speaketh  ?  (H.  A.  Hall,  B.D.)  The  parting-place : — Where 
was  it  that  Orpah  parted  from  her  companions  ?  She  went  with  them  some  way, 
possibly  a  great  way,  but  at  last  they  reached  a  point  in  the  journey  which  was 
geographically,  so  to  speak,  one  of  decision,  one  beyond  which  no  one  could  pass 
without  committing  herself  to  new  things  and  a  new  life,  and  at  this  point  Orpah 
made  up  her  mind  to  return.  What  more  likely  than  that  this  point  was  the  river 
itself,  which  if  they  adopted  the  southern  route  would  form  the  boundary  between 
Moab  and  the  land  of  Judah  ?  The  river  flows  still,  and  each  pilgrim  has  to  make 
up  his  mind  whether  or  not  he  shall  cross  it.  There,  then,  flows  the  river  :  shaU 
we  cross  ?  Sometimes  it  seems  to  us  to  be  the  river  of  surrender.  Can  I  give 
myself  wholly  and  unreservedly  to  God  ?  and  can  I  give  up,  or  consent  to  His 
taking  from  me,  whatever  is  contrary  to  His  will  and  therefore  to  my  happiness, 
love  it  as  I  may  ?  Sometimes  the  river  is  one  of  confession.  We  have  travelled 
thus  far  without  our  life  or  our  relation  to  the  world  being  appreciably  affected  or 
altered,  and  God,  who  is  infinitely  tender  in  His  dealing  with  the  returning  soul, 
often  postpones  the  necessity  of  or  the  occasion  for  a  definite  confession  of  our 
allegiance  to  Him  until  we  are  strong  enough  to  make  it.  Yet  sooner  or  later  the 
river  has  to  be  crossed,  and  the  more  definitely  the  confession  is  made  the  better 
it  always  is  for  the  soul.  And  sometimes  the  river  is  that  of  a  consistent  life.  "  I 
would  not  shrink  from  throwing  in  my  lot  with  that  of  the  people  of  God,"  saya 
many  an  one,  "  if  I  could  only  hope  to  lead  a  consistent  life  :  I  will  make  no  pro- 
fession unless  I  can  carry  it  out,  and  I  fail  to  see  how  under  my  circumstances  that 
can  be  possible."    Certainly  God  requires  that  those  who  follow  Him  shall  follow 


26  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.i. 

Him  fully,  as  Caleb  did,  but  God  asks  no  one  to  lead  the  life  of  faith  in  his  own 
strength  or  trusting  to  his  own  resources.  A  new  life  Ues  before  you ;  but  to  enable 
you  to  live  it,  God  offers  you  new  strength.    {Ibid.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  Ruth  said,  Intreat  me  not  to  leave  thee,  or  to  return. — Ruth 

and  Naomi : — I.  Evert  person  is  tested.  Sooner  or  later,  but  certainly.  The 
tests  will  vary  in  severity  with  the  cases.  In  every  case  they  will  be  conclusive, 
determining  the  genuineness  of  the  life  professed.  They  cannot  be  evaded.  If  one 
is  for  Christ,  he  will  continue  with  Him.  The  test  of  God  cannot  be  too  severe. 
The  true  follower  cannot  be  driven  away.  To  the  strongest  appeals  he  replies : 
"Lord,  to  whom  shall  I  go  ?  "  U.  When  tested,  an  Orpah  will  go  back.  Why 
should  she  leave  so  much  for  so  little?  Naomi  was  only  her  mother-in-law. 
There  was  her  own  mother  standing  and  beckoning  in  the  doorway  of  the 
old  home.  She  was  not  only  leaving  home  and  country,  she  was  leaving 
her  God.  With  much  depth  of  feeling,  there  was  not  depth  enough  to  bind 
her  heart.  IH.  A  Buth,  when  tested,  goes  on.  What  is  the  difference 
between  her  and  Orpah,  leading  to  this  different  conduct?  1.  Her  devotion  to 
Naomi.  She  was  less  impulsive,  perhaps,  than  her  sister,  but  hers  was  a  love 
which  bore  testing.  The  Greeks  and  Latins,  among  their  fine  discriminations, 
distinguished  between  the  emotional  love  of  feeling  and  the  intelligent  love  of 
choice.  Orpah's  love  was  the  former ;  that  of  Euth  was  the  love  of  choice.  It 
grew  out  of  careful  reflection.  It  was  a  deep,  undying  attachment.  2.  The 
religious  foundation  of  her  conduct.  This  is  a  trait,  if  not  wholly  wanting  in 
her  sister,  too  weak  for  any  mention — a  trait  beside  which  Kuth's  exceeding  love  is 
wholly  secondary.  Euth  had  chosen  her  mother's  God.  3.  Her  resolute  exercise 
of  will.  She  was  moved  by  Naomi's  appeals.  She  thought  anew  of  what  she  was 
leaving.  She  heard  tender  voices  calling  her,  of  the  hving,  of  the  dead :  "  Come 
back,  come  back."  Her  heart  began  to  yield.  When  Orpah  returned,  she  could 
scarcely  resist  the  impulse  to  go  with  her.  Then  "  she  strengthened  herself."  She 
summoned  her  soul.  She  put  forth  a  supreme  exercise  of  will.  IV.  Euth  receivbd 
HER  REWARD.  She  bccamo  an  ancestress  of  the  world's  Eedeemer.  {Sermons  by  the 
Monday  Club.)  Ruth's  choice :  -All  the  elements  of  a  true  choice  of  God  are 
here  described.  1.  It  Involves  the  surrender  of  a  false  belief.  This  quiet  scene 
vS&f  be  placed  beside  that  on  Carmel.  Euth's  decision  is  mightier  in  its  gentleness 
than  Israel's  in  its  terror.  In  manner  the  two  are  as  unlike  as  the  dawn  to  the 
earthquake  ;  in  results  as  the  clear  ray  of  a  planet  to  the  flash  of  a  meteor.  In 
essence  they  are  the  same.  Our  false  god  has  no  repulsive  name,  such  as  Baal  or 
Chemosh;  its  real  title  is  self,  its  worship  sin,  its  wages  death.  It  must  be 
surrendered.  2.  True  choice  of  God  involves  sacrifice.  To  start  out  with  Naomi 
meant  not  pleasantness,  but  bitterness.  Ruth  followed,  as  she  thought,  to  loneliness, 
homelessness,  perpetual  widowhood ;  against  the  desire  of  those  she  left,  without 
the  wish  of  those  to  whom  she  was  going  ;  ready  to  work,  to  beg,  to  die  if  need  be, 
for  the  one  who  stood  to  her  as  representing  God.  To-day,  Canaan  in  the  Church 
welcomes  even  Moab  to  its  circle.  Earthly  advantages  are  largely  on  its  side.  But 
a  cross  seems  to  wait  somewhere  in  the  way,  if  only  that  sore  surrender  of  pride 
and  pleasure  and  will  which  prompt  the  soul's  real  refusal.  3.  God  sends  help  to 
a  right  choice.  Providences  both  of  joy  and  of  sorrow ;  attractions  and  repulsions 
of  heart ;  subtle  influences  of  companionship ;  favour  and  famine ;  marriage  and 
mourning  ;  our  life  is  one  long  plea  for  Him.  4.  A  decision  is  forced.  Somewhere 
in  the  way  comes  a  test.  On  either  side  example,  desire,  promise ;  we  must  hold 
to  the  one  and  forsake  the  other.  6.  Eight  decision  has  its  great  rewards.  What 
Euth  feared  proved  only  unsuspected  blessings.  Losing  her  life,  she  found  it. 
Bishop  Hall  exclaims:  "Oh,  the  sure  and  beautiful  payment  of  the  Almighty  I 
Who  ever  forsook  the  Moab  of  this  world  for  the  true  Israel,  and  did  not  at  length 
rejoice  in  the  change  ?  "  {Charles  M.  Southgate.)  Conduct  of  Orpah  and  Ruth 
contrasted : — It  is  the  difference  between  feeling  and  principle  in  religion,  between 
emotion  and  consecration,  kissing  and  cleaving.  I.  Emotion  has  its  larob 
APPOINTED  PLACE  IN  LIFE.  It  is  the  colouT  and  fragrance  of  the  soul's  world.  It 
gives  both  impulse  and  reward  to  action.  Emotion  has  great  play  in  religion. 
God  appeals  to  it.  The  character  of  God  is  so  presented  as  to  excite  our  emotions. 
We  tremble  at  His  awfulness,  adore  His  greatness.  The  story  of  Christ's  life  and 
death  has  power  to  move  us  beyond  all  else.  The  insensible  heart  is  usually  a 
selfish  heart.  But — II.  Emotion  will  not  take  the  place  or  consecration.  Here 
distinguish  between  sensuous  and  spiritual  impressions.   There  is  a  peace,  a  rapture, 


CHAP.  I.]  RUTH.  27 

which  the  Spirit  breathes  into  the  believing  soul,  the  promised  manifestation  of 
Christ  to  him  "  that  hath  My  commandments  and  keepeth  them."  This  is  the 
reward  of  obedience,  not  its  substitute  ;  is  not  of  nature,  but  of  grace.  No  degree 
of  feeling  about  religious  things  is  religion.  Natural  fondness  toward  God,  as 
toward  parents,  may  be  the  mere  deUght  of  an  emotional  nature,  a  snare  to  the 
soul  and  an  affront  to  Him.  What  joy  to  Christ  that  eyes  which  overflow  for  a 
novel  or  a  play  should  moisten  at  the  story  of  Calvary  ?  There  is  need  of  searchings 
of  heart  and  stings  of  conscience  in  unsuspected  places.  Orpah  and  Ruth  feel  alike, 
love  alike,  but  part  for  ever  at  the  test  of  following.  III.  The  true  office  of 
EMOTION  IS  TO  DRAW  TO  CONSECRATION.  Feeling  Is  for  the  sake  of  following.  The 
ChiMih  has  still  no  realm  of  mightier  influence  than  a  consecrated  home. 
The  heaviest  condemnation  of  many  in  the  day  of  judgment  will  be  that  they 
resisted  the  influences  and  withstood  the  prayers  of  a  godly  home.  IV.  Choosing 
God  is  proved  by  choosing  God's  people.  The  world  estimates  our  relation  to 
Christ  by  our  relation  to  His  followers.  Yet  it  often  seems  as  if.  men  must  be  twice 
converted,  first  to  Christ,  and  again  to  His  Church.  Do  not  let  this  woman's 
devotion  shame  us.  She  gave  up,  literally,  all  her  world  for  God.  True  devotion 
to  Christ  turns  to  His  Church  with  Ruth's  matchless  consecration.  {Ibid.)  Ruth; 
or,  decision  for  God  : — 1.  An  impulsive  religion  is  not  always  real  religion ;  nay, 
is  very  often  the  reverse.  Better,  far  better,  to  be  quiet  and  undemonstrative  like 
Euth,  and  to  have  the  root  of  the  matter  in  us,  than  to  be  impulsive  and  demonstra- 
tive like  Orpah,  and  in  the  hour  of  trial  to  fail.  A  straw  wiU  show  in  what 
direction  the  stream  is  flowing.  Ask  yourself,  "  How  do  I  act  in  little  things?  la 
self  habitually  postponed  to  God?  And  this  because  the  Lord  is  my  joy  ?  "  2.  The 
importance  of  (nay,  the  necessity  for)  an  entire  surrender  of  ourselves  to 
God,  if  we  would  be  Christians  indeed.  Let  us  ask  ourselves,  "  Is  it  thus  with 
me  and  the  Saviour?  Have  I  thus  taken  Christ  to  be  mine?  Do  I  thus 
cleave  to  Him  ?  Is  He  supreme  in  my  affections  ? "  3.  The  choice  which 
we  have  been  considering  must  be  made  with  the  full  determination  to 
abide  by  it,  come  weal  or  come  woe,  for  ever.  {Aubrey  C.  Price,  B.A.) 
Ruth's  trial  and  decision : — It  must  have  been  a  severe  trial  to  Ruth's  constancy 
when  she  beheld  her  sister-in-law,  who  had  probably  been  the  companion  of  her 
youth  and  the  friend  of  her  early  widowhood,  turning  away  back  to  Moab  and  its 
idol-gods  and  leaving  her  alone  with  Naomi ;  for  we  are  greatly  influenced  for  good 
or  for  evil  by  sympathy  and  numbers.  And  had  her  steadfastness  now  depended 
on  her  human  relations  and  affections  alone,  and  had  her  heart  not  stricken  down 
and  rooted  itself  in  something  that  was  Divine,  she  would  in  all  likelihood  have 
returned  after  her  sister-in-law.  When  one  flower  in  a  garden  is  pulled  up,  it 
loosens  the  hold  of  aU  the  other  flowers  near  it,  unless  they  are  much  more  deeply 
rooted.  And  Naomi's  words  seemed  to  give  a  voice  to  this  temptation  :  "Behold, 
thy  sister-in-law  has  gone  back  unto  her  people,  and  unto  her  gods  :  return  thou 
after  thy  sister-in-law."  This  was  like  giving  an  increased  momentum  to  the 
stroke,  or  feathering  the  arrow  and  driving  it  to  its  mark.  But  let  us  not  mis- 
understand the  venerable  woman  in  her  yearning  interest  and  disguised  love. 
There  was  a  hidden  harmony  between  her  treatment  of  Euth  and  the  rule  to  deal 
gently  with  young  converts  as  you  would  do  with  the  early  spring  blossom  or  with 
the  new-born  child.  But  she  dreaded  a  choice  made  from  mere  temporary  impulse 
or  secondary  motives.  The  cable  that  is  to  connect  the  ship  with  the  anchor  needs 
to  be  tested  in  every  strand  or  link.  One  weak  point  makes  all  weak,  and  may  be 
the  occasion  of  death  to  thousands.  Suppose  Ruth  to  go  on  to  Bethlehem- judah, 
to  be  brought  face  to  face  with  the  stem  realities  of  penury,  and  then  to  regret  her 
choice  and  to  steal  away  back  to  Moab,  would  not  the  most  sacred  interests  suffer 
the  most  ?  Here,  then,  was  her  "  valley  of  decision."  Naomi  had  anticipated  the 
maxim,  "  Try  before  you  trust " ;  but  she  was  equally  ready  to  obey  the  other  part 
of  it,  "  Trust  after  you  have  tried."  {A.  Thomson,  D.D.)  Whither  thou  goest, 
I  will  g:o ;  .  .  .  thy  people  shall  be  my  people,  and  thy  God  my  God. — Ruth : 
Mind,  its  purposes  and  powers  : — 1.  That  private  families  are  as  much  under  the 
providence  of  God  as  the  houses  of  kings.  2.  That  whilst  religion  does  not  secure 
from  the  ordinary  trials  of  life,  it  does  secure  their  being  overruled  for  good. 
3.  That  a  devout  committal  of  our  being  to  God  in  His  providence  will  never  fail 
of  its  reward.  In  the  text  we  have — I.  A  deliberate  resolution  fob  thb  tbub. 
1.  The  true  in  society.  2.  The  true  in  worship.  JI.  A  social  influenob  fob  thb 
tbtje.  1.  Naomi  represented  her  country,  and  her  people,  and  her  God,  to  Euth. 
8.  The  representation  which  Naomi  gave  was  most  attractive.    (1)  Every  man's 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

conduct  is  a  reflection  both  of  his  companions  and  his  God.  (2)  Heathens  are  able 
to  identify  our  companions  and  our  God.  (3)  "We  may  give  such  a  view  of  both  as 
■will  draw  them  into  our  circle.  III.  Ak  invincible  enekgy  fob  the  time.  1.  This 
force  triumphed  over  all  old  associations.  2.  This  force  overcame  all  the  pleadings 
of  Naomi.  3.  This  force  changed  her  social  condition  and  her  destiny.  Away 
with  the  dogma  that  man  is  the  creature  of  circumstances  !  The  soul  is  a  mariner 
that  can  so  pilot  her  barque  as  to  make  the  most  hostile  winds  waft  her  to  the  shores 
on  which  her  heart  is  set.  She  is  an  eagle  that  can  rise  above  the  darkest  thunder- 
cloud of  circumstances,  and  bask  in  sunlight,  whilst  that  cloud  spends  itself  in  wild 
tempests  beneath  her  buoyant   wing.      (Homilist.)  Ruth's  decision  : — I.  The 

CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  HER  DECISION.  II.  The  EXTENT  OF  HER  DECISION.  It  Comprehends 
the  sum  of  all  her  actions,  and  reaches  to  the  utmost  limit  of  her  existence.  Pro- 
fession without  principle  is  nothing.  III.  The  felicity  of  her  decision.  There 
is  no  substantial  happiness  apart  from  real  religion.  Application :  1.  Are  we 
Christians  ?  Then  we  have  each  a  soul  to  save — a  God  to  serve.  2.  Are  we  yet 
undecided?  Euth  is  our  pattern.  3.  Are  we  indifferent?  Then  we  resemble 
Orpah,  Kuth's  sister-in-law.  (F.  Ellaby,  B.A.)  The  faithful  choice  : — 1.  It  was 
an  humble  choice.  She  has  nothing  to  offer  out  hefseli.  She  affects  not  to  bring 
anything  which  can  make  her  of  any  worth.  She  pleads  only  for  permission  to  be 
to  Naomi  in  her  future  life  all  that  affection  and  fidelity  can  make  her.  She  has 
nothing  else  to  offer.  It  matters  not  in  what  condition  of  life  the  child  of  earth  was 
born,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  brings  her  heart  to  Jesus  she  comes  as  a  beggar.  Parents 
and  sisters  may  say  she  has  been  always  the  light  and  comfort  of  the  household. 
They  are  ready  to  think  she  has  never  sinned.  And  yet  she  feels  the  burden  of 
guilt,  and  weeps,  and  prays  over  the  remembrance  of  her  foolish,  wasted  Ufe.  The 
preciousness  of  the  faithful  saying,  that  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners, 
is  her  only  comfort.  The  assurance  that  the  Son  of  Man  has  come  to  seek  and  to 
save  that  which  was  lost  is  her  single  encouragement  and  support.  2.  It  was  an 
affectionate  choice.  Her  heart  is  with  Naomi.  Her  desires  all  reach  forward  to 
the  land  to  which  Naomi  journeys,  and  thither,  on  whatever  terms,  she  must  and 
she  will  go.  It  is  just  such  a  choice  to  which  the  Saviour  would  lead  you  aU.  "  My 
daughter,  give  Me  thy  heart,"  is  His  tender  appeal  to  you.  And  our  youthful, 
spiritual  traveller  freely  and  affectionately  responds,  "  I  give  my  heart  to  Thee ; 
Thy  face  will  I  seek  ;  hide  not  Thy  face  from  me."  Her  choice  is  of  the  Saviour, 
because  she  really  loves  Him.  Infinite  attractions  are  gathered  around  Him.  His 
service  seems  to  her  all  that  she  can  desire.  3.  Euth's  choice  was  an  entire  one. 
There  was  no  hesitation  in  her  mind  about  the  decision  she  should  make.  She 
manifested  no  remaining  love  for  Moab,  and  no  lingering  desire  to  carry  something 
of  Moab  with  her.  And  it  was  this  entire  choice  which  made  the  happiness  of  her 
future  course.  She  made  the  exchange,  the  transfer  of  herself,  freely,  completely, 
and  without  reserve.  And  there  was  nothing  left  to  turn  her  back  to  Moab  in  her 
possible  experience  hereafter.  When  the  choice  of  a  Saviour  is  thus  entire,  how 
completely  it  opens  the  way  for  future  duty  1  How  it  settles  all  future  discussions 
and  difficulties  with  a  single  decision  !  The  secret  of  happiness  in  religion  is  just 
here.  Making  it  the  entire,  single  choice  of  the  heart.  The  troubles  and  difficulties 
in  the  Saviour's  service  habitually  arise  from  the  vain  attempt  to  serve  two  masters. 

4.  Euth's  choice  was  a  determined  choice.  Lovely  and  gentle  as  she  appears,  and 
humbly  and  affectionately  as  she  pleads,  there  was  amazing  dignity  and  firmness 
in  her  stand.  Some  of  the  most  triumphant  and  remarkable  deaths  in  the  history 
of  early  martyrdom  for  Christ  are  of  young  and  tender  virgins  who  calmly  and 
boldly  endured  every  conceivable  torture  without  a  moment's  faltering.  "  I  am 
a  Christian,"  was  their  gentle  but  firm  reply  to  every  solicitation  to  recant,  until, 
worn  out  with  suffering,  they  departed  to  be  with  Christ.  You  may  never  be  called 
to  the  same  sorrows.  But  you  will  be  always  summoned  to  the  same  decision. 
Jesus  will  always  require  from  you   the  same  unshrinking,  determined  choice. 

5.  Euth's  choice  was  an  instant  choice.  She  asked  no  time  for  consideration.  Her 
mind  was  made  up.  Her  decision  was  settled.  She  staggered  not  in  unbelief,  nor 
wavered  amidst  conflicting  motives.  Why  should  we  ever  hesitate  a  moment  in 
our  acceptance  of  the  Saviour's  offers  ?  Surely  when  the  Lord  sets  before  us  life 
and  death,  a  blessing  and  a  curse,  and  bids  us  choose  for  ourselves  which  we  will 
have,  we  require  no  time  for  consideration.  It  has  become  a  mere  question  of 
personal  voluntary  choice.  This  can  never  be  settled  but  by  our  own  persoual 
decision  and  act.  If  it  is  to  be  settled,  it  must  be  finally,  in  a  single  moment  of 
time.    Why  should  that  moment  be  delayed  ?    Why  should  that  frank  and  affec- 


CHAP.i.]  RUTH.  29 

tionate  choice  be  postponed  ?  Make  an  instant  choice.  Say,  "  When  Thou  sayest, 
Seek  ye  My  face,  my  heart  replies.  Thy  face,  Lord,  will  I  seek. "  Why  should  any 
of  you  hesitate?  All  the  arguments  of  truth,  of  interest,  of  duty,  of  happiness, 
are  on  one  side.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  The  noble  choice  : — Five  choices  Euth 
made,  and  five  choices  must  we  all  maie  if  we  ever  want  to  get  to  heaven.  1.  In 
the  first  place,  if  we  want  to  become  Christians,  we  must,  like  Euth  in  the  text, 
choose  the  Christian's  God — a  loving  God ;  a  sympathetic  God ;  a  great  hearted 
God ;  ati  alt-ehcbmpassing  God ;  a  God  who  flings  Himself  on  this  world  in 
a  very  abandonment  of  everlasting  affection.  2.  Again,  if  we  want  to  be  Christians, 
like  Euth  in  the  text  we  must  take  the  Christian's  path.  "  Where  thou  goest,  I 
will  go,"  cried  out  the  beautiful  Moabitess  to  Naomi.  Dangerous  promise  that. 
There  were  deserts  to  be  crossed.  There  were  jackals  that  came  down  through  the 
wilderness.  There  were  bandits.  There  was  the  Dead  Sea.  Naomi  says :  "  Euth, 
you  must  go  back.  You  are  too  delicate  to  take  this  journey.  You  wiU  give  out 
in  the  first  five  miles.  You  have  not  the  physical  stamina,  or  the  moral  courage, 
to  go  with  me."  Euth  responds :  "  Mother,  I  am  going,  anyhow.  If  I  stay  in  this 
land  I  will  be  overborne  of  the  idolaters ;  if  I  go  along  with  you  I  shall  serve 
God.  Give  me  that  bundle.  Let  me  carry  it.  I  am  going  with  you,  mother,  any- 
how." 3.  Again,  if  we  want  to  become  Christians,  like  Euth  in  the  text  we  must 
choose  the  Christian's  habitation.  "  Where  thou  lodgest,  will  I  lodge,"  cried  Euth 
to  Naomi.  "She  knew  that  wherever  Naomi  stopped,  whether  it  were  hovel  or 
mansion,  there  would  be  a  Christian  home ;  and  she  wanted  to  be  in  it.  4.  If  we 
want  to  become  Christians,  like  Euth  in  the  text  we  must  choose  Christian 
associations.  "  Thy  people  shaU  be  my  people  1 "  cried  out  Euth  to  Naoflli.'  Oh, 
ye  uliconverted  people,  I  know  not  how  you  can  stand  it  down  in  that  moping, 
saturnine  worldly  association.  Come  up  into  the  sunlight  of  Christian  society — 
those  people  for  whom  all  things  are  working  right  now,  and  will  work  right  for 
ever.  I  tell  you  that  the  sweetest  japonicas  grow  in  the  Lord's  garden  ;  that  the 
largest  grapes  are  from  the  vineyards  of  Canaan ;  that  the  most  sparkling  floods 
break  forth  from  the  "  Eock  of  Ages."  Do  not  too  much  pity  this  Euth  of  my 
text;  for  she  is  going  to  become  joint-owner  of  the  great  harvest-fields  of  Boaz. 
5.  Once  more,  if  we  want  to  become  Christians,  we  must,  like  Euth  in  the  text, 
choose  the  Christian's  death  and  burial.  She  exclaimed:  "Where  thou  diest 
will  I  die,  and  there  wiU  I  be  huried."  I  think  we  all,  when  leaving  this  world, 
would  like  to  be  surrounded  by  Christian  influences.  You  would  not  like  to  have 
your  dying  pillow  surrounded  by  caricaturists,  and  punsters,  and  wine-bibbers. 
How  would  you  like  to  have  John  Leech  come  with  his  London  pictorials,  and 
Christopher  North  with  his  loose  fun,  and  Tom  Hood  with  his  rhyming  jokes,  when 
you  are  dying  ?  No,  no  !  What  we  want  is  radiation  in  the  last  moment.  Yes; 
Christian  people  on  either  side  the  bed,  and  Christian  people  at  the  foot  of  the  bed, 
and  Christian  people  to  close  my  eyes,  and  Christian  people  to  carry  me  out,  and 
Christian  people  to  look  after  those  whom  I  leave  behind,  and  Christian  people  to 
remember  me  a  httle  while  after  I  am  gone.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  True- 
heartedness  and  the  tests  of  true-heartedness  : — L  I  observe  that  the  conduct  of  Euth 
assures  us  that  theee  is  such  a  thing  as  teue-heaktedness,  and  thus  teaches  a 
lesson  of  trust  in  humanity.  It  reveals  certain  elements  in  humanity  that  are 
reliable.  Much  heartlessness,  much  frivolity  and  sin,  will  a  wise  and  good  man  find 
as  he  goes  about  in  the  world,  much  to  dissipate  the  rosy  credulousness  of  his  youth, 
and  to  sadden  his  philanthropy ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  something  of  his  faith  will 
be  justified,  and  he  wUl  learn  that,  after  all,  there  are  elements  in  human  nature 
worthy  our  trust  and  our  love.  As  the  chemist  finds  some  admixture  in  what 
seemed  to  be  a  simple  element,  so,  doubtless,  at  the  bottom  of  the  purest  heart 
lurks  some  particle  of  self,  some  ingredient  of  our  earthly  composition.  And  if 
one  is  disposed  to  turn  a  magnifying-glass  upon  this,  it  will  appear  enormous ;  if 
he  beholds  it  through  the  lens  of  a  sad  or  a  foul  experience,  it  wiU  look  grimy  or 
distorted ;  or,  if  with  nothing  more  than  his  naked  eye  he  has  a  mind  to  notice 
only  the  evil  that  exists  among  men,  he  can  see  plenty  of  it,  and  it  will  look  badly 
enough.  But  it  is  an  equally  correct  theory  of  human  nature,  and  a  much  more 
agreeable  one,  which  admits  the  conviction  of  some  moral  loyalty,  extant  even  in 
the  obscurest  places,  and  maintained  under  all  trials.  II.  But,  having  thus  vindi- 
cated human  nature  as  to  the  fact  of  true-heartedness,  let  us  proceed  to  consider 
ITS  TESTS.  By  what  signs  or  expressions  may  we  be  assured  of  its  presence  ?  I 
reply  that  the  very  words  of  the  text,  the  very  ideas  to  which  Euth  referred,  afford 
a  siiOficient  indication  of  these  tests.    For  consider  what  these  ideas,  expressed  in 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

the  language  of  Euth,  really  are.  They  are  the  ideas  of  home,  country,  God,  and 
the  end  of  our  mortal  life.  And  are  there  any  ideas  more  vital  than  these  ?  Surely,  if 
one  cherishes  any  sacred  and  true  thoughts  at  all,  they  must  cluster  around  these 
things.  1.  Home,  that  has  sheltered  and  nourished  you,  that  encloses  your  most 
secret  life,  that  claims  the  first  flow  of  your  affections  and  their  last  throb. 

2.  Country,  that  organism  which  links  your  individual  being  to  a  public  interest, 
that  gives  you  a  share  in  history,  a  pride  in  great  names,  an  influence  in  world-wide 
issues,  and,  as  a  second  home,  inspires  you  with  a  more  comprehensive  loyalty. 

3.  The  grave,  which  bounds  all  earthly  action,  and  Umits  every  earthly  condition, 
that  realm  where  distinctions  of  home  and  country  melt  away,  the  bed  where  all 
must  lie,  "  the  relentless  crucible  "  in  which  rags  and  splendour  alike  dissolve,  the 
gateway  to  a  stupendous  mystery.  4.  And  God,  the  Infinite  Being  to  whom  the 
instincts  of  our  souls  respond,  to  whom  in  our  highest  consciousness  we  aspire, 
the  Source  and  the  Interpretation  of  all  existence,  the  Light  that  comprehends  our 
darkness,  the  Strength  that  sustains  our  weakness,  the  Presence  to  which  in  our 
guilt  and  our  adoration  we  lift  our  cry,  the  Nature  in  which  we  live  and  move 
and  have  our  being — these  are  great  realities ;  and  it  appears  to  me  that  the  words 
of  Euth  are  so  eloquent,  and  her  devotion  seems  so  great,  because  of  the  great- 
ness of  the  things  she  spoke  of.  Indeed,  does  not  this  ground  of  thought  and 
action  constitute  a  grand  distinction  of  our  humanity?  If  in  many  points 
man  is  closely  linked  to  the  brute,  is  he  not  largely  separated  by  his  thoughts 
concerning  these  things,  and  by  his  action  upon  them  ?  Ascribe  to  the  animal 
such  affections,  such  faculties,  such  power  of  reasoning,  as  we  may  and  as  we 
must,  surely  no  one  wUl  claim  for  him  such  conceptions  as  man  entertains 
concerning  home  and  country  and  God  and  the  hmitations  of  his  earthly  lot. 
These  are  manifestations  of  human  nature  which  project  beyond  the  sphere  of 
mere  animal  life,  and  indicate  a  larger  scope  of  being.  They  are  marks  of  im- 
mortality. Start  with  any  one  of  these  ideas,  and  see  to  what  it  leads.  For 
instance,  the  relationships  of  home — is  there  not  an  argument  for  immortality  in 
these?  Or  start  from  the  idea  of  country,  and  is  not  the  same  conclusion 
unfolded  ?  The  duties,  the  achievements,  the  historical  problems,  that  pertain  to 
nationality,  do  not  they  suggest  it  ?  And  he  upon  whose  mind  dawns  some  appre- 
hension of  the  Infinite,  he  who  feels  assured  that  he  holds  communion  with  the 
Eternal  Spirit,  and  presses  forward  towards  that  perfect  excellence,  never  com- 
pletely to  attain,  but  always  capable  of  larger  attainment — surely  in  essence  he 
must  be  imperishable.  And  the  grave  itself,  dark  and  silent  as  it  is,  to  such  a 
conscious  soul  cannot  seem  the  final  barrier  of  existence,  but  only  the  suggestive 
portal  of  new  achievements.  If,  then,  these  great  realities,  of  which  Euth  spoke, 
are  associated  with  all  that  is  deepest  and  noblest  in  our  humanity,  he  who  proves 
faithful  to  even  one  of  these  ideas,  who  holds  it  as  a  sacred  conviction,  and  cherishes 
it  with  a  pure  love,  has  in  him  the  core  of  true-heartedness,  the  ground  of  a  prin- 
ciple, and  a  possibility  in  which  we  may  trust.  And  permit  me  to  add  that  these 
tests  are  personal  and  practical,  tests  by  which  we  may  try  not  so  much  the  true- 
heartedness  of  others,  for  which  we  may  have  very  little  function,  but  by  which 
each  may  try  his  own.  A  man  can  hardly  ask  himself  a  more  practical  question 
than  this :  "  What  are  my  thoughts,  and  what  is  my  conduct,  respecting  home, 
country,  God,  and  the  limitations  of  my  mortal  life  ?  "  III.  I  remark,  finally,  that 
these  four  ideas  are  not  only  the  tests  of  personal  true-heartedness — they  also 
reveal  the  great  bond  of  our  common  humanity.  That  which  is  common  to  men 
abides  in  the  hearts  of  men,  is  linked  with  the  great  facts  expressed  in  the  text. 
They  thus  indicate  the  natural  ground  of  human  unity.  And  upon  these  ideas  it 
is  the  tendency  of  Christianity  to  develop  a  still  nobler  unity.  {E.  H.  Chapin,  D.D.) 
A  good  resolution  : — I.  A  resolution  to  pursue  the  journey  to  heaven.  1.  It  is 
a  narrow  way.  2.  It  sometimes  proves  a  way  of  affliction.  3.  It  is  nevertheless 
a  very  pleasant  way.  II.  A  resolution  to  be  sATisriED  with  spiritu.Uj  enter- 
tainments. 1.  The  Christian  finds  a  sweet  entertainment  in  communion  with  his 
Gk)d — in  praising  Him,  which  is  one  of  the  most  delightful  exercises  of  the  mind ; 
and  in  prayer,  which  is  so  necessary  for  the  renewing  of  his  spiritual  strength. 
2.  In  the  Word  of  God  he  finds  a  delightful  repast.  He  is  made  wise  unto 
salvation.  3.  In  the  conversation  of  his  fellow  Christians,  the  believer  finds 
delightful  refreshing.  4.  The  believer  finds  also  times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence 
of  the  Lord  when  he  takes  up  his  abode  in  the  house  of  God.  He  experiences 
the  truth  of  the  promise, "  they  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength." 
ni.  A  besolution  to  cast  in  the  lot  with  the  people  of  God.    Before  you  make 


CHAP.  I.]  BUTH.  31 

a  resolution  so  to  do,  count  the  cost,  and  consider  the  nature  of  the  step  which  you 
propose  to  take.  1.  The  people  of  God  have  generally  been  a  persecuted  people. 
2.  The  people  of  God  are  an  afflicted  people.  •  3.  The  people  of  God  are  a  holy 
people.  4.  We  have  said  that  the  people  of  God  are  a  persecuted  and  an  afflicted 
people,  but  they  are  nevertheless  a  people  of  the  best  prospects,  so  that  they  are  truly 
wise,  and  consult  their  own  best  interests,  who   cast  in  their  lot  among  them. 

IV.  A  EESOLUTioN  TO  CHOOSE  THE  SEEViCE  OF  GoD.  When  a  sinner  is  truly  converted 
from  his  sin  he  cleaves  unto  the  Lord  with  purpose  of  heart.  "  Thy  God  shall  be 
my  God,"  is  the  resolution  which  he  expresses  to  the  Church  of  Christ ;  and  in 
doing  so — 1.  He  resolves  to  cast  away  his  idols.  2.  He  who  makes  this  resolution 
receives  God  in  Christ  as  his  God— God  in  the  person  of  the  Mediator.  3.  He  who 
chooses  God  for  his  God  resolves  to  devote  himself  to  the  active  service  of  God. 

V.  A  BESOLUTiON  TO  BE  FAITHFUL  UNTO  DEATH.  What  is  ncccssary  to  faithfulness 
unto  death  ?  1.  Begin  aright.  2.  Persevere  as  you  begin,  for  Christ  is  not  only 
the  Door  but  the  Way.  Often  repair  to  the  fountain  of  His  blood  for  peace  ;  con- 
stantly resort  to  His  throne  of  grace  for  spiritual  strength  ;  often  sit  at  the  feet  of 
Jesus  to  learn  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  To  conclude — 1.  We  admire 
the  constancy  and  perseverance  of  Euth.  2.  We  learn  from  this  passage  of  Scrip- 
ture that  we  ought  to  be  faithful  to  those  who  are  inquiring  the  way  to  Zion  with 
their  faces  thitherward.  3.  The  inquiring  and  anxious  sinner  should  persevere 
■whatever  difficulties  may  present  themselves.  If  the  difficulties  and  trials  of  the 
way  were  tenfold,  it  would  still  be  his  interest  as  weU  as  his  duty  to  endure  unto  the 
end.  {Essex  Rememirancer.)  Ruth  the  true-hearted : — That  strong  and  brave 
decision  on  the  hills  of  her  native  Moab,  where  she  resolves  to  cling  to  her  aged  and 
sorrow-stricken  mother-in-law,  reveals  a  character  of  no  ordinary  quality.  There 
is  in  her  what,  for  want  of  a  better  phrase,  I  must  call  depth  of  nature.  Her  cha- 
racter is  rooted  in  a  deep,  rich  soil  of  true  humanity.  A  woman  whose  whole  being 
is  on  the  surface,  who  has  no  hidden  deeps  of  feeling  and  thought  and  aspiration 
and  love — a  tree  decked  with  showy  blossoms,  but  never  hung  with  golden  fruit — 
is  felt  to  be  false  to  her  true  nature  and  Heaven-appointed  mission.  Euth  reveals 
to  us  a  character  nourished  and  strengthened  from  the  unseen  depths  of  an  affluent 
nature  which  we  love  to  associate  with  woman.  The  shallow  woman  exhibits  no 
such  heroism  as  that  of  Euth.  Here,  too,  we  discover  in  her  that  most  essential 
characteristic  of  a  true  woman — heart.  She  thinks  and  speaks  and  acts  like  one 
whose  inspiring  life-force  is  a  heart  aglow  with  the  fires  of  feeling,  throbbing  with 
the  pulsations  of  love  and  beneficence ;  and  her  whole  outward  life  is  but  the 
spontaneous  outflow  of  this  full,  fresh  fountain  within.  A  nature  thus  endowed 
and  animated  is  rich  in  its  own  resources,  and  bestows  its  abundant  benefactions 
upon  all  who  come  within  its  charmed  sphere.  The  heart  is  the  true  regulator  and 
benefactor  of  life.  Sometimes  neither  art  nor  intellect  predominates,  but  the  throne 
which  the  heart  should  occupy  is  held  by  the  ungracious  goddess  of  Stoicism — a 
stolid  form,  which  no  prayer  can  move  to  sympathy,  and  from  which  no  loving 
word  ever  proceeds.  How  desolate  is  the  nature  over  which  either  of  these  three 
false  powers  presides  1  How  impoverished  is  every  life  encompassed  by  the 
chilling  atmosphere  of  such  a  nature  !  On  the  other  hand,  how  enriched  are  aU 
they  who  breathe  the  genial  air  which  surrounds  one  with  a  nature  like  that  of 
Euth,  in  which  the  heart  sits  queen  on  her  rightful  throne,  and  dispenses  her  regal 
gifts  to  all.  Hence  the  importance  of  true  heart-culture  in  education.  The  neglect 
of  this  essential  part  of  genuine  culture,  and  the  giving  of  exclusive  attention  to  the 
intellect  is  one  of  the  most  perilous  tendencies  of  this  age.  Such  a  process  may 
produce  a  Lucretia  Borgia  in  one  sphere,  and  a  George  Eliot  in  another ;  but  a 
Madame  Guyon,  a  Mary  Lyon,  and  an  Elizabeth  Fry  wiU  seldom  or  never  come 
forth  to  bless  mankind  under  its  false  reign.  It  is  Madame  De  Stael  who  wisely 
says  that  "  life  is  valuable  only  so  far  as  it  serves  for  the  religious  education  of  the 
heart."  Let  us  note  another  feature  in  the  character  of  Euth.  Devoted  affection 
like  that  of  this  young  Moabitess  to  her  aged  mother-in-law  deserves  our  highest 
tribute.  There  is  an  utter  unselfishness  in  this  devotion  that  is  beautiful  to  con- 
template. A  selfish,  exacting,  suspicious  passion,  misnamed  love,  is  the  curse  of 
its  possessor ;  a  love  pure  and  unselfish  is  the  perpetual  joy  of  the  heart  in  which 
it  glows,  and  of  all  who  feel  its  Divine  warmth.  Orpah  can  speak  loving  words ; 
Euth  can  do  heroic  deeds.  A  selfish  person  cannot  interpret  unselfish  love.  Two 
hearts  must  be  in  happy  accord  to  read  the  meaning  of  each  aright.  Blessed  are 
they  who  can  discern  and  feel  true  goodness.  Blessed  are  those  homes  where  true- 
hearted  Euths  preside  and  Love  reigns,  goddess  of  the  happy  home  circle.    Yes,  it 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


is  heart-power,  and  not  any  other  force,  that  is  most  impressive  and  most  enduring 
even  in  this  unappreciative  world.  Courage  pays  its  devotion  at  the  shrine  of 
Buffering  love;  physical  force  surrenders  to  the  higher  power  of  the  heart. 
*«  Alexander,  Caesar,  Charlemagne,  and  myself  founded  empires ;  but  upon  what 
foundations  did  we  rest  the  creations  of  our  genius  ?  Upon  force.  Jesus  Christ 
alone  founded  His  empire  upon  love,  and  at  this  hour  millions  of  men  would  die  for 
Him."  We  must  rear  monuments  in  human  hearts,  by  true  love  and  devotion  to 
humanity,  if  we  would  live  through  succeeding  ages.  The  crowning  grace  of  Ruth's 
character,  as  it  is  that  of  every  other  human  being,  is  her  piety.  Love  to  man  is 
crowned  and  glorified  by  love  to  God.  (C.  H.  Payne,  D.D.)  True  decision  : — 
We  have  just  stood  at  the  line  which  separates  Moab  from  Judah.  Orpah  has 
gone.  We  shall  trace  her  course  no  longer.  We  would  gladly  never  see  her 
example  followed  by  others.  We  must  now  confine  ourselves  to  the  beautiful 
decision  and  faithful  choice  of  Ruth.  She  stands  before  us  a  sincere  youthful 
convert  to  the  Lord's  service.  She  has  decided  the  question  for  her  soul  by  grate- 
fully accepting  the  offers  of  a  Saviour's  love.  She  sets  out  upon  an  untried  journey 
alone.  Naomi,  indeed,  is  with  her.  And  her  heart  is  affectionately  bound  to  her 
mother-in-law.  But  Ruth  has  many  cares,  trials,  and  remembrances  of  which 
Naomi  is  not  conscious.  To  Naomi  the  journey  is  a  well-known  return.  To  Ruth 
every  step  is  untried  and  new.  She  was  born  in  Moab.  She  knows  nothing  of 
Judah.  Thus  is  it  with  every  youthful  convert.  The  experienced  and  aged 
Christian  has  much  acquaintance  with  the  way  in  which  you  go.  The  new-born 
child  of  grace  takes  every  step  on  ground  unknown  and  untried.  This  is  the  way 
in  which  all  must  go  who  would  walk  with  God.  "  This  people  shall  dwell  alone." 
Each  one,  be  the  multitude  ever  so  great,  is  a  hidden  one  with  God.  Multitudes 
may  be  travelling  in  the  same  direction,  but  the  feelings  and  experience  of  each  are 
solitary.  Ruth  must  make  her  decision  in  her  own  secret  heart,  and  make  it  for 
herself  alone.  Her  earthly  friends  must  all  be  left.  They  are  in  Moab,  from 
whence  she  takes  now  her  final  departure.  This  separation  is  not  to  be  made 
without  a  trial  of  her  faith.  The  more  affectionate  she  is  in  her  real  choice,  the 
more  she  will  feel  the  separation  from  those  whom  she  leaves  behind.  Religion 
cannot  destroy  our  earthly  affections,  our  interest  in  those  who  are  dear  to  us  in 
natural  ties.  Nay,  it  much  increases  the  warmth  and  power  of  our  love.  This 
decision  may  often  meet  with  much  opposition  from  those  with  whom  yon  dwell. 
Your  dearest  earthly  connections  may  oppose.  They  love  you.  But  they  do  not 
love  your  religion.  You  must  follow  the  Lord  fully  though  you  follow  Him  alone 
among  your  earthly  connections ;  and  He  will  make  those  who  oppose  at  peace  with 
you.  Be  faithful  to  Him,  and  your  fidelity  shall  be  the  source  of  increased  con- 
fidence and  respect,  even  from  the  worldly  who  appear  to  reject  and  despise  you. 
As  we  trace  the  history  of  Ruth,  we  find  her  meeting  with  new  trials  of  her  faith 
and  decision  after  she  sets  out  alone.  Orpah  has  gone.  But  stiU  Naomi  proves 
the  spirit  of  Ruth.  Your  sister  has  gone  back  to  her  people  and  her  gods.  If  you 
mean  ever  to  go  back,  now  is  your  best  time  to  go.  Remember,  I  have  nothing  to 
offer  you.  If  you  go  with  me  it  must  be  to  be  a  partner  of  my  griefs  and  wants. 
Thus  God  often  proves  the  young  disciple  with  new  trials.  He  sends  His  east 
wind  upon  the  young  trees  of  His  planting ;  not  to  weaken  or  destroy,  but  to  give 
greater  strength  and  endurance  for  the  time  to  come.  Our  real  conversion  to  Him 
is  an  hour  of  peace  and  blessedness ;  but  it  is  not  an  end  of  trial.  Nay,  it  is  the 
very  beginning  of  new  contests ;  and  our  fidelity  in  the  decision  we  have  made  is 
to  be  proved  at  once,  and  to  be  proved  constantly,  by  new  dispensations  of  the  will 
of  God.  Be  really  faithful  and  sincere,  and  God  will  prove  your  faith,  to  strengthen, 
settle,  and  stablish  you  for  ever.  Be  truly  gold,  and  then  the  refiner's  fire  will  only 
purify  and  make  you  bright.  This  faithful  decision  Ruth  was  obhged  to  make  in 
the  face  of  backsliding  in  others.  She  sees  Orpah  go  back,  yet  she  perseveres. 
When  a  child  of  the  world  comes  out  on  the  side  of  Christ,  and  pursues,  in  the 
midst  of  the  evil  examples  of  many,  a  course  of  simple,  faithful  devotion  to  the 
Saviour,  how  it  honours  His  truth !  How  it  strengthens  His  cause  !  How  it  im- 
presses even  those  who  oppose !  How  such  faithfulness  is  owned  and  prospered 
by  the  Lord,  to  whom  it  ia  offered,  in  the  usefulness  to  others  of  the  life  which  is 
adorned  by  it.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Ruth  deciding  for  God  :— I.  Affection  fob 
THE  GODLT  SHOULD  INFLUENCE  US  TO  GODLINESS.  Many  forces  combiue  to  effect 
this.  1.  There  is  the  influence  of  companionship.  2.  The  influence  of  admiration. 
Let  us  therefore  copy  the  saints.  3.  The  influence  of  instruction.  When  we  learn 
from  a  teacher  we  are  affected  by  him  in  many  ways.    Inatmotion  is  a  kind  of 


CHAP.  X.]  RUTH.  83 

formation.  4.  The  influence  of  reverence.  Those  who  are  older,  wiser,  and  better 
than  we  are  create  in  us  a  profound  respect,  and  lead  us  to  follow  their  example. 
5.  The  influence  of  desire  to  cheer  them.  6.  The  influence  of  fear  of  separation. 
It  will  be  an  awful  thing  to  be  eternally  divided  from  the  dear  ones  who  seek  our 
salvation,  n.  Eesolves  to  godliness  will  be  tested.  1.  By  the  poverty  of  the 
godly  and  their  other  trials.  2.  By  counting  the  cost.  3.  By  the  drawing  back 
of  others.  4.  By  the  duties  involved  in  religion.  Euth  must  work  in  the  fields. 
Some  proud  people  wiU  not  submit  to  the  rules  of  Christ's  house,  nor  to  the  regula- 
tions which  govern  the  daily  lives  of  believers.  5.  By  the  apparent  coldness  of 
believers.  Naomi  does  not  persuade  her  to  keep  with  her,  but  the  reverse.  She 
was  a  prudent  woman,  and  did  not  wish  Euth  to  come  with  her  by  persuasion,  but 
by  conviction.  6.  By  the  silent  sorrow  of  some  Christians.  Naomi  said,  "  Call 
me  not  Naomi,  but  call  me  Bitterness."  Persons  of  a  sorrowful  spirit  there  always 
•will  be  ;  but  this  must  not  hinder  us  from  following  the  Lord.  III.  Such  godli- 
KESS  MUST  MAINLY  LIE  IN  THE  CHOICE  OF  GoD.  1.  This  is  the  belicver's  distinguishing 
possession :  '•  Thy  God  shaU  be  my  God."  2.  His  great  article  of  belief :  "  I 
believe  in  God."  3.  His  ruler  and  lawgiver :  "  Make  me  to  go  in  the  path  of  Thy 
commandments "  (Psa.  cxix.  38).  4.  His  instructor :  "  Teach  me  Thy  way,  0 
Lord"  (Psa.  xxviii.  2).  5.  His  trust  and  stay  (see  chap.  ii.  12) :  "This  God  is 
our  God  for  ever  and  ever,  He  will  be  our  guide  even  unto  death  "  (Psa.  xlviii.  14). 
IV.  But  IT  SHOULD  involve  the  choice  of  His  people  :  "  Thy  people  shall  be  my 
people."  They  are  ill  spoken  of  by  the  other  kingdom.  Not  all  we  could  wish 
them  to  be.  Not  a  people  out  of  whom  much  is  to  be  gained.  But  Jehovah  is 
their  God,  and  they  are  His  people.  Our  eternal  inheritance  is  part  and  parcel  of 
theirs.  Let  us  make  deliberate,  humble,  firm,  joyful,  immediate  choice  for  God 
and  His  saints  ;  accepting  their  lodging  in  this  world,  and  going  with  them  whither 
they  are  going.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  influence  of  friends  : — It  is  not  im- 
probable that  Euth  was  in  heart  a  Jewess,  and  that,  for  reasons  which  looked 
beyond  the  mere  temporalities  of  life,  she  desired  to  cast  in  her  lot  with  the 
descendants  of  Abraham.  It  may  be  that  the  religion  which  her  mother-in-law 
brought  with  her  into  Moab  had  become  the  daughter's  hope ;  and,  discerning  in 
it  those  elements  of  truth  which  were  wanting  in  the  faith  of  her  own  fathers,  she 
naturally  concluded  that  the  people  who  were  guided  by  its  promises  and  com- 
mands would  have  power  and  blessing  from  above.  When  we  add  to  this  the  fact 
that  this  woman  was  to  be  one  in  that  line  of  generation  through  which  passed  the 
seed  of  the  Shiloh,  that  the  child  yet  to  be  bom  to  her  was  to  be  the  father  of 
David's  sire,  we  may  see  how  direct  is  the  conclusion  that  this  heathen  woman  did, 
in  her  conduct,  obey  not  merely  the  impulses  of  nature,  but  the  influences  of  grace. 
It  does  not  appear  probable  that  God,  having  such  a  work  for  her  to  do,  would 
leave  her  to  herself ;  that  He  would  trust  to  her  unguided  will  and  emotion  the 
part  which  He  designed  her  to  act  in  His  great  scheme  of  love.  The  decision  of 
Euth,  then,  supplies  us  with  this  proposition :  those  who  are  striving  to  serve  the 
Lord  should  cling  to  those  who  are  the  disciples  of  the  same  Master.  The  law  of 
dependence,  as  it  acts  upon  this  world  of  human  beings,  and  resolves  itself  into  the 
other  laws  of  influence  and  of  sympathy,  is  found  in  aU  the  relations  of  man.  In  itself 
it  is  a  beautiful  thing,  this  leaning  of  one  upon  another,  this  clasping  of  hand  to 
hand  in  the  great  circle  of  human  brotherhood,  and  feeling  the  electric  spark  as  the 
touch  of  a  single  finger  sends  a  thrill  through  the  multitude.  Man  was  born  for 
this  thing,  even  when  he  was  born  without  sin ;  and  that  would  be  a  high  life  where 
this  law  of  sympathy  was  at  work,  with  no  power  but  the  power  of  doing  good. 
With  us,  however,  the  kindest  laws  of  heaven  have  felt  the  disturbing  force  of  sin  ; 
and  sin  has  so  perverted  them  that  they  act  against  their  design,  and  in  opposition 
to  themselves.  The  influences,  then,  of  one  upon  another  may  be  for  evil,  as  well 
as  for  good ;  the  best  intentions  may  be  counteracted,  and  the  best  efforts  frustrated, 
by  those  with  whom  we  stand  connected  under  the  laws  of  social  Ufe.  If  we  desire 
to  serve  God  and  be  the  sincere  followers  of  our  Lord  we  must  break  away  from 
those  who  are  serving  other  gods,  and  seek  the  companionship  of  those  who  serve 
the  (Jod  of  Israel.  If,  in  times  past,  our  associations  have  been  with  worldly 
persons,  if  we  have  moved  in  that  circle  of  life  where  there  is  no  God  save  the 
passions,  and  no  law  save  the  will,  we  must  break  out  from  this  circle  and  enter 
another  where  life  takes  a  higher  form.  We  must  surround  ourselves  with  those 
whose  thoughts  and  aims  are  upward,  like  our  own,  that  thus  our  strivings  may  be 
aided,  and  our  efforts  sustained,  by  those  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  This  counsel 
toaohes  some  of  the  most  delicate  points  in  the  social  state.    It  enters  into  the 

39 


34  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

family  circle,  and  draws  its  lines  between  those  who  have  a  common  interest  in  the 
things  which  concern  the  body.  It  sweeps  through  all  our  connections,  from  the 
highest  to  the  lowest,  and  demands  that  everywhere,  and  under  every  form,  ita 
authority  be  acknowledged  and  its  injunctions  obeyed.  Now,  of  these  ties  of 
nature,  some  are  voluntary,  and  others  are  not.  Of  the  latter  I  wiU  not  now  speak ; 
■while  concerning  the  former  I  have  something  more  to  say.  The  tie  of  marriage  is 
a  voluntary  tie,  and  I  here  confess  my  amazement  at  the  readiness  with  which 
Christians  yoke  themselves  with  unbelievers.  I  know  of  few  greater  hindrances  to 
a  consistent  walking  with  God  than  an  irreligious  husband  or  an  irreligious  wife. 
We  say,  and  the  remark  is  applied  to  religious  things,  that  the  husband  can  go  his 
way,  and  the  wife  her  way  ;  but  this  proves,  in  the  trial,  to  be  about  as  practicable 
as  for  the  parts  of  the  body  to  separate  and  move  off  in  opposite  directions.  The 
tie  forbids  this  independence  ;  and  there  is  not  a  Christian  wife  or  husband  in  the 
world  who  can  so  overcome  the  law  which  holds  them  as  to  act  with  entire  freedom 
in  the  face  of  indifference  or  opposition.  It  is  time  for  some  one  to  tell  the  people 
that  marriage  is  an  institution  of  the  Most  High  God,  and  that  in  its  laws  it  touches 
the  interests  which  are  eternal  as  well  as  those  which  are  temporal.  (S.  Cooke,  D.D.) 
Ruth^s  spiritual  affinity  with  Naomi : — This  family  feeling  reigns  among  all  the  true 
Bons  of  God  under  every  dispensation.  It  operates  with  all  the  steadiness  of  an 
instinct.  Apart  altogether  from  Divine  commands,  believers  exercise  mutual 
attraction  like  planets  that  move  round  the  same  central  orb.  They  are  conscious 
of  "the  unity  of  the  Spirit."  Under  the  Old  Testament,  " they  that  feared  the 
Lord  spake  often  one  to  another  "  ;  under  the  New  Testament,  "  they  that  believed 
were  together."  There  is  not  an  instance  recorded  in  the  whole  inspired  history  of 
Christians  preferring  to  live  in  isolation  from  their  brethren.  If  there  were  only 
two  believers  in  the  same  city,  they  would  be  irresistibly  drawn  to  each  other  just  in 
the  degree  in  which  they  were  believers.  And  those  who  are  thus  mutually  attracted 
shed  many  mutual  blessings,  like  flowers  growing  contiguous  to  each  other  in  a 
garden  that  drop  the  dew  around  each  other's  roots.  And  now  her  God-inspired 
resolution  strengthening  and  glowing  as  she  proceeds,  culminates  in  a  solemn  vow 
of  undying  constancy,  in  which  she  imprecates  Heaven's  righteous  retribution  upon 
herself  should  she  fail  to  keep  it :  *'  The  Lord  do  so  to  me,  and  more  also,  if  ought 
but  death  part  thee  and  me."  {A.  Thomson,  D.D.)  Injluence  : — The  Bible  aflSrms 
that  no  man  liveth  to  himself.  Each  life  has  an  influence.  What  is  influence  ?  It 
is  that  subtle  something  which  resides  in  our  deeds,  words,  spirit,  and  character.  It  is 
a  shadow  of  ourselves,  our  impersonal  self.  It  is  to  us  relatively  what  the  fragrance 
is  to  the  flowers,  what  light  is  to  the  star.  We  are  all  sensitive  to  influence  :  our 
hearts  are  open  to  goodness,  beauty,  genius.  There  is  never  a  day  when  perhaps 
unconsciously  we  do  not  receive  and  reflect  a  thousand  shadowy  forms.  Some  are 
more  receptive  of  influences  than  others,  just  as  there  are  certain  soils  that  drink 
in  more  greedily  sunshine  and  shower ;  and  as  there  are  certain  bodily  conditions 
more  open  to  disease,  so  there  are  certain  mental  and  moral  dispositions  more  open 
to  good  and  evU,  truth  and  error.  There  are  men  like  clay — you  can  mould  them 
as  you  will ;  others  are  like  rock — you  must  chisel  them  as  you  can.  Naomi  was 
not  perfect,  but  she  exerted  a  great  influence  upon  her  daughters-in-law.  I.  Soira 
or  THE  LINES  ALONG  WHICH  HER  INFLUENCE  WAS  TBANSMiTTED.  1.  There  was  relation- 
ship. Naomi  was  mother-in-law  to  Euth.  This  link  was  sanctified  to  the  salvation 
of  Euth.  Eelationship  is  to-day  one  of  the  most  powerful  aids  to  moral  influence. 
See  it  in  the  Gospels :  Andrew  first  finds  his  own  brother  Simon  ;  Philip  findeth 
Nathanael.  Most  children  are  open  to  maternal  influences.  Native  missionariea 
are  the  best.  Influence  follows  love.  2.  There  was  sorrow.  These  women  had 
shared  a  common  grief :  they  had  watched  at  the  same  bed  of  death  ;  participated 
in  the  same  hopes  and  fears.  Naomi  would  comfort  Euth  with  her  Jewish  hope 
and  consolation.  Sorrow  fits  for  influence.  The  heart  is  plastic.  The  wax  is 
melted  and  receives  the  impress  of  the  seal.  The  mind  is  filled  for  the  teaching. 
Such  opportunities  for  transmission  of  holy  influence  are  constantly  occurring. 
8.  There  was  humanity.  Eelationship  and  sorrow  are  accidental ;  humanity  is  the 
essential  fact,  and  binds  the  world  together.  Angelic  influence  is  impeded  by 
difference  in  nature.  Our  hands  fit  into  each  other's  palm,  our  faces  reflect  similar 
features.  We  have  common  wants  and  ways.  Influence  runs  along  the  lines  of 
our  human  brotherhood.  II.  Some  of  the  impediments  that  might  havb 
INTERRUPTED  HEE  INFLUENCE.  There  Were  considerations  adverse  to  her  influence, 
1.  NationaUty.  Euth  was  a  Moabitess.  Israel  and  Moab  were  ancient  enemies. 
The  Turk  will  not  readily  yield  to  the  English  influence.    Yet  so  great  is  the  power 


CHAT.  I.]  RUTH.  85 

of  moral  influence  that  it  overcame  this  barrier.  2.  Education.  Euth  had  grown 
up  to  womanhood  before  she  came  under  the  influence  of  Naomi ;  her  habits  were 
formed.  She  was  a  devout  idolatress.  Here  was  a  strong  impediment  for  moral 
influence  to  overcome.  Virgin  soil  may  be  easily  cultivated  as  we  wish ;  not  so  the 
land  long  covered  with  weeds.  When  the  whole  man  is  overrun  with  noxious 
principles  it  is  not  easy  to  exterminate  and  implant  new  ideas  and  habits.  This 
the  good  life  of  Naomi  accomplished  in  Euth.  3.  Adverse  example.  Orpah  went 
back  to  Moab.  The  good  influence  may  fail  even  where  its  power  has  been  felt 
strongly.  Who  can  estimate  the  power  of  adverse  example  to-day  1  How  many 
are  turned  by  it  from  the  ways  of  religion  1  Naomi  may  be  counteracted  by  Orpah. 
III.  The  success  of  the  good  influence.  The  success  was  not  absolute.  Orpah 
returned,  Euth  continued.  See  her  wisdom.  She  in  her  turn  becomes  influential 
and  useful — a  help  to  Naomi.  She  becomes  a  permanent  factor  in  the  redemptive 
history.  See  the  wisdom  of  yielding  to  high  moral  influences.  {E.  Bisconibe.) 
The  power  of  Christian  character  shining  through  the  life  of  a  Christian  man  is 
strikingly  illustrated  in  the  following  incident :  "  An  Afghan  once  spent  an  hour  in 
the  company  of  Dr.  William  Marsh,  of  England.  When  he  heard  that  Dr.  Marsh 
was  dead,  he  said  :  '  His  religion  shall  now  be  my  religion  ;  his  God  shall  be  my 
God ;  for  I  must  go  where  he  is  and  see  his  face  again.'  "  If  ought  but  death  part 
thee  and  me. — Religion  a  'powerful  bond  : — 1.  Such  and  so  powerful  is  the  bond  of 
religion  that  it  makes  the  saints  of  God  not  only  desirous,  but  even  resolute  also, 
both  to  live  and  die  together.  2.  All  persons  and  people  should  so  live  as  those 
that  do  expect  that  they  and  their  relations  may  die.  So  Euth  did  here  expect  it,  both 
for  her  mother  and  for  herself.  "  Alas,  I  never  thought  of  his  death."  So  there  be 
others  that  live  so  licentiously  as  if  they  should  never  die,  never  come  to  judgment, 
as  if  they  were  to  have  an  eternity  of  pleasure  of  sin  in  this  world  (as  Psa.  xHx. 
10-13).  3.  As  burial  is  one  of  the  dues  of  the  dead,  so  dear  friends  desire  to  be 
buried  together.  Euth  desires  to  be  buried  with  her  godly  mother.  It  is  very 
observable  that  the  first  purchase  of  possession  mentioned  in  Scripture  history  was 
a  place  to  bury  in,  not  to  buUd  in  (Gen.  xxiii.  9).  4.  Death  is  the  final  dissolution 
of  all  bonds  of  duty,  whether  natural,  civil,  or  religious.  The  wife  is  no  longer 
bound  to  her  husband  (Eom.  vii.  1-4),  children  to  parents,  subjects  to  princes, 
and  people  to  pastors.     (C.  Ness.) 

Ver.  18.  When  she  saw  that  she  was  stedfastly  minded  to  go  with  her,  then  she 
left  speaking  imto  her. — Trust  after  testing  : — After  proof  and  trial  made  of  their 
fidelity  we  are  to  trust  our  brethren,  without  any  further  suspicion.  Not  to  try 
before  we  trust  is  want  of  wisdom ;  not  to  trust  after  we  have  tried  is  want  of 
charity.  The  goldsmith  must  purify  the  dross  and  ore  from  the  gold,  but  he  must 
be  wary  lest  he  makes  waste  of  good  metal  if  over-curious  in  too  often  refining. 
We  may  search  and  sound  the  sincerity  of  our  brethren,  but  after  good  experience 
made  of  their  uprightness  we  must  take  heed  lest  by  continual  sifting  and  proving 
them  we  offend  a  weak  Christian.  {T.  Fuller,  B.D.)  Benefit  of  a  thorough  deci- 
sion : — Those  who  appear  half-hearted  in  their  self-consecration  expose  themselves 
to  a  legion  of  tempters.  Lingering  on  the  border- land,  they  keep  within  the  arrow- 
mark  of  Satan.  Keeping  in  the  suburbs  of  Sodom,  they  are  in  danger  of  coming 
within  the  sweep  of  its  consuming  fires.  The  world  hopes  that  it  shall  get  them 
back  again  to  its  ranks.  They  resemble  persons  walking  in  a  crowd  with  flowing 
robes,  which  afford  those  who  wish  them  evil  an  easy  means  of  pulling  them  back 
and  laying  them  in  the  dust.  When  it  becomes  clearly  seen  that  our  heart  is  fixed, 
the  world  gives  us  up  in  despair  and  "  leaves  off  speaking  unto  us."  And  how  that 
choice  ennobled  the  young  Moabitess  I  What  pure  human  love  I  What  high  devo- 
tion !  What  sublime  self-renunciation  !  What  true  wisdom  introducing  among  the 
elements  that  should  determine  her  choice  eternity  as  well  as  time  1  Decision  of 
character  gives  full  play  to  a  man's  powers  whatever  they  be,  and  makes  them  his 
own.  {A.  Thomson,  D.I).)  Decision  a  safeguard : — If  a  man  is  seen  to  be  decided 
in  his  stand  for  Christ,  antagonists  wiU  give  over  assailing  him.  There  is  nothing 
in  the  use  of  which  men  are  more  discriminating  than  entreaty,  argument,  or  influ- 
ence. So  long  as  the  object  of  their  solicitude  is  wavering,  they  will  bring  all  their 
batteries  to  bear  upon  him,  for  there  is  stiU  the  hope  that  he  will  yield.  But  when 
he  comes  openly  and  determinedly  out  for  Christ,  they  wiU  waste  no  more  ammuni- 
tion on  him.  They  leave  him  thenceforth  alone,  and  attack  some  one  else.  Thus 
decision,  while  it  may  require  an  effort  to  make  it,  is,  after  it  is  made,  a  safeguard 
against  assault.    So  long  as  a  vessel  has  no  flag  at  her  mast-head,  the  sea-rubber 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

may  think  it  safe  to  attack  her  ;  but  let  her  hoist  the  flag  of  this  nation,  and  that 
will  make  the  assailant  pause.  In  like  manner,  the  hoisting  over  us  of  the  banner 
of  the  Cross,  being  a  symbol  of  decision,  is  also  an  assurance  of  protection.  {W. 
M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Yet.  19.  So  they  two  went  nntil  they  came  to  Bethlehem. — Constancy: — I.  That 

THEY  AEE  TO  BE  ADMITTED  INTO  OUB  FELLOWSHIP  WHOM  WE  FIND  TO  BE  CONSTANT  IN 
A    GOOD     COTTESE,    AND    TRUE    LOVERS    OF   GOODNESS,  WHATSOEVER     THEY   WERE    BEFORE. 

Naomi  thus  admits  of  Kuth,  no  doubt,  with  great  comfort.  Thus  Paul  alloweth  of 
Mark  (2  Tim.  iv.  11),  though  before  he  had  refused  him  (Acts  xv.  38),  and  willeth 
others  to  entertain  him  (Col.  iv.  10,  11).  II.  That  God  leaveth  not  His  in  dis- 
tress, OR  altogether  comfortless.  Naomi  went  out  with  husband  and  children, 
and  lost  them ;  she  returneth  not  alone,  but  God  sent  her  one  to  accompany  her 
and  to  comfort  her.  III.  That  a  true  resolution  will  show  itself  in  a  full  exe- 
cution. She  resolved  to  go  with  Naomi,  and  so  she  did,  till  she  came  to  Bethlehem. 
By  this  may  we  learn  to  know  the  difference  between  solid  resolutions  and  sudden 
flashes,  raw  and  undigested  purposes,  between  true  resolutions  and  such  as  be  made 
in  show,  but  in  substance  prove  nothing  so,  never  seen  in  the  effects.     IV.  In  this 

THEIR  travel  TO  CaNAAN,  AND  THEREIN  TO  BeTHLEHEM,  NOTE  THREE  THINGS  :  THEIB 

UNITY,  FERVENCY,  AND  CONSTANCY.  They  Went  together  lovingly,  they  ceased  not  to 
go  on,  they  did  not  linger,  they  took  no  by-paths,  neither  forgat  they  whither  they 
were  going,  till  they  came  unto  Bethlehem  in  Canaan.  As  these  thus  went  to 
Canaan,  so  should  we  unto  the  spiritual  Canaan  and  heavenly  Bethlehem ;  we 
must  go  in  unity  (1  Cor.  i.  10),  and  be  of  one  heart  (Acts  i.  14,  ii.  1,  46,  and  iv. 
24),  in  a  godly  fervency  (Rom.  xii.  11 ;  Titus  ii.  14 ;  Ezek.  iii.  14),  as  Elijah,  Nehe- 
miah,  the  angel  of  Ephesus  (Rev.  ii.  1,  2),  and  as  our  Saviour,  whom  the  zeal  of 
God's  house  had  eaten  up.  And  we  must  go  in  a  constant  spirit,  and  not  be  weary 
of  well-doing,  for  "  he  that  continueth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved."  {R.  Bernard.) 
True  friendship : — 1.  Such  is  the  faithfulness  of  our  heavenly  Father  to  all  His 
children,  that  He  never  fails  nor  forsakes  them  ;  but  when  one  comfort  faileth  them, 
He  findeth  out  another  for  them.  The  loss  of  one  relation  is  made  up  out  of  God's 
fulness  by  raising  up  another.  2.  There  be  but  few  friends  that  are  true  friends. 
Here  be  but  two  together.  3.  Such  are  fast  and  faithful  friends  indeed  that 
accompany  each  other  to  the  worship  of  God — to  Bethlehem.  Many  there  be  that 
do  accompany  each  other  to  Bethaven,  or  house  of  wickedness,  to  play-houses,  and 
places  of  revelling,  &c.  This  is  rather  a  betraying  than  a  befriending  one  another. 
A  carnal  friend  is  but  a  spiritual  enemy,  who  advised  the  ruin  of  his  soul  for  the 
recovery  of  his  body  (2  Sam.  xiii.  3).  The  truest  friendship  is  to  save  and  deliver  a 
friend  from  the  greatest  evil,  which  is  sin ;  but  to  tempt  any  to  it,  and  to  tolerate 
them  in  it,  is  not  the  part  of  a  true  friend,  but  of  a  real  enemy.  4.  'Tis  matter  of 
astonishing  admiration  to  hear  of,  and  be  eye-witnesses  of,  the  great  afflictions 
that  do  befall  some  persons,  both  great  and  good.  5.  God  works  wonderful 
changes  in  persons,  families,  cities,  countries  and  kingdoms.  {C.  Ness.)  The 
backslider's  return :— Naomi  had  wandered.  But  Naomi  might  return.  God 
had  not  cast  her  away.  He  will  never  cast  away  those  who  truly  love  Him. 
He  calls  them  back  again  to  true  repentance.  He  heals  their  backslidings  and 
loves  them  freely.  Then,  like  Peter,  they  may  strengthen  their  brethren.  They 
have  an  experience  of  human  infirmity  which  they  had  not  before.  They 
know  the  dangers  and  temptations  which  surround  the  Christian's  path.  They  can 
comfort  others  with  the  consolations  wherewith  they  are  comforted  of  God. 
But  the  backslider  must  return  with  total  self-renunciation.  Thus  Naomi 
even  renounces  her  right  to  her  former  name.  "  Call  me  not  Naomi,  call 
me  Mara:  for  the  Almighty  hath  dealt  very  bitterly  with  me."  They  said,  "Is 
this  Naomi?"  "Yes,  I  was  Naomi  when  I  was  contented  and  happy  in  the 
house,  and  among  the  people  of  God.  I  was  Naomi  when  we  took  sweet  counsel 
together,  and  walked  to  the  house  of  God  in  company.  How  foolish  was 
I  thus  to  wander  from  His  holy  ways!  Call  me  not  Naomi  now.  I  have  no 
right  to  that  name.  All  was  pleasant  then.  But  the  remembrance  is  bitterness 
now.  Call  me  Mara.  Let  me  come  back  as  the  poorest  of  the  poor,  sorrowful,  and 
self-condemned."  The  backslider  feels  no  claim  to  a  former  Christian  character. 
He  is  compelled  to  say,  "  Call  me  not  a  Christian.  I  have  forfeited  that  blessed 
name.  Call  me  a  sinner,  the  chief  of  sinners.  But  as  such,  suffer  me  to  return 
again  to  God.  •  I  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  a  son  ;  make  me  as  one  of  Thy 
hired  servants.* "    The  backslider  must  come  back  with  conscious  emptiness.    He 


CHAP,  1.]  BUTE.  37 

has  nothing  to  bring ;  nothing  to  offer.  Naomi  says,  "  I  went  out  full,  and  the  Lord 
hath  brought  me  home  again  empty."  How  true  is  this !  What  can  you  bring 
back  from  your  wanderings  in  Moab  but  the  bitter  remembrance  of  your  folly  ? 
Nothing  but  sadness  can  come  from  a  careless  backsliding  from  God.  And  so  far 
as  your  own  acts  and  conduct  are  concerned,  you  must  return  to  Him  with  perfect 
emptiness.  K  Divine  grace  and  long-suffering  shall  receive  you — if  the  Holy  Spirit 
shaU  consent  to  restore  you,  and  lead  you  back  to  the  mercy-seat,  once  more 
accepted — it  will  be  aU  as  a  free  gift  to  the  chief  of  sinners.  Yet  how  precious  is  the 
expression,  "  The  Lord  hath  brought  me  back  " !  Yes,  though  I  am  empty,  and 
have  nothing;  though  I  am  vile  in  His  sight,  and  "  mine  own  clothes  abhor  me," 
though  I  was  worthy  of  His  rejection  and  His  wrath,  yet  He  did  not  leave  me  in 
my  sin,  nor  suffer  me,  unpardoned,  to  perish.  But  I  come  back  empty.  Every- 
thing has  failed  me  except  the  loving-kindness  and  mercy  of  my  God.  No  condi- 
tion can  be  more  humbling  than  this.  Let  this  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  have  free 
course  in  you.  Do  not  attempt  the  least  justification  of  yourselves.  Speak  not, 
think  not,  of  any  temptation  that  led  you  astray,  or  of  the  influence  of  any  com- 
panions, or  of  the  want  of  watchfulness  of  any  friends,  or  of  the  unfaithfulness  of 
others  in  instructing  and  warning  you,  or  of  the  example  and  habits  of  others  in  the 
social  circle  in  which  you  live,  as  the  least  extenuation  of  your  own  guilt.  Oh, 
no  1  You  have  no  one  to  blame  but  yourself.  You  have  been  tempted  only 
because  you  were  drawn  away  by  your  own  lust.  Yet,  while  the  backslider  him- 
self mourns,  others  rejoice  over  him.  "It  came  to  pass,  when  they  were  come 
to  Bethlehem,  that  all  the  city  was  moved  about  them;  and  they  said,  Is  this 
Naomi  ?  "  Her  friends  had  not  forgotten  her.  They  gather  around  her  again 
with  delight.  All  Bethlehem  rejoices ;  Naomi's  poverty  and  wanderings  are  for- 
gotten. She  has  herself  returned,  and  this  is  enough.  The  poor  prodigal  had 
hardly  time  to  say,  "Father,  I  have  sinned,"  before  his  father  buries  his  voice 
in  his  own  bosom,  and  lifts  up  a  sound  of  joy  which  completely  drowns  the  accents 
of  the  wanderer's  grief.  Oh,  what  a  song  of  praise  does  his  restoration  awaken ! 
Heaven  and  earth  unite  to  say,  over  the  returning  wanderer,  "Is  this  Naomi?" 
Is  this  the  wanderer  ?  This  the  captive  that  we  thought  was  lost?  This  the  giddy 
child  that  was  bent  to  backsliding,  and  fled  from  aU  restraint  ?  Sing,  0  heavens, 
for  the  Lord  hath  done  it.  Shout,  ye  lower  parts  of  the  earth,  for  the  Lord  hath 
blotted  out  as  a  thick  cloud  their  transgressions,  and  as  a  cloud  their  sins  !  (S.  H. 
Tyng,  D.D.)  All  the  city  was  moved  about  them,  and  they  said,  Is  this  Naomi  ? 
— The  changes  wrought  by  time  : — Ten  years  ago  she  left,  but  is  not  forgotten.  The 
story  of  her  battle  with  poverty  and  consequent  emigration  are  well  remembered. 
But  what  a  change !  This  bent  form  and  aspect  of  despair  teU  a  pitiful  tale.  Time 
and  sorrow  have  wrought  their  cruel  work.  Ten  years,  and  such  troubles  as  hers 
leave  terrible  marks  behind  at  her  time  of  life.  Wrinkles,  grey  hairs,  and  feeble- 
ness of  body  soon  reveal  themselves.  Care  makes  men  and  women  grow  old  very 
fast.  We  look  twice — thrice,  at  the  acquaintance  of  former  years,  before  we  believe 
our  eyes.  "  Is  this  Naomi  ?  "  That  means,  where  are  the  husband  and  the  sons  ? 
It  is  no  vulgar  curiosity  that  prompts  the  inquiry.  Women  who  knew  Naomi 
well,  and  attended  her  wedding,  are  there ;  men,  too,  who  were  intimate  friends 
of  Elimelech ;  young  men  also,  who  as  boys  often  played  with  the  dead  lads 
Mahlon  and  Chilion,  all  eagerly  repeat  the  question  to  each  other  as  they  cluster 
round  the  two  poor,  travel-stained,  weeping  women.  It  is  a  bitter  hour.  The 
wounds  are  opened  afresh.  For  no  questions  cut  so  keenly  as  those  which  remind 
us  of  beloved  ones  who  have  passed  into  the  shadow  of  death.  (Wm.  Braden.) 
The  changes  of  life : — I.  Here  is  a  returning  pilgrim.  Home  has  been  but  a 
tent  life,  and  the  curtains  have  been  rent  by  sorrow  and  death.  She  tells  us  the  old, 
old  story.  Here  have  we  no  continuing  city.  Bethlehem — home  1  Oh  1  that 
strange  longing  to  live  through  the  closing  years  in  the  country  places  where  we 
were  born !  It  is  a  common  instinct.  II.  Here  is  a  godly  pilgrim.  Travel- 
worn  and  weary,  with  sandled  feet,  she  is  coming  to  a  city  sanctified  by  the  faith 
of  her  fathers.  "  Is  this  Naomi  ?  "  If  there  is  not  so  much  of  what  the  world  calls 
beauty  in  her  face,  there  is  character  there,  experience  there.  The  young  Christian 
starting  on  his  pilgrimage  is  cheerful  enough.  He  goes  forth  f uU  of  enterprise  and 
hope.  Do  not  be  surprised  if  in  after-years  you  ask, "  Is  this  Naomi  ?  "  How  care- 
ful, how  anxious,  how  dependent  on  God  alone  1  IH.  Hebe  is  an  ancestral 
PILGRIM.  Ancestor  of  whom  ?  Turn  to  Matthew  i.  5,  and  you  will  find  in  the 
genealogy  of  our  Lord  the  name  of  Euth.  Do  you  see  in  the  blue  distance 
One  coming  from  the  judgment  hall?     Do  you  hear  the  wild  cry  of  the  mob, 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  j. 

"Away  with  Him!  away  with  Himl  Crucify  Him!  crucify  Him  "?  Come 
near  and  gaze.  Behold  the  Man !  As  the  reapers  asked,  "  Is  this  Naomi  ?  "  so 
we  ask,  "Is  this  Jesus?"  Is  this  He  whose  sweet  face  lay  in  the  manger?  Is 
this  He  who  passed  the  angels  at  heaven's  high  gate,  and  came  to  earth,  saying 
"Lol  I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God"?  Yes!  Bowed,  bruised,  broken  for  us. 
The  same  Saviour,  who  now  endures  the  Cross,  despising  the  shame.  Well  may  we 
wonder  and  adore  1  IV.  Here  is  a  provided-fob  pilgrim.  Back  to  Bethlehem, 
but  how  to  live  ?  how  to  find  the  roof -tree  that  should  shelter  again  ?  She  knew 
the  Eternal's  name,  "  Jehovah-jireh,"  the  Lord  will  provide.  So  it  ever  is. 
Trust  in  the  Lord  and  you  shall  never  want  any  good  thing.  Believe  still  in 
your  Saviour,  and  provided  for  you  will  be  all  weapons  of  fence,  all  means  of 
consolation,  aU  prosperity  that  shall  not  harm  your  soul.  As  the  snows  hide 
flowers  even  in  the  Alps,  so  beneath  all  our  separations  and  sorrows  there  are 
still  plants  of  the  Lord,  peace  and  hope,  and  joy  and  rest,  in  Him.  Blessed  indeed 
shall  we  be  if  we  can  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  Him.  {W.  M. 
Statham.) 

Yet.  20.  Call  me  not  Naomi,  call  me  Mara. — Naomi :  —I.  Incidents  in  heb 
MFE.  This  world  is  to  all,  in  some  measure,  "  a  vale  of  tears."  The  pilgrimage 
of  the  true  Christian  is  not  through  verdant  plains  and  flowery  fields,  but  through 
a  "  waste  howling  wilderness,"  where  much  toil  is  exercised,  many  troubles  under- 
gone, many  perils  encountered,  and  many  severe  privations  endured.  God  is  a 
Sovereign  in  the  distribution  of  sufferings  and  tribulations.  His  own  people  have 
frequently  the  greatest  share  of  troubles  in  this  Hfe — that  their  souls,  which  are  too 
full  of  earthly  attachments,  may  be  weaned  from  the  world.  We  should  learn  hence 
not  to  murmur  nor  charge  God  foohshly  under  our  trials,  for  if  we  compare  them 
with  those  of  many  of  God's  people  who  were  more  gracious  in  their  dispositions 
and  tempers  than  we  are  they  will  appear  "  light  "  indeed.  We  find  this  bereaved 
and  distressed  individual  returning  towards  her  native  land.  She  acted  wisely, 
for  she  was  more  likely  to  fare  well  in  her  own  country— among  her  relatives  and 
acquaintance,  and  where  the  knowledge  and  fear  of  God  prevailed,  than  among 
strangers  and  idolaters  in  a  foreign  land.  It  would  be  well  if  we  imitated  Naomi 
in  a  spiritual  point  of  view.  At  length  we  find  Naomi  in  Canaan.  When  she 
returned  her  former  acquaintance  were  greatly  astonished  at  her  appearance.  Her 
affluence  was  gone,  her  earthly  glory  had  faded  away,  and  her  circumstances  were 
mean  and  narrow.  God,  however,  in  mercy,  calmed  the  evening  of  her  day.  The 
troubles  of  the  Christian  are  not  only  to  end,  but  to  end  blessedly — even  in  blisa 
and  honour!  U.  Mobaii  excellences  which  stood  prominently  forth  in  the 
CONDUCT  OF  Naomi  under  the  weight  of  her  tribulations.  1.  Her  benevolence. 
Behold  it  delightfully  displayed  towards  both  her  daughters-in-law.  See  how 
ardently  she  wished  their  prosperity,  how  fervently  she  prayed  for  it.  Herein 
she,  and  all  who  are  under  the  governance  of  the  same  superhuman  principle, 
resemble  their  Divine  Master.  He  also  felt  intensely  for  others — even  when  He 
was  Himself  involved  in  dangers.  2.  Her  acknowledgment  of  God  in  her  troubles. 
See  how  piously  she  develops  this  feeling  (chap.  i.  13,  20,  21).  Nothing  enables  a 
man  to  behave  as  he  should  in  the  day  of  adversity,  nothing  enables  him  to  keep 
down  an  envious  and  impatient  spirit,  but  the  viewing  his  troubles  as  the  allot- 
ments of  Heaven,  the  all-wise  appointments  of  his  Father  and  of  his  God.  3.  Her 
gratitude  both  to  God  and  man.  (1)  Her  gratitude  to  God.  If  a  few  handfuls  of 
corn  excited  Naomi  to  offer  to  her  heavenly  Father  a  sacrifice  of  such  fervent 
praise,  how  fervent  should  our  praise  be  for  abundance  of  spiritual  food,  for  Christ 
Himself  to  be  the  strength  and  joy  of  our  souls  ?  If  a  httle  earthly  food  is  a  mercy 
to  be  acknowledged  in  songs  of  adoring  praise,  how  much  warmer  should  our 
affection  be  for  endless  and  unmingled  fehcity  for  the  whole  man  in  the  land  of 
everlasting  life?  (2)  Her  gratitude  to  man.  Inasmuch  as  Euth  had  shown  kind- 
ness to  her  in  Moab,  she  showed  her  all  possible  kindness  in  Judah.  {John  Hughes.) 
The  Almighty  hath  dealt  very  bitterly  with  me. — Unfinished  'providences  not  to  be 
rashly  judged  : — How  unfit  are  we  to  judge  of  an  unfinished  providence,  and  how 
necessary  it  is,  if  we  would  understand  aright  the  reasons  of  God's  ways,  that  we 
should  wait  and  see  the  web  with  its  many  colours  woven  out !  Three  short  months, 
during  which  those  dark  providences  were  suddenly  to  blossom  into  prosperity  and 
joy,  would  give  to  that  sorrowful  woman  another  interpretation  of  her  long  exile  in 
Moab.  And  one  Gentile  proselyte  was  thereby  to  be  brought  to  the  feet  of  Israel's 
God,  who  was  not  only  to  be  the  ancestress  of  Israel's  illustrious  line  of  kings,  but 


OHAP.  I.]  RUTH.  39 

of  that  Divine  Seed  in  whom  "all  the  nations  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed." 
When  the  night  seems  at  the  darkest  we  are  often  nearest  the  dawn.  Begin  to  tune 
thy  harp,  0  weeping  saint  and  weary  pUgrim  1    "  The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day 
is  at  hand."    Learn  to  wait.    When  the  great  drama  of  our  earth's  history  ia 
ended ;  when  Christ's  glorious  redemption-work  is  seen  in  all  its  wondrous  issues 
and  ripened  fruits ;  when  order  has  evolved  itself  out  of  confusion,  and  light  has 
come  out  of  the  bosom  of  darkness,  and  the  evil  passions  of  wicked  men  and  the 
malignant  devices  of  evil  spirits  have  been  so  overruled  as  to  work  out  the  sovereign 
will  of  Heaven ;  when  all  the  enemies  of  Christ  have  been  put  in  subjection  under 
His  feet,  and  death  itself  has  died — then  shall  the  words  spoken  at  the  creation  be 
repeated  at  the  consummation  of  the  higher  work  of  a  lost  world's  redemption,  and 
God  wUl  again  pronounce  all  to  be  "  very  good."    {A.  Thomson,  D.D.)       NaomVt 
error: — N;iomi  began  to  err  when  she  ceased  to  believe  in  the  wi.^doui  and  benignity 
of  all  those  dark  events,  when  she  looked  upon  them,  not  as  expressive  of  paternal 
discipline,  but  of  Divine  indifference  and  desertion,  when  they  appeared  to  her  dis- 
tressed soul  as  the  arrows  of  judgment  rather  than  the  strokes  of  love ;  like  those 
affrighted  disciples  on  the  Galilean  lake  who  failed  to  recognize  Jesus  in  Him  who 
was  walking  in  such  calm  majesty  on  the  tossing  waves.    She  was  also  wrong  in 
this  morbid  concentration  of  her  thoughts  upon  her  trials,  and  in  not  realizing 
the  many  blessings  and  comforts  that  yet  remained  to  her.    Elimelech  and  her  two 
Bons  had  been  taken,  but  this  lovely  and  devoted  Euth  had  been  raised  up.     She 
was  now  poor,  but  she  had  health ;  and  God  had  brought  her  back  to  those  altars 
and  courts  of  the  Lord  after  which  "  her  soul  had  longed,  yea,  even  fainted."    And 
then  there  were  blessings  which  she  could  not  lose,  and  which  were  of  more  value 
to  her  than  a  thousand  worlds.  Besides,  how  greatly  did  she  err,  as  devout  persons 
in  a  despondent  mood  are  so  apt  to  do,  in  measuring  God's  providence,  as  it  were, 
by  her  human  line,  and  imagining  that  the  cloud  which  had  hung  over  her  like  a 
shadow  of  death  could  not  possibly  be  turned  into  the  morning ;  just  as  we  may 
imagine  the  people  near  the  pole,  with  their  many  months  of   unbroken  night, 
beginning  at  length  to  doubt  whether  the  sun  will  ever  rise  again.     An  eloquent 
writer  on  astronomy  imagines  the  different  aspect  in  which  our  earth  would  appear 
to  us  could  we  be  projected  from  its  surface  and  permitted  to  look  on  it  from 
one  of  the  nearest  planets,  or  from  the  moon.     And  how  different  would  the 
afflictions  of  God's  people  often  look  could  they  only  be  projected  a  few  years  into 
the  future,  and  permitted  to  regard  them  even  in  some  of  their  earliest  explanations 
and  consequences.    Lift  up  thy  head,  O  thou  bruised  reed,  thou  too  desponding 
woman,  for  lo,  the  winter  of  thine  adversity  is  past  1    Cease  to  clothe  everything  in 
sackcloth.    Take  down  thy  long  silent  harp  from  the  willows,  and  tune  it  anew  for 
notes  of  loudest  praise.    Thou  hast  long  exercised  the  duty  of  self-denial ;  it  is  time 
for  thee  now  to  exhibit  the  duty  of  delight,     (Ibid.)        No  bitterness  in  God's 
dealings : — Naomi  was  not  wrong  in  tracing  all  her  changes  in  condition  to  God, 
but  she  erred  in  ascribing  any  bitterness  to  God  in  His  treatment  of  her.     The 
father  loves  the  child  as  really  when  he  administers  the  disagreeable  medicine 
which  is  to  recover  him  from  disease  as  when  he  is  dandling  him  upon  his  knees. 
The  only  difference  ia  in  the  manner  in  which  the  love  is  shown,  and  that  is 
accounted  for  by  the  differences  in  the  circumstances  of  the  child.    In  like  manner 
adversity,  how  bitter  soever  it  may  be,  is  a  manifestation  of  God's  love  to  us, 
designed  for  our  ultimate  and  highest  welfare.    Now  this  may  well  reconcile  us  to 
trial.    It  wlQ  not  make  the  trial  less,  but  it  will  help  us  to  bear  it,  just  as  the 
wounded  man  is  braced  for  the  amputation  of  a  Umb  when  he  is  told  that  it  is 
indispensable  if  his  life  is  to  be  preserved.     {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)        The  different 
effects  of  affliction : — How  different  are  summer  storms  from  winter  ones  I     In 
winter  they  rush  over  the  earth  with  their  violence  ;  and  if  any  poor  remnants  of 
foliage  or  flowers  have  lingered  behind,  these  are  swept  along  at  one  gust.    Nothing 
is  left  but  desolation  ;  and  long  after  the  rain  has  ceased,  pools  of  water  and  mud 
bear  tokens  of  what  has  been.    But  when  the  clouds  have  poured  out  their  torrents 
in  summer,  when  the  winds  have  spent  their  fury,  and  the  sun  breaks  forth  again 
in  glory,  all  things  seem  to  rise  with  renewed  loveliness  from  their  refreshing  bath. 
The  flowers,  gUstening  with  rainbows,  smell  sweeter  than  before ;   the  air,  too, 
which  may  previously  have  been  oppressive,  is  become  clear,  and  soft,  and  fresh. 
Such,  too,  is  the  difference,  when  the  storms  of  affliction  fall  on  hearts  unrenewed 
by  Christian  faith,  and  on  those  who  abide  in  Christ.    In  the  former  they  bring  out 
the  dreariness  and  desolation  which  may  before  have  been  unapparent.    But  in  the 
true  Christian  soul,  "though  weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  joy  cometh  in  th? 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  I. 

morning,"  and  tribulation  itseli  is  turned  into  the  chief  of  blessings.    (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.) 

Ver.    22.    So    Kaoml  returned,  and    Ruth. — The  young  convert: — Little  was 
Naomi  aware  of  the  treasure  she  was  bringing  to  Israel  or  of  the  honour  which  was 
in  store  for  Euth.     She  says,  "  The  Lord  hath  brought  me  back  empty."    And  it 
was  so,  so  far  as  she  was  herself  concerned.     But  the  Lord  had  brought  back  with 
her  one  whom  all  generations  should  call  blessed ;  one  who  was  to  be  a  mother  of 
the  promised  Messiah,  the  anointed  Saviour  of  Israel.     We  are  now  to  contemplate 
her  admission  to  Israel.     The  young  convert's  entrance  among  the  people  of  God. 
We  cannot  enter  upon  such  a  view  without  stopping  for  a  moment  to  think  of  the 
happiness  of  Naomi  in  such  a  companion.     How  great  was  the  privilege  to  her  to 
bring  back  with  her  own  return  so  precious  a  soul  to  the  Lord  of  hosts  1     What 
an  unspeakable  joy  it  is  to  a  Christian  parent  to  be  attended  by  his  children  in 
the  heavenly  path  1     "  So  they  two  went  together  until  they  came  to  Bethlehem." 
I  cannot  conceive  a  greater  blessing  in  social  life  than  when  we  can  say  this  of 
father  and  son,  of  mother  and  daughter.     This  is  a  bond  which  must  long  outlast 
every  other  one ;  and  a  treasure  of  enjoyment  which  must  remain  when  every 
other  one  has  failed.     How  such  companionship  in  religion  reheves  the  sorrows  of 
the  road  !     How  it  multiplies  the  joys  of  the  way!     The  mother  and  the  daughter 
take  sweet  counsel  together  on  their  journey.    Naomi  has  much  to  teU,  Ruth  ha3 
much  to  ask,  in  reference  to  the  new  home  to  which  they  are  returning  together. 
Their  mutual  prayers  and  encouragements  are  full  of  advantage.     The  blending 
of  the  varied  experience  of  the  two  becomes  helpful  to  both.     The  despondency  of 
age  is  animated  by  the  joyful  anticipations  of  youth.     The  effervescence  of  youth 
is  moderated  by  the  experience  and  soberness  of  age.     "  So  they  went  together." 
Unity  of  feehng,  unity  of  interest,  unity  of  hope,  bind  them  together.     They  have 
fellowship  one  with  another.     But  while  Euth  took  sweet  counsel  with  Naomi  her 
thoughts  and  feelings  were  still  in  a  great  degree  peculiar  to  herself  and  completely 
her  own.     To  her  every  prospect  is  hopeful,  and  her  imagination  loves  to  stray 
through  all  the  anticipations  which   are  presented   to  her  youthful  mind.     The 
young  Christian  truly  living  and  walking  in  Christ  rejoices  in  the  hopes  which  a 
Saviour  gives ;  is  encouraged,  ardent,  and  delighted  in  looking  forward  over  the 
way  in  which  the  great  Captain  of  salvation  is  leading  the  sons  of  God.     "  I  see 
no  trials  or  sorrows  in  it."     Thus  would  Euth  have  said.     She  could  have  no 
feeling  but  unmingled  pleasure  in  the  prospect  of  the  journey  she  had  undertaken. 
Delightful  encouragements  arise  in  her  mind  which  overwhelm  aU  possible  regreta 
or  fears.     How  many  hopes  and  plans  cluster  around  Bethlehem  and  Judah  I     She 
knows  not  what  the  Lord  has  prepared  for  her.    It  has  not  entered  into  her  youthful 
heart  to  conceive  the  actual  blessings  which  are  laid  up  in  store  for  her  there. 
But  she  knows  that  all  must  be  well  and  happy  for  her  under  the  shadow  of  Hi3 
wings  in  whom  she  has  come  to  put  her  trust.     Nothing  is  in  your  way.    You  may 
do  all  things  through  Christ  that  strengtheneth  you,  and  be  made  more  than  con- 
querors in  Him.     She  comes  with  a  deep  sense  of  her  own  unworthiness.    But  thia 
is  silenced  by  her  conscious  desire  and  choice.    The  young  convert  knows  and  feels 
his  guilt.   But  he  needs  not,  and  does  not,  stop  to  sit  down  under  the  mere  dominion 
of  grief  for  the  past.     He  has  his  new  work  to  do.     He  must  press  forward  in  it. 
And  the  cloud  will  pass  away  and  leave  him  in  the  sunshine  of  his  Saviour's  love, 
to  finish  and  perfect  it.     But  the  perseverance  of  Euth  furnishes  us  with  another 
most  important  example.     "  They  went  together  until  they  came  to  Bethlehem." 
There  is  no  fact  which  gives  the  Church  more  peculiar  joy  in  the  coming  of  young 
converts  to  Christ  than  their  habitual  perseverance.    They  are  the  ones  who  "  hold 
fast  the  beginning  of  their  confidence  steadfast  unto  the  end."     The  most  fruitful, 
faithful  Christians  are  habitually  those  who  begin  the  earliest.    The  time  of  Euth'a 
arrival  at  Bethlehem  was  most   significant.     "  They  came  to  Bethlehem  in  the 
beginning  of  barley  harvest."     The  barley  harvest  of  Palestine  was  in  the  early 
spring.     The  barley  was  sown  after  the  autumnal  rains,  in  the  month  of  October, 
and  the  harvest  was  in  the  month  of  April.     It  was  a  time  of  special  joy,  the  first 
spring-gathering  of  their  annual  fruits.    The  harvest  is  always  employed  as  an 
illustration  of  satisfaction  and  joy.     "  They  joy  before  Thee,  according  to  the  joy 
of  harvest."    And  is  it  not  always  a  scene  of  rejoicing  when  the  sinner  returns  ? 
The  harvest  was  a  time  of  opening  abundance.     No  wants  or  poverty  were  pressing 
now.    There  is  thus  bread  enough  and  to  spare  in  the  Saviour's  house.     And  when 
the  sinner  finds  a  shelter  there  he  finds  all  his  needs  supplied.     His  soul  haa 


CHAP.n.]  RUTH.  41 

abundance  of  all  things  which  it  desireth.  No  more  encouraging  time  could  there 
have  been  for  Ruth's  first  acquaintance  with  Israel.  Every  aspect  of  the  land  was 
promising  and  prosperous.  The  sight  of  plenty  crowned  every  prospect.  And  she 
sees  her  new  home  clothed  with  every  attraction.  Is  it  not  always  so  when  we  first 
come  to  the  feet  of  Jesus  and  find  our  peace  and  acceptance  there?  Now  we  seem 
to  live  for  the  first  time.  There  is  reality,  happiness,  satisfaction  here.  We  have 
found  Him  whom  our  soul  loveth,  and  we  have  found  everything  we  want  in  Him. 
The  barley  harvest  was  the  time  of  the  Passover.  Thus  this  young  convert  from 
the  Gentiles  comes  as  the  first-fruits  of  a  Gentile  harvest  to  be  gathered,  and  is 
welcomed  with  Israel  as  a  partaker  of  the  paschal  feast.  Happy  are  we  in  wel- 
coming our  youthful  friends  giving  evidence  of  their  new  birth  for  God  and  their 
living  faith  in  Jesus  to  the  table  of  the  Lord.  Happy  is  the  house  the  first-fruits 
of  which  are  thus  consecrated  and  sanctified  to  be  the  Lord's  for  ever.  (S.  H. 
Tyng,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  n. 
Veb.  1.  Naomi  had  a  kinsman. — A  kind  kinsman: — I.  God  neveb  wants  BLis 

INSTRUMENTS   OF    SUCCOUR   UNTO   THOSE   THAT   TRUST   IN   HiS  MERCY.       Some    relation 

(either  natural  or  spiritual)  God  will  raise  up  to  relieve  His  in  their  deepest 
extremity.  II.  Some  rich  men  mat  yet  be  religious  men.  Though  indeed  they 
be  rare  birds,  yet   riches  and  religion  are  not  inconsistent  things.    UI.  It  is  A 

BRAVE   attainment   TO   BE  RICH  IN  THIS  WORLD,  AND   TO  BE  RICH  IN  GOOD  WORKS   TOO. 

So  Boaz  was.  Boaz  did  not  make  gold  his  confidence,  but  was  rich  in  faith 
(Jas.  ii.  5),  and  rich  to  God  (Luke  xii.  21).  (C.  Ness.)  Boaz  a  yeoman: — In 
these  early  days,  especially  under  the  rule  of  the  judges,  when  hostUe  inroads  on 
the  chosen  people  were  so  frequently  made  by  unfriendly  neighbours,  the  man  who 
had  great  possessions  was  in  a  manner  compelled  to  be  also  a  military  leader,  and 
so  we  may  very  justly  combine  the  two  meanings,  and  speak  of  him  as  a  valiant 
man  and  a  wealthy  ;  or,  as  Dr.  Morison  has  paraphrased  the  expression,  "  a  strong 
and  substantial  yeoman."  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  rich  kinsman  : — All  that 
the  appointed  kinsman  could  do  for  the  estate  and  body  of  his  impoverished 
relative  the  Lord  Jesus  as  our  goel  does  for  our  souls  and  our  everlasting  state. 
In  His  humanity  He  is  our  nearest  kinsman.  In  His  Deity,  he  is  perfectly  able  to 
supply  all  our  wants,  and  to  defend  us  from  every  danger  and  oppression.  As  the 
promised  goel,  the  Lord  Jesus  has  a  special  relation  to  Israel  as  a  nation,  and  a 
particular  personal  relation  to  every  believing  soul.  He  is  the  goel,  the  Kinsman 
Redeemer  of  the  nation  of  Israel.  He  is  the  seed  of  Abraham,  in  whom  all 
the  nations  are  to  be  blessed.  God  gave  the  land  of  Canaan  unto  Abraham,  and 
unto  his  seed  for  ever.  It  was  to  be  their  permanent  possession.  But  the  children 
of  Abraham  have  been  long  since  cast  out  of  their  inheritance.  Their  land  has 
been  taken  from  them,  and  they  have  been  wanderers  and  exiles  on  the  heart. 
Yet  God  ordained  that  this  land  should  not  be  sold  for  ever,  because  it  was  His 
land.  It  was  Immanuel's  land.  And  Immanuel  is  their  kinsman  according  to  the 
flesh,  who  is  to  restore  again  that  land  to  the  seed  of  Abraham.  His  feet  are  in 
that  day  to  stand  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  also  our 
goel,  our  Kinsman  Redeemer — to  fulfil  the  great  duties  of  a  Restorer  to  us.  He 
restores  that  which  He  took  not  away.  He  has  redeemed  our  lost  estate.  He  has 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light,  and  given  us  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be 
moved.  He  has  redeemed  our  persons  from  bondage  and  condemnation.  We  may 
go  to  Him  just  as  freely  and  hopefully  as  the  impoverished  Jew  went  to  his 
kinsman,  perfectly  sure  that  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins  and 
cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness.  This  gracious  character  of  our  blessed 
Saviour  is  brought  out  in  many  points  of  view  in  the  history  of  Boaz.  When 
Naomi  returned  to  Judah  with  Ruth,  she  found  a  goel  already  prepared  for  her. 
He  was  "  a  mighty  man  of  wealth,"  perfectly  able  to  meet  all  their  wants,  and  to 
restore  them  to  their  happy  condition  again.  And  such  a  kinsman  has  been 
provided  for  us.  We  need  not  say,  "  Who  shall  ascend  up  to  heaven  to  bring 
Christ  down  from  above  ?  "  He  is  already  prepared  to  be  a  Saviour  for  us,  before 
we  are  born.  We  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  receive  Him,  trust  in  Him,  and  obey 
Him,  as  our  gracious  Lord.    Like  Boaz,  He  is  '•  a  mighty  man  of  wealth."    All 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

things  in  heaven  and  earth  are  His.  And  if  we  are  His,  all  things  are  ours.  Ha 
can  enrich  His  people  with  every  conceivable  blessing.  No  good  thing  can  they 
want  while  they  have  Him  for  their  friend  and  portion.  The  name  of  this  rich 
kinsman  of  Naomi's  was  Boaz,  which  means  strength.  In  this  name  we  may  find 
a  memorial  of  our  Divine  Redeemer.  Jesus  is  our  strength  and  our  salvation.  He 
is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  for  us.  What  mighty  works  He  has  done  for 
us !  What  works  of  mercy  is  He  still  willing  to  accomplish  1  He  is  our  Kinsman 
Redeemer.  We  see  Him  in  His  lowly  human,  suffering  form,  wearing  our  nature, 
and  bearing  the  burden  of  our  sins.  We  see  Him  in  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
His  grace  as  God  over  all,  and  in  the  triumphs  of  His  obedience  as  the  Lord  our 
Righteousness,  possessing  unlimited  wealth  to  be  applied  to  our  needs.  We  see 
Him  of  infinite  might,  exalted  above  the  heavens,  angels,  authorities,  and  powers 
being  made  subject  unto  Him.  We  see  Him  fully  provided  for  us,  waiting  to  be 
gracious  to  us,  and  ready  to  receive  the  poorest  and  the  most  wretched  of  His 
kinsmen  who  come  to  Him.     (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.) 

Vers.  2-4.  Let  me  now  go  to  the  field,  and  sle&n.— The  young  to  work  for  their 
parents  : — Ruth  does  not  propose  that  Naomi  should  go  with  her  to  the  field.  She 
wished  her  honoured  mother  to  enjoy  the  rest  and  ease  suited  to  her  time  of  life, 
whilst  she  herself  was  exposed  to  the  troubles  and  inconveniences  of  her  humble 
occupation  in  the  fields  of  strangers.  Young  persons  should  be  cheerfully  willing 
to  bear  fatigues  and  troubles  for  the  sake  of  their  aged  parents,  that  they  may 
enjoy  such  ease  as  the  infirmities  of  age  require.  The  charities  of  the  heart 
sweeten  life.  A  young  woman  cheerfully  labouring  for  aged  parents  is  far  happier 
than  a  fashionable  lady  spending  in  idleness  and  dissipation  the  fruits  of  the 
industry  of  her  ancestors.  {G.  Lawson.)  A  dutiful  daughter: — 1.  God  often 
raises  high  buildings  upon  weak  foundations.  Great  things  often  come  from  small 
beginnings.  2.  All  daughters  ought  to  be  dutiful  daughters  unto  those  mothers 
whom  God  hath  set  over  them ;  they  should  ask  their  counsel,  and  obey  their 
commands,  as  Ruth  did  here  her  mother-in-law,  Naomi.  3.  That  poverty  should 
not  make  any  person  have  low  thoughts  of  piety ;  Ruth  doth  not  grudge  at  God  for 
keeping  His  servants  no  better.  4.  All  honest  endeavours  ought  to  be  used  for 
supplying  wants,  but  not  by  any  wicked  ways  whatsoever.  Ruth  here  resolves  not  to 
return  to  Moab  under  her  present  wants,  as  Israel  did  under  their  wilderness  wants 
to  return  to  Egypt ;  neither  doth  she  think  of  such  wicked  ways  as  stealing  to 
satisfy  her  hunger.  Neither  yet  doth  Ruth  resolve  to  take  up  the  begging  trade,  aa 
too  many  lusty  vagrants  and  vagabonds  do  in  our  time,  but  she  rather  resolves  to 
labour  with  her  hands.  6.  That  even  lawful  liberty  ought  not  to  be  used  without 
modesty  and  humility  in  asking  leave.  A  good  heart  inquireth,  "  Is  it  lawful, 
decent,  and  expedient  ?  "  6.  Such  as  find  grace  and  favour  in  the  sight  of  God 
BhaU  undoubtedly  find  no  less  in  the  sight  of  man.  God  will  speak  in  the  hearts 
of  men,  for  all  such  as  wait  on  Him  in  the  way  of  His  providence,  labouring  with 
their  hands  (Jer.  xv.  11  ;  Prov.  xvi.  7).  7.  A  meek  spirit  gives  forth  mUd 
speeches.  Some  persons  have  quick  and  hot  spirits,  yea,  even  good  persons. 
That  Naomi  should  be  thus  meek  in  her  misery  was  much,  for  misery  is  a  morose 
thing  of  itself,  and  unhinges  the  spirit ;  yet  sanctified  affliction  contributes  much 
to  meeken  even  a  choleric  mind.  (C.  Ness.)  The  gleaner: — We  have  seen  how 
ample  were  the  relief  and  the  portion  provided  for  Ruth.  1.  The  first  step  is  to 
reduce  her  to  the  deepest  necessity.  She  has  arrived  with  Naomi  in  Bethlehem. 
But  they  are  there  in  great  poverty,  and  with  no  apparent  means  of  relief.  How 
this  very  necessity  brought  out  a  proof  of  the  excellence  of  Ruth  I  Love  for  her 
mother  constrained  her  to  seek  a  supply  for  their  need.  And  she  came  to  the  field, 
as  a  poor  stranger,  to  gather  up  the  scattered  heads  of  barley  which  the  reapers  had 
left  in  their  path,  and  in  the  comers  of  the  field.  It  could  have  been  the  result 
only  of  extreme  necessity.  Thus  God  brings  the  soul  that  He  has  loved  and  saved 
to  an  experience  of  utter  want.  He  makes  every  hope  to  fail,  every  means  of 
spiritual  safety  to  depart.  The  sinner  must  be  thus  brought  down  to  fuul  himself 
lost  and  perishing.  And  when  the  Spirit  has  accomplished  this,  it  is  an  important 
and  blessed  step  toward  a  full  revelation  of  the  riches  of  grace  already  prepared  for 
him.  2.  The  next  step  is  to  take  away  all  feeling  of  rebellious  pride  in  their  state 
of  want.  Ruth  had  great  self-respect,  a  dignity  of  character  that  would  have 
honoured  any  condition  in  life.  But  she  had  no  pride  that  rebelled  against  her 
condition.  "  Let  me  glean  after  him  in  whose  sight  I  shall  find  grace."  This  is  a 
most  happy  and  a  most  exemplary  state  of  mind.    She  demanded  and  expected 


CHAP,  u.]  RUTH.  43 

nothing  as  a  claim  of  merit  or  right.  How  important  to  you  is  such  an  example. 
But  it  is  thus  God  leads  the  sinful  soul  to  its  great  Kinsman,  His  gracious  plan  is 
to  give  everything  freely,  and  to  make  man  receive  His  free  gifts  with  grateful 
acknowledgment  that  he  has  deserved  nothing.  But  how  long  do  we  struggle 
against  this  spirit  1  How  hard  it  seems  contentedly  to  depend  on  mere  grace  to  the 
ungodly  1  This  is  one  main  obstacle  in  the  way  of  our  salvation.  3.  The  next 
Btep  is  one  of  gracious  providence,  to  bring  her,  as  it  were  by  accident,  to  an 
unexpected  introduction  to  her  rich  kinsman.  Euth  is  wholly  ignorant  of  him  or 
of  the  location  of  his  fields.  She  is  equally  ignorant  of  the  exalted  connection  she 
is  to  have  with  him.  To  her  the  future  of  life  is  darkness.  But  God,  her  gracious 
God,  in  whom  she  trusts,  is  light  in  whom  is  no  darkness  at  all.  "What  an 
encouragement  to  us  does  this  ignorance  of  hers  afford  I  How  abounding  may  be 
God's  provided  mercies  for  us  I  Euth  goes  out  into  the  harvest-field  of  Juda3a, 
separated  among  its  various  owners  only  by  landmarks,  which  could  not  be 
distinguished  at  a  distance,  not  knowing  to  whose  field  she  might  be  led.  But  God 
had  disposed  and  prepared  her  way  before  her.  "  Her  hap  was  to  light  on  a  part 
of  the  field  belonging  to  Boaz."  It  was  God's  own  plan  for  her,  another  part  of 
which  was  now  coming  out  to  her  view.  And  when  at  last  she  finds  the  gracious 
end  to  which  the  whole  is  brought,  she  could  look  back  upon  this,  and  say,  "  Now 
I  know  why  I  was  made  so  poor,  and  led  to  Boaz's  field  to  glean."  How  often  is 
the  gracious  providence  of  God  thus  manifested  in  bringing  the  poor  and  perishing 
soul  under  the  ministry  of  the  Word.  How  applicable  to  our  purpose  is  this 
illustration  I  The  first  sight  of  a  Saviour  is  attractive  and  lovely  to  the  seeking, 
sinful  soul.  The  sinner  comes  into  the  midst  of  his  flock,  and  is  struck  with  the 
precious  blessings  which  they  enjoy.  The  Shepherd  stands  in  their  midst.  Jesus 
is  there,  to  awaken,  instruct,  sanctify,  and  feed  His  people.  The  hearts  of  all  are 
evidently  refreshed  by  Him.  He  blesses  them,  in  the  ministry  of  His  Word,  by  the 
teaching  of  His  Spirit.  They  praise  Him  with  grateful  homage  in  return.  The 
whole  scene  is  awakening  and  attractive.  Thus  often  the  most  abiding  impres- 
sions of  the  value  of  religion,  of  the  excellence  of  a  Saviour's  worth,  and  the 
happiness  of  those  who  faithfully  wait  upon  Him,  are  received.  Men  are  drawn  to 
Christ,  and  made  happy  in  trusting  Him,  by  the  enjoyment  which  His  people 
evidently  derive  from  His  service.  And  nothing  is  more  important  than  that 
Christians  should  ever  wear  an  aspect  and  maintain  an  influence  which  will  adorn 
the  doctrine  they  profess.  "  I  see,"  said  Eichard  Cecil,  contemplating  his  own 
sinful,  wasted  life,  in  his  youth,  "  I  see  two  unquestionable  facts.  First,  my 
mother  is  greatly  afiiicted  in  circumstances,  body,  and  mind ;  and  yet  I  see  that 
she  cheerfully  bears  up  under  it,  by  the  support  which  she  derives  from  constantly 
retiring  to  her  closet  and  reading  her  Bible.  Second,  that  she  has  a  secret  spfing 
of  conifort  of  which  I  know  nothing  ;  while  I,  who  seek  pleasure  by  every  means, 
seldom  or  never  find  it.  If,  however,  there  is  any  such  secret  in  religion  why  may 
I  not  attain  it  as  well  as  my  mother  ?  I  will  immediately  seek  it  from  God. "  He 
rose  from  his  bed  instantly,  and  began  to  pray.  And  when  the  Saviour  comes  in 
thus  to  bless  His  people,  "  sweetly  the  sacred  odours  spread."  Sinners  are  drawn 
and  encouraged  to  come  to  One  so  gracious  and  so  compassionate.  The  reapers  of 
His  harvest  are  animated  and  strengthened  by  His  presence,  and  the  Word  of  His 
grace  goes  out  with  special  power  to  the  souls  of  those  who  hear.  (S.  H. 
Tyng,  D.D.)  Motive  for  permitting  the  poor  to  glean: — One  forcible  motive  to 
persuade  the  rich  to  suffer  the  poor  to  glean  may  be  this :  Even  the  greatest  in 
respect  of  God  is  but  a  gleaner.  God,  He  is  the  master  of  the  harvest ;  all  giftg 
and  graces  they  are  His  in  an  infinite  measure,  and  every  godly  man  more  or  less 
gleans  from  Him.  Abraham  gleaned  a  great  glean  of  faith,  Moses  of  meekness, 
Joshua  of  valour,  Samson  of  strength,  Solomon  of  wealth  and  wisdom,  St.  Paul  of 
knowledge,  and  the  like.  Now,  if  we  would  be  glad  at  our  hearts  that  the  Lord 
would  give  us  free  leave  and  hberty  for  to  glean  graces  out  of  His  harvest,  let  us 
not  grudge  and  repine  that  poor  people  glean  a  little  gain  from  our  plenty.  (T. 
Fuller,  B.D.) 

Ver.  3.  Her  hap  was  to  light  on  a  part  of  the  field  belonging  unto  Boaa. — 

Gleanings  in  the  field  of  Boaz  : — 1.  I  learn,  first,  from  this  subject,  how  trouble 
develops  character.  2.  Again,  I  see  in  my  text  the  beauty  of  unfaltering  friendship. 
3.  Again,  I  learn  from  this  subject  that  paths  which  open  in  hardship  and  dark- 
ness often  come  out  in  places  of  joy.  And  so  it  often  is  that  a  path  which 
starts  very   darkly   ends   very   brightly.      When  you    started  out  lor  heaven. 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

oh,  how  dark  was  the  hour  of  conviction — how  Sinai  thundered,  and  devils 
tormented,  and  the  darkness  thickened !  All  the  sins  of  your  life  pounced  upon 
you.  After  a  while  you  went  into  the  harvest  field  of  God's  mercy ;  you  began  to 
glean  in  the  fields  of  Divine  promise,  and  you  had  more  sheaves  than  you  could 
carry,  as  the  voice  of  God  addressed  you,  saying,  "  Blessed  is  the  man  whose  trans- 
gressions are  forgiven  and  whose  sins  are  covered."  A  very  dark  starting  in 
conviction ;  a  very  bright  ending  in  the  pardon,  and  the  hope,  and  the  triumph  of 
the  gospel.  So,  very  often,  in  our  worldly  business  or  in  our  sph-itual  career,  we 
start  off  on  a  very  dark  path.  We  have  to  ford  the  river,  we  have  to  climb  the 
mountain,  we  have  to  storm  the  castle ;  but,  blessed  be  God  1  the  day  of  rest  and 
reward  wiU  come.  4.  Again,  I  have  to  learn  from  my  subject  that  events  which 
seem  to  be  most  insignificant  may  be  momentous.  Can  you  imagine  anything 
more  unimportant  than  the  coming  of  a  poor  woman  from  Moab  to  Judah  ?  Can 
you  imagine  anything  more  trivial  than  the  fact  that  this  Euth  just  happened  to 
alight— as  they  say — just  happened  to  alight  on  that  field  of  Boaz  ?  Yet  all  ages, 
all  generations,  have  an  interest  in  the  fact.  So  it  is  in  your  history  and  in  mine ; 
events  that  you  thought  of  no  importance  at  all  have  been  of  very  great  moment. 
That  casual  conversation,  that  accidental  meeting — you  did  not  think  of  it  again 
for  a  long  while  ;  but  how  it  changed  all  the  phase  of  your  life.  5.  Again,  I  see  in 
my  subject  an  illustration  of  the  beauty  of  female  industry.  6.  Once  more ;  I  learn 
from  my  subject  the  value  of  gleanings.  It  is  all  the  straws  that  make  the  harvest, 
it  is  the  pence  that  make  the  pound,  and  it  is  all  the  opportunities  of  doing  good 
that  make  a  life  of  usefulness  if  rightly  employed.  Elihu  Burritt  learned  many 
things  while  toiling  in  a  blacksmith's  shop.  Abercrombie,  the  world-renowned 
philosopher,  was  a  philosopher  in  Scotland,  and  he  got  his  philosophy,  or  the  chief 
part  of  it,  while  as  a  physician  he  was  waiting  for  the  door  of  the  sick-room  to  open. 
(T.  Be  Witt  Talmage.)  Great  issues  out  of  little  things: — It  was  strikingly 
remarked  by  Pascal  that  "  if  the  nose  of  Cleopatra  had  been  a  little  longer  or 
shorter  it  would  have  changed  the  history  of  the  world."  The  cackling  of  geese 
once  saved  Eome.  An  apple  falling  from  a  tree  suggested  to  Sir  Isaac  Newton 
that  great  law  by  which  he  unlocked  the  mysteries  of  the  starry  firmament  and 
shed  a  new  light  on  the  whole  creation  of  God.  The  lifting  of  the  lid  of  a  common 
tea-kettle  by  the  steam  generated  within  it  set  James  Watt  upon  a  train  of  thought 
that  led  to  the  invention  of  a  steam-engine,  which  has  revolutionised  our  whole 
manufacturing  industry  and  multiplied  human  intercourse  a  thousandfold.  A  reed 
of  an  unknown  species,  borne  to  the  feet  of  Columbus  by  the  Atlantic  wave 
awakened  in  his  mind  the  conjecture  that  there  must  be  another  continent ;  and 
this  issued  at  length  in  the  discovery  of  America.  A  little  bird,  flying  from  the 
mouth  of  the  cave  in  which  Mohammed  is  concealed,  misleads  the  soldiers  that  are 
seeking  his  destruction;  and  this  influences  the  character  of  religion  and  the 
history  of  our  race  for  many  centuries  over  the  larger  portion  of  the  earth. 
Pharaoh's  daughter,  coming  down  to  the  waters  of  the  Nile  to  bathe,  finds  a 
smiling  infant  in  its  floating  cradle  among  the  bulrushes,  and  becomes  God's 
unconscious  instrument  in  saving  the  life  of  one  who  is  to  deliver  a  nation  from 
cruel  bondage,  to  ascend  Sinai  and  speak  with  God,  and  to  conduct  the  million 
hosts  of  the  chosen  people,  amid  miracle  and  wonder,  to  the  borders  of  the  promised 
land.  Ruth's  "  hap  is  to  light  on  a  part  of  the  field  belonging  unto  Boaz  " ;  and 
this  eventually  raises  the  poor  stranger  to  affluence,  and  brings  her  name  into  the 
golden  genealogy  of  the  Saviour  of  men.  {A.  Thomson,  D.D.)  The  stranger  in 
the  harvest  field : — 1.  We  see  how  God  raises  up  friends  for  His  people  if  they 
really  need  them.  If  you  are  poor,  perhaps  you  could  tell  how,  when  times  were 
hard  the  Lord  has  sent  you  a  friend  in  your  distress.  Or,  in  some  gloomy  hour, 
when  your  heart  has  been  ready  to  burst  with  inward  grief,  some  kind  Christian 
friend  has  called  upon  you,  into  whose  ear  you  made  bold  to  pour  all  your  troubles, 
and  found  unspeakable  relief.  2.  We  may  learn,  too,  from  this  part  of  Ruth's 
history,  what  a  happy  thing  it  is  to  put  ourselves  under  the  shelter  of  God's  care. 
Happy,  happy,  those  who  are  thus  dwelling  "  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High, 
and  abiding  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty,"  who  can  say,  "  He  is  my  refuge 
and  my  fortress ;  my  God,  in  Him  will  I  trust."     (Bp.  Oxenden.) 

Ver.  4.  Boaz  came  from  Bethlehem,  and  said  onto  the  reapers,  The  Lord  be  with 
you. — Salutation  and  prayer  : — I.  That  it  is  a  commendable  thing  for  one  to  salute 

ANOTHER  WHEN  THEY  MEET.      II.    ThAT    MASTERS   ARE  TO  PR  IT  THAT  GoD  MAY  BB  WITH 

THEIR  HOUSEHOLD,  EAMUiY,  AND  WORKMEN.     {R.  Bernard.)      A  Qood  master : — 1.  The 


CHAP.  11.]  RUTH.  45 

■works  of  God's  providence  are  very  wonderful  works.  There  is  a  "  behold  "  put 
upon  this  passage.  Oh,  the  wonderful  concurrence  of  these  occurrences  1  Here 
Ruth  is  ordered  by  Providence  into  Boaz's  field,  and  Boaz  is  ordered  by  the  same 
Providence  to  meet  Euth  in  his  field;  and  all  this  in  tendency  to  accomplish  a  great 
design  of  their  marrying  together,  infinitely  above  both  their  thoughts.  It  would 
plainly  astonish  us  to  observe  diligently  the  strange  occurrences  of  Divine  Provi- 
dence, and  it  is  our  great  loss  to  live  so  Uttle  in  the  observation  of  every  passage  and 
footstep  thereof.  2.  It  is  comely  and  commodious  for  masters  to  mind  personally 
their  own  concerns.  Thus  Boaz  here  did.  Wise  Cato  could  say,  "  That  man 
which  minds  not  his  vintage  or  harvest,  the  further  he  is  from  his  labour,  the  nearer 
he  is  to  his  loss " ;  and  his  eyes  are  every  way,  and  everywhere.  (1)  Upon  the 
servants;  (2)  upon  the  reapers;  (3)  upon  the  gleaners;  (4)  not  only  looking 
to,  but  even  lodging  in  the  midst  of,  his  labourers,  if  he  did  not  also  labour  him- 
self in  winnowing  work  (chap.  iii.  2,  4).  3.  Christianity  is  no  enemy  to  comity  and 
courtesy ;  or,  civil  salutations  are  consistent  with  true  sanctity  in  humane  society. 
4.  Civil  salutation  ought  to  be  paid  again  in  the  same  coin,  saluting  for  saluting. 
(C.  Ness.)  Boaz  the  farmer: — Farming,  rather  than  gardening  in  the  ordinary 
sense  of  the  word,  is  man's  oldest  occupation.  It  may  not  be  esteemed  the  most 
dignified  one,  nor  may  those  engaged  in  it  be  generally  found  either  the  most 
enlightened  or  refined  of  men  ;  still,  instituted  by  Divine  authority,  and  pursued  by 
man  in  his  primeval  innocence,  with  the  ordinances  of  marriage  and  the  Sabbath- 
day,  it  is  a  vestige  of  Eden.  Besides,  it  is  probable,  if  not  certain,  that  it  is  the 
one  employment  in  which  man  had  God  for  his  teacher.  The  heathens  themselves 
represent  the  gods  as  having  taught  him  how  to  cultivate  corn ;  and  in  this,  as  in 
many  of  their  other  legends,  they  have  preserved  a  valuable  fragment  of  ancient 
truth.  There  is  that  indeed  in  the  nature  of  wheat,  barley,  and  the  other  cereals, 
which  goes  almost  to  demonstrate  that  God  specially  created  them  for  man's  use, 
and  originally  committed  them  to  his  care.  These  plants  are  unique  in  two 
respects — first,  unlike  others,  the  fruits  or  roots  of  which  we  use  for  food,  they  are 
found  wild  nowhere  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  ;  and  secondly,  unlike  others 
also,  they  cannot  prolong  their  existence  independent  of  man,  without  his  care  and 
culture.  When  mines  are  empty,  and  furnaces  stand  quenched  and  cold,  and  deep 
silence  reigns  in  the  caverns  where  the  axe  of  the  pitman  sounded,  the  husbandman 
shall  still  plough  the  soil.  His,  the  first  man's,  shall  probably  be  the  last  man's 
employment.  The  occupation  which  Boaz  followed  rises  still  higher  in  importance 
when  we  look  at  the  multitudes  it  employs.  Great  as  we  are  in  commerce  and 
manufactures — clothing  nations  with  our  fabrics,  covering  every  sea  with  ships, 
and  carrying  the  produce  of  our  arts  to  every  shore — the  cultivation  of  the  soil 
employs  a  larger  number  of  hands  than  any  other  trade.  Now  these  interests  turn 
to  a  great  extent  on  the  manner  in  which  those  who  follow  Boaz's  occupation 
discharge  their  duties :  and  it  is  therefore  a  matter  of  thankfulness  that  in  him  the 
book  which  instructs  both  kings  and  beggars,  peers  and  peasants,  how  to  live,  sets 
before  us  a  model  farmer.  I.  His  diligence  in  business.  Boaz  was  not  one  whom 
necessity  compelled  to  labour.  He  was  rich ;  and  is  indeed  called  "  a  mighty  man  of 
wealth."  Yet  he  made  that  no  reason  for  wasting  his  life  in  ease  and  idleness. 
Nor,  though  he  employed  overseers,  did  he  consider  it  right  to  commit  his  business 
entirely  into  their  hands.  In  the  first  place,  such  irresponsibility  is  not  good  for 
servants.  It  places  them  in  circumstances  of  temptation  to  act  dishonestly. 
Neither  is  it,  in  the  second  place,  for  the  master's  interests.  "  The  eye  of  the 
master  maketh  a  fat  horse,"  says  an  English  proverb.  "  The  farmer  ploughs  best 
with  his  feet,"  says  a  Scotch  one — his  success  turning  on  the  attention  he  personally 
gives  to  the  superintendence  of  his  servants  and  the  different  interests  of  his  farm. 
II.  His  coubteousness.  "  Be  ye  courteous  "  is  a  duty  which  Paul— himself  a  fine 
example  of  it— enjoins  on  Christians  (Acts  xxvi.  12).  His  was  courtesy  to  a 
superior ;  but  a  still  finer  ornament  of  manners,  and  of  religion  also,  is  courtesy 
to  inferiors.  And  what  a  fine  example  of  that  is  Boaz  I  It  is  with  no  cold  looks, 
nor  distant  air,  nor  rough  speech,  nor  haughty  bearing,  making  his  reapers  pain- 
fully sensible  of  their  inferiority — that  they  are  servants  and  he  their  master — Boaz 
enters  the  harvest  field.  More  beautiful  than  the  morning,  with  its  dews  sparkling 
like  diamonds  on  the  grass,  and  its  golden  beams  tipping  the  surrounding  hills  of 
Bethlehem,  these  morning  salutations  between  master  and  servants  I  Loving  him, 
they  esteemed  his  interests  their  own.  His  conduct  corresponded  with  his  speech. 
Observe  the  eye  of  compassion  he  cast  on  Ruth.  He  paid  as  much  honour  to  the 
virtues  and  feelings  of  this  poor  gleaner  as  if  she  had  been  the  finest  lady  in  the 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.d. 

land.  Behold  true  courteousness  1  This  grace  is  a  great  set-off  to  piety.  As  such 
it  should  be  assiduously  cultivated  by  all  who  desire  to  •'  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God 
our  Saviour."  III.  His  piett.  "The  Lord  be  with  you" — his  address  to  the 
reapers  on  entering  the  harvest  field — has  the  ring  of  sterling  metal.  What  a 
contrast  Boaz  offers  to  farmers  we  have  known,  by  whose  lips  God's  name  was 
frequently  profaned,  but  never  honoured — their  servants,  like  their  dogs  and  horses, 
being  often  cursed,  but  never  once  blessed  I  "  Like  master,  like  man."  Boaz 
almost  never  opens  his  mouth  but  pearls  drop  out.  His  speech  breathes  forth 
pious  utterances.  All  his  conversation  is  seasoned  with  grace ;  and,  though  the 
result  of  a  Divine  change  of  heart,  how  natural  his  religion  seems ! — not  hke  a 
gala-dress  assumed  for  the  occasion — not  like  gum-flowers  worn  for  ornament,  but 
such  as  spring  living  from  the  sward — not  like  an  artificial  perfume  that  imparts 
a  passing  odour  to  a  thing  that  is  dead,  but  the  odours  exhaled  by  roses  or  lilies 
bathed  in  the  dews  of  heaven.  Nor  was  it  only  in  the  language  of  piety  that  his 
piety  expressed  itself.  It  did  not  evaporate  in  words.  We  have  heard  him  speak ; 
see  how  he  acts !  One  night  sleeping  by  a  heap  of  corn,  alone  as  he  supposed,  he 
wakes  to  find  a  woman  lying  at  his  feet.  It  is  Euth.  Instructed  by  Naomi, 
she  takes  this  strange  Jewish  fashion  to  seek  her  rights  and  commit  her 
fortunes  into  his  hands.  IV.  His  caee  for  thk  mokal  and  religious 
INTERESTS  OF  HIS  SERVANTS.  Boaz  in  his  own  life  set  them  an  example  of  piety 
which  could  hardly  fail  to  produce  a  favourable  impression  on  their  minds.  Some 
are  content  to  get  work  out  of  their  servants ;  they  take  no  interest  in  their  souls^ 
no  more  than  if,  like  the  cattle  they  tend,  they  had  no  souls  at  all.  Unlike  these, 
Boaz  spoke  to  his  servants  as  a  God-fearing  man.  One  who  felt  himself  responsible 
to  God  and  to  their  parents  also,  he  charged  himself  with  the  care  of  their  morals. 
This  appears  in  the  warnings  and  kind  instructions  he  gave  both  to  them  and 
to  Euth.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Eelations  between  employers  and  employed : — The 
great  operations  which  some  in  these  days  think  fit  to  carry  on,  more  for  their  own 
glory  certainly  than  the  good  of  their  country  or  countrymen,  entirely  preclude 
anything  like  friendship  between  the  chief  and  the  multitude  of  his  subordinates. 
It  is  impossible  that  a  man  who  has  a  thousand  under  him  should  know  and 
consider  each,  and  there  would  be  too  much  pretence  in  saying,  "  God  be  with 
you,"  on  entering  a  yard  or  factory  when  otherwise  no  feeling  is  shown  with  which 
the  name  of  God  can  be  connected.  Apart  altogether  from  questions  as  to  wealth 
and  its  use,  every  employer  has  a  responsibility  for  maintaining  the  healthy 
human  activity  of  his  people,  and  nowhere  is  the  immoraUty  of  the  present  system 
of  huge  concerns  so  evident  as  in  the  extinction  of  personal  goodwill.  The  work- 
man, of  course,  may  adjust  himself  to  the  state  of  matters,  but  it  will  too  often  be  by 
discrediting  what  he  knows  he  cannot  have  and  keeping  up  a  critical  resentful 
habit  of  mind  against  those  who  seem  to  treat  him  as  a  machine.  He  may  often 
be  wrong  in  his  judgment  of  an  employer.  There  may  be  less  hardness  of 
temper  on  the  other  side  than  there  is  on  his  own.  But  the  conditions  being 
what  they  are,  one  may  say  he  is  certain  to  be  a  severe  critic.  We  have 
unquestionably  lost  much  and  are  in  danger  of  losing  more,  not  in  a 
financial  sense,  which  matters  little,  but  in  the  infinitely  more  important 
affairs  of  social  sweetness  and  Christian  civilisation.  (E.  A.  Watson,  M.A.) 
On  the  relations  that  subsist  amongst  the  different  classes  of  society  in  general,  ana 
in  partic^llar  the  intercourse  bettoeen  employers  and  operatives: — How  lovely  is  the 
picture  of  this  Hebrew  harvest  field !  It  has  often  been  remarked  that  the  Bible, 
in  its  histories,  doctrines,  and  precepts,  is  suited  to  all  nations  and  all  times. 
Though  written  by  Jews,  it  is  written  for  the  world ;  though  addressed  chiefly  to 
Israel,  it  is  framed  to  suit  mankind.  To  a  monarchy  in  one  age,  and  a  republio 
in  another,  it  gives  forth  its  saving  lessons  without  partiality  and  without 
embarrassment.  The  patriarchal  institutes  that  prevailed  in  the  time  of  Boaz  were 
very  different  from  the  political  constitutions  of  modern  Europe.  The  subjection 
of  the  servant  to  his  master  which  prevailed  in  those  days  was  very  different  from 
the  freedom  and  equal  rights  of  all  classes  in  our  own  land.  Human  happiness 
and  misery  do  not  turn  on  the  form  which  the  organisation  of  society  may  assume. 
It  is  a  baptism  by  the  Spirit  that  will  sweeten  and  hallow  the  relations  of  life, 
whatever  the  external  form  may  be  into  which  they  have  been  cast.  In  view  of  the 
condition  and  tendencies  of  society,  what  is  the  duty  of  a  Christian  patriot  ?  He  is 
not  to  whine  idly  for  the  return  of  the  good  old  days,  when  society  consisted  only  of 
two  classes,  kind  masters  and  happy  serfs ;  neither  is  he  madly  to  plant  himself 
in  the  breach,  with  the  view  of  stemming  and  turning  the  advancing  tide.    Let 


CHAP,  n.]  RUTH.  47 

believing  men,  whatever  may  be  their  views  of  the  optimism  in  political  organisation, 
fix  it  as  an  axiom  in  their  minds  that  for  the  highest  good  of  the  species  mnch 
more  depends  on  the  spirit  which  animates  persons  than  on  the  forms  which 
institutes  may  assume.  Let  all  who  hope  in  God  and  love  their  brethren  act  on  this 
principle,  and  act  together  on  it.  Consider  now,  more  particularly,  the  two  features 
that  characterised  the  intercourse  between  Boaz  and  his  reapers.  These  are 
kindliness  and  godliness ;  there  is  love  of  men,  and  there  is  reverence  of  God. 
I.  Kindliness  is  greatly  to  be  desired  in  the  intercourse  of  employers  and  employed 
in  our  day.  The  master  and  the  men  must  meet  often  for  the  transaction  of 
business  that  is  of  common  concern.  If  the  meetings  be  devoid  of  kindness,  they 
are  unpleasant  and  injurious.  How  much  we  suffer  from  harsh,  supercilious  pride 
on  the  one  hand,  and  dogged,  discontented  pride  on  the  other !  Here  is  a  noble  field 
for  the  philanthropist  to  labour  on.  He  who  shall  increase  the  kindliness  between 
operatives  and  their  employers  will  be  a  benefactor  of  his  race.  All  does  not  lie 
with  the  masters,  but  the  initiative  is  with  them.  They  have  more  in  their  power. 
We  shall  lose  aU  the  benefit  of  our  vast  machinery,  it  will  be  blighted  by  a  curse,  if 
we  use  living  men  as  a  part  of  it — if  we  make  no  distinction  between  the  most 
wonderful  work  of  God  and  these  dead,  mindless  workers  which  our  own  hands 
have  set  up.  Human  brains  have  been  weighed  in  the  same  balance  with  the  dross 
that  feeds  the  furnace !  You  take  the  girth  of  a  man's  soul,  as  you  do  of  a  wrought - 
iron  piston,  with  the  view  of  ascertaining  the  amount  of  propulsion  that  may  be 
expected  out  of  it.  Both,  and  both  alike,  you  put  under  the  steam,  and  work  them 
till  they  be  worn.  This  is  the  ailment  of  society.  Man  is  not  a  brother  to  man. 
The  labourer  should  not  fret  against  the  employer  as  such.  He  is  part  of  the 
organisation  of  Providence.  "We  don't  want  this  wheel  that  racks  you  taken  out  of 
the  way.  We  want  it  oiled  with  holy  human  sympathy.  But  how  shall  we  get 
such  kindliness  poured  out  upon  the  too,  too  sharp  spirits  of  men,  when  the  classes 
meet  in  a  bristling  array  of  mutual  suspicion  and  defiance  ?  We  must  go  to  seek  it 
in  the  source  of  all  good.  The  sympathy  of  which  we  have  been  speaking  is  the 
second  commandment ;  in  order  to  reach  it  we  must  climb  up  to  the  first.  We  must 
begin  at  the  beginning  (Eccl.  xii.  13).  We  are  thus  brought  to  the  other  leading 
characteristic  of  the  intercourse  depicted  in  the  text.  II.  Its  godliness.  Look  to 
the  subject-matter  of  that  kind  mutual  salutation,  and  you  will  find  that  master 
and  men  lived  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  were  not  ashamed  to  own  their  religion  in 
each  other's  presence.  The  secret  lies  here.  There  would  be  more  of  human 
kindness  amongst  us  if  there  were  more  of  genuine  faith  in  God.  It  is  here  that 
our  defect  lies.  In  great  measure  God  is  banished  from  history,  from  poUtics,  from 
merchandise,  from  manufactures.  God  is  not  willing  to  be  banished  from  any  of 
His  works.  In  Him  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being.  We  do  not  propose 
that  at  your  desks  or  your  counters  you  should  set  aside  your  ledgers  and  commence 
a  debate  on  systems  of  theology.  Everything  in  its  own  time  and  place.  There  is 
such  a  thing  as  doing  common  business  in  a  Christian  spirit,  walking  about  on 
earth  like  one  who  is  going  home  to  heaven.  We  are  very  low  as  to  the  existence 
of  godliness  in  the  heart ;  and  we  are  stiU  lower  as  to  the  manifestation  of  it  in  the 
ordinary  intercourse  of  society.  Very  little  of  it  is  possessed ;  and  even  that  little 
is  not  brought  into  exercise.  We  are  persuaded  that  few  masters  are  to  be  found  at 
present  who  would  not  be  ashamed  to  acknowledge  a  sinner's  hope  in  a  precious 
Saviour  in  presence  of  their  workmen;  and  comparatively  few  mechanics,  who,  if 
such  an  acknowledgment  were  made,  would  not  openly  sneer  or  secretly  impute  it 
to  hypocrisy.  The  two  classes  distrust  each  other.  Even  the  religion  that  they 
have  they  hide  in  each  other's  presence.  Alas,  the  only  salve  is  by  a  tacit  compact 
kept  far  away  from  the  sores  of  society !  The  motions  of  the  community  are  jarring 
and  painful,  because  they  are  not  softened  by  Divine  grace.  It  is  a  short-sighted 
policy  to  shut  up  religion  in  churches  and  prayer-meetings,  or  even  in  households. 
Eeligion  is  intended  for  the  world.  The  world  has  need  of  it.  There  cannot  in  the 
nature  of  things  be  a  proper  intercourse  between  human  beings  if  the  fear  of  God 
and  the  faith  of  the  gospel  do  not  pervade  it.  How  can  you  treat  a  man  aright 
when  you  have  in  view  only  the  lowest  part  of  his  nature — the  briefest  period  of  his 
destiny  ?  If  all  that  your  mind  takes  in  regarding  him  be  his  work  and  his  wages 
— the  profit  and  loss  in  money  of  retaining  or  dismissing  him — your  treatment  of 
him  cannot  possibly  be  right.  It  is  only  when  you  learn  to  take  in  the  whole  man 
that  your  conception  can  be  accurate  and  your  conduct  wise.  Conclusion :  1.  Those 
who  have  no  chief  end  for  their  souls,  and  no  chief  aim  of  their  lives  beyond  things 
Been  and  temporal,  bring  no  godliness  to  bear  on  the  business  of  society.    You  cannot 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

apply  to  a  brother  what  you  have  not  experienced  yourself.  One  thing  is  needful. 
If  you  are  not  working  for  God,  you  are  idle ;  if  you  have  not  gained  your  soul,  you 
have  lost  all.  2.  Those  who  are  born  from  above  bring  too  little  godliness  to  bear  on 
the  common  interests  of  life.  (W,  Arnot.)  Friendly  co-operation  between  masters 
and  men : — Why  do  not  employers  take  employes  into  their  confidence  ?  I  know 
a  gentleman  very  well  who  has  over  a  thousand  hands  in  his  employ.  I  said  to 
him  some  years  ago,  when  there  was  great  trouble  in  the  labour  market,  "  How  are 
you  getting  on  with  your  men  ?  "  *'  Oh,"  he  said,  "  I  have  no  trouble."  •'  Why," 
I  said,  "haven't  you  had  any  strikes?"  "Oh,  no,"  he  said,  "I  never  had  any 
trouble."  "  What  plan  do  you  pursue? "  He  said,  " I  will  tell  you.  All  my  men 
know  every  year  just  how  matters  stand.  Every  little  while  I  call  them  together 
and  say,  '  Now,  boys,  last  year  I  made  so  much ;  this  year  I  make  less ;  so  you  see 
I  can't  pay  you  as  much  as  I  did  last  year.  Now  I  want  to  know  what  you  think  I 
ought  to  have  as  a  percentage  out  of  this  establishment,  and  what  wages  I  ought  to 
give  you.  You  know  I  put  all  my  energy  in  this  business  and  risked  everything, 
put  aU  my  fortune  in  it  and  risked  everything.  What  do  you  really  think  I 
ought  to  have,  and  you  ought  to  have  ? '  By  the  time  we  come  out  of  that 
consultation  we  are  unanimous;  there  never  has  been  an  exception.  When  we 
prosper,  we  all  prosper  together;  when  we  suffer,  we  all  suffer  together;  and 
my  men  would  die  for  me."  Now,  let  aU  employers  be  frank  with  their 
employes.  Take  them  into  your  confidence.  Let  them  know  just  how  matters 
stand.  There  is  an  immense  amount  of  common  sense  in  the  world.  It  is  safe 
always  to  appeal  to  it.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Religion  in  the  harvest  field : — 1,  It 
is  remarkable  that  those  who  stand  prominently  forward  in  the  lineage  of  our  Lord 
according  to  the  flesh  represent  the  varied  callings  and  positions  of  the  human 
race;  as  if  He  who  was  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren  had  woven  into  the 
tapestry  of  His  human  scenes  threads  borrowed  from  every  skein  of  Ufe,  that  He 
might  be,  as  it  were,  girt  with  the  garment  of  our  humanity,  and  consequently  be 
able  entirely  to  sympathise  with  us.  2.  But  whilst  on  the  one  hand  our  blessed 
Lord  received  into  Himself  according  to  the  flesh  streams  from  every  source  of 
human  life.  He  manifested  again  in  His  life  and  works  the  scenes  from  which  they 
flowed.  So  that  there  is  no  employment  in  life  but  what  the  labourer,  be  he  monarch, 
priest,  or  peasant,  may  find  a  practical  brotherhood  in  Christ,  and  derive  lessons  of 
instruction  and  comfort  in  the  hours  of  toil  from  Him  who  was  "  King  of  kings," 
"  our  great  High  Priest,"  and  "  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head."  3.  The  leading 
lesson  which  Boaz  teaches  us  is  the  sanctity  of  every  earthly  occupation  when 
pursued  by  the  servant  of  God.  The  real  greatness  of  any  man's  work  consists  in 
its  being  done  according  to  the  standard  and  limits  of  religion ;  and  the  absence  of 
consciousness  or  religious  expression  is  no  sign  of  the  unreality  of  real  religious 
principle.  4.  In  the  country,  a  large  portion  of  whose  population  is  agricultural, 
the  conduct  and  character  of  the  farmer  or  the  landed  proprietor  is  of  no  small 
consequence.  He  can  improve  or  deteriorate  the  race  of  the  labourer,  he  can 
elevate  or  depress  multitudes  of  those  around  him,  by  the  way  in  which  he  acts ; 
and  we  are  bound  to  believe  that  to  a  great  degree  God  blesses  the  crops  and  the 
harvest  according  to  the  character  of  those  connected  with  them.  6.  The  position 
of  Boaz  is  one  which  silences  all  possible  objections.  He  was  no  inferior  farmer 
who  could  afford  to  be  religious  because  he  had  not  the  opportunity  of  speculation, 
"  for  he  was  a  mighty  man  of  wealth."  He  was  not  ashamed  to  recognise  God, 
while,  alas  1  how  many  amongst  as  of  a  similar  class  have  not  the  courage  to 
acknowledge  to  those  thfey  employ  that  they  recognise  God  as  the  source  and 
author  of  all  that  they  possess.  The  example  of  the  master  will  be  followed  by  the 
man  ;  if  he  puts  religion  forward  in  the  front  of  his  intercourse  with  his  labourers, 
he  will  set  the  fashion  to  the  field,  the  farmyard,  and  the  cottager's  home.  The 
foreman  will  own  God,  and  the  reaper  will  "catch  the  trick"  of  reverence.  It 
would  seem  as  if  some  men  imagined  that  some  chance  hand  opened  the  womb  of 
the  teeming  earth.  It  is  to  such  men  that  God  says,  "  They  did  not  know  that  I 
gave  the  com ;  therefore  will  I  return  and  take  away  My  corn,  I  will  destroy  her 
vines  and  her  fig-trees"  (Hos.  ii.  9).  But  in  the  stately  and  almost  sublime  inter- 
view between  Boaz  and  his  reapers  we  find  a  practical  suggestion  also — why 
should  not  farmers  not  only  recogniie  God  and  religion,  but  do  something  to  realise 
the  connection  between  God  and  themselves  ?  6.  Another  striking  feature  in  the 
conduct  of  Boaz  is  the  care  that  he  takes  of  the  purity  of  unmarried  women  when 
at  work  in  his  fields ;  for  Boaz  said  unto  Kuth,  "  Have  I  not  charged  the  young  men 
that  they  sh^  not  touch  thee  ?    Go  not  to  glean  in  another  field,  bat  abide  here  fart 


CHAP,  n.]  RUTH.  49 

by  my  maidens."  It  would  almost  seem  as  if  the  young  men  and  young  women 
worked  in  different  fields.  How  lamentable  is  the  contrast  of  a  picture  like  this 
with  that  displayed  by  the  estates  of  our  farmers  in  seedtime,  hay  harvest  and  corn 
harvest.  Imagine  the  long  tale  of  shameful  and  miserable  life  that  many  a  woman 
wrecked  early  on  the  quicksand  of  impurity  has  to  tell  upon  her  death-bed,  and  too 
often  connects  it  all  with  the  first  hint  given  in  the  field  in  which  God's  merciful 
hand  was  most  singularly  manifested  in  scattering  His  bounties.  7.  But  there  is 
one  more  point  full  of  instruction  in  the  conduct  of  Boaz — his  consideration  of  the 
gleaners.  Some  farmers  close  their  gates  altogether  against  the  gleaner,  and  many 
are  strict  in  their  injunctions  that  but  little  shall  be  left  for  the  poor.  Yet  surely 
the  prayers  of  the  poor,  when  genuine  and  honest,  bring  a  blessing  upon  all  around 
them,  and  what  is  given  to  them  is  but  a  loan  to  God.  (E.  Monro,  M.A.) 
Business  to  be  sanctified  by  religion : — Our  forefathers  symbolised  a  beautiful  truth 
when  in  our  old  market  towns  they  erected  a  market  cross.  As  if  to  teach  the 
buyers  and  sellers  to  order  their  actions  and  to  sanctify  their  gains  by  the 
remembrance  of  a  crucified  Saviour.  In  the  orders  which  God  gave  for  the 
encampment  of  Israel  during  their  pilgrimage  to  Canaan  it  was  provided  that  every 
part  of  the  camp  looked  towards  the  tabernacle.  And  thus  God  taught  them  ever 
to  remember  that  He  was  in  their  midst,  and  that  before  Him  they  must  walk  day 
by  day.  {Aubrey  C.  Price,  B.A.)  Piety  with  courtesy : — Piety  not  only  stands 
with  humanity  and  civil  courtesy,  but  also  exacteth  and  requireth  it  (Matt.  lii. ; 
1  Pet.  iii.  8 ;  Luke  x.  5).  God  hath  His  ethics,  and  commandeth  good  manners 
as  well  as  good  conscience.  Affability  and  courtesy  is  the  way  to  win  others ;  men's 
minds  are  taken  with  it,  as  passengers'  eyes  are  with  fair  flowers  in  the  springtide ; 
•whereas  a  harsh,  sullen,  sour,  churlish  conversation  is  very  distasteful  to  all,  gaUeth. 
the  best  (witness  David,  1  Sam.  xxv.),  and  openeth  bad  men's  mouths  to  speak  evil 
of  religion.     (J.  Trapp.) 

Vers.  5-7.  Tlien  said  Boaz  unto  his  seirant,  .  .  .  Whose  damsel  is  this  ?  And 
the  servant  .  ,  .  said,  It  is  the  Moabitish  damsel. — The  welcome  reception : — We 
can  imagine  many  ways  in  which  Boaz  and  Euth  might  have  been  made  acquainted 
with  each  other.  But  surely  none  which  would  have  been  better  adapted  to  awaken 
the  deepest  and  tenderest  mutual  interest  in  the  mind  of  each.  She  appears  in  aU 
the  loveliness  of  virtuous  modesty,  humbly  toiling  for  a  mother's  support  and 
comfort,  though  unused  to  labour.  He  appears  before  her  clothed  with  dignity  and 
benevolence.  We  are  now  to  witness  their  first  mutual  introduction,  and  the 
welcome  reception  which  he  gives  to  her.  First  we  have  the  rich  kinsman's  notice 
of  her,  addressed  to  his  head  servant.  Extensive  as  are  the  concerns  of  Boaz,  the 
poor  stranger  whom  the  Lord  hath  led  there  is  not  forgotten.  Happy  indeed  is 
Buch  prosperity  as  this  !  The  heart  is  not  lifted  up,  the  spirit  is  not  made  selfish 
and  arrogant.  There  is  a  tender  care  for  the  poor  maintained  amidst  the 
enjoyments  and  luxuries  of  wealth.  Thus  the  Saviour  comes  to  visit  His  earthly 
field,  and  calls  the  servants  whom  He  has  set  over  it  to  account  for  their  charge. 
His  ministers  watch  for  souls  as  they  who  must  give  an  account.  Not  the  poorest 
stranger  is  unnoticed  or  forgotten  by  Him.  Jesus  may  be  considered  as  asking  His 
ministers  continually,  of  one  and  another  in  their  flock,  "  Who  is  that?  "  What  a 
dying  reflection  was  that  of  the  eminent  Archbishop  Williams  in  the  reign  of 
Charles  I. :  "I  have  passed  through  many  places  of  honour  and  trust,  both  in 
Church  and  State,  more  than  any  of  my  order  in  England,  this  seventy  years  before. 
But  were  I  assured  that  by  my  preaching  I  had  converted  but  one  soul  unto  God,  I 
should  take  therein  more  spiritual  joy  and  comfort  than  in  aU  the  honours  and 
offices  which  have  been  bestowed  upon  me."  This  question  of  Boaz  brings  us  to 
the  reply  which  the  servant  makes.  He  is  not  inquired  of  in  vain.  He  has  mad» 
himself  acquainted  with  the  whole  history  of  Euth.  And  in  giving  his  account  he 
uses  great  skill  and  kindness  in  setting  forth  the  advantageous  circumstances  of 
her  case.  He  tells  of  her  origin  ;  of  her  return,  her  emigration  from  Moab  to 
Israel ;  of  her  need — her  poverty  compelled  her  to  beg  permission  to  glean  ;  of  her 
gentle  humihty ;  of  her  perseverance.  His  account  is  marked  by  the  evidence  of 
the  utmost  kindness  and  compassion.  When  we  think  of  this  as  an  illustration  of 
the  account  we  may  give  of  some  daughters  of  the  Lord  Almighty  who  are 
committed  to  our  charge,  how  appropriate  seems  the  whole  story.  To  create  and 
maintain  a  familiar  and  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  members  of  the  flock 
committed  to  him  is  a  most  important  instrument  of  usefulness  to  a  faithful  pastor. 
The  whole  influence  and  value  of  his  ministry  will  be  greatly  dependent  on  this 

40 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  n. 

knowledge  of  his  people.  Suppose  I  could  say  of  all  the  youthful  females  in  the 
field  around  me,  as  each  one  severally  appeared  for  my  account,  "  This  also  was  a 
daughter  of  Moab,  but  she  has  come  back."  How  applicable  to  them  would  become 
Paul's  account  of  the  Corinthian  Christians,  "  Such  were  you,  but  ye  have  been 
washed,  ye  have  been  justified,  ye  have  been  sanctified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God."  She  has  come  back.  The  answer  of  the 
servant  of  Boaz  leads  us  to  Boaz's  own  address  to  the  lonely  stranger.  How  kindly 
and  freely  he  welcomes  her  to  his  ample  provisions !  And  lest  she  should  not 
understand  the  openness  of  his  invitation,  he  calls  her  attention  particularly  to  this 
fact  of  her  entire  welcome  to  every  provision  there.  The  Saviour's  grace  is  thus 
open  and  free.  Whosoever  will  may  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely.  Here  are 
abundant  supplied  of  all  that  you  can  desu-e  or  ask ;  and  all  given  without 
recompense  or  hope  of  return  from  you.  He  urges  her  to  remain  in  the  field  to 
which  the  gracious  providence  of  God  had  sent  her :  "  Go  not  to  glean  in  another 
field."  Our  gracious  Kinsman  feels  equally  jealous  of  any  partnership  or 
competition  in  His  work  of  grace  for  you.  He  lets  you  know  that  if  you  attempt  to 
be  saved  in  any  other  way  Christ  shall  profit  you  nothing.  There  is  salvation  in 
none  other.  There  is  no  field  in  which  you  can  gather  happiness,  and  rest,  and 
abiding  peace,  but  the  field  of  Christ.  Well  may  we  apply  to  you  Boaz's  address, 
"  Go  not  from  hence.  Abide  here  fast  by  my  maidens.  Let  thine  eyes  be  on  the 
field  that  they  do  reap,  and  go  thou  after  them."  Nothing  is  more  important  for 
your  religious  character  than  appropriate  religious  society.  The  examples  and 
influence  of  faithful  people  of  God  are  a  precious  help  to  you  in  your  Christian 
course.  Be  the  companion  always  of  those  who  fear  God,  and  turn  away  your  feet 
from  the  paths  of  evU  men.  The  landmarks  among  these  various  fields,  which 
separate  them  from  the  field  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed,  may  not  be  always 
perfectly  distinct  and  apparent  to  you.  Try  no  experiment  how  far  you  may  go 
towards  these  strange  fields  and  return  in  safety.  Dwell  in  the  heart  of  the  land, 
and  make  the  fact  always  sure,  that  you  are  with  the  Lord  and  His  chosen  flock. 
Here  you  have  every  promise  of  protection  and  supply.  Your  gracious  Kinsman 
has  charged  His  ministers  to  help  and  guide  you,  not  to  hurt  or  hinder  you.  Euth'a 
humble  and  grateful  answer  to  her  unknown  kinsman  may  conclude  our  present 
thoughts.  "  She  feU  on  her  face,  and  bowed  herself  to  the  ground,  and  said  unto 
him,  Why  have  I  found  grace  in  thine  eyes,  that  thou  shouldest  take  knowledge  of 
me,  seeing  I  am  a  stranger?  "  What  deep  humility!  What  consciousness  of  need! 
What  confession  of  her  own  unworthiness !  What  affectionate  gratitude  for  the 
kindness  he  has  displayed  1  It  is  just  so  that  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord 
humbles  the  pardoned  sinner  to  the  dust.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Hath  continued 
even  from  the  morning  until  now. — Ruth^s  industry  prompted  by  love  : — Ruth  had 
spent  no  more  time  under  covert  than  was  absolutely  necessary  for  enabling  her  to 
return  to  her  labours.  "  It  is  vain  to  rise  up  early  and  sit  up  late,  to  eat  the  bread 
of  sorrows."  We  ought  to  consult  our  health  in  carrying  on  our  labours,  and  not 
to  make  them  a  burden  too  heavy  for  us  to  bear.  When  covetous  desires  of  gain 
induce  men  to  overwork  their  powers,  they  sacrifice  their  health  to  Mammon,  whom 
they  have  chosen  for  their  God.  But  Ruth  was  labouring  for  her  mother  as  well  as 
herself.  Her  love  to  Naomi  would  give  her  spirits  and  strength  to  endure  the  heat 
of  the  cUmate.     (G.  Lawson.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  Then  said  Boaz  unto  Ruth,  Hearest  thou  not,  my  daughter  7  Oo  not 
to  glean  in  another  field. — Loving-kindness : — 1.  There  may  be  an  hearing  without 
an  heeding.  2.  Loving-kindness  to  necessitous  persons  ought  not  to  be  shown  in 
word  and  tongue  only,  but  also  in  deed  and  truth  (1  John  iii.  1).  Boaz's  kindness 
was  real,  as  well  as  verbal.  Mouth-mercy  and  lip-love  is  good,  cheap,  and 
aboundeth  everywhere  in  our  age.  God  is  kinder  to  those  that  glean  in  His  gospel- 
fields  than  ever  Boaz  was  to  Ruth  ;  He  will  not  put  us  off  with  mouth-mercy  only, 
but  will  make  Himself  known  by  His  name  Jehovah  as  well  as  by  His  name  of  God 
Almighty.  3.  God's  gleaners  should  have  their  proper  and  peculiar  gospel-fields  to 
glean  in.  They  should  not  go  to  glean  in  the  fields  of  strangers  (John  x.  5,  8). 
They  have  their  senses  exercised  to  discern  good  and  evil  (Heb.  v.  14).  They  have 
a  spirit  of  discerning  (1  Cor.  xii.  10)  whereby  they  do  discern  the  mind  of  Christ 
(1  Cor.  ii.  IG).  This  makes  them  hate  every  false  way  (Psa.  cxix.  104).  (C.  Ness.) 
Let  thine  eyes  be  on  the  field  that  they  do  Te&jp.^Harvest  lessons  (for  the  Young) : 
— I.  The  MA.KIKESTATION  OF  WHAT  IS  HIDDEN  IN  HUMAN  LIFE.  In  the  early  spring 
the  buried  seed-corn  was  completely  hidden.    You  could  get  no  answer  to  such 


CHAP,  n.]  RUTH.  5: 

questions  as,  "What  sort  ?  How  much  ?  Is  it  germinating  or  rotting  ?  The  reply 
would  be,  Wait.  Harvest  will  reveal.  So  in  human  character.  Thoughts,  and 
wishes,  and  life-bias  are  often  concealed.  The  good,  through  failure,  seems  bad ; 
the  bad,  through  hypocrisy,  good.  There  shall  be  an  unveiling.  Contact  with 
Christ  brings  out,  in  conversion  and  in  judgment,  many  surprises  in  human 
character.  "  There  is  nothing  hid  that  shall  not  be  known."  H.  The  increase  of 
WHAT  IS  SMALL  IX  HUMAN  LIFE.  What  coutrast  between  the  seeds  and  the  sheaf. 
What  growth,  "some  sixty-fold,  some  an  hundred-fold."  So  with  the  greatest 
thing  in  human  history,  Christianity.  The  babe,  becoming  the  sovereign  of  the  race. 
So  with  good  and  evil  in  human  lives.  The  thought  growing  to  wish,  wish  to 
resolve,  resolve  to  deed,  deed  to  habit,  habit  to  influence  that  is  immeasurable. 
"  Who  hath  despised  the  day  of  smaU  things?  "  HI.  The  reteibution  for  what 
is  DONE  IN  HUMAN  LIFE.  In  the  dcstiny  of  tares  and  wheat,  Christ  teaches  souls  to 
read  their  retribution.  It  is  the  outcome  of  the  life.  Hell  and  heaven  are  the 
perfect  outgrowth,  the  harvest  of  character.  The  good  shall  ripen  to  glory,  the  evil 
to  shame.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap  :  he  that  soweth  to 
the  flesh,"  &c.  IV.  The  passing  away  or  opportunity  in  human  life.  Each  season 
gives  its  own  chances.  V.  The  providence  of  God  over  the  whole  of  human  life. 
He  cares  for  human  life,  and  through  frosts  and  summer  heats,  storms  and  mid- 
nights, matures  the  Christly  soul.  "  AH  things  work  together  for  good."  {Urijah 
R.  Thomas.)  Have  I  not  charged  the  young  men. — Masters  and  servants: — 
1.  Here  we  see  that  servile  natures  are  most  prone  and  proclive  to  wrong  poor 
strangers.  Indeed,  generous  spirits  disdain  to  make  those  the  subjects  of  their 
cruelty  which  rather  should  be  the  objects  of  their  pity;  but  it  complies  with  a 
servile  disposition  to  tyrannise  over  such  poor  people  as  cannot  resist  them.  Like 
petty  brooks  pent  within  a  narrow  channel,  on  every  dash  of  rain  they  are  ready  to 
overflow,  and  wax  angry  at  the  apprehension  of  the  smallest  distaste.  2.  From 
these  words  observe,  that  it  is  the  part  of  a  good  master  not  only  to  do  no  harm 
himself,  but  also  to  take  order  that  his  servants  do  none  (Gen.  xii.  20  and  xxvi.  11). 
3.  In  these  words  Boaz  doth  intimate  that  if  he  gave  a  charge  to  the  contrary  none 
of  his  servants  durst  presume  once  to  molest  her.  If  he,  a  mere  earthly  master, 
could  procure  such  obedience  to  his  commands,  surely  if  the  Lord  of  heaven  enjoins 
us  anything  we  ought  to  do  it  without  any  doubt  or  delay.     (T.  Fuller,  B.D.) 

Ver.  10.  Then  she  fell  on  her  face,  and  bowed  herself  to  the  ground. — The  lowly 
attitude  of  a  grateful  heart : — I.  What  deep  and  touching  humility  is  expressed 
herb.  II.  What  affectionate  gratitude  is  here.  HI.  What  confessions  of 
unworthiness  are  here.  IV.  What  consciousness  of  need  is  here.  (TF.  Baxen- 
dale.)  Ruth's  humility  and  gratitude  : — What  had  Boaz  done  for  Ruth  that  she 
falls  down  on  her  knees  and  thanks  him  for  his  favours  in  language  expressive  of 
such  warm  gratitude  ?  He  had  assured  her  of  his  protection.  He  had  invited  her 
to  gather  the  gleanings  of  his  corn,  and  to  drink  of  his  water.  And  what  thanks 
do  we  give  to  Him  who  invites  us  to  come  and  buy  wine  and  milk  from  Him  without 
money  and  without  price  ?  Euth  thought  herself  greatly  honoured  by  the  attentions 
of  Boaz.  She  was  a  stranger  and  foreigner,  an  alien  to  the  commonwealth  of  Israel, 
and  did  not  reckon  herself  entitled  to  any  kindness  from  the  people  of  the  Lord. 
The  humble  are  always  disposed  to  be  thankful,  and  therefore  they  are  always 
happy.  When  men  are  swelled  with  such  a  sense  of  then-  own  merit  that  they 
think  themselves  entitled  to  everything,  they  will  never  be  pleased.  But  you  can 
scarcely  displease  the  humble  man,  because  he  thinks  anything  better  than  he 
deserves.  He  enjoys  peace  in  his  own  bosom,  because  his  expectations  are  seldom 
disappointed.  He  acquires  the  goodwill  of  aU  around  him,  because  he  is 
thankful  for  the  smallest  favours,  and  not  dissatisfied  when  he  meets  with  none. 
(G.  Lawson.) 

Ver.  11.  It  hath  fully  been  shewed  me,  all  that  thou  hast  done  unto  thy  mother- 
in-law.— T/ie  praise  of  virtue  .—I.  That  virtue  shall  not  want  trumpeters  to 
SOUND   out  her  praises  TO   THE   FULL   (Psa.   xxxvii.   6).     II.   That   well-doing 

PROCURETH  favour  to  THE  POOR,   THOUGH  STRANGERS,  AT  THE  HANDS  OF  THE 

virtuous;  for  this  was  the  cause  of  Boaz's  love  to  Euth,  as  here  he  acknow- 
ledgeth;  and  this  is  true  godlmess,  to  love  others  for  their  goodness.  (E.  Bernard.) 
The  gracious  approbation : — Euth  begins  now  to  reap  the  abundant  harvest  which 
is  growing  for  her  in  the  Divine  purposes  of  mercy — a  harvest  of  which  Boaz's  fields 
are  only  a  part,  and  of  which  indeed  all  that  Boaz  possessed  was  but  a  feeble 


52  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

illustration.  She  had  been  faithful  in  that  which  appeared  to  be  the  least,  and  now 
she  was  to  be  rewarded  with  that  which  seemed  to  be  much.  We  have  first  to 
remark  upon  the  gracious  approbation  which  Boaz  bestows  upon  her  whole  history, 
though  he  knew  not  her  personally.  It  is  thus  you  may  often  think  yourself 
unknown,  and  unobserved  in  your  efforts  to  do  right  in  your  different  relations  of 
life,  when  there  are  many  eyes  upon  you,  watching  your  character,  and  many  ears 
may  be  listening  to  what  the  Lord  has  enabled  you  thus  to  do  for  Him.  Give  your- 
self no  concern  about  this.  God,  your  guardian  and  protector,  will  see  that  you 
have  all  the  reputation  and  recompense  which  is  good  for  you.  Euth  supposed 
herself  concealed  in  the  field  of  Boaz.  But  he  declares  to  her  that  her  faithfulness 
to  Naomi  had  been  fully  related  to  him,  and  he  knew  her  well.  Thus  the  Saviour 
recounts  to  His  people,  and  for  them,  the  acts  of  their  life  which  have  manifested 
their  love  to  Him.  Nothing  that  you  do  is  worthy  the  Saviour's  notice.  But 
nothing  that  you  really  do  for  Him  will  be  unnoticed  by  Him.  You  will  never  be 
rewarded  for  your  works.  But  you  will  be  judged  by  your  works.  They  are  the 
proofs  of  your  faith,  as  the  fruits  on  the  tree  are  the  evidences  of  its  character  and 
its  worth.  Certainly  there  is  nothing  on  earth  so  blessed  and  so  precious  as  the 
approbation  of  our  Divine  Master,  speaking  in  our  own  hearts,  of  the  service  we 
have  feebly  but  sincerely  tried  to  render  to  Him.  But  Boaz  not  only  expresses  appro- 
bation, he  also  speaks  of  recompense  to  Ruth.  She  shall  not  be  unrewarded. 
Naomi  may  not  be  able  to  do  anything  for  her.  But  Naomi  has  other  paymasters  in 
the  Lord's  employ  beside  herself.  Our  acts  of  benevolence  and  love  for  Christ's 
sake  can  never  go  without  their  result  of  blessing  even  in  this  life.  The  merciful 
man  doeth  good  to  his  own  soul.  We  comfort  the  needy  and  the  sorrowing,  and 
we  are  thus  preparing  comforters  for  ourselves  in  the  persons  of  others  whom  the 
Lord  will  raise  up  to  minister  to  our  wants.  We  aid  the  children  of  the  poor,  and 
we  are  laying  up  a  heritage  for  our  children  in  the  kindness  of  others  whom  we 
know  not.  But  apart  from  this  result  of  recompense,  there  is  also  our  own  hap- 
piness in  the  work  itself.  "It  is  more  blessed,"  that  is,  it  is  happier,  a  happier 
state  and  habit  of  mind,  a  happier  condition  of  feeling  and  thought,  "  to  give  than 
to  receive."  Whatever  we  do  in  kindness  to  others  for  Christ's  sake  He  returns  to 
us  in  our  own  secret  personal  enjoyments.  He  ministers  to  us  a  peace  and 
blessedness  in  the  work  which  is  our  inward  possession,  and  which  comes  to  us 
without  any  reference  to  outward  results.  But  Boaz  prays  for  more  than  recompense : 
"  A  full  reward  be  given  thee,"  &c.  For  fuU  rewards  in  any  course  of  human  life 
we  must  look  beyond  the  present  state  of  being.  The  Saviour  says  of  the  objects 
of  beneficent  action,  "  They  cannot  recompense  thee,  but  thou  shalt  be  recom- 
pensed in  the  resurrection  of  the  just."  Whatever  results  come  now  from  any  of 
the  acts  of  life,  they  are  extremely  partial.  The  final  results  are  yet  to  be  revealed. 
The  abundant  harvest  is  to  be  gathered  hereafter.  But  it  will  be  surely  gathered. 
The  Saviour  shall  Himself  minister  to  those  who  have  been  faithful  to  Him  here,  an 
abundant  recompense,  a  full  reward.  But  while  the  Saviour  thus  animates  and 
encourages  His  disciples  with  the  blessed  hope  before  them,  see  how  the  answer  of 
Euth  to  Boaz  illustrates  their  self-renouncing  mind.  The  more  generously  a  noble 
mind  is  dealt  with,  the  more  humble  and  unassuming  does  it  become.  This  is 
eminently  the  case  with  the  children  of  God  when  their  Divine  Eedeemer  comforts 
and  blesses  them.  Never  do  they  feel  so  perfectly  unworthy  as  when  He  pours  the 
special  ministration  of  the  oil  of  gladness  into  their  souls.  But  all  this  only 
increases  their  sense  of  their  own  unworthiness  of  such  mercy.  And  their  cry  and 
prayer  is,  that  they  may  still  find  favour  in  His  sight — that  He  would  look  upon 
them  with  eyes  of  mercy,  and  think  of  them  according  to  His  own  grace  and  not 
according  to  their  merits.  Boaz's  gracious  provisions  for  the  lonely  stranger  crown 
and  close  this  instructive  interview.  Was  any  conduct  of  man  ever  more  delicate, 
dignified,  or  beautiful?  But  it  is  only  a  feeble  illustration  of  the  riches  of  a 
Saviour's  grace.     {S.  H,  Tyng,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  The  Lord  recompense  thy  work,  and  a  full  reward  be  given  thee. — 

Ruth's  reward ;  or,  cheer  for  converts : — I.  What  has  the  touno  convebt  donb  ? 
We  illustrate  the  subject  by  the  instance  of  Euth.  1.  Many  young  converts 
deserve  encouragement  because  they  have  left  all  their  old  associates.  Euth,  no 
doubt,  had  many  friends  in  her  native  country,  but  she  tore  herself  away  to  cUng 
to  Naomi  and  her  God.  2.  Next,  Euth,  having  left  her  old  companions,  had  come 
amongst  strangers.  She  knew  Naomi,  but  in  the  whole  town  of  Bethlehem  she 
knew  no  one  else.    She  felt  herself  to  be  alone,  though  under  the  wings  of  Israel's 


CHAP.n.]  RUTH.  53 

God.  Boaz  very  properly  felt  that  she  should  not  think  that  courtesy  and  kindnesE 
had  died  out  of  Israel ;  and  he  made  a  point,  though  he  was  by  far  her  superior 
in  station,  to  go  to  her  and  speak  a  word  of  encouragement  to  her.  Come,  let  ua 
pluck  up  courage,  and  encourage  every  Euth  when  she  is  timid  among  strangers. 
Let  us  help  her  to  feel  at  home  in  Immanuel's  land.  3.  The  new  convert  is  like 
Buth  in  another  respect :  he  is  very  lowly  in  his  own  eyes.  Euth  had  little  self- 
esteem,  and  therefore  she  won  the  esteem  of  others.  She  felt  herself  to  be  a  very 
inconsiderable  person,  to  whom  any  kindness  was  a  great  favour;  and  so  do 
young  converts,  if  they  are  real  and  true.  4.  Once  more,  the  young  convert  is 
like  Euth  because  he  has  come  to  trust  under  the  wings  of  Jehovah,  the  God  of 
Israel.  This  is  what  our  young  converts  have  done :  they  have  come,  not  to  trust 
themselves,  but  to  trust  in  Jesus.  They  have  come  to  find  a  righteousness  in 
Christ — aye,  to  find  everything  in  Him.  II.  What  is  the  full  reward  of  those 
WHO  COME  TO  TRUST  UNDER  THE  WINGS  OF  GoD  ?  I  would  auswer  that  a  full 
reward  will  come  to  us  in  that  day  when  we  lay  down  these  bodies  of  flesh,  that 
they  may  sleep  in  Jesus,  while  our  unclothed  spirits  are  absent  from  the  body  but 
present  with  the  Lord.  But  there  is  a  present  reward,  and  to  that  Boaz  referred. 
There  is  in  this  world  a  present  recompense  for  the  godly,  notwithstanding  the  fact 
that  many  are  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous.  Even  in  losing  the  present  life  for 
Christ's  sake  we  are  saving  it,  and  self-denial  and  taking  up  the  cross  are  but 
forms  of  blessedness.  Do  you  ask  me,  "  How  shall  we  be  rewarded  for  trusting 
in  the  Lord  ?  "  1.  I  answer,  first,  by  the  deep  peace  of  conscience  which  He  will 
grant  you.  Can  any  reward  be  better  than  this?  That,  however,  is  only  the 
beginning  of  the  believer's  reward.  2.  He  that  has  come  to  trust  in  God  shall  be 
"quiet  from  fear  of  evil."  What  a  blessing  that  must  be!  "He  shall  not  be 
afraid  of  evil  tidings ;  his  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord."  3.  More  than 
this  :  the  man  who  trusts  in  God  rests  in  Him  with  respect  to  all  the  _  supplies  he 
now  needs,  or  shall  ever  need.  4.  Another  part  of  the  believer's  great  gain  lies  in  the 
consciousness  that  all  things  are  working  together  for  his  good.  Nothing  is,  after 
all,  able  to  injure  us.  Neither  pains  of  body,  nor  sufferings  of  mind,  nor  losses 
in  business,  nor  cruel  blows  of  death,  can  work  us  real  iU.  Is  not  this  a  reward 
for  which  a  man  may  well  forego  the  flatteries  of  sin?  5.  Then,  let  me  tell  you, 
they  that  trust  in  God  and  follow  Him  have  another  full  reward,  and  that  is,  the 
bliss  of  doing  good.  Can  any  happiness  excel  this  ?  6.  Many  other  items  make 
up  the  full  of  the  reward ;  but  perhaps  the  chief  of  aU  is  communion  with  God. 
III.  What  figure  sets  forth  this  full  reward  ?  I  do  not  think  that  Boaz 
knew  the  full  meaning  of  what  he  said.  He  could  not  foresee  aU  that  was  appointed 
of  the  Lord.  In  the  light  of  Euth's  history  we  will  read  the  good  man's  blessing. 
This  poor  stranger,  Euth,  in  coming  to  put  her  trust  in  the  God  of  Israel,  was 
giving  up  everything ;  yes,  but  she  was  also  gaining  everything.  Ah  I  when  you 
come  to  trust  in  Christ,  you  find  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  one  who  is  next  of  kin 
to  you,  who  redeems  your  heritage,  and  unites  you  to  Himself.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
God's  reward : — A  military  gentleman  once  said  to  an  excellent  old  minister 
in  the  North  of  Scotland,  who  was  becoming  infirm,  "Why,  if  I  had  power 
over  the  pension  list,  I  would  have  you  put  on  half -pay  for  your  long  and 
faithful  services."  He  replied,  "Ah,  my  friend,  your  master  may  put  you  off 
with  half -pay,  but  my  Master  will  not  serve  me  so  meanly — He  will  give  me 
full-pay.  Through  grace  I  expect  a  fuU  reward."  Under  whose  wings  thou 
art  come  to  trust. — The  wings  of  God : — 1.  They  were  swift  wings  under 
which  Euth  had  come  to  trust.  There  is  nothing  in  all  the  handiwork  of 
God  more  curious  than  a  bird's  wing.  You  have  been  surprised  sometimes 
to  see  how  far  a  bird  can  fly  with  one  stroke  of  the  wings;  and,  when  it  has 
food  in  prospect,  or  when  it  is  affrighted,  the  pulsations  of  the  bird's  wings  are 
unimaginable  for  velocity.  The  English  lords  used  to  pride  themselves  on  the 
speed  of  their  falcons.  These  birds,  when  trained,  had  in  them  the  dart  of  the 
lightning.  How  swift  were  the  carrier-pigeons  in  the  time  of  Anthony  and  at 
the  siege  of  Jerusalem !  Wonderful  speed  !  A  carrier-pigeon  was  thrown  up  at 
Eouen  and  came  down  at  Ghent — ninety  miles  off — in  one  hour.  The  carrier- 
pigeons  were  the  telegraphs  of  the  olden  time.  Swallows  have  been  shot  in  our 
latitude  having  the  undigested  rice  of  Georgia  swamps  in  their  crops,  showing 
that  they  had  come  four  hundred  mUes  in  six  hours.  It  has  been  estimated  that, 
in  the  ten  years  of  a  swallow's  life,  it  flies  far  enough  to  have  gone  round  the 
world  eighty-nine  times,  so  great  is  its  velocity.  And  so  the  wings  of  the  Almighty, 
spoken  of  in  the  text,  are  swift  wings.    They  are  swift  when  they  drop  upon  the 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

foe,  and  swift  when  they  come  to  help  God's  friends.  2.  The  wings  under  which 
Buth  had  come  to  trust  were  very  broad  wings.  There  have  been  eagles  shot  on 
the  Eocky  Mountains  with  wings  that  were  seven  feet  from  tip  to  tip.  AVhen  the 
king  of  the  air  sits  on  the  crag  the  wings  are  spread  over  all  the  eaglets  in  the 
eyrie,  and  when  the  eagle  starts  from  the  rock  the  shadow  is  hke  the  spreading  of 
a  storm  cloud.  So  the  wings  of  God  are  broad  wings.  They  cover  up  all  our 
wants,  all  our  sorrows,  all  our  sufferings.  He  puts  one  wing  over  our  cradle,  and 
He  puts  the  other  over  our  grave.  Yes,  it  is  not  a  desert  in  which  we  are  placed  ; 
it  is  a  nest.  Sometimes  it  is  a  very  hard  nest,  like  that  of  the  eagle,  spread  on  the 
rock,  with  ragged  moss  and  rough  sticks,  but  still  it  is  a  nest ;  and,  although  it  may 
be  very  hard  under  us,  over  us  are  the  wings  of  the  Almighty.  3.  The  wings 
under  which  Euth  came  to  trust  were  strong  wings.  The  strength  of  a  bird's 
wing — of  a  sea-fowl's  wing,  for  example — you  might  guess  from  the  fact  that 
sometimes  for  five,  six,  or  seven  days  it  seems  to  fly  without  resting.  There  have 
been  condors  in  the  Andes  that  could  overcome  an  ox  or  a  stag.  There  have  been 
eagles  that  have  picked  up  children  and  swung  them  to  the  top  of  the  cliffs.  The 
flap  of  an  eagle's  wing  has  death  in  it.  There  are  birds  whose  wings  are  packed 
with  strength  to  fly,  to  lift,  to  destroy.  So  the  wings  of  God  are  strong  wings. 
Mighty  to  save.  Mighty  to  destroy.  4.  The  wings  under  which  Buth  had  come 
to  trust  were  gentle  wings.  There  is  nothing  softer  than  a  feather.  You  have 
noticed  when  a  bird  returns  from  flight  how  gently  it  stoops  over  the  nest.  The 
young  birds  are  not  afraid  of  having  their  Uves  trampled  out  by  the  mother-bird  ; 
the  old  whip-poor-will  drops  into  its  nest  of  leaves,  the  oriole  into  its  casket  of 
bark,  the  humming-bird  into  its  hammock  of  moss,  gentle  as  the  light.  And  so, 
says  the  psalmist.  He  shall  cover  thee  with  His  wing.  Oh,  the  gentleness  of  God  ! 
But  even  that  figure  does  not  fully  set  it  forth  ;  for  I  have  sometimes  looked  into 
the  bird's  nest  and  seen  a  dead  bird,  its  life  having  been  trampled  out  by  the 
mother-bird.  But  no  one  that  ever  came  under  the  feathers  of  the  Almighty  was 
trodden  on.  Blessed  nest  I  warm  nest !  Why  will  men  stay  out  in  the  cold  to  be 
shot  of  temptation  and  to  be  chUled  by  the  blast,  when  there  is  this  Divine 
shelter  ?  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Jehovah's  wings  : — Some  have  imagined  the 
reference  to  be  to  a  hen,  beneath  whose  wings  her  little  birds  flee  for  shelter  and 
warmth,  according  to  one  memorable  and  touching  comparison  used  by  our  Lord 
(Luke  xiii.  34).  It  has  been  suggested  by  others  that  the  allusion  is  to  the  mercy- 
seat  in  the  holy  of  holies  in  the  ancient  tabernacle,  over  which  the  wings  of  the 
cherubim  stretched  from  the  one  extremity  to  the  other,  and  above  which  the 
Divine  glory  shone  with  benignant  radiance.  Nothing  could  be  more  sublimely 
descriptive  of  dedication  to  the  service  of  the  true  God — committing  oneself  to 
Him  for  providential  protection  and  salvation,  and  seeking  the  loving  fellowship  of 
His  Church — than  "  coming  to  trust  beneath  Jehovah's  wings."  (A.  Thomson, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  Let  me  find  favour  in  thy  sight,  my  lord;  for  that  thou  hast 
comforted  me. — Good  from  encouraging  words : — Is  there  not  a  useful  suggestion 
in  all  this  to  persons  in  places  of  authority  and  influence  ?  There  is  sometimes  a 
grievous  fault  in  withholding  praise  from  others.  At  the  fountain-head  of  some  of 
our  greatest  rivers  a  slight  touch  of  the  hand  or  foot  would  be  sufficient  to  deter- 
mine the  course  in  which  they  should  ever  afterwards  flow.  And,  in  like  manner, 
a  kind  word  spoken  to  another  at  a  moment  when  the  heart  is  ready  to  faint  may 
be  the  means  of  dispelling  the  chill  of  despondency,  of  stimulating  the  efforts  of 
an  honest  industry,  of  confirming  good  resolutions,  and  of  helping  to  fix  the  future 
destiny  of  a  brother.  Some  persons  are  far  too  much  afraid  of  the  effect  of  a  little 
generous  and  well-timed  praise.  They  would  keep  all  their  flowers  in  an  ice-house. 
Letting  in  a  little  sunshine  upon  them  at  times  would  not  be  amiss.  Let 
masters  and  parents  and  teachers  try  the  experiment  of  what  an  encouraging 
word  or  look  can  sometimes  do.  Let  it  be  distinctly  seen  by  those  whom  they  can 
influence  that  they  are  on  the  side  of  whatever  is  virtuous  in  effort,  noble  in  aim, 
and  heavenward  in  aspiration.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  14.  At  mealtime  come  thou  hither. — The  common  meal: — 1.  It  should 
indicate  the  Divine  hand  in  providing  it.  2.  It  should  minister  to  the  calm  con- 
tentment of  our  hearts.  3.  It  should  indicate  a  self-respect  before  men.  4.  It 
should  prepare  for  the  next  duties  in  life.  {E.  Price.)  Mealtime  in  the  corn- 
ields : — I.  That  God's  beapers  have  thkib  mealtimes.      The  reapers  in  Jesus' 


CHAP,  n.]  BUTE.  55 

fields  shall  not  only  receive  a  blessed  reward  at  the  last,  hut  they  shall  have  plen- 
teous comforts  by  the  way.  1.  God  has  ordained  certain  mealtimes  for  His  reapers ; 
and  He  has  appointed  that  one  of  these  shall  be  when  they  come  together  to  listen 
to  the  Word  preached.  When  the  Lord  blesses  the  provisions  of  His  house,  no 
matter  how  many  thousands  there  may  be,  all  His  poor  shall  be  filled  with  bread. 

2.  Often,  too,  our  gracious  Lord  appoints  us  mealtimes  in  our  private  readings  and 
meditations.  Here  it  is  that  His  "  paths  drop  fatness."  No  wonder  that  men  grow 
so  slowly,  when  they  meditate  so  little.  We  must  take  the  truth,  and  turn  it  over 
and  over  again  in  the  inward  parts  of  our  spirit,  and  so  shall  we  extract  suitable 
nourishment  therefrom.  3.  Let  us  not  forget  that  there  is  one  specially  ordained 
mealtime  which  ought  to  occur  at  least  once  in  the  week — I  mean  the  Supper  of  the 
Lord.  There  you  have  literally,  as  well  as  spiritually,  a  meal.  4.  Besides  these 
regular  mealtimes,  there  are  others  which  God  gives  us,  at  seasons  vrhen,  perhaps, 
we  little  expect  them.  You  have  been  walking  the  street,  and  suddenly  you  have 
felt  a  holy  flowing  out  of  your  soul  toward  God ;  or  in  the  middle  of  business  your 
heart  has  been  melted  with  love  and  made  to  dance  for  joy,  even  as  the  brooks, 
which  have  been  bound  with  winter's  ice,  leap  to  feel  the  touch  of  spring.  You 
have  been  groaning,  dull,  and  earthbound ;  but  the  sweet  love  of  Jesus  has 
enwrapped  your  heart  when  you  scarce  thought  of  it.  Seasons,  too,  we  have 
had  on  our  sick-beds.  5.  Let  me  observe  that,  whUe  these  mealtimes  come,  we 
know  not  exactly  when,  there  are  certain  seasons  when  we  may  expect  them.  The 
Eastern  reapers  generally  sit  down  under  the  shelter  of  a  tree,  or  a  booth,  to  take 
refreshment  during  the  heat  of  the  day.  And  certain  I  am,  that  when  trouble, 
affliction,  persecution,  and  bereavement  become  the  most  painful  to  us,  it  is  then 
that  the  Lord  hands  out  to  us  the  sweetest  comforts.  Again,  these  mealtimes 
frequently  occur  before  a  trial.  Sweet  cordials  prepare  for  stem  conflicts.  Times 
of  refreshing  also  occur  after  trouble  or  arduous  service.  Christ  was  tempted  of 
the  devil,  and  afterwards  angels  came  and  ministered  unto  Him.  After  conflict, 
content ;  after  battle,  banquet.  When  thou  hast  waited  on  thy  Lord,  then  thou 
shalt  sit  down,  and  thy  Master  will  gird  Himself  and  wait  upon  thee.    U.  To 

THESE   MEALS   THE   GLEANER   IS   AFFECTIONATELY   INVITED.      That   is   tO   Say,   the   pOOf 

trembling  stranger  who  has  not  strength  enough  to  reap,  who  has  no  right  to  be  in 
the  field  except  the  right  of  charity — the  poor,  trembling  sinner,  conscious  of  his 
own  demerit,  and  feeling  but  little  hope  and  little  joy,  is  invited  to  the  feast  of 
love.  1.  In  the  text  the  gleaner  is  invited  to  come:  "At  mealtime  come  thou 
hither."  We  trust  none  of  you  will  be  kept  away  from  the  place  of  holy  feasting 
by  any  shame  on  account  of  your  dress,  or  your  personal  character,  or  your 
poverty  ;  nay,  nor  even  on  account  of  your  physical  infirmities.  2.  Moreover,  she 
was  bidden  not  only  to  come,  but  to  eat.  Whatever  there  is  sweet  and  comfortable 
in  the  Word  of  God,  ye  that  are  of  a  broken  and  contrite  spirit  are  invited  to 
partake  of  it.  You  are  saying  in  your  heart,  "  Oh,  that  I  could  eat  the  children's 
bread  1 "  You  may  eat  it.  You  say,  "  I  have  no  right."  But  the  Lord  gives  you 
the  invitation  1    Come  without  any  other  right  than  the  right  of  His  invitation. 

3.  Note  further,  that  she  was  not  only  invited  to  eat  the  bread,  but  to  dip  her 
morsel  in  the  vinegar.  The  Lord's  reapers  have  sauce  with  their  bread ;  they  have 
not  merely  doctrines,  but  the  holy  unction  which  is  the  essence  of  doctrines ;  they 
have  not  merely  truths,  but  a  hallowed  delight  accompanies  the  truths.  HI.  Boaz 
BEACHES  HEB  THE  PAECHED  coBN.  None  but  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  can  hand  out 
the  choicest  refreshments  of  spiritual  minds.  How  does  He  do  this?  1.  By  His 
gracious  Spirit  He  first  of  all  inspires  your  fftith.  2.  Having  done  this,  the 
Saviour  does  more ;  He  sheds  abroad  the  love  of  God  in  your  heart.  3.  But  Jesus 
does  more  than  this :  He  reaches  the  parched  corn  with  His  own  hand,  when  He 
gives  us  close  communion  with  Himself.  4.  Yet  once  more  let  me  add,  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  pleased  to  reach  the  parched  corn,  in  the  best  sense,  when  the  Spirit 
gives  us  the  infallible  witness  within  that  we  are  "  born  of  God."  Philip  de 
Horny,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Prince  Henry  of  Navarre,  was  wont  to  say  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  had  made  his  own  salvation  to  him  as  clear  a  point  as  a  problem 
demonstrated  in  Euclid.  The  sun  in  the  heavens  is  not  more  clear  to  the  eye 
than  his  present  salvation  to  an  assured  believer ;  such  a  man  could  as  soon  doubt 
his  own  existence  as  suspect  his  possession  of  eternal  life.  lY.  After  Boaz  had 
reached  the  parched  corn,  we  are  told  that  "  she  ded  bat,  and  was  sufficed,  and 
LEFT."  So  shall  it  be  with  every  Euth.  Sooner  or  later  every  penitent  shall 
become  a  believer,  every  mourner  a  singer.  1.  "She  did  eat,  and  was  sufficed." 
Your  head  shall  be  satisfied  with  the  precious  truth  which  Christ  reveals ;  joxa 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

heart  shall  be  content  with  Jesus,  as  the  altogether  lovely  object  of  affection ;  your 
hope  shall  be  filled,  for  whom  have  you  in  heaven  but  Christ  ?  Your  desire  shall 
be  satiated,  for  what  can  even  your  desire  hunger  for  more  than  "  to  know  Christ, 
and  to  be  found  in  Him"?  You  shall  find  Jesus  charm  your  conscience,  till  it  is 
at  perfect  peace ;  He  shall  content  your  judgment,  till  you  know  the  certainty  of 
His  teachings ;  He  shall  supply  your  memory  with  recollections  of  what  He  did, 
and  gratify  your  imagination  with  the  prospects  of  what  He  is  yet  to  do.  2.  "  She 
was  sufficed,  and  left."  Some  of  us  have  had  deep  draughts  of  love ;  we  have 
thought  that  we  could  take  in  all  of  Christ,  but  when  we  have  done  our  best,  we 
have  had  to  leave  a  vast  remainder.  There  are  certain  sweet  things  in  the  Word 
of  God  which  you  and  I  have  not  enjoyed  yet,  and  which  we  cannot  enjoy  yet ;  and 
these  we  are  obliged  to  leave  for  a  while,  till  we  are  better  prepared  to  receive 
them.  Did  not  our  Lord  say,  "  I  have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye 
cannot  bear  them  now "  ?  There  is  a  special  knowledge  to  which  we  have  not 
attained,  a  place  of  intimate  fellowship  with  Christ  which  we  have  not  yet  occupied- 
There  is  yet  a  beyond,  and  there  will  be  for  ever.  3.  A  verse  or  two  further  on 
we  are  told  what  Euth  did  with  her  leavings.  It  is  very  wrong,  I  believe,  at  feasts 
to  carry  anything  home  with  you  ;  but  she  was  not  under  any  such  regulation, 
for  that  which  was  left  she  took  home  and  gave  to  Naomi.  So  it  shall  be  even 
with  you,  poor  tremblers,  who  think  you  have  no  right  to  a  morsel  for  yourselves ; 
you  shall  be  allowed  to  eat,  and  when  you  are  quite  sufficed,  you  shall  have 
courage  to  bear  away  a  portion  to  others  who  are  hungering  at  home.  When  you 
hear  a  sermon  you  think,  "  My  poor  mother  cannot  get  out  to-day  ;  how  I  wish 
she  could  have  been  here,  for  that  sentence  would  have  comforted  her.  If  I  forget 
everything  else,  I  will  tell  her  that."  Cultivate  an  unselfish  spirit.  Seek  to  love 
as  you  have  been  loved.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  Let  her  glean  even  among  the  sheaves. — Spiritual  gleaning : — 
I.  The  God  of  the  whole  earth  is  a  great  Husbandman.  This  is  true  in  natural 
things.  As  a  matter  of  fact  all  farm  operations  are  carried  on  by  His  power  and 
prudence.  In  spiritual  matters  God  is  a  great  Husbandman ;  and  there,  too,  all 
His  works  are  done  for  His  children,  that  they  may  be  fed  upon  the  finest  of  the 
wheat.  Permit  me  to  speak  of  the  wide  gospel-fields  which  our  heavenly  Father 
farms  for  the  good  of  His  children.  Every  field  which  our  heavenly  Father  tills 
yields  a  plentiful  harvest,  for  there  are  no  failures  or  famines  with  Him.  1.  One 
part  of  His  farm  is  called  doctrine  field.  What  full  sheaves  of  finest  wheat  are  to  be 
found  there !  Gospel  doctrine  is  always  safe  doctrine.  You  may  feast  upon  it  till 
you  are  full,  and  no  harm  will  oome  of  it.  Be  afraid  of  no  revealed  truth.  2.  The 
great  Husbandman  has  another  field  called  promise  field ;  of  that  I  shall  not  need 
to  speak,  for  I  hope  you  often  enter  and  glean  from  it.  The  whole  field  is  your 
ovsm,  every  ear  of  it ;  you  may  draw  out  from  the  sheaves  themselves,  and  the 
more  you  take  the  more  you  may.  3.  Then  there  is  ordinance  field ;  a  great  deal  of 
good  wheat  grows  in  this  field.  In  all  the  estate  no  field  is  to  be  found  to  rival  this 
centre  and  crown  of  all  the  domain :  this  is  the  King's  acre.  Gospel  gleaner,  abide 
in  that  field ;  glean  in  it  on  the  first  day  of  every  week,  and  expect  to  see  your 
Lord  there ;  for  it  is  written,  "  He  was  known  of  them  in  the  breaking  of  bread." 
4.  Fellowship  and  communion  with  Christ.  This  is  the  field  for  the  Lord's 
choicest  ones  to  glean  in.  II.  A  humble  gleaner.  1.  The  believer  is  a  favoured 
gleaner,  for  h£  may  take  home  a  whole  sheaf,  if  he  likes :  he  may  bear  away  all 
that  he  can  possibly  carry,  for  all  things  are  freely  given  him  of  the  Lord.  Alas, 
our  faith  is  so  Utile  that  we  rather  glean  than  reap  ;  we  are  straitened  in  ourselves, 
not  in  our  God.  May  you  all  outgrow  the  metaphor,  and  come  home,  bringing 
your  sheaves  with  you.  2.  Again,  we  may  remark  that  the  gleaner,  in  her 
business  has  to  endure  much  toil  and  fatigue.  I  know  a  friend  who  walks  five 
miles  every  Sunday  to  hear  the  gospel,  and  has  the  same  distance  to  return. 
Another  thinks  little  of  a  ten  miles'  journey;  and  these  are  wise,  for  to  hear  the 
pure  Word  of  God  no  labour  is  extravagant.  3.  We  remark,  next,  that  every  ear 
the  gleaner  gets  she  has  to  stoop  for.  We  will  go  down  on  our  knees  in  prayer, 
and  stoop  by  self-humiliation  and  confession  of  ignorance,  and  so  gather  with  the 
hand  of  faith  the  daily  bread  of  our  hungering  souls.  4.  Note,  in  the  next  place, 
that  what  a  gleaner  gets  she  wins  ear  by  ear;  occasionally  she  picks  up  a  handful 
at  once,  but  as  a  rule  it  is  straw  by  straw.  Now,  where  there  are  handfuls 
to  be  got  at  once,  there  is  the  place  to  go  and  glean ;  but  if  you  cannot  meet  with 
such  abundance,  be  glad  to  gather  ear  by  ear.    That  is  a  sorry  ministry  which 


CHAP.n.]  EUTH.  57 

yields  nothing.  Go  and  glean  where  the  Lord  has  opened  the  gate  for  you.  Why 
the  text  alone  is  worth  the  journey;  do  not  miss  it.  5.  Note,  next,  that  what  the 
gleaner  picks  up  she  keeps  in  her  hand  ;  she  does  not  drop  the  corn  as  fast  as  she 
gathers  it.  Be  attentive,  hut  be  retentive  too.  Gather  the  grain  and  tie  it  up  in 
bundles  for  carrying  away  with  you,  and  mind  you  do  not  lose  it  on  the  road  home. 
Do  not  lose  by  trifling  talk  that  which  may  make  you  rich  to  all  eternity.  6.  Then, 
again,  the  gleaner  takes  the  wheat  home  and  threshes  it.  It  is  a  wise  thing  to 
thresh  a  sermon  whoever  may  have  been  the  preacher,  for  it  is  certain  that  there 
is  a  portion  of  straw  and  chaff  about  it.  Many  thresh  the  preacher  by  finding 
needless  fault ;  but  that  is  not  half  so  good  as  threshing  the  sei-mon  to  get  out 
of  it  the  pure  truth.  7.  And  then,  in  the  last  place,  the  good  woman,  after 
threshing  the  corn,  no  doubt  winnowed  it.  Euth  did  all  this  in  the  field ;  but  you 
can  scarcely  do  so.  You  must  do  some  of  the  work  at  home.  Separate  between 
the  precious  and  the  vile,  and  let  the  worthless  material  go  where  it  may ;  you 
have  no  use  for  it,  and  the  sooner  you  are  rid  of  it  the  better.  Judge  with  care ; 
reject  false  teaching  with  decision,  and  retain  true  doctrine  with  earnestness,  so 
shall  you  practise  the  enriching  art  of  heavenly  gleaning.  III.  A  GEicious 
PEEMissioN  GIVEN :  "  Let  her  glean  among  the  sheaves,  and  reproach  her  not."  We 
have  no  right  to  any  heavenly  blessings  of  ourselves ;  our  portion  is  due  to  free  and 
sovereign  grace.  I  tell  you  the  reasons  that  moved  Boaz's  heart  to  let  Euth  go 
among  the  sheaves.  The  master  motive  was  because  he  loved  her.  He  would 
have  her  go  there  because  he  had  conceived  an  affection  for  her,  which  he  after- 
wards displayed  in  grander  ways.  So  the  Lord  lets  His  people  come  and  glean 
among  the  sheaves,  because  He  loves  them.  There  was  another  reason  why  Boaz 
allows  Euth  to  glean  among  the  sheaves ;  it  was  because  he  was  her  relative.  This 
is  why  our  Lord  gives  us  choice  favours  at  times,  and  takes  us  into  His  banqueting- 
house  in  so  gracious  a  manner.  He  is  our  next  of  kin,  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh 
of  our  flesh.  Oh,  child  of  God,  never  be  afraid  to  glean  I  Have  faith  in  God,  and 
take  the  promises  home  to  yourself.  Jesus  wiU  rejoice  to  see  you  making  free 
with  His  good  things.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  benevolence  of  Boaz : — This 
benevolence  of  Boaz  seems  to  me  to  have  two  lessons  in  it :  one  practical — how  we 
should  do  our  benevolence ;  and  one  theological — how  God  does  His  benevolence. 
You  wiU  see,  in  the  first  place,  that  Boaz  does  not  give  her  the  wheat.  Generous 
as  he  is,  she  earns  what  she  gets.  He  does  not  send  her  back  home  and  send  the 
young  men  with  sheaves  after  her;  he  lets  her  work  for  what  she  receives.  To 
give  something  for  nothing  is  always  a  dangerous  piece  of  business.  Sometimes 
we  must  do  it,  it  is  true,  but  it  is  not  the  ideal  kind  of  benevolence.  If  you  desire 
to  do  something  for  the  poor  that  wiU  endure,  let  them  do  something  to  earn  that 
which  they  receive  from  you.  And  yet  while  Boaz  thus  allows  her  to  earn  what 
she  receives,  so  that  she  is  no  pauper,  no  beggar,  has  no  self-respect  taken  away 
from  her,  he  does  it  largely  and  with  a  great,  generous  mood,  not  in  a  niggardly 
way.  But,  most  of  aU,  he  gives  her  secretly.  Boaz  anticipated  Christ.  A  great 
many  years  before  Christ  had  said,  "  Let  not  your  right  hand  know  what  your  left 
hand  does,"  Boaz  practised  that  maxim.  He  hid  his  benevolence  from  this 
woman,  and  Boaz  enjoyed  the  benevolence  all  the  more  because  she  did  not 
understand  it.  In  our  benevolence  let  us  maintain  the  self-respect  of  those  we 
aid ;  let  us  not  make  paupers  of  them ;  and  strive  how  we  can  do  the  most  good 
with  the  least  possible  display.  That  is  not  the  ordinary  rule,  but  it  is  a  good  one. 
But  this  story  of  the  benevolence  of  Boaz  is  also  a  parable.  It  indicates  the  way 
in  which  God  does  His  good  works  among  men.  Did  you  ever  think  how  true  it  is 
that  God  also  maintains  our  self-respect  when  He  gives  to  us — how  very  little  He 
gives  unless  we  do  something  to  get  the  gift  ?  When  we  pray  for  bread  for  our 
need.  He  does  not  give  us  the  bread ;  He  gives  us  a  piece  of  land,  and  a  plough, 
and  a  hoe,  and  we  must  sweat  for  the  bread.  When  we  pray  for  clothing,  He  does 
not  send  the  clothing ;  He  gives  us  that  out  of  which  we  can  by  our  own  industry 
make  the  clothing.  It  is  certainly  true  in  the  material  realm.  It  is  true  in  the 
intellectual  realm.  The  world  is  full  of  wisdom,  full  of  the  resources  out  of  which 
wisdom  is  gathered;  but  we  must  gather  it;  we  cannot  get  our  wisdom  ready- 
made.  It  ia  not  handed  to  us.  And  this  is  equally  true  in  the  spiritual  realm. 
God  no  more  hands  the  bread  of  life  ready-made  than  He  hands  the  material 
bread  ready-made.  But  how  generously  He  gives  to  those  who  are  willing  to  work 
for  Hun,  and  take  that  given  in  that  spirit  which  preserves  the  self-respect  while 
receiving  the  benevolence  I  We  cut  down  the  forests  and  find  the  coal-mine ;  we 
exhaust  the  ocean  of  its  whales  and  find  gas  and  electricity  to  take  their  place; 


68  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

and  now  the  scientific  men  are  discussing  the  problem  whether  they  cannot  find  a 
way  to  utilise  the  seemingly  wasted  sunlight.  Nature  has  reservoired  them  in  the 
coal-fields — that  is,  God  has  reservoired  them — and  out  of  its  reservoir  we  gather 
the  light.  But  now  men  are  beginning  to  say,  "  Can  we  not  reservoir  this  sun- 
light, this  heat  that  goes  to  waste,  and  make  it  do  the  world's  work  for  us  ?  "  The 
world  is  full  of  God's  gifts.  He  only  waits  for  us  with  pick  and  axe  and  hoe,  with 
sweat  of  brain  and  sweat  of  body,  to  find  a  way  to  realise  them.  And  as  God  sets 
us  to  work  to  get  His  gifts,  and  as  God  fills  the  world  full  with  them,  so  God 
conceals  Himseli  in  the  giving.  I  turn  to  my  books  of  literature,  and  I  find  praises 
of  Nature.  Nature  I  What  is  Nature  but  a  word  for  God  ?  What  is  Nature  but 
the  minister  and  servant  ?  What  is  Nature  but  the  elements  that  are  dropping  the 
great  sheaves  of  wheat  in  our  path,  and  we  do  not  know  that  Boaz  is  hiding 
behind  the  hedge  smiling  at  our  joy  in  our  discovery.  God  conceals  Himself.  He 
ministers  through  others,  and  takes  as  to  Himself  the  thanks  we  give  to  them. 
{Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.)  Combination  of  strength  and  gentleness  in  Boaz  : — There 
are  persons  to  be  met  with  in  social  life  who,  while  possessing  the  more  solid 
qualities  of  moral  excellence,  are  singularly  deficient  in  the  more  graceful.  They 
have  honesty,  but  they  have  no  sensibility ;  they  have  truth,  but  they  are  strangely 
wanting  in  tenderness.  You  have  the  marble  column,  but  you  have  not  the  polish 
or  the  delicate  tracery  on  its  surface ;  you  have  the  rugged  oak,  but  you  miss  the 
jasmine  or  the  honeysuckle  creeping  gracefully  around  it  from  its  roots.  But  the 
conduct  of  Boaz,  as  we  stand  and  hear  him  giving  those  directions  to  his  reapers, 
proves  the  compatibility  of  those  two  forms  of  excellence,  and  how  the  strong  and 
the  amiable  may  meet  and  harmonise  in  the  same  character.  They  do  always 
meet  in  the  highest  forms  of  moral  greatness.  (A.  Thomson,  D.D.)  The  refining 
art  of  doing  good : — I  speak  of  the  art  of  doing  good  because  it  deserves  a  place 
among  the  beautiful  arts  of  earth  and  heaven.  We  speak  "  of  the  refinement  o£ 
the  arts."  Men  may  cultivate  the  beautiful  and  he  no  better  at  heart  for  it  aU. 
The  beautiful  has  no  ministry  to  those  who  reject  the  great  Artist  of  the  universe. 
He  would  have  saved  the  world  long  ago  by  the  ministry  of  the  beautiful  had  it 
been  possible.  What  pictures  are  like  those  He  hangs  before  us  every  day? 
What  sunsets  represented  on  the  canvas  are  Uke  the  real  sunsets  ?  When  we  love 
the  great  Artist  out  of  whose  mind  has  poured  all  the  beauty  there  is  in  the  world, 
then  every  leaf  and  every  flower,  every  sunrise  and  every  sunset,  every  vision  of 
beauty  in  earth  or  sky  or  sea,  has  its  tender,  gentle,  refilling  influence  upon  the 
adoring  heart.  This  art  of  doing  good  refines  the  heart  and  life  even  more  than 
the  study  of  the  beautiful.     (C.  C.  McCabe,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  So  she  gleaned  In  the  field  until  even.  —  Persevering  labour:  — 
1.  Gleaners  in  gospel-fields  should  continue  in  their  gleaning  work  from  morning  to 
evening.  How  many  are  but  half  Sabbath  folk,  that  can  spare  to  spend  a  morning 
in  Sabbath  service,  but  are  for  their  pastimes  after  that  1  Euth  was  none  of  those 
lazy  gleaners.  2.  Though  God  be  very  bountiful  to  us,  yet  will  He  have  us  to  use 
all  the  means  in  a  way  of  subserviency  to  His  bounty.  God  will  give  ,us  at  the 
second-hand  what  He  would  not  give  us  at  first-hand;  He  will  give  us  grace  and 
knowledge  by  the  use  of  the  means,  which  He  gives  not  immediately  from  Himself. 
"  God  sells  all  for  labour,"  saith  Hesiod.  (C.  Ness.)  Labour : — I,  No  labour  is 
TOO  INSIGNIFICANT  FOB  LOVE.  "  So  sho  gleaned."  She  was  of  a  good  family, 
accustomed  to  a  life  of  ease  and  plenty.  That  which  she  does  now  is  anything  but 
dignified.  1.  A  work  for  the  commonest  powers.  2.  A  work  for  the  commonest 
people.  3.  A  work  whose  results  bear  no  comparison  to  the  expenditure  of  labour. 
4.  A  work  in  which  is  redone  that  which  has  been  considered  as  done.  Men 
measure  the  worth  of  work  by  its  conspicuousness.  The  real  worth  of  work  lies  in 
meeting  the  necessity  for  its  existence,  and  the  motive  which  inspires  it.  Two 
lives  depend  upon  her  toil — then  her  work  has  worth;  she  loves  the  woman  for 
whom  she  toils — then  her  work  has  dignity.  Her  love  consecrates  lowest  means 
for  highest  ends.  II.  No  results  of  labouk  are  too  insignificant  lou  care. 
She  "beat  out  that  she  had  gleaned."  {S.  B.  Rees.)  The  successful  gleaner : — 
1.  Ruth  was  a  gleaner ;  and  so  should  we  be.  The  Bible  is  that  field.  Search  the 
Scriptures ;  glean  there.  Pick  up  every  grain,  for  it  contains  precious  nourish- 
ment. No  matter  how  many  gleaners ;  there  is  food  enough  for  all.  2.  Alas,  how 
many  careless  ones  there  are,  who  never  glean  at  all !  They  loiter  all  the  day  of 
their  life  idle.  And  so,  when  night  comes,  they  sink  into  eternity  with  nothing 
done.     3.  Others,  again,  begin  when  Buth  leaves  off,  at  even.    All  the  bright  and 


CHAP.  11.]  RUTH.  69 

sunny  portion  of  their  lives  they  give  to  the  world.  4.  Euth  began  gleaning  in  the 
morning.  She  felt  that  every  hour  must  he  employed ;  that  every  moment  was 
precious.  She  laboured  diligently.  May  we  make  God's  Word  our  daily  study  I 
{Bp.  Oxenden.) 

Ver.  18.  She  took  it  up,  and  went  into  the  city. — Careful  of  the  fruit  of  labour : — 
It  is  no  less  necessary  to  be  careful  of  the  fruit  of  our  labours  than  to  labour  with 
diligence.  "  In  all  labour  there  is  profit,"  says  the  wise  man  ;  yet  there  are  some 
that  labour  for  the  wind.  They  lose  what  they  have  wrought  because  they  suffer 
it,  through  their  carelessness,  to  slip  through  their  fingers.  This  folly,  however,  is 
much  less  frequent  in  things  relating  to  the  body  than  in  those  which  relate  to  the 
soul.  Yet  some  need  admonition  to  manage  their  worldly  affairs  with  discretion ; 
but  it  is  far  more  needful  to  be  careful  that  we  lose  none  of  those  things  which  we 
have  wrought  in  the  service  of  God,  for  the  benefit  of  our  souls,  but  that  we  receive 
a  fuU  reward.  (G.  Lawson.)  Carry  home  the  wheat : — You  know  it  is  one  thing 
to  have  grace,  and  another  thing  to  have  common  sense.  But  she  had  both.  She 
had  got  more  than  she  wanted,  and  "  she  beat  out  that  she  had  gleaned  ;  and  it  was 
about  an  ephah  of  barley."  And  she  carried  away — the  straw?  No,  she  did  not; 
but  that  is  what  we  do  sometimes.  We  attend  a  meeting,  and  when  we  go  away  we 
leave  the  corn  behind,  and  carry  away  the  straw.    [H.  Moorhouse.) 

Ver.  19.  Where  hast  thou  gleaned  to-day  7 — Where  hast  thou  gleaned  to-day  t — 
I.  The  sphere  :  life's  opportunities.  1.  The  law  of  labour  is  the  law  of  Ufe.  In 
this  world  but  little  can  be  accomplished  without  energy  and  enterprise.  In  every 
department  this  is  true.  2.  To  the  open  and  eager  eye  openings  invite  and  oppor- 
tunities multiply.  "  Let  me  now  go  to  the  field."  "  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open 
door."  "  The  field  is  the  world."  (Isa.  vi.  8.)  3.  Forms  of  activity,  how  diversi- 
fied they  are.  There  is  not  only  the  reaper  but  the  "gleaner"  also.  "  All  works 
are  good,  and  each  is  best  when  most  it  pleases  Thee."  "  Gather  up  the  fragments," 
and  despise  not  "  the  day  of  small  things."  4.  Scope  exists  for  all.  "  How  many 
serve,  how  ihany  more  may  to  the  service  come."  "  Even  I,  in  fields  so  broad,  some 
duties  may  fulfil."    5.  Each  "day"  brings  its  demands.     "To-day."     11.  The 

SERVICE  :       OUR     USE    OB    NEGLECT    OF    LIFE's    OPPORTUNITIES.         1.    Neglcct     pOSSible. 

There  is  no  compulsion.  The  parable  of  the  talents.  The  field  of  the  slothful 
(Prov.  xxiv),  2.  Success  attainable.  Satisfaction  in  healthful  industry.  Benefi- 
cent results  are  an  "  ephah  of  barley."  "  Neither  man  nor  work  unblest  wUt 
Thou  permit  to  be."  "  He  shall  doubtless  come  again  bringing  his  sheaves  with 
him."  " Enter  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  3.  Co-operation  here  desirable.  "Let 
fall  some  for  her."  "Keproach  her  not."  Community  in  labour.  Unselfishly 
thinking  of  others  and  their  work,  without  unkindliness  or  rebuke.  "  Each  worker 
pleases  where  the  rest  he  serves  in  charity."  III.  The  scrutiny  :  direct  investi- 
gation INTO  our  use  of  life's  OPPORTUNITIES.  1.  The  "  day,"  however,  varying 
in  incident  and  duration,  soon  "  goeth  away."  "  The  shadows  of  the  evening  are 
stretched  out."  "  The  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work."  2.  After  that,  the 
tribunal  and  award,  (a)  The  fact  of  judgment  ^Matt.  xxv.  19).  (b)  Its  charac- 
teristics. (1)  Personal  and  individual :"  Those."  (2)  Practical :"  Where."  (3)  Pre- 
cise: Each  "day"  and  its  doings.  How  wise  to  let  the  inquiry  here  anticipate 
the  inquiry  hereafter.  Day  by  day  and  every  day  should  conscience  put  the  ques- 
tion, "  Where  hast  thou  gleaned  to-day?"  (J.  P.  Allen,  M.A.)  A  good  day^g 
gleaning  : — Let  Naomi  ask  us  this  question,  and  let  us  answer,  as  far  as  we  can,  out 
of  Ruth's  experience.  "Where  hast  thou  gleaned?"  1.  The  first  thing  I  am 
impressed  with  is  this — if  you  will  allow  Euth  to  answer  the  question  for  us — no 
matter  how  dark  may  have  been  your  past  life,  no  matter  through  what  changes  and 
hardships  you  may  have  come,  you  are  not  justified  in  giving  in  to  melancholy, 
much  less  to  despair.  Do  not  sit  still ;  go  on  with  your  round.  Cast  about,  go  out 
and  forage  somewhere.  Do  the  thing  that  lies  next  to  your  hand ;  go  back  to  the 
ordinary  common  work-a-day  world,  and  you  wiU  find  relief.  "  Where  hast  thou 
gleaned  to-day  ?  "  2.  If,  in  answer  to  my  question,  you  would  say  that  you  are 
nobody,  that  you  are  of  no  account,  and  that  all  Uf  e's  plans  and  purposes  have  come 
to  one  swift  catastrophe,  I  rebuke  you  from  Euth's  history.  You  may  be  poor  and 
obscure ;  so  was  Euth ;  but  a  new  day  had  dawned.  Keep  up  your  heart ;  greater, 
if  you  only  thought  it,  are  the  things  behind  the  scenes  in  your  favour  than  all  that 
seems  to  be  against  you.  3.  Then,  when  we  stand  here  and  ask,  and  answer,  the 
questions  that  flew  swift  as  a  weaver's  shuttle  between  Euth  and  Naomi — does  not 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.\  [chap,  m 

this  come  out  ?  You  have  not  been  working  in  vain,  if  you  will  tell  the  truth.  If 
you  look  at  things  aright,  and  take  yet  another  look,  especially  those  who  are  down- 
cast, teU  me  if  you  are  not  bound  to  admit  that  your  history  is  beginning  to  show 
glints  of  sunshine,  here  and  there,  through  its  darkness  and  chaos.  Somehow  you 
are  getting  conscious  of  it  that  there  is  an  upper  light  breaking  in.  Now,  think  of 
the  man  who  came  into  the  field,  whose  presence  opened  up  a  new  chapter  for  Euth, 
and  opened  a  wonderful  chapter  in  God's  purposes  for  a  great  while  to  come.  On 
what  small  hinges  do  great  doors  hang !  The  world  is  still  God's  acre.  It  is  not  a 
field  of  riot,  of  chance  and  haphazard.  It  is  not  true  that  this  is  a  world  in  which 
only  the  fittest  survive  and  the  weakest  go  to  the  wall.  It  is  not  true  that  the  race 
is  to  the  swift  and  the  battle  to  the  strong.  Don't  you  see  how  the  gospel  comes  on 
the  scene  with  the  face  of  that  man  Boaz  ?  He  is  always  going  about  the  field,  this 
Boaz,  this  Kinsman,  this  Eedeemer.  His  eyes  are  on  you,  and  He  knows  more 
about  you  than  you  are  giving  Him  credit  for.  Blessed  is  He  who  is  taking  know- 
ledge of  thee.  "  Where  hast  thou  gleaned  to-day  ?  and  where  wroughtest  thou  ?  " 
4.  Again,  looking  at  this  as  a  fireside  gathering,  as  it  were,  to-day,  at  the  end  of  one 
week,  and  before  the  new  one,  with  its  activities,  is  fully  upon  us,  does  not  this  come 
out  of  the  question  and  the  answer — that,  after  aU,  you  have  had  unexpected 
success  ?  Euth's  story  shows  us  that,  when  we  come  across  good  times,  when  we 
come  to  what  is  called  "  good  luck,"  we  are  in  danger  then.  Now,  don't  go  away 
and  say  that  that  is  come  to  you  because  you  rose  early  and  sat  up  late,  because  you 
were  sharper  than  other  people,  because  your  wits  are  keener,  because  you  have 
shuffled  the  per  cents.,  so  to  speak,  more  cleverly.  Put  in  God  somewhere;  give 
God  the  credit,  give  Him  the  praise,  give  Him  the  glory,  for,  I  tell  you,  it  is  all  His. 
(J.  3IcNeill.)  Gleaning  : — There  are  some  whose  only  chance  of  obtaining  know- 
ledge is  by  gleaning.  Their  education  has  been  neglected.  Their  opportunities  of 
attending  a  place  of  worship  are  few.  Their  time  for  reading  is  limited.  In  a  word, 
they  are  not  farmers,  and  can  never  show  a  stack :  they  can  only  gather  by  glean- 
ing. I.  To  such  let  me  say,  "  Glean  whebe  the  corn  grows  and  lies  near  at 
HAND.  You  win  not  find  the  corn  by  the  wayside,  or  on  the  moor.  You  must  go 
to  the  fields :  it  is  only  on  the  cultivated  land  you  can  find  it."  And  so  with  the 
knowledge  that  is  worth  possessing.  It  is  not  to  be  found  everywhere.  For  instance, 
it  is  not  from  every  pulpit  you  hear  the  gospel :  why  go  where  Christ  is  not  preached? 
It  is  not  in  aU  company  that  you  may  glean  wisdom.  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise 
men  shall  be  wise."  It  would  be  well  for  us  to  bear  in  mind  that  we  cannot  be 
friendly  with  the  ungodly  without  storing  up  some  of  the  talk  we  hear,  and  that  we 
thus  store  sorrow  for  the  future.  It  is  not  every  book  from  which  we  can  glean  corn. 
Beading  a  bad  book  is  to  gather  poison.  II.  To  glean  successfully  we  must  bb 
WILLING  TO  stoop.  Gleaning  is  stooping.  The  writer  heard  a  man  behind  a 
counter  say,  "  The  worst  folks  to  deal  with  are  those  who  know  all  you  are  going  to 
say."  This  is  true  enough.  A  schoolboy  who  thinks  he  knows  it  all  is  the  most 
hopeless  of  pupils.  The  apprentice  who  will  not  be  told  never  learns  his  trade. 
Many  a  man  would  have  risen  if  he  could  have  afforded  to  stoop  for  awhile.  HI.  If 
we  would  glean  a  heap,  we  must  be  content  with  a  little  at  a  time.  The  woman 
who  has  gathered  the  largest  bundle  of  corn  never  once  picked  up  a  handful.  It 
was  mostly  in  single  ears:  "  Here  a  Uttle,  and  there  a  little."  It  is  wonderful  what 
may  be  done  by  never  passing  by  a  thing  that  is  worth  preserving.  To  note  down, 
every  day,  each  remarkable  thing,  would  make  a  wonderful  volume  in  time.  To  do 
this  thoroughly,  we  must  know  the  value  of  each  grain  of  truth.  Don't  let  the 
thought  that  it  is  only  a  little  prevent  your  stooping,  for  stacks  are  made  up  of  single 
straws,  and  London  is  made  up  of  single  houses,  which  were  built  a  brick  at  a  time. 
IV.  No  one  can  glean  well  who  is  not  able  to  persevere.  Gleaning  is  tiring  work. 
It  means  a  back-ache.  We  must,  if  we  mean  to  succeed,  be  willing  to  go  on  long 
after  we  are  weary.  We  cannot  expect  to  have  it  all  our  own  way.  If  we  were  aa 
willing  to  spur  ourselves  to  perseverance  as  we  are  to  urge  on  our  weary  horses,  we 
should  accomplish  much  more  than  we  do.  Abraham  Lincoln  was  asked  if  he 
thought  the  war  would  be  over  while  he  was  President.  "  Can't  say,  sir."  "  But, 
Mr,  Lincoln,  what  do  you  mean  to  do?"  "Peg  away,  sir — keep  pegging  away." 
And  pegging  away  liberated  millions  of  bondmen,  and  wiped  the  foul  stain  of  slavery 
from  America's 'scutcheon.  (T.  Champness.)  A  charity  sermon : — Consider  the 
diffusion  of  pleasure  and  delight  which  arose  from  no  great  nor  lasting  act  of 
charity.  The  hearts  of  Naomi  and  Euth  did  sing  for  joy  upon  sight  of  a  relief 
which  would  soon  want  another :  and  Boaz  throbbed  with  more  noble  ecstasies,  by 
as  much  as  it  ia  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,     I.  That  the  poor  hate  a 


CHAP,  n.]  RUTH.  61 

BIGHT  TO  GLEAN  UPON  US,  and  that  part  of  our  substance,  by  the  laws  of  God  and 
nature,  is  their  strict  and  proper  due.    II.  That  the  blessing  of  God  and  the 

POOB   13   AN   AMPLE    EETEIBUTION    TO    THE    EICH   FOE   SDFFEEING   THEM    TO    GLEAN,    and 

that  they  have  as  strict  a  right  to  that  as  the  poor  have  to  their  gleaning,  and  much 
greater  refreshments  springing  from  it.  III.  That  in  beligious  public  ministra- 
tions  IT   13   FAB    FEOM    VAINGLOEY    TO    DISTINGUISH    OUESELVES     BY    OUB    LIBERALITY. 

Then  the  more  we  give  the  more  we  may  be  truly  said  to  promote  the  glory  of  God  1 
Then  the  more  we  show  the  forwardness  of  our  mind  the  more  we  profess  subjec- 
tion to  the  laws  of  Christ.  (R.  Coleire,M.A.)  Gleaners  in  God's  harvest  field  : — 
'\i\Tiat  have  we  gleaned?  What  improvements  in  thought,  character,  or  heart 
treasure  to  refresh  us  in  the  present  and  bring  a  glorious  reward  in  the  future  ? 
The  world  is  God's  harvest  field,  and  we  are  aU  gleaners.  Some  gather  great  swaths 
and  bind  heavy  bundles,  and  some  gather  only  a  little  bunch  of  grain  here  and  there. 
The  most  poor  and  obscure  may  glean,  and  the  richest  and  most  prosperous  can  do 
but  little  more  than  glean.  Each  day  God  throws  down  great  handfuls  from  Time's 
garner.  Let  us  take  one  day.  Man  rises  from  slumber  in  health  and  strength.  He 
goes  forth  ;  nature  welcomes  him,  the  heavens  are  kindling  with  the  dawn,  the  earth 
is  teeming  with  beauty.  He  enters  the  bosom  of  his  family  ;  from  loving  voices, 
smiles  and  all,  he  gleans.  The  chUd  and  mother,  from  a  narrow  yet  fruitful 
field,  are  daily  learning  lessons  that  shall  last  through  all  their  future 
life.  Nothing  is  trivial.  God  seems  to  say  to  us,  "  Attend  to  the  common- 
place, not  the  heroic."  It  is  grains  that  fiU  up  our  days  and  aggregate 
the  substance  of  our  lives.  Where  have  I  been  to-day?  What  company  have 
I  met  ?  What  have  been  my  enjoyments  ?  Whither  have  my  affections 
turned  ?  Some  gather  mean  and  base  things  on  the  highway  of  life,  while  others 
gather  aU  that  is  beautiful.  In  the  same  pond  the  white  and  the  yellow  lily 
grow.  The  one  from  the  surrounding  elements  draws  whiteness,  purity,  and  frag- 
rance ;  and  the  other  only  yellow  hues  and  no  fragrance.  What  have  we  gleaned 
from  this  world  for  the  world  to  come  from  men,  from  books,  from  our  families, 
from  work,  from  nature,  and  from  God  ?  If  we  would  have  our  soul's  hunger  satis- 
fied and  our  spiritual  life  nurtured  into  vigour  and  beauty,  God's  fields  are  open 
before  us  and  we  must  glean.  {J.  Spencer  Kennard.)  Confidence  hehoeen 
kindred  : — It  should  be  one  of  the  first  principles  in  the  government  of  a  family  that 
the  young  shaU  be  taught  to  tell  their  parents  of  all  their  movements,  and  that  they 
shall  in  this  way  have  another  powerful  motive  always  to  act  in  such  a  manner  as 
that  they  shall  never  have  anything  to  conceal.  It  is  one  of  the  worst  signs  in  the 
formation  of  character  when  a  son  has  haunts  which  he  is  afraid  to  name,  com- 
panions with  whom  he  dreads  to  be  seen,  or  books  which  he  can  only  read  by  stealth. 
Such  suspicious  secrecy  is  always  the  sure  and  distinct  indication  of  a  progress 
downwards.  When  the  ingenuous  son  is  ready  to  make  his  father  the  trusted  con- 
fidant of  all  his  pursuits  and  plans,  of  all  his  companionships  and  amusements, 
there  cannot  have  been  any  great  divergence  as  yet  from  the  paths  of  virtue.  But 
when  the  parent  must  needs  be  duped  and  hoodwinked,  and  is  thought  of  and  treated 
as  an  inconvenient  spy,  the  child  has  lost  the  fiarst  element  of  filial  obedience  by  the 
loss  of  filial  trust  and  love,  and  rather  wants  opportunity  than  inclination  to  come 
out  as  a  villain  or  a  profligate.     {A.  Thomson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  20.  Blessed  be  he  of  the  Lord,  who  hath  not  left  off  His  kindness. — God't 
blessing : — 1.  In  its  nature  it  is  "  kindness  " — the  very  soul  of  tenderness  to  the 
God-fearing  among  men.  2.  In  its  continuance.  He  cannot  "  leave  off  "  making 
His  chUdren  happy.  3.  In  its  application  to  both  worlds — to  the  "  living,"  as  the 
song  of  a  Euth  may  testify  ;  to  the  "  dead,"  as  the  hope  of  a  Naomi  must  imply. 
Both  are  in  the  covenant  of  the  God  of  Israel.  4.  In  its  expression.  He  knows 
how  to  prepare  some  lip  to  give  it  adequate  expression  before  the  world.  The  old 
shall  ever  confijrm  the  faith  of  the  young.  {E.  Price.)  Kindness  to  the  dead : — 
The  natural  human  protectors  are  gone,  but  the  Almighty  Father  has  taken  their 
place.  It  is  what  Elimelech  and  Mahlon  would  have  desired,  and  it  is  kindness  to 
them.  Can  we  not  imagine  that  those  who  have  passed  from  earth,  leaving  poor, 
disconsolate  ones  behind  to  struggle  with  life's  difficulties,  often  find,  in  their 
glorified  condition,  ever  fresh  and  continuous  reasons  for  rejoicing,  because  they 
see  how  the  ever-watchful  love  of  God  is  constantly  shown  towards  beloved  ones 
whose  comfort  was  their  desire  and  endeavour  ?  Mothers  and  fathers  have  died 
wondering  what  their  children's  future  would  be  in  this  rude,  rough  world,  and 
with  their  wonder  fear  has  mingled.    Yet  now  from  heaven's  clear  heights  they 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

behold  God's  tender  care  surrounding  them  by  day  and  night,  saving  them  from 
danger,  raising  up  noble-souled  friends  to  help  them,  doing  more  on  their  behalf 
than  their  imagination  or  faith  conceived  possible ;  and  as  they  see  all  this,  their 
souls  are  moved  with  a  passion  of  rapturous  gratitude,  and  heaven  rings  melodious 
with  their  "  new  song  "  of  praise.  Yes,  the  dead  are  wiser  than  we  think,  and 
probably  see  more  than  we  suppose  of  the  lives  from  which  they  are  parted  only  by 
a  thin,  and  perhaps  from  their  side  transparent,  veil.  This,  at  least,  is  certain,  that 
when  God  inspires  the  benevolent  to  shield  the  orphan  and  help  the  widow,  He 
shows  that  He  has  "  not  left  off  His  kindness  to  the  living  and  the  dead."  {Wm. 
Braden.)  The  man  is  near  of  kin  unto  us,  one  of  our  next  kinsmen. — Chriit 
typified  by  the  goel  under  the  law ;— You  can  hardly  need  to  be  told  how  a  con- 
nection, the  very  closest,  may  be  traced  between  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian 
dispensations.  The  redeemer  under  the  law  is  most  accurately  a  type  of  the 
Eedeemer  under  the  gospel.  Now,  suppose  we  take  in  succession  three  cases  in 
which  the  goel  or  redeemer  was  bidden  to  interfere — forfeiture  of  inheritance,  loss 
of  liberty,  and  shedding  of  blood ;  and  examining  each  transaction  under  its  legal 
description,  let  us  strive  to  show  you  the  fidelity  with  which  it  images  the  redemp- 
tion wrought  out  for  us  by  Christ.  I.  We  begin  with  the  fobfeitueh  of  inheri- 
tance. In  Lev.  XXV.  directions  are  given  for  the  interference  of  the  goel,  or 
redeemer.  We  fasten,  first  of  all,  on  the  fact  that  none  but  a  kinsman  could  fill 
the  office  of  goel  or  redeemer.  Who  does  not  see,  that  in  laying  down  and 
adhering  to  such  a  principle  as  this,  the  law  taught  mankind  impressively  the 
lesson  that  He  who  should  arise  the  Eedeemer  of  the  lost  world  must  be  bone  of 
their  bone  and  flesh  of  their  flesh?  "Forasmuch,"  says  the  apostle,  "as  the 
children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood.  He  also  Himself  likewise  took  part  of  the 
same."  And  shall  we  ever  hesitate  to  declare  that  the  comforting  thing  to  the 
followers  of  Christ  is  that  the  Goel,  the  Eedeemer,  is  in  the  strictest  sense  their 
kinsman  ?  Christ  was  like  myself  in  all  points,  my  sinfulness  only  excepted.  Who 
is  the  Israehte  that  has  grown  poor,  and  alienated  from  him  the  possession  of  his 
father,  if  it  be  not  man,  originally  the  chosen  of  God,  rich  in  a  birthright  which 
gave  him  a  glorious  world  for  his  dwelling-place,  yes,  and  immortality  for  his 
lifetime,  but  who  afterwards,  by  yielding  to  temptation,  stripped  himself  of  all  his 
wealth,  and  made  himself  the  heir  to  nothing  but  corruption  ?  And  when  we  have 
pointed  out  to  you  the  impoverished  Jew,  spoiled  of  the  possession  of  his  fathers, 
vmable  of  himself  to  do  anything  towards  regaining  the  inheritance,  and  then  have 
turned  your  attention  on  the  kinsman  redeemer  paying  down  the  ransom, 
bringing  back  the  land  into  the  family,  keeping  it  in  his  own  hands  until  the 
jubilee  trumpet  sounded,  and  then  restoring  it  to  the  original  owner — we  think  we 
have  furnished  you  with  so  vivid  a  sketch  of  paradise  lost  through  human  apostasy 
and  regained  by  the  purchase  of  the  Mediator,  and  given  back  on  the  day  that  the 
archangel  shall  lift  his  trumpet,  and  shall  blow  a  blast  at  which  the  sheeted  dead 
shall  start,  that  it  must  on  all  hands  be  confessed  that  the  goel  of  the  law  was 
pre-eminently  a  type  of  the  Eedeemer  of  the  gospel.  II.  A  brief  notice  will  suffice 
for  the  second — where  there  has  been  loss  of  liberty.  You  will  find,  by 
referring  to  Lev.  xxv.,  from  which  we  have  already  quoted,  that  for  the  dis- 
charge of  debt,  or  the  procuring  of  subsistence,  an  Israelite  might  sell  himself 
either  to  an  Israelite  or  to  a  stranger.  If  he  became  the  servant  of  an  Israelite, 
there  appears  to  have  been  no  right  of  redemption — he  must  remain  in  his  power 
till  the  year  of  jubilee.  But  if  he  became  the  servant  of  a  stranger,  then  there  was 
a  case  for  the  interposition  of  the  goel  in  the  law ;  for  even  after  that  he  is  sold  he 
may  be  redeemed  again — one  of  his  brethren  may  redeem  him.  If  the  master  were 
an  Israelite,  the  servant  was  in  no  sense  alienated  from  God's  people,  and  the 
exigence  was  not  such  as  to  warrant  the  goel's  interference ;  but  if  the  master 
were  a  stranger,  then  the  servitude  became  typical  of  man's  bondage  to  Satan.  It 
might  have  been  said,  in  a  degree,  to  have  withdrawn  the  servant  from  the  con- 
gregation of  Israel ;  and  thus  a  case  made  out  for  the  kinsman  redeemer.  The 
goel  might  come  forward,  and  the  servant  might  be  freed.  You  will  perceive  at 
once  that,  in  its  typical  character,  this  transaction  is  identical  with  that  already 
reviewed.  Is  it  not  the  Scriptural  representation  of  man  by  nature  that  he  is  the 
servant  of  sin,  led  captive  by  Satan  at  his  will  ?  The  Israelite  could  have  sold 
himself  to  a  stranger ;  and  not  one  farthing  could  he  advance  towards  bringing 
back  his  freedom.  Must  he  languish,  then,  for  ever  in  bondage  ?  Must  he  groan 
for  ever  beneath  the  load  of  oppression  ?  There  advances  a  Mighty  One,  who 
proclaims  Himself  his  Kinsman,  a  Goel  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law, 


CHAP,  n.]  RUTH.  63 

and  bearing  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  ;  and  He  pays  down  in  sufferings  the  price 
of  redemption.  He  strikes  the  chain  with  His  Cross,  and  it  is  broken  into  shivers  ; 
He  bids  the  prisoner  come  forth,  and  he  walks  in  "  the  glorious  hberty  of  the 
children  of  God."  HI.  We  proceed  to  the  third  case  of  the  goel's  interference,  a 
case  which  differs  considerably  from  those  akeady  examined.  It  was  the  office  of 
the  kinsman,  the  goel,  to  interfere,  not  only  when  there  had  been  forfeiture  of 
inheritance,  or  loss  of  liberty,  but  also  when  theee  had  been  shedding  of  blood. 
If  murder  had  been  perpetrated,  the  prosecution  and  the  execution  of  the  murderer 
devolved  on  the  nearest  of  kin  to  the  murdered  party.  He  must  pursue  the 
murderer ;  and  if  he  overtook  him  before  he  reached  the  city  of  refuge  he  might 
take  summary  vengeance  for  the  death  of  his  relative.  But  if  the  goel  were  not 
at  hand  at  the  time  when  the  crime  was  committed,  it  would  seem  that  no  stranger 
had  right  to  arrest  or  follow  the  criminal.  He  betook  himself  unmolested  to  the 
nearest  city  of  refuge,  and  remained  there  in  safety  until  the  cause  was  tried  before 
the  judges  of  the  land.  So  that  in  this  case,  as  well  as  in  the  others,  the  inter- 
ference depended  on  the  kinsmanship ;  nothing  else  could  warrant  a  man  in 
undertaking  the  office  of  the  goel.  Axid  thus  that  distinguishing  feature  of  a  goel, 
which  made  him  throughout  the  type  of  Christ — the  feature  of  kinsmanship  to  the 
party  requiring  interference — stands  out  as  prominently  when  blood  was  to  be 
avenged  as  when  land  was  to  be  redeemed  or  hberty  regained.  But  wherein,  you 
will  say,  in  this  instance,  lies  the  typical  resemblance  between  the  offices  of  the 
goel  and  the  offices  of  Christ  ?  Created  deathless  and  imperishable,  was  not  the 
human  race  slain  by  Satan  when  he  wrought  up  our  first  parents  to  an  act 
prohibited  by  the  words,  "  In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely 
die  "  ?  We  suppose  it  to  have  been  with  reference  to  this  slaughter  of  mankind 
that  Christ  said  of  the  devil,  "  He  was  a  murderer  from  the  beginning."  It  was 
clearly  through  the  instrumentality  of  Satan  that  death,  whether  of  body  or  of 
soul,  gained  footing  in  this  creation ;  but  if  done  through  his  instrumentality  it 
may  justly  be  ascribed  to  his  authorship  ;  and  we  account  it  most  correct,  there- 
fore, to  describe  Satan  as  the  great  "  man-slayer."  He  it  is  that  hath  shed  human 
blood ;  and  all  that  vast  mowing  down  of  successive  generations,  which  keeps  the 
sepulchres  replenished  with  fresh  harvests  of  death,  must  be  referred  to  that  awful 
being  who  was  "  a  miurderer  from  the  beginning."  And  if  we  can  thus  find  "  the 
man-slayer"  in  Satan,  cannot  we  find  "the  avenger  of  blood"  in  Christ?  Who 
pursued  the  murderer  ?  Who,  century  after  century,  unwearied  and  undiverted, 
opposed  Himself  in  every  quarter,  by  every  weapon,  to  the  shedder  of  blood,  till  at 
last,  meeting  him  front  to  front,  in  one  dread  struggle.  He  took  on  him  a  vengeance 
that  drew  the  wonder  of  the  inteUigent  universe,  and  "  through  death  destroyed 
him  that  had  the  power  of  death "  ?  Who  was  it  that,  sorrowing  over  the 
wretchedness  of  a  stricken  race,  "  put  on  righteousness  as  a  breastplate,  and 
clothed  Himself  with  zeal  as  with  a  cloak,"  and  then,  equipped  for  the  conflict, 
sprang  forth  to  grapple  with  the  assassin?  Who  but  the  Goel?  who  but  the 
Kinsman  Eedeemer  ?    (JET.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Vet.  22.  It  is  good,  my  daughter,  that  thou  go  out  with  his  maidens. — 
Instruction  from  elders : — Old  persons  may  be  expected  to  have  collected,  by 
reflection  and  experience,  more  wisdom  than  the  young,  and  should  be  ready  to 
communicate  instruction  to  those  that  need  it.  Let  the  young  have  their  hands 
prepared  for  the  service  of  the  old,  and  the  old  may  recompense  them  abundantly 
by  the  words  of  their  mouths.  Happy  would  it  have  been  for  Rehoboam  and  for 
all  his  people  had  he  known  what  respect  is  due  to  the  wise  counsels  of  the  aged. 
What  numbers  of  young  persons  take  rash  steps  in  the  journey  of  life  which  cannot 
be  retraced,  because  they  rather  choose  to  follow  the  impulse  of  their  own  passions 
than  to  ask  and  follow  the  advices  of  those  who  brought  them  into  the  world.  (G. 
Lawson.)  The  acceptance  of  favours  : — "  It  is  good  that  thou  go  forth  with  his 
maidens,"  since  he  invites  thee  to  glean  in  his  fields.  Although  Naomi  would  not 
be  troublesome  to  her  relations,  nor  solicit  favours  from  them  when  necessity  did 
not  compel  her,  she  was  not  so  high-minded  as  to  reject  a  favour  that  was  offered. 
Poor  persons,  who  have  seen  better  days,  are  sometimes  too  nice  and  scrupulous  in 
receiving  obligations.  It  is  good  to  be  as  independent  in  the  world  as  our  circum- 
stances will  allow ;  but  to  be  absolutely  independent  is  impossible,  and  to  have  a 
spirit  above  the  acceptance  of  favours,  when  our  circumstances  render  the  accep- 
tance of  them  needful,  is  a  proud  resistance  of  our  spirits  to  that  Providence  which 
manages  our  concerns  and  which  manages  them  with  wisdom  and  kindness  when 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

it  lays  our  pride  in  the  dust.     {Ibid.)        That  they  meet  thee  not  In  any  other 

field. — Gadding  to  be  discouraged  : — "Maidens,"  says  one  shrewd  old  commentator, 
"  are  the  fittest  company  for  maidens,  among  whom  a  chaste  widow,  such  as  Euth 
was,  may  well  be  recounted."  Modesty  is  the  life-guard  of  chastity.  Let  this 
suggest  the  wider  rule  that  every  one  should  have  his  chosen  field  in  which  to 
gather  Christian  instruction  and  wisdom ;  and  that  having  chosen  it,  he  ought  to 
keep  to  it.  The  common  shepherd  whom  you  meet  on  the  mountains  wiU  teU  you 
that  the  wandering  sheep  never  thrives.  And  further,  that  we  ought  to  choose  for 
our  cherished  companions  and  "  inner  friends "  those  who  are  gleaners  in  the 
gospel-field  like  ourselves.  Wander,  through  want  of  vigilance  or  through  secret 
preference,  into  the  society  of  the  idle,  the  ungodly,  or  the  immoral,  and  you  are 
on  the  enemy's  ground  and  in  the  midst  of  serpents  and  snares.  You  are  out  of 
the  sphere  of  Divine  protection  whenever  you  walk  into  the  circle  of  temptation 
without  a  call  of  duty  ;  and  there  is  no  Davy-lamp  in  those  noxious  mines  to 
prevent  explosion,  or  to  protect  you  from  destruction.  But  the  fellowship  of  them 
that  fear  God  will  show  you  how  to  be  good,  and  will  make  you  better.  Even  the 
lump  of  clay,  when  it  was  placed  near  the  rose,  according  to  the  beautiful  Persian 
proverb,  caught  some  ol  its  fragrance  (Cant.  i.  8).    {A.  Thomson,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  m. 

Vbb.  1.  Shall  I  not  seek  rest  for  thee  7 — Rest  for  Ruth : — ^I.  Thb  object  or 

Naomi's  solicitude.  Poor  Ruth  :  a  destitute,  forlorn,  bereaved,  homeless,  portion- 
less widow.  Think  of  the  destitute  circumstances  of  a  bereaved  sinner,  when 
awakened  to  find  out  how  deplorably  he  is  ruined  and  utterly  undone  under  the 
fall.  She  was  between  the  two  countries.  Just  the  position  of  a  soul  awakened. 
Yet  further,  see  the  character  of  Ruth  portraying  thy  condition  yet  more  strongly. 
You  remark,  that  she  had  escaped  from  Moab  and  refused  to  go  back  again.  There 
was  a  decision  of  character,  there  was  a  distinction,  there  was  the  plain  mark  of 
belonging  to  God.  Do  mark,  I  beseech  you,  here,  the  importance  of  steadfast 
perseverance  in  the  Christian  character.  II.  The  nature  of  Naomi's  solicitude. 
It  was  rest  she  wanted  for  her  daughter-in-law  :  "  Shall  I  not  seek  rest  for  thee  ?  " 
I  wish  to  give  some  description  of  this  rest.  1.  And  the  first  idea  is  tranquillity  ;  a 
sacred  calm,  a  blessed  believing  satisfaction.  For  when  the  poor  soul  is  first 
awakened  by  the  Spirit  of  God  there  is  anything  but  tranquillity ;  it  is  tossed  to  and 
fro  in  a  state  of  uncertainty,  a  state  of  perplexity,  a  state  of  wretchedness.  "  Shall 
I  not  seek  rest  for  thee  ?  "  Shall  I  not  teU  thee  where  it  is  to  be  had  ?  Shall  I  not 
point  out  the  fact  that  it  is  to  be  found  only  in  Ruth's  determination — "  Thy  God 
shall  be  my  God,"  a  covenant  God — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost?  Get  to  know 
Him,  get  to  serve  Him  with  decision,  and  thou  shalt  have  tranquillity.  2.  But  I 
pass  on  to  mark,  in  addition  to  the  tranquiUity  sought,  it  was  desired  that  she 
should  have  an  inheritance,  and  an  inheritance  of  great  value  too.  Now  what 
says  the  apostle  to  this  ?  "  Blessed  be  God,"  we  have  got  an  inheritance, 
in.  The  bnd  of  this  solicitude.    And  a  very  blessed  one  it  was.     (J.  Irons.) 

Yer.  3.  Wash  thyself,  therefore,  and  anoint  thee,  and  put  thy  raiment  npon 
thee. — Washed,  anointed,  and  clothed  : — Need  we  explain  this  washing,  anointing, 
and  clothing  ?  Need  we  point  to  the  only  fountain  for  sin  ?  Need  we  say  that  the 
holy  anointing  oil,  which  consecrates  the  believer  in  Jesus  a  priest  and  king  unto 
God,  is  His  own  blessed  Spirit?  Must  we  define  the  raiment  to  be  that  robe 
of  Divine  and  human  righteousness  combined  wherewith  each  soul  is  invested 
which  rejects  its  own  filthy  rags?     {G.  F.  Hall.) 

Ver.  4.  Uncover  hla  feet,  and  lay  thee  down. — Doubtful  expedients : — I.  Wk 
begin  with  some  explanatory  observations,  fob  the  purpose  of  vindioatino  the 
NARRATIVE  FROM  MISAPPREHENSION  AND  ABUSE.  1.  We  must  notico  the  general 
contrariety  of  pastoral  customs  to  our  own  which  marked  those  ancient  times 
in  the  East.  What  unadorned  simplicity  I  Wearing  the  garments  which  had  been 
worn  by  him  during  the  day,  he  throws  himself  down  to  rest  at  the  end  of  the 
heaps  of  winnowed  corn,  with  nothing  but  a  simple  mat  beneath  him,  and  a  similar 


CHAP.m.]  RVTE.  65 

covering  or  cloak  above  him.  How  different  is  all  this  from  the  dignity  and 
reserve- which  would  be  maintained  and  the  many  artificial  luxuries  and  comforts 
that  would  be  possessed  by  a  person  of  similar  rank  and  wealth  among  ourselves. 
2.  It  is  a  fact  that,  both  in  those  times  and  up  to  this  hour  in  the  East,  servants 
have  been  accustomed  to  lay  themselves  in  this  manner  at  the  feet  of  their  master. 
One  modem  traveller  mentions  that  his  Arab  servants  were  quite  in  the  practice  of 
doing  so  with  him ;  and,  in  cold  evenings,  of  claiming  the  privilege,  which  had 
descended  from  immemorial  usage,  of  drawing  over  themselves  the  skirts  of  the 
long  mat  or  cloak  in  which  his  person  was  enveloped.  3.  Moreover,  it  is  an 
interesting  fact  bearing  on  the  present  subject,  that  a  very  prominent  part  of  the 
marriage  ceremony  among  the  Orientals  was  for  the  bridegroom  to  throw  the  skirt 
of  his  robe  over  his  bride.  The  act  of  Euth  here  described  was,  therefore,  a 
significant  action,  in  which  she  claimed  the  protection  of  Boaz  and  the  honourable 
acknowledgment  of  her  as  his  wife.  4.  It  is  further  to  be  observed  that  while  the 
whole  scene  proves  Boaz  to  have  been  a  man  most  pure  in  spirit  and  of  sensitive 
virtue,  the  conduct  of  Euth  does  not  for  one  moment  make  him  doubt  or  question 
her  purity.  But  here  our  defence  ceases,  at  least  in  respect  to  Naomi.  While  we 
vindicate  her  intentions,  we  are  constrained  to  censure  her  measures ;  while  we 
acquit  her  of  designing  evil,  we  must  blame  her  for  not  ♦'  abstaining  from  all 
appearance  of  evil."  There  was  too  much  of  cuiming  and  stratagem  about  the 
manner  of  the  whole  transaction.  There  was  a  forcing  of  Providence  where  there 
Bhould  have  been  a  trustful  waiting  on  it ;  a  cutting  of  a  short  way  to  a  desired 
issue,  instead  of  moving  in  the  way  which  God  might  open  to  her.    II.  Thus 

EXPLAINED,  THE  TBANSACTION   SUGGESTS   SOME    IMPORTANT  PEACTICAL  LESSONS.       1.    The 

duty  of  caring  for  our  good  name.  "  Two  things  there  are,"  saith  St.  Augustine, 
"  whereof  every  man  should  be  specially  chary  and  tender — his  conscience  and  his 
credit."  2.  The  duty  of  charity  in  our  judgment  of  others.  It  will  often  be  found 
to  be  the  wisest  course  to  form  our  estimate  of  a  doubtful  action  by  the  character  of 
the  actor,  and  when  we  stand  in  doubt,  to  let  love  turn  the  scale.  Persons  seem  to 
each  man  what  he  is  to  himself.  One  who  suspects  hypocrisy  in  the  world  is 
rarely  transparent;  the  man  constantly  on  the  watch  for  cheating  is  generally 
dishonest;  he  who  suspects  impurity  is  prurient.  3.  It  is  a  first  principle  in 
Christian  morals  that  duty  must  always  have  the  preference  before  inclination. 
What  true  Christian  chivalry,  born  of  faith,  there  was  in  the  heart  of  this 
Bethlehem  yeoman  1  He  was  not  only  sternly  honest,  but  sensitively  honourable, 
bearing  his  escutcheon  without  a  sinister  brand  on  it.  4.  It  is  surely  not  unnatural 
to  ascend  in  thought  from  Boaz  to  Him  who,  in  an  infinitely  higher  sense,  is  our 
Kinsman  Eedeemer,  who  became  "  bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,"  and 
died  as  the  propitiatory  victim  for  our  offences,  in  order  that  He  might  reinstate  as 
in  the  Divine  favour,  and  redeem  for  us  the  heavenly  inheritance  which  we  had  lost. 
(A.  Thornton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10, 11.  Blessed  be  thou  of  the  Lord,  my  daughter.  ...  I  will  do  to  thee 
all  that  thou  requirest — The  first-fruits  of  grace : — The  passage  before  us  gives  a 
copious  illustration  of  the  first-fruits  of  grace  to  the  accepted  soul.  Jesus  welcomes, 
blesses,  and  abundantly  rewards  aU  who  thus  come  unto  Him.  First  we  have 
Divine  approval.  Boaz  does  not  reject  or  repel  the  lowly  suitor  at  his  feet.  The 
difference  in  their  outward  conditions  was  great.  Yet  he  neither  chides  her 
boldness,  nor  reproaches  her  with  sorrow,  nor  refuses  her  plea.  He  listens  to  her 
prayer  in  kindness.  He  invokes  the  Divine  blessing  upon  her  in  her  need.  And 
how  his  whole  address  to  her  illustrates  the  Saviour's  gracious  approval  of  those 
who  seek  Him  I  When  the  wearied  soul  comes  to  the  feet  of  Jesus  this  is  ever  the 
welcome  of  approbation  which  it  receives.  The  Saviour  takes  immediate  notice  of 
the  prayer  which  rises  up  before  Him,  and  answers  it  with  the  kindest  encourage- 
ment. Boaz  next  illustrates  for  us  the  Divine  promises.  He  meets  the  full 
requisition  of  his  suppliant.  There  is  not  a  want  which  the  Christian  feels  for 
which  there  is  not  a  provision  promised  in  the  Word  of  God.  And  when  we  come  to 
ask  His  mercy,  and  lay  ourselves  at  His  feet  in  humble  dedication  to  Him,  the 
Saviour  takes  all  our  concerns  into  His  own  hands,  and  Himself  promises  to 
provide  for  every  need.  Another  of  the  first-fruits  of  grace  which  we  find  in  this 
illustration  is  the  bounty  of  Divine  gifts.  Boaz  not  only  promises  for  the  future, 
but  he  bestows  in  the  present.  He  will  not  send  Euth  away  empty.  He  fills  her 
vail  with  as  much  barley  as  she  could  carry  to  her  mother.  An  abundant  supply 
for  the  wants  of  both.    He  is  as  generous  in  the  amount  of  his  liberality  as  he 

41 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  in. 

is  delicate  and  free  in  the  manner  of  its  bestowal.  Thus  the  Saviour  richly  and 
freely  bestows  His  gifts  of  grace  upon  those  who  love  Him.  What  sweet  peace  Ha 
pours  into  the  conscience  in  the  assurance  of  our  forgiveness  1  What  clear  light 
He  gives  to  the  understanding  of  His  whole  method  of  salvation  and  scheme  of 
truth !  What  solidity  He  bestows  upon  the  judgment  in  its  satisfaction  with  Hia 
plans  revealed  1  What  joy  He  awakens  in  the  heart,  in  the  hope  and  anticipation 
of  His  final  glory  1  How  He  makes  our  whole  path  a  path  of  increasing  light  and 
abounding  peace  1  In  Him  we  are  never  straitened.  The  more  diligently  and 
truly  we  wait  upon  Him,  the  more  abundantly  will  our  strength  be  renewed.  Ha 
will  freely  say  to  us,  like  Boaz  to  Euth,  "  Bring  the  vail  that  thou  hast  upon  thee, 
and  hold  it."  Whatever  we  are  ready  to  receive  He  is  waiting  to  bestow.  But  the 
illustration  from  the  vail  of  Euth  fails,  in  the  important  fact  that  its  measure 
-was  fixed,  but  our  capacity  to  hold  increases  with  our  receipts  of  the  Divine  bounty. 
And  who  shall  tell  where  God's  gracious  willingness  to  bestow  shall  find  its  limit  ? 
As  faith  enlarges,  and  we  learn  to  expect  large  things,  and  to  attempt  large  things, 
so  also  becomes  enlarged  the  measure  of  grace  which  faith  receives.  The  history 
before  us  illustrates  the  Divine  fidelity.  With  what  confidence  Naomi  trusts  In  the 
truth  and  faithfulness  of  Boaz !  The  result  proved  that  her  confidence  was  not 
misplaced.  He  did  complete  with  entire  success  the  work  of  protection  and  mercy 
which  he  had  undertaken.  It  is  upon  such  entire  fidelity  in  our  gracious  Kinsman 
that  we  are  required  to  place  our  trust.  "  Great  is  His  faithfulness."  "  His  nama 
is  called  faithful  and  true."  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Thou  art  a  virtuouB  woman.— 
Ruth  the  virtuotu  : — 1.  Observe,  to  begin  with  one  of  her  humblest  virtues,  Euth'a 
industry.  She  accompanies  Naomi  to  the  land  of  Israel ;  but  not  to  live  on  public 
charity  or  become  the  humble  pensioner  of  affluent  relatives.  Beared  in  the  lap  of 
luxury,  she  has  never  learned  to  work ;  yet  in  a  noble  spirit  of  independence  she 
resolves  to  earn  her  bread  with  her  own  hands.  We  have  called  this  a  humbla 
virtue,  not  because  we  hold  it  cheap,  or  do  not  regret  that  under  the  debasing 
influence  of  our  poor-laws  and  the  self-indulgent  spirit  of  the  age,  it  is  dying 
out  of  the  land.  One  of  the  saddest  phases  of  the  times  is  that,  for  themselves 
or  their  parents,  thousands  now  accept  and  even  clamour  for  public  charity  who,  less 
than  a  century  ago,  would  have  scorned  to  touch  it.  We  call  it  a  humble  virtue, 
because,  notwithstanding  the  degeneracy  of  the  age,  it  still  dwells  in  many  a  lowly 
home,  stamping  those  with  a  true  nobility  who  feel  the  bread  taste  sweet  their  own 
hands  have  earned,  and,  looking  forward  with  a  Christian's  hope  to  the  rest  of 
heaven,  are  content  here  to  live  to  work  and  work  to  live.  2.  Observe  next  her 
humility.  On  losing  their  fortune  some  retain  in  a  silly  pride  what  but  aggravates 
the  loss,  rankling  like  a  thorn  in  a  bleeding  wound.  Aii  empty  sack  cannot  stand 
erect ;  yet  they  inflict  misery  on  themselves,  and  not  seldom  wrong  on  others, 
by  the  mean  and  even  dishonest  things  they  do  to  keep  up  appearances.  Deeming 
some  honest  but  humble  work  beneath  their  dignity,  they  buy  what  they  cannot 
pay  for,  or  borrow  what  they  cannot  return.  Ashamed  to  work,  they  are  not 
ashamed  to  live  on  the  fruits  of  others'  industry  rather  than  their  own.  There  ia 
something  inexpressibly  mean  in  this  ;  and  worse  than  mean.  It  argues  a  spirit  of 
rebellion  against  Him  and  His  providence  who  setteth  up  one  and  putteth  down 
another.  How  different  from  this  un-Christian  and  rebellious  spirit  the  humility 
of  Euth  I  How  beautiful  it  is  1  Willing  to  engage  in  any  honest  work,  however 
humble,  she  bends  like  a  reed  to  the  blast,  bows  her  gentle  head  meekly  before  the 
majesty  of  heaven,  and,  meeting  her  trials  like  a  Christian  heroine,  drinks  off  tha 
cup  mingled  and  presented  by  her  Father's  hand.  3.  Observe  her  affection  to 
Naomi.  It  wrings  Euth's  heart  to  part  with  sister,  mother,  and  country ;  but  it 
would  break  it  to  part  with  Naomi.  She  cannot  do  it.  The  ship  may  sink  ;  but, 
nailing  her  colours  to  the  mast,  she  will  sink  or  swim  with  it.  Death  only  shall 
part  them :  nor  death — the  last  favour  her  lips  shall  ask,  that  they  lay  her  in 
Naomi's  grave.  Nobly  did  Euth  redeem  the  pledges  of  this  affecting  scene.  Sha 
teaches  us,  by  what  she  was  to  Naomi,  what  we  are  to  be  to  Christ ;  how  we  should 
cleave  to  Him — how  we  should  love  Him — with  what  devotion  of  heart  and  body, 
of  soul,  strength,  mind  and  spirit  we  should  serve  Him,  and  gladly  spend  and  be 
spent  for  Him— saying,  as  we  take  up  our  cross  to  foUow  the  lover  and  Eedeemer 
of  our  souls,  "  Where  Thou  goest,"  &o.     (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15-17.  Six  measures  of  harley. — Exact  reckonings  of  mercies : — 1.  Trua 
virtue  or  grace  makes  persons  universally  good.  Boaz  was  a  gracious  or  virtuoua 
i.'.:\n.    He  is  good  in  hia  charity  as  well  as  in  hia  ohaatity:  he  adds  one  grace  to 


CHAP,  m.]  BUTE.  67 

another  (2  Pet.  i.  5).  2.  God's  blessings  bestowed  on  ns  should  be  received  by  ns 
in  an  exact  reckoning :  we  should  receive  them  by  number,  weight  and  measure ; 
and  to  behold  the  quantity  of  them  is  an  excellent  way  to  get  a  thankful  heart 
(Psa.  cxvi.  12).  3.  As  charity  is  no  churl,  so  neither  must  it  be  blind  or  extrava- 
gant. His  liberality  is  not  lavish  in  laying  out  God's  blessings,  but  he  giveth 
in  judgment  with  discretion,  not  without  consideration.  Prudence  is  the  general 
guide  and  universal  mistress  in  all  acts  and  exercises  of  virtue  (Psa.  cxii.  5).  4.  As 
Boaz,  so  much  more  our  God  never  sends  home  true  suitors  empty.  He  giveth, 
and  He  giveth  liberally — He  giveth  grace,  He  giveth  more  grace  (Jas.  iv.  6).  Every 
Sabbath,  and  sermon  or  sacrament,  Christ  cries  to  us,  as  Boaz  to  Euth,  "  Bring 
hither  thy  vail,  that  I  may  fill  it."  Faith  is  the  receiving  grace.  God  proportions 
His  performing  to  our  believing :  as  thou  believest  so  be  it  unto  thee  (Matt.  viii. 
13).     (C.  Ness.) 

Ver.  18.  Sit  still,  my  daughter. — Wailing  upon  Providence: — 1.  When  lawful 
means  are  rightly  used,  then  should  we  wait  upon  God  for  the  end.  The  care 
of  the  means  belongs  to  us,  but  the  care  of  the  end  belongs  to  God.  We 
must  commit  ourselves  in  all  well-doing  to  the  Lord  (Psa.  xxxvii.  5 ;  1  Pet. 
iv.  19).  "  Until  thou  know  how  the  matter  shall  fall."  2.  All  matters  con- 
cerning mankind  are  appointed  by  a  Divine  decree  in  heaven,  before  they 
be  accomplished  by  a  Divine  Providence  upon  earth.  Even  aU  matches  and 
marriages  are  made  in  heaven,  before  ever  they  come  to  be  solemnised  on 
earth  (Psa.  Iv.  22).  It  is  our  work  to  cast  care,  and  it  is  God's  work  to  take  care 
(1  Pet.  V.  7).  We  must  let  God  alone  with  His  own  work,  which  is  then  only  well 
done,  when  it  is  done  by  Himself.  The  man  will  not  be  at  rest.  3.  Conscientious 
persons  should  be  restless  until  they  make  good  payment  of  their  promises.  Alas, 
how  few  Boaz's  are  in  the  world,  who  pay  what  they  promise!  {Ibid.) 
Avoid  over-haste  in  the  plans  of  life  : — I  want  to  give  you  old  Naomi's  advice. 
Listen,  let  older  heads  speak  to  you,  even  let  God,  speak  to  you :  "  He  who  was, 
and  is,  and  is  to  come,"  the  Almighty  God,  speak  a  word  like  this :  "  Do  not  get 
fretful ;  do  not  get  desponding ;  do  not  get  over-eager ;  do  not  lag  behind,  but  do 
not  run  too  far  forward  ;  take  care  of  taking  things  too  much  into  your  own  hands." 
You  are  only  in  the  middle  of  things.  Life  is  a  plan ;  there  is  a  purpose  giving 
shape,  aye,  and  blessedness  to  it  aU.  Have  you  seen  and  understood  ?  There  is 
a  clue  to  the  maze,  and  that  is  the  Man  on  the  field,  to  whom  all  belongs,  the 
mighty  man  of  wealth.  Do  you  know  Him,  and  is  His  arm  working  for  you? 
Well,  don't  rush  now ;  just  go  on  steadily ;  sit  still,  my  daughter.  Sit  stUl,  my 
heart,  wait  on  thy  God,  leave  God  to  order  all  thy  ways,  and  trust  in  Him  whate'er 
betide.  Be  sure  of  it  that  He  who  has  begun,  in  the  way  of  infinite  wisdom,  has 
not  done  yet.  Tour  days  are  only  in  the  beginning,  you  are  not  at  the  end — wait 
on  God.  •*  Be  of  good  courage.  He  shall  strengthen  your  heart — wait,  I  say,  on 
the  Lord."  "  He  who  has  begun  a  good  work  will  carry  it  on  until  the  day  of 
Jesus  Christ."  Look  back  and  see  what  He  has  done  already;  strengthen,  and 
calm,  and  steady  your  hot  and  feverish  soul ;  and  let  me  say  this  for  your  en- 
couragement, what  Naomi  said  to  Euth :  "  Ah,"  she  as  good  as  said,  "  I  faaow  this 
man."  Are  you  a  little  eager?  Does  your  soul,  sometimes  in  spite  of  yourself, 
haste  forward  to  the  consummation?  Much  more  does  His.  He  has  set  His 
mighty  heart  upon  you ;  He  loves  you  with  an  everlasting  love ;  He  is  weary  to 
get  you,  and  He  is  shaping  and  controlling  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth  for  just 
one  thing — to  finish  His  redeeming  work,  and  to  get  you  home  with  rejoicing  to  be 
with  Himself  for  ever  and  ever.  (J.  McNeill.)  The  man  will  not  be  In  rest. — 
Duty  done  at  the  right  time : — I.  Lr  this  is  to  bb  oub  characteristic  and  habit, 

THERB   ARE    CERTAIN   ETTLES   THB  OBSERVANCE   OF  WHICH   IS   INDISPENSABLE.      We  mUSt 

not  undertake  more  work,  or  ambitiously  grasp  at  more  engagements,  than  there 
is  a  fair  and  reasonable  likelihood  of  our  being  able  to  accomplish.  We  must 
endeavour,  by  plan  and  forethought,  so  to  dispose  of  our  time  as  to  make  the  most 
of  every  hour  that  is  given  us  to  work  in.  Then  there  must  be  no  indolent  pro- 
crastination, or  giving  way  before  little  difficulties,  or  sitting  down  or  turning 
aside  because  we  think  we  see  lions  in  the  way;  but  rather  the  putting  forth  of 
vigorous  effort  in  order  to  realise  our  plans  and  to  keep  ourselves  master  of  our 
circumstances,  instead  of  allowing  our  circumstances  to  master  us.  The  benefits 
which  grow  out  of  this  ordering  of  our  time,  and  doing  the  work  of  each  day  in 
the  day,  are  various  and  great.  It  helps  to  secure  that  whatever  we  undertake  to 
do  shall  be  weU  done,  by  our  having  abundance  of  time  in  which  to  do  ii    It 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it. 

saves  our  consciences  from  the  reproach  and  oar  characters  from  the  shame  of 
promise-breaking ;  for  when  the  work  of  to-day  is  thrown  over  upon  to-morrow,  it 
is  likely  that  much  will  fail  to  be  done  at  all,  according  to  the  old  Spanish  proverb 
that  "  the  street  of  By-and-By  leads  to  the  house  of  Never."  It  preserves  us  from 
that  fretting  of  the  temper  which  is  the  certain  effect  of  hurry,  and  enables  us 
to  maintain  more  tranquillity  of  mind,  and  self-control,  and  seK-respect.     II.  Next 

liET   us   APPLY   THE    PRINCIPLB   IK   THESK    WOBDS   TO    SOME    THINGS     IN     DETAIL.      There 

is  especially  one  direction  in  which  it  is  pre-eminently  applicable.  Suppose  a 
man  to  have  the  consciousness  awakened  in  him  that  he  has  never  given  earnest 
attention  to  the  matter  of  his  personal  salvation  ;  that  he  is  under  the  displeasure 
of  God,  with  a  life  of  unf orgiven  sins  accusing  him ;  and  that  the  near  and  solemn 
eternity  is  all  unprovided  for.  This  ought  surely  to  become  his  immediate  and 
paramount  concern.  "The  man  should  not  be  [in  rest  until  he  hath  finished 
the  thing  this  day."  Who  would  sing  songs  to  a  man  that  was  sinking  and 
perishing  in  the  fearful  pit  and  the  miry  clay  ?  Get  him  out  of  the  pit  first.  He 
would  be  a  fool  who  should  propose  to  paint  his  ship  while  it  was  toiling  and 
straining  in  the  storm.  Bring  it  first  into  calm  waters  and  the  safe  harbour. 
But  let  us  assume  that  the  supreme  interest  has  been  cared  for ;  and  there  are 
two  observations  which  it  is  natural  to  connect  with  these  suggestive  words  of 
Naomi.  1.  There  are  certain  duties  which  regularly  fall  to  be  performed  by  us, 
and  which  may  be  described  as  the  work  of  every  day.  There  are,  for  example, 
the  duties  of  our  stated  secular  vocation,  whether  they  consist  in  headwork  or  in 
handiwork,  or  in  both  combined.  In  these  we  are  daily  summoned  anew  to  serve 
God ;  and  very  much  of  the  Christian's  everyday  religion  consists  in  his  discharging 
these  common  services  in  a  Christian  spirit.  And  daily  mingling  with  these,  and 
shedding  down  hallowed  influences  upon  them,  there  are  the  more  direct  exercises 
of  religion,  especially  those  of  secret  devotion,  on  the  morning  and  evening 
of  every  day.  And  scarcely  less  congenial  with  the  tastes  of  his  new  nature 
will  be  his  daily  perusal  of  some  chosen  portion  of  Holy  Scripture.  And 
must  we  not  further  claim  from  the  Christian  heads  of  families  that  domestic 
devotion  shall  form  an  essential  part  of  each  day's  round  of  service,  in  which  every 
day's  wants  shall  be  turned  to  prayer,  and  every  day's  mercies  to  praise ;  in  which 
family  affection  shall  be  nurtured  and  sanctified ;  in  which  the  parents  shall 
become  more  venerable  and  the  children  more  endeared,  and  home  become  as  one 
of  the  gates  of  heaven  ?  2.  There  is  another  large  class  of  duties  of  a  more  special 
kind,  which  are  not  of  daily  recurrence,  but  are  rather  appropriate  to  particular 
times  and  circumstances,  and  may  be  said  to  grow  out  of  them.  (1)  Observation 
of  the  weekly  day  of  rest.  (2)  Making  your  will.  (3)  Making  up  quarrels. 
(4)  Speaking  words  in  season.  Do  not  withhold  yourself  from  doing  good  because 
your  sphere  of  beneficent  action  is  narrow.  If  you  cannot  do  a  prophet's  work, 
yet  give  a  cup  of  cold  water  to  one  of  Christ's  little  ones.  If  you  have  not  the 
means  of  founding  or  endowing  a  hospital,  you  can  take  a  flower,  perchance,  and 
give  it  to  some  sister  or  brother  who  is  pining  in  one  of  its  wards,  and  you  can 
give  kind  words  and  suimy  looks  along  with  it.  The  world  around  is  full  of 
opportunities  of  usefulness,  if  we  would  but  seize  them.  We  can  scarcely  stretch 
forth  our  hand  without  touching  some  form  of  human  misery  which  we  could 
mitigate  or  relieve.  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it."  {A.  Thoauon,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vbbs.  1-5.  Then  went  Boas  up  to  the  grate. — Friends  in  eouneil : — I.  This  is  how 
BUSINESS  SHOULD  BE  ATTENDED  TO.  1.  Speedily.  2.  Expeditiously.  8.  Righteously. 
n.  This  is  how  ddticult  affairs  should  be  settled,  delicate  claims  adjusted, 
FAiB  rights  allowed  AND  SATISFIED.  1.  Openly  and  publicly.  2.  By  the  advice  of 
wise  men.     3.  Calmly  and  deliberately.     4.  With  care  and  exactitude.    HI.  This  I8 

the  WAT  the  AFFAIRa  OF  THE  DESTITUTE  AND  NEEDY  ESPECIALLY  SHOULD  BE  ATTENDED  TO. 

{W.  Baxendale.)  Judicious  methods  of  attaining  our  ends  : — 1.  The  most  probable 
means  ought  judiciously  to  be  used  in  order  to  the  accomplishing  of  our  proposed 
ends.  Thus  Boaz,  being  restless  for  obtaining  his  promised  end  (chap.  iii.  18) ,  uses  the 
likeliest  means  to  obtain  his  end.  Many  a  man  loses  a  good  end  for  want  of  right 
means  tending  to  the  end.    8.  A  marvellous  providence  doth  attend  Qod'i  servants 


CHAP,  rr.]  BUTE.  69 

that  do  wait  upon  God  in  the  way  of  obedience.  The  guiding  hand  of  God  doth 
make  many  a  happy  hit  in  the  occurrences  of  His  people.  Thus  the  comely 
contexture  of  various  providences  are  very  marvellous  to  those  that  make 
observation  of  them.  (C.  Ness.)  Redemption  proposed  : — How  completely  this 
proposal  illustrates  the  proposition  of  our  great  Kedeemer  in  our  behalf.  Thus 
publicly  He  agreed,  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God,  to  make  Himself  an 
offering  for  sin.  Thus  legally  would  He  fulfil  aU  righteousness  for  man,  and  be 
made  vmder  the  law,  that  He  might  redeem  those  who  were  under  the  law  from  the 
bondage  of  its  condemnation.  Thus  perfectly  and  completely  would  He  buy  back 
all  that  man  had  lost,  and  unite  unto  Himself  the  nature  which  had  sinned  and 
fallen.  But  angels  were  a  created  nature,  far  nearer  in  relation  to  man.  Might 
not  the  proposition  be  made  to  them?  Would  they  not  redeem  the  lost?  Ah, 
willing  they  might  be — we  doubt  not  they  were.  But  able  they  could  never  be. 
The  redemption  of  a  soul  they  must  let  alone  for  ever.  The  Son  of  God  remained 
alone.  His  own  arm  must  bring  salvation.  His  righteousness  must  sustain  Him. 
He  was  content  to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  His  law  was  in  His  heart.  Here  was  to 
be  complete  redemption.  He  would  take  the  shoe,  like  Boaz,  and  acknowledge  the 
obligation,  and  perform  the  duties  of  which  it  was  the  token.  He  would  stand  in 
the  sinner's  place.  He  would  make  Himself  an  offering  in  his  stead.  All  this 
exercise  and  work  of  redeeming  love  was  in  the  fulness  of  His  own  grace,  without 
any  connection  of  yours  with  it.  Yes ;  just  as  the  proposal  of  Boaz  was  without 
Ruth's  presence  or  knowledge — made  in  her  absence,  while  she  was  with  her  mother 
at  home,  and  not  to  be  made  known  to  her  until  it  was  completed — so  was  this 
great  proposal  of  the  Son  of  God  to  be  your  Kinsman,  and  to  fulfil  for  you  all  the 
kinsman's  obligations,  made  without  your  counsel  and  accomplished  without  your 
help.  This  is  the  unsearchable  riches  of  grace.  We'call  it  sovereign  grace.  It 
ruled  over  every  obstacle.  It  met  every  difficulty.  We  call  it  free  grace.  It  is 
extended  to  sinful  man  with  no  conditions.  It  invites  him,  and  offers  its  bounties 
to  him  without  any  qualifications  whatever.  It  announces  a  redemption  all 
complete,  and  begs  him  to  receive  and  to  enjoy  it.  Thus  God  has  chosen  to  redeem. 
And  thus  He  has  chosen  us  to  be  the  subjects  of  His  redemption.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.) 
Fair  dealing  and  good  principle  in  Boaz  : — There  are  two  things  especially  worthy 
of  notice  in  this  language  of  Boaz.  1.  The  spirit  of  candour  and  fair  dealing 
by  which  it  is  distinguished.  He  knew  the  preference  which  both  Naomi  and  Euth 
had  for  himself ;  he  was  conscious  too  that  he  no  longer  regarded  with  indifference 
this  beautiful  daughter  of  Moab.  His  fine  sense  of  honour  was  not  blunted  either 
by  covetousness  or  by  inclination,  nor  would  his  conscience  allow  him,  even  when 
Eeeking  a  good  and  generous  end,  to  have  recourse  to  sharp  practice.  Here  is  that 
"  clear  and  round  dealing  which  is  the  honour  of  man's  nature."  He  was  one  of 
those  men  who,  at  the  close  of  a  transaction,  could  have  borne  to  be  cross-examined 
regarding  his  part  in  it  by  an  enemy.  2.  Then  remark  how  much  the  following  of 
principle  simplifies  a  man's  course.  Boaz  had  his  own  wishes  as  to  the  way  in 
which  the  transaction  should  terminate ;  and  suppose  him  to  have  stooped,  as 
thousands  in  his  circumstances  would  have  done,  to  crooked  courses  and  carnal 
concealments,  in  order  to  make  the  matter  end  according  to  his  wishes,  what  must 
have  been  his  perplexity  and  anxiety,  not  to  speak  of  his  self-contempt  and  self- 
accusation  1  These  are  what  Lord  Bacon  has  called  '*  the  winding  and  crooked 
goings  of  the  serpent,  which  goeth  basely  upon  the  belly  and  not  upon  the  feet." 
But  in  following  the  course  of  simple  duty,  and  making  his  inclinations  and 
preferences  wait  on  the  disposal  of  God,  he  at  once  retained  peace  of  conscience, 
self-respect,  and  a  good  name.  "  His  eye  was  single,  and  therefore  his  whole  body 
was  full  of  light."    {A.  Thomson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  I  cannot  redeem  it  for  myself,  lest  I  mar  mine  own  iolieritance. — The 
endangered  inheritance : — Many  men  mar  noble  inheritances.  I.  The  inheritance  of 
PHTSiCAL  HEALTH.  The  ancicnts  were  right  who  spoke  of  a  sound  mind  in  a  sound  body 
es  one  of  the  best  gifts  of  the  gods.  God  has  written  His  will  upon  the  body  as  truly 
as  upon  the  pages  of  the  Bible.  Every  natural  motion  of  the  body  is  a  revelation  of 
the  will  and  purpose  of  the  Divine  Creator.  Ever  since  Christ  was  cradled  in  the 
manger  at  Bethlehem  the  body  has  been  honoured,  exalted,  glorified.  Ever  since  the 
descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  the  body  has  been  the  temple  of 
the  Third  Person  of  the  Trinity.  The  man  who  overworks  his  body  sins  against 
God.  The  man  who  by  intemperance  in  eating  or  drinking  unfits  his  body  for 
discharging  its  normal  functions  degrades  himself  and  dishonours  the  Almighty. 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chip.  it. 

It  is  true  that  many  men  with  broken  bodies  have  accomplished  wonderful  resulta 
in  life.  The  names  of  John  Calvin,  Robert  Hall,  and  a  score  more,  suggest 
themselves  as  illustrations.  Let  no  man  be  discouraged  who  has  inherited  a  weak 
body.  Great  souls  have  often  dwelt  in  frail  tenements,  until  the  tired  body  waa 
laid  to  its  rest  and  the  great  soul  went  up  in  triumph  to  God.  But  let  those  who 
have  received  the  inheritance  of  physical  health  prize  it  as  one  of  the  great  gifts  of 
life,  care  for  it  as  one  of  the  sacred  inheritances  of  life,  and  lay  it  as  a  willing 
offering  at  the  feet  of  the  Lord  Christ.  11.  The  inheritance  of  intellectuaIi 
CAPABILITIES.  Of  coursc  there  are  great  differences  among  men  in  these  respects. 
But  in  our  day  ignorance  is  not  simply  a  misfortune ;  it  is  a  crime.  Christian  men 
must  develop  all  their  faculties  to  their  highest  possibilities.  Every  man  is  bound, 
by  the  most  sacred  obligations,  to  make  the  most  of  himself  for  time  and  for 
eternity.  What  a  man  is  intellectually  here  will  determine  to  some  degree  what  he 
will  be  intellectually  hereafter.  The  life  to  come  is  but  the  developed  results  of 
present  conditions  and  attainments ;  that  life  is  but  the  ripened  fruit  of  the 
intellectual  and  moral  seed  sown  in  this  life.  Every  Christian,  because  inspired  by 
a  sense  of  loyalty  to  Jesus  Christ,  will  desire  to  develop  his  intellectual  powers  to 
their  utmost  degree.  He  cannot  but  wish  to  possess  numerous  and  varied  mental 
faculties  for  the  salvation  of  men  and  for  the  greater  glory  of  the  Lord.  Divine  lova 
in  human  hearts  puts  enlarged  brains  into  human  heads.  Religion  stimulates 
every  noble  faculty  of  the  soul.  It  made  John  Bunyan  the  immortal  dreamer ;  it 
made  Samuel  Bradburn  one  of  the  greatest  workers  and  orators  in  his  Church, 
a  man  of  whom  Dr.  Abel  Stevens  said  that  "  during  forty  years  Samuel  Bradburn 
was  esteemed  the  Demosthenes  of  Methodism  " ;  it  made  William  Carey  a  profound 
scholar,  a  lofty  thinker,  a  consecrated  toiler,  and  an  inspired  genius.  Christianity 
adorns  culture  with  true  symmetry  and  highest  beauty  ;  and  culture,  in  turn,  givea 
Christianity  its  fullest  beauty  and  its  grandest  opportunity.  They  ought  never  to 
be  separated.  Each  sweetly  and  divinely  ministers  to  the  other.  Let  no  young  man 
or  woman  neglect  wide  reading,  careful  study,  earnest  thought.  Young  Christiana 
should  be  model  students.  They  have  Jesus  Christ  for  their  teacher  and  the 
noblest  men  and  women  in  the  world  as  their  fellow-pupils.  III.  The  inheritance 
of  A  woBTHT  FAMHiT  HISTORY.  This  is  a  gift  above  the  worth  of  all  mere  financial 
values.  A  good  name  is  more  to  be  desired  than  gold,  yea,  than  much  fine  gold. 
A  good  name  is  the  ripe  product  of  years  of  noble  ancestral  character.  Is  there  a 
man  who  has  wandered  from  his  father's  and  his  mother's  God  ?  Is  there  one 
who  has  lowered  the  standard  of  a  noble  family  life  and  history  ?  la  there  one 
who  is  besmirching  his  name  and  staining  his  character  by  unholy  thoughts  and 
impure  acts  ?  In  the  name  of  that  worthy  family  history,  in  the  name  of  an  ideal 
family  life,  in  the  name  of  the  great  God  and  Father  of  us  all,  I  beseech  him  to  stop 
and  to  stop  now.  He  is  marring  his  own  inheritance.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be 
able  to  give  a  noble  family  inheritance  to  one's  children.  Let  us  carefully  guard  it ; 
let  us  sacredly  preserve  it ;  let  us  continually  honour  it ;  let  us  never  so  live  thai 
our  children  shall  be  ashamed  of  the  name  they  bear.  Let  us  send  it  down  to  them 
as  an  honoured  inheritance  to  which  they  shall  add  honours  from  all  the  generations 
to  come.  lY.  The  inheritance  of  bslioious  poss3Iliti£S.  Intellectual  attainments 
and  religious  experiences  cannot  be  transmitted  to  our  children.  We  can  transmit 
our  vices ;  but,  strictly  speaking,  not  our  virtues.  There  is  a  sense,  however,  in 
which  we  can  transmit  tendencies  toward  good  and  God,  or  toward  evil  and  the 
devil.  There  is  a  Divine  truth  in  much  that  is  said  regarding  heredity  in  our  day. 
It  is  much  for  a  man  to  be  able  to  say,  "  My  father's  God  " ;  it  is  vastly  easier  for 
such  a  man  to  say,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God,"  after  having  been  taught  to  say,  "  My 
father's  God."  Children  of  Christian  men  and  women  stand  upon  a  vastly  higher 
plane  of  possibility  than  the  children  of  ungodly  men  and  women.  The  time  may 
come  when  the  natural  will  be  much  more  like  the  supernatural  than  as  we  now  see 
it.  Indeed,  there  ia  a  sense  in  which  there  is  no  distinction  between  the  natural  and 
supernatural.  God  is  active  in  all  spheres  of  nature.  The  possibility  of  being 
translated  out  of  the  kingdom  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son 
ought  to  be  realised  in  early  childhood.  No  man,  however  far  he  may  go  into  sin, 
can  shake  off  entirely  the  influences  of  a  godly  parentage  and  of  early  religioua 
training.  I  once  talked  with  a  man  who  had  just  recovered  from  a  period  of 
dissipation,  and  with  broken  voice  and  moist  eyes,  he  said,  "  How  could  I  so  far 
forget  myself,  so  greatly  dishonour  my  sainted  parents,  and  ao  wickedly  disobey 
my  father's  God  ? "  Oh  1  children  of  Ood's  children,  prize  yoor  privilegea  I 
{R.  S.  Mac  Arthur,  D.D.) 


chap.it.]  BUTE.  71 

Yer.  9.  I  have  bonglit  all  that  was  Elimelech's. — Redemption  accomplithed : — 
This  passage  brings  to  our  view  the  great  subject  of  the  gospel  revelation — 
redemption  accomplished  in  the  death  and  resurrection  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  human  flesh  for  guilty  man.  Boaz  took  his  kinsman's  shoes  as  a 
simple  but  solemn  token  of  the  agreement  which  he  had  now  assumed.  He 
called  all  the  inhabitants  and  elders  of  his  city  to  witness  that  he  acknowledged 
all  this  responsibility,  and  was  pledged  to  accomplish  the  redemption  which 
was  thus  described  and  undertaken.  The  actual  accomplishment  of  the  work 
now  depended  upon  the  ability  and  the  faithfulness  of  Boaz.  Everything  now 
rested  upon  his  power  and  his  truth.  Was  it  not  just  so  with  the  hope  of 
man  from  the  day  of  his  fall  to  the  day  of  the  Savioiur's  manifestation  and 
victory?  He  had  undertaken  to  be  man's  Redeemer.  Could  He,  and  would  He  fulfil 
the  wonderful  promises  which  He  had  given,  and  upon  which  He  had  caused  His 
people  to  place  their  trust  ?  The  history  of  the  New  Testament  answers  this  all- 
important  question.  These  sacred  Scriptures  reveal  the  facts  of  redemption  accom- 
plished; the  work  undertaken  completely  finished;  the  fidelity  of  the  Kinsman 
Redeemer  gloriously  established ;  and  His  almighty  power  triumphantly  made  known. 
This  is  now  the  great  message  of  the  gospel  to  guilty  man.  It  proclaims  this 
accomplished  work,  and  it  begs  man  to  accept  and  enjoy  the  blessings  which  are 
offered  in  it  freely  and  without  price.  Like  Boaz,  Jesus  bought  back  the  whole 
Jiheritance  for  man.  All  that  was  lost  in  the  first  Adam  is  restored  by  the  second. 
The  Redeemer  Himself  now  owns  the  inheritance  which  He  has  purchased.  That 
which  was  Elimelech's  is  now  the  property  of  Boaz.  That  which  was  man's,  and 
to  be  in  the  reward  of  man's  obedience,  is  now  Christ's,  and  only  to  be  had  in  the 
freeness  and  fulness  of  His  gift.  It  is  His  own  inheritance,  and  He  bestows  it  upon 
His  people  according  to  His  wiU ;  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  Christ. 
We  have  everything  in  Him.  Without  Him  we  have  nothing.  He  has  bought 
back  man  also  for  Himself.  His  chosen  fiock  are  His  purchased  possession,  and  are 
to  be  to  the  praise  of  His  glory  for  ever.  But  the  people  of  Bethlehem  were  not 
merely  the  witnesses  of  this  covenant  of  Boaz;  they  were  partakers  of  his  joy. 
They  united  in  their  supplications  for  abundant  blessings  upon  the  noble  and 
exalted  plan  which  Boaz  had  proclaimed.  So  angels,  the  witnesses  of  the  covenant 
of  our  Redeemer,  were  more  than  silent  witnesses  also.  When  the  foundation  of 
this  wonderful  work  was  laid  in  the  Divine  covenant  these  morning  stars  sang 
together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy.  When  the  Saviour  appeared  as 
a  babe  in  Bethlehem  they  filled  the  heavens  with  their  songs  of  praise  and  prayer : 
"  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  peace  on  earth,  goodwill  to  men."  When  He  was 
travelling  in  the  greatness  of  His  strength,  beneath  His  load  of  sorrow  on  the  earth, 
they  ministered  unto  Him  and  strengthened  Him  for  His  work.    {S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  Ruth  the  Moabitess  .  .  .  haye  I  purchased  to  be  my  wife.— TA* 
marriage  of  Boat  and  Ruth  : — Two  features  which  stand  prominent  in  this  descrip- 
tion make  it  valuable  for  all  time.  1.  There  is  the  publicity  by  which  the  interesting 
transaction  was  distinguished.  All  the  people  that  were  in  the  gate,  and  the  elders, 
said,  "  We  are  witnesses."  The  laws  and  customs  of  every  country  not  in  the  lowest 
stage  of  barbarism  or  in  the  foulest  depths  of  licentiousness  have  provided  that  the 
conjugal  relation  shall  be  formed  in  the  presence  of  qualified  witnesses,  and  in  the 
observance  of  certain  well-understood  ceremonies  and  forms.  This  is  appointed 
for  reasons  of  obvious  propriety,  especially  to  enforce  fidelity,  and  to  secure  per- 
manence to  the  connection,  and,  by  a  line  sufl&ciently  distinct  and  broad,  to  separate 
virtuous  marriage  from  all  illicit  and  impure  connections.  Clandestine  marriages 
are  always  disreputable  in  themselves.  Then — 2.  Let  us  not  leave  unnoticed  the 
religious  spirit  in  which  the  union  was  formed.  The  devout  benedictions  of  the 
elders  and  the  other  witnesses  were  showered  upon  Boaz  and  his  bride  with  all  the 
lavish  profusion  of  a  most  hearty  goodwill,  and  prayers  ascended  for  them  to  Him 
who  in  all  ages  has  looked  approvingly  on  virtuous  wedlock.  It  is  one  of  the  marks 
of  the  divinity  of  our  religion  that  it  touches  our  humanity  on  all  sides.  Surely  the 
formation  of  the  marriage-bond  pre-eminently  ought  to  be  "  sanctified  by  the  Word 
of  God  and  prayer."  (A.  Thornton,  D.D.)  A  happy  marriage  : — Ruth's  marriage 
was  a  happy  one — 1.  Because  they  could  reckon  on  God's  blessing,  and  doubtless 
both  earnestly  prayed  for  it.  2.  Again,  we  may  be  sure  it  was  a  happy  marriage, 
for  there  was  a  oneness  of  feeling  between  Boaz  and  Ruth.  They  both  loved  God, 
They  were  both  journeying  on  one  and  the  same  road.  They  were  partners  for 
eternity.    It  matters  little,  whether  earthly  comforts  be  many  or  few ;  if  the  hearts 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

within  it  are  bound  together  by  that  bond  which  is  stronger  even  than  the  tie 
of  affection — the  bond  of  grace — then,  be  assured,  there  will  be  happiness.  (Bp. 
Oxenden.)  What  a  true  wife  ought   to   be: — Marriage,   to   a  certain   degree, 

a  young  man  is  to  look  upon  from  a  utilitarian  standpoint.  A  good  wife 
is  so  much  capital.  She  makes  him  to  be,  by  a  kind  of  grace,  a  great  deal  more 
than  he  is  by  nature.  She  contributes  the  qualities  needed  in  order  to 
convert  his  vigour  into  a  safe  as  well  as  productive  eflSciency.  She  intro- 
duces, for  instance,  into  his  intellectual  nature  that  ingredient  of  sentiment 
which  intellect  requires  in  order  to  be  able  to  do  its  best  work.  Heart  and  brain 
need  to  conspire  in  order  to  the  attainment  of  the  true,  and  without  caring  to  assert 
that  man  is  naturally  heartless,  any  more  than  I  should  wish  to  assume  that  woman 
is  by  nature  brainless,  yet  heart  in  its  way  is  just  as  precious  as  brain  in  its  way, 
and  woman,  so  long  as  she  is  untainted  by  the  passion  of  wanting  to  be  a  man,  will 
be  that  member  of  the  connubial  corporation  that  wUl  in  particular  contribute  to 
the  capital  stock  its  affectional  element.  Some  women  may  resent  this,  but  I 
would  Hke  to  caution  young  men  against  cherishing  matrimonial  designs  upon  any 
woman  who  is  likely  to  resent  it.  If  what  you  want  is  a  wife,  and  not  merely  a 
housekeeper,  you  must  keep  your  eye  weU  open  for  a  warm  bundle  of  femininity 
that  will  be  to  you  in  a  personal  way  what  the  fire  on  the  hearth  is  to  you  in  a 
physical  way — a  fund  of  tropical  comfort  that  will  keep  the  stiffness  out  of  your 
thinking,  the  frost  out  of  your  feeling,  and  the  general  machinery  of  your  life  in  a 
condition  of  pleasurable  activity.     (C.  E.  Parkhurtt,  D.D.) 

Vers.  17-22.  And  they  called  Mb  name  Obed. — Little  Ohed : — No  doubt  there 
were  circumstances  connected  with  the  birth  of  this  child  which  surrounded  it  with 
a  special  interest.  But  take  the  birth  of  any  child,  and  while  few  events  are  more 
common,  few  can  occur  on  the  earth  which  in  sober  reality  are  more  momentous. 
What  a  mystery  hangs  over  its  wondrous  constitution  of  thought  and  matter,  of 
Boul  and  body  1  What  a  capacity  is  there  of  sin  and  suffering,  of  holy  service  and 
blessedness!  What  will  be  its  future  and  final  destiny?  The  hopes  of  friends 
at  such  a  moment  are  naturally  sanguine,  woven  far  more  of  sunbeams  than  of 
shadows.  And  there  were  circumstances  which  made  the  congratulations  of  Euth'a 
friends  peculiarly  glad  and  hopeful ;  for  this  little  smiling  boy  folded  in  his  young 
mother's  arms  was  not  only  the  heir  of  Boaz  but  of  Mahlon.  He  was  to  unite  the 
family  inheritances ;  he  was  to  save  the  name  of  an  old  and  honoured  family  in 
Bethlehem  from  being  "  extinguished  in  Israel,"  and  to  give  to  Naomi  and  to  Kuth 
that  position  of  honour  and  consequence  in  Jewish  society  which  grew  out  of  the 
maternal  relation.  There  was  now  "  hope  concerning  this  tree,  that  it  would  yet 
bud  and  flourish."  This  wiU  account  to  us  for  the  warmth  of  the  language  in 
which  the  birth  of  Obed  was  hailed.  To  some  it  may  appear  strange  that  the  con- 
gratulations of  the  friendly  women  were  addressed  to  Naomi  rather  than  to  Euth, 
the  child's  own  mother.  The  explanation  has  in  part  been  suggested  already,  in 
the  fact  that  the  birth  of  this  child  exercised  so  peculiar  and  propitious  an  influence 
over  Naomi's  social  position  and  family  fortunes.  It  secured  to  her  the  position  of 
a  tribe-mother.  It  may  be,  too,  that  those  kindly  women  had  known  Naomi  and 
been  her  comforters  in  the  days  of  her  deep  affliction,  when  she  appeared  in  the 
streets  of  Bethlehem  claiming  to  be  called  Mara — "  the  woman  with  the  sorrowful 
spirit "  ;  and  as  they  beheld  her  on  this  day  of  revived  hopes  and  vanished  clouds 
the  same  true  sympathy  that  had  formerly  made  them  weep  with  her  when  she 
wept  now  made  them  rejoice  with  her  when  she  rejoiced.  That  we  are  correct 
in  this  explanation  is  evident  from  the  words  of  the  women,  in  which,  with  such 
glad  anticipations  for  the  future,  there  is  also  a  looking  back  upon  the  sorrowful 
past.  "There  shall  be  unto  thee"  in  this  child  "a  restorer  of  thy  life  and  a 
nourisher  of  thine  old  age."  How  beautifully  descriptive  are  these  words  of  what 
children  should  aim  to  be  to  aged  parents  and  relatives,  and  of  what  there  is  every 
reason  to  believe  this  child  eventually  became  to  Naomi.  The  former  clause  brings 
before  us  the  picture  of  a  tree  in  whose  roots  there  remains  a  kind  of  lingering  life, 
but  which,  assailed  by  storms  and  smitten  by  other  unkindly  influences,  stands 
almost  without  leaf  or  blossom,  with  no  birds  making  music  in  its  branches,  a 
blighted  and  forsaken  thing.  But  there  comes  at  length  a  genial  influence  of 
shower,  and  sunshine,  and  breeze,  which  quickens  within  it  the  vegetative  life,  and 
covers  it  with  the  leaves  and  blossoms  of  its  earlier  springs.  Now,  Naomi's  life  had 
been  to  her  for  many  years  like  a  long  winter.  But  this  little  child  would  bring 
back  to  her  the  recollections  and  the  joys  of  her  happier  days ;  the  blank  in  her 


CHAP.  IV.]  RUTH.  73 

heart  would  be  filled  up ;  she  would  find  something  to  love  and  cherish  without 
restraint,  and  this  itself  would  be  to  her  a  well  of  happiness ;  she  would  remember 
Mahlon  and  Chilion  in  little  Obed's  childish  sports  and  expanding  mind  ;  her 
thoughts,  which  had  been  too  much  turned  inward  upon  her  sorrows,  would  hence- 
forth go  outward  upon  him,  and  the  future  would  not  so  much  be  a  prolongation  of 
the  present  as  a  return  to  her  sunnier  days — "  He  shall  be  unto  thee  a  restorer  of 
thy  life,"  and  he  shall  be  unto  thee  "  a  nourisher  of  thine  old  age."  The  meaning 
of  this  is  not  exhausted  by  supposing  that  Naomi  would  never  want  the  means  of 
support  while  Obed  lived,  but  that  his  affluence  would  be  her  riches.  It  includes  in 
it,  besides,  those  thousand  varied  acts  of  respect  and  tenderness  which  we  are 
accustomed  to  describe  by  the  name  of  kindness.  In  the  case  of  persons  in 
advanced  years  many  sources  of  enjoyment  are  dried  up,  many  frailties  are 
induced,  the  senses  are  dulled,  the  power  of  motion  is  diminished,  not  a  few  of 
their  companions  have  been  removed  into  the  other  world,  and  they  are  apt  to  feel, 
in  their  infirmity  and  inaction,  as  if  they  had  become  useless  to  their  generation. 
It  is  the  duty  of  the  young,  and  especially  of  the  children  and  descendants  of  the 
aged,  to  endeavour  to  cheer  them  in  the  autumn  of  their  life,  to  anticipate  their 
wishes,  to  study  their  feelings,  to  make  growing  frailties  only  another  reason  for 
growing  attentions,  and,  by  kind  words  and  kinder  acts,  to  shed  a  calm  sunshine 
on  the  path  by  which  they  are  travelling  to  the  tomb.  Eehgion,  and  even  the 
instincts  of  our  human  nature,  command  us  to  "  stand  up  before  the  old  man,"  and 
to  put  honour  on  the  hoary  head.  And  never  do  children  appear  more  lovely 
than  when  they  are  thus  seen  nourishing  the  old  age  of  a  father  or  a  mother. 
{A.  Thomson,  D.D.)  Lessons  from  the  Book  of  Ruth: — I.  In  the  first  place  it 
seems  to  me  that  the  Book  of  Euth  exhibits  to  us  an  eternal  law  of  God's  kingdom  ; 

THAT     IN    THE    WORST  AND   DARKEST    TIMES    OF    THE    ChUBCH    GoD    HAS   HAD    HiS   OWN 

PEOPLE.  Ever  since  God  had  a  Church  on  earth  true  spiritual  religion  has  never 
been  utterly  extinguished.  Faith  can  always  say  with  the  apostle  that  there  is  "  a 
remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace."  When  God's  holy  dove  is  driven  from 
cities  and  the  abodes  of  men,  that  bird  of  sweetest  note  can  be  heard  singing  in 
remote  places,  even  in  dens  and  in  the  clefts  of  the  rocks.  II.  We  may  learn  a 
lesson  on  the  law  of  social  life.  There  is  throughout  the  book  a  constant  reference 
to  the  Levitical  law.  There  is  the  goal,  the  redeeming  kinsman.  But  I  wish 
you  specially  to  observe  the  beneficence  of  the  law.  I  wish  that  some  who  speak 
of  the  barbarous  character  of  the  old  law  would  take  their  Bibles  and  read  the 
eighteenth  chapter  of  Leviticus.  You  will  there  see  that  God  ordained  that  a 
portion  should  be  reserved  for  the  poor  and  the  stranger.  The  law  gave  a  measure 
of  wealth  to  the  indigent.  It  solved  in  this  way  one  of  the  most  terrible  problems 
of  our  modern  society.  While  it  did  this  there  was  an  ample  margin  left  for  the 
exercise  of  private  charity.  The  corner  of  the  field  was  defined  to  mean  a  portion 
that  in  modern  language  would  have  been  a  poor-rate  of  fourpence  in  the  pound. 
It  was  not  a  system  of  outdoor  relief,  for  the  Book  of  Euth  shows  us  that  there  was 
great  deUcacy  to  be  observed  in  giving.  Depend  upon  it,  as  the  spirit  of  the  Old 
Testament  works,  the  bitter  taunt  will  become  less  and  less  true  that  England  is  a 
paradise  for  the  rich  and  a  purgatory  for  the  poor.     III.  There  is  an  evangelicaIi 

LAW    CONNECTtNG    THIS    BOOK    OF    THE    OlD    TESTAMENT   WITH  ChRIST  JeSUS  OUR  LoRD. 

IV.  Lastly,  we  learn  the  law  which  pervades  the  life  of  evert  true  believer. 
We  may  learn  that  our  Uves  are  not  random  things,  and  that  there  is  no  such  thing 
as  chance  about  the  Christian's  life.  This  story  of  Euth,  Uke  every  story  of  the 
highest  sort,  would  lead  us  to  perfect  trust  in  Him  who  wants  His  own  dear  children 
to  lift  up  their  hands  to  Him  when  in  darkness.  They  must  wrestle  in  the  darkness 
before  they  can  face  the  sunrise.  God  seems  to  keep  sUence  when  we  pray.  We 
ask,  and  God  seems  not  to  give  us  the  things  for  whidi  we  pray.  Ah  1  bat  He  gives 
as  far  better.     {Abp.  William  Alexander.) 


42 


«>^ 


,t  -<■ 


Date  Due 


